古文：起上章困敦七月，尽旃蒙大荒落正月，凡四年有奇。
现代文：起上章困敦七月，尽旃蒙大荒落正月，凡四年有奇。
English: From the beginning of the year to July, from the end of the year to the first month of the year, every four years is strange.

古文：则天顺圣皇后下
现代文：则天顺圣皇后下
English: Then Tenshun the Holy Empress ascended

古文：久视元年庚子，公元七零零年秋，七月，献俘于含枢殿。
现代文：则天皇后久视元年秋季七月，李楷固献契丹俘虏于含枢殿。
English: In the autumn of July in the first year of Emperor Go-Ji's reign, Li Kai-Gu presented the Khitan captives at the Han Palace.

古文：太后以楷固为左玉钤卫大将军、燕国公，赐姓武氏。
现代文：武则天任命李楷固为左玉钤卫大将军，封燕国公，赐姓武氏。
English: Wu Zetian appointed Li Kai Gu as General of the Left Jade Division of the Imperial Guards, and he was given the title of Prince of Yan Province and the surname of Wu.

古文：召公卿合宴，举觞属仁杰曰： 公之功也。 
现代文：武则天设宴款待诸位公卿，席间举杯对狄仁杰说： 这是您的功劳啊！ 
English: Wu Zetian held a banquet to entertain the nobles. During the banquet, he raised a glass to Di Renjie and said: This is your achievement!

古文：将赏之，对曰： 此乃陛下威灵，将帅尽力，臣何功之有！ 
现代文：准备赏赐他，狄仁杰回答说： 此次平定契丹余党乃是由于陛下的声威以及将帅竭忠尽力所致，我又有什么功劳呢？ 
English: Preparing to reward him, Di Renjie replied: This time, the pacification of the Khitan Yu Party was due to the prestige of His Majesty and the efforts of the commander. What merit do I have?

古文：固辞不受。
现代文：坚决推辞，不接受赏赐。
English: Sun Qian resolutely refused to accept soldiers.

古文：闰月，戊寅，车驾还宫。
现代文：闰月，戊寅，武则天自三阳宫回到洛阳宫。
English: The leap month, Wu Yin, and Wu Zetian returned to Luoyang Palace from Sanyang Palace.

古文：己丑，以天官侍郎张锡为凤阁侍郎、同平章事。鸾台侍郎、同平章事李峤罢为成均祭酒。
现代文：己丑，武则天任命天宫侍郎张锡为凤阁侍郎、同平章事；鸾台侍郎、同平章事李峤被罢免为成均祭酒。
English: As a result, Bu Zetian appointed Zhang Xi, the attendant of the Heavenly Palace, as the attendant of Fengge and Tongping, and Li Xi, the attendant of Xingtai and Tongping, as the attendant of Chengjun.

古文：锡，峤之舅也，故罢峤政事。
现代文：因为张锡是李峤的舅父，所以免去李峤的宰相职务。
English: Because Zhang Xi was Li Xi's uncle, Li Xi was relieved of his position as prime minister.

古文：丁酉，吐蕃将麹莽布支寇凉州，围昌松，陇右诸军大使唐休璟与战于洪源谷。
现代文：丁酉，吐蕃将领莽布支进犯凉州，包围了昌松。唐陇右诸军大使唐休与莽布支在洪源谷交战。
English: Ding Rong and Tu Rong led Meng Bu to invade Liangzhou and besieged Changsong. Tang Xiu, the ambassador of Tang Xiu's right army, fought with Meng Bu in Hongyuan Valley.

古文：麹莽布支兵甲鲜华，休璟谓诸将曰： 诸论既死，麹莽布支新为将，不习军事，诸贵臣子弟皆从之，望之虽如精锐，实易与耳，请为诸君破之。 
现代文：莽布支的军队兵器盔甲明亮，唐休对他手下的部将们说： 吐蕃掌权的论钦陵兄弟都已经被杀，莽布支初次领兵打仗，还不熟悉军事。所以虽然吐蕃军队看起来好像是精锐之师，但实际上却容易对付，让我先击破他们。 
English: The weapons and armor of Mangbushi's army were bright, and Tang Xiu said to his subordinates: "The Onqinling brothers, who are in power in Tubo, have all been killed. Mangbushi is leading soldiers into battle for the first time, and is not familiar with military affairs. Therefore, although the Tubo army seems to be an elite division, it is actually easy to deal with. Let me defeat them first."

古文：乃被甲先陷陈，六战皆捷，吐蕃大奔，斩首二千五百级，获二裨将而还。
现代文：于是披挂上阵，率先攻破莽布支军队的防线，并连续六战皆捷，吐蕃兵溃不成军。唐休共斩敌人首级二千五百个，俘获吐蕃两员裨将，然后收兵。
English: So he went into battle, took the lead in breaking through the defense line of the reckless Bu army, and achieved success in six consecutive battles. The Tubo soldiers were routed and could not form an army. Tang Xiu cut off a total of 2,500 enemy heads, captured two Tubo soldiers, and then withdrew the troops.

古文：司府少卿杨元亨，尚食奉御杨元禧，皆弘武之子也。
现代文：司府少卿杨元亨和尚食奉御杨元禧，都是杨弘武的儿子。
English: Yang Yuanheng, Sifu Shaoqing, and Yang Yuanxi, Shangshui Bongyo, were both sons of Yang Hongwu.

古文：元禧尝忤张易之，易之言于太后： 元禧，杨素之族；素父子，隋之逆臣，子孙不应供奉。 
现代文：杨元禧曾经触犯过张易之。张易之因此对武则天说： 杨元禧是杨素的族人，而杨素父子又是隋朝的逆臣，他们的子孙不应该在皇帝身边供职。 
English: Yang Yuanxi once offended Zhang Yizhi. Zhang Yizhi therefore said to Wu Zetian: Yang Yuanxi is a member of Yang Su's family, and Yang Su and his son are rebellious vassals of the Sui Dynasty. Their children and grandchildren should not serve alongside the emperor.

古文：太后从之，壬寅，制： 杨素及其兄弟子孙皆不得任京官。 
现代文：武则天采纳了张易之的建议，于壬寅颁下制书： 杨素及其兄弟的子孙都不许担任京官。 
English: Wu Zetian accepted Zhang Yizhi's suggestion and issued an edict to Yu Renyin: Yang Su and the descendants of his brothers were not allowed to serve as Beijing officials.

古文：左迁元亨睦州刺史，元禧贝州刺史。
现代文：并将杨元亨降职为睦州刺史，将杨元禧降职为贝州刺史。
English: and demoted Yang Yuanheng to the position of Muzhou chief historian, and demoted Yang Yuanxi to the position of Beizhou chief historian.

古文：庚戌，以魏元忠为陇右诸军大使，击吐蕃。
现代文：庚戌，武则天任命魏元忠为陇右诸军大使，进攻吐蕃。
English: Geng Zheng, Wu Zetian appointed Wei Yuanzhong as the ambassador of the right-wing armies, and attacked Tubo.

古文：庚申，太后欲造大像，使天下僧尼日出一钱以助其功。
现代文：庚申，武则天要建造一尊大佛像，让全国的和尚尼姑每人每天捐出一文钱来，以促成其事。
English: According to the legend, Wu Zetian wanted to build a large Buddha statue and asked all the monks and nuns in the country to donate a penny a day to make it happen.

古文：狄仁杰上疏谏，其略曰： 今之伽蓝，制过宫阙。
现代文：狄仁杰上疏谏阻，奏疏的大意是： 当今的佛教寺院，在建筑规模上已经超过皇帝的宫殿。
English: Today's Buddhist temples have surpassed the emperor's palaces in architectural scale.

古文：功不使鬼，止在役人，物不天来，终须地出，不损百姓，将何以求！ 
现代文：营建这些寺院无法借助鬼神之助，只能依靠百姓出力。物资不会从天而降，终究来自地里，不靠损害百姓，那么又怎能得到这些东西呢？ 
English: The construction of these temples cannot be done with the help of ghosts and gods, but can only rely on the people's efforts. Materials do not fall from the sky, after all, they come from the ground, not by harming the people, so how can you get these things?

古文：又曰： 游僧皆托佛法，诖误生人；里陌动有经坊，阛阓亦立精舍。
现代文：他又说： 游方和尚都依托佛法，贻误百姓，他们动不动就在里巷修建经坊，连市场里也盖起佛寺。
English: He also said: Yu Fang and his monks rely on the Buddhist law to mislead the people. They are constantly building scriptures in the lanes and alleys, and even build Buddhist temples in the market.

古文：化诱所急，切于官征；法事所须，严于制敕。 
现代文：佛教教化诱导众生所急需之物，被看成比官府征收赋税还急迫，僧尼作法事所需物品，也被看成比皇帝的敕令还紧急。 
English: The things that are urgently needed for Buddhist enlightenment to induce sentient beings are considered to be more urgent than the collection of taxes by the government, and the items needed by monks and nuns to perform religious duties are also considered to be more urgent than the emperor's edict.

古文：又曰： 梁武、简文舍施无限，及三淮沸浪，五岭腾烟，列刹盈衢，无救危亡之祸，缁衣蔽路，岂有勤王之师！ 
现代文：他还说： 梁武帝、简文帝父子对佛寺的施舍无限，等到三淮、五岭叛乱迭起的时候，大街上鳞次栉比的寺院佛塔，无法挽救身危国亡之祸；到处都是和尚尼姑，又哪里有勤王救主之师！ 
English: He also said: Emperor Liangwu and Emperor Jianwen, father and son, gave unlimited charity to Buddhist temples. By the time of the Three Huai and Five Ling rebellions, the numerous temple pagodas on the streets could not save the country from peril; there were monks and nuns everywhere, and there were teachers who were devoted to the King and Savior!

古文：又曰： 虽敛僧钱，百未支一。
现代文：他又说： 陛下即使收齐了僧侣所捐助的资金，但这笔钱还不够建造佛像所需费用的百分之一。
English: He also said, "Your Majesty, even if you collected all the money donated by the monks, it would not be enough to cover one percent of the cost of building a Buddha statue.

古文：尊容既广，不可露居，覆以百层，尚忧未遍，自馀廊宇，不得全无。
现代文：再说佛像庞大，不能露居旷野，即使修建一座百层高的殿堂，还担心不能将它完全遮盖，况且其他堂前廊屋，也不能一点都不建啊！
English: Moreover, the Buddha statue is huge and cannot be exposed to the wilderness. Even if a hundred-storey-high temple is built, it is feared that it cannot be completely covered. Moreover, other front porches cannot be built at all!

古文：如来设教，以慈悲为主。岂欲劳人，以存虚饰？ 
现代文：如来佛创立佛教，以大慈大悲为宗旨，哪里要劳民伤财，以设置浮华无实用的装饰！ 
English: If you come to the Buddha to establish Buddhism, with the purpose of great mercy and compassion, where do you have to work people and hurt money to set up flashy and useless decorations!

古文：又曰： 比来水旱不节，当今边境未宁，若费官财，又尽人力，一隅有难，将何以救之！ 
现代文：又说： 近年来水旱灾害时有发生，边境又不安宁，如果为修建大佛像而耗费国库资财，又用尽民力，那么万一哪一个角落有灾难，陛下将用什么去救援呢？ 
English: He also said: In recent years, floods and droughts have occurred from time to time, and the border is restless. If the construction of a large Buddha statue consumes national treasury resources and exhausts people's resources, then in the event that there is a disaster in any corner, what will His Majesty use to rescue?

古文：太后曰： 公教朕为善，何得相违！ 
现代文：武则天说： 您劝导我行善，我又怎么能违背您的意愿呢？ 
English: Wu Zetian said: You have advised me to do good, how can I go against your wishes?

古文：遂罢其役。
现代文：于是停止了修建大佛像的工程。
English: As a result, the project to build a large Buddha statue was stopped.

古文：阿悉吉薄露叛，遣左金吾将军田扬名、殿中侍御史封思业讨之。
现代文：西突厥的阿悉吉薄露发动叛乱，武则天派左金吾将军田扬名和殿中侍御史封思业前往征讨。
English: The West Turk, Aserji Bo Lu, launched a rebellion, and Bu Zetian sent the Left King's general, Tian Yang Ming, and the palace attendant, Gu Shi Feng Siye, to investigate.

古文：军至碎叶，薄露夜于城傍剽掠而去，思业将骑追之，反为所败。
现代文：等到唐军来到碎叶城时，阿悉吉薄露已趁夜在城边大肆劫掠之后逃离。封思业率骑兵追击，反而被薄露所击败。
English: By the time the Tang army arrived at the City of Broken Leaves, Asierji Bo Lu had already taken advantage of the night to flee after plundering the city. Feng Siyu led the cavalry in pursuit, but was defeated by Bo Lu.

古文：扬名引西突厥斛瑟罗之众攻其城，旬馀，不克。
现代文：田扬名率西突厥斛瑟罗部落的军队攻打薄露所占据的城池，历时十余日未能攻克。
English: Tian Yangmei led the army of the West Turk Qusaro tribe to attack the city occupied by Bo Lu, which lasted for more than ten days.

古文：九月，薄露诈降，思业诱而斩之，遂俘其众。
现代文：九月，薄露假意投降，封思业将计就计，趁机将其斩首，因而俘获了他的全部人马。
English: In September, when Bo Lu pretended to surrender, Feng Siye took advantage of the opportunity to behead him, thus capturing all of his men.

古文：太后信重内史梁文惠公狄仁杰，群臣莫及，常谓之国老而不名。
现代文：武则天十分信任和推重内史梁文惠公狄仁杰，没有哪一个大臣能比得上。她常常称狄仁杰为国老，而不是直呼其名。
English: Wu Zetian has great trust in and respect for Di Renjie, Minister of Internal Affairs Liang Wenhui, which no other minister can match. She often refers to Di Renjie as the elder statesman, rather than calling him by his name.

古文：仁杰好面引廷争，太后每屈意从之。
现代文：狄仁杰习惯于在朝堂上当面直言规谏，武则天则常常采纳他的建议，即使这样做违背了自己的本意时也是如此。
English: Di Renjie was used to speaking his mind in front of the imperial court, and Bu Zetian often took his advice, even if it was against his own intentions.

古文：尝从太后游幸，遇风吹仁杰巾坠，而马惊不能止，太后命太子追执其鞚而系之。
现代文：有一次狄仁杰陪同武则天巡游，途中遇到大风，狄仁杰的头巾被风吹落在地，他的坐骑也因受惊而无法驾驭，武则天让太子李显追上惊马，抓住它的笼头并将它拴好。
English: Once, when Di Renjie accompanied Wu Zetian on a parade, they encountered a strong wind on the way. The wind blew Di Renjie's headscarf to the ground, and his horse was frightened and could not be ridden. Wu Zetian let Prince Li Xian catch up with the frightened horse, grab its bridle and tie it up.

古文：仁杰屡以老疾乞骸骨，太后不许。
现代文：狄仁杰曾屡次因年老多病的缘故而提出退休的请求，武则天都没有答应。
English: Di Renjie had repeatedly requested retirement due to old age and illness, but Wu Zetian did not agree.

古文：入见，常止其拜，曰： 每见公拜，朕亦身痛。 
现代文：武则天在狄仁杰入朝参见的时候，还常常阻止他行跪拜礼，说： 每当看到您行跪拜礼的时候，朕的身体都会感到痛楚。 
English: Wu Zetian also often prevented Di Renjie from kneeling when he visited the emperor, saying, "Whenever I see you kneeling, my body feels pain.

古文：仍免其宿直，戒其同僚曰： 自非军国大事，勿以烦公。 
现代文：武则天还免除了狄仁杰晚上在宫中轮流值班的义务，并告诫他的同僚们说： 如果没有十分重要的军国大事，都不要去打扰狄老先生。 
English: Wu Zetian also exempted Di Renjie from the obligation to take turns on duty in the palace in the evening, and warned his colleagues: If there is no very important military event, do not disturb Mr. Di Lao.

古文：辛丑，薨，太后泣曰： 朝堂空矣！ 
现代文：辛丑，狄仁杰去世，武则天流着眼泪说： 朝堂上再也没有可以依靠的师长了！ 
English: Sin ugly, Di Renjie died, Wu Zetian shed tears and said: There is no longer a divisional commander to rely on in the morning hall!

古文：自是朝廷有大事，众或不能决，太后辄叹曰： 天夺吾国老何太早邪！ 
现代文：此后朝廷一有大事，如果群臣无法决断，武则天就会叹息道： 老天为什么这么早就把我的国老夺走呢！ 
English: After that, whenever there was a major event in the imperial court, if the ministers were unable to make a decision, Wuzetian would sigh and say, "God, why did you take my elder away so early?"

古文：太后尝问仁杰： 朕欲得一佳士用之，谁可者？ 
现代文：武则天曾经问狄仁杰： 朕希望能找到一位杰出的人才委以重任，您看谁合适呢？ 
English: Wu Zetian once asked Di Renjie: I hope to find an outstanding talent to entrust with an important task. Who do you think is suitable?

古文：仁杰曰： 未审陛下欲何所用之？ 
现代文：狄仁杰问道： 不知道陛下想让他担任什么职务？ 
English: Di Renjie asked: I don't know what position His Majesty wants him to hold?

古文：太后曰： 欲用为将相。 
现代文：武则天说： 我想让他担任将相。 
English: Wu Zetian said, "I want him to be the general secretary."

古文：仁杰对曰： 文学缊藉，则苏味道、李峤固其选矣。
现代文：狄仁杰回答道： 如果您所要的是文采风流的人才，那么苏味道、李峤本来就是合适的人选。
English: Di Renjie replied, "If you are looking for a person with a literary flair, then Su Yi and Li Yao are the right candidates.

古文：必欲取卓荦奇才，则有荆州长史张柬之，其人虽老，宰相才也。 
现代文：如果您一定要找出类拔萃的奇才，那就只有荆州长史张柬之了，他的年纪虽然老了一些，但却实实在在地是一位宰相之才。 
English: If you must find an outstanding prodigy, then there is only the governor of Jing Province, Zhang Khamzhi, who, although he is a little older, is truly a prime ministerial talent.

古文：太后擢柬之为洛州司马。
现代文：武则天于是提拔张柬之作了洛州司马。
English: Wu Zetian then promoted Zhang Kamm to the post of Lozhou Sima.

古文：数日，又问仁杰，对曰： 前荐柬之，尚未用也。 
现代文：过了几天之后，武则天又要求狄仁杰举荐人才，狄仁杰回答说： 我前几天推荐的张柬之，您还没有任用呢。 
English: A few days later, Wu Zetian again asked Di Renjie to recommend talents. Di Renjie replied: You haven't appointed Zhang Xia, whom I recommended a few days ago.

古文：太后曰： 已迁矣。 
现代文：武则天说： 我已经给他升了官了。 
English: Wu Zetian said: I have promoted him.

古文：对曰： 臣所荐者可为宰相，非司马也。 
现代文：狄仁杰回答说： 我所推荐的张柬之是可以作宰相的人才，不是用来作一个司马的。 
English: Di Renjie replied: What I recommend Zhang Kamm is a talent that can be used as a prime minister, not as a steward.

古文：乃迁秋官侍郎；久之，卒用为相。
现代文：武则天于是任命张柬之为秋官侍郎。过了很长时间，终于任命他为宰相。
English: Wu Zetian then appointed Zhang Kammai as the attendant of the autumn official. After a long time, he finally appointed him as the prime minister.

古文：仁杰又尝荐夏官侍郎姚元崇、监察御史曲阿桓彦范、太州刺史敬晖等数十人，率为名臣。
现代文：狄仁杰还先后向武则天推荐了夏官侍郎姚元崇、监察御史曲阿人桓彦范、太州刺史敬晖等数十人，后来这些人都成为唐代名臣。
English: Di Renjie also successively recommended dozens of people to Wu Zetian, including Yao Yuan Chong, the attendant of the summer governor, Guan Shi Quah, Quan Yan Fan, and Taizhou Shishi Jingyao, all of whom later became famous ministers of the Tang Dynasty.

古文：或谓仁杰曰： 天下桃李，悉在公门矣。 
现代文：有人对狄仁杰说： 治理天下的贤能之臣，都出自您门下。 
English: Someone said to Di Renjie: All the virtuous vassals who govern the world come from your family.

古文：仁杰曰： 荐贤为国，非为私也。 
现代文：狄仁杰回答说： 举荐贤才是为国家着想，并不是为我个人打算。 
English: Di Renjie replied: It is for the sake of the country to recommend a person, and it is not for me personally.

古文：初，仁杰为魏州刺史，有惠政，百姓为之立生祠。
现代文：起初，狄仁杰担任魏州刺史，因为他施政仁爱宽厚，所以魏州百姓为他建造了生祠。
English: At first, Di Renjie served as the chief historian of Weizhou, because he was generous and benevolent, so the people of Weizhou built a small shrine for him.

古文：后其子景晖为魏州司功参军，贪暴为人患，人遂毁其像焉。
现代文：后来他的儿子狄景晖担任魏州司功参军，贪婪残暴，成了百姓的祸害，于是老百姓又捣毁了狄仁杰的塑像。
English: Later, his son Di Jingyao served as Wei Zhou's secretary and joined the army. Greedy and cruel, he became the scourge of the people, so the people destroyed Di Renjie's statue.

古文：冬，十月，辛亥，以魏元忠为萧关道大总管，以备突厥。
现代文：冬季，十月，辛亥，武则天任命魏元忠为萧关道大总管，目的是为了防备突厥的侵扰。
English: In the winter, October, Xinhai, Wu Zetian appointed Wei Yuanzhong as the general manager of Xiaoguan Road, in order to prevent the invasion of the Turks.

古文：甲寅，制复以正月为十一月，一月为正月，赦天下。
现代文：甲寅，武则天颁下制书，又重新以正月为十一月，以一月为正月，并大赦天下。
English: Emperor Wu Zetian issued an edict to begin the production of books, and the first month of the year was changed to November, and the first month of the year was changed to January, and a general amnesty was declared.

古文：丁巳，纳言韦巨源罢，以文昌右丞韦安石为鸾台侍郎、同平章事。
现代文：丁巳，武则天免去纳言韦巨源的职务，任命文昌右丞韦安石为鸾台侍郎、同平章事。
English: At the same time, Emperor Wuzetian relieved Nagan Wei Jiuyuan of his duties and appointed Wenchang Yuanzheng Wei Anshi as the attendant of Xingtai and Tongping Zhangji.

古文：安石，津之孙也。
现代文：韦安石是韦津的孙子。
English: Wei Anshi is the grandson of Wei Jin.

古文：时武三思、张易之兄弟用事，安石数面折之。
现代文：这时正值武三思和张易之兄弟执掌朝政，韦安石屡次当面驳斥他们。
English: At this time, the brothers Wu Sanshi and Zhang Yi were in charge of the imperial government, and Wei Anshi repeatedly refuted them in person.

古文：尝侍宴禁中，易之引蜀商宋霸子等数人在座同博。安石跪奏曰： 商贾贱类，不应得预此会。 
现代文：有一次韦安石在宫中陪武则天用膳，见张易之带进蜀地富商宋霸子等几个人在一起赌博，便向武则天跪拜奏道： 商贾之徒，名列贱籍，没有资格参加这样的宴会。 
English: Once, Wei Anshi was having dinner with Wu Zetian in the palace. When he saw Zhang Yizhi bring in a rich merchant from Shu, Song Baozi, and several other people to gamble together, he knelt down before Wu Zetian and said, "Merchant Jia's followers are low-ranking citizens and are not eligible to attend such a banquet."

古文：顾左右逐出之，座中皆失色；太后以其言直，劳勉之，同列皆叹服。丁卯，太后幸新安；壬申，还宫。
现代文：说完就让侍臣们将这几个人赶出去，在座的臣僚们都吓得变了脸色。由于韦安石敢于直言规谏，武则天特意对他慰劳嘉勉，他的同僚也因此而对他十分钦佩。丁卯，武则天巡幸新安；壬申，又回到宫中。
English: After he finished speaking, he asked his courtiers to drive these people out, and the ministers present turned pale with fear. Because Wei Anshi dared to speak out, Wu Zetian specially consoled and encouraged him, and his colleagues also admired him very much. Ding, Wu Zetian went on a tour of Xin'an; Jinshin, and returned to the palace.

古文：十二月，甲寅，突厥掠陇右诸监马万馀匹而去。
现代文：十二月，甲寅，突厥兵掠走陇右诸牧监畜养的军马一万多匹后撤离。
English: In December, after the Turkish soldiers had plundered more than ten thousand horses bred by 右諸牧 prisoners, they withdrew.

古文：时屠禁尚未解，凤阁舍人全节崔融上言，以为： 割烹牺牲，弋猎禽兽，圣人著之典礼，不可废阙。
现代文：这时，有关杀猪宰羊以及捕鱼捞虾的禁令还没有解除，担任凤阁舍人职务的全节县人崔融进言，认为： 宰割烹调牲畜和猎杀飞禽走兽，已被圣人写入礼制典章，不可废弃和缺少。
English: At this time, the ban on killing pigs, slaughtering sheep, and fishing for shrimp had not yet been lifted. Cui Rongjin, a full-time county resident who held the position of Fengge villager, believed that: slaughtering and cooking livestock and hunting birds and beasts had been written into the ceremonial code by the sage, and could not be discarded or lacking.

古文：又，江南食鱼，河西食肉，一日不可无；富者未革，贫者难堪，况贫贱之人，仰屠为生，日戮一人，终不能绝，但资恐喝，徒长奸欺。
现代文：况且鱼和肉分别是江南人和河西人必备的食品，一天也不能没有它们；富人的生活习惯无法改变，穷人也无法忍受终日不见鱼肉的生活；再说贫穷卑贱的屠户，一直都是把屠宰当作衣食之源的。
English: Moreover, fish and meat are essential foods for the people in the south of the Yangtze River and the west of the river, respectively, and they cannot go without them for a day; the living habits of the rich cannot be changed, and the poor cannot bear to live without fish and meat all day long; furthermore, the poor and lowly butchers have always used slaughter as a source of food and clothing.

古文：为政者苟顺月令，合礼经，自然物遂其生，人得其性矣。 戊午，复开屠禁，祠祭用牲牢如故。
现代文：所以即使陛下每天都要处死一个敢于违反禁令的人，终究不可能真正有效地实施禁止屠宰捕鱼的法令，只不过助长要挟恐赫和奸诈行为而已。治理国家的人行事如果真正能够顺应自然气候的变化，合乎礼经的规定，自然会使万物的生长符合其本身的规律，百姓也能够各按他们的本性生活。 
English: Therefore, even if His Majesty were to execute a person who dared to violate the ban every day, it would not be possible to effectively enforce the ban on slaughtering and fishing. It would only encourage intimidation and treachery. If the people who govern the country can truly adapt to the changes in the natural climate and act in accordance with the rules of etiquette, they will naturally make the growth of all things conform to their own laws, and the people will be able to live according to their nature.

古文：长安元年辛丑，公元七零一年
现代文：戊午，武则天下诏废除有关屠宰捕鱼的禁令，祭祀时仍然像往常那样用牛羊猪等牺牲作祭品。长安元年
English: At noon, the Emperor Wu Zetian issued an edict abolishing the ban on slaughtering and fishing, and sacrifices such as cattle, sheep and pigs were still used as usual.

古文：春，正月，丁丑，以成州言佛迹见，改元大足。
现代文：春季正月，丁丑，由于成州说发现了佛的足迹的缘故，武则天改年号为大足。
English: In the first month of spring, Dingwuxi, due to the discovery of Buddha's footprints in Chengdu, Wu Zetian changed the name of the year to Dashu.

古文：二月，己酉，以鸾台侍郎柏人李怀远同平章事。
现代文：二月，己酉，武则天任命鸾台侍郎柏人县人李怀远为同平章事。
English: In February, Emperor Wu Zetian appointed Li Huaiyuan, a person from Bairen County and a retainer of Xingtai, to be the first to be awarded the title of Tongping.

古文：三月，凤阁侍郎、同平章事张锡坐知选漏泄禁中语、赃满数万，当斩，临刑释之，流循州。
现代文：三月，凤阁侍郎、同平章事张锡因主持铨选时泄漏宫中语以及非法获取财物达数万之多而获罪，应当斩首，等到即将行刑之际又被免除死罪，流放循州。
English: In March, Fengge's chamberlain, Tongping Zhang Xie, was found guilty of leaking the palace Chinese language and illegally acquiring tens of thousands of property when presiding over the election. He should be beheaded, and when he was about to be executed, he was exempted from the death penalty and exiled to Xuzhou.

古文：时苏味道亦坐事与锡俱下司刑狱，锡乘马，气色自若，舍于三品院，帷屏食饮，无异平居。
现代文：当时苏味道也因事犯罪与张锡一起入司刑寺监狱。在去监狱的路上，张锡骑在马上，神态自若，直接住进专门为犯罪的三品以上官员准备的三品院中，帷帐的张设和饮食的排场，与平时完全相同。
English: On the way to the prison, Zhang Xi rode on a horse, looking self-assured, and directly lived in the third-class court, specially prepared for officials with three or more criminal offenses. The setting of the curtains and the layout of the meals were exactly the same as usual.

古文：味道步至系所，席地而卧，蔬食而已。
现代文：苏味道则是徒步走到羁押场所，夜晚睡在冰凉的地板上，每顿只吃蔬菜。
English: Ms. Su walked to the detention center on foot, slept on the cold floor at night, and ate only vegetables at every meal.

古文：太后闻之，赦味道，复其位。
现代文：武则天听说了这件事之后，下令赦免苏味道的罪，并恢复了他的原任职务。
English: After Wu Zetian heard about the incident, he ordered to pardon Su Meido's crime and restored him to his original position.

古文：是月，大雪，苏味道以为瑞，帅百官入贺。
现代文：就在这个月，突然降下大雪，苏味道认为这是吉兆，便带领文武百官入朝祝贺。
English: Just this month, heavy snow suddenly fell. The Su clan thought this was a good omen, and led hundreds of civil and military officials to the North to offer congratulations.

古文：殿中侍御史王求礼止之曰： 三月雪为瑞雪，腊月雷为瑞雷乎？ 
现代文：殿中侍御史王求礼上前制止，他说： 如果说阳春三月下的雪是瑞雪，那么寒冬腊月打雷就应该是瑞雷啦！ 
English: An attendant in the hall, Shi Wang, came forward to stop it. He said, "If the snow in March is Ruixue, then the thunder in winter should be Ruilei!"

古文：味道不从。
现代文：苏味道不听劝阻。
English: Su taste does not listen to dissuasion.

古文：既入，求礼独不贺，进言曰： 今阳和布气，草木发荣，而寒雪为灾，岂得诬以为瑞！
现代文：入朝之后，惟独王求礼不但不称贺，反而向武则天进言道： 现在正是春天温暖的气息散发、草木生长开花的季节，而突然降下大雪会成为灾害，怎么能歪曲说这场大雪象征着吉兆呢？
English: After entering the imperial court, the king was the only one who not only did not offer congratulations, but also made a speech to Wuzetian: Now is the season when the warm spring air is emitted and plants grow and bloom, but a sudden heavy snowfall can be a disaster. How can it be distorted that this heavy snowfall symbolizes a good omen?

古文：贺者皆谄谀之士也。 
现代文：称贺的人都是阿谀奉承之辈。 
English: The people celebrating are sycophants.

古文：太后为之罢朝。
现代文：武则天因此而罢朝。
English: As a result, Emperor Wu Zetian abdicated.

古文：时又有献三足牛者，宰相复贺。
现代文：这时又有人来献一头三条腿的牛，宰相们又一次入朝称贺。
English: At this time, someone else came to offer a three-legged cow, and the prime ministers once again entered the imperial palace to offer congratulations.

古文：求礼扬言曰： 凡物反常皆为妖。此鼎足非其人，政教不行之象也。 
现代文：王求礼大声疾呼： 反常的东西都算妖，出现三足牛的现象，是三公没有合适的人选以及国家的刑赏教化没有得到实行的象征。 
English: Wang Qurei shouted out: All abnormal things are considered to be demons, and the appearance of the three-legged ox is a symbol that the Three Wise Men have no suitable candidate and that the state's punishment, reward and education have not been implemented.

古文：太后为之愀然。
现代文：武则天听完之后愁容满面。
English: After listening to Wu Zetian, his face was full of sorrow.

古文：夏，五月，乙亥，太后幸三阳宫。
现代文：夏季五月，乙亥，武则天住进了三阳宫。
English: In the summer of May, Yihai, Wu Zetian moved into Sanyang Palace.

古文：以魏元忠为灵武道行军大总管，以备突厥。
现代文：武则天任命魏元忠为灵武道行军大总管，目的是为了防备突厥的侵扰。
English: Wu Zetian appointed Wei Yuanzhong as the general manager of the spiritual martial arts march, with the aim of preventing Turkish intrusion.

古文：天官侍郎盐官顾琮同平章事。
现代文：天官侍郎盐官县人顾琮任同平章事。
English: Gu Xuan, the attendant of the heavenly official and a resident of Yanquan County, was appointed to the position of Tongping.

古文：六月，庚申，以夏官尚书李迥秀同平章事。
现代文：六月，庚申，武则天任命夏官尚书李迥秀为同平章事。
English: In June, Gao Sheng and Wu Zetian appointed Xia official Shangshu Li Yuxiu as Tongping.

古文：迥秀性至孝，其母本微贱，妻崔氏常叱媵婢，母闻之不悦，迥秀即时出之。
现代文：李迥秀生性极为孝顺，他的母亲原来出身卑微低贱，李迥秀的妻子崔氏经常大声呵斥陪嫁使女，他母亲听到后感到不快，迥秀便立即将崔氏休弃。
English: Li Yuxiu's nature is extremely filial. His mother originally came from a humble background. Li Yuxiu's wife, Cui, often loudly scolded the maid of honor. His mother felt uncomfortable after hearing this, and Cui Xiu immediately abandoned Cui.

古文：或曰： 贤室虽不避嫌疑，然过非七出，何遽如是！ 
现代文：有人对他说： 您的妻子虽然不善避开嫌疑，但她的过失不属于休妻七条，为什么您匆忙把她休弃了呢？ 
English: Someone said to him: Although your wife is not good at avoiding suspicion, her fault does not belong to the seven articles of divorce. Why did you abandon her in a hurry?

古文：迥秀曰： 娶妻本以养亲，今乃违忤颜色，安敢留也！ 
现代文：李迥秀回答说： 娶妻的目的本来就是为了侍养双亲，现在她却惹得母亲不高兴，我哪里还敢把她留在家中呢！ 
English: Li Yuxiu replied, "The purpose of marrying a wife was originally to serve my parents, but now she has made my mother unhappy. How dare I leave her at home!

古文：竟出之。
现代文：终于还是将崔氏休弃了。
English: He finally renounced the Choe clan.

古文：秋，七月，甲戌，太后还宫。
现代文：秋季，七月，甲戌，武则天回到宫中。
English: In the autumn, in July, Armor Bearer, Wu Zetian returns to the palace.

古文：甲申，李怀远罢为秋官尚书。
现代文：甲申，李怀远被罢免为秋官尚书。
English: Jiaxin, Li Huaiyuan was removed from his post as vice-premier.

古文：八月，突厥默啜寇边，命安北大都护相王为天兵道元帅，统诸军击之，未行而虏退。
现代文：八月，突厥阿史那默啜进犯边境，武则天派安北大都护相王李旦任天兵道元帅，统率众路大军迎击，还没有等到发兵，突厥即已退军。
English: In August, the Turk Ashinamers invaded the border. Wu Zetian sent Wang Li Dan, the tutelary minister of Anbei, as the marshal of the Heaven's Guards, to lead the army to counterattack. Before the troops were sent out, the Turks had already withdrawn.

古文：丙寅，武邑人苏安恒上疏曰： 陛下钦先圣之顾托，受嗣子之推让，敬天顺人，二十年矣。
现代文：丙寅，武邑人苏安恒上疏道： 陛下钦仰先帝的临终嘱托，接受太子的辞让，上敬天意，下顺民心，至今已有二十年了。
English: Hsin Yin, Su An Heng, a native of Wuyi, said: It has been 20 years since Your Majesty admired the last emperor's last request, accepted the prince's resignation, respected the will of heaven, and followed the will of the people.

古文：岂不闻帝舜褰裳，周公复辟！
现代文：难道陛下没有听说过帝舜撩起衣裳、离开帝位，和周公归政于成王的事情吗！
English: Hasn't Your Majesty heard about the emperor taking off his clothes, leaving the imperial throne, and Zhou Gong returning to the throne to become king?

古文：舜之于禹，事只族亲；旦与成王，不离叔父。
现代文：帝舜和大禹之间，仅仅是同族亲属的关系；周公旦与周成王之间，也不过是叔侄关系。
English: The relationship between Empress Dowager Cixi and Dayu was merely that of relatives of the same race; between Zhou Gongdan and Zhou Chengwang, it was no more than an uncle-nephew relationship.

古文：族亲何如子之爱，叔父何如母之恩？
现代文：同族亲属之间的感情哪里能与亲生儿子对母亲的敬爱相比，叔父对于侄子又哪里能够比得上母亲对儿子的情分？
English: How can the feelings between relatives of the same race be compared with the love of a natural son for his mother, and how can the feelings of an uncle for his nephew be compared with the feelings of a mother for her son?

古文：今太子孝敬是崇，春秋既壮，若使统临宸极，何异陛下之身！
现代文：现在太子尊崇孝亲敬上之道，又已到壮年，如果让他即皇帝位，治理国家，与陛下自居帝位又能有什么区别！
English: Now that the crown prince has taken the path of honoring filial piety and respect, and has reached the prime of life, if he is made emperor and governs the country, what difference can there be between him and His Majesty, who considers himself to be the emperor!

古文：陛下年德既尊，宝位将倦，机务繁重，浩荡心神，何不禅位东宫，自怡圣体！
现代文：陛下的年纪与德望都很高了，身居帝位将感到疲倦，需要处理的事务十分烦重，会使您心神耗竭，无从思虑，陛下为什么不将帝位禅让给太子，以追求御体的安康愉悦呢！
English: Your Majesty's age and prestige are very high. You will feel tired when you are on the throne. The affairs that need to be handled are very troublesome, which will exhaust your mind and make you unable to think. Why doesn't Your Majesty give up the imperial throne to the crown prince in order to pursue the health and happiness of the Emperor?

古文：自昔理天下者，不见二姓而俱王也，当今梁、定、河内、建昌诸王，承陛下之廕覆，并得封王。
现代文：自古以来治理天下，不曾见过两个不同姓氏的家族成员同时被封为王的，而现在梁王武三思、定王武攸暨、河内王武懿宗、建昌王武攸宁等，承蒙陛下的荫庇，都被封为王。
English: Since ancient times, there has never been a time when two members of the same family with different surnames have been crowned as kings at the same time. Now, Liang Wang Wusan Si, Ding Wang Wuyuan Ji, Hanoi Wang Wuyuan Zong, and Jianchang Wang Wuyuan Ning have all been crowned as kings under the patronage of His Majesty.

古文：臣谓千秋万岁之后，于事非便。臣请黜为公侯，任以闲简。
现代文：臣以为这件事在陛下百年之后，将会非常不利，因此我请求陛下将他们降为公侯，并任命他们担任清闲的职务。
English: My courtiers thought that this would be very bad for His Majesty after a hundred years, so I asked His Majesty to demote them to the rank of dukes and appoint them to positions of leisure.

古文：臣又闻陛下有二十馀孙，今无尺寸之封，此非长久之计也。臣请分土而王之，择立师傅，教其孝敬之道，以夹辅周室，屏籓皇家，斯为美矣。 
现代文：此外，我还听说陛下有二十多个孙子，至今仍然没有得到任何封号，这也同样不是长久之计，所以臣请求陛下把他们分封为王，为他们选择师傅，以教导他们孝亲敬上之道，使他们能辅佐大周皇室，成为国家的屏障，这就完美无缺了。 
English: In addition, I also heard that His Majesty has more than twenty grandchildren, but they still haven't received any titles, which is also not a long-term solution, so I asked His Majesty to appoint them as kings and choose a master for them to teach them the way of filial piety, so that they can assist the Zhou royal family and become a barrier to the country, which is perfect.

古文：疏奏，太后召见，赐食，慰谕而遣之。
现代文：奏疏进呈后，武则天召见了他，并赐给酒饭，用好话慰解之后送他出宫。
English: After the report was submitted, Wu Zetian summoned him and gave him wine and rice. After consoling him with kind words, he sent him out of the palace.

古文：太后春秋高，政事多委张易之兄弟；邵王重润与其妹永泰郡主、主婿魏王武延基窃议其事。
现代文：武则天年事已高，朝廷政事多让张易之兄弟去处理；邵王李重润和他的妹妹永泰郡主及永泰郡主的丈夫魏王武延基在私下议论此事。
English: Wu Zetian was very old, and the imperial court affairs were mostly handled by Zhang Yi's brothers; Shao Wang Li Chongrun and his sister Yongtai Princess and Yongtai Princess's husband Wei Wang Wu Yanji discussed the matter in private.

古文：易之诉于太后，九月，壬申，太后皆逼令自杀。
现代文：张易之把这件事告诉了武则天。九月，壬申，武则天副迫邵王李重润、永泰郡主及魏王武延基自杀。
English: Zhang Yizhi told Wu Zetian about this. In September, in Jinshin, Wu Zetian's deputy forced Shao Wang Li Chongrun, Yongtai Princess and Wei King Wu Yanji to commit suicide.

古文：延基，承嗣之子也。
现代文：武延基，是武则天的侄子武承嗣之子。
English: Wu Yanji was the son of Wu Zetian's nephew, Wu Chengzhi.

古文：丙申，以相王知左、右羽林卫大将军事。
现代文：丙申，武则天任命相王李旦主持左、右羽林卫大将军的事务。
English: According to the legend, King Wu Zetian appointed King Li Dan to preside over the affairs of the left and right wings of Lin Wei.

古文：冬，十月，壬寅，太后西入关，辛酉，至京师；赦天下，改元。
现代文：冬季十月，壬寅，武则天西行入潼关，辛酉，到达京城长安；下诏赦免天下罪犯，改年号为长安。
English: In the winter of October, Ren Yin, Wu Zetian westbound into Shaoguan, Xin Zetian, arrived in the capital Chang'an; the next edict pardoned the world's criminals and changed the year to Chang'an.

古文：十一月，戊寅，改含元宫为大明宫。
现代文：十一月，戊寅，武则天把含元宫改名为大明宫。
English: In November, Wu Zetian changed the name of Han Yuan Palace to Daming Palace.

古文：天官侍郎安平崔玄，性介直，未尝请谒。
现代文：天官侍郎安平县人崔玄，性情耿直，从来不向权贵请托求见。
English: Cui Xuan, a man from Anping County, who served as an attendant to the emperor, had a straightforward disposition and never asked for favors from those in power.

古文：执政恶之，改文昌左丞。
现代文：这些人讨厌他，于是让他改任文昌左丞。
English: These people hated him, so they made him change his position to Wenchang Zuo.

古文：月馀，太后谓玄曰： 自卿改官以来，闻令史设斋自庆。此欲盛为奸贪耳，今还卿旧任。 
现代文：一个多月之后，武则天对崔玄说： 我听说自从你改任文昌左丞之后，你原来属下的令史等官吏纷纷准备斋食施给僧尼以示庆贺，看起来他们是想大干贪赃枉法的事呀！
English: More than a month later, Wu Zetian said to Cui Xuan, "I heard that since you were transferred to the post of Wenchang Zuo Rong, your subordinate officials such as Ling Shi have been preparing to celebrate by giving food to monks and nuns. It looks like they want to do a lot of corrupting things!"

古文：乃复拜天官侍郎，仍赐彩七十段。
现代文：所以现在我让你官复原职。 于是重新任命崔玄为天官侍郎，还赏赐他彩色丝织物七十段。
English: So now I have reinstated your position, reappointed Cui Xuan as a celestial official, and rewarded him with seventy pieces of colored silk fabric.

古文：以主客郎中郭元振为凉州都督、陇右诸军大使。
现代文：武则天任命主客郎中郭元振为凉州都督、陇右诸军大使。
English: Wu Zetian appointed his chief concubine, Zhong Guo Yuan Zhen, as the governor of Liangzhou and the ambassador to the armies in Shiyu.

古文：先是，凉州南北境不过四百馀里，突厥、吐蕃频岁奄至城下，百姓苦之。
现代文：在此之前，凉州全境南北不过四百多里，突厥和吐蕃的兵马连年都经常突然出现在州城下，老百姓为此而受苦。
English: Prior to this, the entire territory of Liangzhou was only more than four hundred miles from north to south, and the Turkish and Tuvan soldiers and horses often suddenly appeared under the state capital for years, and the common people suffered for this.

古文：元振始于南境硖口置和戎城，北境碛中置白亭军，控其冲要，拓州境千五百里，自是寇不复至城下。
现代文：郭元振开始在凉州南部边境的硖口修筑和戎城，在北部边境的沙漠中设置白亭军，控制了凉州的交通要道，将凉州边境拓展了一千五百里，从此突厥、吐蕃的兵马无法再前来州城侵扰。
English: Guo Yuanzhen began to build He Rong City at the southern border of Liangzhou, and set up the Baiting Army in the desert of the northern border. He controlled the traffic routes of Liangzhou and expanded the border of Liangzhou by 1,500 miles. From then on, the Turkish and Tibetan soldiers and horses could no longer come to the state capital to invade.

古文：元振又令甘州刺史李汉通开置屯田，尽水陆之利。
现代文：郭元振又让甘州刺史李汉通实行屯田政策，充分利用当地的河流土地从事农业生产。
English: Guo Yuanzhen also allowed Ganzhou Zhishi Li Hantong to implement the policy of land consolidation, making full use of the local river land for agricultural production.

古文：旧凉州粟麦斛至数千，及汉通收率之后，一缣籴数十斛，积军粮支数十年。
现代文：以往凉州地区的谷子和小麦每斛值数千钱，到了李汉通募民垦种土地之后，一匹细绢就可以换到数十斛粮，积存在军粮可供数十年之用。
English: In the past, grain and wheat in the Liangzhou area were worth thousands of yuan per mule. After Li Hantong recruited people to cultivate land, a fine mule could be exchanged for dozens of mule grain, which could be stored in military grain for decades.

古文：元振善于抚御，在凉州五年，夷、夏畏慕，令行禁止，牛羊被野，路不拾遗。
现代文：郭元振擅长安抚统治百姓，在凉州任职的五年中，深受当地各族百姓敬畏，真正做到了令行禁止，所畜养的牛羊漫山遍野，境内路不拾遗。
English: Guo Yuanzhen is good at appeasing the ruling people. During the five years he served in Liangzhou, he was deeply revered by the local people of all ethnic groups. He truly achieved the ban. The cattle and sheep raised by him are everywhere, and there is no way to find them within the territory.

古文：长安二年壬寅，公元七零二年春，正月，乙酉，初设武举。
现代文：长安二年春季正月，乙酉，武则天第一次在科举考试中增设武举。
English: In the first month of the spring of the second year of Chang'an, the Wu Zetian was added for the first time in the imperial examinations.

古文：突厥寇盐、夏二州。
现代文：突厥兵进犯盐州和夏州。
English: The Turks invaded Yanzhou and Xiazhou.

古文：三月，庚寅，突厥破石岭，寇并州。
现代文：三月，庚寅，突厥兵攻破石岭关，进犯并州。
English: In March, Geng Yin, a Turkic soldier, broke through Shiling Pass and invaded and annexed the prefecture.

古文：以雍州长史薛季昶摄右台大夫，充山东防御军大使，沧、瀛、幽、易、恒、定等州诸军皆受季昶节度。
现代文：武则天任命雍州长史薛季昶为代理右台大夫，充任山东防御军大使，沧州、瀛州、幽州、易州、恒州、定州等处兵马都归他指挥调度。
English: Wu Zetian appointed the governor of Yongzheng, Shi Xuejian, as the acting right-side doctor, acting as the ambassador of the Shandong Defense Army. The soldiers and horses in Cangzhou, Zhangzhou, Yuzhou, Yizhou, Hengzhou and Dingzhou were under his command and control.

古文：夏，四月，以幽州刺史张仁愿专知幽、平、妫、檀防御，仍与季昶相知，以拒突厥。
现代文：夏季，四月，武则天又指派幽州刺史张仁愿专门主持幽州、平州、妫州、檀州的军事防御工作，并且让他与薛季昶互相配合，以抵御突厥军队的进犯。
English: In the summer, in April, Wu Zetian assigned Zhang Ren Rong, the governor of Yuzhou, to preside over the military defense of Yuzhou, Pingzhou, Zhangzhou and Danzhou, and asked him to cooperate with Xue Jizhe to resist the invasion of the Turkish army.

古文：五月，壬申，苏安恒复上疏曰： 臣闻天下者，神尧、文武之天下也。陛下虽居正统，实因唐氏旧基。
现代文：五月，壬申，苏安恒再次上疏说： 臣听说这天下是高祖神尧皇帝和太宗文武皇帝的天下，陛下虽居皇帝之位，但实际所依靠的毕竟是大唐旧有的基业。
English: In May, in Jinshin, Su Anheng went up to the palace again and said, "Minister, I have heard that this world is the world of Emperor Gaozhenshu and Emperor Taizongwenwu. Although Your Majesty is the emperor, what you actually rely on is the old Tang Dynasty.

古文：当今太子追回，年德俱盛，陛下贪其宝位而忘母子深恩，将何圣颜以见唐家宗庙，将何诰命以谒大帝坟陵？
现代文：现在太子重新得立，正当壮年，品德高尚，陛下因贪恋皇位而忘却母子之间的深厚恩情，将以什么脸面去见供奉在宗庙之中的大唐列祖列宗，又将以何种身份去谒见大唐高宗皇帝的陵寝？
English: Now that the crown prince has been reinstated, he is of the right age and has a high moral character. His majesty has forgotten the deep affection between his mother and son because of his greed for the throne. With what face will he go to see the ancestors of the Great Tang Dynasty enshrined in the ancestral temple, and in what capacity will he visit the tomb of Emperor Gaozong of the Great Tang Dynasty?

古文：陛下何故日夜积忧，不知钟鸣漏尽！
现代文：陛下为什么还要日夜忧虑国事，而不明白自己已到了晨钟已响、夜漏将尽的暮年！
English: Why should His Majesty worry day and night about the affairs of state, without understanding that he has reached the twilight of his life, when the morning bell has already rung and the night is about to end!

古文：臣愚以为天意人事，还归李家。
现代文：臣愚昧，以为天意人心，都希望将皇位归还李家。
English: The foolish vassals, thinking that it was God's will, all hoped that the imperial throne would be returned to the Li family.

古文：陛下虽安天位，殊不知物极则反，器满则倾。
现代文：陛下只安于皇位，很不明白物极必反、器满则倾的道理！
English: His Majesty is only comfortable on the throne, and doesn't understand the principle that one must do the opposite of what one wants to do, and what one wants to do when one's cup is full!

古文：臣何惜一朝之命，而不安万乘之国哉！ 
现代文：臣为了使社稷长治久安，又怎么能顾惜个人的短暂生命呢！ 
English: In order to ensure long-term peace and stability in society, how can a minister spare his own short life?

古文：太后亦不之罪。
现代文：武则天也没有加罪于他。
English: Wu Zetian did not add to his sentence.

古文：乙未，以相王为并州牧，充安北道行军元帅，以魏元忠为之副。
现代文：乙未，武则天任命相王李旦为并州牧，充任安北道行军元帅，任命魏元忠作他的副职。
English: In the second year of Wu Zetian's reign, he appointed Wang Li Dan as the provincial governor of Anbei Province, and appointed Wei Yuanzhong as his deputy.

古文：六月，壬戌，召神都留守韦巨源诣京师，以副留守李峤代之。
现代文：六月，壬戌，武则天将神都留守韦巨源召到京师长安，指派神都副留守李峤代行他的职务。
English: In June, Wu Zetian summoned Wei Jiuyuan, the deputy guardian of Jindu, to the capital Chang'an, and appointed Li Xi, the deputy guardian of Jindu, to perform his duties.

古文：秋，七月，甲午，突厥寇代州。
现代文：秋季七月，甲午，突厥兵进犯代州。
English: In the autumn of July, in the afternoon of the 1st, the Turkish soldiers invaded Daizhou.

古文：司仆卿张昌宗兄弟贵盛，势倾朝野。
现代文：司仆卿张昌宗兄弟贵显已极，权倾朝野。
English: Servant of the Emperor Zhang Changzong's brother, Gui Xian, has reached the extreme, and power has been transferred to the court.

古文：八月，戊午，太子、相王、太平公主上表请封昌宗为王，制不许；壬戌，又请，乃赐爵鄴国公。
现代文：八月，戊午，太子李显、相王李旦、太平公主上表，请求封张昌宗为王，武则天拒绝了这一建议；壬戌，这些人又请求封张昌宗为王，武则天才答应赐张昌宗为邺国公。
English: In the afternoon of August, Prince Li Xian, Prince Li Tan, and Princess Taiping came to the table to request that Zhang Changzong be crowned king, but Wu Zetian rejected this suggestion. Later, these people also requested that Zhang Changzong be crowned king, and Wu Zetian agreed to give Zhang Changzong the title of Duke of An.

古文：敕： 自今有告言扬州及豫、博馀党，一无所问，内外官司无得为理。 
现代文：武则天颁下敕书： 从现在起如果再有揭发光宅元年扬州徐敬业谋反案以及垂拱四年豫州李贞、博州李冲父子谋反案余党的，都不必过问，朝廷内外各衙门一律不得受理。 
English: Wu Zetian issued an imperial edict: From now on, if there are any more parties involved in the Yangzhou Xu Jingye's countermeasures case in the first year of the Ming Dynasty and the countermeasures case of the father and son in the four years of the Ming Dynasty, there is no need to ask questions, and all complaints both inside and outside the imperial court shall not be accepted.

古文：九月，乙丑朔，日有食之，不尽如钩，神都见其既。
现代文：九月，乙丑朔，出现日食，没有全食，还看到像镰刀一样的形状，在神都能见到日全食。
English: In September, the second month of the year, there was a solar eclipse, but not a total eclipse. I also saw a shape like a sickle, and I could see a total solar eclipse in the sky.

古文：壬申，突厥寇忻州。
现代文：壬申，突厥兵进犯忻州。
English: On the 8th day of the 1st month, the Turkic and other armies invaded Zhangzhou.

古文：己卯，吐蕃遣其臣论弥萨来求和。
现代文：己卯，吐蕃派大臣论弥萨前来求和。
English: On the day of the mass, the ministers of the Tubo faction came to ask for peace.

古文：庚辰，以太子宾客武三思为大谷道大总管，洛州长史敬晖为副；辛巳，又以相王旦为并州道元帅，三思与武攸宜、魏元忠为之副；姚元崇为长史，司礼少卿郑杲为司马；然竟不行。
现代文：庚辰，武则天任命太子宾客武三思为大谷道大总管，任命洛州长史敬晖为武三思的副职；辛巳，武则天又任命相王李旦为并州道元帅，任命武三思与武攸宜、魏元忠三人为李旦的副职；任命姚元崇为长史，司礼少卿郑杲为司马，但是却没有赴任。
English: Geng Chen and Wu Zetian appointed the prince guest Wu Sanshi as the general manager of Datang Road, and appointed the governor of Luo Province Shi Jingyao as the deputy of Wu Sanshi; meanwhile, Wu Zetian also appointed the king of the party and the people Li Dan as the marshal of Nian County Road, and appointed Wu Sanshi, Wu Youyi and Wei Yuanzhong as the three deputies of Li Dan; appointed Yao Yuanzhong as the chief historian, and appointed the Secretary of the Ministry of Civil Affairs Zheng Yao as the secretary, but they did not take office.

古文：癸未，宴论弥萨于麟德殿。
现代文：癸未，武则天在麟德殿宴请吐蕃大臣论弥萨。
English: On the following day, Emperor Wu Zetian invited the minister of Tu Wei to a banquet at the Lin De Palace to discuss the mass.

古文：时凉州都督唐体璟入朝，亦预宴。
现代文：这时凉州都督唐休正好入朝，也参加了这次宴会。
English: At this time, the governor of Liangzhou, Tang Xiu, just entered the imperial court and also attended the banquet.

古文：弥萨屡窥之。
现代文：论弥萨屡次偷看唐休。
English: On the subject of the Mass, Tang Xiu peeped in repeatedly.

古文：太后问其故，对曰： 洪源之战，此将军猛厉无故，故欲识之。 
现代文：武则天询问论弥萨这样做的原因，论弥萨回答说： 在洪源战役中，这位将军勇猛无敌，所以我想要认识他。 
English: Wu Zetian asked On Missa why he did this. On Missa replied, "In the Battle of Hongyuan, this general was invincible, so I want to know him."

古文：太后擢休璟为右武威、金吾二卫大将军。
现代文：武则天提拔唐休为右武威、金吾二卫大将军。
English: Wu Zetian promoted Tang Xiu to the Right Wu Wei and King Wu Erwei Generals.

古文：休璟练习边事，自碣石以西逾四镇，绵亘万里，山川要害，皆能记之。
现代文：唐休极为熟悉边境地区的军政事务，自辽东碣石以西直至安西四镇以外绵延万里的山川险要之处，他都能记住。
English: Tang Xiu is very familiar with the military and political affairs of the border areas. He can remember the key points of the mountains and rivers stretching for thousands of miles from the west of Liaodong Zhanshi to the four towns of Anxi.

古文：冬，十月，甲辰，天官侍郎、同平章事顾琮薨。
现代文：冬季十月，甲辰，天官侍郎、同平章事顾琮去世。
English: In the winter of October, Jia Chen, the attendant of Heaven, and Tongping Zhang Zhi Gui passed away.

古文：戊申，吐蕃赞普将万馀人寇茂州，都督陈大慈与之四战，皆破之，斩首千馀级。
现代文：戊申，吐蕃赞普率领一万多人马进犯茂州，都督陈大慈与吐蕃军队四次交战，每次都打败了他们，共斩敌首一千余级。
English: Wushin, Zhuge Zampu led more than ten thousand people to invade Maozhou. The governor Chen Daci fought with the Tubo army four times, and defeated them each time, with a total of more than a thousand enemy heads.

古文：十一月，辛未，监察御史魏靖上疏，以为： 陛下既知来俊臣之奸，处以极法，乞详覆俊臣等所推十狱，伸其枉滥。 
现代文：十一月，辛未，监察御史魏靖上疏认为： 陛下已了解来俊臣的奸邪，并将他处死。臣请求详细复核来俊臣等人当时所主持办理的重大案件，为那些受冤枉的人平反昭雪。 
English: In November, Xinwei, the inspector, Wei Jing Shangsuo, thought: His Majesty has learned of the treachery of Lai Junchen and will put him to death. The minister requested a detailed review of the major cases handled by Lai Junchen and others at that time, in order to vindicate those who were wronged.

古文：太后乃命监察御史苏颋按覆俊臣等旧狱，由是雪免者甚众。
现代文：武则天于是指派监察御史苏复核来俊臣等人所处理的案件，很多人因此而得以免罪昭雪。
English: Wu Zetian then assigned the inspector of the imperial court to review the cases handled by Juncheng and others, and many people were exonerated as a result.

古文：颋，夔之曾孙也。
现代文：苏，是苏夔的曾孙。
English: Su is Su Yao's great-grandson.

古文：戊子，太后祀南郊，赦天下。
现代文：戊子，武则天到南郊祭祀，大赦天下罪人。
English: Bo Zi, Wu Zetian went to the southern suburbs to offer sacrifices and pardon the sinners of the world.

古文：十二月，甲午，以魏元忠为安东道安抚大使，羽林卫大将军李多祚检校幽州都督，右羽林卫将军薛讷、左武卫将军骆务整为之副。
现代文：十二月，甲午，武则天任命魏元忠为安东道安抚大使，羽林卫大将军李多祚为检校幽州都督，右羽林卫将军薛讷、左武卫将军骆务整作他的副职。
English: In the afternoon of the first day of December, Wu Zetian appointed Wei Yuanzhong as the Ambassador of Peace and Tranquility, Ulin Guard General Li Duojun as the Governor of Yuzhou, and Ulin Guard General Xue Ne and Zuo Guard General Luo Mu as his deputies.

古文：戊申，置北庭都护府于庭州。
现代文：戊申，朝廷在西域的庭州设置北庭都护府。
English: In Busshin, the imperial court set up the Northern Court Capital Protectorate in the western region of Tingzhou.

古文：侍御史张循宪为河东采访使，有疑事不能决，病之，问侍吏曰： 此有佳客，可与议事者乎？ 
现代文：侍御史张循宪任河东采访使，有疑难事无法决断，很是忧虑，于是问侍奉他的官吏道： 这个地方有没有可以商议事情的杰出人才呀？ 
English: Zhang Xuanxian, the attendant of the Historian of the East China Sea, asked the official who served him, "Is there any outstanding talent in this place that can discuss things?"

古文：吏言前平乡尉猗氏张嘉贞有异才，循宪召见，询以事；嘉贞为条析理分，莫不洗然。
现代文：官吏告诉他，曾任平乡尉的猗氏县人张嘉贞有奇才。张循宪召见张嘉贞，向他请教这件疑难问题的处理方法。
English: The official told him that Zhang Jiazhen, a man from Jinshi County who was once a Pingxiang lieutenant, had a great talent. Zhang Xuanxian called Zhang Jiazhen and asked him how to deal with this difficult problem.

古文：循宪因请为奏，皆意所未及。
现代文：张嘉贞于是对这个问题的各个方面和其中的道理进行了分析，没有一点不清晰之处。
English: Zhang Jiazhen then analyzed the various aspects of this problem and the reason for it, and there was nothing unclear.

古文：循宪还，见太后，太后善其奏，循宪具言嘉贞所为，且请以己之官授之。
现代文：张循宪于是请他代写奏疏，所谈的都是自己没有考虑到的。张循宪回到朝中，见到武则天，武则天称赞他的奏疏写得很好，张循宪于是把疏文为张嘉贞所拟的事全部禀告了武则天，并请求武则天允许将他自己所担任的侍御史职务授给张嘉贞。
English: Zhang Xianxian then asked him to write a sonnet on his behalf, and all the things he talked about were things he had not considered. Zhang Xianxian returned to the court and saw Wu Zetian. Wu Zetian praised his sonnet as well written. Zhang Xianxian then denounced to Wu Zetian all the things that the sonnet had written for Zhang Jiazhen, and asked Wu Zetian for permission to give Zhang Jiazhen the position of courtier-historian, which he himself held.

古文：太后曰： 朕宁无一官自进贤邪！ 
现代文：武则天说： 朕难道没有一个官位来荐引提拔贤能之士吗！ 
English: Wu Zetian said, "Don't I have an official position to recommend and promote talented people?

古文：因召嘉贞，入见内殿，与语，大悦，即拜监察御史；擢循宪司勋郎中，赏其得人也。长安三年癸卯，公元七零三年春，三月，壬戌朔，日有食之。
现代文：长安三年春季三月，壬戌朔，出现日食。
English: In the spring of March in the third year of Chang'an, a solar eclipse occurred.

古文：夏，四月，吐蕃遣使献马千匹、金二千两以求昏。
现代文：夏季，四月，吐蕃派遣使者前来进献马一千匹、黄金二千两，目的是为了向大唐求婚。
English: In the summer, in April, Tubo sent an envoy to offer a thousand horses and two thousand taels of gold in order to propose marriage to Datang.

古文：闰月，丁丑，命韦安石留守神都。
现代文：闰月，丁丑，武则天命令韦安石留守神都。
English: The intercalary month, Ding Chou, and Wu Zetian ordered Wei Anshi to stay in the capital.

古文：己卯，改文昌台为中台。以中台左丞李峤知纳言事。
现代文：己卯，武则天将文昌台改名为中台，任命中台左丞李峤掌管纳言事务。
English: At the same time, Wu Zetian changed the name of Wenchangdai to Zhongdai and appointed Zhongdai Zuo Rong to be in charge of Nagan affairs.

古文：新罗王金理洪卒，遣使立其弟崇基为王。
现代文：新罗王金理洪去世，武则天派遣使者前去立他的弟弟金崇基为王。
English: When King Jin Li Hong of Silla died, Emperor Wu Zetian sent an envoy to install his younger brother, King Kim Chong Gi, as king.

古文：六月，辛酉，突厥默啜遣其臣莫贺干来，请以女妻皇太子之子。
现代文：六月，辛酉，突厥阿史那默啜派大臣莫贺干前来，请求把他的女儿嫁给皇太子的儿子。
English: In June, Xinran, a Turk, sent a minister, Moga Gan, to request that his daughter be married to the crown prince's son.

古文：宁州大水，溺杀二千馀人。
现代文：宁州发大水，淹死二千多人。
English: More than two thousand people drowned in the floods in Ningzhou.

古文：秋，七月，癸卯，以正谏大夫硃敬则同平章事。
现代文：秋季七月，癸卯，武则天任命正谏大夫硃敬则为同平章事。
English: In the autumn of July, Wu Zetian's appointment of Zhengyi Doctor Gong Jing was a matter of equal importance.

古文：戊申，以并州牧相王旦为雍州牧。
现代文：戊申，武则天任命相王李旦为雍州牧。
English: Wushin, Wu Zetian appointed King Li Dan as Yongzhou Patriarch.

古文：庚戌，以夏官尚书、检校凉州都督唐休璟同凤阁鸾台三品。
现代文：庚戌，武则天任命夏官尚书、检校凉州都督唐休为同凤阁鸾台三品。
English: Geng Zheng and Wu Zetian appointed Xia official Shang Shu and Yangzhou governor Tang Xiu as the three leaders of Tongfeng Pavilion.

古文：时突骑施酋长乌质勒与西突厥诸部相攻，安西道绝。
现代文：当时由于突骑施酋长乌质勒与西突厥各部落互相攻伐，通安西的道路断绝。
English: At that time, the road to Anxi was cut off due to the mutual attacks between the Western Turkic tribes and Ujile, the chief of the Tujia Shi.

古文：太后命休璟与诸宰相议其事，顷之，奏上，太后即依其议施行。
现代文：武则天命令唐休与各位宰相商议解决办法。不一会儿，商议好的办法就呈报了上来，武则天就依照他们的意见施行。
English: Wu Zetian ordered Tang Xiu to discuss a solution with the various chancellors. Soon, the solution that was discussed was reported, and Wu Zetian implemented it according to their opinions.

古文：后十馀日，安西诸州请兵应接，程期一如休璟所画，太后谓休璟曰： 恨用卿晚！ 
现代文：十几天后，安西都护府所辖各州请求派兵接应，具体的时间与唐休所预想的完全相符。武则天对唐休说： 朕实在遗憾用你用得太晚了。 
English: A dozen days later, the states under the jurisdiction of the Anxi Capital Protectorate requested the dispatch of troops, and the specific time was completely consistent with Tang Xiu's expectation. Wu Zetian said to Tang Xiu: I really regret that you used it too late.

古文：谓诸宰相曰： 休璟练习边事，卿曹十不当一。 
现代文：并且对各位宰相说： 唐休极为熟悉边境事务，你们十个人也抵不上他一个人。 
English: And he said to the prime ministers: Tang Xiu is very familiar with border affairs, and ten of you cannot match him.

古文：时西突厥可汗斛瑟罗用刑残酷，诸部不服。
现代文：起初西突厥可汗斛瑟罗所实行的刑罚十分残酷，他统辖的各个部落都不服从他。
English: At first, the Western Turkic khan, Khosrow, was so harsh in his punishments that the tribes he ruled did not obey him.

古文：乌质勒本隶斛瑟罗，号莫贺达干，能抚其众，诸部归之，斛瑟罗不能制。
现代文：乌质勒本来是斛瑟罗的下属，号莫贺达干，因为他善于安抚部下，各个部落便纷纷归附他，斛瑟罗无力制止。
English: Uzziel was originally a subordinate of Uzzah, but because he was good at placating his subordinates, the various tribes flocked to him, and Uzzah was powerless to stop them.

古文：乌质勒置都督二十员，各将兵七千人，屯碎叶西北；后攻陷碎叶，徙其牙帐居之。
现代文：乌质勒共任命了二十名都督，让他们每个人统率七千人，驻扎在碎叶城的西北，后来攻陷碎叶城，将自己的衙帐迁到那里。
English: Uzziel appointed twenty governors, each of whom commanded seven thousand men, and stationed them in the northwest of the City of Broken Leaves. Later, he conquered the City of Broken Leaves and moved his capital there.

古文：斛瑟罗部众离散，因入朝，不敢复还，乌质勒悉并其地。
现代文：斛瑟罗手下的人马都已四分五裂，于是入朝，不敢再回到西北边境去。乌质勒于是全部吞并了斛瑟罗原有的领地。
English: The men and horses under the command of Uthero had been torn to pieces, so they entered the kingdom and did not dare to return to the northwestern border. Ugile then completely annexed Uthero's original territory.

古文：九月，庚寅朔，日有食之，既。
现代文：九月，庚寅朔，出现日食，是日全食。
English: In September, Geng Yinshuo, a solar eclipse occurred, a total solar eclipse.

古文：初，左台大夫、同凤阁鸾台三品魏元忠为洛州长史，洛阳令张昌仪恃诸兄之势，每牙，直上长史听事；元忠到官，叱下之。
现代文：当初，左台大夫、同凤阁鸾台三品魏元忠曾担任洛州长史职务。在魏元忠到任以前，洛阳令张昌仪倚仗几个兄长的权势，每次到洛州长史衙门参拜，都不按规定在庭下站立，而径直走上长史办公的大厅；魏元忠到任后，叱令他下去。
English: At the beginning, Wei Yuanzhong, a doctor of the Left Division, Tongfeng Pavilion and Three Treasures of Fengtai, served as the governor of Luo Province. Before Wei Yuanzhong took office, Zhang Changyi, the governor of Luoyang, relied on the power of several older brothers. Every time he visited the governor of Luo Province, he did not stand under the court according to regulations, but walked straight into the hall of the long history office. After Wei Yuanzhong took office, he scolded him to go down.

古文：张易之奴暴乱都市，元忠杖杀之。
现代文：张易之的家奴在神都的街市上横行不法，魏元忠下令将其用杖刑处死。
English: Zhang Yizhi's family slave ran amok in the streets and markets of the capital, and Wei Yuanzhong ordered that he be put to death with a cane.

古文：及为相，太后召易之弟岐州刺史昌期，欲以为雍州长史，对仗，问宰相曰： 谁堪雍州者？ 
现代文：在魏元忠入朝作宰相以后，武则天征召张易之的弟弟岐州刺史张昌期入朝，想要任命他为雍州长史。百官上朝奏事时，武则天向诸位宰相问道： 谁可以胜任雍州长史的职务？ 
English: After Wei Yuanzhong entered the imperial court as prime minister, Wu Zetian conscripted Zhang Yizhi's younger brother, the Qizhou governor Zhang Changji, to enter the imperial court and wanted to appoint him as the Yongzheng governor. When hundreds of officials came to the imperial court to report, Wu Zetian asked the prime ministers: Who is qualified to serve as the Yongzheng governor?

古文：元忠对曰： 今之朝臣无以易薛季昶。 
现代文：魏元忠说： 现在众多的朝臣之中，没有哪一位比薛季昶更合适的了。 
English: Wei Yuanzhong said: Among the numerous courtiers nowadays, there is no one more suitable than Xue Jizhe.

古文：太后曰： 季昶久任京府，朕欲别除一官；昌期何如？ 
现代文：武则天说： 薛季昶长期以来一直在京府任职，朕打算另外任命他一个职务。你们认为张昌期这个人怎么样？ 
English: Wu Zetian said: Xue Jizhe has been working in Beijing for a long time, I intend to appoint him to another position. What do you think of Zhang Changru?

古文：诸相皆曰： 陛下得人矣。 
现代文：宰相们纷纷回答说： 陛下可算是真正找到了合适的人选了。 
English: The prime ministers replied one after another: His Majesty has really found the right person.

古文：元忠独曰： 昌期不堪！ 
现代文：唯独魏元忠提出反对意见： 张昌期无法胜任这一职务！ 
English: Only Wei Yuanzhong raised an objection: Zhang Changji is not qualified for this post!

古文：太后问其故，元忠曰： 昌期少年，不闲吏事，向在岐州，户口逃亡且尽。
现代文：武则天询问原因，魏元忠回答说： 张昌期还很年轻，不熟悉治理之道。以前他在岐州任官时，岐州户口逃亡严重，所剩无几。
English: Wu Zetian asked the reason, Wei Yuanzhong replied: Zhang Changji is still very young and is not familiar with the way of governance. Previously, when he was an official in Qizhou, the Qizhou hukou was seriously fled, and there were few left.

古文：雍州帝京，事务繁剧，不若季昶强干习事。 
现代文：雍州地处京城，事情多、担子重，张昌期自然不如薛季昶精明强干、熟悉事务。 
English: Yongzhou is located in the capital city, there are many things and the burden is heavy. Zhang Chang period is naturally not as shrewd and strong as Xue Jizhe, and is familiar with affairs.

古文：太后默然而止。
现代文：武则天没有再说什么。
English: Wu Zetian didn't say anything else.

古文：元忠又尝面奏： 臣自先帝以来，蒙被恩渥，今承乏宰相，不能尽忠死节，使小人在侧，臣之罪也！ 
现代文：魏元忠还曾当面向武则天进言道： 从先帝在位直到现在，臣蒙受朝廷大恩，如今臣得忝列宰相之位，不能为国家竭忠效死，致使小人得以在陛下左右掌权，这是臣的罪过呀！ 
English: Wei Yuanzhong also said in front of Wu Zetian: From the reign of the former emperor until now, the vassal has received great favor from the imperial court, and now the vassal has won the position of prime minister, and cannot die for the country, so that the villain can take power around His Majesty. This is the vassal's sin!

古文：太后不悦，由是诸张深怨之。
现代文：武则天听后很不高兴。张易之兄弟也因此而十分痛恨魏元忠。
English: Wu Zetian was very unhappy after hearing this. Zhang Yi's brothers also hated Wei Yuanzhong very much because of this.

古文：司礼丞高戬，太平公主之所爱也。
现代文：司礼丞高戬，是太平公主所宠爱的人。
English: Sereicho Takatsuki is a favorite of Princess Taiping.

古文：会太后不豫，张昌宗恐太后一日晏驾，为元忠所诛，乃谮元忠与戬私议云 太后老矣，不若挟太子为久长。 
现代文：恰好武则天生病，张昌宗害怕一旦武则天去世，自己会被魏元忠杀掉，于是诬陷魏元忠曾和高戬私下商议说： 太后年岁太大了，我们不如倚仗太子，这样才是长久之计。 
English: Just as Wu Zetian fell ill, Zhang Changzong was afraid that once Wu Zetian died, he would be killed by Wei Yuanzhong. Therefore, he falsely accused Wei Yuanzhong and had a private discussion with Gao Qi, saying: The empress dowager is too old, we might as well rely on the crown prince. This is a long-term strategy.

古文：太后怒，下元忠、戬狱，将使与昌宗廷辨之。
现代文：武则天十分生气，下令将魏元忠和高戬逮捕入狱，并准备让他们两人与张昌宗在朝廷上当场对质。
English: Wu Zetian was very angry and ordered Wei Yuanzhong and Gao Qi to be arrested and imprisoned. He also planned to have the two of them confront Zhang Changzong in court.

古文：昌宗密引凤阁舍人张说，赂以美官，使证元忠，说许之。
现代文：张昌宗暗地里找来凤阁舍人张说，用高官厚禄收买他，要他出面证明魏元忠确实说过上面的话，张说答应为他作这样的证明。
English: Zhang Changzong secretly found Fengge's housekeeper Zhang and bribed him with a high-ranking official's generous salary, asking him to come forward to prove that Wei Yuanzhong had indeed said the above words. Zhang said that he promised to make such a proof for him.

古文：明日，太后召太子、相王及诸宰相，使元忠与昌宗参对，往复不决。
现代文：第二天，武则天召来太子李显、相王李旦以及诸位宰相，让魏元忠与张昌宗当着大家的面互相对质，双方各不相让，因而无法作出决断。
English: The next day, Emperor Wu Zetian summoned the Crown Prince Li Xian, the Minister King Li Dan, and all the ministers, and had Wei Yuanzhong and Zhang Changzong confront each other in front of everyone. The two sides did not give in to each other, so they could not make a decision.

古文：昌宗曰： 张说闻元忠言，请召问之。 
现代文：张昌宗说： 张说听到魏元忠说的话，请陛下召见张说询问。 
English: Zhang Changzong said: Zhang said that he had heard Wei Yuanzhong's words, and asked His Majesty to summon Zhang to inquire.

古文：太后召说。
现代文：武则天召见张说。
English: Wu Zetian was summoned by heaven to see Zhang.

古文：说曰： 易之兄弟小人，徒闻伊、周之语，安知伊、周之道！
现代文：殿中侍御史济源人张廷对他说： 孔子说过： 早上得知真理，要我当晚死去都行。  
English: Zhang Ting, the attendant of Shi Jiyuan in the hall, said to him: Confucius said: If I learn the truth in the morning, I can die that night.

古文：日者元忠初衣紫，臣以郎官往贺，元忠语客曰： 无功受庞，不胜惭惧。 
现代文：左史刘知几也对他说： 不要使您自己的行为玷污了青史，成为子孙后代的耻辱！ 
English: The left historian Liu Zhikai also said to him: Don't let your own behavior tarnish young history and become a disgrace for future generations!

古文：臣实言曰： 明公居伊、周之任，何愧三品！ 彼伊尹、周公皆为臣至忠，古今慕仰。
现代文：彼伊尹、周公皆为臣至忠，古今慕仰。
English: He Yiyin and Zhou Gong are all loyal subjects, admired from ancient times to the present.

古文：陛下用宰相，不使学伊、周，当使学谁邪？
现代文：陛下用宰相，不使学伊、周，当使学谁邪？
English: Your Majesty uses the prime minister, but does not make him learn Yi and Zhou, who should he make learn evil?

古文：且臣岂不知今日附昌宗立取台衡，附元忠立致族灭！
现代文：且臣岂不知今日附昌宗立取台衡，附元忠立致族灭！
English: And don't they know that today, Fuchucho Shoson stood up to take Taihei, and Fuchimoto Tadayasu stood up to destroy the nation!

古文：但臣畏元忠冤魂，不敢诬之耳。 
现代文：但臣畏元忠冤魂，不敢诬之耳。 
English: However, the vassal feared the former loyal and wronged soul, and dared not offend his ear.

古文：太后曰： 张说反覆小人，宜并系治之。 
现代文：太后曰： 张说反覆小人，宜并系治之。 
English: The empress dowager said: Zhang said repeatedly villain, it is appropriate to deal with it.

古文：他日，更引问，说对如前。
现代文：他日，更引问，说对如前。
English: On the second day, he was asked more questions and answered the same as before.

古文：太后怒，命宰相与河内王武懿宗共鞫之，说所执如初。
现代文：太后怒，命宰相与河内王武懿宗共鞫之，说所执如初。
English: The empress dowager was enraged and ordered the prime minister and the king of Hanoi, King Mu Rongzong, to work together, saying that everything would be carried out as before.

古文：硃敬则抗疏理之曰： 元忠素称忠正，张说所坐无名，若令抵罪，失天下望。 
现代文：硃敬则上疏直言申辩说： 魏元忠一向以忠诚正直著称于世，张说入狱又没有任何正当理由，如果将他们治罪，会失掉天下民心。 
English: On the other hand, Zhang Jing said that Wei Yuanzhong has always been famous for his loyalty and honesty in the world. Zhang said that there is no legitimate reason for his imprisonment. If they are punished, they will lose the hearts of the people.

古文：苏安恒亦上疏，以为： 陛下革命之初，人以为纳谏之主；暮年以来，人以为受佞之主。
现代文：苏安恒也为此上疏，认为： 陛下登基之初，臣民们都认为您是善于纳谏的皇帝，年纪大了以后，都认为您是喜欢阿谀奉承的皇帝。
English: Su Anheng was also puzzled by this, saying: At the beginning of His Majesty's accession to the throne, the subjects all thought that you were an emperor who was good at flattery, and when you got older, they all thought that you were an emperor who liked flattery.

古文：自元忠下狱，里巷恟恟，皆以为陛下委信奸宄，斥逐贤良。
现代文：自从魏元忠下狱，大街小巷纷扰不安，士民们都认为陛下信用为非作歹之徒，贬逐贤良方正之士。
English: Since Wei Yuanzhong was imprisoned, the streets and alleys have been disturbed and uneasy. The scholars and the people all think that His Majesty's Trust is a non-criminal and despise the virtuous and upright people.

古文：忠臣烈士，皆抚髀于私室而钳口于公朝，畏迕易之等意，徒取死而无益。
现代文：那些忠臣志士，都在自己家中拍着大腿唉声叹气，而在朝堂之上却缄口不言，害怕万一违犯了张易之等人的意图，会白白送死而毫无益处。
English: Those loyalists, in their own homes, were slapping their thighs and sighing aloud, but above the imperial court, they were silent, afraid that if they violated the intentions of Zhang Yi and others, they would die in vain without any benefit.

古文：方今赋役烦重，百姓凋弊，重以谗慝专恣，刑赏失中，窃恐人心不安，别生它变，争锋于硃雀门内，问鼎于大明殿前，陛下将何以谢之，何以御之？ 
现代文：现在朝廷征发的赋税劳役都很烦重，百姓生计日益残破，再加上邪恶之徒专擅放纵，刑罚与赏赐失当，我真担心民心不稳，引发其他的变故，以敌朱雀门内动起刀兵，有人前来大明殿夺取帝位，陛下将用什么来解释，又将靠什么来抵御他们？ 
English: Now the taxes and labor services collected and issued by the imperial court are very burdensome, the people's livelihoods are increasingly ruined, coupled with the evil people's arbitrary indulgence, improper punishment and reward, I am really worried about the instability of the people's hearts, triggering other changes, with the enemy Suzaku moving swords and soldiers inside the door, some people come to Daming Palace to seize the throne, what will Your Majesty use to explain, and what will you rely on to resist them?

古文：易之等见其疏，大怒，欲杀之，赖硃敬则及凤阁舍人桓彦范、著作郎陆泽魏知古保救得免。
现代文：张易之等人见到他的奏疏之后，勃然大怒，想要杀死他，幸亏有硃敬则和凤阁舍人桓彦范、著作郎陆泽县人魏知古的多方保护才得以幸免。
English: After Zhang Yizhi and others saw his sonography, they flew into a rage and wanted to kill him. Fortunately, they were spared thanks to the multi-faceted protection of Zou Jingze, Fengge's housemate, Kuan Yan Fan, and Luze County writer, Wei Zhigu.

古文：丁酉，贬元忠为高要尉，戬、说皆流岭表。
现代文：丁酉，武则天将魏元忠贬职为高要县尉，将高戬和张说二人流放到岭南。
English: Ding Xi and Wu Zetian demoted Wei Yuanzhong to a high-ranking county official, and exiled Gao Xi and Zhang Xi to Lingnan.

古文：元忠辞日，言于太后曰： 臣老矣，今向岭南，十死一生。陛下他日必有思臣之时。 
现代文：魏元忠辞行的时候，对武则天说： 臣年纪大了，这次前去岭南，多半会死在那里，日后陛下一定会有想起我的时候。 
English: When Wei Yuanzhong was leaving, he said to Wu Zetian: "Your majesty is very old, and if you go to Lingnan this time, you will most likely die there. Your majesty will surely think of me in the future."

古文：太后问其故，时易之、昌宗皆侍侧，元忠指之曰： 此二小儿，终为乱阶。 
现代文：武则天询问他这样讲的原因，当时张易之、张昌宗都在武则天身旁侍奉，魏元忠用手指着他俩回答说： 这两个小儿，最终将成为祸乱的根由。 
English: Wu Zetian asked him why he said this. At that time, Zhang Yizhi and Zhang Changzong were both serving next to Wu Zetian. Wei Yuanzhong answered with his fingers: "These two children will eventually become the root cause of the disaster."

古文：易之等下殿，叩膺自掷称冤。
现代文：张易之等人赶忙走下殿堂，呼天抢地、捶胸顿足地声称魏元忠冤枉了他们。
English: Zhang Yizhi and others hurried down the hall of fame, shouting and beating their chests, claiming Wei Yuanzhong had wronged them.

古文：太后曰： 元忠去矣！ 
现代文：武则天叹道： 魏元忠去吧！ 
English: Wu Zetian sighed: Wei Yuanzhong, go!

古文：殿中侍御史景城王晙复奏申理元忠，宋璟谓之曰： 魏公幸已得全，今子复冒威怒，得无狼狈乎！ 
现代文：殿中侍御史景城县人王又上奏为魏元忠申辩，宋对他说： 魏公已侥幸免死，现在您又来惹天子发怒，能不倒霉吗！ 
English: The palace attendant, the king of Jingcheng County, also played for Wei Yuanzhong's defense. Song said to him: Wei Gong has been spared from death by chance, now you have come to provoke the wrath of God, can you not be unlucky!

古文：晙曰： 魏公以忠获罪，晙为义所激，颠沛无恨。 
现代文：王说： 魏公忠正无二却受到处罚，我激于正义才这样做，即使因此而颠沛流离，也不感到遗憾。 
English: Wang said: Wei Gongzhong Zhengyuan was punished, I was motivated by justice to do so, and even if I was driven away because of this, I do not regret it.

古文：璟叹曰： 璟不能申魏公之枉，深负朝廷矣！ 
现代文：宋慨叹道： 宋不能辨明魏公所受的冤屈，深深辜负朝廷重托。 
English: Song sighed: Song could not identify the grievances of Wei Gong, and deeply failed the heavy trust of the imperial court.

古文：太子仆崔贞慎等八人饯元忠于郊外，易之诈为告密人柴明状，称贞慎等与元忠谋反。
现代文：太子仆崔贞慎等八人在郊外为魏元忠饯行，张易之冒充告密人柴明呈上一份状纸，告崔贞慎等人与魏元忠一起谋反。
English: Eight people, including the prince's manservant Cui Zhengshen, went to the countryside to spy for Wei Yuanzhong. Zhang Yi's impersonator and informer Chai Ming submitted a petition accusing Cui Zhengshen and others of plotting a rebellion with Wei Yuanzhong.

古文：太后使监察御史丹徒马怀素鞫之，谓怀素曰： 兹事皆实，略问，速以闻。 
现代文：武则天派监察御史丹徒县人马怀素负责审理这个案子，并对他说： 状子上指控的事全都是属实的，你大略地审问一下，就赶紧把处理意见报上来。 
English: Wu Zetian assigned the person in charge of hearing the case to Ma Huai Su, the inspector of Stentu County, and said to him: The allegations on the complaint are all true. If you make a general inquiry, you should quickly report the handling opinions.

古文：顷之，中使督趣者数四，曰： 反状皎然，何稽留如此？ 
现代文：时间不长，奉命前来催办此案的宦官就有好几批，并且对他说： 魏元忠与崔贞慎等人谋反的情节非常清楚，你为什么还要这样拖延不决？ 
English: The time was not long, and there were several groups of eunuchs who were ordered to come to expedite the case, and they said to him: The plot of Wei Yuanzhong and Cui Zhengshen and others to rebel is very clear, why do you have to delay?

古文：怀素请柴明对质，太后曰： 我自不知柴明处，但据状鞫之，安用告者？ 
现代文：马怀素请求让柴明与崔贞慎等人当面对质，武则天说： 我也不知道柴明在哪里，你只须按照状子上告发的事实审问，还要找那个告状的人干什么？ 
English: Ma Huai Su requested that Chai Ming and Cui Zhengshen and others be confronted face to face, Wu Zetian said: I don't know where Chai Ming is, you only need to interrogate according to the facts reported on the complaint, what else do you need to find the person who filed the complaint?

古文：怀素据实以闻，太后怒曰： 卿欲纵反者邪？ 
现代文：马怀素根据实际情况上报，武则天勃然大怒地问他： 你想放纵谋反的人吗？ 
English: Ma Huai Su reported according to the actual situation, and Wu Zetian asked him angrily: Do you want to indulge the rebel plotters?

古文：对曰： 臣不敢纵反者。
现代文：马怀素回答说： 臣不敢放纵谋反的罪犯！
English: Ma Huai Su replied: "A minister would not dare to indulge a criminal who plotted rebellion!"

古文：元忠以宰相谪官，贞慎等以亲故追送，若诬以为反，臣实不敢。
现代文：但魏元忠以宰相的身分遭贬，崔贞慎等人因亲朋故旧的关系为他饯行，如果诬陷他们在共同谋反，臣实在不敢。
English: However, Wei Yuanzhong was demoted to the position of prime minister, and Cui Zhengshen and others followed him because of the old-fashioned relationship between relatives and friends. If they were falsely accused of plotting together, the minister really did not dare.

古文：昔栾布奏事彭越头下，汉祖不以为罪，况元忠之刑未如彭越，而陛下欲诛其送者乎！
现代文：从前梁王彭越谋反，头被砍下示众，梁大夫栾布出使回来，对着他的头奏事，汉高祖也没有认为栾布有罪，何况今天魏元忠所受的处罚远远不及彭越，难道陛下反而杀掉为他饯行的人吗！
English: Once upon a time, Liang Wang Peng Yue plotted a rebellion, and his head was cut off and displayed to the public. Liang's doctor, Zibo, returned from an expedition and brought charges against his head. Han Gao Zu did not consider Zibo guilty. Moreover, the punishment Wei Yuan Zhong received today is far less than that of Peng Yue. Could it be that His Majesty instead killed the person who was acting for him?

古文：且陛下操生杀之柄，欲加之罪，取决圣衷可矣；若命臣推鞫，臣敢不以实闻！ 
现代文：再说陛下掌握着生杀大权，如果要加罪于这些人，您自己决断也就行了。既然陛下派臣负责审理此案，我就不敢不根据实情上报了。 
English: Besides, His Majesty holds the power of life and death, and if you want to add guilt to these people, you can decide for yourself. Since His Majesty has sent a minister to take charge of the case, I dare not report it based on the facts.

古文：太后曰： 汝欲全不罪邪？ 
现代文：武则天问： 这么说对这些人你是打算一个也不治罪了？ 
English: Wu Zetian asked: So you are planning to not punish any of these people?

古文：对曰： 臣智识愚浅，实不见其罪！ 
现代文：马怀素回答说： 臣才智低下，见识浅陋，实在没发现他们有什么罪过。 
English: Ma Huai Su replied, "The ministers are of low intelligence and have a shallow understanding, and they really did not find any fault with them.

古文：太后意解。
现代文：武则天这才打消了原来的想法。
English: It was then that Wu Zetian dismissed the original idea.

古文：贞慎等由是获免。
现代文：崔贞慎等人也因此而得以幸免。
English: As a result, Cui Zhengshen and others were also spared.

古文：太后尝命朝贵宴集，易之兄弟皆位在宋璟上。易之素惮璟，欲悦其意，虚位揖之曰： 公方今第一人，何乃下坐？ 
现代文：武则天曾宴请朝中权贵。张易之兄弟的官职都在宋之上，但张易之素来惧怕宋，为了取悦宋，于是空出上位来请宋坐，说道： 您是当今第一人，为什么在下位落坐呀？ 
English: Wu Zetian once held a banquet for the high-ranking dignitaries of the dynasty. Zhang Yi's brothers' official positions were all higher than Song's, but Zhang Yi was always afraid of Song. In order to please Song, he invited Song to sit in his place, saying: You are the first person today, why are you sitting in the lower position?

古文：璟曰： 才劣位卑，张卿以为第一，何也？ 
现代文：宋说： 本人才智低劣，职务卑微，张卿反说我是当今第一人，这是什么道理？ 
English: Song said: My talent is inferior in intelligence and my position is lowly. On the other hand, Zhang Qing said that I am the first person today. What is the reason for this?

古文：天官侍郎郑杲谓璟曰： 中丞奈何卿五郎？ 
现代文：天官侍郎郑杲对宋说： 中丞为什么称五郎为张卿呢？ 
English: Zheng Yao, the attendant of the heavenly official, said to Song: Why did the middle-ranking official call Goro Zhang Qing?

古文：璟曰： 以官言之，正当为卿。
现代文：宋说： 根据他的官职，称他为张卿最为合适。
English: Song said: According to his official position, it is most appropriate to call him Zhang Qing.

古文：足下非张卿家奴，何郎之有！ 
现代文：您本人并不是张卿的家奴，为什么要称他为郎呢？ 
English: You are not Sir Zhang's servant, so why do you call him "brother"?

古文：举坐悚惕。
现代文：所有在座的人听到这话都为他提心吊胆。
English: Everyone in the room was scared for him when they heard that.

古文：时自武三思以下，皆谨事易之兄弟，璟独不为之礼。
现代文：当时朝中大臣自武三思以下，都谨慎地奉承张易之兄弟，惟独宋对他们不给予礼遇。
English: At that time, all the ministers in the middle and lower ranks of the imperial court were careful to flatter Zhang Yi's brothers, except that Song did not give them courtesy.

古文：诸张积怒，常欲中伤之；太后知之，故得免。
现代文：张易之兄弟怀恨已久，常常想恶意诬陷宋。武则天清楚这一点，宋才因此而得以幸免。
English: Zhang Yi's brother had been holding a grudge for a long time and often wanted to maliciously frame Song. Wu Zetian was aware of this, which is why Song was spared.

古文：丁未，以左武卫大将军武攸宜充西京留守。
现代文：丁未，武则天派左武卫大将军武攸宜充任西京留守。
English: Ding Wei, General Wu Youyi of the Left Division of the Middle Palace Guards, sent by Emperor Wu Zetian, stayed in Xijing.

古文：冬，十月，丙寅，车驾发西京；乙酉，至神都。
现代文：冬季十月，丙寅，武则天从西京出发；乙酉，抵达神都。
English: In the winter of October, He Yin and Wu Zetian set out from Xijing and arrived in Jingu.

古文：十一月，己丑，突厥遣使谢许昏。
现代文：十一月，突厥阿史那默啜派遣使者前来感谢朝廷充许通婚。
English: In November, the Turkic Ashnamo sent an envoy to thank the court for allowing the marriage.

古文：丙申，宴于宿羽台，太子预焉。
现代文：丙寅，武则天在宿羽台设宴款待突厥使者，太子李显也参加了宴会。
English: Hsin Yin and Wu Zetian hosted a banquet for the Turkish envoys at Sukuhatai, and Prince Li Xian also attended the banquet.

古文：宫尹崔神庆上疏，以为： 今五品以上所以佩龟者，为别敕征召，恐有诈妄，内出龟合，然后应命。
现代文：宫尹崔神庆上疏认为： 当今五品以上官员之所以随身佩戴龟符，是因为天子如有特别命令征召入宫，担心有人欺诈，冒充被召之人，所以必须宫中拿出的龟符与官员随身佩戴的龟符两相吻合，然后被召之人才可以应命入宫。
English: Gong Yin Cui Shenqing Shangsuo believes that: The reason why today's officials above the fifth grade wear tortoise charms is because if the emperor has a special order to conscript into the palace, they are worried that someone will cheat and impersonate the summoned person. Therefore, the tortoise charms taken out of the palace must match the tortoise charms worn by the officials, and then the summoned person can enter the palace as ordered.

古文：况太子国本，古来征召皆用玉契。此诚重慎之极也。
现代文：何况太子是立国的根本，自古以来征召太子入宫都用玉契，这实在是达到郑重谨慎的极点了。
English: What's more, the crown prince is the foundation of the country. Since ancient times, the imperial edict has been used to summon the crown prince to the palace. This is really the pinnacle of solemn prudence.

古文：昨缘突厥使见，太子应预朝参，直有文符下宫，曾不降敕处分，臣愚谓太子非朔望朝参、应别召者，望降墨敕及玉契。 
现代文：昨天由于突厥使者前来朝见，太子应该一同入朝参见陛下，当时只有文书下达宫中，而没有另外由陛下降敕征召。依臣愚见，太子如不是在初一、十五入朝参见，而是接受特别征召前来，那么就希望陛下向太子颁发玉契以及由陛下亲自书写墨敕。 
English: Yesterday, because a Turkic envoy came to see the Emperor, the Crown Prince should have come to see His Majesty together. At that time, only a document was issued to the palace, but there was no other call from His Majesty. In my humble opinion, if the Crown Prince did not come to see the Emperor on the first day or the fifteenth day of the year, but received a special call, then I hope that His Majesty will issue a document to the Crown Prince and that His Majesty will personally write a letter.

古文：太后甚然之。
现代文：武则天认为他的建议十分正确。
English: Wu Zetian believes that his suggestion is quite correct.

古文：始安獠欧阳倩拥众数万，攻陷州县，朝廷思得良吏以镇之。
现代文：居住在桂州始安郡的仡佬族人欧阳倩，拥有数万人马，攻陷了当地的州县，朝廷希望能选派一位精明强干的官员前往镇守弹压。
English: Ouyang Zhou, a member of the Qiang ethnic group who lives in Shi'an County, Guizhou, owns tens of thousands of horses and has conquered the local prefectures. The imperial court hopes to select a shrewd and strong official to go to the town to suppress the rebellion.

古文：硃敬则称司封郎中裴怀古有文武才；制以怀古为桂州都督，仍充招慰讨击使。
现代文：硃敬则认为司封郎中裴怀古具备文武全才，武则天于是任命裴怀古为桂州都督兼招慰讨击使。
English: Zou Jing, on the other hand, believed that Pei Huai Gu, the second-in-command of the imperial envoys, possessed all-round talent in literature and military skills. Therefore, Emperor Wu Zetian appointed Pei Huai Gu as the governor of Guizhou as well as the envoy of consolation and reconciliation.

古文：怀古才及岭上，飞书示以祸福，倩等迎降，且言 为吏所侵逼，故举兵自救耳。 
现代文：裴怀古才到五岭，就立即飞递书信给欧阳倩晓以利害祸福，欧阳倩等派人迎降，并且说： 由于受官吏欺凌威逼，我们才兴兵自救。 
English: When Pei Huai Gu arrived at Wuling, he immediately sent a letter to Ouyang Zengxiao to discuss the benefits and disadvantages. Ouyang Zengxiao and others sent people to meet the surrender, and said: Due to being bullied and intimidated by officials, we only raised an army to save ourselves.

古文：怀古轻骑赴之。左右曰： 夷獠无信，不可忽也。 
现代文：裴怀古想自己轻装骑马前往抚慰，身边的下属对他说： 夷獠之徒不讲信用，您不能麻痹大意。 
English: Pei Huigu wanted to ride his horse lightly to comfort him, and the subordinates around him said to him: The barbarians are not trustworthy, you can't paralyze them.

古文：怀古曰： 吾仗忠信，可通神明，而况人乎！ 
现代文：裴怀古回答说： 我所依赖的是忠信二字，仅凭这一点即可与神明相通，何况欧阳倩这些人呢！ 
English: Pei Huagu replied, "What I rely on is the word 'faithfulness,' which is the only way to communicate with the gods, let alone the Ouyang Clan!

古文：遂诣其营，贼众大喜，归所掠货财；诸洞酋长素持两端者，皆来款附，岭外悉定。
现代文：于是到达了欧阳倩的营地。这些仡佬人十分高兴，便全部归还了他们抢劫的财物；平时一向对朝廷首鼠两端的各洞酋长，也纷纷前来诚心归附。岭外之地于是全部平定。
English: So they arrived at Ouyang Xuan's camp. These ruffians were very happy and returned all the property they had robbed; the Dong chieftains, who had always been loyal to the heads of the imperial court on both sides, also came one after another to sincerely return the favor. The land outside the ridge was then completely pacified.

古文：是岁，分命使者以六条察州县。
现代文：这一年，武则天分别命令使者根据六条标准到各地考察州县官吏的政绩。
English: This year, Emperor Wu Zetian ordered the emissaries to go to various regions to inspect the political performance of state and county officials according to six standards.

古文：吐蕃南境诸部皆叛，赞普器弩悉弄自将击之，卒于军中。诸子争立，久之，国人立其子弃隶蹜赞为赞普，生七年矣。
现代文：吐蕃南部边境各部落都发生了叛乱，赞普器弩悉弄亲自率军前往平叛，死于军中，他的儿子们争着要继位，过了很久之后，国人才立他年仅七岁的儿子弃隶赞为赞普。长安四年
English: Tribes on the southern border of Tubo rebelled, and Zampu himself led the army to fight against the rebels. He died in the army, and his sons fought for the succession. It took a long time before his son, who was only seven years old, was named Zampu.

古文：春，正月，丙申，册拜右武卫将军阿史那怀道为西突厥十姓可汗。
现代文：春季正月，丙申，武则天下诏册拜右武卫将军阿史那怀道为西突厥十姓可汗。
English: In the first month of the spring, Bishin, Wu Zetian issued an edict to worship General Ubuwei, Ashina, who was the 10th khan of the Western Turkic people.

古文：怀道，斛瑟罗之子也。
现代文：阿史那怀道是斛瑟罗的儿子。
English: Ashnavai-dau is the son of Khosrow.

古文：丁未，毁三阳宫，以其材作兴泰宫于万安山。
现代文：丁未，武则天下令拆毁三阳宫，用拆下来的木石材料在万安山修建兴泰宫。
English: Ding Wei and Wu Zetian ordered the demolition of Sanyang Palace and used the dismantled wood and stone materials to build Xingtai Palace on Mount Wan'an.

古文：二宫皆武三思建议为之，请太后每岁临幸，功费甚广，百姓苦之。
现代文：三阳宫和兴泰宫都是在武三思的建议下修建的，武三思请武则天每年驾临其地，工程耗费极大，老百姓因此而受苦。
English: Sanyang Palace and Xingtai Palace were both built at the suggestion of Wu Sansi. Wu Sansi asked Wu Zetian to visit the site every year. The project was extremely costly, and the common people suffered as a result.

古文：左拾遗卢藏用上疏，以为： 左右近臣多以顺意为忠，朝廷具僚皆以犯忤为戒，致陛下不知百姓失业，伤陛下之仁。
现代文：左拾遗卢藏用上疏认为： 陛下左右的近臣大多把顺从您的心意当作忠诚，朝廷臣僚又都把违逆触犯您的旨意奉为戒条，致使陛下不了解百姓已经因此而失去了谋生的常业，从而有损于陛下的仁德。
English: Zuo Zhi Ru Zang used Shang Shu to think: Most of the courtiers around His Majesty regard obedience to Your will as loyalty, and the courtiers of the court regard disobeying and violating Your will as a precept, so that His Majesty does not understand that the people have lost their livelihood as a result, which is detrimental to His Majesty's benevolence.

古文：陛下诚能以劳人为辞，发制罢之，则天下皆知陛下苦己而爱人也。 
现代文：假如陛下真能以劳累百姓为理由，颁发制书下令停止这项工程，那么天下百姓就会都知道陛下爱护百姓甘愿自己吃苦的美德了。 
English: If His Majesty could really issue a decree to stop this project on the grounds that it was exhausting the people, then people all over the world would know the virtue of His Majesty's love for the people and his willingness to suffer.

古文：不从。
现代文：武则天不听。
English: Le Zhu Rong did not listen.

古文：藏用，承庆之弟孙也。
现代文：卢藏用是卢承庆之弟的孙子。
English: Lu Zangyong is the grandson of Lu Chengqing's younger brother.

古文：壬子，以天官侍郎韦嗣立为凤阁侍郎、同平章事。
现代文：壬子，武则天任命天官侍郎韦嗣立为凤阁侍郎、同平章事。
English: According to the legend, Bu Zetian appointed Wei Zhi, the attendant of heaven, as the attendant of Fengge and Tongping.

古文：夏官侍郎、同凤阁鸾台三品李迥秀颇受贿赂，监察御史马怀素劾奏之。
现代文：夏官侍郎、同凤阁鸾台三品李迥秀广收贿赂，监察御史马怀素上奏章弹劾他。
English: Li Shuxiu Guang, the attendant of the summer official and the third-ranked official of the Tongfeng Pavilion, accepted bribes, and the inspector, Ma Huai, wrote a report to impeach him.

古文：二月，癸亥，迥秀贬庐州刺史。
现代文：二月，癸亥，武则天将李迥秀贬为庐州刺史。
English: In February, Emperor Wu Zetian demoted Li Yuxiu to the status of a provincial official.

古文：壬申，正谏大夫、同平章事硃敬则以老疾致仕。
现代文：壬申，正谏大夫、同平章事硃敬则因年老多病而退休。
English: Jinshin, Zhengqi, and Tongping retired due to old age and illness.

古文：敬则为相，以用人为先，自馀细务不之视。
现代文：硃敬则作宰相，把任用人才放在首位，除此之外的琐碎事务则不过问。
English: Hao Jing is the prime minister, putting the appointment of talent in the first place, in addition to other trivial matters.

古文：太后尝与宰相议及刺史、县令。
现代文：武则天曾经与宰相们讨论到刺史、县令等地方官吏的选用问题。
English: Wu Zetian once discussed with the prime ministers the selection of local officials such as magistrates and county magistrates.

古文：三月，己丑，李峤、唐休璟等奏： 窃见朝廷物议，远近人情，莫不重内官，轻外职，每除授牧伯，皆再三披诉。
现代文：三月，己丑，李峤、唐休就这一问题上奏武则天说： 我们私下发现朝廷中人们的议论，远近的世俗人情，没有不是看重朝内官而轻视地方官的，每当任命州县官时，被任命的人都要再三表白、申诉。
English: In March, Li Qiye and Tang Xiu said: "We have privately found that people in the imperial court talk about and despise local officials far and wide, and there is no one who values imperial officials but despises local officials. Whenever a prefectural or county official is appointed, the appointee must repeatedly make a statement and appeal.

古文：比来所遣外任，多是贬累之人；风俗不澄，实由于此。
现代文：近来陛下所任命的地方官，大多是受到降职处分的人；人们看重朝内官、轻视地方官的坏风气无法改变，实际上就是由于这个原因。
English: Most of the local officials recently appointed by His Majesty are people who have been demoted and punished; this is actually the reason why the bad tradition of people valuing the Inner Palace officials and despising the local officials cannot be changed.

古文：望于台、阁、寺、监妙简贤良，分典大州，共康庶绩。
现代文：希望今后陛下能够从台、阁、寺、监的官员中选择贤良方正之士，分派他们主管各大州的政务，共同成就各种功业。
English: It is hoped that in the future, His Majesty will be able to select virtuous and upright people from among the officials of Taiwan, the Cabinet, temples, and prisons, assign them to be in charge of the government affairs of various states, and jointly achieve various feats.

古文：臣等请辍近侍，率先具僚。 
现代文：臣等请求陛下停止我们的近侍职务，在朝廷臣僚中首先任命我们为地方官。 
English: The courtiers requested His Majesty to stop our close attendant duties and to appoint us as local officials first among the imperial courtiers.

古文：太后命书名探之，得韦嗣立及御史大夫杨再思等二十人。
现代文：武则天命令分别在纸条上书写所有上疏人的姓名，然后抽签，得到了韦嗣立及御史大夫杨再思等二十人。
English: Wu Zetian ordered to write the names of all the Shangxu people separately on a piece of paper, and then draw lots, resulting in 20 people including Wei Zili and the chief historian Yang Zaisi.

古文：癸巳，制各以本官检校刺史，嗣立为汴州刺史。
现代文：癸巳，武则天颁下制书，命令他们各带现任官职出为检校刺史。韦嗣立被任命为检校汴州刺史。
English: At this time, Wu Zetian issued a decree ordering them to each take their current posts to become the school inspection record. Wei Shili was appointed as the school inspection record of Zhangzhou.

古文：其后政迹可称者，唯常州刺史薛谦光、徐州刺史司马鍠而已。
现代文：后来这些人在各州为官的政绩值得称许的，只有常州刺史薛谦光和徐州刺史司马而已。
English: Later, the political achievements of these people who served as officials in various states were commendable, but only the Changzhou magistrate Xue Qianguang and the Xuzhou magistrate Sima were commendable.

古文：丁亥，徙平恩王重福为谯王。
现代文：丁亥，改封平恩王李重福为谯王。
English: Dinghai, changed the title of Ping'en King Li Chungfu to the King of Gong.

古文：以夏官侍郎宗楚客同平章事。
现代文：武则天任命夏官侍郎宗楚客为同平章事。
English: Emperor Wu Zetian appointed the summer official Zong Chuk to the position of Tongping.

古文：凤阁侍郎、同凤阁鸾台三品苏味道谒归葬其父，制州县供葬事。
现代文：凤阁侍郎、同凤阁鸾台三品苏味道请求回乡安葬他死去的父亲，武则天颁下制书，要求当地州县负责供给安葬所需的物品、人力。
English: Fengge's waiter, Tongfengge Xingtai Sanpin Su Jiadu, requested to return to his hometown to bury his dead father. Wu Zetian issued a document, requiring the local state and county to be responsible for supplying the necessary goods and manpower for burial.

古文：味道因之侵毁乡人墓田，役使过度。监察御史萧至忠劾奏之，左迁坊州刺史。
现代文：苏味道趁机侵占毁坏同乡百姓的坟墓田地，并且役使当地百姓超过了限度，监察御史萧至忠上奏弹劾他，武则天于是将他降职为坊州刺史。
English: Su Shi took advantage of the opportunity to occupy and destroy the grave fields of his fellow villagers, and helped the local people to exceed the limit. The inspector, Gu Shi Xiao Zhizhong, impeached him, and Wu Zetian then demoted him to the position of Fangzhou assassin.

古文：至忠，引之玄孙也。
现代文：萧至忠是萧引之的玄孙。
English: Xiao Zhizhong is the great-great-grandson of Xiao Yin.

古文：夏，四月，壬戌，同凤阁鸾台三品韦安石知纳言，李峤知内史事。
现代文：夏季四月，壬戌，武则天指派同凤阁鸾台三品韦安石掌管纳言事务，李峤掌管内史事务。
English: In the summer of April, Wu Zetian assigned Tong Fengge Xingtai Sanpin Wei Anshi to be in charge of Nagan affairs, and Li Xuan to be in charge of internal history affairs.

古文：太后幸兴泰宫。
现代文：武则天到兴泰宫。
English: Wu Zetian arrives at Xingtai Palace.

古文：太后复税天下僧尼，作大像于白司马阪，令春官尚书武攸宁检校，糜费巨亿。
现代文：武则天再一次向全国的和尚、尼姑征税，在洛城以北的白司马阪建造大佛像，命令春官尚书武攸宁主持这一工程，耗费的资财人力十分巨大。
English: Wu Zetian once again levied taxes on the country's monks and nuns, and built a large Buddha statue in Baishimasaka, north of Los Angeles. He ordered the Crown Prince Shang Shouwu Youning to preside over this project, which consumed a huge amount of money and manpower.

古文：李峤上疏，以为： 天下编户，贫弱者众。
现代文：李峤上疏认为： 全国编入户籍的平民百姓，贫困潦倒无以为生的很多。
English: Li Yuxiangsu believes that: Many of the common people who have been registered with a household registration nationwide are poor and have nothing to live for.

古文：造像钱见有一十七万馀缗，若将散施，人与一千，济得一十七万馀户。
现代文：现已筹集到的用于建造大佛像的钱有十七万余缗，如果用来分散施舍穷苦百姓，每人给钱一千的话，也可救济十七万多户。
English: The money that has been raised for the construction of the large Buddha statue has reached more than 170,000 baht. If it is used to distribute alms to the poor, and each person gives a thousand, it can also help more than 170,000 households.

古文：拯饥寒之弊，省劳役之勤，顺诸佛慈悲之心，沾圣君亭育之意，人神胥悦，功德无穷。
现代文：拯救百姓饥寒之苦，减少臣民劳役之勤，既顺乎佛祖慈悲为怀的本心，又可使人们蒙受圣明天子抚养培育的恩惠，这将使人神皆大欢喜，功德无穷。
English: To save the people from the sufferings of cold and hunger, and to reduce the labor of the subjects, is not only in accordance with the Buddha's original heart of compassion, but also allows people to receive the blessings of the Holy Son of Heaven's upbringing and cultivation, which will bring great joy to all men and women, and endless merit.

古文：方作过后因缘，岂如见在果报！ 
现代文：陛下修造佛像以成就来世的因缘，哪里比得上赈济百姓以求得现世的效应呢？ 
English: Your majesty, building a Buddha statue to achieve the cause and condition of the afterlife, how can it be compared to giving alms to the people in order to obtain the effect of this world?

古文：监察御史张廷珪上疏谏曰： 臣以时政论之，则宜先边境，蓄府库，养人力；以释教论之，则宜救苦厄，灭诸相，崇无为。
现代文：监察御史张廷也上疏谏阻道： 臣从当前治理国家的需要来说，则应首先考虑边境地区的防务，增加国库储备，使百姓得以休养生息；从佛教教义方面来看，则应当拯救众生的苦难，消除各种追求形象的做法，崇尚清静无为。
English: Zhang Ting, the inspector of imperial history, also spoke up: From the perspective of the current needs of governing the country, the minister should first consider the defense of the border areas, increase the treasury reserves, and enable the people to rest and recuperate; from the perspective of Buddhist doctrine, it is necessary to save the suffering of all beings, eliminate all kinds of image-seeking practices, and advocate tranquility and inaction.

古文：伏愿陛下察臣之愚，行佛之意，务以理为上，不以人废言。 
现代文：恳切地希望陛下能够体察臣的愚见，执行佛祖的旨意，一定要把是否有理放在首位，而不是因人废言。 
English: I sincerely hope that His Majesty will be able to see through the follies of his ministers and carry out the will of the Buddha. He must put the truth first, and not waste words for the sake of others.

古文：太后为之罢役，仍召见廷珪，深赏慰之。
现代文：武则天因此而停止了修建大佛像的工程，并且召见张廷，表达对他的赞赏与抚慰之情。
English: As a result, Wu Zetian stopped the construction of the large Buddha statue, and summoned Zhang Ting to express his appreciation and consolation.

古文：凤阁侍郎、同凤阁鸾台三品姚元崇以母老固请归侍；六月，辛酉，以元崇行相王府长史，秩位并同三品。
现代文：凤阁侍郎、同凤阁鸾台三品姚元崇因母亲年事已高，坚决请求武则天允许他辞去官职，回家侍奉母亲。六月，辛酉，武则天命姚元崇行相王府长史，俸禄、地位都与三品官相同。
English: Fengge's chamberlain and Tongfengge's steward of the Three Treasures, Yao Yuan Chong, because of his mother's advanced age, firmly requested Wu Zetian to allow him to resign from his official post and return home to serve his mother. In June, Xin Zi, Wu Zetian ordered Yao Yuan Chong to serve as the chief of Wangfu, with the same salary and status as the Three Treasures.

古文：乙丑，以天官侍郎崔玄同平章事。
现代文：乙丑，武则天任命天官侍郎崔玄为同平章事。
English: In the second story, Bu Zetian appointed Choe Hyun, the attendant of the celestial official, as the peer of the emperor.

古文：召凤阁侍郎、同平章事、检校汴州刺史韦嗣立赴兴泰宫。
现代文：武则天征召凤阁侍郎、同平章事、检校汴州刺史韦嗣立前往兴泰宫。
English: Emperor Wu Zetian conscripted Fengge's chamberlain, Tongping Zhangji, and the inspector of schools, Zhangzhou's secretary, Wei Shi, to go to Xingtai Palace.

古文：丁丑，以李峤同凤阁鸾台三品。
现代文：丁丑，武则天任命李峤为同凤阁鸾台三品。
English: Ding Yuxi and Wu Zetian appointed Li Qian as the three stars of Tongfeng Pavilion.

古文：峤自请解内史。
现代文：李峤自己请求解除他的内史职务。
English: Li Jun himself asked to be relieved of his duties as an historian.

古文：壬午，以相王府长史姚元崇兼知夏官尚书、同凤阁鸾台三品。
现代文：壬午，武则天任命相王府长史姚元崇兼任夏官尚书、同凤阁鸾台三品。
English: In the morning of the third day of the third month, Emperor Wuzetian appointed the prefect of Wang Prefecture, Shi Yao Yuan Chong, to serve as the summer official of Shangshu and Tongfeng Pavilion.

古文：秋，七月，丙戌，以神都副留守杨再思为内史。
现代文：秋季七月，丙戌，武则天任命神都副留守杨再思为内史。
English: In the autumn of July, Wu Zetian appointed Yang Zaisi, the deputy governor of the capital, as the secretary of the inner history.

古文：再思为相，专以谄媚取容。
现代文：杨再思作宰相，专门靠阿谀奉承来取悦于人。
English: Yang Jieshi, as prime minister, relies exclusively on flattery to please people.

古文：司礼少卿张同休，易之兄也，尝召公卿宴集，酒酣，戏再思曰： 杨内史面似高丽。 
现代文：司礼少卿张同休是张易之的哥哥，有一次他宴请朝中公卿大臣。在酒喝到最畅快的时候，张同休拿杨再思开玩笑说： 杨内史脸长得象高丽人。 
English: Zhang Tongxiu, the younger brother of Zhang Yizhi, was the chief priest. Once he hosted a banquet for the ministers of the court nobility in the Joseon Dynasty. When the wine was at its best, Zhang Tongxiu joked about Yang Jiasi, saying, "Yang Neishi's face looks like a Korean."

古文：再思欣然，即剪纸帖巾，反披紫袍，为高丽舞，举坐大笑。
现代文：杨再思听了反倒很高兴，当即剪纸贴在帽子上，反披着紫色朝服，表演起高丽舞来，满座的人都大笑。
English: On the contrary, Yang Jieshi was very happy to hear it. He immediately put the paper cutout on his hat, put on the purple imperial robe, and performed a Korean dance. The whole audience laughed.

古文：时人或誉张昌宗之美曰： 六郎面似莲花。 
现代文：当时还有人称颂张昌宗长得漂亮，说： 六郎的脸长得像莲花一样。 
English: At that time, some people praised Zhang Changzong for his good looks, saying, "Rokuro's face looks like a lotus flower."

古文：再思独曰： 不然。 
现代文：唯独杨再思道： 不是这样的。 
English: However, Yang Zai thought: This is not the case.

古文：昌宗问其故，再思曰： 乃莲花似六郎耳。 
现代文：张昌宗问他否定别人说法的原因，他回答说： 应当说莲花长得像六郎才对。 
English: Zhang Changzong asked him why he denied the other's statement, and he replied: It is only right to say that the lotus looks like Rokuro.

古文：甲午，太后还宫。
现代文：甲午，武则天回到宫中。
English: In the afternoon of the first day, Emperor Wu returned to the palace.

古文：乙未，司礼少卿张同休、汴州刺史张昌期、尚方少监张昌仪皆坐赃下狱，命左右台共鞫之；丙申，敕，张易之、张昌宗作威作福，亦命同鞫。
现代文：乙未，司礼少卿张同休、汴州刺史张昌期、尚方少监张昌仪都因犯有贪赃罪而被捕下狱。武则天命令左右台共同审理此案；丙申，武则天颁下敕书，认为张易之、张昌宗专行赏罚，独揽威权，应当与张同休等人并案审理。
English: In the second year of Wu Zetian's reign, Zhang Tongxiu, the Vice-Minister of Justice, Zhang Changzhi, the Vice-Governor of Zhangzhou, and Zhang Changyi, the Vice-Governor of Shangfang, were all arrested and sent to prison for committing the crime of corruption. Wu Zetian ordered the left and right sides to jointly investigate the case; in addition, Wu Zetian issued an imperial edict, saying that Zhang Yizhi and Zhang Changzong were exclusively rewarding and punishing, monopolizing authority, and should be tried together with Zhang Tongxiu and others.

古文：辛丑，司刑正贾敬言奏： 张昌宗强市人田，应征铜二十斤。 
现代文：辛丑，司刑正贾敬言上奏说： 张昌宗强行收买民田，应当向他征收黄铜二十斤。 
English: Sin ugly, the magistrate Zheng Jia respectfully said: Zhang Changzong forcibly bought people's land, he should be levied twenty pounds of brass.

古文：制 可 。
现代文：武则天颁下制书说： 可以。 
English: Wu Zetian awarded the book and said: Yes.

古文：乙巳，御史大夫李承嘉、中丞桓彦范奏： 张同休兄弟赃共四千馀缗，张昌宗法应免官。 
现代文：乙巳，御史大夫李承嘉、御史中丞桓彦范上奏道： 张同休兄弟共贪赃钱四千余缗，依法应判处张昌宗免官。 
English: Presently, Grand Historian Li Chengjia and Grand Historian Chunjong Juan Fan gave a speech: Zhang Tongyu's brothers had embezzled more than 4,000 yuan in total, and according to the law, Zhang Changzong should be sentenced to dismissal.

古文：昌宗奏： 臣有功于国，所犯不至免官。 
现代文：张昌宗上奏申辩说： 臣为国家立过功，现在所犯的罪过还不至于达到必须被免官的程度。 
English: Zhang Changzong said in his appeal: The minister has made great contributions to the country, and the crimes he has committed are not so serious that he must be removed from office.

古文：太后问诸宰相： 昌宗有功乎？ 
现代文：武则天向各位宰相发问： 张昌宗有没有立过功？ 
English: Wu Zetian asked the prime ministers: Has Zhang Changzong made any contributions?

古文：杨再思曰： 昌宗合神丹，圣躬服之有验，此莫大之功。 
现代文：杨再思回答说： 张昌宗调制了神丹，陛下服下后确有效验，没有比这更大的功劳了。 
English: Yang Jiasi replied: Zhang Changzong had prepared the holy elixir, and it was indeed tested after His Majesty had served it. There is no greater achievement than this.

古文：太后悦，赦昌宗罪，复其官。
现代文：武则天听后很高兴，于是下令赦免张昌宗的罪，并恢复他的原任官职。
English: Wu Zetian was pleased to hear this, so he ordered to pardon Zhang Changzong's crime and restore him to his original post.

古文：左补阙戴令言作《两脚狐赋》，以讥再思，再思出令言为长社令。
现代文：左补阙戴令言写了一篇《两脚狐赋》讥讽杨再思，杨再思将戴令言外放为长社县令。
English: Zuo Zhuan Dai Lingyan wrote an article "Two-footed Fox Fu" to ridicule Yang Zaisi, Yang Zaisi will Dai Lingyan outsourced to Chosha County.

古文：丙午，夏官侍郎、同平章事宗楚客有罪，左迁原州都督，充灵武道行军大总管。
现代文：丙午，夏官侍郎、同平章事宗楚客因有罪而被降职为原州都督，充任灵武道行军大总管。
English: In the afternoon of the third day, Xia Guan's servant, Tongping Zhang Jizong, was demoted to the position of Yuanzhou Governor and appointed as the general manager of the martial arts march.

古文：癸丑，张同休贬岐山丞，张昌仪贬博望丞。
现代文：癸丑，武则天将张同休贬为岐山丞，将张昌仪贬为博望丞。
English: However, Wu Zetian demoted Zhang Tongxu to Qishan Rong and Zhang Changyi to Bohang Rong.

古文：鸾台侍郎、知纳言事、同凤阁鸾台三品韦安石举奏张易之等罪，敕付安石及右庶子、同凤阁鸾台三品唐休璟鞫之，未竟而事变。
现代文：鸾台侍郎、知纳言事、同凤阁鸾台三品韦安石上奏检举张易之等人所犯罪行，武则天下令将张易之等人交付韦安石及右庶子、同凤阁鸾台三品唐休审讯，但还没等此案审理完毕，事情就已经发生了变化。
English: Zhang Yi was accused of a crime by Wei Anshi, the chamberlain of Xingtai, the chancellor of the palace, and the three princes of Xingtai and Fengge, and ordered by the emperor to be handed over to Wei Anshi and his son, Tang Xiu, the three princes of Xingtai and Fengge, for trial. However, before the trial was over, things had already changed.

古文：八月，甲寅，以安石兼检校扬州长史，庚申，以休璟兼幽营都督、安东都护。
现代文：八月甲寅，武则天任命韦安石兼任检校扬州长史，庚申，又任命唐休兼任幽州、营州都督、安东都护。
English: In August, Wu Zetian appointed Wei Anshi to concurrently hold the posts of Yang Guozhongshi and Gaoshin, and also appointed Tang Xiu to concurrently hold the posts of Yuzhou, Yingzhou, and Andong.

古文：休璟将行，密言于太子曰： 二张恃宠不臣，必将之乱。
现代文：唐休赴任之前，秘密地对太子说： 现在张易之和张昌宗凭借天子的恩宠而不履行臣子的本分，日后必将作乱。
English: Before Tang Xiu took office, he secretly said to the prince: Now Zhang Yizhi and Zhang Changzong, by virtue of the grace of the Son of Heaven, do not perform the duties of a vassal, and will surely cause chaos in the future.

古文：殿下宜备之。 
现代文：殿下应当对此加以防备。 
English: His Royal Highness should take precautions against this.

古文：相王府长史兼知夏官尚书事、同凤阁鸾台三品姚元崇上言： 臣事相王，不宜典兵马。臣不敢爱死，恐不益于王。 
现代文：相王府长史兼知夏官尚书事、同凤阁鸾台三品姚元崇对武则天说： 臣事奉相王，就不应当再担任夏官尚书这一掌管兵马的官，这并不是因为我怕死，而是由于我担心这样做会不利于相王。 
English: Yao Yuan Chong, the prefect of the Prince's palace, who knew Xia Guan Shang Shuji and Tongfeng Pavilion, said to Wu Zetian: "As a minister serving the Prince, I should no longer serve as Xia Guan Shang Shuji, the official in charge of the soldiers and horses. This is not because I am afraid of death, but because I am worried that doing so will be detrimental to the Prince.

古文：辛酉，改春官尚书，馀如故。
现代文：辛酉，改任姚元崇为春官尚书，其余职务不变。
English: Xin Zhen, Yao Yuan Chong was appointed as the spring official Shang Shu, and the rest of the positions remained unchanged.

古文：元崇字元之，时突厥叱列元崇反，太后命元崇以字行。
现代文：姚元崇字元之，当时由于突厥叱列元崇谋反的缘故，武则天特命姚元崇以字代名，称姚元之。
English: Yao Yuan Chong Zi Yuan Zi, at that time, due to the fact that the Turks were plotting against Yao Yuan Chong, Wu Zetian specially ordered Yao Yuan Chong to use the name of Zi Yuan Zi, called Yao Yuan Zi.

古文：突厥默啜既和亲，戊寅，始遣淮阳王武延秀还。
现代文：突厥阿史那默啜已经与大唐宗室结亲，戊寅，突厥遣返淮阳王武延秀。
English: The Turkic Ashina Murshid had already married into the Datang family, and Wu Yin, the Turkic repatriated Huaiyang King Wu Yanxiu.

古文：九月，壬子，以姚元之充灵武道行军大总管；辛酉，以元之为灵武道安抚大使。
现代文：九月，壬子，武则天派姚元之充任灵武道行军大总管；辛酉，又任命姚元之为灵武道安抚大使。
English: In September, Wu Zetian sent Yao Yuanzhi to serve as the general manager of the Lingwu martial arts march; Xin Yao also appointed Yao Yuanzhi as the ambassador of Lingwu martial arts pacification.

古文：元之将行，太后令举外司堪为宰相者。
现代文：姚元之即将赴任时，武则天让他推荐外朝官中才德可以胜任宰相职务的人。
English: When Yao Yuanzhi was about to take office, Wu Zetian asked him to recommend a person who could competently hold the post of prime minister.

古文：对曰： 张柬之沉厚有谋，能断大事，且其人已老。惟陛下急用之。 
现代文：姚元之回答说： 张柬之朴实稳重，富于智谋，对于国家大事能够当机立断，况且他已很老了，请陛下赶紧重用他。 
English: Yao Yuanzhi replied, "Zhang Kam is simple and steady, full of wisdom, able to make decisions on national affairs. Moreover, he is already very old, so please use him again soon.

古文：冬，十月，甲戌，以秋官侍郎张柬之同平章事，时年且八十矣。
现代文：冬季，十月，甲戌，武则天任命秋官侍郎张柬之为同平章事，这时张柬之已经年近八十了。
English: In the winter, October, Armor, Wu Zetian appointed Zhang Kammai, the attendant of the autumn official, as Tongping Zhang, who was nearly eighty years old at that time.

古文：乙亥，以韦嗣立检校魏州刺史，馀如故。
现代文：乙亥，武则天任命韦嗣立为检校魏州刺史，其他职务不变。
English: Wu Zetian appointed Wei Shili as the inspector of the school in Weizhou, and other positions remain unchanged.

古文：壬午，以怀州长史河南房融同平章事。
现代文：壬午，武则天任命怀州长史河南人房融为同平章事。
English: In the morning of the third day of the third month, Wu Zetian appointed the governor of Huai Province, Shi Henan, to integrate the people's quarters into the same level.

古文：太后命宰相各举堪为员外郎者，韦嗣立荐广武令岑羲曰： 但恨其伯父长倩为累。 
现代文：武则天命令宰相们各自举荐能够胜任员外郎职务的人，韦嗣立推荐了广武令岑羲，并说： 只可惜他受到了他伯父岑长倩的连累。 
English: Wu Zetian ordered the prime ministers to each recommend a person who could be qualified for the post of foreign minister. Wei Xi Li recommended Guangwu Lingjun, and said: It's just a pity that he was dragged down by his uncle Zou Changjun.

古文：太后曰： 苟或有才，此何所累！ 
现代文：武则天说： 只要有才干，这点事情又有什么可连累的！ 
English: Wu Zetian said: As long as there is talent, there is nothing to be worried about!

古文：遂拜天官员外郎。
现代文：于是任命岑羲为天官员外郎。
English: As a result, Zou was appointed as the heavenly official's second son.

古文：由是诸缘坐者始得进用。
现代文：从此那些因为亲属犯罪而受到牵连的人才开始能得到提拔任用。
English: Since then, those who have been implicated in the crimes of their relatives have begun to be promoted.

古文：十一月，丁亥，以天官侍郎韦承庆为凤阁侍郎、同平章事。
现代文：十一月，丁亥，武则天任命天官侍郎韦承庆为凤阁侍郎、同平章事。
English: In November, Dinghai, Wu Zetian appointed Wei Chengqing, the attendant of heaven, as the attendant of Fengge and Tongping.

古文：癸卯，成均祭酒、同凤阁鸾台三品李峤罢为地官尚书。
现代文：癸卯，武则天免去成均祭酒、同凤阁鸾台三品李峤的职务，另外任命他为地官尚书。
English: At the same time, Wu Zetian exempted Chengjun from the duties of offering wine and Tongfeng Pavilion from the duties of serving three dishes of rice dumplings. In addition, he appointed him as the local official Shangshu.

古文：十二月，甲寅，敕大足已来新置官并停。
现代文：十二月，甲寅，武则天颁下敕书，决定停设所有大足元年以来新设置的官职。
English: In December, Emperor Go-Jin and Emperor Wu Zetian issued an imperial edict, deciding to suspend all newly created official positions since the first year of Taizu.

古文：丙辰，凤阁侍郎、同平章事韦嗣立罢为成均祭酒，检校魏州刺史如故；以兄承庆入相故也。
现代文：丙辰，凤阁侍郎、同平章事韦嗣立被免去取务，改任成均祭酒，原任的检校魏州刺史职务仍保留；这是因为他的哥哥韦承庆已被任命为宰相的缘故。
English: Xing Chen, Fengge waiter, Tongping secretary Wei Shiguang was relieved of his duties and reassigned to Chengyun sacrificial wine, and the original post of inspecting schools in Weizhou was still retained; this was because his brother Wei Chengqing had been appointed prime minister.

古文：太后寝疾，居长生院，宰相不得见者累月，惟张易之、昌宗侍侧。
现代文：武则天一病不起，一直住在长生院，只有张易之和张昌宗二人在身旁侍奉，宰相们无法与她相见已经几个月。
English: Wu Zetian became very ill and has been living in the Chang Sheng Yuan, with only Zhang Yizhi and Zhang Changzong serving at her side. The prime ministers have not been able to meet with her for several months.

古文：疾少间，崔玄奏言： 皇太子、相王，仁明孝友，足侍汤药。
现代文：当武则天的病情稍有好转的时候，崔玄上奏说： 皇太子和相王，仁德彰明，孝顺母亲，友爱兄弟，完全可以在您身旁侍奉汤药。
English: When Wu Zetian's condition improved slightly, Cui Xuan said: "Crown Prince and King, benevolence, filial piety, brotherly love, it is entirely possible to serve soup and medicine next to you.

古文：宫禁事重，伏愿不令异姓出入。 
现代文：皇宫是重地，事关重大，希望陛下不要让异姓人随意出入。 
English: The Imperial Palace is a place of great importance. I hope that His Majesty will not allow people with different surnames to enter and leave at will.

古文：太后曰： 德卿厚意。 
现代文：武则天说： 我十分感激您的厚意。 
English: Wu Zetian said: I am very grateful for your kindness.

古文：易之、昌宗见太后疾笃，恐祸及己，引用党援，阴为之备。
现代文：张易之、张昌宗见武则天病情十分严重，担心她死后自己大祸临头，便拉同伙援助自己，暗地里作准备。
English: Zhang Yizhi and Zhang Changzong saw that Wu Zetian's condition was very serious. Fearing that a great disaster would befall them after her death, they pulled their associates to help themselves and secretly made preparations.

古文：屡有人为飞书及榜其事于通衢，云 易之兄弟谋反 ，太后皆不问。
现代文：不断有人写匿名信和将匿名信张贴于通衢闹市，说 张易之兄弟阴谋反叛 ，武则天对这些消息一概不闻不问。
English: People kept writing anonymous letters and posting them in Tonglu downtown, saying that Zhang Yi's brothers were plotting to rebel, but Wu Zetian ignored all these messages.

古文：辛未，许州人杨元嗣，告 昌宗尝召术士李弘泰占相，弘泰言昌宗有天子相，劝于定州造佛寺，则天下归心。 
现代文：辛未，许州人杨元嗣指控 张昌宗曾召见过一个名叫李弘泰的江湖术士给他看相占卦，李弘泰说张昌宗有天子之相，劝他在定州修建佛寺，并说这样做的话就会使天下百姓对他倾心归附。 
English: Soon after, Yang Yuanzi from Huzhou accused Zhang Changzong of having summoned a charlatan named Li Hongtai to show him divination. Li Hongtai said that Zhang Changzong had the appearance of a son of heaven and advised him to build a Buddhist temple in Dingzhou, saying that doing so would make the people of the world fall in love with him.

古文：太后命韦承麇庆及司刑卿崔神庆、御史中丞宋璟鞫之。
现代文：武则天指派凤阁侍郎、同平章事韦承庆及司刑卿崔神庆和御史中丞宋共同审理此案。
English: Wu Zetian assigned Fengge's chamberlain, Tongping Zhangji Wei Chengqing, and the chief of the criminal court, Cui Shenqing, and the chief historian, Zhongzheng Song, to jointly try the case.

古文：神庆，神基之弟也。
现代文：崔神庆是崔神基的弟弟。
English: Cui Shenqing is Cui Shenji's younger brother.

古文：承庆、神庆奏言： 昌宗款称 弘泰之语，寻已奏闻 ，准法首原；弘泰妖言，请收行法。 
现代文：韦承庆和崔神庆上奏道： 张昌宗招供说 李弘泰说过的话，我很快就向天子奏明了 ，根据法律的规定，张昌宗主动自首应当免予处罚；李弘泰妖言惑众，应当逮捕治罪。 
English: Wei Chengqing and Cui Shenqing made a report: Zhang Changzong's confession said what Li Hongtai said, I quickly reported to the heavenly son, according to the provisions of the law, Zhang Changzong's voluntary surrender should be exempted from punishment; Li Hongtai's demonic speech should be arrested and punished.

古文：璟与大理丞封全祯奏： 昌宗庞荣如是，复召术士占相，志欲何求！
现代文：宋与大理丞封全祯上奏道： 张昌宗受到陛下如此恩宠，还要召见术士看相占卦，他到底还希望得到什么！
English: Song and Dali's son-in-law, Zheng Quanzhang, gave a speech: Zhang Changzong was so favored by His Majesty that he had to summon a sorcerer to see a fortune-teller, what else did he hope to get!

古文：弘泰称筮得纯《乾》，天子之卦。
现代文：李弘泰说他为张昌宗占得纯《乾》卦，这是天子之卦。
English: Li Hongtai said that for Zhang Changzong, he obtained pure "Kian" gossip, which is the gossip of the heavenly son.

古文：昌宗倘以弘泰为妖妄，何不即执送有司！
现代文：如果张昌宗认为李弘泰的所作所为是妖言妄行，那么他为什么不将李弘泰捆起来送到有关部门治罪！
English: If Zhang Changzong thought that Li Hongtai's actions and deeds were the result of witchcraft, then why didn't he tie up Li Hongtai and send him to the relevant department to be punished!

古文：虽云奏闻，终是包藏祸心，法当处斩破家。
现代文：虽然他说已经将此事上奏天子，终究还是包藏祸心，依法应对他处以斩刑，并没收他的家产。
English: Although he said that he had reported the matter to the emperor, he still harbored evil intentions, and according to the law, he should be sentenced to beheading and his family property should be confiscated.

古文：请收付狱，穷理其罪！ 
现代文：请逮捕张昌宗下狱，彻底处治他的罪！ 
English: Please arrest Zhang Changzong, throw him in jail, and thoroughly punish his crime!

古文：太后久之不应，璟又曰： 傥不即收系，恐其摇动众心。 
现代文：过了好大一会儿，武则天还是不作声。宋又说： 如果不将他立即拘禁，恐怕会造成人心不稳的后果。 
English: After a long while, Wu Zetian remained silent. Song also said: If he is not immediately detained, I am afraid it will cause instability in the hearts of the people.

古文：太后曰： 卿且停推，俟更检详文状。 
现代文：武则天说： 你们先暂且停止审理这个案子，等我仔细看一看有关的文书诉状再说。 
English: Wu Zetian said: You should temporarily stop the trial of this case, and wait for me to take a closer look at the relevant written complaint.

古文：璟退，左拾遗江都李邕进曰： 向观宋璟所奏，志安社稷，非为身谋，愿陛下可其奏。 
现代文：宋退出长生殿，左拾遗江都县人李邕上前进言道： 刚才听了宋的话，我认为他是一心为安定国家着想，并没有考虑自身的安危得失，希望陛下能同意按照他的意见办理此案。 
English: Song withdrew from the Chosheng Hall, and Li Yan, a resident of Jiangdu County, stepped forward and said: Just now, after listening to Song's words, I think that he is single-minded for the sake of a stable country, and did not consider his own safety. I hope that His Majesty will agree to handle this case according to his opinion.

古文：太后不听。
现代文：武则天不同意这样做。
English: The Queen Mother did not follow his advice.

古文：寻敕璟扬州推按，又敕璟按幽州都督屈突仲翔赃污，又敕璟副李峤安抚陇、蜀；璟皆不肯行，奏曰： 故事，州县官有罪，品高则侍御史、卑则监察御史按之，中丞非军国大事，不当出使。
现代文：一会儿就敕令宋到扬州审理案件，又敕命宋去审理幽州都督屈突仲翔的贪污案，接着又敕命宋作李峤的副职安抚陇、蜀之民。宋对这些新的任命都没有接受，他不肯外出，并上奏道： 依照惯例：州、县官吏犯罪，官品高的由侍御史审理，官品低的由监察御史审理，如果没有事关军国大事的重大案件发生，御史中丞都不应出使地方。
English: Soon after, he ordered Song to Yangzhou to try a case, then ordered Song to Yuzhou to try the corruption case of the governor of Yuzhou, Qu Du Zhong Xiang, and then ordered Song to serve as Li Qian's deputy to pacify the people of Shu. Song did not accept these new appointments, he refused to go out, and made a report: According to the usual practice: if a state or county official commits a crime, the high-ranking official will be tried by the attendant magistrate, and the low-ranking official will be tried by the inspector magistrate. If there is no major case related to military affairs, the magistrate magistrate should

古文：今陇、蜀无变，不识陛下遣臣出外何也？臣皆不敢奉制。 
现代文：现在陇、蜀二地并没有任何重大事变发生，我不清楚陛下一定要派我外出的原因是什么，因此我都不敢接受您的任命。 
English: At present, there are no major incidents in Shandong and Shandong. I do not know why Your Majesty must send me out, so I am afraid to accept your appointment.

古文：司刑少卿桓彦范上疏，以为： 昌宗无功荷宠，而包藏祸心，自招其咎，此乃皇天降怒；陛下不忍加诛，则违天不祥。
现代文：司刑少卿桓彦范上疏认为： 张昌宗没有任何功劳而受到陛下如此宠爱，却包藏祸心，这是他自作自受，也是上天动怒要惩罚他；陛下不忍心诛杀张昌宗，是违背天意的不祥行为。
English: Juvenile Chief Magistrate Huan Yan Fan Shang Shou thought: Zhang Changzong did not do any merit to be so favored by His Majesty, but he harbored evil intentions. This was his own doing, and it was also Heaven's wrath to punish him. His Majesty did not have the heart to kill Zhang Changzong, which was an ominous act against the will of Heaven.

古文：且昌宗既云奏讫，则不当更与弘泰往还，使之求福禳灾，是则初无悔心；所以奏者，拟事发则云先已奏陈，不发则俟时为逆。
现代文：况且张昌宗既然说他已经把李弘泰的反逆言论上奏陛下，便不应当再与他交往，让他用法术为自己求福消灾，这只能说明他根本没有悔改的意思。张昌宗之所以把这件事上奏给您，是打算万一事情败露了就说事先已经告诉过您，如果没有人发觉便等待时机作乱。
English: Moreover, since Zhang Changzong said that he had reported Li Hongtai's treasonous remarks to His Majesty, he should no longer associate with him and let him use magic to seek blessings for himself and eliminate disasters, which only shows that he has no intention of repenting. Zhang Changzong reported this matter to you because he intended to say that he had told you in advance in case the matter was revealed, and if no one found out, he would wait for the opportunity to make trouble.

古文：此乃奸臣诡计，若云可舍，谁为可刑！
现代文：这是奸臣的诡计，如果说他还可以饶恕的话，那么什么样的人才够得上受处罚呢？
English: This is a trick of a treacherous minister. If he can forgive, then what kind of person can be punished?

古文：况事已再发，陛下皆释不问，使昌宗益自负得计，天下亦以为天命不死，此乃陛下养成其乱也。
现代文：再说这样的事情已是第二次发生，陛下都不加追究，使张昌宗更加自以为得计，天下臣民也会因此而错误地认为是上天不让他死，这是陛下姑息养奸而导致他作乱哪。
English: Moreover, this is the second time that such a thing has happened, and His Majesty did not investigate, which made Zhang Changzong more self-righteous, and the subjects of the world would therefore mistakenly believe that God would not let him die. This is His Majesty's condoning of adultery and causing him to make trouble.

古文：苟逆臣不诛，社稷亡矣。
现代文：倘若对谋逆之臣也不加诛戮，这江山社稷就会覆亡。
English: If no action is taken against the traitorous ministers, this country and society will perish.

古文：请付鸾台凤阁三司，考竟其罪！ 
现代文：请陛下允许将张昌宗交付鸾台凤阁及中台秋官和司刑寺、御史台三司处理，以便彻底查清他的罪行！ 
English: Your majesty, please allow Zhang Changzong to be handed over to the Fengtai Fengge and Zhongtai Qiu Guan, and the Three Departments of the Shichong Temple and the History Channel, so that his crimes can be thoroughly investigated!

古文：疏奏，不报。
现代文：这篇奏疏呈上去以后，没有得到任何答复。
English: No response has been received since the submission of this communication.

古文：崔玄亦屡以为言，太后令法司议其罪。
现代文：崔玄也屡次向武则天提起这件事，武则天于是下令司法部门议定张宗昌的罪。
English: Cui Xuan also repeatedly mentioned the matter to Wu Zetian, who then ordered the judicial department to convict Zhang Zongchang.

古文：玄弟司刑少卿昪，处以大辟。
现代文：崔玄的弟弟司刑少卿崔认为应当将张昌宗处以死刑。
English: Cui Xuan's younger brother, Sentencing Minor Secretary Cui, believed that Zhang Changzong should be sentenced to death.

古文：宋璟复奏收昌宗下狱。
现代文：宋又奏请逮捕张昌宗入狱。
English: Song also requested the arrest and imprisonment of Zhang Changzong.

古文：太后曰： 昌宗已自奏闻。 
现代文：武则天说： 张昌宗自己已经把那件事情告诉了我。 
English: Wu Zetian said: Zhang Changzong himself has already told me about that.

古文：对曰： 昌宗为飞书所逼，穷而自陈，势非得已。
现代文：宋回答说： 张昌宗是因为被匿名信逼得走投无路才自己说出来的，实际上根本不是出因自他的本意。
English: Song replied, "Zhang Changzong said it himself because he was cornered by the anonymous letter. In fact, it was not his intention at all.

古文：且谋反大逆，无容首免。
现代文：况且他所犯下的是谋反大逆之罪，不允许因自首而免刑。
English: What's more, he committed the crime of conspiring to commit high treason, and he is not allowed to be released on his own recognizance.

古文：若昌宗不伏大刑，安用国法！ 
现代文：如果张昌宗可以不被处死，那还要国法干什么！ 
English: If Zhang Changzong can be spared the death penalty, then what is the need for national law!

古文：太后温言解之。
现代文：武则天语气温和地为张昌宗辨解开脱。
English: Wu Zetian's tone of voice gently absolved Zhang Changzong.

古文：璟声色逾厉曰： 昌宗分外承恩，臣知言出祸从，然义激于心，虽死不恨！ 
现代文：宋越来越激动，声色俱厉地说： 张昌宗承受着他不应该享受的恩泽，臣深知此言一出就会大祸临头，但正义驱使着我说出这样的话，即使是因此而死也没有什么可遗憾的！ 
English: Song became more and more excited and said with a strained voice, "Zhang Changzong is the recipient of unmerited favors. The minister knew very well that if he said this, a great calamity would befall him. However, justice drove me to say such a thing. Even if I die because of it, there is nothing to regret!"

古文：太后不悦，杨再思恐其忤旨，遽宣敕令出，璟曰： 圣主在此，不烦宰相擅宣敕命！ 
现代文：杨再思担心宋忤犯天子旨意，急忙宣敕让他退出，宋大声说道： 圣明天子就在眼前，用不着麻烦你这个作宰相的擅自宣布敕命！ 
English: Yang Zaixi was worried that Song Tao had violated the will of the heavenly son, and hastily announced that he should withdraw. Song said loudly: The heavenly son is right in front of us, there is no need to trouble you, the prime minister, to announce his death without authorization!

古文：太后乃可其奏，遣昌宗诣台，璟庭立而按之；事未毕，太后遣中使召昌守特敕赦之。
现代文：武则天最终同意了他的意见，让张昌宗前往御史台接受审讯。宋立即在庭院对他进行审讯，但还没等他审讯完毕，武则天就从宫中派宦官召回张昌宗并且颁下敕书赦免了他。
English: Wu Zetian finally agreed to his opinion and let Zhang Changzong go to the Grand Historian's Office for interrogation. Song immediately interrogated him in the courtyard, but before his interrogation was completed, Wu Zetian sent eunuchs from the palace to recall Zhang Changzong and issued an imperial edict to pardon him.

古文：璟叹曰： 不先击小子脑裂，负此恨矣！ 
现代文：宋叹息道： 没有先把这小子的脑袋打碎，真是终生遗憾。 
English: Song sighed, "It's a lifelong regret that I didn't smash this kid's head first."

古文：太后乃使昌宗诣璟谢，璟拒不见。
现代文：武则天于是让张昌宗到宋那里道歉，宋拒而不见。
English: Wu Zetian then asked Zhang Changzong to apologize to Song, but Song refused and disappeared.

古文：左台中丞桓彦范、右台中丞东光袁恕己共荐詹事司直阳峤为御史。
现代文：左台中丞桓彦范、右台中丞东光县人袁恕己共同举荐太子詹事司直阳峤为御史。
English: On the left, Junior Secretary of the Imperial Household Agency, Kanehiko Fan, and on the right, Junior Secretary of the Imperial Household Agency, Yuan Shouji, both of whom hail from Dongguang County, jointly recommend Prince Zhan's Secretary of the Imperial Household Agency, Naoyang Zhao, as Imperial Historian.

古文：杨再思曰： 峤不乐搏击之任如何？ 
现代文：杨再思问道： 阳峤不愿意担任这种搏击、弹劾他人的职务怎么办？ 
English: Yang Zhaisi asked: What if the impotence is not willing to take on the role of fighting and impeaching others?

古文：彦范曰： 为官择人，岂必待其所欲！
现代文：桓彦范说： 为某一职务选择合适的人才，哪里一定要等待自己愿意就任的人呢！
English: Kuan Yan Fan said: Selecting the right talent for a certain position, where do you have to wait for the person you want to take office!

古文：所不欲者，尤须与之，所以长难进之风，抑躁求之路。 
现代文：越是不愿干的，越要让他去干，只有这样才能助长视进取为难事的风气，抑制热衷于功名、急于求进取的道路。 
English: The more you don't want to do it, the more you have to let him do it. This is the only way to promote a culture that regards advancement as difficult, and to curb the path of enthusiasm for achievement and eagerness for advancement.

古文：乃擢为右台侍御史。
现代文：于是提拔阳峤担任右台侍御史的职务。
English: As a result, he promoted Yang Xuan to the post of the Right Division's Attendant of History.

古文：峤，休之之玄孙也。
现代文：阳峤是北齐阳休之的玄孙。
English: He is the great-great-grandson of Northern Qi's Yang Xiu.

古文：先是李峤、崔玄奏： 往属革命之时，人多逆节，遂致刻薄之吏，恣行酷法。其周兴等所劾破家者，并请雪免。 
现代文：在此之前，李峤、崔玄曾上奏道： 以前陛下刚刚登基时，很多臣民不遵守臣节，从而导致苛酷的官吏，肆无忌惮地施行严酷的刑罚，恳请陛下为所有被周兴等人治罪而家破人亡的人昭雪，赦免他们的罪。 
English: Prior to this, Li Wei and Cui Xuan had written: In the past, when Your Majesty had just ascended to the throne, many subjects did not observe the Subordinate Day, which led to harsh officials unscrupulously enforcing harsh punishments. I implore Your Majesty to shed light on and pardon the sins of all those who were punished by Zhou Xing and others and whose families were destroyed.

古文：司刑少卿桓彦范又奏陈之，表疏前后十上，太后乃从之。
现代文：司刑少卿桓彦范也上奏陈述此意，前后共上奏疏达十次之多，武则天才最终采纳了他的建议。
English: Juvenile Chief Magistrate Kanehiko Fan also submitted a report stating this intention, a total of ten times, and Busetsu Tensai finally adopted his suggestion.

古文：中宗大和大圣大昭孝皇帝上
现代文：中宗大和大圣大昭孝皇帝上
English: Emperor Zhongzongda and Da Sheng Da Zhaoxiao

古文：神龙元年乙巳，公元七零五年春，正月，壬午朔，赦天下，改元。
现代文：唐中宗神龙元年春季正月，壬午朔，武则天下诏赦免天下罪犯，改年号。
English: In the first month of the spring of the first year of the Tang Dynasty, Wu Zetian issued an edict to pardon all criminals and changed the year.

古文：自文明以来得罪者，非扬、豫、博三州及诸反逆魁首，咸赦除之。
现代文：规定自文明元年以来犯罪的人，如果不是扬州、豫州、博州三州谋反案以及各种叛乱的罪魁祸首，都可以赦免他们的罪过。
English: It stipulates that those who have committed crimes since the first year of civilization can be pardoned if they are not the culprits of the Yangzhou, Yuzhou and Bozhou Three-State Conspiracy and various rebellions.

古文：太后疾甚，麟台监张易之、春官侍郎张昌宗居中用事，张柬之、崔玄与中台右丞敬晖、司刑少卿桓彦范、相王府司马袁恕己谋诛之。
现代文：武则天病得非常严重，麟台监张易之和春官侍郎张昌宗居宫中执政，张柬之、崔玄与中台右丞敬晖、司刑少卿桓彦范以及相王府司马袁恕己谋划杀掉张易之和张昌宗。
English: Wu Zetian was very seriously ill, and Lintai Supervisor Zhang Yizhi and the attendant of the Crown Prince Zhang Chang Zong lived and ruled in the palace. Zhang Xizhi, Cui Xuan, and the Central Taiwan U.S.S.R. Keisuke, the Assistant Secretary of Justice Guan Yanfan, and the Secretary of the Imperial Household, Ma Yuan Shou, plotted to kill Zhang Yizhi and Zhang Chang Zong.

古文：柬之谓右羽林卫大将军李多祚曰： 将军今日富贵，谁所致也？ 
现代文：张柬之问右羽林卫大将军李多祚说： 将军今日的荣华富贵，是谁给的？ 
English: Zhang Khamzhi's question to General Li Duoxuan of the Right Feather Lin Guard said: General, who gave you today's glory and wealth?

古文：多祚泣曰： 大帝也。 
现代文：李多祚流着眼泪回答说： 是高宗大帝给的。 
English: With tears streaming down his face, Li Duoxuan replied: Emperor Gaozong gave it to me.

古文：柬之曰： 今大帝之子为二竖所危，将军不思报大帝之德乎？ 
现代文：张柬之说： 现在大帝的儿子受到张易之和张昌宗这两个小子的威胁，难道将军不想报答大帝的恩德吗！ 
English: Zhang Khamzhi said: Now that the emperor's son is threatened by the two boys Zhang Yizhi and Zhang Changzong, doesn't the general want to repay the emperor's kindness?

古文：多祚曰： 苟利国家，惟相公处分，不敢顾身及妻子！ 
现代文：李多祚回答说： 只要对国家有利，我一切都听相公安排，不敢顾及自身以及妻儿的安危。 
English: Li Dorje replied: "As long as it is beneficial to the country, I will do everything according to the arrangement of relatives, and I dare not consider the safety of myself and my wife and children.

古文：因指天地以自誓。遂与定谋。
现代文：于是自己指天发誓，并且与张柬之、崔玄等人一同定下了铲除张易之和张昌宗的计谋。
English: So he swore by heaven, and together with Zhang Khamzhi, Cui Xuan and others, they set up a plan to eradicate Zhang Yizhi and Zhang Changzong.

古文：初，柬之与荆府长史閺乡杨元琰相代，同泛江，至中流，语及太后革命事，元琰慨然有匡复之志。
现代文：当初，张柬之接替荆州都督府长史乡人杨元琰的职务，二人一同泛舟于长江之中，当小船漂到江心时，谈到了武则天以周代唐的事，杨元琰慷慨激昂，有救助大唐的志向。
English: At the beginning, Zhang Khamzhi took over the post of Jingzhou prefectural governor from Yang Yuanzhong, a villager and historian. The two of them went rafting on the Yangtze River together. When the boat drifted to the middle of the river, they talked about Wu Zetian and the Tang Dynasty. Yang Yuanzhong was impassioned and had the ambition to save the Great Tang Dynasty.

古文：及柬之为相，引元琰为右羽林将军，谓曰： 君颇记江中之言乎？
现代文：张柬之入朝作了宰相后，便推荐杨元琰担任右羽林将军，并且提醒他说： 您大概还记得我们当初在江心泛舟时所说的话吧？
English: After Zhang Khamzhi entered the imperial court as the prime minister, he recommended Yang Yuanzhang to serve as the general of Ulin, and reminded him: You probably remember what we said when we were rafting in the middle of the river?

古文：今日非轻授也。 
现代文：今天这项任命可不是随便给您的呀。 
English: Today's appointment is not a casual one.

古文：柬之又用彦范、晖及右散骑侍郎李湛皆为左、右羽林将军，委以禁兵。
现代文：张柬之还任用了桓彦范、敬晖以及右散骑侍郎李湛，都让他们担任左、右羽林将军，把禁军交给他们指挥。
English: Zhang Kammizhi also appointed Kuan Yan Fan, Jing Xi, and the right horseman Li Tan, all of whom served as the left and right eagle forest generals, and gave them the command of the forbidden army.

古文：易之等疑惧，乃更以其党武攸宜为右羽林大将军，易之等乃安。
现代文：这件事引起了张易之等人的怀疑和忧虑，张柬之于是又任用他的党羽武攸宜为右羽林大将军，张易之等人才放了心。
English: This incident aroused the suspicion and anxiety of Zhang Yizhi and others. Zhang Kamzhi then appointed his party follower Wu Youyi as the Right Feather Lin Grand General. Zhang Yizhi and others were relieved.

古文：俄而姚元之自灵武至都，柬之、彦范相谓曰： 事济矣！ 
现代文：不久，姚元之从灵武回朝，张柬之和桓彦范交谈说： 大事就要成功了！ 
English: Soon after, Yao Yuanzhi returned to the North from Lingwu, Zhang Kamzhi and Huan Yanfan talked and said: Big things are about to succeed!

古文：遂以其谋告之。
现代文：于是把商量好的计谋告诉姚元之。
English: So he told Yao Yuanzhi about the well-considered strategy.

古文：彦范以事白其母，母曰： 忠孝不两全，先国后家可也。 
现代文：桓彦范将这事禀告了他的母亲，母亲勉励他说： 忠孝不能两全，应当先为国家大事着想，然后再考虑自家的小事。 
English: Kuan Yan Fan reported the matter to his mother, who encouraged him, saying, "Loyalty and filial piety cannot be two different things. You should first think about the great matters of the state, and then think about the small matters of your own family."

古文：时太子于北门起居，彦范、晖谒见，密陈其策，太子许之。
现代文：当时太子李显都从北门入宫向天子问安，桓彦范和敬晖前往拜见，秘密地把他们的计策告诉太子，太子允许他们这样去做。
English: At that time, the prince Li Xian entered the palace from the north gate to ask the heavenly son for greetings. Huan Yan Fan and Jing Yi went to visit and secretly told the prince about their strategy, and the prince allowed them to do so.

古文：癸卯，柬之、玄、彦范与左威卫将军薛思行等，帅左右羽林兵五百馀人至玄武门，遣多祚、湛及内直郎、驸马都尉安阳王同皎诣东宫迎太子。
现代文：癸卯，张柬之、崔玄、桓彦范与左威卫将军薛思行等人率领左右羽林兵五百余人来到玄武门，派李多祚、李湛及内直郎、驸马都尉安阳人王同皎到东宫去迎接太子李显。
English: Yu Yu, Zhang Kammanzhi, Cui Xuan, Kuan Yan Fan, and General of the Left and Right Wings of the Wei Dynasty Xue Siyong led more than 500 soldiers to the Xuanwu Gate, and sent Li Duoying, Li Zhan, and Nai Naorong, as well as the imperial equerry Anyangren Wang Tongyi, to the East Palace to meet the prince Li Xian.

古文：太子疑，不出，同皎曰： 先帝以神器付殿下，横遭幽废，人神同愤，二十三年矣！
现代文：太子有所怀疑，没有出来，王同皎说： 先帝把皇位传给殿下，殿下无故遭到幽禁废黜，皇天后土、士民百姓无不义愤填膺，已经有二十三年了。
English: The crown prince had some doubts, but he did not come out, and Wang Tongyu said: The previous emperor passed the imperial throne to Your Royal Highness, Your Royal Highness was imprisoned and deposed without reason, and the empress dowager, the people and the scholars have been filled with unjustified indignation for 23 years.

古文：今天诱其衷，北门、南牙，同心协力，以今日诛凶竖，复李氏社稷，愿殿下暂至玄武门，以副众望。 
现代文：现在上天诱导人心。北门的羽林诸将与南牙朝臣得以同心协力，立志诛灭凶恶的小人，恢复李氏的江山社稷，希望殿下暂时到玄武门去以满足大家的期望。 
English: Now the heavens are guiding the hearts of the people. The North Gate's egrets and doves will be able to work together with the South Gate's courtiers, determined to exterminate the evil villains and restore the Li clan's social order. I hope that His Royal Highness will temporarily go to the Xuanwu Gate to meet everyone's expectations.

古文：太子曰： 凶竖诚当夷灭，然上体不安，得无惊怛！
现代文：太子回答说： 凶恶的小人的确应该翦除，但是天子圣体欠安，你们这样做能不使天子受惊吗！
English: The prince replied, "It is true that evil villains should be eliminated, but the holy body of the heavenly son is not in good health. If you do this, will you not frighten the heavenly son?"

古文：诸公更为后图。 
现代文：请诸位日后再图此事。 
English: Please come back to this in the future.

古文：李湛曰： 诸将相不顾家族以徇社稷，殿下奈何欲纳之鼎镬乎！
现代文：李谌说： 诸位将帅宰相为了国家不顾身家性命，殿下为什么非要让他们面临鼎镬的酷刑呢！
English: Li Wei said, "You generals and prime ministers have risked your lives for the sake of the country. Why did Your Highness have to make them face the most brutal torture?"

古文：请殿下自出止之。 
现代文：请殿下亲自去制止他们好了。 
English: Your Highness, please go and stop them yourself.

古文：太子乃出。
现代文：太子这才出来。
English: The prince has just come out.

古文：同皎扶抱太子上马，从至玄武门，斩关而入。
现代文：王同皎将太子抱到马上，并陪同太子来到玄武门，斩断门栓进入宫中。
English: Wang Tongyao carried the prince to the horse, and accompanied the prince to the Xuanwu Gate, cut off the bolt and entered the palace.

古文：太后在迎仙宫，柬之等斩易之、昌宗于庑下，进至太后所寝长生殿，环绕侍卫。
现代文：此时武则天在迎仙宫，张柬之等人在迎仙宫的走廊里将张易之和张昌宗斩首，然后进至武则天居住的长生殿，在她周围环绕侍卫。
English: At this time, Wu Zetian was in the Yingxian Palace. Zhang Xizhi and others beheaded Zhang Yizhi and Zhang Changzong in the corridor of the Yingxian Palace, and then went to the Hall of Immortality, where Wu Zetian lived, and surrounded her with attendants.

古文：太后惊起，问曰： 乱者谁邪？ 
现代文：武则天吃惊地坐起来，问道： 是谁作乱？ 
English: Wu Zetian sat up in surprise and asked: Who caused the disturbance?

古文：对曰： 张易之、昌宗谋反，臣等奉太子令诛之，恐有漏泄，故不敢以闻。
现代文：张柬之回答说： 张易之、张昌宗阴谋造反，臣等已奉太子的命令将他们杀掉了，因为担心可能会走漏消息，所以没有向您禀告。
English: Zhang Khamzhi replied, "Zhang Yizhi and Zhang Changzong plotted to rebel, and the courtiers have killed them on the prince's orders. I did not inform you because I was worried that the news might leak out.

古文：称兵宫禁，罪当万死！ 
现代文：在皇宫禁地举兵诛杀逆贼，惊动天子，臣等罪该万死！ 
English: To raise an army in the restricted area of the imperial palace to kill the traitors, to alarm the emperor, the vassals, and so on, is a crime worthy of death!

古文：太后见太子曰： 乃汝邪？
现代文：武则天看见太子李显也在人群之中，便对他说： 这件事是你让干的吗？
English: When Wu Zetian saw that Prince Li Xian was also in the crowd, he said to him, "Did you let him do this?

古文：小子既诛，可还东宫！ 
现代文：这两个小子已经被诛杀了，你可以回到东宫里去了。 
English: The two boys have been killed. You can go back to the East Palace.

古文：彦范进曰： 太子安得更归！
现代文：桓彦范上前说： 太子哪能还回到东宫里去呢？
English: Kanehiko Fan stepped forward and said, "How can the prince return to the East Palace?

古文：昔天皇以爱子托陛下，今年齿已长，久居东宫，天意人心，久思李氏。
现代文：当初天皇把心爱的太子托付给陛下，现在他年纪已大，却一直在东宫当太子，天意民心，早已思念李家。
English: At first, the emperor entrusted his beloved prince to his majesty, but now that he is old, he has always been the prince in the East Palace, and the people's hearts have long missed the Li family.

古文：群臣不忘太宗、天皇之德，故奉太子诛贼臣。
现代文：群臣不敢忘怀太宗、天皇的恩德，所以尊奉太子诛灭犯上作乱的逆臣。
English: The courtiers dared not forget the benevolence of Emperor Taizong and the emperor, so they honored the prince to exterminate the rebellious courtiers.

古文：愿陛下传位太子，以顺天人之望！ 
现代文：希望陛下将帝位传给太子，以顺从上天与下民的心愿！ 
English: I hope that His Majesty will pass the throne to the Crown Prince, in obedience to the wishes of Heaven and the people!

古文：李湛，义府之子也。太后见之，谓曰： 汝亦为诛易之将军邪？
现代文：李湛是李义府的儿子，武则天发现了他，对他说： 你也是杀死张易之的将军吗？
English: Li Zhan was the son of Li Yifu. Wu Zetian found him and said to him, "Are you also the general who killed Zhang Yizhi?"

古文：我于汝父子不薄，乃有今日！ 
现代文：我平时对你们父子不薄，想不到竟然有今天的变故！ 
English: I'm usually very fond of your father and son, but I couldn't have imagined today's turn of events!

古文：湛惭不能对。
现代文：李湛满面羞惭，无法回答。
English: Li Zhan was too ashamed to answer.

古文：又谓崔玄曰： 他人皆因人以进，惟卿朕所自擢，亦在此邪？ 
现代文：武则天又对崔玄说： 别的人都是经他人推荐之后提拔的，只有你是朕亲手提拔的，你怎么也在这里呢？ 
English: Wu Zetian also said to Cui Xuan: Other people are promoted after being recommended by others. Only you were promoted by me. Why are you here?

古文：对曰： 此乃所以报陛下之大德。 
现代文：崔玄说： 我这样做正是为了报答陛下对我的大恩大德。 
English: Cui Xuan said: I am doing this to repay His Majesty's great kindness to me.

古文：于是收张昌期、同休、昌仪等，皆斩之，与易之、昌宗枭首天津南。
现代文：接下来逮捕了张昌期、张同休、张昌仪等人，将他们全部处斩，并在神都天津桥的南边将上述人犯与张易之、张昌宗二人一道枭首示众。
English: Next, Zhang Changzhi, Zhang Tongxiu, Zhang Changyi and others were arrested and all of them were beheaded, and the above-mentioned criminals, together with Zhang Yizhi and Zhang Changzong, were publicly beheaded on the south side of Tianjin Bridge, the sacred city.

古文：是日，袁恕己从相王统南牙兵以备非常，收韦承庆、房融及司礼卿崔神庆系狱，皆易之之党也。
现代文：在这一天里，为防范突然事变的发生，袁恕己随从相王李旦统率南牙兵马，他们将韦承庆、房融及司礼卿崔神庆等逮捕下狱，这些人都是张易之的同党。
English: On this day, in order to prevent the occurrence of sudden incidents, Yuan Shuxi followed the king of states, Li Dan, to lead the Nan Ya soldiers and horses. They arrested and imprisoned Wei Chengqing, Fang Rong and Secretary Cui Shenqing, all of whom were Zhang Yizhi's fellow party members.

古文：初，昌仪新作第，甚美，逾于王主。或夜书其门曰： 一日丝能作几日络？ 
现代文：先前，张昌仪新建起一幢非常豪华的宅第，规模比诸王及诸位公主的宅第还要宏大，有人晚上在他的门上写道： 一日的丝能织几日的薄纱？ 
English: Earlier, Zhang Changyi had built a very luxurious mansion, larger than the mansions of kings and princesses. Someone wrote on his door at night: "How many days of gauze can be woven with a day's worth of silk?"

古文：灭去，复书之，如是六七。
现代文：张昌仪让人把字迹除掉，结果又被人写上，这种情况总共出现了六七次。
English: Zhang Changyi had the handwriting erased, only to have it written on again. This happened a total of six or seven times.

古文：昌仪取笔注其下曰： 一日亦足。 
现代文：张昌仪用笔在门上写道： 即使是只织一天，我也感到满足。 
English: Zhang Changyi wrote on the door with a pen: Even if I only knit for one day, I feel satisfied.

古文：乃止。
现代文：此后便没有再出现这种情况。
English: He dismissed the idea.

古文：甲辰，制太子监国，赦天下。
现代文：甲辰，武则天颁下制书，决定由太子李显代行处理国政，大赦天下。
English: Ji Chen and Wu Zetian issued a document, deciding that the prince Li Xian would handle national affairs on his behalf, and the world would be amnestied.

古文：以袁恕己为凤阁侍郎、同平章事，分遣十使赍玺书宣慰诸州。
现代文：任命袁恕己为凤阁侍郎、同平章事，派遣十位使者分别携带天子的玺书前往各州进行安抚工作。
English: He appointed Yuan Shuxi as Fengge's attendant, Tongping Zhangji, and sent ten emissaries to carry the imperial edict of the Son of Heaven to each state to carry out the pacification work.

古文：乙巳，太后传位于太子。
现代文：乙巳，武则天将帝位传给太子李显。
English: Suddenly, Emperor Wu Zetian passed the imperial throne to Prince Li Xian.

古文：丙午，中宗即位。
现代文：丙午，唐中宗李显即皇帝位。
English: In the afternoon of the 3rd day of the 4th month, Emperor Li Xian of the Tang Dynasty ascended to the throne.

古文：赦天下，惟张易之党不原；其为周兴等所枉者，咸令清雪，子女配没者皆免之。
现代文：中宗下诏大赦天下，只有张易之的党羽们不在赦免之列；那些被周兴等人冤枉的人，都让进行清理和昭雪，他们的子女中如有被发配流放或者被没入官府作奴婢的，都予以赦免。
English: Only Zhang Yizhi's followers were not included in the amnesty. Those who had been wronged by Zhou Xing and others were ordered to be purged and purged. If any of their children had been sent into exile or had been enslaved in government offices, they were all pardoned.

古文：相王加号安国相王，拜太尉、同凤阁鸾台三品，太平公主加号镇国太平公主。
现代文：唐中宗还加相王李旦封号为安国相王，并任命他为太尉、同凤阁鸾台三品；加太平公主封号为镇国太平公主。
English: Tang Zhongzong also conferred the title of An Guo Xiang Wang (安国相王) on King Li Dan, and appointed him as Tai Li (太尉) and Tong Feng Ge (同凤阁) of the Three Princes of Xingtai (台三品); he also conferred the title of Zhenguo Taiping Princess (镇国太平公主).

古文：皇族先配没者，子孙皆复属籍，仍量叙官爵。
现代文：此外，皇族先前被发配或没入官府为奴的，他们的子孙都恢复皇族身分，并且根据具体情况封授官爵。
English: In addition, the descendants of those members of the imperial family who had previously been exiled or enslaved by the government restored their status as members of the imperial family, and were given official ranks according to the specific circumstances.

古文：丁未，太后徙居上阳宫，李湛留宿卫。
现代文：丁未，武则天搬到上阳宫居住，李湛留下负责警卫。
English: Ding Wei, Wu Zetian moved to Shangyang Palace to live, Li Zhan remained in charge of the guards.

古文：戊申，帝帅百官诣上阳宫，上太后尊号曰则天大圣皇帝。
现代文：戊申，唐中宗带领文武百官来到上阳宫，上武则天尊号为则天大圣皇帝。
English: Wushin, Tang Zhongzong led hundreds of civil and military officials to the Shangyang Palace, and the Shangwu Emperor was called the Emperor of Heaven.

古文：庚戌，以张柬之为夏官尚书、同凤阁鸾台三品，崔玄为内史，袁恕己同凤阁鸾台三品，敬晖、桓彦范皆为纳言；并赐爵郡公。
现代文：庚戌，唐中宗任宗张柬之为夏官尚书、同凤阁鸾台三品，崔玄为内史，袁恕己同凤阁鸾台三品，敬晖和桓彦范都被任命为纳言；上述有功之臣都赐爵为郡公。
English: Geng Yao, Tang Zhong Zong Ren Zong Zhang Kammai, Xia Guan Shang Shu, Tong Feng Ge Xing Tai San Pin, Cui Xuan, Naishi, Yuan Shuji, Tong Feng Ge Xing Tai San Pin, Jing Yi and Huan Yan Fan were all appointed as Nagon; the above-mentioned meritorious vassals were given the title of Guan Gong.

古文：李多祚赐爵辽阳郡王，王同皎为右千牛将军、琅邪郡公，李湛为右羽林大将军、赵国公；自馀官赏有差。
现代文：李多祚赐爵为辽东郡王；任命王同皎为右千牛将军，并赐爵为琅邪郡公；任命李湛为右羽林大将军，进爵赵国公。
English: Li Dorong was given the title of King of Liaodong County; Wang Tongyu was appointed as the General of the Right Thousand Cows and the Duke of the Evil County; Li Zhan was appointed as the General of the Right Feather Forest and the Duke of Zhao.

古文：张柬之等之讨张易之也，殿中监田归道将千骑宿玄武门，敬晖遣使就索千骑，归道先不预谋，拒而不与。
现代文：其他有功人员也给予不同的官爵和赏赐。张柬之等人讨伐张易之的时候，殿中监田归道正好统领千骑兵守卫玄武门，敬晖派人去征调他手下的千骑兵，由于田归道事先并不知道有诛杀张易之等人的计划，所以拒绝将手下人马交给敬晖调遣。
English: Other meritorious personnel were also given different ranks and rewards. When Zhang Kamm and others were fighting against Zhang Yi, the palace supervisor, Tian Guido, happened to be in charge of the thousand cavalrymen guarding the Xuanwu Gate, and Jing Yi sent someone to recruit his thousand cavalrymen. Since Tian Guido did not know in advance that there was a plan to kill Zhang Yi and others, he refused to transfer his men to Jing Yi.

古文：事宁，晖欲诛之，归道以理自陈，乃免归私第；帝嘉其忠壮，召拜太仆少卿。
现代文：等到事情结束之后，敬晖想杀掉田归道，田归道据理力争，于是唐中宗只是免去他的殿中监职务，让他回到家中。唐中宗认为田归道忠勇可嘉，又将他召回，任命他为太仆少卿。
English: When the matter was over, Jingyao wanted to kill Tian Fuido, and Tian Fuido argued with him, so Tang Zhongzong just relieved him of his duties as palace overseer and let him return home. Tang Zhongzong thought that Tian Fuido was loyal and brave, and recalled him and appointed him as a servant of the young lord.

