古文：花云，怀远人。
现代文：花云，怀远人。
English: Flowers and clouds, nostalgic people.

古文：貌伟而黑，骁勇绝伦。
现代文：体貌魁伟，面色黝黑，骁勇无比。
English: He is tall, dark-skinned, and incredibly brave.

古文：至正十三年癸巳，杖剑谒太祖于临濠。
现代文：元至正十三年，手执宝剑来临濠拜见太祖。
English: In the 13th year of the Yuan to Zheng dynasties, he came with a sword in his hand to pay homage to the great ancestor.

古文：奇其才，俾将兵略地，所至辄克。破怀远，擒其帅。攻全椒，拔之。
现代文：太祖器重他的奇才，使他领兵攻占各地。他战无不胜，攻无不克，破怀远，擒元守军主帅，攻下全椒，袭击缪家寨。
English: Great-grandfather valued his prodigious talent and made him lead the army to conquer all over the country. He was invincible in battle, attacked everything, broke far away, the commander of the defense army of Shanyuan, captured the whole pepper, and attacked Miao Jiazhai.

古文：袭缪家寨，群寇散走。太祖将取滁州，率数骑前行，云从。猝遇贼数千，云举铍翼太祖，拔剑跃马冲阵而进。贼惊曰： 此黑将军勇甚，不可当其锋。 
现代文：太祖攻打滁州时，亲自率数骑先行，云随从，突然遇敌军数千人，云以长矛保护太祖，又拔剑跃马冲进敌阵，敌人大惊道： 这个黑将军十分勇猛，不可抵挡。 
English: When the great-grandfather attacked Zhangzhou, he personally led several horsemen ahead, followed by Yun, and suddenly encountered thousands of enemy troops. Yun protected the great-grandfather with a spear, and rushed into the enemy line with a sword. The enemy was shocked: This black general is very brave and irresistible.

古文：兵至，遂克滁州。
现代文：大军继至，攻克滁州。
English: A large army followed and conquered Zhangzhou.

古文：甲午从取和州，获卒三百，以功授管勾。
现代文：十四年，云随太祖攻取和州，俘敌三百人，因功授管勾。
English: In the 14th year, Yun followed his great-grandfather to conquer He Prefecture, captured 300 enemies, and was awarded the title of governor.

古文：乙未，太祖渡江，云先济。既克太平，以忠勇宿卫左右。
现代文：十五年，太祖渡江，云先渡，攻克太平，因其忠勇而留为太祖侍卫。
English: In the fifteenth year, Emperor Taizu crossed the Yangtze River and conquered Taiping. Because of his loyalty and bravery, he remained as Emperor Taizu's bodyguard.

古文：从下集庆，获卒三千，擢总管。
现代文：随太祖攻克集庆，俘敌三千，提升为总管。
English: He conquered Jieqing with his great-great-grandfather, captured three thousand enemies, and was promoted to general manager.

古文：徇镇江、丹阳、丹徒、金坛，皆克之。
现代文：云进一步攻克镇江、丹阳、丹徒、金坛。
English: Yun went on to conquer Zhenjiang, Danyang, Dantu and Jintan.

古文：过马驮沙，剧盗数百遮道索战。云且行且斗三日夜，皆擒杀之，授前部先锋。
现代文：经过马驮沙时，忽遇盗贼数百人拦道挑战，云且战且走，经三日三夜，盗贼都被他斩尽杀绝，因功授前部先锋。
English: When passing through Ma Bingsha, he suddenly encountered hundreds of thieves who blocked the road and challenged him. After three days and three nights, the thieves were all killed by him, and he was awarded the front vanguard.

古文：从拔常州，守牛塘营。
现代文：随太祖攻下常州，扼守牛塘营。
English: He conquered Changzhou with his great-grandfather and guarded the Cattle Pond Camp.

古文：太祖立行枢密院于太平，擢云院判。
现代文：太祖在太平建立行枢密院，升云为院判。
English: Emperor Taizu established the Imperial Privy Council in Taiping, and Shengyun became a member of the Council.

古文：丁酉克常熟，获卒万余。
现代文：十七年，攻克常熟，俘敌万余。
English: Seventeen years, conquered Changshu, captured more than ten thousand enemies.

古文：命趋宁国，兵陷山泽中八日，群盗相结梗道。云操矛鼓噪出入，斩首千百计，身不中一矢。
现代文：奉命向宁国进军，兵陷于山泽中八天不能出来，群盗连成一气，阻塞他们前进的道路，云持矛而出，众军士擂鼓呐喊助威，斩贼千百人而自身未中一箭。
English: He was ordered to march to Ningguo. The soldiers were stuck in the mountains for eight days and could not get out. A group of bandits joined forces to block their way forward. They came out with spears, and all the sergeants played drums and shouted encouragement. They killed thousands of thieves, but did not hit a single arrow themselves.

古文：还驻太平。庚子闰五月，陈友谅以舟师来寇。
现代文：花领军回驻太平，至正二十年闰五月，陈友谅遣水军来攻太平。
English: Hua led the army back to Taiping, and in May, exactly 20 years later, Chen Youzhen sent a naval force to attack Taiping.

古文：又破临安，执同知赵天麟，亦不屈，并送友谅所。友谅方攻洪都，杀三人徇城下。
现代文：云与元帅朱文逊、知府许瑗、院判王鼎联合迎战。文逊战死。陈友谅军连攻三日，毫无进展，乘水涨时以大船进攻，攻下太平，云被俘，慷慨就义，终年三十九岁。
English: Yun and the marshal Zhu Wensong, the governor Xu Xi, and the court judge Wang Ding jointly faced the battle. Wensong died in battle. Chen You Yue's army attacked for three days in a row, made no progress, attacked with a large ship when the water rose, captured Taiping, Yun was captured, and generously became righteous. He was thirty-nine years old.

古文：及陷无为州，执知州董曾，曾抗骂不屈，沉之江。王恺，字用和，当涂人。
现代文：许瑗、王鼎也被害。太祖即吴王位，追封花云为东丘郡侯，许瑗为高阳郡侯，王鼎为太原郡侯，建立忠臣祠，将他们供奉于祠内祭祀。王恺，字用和，当涂人。
English: Xu Rong and Wang Ding were also killed. The great-grandfather of the Wu throne, Huayun, was the marquis of Dongqiu County, Xu Rong was the marquis of Gaoyang County, and Wang Ding was the marquis of Taiyuan County. They established a loyal vassal's shrine and dedicated them in the shrine. Wang Rong, whose Chinese character is 和, was a painter.

古文：通经史，为元府吏。
现代文：通晓经史，曾为元朝府吏。
English: He is familiar with the history of the scriptures and was a former government official.

古文：太祖拔太平，召为掾。
现代文：太祖攻克太平，召他为属官。
English: The great-grandfather conquered Taiping and appointed him as a subordinate official.

古文：从下京口，抚定新附民。
现代文：他随太祖攻下京口，安抚新占领地区的百姓。
English: He followed his great-grandfather in conquering Kyoguchi and pacified the people in the newly occupied area.

古文：及建中书省，用为都事。
现代文：成立中书省，任命他为都事。
English: The Ministry of Literature was established, and he was appointed to the post of prefect.

古文：杭州苗军数万降，待命严州境。恺驰谕之，偕其帅至。
现代文：杭州苗军数万人归降太祖，待命于严州境内，恺奉命去抚谕他们。
English: Tens of thousands of Hangzhou Miao troops surrendered to Taizu and were on standby in the territory of Yanzhou. He was ordered to pacify them.

古文：太祖克衢州，命总制军民事。
现代文：衢州攻克后，命恺总管该州军民政务。
English: After the conquest of Zhangzhou, he was appointed as the general manager of the military and civil affairs of the state.

古文：恺增城浚濠，置游击军，籍丁壮，得万余人。
现代文：恺修理城池，设置游击军，征发壮丁万余人。
English: He repaired the castle, set up a guerrilla army, and conscripted more than 10,000 soldiers.

古文：常遇春屯兵金华，部将扰民，恺械而挞诸市。
现代文：常遇春屯兵金华，其部将侵扰百姓，恺将他们逮捕，在大街上当众鞭打。
English: Jinhua, the Spring Garrison, was often encountered, and his troops would harass the people, arrest them, and publicly whip them in the streets.

古文：遇春让恺，恺曰： 民者国之本，挞一部将而民安，将军所乐闻也。 
现代文：遇春责备他不该如此，恺说： 人民是国家根本，鞭打一不法部将而安定民心，想将军也是乐于闻知这样事的。 
English: Hunchun reproached him for not doing so, and Zou said: The people are the foundation of the country, and whipping an illegal general will stabilize the people's hearts. I think the general is also happy to hear such things.

古文：乃谢恺。
现代文：遇春向他表示歉意。
English: She apologized to him in the spring.

古文：时饥疫相仍，恺出仓粟，修惠济局，全活无算。
现代文：当时饥荒与瘟疫相继流行，恺以府库粮食赈济饥民，并建惠济局为民治病，把无数人从死亡拯救出来。
English: At that time, famine and plague were endemic successively. The prefectural treasury was used to feed the hungry, and the Welfare Bureau was established to cure the people, saving countless people from death.

古文：学校毁，与孔子家庙之在衢者，并新之。
现代文：在衢州修建学校和孔庙，请博士教育子弟，士民无不心悦诚服。
English: To build a school and a Confucius temple in Zhangzhou, please let the doctor educate his children, and the scholars and the people will be sincerely pleased.

古文：设博士弟子员，士翕然悦服。开化马宣、江山杨明并为乱，先后讨擒之。
现代文：开化马宣、江山杨明同时叛乱，恺派兵讨平。
English: Kaifu Ma Xuan and Jiangshan Yang Ming rebelled at the same time, and Yao sent troops to settle the matter.

古文：迁左司郎中，佐胡大海治省事。
现代文：调为左司郎中，辅助胡大海治理浙江省事。
English: He was transferred to the Middle Left Division to assist Hu Haitao in the governance of Zhejiang Province.

古文：苗军作乱，害大海。
现代文：苗军作乱，杀害大海。
English: Miao troops rioted, killing the sea trout.

古文：其帅多德恺，欲拥之而西。
现代文：苗军统帅对恺很好，准备拥他西去。
English: The commander-in-chief of the Miao Army was very kind to Yao, and prepared to take him to the West.

古文：恺正色曰： 吾守士，议当死，宁从贼邪！ 
现代文：恺严正说： 我有责守卫疆土，宁死也不能从贼！ 
English: Yan Yan Zheng said: I have the responsibility to defend the territory, I would rather die than be a thief!

古文：遂并其子行杀之。年四十六。
现代文：与其子王行被杀，时年仅四十六岁。
English: He was only 46 years old when his son Wang Xing was killed.

古文：恺善谋断，尝白事，未听，却立户外，抵暮不去。
现代文：恺善于谋划、决断。曾向太祖陈奏政务，太祖不听。他退立门外，至晚不离开。
English: He is good at planning and decision-making. He once asked his great-grandfather Chen about government affairs, but the great-grandfather did not listen. He retreated outside the door and did not leave until late.

古文：太祖出，怪问之，恺谏如初，卒从其议。
现代文：太祖出来看他还在这里，感到奇怪，问他为何如此。
English: The great-grandfather came out to see that he was still there, was surprised, and asked him why.

古文：后赠奉直大夫、飞骑尉，追封当涂县男。
现代文：他像前次那样再进谏一遍，太祖终于听取了他的意见。恺死后赠奉直大夫、飞骑尉，追封当涂县男爵。
English: As he had done the previous time, he went back to Shun again, and the great-grandfather finally listened to his opinion. After Shun's death, he was given the titles of Dr. Zhi, Lieutenant Fei, and Baron of Dangtu County.

古文：孙炎，字伯融，句容人。
现代文：孙炎，字伯融，句容人。
English: Sun Yan, the character Bo Rong, the sentence Yongren.

古文：面铁色，跛一足。谈辨风生，雅负经济。
现代文：面铁色，跛一足，言谈风生，自负有济世之才。
English: Iron-faced, one-footed, smooth-talking, boastful of his ability to benefit the world.

古文：与丁复、夏煜游，有诗名。
现代文：与丁复、夏煜等交游，有诗人名声。
English: Mingled with Ding Fu and Xia Yao, and had a reputation as a poet.

古文：太祖下集庆，召见，请招贤豪成大业。
现代文：太祖攻下集庆，召见孙炎，请他招纳贤士豪杰共成大业。
English: The great-grandfather conquered Jieqing, summoned Sun Yan, and asked him to recruit sages and heroes to become a great cause.

古文：时方建行中书省，用为首掾。
现代文：这时刚成立中书省，任用炎为中书省官员。
English: At this time, the Ministry of Chinese Literature had just been established, and Yan was appointed as an official of the Ministry of Chinese Literature.

古文：从征浙东，授池州同知，进华阳知府，擢行省都事。
现代文：随太祖征浙东，授池州同知，进升华阳知府，又升为行省都事。
English: With the Great Ancestor, he conquered eastern Zhejiang, granted the same title to Chizhou, advanced to Huayang Prefecture, and rose to become the provincial capital.

古文：克处州，授总制。
现代文：攻克处州，授炎为总制。
English: Conquer the prefecture, infuse inflammation as the general system.

古文：太祖命招刘基、章溢、叶琛等，基不出。
现代文：太祖命他去招请刘基、章溢、叶琛等人。
English: His great-grandfather ordered him to invite Liu Ji, Zhang Yue, Ye Xuan and others.

古文：炎使再往，基遗以宝剑。
现代文：刘基不肯出来，炎再派人去请，基送他一把宝剑。
English: Liu Ji refused to come out, and Yan sent someone to invite him, and Ji sent him a sword.

古文：炎作诗，以为剑当献天子，斩不顺命者，人臣不敢私，封还之。遗基书数千言，基始就见，送之建康。
现代文：炎做诗，大意是剑应当献给天子，斩尽那些不肯顺应天命的人，作为臣子不敢私有，退还给刘基，并写了一封长数千字的信，基才出来见他，孙炎送刘基到建康。
English: Flame made a poem, the meaning of which was that the sword should be dedicated to the heavenly son, and those who refused to comply with the destiny of heaven should be killed. As a vassal, he did not dare to be private. He returned it to Liu Ji, and wrote a letter of several thousand words. Ji came out to see him, and Sun Yan sent Liu Ji to Jiankang.

古文：时城外皆贼，城守无一兵。
现代文：处州城外都是敌军，而城内无一兵一卒。
English: There were enemy troops everywhere outside the city, but not a single soldier in the city.

古文：彦达以荫得官，痛父，终身不仕。王祎，字子充，义乌人。
现代文：苗军作乱，杀院判耿再成，逮捕了孙炎及知府王道同、元帅朱文刚，把他们囚禁在一间空房内，强迫他们投降，孙炎等不屈，苗军统帅贺仁德以酒肉款待他们，炎边饮边骂，与道同、文刚被害，年仅四十。
English: Miao troops rioted, the court sentenced Geng Jicheng to death, arrested Sun Yat-sen, Governor Wang Daotong, and Marshal Zhu Wengang, imprisoned them in an empty room, and forced them to surrender. Sun Yat-sen and others were unyielding, and Miao commander Herende treated them to meat and wine, drinking and cursing in front of the fire. He, Daotong, and Wengang were killed at the age of only forty.

古文：幼敏慧，及长，身长岳立，屹有伟度。
现代文：朝廷追赠他为丹阳县男爵，画像，建 再生祠 祭祀。王祎，字子充，义乌人。
English: The imperial court posthumously bestowed him with the title of Baron of Danyang County, a portrait, and a reborn ancestral shrine was built for him.

古文：师柳贯、黄溍，遂以文章名世。
现代文：自幼聪敏，长大身体魁伟。拜柳贯、黄缙为师，以文章著名于世。
English: He was bright from a young age and grew up with a great physique. He studied under Bai Liuquan and Huang Qi, and became famous in the world for his articles.

古文：睹元政衰敝，为书七八千言上时宰。
现代文：元代时，他目观当时的弊政，曾向宰相上书七八千言。
English: At the time of the Yuan Dynasty, he had written seven or eight thousand words to the prime minister about the bad government at that time.

古文：危素、张起岩并荐，不报。隐青岩山，著书，名日盛。
现代文：危素、张起岩都举荐他，得不到任用，隐居于青岩山，著书立说，名声日高。
English: He was recommended by Gu Xuxu and Zhang Qiyan, but was not appointed. He lived in seclusion in Qingyan Mountain, wrote books and became famous.

古文：太祖取婺州，召见，用为中书省掾史。
现代文：太祖取得婺州，任用祎为中书省官员。
English: The great-great-grandfather obtained Zhangzhou and appointed Zhang as the official of the Chinese Literature Province.

古文：征江西，祎献颂。太祖喜曰： 江南有二儒，卿与宋濂耳。学问之博，卿不如濂。才思之雄，濂不如卿。 
现代文：太祖征江西，祎著文歌颂，太祖高兴地说 ：江南有二儒生，即卿与宋濂，论学问之渊博，卿不如濂；论才思之丰富，濂不如卿。 
English: The great-grandfather conquered Jiangxi and wrote a poem in praise of Confucianism. The great-grandfather said happily, "There are two Confucianists in the south of the Yangtze River, namely, Ch'ing and Song Xi. Ch'ing is more learned than Ch'ing; Ch'ing is more talented than Ch'ing; Ch'ing is more thoughtful than Ch'ing.

古文：太祖创礼贤馆，李文忠荐祎及许元、王天锡，召置馆中。
现代文：太祖建立礼贤馆，李文忠推荐祎及许元、王天锡至馆中任职。
English: The great-grandfather established the Hall of Rites and Virtues, and Li Wenzhong recommended Zou, Xu Yuan, and Wang Tianxi to serve in the hall.

古文：旋授江南儒学提举司校理，累迁侍礼郎，掌起居注。
现代文：不久，授祎为江南儒学提举司校理，后调任侍礼郎，掌管撰述《起居注》的事，又调任南康府同知。
English: Soon after, he was awarded the title of Jiangnan Confucianism Promotion Division, and later he was transferred to the post of chamberlain, in charge of compiling the "Living and Living Notes," and was also transferred to the post of Nankangfu Tongzhi.

古文：同知南康府事，多惠政，赐金带宠之。太祖将即位，召还，议礼。坐事忤旨，出为漳州府通判。
现代文：太祖将即皇帝位，将祎召回朝商讨即位礼仪事宜，因违背了太祖的旨意，贬为漳州府通判。
English: The great-great-grandfather was about to ascend to the throne, and he called Zou back to the imperial court to discuss the matters of the enthronement ceremony. Because he violated the will of the great-great-grandfather, he was demoted to the general magistrate of Zhangzhou.

古文：洪武元年八月，上疏言： 祈天永命之要，在忠厚以存心，宽大以为政，法天道，顺人心。
现代文：洪武元年八月，祎上书说： 祈求上天保佑朝廷永世不衰，关键在于要心存忠厚，为政宽大，遵循天道，顺乎人心。
English: In August of the first year of Hongwu, the imperial edict said: "Pray to the heavens to bless the imperial court with eternal prosperity. The key is to be loyal, to be generous in politics, to follow the heavenly path, and to follow the hearts of the people."

古文：雷霆霜雪，可暂不可常。
现代文：严厉刑法只能行于一时，不可经常如此。
English: Severe criminal law can only be applied temporarily, not permanently.

古文：浙西既平，科敛当减。 
现代文：现浙西既已平定，那里的赋税应当减轻。 
English: Now that western Zhejiang has been pacified, taxes there should be reduced.

古文：太祖嘉纳之，然不能尽从也。
现代文：太祖高兴地采纳这些意见，但并未完全付诸实施。
English: The great-grandfather was happy to accept these suggestions, but did not fully implement them.

古文：明年修《元史》，命祎与濂为总裁。
现代文：洪武二年修《元史》，命祎与濂为总裁。
English: In the second year of Hongwu's term as president, he revised the "History of Yuan Dynasty."

古文：祎史事擅长，裁烦剔秽，力任笔削。
现代文：祎熟悉元朝史事，他大力修改初稿，将繁杂和污秽的内容删掉。
English: Familiar with the history of the Yuan Dynasty, he vigorously revised the first draft and deleted the complex and filthy content.

古文：书成，擢翰林待制，同知制诰兼国史院编修官。
现代文：书成之后，升为翰林待制、同知制诰兼国史院编修官。
English: After the completion of the book, he was promoted to Hanlin standby system, Tongzhi system and editor-in-chief of the National Academy of History.

古文：奉诏预教大本堂，经明理达，善开导。
现代文：奉诏参与 大本堂 的教学工作，把经书中的道理讲得明白透彻，善于开导启发。
English: He participated in the teaching work of the large main hall, and spoke the principles in the scriptures clearly and thoroughly, and was good at enlightening and inspiring.

古文：召对殿廷，必赐坐，从容宴语。
现代文：每召至殿廷问话，必赐坐，他从容回答。
English: Whenever he was summoned to the imperial court for questioning, he would sit down and calmly answer questions.

古文：未久，奉使吐蕃，未至，召还。
现代文：不久，奉诏出使土蕃，还未走到又被召回朝廷。
English: Not long after, he was summoned back to the imperial court.

古文：五年正月议招谕云南，命祎赍诏往。
现代文：洪武年正月，朝廷决定招谕云南归顺明朝，命祎奉诏前往。
English: In the first month of the Hongwu year, the imperial court decided to invite Yunnan to return to the Ming Dynasty, and he was ordered to go there.

古文：至则谕梁王，亟宜奉版图归职方，不然天讨旦夕至。
现代文：祎到云南后，尽力劝说梁王将所属地域归于大明版图，否则，明朝讨伐大军旦夕即至。
English: After arriving in Yunnan, he tried his best to persuade Liang Wang to return his region to the Daming territory, otherwise, the great army would arrive in the morning.

古文：王不听，馆别室。
现代文：梁王不肯，并把祎从宾馆迁到别处去住。
English: Mr. Liang refused, and moved Ms. Zou from the hotel to another place to live.

古文：他日，又谕曰： 朝廷以云南百万生灵，不欲歼于锋刃。
现代文：改日祎又劝梁王说 ：朝廷为了云南百万民众生命财产的安全，不忍兴兵讨伐。
English: On the following day, Liang Wang was also persuaded to say: "For the sake of the safety of the lives and property of millions of people in Yunnan, the imperial court cannot bear to fight against the Xing soldiers."

古文：若恃险远，抗明命，龙骧鹢舻，会战昆明，悔无及矣。 
现代文：但若你恃其地远险要，抗拒朝廷，朝廷派威武的舰队来会战于昆明，那时就悔之不及了。 
English: But if you go too far and resist the imperial court, which sends a powerful fleet to fight in Kunming, then you will regret it.

古文：梁王骇服，即为改馆。
现代文：梁王害怕，把祎请回宾馆。
English: Liang Wang was afraid and invited Zou back to the hotel.

古文：会元遣脱脱征饷，胁王以危言，必欲杀祎。
现代文：这时，元朝派脱脱来云南征饷，对梁王进行威胁，一定要他杀掉王祎。
English: At this time, the Yuan Dynasty sent a detachment to Yunnan to recruit soldiers and threatened Liang Wang to kill him.

古文：王不得已出祎见之，脱脱欲屈祎，祎叱曰： 天既讫汝元命，我朝实代之。汝爝火余烬，敢与日月争明邪！
现代文：王不得已，只得把祎交给脱脱。脱脱要使祎屈服，祎大声骂道： 上天既然决意结束你元朝的命运，而且我大明朝实际上取而代之了，你们不过是星星余火，怎敢与日月争辉！
English: The king had no choice but to hand over the scepter to Dedue. Dedue wanted to make Dedue submit, and Dedue cursed loudly: Since heaven has decided to end the fate of your Yuan Dynasty, and I, the Ming Dynasty, have actually replaced it, you are nothing but the afterglow of the stars. How dare you compete with the sun and the moon!

古文：且我与汝皆使也，岂为汝屈！ 
现代文：我与你都是朝廷使臣，岂能为你所屈服！ 
English: I and you are both imperial envoys, how can I give in to you!

古文：或劝脱脱曰： 王公素负重名，不可害。 
现代文：有人劝脱脱说： 王公素来名声很大，不可害他。 
English: Some people tried to dissuade him, saying, "Wang Gongyu has always been very famous, so don't harm him."

古文：脱脱攘臂曰： 今虽孔圣，义不得存。 
现代文：脱脱卷袖伸臂，大声嚷道 ：今天就是孔圣人也不叫他活着！ 
English: He took off his rolled-up sleeves, stretched out his arms, and shouted loudly, "Today, even the sage Kong would not let him live!"

古文：祎顾王曰： 汝杀我，天兵继至，汝祸不旋踵矣。 
现代文：王祎对梁王说： 你要杀了我，朝廷天兵立即会来，你很快就祸殃临头了。 
English: Wang Yao said to Liang Wang, "If you try to kill me, the imperial soldiers will come immediately, and you will soon be plagued by misfortune."

古文：弘治四年五月赠云刑部尚书，谥忠节，与祎并祠，改祠额曰二忠。熊鼎，字伯颍，临川人。
现代文：十二月二十四日，王祎被害。梁王遣使祭奠安葬。建文时期，祎之子王绅向朝廷申述其父亲的事迹，诏赠翰林学士，谥文节。正统年间改谥忠文，成化年间，诏令建祠祭祀。熊鼎，字伯颖，临川人。
English: During the Jianwen period, Jianwen's son Wang Sheng told the imperial court about his father's deeds, and the imperial edict granted him the title of Hanlin Scholar, and the Jianwen Festival. During the orthodox period, the title of Jianwen was changed to Zhongwen, and during the Chenghua period, the imperial edict was issued to build a small shrine. Xiong Ding, the character of Bo Ying, was from Linchuan.

古文：元末举于乡，长龙溪书院。
现代文：元末乡试中举，主持 龙溪书院 。
English: At the end of the Yuan Dynasty, he presided over the middle school examination of Longxi College.

古文：江西寇乱，鼎结乡兵自守。
现代文：江西兵乱，鼎组织乡兵自卫。
English: Jiangxi soldiers rioted, and village soldiers were organized to defend themselves.

古文：陈友谅屡胁之，不应。
现代文：陈友谅多次胁迫他加入其反元队伍，鼎不肯。
English: Chen Youzhen repeatedly coerced him to join his anti-Yuan team, but he refused.

古文：邓愈镇江西，数延见，奇其才，荐之。
现代文：邓愈镇守江西，认为鼎是个奇才，多次请求相见，向太祖推荐。
English: Deng Yu, the governor of Jiangxi Province, thought that Ding was a genius, and repeatedly asked to meet him, and recommended him to his great-grandfather.

古文：太祖欲官之，以亲老辞，乃留愈幕府赞军事。
现代文：太祖欲任他官职，他以父母年迈为理由而推辞，只愿留在邓愈幕府中参与军事。
English: His great-grandfather wanted to appoint him to an official post, but he declined on the grounds that his parents were too old. He only wanted to stay in the Dengyu Shogunate and participate in the military.

古文：母丧除，召至京师，授德清县丞。
现代文：母亲去世，他守孝期满，被召至京师，授德清县丞。
English: After his mother's death, his term of filial piety expired, and he was summoned to Beijing to become a teacher, and was awarded the title of Qingxianzheng.

古文：松江民钱鹤皋反，邻郡大惊，鼎镇之以静。
现代文：松江民钱鹤皋叛乱，邻郡大受震动，而鼎却镇静如常。
English: The people of Songjiang rebelled, the neighboring counties were greatly shaken, but Ding remained calm as usual.

古文：吴元年召议礼仪，除中书考功博士。
现代文：吴元年，太祖即吴王位，召集大臣议论建立朝廷的礼仪，任鼎为中书考功博士。
English: In the first year of the Wu Dynasty, the Great Ancestor, the throne of the Wu Dynasty, convened the ministers to discuss the establishment of the etiquette of the imperial court, and appointed Ding as a doctor of Chinese calligraphy.

古文：迁起居注，承诏搜括故事可惩戒者，书新宫壁间。舍人耿忠使广信还，奏郡县官违法状，帝遣御史廉之。
现代文：后调去专管撰述《起居注》。他奉诏搜集已往事例作为惩戒的借鉴，写于新宫殿壁上，舍人耿忠出使广信回来，奏报郡县官吏的一些违法事实，太祖遣御史去核查。
English: Afterward, he was transferred to be in charge of writing the "Resident's Note." He was ordered to collect past cases as a reference for disciplinary action and write them on the wall of the new palace. His subordinate, Geng Zhong, sent Guanxin back to report some illegal facts to county and prefectural officials, and the great ancestor sent Gu Shi to verify.

古文：而时已颁赦书，丞相李善长再谏不纳，鼎偕给事中尹正进曰： 朝廷布大信于四方，复以细故烦御史，失信，且亵威。 
现代文：这时朝廷已颁布赦令，丞相李善长再三劝阻派遣御史，不听。鼎与给事中尹正上书说 ：朝廷已向全国颁布了赦令，现在又因小事派御史核查，这样不仅失信于民，且有损朝廷威严。 
English: At this time, the imperial court had already issued a pardon order, but the prime minister, Ri Son Gwon, repeatedly tried to dissuade him from sending the imperial historian, but he would not listen. In the course of negotiations, Yin Zheng sent a letter saying: The imperial court has issued a pardon order to the whole country, and now it is sending the imperial historian to check on minor matters. This is not only a breach of trust with the people, but also undermines the dignity of the imperial court.

古文：帝默然久之，乃不遣物史。
现代文：太祖沉默了许久，决定不派遣御史。
English: The great-grandfather was silent for a long time and decided not to send an envoy.

古文：洪武改元，新设浙江按察司，以鼎为佥事，分部台、温。
现代文：洪武元年，新设浙江按察司，任鼎为佥事，分管台州和温州。
English: In the first year of Hongwu, the Zhejiang Inspection Department was newly set up. It was in charge of Taizhou and Wenzhou.

古文：台、温自方氏窃据，伪官捍将二百人，暴横甚。
现代文：台、温自方国珍占据后，其文官悍将共二百人，都十分横暴。
English: After Taiwan and Wen Zifang were occupied by Guozhen, there were a total of two hundred civil officers and generals, all of whom were very violent.

古文：鼎尽迁之江、淮间，民始安。
现代文：鼎把他们迁到江、淮一带，人民才得安宁。
English: Ding moved them to the areas around the Yangtze River and Huai River so that the people could live in peace.

古文：平阳知州梅镒坐赃，辨不已，民数百咸诉知州无罪。
现代文：平阳知州梅镒被诬告贪赃枉法，但定不了案，百姓数百人至官府申诉知州无罪。
English: Pingyang Chizhou Meiqi was falsely accused of corruption, but the case could not be settled. Hundreds of people went to the government to appeal Chizhou's innocence.

古文：鼎将听之，吏白鼎： 释知州，如故出何？ 
现代文：鼎听取了民众的申诉，有个官吏对鼎说： 如果释放了知州，以后有人援例将怎么办？ 
English: Ding listened to the people's complaints. An official said to Ding: "If Zhizhou is released, what will happen if someone comes to Zhou's aid in the future?"

古文：是秋，山东初定，设按察司，复以鼎为佥事。
现代文：是年秋平定山东，朝廷在山东设按察司，任鼎为佥事。
English: In the autumn of the same year, Shandong was pacified, and the imperial court set up an inspectorate in Shandong.

古文：鼎至，奏罢不职有司数十辈，列部肃清。鼎欲稽官吏利弊，乃令郡县各置二历，日书所治讼狱钱粟事，一留郡县，一上宪府，递更易，按历钩考之，莫敢隐者。
现代文：鼎到任后，奏请罢黜不称职的官吏数十人，还准备考核官吏的利弊，令郡县各设两个日志，每天将所办理的诉讼、钱粮等事记载在日志上，一份留郡县备查，一份上报省府，以后按日志上的记载来考核官吏的政绩，无人敢于隐瞒。
English: After Ding took office, he requested the dismissal of dozens of incompetent officials, and also prepared to assess the advantages and disadvantages of officials. He ordered that each county should set up two journals, and record the proceedings, money and grain, etc. handled on the journal every day. One should be kept by the county for reference, and one should be reported to the provincial government. Later, the political performance of officials should be assessed according to the records in the journal. No one dared to conceal it.

古文：寻进副使，徙晋王府右傅。
现代文：不久进升为副使，又转任晋王府右傅。
English: He was soon promoted to vice-envoy and transferred to the post of the right-hand man of the Jin royal court.

古文：坐累左迁，复授王府参军，召为刑部主事。
现代文：因犯过失而降为左傅。其后授为王府参军，又召回朝任刑部主事。
English: He was demoted to the rank of sous-lieutenant for committing a mistake. Later, he was given the title of prince to join the army, and was recalled to the imperial court to serve as the head of the criminal justice department.

古文：八年，西部朵儿只班率部落内附，改鼎岐宁卫经历。
现代文：洪武八年，西部朵儿只班率所部归附明朝，因此改任鼎为岐宁卫经历。
English: In the eighth year of Hongwu, the western part of Dong'er was annexed to the Ming Dynasty, so he was transferred to the top position of Qin Ningwei.

古文：既至，知寇伪降，密疏论之。
现代文：鼎到任后，探知朵儿只班是假降，密告朝廷。
English: After Ding took office, he discovered that Du's only duty was to pretend to abdicate and tipped off the imperial court.

古文：帝遣使慰劳，赐裘帽，复遣中使赵成召鼎。
现代文：太祖遣使慰劳鼎，赐裘帽。又遣宦官赵成召鼎回朝。
English: The great-grandfather sent a consolation to Ding Laodong and gave him a fur cap. He also sent the eunuch Zhao Cheng to summon Ding back to the imperial court.

古文：鼎既行，寇果叛，胁鼎北还。
现代文：鼎刚要离开岐宁卫，朵儿只班果然反叛，强迫鼎等随他去北方蒙古。
English: Just as Ding was about to leave Qin Ningwei, Du'er Zhidaban rebelled and forced Ding to follow him to northern Mongolia.

古文：兵败，皆遇害。
现代文：鼎对朵儿只班责以大义，而同赵成及知事杜寅一齐被杀。
English: Ding's only duty to Doer was to uphold justice, and he was killed together with Zhao Cheng and Governor Du Yin.

古文：郡人哀之，为配享忠臣庙。
现代文：太祖闻知，非常哀痛惋惜，命葬于黄羊川，为他建祠，将所食俸禄都给其家。
English: The great-grandfather heard about this and was very sad and regretful. He was buried in Huangyang River, a small shrine was built for him, and his family was given all the food they could eat.

古文：王祯，字维祯，吉水人。
现代文：王祯，字维祯，吉水人。
English: Wang Yao, Zha Wei Yao, Jishui Ren.

古文：祖省，死建文难，自有传。
现代文：祖父王省，死于建文之难。
English: His grandfather, Wang Shou, died in the Jianwen Incident.

古文：成化初，祯由国子生授夔州通判。
现代文：成化初年，祯由国子生授夔州通判。
English: In the first year of its establishment, the school was awarded the "Shangzhou General Award" by the provincial government.

古文：二年，荆、襄石和尚流劫至巫山，督盗同知王某者怯不救。祯面数之，即代勒所部民兵，昼夜行。至则城已陷，贼方聚山中。
现代文：成化二年，荆、襄石和尚起义反明，进攻四川巫山。督盗同知王某胆怯不敢救援，祯当面指责其怕死之罪，自己领王某所部民兵，昼夜兼程赶去巫山援救，但他赶到时，巫山已陷落。
English: In the second year of Chenghua, the monks Jing and Xiangshi revolted against Ming and attacked Wushan in Sichuan. The thief and thief's comrade Wang was too timid to help, and Zou accused him of being afraid of death. He led a certain unit of militia to rush to Wushan day and night to rescue, but when he arrived, Wushan had fallen.

古文：祯击杀其魁，余尽遁，乃行县抚伤残，招溃散，久乃得还。
现代文：义军聚集山中，祯趋兵进剿，杀义军首领，其余逃走。接着又安抚伤残士卒，招集被义军击溃逃散的官兵。
English: The rebels gathered in the mountains, marched into the castle, killed the leader of the rebels, and the rest fled. Then they pacified the wounded soldiers, and summoned the officers and soldiers who had been routed and scattered by the rebels.

古文：甫三日，贼复劫大昌。
现代文：三日后，义军转攻四川大昌。
English: Three days later, the rebels attacked Sichuan Daxang.

古文：祯趣同知行，不应。
现代文：祯催促王同知出兵，同知不肯，指挥曹能、柴成的态度与王同知一样。
English: He urged Wang Tongzhi to send troops, but Wang Tongzhi refused. The commanders Cao Neng and Chai Cheng had the same attitude as Wang Tongzhi.

古文：指挥曹能、柴成与同知比，激祯曰： 公为国出力，肯复行乎？ 祯即请往，两人伪许相左右。
现代文：他们激励祯说 ：公为国出力，肯再带兵出战否？ 祯立即答应，曹、柴二人假称愿为祯左右手。
English: They encouraged Zou and said, "If you are willing to work hard for the country, would you be willing to lead soldiers into battle again?" Zou immediately agreed, and Cao and Chai pretended to be Zou's right and left hands.

古文：海寇大至，率三子臣、朝、实迎战竞日。
现代文：但在渡河后一见义军，二人便逃走了。祯被义军围困，陷入泥淖之中，不能自拔，为义军所俘。义军要他投降，他不肯，破口大骂。
English: However, after crossing the river, the two fled at the first sight of the rebels. He was besieged by the rebels, got stuck in the mud, could not extricate himself, and was captured by the rebels. The rebels wanted him to surrender, but he refused and cursed loudly.

古文：伏兵起，振被杀，尸僵立。
现代文：义军先割断他的喉，再砍断右臂，死去。
English: The rebels first cut his throat, then his right arm, and he died.

古文：三子救之，臣重伤，朝、实皆死。
现代文：随行的奉节典史及部卒六百余人都死。
English: More than six hundred people died, including Fengjie Cengshi and his subordinates.

古文：亦予恤有差。
现代文：朝廷闻知，赠祯为佥事，任其一子为官。
English: The imperial court heard that the bestowal of the imperial scepter was a trivial matter, and allowed one of his sons to become an official.

古文：孙燧，字德成，余姚人。
现代文：孙燧，字德成，余姚人。
English: Sun Yat-sen, Zi Decheng, Yu Yao Ren.

古文：弘治六年进士。
现代文：弘治六年进士。
English: Koji became a priest six years later.

古文：历刑部主事，再迁郎中。正德中，历河南右布政使。
现代文：由刑部主事升刑部郎中，正德年间，任河南右布政使。
English: He was promoted from the head of the Criminal Investigation Department to a junior member of the Criminal Investigation Department, and during the Zhengde era, he served as the Henan Right Branch Political Envoy.

古文：宁王宸濠有逆谋，结中官幸臣，日夜诇中朝事，幸有变。
现代文：宁王宸濠阴谋叛乱，勾结太监和皇帝的宠臣，日夜刺探朝廷动向，希望朝廷发生什么变故，他好乘机起事。
English: Ning Wangtao plotted a rebellion, colluded with eunuchs and the emperor's favorite vassals, and spied on the movement of the imperial court day and night, hoping that something would happen to the imperial court, so that he could take the opportunity to rise up.

古文：又劫持群吏，厚饵之，使为己用。
现代文：又威胁和利诱一些官吏，以便为他所用。
English: He also threatened and bribed some officials to work for him.

古文：恶巡抚王哲不附己，毒之，得疾，逾年死。
现代文：他恼恨巡抚王哲不顺从他，下毒药使哲得病，一年后去世。
English: He was angry with the governor Wang Zhe for not obeying him, and poisoned him to make him sick. He died a year later.

古文：董杰代哲，仅八月亦死。
现代文：董杰接任，仅八个月又死。
English: Dong Jie took over and died only eight months later.

古文：自是，官其地者惴惴，以得去为幸。
现代文：从此以后，凡在江西做官的人，都惶恐不安，以离开江西为幸事。
English: Since then, all officials in Jiangxi have been worried and anxious, considering it a blessing to leave Jiangxi.

古文：代杰者任汉、俞谏，皆岁余罢归。
现代文：董杰之后相继接任的任汉、俞谏，都只一年便罢官归家。
English: After Dong Jie, Ren Han and Zou, who successively took over the post, were dismissed and returned home after only one year.

古文：燧以才节著治声，廷臣推之代。
现代文：燧的才干和节操，都名声卓著，所以廷臣都推荐他去江西任巡抚。
English: He was famous for his talent and discipline, so the courtiers recommended him to be the governor of Jiangxi Province.

古文：十年十月擢右副都御史，巡抚江西。
现代文：正德十年十月，升燧为右副都御史，巡抚江西。
English: In October of the 10th year of Zhengde, he was promoted to the right vice-governor of the capital and governor of Jiangxi.

古文：燧闻命叹曰： 是当死生以之矣。 
现代文：燧受命后叹息道： 这到了生死关头了。 
English: After receiving the order, Zou sighed and said, "This is a matter of life and death."

古文：燧念讼言于朝无益，乃托御他寇预为备。先城进贤，次城南康、瑞州。患建昌县多盗，割其地，别置安义县，以渐弭之。而请复饶、抚二州兵备，不得复，则请敕湖东分巡兼理之。九江当湖冲，最要害，请重兵备道权，兼摄南康、宁州、武宁、瑞昌及湖广兴国、通城，以便控制。
现代文：燧考虑到向朝廷告发是无济于事的，便借口御寇而预做防乱准备：先屯兵于进贤城，再屯兵于南康、瑞州两城；因建昌县多盗，从中分出一些地方而设立安义县，以渐渐消除忧患；奏请恢复饶、抚二州兵备，若能恢复，则请令湖东分巡兼管；九江为鄱阳湖之重地，最为要害，奏请加重兵备的权力，使他们兼管南康、宁州、武宁、瑞昌以及湖广之兴国、通城，以便控制形势。
English: Considering that it was useless to report to the imperial court, they made preparations to prevent disorder on the pretext of robberies: the first troops were stationed in Jinxian City, followed by troops in Nankang and Ruizhou; due to the large number of robberies in Jianchang County, some places were separated from it and Anyi County was established to gradually eliminate the troubles; they requested to restore the military preparedness of Rao and Fuzhou in the two states, and if it could be restored, they asked to have the patrol of the eastern part of the lake in charge; Jiujiang was the most important place of Poyang Lake, the most important, they requested the power to

古文：广信横峰、青山诸窑，地险人悍，则请设通判驻弋阳，兼督旁五县兵。
现代文：广信之横峰、青山诸窑场，地势险要人悍强，奏请设通判驻于弋阳，兼督附近五县兵马。
English: Guangxin's cross-peak, Aoyama's kiln sites, the terrain is almost intimidatingly strong, so please set up a pass to be stationed in Fenyang, and five counties around the governor.

古文：又恐宸濠劫兵器，假讨贼，尽出之他所。
现代文：又恐宸濠劫夺兵器，便以讨贼为名，将兵器转移到别处。
English: Fearing that their weapons would be looted, they moved them to another location in the name of deterring thieves.

古文：宸濠瞷燧图己，使人赂朝中幸臣去燧，而遣燧枣梨姜芥以示意，燧笑却之。
现代文：宸濠窥探到孙燧是在对付他，使人贿赂朝中幸臣设法除去孙燧，而且送给燧以枣梨姜芥以示意，燧笑着退还。
English: He spied out that Sun Yat-sen was plotting against him. He bribed Cho Jung-suk to try to get rid of Sun Yat-sen. He also gave Sun Yat-sen a jujube and ginger mustard as a gesture, which he returned with a smile.

古文：逵劝燧先发后闻，燧曰： 奈何予贼以名，且需之。 
现代文：许逵劝燧先发制人，然后上报朝廷，燧曰 ：为何要给贼以发难的借口，暂且等待。 
English: Xu Zhen advised Zhen to preemptively attack and then report to the imperial court. Zhen said, "Why should we give the thief an excuse to cause trouble? Let's wait for a while."

古文：十三年，江西大水，宸濠素所蓄贼凌十一、吴十三、闵念四等出没鄱阳湖，燧与逵谋捕之。
现代文：正德十三年，江西大水，宸濠平素所蓄养的盗贼如陵十一、吴十三、闵念四等，出没于鄱阳湖。燧与逵策划要将他们逮捕。
English: In the thirteenth year of Zhengde, Jiangxi Dashui, the thieves such as Ling XI, Wu XIII, and Zou Nian IV, who were raised by Zou Ping Su, haunted the Poyang Lake. Zou and Zou planned to arrest them.

古文：三贼遁沙井，燧自江外掩捕，夜大风雨，不克济。
现代文：三贼逃到沙井，燧计划自江外乘其不备予以逮捕，但是那夜大风大雨，未能成功，三贼躲藏于宸濠的祖坟中。
English: The three thieves fled to a manhole, and Zou planned to take advantage of his lack of preparation to arrest them from outside the river, but the heavy wind and rain that night did not succeed, and the three thieves hid in Zou's ancestral grave.

古文：三贼走匿宸濠祖墓间，于是密疏白其状，且言宸濠必反。
现代文：燧秘密上疏，向朝廷报告盗贼的情形，并且说宸濠必反。
English: He kept it a secret and reported the situation of the thief to the imperial court, saying that he would retaliate.

古文：章七上，辄为宸濠遮狱，不得达。
现代文：连续上疏七次，都为宸濠半途截获，而未能到达朝廷。
English: Seven times in a row, it was intercepted halfway and failed to reach the imperial court.

古文：宸濠恚甚，因宴毒燧，不死。
现代文：宸濠非常憎恨孙燧，设宴毒害他，燧未死。
English: Yao hated Sun Yat-sen very much. He poisoned him at a banquet, but Yao did not die.

古文：燧乞致仕，又不许，忧惧甚。
现代文：燧请求辞职，朝廷不准，他十分忧惧。
English: He requested to resign, but the court did not allow him to do so. He was very worried.

古文：明年，宸濠胁镇巡官奏其孝行，燧与巡按御史林潮冀藉是少缓其谋，乃共奏于朝。
现代文：正德十四年，宸濠强迫镇巡官向朝廷奏陈其 孝行 ，燧与巡按御史林潮想藉此延缓宸濠反叛的阴谋，于是共同将宸濠的 孝行 奏于朝廷。
English: In the 14th year of Zhengde, Zou forced the town inspector to report his filial piety to the imperial court. Zou and the inspector, Linchao, wanted to use this to delay Zou's rebellion, so they jointly reported Zou's filial piety to the imperial court.

古文：朝议方降旨责燧等，会御史萧淮尽发宸濠不轨状，诏重臣宣谕，宸濠闻，遂决计反。
现代文：朝廷正要降旨谴责孙燧等人，恰巧御史肖淮揭发了宸濠一切不轨行径，朝廷诏令重臣宣布。宸濠闻讯，便决意起兵反叛。
English: Just as the imperial court was about to issue an order condemning Sun Yat-sen and his followers, it so happened that Emperor Xiao Hui revealed all of Sun Yat-sen's misdeeds, and the imperial court issued an edict to senior officials to announce it. Upon hearing this, Sun Yat-sen decided to raise an army to rebel.

古文：今太后有诏，令我起兵讨贼，亦知之乎？ 
现代文：六月十三日是宸濠的生日，宴请镇巡三司。十四日，燧与诸大吏去向宸濠道谢，宸濠预设伏兵，燧等来时，声称太后诏令他起兵讨贼。
English: On the fourteenth day of the sixth month, he and all the officials went to thank her. She had prepared an ambush, and when he arrived, he claimed that the Empress Dowager had ordered him to raise an army to hunt down the thieves.

古文：众相顾愕眙，燧直前曰： 安得此言！请出诏示我。 
现代文：众人相顾失色，不知所措。燧向前说道： 这是说哪里话，请把诏书拿出来我们看！ 
English: Everyone looked at each other, disconsolate, at a loss for words. Zou said forward: What is this saying, please take out the edict and let's see!

古文：宸濠曰： 毋多言，我往南京，汝当扈驾。 
现代文：宸濠说 ：不必多讲，我要去南京，你给我扈驾。 
English: Zou said, "There's no need to say more. I'm going to Nanjing. Please give me a ride."

古文：燧大怒曰： 汝速死耳。天无二日，吾岂从汝为逆哉！ 
现代文：燧大怒道 ：汝命不长了，天无二日，我岂能从你为逆！ 
English: Gong Da Rude said: Your life is not long, there is no second day, how can I turn away from you!

古文：宸濠怒叱燧，燧益怒，急起，不得出。宸濠入内殿，易戎服出，麾兵缚燧。
现代文：他急起要走，但已走不出去了。宸濠入内殿，换上军装，指挥士兵缚住孙燧。
English: He was anxious to leave, but he couldn't get out. He broke into the inner hall, put on his military uniform, and commanded soldiers to tie up Sun Yat-sen.

古文：逵奋曰： 汝曹安得辱天子大臣！ 
现代文：许逵奋起喝道 ：你们怎能侮辱天子大臣！ 
English: Xu Yao stood up and shouted: "How can you insult the Son of Heaven!

古文：因以身翼蔽燧，贼并缚逵。
现代文：以身挡燧。贼也把逵捆绑起来。
English: The thief also tied up the donkey.

古文：二人且缚且骂，不绝口，贼击燧，折左臂，与逵同曳出。逵谓燧曰： 我劝公先发者，知有今日故也。 
现代文：二人大骂。贼把燧的左臂折断，与逵一同拉出去了。逵对燧说 ：我之早劝公先发制人，是因为料定会有今日。 
English: The two scolded loudly. The thief broke the donkey's left arm and pulled it out together with the donkey. The donkey said to the donkey, "I advised you to strike first, because I knew it would happen today."

古文：燧、逵同遇害惠民门外。
现代文：燧与逵同被害于惠民门外。
English: and  were both injured outside Huimin Gate.

古文：巡按御史王金、布政使梁宸以下，咸稽首呼万岁。
现代文：巡按御史王金、布政使梁宸以下，都向宸濠叩头，高呼万岁。
English: Wang Jin, the inspector-general of history, and Liang Qi, the political envoy of cloth, all bowed to Qi and shouted "long live."

古文：宸濠遂发兵，伪署三贼为将军，首遣娄伯徇进贤，为知县刘源清所斩。
现代文：宸濠举兵反叛，任命三贼为将军，首先遣娄伯进军进贤，为知县刘源清所斩。
English: Zhai raised an army to rebel, appointed three thieves as generals, and first sent Zibo to march into Jinxian, and was beheaded by Liu Yuanqing of Zhixian.

古文：招窑贼，贼畏守吏，不敢发。
现代文：宸濠招窑贼响应，贼怕守吏而不敢动。
English: The thieves were afraid of the guards and did not dare to move.

古文：大索兵器于城中，不得，贼多持白梃。
现代文：宸濠大肆搜索城中军械，城中军械早已转移了，以致其兵卒多持木棍。
English: He searched frantically for the city's ordnance, which had long since been moved, so that his soldiers mostly carried sticks.

古文：伍文定起义兵，设两人木主于文天祥祠，率吏民哭之。
现代文：伍文定起兵抗贼，设孙燧、许逵二人的灵牌于文天祥祠内，率吏民祭祀恸哭。
English: Wu Wending raised an army to resist the bandits, set up the memorial plaques of Sun Yat-sen and Xu Yat-sen in the Wen Tianxiang Shrine, and led the officials and people in sacrificial rites and wailing.

古文：南赣巡抚王守仁与共平贼。
现代文：南赣巡抚王守仁也起兵平叛。
English: The governor of Nankan, Wang Shuren, also raised an army to put down the rebellion.

古文：并以文章行谊世其家。升、鑨、鑛、如游、如法、嘉绩，事皆别见。许逵，字汝登，固始人。
现代文：燧子堪闻父被害，率两弟墀、升赶到南昌，这时宸濠已被擒，兄弟三人扶父亲灵柩归葬。许逵，字汝登，固始人。
English: Xun Zi Kan heard of his father's death and rushed to Nanchang with his two younger brothers, Zou and Sheng. By this time, Zou had already been executed, and the three brothers helped their father's coffin to be buried. Xu Zi, also known as Ruden, was the founder.

古文：正德三年进士。长身巨口，猿臂燕颔，沈静有谋略。
现代文：正德三年进士，长身大嘴，猿臂燕颔，性格沉静，有谋有略。
English: Zhengde, a three-year-old trainee, has a long body, a big mouth, an ape-like arm, a quiet personality, and a cunning plan.

古文：授乐陵知县。
现代文：授乐陵知县。
English: It is located in Lingchi County.

古文：六年春，流贼刘七等屠城邑，杀长吏。诸州县率闭城守，或弃城遁，或遗之刍，粟弓马乞贼毋攻。逵之官，慨然为战守计。
现代文：正德六年，刘七等在霸州起义，攻城邑，杀官吏，诸州县或闭门守城，或弃城逃走，或送粮草弓马给义军，请求不攻打他们，而逵就任后，做迎战准备。
English: In the sixth year of Zhengde, Liu VII and others revolted in Bazhou, attacked cities and towns, killed officials, and either guarded the city behind closed doors in Zhouzhou County, or abandoned the city and fled, or sent grain, grass, bows and horses to the rebels, asking them not to attack them, and after taking office, made preparations for war.

古文：县初无城，督民版筑，不逾月，城成。
现代文：乐陵原无城墙，逵督民夫修筑，一月即成。
English: Le Ling originally had no city wall, but was built by the governor and his men. It was completed in one month.

古文：令民屋外筑墙，墙高过帘，启圭窦，才容人。家选一壮者执刃伺窦内，余皆入队伍，日视旗为号，违者军法从事。
现代文：令民房外筑高墙，旁开一小门进出，各家选一壮丁执刀守候小门内，其余的人都编成队伍，以旗为号令，视号令行动，违者以军法论处。
English: A high wall shall be built outside the houses, a small gate shall be opened at the side for people to enter and exit, each family shall select a young man to hold a sword and wait inside the small gate, and the rest of the people shall form a team, take the flag as a signal, act according to the signal, and the violators shall be dealt with by military law.

古文：又募死士伏巷中，洞开城门。
现代文：又募敢死队埋伏巷中，大开城门，候敌深入。
English: He also recruited death squads to lie in wait in the alleys, opened the gates wide, and waited for the enemy to advance.

古文：贼果至，旗举伏发，窦中人皆出，贼大惊窜，斩获无遗。
现代文：义军果然进城，逵令举旗，伏兵四起，全城抗击。义军被迫退走，后来虽多次进攻，都遭阻击。
English: The rebel army did indeed enter the city, the order was given to raise the flag, four ambushes were set up, and the whole city resisted. The rebel army was forced to retreat, and although they attacked several times later, they were all blocked.

古文：明年五月，贼杨寡妇以千骑犯濰县，指挥乔刚御之，贼少却。
现代文：逵因功升官阶二级。当时知县能抵抗义军者，除乐陵许逵外，还有益都牛鸾、郯城唐龙、汶上左经、浚县陈滞，而逵功尤大，与鸾一同升为兵备佥事。
English: At that time, those who were able to resist the rebels in Zhixian County were, in addition to Le Ling Xu Yao, Yiddu Niu Yao, Yicheng Tang Long, Wen Shang Zuo Jing, and Jian County Chen Yao. However, Yu's contribution was particularly great, and he was promoted to the rank of soldier together with Yu.

古文：逵追败之高苑，令指挥张勋邀之沧州，先后俘斩二百七十余余人。
现代文：逵驻武定州，该州城墙倒塌，城濠填平，逵督民夫筑城挖壕，建望楼，设巡逻队。
English: He was stationed in Wuding Prefecture, where the city walls had collapsed and the battlements had been filled in. The governor and his men dug trenches, built watchtowers, and set up patrols.

古文：未几，贼别部掠德平，逵尽歼之，咸名大著。
现代文：第二年五月，杨寡妇等进攻维县、高苑、沧州、德平，均为逵所败。逵的声威大振。
English: In May of the following year, Yang Widow and others attacked Wei County, Gaoyuan, Cangzhou, and Deping, but were all defeated by Yao. Yao's prestige soared.

古文：十二年迁江西副使。
现代文：正德十二年，逵调任江西副使。
English: In the twelfth year of Zhengde, he was transferred to Jiangxi as deputy envoy.

古文：时宸濠党暴横，逵以法痛绳之。
现代文：当时宁王宸濠的党徒在江西横行无忌，逵将他们绳之以法。
English: At that time, Ning Wangyao's party members were rampant in Jiangxi, and he brought them to justice.

古文：尝言于孙燧曰： 宁王敢为暴者，恃权臣也。
现代文：他曾对孙燧说： 宁王敢于横暴，是依靠朝中权臣。
English: He once said to Sun Yat-sen, "Ning Wang dares to be domineering and violent, but he relies on the high-ranking officials in the imperial court.

古文：权臣左右之者，贪重贿也。
现代文：权臣之所以受宁王左右，是贪图宁王的贿赂。
English: The reason why the powerful vassals were swayed by King Ning was that they were greedy for bribes from King Ning.

古文：重贿由于盗薮，今惟翦盗则贿息，贿息则党孤。 
现代文：宁王能重贿权臣，是靠强盗为他提供财物。如今只有铲除盗贼。盗贼铲除了，贿赂的财源就没有了，宁王党羽在江西孤立起来了。 
English: Ning Wang was able to bribe powerful officials by relying on robbers to provide him with wealth. Now, the only way is to eliminate the thieves. Once the thieves are eliminated, there will be no source of money for bribes, and Ning Wang's party will be isolated in Jiangxi.

古文：燧深然之，每事辄与密议。
现代文：燧深以为然，故常与逵秘密商议对付宸濠的大计。
English: Yan was deeply convinced of this, so he often secretly discussed with Yan how to deal with Yan's grand plan.

古文：及宸濠缚燧，逵争之。
现代文：在宸濠逮捕孙燧时，逵出来抗争，也被缚。
English: During the arrest of Sun Yat-sen, Gao Gao came out to protest and was also tied up.

古文：宸濠素忌逵，问许副使何言，逵曰： 副使惟赤心耳。 
现代文：宸濠平时就忌刻许逵，问他有何话说，逵厉声回答： 我身为副使，为国赤胆忠心！ 
English: When asked what he had to say, he replied sharply: "As a deputy envoy, I am loyal to the country!"

古文：宸濠怒曰： 我不能杀汝邪？ 
现代文：宸濠大怒道 ：我不能杀你吗？ 
English: Yan Yan angrily said, "Can't I kill you?"

古文：逵骂曰： 汝能杀我，天子能杀汝。
现代文：逵骂道 ：你能杀我，而天子能杀你。
English: You can kill me, but God can kill you.

古文：逵父家居，闻江西有变，杀都御史及副使，即为位，易服哭。
现代文：你这个反贼，将碎尸万段，悔之不及。 宸濠将逵杀害，这时他才年三十六岁。
English: You, the anti-thief, will chop up thousands of corpses, and you will not regret it. He was only thirty-six years old when he killed Zou Zou.

古文：人怪问故。父曰： 副使，必吾儿也。 
现代文：逵曾将《文天祥集》赠给好友给事中张汉卿，但无书信。汉卿对人说： 宁王必反，汝登将为文天祥！ 
English: Yao had given the "Wen Tianxiang Collection" to his friend Zhang Hanqing, but there was no letter. Hanqing said to the man: "Ning Wang will surely rebel, and you will become Wen Tianxiang!"

古文：世宗即位，赠左副都御史，谥忠节，荫一子。
现代文：世宗即位，赠逵左副都御史，谥忠节，荫子一人。
English: The enthronement of King Sejong, the bestowal of 左副都御史, 忠节, and one shadow child.

古文：许氏子孙不如孙氏贵显，亦能传其家。黄宏，字德裕，鄞人。
现代文：又因逵在山东抗击义军有功，再荫一子。嘉靖元年，改赠逵为礼部尚书，升所荫子为指挥佥事。黄宏，字德裕，鄞县人。
English: In the first year of the Jiajing Dynasty, Huang Hong, also known as Deyu, was awarded the title of "Shang Shu of the Ministry of Rites" and the title of "Shang Zi of the Commanding Office." He was from Shixian County.

古文：弘治十五年进士。知万安县。
现代文：弘治十五年进士，授万安县知县。
English: In 15 years, Hongzhi was promoted to a scholar and awarded the title of Zhixian of Wan'an County.

古文：民好讼，讼辄祷于神，宏毁其祠曰： 令在，何祷也。 
现代文：万安县民好打官司，凡打官司的人都要祈祷神灵。宏毁其祠，对百姓说： 有我县令在，你们还祈祷谁。 
English: The people of Wan'an County are good at suing, and everyone who sues must pray to the gods. Hong destroyed his shrine and said to the people: If my county magistrate is here, who will you pray to?

古文：讼者至，辄片言折之。
现代文：每次审案他几句话就把案子判定了。
English: Each time he tried a case, he decided the case in a few words.

古文：累迁江西左参议，按湖西、岭北二道。
现代文：后调任江西左参议，负责湖西、岭北两道。
English: Later, he was transferred to the post of Jiangxi Left Counselor, responsible for the two provinces of Huxi and Lingbei.

古文：王守仁讨横水、桶冈贼，宏主饷有功。
现代文：王守仁征讨横水、桶冈盗贼时，宏负责供应军饷有功。
English: When Wang Shouren was fighting against thieves in Hengshui and Baekgang, Hong was responsible for supplying military supplies and played a significant role.

古文：贼闵念四既降，复恃宸濠势，剽九江上下。
现代文：贼闵念四投降后，又依恃宸濠，剽劫九江一带，宏发兵追捕。
English: After the bandits surrendered on the 4th day of the 4th month of the year, Hong sent soldiers to chase after them and robbed the Jiujiang area.

古文：宏发兵捕之，走匿宸濠祖墓中，尽得其辎重以归。
现代文：闵念四等躲入宸濠的祖坟陵园中，宏获得其贼之辎重而归。
English: Zou Nian (念四等) hid in Zou's ancestral cemetery, and Hong gained the weight of his theft and returned.

古文：宸濠逆节益露，士大夫以为忧，宏正色曰： 国家不幸有此，我辈守士，死而已。 
现代文：宸濠反朝廷的罪行日益暴露，江西的士大夫们为之担忧，宏严肃地说： 国家不幸有此逆贼，我们应死守境土。 
English: The crimes of instigating rebellion against the imperial court were increasingly exposed, and the leading officials of Jiangxi were worried about it, solemnly saying: The country is unfortunate to have such a traitor, we should defend our territory to the death.

古文：有持大义不从宸濠党者，宏每阴左右之。
现代文：有持大义不肯随从宸濠谋反的人，宏暗中支持他们。
English: There are those who uphold justice and do not want to follow the rebels, and secretly support them.

古文：值宸濠反，被执系狱，不屈，绝食六日死。
现代文：宸濠反，宏被捕，自杀而死。世宗即位，赠宏为太常少卿。
English: As a result of the rebellion, Hiroshi was arrested and committed suicide. Sejong ascended to the throne, and Hiroshi was given the title of Taijo Shokei.

