古文：秦伐楚，使王翦将兵六十万人，始皇自送至灞上。
现代文：原文秦始皇派王翦率六十万大军攻打楚国，出征时秦始皇亲自到灞上送行。
English: The original text: Qin Shi Huang sent Wang Qian to lead 600,000 troops to attack Chu, and Qin Shi Huang personally accompanied Wang Qian on his journey.

古文：王翦行，请美田宅园地甚众，始皇曰： 将军行矣，何忧贫乎？ 
现代文：临行前，王翦请求始皇赏赐给他大批田宅。秦始皇说： 将军即将率领大军出征，为什么还担心生活的贫穷呢？ 
English: Before leaving, Wang Xi asked the first emperor to reward him with a large number of farmhouses. Qin Shi Huang said: The general is about to lead a large army to war, why worry about the poverty of life?

古文：王翦曰： 为大王将，有功终不得封侯；故及大王之向臣，臣亦及时以请园地，为子孙业耳。 
现代文：王翦说： 臣身为大王的将军，立下汗马功劳，却始终不能封侯，所以想趁大王委派臣重任的时候，请大王赏赐田宅，作为子孙日后生活的依靠。 
English: Wang Yao said, "As a great king's general, I have made great achievements, but I have never been able to be a vassal, so I would like to take advantage of the time when the great king assigns important duties to his vassals, and ask the great king to reward me with a farmhouse, as a support for the future life of my children and grandchildren.

古文：始皇大笑。
现代文：秦始皇听了不由放声大笑。
English: Qin Shi Huang laughed out loud.

古文：王翦既至关，使使还请善田者五辈，或曰： 将军之乞贷亦已甚矣! 
现代文：王翦率军抵达关口后，又曾五次遣使者向始皇请求封赏。有人劝王翦说： 将军要求封赏的举动，似乎过分了些。 王翦说： 你错了。
English: After Wang Hui and his army arrived at the pass, he sent envoys to the First Emperor five more times to request a reward. Someone advised Wang Hui to say: The general's action of requesting a reward seems excessive. Wang Hui said: You are wrong.

古文：王翦曰： 不然，夫秦王恒中粗而不信人，今空秦国甲士而专委于我，我不多请田宅为子孙业以自坚，顾令秦王坐而疑我耶？ 
现代文：大王疑心病重，用人不专，现在他将秦国的兵力都交给了我，我如果不用为子孙求日后生活保障为借口，向大王请赐田宅，难道要大王坐在宫中对我生疑吗？ 
English: The great king suspected that he was seriously ill and did not employ anyone. Now he has handed over all the military forces of Qin to me. If I do not have to ask the great king for a farmhouse as an excuse for my children and grandchildren to have a secure life in the future, should the great king sit in the palace and be suspicious of me?

古文：汉高专任萧何关中事。汉三年，与项羽相距京、索间。
现代文：汉高祖三年，萧何镇守关中，汉王与项羽在京、索一带相持不下。
English: In the third year of Henkel's founding, Xiao He Town was in the middle of guarding the pass, and Han Wang and Xiang Yu could not keep up with each other in Beijing and the cable area.

古文：上数使使劳苦丞相，鲍生谓何曰： 今王暴衣露盖，数劳苦君者，有疑君心也，为君计，莫若遣君子孙昆第能胜兵者，悉诣军所。 
现代文：这期间，汉王屡次命使者慰问镇守关中的宰相萧何。鲍生于是对萧何说： 在战场上备尝野战之苦的君主，之所以屡次派使者慰劳属臣，是因为君王对属臣心存疑虑啊。为您考虑，丞相最好选派善战的子弟兵，亲自率领他们到前线和君主并肩作战，这样一来，君主才能消除心中疑虑，信任丞相。 
English: During this period, the Han king repeatedly sent emissaries to console Xiao He, the prime minister of the town of Guanzhong. Bao Sheng then said to Xiao He: The reason why the monarch, who prepared for the hardships of the field battle on the battlefield, repeatedly sent emissaries to comfort his vassals was because the monarch had doubts about his vassals. For your consideration, it is best for the prime minister to choose soldiers who are good at fighting and personally lead them to the front to fight alongside the monarch. In this way, the monarch can eliminate doubts in his heart and trust the prime minister.

古文：于是何从其计，汉王大悦。
现代文：萧何采纳鲍生的建议，从此汉王对萧何很满意。
English: Xiao He accepted Bao Sheng's suggestion, and from then on, Han Wang was very satisfied with Xiao He.

古文：吕后用萧何计诛韩信，上已闻诛信，使使拜何为相国，益封五千户，令卒五百人，一都尉为相国卫。
现代文：汉高祖十一年，淮阴侯韩信在关中叛乱，吕后用萧何的计谋诛灭韩信。高祖知道淮阴侯被杀的事情后，就派使臣任命萧何为相国，加封五千户邑民，另外派遣士兵五百人和一名都尉作为相国的护卫兵。
English: In the eleventh year of the reign of Emperor Gaozu, the Huaiyin warlord Han Xin rebelled in Guanzhong, and Emperor Lugu used the stratagem of Xiao He to destroy Han Xin. After Gaozu learned of the murder of Huaiyin warlord, he sent an envoy to appoint Xiao He as a consort, sealed off five thousand households, and sent five hundred soldiers and a captain as guards for the consort.

古文：诸君皆贺，召平独吊。曰： 祸自此始矣!
现代文：群臣都向萧何道贺，唯独召平向萧何表示哀悼之意，说： 相国的灾祸从现在就要开始啦!
English: The ministers all congratulated Xiao He, but only Ping Xiang expressed his condolences to Xiao He, saying, "The disaster of our country is about to begin!"

古文：上暴露于外，而君守于内，非被矢石之难，而益封君置卫，非以宠君也，以今者淮阴新反，有疑君心，愿君让封勿受，悉以家财佐军。 
现代文：皇上在外率军征战，而相国留守关中，没有战场上的急难，却获赐增加封邑和护卫兵，这并不是宠信相国，只是因为淮阴侯刚谋反被平，皇上对相国的忠心也有所怀疑。我建议相国恳辞封赏不受，并把家中财产全部捐出充作军费。 
English: The fact that the emperor led an army to fight abroad, while his country was left behind, and there was no emergency on the battlefield, but he was granted an increase in fiefs and guards. This is not a favor to his country, but because Huai Yinhong plotted to rebel and was leveled, the emperor also has doubts about his country's loyalty. I suggest that his country refuse to be rewarded, and donate all the family's property as military expenses.

古文：何从之，上悦。
现代文：萧何采纳了陈平的建议，高祖果然大为高兴。
English: Xiao He accepted Chen Ping's suggestion and Gao Zu was very pleased.

古文：其秋黥布反，上自将击之。
现代文：汉高祖十二年秋天，英布叛变，高祖御驾亲征，其间几次派使者回长安打探萧何的动静。
English: In the autumn of the twelfth year of the reign of Emperor Gaozu, Ying Bu rebelled, and Emperor Gaozu personally led the expedition, during which he sent several emissaries back to Chang'an to investigate the movement of Xiao He.

古文：数使使问相国何为，曰： 为上在军，拊循勉百姓，悉取所有佐军，如陈豨时。 
现代文：萧何对使者说： 因为皇上御驾亲征，所以我在后方鼓励人民捐献财物支援前方，和皇上上次讨伐陈豨叛变时做法相同。 
English: Xiao He said to the envoy, "Since the emperor is personally leading the enlistment, I encourage the people in the rear to donate money and goods to support the front, the same way as the emperor did the last time he fought against the Chen Xi rebellion.

古文：客又说何曰： 君灭族不久矣!
现代文：这时，有人对萧何说： 你灭门之日不远啦！
English: At this time, someone said to Xiao He: "The day of your death is not far away!"

古文：夫君位为相国，功第一，不可复加。
现代文：你已经身为相国，功冠群臣，皇上没法再提升你的官职。
English: You are already a peer of the realm and an honored retainer. The emperor cannot promote you any further.

古文：然君初入关中，得百姓心十余年矣，尚复孳孳得民和。
现代文：自从相国进入关中，十多年来深得民心现在还在勤勉不懈地为百姓。
English: Since the country has entered the middle of the gate, more than ten years have been deeply won the people's hearts and are still diligently working for the people.

古文：上所为数问君，畏君倾动关中。
现代文：皇上之所以多次派使者慰问相国，就是担心相国在关中谋反。
English: The reason why the emperor repeatedly sent emissaries to offer condolences to the neighboring country was that he was worried that the neighboring country was plotting a rebellion in Guanzhong.

古文：今君胡不多买田地，贱贳贷以自污。
现代文：相国如想保命，不妨低价强购百姓的田地，并且不以现金支付而以债券取代，从而贬损自己的名声。
English: If the partner country wants to save its own skin, it may as well force the purchase of people's fields at a low price and replace them with bonds instead of paying in cash, thus degrading its own reputation.

古文：上心必安。 
现代文：这样皇上才会安心。 
English: Only in this way will the Emperor be reassured.

古文：于是何从其计。
现代文：萧何又采纳这个建议。
English: Xiao He also accepted this suggestion.

古文：上还，百姓遮道诉相国，上乃大悦。
现代文：高祖在平定英布之乱凯旋而归后，百姓沿途拦驾上奏，控告萧何低价强购民田，高祖听后心中窃喜。
English: After Gaozu's triumphant return from pacifying the Yingbu Disturbance, the common people stopped him along the way to complain about Xiao He's forced purchase of people's farmland at a low price. Gaozu was overjoyed after hearing this.

古文：汉史又言，何买田宅必居穷僻处，不治垣屋，曰： 令后世贤，师吾俭；不贤，无为势家所夺。 
现代文：汉史又记载，萧何购买田宅都是选择偏远的穷乡，也从不在自家宅院建筑高楼围墙。他说： 如果子孙贤德，就会学习我的节俭；如果子孙不肖，这样的田地比较不容易遭人觊觎。 
English: Chinese history also records that Xiao He always chose remote poor villages to purchase farmhouses, and never built high-rise fences in his own homestead. He said: If the descendants are virtuous, they will learn my frugality; if the descendants are not handsome, such fields are less likely to be stolen.

古文：与前所云强买民田宅似属两截，不知前乃免祸之权，后乃保家之策，其智政不相妨也。
现代文：这和前面所记萧何强行购置民田的事迹，似乎完全不同。其实强购民田是为免遭杀身之祸的权宜之策，至于穷乡僻壤，则是为了保护家产。这两件事所表现的智慧是不相妨碍的。
English: This seems to be completely different from the story of Xiao He's forcible purchase of people's land described above. In fact, the forcible purchase of people's land is a stopgap measure to avoid the scourge of suicide, and as for the poor and remote land, it is to protect the family property. The wisdom shown by these two things is not an obstacle.

古文：宋赵韩王普强买人第宅，聚敛财贿，为御史中丞雷德骧所劾。
现代文：宋朝的时候，韩王赵普因为强行购买百姓宅第，行贿敛财，遭御史中丞雷德骧弹劾。
English: During the Song Dynasty, King Han Zhao Pu was impeached by the Grand Historian Lei Dejun for forcibly buying people's houses and taking bribes to accumulate wealth.

古文：韩世忠既罢，杜门绝客，口不言兵，时跨驴携酒，从一二奚童，纵游西湖以自乐。
现代文：韩世忠罢官后，拒绝访客上门，且绝口不谈兵事，常常骑着一匹驴，带着一壶好酒，领着一两个童子，在西湖上饮酒自娱。
English: After Han Shizhong was dismissed from his post, he refused to have visitors come to his house, and never talked about military affairs. He often rode a donkey, carried a jug of good wine, led one or two boys, and drank alcohol on the West Lake to amuse himself.

古文：尝议买新淦县官田，高宗闻之，甚喜，赐御札，号其庄曰： 旌忠 。
现代文：有人曾批评他在新淦县购置官田，宋高宗听说后非常高兴，并且颁赐匾额，赐名韩的田庄为 旌忠 。
English: Some people had criticized him for purchasing government-owned farmland in Xinlu County, but Song Gaozong was very happy to hear about it, and awarded him a large sum of money, giving the name of the Korean farm to Gongzhong.

古文：二公之买田，亦此意也。
现代文：其实他们两人不论购民宅或买官田，都只是为了消除君主对自己的疑虑罢了。
English: In fact, both of them, whether they buy private houses or buy government land, are just to eliminate the monarch's doubts about themselves.

古文：夫人主不能推肝胆以与豪杰功，至令有功之人，不惜自污以祈幸免。
现代文：唉，当君主不能与大臣们肝胆相照、推心置腹的时候，就会使有功的大臣不惜污损自己的名誉而求自保。
English: Alas, when the sovereign is not able to put his heart and soul into the service of his ministers, he will cause the meritorious minister to seek self-preservation at the risk of tarnishing his reputation.

古文：三代交泰之风荡如矣!然降而今日，大臣无论有功无功，无不多买田宅自污者，彼又持何说耶？
现代文：三代时君臣水乳交融的情感早已经不复存在，然而演变到现在，大臣不论有功无功，都拼命的购买田宅，他们所持的理由又是什么呢？
English: The sentiments of three generations of monarchs and ministers mixing milk and water have long since ceased to exist. However, they have evolved to the present. Ministers, regardless of whether they are successful or not, are desperately buying farmhouses. What are their reasons for holding them?

古文：陈平当吕氏异议之际，日饮醇酒，弄妇人；裴度当宦官熏灼之际，退居绿野，把酒赋诗，不问人间事。
现代文：陈平在吕氏对自己有疑虑时，整日醉酒调戏妇人；而唐朝的裴度在宦官气焰正盛时，也曾隐居乡间喝酒作诗，不过问朝廷的事。
English: Chen Ping in the Lv dynasty, when he had doubts about himself, spent all day getting drunk and flirting with women; while Pei Du in the Tang dynasty, when he was in the prime of his eunuch career, also lived in seclusion in the countryside, drinking and writing poetry, but asked questions about the imperial court.

古文：古人明哲保身之术，例如此，皆所以绝其疑也。
现代文：这些都是古人明哲保身的办法，其目的都是为了消除君主对自己的疑虑。
English: These are all methods of self-preservation of the ancients, and their purpose is to eliminate the doubts of the monarch about himself.

古文：国初，御史袁凯以忤旨引风疾归。太祖使人觇之，见凯方匍匐往篱下食猪犬矢，还报，乃免。
现代文：明朝初年，御史袁凯因为触怒太祖，被迫托病辞官归隐，太祖仍旧不放心，派人窥探，派来的密探只见袁凯趴在竹篱下，吃猪狗的粪便。
English: In the first year of the Ming Dynasty, Yuan Kai, the Imperial Historian, was forced to go into seclusion after he offended the Grandfather. The Grandfather was still not reassured and sent someone to spy on him. The sent spy only saw Yuan Kai lying under the bamboo fence, eating pig and dog excrement.

古文：盖凯逆知有此，使家人以炒面搅砂糖，从竹筒出之，潜布篱下耳，凯亦智矣哉!
现代文：密探向太祖报告这一情况后，袁凯才得以保住了性命。原来袁凯早就料到太祖会派人监视他的行动，于是就让家人预先在炒面中搅拌砂糖，灌进竹筒里边，悄悄放置在竹篱的下边，从而避过密探耳目。看来袁凯也是聪明人啊！
English: It was only after the spy reported the situation to his great-grandfather that Yuan Kai was able to save his life. Originally, Yuan Kai had long expected that his great-grandfather would send someone to monitor his actions, so he asked his family to stir sugar into the fried noodles in advance, pour it into the bamboo tube, and quietly place it under the bamboo fence, thus avoiding the spy's eyes and ears. It seems that Yuan Kai is also a smart person!

