古文：庾杲之王谌孔珪刘怀珍
现代文：庾杲之字景行，新野人。
English: 之字景行,新野人.

古文：杲之幼有孝行，宋司空刘勉见而奇之，谓曰： 见卿足使江汉崇望，杞梓发声。 
现代文：祖父庾深之，位居义兴太守，以善政而闻名。父亲庾粲是南郡王刘义宣的丞相城局参军，南郡王起兵，他被杀害。庾杲之幼年就很有孝行，宋朝的司空刘面力见到他认为很奇异，对他说： 见到您足以使江汉一带仰望，优秀人才声名远扬。 
English: His grandfather, Yu Shengyi, was the governor of Yixing and was famous for his good governance. His father, Yu Shengyi, was the son of King of Nan County, Liu Yixuan, who joined the army and was killed. Yu Shengyi was very filial when he was young. When Liu Mengli, the governor of Song Dynasty, saw him, he thought it was very strange and said to him, "Seeing you is enough to make the Jianghan region look up to you. Excellent talents are famous far and wide."

古文：解褐奉朝请，稍迁尚书驾部郎。
现代文：初次做官担任奉朝请，逐步升迁为尚书驾部郎。
English: For the first time, he served as an official at the request of the Emperor, and was gradually promoted to the post of Shosho chauffeur.

古文：清贫自业，食唯有韭葅瀹韭生韭杂菜。
现代文：家业清贫，吃的只有腌韭菜、煮韭菜、生韭菜等。
English: The family was poor and only ate stew, boiled stew, raw stew, and so on.

古文：任昉尝戏之曰： 谁谓庾郎贫，食鲑尝有二十七种。 
现代文：任窻曾经给他开玩笑地说： 谁说庾郎贫穷，吃菜曾经有三九二十七种。 
English: Ren Hao once jokingly said to him: Who says Hao Lang is poor, there used to be thirty-nine and twenty-seven kinds of vegetables.

古文：累迁尚书左丞。
现代文：他经过多次调动担任了尚书左丞。
English: After being transferred several times, he assumed the post of Shangshu Zuoren.

古文：王俭谓人曰： 昔袁公作卫军，欲用我爲长史，虽不获就，要是意向如此。
现代文：王俭对别人说： 过去袁公做卫军，想用我为长史，虽然没有做成，关键是他曾有这种意向。
English: Wang Jian said to others: In the past, Yuan Gonglu was a guard and wanted to use me as a long history, although it did not work out, the key is that he had this intention.

古文：今亦应须如我辈人也。 
现代文：现在也需要像我们这样的人。 
English: People like us are needed now.

古文：乃用杲之爲卫将军长史。
现代文：于是任用庾杲之为卫将军长史。
English: As a result, he was appointed as the commander-in-chief of the Shinsengumi.

古文：安陆侯萧缅与俭书曰： 盛府元僚，实难其选。
现代文：安陆侯萧缅给王俭写信说： 贵府的僚佐，实在难以选拔。
English: Anlu Hou Xiao Ming wrote to Wang Jian, saying: It is really difficult to select the vice-premiers of your prefecture.

古文：庾景行泛渌水，依芙蓉，何其丽也。 
现代文：庾景行泛渌水，依芙蓉，多么美丽啊！ 
English: Scenery of dragonflies and damselflies, along with rhododendrons, how beautiful!

古文：时人以入俭府爲莲花池，故缅书美之。
现代文：当时的人把入王俭府比作莲花池，所以萧缅写信赞美他。
English: At that time, people compared the entrance to Wang Jianfu to a lotus pond, so Xiao Mian wrote a letter to praise him.

古文：历位黄门吏部郎，御史中丞，参大选。
现代文：他历任黄门吏部郎，御史中丞，参与大选。
English: He successively served as the secretary of the Yellow Gate and the Vice-Minister of History, and participated in the general election.

古文：美容质，善言笑。
现代文：他容貌美好，善于谈笑。
English: He was good-looking and funny.

古文：尝兼侍中夹侍，柳世隆在御坐，谓齐武帝曰： 庾杲之爲蝉冕所映，弥有华采，陛下故当与其即真。 
现代文：曾经兼任侍中夹侍，柳世隆在皇帝那儿坐，对齐武帝说： 庾杲之被蝉冠所辉映，更加富有华彩，陛下所以应当让他真地成为贵近朝臣。 
English: Liu Shilong, who also served as an aide-de-camp, sat next to the emperor and said to Emperor Wu, "His majesty should really make him a close courtier, because the cicada crown makes him look more gorgeous."

古文：上甚悦。王俭仍曰： 国家以杲之清美，所以许其假职。
现代文：皇上很高兴，王俭则说： 国家因为庾杲之清美，所以允许他假借官职。
English: The emperor was very pleased, and Wang Jian said, "The state allowed him to assume official duties because of his beauty.

古文：若以其即真，当在胡谐之后。 
现代文：如果让他真地任职，应当在胡谐之的后面。 
English: If he is to be given a real job, it should be behind the scenes.

古文：武帝尝与朝臣商略，酒后谓群臣曰： 我后当得何諡？ 
现代文：武帝曾经与朝臣商议，一次酒后他对群臣说： 我以后应当得到什么样的谥号？ 
English: Emperor Wu once had a discussion with his courtiers. Once, after drinking, he said to his courtiers: What kind of nickname should I get in the future?

古文：群臣莫有答者。
现代文：群臣没有人回答。
English: None of the courtiers answered.

古文：王俭因目杲之，从容曰： 陛下寿等南山，方与日月齐明，千载之后，岂是臣子轻所仰量。 
现代文：王俭于是眼睛看着庾杲之，庾杲之从容地说： 陛下寿比南山，正与日月齐明，千载以后，难道是臣子们轻易可以衡量的吗？ 
English: Wang Jian then looked at Yao Zhi with his eyes, and Yao Zhi calmly said, "Your Majesty's lifespan is greater than that of Nanshan Mountain, and is as bright as the sun and moon. After a thousand years, is it possible for courtiers to easily measure it?

古文：时人雅叹其辩答。
现代文：当时的人都很称赞他雄辩的对答。
English: People at the time praised his eloquent repartee.

古文：杲之尝兼主客郎对魏使，使问杲之曰： 百姓那得家家题门帖卖宅？ 
现代文：庾杲之曾经兼任主客郎对答魏朝的使者，使者问庾杲之说： 百姓们怎么能够家家写门帖卖宅子？ 
English: Zou Zi, who also served as host and guest, answered the envoy of the Wei Dynasty. The envoy asked Zou Zi: "How can people write doorposts to sell houses?

古文：答曰： 朝廷既欲扫荡京洛，克复神州，所以家家卖宅耳。 
现代文：回答说： 朝廷既然要扫荡京洛，克复神州，所以才家家卖宅子。 
English: He replied, "Since the imperial court wants to sweep through Kyōto and recapture Shinshū, that's why everyone is selling their houses.

古文：魏使缩鼻而不答。
现代文：魏朝的使者缩着鼻子而不回答。
English: The emissary of the Wei Dynasty held his nose and did not answer.

古文：时人呼孔逖何宪爲王俭三公。及卒，俭惜之，爲撰祭文。
现代文：当时诸王年少，不能轻率地称赞和接待别人，诏令庾杲之和济阳的江淹五天一次去到诸王那里去，让他们交游通好。庾杲之又升迁为尚书吏部郎，参大选事务，太子右卫率，加任通直常侍。
English: At that time, the kings were young and could not praise and receive others carelessly. The emperor ordered Shanzhi and Jiangu of Jiyang to go to the kings for five days at a time, so that they would have a good relationship. Shanzhi was promoted to be the secretary of the secretary of the secretary of the secretary of the secretary of the secretary of the secretary of the secretary of the secretary of the secretary of the secretary of the secretary of the secretary of the secretary of the secretary of the secretary of the secretary of the secretary of the secretary of the secretary of the secretary of the secretary of the secretary of the secretary of the secretary of the secretary of the secretary of the secretary of the secretary of the

古文：孔珪字德璋，会稽山阴人也。
现代文：永明九年去世，皇上非常惋惜，谥号为贞子。孔珪字德璋，会稽山阴人。
English: Emperor Yongming passed away in the ninth year of the Ming Dynasty. He was greatly mourned by the emperor. His nickname was Sadako.

古文：祖道隆，位侍中。
现代文：祖父孔道隆，位居侍中。
English: His grandfather, Kong Dorong, was an attendant.

古文：父灵産，泰始中，晋安太守，有隐遁之志。
现代文：父亲孔灵产，泰始年间，任晋安太守，有隐遁之志。
English: His father, Kong Ling, was born in the Taishi era and served as the governor of Jin'an. He had a dream of becoming a hermit.

古文：于禹井山立馆，事道精笃。
现代文：在禹井山建立了一座馆舍，侍奉道规非常精心。
English: A residence was built on Mount Ui, and the rules of etiquette were carefully observed.

古文：吉日于静屋四向朝拜，涕泣滂沱。
现代文：吉日在安静的屋子里朝四个方向朝拜，泪流不止。
English: On the auspicious day, in a quiet room, I prostrated myself in four directions, tears streaming down my face.

古文：东出过钱唐北郭，辄于舟中遥拜杜子恭墓。
现代文：一次东出路过钱塘城北面，便在舟中遥拜杜子恭墓。
English: One eastbound trip passed the north side of Qiantang City, and they worshipped Du Zi Gong's tomb in the boat.

古文：自此至都，东向坐，不敢背侧。
现代文：从这里直到都城，他面朝东坐着，不敢背对或侧对。
English: From here to the capital, he sat facing east, not daring to face backwards or sideways.

古文：元徽中，爲中散大夫，颇解星文，好术数。
现代文：元徽年间，为中散大夫，很懂得星文，喜欢术数。
English: During the Yuanhui era, he was a doctor of Zhongshan, knew astrology very well, and liked the number of operations.

古文：齐高帝辅政，沈攸之起兵，灵産白高帝曰： 攸之兵衆虽强，以天时冥数而观，无能爲也。 
现代文：齐高帝辅政，沈攸之起兵，孔灵产告诉高帝说： 沈攸之的兵众虽然很强，但是以天时运数来看，没有什么作为。 
English: Emperor Qigong was assisted by Emperor Qigong, and Shen Youzhi raised an army. Kong Lingzang told Emperor Qigong: Although Shen Youzhi's army was very strong, in terms of the number of days and seasons, there was nothing to be done.

古文：高帝验其言，擢迁光禄大夫，以簏盛灵産上灵台，令其占候。
现代文：高帝验证了他的话，提拔他做光禄大夫，用竹箱盛着孔灵产抬上灵台，让他占候吉凶。
English: Emperor Gao verified his words, promoted him to be a doctor of Guanglu, and used a bamboo box to carry Kong Lingzhu onto the funeral table, so that he could predict the future.

古文：饷灵産白羽扇、素隐几，曰： 君有古人之风，故赠君古人之服。 
现代文：赠给孔灵产白羽扇、白几案，说： 您有古人之风，所以赠给您古人的衣服。 
English: He presented Kong Lingzhu with a white feather fan and a white case, saying: You have the style of the ancients, so I will give you the clothes of the ancients.

古文：当世荣之。
现代文：当时的人都认为十分荣耀。
English: People at the time thought it was quite an honor.

古文：珪少学涉有美誉，太守王僧虔见而重之，引爲主簿。
现代文：孔珪少年时在学问的涉猎上有很好的声誉，太守王僧虔见到后非常重视，任用他为主簿。
English: When Confucius was a young boy, he had a good reputation in the pursuit of learning. After seeing him, Daju Wang Sangyan attached great importance to him and appointed him as the head of the book.

古文：举秀才，再迁殿中郎。
现代文：后来举为秀才，又升迁为殿中郎。
English: Later, he was promoted to be an outstanding talent, and was promoted to the post of palace middle-ranking official.

古文：高帝爲骠骑，取爲记室参军，与江淹对掌辞笔。
现代文：高帝做了骠骑，取他为记室参军，与江淹一齐掌管辞笔。
English: Gao Di did the trick, he took him to join the army as a recorder, and together with Jiang Dun, he was in charge of the writing pen.

古文：爲尚书左丞，父忧去官。
现代文：担任尚书左丞，遇到了父亲的丧事离职。
English: He held the post of Shangshuzojo, but left the post after his father's death.

古文：与兄仲智还居父山舍。
现代文：和他的哥哥孔仲智回到了他们父亲的山舍居住。
English: He and his brother, Kong Zhongzhi, returned to live in their father's mountain cottage.

古文：仲智妾李氏骄妒无礼，珪白太守王敬则杀之。
现代文：孔仲智的妾李氏骄妒无礼，孔珪告诉了太守王敬则把她杀掉。
English: Kong Zhongzhi's concubine, Ms. Li, was arrogant and rude. When Kong Yao told the governor, Wang Jing, he killed her.

古文：永明中，历位黄门郎，太子中庶子，廷尉。
现代文：永明年间，历任黄门郎，太子中庶子，廷尉。
English: From generation to generation, successive Huangmenro, the prince's middle child, the courtier.

古文：江左承用晋时张、杜律二十卷，武帝留心法令，数讯囚徒，诏狱官详正旧注。
现代文：江东继续使用晋朝时候的张、杜律二十卷，武帝留心法令，多次审讯囚徒，诏令狱官详细地订正旧注。
English: Jiangdong continued to use the twenty volumes of Zhang and Du Lu from the time of the Jin Dynasty. Emperor Wu paid attention to the decrees, interrogated the prisoners many times, and ordered the prison officials to revise the old notes in detail.

古文：先是尚书删定郎王植撰定律，奏之，削其烦害，录其允衷，取张斐注七百三十一条，杜预注七百九十一条，或二家两释于义乃备者，又取一百七条，其注相同者取一百三条，集爲一书，凡一千七百三十二条，爲二十卷。
现代文：在此以前尚书删定了郎官王植撰写订正的法律，上奏后，删削其中的烦琐有害的条文，采录其中允当合理的部分，吸取张裴的注七百三十一条，杜预的注七百九十一条，或者二家两种解释意义才完备的，又取了一百零七条，他们的注解相同者取了一百零三条，集结为一本书，共一千七百三十二条，为二十卷。
English: Prior to this, Shang Shu deleted the revised law written by Lang Guan Wang Zhi, and after it was published, he deleted the cumbersome and harmful provisions, extracted the reasonable part, absorbed Zhang Pei's note 731 and Du Yuan's note 791, or the two interpretations were complete, and took 107 articles, and their commentators took 103 articles, and assembled them into a book, a total of 1732 articles, 20 volumes.

古文：请付外详校，擿其违谬。
现代文：孔珪请求交付外界详细校订，挑出其中不合理的地方。
English: Kong Wei requested to deliver detailed proofs to the outside world, and picked out the unreasonable parts.

古文：诏从之。
现代文：诏令采纳了他的意见。
English: He complied.

古文：于是公卿八座参议，考正旧注，有轻重处，竟陵王子良下意多使从轻。
现代文：于是公卿八座参议，考正旧注，有可轻可重的地方，竟陵王萧子良的意见大多使它从轻。
English: As a result, the eight-seat council of court nobles, the examination of the old note, there are light and heavy places, in fact, most of the opinions of King Xiao Ziliang made it lighter.

古文：其中朝议不能断者，则制旨平决。
现代文：其中朝官们议论不能断定的，则按皇上的意见裁决。
English: If the discussion among the imperial officials is inconclusive, the decision will be made in accordance with the Emperor's opinion.

古文：至九年，珪表上律文二十卷，录序一卷，又立律学助教，依五经例，诏报从之。事竟不行。
现代文：到了永明九年，孔珪奏表呈上《律文》二十卷，《录序》一卷，又设置了律学助教，依照《五经》的例子，诏令答复依照他的意见执行，事情终于没有落实。
English: In the ninth year of the Yongming era, Confucius submitted the twenty volumes of the "Laws" and one volume of the "Recorded Precedents" to the Confucius Institute, and also set up a legal assistant. According to the example of the "Five Classics," the reply to the edict was carried out according to his opinion, and the matter was finally not implemented.

古文：转御史中丞。
现代文：转为御史中丞。
English: He was promoted to goshi chujo.

古文：建武初，爲平西长史、南郡太守。
现代文：建武初年，他做平西长史、南郡太守。
English: In the first year of the Jianwu era, he served as the long-term governor of Pingxi and the governor of Nan County.

古文：珪以魏连岁南伐，百姓死伤，乃上表陈通和之策，帝不从。
现代文：孔珪因为魏朝连续南侵，百姓死伤，便上表陈述了通和的策略，明帝不听从。
English: Because of the continuous southern invasion by the Wei Dynasty and the death and injury of the people, Confucius stated the strategy of peace on the table, but Emperor Ming did not listen.

古文：征侍中，不行，留本任。
现代文：征调为侍中，没有上任，留在本来的职位上。
English: He was conscripted as a chamberlain, but did not take up the post, remaining in his original position.

古文：珪风韵清疏，好文咏，饮酒七八斗。
现代文：孔珪风韵清疏，喜好文章和吟咏，饮酒七八斗。
English: Kong Hao's demeanor is sparse, he likes to read and sing, and he drinks a lot.

古文：与外兄张融情趣相得，又与琅邪王思远、庐江何点、点弟胤并款交，不乐世务。
现代文：和他的表兄张融情趣相合，又和琅笽的王思远、庐江的何点、何点的弟弟何胤都很要好，不喜欢世俗事务。
English: He and his cousin, Zhang Rong, share the same interests, and he is also very close to Wang Siyuan of Luoyang and his younger brother, He Tan, both of which are in Luoyang. They do not like worldly affairs.

古文：居宅盛营山水，凭几独酌，傍无杂事。
现代文：居住的宅院里营建了许多山水，在小桌前独自饮酒，别无杂事。
English: Many landscapes have been built in the residential courtyard, drinking alone at a small table, nothing else.

古文：门庭之内，草莱不翦。
现代文：门庭以内，杂草不剪。
English: Within the gate yard, weeds are not to be cut.

古文：中有蛙鸣，或问之曰： 欲爲陈蕃乎？ 
现代文：当中有青蛙的叫声，有人问他说： 想做陈蕃吗？ 
English: There was the cry of a frog, and someone asked him: "Do you want to be Chen Zhuo?"

古文：珪笑答曰： 我以此当两部鼓吹，何必效蕃。 
现代文：孔珪笑着回答说： 我拿这可以当作两部乐队，何必效法陈蕃！ 
English: Kong Hao smiled and replied: I can take this as two bands, why follow Chen Hao!

古文：王晏尝鸣鼓吹候之，闻群蛙鸣，曰： 此殊聒人耳。 
现代文：王晏曾经奏着乐等候他，听到了群蛙乱叫，说： 这叫声很聒人耳朵。 
English: Wang Yao used to play music and wait for him. When he heard the frogs screaming, he said, "This screaming is very deafening.

古文：珪曰： 我听鼓吹，殆不及此。 
现代文：孔珪说： 我听乐队，还不如这。 
English: Kong Hao said: I listen to the band, but it's not as good as this.

古文：晏甚有惭色。
现代文：王晏的脸色非常惭愧。
English: Wang Yao's face was very ashamed.

古文：永元元年，爲都官尚书，迁太子詹事，加散骑常侍。
现代文：永元元年，他担任都官尚书，调为太子詹事，加任散骑常侍。
English: In the first year of the Yongyuan era, he served as the capital official Shangshu, was transferred to the prince Zhanji, and was appointed as a horseback riding attendant.

古文：歊字士光，生夕有香气，氛氲满室。
现代文：三年，孔珪得病，东昏侯将他排除，用床把他抬走，因此病情加重，于是死去。
English: Three years later, Kong Rong fell ill. Dong Wumen removed him and carried him away on a bed. As a result, his condition worsened, and he died.

古文：幼有识慧，四岁丧父，与群儿同处，独不戏弄。
现代文：赠他为金紫光禄大夫。刘粲字士光，出生的那天晚上有香气，氤氲满屋。他自幼就很有聪明智慧，四岁死了父亲，与一群小孩在一起，只有他不做游戏。
English: He gave him the name Jin Zi Guanglu Doctor. Liu Zi Zi Shiguang, the night he was born, had a fragrance that filled the house. He was very smart and wise since he was a child. His father died when he was four years old. He was with a group of children, but he didn't play games.

古文：六岁诵论语、毛诗，意所不解，便能问难。
现代文：六岁诵《论语》、《毛诗》。心里不理解的，便能提出问题。
English: Six-year-olds recite "Analects of Confucius" and "Mao Poems." If they don't understand something, they can ask questions.

古文：十二读庄子逍遥篇曰： 此可解耳。 
现代文：十二岁的时候读《庄子·逍遥篇》说： 这是可以理解的。 
English: When he was twelve years old, he read "Zhuang Zi · Prodigal" and said: This is understandable.

古文：客问之，随问而答，皆有情理，家人每异之，谓爲神童。
现代文：有客人问他，随问随答，都合乎情理，家里的人常常感到奇怪，称他为神童。
English: When guests ask him about it, he answers questions as they come up, which makes sense. People at home are often surprised and call him a child prodigy.

古文：及长，博学有文才，不娶不仕，与族弟吁并隐居求志，遨游林泽，以山水书籍相娱而已。
现代文：等他长大以后，博学而有文才，不娶妻子，也不做官，与他的族弟刘讠于一起隐居寻求自己的志向，在林泽之中自由地旅游，以山水书籍互相娱乐。
English: When he grew up, he was erudite and literate, did not marry a wife, nor did he work as an official. Together with his younger brother Liu Shanyu, he lived in seclusion to seek his own aspirations, traveled freely in the forest, and entertained each other with landscape books.

古文：奉母兄以孝悌称，寝食不离左右。
现代文：他侍奉母亲、兄长以孝悌闻名，睡觉、吃饭都不离开身边。
English: He serves his mother and elder brother, and is known for his filial piety. He never leaves their side when sleeping or eating.

古文：母意有所须，口未及言，歊已先知，手自营办，狼狈供奉。
现代文：母亲心里有什么需要，口里还没有说出，刘粲已经预先知道，自己动手办理，尽力供奉。
English: What her mother needed in her heart, she had not yet said out loud, but Liu Ye already knew in advance, so he took matters into his own hands and tried his best to provide for her.

古文：母每疾病，梦歊进药，及翌日转有间效，其诚感如此。
现代文：母亲每次有病，梦见刘粲给她拿药，等第二天就会见效好转，她就是这样地以诚心感人。
English: Every time her mother was ill, she dreamed that Liu Ye would give her medicine, and the next day she would see results and feel better. She was so sincere and touching.

古文：性重兴乐，尤爱山水，登危履嶮，必尽幽遐，人莫能及，皆叹其有济胜之具。
现代文：他性格重视高兴快乐，尤其喜爱山水，攀登高山探求险阻，务必穷尽深远之地，别人都赶不上，都感叹他有制胜的法宝。
English: His character attaches great importance to joy and happiness, especially loves the landscape, climbs high mountains to explore obstacles, and must exhaust far-reaching places. Others can't keep up, and they all lament that he has a magic weapon to win.

古文：常欲避人世，以母老不忍违。
现代文：他经常想要避开人世，只是因为母亲年老不忍心违拗她。
English: He often wanted to avoid the world, just because his mother couldn't bear to defy her in her old age.

古文：每随兄霁、杳从宦。
现代文：所以常常随着哥哥刘霁、刘杳做官。
English: Therefore, he often followed his elder brothers Liu Ye and Liu Ye to become an official.

古文：少时好施，务周人之急，人或遗之，亦不拒也。
现代文：少年的时候喜欢施舍，努力周济别人的急困，人们有时赠送些东西，他也不拒绝。
English: When he was young, he liked to give alms. He tried to help others in need. People sometimes gave him things, and he did not refuse.

古文：久而叹曰： 受人者必报；不则有愧于人。
现代文：时间久了，他便感叹说： 接受别人的东西，必须要报答；否则就会对人有愧。
English: After a long time, he sighed and said, "If you accept something from others, you must repay them; otherwise, you will feel sorry for them."

古文：吾固无以报人，岂可常有愧乎。 
现代文：我本来没有什么东西报答别人，难道可以经常心里有愧么？ 
English: I don't have anything to repay others with, so how can I always feel guilty?

古文：天监十七年，忽着革终论。
现代文：天监十七年他忽然著了一篇《革终论》。
English: In the seventeenth year of Tianjing, he suddenly wrote a "Revolutionary Theory."

古文：以爲：形者无知之质，神者有知之性。
现代文：认为： 形是无知觉的质，神是有知觉的性。
English: Belief: Form is an unconscious quality, while God is a conscious being.

古文：有知不独存，依无知以自立，故形之于神，逆旅之馆耳。
现代文：有知觉的东西不能单独存在，要依靠无知觉的东西来自立，所以形对于神，是旅馆的房舍。
English: The spirit is sentient but cannot exist alone. It can only stand on its own if it is attached to a non-sentient form. Therefore, for the spirit, the form is like a hotel on a journey.

古文：及其死也，神去此馆，速朽得理。
现代文：等他死了，神离开了这个房舍，迅速腐朽便合乎道理。
English: When he died, the gods left the house, and it stands to reason that it would quickly decay.

古文：是以子羽沈川，汉伯方圹，文楚黄壤，士安麻索：此四子者得理也。
现代文：所以子羽沉到河里，汉伯葬入方穴，文楚埋进黄土，士安使用麻绳。这四位都是获得到了真理的人。
English: Therefore, Zi Yu sank into the river, Han Bo buried into the square hole, Wen Chu buried into the loess, and Shi An used the hemp rope. These four are all people who have obtained the truth.

古文：若从四子而游，则平生之志得矣。
现代文：如果与这四位交往，则平生的心意就自由了。
English: If I can follow these four gentlemen, then my lifelong ambition will be fulfilled.

古文：然积习生常，难卒改革，一朝肆志，傥不见从。
现代文：然而积习形成了常规，难以一下子革除，一旦任凭意志，或许并不听从。
English: But many years of customs have been passed down for a long time, funeral rules are difficult to change at once, and suddenly I have to fully comply with my own ideas, I am worried that my loved ones will not obey me out of love.

古文：今欲翦截烦厚，务存俭易，进不裸尸，退异常俗，不伤存者之念，有合至人之道。
现代文：现在我想应该改革繁厚，务存简易，激进并不裸露尸体，退守也不同于习俗，不伤活人的心，合乎圣人的道。
English: Now I think that reform should be abundant, preservation should be simple, radical does not expose the corpse, retreat is also different from the custom, does not hurt the heart of the living, and conforms to the way of the saints.

古文：且张奂止用幅巾，王肃唯盥手足，范冉敛毕便葬，爰珍无设筵几，文度故舟爲棺，子廉牛车载柩，叔起诫绝坟陇，康成使无卜吉。
现代文：况且张奂只用方巾，王肃只洗手脚，范冉殓罢就葬，爰珍不设筵席，文度破船作为棺材，子廉牛车拉着灵柩，叔起告诫不起坟垅，康成让人不要卜吉。
English: Moreover, Zhang Xuan only used a square scarf, Wang Su only washed his hands and feet, Fan Ranjun was buried as soon as he was dead, Yu Zhen did not set up a funeral banquet, Wen Du broke the ship as a coffin, Zillian ox cart pulled the coffin, Uncle Xi warned him not to dig a grave, Kang Cheng let people not pray.

古文：此数公者，尚或如之，况爲吾人，而尚华泰。
现代文：这几位贤人，尚且这样来办，何况是我们这些人，而却要豪华。
English: For these wise men to do this, and for the rest of us to do the same, is a luxury.

古文：今欲髣佛景行，以爲轨则。
现代文：现在想要仿照大道，作为规则。
English: Now I want to follow the example of the boulevard as a rule.

古文：气绝不须复魂，盥漱而敛。
现代文：气绝了不需要复魂，洗漱一下便可盛殓。
English: If you are out of breath, you don't need to replenish your soul. Just wash and refresh yourself, and you'll be fine.

古文：以一千钱市成棺，单故裙衫，衣巾枕履。
现代文：用一千钱买个现成的棺材，旧的单衣裙衫，衣巾枕头鞋子。
English: With a thousand money to buy a ready-made coffin, old singlet, towel, pillow and shoes.

古文：此外送往之具，棺中常物，一不得有所施。
现代文：此外送葬的用品，棺材中的常规物品，一样也不要使用。
English: In addition, funeral supplies, such as the usual items in a coffin, should not be used either.

古文：世多信李、彭之言，可谓惑矣。
现代文：社会上的人大多相信关于李耳、彭祖的说法，可以说是很糊涂的。
English: Many people in the world believe in the sayings of Peng Zu and Li Er, which can be regarded as being confused.

古文：余以孔、释爲师，差无此惑。
现代文：我以孔子、释迦为师，基本上没有这种迷惑。
English: With Confucius and Buddha as my teachers, I basically don't have this kind of confusion.

古文：敛讫，载以露车，归于旧山，随得一地，地足爲坎，坎足容棺。
现代文：装殓以后，就用没有帷盖的露车拉上，回到故乡，随便得到一块土地，土地足够挖个墓穴，墓穴足够装下棺材。
English: After decorating, they pull up in a trolley without a curtain, go back to their hometown, and get a piece of land at random. The land is enough to dig a grave, and the grave is enough to fit a coffin.

古文：不须砖甓，不劳封树，勿设祭飨，勿置几筵。
现代文：不需要砖瓦，用不着种树，不要设置祭品，不要陈列酒席。
English: There is no need for bricks and tiles, no need to plant trees, no need to set up offerings, no need to display banquets.

古文：其蒸尝继嗣，言象所绝，事止馀身，无伤世教。
现代文：平常进行祭祀，言语要恰如其分，事情要限于自身，不要损害世间的教化。 
English: Perform the ritual as usual, the words should be appropriate, the matter should be limited to oneself, and do not damage the enlightenment of the world.

古文：初，吁之疾，歊尽心救疗，及卒哀伤，爲之诔，又着悲友赋以序哀情。
现代文：起初，刘讠于有病，刘粲尽心救治，等死了以后，十分哀伤，为他写了一篇诔文，又写了一篇《悲友赋》以表达自己的哀情。
English: At first, Liu Xuanyu was ill, and Liu Xuan tried his best to treat him. After he died, he was very sad and wrote an obituary for him, and wrote a "sad friend" to express his sorrow.

古文：忽有老人无因而至，谓曰： 君心力坚猛，必破死生；但运会所至，不得久留一方耳。 
现代文：一次忽然有一个老人没有原因地到来，对他说： 您意志坚强，力量勇猛，必定能破去死生；但是由于命运的关系，不能长久地留在一方。 
English: Suddenly, an old man arrived without any reason and said to him, "You are strong-willed and powerful, and you can surely defeat death and life. However, due to the relationship of fate, you cannot stay away for a long time.

古文：弹指而去。
现代文：转眼走了。
English: He left in the blink of an eye.

古文：歊心知其异，试遣寻之，莫知其所。
现代文：刘粲心里知道他很奇异，想试着派人去寻找他，却不知道他的去处。
English: Liu Ye knew in his heart that he was very strange and wanted to try to send someone to look for him, but he didn't know where he was going.

古文：于是信心弥笃。
现代文：于是信心更加坚定。
English: As a result, confidence has become more firm.

古文：既而寝疾，恐贻母忧，乃自言笑，勉进汤药。
现代文：很快自己又生了病，恐怕让母亲担忧，便自己有说有笑，尽力服用汤药。
English: Soon she fell ill again, and afraid of worrying her mother, she talked and laughed to herself and tried her best to take the herbal medicine.

古文：谓兄霁、杳曰： 两兄禄仕，足伸供养。
现代文：他对哥哥刘霁、刘杳说： 两位兄长做官有薪水，足够供养母亲。
English: He said to his elder brothers Liu Hui and Liu Hui: The two elder brothers are government officials and have enough salary to support their mother.

古文：歊之归泉，复何所憾。
现代文：我即使命归黄泉，又有什么遗憾！
English: Even if I go to hell, I have no regrets!

古文：愿深割无益之悲。 
现代文：希望一定要割舍无用的伤悲。 
English: Hope must abandon useless sadness.

古文：十八年，年三十二卒。
现代文：天监十八年，三十二岁去世。
English: He died at the age of thirty-two in the eighteenth year of Tianjun.

古文：始沙门释宝志遇歊于兴皇寺，惊起曰： 隐居学道，清净登仙。 
现代文：开始的时候，和尚释宝志在兴皇寺遇到了刘粲，惊异地站起来说： 隐居学道，清净登仙。 
English: At the beginning, the monk Shi Baozhi met Liu Yao at Xingwang Temple, stood up in surprise and said: "Study in seclusion, ascend to heaven with purity."

古文：如此三说。
现代文：这样连说了三次。
English: He said it three times in a row.

古文：歊未死之春，有人爲其庭中栽柿，歊谓兄子弇曰： 吾不见此实，尔其勿言。 
现代文：刘粲还没有死的那年春天，有人给他在院子里栽了柿树。刘粲对他哥哥的儿子刘粲说： 我将看不到这棵树上的果实了，你不要对外面说起。 
English: In the spring of the year when Liu Yao was still alive, someone planted a persimmon tree for him in the yard. Liu Yao said to his brother's son Liu Yao: "I won't be able to see the fruit on this tree. Don't talk about it to the outside world."

古文：至秋而亡，人以爲知命。
现代文：到秋天就死了，人们都认为他知命。
English: He died in the fall, and people thought he took his own life.

古文：亲故诔其行迹，諡曰贞节处士。
现代文：亲戚旧友写诔文追念他的行迹。谥号为贞节处士。
English: Relatives and old friends wrote eulogies to remember his deeds. His nickname was "Chastity Officer."

古文：先是有太中大夫琅邪王敬胤以天监八年卒，遗命： 不得设复魄旌旐，一芦笰藉下，一枚覆上。
现代文：在此以前，有太中大夫琅笽人王敬胤在天监八年去世，遗嘱说： 不能设复魂的旗子，用芦席一领垫在下面，一领盖在上面。
English: Prior to this, there was a Tai Zhong Dafu (Grand Vice-Minister of the Middle Court) Wang Jingyin, who died in the eighth year of the Heavenly Prison. His will said, "It is not possible to set up a soul-recovering banner. Use a reed seat with one collar padded below and one collar covered above.

古文：吾气绝便沐浴，篮舆载尸，还忠侯大夫隧中。
现代文：我气绝后就进行沐浴，用竹轿抬着尸体，送回到忠侯大夫墓道当中。
English: After I was exhausted, I took a bath, carried the body with a bamboo palanquin, and sent it back to the middle of the Zhonghou Doctor Cemetery.

古文：若不行此，则戮吾尸于九泉。 
现代文：如果你们不照这样办的话，就斩杀我的尸体于九泉之下吧！ 
English: If you don't do it this way, just chop off my body and throw it in the river!

古文：敬胤外甥许慧诏因阮研以闻。
现代文：王敬胤的外甥许慧诏通过阮研报知朝廷。
English: Wang Jingyan's nephew Xu Huizhao informed the imperial court through Ruan Yan.

古文：诏曰： 敬胤令其息崇素，气绝便沐浴，藉以二芦笰，凿地周身，归葬忠侯。
现代文：诏书说： 王敬胤让他的儿子王崇素，气绝就进行沐浴，铺盖两领草席，挖地容下身体，归葬在忠侯墓中。
English: The edict said: Wang Jingyin let his son, Wang Chongsu, take a bath when he died, covered his two collars with straw mats, dug a grave for his body, and buried it in the tomb of a loyal vassal.

古文：此达生之格言，贤夫玉匣石椁远矣。
现代文：这是一种通达人生的格言，胜过玉匣石棺实在很远。
English: This is a kind of life maxim, which is far superior to the jade box sarcophagus.

古文：然子于父命，亦有所从有所不从。
现代文：然而儿子对于父亲的命令，也可以有所听从、有所不从。
English: However, a son can either obey or disobey his father's orders.

古文：今崇素若信遗意，土周浅薄，属辟不施，一朝见侵狐鼠，戮尸已甚。
现代文：现在王崇素如果信守遗志，埋土比较浅薄，不建辅助设施，一旦被狐狸老鼠侵害，比斩杀尸体还要厉害。
English: Now, if Wang Chongsu adheres to his last wishes, the buried soil is relatively shallow, and no auxiliary facilities are built. Once it is encroached by foxes and mice, it is even more terrible than chopping up corpses.

古文：父可以训子，子亦不可行之。
现代文：父亲可以教训儿子，儿子仍不可以实行。
English: The father may teach the son, but the son is still not allowed to practice.

古文：外内易棺，此自奉亲之情，藉土而葬，亦通人之意。
现代文：内外修治棺材，这自然是侍奉父亲的情意，借土埋葬，也是通达人士的心情。
English: The inside and outside of the coffin are repaired, which is naturally the desire to serve the father, to borrow soil for burial, and is also the mood of those who are knowledgeable.

古文：宜两舍两取，以达父子之志。
现代文：应该两边各有取舍，以表达父亲和儿子两人的心意。
English: There should be give and take on both sides to express the heart of both father and son.

古文：勿设飨祀，无求继嗣。 
现代文：棺材容下身体，挖土盛下外棺，不用牲畜来祭奠，殡殓时穿当时的衣服。
English: The body is placed in the coffin, the earth is dug up and placed in an outer coffin, no livestock is used to pay tribute, and the clothes of the time are worn during the funeral.

古文：歊从而行之。宗人至友，相与刊石立铭，諡曰玄贞处士。善明，怀珍族弟也。
现代文：一来可以表达哀悼的心情，二来可以与家中情况相称。礼教不要违背，生死不要受辱，这样显然是比较妥善的。 刘善明，是刘怀珍的族弟。
English: On the one hand, it can express the mood of mourning, and on the other hand, it can be commensurate with the situation at home. Don't violate etiquette, don't be humiliated in life and death, this is obviously more appropriate. Liu Shanming is Liu Huaizhen's younger brother.

古文：父怀人，仕宋爲齐、北海二郡太守。
现代文：父亲刘怀人，在宋朝做官为齐、北海二郡太守。
English: His father, Liu Huai, was an official in the Song Dynasty and the governor of two counties in the North Sea.

古文：元嘉末，青州饥荒，人相食。
现代文：元嘉末年，青州发生饥荒，人与人彼此相食。
English: In the last years of Yuan Jia, a famine occurred in Qingzhou, and people ate each other.

古文：善明家有积粟，躬食饘粥，开仓以救，乡里多获全济，百姓呼其家田爲续命田。
现代文：刘善明家里有积存的谷子，自己只吃稠粥，开仓救灾，乡民有很多获得了活命和救助，百姓们都把他家的田地称为续命田。
English: Liu Shanming has stored millet in his home, he only eats thick porridge, opened a warehouse for disaster relief, many villagers have been saved and rescued, and the people have called his family's fields "life-sustaining fields."

古文：善明少而静处读书，刺史杜骥闻名候之，辞不相见。
现代文：刘善明少年时期安静读书，刺史杜骥听说了他的名字，等候要见他，而他却推辞不见。
English: When Liu Shanming was a young boy, he read quietly. Zhi Shi Du Yao heard his name and waited to see him, but he did not show up.

古文：年四十，刺史刘道隆辟爲中从事。
现代文：四十岁的时候，刺史刘道隆聘他为中从事。
English: At the age of forty, Liu Daolong hired him to be a middle school teacher.

古文：怀人谓善明曰： 我已知汝立身，复欲见汝立官也。 
现代文：刘怀人对刘善明说： 我已经知道了你的立身，还想见到你的立官。 
English: Liu Huai said to Liu Shanming: "I have already known your standing, and I still want to see you become an official.

古文：善明应辟，仍举秀才。
现代文：刘善明应聘了，又举他为秀才。
English: Liu Shanming applied for the job, and he was praised as an outstanding talent.

古文：宋孝武见其策强直，甚异之。
现代文：宋孝武帝见到他的策论直率有力，感到他十分奇异。
English: Emperor Song Xiaowu saw his straightforward and powerful strategy and thought he was very strange.

古文：泰始初，徐州刺史薛安都反，青州刺史沈文秀应之。
现代文：泰始初年，徐州刺史薛安都反叛，青州刺史沈文秀响应他。
English: In the first year of the reign of Emperor Taizhi, Xuzhou Prince Xue Andu rebelled, and Qingzhou Prince Shen Wenxiu responded to him.

古文：时州居东阳城，善明家在郭内，不能自拔。
现代文：当时州治在东阳城，刘善明家在城郭以内，不能自己逃出。
English: At that time, the prefectural government was in Dongyang City, and Liu Shanming's family was within the city walls, unable to escape on their own.

古文：伯父弥之诡说文秀求自效，文秀使领军主张灵庆等五千人援安都。
现代文：他的伯父刘弥之虚假地对沈文秀说自己请求效力，沈文秀让他率领军主张灵庆等五千人增援安都。
English: His uncle Liu Yizhi falsely told Shen Wenxiu that he was asking for effectiveness. Shen Wenxiu let him lead the army to advocate Lingqing and other five thousand people to reinforce Andu.

古文：弥之出门，密谓部曲曰： 始免祸坑矣。 
现代文：刘弥之出门以后，秘密地对部下说： 这才逃出祸坑了。 
English: After Liu Yizhi left home, he secretly said to his subordinates: This is the only way out of the pit.

古文：行至下邳，乃背文秀，善明从伯怀恭爲北海太守，据郡相应。
现代文：走到下邳，便背弃了沈文秀，刘善明的堂伯刘怀恭为北海太守，占据郡城与他相应。
English: When he came to the Lower Yangtze River, he turned his back on Shen Wenshu. Liu Shanming's cousin Liu Huaiqong became the governor of the North Sea and occupied the county seat corresponding to him.

古文：善明密契，收集门宗部曲，得三千人。
现代文：刘善明秘密相约，收集了门宗部下，得到三千人。
English: Liu Shanming made a secret appointment, gathered the subordinates of Menzong, and obtained three thousand people.

古文：夜斩关奔北海。
现代文：夜间斩了关门的守将投奔北海。
English: The guards, who closed the gate at night, will go to the North Sea.

古文：族兄乘人又聚衆勃海以应朝廷。
现代文：他的族兄刘乘人又在渤海聚集兵众呼应朝廷。
English: His elder brother Liu Xianren also gathered soldiers in the Bohai Sea in response to the imperial court.

古文：而弥之寻爲薛安都所杀，明帝赠青州刺史。
现代文：而刘弥之等人不久被薛安都所杀，明帝追赠他为青州刺史。
English: However, Liu Yizhi and others were all killed by Xue An soon after, and Emperor Ming gave him the title of "Qingzhou's history" posthumously.

古文：以乘人爲冀州刺史，善明爲北海太守，除尚书金部郎。
现代文：任命刘乘人为冀州刺史，刘善明为北海太守。又任命他为尚书金部郎。
English: He appointed Liu Rongren as the historian of Jizhou and Liu Shanming as the governor of the North Sea. He also appointed him as the secretary of the Ministry of Finance.

古文：乘人病卒，仍以善明爲冀州刺史。
现代文：刘乘人生病去世，便以刘善明为冀州刺史。
English: When Liu Xianren died of illness, Liu Shanming was chosen to write the history of Jizhou.

古文：文秀既降，除善明海陵太守，郡境边海，无树木，善明课人种榆檟杂果，遂获其利。
现代文：沈文秀投降以后，任命刘善明为海陵太守，郡的边境处在海边，没有树木，刘善明让人种植榆、茶等各种果树，于是获得了利益。
English: After the surrender of Shen Wenshu, Liu Shanming was appointed as the governor of Hailing. The border of the county was on the seashore, and there were no trees. Liu Shanming had people plant all kinds of fruit trees such as gourd and tea, and thus gained profits.

古文：还爲直合将军。
现代文：还京后为直阁将军。
English: After returning to Kyoto, he became General Naokaku.

古文：五年，魏克青州，善明母在焉，移置代郡。
现代文：泰始五年，魏朝攻克了青州，刘善明的母亲在那里，把她转移到了代郡。
English: In the first five years of the Tai Dynasty, the Wei Dynasty conquered Qingzhou. Liu Shanming's mother was there, and she was transferred to Dai County.

古文：善明布衣蔬食，哀戚如持丧，明帝每见，爲之叹息。
现代文：刘善明穿布衣吃蔬菜，悲哀得像守丧一样，明帝每次见到，都为他而叹息。
English: Liu Shanming wore cloth and ate vegetables. He was as sad as a mourner. Every time Emperor Ming saw him, he would sigh for him.

古文：转巴西梓潼二郡太守。
现代文：后来转为巴西、梓桐二郡太守。
English: Later, he was transferred to Brazil and became the governor of Azusa County.

古文：善明以母在魏，不愿西行，泣涕固请，见许。
现代文：刘善明因为母亲在魏朝，不愿意西行，流着眼泪坚持请求，得到了准许。
English: Liu Shanming, who did not want to go west because his mother was in the Wei Dynasty, insisted on his request with tears and was granted permission.

古文：朝廷多哀善明心事，元徽初遣北使，朝议令善明举人。
现代文：朝廷官员大多同情刘善明的心事，元徽初年派人出使北方，朝中议论让刘善明举荐人选。
English: Most of the court officials sympathized with Liu Shanming's feelings. In the first year of the Yuan Dynasty, they sent an envoy to the North to discuss with the North and let Liu Shanming recommend a candidate.

古文：善明举州乡北平田惠绍使魏，赎母还。
现代文：刘善明推荐州乡北平人田惠绍出使魏朝，把他母亲赎了回来。
English: Liu Shanming recommended that Tian Huishao, a Beiping person from Zhouzhou Township, send an envoy to the Wei Dynasty to redeem his mother.

古文：时宋后废帝新立，群臣执政，善明独事齐高帝，委身归诚。
现代文：当时宋朝的后废帝刚刚登基，群臣执政，刘善明独独侍奉齐高帝，委身效忠。
English: At that time, the deposed emperor of the Song Dynasty had just ascended to the throne, and a group of courtiers were in power. Liu Shanming served Emperor Qigong single-handedly and devoted himself to loyalty.

古文：出爲西海太守，行青冀二州刺史。
现代文：出京担任西海太守，行青、冀二州刺史。
English: He went to Beijing to serve as the governor-general of the West Sea, and made history in Xingqing and Jizhou.

古文：善明从弟僧副与善明俱知名于乡里，泰始初，魏攻淮北，僧副将部曲二千人东依海岛。
现代文：刘善明的堂弟刘僧副与刘善明都在家乡很知名。泰始初年，魏朝进攻淮北，刘僧副率领部下二千人东面依凭海岛。
English: Liu Zengfei and Liu Zengming's cousin Liu Zengfei were both well-known in their hometown. In the first year of the reign of Emperor Taizhi, the Wei Dynasty attacked Huaibei, and Liu Zengfei led his two thousand subordinates to the east of Yili Island.

古文：齐高帝在淮阴，壮其所爲，召与相见，引爲安成王抚军参军。
现代文：齐高帝在淮阴，认为他的作为很豪壮，召他相见，任用他为安成王抚军参军。
English: In Huaiyin, Emperor Qigong thought that his actions were very heroic, summoned him to meet, and appointed him to join the Ancheng Wangfu army.

古文：后废帝肆暴，高帝忧恐，常令僧副微行，伺察声论。
现代文：后废帝放肆暴虐，高帝忧虑恐惧，常常让刘僧副化装出行，侦察风声。
English: After the dethronement of the tyrannical emperor, Emperor Gao, worried and fearful, often let Liu Xiang travel in disguise to investigate rumors.

古文：使密告善明及东海太守垣崇祖，使动魏兵。
现代文：让他秘密告诉刘善明和东海太守垣崇祖，使他们扰动魏军。
English: Let him secretly tell Liu Shanming and the East Sea governor, Waki Chongzu, so that they can disturb the Wei army.

古文：善明劝静以待之，高帝纳焉。
现代文：刘善明劝他安静地等待时机，高帝采纳了。
English: Liu Shanming advised him to quietly wait for the right time, and Gao Di accepted.

古文：废帝见杀，善明爲高帝骠骑谘议、南东海太守，行南徐州事。
现代文：废帝被杀，刘善明做高帝的骠骑咨议、南东海太守，兼管南徐州事务。
English: The deposed emperor was killed, and Liu Shanming became Emperor Gao's riding adviser, the governor of the South East China Sea, and also in charge of the affairs of South Xuzhou.

古文：沈攸之反，高帝深以爲忧。
现代文：沈攸之反叛，高帝感到非常担忧。
English: Emperor Gao was very worried about Shen Yu's rebellion.

古文：善明献计曰： 沈攸之控引八州，纵情蓄敛，苞藏贼志，于焉十年。
现代文：刘善明献计说： 沈攸之控制着八个州，纵情搜刮，包藏贼志，已有十年。
English: Liu Shanming said: Shen Youzhi has been controlling eight states, indulging in extortion and stealing, and has been a thief for ten years.

古文：性既险躁，才非持重，起逆累旬，迟回不进，岂应有所待也？
现代文：他性情阴险急躁，才能不可担当重任，叛逆起兵已经几十天，徘徊不进，难道该是有所等待么？
English: His temperament is insidious and impetuous, he is not able to take on heavy responsibilities, he has been a rebel soldier for dozens of days, and he has not progressed. Is there something to wait for?

古文：一则闇于兵机，二则人情离怨，三则有掣肘之患，四则天夺其魄。
现代文：一则是他不懂兵机，二则是人心怨恨，三则是他有掣肘的忧虑，四则是天夺了他的胆魄。
English: On the one hand, he does not understand the military machine, on the other hand, he is hated by the people, on the third hand, he is worried about his limitations, and on the fourth hand, the heavens have robbed him of his courage.

古文：本疑其轻速，掩袭未备；今六师齐奋，诸侯同举，此已笼之鸟耳。 
现代文：本来怀疑他会迅速推进，攻其不备；现在朝廷六师一齐奋起，诸侯共同举兵，他已经成为笼中之鸟了。 
English: Originally, it was suspected that he would advance quickly and attack the enemy unprepared; now, the six divisions of the imperial court have risen together, and the princes have raised troops together. He has become a bird in a cage.

古文：事平，高帝召善明还都，谓曰： 卿策沈攸之，虽张良、陈平适如此耳。 
现代文：事情平定后，高帝召刘善明返回京城，对他说： 卿分析沈攸之，即使张良、陈平也只能是这样罢了。 
English: After the matter was settled, Emperor Gao summoned Liu Shanming to return to Beijing and said to him: "Your analysis of Shen Youzhi is correct, even Zhang Liang and Chen Ping can only be like this.

古文：仍迁太尉右司马。
现代文：于是调他担任太尉右司马。
English: As a result, he was transferred to the post of Second Lieutenant of the Right Division.

古文：齐台建，爲右卫将军，辞疾不拜。
现代文：齐台建立，他担任右将军，因为疾病推辞没有上任。
English: After the establishment of Qidai, he served as the right general, but did not take office due to illness.

古文：司空褚彦回谓善明曰： 高尚之事，乃卿从来素意，今朝廷方相委待，讵得便学松、乔邪。 
现代文：司空褚彦回对刘善明说： 高尚的事业，本是您历来的心意，现在朝廷正相委任，哪能就学隐士赤松子与王子乔呢！ 
English: Sikuo Shuhiko replied to Liu Shanming, saying, "It has always been your intention to start a noble cause, but now the imperial court is appointing you, how can you study the hermit Akamatsu and Prince Qiao?

古文：善明答曰： 我本无宦情，既逢知己，所以戮力驱驰。
现代文：刘善明回答说： 我本来就没有做官的兴趣，既然遇到了知己，所以奋力奔走。
English: Liu Shanming replied: I originally had no interest in being an official, but since I met a confidant, I've been running hard.

古文：天地廓清，朝廷济济，鄙吝既申，不敢昧于富贵矣。 
现代文：天地已经廓清，朝廷人才济济，我的怀抱已经实现，不敢再贪求富贵。 
English: Heaven and earth have been purified, the talent of the imperial court is abundant, my embrace has been realized, and I dare not covet wealth.

古文：高帝践阼，以善明勋诚，欲与之禄，召谓曰： 淮南近畿，国之形胜，非亲贤不居，卿与我卧理之。 
现代文：高帝登基，因为刘善明有功而且忠诚，打算给他俸禄，就召来刘善明对他说： 淮南接近京城，是国家的形胜之地，非亲近的贤臣不能管理这里，卿给我高卧治理这里吧！ 
English: When Emperor Gao ascended to the throne, because Liu Shanming was meritorious and loyal, and because he planned to give him a salary, he summoned Liu Shanming and said to him: Huainan is close to Beijing, it is a place of national significance, and wise men who are not close cannot manage here. Sir, give me a high-lying governance here!

古文：乃代明帝爲淮南宣城二郡太守。
现代文：于是他便代替明帝担任了淮南、宣城二郡的太守。
English: Therefore, he replaced Emperor Ming as the governor of Huainan and Xuancheng counties.

古文：遣使拜授，封新淦伯。
现代文：又派遣使者前往授爵，封他为新淦伯。
English: He also sent an envoy to confer a knighthood, naming him the new Duke.

古文：善明至郡，上表陈事凡一十一条：其一以爲 天地开创，宜存问远方，广宣慈泽 。
现代文：刘善明到了郡上，上表言事共十一条：其一认为 天地开创，应该慰问远方，广泛地传扬皇上的恩泽 。
English: When Liu Shanming arrived in Guzheng, he made a total of eleven statements: First, he believed that heaven and earth were created, and that it was necessary to offer condolences to distant lands and widely spread the emperor's grace.

古文：其二以爲 京都远近所归，宜遣医药，问其疾苦，年九十以上及六疾不能自存者，随宜量赐 。
现代文：其二认为 京都所属的远近地方，应该派发医生和药物，慰问疾苦，年龄九十以上以及病重不能治疗的，应该酌情赏赐 。
English: The second is that doctors and medicines should be distributed to areas near and far from Kyoto, and people over the age of 90 who are unable to receive medical treatment should be rewarded as appropriate.

古文：其三以爲 宋氏赦令，蒙原者寡。
现代文：其三认为 宋代的赦令，真正得到宽大的很少。
English: The third is that the amnesty decrees of the Song Dynasty were rarely truly lenient.

古文：愚谓今下赦书，宜令事实相副 。
现代文：我认为现在下赦书，应该让事实与它相合 。
English: I think that now that the pardon has been issued, the facts should be brought into line with it.

古文：其四以爲 刘昶犹存，容能送死境上，诸城宜应严备 。
现代文：其四认为 刘昶还在，或许会到边境上来送死，各城应该严密守备 。
English: A fourth thought that Liu Ye was still alive and might come to the border to be sent to his death, and that all cities should be on high alert.

古文：其五以爲 宜除宋氏大明以来苛政细制，以崇简易 。
现代文：其五认为 应该废除宋朝大明以来的苛细政法条令，尊崇简易 。
English: The fifth thought that the strict political and legal regulations since the Song Dynasty and the Ming Dynasty should be abolished, and that simplicity should be respected.

古文：其六以爲 凡诸土木之费，且可权停 。
现代文：其六认为 凡是各种土木建筑开支，可以暂且停止 。
English: The sixth is that all kinds of civil construction expenditure can be temporarily stopped.

古文：其七以爲 帝子王女，宜崇俭约 。
现代文：其七认为 帝子王女，应该崇尚简约 。
English: A seventh said that princesses should be simple.

古文：其八以爲 宜诏百官及府州郡县，各贡谠言，以弘广唐、虞之美 。
现代文：其八认为 应该诏令百官以及府州郡县，各自贡献正直言论，以弘扬唐尧、虞舜的美德 。
English: The eighth thought that it was necessary to order the officials of prefectures, counties, and counties to make their own contributions of honest speech to promote the virtues of Tang Dynasty and Yu Dynasty.

古文：其九以爲 忠贞孝悌，宜擢以殊阶；清俭苦节，应授以政务 。
现代文：其九认为 忠贞孝悌，应该以特殊的办法提拔；清苦节俭，应该授给他政务 。
English: Nine of them believed that the most loyal and filial should be promoted in a special way; the most pious and frugal should be given government affairs.

古文：其十以爲 革命惟始，宜择才北使 。
现代文：其十认为 革命成功初始，应该挑选人才出使北国 。
English: The tenth thought that since the revolution had begun successfully, it was necessary to select talented people to be sent to the North.

古文：其十一以爲 交州险敻，要荒之表，宋末政苛，遂至怨叛。
现代文：其十一认为 交州险要而遥远，在荒原以外，宋末政治苛刻，以至怨恨叛变。
English: The eleventh thought that Jiaozhou was dangerous and far away, and outside the wasteland, the politics at the end of the Song Dynasty were harsh, so much so that they resented the rebellion.

古文：今宜怀以恩德，未应远劳将士，摇动边甿 。
现代文：现在应该以恩德进行怀柔，不应劳累将士远征，搅动边民 。
English: Now is the time to use grace to win hearts and minds, instead of exhausting our soldiers with expeditions and agitating the border residents.

古文：又撰贤圣杂语奏之，托以讽谏。上优诏答之。
现代文：又撰写了《贤圣杂语》上奏，托辞进行讽谏，皇上用优厚的诏书进行了答复。
English: He also wrote "Xian Sheng Zangguo" (Miscellaneous Sayings of the Wise and Sublime) for the prelude, using the excuse of being sarcastic, to which the emperor replied with a generous imperial edict.

古文：又谏起宣阳门，表陈： 宜明守宰赏罚，立学校，制齐礼，开宾馆以接邻国。 
现代文：刘善明又提议建筑宣阳门，他上表说： 应该明确地方长官的赏罚，建立学校，制定齐朝的礼仪，开设宾馆以接待邻国。 
English: Liu Shanming also proposed the construction of Xuanyang Gate. He said on the table: It is necessary to clarify the rewards and punishments of local governors, establish schools, formulate the etiquette of Qi Dynasty, and open a hotel to receive neighboring countries.

古文：上答曰： 夫赏罚以惩守宰，饰馆以待遐荒，皆古之善政，吾所宜勉。
现代文：皇上答复说： 用赏罚以警戒地方长官，修饰宾馆以等待远国，都是古代的善政，是我应该努力做到的。
English: The emperor replied, "Using rewards and punishments to alert local governors, and decorating hotels to wait for distant countries, are all ancient good governance. I should work hard to achieve this.

古文：更撰新礼，或非易制。
现代文：重新创造新的礼节，可能不容易编制。
English: Re-creating a new etiquette may not be easy.

古文：国学之美，已敕公卿。
现代文：国学的美好，已经下令告诉了公卿。
English: The nobility has been ordered to be told about the beauty of Chinese studies.

古文：宣阳门今敕停。
现代文：宣阳门现在下令停建。
English: Xuanyang Gate has now ordered a halt to construction.

古文：寡德多阙，思复有闻。 
现代文：我会有很多缺失，很想再听到您的建议。 
English: I'm going to be missing a lot and I'd love to hear from you again.

古文：善明身长七尺九寸，质素不好声色，所居茅斋，斧木而已。
现代文：刘善明身高七尺九寸，品质朴素不喜欢声色，他所住的茅斋，只是用些斧子砍的木头。
English: Liu Shanming is seven feet nine inches tall. He is simple and does not like the tone of voice. The hut he lives in is just wood hewn with axes.

古文：床榻几案，不加划削。
现代文：床和桌椅，都不加刨削。
English: Neither the bed nor the tables and chairs are planed.

古文：少立节行，常云： 在家当孝，爲吏当清，子孙楷栻足矣。 
现代文：从少年时就立下了节行，他常说： 在家应当孝顺，为官应当清廉，可以作为子孙的楷模就行了。 
English: Since he was a young boy, he has set up the festival. He often said: You should be filial at home, you should be incorruptible as a government official, and you can be a role model for your children and grandchildren.

古文：及累爲州郡，颇黩财贿，崔祖思怪而问之，答曰： 管子云，鲍叔知我。 
现代文：等他多次做了州郡长官，颇多贪污纳贿，崔祖思感到奇怪，便问他怎么回事，他回答说： 管子说过，鲍叔了解我。 
English: When he became the governor of the state and county many times and took bribes, Cui Zu Si felt strange and asked him what was going on. He replied, "The pipe said that Uncle Bao knew me.

古文：因流涕曰： 方寸乱矣，岂暇爲廉。 
现代文：于是流着眼泪说： 方寸已经乱了，哪有闲暇廉洁！ 
English: Then, with tears streaming down his face, he said, "The balance has been upset. There is no such thing as leisure and cleanliness!"

古文：所得金钱皆以赎母。
现代文：所得的金钱都用来赎回他的母亲。
English: All the money was used to ransom his mother.

古文：及母至，清节方峻。
现代文：等他母亲回来，清廉的节操才严峻起来。
English: It wasn't until his mother returned that the chastity became a serious issue.

古文：所历之职，廉简不烦，俸禄散之亲友。
现代文：所经历的职务，廉洁简明而不烦琐，他的俸禄都散发给了亲友。
English: The duties he performed were simple and uncomplicated, and his salary was distributed among his relatives and friends.

古文：与崔祖思友善，祖思出爲青冀二州，善明遗书敍旧，因相勖以忠概。
现代文：他和崔祖思非常要好，崔祖思出京为青、冀二州官长，刘善明写信跟他叙旧，于是以忠诚相勉励。
English: He and Cui Zu Si were very good friends. Cui Zu Si was a young man when he left Beijing, and he was the governor of two provinces in Hebei Province. Liu Shanming wrote to him to tell him about the old days, so they encouraged each other with loyalty.

古文：及闻祖思死，恸哭，仍得病。
现代文：等听说崔祖思死去，伤心痛哭，便得了病。
English: When she heard that Choi Zu Si had died, she cried bitterly and fell ill.

古文：建元二年卒，遗命薄殡。
现代文：建元二年去世，遗命要实行薄葬。
English: He died two years after the founding of the People's Republic of China, and it was decreed that he should be buried in a shallow grave.

古文：赠左将军、豫州刺史，諡烈伯。
现代文：追赠他为左将军、豫州刺史，谥号为烈伯。
English: He was posthumously awarded the titles of General of the Left and Henan Provincial Historian, and his posthumous name was Liu Bo.

古文：子涤嗣。
现代文：他的儿子刘涤承袭了爵位。
English: His son Liu Ying inherited the title.

古文：善明家无遗储，唯有书八千卷。
现代文：刘善明家中没有遗留的积蓄，只有书八千卷。
English: Liu Shanming's family has no remaining savings, only eight thousand volumes of books.

古文：高帝闻其清贫，赐涤家葛塘屯谷五百斛，曰： 葛屯亦吾之垣下，令后世知其见异。 
现代文：高帝听说他家清贫，赐给刘涤家葛塘的库存谷子五百斛，说： 葛塘的库存也在我的官署之下，要让后世知道他的见识不凡。 
English: When Emperor Gao heard that his family was poor, he gave Liu Jia's family five hundred mu of grain, saying, "The inventory of Guetang is also under my government, and I want future generations to know his extraordinary insight.

