古文：宋申锡，字庆臣。
现代文：宋申锡字庆臣。
English: Song Shenxi is the pen name of Qingcheng.

古文：祖素，父叔夜。
现代文：祖父宋素，父宋叔夜。
English: His grandfather was Song Su, and his father was Song Shuya.

古文：申锡少孤贫，有文学。
现代文：宋申锡从小父母亡故，家境贫寒，博学能文。
English: Song Shenxi lost his parents when he was a child, his family was poor, and he was erudite.

古文：登进士第，释褐秘书省校书郎。
现代文：登进士第，授官秘书省校书郎。
English: He was promoted to the rank of scholar, and became the secretary of the provincial school.

古文：韦贯之罢相，出湖南，辟为从事。
现代文：韦贯之罢相，出朝至湖南赴任，召宋申锡为从事。
English: Wei Gangzhi quit the position of the prime minister, went to Hunan Province to take up the post, and summoned Song Shenxi to take up the post.

古文：其后累佐使府。
现代文：其后屡在使府做僚属。
English: After that, he repeatedly worked as a subordinate in the legation.

古文：长庆初，拜监察御史。
现代文：长庆初，拜监察御史。
English: At the beginning of the Qing Dynasty, he was appointed as the inspector general of history.

古文：二年，迁起居舍人。
现代文：二年，调任起居舍人。
English: Two years later, he was transferred to the position of a housemaster.

古文：宝历二年，转礼部员外郎，寻充翰林侍讲学士。
现代文：宝历二年，转任礼部员外郎，随即充任翰林侍讲学士。
English: In the second year of the lunar calendar, he was transferred to the position of the member of the etiquette club, and then he was appointed as the assistant lecturer of Hanlin.

古文：申锡始自策名，及在朝行，清慎介洁，不趋党与。
现代文：宋申锡从入仕起，直到在朝廷任职，始终清廉正直，不交朋结党。
English: From the time of his appointment until his appointment to the imperial court, Song Shensi was always clean and honest, and did not make friends or join parties.

古文：当长庆、宝历之间，时风嚣薄，朋比大扇。
现代文：正当长庆、宝历之际，世风喧噪浮薄，朋党之风炽烈。
English: At the time of Changqing and Baoli, the social atmosphere was noisy and frivolous, and the party atmosphere was fierce.

古文：及申锡被用，时论以为激劝。
现代文：及至宋申锡被重用，舆论认为这是一种激励。
English: As far as Song Shengxi is reused, public opinion believes that this is an incentive.

古文：文宗即位，拜户部郎中、知制诰。
现代文：文宗即位，拜宋申锡户部郎中、知制诰。
English: Emperor Wenzong ascended to the throne, and Song Shensi's son-in-law, Chisei, became the next emperor.

古文：太和二年，正拜中书舍人，复为翰林学士。
现代文：大和二年，正式拜中书舍人，再任翰林学士。
English: In the second year of the Yamato era, he officially became a scholar of Chinese classics and was reappointed as a scholar of Hanlin.

古文：初，文宗常患中人权柄太盛，自元和、宝历，比致宫禁之祸。
现代文：起初，文宗时常忧虑宦官权势太盛，自元和、宝历以来连续导致宫禁之祸。
English: At first, Emperor Wenzong was often worried that the power of eunuchs was too strong, which had continuously led to the calamity of imperial ban since the Yuan Dynasty and the Baoli Dynasty.

古文：及王守澄之领禁兵，恃其宿旧，跋扈尤甚。
现代文：及至王守澄统率禁兵，倚仗自己是宿老旧臣，极其跋扈。
English: When Wang Shoucheng led the ban on soldiers, he relied on himself as an old vassal and was extremely arrogant.

古文：有郑注者，依恃守澄为奸利，出入禁军，卖官贩权，中外咸扼腕视之。
现代文：有个叫郑注的，靠着王守澄行奸牟利，出入禁军，卖官贩权，朝内朝外人士对他皆扼腕怒视。
English: There was a man named Zheng Zhu, who relied on Wang Shoucheng to make profits by committing treason, entering and leaving the forbidden army, and selling official power. People inside and outside the DPRK glared at him.

古文：文宗雅知之，不能堪。
现代文：文宗老早知道，也不能忍受。
English: Wenzong had known this for a long time and could not bear it.

古文：申锡时居内廷，文宗察其忠厚，可任以事。
现代文：宋申锡当时在内廷任职，文宗了解他为人忠厚，可委任以大事。
English: At that time, Song Shensi was serving in the Inner Court, and Wenzong understood that he was a loyal person and could be appointed to important matters.

古文：尝因召对，与申锡从容言及守澄，无可奈何，令与外廷朝臣谋去之，且约命为宰相。申锡顿首谢之。
现代文：曾因召见应对，与宋申锡随口谈及王守澄，对他无可奈何，便令宋申锡与外廷朝臣谋划除掉他，并约定命宋申锡为宰相，宋申锡顿首谢恩。
English: Once, in response to being summoned, he had a casual conversation with Song Shensi about Wang Shoucheng, but he could do nothing about him, so he ordered Song Shensi and the foreign court courtiers to plan to get rid of him, and agreed to appoint Song Shensi as prime minister, and Song Shensi was the first to thank him.

古文：未几，拜左丞。逾月，加平章事。
现代文：不久，拜左丞，一月后加授平章事。
English: Soon after, he was awarded the rank of General, and one month later, he was awarded the rank of General.

古文：申锡素能谨直，宠遇超辈，时情大为属望。
现代文：宋申锡素来谨严正直，此番宠遇超过同辈，一时人们对他寄以厚望。
English: Song Shengxi has always been scrupulous and honest. This time, he was favored more than his peers. At one time, people had high hopes for him.

古文：及到中书，剖断循常，望实颇不相副。
现代文：及至到中书省任职，析理断事都很平常，名望与实力不相符合。
English: Up to the appointment of the Ministry of Education, analysis and judgment are very common, and reputation and strength do not match.

古文：太和五年，忽降中人召宰相入赴延英。
现代文：大和五年，突然降旨命中官召宰相入宫赴延英殿。
English: In the fifth year of the Yamato era, an order was suddenly issued to summon the prime minister to the palace to visit Nobuhide.

古文：路随、李宗闵、牛僧孺等既至中书东门，中人云： 所召无宋申锡。 
现代文：路随、李宗闵、牛僧孺等已到了中书省东门，中官道： 所召见无宋申锡。 
English: Lu Sui, Li Zongyao, Niu Zangyao, etc. have arrived at the East Gate of the Chinese Book Province.

古文：申锡始知被罪，望延英以笏叩头而退。
现代文：宋申锡这才知道自己获罪，眼望延英殿以笏叩击头额而退返。
English: Only then did Song Shenxi realize that he had been found guilty. He looked at Yan Ying Dian, slapped his forehead with a hammer, and retreated.

古文：随等至，文宗以神策军中尉王守澄所奏，得本军虞候豆卢著状，告宋申锡与漳王谋反，随等相顾愕然。
现代文：路随等到了延英殿，文宗根据神策军中尉王守澄所奏，又得到本军虞候豆卢著的诉状，告宋申锡与漳王谋反，路随等人相顾愕然。
English: Lu Sui waited until he arrived at Yan Ying Dian. Wenzong, according to the complaint written by Wang Shoucheng, a lieutenant of the Shinshe Army, and also received a complaint written by a member of his own army, accused Song Shensi of plotting against Shao Wang. Lu Sui and others looked at each other in amazement.

古文：初，守澄于浴堂以郑注所构告于文宗，守澄即时于市肆追捕，又将以二百骑就靖恭里屠申锡之家。
现代文：这之前，王守澄在浴堂用郑注编造的话向文宗诬告宋申锡，此时王守澄立即往街市追捕宋申锡，还准备派遣二百骑兵赴靖恭里屠杀他的家属。
English: Prior to this, Wang Shoucheng falsely accused Song Shensi to Wenzong in the bathhouse with words fabricated by Zheng Zhu. At this time, Wang Shoucheng immediately went to the city to hunt down Song Shensi, and also prepared to send two hundred cavalrymen to Jingyongli to massacre his family members.

古文：会内官马存亮同入，诤于文宗曰： 谋反者适宋申锡耳，何不召南司会议。
现代文：恰好内官马存亮同时入朝，向文宗进谏道： 谋反者只是宋申锡一人呀，为何不召集宰相一同议处。
English: It just so happened that the Inner Official, Ma Cunliang, entered the imperial court at the same time as Emperor Wenzong. He approached Emperor Wenzong and said, "Song Shenxi is the only one who is plotting a rebellion. Why don't you convene the prime minister for a discussion?"

古文：今卒然如此，京师企足自为乱矣。 
现代文：现在这样仓卒行事，京师眼看要自遭祸乱了。 
English: Now, by acting in such a haste, the Beijing division is on the verge of self-destruction.

古文：守澄不能难，乃止。乃召三相告之。
现代文：王守澄不能反驳，只得罢休，于是召三省宰相通告此事。
English: Wang Shoucheng could not refute, but had to give up, so he called the three provincial prime ministers to report the matter.

古文：又遣右军差人于申锡宅捕孔目官张全真、家人买子缘信等。
现代文：又令右军派人至宋申锡居宅拘捕孔目官张全真、家人买子缘信等。
English: He also ordered the right-wing army to send people to the residence of Song Shensi to arrest the official Zhang Quanzhen and his family members.

古文：又于十六宅及市肆追捕胥吏，以成其狱。
现代文：又于十六宅及街市追捕宋申锡之胥吏，以定其罪。
English: They also hunted down Song Shensi's henchmen in 16 residences and markets to find him guilty.

古文：文宗又召师保、仆射、尚书丞郎、常侍、给事、谏议、舍人、御史中丞、京兆尹、大理卿，同于中书及集贤院参验其事。
现代文：文宗又召师保、仆射、尚书丞郎、常侍、给事、谏议、舍人、御史中丞、京兆尹、大理卿，同至中书省及集贤院验证其事。
English: In addition, Wenzong summoned Shi Bao, Fu Sha, Shang Shuzhongro, Zheng Zhi, Xie Ji, Yan Yan, Xie Ren, Mishi Zhongzheng, Jing Zhaoyun, and Daliqing to the Ministry of Chinese Literature and Juxian Academy to verify the matter.

古文：翌日，开延英，召宰臣及议事官，帝自询问。
现代文：次日，开延英殿，召见宰臣及议事官，皇上亲自询问。
English: The next day, Kaien Eiden summoned the vice-ministers and councilors, and the emperor personally inquired.

古文：左常侍崔玄亮，给事中李固言，谏议大夫王质，补阙卢钧、舒元褒、罗泰、蒋系、裴休、窦宗直、韦温，拾遗李群、韦端符、丁居晦、袁都等一十四人，皆伏玉阶下奏以申锡狱付外，请不于禁中讯鞫。
现代文：左常侍崔玄亮，给事中李固言，谏议大夫王质，补阙卢钧、舒元褒、罗泰、蒋系、裴休、窦宗直、韦温，拾遗李群、韦端符、丁居晦、袁都等一十四人，皆俯伏玉阶之下奏请将宋申锡案交付外廷，不要在宫禁中审讯。
English: There were fourteen attendants, including Zuo Changzhi, Cui Xuanliang; Li Guyan, who was in charge of the matter; the royal doctor, Shu Yuanbo; Lu Xun, Shu Yuanbo; Luo Tai, Jiang Jie, Pei Xiu, Dou Zongzhong, Wei Wen; Li Qun, Wei Duan Fu, Ding Juyao, and Yuan Du, who were in charge of the matter. All of them prostrated themselves and requested that the Song Shensi case be handed over to the Foreign Court, and not be tried under house arrest.

古文：文宗曰： 吾已谋于公卿大僚，卿等且出。 
现代文：文宗道： 吾已与公卿大臣们商量过，你们退下吧。 
English: Wenzong said, "I have already discussed this with the nobles and ministers, so please withdraw."

古文：玄亮固言，援引今古，辞理恳切。
现代文：崔玄亮执意进言，援引古今事例，言辞情理恳切。
English: Cui Xuanliang insisted on speaking, citing ancient and modern cases, and his words were sincere.

古文：玄亮泣涕久之，文宗意稍解，贬申锡为右庶子，漳王为巢县公。再贬申锡为开州司马。
现代文：崔玄亮涕泣不止，文宗心绪稍稍缓和，贬宋申锡为右庶子，贬漳王为巢县公，再贬宋申锡为开州司马。
English: Cui Xuanliang cried endlessly, Wenzong's mood was slightly softened, and he demoted Song Shensi to the second son, demoted Yao Wang to the county magistrate, and then demoted Song Shensi to the county magistrate.

古文：初，申锡既得密旨，乃除王璠为京兆尹，以密旨喻之。
现代文：当初，宋申锡得到皇上密旨后，便授王播为京兆尹，将密旨告诉他。
English: At first, after Song Shensi obtained the emperor's secret order, he conferred Wang Bo as the Beijing Zhaoyun and told him the secret order.

古文：璠不能谋，而注与守澄知之，潜为其备。
现代文：王播不善谋事，让郑注和王守澄知道了，他们暗中做了防备。
English: Wang Huan was not good at scheming, so Zheng Zhu and Wang Shoucheng found out, and they secretly took precautions.

古文：漳王凑，文宗之爱弟也，贤而有人望。
现代文：漳王凑，是文宗的爱弟，贤明而得人心。
English: Shao Wangqin was Wenzong's beloved younger brother. He was wise and popular.

古文：豆卢著者，职属禁军，与注亲表。
现代文：豆卢著其人，在禁军中任职，与郑注为表亲。
English: Dou Lu, the author, served in the imperial army and was a cousin of Zheng Zhu.

古文：文宗不省其诈，乃罢申锡为庶子。
现代文：文宗不能识破他们的诡诈，于是罢免宋申锡为庶子。
English: Wenzong could not see through their trickery, so he dismissed Song Shensi as an illegitimate son.

古文：时京城恟々，众庶哗言，以为宰相真连十宅谋反，百僚震骇。
现代文：一时京城纷扰不安，舆论哗然，以为宰相真格儿串连十宅谋反，百官震惊恐骇。
English: At one time, the capital was disturbed and uneasy, and public opinion was in an uproar, believing that the prime minister, Zhenger, was plotting a rebellion in ten houses. The officials were shocked and horrified.

古文：居一二日，方审其诈。
现代文：事过一两天，才明白其中有诈。
English: After a day or two, it became clear that there had been fraud.

古文：谏官伏阁恳论，文宗震怒，叱谏官令出者数四。
现代文：谏官伏阁恳切论奏，文宗震怒，好几次呵叱谏官令其退出。
English: The eunuch Fukaku argued earnestly about the performance, and Wenzong was furious. He scolded the eunuch several times and ordered him to withdraw.

古文：时中外属望大僚三数人廷辩其事。
现代文：这时朝内朝外寄希望几位大臣在朝廷辩说其事。
English: At this time, several ministers inside and outside the imperial court expressed their hope and argued the matter in the imperial court.

古文：仆射窦易直曰： 人臣无将，将而必诛。 
现代文：仆射窦宗直道： 做臣子的不必再请求，请求者必诛。 
English: Dosha Dou Zongzhong: If you are a vassal, you don't have to ask for anything. If you ask for something, you have to do it.

古文：闻者愕然。唯京兆尹崔琯、大理卿王正雅连上疏请出内狱，且曰： 王师文未获，即狱未具，请出豆卢著与申锡同付外廷勘。 
现代文：惟独京兆尹崔、大理卿王正雅联名上疏请求让内官交出此案，并说： 王师文未捕获，则罪案不能最后成立，请交出豆卢著与宋申锡同赴外廷审讯。 
English: However, Beijing Zhaoyun Cui and Daliqing Wang Zhengya jointly requested that the internal affairs officer hand over the case, and said: If Wang Shiwen is not captured, then the crime cannot be finally established. Please hand over Zhuo Lu and Song Shensi to go to the court for trial.

古文：当时人情翕然推重。
现代文：此举受到当时人们一致推重。
English: This move was unanimously supported by the people at that time.

古文：初议申锡抵死，顾物论不可，又将投于岭表。文宗终悟外廷之言，乃有开州之命。
现代文：最初论处宋申锡以死抵罪，但舆论不容，又准备将他流放岭南，后来文宗终于领悟外廷之言，这才将宋申锡贬谪开州。
English: At first, it was decided to punish Song Shensi with death, but public opinion did not allow it, and it was also planned to exile him to Lingnan. Later, Wenzong finally understood the words of the Foreign Court, and it was only then that Song Shensi was banished to Kaizhou.

古文：初，申锡既被罪，怡然不以为意，自中书归私第，止于外，素服以俟命。
现代文：起初，宋申锡既已蒙受罪名，心中安然毫不介意，自中书省归私第，静坐在外厅，身著素服等候诏命。
English: At first, Song Shensi, who had already been convicted, did not mind at all. He resigned from the Ministry of Education and Culture, and sat quietly in the outer hall, dressed in plain clothes, waiting for the imperial edict.

古文：其妻出谓之曰： 公为宰相，人臣位极于此，何负天子反乎？ 
现代文：其妻出来对他说道： 公为宰相，身居人臣至极之位，为何背逆天子谋反呢？ 
English: His wife came out and said to him, "As you are officially the prime minister and hold the highest position of a vassal, why do you rebel against the Son of God?

古文：申锡曰： 吾生被厚恩，擢相位，不能锄去奸乱，反为所罗织，夫人察申锡，岂反者乎？ 
现代文：宋申锡道： 我自一介书生蒙受厚恩，擢居相位，不能锄奸去乱，反为奸人所陷害，夫人细察申锡难道是个谋反之人吗？ 
English: Song Shensi said: I have been favored and promoted since I was a student. I can't instigate chaos, but I was set up by traitors. Madam, can you see if Shensi is a rebel?

古文：因相与泣下。
现代文：说罢二人俱伤痛流泣。
English: Both of them were in tears.

古文：申锡自居内廷，及为宰相，以时风侈靡，居要位者尤纳贿赂，遂成风俗，不暇更方远害，且与贞元时甚相背矣。
现代文：宋申锡自居内廷，至任宰相，因社会风尚奢侈靡丽，身居要职者尤好收受贿赂，于是形成风气，毫不顾及移易风俗远避祸害，而且与贞元时尚完全相反了。
English: Song Shensi lived in the Inner Court until he became the Prime Minister. Due to the social fashion of extravagance and luxury, those in important positions were particularly good at accepting bribes. Thus, a culture was formed that did not take into account the customs of emigration and avoided the scourge, and it was completely opposite to the Zhenyuan fashion.

古文：申锡至此，约身谨洁，尤以公廉为己任，四方问遗，悉无所受。
现代文：宋申锡居此相位，严格约束自身，尤以公正廉洁为己任，四方慰问馈赠，概不收纳。
English: Song Shensi is in this phase, he strictly restricts himself, especially with fairness and integrity as his responsibility, and does not accept gifts of condolences from the four parties.

古文：既被罪，为有司验劾，多获其四方受领所还问遗之状，朝野为之叹息。
现代文：蒙受罪名之后，主管官署审核查证，获知许多退还四方慰问馈赠的事实，朝野之人皆为之叹息。
English: After being convicted, the competent authority examined the verification certificate and learned that many of the gifts were returned, which made everyone sigh.

古文：七年七月，卒于开州。
现代文：大和七年七月，在开州逝世。
English: He passed away in July of the seventh year of the Yamato era in Keshu.

古文：诏曰： 申锡虽不能周慎，自抵宪章，闻其亡殁遐荒，良用悲恻。
现代文：诏书说： 宋申锡虽不能做到谨慎周全，自己违犯了典章制度，闻知他殁于远荒之地，亦极为悲痛。
English: The imperial edict said: Although Song Shensi could not be prudent and thorough, he violated the legal code system, and it was also extremely sad to hear that he was stranded in a distant wasteland.

古文：宜许其归葬乡里，以示宽恩。 
现代文：当允许他归葬乡里，以示宽赦恩宠。 
English: He should be allowed to return to his hometown for burial as a sign of forgiveness and grace.

古文：开成元年九月，诏复申锡正议大夫、尚书左丞、同中书门下平章事、上柱国，赐紫，兼赠兵部尚书。
现代文：开成元年九月，降诏复授宋申锡正议大夫、尚书左丞、同中书门下平章事、上柱国、赐紫服，追赠兼兵部尚书。
English: In September of the first year of the founding of the People's Republic of China, the imperial edict was re-issued to Song Shensi, who was appointed to the post of chief adviser to the emperor, Shang Shuxu, who was appointed to the post of secretary of the left, and Tong Zhong Shumen, who was appointed to the post of the second secretary of the left, Shang Zhuo, who was awarded the purple uniform, and Heibu Shang Shuxu, who was posthumously awarded.

古文：仍以其子慎微为城固县尉。
现代文：令其子宋慎微为城固县尉。
English: He made his son, Song Shenwei, a lieutenant of Chenggu County.

