古文：汉氏承秦燔书，大弘儒训，太学生徒，动以万数，郡国黉舍，悉皆充满。学于山泽者，至或就为列肆，其盛也如是。
现代文：汉代以秦朝的焚书为鉴戒，大力弘扬儒教，太学的学生，往往达到万人以上，各郡国的学校，也都充实满员，学校设在山野之中，甚至依傍学校开设商铺，成为市集，学校的兴盛竟到了这样的程度。
English: The Han Dynasty took the book-burning of the Qin Dynasty as a warning, vigorously promoted Confucianism, and the number of students of Taixue often reached more than ten thousand. The schools of all counties and states were also fully staffed. The schools were located in the mountains and fields, and even shops were opened next to the schools to become markets. The prosperity of the schools had actually reached such a level.

古文：汉末丧乱，其道遂衰。
现代文：汉代末年，政局动乱，儒家之道于是衰落。
English: At the end of the Han Dynasty, the political situation was in turmoil, and the Confucianism was in decline.

古文：魏正始以后，仍尚玄虚之学，为儒者盖寡。
现代文：魏代正始年间之后，相继崇尚玄远虚无的道家学说，研究儒学的人因此少了。
English: After the first years of the Wei Dynasty, successive Taoist doctrines advocating the mysterious and the non-existent were introduced, and as a result, the number of people studying Confucianism decreased.

古文：时荀抃、挚虞之徒，虽删定新礼，改官职，未能易俗移风。
现代文：当时荀频、挚虞之流，虽然删定新礼，更改官职，但是未能移风易俗。
English: At that time, although the new rite was deleted and the official position was changed, it failed to change the custom.

古文：自是中原横溃，衣冠殄尽；江左草创，日不暇给；以迄于宋、齐。国学时或开置，而劝课未博，建之不及十年，盖取文具，废之多历世祀，其弃也忽诸。
现代文：从造以后中原动乱以至沦陷，文明礼教全都败坏，晋朝迁往江左，一切都在草创之中，国家事务繁忙，没有空闲办学，到了宋、齐，国学有时开办，但是没有广泛的鼓励与督促，建立的时间不到十年，废置却有许多年代，因为兴办学校国家祇在条文中空有规定，所以突然间也就废弃不问了。
English: From the creation of the Central Plains upheaval to the fall, civilization, manners, and education were all corrupted. The Jin Dynasty moved to Jiangzu, and everything was in the process of being created. The state affairs were busy, and there was no free time to run schools. In the Song and Qi Dynasties, Chinese studies were sometimes run, but there was no widespread encouragement and supervision. It took less than ten years to establish, but it took many years to abolish it. Because the state only had empty provisions in the regulations for running schools, it was suddenly abandoned without question.

古文：乡里莫或开馆，公卿罕通经术。朝廷大儒，独学而弗肯养众；后生孤陋，拥经而无所讲习。三德六艺，其废久矣。
现代文：各乡各里没有一处开办学校，公卿大臣精通经术的很少，朝廷中的大儒，衹是自己操习经术而不肯教导学生，年轻人孤陋寡闻，抱着经书却没有学习研讨的地方，三德六艺，荒废已经很久了。
English: Not a single school has been opened in every township and village, there are very few noblemen and ministers who are proficient in the study of the sutras, the great scholars in the imperial court only practice the sutras themselves and refuse to teach the students, the young people are uneducated and ignorant, clinging to the scriptures but have no place to study and discuss, the three virtues and six arts have been neglected for a long time.

古文：高祖有天下，深愍之，诏求硕学，治五礼，定六律，改斗历，正权衡。
现代文：高祖为帝之后，深深为这种状况伤心忧虑，于是下诏搜求学问渊博的大儒，整饬五礼，核定六律，修改历法，校正权衡。
English: After Gaozu became emperor, he was deeply saddened and worried about this situation, so he issued an edict to search for a learned great scholar, rectify the Five Rites, approve the Six Laws, modify the calendar, and correct and weigh.

古文：天监四年，诏曰： 二汉登贤，莫非经术，服膺雅道，名立行成。
现代文：天监四年，高祖下诏说：两漠进用贤人，没有谁不是凭藉经术，传授儒学，声名确立，道德有成。
English: In the fourth year of the Celestial Inspector, Gao Zu issued an edict saying: "The two deserts are full of sages, and there is no one who does not use scripture to teach Confucianism, establish a reputation, and achieve moral success.

古文：魏、晋浮荡，儒教沦歇，风节罔树，抑此之由。
现代文：魏、晋时代风气浮荡，儒家学问衰退，或许是因为这一点，风节气概不能树立。
English: During the Wei and Jin dynasties, Confucianism was on the wane. Perhaps because of this, it was not possible to establish the spirit of the festival.

古文：朕日昃罢朝，思闻俊异，收士得人，实惟酬奖。
现代文：我每天很晚才罢朝，就是想听到俊才贤士的消息，任用士人得到贤才，实在应当给予奖赏。
English: I go to the palace very late every day, just to hear the news of the talented sages. The appointment of scholars to get the talented ones should really be rewarded.

古文：可置《五经》博士各一人，广开馆宇，招内后进。 
现代文：应当设立《五经》博士，每一经设博士一人，广设学馆，接纳年轻人人馆学习。
English: A "Five Classics" doctorate should be set up, with one doctorate per person, and a wide range of schools should be set up to accept young people to study.

古文：于是以平原明山宾、吴兴沈峻、建平严植之、会稽贺蒨补博士，各主一馆。
现代文：于是以平原明山宾、吴郡陆琏、吴兴沈峻、建平严植之、会稽贺场等补任博士，各人主持一个学馆。
English: As a result, Drs. Pingyuan Mingshan Bin, Wu County Lujuan, Wu Xing Shenjun, Jianping Yan Zhi, and Hefei Hefei were appointed, each of whom presided over a school.

古文：馆有数百生，给其饩廪。
现代文：学馆内有数百名学生，由朝廷供给他们俸禄。
English: There are hundreds of students in the school, and the Imperial Court provides them with a stipend.

古文：其射策通明者，即除为吏。
现代文：其中那些选择事情进行陈说的射策如果开通贤明，就除授为官吏。
English: Among them, those who choose things to present, if they are wise, will be removed as officials.

古文：十数月间，怀经负笈者云会京师。
现代文：十余年间，精通经学饱读经书的人云集京城。
English: For more than ten years, people who are proficient in studying and reading scriptures have gathered in Beijing.

古文：又选遣学生如会稽云门山，受业于庐江何胤。
现代文：又选派学生去会稽云门山，到庐江何胤那儿学习学业。
English: In addition, selected students were sent to study in Yunmen Mountain, and to study in Heyan, Jiangsu Province.

古文：分遣博士祭酒，到州郡立学。
现代文：分别派遣博士祭酒到各州郡建立学校。
English: and dispatched doctoral students to build schools in various states and counties.

古文：七年，又诏曰： 建国君民，立教为首，砥身砺行，由乎经术。
现代文：天监七年，高祖又下诏说：建立国家，做万民的君主，树立教化，推行教育是首要的事情；培养学问，砥砺德行，经学是必须经由的途径。
English: In the seventh year of the Heaven's Guardianship, Gao Zu issued another edict, saying, "To establish a country, to be the ruler of all the people, to establish enlightenment, and to promote education are the most important things; to cultivate learning, to cultivate virtue, and to study the classics are the necessary means.

古文：朕肇基明命，光宅区宇，虽耕耘雅业，傍阐艺文，而成器未广，志本犹阙。非以熔范贵游，纳诸轨度；思欲式敦让齿，自家刑国。
现代文：我创立基业，广有天下，虽然努力经营儒学，但有才之士不多，德行根本犹有欠缺，不足以陶冶王公贵族，使他们遵从儒教的法度，想要勉励他们尊重长者，从家裹推行，进而成为天下的典范。
English: I founded the foundation, which is widespread in the world. Although efforts have been made to manage Confucianism, there are not many talented people. Virtue is still fundamentally lacking. It is not enough to cultivate princes and aristocrats, make them comply with the laws of Confucianism, encourage them to respect the elderly, promote from home, and then become a model for the world.

古文：今声训所渐，戎夏同风。宜大启痒斅，博延胄子，务彼十伦，弘此三德，使陶钧远被，微言载表。 
现代文：现在声威浸染的地方，戎族华夏同受感化，应当大力开办学校，广泛招请王室贵族子弟，修习十伦，弘扬三德，使朝廷的教化远布天下，精妙的言辞能够显扬。
English: Now, in places where prestige is impregnated, the Rong people of China are equally influenced, and they should vigorously open schools, widely invite the children of the royal aristocracy, study the Ten Rulings, and promote the Three Virtues, so that the enlightenment of the imperial court can be spread far and wide, and the exquisite words can be displayed.

古文：于是皇太子、皇子、宗室、王侯始就业焉。
现代文：于是皇太子、皇子、皇族宗室、王侯才开始到学校求学。
English: As a result, crown princes, princes, royal families, and princes began to go to school.

古文：高祖亲屈舆驾，释奠于先师先圣，申之以宴语，劳之以束帛，济济焉，洋洋焉，大道之行也如是。
现代文：高祖枉驾屈尊，亲自到学校向子子及其他前代圣人行释奠之礼，和学生交谈，鼓励他们，用绢帛慰勉他们，学校庄敬，学生众多，大道之行到了这样隆盛的程度。
English: Gao Zu unduly condescended, personally went to the school to pay tribute to his son and other past saints, talked to the students, encouraged them, and consoled them with candy. The school is dignified, there are many students, and the trip to the avenue has reached such a prosperous level.

古文：其伏曼容、何佟之、范缜，有旧名于世；为时儒者，严植之、贺蒨等首膺兹选。
现代文：其中伏曼容、何佟之：范缜原来在当代就有名气；当时出名的儒者，名列俊彦人选首当严植之、贺埸等人。
English: Among them, Fu Man Rong and He Xizhi: Fan Xizhi was originally famous in contemporary times; the famous Confucianists at that time were Yan Zhi Zhi and He Xizhi, who were the first to be selected by Toshihiko.

古文：今并缀为《儒林传》云。
现代文：现在把这些人的事迹连缀在一起，编成《儒林传》。
English: Now, the stories of these people have been intertwined and compiled into the "Jurassic Legend."

古文：伏曼容，字公仪，平昌安丘人。
现代文：伏曼容字公仪，平昌安丘人。
English: Fuman Yongzhi Gongyi, a native of Anqiu, Pyeongchang.

古文：曾祖滔，晋著作郎。
现代文：他的曾祖伏滔，晋时任著作郎。
English: His great-grandfather, Futo, was a scholar at the time of Jin.

古文：父胤之，宋司空主簿。
现代文：他的父亲伏胤之，宋时任司空主簿。
English: His father, Fuchin, was the chief secretary of the Song Dynasty.

古文：曼容早孤，与母兄客居南海。
现代文：伏曼容很早就失去父亲，他和母亲与兄长客居南海。
English: Fuman Rong lost his father at a very early age. He lives with his mother and elder brother in Nanhai.

古文：少笃学，善《老》、《易》，倜傥好大言，常云： 何晏疑《易》中九事。以吾观之，晏了不学也，故知平叔有所短。 
现代文：伏曼容从小专心好学，精通《老子》、《周易》，他豪爽洒脱喜欢夸大其辞，他曾经说： 何晏对《易》的九件事有疑问，从我的眼光看，何晏完全不学习，所以知道何平叔有短处。 
English: From a young age, Fu Manrong was eager to learn and was well versed in "Lao Zi" and "Zhou Yi." He was bold and free and liked to exaggerate his words. He once said: He Yao has doubts about the nine things in "Yi." From my perspective, He Yao does not study at all, so I know that Uncle He Ping has a shortcoming.

古文：聚徒教授以自业。
现代文：伏曼容聚集学生教授他们学业，把这当作自己的职业。
English: Fumanrong gathers students and teaches them their studies, considering it as his profession.

古文：为骠骑行参军。
现代文：伏曼容任骠骑行参军。
English: Fuman allowed him to join the army on horseback.

古文：宋明帝好《周易》，集朝臣于清暑殿讲，诏曼容执经。
现代文：宋明帝爱好《周易》，聚集朝臣在清暑殿论说《周易》，下韶命伏曼容执经解答疑难。
English: Emperor Song Ming loved "Zhou Yi" and gathered the courtiers in the Qing Xiao palace to discuss "Zhou Yi." He ordered them to read the book and solve the difficult questions.

古文：曼容素美风采，帝恒以方嵇叔夜，使吴人陆探微画叔夜像以赐之。
现代文：伏曼容风姿仪态都很美，宋明帝常常把他和嵇叔夜相提并论，还命吴人陆探微昼嵇叔夜的像，把像赐给伏曼容。
English: Fu Man Rong's appearance, style, posture, and demeanor were all beautiful. Song Mingdi often compared him to Uncle Yu, and ordered Wu Renlu to explore the image of Uncle Yu at noon and give the image to Fu Man Rong.

古文：迁司徒参军。
现代文：伏曼容迁任司徒参军。
English: Fuman Yoneki assigned Sito to join the army.

古文：袁粲为丹阳尹，请为江宁令，入拜尚书外兵郎。
现代文：袁粲任丹阳尹的时候，请求让伏曼容担任江宁令。伏曼容入京被授为尚书外兵郎。
English: When Yuan Shao served as Danyangyin, he requested that Fu Man Rong be appointed as Jiangningling. When Fu Man Rong entered Beijing, he was awarded the title of Shangshu Foreign Soldier.

古文：升明末，为辅国长史、南海太守。
现代文：升明末年，他任辅国长史、南海太守。
English: At the end of the Ming Dynasty, he served as the Vice-Governor of the State and the Governor of the South China Sea.

古文：齐初，为通直散骑侍郎。
现代文：齐代初年，他任通直散骑侍郎。
English: In the first year of the Qi Dynasty, he was appointed as the attendant of Zongzhizhong Sanzhi.

古文：永明初，为太子率更令，侍皇太子讲。
现代文：永明初年，他为太子率更令，侍皇太子讲。
English: In the first year of the reign of Emperor Yongming, he was promoted to the position of crown prince and became the crown prince's attendant.

古文：卫将军王俭深相交好，令与河内司马宪、吴郡陆澄共撰《丧服义》，既成，又欲与之定礼乐。
现代文：卫将军王俭与伏曼容非常友善，交情很深，王俭命伏曼容与河内司马宪、吴郡陆澄共同撰写《丧服义》，《丧服义》撰写完以后，王俭又想和伏曼容一起审定礼乐。
English: General of the Guards Wang Jian and Fu Man Rong were very friendly and had a deep friendship. Wang Jian ordered Fu Man Rong to co-write the "Declaration of Mourning" with Hanoi Sima Xian and Wu County Lu Cheng. After the "Declaration of Mourning" was written, Wang Jian wanted to review the ceremonial music with Fu Man Rong.

古文：会俭薨，迁中书侍郎、大司马谘议参军，出为武昌太守。
现代文：恰逢王俭去世，伏曼容迁升中书侍郎、大司马谘议参军，又出京任武昌太守。
English: Coinciding with the death of Wang Jian, Fuman Rongqian was promoted to the position of junior secretary and senior secretary of the army, and went to Beijing to serve as the governor of Wuchang.

古文：建武中，入拜中散大夫。
现代文：建武年间，伏曼容入京被授为中散大夫。
English: During the Kenmu era, Fu Man Rong was awarded the title of Zhongshan Doctor when he entered Beijing.

古文：时明帝不重儒术，曼容宅在瓦官寺东，施高坐于听事，有宾客辄升高坐为讲说，生徒常数十百人。
现代文：当时明帝不看重儒术，伏曼容住宅在瓦官寺的束边，伏曼容就在家裹厅堂上设置高座，有宾客来就登上高座为他们讲说经义，聚集来听讲的学生常有数十或者上百人。
English: At that time, Emperor Ming did not attach much importance to Confucianism. Fu Man Rong's residence was on the outskirts of the Wakan Temple, and Fu Man Rong set up a high seat in the hall of the house. When guests came, he would climb onto the high seat to lecture them on the meaning of the scriptures. There were often dozens or hundreds of students who gathered to listen to the lecture.

古文：梁台建，以曼容旧儒，召拜司马，出为临海太守。
现代文：梁国台府建立，因为伏曼容是资望很高的大儒者，高祖于是就把他召来拜为司马，又出任临海太守。
English: Liang Guotaifu was established, because Fu Manrong was a great Confucian with a high reputation. Gaozu then called him to worship as a Sima, and he also served as Linhai Dazhong.

古文：天监元年，卒官，时年八十二。
现代文：天监元年，伏曼容在任职期间去世，死时八十二岁。
English: In the first year of Tianjun, Fu Manrong died during his term of office, at the age of eighty-two.

古文：为《周易》、《毛诗》、《丧服集解》、《老》、《庄》、《论语义》。
现代文：伏曼容着有《周易集解》、《毛诗集解》、《丧服集解》，《老子义》、《庄子义》、《论语义》。
English: Fuman contains "Zhou Yi Collection," "Mao Poetry Collection," "Funeral Costume Collection," "Lao Zi Yi," "Shuang Zi Yi" and "On Semantics."

古文：子芃，在《良吏传》。
现代文：伏曼容之子伏佢，事迹在《良吏传》中。
English: Fu Man Rong's son, Fuxi, is described in "The Biography of a Good Official."

古文：何佟之，字士威，庐江灊人，豫州刺史恽六世孙也。
现代文：何佟之字士威，庐江洒县人，他是豫州刺史何惮的第六代孙。
English: He Xizhi Shiwei, a native of Lijiang County, is the sixth-generation grandson of Yuzhou Xizhi He Shuang.

古文：祖劭之，宋员外散骑常侍。
现代文：他的祖父何劭之，宋时任员外散骑常侍。
English: His grandfather, He Yanzhi, was a non-commissioned officer in the Song Dynasty.

古文：父歆，齐奉朝请。
现代文：父亲何歆，齐时为奉朝请。
English: Father He Xuan, please come to serve the emperor at the same time.

古文：佟之少好《三礼》，师心独学，强力专精，手不辍卷，读《礼》论二百篇，略皆上口。
现代文：何佟之从小爱好《三礼》，他以心为师，自己独立学习，努力专心求精，手不释卷。他读《礼》论三百篇，全都读得纯熟，文句能顺口而出。
English: He has been fond of "Three Rites" since childhood. He takes his heart as his teacher, studies independently, strives to concentrate on refinement, and does not let go of the volume. He reads "Three Rites" on three hundred pieces, all read perfectly, and the words can come out smoothly.

古文：时太尉王俭为时儒宗，雅相推重。
现代文：太尉王俭是当时儒家的宗师，也很推重何佟之。
English: Captain Wang Jian was the master of Confucianism at that time, and he also highly valued He Xuanru.

古文：起家扬州从事，仍为总明馆学士，频迁司徒车骑参军事、尚书祠部郎。
现代文：何佟之初出仕任扬州从事，接着为总明馆学士，屡屡迁升，后任司徒车骑参军事，尚书祠部郎。
English: At the beginning of his career, He Yanzhi served in Yangzhou, then he was a bachelor of the General Ming Museum, repeatedly moved up, and later he served as a military cavalryman of the Stochae, and a priest of the Shangshu Shrine.

古文：齐建武中，为镇北记室参军，侍皇太子讲，领丹阳邑中正。
现代文：齐建武年间，他任镇北记室参军，侍皇太子讲，领丹阳邑中正。
English: During the Qi Jianwu years, he was appointed to the North Town Records Office to join the army, served as the crown prince, and was the leader of Danyang.

古文：时步兵校尉刘献、征士吴苞皆已卒，京邑硕儒，唯佟之而已。
现代文：当时步兵校尉刘珊、征士吴苞都已去世，京城中的硕儒，衹有何佟之一人而已。
English: At that time, Liu Shan, an infantry lieutenant, and Wu Yao, a conscript, had both died. As a young man in the capital, he was just one of many.

古文：佟之明习事数，当时国家吉凶礼则，皆取决焉，名重于世。
现代文：何佟之明了熟悉术敷之学，当时国家吉礼凶礼的标准原则，全都取决于他，名重一时。
English: He Xizhi understood and was familiar with the study of jujutsu. At that time, the national standard principles of auspicious and inauspicious ceremonies all depended on him. He was momentarily famous.

古文：历步兵校尉、国子博士，寻迁骠骑谘议参军，转司马。
现代文：何佟之先后任步兵校尉、国子博士，不久迁任骠骑谘议参军，转任司马。
English: He Yanzhi was successively appointed as an infantry lieutenant, Dr. Kuniko, and soon moved to the post of cavalry adviser to join the army, and then to the post of Sima.

古文：永元末，京师兵乱，佟之常集诸生讲论，孜孜不怠。
现代文：永元末年，京城发生战乱，但何佟之常常聚集学生评论研究经义，十分勤勉，从不懈怠。
English: At the end of the 17th century, there was a war in Beijing, but He Yanzhi often gathered students to review and study the sutras. He was very diligent and never slacked.

古文：中兴初，拜骁骑将军。
现代文：中兴初年，何佟之被拜为骁骑将军。
English: In the first year of ZTE, He Yanzhi was worshipped as the general of the cavalry.

古文：高祖践阼，尊重儒术，以佟之为尚书左丞。
现代文：高祖登上帝位之后，尊重儒术，命何佟之为尚书左丞。
English: After Gao Zu ascended to the throne of God, he respected Confucianism, and was ordered to study Confucianism.

古文：是时百度草创，佟之依《礼》定议，多所裨益。
现代文：当时各种制度都在草创之中，何佟之依《礼》确定见解，对制定制度裨益很大。
English: At that time, all kinds of systems were in the process of being created, and He Yanzhi's determination of opinions according to "Rite" was of great benefit to the development of the system.

古文：天监二年，卒官，年五十五。
现代文：天监二年，何佟之在任职期间去世，死时五十五岁。
English: Two years into his term as overseer of heaven, He Yanzhi passed away at the age of fifty-five.

古文：高祖甚悼惜，将赠之官；故事左丞无赠官者，特诏赠黄门侍郎，儒者荣之。
现代文：高祖为他的去世伤悼惋惜，将要给他追封爵位和官职；按照以前的典章制度，任左丞的人死后没有封赠官职的先例，但是高祖专门颁发诏书赠何佟之黄门侍郎之职，儒者对这种恩宠感到荣耀。
English: Gao Zu was saddened by his death and was going to give him a knighthood and an official post. According to the previous award system, there was no precedent for awarding an official post after the death of a person who was appointed as a left-handed person, but Gao Zu specially issued an imperial decree to give him the post of Huangmen waiter. Confucians are proud of this grace.

古文：所著文章、《礼义》百许篇。
现代文：何佟之着有文章、《礼义》共一百篇左右。
English: There are about a hundred articles on He Xuan's clothing and "Rites and Etiquette."

古文：子：朝隐、朝晦。
现代文：何佟之之子叫何朝隐、何朝晦。
English: The son of Ho Ho is called Ho Chaoying and Ho Chaowei.

古文：范缜，字子真，南乡舞阴人也。
现代文：范缜字子真，南乡舞阴人。
English: Fan Yu Zizhizhen, Nanxiang Wujin Ren.

古文：晋安北将军汪六世孙。
现代文：他是晋安北将军范汪的第六代孙。
English: He is the sixth generation grandson of Fan Wang, the Northern General of Jinan.

古文：祖璩之，中书郎。
现代文：他的祖父范璩之，任中书郎。
English: His grandfather, Fan Xizhi, was appointed to the post of middle school teacher.

古文：父濛，早卒。
现代文：父亲范濛，早年就去世了。
English: His father, Fan Qi, died at an early age.

古文：缜少孤贫，事母孝谨。
现代文：范缜很小就失去了父亲，家中贫穷，事奉母亲孝顺而恭谨。
English: Fan Qi lost his father at a very young age, his family was poor, and he served his mother dutifully and respectfully.

古文：年未弱冠，闻沛国刘献聚众讲说。
现代文：范缜还不到二十岁的时候，听说沛国刘珊招聚学生论说经义，就去拜刘珊为师学习。
English: When Fan Qi was not yet twenty years old, he heard that Liu Shan of Pei Province was recruiting students to discuss the meaning of the sutras, so he went to study under Liu Shan.

古文：始往从之，卓越不群而勤学，献甚奇之，亲为之冠。
现代文：范缜才能卓越，不同于一般人，而且学习勤勉，刘珊认为他是奇才，亲自为他行冠礼。
English: Fan Qi's talent is outstanding, different from ordinary people, and he is a diligent learner. Liu Shan thinks he is a genius and personally performs the coronation ceremony for him.

古文：在献门下积年，去来归家，恒芒矰布衣，徒行于路。
现代文：范缜在刘珊门下学习多年，每次回家来去，都常穿着草鞋布衣，徒步往返。
English: Fan Qi has been studying under Liu Shan for many years. Every time she comes home, she often wears straw sandals and clothes and walks back and forth.

古文：献门多车马贵游，缜在其门，聊无耻愧。
现代文：刘珊门下有很多乘车骑马的王公贵族，范缜在刘珊门下，一点也不因为自己贫穷而感到羞耻与惭愧。
English: Under Liu Shan's tutelage, there are many princes and aristocrats who ride horses. Under Liu Shan's tutelage, Fan Qi does not feel ashamed and embarrassed at all because he is poor.

古文：既长，博通经术，尤精《三礼》。
现代文：范缜年长之后，通晓经术，尤其精通《三礼》。
English: After Fan Rong became older, he became familiar with the scriptures, especially with the "Three Rites."

古文：性质直，好危言高论，不为士友所安。
现代文：范缜生性质朴直率，喜欢发表正直而又不同凡响的言论，所以和他交往的士友常感到不乐意。
English: Fan Xinsheng is simple and straightforward in nature, and likes to make honest and extraordinary remarks, so the scholars and friends who interact with him are often unhappy.

古文：唯与外弟萧琛相善，琛名曰口辩，每服缜简诣。
现代文：范缜衹和表弟萧琛交情很好。萧琛被称做能言善辩之才，但常常对范缜的文辞简练而周到十分信服。
English: Fan Rong and his cousin Xiao Rong have a good relationship. Xiao Rong is said to be a talented speaker, but he is often convinced by Fan Rong's concise and thoughtful words.

古文：起家齐宁蛮主簿，累迁尚书殿中郎。
现代文：范缜初出仕任齐宁蛮主簿，积功升迁为尚书殿中郎。
English: Fan Qi was appointed as the chief bookkeeper of the Qinling Palace for the first time, and he was promoted to the vice-master of the Palace Library.

古文：永明年中，与魏氏和亲，岁通聘好，特简才学之士，以为行人。缜及从弟云、萧琛、琅邪颜幼明、河东裴昭明相继将命，皆著名邻国。
现代文：永明年间，齐舆魏氏和睦友好，每年使臣往来，互访通好。齐专门挑选有才学的士人充任使者，范缜和堂弟范云、表弟萧琛、琅邪颜幼明、河东裴昭明等人相继奉命出使，都在邻国留下了卓著的名声。
English: Over the next few years, the Qi and Wei clans maintained amicable relations, exchanging envoys and visits every year. Qi specially selected talented scholars to serve as envoys. Fan Jun, his cousin Fan Yun, his cousin Xiao Jun, Zou Yanyan Youming, and Hedong Pei Zhaoming were successively sent as envoys, all of whom left outstanding reputations in neighboring countries.

古文：于时竟陵王子良盛招宾客，缜亦预焉。
现代文：当时竟陵王萧子良广泛招纳宾客，范缜也在被招纳的人员之列。
English: At that time, Xiao Ziliang, the king of mausoleums, invited a wide range of guests, and Fan Qi was also one of the people invited.

古文：建武中，迁领军长史。
现代文：建武年间，范缜迁任领军长史。
English: During the Jianwu period, Fan Xuanqian was appointed as the leader of the Long March.

古文：出为宜都太守，母忧去职，归居于南州。
现代文：出京任宜都太守，因母亲去世而离职。回家在南州居丧。
English: He went to Beijing to serve as the governor of Yidu, but left due to the death of his mother. He returned home to Nanzhou to mourn.

古文：义军至，缜墨绖来迎。
现代文：高祖义军到达南州，范缜穿着黑色丧服来迎接义军。
English: Gao Zu's rebel army arrived in Nanzhou. Fan Wei wore a black mourning dress to greet the rebel army.

古文：高祖与缜有西邸之旧，见之甚悦。
现代文：高祖与范缜曾同在竟陵王萧子良所开的西邸，原有交往，现在见到范缜，十分高兴。
English: Gao Zu and Fan Qi had been in contact with each other at the West Mansion, which was opened by Xiao Ziliang, the King of Jingling. I am very happy to see Fan Qi now.

古文：及建康城平，以缜为晋安太守，在郡清约，资公禄而已。
现代文：建康城平定以后，高祖命范缜为晋安太守，范缜在任期间清廉节俭，衹是取用国家俸禄而已。
English: After Jiankang City was pacified, Gao Zu's son, Fan Hui, became the governor of Jinan. During his tenure, Fan Hui was honest and frugal, and only used the state salary.

古文：视事四年，征为尚书左丞。
现代文：任职四年后，被征召为尚书左丞。
English: After four years of service, he was called up to serve as Shoshu Sajo.

古文：缜去还，虽亲戚无所遗，唯饷前尚书令王亮。
现代文：范缜离家返家，即使是亲戚也无所馈赠，衹是赠送东西给前尚书令王亮。
English: When Fan Wei left home and returned home, even his relatives had nothing to give him. He was giving things to Wang Liang, the former Shang Shuling.

古文：缜仕齐时，与亮同台为郎，旧相友，至是亮被摈弃在家。
现代文：范缜在齐任职时，和王亮同在台府为郎，原来就互相友好，到这时候王亮被斥退废黜在家。
English: When Fan Rong served in Qi, he and Wang Liang were both brothers in Taifu, and they were originally friendly with each other. At this time, Wang Liang was expelled from home.

古文：缜自迎王师，志在权轴，既而所怀未满，亦常怏怏，故私相亲结，以矫时云。
现代文：范缜亲自迎接高祖军队之后，心志在于卿相之职，不久他的志向未能实现，也就经常怏怏不乐，所以私下与王亮交结亲近，以矫正时弊。
English: After welcoming Gaozhu's army in person, Fan Rong's ambition was to be the prime minister. Soon, his ambition failed to be realized, and he was often unhappy. Therefore, he became close to Wang Liang in private to correct the shortcomings of the time.

古文：后竟坐亮徙广州，语在亮传。
现代文：后来他最终因为王亮之事被迁徙广州，事情记载在《王亮传》中。
English: Later, he was finally moved to Guangzhou because of Wang Liang, which was recorded in "Wang Liang Biography."

古文：初，缜在齐世，尝侍竟陵王子良。
现代文：当初，还在齐代的时候，范缜曾经陪侍竟陵王萧子良。
English: At first, when he was still a member of the Qi Dynasty, Fan Ye used to accompany King Xiao Ziliang of the Qingting Dynasty.

古文：子良精信释教，而缜盛称无佛。
现代文：萧子良深信佛教，而范缜极力称说没有佛。
English: Xiao Ziliang is a firm believer in Buddhism, while Fan Ye insisted that there is no Buddha.

古文：子良问曰： 君不信因果，世间何得有富贵，何得有贫贱？ 
现代文：萧子良问范缜说： 你不相信因果，那么人世间怎么会有富贵，怎么会有贫贱? 
English: Xiao Ziliang asked Fan Jun: If you don't believe in cause and effect, then how can there be rich and poor in the world?

古文：缜答曰： 人之生譬如一树花，同发一枝，俱开一蒂，随风而堕，自有拂帘幌坠于茵席之上，自有关篱墙落于溷粪之侧。
现代文：范缜回答说： 人生如同一棵树上的花，同在一根枝上长，同在一个蒂上开，随风飘堕，有的花拂开帘幕飘坠在茵席之上，有的花穿遇篱墙坠落在秽土粪坑旁边。
English: Fan Ye replied: Life is like a flower on a tree. It grows on the same branch, opens on the same stem, and falls with the wind. Some flowers open the curtain and fall on the seat, and some flowers fall through the fence and fall next to the filth pit.

古文：坠茵席者，殿下是也；落粪溷者，下官是也。
现代文：在茵席之上的，殿下你就是这种情况；坠落在秽土粪坑旁边的，下官我就是这种情况。
English: This is the case for you, Your Highness, on the top of the throne; this is the case for me, the junior officer, who fell next to the cesspit of filth.

古文：贵贱虽复殊途，因果竟在何处？ 
现代文：贵贱虽然道路不同，因果最终在哪裹? 
English: Although the road of noble and low is different, where is the cause and effect in the end?

古文：子良不能屈，深怪之。
现代文：萧子良不能使他理屈，对茎垄的见解深感奇怪。
English: Xiao Ziliang could not reason with him, and was deeply puzzled by his views on the stem and ridge.

古文：缜退论其理，著《神灭论》曰：
现代文：返回后论述自己的道理，着《神灭论》，说：
English: After his return, he expounded on his theory in "Theory of the Destruction of the Gods," saying:

古文：或问予云： 神灭，何以知其灭也？ 
现代文：有人间我说： 你说精神会消灭，凭什么知道它会消灭? 
English: Someone once said to me: You say that the spirit will perish, how do you know that it will perish?

古文：答曰： 神即形也，形即神也；是以形存则神存，形谢则神灭也。 
现代文：回答说： 精神就是形体，形体就是精神，因此形体存在精神就存在，形体凋谢，精神也就消灭了。 
English: He replied: The spirit is the body, and the body is the spirit. Therefore, when the body exists, the spirit exists, and when the body withers, the spirit perishes.

古文：问曰： 形者无知之称，神者有知之名。
现代文：间： 形体是对没有知觉的东西的称呼，精神是对有知觉的东西的称呼。
English: Between: Form is the name of something that is not conscious, spirit is the name of something that is conscious.

古文：知与无知，即事有异，神之与形，理不容一，形神相即，非所闻也。 
现代文：有知觉与无知觉，那就是事物有区别；精神和形体，按理就不允许合而为一。形体和精神就是一体的说法，我没有听说过。 
English: Perception and non-perception, that is, things are different; spirit and form, by definition, are not allowed to merge into one. I have never heard the saying that form and spirit are one.

古文：答曰： 形者神之质，神者形之用；是则形称其质，神言其用；形之与神，不得相异也。 
现代文：答： 形体是精神的物质形式，精神是形体的外在表现，因此说形体是指它的物质形式，说精神是指它的外在表现，形体与精神，不能把它们互相割裂。 
English: Answer: The body is the material form of the spirit, and the spirit is the outward manifestation of the body. Therefore, the body refers to its material form, and the spirit refers to its outward manifestation. The body and the spirit cannot be separated from each other.

古文：问曰： 神故非质，形故非用，不得为异，其义安在？ 答曰： 名殊而体一也。 
现代文：间： 精神本来就不是一种物质形式，形体本来也不是一种外在表现，不能把它们相区别，其中的道理在哪裹? 答： 名称不同，但本体却是一个。 
English: Interviewer: Spirit is not originally a material form, and form is not originally an external manifestation. They cannot be distinguished. What is the reason for this? Answer: The names are different, but the essence is the same.

古文：问曰： 名既已殊，体何得一？ 
现代文：问： 名称既然不相同，本体怎么能是一个呢? 
English: Q: Since the names are different, how can the body be the same?

古文：答曰： 神之于质，犹利之于刀；形之于用，犹刀之于利；利之名非刀也，刀之名非利也。
现代文：答： 精神对于物质实体来说，就如同锋利和刀的关系；形体对于外在形式来说，就如同刀和锋利的关系。锋利这个概念不是刀，刀这个概念也不是锋利。
English: A: For a material entity, the spirit is like the relationship between sharpness and a knife; for an external form, the form is like the relationship between a knife and sharpness. The concept of sharpness is not a knife, and the concept of a knife is not sharp.

古文：然而舍利无刀，舍刀无利。未闻刀没而利存，岂容形亡而神在？ 
现代文：然而舍弃了锋利就没有刀，舍弃了刀也就没有了锋利，没听说过刀没有了而锋利却还存在，哪裹容许形体没有了而精神却存在呢? 
English: However, if you give up the sharpness, there will be no knife. If you give up the knife, there will be no sharpness. Haven't you heard that the knife is gone but the sharpness still exists? How can the body be gone but the spirit still exists?

古文：问曰： 刀之与利，或如来说；形之与神，其义不然。
现代文：问： 刀和锋利的关系，也许正像你刚才所说的那样；形体与精神的关系，其中的道理又不是这样。
English: Q: The relationship between the knife and the sharpness may be just as you just said; the relationship between the body and the spirit, the reason for which is not the same.

古文：何以言之？
现代文：为什么这样说呢?
English: Why do you say that?

古文：木之质无知也，人之质有知也；人既有如木之质，而有异木之知，岂非木有一、人有二邪？ 
现代文：树木的物质实体没有知觉，人的物质实体却有知觉，人既有像树木那样的物质实体，又有不同于树木的知觉，岂不是树木衹有形体一样，而人却有形体和精神两样吗? 
English: The material substance of trees is not sentient, but the material substance of human beings is sentient. Human beings have both a material substance like trees and a different perception from trees. Aren't trees like corporeal bodies, but human beings are corporeal and spiritual?

古文：答曰： 异哉言乎！
现代文：答： 你的话真奇怪啊!
English: A: What a strange thing to say!

古文：人若有如木之质以为形，又有异木之知以为神，则可如来论也。
现代文：人假若具有像树木的物质形体作形体，又有不同于树木的知觉作精神，那样就能像你刚才所说的那样。
English: If a person has a material body like a tree, but a different perception and spirit than a tree, then he can do what you just said.

古文：今人之质，质有知也；木之质，质无知也。人之质非木质也，木之质非人质也，安有如木之质而复有异木之知哉！ 
现代文：现在人的物质实体，本身就有知觉，树木的物质实体，本身没有知觉，人的物质实体不是树木的物质实体，树木的物质实体不是人的物质实体，怎么能说人既有像树木那样的物质实体，却又有不同于树木的知觉呢! 
English: Now, the material entity of a human being has consciousness in itself, but the material entity of a tree has no consciousness in itself. The material entity of a human being is not the material entity of a tree, and the material entity of a tree is not the material entity of a human being. How can it be said that a human being has the same material entity as a tree, but has a different consciousness from a tree?

古文：问曰： 人之质所以异木质者，以其有知耳。
现代文：问： 人的物质实体和树木的物质实体的区别，就正是因为人有知觉而已。
English: Question: The difference between the material substance of a human being and the material substance of a tree is that a human being is conscious.

古文：人而无知，与木何异？ 
现代文：人假如没有知觉，与树木有什么分别? 
English: If man is not conscious, what is the difference between him and a tree?

古文：答曰： 人无无知之质，犹木无有知之形。 
现代文：答： 人没有无知觉的物质实体，就如同树木没有有知觉的物质实体。 
English: Answer: Man does not have an unconscious material entity, just as trees do not have a conscious material entity.

古文：问曰： 死者之形骸，岂非无知之质邪？ 
现代文：问： 死者的形骸，难道不是没有知觉的物质实体吗? 
English: Question: Aren't the remains of the dead an unconscious material entity?

古文：答曰： 是无人质。 
现代文：答： 这形骸是没有人的知觉的物质实体。 
English: A: The skeleton is a material entity without human consciousness.

古文：问曰： 若然者，人果有如木之质，而有异木之知矣。 
现代文：问： 像这样的话，人是真的有像树木那样的物质实体，又有不同于树木的知觉了。 
English: Question: In this way, people really have the same material substance as trees, but they have a different perception from trees.

古文：答曰： 死者如木，而无异木之知；生者有异木之知，而无如木之质也。 
现代文：答： 死人有像树木那样的物质实体，却没有不同于树木的知觉；活人有不同于树木的知觉，却没有像树木那样的物质实体。 
English: A: The dead have material substance like trees, but no consciousness different from trees; the living have consciousness different from trees, but no material substance like trees.

古文：问曰： 死者之骨骼，非生之形骸邪？ 
现代文：问： 死人的骨骼，不就是活人的形骸吗? 
English: Question: Aren't the bones of a dead person the remains of a living person?

古文：答曰： 生形之非死形，死形之非生形，区已革矣。安有生人之形骸，而有死人之骨骼哉？ 
现代文：答： 活人的形骸不同于死人的形骸，死人的形骸不同于活人的形骸，区别已经很清楚了，哪有活人的形骸，却又有死人的骨骼呢? 
English: A: The shape of a living person is different from that of a dead person, and the shape of a dead person is different from that of a living person. The difference is very clear. How can there be the shape of a living person and the skeleton of a dead person?

古文：问曰： 若生者之形骸，非死者之骨骼；非死者之骨骼，则应不由生者之形骸；不由生者之形骸，则此骨骼从何而至此邪？ 
现代文：问： 假如活人的形骸不是死人的骨骼，既然不是死人的骨骼，那么骨骼就应当不是从活人的形骸变来，如果不是由活人的形骸变来，那么这死人的骨骼是从哪裹来的呢? 
English: Question: If the skeleton of a living person is not the skeleton of a dead person, since it is not the skeleton of a dead person, then the skeleton should not have come from the skeleton of a living person, and if it did not come from the skeleton of a living person, then where did this dead person's skeleton come from?

古文：答曰： 是生者之形骸，变为死者之骨骼也。 
现代文：答： 这是活人的形骸，变成死人的骨骼。 
English: A: This is the skeleton of a living person, turned into the bones of a dead person.

古文：问曰： 生者之形骸虽变为死者之骨骼，岂不因生而有死？则知死体犹生体也。 
现代文：问： 活人的形骸虽然变成了死人的骨骼，这岂不是因为有活的形体而后有死的形体，那么就可以知道死的形体就是活的形体。 
English: Question: Although the remains of a living person turn into the bones of a dead person, isn't this because there is a living body and then a dead body, so we can know that the dead body is a living body.

古文：答曰： 如因荣木变为枯木，枯木之质，宁是荣木之体！ 
现代文：答： 逭就如同由活树变成枯树，枯树的物质实体，难道是活树的形体! 
English: A: It is just like a living tree turning into a dead tree. Is the material substance of a dead tree the form of a living tree?

古文：问曰： 荣体变为枯体，枯体即是荣体；丝体变为缕体，缕体即是丝体，有何别焉？ 
现代文：问： 活树树体变成枯树树体，那么枯树树体就是活树树体；丝的形体变成线的形体，线的形体就是丝的形体，两者之间有什么区别呢? 
English: Q: If the living tree's body becomes the dead tree's body, then the dead tree's body is the living tree's body; if the shape of the silk becomes the shape of the thread, then the shape of the thread is the shape of the silk. What is the difference between the two?

古文：答曰： 若枯即是荣，荣即是枯，应荣时凋零，枯时结实也。
现代文：答： 如果枯树就是活树，活树就是枯树，那么就应当在枝叶茂盛的时候凋零，枯萎的时候结果。
English: Answer: If a dead tree is a living tree, and a living tree is a dead tree, then it should wither when its branches and leaves are in full bloom, and bear fruit when it withers.

古文：又荣木不应变为枯木，以荣即枯，无所复变也。
现代文：又活树不应当变成死树，因为活树就是死树，没有再需要变化的地方。
English: And a living tree should not become a dead tree, because a living tree is a dead tree, and there is no longer any need for change.

古文：荣枯是一，何不先枯后荣？
现代文：活树和死树是一样，那么为什么不先枯萎再生长繁茂?
English: A living tree is the same as a dead tree, so why not first wither and then grow and flourish?

古文：要先荣后枯，何也？
现代文：大体上树木总是先繁茂后枯萎，为什么呢?
English: Generally speaking, trees always grow first and then wither. Why is that?

古文：丝缕之义，亦同此破。 
现代文：你说的丝和饯的道理，也可以同样驳斥。 
English: What you said about silk and satin can also be refuted in the same way.

古文：问曰： 生形之谢，便应豁然都尽。何故方受死形，绵历未已邪？ 
现代文：问： 活的形体的凋谢，就应一下子都消尽，为什么将要变成死的形体的时候，要延长很长时间呢? 
English: Question: If the withering of a living body is supposed to happen all at once, why does it take a long time to turn into a dead body?

古文：答曰： 生灭之体，要有其次故也。
现代文：答： 逭是因为形体的生成和消灭，大体上总有一定程序的缘故。
English: A: It's because of the creation and destruction of forms, and there's always a certain procedure.

古文：夫惸而生者必惸而灭，渐而生者必渐而灭。
现代文：那些突然生成的东西一定会突然间消灭，逐渐生成的东西一定会逐渐消灭。
English: That which is born suddenly must die suddenly, and that which is born gradually must die gradually.

古文：惸而生者，飘骤是也；渐而生者，动植是也。
现代文：突然生成的东西，暴风暴雨就是这一类；逐渐生成的东西，动物植物就是造一类。
English: Things that come into being suddenly, such as storms and rain, are of this class; things that come into being gradually, such as animals and plants, are of the artificial class.

古文：有惸有渐，物之理也。 
现代文：有突然生成的，有逐渐生成的，这是万物的规律。 
English: There is sudden generation, and there is gradual generation. This is the law of all things.

古文：问曰： 形即是神者，手等亦是邪？ 
现代文：问： 形体就是精神的话，那手这一类东西也是精神吗? 
English: Question: If the body is spirit, then are things like hands also spirit?

古文：答曰： 皆是神之分也。 
现代文：答： 这一类东西都是精神的一个部分。 
English: A: This kind of thing is all part of the spirit.

古文：问曰： 若皆是神之分，神既能虑，手等亦应能虑也？ 
现代文：问： 假如都是精神的一部分，那么精神能够思虑，手这一类东西也应当能够思虑吗? 
English: Q: If it's all part of the mind, then if the mind can reason, shouldn't something like a hand be able to reason too?

古文：答曰： 手等亦应能有痛痒之知，而无是非之虑。 
现代文：答： 手这一类东西也应当有痛痒的知觉，而没有判断是非的思虑。 
English: A: A thing like a hand should also have the sensation of itching, but without the concern of judging right and wrong.

古文：问曰： 知之与虑，为一为异？ 答曰： 知即是虑。
现代文：问： 知觉和思虑，是一种东西还是不同的东西? 
English: Question: Are perception and thought one and the same thing or different?

古文：浅则为知，深则为虑。 
现代文：答： 知觉就是思虑，浅的思虑叫知觉，深的思虑才叫思虑。 
English: A: Perception is thinking. Shallow thinking is called perception. Deep thinking is called thinking.

古文：问曰： 若尔，应有二虑；虑既有二，神有二乎？ 
现代文：问： 这样的话，就应当有两种思虑，思虑既然有两种，精神有两种吗? 
English: Question: In that case, there should be two kinds of thoughts. Since there are two kinds of thoughts, are there two kinds of spirits?

古文：答曰： 人体惟一，神何得二。 
现代文：答： 人的形体衹有一个，精神哪能有两种! 
English: Answer: There is only one human body, how can there be two spirits?

古文：问曰： 若不得二，安有痛痒之知，复有是非之虑？ 
现代文：问： 假如精神不能有两种，那么哪裹会有感觉痛痒的知觉，又有判断是非的思虑? 
English: Question: If there cannot be two kinds of mind, then where will there be the perception of feeling itchy, as well as the consideration of judging right and wrong?

古文：答曰： 如手足虽异，总为一人。是非痛痒虽复有异，亦总为一神矣。 
现代文：答： 造就犹如手足虽有不同，但毕竟同属一个人；判断是非感觉痛痒虽然有区别，但毕竟同属一个精神。 
English: A: Creation is like a person's hands and feet, which are different but belong to the same person. Judging right and wrong, feeling pain and itching are different but belong to the same spirit.

古文：问曰： 是非之虑，不关手足，当关何处？ 
现代文：问： 判断是非的思虑，和手足没有关系，那同哪裹有关系? 
English: Question: The consideration of judging right and wrong has nothing to do with limbs, so what does it have to do with?

古文：答曰： 是非之虑，心器所主。 
现代文：答： 判断是非的思虑，是由心主管。 
English: A: It is the mind that is in charge of judging right and wrong.

古文：问曰： 心器是五藏之心，非邪？ 
现代文：问： 心是指五脏中的心，还是不是指五脏之心呢? 
English: Question: Does "heart" refer to the heart within the five viscera, or does it not refer to the heart within the five viscera?

古文：答曰： 是也。 
现代文：答： 是指五脏中的心。 
English: A: It refers to the heart within the five viscera.

古文：问曰： 五藏有何殊别，而心独有是非之虑乎？ 
现代文：问： 五脏之间有什么区别，而心单单有判断是非的忧虑呢? 
English: Q: What is the difference between the five viscera and the mind, which is concerned only with judging right and wrong?

古文：答曰： 七窍亦复何殊，而司用不均。 
现代文：答： 七窍又有什么不同，它们的职能却不一样。 
English: A: There is no difference between the seven acupoints, but their functions are different.

古文：问曰： 虑思无方，何以知是心器所主？ 
现代文：问： 思虑没有一定的方位，凭什么知道思虑是由心主管? 
English: Question: Since thoughts do not have a certain direction, how can we know that thoughts are controlled by the mind?

古文：答曰： 五藏各有所司，无有能虑者，是以知心为虑本。 
现代文：答： 五脏各有职能，除了心没有一样能够思虑，因此知道心是主管思虑的根基。 
English: A: Each of the five internal organs has its own function. Apart from the heart, there is no organ that can think. Therefore, we know that the heart is the foundation of competent thinking.

古文：问曰： 何不寄在眼等分中？ 
现代文：问： 为什么思虑不托付在眼遣一类的器官中? 
English: Q: Why not consign worry to an organ like the eye?

古文：答曰： 若虑可寄于眼分，眼何故不寄于耳分邪？ 
现代文：答： 假如思虑可以托付在眼这个器官中，那眼的视觉为什么不托付在耳这类器官中呢? 
English: A: If thought can be entrusted to the eye as an organ, why can't the vision of the eye be entrusted to an organ like the ear?

古文：问曰： 虑体无本，故可寄之于眼分；眼自有本，不假寄于佗分也。 
现代文：问： 思虑没有根基，所以能够托付给眼这类器官；眼自有它的基本作用，不用临时托付给其他器官。 
English: Q: Thought has no foundation, so it can be entrusted to organs such as the eye; the eye has its own basic function and does not need to be temporarily entrusted to other organs.

古文：答曰： 眼何故有本而虑无本；苟无本于我形，而可遍寄于异地。亦可张甲之情，寄王乙之躯；李丙之性，托赵丁之体。
现代文：答： 为什么说眼有它的基本作用而思虑却没有根基?假如思虑在自己的形体当中没有根基，而能够广泛托付到别的地方，那么张甲的感情，也可托付在王乙的躯体上，李丙的性情，也可寄附在赵丁的躯体上。
English: Answer: Why is it said that the eye has its basic function, but thoughts have no foundation? If thoughts have no foundation in one's own body, but can be widely entrusted to other places, then Zhang Jia's feelings can also be entrusted to Wang B's body, and Li H's disposition can also be attached to Zhao Ding's body.

古文：然乎哉？
现代文：这样对吗?不对。 
English: Is that right? No.

古文：不然也。 问曰： 圣人形犹凡人之形，而有凡圣之殊，故知形神异矣。 答曰： 不然。
现代文：问： 圣人的形体犹如凡人的形体，但却存在凡人圣人的区别，所以知道形体和精神的不同了。 答： 不是这样。
English: Question: The form of a saint is like that of an ordinary person, but there is a difference between an ordinary saint and a saint, so we know the difference between the form and the spirit.

古文：金之精者能昭，秽者不能昭，有能昭之精金，宁有不昭之秽质。
现代文：精粹的金能够闪光，秽杂的金就不能闪光，能够闪光的精粹之金，难道会有不闪光的秽杂的物质实体?
English: Pure gold can sparkle, impure gold cannot sparkle, can pure gold, which can sparkle, have impure material entities that do not sparkle?

古文：又岂有圣人之神而寄凡人之器，亦无凡人之神而托圣人之体。
现代文：又哪裹会有圣人的精神寄附在凡人的形体上?也没有凡人的精神托付在圣人的形体上。
English: For how can the spirit of the holy man be in the flesh, or the flesh of the holy man be in the spirit?

古文：是以八采、重瞳，勋、华之容；龙颜、马口，轩、皞之状；形表之异也。
现代文：因此眉分八采、目有重瞳是放勋、重华的容颜，颜面如龙、口如马口，是轩辕、皋陶的形貌，这是形体外表的区别。
English: Therefore, the eyebrows are divided into eight parts and the eyes have heavy pupils, which is the face of exuberance and solemnity, the face is like a dragon, the mouth is like a horse's mouth, and it is the shape of Xuan Xuan and Jiu Tao, which is the difference in the appearance of the body.

古文：比干之心，七窍列角；伯约之胆，其大若拳；此心器之殊也。
现代文：比干的心，七窍四布，姜伯约的胆，其大如拳，这是体内器官的差别。
English: Compared to the heart, which has seven notches and four folds, the gallbladder of ginger is as big as a fist. This is the difference between the internal organs.

古文：是知圣人定分，每绝常区，非惟道革群生，乃亦形超万有。
现代文：所以知道圣人由天确定为圣人的身份，每每超出寻常之辈，不衹是道和凡人不一样，就是形体也会超出一般百姓。
English: Therefore, knowing that a saint's identity as a saint is determined by heaven, he is always beyond the ordinary generation. Not only is his way different from that of ordinary people, but his form is also beyond that of ordinary people.

古文：凡圣均体，所未敢安。 
现代文：你说凡人圣人形体相同，我不敢同意。 
English: When you say that mortal saints have the same body, I can't agree.

古文：问曰： 子云圣人之形必异于凡者。敢问阳货类仲尼，项籍似大舜；舜、项、孔、阳，智革形同，其故何邪？ 
现代文：问： 你说圣人形体一定和凡人形体不一样，那么请问阳货像仲尼，项籍像大舜，大舜、项籍、孔丘、阳货，智力有差异，形貌却相同，其中的原因是什么呢? 
English: Q: You said that the holy human body must be different from other human bodies, so what is the reason for the fact that Yang Jia is like Zhong Ni, Xiang Zi is like Dafu, Dafu, Xiang Zi, Kong Qiu, Yang Jia, and they have different intelligence but the same appearance?

古文：答曰： 珉似玉而非玉，鸡类凤而非凤；物诚有之，人故宜尔。
现代文：答： 珉和玉相似但却不是玉，鶸和凤相似却不是凤，万物本来就有这样的情况，人当然也应当有这种情况。
English: A: A dragonfly is similar to a jade but not a jade. A dragonfly is similar to a phoenix but not a phoenix. All things have this kind of situation. Of course, people should also have this kind of situation.

古文：项、阳貌似而非实似，心器不均，虽貌无益。 
现代文：项籍、阳货形貌似圣人而不是实质上相似，他们的器官和圣人不一样，即使是形貌相似也没有用处。 
English: They resemble saints in appearance but not in substance. Their organs are not the same as those of saints. Even if they are similar in appearance, it is of no use.

古文：问曰： 凡圣之殊，形器不一，可也。圣人员极，理无有二；而丘、旦殊姿，汤、文异状，神不侔色，于此益明矣。 
现代文：问： 凡人圣人的区别，形体器官不一样，这种说法是可以的；圣人的地位最高，按理不会有两样的情况，但是孔丘、周公旦形体不一样，商汤、文王形貌有区别，精神舆外表不等同，从这裹看得更加清楚了。 
English: Question: It is possible to say that the difference between ordinary saints is that their bodies and organs are different. The status of a saint is the highest, and it is reasonable that there will not be two different situations. However, the bodies of Confucius and Zhou Gongdan are different, the shapes of Shang Tang and King Wen are different, and the spiritual appearance is not the same. From this, we can see more clearly.

古文：答曰： 圣同于心器，形不必同也，犹马殊毛而齐逸，玉异色而均美。
现代文：答： 圣人相同之点在于内部器官相同，人体不一定相同，遣就如同马的毛色不同却都能快跑，玉的色泽不同却都同样美。
English: A: The similarities between saints lie in the fact that their internal organs are the same, the human body is not necessarily the same, just as horses can run fast despite their different coat colors, and jade can be equally beautiful despite its different color and luster.

古文：是以晋棘、荆和，等价连城；骅骝、騄骊，俱致千里。 
现代文：因此晋国的垂棘白璧、楚国的和氏之璧，同样都是价值连城，驿骝、脲骊，同样都日行千里。 
English: Therefore, Jin Province's "Thorny White" and Chu Province's "Harmonious White" are also of great value, and they both travel thousands of miles every day.

古文：问曰： 形神不二，既闻之矣，形谢神灭，理固宜然。
现代文：问： 形体精神不可分离，这个道理我已经听说了，形体凋谢，精神也就消灭，按道理本来就应当是这样。
English: Question: I have already heard that body and spirit cannot be separated. If the body withers away, the spirit will also perish, which is how it should be.

古文：敢问经云 为之宗庙，以鬼飨之 ，何谓也？ 
现代文：那么请问经书上说 为他建立宗庙，用对待鬼神的礼仪祭奠他 ，逭是指什么呢? 
English: So what does the scripture say about building a family temple for him and honoring him with rituals for dealing with ghosts and gods?

古文：答曰： 圣人之教然也。所以弭孝子之心，而厉偷薄之意，神而明之，此之谓矣。 
现代文：答： 圣人的教导是这样，这是平息孝子思念亲人的心绪，激励浮薄心意的方式，使死者成为神而摆在显著的位置，指的就是这一点。 
English: Answer: The teaching of the sages is that this is the way to calm the hearts of the filial sons and daughters who are thinking about their loved ones, and to stimulate their weak-willed minds, so that the dead become gods and are placed in a prominent position. This is what this refers to.

古文：问曰： 伯有被甲，彭生豕见，坟素著其事，宁是设教而已邪？ 
现代文：问： 伯有死后披上盔甲出现，彭生死后以猪的形体出现，史册上记着逭事情，难道衹是进行教导而已吗? 
English: Q: After the death of Bo You, he appeared in armor. After the death of Peng Sheng, he appeared in the form of a pig. This is recorded in the annals of history. Is this just teaching?

古文：答曰： 妖怪茫茫，或存或亡，强死者众，不皆为鬼。
现代文：答： 怪异的事情很多，有的流传下来，有的亡逸了。
English: A: There are many strange things, some of which have been passed down, and some of which have been lost.

古文：彭生、伯有，何独能然；乍为人豕，未必齐、郑之公子也。 
现代文：遇横祸死于非命的人很多，都不会变成鬼，彭生、伯有，哪裹就单单能够这样变鬼出现，突然间遇见猪像人似的站立出现，并不一定就是齐国的彭生、郑国的伯有。 
English: A lot of people who die in accidents do not turn into ghosts. Peng Sheng and Bo Ye are not the only ones who can turn into ghosts. If you suddenly see a pig standing up like a human, it is not necessarily Peng Sheng from Qi or Bo Ye from Zheng.

古文：问曰： 《易》称 故知鬼神之情状，与天地相似而不违 。
现代文：问： 《易》中说 所以知道鬼神的各种情形，舆天地相似，不违背天地之道。 
English: Question: "Yi" says that knowing the various situations of ghosts and gods is similar to knowing heaven and earth, and does not violate the way of heaven and earth.

古文：又曰： 载鬼一车。 
现代文：又说： 装载着满满一车鬼。 
English: He also said: "It's loaded with a car full of ghosts.

古文：其义云何？ 
现代文：这话的意义是说什么? 
English: What does this mean?

古文：答曰： 有禽焉，有兽焉，飞走之别也；有人焉，有鬼焉，幽明之别也。
现代文：答： 有飞禽，有走兽，这是飞翔和奔跑的不同情形；有人在，有鬼在，这是有形和无形的区别。
English: Answer: There are birds and beasts, which are different situations of flying and running; there are people and ghosts, which is a tangible and intangible difference.

古文：人灭而为鬼，鬼灭而为人，则未之知也。 
现代文：人灭而变成鬼，鬼灭而变成人，这种说法我不知道。 
English: I don't know about the saying that when people die, they turn into ghosts, and when ghosts die, they turn into people.

古文：问曰： 知此神灭，有何利用邪？ 
现代文：问： 知道这种形体凋谢、精神随之消灭的道理，有什么用处呢? 
English: Question: What is the use of knowing this principle of the withering away of the body and the consequent extinction of the spirit?

古文：答曰： 浮屠害政，桑门蠹俗。风惊雾起，驰荡不休。吾哀其弊，思拯其溺。
现代文：答： 佛教危害国家政治，僧人败坏百姓风俗，像暴风突发，迷雾四起，奇谈怪论到处游荡而不停止，我为这种坏习气而痛心，想把沉溺在佛教毒害中的人们拯救出来。
English: A: Buddhism is harmful to national politics, monks corrupt people's customs, like a sudden storm, fog rises everywhere, and bizarre stories wander around without stopping. I am saddened by this bad habit and want to save people who are addicted to the poison of Buddhism.

古文：夫竭财以赴僧，破产以趋佛，而不恤亲戚，不怜穷匮者何？
现代文：那些倾家荡产去事奉僧佛，却不肯救助亲戚，不肯同情穷困匮乏的人们，究竟是为什么呢?
English: Why is it that those who devote themselves to the service of monks and Buddhists, but do not want to help their relatives, do not want to sympathize with the poor and destitute?

古文：良由厚我之情深，济物之意浅。
现代文：实在是因为自己争名夺利的欲念深，帮助别人的心意少。
English: It's really because they have a deep desire to compete for fame and profit, and have little desire to help others.

古文：是以圭撮涉于贫友，吝情动于颜色；千钟委于富僧，欢意畅于容发。
现代文：因此把一撮米送给贫穷的朋友，吝啬之情就会流露出来；把千钟粮交给富裕的僧人，欢悦之情就会处处表露。
English: Therefore, if you give a pinch of rice to a poor friend, the feeling of stinginess will be revealed; if you give a thousand grains of rice to a rich monk, the feeling of joy will be revealed everywhere.

古文：岂不以僧有多稌之期，友无遗秉之报，务施阙于周急，归德必于在己。
现代文：逭难道不就是冲，因为从僧人那襄可以得到获取更多钱粮的希望，而从朋友那裹却得不到一把遣穗的报答。
English: Isn't it just rushing, because from a monk you can get the hope of getting more money and grain, but from a friend you can't get a reward for sending an ear.

古文：又惑以茫昧之言，惧以阿鼻之苦，诱以虚诞之辞，欣以兜率之乐。
现代文：僧人从事施舍，但却不去帮助有了急难的贫穷人，有了功德，却一定把它全归于自己，又以虚无渺茫的谎言迷惑人，用阿鼻地狱的痛苦吓唬人，用荒诞无稽的言辞欺骗人，用兜率天堂的快乐糊弄人，使人欢欣。
English: Monks are engaged in almsgiving, but they do not help the poor who are in dire straits. If they have merit, they must attribute it all to themselves. They also deceive people with lies of nothingness and vagueness, frighten people with the pain of hell, deceive people with absurd words, and deceive people with the happiness of heaven, making people rejoice.

古文：故舍逢掖，袭横衣，废俎豆，列瓶钵；家家弃其亲爱，人人绝其嗣续。致使兵挫于行间，吏空于官府，粟罄于惰游，货殚于泥木。
现代文：所以许多人脱去儒生的服装，穿上僧人的袈裟，废弃祭祀祖先的礼仪，陈放供奉佛祖的瓶钵，家家抛开了亲人，人人离弃了子孙，致使兵士跑出军队，官吏跑出官府求神拜佛，粮食在游荡中用尽，钱财在兴建佛寺的土木工程中耗完。
English: Therefore, many people took off their Confucian clothing, put on the robes of monks, abandoned the ritual of sacrificing ancestors, and put out the vases dedicated to Buddha. Families abandoned their relatives, and everyone abandoned their children and grandchildren. As a result, soldiers ran out of the army, officials ran out of the government office to pray and worship Buddha, grain was exhausted in wandering, and money was exhausted in the civil engineering project of building a Buddhist temple.

古文：所以奸宄弗胜，颂声尚拥，惟此之故，其流莫已，其病无限。
现代文：造就是违法作乱的事情不能禁止、歌颂太平的呼声还被壅蔽的原因。因为这缘故，佛教的流行不禁止，它带来的弊病就没有止境。
English: This is the reason why illegal and disorderly activities cannot be prohibited, and the call for peace cannot be silenced. Therefore, if the spread of Buddhism is not prohibited, there will be no end to the ills it brings.

古文：若陶甄禀于自然，森罗均于独化；忽焉自有，恍尔而无，来也不御，去也不追，乘夫天理，各安其性。
现代文：假如处理事情秉承自然，万事万物由它自行变化，忽然间自己发生，忽然间又自行消灭，来也不拒绝它，去也不挽留它，顺应自然规律，安于它自身特点。
English: If you deal with things in accordance with nature, everything will change by itself, suddenly occur by itself, and suddenly disappear by itself, you will not reject it, nor will you retain it, conform to the laws of nature, and be satisfied with its own characteristics.

古文：小人甘其垄亩，君子保其恬素；耕而食，食不可穷也；蚕而衣，衣不可尽也；下有余以奉其上，上无为以待其下，可以全生，可以匡国，可以霸君，用此道也。 
现代文：小人以在田亩耕种为乐，君子保住他恬淡寡欲的素养，耕田供给食用，食用不会穷尽；养蚕供给衣着，衣着不会匮乏。在下的百姓有余力供奉君长，在上的君王以无为之治对待百姓。能够保全自身，能够匡正国家，能够使国君称霸，全都是因为运用了这种神减的道理。 
English: The villain takes pleasure in cultivating his acres of land, the gentleman preserves the quality of his meekness. The cultivated land provides food, and the food will not be exhausted; the serpents provide clothing, and there will be no shortage of clothing. The people below have enough energy to serve the ruler, and the king above treats the people with nothing. Being able to preserve oneself, rectify the country, and make the king dominate are all due to the use of this principle of diminishing God.

古文：此论出，朝野喧哗，子良集僧难之而不能屈。
现代文：逭篇《神灭论》一写出来，朝野人士都为之哗然。萧子良聚集了许多僧人诘难范缜，但却不能使范缜理屈。
English: Xiao Ziliang gathered many monks to oppose Fan Kuo, but they were unable to persuade him.

古文：缜在南累年，追还京。
现代文：范缜在南方多年，被召回京城。
English: Fan Ye has been in the south for many years and has been called back to Beijing.

古文：既至，以为中书郎、国子博士，卒官。
现代文：回到京城后，朝廷命他为中书郎、国子博士，在任职期间去世。
English: After returning to Kyoto, the Imperial Court appointed him as Chushiro, Dr. Kuniko, but he died while in office.

古文：文集十卷。
现代文：范缜有文集十卷。
English: Yan Yan died during his term of office. He had a collection of ten volumes.

古文：子胥，字长才。
现代文：范缜之子范胥，字长才。
English: Fan Qi, the son of Fan Qi, is called Chang Cai.

古文：传父学，起家太学博士。
现代文：他继承了父亲的学问，初出仕任太学博士。
English: He inherited his father's learning and became a doctor of science for the first time.

古文：胥有口辩，大同中，常兼主客郎，对接北使。
现代文：范胥有能言善辩之才，大同年间，曾经兼任主客郎，承担迎接对答北方使者的使命。
English: Fan Xuan had a talent for eloquence and debate. During the same year, he also served as host and guest, undertaking the mission of welcoming and answering the northern envoys.

古文：迁平西湘东王谘议参军，侍宣城王读。
现代文：范胥迁任平西湘东王谘议参军，侍宣城王读。
English: Fan Qianqian was appointed as the adviser to the king of Pingxi and Shandong to join the army, and the attendant to the king of Xuancheng.

古文：出为鄱阳内史，卒于郡。
现代文：出京任鄱阳内史，在郡中去世。
English: He went to Beijing to serve as the Inner Historian of Shenyang and died in Guozhong.

古文：严植之，字孝源，建平秭归人也。
现代文：严植之字孝源，建平秭归人。
English: Yan Zhi's character Xiaoyuan, Jian Pingyao, has passed away.

古文：祖钦，宋通直散骑常侍。
现代文：他的祖父严钦，宋时任通直散骑常侍。
English: His grandfather, Yan Qin, was a Song Dynasty general.

古文：植之少善《庄》、《老》，能玄言，精解《丧服》、《孝经》、《论语》。
现代文：严植之从小精通庄子》、《老子》，能够谈论老、庄的玄理理论，对《丧服》、孝经》、《论语》有很精妙的理解。
English: Yan Zizhi has been proficient in Zhuangzi and Laozi since childhood. He is able to talk about the metaphysical theory of Lao and Zhuang, and has a very fine understanding of "Funeral Clothes," "Filial Piety" and "Analects."

古文：及长，遍治郑氏《礼》、《周易》、《毛诗》、《左氏春秋》。
现代文：到成年以后，他广泛研读郑氏所注的《礼》、周易》、《毛诗》、《左氏春秋》。
English: After he became an adult, he extensively studied "Li," "Zhou Yi," "Mao Shi" and "Zao Shi Chunqiu" all of which were written by Zheng.

古文：性淳孝谨厚，不以所长高人。
现代文：他性情淳朴孝敬，恭谨厚道，不凭自己的长处凌驾别人之上。
English: His disposition is simple and filial, respectful and kind, and he does not rely on his own strengths to dominate others.

古文：少遭父忧，因菜食二十三载，后得风冷疾，乃止。
现代文：严植之少年时候父亲去世，因而二十三年间衹食用蔬菜，后来因为患上了风寒病，才改变衹用蔬食的习惯。
English: When Yan Zhi's father died when he was a young boy, Yan Zhi ate vegetables for 23 years. Later, he changed his habit of eating vegetables because he suffered from cold and flu.

古文：齐永明中，始起家为庐陵王国侍郎，迁广汉王国右常侍。
现代文：齐永明年间，他初出仕任庐陵王国侍郎。迁任广汉王国右常侍。
English: In the middle of the Qianlong year, he first served as the attendant of the Kingdom of Fuling. He was transferred to the right attendant of the Kingdom of Guanghan.

古文：王诛，国人莫敢视，植之独奔哭，手营殡殓，徒跣送丧墓所，为起冢，葬毕乃还，当时义之。
现代文：广汉王被诛，国中之人没有谁敢去处理广汉王的尸身，严植之一个人赶去哭吊，亲手办理殡殓广汉王的事情，赤着脚把丧柩送往墓地，下葬后又为广汉王建造墓冢，埋葬之事办完才回家，当时人认为严植之很讲求义。
English: When Guanghan Wang was buried, no one in the country dared to dispose of the body of Guanghan Wang. A person from Yan Zi rushed to cry and hang, personally handled the funeral of Guanghan King, sent the funeral to the cemetery barefoot, and built a tomb for Guanghan King after the burial. After the burial, he went home. At that time, people thought that Yan Zi was very eloquent.

古文：建武中，迁员外郎、散骑常侍。
现代文：建武年间，严植之迁任员外郎、散骑常侍。
English: During the Kenmu era, Yan Zi was transferred to the position of outside retainer, and became a samurai.

古文：寻为康乐侯相，在县清白，民吏称之。
现代文：不久又任康乐侯相，在县任职期间为官廉洁，百姓、属下官吏都称颂他。
English: Not long after, he was appointed as Kangle Hossang. During his tenure in the county, he was an incorruptible official, and the people and subordinate officials all praised him.

古文：天监二年，板后军骑兵参军事。
现代文：天监二年，严植之被任命为后军骑兵参军事。
English: In the second year of Tianjun, Yan Zizhi was appointed as a rear army cavalryman to participate in the military.

古文：高祖诏求通儒治五礼，有司奏植之治凶礼。
现代文：高祖下韶征求通晓古今学识渊博的儒者研究五礼，有司上奏，严植之可以研究凶礼。
English: Gao Zu asked Confucius, who was well-versed in ancient and modern studies, to study the Five Rites.

古文：四年初，置《五经》博士，各开馆教授，以植之兼《五经》博士。
现代文：天监四年，开始设置《五经》博士，各经博士都开设学馆教授学生，命严植之兼《五经》博士。
English: In the fourth year of the Heaven's Supervision, the establishment of the "Five Classics" doctorate began. Each doctor of philosophy opened a school to teach students, and the doctor of "Five Classics" was also appointed.

古文：植之馆在潮沟，生徒常百数。
现代文：严植之学馆设在翘遘，学生常有数百人。
English: Yan Zhi's school is located in Zhaozhou, and there are often hundreds of students.

古文：植之讲，五馆生必至，听者千余人。
现代文：屋擅主讲解经义，五馆的学生一定都来，听他讲授的有一千余人。
English: Ya is good at explaining the meaning of the sutras, and students from the five schools are sure to come. There are more than a thousand people listening to his lectures.

古文：六年，迁中抚军记室参军，犹兼博士。
现代文：天监六年，严植之迁任抚军记室参军，还兼任博士。
English: After six years as a celestial supervisor, Yan Zi was transferred to the military record office to join the army, and also served as a doctor.

古文：七年，卒于馆，时年五十二。
现代文：天监七年，严植之在学馆去世，死时五十二岁。
English: After seven years as overseer of heaven, Yan Zizhi died at the academy, at the age of fifty-two.

古文：植之自疾后，便不受廪俸，妻子困乏。
现代文：严植之从患病以后，就不肯接受俸禄，妻子和孩子的生活因此而困乏。
English: After Yan Shizhi fell ill, he refused to accept his salary. As a result, his wife and children's lives were impoverished.

古文：既卒，丧无所寄，生徒为市宅，乃得成丧焉。
现代文：严植主死后，丧柩没有地方寄放，他的学生为他家买了宅院，这才得以完成丧葬事宜。
English: After the death of Mr. Yan Zi, there was no place to leave the funeral. His students bought a house for his family, which made it possible to complete the funeral.

古文：植之性仁慈，好行阴德，虽在暗室，未尝怠也。
现代文：严植之生性仁慈，喜欢不声不响地干善事，即使在众人不知道的情况下，也未曾懈怠。
English: He has a strong benevolent nature and likes to quietly do good deeds, even if people don't know about it.

古文：少尝山行，见一患者，植之问其姓名，不能答，载与俱归，为营医药，六日而死。
现代文：严植主年轻时曾在山中赶路，见到一个患病的人，严擅之间那个病人的姓名，病人不能回答。严植之于是把那病人放上车，载着他一同回家，为他请臀抓药。
English: When Yan Zechuan was young, he was driving in the mountains. He saw a sick man. Yan Zechuan knew the name of the sick man, but the sick man could not answer. Yan Zechuan then put the sick man in the car, drove him home together, and asked him to take medicine for his hip.

古文：植之为棺殓殡之，卒不知何许人也。
现代文：病人过了六天就死了，严植之又为他买棺殡殓，到最终也不知道逭病人是什么人。
English: The patient died six days later, and Yan Zhi also bought a coffin for his funeral. In the end, he didn't even know who the patient was.

古文：尝缘栅塘行，见患人卧塘侧，植之下车问其故，云姓黄氏，家本荆州，为人佣赁，疾既危笃，船主将发，弃之于岸。
现代文：严植之一次曾沿着挝坛行路，见到一个病人躺在堤旁，严植之下车向病人了解情况，病人自己说是姓黄，家本来在荆州，为人做佣工，患上了病，病已经很重而且危险，雇佣他的船主将要开船的时候，把他丢在岸上。
English: On one occasion, Yan Zhi was traveling along the Lao Altar and saw a sick man lying by the embankment. Yan Zi got out of the car to inquire about the patient. The patient himself said that his surname was Huang, his home was originally in Jingzhou, he worked as a domestic helper, and he fell ill. The illness was already severe and dangerous. When the shipowner who hired him was about to sail, he left him on the shore.

古文：植之心恻然，载还治之，经年而黄氏差，请终身充奴仆以报厚恩。
现代文：严植之内心十分同情他，就把他用车载回家，为他治病。过了一年姓黄的人病已痊愈，他请求终身做严植之的奴仆来报答严植之的大恩。
English: Yan Zi felt very sorry for him, so he took him home in his car and treated him. After a year, the man surnamed Huang had recovered from his illness, and he asked to be Yan Zi's slave for life to repay Yan Zi's great favor.

古文：植之不受，遗以资粮，遣之。
现代文：严植之不肯接受，而且送钱送粮给他，让他回家。
English: Yan Zhi refused to accept it, and sent money and grain to him so that he could return home.

古文：其义行多如此。
现代文：严植之像这样的仁义之举很多。
English: There are many acts of kindness like this.

古文：撰《凶礼仪注》四百七十九卷。
现代文：严植之撰写了《凶礼仪注》四百七十九卷。
English: Yan Zizhi authored 479 volumes of "Fierce Rites and Rituals."

古文：贺瑒，字德琏，会稽山阴人也。
现代文：贺瑒字德琏，会稽山阴入。
English: He Xuan, Zi De, He Jian, He Jian, He Jian, He Jian.

古文：祖道力，善《三礼》，仕宋为尚书三公郎、建康令。
现代文：他的祖父贺道力，精通《三礼》，在宋时任尚书三公郎、建康令。
English: His grandfather, He Daoli, was well versed in the "Three Rites" and served as Shangshu Sangongro and Jiankangling during the Song Dynasty.

古文：瑒少传家业。
现代文：贺瑒从小继承家学。
English: He Xi inherited the family education from an early age.

古文：齐时，沛国刘献为会稽府丞，见蒨深器异之。
现代文：齐时沛国刘献为会稽府丞，见到贺埸，对他的才学十分惊异，非常器重他。
English: At that time, Liu Xian, a member of the board of examiners, was very surprised to see He Xuan, and was very impressed by his talent.

古文：尝与俱造吴郡张融，指蒨谓融曰： 此生神明聪敏，将来当为儒者宗。 
现代文：刘献曾经与贺场一同拜访吴郡张融，刘献指着画笔墨对张融说： 这个年轻人心智聪明灵敏，将来会成为儒者的宗师。 
English: Liu Xian once visited Zhang Rong in Wu County together with He Champ. Liu Xian pointed to the brush and said to Zhang Rong: This young man is smart and sensitive, and will become the master of Confucianism in the future.

古文：献还，荐之为国子生。
现代文：刘献回到京城之后，推荐贺瑒为国子生。
English: After Liu Xian returned to Beijing, he recommended He Yao as the son of the country.

古文：举明经，扬州祭酒，俄兼国子助教。
现代文：贺瑒被荐举为明经，祭酒，不久又兼国子助教。
English: He Xuan was recommended as a Ming Dynasty, sacrificial wine, and soon became an assistant professor of Kuniko.

古文：历奉朝请、太学博士、太常丞，遭母忧去职。
现代文：先后担任奉朝请，太学博士，太常丞，遇到母亲去世离职。
English: He successively held the posts of Minister of Education, Vice-Minister of Education, Vice-Minister of Education, and Vice-Minister of Education until his mother passed away.

古文：天监初，复为太常丞，有司举治宾礼，召见说《礼》义，高祖异之，诏朝朔望，预华林讲。
现代文：天监初年，他又任太常丞，有司荐举他研究宾礼，高祖召见他讲说《礼》的经义，对他的学识深感惊异，下诏命每月初一、十五上朝，参预在华林园讲经。
English: In the first year of his tenure as celestial supervisor, he was appointed to the position of Tai Changzheng (太常丞) and was recommended by the secretary to study the sutras. Gao Zu summoned him to lecture on the meaning of the "Rite" and was deeply surprised by his knowledge. He was ordered by the emperor to go to the morning on the first day and the fifteenth day of every month to participate in the sermon at the Hualin Garden.

古文：四年初，开五馆，以瑒兼《五经》博士，别诏为皇太子定礼，撰《五经义》。
现代文：型四年，刚刚开设《五经》学馆，命贺场兼《五经》博士，专门下韶命贺场为皇太子定礼，撰写《五经义》。
English: In the fourth year of his reign, he had just opened the "Five Classics" study hall, and appointed He Yifang as the "Five Classics" doctor. He specially appointed He Yifang as the crown prince's celebrant and wrote "Five Classics."

古文：瑒悉礼旧事。时高祖方创定礼乐，蒨所建议，多见施行。
现代文：贺场熟悉礼及有关旧例，当时产担正在改定创制礼乐制度，贺场提出的见解，多数被直狙采用施行。
English: Hefang was familiar with the ritual and related old cases. At that time, the production department was revising the system of creating ritual music. Most of the opinions put forward by Hefang were directly adopted and implemented.

古文：七年，拜步兵校尉，领《五经》博士。
现代文：玉监七年，画逊被拜为步兵校尉，领《五经》博士。
English: In the seven years of the Jade Emperor, the artist was worshiped as an infantry captain and received the title of "Five Classics" doctor.

古文：九年，遇疾，遣医药省问，卒于馆，时年五十九。
现代文：天监九年，贺场患病，直担派医送药，常常探问。贺埸在学馆中去世，死时五十九岁。
English: In the ninth year of Tianjun, Hefang fell ill. He was directly in charge of sending doctors to deliver medicine, and often inquired. He He passed away at the age of fifty-nine in the school hall.

古文：所著《礼》、《易》、《老》、《庄讲疏》、《朝廷博议》数百篇，《宾礼仪注》一百四十五卷。
现代文：贺场着有《礼讲疏》、《易讲疏》、《老子讲疏》、《庄子讲疏》、《朝廷博议》共敷百篇，《宾礼仪注》一百四十五卷。
English: There are a total of 100 volumes of "Rites and Etiquette," "Easy to Recite," "Lao Zi Recites," "Zhuang Zi Recites," "Imperial Court Discussions," and 145 volumes of "Rites and Etiquette Notes."

古文：瑒于《礼》尤精，馆中生徒常百数，弟子明经封策至数十人。
现代文：贺场对于《礼》尤其精通，他的学馆中学生常常有数百名，弟子参加明经对策的有数十人。
English: Hechang is particularly proficient in the "Rite." There are often hundreds of middle school students in his school, and dozens of disciples participate in the Mingjing countermeasures.

古文：二子。
现代文：贺瑒有两个儿子。
English: Herao has two sons.

古文：革，字文明。
现代文：大儿子贺革字文明。
English: The eldest son, He Gezi Wenming, was born.

古文：少通《三礼》，及长，遍治《孝经》、《论语》、《毛诗》、《左传》。
现代文：从小通晓《三礼》，到成年之后，广泛研究《孝经》、《论语》、《毛诗》、《左传》。
English: From an early age, he was familiar with the "Three Rites," and after he became an adult, he extensively studied the "Book of Filial Piety," the "Analects," the "Mao Poems" and the "Left Biography."

古文：起家晋安王国侍郎、兼太学博士，侍湘东王读。
现代文：初出仕任晋安王国侍郎、兼太学博士，侍湘东王读。
English: At the beginning of his service, he was appointed as a chamberlain of the Jinan Kingdom, and also as a Doctor of Theology, studying under the Eastern King of Hunan.

古文：敕于永福省为邵陵、湘东、武陵三王讲礼。
现代文：高祖命他在永福省为邵陵王、湘东王、武陵王讲解礼。
English: Gao Zu ordered him to explain the etiquette to King Shao Ling, King Xiangdong and King Wuling in Yongfu Province.

古文：稍迁湘东王府行参军，转尚书仪曹郎。
现代文：贺堇逐渐迁升为湘东王府行参军，转任尚书仪曹郎。
English: He He gradually moved up to join the army in Wangfujing, Shandong Province, and was transferred to the position of Shoshuyi sergeant.

古文：寻除秣陵令，迁国子博士，于学讲授，生徒常数百人。
现代文：不久又被除授秣陵令，迁任国子博士，在国学讲授的时候，学生常有数百人。
English: Not long after, he was stripped of his Fuling Order and transferred to the position of Dr. Kuniko. When he was lecturing on Chinese studies, there were often hundreds of students.

古文：出为西中郎湘东王谘议参军，带江陵令。
现代文：贺革出京任西中郎湘东王谘议参军，兼任江陵令。
English: He Ge went to Beijing to serve as the West Middle Lord of the Shandong King to consult on joining the army, and also served as the Gangneung Ruling.

古文：王初于府置学，以革领儒林祭酒，讲《三礼》，荆楚衣冠听者甚众。
现代文：湘束王开始在王府中设置学校，命贺革领儒林祭酒，讲授《三礼》，荆楚一带仕宦之家来听贺革讲授的人很多。
English: King Xiangzhu began to set up a school in the royal palace. He ordered He Ge to lead the Julin festival wine and teach the "Three Rites." Many people from Jingchu and other areas came to listen to He Ge's lecture.

古文：前后再监南平郡，为民吏所德。
现代文：贺革前后两次作南平郡监，百姓官吏都对他感恩戴德。
English: He Ge served as Nanping County Supervisor twice before and after, and the people and officials were very grateful to him.

古文：寻加贞威将军、兼平西长史、南郡太守。
现代文：不久，贺革被加授贞威将军、兼平西长史、南郡太守。
English: Soon, Hege was awarded the title of General Zhenwei, as well as the titles of Pingxi Changshi and Nan County Governor.

古文：革性至孝，常恨贪禄代耕，不及养。
现代文：贺革生性非常孝敬，常常因为贪求俸禄代替耕种、不能在双亲健在时适时供养而遣憾。
English: He Ge was born with a very filial nature, and he often regretted not being able to provide for his parents when they were healthy because he was greedy for salary instead of farming.

古文：在荆州历为郡县，所得俸秩，不及妻孥，专拟还乡造寺，以申感思。
现代文：所以贺革在荆州历任郡县长官之职，得到的俸禄，不给妻子和孩子，专门留存，准备回乡建造寺庙，以表达自己思念父母之情。
English: Therefore, He Ge did not give his wife and children the salary he received for his position as the most senior county magistrate in Jingzhou, but kept it for himself, preparing to return to his hometown to build a temple to express his feelings of missing his parents.

古文：大同六年，卒官，时年六十二。
现代文：大同六年，贺革在任职期间去世，死时六十二岁。
English: In the sixth year of Datong, He Ge passed away during his term of office, at the age of sixty-two.

古文：弟季，亦明《三礼》，历官尚书祠部郎，兼中书通事舍人。累迁步兵校尉、中书黄门郎，兼著作。
现代文：贺革之弟贺季，也通晓《三礼》，历任尚书祠部郎，兼中书通事舍人，积累功劳升迁为步兵校尉，中书黄门郎，兼著作郎。
English: Hege's younger brother, He Ji, was also familiar with the "Three Rites" and successively served as the minister of the temple of Shangshu, as well as the secretary of Chinese calligraphy, and was promoted to the rank of infantry lieutenant, the Huangmen Lang of Chinese calligraphy, and the author.

古文：司马筠，字贞素，河内温人，晋骠骑将军谯烈王承七世孙。
现代文：司马筠字贞素，河内温县人，他是晋骠骑将军谯烈王司马承的第七代子孙。
English: Sima Xizhe Zhengsu, a native of Hanoi's Wen County, is the seventh generation descendant of Wang Sima Cheng, a general of the Jin Dynasty.

古文：祖亮，宋司空从事中郎。
现代文：他的祖父司马亮，宋时任司空从事中郎。
English: His grandfather, Sima Liang, was a middle-ranking official in Song Dynasty.

古文：父端，齐奉朝请。
现代文：父亲司马端，齐时任奉朝请。
English: His father, Sima Duan, was appointed to serve the imperial court at that time.

古文：筠孤贫好学，师事沛国刘献，强力专精，深为献所器异。
现代文：司马筠从小失去父亲，家中贫穷，但他十分爱好学习，他师从沛国，努力刻苦，专一求精，深受器重。
English: Sima Yao lost his father when he was a child, and his family was poor, but he was very fond of learning. He learned from Pei Guo, worked hard, devoted himself to excellence, and was deeply valued.

古文：既长，博通经术，尤明《三礼》。
现代文：到成年之后，司马筠知识渊博，精通经术，尤其通晓《三礼》。
English: After he became an adult, Sima Ye was very knowledgeable and proficient in the classics, especially in the "Three Rites."

古文：齐建武中，起家奉朝请，迁王府行参军。
现代文：齐建武年间，司马筠从家居出仕任奉朝请，迁任王府行参军。
English: During Qi Jianwu's reign, Sima Wei left home to serve at the request of the emperor and moved to the royal palace to join the army.

古文：天监初，为本州治中，除暨阳令，有清绩。
现代文：天监初年，司马筠为本州治中，被除授暨阳令，有清明廉洁的政续。
English: In the first year of the Heaven's Supervisor, Sima Wei was in the middle of governing Honshu. He was stripped of his title and given the rank of Yangling. He had a clear and clean political continuity.

古文：入拜尚书祠部郎。
现代文：司马筠入京被拜为尚书祠部郎。
English: Sima Ye entered Beijing and was worshipped as the minister of the temple of Shangshu.

古文：七年，安成太妃陈氏薨，江州刺史安成王秀、荆州刺史始兴王憺，并以《慈母表》解职，诏不许，还摄本任；而太妃薨京邑，丧祭无主。
现代文：天监七年，安成太妃陈氏去世，江州刺史安成王萧秀、荆州刺史始兴王萧儋，都因为太妃是抚育自己成长的庶母，有慈母之恩，所以都以慈母去世的理由上表请求解职，高祖下韶不准许，命他们回任所管辖任内的事情，但太妃是在京城去世，因此丧事祭奠都没有丧主。
English: In the seventh year of Tianjing, Ancheng Taifei Chen died, Jiangzhou Taifei Ancheng Wang Xiao Xiu and Jingzhou Taifei Shi Xing Wang Xiao Wei died. Because Taifei was the stepmother who raised them and had the grace of a loving mother, they all requested to be relieved of their duties on the grounds of their mother's death. Gaozhu Xing did not allow them and ordered them to return to the matters under their jurisdiction. However, Taifei died in Beijing, so they did not lose their master.

古文：舍人周舍议曰： 贺彦先称 慈母之子不服慈母之党，妇又不从夫而服慈姑，小功服无从故也。 
现代文：舍人周舍论说道： 贺彦先称 慈母养育的孩子不为慈母的族亲服丧，慈母之子的妻子又不随从丈夫为慈姑服丧，这是因为小功丧服没有随从服丧的规定 。
English: On the subject of mourning, Zhou Shao said: Hera Hong first said that the children raised by the loving mother did not mourn for the relatives of the loving mother, and the wife of the loving mother's son did not follow her husband to mourn for the loving aunt. This is because there is no requirement for the mourning clothes to follow the mourning.

古文：庾蔚之云： 非徒子不从母而服其党，孙又不从父而服其慈母。 由斯而言，慈祖母无服明矣。
现代文：庾蔚之说： 不衹是慈母之子不随从慈母为慈母的族亲服丧，孙子也不随从父亲为父亲的慈母服丧，由此看来，孙子不为慈祖母服丧是很清楚的了。
English: Gong Weizhi said, "It is not right that the son of a loving mother does not follow his loving mother to mourn for his loving mother's relatives, and the grandson does not follow his father to mourn for his father's loving mother. From this, it is very clear that the grandson does not mourn for his loving grandmother."

古文：寻门内之哀，不容自同于常；按父之祥禫，子并受吊。
现代文：考察家门之内治哀的礼仪，不允许和常礼相同；查核古礼，在父亲死后二十五个月举行的祥祭和死后二十七个月举行的掸祭仪式上，儿子要接受宾客吊祭。
English: Examining the etiquette of mourning within the family, it is not allowed to be the same as the rite; checking the ancient rite, at the Xiang Festival held twenty-five months after his father's death and the sacrificial ceremony held twenty-seven months after his death, the son must accept the guest hanging sacrifice.

古文：今二王诸子，宜以成服日，单衣一日，为位受吊。 
现代文：现在安成王、始兴王二位王爷，应当在大殓之后穿上丧服的成服之日，全天穿单衣素服，站在丧主位置上接受宾客祭吊。 
English: Now, the two princes, Ancheng Wang and Shixing Wang, should wear single-layer plain clothes all day long on the day when they put on the completed mourning clothes after the funeral, and stand in the position of the bereaved to receive the guests' offerings.

古文：制曰： 二王在远，诸子宜摄祭事。 
现代文：高祖命令说： 安成王、始兴王二王在远离京城的地方，他们的儿子应当代为主持祭奠之事。 
English: Gao Zu ordered: King Ancheng and King Shi Xing are far away from the capital, and their sons should preside over the memorial service.

古文：舍又曰： 《礼》云 缟冠玄武，子姓之冠 。则世子衣服宜异于常。
现代文：周舍又说： 《礼》中说： 缟冠玄武，是子孙们戴的冠，据此世子在祭祀时穿的衣服应当不同于常人穿的衣服。
English: Zhou She also said, "In "Rite," it says, "The crown worn by Xuanwu is the crown worn by his descendants. According to this, the clothes worn by the world's son during the ritual should be different from the clothes worn by ordinary people."

古文：可著细布衣，绢为领带，三年不听乐。
现代文：应当制作捆布衣服，用绢作领和带，三年不听音乐。
English: They are to make sackcloth their clothing, and put sackcloth on their loins for a collar and for a belt; and they are not to listen to music for three years.

古文：又《礼》及《春秋》：庶母不世祭，盖谓无王命者耳。
现代文：又《礼》和《春秋》中说，对庶母不世代祭祀，大概指的衹是没有受王命封赠的妇人而已。
English: It is also said in "Rite" and "Spring and Autumn" that there is no generational sacrifice for the stepmother, which roughly means a woman who has not been bestowed by the king's order.

古文：吴太妃既朝命所加，得用安成礼秩，则当祔庙，五世亲尽乃毁。
现代文：吴太妃既是朝廷已命加以封赠的，能够按安成王礼仪祭祀，那么吴太妃就应当享受拊祭礼仪，到五代亲族全都不存之后才毁去庙。
English: Since Empress Dowager Wu had been ordered by the imperial court to seal the gift, and since she was able to perform the ritual according to the etiquette of King Ancheng, then Empress Dowager Wu should have enjoyed the ritual of the burnt offering, and only destroyed the temple after all five generations of relatives had passed away.

古文：陈太妃命数之重，虽则不异，慈孙既不从服，庙食理无传祀，子祭孙止，是会经文。 
现代文：陈太妃的地位等级，和吴太妃虽然没有差别，但她衹是二王的慈母，慈孙不随从父亲为慈祖母服丧，按理在宗庙中享受祭祀也不应当延续，儿子要祭祀慈母，孙辈就应停止，这样才和经文所说的相符。 
English: Although there is no difference in the status and rank of Chen Taifei and Wu Taifei, she is the loving mother of the two kings. The loving grandchildren do not follow their father to pay their respects to the loving grandmother. According to the theory, they should not continue to enjoy the sacrifice in the ancestral temple. The son should sacrifice the loving mother, and the grandchildren should stop. This is in line with what the scripture says.

古文：高祖因是敕礼官议皇子慈母之服。
现代文：高祖因此命令礼官议定皇子为慈母服丧的丧服和守丧期限。
English: Gaozu therefore ordered the etiquette officer to agree on the mourning clothes and the period of mourning for the prince to mourn his mother.

古文：筠议： 宋朝五服制，皇子服训养母，依《礼》庶母慈己，宜从小功之制。
现代文：司马筠主张： 宋朝的五服制规定，皇子为训养母服丧，依照礼》庶母慈养自己应当服丧的条文，应当服小功之丧。
English: Sima Yi advocated: According to the Song Dynasty's five-service system, the prince should perform funeral rites for his training mother, and in accordance with the provisions of the "Rite" that the common mother should perform funeral rites for herself, she should perform funeral rites for minor merits.

古文：按《曾子问》曰：子游曰： 丧慈母如母，礼欤？ 
现代文：据《曾子间》文中说： 子游说：为慈母服丧，如同为母亲服丧，这符合礼吗?
English: According to the article "Among the Sons and Daughters of the Ancients," the son lobbied: "Is it proper to mourn for a loving mother as one mourns for a mother?

古文：孔子曰： 非礼也。
现代文：孔子说：这不符合礼。
English: Confucius said, "This is not proper.

古文：古者男子外有傅，内有慈母，君命所使教子也，何服之有？ 郑玄注云： 此指谓国君之子也。 
现代文：古代男子在外有师傅，家内有慈母，这是国君派他们来教育孩子的，哪有为他们服丧的礼，郑玄注解说： 这是指国君之子而言。 
English: In ancient times, men had a teacher outside and a loving mother at home. This was because the sovereign sent them to educate their children. There was no funeral service for them, Zheng Xuan commented: This refers to the sons of the sovereign.

古文：若国君之子不服，则王者之子不服可知。
现代文：假若国君之子不为慈母服丧，那君王之子不为慈母服丧就能够清楚地知道了。
English: If the son of the sovereign does not mourn for his mother, then the son of the sovereign does not mourn for his mother.

古文：又《丧服经》云 君子子为庶母慈己者 。
现代文：又《丧服》经文中说： 君子之子为养育自己的庶母服丧。 
English: In addition, the "mourning clothes" scripture says: The son of a nobleman will mourn for the stepmother who raised him.

古文：《传》曰： 君子子者，贵人子也。 
现代文：传文说： 君子之子，指贵族之子。 
English: The message said: "The son of a gentleman, meaning the son of a nobleman."

古文：郑玄引《内则》：三母止施于卿大夫。
现代文：郑玄注引《内则》，设立三母的礼制衹在卿大夫的范围内施行。
English: Zheng Xuan cited the "Internal Regulations" to establish the three-mothers' etiquette within the scope of the doctor.

古文：以此而推，则慈母之服，上不在五等之嗣，下不逮三士之息。
现代文：用这些依据来推论，那么为慈母服丧的规定，往上不涉及享有五等爵位的诸侯之子，往下不涉及上士、中士、下士三等士人之子。
English: On the basis of these considerations, it can be deduced that the regulation of mourning for a loving mother does not apply to the sons of princes who enjoy the fifth rank of peerage, and it does not apply to the sons of officers, sergeants, and corporals of the third rank.

古文：傥其服者止卿大夫，寻诸侯之子尚无此服，况乃施之皇子。
现代文：假若为慈母服丧衹是在卿大夫范围之内，查核诸侯之子还没有按这规定服丧，更何况是皇帝之子呢。
English: If it is within the scope of a court physician to mourn the death of a beloved mother, the sons of princes have not been mourned according to this rule, let alone the son of an emperor.

古文：谓宜依《礼》刊除，以反前代之惑。 
现代文：我认为应当依照《礼》删除这条规定，以便澄清前代的糊涂观念。 
English: I think that this provision should be deleted in accordance with the "Ritual" in order to clarify the confused ideas of the previous generation.

古文：高祖以为不然，曰： 《礼》言慈母，凡有三条：一则妾子之无母，使妾之无子者养之，命为母子，服以三年，《丧服齐衰章》所言 慈母 是也；二则嫡妻之子无母，使妾养之，慈抚隆至，虽均乎慈爱，但嫡妻之子，妾无为母之义，而恩深事重，故服以小功，《丧服小功章》所以不直言慈母，而云 庶母慈己 者，明异于三年之慈母也；其三则子非无母，正是择贱者视之，义同师保，而不无慈爱，故亦有慈母之名。
现代文：高祖认为不是这样。他说： 《礼》中说的慈母，共有三处：一是妾之子生母死了，命其他无子之妾抚养逭孩子，命为母子关系，养母死了之后，养子为她服丧三年，《丧服。齐衰章》说的 为慈母服丧如同为母亲服丧，指的就是这种情况；二是嫡妻之子生母死了，使妾养育逭孩子，仁爱抚育，关怀备至，虽和母亲之爱相同，但是嫡妻之子，没有以妾为母的规定，由于感情深、恩义重，所以养母死后，养子为之服小功丧服，《丧服叫、功章》不直接说 慈母 ，而说 抚养自己的庶母 的原因，就是为了表明这和那要为之服三年之丧的 慈母，有所不同；三是孩子并非没有母亲，衹是选择身份低贱的人养育遣孩子，这种形式如同师傅、保姆，但也有慈母爱子之情，所以也有慈母的名称。
English: Gao Zu didn't think so. He said, "There are three things about the loving mother mentioned in the "Rite": First, the concubine's son's birth mother died and ordered other concubines without children to raise the concubine's child. Life is a mother-child relationship. After the death of the adoptive mother, the adopted son mourned for her for three years. The "Ceremonial of Mourning" said that mourning for the loving mother is like mourning for the mother, which refers to this situation. Second, the legitimate wife's son's birth mother died, and the concubine raised the concubine's child. Although the love

古文：师保既无其服，则此慈亦无服矣。
现代文：师傅、保姆死后既然孩子不为他们服丧，那这种慈母死后也不必为之服丧。
English: Since children do not mourn the death of their teachers or nannies, they do not have to mourn the death of such a loving mother.

古文：《内则》云 择于诸母与可者，使为子师；其次为慈母；其次为保母 ，此其明文。
现代文：《内则》说 从诸母中选择条件适宜的，使她为子师；其次就为慈母，再其次就为保母 ，这是关于慈母的清清楚楚的文字规定。
English: The "Internal Regulations" say that from among the mothers, the most suitable one should be selected to be the son's teacher, followed by the loving mother, followed by the nursing mother, which is a clear and precise textual regulation of the loving mother.

古文：此言择诸母，是择人而为此三母，非谓择取兄弟之母也。
现代文：这裹说的 从诸母中选择 ，是指挑选人来担任遣三母，并不是说选择兄弟的母亲来担任三母。
English: The expression "choose from among the mothers" refers to the selection of a person to serve as the third mother, not to the selection of a brother's mother to serve as the third mother.

古文：何以知之？
现代文：凭什么知道这一点呢?
English: How do you know this?

古文：若是兄弟之母其先有子者，则是长妾，长妾之礼，实有殊加，何容次妾生子，乃退成保母，斯不可也。
现代文：假若是兄弟之母，那么就是先生了儿子，先生儿子身份就是长妾，长妾享受的礼仪已经有所提高，与一般妾的身份不同，哪会容许地位较低的妾生了儿子，竟然降低身份成为保母，这是不可能的。
English: If it is the mother of a brother, then it is the father of a son, the father of a son is the eldest concubine, and the etiquette enjoyed by the eldest concubine has been improved. Different from the status of a general concubine, which would allow a concubine with a lower status to have a son, and even lower the status to become a nanny, this is impossible.

古文：又有多兄弟之人，于义或可；若始生之子，便应三母俱阙邪？
现代文：又，有多个兄弟之人，在意义上或许讲得通；这样理解，假如是开始生的第一个儿子，就应当让三母的位置都空缺吗?
English: Also, if there are multiple brothers, it may make sense in a sense; understood in this way, if it is the first son to be born, should the position of the three mothers be left vacant?

古文：由是推之，《内则》所言 诸母 ，是谓三母，非兄弟之母明矣。
现代文：由遣点推论，内则》中说的 诸母，就是指的三母，并不是指兄弟的母亲，这是很清楚的。
English: It is clear from the above that the "mothers" mentioned in the "Inner Canon" refers to the three mothers, not to the mother of the brothers.

古文：子游所问，自是师保之慈，非三年小功之慈也，故夫子得有此对。
现代文：子游问的慈母，应当是指任师保的那种慈母，并不是指那种应当服三年小功丧服的慈母，所以孔子才有这样的对答。
English: The kind of loving mother that Ziyou asked about should be the kind of loving mother who is appointed as a teacher and guardian, not the kind of loving mother who should serve three years of hard labor, which is why Confucius had such a reply.

古文：岂非师保之慈母无服之证乎？
现代文：造岂不是对任师保的那种慈母儿子不必服丧的明证吗?
English: Isn't this a clear proof that the kind of motherly son who is the guarantor of the teacher doesn't have to mourn?

古文：郑玄不辨三慈，混为训释，引彼无服，以注 慈己 ，后人致谬，实此之由。
现代文：郑玄没有分辨三种慈母，含混地进行注释，引用对任师保的那种慈母不必服丧的例证，来注解 养育自己的庶母 ，后代人理解礼仪上的谬误，实在是出自郑玄这条注语。
English: Zheng Xuan did not distinguish between the three kinds of loving mothers, vaguely commented, and quoted the example of not having to mourn the kind of loving mother who was a teacher and guardian, to explain the fallacy of raising his own stepmother, future generations understand the etiquette, is really from Zheng Xuan's comment.

古文：经言 君子子 者，此虽起于大夫，明大夫犹尔，自斯以上，弥应不异，故传云 君子子者，贵人之子也 。
现代文：经文中说 君子之子，逭裹虽然指由大夫开始，但也清楚地指出大夫也还在遣范围内，从遣往上，更应当没有区别，所以传文说 君子之子，指贵族之子 。
English: The text says that the sons of nobles, although it refers to the beginning of the doctor, but it also clearly points out that the doctor is still within the scope of the dispatch, and there should be no difference from the dispatch, so the legend says that the sons of nobles, refers to the sons of nobles.

古文：总言曰贵，则无所不包。
现代文：总称为贵族，那么就无所不包。
English: If they are all called aristocrats, then they are all-inclusive.

古文：经传互文，交相显发，则知慈加之义，通乎大夫以上矣。
现代文：逭裹经文和传文互文见义，互相补充，互相说明，就知道对慈母加厚礼仪，由服鳃麻丧服改为服小功丧服的规定，在大夫以上全都通用。
English: If we look at the intertextuality, complementarity, and mutual explanation between the sutras and the proverbs, we will know that the rules of strengthening the etiquette for the loving mother, changing from wearing the nettle funeral dress to wearing the small merit funeral dress, are all common to doctors and above.

古文：宋代此科，不乖《礼》意，便加除削，良是所疑。 
现代文：宋代遣条规定，并不违背《礼》的原意，要消除它，实在是令人有所怀疑。 
English: According to the stipulation of the Song Dynasty, it does not violate the original meaning of the "Rite," and it is really doubtful to eliminate it.

古文：于是筠等请依制改定：嫡妻之子，母没为父妾所养，服之五月，贵贱并同，以为永制。
现代文：于是司马筠等人请求依照高祖的命令把有关礼仪改定为：嫡妻之子，母亲死后被父亲之妾养育，养母死后，应当为养母服丧五个月，贵贱都一同采用逭条规定，定为永久的制度。
English: Therefore, Sima Yi and others requested that, in accordance with Gao Zu's order, the relevant etiquette be changed to: the son of a legitimate wife, raised by his father's concubine after the death of his mother, after the death of his adoptive mother, he should mourn for his adoptive mother for five months, and both noble and humble people should adopt the provisions of the imperial edict and make it a permanent system.

古文：累迁王府谘议、权知左丞事，寻除尚书左丞。
现代文：司马筠积功迁任王府谘议、权知左丞事，不久除授为尚书左丞。
English: Sima accumulated merits and was appointed to the king's office of consultation, authority and knowledge, and was soon awarded the title of Shangshu Zuojie.

古文：出为始兴内史，卒官。
现代文：出京任始兴内史，在任职期间去世。
English: He went to Beijing to take up the post of First Vice-Minister of the People's Republic of China, but died while in office.

古文：子寿，传父业，明《三礼》。
现代文：司马筠之子司马寿，继承父亲的学业，精通《三礼》。
English: Sima Yu's son Sima Shou, inheriting his father's studies, is proficient in the "Three Rites."

古文：大同中，历官尚书祠部郎，出为曲阿令。
现代文：大同年间，曾任尚书祠部郎，出京任曲阿令。
English: In the same year, he was appointed as the minister of the temple of Shangshu, and went to Beijing to be appointed as the minister of Qu'ao.

古文：卞华，字昭丘，济阴冤句人也。
现代文：卞华字昭丘，济阴冤句人。
English: Zhihua Zi Zhao Qiu, Jiyin Guanzhu Ren.

古文：晋骠骑将军忠贞公壸六世孙。
现代文：他是晋骠骑将军忠贞公土童的第六代子孙。
English: He is the sixth generation descendant of the son of the general of the Jin and Qin Dynasties, Zhongzheng Doudong.

古文：父伦之，给事中。
现代文：他的父亲主俭主，任给事中。
English: His father was the main breadwinner, and he was left to his own devices.

古文：华幼孤贫好学。
现代文：卞华从小失去父亲，家中贫穷，但爱好学习。
English: Hao Hua lost her father when she was a child. Her family was poor, but she loved to study.

古文：年十四，召补国子生，通《周易》。
现代文：十四岁的时候，卞华被召补为国子生，通晓《周易》。
English: At the age of fourteen, Zou Hua was called to be a son of the country and was familiar with "Zhou Yi."

古文：既长，遍治《五经》，与平原明山宾、会稽贺蒨同业友善。
现代文：成年之后，卞华广泛研究《五经》，他与平原明山宾、会稽贺蒨一同修业，交情很好。
English: After he became an adult, Zou Hua extensively studied the "Five Classics." He studied with Pingyuan Mingshan Bin and He Zou, a member of the association, and they had a good relationship.

古文：起家齐豫章王国侍郎，累迁奉朝请、征西行参军。
现代文：初出仕任齐豫章王国侍郎，积功升迁为奉朝请，征西行参军。
English: At the beginning of his service, he was appointed as the attendant of the Qiyuzhang Kingdom, and was promoted to the position of minister to the emperor, and went to the west to join the army.

古文：天监初，迁临川王参军事，兼国子助教，转安成王功曹参军，兼《五经》博士，聚徒教授。
现代文：天监初年，卞华迁任临川王参军事，兼国子助教，转任安成王功曹参军，兼《五经》博士，聚集学生教授经学。
English: In the first year of the Heaven's Supervision, Zou Hua was transferred to the position of Linchuan Wangsan Military, and also Kuniko Assistant Professor, and then transferred to the position of Ancheng Wangsang Cao Military, and also Doctor of "Five Classics," and gathered students to teach classics.

古文：华博涉有机辩，说经析理，为当时之冠。
现代文：卞华涉猎很广，知识渊博，机智而且有口才，解说经文，剖析经义，是当时首屈一指的人物。
English: Zou Hua was a man of wide-ranging interests, profound knowledge, wit and eloquence. He was a preeminent figure at the time, interpreting scriptures and dissecting their meaning.

古文：江左以来，钟律绝学，至华乃通焉。
现代文：晋迁往江左之后，乐律成为绝学，到卞华才算通晓乐律。
English: After Jin moved to Jiangzuo, he never learned music theory, and it was not until he came to Zenghua that he became familiar with music theory.

古文：迁尚书仪曹郎，出为吴令，卒。
现代文：卞垄迁任尚书仪曹郎，出京任吴令，去世。
English: He was transferred to Shang Shuxi Cao Lang, and went to Beijing as Wu Ling, and passed away.

古文：崔灵恩，清河武城人也。
现代文：崔灵恩，清河东武城人。
English: Cui Ling'en, a native of Wucheng, East Qinghe.

古文：少笃学，从师遍通《五经》，尤精《三礼》、《三传》。
现代文：他从小专心好学，跟随老师学《五经》全都通晓，尤其精通《三礼》、《三传》。
English: He has been eager to learn since he was a child, following his teacher to study the "Five Classics" and is well versed in all of them, especially in the "Three Rites" and "Three Traditions."

古文：先在北仕为太常博士，天监十三年归国。
现代文：崔灵恩先在北朝出仕，任太常博士，天监十三年他回归梁。
English: Cui Ling'en first served in the Northern Dynasty, and was appointed to the position of Doctor of the Chinese Academy of Sciences. He returned to Liang in the 13th year of the Heaven's Guardianship.

古文：高祖以其儒术，擢拜员外散骑侍郎，累迁步兵校尉，兼国子博士。
现代文：高祖因为崔灵恩精通儒术，提拔他为员外散骑侍郎，积功迁任步兵校尉，兼国子博士。
English: Because Choe Ling En was proficient in Confucianism, Gao Zu promoted him to the rank of non-commissioned officer, and he was transferred to the rank of infantry lieutenant, and he was also awarded the title of Dr. Kuniko.

古文：灵恩聚徒讲授，听者常数百人。
现代文：崔灵恩收聚学生讲授经学，听他讲授经学的学生常常达到数百人。
English: Choe Ling Un gathers students to give lectures on the study of scripture, and the number of students who listen to his lectures on the study of scripture often reaches hundreds.

古文：性拙朴无风采，及解经析理，甚有精致，京师旧儒咸称重之，助教孔佥尤好其学。
现代文：他生性拙朴，没有文采，但是到解释经文剖析经义的时候，却很有情趣，京城中那些有声望的儒生都称道他，看重他，助教孔余特别喜爱他的学说。
English: He is simple by nature and has no literary flair, but when it comes to explaining and dissecting the meaning of scriptures, he is very amusing. All the reputable Confucian scholars in Beijing praise him and value him. Assistant Professor Kong Yu is particularly fond of his teachings.

古文：灵恩先习《左传》服解，不为江东所行；及改说杜义，每文句常申服以难杜，遂著《左氏条义》以明之。时有助教虞僧诞又精杜学，因作《申杜难服》，以报灵恩，世并行焉。
现代文：当时有助教虞僧诞又精通杜预的注解，因而着《申杜难服》，用以答对崔灵恩，他们两人的书在世上同时流传。虞僧诞，会稽余姚人，讲《左氏传》教授学生，听他讲授的也有数百人。
English: At that time, Yu Sangzhi, who was a teaching assistant and was also proficient in Du Yu's annotation, wrote "Shin Du Nanfu" as a reply to Cui Ling'en, and both of their books were circulated in the world at the same time. Yu Sangzhi, the auditor, taught students about "The Biography of Zuo," and hundreds of people listened to his lecture.

古文：先是儒者论天，互执浑、盖二义，论盖不合于浑，论浑不合于盖。
现代文：虞僧涎全面了解《左氏传》著书的主旨和体例，当时没有人能比得上。在这以前儒家学者论说天体，浑天、盖天两种说法并存，论说天体为盖天的人不同意潭天的观点，论说天体为浑天的人不同意盖天的观点。
English: At that time, there was no one who could match the comprehensive understanding of the theme and style of the book "The Biography of Zuo" by Yu Sangyu. Before this, Confucian scholars argued that the celestial bodies, the sky and the sky existed side by side. Those who argued that the celestial bodies were the sky did not agree with the view of the sky, and those who argued that the celestial bodies were the sky did not agree with the view of the sky.

古文：灵恩立义，以浑、盖为一焉。
现代文：查玺墨树立自己的观点，把潭天、盖天的学说糅合在一起。
English: Zha Rongmo set up his own point of view and combined the teachings of the sky and the sky.

古文：出为长沙内史，还除国子博士，讲众尤盛。
现代文：崔灵恩出京任长沙内史，回京被除授为国子博士，向他学习的学生特别多。
English: Cui Ling'en went to Beijing to serve as the Changsha Inner Historian, and returned to Beijing to be awarded the title of Kuniko Doctor. Many students studied under him.

古文：出为明威将军、桂州刺史，卒官。
现代文：他出京任明威将军、挂丛刺史，在任职期间去世。
English: He went to Beijing to serve as General Mingwei, but died while in office.

古文：灵恩集注《毛诗》二十二卷，集注《周礼》四十卷，制《三礼义宗》四十七卷，《左氏经传义》二十二卷，《左氏条例》十卷，《公羊谷梁文句义》十卷。
现代文：崔龃撰有《集注毛诗》二十二卷，《集注周礼》四十卷，着有《三礼义宗》四十七卷，《左氏经传义》二十二卷，《左氏条例》十卷，公羊谷梁文句义》十卷。
English: Cui Jian wrote 22 volumes of "Collections of Mao Poetry," 40 volumes of "Collections of Weekly Rituals," 47 volumes of "Three Rites of Yizong," 22 volumes of "Introduction of Zuo's Classics," 10 volumes of "Regulations of Zuo," and 10 volumes of "Commentary on the Ram Valley."

古文：孔佥，会稽山阴人。
现代文：孔佥，会稽山阴入。
English: Confucius said, "Confucianism is like a mountain.

古文：少师事何胤，通《五经》，尤明《三礼》、《孝经》、《论语》，讲说并数十遍，生徒亦数百人。
现代文：年幼时王逾拜何胤为师，他通晓五经》，尤其精通三礼》、《孝致、论语》，论说讲授这些经文都有数十遍，学生也有数百人。
English: When he was young, Wang Xiaobai took He Yin as his teacher. He was well versed in the Five Classics, especially in the Three Rites, Filial Piety, and Analects. He lectured on these scriptures dozens of times, and had hundreds of students.

古文：历官国子助教，三为《五经》博士，迁尚书祠部郎。
现代文：壬嘘历任国子助教，三次任《五经》博士，迁任尚书祠部郎。
English: He was successively appointed as assistant professor of Kuniko, three times as a doctor of "Five Classics," and was transferred to Shangshu Shrine.

古文：出为海盐、山阴二县令。
现代文：出京任、二县县令。
English: He was appointed to Beijing, and became the governor of two counties.

古文：佥儒者，不长政术，在县无绩。
现代文：孔佥是个衹通经书的儒生，不擅长治理百姓的方法，任县令期间没有留下政绩。
English: Confucius was a Confucian scholar who studied the scriptures and was not good at governing the people. During his time as county magistrate, he did not leave any political achievements.

古文：太清乱，卒于家。
现代文：立遣年间发生动乱的时候，孔余在家中去世。
English: At the time of the turmoil that occurred during the reign of Emperor Ritsugen, Kong Yu passed away at home.

古文：子俶玄，颇涉文学，官至太学博士。
现代文：孔佥之子孔俶玄，注重研究儒家学说，官职升至太学博士。
English: Confucius's son, Confucius Xuan, focused on the study of Confucianism and rose to the rank of Doctor of Theology.

古文：佥兄子元素，又善《三礼》，有盛名，早卒。
现代文：孔令兄长的儿子孔俶玄，也精通《三礼》，有很大的名声，但去世很早。
English: Kong Rongxuan, the son of Kong Rongling's elder brother, was also proficient in the "Three Rites" and had a great reputation, but he died early.

古文：卢广，范阳涿人，自云晋司空从事中郎谌之后也。
现代文：卢广，范阳涿人，他自己说是置司空从事中郎卢谌的后代。
English: Lu Guang, Fan Yang's nephew, said that he was the descendant of Lu Yao, the middle-ranking official in charge of setting up the space program.

古文：谌没死冉闵之乱，晋中原旧族，谌有后焉。
现代文：卢谌因叛乱之时陷没以致死在军中，晋时仍在中原的名门望族之中，有卢谌的后人。
English: Lu Xun died in the army when he was caught up in the rebellion. At the time of the Jin Dynasty, he was still among the prestigious families of the Central Plains, and there are descendants of Lu Xun.

古文：广少明经，有儒术。
现代文：卢广从小通晓经书，有儒家的学问。
English: Lu Guang has been familiar with scriptures since childhood, and has knowledge of Confucianism.

古文：天监中归国。
现代文：卢广在天监年间回归凿。
English: Lu Guang returned to gouge during the years of the Heavenly Prison.

古文：初拜员外散骑侍郎，出为始安太守，坐事免。
现代文：最初拜为员外散骑侍郎，出京任堑达太守，因有罪而被免官。
English: At first, Bai served as a non-commissioned officer, and went to Beijing to serve as the governor of Banda. However, he was removed from his post due to his guilt.

古文：顷之，起为折冲将军，配千兵北伐，还拜步兵校尉，兼国子博士，遍讲《五经》。
现代文：不久，卢广被起用为折冲将军，朝廷配给他一千名兵士北伐，回朝后他被拜为步兵校尉，兼国子博士，在学馆《五经》全都讲授。
English: Not long after, Lu Guang was appointed as General Orichong, and the imperial court assigned him a thousand soldiers for the Northern Expedition. After returning to the imperial court, he was worshiped as an infantry captain, as well as Dr. Kuniko, and taught all the "Five Classics" at the academy.

古文：时北来人，儒学者有崔灵恩、孙详、蒋显，并聚徒讲说，而音辞鄙拙；惟广言论清雅，不类北人。
现代文：当时从北方来的儒家学者有崔灵恩、孙详、蒋显等人，都收聚学生讲授经学，但他们语音鄙俗拙劣；衹有卢广言辞清朗高雅，不像北方人。
English: At that time, Confucian scholars from the north, such as Cui Ling'en, Sun Zhe, Jiang Xian and others, all gathered students to teach scripture, but their voices were vulgar and clumsy; but Lu Guang's words were clear and elegant, unlike the northerners.

古文：仆射徐勉，兼通经术，深相赏好。
现代文：仆射徐勉，同时也通晓经术，他对卢广深为赏识。
English: He admired Lu Guangcheng, who was a disciple of Xu Zhen and also a scholar of the classics.

古文：寻迁员外散骑常侍，博士如故。
现代文：不久，卢广迁任员外散骑常侍，博士之职不变。
English: Soon, Lu Guang was transferred to the position of non-commissioned officer, and the position of doctor remained unchanged.

古文：出为信武桂阳嗣王长史、寻阳太守。
现代文：又出京任信武桂阳嗣王长史、寻阳太守。
English: In addition, he went to Beijing to be appointed as the successor of Wang Changshi of Xinwu Guiyang and the governor of Huanyang.

古文：又为武陵王长史，太守如故，卒官。
现代文：又任武陵王长史，太守之职不变，在任职期间去世。
English: He also held the position of Wuling Wang Changshi, the position of Taishou remained unchanged, and he died during his term of office.

古文：沈峻，字士嵩，吴兴武康人。
现代文：沈峻字士嵩，吴兴武康人。
English: Shen Junzhi Song, Wu Xingwu Kangren.

古文：家世农夫，至峻好学，与舅太史叔明师事宗人沈麟士门下积年。昼夜自课，时或睡寐，辄以杖自击，其笃志如此。
现代文：家中世代是农夫，直到迎空。他爱好学习，和舅父太史叔明以同宗人选沈峻为师，在沈峻牡门下学习多年，昼夜都给自己规定任务读书，有时打瞌睡，就用木杖击打自己，他专心一意到了这样的地步。
English: He loved to study. He and his uncle, Taishi Shuming, were taught by a man of the same family, Shumjun. He studied for many years under Shumjun's tutelage. He set himself the task of reading day and night. Sometimes, when he dozed off, he would beat himself with a wooden cane. He had become so absorbed in his studies.

古文：麟士卒后，乃出都，遍游讲肆，遂博通《五经》，尤长《三礼》。
现代文：沈鳞死后，这哩才离开京城，遍游各处学馆，于是通晓《五经》，尤其精通《三礼》。
English: After the death of Shen Qi, he left Beijing for the first time and traveled to various schools. As a result, he became familiar with the "Five Classics" and was particularly proficient in the "Three Rites."

古文：初为王国中尉，稍迁侍郎，并兼国子助教。
现代文：沈峻最初任王国中尉，逐渐升迁为侍郎，并兼国子助教。
English: Shen Jun was initially a lieutenant of the kingdom, and was gradually promoted to a chamberlain, and was also an assistant professor of Kuniko.

古文：时吏部郎陆倕与仆射徐勉书荐峻曰： 《五经》博士庾季达须换，计公家必欲详择其人。
现代文：当时吏部郎陆堡给仆射涂垫写信推荐选些说： 《五经》博士尘至达必须调换，考虑朝廷一定想要仔细挑选适当的人才替代。
English: At that time, the Chief of the General Staff, Lang Lubao, wrote a letter of recommendation to Zhuge Liang, saying: "The doctor of the Five Classics must be replaced, considering that the imperial court must carefully select the appropriate talent to replace him.

古文：凡圣贤可讲之书，必以《周官》立义，则《周官》一书，实为群经源本。
现代文：衹要是可以研读的圣贤之书，必须依据《周官》确立观点，那么《周官》造部书，实在是各种经书的源头和基础。
English: If it is possible to study the book of sages, it must be based on the "Zhou Guan" to establish a point of view, then the "Zhou Guan" book is really the source and foundation of all kinds of scriptures.

古文：此学不传，多历年世，北人孙详、蒋显亦经听习，而音革楚、夏，故学徒不至；惟助教沈峻，特精此书。
现代文：但是《周官》的学问，已有很多年代不相传授，北方来的孙详、蒋颢也曾经学习并讲授，但因为他们语音有如南楚和诸夏，相隔甚远，不易听懂，所以学生不愿来学习，祇有助教沈峻，特别精通周官》这部书。
English: However, the knowledge of "Zhou Guan" has not been taught for many years. Sun Zhao and Jiang Qi, who came from the north, had also studied and taught, but because their voices were like that of Nan Chu and Zhu Xia, far apart and not easy to understand, the students did not want to come to study. They only helped teach Shen Jun, who was particularly proficient in the book "Zhou Guan."

古文：比日时开讲肆，群儒刘岩、沈宏、沈熊之徒，并执经下坐，北面受业，莫不叹服，人无间言。
现代文：近来时常开馆讲学，许多儒生如刘画、沈宏、沈熊之流，都到他的讲坛之下拜他为师，带着经书去听他讲授，这些人没有一个不叹服，人人都没有批评的话。
English: Recently, he has often held lectures. Many Confucian scholars, such as Liu Ga, Shen Hong, and Shen Xiong, have come to his pulpit to worship him as a teacher and bring scriptures to listen to his lectures. None of these people are unconvinced, and none of them have any criticism.

古文：第谓宜即用此人，命其专此一学，周而复始。使圣人正典，废而更兴；累世绝业，传于学者。 
现代文：我认为应当马上起用这样的人，命他专攻这一门学问，讲授《周官》周而复始，使圣人的正宗典籍，在被废弃之后重新被重视，多年失传的学问，能传授给学者。 
English: I think that such a person should be employed immediately, and he should be ordered to specialize in this field of study, to teach "Chou Guan" repeatedly, so that the authentic classics of the saint, after being abandoned, can be re-appreciated, and the knowledge that has been lost for many years can be taught to scholars.

古文：勉从之，奏峻兼《五经》博士。
现代文：徐勉听从了陆任的建议，上奏章举荐沈峻兼《五经》博士。
English: Xu Mian listened to Lu Ren's suggestion and recommended Shen Jun and "Five Classics" doctor to play the chapter.

古文：于馆讲授，听者常数百人。
现代文：沈峻在学馆中讲授，听讲的学生常常达到数百人。
English: Shen Jun teaches in a school hall, and there are often hundreds of students listening to his lectures.

古文：出为华容令，还除员外散骑侍郎，复兼《五经》博士。
现代文：沈峻出京任华容令，回京后被除授为员外散骑侍郎，又兼《五经》博士。
English: Shen Jun went to Beijing as a member of the Huarong order, and after returning to Beijing, he was awarded the title of non-commissioned officer, and also became a doctor of the "Five Classics."

古文：时中书舍人贺琛奉敕撰《梁官》，乃启峻及孔子袪补西省学士，助撰录。
现代文：当时中书舍人贺琛奉皇上命令编撰《梁官》，他于是上表启奏让沈峻和孔子祛补任西省学士，帮助自己撰写《梁官》。
English: At that time, He Qian, a scholar of the Central Academy of Chinese Literature, was ordered by the emperor to compile the "Liang Guan," and he then asked Shen Jun and Confucius to fill in as the West Provincial Scholars to help him write the "Liang Guan."

古文：书成，入兼中书通事舍人。
现代文：《梁官》一书完成之后，沈峻入朝兼中书通事舍人。
English: After the completion of the book "Liang Guan," Shen Jun entered the imperial court and passed on the book.

古文：出为武康令，卒官。
现代文：后出京任武康令，在任职期间去世。
English: After that, he went to Beijing to take up the post of Wu Kang Rong and died during his term of office.

古文：子文阿，传父业，尤明《左氏传》。
现代文：沈峻之子沈文阿，继承了父亲的学业，尤其通晓《左氏传》。
English: Shen Wen Ah, the son of Shen Jun, inherited his father's studies, and is especially familiar with "The Biography of Zuo Shi Huang."

古文：太清中，自国子助教为《五经》博士。
现代文：太清年间，沈文阿从国子助教升迁为《五经》博士。
English: During the Qing Dynasty, Shen Wen'ao was promoted from assistant professor to "Doctor of the Five Classics."

古文：传峻业者，又有吴郡张及、会稽孔子云，官皆至《五经》博士、尚书祠部郎。
现代文：继承沈峻学业的人，还有吴郡张及、会稽孔子云，他们的官职都升迁到《五经》博士、尚书祠部郎。
English: The inheritors of Shenjun's studies, as well as Wu County Zhang and the auditor Confucius Yun, have been promoted to "Five Classics" doctor and Shangshu Shrine priest.

古文：太史叔明，吴兴乌程人，吴太史慈后也。
现代文：太史叔明，吴兴乌程人，他是吴太史慈的后人。
English: He was a descendant of Wu Taishi Shuming and Wu Xing Wucheng.

古文：少善《庄》、《老》，兼治《孝经》、《礼记》，其三玄尤精解，当世冠绝，每讲说，听者常五百余人。
现代文：太史叔明从小精通《庄子》、《老子》，同时研读《孝经》、《礼记》，他对《庄子》、《老子》、周易》这三部书特别精通，在当时首屈一指，每次讲授时，听讲者常常达到五百余人。
English: Taishi Shuming was proficient in "Zhuang Zi" and "Lao Zi" since he was a child, and he also studied "The Book of Filial Piety" and "The Book of Rites." He was particularly proficient in the three books of "Zhuang Zi," "Lao Zi" and "Zhou Yi." At that time, he was second to none. During each lecture, the audience often reached more than five hundred people.

古文：历官国子助教。
现代文：太史叔组连年任国子助教。
English: Taishi uncle group has been appointed as Kuniko assistant professor for consecutive years.

古文：邵陵王纶好其学，及出为江州，携叔明之镇。
现代文：喜欢太史叔明的学问，他出京任江州刺史时，也把太史叔明带往江州。
English: He liked the learning of Taishi Shuming. When he went to Beijing to serve as the governor of Jiangsu Province, he also took Taishi Shuming to Jiangsu Province.

古文：王迁郢州，又随府，所至辄讲授，江外人士皆传其学焉。
现代文：迁任郢州刺史，太史叔明又随同王府迁往郢州，每到一处太史叔明就开馆讲授，江南人士都继承了他的学说。
English: Taishi Shuming moved to Bozhou with the king's court, and opened a teaching center in each place he visited. People from the south of the Yangtze River inherited his teachings.

古文：大同十三年，卒，时年七十三。
现代文：大同十三年，太史叔明去世，死时七十三岁。
English: In the thirteenth year of Datong, Taishi Shuming passed away at the age of seventy-three.

古文：孔子袪，会稽山阴人。
现代文：孔子袪，会稽山阴人。
English: Confucius, Confucius, Confucius, Confucius, Confucius.

古文：少孤贫好学，耕耘樵采，常怀书自随，投闲则诵读。
现代文：他从小失去父亲，家中贫穷，但却爱好学习，在耕耘田地、上山采樵时，经常随身带著书，一有空闲就朗读背诵。
English: He lost his father when he was a child, and his family was poor, but he loved to study. When he was ploughing the fields and going up the mountain to pick strawberries, he often took books with him. Whenever he had free time, he would read aloud and recite.

古文：勤苦自励，遂通经术，尤明《古文尚书》。
现代文：他勤劳刻苦，坚持不懈，终于精通经术，尤其精通《古文尚书》。
English: Through hard work and perseverance, he finally became proficient in the study of the classics, especially the Classic of Confucianism.

古文：初为长沙嗣王侍郎，兼国子助教，讲《尚书》四十遍，听者常数百人。
现代文：孔子祛最初任长沙嗣王侍郎，兼国子助教，他先后讲授《尚书》四十遍，听他讲授者常有数百人。
English: At first, Confucius served as the attendant of King Shishi of Changsha and the assistant teacher of Kuniko. He taught "Shang Shu" forty times successively, and there were often hundreds of people listening to his lectures.

古文：中书舍人贺琛受敕撰《梁官》，启子袪为西省学士，助撰录。
现代文：中书舍人贺琛奉皇上之命编撰《梁官》，他上表启奏让孔子祛为西省学士，帮助自己撰写《梁官》。
English: He Jian, a scholar of the Chinese classics, was ordered by the emperor to compile "Liang Guan," and he asked Confucius to become a bachelor of the Western Province to help him write "Liang Guan."

古文：书成，兼司文侍郎，不就。
现代文：《梁官》一书完成之后，孔子祛兼司文侍郎，他没有去上任。
English: After the completion of the book "Liang Guan," he did not go to take office.

古文：久之兼主客郎、舍人，学士如故。
现代文：很久以后又兼主客郎、舍人，学士之职不变。
English: After a long time, he also became a host, guest, and hostess, and his position as a bachelor remained unchanged.

古文：累迁湘东王国侍郎、常侍、员外散骑侍郎，又云麾庐江公记室参军，转兼中书通事舍人。
现代文：又积功升迁为湘东王国侍郎，常侍，员外散骑侍郎，又任云麾庐江公记室参军，转兼中书通事舍人。
English: He was also promoted to the position of chamberlain of the Shandong Kingdom, regular chamberlain, non-commissioned cavalry chamberlain, and was also appointed to the Yunnan River Public Records Office to join the army, and then to the position of Chinese bookkeeper.

古文：寻迁步兵校尉，舍人如故。
现代文：不久又迁步兵校尉，舍人之职不变。
English: He was soon transferred to the rank of infantry captain, but his duties remained the same.

古文：高祖撰《五经讲疏》及《孔子正言》，专使子袪检阅群书，以为义证。
现代文：高祖撰写《五经讲疏》和《孔子正言》的时候，特地命孔子祛查检各种书籍，找出材料作义证。
English: When Gaozu was writing the "Five Classics" and "The Analects of Confucius," he specifically ordered Confucius to inspect all kinds of books and find materials as evidence.

古文：事竟，敕子袪与右卫硃异、左丞贺琛于士林馆递日执经。
现代文：事情完成之后，高祖命孑子挂和右卫朱异、左丞贺琛在士林馆每天轮流执经问难，考核士人。
English: After the matter was completed, Gao Zu's son Hang Zi Hang, Zhu Yi, the right guard, and He Yao, the left guard, took turns in Shilin Pavilion to ask difficult questions every day. They were the examiners.

古文：累迁通直正员郎，舍人如故。
现代文：孑子祛又积功迁为通直正员郎，舍人之职不变。
English: Zou Zixuan was transferred to be the younger brother of Tsunenao, and his position remained unchanged.

古文：中大同元年，卒官，时年五十一。
现代文：中大同元年，孔子祛在任职期间去世，死时五十一岁。
English: In the first year of the middle and high school year, Confucius Yao died during his term of office. He was 51 years old at the time of his death.

古文：子袪凡著《尚书义》二十卷，《集注尚书》三十卷，续硃异《集注周易》一百卷，续何承天《集礼论》一百五十卷。
现代文：孔子祛共着有《尚书义》二十卷，《集注尚书》三十卷，续朱异《集注周易》一百卷，续何承天《集礼论》一百五十卷。
English: Confucius wrote 20 volumes of "Shang Shu Yi," 30 volumes of "Shang Shu Ji," 100 volumes of Zhu Yi's "Shu Yi Ji," and 150 volumes of He Zheng Tian's "Shu Li Xuan."

古文：皇侃，吴郡人，青州刺史皇象九世孙也。
现代文：皇侃，吴郡人，他是青州刺史皇象的第九代子孙。
English: Wang Kan, a native of Wuxi County, is the ninth generation descendant of the Qingzhou King Elephant.

古文：侃少好学，师事贺蒨，精力专门，尽通其业，尤明《三礼》、《孝经》、《论语》。
现代文：皇侃从小喜爱学习，他拜贺场为师，专心竭力向贺场学习，于是广泛通晓经术，尤其精通《三礼》、《孝经》、《论语》。
English: Wang Kan loved to study from a young age. He followed He Yuan as his teacher and devoted himself to learning from He Yuan. As a result, he was widely versed in the scriptures, especially in the "Three Rites," "The Filial Piety Sutra" and "The Analects."

古文：起家兼国子助教，于学讲说，听者数百人。
现代文：初出仕兼国子助教，于学馆讲论经义，听讲的学生有数百人。
English: He was the first to serve as assistant professor of Kuniko, and lectured on the meaning of the sutras in the school hall. There were hundreds of students listening to the lecture.

古文：撰《礼记讲疏》五十卷，书成奏上，诏付秘阁。
现代文：皇侃撰写《礼记讲疏》五十卷，书写成之后，进呈皇上，皇上命令交给秘阁珍藏。
English: Emperor Kan composed "Reki Dokosho" in fifty volumes. After it was written, it was presented to the emperor, who ordered it to be kept in a secret cabinet.

古文：顷之，召入寿光殿讲《礼记义》，高祖善之，拜员外散骑侍郎，兼助教如故。
现代文：不久，皇侃被召进画勇继讲说《礼记义》，直担认为他学问很好，拜授为员外散骑侍郎，兼助教之职不变。
English: Not long after, Wang Kan was called in to give a lecture on "Rituals and Etiquette," and the direct supervisor thought that he was very well educated. He was taught as a non-staff member, and his position as a teaching assistant remained unchanged.

古文：性至孝，常日限诵《孝经》二十遍，以拟《观世音经》。
现代文：皇侃生性十分孝敬，常常每天规定背诵《孝经》二十遍，这是仿照背诵《观世音经》。
English: The Emperor Kan was very filial by nature, and often prescribed the recitation of the "Filial Piety Sutra" twenty times a day, which was modeled on the recitation of the "Kunseon-kyo Sutra."

古文：丁母忧，解职还乡里。
现代文：皇侃母亲去世，他为守丧而解职回归家乡。
English: After the death of his mother, Emperor Kan was relieved of his duties to attend the funeral and returned home.

古文：平西邵陵王钦其学，厚礼迎之。
现代文：干西邵陵王仰慕皇侃的学问，用厚礼去迎聘皇侃。
English: King Shao Ling of Gansu admired Wang Kan's learning, and treated him with great courtesy.

古文：侃既至，因感心疾，大同十一年，卒于夏首，时年五十八。
现代文：皇侃到邵陵王处之后，因为染上了心疾，大同十一年在夏首去世，死时五十八岁。
English: After the Emperor Kan went to King Shao Ling, he contracted a heart disease and died in the summer of the eleventh year of Datong, at the age of fifty-eight.

古文：所撰《论语义》十卷，与《礼记义》并见重于世，学者传焉。
现代文：皇侃撰写的《论语义》十卷，和《礼记义》在当时都被学者看重，有学者继承了他的学说。
English: The ten volumes of "On Semantics" and "On Etiquette" written by King Kan were both valued by scholars at the time, and some scholars inherited his theory.

古文：陈吏部尚书姚察曰：昔叔孙通讲论马上，桓荣精力凶荒；既逢平定，自致光宠；若夫崔、伏、何、严互有焉。
现代文：陈吏部尚书姚察曰：从前叔孙通在战争年代，在马上讲论经学，桓荣在动乱之中，在饥困中讲论经学，到时势安定之后，他们自然招致宠幸和荣耀，至于崔、伏、何、严等人都有他们这种专心致力于经学的志向。
English: Chen Li Bu Shang Shiu Yao said: In the past, Uncle Sun Tong in the war years, immediately lectured on the study of classics, Huan Rong in the turmoil, lectured on the study of classics in the famine, after the situation stabilized, they naturally attracted favor and glory, as for Cui, Fu, He, Yan and others, they all have this kind of dedication to the study of classics.

古文：曼容、佟之讲道于齐季，不为时改；贺蒨、严植之之徒，遭梁之崇儒重道，咸至高官，稽古之力，诸子各尽之矣。
现代文：伏曼容、何佟之在齐末年讲授经学，不因为时势而改变志向，贺场、严植之等人遇上了梁崇尚儒学、重视经学的机会，都享受高官厚禄，考察古礼作为当代的借鉴，这些儒家学者都尽了自己的力量。
English: Fu Man Rong and He Xizhi lectured on Confucianism at the end of the Qi Dynasty, and did not change their aspirations because of the current situation. He Champa and Yan Zi Zhi, who met Liang, advocated Confucianism and attached importance to Confucianism. They all enjoyed high-ranking officials, and examined ancient rites as a reference for the present. These Confucian scholars have done their best.

古文：范缜墨绖侥幸，不遂其志，宜哉。
现代文：范缜穿着黑色丧服迎接义军，以圆侥幸获得恩宠，他的意图未能实现，也是应该的啊!
English: Fan Wei wore a black mourning dress to meet the rebels, and won the favor with a round fluke. His intention could not be realized, and it should be!

