古文：世信祭祀，以为祭祀者必有福，不祭祀者必有祸。
现代文：一般人迷信祭祀，认为祭祀的人一定有福，不祭祀的人一定有祸。
English: Ordinary people are superstitious about sacrifices, believing that those who make sacrifices are sure to be blessed and those who do not make sacrifices are sure to be cursed.

古文：是以病作卜祟，祟得修祀，祀毕意解，意解病已，执意以为祭祀之助，勉奉不绝。
现代文：因此生了病就占卜是什么鬼神在作怪，知道了是哪种鬼神在作怪就举行祭祀，祭祀结束心中疑虑就消除，疑虑消除病也好了，却固执地认为这是祭祀的作用，而不断地尽力去祭祀。
English: Therefore, when one is sick, one divines what kind of ghosts and gods are haunting, and when one knows what kind of ghosts and gods are haunting, one holds a ritual. When the ritual is over, one's doubts are eliminated, and it is good to eliminate the doubts and the illness. However, one stubbornly believes that this is the role of the ritual, and continuously makes every effort to perform the ritual.

古文：谓死人有知，鬼神饮食，犹相宾客，宾客悦喜，报主人恩矣。
现代文：认为死人有知觉，鬼神能饮食，好像招待宾客一样，宾客高兴，就报答主人的恩情了。
English: To think that the dead are conscious, that ghosts and spirits can eat, is like inviting guests. If the guests are happy, they will repay the host's kindness.

古文：其修祭祀，是也；信其享之，非也。
现代文：他们举行祭祀，这是对的；相信鬼神能享受供物，那就错了。
English: It is right for them to offer sacrifices, but it is wrong to believe that ghosts and gods can enjoy the offerings.

古文：实者，祭祀之意，主人自尽恩勤而已，鬼神未必欲享之也。
现代文：实际上，祭祀的意义，只是主人自己尽到对鬼神报恩和表示殷勤的心意罢了，鬼神未必会享受供物。
English: In fact, the meaning of the sacrificial rites is only that the owner himself has done his best to repay the favor and show diligence to the ghosts and gods. The ghosts and gods may not enjoy the offerings.

古文：何以明之？
现代文：用什么来证明这一点呢？
English: How do you prove it?

古文：今所祭者报功，则缘生人为恩义耳，何歆享之有？
现代文：如今祭祀的目的是为了报答被祭者的功德，乃是遵循活人报答恩义的办法而已，其实鬼神哪里会享受供物呢？
English: Nowadays, the purpose of sacrifice is to repay the merits of the sacrificed. It is just a way to follow the living to repay their gratitude. In fact, where will the ghosts and gods enjoy the offerings?

古文：今所祭死人，死人无知，不能饮食。
现代文：现在所祭祀的是死人，死人没有知觉，是不能吃东西的。
English: What is being sacrificed now are the dead. The dead are unconscious and cannot eat.

古文：何以审其不能歆享饮食也？
现代文：根据什么确知受祭祀者不能享用供物呢？
English: On what basis do you know for certain that the recipient of the sacrifice cannot partake of the offering?

古文：夫天者，体也，与地同。
现代文：天是实体，与地相同。
English: Heaven is a substance, the same as the earth.

古文：天有列宿，地有宅舍。
现代文：天上有各种星宿，地上有住宅房舍。
English: There are stars in the sky and houses on the ground.

古文：宅舍附地之体，列宿着天之形。
现代文：住宅房舍依附在大地的形体上，各种星宿依附在天的形体上。
English: Residential buildings are attached to the shape of the earth, and various stars are attached to the shape of the sky.

古文：形体具，则有口乃能食。
现代文：形体具备，就有口，才能吃东西。
English: If you have a body, you must have a mouth to eat.

古文：使天地有口能食，祭食宜食尽；如无口，则无体，无体则气也，若云雾耳，亦无能食如。
现代文：假使天地有口能吃东西，应该把上供的食物都吃光。如果没有口的话，那也就没有形体，没有形体就是气了，如同云雾一样罢了，也就不能吃东西。
English: If heaven and earth had mouths that could eat, they should have eaten up all the food that was offered to them. If there were no mouths, there would be no form. If there were no form, there would be no breath. It would just be like a cloud, and they would not be able to eat.

古文：天地之精神，若人之有精神矣。以人之精神，何宜饮食？
现代文：如果天地的精神，就像人具有的精神一样，就人的精神来说，怎么能吃喝东西呢？
English: If the spirit of heaven and earth is the same as the spirit of man, then how can man eat and drink?

古文：中人之体七八尺，身大四五围，食斗食，歠斗羹，乃能饱足，多者三四斗。
现代文：中等人的身体高七八尺，身大有四五围，要吃一斗食物，喝一斗汤，才能饱足，吃得多的要三四斗才够。
English: The body of an average person is seven or eight feet tall, with a height of four to five meters. It takes a bucket of food and a bucket of soup to be full, and it takes three or four buckets to eat more.

古文：天地之广大，以万里数，圜丘之上，一茧栗牛，粢饴大羹，不过数斛。以此食天地，天地安能饱？
现代文：天地的广大，要以万里来计算。圜丘上面，一头小牛犊，加上谷物、麦芽糖和肉汤，不过几斛而已，用这点东西给天地吃，天地怎么能吃得饱呢？
English: The vastness of heaven and earth is measured in thousands of miles. On the top of the mound, a calf, together with grain, maltose and broth, is only a few handfuls. With this one thing to feed heaven and earth, how can heaven and earth be fed?

古文：天地用心，犹人用意也。人食不饱足，则怨主人，不报以德矣。
现代文：天地的想法就同人的想法一样，人吃东西不饱足，就会埋怨主人，不会用恩德来回报他。
English: The thoughts of heaven and earth are the same as the thoughts of man. If a man does not have enough to eat, he will blame his master and will not repay him with kindness.

古文：必谓天地审能饱食，则夫古之效者负天地。
现代文：一定要说天地确实能吃得饱，那么古代郊祀的人就对不起天地了。
English: It must be said that heaven and earth can indeed eat their fill, then the ancient suburban worshippers would feel sorry for heaven and earth.

古文：山，犹人之有骨节也；水，犹人之有血脉也。
现代文：大地上的山，好比人身上有骨骼；大地上的水，好比人身上有血脉。
English: The mountains of the earth are as the bones of a man; and the waters that are upon the earth are the blood of man.

古文：故人食肠满，则骨节与血脉因以盛矣。
现代文：所以人吃喝得肠胃饱满了，那么骨骼和血脉因此也就强健旺盛了。
English: So people eat and drink until their stomachs are full, and their bones and blood vessels are strong and vigorous as a result.

古文：今祭天地，则山川随天地而饱。
现代文：现在祭祀天地，那么山川也随天地而吃饱了。
English: If heaven and earth are now being sacrificed, then the mountains and rivers have had enough of heaven and earth.

古文：今别祭山川，以为异神，是人食已，更食骨节与血脉也。
现代文：如今又另外祭祀山川，认为是不同的神，这样就等于说人吃完了，还要让骨骼和血脉再吃。
English: Nowadays, mountains and rivers are also worshipped as different gods, which is tantamount to saying that people have finished eating, and bones and blood need to be eaten again.

古文：社稷报生谷物之功。
现代文：祭祀社稷，是为了报答它们生育谷物的功劳。
English: Sacrifices were made to them in order to reward them for their work in producing grain.

古文：万民生於天地，犹毫毛生於体也。
现代文：万民生长在天地之间，好比毫毛生长在人体上一样。
English: The growth of mankind between heaven and earth is like the growth of a hair on the human body.

古文：祭天地，则社稷设其中矣；人君重之，故复别祭。
现代文：祭祀天地，那么社稷也包括在其中了，君王尊重社稷，所以又另外祭祀。
English: If heaven and earth are sacrificed, then the shrine is also included. The monarch respects the shrine, so there is another sacrifice.

古文：必以为有神，是人之肤肉当复食也。
现代文：一定要认为社稷神灵，这等于说人吃饱后皮肤和肌肉还要再吃东西。
English: It is necessary to think that society is a god, which is equivalent to saying that after a person has eaten enough, the skin and muscles still need to eat more.

古文：五祀初本在地。门户用木与土，土木生於地，井灶室中霤皆属於地。祭地，五祀设其中矣；人君重之，故复别祭。
现代文：五种祭祀的对象起初都来源于土地，门、户是用土和木造成的，土和木生于地上，井神、灶神、室中霤都属于地，祭祀土地，五祀都包括在其中了，君王尊重五祀，所以又另外祭祀。
English: At first, the five types of objects of worship were all derived from the land. Doors and doors were made of earth and wood, and earth and wood were born on the earth. The god of the well, the god of the hearth, and the god of the living room all belonged to the earth, and were worshipped on the land. The five deities were all included in this, and the king respected the five deities, so they were worshipped separately.

古文：必以为有神，是人食己，当复食形体也。
现代文：一定认为五祀的对象有神灵，这等于说人吃完了，还要再给身体的其他部分吃。
English: One must think that the object of worship has a deity, which is tantamount to saying that when one has finished eating, one must then feed the other parts of the body.

古文：风伯、雨师、雷公，是群神也。
现代文：风师、雨伯、雷公，是一般的神。
English: Fengshi, Yubei, and Lei Gong are ordinary gods.

古文：风犹人之有吹煦也，雨犹人之有精液也，雷犹人之有腹鸣也，三者附於天地，祭天地，三者在矣；人君重之，故别祭。
现代文：风，好比人有呼吸；雨，好比人有精液；雷，好比人有腹鸣。风、雨、雷都附于天地，祭祀天地，三者都包括在其中了，君王尊重这三者，所以又另外祭祀。
English: The wind, the rain, and the thunder are attached to heaven and earth, and they offer sacrifices to heaven and earth. All three are included in this, and the king respects these three, so he offers another sacrifice.

古文：必以为有神，则人吹煦、精液、腹鸣当复食也。
现代文：一定认为风、雨、雷有神灵，那么人的呼吸、精液、腹鸣都应当再吃东西了。
English: They must think that wind, rain, and thunder have gods, so that human breath, semen, and abdominal rumblings should no longer be eaten.

古文：日月犹人之有目，星辰犹人之有发。
现代文：日月，好比人有眼睛；星，好比人有毛发。
English: The sun and the moon are like the eyes of a man; the stars are like the hair of a man.

古文：三光附天，祭天，三光在矣；人君重之，故复别祭。
现代文：日月星依附于天，祭祀天，日月星辰都包括在其中了，君王尊重日月星，所以又另外祭祀。
English: The sun, the moon and the stars are attached to the sky, and the sun, the moon and the stars are included in the sacrifice. The monarch respects the sun, the moon and the stars, so there is another sacrifice.

古文：必以为有神，则人之食已，复食目与发也。
现代文：一定认为日月星有神灵，那就是说人吃完了，又让眼睛和毛发再吃东西。
English: They must think that the sun, moon and stars have gods, that is to say, when they have finished eating, they let their eyes and hair eat again.

古文：宗庙，己之先也。
现代文：宗庙，是祭祀自己祖先的地方。
English: The ancestral temple is a place to worship one's ancestors.

古文：生存之时，谨敬供养，死不敢不信，故修祭祀，缘生事死，示不忘先。
现代文：祖先活着的时候，谨慎恭敬地供养他们，祖先死了以后对他们也不敢不虔诚，所以举行祭祀，遵循侍奉活人的道理去侍奉死去的祖先，表示不忘记祖先。
English: When our ancestors were alive, we carefully and respectfully provided for them. When our ancestors died, we did not dare to be unfaithful to them. Therefore, we held a sacrifice, following the principle of serving the living to serve the dead ancestors, to show that we would not forget our ancestors.

古文：五帝、三王郊宗黄帝、帝喾之属，报功坚力，不敢忘德，未必有鬼神审能歆享之也。
现代文：五帝三王郊祭黄帝、帝喾之类，是为了报答他们的功德，尊重他们的辛劳，不敢忘记祖先的功德，未必有鬼神真能享用供物。
English: The Five Emperors and Three Kings Suburban Festival honors the Yellow Emperor, the Empress Dowager, and the like in order to reward their merits, respect their hard work, and dare not forget the merits of their ancestors. It is not necessarily the case that ghosts and gods can really enjoy the offerings.

古文：夫不能歆享，则不能神；不能神，则不能为福，亦不能为祸。
现代文：不能享用供物，就不能成为神；不能成为神，就不能赐福，也不能为祸。
English: If you cannot partake of the offerings, you cannot become a god; if you cannot become a god, you cannot give blessing or cause disaster.

古文：祸福之起，由於喜怒，喜怒之发，由於腹肠。
现代文：祸福的产生，由于鬼神的喜怒；喜怒的发生，由于鬼神的腹肠。
English: The generation of misfortune and good fortune is due to the demon's anger and joy; the occurrence of anger and joy is due to the demon's stomach.

古文：有腹肠者辄能饮食，不能饮食则无腹肠，无腹肠则无用喜怒，无用喜怒则无用为祸福矣。
现代文：有腹肠的就能吃喝，不能吃喝就没有腹肠，没有腹肠就不能产生喜怒之情，不能产生喜怒之情就无从造成祸福了。
English: If you have the stomach and intestines, you can eat and drink. If you can't eat and drink, you don't have the stomach and intestines. If you don't have the stomach and intestines, you can't feel joy and anger. If you can't feel joy and anger, you can't cause misfortune and good fortune.

古文：或曰： 歆气，不能食也。 
现代文：有人说： 鬼神只是吸取供品的香气，不能吃供品。 
English: Some people say: ghosts and gods only absorb the aroma of the offerings, and cannot eat the offerings.

古文：夫歆之与饮食，一实也。
现代文：吸取香气与吃喝，是同一回事。
English: Absorbing aromas is the same as eating and drinking.

古文：用口食之，用口歆之。
现代文：用口吃供品，也用口吸供品的香气。
English: Offerings are made by stuttering, and the aroma of the offering is inhaled.

古文：无腹肠则无口，无口无用食，则亦无用歆矣。
现代文：没有腹肠就没有口，没有口，就无法吃东西，也就无从吸取香气了。
English: Without an abdomen, there is no mouth, and without a mouth, there is no way to eat, and there is no way to absorb aromas.

古文：何以验其不能歆也？
现代文：根据什么证明它们不能吸取香气呢？
English: What evidence is there that they can't absorb scent?

古文：以人祭祀有过，不能即时犯也。
现代文：根据人们祭祀时出现了差错，而鬼神却不能立即惩罚他们就可以作为证明。
English: According to the people, there was a mistake in the sacrifice, and the ghosts and gods could not immediately punish them as proof.

古文：夫歆不用口则用鼻矣。口鼻能歆之，则目能见之，目能见之，则手能击之。
现代文：吸取香气不用口就用鼻，口鼻能吸取香气眼睛就能看见供品，眼睛能看到供品手就能接触供品。
English: If you don't use your mouth to inhale the aroma, use your nose. If your mouth and nose can inhale the aroma, your eyes can see the offering. If your eyes can see the offering, your hands can touch the offering.

古文：今手不能击，则知口鼻不能歆之也。
现代文：现在手不能接触供品，就知道口鼻不能吸取供品的香气了。
English: Now that the hand can't touch the offering, we know that the mouth and nose can't absorb the aroma of the offering.

古文：或难曰： 宋公鲍之身有疾。
现代文：有人反驳说： 宋公鲍的身体有疾病。
English: Some people countered: Song Gongbao's body has a disease.

古文：祝曰夜姑，掌将事於历者。
现代文：主祭官名叫夜姑，曾奉命从事祭祀厉鬼的事。
English: The chief sacristan was named Yagu, who had been ordered to perform sacrifices to the spirits of the dead.

古文：历鬼杖楫而与之言曰： 何而粢盛之不膏也？
现代文：厉鬼拄着船桨对夜姑说： 为什么你上供的谷物不丰厚？
English: With his oar in his hand, the demon said to the nightingale, "Why isn't the grain you offer plentiful?

古文：何而蒭牺之不肥硕也？
现代文：为什么你上供的蒭牲不肥大？
English: Why is the sacrificial animal you offer not fat?

古文：何而珪璧之不中度量也？
现代文：为什么你用的圭、璧不符合标准尺寸？
English: Why don't the gauze and gauze pads you are using conform to the standard size?

古文：而罪欤？
现代文：是你的罪呢？
English: What is your sin?

古文：其鲍之罪欤？ 
现代文：还是宋公鲍的罪呢？ 
English: Or is it Song Gong Bao's fault?

古文：夜姑顺色而对曰： 鲍身尚幼，在襁褓，不预知焉。
现代文：夜姑和颜悦色地回答说： 宋公鲍本人还年幼，在襁褓之中，没有参与过问这件事。
English: The nightingale replied pleasantly: Song Gong Bao himself is still young, in his infancy, and has not been involved in this matter.

古文：审是掌之。 
现代文：确实是我在主管此事。 
English: I'm actually in charge of this.

古文：历鬼举楫而掊之，毙於坛下。
现代文：厉鬼举起船浆打夜姑，夜姑死于祭坛下。
English: A fierce demon lifted the boat's hull to strike the nightingale, and the nightingale died under the altar.

古文：此非能言用手之验乎？ 
现代文：难道这不是鬼能说话能用手打人的证明吗？ 
English: Isn't this proof that ghosts can talk and hit people with their hands?

古文：曰：夫夜姑之死，未必历鬼击之也，时命当死也。
现代文：我以为：夜姑的死，未必是厉鬼打他造成的，而是当时命里注定他该死。
English: I thought: the death of the night watchman was not necessarily caused by a fierce demon beating him, but at that time fate destined him to die.

古文：妖象历鬼，象鬼之形，则象鬼之言，象鬼之言，则象鬼而击矣。
现代文：妖象以厉鬼的形象出现，像鬼的形体就像鬼的说话，像鬼的说话就像鬼而打人。
English: The demon elephant appears in the form of a fierce ghost, its ghost-like body speaks like a ghost, and its ghost-like speech strikes like a ghost.

古文：何以明之？
现代文：用什么来证明这一点呢？
English: How do you prove it?

古文：夫鬼者，神也，神则先知。
现代文：鬼，很神灵，很神灵就能预先知道。
English: Ghosts, very gods, very gods can be known in advance.

古文：先知则宜自见粢盛之不膏、圭璧之失度、牺牲之臞小，则因以责让夜姑，以楫击之而已，无为先问。
现代文：预先知道就应当亲自看到谷物不丰厚，圭璧不合尺寸，牺牲的瘦小，就可用以这些理由去责备夜姑，用船浆打他就行了，用不着要事先提问。
English: If you know in advance, you should personally see that the grain is not plentiful, the gruel is not the right size, and the sacrifice is too small, you can use these reasons to reproach the nightingale and beat him with the ship's pulp, no need to ask questions in advance.

古文：先问，不知之效也；不知，不神之验也。
现代文：事先提问，是不能预知的证明；不能预知，是不神灵的证明。
English: Asking questions in advance is proof of unpredictability; unpredictability is proof that there is no god.

古文：不知不神，则不能见体出言，以楫击人也。
现代文：不能预知不神灵，就不能现形说话，用船浆去打人。
English: If you can't predict ghosts, you can't speak in real life, and you can't hit people with a boat.

古文：夜姑，义臣也，引罪自予己，故鬼击之。
现代文：夜姑是正直的臣子，把罪过归到自己头上了，所以鬼打了他。
English: The lady of the night was an honest courtier and blamed herself for the crime, so the demon beat her.

古文：如无义而归之鲍身，则厉鬼将复以楫掊鲍之神矣。
现代文：如果他不正直而把罪过推到宋公鲍身上，那么厉鬼又会用船浆去打宋公鲍了。
English: If he is dishonest and puts the blame on Song Gong Bao, then the evil spirits will use the boat pulp to beat Song Gong Bao.

古文：且祭祀不备，神怒见体，以杀掌祀。
现代文：况且祭祀不周全，鬼神发怒就会现出形体，因此而杀死掌管祭祀的人。
English: Moreover, if the sacrificial rites are not complete, the ghosts and gods will appear in anger, and therefore kill the person in charge of the sacrificial rites.

古文：如礼备神喜，肯见体以食赐主祭乎？
现代文：如果祭祀的礼节周到鬼神高兴了，肯显现形体而把食品赐给主祭的人吗？
English: If the etiquette of the sacrifice is so thoughtful that the ghosts and gods are pleased, will they appear in the form and give food to the main sacrificial person?

古文：人有喜怒，鬼亦有喜怒。
现代文：人有喜怒，鬼神也有喜怒。
English: People have emotions, ghosts and gods have emotions.

古文：人不为怒者身存，不为喜者身亡。厉鬼之怒，见体而罚。
现代文：人不会为有发怒的事而使自身存在，也不会为有高兴的事而使自身消失，厉鬼的怒，表现为显露形体而进行惩罚。
English: One does not make oneself exist for the sake of anger, nor does one make oneself disappear for the sake of happiness.

古文：宋国之祀，必时中礼，夫神何不见体以赏之乎？
现代文：宋国的祭祀，必定有符合礼节的时候，为什么鬼神不显现形体而赏赐他们呢？
English: There must have been a time when the sacrificial rites of the Song Dynasty conformed to etiquette. Why didn't the ghosts and gods appear in physical form to reward them?

古文：夫怒喜不与人同，则其赏罚不与人等。赏罚不与人等，则其掊夜姑，不可信也。
现代文：鬼神的喜怒与人不同，那么鬼神的赏罚也与人不相同；赏罚与人不一样，那么关于厉鬼怒击夜姑的说法，就不可信了。
English: If the emotions and anger of ghosts and gods are different from those of humans, then the rewards and punishments of ghosts and gods are also different from those of humans; if the rewards and punishments are different from those of humans, then the story about a fierce ghost attacking a nightingale cannot be believed.

古文：且夫歆者，内气也，言者，出气也。
现代文：况且所谓 歆 ，是吸入供品的香气；说话，是呼出气息。
English: Moreover, the so-called, is the inhaled aroma of the offering; speaking, is the exhaled breath.

古文：能歆则能言，犹能吸则能呼矣。
现代文：能吸入香气就能说话，好比能吸就能呼一样。
English: If you can breathe in the aroma, you can speak, just like if you can breathe in, you can breathe out.

古文：如鬼神能歆，则宜言於祭祀之上。
现代文：如果鬼神能吸入香气，就应当在祭祀坛上说话。
English: If ghosts and gods can inhale incense, they should speak on the sacrificial altar.

古文：今不能言，知不能歆，一也。
现代文：现在不能说话，可知鬼神不能吸入香气，这是第一点。
English: Now I can't speak, but I know that ghosts and gods can't inhale aromas, which is the first point.

古文：凡能歆者，口鼻通也。
现代文：凡能吸入香气的，口鼻是通畅的。
English: If you can inhale the aroma, your mouth and nose will be clear.

古文：使鼻鼽不通，口钳不开，则不能歆矣。
现代文：假使鼻子堵塞不通，口紧闭不张开，就不能吸入供品的香气了。
English: If the nose is blocked and the mouth is tightly closed, the aroma of the offering cannot be inhaled.

古文：人之死也，口鼻腐朽，安能复歆？
现代文：人死了，口鼻都腐朽了，怎么能又会吸入香气了呢？
English: When a person dies, his mouth and nose are rotten. How can he inhale fragrance again?

古文：二也。
现代文：这是第二点。
English: That's two.

古文：《礼》曰： 人死也，斯恶之矣。 
现代文：《礼记》上说： 人死了，就会被人厌恶。 
English: "The Book of Etiquette" says: When a person dies, people will be disgusted.

古文：与人异类，故恶之也。
现代文：死人与活人属于不同类，所以人们厌恶死人。
English: The dead and the living belong to different categories, so people loathe the dead.

古文：为尸不动，朽败灭亡，其身不与生人同，则知不与生人通矣。
现代文：死人变成尸体不会动，很快朽败灭亡，他的身体与活人的不相同，那么知觉也就不能和活人相通了。
English: When a dead person turns into a corpse, he does not move, he quickly decays and dies. His body is different from that of a living person, so his consciousness cannot communicate with a living person.

古文：身不同，知不通，其饮食不与人钧矣。
现代文：身体不同，知觉不通，他们的饮食就与活人不一样了。
English: Their bodies are different, their consciousness is not clear, and their diet is different from that of living people.

古文：胡、越异类，饮食殊味。
现代文：胡、越是不同的族类，口味大不相同。
English: Hu, the more different races, the more different tastes.

古文：死之与生，非直胡之与越也。
现代文：死人与活人的差别，不仅仅是胡人和越人的区别了。
English: The difference between the dead and the living is not just the difference between the Hu people and the Yue people.

古文：由此言之，死人不歆，三也。
现代文：由此说来，死人不会吸取供品的香气，这是第三点。
English: From this it follows that the dead do not absorb the aroma of the offerings, which is the third point.

古文：当人之卧也，置食物其旁，不能知也。
现代文：当人睡觉的时候，放置食物在他的旁边，他是不能知道的。
English: When a person is sleeping, place food next to him, he cannot know.

古文：觉乃知之，知乃能食之。
现代文：睡醒了才知道食物在旁边，知道了才能去吃食物。
English: Only when you wake up do you know that the food is next to you, and only when you know that can you eat the food.

古文：夫死，长卧不觉者也，安能知食？
现代文：死人，是长卧不醒的人，怎么会知道吃东西呢？
English: How does a dead man, a man who has not been awake for long, know how to eat?

古文：不能歆之，四也。
现代文：死人不能享用供物的香气，这是第四点。
English: The fourth point is that the dead cannot enjoy the aroma of the offerings.

古文：或难曰：  祭则鬼享之 ，何谓也？ 
现代文：有人反驳说：  祭祀时鬼就来享用祭品 ，这是什么意思呢？ 
English: Some people objected: What does it mean that when there is a ritual, the ghosts come to enjoy the offerings?

古文：曰：言其修具谨洁，粢牲肥香，人临见之，意饮食之。
现代文：我以为：这是说他准备祭品又认真又整洁，谷米清香牺牲肥大，人面对着见到这些东西，就想吃这些东西。
English: I thought: This means that he prepared the sacrificial offerings carefully and neatly, and the grain, rice, and incense offerings were large. When people see these things, they want to eat these things.

古文：推己意以况鬼神，鬼神有知，必享此祭，故曰鬼享之也。
现代文：拿自己的想法去推知鬼神的想法，认为鬼神如果有知觉，必定会享用这些祭品，所以说 鬼来享用祭品 。
English: They use their own thoughts to deduce the thoughts of ghosts and gods, and think that if ghosts and gods are sentient, they will certainly enjoy these offerings, so they say that ghosts come to enjoy the offerings.

古文：难曰： 《易》曰： 东邻杀牛，不如西邻之祭。 
现代文：反驳说： 《周易》上说： 纣王杀牛上供，不如周文王用素菜祭祀。 
English: Rebuttal: "Zhou Yi" said: "It is not as good as Zhou Wen Wang to use vegetables for sacrifice as it is for Zhao Wang to sacrifice cattle."

古文：夫言东邻不若西邻，言东邻牲大福少，西邻祭少福多也。
现代文：说纣王不如周文王，是说纣王上供的牲畜大却福少，而周文王的祭品少却福多。
English: To say that King Zou is not as good as King Zhouwen is to say that the livestock offered by King Zou is larger but has less blessing, while King Zhouwen's offerings are smaller but have more blessing.

古文：今言鬼不享，何以知其福有多少也？ 
现代文：现在讲鬼不吃供物，那么又依据什么来知道它所赐的福有多少呢？ 
English: Now that it is said that ghosts do not eat offerings, how can we know how much blessing it brings?

古文：曰：此亦谓修具谨洁与不谨洁也。
现代文：我以为：这也是讲准备供品认真不认真，整洁不整洁的问题。
English: I thought: This is also a matter of whether the preparation of the offering is serious or not, and whether it is neat or not.

古文：纣杀牛祭，不致其礼。文王衤勺祭，竭尽其敬。
现代文：纣王杀牛祭祀，却没有尽到礼节；文王用素菜祭祀，却竭尽了他的诚敬。
English: King Yao slaughtered cattle for sacrifice, but he didn't follow proper etiquette; King Wen sacrificed vegetables, but he didn't follow proper etiquette.

古文：夫礼不至，则人非之，礼敬尽，则人是之。
现代文：礼节没尽到，人们就要非议他；礼节虔诚地尽到了，人们就会赞扬他。
English: When propriety is wanting, he is censured; when propriety is religiously perfect, he is praised.

古文：是之则举事多助，非之则言行见畔。
现代文：受人赞扬，那么他兴办事情赞助的人就多；遭人非议，那么他的言行就会遭到反对。
English: If he is praised, there will be more people to sponsor his activities; if he is criticized, his words and deeds will be opposed.

古文：见畔，若祭，不见享之祸；多助，若祭，见歆之福：非鬼为祭祀之故有喜怒也。
现代文：遭到反对，好像是祭祀不被鬼神享用而带来的灾祸；赞助的人多，好像是祭祀被鬼神享用而带来的福祐。其实并非鬼神由于祭祀好坏的缘故而有喜有怒。
English: If there is opposition, it seems to be a calamity brought about by the fact that the sacrifice is not enjoyed by the ghosts and gods; if there are many sponsors, it seems to be a blessing brought about by the fact that the sacrifice is enjoyed by the ghosts and gods. In fact, it is not that the ghosts and gods have joy and anger because the sacrifice is good or bad.

古文：何以明之？
现代文：用什么来证明这一点呢？
English: How do you prove it?

古文：苟鬼神，不当须人而食。须人而食，是不能神也。
现代文：假如鬼是神灵的，不应当等人们上供才吃，等人们上供才吃，这是不神灵的表现。
English: If ghosts are divine, they should not wait for people to offer food before they eat. They should wait for people to offer food before they eat. This is a manifestation of not being divine.

古文：信鬼神，歆祭祀，祭祀为祸福，谓鬼神居处何如状哉？
现代文：如果鬼神真的享受祭祀，因为祭祀而带来祸福，那么你说鬼神的日常生活是什么样子呢？
English: If ghosts and gods really enjoy sacrificial rites, and bring misfortune and good fortune because of sacrificial rites, then what do you say is the daily life of ghosts and gods?

古文：自有储偫邪，将以人食为饥饱也？
现代文：是鬼神自有储备呢？还是以人们上供与否作为饥饱的条件呢？
English: Do ghosts and gods have their own reserves? Or do they depend on whether or not people are fed as a condition for being hungry?

古文：如自有储偫，储偫必与人异，不当食人之物。
现代文：如果自有储备，储备必然和人的不同，就不该吃人的食物。
English: If you have your own reserves, which are necessarily different from those of humans, you should not eat human food.

古文：如无储偫，则人朝夕祭乃可耳。
现代文：如果没有储备，那么就要人们每天早晚都祭祀才行。
English: If there is no reserve, then it is necessary for people to offer sacrifices every morning and evening.

古文：壹祭壹否，则神壹饥壹饱。壹饥壹饱，则神壹怒壹喜矣。
现代文：有时祭祀有时不祭祀，那么鬼神就会有时饥饿有时饱足，时而饥饿时而饱足，那么鬼神就会时而愤怒时而欢喜了。
English: Sometimes there is sacrifice and sometimes there is not, then the ghosts and gods will be sometimes hungry and sometimes satiated, sometimes hungry and sometimes satiated, then the ghosts and gods will be sometimes angry and sometimes joyful.

古文：且病人见鬼，及卧梦与死人相见，如人之形，故其祭祀，如人之食。
现代文：况且病人看见鬼，以及睡梦中与死人相见，鬼都像人的形状，所以祭祀时摆的祭品和人吃的东西一个样。
English: Moreover, if the patient sees a ghost, or if he sees a dead person in his sleep, the ghost is in the shape of a human being, so the sacrificial offering at the time of the sacrifice is the same as what a human being would eat.

古文：缘有饮食则宜有衣服，故复以缯制衣，以象生仪。
现代文：根据鬼要吃饭的道理来推论，那么鬼也该有衣服，所以又用丝绸给鬼做衣服，以仿效鬼活着时的仪表。
English: According to the principle that ghosts need to eat, ghosts should also have clothes, so they used silk to make clothes for ghosts to imitate the appearance of ghosts when they were alive.

古文：其祭如生人之食，人欲食之，冀鬼飨之。
现代文：用如同活人吃的食物来祭祀，活人想吃这些东西，也希望鬼能享用这些祭品。
English: Sacrifices are made with food that is eaten as if it were alive. The living want to eat these things, and they also hope that the ghosts can enjoy these offerings.

古文：其制衣也，广枞不过一尺若五六寸。
现代文：给鬼做衣服长短不过一尺或五六寸。
English: To make clothes for ghosts, the length is only a foot or five or six inches.

古文：以所见长大之神，贯一尺之衣，其肯喜而加福於人乎？
现代文：让所见到的又高又大的鬼神来穿一尺长短的衣服，难道鬼会高兴而给人们带来福祐吗？
English: Let the tall and big ghosts and gods you see wear clothes that are a foot long and a foot short. Will the ghosts be happy and bring blessings to people?

古文：以所见之鬼为审死人乎？
现代文：认为所见到的鬼果真是死去的人吗？
English: Do you think the ghosts you see are really dead people?

古文：则其制衣，宜若生人之服。
现代文：那么给它做衣服就应该像活人的衣服一样。
English: Then you shall make for him a robe like the robes of the living.

古文：如以所制之衣审鬼衣之乎？
现代文：如果所做的小衣服鬼真的穿上它吗？
English: What if the little cross dresser who made it actually put it on?

古文：则所见之鬼宜如偶人之状。
现代文：那么所见到的鬼就该像偶人的样子。
English: Then the ghost you see should look like a doll.

古文：夫如是也，世所见鬼，非死人之神；或所衣之神非所见之鬼也。
现代文：这样说来，世人所见到的鬼并不是死人的神变的，或许穿这种衣服的神并不是所见到的鬼。
English: In this way, the ghosts seen by the world are not the gods of the dead, and perhaps the gods wearing such clothes are not the ghosts seen.

古文：鬼神未定，厚礼事之，安得福佑而坚信之乎？
现代文：鬼神是什么还不能肯定，就用丰厚的礼节去侍奉它，怎么会得到鬼神的福祐而对它坚信不疑呢？
English: If you are not sure what ghosts and gods are, then you should serve them with abundant etiquette. How can you receive the blessings of ghosts and gods while firmly believing in them?

