古文：昔在庖牺，观象察法，以通神明之德，以类天地之情，可以藏往知来，开物成务。
现代文：从前庖牺观察自然界的现象和规律，目的是通晓上天的德性，附全天地之间的真情，由此可回顾以往，预知未来，揭示事物的真相，使人事各得其宜。
English: In the past, people used to observe the phenomena and laws of the natural world. The purpose was to understand the virtues of heaven and the true feelings between heaven and earth, so that they could review the past, predict the future, reveal the truth of things, and make personnel appropriate.

古文：故《易》曰： 天垂象，见吉凶，圣人象之。 
现代文：所以《易经》说： 上天垂示天象，显现吉凶的微兆，圣人就效法这些。 
English: That is why the I Ching says: The heavens display constellations and show signs of auspicious and inauspicious events, and the sages follow their example.

古文：此则观乎天文以示变者也。
现代文：这就是观察日月星辰的分布运行来显示变化。
English: This is to observe the distribution run of the sun, moon and stars to show the changes.

古文：《尚书》曰： 天聪明自我民聪明。 
现代文：《尚书》说： 天上的聪明通达来自于我们民众的聪明通达。 
English: "Shangshu" said: The wisdom of heaven comes from the wisdom of our people.

古文：此则观乎人文以成化者也。
现代文：这就是观察人类的礼教文化来成就教化。
English: This is to observe the human culture of etiquette to achieve enlightenment.

古文：是故政教兆于人理，祥变应乎天文，得失虽微，罔不昭著。
现代文：所以政教好坏的微兆在于民情是否和顺，吉凶变化和天体宇宙相应和，得兴失虽然很微小，也没有不彰明显著的。
English: Therefore, the slightest sign of the good or bad of politics and religion lies in whether the people's sentiments are harmonious, and whether the changes in fortune and misfortune are in accordance with the celestial universe. Although the gains and losses are very small, they are not conspicuous.

古文：然则三皇迈德，七曜顺轨，日月无薄蚀之变，星辰靡错乱之妖。
现代文：于是三皇勤勉德，日月五星顺其轨道而行，日月没有客星迫近薄蚀的变异，星辰也没有运行错乱的怪现象。
English: As a result, the three emperors were diligent, the sun, moon and five stars followed their orbits, the sun and moon did not have the variation of the guest star approaching the eclipse, and the stars did not have the strange phenomenon of running disorderly.

古文：黄帝创受《河图》，始明休咎，故其《星传》尚有存焉。
现代文：黄帝首先研究了《河图》，开始明了吉凶善恶，所以他的《星传》还一直保存着。
English: The Yellow Emperor first studied the "River Map" and began to understand good and evil, so his "Star Biography" has been preserved.

古文：降在高阳，乃命南正重司天，北正黎司地。
现代文：以后到了高阳时代，任命南正重主管天文，北正黎主管地理。
English: Later, in the Goyang era, Nan Zhengzhu was appointed to be in charge of astronomy, and Bei Zhengli was appointed to be in charge of geography.

古文：爰洎帝喾，亦式序三辰。
现代文：到了帝喾当政，仍然观察日月星辰的规律次序。
English: When the emperor came to power, he still observed the regular order of the sun, moon and stars.

古文：唐虞则羲和继轨，有夏则昆吾绍德。
现代文：唐虞时代是羲氏、和氏接继了他的法则，有夏时代是昆吾承继了以往的规矩。
English: In the Tang and Yu dynasties, the Shih clan and the He clan succeeded his rule, and in the Tang and Yu dynasties, the Kunwu clan succeeded the previous rules.

古文：年代绵邈，文籍靡传。
现代文：不过年代都已久远，文献典籍没有流传下来。
English: However, they all date back to a long time ago, and no literature has been passed down.

古文：至于殷之巫咸，周之史佚，格言遗记，于今不朽。其诸侯之史，则鲁有梓慎，晋有卜偃，郑有裨灶，宋有子韦，齐有甘德，楚有唐昧，赵有尹皋，魏有石申夫，皆掌著天文，各论图验。
现代文：至于殷商的巫咸和周代的史佚，那些诸侯国的史官司，如鲁国有梓慎，晋国有卜偃，郑国有裨灶，宋国有子韦，齐国有甘德，楚国有唐昧，赵国有尹皋，魏国有石申夫，他们都主管着天文的微兆，各自论述图象的应验情况。
English: As for Wuxian of the Yin merchants and Shi Yan of the Zhou dynasty, those historical lawsuits of the vassal states, such as Zizhen of the State of Lu, Bu Yan of the State of Jin, Bu Zhao of the State of Zheng, Zi Wei of the State of Song, Gande of the State of Qi, Tangmai of the State of Chu, Yin Yu of the State of Zhao, and Shishenfu of the State of Wei, were all responsible for the minor signs of astronomy, and each discussed the fulfillment of the image.

古文：其巫咸、甘、石之说，后代所宗。
现代文：其中巫咸、甘德、石申夫之的学说，为后代所尊崇。
English: Among them, the teachings of Wuxian, Gande, and Shishenfuzhi are revered by future generations.

古文：暴秦燔书，六经残灭，天官星占，存而不毁。
现代文：暴虐的秦始皇焚烧书籍，六经或残或减，而有关天文星象的书，却全部保存下来并未加以毁坏。
English: The tyrannical Qin Shihuang burned books, and the Six Classics were either destroyed or reduced, but the books on astronomy and the stars were all preserved and not destroyed.

古文：及汉景武之际，司马谈父子继为史官，著《天官书》，以明天人之道。
现代文：直到汉景帝、汉武帝时，司马谈父子相继担任太史令，撰写了《天官书》，用以阐明天与人之间的法则。
English: Until the time of Emperor Han Jing and Emperor Han Wudi, Sima Tong and his son successively served as Taishi Ling and wrote "The Book of Heavenly Officials" to clarify the rules between tomorrow and people.

古文：其后中垒校尉刘向，广《洪范》灾条，作《皇极论》，以参往之行事。
现代文：这以后中垒校尉刘向扩展了《洪范》一书中关于灾害规律的记载，编著了《皇极论》，用来参考往昔所经历的事件。
English: After that, Lieutenant Commander Liu Xiang expanded the records on the laws of disasters in the book "Hong Fan" and compiled "Imperialism" to refer to the events experienced in the past.

古文：及班固叙汉史，马续述《天文》，而蔡邕、谯周各有撰录，司马彪采之，以继前志。
现代文：到班固撰写《汉书》，马续著述《天文》，蔡邕、谯周等人也各有撰录，司马彪采用这些人的著述来接续以前的各种记载。
English: Ban Gu wrote "Hanshu" and Ma Zheng wrote "Astronomy" successively. Cai Qi and Zou Zhou and others also wrote their own records. Sima Biao used the writings of these people to continue the previous records.

古文：今详众说，以著于篇。
现代文：现在详录大家的学说，写了下面的这篇文章。
English: I have now written the following article detailing everyone's theories.

古文：古言天者有三家，一曰盖天，二曰宣夜，三曰浑天。
现代文：古代提出有关于的理论有三家，一家主张 盖天说 ，一家主张 宣夜说 ，一家主张 浑天 说。
English: In ancient times, there were three theories about it. One advocated "covering the sky," one advocated "announcing the night," and one advocated "covering the sky."

古文：汉灵帝时，蔡邕于朔方上书，言 宣夜之学，绝无师法。
现代文：汉灵帝时，蔡邕在朔方上书，书中讲道： 宣夜之说，根本没有师法可承。
English: At the time of Han Lingdi, Cai Qi wrote a letter to the Emperor, in which he preached: According to Xuan Ye, there is no teaching method to follow.

古文：《周髀》术数具存，考验天状，多所违失。
现代文：《周髀》中的数学论证全都保存着，考察检验天体的状况，有许多违背事实的地方。
English: The mathematical arguments in "Zhou Xuan" have all been preserved, and there are many inconsistencies in the examination of the status of celestial bodies.

古文：惟浑天近得其情，今史官候台所用铜仪则其法也。
现代文：只有浑天之说接近天的实际情况，现在的史官司的观象台所用的浑天仪就依照了浑天说的法则。
English: Only the theory of Hunten is close to the actual situation of heaven, and the observatory used by the current historical court is in accordance with the law of Hunten.

古文：立八尺圆体而具天地之形，以正黄道，占察发敛，以行日月，以步五纬，精微深妙，百代不易之道也。
现代文：树起一个八尺高的圆球，使它具有天地的形状，确定好太阳绕地球运行的轨道，观察它的显现与隐没，以此掌握日月运行的规律。测算出五大行星的位置，其精密细微高深神妙，是流传万世而不变的法式。
English: Build an eight-foot-tall round ball, make it have the shape of heaven and earth, determine the orbit of the sun around the earth, observe its appearance and disappearance, and thus grasp the laws of the movement of the sun and moon. Calculate the position of the five planets, its precision is subtle and profound, is a French formula that has been passed down for centuries.

古文：官有其器而无本书，前志亦阙 。
现代文：官府保留这种仪器却没有浑天说的原书，以前的志书也残缺不全。 
English: The government has kept this instrument but not the original book, and the previous record book is incomplete.

古文：蔡邕所谓《周髀》者，即盖天之说也。
现代文：蔡邕所说的《周髀》一书，就是盖天说。
English: The book "Zhou Xuan" mentioned by Cai Xuan is said to cover the sky.

古文：其本庖牺氏立周天历度，其所传则周公受于殷商，周人志之，故曰《周髀》。
现代文：它本源于庖牺氏创制的周天历度，其流传途径是殷商传授给周公，周代人记录下来，所以叫《周髀》。
English: It originally originated from the Zhou calendar created by the Zhou family. It was passed down through Yin merchants to Zhou, and Zhou people recorded it. That is why it is called "Zhou Calendar."

古文：髀，股也；股者，表也。
现代文：髀，就是股；股，就是观察太阳投影的表。
English: , that is,股;股, that is, observe the sun projection table.

古文：其言天似盖笠，地法覆槃，天地各中高外下。
现代文：按它的说法，天就像贺形的伞盖和斗笠，地就像一个扣着的大盘子，天和地都是中间高而四周低。
English: According to it, the sky is like a hail-shaped umbrella cover and a cone, and the ground is like a buttoned-up large plate. Both the sky and the ground are high in the middle and low around.

古文：北极之下为天地之中，其地最高，而滂沲四隤，三光隐映，以为昼夜。
现代文：北天极的下面是天地的中央，这里的地势最高，而四周则倾斜向下，日月星三光交替隐没出现，以此形成白昼黑夜。
English: Below the north celestial pole is the center of heaven and earth. The terrain here is the highest, while the surroundings are tilted downwards. The sun, moon and stars alternately appear and disappear, thus forming day and night.

古文：天中高于外衡冬至日之所在六万里，北极下地高于外衡下地亦六万里，外衡高于北极下地二万里。
现代文：天的中央比外衡在冬至所在处高六万里。北极低处比外衡在冬至日所在处高六万里。北极低处比外衡低处也是高六万里、外衡比北极低处高二万里。
English: The center of the sky is 60,000 miles higher than the balance at the location of the winter solstice. The low point of the North Pole is 60,000 miles higher than the balance at the location of the winter solstice. The low point of the North Pole is also 60,000 miles higher than the balance, and the balance is 20,000 miles higher than the low point of the North Pole.

古文：天地隆高相从，日去地恆八万里。
现代文：天与地的隆高处相互对应，太阳跳高地面永远是八万里。
English: The sky and the high places of the earth correspond to each other, the sun jumps high and the ground is always eighty thousand miles away.

古文：日丽天而平转，分冬夏之间日所行道为七衡六间。
现代文：太阳附着在天上而平行运转，把冬夏之间太阳运行的轨道分为七卫六间。
English: The sun is attached to the sky and rotates in parallel, dividing the sun's orbit between winter and summer into seven eclipses.

古文：每衡周径里数，各依算术，用句股重差推晷影极游，以为远近之数，皆得于表股者也。故曰《周髀》。
现代文：每一卫圆周的长度里数，都依照运算的法则，用勾股定理和重差等运算法推断晷影变得最长和最短的情况，以此做为远近的数据。这些都自于所立的表和表的投影。所以叫《周髀》。
English: The number of miles in the length of each circle is calculated according to the rules of operation, using the hook theorem and the weight difference algorithm to deduce the case where the shadow becomes the longest and the shortest, using this as far and near data. These are all from the table and the projection of the table. That's why it's called "Zhou Xuan."

古文：又《周髀》家云： 天圆如张盖，地方如棋局。
现代文：研究《周髀》的人认为： 天是圆形的，好象张开的大伞，地是方的，好像一个棋盘。
English: People who study "Zhou Yu" think: The sky is round, like an open umbrella, and the ground is square, like a chessboard.

古文：天旁转如推磨而左行，日月右行，随天左转，故日月实东行，而天牵之以西没。
现代文：天向左侧运转好像推磨一样，太阳和月亮向右旋转，但它们又随着天体运转而向左转，所以太阳和月亮实际上是向东运行的，者因受天休牵制而向西沉没。
English: The movement of the heavens to the left is like grinding, the sun and the moon rotate to the right, but they also turn to the left with the movement of the celestial bodies, so the sun and the moon are actually moving to the east, and those who are restrained by the sky are sinking to the west.

古文：譬之于蚁行磨石之上，磨左旋而蚁右去，磨疾而蚁迟，故不得不随磨以左回焉。
现代文：就好像蚂蚁在磨盘上爬行，磨盘向左旋转而蚂蚁向右爬，磨盘转得快，蚂蚁爬得慢，所以不得不随着磨盘的方向向左边转去。
English: It's like ants crawling on a grinder, the grinder spins to the left and the ants crawl to the right, the grinder spins fast and the ants crawl slowly, so they have to follow the direction of the grinder to the left.

古文：天形南高而北下，日出高，故见；日入下，故不见。天之居如倚盖，故极在人北，是其证也。极在天之中，而今在人北，所以知天之形如倚盖也。
现代文：天体的整体形状就像一个倾斜的大伞，所以极点的人在北面，这就是证明，极点本来在天体正中，而现在又在人的北面，所以可以知道天的形状就像一个斜倚的大伞。
English: The whole shape of the celestial body is like a tilted umbrella, so the person at the pole is in the north, which is proof that the pole was originally in the middle of the celestial body, and now it is in the north of the person, so we can know that the shape of the sky is like a reclining umbrella.

古文：日朝出阳中，暮入阴中，阴气暗冥，故没不见也。
现代文：早晨太阳从阳中升起，晚上落入阴中，阴气幽暗冥晦，所以隐没看不见。
English: In the morning the sun rises from the sun, in the evening it falls into the shade, the shade is dark and gloomy, so it is invisible.

古文：夏时阳气多，阴气少，阳气光明，与日同辉，故日出即见，无蔽之者，故夏日长也。
现代文：夏天阳气盛多，阴气弱少，阴气光照明亮，与太阳一样辉煌，所以太阳一出来就可以看见，没有能遮蔽它的，所以夏季白天的时间就长。
English: In summer, the yang is strong, the yin is weak, and the yin is bright and bright, as brilliant as the sun, so the sun can be seen as soon as it comes out, and nothing can cover it, so the daylight time in summer is long.

古文：冬天阴气多，阳气少，阴气暗冥，掩日之光，虽出犹隐不见，故冬日短也。 
现代文：冬天阴气盛多，阳气弱少，阴气幽暗冥晦，掩蔽住了太阳的光辉，太阳虽然出来了，但还是像隐没看不见，所以简报白天的时间就短。 
English: In winter, the yin is abundant, the yang is weak, and the yin is dark and gloomy, covering the sun's brilliance. Although the sun has come out, it is still invisible, so the briefing time during the day is short.

古文：宣夜之书亡，惟汉秘书郎郗萌记先师相传云： 天了无质，仰而瞻之，高远无极，眼瞀精绝，故苍苍然也。
现代文：宣扬宣夜之说的书都失传了，只汉秘书郎郗萌记载先师相传说： 天完全没有质地，抬头看它，又高又过没有极限，眼花目眩，精绝神息，所以是苍茫一片的样子。
English: The books that propagated the story of Xuan Ye have all been lost, only the Han secretary Lang Yimeng recorded the legend of the previous teacher: The sky is completely without texture, look up at it, it is high and has no limit, the eyes are dazzled, the spirit is exhausted, so it looks like a vast expanse.

古文：譬之旁望远道之黄山而皆青，俯察千仞之深谷而窈黑，夫青非真色，而黑非有体也。
现代文：譬如侧记远处的黄土山都呈现出青色，俯视千丈深谷而都显得黝黑。那青，并不是本来的颜色；黑，也不是因为有东西。
English: For example, in a side note, the loess mountains in the distance all appear blue, and when looking down on the deep valleys, they all appear dark. That blue is not the original color; black is not because of something.

古文：日月众星，自然浮生虚空之中，其行其止皆须气焉。
现代文：日月群星，自然地飘浮在虚空之中，它们的移动停止都依靠大气。
English: The sun, moon, and stars naturally float in the void, and their movement stops depending on the atmosphere.

古文：是以七曜或逝或住，或顺或逆，伏见无常，进退不同，由乎无所根系，故各异也。
现代文：所以，七星时隐时现，时顺行，时逆行，隐伏和显现没有党规，前进和倒退也不相同，是由于它们没有根基牵系，所以各个都不相同。
English: Therefore, the seven stars appear and disappear at different times, advance and retreat at different times, advance and retreat at different times, appear and retreat at different times, and have no party rules. They are all different because they have no foundation.

古文：故辰极常居其所，而北斗不与众星西没也。
现代文：所以北极星总是在那固定的位置上，而北斗星不和其它的星一起西沉。
English: Therefore, the North Star is always in that fixed position, and the Big Dipper does not sink with the other stars.

古文：摄提、填星皆东行，日行一度，月行十三度，迟疾任情，其无所系著可知矣。
现代文：摄提星、土星都向东运行，每天运行一度，每个月运行十三度，快慢很任意没有规则，其无所牵系就可行而知了。
English: Both the shooting star and Saturn move eastward, moving once a day and thirteen degrees every month. The speed is very arbitrary and there is no rule, so it is possible to know without any connection.

古文：若缀附天体，不得尔也。
现代文：如果是依附连缀在天体上，就不能这样了。 
English: This would not be the case if they were attached to a celestial body.

古文：成帝咸康中，会稽虞喜因宣夜之说作《安天论》，以为 天高穷于无穷，地深测于不测。
现代文：成帝咸康年间，会稽虞喜依据宣夜说作《安天论》，认为： 天很高无穷无尽，地很深无法测知。
English: During the reign of Emperor Xiankang, he would consult Yu Xi on the basis of Xuan Ye's "Theory of Heaven" and believed that: Heaven is very high and endless, and earth is very deep and cannot be detected.

古文：天确乎在上，有常安之形；地塊焉在下，有居静之体。
现代文：天结而高在上面，有常外安定之形；地固而实在下面，有静止不变之体。
English: Above, where the heavens are closed and high, there is a form that is outwardly stable; below, where the earth is solid and real, there is a body that is static and unchanging.

古文：当相覆冒，方则俱方，圆则俱圆，无方圆不同之义也。
现代文：应当相互蒙盖掩蔽，方就都方，圆则全圆，没有方圆不同的道理。
English: They should cover each other. A square is a perfect square, a circle is a perfect circle, and there is no reason why a square and a circle should be different.

古文：其光曜布列，各自运行，犹江海之有潮汐，万品之有行藏也 。
现代文：它们的光照和排列，各自运行的情况，就像江海有潮汐，像万物都有自己的行止特点 。
English: Their illumination and arrangement, the way they move independently, are like the tides of the river and sea, like all things have their own movement characteristics.

古文：葛洪闻而讥之曰： 苟辰宿不丽于天，天为无用，便可言无，何必复云有之而不动乎？ 
现代文：葛洪听说了讥笑他说： 如果星宿不附着显现在天上，天就没什么用处，便可以说没有，何必又说有而且不动呢？ 
English: Ge Hong heard the taunt: "If the stars do not appear in the sky, the sky is of no use, it can be said to be without, why should it be said to have and not move?"

古文：由此而谈，稚川可谓知言之选也。
现代文：由此来说，稚川可说是明白议谈是必须选择的。
English: From this point of view, it can be said that it is clear that discussions must be chosen.

古文：虞喜族祖河间相耸又立穹天论云： 天形穹隆如鸡子，幕其际，周接四海之表，浮于元气之上。
现代文：虞喜的本族祖父河间相虞耸又写了《穹天论》说： 天体的形状中间隆起、四周下垂，像个鸡蛋在处壳，它周围边缘连接着四海之边，浮在元气之上。
English: Yu Xi's grandfather of the same ethnic group, Kawama Sangyu Shaku, also wrote "The Theory of the Firmament," saying: The shape of the celestial body bulges in the middle and droops around, like an egg in the shell, and its surrounding edge connects the edge of the four seas and floats on vitality.

古文：譬如覆奁以抑水，而不没者，气充其中故也。
现代文：就好像倒扣的盆子放在流水之上，它之所以不沉没，是气体充塞其中的缘故。
English: It's like an upside-down pot placed on top of running water. The reason it doesn't sink is because it's filled with gas.

古文：日绕辰极，没西而还东，不出入地中。
现代文：太阳绕着北头运行，向西方降落，又从东方升起，并不出入于地中。
English: The sun goes round the north, and sets in the west, and rises in the east, and goes in and out of the earth.

古文：天之有极，犹盖之有斗也。
现代文：天有四极，就好像是伞盖上一定有斗一样。
English: The sky has four poles, as if there must be a bucket on the umbrella cover.

古文：天北下于地三十度，极之倾在地卯酉之北亦三十度，人在卯酉之南十馀万里，故斗极之下不为地中，当对天地卯酉之位耳。
现代文：天体的北面向下倾斜三十度，极点的下方在于地相对应点的北面的三十度，人在对应点之南的十余万里，所以北天极之下并不是地的中心，应当对着天地对应点的位置。
English: The north side of the celestial body is inclined downward by 30 degrees. Below the pole is 30 degrees north of the corresponding point of the earth. A person is more than 100,000 miles south of the corresponding point. Therefore, under the north celestial pole is not the center of the earth. It should be facing the position of the corresponding point of heaven and earth.

古文：日行黄道绕极，极北去黄道百一十五度，南去黄道六十七度，二至之所舍以为长短也。 
现代文：太阳走黄道围绕着极点运行，而极点北面距离黄道一百一十五度，南面距离黄道六十七度，冬至、夏至时的止息处就有了时间上的长短之分。 
English: The sun follows the ecliptic around the pole, and the north side of the pole is one hundred and fifteen degrees away from the ecliptic, and the south side is sixty-seven degrees away from the ecliptic. The resting place at the winter solstice and summer solstice has a difference in time.

古文：吴太常姚信造昕天论云： 人为灵虫，形最似天。
现代文：吴太常姚信写成了《昕天论》，说： 人为万物之灵，期形体最像是天。
English: Wu Taizang Yao Xin wrote "On the Theory of Heaven and Earth," saying: Man is the spirit of all things, and his body is most like heaven.

古文：今人颐前侈临胸，而项不能覆背。
现代文：现在人的下颐向前突出在胸的上方，而脖项不能覆盖后背。
English: Now people's lower jaws protrude forward above the chest, and the neck cannot cover the back.

古文：近取诸身，故知天之体南低入地，北则偏高。
现代文：近处取于自身，所以知道天体的南面低倾入地，北面则偏高。
English: The proximity is taken from itself, so it is known that the southern side of the celestial body is low-dipping into the ground, while the northern side is high.

古文：又冬至极低，而天运近南，故日去人远，而斗去人近，北天气至，故冰寒也。
现代文：又冬至时极点低下，而天向南接近，所以太阳距离人远，而头距离人近，北天之气降临，所以寒冷。
English: At the winter solstice, the pole is low, and the sky is close to the south, so the sun is far away from people, but the head is close to people, and the north wind comes, so it is cold.

古文：夏至极起，而天运近北，故斗去人远，日去人近，南天气至，故蒸热也。
现代文：夏至时极点隆起，而天向北接近，所以斗距离人远，太阳距离人近，南天之气降临，所以很闷热。
English: At the time of the summer solstice, the pole rises, and the sky approaches the north, so the battle is far away from people, the sun is close to people, and the south wind comes, so it is very hot.

古文：极之立时，日行地中浅，故夜短；天去地高，故昼长也。
现代文：极点高时，太阳运行到地中时就浅，所以黑夜的时间就短；天距离地面高，所以白昼的时间就长。
English: When the pole is high, the sun is shallow when it reaches the middle of the earth, so the time of night is short; the sky is high from the ground, so the time of day is long.

古文：极之低时，日行地中深，故夜长；天去地下，故昼短也。 
现代文：极点低时，太阳运行到地中时就深，所以黑夜时间长；天距离地低，所以白昼的时间就短 
English: When the pole is low, when the sun moves to the middle of the earth, it is deep, so the night time is long; the distance between the sky and the earth is low, so the day time is short

古文：自虞喜、虞耸、姚信皆好奇徇异之说，非极数谈天者也。
现代文：虞喜、虞耸、姚信等人都喜好新奇、追求怪异之说，并不是致力于穹其道理的谈论天文的人。
English: Yu Xi, Yu Sheng, Yao Xin and others are all fond of novelty and pursuit of weirdness, and they are not people who are committed to talking about astronomy in a rational way.

古文：至于浑天理妙，学者多疑。
现代文：至于浑天说的理论精微奥妙，学者大多都有疑问。
English: As for Hunten's theory of subtle and mysterious, most scholars have doubts.

古文：汉王仲任据盖天之说，以驳浑仪云： 旧说天转从地下过。
现代文：汉代王仲任根据盖天说来批驳浑天仪说： 书说天体运动从地下经边。
English: Han Dynasty King Zhong Ren criticized the armillary sphere on the grounds that it covered the sky, saying, "The book says that the movement of celestial bodies comes from underground meridians.

古文：今掘地一丈辄有水，天何得从水中行乎？
现代文：现在挖掘地下一丈深就有水，天怎么能从水中运行呢？
English: Now, if you dig one level deep underground, there will be water. How can the sky move from the water?

古文：甚不然也。
现代文：非常不正确。
English: Very inaccurate.

古文：日随天而转，非入地。
现代文：太阳随着天体运转，并不进入地下。
English: The sun moves with the celestial bodies and does not go underground.

古文：夫有目所望，不过十里，天地合矣；实非合也，远使然耳。
现代文：人的眼睛所看到的，不过十里远的地方，见天地合在一起，实际上并不合在一起，是太远了使它们呈现出这个样子。
English: What the human eye sees, but ten miles away, seeing heaven and earth together, is actually not together, it is too far away to make them look like this.

古文：今视日入，非入也，亦远耳。
现代文：现在看到太阳落地，并不是落地，也是由于遥远所致。
English: Now, when we see the sun set, it's not because it's setting, but because it's so far away.

古文：当日入西方之时，其下之人亦将谓之为中也。
现代文：当太阳落入西方时，它下面的人也会把那里叫做是正中的。
English: When the sun sets in the west, people below it also call it the middle.

古文：四方之人，各以其所近者为出，远者为入矣。何以明之？
现代文：四面的人们，不过是每人都把太阳离自己近时叫出，离自己远时叫落，根据什么发明呢？
English: People on all sides, however, each one calls out the sun when it is close to him, and shouts it down when it is far away from him. What is the basis for this invention?

古文：今试使一人把大炬火，夜行于平地，去人十里，火光灭矣；非灭也。远使然耳。
现代文：现在试着让一个人手持一个大火把，夜间在平地上行走，离开人十里远，火光就像是息灭了；其实并没有息灭，是距离远使它这样的。
English: Now try to get a person to hold a torch and walk on the plain at night, ten miles away from people, and the light of the fire seems to be extinguished; in fact, it is not extinguished, it is the distance that makes it so.

古文：今日西转不复见，是火灭之类也。
现代文：现在太阳向西运转不再看得见了，就是火把息灭一类的事情。
English: Now that the sun's westward motion is no longer visible, it's like putting out a fire.

古文：日月不员也，望视之所从员者，去人远也。
现代文：日月并不圆，望去之所以是圆的，是离人太远的缘故。
English: The sun and the moon are not round. The reason why they look round is because they are too far away from us.

古文：夫日，火之精也；月，水之精也。
现代文：翻译太阳是火之精魄，月亮是水之精魄。
English: The sun is the spirit of fire, the moon is the spirit of water.

古文：水火在地下员，在天何故员？ 
现代文：水和火在地上并不圆，在天上为什么就圆了呢？ 
English: Water and fire are not round on the earth, so why are they round in the sky?

古文：故丹阳葛洪释之曰：《浑天仪注》云： 天如鸡子，地如鸡中黄，孤居于天内，天大而地小。
现代文：所以丹阳葛洪解释说：《浑天仪注》说： 天体像鸡蛋，地就像是鸡蛋中的蛋黄，独处于天体之内，天是大的而地是小的。
English: Therefore, Danyang Ge Hong explained: "Hundred Heavens Instrument Note" said: The celestial body is like an egg, and the earth is like the yolk in the egg. It is alone in the celestial body. The sky is big and the earth is small.

古文：天表里有水，天地各乘气而立，载水而行。
现代文：天体里处都是水，天与地各自乘气而立，靠着水而运行。
English: Water is everywhere in the celestial bodies. The sky and the earth each stand on air and run on water.

古文：周天三百六十五度四分度之一，又中分之，则半覆地上，半绕地下，故二十八宿半见半隐，天转如车毂之运也。 
现代文：天体一周是三百六十五又四分之一度，又从中间分开，则一半覆盖在地上，一半围绕在地下，所以二十八宿半隐半现，天体的运转就像车轮的运转一样。 
English: The circumference of a celestial body is three hundred sixty-five and a quarter degrees, and when it is separated from the center, half of it is covered by the ground and half is surrounded by the ground. Therefore, the twenty-eight mansions are half hidden and half present, and the movement of the celestial body is like the movement of a wheel.

古文：诸论天者虽多，然精于阴阳者少。
现代文：各种谈论天文的人虽然很多，但是精通于阴阳之学的人很少。
English: Although there are many people who talk about astronomy in various ways, there are few people who are proficient in the study of yin and yang.

古文：张平子、陆公纪之徒，咸以为推步七曜之道，以度历象昏明之证候，校以四八之气，考以漏刻之分，占晷景之往来，求形验于事情，莫密于浑象者也。
现代文：张平之，陆公纪等人，都认为推算天象北斗七星的规律，用来分析历法昏暗和明亮的天象，以四时八节的气象来校订，用计时漏壶的分刻来考核，预测日影的来去，在具体的事物中考求微兆的灵验等等，没有比浑天仪更精密的了。
English: Zhang Pingzhi, Lu Gongji and others all believe that there is nothing more precise than the armillary sphere for calculating the laws of the astronomical Big Dipper, for analyzing the dim and bright celestial phenomena of the calendar, for calibrating with the meteorology of the four o'clock and eight quarter, for assessing with the fractions of the time leak pot, for predicting the coming and going of the sun shadow, for testing the effectiveness of the minor signs in specific things, and so on.

古文：张平子既作铜浑天仪，于密室中以漏水转之，令伺之者闭户而唱之。
现代文：张卫做出了铜制浑天仪之后，在密室中用漏水的方法使它转动，命令观察的人关起门来宣读结果。
English: After Zhang Wei made a bronze armillary sphere, he used a water leak to rotate it in a secret room and ordered the observer to close the door to read out the results.

古文：其伺之者以告灵台之观天者曰： 璇玑所加，某星始见，某星已中，某星今没 ，皆如合符也。
现代文：那些观察的人就告诉灵台上观察天象的人说：测天仪器上所显现的是，某某星开始出现，某某星升入中天，某某星现在已经隐没了。 
English: Those who were observing told those on the platform who were observing the celestial phenomenon: What appears on the celestial instrument is that such-and-such a star began to appear, such-and-such a star rose into the middle of the sky, and such-and-such a star has now disappeared.

古文：崔子玉为其碑铭曰： 数术穷天地，制作侔造化，高才伟艺，与神合契。 
现代文：一切都与实际相符合。崔子玉为他写碑文说： 天方、历法的学问冠天下，制伏仪器的技术与大自然等同，高超精伟才艺，契合神灵的旨意。 
English: Cui Ziyu wrote an inscription for him, saying: "The knowledge of the heavenly direction and calendar is the best in the world, the technology of the subduing instrument is the same as that of nature, the talent is superb and exquisite, and it conforms to the will of the gods."

古文：盖由于平子浑仪及地动仪之有验故也。
现代文：这都是因为张平子浑天仪和地动仪十分灵验缘故。
English: This is all due to the fact that Zhang Ping Zi's armillary sphere and earth-moving instrument are very effective.

古文：若天果如浑者，则天之出入行于水中，为的然矣。
现代文：如果天体真的像浑天论说的那样，那么天体的出入运行于水中，就是非常明显的了。
English: If the celestial body is really as the theory of the firmament says, then the movement of the celestial body in and out of the water is very obvious.

古文：故黄帝书曰， 天在地外，水在天外 ，水浮天而载地者也。
现代文：所以黄帝书中说： 天在地之外，水在天之外。 水浮在天上而承载着大地。
English: Therefore, it is said in the Yellow Emperor's Book: Heaven is outside the earth, water is outside the sky, water floats in the sky and carries the earth.

古文：又《易》曰： 时乘六龙。 
现代文：又《易经》上说： 阳气按时乘着六龙。 
English: "I Ching" also says: Yang Qi rides the six dragons on time.

古文：夫阳爻称龙，龙者居水之物，以喻天。
现代文：阳爻称为龙，龙是生活在水中的动物，用它来比喻天。
English: Impotence is called the dragon. The dragon is an animal that lives in the water, and it is used as a metaphor for heaven.

古文：天，阳物也，又出入水中，与龙相似，故以比龙也。
现代文：天是，阳物，又出入于水中，与龙相似，所以用在来作比。
English: He is celestial, masculine, and goes in and out of the water, similar to a dragon, so he is used for comparison.

古文：圣人仰观俯察，审其如此，故《晋》卦《坤》下《离》上，以证日出于地也。
现代文：圣人仰观天，俯察地，番知它们是这样的，所以《晋》卦的卦象是《坤》在下《离》在上，用来证明太阳出于地下。
English: The sages looked up at the sky, looked down at the earth, and knew that they were all like this. Therefore, the "Jin" gua is like the "Kun" in the bottom and the "Leave" in the top, which is used to prove that the sun comes from the underground.

古文：又《明夷》之卦《离》下《坤》上，以证日入于地也。
现代文：又《明夷》卦的卦象是《离》在下《坤》在上，以此来证明太阳入于地下。
English: Also, the "Mingyi" hexagram of the hexagrams is like "Left" under "Kun" above, in order to prove that the sun goes underground.

古文：《需》卦《乾》下《坎》上，此亦天入水中之象也。
现代文：《需》卦的卦象是《乾》在下《坎》在上，以此来证明天入于水中的微象。
English: The "need" hexagram is like the "dry" hexagram below and the "can" hexagram above, in order to prove the microcosm of the sky falling into the water.

古文：天为金，金水相生之物也。
现代文：天为金，金和水是相生之物。
English: Heaven is gold, and gold and water go together.

古文：天出入水中，当有何损，而谓为不可乎？
现代文：天出入于水中，会有什么妨害，而认为这样不行呢？
English: What hinders the movement of the heavens and the earth through the water, and why do we think that this is not possible?

古文：故桓君山曰： 春分日出卯入酉，此乃人之卯酉。天之卯酉，常值斗极为天中。
现代文：所以桓君山说： 春分这天太阳出于卯时而落于酉时，经常遇到北斗星和北极星在天的正中。
English: Therefore, Mount Kwan said, "On the day of the vernal equinox, when the sun sets in the morning, the Big Dipper and the North Star are often found in the middle of the sky.

古文：今视之乃在北，不正在人上。
现代文：现在看来却在北面，不是正在人们的头上。
English: Now it seems to be in the north, not in people's heads.

古文：而春秋分时，日出入乃在斗极之南。
现代文：而春分秋分之时，太阳的升起没落在北斗北极的南面。
English: But at the vernal equinox, the sun's rise does not fall south of the North Pole.

古文：若如磨右转，则北方道远而南方道近，昼夜漏刻之数不应等也。 
现代文：如果像磨盘似的向右转，那么北方路远而南方路近，白昼和黑夜的漏刻数目不应该相等。 
English: If you turn to the right like a grinding wheel, then the north road is far away and the south road is close, and the number of missing hours of day and night should not be equal.

古文：后奏事待报，坐西廊庑下，以寒故暴背。有顷，日光出去，不复暴背。
现代文：后来有事要上奏等待传报，坐在西边的走廊上，因为寒冷让背晒阳光，过了一会儿，曝光射出了走廊，不而照到背上。
English: Later, there was something to be played, waiting for a telegram, sitting in the corridor on the west side, because the cold made the back exposed to the sun, after a while, the exposure shot out of the corridor and shone on the back.

古文：君山乃告信盖天者曰： 天若如推磨右转而日西行者，其可知矣。 
现代文：君山就告诉相信盖天说的人说： 天体如果像推磨一样向右旋转而太阳向西运行的话，那么日影就应该照在这个走廊的下段而向东，不应当脱离出去。
English: "If the celestial body rotates to the right like a grinding wheel and the sun moves to the west, then the sun's shadow should follow the lower part of this corridor and move to the east. It should not break away.

古文：然则天出入水中，无复疑矣。
现代文：脱离出去是夜深人静了浑天论的说法。浑天学论的是天体的真实形态，于与可以明了了。 
English: To break away from it is a way of saying that the dead of night are silent and the sky is cloudy. The sky is the true form of the celestial body, so it can be understood.

古文：又今视诸星出于东者，初但去地小许耳。
现代文：那么，天出于水中，就不再有疑问了。况且现在看各个从东方升起的星宿，起初离开地面一点距离而已。
English: Then there would no longer be any doubt that the sky emerged from the water, and furthermore, looking at the stars now rising from the east, at first they were only a little distance from the ground.

古文：渐而西行，先经人上，从遂西转而下焉，不旁旋也。
现代文：渐渐向西运行，先经过人太顶上，然后就转向向运行直到落下，并不向旁边旋转。
English: It gradually moved westward, first passing over the top of the man, and then turned to run until it fell, without rotating to the side.

古文：其先在西之星，亦稍下而没，无北转者。
现代文：那些原先就在西方的星宿，也稍稍下落而没，没有向北转的。
English: Those stars that were originally in the west also fell slightly and disappeared, without turning north.

古文：日之出入亦然。
现代文：太阳的出入也是这样的。
English: The sun rises and sets in the same way.

古文：若谓天磨右转者，日之出入亦然，众日月宜随夫而回，初在于东，次经于南，次到于西，次及于北，而复还于东，不应横过去也。今日出于东，冉冉转上，及其入西，亦复渐渐稍下，都不绕边北去。
现代文：如果说天如磨盘向右转动的话，日月众星也应该随着天体而往回转，最初在东方，最后又回到东方，不应该横着转过去。现在太阳从东方出现，冉冉向上升起，等到它转向西方降落时，也是渐渐地稍稍向下，从不绕到北方去。
English: If the heavens are said to turn to the right like a grinding wheel, the sun, moon, and stars should also rotate with the celestial bodies, first in the east, and finally back to the east, and should not turn sideways. Now the sun appears from the east, rising steadily, and when it turns to the west to land, it gradually moves slightly downward, never going around to the north.

古文：了了如此，王生必固谓为不然者，疏矣。
现代文：清清楚楚是这样，王生一定要坚持说不是这样，实在是疏陋浅薄啊！
English: This is clearly the case, Wang Sheng must insist that this is not the case, it is really crude and shallow!

古文：今日径千里，围周三千里，中足以当小星之数十也。
现代文：现今太阳的直径有一千里，周长三千里，其中足可以顶着上几十个小星星。
English: Today's sun has a diameter of one thousand miles and a circumference of three thousand miles, of which the foot can support dozens of small stars.

古文：若日以转远之故，但当光曜不能复来照及人耳，宜犹望见其体，不应都失其所在也。
现代文：如果因为太阳越来越远的缘故，只应当是光照不能再照到人们身上而已，还应该能望得见它，不应该全都消失不见了。
English: If, because the sun is getting farther and farther away, it should only be that the light can no longer shine on people, it should still be possible to see it, it should not all disappear.

古文：日光既盛，其体又大于星多矣。
现代文：曝光既然很强烈，其个体又比星宿大得多。
English: Since the exposure is very strong, the individual is much larger than the star.

古文：今见极北之小星，而不见日之在北者，明其不北行也。
现代文：现在能看见最北面的小星星，却看不见在北边的太阳，就知道太阳并没有向北运行机制了。
English: Now you can see the northernmost small star, but you can't see the sun in the north, so you know that the sun doesn't have a northward movement mechanism.

古文：若日以转还之故，不复可见，其北入之间，应当稍小，而日方入之时乃更大，此非转远之徵也。
现代文：如果太阳因为遥远的缘故，不再能看得见，那它在将落的时候，应当稍小一点，而太阳在将要落没有之时却更大，这并不是太阳变远了的样子。
English: If the sun is no longer visible because it is far away, it should be a little smaller when it is about to set, and the sun should be larger when it is not about to set. This is not the sun that has become distant.

古文：王生以火炬喻日，吾亦将借子之矛以刺子之楯焉。
现代文：王生用火炬来比喻太阳，我也就借子之矛来刺子之盾了。
English: Wangsheng used a torch to compare the sun, and I also borrowed a spear to use as a shield.

古文：把火之人去人转远，其光转微，而日月自出至入，不渐小也。
现代文：手持有异议火炬的人离人越来越远，火光越来越微弱，而太阳月亮从升起到降落，光亮并不渐渐变小。
English: Those who hold the torch of dissent in their hands are getting farther and farther away from people, the fire is getting weaker and weaker, and the sun and the moon do not gradually become less bright from rising to setting.

古文：王生以火喻之，谬矣。
现代文：王生用火炬来比喻，十分荒谬。翻译
English: Wang Sheng's use of a torch as a metaphor is quite absurd.

古文：又日之入西方，视之稍稍去，初尚有半，如横破镜之状，须臾沦没矣。
现代文：再者，太阳落入西方的时候，看上去是一点一点降落的，开始还有一半，好像一个横放着的破圆镜的形状，一会儿就全落下去了。
English: Moreover, when the sun sets in the west, it seems to set little by little, at first half, like the shape of a broken mirror lying on its side, and then all at once.

古文：若如王生之言，日转北去有半者，其北都没之顷，宜先如竖破镜之状，不应如横破镜也。
现代文：如果像王生说的那样，太阳向北转去有一半的话，其向北将要全没的时刻，应该先呈现竖立着的破镜的形状，不应该像横放着的破镜。
English: If, as Wang Sheng said, half of the sun is turned to the north, then the time when it will completely disappear to the north should first appear in the shape of an upright broken mirror, and should not be like a broken mirror placed horizontally.

古文：如此言之，日入西方，不亦孤于乎？
现代文：像这样说起来，太阳落入北方，不也太奇特了吗？
English: To put it like this, isn't it strange that the sun sets in the north?

古文：又月之光微，不及日远矣。
现代文：再说月亮的光芒微弱，远远比不上太阳。
English: Moreover, the light of the moon is weak, far less than that of the sun.

古文：月盛之时，虽有重云敝之，不见月体，而夕犹朗然，是光犹从云中而照外也。
现代文：月亮强盛之时，虽有浓云掩蔽着，看不见月亮的本体，而夜晚仍然明朗朗的，这光线仍然从云里照射到外面来。
English: When the moon is strong, although it is covered by thick clouds, the body of the moon cannot be seen, and the night is still clear, this light still shines out from the clouds.

古文：日若绕西及北者，其光故应如月在云中之状，不得夜便大暗也。
现代文：太阳如果绕过西方转到北边，它的光线就应当像月亮在浓云中的情况，不能一到夜里就非常黑暗了。
English: If the sun goes around the west to the north, its light should be like that of the moon in thick clouds, and it should not be very dark at night.

古文：又日入则星月出焉。
现代文：另外，太阳一落下，那么星宿月亮就出现了。
English: In addition, as soon as the sun sets, the starry moon appears.

古文：明知天以日月分主昼夜，相代而照也。
现代文：分明是天以日月来分别主掌白昼和黑夜，相互更替而照耀着。
English: It is clear that the sky, with the sun and the moon as its masters, alternates day and night, illuminating each other.

古文：若日常出者，不应日亦入而星月亦出也。
现代文：如果太阳总是出现，就不应该太阳也隐没而星宿月亮也出现了。
English: If the sun always appears, shouldn't the sun also disappear and the stars and moon also appear.

古文：又案《河》、《洛》之文，皆云水火者，阴阳之余气也。
现代文：又据《河圆》、《洛书》上的文字，都说水和火是阴阳的余气。
English: According to the "Hawuan" and "Luo Shu" texts, both say that water and fire are the remaining air of yin and yang.

古文：夫言余气，则不能生日月可知也，顾当言日精生火者可耳。
现代文：说是余气，那么不能生于日月是可想而知了，不过应当说日精产生火是可以的。
English: It is conceivable that the remaining gas cannot be born from the sun and moon, but it should be said that it is possible for the sun spirit to produce fire.

古文：若水火是日月所生，则亦何得尽如日月之员乎？
现代文：若水火是日月所产生的，那么又怎么能像日月一样圆呢？
English: If water and fire are produced by the sun and moon, then how can they be as round as the sun and moon?

古文：今火出于阳燧，阳燧员而火不员也；水出于方诸，方诸方而水不方也。
现代文：现在火出于凹面铜镜阳燧，阳燧圆而火不圆；水出于取水的器具方诸中，方诸方而水不方。
English: Now fire comes from a concave copper mirror, which is round, but fire is not round; water comes from a water-drawing device, which is square, but water is not square.

古文：又阳燧可以取火于日，而无取日于火之理，此则日精之生火明矣，方诸可以取水于月，而无取月于水之道，此则月精之生水了矣。
现代文：再说阳燧可以从太阳中取火，而没有从火中取太阳的道理，这样日精之产生火是很明了的了；方诸可以从月中取水，而没有从水中取月的道理，这样月精之产生水也十分清楚了。
English: Moreover, since the impotent man can take fire from the sun, but cannot take the sun from the fire, it is clear that the sun spirit can produce fire; and since the powerful man can take water from the moon, but cannot take the moon from the water, it is also clear that the moon spirit can produce water.

古文：王生又云远故视之员。
现代文：王生又说因为远所以看起来是圆的。
English: Wang Sheng also said that because it was far away, it looked round.

古文：若审然者，月初生之时及既亏之后，何以视之不员乎？
现代文：若果然是这样，月亮初升之时，以及已然不圆之后，为什么看着不圆呢？
English: If this is indeed the case, why does the moon look round when it first rises, and after it is no longer round?

古文：而日食或上或下，从侧而起，或如钩至尽。
现代文：而日食也有时在上有时在下，从侧面亏起，有时像勾子一样直到看不见。
English: But eclipses are also sometimes up, sometimes down, from the side, sometimes like a hook until they are invisible.

古文：若远视见员，不宜见其残缺左右所起也。
现代文：如果远远看上云就显得圆，不应当看见它残缺左右所产生的样子。
English: If you look at the cloud from far away, it appears round. You should not see the appearance caused by its incomplete left and right.

古文：此则浑天之理，信而有徵矣。
现代文：这样看来浑天之说，是真实而有依据的。
English: Thus, it appears that Hunten's claim is true and well-founded.

古文：◎仪象《虞书》曰： 在旋玑玉衡，以齐七政。 《考灵曜》云： 分寸之咎，代天气生，以制方员。
现代文：《虞书》说： 察看玑玉衡等测天仪器，用来辨别日月及五星 《考灵曜》说： 微小的日咎，代替时间而出现，来制定方圆。
English: "The Book of Fortune" says: Look at the astronomical instruments such as the compass and the balance, which are used to distinguish between the sun, the moon and the five stars. "The Book of Changes" says: Tiny sunspots, which appear in place of time, are used to determine the square.

古文：方员以成，参以规矩。
现代文：方圆制成之后，再参照规和矩。
English: After the square circle is made, reference is then made to the rule and the moment.

古文：昏明主时，乃命中星观玉仪之游。 
现代文：黑夜白天主分辨时间，就命定中星以此来观察浑天仪的流动。 
English: The god of day and night can tell the time, so he ordered the middle star to be used to observe the flow of the armillary sphere.

古文：郑玄谓以玉为浑仪也。
现代文：郑玄说是用玉制成的浑天仪。
English: Zheng Xuan said that it was made of jade.

古文：《春秋文曜钩》云： 唐尧既位，羲和立浑仪。 
现代文：《春秋文曜钩》说： 唐尧既位，羲和创立了浑仪。 
English: "Spring, Autumn, and Winter" said: Tang Xuan was already in power, and He He founded Hun Yi.

古文：此则仪象之设，其来远矣。
现代文：这样看来那么测天仪的设置使用，其来源很久远了。
English: It seems that the source of the setting and use of the planetarium is a long way away.

古文：绵代相传，史官禁密，学者不睹，故宣、盖沸腾。
现代文：世世代代相传，史官严守秘密，学者没有看到过，所以宣夜说、盖天说兴旺流行，声势猛烈。
English: It has been passed down from generation to generation. Historians have kept it a closely guarded secret, and scholars have never seen it. Therefore, it is very popular to say "Xuan Ye" and "Geitian."

古文：暨汉太初，落下闳、鲜于妄人、耿寿昌等造员仪以考历度。
现代文：到汉太初年间，落下闳、鲜于妄人、耿寿昌等人制造圆仪来历法度数。
English: By the first year of the Han Dynasty, people such as Xiao Jia, Xian Xuanren, and Geng Shuchang were making round instruments.

古文：后至和帝时，贾选逵系作，又加黄道。
现代文：以后到和帝时，贾逵继续研究和制造，又加上了太阳绕地运行的轨道。
English: Later, when he came to Hetian, Jia Wei continued to research and manufacture, and added the orbit of the sun around the earth.

古文：至顺帝时，张衡又制浑象，具内外规、南北极、黄赤道，列二十四气、二十八宿中外星官及日月五纬，以漏水转之于殿上室内，星中出没与天相应。
现代文：到顺帝时，张衡又制出了浑天仪，上面具有内规外规、南极北极、黄道亦道等，列了二十四节气、二十八星宿内外的天文星象和太阳、月亮以及金、木、水、火土五星，用漏水的办法让其在大殿之上的室内转动，仪器上星星的出没与天象相夜深人静。
English: By the time of Emperor Shun, Zhang Heng had also produced the armillary sphere, which had an inner and outer scale, the South Pole, the North Pole, the Zodiac, and so on. It listed the twenty-four solar terms, the twenty-eight constellations, and the astronomical constellations inside and outside, as well as the sun, the moon, and the five stars of gold, wood, water, and fire. It was rotated in the room above the Great Hall by means of a water leak, and the appearance of the stars on the instrument contrasted with the constellations in the deep silence of the night.

古文：因其关戾，又转瑞轮蓂荚于阶下，随月虚盈，依历开落。
现代文：交相转动，又带动下面的玉轮瑞草，随着月亮的圆缺，依照日历而开花落下。
English: The intersecting phases rotate, which in turn drives the jade wheel of Seocho below, which blooms and falls according to the calendar as the moon is waning.

古文：其后陆绩亦造浑象。
现代文：这以后陆绩也制造了浑天仪。
English: This was followed by the creation of the armillary sphere.

古文：至吴时，中常侍庐江王蕃善数术，传刘洪《乾象历》，依其法而制浑仪，立论考度曰：
现代文：吴国时，中常侍庐江王蕃善于天文历法，传授传刘洪的《乾象历》，依照上面的法则而制浑天仪，他确立论点并考核论述说：
English: When he was in the State of Wu, he was good at astronomical calendars. He taught Liu Hong's "Dry Elephant Calendar" and made the armillary sphere according to the above rules. He established the argument and examined the discussion and said:

古文：前儒旧说天地之体，状如鸟卵，天包地外，犹壳之果黄也；周旋无端，其形浑浑然，故曰浑天也。周天三百六十五度五百八十九分度之百四十五，半覆地上，半在地下。
现代文：以前学者的旧有之说是，天与地的形体像个鸟蛋，天包在地之外，就好像蛋壳包裹着蛋黄一样；循环运转没有尽端，其形状浑浑沌沌不分明，所以称为浑天，绕天一周是三百六十五度五百八十九分度之一百四十五，一半覆盖在地上，一半掩在地下。
English: In the past, scholars used to say that the shape of the sky and the earth is like a bird's egg, the sky is wrapped outside the earth, just as the eggshell is wrapped around the yolk; the cycle has no end, and its shape is chaotic and indistinct, so it is called the sky. The circumference of the sky is 365 degrees 589 minutes and one hundred forty-five, half covered by the ground, half hidden under the ground.

古文：其二端谓之南极、北极。
现代文：其两端叫南极、北极。
English: Its two ends are called the South Pole and the North Pole.

古文：北极出地三十六度，南极入地三十六度，两极相去一百八十二度半强。
现代文：北极高出地而三十六度，南极进入地下三十六度，两极相差一百八十二度半还多。
English: The North Pole is 36 degrees above the ground, while the South Pole is 36 degrees below. The difference between the two poles is more than 182.5 degrees.

古文：绕北极径七十二度，常见不隐，谓之上规。
现代文：环绕北极径有七十二度，总是显现着不隐云，叫做上规。
English: There are seventy-two degrees around the Arctic Circle, and there are always clouds, which is called the upper limit.

古文：绕南极七十二度，常隐不见，谓之下规。赤道带天之纮，去两极各九十一度少强。
现代文：环绕南极的七十二度，常常隐蔽不显现出来，叫做下规，赤道环绕着天体的周界，距离两极各是九十一度多一点。
English: The seventy-two degrees around the South Pole, which is often hidden and does not appear, is called the lower limit. The equator surrounds the perimeter of the celestial body, and the distance between the two poles is a little more than ninety-one degrees.

古文：黄道，日之所行也，半在赤道外，半在赤道内，与赤道东交于角五少弱，西交于奎十四少强。
现代文：黄道，是太阳运行的轨道，一半在赤道之外，一半在赤道之内，与赤道的东方角宿五度不到的地方相交，在西方奎宿十四度多点的地方相交。
English: The ecliptic is the orbit of the sun, half outside the equator and half within it. It intersects the equator at less than five degrees east of the equator and at more than fourteen degrees west of the equator.

古文：其出赤道外极远者，去赤道二十四度，斗二十一度是也。
现代文：那些离开赤道外极很远的，距离赤道二十四度、斗星二十一度。
English: Those farthest from the equator are twenty-four degrees from the equator and twenty-one degrees from the star.

古文：其入赤道内极远者，亦二十四度，井二十五度是也。
现代文：那些进入赤道内极很远的，也是二十四度，距离井星二十五度。
English: Those very far inside the equator are also twenty-four degrees, twenty-five degrees away from the star.

古文：日南至在斗二十一度，去极百一十五度少强。
现代文：太阳冬至时在斗星二十一度上，距离极一百一十一五度多一点。
English: At the winter solstice, the sun is on the 21st degree of the Big Dipper, a little more than 115 degrees away from the pole.

古文：是也日最南，去极最远，故景最长。
现代文：这一天太阳最靠南，距离极最远，所以日影最长。
English: On this day, the sun is farthest to the south, the distance is the farthest, so the shadow is the longest.

古文：黄道斗二十一度，出辰入申，故日亦出辰入申。
现代文：黄道晨斗星二十一度上，出于辰时，没于申时，所以太阳也出于辰时没于申时。
English: On the twenty-first day of the zodiac, the morning star rises at the hour of the hour, not at the hour of the moon, so the sun also rises at the hour of the hour, not at the hour of the moon.

古文：日昼行地上百四十六度强，故日短；夜行地下二百一十九度少弱，故夜长。
现代文：太阳白昼地在上运行一百四十六度多，所以白天时间短；太阳夜间在地下运行二百一十九度稍差差一点，所以夜间时间长。
English: During the day, the sun moves upwards by more than a hundred and forty-six degrees, so the day time is short; during the night, the sun moves underground by two hundred and nineteen degrees, slightly less, so the night time is long.

古文：自南至之后，日去极稍近，故景稍短。
现代文：自冬至之后，太阳距离极逐渐变近，所以日影逐渐变短。
English: Since the winter solstice, the sun's distance from the pole has gradually become closer, so the sun's shadow has gradually become shorter.

古文：日昼行地上度稍多，故日稍长；夜行地下度稍少，故夜稍短。
现代文：太阳白昼在地上运行的度数逐渐增多，所以白天的时间变长；夜间在地下运行的度数逐渐减少，所以夜间时间逐渐变短。
English: The frequency of the sun's movement on the ground during the day gradually increases, so the daytime time becomes longer; the frequency of the sun's movement underground at night gradually decreases, so the night time gradually becomes shorter.

古文：日所在度稍北，故日稍北，以至于夏至，日在井二十五度，去极六十七度少强，是日最北，去极最近，景最短。黄道井二十五度，出寅入戌，故日亦出寅入戌。
现代文：太阳所在的度逐渐向北，所以太阳也就逐渐向北，等到了夏至，太阳在井星二十五度，距离极点六十七度稍微多一点，这一天太阳最靠北，距离极点最近，日影最短，黄道在井星二十五度上，出于寅时入于戌时，所以太阳也出于寅时入于戌时。
English: The degree of the sun's location is gradually northward, so the sun is also gradually northward. Wait until the summer solstice, the sun is at 25 degrees of the well star, slightly more than 67 degrees away from the pole. On this day, the sun is farthest north, the distance to the pole is the closest, the shadow is the shortest, the ecliptic is at 25 degrees of the well star, and the sun enters the ecliptic at midnight, so the sun also enters the ecliptic at midnight.

古文：日昼行地上二百一十九度少弱，故日长；夜行地下百四十六度强，故夜短。
现代文：太阳白昼时在地上运行二百一十九度稍少一点，所以白天时间长；夜间在地下运行一百四十六度稍多一点，所以夜间时间短。
English: During the day, the sun moves a little less than two hundred and nineteen degrees on the ground, so the day time is long; at night, it moves a little more than a hundred and forty-six degrees underground, so the night time is short.

古文：自夏至之后，日去极稍远，故景稍长。日昼行地上度稍少，故日稍短；夜行地下度稍多，故夜稍长。
现代文：从夏至以后，太阳距离极点逐渐变远，所以日影逐渐变长，太阳于白昼时在地上运行的度数逐渐减少，所以白天时间逐渐变短；夜间在地下运行机制的度数逐渐增多，所以夜间时间变长。
English: After the summer solstice, the sun's distance from the pole gradually becomes farther, so the shadow gradually becomes longer; the degree of the sun's movement on the ground during the daytime gradually decreases, so the daytime time gradually becomes shorter; the degree of the underground movement mechanism at night gradually increases, so the night time becomes longer.

古文：日所在度稍南，故日出入稍南，以至于南至而复初焉。
现代文：太阳所在的度数逐渐向南，所以太阳的出入也逐渐向南，等到了冬至就又恢复到了原样了。
English: The degree of the sun's location gradually moved southward, so the sun's rising and setting also gradually moved southward, and by the winter solstice it had returned to its original state.

古文：斗二十一，井二十五，南北相应四十八度。
现代文：斗星二十一度，井星二十五度，南北相应点是四十八度。
English: Douxing is twenty-one degrees, Jingxing is twenty-five degrees, and the north-south corresponding point is forty-eight degrees.

古文：春分日在奎十四少强，秋分日在角五少弱，此黄赤二道之交中也。
现代文：春分这天太阳在奎星十四度稍多的地方，秋分这天太阳在角星五度稍少一点的地方，这正是黄道、赤道相交的中心。
English: On the day of the vernal equinox, the sun rises a little more than fourteen degrees above the horizon, and on the day of the autumnal equinox, the sun rises a little less than five degrees below the horizon. This is the center of the intersection of the ecliptic and the equator.

古文：去极俱九十一度少强。南北处斗二十一，井二十五之中，故景居二至长短之中。
现代文：距离极点都是九十一度稍多一点，南北处在斗星二十一度、井星二十五度之中，所以日影在冬至和夏至一长一短之中。
English: The distance between the poles is slightly more than ninety-one degrees, and the north and south are in the middle of the star twenty-one degrees and the star twenty-five degrees, so the shadow of the sun is in the middle of the winter solstice and the summer solstice.

古文：奎十四，角五，出卯入酉，故日亦出卯入酉。
现代文：奎星十四度、角星五度，出于卯时入于酉时，以所太阳也出于卯时入于酉时。
English: The Kui Star is 14 degrees and the Angular Star is 5 degrees. It rises at midnight and sets at dawn. Therefore, the sun also rises at midnight and sets at dawn.

古文：日昼行地上，夜行地下，俱百八十二度半强，故日见之漏五十刻，不见之漏五十刻，谓之昼夜同。
现代文：太阳于白昼在地上运行，夜晚在地下运行，都是一百八十二度半多，所以太阳在刻漏显现出有五十刻，没有显现出的有五十刻，这就叫白昼与夜晚同等。
English: The sun moves over the earth in the daytime and under the earth at night, and both are more than one hundred and eighty-two degrees and a half. Therefore, the sun appears for fifty minutes when it is not shining, and for fifty minutes when it is shining. This means that the day and night are equal.

古文：夫天之昼夜以日出没为分，人之昼夜以昏明为限。
现代文：天体的昼夜以太阳的出没划分，人的昼夜以黑暗和明亮为界限。
English: The day and night of a celestial body are divided by the appearance of the sun, and the day and night of a human being are delimited by darkness and brightness.

古文：日未出二刻半而明，日入二刻半而昏，故损夜五刻以益昼，是以春秋分漏昼五十五刻。
现代文：太阳出来之前的两刻半就天亮了，太阳落下两刻半之后天变暗，所以减少夜间的五刻来补充白昼，因此春分秋分划分漏刻白昼是五十五度。
English: Two and a half hours before the sun rises, it is dawn. Two and a half hours after the sun sets, the sky becomes dark. Therefore, the five hours of night are reduced to supplement the daytime. Therefore, the division of the vernal equinox and the autumnal equinox is 55 degrees.

古文：三光之行，不必有常，术家以算求之，各有同异，故诸家历法参差不齐。
现代文：日月星三光运行，不必有一定的规律，擅长天文历算的学者用计算的方法求证，各有异同，所以管中窥豹的历法也参差不齐。
English: The sun, moon and stars do not have to have a certain regularity in their three-pointed movement. Scholars who are good at astronomical calendar calculation use calculation methods to verify. Each has its own similarities and differences, so the calendar of the peephole in the tube is also uneven.

古文：《洛书甄曜度》、《春秋考异邮》皆云： 周天一百七万一千里，一度为二千九百三十二里七十一步二尺七寸四分四百八十七分分之三百六十二。 
现代文：《洛书甄曜度》、《春秋考异邮》都说： 绕天一周是百七万一千里，一度是二千九百三十二里七十一步二尺七寸四分四百八十七分分之三百六十二。 
English: "Laoshu Zhengyou Dao" and "Spring and Autumn Examination of Foreign Mail" both say: A circle around the sky is one million seventy-one thousand miles, and once it was two thousand nine hundred and thirty-two miles, seventy-one steps, two feet, seven inches, four minutes, three hundred and sixty-two of four hundred and eighty-seven minutes.

古文：陆绩云： 天东西南北径三十五万七千里。 
现代文：陆绩说： 天东西南北径三十五万七千里。 
English: Lu Ji said: The east-west-north-south diameter of the sky is 357,000 miles.

古文：此言周三径一也。
现代文：这是说周周长和直径比率是三比一。
English: This means that the ratio of the circumference to the diameter is three to one.

古文：考之径一不啻周三，率周百四十二而径四十五，则天径三十二万九千四百一里一百二十二步二尺二寸一分七十一分分之十。
现代文：考察一下直径是一而周长则不只是三，大概周长是一百四十二而直径是四十五，那么天体直径为三十二万九千四百一里一百二十二步二尺二寸一分七十一分分之十。
English: If the diameter is one and the circumference is not only three, but if the circumference is approximately one hundred and forty-two and the diameter is forty-five, then the diameter of the celestial body is three hundred and twenty-nine thousand four hundred and one miles, one hundred and twenty-two paces, two feet and two inches, one minute and seventy-one tenths.

古文：《周礼》： 日至之景尺有五寸，谓之地中。 
现代文：《周礼》： 夏至的日影一尺五寸长，叫做地中。 
English: "Zhou Li": The shadow of the summer solstice is one foot and five inches long, which is called the middle of the earth.

古文：郑众说： 土圭之长尺有五寸，以夏至之日立八尺之表，其景与土圭等，谓之地中，今颍川阳城地也。 
现代文：郑众说： 测量日影的土圭的长度是一尺五寸，在夏至这天立一个八尺惊扰华表，它的影子长度与土圭相等，叫做地中，是现今颍川阳城地也。 
English: Zheng Zong said: The length of the togui for measuring the shadow of the sun is one foot and five inches. On the day of the summer solstice, an eight-foot alarm chronometer is set up. Its shadow length is equal to that of the togui. It is called the middle of the earth. It is also the present-day Yangcheng in Luochuan.

古文：郑玄云： 凡日景于地，千里而差一寸，景尺有五寸者，南戴日下万五千里也。 
现代文：郑玄说： 大凡太阳的影子射在地上，一千里差一寸，影子长一尺五寸的原因，正是南边太阳之下一万五千里远。 
English: Zheng Xuan said: The reason why the shadow of the sun cast on the earth is one inch less than a thousand miles away, and the shadow is one foot and five inches long, is that it is fifteen thousand miles away under the southern sun.

古文：以此推之，日当去其下地八万里矣。
现代文：以此推算，太阳应当距离其下面的大地八万里远。
English: By this reckoning, the sun should be eighty thousand miles away from the earth below it.

古文：日邪射阳城，则天径之半也。
现代文：太阳斜射到阳城，正是天体直径的一半。
English: The sun slants to Yangcheng, exactly half the diameter of the celestial body.

古文：天体员如弹丸，地处天之半，而阳城为中，则日春秋冬夏，昏明昼夜，去阳城皆等，无盈缩矣。
现代文：天体浑圆像个弹丸，大地处于天体的一半，而阳城为正中，则太阳无论在春秋冬夏、黑夜还是白昼，距离阳城都一样远近，没有增加或减少。
English: The celestial body is round like a projectile, the earth is in the half of the celestial body, and the yangcheng is in the middle, then the sun is the same distance from the yangcheng in spring, autumn, winter, summer, night and day, without increasing or decreasing.

古文：故知从日邪射阳城，为天径之半也。
现代文：所以知道从太阳斜射阳城，正为天体直径的一半。
English: Therefore, it is known that the oblique sun from the sun is exactly half the diameter of the celestial body.

古文：以句股法言之，旁万五千里，句也；立八万里，股也；从日邪射阳城，弦也。
现代文：从勾股算法来说，横旁连天万五千里，是勾；竖旁八万里，是股；从太阳斜射阳城，是弦。
English: From the perspective of the gradient algorithm, it is a gradient if it is parallel to the heavens for fifteen thousand miles; it is a gradient if it is parallel to the earth for eighty thousand miles; and it is a chord if it is oblique to the sun.

古文：以句股求弦法入之，得八万一千三百九十四里三十步五尺三寸六分，天径之半而地上去天之数也。
现代文：用勾股求弦的方法代入，得八万一千三百九十四里三十步五尺三寸六分，正是天体直径的一半而且是地上距离天体的数日。
English: Substituting by the method of finding the chord by hooking, the result is 81,394 li 30 paces 5 feet 3 inches 6 minutes, which is exactly half the diameter of the celestial body and is several days away from the celestial body on the ground.

古文：倍之，得十六万二千七百八十八里六十一步四尺七寸二分，天径之数也。
现代文：加上一倍，得十六万二千七百八十八里六十一步四尺七寸二分，正是天体直径的数目。
English: If you double it, you get 162,788 miles, which is exactly the number of the diameter of the celestial body.

古文：以周率乘之，径率约之，得五十一万三千六百八十七里六十八步一尺八寸二分，周天之数也。
现代文：乘上圆周率之，径率都约简而算之，得五十一万三千六百八十七里六十八步一尺八寸二分，正是天体圆周的数目。
English: Multiplying by the circumference, the radii are all approximately equal, and the result is 5,113,687 miles, 68 stadia, 1 foot, 8 inches and 2 minutes, which is the number of the circumference of the celestial body.

古文：减《甄曜度》、《考异邮》五十五万七千三百一十七里有奇。
现代文：比《甄曜度》、《考异邮》少五十五万七千三百一十七里还多。
English: It is more than 557,317 li less than that of "Screening Degree" and "Different Posting Test."

古文：一度凡千四百六里百二十四步六寸四分十万七千五百六十五分分之万九千四十九，减旧度千五百二十五里二百五十六步三尺三寸二十一万五千一百三十分分之十六万七百三十。
现代文：一度凡千四百六里百二十四步六寸四分十万七千五百六十五分分之万九千四十九，比旧度少千五百二十五里二百五十六步三尺三寸二十一万五千一百三十分分之十六万七百三十。
English: Once every fourteen hundred and sixty-six miles, one hundred and twenty-four paces, six inches and four minutes, one hundred and seventy-five thousand, nine hundred and forty-nine minutes, one thousand five hundred and twenty-five miles, two hundred and fifty-six paces, three feet and three inches, two hundred and fifteen thousand, one hundred and thirty minutes less than the old degree.

古文：分黄赤二道，相兴交错，其间相去二十四度。
现代文：分黄道、赤道，二道相互交错，中间相距二十四度。
English: Divide the zodiac, the equator, the two intertwined, the middle distance of twenty-four degrees.

古文：以两仪推之，二道俱三百六十五度有奇，是以知天体员如弹丸也。
现代文：用天地两仪云推算，两道都是三百六十五度胡余，所以知道天体像弹丸一样浑圆。
English: Using the two clouds of heaven and earth, both are three hundred and sixty-five degrees, so we know that the celestial body is round like a projectile.

古文：而陆绩造浑象，其形如鸟卵，然则黄道应长于赤道矣。
现代文：而陆绩制造浑天仪，其形状像鸟蛋，这样那黄道就应该比赤道长了。
English: But Lu Ji made the armillary sphere, which is shaped like a bird's egg, so that the ecliptic should be longer than the equator.

古文：绩云 天东西南北径三十五万七千里 ，然则绩亦以天形正员也，而浑象为鸟卵，则为自相违背。
现代文：陆绩说 天体东西南北的直径都是三十五万七千里 ，那么陆绩认为天体的形状是正圆的，而浑天仪却做成鸟蛋形，这就是自相矛盾了。
English: Lu Ji said that the diameter of the celestial body from east to west and north to south is 357,000 li, so Lu Ji thought that the shape of the celestial body was round, but the armillary sphere was made into a bird's egg shape, which was a contradiction.

古文：古旧浑象以二分为一度，凡周七尺三寸半分。
现代文：古代旧的浑天仪以二分为一度，大体上一周为七尺三寸半分。
English: In ancient times, the old armillary sphere was divided into two equal parts, with a circumference of seven feet, three and a half inches.

古文：张衡更制，以四分为一度，凡周一丈四尺六寸一分。
现代文：张衡改变了旧的体制，以四分为一度，周长为一丈四尺六寸一分。
English: Zhang Heng changed the old system, divided by four into one, and the circumference was increased to one meter four feet six inches one point.

古文：◎天文经星《洪范传曰》： 清而明者，天之体也。天忽变色，是谓易常。
现代文：王蕃认为古代的样式发展阶段太小，星辰分布过于稠密，张衡的仪器又太大，难以移动，又重新制造了浑天仪，以三分为一度，天体一周是一丈九寸五分四分分之三。《洪范传》说： 清朗而明亮的，是天体。天体忽然改变颜色，这叫改易了常规。
English: Wang Yao thought that the development stage of the ancient style was too small, the distribution of stars was too dense, and Zhang Heng's instrument was too large and difficult to move. He also re-made the armillary sphere, with three divided by one, and the circumference of the celestial body was three-quarters of a meter. "Hong Fan Biography" said: It is the celestial body that is clear and bright. The celestial body suddenly changes color, which is called changing the routine.

古文：天裂，阳不足，是谓臣强。
现代文：天体开裂，阳气不足，这是臣下太强。
English: The celestial body is cracking, the yang is insufficient, and the vassal is too strong.

古文：天裂见人，兵起国亡。
现代文：天体开裂而见人，战乱兴起而国家灭亡。
English: The heavens will be rent asunder and the people will be scattered. Wars will break out and nations will be destroyed.

古文：天鸣有声，至尊忧且惊。
现代文：天体鸣叫而有声，天子担忧而惊醒。
English: The heavenly bodies sing and make noise, and the Son of Heaven is alarmed and wakes up.

古文：皆乱国之所生也。 
现代文：这都是乱国产生产原因。 
English: All of this is the result of chaotic domestic production.

古文：马续云： 天文在图籍昭昭可知者，经星常宿中外官凡一百一十八名，积数七百八十三，皆有州国官宫物类之象。 
现代文：马续说： 天文在图册典籍中可以清清楚楚地认识明白的，二十八宿等恒星中外之官共一百一十八名，总数是七百八十三，都类似州邑、邦国、官府、宫廷万物的形象。 
English: Ma went on to say: Astronomy can be clearly understood from the atlas classics. There are a total of one hundred and eighteen officials in and out of twenty-eight stars, with a total of seven hundred and eighty-three. They are all similar to the image of everything in the county, state, government, and court.

古文：张衡云： 文曜丽乎天，其动者有七，日月五星是也。
现代文：张衡说： 日月星辰附着在天上，其中运动着的有七个：太阳、月亮和金、木、水、火、土五大恒星。
English: Zhang Heng said: The sun, moon and stars are attached to the sky, and there are seven of them in motion: the sun, the moon and the five major stars of gold, wood, water, fire and earth.

古文：日者，阳精之宗；月者，阴精之宗；五星，五行之精。
现代文：太阳，是阳精的本源；月亮，是阴精的本源；五星，是金、木、水、火、土五行的本源。
English: The sun is the origin of the male essence; the moon is the origin of the female essence; the five stars are the origin of the five elements of gold, wood, water, fire and earth.

古文：众星列布，体生于地，精成于天，列居错峙，各有攸属。在野象物，在朝象官，在人象神。
现代文：众星分别排列错杂峙立，各有所属。对应野庶，就取法于物象，对应朝廷，就摹官象，对应人情，就摹各类事物。
English: The stars are arranged in a jumble, each with its own affiliation. To correspond to the barbarians, take the law from the objects, to correspond to the imperial court, to correspond to the officials, to correspond to the people, to correspond to all kinds of things.

古文：其以神差，有五列焉，是为三十五名。
现代文：其中以神著名的，有五列，共三十五名。
English: Of these, five were famous for their gods, making a total of thirty-five.

古文：一居中央，谓之北斗。
现代文：一个居于中央，叫做北斗星。
English: The one in the middle is called the Big Dipper.

古文：四布于方各七，为二十八舍。
现代文：四个分布于四方各有七颗，成为二十八舍。
English: Four distributed in the four directions each have seven, making twenty-eight.

古文：日月运行，历示吉凶，五纬躔次，用告祸福。
现代文：太阳月亮运行不休，用来显示吉凶，五大行星在轨道上的位置，用来告知祝福。
English: The sun and moon are in constant motion to indicate good and bad luck, and the positions of the five planets in their orbits are used to convey blessings.

古文：中外之官，常明者百有二十四，可名者三百二十，为星二千五百，微星之数盖万有一千五百二十。
现代文：内外之官，经常明亮的有一百二十四颗，可以叫出名字的有三百二十颗，算作星宿的有二千五百颗，微小的星星的数目大概有一万一千五百二十颗。
English: There are one hundred and twenty-four stars that are always bright, three hundred and twenty that can be named, two thousand five hundred that can be counted as constellations, and about eleven thousand five hundred and twenty tiny stars.

古文：庶物蠢蠢，咸得系命。
现代文：庶物之物众多而杂乱，全都得以寄托性命。
English: There are a lot of miscellaneous things, and they are all able to save their lives.

古文：不然，何得总而理诸？ 
现代文：不然，怎么能统一治理呢？ 
English: Otherwise, how can there be unified governance?

古文：后武帝时，太史令陈卓总甘、石、巫咸三家所著星图，大凡二百八十三官，一千四百六十四星，以为定纪。
现代文：后来武帝时，太史令陈卓总合甘德、石申夫和巫咸三家所著的星图，大概有二百八十三个星官，一千四百六十四颗星星，以为定数。
English: Later, during the reign of Emperor Wu, Emperor Taishi ordered Chen Zhuo to compile the star charts of Gande, Shi Shenfu, and Wuxian, which contained approximately 283 eclipses and 1,464 stars.

古文：今略其昭昭者，以备天官云。
现代文：现在记下那些非常清楚明白的，以充备天象。翻译
English: Now write down the ones that are very clear and obvious, to fill in the blanks.

古文：◎中宫北极五星，钩陈六星，皆在紫宫中。
现代文：北极昨夜五颗星，钩陈昨夜六星，都在紫恒星中。
English: The five stars at the North Pole last night, and the six stars at the Hook of Chen last night, are all among the purple stars.

古文：北极，北辰最尊者也，其纽星，天之枢也。
现代文：北极星，是北极星座中最尊贵的，其第五颗纽星，是天的枢纽。
English: Polaris is the most precious of the northern constellations, and its fifth new star is the hub of the sky.

古文：天运无穷，三光迭耀，而极星不移，故曰 居其所而众星共之 。
现代文：天体运行没有穷尽，日月星三光迭相照耀，而北极星从后移动，所以说： 处在它的位置上而其他众星环绕着它。 
English: There is no end to the movement of the heavenly bodies. The sun, moon, and stars shine in a triplicate, and the North Star moves backwards, so it is said to be in its place and the other stars surround it.

古文：第一星主月，太子也。
现代文：第一颗星表示月亮，象微太子。
English: The first star represents the moon, like a little prince.

古文：第二星主日，帝王也；亦太乙之坐，谓最赤明者也。
现代文：第二颗星表示太阳，象微帝王；也就是太乙星，指的是最红最这的一颗。
English: The second star represents the sun, like the emperor; that is, the second star, refers to the reddest one.

古文：第三星主五星，庶子也。
现代文：第三颗星表示五星，象微众庶之子。
English: The third star represents the five stars, like the son of a commoner.

古文：中星不明，主不用事；右星不明，太子忧。
现代文：中星不明亮，预示帝王不能当权执政；右星不明亮，是太子的忧患。
English: If the middle star is not bright, it indicates that the emperor will not be able to govern; if the right star is not bright, it is the prince's sorrow.

古文：钩陈，后宫也，大帝之正妃也，大帝之常居也。
现代文：钩陈星，象微着后宫，是皇帝的正妃，又是皇帝的常居之地。
English: Hook Chen Xing, like a small harem, is the emperor's lawful wife and the emperor's permanent residence.

古文：北四星曰女御宫，八十一御妻之象也。
现代文：北面四颗星为女御宫，象微着八十一位御妻。
English: The four stars to the north are the four empresses, symbolizing the eighty-one empresses.

古文：钩陈口中一星曰天皇大帝，其神曰耀魄宝，主御群灵，执万神图。
现代文：钩陈星座口中的一颗星叫天皇大帝，它的神叫耀魄宝，主宰着生灵，掌管着万神图。
English: One of the stars in the mouth of the constellation of Hook Chen is called the Emperor, and its god is called Dazzling Treasure, dominating the living beings and controlling the map of all the gods.

古文：抱北极四星曰四辅，所以辅佐北极而出度授政也。
现代文：环抱着北极四颗星叫四辅，用来辅佐北极发布法令。
English: The four stars encircling the North Pole are called the four auxiliary stars, which are used to assist the North Pole in issuing decrees.

古文：大帝上九星曰华盖，所以覆蔽大帝之坐也。
现代文：大帝上面的九颗星叫华盖，是用来覆盖遮蔽天帝的宝座的。
English: The nine stars above the Great Emperor are called "Hua Gai" and are used to cover the throne of the Heavenly Emperor.

古文：盖下九星曰杠，盖之柄也。
现代文：盖下面的九颗星叫杠，是华盖的柄把。
English: The nine stars below the lid are called "bars" and are the handles of the lid.

古文：华盖下五星曰五帝内坐，设叙顺帝所居也。
现代文：华盖下面的五星叫五帝内坐，排列的次序按照五帝的顺序。
English: The five stars below the lid are called the five emperors seated inside, and they are arranged in the order of the five emperors.

古文：客星犯紫宫中坐，大臣犯主。
现代文：客星如果侵犯了微星的中座，就是大臣干犯了君主。
English: If the guest star encroaches on the middle seat of the micro star, it is the minister who has violated the monarch.

古文：华盖杠旁六星曰六甲，可以分阴阳而配节候，故在帝旁，所以布政教而授农时也。
现代文：华盖柄把旁边的六颗星叫六甲，可以区分阴阳、调配时令气候，所以帝座旁边，用来发布政教并且教授农时。
English: The six stars next to the handle of the huagai are called the six stars, which can distinguish between yin and yang and adjust the seasonal climate. Therefore, next to the imperial throne, it is used to issue political education and teach agricultural time.

古文：极东一星曰柱下史，主记过；左右史，此之象也。
现代文：最东边的一颗星叫柱下史，主管记录过失；左史右史，是妇官中的低微者，主管传报时辰，所以汉代有侍史官。
English: The easternmost star is called the lower column history, the supervisor records the fault; the left history, the right history, is the inferior of the women's officers, the supervisor announces the time, so the Han Dynasty has the attendant historian.

古文：柱史北一星曰女史，妇人之微者，主传漏，故汉有侍史。传舍九星在华盖上，近河，宾客之馆，主胡人入中国。客星守之，备奸使，亦曰胡兵起。传舍南河中五星曰造父，御官也，一曰司马，或曰伯乐。
现代文：传舍九星在华盖的上面，靠近天河，像招待宾客的馆舍，表示胡夷之人进入中原。客星守望着，防备奸诈的使臣，此星也叫做胡兵起。传舍南面天河中的五颗星叫造父，是侍御之官，又叫司马，或者叫伯乐。
English: The nine stars on the top of the pavilion, close to the Tianhe River, are like a guest house, indicating that the Hui people have entered the Central Plains. The guest star is watching, guarding against treacherous envoys. This star is also called Hu Bingqi. The five stars in the Tianhe River on the south side of the pavilion are called Zoufu, they are attendants, and are also called Sima, or Bo Le.

古文：星亡，马大贵。
现代文：此星消失，马就非常珍贵。
English: If this star disappears, the horse will be very precious.

古文：其西河中九星如钩状，曰钩星，直则地动。
现代文：它西面天河中的杂颗星像勾子的形状，叫勾星，若成一直线，就会发生地震。
English: The motley stars in the celestial river to the west of it have the shape of a hook, called a hook star. If they form a straight line, an earthquake will occur.

古文：天一星在紫宫门右星南，天帝之神也，主战斗，知人吉凶者也。
现代文：天一星在紫宫门右星的南面，是天帝之神，主管战争讨伐，能预知人的凶吉。
English: Tian Yixing, south of the star on the right side of the Purple Palace Gate, is the god of the heavenly emperor, in charge of the war crusade, and can predict the fate of people.

古文：太一星在天一南，相近，亦天帝神也，主使十六神，知风雨水旱、兵革饥谨、疾疫灾害所在之国也。
现代文：太一星在天一星的南面，离得很近，也是天帝之神，主管指使十六尊神，能预示风、寸、水、旱、战乱饥荒和瘟疫灾害等将要在哪个国家产生。
English: Taiyi Xing is located in the south of Tianyi Xing, very close to it. It is also the god of the celestial emperor, and is in charge of directing the sixteen gods. It can predict which country will be affected by wind, snow, water, drought, war, famine and plague.

古文：紫宫垣十五星，其西番七，东番八，在北斗北。
现代文：紫微垣有十五颗星，其中西方有七颗，东方有八颗，在北斗星的北面。
English: There are fifteen stars in Zi Weigaki, including seven in the west and eight in the east, on the north side of the Big Dipper.

古文：一曰紫微，大帝之坐也，天子之常居也，主命主度也。
现代文：一个叫紫微，是天帝的宝座，天子平常居坐的地方，主掌号令和法规。
English: One is called Ziwei, which is the throne of the heavenly emperor, the place where the heavenly son usually resides, and where the orders and laws are issued.

古文：一曰长垣，一曰天营，一曰旗星，为番卫，备番臣也。
现代文：一个叫长垣，一个叫天营，一个叫旗星，作为屏障和守卫，防备蕃属之臣。
English: One is called Nagagaki, one is called Heaven Camp, and one is called Banner Star. They are used as barriers and guards to protect the vassals.

古文：宫阙兵起，旗星直，天子出，自将宫中兵。东垣下五星曰天柱，建政教，悬图法。门内东南维五星曰尚书，主纳言，夙夜谘谋；龙作纳言，此之象也。
现代文：宫廷内部若有兵将，东垣下的五颗星叫天柱，主管建立政教，公布法度，门内东南角的五星叫尚书，主管出纳王命，日夜咨询谋划；龙设置了纳言一官，正是此星的象微。
English: If there is a general inside the palace, the five stars under the east wall are called the heavenly pillars, responsible for establishing politics and religion, and promulgating laws. The five stars in the southeast corner of the gate are called Shangshu, responsible for the king's cashier, and consulting and planning day and night. The dragon has set up a nagon, which is the image of this star.

古文：西南角外二星曰内厨，主六宫之内饮食，主平刑断狱也。
现代文：尚书以西的二星是阴德、阳德，主管周济困急，赈济匮乏。宫门左星内的二星叫大理，主管判决诉讼刑狱。
English: The two stars to the west of Shangshu are Yin De and Yang De, with Zhou Jizhi in charge of the distressed and the destitute. The two stars in the left star of the palace gate are called Dali, and the supervisor is in charge of sentencing the lawsuit to prison.

古文：门外六星曰天床，主寝舍，解息燕休。
现代文：门外六星叫天床星，主管宫室寝舍，闲居休息。
English: The six-pointed star outside the gate is called the Heavenly Bed Star, which is in charge of the bedroom of the palace, living and resting.

古文：西南角外二星曰内厨，主六宫之内饮食，主后妃夫人与太子宴饮。
现代文：西南角外的二星叫内厨星，主管六宫之内的饮食，主管后妃、夫人和太子们的宴食。
English: The two stars outside the southwest corner are called the inner kitchen stars, responsible for the food and drink inside the six palaces, and for the banquets of queens, wives and princes.

古文：东北维外六星曰天厨，主盛馔。
现代文：东北角外的六星叫天厨星，主管盛大的宴会。
English: Six stars outside the northeast corner are called heavenly kitchen stars, and they are in charge of grand banquets.

古文：北斗七星在太微北，七政之枢机，阴阳之元本也。
现代文：北斗七星在太微垣的北面，是日月星辰的中心，阴阳的本元。
English: The Big Dipper is on the north side of the Great Wall. It is the center of the sun, moon and stars, and the source of yin and yang.

古文：故运乎天中，而临制四方，以建四时，而均五行也。
现代文：所以运行于天体中央，而监临控制四方，用以建立四时，并均衡五行。
English: Therefore, it runs in the center of the celestial body, and monitors and controls the four directions to establish the four o'clock and balance the five elements.

古文：魁四星为旋玑，杓三星为玉衡。
现代文：魁部的四星叫璇玑，杓部的三星叫玉衡。
English: The four-pointed star at the end of the neck is called the cormorant, and the three-pointed star at the end of the neck is called the eagle.

古文：又曰，斗为人君之象，号令之主也。
现代文：又一说，斗是人群的象微，是发布号令的主宰。
English: Another said that Dou was the leader of the crowd and the one who issued the order.

古文：又为帝车，取乎运动之义也。
现代文：又是帝王的车驾，取于运动之义。
English: It's the emperor's chariot again, taking its lead from the spirit of sport.

古文：又魁第一星曰天枢，二曰璇，三曰玑，四曰权，五曰玉衡，六曰开阳，七曰摇光，一至四为魁，五至七为杓。
现代文：又北斗星的第一颗星叫天枢，第二颗星叫璇，第三颗叫玑，第四颗叫权，第五颗叫玉衡，第六颗叫开阳，第七颗叫摇光；第一颗到第四颗为魁头，第五颗到第七颗为杓柄。
English: In addition, the first star of the Big Dipper is called the heavenly center, the second star is called the cormorant, the third is called the cormorant, the fourth is called the right, the fifth is called the jade, the sixth is called the open sun, and the seventh is called the shaking light; the first to the fourth is the leader, and the fifth to the seventh is the shovel handle.

古文：枢为天，璇为地，玑为人，权为时，玉衡为音，开阳为律，摇光为星。
现代文：极为天，璇为地，玑为人，权为时，玉衡为音，开阳为律，摇光为星。
English: Heaven is the highest, earth is the lowest, man is the lowest, power is time, weight is sound, the sun is the law, and light is the star.

古文：石氏云： 第一曰正星，主阳德，天子之象也。
现代文：石氏说： 第一颗叫正星，主宰阳德，是天子之的象徵。
English: Shi said, "The first star is called Zhengxing, which governs the yang and virtue, and is a symbol of the Son of Heaven.

古文：二曰法星，主阴刑，女主之位也。
现代文：第二颗叫法星，主宰阴刑，是王后之位。
English: The second is called the Law Star, which governs Yin and Yang, and is the Queen's throne.

古文：三曰令星，主中祸。
现代文：第三颗叫令星，主管中祸。
English: The third star is the ringing star, the supervisor is in trouble.

古文：四曰伐星，主天理，伐无道。
现代文：第四颗叫伐星，主管天理，讨伐无道。
English: The fourth one is called the Star of the Crusade, the leader is Tenri, and there is no way to fight it.

古文：五曰杀星，主中央，助四旁，杀有罪。
现代文：第五颗叫杀星，主管中央，佐助四旁，诛杀有罪之人。
English: The fifth one is called "Killing Star," in charge of the center, with Sasuke on either side, killing the guilty.

古文：六曰危星，主天仓五谷。
现代文：第六颗叫危星，主管天仓五谷。
English: The sixth is called "Gekisei" and is directed by Amakura Itani.

古文：七曰部星，亦曰应星，主兵。 
现代文：第七颗叫部星，又叫应星，主管兵革战争。 
English: The seventh is called Bu Xing, also known as Ying Xing, and is in charge of the Revolutionary War.

古文：又云： 一主天，二主地，三主火，四主水，五主土，六主木，七主金。 
现代文：又说： 第一颗表示，第二颗发示地，第三颗表示火，第四颗表示水，第五颗表示土，第六颗表示木，第七颗表示金。 
English: And he said, The first shall be the earth, and the second the sea, and the third fire, and the fourth water, and the fifth earth, and the sixth wood, and the seventh gold.

古文：又曰： 一主秦，二主楚，三主梁，四主吴，五主燕，六主赵，七主齐。 
现代文：又说： 第一颗代表秦国，第二颗星代表楚，第三颗星代表梁，第四颗星代表吴，第五颗星代表燕，第六颗星代表赵，第七颗星代表齐。 
English: He also said: The first star represents Qin, the second star represents Chu, the third star represents Liang, the fourth star represents Wu, the fifth star represents Yan, the sixth star represents Zhao, and the seventh star represents Qi.

古文：魁中四星为贵人之牢，曰天理也。
现代文：魁斗中的四颗星是贵人的居处，叫做天理。
English: The four stars in the Quidditch are the residences of the nobles, called Tenri.

古文：辅星傅乎开阳，所以佐斗成功，丞相之象也。
现代文：辅星伴随在开阳星旁边，用来辅佐斗星成功，是丞相的象徵。
English: The companion star next to the rising sun, used to support the success of the shooting star, is a symbol of the prime minister.

古文：七政星明，其国昌；辅星明，则臣强。
现代文：北斗七星明亮，国运昌盛；辅星明亮，则臣下强悍。
English: The seven stars of the Big Dipper are bright, the national movement is prosperous; the auxiliary star is bright, and the vassal is strong.

古文：杓南三星及魁第一星西三星皆曰三公，主宜德化，调七政，和阴阳之官也。
现代文：杓柄南面的三星及魁斗第一颗星西面的三颗星都叫三公，是主管宣扬道德教化、调和七政、均衡阴阳的官。
English: The three stars on the south side of the cormorant handle and the three stars on the west side of the first star of the quid are called the three kings. They are the officials in charge of promoting moral enlightenment, reconciling the seven political systems, and balancing yin and yang.

古文：文昌六星，在北斗魁前，天之六府也，主集计天道。
现代文：文昌六星，在北斗魁星的前面，是上天的六府，主管征集意见计划天道。
English: The six stars of Wenchang, in front of the Big Dipper, are the six prefectures of heaven.

古文：一曰上将，大将军建威武。
现代文：第一颗星叫上将，是大将军建威立武。
English: The first star is called the Admiral, which is the general Jian Wei Liwu.

古文：二曰次将，尚书正左右。
现代文：第三颗叫次将，是尚书端正左右。
English: The third one is called "Zi Jian" (Second Lieutenant) and is about the same length as Shang Shu.

古文：三曰贵相，太常理文绪。
现代文：第三颗叫贵相，是太常治理文教礼乐。
English: The third one is called Gui Xiang, which is too often used to govern literature, education and music.

古文：四曰司禄、司中，司隶赏功进。
现代文：第四颗叫司禄、司中，是司隶赏功进皆。
English: The fourth one is called Shiroku, Shizhong, and it is the Shizhu awarding merit to everyone.

古文：五曰司命、司怪，太史主灭咎。
现代文：第五颗叫司命、司怪，是太史官掌管消除凶咎。
English: The fifth is called "Sifu" or "Siki," which is the historical official in charge of wiping out evil.

古文：六曰司冠，大理佐理宝。
现代文：第六颗星叫司寇，是大理辅佐治理宝物。
English: The sixth star is called Scor, which is a treasure of Dali's governance.

古文：所谓一者，起北斗魁前近内阶者也。
现代文：所谓第一，是指起自北斗魁星之前靠近内皆的星。
English: The so-called "first" refers to the star that has been close to the inner circle since before the Big Dipper.

古文：明润，大小齐，天瑞臻。
现代文：明亮润泽，大小整齐，上天降下的祥瑞就盛多无尽了。
English: Bright and moisturizing, neat in size, the auspicious charms sent down from heaven are endless.

古文：文昌北六星曰内阶，天皇之阶也。
现代文：文昌星北面的六星叫内阶星，是天皇和的阶梯。
English: The six stars on the north side of the Moon Changxing are called the inner steps, and are the steps of the emperor.

古文：相一星在北斗南。
现代文：相星一颗在北斗的南面。
English: A companion star is located to the south of the Big Dipper.

古文：相者，总领百司而掌邦教，以佐帝王安邦国，集众事也。
现代文：所谓 相 ，要统领百官并掌管邦国政教，用以辅佐帝王安邦治国，治理万事。
English: The so-called phase was to command a hundred officials and control the state, politics and religion, to assist the emperor in governing the country and governing everything.

古文：其星明，吉。
现代文：这颗星明亮，就吉祥。
English: If the star is bright, it is auspicious.

古文：太阳守一星，在相西，大将大臣之象也，主戒不虞，设武备。
现代文：太阳守一颗星，在相星之西，是大将大臣的象徵，主管防备非常事件，设立武装警戒。
English: The sun guards a star, in the west of the phase star, it is the symbol of the general minister, responsible for the prevention of emergencies and the establishment of armed vigilance.

古文：西北四星曰势。
现代文：西北面的四颗星叫势。
English: The four stars in the northwest are calling the shots.

古文：势，腐刑人也。
现代文：势，是受了宫刑的人。
English: He is a man who has been punished by the palace.

古文：天牢六星，在北斗魁下，贵人之牢也。
现代文：天牢六颗星，在北斗魁星下，是贵人的监狱。
English: The Celestial Prison of Six Stars, under the Big Dipper, is a prison for nobles.

古文：太微，天子庭也，五帝之坐也，十二诸侯府也。
现代文：太微垣，是天子的宫庭，五帝的座位，十二诸侯的官府。
English: It is the palace of the Son of Heaven, the seat of the Five Emperors, and the government office of the Twelve Princes.

古文：其外蕃，九卿也。
现代文：它的外部蕃屏，是九卿。
English: Its outer screen is the Nine Lords.

古文：一曰太微为衡。
现代文：第一叫太微为衡。
English: The first is that it is too small.

古文：衡，主平也。
现代文：衡，主掌平衡。
English: weight, the main palm is balanced.

古文：又为天庭，理法平辞，监升授德，列宿受符，诸神考节，舒情稽疑也。南蕃中二星间曰端门。
现代文：又叫天庭，理顺法度平叛诉辞，掌管提升，任用有德之人，众星宿爱符命，各位神灵察看法则，舒展情怀，解决疑难，南方中的两星之间叫端门。
English: It is also called the heavenly court, the rectification of laws, the suppression of traitors' appeals, the management of promotion, the appointment of virtuous people, the stars are the symbols of life, the gods observe opinions, expand feelings, solve difficulties, and the door between the two stars in the south.

古文：东曰左执法，廷尉之象也。
现代文：东边的叫左执法，是廷尉的象徵。
English: The one on the east is called Zuo Jianfu, which is the symbol of the imperial lieutenant.

古文：西曰右执法，御史大夫之象也。
现代文：西边的叫右执法，是御史大夫的象徵。
English: The one on the west is called the Right Law Enforcement, and is a symbol of the Imperial Historian.

古文：执法，所以举刺凶奸者也。
现代文：执法，就是检举制裁凶恶奸邪之人。
English: To enforce the law is to prosecute and punish the perpetrators of heinous crimes.

古文：左执法之东，左掖门也。
现代文：左执法的东边是左掖门。
English: To the east of the left enforcement is the Zuoying Gate.

古文：右执法之西，右掖门也。
现代文：右执法的西边，是右掖门。
English: On the west side of the right enforcement, is the right gate.

古文：东蕃四星，南第一星曰上相，其北，东太阳门；第二星曰次相，其北，中华东门也；第三星曰次将，其北，东太阴门也；第四星曰上将：所谓四辅也。
现代文：东方四颗星，南边第一颗叫上相，它的北面是东太阳门；第二颗星叫次相，它的北面是中华东门；第三颗星叫次将，它的北面，是东太阴门；第四颗星叫上将，它的北面是西太阳门；第二颗星叫次将，它的北面是中华西门；第三颗星叫次相，它的北面是西太阴门；第四颗星叫上相。
English: The four stars in the east, the first one in the south is called the Upper Phase, and its north face is the East Sun Gate; the second star is called the Second Phase, and its north face is the East China Gate; the third star is called the Second General, and its north face is the East Taiga Gate; the fourth star is called the Admiral, and its north face is the West Sun Gate; the second star is called the Second General, and its north face is the West China Gate; the third star is called the Second Phase, and its north face is the West Taiga Gate; the fourth star is called the Upper Phase.

古文：西蕃四星，南第一星曰上将，其北，西太阳门也；第二星曰次将，其北，中华西门也；第三星曰次相，其北，西太阴门也；第四曰上相：亦曰四辅也。
现代文：这也称为四辅。
English: This is also known as the four auxiliary rings.

古文：东西蕃有芒及动摇者，诸侯谋。
现代文：东西两方若有彗星或者有活动的星星时，就预示着诸侯图谋天子。
English: If there is a comet or an active star in the east and west, it indicates that the states are plotting against the Son of Heaven.

古文：执法移，刑罚尤急。月、五星入太微，轨道，吉。
现代文：月亮和五星进入太徵垣，若顺着轨道，就吉祥。
English: When the moon and the five stars enter Taishouki, if they follow the orbit, it is auspicious.

古文：其所犯中坐，成刑。
现代文：它的居处若侵犯帝座，就会构成灾害。
English: If its habitat encroaches on the imperial throne, it will constitute a disaster.

古文：其西南角外三星曰明堂，天子布政之宫。明堂西三星曰灵台，观台也，主观云物，察符瑞，候灾变也。
现代文：它的西南角外部的三星叫明堂，是天子发布政令的宫殿，明堂西边的三星叫灵台，是观测之台，主管观测云气灾荒，察看吉祥的徵兆，侦伺灾祸的变异。
English: The three stars outside its southwest corner are called Myeongdong, which is the palace of the heavenly son issuing government orders. The three stars on the west side of Myeongdong are called Lingdae, which is an observation platform. It is responsible for observing clouds and disasters, observing auspicious signs, and investigating changes in disasters.

古文：左执法东北一星曰谒者，主赞宾客也。谒者东北三星曰三公内坐，朝会之所居也。
现代文：左执法东北方的一颗星叫谒者，主管迎候宾客，谒者东北部的三颗星叫三公内坐，是朝见聚会的场所。
English: On the left, a star in the northeastern part of the law enforcement system is called the eavesdropper, the supervisor greets the guests, and the three stars in the northeastern part of the eavesdropper are called the three public seats, which is the venue for the morning meeting.

古文：三公北三星曰九卿内坐，治万事。
现代文：三公星北面的三颗星叫九卿内坐，主管治理万事。
English: The three stars to the north of the Three Kings are called the Nine Lords of the Inner Court, who are in charge of governing everything.

古文：九卿西五星曰内五诸侯，内待天子，不之国也。
现代文：九卿星西面的五颗星叫内五诸侯，在宫肉侍奉天子，并不到自己本国云。
English: The five stars to the west of the Nine Stars are called the Inner Five Princes. They serve the Son of Heaven in the imperial court, and do not go to their own country.

古文：辟雍之礼得，则太微、诸侯明。
现代文：教育风化之礼得以奉行，则太微星、诸侯星明亮。
English: If the ceremony of education and demeanor can be carried out, then the stars are too small, and the stars of the princes are bright.

古文：黄帝坐在太微中，含枢纽之神也。
现代文：黄帝之星坐落在太微垣正中，是操纵枢纽的神。
English: The Star of the Yellow Emperor is located in the middle of the Taiwakaki, and is the god that controls the hub.

古文：天子动得天度，止得地意，从容中道，则太微五帝坐明以光。
现代文：如果天子行动能合乎天之法度，止息能符合地之旨意，一举一动都胡遵从道义，那么太微五帝星座明亮光耀。
English: If the actions of the Son of Heaven can conform to the laws of Heaven, the cessation can conform to the will of the earth, and every move is in accordance with morality, then the constellation of the Five Emperors will shine brightly.

古文：黄帝坐不明，人主求贤士以辅法，不然则夺势。
现代文：黄帝之星座若不明亮，君主就应该求取贤能之士来辅佐执法，否则就会丧失权势。
English: If the constellation of the Yellow Emperor is not bright, the monarch should solicit capable people to assist in law enforcement, otherwise he will lose power.

古文：四帝星夹黄帝坐，东方苍帝，灵威仰之神也；南方赤帝，赤熛怒之神也；西方白帝，白招矩之神也；北方黑帝，叶光纪之神也。
现代文：四帝星座围绕着黄帝星座，东方是苍帝，是灵威仰之神；南方是赤帝，是赤熛怒之神；西方是白帝，是白招矩之神；北方是黑帝，是叶光纪之神。
English: The constellation of the Four Emperors revolves around the constellation of the Yellow Emperor. In the east is the God Emperor, the god of inspiration; in the south is the Red Emperor, the god of wrath; in the west is the White Emperor, the god of wisdom; in the north is the Black Emperor, the god of enlightenment.

古文：五帝坐北一星曰太子，帝储也。
现代文：五帝星座北面的一颗星叫太子星，是帝王的王储。
English: A star to the north of the constellation of the Five Emperors is called the Crown Prince Star. It is the crown prince of the emperor.

古文：太子北一星曰从官，侍臣也。
现代文：太子星北面的一颗星叫坐官，是侍奉之臣。
English: A star to the north of the Prince Star is called Zikan, which is a servant of a vassal.

古文：帝坐东北一星曰幸臣。屏四星在端门之内，近右执法。
现代文：一旁星腐座东北面的一颗星叫幸臣，它在端门之内屏卫着四星，靠近右执法官。
English: On the other hand, a star in the northeastern part of the constellation of the rotting star is called Sachiomi. It guards the four stars inside the end door, near the right bailiff.

古文：屏，所以雍蔽学帝也。
现代文：所谓屏，就是用来庶蔽环卫帝王这庭的。
English: The so-called screen is used to cover the garden of the emperor.

古文：执法主刺举；臣尊敬君上，则星光明润泽。
现代文：执法星主掌检举好起来，举荐有功；臣下尊敬君上，则星就光亮润泽。
English: When the law-enforcement star of the master's palm is well-examined, the recommendation is meritorious; when the vassal respects the superior, the star is bright and shiny.

古文：郎位十五星在帝坐东北。
现代文：郎位十五颗星在帝坐东北方。
English: Fifteen stars rise in the north-east of the constellation.

古文：一曰依乌郎府也。
现代文：又叫依乌郎府。
English: It is also called Yiwu Langfu.

古文：周官之元士，汉官之光禄、中散、谏议、议郎、三署郎中，是其职也。
现代文：周周官职中的元士，汉官职中的光禄、中散、谏议、议郎、三署郎中等，就相当于这个官职。
English: The rank of genshi in the Zhou official position, and the ranks of guoru, zhongsan, zengpo, heguro and sanzhongro in the Han official position, are equivalent to this official position.

古文：郎，主守卫也。
现代文：郎，就是负责守卫的官。
English: Rō, is the officer in charge of the guards.

古文：其星不具，后妃死，幸臣诛。
现代文：这颗星不完备，就预示着后妃死亡，宠臣被诛杀。
English: If this star is incomplete, it indicates the death of the empress dowager and the death of a favorite.

古文：星明大及客星入之，大臣为乱。
现代文：此星又大又亮或者新出现的星星掺入此星座之中，就预示着大臣作乱。
English: If the star is large and bright, or if a new star is added to the constellation, it means that the minister is making trouble.

古文：郎将在郎位北，主阅具，所以为武备也。武贲一星，在太微西蕃北，下台南，静室旄头之骑官也。
现代文：郎将星在郎位星的北面，主管检查配备，作用是管理军事装备，武贲一星，在太微星西部的北边，下台星的南面，是天子行运静室时先驱骑兵的骑官。
English: Lang will star in the north side of the Lang position star, the supervisor checks the equipment, the role is to manage the military equipment, Wu Wei one star, in the north side of the west of the Taiwei star, the south side of the lower stage star, is the cavalry officer of the pioneer cavalry when the heavenly son moves in the quiet room.

古文：常陈七星，如毕状，在帝坐北，天子宿卫武贲之士，以设强御也。
现代文：常陈七星，像鸟网的形状，在帝座之北，是天子的宿卫武士，用来设置强大的防卫。
English: Chang Chen Qixing, shaped like a bird's web, in the north of the imperial throne, is the guardian warrior of the son of heaven, used to set up a strong defense.

古文：星摇动，天子自出，明则武兵用，微则兵弱。
现代文：此星一摇动，天子就亲自出动，此星明亮则兵威大盛，光线暗则兵力微弱。
English: As soon as this star is shaken, the heavenly son himself will be dispatched. When this star is bright, the military power is great, but when the light is dim, the military power is weak.

古文：三台六星，两两而居，起文昌，列抵太微。
现代文：三台六颗星，两颗两颗在一起，起自文昌，一直排列到太微。
English: Three sets of six stars, two two together, starting from Wenchang, have been arranged until they are too small.

古文：一曰天住，三公之位也。
现代文：又叫天住星，是三公之位。
English: It is also called heaven and earth, and is one of the Three Kingdoms.

古文：在人曰三公，在天曰三台，主开德宜符也。
现代文：在人就叫三公，在天就叫三台，主管展示和彰明道德法度。
English: In people, it is called the Three Princes, and in heaven, it is called the Three Divisions, which are responsible for demonstrating and clarifying the moral law.

古文：西近文昌二星曰上台，为司命，主寿。
现代文：西边靠近文昌的两颗叫上台，是司命，负责寿命。
English: The two on the west side, near Wenchang, were called to power. They are responsible for life expectancy.

古文：次二星曰中台，为司中，主宗室。
现代文：其次的两颗叫中台，是司中，主管宗室。
English: The next two are called Zhongtai, which is the middle of the department and the head of the family.

古文：东二星曰下台，为司禄，主兵，所以昭德塞违也。
现代文：东边的两颗星叫下台，是司禄，主管兵甲，作用是宣昭德性、阻止小人和奸臣。
English: The two stars in the east are called to step down. It is Siroku, who is in charge of the military, and his role is to promote virtue and stop villains and traitors.

古文：又曰三台为天阶，太一蹑以上下。
现代文：又说三台星是天之阶梯，太一星踏着它上上下下。
English: It is also said that the three-pointed star is the ladder of heaven, and Taichi star treads it up and down.

古文：一曰泰阶。
现代文：又叫泰阶。
English: It is also known as Thai steps.

古文：上阶，上星为天子，下星为女主；中阶，上星为诸侯三公，下星为卿大夫；下阶，上星为士，下星为庶人：所以和阴阳而理万物也。
现代文：最上一阶，上面的星指天子，下面的星指天子之后；中间的一阶，上面的星指诸侯三公，下面的星指卿大夫；最下一阶，上面是指士，下面的星指庶民百姓。其作用是调和阴阳并理顺万物。
English: At the topmost level, the star at the top points to the Son of Heaven, and the star at the bottom points to the one after the Son of Heaven; at the middle level, the star at the top points to the three princes, and the star at the bottom points to the doctor; at the lowest level, the star at the top points to the nobles, and the star at the bottom points to the common people. Its function is to harmonize yin and yang and rationalize all things.

古文：君臣和集，如其常度，有变则占其人。
现代文：群臣和睦相处，它们就像平常一样，如果有变化则占示其人。
English: The courtiers get along well, they are as usual, and if there is a change, it is up to the people.

古文：南四星曰内平，近职执法平罪之官也。
现代文：南面的四颗星叫内平，是职务接近执法定罪的官。
English: The four stars on the south side are called Nai Ping, which are the officers whose duties are close to law enforcement and conviction.

古文：中台之北一星曰太尊，贵戚也。
现代文：中台北面的一星叫太尊，像徵君主的贵戚。
English: The one star on the face of the Chinese Taipei is called Taizun, symbolizing the noble relatives of the monarch.

古文：摄提六星，直斗杓之南，主建时节，伺禨祥。
现代文：摄提六颗星，垂直在斗杓南面，主管建立时令节气，伺察吉凶先兆。
English: Six stars were photographed, perpendicular to the south of the crossbow, and the supervisor established the seasonal solar terms and looked for omens.

古文：摄提为楯，以夹拥帝座也，主九卿。
现代文：摄提是像杠杆一样，左右围拥着帝座，统指九卿。
English: The camera is like a lever, encircling the imperial throne from left to right, pointing at the nine emperors.

古文：明大，三公恣。
现代文：此星又亮又大，则三公恣肆。
English: This star is both bright and large, and the three princes act arbitrarily.

古文：客星入之，圣人受制。
现代文：客星如果侵入其中，圣人就要受到挟制。
English: If a guest star intrudes, the saint will be constrained.

古文：西三星曰周鼎，主流亡。
现代文：西面三颗星叫周鼎，主演流亡。
English: The western three stars are called Zhou Ding, starring in exile.

古文：大角在摄提间。
现代文：大角星在摄提星之间。
English: Arcturus is between the protostars.

古文：大角者，天王座也。
现代文：大角，就是天王座。
English: The Great Horn, that is, the Celestial Throne.

古文：又为天栋，正经纪也。
现代文：又是天之栋梁，用来端正纲常法度。
English: It is also the pillar of heaven, used to straighten out the common law.

古文：北三星曰帝席，主宴献酬酢。
现代文：北面三颗星叫帝席，主掌宴餐饮酒之事。
English: The three stars in the north are called the emperor's seat, and the main event is the banquet and drinking.

古文：北三星曰梗河，天矛也。
现代文：北面的三颗星叫梗河，是天之矛。
English: The three stars on the north side are called Jinghe. They are the celestial spears.

古文：一曰天锋，主胡兵。
现代文：又叫天锋，主管胡夷之兵。
English: Also known as Tianfeng, the leader of the Hui soldiers.

古文：又为丧，故其变动应以兵丧也。
现代文：又预示丧事，所以它的变化总是应全着兵乱和丧事。
English: It also portends mourning, so its changes should always be full of turmoil and mourning.

古文：星亡，其国有兵谋。
现代文：此星隐没，这个国家就有兵变。
English: When that star faded, the country had a mutiny.

古文：其北一星曰招摇，一曰矛楯，其北一星曰玄戈，皆主胡兵，占与梗河略相类也。
现代文：它北面的一颗星叫招摇，又叫矛盾，它北面的一星叫玄戈，这两颗星都主掌胡夷的兵事，它们所预示的与梗河星大略相似。
English: A star to the north of it is called "Boastful" and "Contradictory," and a star to the north of it is called "Xengo." Both of these stars are in charge of Hui's military affairs, and what they portend is roughly similar to the Star of the Yangtze River.

古文：招摇与北斗杓间曰天库。
现代文：招摇星与北斗杓星之间的究竟叫天库。
English: What lies between the Shining Star and the Big Dipper is called the Celestial Treasury.

古文：星去其所，则有库开之祥也。
现代文：星座离开了它的位置，就出现了开库的祥兆。
English: When the constellation leaves its position, the auspicious sign of the opening of the repository appears.

古文：招摇欲与栋星、梗河、北斗相应，则胡兵当来受命于中国。
现代文：招摇星如果是栋星、梗河星、北斗星相对应，那么胡夷之人就会来顺从听命于华夏。
English: If the wavering star corresponds to Dongxing, Jinghexing, and Beidouxing, then the Hui people will come to obey the orders of Huaxia.

古文：玄戈又主北夷，客星守之，胡大败。
现代文：玄戈星又主管北夷，如果客星守卫着它，胡人就会大败。
English: Xuan Ge Star is also in charge of Beiyi. If the guest star guards it, the Hu people will be defeated.

古文：天枪三星，在北斗杓东，一曰天钺，天之武备也。
现代文：天枪三星，在北斗杓星的东面，又叫天钺，表示上天的兵革装备。
English: Tianzhu three stars, in the east of the Big Dipper, also known as Tianyu, indicating the heavenly military equipment.

古文：故在紫宫之左，所以御难也。
现代文：所以在紫微星左边有原因，是用来抵御兵乱灾难的。
English: Therefore, there is a reason on the left side of the purple star, which is used to resist the disaster of the war.

古文：女床三星，在纪星北，后宫御也，主女事。
现代文：女床星三颗，在纪星的北边，是后宫待御，主管女子之事。
English: The three stars of the female bed, on the north side of the star, are the harem waiting for you, in charge of women's affairs.

古文：天棓五星，在女床北，天子先驱也，主分争与刑罚，藏兵亦所以御难也。
现代文：天棓星五颗，在女床星之北，是天子的先驱，主管纠纷诉讼刑罚之事，藏有兵器也是用来防御动乱灾难的。
English: The five stars of the heavens, north of the five stars of the female bed, are the forerunners of the heavenly sons. They are in charge of disputes, lawsuits and punishments. They also have weapons to prevent turmoil and disasters.

古文：枪、棓，皆以备非常也；一星不具，其国兵起。
现代文：天枪、天棓，都是用来防备非常事件的；有一颗星不完备，这个国家就会发生兵乱。
English: Heaven's arrow and heaven's thunderbolt are both used to prevent extraordinary events; if one star is not complete, there will be a mutiny in this country.

古文：东七星曰扶筐，盛桑之器，主劝蚕也。
现代文：东方的七颗星叫扶筐，是盛桑业的器具，掌管鼓励养蚕之事。
English: The seven stars of the East are called Fuxi, which are the instruments of the mulberry industry, and are in charge of encouraging the raising of silkworms.

古文：七公七星，在招摇东，天之相也，三公之象也，主七政。
现代文：七公七颗星，在招摇星的东面，是天体的辅相，表示人间的三公，主管七政。
English: The seven kings and seven stars, rising in the east of the waving star, are the complement of the celestial bodies, representing the three kings of the human world, in charge of the seven governments.

古文：贯索九星在其前，贱人之牢也。
现代文：贯索九颗星在它的前面，是卑贱人的监狱。
English: With nine stars stretching across its face, it is a prison for the lowly.

古文：一曰连索，一曰连营，一曰天牢，主法律，禁暴强也。
现代文：一叫连索，一叫边营，一叫天牢，主管法律，禁忌强暴。
English: One is called Lian Suo, one is called Bian Ying, one is called Tian Guo, in charge of law, taboo rape.

古文：牢口一星为门，欲其开也。
现代文：牢口的一颗星是门，希望它开着。
English: The one star at the mouth of the cell is the door. I hope it's open.

古文：九星皆明，天下狱烦；七星见，小赦；六星、五星，大赦。
现代文：九颗星都明亮，天下狱讼之事就烦多；七颗星显现出来，是小赦；六颗星、五颗星显现出来，天下大赦。
English: Nine stars are bright, and there are many troublesome things in the world of prison litigation; seven stars appear, and it is a small pardon; six stars, five stars appear, and the world is forgiven.

古文：动则斧钅质用，中空则更元。
现代文：此星若移动则预示动用刑具，中间空缺预示更改年号。
English: If this star moves, it indicates the use of torture instruments, and a gap in the middle indicates a change in the year number.

古文：《汉志》云十五星。
现代文：《汉志》说有十五颗星。
English: "Hanshi" says that there are fifteen stars.

古文：天纪九星，在贯索东，九卿也，主万事之纪，理怨讼也。
现代文：天纪星九星，在贯索星以东，象徵九卿，主管万事的纪纲，判理仇怨诉讼。
English: The nine stars of the celestial calendar, east of the nine stars of the zodiac, symbolize the nine lords, who are in charge of the schedule of all affairs and judge the litigation of vendettas.

古文：明则天下多辞讼；亡则政理坏，国纪乱；散绝则地震山崩。
现代文：此星明亮则天下诉讼官司就多；此星消失则政教治理败坏，国家法纪紊乱；此星散乱断裂则地震山崩。
English: If this star is bright, there will be more lawsuits and legal proceedings in the world; if this star disappears, the political and religious governance will be corrupted and the national legal discipline will be disordered; if this star is scattered and broken, there will be earthquakes and landslides.

古文：织女三星，在天纪东端，天女也，主果蓏丝帛珍宝也。
现代文：织女星三颗，在天纪星东端，是天女也，主管瓜果、蔬菜、丝帛、珍宝之事。
English: The three stars of Vega, at the eastern end of the celestial calendar, are also celestial maidens, in charge of fruits, vegetables, silk cocoons, and treasures.

古文：王者至孝，神祗咸喜，则织女星俱明，天下和平。
现代文：君王非常贤孝，神祗都很高兴，则织女星都很明亮，天下和顺太平。
English: The king is very virtuous and filial, the gods are very happy, the star Vega is very bright, and the world is peaceful.

古文：大星怒角，布帛贵。
现代文：最大最亮的那颗星如果芒角刺出，布帛就会昂贵。
English: The biggest, brightest star, if it's got horns, it's going to be expensive.

古文：东足四星曰渐台，临水之台也，主晷漏律吕之事。
现代文：东面底脚的四颗星叫渐台，是临架在水上的台，主掌日晷、刻漏、音律等事。
English: The four stars at the bottom of the eastern side are called the crescents. They are a platform on the water, and are responsible for the sundial, the spout, the melody, and other things.

古文：西足五星曰辇道，王者得嬉游之道也，汉辇道通南北宫，其象也。左右角间二星曰平道之官。平道西一星曰进贤，主卿相举逸才。
现代文：汉代辇道通往南北两宫，正是这个星座的样子。左右两角星间的两颗星叫平道之官。平道西边的一颗星叫进贤，表示卿相举荐贤逸俊才。
English: In the Han Dynasty, the Shandong Road led to the two palaces in the north and south, which is exactly what this constellation looks like. The two stars between the left and right two-pointed stars are called the officials of Pingdao. A star on the west side of Pingdao is called Jinxian, which means that the lord recommends the virtuous and talented.

古文：亢、东咸、西咸各四星，在房心北，日月五星之道也。
现代文：亢宿。东咸、西咸各有四颗星，在房宿、心宿北边，是太阳、月亮、五大行星运行之道。
English: East Ham and West Ham each have four stars, and on the north side of the inn and innermost is the path of the sun, the moon, and the five planets.

古文：房之户，所以防淫佚也。
现代文：房宿的门户，是用来防范恣虐逸乐的。
English: The doorway of a rooming house is used to prevent abuse.

古文：星明则吉；月、五星犯守之，有阴谋。
现代文：此星明亮则吉祥；月亮和五星若触及到或侵犯到它的范围，就会产生阴谋。
English: If this star is bright, it is auspicious; if the moon and the five stars touch or encroach on its territory, there will be a conspiracy.

古文：键闭一星，在房东北，近钩钤，主关籥。
现代文：键闭一星，在宿房东北方，靠近钩钤星，主管门户的锁。
English: One star, in the northeast of the inn, near the hook star, is responsible for the lock of the portal.

古文：天市垣二十二星，在房心东北，主权衡，主聚众。
现代文：天市垣二十二颗星，在房宿、心宿的东北方，主管权力法度，负责招集众人。
English: Twenty-two stars in the sky, in the northeast of the house and heart, are in charge of power and law, and are responsible for summoning people.

古文：一曰天旗庭，主斩戮之事也。
现代文：一叫天旗庭，主掌斩杀之事。
English: One is called the Heavenly Banner Garden, and the main event is the slaughter.

古文：市中星众润泽，则岁实。
现代文：天市垣中的众星如果明亮有光泽，年景就丰实。
English: If the stars in the sky are bright and shiny, the year will be prosperous.

古文：荧惑守之，戮不忠之臣。
现代文：火星若进入此星区，就要戮杀不忠之臣。
English: If Mars enters this sector, he will kill disloyal vassals.

古文：彗星除之，为徙市易都。
现代文：彗星通过，表示要徙市易都。
English: The passing of the comet meant that the capital had to be moved.

古文：客星入之，兵大起；出之，有贵丧。
现代文：客星如果侵入，就会发生大规模的战争；客星飞出，就会有贵人丧事。
English: If the guest star invades, there will be a large-scale war; if the guest star flies out, there will be a noble funeral.

古文：帝坐一星，在天市中候星西，天庭也。
现代文：帝坐星，在天市垣中候星的西边，是天帝的宫廷。
English: The Emperor's Seat, on the west side of the star in the middle of the heavenly city wall, is the Emperor's court.

古文：光而润则天子吉，威令行。
现代文：它光亮而润泽则天子吉祥，威令得以通行。
English: If it is bright and moist, it is auspicious, and it is allowed to pass.

古文：候一星，在帝坐东北，主伺阴阳也。
现代文：候星一颗，在帝座星的东北面，负责伺察阴阳变化。
English: A variable star, located in the northeast of the star of the constellation Monoceros, is responsible for observing changes in the yin and yang.

古文：明大，辅臣强，四夷开；候细微，则国安；亡则主失位；移则不安。
现代文：它明亮硕大，辅佐之臣就强盛，四边夷邦离心离德；候星细小微暗，则国家安定；候星消失则君主丧失帝位；候星多动位置则君主不安。
English: It is bright and large, the vassal of the assistant is strong, the four-sided barbarian states are centrifugal and separated from Germany; if the star is small and dim, the country is stable; if the star disappears, the monarch loses the imperial throne; if the star moves more, the monarch is uneasy.

古文：宦者四星，在帝坐西南，侍主刑余之人也。
现代文：宦者星四颗，在帝座星的西南部，是侍奉君主的受过宫刑的人。
English: The four stars of the Deceiver, in the southwest of the star of the Empire, are those who have served the monarch and have been punished by the palace.

古文：星微，吉；非其常，宦者有夏。
现代文：此星微暗，就预示吉祥；此星失其常态，宦官就有灾祸。
English: When the star is faint, it is auspicious; when the star loses its normal state, it is disastrous for the eunuch.

古文：宗正二星，在帝坐东南，宗大夫也。
现代文：宗正星两颗，在帝座星的东南边，是象徵与君主同宗的大夫。
English: Zongzheng star two, in the southeast side of the star of the emperor, is a symbol of the doctor who is the same as the monarch.

古文：彗星守之，若失色，宗正有事；客星守之，更号令也。
现代文：彗星侵入停留，若推动平常的色泽，宗正官就有事端；客星侵入并停留，就会更改号令。
English: If the comet enters and stays, if it pushes the usual color, the chief magistrate will have an accident; if the guest star enters and stays, the order will be changed.

古文：宗人四星，在宗正东，主录亲疏享祀。
现代文：宗人星四颗，在宗正星东面，主管记录亲疏与享祀之事。
English: There are four So Ren stars, and on the east side of the So Jeong star, the supervisor records the matter of kinship and worship.

古文：族人有序，则如绮文而明正。
现代文：同族之人长幼尊卑有秩序，则此星纹路绮丽而明亮端正。
English: If the people of the same clan have an orderly hierarchy, then this star pattern will be beautiful, bright and neat.

古文：动则天子亲属有变；客星守之，贵人死。
现代文：此星若移动则天子的亲属会有事变；外星侵入并停留，则预示贵人去世。
English: If this star moves, there will be a change in the relatives of the heavenly son; if the alien invades and stays, it indicates the death of the noble.

古文：宗星二，在候星东，宗室之象，帝辅血脉之臣也。
现代文：宗星两颗，在侯星的东面，象徵着宗室，是辅佐帝王并与帝王有血缘关系的臣子。
English: The two main stars, on the east side of the main star, symbolize the family, and are the vassals who assist the emperor and are related by blood to the emperor.

古文：客星守之，宗支不和。
现代文：客星若进入停留，则天子宗室支脉不和。
English: If the guest star enters and stays, then there will be discord in the lineage of the heavenly son.

古文：天江四星，在尾北，主太阴。
现代文：天江四颗星，在尾宿星北面，主管水事。
English: Tianjiang four stars, in the north of the tail of the star, in charge of water affairs.

古文：江星不具，天下津河关道不通。
现代文：天江星不全备，天下的河流要道关卡就不通畅。
English: If the heavenly river is not complete, the world's rivers will not pass smoothly.

古文：明若动摇，大水出，大兵起；参差则马贵。
现代文：它明亮或者动摇不定，就发大水，并有大的战乱发生；它参差不齐则天下马贵。
English: If it is bright or shaky, there will be a lot of water, and there will be a big war; if it is uneven, the world will be expensive.

古文：荧惑守之，有立主。
现代文：火星进入并停留，要新立君主。
English: Mars enters and stays, to establish a new monarch.

古文：客星入之，河津绝。
现代文：客星侵入并停留，则河流阴绝不通。
English: If a guest star enters and stays, the river will never be able to flow.

古文：天籥八星在南斗柄西，主关闭。
现代文：天籥星八颗在南斗斗柄的西面，主管开口闭锁之事。
English: On the west side of the handle of the Nan Dou Dou Dou, there are eight constellations.

古文：建星六星在南斗北，亦曰天旗，天之都关也。
现代文：建星六颗在南斗之北，也叫天旗，是上天的主要关隘。
English: The six constellations in the northern part of the Southern Cross, also known as the Heavenly Banner, are the main gateways to heaven.

古文：为谋事，为天鼓，为天马。
现代文：主管谋划事情，充当天鼓，充当天马。
English: The supervisor plans things, acts as the day's drum, acts as the day's horse.

古文：南二星，天库也。
现代文：南面的两颗星，叫天库。
English: The two stars to the south are called the Celestial Treasury.

古文：中央二星，市也，鈇钅质也。
现代文：中央的两颗星，叫市，是斧锁等斩刑之具。
English: The two stars in the centre, known as the City, are the instruments of execution, such as the axe and lock.

古文：上二星，旗跗也。
现代文：上面的两颗星，叫旗跗。
English: The two stars above are called the chevrons.

古文：斗建之间，三光道也。
现代文：在斗宿和建星之间，是日月星三光之道。
English: Between fighting and building, there is the path of the three lights of the sun, moon and stars.

古文：星动则众劳。
现代文：星座移动则群众辛劳。
English: When the constellations move, the masses toil.

古文：月晕之，蛟龙见，牛马疫。
现代文：月亮周围有光圈，就会出现蛟龙，牛马发生瘟疫。
English: If there is an aperture around the moon, a dragon will appear, and a plague will occur in cattle and horses.

古文：月、五星犯之，大臣相谮有谋，亦为关梁不通，有大水。
现代文：月亮、五星侵入，大臣就会相互诋毁策划阴谋，也表示水陆要道不通，有大水灾。
English: If the moon and the five stars invade, the ministers will slander each other and plot conspiracies. They will also say that the water and land routes are impassable and there will be major floods.

古文：东南四星曰狗国，主鲜卑、鸟丸、沃且。
现代文：东南面的四颗星叫狗国，主管鲜卑、鸟丸、沃且。
English: The four stars on the southeast face are called Dog Country, headed by Xianbei, Torimaru, and Woqi.

古文：荧惑守之，外夷为变。
现代文：火星若进入停留，外夷之邦就会发生变乱。
English: If Mars comes to a standstill, there will be turmoil in the country of the barbarians.

古文：狗国北二星曰天鸡，主候时。
现代文：狗国星北面的两颗星叫天鸡星，主管侯令时辰。
English: The two stars to the north of the Dog Star are called the Rooster Star, and are in charge of the clock.

古文：天弁九星，在建星北，市官之长也，以知市珍也。
现代文：天弁星九颗，在建星之北，是管理集市的官员之长，作用是了解集市的珍美之物。
English: The nine stars of the sky, in the north of Jianxing, are the heads of the officials who manage the bazaar. Their role is to understand the precious things of the bazaar.

古文：星欲明，吉。
现代文：此星如果明亮，就吉祥。
English: If this star is bright, it is auspicious.

古文：彗星犯守之，籴贵，囚徒起兵。
现代文：彗星侵入并停留，预示货物价格昂贵，囚徒武装造。
English: The comet enters and stays, indicating that the goods are expensive and the prisoners are armed.

古文：河鼓三星，旗九星，在牵牛北，天鼓也，主军鼓，主鈇钺。
现代文：河鼓星三颗，旗星九颗，在牵牛星的北边，是天鼓，主管军事战鼓，也主管斧鈇等武器。
English: There are three river drum stars and nine flag stars. On the north side of Altair, there is the heavenly drum, which is responsible for military war drums and axes and other weapons.

古文：一曰三武，主天子三将军；中央大星为大将军，左星为左将军，右星为右将军。
现代文：又叫三武，表示天子的三员大将军；中央的大星是大将军，左边一星是左将军，右边一星是右将军。
English: It is also called Sanbu, which means the three generals of the heavenly son. The big star in the center is the general, the left star is the left general, and the right star is the right general.

古文：左星，南星也，所以备关梁而距难也，设守阴险，知谋徽也。
现代文：左边的星就是南面的星，是用来防守水陆要道并避免祸患的，在险阻之地设置守军，预知图谋的徵兆。
English: The star on the left is the southern star, which is used to guard the land and sea routes and avoid disasters, set up defenders in dangerous places, and predict the signs of conspiracies.

古文：旗即天鼓之旗，所以为旌表也。
现代文：旗就是天鼓的旗，是用来作旌旗标识的。
English: The flag is the flag of the Heavenly Drum, which is used to mark the cymbals.

古文：左旗九星，在鼓左旁。
现代文：左旗星九颗，在河鼓的左边。
English: There are nine stars on the left banner, to the left of the river drum.

古文：鼓欲正直而明，色黄光泽，将吉；不正，为兵忧也。
现代文：河鼓星如果端正平直而且明亮，色泽黄亮润泽，就会吉祥；不端正，就预示有战乱之忧。
English: If the river drum star is neat, straight and bright, with a yellow, bright and moist color, it will be auspicious; if it is not neat, it portends the danger of war.

古文：星怒，马贵。
现代文：此星芒角刺出，马价昂贵。
English: This star has a prominent horn and is a very expensive horse.

古文：动则兵起，曲则将失计夺势。
现代文：星移动则战乱起，此星扭曲则策划失误并丧失权势。
English: If the star moves, there will be war, but if the star is distorted, there will be mistakes in planning and a loss of power.

古文：旗星差戾，乱相陵。
现代文：旗星如果变异反常，就会动乱并相互侵扰。
English: If the flag stars mutate abnormally, they will be disturbed and interfere with each other.

古文：旗端四星南北列，曰天桴，鼓桴也。
现代文：旗星一端有四颗星南北方向排列，叫天桴星，象徵鼓槌。
English: At one end of the flag star, there are four stars arranged in a north-south direction, called the heavenly harp star, symbolizing the drumstick.

古文：星不明，漏刻失时。
现代文：此星不亮，计时的刻漏就会不准确。
English: If this star is not bright, the timing will be inaccurate.

古文：前近河鼓，若桴鼓相直，皆为桴鼓用。
现代文：它的前端接近河鼓星，如果鼓槌和鼓柄相互对应，都是为报警告急所用。
English: Its front end is close to the river drum star, and if the drumstick and the drum handle correspond to each other, it is used for emergency warning.

古文：离珠五星，在须女北，须女之藏府，女子之星也。
现代文：离珠星五颗，在须女星宿北面，是须女的府库，是女子之星。
English: Five points away from the Pearl Star, on the north side of the Suzhou constellation, it is the prefecture of Suzhou, and it is the star of women.

古文：天津九星，横河中，一曰天汉，一曰天江，主四渎津梁，所以度神通四方也。
现代文：天津星九颗，横跨天河之中，又叫天汉，又叫天江，主管长江、黄河、准河、济水四条大河的桥梁渡口，用来渡神通往四方。
English: The nine stars of Tianjin straddle the Tianhe River, also known as the Tianhan River and the Tianjiang River. It is in charge of the bridges and ferry ports of the Yangtze River, the Yellow River, the Junhe River and the Jishui River, and is used to ferry gods to the four directions.

古文：一星不备，津关道不通。
现代文：一颗星不全，预示水陆要道的关口处不通畅。
English: If one star is not complete, it indicates that the water and land passages are not smooth.

古文：其四星曰天驷，旁一星曰王良，亦曰天马。其星动，为策马，车骑满野。
现代文：腾蛇二十二颗星，在营室星之北，是天蛇，主管水中动物。王良星五颗，在奎宿的北面，位居天河之中，是为天子驾车的御官。其中四颗星移动，就预示驱策马匹，车辆战马布满原野。
English: Twenty-two stars, in the north of the camp room star, are celestial serpents, supervising aquatic animals. Five Wang Liang stars, in the north of the Kui inn, are located in the middle of the heavenly river, and are the driving officers for the heavenly son. Four of the stars move, indicating the driving of horses, and the vehicles are full of horses.

古文：亦曰梁，为天桥，主御风雨水道，故或占车骑，或占津梁。
现代文：又叫梁，是天桥，主掌抵御风雨水道，所以有的说可以预测车辆马匹，有的说可以预测桥梁渡口。
English: Also known as the beam, it is a flyover, the main palm is resistant to wind and rain water, so some say it can predict vehicles and horses, and some say it can predict bridge crossings.

古文：客星守之，桥不通道。
现代文：客星入居，则桥不通行。
English: If a guest star moves in, the bridge is closed to traffic.

古文：前一星曰策星，王良之御策也，主天子之仆，在王良旁。
现代文：它前面的一颗星叫策星，是王良驭马的鞭策，表示天子的仆从，在五良星的旁边。
English: A star in front of it is called Zhaoxing, which is the whip of Wang Liang riding a horse, indicating the servant of the Son of Heaven, next to the Five Stars.

古文：若移在马后，是谓策马，则车骑满野。
现代文：如果此星移动在马星的后面，这就表示驱策马匹，于是车辆马匹布满四野。
English: If this star moves behind the horse star, it means driving horses, so the chariot horses are everywhere.

古文：阁道六星，在王良前，飞道也。
现代文：阁道星六颗，在王良星之前，是飞行之道。
English: In front of Wang Liangxing, there are six lofty stars, representing the path of flight.

古文：从紫宫至河，神所乘也，一曰，阁道星，天子游别宫之道也。
现代文：从紫微垣至天河，是神之所乘，一说阁道星，是天子游历别宫的道路。
English: From Ziyi Weigaki to Tianhe, it is the god's ride, and it is said that the road star is the way of the heavenly son to travel to the other palace.

古文：傅路一星，在阁道南，旁别道也。
现代文：传路星一颗，在阁道星之南，是旁边的另一条道路。
English: There is another road next to it, just south of the main road.

古文：东壁北十星曰天厩，主马之官，若今驿亭也，主传令置驿，逐漏驰骛，谓其行急疾，兴晷漏竞驰也。
现代文：东壁宿北面的十颗星叫天厩，管理马匹之官，就像是现在的驿亭，主管传输命令、设置驿站，随时奔赴不停，是说它运行急速迅疾，像是与日晷漏刻竞相急驰。
English: The ten stars on the north side of the east wall of the inn are called the heavenly stables. The official who manages the horses is like the current pavilion, responsible for transmitting orders, setting up stations, and running non-stop at any time. That is to say, it runs at a rapid speed, as if racing against the sundial.

古文：天将军十二星，在娄北，主武兵。
现代文：天将军星十二颗，在娄宿之北，主掌军事兵车。
English: There are twelve stars in the sky, and in the north of Oshuku, there is a military vehicle.

古文：中央大星，天之大将也。
现代文：中央的大星，是上天的大将。
English: The great star in the center is the general of heaven.

古文：南一星曰军南门，主谁何出入。
现代文：南边的一颗叫军南门，主管盘查询问出入之人。
English: The one on the south side is called the South Gate of the Military, and the person in charge of the inventory will inquire about people entering and leaving.

古文：太陵八星在胃北，亦曰积京，主大丧也。积京中星众，则诸侯有丧，民多疾，兵起。
现代文：太陵星八颗在胃宿的北面，也叫积京星，预示帝王的丧事，积京座中星体繁多，则表示诸侯中有丧事，百姓多疾病，战事兴起。
English: The eight Tairing stars to the north of the stomach lodge, also known as the Pleiades, foreshadow the death of the emperor. The many stars in the Pleiades indicate that there will be a death among the princes, many illnesses among the people, and the rise of war.

古文：太陵中一星曰积尸，明则死人如山。
现代文：太陵星中一颗叫积尸，它若明亮则预示死人多得堆积如山。
English: One of the Tairing stars is called Zhouguang. If it is bright, it indicates that there are many dead people piled up like a mountain.

古文：北九星曰天船，一曰舟星，所以济不通也。
现代文：北边的九颗星叫天船，又叫舟星，是用来舟济通航的。
English: The nine stars in the north are called the ships of heaven, also known as the stars of the boat. They are used to help the boat navigate.

古文：中一星曰积水，候水灾。
现代文：中间的一颗星叫积水，负责侦察水灾。
English: The star in the middle is called Sekisui, which is responsible for detecting floods.

古文：昴西二星曰天街，三光之道，主伺候关梁中外之境。
现代文：昴宿西面的两颗星叫天街，是日月星三光之道，主管守候观望水陆要道里外的境地。
English: The two stars on the west side of Oshuku are called Tianjie. It is the path of the three lights of the sun, moon and stars. Supervisors wait and watch the situation inside and outside the water and land routes.

古文：卷舌六星，在昴北，主口语，以知侫谗也。
现代文：卷舌星六颗，在昴宿之北，主管言谈议论，作用是察知奸佞邪恶。
English: There are six tongue-twisting stars. In the north of the mansion, the superintendent speaks and discusses. The role is to detect the evil of the traitor.

古文：曲，吉；直而动，天下有口舌之害。
现代文：它弯曲，则吉祥，它笔直而且多动，则天下有口舌之灾。
English: If it bends, it is auspicious; if it is straight and moves a lot, it is a disaster for the world.

古文：中一星曰天谗，主巫医。
现代文：中间一颗星叫天谗星，主管巫师医士。
English: In the middle, there is a star called the Celestial Star, which is in charge of witches and doctors.

古文：五车五星，三柱九星，在毕北。
现代文：五车星五颗，三柱星九颗，都在毕宿之北。
English: Five five-pointed stars and nine three-pointed stars, all in the north of Bijuku.

古文：五车者，五帝车舍也，五帝坐也，主天子五兵，一曰主五谷丰耗。
现代文：五车，就是五帝的车舍，五帝乘坐，主管天子的五种兵器，一说主管五谷丰收减产。
English: The five chariots are the chariots of the five emperors, the five emperors ride in them, and they are in charge of the five weapons of the son of heaven.

古文：西北大星曰天库，主太白，主秦。
现代文：西北边的大星叫天库，对应金星主管秦地。
English: The large star in the northwest is called the Celestial Treasury, corresponding to the planet Venus in charge of Qin.

古文：次东星曰天仓，主岁星，主鲁卫。
现代文：接下去东北面的星叫狱星，应对水星，主管燕赵之地。
English: Next, the star in the northeast is called the Prison Star, which corresponds to Mercury and governs the land of Yan Zhao.

古文：次东南星曰司空，主填星，主楚。
现代文：接下去东南面的星叫司空，对应土星，主管楚地。
English: Next, the star in the southeast is called Siku, corresponding to Saturn, and in charge of Chu.

古文：次西南星曰卿星，主荧惑，主魏。
现代文：接下去西南面的星叫卿星，对应火星，主管魏地。
English: Next, the star in the southwest is called Jing Xing, corresponding to Mars, in charge of Wei Di.

古文：五星有变，皆以其所主占之。
现代文：这五颗星若有变化，都用它们所对应的去占卜。
English: If there is a change in these five stars, they all use their corresponding divination cranes.

古文：三柱一曰三泉。
现代文：三柱星又叫三朱。
English: The Three-Pillar Star is also called the Three Jewels.

古文：天子得灵台之礼，则五车、三柱均明有常。
现代文：天子若掌握了灵台观天之礼，则五车星、三柱星都明亮有规律。
English: If the heavenly son has mastered the ritual of looking at the heavens from the spiritual platform, then the five-chariot star and the three-pillared star are bright and regular.

古文：其中五星曰天潢。
现代文：中间的五颗星叫天潢星。
English: The five stars in the middle are called the Pleiades.

古文：天潢南三星曰咸池，鱼囿也。
现代文：天潢星南面的三颗星叫咸池星，是养鱼的池塘。
English: The three stars on the south side of the constellation are called Hamchi Stars, and are fish ponds.

古文：月、五星入天潢，兵起，道不通，天下乱。
现代文：月亮和五星进入天潢星，战乱发生，政教不通，天下混乱。
English: The moon and the five stars entered the heavens, war broke out, politics and religion did not get along, and the world was in chaos.

古文：五车南六星曰诸王，察诸侯存亡。
现代文：五车南面的六颗星叫诸王星，侦察诸侯的存亡。
English: The six stars to the south of the five chariots are called the Planets, and they watch over the lives of the princes.

古文：其西八星曰八谷，主候岁。
现代文：它西面的八颗星叫八谷，主管观察年景。
English: The eight stars on its western side are called Yatsugatani, and the superintendent observes the seasons.

古文：八谷一星亡，一谷不登。
现代文：八谷星中消失一颗星，就预示一各谷物没收成。
English: The disappearance of one star in the star of the eight grains indicates the confiscation of each grain.

古文：天关一星，在五车南，亦曰天门，日月之所行也，主边事，主关闭。
现代文：天关星一颗，在五车星正南，也叫天门，是日月运行之道，主管边关之事，负责边关阻绝。
English: A celestial gateway star, in the south of the five-chariot star, also called the celestial gate, is the path of the sun and the moon, in charge of the border, responsible for blocking the border.

古文：芒角，有兵。
现代文：此星放光，就有后乱。
English: If this star shines, there will be chaos.

古文：五星守之，贵人多死。
现代文：五星进入并停留，就会有很多贵人死去。
English: If the Five-Star Movement enters and stays, many dignitaries will die.

古文：东井钺前四星曰司怪，主候天地日月星辰变异及鸟兽草木之妖，明主闻灾，修德保福也。
现代文：东井宿钺星前面的四颗星叫司怪，主管候察天地日月星辰的变化和鸟兽草木的反常情况，明主听说有灾祸，就要修德养性、保障福瑞。
English: The four stars in front of the star in the East Well are called strange stars. They are in charge of observing the changes of the stars in the heavens and the earth, the sun, the moon and the stars, and the abnormal conditions of birds, animals and plants. When the Lord hears that there is a disaster, it is necessary to cultivate virtue and protect good fortune.

古文：司怪西北九星曰坐旗，君臣设位之表也。
现代文：司怪西北面的九颗星叫坐旗，是君臣确立位次的标识。
English: The nine stars on the northwest side of the Sikyong are called "sitting flags" and are the symbols of the monarchs and ministers establishing their ranks.

古文：坐旗西四星曰天高，台谢之高，主远望气象。
现代文：坐旗星西边的四颗星叫天高星，象徵台榭之高，负责远观云气天象。
English: The four stars on the west side of the flag-sitting star are called the sky-high stars, symbolizing the height of the table, responsible for viewing the distant clouds.

古文：天高西一星曰天河，主察山林妖变。
现代文：天高西面的一星叫天河星，主管侦察山林的反常变异。
English: A star to the west of the celestial height is called the celestial river star, which is responsible for reconnaissance of the abnormal variation of the mountain forest.

古文：南河曰南戍，一曰南宫，一曰阳门，一曰越门，一曰权星，主火。
现代文：南河星、北河星各三颗，夹着东井宿。一说天高星，是天体的关门，主管水陆交通要道。南河星叫南戍，又叫南宫、阳门、越门、权星，主管火。
English: Nanhexing and Beihexing are three stars each, sandwiched by Dongjing. It is said that Tiangao Star is the closing door of the celestial body and is responsible for the important road of land and water transportation. Nanhexing is called Nanluo, and is also called Nangu, Yangmen, Yuemen, and Guanxing, and is responsible for fire.

古文：北河曰北戍，一曰北宫，一曰阴门，一曰胡门，一曰衡星，主水。
现代文：北河星叫北戍，也叫北宫，阴门，胡门，衡星，主管水。
English: Beihexing is called Beigu, also known as Beigu, Yinmen, Humen, Hengxing, and Guanshui.

古文：两河戍间，日月五星之常道也。
现代文：两河星南北戍之间，是日月五星通常运行的轨道。
English: Between the north and south poles of the two river stars is the orbit in which the sun, moon and five stars usually move.

古文：河戍动摇，中国兵起。
现代文：河戍如果动摇不定，中原就会发生战乱。
English: If Hebei falters, there will be war in the Central Plains.

古文：南河南三星曰阙丘，主宫门外象魏也。
现代文：南河星南面的三颗星叫阙丘星，主管宫门外县示教令的观阙。
English: The three stars on the south side of Nanhe Star are called Gongqiu Star, and are responsible for the observation of the teaching order of the county outside the palace gate.

古文：五诸侯五星，在东井北，主刺举，戒不虞。
现代文：五诸侯星五颗，在东井宿的北部，主管揭发与举荐，警戒非常事件。
English: Five princes, five stars, in the northern part of Dongjingjuku, the superintendent exposed and recommended, warning of an extraordinary event.

古文：又曰理阴阳，察得失。
现代文：一说是调理阴阳，考察得失。
English: One is to adjust the yin and yang, and examine the gains and losses.

古文：亦曰主帝心。
现代文：又说是主掌帝五之心。
English: It is also said to be the master of the five hearts of the emperor.

古文：一曰帝师，二曰帝友，三曰三公，四曰博士，五曰太史，此五者常为帝定疑议。
现代文：一叫帝师，二叫帝友，三叫三公，四叫博士，五叫太史，这五种人经常为帝定夺疑难问题。
English: One is called the emperor's teacher, the second is called the emperor's friend, the third is called the third prince, the fourth is called the doctor, and the fifth is called the great historian. These five kinds of people often solve difficult problems for the emperor.

古文：星明大润泽，则天下大治；芒角，则祸在中。
现代文：此星若明亮硕大，则天下大安；若有芒角刺出，则必有灾祸。
English: If this star is bright and large, then the world will be safe; if there is a mole, then there will be a disaster.

古文：五诸侯南三星曰天尊，主盛饘粥以给贪馁。
现代文：五诸候星南面的三颗星叫天樽星；主管盛装稠粥来赈给贫穷饥饿。
English: The three stars to the south of the five planets are called the stars of heaven and earth; the chief is holding thick gruel to feed the poor and hungry.

古文：积水一星，在北河西北，水河也，所以供酒食之正也。
现代文：积水一星，在北河星的西北方，是水河，是用来供给酒食的长官。
English: "Sekisui-ichisei," in the northwest of "Beihe-xing," is a water river, which is used to supply food and wine.

古文：积薪一星在积水束北，供庖厨之正也。
现代文：积薪星一颗在积水星东北方，是供给厨房的长官。
English: The waxing gibbous star is in the northeast of the waxing Mercury, and is the ruler of the kitchen.

古文：水位四星，在积薪柬，主水衡。
现代文：水位星四颗，在积薪星的东面，是主管水利之官。
English: The four Mercury stars, to the east of the waxing gibbous star, are the officials in charge of water conservancy.

古文：客星若水火守犯之，百川流溢。
现代文：客星如果水火各族入侵并停留，则百川泛滥成灾。
English: If the water and fire of all ethnic groups invade and stay, then all rivers will be flooded.

古文：轩辕十七星，在七星北。
现代文：轩辕星十七颗，在七星宿北面。
English: Seventeen stars, rising in the north of the seven-star inn.

古文：轩辕，黄帝之神，黄龙之体也；后妃之主，土职也。
现代文：轩辕，是黄帝之神灵，黄龙的本体；是后妃的尊长，是士职。
English: Xuanzang, is the god of the Yellow Emperor, the body of the Yellow Dragon; is the eminence of the Empress Dowager, is a scholar.

古文：一曰东陵，一曰权星，主雷雨之神。
现代文：一叫东陵，一叫权星，是主管雷雨的神。
English: One is called Dongling and the other is called Guanxing. He is the god in charge of thunderstorms.

古文：南大星，女主也。
现代文：南面的大星，是帝王之后。
English: The large star in the south is after the emperor.

古文：次北一星，夫人也，屏也，上将也。
现代文：其次北面的一颗星，是夫人，表示围屏，也象徵上将。
English: Next, a star in the north, the Lady, indicates the enclosure and also symbolizes the admiral.

古文：次北一星，妃也，次将也。
现代文：再北面的一颗星，是妃，也象徵次将。
English: A star to the north, the hime, also symbolizes the second captain.

古文：其次诸星，皆次妃之属也。
现代文：再其次的各颗星，都属于次妃列。
English: The next-highest stars are all in the second row.

古文：女主南小星，女御也。
现代文：帝王之后南面的小星，是宫中女御。
English: The small star to the south of the emperor is the queen of the palace.

古文：左一星少民，后宗也。
现代文：左面的一颗星是少民，是帝后的宗室。
English: A star on the left is Shomin, the imperial family's ancestral home.

古文：右一星大民，太后宗也。
现代文：右边一颗星叫大民，是太后的宗室。
English: On the right, a star called Daimin, the ancestral home of the empress dowager.

古文：欲其色黄小而明也。
现代文：希望它呈黄色微小而明亮。
English: Let's hope it's yellow, tiny and bright.

古文：轩辕右角南三星曰酒旗，酒官之旗也，主宴飨饮食。
现代文：轩辕星座右角南面的三颗星叫酒旗，是酒官的旗帜，主管宴请之事。
English: The three stars in the southern right-hand corner of the constellation Lupus are called the wine flag. They are the flag of the wine steward, who is in charge of the banquet.

古文：五星守酒旗，天下大酺，有酒肉财物，赐若爵宗室。
现代文：五星进入并停留于酒旗星之中，天下就会大肆饮食之事。五星进入并停留与酒旗星之中，天下就会大肆宴饮，有很多酒肉财物，给宗室赏赐或封爵。
English: Five stars enter and stay in the wine flag star, the world will have a lot of eating and drinking. Five stars enter and stay in the wine flag star, the world will have a lot of feasting, there are a lot of wine, meat and property, and the family will be rewarded or knighted.

古文：酒旗南三星曰天相，丞相之象也。
现代文：酒旗星南面的三颗星叫天相，是丞相的象徵。
English: The three stars on the southern side of the wine flag star are called the celestial aspect, which is a symbol of the emperor.

古文：轩辕西四星曰爟，爟者，烽火之爟也，边亭之警候。
现代文：轩辕星西面的四颗星叫爟，爟就是报警的烽火，是边地驿亭的哨所。
English: The four stars on the west side of the star are called the beacon. The beacon is the campfire of the alarm, and it is the outpost of the pavilion.

古文：爟北四星曰内平，平罪之官，明刑罚。
现代文：翻译爟星北面的四颗星叫内平，是平衡责之官，彰明刑罚。
English: Translated: The four stars on the north side of the star are called the Inner Planes. They are responsible for balance and punishments.

古文：少微四星在太微西，士大夫之位也。
现代文：少微四颗星在太微垣的西面，是士大夫的位置。
English: The small four-pointed star on the west side of Taiko-gaki is the location of Shidafu.

古文：一名处士，亦天子副主，或曰博士官，一曰主卫掖门。
现代文：又叫处士，也是天子的储君。或者叫博士官，一说负责守卫宫廷的边门。
English: He is also called the steward, and is also the crown prince of the heavenly son. Or he is called the doctor, and is said to be responsible for guarding the side gate of the palace.

古文：南第一星处士，第二星议士，第三星博士，第四星大夫。
现代文：南面第一星是处士，第二星是义士，第三星是博士，第四星是大夫。
English: In the south, the first star is the clerk, the second star is the knight, the third star is the doctor, and the fourth star is the doctor.

古文：明大而黄，则贤士举也。
现代文：此星明亮硕大并呈黄色，那么贤士得以举荐。
English: The star is large, bright and yellow, so it is recommended by the sages.

古文：月、五星犯守之，处士、女主忧，宰相易。
现代文：月亮和五星侵入并停留其间，处士和女主有灾祸，宰相也要更换。
English: The moon and the five stars will invade and stay there, and there will be calamity for the maidservant and the mistress, and the chancellor will also be changed.

古文：南四星曰长垣，主界域及胡夷。
现代文：南面四颗星叫长垣，主管边界的境域以及四方的邻国。
English: The four stars in the south are called Nagagaki, which governs the border area as well as the four neighboring countries.

古文：荧惑入之，胡入中国；太白入之，九卿谋。
现代文：火星进入的话，则邻国入侵中原；如果太白星进入其间，则九卿合谋。
English: If Mars enters, then the neighboring countries will invade the Central Plains; if Taibai enters, then the Nine Lords will conspire.

古文：◎二十八舍东方。
现代文：东方。
English: East.

古文：角二星为天关，其间天门也，其内天庭也。
现代文：角宿两星是天之关口，它的中间是天门，它的里面是天庭。
English: Kakunodate two stars is the gateway to heaven, its middle is the gate to heaven, and its inside is the heavenly garden.

古文：故黄道经其中，七曜之所行也。
现代文：所以太阳运行的黄道经过其中，是日、月、五星所运行的轨道。
English: Therefore, the ecliptic of the sun's movement passes through it, which is the orbit of the sun, moon and five stars.

古文：左角为天田，为理，主刑；其南为太阳道。
现代文：左角边的星是天田，是治理讼狱的官，负责刑罚；它的南非是太阳之道。
English: The star in the left-hand corner is Amida, the warden of the prison, in charge of punishment; his South Africa is the path of the sun.

古文：右角为将，主兵；其北为太阴道。
现代文：右角边的星为将，主掌兵事；它的北面是太阴之道。
English: The star in the right-hand corner is the general, who leads the army; to the north of it is the path of the Great Yin.

古文：盖天之三门，犹房之四表。
现代文：大体上天的三门，就像房星的四表。
English: In general, the three gates of heaven are like the four watches of the house star.

古文：其星明大，王道太平，贤者在朝；动摇移徙，王者行。
现代文：此星明亮硕大，王道就太平，贤能之人在朝廷之上；此星若动摇移走，则君王出行。
English: This star is bright and large, the king's way is peaceful, and the wise man is above the court; if this star wavers and moves away, then the king will travel.

古文：亢四星，天子之内朝也，总摄天下奏事，听讼理狱录功者也。
现代文：亢宿四颗星，是天子的内朝，是统一管理天下表奏之事、听取讼诉、治理案狱、记录功劳之人。
English: The four-pointed star is the Inner Court of the Son of Heaven. It is the unified management of the performance of the world, the hearing of lawsuits, the management of prisons, and the recording of merits.

古文：一曰疏庙，主疾疫。
现代文：一说叫疏庙，主管疾病瘟疫。
English: One of them is called "Shuo Miao," which is in charge of diseases and plagues.

古文：星明大，辅纳忠，天下宁。
现代文：此星明亮硕大。则预示辅臣献纳忠言，天下安宁无事。
English: This star is bright and large. It indicates that the vassal will offer loyal advice, and there will be no trouble in the world.

古文：氐四星，王者之宿宫，后妃之府，休解之房。
现代文：氐宿四颗，是君王的寝宫，后妃的居所，是休息安歇的房屋。
English: There are four lodgings, the king's bedchamber, the queen's residence, and the house of rest and relaxation.

古文：前二星，適也，后二星，妾也。
现代文：前面的两颗星，表示嫡夫人；后面的两颗星，表示妾。
English: The two stars in front indicate the legitimate wife; the two stars behind indicate the concubine.

古文：后二星大，则臣奉度。
现代文：如果后面两颗星硕大，则群臣遵奉法度。
English: If the two stars at the back are large, then the ministers obey the law.

古文：房四星，为明堂，天子布政之宫也，亦四辅也。
现代文：房宿四颗，为明堂，是天子颁布政令的宫殿，也是四辅。
English: The four lodgings are Myeongdong, the palace where the emperor issued his decrees, and Shifu.

古文：下第一星，上将也；次，次将也；次，次相也；上星，上相也。南二星君位，北二星夫人位。又为四表，中间为天衢，为天关，黄道之所经也。
现代文：下面的第一颗星，是上将；其次一次，是次将；再其次，是次相；上面一颗，是上相，南面两颗星是君主之位，北面两颗星是夫人之位，也是四表，中间的天体的大路，是天之关口，是太阳运行轨道所经过的。
English: The first star below is the general; the next one is the second general; the next one is the second phase; the one above is the upper phase, the two stars on the south side are the position of the monarch, the two stars on the north side are the position of the lady, and also the four watches, the middle celestial road is the gate of heaven, which is passed by the sun's orbit.

古文：南间曰阳环，其南曰太阳；北间曰阴间，其北曰太阴。
现代文：南部空间叫阳环，它的南面叫太阳；北部究竟叫阴间，它的北面叫太阴。
English: The southern space is called Yanghuan, and its southern side is called the sun; the northern space is called Yin, and its northern side is called Taiyin.

古文：七曜由乎天衢，则天下平和；由阳道则旱丧；由阴道则水兵。
现代文：日月五星经由天之衢道，则天下平安；经由阳道则有旱灾丧事；经由阴道则有水灾战乱。
English: When the sun, moon and five stars pass through the meridians of heaven, the world is at peace; when they pass through the yang, there are droughts and deaths; when they pass through the vagina, there are floods and wars.

古文：亦曰天驷，为天马，主车驾。
现代文：也叫天驷，是天马，主管帝王所乘的车驾。
English: Also known as the Heavenly Horse, it is the Heavenly Horse, which is responsible for the chariot used by the emperor.

古文：南星曰左骖，次左服，次右服；次右骖。
现代文：南边的星叫左骖，其次是左服，再其次是右服，再其次是右骖。
English: The star to the south is called Zuo Jiao, followed by Zuo Bu, followed by Zuo Bu, followed by Zuo Bu, followed by Zuo Bu.

古文：亦曰天厩，又主开闭，为畜藏之所由也。
现代文：也叫天厩，还主管打开封闭，是家畜储藏所经由的地方。
English: Also known as the sky stable, it is also the place where the supervisor opens and closes, and it is the place where the livestock storage passes through.

古文：房星明，则王者明；骖星大，则兵起；星离，民流。
现代文：房宿明亮，则君王贤明；骖星硕大，则战事兴起；此星离散，是百姓流亡。
English: If the house is bright, the king is wise; if the star is large, there will be war; if the star is scattered, the people will be exiled.

古文：又北二小星曰钩钤，房之钤键，天之管籥，主闭键天心也。
现代文：又北面的两颗小星叫钩钤，是房星的匙和锁，也是天体的匙和锁，主管开关天心。
English: The two small stars in the north are called Hook and Hoop. They are the key and lock of the house star, and also the key and lock of the celestial body. They are in charge of the switch Tenshin.

古文：明而近房，天下同心。钩钤间有星及疏坼，则地动河清。
现代文：它明亮而且接近房宿，天下同心同德，房宿与钩钤星之间有客星或疏远坼离，则会发生地震，黄河水变清。
English: It is bright and close to the accommodation. The world is one and the same. If there is a guest star or alienation between the accommodation and the hook star, an earthquake will occur and the Yellow River water will become clear.

古文：心三星，天王正位也。
现代文：心突三星，是天王的正位。
English: The three-pointed star at the center of the heart is the king's rightful place.

古文：中星曰明堂，天子位，为大辰，主天下之赏罚。
现代文：中间一星为明堂，是天子之位，就是大辰，主管天下的奖赏惩罚。
English: One star in the middle is the bright hall, which is the position of the son of heaven, that is, the great clock, which is in charge of the rewards and punishments of the world.

古文：天下变动，心星见祥。
现代文：天下若有变动，心星就显现出徵兆。
English: If there is a change in the world, the stars will show signs of change.

古文：星明大，天下同。
现代文：此星明亮硕大，天下大同。
English: This star is bright and huge, and it is the same all over the world.

古文：前星为太子，后星为庶子。
现代文：前一星为太子，后一星为庶子。
English: The former star is the prince, the latter star is the bastard.

古文：心星直，则王失势。
现代文：心星若垂直，则君王丧失权势。
English: If the heart star is vertical, the monarch loses power.

古文：尾九星，后宫之场，妃后之府。
现代文：尾宿九颗，是皇宫的场所，妃后们的居处。
English: There are nine inns in Ojuku, which is the site of the Imperial Palace and the residence of the empresses.

古文：上第一星，后也；次三星，夫人；次星，嫔妾。
现代文：上面第一颗星，是王后；其次第三颗星，是夫人；再其次的星星，是嫔妾。
English: The first star is the queen, the second star is the wife, and the third star is the concubine.

古文：第三星傍一星名曰神宫，解衣之内室。
现代文：第三星旁边的一星叫神宫，是解衣宽带的内室。
English: The first star next to the third star is called Jingu, which is the inner room of the undressing broadband.

古文：尾亦为九子，星色欲均明，大小相承，则后宫有叙，多子孙。
现代文：尾宿也叫九子，此星的颜色如果明亮均匀，大小相互承接，则皇宫长幼有序，子孙众多。
English: If the color of this star is bright and uniform, and the size is consistent with each other, then the imperial palace is orderly and has many descendants.

古文：箕四星，亦后宫妃后之府。
现代文：箕宿四星，也是后宫后妃的居所。
English: This four-star inn is also the residence of the queen of the harem.

古文：亦曰天津，一曰天鸡，主八风。
现代文：也叫天津，一说叫天鸡，主掌八面之风。
English: It is also called Tianjin, one saying is called Tianqi, and the main wind is the wind of the eight directions.

古文：凡日月宿在箕、东壁、翼、轸者风起。又主口舌，主客蛮夷胡貉；故蛮胡将动，先表箕焉。北方。
现代文：又主管言语交际之事，负责接待外邦来的人，所以外邦邻国的人将要行动时，先在箕星上显示出来。北方。
English: It is also in charge of language communication and is responsible for receiving foreigners, so when foreigners from neighboring countries are about to act, they will first appear on the North Star.

古文：南斗六星，天庙也，丞相太宰之位，主褒贤进士，禀授爵禄。
现代文：斗宿六颗星，是天庙，即丞相太宰的位置，主管褒奖举荐贤能之士，授与爵位和俸禄。
English: The six-star dojo is a heavenly temple, that is, the position of the prime minister and the dazai, the person in charge of praising and recommending virtuous people, and awarding peerages and salaries.

古文：又主兵，一曰天机。
现代文：又主管军事，一说叫天机。
English: He is also in charge of military affairs.

古文：南二星魁，天梁也。
现代文：南面的两颗星叫魁，是天梁。
English: The two stars in the south are called Kui and are celestial beams.

古文：中央二星，天相也。
现代文：中央的两颗星是天相。
English: The two stars in the centre are the constellations.

古文：北二星，天府庭也，亦为寿命之期也。
现代文：北面的丙颗星是天府之庭，也是预示寿命的期限。
English: The C star in the north is the Garden of Heaven, and also indicates the duration of life.

古文：将有天子之事，占于斗。
现代文：将要有天子的事情时，就用斗宿占卜。
English: When there will be a divine event, they will use the dojuku for divination.

古文：斗星盛明，王道平和，爵禄行。
现代文：斗宿若丰满明亮，王道就平和，有爵位和俸禄。
English: If the battle is full and bright, the royal road will be peaceful, with peerage and salary.

古文：牵牛六星，天之关梁，主牺牲事。
现代文：牛宿六颗星，是天体的水陆交通要道，负责祭祀的牺牲供品之事。
English: Ushijuku six stars, is the celestial land and water transportation routes, responsible for the sacrificial offerings.

古文：其北二星，一曰即路，一曰聚火。
现代文：它北面的两颗星，一个叫即路，一个叫聚火。
English: There are two stars to the north of it, one is called the immediate road and the other is called the gathering fire.

古文：又曰，上一星主道路，次二星主关梁，次三星主南越。
现代文：又说，上面的一颗星主掌道路，接下的两颗星主掌水陆交通要道，再其次的三颗星负责南越。
English: He also said that the top one star is responsible for roads, the next two stars are responsible for water and land transportation routes, and the next three stars are responsible for South Vietnam.

古文：摇动变色则占之。
现代文：此星若摇动变色就要占卜。
English: If this star is shaken and changes color, it is necessary to perform divination.

古文：星明大，王道昌，关梁通。
现代文：星宿明亮硕大，王道昌盛，水陆交通通畅。
English: Xingjuku is bright and large, the royal road is prosperous, and water and land traffic is smooth.

古文：须女四星，天少府也。
现代文：须女四颗星，是上天的少府官。
English: A woman with four stars is heaven's youngest magistrate.

古文：须，贱妾之称，妇职之卑者也，主布帛裁制嫁娶。
现代文：须，是贱妾的名称，是女职中的卑下者，主管布帛裁制和婚姻嫁娶之事。
English: "Shu" is the name of a lowly concubine, a subordinate in a woman's position, in charge of cloth cutting and marriage.

古文：虚二星，冢宰之官也，主北方邑居庙堂祭祀祝祷事，又主死丧哭泣。
现代文：虚宿二颗星，是冢宰官，主空头支票北方里邑住宅庙堂祭祀祝祷事，又主管死丧哭泣之事。
English: The two stars of the false star are the magistrate, the master of the sacrifice and prayer of the residential temple in the northern town, and the supervisor of the death and weeping.

古文：危三星，主天府天市架屋；余同虚占。
现代文：危宿三颗星，主管天府、天市的房屋建筑；其余的与虚宿的预示相同。
English: Three stars for dangerous lodgings, responsible for the construction of houses in heaven and heaven; the rest are the same as the omens of false lodgings.

古文：坟墓四星，属危之下，主死丧哭泣，为坟墓也。
现代文：坟墓星四星，隶属在危星之下，主管死丧时哭泣，为示坟墓。
English: Grave star four stars, subordinate under the danger star, in charge of crying when dying, to show the grave.

古文：营室二星，天子之宫也。
现代文：室宿两颗，是天子的宫殿。
English: With two rooms, it is the palace of the Son of Heaven.

古文：一曰玄宫，一曰清庙，又为军粮之府及土功事。
现代文：一叫玄宫，一叫清庙，又管理军粮的府库和治水筑城之事。
English: One is called the Xuan Palace, one is called the Qing Temple, and they also manage the treasury of military supplies and the construction of the city.

古文：星明，国昌；小不明，祠祀鬼神不享。
现代文：此星明亮，则国运昌盛；星小不明亮，则祭祀时鬼神不肯享用。
English: If this star is bright, then the country will prosper; if the star is small and not bright, then the ghosts and gods will not enjoy it during the sacrifice.

古文：离宫六星，天子之别宫，主隐藏休息之所。
现代文：离宫星六颗，是天子的别官，主管隐藏休息的地方。
English: Six stars away from the palace is another official of the son of heaven, in charge of hiding the place of rest.

古文：东壁二星，主文章，天下图书之秘府也。
现代文：壁宿两颗，主管文章，是天下收藏图书的秘府。
English: There are two lodgings on the wall, which are in charge of articles. It is a secret place for the world to collect books.

古文：星明，王者兴，道术行，国多君子；星失色，大小不同，王者好武，经士不用，图书隐；星动，则有土功。
现代文：此星明亮，君王兴盛，学术畅行，国内多君子；此星失去光色，且大小不同，则君主好战，经学之士得不到重用，图书隐蔽不现；此星话动，则有水土建筑之事。
English: This star is bright, the king is prosperous, the academic is flourishing, and there are many gentlemen in the country; if this star loses its luster, and the size is different, the monarch is belligerent, the scholars are not reused, and the books are not hidden; if this star is moving, there is the matter of soil and water construction.

古文：西方。
现代文：西方。
English: West.

古文：奎十六星，天之武库也。
现代文：奎宿十六颗星，是上天的开口仓库。
English: Kuei-juku, with its 16 stars, is heaven's open warehouse.

古文：一曰天豕，亦曰封豕。
现代文：一说叫天豕，又说叫封豕。
English: Some say it is called Tianzhuo, while others say it is called Fuzhuo.

古文：主以兵禁暴，又主沟渎。
现代文：主管用武力禁止暴行，又主管河流沟渎。
English: The supervisor uses force to prohibit violence, and is also in charge of river ditching.

古文：西南大星，所谓天豕目，亦曰大将，欲其明。
现代文：西南面的大星，是所谓的天豕的眼睛，也叫大将，希望它明亮。
English: The large star in the southwest is the so-called eye of the eagle, also called the general, I hope it is bright.

古文：娄三星，为天狱，主苑牧牺牲，供给郊祀。胃三星，天之厨藏，主食廪，五谷府也，明则和平。
现代文：娄宿三颗星，是天狱，主管苑囿牧场和供祭祀用的牲畜，供给祭祀天地的郊祀胃宿三颗星，是上天的庖厨粮仓，主管仓库，存放五谷粮食的论坛库，此星明亮则天下和平。
English: The three stars of the three stars of the three stars of the three stars of the three stars of the three stars of the three stars of the three stars of the three stars of the three stars of the three stars of the three stars of the three stars of the three stars of the three stars of the three stars of the three stars

古文：昴七星，天之耳目也，主西方，主狱事。
现代文：昴宿七星，是上天的耳目，主管西方，主掌讼狱之事。
English: The seven stars of the Pleiades are the eyes and ears of the heavens. They are in charge of the west and are in charge of the prison.

古文：又为旄头，胡星也。
现代文：又是旄头，是象徵胡人的星宿。
English: It is also a skull and crossbones. It is the star constellation symbolizing the Hu people.

古文：昴、毕间为天街，天子出，旄头罕毕以前驱，此其义也。
现代文：昴宿、毕宿之间是天街，天子出行，旄头作为皇帝的仪仗要走在前面，这就是它的意义。
English: Between Shantou and Bi, there is Tianjie, the road to heaven. Shantou, as the emperor's ceremonial capital, should be at the forefront. This is its significance.

古文：黄道之所经也。
现代文：是黄道所要经由的地方。
English: It is the place through which the zodiac passes.

古文：昴明，则天下牢狱平。
现代文：昴宿明亮，则天下狱讼诉公平。
English: If one's lodging is bright, then one's imprisonment is fair.

古文：昴六星皆明，与大星等，大水。
现代文：昴宿六星都很明亮，与那颗大星相同，就会发大水。
English: The six stars of Omotesando are all very bright, and just like the big star, they will produce a lot of water.

古文：七星皆黄，兵大起。
现代文：七颗星都呈黄色，就会发生大规模的战乱。
English: If all seven stars are yellow, there will be a large-scale war.

古文：一星亡，为兵丧；摇动，有大臣下狱，及有白衣之会。
现代文：一颗星星消失不见，就会有战争和丧乱；若动摇不定，就会有大臣入狱，并会有帝室之丧。
English: If a star disappears, there will be war and disorder; if it wavers, there will be ministers in prison and a royal funeral.

古文：大而数尽动若跳跃者，胡兵大起。
现代文：此星宿若硕大而且全都多次活动像踊跃一样时，胡兵就会大举进犯。
English: If this star system is huge and all of its multiple activities are vigorous, the Hu soldiers will attack in a big way.

古文：毕八星，主边兵，主弋猎。
现代文：毕宿八颗，主管边防军队，并主掌狩猎。
English: He spent the rest of his life in Hachikotsu, was in charge of the border troops, and was in charge of hunting.

古文：其大星曰天高，一曰边将，主四夷之尉也。
现代文：其中那颗在星叫天高，一说叫边将，主管四方夷狄的尉官。
English: The one on the star is called Tien Gao, and the one on the other side is called Bian Zheng, the lieutenant in charge of Shifang Yidi.

古文：星明大，则远夷来贡，天下安；失色，则边兵乱。
现代文：此星明亮硕大，则远方夷邦前来纳贡，天下安定；此星失去色泽，则边境就会发生兵乱。
English: If this star is bright and large, then distant barbarians will come to pay tribute, and the world will be stable; if this star loses its luster, then there will be military turmoil on the border.

古文：附耳一星，在毕下，主听得失，伺愆邪，察不祥。
现代文：附耳星一颗，在毕宿之下，主管倾听得失，侦伺过失和邪恶，察看不祥之事。
English: With an ear star, under the afterlife, the supervisor listens to gains and losses, investigates faults and evils, and observes ominous things.

古文：星盛，则中国微，有盗贼，边候惊，外国反；移动，佞谗行。
现代文：此星盛大，则中原地区微弱，有盗贼出现，边关动乱，外国反叛；此星若移动，谗佞得以流行。
English: If the star is large, the Central Plains will be weak, there will be thieves, border turmoil, and foreign rebellion; if the star moves, the dragonfly will become popular.

古文：月入毕，多雨。
现代文：月亮进入毕宿，则天下多雨。
English: When the moon is in its last quarter, there will be more rain.

古文：觜觿三星，为三军之候，行军之藏府，主葆旅，收敛万物。
现代文：觜宿三星，是三军的军候，是行军中的粮草府库，主管保障军旅，收敛万物。
English: As a three-star lodging, it is a military camp for the three armies, a granary for grain and grass in the march, and is in charge of protecting the military brigade and converging all things.

古文：又主权衡。
现代文：此星明亮则军事储备充盈，将军得势。
English: When this star is bright, military reserves are full and generals gain power.

古文：所以平理也。又主边城，为九译，故不欲其动也。
现代文：参宿十星，一说叫参伐，一说叫大辰，一说叫天市，一说叫鈇铖，主管战争讨伐。又主管法度、标准，用来评断裁决。又主管边境城市，是九译官，所以不希望它活动。
English: It is in charge of the war crusade. It is also in charge of laws and standards, which are used to judge rulings. It is also in charge of border cities. It is the ninth translator, so it does not want it to operate.

古文：参，白兽之体。
现代文：参宿，白虎的身体。
English: Betelgeuse, the body of the white tiger.

古文：其中三星横列，三将也。
现代文：其中之一三颗星横列，是三位将军。
English: One of them, three stars in a row, is the three generals.

古文：东北曰左肩，主左将；西北曰右肩，主右将；东南曰左足，主后将军；西南曰右足，主偏将军。
现代文：东北方的叫左肩，表示左将；西北方的叫右肩，表示右将；东南方的叫右足，表示后将军；西南方的叫右足，表示偏将军。
English: The northeast is called the left shoulder, indicating the left general; the northwest is called the right shoulder, indicating the right general; the southeast is called the right foot, indicating the rear general; the southwest is called the right foot, indicating the partial general.

古文：故《黄帝占》参应七将。
现代文：所以《黄帝占》中参宿应对七将。
English: Therefore, in "The Yellow Emperor" the seven generals should be the seven generals.

古文：中央三小星曰伐，天之都尉也，主胡、鲜卑、戎、狄之国，故不欲明。
现代文：中央三颗小星叫伐，是上天的都尉，主管胡、鲜卑、戎、狄等国，所以不希望它明亮。
English: The three small stars in the center are the captains of heaven, in charge of Hu, Xianbei, Eun, Di and other countries, so I do not want it to be bright.

古文：七将皆明大，天下兵精也。
现代文：七颗将军都明亮硕大，天下兵甲锐利强大。
English: The seven generals are bright and large, and the world's armour is sharp and powerful.

古文：王道缺则芒角张。
现代文：王道缺损则此星的光芒四射张大。
English: The defect of the royal road is that the radiance of this star is widely spread.

古文：伐星明与参等，大臣皆谋，兵起。
现代文：伐星的明亮程度和参宿相等时，则大臣都参与策谋，会发生战争。
English: When the brightness of the shooting star is equal to that of Betelgeuse, then the ministers are all involved in the plot, and war will occur.

古文：参星失色，军散败。
现代文：参宿失去色泽，军队散乱溃败。
English: Banshuku lost its luster, and the army was scattered and defeated.

古文：参芒角动摇，边候有急，兵起，有斩伐之事。
现代文：参宿的光芒动摇不定，则边关紧急，战事兴起，会有斩杀讨伐之事。
English: If the light of the Betelgeuse wavers, there will be an emergency at the border, war will break out, and there will be a battle to the death.

古文：参星移，客伐主。
现代文：参星移动，客会伐主。
English: Move with the stars, and the guests will move with you.

古文：参左足入玉井中，兵大起，秦大水，若有丧，山石为怪。
现代文：参宿的左足星进入玉井星之中，就会有大的战乱发生，秦地将发大水，像有丧事一亲，山石也兴妖作怪。
English: If the left foot star of the Betelgeuse enters the middle of the Tamai star, there will be a great war, and the Qin land will be flooded. It is like a bereaved family, and the mountains and rocks will be haunted by monsters.

古文：参星差戾，王臣贰。
现代文：参星变异反常，则王臣有二心。
English: If the variation of ginseng stars is abnormal, then Wang Chen will have two hearts.

古文：南方。东井八星，天之南门，黄道所经，天之亭候，主水衡事，法令所取平也。
现代文：东井宿八颗星，是天体的南门，是黄道所经过的，是上天的亭候土堡，主管水衡官的事，法律政令以此来取得公平论断。
English: Dongjing eight-pointed star, is the southern gate of the celestial body, is the passage of the zodiac, is the heavenly pavilion waiting for the earth castle, responsible for the affairs of the hydrographer, laws and decrees to obtain a fair judgment.

古文：王者用法平，则井星明而端列。
现代文：君主运用法令公平合理，则井宿明亮而且排列端正。
English: If the monarch applies the laws fairly and reasonably, then the wells and lodgings are bright and neatly arranged.

古文：钺一星，附井之前，主伺淫奢而斩之。
现代文：钺星一颗，附在井宿之前，主管侦伺奢侈过度之事而断绝它。
English: A bad omen hangs over the inn until the superintendent discovers the extravagance and shuts it down.

古文：故不欲其明，明与井齐，则用钺于大臣。月宿井，有风雨。
现代文：所以不希望它明亮，如果它与井宿在井星之中，则表示有风雨。
English: Therefore, you do not want it to be bright. If it is in the middle of the stars with the well, it means that there is wind and rain.

古文：舆鬼五星，天目也，主视，明察奸谋。
现代文：鬼宿五颗星，是天之目，主管视觉，明察奸谋。
English: The five stars of the Haunted Mansion are the eyes of heaven. They are in charge of vision and can see the evil plots.

古文：东北星主积马，东南星主积兵，西南星主积布帛，西北星主积金玉，随变占之。
现代文：东北之星主管积蓄马匹，东南星主管积蓄兵器，西南星主管积蓄布帛，西北星主积金玉，各自随着变化而有所预示。
English: The north-east star is in charge of accumulating horses, the south-east star is in charge of accumulating weapons, the south-west star is in charge of accumulating cloth, and the north-west star is in charge of accumulating gold.

古文：中央星为积尸，主死丧祠祀。
现代文：中央一星叫积尸，主管死丧的祠祀。
English: The central star is called Zekko, which is in charge of ancestral shrines for the dead.

古文：一曰鈇锧，主诛斩。
现代文：一说叫鈇锧，主管诛杀斩伐。
English: One person says something, and the supervisor shoots him down.

古文：鬼星明，大谷成；不明，百姓散。
现代文：鬼星若明亮，五谷大丰收；不明亮，则百姓离散。
English: If the ghost star is bright, the grain harvest will be abundant; if it is not bright, the people will be scattered.

古文：锧欲其忽忽不明，明则兵起，大臣诛。
现代文：锧星则希望它忽忽不明，若明亮则会发生战争，大臣被诛杀。
English: If it is bright, there will be a war, and the minister will be killed.

古文：柳八星，天之厨宰也，主尚食，和滋味，又主雷雨。
现代文：柳宿八星，是上天的厨宰，主管帝王的膳食，调和五味，又主管雷雨。
English: The eight-star Willow Inn is heaven's chef, in charge of the emperor's meals, blending the five flavors, and in charge of thunderstorms.

古文：七星七星，一名天都，主衣裳文绣，又主急兵盗贼。
现代文：七宿星七颗，又叫天都，主管衣裳文绣，又主管突然发生的战乱和盗贼。
English: The seven stars of the Pleiades, also called the Celestial Capital, are in charge of clothing and embroidery, as well as sudden wars and thieves.

古文：故星明王道昌；暗则贤良不处，天下空。
现代文：所以此星明亮则王道昌盛；昏暗则贤良不得安居，天下空乏。
English: Therefore, if this star is bright, the king will prosper; if it is dim, the virtuous will not be able to live safely, and the world will be empty.

古文：张六星，主珍宝、宗庙所用及衣服，又主天厨饮食赏赍之事。
现代文：张宿六颗星，主管珍宝、宗庙所使用的器物以及衣服，又主管天厨的饮食和赏赐之事。
English: Zhanjuku six stars, in charge of treasures, utensils and clothes used by the ancestral temple, and in charge of the food and rewards of the heavenly kitchen.

古文：星明则王者行五礼，得天之中。
现代文：此星明则君主能行五礼，能得天之正中。
English: This star indicates that the monarch can perform the five prostrations, and can obtain the right hand of heaven.

古文：翼二十二星，天之乐府俳倡，又主夷狄远客、负海之宾。
现代文：翼宿二十二星，是上天的乐府，主管歌舞艺人戏乐之事，又主管夷猛狄之地的远客和边远地区的宾客。
English: The twenty-two-star Wings Hotel is heaven's music palace, in charge of singing and dancing artists, as well as distant guests and guests in remote areas.

古文：星明大，礼乐兴，四夷宝。
现代文：此星亮硕大，礼乐兴盛，四夷宝至。
English: This star shines brightly and large, and the ceremonial music is flourishing.

古文：动则蛮夷使来，离徙则天子举兵。
现代文：此星若移动则蛮夷使臣前来，若离散则天子发兵与战。
English: If this star moves, barbarian envoys will come, if it is scattered, the Son of Heaven will send troops to fight.

古文：轸四星，主冥宰，辅臣也；主车骑，主载任。
现代文：轸宿四星，主管冥宰，是辅佐之臣；主管车辆马匹，负责载负之事。
English: The four-star general in charge of Meizai was a subordinate vassal; he was in charge of chariots and horses, and was responsible for carrying loads.

古文：有军出入，皆占于轸。
现代文：有军队出入行动，都要向轸宿占卜。
English: If there are military movements in and out, they should all make divination to Shishuku.

古文：又主风，主死丧。
现代文：又主管风，主管死丧之事。
English: He is also in charge of wind, in charge of death and mourning.

古文：轸星明，则车驾备；动则车驾用。
现代文：轸宿若明亮，则车驾齐备；若移动则要使用车驾。
English: If the accommodation is bright, the car is ready; if you move, you need to use the car.

古文：天汉起东方，经尾箕之间，谓之汉津。
现代文：天河起自东方，经过尾宿、箕宿之间，叫做汉津。
English: The Tianhe rises in the east, passing through the area between the towns of Oshuku and Shuku, and is called Hanjin.

古文：乃分为二道，其南经傅说、鱼、天籥、天弁、河鼓，其北经龟，贯箕下，次络南斗魁、左旗，至天津下而合南道。
现代文：于是分为两道，其南边的一道经过传说星、鱼星、天籥星、天弁星、河鼓星，其北边的一道经过龟星，直贯箕宿之下，然后围绕南斗的魁星、左旗星，直到天津星之下而与南道相合。
English: As a result, it was divided into two roads, the southern one passing through Legend Star, Fish Star, Heavenly Pheasant Star, Heavenly Dove Star, and River Drum Star, and the northern one passing through the Turtle Star, running straight under the Pescadores, and then around the Southern Dipper's Kui Star, Left Banner Star, until under the Tianjin Star and merging with the Southern Road.

古文：乃西南行，又分夹匏瓜，络人星、杵、造父、腾蛇、王良、傅路、阁道北端、太陵、天船、卷舌而南行，络五车，经北河之南，入东井水位而东南行，络南河、阙丘、天狗、天纪、天稷，在七星南而没。
现代文：这绕向西南延伸，又分开来夹绕了匏瓜星，围绕人星、杵星、造父星、腾蛇星、王良星、傅路星、阁道星的北端、太陵星、天船星、卷舌星而向南延伸，又围绕了五车星，经过北河星的南端，进入东井宿和水位星然后向东南延伸，围绕了南河星、阙丘星、天狗星、天纪星、天稷星，在七星之南消失。
English: This extends to the southwest, and then splits apart to encircle the star of the muskmelon, and extends to the south around the north end of the star of the man, the star of the dragon, the star of the father, the star of the snake, the star of Wang Liang, the star of Fu Lu, the star of the road, the star of Tai Ling, the star of the ship, and the star of the tongue, and also around the star of the five chariots, through the southern end of the star of the North River, into the Dongjing and the water level star, and then extends to the southeast, around the star of the South River, the star of

古文：○十二次度数
现代文：十二次。
English: Twelve times.

古文：十二次。班固取《三统历》十二次配十二野，其言最详。
现代文：班固依照《三统历》用十二次配合十二分野，他的说法最详尽。
English: According to the "Three Imperial Calendars," Ban Gu used twelve times to match twelve fields, and his explanation was the most detailed.

古文：又有费直说《周易》、蔡邕《月令章句》，所言颇有先后。
现代文：又有费直解说《周易》、蔡邕写的《月令章句》，所论述的内容颇有先后之别。
English: It is also difficult to explain "Zhou Yi" and "Monthly Chapter" written by Cai Qi. The content discussed is quite different from each other.

古文：魏太史令陈卓更言郡国所入宿度，今附而次之。
现代文：魏太史令陈卓重新论定各郡国所对应的星宿位置的度数，现在依次附在后面。
English: Wei Taishi ordered Chen Zhuo to re-determine the number of degrees of the star position corresponding to each county, which is now attached to the back.

古文：自轸十二度至氐四度为寿星，于辰在辰，郑之分野，属兗州。
现代文：自轸宿十二度至氐宿四度中的寿星，于十二辰中在辰，是郑地的地哉，位属兖州。
English: The birthday star from the 12th to the 4th degree of the 12th degree of the 12th degree of the 12th degree of the 12th degree of the 12th degree of the 12th degree of the 12th degree of the 12th degree of the 12th degree of the 12th degree of the 12th degree of the 12th degree of the 12th degree of the 12th degree of the 12th degree.

古文：费直《周易分野》，寿星起轸七度。
现代文：费直的《周易分野》说，寿星起自轸宿七度。
English: The biased "Zhou Yi Field" said that the birthday star has risen seven times since it was born.

古文：蔡邕《月令章句》，寿星起轸六度。
现代文：蔡邕的《月令章句》说，寿星起自轸宿六度。
English: Cai Qi's "Monthly Chapter" says that the birthday star rises six degrees from the pagoda.

古文：自氐五度至尾九度为大火，于辰在卯，宋之分野，属豫州。
现代文：自氐宿五度至尾宿九度为二战斗次中的大火，于十二辰在卯，是宋地的地域，位属豫州。
English: From the 5th to the 9th day of the 2nd battle, there was a big fire in the 2nd battle, and it was in the 12th day of the 12th month. It is a region of the Song Dynasty and belongs to Yuzhou.

古文：费直，起氐十一度。
现代文：费直认为，起自氐宿十一度。
English: According to Fei Zhi, it has been eleven times since Oshuku.

古文：蔡邕，起亢八度。
现代文：蔡邕认为，起自亢宿八度。
English: According to Cai Wei, it is better to start from the 8th octave.

古文：自尾十度至南斗十一度为析木，于辰在寅，燕之分野，属幽州。
现代文：自尾宿十度到南斗十一度，为十二次中的析木，于十二辰在寅，是燕地的地域，位属幽州。
English: From Owase ten degrees to Nanto eleven degrees, it is the deposition of wood in the middle of the twelfth degree, and in the twelfth hour it is in Tama, it is the area of Yanchi, it belongs to Yuzhou.

古文：费直，起尾九度。
现代文：费直认为，起自尾宿九度。
English: Fei Zhi believes that it has been nine degrees since the end of the inn.

古文：蔡邕，起尾四度。
现代文：蔡邕认为，起自尾宿四度。
English: According to Cai Wei, it has risen four times since the end of the year.

古文：自南斗十二度至须女七度为星纪，于辰在丑，吴越之分野，属扬州。
现代文：从南斗十二度至须女七度为十二次中的星纪，于十二辰在丑，是吴地、越地的地域，位属扬州。
English: From the 12th degree of the Southern Cross to the 7th degree of the Southern Cross is the middle of the 12th astrological cycle, and the 12th hour is in the Ug, which is the region of Wudi and Yueji, and belongs to Yangzhou.

古文：费直，起斗十度。
现代文：费直认为，起自斗宿十度。
English: Fei Zhi believes that it has been ten degrees since the fight.

古文：蔡邕，起斗六度。
现代文：蔡邕认为，起自斗宿六度。
English: According to Cai Wei, it's been six years since Douju.

古文：自须女八度至危十五度为玄枵，于辰在子，齐之分野，属青州。
现代文：翻译自须女宿八度至危宿十五度为十二次中的玄枵，于十二辰在子，是齐地的地域，位属青州。
English: Zisu Girls' Hostel (八度) to Jeopardy Hostel (危宿) (十五度) are the 12th generation of Xuan Zang (玄) and were founded in the 12th century. They are located in the Qidi region, which belongs to Qingzhou.

古文：费直，起女六度。
现代文：费直认为，起自女宿六度。
English: Fei Zhi believed that it was six degrees from the girls' hostel.

古文：蔡邕，起女十度。
现代文：蔡邕认为，起自女宿十度。
English: Cai Wei believes that it is ten degrees higher from the girls' hostel.

古文：自危十六度至奎四度为诹訾，于辰在亥，卫之分野，属并州。
现代文：自危宿十六度至奎宿四度为十二次中的诹訾，于十二辰中在亥，是卫地地域，位属并州。
English: From the 16th degree of self-danger to the 4th degree of Kui, it is the middle of the 12th degree, and in the middle of the 12th degree, it is in the boar, it is the Meiji area, and it belongs to the annexed prefecture.

古文：费直，起危十四度。
现代文：费直认为，起自危宿十四度。
English: Fei Zhi believed that it was fourteen degrees since the dangerous lodging.

古文：蔡邕，起危十度。
现代文：蔡邕认为，起自危宿十度。
English: According to Cai Wei, it is ten degrees higher than the dangerous accommodation.

古文：自奎五度至胃六度为降娄，于辰在戌，鲁之分野，属徐州。
现代文：自奎宿五度到胃宿六度为十二次中的降娄，于十二辰中在戌，是鲁地的地域，位属徐州。
English: From Guizhou 5th to Guizhou 6th, it is the middle of the 12th, and it is in the middle of the 12th, it is the region of Ludi, and it belongs to Xuzhou.

古文：费直，起奎二度。
现代文：费直认为，起自奎宿二度。
English: Fei Zhi thought that it was the second time since he moved to Kui.

古文：蔡邕，起奎八度。
现代文：蔡邕认为，起自奎宿八度。
English: Cai Wei believes that it is better to start from the middle of the octave.

古文：自胃七度至毕十一度为大梁，于辰在酉，赵之分野，属冀州。
现代文：自胃宿七度至毕宿十一度为十二次中的大梁，十二辰中在酉，是赵地的地域，位属冀州。
English: From the stomach of the seventh degree to the eleventh degree of the eleventh degree of the eleventh degree is the beam of the twelfth degree, and the twelfth degree is in Zhao, which is the region of Zhao, and belongs to Jizhou.

古文：费直，起娄十度。
现代文：费直认为，起自娄宿十度。
English: Fei Zhi believes that it has been ten degrees since Xingjuku.

古文：蔡邕，起胃一度。
现代文：蔡邕认识，起自胃宿一度。
English: Cai Qi knew, since the gastric lodging once.

古文：自毕十二度至东井十五度为实沈，于辰在申，魏之分野，属益州。
现代文：自毕宿十二度至东井宿十五度为实十二次中沈，于十二辰中在申，是魏地的地域，位属益州。
English: From the end of the 12th degree to the 15th degree of Dongjing, it is actually the middle of the 12th degree and the middle of the 12th degree, and it is in Shen in the middle of the 12th degree. It is the area of Wei, and it belongs to Yizhou.

古文：费直，起毕九度。
现代文：费直认为，起自毕宿九度。
English: Fei Zhi believes that it has been nine degrees since the end of the stay.

古文：蔡邕，起毕六度。
现代文：蔡邕认为，起自毕宿六度。
English: Cai Wei believes that it has been six degrees since the end of the world.

古文：自东井十六度至柳八度为鹑首，于辰在未，秦之分野，属雍州。
现代文：自东宿井十六度到柳宿八度为十二次中的鹑首，于十二辰在未，是秦的地域，位属雍州。
English: From the 16th degree of Dongshujing to the 8th degree of Liushujing is the 12th dagger, in the 12th hour, it is the region of Qin, belonging to Yongzhou.

古文：费直，起井十二度。
现代文：费直认为，起自井宿十二度。
English: According to Fei Zhi, it has been 12 degrees since he left Jingjuku.

古文：蔡邕，起井十度。
现代文：蔡邕认为，起自井宿十度。
English: According to Cai Wei, it is ten degrees up from Jingjuku.

古文：自柳九度至张十六度为鹑火，于辰在午，周之分野，属三河。
现代文：自柳宿九度至张宿十六度为十二次中的鹑火，于十二辰中在午，是周的地域，位属三河。
English: From Liuju nine degrees to Zhangju sixteen degrees is the middle of the twelve bonfires, in the middle of the twelve hours in the afternoon, is the area of Zhou, belongs to the three rivers.

古文：费直，起柳五度。
现代文：费直认为，起自柳宿五度。
English: Fei Zhi believes that it has been five times since Yanagidokoro.

古文：蔡邕，起柳三度。
现代文：蔡邕认为，起自柳宿三度。
English: According to Cai Wei, it has been three times since Yanagishuku.

古文：自张十七度至轸十一度为鹑尾，于辰在已，楚之分野，属荆州。
现代文：自张宿十七度到轸宿十一度为十二次中的鹑尾，于十二辰中在已，是楚的地域，位属荆州。
English: From Zhangjuku 17th to Minshuku 11th, it is Shanwei in the 12th, and in the 12th, it is Ya, it is Chu's area, it belongs to Jingzhou.

古文：费直，起张十三度。
现代文：费直认为，起自张宿十三度。
English: Fei Zhi believes that it has been 13 degrees since Zhangyuan.

古文：蔡邕，起张十二度。
现代文：蔡邕认为，起自张宿十二度。
English: Cai Wei believes that it has been twelve degrees since Zhangshu.

古文：州郡躔次陈卓、范蠡、鬼谷先生、张良、诸葛亮、谯周、京房、张衡并云：
现代文：陈卓、范蠡、鬼谷先生、张良、诸葛亮、谯周、京房、张衡都说：
English: Chen Zhuo, Fan Hui, Mr. Ghost Valley, Zhang Liang, Zhuge Liang, Zou Zhou, Jing Fang, Zhang Heng all said:

古文：角、亢、氐，郑，兗州：东郡入角一度
现代文：角宿、亢宿、氐宿，对应郑地，兖州：东郡对应角宿一度
English: Jiaojing, Shijie, Shijie, corresponding to Zhengde, Bozhou: Dong County corresponding to Jiaojing once

古文：东平、任城、山阳入角六度泰山入角十二度济北陈留入亢五度
现代文：东平、任城、山阳对应角六度泰山对应角十二度济北陈留对应亢五度
English: Dongping, Rencheng and Sanyang have a corresponding angle of 6 degrees, Mount Taishan has a corresponding angle of 12 degrees, Jibei and Chenliu have a corresponding angle of 5 degrees

古文：济阴入氐二度东平入氐七度
现代文：济阴对应氐二度东平对应氐七度
English: Jinyin corresponds to 2 degrees, Dongping corresponds to 7 degrees

古文：房、心，宋，豫州：颍川入房一度汝南入房二度
现代文：房、心，宋，豫州：颍川对应房一度汝南对应房二度
English: Fang, Xin, Song, and Yuzhou: corresponding to Fangchuan once, corresponding to Renan twice

古文：沛郡入房四度梁国入房五度
现代文：沛郡对应房四度梁国对应房五度
English: Liangguo County's corresponding room is fourth, Liangguo County's corresponding room is fifth

古文：淮阳入心一度鲁国入心三度，
现代文：淮阳对应心一度鲁国对应心三度，
English: The corresponding center of Huaiyang increased by one degree, and the corresponding center of Lu by three degrees.

古文：楚国入房四度。
现代文：楚国对应房四度。
English: The number of corresponding houses in Chu has increased four times.

古文：尾、箕，燕，幽州：凉州入箕中十度上谷入尾一度
现代文：尾、箕，燕，幽州：凉州对应箕中十度上谷对应尾一度
English: 尾,,燕,幽州: 凉州 corresponding to 中十度上谷 corresponding to尾一度

古文：渔阳入尾三度右北平入尾七度
现代文：渔阳对应尾三度右北平对应尾七度
English: Yuyang corresponds to the tail three degrees, right Beiping corresponds to the tail seven degrees

古文：西河、上郡、北地、辽西东入尾十度涿郡入尾十六度
现代文：西河、上郡、北地、辽西东对应尾十度涿郡对应尾十六度
English: Xihe, Shangxian, Beidi, and Liaocheng West-East correspond to the last ten degrees, and Handan County corresponds to the last sixteen degrees.

古文：渤海入箕一度乐浪入箕三度
现代文：渤海对应箕一度乐浪对应箕三度
English: The Bohai Sea corresponds to  once, the Le Wave corresponds to  three times.

古文：玄菟入箕六度广阳入箕九度。
现代文：玄菟对应箕六度广阳对应箕九度。
English: Xuanzang corresponds to 6 degrees, Guangyang corresponds to 9 degrees.

古文：斗、牵牛、须女，吴、越，扬州：
现代文：斗、牵牛、须女，吴、越，扬州：
English: Fighting, cowherding, bearded women, Wu, Yue, Yangzhou:

古文：九江入斗一度庐江入斗六度
现代文：九江对应斗一度庐江对应斗六度
English: Jiujiang corresponding to dou once; Minjiang corresponding to dou six times.

古文：豫章入斗十度丹阳入斗十六度
现代文：豫章对应斗十度丹阳对应斗十六度
English: Yuanzhang corresponds to ten degrees, Danyang corresponds to sixteen degrees

古文：会稽入牛一度临淮入牛四度
现代文：会稽对应牛一度临淮对应牛四度
English: once for cattle, four times for cattle

古文：广陵入牛八度泗水入女一度
现代文：广陵对应牛八度泗水对应女一度
English: Guangling corresponds to ox octave, Xinshui corresponds to female octave

古文：六安入女六度
现代文：六安对应女六度
English: 六安 corresponding to female 六度

古文：虚、危，齐，青州：
现代文：虚、危，齐，青州：
English: Deceptive, dangerous, Qi, Qingzhou:

古文：齐国入虚六度北海入虚九度
现代文：齐国对应虚六度北海对应虚九度
English: Qi country corresponds to imaginary six degrees and the North Sea corresponds to imaginary nine degrees

古文：济南入危一度乐安入危四度
现代文：济南对应危一度乐安对应危四度
English: Jinan once at risk, Le'an four times at risk

古文：东莱入危九度平原入危十一度
现代文：东莱对应危九度平原对应危十一度
English: Donglai faces danger nine times, the plain faces danger eleven times

古文：菑川入危十四度
现代文：菑川对应危十四度
English: Huluncheon River rises to dangerous 14 degrees

古文：营室、东壁，卫，并州：
现代文：营室、东壁，卫，并州：
English: The camp room, the east wall, the gate, and the state:

古文：安定入营室一度天水入营室八度
现代文：安定对应营室一度天水对应营室八度
English: Stable corresponds to the camp once, heavenly water corresponds to the camp eight times

古文：陇西入营室四度酒泉入营室十一度
现代文：陇西对应营室四度酒泉对应营室十一度
English: Shaanxi camp four times, Jiuquan camp eleven times

古文：张掖入营室十二度武都入东壁一度
现代文：张掖对应营室十二度武都对应东壁一度
English: Zhang Ye corresponds to the camp room twelve times, Wu Du corresponds to the east wall once.

古文：金城入东壁四度武威入东壁六度
现代文：金城对应东壁四度武威对应东壁六度
English: Jincheng corresponds to the east wall of four degrees Wuwei corresponds to the east wall of six degrees

古文：敦煌入东壁八度。
现代文：敦煌对应东壁八度。
English: Dunhuang corresponds to the east wall octave.

古文：奎、娄、胃，鲁，徐州：
现代文：奎、娄、胃，鲁，徐州：
English: Kui, Qi, stomach, Lu, Xuzhou:

古文：东海入奎一度琅邪入奎六度
现代文：东海对应奎一度琅邪对应奎六度
English: The East China Sea has warmed by one degree, the Yangtze by one degree and the Yangtze by six degrees.

古文：高密入娄一度城阳入娄九度
现代文：高密对应娄一度城阳对应娄九度
English: High density corresponds to 1 degree of city-sunshine corresponds to 9 degree of rise

古文：胶东入胃一度
现代文：胶东对应胃一度
English: Jiaodong corresponding to the stomach once

古文：昴、毕，赵、冀州：
现代文：昴、毕，赵、冀州：
English: Gong, Bi, Zhao, Jizhou:

古文：魏郡入昴一度钜鹿入昴三度
现代文：魏郡对应昴一度钜鹿对应昴三度
English: Wei County's corresponding  once, Elk corresponding  three times

古文：常山入昴五度广平入昴七度
现代文：常山对应昴五度广平对应昴七度
English: Changshan corresponding to 5 degrees, Guangping corresponding to 7 degrees

古文：中山入昴一度清河入昴九度
现代文：中山对应昴一度清河对应昴九度
English: Zhongshan corresponds to  once, Qinghe corresponds to  nine degrees

古文：信都入毕三度赵郡入毕八度
现代文：信都对应毕三度赵郡对应毕八度
English: Xindu corresponding to three degrees, Zhao County corresponding to eight degrees

古文：安平入毕四度河间入毕十度
现代文：安平对应毕四度河间对应毕十度
English: Anping corresponds to four degrees, and Huan corresponds to ten degrees.

古文：真定入毕十三度
现代文：真定对应毕十三度
English: True and Corresponding Bi-13 Degrees

古文：觜、参，魏，益州：
现代文：觜、参，魏，益州：
English: ,参,魏,益州:

古文：广汉入觜一度越巂入觜三度
现代文：广汉对应觜一度越巂对应觜三度
English: Guanghan corresponds to  once, Yue corresponds to  three times

古文：蜀郡入参一度犍为人参三度
现代文：蜀郡对应参一度犍为人参三度
English: Shu County's corresponding ginseng once, ginseng three times

古文：牂柯入参五度巴郡入参八度
现代文：牂柯对应参五度巴郡对应参八度
English: Zengke corresponds to the fifth degree, Ba County corresponds to the eighth degree.

古文：汉中入参九度益州入参七度
现代文：汉中对应参九度益州对应参七度
English: Hanzhong Corresponding to Nine Degrees, Yizhou Corresponding to Seven Degrees

古文：东井、舆鬼，秦，雍州：
现代文：东井、舆鬼，秦，雍州：
English: East well, public spirit, Qin, Yongzhou:

古文：云中入东井一度定襄入东井八度
现代文：云中对应东井一度定襄对应东井八度
English: Yunzhong corresponding to Dongjing once, Dingxiang corresponding to Dongjing eight times

古文：雁门入东井十六度代郡入东井二十八度
现代文：雁门对应东井十六度代郡对应东井二十八度
English: Gammon corresponds to the 16th degree of Dongjing, and Daigun corresponds to the 28th degree of Dongjing

古文：太原入东井二十九度上党入舆鬼二度。
现代文：太原对应东井二十九度上党对应舆鬼二度。
English: Taiyuan corresponds to the East well twenty-nine degrees, and the upper party corresponds to the public spirit two degrees.

古文：柳、七星、张，周，三辅：
现代文：柳、七星、张，周，三辅：
English: Liu, Qixing, Zhang, Zhou, and the three assistants:

古文：弘农入柳一度河南入七星三度
现代文：弘农对应柳一度河南对应七星三度
English: Hongnong corresponds to the willow once, Henan corresponds to the seven stars three times

古文：河东入张一度河内入张九度
现代文：河东对应张宿一度河内对应张九度
English: East of the river corresponds to Zhangshu once, Hanoi corresponds to Zhangjiudou

古文：翼、轸，楚。
现代文：翼、轸，楚。
English: Wings, beak, chin.

古文：荆州：
现代文：荆州：
English: Jingzhou:

古文：南阳入翼六度南郡入翼十度
现代文：南阳对应翼六度南郡对应翼十度
English: Nanyang corresponding wing six degrees Nanshun corresponding wing ten degrees

古文：江夏入翼十二度零陵入轸十一度
现代文：江夏对应翼十二度零陵对应轸宿十一度
English: Jiangxia Corresponding Wing Twelve Degrees Zero Mausoleum Corresponding Fief Eleven Times

古文：桂阳入轸六度武陵入轸十度
现代文：桂阳对应轸宿六度武陵对应轸宿十度
English: Guiyang is six degrees higher than Minshuku, Wuling is ten degrees higher than Minshuku

古文：长沙入轸十六度
现代文：长沙对应轸宿十六度
English: Changsha's equivalent of Oshuku is 16 degrees

