古文：凡与敌战，若我众强，可伪示怯弱以诱之，敌必轻来与我战，吾以锐卒击之，其军必败。
现代文：凡是对敌作战，如果我军兵多力强，可以伪装成兵力怯弱以诱惑敌人，敌人必定轻率前来与我方交战，我便乘机出动精锐部队攻击它，他必定会失败。
English: In any war against the enemy, if my army is more powerful and can disguise itself as a weak force to tempt the enemy, the enemy will certainly come to fight us rashly, and I will take the opportunity to send elite troops to attack it, and he will certainly fail.

古文：法曰： 能而示之不能。 
现代文：诚如兵法所说： 能胜而故意显示出不能胜。 
English: It's true what the art of war says: you can win, but you deliberately show that you can't.

古文：战国，赵将李牧常居雁门，备匈奴。
现代文：战国末期，赵国大将李牧常年驻守代郡、雁门郡边境地区防御匈奴。
English: At the end of the Warring States period, the Zhao general Li Mu was stationed in the border areas of Dayi County and Yanmen County for many years to defend against the Huns.

古文：以便宜置吏，市租皆输入幕府，为士卒费。
现代文：他可以根据实际情况自行设置官吏，收取的租税全部送到他的府署，作为官兵的费用。
English: He can set up officials according to the actual situation, and all the taxes collected will be sent to his government office as the cost of officers and soldiers.

古文：日击数牛享士，习骑射，谨烽火，多间谍，厚遇将士，约曰： 匈奴入盗，急入收保，有敢捕虏者，斩。 
现代文：每天都宰杀几头牛慰劳士兵，训练士卒骑马射箭，各个地方多设置烽火，多派间谍侦察敌情，给战士以优厚待遇，并规定说： 如果匈奴前来进犯，大家要立即收兵回城防御，倘若有人胆敢捕捉匈奴兵，立即问斩。 
English: Every day, several oxen were slaughtered to comfort the soldiers, the drill sergeants rode horses and shot arrows, bonfires were set up in various places, more spies were sent to reconnoitre the enemy situation, soldiers were given preferential treatment, and it was stipulated that: If the Huns come to attack, everyone should immediately withdraw their troops back to the city for defense, and if anyone dares to capture the Huns, they should be killed immediately.

古文：匈奴每入盗，辄入收保，不与战。
现代文：因此，匈奴每次来犯，他的部队都退入营垒坚守，不同匈奴兵交战。
English: Therefore, every time the Huns invaded, his troops retreated to their barracks and fought against the Huns.

古文：如是数岁，无所亡失。
现代文：这样几年，边境上没受什么伤亡和损失。
English: In such years, there were no casualties or losses on the border.

古文：然匈奴以李牧为怯，虽赵边兵亦以为吾将怯。
现代文：但匈奴人却认为李牧这是胆怯，就连赵国边境上的士兵也认为自己的将军是胆小害怕。
English: However, the Xiongnu thought that Li Mu was timid, and even the officers and soldiers guarding the border of Zhao also thought that their master was timid and afraid of war.

古文：赵王让李牧，李牧如故。
现代文：赵王因此而责备了李牧。但李牧依然坚持原来的做法。
English: Zhao Wang reprimanded Li Mu, but Li Mu remained the same.

古文：赵王召之，使人代牧将。
现代文：于是，赵王召回了李牧，另派他人取代李牧为将。
English: As a result, Zhao Wang recalled Li Mu and sent someone else to replace Li Mu.

古文：岁余，匈奴来，每出战，数不利，失亡多，边不得田畜。于是复请牧。
现代文：新任将领到职一年多，每当匈奴兵来犯，他都命令部队出战，往往受挫失利，损失伤亡很多，致使边境地区无法耕种和放牧。于是，赵王又去请李牧出任边帅。
English: The new general had been in office for more than a year. Whenever the Huns invaded, he ordered his troops to go to war, but they were often defeated and suffered many casualties, making it impossible to farm and graze cattle in the border area. Therefore, King Zhao went to ask Li Mu to serve as border guard.

古文：牧称疾，杜门不出。
现代文：李牧推称有病，闭门不出。
English: Li Mu is said to be ill and unable to leave the house.

古文：赵王乃复强起使将兵。
现代文：赵王不得不强行起用李牧统率边兵。
English: King Zhao then forced him to command the troops.

古文：牧曰： 若用臣，臣如前，乃敢奉命。 
现代文：李牧说： 如果任用我，必须允许我用以前的办法，我才敢接受任命。 
English: Li Mu said: If I am appointed, I must be allowed to use the previous method before I dare to accept the appointment.

古文：王许之。
现代文：赵王答应了。
English: Zhao Wang agreed to his request.

古文：李牧遂往，至，如故约。
现代文：李牧于是到了边境，仍按原来的规约行事。
English: Li Mu then arrived at the border and continued to act according to the original regulations.

古文：匈奴来无所得，终以为怯。
现代文：匈奴兵来犯一无所获，但他们始终认为李牧胆怯不敢出战。
English: The Xiongnu soldiers came to commit crimes and got nothing, but they always thought that Li Mu was too cowardly to go to war.

古文：边士日得赏赐，不用，皆愿一战。
现代文：守边士卒每天都得到赏赐，却不用他们打仗，因此，都请求愿与匈奴决一死战。
English: The border guards were rewarded daily, but they did not have to fight, so they all asked for a fight to the death with the Huns.

古文：于是乃具选车得一千三百乘，选骑得一万三千匹、百金之士五万人、控弦者十万人，悉勒兵习战，大纵畜牧，人民满野。
现代文：李牧于是就准备了经过挑选的战车一千三百辆，精选的战马一万三千匹，挑选曾获重金奖赏的勇士五万人，会拉弓射箭的射手十万人，然后全部组织起来加以训练。又大纵牲畜，让人民满山遍野地放牧。
English: Li Mu then prepared thirteen hundred selected chariots, thirteen thousand selected horses, fifty thousand selected warriors who had received heavy gold awards, and one hundred thousand archers who could draw bows and arrows, and then organized them all for training.

古文：匈奴来，佯败不胜，以数千人委之。
现代文：匈奴见此情景，先是派遣小股兵力入侵，接战后李牧佯装不胜，故意丢弃几千人而退走。
English: Seeing this situation, the Huns first sent small units of troops to invade, and after the battle, Li Muyang pretended to be invincible, deliberately abandoned several thousand people and retreated.

古文：单于闻之，大率众来入。
现代文：匈奴首领单于得此消息后，立即亲率大军入侵赵国边境。
English: As soon as he heard about the situation, he led a large number of people to invade.

古文：李牧多为奇阵，张左右翼以击之，大破之，杀匈奴十万余骑，单于奔走。
现代文：李牧布设很多奇阵，指挥赵军展开左右两翼包抄匈奴军，把他们打得大败，歼灭匈奴骑兵十余万人，单于仓皇远逃。
English: Li Mu set up a lot of strange formations, commanded the Zhao Army to expand the left and right wings to encircle the Xiongnu Army, beat them badly, annihilated more than 100,000 Xiongnu cavalry, and fled in panic.

古文：其后十余岁，匈奴不敢犯赵边。
现代文：此后十余年间，匈奴不敢再侵扰赵国边境。
English: For more than ten years after that, the Huns did not dare to invade the border of Zhao again.

