古文：起阏逢困敦，尽著雍困敦，凡二十五年。
现代文：起，止共二十五年。周纪四周赧王十八年
English: and lasted for a total of twenty-five years. In the 18th year of the reign of King Zhou

古文：赧王中十八年楚怀王亡归。秦人觉之，遮楚道。
现代文：楚怀王逃脱看守，被秦国人发现，封锁通往楚国的道路。
English: King Chu Huai escaped from the guards and was discovered by the Qin people, who blocked the road to Chu.

古文：怀王从间道走赵。赵主父在代，赵人不敢受。
现代文：楚怀王从小路逃到了赵国，正逢赵主父外出在代郡，赵国官员不敢作主收留他。
English: Chu Hui Wang fled from the path to Zhao. When Zhao's father was out in Dai County, Zhao officials did not dare to host him.

古文：怀王将走魏，秦人追及之，以归。
现代文：楚怀王又想逃奔魏国，却被秦国人追上，抓回秦国。
English: King Chu Huai also wanted to flee to Wei, but he was caught by the Qin people and taken back to Qin.

古文：鲁平公薨，子缗王贾立。赧王中十九年
现代文：鲁国鲁平公去世，其子姬贾即位为鲁缗公。赧王十九年
English: King Ruping of the State of Lu died, and his son Ji Jia ascended the throne as King Lu Ye. In the 19th year of King Ye,

古文：楚怀王发病，薨于秦，秦人归其丧。
现代文：楚怀王发病，死在秦国。
English: King Chuhai fell ill and died in Qin.

古文：楚人皆怜之，如悲亲戚。
现代文：秦国送回他的灵柩，楚国人见了都十分悲痛，像死了自己的亲人一样。
English: The people of Chu all grieved for King Huai, just as they grieved for their own parents and brothers.

古文：诸侯由是不直秦。
现代文：各国诸侯因此也对秦国不满。
English: The lords saw from this that the Qin king was not honest. Qin Chu broke off diplomatic relations.

古文：齐、韩、魏、赵、宋同击秦，至盐氏而还。
现代文：齐、韩、魏、赵、宋五国共同出兵攻打秦国，到了盐氏地方即行撤回。
English: The five countries of Qi, Han, Wei, Zhao and Song jointly sent troops to attack Qin, but withdrew when they reached the Yan region.

古文：秦与韩武遂、与魏封陵以和。
现代文：秦国把武遂归还韩国，把封陵归还魏国，以求和解。
English: In order to seek reconciliation, Qin returned Wusui to Korea and the mausoleum to Wei.

古文：赵主父行新地，遂出代；西遇楼烦王于西河而致其兵。
现代文：赵主父视察新获取的领土，离开代郡，向西在西河会见楼烦王，接受了他的部队。
English: Father Zhao inspected the newly acquired territory, left the county and went west to the West River to meet with King Lou and accept his troops.

古文：魏襄王薨，子昭王立。
现代文：魏国魏襄王去世，其子即位为魏昭王。
English: King Wei Xiang of the State of Wei died, and his son ascended the throne as King Wei Zhao.

古文：韩襄王薨，子釐王咎立。
现代文：韩国韩襄王去世，其子韩咎即位为韩王。
English: King Han Xiang of Korea died, and his son Han Jianxing became King of Korea.

古文：赧王中二十年
现代文：赧王二十年
English: Twenty years of the Dragon King

古文：秦尉错伐魏襄城。
现代文：秦国国尉司马错进攻魏国襄城。
English: Qin's Lieutenant Sima mistakenly attacked Wei's Xiangcheng.

古文：赵主父与齐、燕共灭中山，迁其王于肤施。
现代文：赵主父与齐国、燕国联合灭掉中山国，把中山王迁到肤施居住。
English: Zhao Shifu, together with the states of Qi and Yan, destroyed the state of Zhongshan, and moved the king of Zhongshan to live in Queshi.

古文：归，行赏，大赦，置酒，酺五日。
现代文：赵主父回来后，论功行赏，大赦罪人，设酒庆祝，全国欢宴五天。
English: After Father Zhao's return, there will be a five-day national celebration, including the awarding of meritorious deeds, the amnesty of sinners, and the celebration of wine.

古文：赵主父封其长子章于代，号曰安阳君。
现代文：赵主父把长子赵章封到代，号称安阳君。
English: Zhao's father named his eldest son Zhao Zhangfeng as his successor, known as Anyangjun.

古文：安阳君素侈，心不服其弟。
现代文：安阳君平素为人骄横，内心对弟弟立为王十分不服。
English: Anyang Junping was arrogant and disliked his younger brother's position as king.

古文：主父使田不礼相之。
现代文：赵主父派田不礼做他的国相。
English: Father Zhao sent Tian Rude to be his minister of state.

古文：李兑谓肥义曰： 公子章强壮而志骄，党众而欲大，田不礼忍杀而骄，二人相得，必有阴谋。
现代文：李兑对肥义说： 公子赵章身强力壮而怀有野心，党羽众多而贪欲极大，田不礼又残忍好杀，十分狂妄，两人互相勾结，必定会图谋不轨。
English: Li Dui said to Feiyi: Zhao Zhang is strong and ambitious, he has many followers and is extremely greedy, he is impolite and cruel, he is very arrogant, the two of them collude with each other, and they will definitely try to do something wrong.

古文：夫小人有欲，轻虑浅谋，徒见其利，不顾其害，难必不久矣。
现代文：小人有了野心，就要轻举妄动，他只看到想获取的利益，看不到带来的危害。一场灾难就在眼前了。
English: If a villain has ambition, he will act rashly. He only sees the benefits he wants to obtain, but not the harm he brings. A disaster is just around the corner.

古文：子任重而势大，乱之所始而祸之所集也。
现代文：你身居要职，权势很大，你将成为动乱的由头，灾祸也将集中在你身上。
English: You are a man of great position and authority. You will become a source of unrest, and calamity will be concentrated on you.

古文：子奚不称疾毋出而传政于公子成，毋为祸梯，不亦可乎！ 
现代文：你何不称病不出，把朝政交给公子赵成去处理，免得被祸事牵连。这样不好吗！ 
English: Why don't you call in sick and leave the government to your son Zhao Cheng to deal with, so that you won't be implicated in the calamity. Isn't that good!

古文：肥义曰： 昔者主父以王属义也，曰： 毋变而度，毋易而虑，坚守一心，以殁而世。 
现代文：肥义说： 当年赵主父把赵王嘱托给我，说： 不要改变你的宗旨，不要改变你的心意，要坚守一心，至死效忠！ 
English: Huiyi said, "Back then, Master Zhao entrusted me with the command of King Zhao, saying, 'Don't change your purpose, don't change your heart, stick to one heart, and be loyal to death!'"

古文：义再拜受命而籍之。
现代文：我再三拜谢承命并记录在案。
English: Then I received the king's command and wrote it down.

古文：今畏不礼之难而忘吾籍，变孰大焉！
现代文：现在如果怕田不礼加祸于我而忘掉当年的记录，就是莫大的背弃。
English: Now, if I were to forget that year's record out of fear that Tian Rude might do me harm, that would be a huge betrayal.

古文：谚曰： 死者复生，生者不愧。 
现代文：俗话说崐： 面对复生的死者，活着的人无需感到惭愧。 
English: As the saying goes: Faced with the resurrection of the dead, the living need not feel ashamed.

古文：吾欲全吾言，安得全吾身乎！
现代文：我要维护我的诺言，哪能光顾保全生命！
English: I want to keep my promise, how can I neglect the preservation of life!

古文：子则有赐而忠我矣。虽然，吾言已在前矣，终不敢失！ 李兑曰： 诺。子勉之矣！
现代文：你对我的建议是一片好心，但是我已有誓言在先，决不敢放弃！ 李兑说： 好，你勉力而为吧！
English: Your advice to me is well-meaning, but I have already made a vow in advance and dare not give up! Li Dui said: Good, do your best!

古文：吾见子已今年耳。 
现代文：能见到你恐怕只有今年了。 
English: I've only been able to see you this year.

古文：涕泣而出。
现代文：说罢流泪而出。
English: After saying this, he went away weeping bitterly.

古文：李兑数见公子成以备田不礼。
现代文：李兑几次入见公子赵成，商议防备田不礼。
English: Li Du repeatedly met with Zhao Cheng, the prince, to discuss the prevention of the preparation of the fields.

古文：肥义谓信期曰： 公子章与田不礼声善而实恶，内得主而外为暴，矫令以擅一旦之命，不难为也。
现代文：肥义对信期说： 公子赵章与田不礼语言动听而本质凶恶，在内讨得主父的欢心，在外恣意施暴。他们一旦假借主父的命令来发动政变，是很容易得手的。
English: Huiyi said to Xinyi: Zhao Zhang and Tian are impolite, their language is charming but their essence is vicious. They try to win the favor of their master on the inside, and arbitrarily commit violence on the outside. Once they fake their master's order to launch a coup, they can easily succeed.

古文：今吾忧之，夜而忘寐，饥而忘食，盗出入不可不备。
现代文：现在我忧虑此事，已经到了废寝忘食的程度。强盗在身边出入不能不防！
English: Now I'm worried about it, to the point where I'm losing sleep over it. I can't help but watch out for robbers coming and going around me!

古文：自今以来，有召王者必见吾面，我将以身先之。无故而后王可入也。 信期曰： 善。 
现代文：从此以后，有人奉主父命来召见赵王必须先见我的面，我将先前往，没有变故，赵王才能去。 信期说： 好。 
English: From then on, when someone was summoned to see King Zhao by the order of the Lord's father, he had to see me first. I would go first, and nothing would change until King Zhao could go.

古文：主父使惠文王朝群臣而自从旁窥之，见其长子傫然也，反北面为臣。诎于其弟，心怜之，于是乃欲分赵而王公子章于代，计未决而辍。
现代文：赵主父让赵惠文王朝见群臣，自己在旁边窥察，只见当哥哥的赵章反而俯首称臣，无精打采地听高高在上的弟弟赵何训示，心中有些不忍，于是想把赵国一分为二，让赵章在代郡称王，但这个计划还没有最后决定就搁置起来。
English: Zhao's father let the Zhao Huiwen dynasty see the ministers, and he spied on the side, only to see Zhao Zhang, who was the elder brother, bow his head and praise the ministers instead. He listened to the instructions of his brother Zhao He, who was high and mighty, listlessly. He felt a little impatient, so he wanted to divide Zhao Province into two, and let Zhao Zhang proclaim the king in the vicinities, but this plan was shelved without a final decision.

古文：主父及王游沙丘，异宫，公子章、田不礼以其徒作乱，诈以主父令召王。肥义先入，杀之。
现代文：赵主父和赵王出游沙丘，分别住在两个行宫里。赵章、田不礼乘机率领门徒作乱，他们假称赵主父的命令召见赵王，肥义先进去，被杀死。
English: Zhao Zhang and Tian Bulu took the opportunity to lead the disciples into a riot. They pretended to have been summoned to see Zhao Wang on the orders of Zhao Wang, while Feiyi went first and was killed.

古文：高信即与王战。
现代文：高信便与赵王一同抵抗。
English: Gao Xin Li Ji and King Hui Wen fought together with Prince Zhang.

古文：公子成与李兑自国至，乃起四邑之兵入距难，杀公子章及田不礼，灭其党。
现代文：公子赵成与李兑从国都邯郸赶来，发动四邑的军队入宫镇压叛乱，杀死赵章及田不礼，处死全部党羽。
English: Zhao Cheng and Li Dui, the prince's sons, arrived from the capital of the country, launched the troops of the four towns to enter the palace to suppress the rebellion, killed Zhao Zhang and Tian Rude, and executed all the party members.

古文：公子成为相，号安平君；李兑为司寇。
现代文：公子赵成担任相国，称为安平君；李兑被任命为司寇。
English: Zhao Cheng, the son of a noble family, served as a consort, known as Anping Jun; Li Dui was appointed as a scout.

古文：是时惠文王少，成、兑专政。
现代文：当时赵惠文王还年幼，政权都掌握在公子赵成、李兑手中。
English: At that time, Zhao Huiwen Wang was still young, and the power was in the hands of his sons Zhao Cheng and Li Dui.

古文：公子章之败也，往走主父，主父开之。
现代文：赵章败退的时候，逃到赵主父那里，赵主父开门接纳了他。
English: When Zhao Zhang was defeated and retreated, he fled to Zhao's father, who opened the door and welcomed him.

古文：成、兑因围主父宫。
现代文：公子赵成、李兑于是带兵包围了赵主父的行宫。
English: Prince Zhao Cheng and Prince Li Dui then led soldiers to surround the palace of Zhao's father.

古文：公子章死，成、兑谋曰： 以章故，围主父；即解兵，吾属夷矣！ 
现代文：杀死赵章后，公子赵成、李兑商议道： 我们为追杀赵章，竟包围了主父的行宫，如此大罪，要是撤兵回去，会被满门抄斩的！ 
English: After killing Zhao Zhang, Zhao Cheng and Li Dui discussed: "In order to pursue and kill Zhao Zhang, we have encircled our master's palace. Such a great crime. If we withdraw, we will be beheaded!"

古文：乃遂围之，令： 宫中人后出者夷！ 
现代文：于是又下令围住赵主父行宫，宣布： 宫中人晚出来的杀！ 
English: Therefore, he also ordered to surround the palace of Zhao Shifu and announced: "Kill anyone in the palace who comes out late!"

古文：宫中人悉出。主父欲出不得，又不得食，探雀鷇而食之。三月馀，饿死沙丘宫。
现代文：宫中的人听见命令全部逃出，赵主父想出来却不被准许，又得不到食物，只好捕捉幼鸟吃，三个多月后，他终于饿死在沙丘行宫中。
English: When the people in the palace heard the order, they all fled. Father Zhao tried to escape, but he was not allowed, and he did not get any food. He had to catch baby birds to eat. After more than three months, he finally starved to death in the sand dune palace.

古文：主父定死，乃发丧赴诸侯。
现代文：直到赵主父确死无疑，赵国才向各国报告丧事。
English: The death of the father-in-law had already been established beyond doubt, and it was only then that an obituary notice was sent to the princes.

古文：主父初以长子章为太子，后得吴娃，爱之，为不出者数岁。
现代文：起初，赵主父定长子赵章为太子，后来他娶了美女吴娃，十分宠爱，曾经几年不出宫上朝。
English: At first, Zhao's father designated his eldest son, Zhao Zhang, as the crown prince. Later, he married the beautiful Wu Wa. He was very fond of her and did not leave the palace for several years.

古文：生子何，乃废太子章而立之。
现代文：生下儿子赵何后，便废去太子赵章，立赵何为太子。
English: After she gave birth to her son Zhao He, she abolished the prince Zhao Zhang and established Zhao He as prince.

古文：吴娃死，爱驰；怜故太子，欲两王之，犹豫未决，故乱起。
现代文：吴娃死后，赵主父对赵何的偏爱也逐渐减退，又可怜起原来的太子，想立两个王。他总是犹豫不决，所以引起了内乱。
English: After Wu Wa's death, Zhao Shifu's preference for Zhao He also gradually waned, and he pitied the original prince and wanted to set up two kings. He always hesitated, so he caused civil unrest.

古文：秦楼缓免相，魏冉代之。
现代文：秦国罢免楼缓的丞相，由魏冉代任。
English: Qin removed Lou Ye from his post as chancellor and replaced him with Wei Ran.

古文：赧王中二十一年
现代文：赧王二十一年
English: In the 21st year of King Gong

古文：秦败魏师于解。
现代文：秦国在解击败魏国军队。
English: Qin defeated Wei's army at the Battle of Lo.

古文：赧王中二十二年
现代文：赧王二十二年
English: In the 22nd year of King Min

古文：韩公孙喜、魏人伐秦。
现代文：韩国派大将公孙喜联合魏国攻打秦国。
English: Korea sent the general Gongsun Xi to attack Qin together with Wei.

古文：穰侯荐左更白起于秦王以代向寿将兵，败魏师、韩师于伊阙，斩首二十四万级，虏公孙喜，拔五城。
现代文：秦国穰侯把任左更之职的白起推荐给秦王，代替向寿统率秦军，结果在伊阙大败韩、魏联军，杀死二十四万人，活捉公孙喜，夺取五座城。
English: Qin Guozhong recommended Bai Qi to the Qin King to replace Xiang Shou Tong as the leader of the Qin army. As a result, he defeated the combined forces of South Korea and Wei in Yili, killed 240,000 people, captured Gongsunxi alive, and seized five cities.

古文：秦王以白起为国尉。
现代文：秦王便任命白起为国尉。
English: King Qin then appointed Bai Qi as a lieutenant.

古文：秦王遗楚王书曰： 楚背秦，秦且率诸侯伐楚，愿王之饬士卒，得一乐战！ 
现代文：秦王送信给楚王，写道： 楚国背叛了秦国，秦国将率领各国来讨伐楚国，希望你整顿好军队，我们痛痛快快地打一仗！ 
English: The King of Qin sent a message to the King of Chu, writing: Chu betrayed Qin, Qin will lead all countries to fight against Chu, I hope you will reorganize your army, we will happily fight a war!

古文：楚王患之，乃复与秦和亲。
现代文：楚王十分恐惧，只好再与秦国修好结亲。
English: King Chu was so afraid that he had no choice but to make amends with Qin.

古文：赧王中二十三年
现代文：赧王二十三年
English: The 23rd Year of the Monkey King

古文：楚襄王迎妇于秦。
现代文：楚襄王从秦国迎娶新娘。
English: King Chu Xiang married a bride from Qin.

古文：臣光曰：甚哉秦之无道也，杀其父而劫其子；楚之不竞也，忍其父而婚其仇！呜呼！
现代文：臣司马光曰：秦国真是太不讲道理了，害死楚怀王又逼迫其子楚襄王；楚国也太不争气了，忍下杀父之仇而与敌人通婚！呜呼！
English: Minister Sima Guang said: "Qin is so unreasonable, killing King Chu Huai and persecuting his son, King Chu Xiang; Chu is also so unreasonable, tolerating his father's murder and marrying his enemy! Alas!

古文：楚之君诚得其道，臣诚得其人，秦虽强，乌得陵之哉！
现代文：楚国君王如果能坚持正确的治国之道，对臣下任用得人，秦国虽然强大，又怎能肆意欺凌它呢！
English: If the king of Chu can adhere to the correct way of governing the country and appoint the best people for his subordinates, how can Qin, although powerful, bully it?

古文：善乎荀卿论之曰： 夫道，善用之则百里之地可以独立，不善用之则楚六千里而为仇人役。 
现代文：荀况说得好： 治国之道，善于掌握则仅有百里方圆的地方也可以独立于天下，不善于掌握哪怕像楚国有六千里国土也只能被仇人所驱使。 
English: It is well said that the way of governing the country is easy to master, but only a hundred-mile-square place can be independent from the world. If you are not good at mastering even a six-thousand-mile-long land like Chu, you can only be driven by enemies.

古文：故人主不务得道而广有其势，是其所以危也。
现代文：所以君王不认真讲求治国之道，只一味制造声势，正是走向危亡的原因。
English: Therefore, the monarch is not committed to mastering the way of governing the country, but only seeks to expand his power, which is why he is in danger.

古文：秦魏冉谢病免，以客卿烛寿为丞相。
现代文：秦国魏冉因病辞去职务，以客卿烛寿为丞相。
English: Qin Guo Wei Ran resigned from his post due to illness, and Hakka Emperor Jian Shou took over as chancellor.

古文：赧王中二十四年
现代文：赧王二十四年
English: The twenty-four years of the Dragon King

古文：秦伐韩，拔宛。
现代文：秦国进攻韩国，攻取宛。
English: Qin attacked Korea to capture it.

古文：秦烛寿免。魏冉复为丞相，封于穰与陶，谓之穰侯。
现代文：秦国免去烛寿职务，魏冉再度出任丞相，受封穰、陶两地，称为穰侯。
English: Qin was relieved of his duties on the eve of the New Year, and Wei Ran was once again appointed chancellor. He was given the titles of Shun and Tao, and was known as Shun Hou.

古文：又封公子市于宛，公子悝于邓。
现代文：秦国又把宛封给公子市，把邓封给公子悝。
English: Qin also gave Wanfeng to Gongzi City and Dengfeng to Gongzi County.

古文：赧王中二十五年
现代文：赧王二十五年
English: Twenty-five years of the Dragon King

古文：魏入河东地四百里、韩入武遂地二百里于秦。
现代文：魏国把河东方圆四百里、韩国把武遂方圆二百里献给秦国。
English: Wei dedicated to Qin a river four hundred miles in circumference, and Korea a river two hundred miles in circumference.

古文：魏芒卯始以诈见重。
现代文：魏国芒卯以诈术开始受到重用。
English: Wei Mengwu began to be heavily used for cheating.

古文：赧王中二十六年
现代文：赧王二十六年
English: The 26th year of King Gong

古文：秦大良造白起、客卿错伐魏，至轵，取城大小六十一。
现代文：秦国派大良造白起、客卿司马错进攻魏国，抵达轵地，夺取大小城镇六十一座。
English: From the time that Qin sent Daliang Zoubei to attack Wei, the guest lord Sima made a mistake and arrived at Fengtian, capturing sixty-one large and small towns.

古文：赧王中二十七年
现代文：赧王二十七年
English: The 27th year of the Dragon King

古文：冬，十月，秦王称西帝，遣使立齐王为东帝，欲约与共伐赵。
现代文：冬季，十月，秦王自称西帝，派使者建议齐王立为东帝，想约定两国共同进攻赵国。
English: In the winter, in October, King Qin claimed to be the Western Emperor and sent an envoy to suggest that King Qi be installed as the Eastern Emperor. He wanted to make an agreement for the two countries to jointly attack Zhao.

古文：苏代自燕来，齐王曰： 秦使魏冉致帝，子以为何如？ 
现代文：苏代从燕国前来，齐王便问他： 秦国派魏冉来劝我帝，你的意见如何？ 
English: When Su Dai came from Yan, King Qi asked him: Qin sent Wei Ran to persuade my emperor, what is your opinion?

古文：对曰： 愿王受之而勿称也。
现代文：苏代回答说： 我建议大王先予以接受，但暂时不称帝。
English: Sudai replied, "I suggest that the great king accept it first, but not proclaim him emperor for the time being."

古文：秦称之，天下安之，王乃称之，无后也。
现代文：秦王称帝后，天下如果不表示反对，大王再称帝，也不算晚。
English: After the Qin Dynasty was proclaimed emperor, if the world was stable, the great king would be proclaimed emperor again, it was not too late.

古文：秦称之，天下恶之，王因勿称，以收天下，此大资也。
现代文：秦王称帝如果遭到天下指责，大王就不再称帝，趁势收买天下人心，这是个大资本。
English: If the whole world hates him after the Qin State proclaims him emperor, the great king should not proclaim him emperor, so as to win the hearts of the world. This is a great capital.

古文：且伐赵孰与伐桀宋利？
现代文：况且进攻赵国与进攻有夏桀恶名的宋国，哪个有利呢？
English: Besides, which is more advantageous, attacking Zhao Province or attacking Song Province, which has the notoriety of Xia Xi?

古文：今王不如释帝以收天下之望，发兵以伐桀宋，宋举则楚、赵、梁、卫皆惧矣。
现代文：现在大王不如暂时放弃帝号以使天下归心，然后发兵讨伐 桀宋 ，征服宋国后，楚国、赵国、魏国、卫国都会恐崐惧臣服。
English: Now it is better for the great king to temporarily give up the imperial title to make the world come to its senses, and then send an army to fight the Song Dynasty. After conquering the Song Dynasty, the Chu, Zhao, Wei and Wei Dynasties would all be afraid to submit.

古文：是我以名尊秦而令天下憎之，所谓以卑为尊也。 
现代文：这样，我们名义上尊重秦国而让天下去憎恨它，正是齐国反卑为尊的计策。 
English: In this way, we nominally respect the Qin State and let the world hate it, which is exactly the strategy of the anti-inferiority of Qi.

古文：齐王从之，称帝二日而复归之。
现代文：齐王采纳了他的建议，只称帝两天便放弃了。
English: King Qi accepted his suggestion, only to be told that the emperor had given up after two days.

古文：十二月，吕礼自齐入秦，秦王亦去帝复称王。
现代文：十二月，吕礼从齐国到秦国，秦王也去掉帝号，仍旧称王。
English: In December, Luli moved from Qi to Qin, and the Qin king also removed the imperial title, but still called himself king.

古文：秦攻赵，拔杜阳。
现代文：秦国攻打赵国，攻取杜阳。
English: Qin attacked Zhao and captured Duyang.

古文：赧王中二十八年
现代文：二十八年
English: Twenty-eight years later

古文：秦攻魏，拔新垣、曲阳。
现代文：秦国攻打赵国，夺取新垣、曲阳。
English: Qin attacked Zhao and captured Aragaki and Quyang.

古文：赧王中二十九年
现代文：二十九年
English: 29 years later

古文：秦司马错击魏河内。魏献安邑以和，秦出其人归之魏。
现代文：秦国派司马错攻击魏国河内，魏国献出安邑求和，秦国将城内人民驱赶回魏国。
English: Qin sent Sima to attack Wei's Hanoi by mistake, Wei offered Amoy for peace, and Qin drove the people in the city back to Wei.

古文：秦败韩师于夏山。
现代文：秦国在夏山打败韩国军队。
English: Qin defeated the Korean army at Xia Mountain.

古文：宋有雀生鸇于城之陬。史占之，曰： 吉。
现代文：宋国发生雀鸟在城边生下鹞鹰的怪事，太史卜了一卦，说： 吉利。
English: In the Song Dynasty, a strange thing happened: a bird gave birth to a bald eagle on the edge of the city. The emperor was very curious and said, "Good luck."

古文：小而生巨，必霸天下。 
现代文：小而生大，必霸天下。 
English: From small to big, we will dominate the world.

古文：宋康王喜，起兵灭滕；伐薛；东败齐，取五城；南败楚，取地三百里，西败魏军。与齐、魏为敌国，乃愈自信其霸。
现代文：宋康王大喜，起兵灭掉滕国，攻占薛地，向东击败齐国，夺取五座城，向南战胜楚国，占地方圆三百里，向西打垮魏军，宋国一时成为可与齐国、魏国相匹敌的国家，宋康王对成就霸业更加自信。
English: Song Kang Wang was overjoyed. He raised an army to wipe out Teng Guo, occupied Xue Di, defeated Qi Guo to the east, captured five cities, defeated Chu Guo to the south, occupied a local radius of three hundred miles, and defeated Wei Guo to the west. Song Guo temporarily became a country comparable to Qi Guo and Wei Guo. Song Kang Wang was more confident in achieving hegemony.

古文：欲霸之亟成，故射天笞地，斩社稷而焚灭之，以示威服鬼神。
现代文：他想早日完成霸业，便射天鞭地，砍倒神坛后烧毁，以表示自己的声威可以镇慑鬼神。
English: He wanted to complete his domineering career as soon as possible, so he shot heaven and earth, cut down the altar and burned it, to show that his voice could restrain ghosts and gods.

古文：为长夜之饮于室中，室中人呼万岁，则堂上之人应之，堂下之人又应之，门外之人又应之，以至于国中，无敢不呼万岁者。
现代文：他在宫室中整夜饮酒，令室中的人齐声高呼万岁，大堂上的人闻声响应，堂下的人接着响应，门外的人又继续响应，以至于国中没有人敢不呼万岁。
English: He drank alcohol all night in the palace room, causing the people in the room to shout viva in unison, the people in the lobby heard the voice and responded, the people in the hall then responded, and the people outside the door continued to respond, so that no one in the country dared not shout viva.

古文：天下之人谓之 桀宋 。
现代文：天下的人都咒骂他是 桀宋 。
English: People all over the world curse him for being the leader of the Song Dynasty.

古文：齐湣王起兵伐之，民散，城不守。
现代文：齐王趁机起兵征伐宋国，人民四下逃散，弃城不守。
English: King Qi took the opportunity to raise an army to invade Song, and the people fled in all directions, abandoning the city.

古文：宋王奔魏，死于温。
现代文：宋王只好逃往魏国，死于温地。
English: King Song had to flee to Wei and died in a warm place.

古文：赧王中三十年
现代文：三十年
English: Thirty years

古文：秦王会楚王于宛，会赵王于中阳。
现代文：秦王与楚王在宛会面，与赵王在中阳会面。
English: King Qin and King Chu met in Wan, and King Zhao met in Zhongyang.

古文：秦蒙武击齐，拔九城。
现代文：秦国派蒙武攻击齐国，夺取九座城池。
English: Qin sent Mengwu to attack Qi and captured nine cities.

古文：齐湣王既灭宋而骄，乃南侵楚，西侵三晋，欲并二周，为天子。
现代文：齐王灭掉宋国后十分骄傲，便向南侵入楚国，向西攻打赵、魏、韩国，想吞并东西二周，自立为天子。
English: King Qi was very proud after eliminating Song, so he invaded Chu to the south and attacked Zhao, Wei, and Korea to the west. He wanted to annex both east and west and establish himself as the Son of Heaven.

古文：狐咺正议，斫之檀衢，陈举直言，杀之东闾。
现代文：狐义正辞严地劝谏他，被斩首于檀台大路上。陈举直言不讳地劝止，被杀死在东门。
English: He was beheaded on Dantai Road after he sternly advised him, while Chen Jie was killed at the East Gate after he bluntly dissuaded him.

古文：燕昭王日夜抚循其人，益为富实，乃与乐毅谋伐齐。
现代文：燕昭王却日夜安抚教导百姓，使燕国更加富足，于是他与乐毅商议进攻齐国。
English: However, Yan Zhaowang pacified and educated the people day and night, making Yan's country more prosperous, so he and Le Yi discussed attacking Qi.

古文：乐毅曰： 齐，霸国之馀业也。地大人众，未易独攻也。
现代文：乐毅说： 齐国称霸以来，至今有余力，地广人多，我们独力攻打不易。
English: Le Yi said: Since the rise of Qi's hegemony, we still have room to spare, there are many people in the vast land, and it is not easy for us to attack alone.

古文：王必欲伐之。莫如约赵及楚、魏。 
现代文：大王一定要讨伐它，不如联合赵国及楚、魏三国。 
English: The great king must fight it. It is better to unite the three countries of Zhao, Chu and Wei.

古文：于是使乐毅约赵，别使使者连楚、魏，且令赵啖秦以伐齐之利。
现代文：燕王便派乐毅约定赵国，另派使者联系楚国、魏国，再让赵国用讨伐齐国的好处引诱秦国。
English: King Yan then sent Le Yi to negotiate with Zhao, and sent another envoy to contact Chu and Wei, and then let Zhao use the advantages of fighting Qi to lure Qin.

古文：诸侯害齐王之骄暴，皆争合谋与燕伐齐。
现代文：各国苦于齐王的骄横暴虐，都争相赞成参加燕国的攻齐战争。
English: All countries suffered from the arrogance and tyranny of King Qi, and all of them were in favor of participating in the war of conquest of Yan.

古文：赧王中三十一年
现代文：赧王三十一年
English: In the 31st year of King Min's reign

古文：燕王悉起兵，以乐毅为上将军。
现代文：燕王调动全部兵力，以乐毅为上将军。
English: Yan Wang mobilized all the troops, with Le Yi as the top general.

古文：秦尉斯离帅师与三晋之师会之。
现代文：秦国尉斯离率军队与韩、赵、魏联军也前来会合。
English: The army led by Qin Guofeng and the allied forces of Han, Zhao and Wei also came to the meeting.

古文：赵王以相国印授乐毅，乐毅并将秦、魏、韩、赵之兵以伐齐。
现代文：赵王把相国大印授给乐毅，乐毅统一指挥秦、魏、韩、赵大军发动进攻。
English: Zhao Wang conferred the Great Seal of the Fatherland to Le Yi, and Le Yi unifiedly commanded the Qin, Wei, Han, and Zhao armies to launch an attack.

古文：齐湣王悉国中之众以拒之，战于济西，齐师大败。
现代文：齐王集中国内全部人力进行抵御，双方在济水西岸大战。齐国军队大败。
English: King Qi gathered all the manpower in China to resist, and the two sides fought a great battle on the west coast of Jishui. The Qi army was defeated.

古文：乐毅还秦、韩之师，分魏师以略宋地，部赵师以收河间，身率燕师，长驱逐北。
现代文：乐毅便退回秦国、韩国军队，令魏国军队分兵进攻宋国旧地，布署赵国军队去收复河间。自己率领燕军，由北长驱直入齐国。
English: Le Yi then returned to the Qin and Korean armies, ordered the Wei army to attack the old land of Song, and dispatched the Zhao army to recover Hema. He led the Yan army and drove it straight into Qi from Beichang.

古文：剧辛曰： 齐大而燕小，赖诸侯之助以破其军，宜及时攻取其边城以自益，此长久之利也。
现代文：剧辛劝说道： 齐国大，燕国小，依靠各国的帮助我们才打败齐军，应该及时地攻取边境城市充实燕国领土，这才是长久的利益。
English: Yan Guoqin said: "Qi Guoqin is big and Yan Guoqin is small. We can only defeat the Qi army by relying on the help of other countries. We should timely capture the border cities and enrich the territory of Yan Guoqin. This is the long-term benefit."

古文：今过而不攻，以深入为名，无损于齐，无益于燕，而结深怨，后必悔之。 
现代文：现在大军过城不攻，一味深入，既无损于齐国又无益于燕国，只能结下深怨，日后必定要后悔。 
English: Now the great army has passed through the city without attacking, and has gone deep into it, which neither harms Qi Province nor benefits Yan Province, but can only cause deep resentment, which will certainly be regretted in the future.

古文：乐毅曰： 齐王伐功矜能，谋不逮下，废黜贤良，信任谄谀，政令戾虐，百姓怨怼。
现代文：乐毅说： 齐王好大喜功，刚愎自用，不与下属商议，又罢黜贤良人士，专门信任谀谄小人，政令贪虐暴戾，百姓十分怨愤。
English: Le Yi said: King Qi is very proud of his achievements, he is stubborn and self-serving, he does not consult with his subordinates, he dismisses good people, he only trusts scoundrels, his decrees are greedy and violent, and the people are very resentful.

古文：今军皆破亡，若因而乘之，其民必叛，祸乱内作，则齐可图也。
现代文：现在齐国军队已溃不成军，如果我们乘胜追击，齐国百姓必然反叛，内部发生动乱，齐国就可以收拾了。
English: Now that the Qi army has been defeated and cannot become an army, if we use the victory to pursue, the people of Qi will inevitably rebel, and internal turmoil will occur, and Qi can be cleaned up.

古文：若不遂乘之，待彼悔前之非，改过恤下而抚其民，则难虑也。 
现代文：如果不抓住时机，等到齐王痛改前非，体贴臣下而抚恤百姓，我们就难办了。 
English: If we don't seize the opportunity and wait for King Qi to mend his ways, be considerate to his vassals and show mercy to the people, it will be difficult for us to do so.

古文：遂进军深入。
现代文：于是下令进军深入齐国。
English: He then ordered an advance deep into Qi.

古文：齐人果大乱失度，湣王出走。
现代文：齐国果然大乱，失去常度，齐王出逃。
English: The state of Qi was indeed in chaos, losing its stability, and the king of Qi fled.

古文：乐毅入临淄，取宝物、祭器，输之于燕。
现代文：乐毅率军进入齐都临淄，搜刮宝物和祭祀重器，运回燕国。
English: Le Yi led the army into Linyi, the capital of Qi, and scavenged treasures and heavy ritual implements, which were transported back to Yan.

古文：燕王亲至济上劳军，行赏飨士，封乐毅为昌国君，遂使留徇齐城之未下者。
现代文：燕王亲自到济水上游去慰劳军队，颁行奖赏，犒劳将士；燕王封乐为昌国君，让他留在齐国进攻其余未克的城市。
English: King Yan himself went to the upper reaches of the Jishui River to console the troops, award prizes, and reward the soldiers for their hard work; King Yan designated Le as the ruler of Chang and let him stay in Qi to attack the remaining cities.

古文：齐王出亡之卫，卫君辟宫舍之，称臣而共具。
现代文：齐王出逃到卫国，卫国国君让出宫殿给他居住，向他称臣并供给日常用度。
English: King Qi fled to the old country, and the king of the old country gave him the palace to live in, praised him as a vassal, and provided him with daily necessities.

古文：齐王不逊，卫人侵之。齐王去奔邹、鲁，有骄色，邹、鲁弗内，遂走莒。
现代文：齐王却傲慢不逊，卫国人气愤地攻击他，齐王又出奔到邹、鲁国，仍旧面有骄色；邹、鲁两地闭门不纳，齐王又出奔莒地。
English: However, King Qi was arrogant and insolent, and the defenders of the country attacked him angrily. King Qi fled to the provinces of Shandong and Shandong, still with a proud look on his face. Shandong and Shandong closed their doors to him, and King Qi fled to Shandong.

古文：楚使淖齿将兵救齐，因为齐相。
现代文：楚国派淖齿率军前来救援齐王，被任命为齐相。
English: The State of Chu sent Zang Jian and his army to rescue King Qi, and he was appointed as the leader of Qi.

古文：淖齿欲与燕分齐地，乃执湣王而数之曰： 千乘、博昌之间，方数百里，雨血沾衣，王知之乎？ 
现代文：淖齿却想与燕国瓜分齐国，于是抓住齐王数说他的罪过： 千乘、博昌之间的方圆几百里地，下血雨浸湿衣服，你齐王知道吗？ 
English: However, Hao Jian wanted to divide Qi with Yan Guo, so he caught Qi Wangqi and said that he was guilty: There are hundreds of miles between Qianren and Bochang, and the rain of blood soaked his clothes, do you know that, Qi Wangqi?

古文：曰： 知之。 
现代文：齐王回答： 知道。 
English: Zhang Qing said: I really understand this.

古文： 赢、博之间，地坼及泉，王知之乎？ 
现代文： 嬴、博之间，大地崩塌，泉水上涌，你齐王知道吗？ 
English: Do you, King Qi, know that the earth will collapse and springs will gush forth between the mountains and plains?

古文：曰： 知之。 
现代文：回答： 知道。 
English: Zhang Qing said: I really understand this.

古文： 有人当阙而哭者，求之不得，去则闻其声，王知之乎？ 曰： 知之。 
现代文： 有人堵着宫门哭泣，却不见人影，离开时又音响可闻，齐王你知道吗？ 回答： 知道。 
English: Someone blocked the palace gate and wept, but no one was seen, and the sound system could be heard as they left. King Qi, do you know? Answer: I know.

古文：淖齿曰： 天雨血沾衣者，天以告也；地坼及泉者，地以告也；有人当阙而哭者，人以告也。
现代文：淖齿说： 天降血雨，是上天警告你；地崩泉涌，是大地警告你；人堵着宫门哭，是人心在警告你。
English: "The heavens are warning you with the rain of blood falling from the sky, the earth is warning you with the gushing of springs, and the hearts of people are warning you with weeping at the gates of the palace," said Fang Fang.

古文：天、地、人皆告矣，而王不知诫焉，何得无诛！ 
现代文：天、地、人都警告，而你却不知改悔，你还想不死吗！ 
English: Heaven, earth, and man all warned you, yet you did not repent. Do you still want to die?

古文：遂弑王于鼓里。
现代文：于是在鼓里这个地方将齐王处死。
English: Therefore, Qi Wang was executed at this place in Guli.

古文：荀子论之曰：国者，天下之利势也。
现代文：荀况论之曰：国家，集中了天下的利益和权势。
English: According to the state of affairs theory, the country concentrates the world's interests and power.

古文：得道以持之，则大安也，大荣也，积美之源也。
现代文：有道行的人主持，可以得到大的安乐，大的荣耀，成为幸福的源泉。
English: If it is presided over by a practitioner of Taoism, it can bring great happiness, great glory, and become a source of happiness.

古文：不得道以持之，则大危也，大累也，有之不如无之。及其綦也，索为匹夫，不可得也。
现代文：无道行的人主持，却带来大的危险，大的拖累，有君王的地位还不如没有；等到形势极度恶化，他即使想当一个普通老百姓，也做不到了。
English: It is a great danger and a great burden to be presided over by an impious person, and it is better to have the status of a king than not; when the situation gets extremely worse, even if he wants to be an ordinary commoner, he cannot do it.

古文：齐湣、宋献是也。
现代文：齐王、宋康王便是如此。
English: This was the case with King Qi and King Song Kang.

古文：故用国者义立而王，信立而霸，权谋立而亡。
现代文：所以治理国家的君主如果提倡礼义，就可以称王，树立信誉就可以称霸，玩弄权术则必然灭亡。
English: Therefore, if the monarch who governs the country advocates etiquette and righteousness, he can be called a king. If he establishes credibility, he can be called a ruler. If he plays with power, he will inevitably perish.

古文：挈国以呼礼义也，而无以害之。
现代文：领导国家提倡礼义，就无人可以加害于他。
English: When the leader of a country advocates propriety, no one can harm him.

古文：行一不义，杀一无罪，而得天下，仁者不为也。
现代文：即使做一件坏事、杀一个无辜的人便可以得到天下，仁爱的人也不会去干。
English: Even if doing a bad thing, killing an innocent person, can gain the world, a benevolent person will not do it.

古文：擽然扶持心国，且若是其固也。
现代文：君主守定意志，维护国家，坚如磐石，以此礼待他人，就可以产生众多的仁人志士。
English: Monarchs are rock-solid when it comes to sticking to their word and protecting their country. Treating others with respect in this way can produce many benevolent people.

古文：之所与为之者之人，则举义士也；之所以为布陈于国家刑法者，则举义法也；主之所极然，帅群臣而首向之者，则举义志也。
现代文：以此条陈布置国家刑事法律，就可以制定出良好的法律。君主极力如此主张，再率领群臣以身作则，就可以树立起礼义的风尚。
English: If the national criminal law is arranged according to this principle, it will be possible to formulate good laws. If the monarch strongly advocates this, and then leads the courtiers to lead by example, it will be possible to establish a culture of etiquette.

古文：如是，则下仰上以义矣，是綦定也。綦定而国定，国定而天下定。
现代文：这样，属下能够以礼义纲常尊崇上司，统治基础就稳定了，基础稳定国家便安定，国家安定则天下平定。
English: In this way, subordinates can always respect their superiors with etiquette, and the ruling foundation will be stable. If the foundation is stable, the country will be stable, and if the country is stable, the world will be stable.

古文：故曰：以国济义，一日而白，汤、武是也。是所谓义立而王也。
现代文：因此说：用国家的权力推行礼义，一天就可以做到众人皆知，商汤王、周武王便是如此，即所谓的以提倡礼义而称王。
English: Therefore, it is said that using the power of the state to promote etiquette can make it known to everyone in one day. This is the case of Shang Tang Wang and Zhou Wu Wang, that is, the so-called promotion of etiquette to become a king.

古文：德虽未至也，义虽未济也，然而天下之理略奏矣，刑赏已诺信乎天下矣，臣下晓然皆知其可要也。
现代文：即使道德还未达到完美，礼义也没有做到完善，然而已经可以掌握治理天下的大致条理。做到赏罚分明，取得天下的信任，使臣属清楚地看到它的重要性。
English: Even if morality has not yet reached perfection, and etiquette has not been perfected, it is already possible to grasp the general structure of governing the world, to make rewards and punishments clear, to gain the trust of the world, and to make subordinates clearly see its importance.

古文：政令已陈，虽睹利败，不欺其民；约结已定，虽睹利败，不欺其与。
现代文：政令一经颁布，不管成功还是失败，都不欺骗百姓；条约已经缔结，不管有利还是无利，都不欺骗合作的邻国。
English: Once the decree is issued, whether it succeeds or fails, it will not deceive the people; the treaty has been concluded, whether it is beneficial or not, it will not deceive the neighboring countries.

古文：如是，则兵劲城固，敌国畏之；国一綦明，与国信之。
现代文：这样，才能军队强劲，城池坚固，使敌对国家畏惧。国家的方针一贯而明确，友邦就予以信任。
English: Only in this way can the army be strong, the city be solid, and the hostile country be feared. The country's policy is consistent and clear, and the friendly country is trusted.

古文：虽在僻陋之国，威动天下，五伯是也。是所谓信立而而霸也。
现代文：即使是偏僻的小国，也可以威震天下。春秋时期的齐、晋、宋、秦、楚五霸主便是如此，即所谓的以树立信誉而称霸。
English: Even a small country in the middle of nowhere can dominate the world. This was the case with the five overlords of Qi, Jin, Song, Qin, and Chu in the Spring and Autumn Period, that is, the so-called domination by establishing credibility.

古文：挈国以呼功利，不务张其义，齐其信，唯利之求；内则不惮诈其民而求小利焉，外则不惮诈其与而求大利焉。
现代文：带领国家追逐功利，不申张正义，不遵守信用，唯利是图；对内不惜为了一点小利去欺骗人民，对外为了追求大的利益不怕欺骗友邦。
English: He leads the country in the pursuit of utilitarianism, does not advocate justice, does not abide by trust, and seeks only profit. At home, he does not hesitate to deceive the people for a little profit, and abroad, he is not afraid to deceive friendly countries in pursuit of great interests.

古文：内不修正其所以有，然常欲人之有，如是，则臣下百姓莫不以诈心待其上矣。
现代文：对内不好好治理自己已有的东西，却常常觊觎别人的成果。这样，臣下百姓就无不以奸诈之心对待上司。
English: They don't manage what they already have well internally, but often covet the achievements of others. In this way, their subordinates treat their superiors with a treacherous heart.

古文：上诈其下，下诈其上，则是上下析也。
现代文：上欺下，下瞒上，于是上下关系分崩离析。
English: The upper cheats the lower, and the lower cheats the upper, so the relationship between the upper and the lower falls apart.

古文：如是，则敌国轻之，与国疑之，权谋日行而国不免危削，綦之而亡，齐湣、薛公是也。
现代文：这样，便使敌对国家轻视，友好国家不信任，权术泛滥而国家日益削弱，走向极端，终于灭亡，齐王、孟尝君便是如此。
English: In this way, the hostile countries are despised, the friendly countries are distrusted, the power and technology are rampant, and the countries are increasingly weakened, go to extremes, and finally perish. This is the case of King Qi and Meng Yijun.

古文：故用强齐，非以修礼义也，非以本政教也，非以一天下也，绵绵常以结引驰外为务。
现代文：齐王要强大齐国，不去提倡礼义，不去修明政治，不去统一天下的思想，只是成年累月地骑马在外面征战。
English: King Qi wanted a strong and unified country, but he didn't advocate etiquette, didn't clarify politics, and didn't unify the country's ideology. He just rode out to fight on horseback for months on end.

古文：故强，南足以破楚，西足以诎秦，北足以败燕，中足以举宋。
现代文：所以齐国强大的时候，向南能够打败楚国，向西能够逼迫秦国，向北可以战胜燕国，在中原能够征服宋国。
English: Therefore, when the State of Qi was strong, it could defeat the State of Chu to the south, force the State of Qin to the west, defeat the State of Yan to the north and conquer the State of Song in the Central Plains.

古文：及以燕、赵起而攻之，若振槁然，而身死国亡，为天下大戮，后世言恶则必稽焉。
现代文：然而燕国、赵国一旦群起而攻齐，便如摧枯拉朽。齐王身死国亡，成为天下共同声讨的对象，后世提起暴君总要举他为例。
English: However, as soon as the Yan and Zhao kingdoms attacked together, they were destroyed. The death of King Qi became the object of the world's common criticism, and future generations would always cite him as an example of a tyrant.

古文：是无他故焉，唯其不由礼义而由权谋也。
现代文：这不是别的原因，就是因为他不崇尚礼义而沉溺权术。
English: This is for no other reason than that he does not respect propriety and indulges in power games.

古文：三者，明主之所谨择也，仁人之所务白也。
现代文：以上三种，贤明的君王必须慎重地加以抉择，仁人志士必须认真地予以辨明。
English: Of the above three, a wise ruler must carefully choose, and a benevolent person must carefully discern.

古文：善择者制人，不善择者人制之。
现代文：善于抉择的人可以控制别人，不善于抉择的人则被别人控制。
English: Those who are good at making decisions can control others, while those who are not good at making decisions are controlled by others.

古文：乐毅闻昼邑人王蠋贤，令军中环画邑三十里无入。使人请蠋，蠋谢不往。
现代文：乐毅听说昼邑人王贤良，下令围绕昼邑三十里周围不得进入军队，又派人请王，王辞谢不去。
English: When Le Yi heard that Wang Xianliang, a person from Daying Town, had ordered that the army should not enter the thirty-mile area around Daying Town, he also sent someone to ask Wang to leave, but Wang declined.

古文：燕人曰： 不来，吾且屠画邑！ 
现代文：燕国人威胁说： 你要是不来，我们就在昼邑屠城！ 
English: The Yan people threatened: "If you don't come, we will slaughter you in the afternoon!"

古文：蠋曰： 忠臣不事二君，烈女不更二夫。
现代文：王叹息说： 忠臣不事二君，烈女不更二夫。
English: The king sighed and said, "A loyal subject is not worth two princes, nor is a virtuous woman worth two husbands."

古文：国破君亡，吾不能存，而又欲劫之以兵，吾与其不义而生，不若死！ 
现代文：国破君亡，我不能使崐之保存，而自身又被燕人逼迫，我与其苟且偷生，不如一死！ 
English: The country is ruined, the king is dead, I can't save the dragonfly, and I'm being persecuted by the swallows, I'd rather die than live!

古文：遂经其颈于树枝，自奋绝脰而死。
现代文：于是把脖子系在树枝上，纵身一跃，自尽而死。
English: So he tied his neck to a tree branch, jumped to his death, and committed suicide.

古文：燕师乘胜长驱，齐城皆望风奔溃。
现代文：燕国军队乘胜长驱直入，齐国大小城市望风崩溃。
English: Yan's army drove straight in, taking advantage of the victory, and the large and small cities of Qi collapsed.

古文：乐毅修整燕军，禁止侵掠，求齐之逸民，显而礼之。
现代文：乐毅整肃燕军纪律，禁止侵掠，寻访齐国的隐士高人，致以荣誉礼待。
English: Le Yi rectified the discipline of the Yan army, prohibited invasion and plunder, and sought out the hermit Gao Ren of Qi, and treated him with honor and courtesy.

古文：宽其赋敛，除其暴令，修其旧政，齐民喜悦。
现代文：还放宽人民赋税，革除苛刻的法令，恢复齐国旧的良好传统，齐国人民都十分喜悦。
English: He also relaxed the people's taxes, eliminated harsh laws and regulations, and restored the good old traditions of Qi. The people of Qi are very pleased.

古文：乃遣左军渡胶东、东莱；前军循太山以东至海，略琅邪；右军循河、济，屯阿、鄄以连魏师；后军旁北海以抚千乘；中军据临淄而镇齐都。
现代文：乐毅于是调左军在胶东东莱渡过胶水；前军沿泰山脚下向东到达渤海，进攻琅邪；右军循着黄河、济水而下，屯扎在东阿、鄄城，与魏国军队相连；后军沿北海镇抚千乘，中军占据临淄，镇守齐国国都。
English: Le Yi then transferred the left army to cross the glue in Jiaodong Donglai; the front army reached the Bohai Sea along the foot of Mount Tai to the east and attacked the evil; the right army followed the Yellow River and Jishui and settled in Donga and Shicheng, connected with the Wei army; the rear army went along the North Sea to the town of Fuxian, the Chinese army occupied Linyi and guarded the capital of Qi.

古文：祀桓公、管仲于郊，表贤者之闾，封王蠋之墓。
现代文：他还亲至城郊祭祀齐桓公、管仲，表彰齐国的贤良人才，赐封修治王的陵墓。
English: He also went to the outskirts of the city to offer sacrifices to Qi Huan and Guanzhong, to commend the virtuous people of Qi, and to seal the mausoleum of King Shuji.

古文：齐人食邑于燕者二十馀君，有爵位于蓟者百有馀人。
现代文：经过收敛人心，齐国人接受燕国所封君号、领取俸禄的有二十余人；接受燕国爵位的有一百多人。
English: After the convergence of people's hearts, there are more than 20 people in Qi who accept the title of Yan Guo and receive salaries; more than 100 people accept the title of Yan Guo.

古文：六月之间，下齐七十馀城，皆为郡县。
现代文：六个月之内，燕军攻下齐国七十余座城，都设立郡县治理。
English: Within six months, Yan's army captured more than 70 cities in Qi, all of which set up county governance.

古文：秦王、魏王、韩王会于京师。
现代文：秦王、魏王、韩王在周朝京师相会。
English: The kings of Qin, Wei and Han met in the capital of the Zhou Dynasty.

古文：赧王中三十二年
现代文：赧王三十二年
English: In the thirty-second year of King Gong

古文：秦、赵会于穰。
现代文：秦国、赵国在穰地举行会议。
English: Qin and Zhao held a meeting in Handan.

古文：秦拔魏安城，兵至大梁而还。
现代文：秦国攻克魏国安城，一直打到魏国首都大梁才退回。
English: Qin conquered Wei Guoancheng and did not retreat until the capital of Wei, Daliang.

古文：齐淖齿之乱，湣王子法章变名姓为莒太史敫家佣。
现代文：齐国发生淖齿杀王之乱时，齐王的儿子田法章改名易姓躲到莒地太史敫家做雇工。
English: When the War of the King of Qi broke out in Qi, the son of the King of Qi, Tian Fangzhang, changed his name and surname to hide and work as a hired laborer in the family of Taishi Reng of Qi.

古文：太史敫女奇法章状貌，以为非常人，怜而常窃衣食之，因与私通。
现代文：太史敫的女儿惊奇田法章的像貌伟岸，认为不是普通人的气质，便可怜他，常常私下送给他衣服和食物，久而久之，两人已暗中结为夫妻。
English: Too Shi Yan's daughter was surprised by Tian Fa Zhang's resemblance to Gao Weigang. She thought it was not an ordinary person's temperament, so she pitied him and often gave him clothes and food in private. Over time, the two secretly became husband and wife.

古文：王孙贾从湣王，失王之处，其母曰： 汝朝出而晚来，则吾倚门而望；汝暮出而不还，则吾倚闾而望。
现代文：王孙贾是齐王的随臣，乱中找不到主子的下落，他的母亲说： 你早出晚归，我倚着大门盼望；你夜出不回，我靠着街门等待。
English: Wang Sunjia was a retainer of King Qi. During the turmoil, the whereabouts of his master could not be found. His mother said, "You leave early and return late. I lean on the gate and hope. You leave at night and do not return. I wait by the street gate."

古文：汝今事王，王走，汝不知其处，汝尚何归焉！ 
现代文：你如今服侍君王，君王离开了，你却不知道他的下落，你还回来做什么！ 
English: You are now serving the king, the king has left and you don't know where he is, what are you doing back!

古文：王孙贾乃入市中呼曰： 淖齿乱齐国，杀湣王。
现代文：王孙贾便来到集市振臂高呼： 淖齿搞乱齐国，杀害王。
English: Wang Sunjia then came to the bazaar, waving his arms and chanting: "The gnome has disrupted Qi Province and killed the king."

古文：欲与我诛之者袒右！ 
现代文：愿意和我一起去干掉他的就把右臂伸出来！ 
English: If you want to go with me and kill him, stick out your right arm!

古文：市人从者四百人，与攻淖齿，杀之。
现代文：集市上的人有四百多人随他前去攻击淖齿，把他杀掉了。
English: More than four hundred people in the market followed him to attack the badger and kill him.

古文：于是齐亡臣相与求湣王子，欲立之。
现代文：于是齐国的大臣们四下搜寻齐王的儿子，想立他为王。
English: As a result, the ministers of the State of Qi searched far and wide for the son of the King of Qi and wanted to make him king.

古文：法章惧其诛己，久之乃敢自言，遂立以为齐王，保莒城以拒燕，布告国中曰： 王已立在莒矣！ 
现代文：田法章害怕人们加害自己，过了很久才敢自己说明身份，于是大家拥立他为齐王，坚守莒城以抵抗燕军。在全国宣布： 齐王已经在莒地即位了！ 
English: Tian Fa Zhang was afraid that people would harm him, and it took him a long time before he dared to reveal his identity. Therefore, everyone supported him as the King of Qi and held fast to the city of Handan to resist Yan's army. He announced to the whole country: The King of Qi has ascended the throne in Handan!

古文：赵王得楚和氏璧，秦昭王欲之，请易以十五城。
现代文：赵王得到楚国宝玉和氏璧，秦昭王想要，愿意用十五座城来交换。
English: King Zhao got the treasure of Chu, the jade and gems. King Qin Zhao wanted and was willing to exchange fifteen cities.

古文：赵王欲勿与，畏秦强，欲与之，恐见欺。
现代文：赵王想不给他，又畏惧秦国的强大；给他，又怕被秦王欺骗。
English: Whether Zhao Wang wanted to give it to him or not, he was afraid of the powerful Qin State; if he gave it to him, he was afraid of being deceived by Qin Wang.

古文：以问蔺相如，对曰： 秦以城求璧而王不许，曲在我矣；我与之璧而秦不与我城，则曲在秦。
现代文：便征求蔺相如的意见。蔺相如回答说： 秦国用城来换宝玉而大王不允许，是我们理屈。而我们给他宝玉，他不给我们城，是秦国理屈。
English: He then sought the opinion of Gong Xiangru. Gong Xiangru replied, "It is our theory that Qin used the city to exchange for gems, but the great king did not allow it. And we gave him gems, but he did not give us the city, it is the theory of Qin."

古文：均之二策，宁许以负秦。
现代文：衡量两种办法，我看宁可让秦国在道义上有负于我们。
English: Between the two methods, I think it is better to let Qin be morally inferior to us.

古文：臣愿奉璧而往；使秦城不入，臣请完璧而归之。 
现代文：我愿护持宝玉前去，假如秦国不交出城来，我一定能完璧归赵。 
English: I am willing to go forward with the treasure. If Qin does not surrender the city, I will definitely be able to return to Zhao.

古文：赵王遣之。
现代文：赵王便派他前往。
English: Zhao Wang then sent him to Mt.

古文：相如至秦，秦王无意偿赵城。相如乃以诈绐秦王，复取璧，遣从者怀之，间行归赵，而以身待命于秦。
现代文：蔺相如到了秦国，看出秦王并无真意用城来换赵国的宝玉，就哄骗秦王，取回和氏璧，派随从藏在怀中，从小道潜回赵国，而他自己留下来听任秦王的处置。
English: When Yuxiangru arrived in Qin, he saw that the Qin king had no real intention of exchanging the city for the precious stones of Zhao. He tricked the Qin king, retrieved the Wuzhi Bi, sent a follower to hide it in his bosom, and sneaked back to Zhao from the trail, while he himself remained at the disposal of the Qin king.

古文：秦王以为贤而弗诛，礼而归之。
现代文：无奈之际，秦王只好称赞蔺相如的贤能，不但不杀他，反而以礼相待，送他回国。
English: Faced with a hopeless situation, King Qin had no choice but to praise the virtuousness of Gong Xiangru. Instead of killing him, he treated him with courtesy and sent him back to China.

古文：赵王以相如为上大夫。
现代文：蔺相如回到赵国，赵王封他为上大夫。
English: Gong Xiangru returned to Zhao Province, and Zhao Wang appointed him as the chief doctor.

古文：卫嗣君薨，子怀君立。
现代文：卫国国君卫嗣君去世，其子即位为卫怀君。
English: Emperor Weizong died and his son Emperor Weihuai ascended to the throne.

古文：嗣君好察微隐，县令有发褥而席敝者，嗣君闻之，乃赐之席。
现代文：卫嗣君在位时喜好侦察别人的崐隐私。有个县令曾掀开褥子，露出下面的破席子。卫嗣君听说了，便赏赐给他一领新席。
English: When he was on the throne, he liked to spy on other people's private lives. One county magistrate once lifted the curtain to reveal a broken seat underneath. When he heard about it, he rewarded him with a new seat.

古文：令大惊，以君为神。
现代文：县令大惊，以为国君事如神。
English: The county magistrate was shocked, thinking that the sovereign was a god.

古文：又使人过关市，赂之以金，既而召关市，问有客过与汝金，汝回遣之，关市大恐。
现代文：卫嗣君还曾派人经过关卡，用金钱贿赂掌关的官员。事后把掌关官员召来，指令说有客人过关时给了你金了，你快退回去。掌关官员十分惊恐。
English: Weizikun had also sent someone through the checkpoint to bribe the official in charge of the checkpoint with money. Afterwards, he called the official in charge of the checkpoint and ordered him to say that a guest had given you money when passing through the checkpoint, and that you should quickly go back. The official in charge of the checkpoint was very frightened.

古文：又爱泄姬，重如耳，而恐其因爱重以壅己也，乃贵薄疑以敌如耳，尊魏妃以偶泄姬，曰： 以是相参也。 
现代文：卫嗣君还宠爱泄姬，器重臣子如耳，但又怕这两人因受到宠爱器重而敢于欺瞒自己，于是提升另一个臣子薄疑来与如耳匹敌，尊崇魏妃来与泄姬分庭抗礼，说： 以此可互相参列比较。 
English: Weizhikun also favored Lue Ji, the most important vassal, but he was afraid that the two of them would dare to deceive themselves because they were favored, so he promoted another vassal to match Lue Ji, and revered Wei Fei to match Lue Ji. He said, "In this way, they can be compared with each other."

古文：荀子论之曰：成侯、嗣君，聚敛计数之君也，未及取民也。
现代文：荀况论曰：卫成侯和卫嗣君，都是斤斤计较的小器量国君，没有做到招揽民心。
English: The situation theory says: Wei Cheng Hou and Wei Zhi Jun, are both small-scale national leaders, who have not been able to attract the hearts of the people.

古文：子产，取民者也，未及为政也。
现代文：郑国大臣子产，能招揽民心，但没有做到为政精明。
English: Zheng Guojun, the Minister of the State of Zheng, was able to win the hearts and minds of the people, but he failed to be a shrewd politician.

古文：管仲，为政者也，未及修礼也。
现代文：齐国大臣管仲，能为政精明，但没有做到倡导礼义。
English: Minister Qizhong Guanzhong was able to be shrewd in politics, but he did not succeed in advocating propriety.

古文：故修礼者王，为政者强，取民者安，聚敛者亡。
现代文：由此而见，倡导礼义的人才能称王，治政精明的人可以使国家富强，招揽民心的人可以使国家安定，而搜刮者只能灭亡。
English: From this, it can be seen that only those who advocate propriety and righteousness can become kings, those who are shrewd in governance can make the country rich and strong, those who can win the hearts and minds of the people can make the country stable, and those who are scroungers can only perish.

古文：赧王中三十三年
现代文：赧王三十三年
English: The 33rd Year of the Monkey King

古文：秦伐赵，拔两城。
现代文：秦国攻打赵国，夺取了两座城池。
English: Qin attacked Zhao and captured two cities.

古文：赧王中三十四年
现代文：赧王三十四年
English: In the thirty-fourth year of King Min

古文：秦伐赵，拔石城。
现代文：秦国又攻打赵国，夺取石城。
English: Qin also attacked Zhao and captured Shicheng.

古文：秦穰侯复为丞相。
现代文：秦穰侯魏冉再次担任丞相。
English: Qin Shi Hou and Wei Ran again served as prime ministers.

古文：楚欲与齐、韩共伐秦，因欲图周。
现代文：楚国想联合齐国、韩国共同进攻秦国，顺便灭掉周王朝。
English: Chu wanted to unite with Qi and Korea to jointly attack Qin, thereby eliminating the Zhou Dynasty.

古文：王使东周武公谓楚令尹昭子曰： 周不可图也。 
现代文：周王派东周的武公对楚国任令尹职的昭子说： 周朝可不能算计。 
English: King Zhou of Eastern Zhou sent Wu Gong to Akiko, who had been appointed by the State of Chu to the post of Yin, saying: The Zhou Dynasty cannot be counted on.

古文：昭子曰： 乃图周，则无之；虽然，何不可图？ 武公曰： 西周之地，绝长补短，不过百里。
现代文：昭子说： 要说算计周朝，那是没有的事。尽管如此，我想问你，周朝为什么不能灭掉？ 武公回答： 西周现在的地盘，取长补短，也不过方圆一百里。
English: Akiko said, "To say that the Zhou Dynasty should be counted is not true. Nevertheless, I would like to ask you, why can't the Zhou Dynasty be eliminated?" Wu Gong replied, "The current territory of West Zhou is not more than a hundred miles in circumference.

古文：名为天下共主，裂其地不足以肥国，得其众不足以劲兵。
现代文：抢占这块地方并不足以使哪个国家富强，得到那里的百姓也不足以壮大军队。
English: Xi Zhou was reputed to be a monarch who was revered by all the princes of the world. In fact, it was not enough to occupy all of his land to make the country strong, and it was not enough to occupy all of his people to strengthen the military.

古文：虽然，攻之者名为弑君。
现代文：但西周却有天下共同拥戴的宗主名义，谁攻打它，谁就是犯上作乱。
English: However, West Zhou has the name of the patriarch, which is held in common by the whole world. Anyone who attacks it is guilty of creating a disturbance.

古文：然而犹有欲攻之者，见祭器在焉故也。
现代文：尽管如此，还是有人想去攻占它，是何原因呢？
English: Despite this, there are still people who want to conquer it. Why?

古文：夫虎肉臊而兵利身，人犹攻之；若使泽中之麋蒙虎之皮，人之攻之也必万倍矣。
现代文：就是因为古代传下来的祭祀重器在那里。老虎的肉腥臊而又有尖牙利爪，仍有人猎取它；山林中的麋鹿没有爪牙之利，假如再给它披上一张诱人的虎皮，人们猎取它的欲望一定会增加万倍。
English: That's because the heavy ritual tools handed down from ancient times are still there. Tigers are still hunted for their meaty beaks and sharp claws; elk in the mountains and forests are not so easy to catch. If you put an attractive tiger skin on it, people's desire to hunt it will surely increase a thousandfold.

古文：裂楚之地，足以肥国；诎楚之名，足以尊主。
现代文：楚国的情形正是这样，分割楚国的领土，足以使自己富庶；讨伐楚国的名义，又足以有尊崇周王室的声名。
English: Possessing the land of Chu is enough to make the country strong; denouncing the reputation of Chu is enough to make the monarch noble.

古文：今子欲诛残天下之共主，居三代之传器，器南，则兵至矣。 
现代文：楚国要是残害了天下共同拥戴的周王朝，占有了夏、商、周三代相传的礼器，你刚把礼器运回南方，各国证讨的大兵也就到了！ 
English: If the State of Chu were to destroy the Zhou Dynasty, which is held in common by the whole world, and take possession of the ceremonial objects handed down from generation to generation by the Xia, Shang, and San dynasties, no sooner would you have transported the ceremonial objects back to the south than the soldiers from various countries would arrive to collect the certificates!

古文：于是楚计辍不行。
现代文：令尹昭子觉得言之有理，于是放弃了楚国原来的打算。
English: As a result, the state of Chu abandoned its original plan.

古文：赧王中三十五年
现代文：赧王三十五年
English: Thirty-five years of King Gong

古文：秦白起败赵军，斩首二万，取代光狼城。
现代文：秦国大将白起打败赵国军队，杀死二万人，夺取代地光狼城。
English: The general of Qin State defeated the army of Zhao State in vain, killed twenty thousand people, and took the place of Diiguang Wolf City.

古文：又使司马错发陇西兵，因蜀攻楚黔中，拔之。
现代文：秦国又派司马错调动陇西军队，从蜀地进攻楚国黔中郡，予以攻占。
English: Qin also sent Sima Luo to mobilize the Shaanxi army to attack and occupy Luzhong County of Chu from Shudi.

古文：楚献汉北及上庸地。
现代文：楚国被迫献出汉水以北及上庸地方。
English: Chu was forced to give up the areas north of Hanshui and Shangyong.

古文：赧王中三十六年
现代文：赧王三十六年
English: In the thirty-sixth year of King Min

古文：秦白起伐楚，取鄢、邓、西陵。
现代文：秦国大将白起攻打楚国，占领鄢、邓、西陵等地。
English: The general of Qin attacked the state of Chu in vain and occupied the cities of Handan, Deng and Xiling.

古文：秦王使使者告赵王，愿为好会于河外渑池。
现代文：秦王派使者通知赵王，愿意在黄河外的渑池和好相会。
English: King Qin sent an envoy to inform King Zhao that he was willing to meet him at Dianchi outside the Yellow River.

古文：赵王欲毋行，廉颇、蔺相如计曰： 王不行，示赵弱且怯也。 
现代文：赵王不想赴会，廉颇、蔺相如建议说： 大王若是不去，就显得赵国懦弱而又胆怯。 
English: Zhao Wang didn't want to go to the meeting, but Renpo and Yan Xiang suggested: "If the great king doesn't go, Zhao Guo will appear weak and timid.

古文：赵王遂行，相如从。
现代文：赵王于是决定前往，由蔺相如随行。
English: Zhao Wang then went to the meeting, as if he was accompanying.

古文：廉颇送至境，与王诀曰： 王行，度道里会遇之礼毕，还，不过三十日。三十日不还，则请立太子，以绝秦望。 
现代文：廉颇送到边境，与赵王告别时说： 大王此行，估计加上路程时间，到会议仪式全部结束，不超过三十天就会回来，如果超过三十天您还没有回来，请允许我们立太子为赵王，以断绝秦国的要挟念头。 
English: When Lianpo was sent to the border to bid farewell to King Zhao, he said: "Since the great king is on this trip, it is estimated that with the travel time, he will return no more than thirty days after all the meeting ceremonies are over. If you have not returned for more than thirty days, please allow us to appoint the crown prince as King Zhao, so as to cut off the threat of the Qin State.

古文：王许之。
现代文：赵王同意。
English: Zhao Wang agreed to his request.

古文：会于渑池。
现代文：渑池相会，秦王与赵王饮酒。
English: They meet at Dianchi Lake, and Qin Wang and Zhao Wang drink alcohol.

古文：王与赵王饮，酒酣，秦王请赵王鼓瑟，赵王鼓之。
现代文：酒兴之间，秦王请赵王表演鼓瑟，赵王便演奏了。
English: While drinking wine, Qin Wang asked Zhao Wang to play the drums, and Zhao Wang played.

古文：蔺相如复请秦王击缶，秦王不肯。
现代文：蔺相如也请秦王表演敲击瓦盆的音乐，秦王却不肯。
English: Zou Xiangru also asked Qin Wang to perform the music of knocking on the clay pot, but Qin Wang refused.

古文：相如曰： 五步之内，臣请得以颈血溅大王矣！ 
现代文：蔺相如厉色说道： 在五步之内，我就可以血溅大王！ 
English: The dragonfly said brightly, "Within five steps, I can make a blood splatter!"

古文：左右欲刃相如，相如张目叱之，左右皆靡。
现代文：秦王左右卫士想上前杀死蔺相如，蔺相如怒目喝斥，左右人都畏缩不敢行动。
English: The attendants wanted to kill him so much, so much that they cried out with eyes wide open. The attendants were so scared that they all retreated.

古文：王不怿，为一击缶。
现代文：秦王只好非常不情愿地敲了一下瓦盆。
English: Qin Wang reluctantly knocked on the earthenware pot.

古文：罢酒，秦终不能有加于赵。
现代文：直到酒宴结束，秦国始终不能对赵国加以非分之求。
English: Until the end of the banquet, Qin could not ask Zhao for anything.

古文：赵人亦盛为之备，秦不敢动。
现代文：再加上赵国人也早有军队戒备，秦国到底没敢轻举妄动。
English: In addition, the people of Zhao already had their army on alert, so Qin did not dare to act rashly.

古文：赵王归国，以蔺相如为上卿，位在廉颇之右。
现代文：赵王回国，加封蔺相如为上卿之职，地位在大将廉颇之上。
English: When King Zhao returned to China, he was given the title of Shangqing (上卿), which was higher than that of General Renpo.

古文：廉颇曰： 我为赵将，有攻城野战之功。蔺相如素贱人，徒以口舌而位居我上。吾羞，不忍为之下！ 
现代文：廉颇不满地说： 我作为赵国大将，有攻城野战之功，蔺相如原不过是下层小民，只以能说善辩而位居我之上，我实在感到羞耻，忍不下这口气！ 
English: Disgusted and dissatisfied, he said, "I, as the general of Zhao Guo, have the merit of attacking the city and the field, but I am still just a low-class commoner, and I am only ranked above me because I can speak well. I really feel ashamed, I can't bear it!

古文：宣言曰： 我见相如，必辱之！ 
现代文：便宣称： 我遇到蔺相如，一定要羞辱他一番！ 
English: He then declared: "I have met my match, I must humiliate him the most!"

古文：相如闻之，不肯与会；每朝，常称病，不欲争列。
现代文：蔺相如听说后，不愿意和他遇见。每逢上朝，常常称病，不和廉颇去争排列顺序。
English: After hearing about him, Yan Xiangru did not want to meet him. Whenever he went to the temple, he often called in sick, and did not want to fight with Renpo about the order of the line-up.

古文：出而望见，辄引车避匿。
现代文：出门在外，远远望见廉颇的车驾，便令自己的车回避。
English: If you are out and about and see a car driven by a corrupt person in the distance, you will avoid driving your own car.

古文：其舍人皆以为耻。
现代文：蔺相如的门客下属都感到十分羞耻。
English: His henchmen, all of whom resemble him, are deeply ashamed.

古文：相如曰： 子视廉将军孰与秦王？ 
现代文：蔺相如对他们说： 你们看廉将军的威严比得上秦王吗？ 
English: Gong Xiangru said to them, "Do you think General Lian's majesty is comparable to that of King Qin?"

古文：曰： 不若。 
现代文：回答都说： 比不上。 
English: Fan Ye said: I am not as good as them.

古文：相如曰： 夫以秦王之威而相如廷叱之，辱其群臣。相如虽驽，独畏廉将军哉！
现代文：蔺相如说： 面对秦王那么大的威势，我都敢在他的朝廷上叱责他，羞辱他的群臣，我虽然无能，难道单单怕廉将军吗！
English: Gong Xiangru said: Faced with the great power of King Qin, I dare to scold him in his court and humiliate his ministers. Although I am incompetent, am I afraid of General Ren?

古文：顾吾念之，强秦之所以不敢加兵于赵者，徒以吾两人在也。
现代文：我是考虑到：强暴的秦国之所以还不敢大举进犯赵国，就是因为我和廉将军在。
English: I took into account that the reason why the violent Qin State did not dare to invade Zhao State in a big way was because I was with General Liang.

古文：今两虎共斗，其势不俱生。
现代文：我们两虎相争，必有一伤。
English: When two tigers fight, one must get hurt.

古文：吾所以为此者，先国家之急而后私仇也。 
现代文：我所以避让，是先考虑到国家的利益而后才去想个人的私怨啊！ 
English: That's why I'm avoiding concessions, considering the interests of the country before thinking about personal grudges!

古文：廉颇闻之，肉袒负荆至门谢罪，遂为刎颈之交。
现代文：廉颇听说了这番话十分惭愧，便赤裸着上身到蔺相如府上来负荆请罪，两人从此结为生死之交。
English: After hearing these words, Lian Bo was very ashamed, so he went to the emperor's residence bare-chested to apologize, and the two became friends for life and death.

古文：初，燕人攻安平，临淄市掾田单在安平，使其宗人皆以铁笼傅车轊。
现代文：当初，燕国军队攻打齐国安平时，临淄市的一个小官田单正在城中，他预先让家族人都用铁皮包上车轴头。
English: At the beginning, when Yan's army attacked Qi Guoanping, a small official in Linyi, Tian Shan, was in the city. He had his family members wrap the axle heads with iron sheets in advance.

古文：及城溃，人争门而出，皆以轊折车败，为燕所禽；独田单宗人以铁笼得免，遂奔即墨。
现代文：待到城破，人们争相涌出城门，都因为车轴互相碰断，车辆损坏难行，被燕军俘虏，只有田单一族因铁皮包裹车轴得以幸免，逃到了即墨。
English: By the time the city was breached, people were rushing to get out of the city gates, all because the axles had broken against each other, the vehicles were damaged and difficult to move, and they were captured by Yan's army. Only the Tianyong people were spared because the axles were wrapped in iron, and they fled to Zhimo.

古文：是时齐地皆属燕，独莒、即墨未下，乐毅及并右军、前军以围莒，左军、后军围即墨。
现代文：当时齐国大部分地区都被燕军占领，仅有莒城、即墨未沦陷。乐毅于是集中右军、前军包围莒城，集中左军、后军包围即墨。
English: At that time, most areas of Qi were occupied by Yan's army, only Lucheng, that is, Moxing, had not fallen. Therefore, Le Yi concentrated the right army and the front army to surround Lucheng, and concentrated the left army and the rear army to surround Moxing.

古文：即墨大夫出战而死。
现代文：即墨大夫出战身亡。
English: That is, Dr. Mo went to war and died.

古文：即墨人曰： 安平之战，田单宗人以铁笼得全，是多智习兵。 
现代文：即墨人士说： 安平之战，田单一族人因铁皮包轴得以保全，可见田单足智多谋，熟悉兵事。 
English: Those who have read it say: In the Anping War, the Tianyi people were saved by the iron-clad shaft, which shows that Tianyi was resourceful and familiar with military affairs.

古文：因共立以为将以拒燕。
现代文：于是共同拥立他为守将抵御燕军。
English: As a result, they jointly supported him as a defender against Yan's army.

古文：乐毅围二邑，期年不克，及令解围，各去城九里而为垒，令曰： 城中民出者勿获，困者赈之，使即旧业，以镇新民。 
现代文：乐毅围攻两城，一年未能攻克，便下令解除围攻，退至城外九里处修筑营垒，下令说： 城中的百姓出来不要抓捕他们，有困饿的还要赈济，让他们各操旧业，以安抚新占地区的人民。 
English: Le Yi besieged the two cities and failed to conquer them for a year. He then ordered the siege to be lifted and withdrew to a place nine miles outside the city to build a camp. He ordered: The people in the city should not come out to capture them, and those who are hungry should be helped, and let them each do their old business in order to appease the people in the newly occupied area.

古文：三年而犹未下。
现代文：过了三年，城还未攻下。
English: Three years later, the city has yet to be taken.

古文：或谗之于燕昭王曰： 乐毅智谋过人，伐齐，呼吸之间克七十馀城。
现代文：有人在燕昭王面前挑拨说： 乐毅智谋过人，进攻齐国，一口气攻克七十余城。
English: Someone said in front of King Yan Zhao: "Le Yi outsmarted others, attacked Qi, and conquered more than 70 cities in one breath.

古文：今不下者两城耳，非其力不能拔，所以三年不攻者，欲久仗兵威以服齐人，南面而王耳。
现代文：现在只剩两座城，不是他的兵力不能攻下，之所以三年不攻，就是他想倚仗兵威来收服齐国人心，自己好南面称王而已。
English: Now there are only two cities left. It's not that his army can't conquer them. The reason why he hasn't attacked for three years is that he wants to rely on his military power to win the hearts of the people of Qi, and he wants to be king of the south.

古文：今齐人已服，所以未发者，以其妻子在燕故也。
现代文：如今齐国人心已服，他之所以还不行动，就是因为妻子、儿子在燕国。
English: Now that the people of Qi have been convinced, the reason why he is still inactive is because his wife and son are in Yan.

古文：且齐多美女，又将忘其妻子。
现代文：况且齐国多有美女，他早晚将忘记妻子。
English: Besides, there are many beautiful women in Qi. Sooner or later, he will forget his wife.

古文：愿王图之！ 
现代文：希望大王早些防备！ 
English: Let's hope the king takes precautions sooner!

古文：昭王于是置酒大会，引言者而让之曰： 先王举国以礼贤者，非贪土地以遗子孙也。
现代文：燕昭王听罢下令设置盛大酒宴，拉出说此话的人斥责道： 先王倡导全国礼待贤明人才，并不是为了多得土地留给子孙。
English: Yan Zhao Wang listened and ordered a grand wine banquet to be set up, and the person who said this was reprimanded: The previous king advocated the national treatment of wise people, not in order to gain more land to leave to his descendants.

古文：遭所传德薄，不能堪命，国人不顺。齐为无道，乘孤国之乱以害先王。
现代文：他不幸遇到继承人缺少德行，不能完成大业，使国内人民怨愤不从，无道的齐国趁着我们国家动乱得以残害先王。
English: Unfortunately, he encountered a successor who lacked virtue and was unable to complete the great cause, which made the domestic people resentful and disobedient, and the lawless Qi State took advantage of the turmoil in our country to kill the former king.

古文：寡人统位，痛之入骨，故广延群臣，外招宾客，以求报仇。
现代文：我即位以后，对此痛心疾首，才广泛延请群臣，对外招揽宾客，以求报仇。
English: It was only after I ascended the throne that I became so distressed about this that I invited a large number of ministers and invited guests from abroad in order to seek revenge.

古文：其有成功者，尚欲与之同共燕国。
现代文：谁能使我成功，我愿意和他分享燕国大权。
English: Whoever can make me successful, I am willing to share the power of Yan Guo with him.

古文：今乐君亲为寡人破齐，夷其宗庙，报塞先仇，齐国固乐君所有，非燕之所得也。
现代文：现在乐毅先生为我大破齐国，平毁齐国宗庙，报却了旧仇，齐国本来就应归乐先生所有，不是燕国该得到的。
English: Now, Mr. Le Yi has destroyed Qi Province for me, razed the ancestral temple of Qi Province, and reported the old feud. Qi Province should have been owned by Mr. Le, not by Yan Province.

古文：乐君若能有齐，与燕并为列国，结欢同好，以抗诸侯之难，燕国之福，寡人之愿也。
现代文：乐先生如果能拥有齐国，与燕国成为平等国家，结为友好的邻邦，抵御各国的来犯，这正是燕国的福气、我的心愿啊！
English: If Mr. Le can have a country that is on a par with Yan's, become an equal country with Yan's, become a friendly neighbor, and resist the invaders of all countries, this is the blessing of Yan's country, my heart's desire!

古文：汝何敢言若此！ 
现代文：你怎么敢说这种话呢！ 
English: How dare you say such a thing!

古文：乃斩之。
现代文：于是将挑拨者处死。
English: and beheaded her.

古文：赐乐毅妻以后服，赐其子以公子之服；辂车乘马，后属百两，遣国相奉而致之乐毅，立乐毅为齐王。
现代文：又赏赐乐毅妻子以王后服饰，赏赐他的儿子以王子服饰，配备君王车驾乘马，及上百辆属车，派宰相侍奉送到乐毅那里，立乐毅为齐王。
English: He also rewarded Leyi's wife with a queen's attire, rewarded his son with a prince's attire, equipped him with a king's chariot to drive and ride a horse, and hundreds of chariots, and sent the prime minister's servants to Leyi, establishing Leyi as the king of Qi.

古文：乐毅惶恐不受，拜书，以死自誓。
现代文：乐毅十分惶恐，不敢接受，一再拜谢，写下辞书，并宣誓以死效忠燕王。
English: Le Yi was very frightened and did not dare to accept. He repeatedly thanked the king, wrote down a dictionary, and swore allegiance to King Yan with his life.

古文：由是齐人服其义，诸侯畏其信，莫敢复有谋者。
现代文：从此齐国人敬服燕国乐毅的德义，各国也畏惧他的信誉，没有再敢来算计的。
English: From then on, the people of Qi respected the virtue of Yan Guo Leyi, and all countries were afraid of his credibility, and did not dare to calculate.

古文：顷之，昭王薨，惠王立。
现代文：不久，燕昭王去世，燕惠王即位。
English: Soon after, Yan Zhao Wang died, and Yan Hui Wang ascended the throne.

古文：惠王自为太子时，尝不快于乐毅。
现代文：惠王从当太子时，就与乐毅有矛盾。
English: Hui Wang has been at odds with Le Yi since he was crown prince.

古文：田单闻之，乃纵反间于燕，宣言曰： 齐王已死，城之不拔者二耳。
现代文：田单听说了，便派人去燕国用反间计，散布说： 齐王已经死了，齐国仅有两座城未被攻克。
English: When Tian Shan heard about this, he took countermeasures and spread rumours in Yan's country, saying: King Qi has passed away, and the only cities that cannot be conquered are Shu and Mo.

古文：乐毅与燕新王有隙，畏诛而不敢归，以伐齐为名，实欲连兵南面王齐。
现代文：乐毅与燕国新王有矛盾，害怕加祸不敢回国，他现在以攻打齐国为名，实际想率领军队在齐国称王。
English: Le Yi had a conflict with the new king of Yan, and was afraid to return home for fear of aggravating the situation. He now wanted to lead the army to claim the throne in Qi in the name of attacking Qi.

古文：齐人未附，故且缓攻即墨以待其事。
现代文：齐国人没有归附，所以他暂缓进攻即墨，等待时机举行大事。
English: The hearts of the people of Qi have not yet been won over, so they are delaying the time, delaying the attack, so that they can wait for the time to be ripe to become king.

古文：齐人所惧，唯恐他将之来，即墨残矣。 
现代文：齐国人所怕的，是燕王派别的大将来，那样即墨就城破受害了。 
English: What the people of Qi were worried about was that Yan might send other generals, in which case, the city of Mocheng would undoubtedly be destroyed.

古文：燕王固已疑乐毅，得齐反间，乃使骑劫代将而召乐毅。
现代文：燕惠王本来就疑心乐毅，中了齐国的反间计，便派骑劫代替乐毅为大将，召他回国。
English: Yan Hui Wang was originally suspicious of Le Yi, and when he fell into the anti-foreign plot of Qi, he sent the cavalry to replace Le Yi as the general and called him back to the country.

古文：乐毅知王不善代之，遂奔赵。
现代文：乐毅知道燕王换将居心不良，于是投奔了赵国。
English: Le Yi knew that Yan Wang's change of generals was ill-intentioned, so he went to Zhao.

古文：燕将士由是愤惋不和。
现代文：从此，燕军将士都愤愤不平，内部不和。
English: Since then, the soldiers of Yan's army have been angry and discontented, and there has been internal discord.

古文：田单令城中人，食必祭其先祖于庭，飞鸟皆翔舞而下城中。燕人怪之，田单因宣言曰： 当有神师下教我。 
现代文：这时，田单下令让城中人吃饭时，先在庭院里祭祀祖先，四处飞鸟争吃祭饭都盘旋落到城中，燕军很是惊讶，田单又让人散布说： 会有天神派军师下界来帮助我们。 
English: At this time, Tian Shan ordered that when the people in the city were eating, they should first offer sacrifices to their ancestors in the courtyard. The flying birds that were competing for the sacrificial meal circled around and landed in the city. Yan Jun was very surprised, and Tian Shan had people spread the word, saying, "There will be a god who will send a military strategist from the lower realm to help us."

古文：有一卒曰： 臣可以为师乎？ 
现代文：有个士兵说： 我可以做神师吗？ 
English: One soldier said, "Can I be your drill sergeant?"

古文：因反走。
现代文：说罢起身便走。
English: After saying this, he walked away.

古文：田单起引还，坐东乡，师事之。卒曰： 臣欺君。 
现代文：田单急忙离座追回他，让他面东高坐，奉为神师。士兵说： 我犯上欺主了。 
English: Tian Shan hurriedly left his seat and chased after him, asking him to sit facing the east and serve as a priest. The soldier said, "I have sinned against the Lord."

古文：田单曰： 子勿言也。 
现代文：田单忙悄声嘱咐： 你不要说出去。 
English: Tian Shan hurriedly ordered in a whisper, "Don't speak out.

古文：因师之，每出约束，必称神师。
现代文：便以他为师，每当发布号令，都必称奉神师之命。
English: He took him as his teacher, and whenever he issued an order, he would say that he was following the orders of the priest.

古文：乃宣言曰： 吾唯惧燕军之劓所得齐卒，置之前行，即墨败矣！ 
现代文：田单又令人散布说： 我就怕燕军把齐国俘虏割去鼻子，作为前导，那样即墨城就完了！ 
English: Tian Shan said, "I am afraid that Yan Jun's army will cut off the noses of the Qi prisoners as a forerunner, and then Mocheng will be finished!"

古文：燕人闻之，如其言。
现代文：燕国人听说，果然这样做了。
English: When Yan Jun heard this, he acted accordingly.

古文：城中见降者尽劓，皆怒，坚守，唯恐见得。
现代文：城中守兵看到投降燕军的人都被割去鼻子，万分痛恨，决心坚守不降，唯恐被俘。
English: When the guards in the city saw that the people who had surrendered to Yan's army had all had their noses cut off, they absolutely hated it and were determined not to surrender for fear of being captured.

古文：单又纵反间，言： 吾惧燕人掘吾城外冢墓，可为寒心！ 
现代文：田单再使出反间计，说： 我怕燕军掘毁我们的城外坟墓，那样齐国人就寒心了。 
English: Tian Shan then resorted to a countermeasure, saying, "I am afraid that Yan's army will dig up our tombs outside the city. If that happens, the people of Qi will feel cold."

古文：燕军尽掘冢墓，烧死人。
现代文：燕军又中计，把城外坟墓尽行挖毁，焚烧死尸。
English: The Yan army also planned to dig up the graves outside the city and burn the dead bodies.

古文：齐人从城上望见，皆涕泣，共欲出战，怒自十倍。
现代文：齐国人从城上远远望见，都痛哭流涕，争相请求出战，怒气倍增。
English: The people of Qi, who could be seen far away from the city, were in tears, clamoring to go to war, and their anger was multiplying.

古文：田单知士卒之可用，乃身操版、锸，与士卒分功；妻妾编于行伍之间；尽散饮食飨士。
现代文：田单知道这时军士已经可以死战，于是带头拿起版、锹和士卒一起筑城，把自己的妻妾编进军队，还分发全部食品犒劳将士。
English: Tian Shan knew that at this time the sergeant could already fight to the death, so he took the lead in building the city together with the soldiers, organizing his wife and concubine into the army, and distributing all the food to the laborers.

古文：令甲卒皆伏，使老、弱、女子乘城，遣使约降于燕，燕军皆呼万岁。
现代文：他下令让披甲士兵都潜伏在城下，只以老弱人员、女子登城守卫，又派人去燕军中约定投降，燕军都欢呼万岁。
English: He ordered the armored soldiers to lurk under the city, and only the old and weak people and women to guard the city. He also sent someone to the Yan army to agree to surrender, and the Yan army all cheered.

古文：田单又收民金得千镒，令即墨富豪遗燕将，曰： 即降，愿无虏掠吾族家。 
现代文：田单在城中百姓中募集到一千镒金银，让即墨城的富豪送给燕军大将，说： 我们马上就投降。请不要抢劫掠夺我们的家族！ 
English: Tian Shan collected a thousand pieces of gold and silver from the people in the city, and asked the rich people in the city to give it to the general of the Yan army, saying: We will surrender immediately. Please do not rob and plunder our families!

古文：燕将大喜，许之。
现代文：燕国将军大喜，立刻应允。
English: The general of Yan's army was very pleased and agreed.

古文：燕军益懈。
现代文：燕军戒备更加松懈。
English: The alertness of Yan's army was more lax.

古文：田单乃收城中，得牛千馀，为绛缯衣，画以五采龙文，束兵刃于其角，而灌脂束苇于其尾，烧其端，凿城数十穴，夜纵牛，壮士五千人随其后。
现代文：田单在城中搜罗到一千余头牛，给牛披上大红绸衣，绘上五彩天龙花纹，在牛角上绑束尖刀，而在牛尾绑上灌好油脂的苇草，然后点燃，趁着夜色，从预先凿好的几十个城墙洞中，赶牛冲出，后而紧随着五千名壮士。
English: Tian Shan collected more than a thousand head of cattle in the city, draped the cattle in red silk, painted them with colorful dragon patterns, tied a bunch of sharp knives on the horns of the cattle, and tied oil-filled eucalyptus at the tail of the cattle, and then ignited. Taking advantage of the night, from dozens of pre-hewn holes in the city wall, the cattle rushed out, followed by five thousand strong men.

古文：牛尾热，怒而奔燕军。
现代文：牛尾部被火燎烧，都惊怒地奔向燕军大营。
English: The tail part of the cow was scorched by the fire, and they all ran to the camp of Yan's army in a rage.

古文：燕军大惊，视牛皆龙文，所触尽死伤。
现代文：燕军大惊失色，看到牛身上都是天龙花纹，碰到的不是死就是伤。
English: The Swallow's Army was shocked and disgraced. They saw that the cow's body was covered with dragon patterns. What they encountered was either death or injury.

古文：而城中鼓噪从之，老弱皆击铜器为声，声动天地。
现代文：加上城中敲锣打鼓齐声呐喊，老弱居民也敲击铜器助威，响声惊天动地。
English: In addition to the city beating gongs and drums in unison and shouting, the old and weak residents also beat copper utensils to cheer, the sound was earth-shattering.

古文：燕军大骇，败走。
现代文：燕国军队万分恐惧，纷纷败逃。
English: Yan's army was greatly alarmed and fled in defeat.

古文：齐人杀骑劫，追亡逐北，所过城邑皆叛燕，复为齐。
现代文：齐军趁乱杀死燕军大将骑劫，追杀逃亡的燕军，所经过的城邑都叛离燕国，再度归顺齐国。
English: The Qi army took advantage of the turmoil to kill the general of the Yan army, ride and rob, chase and kill the fleeing Yan army, and the towns they passed through all rebelled from the Yan country and returned to the Qi country.

古文：田单兵日益多，乘胜，燕日败亡，走至河上，而齐七十馀城皆复焉。
现代文：田单的军队越来越多，乘胜而入，燕军日日望风而逃，逃到黄河边，齐国失去的七十几座城都复归。
English: Tianlan's army increased more and more, taking advantage of the victory, Yan's army fled day by day, fleeing to the Yellow River, and the more than seventy cities lost by Qi were returned.

古文：乃迎襄王于莒。入临淄，封田单为安平君。
现代文：田单于是前往莒城迎齐襄王回国都临淄，襄王册封田单为安平君。
English: Then, Tian Shan went to Licheng to welcome the King of Xiang to return to the capital Linyi. The King of Xiang wrote a letter to Tian Shan for Anping.

古文：齐王以太史敫之女为后，生太子建。
现代文：齐襄王立太史敫的女儿为王后，生下太子田建。
English: The daughter of King Taishi of Qixiang became queen and gave birth to Prince Tian Jian.

古文：太史敫曰： 女不取媒，因自嫁，非吾种也，污吾世！ 
现代文：太史敫却说： 我的女儿不经过媒人，自定婚嫁，不是我家的人，她败坏了我的家风！ 
English: However, Ms. Shi said, "My daughter did not go through a matchmaker, she got married of her own accord, she is not from my family, and she has ruined my family's tradition!"

古文：终身不见君王后，君王后亦不以不见故失人子之礼。
现代文：终身不见王后，但王后并不因他不见而失去做儿女应有的礼数。
English: He does not see the Queen for life, but the Queen does not lose the dignity of being a child because of his absence.

古文：赵王封乐毅于观津，尊宠之，以警动于燕、齐。
现代文：赵王分封乐毅于观津，对他十分尊宠。以此来警戒燕国和齐国。
English: Zhao Wang Fenfeng was very fond of Guanzin and held him in high esteem. In this way, he warned Yan and Qi.

古文：燕惠王乃使人让乐毅，且谢之曰： 将军过听，以与寡人有隙，遂捐燕归赵。
现代文：燕惠王便派人去批评乐毅，并道歉说： 乐将军你过于听信传言，因为与我有矛盾，就抛弃燕国跑到赵国。
English: Yan Hui Wang then sent someone to criticize Le Yi, and apologized, saying: General Le, you listen too much to rumors. Because you have a conflict with me, you abandoned Yan Province and ran to Zhao Province.

古文：将军自为计则可矣，而亦何以报先王之所以遇将军之意乎？ 
现代文：你这样做为自己打算是可以的，然而，又怎能报答先王对你的一片恩情呢？ 
English: It was all right for the general to think for himself, but how could he live up to the former king's deep affection for the general?

古文：乐毅报书曰： 昔伍子胥说听于阖闾而吴远迹至郢；夫差弗是也，赐之鸱夷而浮之江。
现代文：乐毅回信答复道： 从前伍子胥的建议被吴王阖闾采纳，吴国的势力一直扩展到郢地；而继任吴王夫差不听他的话，把伍子胥的尸体装入皮囊抛进江中。
English: Le Yi replied in a letter: In the past, Wu Zixuan's suggestion was adopted by Wu Wangtao, and the power of the State of Wu extended all the way to Handan; however, his successor, Wu Wangfu, did not listen to his words and put Wu Zixuan's body in a leather bag and threw it into the river.

古文：吴王不寤先论之可以立功，故沈子胥而不悔；子胥不蚤见主之不同量，是以至于入江而不化。
现代文：夫差不明白伍子胥对先王的建议是吴国得以成就功业的根本，所以沉下伍子胥的尸体一点儿也不后悔。伍子胥不能早日看出不同的君王有不同的器量，所以尸体虽入江而魂灵仍怨愤不化。
English: The husband did not understand that Wu Zixuan's advice to the former king was the basis for Wu to achieve his career, so he did not regret the sinking of Wu Zixuan's body at all. Wu Zixuan could not see early that different kings had different tools, so although the body entered the river, the soul was still resentful.

古文：夫免自立功以明先王之迹，臣之上计也。
现代文：免去自身的灾祸，立就功业，以表明先王的心迹，是我的上策。
English: It is my best policy to avoid my own misfortune and set up a meritorious deed to show the spirit of the former king.

古文：离毁辱之诽谤，堕先王之名，臣之所大恐也。
现代文：自己遭到别人的诽谤，从而使先王的英名蒙上耻辱，是我最害怕的。
English: To be insulted and slandered, and to ruin the reputation of the late king, is what I fear the most.

古文：临不测之罪，以幸为利，义之所不敢出也。
现代文：但因为蒙受了不白之冤，就以新的宠幸为利益，谋算燕国，也是我在道义上绝不会做的。
English: Faced with an unforeseeable crime, it is something that a moral person would not dare to do, to take the opportunity of being spared from the scourge of killing as an opportunity for personal gain.

古文：臣闻古之君子，交绝不出恶声，忠臣去国，不洁其名。
现代文：我听说古代的君子，与人断交绝不口出恶言；忠臣被迫离开祖国，也不去辩解洗雪自己的名声。
English: I have heard that in ancient times, a gentleman never uttered a bad word when he broke off relations with someone; a loyal subject was forced to leave his homeland, and he did not try to justify his reputation.

古文：臣虽不佞，数奉教于君子矣。
现代文：我虽然不成器，也曾多次从古代君子身上得到教益。
English: Although I am not an expert, I have learned a lot from the ancient gentleman.

古文：唯君王之留意焉！ 
现代文：谨请大王明鉴。 
English: I would like to ask the Great King Ming Jian.

古文：于是燕王复以乐毅子闲为昌国君，而乐毅往来复通燕，卒于赵，号曰望诸君。
现代文：于是燕王仍封乐毅的儿子乐为昌国君，而乐毅也为修好睦邻而往来燕国，最后死于赵国，谥号望诸君。
English: As a result, Yan Wang still named Le Yi's son Le as Chang Guojun, and Le Yi also traveled to and from Yan for the sake of good neighborliness, and finally died in Zhao. His posthumous name was Wang Zhuojun.

古文：田单相齐，过淄水，有老人涉淄而寒，出水不能行。
现代文：田单出任齐国国相，有次路过淄水，见到一个老人渡淄水时冻得直哆嗦，走出水面时已不能前行。
English: Tian Shan served as the Minister of the State of Qi. Once, when passing by Surabaya, he saw an old man who was frozen stiff when crossing the water and could not move forward when he got out of the water.

古文：田单解其裘而衣之。
现代文：田单便解下自己的皮袍给他披上。
English: So he took off his robe and put it on him.

古文：襄王恶之，曰： 田单之施于人，将欲以取我国乎？不早图，恐后之变也。 
现代文：齐襄王听说后十分厌恶，说： 田单对别人施恩，是打算夺我的国位，我不早下手，恐怕以后会有变故！ 
English: After hearing this, King Qixiang was very disgusted and said, "Tian Shan is trying to take over my throne by being kind to others. If I don't act soon, I'm afraid things will change in the future!"

古文：左右顾无人，岩下有贯珠者，襄王呼而问之曰： 汝闻吾言乎？ 
现代文：说完一看左右无人，只在殿阶下有个穿珠子的人，襄王便召他过来问道： 你听见我的话了吗？ 回答： 听见了。 
English: When he had said this, he saw that there was no one about, only a bead-wearing man at the foot of the palace steps. The king called him over and asked, "Did you hear what I said?" He replied, "Yes, I did."

古文：对曰： 闻之。 
现代文：襄王问： 你觉得怎么样？ 
English: The pearler freely admits: I've heard it all.

古文：王曰： 汝以为何如？ 
现代文：回答说： 大王不如把此事变成自己的善行。
English: And he said, Let the king now do that which is good in his sight.

古文：对曰： 王不如因以为己善。王嘉单之善，下令曰： 寡人忧民之饥也，单收而食之；寡人忧民之寒也，单解裘而衣之；寡人忧劳百姓，而单亦忧之，称寡人之意。 
现代文：大王可以嘉奖田单的善心，下令说： 我忧虑人民的饥饿，田单就收养他们，供给饮食；我忧虑人民的寒冷，田单就脱下皮袍给他们披上；我忧虑人民的操劳，田单也因此忧虑。
English: The great king could reward Tian Tan's kindness by ordering: I am worried about the people's hunger, so Tian Tan will take them in and provide them with food; I am worried about the people's cold, so Tian Tan will take off his robe and put it on them; I am worried about the people's labor, so Tian Tan is also worried.

古文：单有是善而王嘉之，单之善亦王之善也。 王曰： 善。 
现代文：他正符合我的心意。 田单有善行而大王嘉奖他，那么田单的善行也就是大王的善行了。 襄王说： 好。 
English: He is just to my liking. If Tian Shan does a good deed and the king praises him, then Tian Shan's good deed is the king's good deed. The king said, "Good."

古文：乃赐单牛酒。
现代文：于是赏赐田单酒宴。
English: As a result, he rewarded Tian Shan with a wine banquet.

古文：后数日，贯珠者复见王曰： 王朝日宜召田单而揖之于庭，口劳之。
现代文：过了几天，穿珠子的人又来见齐襄王说： 大王应该在群臣朝见时召见田单，在殿庭上致谢，亲自慰劳他。
English: A few days later, the man wearing the beads came to see King Qixiang again and said, "The great king should invite Tian Shan to meet his courtiers at court, thank him in the palace courtyard, and console him in person."

古文：乃布令求百姓之饥寒者，收穀之。 
现代文：然后布告国内寻找百姓中饥饿者，予以收养。 
English: Then they announced that they would search for starving people in the country and adopt them.

古文：乃使人听于闾里，闻大夫之相与语者曰： 田单之爱人，嗟，乃王之教也！ 
现代文：襄王这样做后，派人到街头里巷去探听，听到大夫等官员互相说： 哦！田单疼爱百姓，是大王的教诲呀！ 
English: After King Xiang did this, he sent people to the streets and alleys to listen, and heard doctors and other officials say to each other: Oh! Tian Shan loves the people, it is the king's teaching!

古文：田单任貂勃于王。
现代文：田单向齐王推荐貂勃。
English: Tian Shan Xiang Qi Wang recommended Zibo.

古文：王有所幸臣九人，欲伤安平君，相与语于王曰： 燕之伐齐之时，楚王使将军将万人而佐齐。
现代文：齐王的九个宠幸臣子都想中伤田单。争相对齐王说： 燕国攻打齐国时，楚王曾派将军率一万军队来帮助齐国。
English: Nine of King Qi's favorite vassals all wanted to slander Tian Tan. He said to King Qi: When Yan attacked Qi, King Chu sent a general and ten thousand troops to help Qi.

古文：今国已定而社稷已安矣，何不使使者谢于楚王？ 
现代文：现在齐国已经安定，社会也日趋稳固，何不派使者前去楚国道谢？ 
English: Now that Qi has been stabilized and the society has become increasingly stable, why not send an envoy to Chu to express gratitude?

古文：王曰： 左右孰可？ 
现代文：齐王问： 左右的人谁合适？ 
English: Qi Wang asked: Who is the right person?

古文：九人之属曰： 貂勃可。 
现代文：九个人都说： 貂勃可以。 
English: All nine of them said, "It can be done."

古文：貂勃使楚，楚王受而觞之，数月不反。
现代文：貂勃出使楚国，楚王予以热情款待，几个月不放他回去。
English: Zou Bo sent an envoy to the State of Chu. The King of Chu gave him warm hospitality and did not allow him to return for several months.

古文：九人之属相与语于王曰： 夫一人之身而牵留万乘者，岂不以据势也哉！
现代文：九个人又一齐对齐王说： 以貂勃一个人的地位能受到万乘车马的楚国重视，难道不是倚仗了田单的权势吗！
English: The nine people also aligned themselves with the king and said, "Isn't it true that Zibo's status as the only person who can be valued by the country of Chu, a country of thousands of horses and chariots, relies on the power of Tian Shan?"

古文：且安平君之与王也，君臣无异而上下无别。且其志欲为不善，内抚百姓，外怀戎翟，礼天下之贤士，其志欲有为也，愿王之察之！ 
现代文：田单与大王之间，不分君臣上下，况且他心怀不良之志，对内安抚百姓，对外关怀狄族，礼待天下的贤良人才，他的志向是想大有作为，希望大王明察！ 
English: Between Tian Shan and the great king, there is no distinction between the monarch and his subordinates. Moreover, he harbors bad intentions, pacifies the people internally, cares for the Di ethnic group externally, and treats the world's talented people with respect. His ambition is to do great things. I hope the great king is watching!

古文：异日，王曰： 召相单而来！ 
现代文：过了几天，齐王喝道： 召国相田单来！ 
English: A few days later, King Qi shouted, "Call Guo Aida to come!"

古文：田单免冠、徒跣、肉袒而进，退而请死罪，五日而王曰： 子无罪于寡人。
现代文：田单非常惊恐，摘下帽子，光着脚，赤裸上身前来，退下时请齐王治他的死罪。过了五天，齐王却说： 你没有得罪我。
English: Terrified, Tian Shan took off his hat, walked barefoot and bare-chested. When he retreated, he asked King Qi to sentence him to death. Five days later, however, King Qi said, "You have not offended me."

古文：子为子之臣礼，吾为吾之王礼而已矣。 
现代文：只不过要你行你臣子的礼节，我守我君王的礼节而已。 
English: I only ask you to observe the etiquette of your subjects, while I observe the etiquette of my sovereign.

古文：貂勃从楚来，王赐之酒。
现代文：貂勃从楚国回来，齐王赐宴招待。
English: When Zibo returned from Chu, the king of Qi gave him an invitation to a banquet.

古文：酒酣，王曰： 召相单而来！ 
现代文：饮到兴头上，齐王又喝道： 召国相田单来！ 
English: After drinking to his heart's content, King Qi shouted again, "Summon Guo Aida Shan!

古文：貂勃避席稽首曰： 王上者孰与周文王？ 
现代文：貂勃离开座位下拜说： 大王上比周文王如何？ 
English: Zou Bo left his seat and bowed down and said: How is the great king Zhou Wenwang?

古文：王曰： 吾不若也。 
现代文：齐王回答： 我不如。 
English: Zou Bo said: Yes, it is better for the vassal to know.

古文：貂勃曰： 然，臣固知王不若也。
现代文：貂勃说： 是的，我本知道大王不如崐。
English: Zou Bo also said, "Yes, I also know that a great king is not as good as a cow."

古文：下者孰与齐桓公？ 
现代文：那么下比齐桓公如何？ 
English: So, what about Shimobi Chikanko?

古文：王曰： 吾不若也。 
现代文：齐王回答： 我也不如。 
English: Zou Bo said: Yes, it is better for the vassal to know.

古文：貂勃曰： 然，臣固知王不若也。
现代文：貂勃又说： 是的，我也知道大王不如。
English: Zou Bo also said, "Yes, I also know that a great king is not as good as a cow."

古文：然则周文王得吕尚以为太公，齐桓公得管夷吾以为仲父，今王得安平君而独曰 单 ，安得此亡国之言乎！
现代文：然而周文王得到吕尚，尊为太公；齐桓公得到管仲，敬为仲父。现在大王您得到安平君田单，却直呼 田单 ，怎么能说这种亡国的话呢？
English: However, King Zhou Wen got Lushang, respected as the grand duke; King Qi Huan got Guanzhong, respected as the stepfather. Now, great king, you got Anping Jun Tian Shan, but you call him Tian Shan, how can you say such words of ruining the country?

古文：且自天地之辟，民人之始，为人臣之功者，谁有厚于安平君者哉？
现代文：何况自开天辟地，有人民起，做臣子的功劳，谁能比安平君更高？
English: What's more, since the creation of heaven and earth and the existence of the people, who can do a greater service as a courtier than Anping?

古文：王不能守王之社稷，燕人兴师而袭齐，王走而之城阳之山中，安平君以惴惴即墨三里之城，五里之郭，敝卒七千人，禽其司马而反千里之齐，安平君之功也。
现代文：当年大王不能承守祖业，在燕国起兵袭击齐国时，大王逃到城阳的山里，安平君以人心危恐的即墨方圆三五里城郭，疲惫不堪的七千名士兵，力擒敌军大将，收复齐国千里领土，这些都是安平君的功劳呀！
English: At that time, the great king could not uphold his ancestral heritage. When Yan's army attacked Qi, the great king fled to the mountains of Chengyang. Anping, with his heart in danger, surrounded the city with a thirty-five-mile perimeter, exhausted seven thousand soldiers, defeated the enemy general, and recovered thousands of miles of territory in Qi. These are the merits of Anping!

古文：当是之时，舍城阳而自王，天下莫之能止。
现代文：如果当时他置城阳的大王不顾，自立为王，天下没有谁能阻止。
English: If at that time he disregarded the great king of Chengyang and established himself as king, no one in the world could stop him.

古文：然而计之于道，归之于义，以为不可，故栈道木阁而迎王与后于城阳山中，王乃得反，子临百姓。
现代文：然而他从道德礼义考虑，认为坚决不能那样做，所以修筑栈道木阁前去城阳山中迎接大王和王后，大王您才能得以回归，治理百姓子民。
English: However, from the perspective of morality and etiquette, he thought that it was absolutely impossible to do that, so he built a wooden pavilion and went to meet the great king and queen in the mountains of Chengyang. Only then could the great king return and govern the people.

古文：今国已定，民已安矣，王乃曰 单 ，婴儿之计不为此也。
现代文：现在国家已经稳定，人民已经安宁，大王却 田单、田单 地叫，小孩子也知道不该这样做。
English: Now that the country has been stabilized and the people have been pacified, the great king is crying out, "Tianlan, Tianlan," and even a child knows not to do this.

古文：王亟杀此九子者以谢安平君，不然，国其危矣！ 
现代文：大王您赶快杀掉那九个家伙向安平君谢罪；不然，国家就危险了！ 
English: Great King, you should kill those nine guys as soon as possible and apologize to Anping; otherwise, the country will be in danger!

古文：乃杀九子而逐其家，益封安平君以夜邑万户。
现代文：齐王听从指责，杀掉了那九个幸臣并流放其家族，加封给安平君掖邑地方的一万户俸禄收入。
English: King Qi listened to the accusation, killed the nine lucky ministers and exiled their families, and added 10,000 households' salary income to the Anping Junyi District.

古文：田单将攻狄，往见鲁仲连。鲁仲连曰： 将军攻狄，不能下也。 
现代文：田单准备攻打狄族，前去见鲁仲连，鲁仲连说： 将军您去攻狄，恐怕攻不下来。 
English: Tian Shan was preparing to attack the Di people and went to see Lu Zhonglian. Lu Zhonglian said, "General, if you attack the Di people, I'm afraid you won't be able to defeat them."

古文：田单曰： 臣以即墨破亡馀卒破万乘之燕，复齐之墟，今攻狄而不下，何也？ 
现代文：田单说： 当年我以即墨的残兵败将击破拥有万乘战车的燕军，光复齐国沦亡土地；现在会攻不下狄族，有什么道理？ 
English: Tian Shan said, "Back then, I defeated Yan's army, which had 10,000 chariots, with the remnants of the retreating army, and recovered the land of Qi; now I can't defeat the Di people, what's the reason?

古文：上车弗谢而去，遂攻狄，三月不克。
现代文：上车扬长而去。于是田单率军进攻狄族，三个月也未能攻克。
English: He got on the car and drove away. Then, Tian Han led the army to attack the Di people, but they were unable to conquer them for three months.

古文：齐小儿谣曰： 大冠若箕，修剑拄颐。攻狄不能下，垒枯骨成丘。 
现代文：齐国小孩子在歌谣中讥讽唱道： 大冠像簸箕，长剑撑面皮，攻狄不能下，枯骨垒成丘。 
English: In the ballads, the children of Qi state sang sarcastically: The crown is like a skull, the long sword supports the face, you can't attack it, and the bones become a hill.

古文：田单乃惧，问鲁仲连曰： 先生谓单不能下狄，请问其说。 
现代文：田单开始惊惧起来，又去问鲁仲连： 先生早日说我攻不下狄族，请让我知道原因。 
English: Tian Shan began to be alarmed and went to ask Lu Zhonglian again: The teacher said earlier that I could not conquer the Di people, please let me know the reason.

古文：鲁仲连曰： 将军之在即墨，坐则织蒉，立则仗锸，为士卒倡曰： 无可往矣！
现代文：鲁仲连说： 将军在即墨的时候，坐着，手编草鞋；站着，手拿铁锹；带领士兵们唱歌道： 无可往矣！
English: Lu Zhonglian said: When the general was about to ink, he was sitting, hand-knitting straw sandals; standing, holding a spade; leading the soldiers in singing: There is no going back!

古文：宗庙亡矣！
现代文：宗庙亡矣！
English: The soul of the ancestral temple perished and flew away!

古文：今日尚矣！
现代文：今日有没有救，看我们有没有胆！ 
English: If there is no rescue today, let's see if we have the guts!

古文：归于何党矣！ 当此之时，将军有死之心，士卒先无之气，闻君言莫不挥泣奋臂而欲战，此所以破燕也。
现代文：当时，将军有战死的决心，士兵无偷生的念头，听见您的号召无不挥泪奋臂，决一死战，所以才能打败燕军。
English: At that time, the general had the determination to die in battle, the soldiers did not have the idea of stealing a living, and when they heard your call, they all shed tears and raised their arms to fight to the death, so they could defeat Yan's army.

古文：当今将军东有夜邑之奉，西有淄上之娱，黄金横带而骋乎淄、渑之间，有生之乐，无死之心，所以不胜也。 
现代文：现在将军您东面有掖邑丰厚的俸禄，西边有淄上封地的游乐，腰系黄金带，驰骋于淄水、渑水之间，有的只是生活的乐趣，而无战死之心，所以无法取胜啊！ 
English: Now, General, to the east of you, there is the rich bounty of the county, to the west, there is the amusement of the fiefdom, the golden belt around your waist, galloping in and out of the water, and some are just the fun of life, but there is no fighting spirit, so you can't win!

古文：田单曰： 单之有心，先生志之矣。 
现代文：田单说： 我田单有这样的决心，是先生您为我下的。 
English: Tian Shan said: I, Tian Shan, have such a determination. It was you, sir, who made it for me.

古文：明日，乃厉气循城，立于矢石之所，援袍鼓之。狄人乃下。
现代文：第二天，他振奋精神，亲临城下，站在箭雨弹雹之中，手持鼓捶，击鼓进军，于是攻克了狄族大营。
English: The next day, he cheered up and went to the outskirts of the city, stood in the middle of a hail of arrows and bullets, marched into the army with a tambourine in hand, and beat the drum, thus conquering the large camp of the Di people.

古文：初，齐湣王既灭宋，欲去孟尝君。孟尝君奔魏，魏昭王以为相，与诸侯共伐破齐。湣王死，襄王复国，而孟尝君中立为诸侯，无所属。
现代文：起初，齐王灭掉宋国以后，想驱逐在薛地的孟尝君，孟尝君便投奔魏国，魏昭王任用他为国相，与各国联合攻破齐国，齐王死后，齐襄王光复国土，而孟尝君独立于各国之间，无所依属。
English: At first, after King Qi eliminated the Song Dynasty, he wanted to expel Meng Yaojun from Xue, but Meng Yaojun fled to Wei. King Wei Zhao appointed him as the minister of state and jointly defeated Qi with other countries. After the death of King Qi, King Qixiang recovered the land, but Meng Yaojun was independent of other countries and had nothing to depend on.

古文：襄王新立，畏孟尝君，与之连和。
现代文：齐襄王因为新即位，害怕孟尝君，便与他和好。
English: King Qixiang was afraid of Meng Yaojun because he was newly enthroned, so he made peace with him.

古文：孟尝君卒，诸子争立，而齐、魏共灭薛，孟尝君绝嗣。
现代文：孟尝君死后，几个儿子争夺权力，齐国、魏国趁机共同灭掉薛地，于是孟尝君断了后代。
English: After the death of Meng Yuqun, several sons competed for power, and Qi and Wei took the opportunity to jointly eliminate Xue Di, so Meng Yuqun cut off the descendants.

古文：赧王中三十七年
现代文：赧王三十七年
English: In the thirty-seventh year of King Min

古文：秦大良造白起伐楚，拔郢，烧夷陵。
现代文：秦国派大良造白起进攻楚国，攻占郢城，火烧夷陵。
English: Qin sent Dalang Zuobao to attack Chu, capture the city of Handan, and burn the tomb.

古文：楚襄王兵散，遂不复战，东北徙都于陈。
现代文：楚襄王的军队四散，于是不再迎战，把国都向东北迁到陈地。
English: King Chu Xiang's army was scattered, so he did not fight anymore and moved the capital to the northeast to Chen Di.

古文：秦以郢为南郡，封白起为武安君。
现代文：秦国以郢城为南郡，封白起为武安君。
English: In Qin, Lucheng was known as Nan County, and Buanjun was known as Buanjun.

古文：赧王中三十八年
现代文：赧王三十八年
English: In the thirty-eighth year of King Min

古文：秦武安君定巫、黔中，初置黔中郡。
现代文：秦国武安君平定巫、黔中，秦国在此设置黔中郡。
English: Wu Anjun of Qin State subdued Wuchang and Yuzhong, and Qin State set up Yuzhong County here.

古文：魏昭王薨，子安釐王立。
现代文：魏国魏昭王去世，他的儿子即位为魏安王。
English: King Wei Zhao of Wei died, and his son ascended the throne as King Wei An.

古文：赧王中三十九年
现代文：赧王三十九年
English: In the thirty-ninth year of King Min

古文：秦武安君伐魏，拔两城。
现代文：秦国武安君进攻魏国，攻占两城。
English: Wu Anjun of Qin attacked Wei and captured two cities.

古文：楚王收东地兵，得十馀万，复西取江南十五邑。
现代文：楚王召集东部军队，得到十余万人，又向西攻取长江以南十五邑。
English: King Chu gathered the eastern army, got more than one hundred thousand people, and went west to capture fifteen counties south of the Yangtze River.

古文：魏安釐王封其弟无忌为信陵君。
现代文：魏安王封他的弟弟魏无忌为信陵君。
English: Wei An Wang appointed his younger brother Wei Wu Bo as Shunling.

古文：赧王中四十年
现代文：四十年
English: Forty years

古文：秦相国穰侯伐魏。
现代文：秦国相国穰侯魏冉进攻魏国。
English: Qin and Wei attacked Wei.

古文：韩暴鸢救魏，穰侯大破之，斩首四万。
现代文：韩国派暴鸢率军救魏，魏冉大破韩军，杀死四万人。
English: South Korea sent troops to rescue Wei, and Wei defeated the South Korean army, killing forty thousand people.

古文：暴鸢走开封。
现代文：暴鸢逃往开封。
English: The ruffian fled to Kaifeng.

古文：魏纳八城以和。
现代文：魏国只好献出八座城求和。
English: Wei had to offer eight cities to sue for peace.

古文：穰侯复伐魏，走芒卯，入北宅。
现代文：魏冉却继续攻打魏国，赶走魏将芒卯，进军北宅。
English: Wei Ran, however, continued to attack Wei, drove away Wei general Meng Wu, and marched into Beizhu.

古文：遂围大梁，魏人割温以和。
现代文：魏国又割让温邑再行求和。
English: Wei also ceded Wenwu to the Mongols, who then sued for peace.

古文：赧王中四十一年
现代文：四十一年
English: Forty-one years

古文：魏复与齐合从。
现代文：魏国重新与齐国联合抗秦。
English: The State of Wei and the State of Qi united again to resist the Qin.

古文：秦穰侯伐魏，拔四城，斩首四万。
现代文：秦国派魏冉进攻魏国，攻陷四城，杀四万人。
English: Qin sent Wei Ran to attack Wei, capturing four cities and killing forty thousand people.

古文：鲁缗公薨，子顷公雠立。
现代文：鲁国鲁公去世，其子姬仇即位为鲁倾公。
English: King Lu of the State of Lu died, and his son Ji Jie ascended to the throne as King Lu.

古文：赧王中四十二年
现代文：四十二年
English: Forty-two years

古文：赵人、魏人伐韩华阳。
现代文：赵国、魏国联合进攻韩国华阳。
English: Zhao and Wei jointly attacked Huayang in Korea.

古文：韩人告急于秦，秦王弗救。
现代文：韩国向秦国告急，秦王不救。
English: South Korea sent an urgent appeal to the State of Qin, but the King of Qin refused to help.

古文：韩相国谓陈筮曰： 事急矣！
现代文：韩国相国对陈筮说： 事情危急了！
English: South Korea's foreign minister told Chen Qi: "The situation is critical!

古文：愿公虽病，为一宿之行。 
现代文：希望你能抱病连夜走一遭！ 
English: I hope you will be able to stay up all night with an illness!

古文：陈筮如秦，见穰侯。
现代文：陈筮到了秦国，拜见魏冉。
English: Chen Xi arrived in Qin and met Wei Ran.

古文：穰侯曰： 事急乎？
现代文：魏冉冷笑道： 事情危急了吧？
English: Gong Hou said, "Things are pressing, aren't they?"

古文：故使公来。 
现代文：所以让你来。 
English: That's why I sent you.

古文：陈筮曰： 未急也。 
现代文：陈筮却说： 不着急。 
English: Chen Yao said, "I'm not in a hurry.

古文：穰侯怒曰： 何也？ 
现代文：魏冉生气地问： 为什么？ 
English: Wei Ran angrily asked: Why?

古文：陈筮曰： 彼韩急则将变而他从；以未急，故复来耳。 
现代文：陈筮回答： 韩国要是真的逼急了，就会转而投靠别的国家。现在还不算急，所以再来秦国求救。 
English: Chen Yao answered: If South Korea is really in a hurry, it will turn to other countries. Now it is not urgent, so come to Qin for help.

古文：穰侯曰： 请发兵矣。 
现代文：魏冉忙说： 我答应出兵了。 
English: Wei Ranhe said: I have agreed to send troops.

古文：乃与武安君及客卿胡阳救韩，八日而至，败魏军于华阳之下，走芒卯，虏三将，斩首十三万。
现代文：于是与武安君白起及客卿胡阳率军救韩，八天后到达，在华阳城下击败魏军，又赶跑芒卯，俘虏三员敌将，杀死十三万人。
English: So he and Wu'an Jun Baiqi and Hakka Emperor Hu Yang led an army to save South Korea. They arrived eight days later, defeated the Wei army under Huayang Castle, and chased Mengwu, captured three enemy generals, and killed 130,000 people.

古文：武安君又与赵将贾偃战，沈其卒二万人于河。
现代文：白起又与赵军大将贾偃交战，设计在黄河中淹死赵兵二万人。
English: Baiqi also fought with Zhao's general Jia Jun, and planned to drown 20,000 of Zhao's soldiers in the Yellow River.

古文：魏段干子请割南阳予秦以和。
现代文：魏国的段干子建议割让南阳给秦国以求和。
English: Duan Gangzi of Wei proposed to cede Nanyang to Qin in order to make peace.

古文：苏代谓魏王曰： 欲玺者，段干子也；欲地者，秦也。
现代文：苏代对魏王说： 段干子想掌握秦国的相印，秦国想占据魏国的领土。
English: Su Dai said to Wei Wang: Duan Gan Zi wanted to grasp the imprint of Qin, and Qin wanted to occupy Wei's territory.

古文：今王使欲地者制玺，欲玺者制地，魏地尽矣！
现代文：现在大王您让想夺地的秦国控制相印，让想要相印的段干子来控制魏国土地，互相勾结，魏国的土地就会丧失干净！
English: Now, great king, you are letting Qin, who wants to seize the land, control the state seal, and you are letting Duan Gangzi, who wants to control the state seal, control the land of Wei. If they collude with each other, the land of Wei will be lost!

古文：夫以地事秦，犹抱薪救火，薪不尽，火不灭。 
现代文：献地去向秦国讨好，好比抱着干柴去救火，干柴烧不完，火是不会灭的。 
English: Offering land to ingratiate oneself with Qin is like holding dry wood to put out a fire. The dry wood cannot be burned completely, and the fire will not be extinguished.

古文：王曰： 是则然也。虽然，事始已行，不可更矣！ 
现代文：魏王说： 话虽是如此，但是，事情已经开始进行，无法改变了。 
English: Wei Wang said: That being said, however, things have already begun and cannot be changed.

古文：对曰： 夫博之所以贵枭者，便则食，不便则止。
现代文：苏代又劝说： 下棋时之所以重视 枭子 ，是因为这个棋子方便时可以吃子，不便时可以停止。
English: Sudai also advised: The reason why we attach importance to the dice when playing chess is because this piece can be moved when convenient, and can be stopped when inconvenient.

古文：今何王之用智不如用枭也？ 
现代文：现在大王使用智谋为什么还不如下棋用 枭子 那样灵活呢？ 
English: Now, why is the use of wit by the great king not as flexible as the use of dice in chess?

古文：魏王不听，卒以南阳为和，实修武。
现代文：魏王到底没有听从苏代的劝告，割让了南阳求和。南阳，实际上就是修武。
English: In the end, the Wei king did not listen to the advice of the Su dynasty and conceded to the Nanyang to sue for peace. The Nanyang, in fact, is a martial art.

古文：韩釐王薨，子桓惠王立。
现代文：韩国韩王去世，其子即位为韩桓惠王。
English: King Han of Korea died, and his son ascended the throne as King Han Huan Hui.

古文：韩、魏既服于秦，秦王将使武安君与韩、魏伐楚，未行，而楚使者黄歇至，闻之，畏秦乘胜一举而灭楚也，乃上书曰： 臣闻物至则反，冬、夏是也；致至则危，累棋是也。
现代文：韩国、魏国已向秦国屈服，秦王便派武安君白起联合韩、魏两军进攻楚国。尚未出发，楚国已派使臣黄歇前来。黄歇听说此事，怕秦国乘胜一举消灭楚国，于是急忙上书秦王说： 我听说物极必反，冬天、夏天的交替即是如此；走极端则危险，垒棋子即是如此。
English: South Korea and Wei had already surrendered to Qin, so the Qin king sent Wu Anjun to join forces with South Korea and Wei to attack Chu. Before they set off, Chu had already sent the envoy Huang Xie. Huang Xie heard about this and, fearing that Qin would use the victory to wipe out Chu, he hurriedly wrote to the Qin king, saying, "I have heard that extremes are counterproductive, such as the alternation of winter and summer; it is dangerous to go to extremes, such is the case with wares."

古文：今大国之地，遍天下有其二垂，此从生民已来，万乘之地未尝有也。
现代文：现在强大的秦国的地域，遍及天下，控制西、北两端，这是自古以来，拥有万乘车马的大国从未达到的。
English: At present, the land of Qin occupies the western and northern edges of the world. This is something that has not been seen since the beginning of mankind, even in the realm of the Son of Heaven.

古文：先王三世不忘接地于齐，以绝从亲之要。
现代文：楚国三世先王都不忘与齐国接壤，以切断联合抗秦阵线的韩、魏中段。
English: The third king of Chu did not forget the border with Qi, in order to cut off the middle section of Han and Wei from the joint anti-Qin front.

古文：今王使盛桥守事于韩，盛桥以其地入秦，是王不用甲，不信威，而得百里之地，王可谓能矣！
现代文：如今大王派盛桥在韩国掌权，盛桥迫使韩国割地给秦国，大王您不动甲兵，不施威势，就得到百里土地，大王可谓能干之极！
English: Now the king has sent Shengqiao to take power in Korea. Shengqiao has forced Korea to give land to Qin. If you don't move your armored soldiers and don't use your power, you will get a hundred miles of land. The king is extremely capable!

古文：王又举甲而攻魏，杜大梁之门，举河内，拔燕、酸枣、虚、桃，入邢，魏之兵云翔而不敢救，王之功亦多矣！
现代文：大王又出兵攻魏，封堵魏国门户，攻下河内，夺取燕、酸枣、虚、桃等地，进入邢丘，魏兵云集而不敢前救，大王可谓战功累累！
English: The great king also sent troops to attack Wei, block the gateway to Wei, capture Hanoi, seize Yan, Sour Date, Huo, Peach and other places, enter Muxiu, Wei soldiers gathered and did not dare to rescue, the great king can be described as a war hero!

古文：王休甲息众，二年而后复之，又并蒲、衍、首、垣以临仁、平丘，黄、济阳婴城而魏氏服。
现代文：大王休息军队，两年后再举用兵，又吞并蒲、衍、首、垣等地，兵临仁、平丘，使黄、济阳据城自守，魏王只好屈服。
English: The great king rested his army, and two years later he raised an army again, and annexed Pu, Yan, Shou, and Waki, as well as soldiers Linren and Pingqiu, and made Huang and Jiyang defend themselves. The Wei king had to give in.

古文：王又割濮磨之北，注齐、秦之要，绝楚、赵之脊，天下五合六聚而不敢救，王之威亦单矣！
现代文：大王又占据濮磨之北，使土地互相联结于齐国和秦国的腰部，切断楚国、赵国的联系中枢，各国三番五次地联合、聚会，终于不敢来救，大王可谓威名赫赫无双！
English: The great king also occupied the north of Loma, so that the land was connected to each other at the waist of Qi and Qin, cutting off the connection center of Chu and Zhao. The countries repeatedly united and gathered, and finally did not dare to come to the rescue. The great king can be described as unparalleled prestige!

古文：王若能保功守威，绌攻取之心，而肥仁义之地，使无后患，三王不足四，五伯不足六也！
现代文：现在，大王如果能保守功业威势，收敛继续进攻的雄心，而在领地上广施仁义，消除后患，那么，大王的功业绝不止是三代圣王之后的第四个，五位霸主之后的第六个！
English: Now, if the great king can maintain the power of his exploits, restrain the ambition to continue the attack, and spread benevolence and righteousness in the territory to eliminate the aftermath, then the great king's exploits will not only be the fourth after three generations of holy kings, but also the sixth after five overlords!

古文：王若负人徒之众，仗兵革之强，乘毁魏之威，而欲以力臣天下之主，臣恐其有后患也。《诗》曰： 靡不有初，鲜克有终。 《易》曰： 狐涉水，濡其尾。 
现代文：但是大王如果倚仗军队众多，凭借武器精良，乘平毁魏国的兵威，想以武力使天下各国君王都向您俯首称臣，我担心您会引来后患。《诗经》说： 常见善始，少见善终。 《易经》说： 小狐渡水，尾部浸湿。 
English: However, if the great king relies on a large number of troops, relies on sophisticated weapons, takes advantage of the military power to destroy Wei, and wants to use force to make the kings of all countries in the world bow down to you, I am afraid that you will attract trouble. "The Book of Songs" says: It is common to have a good beginning, but it is rare to have a good ending. "The Book of Changes" says: The little fox crosses the water, and the tail is wet.

古文：此言始之易，终之难也。
现代文：这都是指开始容易，结束困难。
English: These words mean that the beginning is easy and the end is difficult.

古文：昔吴之信越也，从而伐齐，既胜齐人于艾陵，还为越禽于三江之浦。
现代文：当年吴国听信越国，出兵攻齐，已经在艾陵战胜齐国，回来却被越王在三江之滨擒杀。
English: At that time, Wu believed Yue Guo and sent troops to attack Qi. They had already defeated Qi in Ailing, but when they returned, they were killed by Yue Wang on the banks of the Sanjiang River.

古文：智氏之信韩、魏也，从而伐赵，攻晋阳城，胜有日矣，韩、魏叛之，杀智伯瑶于凿台之下。
现代文：智伯瑶信任韩、魏两家，联合进攻赵家，围攻晋阳时，胜利已指日可待，韩家、魏家却突然反叛，智伯瑶终于在凿台之下被杀。
English: Zhibao trusted Han and Wei, and jointly attacked Zhao and besieged Jinyang. Victory was just around the corner, but Han and Wei suddenly rebelled, and Zhibao was finally killed under the scaffold.

古文：今王妒楚之不毁，而忘毁楚之强韩、魏也，臣为王虑而不取也。
现代文：如今大王忌恨楚国尚未灭亡，而忘记了楚国灭亡只会使韩国、魏国强大，臣下我认为您的这种做法不可取而为您忧虑。
English: Today, the great king regrets that the State of Chu has not yet perished, and forgets that the demise of the State of Chu will only make South Korea and the State of Wei strong. My vassal, I think that this action of yours is not advisable, and I am worried about you.

古文：夫楚国，援也；邻国，敌也。
现代文：楚国，是您的援手；其他邻国，是您的敌人。
English: Chu Province is your helping hand; other neighboring countries are your enemies.

古文：今王信韩、魏之善王，此正吴之信越也，臣恐韩、魏卑辞除患而实欲欺大国也。
现代文：现在大王相信韩国、魏国亲善秦国，这正像当年吴国信任越国。我以为，恐怕韩国、魏崐国表面上谦语卑辞是为了免除灾祸，而实际上却是想欺骗秦国。为什么呢？
English: Now the emperor believes that Korea and Wei are friendly to Qin, just as Wu trusted Yue back then. I'm afraid I thought that Korea and Wei and Qin were trying to deceive Qin. Why?

古文：何则？王无重世之德于韩、魏而有累世之怨焉。
现代文：因为秦王对于韩、魏两国并无再世的恩德，却有累世的积怨呀！
English: Because for Han and Wei, King Qin did not have a second generation of benevolence, but he did have a long-standing grudge!

古文：夫韩、魏父子兄弟接踵而死于秦者将十世矣，故韩、魏之不亡，秦社稷之忧也。
现代文：韩国、魏国人中，父子兄弟接连死于秦国刀兵之下的，已近十代了。所以韩国、魏国只要不灭亡，终究是秦国的忧患。
English: Among the Korean and Wei people, it has been nearly ten generations since father and son brothers died one after another under the sword of Qin soldiers. Therefore, as long as Korea and Wei do not perish, it is ultimately a sorrow for Qin.

古文：今王资之与攻楚，不亦过乎！
现代文：大王却要资助他们一起进攻楚国，这不是个大错误吗？
English: However, the great king wanted to finance them to attack Chu together. Isn't this a big mistake?

古文：且攻楚将恶出兵？
现代文：况且，进攻楚国从何处出兵？
English: Moreover, where did the attack on Chu come from?

古文：王将借路于仇雠之韩、魏乎？
现代文：大王是否准备向世仇魏、韩两国去借道？
English: Is the great king preparing to borrow a path from the world's enemies, Wei and Han?

古文：兵出之日而王忧其不反也。
现代文：那样做，自秦兵出发之日大王就会担忧他们回不来。
English: If you do that, from the day the Qin soldiers leave, the great king will be worried that they will not come back.

古文：王若不借路于仇雠之韩、魏，必攻随水右壤，此皆广川、大水、山林、溪谷，不食之地。是王有毁楚之名而无得地之实也。且王攻楚之日，四国必悉起兵以应王。
现代文：大王如果不向世仇韩、魏去借道，势必只有攻随水的西边，那里都是广川、大河、山林、深谷，不毛之地，大王徒有征服楚国的名义而没有得到土地的实际利益，而且大王进攻楚国时，四国必然全部起兵响应大王，当秦国、楚国军队打得难解难分时，魏国就会趁机出兵进攻留、方与？
English: If the Great King did not take the path of the world's enemies, Korea and Wei, he would only attack the west side of the water, where there are broad rivers, big rivers, mountains, deep valleys, and barren lands. The Great King's followers had the name of conquering Chu without obtaining the actual benefits of the land. Moreover, when the Great King attacked Chu, all four countries would inevitably raise troops to respond to the Great King. When the Qin and Chu armies fought hard, Wei would take the opportunity to send troops to attack.

古文：秦、楚之兵构而不离；魏氏将出而攻留、方舆、铚、湖陵、砀、萧、相，故宋必尽；齐人南面攻楚，泗上必举。此皆平原四达膏腴之地。
现代文：湖陵、砀、萧、相等地，宋国旧地将尽入其手。齐国人也会向南攻楚，必然夺取泗上，这些都是四通八达的平原，肥沃膏腴之地。
English: Huling, Handan, Xiao, and so on, the old land of Song will fall into their hands. The people of Qi will also attack Chu to the south, and they will inevitably seize Handan. These are all plains with good access and fertile land.

古文：如此，则天下之国莫强于齐、魏矣。
现代文：那样的话，天下的国家中将是齐国、魏国最强大了。
English: In that case, Qi and Wei will be the most powerful countries in the world.

古文：臣为王虑，莫若善楚。
现代文：我为大王考虑，不如与楚国亲善为好。
English: I think for the great king, there is no better way than to be friendly with Chu.

古文：秦、楚合而为一以临韩，韩必敛手而朝；王施以东山之险，带以曲河之利，韩必为关内之侯。
现代文：秦国、楚国合二为一进攻韩国，韩国必然束手无策，屈服称臣，大王控制华山以东的险要，占有九曲黄河的利益，韩王必定成为您的关内之侯。
English: Qin and Chu united as one to attack Korea. Korea was bound to have no choice but to capitulate and submit. The great king controlled the vital points east of Mount Huashan and held the interests of the nine bends of the Yellow River. The king of Korea would surely become your prince of Guanai.

古文：若是而王以十万戍郑，梁氏寒心，许、鄢陵婴城而上蔡、召陵不往来也。
现代文：这时大王再派十万大兵驻守韩都新郑，足使魏王胆战心惊，许、鄢陵两城被困后，上蔡、召陵也将与魏都大梁无法来往。
English: At this time, the great king sent another 100,000 soldiers to garrison the Han capital of Xinzheng, which made the Wei king afraid. After the two cities of Xu and Fuling were trapped, Shang Cai and Zhaoling would also be unable to communicate with the Wei capital of Dalian.

古文：如此，魏亦关内侯矣。
现代文：那时，魏国就成了关内侯。
English: At that time, Wei became Guan Nei Hou.

古文：王壹善楚而关内两万乘之主注地于齐，齐右壤可拱手而取也。
现代文：大王一施行与楚国亲善的政策而使关内两个拥有万乘兵车的大国向齐国索要土地，齐国西部领土便垂手可得。
English: As soon as the Great King implemented the policy of amity with the State of Chu, the two big countries in Guanzhong with 10,000 chariots demanded land from the State of Qi, and the western territory of the State of Qi was at their fingertips.

古文：王之地一经两海，要约天下，是燕、赵无齐、楚，齐、楚无燕、赵也。
现代文：大王的领土横贯西海、东海，扼制天下，于是燕国、赵国不能与齐国、楚国联合，齐国、楚国也不能与燕国、赵国相援助。
English: The Great King's land stretches across the East and West Seas, binding the princes of the world. Thus, Yan and Zhao were not supported by Qi and Chu, and Qi and Chu were not supported by Yan and Zhao.

古文：然后危动燕、赵，直摇齐、楚，此四国者不待痛而服矣。 
现代文：然后大王再威逼燕国、赵国，直捣齐国、楚国，这四个国家不等到被痛击就会降服了。 
English: Then the great king forced Yan Guo, Zhao Guo, and directly attacked Qi Guo and Chu Guo. These four countries would surrender without waiting to be beaten.

古文：王从之，止武安君而谢韩、魏，使黄歇归，约亲于楚。
现代文：秦王听从了黄歇的意见，令白起停止行动，辞谢了韩国、魏国军队，派黄歇归国，与楚国缔结亲善睦邻邦交条约。
English: The Qin king listened to Huang Xie's opinion, ordered Bai Ju to stop the action, thanked the Korean and Wei armies, sent Huang Xie back to China, and concluded a treaty of goodwill and good neighborly relations with Chu.

