古文：◎仁宗
现代文：仁宗
English: Nizong

古文：仁宗敬天体道纯诚至德弘文钦武章圣达孝昭皇帝，讳高炽，成祖长子也。
现代文：仁宗敬天体道纯诚至德弘文钦武章圣达孝昭皇帝，叫朱高炽，明成祖长子。
English: Emperor Zhu Gaozhao, the eldest son of Emperor Mingcheng, revered the celestial path as pure and virtuous.

古文：母仁孝文皇后，梦冠冕执圭者上谒。寤而生帝。
现代文：其母仁孝文皇后，梦见一个头戴礼帽、手拿白圭的人请见，醒来便生下昭皇帝。
English: His mother, Empress Ren Xiaowen, had a dream about a man wearing a ceremonial hat and holding a white carnation. When she woke up, she gave birth to Emperor Zhao.

古文：幼端重沉静，言动有经。
现代文：仁宗幼年时端重沉静、言行有礼。
English: When he was a child, Rinzong was very quiet and polite.

古文：稍长习射，发无不中。
现代文：稍长大，练习骑射，百发百中。
English: He grew up a bit, practiced riding and shooting, and made a hundred shots.

古文：好学问，从儒臣讲论不辍。
现代文：他勤奋好学，跟从儒臣讲经论史，滔滔不绝。
English: He is diligent and eager to learn. He lectures on history with Confucius and talks endlessly.

古文：洪武二十八年，册为燕世子。
现代文：洪武二十八年册封为燕世子。
English: In the 28th year of Hongwu's reign, he was awarded the title of "Yan Zi."

古文：尝命与秦、晋、周三世子分阅卫士，还独后。
现代文：太祖曾命令他与秦、晋、周三世子分阅卫士，高炽一人后还。
English: The great-grandfather had ordered him to share guards with Qin, Jin, and the third generation, and Gao Hui was the last one to leave.

古文：问之。对曰： 旦寒甚，俟朝食而后阅，故后。 
现代文：问他，回答说： 早晨非常寒冷，等待朝食后再检阅，所以后回。 
English: When asked, he replied: "It's very cold in the morning. I'm waiting for the inspection after breakfast, so I'll come back later."

古文：又命分阅章奏，独取切军民利病者白之。
现代文：又命他分阅奏章，他专取有关军民利弊的奏章陈述。
English: He also ordered him to read out the report, and he specifically took the report on the advantages and disadvantages of the military and the people.

古文：或文字谬误，不以闻。
现代文：有的有文字错误就不奏述。
English: If there are any typographical errors, they will not be reported.

古文：太祖指示之曰： 儿忽之耶？ 
现代文：太祖指着对他说 ：你疏忽了么？ 
English: The great-grandfather pointed at him and said, "Are you negligent?"

古文：对曰： 不敢忽，顾小过不足渎天德。 
现代文：他回答说： 不敢疏忽，只是考虑到小过失不足以冒犯皇上。 
English: He answered: I dare not be negligent, but I consider that a small fault is not enough to offend the Emperor.

古文：又尝问： 尧、汤时水旱，百姓奚恃？ 
现代文：又曾问： 尧、汤时，水、旱灾频繁，百姓依赖什么？ 
English: He also asked, "What do the people rely on when there are frequent floods and droughts?

古文：对曰： 恃圣人有恤民之政。 
现代文：回答说 ：依靠圣人有抚恤百姓的政策。 
English: He replied: Relying on sages to have a policy of caring for the people.

古文：太祖喜曰： 孙有君人之识矣。 
现代文：太祖高兴地说 ：孙子有君主的眼光。 
English: The great-grandfather said happily, "My grandson has a monarch's vision."

古文：成祖举兵，世子守北平，善拊士卒，以万人拒李景隆五十万众，城赖以全。
现代文：成祖举兵，世子留守北平，善于抚慰士卒，以万余人抗拒李景隆五十万人，北平城因此得以保全。
English: Cheng Zu raised an army, his son stayed behind in Peiping, and was good at comforting his soldiers. With more than 10,000 people, he resisted Li Jinglong's 500,000 people, and Peiping City was thus preserved.

古文：先是，郡王高煦、高燧俱以慧黠有宠于成祖。
现代文：起初，郡王高煦、高燧都以聪明狡猾而得宠于明成祖。
English: At first, the county king, Gao Jiong, and Gao Jiong were favored by Ming Chengzu because of their cleverness and cunning.

古文：而高煦从军有功，宦寺黄俨等复党高燧，阴谋夺嫡，谮世子。
现代文：高煦又因从军有功，宦寺黄俨等与高燧结党营私，想阴谋夺取嫡长子之位，说世子的坏话。
English: Because Gao Yao had distinguished himself in the army, Huang Yao and others in the Ancestral Temple plotted with Gao Yao to usurp the position of the eldest legitimate son and speak ill of the heir.

古文：会朝廷赐世子书，为离间。世子不启缄，驰上之。
现代文：正好朝廷赐给世子诏书，定想离间父子二人，世子不启缄，驰马上报。
English: Just as the imperial court issued an imperial edict to the heir, it was decided that if the father and son were to be separated, the heir would not initiate divorce, but would immediately report it.

古文：而俨先潜报成祖曰： 世子与朝廷通，使者至矣。 
现代文：然而，黄俨已先告诉成祖说： 世子与朝廷通好，使者到了。 
English: However, Huang Yao had already told Cheng Zu: The emperor and the imperial court are on good terms, and the messenger has arrived.

古文：无何，世子所遣使亦至。
现代文：不久，世子派遣的使者也到了。
English: Soon, the messenger sent by the world also arrived.

古文：成祖发书视之，乃叹曰： 几杀吾子。 
现代文：成祖打开诏书一看，长叹一声说 ：差点杀掉我的儿子。 
English: When Cheng Zu opened the edict, he sighed and said, "I almost killed my son."

古文：成祖践阼，以北平为北京，仍命居守。
现代文：成祖登基，以北平为北京，仍命世子居守。
English: Cheng Zu ascended to the throne, with Beiping as Beijing, still living with his heir.

古文：永乐二年二月，始召至京，立为皇太子。
现代文：永乐二年二月，召至北京，立为皇太子。
English: In February of the second year of Yongle, he was summoned to Beijing and installed as crown prince.

古文：成祖数北征，命之监国，裁决庶政。
现代文：成祖屡次北征，命他监国，裁决平民政事。
English: Chengzu repeatedly led the Northern Expedition, ordered others to supervise the country, and adjudicated on civil affairs.

古文：四方水旱饥馑，辄遣振恤，仁闻大著。
现代文：四方水旱灾荒，往往遣使赈恤，因而名声大振。
English: The floods, droughts, and famines in the four directions often make people feel depressed, which is why it is so famous.

古文：而高煦、高燧与其党日伺隙谗构。
现代文：而高煦、高燧与其党徒时时找机会讲坏话。
English: However, Gao Rong, Gao Rong and his party members are always looking for opportunities to speak ill of others.

古文：或问太子： 亦知有谗人平？ 
现代文：或直问太子： 知道有讲坏话的人么？ 
English: or directly ask the prince: Do you know anyone who speaks ill of you?

古文：曰： 不知也，吾知尽子职而已。 
现代文：朱高炽回答说： 不知道，我只知道尽自己的职责而已。 
English: Zhu Gaoqing replied: I don't know, I only know how to do my duty.

古文：十年，北征还，以太子遣使后期，且书奏失辞，悉徵宫僚黄淮竺下狱。
现代文：永乐十年，成祖北征回京，因太子遣使迎接误期，且书奏失言，将官僚黄淮等全部投入监狱。
English: In the tenth year of Yongle, Cheng Zu returned to Beijing for the Northern Expedition. Because the prince sent an envoy to meet the delay and made a slip of the tongue, he threw all the bureaucrats, including Huang Huai, into prison.

古文：十五年，高煦以罪徙乐安。
现代文：十五年，高煦犯罪，徙迁乐安。
English: Fifteen years, high-rise crime, migration and happiness.

古文：明年，黄俨等复谮太子擅赦罪人，宫僚多坐死者。
现代文：第二年，黄俨等又趁机诬陷太子擅自赦免罪人，宫僚大多连坐而死。
English: The following year, Huang Qi and others took advantage of the opportunity to frame the crown prince for pardoning criminals without authorization, and most of the palace officials died in the process.

古文：侍郎胡濙奉命察之，密疏太子诚敬孝谨七事以闻，成祖意乃释。
现代文：侍郎胡氵荧奉命查实，秘密奏疏太子确实孝敬严谨，奏疏中列举七件事上报，成祖这才大松一口气。
English: The chamberlain, Hu Yuxuan, was ordered to investigate and found that the secret of the Prince of Songzo was indeed strict in terms of filial piety. He enumerated seven things in the Songzo and reported them to the emperor. Chengzu was greatly relieved.

古文：其后黄俨等谋立高燧，事觉伏诛，高燧以太子力解得免，自是太子始安。
现代文：事后黄俨等谋立高燧为皇长子，事情暴露后被诛灭，高燧因得太子解救而幸免，从此，太子之事才开始安定。
English: After the fact, Huang Qi and others tried to set up Gao Qi as the eldest son of the emperor. After the affair was exposed, they were annihilated. Gao Qi was spared because of the rescue of the eldest son. From then on, the situation of the prince began to stabilize.

古文：二十二年七月，成祖崩于榆木川。
现代文：永乐二十二年七月，成祖死于榆木川。
English: In July of the 22nd year of Yongle, Cheng Zu died in Zhangmu River.

古文：八月甲辰，遗诏至，遣皇太孙迎丧开平。
现代文：八月二日，遗诏到，派皇太孙迎丧开平。
English: On August 2nd, the imperial edict arrived, dispatching the Emperor's grandson, Kaiping, to attend the funeral.

古文：丁未，出夏原吉等于狱。
现代文：五日，夏原吉释出监狱。
English: On the fifth day, Natsuhara Yoshitaka was released from prison.

古文：丁巳，即皇帝位。
现代文：十五日，朱高炽即皇帝位。
English: On the fifteenth day, Zhu Gaoqing ascended to the throne.

古文：大赦天下，以明年为洪熙元年。
现代文：在全国大肆赦免，以第二年为洪熙元年。
English: He pardoned a large number of people across the country, with the second year being the first year of Hongxi.

古文：罢西洋宝船、迤西市马及云南、交阯采办。
现代文：停止西洋宝船、迤西市马及云南、交趾采办。
English: Stop purchasing Western treasure ships, horses from Shaanxi, horses from Yunnan, and horses from Jiaozi.

古文：戊午，复夏原吉、吴中官。
现代文：十六日，恢复夏原吉、吴中官职。
English: On the 16th, Xia Yuanji and Wu Zhong were reinstated as officials.

古文：己未，武安侯郑亨镇大同，保定侯孟瑛镇交阯，襄城伯李隆镇山海，武进伯朱荣镇辽东。
现代文：十七日，武安侯郑亨镇守大同，保定侯孟瑛镇守交趾，襄城伯李隆镇守山海关，武进伯朱荣镇守辽东。
English: On the 17th, Wuan Hou Zheng Heng Town guarded Datong, Baoding Hou Meng Ying Town guarded Jiaozuo, Xiangcheng Bo Li Long Town guarded Shanhaiguan, and Wujin Bo Zhu Rong Town guarded Liaodong.

古文：复设三公、三孤官，以公、侯、伯、尚书兼之。
现代文：重新设置三公、三孤官，以公、侯、伯、尚书兼任。
English: Re-establish the three public and three isolated officials, with the public, the lord, the noble, and the scholar concurrently serving.

古文：进杨荣太常寺卿，金幼孜户部侍郎，兼大学士如故，杨士奇为礼部左侍郎兼华盖殿大学士，黄淮通政使兼武英殿大学士，俱掌内制，杨溥为翰林学士。
现代文：进升杨荣为太常寺卿，金幼孜为户部侍郎，兼大学士如往常一样，杨士奇为礼部左侍郎兼华盖殿大学士，黄淮为通政使兼武英殿大学士，全权掌管内部制度，杨溥为翰林学士。
English: Jin Sheng Yang Rong is the Lord of Taizhong Temple, Jin Yu Ze is the Attendant of the Household Department and the University Scholar, as usual, Yang Shqi is the Left Attendant of the Ceremonial Department and the University Scholar of the Huagai Hall, Huang Huai is the Political Envoy and the University Scholar of the Wu Ying Hall, in full control of the internal system, and Yang Jie is the Hanlin Scholar.

古文：辛酉，镇远侯顾兴祖充总兵官，讨广西叛蛮。
现代文：十九日，镇远侯顾兴祖为总兵官，征讨广西叛蛮。
English: On the 19th, Gu Xingzu, the mayor of Zhenyuan, became the commander-in-chief of the army to fight against the rebels in Guangxi.

古文：甲子，汰冗官。
现代文：二十二日，淘汰多余官员。
English: On the 22nd, redundant officials will be eliminated.

古文：乙丑，召汉王高煦赴京。
现代文：二十三日，召汉王高燧赴京。
English: On the 23rd, Han Wang Gaozong was summoned to Beijing.

古文：戊辰，官吏谪隶军籍者放还乡。
现代文：二十六日，官吏流放隶属军籍的释放还乡。
English: On the 26th, the officials exiled from the military were released and returned to their hometowns.

古文：己巳，诏文臣年七十致仕。
现代文：二十七日，下诏文臣年满七十便辞官退职。
English: On the 27th day of the following month, Wencheng resigned from his post upon reaching the age of 70.

古文：九月癸酉，交阯都指挥方政与黎利战于茶笼州，败绩，指挥同知伍云力战死。
现代文：九月一日，交趾都指挥方政与黎利战于荣笼州，方政失败，指挥同知伍云奋力战死。
English: On September 1st, the commander Fang Zheng and the commander Li Li fought in Rongcheng Prefecture. Fang Zheng was defeated, and the commander Tong Zhi Wuyun died in the battle.

古文：丙子，召尚书黄福于交阯。
现代文：四日，召尚书黄福于交趾。
English: On the fourth day, Shangshu Huangfu was summoned to the meeting.

古文：庚辰，河溢开封，免税粮，遣右都御史王彰抚恤之。
现代文：八日，开封附近黄河涨水，免当地税粮，遣右都御史王彰抚恤。
English: On the 8th, the Yellow River near Kaifeng was flooded, local tax and grain were exempted, and the right-wing governor Wang Zhang was given a pension.

古文：壬午，敕自今官司所用物料于所产地计直市之，科派病民者罪不宥。
现代文：十日，命令从今起，官吏所用物料在所产地计算价值买卖，科派损害百姓的罪不饶恕。
English: On the 10th, it was ordered that from now on, the value of materials used by officials should be calculated and sold in the place of origin, and the crime of damaging the people would not be forgiven.

古文：癸未，礼部尚书吕震请除服，不许。
现代文：十一日，礼部尚书吕震请求除去丧服，不许。
English: On the 11th day, the Ministry of Ceremonies requested the removal of the mourning clothes, but it was not allowed.

古文：乙酉，增诸王岁禄。
现代文：十三日，增加诸王俸禄。
English: On the 13th, the king's stipend was increased.

古文：丙戌，以风宪官备外任，命给事中萧奇等三十五人为州县官。
现代文：十四日，以风宪官备外任，命给事中萧奇等三十五人为州县官。
English: On the 14th, with the style of a gendarme preparing for an outside post, Xiao Qi and other thirty-five people were appointed as state and county officials.

古文：丁亥，黎利寇清化，都指挥同知陈忠战死。
现代文：十五日，黎利攻掠清化，都指挥同知陈忠战死。
English: On the fifteenth day, Lili attacked, plundered and purified, all under the command of his comrade Chen Zhong, who died in battle.

古文：戊子，始设南京守备，以襄城伯李隆为之。
现代文：十六日，开始设置南京守备，以襄城伯李隆充任。
English: On the 16th, the Nanjing garrison began to be set up, with Xiangcheng Mayor Li Long as commander.

古文：乙未，散畿内民所养官马于诸卫所。
现代文：二十三日，分散畿田百姓所养官马于各卫所。
English: On the 23rd, the horses raised by the villagers in the Kita district were dispersed to various sanatoriums.

古文：戊戌，赐吏部尚书蹇义及杨士奇、杨荣、金幼孜银章各一，曰 绳愆纠缪 ，谕以协心赞务，凡有阙失当言者，用印密封以闻。
现代文：二十六日，赐吏部尚书蹇义及杨士奇、杨荣、金幼孜银章各一枚，叫 绳愆纠缪 ，要他们同心协力参与重要事务，凡有阙失应当说明的，均用此印密封上报。
English: On the 26th, he gave a silver medal to Shang Shuxin Yi, Yang Shqi, Yang Rong and Jin Yuzi of the Personnel Department, and asked them to work together to participate in important affairs. If there were any shortcomings, they should be reported with this seal.

古文：冬十月壬寅，罢市民间金银，革两京户部行用库。
现代文：冬十月一日，停止民间买卖金银，革除两京户部行用仓库。
English: On the first day of October in winter, the private sale and purchase of gold and silver was stopped, and the warehouses used by the two Beijing households were removed.

古文：癸卯，诏天下都司卫所修治城池。
现代文：二日，下诏天下都司卫所修治城池。
English: On the second day, it was announced that the world's largest public health institute would be built to administer the city.

古文：戊申，通政使请以四方雨泽章奏送给事中收贮。
现代文：七日，通政使请求以四方雨泽章奏送给事中收藏。
English: On the seventh day, the diplomatic envoy requested that the four-way Yuzawa chapter be sent to the collection.

古文：帝曰： 祖宗令天下奏雨泽，欲知水旱，以施恤民之政。
现代文：仁宗说 ：祖宗命天下上奏雨泽，是想知道水旱，以施行恤民之政。
English: Ninsong said, "It was my ancestor's will to make the rain and the drought known to the world in order to carry out the policy of caring for the people.

古文：积之通政司，既失之矣，今又令收贮，是欲上之人终不知也。
现代文：聚积到通政司，既已全部逾期，现在又令收藏，是想上面最终不知道。
English: The accumulation to the Secretary of State, which has already been fully overdue, is now a collection, in the hope that the above will eventually not know.

古文：自今奏至即以闻。 
现代文：从今以后奏章一到即刻上报。 
English: From now on, the score will be announced immediately.

古文：己酉，册妃张氏为皇后。
现代文：八日，册立妃张氏为皇后。
English: On the 8th, Princess Zhang was enthroned as empress.

古文：壬子，立长子瞻基为皇太子。
现代文：十一日，立长子朱瞻基为皇太子。
English: On the 11th day of the month, the eldest son Zhu Zhanji became crown prince.

古文：封子瞻埈为郑五，瞻墉越王，瞻墡襄王，瞻堈荆王，瞻墺淮王，瞻垲滕王，瞻垍梁王，瞻埏卫王。
现代文：封子瞻为郑王，瞻墉为越王，瞻土善为襄王，瞻土冈为荆王，瞻土奥为淮王，瞻垲为滕王，瞻土自为梁王，瞻埏为卫王。
English: Fuzizizhan is the king of Zheng, Zhanqun is the king of Yue, Zhanqun is the king of Xiang, Zhanqun is the king of Jing, Zhanqun is the king of Au, Zhanqun is the king of Teng, Zhanqun is the king of Liang, Zhanqun is the king of Wei.

古文：乙卯，诏中外官举贤才，严举主连坐法。
现代文：十四日，诏中外官推举贤才，严格推荐主连坐之法。
English: On the 14th, the Foreign Minister issued an edict to promote talents and strictly recommend the method of sitting in the front row.

古文：丁巳，令三法司会大学士、府、部、通政、六科于承天门录囚，著为令。
现代文：十六日，令三执法部门官吏会同大学士、府、部、通政、六科在承天门审查囚犯，写成法令。
English: On the 16th, the officials of the three law enforcement departments were ordered to review the prisoners together with university professors, prefectural government, ministries, departments, and six departments in Chengtianmen and write a decree.

古文：庚申，增京官及军士月廪。
现代文：十九日，增加京官及军士每月粮食。
English: On the 19th, the monthly food rations for Beijing officials and military officers were increased.

古文：丁卯，擢监生徐永潜等二十人为给事中。
现代文：二十六日，提升监生徐永氵晋等二十人为给事中。
English: On the 26th, 20 people, including the promoted inmate Xu Yongbaijin, were in the process of being transferred.

古文：十一月壬申朔，诏礼部： 建文诸臣家属在教坊司、锦衣卫、浣衣局及习匠、功臣家为奴者，悉宥为民，还其田土。
现代文：十一月一日，诏礼部： 建文诸臣家属在教坊司、锦衣卫、浣衣局及习匠、功臣家为奴的，全部宽饶为民，归还其田土。
English: On November 1st, the Department of Imperial and Ceremonial Affairs: Jianwen, the families of all the vassals who had been enslaved by the Minister of Education, the Inspector of Clothing, the Bureau of Clothing, and the apprentices and meritorious vassals, were all released and returned to their land.

古文：言事谪戍者亦如之。 
现代文：谈论政事被贬流放的也按上例办理。 
English: Talking about politics with those who have been exiled is also handled according to the above example.

古文：癸酉，诏有司： 条政令之不便民者以闻，凡被灾不即请振者，罪之。 
现代文：二日，下诏有关官吏： 分条陈述政策法令对百姓不利的方面上报。凡是遭灾而不即时请求赈济的，加罪。 
English: On the second day, the relevant officials issued the following edict: Report the unfavorable aspects of policies and decrees to the people in separate articles. Anyone who is affected by a disaster and does not immediately request relief will be punished.

古文：阿鲁台来贡马。
现代文：阿鲁台前来进贡马匹。
English: Arutai came to collect the tribute horses.

古文：甲戌，诏群臣言时政阙失。
现代文：三日，诏群臣讨论时政得失。
English: On the third day, the Emperor's ministers discussed the gains and losses of the era.

古文：乙亥，赦兀良哈罪。
现代文：四日，赦免兀良哈罪行。
English: On the 4th, he pardoned the crimes of Ailiangha.

古文：始命近畿诸卫官军更番诣京师操练。
现代文：开始命令近畿各卫官军轮番到京师操练。
English: At the beginning, he ordered the guards of the Kinki region to come to the capital in rotation to practice.

古文：丙子，遣御史巡察边卫。
现代文：五日，遣御史巡查边境各卫。
English: On the fifth day, envoys from the Imperial Household Agency came to inspect the border guards.

古文：癸未，遣御史分巡天下，考察官吏。
现代文：十二日，遣御史分巡天下，考察官吏。
English: On the 12th, Emperor Go-Seki went on a tour of the country to inspect officials.

古文：丙戌，赐户部尚书夏原吉 绳愆纠缪 银章。
现代文：十五日，赐户部尚书夏原吉 绳愆纠缪 银章。
English: On the fifteenth day of the month, he awarded the silver medal to Shoshu Natsuhara Yoshitaka, Tsuneyoshi Tsuchimasu, and others of the Household Division.

古文：己丑，礼部奏冬至节请受贺，不许。
现代文：十八日，礼部奏冬至节请接受朝臣庆贺，不许。
English: On the 18th, the winter solstice festival, please accept the courtier's celebration, not allowed.

古文：庚寅，敕诸将严边备。
现代文：十九日，告诫边将要严格边防守备。
English: On the 19th, they warned that they would be on high alert.

古文：辛卯，禁所司擅役屯田军士。
现代文：二十日，禁止卫所官吏擅自役使屯田军士。
English: On the 20th, officials of the National Guard Bureau were prohibited from serving as Tonden sergeants without authorization.

古文：壬辰，都督方政同荣昌伯陈智镇交阯。
现代文：二十一日，都督方政同荣昌伯陈智镇守交趾。
English: On the 21st, Governor Fang Zheng met with Rong Changbo Chen Zhi Zhen.

古文：是月，谕蹇义、杨士奇、夏原吉、杨荣、金幼孜曰： 前世人主，或自尊大，恶闻直言，臣下相与阿附，以至于败。
现代文：这一月，告诉蹇义、杨士奇、夏原吉、杨荣、金幼孜说： 前世人君，或妄自尊大，厌恶听信直言，臣下相继阿谀奉承，以至于灭亡。
English: This month, he told Zhai Yi, Yang Shiqi, Xia Yuanji, Yang Rong, and Jin Yuzi: "The former world ruler, or arrogant, detested listening to the truth, and his subjects flattered him one after another, to the point of perishing.

古文：朕与卿等当用为戒。 
现代文：我与你们应当引以为戒。 
English: You and I should take heed.

古文：又谕士奇曰： 顷群臣颇怀忠爱，朕有过方自悔，而进言者已至，良惬朕心。 
现代文：又告诉杨士奇说 ：近来群臣颇怀念忠爱之人，朕有过应当自己悔改，而进言者自己来，朕已心满意足了。 
English: He also told Yang Shichi, "Recently, the courtiers have been quite nostalgic for those who are loyal and loved. I have had people who should have repented on their own, but those who came to speak on their own, I am satisfied with my heart.

古文：十二月癸卯，宥建文诸臣外亲全家戍边者，留一人，余悉放还。
现代文：十二月二日，宽恕建文诸臣外亲，全家戍边的，留下一人，其余全部放回。
English: On December 2, he pardoned Jianwen's vassals, relatives, and the whole family, leaving one person and returning the rest.

古文：辛亥，揭天下三司官姓名于奉天门西序。
现代文：十日，标帜天下三司官姓名于奉天门西墙。
English: On the 10th, banners with the names of the world's three highest-ranking officials were hung on the west wall of the Feng Tianmen Gate.

古文：癸丑，免被灾税粮。
现代文：十二日，免遭灾税粮。
English: On the 12th, tax grain was exempted from the disaster.

古文：庚申，葬文皇帝于长陵。
现代文：十九日，葬文皇帝于长陵。
English: On the 19th, Emperor Wen was buried in Changling Mausoleum.

古文：丙寅，镇远侯顾兴祖破平乐、浔州蛮。
现代文：二十五日，镇远侯顾兴祖攻破平乐、浔州蛮夷。
English: On the 25th, Zhenyuanhou Gu Xingzu defeated Pingle and Zhangzhou Barbarians.

古文：是年，丁阗、琉球、占城、哈密、古麻剌朗、满剌加、苏禄、瓦剌入贡。
现代文：这一年，于阗、琉球、占城、哈密、古麻剌朗、满剌加、苏禄、瓦剌入朝进贡。
English: In that year, tributes were paid to the imperial court from Yunnan, Ryukyu, Jamsung, Hami, Goma, Manchukuo, Sulu, and Wakkanai.

古文：洪熙元年春正月壬申朔，御奉天门受朝，不举乐。
现代文：洪熙元年春正月一日，到奉天门受朝贺，不奏乐。
English: On the first day of the first month of spring in the first year of Hongxi, he went to the Fengtian Gate to receive morning greetings, but did not play music.

古文：乙亥，敕内外群臣修举职业。己卯，享太庙。
现代文：四日，嘱咐内外群臣整治、兴办分内之事。八日，祭祀太庙。
English: On the fourth day, he ordered a group of ministers from inside and outside the country to rectify and set things in order. On the eighth day, the temple was dedicated.

古文：建弘文阁，命儒臣入直，杨溥掌阁事。
现代文：兴建弘文阁，命儒臣入阁供职，杨溥掌管阁事。
English: He built the Hongwen Pavilion, ordered Zhu Chen to serve in the cabinet, and put Yang Xuan in charge of cabinet affairs.

古文：癸未，以时雪不降，敕群臣修省。
现代文：十二日，当降雪时不降，告诫群臣修身反省。
English: On the 12th, when it snowed, it did not snow, and he admonished his retainers to self-cultivation and reflection.

古文：丙戌，大祀天地于南郊。奉太祖、太宗配。
现代文：十五日，在南郊大祭天地，顺便祭太祖、太宗。
English: On the fifteenth day, in the southern suburbs, a grand festival was held, in which Taizu and Taizong were also celebrated.

古文：壬辰，朝臣予告归省者赐钞有差，著为令。
现代文：二十一日，朝臣有功退休并归附反省的赐给钱钞各有差别，写成法令。
English: On the twenty-first day, the courtier retired with merit and attached the remorse of giving money and banknotes to each of the differences, and wrote a decree.

古文：己亥，布政使周干、按察使胡概、参政叶春巡视南畿、浙江。
现代文：二十八日，布政使周干、按察使胡概、参政叶春巡视南畿、浙江。
English: On the 28th, the political envoy Zhou Gan, the inspector Hu Qi, and the political appointee Ye Chun toured Nangui and Zhejiang.

古文：二月辛丑，颁将军印于诸边将。
现代文：二月一日，颁发将军印于各边将。
English: On February 1, the general seal was issued to all generals.

古文：戊申，祭社稷。
现代文：八日，祭社稷。
English: On the 7th day of the first month, the god of the shrine is worshipped.

古文：命太监郑和守备南京。
现代文：命太监郑和守备南京。
English: The eunuch Zheng He guarded Nanjing.

古文：丙辰，耕耤田。
现代文：十六日，亲自耕种田地。
English: On the 16th, I personally cultivated the fields.

古文：丙寅，太宗神主祔太庙。
现代文：二十六日，太宗神牌附祭于太庙。
English: On the 26th, the Taizong Shen plaque was attached to the temple.

古文：是月，南京地屡震。
现代文：本月，南京多次发生地震。
English: That month, there were several earthquakes in Nanjing.

古文：三月壬申，前光禄署丞权谨以孝行擢文华殿大学士。
现代文：三月二日，前光禄寺丞权谨以孝行擢升文华殿大学士。
English: On March 2nd, the former Kōroku-ji Chojun was promoted to the rank of a scholar of the University of the Palace of Literature for his filial duty.

古文：丁丑，求直言。
现代文：七日，求直言。
English: On the seventh day, ask for a straight answer.

古文：戊子，隆平饥，户部请以官麦贷之。
现代文：十八日，隆平发生饥荒，户部请求用官麦借给老百姓。
English: On the 18th, a famine occurred in Longping, and the household department requested to use official wheat to lend to the common people.

古文：帝曰： 即振之，何贷为。 
现代文：仁宗说： 立即赈济，为何要借贷。 
English: Rinzong said, "Let's immediately save money. Why do we need to borrow money?"

古文：己丑，诏曰： 刑者所以禁暴止邪，导民于善，非务诛杀也。
现代文：十九日，下诏说： 刑法只能禁暴止邪，把百姓往好的方向引导，并不是一定要诛杀。
English: On the 19th, the next edict said: Criminal law can only prohibit violence and stop evil, and guide the people in a good direction, not necessarily fight and kill.

古文：吏或深文傅会，以致冤滥，朕深悯之。
现代文：官吏或者把深奥的文字掺合在一起，牵强附会，以至于造成冤假错案，朕深深怜悯他们。
English: I have deep sympathy for officials who mix esoteric words together to create far-fetched notions, leading to unjust, false and wrongful cases.

古文：自今其悉依律拟罪。
现代文：从今以后全部依法律定罪。
English: From now on, everyone will be convicted according to the law.

古文：或朕过于嫉恶，法外用刑，法司执奏，五奏不允，同三公、大臣执奏，必允乃已。
现代文：或者朕过于厌恶，法外用刑，法官要上奏。五次复奏不许，同三公、大臣一起上奏，必须得到允许才能施行。
English: Or I am too disgusted, extrajudicial punishment, the judge must play it. Five times repeated performance is not allowed, and it must be played together with the three princes and the minister, and must be allowed to be implemented.

古文：诸司不得鞭囚背及加入宫刑。
现代文：诸官吏不得鞭打囚徒及乱加犯人宫刑。
English: Officials are not allowed to whip prisoners or randomly inflict corporal punishment on prisoners.

古文：有自宫者以不孝论。
现代文：有自处宫刑的以不孝罪论处。
English: Those who cut themselves off from others will be punished as unfilial.

古文：非谋反。勿连坐亲属。
现代文：不是谋反，不得连累亲属。
English: If it is not a conspiracy, relatives must not be implicated.

古文：古之盛世，采听民言，用资戒儆。
现代文：古之盛世，广听民言，以资历威望以一儆百。
English: In the golden age of the ancients, listening to the people's words, with seniority and prestige to be the best in a hundred.

古文：今奸人往往摭拾，诬为诽谤，法吏刻深，锻练成狱。
现代文：现在，奸人往往摭拾他人之言，诬告诽谤，法官严酷唯恐不能陷人于官司。
English: Nowadays, deceivers often pick up other people's words, falsely accuse them of slander, and judges are so strict that they are afraid of being sued.

古文：刑之不中，民则无措，其余诽谤禁，有告者一切勿治。 
现代文：刑法用得不当，百姓则不知所措，除去诽谤禁令，有上告者一律不予惩治。 
English: The criminal law is used inappropriately, and the people are at a loss. With the removal of the ban on defamation, all complainants will not be punished.

古文：庚寅，阳武侯薛禄为镇朔大将军，率师巡开平、大同边。
现代文：二十日，阳武侯薛禄为镇朔大将军，率师巡视开平、大同边境。
English: On the 20th, Yangwu Hou Xue Lu was appointed as the general of Zhenshuo, and led his division to inspect the border between Kaiping and Datong.

古文：辛卯，参将安平伯李安与荣昌伯陈智同镇交阯。
现代文：二十一日，参将安平伯李安与荣昌伯陈智同镇交趾。
English: On the 21st, Anping general Li An and Rongchang general Chen Zhi met in the same town.

古文：戊戌，将还都南京，诏北京诸司悉称行在，复北京行部及行后军都督府。
现代文：二十八日，将还都南京，下诏北京各部门官吏都称行在，恢复北京行部及行后军都督府。
English: On the 28th, the capital was returned to Nanjing, and officials from all departments in Beijing announced that they were present, restoring the Beijing headquarters and the military governor's office.

古文：是月，南京地屡震。
现代文：当月，南京多次发生地震。
English: That month, there were several earthquakes in Nanjing.

古文：夏四月壬寅，帝闻山东及淮、徐民乏食，有司徵夏税方急，乃御西角门诏大学士杨士奇草诏，免今年夏税及科粮之半。
现代文：夏四月三日，仁宗听说山东及淮、徐百姓缺乏粮食，有关官吏征夏税应急，乃在西角门诏大学士杨士奇草拟诏书，免今年夏税及秋粮的一半。
English: On the 3rd day of the 4th month of the summer, Renzong heard that the people of Shandong, Huai and Xu provinces were short of grain, and the relevant officials were levying an emergency summer tax. It was Yang Shichi, a scholar at Xiqiao Mengzhao University, who drafted an edict to exempt half of this year's summer tax and autumn grain.

古文：士奇言： 上恩至矣，但须户、工二部预闻。 
现代文：杨士奇说 ：皇上的恩典来了，但须户、工二部预先知道。 
English: Yang Shichi said, "The Emperor's grace has come, but it is necessary for the household and the second division of workers to know in advance.

古文：帝曰： 救民之穷当如救焚拯溺，不可迟疑。
现代文：仁宗说： 救济百姓穷困，犹如救火振溺，不可迟疑。
English: Rinzong said, "Relieving the poverty of the people is like putting out a fire to quench thirst. One should not hesitate to do so."

古文：有司虑国用不足，必持不决之意。 
现代文：官吏考虑国用不足，必持不同意见。 
English: Government officials are bound to have different opinions, considering the shortage of state-owned enterprises.

古文：趣命中官具楮笔，令士奇就门楼书诏。
现代文：赶快命令中官准备纸笔，命杨士奇就门楼书写诏书。
English: He quickly ordered the lieutenant-general to prepare a pen and paper and ordered Yang Shichi to write an edict about the gatehouse.

古文：帝览毕，即用玺付外行之。
现代文：仁宗看完后，立即用玉玺付外施行。
English: After watching it, Rinzong immediately put it on with a tambourine.

古文：顾士奇曰： 今可语部臣矣。 
现代文：望着杨士奇说 ：现在可以告诉部臣了。 
English: Looking at Yang Shiqi, he said, "Now I can tell my subordinates."

古文：设北京行都察院。
现代文：设置北京行都察院。
English: The Beijing Office of the Central Government was set up.

古文：壬子，命皇太子谒孝陵，遂居守南京。
现代文：十三日，命皇太子拜谒孝陵，居守南京。
English: On the 13th, he ordered the crown prince to visit the Mausoleum of Sun Yat-sen and stay in Nanjing.

古文：戊午，如天寿山，谒长陵。
现代文：十九日，到天寿山，拜谒长陵。
English: On the 19th, they went to Tianshou Mountain to visit the Long Mausoleum.

古文：己未，还宫。
现代文：二十日，回宫。
English: On the 20th, he returned to the Imperial Palace.

古文：是月，振河南及大名饥。
现代文：本月，赈济河南及大名饥荒。
English: This month, famine broke out in Henan Province and Daimyo Province.

古文：南京地屡震。
现代文：南京多次地震。
English: Nanjing has been hit by several earthquakes.

古文：五月己卯，侍读李时勉、侍讲罗汝敬以言事改御史，寻下狱。
现代文：五月十日，侍读李时勉、侍讲罗汝敬因谈论政事任御史，不久被投入监狱。
English: On May 10, the attendant Li Shizhen and the attendant Luo Ruqing were thrown into prison for talking about politics.

古文：庚辰，帝不豫，遣使召皇太子于南京。
现代文：十一日，仁宗身体不适，遣使召皇太子于南京。
English: On the 11th day, Emperor Nizong felt unwell and sent an envoy to summon the crown prince to Nanjing.

古文：辛巳，大渐，遗诏传位皇太子。
现代文：十二日，病情加重，遗诏传位皇太子。
English: On the 12th, his condition worsened, and he abdicated as crown prince.

古文：是日，崩于饮安殿，年四十有八。
现代文：当天，死于钦安殿，终年四十八岁。
English: On the same day, he died at Qin'an Palace, at the age of 48.

古文：秋七月己巳，上尊谥，庙号仁宗，葬献陵。
现代文：秋七月二日，上尊谥，庙号仁宗，葬于献陵。
English: On the 2nd day of the 7th month of autumn, Shangzong, whose temple name was Renzong, was buried in the mausoleum.

古文：赞曰： 当靖难师起，仁宗以世子居守，全城济师。
现代文：评论：当靖难之师兴起时，仁宗以世子居守北京，保全了城市，帮助了军队。
English: Comment: When the rise of Jingnan's division, Renzong with his heir stayed in Beijing, preserved the city and helped the army.

古文：其后成祖乘舆，岁出北征，东宫监国，朝无废事。
现代文：此后成祖登基，年年出兵北征，仁宗于东宫监国，朝中没有什么废事。
English: After that, Cheng Zu ascended to the throne, sent troops to the North every year, and Ninsong was in the East Palace supervising the country. There was no nonsense in the court.

古文：然中遘媒孽，濒于危疑者屡矣，而终以诚敬获全。
现代文：然而中途遭祸，多次濒于危险边缘，但最终以诚心而得到天下。
English: However, he met with a mishap in the middle of his journey and was on the brink of danger several times, but he eventually won the world with his sincerity.

古文：善乎其告人曰 吾知尽子职而已，不知有谗人也 ，是可为万世子臣之法矣。
现代文：他友好地告诉人们说 ：我只知道尽到自己的职责而已，不知有说坏话的人。 真可为万世子孙效法。
English: He kindly told people, "I only know how to do my duty, and I don't know anyone who speaks ill of me. I can truly be an example for future generations."

古文：在位一载。用人行政，善不胜书。
现代文：仁宗在位一年，用人行政，美不胜书。
English: Ren Zong reigned for one year, employed people in administration, and wrote many beautiful books.

古文：使天假之年，涵濡休养，德化之盛，岂不与文、景比隆哉。
现代文：假使他有生之年，包含休养，其功德造化之盛，岂不是能与汉文、景帝媲美么？
English: If he had lived his entire life, including his rest and recuperation, wouldn't his achievements and virtues have been comparable to those of Han Wen and Emperor Jing?

