古文：寿光侯者，汉章帝时人也。
现代文：寿光侯，是汉章帝时候的人。
English: Shouguang Hou is a person from the time of Emperor Han Zheng.

古文：能劾百鬼众魅，令自缚见形。
现代文：能弹劾各种鬼怪，使它们自投罗网并现出原形。
English: Can impeach all kinds of ghosts and monsters, so that they are caught in the net and appear in their original form.

古文：其乡人有妇为魅所病，侯为劾之，得大蛇数丈，死于门外，妇因以安。
现代文：他家乡有个妇女被精怪所害，他为她弹劾，得到几丈长的大蛇，死在门外，这妇女因此而太平了。
English: In his hometown, a woman was victimized by a genie. He impeached her, got a huge snake several feet long, and died outside the door. The woman was at peace because of this.

古文：又有大树，树有精，人止其下者死，鸟过之亦坠。
现代文：又有一棵大树，村里有精怪，人一走到这树下就死，鸟飞过这棵树也就摔下来了。
English: There was also a large tree in the village that contained a strange creature. If you walked under it, you would die, and if a bird flew over it, it would fall down.

古文：侯劾之，树盛夏枯落，有大蛇，长七八丈，悬死树间。
现代文：他去惩办，这棵树便在盛夏枯死落时，有条大蛇长六八丈，吊死在树中间。
English: He went to punish it, and when the tree withered and fell down in midsummer, a huge snake, six hundred and eight feet long, was found hanging dead in the middle of the tree.

古文：章帝闻之，征问。对曰： 有之。 
现代文：汉章帝听说了这件事，把他召来询问，他回答说： 有这件事。 
English: When Emperor Han Zheng heard of this, he summoned him for questioning. He replied, "There is this matter.

古文：帝曰： 殿下有怪，夜半后，常有数人，绛衣，披发，持火相随。
现代文：章帝说： 宫中有精怪：半夜过后，经常有几个人，穿着大红衣服，披着长头发，手拿火烛互相伴随着。
English: Zhang Di said: There is a strange phenomenon in the palace: after midnight, there are often several people, wearing bright red clothes, wearing long hair, holding candles and accompanying each other.

古文：岂能劾之？ 
现代文：你是否能把他们揭发出来呢？ 
English: Will you be able to expose them?

古文：侯曰： 此小怪，易消耳。 
现代文：寿光侯回答说： 这是小精怪，很容易消灭的。 
English: Shouguang Hou replied, "It's a small sprite, and it's easy to exterminate.

古文：帝伪使三人为之。
现代文：章帝便派三个人冒充精怪去做那种事。
English: Emperor Zhang sent three people to do the same thing, pretending to be elves.

古文：侯乃设法，三人登时仆地，无气。
现代文：寿光侯就施行法术，三个人一下子就倒在地上断了气。
English: Shouguang Hou then performed a spell, and all three of them collapsed to the ground and passed away.

古文：帝惊曰： 非魅也，朕相试耳。 
现代文：章帝惊恐地说： 他们不是精怪啊！
English: Zhang Di said in shock: Aren't they amazing!

古文：即使解之。
现代文：我只是试试你罢了。 
English: I'm just testing you.

古文：或云： 汉武帝时，殿下有怪常见，朱衣，披发，相随，持烛而走。
现代文：就马上让他解除法术。另一种说法是：汉武帝的时候，宫中有精怪，人们经常看见穿着红衣服、披着长头发的人互相陪伴着，手拿着火烛奔跑。
English: Another theory is that during the reign of Emperor Hanwu, there were strange creatures in the palace, and people often saw people wearing red clothes and long hair accompanying each other and running with candles in their hands.

古文：帝谓刘凭曰： 卿可除此否？ 凭曰： 可。 
现代文：武帝对刘凭说： 您可以除去这些精怪吗？ 刘凭说： 可以。 
English: Emperor Wu said to Liu Biao, "Can you remove these monsters?" Liu Biao said, "Yes."

古文：乃以青符掷之，见数鬼倾地。
现代文：说完他就用青色的符箓扔上去，便看见几个鬼倒地而死。
English: When he had said this, he threw a blue dart at it and saw several ghosts fall to the ground and die.

古文：帝惊曰： 以相试耳。 
现代文：武帝惊谎他说： 我不过是用它来试试你的法术罢了。 
English: Emperor Wu lied and said, "I'm just using it to test your magic."

古文：解之而苏。 
现代文：刘凭解除了法术，这几个 鬼 就复活了。
English: Liu Bei broke the spell, and the ghosts came back to life.

古文：樊英，隐于壶山。尝有暴风从西南起，英谓学者曰： 成都市火甚盛。 
现代文：樊英隐居在壶山，曾经有狂风从西南方刮起来，樊英对学生说： 成都城里火很旺。 
English: Zou Ying lived in seclusion in Jushan. Once, there was a strong wind blowing from the southwest. Zou Ying said to the students: There is a lot of fire in Chengdu.

古文：因含水嗽之。
现代文：就含了口水喷过去，又叫学生把这日期记下来。
English: He sprayed it with saliva and asked the students to write down the date.

古文：乃命计其时日，后有从蜀来者，云： 是日大火，有云从东起，须臾大雨火遂灭。 
现代文：后来有个从蜀国来的人说： 这一天火烧得很旺，忽然有乌云从东边升起，一会儿下起大雨来，火就熄灭了。 
English: Later, a person who came from Shu said: On this day, the fire was burning very vigorously. Suddenly, a dark cloud rose from the east, and a heavy rain fell in an instant, and the fire was extinguished.

古文：闽中有徐登者，女子化为丈夫，与东阳赵昺，并善方术。
现代文：闽中郡有个叫徐登的人，是由女人变为男人的。他与东阳郡的赵昺，都擅长法术。
English: There is a man named Xu Deng in Yuzhong County, who was transformed from a woman into a man. He and Zhao Yao from Dongyang County are both good at magic.

古文：时遭兵乱，相遇于溪，各矜其所能。
现代文：当时碰上战乱，他们在一条溪水边相遇，两人便都炫耀起自己的才能来。
English: During the war, they met at the edge of a stream and both showed off their talents.

古文：登先禁溪水为不流，昺次禁杨柳为生稊。
现代文：徐登先念起咒语禁令溪水，使它不再流动；赵昺便接着念起咒语禁令杨柳，使枯死的杨柳再生出嫩芽。
English: Xu Deng first recited the incantation of the ban on stream water, so that it would no longer flow; Zhao Wei then recited the incantation of the ban on willow, so that the dead willow would regrow shoots.

古文：二人相视而笑。
现代文：两人互相望着，会意地笑了。
English: The two can't help but smile at each other.

古文：登年长，昺师事之。
现代文：徐登年龄比赵昺大，赵昺就把他当作者师来侍奉。
English: Xu Deng is older than Zhao Yu, so Zhao Yu serves him as a writing teacher.

古文：后登身故，昺东入长安，百姓未知，昺乃升茅屋，据鼎而爨。主人惊怪，昺笑而不应，屋亦不损。
现代文：后来徐登死了，赵昌住到东边的章安县去了，百姓都不知道。有一次，赵昺竟登上草屋，用食鼎烧饭，房东十分惊奇，赵昺笑着不睬他，草屋也没被搞坏。
English: Later, Xu Deng died, and Zhao Chang went to live in Zhang'an County in the east, unbeknownst to the common people. Once, Zhao Yao actually boarded a grass hut and cooked rice with a canteen. The landlord was very surprised. Zhao Yao laughed and ignored him, and the grass hut was not damaged.

古文：赵昺尝临水求渡，船人不许。
现代文：赵昺曾到河边请求渡河，艄公不同意。
English: Zhao Yao once went to the river to request crossing the river, but Yao Gong did not agree.

古文：昺乃张帷盖，坐其中，长啸呼风，乱流而济。
现代文：赵昺就张挂起车上的帷幔和顶盖，然后坐在里边，长吼一声，呼来一阵风，便对着水流横渡过去了。
English: Zhao Yao hung up the curtains and the top cover of the car, then sat inside, shouted loudly, called out a gust of wind, and crossed against the current.

古文：于是百姓敬服，从者如归。
现代文：于是百姓都钦佩他，跟从他的人就象回到家似的。
English: As a result, the people all admired him, and people who worshiped him as a teacher flooded in.

古文：长安令恶其惑众，收杀之。
现代文：章安县令恨他蛊惑百姓，就把他抓住杀了。
English: The Zhang'an County government hated him for deceiving the people, so they caught him and killed him.

古文：民为立祠于永康，至今蚊蚋不能入。
现代文：百姓给他在永康县建造了祠堂，直到今天，蚊子也飞不进这祠堂。
English: The people built an ancestral hall for him in Yongkang County, and to this day, even mosquitoes cannot fly into this ancestral hall.

古文：徐登、赵昺，贵尚清俭，祀神以东流水，削桑皮以为脯。
现代文：徐登、赵昺，崇尚清洁俭朴，他们用向东流动着的水来祭神，把桑树皮削下来当作祭神的干肉。
English: Xu Deng and Zhao Wei advocated cleanliness and frugality. They used water flowing eastward to worship the gods, and cut down the bark of mulberry trees to use as dried meat to worship the gods.

古文：陈节访诸神，东海君以织成青襦一领遗之。
现代文：陈节去拜访各位神仙，东海龙王把一件用名贵的丝织品做的青色短袄送给了他。
English: When Chen Si went to visit the immortals, the Dragon King of the East Sea gave him a blue short gown made of precious silk fabric.

古文：宣城边洪，为广阳领校，母丧归家。
现代文：宣城县人边洪，担任广阳县领校。母亲死了，他回到家中，韩友来他家投宿。
English: Xuancheng County resident Bianhong, served as the headmaster of Guangyang County. His mother died, he returned home, and Han You came to stay at his home.

古文：韩友往投之，时日已暮，出告从者： 速装束，吾当夜去。 
现代文：当时天色已晚，韩友却出门吩咐随从： 快点整理好行李，我们今天夜里就走。 
English: At that time, it was late in the day, but Han You went out and told his entourage: Hurry up and pack your bags, we'll leave tonight.

古文：从者曰： 今日已暝，数十里草行，何急复去？ 
现代文：随从说： 今天天已黑了，而且有几十里的茅草小路要走，为什么要急着离开这儿继续赶路呢？ 
English: The follower said: Today it is already dark, and there are dozens of miles of thatched paths to walk, why hurry to leave here and continue the journey?

古文：友曰： 此间血覆地，宁可复住。 
现代文：韩友说： 这地方流血遍地，怎么能再呆下去？ 
English: Han You said, "This place is bleeding all over, how can I stay here any longer?"

古文：苦留之，不得。
现代文：随从苦口婆心地劝他留下，还是没成。
English: Followers tried hard to persuade him to stay, but to no avail.

古文：其夜，洪欻发狂，绞杀两子，幷杀妇。又斫父婢二人，皆被创，因走亡，数日，乃于宅前林中得之，已自经死。
现代文：那天夜里，边洪突然发疯，用绳子勒死了两个儿子，又杀掉了妻子，又砍他父亲的两个丫鬟，两个丫鬟都被他砍伤了；边洪也因此逃走了。过了几天，人们才在他家前面的树林里发现了他，但他已经上吊自杀了。
English: That night, Bianhong suddenly went mad, strangled his two sons with a rope, killed his wife, and slashed his father's two maids, both of whom were injured by him; Bianhong also fled. A few days later, people found him in the woods in front of his house, but he had hanged himself.

古文：鞠道龙，善为幻术。
现代文：鞠道龙善于变魔术。
English: Doryu is good at conjuring.

古文：尝云： 东海人黄公，善为幻，制蛇，御虎。
现代文：他曾说： 东海郡人黄公，善于变魔术，能制眼毒蛇，驾驭老虎。
English: He once said: Huang Gong, a resident of Donghai County, is good at magic, can control eye vipers, and drive tigers.

古文：常佩赤金刀。
现代文：他常常佩带铜刀。
English: He often carries a bronze knife.

古文：及衰老，饮酒过度。
现代文：等到他衰老了，喝酒老是喝过头。
English: When he got old, he always drank too much.

古文：秦末，有白虎见于东海，诏遣黄公以赤刀往厌之；术既不行，遂为虎所杀。 
现代文：秦朝末年，有只白虎出现在东海郡，皇帝下诏派黄公用铜刀去镇压它。但他的魔术已经不奏效了，于是就彼老虎咬死了。 
English: At the end of the Qin Dynasty, a white tiger appeared in Donghai County, and the emperor sent Huang Gong to suppress it with a copper sword. However, his magic was no longer effective, so he was bitten to death by the tiger.

古文：谢纠，尝食客，以朱书符投井中，有一双鲤鱼跳出，即命作脍。
现代文：谢糺有次曾请客人吃饭，他用丹砂写了符箓丢进井里，就有一对鲤鱼跳出来，他就叫厨师做成鱼末子，宴席上的人都吃上了。
English: Xie Yao once invited guests to dinner. He wrote a charm with red sand and threw it into the well. A pair of eels jumped out, and he asked the chef to make the youngest fish. Everyone at the banquet ate it.

古文：一坐皆得遍。晋永嘉中，有天竺胡人，来渡江南。
现代文：晋朝永嘉年间，有个印度人经过江南。
English: During the Yongjia era of the Jin Dynasty, an Indian passed through the south of the Yangtze River.

古文：其人有数术：能断舌复续，吐火。所在人士聚观。
现代文：这人有法术，能让舌头断了再连起来，又能吐火，当地的人都去围观。
English: The man had a spell that could reattach his tongue after it was broken, and he could also breathe fire. The local people gathered around to watch.

古文：将断时，先以舌吐示宾客，然后刀截，血流覆地，乃取置器中，传以示人，视之舌头，半舌犹在，既而还取含续之。
现代文：将要割断舌头的时候，他先把舌头吐出来给观众看，然后用刀一割，鲜血直淌，洒在地上。他就拿割下来的舌头放在器皿中，让大家传递观看。
English: When he is about to cut out his tongue, he first spits it out for the audience to see, then he cuts it with a knife, and the blood flows and spills onto the ground. He then places the cut tongue in a vessel and passes it around for everyone to see.

古文：坐有顷，坐人见舌则如故，不知其实断否。
现代文：再看他的舌头，半截还在嘴里。过了一会儿，大家把半截舌头还给他，他就拿了含在嘴里接舌头。
English: Look at his tongue again, half of it is still in his mouth. After a while, everyone gave him back the half of the tongue, and he took it and held it in his mouth to attach the tongue.

古文：其续断，取绢布，与人合执一头，对翦中断之；已而取两断合视，绢布还连续，无异故体。
现代文：坐了一会儿，坐席上的观众看他的舌头，便象原来的一样，不知道那舌头真的是否断过。他还会连接其他断了的东西：他拿一块绸布，和别人各握住一头，对着它一剪刀，把绸布的中间剪断了。接着拿了两个断头一合，大家一看，绸布又连接在一起，和原来的没有什么两样。
English: After sitting for a while, the audience at the table looked at his tongue and saw that it was the same as before, not knowing whether the tongue had really been broken. He would also connect other broken things: he took a piece of silk cloth, held one end with the other, held a pair of scissors against it, and cut the middle of the silk cloth. Then he took two broken ends and joined them, and everyone saw that the silk cloth was connected again, no different from the original.

古文：时人多疑以为幻，阴乃试之，真断绢也。
现代文：当时很多人都产生怀疑，认为这不过是一种魔术，就暗地里去试探了一下，真的是把绸布剪断了。
English: At that time, many people were suspicious and thought that this was just a magic trick, so they secretly went to test it and really cut the silk cloth.

古文：其吐火，先有药在器中，取火一片，与黍合之，再三吹呼，已而张口，火满口中，因就爇取以炊，则火也。
现代文：他吐火的时候，先拿出一个装有药物的器皿，取一片能燃烧的药，和麦芽糖搅合在一起放入口中，反复吹气；接着张开嘴，火便燃遍了口中；接着他又从嘴里引火来烧饭，那的的确确是火。
English: When he breathes fire, he first takes out a vessel containing medicine, takes a piece of medicine that can burn, mixes it with maltose, puts it in his mouth, and repeatedly breathes; then he opens his mouth, and the fire burns all over his mouth; then he draws fire from his mouth to cook rice, and it really is fire.

古文：又取书纸及绳缕之属，投火中，众共视之，见其烧爇了尽；乃拨灰中，举而出之，故向物也。
现代文：接着他又拿来书本、纸张以及粗绳细线之类投入火中，大家一起注意看，只见它们都烧成了灰烬。他便在灰里翻来检去，一会儿把它提出来，却仍然是原来的东西。
English: Then he took books, papers, coils of twine, and the like, and threw them into the fire, and they all burned to ashes, and he turned it over and over in the ashes, and after a while he took it out, and it was still the same.

古文：扶南王范寻养虎于山，有犯罪者，投与虎，不噬，乃宥之。
现代文：南海扶南国国王范寻把老虎养在山里，有谁犯了罪，就把他扔给老虎，老虎如果不吃，就赦免他。
English: King Fan Xuan of Nanhai Fu Nan Guo raised tigers in the mountains. If anyone committed a crime, he would be thrown to the tigers. If the tigers did not eat him, he would be pardoned.

古文：故山名大虫，亦名大灵。
现代文：所以人们把这座山叫做 大虫 ，也叫做 大灵 。
English: That's why people call this mountain the Big Worm, also known as the Great Spirit.

古文：又养鳄鱼十头，若犯罪者，投与鳄鱼，不噬，乃赦之，无罪者皆不噬。故有鳄鱼池。
现代文：范寻又养了十分鳄鱼，十头鳄鱼如果谁犯了罪，就把他扔给鳄鱼，鳄鱼不吃，就赦免他。没有罪的人都不会被吃掉，所以一直保存着这鳄鱼池。
English: Fan Xing also raised ten crocodiles. If anyone who committed a crime was thrown to the crocodiles, the crocodiles would forgive him if he did not eat it. People who did not commit crimes would not be eaten, so he always kept this crocodile pool.

古文：又尝煮水令沸，以金指环投汤中，然后以手探汤：其直者，手不烂，有罪者，入汤即焦。
现代文：范寻又曾烧水使水沸腾，把金戒指扔进这沸水中，然后让人用手在沸水中摸取。那平白无故的人，手不会被煮烂，有罪的人，手一伸进这沸水就被烫伤了。
English: Fan Hui also boiled water to make the water boil, threw the gold ring into the boiling water, and then let people feel it with their hands in the boiling water. The innocent person's hand will not be boiled, and the guilty person's hand will be burned as soon as it enters the boiling water.

古文：戚夫人侍儿贾佩兰，后出为扶风人段儒妻，说： 在宫内时，尝以弦管歌舞相欢娱，竞为妖服以趋良时。
现代文：汉高祖宠姬戚夫人的婢女贾佩兰，后来出宫做了扶风郡人氏段懦的妻子。她说在皇宫内的时候，曾经用丝竹奏乐载歌载舞来取乐，争着穿各种奇装异服来欢度那美好的时光。
English: Jia Peran, the maid of Henkel's beloved kith and kin, later became the wife of Fu Feng County's Duan Wu. She said that when she was in the palace, she used to make music with silk and bamboo, sing and dance to have fun, and compete to wear all kinds of strange clothes to spend that wonderful time.

古文：十月十五日，共入灵女庙，以豚黍乐神，吹笛，击筑，歌上灵之曲。
现代文：十月十五日，大家一起到灵女庙，用小猪、黍子等祭享神仙，吹笛击筑，歌唱《上灵之曲》。
English: On October 15th, everyone went to the Spirit Temple together, using piglets, pigtails, and other offerings to enjoy the gods, play the flute, and sing the "Song of the Upper Spirit."

古文：既而相与连臂踏地为节，歌赤凤皇来，乃巫俗也。
现代文：接着互相挽起手臂，用脚在地上打着节拍，歌唱《赤凤凰来》的曲子。
English: Then they put their arms around each other and beat the beat with their feet on the ground, singing the tune of "Red Phoenix."

古文：至七月七日，临百子池，作于阗乐，乐毕，以五色缕相羁，谓之 相连绶。 
现代文：这就是巫祝的习俗。
English: This is the custom of Wushu.

古文：八月四日，出雕房北户，竹下围棋。
现代文：到七月初七，来到百子池妻于阗国的音乐。
English: On the 7th day of the 7th month of the 7th month of the 7th month of the 7th month of the 7th month of the 7th month of the 7th month of the 7th month of the 7th month of the 7th month of the 7th month of the 7th month of the 7th month of the 7th month of the 7th month of the 7th month of the 7th month of the 7th month of the 7th month of the 7th month of the 7th month of the 7th month of the 7th month of the 7th month of the 7th month of the 7th month of the 7th month of the 7th month of the 7

古文：胜者，终年有福；负者，终年疾病。
现代文：音乐奏过后，就用五彩丝线互相缠缚，大家管它叫 相连绶 。
English: After the music is played, they tie each other up with multicolored silk threads, which is called "shenlian" by everyone.

古文：取丝缕，就北辰星求长命，乃免。九月，佩茱萸，食蓬饵，饮菊花酒，令人长命。
现代文：八月初四，走出雕刻着花纹的房间北门，在竹林中下围棋，赢的人就整年有福，输的人就整年生病，如果拿一些丝线，对着北极星祈求长寿，疾病就可以免除了。九月，佩带茱萸，吃蓬蒿做的饼，喝菊花酒，可使人长寿。
English: On the 4th day of the 8th month, go out of the north gate of the room carved with patterns, and play Go in the bamboo forest. The winner will be blessed all year round, and the loser will be sick all year round. If you take some silk thread and pray for longevity to the North Star, the disease can be avoided. In September, wearing dogwood, eating cakes made of pomelo, and drinking chrysanthemum wine can make people live longer.

古文：菊花舒时，幷采茎叶，杂黍米饟之，至来年九月九日始熟，就饮焉，故谓之 菊花酒。 
现代文：菊花盛开的时候。连茎和叶子都一起摘下来，把它和黄米拌和后酿造，到明年九月初九酒才酿成，就可以喝它了，所以，人们把它叫做菊花西。
English: When chrysanthemums are in full bloom, even the stems and leaves are plucked off, mixed with yellow rice and then brewed. By the beginning of September next year, nine wines will be brewed, and you can drink it, so people call it Chrysanthemum West.

古文：正月上辰，出池边盥濯，食蓬饵，以祓妖邪。
现代文：正月上旬的辰日，出门到池塘边舀水洗涤，吃蓬蒿做的饼，来祓除妖怪邪恶。
English: On the first day of the first half of the first month, go out to the edge of the pond to wash with water and eat cakes made of pongee to exorcise evil spirits.

古文：三月上已，张乐于流水。
现代文：三月上旬的已日，在流水边奏乐，皇宫里就是象这样来度过一年的。
English: It was a sunny day in early March, and the cranes were playing music by the water's edge, just as they do at the Imperial Palace to see out the year.

古文：如此终岁焉。 
现代文：汉武帝当时非常宠爱李夫人。
English: Emperor Hanwu was very fond of Mrs. Li.

古文：汉武帝时，幸李夫人，夫人卒后，帝思念不已。方士齐人李少翁，言能致其神。
现代文：李夫人死后，汉武帝老是想念她。齐国临淄的方士李少君说能招来她的灵魂。
English: After Mrs. Li's death, Emperor Han always missed her. Li Shaojun, a sorcerer in Linyi, Qi Province, said that he could attract her soul.

古文：乃夜施帷帐，明灯烛，而令帝居他帐遥望之。
现代文：于是他就在夜里设置了帷帐，点亮了灯烛，而叫汉武帝呆在别的帷帐里，远远地望着它。
English: So he set up a curtain in the night, lit a candle, and asked Emperor Hanwu to stay in another curtain and look at it from a distance.

古文：见美女居帐中，如李夫人之状，还幄坐而步，又不得就视。帝愈益悲感，为作诗曰： 是耶？
现代文：汉武帝看见一个美女在那帷帐中，就象卒夫人的样子，真是不好受，使回到自己的帷帐中，一会儿坐下去，一会儿又站起来走走，但又不能走近去细看，汉武帝更加感伤了，为此作了首诗说： 是她么？
English: Emperor Hanwu saw a beautiful woman in the curtain, who looked like a footman's wife. He felt really bad, so he went back to his own curtain, sat down for a while, stood up for a while and walked around, but he couldn't get closer to take a closer look. Emperor Hanwu was even more saddened, and for this reason he wrote a poem saying: Is it her?

古文：非耶？
现代文：不是她么？
English: Or not?

古文：立而望之，偏婀娜，何冉冉其来迟！ 
现代文：我伫立望着，她翩翩地多婀娜！为什么慢吞吞地来得这样不迅速？ 
English: I stood and watched, she was so graceful and graceful! Why did she come so slowly?

古文：令乐府诸音家弦歌之。
现代文：又命令音乐机美中的音乐家用琴瑟伴奏着来唱这首诗歌。
English: He ordered the musicians at the music school to sing along with the music.

古文：汉北海营陵有道人，能令人与已死人相见。
现代文：汉代北海郡营陵县有一个道士，能使活人与死人相见。
English: In the Han Dynasty, there was a Taoist monk in the Beihai Yingling Mausoleum who was able to make people meet the dead.

古文：其同郡人妇死已数年，闻而往见之，曰： 愿令我一见亡妇，死不恨矣。 
现代文：有一个和他同郡的人，妻子死了已经好几年，听说后就来求见他，说， 希望你能让我见一下死了的妻子，如果真能这样，我就是死了：也没有什么遗憾的了。 
English: One of his countrymen, whose wife had been dead for several years, came to see him when he heard of it, and said, "I wish you would let me see my dead wife, but if you do, I'll be dead: there's nothing to regret."

古文：道人曰： 卿可往见之。
现代文：这道士说： 您可以去见她。
English: The Taoist said, "You can go and see her."

古文：若闻鼓声，即出，勿留。 
现代文：可是，如果听到鼓声，就得马上出来，别再逗留。 
English: But if you hear the drums, you have to get out immediately, don't linger.

古文：乃语其相见之术。
现代文：于是这道士就告诉他相见的办法。
English: Then he taught him the art of meeting the dead.

古文：俄而得见之；于是与妇言语，悲喜恩情如生。
现代文：一会儿这人就见到了妻子，于是和妻子谈话，那悲袁、喜悦以及恩爱之情就象妻子生前一样。
English: In a moment the man saw his wife and spoke to her with the same sadness, joy, and tenderness that he had felt when she was alive.

古文：良久，闻鼓声，恨恨不能得住，当出户时，忽掩其衣裾户间，掣绝而去。
现代文：过了好久，他听见鼓声，十分惆怅，但不能再呆下去了。当他出门的时候，忽然他的衣襟被压在门边上，他拽断衣襟就走。
English: After a long time, he heard the sound of a drum. He was very tired, but he couldn't stay any longer. When he went out, his shirt collar was suddenly pressed against the edge of the door. He tugged at the collar and left.

古文：至后岁余，此人身亡。
现代文：过了一年多，这人死了。
English: More than a year later, the man died.

古文：家葬之，开冢，见妇棺盖下有衣裾。
现代文：人们把他和妻子合葬，掘开他妻子坟墓时，发现他妻子的棺材盖下有他那被拽断的衣襟。
English: They buried him with his wife, and when they dug up his wife's grave, they found his torn collar under the lid of her coffin.

古文：吴孙休有疾，求觋视者，得一人，欲试之。乃杀鹅而埋于苑中，架小屋，施床几，以妇人屐履服物着其上。使觋视之，告曰： 若能说此冢中鬼妇人形状者，当加厚赏，而即信矣。 
现代文：吴国景帝孙休有点小毛病，想请男巫来看病，我到了一个人，想先试试他，就杀了只鹅埋在养禽兽的苑囿中，在它上面盖起了小屋，放置了床和小矮桌，拿妇女的鞋子衣服等放在上页，让这男巫来看，并告诉他说： 如果你能说出这坟墓中女鬼的形状，就会给你丰厚的赏赐，而且也就相信你了。 
English: Wu Guojing Emperor Sun Xiu had a little problem and wanted to invite a male witch to see him. I found a person and wanted to try him first, so I killed a goose and buried it in an animal farm, built a hut on it, placed a bed and a low table, and put the woman's shoes, clothes, etc. on the upper page for the witch to see, and told him: If you can tell the shape of the female ghost in this grave, it will give you a rich reward, and also believe you.

古文：竟日无言。
现代文：这男巫却整天不吭声。
English: But the sorcerer remained silent the whole day.

古文：帝推问之急，乃曰： 实不见有鬼，但见一白头鹅立墓上，所以不即白之。
现代文：景帝摧问他问得急了，他才说： 实在没见到有什么鬼，只看见一只白头鹅立在坟上。
English: When Emperor Jing asked him a question in a hurry, he said, "I really didn't see any ghosts. I only saw a white-headed goose standing on the grave."

古文：疑是鬼神变化作此相，当候其真形而定。
现代文：我之所以不马上把它告诉你，是因为疑心这鬼怪变化成这模样来捉弄我们。但当我探测它的真正形状时，它却固定了不再有什么变动。
English: The reason I don't tell it to you right away is that the suspicion monster changes into this shape to play tricks on us, but when I detect its true shape, it is fixed and no longer changes.

古文：不复移易，不知何故，敢以实上。 
现代文：我实在不知道这是什么缘故，只好大胆地把它如实向皇上汇报了。 
English: I really don't know the reason for this, so I had no choice but to boldly report it to the Emperor.

古文：吴孙峻杀朱主，埋于石子冈。
现代文：吴国的孙峻杀了孙权的女儿朱主，把她埋在石子冈。
English: Sun Jun of the State of Wu killed Sun Quan's daughter, Zhu Shuzhu, and buried her in Shishioka.

古文：归命即位，将欲改葬之，冢墓相亚，不可识别。
现代文：归命侯孙皓即位，想要把她改葬，但坟墓排列在一起，不能辨别哪一个是来主的坟了，只有宫女还比较了解朱主死亡时所穿的衣服。
English: Hou Sun Rong ascended the throne and wanted to have her reburied, but the tombs were lined up together, and it was impossible to distinguish which one was the tomb of the deceased. Only the concubine knew more about the clothes worn by Zhu Rong at the time of his death.

古文：而宫人颇识主亡时所着衣服，乃使两巫各住一处，以伺其灵，使察鉴之，不得相近。
现代文：于是就让两个巫婆各自呆在一个地方，来探察她们的神通，派察战官监督她们，不准他们接近。
English: So they let the two witches stay in one place each, to explore their magical powers, and sent an inspector to supervise them and not allow them to approach.

古文：久时，二人俱白见一女人，年可三十余，上着青锦束头，紫白袷裳，丹绨丝履，从石子冈上半冈，而以手抑膝长太息，小住须臾，更进一冢上，便止，徘徊良久，奄然不见。
现代文：过了很长一段时间，两个巫婆都说： 看见一个女人，年龄大约在三十多，上面用青色的丝中包着头，穿着紫色面子、白色里子的夹衣与红色的绸缎鞋子，从石子冈上走过。走到半山时，她用手撑在膝盖上，长长地叹气。稍微停留了一会儿，她又向前走到一个坟上便停住了，在那坟边徘徊了很久，忽然不见了。 
English: After a long time, both witches said: I saw a woman, about thirty years old, with her head wrapped in blue silk, wearing a purple face, a white-lined jacket and red satin shoes, walk past the stone mound. When she reached the middle of the mountain, she held her hands on her knees and sighed for a long time. She paused for a moment, then walked forward to a grave and stopped. She wandered around the grave for a long time, and suddenly disappeared.

古文：二人之言，不谋而合。于是开冢，衣服如之。
现代文：两个巫婆的话，不约而同，于是就掘开坟墓，那女尸穿的衣服就象巫婆说的那样。
English: The two witches agreed, so they dug up the grave, and the corpse was dressed just as the witch had said.

古文：夏侯弘自云见鬼，与其言语。
现代文：夏侯弘自己说看见了鬼，和鬼谈了话。
English: Xia Houhong says he can see and talk to ghosts.

古文：镇西谢尚所乘马忽死，忧恼甚至。
现代文：镇西将军谢尚骑的马忽然死去，他忧伤烦恼到了极点。
English: The horse ridden by Zhenxi General Xie Shang suddenly died, and he was extremely sad and troubled.

古文：谢曰： 卿若能令此马生者，卿真为见鬼也。 
现代文：谢尚对夏侯弘说： 您如果能够使这匹马复活，那么您真的是看见过鬼了。 
English: Xie Shang said to Xia Houhong: If you can bring this horse back to life, then you really have seen a ghost.

古文：弘去良久，还曰： 庙神乐君马，故取之。
现代文：夏侯弘走了，过了很久他才回来，说： 庙里的神仙喜欢您的马，所以才把它牵走了。
English: Xia Houhong left, and it was a long time before he returned, saying, "The god in the temple likes your horse, so he took it away."

古文：今当活。 
现代文：现在这马可以活过来了。 
English: Now the horse can live.

古文：尚对死马坐，须臾，马忽自门外走还，至马尸间，便灭，应时能动，起行。
现代文：谢尚面对死马坐着。一会儿，马忽然从门外跑回来，跑到马的尸体上就消失了，那死马立即能动弹了，爬起来走了。
English: Xie Shan sat facing the dead horse. A moment later, the horse suddenly ran back from outside the gate, ran to the horse's body and disappeared. The dead horse was immediately able to move, got up and walked away.

古文：谢曰： 我无嗣，是我一身之罚。 
现代文：谢尚说： 我没有儿子，这是对我终生的惩罚。 
English: Xie Shang said, "I don't have a son, this is my lifelong punishment."

古文：弘经时无所告。
现代文：夏侯弘过了一段时间也没说出个究竟。
English: After a while, Xia Houhong did not say anything.

古文：曰： 顷所见，小鬼耳，必不能辨此源由。 
现代文：他说： 刚才我所看见的，都是些小鬼，肯定不能知道这件事的原因。 
English: He said: "All I saw just now were little devils. It's impossible to know the reason for this.

古文：后忽逢一鬼，乘新车，从十许人，着青丝布袍。
现代文：后来他忽然遇见一个鬼，乘着新的车子，跟随着十几个人，穿着青色丝绸做的衣袍。
English: Later, Xia Houhong suddenly met a ghost, sitting in a new ox cart, with more than ten followers, wearing a blue silk robe.

古文：弘前提牛鼻，车中人谓弘曰： 何以见阻？ 
现代文：夏侯弘走上前去提起拉车的牛的鼻子，牛车便停住了。车里的人对夏侯弘说： 为什么要阻拦我？ 
English: Xia Houhong stepped forward to lift the nose of the cow pulling the cart, and the cart stopped. The people in the cart said to Xia Houhong: Why are you stopping me?

古文：弘曰： 欲有所问。
现代文：夏侯弘说： 我想问件事。
English: Xia Houhong said: I want to ask about something.

古文：镇西将军谢尚无儿。
现代文：镇西将军谢尚没有儿子。
English: Zhenxi General Xie Shang did not have a son.

古文：此君风流令望，不可使之绝祀。 
现代文：这人英俊杰出，名声显扬，不能让他断了香火。 
English: This man is handsome, distinguished, and famous, and he cannot be allowed to burn out.

古文：军中人动容曰： 君所道正是仆儿。
现代文：车里的人被触动了心事，脸色也变了，他说： 您所说的人，正是我的儿子。
English: The man in the car was touched and his face changed. He said: "The person you are talking about is my son.

古文：年少时，与家中婢通誓约不再婚，而违约；今此婢死，在天诉之，是故无儿。 
现代文：他年轻的时候，和家里的婢女私通，发誓不再和别人结婚，但后来却违背了誓约。现在这婢女死了，在天上告他的状，所以他没有儿子。 
English: When he was young, he committed adultery with one of his maidservants and swore never to marry again, but he broke his promise; and now that maidservant is dead, she complains to heaven that he has no son.

古文：弘具以告。
现代文：夏侯弘把这些话都告诉了谢尚。
English: Xia Houhong told Xie Shang all these words.

古文：谢曰： 吾少时诚有此事。 
现代文：谢尚说： 我年轻时的确有这件事。 
English: Xie Shang said: I did have this incident when I was young.

古文：弘于江陵，见一大鬼，提矛戟，有随从小鬼数人。
现代文：夏侯弘在江陵，看见一个大鬼，提着兵器，有几个小鬼跟着。
English: Xia Houhong was in Jiangling when he saw a large demon carrying a weapon, followed by several smaller demons.

古文：弘畏惧，下路避之。
现代文：夏侯弘害怕了，走到路下躲避他。
English: Xia Houhong was scared and hid on the side of the road.

古文：大鬼过后，捉得一小鬼，问： 此何物？ 
现代文：大鬼经过后，他捉住了一个小鬼，问道： 这个是什么东西？ 
English: After the giant ghost passed by, he caught a small ghost and asked, "What is this thing?"

古文：曰： 杀人以此矛戟，若中心腹者，无不辄死。 
现代文：那小鬼说： 杀人就用这种兵器。如果刺中心腹，没有不马上死去的。 
English: The little ghost said, "This weapon is used to kill people. If you stab someone in the center of the abdomen, they will die immediately."

古文：弘曰： 治此病有方否？ 
现代文：夏侯弘说： 治疗这种疾病有单方吗？ 
English: Xia Houhong said: Is there a one-way cure for this disease?

古文：鬼曰： 以乌鸡薄之，即差。 
现代文：小鬼说： 用乌骨鸡覆盖在心腹上，病就好了。 
English: The imp said, "Cover your heart and abdomen with black-boned chicken, and your illness will be cured."

古文：弘曰： 今欲何行？ 
现代文：夏侯弘说： 现在你们要到什么地方去？ 
English: Xia Houhong said: Now where are you going?

古文：鬼曰： 当至荆、扬二州尔。 
现代文：小鬼说： 要到荆州、扬州。 
English: The imp said, "I want to go to Jingzhou and Yangzhou."

古文：时比日行心腹病，无有不死者，弘乃教人杀乌鸡以薄之，十不失八九。
现代文：这时候连日流行心腹病，得病的没有不死的。夏侯弘就叫人杀了乌骨鸡用来覆盖在病人的心腹上，百分之八九十都能奏效。
English: At this time, there was an epidemic of cardio-abdominal disease, and no one who got sick would not die. Xia Houhong had a black-boned chicken killed to be used to cover the patient's heart and abdomen, and it worked eighty to ninety percent of the time.

古文：今治中恶辄用乌鸡薄之者，弘之由也。
现代文：现在治疗突发的急病，总是采用乌骨鸡覆盖病灶的办法，这是夏侯弘开的头啊。
English: Nowadays, the treatment of sudden illness always uses the method of covering the source of the disease with black bone chicken, which is the idea of Xia Hou Hongkai.

