古文：大国不失其威，小国不失其卑。敌国不失其权。
现代文：面对大国不失我的威严，面对小国不失我的谦卑，国力相当的国家不失彼此的平衡。
English: In the face of big countries, I will not lose my dignity, in the face of small countries, I will not lose my humility, and countries with equivalent national strength will not lose each other's balance.

古文：岠险伐夷，并小夺乱，□强攻弱而袭不正，武之经也。
现代文：依据天险，攻伐平地，兼并小国，夺取乱国，以强攻弱，袭击邪恶，是武事的 经 。
English: According to the natural peril, attack the flatland, annex the small country, seize the chaotic country, attack the weak with strength, and attack the evil, are the martial arts.

古文：伐乱伐疾伐疫，武之顺也。
现代文：讨伐内乱的国家，讨伐憎恶的国家，讨伐疫病流行的国家，是武事的 顺 。
English: To fight a country in civil strife, to fight a country where there is hatred, to fight a country where there is an epidemic, is the order of martial arts.

古文：贤者辅之，乱者取之，作者劝之，怠者沮之，恐者惧之，欲者趣之，武之用也。
现代文：贤明的辅佐他，动乱的夺取他，操劳的勉励他，怠惰的制止他，惶恐的惊惧他，贪心的除去他，是武事的 用 。
English: It is the art of war to support him with wisdom, to capture him with turmoil, to encourage him with toil, to restrain him with idleness, to frighten him with fear, and to eliminate him with greed.

古文：美男破老，美女破舌少。淫图破□，淫巧破时，淫乐破正，淫言破义，武之毁也。
现代文：用美少年贬斥老年人，用美女贬损其正妻，用邪谋坏他人的正计，用奇巧毁他人的资财，用淫乱之声坏他人的雅乐，用邪恶之言诋毁他人合理的话，是武事的 毁 。
English: Using beautiful boys to disparage the elderly, using beautiful women to disparage one's lawful wife, using evil to ruin the righteous plans of others, using magic to destroy the wealth of others, using lewd voices to ruin the elegant music of others, and using evil words to defame others.

古文：赦其众，遂其咎，抚其□，助其囊，武之闲也。
现代文：赦免被俘的兵众，谅解他的过错，抚慰他的百姓，盛满他的粮袋，是武事的 间 。
English: To forgive the multitude of his prisoners, and to overlook their iniquity, to comfort his people, and to fill his sack with corn, in the day of battle.

古文：饵敌以分，而照其储，以伐辅德，追时之权，武之尚也。
现代文：用珍宝作钓饵以探知他的储备，诛伐他的谋臣，权衡追击的时机，是武事的 尚 。
English: Using treasures as bait to detect his reserves, hunting down his advisers, and weighing the timing of the pursuit, is the essence of martial arts.

古文：春违其农，秋伐其穑，夏取其麦，冬寒其衣服，春秋欲舒，冬夏欲亟，武之时也。
现代文：春季使他们违背农时，秋季骚扰他们的收获，夏季割取他们的麦子，冬季使他们衣着单薄。春秋两季要舒缓，冬夏两季要急速。这是武事的 时 。
English: Spring makes them violate the agricultural time, autumn harasses their harvest, summer cuts off their wheat, winter makes them wear thin clothes. Spring and autumn should be gentle, winter and summer should be rapid. This is the time of martial arts.

古文：长胜短，轻胜重，直胜曲，众胜寡，强胜弱，饱胜觊，肃胜怒，先胜后，疾胜迟，武之胜也。
现代文：长兵器胜短兵器，轻装胜重负，理直胜理曲，人多胜人少，强大胜弱小，饱食胜饥饿，肃敬胜愤怒，先发胜后发，疾速胜迟缓，是武事的 胜 。
English: Long weapon is better than short weapon, light load is better than heavy load, straight line is better than curved line, more people is better than less people, strong is better than weak, satiety is better than hunger, solemnity is better than anger, first attack is better than later attack, speed is better than slowness, is the victory of martial arts.

古文：追戎追戎无恪，穷寇不格，力倦气竭，乃易克，武之追也。
现代文：追击敌人要谨慎，走投无路之敌不要攻击，待他疲劳气尽就容易制服，是武事的 追 。
English: Pursue the enemy cautiously, do not attack the cornered enemy, wait for him to be exhausted and then easily subdue him. This is the pursuit of martial arts.

古文：既胜人，举旗以号令，命吏禁掠，无取侵暴，爵位不谦，田宅不亏，各宁其亲，民服如合，武之抚也。
现代文：战胜了敌人，举令旗发号令，要官吏禁止抢劫，不得侵凌强暴民众；不降低爵位，田土住宅不减损，各自安定亲属，民众自然归服。是武事的 抚 。
English: Defeated the enemy, raised the banner to issue orders, and ordered the officials to prohibit robbery, not to abuse and rape the violent people; not to reduce the rank, not to reduce the rural houses, to stabilize their respective relatives, and the people naturally submit. It is a martial fist.

古文：百姓咸骨，偃兵兴德，夷厥险阻，以毁其服，四方畏服，奄有天下，武之定也。
现代文：普天下归服以后。止息战争兴办文教，平掉险阻的工事，毁掉打仗的武器，四方敬畏服从，包有天下，是武事的 定 。
English: After the whole world has been subdued, the war will be stopped, the construction of literature and education will be carried out, the dangerous construction will be smoothed out, the weapons used in the war will be destroyed, and the four sides will fear and obey, and the whole world will be included, which is the determination of martial arts.

