古文：桓公问管子曰： 事之至数可闻乎？ 
现代文：桓公问管仲说： 治理国事的最佳办法，可以说给我听听么？ 
English: Huan Gong asked Guanzhong: "Can you tell me the best way to manage state affairs?"

古文：管子对曰： 何谓至数？ 
现代文：管仲回答说： 什么叫最佳办法？ 
English: Guanzhong replied: What is the best way?

古文：桓公曰： 秦奢教我曰： 帷盖不修，衣服不众，则女事不泰。
现代文：桓公说： 秦奢教我说： 不修饰车帷车盖，不大量添置衣服，女工的事业就不能发展。
English: Huan Gong said: Qin Suo taught me: Without decorating the curtains and covers, without a large number of additional clothes, the career of female workers cannot develop.

古文：俎豆之礼不致牲，诸侯太牢，大夫少牢，不若此，则六畜不育。
现代文：祭祀之礼不用牲，比如诸侯依礼用牛，大夫依礼用羊，不如此，六畜就不能繁育。
English: Sacrifices do not require animals, for example, lords use cattle, and doctors use sheep. Otherwise, the six animals cannot be bred.

古文：非高其台榭，美其宫室，则群材不散。 
现代文：不能高建楼台亭榭，美修华丽宫室，各种木材就没有出路。 
English: It is not possible to build high-rise buildings, pavilions and pavilions, beautify ornate palace rooms, and there is no way out for all kinds of wood.

古文：此言何如？ 管子曰： 非数也。 
现代文：这种说法对不对？ 管仲说： 这是错误办法。 
English: Is this statement correct? Guanzhong said: This is a wrong approach.

古文：桓公曰： 何谓非数？ 
现代文：桓公说： 为什么说是个错误办法？ 
English: Kan said: Why is it a wrong way?

古文：管子对曰： 此定壤之数也。
现代文：管仲回答说： 这是定地管理的方法。
English: Guanzhong replied: This is the method of local management.

古文：彼天子之制，壤方千里，齐诸侯方百里，负海子七十里，男五十里，若胸臂之相使也。
现代文：那里天子的管辖，方圆干里土地，列国诸侯方圆百里，滨海的子国七十里，男国五十里，象身体上的胸臂一样互相为用。
English: There, under the rule of the Son of Heaven, the circumference of the dry land is one kilometer, the circumference of the countries and principalities is one hundred kilometers, the coastal countries are seventy kilometers, and the male countries are fifty kilometers, and they use each other like the chest and arms of the body.

古文：故准徐疾、赢不足，虽在下也，不为君忧。
现代文：所以调节缓急余缺，即使粮财散在民间，也不致成为统一国家君主的忧虑。
English: Therefore, the adjustment of priorities, even if grain and money are scattered among the people, will not become the concern of the monarch of a unified country.

古文：彼壤狭而欲举与大国争者，农夫寒耕暑耘，力归于上，女勤于缉绩徽织，功归于府者，非怨民心伤民意也，非有积蓄不可以用人，非有积财无以劝下。
现代文：但是，领土狭小而还要起来与大国争强的国家，必须使农夫努力耕耘，成果归于君主，使妇女勤于纺织，成果归于官府，这并不是想要伤害民心与民意，而是因为国无积蓄就不能用人，国无余财就不能鼓励臣下。
English: However, for a country with a small territory that wants to compete with big countries, it is necessary to make farmers work hard, and the results will be attributed to the monarch, and to make women work hard in textiles, and the results will be attributed to the government. This is not to hurt the hearts and minds of the people, but because the country cannot employ people without savings, and the country cannot encourage its subjects without surplus wealth.

古文：泰奢之数，不可用于危隘之国。 桓公曰： 善。 
现代文：过分奢侈的办法，不可用在领土狭小的国家。 桓公说： 好。 
English: An excessively extravagant method cannot be used in a country with a small territory. Huan Gong said: Good.

古文：桓公又问管子曰： 佚田谓寡人曰： 善者用非其有，使非其人，何不因诸侯权以制夭下？  
现代文：桓公又问管仲说： 佚田对我说： 善于治国的人，能够运用不归他所有的资财，使用不归他所有的人力，为什么不利用各诸侯盟国的外援来控制天下呢？  
English: Huan also asked Guanzhong, saying: Putian said to me: If a person who is good at governing the country can use resources that do not belong to him, and use manpower that does not belong to him, why not use the foreign aid of the allied countries of the various provinces to control the world?

古文：管子对曰： 佚田之言非也，彼善为国者，壤辟举则民留处，仓廪实则知礼节。
现代文：管仲回答说： 佚田的话不对。那种善于治国的人，总是使国内荒地开发，人民就安心留住；仓廪粮食充裕，人民就懂得礼节。
English: Guanzhong replied: Putian's words are not correct. The kind of people who are good at governing the country always develop the wasteland in the country, and the people will keep it at ease; there is plenty of grain in the granaries, and the people know the etiquette.

古文：且无委致围，城脆致冲。
现代文：而且国无积蓄将受敌国围困，城防不固将受敌国冲击。
English: Moreover, a country with no savings will be besieged by an enemy country, and a city with a weak defense will be attacked by an enemy country.

古文：夫不定内，不可以持天下。
现代文：内部不安定，就无法掌握天下。
English: If it is not stable internally, it will not be able to rule the world.

古文：佚田之言非也。 
现代文：佚田的话是不对的。 
English: Hakamada's words are wrong.

古文：管子曰： 岁藏一，十年而十也。
现代文：管仲接着说： 每年贮备粮食一成，十年就是十成。
English: Guanzhong went on to say: Every year, grain storage is one-tenth, and ten years is one-tenth.

古文：岁藏二，五年而十也。
现代文：每年贮备二成，五年就是十成。
English: Twenty percent is stockpiled every year, and ten percent after five years.

古文：谷十而守五，绨素满之，五在上。
现代文：十成粮食由国家掌握五成，注意用蔬菜补助民食，就可以保住这五成常在政府手里。
English: Ten percent of grain is controlled by the state fifty percent, pay attention to the use of vegetables to supplement people's food, you can keep this fifty percent always in the hands of the government.

古文：故视岁而藏，县时积岁，国有十年之蓄，富胜贫，勇胜怯，智胜愚，微胜不微，有义胜无义，练士胜驱众。
现代文：这样，看农业年景加强贮备，积年累月，国家若有十年的积蓄，就可以做到以富胜贫，以勇胜怯，以智胜愚，以用兵精妙胜不精妙，以有义胜不义，以有训练的士卒战胜无训练的乌合之众，这全部制胜的因素都具备了。
English: In this way, if the country has ten years of savings, it can use wealth to defeat poverty, courage to defeat cowardice, wisdom to defeat stupidity, skillful soldiers to defeat unskillful soldiers, righteous soldiers to defeat unrighteous soldiers, and trained soldiers to defeat untrained mobs. All these factors for victory are available.

古文：凡十胜者尽有之，故发如风雨，动如雷霆，独出独入，莫之能禁止，不待权舆。
现代文：于是发兵如风雨，动作如雷霆，独出独入，无人阻止，根本不需要外国的帮助。
English: As a result, it sends troops like the wind and rain, moves like thunder, goes it alone, is not stopped by anyone, and does not need foreign help at all.

古文：故佚田之言非也。 桓公曰： 善。 
现代文：所以佚田的话是不对的。 桓公说： 好。 
English: Therefore, Hakamada's words were incorrect.Kanko said, "Okay."

