古文：二年春，王正月，城楚丘。
现代文：二年春季，周历正月，诸侯在楚丘筑城。
English: In the spring of the second year, the first month of the lunar calendar, the lords began to build a city in Chuqiu.

古文：夏五月辛巳，葬我小君哀姜。
现代文：夏季五月辛巳日，安葬哀姜。
English: In the summer of May, on Xin Si Day, mourners buried their dead.

古文：虞师、晋师灭下阳。
现代文：虞国与晋国军队联合灭亡了下阳。
English: The Yu and Jin armies jointly perished in the Battle of Geyang.

古文：秋九月，齐侯、宋公、江人、黄人盟于贯。
现代文：秋季九月，齐桓公、宋桓公、江、黄两地的头目在贯地结盟。
English: In September of autumn, the leaders of Qi Huan Gong, Song Huan Gong, Jiang and Huang formed an alliance.

古文：冬十月，不雨。
现代文：冬季十月，不下雨。
English: Winter in October, no rain.

古文：楚人侵郑。
现代文：楚国攻打郑国。
English: Chu attacked Zheng.

古文：二年春，诸侯城楚丘而封卫焉。
现代文：二年春季，诸侯在楚丘筑城，而将由周天子封给卫国。
English: In the spring of the second year, the lords built a city in Chuqiu, and Zhou Tianzi Feng was appointed to defend the country.

古文：不书所会，后也。
现代文：《春秋》没有记载诸侯会见，是由于僖公到会晚了。
English: "Spring and Autumn" did not record the meeting of the princes, due to the late arrival of the Duke of Xing.

古文：晋荀息请以屈产之乘，与垂棘之璧，假道于虞以伐虢。
现代文：晋国的荀息请求用屈地出产的马和垂棘出产的璧玉向虞国借路来进攻虢国。
English: At the request of Jin's Hanxi, the horses produced in Qu and the jade produced in Tiexian were used to attack Shandong by way of Yu.

古文：公曰： 是吾宝也。 
现代文：晋献公说： 这是我的宝物啊！ 
English: Jin Xian Gong said, "This is my treasure!"

古文：对曰： 若得道于虞，犹外府也。 公曰： 宫之奇存焉。 
现代文：荀息回答说： 如果向虞国借到了路，东西放在虞国，就像放在宫外的库房里一样。 晋献公说： 宫之奇还在那里。 
English: He Xixi replied, "If we borrow a road from the State of Yu, things are placed in the State of Yu, just as if they were placed in a storeroom outside the palace." Jin Xian Gong said, "The miracle of the palace is still there."

古文：对曰： 宫之奇之为人也，懦而不能强谏，且少长于君，君暱之，虽谏，将不听。 
现代文：荀息回答说： 宫之奇的为人，懦弱而不能坚决进谏，而且从小就和虞君在宫里一起长大，虞君对他亲昵，虽然进谏，虞君不会听从的。 
English: Hao Xiu replied, "He is a rare person in the palace. He is weak and cannot resolutely enter the palace. Moreover, he has grown up with Yu Jun in the palace since childhood. Yu Jun is very close to him. Although he enters the palace, Yu Jun will not obey him.

古文：乃使荀息假道于虞，曰： 冀为不道，入自颠，伐鄍三门。
现代文：于是晋献公就派荀息到虞国去借路，说： 冀国无道，从颠軨入侵，围攻虞国鄍邑的三面城门。
English: As a result, Jin Xianguo sent his troops to Yuguo to borrow a road, saying: "Ji Province has no road, so we will invade from the bumps and besiege the three gates of Yuguo, Yuguo."

古文：冀之既病，则亦唯君故。
现代文：敝国伐冀而使冀国受到损失，也是为了君王的缘故。
English: It is also for the sake of the monarch that the Hebei Province suffered losses due to the Mongol invasion of the Hebei Province.

古文：今虢为不道，保于逆旅，以侵敝邑之南鄙。
现代文：现在虢国无道，在客舍里筑起堡垒，来攻打敝国的南部边境。
English: Now there is no way out of the country, and they are building a fortress in the guest house to attack the southern border of the country.

古文：敢请假道以请罪于虢。 
现代文：谨大胆地请求贵国借路，以便到虢国去问罪。 
English: I have the audacity to ask your country for permission to travel to my country for questioning.

古文：虞公许之，且请先伐虢。
现代文：虞公答应了，而且自己请求先去进攻虢国。
English: Yugong agreed, and asked to attack Shandong first.

古文：宫之奇谏，不听，遂起师。
现代文：宫之奇劝阻，虞公不听，就带兵进攻虢国。
English: Miya no Kiki tried to dissuade him, but Yugo didn't listen, so he led an army to attack Shikoku.

古文：夏，晋里克、荀息帅师会虞师伐虢，灭下阳。
现代文：夏季，晋国的里克、荀息领兵会合虞军，进攻虢国，灭亡了下阳。
English: In the summer, the Rik of Jin Province and the Yixi Leader's Meeting of the Yu Army attacked Ying Province and destroyed Xieyang.

古文：先书虞，贿故也。
现代文：《春秋》把虞国写在前面，因为虞国接受了贿赂。
English: "Spring and Autumn" put Yu Guo in the front, because Yu Guo accepted bribes.

古文：秋，盟于贯，服江、黄也。
现代文：秋季，齐桓公、宋桓公、江、黄两地的头目在贯地结盟，这是为了江、黄两国归服于齐。
English: In the autumn, the leaders of Qi Huan Gong, Song Huan Gong, Jiang and Huang made an alliance in succession, in order for Jiang and Huang to submit to each other.

古文：齐寺人貂始漏师于多鱼。
现代文：齐国的寺人貂开始在多鱼地方泄漏了军事机密。
English: Priests and nuns in Qi began to leak military secrets in fishy places.

古文：虢公败戎于桑田。
现代文：虢公在桑田打败了戎人。
English: Shoko defeated Ebisujin in Kuwata.

古文：晋卜偃曰： 虢必亡矣，亡下阳不惧，而又有功，是天夺之鉴，而益其疾也。
现代文：晋国的卜偃说： 虢国必将被灭亡。被灭掉了下阳不知戒惧，反而又建立了武功，这是上天夺去了虢国的镜子，而加重它的作恶啊！
English: Bu Xi of Jin said: "Yang Guo will certainly be destroyed. It was destroyed by the setting sun and did not know fear, but on the contrary, it established martial arts. This is heaven taking away the mirror of Yang Guo, and aggravating its evil!

古文：必易晋而不抚其民矣，不可以五稔。 
现代文：虢国必定轻视晋国又不爱抚百姓，过不了五年，必然灭亡。 
English: Shan State will certainly despise Jin State and not caress the people, and will inevitably perish in less than five years.

古文：冬，楚人伐郑，鬥章囚郑耼伯。
现代文：冬季，楚国人进攻郑国，鬬章囚禁了郑国的聃伯。
English: In winter, the people of Chu attacked Zheng, and Zizang imprisoned Zheng's Zibo.

