古文：凡安不忘危，治不忘乱，圣人之深诫也。天下无事，不可废武，虑有弗庭，无以捍御。
现代文：凡是国家处于和平安定时期，一定不能忘记发生战争的危险；社会处于治理有序时期，不可忘记还有发生祸乱的可能，这是古代圣贤哲人留传下来的深刻教诫。天下太平无事，但不能废弃武备；考虑到周边还有尚未归顺且与朝廷为敌的国家，一旦废弃武备，就无法在战争来临时御敌。
English: Whenever a country is in a period of peace and stability, it must not forget the danger of war; when a society is in a period of orderly governance, it must not forget the possibility of disaster. This is a profound admonition passed down by ancient sages and sages. The world is at peace, but weapons cannot be abandoned; considering that there are still countries around that have not surrendered and are enemies of the imperial court, once weapons are abandoned, it will be impossible to resist the enemy when war comes.

古文：必须内修文德，外严武备，怀柔远人，戒不虞也。
现代文：因此，必须对内修明政治，对外加强战备，行仁德以怀服边远部族百姓，时时刻刻警惕意外事件的发生。
English: Therefore, it is necessary to clarify politics internally, strengthen military preparedness externally, practice benevolence with the people of outlying tribes in mind, and be alert to the occurrence of accidents all the time.

古文：四时讲武之礼，所以示国不忘战。
现代文：一年四季都要坚持武备教育的制度，以此表明国家从未忘记战备。
English: It is necessary to adhere to the system of military education all year round, so as to show that the country has never forgotten the war.

古文：不忘战者，教民不离乎习兵也。
现代文：所谓不忘战备，就是教导百姓不能停止军事练习。
English: The so-called "remember to be prepared" is to teach the people that they cannot stop military exercises.

古文：法曰： 天下虽安，忘战必危。 
现代文：诚如兵法所说： 国家和平安定时期，忘记战备必有覆灭危险。 
English: As stated in the Art of War: In times of national peace and stability, there is a danger of forgetting to prepare for war.

古文：唐玄宗时，承平日久，毁戈牧马，罢将销兵，国不知备，民不知战。
现代文：唐玄宗李隆基统治后期，由于国家长期处于和平安定环境，统治者逐渐失去战争的警惕性，因而出现废毁武器，将战马放归牧场，罢免朝中武将，消减军队士兵人数，使国家不知道加强战备，老百姓全都不懂作战。
English: In the late period of the reign of Emperor Xuanzong of Tang Dynasty and Li Longji, since the country had been in a peaceful and stable environment for a long time, the rulers gradually lost their war vigilance. As a result, weapons were destroyed, horses were put out to pasture, generals of the Korean and Chinese armies were dismissed, and the number of soldiers in the army was reduced, so that the country did not know how to strengthen combat readiness, and the common people did not know how to fight.

古文：及安史之乱，仓卒变生于不图，文士不足以为将，市人不足以为战，而神器几危，旧物几失。
现代文：等到安史之乱突然爆发的时候，人们毫无准备，文官无法充当将领指挥打仗，百姓不能充当士兵对敌作战，以致国家政权几乎崩溃，大好河山几乎沦丧。唉！
English: When the Anshi Rebellion suddenly broke out, the people were unprepared, the civil officials could not act as generals to command the war, and the people could not act as soldiers to fight against the enemy, so that the state power almost collapsed, and the great rivers and mountains almost perished. Alas!

古文：吁，战岂可忘乎哉！
现代文：军事作战，这样重要的事情，难道可以忘掉吗？
English: Can military operations, such an important matter, be forgotten?

