古文：袁涣字曜卿，陈郡扶乐人也。
现代文：袁涣字曜卿，陈郡扶乐县人。
English: Yuan Junzhi Youqing, a resident of Fule County, Chen County.

古文：父滂，为汉司徒。
现代文：袁涣的父亲袁滂，曾是汉朝的司徒。
English: Yuan Qi's father, Yuan Qi, was a scholar of the Han Dynasty.

古文：当时诸公子多越法度，而涣清静，举动必以礼。
现代文：当时其他世家公子大多违反律法礼制，但袁涣清净雅致，言行举止都符合礼制。
English: At that time, most of the other aristocrats of the family violated the law and etiquette, but Yuan Qi was clean and elegant, and his words and deeds were in line with the etiquette.

古文：郡命为功曹，郡中奸吏皆自引去。
现代文：郡里太守任命他为功曹，郡中奸诈狡猾的官吏都自动离开。
English: The governor of the county appointed him as a meritorious person, and all the treacherous and cunning officials in the county left voluntarily.

古文：后辟公府，举高第，迁侍御史。
现代文：后来被征召到公府，考试成绩优异，被提升为侍御史。
English: Later, he was called up to the public office, with excellent exam results, and was promoted to Samurai Historian.

古文：除谯令，不就。
现代文：后担任谯县县令，没有赴任。
English: Later, he served as the county magistrate of Jixian County, but did not take up the post.

古文：刘备之为豫州，举涣茂才。
现代文：刘备治理豫州的时候，推举袁涣为茂才。
English: When Liu Bei governed Yuzhou, he promoted Yuan Shao to the highest position.

古文：后避地江、淮间，为袁术所命。
现代文：后来袁涣因躲避灾祸到了江淮地区，被袁术所用。
English: Later, Yuan Xuan went to the Jianghuai region to escape the disaster and was used by Yuan Shu.

古文：术每有所咨访，涣常正议，术不能抗，然敬之不敢不礼也。
现代文：每次袁术有问题咨询，袁涣常常严正商议，袁术并不能抵抗，但还是很尊敬他，不敢不尊礼节。
English: Every time Yuan Shuxu had a consultation on a problem, Yuan Hui often had a serious discussion. Yuan Shuxu could not resist, but he still respected him very much and did not dare to disrespect etiquette.

古文：顷之，吕布击术於阜陵，涣往从之，遂复为布所拘留。
现代文：不久，吕布在阜陵攻打袁术，袁涣前往跟从袁术，于是也被吕布收押扣留。
English: Soon after, Lv Bu attacked Yuan Shu in Fuling. Yuan Shun went to follow Yuan Shu, and was also arrested and detained by Lv Bu.

古文：布初与刘备和亲，后离隙。
现代文：当初吕布和刘备结为儿女亲家，后来产生了嫌隙。
English: At first, Lü Bu and Liu Bei were married and had a child together, but later a rift developed.

古文：布欲使涣作书詈辱备，涣不可，再三强之，不许。
现代文：吕布想让袁涣写信辱骂刘备，袁涣不同意，吕布多次逼迫他，依然不答应。
English: Lü Bu wanted Yuan Shao to write a letter to abuse Liu Bei, but Yuan Shao did not agree. Lü Bu forced him many times, but he still did not agree.

古文：布大怒，以兵胁涣曰： 为之则生，不为则死。 
现代文：吕布大怒，用兵器危险袁涣说： 做这件事就能活命，不做就死。 
English: Lv Bu flew into a rage and threatened Yuan Qi with a weapon, saying, "If you do this, you will live, but if you don't, you will die."

古文：涣颜色不变，笑而应之曰： 涣闻唯德可以辱人，不闻以骂。
现代文：袁涣面不改色，笑着回答他说： 我听说只有道德才能侮辱人，没有听说过辱骂可以。
English: Yuan Xuan did not change his expression, and answered him with a smile, "I have heard that only morality can insult people, but I have not heard that abuse can be used.

古文：使彼固君子邪，且不耻将军之言，彼诚小人邪，将复将军之意，则辱在此不在於彼。
现代文：如果他本来就是君子，那他不会因将军的话感到耻辱，如果他实在是个小人，那他就会像将军一样写信辱骂将军，那受辱的人在这里而不是那边。
English: If he had been a gentleman, he would not have been put to shame by the general's words; if he had been a scoundrel, he would have written like the general and abused him.

古文：且涣他日之事刘将军，犹今日之事将军也，如一旦去此，复骂将军，可乎？ 
现代文：况且我从前侍奉刘将军，就像现在侍奉将军您一样，如果我有一天离开这里，再回过来辱骂您，可以吗？ 
English: Besides, I have served General Liu before, just as I am serving you now. If I leave here one day, can I come back and abuse you?

古文：布惭而止。
现代文：吕布才因感到惭愧而停止逼迫他。
English: Lvbu only felt ashamed and stopped persecuting him.

古文：布诛，涣得归太祖。
现代文：吕布被诛杀后，袁涣得以回来跟随太祖。
English: After Lü Bu was assassinated, Yuan Shao was able to return to follow his ancestor.

古文：涣言曰： 夫兵者，凶器也，不得已而用之。
现代文：袁涣说： 战争，是凶器，只有在迫不得已的时候才使用它。
English: Yuan Shao said: War is a deadly weapon, and it should only be used when absolutely necessary.

古文：鼓之以道德，征之以仁义，兼抚其民而除其害。
现代文：用道德来鼓动，用仁义来征讨，加上安抚百姓，为他们除掉祸害。
English: Use morality to encourage, use benevolence and righteousness to solicit, and appease the people to eliminate the scourge for them.

古文：夫然，故可与之死而可与之生。
现代文：做到这样，才可以与他们同生共死。
English: Only in this way can we live and die with them.

古文：自大乱以来十数年矣，民之欲安，甚於倒悬，然而暴乱未息者，何也？
现代文：自从天下动乱，已经有十几年了，百姓想要安定的愿望比被倒挂在树上得到解脱还强烈，但暴力和战乱一直没有停歇，为什么呢？
English: It has been more than a dozen years since the world was in turmoil. The people's desire for stability is stronger than the desire to be freed from being hung upside down from a tree, but violence and war have not stopped. Why?

古文：意者政失其道欤！
现代文：大概是政治不在正道上啊！
English: Probably because politics is not on the right track!

古文：涣闻明君善于救世，故世乱则齐之以义，时伪则镇之以朴；世异事变，治国不同，不可不察也。
现代文：袁涣听说圣明的君主善于拯救天下，所以在乱世的时候可以用大义来统一，世道虚伪的时候就用质朴来治理；但世道改变时事也不同，治国之道自然也会不同。
English: Yuan Qi heard that the enlightened monarch is good at saving the world, so when the world is in chaos, it can be unified with great righteousness, and when the world is hypocritical, it can be governed with simplicity; but when the world changes, current events are also different, and the way of governing the country will naturally be different.

古文：夫制度损益，此古今之不必同者也。
现代文：各种制度的删改，是古代与现在一定会不同的地方。
English: The deletion and modification of various systems is a place where ancient times and the present are definitely different.

古文：若夫兼爱天下而反之於正，虽以武平乱而济之以德，诚百王不易之道也。
现代文：如果能平等地爱天下的人，拨乱反正，即使是用武力平定但依靠德行安抚救助，实在是自古以来的帝王没有改变的办法。
English: If you can love all the people in the world equally, and set things right, even if you use force to pacify, but rely on virtue to pacify and rescue, it is really a method that emperors have not changed since ancient times.

古文：公明哲超世，古之所以得其民者，公既勤之矣，今之所以失其民者，公既戒之矣，海内赖公，得免於危亡之祸，然而民未知义，其惟公所以训之，则天下幸甚！ 
现代文：您的聪慧明智超出当人，古代帝王用来获得民心的办法，您已经尽力在做了，现在会失掉民心的事您已经不做了，天下人仰赖您，得以免除危亡的祸事，但百姓还不了解其中的大义，希望您用这些事来教化他们，那就是天下万民的大幸事了！ 
English: Your wisdom and wisdom are beyond compare. The ancient emperors used various methods to win the hearts of the people. You have done your best. You have not done anything that would lose the hearts of the people. The people of the world rely on you to save them from perilous calamities. However, the people still do not understand the true meaning of these things. I hope you will use these things to enlighten them. That would be a great blessing for all the people in the world!

古文：太祖深纳焉。
现代文：太祖全部接受他了他建议。
English: The great-grandfather accepted everything he suggested.

古文：拜为沛南部都尉。
现代文：任命袁涣为沛郡南部都尉。
English: Yuan Qi was appointed as the Southern Lieutenant of Pei County.

古文：是时新募民开屯田，民不乐，多逃亡。
现代文：这时候朝廷刚招募百姓开垦屯田，百姓不愿意，有很多逃走的。
English: At this time, the imperial court had just recruited the common people to reclaim the farmlands. The common people were reluctant, and many fled.

古文：涣白太祖曰： 夫民安土重迁，不可卒变，易以顺行，难以逆动，宜顺其意，乐之者乃取，不欲者勿强。 
现代文：袁涣告诉太祖说： 百姓安于本土，不愿轻易迁移，不能立刻改变，顺着他们的意愿做事就很简单，违背他们意愿做事就很困难，应该顺应他们的心意，他们喜欢的再采用实施，他们不愿意的也不要逼迫。 
English: Yuan Xuan told Taizu, "The people are at ease on the mainland, they don't want to move easily, and they can't change immediately. It's easy to do things according to their wishes, but it's very difficult to do things against their wishes. We should follow their wishes, re-adopt and implement what they like, and don't persecute what they don't like.

古文：太祖从之，百姓大悦。
现代文：太祖采纳了他的建议，百姓都很高兴。
English: The great-grandfather accepted his suggestion, and the people were very happy.

古文：迁为梁相。
现代文：袁涣被提升为梁相。
English: Yuan Qi was promoted to Liang Sang.

古文：涣每敕诸县： 务存鳏寡高年，表异孝子贞妇。
现代文：袁涣经常向各县发布政令： 一定要抚恤鳏夫、寡妇和年事已高的人，表彰孝顺的子孙和贞节的妇女。
English: Yuan Shao often issued decrees to all counties: it is necessary to support widowers, widows and the elderly, and commend filial sons and daughters and chaste women.

古文：常谈曰 世治则礼详，世乱则礼简 ，全在斟酌之间耳。
现代文：常言说 天下安定，礼节制度就会详细，天下动乱，礼节制度就会简易 ，这些分寸只不过是在对事情的考虑上而已。
English: It is often said that when the world is stable, the etiquette system will be detailed, and when the world is in turmoil, the etiquette system will be simple. These measurements are only in consideration of things.

古文：方今虽扰攘，难以礼化，然在吾所以为之。 
现代文：现在虽然纷乱不休，全按礼节行事比较困难，但也只是在于我们怎么做。 
English: Now, despite the turmoil, it is more difficult to act entirely according to etiquette, but it just depends on how we do it.

古文：为政崇教训，恕思而后行，外温柔而内能断。
现代文：袁涣处理政务推崇教化训导，遇事以宽厚之心考虑然后才施行，外表温和柔顺但实际上行事果决。
English: Yuan Shao dealt with government affairs by advocating education and discipline. In the event of an incident, he would consider it with a generous heart before implementing it. On the outside, he was gentle and submissive, but in reality, he acted decisively.

古文：以病去官，百姓思之。
现代文：后来因病辞官，百姓都思念他。
English: Later, he was forced to resign due to illness, and the people all missed him.

古文：后徵为谏议大夫、丞相军祭酒。
现代文：后来被征召为谏议大夫、丞相军祭酒。
English: Later, he was conscripted as a doctor of the imperial court and a minister of the imperial court.

古文：前后得赐甚多，皆散尽之，家无所储，终不问产业，乏则取之於人，不为皦察之行，然时人服其清。
现代文：前后得到的赏赐非常多，但全都散发出去了，家里没有积蓄，他一直不过问家中的产业，缺少的就向别人拿取，没有貌似清白的行为，但当时的人都佩服他的清廉。
English: He received a lot of rewards before and after, but they were all distributed. There was no savings in the family. He never asked about the family's property, and took what was lacking from others. There was no seemingly innocent behavior, but people at the time admired his integrity.

古文：魏国初建，为郎中令，行御史大夫事。
现代文：魏国刚刚建立，袁涣被任命为郎中令，行使御史大夫的职权。
English: The State of Wei had just been established, and Yuan Shao was appointed as the second-in-command, exercising the authority of the imperial historian.

古文：涣言於太祖曰： 今天下大难已除，文武并用，长久之道也。
现代文：袁涣对太祖说： 现在天下间的祸事已经消除，文治武功一起推行，才是长治久安的道理。
English: Yuan Shao said to Taizu: Now that the evil in the world has been eliminated, it is the principle of long-term peace and stability to promote the rule of law and martial arts together.

古文：以为可大收篇籍，明先圣之教，以易民视听，使海内斐然向风，则远人不服可以文德来之。 
现代文：我认为可以广泛收集典籍，彰显先贤的教化，来改变百姓的所见所闻，让天下形成文明的风气，那么远方的少数民族就算不能以武力征服，也能依靠文化德行招揽他们。 
English: I think it is possible to collect a wide range of classics, highlight the enlightenment of the sages, change what the people see and hear, and let the world form a civilized ethos, so that distant ethnic minorities, even if they cannot be conquered by force, can rely on cultural virtues to attract them.

古文：太祖善其言。
现代文：太祖认为他说的有道理。
English: The great-grandfather thought he was on to something.

古文：时有传刘备死者，群臣皆贺；涣以尝为备举吏，独不贺。
现代文：当时有人传言刘备死了，朝中官员都互相庆贺；只有袁涣因为曾被刘备推荐为官，没有庆贺。
English: At that time, there was a rumor that Liu Bei had died, and officials from both North Korea and China congratulated each other; only Yuan Qi did not celebrate because he had been recommended by Liu Bei.

古文：居官数年卒，太祖为之流涕，赐谷二千斛，一教 以太仓谷千斛赐郎中令之家 ，一教 以垣下谷千斛与曜卿家 ，外不解其意。
现代文：任官几年后去世，太祖也为他流泪，赏赐谷物两千斛，一份叫 以一千斛太仓谷赐给郎中令家 ，一份叫 用一千斛垣下谷送给曜卿家 ，外人都不明白其中的意思。
English: A few years after his appointment, he died, and his great-grandfather shed tears for him and rewarded him with 2,000 monme of grain. One part was called "1,000 monme of Taicang Valley" and given to his son-in-law's family, and the other part was called "1,000 monme of Kakigachitani" and given to his son-in-law's family. Outsiders do not understand the meaning of this.

古文：教曰： 以太仓谷者，官法也；以垣下谷者，亲旧也。 
现代文：太祖说： 送太仓谷，是根据律法；送垣下谷，是因为他是我亲近的故交。 
English: The great-grandfather said, "I sent Taicanggu according to the law, and I sent Gegegok because he is my close friend.

古文：又帝闻涣昔拒吕布之事，问涣从弟敏： 涣勇怯何如？ 
现代文：又有文帝听说袁涣之前对抗吕布的事情，就问袁涣的弟弟袁敏说： 袁涣的勇敢和怯懦是怎么样的？ 
English: When Emperor Wen heard of Yuan Shao's previous confrontation with Lü Bu, he asked Yuan Shao's younger brother Yuan Min: "What about Yuan Shao's bravery and cowardice?

古文：敏对曰： 涣貌似和柔，然其临大节，处危难，虽贲育不过也。 涣子侃，亦清粹间素，有父风，历位郡守尚书。
现代文：袁敏回答说： 袁涣看上去温和柔顺，但他只要面对节操的选择或处在危难之中，即使是孟贲、夏育也不能胜过他。 袁涣的儿子袁侃，也是清高纯正，朴素淡雅的人，有父亲的风范，曾担任过郡守和尚书。
English: Yuan Min replied, "Yuan Qi looks gentle and pliable, but as long as he faces the choice of discipline or is in danger, even Meng Qi and Xia Yu can't beat him.Yuan Qi's son Yuan Kan is also a high-quality, pure, simple and elegant person, has the demeanor of a father, and once served as a county magistrate and monk.

古文：初，涣从弟霸，公恪有功幹，魏初为大司农，及同郡何夔并知名於时。
现代文：当初，袁涣的堂弟袁霸，恪尽职守，公正有才干，魏国初年担任大司马，与同郡人何夔在当时都很有名气。
English: At the beginning, Yuan Yu's cousin, Yuan Ba, was conscientious, fair and talented. He served as the grand steward in the first year of the Wei Dynasty, and was very famous at that time with his compatriot He Jun.

古文：而霸子亮，夔子曾，与侃复齐声友善。
现代文：袁霸的儿子袁亮，何夔的儿子何曾，和侃复、齐声关系密切。
English: Yuan Liang, the son of Yuan Ba, and He Zeng, the son of He Xuan, were closely related to Kan Fu and Qi Xuan.

古文：亮贞固有学行，疾何晏、邓飏等，著论以讥切之，位至河南尹、尚书。
现代文：袁亮坚贞有学识，厌恶何晏、邓飏等人，著写文章讥讽他们，后来官至河南尹、尚书。
English: Yuan Liang Jianzhen was learned and detested He Yao, Deng Yao and others. He wrote articles ridiculing them. Later, he was sent to Yin and Shangshu in Henan Province.

古文：霸弟徽，以儒素称。
现代文：袁霸的弟弟袁徽，因朴素儒雅闻名。
English: Yuan Hui, the younger brother of Yuan Ba, is famous for his simplicity and gentleness.

古文：遭天下乱，避难交州。
现代文：遇上天下动乱，到交州避难。
English: When the world was in turmoil, he took refuge in Jiaozhou.

古文：司徒辟，不至。
现代文：后来司徒征召他，他没有前往。
English: He was later called up by Stuto, but he did not go.

古文：徽弟敏，有武艺而好水功，官至河堤谒者。
现代文：袁徽的弟弟袁敏，身怀武艺，善于水利之事，做官到河堤谒者。
English: Yuan Hui's younger brother, Yuan Min, was skilled in martial arts, good at water conservancy, and excelled at working on river dikes as an official.

古文：张范，字公仪，河内脩武人也。
现代文：张范，字公仪，河内郡修武县人。
English: Zhang Fan, alias Gongyi, is from Shouwu County, Hanoi County.

古文：祖父歆，为汉司徒。
现代文：祖父张歆，是汉朝的司徒。
English: His grandfather, Zhang Ye, was a scholar of the Han Dynasty.

古文：父延，为太尉。
现代文：父亲张延，担任太尉。
English: His father, Zhang Yan, was a lieutenant.

古文：太傅袁隗欲以女妻范，范辞不受。
现代文：太尉袁隗想让自己的女儿嫁给张范为妻，张范推辞了没有接受。
English: Second Lieutenant Yuan Qi wanted to let his daughter marry Zhang Fan as his wife, but Zhang Fan declined and did not accept.

古文：性恬静乐道，忽於荣利，徵命无所就。
现代文：张范生性安静，爱好习道，看轻荣华利禄，朝廷的征召和任命都没有赴任。
English: Zhang Fansheng was a quiet person, fond of studying Taoism, and looked down on Ronghua Lilu. He was neither conscripted nor appointed by the imperial court.

古文：弟承，字公先，亦知名，以方正徵，拜议郎，迁伊阙都尉。
现代文：弟弟张承，字公先，也很出名，因为行事端正受到朝廷征召，被任命为议郎，又提升为伊阙都尉。
English: His younger brother, Zhang Cheng, also known as Gongxian, was also famous, because he was called up by the imperial court for his good conduct, was appointed as a negotiator, and was promoted to Ili captain.

古文：董卓作乱，承欲合徒众与天下共诛卓。
现代文：董卓祸乱天下时，张承打算召集兵众们和天下英豪一起讨伐董卓。
English: When Dong Zhuo brought disaster to the world, Zhang Cheng planned to gather soldiers to fight Dong Zhuo together with the world's heroes.

古文：承弟昭时为议郎，適从长安来，谓承曰： 今欲诛卓，众寡不敌，且起一朝之谋，战阡陌之民，士不素抚，兵不练习，难以成功。
现代文：张承的弟弟张昭当时担任议郎，刚好从长安过来，对张承说： 现在想要诛杀董卓，人马太少是敌不过的，况且实施一个仓促制定的计策，用民间百姓来作战，平时对士人没有加以安抚，对士兵没有加以训练，是很难成功的。
English: Zhang Zhao, Zhang Cheng's younger brother, who was serving as the mediator at the time, had just arrived from Chang'an and said to Zhang Cheng: If you want to kill Dong Zhuo now, you can't do it with too few men and horses. Moreover, it is very difficult to implement a hastily formulated strategy of using civilians to fight without pacifying the scholars and training the soldiers in normal times.

古文：卓阻兵而无义，固不能久；不若择所归附，待时而动，然后可以如志。 承然之，乃解印绶间行归家，与范避地扬州。
现代文：董卓仗恃军队却不守正道，本来就不能长久；不如选择一方归附，等候时机再行动，这样就可以实现志向。 张承认为他说得对，就结下官印绶带，从小路回了家里，然后和张范一起到扬州躲避战乱。
English: However, if Dong Zhuoqian's army did not keep to the right path, he would not have been able to stay long; it was better to choose a side to join and wait for the right time to act, so that his ambition could be realized. Zhang Cheng thought he was right, so he tied the official seal ribbon, returned home from the path, and then went to Yangzhou with Zhang Fan to avoid the war.

古文：袁术备礼招请，范称疾不往，术不强屈也。
现代文：袁术准备礼品招揽他们，张范谎称生病没有前往，袁术也没有强迫他屈服。
English: Yuan Shou prepared gifts to lure them, Zhang Fan lied that he was ill and did not go, and Yuan Shou did not force him to give in.

古文：遣承与相见，术问曰： 昔周室陵迟，则有桓、文之霸；秦失其政，汉接而用之。
现代文：张范让张承去见袁术，袁术问道： 从前周王室衰微，就产生了齐桓公、晋文公的霸业；秦朝政治混乱，汉代就接替了他的势力并继续利用。
English: Zhang Fan asked Zhang Cheng to meet with Yuan Shou, and Yuan Shou asked: Since the decline of the royal family last week, the hegemony of Qi Huan Gong and Jin Wenguang has emerged; the Qin Dynasty was in political turmoil, and the Han Dynasty succeeded his power and continued to use it.

古文：今孤以土地之广，士民之众，欲徼福齐桓，拟迹高祖，何如？ 
现代文：现在我凭借广大的地盘，众多的士兵，想要求得和齐桓公那样的福气，追随汉高祖的脚步，如何？ 
English: Now, with a vast territory and a large number of soldiers, I would like to ask for the same fortune as Qi Huan, to follow in the footsteps of Han Gaozu, how about it?

古文：承对曰： 在德不在强。
现代文：张承回答说： 这种事重在品德而不在势力。
English: Zhang Cheng replied: This kind of thing is more about character than power.

古文：夫能用德以同天下之欲，虽由匹夫之资，而兴霸王之功，不足为难。
现代文：如果能依靠德行统一天下百姓的想法，就算只依靠普通人，也能成就霸王的功业，没有什么困难的。
English: If you can rely on virtue to unify the people's thoughts, even if you only rely on ordinary people, you can achieve the work of the overlord, there is no difficulty.

古文：若苟僣拟，干时而动，众之所弃，谁能兴之？ 术不悦。
现代文：如果现在有僭越的想法，干预天时而轻率行动，就会遭到众人的抛弃，谁还能使他兴盛呢？ 袁术听了不高兴。
English: If there is now the idea of arrogance, interference with the times and imprudent actions, it will be abandoned by many people, who can make him flourish? Yuan Shuxu was not happy to hear this.

古文：是时，太祖将征冀州，术复问曰： 今曹公欲以弊兵数千，敌十万之众，可谓不量力矣！
现代文：这时候，太祖即将前往冀州征讨，袁术又问： 现在曹公想要凭借几千疲敝的将士抵抗我的十万大军，实在是不自量力啊！
English: At this time, the great ancestor was about to go to Jizhou to fight, and Yuan Shicun asked: Now Cao Gong wants to use several thousand tired soldiers to resist my hundred thousand army, it is really beyond his capacity!

古文：子以为何如？ 
现代文：你认为怎么样呢？ 
English: What do you think?

古文：承乃曰： 汉德虽衰，天命未改，今曹公挟天子以令天下，虽敌百万之众可也。 
现代文：张承才说： 汉王室国祚虽然衰微，但天命还未改变，现在曹公挟持天子号令天下，就算有百万大军，也是可以抵御的。 
English: Zhang Chengcai said: Although the Han royal family and the imperial state are in decline, the destiny of heaven has not changed. Now Cao Gong holds the heavenly call and commands the world. Even if there is a million-strong army, it can be resisted.

古文：术作色不怿，承去之。
现代文：袁术脸色忽变，非常不高兴，张承就离开了他。
English: Yuan Shuxu's face suddenly changed and he was very unhappy. Zhang Cheng then left him.

古文：太祖平冀州，遣使迎范。
现代文：太祖平定冀州后，派使者前去迎接张范。
English: After Emperor Taizu conquered Jizhou, he sent an envoy to meet Zhang Fan.

古文：范以疾留彭城，遣承诣太祖，太祖表以为谏议大夫。
现代文：张范因为生病留在彭城，派张承到太祖那里，太祖上书推荐张承担任谏议大夫。
English: Zhang Fan stayed in Pengcheng due to illness, and sent Zhang Cheng to the great-grandfather. The great-grandfather sent a letter to recommend Zhang Cheng to serve as the chief doctor.

古文：范子陵及承子戩为山东贼所得，范直诣贼请二子，贼以陵还范。
现代文：张范的儿子张陵和张承的儿子张戩被山东地区的贼寇抓走，张范直接去见贼寇请求放了两个孩子，贼人将张陵送还张范。
English: Zhang Fan's son, Zhang Ling, and Zhang Cheng's son, Zhang Yao, were taken away by bandits in Shandong. Zhang Fan went directly to see the bandits and asked them to release the two children. The bandits returned Zhang Ling to Zhang Fan.

古文：范谢曰： 诸君相还儿厚矣。
现代文：张范辞谢说： 各位将儿子还给我，这份好意很深厚。
English: Zhang Fan said, "You have all returned my son to me. This kindness is very profound.

古文：夫人情虽爱其子，然吾怜戩之小，请以陵易之。 
现代文：从感情上讲，虽然人都爱护自己的孩子，但我怜惜张戩还小，希望能用张陵交换他。 
English: Emotionally speaking, although everyone cherishes their children, I feel sorry for Zhang Ye, who is still young, and hope to exchange him for Zhang Ling.

古文：贼义其言，悉以还范。
现代文：贼寇认为他的话很有道义，将两个孩子全都归还给张范。
English: The thief thought his words were very moral, and returned the two children to Zhang Fan.

古文：太祖自荆州还，范得见於陈，以为议郎，参丞相军事，甚见敬重。
现代文：太祖率军从荆州回许县，张范在陈郡得以和太祖会面，太祖任命他为议郎，参与决策丞相军事，很受敬重。
English: Grandfather led the army from Huixu County, Jingzhou. Zhang Fan was able to meet Grandfather in Chen County. Grandfather appointed him as a mediator, participated in the decision-making of the prime minister's military, and was highly respected.

古文：太祖征伐，常令范及邴原留，与世子居守。
现代文：太祖率军四处征讨，经常让张范与邴原和世子曹丕一同留守。
English: The great-great-grandfather led the army to conquer everywhere, and often let Zhang Fan stay with Yuyuan and his son Cao Yu.

古文：太祖谓文帝： 举动必谘此二人。 
现代文：太祖对文帝说： 各种事情一定要先询问这两人。 
English: The great-grandfather said to Emperor Wen: You must first ask these two people about various matters.

古文：世子执子孙礼。
现代文：世子对他们行后辈礼节。
English: The emperor treated them with the courtesy of a younger generation.

古文：救恤穷乏，家无所馀，中外孤寡皆归焉。
现代文：张范救助抚恤贫穷困顿的人，家里没有什么财物，各地的的孤儿寡妇都来依附他。
English: Zhang Fan helps the poor and destitute, who have no property at home. Orphans and widows from all over the country come to depend on him.

古文：赠遗无所逆，亦终不用，及去，皆以还之。
现代文：张范所赠送的东西，他们没有退回去，但一直也不会使用，等到离开的时候，将东西都还回去。
English: They didn't return what Zhang Fan gave them, but they never used it. When they left, they returned everything.

古文：建安十七年卒。
现代文：张范在建安十七年去世。
English: Zhang Fan died in the seventeenth year of Jianan.

古文：魏国初建，承以丞相参军祭酒领赵郡太守，政化大行。
现代文：魏国刚建立时，张承以丞相参军祭酒的身份兼任赵郡太守，当地的政治教化推广得很好。
English: When the state of Wei was just established, Zhang Cheng concurrently served as the governor of Zhao County in the capacity of the prime minister of the army, and the local political indoctrination was well promoted.

古文：太祖将西征，徵承参军事，至长安，病卒。
现代文：太祖将要往西征讨，征召张承为参军事，到长安后，张承就因病去世了。
English: The great-grandfather was going to go to the west to enlist Zhang Cheng in the military. After arriving in Chang'an, Zhang Cheng died of illness.

古文：凉茂字伯方，山阳昌邑人也。
现代文：凉茂字伯方，山阳郡昌邑人。
English: He is from Changyi, Sanyang County.

古文：少好学，论议常据经典，以处是非。
现代文：年少时就喜好学习，谈论时经常引用经文典籍，来判断事情对错。
English: When he was young, he liked to study, and he often quoted scriptures and classics to judge whether something was right or wrong.

古文：太祖辟为司空掾，举高第，补侍御史。
现代文：太祖征召他为司空掾，考试成绩优异，补官担任侍御史。
English: His great-grandfather conscripted him into the Imperial Household Agency, and he excelled in his examinations and served as an assistant officer in the Imperial Household Agency.

古文：时泰山多盗贼，以茂为泰山太守，旬月之间，襁负而至者千馀家。
现代文：当时泰山地区很多盗匪贼寇，太祖任命凉茂为泰山太守，不到一个月的时间，用襁褓带着婴儿前来投靠的有一千多户。
English: At that time, there were many bandits and robbers in Mount Tai area. Taizu appointed Liangmao as the governor of Mount Tai. In less than a month, more than a thousand families came to stay with their babies.

古文：转为乐浪太守。
现代文：转为乐浪太守。
English: He was transferred to the post of Lelang Taishou.

古文：公孙度在辽东，擅留茂，不遣之官，然茂终不为屈。
现代文：公孙度在辽东，擅自将凉茂强留下，不让他到官任职，但凉茂始终没有屈从。
English: In Liaodong, Gongsundu left Liangmaoqiang without permission and did not allow him to hold any official position, but Liangmao never gave in.

古文：度谓茂及诸将曰： 闻曹公远征，邺无守备，今吾欲以步卒三万，骑万匹，直指邺，谁能御之？ 
现代文：公孙度对凉茂和众位将领说： 听闻曹公率军远征，邺城没有充足的防守准备，现在我打算用步兵三万、骑兵一万，直奔邺城攻打，有谁能抵抗？ 
English: Gongsundu said to Liangmao and the other generals: "I have heard that Cao Gong led an expeditionary force, and Lucheng did not have sufficient defensive preparations. Now I plan to attack Lucheng with 30,000 infantry and 10,000 cavalry. Who can resist?

古文：诸将皆曰： 然。 
现代文：各位将领都说： 说得对。 
English: The generals all said: That's right.

古文：又顾谓茂曰： 於君意何如？ 
现代文：又转头对凉茂说： 您怎么看？ 
English: He also turned to Liangmao and said: What do you think?

古文：茂答曰： 比者海内大乱，社稷将倾，将军拥十万之众，安坐而观成败，夫为人臣者，固若是邪！
现代文：凉茂说： 最近天下动乱，江山社稷即将倾颓，将军您坐拥十万大军，安守辽东然后观察各方势力的成败，为人臣子，本来是这样的吗！
English: Liangmao said, "Recently, the world is in turmoil, the country and society are on the verge of collapse. General, you are sitting with a hundred thousand troops, keeping Liaodong safe, and then observing the success or failure of various forces. As a courtier, is this how it should be?

古文：曹公忧国家之危败，愍百姓之苦毒，率义兵为天下诛残贼，功高而德广，可谓无二矣。
现代文：曹公忧虑国家的危机衰败，怜悯百姓的疾苦忧患，统率义军为天下诛杀残暴的叛贼，功劳卓著，德行广布，可以说是没有第二个了。
English: Cao Gong worried about the crisis and decline of the country, pitied the sufferings of the people, and led the rebel army to fight and kill the cruel traitors for the whole world. His achievements are outstanding, and his virtue is widespread. It can be said that there is no second.

古文：以海内初定，民始安集，故未责将军之罪耳！
现代文：因为天下刚刚安定下来，百姓刚刚聚集安顿，所以还没有追究将军的罪责罢了。
English: Because the country had just settled down, and the people had just gathered and settled down, the generals had not yet been held accountable.

古文：而将军乃欲称兵西向，则存亡之效，不崇朝而决。
现代文：但将军您却想要起兵向西进攻，这样生死存亡的影响，不应该在一个早上就决定。
English: But you, General, want to attack to the west, and the life-and-death consequences of that should not be decided in one morning.

古文：将军其勉之！ 
现代文：将军您还是再好好想想吧！ 
English: General, you'd better think again!

古文：诸将闻茂言，皆震动。
现代文：众位将领听了凉茂的话，都受到震动。
English: All the generals were shocked when they heard Liangmao's words.

古文：良久，度曰： 凉君言是也。 
现代文：过了很久，公孙度说： 凉茂说得对啊。 
English: After a long time, Gongsun Du said, "Liangmao was right.

古文：后徵迁为魏郡太守、甘陵相，所在有绩。
现代文：后来凉茂被征召为魏郡太守、甘陵相，他在任官上都有政绩。
English: Later, Liangmao was conscripted to be the governor of Wei County and the minister of Ganling, and he had great achievements in his post.

古文：文帝为五官将，茂以选为长史，迁左军师。
现代文：文帝还是五官中郎将时，凉茂被选拔担任长史，又提升为左军师。
English: When Emperor Wen was still a middle-ranking general, Liangmao was selected to be the long-term secretary and promoted to the left-arm division.

古文：魏国初建，迁尚书仆射，后为中尉奉常。
现代文：魏国刚建立时，升迁为尚书仆射，后来任中尉奉常。
English: When the state of Wei was first established, he was promoted to Shang Shufu, and later he was appointed as a lieutenant.

古文：文帝在东宫，茂复为太子太傅，甚见敬礼。
现代文：文帝还在东宫做太子时，凉茂又是太子太傅，很受文帝的尊敬和礼遇。
English: When Emperor Wen was still crown prince in the East Palace, Liangmao was also crown prince, and was highly respected and treated with courtesy by Emperor Wen.

古文：卒官。
现代文：后来死在任职上。
English: He later died in office.

古文：国渊字子尼，乐安盖人也。
现代文：国渊字子尼，乐安国盖县人。
English: Guoyuan Zi Zi Ni, from Le'an Guogai County.

古文：师事郑玄。
现代文：曾经师从并侍奉郑玄。
English: He once studied under and served Zheng Xuan.

古文：后与邴原、管宁等避乱辽东。
现代文：后来和邴原、管宁等人到辽东郡躲避战乱。
English: Later, he went to Liaodong County to escape the war with Haobara, Guanning and others.

古文：既还旧土，太祖辟为司空掾属，每於公朝论议，常直言正色，退无私焉。
现代文：回到故土后，太祖征召他担任司空掾属，每次在曹公家中谈论政事，经常是神情严肃地直言不讳，没有什么私心。
English: After returning to his homeland, the great-grandfather conscripted him to serve as the secretary of the Kuang family. Every time he talked about politics in Cao Gong's family, he was often serious and outspoken, with no selfishness.

古文：太祖欲广置屯田，使渊典其事。
现代文：太祖想要加大兴办屯田的力度，派国渊主管这件事。
English: Grandfather wanted to increase the intensity of the construction of the military canton, and sent Guoyuan to be in charge of this matter.

古文：渊屡陈损益，相土处民，计民置吏，明功课之法，五年中仓廪丰实，百姓竞劝乐业。
现代文：国渊多次向太祖陈述应该增删的项目，实地考察，安置百姓，计算民众数量，设置官吏，阐明考核的方法，五年之内，使得仓库充实，百姓争相勉励，安于职守。
English: Guoyuan repeatedly stated to the great ancestor the items that should be added or deleted, the field inspection, the placement of the people, the calculation of the number of people, the establishment of officials, and the clarification of the assessment method. Within five years, the warehouse was enriched, and the people were encouraged and satisfied with their duties.

古文：太祖征关中，以渊为居府长史，统留事。
现代文：太祖征讨关中地区，任命国渊为居府长史，统管留守事宜。
English: Taizhu conquered the Guanzhong area, appointed Guoyuan as the governor of the residence, and took charge of the affairs of the residence.

古文：田银、苏伯反河间，银等既破，后有馀党，皆应伏法。
现代文：田银、苏伯在河间反叛，他们被攻破后，留有余党，都应该依法惩处。
English: Tian Yin and Su Bo rebelled in Hebei Province. After they were defeated, they should be punished according to the law.

古文：渊以为非首恶，请不行刑。
现代文：国渊认为他们作恶的首要人员，请求不判处死刑。
English: Guoyuan believes that they are the main perpetrators of evil and requests that they not be sentenced to death.

古文：太祖从之，赖渊得生者千馀人。
现代文：太祖同意了，仰赖国渊的话得以生还的有一千多人。
English: The great-grandfather agreed, and more than a thousand people survived by relying on Kunio's words.

古文：破贼文书，旧以一为十，及渊上首级，如其实数。
现代文：攻破敌人的文书，旧时都是夸大数据，把一个当做十个，等到国渊上报斩杀的数量时，跟实际的数量一致。
English: In the old days, the documents for defeating the enemy were all exaggerated data, one was treated as ten, and when the number of killings was reported in Guoyuan, it was consistent with the actual number.

古文：太祖问其故，渊曰： 夫征讨外寇，多其斩获之数者，欲以大武功，且示民听也。
现代文：太祖问他原因，国渊说： 征讨在外的贼寇，夸大斩杀或俘虏的数量，是想要夸大战绩，并且显示给民众看。
English: The great-great-grandfather asked him the reason, and Guoyuan said, "The purpose of recruiting outside thieves and robbers and exaggerating the number of people killed or captured is to exaggerate the results of the war and show them to the public.

古文：河间在封域之内，银等叛逆，虽克捷有功，渊窃耻之。 
现代文：河间地区在封地之内，田银等人反叛，攻破并战胜他们虽然有功劳，但我私下为这样的事感到耻辱。 
English: Kawama district was within the fiefdom, Tian Yin and others rebelled, and although there was merit in breaking through and defeating them, I was privately ashamed of such a thing.

古文：太祖大悦，迁魏郡太守。
现代文：太祖十分高兴，将他升迁为魏郡太守。
English: The great-grandfather was very pleased and promoted him to the governor of Wei County.

古文：时有投书诽谤者，太祖疾之，欲必知其主。
现代文：当时有人写信诽谤他人，太祖非常厌恶，一定要知道写信的人是谁。
English: At that time, someone wrote a letter slandering others, and Taizu was very disgusted. He had to know who the letter writer was.

古文：渊请留其本书，而不宣露。
现代文：国渊请求留下原信，但没有对外宣扬或泄露。
English: Guoyuan requested that the original letter be left behind, but it was not publicized or leaked.

古文：其书多引二京赋，渊敕功曹曰： 此郡既大，今在都辇，而少学问者。
现代文：信中引用了很多《二京赋》的内容，国渊命功曹说： 这个郡范围这么大，现在虽然是国都，但也少有学识渊博的人。
English: The letter quoted a lot of the content of "Erjing Fu," and Guofeng Mingzhu Gong Cao said: This county is so large that although it is now the national capital, there are few people with profound knowledge.

古文：其简开解年少，欲遣就师。 
现代文：这封信能开解引导年轻人，我打算派人去从师学习。 
English: This letter can enlighten and guide young people, and I plan to send someone to learn from the teacher.

古文：功曹差三人，临遣引见，训以 所学未及，二京赋，博物之书也，世人忽略，少有其师，可求能读者从受之。 又密喻旨。
现代文：功曹派出了桑耳，快要出发时，国渊召见了他们，教导他们： 你们学习的内容还不够广泛，《二京赋》是记载了很多内容的书籍，现在的人都忽视了它，很少有能讲解它的老师，你们可以去请求能读懂它的人并向他请教。 
English: Gong Cao sent out Sang Er, and when they were about to leave, Guoyuan summoned them and taught them: The content of your studies is not extensive enough. "Erjing Fu" is a book that records a lot of content. Nowadays, people ignore it. There are few teachers who can explain it. You can ask someone who can read it and ask him for advice.

古文：旬日得能读者，遂往受业。
现代文：有秘密地告诉他们自己的真实想法。
English: There is a secret to telling them what you really think.

古文：吏因请使作笺，比方其书，与投书人同手。
现代文：这三个人十天后就找到了能读懂《二京赋》的人，就前往请求拜师学习。
English: Ten days later, the three of them found someone who could read "Nijo-fu" and went to ask him to study with them.

古文：收摄案问，具得情理。
现代文：三人就请那个人写了一纸笺书，跟诽谤信做对比，两种笔迹是一样的。
English: The three of them asked the man to write a handwritten note to compare with the defamatory letter, and the two handwriting were the same.

古文：迁太仆。居列卿位，布衣蔬食，禄赐散之旧故宗族，以恭俭自守，卒官。
现代文：于是将这个人收押审问，详细了解了其中的缘由。后来国渊被提升为太仆。国渊虽然位居九卿之列，但依然穿着布做的衣物，吃素食，将自己的俸禄和赏赐都散发给旧友亲族，并以谦恭节俭坚守本心，后来在官任上去世。
English: Therefore, this person was detained and interrogated, and the reason for this was understood in detail. Later, Kunihisa was promoted to the position of eunuch. Although Kunihisa was ranked among the nine lords, he still wore clothes made of cloth, ate vegetarian food, distributed his salary and rewards to old friends and relatives, and adhered to his original intention with modesty and thrift, and later died in office.

古文：田畴字子泰，右北平无终人也。
现代文：田畴字子泰，是右北平郡无终县人。
English: Tian Zhen Zi Tai is a resident of Mufeng County, North Ping County.

古文：好读书，善击剑。
现代文：爱好读书，擅长击剑。
English: Enjoys reading and is good at fencing.

古文：初平元年，义兵起，董卓迁帝于长安。
现代文：初平元年，关东地区兴起很多义兵，董卓将汉献帝迁往长安。
English: In the first year of the Heian period, many volunteers arose in the Kanto region, and Dong Zhuo moved Han Xianti to Chang'an.

古文：幽州牧刘虞叹曰： 贼臣作乱，朝廷播荡，四海俄然，莫有固志。
现代文：幽州牧刘虞感叹说： 乱臣贼子兴起祸事，朝廷中流离动荡，天下忽然间乱事纷纷，没有人有坚定意志。
English: Liu Yu, a herdsman from Yuzhou, lamented, "Disasters arise from unruly vassals and thieves, the imperial court is in upheaval, and the world is suddenly in turmoil. No one has a firm will.

古文：身备宗室遗老，不得自同於众。
现代文：我作为皇家宗室的旧臣，不能和众人相同。
English: As an old retainer of the royal family, I cannot be like everyone else.

古文：今欲奉使展效臣节，安得不辱命之士乎？ 
现代文：现在我希望能奉命出使以展示我身为臣子的气节，怎么样做才能得到不辱使命的义士呢？ 
English: Now I hope that I can be ordered to send an envoy to show my dignity as a courtier, how can I do to get a righteous man who does not dishonor his mission?

古文：众议咸曰： 田畴虽年少，多称其奇。 畴时年二十二矣。
现代文：众人商议后都说： 田畴年龄虽小，但很多人都称赞他的才能。 田畴当时年仅二十二岁。
English: After deliberation, they all said: Although Tian Zomeng was young, many people praised his talent. Tian Zomeng was only 22 years old at the time.

古文：虞乃备礼请与相见，大悦之，遂署为从事，具其车骑。
现代文：刘虞就准备好礼品请他前来相见，对他很是满意，就任命他为从事，为他准备了出行的全套车马装备。
English: Liu Yu prepared a gift and invited him to come and meet him. He was very satisfied with him and appointed him to work for him. He prepared a full set of horse and carriage equipment for the trip.

古文：将行，畴曰： 今道路阻绝，寇虏纵横，称官奉使，为众所指名。
现代文：即将出发的时候，田畴说： 现在道路阻塞断绝，贼寇盗匪横行，要是我说自己是官员，奉命出使，会被众人指点议论。
English: As he was about to set off, Tian Zang said, "Nowadays, the road is blocked, thieves and bandits are rampant. If I were to say that I am an official, sent by order, I would be criticized by everyone.

古文：愿以私行，期於得达而已。 
现代文：希望能以私人身份行动，希望能够顺利到达。 刘虞同意了。
English: Hoping to act in a private capacity, hoping to arrive smoothly, Liu Yu agreed.

古文：虞从之。畴乃归，自选其家客与年少之勇壮慕从者二十骑俱往。
现代文：田畴就回去自己选择了家中客卿和年少勇敢又自愿前来跟随的二十多名年轻人，和他们一起骑马前往。
English: When Tian Zhen went back, he chose the guest of honor from his family and more than twenty young people who bravely and voluntarily came to follow, and rode with them.

古文：虞自出祖而遣之。
现代文：刘虞亲自出来祭祀路神，为田畴送行。
English: Liu Yu himself came out to offer sacrifice to the god of the road to see off Tian Zhen.

古文：既取道，畴乃更上西关，出塞，傍北山，直趣朔方，循间径去，遂至长安致命。
现代文：上路以后，田畴就前往居庸关，出了边塞，沿着北山，直奔朔方郡，沿着小路前行，最后到达长安完成了使命。
English: After going on the road, Tian Zong went to Juyongguan, out of the border town, along the North Mountain, straight to Shuofang County, along the road, and finally arrived in Chang'an to complete the mission.

古文：诏拜骑都尉。
现代文：朝廷下诏授予田畴骑都尉之职。
English: The Imperial Court issued an edict awarding Tajome the position of cavalry captain.

古文：畴以为天子方蒙尘未安，不可以荷佩荣宠，固辞不受。
现代文：田畴认为天子刚刚经历颠沛流离，还没有安定下来，自己不能享受这样的恩宠，就坚决推辞没有接受任命。
English: Tian Zhuang believed that Tian Zi had just experienced a turbulent wandering, had not yet settled down, and could not enjoy such a grace, so he firmly declined to accept the appointment.

古文：朝廷高其义。
现代文：朝廷称赞他的高义。
English: The court praised his high moral character.

古文：三府并辟，皆不就。
现代文：三公府同时征召，田畴都没有赴任。
English: Three public offices were called up at the same time, but none of the field commanders were appointed.

古文：得报，驰还，未至，虞已为公孙瓒所害。
现代文：田畴得到回复后，骑马迅速返回，还没回到，刘虞已经被公孙瓒杀死。
English: After receiving a reply from Tian Zhen, he quickly returned on horseback. Before he could return, Liu Yu had already been killed by Gong Sun Quan.

古文：畴至，谒祭虞墓，陈发章表，哭泣而去。
现代文：田畴回到后，到刘虞的坟前焚香拜祭，将朝廷的表彰内容告诉他，然后哭着离开了。
English: After Tian Zang returned, he went to Liu Yu's grave to burn incense and worship, told him the content of the award from the imperial court, and then left crying.

古文：瓒闻之大怒，购求获畴，谓曰： 汝何自哭刘虞墓，而不送章报於我也？ 畴答曰： 汉室衰穨，人怀异心，唯刘公不失忠节。
现代文：公孙瓒闻讯，十分生气，悬赏抓捕田畴，抓到以后对他说： 你为什么自己到刘虞坟前哭，却不将朝廷的表彰文书拿给我？ 田畴回答说： 汉王室衰微，每个人都怀有二心，只有刘公没有失去为臣子的忠诚节义。
English: When Gongsun Qian heard the news, he was very angry and offered a reward for the capture of Tian Zhen. After catching him, he said to him: Why did you go to Liu Yu's grave to cry, but did not show me the award document from the imperial court? Tian Zhen replied: The Han royal family is fading, everyone has two hearts, only Liu Gong has not lost his loyalty as a courtier.

古文：章报所言，於将军未美，恐非所乐闻，故不进也。
现代文：朝廷的文书里所写的，没有对将军您的褒扬，恐怕不是您乐意知道的，所以没有拿给你。
English: I'm afraid you didn't want to know what was written in the court documents, which didn't praise the general, so I didn't give it to you.

古文：且将军方举大事以求所欲，既灭无罪之君，又雠守义之臣，诚行此事，则燕、赵之士将皆蹈东海而死耳，岂忍有从将军者乎！ 瓒壮其对，释不诛也。
现代文：况且将军您正在筹划大事来求得自己想要的，既杀害了没有罪责的主上，又和坚守忠义的臣子为仇，如果真的做了这件事，那燕赵地区的将士将会投入东海自尽，哪会有人忍着愤怒跟随将军呢？ 公孙瓒觉得他的回答很豪迈，就释放了他，没有杀掉他。
English: Moreover, General, you are planning a big event to get what you want. You have both killed the innocent master and antagonized the loyal vassal. If you really do this, then the soldiers in the Yanzhao region will be thrown into the East China Sea to commit suicide. How can anyone bear the anger and follow the general? Gongsun Yao thought his answer was very heroic and released him without killing him.

古文：拘之军下，禁其故人莫得与通。
现代文：公孙瓒把田畴扣留在军营中，严禁他的朋友和他交流沟通。
English: Gongsun Yao detained Tian Zang in the military camp and strictly forbade his friends to communicate with him.

古文：或说瓒曰： 田畴义士，君弗能礼，而又囚之，恐失众心。 
现代文：有人劝说公孙瓒说： 田畴是义士，您不能对他以礼相待，却又囚禁了他，恐怕会失掉人心。 
English: Some people persuaded Gongsun Yao to say: Tian Zhen is a righteous man, you can't treat him with courtesy, but you have imprisoned him, I'm afraid you will lose people's hearts.

古文：瓒乃纵遣畴。
现代文：公孙瓒才释放并送走了田畴。
English: It was only then that Gongsun Yan released and sent away Tian Zhuang.

古文：畴得北归，率举宗族他附从数百人，扫地而盟曰： 君仇不报，吾不可以立於世！ 
现代文：田畴得以回到北方，率领着全宗族和其他几百个依附他的人，他们扫地盟誓说： 您的仇不报，我就不能再立于世间了！ 
English: Tian Zhen was able to return to the north, leading the whole clan and hundreds of other people who depended on him, sweeping the ground and swearing: "If you don't avenge me, I won't be able to stand on this earth anymore!"

古文：遂入徐无山中，营深险平敞地而居，躬耕以养父母。
现代文：就进入徐无山中，修整了一块深远险峻又平整敞亮的地方住下，亲自耕种粮食，奉养父母。
English: He went into the middle of the mountains, repaired a far-reaching precipitous and flat and spacious place to live, personally cultivated grain, and supported his parents.

古文：百姓归之，数年间至五千馀家。
现代文：百姓都来依附他，几年时间这里就有了五千多户人家。
English: The people all came to depend on him, and in a few years there were more than five thousand households here.

古文：畴谓其父老曰： 诸君不以畴不肖，远来相就。
现代文：田畴对父老长辈们说： 各位不认为田畴品行不好，从很远的地方来投奔。
English: Tian Zeng said to his parents and elders, "You don't think Tian Zeng is a bad person, coming from far away to run away.

古文：众成都邑，而莫相统一，恐非久安之道，愿推择其贤长者以为之主。 皆曰： 善。 
现代文：聚集成城镇，但却没有能统一起来，恐怕不是长久安定的办法，希望大家推举选择贤能的长者来担任领袖。 众人都说： 好。 
English: I am afraid that gathering into towns but failing to unify them is not a long-term and stable method, and I hope everyone will nominate and select capable elders to serve as leaders.

古文：同佥推畴。
现代文：一起推举了田畴。
English: At the same time, Tianzheng was promoted.

古文：畴曰： 今来在此，非苟安而已，将图大事，复怨雪耻。
现代文：田畴说： 我们现在来到这个地方并住在这里，不是只求一时安定而已，而是应该计划大事，以报仇和洗刷耻辱。
English: "We have now come to this place and are living here, not just to seek temporary stability, but we should plan big things to take revenge and wash away the shame," Tian Zhen said.

古文：窃恐未得其志，而轻薄之徒自相侵侮，偷快一时，无深计远虑。
现代文：我暗暗担心还没有完成我们的志向，那些轻佻浮薄就自己互相侵扰欺侮，只求一时的畅快，没有深思熟虑的计策。
English: I'm secretly worried that we haven't yet fulfilled our ambitions, and that those frivolous people will harass and bully each other on their own, seeking only momentary pleasure, without a well-thought-out strategy.

古文：畴有愚计，愿与诸君共施之，可乎？ 
现代文：田畴有一条粗浅的计划，希望和各位一同实施，可以吗？ 众人都说： 可以。 
English: Tianzheng has a rough plan and hopes to implement it together with you, is it possible? Everyone said: Yes.

古文：皆曰： 可。 畴乃为约束相杀伤、犯盗、诤讼之法，法重者至死，其次抵罪，二十馀条。
现代文：田畴就为众人制定了二十多天有关杀人伤人、盗窃财物、案件诉讼的律法，规定犯了重罪的要判处死刑，比死罪低一级的行为也要抵偿罪责。
English: Tianzheng has set up more than 20 days of laws related to homicide and injury, theft of property, and litigation of cases for everyone, stipulating that those who have committed serious crimes should be sentenced to death, and acts that are one level lower than the death penalty should also compensate for criminal responsibility.

古文：又制为婚姻嫁娶之礼，兴举学校讲授之业，班行其众，众皆便之，至道不拾遗。
现代文：又制定了两家结为婚姻，男女嫁娶的礼制，兴办学校传授知识，并向众人颁布，众人都熟悉后，做到了路不拾遗的地步。
English: He also established the etiquette for two families to marry, and for men and women to marry together, and established a school to teach knowledge, and promulgated it to everyone. After everyone was familiar with it, it reached the point where there was no way to pick it up.

古文：北边翕然服其威信，乌丸、鲜卑并各遣译使致贡遗，畴悉抚纳，令不为寇。
现代文：北方边境的百姓都被他的威信折服，乌丸、鲜卑各自派出使者献上礼物，田畴都安抚、接纳了他们，让他们不要再侵扰边境。
English: The people on the northern border were all impressed by his prestige. Both the Emperor and the Empress sent envoys to present gifts, and the fields appeased and accepted them, so that they would no longer invade the border.

古文：袁绍数遣使招命，又即授将军印，因安辑所统，畴皆拒不受。
现代文：袁绍多次派遣使者前来招抚任命，又立刻授予将军印信，以安抚田畴治理的百姓，田畴都拒绝没有接受。
English: Yuan Shao repeatedly sent envoys to invite and appoint, and immediately granted the general a seal letter to appease the people of Tianzheng governance. Tianzheng refused and did not accept.

古文：绍死，其子尚又辟焉，畴终不行。
现代文：袁绍死后，他的儿子袁尚又前来征召，田畴最终都没有前往。
English: After the death of Yuan Shao, his son Yuan Shang was called up again, but Tian Zhen did not go.

古文：畴常忿乌丸昔多贼杀其郡冠盖，有欲讨之意而力未能。
现代文：田畴经常为乌丸从前多次残杀郡中的士人官吏而忿恨不平，有想要征讨他们的想法但实力不足。
English: Tian Zhen often resented the fact that Wu Maru had killed many officers and officials in the county in the past, and wanted to solicit their ideas, but lacked the strength.

古文：建安十二年，太祖北征乌丸，未至，先遣使辟畴，又命田豫喻指。
现代文：建安十二年，太祖率军北征乌丸，还没有到，先派出使者征召田畴，又命令田畴告知他的旨意。
English: In the twelfth year of Jian'an, the great ancestor led the army to the north to conquer Wuyuan, but before he arrived, he first sent an envoy to recruit Tianzheng, and ordered Tianzheng to inform him of his will.

古文：畴戒其门下趣治严。
现代文：田畴告诫他的门客尽快整理行装。
English: Tian Zhen cautioned his customers to pack up as soon as possible.

古文：门人谓曰： 昔袁公慕君，礼命五至，君义不屈；今曹公使一来而君若恐弗及者，何也？ 畴笑而应之曰： 此非君所识也。 遂随使者到军，署司空户曹掾，引见谘议。
现代文：门客对他说： 从前袁公欣赏您，多次送来礼品和征召的命令，您坚守道义都没有屈服；现在曹公的使者第一次来，您好像担心来不及一样让我们收拾行李，为什么呢？ 田畴笑着回答他说： 这就不是您能了解的力量。 就跟随使者来到太祖的军营，被任命为司空户曹掾，太祖召见他，向他咨询探讨。
English: The doorkeeper said to him: In the past, Yuan Gong appreciated you, sent gifts and conscription orders many times, you adhered to morality and did not give in; now, Cao Gong's messenger has come for the first time, you seem to be worried that it is too late, let us pack our bags, why? Tian Zang replied with a smile, "This is not a power you can understand." He followed the messenger to Taizu's military camp and was appointed as the guardian of Cao Zang. Taizu summoned him to consult and discuss with him.

古文：明日出令曰： 田子泰非吾所宜吏者。 即举茂才，拜为蓚令，不之官，随军次无终。
现代文：第二天，太祖下令说： 田子泰不是适合作我的小吏的人。 立即推举田畴为茂才，被任命为蓚县县令，田畴没有到官任职，跟随军队到了无终县。
English: The next day, the great-grandfather ordered: Tian Zi Tai is not a suitable person to be my petty officer. Tian Zang was immediately elected as Mucai and was appointed as the county magistrate of Jixian County. Tian Zang did not go to the official post, but followed the army to Mucen County.

古文：时方夏水雨，而滨海洿下，泞滞不通，虏亦遮守蹊要，军不得进。
现代文：当时正是夏天多雨的时节，而海边的地势低洼地区，道路泥泞无法通行，敌军又把守险要路段，大军无法前进。
English: At that time, it was the rainy season in summer, and the low-lying areas along the coast, the roads were muddy and impassable, and the enemy forces had to guard the dangerous sections of the road, so the large army could not advance.

古文：太祖患之，以问畴。
现代文：太祖对此很担忧，以这件事询问田畴。
English: The great-grandfather was worried about this and asked Tian Zeng about it.

古文：若嘿回军，从卢龙口越白檀之险，出空虚之地，路近而便，掩其不备，蹋顿之首可不战而禽也。 太祖曰： 善。 乃引军还，而署大木表于水侧路傍曰： 方今暑夏，道路不通，且俟秋冬，乃复进军。 虏候骑见之，诚以为大军去也。
现代文：田畴说： 这条路在夏秋时节经常有积水，浅的地方车马不能通行，深的地方也不能行船，造成不方便已经很久了。原来的北平郡的治所在平冈县，从卢龙出发，直到柳城；从汉光武帝建武年间以来，这里就塌陷破败无法通行，至今已经有将近两百年了，但还有隐蔽的小路可以穿过。现在敌方将领正率军前往无终，因无法前进，正在后退，懈怠松弛没有防备。如果我们率军暗中返回，从卢龙口越过白檀的险要之处，从空旷地带出来，路程近道路也好走，趁他们没有防备而攻打，那蹋顿的首领就可以不用打仗也能抓获了。 太祖说： 好。 就率军返回，又在水边路上立了一块大木板，写上： 现在是盛夏时节，这条路不能通行，先等到秋冬时节，再重新进军。 敌军负责侦查的骑兵看到了木牌，真的以为曹军已经离开了。
English: Tian Zhen said: This road is often flooded in summer and autumn. In shallow places, vehicles and horses cannot pass, and in deep places, ships cannot sail, which has caused inconvenience for a long time. The original capital of Beiping County is located in Pinggang County, starting from Lulong and reaching Liucheng; since the Han Emperor Guangwu Jianwu, it has been collapsed and dilapidated and impassable. It has been nearly two hundred years, but there are still hidden paths that can be crossed. Now the enemy generals are leading the army to no end, because they cannot advance, they are retreating, and there is no protection against slackness. If

古文：太祖令畴将其众为乡导，上徐无山，出卢龙，历平冈，登白狼堆，去柳城二百馀里，虏乃惊觉。
现代文：太祖让田畴率领部下作为向导，登上徐无山，过了卢龙，经过平岗，登上白狼城，到了距离柳城二百多里的地方时敌军才警戒觉悟。
English: The great-grandfather asked Tian Zhen to lead his subordinates as a guide, ascended Xu Wu Mountain, passed Lulong, passed Pinggang, ascended the White Wolf City, and when it was more than two hundred miles away from Liucheng, the enemy army was alerted.

古文：单于身自临陈，太祖与交战，遂大斩获，追奔逐北，至柳城。
现代文：他们的单于亲自来到两军阵前，太祖和他交战，最后大获全胜，追逐逃亡的败兵直到柳城。
English: Their great-great-grandfather personally came to the front of the two armies, fought with him, and finally won a complete victory, chasing the fleeing defeated soldiers to Liucheng.

古文：军还入塞，论功行封，封畴亭侯，邑五百户。
现代文：太祖大军返回关内，评定功劳加以封赏，封田畴为亭侯，食邑五百户。
English: Emperor Taizu's army returned to Guanai, where they were rewarded for their meritorious service. The fiefdoms were divided into pavilions, and there were 500 households in the food villages.

古文：畴自以始为居难，率众循逃，志义不立，反以为利，非本意也，固让。
现代文：田畴认为自己当初是因为主君遇难才率领众人逃亡，报仇的志向还没有实现，却依靠它获取荣名利禄，不是他的本意，坚决推辞。
English: Tian Zang believes that he initially led the people to escape because his master was killed. The ambition of revenge has not yet been realized, but relying on it to gain fame and fortune is not his intention, and he firmly refuses.

古文：太祖知其至心，许而不夺。
现代文：太祖了解他的心意，答应了他，没有勉强。
English: The great-grandfather knew what he wanted and agreed to it, not reluctantly.

古文：辽东斩送袁尚首，令 三军敢有哭之者斩 。
现代文：辽东地区斩杀了袁尚并将他的首级送来，太祖下令说： 军中有敢为袁尚哭的，立斩 。
English: The Liaodong region killed Yuan Shang and sent his head to the emperor, who ordered: "If anyone in the army dares to cry for Yuan Shang, behead him."

古文：畴以尝为尚所辟，乃往吊祭。
现代文：田畴因为曾经被袁尚征召为官，就前往吊唁。
English: Tian Zeng, because he was once conscripted by Yuan Shang, went to the funeral.

古文：太祖亦不问。
现代文：太祖也没有过问。
English: My great-grandfather didn't even ask.

古文：畴尽将其家属及宗人三百馀家居邺。
现代文：田畴将自己家中亲属和三百多户族人安置在邺城。
English: Tian Zeng has resettled his relatives and more than three hundred other ethnic families in Lucheng.

古文：太祖赐畴车马谷帛，皆散之宗族知旧。
现代文：太祖赏赐给田畴各种车马器物粮食丝帛，田畴都将这些散发给族人或旧友故交。
English: The great-grandfather rewarded Tian Zang with various chariots and horses, grain silks, and Tian Zang distributed these to his relatives or old friends.

古文：从征荆州还，太祖追念畴功殊美，恨前听畴之让，曰： 是成一人之志，而亏王法大制也。 於是乃复以前爵封畴。
现代文：田畴跟随太祖征讨荆州回来，太祖感念他的功劳卓著，后悔之前答应了田畴的推让，说： 这是成全了一个人的志向，但却使国家律法受损啊。 于是又将之前要封赏给他的爵位赐给他。
English: Tian Zhen returned with his great-great-grandfather after the conquest of Jingzhou. The great-great-grandfather thought highly of Tian Zhen's outstanding achievements, and before he regretted it, he agreed to Tian Zhen's concession, saying, "This is the fulfillment of a person's aspiration, but it has damaged the country's law. Therefore, he also gave him the title of nobility that was to be awarded to him before.

古文：畴上疏陈诚，以死自誓。
现代文：田畴上表陈说自己的诚意，并以死发誓。
English: Tian Zong publicly declared his sincerity and swore to die.

古文：太祖不听，欲引拜之，至于数四，终不受。
现代文：太祖没有同意，打算征召他为官，来回好几次，田畴最终也没有接受。
English: The great-grandfather did not agree, intending to conscript him as an official, and he went back and forth several times. In the end, Tianzheng did not accept.

古文：有司劾畴狷介违道，苟立小节，宜免官加刑。
现代文：有官员弹劾田畴孤高自傲，违背正道，只知道固守小节，应该免除官职并加以刑罚。
English: Some officials have impeached Tian Zhen for being arrogant and insolent, going against the right path, and only knowing how to stick to the rules. He should be removed from office and punished.

古文：太祖重其事，依违者久之。
现代文：太祖尊重田畴的行为，迟疑了很久。
English: Taizu respected Tanaka's actions and hesitated for a long time.

古文：乃下世子及大臣博议，世子以畴同於子文辞禄，申胥逃赏，宜勿夺以优其节。
现代文：最后将这件事交给世子曹丕和大臣们广泛讨论。世子曹丕认为田畴和楚国令尹子文推辞俸禄，申包胥逃避封赏是一样的，应该不强迫他，以成全他的志向。
English: Finally, the matter was handed over to the heir Cao Pi and the ministers for extensive discussion. The heir Cao Pi believed that Tian Zhen and the Chu governor Yin Ziwen's refusal to accept the reward was the same as Bao Pi's evasion of the reward, and that he should not be forced to fulfill his ambition.

古文：尚书令荀彧、司隶校尉锺繇亦以为可听。
现代文：尚书令荀彧、司隶校尉钟繇也认为可以听从他自己的意愿。
English: Shang Shuling Yao and Sili Lieutenant Zhong Yao also thought that they could follow his wishes.

古文：太祖犹欲侯之。
现代文：太祖依然想封田畴为侯。
English: The great-grandfather still wants to be a feudal lord.

古文：畴素与夏侯惇善，太祖语惇曰： 且往以情喻之，自从君所言，无告吾意也。 惇就畴宿，如太祖所戒。
现代文：田畴向来跟夏侯惇关系很好，太祖对夏侯惇说： 你去以情谊劝说他，就说都是你的意思，不要告诉他我的想法。 
English: Tian Zhen had always had a good relationship with Xia Houzhu. The great-grandfather said to Xia Houzhu, "If you want to persuade him with affection, just say what you mean, and don't tell him what I think."

古文：畴揣知其指，不复发言。
现代文：夏侯惇到田畴那里住宿，向太祖告诉他的那样说。田畴揣摩到他的想法，没有再说话。
English: Xia Houyi went to stay with Tian Zhengyi and told him what the great-grandfather had told him. Tian Zhengyi guessed his thoughts and did not speak again.

古文：惇临去，乃拊畴背曰： 田君，主意殷勤，曾不能顾乎！ 畴答曰： 是何言之过也！
现代文：夏侯惇临走前。才抚着田畴的背说： 田君，主君的想法很诚恳，怎么能不顾及呢！ 田畴回答说： 您这话说得太过分了！
English: Just before Xia Houyi left, he stroked Tian Jiao's back and said, "Tian Jun, your master's thoughts are very sincere, how can you ignore them!" Tian Jiao replied, "You've gone too far with your words!

古文：畴，负义逃窜之人耳，蒙恩全活，为幸多矣。
现代文：田畴，只是个忘恩负义四处逃往的人罢了，承蒙主君的恩赏才得以苟活，已经是很大的幸运了。
English: Tian Zhen was just an ungrateful person who fled everywhere. It was only thanks to his master's blessing that he was able to survive. He was very lucky.

古文：岂可卖卢龙之塞，以易赏禄哉？
现代文：怎么能出卖卢龙要塞以换取功劳赏赐呢？
English: How could the Lulong Fortress be sold in exchange for a reward?

古文：纵国私畴，畴独不愧於心乎？
现代文：即使国家偏爱田畴，田畴难道就问心无愧吗？
English: Even if the country favors Tianzheng, does Tianzheng have a clear conscience?

古文：将军雅知畴者，犹复如此，若必不得已，请愿效死刎首於前。 言未卒，涕泣横流。
现代文：将军您向来是了解田畴的，但还是这样做，如果实在不得已，我希望在您面前自刎而死，献出我的性命。 话还没说完，已经痛哭流涕。
English: General, you have always been aware of Tian Zhen, but still do this, if it is really a last resort, I hope to die in front of you and give my life, I have not finished speaking, I have been crying.

古文：惇具答太祖。太祖喟然知不可屈，乃拜为议郎。
现代文：夏侯惇将田畴的话详细地回禀太祖，太祖感叹着知道他是不会屈从了，就任命他为议郎。
English: Xia Houyi returned Tanaka's words in detail to his great-grandfather. The great-grandfather sighed, knowing that he would not give in, and appointed him as a mediator.

古文：年四十六卒。
现代文：田畴在四十六岁的时候去世。
English: Tajome passed away at the age of 46.

古文：子又早死。
现代文：他的儿子又早亡。
English: His son also died young.

古文：文帝践阼，高畴德义，赐畴从孙续爵关内侯，以奉其嗣。
现代文：文帝登基即位后，敬重田畴的德行信义，给田畴的侄孙子田续封爵为关内侯，以表示对田畴后代的尊重。
English: After Emperor Wen ascended to the throne, he respected Tian Jiao's virtue and loyalty, and gave Tian Jiao's nephew and grandson Tian Jiao the title of Guan Nei Hou, to show his respect for Tian Jiao's descendants.

古文：王脩字叔治，北海营陵人也。
现代文：王脩字叔治，北海郡营陵县人。
English: Wang Shuji, from Yingling County, Beihai County.

古文：年七岁丧母。
现代文：七岁的时候母亲就去世了。
English: His mother died when he was seven.

古文：母以社日亡，来岁邻里社，脩感念母，哀甚。
现代文：他的母亲是在社日那天去世的，第二年乡里人在这一天祭祀土神，王脩念及母亲，非常哀痛。
English: His mother died on the day of Shabbat. The next year, the villagers made a sacrifice to the god of the soil on this day, and Wang Xi remembered his mother with great sorrow.

古文：邻里闻之，为之罢社。
现代文：乡里人知道后，为此停止了社日活动。
English: After the villagers found out, the social day activities were stopped.

古文：年二十，游学南阳，止张奉舍。
现代文：王脩二十岁的时候，到南阳游历学习，住在张奉的家里。
English: When Wang Yao was twenty years old, he traveled to Nanyang to study and lived in Zhang Feng's home.

古文：奉举家得疾病，无相视者，脩亲隐恤之，病愈乃去。
现代文：张奉全家人都生了病，没有看顾的人，王脩亲自精心照顾他们，直到他们病好才离开。
English: Zhang Bong's entire family fell ill. Wang Yao personally took good care of those who had no one to look after them until they were well enough to leave.

古文：初平中，北海孔融召以为主簿，守高密令。
现代文：初平年间，北海的孔融征召王脩担任主簿，任高密县令。
English: At the beginning of the Heian period, Kong Rong of the North Sea conscripted Wang Xi to serve as the chief accountant, and he was appointed Gaomi County Governor.

古文：高密孙氏素豪侠，人客数犯法。
现代文：高密人孙氏向来有豪侠之气，他的门客多次违犯律法。
English: Mr. Sun, a highly secretive man, has always had the air of a hero, and his protégé has repeatedly violated the law.

古文：民有相劫者，贼入孙氏，吏不能执。
现代文：民间有抢劫事情发生，贼人逃入孙家，官吏们没法抓捕。
English: There was a robbery by civilians. The thieves fled into Sun's house, and the officials were unable to arrest them.

古文：脩将吏民围之，孙氏拒守，吏民畏惮不敢近。
现代文：王脩率领官吏百姓将孙家包围起来，孙家抗拒坚守，官吏百姓们畏惧忌惮不敢靠近。
English: Wang Hui led the officials and commoners to surround the Sun family. The Sun family resisted and held firm, and the officials and commoners were afraid to approach.

古文：脩令吏民： 敢有不攻者与同罪。 孙氏惧，乃出贼。
现代文：王脩对他们下令说： 有胆敢不进攻的和孙家同罪论处。 孙家害怕了，才将贼人交出来。
English: Wang Yao ordered them, "If you dare not to attack, you and the Sun family will be charged with the same crime." The Sun family was afraid, so they handed the thief over.

古文：由是豪强慑服。
现代文：从此当地强横或有势力的人都因被震慑而畏服。
English: From then on, anyone who was domineering or powerful in the area was deterred and cowed.

古文：举孝廉，脩让邴原，融不听。
现代文：王脩被推举为孝廉，他推让给邴原，孔融没有同意。
English: Wang Yao was elected as a filial piety, he conceded to He Yuan, but Kong Rong did not agree.

古文：时天下乱，遂不行。
现代文：当时天下动乱，这件事就没有实行。
English: At that time, the country was in turmoil, and the matter was not implemented.

古文：顷之，郡中有反者。
现代文：不久，郡中有人反叛。
English: Before long, the county was in revolt.

古文：脩闻融有难，夜往奔融。
现代文：王脩听说孔融遇到危难，连夜赶到孔融那里。
English: Wang Qian heard that Kong Rong was in danger and rushed to him overnight.

古文：贼初发，融谓左右曰： 能冒难来，唯王脩耳！ 言终而脩至。
现代文：贼人刚发动叛乱时，孔融对身边的人说： 能冒着危难前来的，只有王脩而已！ 话一说完，王脩就到了。
English: When the thieves had just started their rebellion, Kong Rong said to the people around him: Only Wang Yao can come here in the face of danger! As soon as he finished speaking, Wang Yao arrived.

古文：复署功曹。
现代文：后来王脩又被任命为功曹。
English: Later, Wang Yao was also named a meritorious person.

古文：时胶东多贼寇，复令脩守胶东令。
现代文：当时胶东地区有很多盗贼寇匪，朝廷又让王脩担任胶东令。
English: At that time, there were many thieves and bandits in the Jiaodong area, and the imperial court made Wang Qi serve as the Jiaodong commander.

古文：胶东人公沙卢宗强，自为营堑，不肯应发调。
现代文：胶东人公沙卢宗族强盛，自己修建了营寨防御，不肯相应官府的发派调遣。
English: The powerful Jiaodong people of the Shalu clan built their own camp defense and refused to be dispatched by the corresponding government.

古文：脩独将数骑径入其门，斩卢兄弟，公沙氏惊愕莫敢动。
现代文：王脩独自带着几个人骑马只冲进公沙卢家里，将他兄弟几个都斩杀了，公沙氏族人都震惊畏惧，没有敢随意行动的。
English: Wang Yao alone with a few people on horseback rushed into Gongsalu's home and killed several of his brothers. Gongsalu's clansmen were shocked and afraid and did not dare to act arbitrarily.

古文：脩抚慰其馀，由是寇少止。
现代文：王脩安抚了剩下的人，从此以后贼寇渐渐减少了。
English: Wang Hui calmed down the rest of the people, and from then on the banditry gradually decreased.

古文：融每有难，脩虽休归在家，无不至。
现代文：孔融每次有危难，王脩就算是在家休养，没有不赶到的。
English: Every time Kong Rong is in danger, even if Wang Yao is recuperating at home, he will not be late.

古文：融常赖脩以免。
现代文：孔融常常是仰赖王脩才幸免于难。
English: Kong Rong often had to rely on Wang Yao to survive.

古文：袁谭在青州，辟脩为治中从事，别驾刘献数毁短脩。
现代文：袁谭在青州的时候，征召王脩担任治中从事，别驾刘献多次诋毁王脩。
English: When Yuan Tan was in Qingzhou, he conscripted Wang Hui to serve as a middle-ranking official. Liu Xian repeatedly slandered Wang Hui.

古文：后献以事当死，脩理之，得免。
现代文：后来刘献因事获罪，应当被处死，王脩审理这件案子，刘献才免于死罪。
English: Later, Liu Xian was found guilty for the incident and should be put to death. Wang Yao tried the case, and Liu Xian was exempted from the death penalty.

古文：时人益以此多焉。
现代文：当时的人也因此更加称赞他。
English: People at the time praised him all the more for it.

古文：袁绍又辟脩除即墨令，后复为谭别驾。
现代文：袁绍又征召王脩担任即墨县县令，后来又成为袁谭的别驾。
English: Yuan Shao also conscripted Wang Qian to serve as the county magistrate of Zhimo County, and later became Yuan Tan's second in command.

古文：绍死，谭、尚有隙。尚攻谭，谭军败，脩率吏民往救谭。
现代文：袁绍死后，袁谭、袁尚产生嫌隙，袁尚攻打袁谭，袁谭军队战败失利，王脩率领官吏百姓前去援救袁谭。
English: After the death of Yuan Shao, Yuan Tan and Yuan Shang had a grudge, Yuan Shang attacked Yuan Tan, Yuan Tan's army was defeated, and Wang Xi led the officials and people to rescue Yuan Tan.

古文：谭喜曰： 成吾军者，王别驾也。 谭之败，刘询起兵漯阴，诸城皆应。
现代文：袁谭欣喜地说： 保全我军的人，就是王别驾啊。 袁谭失败时，刘询在漯阴起兵，各城都纷纷响应他。
English: Yuan Tan said with joy: The person who protects our army is Wang Bie Jie. When Yuan Tan failed, Liu Zhen raised an army in Shuyin, and all the cities responded to him.

古文：谭叹息曰： 今举州背叛，岂孤之不德邪！ 脩曰： 东莱太守管统虽在海表，此人不反。
现代文：袁谭叹息着说： 现在全州郡都背叛我，难道是因为我没有德行吗？ 王脩说： 东莱太守管统虽然远在海外边远之地，但这个人不会反叛。
English: Yuan Tan sighed and said, "Now the whole county has betrayed me, is it because I am not virtuous?" Wang Yao said, "Although Donglai is far away in a remote place overseas, this person will not rebel.

古文：必来。 后十馀日，统果弃其妻子来赴谭，妻子为贼所杀，谭更以统为乐安太守。
现代文：他一定会来。 过了十几天，管统果然抛下家小奔赴袁谭这里，他的妻子孩子被贼人杀害了。袁谭改任管统为乐安太守。
English: He will definitely come. A dozen days later, the governor left his home and rushed to Yuan Tan, where his wife and children were killed by thieves. Yuan Tan was appointed governor of Le'an.

古文：谭复欲攻尚，脩谏曰： 兄弟还相攻击，是败亡之道也。 谭不悦，然知其志节。
现代文：袁谭又打算攻打袁尚，王脩劝谏说： 兄弟之间互相往来进攻，是走向失败灭亡的原因。 袁谭不高兴，但了解王脩的志向节操。
English: Yuan Tan also planned to attack Yuan Shang, but Wang Xi advised him: "Brothers attacking each other is a recipe for failure and death." Yuan Tan was not happy, but he understood Wang Xi's determination.

古文：后又问脩： 计安出？ 脩曰： 夫兄弟者，左右手也。
现代文：后来又问王脩说： 有什么计策吗？ 王脩说： 兄弟，就像左手和右手一样。
English: Later, he asked Wang Yao, "Do you have any plans?" Wang Yao said, "Brother, it's just like the left hand and the right hand.

古文：譬人将斗而断其右手，而曰 我必胜 ，若是者可乎？
现代文：就像一个人将要与人战斗的时候将自己的右手斩断，却说 我一定取胜 ，像这样做可以吗？
English: It's like when a man is about to fight someone and he cuts off his right hand, but he says, "I'm sure to win," is it okay to do that?

古文：夫弃兄弟而不亲，天下其谁亲之！
现代文：抛弃兄弟，互相不亲近，天下间还有谁会亲近呢！
English: Abandoning brothers, not being close to each other, who else in the world would be close?

古文：属有谗人，固将交斗其间，以求一朝之利，愿明使君塞耳勿听也。
现代文：您的属下有进谗言的人，本来就参与你们兄弟间的争斗，以求取一时的利益，我希望清楚地告诉您，将耳朵闭塞起来不要听他们的话。
English: I wish to make it clear to you that you should close your ears to the arguments of those of your subordinates who are involved in the struggle between your brothers for the sake of short-term gain.

古文：若斩佞臣数人，复相亲睦，以御四方，可以横行天下。 谭不听，遂与尚相攻击，请救於太祖。太祖既破冀州，谭又叛。
现代文：如果将几个奸佞的臣下斩杀了，恢复兄弟间的亲近和睦，抵御四面的敌人，就可以在天下间纵横驰骋。 袁谭没有听从他的话，和袁尚互相进攻，又向太祖请求援助。太祖攻破了冀州，袁谭又反叛。
English: If he killed a few traitorous vassals, restored brotherly closeness and harmony, and resisted enemies on all sides, he would be able to run rampant throughout the world. Yuan Tan did not listen to his words, and Yuan Shang attacked each other, and asked his great-grandfather for help. The great-grandfather conquered Jizhou, and Yuan Tan rebelled again.

古文：太祖遂引军攻谭于南皮。
现代文：于是太祖率军在南皮攻打袁谭。
English: As a result, Taizu led an army to attack Yuan Tan in Nanpi.

古文：脩时运粮在乐安，闻谭急，将所领兵及诸从事数十人往赴谭。
现代文：王脩当时在乐安运送粮食，得知袁谭情况紧急，带着所管理的士兵和各个从事一共几十个人赶赴袁谭那里。
English: At that time, Wang Qian was transporting grain in Le'an. When he learned that the situation in Yuan Tan was urgent, he rushed to Yuan Tan with the soldiers he managed and a total of dozens of people engaged in various activities.

古文：至高密，闻谭死，下马号哭曰： 无君焉归？ 遂诣太祖，乞收葬谭尸。
现代文：赶到高密时，得知袁谭已经死了，王脩下马痛苦，说： 没有您，我回哪里去呢？ 于是去到太祖那里，请求收殓埋葬袁谭的尸首。
English: When he arrived in Gaomi, he learned that Yuan Tan had died. Wang Yao dismounted his horse in pain and said, "Without you, where would I go back to?" So he went to his great-grandfather and asked him to collect and bury Yuan Tan's body.

古文：太祖欲观脩意，默然不应。
现代文：太祖想要观察王脩的诚意，沉默着没有回应。
English: The great-grandfather wanted to observe Wang Yao's sincerity, but he remained silent and did not respond.

古文：脩复曰： 受袁氏厚恩，若得收敛谭尸，然后就戮，无所恨。 太祖嘉其义，听之。
现代文：王脩又说： 我受到袁氏的大恩，如果能收殓安葬袁谭的时候，然后再被杀，我也没有什么遗憾的。 
English: Wang Yao also said, "I was greatly blessed by the Yuan clan. If I could be buried with Yuan Tan, and then killed again, I would not have any regrets."

古文：以脩为督军粮，还乐安。
现代文：太祖赞赏他的忠义，同意了他的请求。太祖任命王脩为督军粮，返回乐安。
English: The great-grandfather appreciated his loyalty and agreed to his request. The great-grandfather appointed Wang Qian as the commander of the military rations and returned to Le'an.

古文：谭之破，诸城皆服，唯管统以乐安不从命。
现代文：攻破袁谭后，州中各城都服从太祖，只有管统凭借乐安不肯臣服。
English: After defeating Yuan Tan, all the cities in the state obeyed the great-grandfather. Only Guan Tong refused to submit by virtue of Le An.

古文：太祖命脩取统首，脩以统亡国之忠臣，因解其缚，使诣太祖。
现代文：太祖令王脩将管统的首级取来，王脩认为管统是亡国的忠臣，就将捆绑他的绳子解开，让他去见太祖。
English: The great-grandfather ordered Wang Yao to take the head of Guanzhong. Wang Yao thought that Guanzhong was a loyal subject who had lost his country, so he untied the ropes that bound him and let him go to see the great-grandfather.

古文：太祖悦而赦之。
现代文：太祖很高兴，然后赦免了管统。
English: The great-grandfather was very happy, and then pardoned the chancellor.

古文：袁氏政宽，在职势者多畜聚。
现代文：袁氏治政宽和，有职务在身的有势力的人大多积聚钱财。
English: Yuan's administration was broad-based, and most of the powerful people with positions accumulated money and wealth.

古文：太祖破邺，籍没审配等家财物赀以万数。
现代文：太祖攻破邺城，登记并没收审配等人的家产数以万计。
English: Taizu broke through Shicheng, registered and confiscated tens of thousands of people's family products.

古文：及破南皮，阅脩家，谷不满十斛，有书数百卷。
现代文：等到太祖攻破南皮县，查阅王脩家，家中谷物不到十斛，有几百卷书册。
English: Wait until the Great Ancestor conquers Nanpi County, and look up Wang Xuan's family. There are less than ten bushels of grain in the family, and there are hundreds of volumes of books.

古文：太祖叹曰： 士不妄有名。 乃礼辟为司空掾，行司金中郎将，迁魏郡太守。
现代文：太祖感叹说： 王脩做为士人，不愧有这样的名声啊。 就按礼征召王脩为司空掾，代理司金中郎将，又提升为魏郡太守。
English: The great-grandfather sighed and said, "As a scholar, Wang Yao is truly worthy of such a reputation." He then summoned Wang Yao to be the Secretary of the Ku Klux Klan, the Acting Secretary of the Central Committee of the Ku Klux Klan, and promoted him to the Governor of Wei County.

古文：为治，抑强扶弱，明赏罚，百姓称之。
现代文：王脩处理政事，抑制豪强，扶助弱小，赏罚分明，百姓都交口称赞。
English: Wang Hui dealt with political affairs, restrained the brave and strong, supported the weak and small, rewarded and punished clearly, and was praised by the people.

古文：魏国既建，为大司农郎中令。
现代文：魏国建立后，王脩担任大司农郎中令。
English: After the establishment of the State of Wei, Wang Qian served as the grand secretary and the middle-ranking farmer.

古文：太祖议行肉刑，脩以为时未可行，太祖采其议。
现代文：太祖商议实行肉刑，王脩认为时机还不允许实行，太祖采纳了他的建议。
English: The great-grandfather discussed the implementation of corporal punishment, but Wang Xi believed that the time was not yet right to implement it, and the great-grandfather adopted his suggestion.

古文：徙为奉尚。
现代文：王脩被调任奉尚。
English: Wang Yao was transferred to the position of minister.

古文：其后严才反，与其徒属数十人攻掖门。
现代文：后来严才造反，和他几十个下属一起攻打宫殿侧门。
English: Later Yan Zai rebelled and attacked the side gate of the palace together with dozens of his subordinates.

古文：脩闻变，召车马未至，便将官属步至宫门。
现代文：王脩得知宫中有变故，召来车马，车马还没到，王脩就带着属下管理走到了宫门前。
English: Wang Yao learned that there was a change in the palace and summoned a carriage. The carriage had not yet arrived, so Wang Yao and his subordinates walked to the front of the palace gate.

古文：太祖在铜爵台望见之，曰： 彼来者必王叔治也。 相国锺繇谓脩： 旧，京城有变，九卿各居其府。 脩曰： 食其禄，焉避其难？
现代文：太祖在铜爵台望到他们，说： 现在来的那些人一定是王叔治。 相国锺繇对王脩说： 从前京城发生变故时，朝中各长官们是各自留在官府的。 
English: The great-grandfather looked at them on the dazzling dais and said, "Those people who are coming now must be Wang Shuji." The consort said to Wang Shuji, "Once upon a time, when there was a disaster in the capital, all the officials of the imperial court stayed in the government office.

古文：居府虽旧，非赴难之义。 顷之，病卒官。
现代文：王脩说： 享受国家的俸禄待遇，怎么能避开危难？
English: Wang Yao said: How can one avoid danger while enjoying the state's salary?

古文：子忠，官至东莱太守、散骑常侍。
现代文：留守官府中虽然是惯例，但不是奔赴国家危难的忠义。 
English: Although it is customary to stay in the government, it is not loyalty to rush to the country's peril.

古文：初，脩识高柔于弱冠，异王基于幼童，终皆远至，世称其知人。
现代文：不久之后，王脩在官任上去世。他的儿子王忠，官拜东莱太守、散骑常侍。当初，王脩在高柔二十岁的时候就赏识他，在王基还是幼童时就看出他的才能，这两人最终都取得很好的成绩，诗人称赞王脩善于识人。
English: Not long after, Wang Qi died in office. His son, Wang Zhong, was the governor of Baidonglai and the attendant of the cavalry. At the beginning, Wang Qi appreciated Gao Ju when he was 20 years old, and saw his talent in Wang Qi when he was a child. Both of them eventually achieved good results. The poet praised Wang Qi for being good at recognizing people.

古文：邴原字根矩，北海朱虚人也。
现代文：邴原字根矩，北海国朱虚县人。
English: He is a native of Zhuxu County, Beihai Province.

古文：少与管宁俱以操尚称，州府辟命皆不就。
现代文：年少时和管宁一起因为节操高尚知名，对州府的各种征召命令，都没有赴任。
English: When he was young, he and Guanning were well-known for their high-mindedness, and they did not go to work because of the various recruitment orders from the state government.

古文：黄巾起，原将家属入海，住郁洲山中。
现代文：黄巾军起兵，邴原带着家人亲属进入东海，住在郁洲山中。
English: The Yellow Turban Army raised an army, and Shihara took his family and relatives into the East China Sea and lived in the mountains of Yuzhou.

古文：时孔融为北海相，举原有道。
现代文：当时孔融担任北海相，推举邴原有道义。
English: At that time, Kong Rong served as the Minister of the North Sea, and it was morally right to nominate him.

古文：原以黄巾方盛，遂至辽东，与同郡刘政俱有勇略雄气。
现代文：邴原认为黄巾军正是兴盛之时，就到了辽东郡，他跟同郡人刘政都有勇气胆略豪侠之气。
English: Gongyuan believed that the Yellow Turban Army was at its peak when he arrived in Liaodong County. He and his compatriot Liu Zheng both had the courage to be courageous.

古文：辽东太守公孙度畏恶欲杀之，尽收捕其家，政得脱。
现代文：辽东太守公孙度忌惮又厌恶刘政，想要将他杀掉，将他全家老小都拘捕收押了，刘政得以逃脱。
English: Liaodong's grand marshal Sun Du both feared and loathed Liu Zheng. He wanted to kill him, and his entire family was arrested and detained. Liu Zheng was able to escape.

古文：度告诸县： 敢有藏政者与同罪。 政窘急，往投原，原匿之月馀，时东莱太史慈当归，原因以政付之。
现代文：公孙度告知辽东各县说： 有胆敢窝藏刘政的人，和刘政同罪论处。 刘政情况窘迫又危急，前去投奔邴原，邴原将他藏起来一个多月，当时的东莱郡太史慈正要返回，邴原就将刘政托付给他。
English: Gongsun Du informed all counties in Liaodong that: Anyone who dares to hide Liu Zheng will be punished for the same crime as Liu Zheng. Liu Zheng's situation was distressing and critical, and he went to Fucheng. Fucheng hid him for more than a month. At that time, Taishi Ci of Donglai County was about to return, and Fucheng entrusted Liu Zheng to him.

古文：既而谓度曰： 将军前日欲杀刘政，以其为己害。
现代文：然后对公孙度说： 将军您不久前想要杀掉刘政，因为把他当做自己的祸患。
English: Then he said to Gong Sundu: General, you recently wanted to kill Liu Zheng, because you regarded him as your own evil.

古文：今政已去，君之害岂不除哉！ 度曰： 然。 原曰： 君之畏政者，以其有智也。
现代文：现在刘政已经离开了，您的祸患不是已经消除了吗？ 
English: Now that Liu Zheng has left, hasn't your misfortune been eliminated?

古文：今政已免，智将用矣，尚奚拘政之家？
现代文：公孙度说： 没错。 邴原说： 将军您忌惮刘政，是因为他又智谋。
English: Gongsun Du said, "That's right." Gongyuan said, "General, you're afraid of Liu Zheng because he's clever.

古文：不若赦之，无重怨。 度乃出之。
现代文：现在刘政已经免于一死，他将会用他的智谋了，怎么还要扣押刘政的家人呢？不如赦免他们，不要再多加一层仇怨。 
English: Now that Liu Zheng has been spared from a certain death, he will use his wits. How can he still detain Liu Zheng's family? It is better to pardon them and not add another layer of hatred.

古文：原又资送政家，皆得归故郡。
现代文：公孙度才释放了刘政的家人。邴原又出资把他们送到刘政家里，让他们都能回到故地。
English: Gongsundu only released Liu Zheng's family members. Yuyuan also invested in sending them to Liu Zheng's family, so that they could all return to their hometowns.

古文：原在辽东，一年中往归原居者数百家，游学之士，教授之声，不绝。
现代文：邴原在辽东郡，一年之中前往邴原居所想要依附的有几百家，游历学习的士人，教学讲授的声音，从未断绝。
English: In Liaodong County, there are hundreds of families who want to attach themselves to the residence of Yuyuan in the middle of the year. Scholars who travel and study, and the sound of teaching and lecturing have never been cut off.

古文：后得归，太祖辟为司空掾。
现代文：后来邴原得以返回故地，太祖征召他担任司空掾。
English: Later, Kajiwara was able to return to his hometown, and the great-grandfather conscripted him to serve as the second-in-command.

古文：原女早亡，时太祖爱子仓舒亦没，太祖欲求合葬，原辞曰： 合葬，非礼也。
现代文：邴原的女儿很早就去世了，当时太祖宠爱的儿子仓舒也去世了，太祖想将两个孩子合葬，邴原推辞说： 合葬，不符合礼制。
English: Sakakibara's daughter passed away a long time ago. At that time, the grandfather's favorite son, Cangshu, also passed away. The grandfather wanted to bury the two children together, but Sakakibara said, "To bury them together is not in accordance with the etiquette."

古文：原之所以自容於明公，公之所以待原者，以能守训典而不易也。
现代文：邴原我之所以在明公这里能保全自己，明公您之所以这样厚待我，是因为我能秉持法则而不改变啊。
English: The reason why I can protect myself here in Menggong, the reason why you treat me so kindly, is because I can uphold the law and not change it.

古文：若听明公之命，则是凡庸也，明公焉以为哉？ 太祖乃止，徙署丞相徵事。
现代文：若是这一次听从了明公的命令，那就是平凡庸俗的人了，明公怎么还能做呢？ 太祖才打消了这个念头，调任他代理丞相徵事的职务。
English: If he obeyed Ming Gong's order this time, then he would be an ordinary and vulgar person. How could Ming Gong still do that? Grandfather only dispelled this idea and transferred him to the post of acting minister of recruitment.

古文：崔琰为东曹掾，记让曰： 徵事邴原、议郎张范，皆秉德纯懿，志行忠方，清静足以厉俗，贞固足以幹事，所谓龙翰凤翼，国之重宝。
现代文：崔琰担任东曹掾，在他推让官职的奏本里记着： 徵事邴原、议郎张范，都秉持德行，纯良美好，志向行为都忠诚正直，他们的清廉洁净足够用来激励世俗之人，忠贞坚守足够用来成就大事，正是所谓的龙凤羽翼，国家的珍宝。
English: Cui Wei served as the East Cao Wei, and wrote in the record book of his promotion to the post of official: the solicitor Yu Yuan and the negotiator Zhang Fan both upheld virtue, purity and beauty, and their aspirations and behaviors were loyal and honest. Their integrity and purity were enough to inspire secular people, and their loyalty and adherence were enough to achieve great things. It is the so-called dragon and phoenix wings, the treasure of the country.

古文：举而用之，不仁者远。 代凉茂为五官将长史，闭门自守，非公事不出。
现代文：选举并任用他们，那些不仁义的人就会远离了。 邴原代替凉茂担任五官将长史，在家闭门不出，坚守本心，不是公家事务就不参加。
English: By electing and appointing them, those who are not benevolent and righteous will be far away.Shihara replaced Liangmao to serve as the five official generals for a long time, staying at home behind closed doors, sticking to his original intention, and not participating in public affairs.

古文：太祖征吴，原从行，卒。
现代文：太祖征讨东吴时，邴原跟随出发，后来去世了。
English: When the Great Ancestor conquered Eastern Wu, Yu Yuan followed him and later passed away.

古文：是后大鸿胪钜鹿张泰、河南尹扶风庞迪以清贤称，永宁太仆东郡张阁以简质闻。
现代文：在这之后，大鸿胪巨鹿人张泰、河南尹扶风人庞迪都因为清廉贤明著称，永宁太仆东郡人张阁以简洁质朴闻名。
English: After this, Zhang Tai, a giant deer, and Pang Di, a Henan Yin Fu Feng, were both famous for their integrity and wisdom, and Zhang Ge, a Yongning Taipu Dong Gu, was famous for his simplicity.

古文：管宁字幼安，北海朱虚人也。
现代文：管宁字幼安，北海国朱虚县人。
English: Guan Ning, surnamed Yu'an, was from Zhuxu County, Beihai Province.

古文：年十六丧父，中表愍其孤贫，咸共赠赗，悉辞不受，称财以送终。
现代文：十六岁时父亲去世，族中兄弟们怜悯他孤独贫苦，都给他送来办理丧事的费用，管宁全部推辞了没有接受欧，依据自己的钱财为父亲办理丧事。
English: When he was sixteen years old, his father passed away. The brothers in the clan pitied him for his loneliness and poverty, and all sent him money to pay for the funeral. Guan Ning refused all of it and did not accept Ou. He paid for his father's funeral with his own money.

古文：长八尺，美须眉。
现代文：管宁身高八尺，长相俊美。
English: Guan Ning is eight feet tall and handsome.

古文：与平原华歆、同县邴原相友，俱游学於异国，并敬善陈仲弓。
现代文：他和平原人华歆、同县人邴原是好友，一起到别郡游历学习，都敬重亲善陈仲弓。
English: He is a good friend of Huayuan from Pingyuan and Shanyuan from the same county, and they travel to other counties to study together. Both of them respect the friendship of Chen Zhongyu.

古文：天下大乱，闻公孙度令行於海外，遂与原及平原王烈等至于辽东。
现代文：天下陷入战乱中，管宁得知公孙度在海外推行政令，就和邴原及平原人王烈等人去到辽东郡。
English: The world was engulfed in war, and when Guanning learned that Gongsun Du was promoting the executive order overseas, he went to Liaodong County with Wang Lie, a native of the Plains and the Plains, and others.

古文：度虚馆以候之。
现代文：公孙度空出住处等候他们。
English: His grandson came out of his house to wait for them.

古文：既往见度，乃庐於山谷。
现代文：前往拜见公孙度以后，管宁就在山谷中修建庐舍居住。
English: After visiting his grandson, Guanning built a hut in the valley to live in.

古文：时避难者多居郡南，而宁居北，示无迁志，后渐来从之。
现代文：当时躲避战乱的人大多住在郡的南部，而管宁却住在郡的北部，表示自己没有搬迁的想法，后来逐渐有人来跟随他。
English: At that time, most of the people who fled the war lived in the southern part of the county, but Kuning lived in the northern part of the county and said he had no idea of moving. Later, people gradually came to follow him.

古文：太祖为司空，辟宁，度子康绝命不宣。
现代文：太祖担任司空时，征召管宁为官，公孙度的儿子公孙康截下了诏令，没有向管宁宣布。
English: When the great-grandfather served as the Secretary of the Air Force, he conscripted Guan Ning as an officer. Guan Sun Du's son, Guan Sun Kang, intercepted the imperial decree and did not announce it to Guan Ning.

古文：王烈者，字彦方，於时名闻在原、宁之右。
现代文：王烈，字彦方，在当时的知名度在邴原、管宁之上。
English: At that time, Wang Lie, a member of the Yan faction, was better known than Gongyuan and Guanning.

古文：辞公孙度长史，商贾自秽。
现代文：王烈辞掉了公孙度手下的长史职位，从事商贾之事自诬声名。
English: Wang Lie resigned from his long-term position under Gongsun Du, and made a name for himself as a businessman.

古文：太祖命为丞相掾，徵事，未至，卒於海表。
现代文：太祖任命他为丞相掾、征事，他还没有到任，就死在了海外。
English: His great-grandfather appointed him chancellor of the exchequer, but he died abroad before he could take up the post.

古文：中国少安，客人皆还，唯宁晏然若将终焉。
现代文：中原地区稍稍安定后，逃到辽东郡避难的人都回来了，只有管宁安定闲适仿佛要在那里终老。
English: After the Central Plains region was somewhat stabilized, people who had fled to Liaodong County for refuge returned. Only Guan Ning, who was calm and relaxed, seemed to want to live out the rest of his life there.

古文：黄初四年，诏公卿举独行君子，司徒华歆荐宁。
现代文：黄初四年，文帝下诏令朝中大臣们推举特立独行又品德高尚的君子，司徒华歆举荐了管宁。
English: In the 4th year of the Yellow Emperor's reign, Emperor Wen issued an edict ordering the ministers of the dynasty to nominate a gentleman who was both a maverick and a man of high moral character.

古文：文帝即位，徵宁，遂将家属浮海还郡，公孙恭送之南郊，加赠服物。
现代文：文帝登基即位后，征召管宁，管宁就带领家人亲属乘船渡海回到北海郡，公孙恭送他到南郊，加倍赠送给他服饰器物。
English: After Emperor Wen ascended to the throne, he summoned Guan Ning, and Guan Ning led his family members and relatives to cross the sea back to Beihai County. His great-grandson sent him to the southern suburbs and gave him twice as much clothing and equipment.

古文：自宁之东也，度、康、恭前后所资遗，皆受而藏诸。
现代文：自从管宁来到辽东郡，公孙度、公孙康、公孙恭先后资助或赠送的东西，管宁都接受然后收藏起来。
English: Since Guan Ning came to Liaodong County, Guan Ning has accepted and collected all the things that have been funded or donated by Gongsundu, Gongsunkang, and Gongsunqong.

古文：既已西渡，尽封还之。
现代文：等到返回北海郡时，管宁将这些物品全都封号还给他们。
English: By the time he returned to Beihai County, Guanning had returned all of these items to them, sealed and numbered.

古文：诏以宁为太中大夫，固辞不受。
现代文：文帝下诏授予管宁太中大夫的职位，管宁坚决推辞没有接受。
English: Emperor Wen issued an edict to grant Guan Ning the position of Tai Zhong Dao, but Guan Ning resolutely refused to accept it.

古文：明帝即位，太尉华歆逊位让宁，遂下诏曰： 太中大夫管宁，耽怀道德，服膺六艺，清虚足以侔古，廉白可以当世。
现代文：明帝登基后，太尉华歆退位想让给管宁，明帝就下诏说： 太中大夫管宁，潜心修习道义仁德熟习六艺，清高淡泊足以比肩古代贤人，廉洁清白可以称名当世。
English: After Emperor Ming ascended the throne, Taifu Huayu abdicated and wanted to cede the throne to Guanning. Emperor Ming issued an edict saying, "Taifu Guanning has devoted himself to the study of morality and benevolence, and has mastered the six arts. He is so high-minded and light-hearted that he is comparable to the ancient sages. He is so honest and pure that he can be famous in the world.

古文：曩遭王道衰缺，浮海遁居，大魏受命，则襁负而至，斯盖应龙潜升之道，圣贤用舍之义。
现代文：过去遭遇过王道衰败缺失，只好乘船出海隐居，大魏朝承受天命，他就率领家中老小来到这里，这大概就是神龙潜伏飞升的意思啊，圣贤们入仕出世的道理吧。
English: In the past, he had to go out to sea to live in seclusion after encountering the decline and fall of the royal way. When the Great Wei Dynasty was doomed by fate, he led his family members to come here. This is probably the meaning of the divine dragon lurking and soaring, the reason why sages enter the world.

古文：而黄初以来，徵命屡下，每辄辞疾，拒违不至。
现代文：而黄初年间以来，数次颁布征召他的命令，每次都以生病为由推辞，拒绝、为名不来赴任。
English: However, since the early years of the Huang dynasty, the order to conscript him has been issued several times, and each time he has declined to take up the post on the grounds of illness.

古文：岂朝廷之政，与生殊趣，将安乐山林，往而不能反乎！
现代文：难道是朝廷的事务和您的志趣不同，您将要在山林中安逸享乐，去了不再回来吗！
English: Is it because the affairs of the imperial court are different from your interests, and you want to enjoy the mountains and forests and never come back?

古文：夫以姬公之圣，而耇德不降，则鸣鸟弗闻。
现代文：以姬公的圣明，年高有德之人不肯降低志向，就无法听到神鸟的鸣叫声。
English: According to the holy light of Hieko, people of high age and virtue who refuse to lower their aspirations will not be able to hear the chirping of the divine bird.

古文：以秦穆之贤，犹思询乎黄发。
现代文：以秦穆公的贤德，依然想着向老人咨询问题。
English: With the virtue of Qin Mu Gong, he still wants to consult with the elderly.

古文：况朕寡德，曷能不愿闻道于子大夫哉！
现代文：更何况我德行浅薄，怎么能不愿向世子大夫学习道理呢？
English: How could I not want to learn the truth from the world's doctor, not to mention the fact that my virtue is shallow?

古文：今以宁为光禄勋。
现代文：现在任命管宁为光禄勋。
English: He has now appointed Guan Ning as a member of the Order of the Star.

古文：礼有大伦，君臣之道，不可废也。
现代文：礼制将就伦常大道，君臣之间的关系不能废弃。
English: The etiquette system will be on the right track, and the relationship between monarchs and ministers cannot be abandoned.

古文：望必速至，称朕意焉。 又诏青州刺史曰： 宁抱道怀贞，潜翳海隅，比下徵书，违命不至，盘桓利居，高尚其事。
现代文：希望能迅速前来，以符合我的旨意。 又诏令青州刺史说： 管宁胸怀道义坚守节操，隐藏在偏远的海角，连续颁发诏书，都违背旨意不肯前来，徘徊在他的居所，从事他认为高贵的事务。
English: I hope I can come quickly, so as to conform to my will. He also issued an edict to the history of Qingzhou, saying: Guan Ning, with a moral conscience, adhered to discipline, hid in a remote cape, issued consecutive edicts, refused to come against his will, lingered in his residence, and engaged in what he considered to be noble affairs.

古文：虽有素履幽人之贞，而失考父兹恭之义，使朕虚心引领历年，其何谓邪？
现代文：虽然有清白隐士的操守，但缺失了考父增加恭敬的内涵，让我谦虚地等待已经一年有余，这样能说什么？
English: Although I have the integrity of a pure hermit, I lack the connotation of the examiner's increased respect, so I have been humbly waiting for more than a year. What can I say?

古文：徒欲怀安，必肆其志，不惟古人亦有翻然改节以隆斯民乎！
现代文：他只是想要自身安定，但我一定要扩大他的志向，古人不是也有突然改变操守以造福百姓的吗？
English: He just wants his own stability, but I must expand his aspirations. Didn't the ancients also suddenly change their ethics to benefit the people?

古文：日逝月除，时方已过，澡身浴德，将以曷为？
现代文：日月流逝，天下混乱的时候已经过去，谨守节操洁身自好，将要做什么呢？
English: The sun and the moon are passing, the time of chaos in the world has passed. What will you do to keep the festival and cleanse yourself?

古文：仲尼有言： 吾非斯人之徒与而谁与哉！ 
现代文：仲尼曾说： 我不是这样的人又是什么样的呢！ 
English: "I'm not that kind of person, and what kind of person am I?" he once said.

古文：其命别驾从事郡丞掾，奉诏以礼发遣宁诣行在所，给安车、吏从、茵蓐、道上厨食，上道先奏。 宁称草莽臣上疏曰： 臣海滨孤微，罢农无伍，禄运幸厚。
现代文：我命令别驾从事郡丞掾：奉旨意按照礼节将管宁送到我在的处所，给他提供小车、随从、褥子被子，路上的饮食，出发之前先奏报。 管宁自称草莽之臣上疏说： 臣只是偏远海边地区的孤弱低微之人，不从事农业也不参军，但很幸运，俸禄优厚。
English: I ordered him not to drive to the county magistrate's office: according to my will, I sent Guan Ning to my place in accordance with the etiquette, provided him with a car, a retinue, a satin quilt, meals on the road, and a report before departure.Guan Ning, who called himself a grass-roots vassal, said: The vassal is only a weak and low-level person in remote coastal areas, does not engage in agriculture and does not join the army, but is very lucky and has a good salary.

古文：横蒙陛下纂承洪绪，德侔三皇，化溢有唐。
现代文：承蒙陛下继承洪大的统绪，德行等同三皇，对百姓的教化超过有唐氏。
English: Thanks to His Majesty inheriting Hongda's unified system, his virtue is equal to that of the three emperors, and his enlightenment of the people surpasses that of the Tang Dynasty.

古文：久荷渥泽，积祀一纪，不能仰答陛下恩养之福。
现代文：承蒙陛下恩泽，已经有十二年了，但不能报答陛下爱护养育的福泽。
English: Thanks to His Majesty's grace, it's been twelve years, but I can't repay His Majesty's blessing of loving and nurturing me.

古文：沈委笃痾，寝疾弥留，逋违臣隶颠倒之节，夙宵战怖，无地自厝。
现代文：但我沉溺萎顿，病入膏肓，延迟违背了臣子隶属服从的职责，早晚惊忧恐惧，无地自容。
English: But I was addicted to withering away, terminally ill, delay violated the duties of subordinate obedience of the vassal, sooner or later I was worried and afraid, and I had no self-respect.

古文：臣元年十一月被公车司马令所下州郡，八月甲申诏书徵臣，更赐安车、衣被、茵蓐，以礼发遣，光宠并臻，优命屡至，怔营竦息，悼心失图。
现代文：臣下于太和元年十一月承蒙公车司马令颁下州郡，以八月甲申日的诏书征召臣下，还赏赐车乘、衣服被褥、垫子，按照礼节遣送臣下，荣光和恩宠一起到来，优厚的命令连续来到，让我惶恐不安，不知该如何是好。
English: In November of the first year of the Taisho era, my vassals were awarded prefectures and counties by the order of the Master of the Bus and Coach, and were conscripted by the edict of August 6th. They were also rewarded with car rides, clothes, bedding, and cushions, and sent to their vassals in accordance with etiquette. The glory and grace came together, and the generous orders came one after another. I was terrified and anxious, and I didn't know what to do.

古文：思自陈闻，申展愚情，而明诏抑割，不令稍脩章表，是以郁滞，讫于今日。
现代文：想要陈述自己的想法，表明自己的心情，但诏书命令，不允许我修书上奏，因此才停滞不前，一直到今天。
English: I wanted to state my thoughts and express my feelings, but the imperial decree did not allow me to revise the book and play it, so I stagnated, until today.

古文：诚谓乾覆，恩有纪极，不意灵润，弥以隆赫。
现代文：本来以为陛下的恩典已经到了极点，没有想过恩德更加隆重显赫。
English: Originally, I thought that His Majesty's grace had reached its peak, and I did not think that His grace would be more grand and prominent.

古文：奉今年二月被州郡所下三年十二月辛酉诏书，重赐安车、衣服，别驾从事与郡功曹以礼发遣，又特被玺书，以臣为光禄勋，躬秉劳谦，引喻周、秦，损上益下。
现代文：今年二月承蒙州郡颁下三年十二月辛酉日诏书，又恩赐坐乘、衣物，令别驾从事与郡中功曹按照礼节派遣臣下，又特别得到陛下诏书，任命臣为光禄勋，劳烦陛下亲自谦虚动问，原因周、秦事例，努力劝说。
English: In February of this year, Mengzhou County issued an imperial edict on the third day of the twelfth month of the twelfth year of the twelfth month of the twelfth year of the third year of the twelfth month of the twelfth year of the twelfth month of the twelfth year of the twelfth month of the twelfth year of the thirteenth year of the twelfth month of the twelfth year of the thirteenth year of the twelfth year of the twelfth month of the twelfth year of the twelfth year of the thirteenth year of the twelfth year of the twelfth year of the thirteenth year of the thirteenth year of the thirteenth

古文：受诏之日，精魄飞散，靡所投死。
现代文：臣接受诏书之时，魂飞魄散，无处容身。
English: When the vassal received the imperial edict, his soul was scattered and there was nowhere to hide.

古文：臣重自省揆，德非园、绮而蒙安车之荣，功无窦融而蒙玺封之宠，楶棁驽下，荷栋梁之任，垂没之命，获九棘之位，惧有朱博鼓妖之眚。
现代文：臣下重新思量，臣的德行比不上东园公、绮里，却蒙受赏赐安车的恩宠，也没有窦融那样的功绩，却蒙受赐玺封官荣宠，本来没有什么才能，却肩负栋梁之人的重任，将死之人，却得到了至高的地位，担心有朱博鼓妖的祸事。
English: The vassal reconsidered. The virtue of the vassal was not as good as that of Dongyuan Gong and Baoli, but he was rewarded with the grace of the carriage. He did not have the merits like Dou Rong, but he was awarded the honor of the sealing official. Originally, he had no talent, but he shouldered the heavy responsibility of the pillar, and the person who was about to die, but he got the highest status. He was worried about the evil of Zhu Bo, the drum demon.

古文：又年疾日侵，有加无损，不任扶舆进路以塞元责。
现代文：况且我年龄渐大，病情加重，只有增加没有好转，没有办法勉强自己上路去完成自己的重任。
English: Moreover, I am getting older, my condition is getting worse, only getting worse, there is no way to force myself to go on the road to complete my important task.

古文：望慕阊阖，徘徊阙庭，谨拜章陈情，乞蒙哀省，抑恩听放，无令骸骨填于衢路。 自黄初至于青龙，徵命相仍，常以八月赐牛酒。
现代文：我心中向往皇宫，徘徊宫廷，谨奉上章表，陈述想法，请求得到哀悯怜惜，收回隆恩，听人臣下放逐，不要让我的骸骨被填埋在街市大道上。 从文帝黄初年间直到明帝青龙年间，征召管宁的诏令依旧连续不断，还经常在八月份赏赐牛酒。
English: In my heart, I yearn for the imperial palace, wander around the court, respectfully submit to the previous chapter table, state my thoughts, request to receive pity and mercy, recover long grace, listen to the vassal's banishment, and do not let my skeleton be buried on the street and market avenue. From the early years of Emperor Wen to the Qing Dynasty, the edict of conscripting Guanning is still continuous, and cattle wine is often awarded in August.

古文：诏书问青州刺史程喜： 宁为守节高乎，审老疾尫顿邪？ 喜上言： 宁有族人管贡为州吏，与宁邻比，臣常使经营消息。
现代文：明帝下诏书问青州刺史程喜： 管宁是究竟是自高守节呢，还是衰病困顿呢？ 程喜上奏说： 管宁有一个族人叫管贡，现在担任州吏，和管宁比邻而居，臣经常让他探听管宁的消息。
English: In the imperial decree issued by the Ming Emperor, the Qing Emperor asked Cheng Xi, a member of the Qing State Council, whether Guan Ning had become a high-ranking official, or whether he had fallen ill. Cheng Xi said: Guan Ning had a relative named Guan Gong, who was now a state official. He lived next to Guan Ning, and the minister often asked him to find out information about Guan Ning.

古文：贡说： 宁常著皂帽、布襦袴、布裙，随时单复，出入闺庭，能自任杖，不须扶持。
现代文：管贡说： 管宁经常戴着黑色的帽子，穿着布衣布裙，依随时节变化穿单衣或夹袄，进出内室外庭，能自己依靠手杖行走，不需要扶着。
English: Guangong said: Guanning often wears a black cap, wears a cloth dress, wears a singlet or a jacket according to seasonal changes, enters and exits the inner and outer courtyards, can walk on his own with a cane, and does not need to be supported.

古文：四时祠祭，辄自力强，改加衣服，著絮巾，故在辽东所有白布单衣，亲荐馔馈，跪拜成礼。
现代文：一年四季的祭祀，一直是自己强力支撑，改换增加衣物，戴着粗丝棉巾，穿着以前在辽东时拥有的白布单衣，亲自布置食物供品，跪拜行礼。
English: During the year-round sacrifices, she has always been her own strong support, changing and adding clothes, wearing a thick silk cotton towel, wearing a white cloth singlet that she previously owned in Liaodong, personally arranging food offerings, and kneeling in worship.

古文：宁少而丧母，不识形象，常特加觞，泫然流涕。
现代文：管宁年少时母亲就去世了，不记得母亲的样子，他经常特意增加酒觞，泪流满面。
English: Guan Ning's mother died when he was young, and he doesn't remember what his mother looked like. He often deliberately drinks more wine and bursts into tears.

古文：又居宅离水七八十步，夏时诣水中澡洒手足，闚於园圃。
现代文：还有，他的居所距离水边有七八十步，他夏天时到水中濯洗手足，在园圃中散步。 
English: Moreover, his house was seventy or eighty paces from the water's edge, and in the summer he washed his hands and feet in the water and walked in the garden.

古文：臣揆宁前后辞让之意，独自以生长潜逸，耆艾智衰，是以栖迟，每执谦退。
现代文：臣揣测管宁之前多次推辞的意思，只是因为自己生活在隐逸之中，年龄渐大，智力衰退，所以滞留原地，每次都谦虚推让。
English: The minister guessed the meaning of Guanning's multiple refusals before, but because he was living in seclusion, getting older, and his intelligence was fading, he stayed where he was and humbly made concessions every time.

古文：此宁志行所欲必全，不为守高。 
现代文：这是管宁一定想要保全的自己的志向和操行，不是因为清高自守。 
English: This is the aspiration and behavior that Guanning must want to preserve, not because of self-preservation.

古文：正始二年，太仆陶丘一、永宁卫尉孟观、侍中孙邕、中书侍郎王基荐宁曰：
现代文：正始二年，太仆陶丘一、永宁卫尉孟观、侍中孙邕、中书侍郎王基推举管宁说：
English: At the beginning of the second year, the eunuch Tao Qiu I, the Yongning Guardsman Meng Guan, the attendant Sun Qi, the attendant Wang Ji, the attendant Wang Qi said:

古文：臣闻龙凤隐耀，应德而臻，明哲潜遁，俟时而动。
现代文： 臣下听闻，龙凤会隐藏他们的神采，只有相应的德行出现的时候它们才出现，圣明的贤哲之人隐退起来，等到适当的时机才行动。
English: Subordinates have heard that dragons and phoenixes hide their brilliance, and only appear when the corresponding virtue appears, and holy sages retreat and wait for the right time to act.

古文：是以鸾鷟鸣岐，周道隆兴，四皓为佐，汉帝用康。
现代文：所以凤鸟在岐山上鸣叫，周王朝的国运兴盛，商山四郜做为辅佐之人，汉朝皇帝得以康宁。
English: Therefore, the phoenix bird chirped on the Qishan Mountain, the national movement of the Zhou Dynasty flourished, the Shangshan Four Emperors acted as assistants, and the Han Dynasty emperor was able to Kangning.

古文：伏见太中大夫管宁，应二仪之中和，总九德之纯懿，含章素质，冰絜渊清，玄虚澹泊，与道逍遥；娱心黄老，游志六艺，升堂入室，究其阃奥，韬古今於胸怀，包道德之机要。
现代文：我们看到太中大夫管宁，顺应天地中和之道，汇聚所有品德的纯正美好，包含美质，内质素朴，冰清玉洁，智谋深远，心胸淡泊，持守正道，逍遥世外；喜好黄老之道，立志熟习六艺，有高深的学问，探究渊博的知识，胸怀古今韬略，囊括道义德行的精义要旨。
English: We can see that the Taizhong Dr. Guan Ning follows the way of harmony between heaven and earth, and gathers the pure and beautiful of all virtues, including beauty, simplicity, purity, profound wisdom, light-heartedness, adherence to the right path, and getting away from the world; he likes the yellow and old way, is determined to master the six arts, has profound knowledge, explores profound knowledge, cherishes the ancient and modern, and embraces the essence of morality.

古文：中平之际，黄巾陆梁，华夏倾荡，王纲弛顿。
现代文：中平年间，黄巾军猖獗，中原地区动荡不安，朝廷法度松弛委顿。
English: During the period of Zhongping, the Yellow Turban Army was rampant, the Central Plains region was turbulent and unstable, and the relaxation of the imperial court's legal system came to an end.

古文：遂避时难，乘桴越海，羁旅辽东三十馀年。
现代文：管宁因此躲避战乱，乘船渡海，在辽东地区漂泊三十多年。
English: As a result, Guanning avoided the war, took a boat across the sea, and drifted in the Liaodong region for more than 30 years.

古文：在乾之姤，匿景藏光，嘉遁养浩，韬韫儒墨，潜化傍流，畅于殊俗。
现代文：在天下平定之后，隐藏身影，将自己的光辉掩埋起来，合乎正道地隐退，修养自身的浩然之气，努力修习儒墨学问，对其他学说也能潜移默化地接受，比普通人更畅达。 
English: After the world is pacified, hide your shadow, bury your brilliance, retreat righteously, cultivate your magnificence, strive to learn Confucianism, and accept other doctrines subtly, more smoothly than ordinary people.

古文：黄初四年，高祖文皇帝畴谘群公，思求隽乂，故司徒华歆举宁应选，公车特徵，振翼遐裔，翻然来翔。
现代文： 黄初四年，高祖文皇帝向官员们咨询，想要寻找才德超卓的人，所以司徒华歆推举管宁应选，用公车特别征召，他在偏远地区像鸟展开翅膀一样赶来。
English: In the fourth year of the Yellow Emperor's reign, Emperor Gao Zuwen consulted with officials to look for people with outstanding talents. Therefore, Emperor Gao Zhuwen chose Guan Ning, who was specially recruited by bus. He came to the remote area like a bird spreading its wings.

古文：行遇屯厄，遭罹疾病，即拜太中大夫。
现代文：路上遇到危难，身患疾病，于是立即任命他为太中大夫。
English: Encountering a crisis on the road and falling ill, he was immediately appointed as the First Vice-Minister of Health.

古文：烈祖明皇帝嘉美其德，登为光禄勋。
现代文：烈祖明皇帝赞许褒扬他的品德，提升他为光禄勋。
English: Emperor Ming, the founder of the Ming Dynasty, praised and commended his moral character and promoted him to the highest rank of the Order of the Star.

古文：宁疾弥留，未能进道。
现代文：管宁病重弥留，没能出发。
English: Guan Ning was seriously ill and died before he could set off.

古文：今宁旧疾已瘳，行年八十，志无衰倦。
现代文：现在管宁旧病已经痊愈，年龄将近八十，志向没有衰退倦怠。
English: Now Guan Ning's old illness has been cured, he is nearly eighty years old, and his ambition has not faded.

古文：环堵筚门，偃息穷巷，饭鬻糊口，并日而食，吟咏诗书，不改其乐。
现代文：他住在简陋的居室中，在陋巷里隐藏自己，以粥饭糊口，两三天才能吃上一天的粮食，吟诵《诗经》、《尚书》，也没有改变他的乐趣。
English: He lived in a simple room, hid himself in the alley, lived on porridge and rice, two or three days to eat a day's food, recited the "Book of Songs," "Song of Songs," and did not change his fun.

古文：困而能通，遭难必济，经危蹈险，不易其节，金声玉色，久而弥彰。
现代文：困顿的时候能够通达，遭逢危难时一定能渡过，经受危险也不改变志节，坚贞品格和操守，时间久了就更能展现出来。
English: When you are in trouble, you can get through, when you are in danger, you can definitely get through, and when you are in danger, you will not change your ambition, integrity and integrity. After a long time, you will be able to show it more.

古文：揆其终始，殆天所祚，当赞大魏，辅亮雍熙。
现代文：揣摩他一直的想法，大概是天降福祚，应当辅佐大魏，使天下得以安定。
English: He had always thought that it was probably a blessing from heaven that he should support the Great Wei Dynasty, so that the world would be stable.

古文：兖职有阙，群下属望。
现代文：官职有空缺，众人都期待着他。
English: There is a vacancy in the office and everyone is waiting for him.

古文：昔高宗刻象，营求贤哲，周文启龟，以卜良佐。
现代文：从前殷高宗刻画梦中贤人形象，以寻访贤明之人，周文王用龟骨占卜，以寻求良臣。
English: Formerly, Yin Gaozong depicted the image of a wise man in a dream to search for a wise man, and King Zhouwen used turtle bones to divinize in order to find a good minister.

古文：况宁前朝所表，名德已著，而久栖迟，未时引致，非所以奉遵明训，继成前志也。
现代文：况且管宁被前朝表彰，声名德行已经很显著，但却长时间逗留，没有按时赴任，这不是遵从训诫的，继承前朝的意志。
English: Moreover, Guanning was commended by the previous government, and his reputation and deeds have been very prominent, but he stayed for a long time and did not take office on time. This is not following the admonition and inheriting the will of the previous government.

古文：陛下践阼，纂承洪绪。
现代文：陛下登基，继承洪大的统绪。
English: His Majesty ascended to the throne, inheriting Hongda's unification.

古文：圣敬日跻，超越周成。
现代文：圣明一直在进步，超越了周成王。
English: Shengming has been making progress, surpassing Zhou Chengrong.

古文：每发德音，动谘师傅。
现代文：每次颁布合乎仁德的言语教令，都要向太师太傅咨询。
English: Every time a benevolent speech edict is issued, it should be consulted with the Grand Master.

古文：若继二祖招贤故典，宾礼俊迈，以广缉熙，济济之化，侔于前代。
现代文：如果能延续太祖、文帝招揽贤人的旧例，对贤哲之人待以宾客之礼，以广泛地招揽贤人，端庄盛大的教化的是等同于前代的。 
English: If we can continue the old example of the great ancestors and Emperor Wen to invite sages, treat the sages with the courtesy of guests, and widely invite sages, the dignified and grand enlightenment will be equivalent to that of the previous generation.

古文：宁清高恬泊，拟迹前轨，德行卓绝，海内无偶。
现代文： 管宁清高自守，宁静淡泊，仿效先贤，德行出众绝伦，天下没有第二个。
English: Guan Ning is clear and high self-preservation, quiet and indifferent, emulating the sages, and his virtue is outstanding. There is no second in the world.

古文：历观前世玉帛所命，申公、枚乘、周党、樊英之俦，测其渊源，览其清浊，未有厉俗独行若宁者也。
现代文：观察前代以如此礼节任命的官员，如申公、枚乘、周党、樊英等人，探究他们的本源，考察他们的优劣善恶，没有谁像管宁那样脱离世俗坚守本性的。
English: Observing the previous generation of officials appointed with such etiquette, such as Shen Gong, Hachi, Zhou Dang, Zou Ying and others, exploring their origin, examining their merits and demerits, good and evil, there is no one like Guan Ning who is detached from the world and sticks to his nature.

古文：诚宜束帛加璧，备礼徵聘，仍授几杖，延登东序，敷陈坟素，坐而论道，上正璇玑，协和皇极，下阜群生，彝伦攸叙，必有可观，光益大化。
现代文：实在应该以丝帛玉璧，按照礼制征召他，重新授予他表示尊敬几杖，延揽擢用他讲学，教授典籍，允许他坐而论道，在上辅佐朝廷，协调朝廷准则，在下使百姓富足，成为道德常理的表率，一定有很好的效果，将国家教化发扬光大。
English: It is really necessary to recruit him with silk brocade and jade, recruit him according to the etiquette, re-award him a few sticks to show respect, promote and use him to lecture, teach classics, allow him to sit and discuss, assist the imperial court in the upper, coordinate the imperial standard, enrich the people in the lower, and become a model of moral common sense, which will certainly have a good effect and carry forward the country's enlightenment.

古文：若宁固执匪石，守志箕山，追迹洪崖，参踪巢、许。
现代文：如果管宁像石头一样坚定不移，像守着箕山坚守情志，效法洪崖，追随巢父、许由的步伐。
English: If Guan Ning is as unswerving as a stone, like guarding Lushan and adhering to sentiments, imitating Hongya, following the pace of the nest father and Xu Yu.

古文：斯亦圣朝同符唐、虞，优贤扬历，垂声千载。
现代文：这也是圣朝和唐尧、虞舜时代相合的，一样优待贤士，表彰功绩，声名流传千年。
English: This is also in line with the Holy Dynasties of Tang and Yunnan dynasties. The same preferential treatment is given to sages, their achievements are commended, and their fame has been passed down for thousands of years.

古文：虽出处殊涂，俯仰异体，至於兴治美俗，其揆一也。
现代文：虽然出处不同，体式不一样，但至于天下安定，民俗美好，其中的道理是一样的。 
English: Although the source is different and the style is different, as far as the world is stable and folk customs are beautiful, the reason is the same.

古文：於是特具安车蒲轮，束帛加璧聘焉。
现代文：于是特地准备好坐乘，把车轮用蒲裹上，带着贵重的礼品前去征召管宁。
English: So he made special preparations for the ride, wrapped the wheels in a cloth, and went to recruit Guan Ning with a valuable gift.

古文：会宁卒，时年八十四。
现代文：适逢管宁去世，时年八十四岁。
English: His death coincided with that of Guanning, who was eighty-four years old.

古文：拜子邈郎中，后为博士。
现代文：任命他的儿子管邈为郎中，后来又任命为博士。
English: He appointed his son Guan Yu as a disciple, and later appointed him as a doctor.

古文：初，宁妻先卒，知故劝更娶，宁曰： 每省曾子、王骏之言，意常嘉之，岂自遭之而违本心哉？ 
现代文：当初，管宁的妻子先去世了，管宁的知心旧友劝他再娶，管宁说： 每次思考曾子、王骏的话，心中常常赞许他们，怎么能自己遇上这样的事就违背本心呢？ 
English: At first, Guan Ning's wife died first, and Guan Ning's old friends advised him to remarry. Guan Ning said: Every time I think about the words of my great-grandson, Wang Yao, I often approve of them in my heart. How can I meet such a thing and go against my heart?

古文：时钜鹿张臶，字子明，颍川胡昭，字孔明，亦养志不仕。
现代文：当时，钜鹿人张臶，字子明，颍川人胡昭，字孔明，也是修养志气没有做官。
English: At that time, Zhang Qian, Zi Ming, and Hu Zhao, Kong Ming, who were from Elk and Shichuan respectively, also cultivated their morals and did not become officials.

古文：臶少游太学，学兼内外，后归乡里。
现代文：张臶年少时曾在太学里学习，学习的内容兼顾身体素质与道德修养，后来回到故乡。
English: When Zhang Ye was young, he studied in Taishu, the content of which took into account physical fitness and moral cultivation. Later, he returned to his hometown.

古文：袁绍前后辟命，不应，移居上党。
现代文：袁绍前后几次征召任命，张臶都没有答应，搬到上党县居住。
English: Yuan Shao was conscripted and appointed several times, but Zhang Ye did not agree and moved to Shangdang County to live.

古文：并州牧高幹表除乐平令，不就，徙循常山，门徒且数百人，迁居任县。
现代文：并州牧高幹上表任命张至存为乐平县令，他也没有赴任，移居常山，学生将近几百人，后又转移到任县。
English: And Zhang Zhicun was appointed as the Leping County magistrate by the state pastoral high school cadre on the table. He did not take up the post, moved to Changshan, with nearly hundreds of students, and then moved to Ren County.

古文：太祖为丞相，辟，不诣。
现代文：太祖担任丞相后，征召他，他也没有到。
English: After his great-grandfather became chancellor, he was called up for military service, but he did not come.

古文：太和中，诏求隐学之士能消灾复异者，郡累上臶，发遣，老病不行。
现代文：太和年间，朝廷下诏访求那些能消解祸患解释异常情况的隐逸有学问的士人，郡里多次向朝廷举荐张臶，遣送他入京，都因为他年老多病未能出发。
English: During the reign of Emperor Taizu, the imperial court made an imperial edict to solicit the hidden and learned scholars who could resolve the disaster and explain the abnormal situation. The county repeatedly recommended Zhang Ye to the imperial court and sent him to Beijing, all because he was too old and sick to set out.

古文：广平太守卢毓到官三日，纲纪白承前致版谒臶。
现代文：广平太守卢毓到任三天，纲纪就告诉他可以像以前一样递交拜帖去见张臶。
English: Three days after Guangping's grand marshal Lu Wei took office, Gang Ji told him that he could submit an invitation to meet Zhang Ye as before.

古文：毓教曰： 张先生所谓上不事天子，下不友诸侯者也。
现代文：张臶教训说： 张先生是所谓的对上不侍奉天子，对下不结交诸侯的人。
English: Zhang Xuanli said: Mr. Zhang is a so-called person who does not serve the Son of God on the one hand and does not make friends with princes on the other hand.

古文：此岂版谒所可光饰哉！ 但遣主簿奉书致羊酒之礼。
现代文：对这样的人难道用拜帖请见就可以增加他的荣耀吗？ 只是派遣主簿带着信件，致以羊酒之礼。
English: Is it to increase the glory of such a man that he should be visited with a present? No, but he is to be sent with letters and a present of sheep's wine.

古文：青龙四年辛亥诏书： 张掖郡玄川溢涌，激波奋荡，宝石负图，状像灵龟，宅于川西，嶷然磐峙，仓质素章，麟凤龙马，焕炳成形，文字告命，粲然著明。
现代文：青龙四年，明帝下诏说： 张掖郡有玄妙的川流涌动，波涛激荡，出现了宝石，上面背负着图像，图上的画像一只灵龟，屹立在川西，巍然不动，质地为青色，素色的纹路，还画着麟凤龙马，形状光彩明丽，文字彰显天命，光辉灿烂，意义明确。
English: In the 4th year of the Qing Long, Emperor Ming issued an edict saying: Zhangye County has a mysterious river flow, waves are agitated, and precious stones have appeared, bearing images on them. The image on the picture is a spirit turtle, standing in the west of Sichuan, motionless, with a blue texture and plain lines. It also depicts a unicorn, a phoenix, and a dragon. The shape is bright and beautiful, and the text highlights the fate of the world. It is brilliant and has a clear meaning.

古文：太史令高堂隆上言：古皇圣帝所未尝蒙，实有魏之祯命，东序之世宝。 事颁天下。 
现代文：太史令高堂隆上告朝廷说： 这样的物品，是古代圣明贤德的帝王都没有蒙受过的，实在是大魏上天预示的吉兆，国家的世代相传的珍宝。 将这件事诏告天下。 
English: Taishi ordered Gaodang Rong to report to the imperial court, saying, "This kind of item is something that none of the ancient holy and wise emperors ever received, and it is truly a good omen foretold by the Great Wei Emperor, and a precious treasure handed down from generation to generation of the country.

古文：任令于绰连赍以问臶，臶密谓绰曰： 夫神以知来，不追已往，祯祥先见而后废兴从之。
现代文：任县县令于绰将诏书及石图拿去询问张臶，张臶秘密地对于绰说： 神明只知道将来的事情，不探究以往的事，先出现吉祥的征兆，王朝的兴盛衰败才随之而来。
English: The county magistrate ordered Yu Pei to take the edict and the stone map to Zhang Ye for questioning. Zhang Ye secretly said to Pei: The gods only know what will happen in the future, and do not investigate what has happened in the past. The auspicious signs will appear first, and the rise and fall of the dynasty will follow.

古文：汉已久亡，魏已得之，何所追兴徵祥乎！
现代文：汉代灭亡已经很久了，大魏一定得到了天下，为什么还要寻找吉兆呢！
English: It has been a long time since the fall of the Han Dynasty. The Great Wei Dynasty must have gained the world. Why should we look for good omens?

古文：此石，当今之变异而将来之祯瑞也。 正始元年，戴鵀之鸟，巢臶门阴。
现代文：这块石头，是预示当前的局势变化和将来的吉祥。 正始元年，有戴胜鸟在张臶家门后面筑巢。
English: This stone is an omen of the current changes in the situation and an auspicious omen for the future.At the beginning of the first year of the year, a hoopoe built a nest behind the door of Zhang Ye's house.

古文：臶告门人曰： 夫戴鵀阳鸟，而巢门阴，此凶祥也。 乃援琴歌咏，作诗二篇，旬日而卒，时年一百五岁。
现代文：张臶告诉看门的人说： 戴鵀是随阳之鸟，现在在门背后筑巢，这是凶兆啊。 就拿过琴弹唱歌咏，写下两篇诗，十天之后就去世了，享年一百零五岁。
English: Zhang Ye told the gatekeeper: "Dai Ye is a bird that follows the sun, and now he is building a nest behind the gate, which is a bad omen." He took a piano and played a song, wrote two poems, and died ten days later, at the age of one hundred and five.

古文：是岁，广平太守王肃至官，教下县曰： 前在京都，闻张子明，来至问之，会其已亡，致痛惜之。此君笃学隐居，不与时竞，以道乐身。
现代文：这一年，广平太守王肃到任，教导属下官吏说： 我之前在京城就听说张子明，来到这里一问，又赶上他已经去世，我深感痛惜，这位先生专心好学，避世隐居，不和时运竞争，依靠学问安守自身。
English: In the same year, Wang Su, the governor of Guangping, arrived at his post and said to his subordinate officials: "I had heard of Zhang Ziming in Beijing before, and when I came here, I asked him, and when I caught up with him, he had passed away. I am deeply sorry. This gentleman was devoted to learning, avoided the world, lived in seclusion, did not compete with the times, and relied on learning to keep himself safe.

古文：昔绛县老人屈在泥涂，赵孟升之，诸侯用睦。
现代文：从前绛县老人屈身隐居，就像身处泥沼之中，赵孟提拔了他，使得诸侯之间和睦相处。
English: Once upon a time, the old man of Jixian County bent over and lived in seclusion, as if he were in a quagmire. Zhao Meng promoted him and made the princes live in harmony.

古文：愍其耄勤好道，而不蒙荣宠，书到，遣吏劳问其家，显题门户，务加殊异，以慰既往，以劝将来。 
现代文：我怜悯他年老好学，喜爱道学，却没有蒙受恩宠，书信到的时候，派官吏慰问他的家人，为他们题字以彰显荣耀，一定要给予特殊照顾，以安慰去世的人，劝勉将来的人。 
English: I pitied him for his old age and eagerness to learn, for his love of Taoism, but he did not receive grace. When the letter arrived, officials were sent to console his family, inscribe them with glory, and be sure to give them special care, to comfort those who have passed away, and to encourage those who will come in the future.

古文：胡昭始避地冀州，亦辞袁绍之命，遁还乡里。
现代文：胡昭刚开始时到冀州躲避战乱，也推辞的袁绍了任命，回乡隐居。
English: When Hu Zhaozhou first went to Jizhou to escape the war, Yuan Shao, who also declined, was appointed and returned to his hometown to live in seclusion.

古文：太祖为司空丞相，频加礼辟。
现代文：太祖担任司空丞相时，多次以礼征召他。
English: When the great-great-grandfather served as the prime minister of Skuku, he repeatedly summoned him with courtesy.

古文：昭往应命，既至，自陈一介野生，无军国之用，归诚求去。
现代文：胡昭前往接受任命，到了之后，自己说自己只是一个乡野间的书生，对军事国家都没有用处，诚心地请求可以回归乡里。
English: Hu Zhao went to accept the appointment. When he arrived, he said that he was just a book student in the countryside and was of no use to the military state. He sincerely asked to return to the countryside.

古文：太祖曰： 人各有志，出处异趣，勉卒雅尚，义不相屈。 昭乃转居陆浑山中，躬耕乐道，以经籍自娱。
现代文：太祖说： 人都有自己的志向，出仕为官还是避世隐居，都有自己的追求，努力追求风雅高尚的志趣吧，我一定不会勉强你。 胡昭就移居到陆浑山中，亲自耕种，乐于求道，以研读经史典籍娱乐。
English: The great-grandfather said: People all have their own aspirations, whether it is to become an official or to live in seclusion, they all have their own pursuits. Strive to pursue an elegant and noble aspiration, I will not force you. Hu Zhao moved to the Lukhun Mountains, cultivated by himself, was willing to seek the way, and enjoyed studying the classics.

古文：闾里敬而爱之。
现代文：乡里人都尊敬并喜爱他。
English: The villagers all respect and love him.

古文：建安二十三年，陆浑长张固被书调丁夫，当给汉中。
现代文：建安二十三年，陆浑县长张固被命令征调壮丁，将要到汉中服役。
English: In the 23rd year of Jian'an, Zhang Gu, head of Lukhun County, was ordered to conscript young men to serve in the Han Middle School.

古文：百姓恶惮远役，并怀扰扰。
现代文：百姓都厌恶害怕到很远的地方服役，都心中担忧不安。
English: People are averse to the fear of serving far away, and are worried and uneasy in their hearts.

古文：民孙狼等因兴兵杀县主簿，作为叛乱，县邑残破。
现代文：平民孙狼等人趁机起兵杀掉了县里主簿，发动叛乱，县里因此破损残败。
English: Civilian Sun Wolf and others took advantage of the opportunity to kill the county's master book and launch a rebellion. As a result, the county was damaged and destroyed.

古文：固率将十馀吏卒，依昭住止，招集遗民，安复社稷。
现代文：张固带着十几个吏役士兵，到了胡昭住的地方，招揽召集留下的百姓，恢复并安定了政权。
English: Zhang Gu took more than a dozen officers and soldiers to the place where Hu Zhao lived, invited and summoned the remaining people, and restored and stabilized the regime.

古文：狼等遂南附关羽。
现代文：孙狼等人就往南投靠关羽。
English: Son Wol and others went south to Guan Yu.

古文：羽授印给兵，还为寇贼。
现代文：关羽授予他们印信，拨出士兵，让他们回去，当了盗匪贼寇。
English: Guan Yu granted them a seal letter, sent out soldiers, let them go back, and became a bandit.

古文：到陆浑南长乐亭，自相约誓，言： 胡居士贤者也，一不得犯其部落。 一川赖昭，咸无怵惕。
现代文：到了陆浑以南的长乐亭，他们自己相互发誓说： 胡居士是个贤人，统一不能侵犯他的部落。 当地都仰赖胡昭，都不需要担忧恐惧。
English: When they arrived at Changle Pavilion, south of Lukhun, they themselves swore to each other: "Hu Jushi is a wise man, and unification cannot encroach on his tribe; the local people all rely on Hu Zhao, and there is no need to worry or fear."

古文：天下安辑，徙宅宜阳。
现代文：天下安定后，胡昭将住宅搬到了宜阳。
English: After the country stabilized, Hu Zhao moved his residence to Yiyang.

古文：正始中，骠骑将军赵俨、尚书黄休、郭彝、散骑常侍荀顗、锺毓、太仆庾嶷、弘农太守何桢等递荐昭曰： 天真高絜，老而弥笃。
现代文：正始年间，骠骑将军赵俨、尚书黄休、郭彝、散骑常侍荀岂页、钟毓、太仆庾嶷、弘农太守何桢等人先后推举胡昭，说： 他天真纯良，品行高洁，年纪越大越坚守。
English: At the beginning of the year, Zhao Zhao, Shangshu Huangxiu, Guo Zhao, Zangjie Changzhi, Zhong Zhou, Taifu Zhou, Hongnong Taifu He Zhou and others successively nominated Hu Zhao, saying: He is innocent and pure, his conduct is high and clean, and the older he gets, the more he sticks to it.

古文：玄虚静素，有夷、皓之节。
现代文：学问深远，静雅素朴，有伯夷、四皓的志节。
English: Far-reaching learning, quiet elegance and simplicity, with the aspirations of Bo Yi and Siyuan.

古文：宜蒙徵命，以励风俗。 至嘉平二年，公车特徵，会卒，年八十九。
现代文：应该蒙受朝廷征召，以勉励天下百姓。 到了嘉平二年，朝廷派公车特别征召，但刚好遇上胡昭去世，享年八十九岁。
English: He should be conscripted by the imperial court to encourage the people of the world.In the second year of Jiaping, the imperial court sent a special bus to conscript, but it just happened that Hu Zhao died at the age of eighty-nine.

古文：拜子纂郎中。
现代文：朝廷任命胡昭的儿子儿子胡纂为郎中。
English: The imperial court appointed Hu Zhao's son, Hu Zuo, as a vassal.

古文：初，昭善史书，与锺繇、邯郸淳、卫觊、韦诞并有名，尺牍之迹，动见模楷焉。
现代文：当初，胡昭擅长隶书书法，在当时和钟繇、邯郸淳、卫岂页、韦诞等人齐名，他的大小书法作品，经常被人拿来当做模仿的对象。
English: At the beginning, Hu Zhao was good at Li calligraphy. At that time, he was as famous as Zhong Xuan, Zou Jun, Wei Zizhe, Weixing and others. His large and small calligraphy works were often used as an object of imitation.

古文：评曰：袁涣、邴原、张范躬履清蹈，进退以道，盖是贡禹、两龚之匹。
现代文：评曰：袁涣、邴原、张范亲身展现节操，进退都符合道义，大概是和贡禹、龚胜、龚舍等同的人。
English: The review said: Yuan Yu, Yu Yuan and Zhang Fan have personally demonstrated discipline, and their advances and retreats are in line with morality. They are probably the same as Gong Yu, Yao Sheng and Yao She.

古文：凉茂、国渊亦其次也。
现代文：凉茂、国渊也是仅次于他们而已。
English: Liangmao and Guoyuan are just behind them.

古文：张承名行亚范，可谓能弟矣。
现代文：张承的声名言行都不如张范，可以称得上是会做弟弟的。
English: Zhang Cheng's words and deeds are not as good as Zhang Fan's, and he can be said to be a younger brother.

古文：田畴抗节，王脩忠贞，足以矫俗；管宁渊雅高尚，确然不拔；张臶、胡昭阖门守静，不营当世：故并录焉。
现代文：田畴坚守节操，王修忠诚坚贞，足够矫正风俗弊端；管宁深远高雅，品德高尚，坚定不移；张臶、胡昭闭门守静，不追求世俗名利，所以将他们一起记录在这里。
English: Tian Zhen adhered to discipline, Wang Xiu was loyal and steadfast, sufficient to correct the customs and drawbacks; Guan Ning was profound and elegant, with high moral character and unswerving determination; Zhang Qian and Hu Zhao kept quiet and did not pursue worldly fame and fortune, so they will be recorded together here.

