古文：谷水出宏农黾池县南墦冢林谷阳谷，《山海经》曰：傅山之西有林焉，曰墦冢，谷水出焉，东流注于洛，其中多玉。
现代文：谷水发源于弘农郡龟池县南边的潘取林毅阳谷，《山海经》说：傅山西边有一片森林，叫潘爆林，谷水就发源在那里，东流注入洛水，沿溪一带多产咽玉。
English: The valley water originates from the Pan-Tori Lin-Yi Yang Valley in the south of Guechi County, Hongnong County. The "Shanhai Jing" says: There is a forest on the west side of Fu Shan, called the Pan-Bao Forest. The valley water originates there. The east stream flows into the Luoshui, and the area along the stream produces a lot of pharyngeal beads.

古文：今谷水出千崤东马头山谷阳谷，东北流历黾池川，本中乡地也。
现代文：现在谷水发源于干蜻山以东的马头山毁阳谷，往东北流经龟池川，这里原来是中乡地区。
English: At present, the valley water originates in the Ma Tau Shan Ruyang Valley east of Mount Ganlu, and flows to the northeast through the Kameike River, which was originally in the Zhongxiang area.

古文：汉景帝中二年，初城，徙万户为县，因崤黾之池以目县焉。
现代文：汉景帝中元二年前，首次筑城，迁移了一万户过去，设立为县，就依晴龟之池来取县名。
English: Han Dynasty Emperor Zhongyuan two years ago, the first time to build a city, moved ten thousand households in the past, set up as a county, according to the clear turtle pond to take the name of the county.

古文：亦或谓之彭池，故徐广《史记音义》曰：黾，或作彭。谷水出处也。
现代文：也有人把它叫彭池。所以徐广《史记音义》说：龟字也有写作彭字的，彭池是谷水的发源地。
English: Some people also call it Pengchi. Therefore, Xu Guang's "Historical Notation" said: the turtle character is also written as Pengchi, and Pengchi is the birthplace of grain water.

古文：谷水又东径秦、赵二城南。
现代文：钗水又往东流经秦、赵两城以南。
English: Surabaya water also flows eastward through Qin and Zhao, south of the two cities.

古文：司马彪《续汉书》曰：赤眉从黾池自利阳南，欲赴宜阳者也。
现代文：司马彪《续汉书》说：赤眉军从龟池取道利阳南下，打算去宜阳。
English: Sima Biao's "Continuation of the Book of Han" said: the Red Eyed Army went south from Kamechi to Liyang, intending to go to Yiyang.

古文：世谓之俱利城。
现代文：世人称为俱利城。
English: The world knows it as club city.

古文：耆彦曰：昔秦、赵之会，各据一城，秦王使赵王鼓瑟。蔺相如令秦王击缶处也。
现代文：老人们说：从前秦国和赵国会盟，两方都占有一城。秦王叫赵王弹瑟，蔺相如则要秦王击击，就在这地方。
English: The old people said, "From the time of the former Qin State and the Zhao National League, both sides have occupied a city. The Qin King asked the Zhao King to play, and the Qin King wanted the Qin King to strike, and this is the place.

古文：冯异又破赤眉于是川矣，故光武《玺书》曰：始虽垂翅回溪，终能奋翼黾池，可谓失之东嵎，收之桑榆矣。
现代文：冯异也是在这片平原上打败赤眉军的。所以光武帝的《玺书》说：开头虽然在回溪垂头丧气，最后却在龟池奋翅高飞，可说是失之东隅，收之桑榆了。
English: It was also on this plain that Feng Yi defeated the Red-Eyed Army. Therefore, Emperor Guangwu's "Book of Revelations" said: Although at the beginning he was discouraged in Huixi, in the end he was flying high in Turtle Pond, which can be said to be the lost corner of the East and the lost mulberry.

古文：谷水又东径土崤北，所谓三崤也。
现代文：殷水又往东流经土蜡北面，就是所谓三蜻。
English: The Yin Shui also flows eastward through the northern side of the soil wax, which is the so-called three rivers.

古文：谷水又东，左会北溪，溪水北出黾池山，东南流注于谷。
现代文：谷水又东流，在左边汇合了北溪。溪水发源于北方的龟池山，往东南流，注入谷水。
English: The valley water also flows to the east, where it meets the North Stream on the left. The stream water originates in the northern Kameichiyama, flows southeast, and is injected into the valley water.

古文：疑即孔安国所谓涧水也。
现代文：可能这就是孔安国所谓的涧水。
English: Perhaps this is what Kong An Guo called the Surabaya.

古文：谷水又东径新安县故城南，北夹流而西接崤黾。
现代文：谷水又往东流经新安县旧城，从城南北两边穿过，西边与蜻龟池相接。
English: The valley water also flows eastward through the old city of Xin'an County, passing through the north and south sides of the city, and is connected to the tortoise pond on the west side.

古文：昔项羽西入秦，坑降卒二十万于此，国灭身亡，宜矣。
现代文：从前项羽往西打进秦境，就在这里活埋了二十万投降的秦兵。
English: From the previous Xiang Yu westward into Qin territory, it was here that two hundred thousand surrendered Qin soldiers were buried alive.

古文：谷水又东径千秋亭南，其亭累石为垣，世谓之千秋城也。
现代文：这位霸王落得国灭身亡，实在罪有应得 谷水又往东流经千秋亭南边，亭的四周用石块砌垒成城墙，世人称为千秋城。
English: This tyrant fell to the death of the country, and really deserved the crime. The valley water flowed eastward through the south side of Qianqiu Pavilion, and the pavilion was surrounded by stone walls, known to the world as Qianqiu City.

古文：潘岳《西征赋》曰：亭有千秋之号，子无七旬之期。
现代文：潘岳《西征赋》说：这亭虽有千秋的名号，孩子却活不了七十天时间！
English: Pan Yue from "Western Conquest" said: Although this pavilion has a famous name, the child cannot live for seventy days!

古文：谓是亭也。
现代文：指的就是此亭。
English: It refers to this pavilion.

古文：又东径雍谷溪，回岫萦纡，石路阻峡，故亦有峡石之称矣。
现代文：谷水又往东流经雍谷溪，山谷回环曲折，石路为峡谷所阻，所以又有峡石之称。
English: The valley water flows eastward through the Yonggu Creek, the valley loop twists and turns, and the stone road is blocked by the canyon, so it is also known as the canyon stone.

古文：谷水历侧，左与北川水合，水有二源，并导北山，东南流合成一水，自乾注巽，入于谷。
现代文：谷水从一边流过，在左边与北川水汇合。北川水有两个源头，都从北山流出，往东南流，汇合成一条水，从西北往东南注入鼓水。
English: The valley water flows on one side and merges with the Beichuan water on the left. The Beichuan water has two sources, both flowing out of the North Mountain, flowing southeast, merging into one water, and injecting the drum water from the northwest to the southeast.

古文：谷水又东径缺门山，山阜之不接者里余，故得是名矣。
现代文：谷水又往东流经缺门山，山冈中间约有一里多的一段断而不连，所以得了缺门之名。
English: The valley water also flows eastward through the mountain of the missing gate, and a section of more than one kilometer in the middle of the mountain is broken and does not connect, so it got the name of the missing gate.

古文：二壁争高，斗耸相乱，西瞻双阜，右望如砥。
现代文：两边的岩壁竞相争高，陡峭耸峙，难分高下；西望两山，就像两块巨大的磨石。
English: The rock walls on both sides compete with each other for height, towering steeply, difficult to separate; looking west, the two mountains are like two huge millstones.

古文：谷水自门而东，广阳川水注之，水出广阳北山，东南流注于谷。
现代文：谷水从缺门东流，广阳川水注入。广阳川水发源于广阳北山，往东南流，注入谷水。
English: The valley water flows from the east of the gate, and the water of the Guangyang River is injected. The water of the Guangyang River originates from the North Mountain of Guangyang, flows to the southeast, and is injected into the valley water.

古文：南望微山，云峰相乱。
现代文：南望微山，群峰云雾缭绕，谷水又流经白超垒南边。
English: Looking south at the Weishan Mountains, the peaks are surrounded by clouds and fog, and the valley water flows through the southern side of the Bai Chao He.

古文：谷水又径白超垒南，戴延之《西征记》云：次至白超垒，去函谷十五里，筑垒当大道，左右有山夹立，相去百余步，从中出北，乃故关城，非所谓白超垒也。
现代文：戴延之《西征记》说：接着到了白超垒，这里离函谷关十五里。城堡就筑在大道上，两边山岗耸立，相距百余步，道路就从中间通向北方。其实这是从前的关城，并不是什么白超垒。
English: Dai Yan's "Record of the Western Conquest" said: Then came the Bai Chao Bastion, which is fifteen miles from the Huan Valley Pass. The castle was built on the main road, with mountains rising on both sides, more than a hundred paces apart, and the road leading from the middle to the north. In fact, this was a former pass, not a Bai Chao Bastion.

古文：是垒在缺门东十五里，垒侧旧有坞，故冶官所在。
现代文：真正的白超垒在缺门东边十五里，堡垒旁边从前有个土城，当时冶官就驻在这里。
English: The real Bai Chao Bastion is located fifteen miles to the east of the gate. There used to be a mud castle next to the fortress, and the metallurgist was stationed here at that time.

古文：魏、晋之日，引谷水为水冶，以经国用，遗迹尚存。
现代文：魏晋时期，引了敦水利用水力鼓风冶炼，以供国家需用，今天还留有遗迹。
English: During the Wei and Jin Dynasties, Dongshui was introduced to use hydraulic blast smelting to supply the country's needs, and there are still remains today.

古文：谷水又东，石默溪水出微山东麓石默溪，东北流入于谷。
现代文：谷水又东流，石默溪水源出微山的东麓，往东北流，注入鼓水。
English: The valley water also flows to the east, and the source of the water of Shimer Creek flows from the eastern foot of the hill, flows to the northeast, and injects the drum water.

古文：谷水又东，宋水北流注于谷。
现代文：谷水又东流，宋水北流注于谷水。
English: The east stream of the valley water and the north stream of the Song water flow into the valley water.

古文：谷水又东径魏将作大匠田丘兴墓南，二碑存焉。
现代文：谷水又往东流经魏时将作大匠母丘兴墓南，如今还留着两块墓碑。
English: When the valley water flowed eastward through the Wei Dynasty, it would form the south side of the Great Master's mother mound, the Xing Tomb. Today, two tombstones remain.

古文：俭父也。
现代文：丹丘兴是母丘俭的父亲。
English: Dan Qiu Xing is the father of his mother Qiu Jian.

古文：《管辂别传》曰：辂尝随军西征，过其墓而叹，谓士友曰：玄武藏头，青龙无足，白虎衔尸，朱雀悲哭，四危已备，法应灭族。
现代文：《管格别传》说：管格曾随军西征，经过他的墓旁，看到四面的雕刻，不觉叹了一口气，对朋友说：玄武缩着头，青龙断了足，白虎衔死尸，朱雀在悲哭：四种危象齐全，按理应当灭族。
English: "The Biography of Guan Ge" said: Guan Ge had accompanied the army to the Western Expedition, passed by his grave, saw the carvings on all sides, sighed unconsciously, and said to his friend: Xuanwu shrank his head, the blue dragon broke his foot, the white tiger dragged the dead body, and the blackbird was crying in grief: the four kinds of danger were complete, and the nation should be exterminated.

古文：果如其言。
现代文：他真的说中了。
English: He really nailed it.

古文：谷水又东径函谷关南，东北流，皂涧水注之，水出新安县，东南流径田丘兴墓东，又南径函谷关西，关高险狭，路出廛郭。
现代文：谷水又往东流经函谷关南，往东北流，皂涧水注入。皂涧水发源于新安县，往东南流经母丘兴墓东面，又往南流经函谷关西面。函谷关又高又险，道路就从关城通出。
English: The valley water also flows eastward through the south of Hakodate, and to the northeast, the saponified water is injected. The saponified water originates in Xin'an County, flows southeastward through the east side of the mother mound Xing Tomb, and flows southward through the west side of Hakodate. Hakodate is high and dangerous, and the road goes out of the city.

古文：汉元鼎三年，楼船将军杨仆数有大功，耻居关外，请以家僮七百人，筑塞徒关于新安，即此处也。
现代文：汉朝元鼎三年前，楼船将军杨仆，屡建大功，觉得住在关外是一件不光彩的事，申请以七百名憧仆来修筑要塞，把关口迁到新安去，就是这地方。
English: Three years before the founding of the Han Dynasty, the general of the ships, Yang Bu, who had repeatedly made great achievements, felt that living outside the pass was a disgraceful thing. He applied to build a fortress with seven hundred long-suffering servants and move the pass to Xin'an. This is the place.

古文：昔郭丹西入关，感慨于其下曰：不乘驷马高车，终不出此关也。
现代文：从前郭丹从西方入关，在关下慷慨地说：如果我不能乘坐驯马高车，就永远不从这关口出去！
English: Once upon a time, Guo Dan entered the pass from the west, and said generously: "If I can't ride the horse-training car, I will never leave this pass!"

古文：去家十二年，果如志焉。
现代文：他离家十二年，果然实现了自己的志愿。
English: He has been away from home for twelve years, and he has certainly achieved his goal.

古文：皂涧水又东流入于谷。
现代文：皂涧水又东流，注入谷水。
English: Soapy water also flows to the east, injecting valley water.

古文：谷水又东北径函谷关城东，右合爽水。
现代文：谷水又往东北流经函谷关城东，在右边汇合了爽水。
English: The valley water then flows northeast through the eastern part of Hakodate, where it meets the fresh water on the right.

古文：《山海经》曰：白石山西五十里曰谷山，其上多谷，其下多桑，爽水出焉。
现代文：《山海经》说：白石山以西五十里有山叫毅山，山上多毁，山下多桑树，爽水就发源在这里。
English: "Shanhai Jing" said: There is a mountain called Yishan in the west of Shiroishi Mountain. There are many ruins on the mountain and many mulberry trees at the foot of the mountain. The source of fresh water is here.

古文：世谓之纻麻涧，北流注于谷，其中多碧绿。
现代文：世人叫它经麻涧，北流注于谷水，水中多产孔雀石。
English: The world calls it the Maotai River. The north stream pours into the valley water, and the water is rich in malachite.

古文：谷水又东，涧水注之。
现代文：谷水义东流，涧水注入。
English: The valley water flows to the east, and the brackish water is injected.

古文：《山海经》曰：娄涿山西四十里曰白石之山，涧水出焉，北流注于谷。
现代文：《山海经》说：娄琢山以西四十里，有山叫白石之山，涧水就发源在这里，北流注入谷水。
English: "Mountain and Sea Sutra" says: Forty miles west of Mt. Zhigou, there is a mountain called the White Stone Mountain. The spring water originates here, and the north stream flows into the valley water.

古文：挚仲治《三辅决录注》云：马氏兄弟五人，共居涧、谷二水之交，作五门客，因舍以为名。今在河南西四十里。
现代文：挚仲治《三辅决录注》说：马氏兄弟五人，一起住在涧水与谷水的汇流处，建了一座有五道门的客舍，因而就以五门为名，地点就在河南以西四十里。
English: Zhi Zhongzhi's "Three Auxiliary Record Notes" said: The five Ma brothers lived together at the confluence of the Surabaya River and the Grain River and built a guest house with five doors, so they named it after the five doors. The place is forty miles west of Henan.

古文：以《山海经》推校，里数不殊仲治所记，水会尚有故居处。
现代文：用《山海经》来核对，里数与挚仲治所记并无不同，两水汇合处还留有马氏故居的旧址。
English: Using the "Shanhai Jing" to check, the number of miles is no different from that recorded by Jing Zhongzhi, and there is still the old site of Ma's former residence at the confluence of the two waters.

古文：斯则涧水也，即《周书》所谓我卜涧水东。言是水也。
现代文：这就是涧水，《周书》所谓我在涧水东岸占卜，说的就是这条水。
English: This is Surabaya, and the so-called divination on the east coast of Surabaya in the "Weekly Book" refers to this water.

古文：自下通谓涧水为谷水之兼称焉。
现代文：从这里起，下流也都称为涧水了，是谷水的兼称。
English: From here on, the lower reaches are also known as Surabaya, which is also known as Grain River.

古文：故《尚书》曰：伊、洛、瀍、涧，既入于河。而无谷水之目，是名亦通称矣。
现代文：所以《尚书》说：伊、洛、浪、涧四条水，都注入河水，但却没有提到谷水，可知涧水也是通称了。
English: Therefore, "Shangshu" said: the four waters of I, Luo, Lang and Zou are all injected into river water, but there is no mention of grain water, so it can be known that Zou water is also a common name.

古文：刘澄之云：新安有涧水，源出县北，又有渊水，未知其源。
现代文：刘澄之说：新安有涧水，发源于县北；又有渊水，不知源头在哪里。
English: Liu Chengzhi said: Xin'an has turbid water, originating from the north of the county; there is also deep water, I don't know where the source is.

古文：余考诸地记，并无渊水，但渊、涧字相似，时有字错为渊也。
现代文：我查阅过各种地理著作，都没有提到渊水，但渊与涧字形相近，有些涧字就时常错成渊字。
English: I have checked various geographical works, and there is no mention of Yuanshui, but Yuanshui is similar to the, and some  characters are often mistaken for Yuanshui.

古文：故阚駰《地理志》曰：《禹贡》之渊水，是以知传写书误，字谬舛真，澄之不思所致耳。
现代文：所以阐胭《地理志》说：《禹贡》的渊水，可知是由于传抄时写错的，刘澄之没有想到这一点，所以受惑了。
English: Therefore, Liu Chengzhi said in his "Geography": "The deep water of Yugong" is obviously due to a transcription error. Liu Chengzhi did not think of this, so he was confused.

古文：既无斯水，何源之可求乎？
现代文：既然没有这么一条水，又哪有什么源头可找呢？
English: Since there is no such water, where is the source to be found?

古文：谷水又东，波水注之。
现代文：殷水又往东流，波水注入。
English: The high water also flows eastward, and wave water is injected.

古文：《山海经》曰：瞻诸山西三十里娄涿之山，无草木，多金玉，波水出于其阴，世谓之百答水，北流注于谷，其中多茈石、文石。
现代文：《山海经》说：瞻诸山以西三十里有娄琢之山，山上没有草木，却多金玉，波水就发源山北。世人称波水为百答水，北流注入谷水，沿渠多紫石和纹石。
English: "Mountains and Seas Sutra" says: There are thirty mountains west of the mountains. There are no plants on the mountains, but there are many jewels. The wave water originates in the north of the mountains. The world calls the wave water Baidu water, the north stream is injected into the valley water, and there are many purple stones and textured stones along the canal.

古文：谷水又东，少水注之。
现代文：殷水又东流，少水注入。
English: The high water flows to the east, and less water is injected.

古文：《山海经》曰：瞻诸山西三十里曰瞻诸之山，其阳多金，其阴多文石，少水出于其阴。
现代文：《山海经》说：庵山以西三十里叫瞻诸之山，山南多金，山北多纹石，少水就发源于北麓。
English: "Mountains and Seas Sutra" says: "Thirty miles west of Anshan is called the mountain of all mountains. The south of the mountain is rich in gold, the north of the mountain is multi-textured stone, and less water originates from the northern foot.

古文：控引众溪，积以成川，东流注于谷，世谓之慈涧也。
现代文：这条水汇合了许多溪涧，聚集成一条川流，往东注入谷水，世人称为慈涧。
English: This water converged many streams, gathered into a river flow, eastward into the valley water, the world known as Cixi.

古文：谷水又东，俞随之水注之。
现代文：谷水又东流，俞随之水注入。
English: The valley water also flows to the east, and the reeds are inundated with water.

古文：《山海经》曰，平蓬山西十里廆山，其阳多琈之玉，俞随之水出于其阴，北流注于谷，世谓之孝水也。
现代文：《山海经》说：平蓬山以西十里有鹿山，山南多礴浮之玉，俞随之水就发源于北麓，北流注入谷水，世人称为孝水。
English: "Mountain and Sea Sutra" says: There are Deer Mountain to the west of Pingpong Mountain, and there are many floating balls in the south of the mountain. As a result, the water originates from the northern foot, and the northern current is injected into the valley water. The world is known as the water of filial piety.

古文：潘岳《西征赋》曰：澡孝水以濯缨，嘉美名之在兹。
现代文：潘岳《西征赋》说：在孝水洗涤帽带，称道这里有个美名。
English: Pan Yue "Western Expedition" said: In the filial water washing hat band, praised that there is a beautiful name here.

古文：是水在河南城西十余里，故吕忱曰：孝水在河南。
现代文：这条水在河南城西十多里，所以吕忱说：孝水在河南。
English: This water is more than ten miles west of Henan City, so Lu Zhen said: Xiaoshui is in Henan.

古文：而戴延之言在函谷关西。刘澄之又云出檀山。檀山在宜阳县西，在谷水南，无南入之理。
现代文：但戴延之却说在函谷关西面，刘澄之又说发源于檀山，而檀山在宜阳县西面，宜阳县又在谷水以南，那么孝水就不可能往南注入谷水了。
English: However, Dai Yanzhi said that it was in the west of Hakodate Kansai, and Liu Chengzhi said that it originated in Danzan, and Danzan is in the west of Yiyang County, and Yiyang County is south of Gushui, so it is impossible for Xiaoshui to inject Gushui to the south.

古文：考寻兹说，当承缘生《述征》谬志耳。
现代文：推想起来，这一说法一定是由郭缘生《征述记》的错误而来的。
English: In retrospect, this statement must have come from Guo Yansheng's "Record of Enlistment" error.

古文：缘生从戍行旅，征途讯访，既非旧土，故无所究，今川澜北注，澄映泥泞，何得言枯涸也。
现代文：郭缘生随军行进，沿途查访，但所到之处都不是他旧时熟悉的地方，所以也无法查清了。
English: Guo Yansheng marched with the army and visited along the way, but the places he went to were not familiar to him in the old days, so he could not find out.

古文：皆为疏僻矣。东北过谷城县北，城西临谷水，故县取名焉。
现代文：现在溪水荡着碧波往北奔流，澄清得可以看见水底的淤泥，怎能说水已干枯呢！
English: Now the water of the stream is rushing northward, clear enough to see the silt at the bottom of the water. How can it be said that the water has dried up?

古文：谷水又东径谷城南，不历其北，又东，洛水枝流入焉，今无水也。
现代文：他这些记述都很草率。往东北流过毅城县北面，县城西濒谷水，所以县也因水取名了。谷水又往东流经毅城南面，并不流过城北；又东流，洛水支流注入，现在已经无水了。
English: He was very hasty in these descriptions. The northeast flowed through the north of Yicheng County, and the west of the county was near the valley water, so the county was also named after the water. The valley water also flowed eastward through the south of Yicheng, and did not flow through the north of the city; and the east flow, the Luoshui tributary, has now no water.

古文：又东过河南县北，东南入于洛。
现代文：又往东流过河南县北面，往东南注人洛水。
English: It also flows eastward across the northern part of Henan County and flows southeastward into Renluo Water.

古文：河南王城西北，谷水之右有石碛，碛南出为死谷，北出为湖沟。
现代文：河南王城西北，谷水右边有石滩，滩水南流就是死毁，北流就是湖沟。
English: Northwest of Wangcheng, Henan Province, there is a rocky beach on the right side of the valley water. The southern stream of the beach water is dead, and the northern stream is a ditch.

古文：魏太和四年，暴水流高三丈，此地下停流以成湖渚，造沟以通水，东西十里，决湖以注瀍水。
现代文：魏太和四年发大水，水高三丈，这里地势低洼，就积成湖泊，于是开了一条东西走向的十里长沟，疏导湖水注入浪水。
English: In the fourth year of Wei Taihe, there was a large amount of water, the water was three meters high, and the land here was low-lying, so it accumulated into a lake. Therefore, a ten-mile long ditch was opened in the east-west direction to channel the lake water into the waves.

古文：谷水又径河南王城西北，所谓成周矣。
现代文：谷水又流经河南王城西北，这就是所谓成周。
English: The valley water also flows through the northwest of Henan Wangcheng, which is the so-called Chengzhou.

古文：《公羊》曰：成周者何？
现代文：《公羊传》说：什么是成周呢？
English: "The Ram" says: What is Cheng Zhou?

古文：东周也。
现代文：就是东周。
English: It is the Eastern Zhou Dynasty.

古文：何休曰：名为成周者，周道始成，王所都也。
现代文：何休说：取名成周，是因为周朝政制刚刚成立，这是周王建都的地方。
English: He Xiu said that he chose the name Cheng Zhou because the political system of the Zhou Dynasty had just been established, and this was the place where King Zhou built the capital.

古文：《地理志》曰：河南河南县，故郏、鄏地也。
现代文：《地理志》说：河南郡的河南县，是旧时邦、哪地方。
English: "Geography" said: Henan County, Henan County, is the old state, which place.

古文：京相璠曰：郏山名；鄏地邑也。
现代文：京相潘说：邦是山名，娜是城邑。
English: Beijing Minister Pan said: Bang is the name of the mountain, Na is the town.

古文：卜年定鼎，为王之东都，谓之新邑，是为王城。
现代文：占卜传国的年数，择地安放九鼎，成为周王的东都，称为新邑，这就是王城。
English: According to the number of years of divination, Jiuding was placed in a certain place to become the eastern capital of King Zhou, known as Xinyi, which is the royal city.

古文：其城东南名曰鼎门，盖九鼎所从入也，故谓是地为鼎中。
现代文：城东南面城门为鼎门，就是九鼎搬运所经处，所以把这地方叫鼎中。
English: The south-eastern gate of the city is the Dingmen Gate, which is the place where Jiuding was transported, so this place is called Dingzhong.

古文：积石为堨而开沟渠五所，谓之五龙渠。
现代文：楚子讨伐陆浑之戎时，探听放在这里的宝鼎。《征记》说谷水和洛水原在王城东北合流，就是所谓毁、洛相斗。
English: When Chu Zi was fighting the troops of Lu Hun, he was looking for the treasure that was stored here. "Record of Conquest" said that the valley water and Lu Suyuan merged in the northeast of the royal city, which is the so-called destruction and Lu fight.

古文：渠上立堨，堨之东首，立一石人，石人腹上刻勒云：太和五年二月八白庚戌造筑此堨，更开沟渠此水衡渠上，其水助其坚也，必经年历世，是故部立石人以记之云尔。
现代文：现在城的东南方不到一千步处，世人又说就是从前毁、洛二水斗合的地点，这些说法都不正确。我按史传，周灵王时谷水与洛水改道遇合，冲毁了王宫，灵王打算筑堤拦阻，太子晋谏阻灵王，灵王不听，当时所筑的三道堤堰都还存在。《左传》：襄公二十五年二月八日庚戌，筑成此堰，又开凿沟渠。当水冲沟渠时，就拦截水流，以保渠道牢固，经久不坏，因而立此石人记事。
English: It is now less than a thousand paces to the southeast of the city, and people say that it is the site of the former destruction and the confluence of the Luo and Luo rivers. These statements are not correct. According to history, Zhou Lingwang, when the valley water met the Luo water diversion, destroyed the royal palace, Lingwang planned to build a dike to block it, Prince Jinjun blocked Lingwang, Lingwang did not listen, and the three dike weirs built at that time still exist. "Zhuan": Xianggong on February 8, 25th, built this weir and dug a ditch. When the water flushed the ditch, it

古文：盖魏明帝修王、张故绩也。
现代文：这是魏明帝重修王梁、张纯的旧堰时所立。
English: This was built by Emperor Wei Ming when he rebuilt the old weir of Wang Liang and Zhang Chun.

古文：堨是都水使者陈协所造。
现代文：堰是都水使者陈协所造。
English: The weir was built by Chen Xie, the messenger of the capital water.

古文：《语林》曰：陈协数进阮步兵酒，后晋文王欲修九龙堰，阮举协，文王用之。
现代文：《语林》说：陈协多次送酒给阮步兵，后来晋文王想修建九龙堰，阮步兵推荐了陈协，文王也任用他。
English: "Yu Lin" said: Chen Xie repeatedly gave wine to Nguyn Phúc. Later, King Jinwen wanted to build the Jiulong Weir. Nguyn Phúc recommended Chen Xie, and King Wen also appointed him.

古文：掘地得古承水铜龙六枚，堰遂成。
现代文：在动工掘地时，掘出了六枚古代的接水铜龙，堰也于是筑成了。
English: At the start of the excavation, six ancient bronze dragons were unearthed, and the weir was built.

古文：水历堨东注，谓之千金渠。
现代文：水经此堰往东流注，称为千金渠。
English: The water flows through this weir to the east and is called the Qianjin Canal.

古文：逮于晋世，大水暴注，沟渎泄坏，又广功焉。
现代文：到了晋朝，大水猛涨冲击，渠道也被冲坏了，于是又扩大重建。
English: In the Jin Dynasty, the water surged and the channels were washed away, so the construction was expanded and rebuilt.

古文：石人东胁下文云：太始七年六月二十三日，大水迸瀑，出常流上三丈，荡坏二堨，五龙泄水，南注泻下，加岁久漱啮，每涝即坏，历载消弃大功，今故无令遏，更于西开泄，名曰代龙渠，地形正平，诚得为泄至理。
现代文：石人东边胁下刻的字是；泰始七年六月二十三日，大水奔腾汹涌，高出正常水位三丈，把两道堰坝也冲坏了，五龙渠泄出的水，往南奔泻而下，加以年久逐渐受到侵蚀，每有水涝就被冲坏，历年的巨大工程全都枉费了，所以现在要使水流不再受阻，又在西边开渠泄水，名叫代龙渠。这里地形平正，开凿此渠确实是掌握了溢洪泻泄的正确规律了。
English: The words engraved under the stone dike on the east side of the stone man are as follows: On June 23rd, the seventh year of the Tai Dynasty, the torrential water was three times higher than the normal water level, and the two dams were washed away. The water released by the Wulong Canal flowed southward, and gradually eroded over the years. Every dike was washed away. The huge projects over the years were all wasted. So now it is necessary to make the water flow no longer obstructed, and open a canal to discharge water on the west side, called the Dragon Canal. The terrain here is flat, and the excavation of this canal has indeed mastered the correct

古文：千金不与水势激争，无缘当坏，由其卑下，水得逾上漱啮故也。
现代文：千金竭并不正面迎着凶猛的水势，原当不会被冲坏的，但由于地势低洼，水就会漫到堰上，逐渐侵蚀的缘故。
English: It is not facing the ferocious water, it should not be washed away, but because of the low-lying terrain, the water will spread to the weir, due to gradual erosion.

古文：今增高千金于旧一丈四尺，五龙自然必历世无患。
现代文：现在把千金竭比过去加高一丈四尺，五龙渠自然也定会长期不闹水灾了。
English: Now that the height of the culverts has been raised by one and a quarter feet, the Wulong Qu naturally will not flood for a long time.

古文：若五龙岁久复坏，可转于西更开二堨、二渠。
现代文：假如五龙渠年久以后又毁坏了，可以转向西边再筑两道堰。
English: If the Wulong Canal is destroyed again after many years, you can turn to the west and build two more weirs.

古文：合用二十三万五千六百九十八功，以其年十月二十三日起作，功重人少，到八年四月二十日毕。
现代文：开两条渠道，工程共耗费二十三万五千六百九十八工，在当年十月二十三日开工，因工程浩大，人力不足，到八年初，汝阴太守李矩、汝南太守袁孚修复了这条堰，以便运输，官府和百姓都要依靠它。
English: To open the two channels, the project required a total of 235,698 workers. Construction began on October 23 of that year. Due to the large scale of the project and the lack of manpower, by the beginning of the eighth year, Ruyin's grand marshal Li Rui and Ruinan's grand marshal Yuan Fu had repaired the weir to facilitate transportation. Both the government and the people had to rely on it.

古文：水积年渠堨颓毁，石砌殆尽，遗基见存，朝廷太和中修复故堨。
现代文：年积月累，渠道和堰坝又塌毁了，砌堰的石块差不多都冲走了，只有遗址还留着。朝廷在太和年间修复了这条旧堰。
English: Over the years, the canal and the dam collapsed again, and almost all the stones of the dam were washed away, leaving only the ruins. The imperial court restored the old dam in the Taichung period.

古文：按千金堨石人西胁下文云：若沟渠久疏，深引水者当于河南城北、石碛西，更开渠北出，使首狐丘。
现代文：按千金竭石人西边胁卞刻的是：假如沟渠年久荒废，进行深浚引水工程的人，应当在河南南城以北、石滩以西另开沟渠通往北面，与旧渠道汇合。
English: According to the inscription on the west side of the stone wall of the stone people who spent a lot of money, if the ditch has been abandoned for a long time, those who carry out deep dredging and water diversion projects should open another ditch north of Nancheng in Henan Province and west of the stone beach to the north, and merge with the old channel.

古文：故沟东下，因故易就碛坚，便时事业已讫，然后见之。
现代文：日沟通往东方，循旧道施工较为容易，石滩也牢固又省时。工程完成后，就可以看到效益。
English: The sun sets to the east, it is easier to follow the old way of construction, the stone beach is also solid and time-saving. After the project is completed, you can see the benefits.

古文：加边方多事，人力苦少，又渠堨新成，未患于水，是以不敢预修通之。
现代文：但因边境多事，苦于人力不足，而且渠道和堰坝刚刚建成，尚未受到水灾的威胁，所以也不敢预先把它修通。
English: However, due to the fact that the border is complicated and suffers from a shortage of manpower, and the channel and dam have just been built and have not yet been threatened by floods, they do not dare to repair it in advance.

古文：若于后当复兴功者，宜就西碛，故书之于石，以遗后贤矣。
现代文：以后如果要重新动工，以在西边石滩处施工为妥。因此把这些意见刻在石上，留给后世贤者参考。
English: In the future, if construction is to be restarted, it would be appropriate to start construction at the western rocky beach. Therefore, these opinions are engraved on the stone and left for future generations of sages for reference.

古文：其中引水飞皋，倾澜瀑布，或枉渚声溜，潺潺不断，竹柏荫于层石，绣薄丛于泉侧，微飙暂拂，则芳溢于六空，实为神居矣。其水东注天渊池，池中有魏文帝九华台，殿基悉是洛中故碑累之，今造钓台于其上。
现代文：现在虽然石滩也淹没了，但遗迹还依稀可辨。照石人铭文看来，引渠北出，是往东与旧渠道相汇合的。旧渠又东流，晋惠帝在水上造了一座石桥，石桥西门朝南一面刻的是：晋元康二年十一月二十日，改建石巷、水门；拆除了竖式杭柱，改为卷洞式仿门，又在上面造桥屋遮盖，在屋前后两面加砌右级与堤岸相接，使南北两头都伸入岸上。
English: Now, although the stone beach is also submerged, the remains can still be faintly discerned. According to the inscription of the stone people, the diversion channel comes out to the north and converges with the old channel to the east. The old canal also flows to the east. Emperor Jin Hui built a stone bridge on the water. On the south side of the west gate of the stone bridge, it is engraved: On November 20, the second year of Jin Yuan Kang, the stone alley and the water gate were rebuilt; the vertical pile pillar was removed and replaced with a roll-in-hole imitation door, and the bridge house was covered on top, and the right step was added to the

古文：池南直魏文帝茅茨堂，前有《茅茨碑》，是黄初中所立也。其水自天渊池东出华林园，径听讼观南，故平望观也。
现代文：又把冲蚀的地方修好，以减煞水势。工程于三年所立。水从天渊池往东流出华林园一，流经听讼观南面，也就是先前的平望观。
English: The project was established three years ago. Water flows from Tianyuan Pond to the east out of Hualin Garden 1 and flows through the southern side of the courtyard, that is, the previous observation deck.

古文：魏明帝常言，狱，天下之命也，每断大狱，恒幸观听之。
现代文：魏明帝常常说，讼案是天下人命交关的大事，每次审判大案，他常常亲自到这里听审。
English: Wei Mingdi often said that litigation is a major event that affects the lives of people all over the world. Every time a major trial is held, he often comes here in person to listen to the trial.

古文：以太和三年，更从今名。
现代文：从太和三年起，这里改成听讼观。
English: From the third year of Taihe, it was changed to the view of hearing cases.

古文：观西北接华林，隶簿昔刘桢磨石处也。
现代文：听讼观西北与华林隶簿相邻接，是从前刘祯磨石的地方。
English: The northwestern part of Hezheng is adjacent to Hualin County, which is the place of the former Liuye millstone.

古文：《文士传》曰：文帝之在东宫也，宴诸文学，酒酣，命甄后出拜，坐者咸伏，惟刘桢平视之。
现代文：《文士传》说：文帝在东宫时，设宴款待各位文学官，酒喝得正高兴时，叫甄后出来与各人行礼相见，在座的人都低着头不敢抬起来看，只有刘祯正视着她。
English: "Biography of a Scribe" said: "When Emperor Wen was in the East Palace, he held a banquet to entertain the literary officials. When he was happy to drink wine, he asked his concubine to come out and meet everyone. Everyone present kept their heads down and did not dare to look up. Only Liu Ye looked directly at her.

古文：太祖以为不敬，送徒隶簿。
现代文：太祖以为他无礼，就把他送到囚犯服劳役的地方。
English: The great-grandfather thought he was impolite and sent him to a place where prisoners were forced to work.

古文：后太祖乘步牵车乘城，降阅簿作，诸徒咸敬，而桢拒坐，磨石不动。
现代文：后来太祖下车步行登城，随后下来视察囚犯劳作的场所，犯人们个个都恭恭敬敬地行礼，但刘祯却照样坐在那里磨石头，动也不动。
English: Later, the great-grandfather got out of the car and walked to the city, then came down to inspect the place where the prisoners were working. All the prisoners bowed respectfully, but Liu Wei still sat there grinding stones and did not move.

古文：太祖曰，此非刘桢也，石如何性。
现代文：太祖说：那不是刘祯吗？这石头质地怎么样？
English: The great-grandfather said, "Isn't that Liu Ye? What's the texture of the stone?

古文：桢曰：石出荆山玄岩之下，外炳五色之章，内秉坚贞之志，雕之不增文，磨之不加莹，禀气贞正，禀性自然。
现代文：刘祯说：这石头是从荆山黑岩下采来的，外观上五彩花纹，光辉灿烂，骨子里则秉性坚贞，志不可夺；给它雕琢，也加不上多少美观，把它研磨，也添不了多少光泽。它的气质天生就是坚贞刚正，性格就是朴质自然。
English: Liu Wei said, "This stone was quarried from under the black rock of Mount Jing. On the outside, it has multicolored patterns and a brilliant shine. On the inside, it is firm and steadfast, and cannot be taken away. Carving it cannot add much beauty, and grinding it cannot add much luster. Its temperament is inherently firm and upright, and its character is simple and natural.

古文：太祖曰：名岂虚哉？
现代文：太祖说：真是名不虚传！
English: The great-grandfather said: "It's a true legend!

古文：复为文学。
现代文：于是又恢复了他的文学之职。
English: So he resumed his literary duties.

古文：池水又东流入洛阳县之南池，池，即故翟泉也，南北百一十步，东西七十步。
现代文：池水又往东流入洛阳县的南池，这口池就是从前的翟泉，南北一百一十步，东西七十步。
English: The pond water flows eastward into the South Pond of Luoyang County. This pond is the former Lushan Spring, one hundred and ten steps north and south, and seventy steps east and west.

古文：皇甫谧曰：悼王葬景王于翟泉，今洛阳太仓中大冢是也，《春秋》定公元年，晋魏献子合诸侯之大夫于翟泉，始盟城周。班固、服虔、皇甫谧咸言翟泉在洛阳东北，周之墓地。
现代文：皇甫谧说：悼王把景王葬在翟泉，就是现在洛阳太仓中的大坟。《春秋》：定公元年乙酉、壬申两次诏书，指出城下运粮水道东通河水、济水，南引江水、淮水，各方纳贡运输都要到这里来，因此指派中渴者魏郡清渊县马宪监建石桥和梁柱，敦促工匠们施展出他们最巧妙的技艺，把很重的石块拼合起来，把卷门砌得高高的。
English: The Emperor Fuxi said: "The mourning king buried King Jing in the Jiuquan Spring, which is now the big grave in the Luoyang Taicang." "Spring and Autumn": The imperial edict issued twice in the fixed years of Acetylene and Jinshin pointed out that the grain transportation waterways of the city, the Dongtong River, the Jishui River, the South Yangtze River, and the Huai Shui River, should be transported here by all parties. Therefore, the thirsty people of Wei County and Qingyuan County were assigned to supervise the construction of stone bridges and beam columns, and urged the craftsmen to display their most ingenious skills, to put

古文：河南尹邳崇、丞渤海重合双福、水曹掾中牟任防、史王荫、史赵兴、将作吏睢阳申翔，道桥掾成皋卑国，洛阳令江双，丞平阳降监掾王腾之，主石作右北平山仲，三月起作，八月毕成。
现代文：桥梁务必精美，道路务必宽阔，才能通行万里，如此等等。河南尹那郡崇魄、垂渤海郡重合县双福、水曹椽中牟县任防、史官王荫及赵兴、将作吏唯阳县申翔，道桥椽成皋县卑国、洛阳令江双、垂平阳县降监椽王腾之、主石作右北平郡山仲。三月开工，八月建成。
English: The bridge must be exquisite, the road must be wide to pass thousands of miles, and so on. Henan Yunna County Chongpiao, Zhuhai County Zhuhai County Shuangfu, Shizuo County Shuzhongmu Renfen, Wangyin and Zhao Xing, Weiyang County Shenxiang, Luoyang Lingjiang Shuang, Zhuoyang County Bai Guo, Luoyang Lingjiang Shuang, Zhuoyang County Zhuoyang Wang Tengzhi, the main stone of the right Beiping County Shanzhong. Construction began in March and was completed in August.

古文：其水依柱，又自乐里道屈而东出阳渠。
现代文：水高到柱边，又从乐里道转弯往东从阳渠流出去。
English: The water was as high as the column's edge, and flowed out of the canal from the east at the turn of Leli Road.

古文：昔陆机为成都王颖入洛败北而返，水南即马市，旧洛阳有三市，斯其一也。
现代文：从前陆机为成都王颖进军洛阳，却打了败仗回来。南岸就是马市，从前洛阳有三个市集，这也是其中的一个。
English: Wang Ying marched into Luoyang for Chengdu from the forward land plane, but he was defeated and returned. The south bank is Ma City. Luoyang used to have three markets, and this is one of them.

古文：亦嵇叔夜为司马昭所害处也。
现代文：这里也是稽叔夜被司马昭杀害的地方。
English: This is also the place where Uncle Jin was killed by Sima Zhao.

古文：北则白社故里，昔孙子荆会董威辇于白社，谓此矣。
现代文：北边是白社旧地，从前孙子荆在白社会见董威辈，就是这地方。
English: To the north is the old town of Baisha. This is the place where Sun Zi Jing used to meet Dong Wei in the White Society.

古文：以同载为荣，故有《威辇图》。
现代文：孙子荆以能与董威荤同车为荣，所以有《威辈图》。
English: Grandson Jing is proud to be able to ride in the same car as Dong Weiyu, so there is a "Weiyu map."

古文：又东径马市石桥，桥南有二石柱，并无文刻也。
现代文：又往东流经马市石桥，桥南有两根石柱，都没有刻字。
English: It also flows eastward through the Ma Shi Stone Bridge. There are two stone pillars to the south of the bridge, but they are not inscribed.

古文：汉司空渔阳王梁之为河南也，将引谷水以溉京都，渠成而水不流，故以坐免。
现代文：汉司空渔阳王梁当河南尹，准备引谷水灌溉京都，但渠道开成后却不能通水，因此被免职。
English: Wang Liangdang from Henan Province, who was in charge of the Han Dynasty's aerial fishery, prepared to divert valley water to irrigate Kyoto, but after the channel was opened, he was unable to pass the water, so he was dismissed.

古文：后张纯堰洛以通漕，洛中公私穰赡。
现代文：后来张纯在洛水筑堰以通水运，洛阳一带官民都获利。
English: Later, Zhang Chun used water transport to build a weir in Luoshui, and the public and private sectors in Luoyang all benefited.

古文：是渠今引谷水，盖纯之创也。
现代文：这条河渠今天引入谷水，就是张纯所开创的。
English: This canal, which is now fed by valley water, was pioneered by Zhang Chunlong.

古文：按陆机《洛阳记》、刘澄之《永初记》言，城之西面有阳渠，周公制之也。
现代文：按陆机《洛阳记》、刘澄之《永初记》说：城的西面有阳渠，是周公所开。
English: According to Lu Ji's "Luoyang Ji" and Liu Cheng's "Yongchu Ji," there is a canal to the west of the city, which was built by Zhou Gong.

古文：昔周迁殷民于洛邑，城隍逼狭，卑陋之所耳。
现代文：从前周把殷商的百姓迁到洛邑，当时洛邑城很狭小局促，不过是个卑陋的小城。
English: From the previous week, the people of Yin merchants were moved to Luoyang. At that time, Luoyang City was very small and cramped, but it was a humble small city.

古文：晋故城成周以居敬王，秦又广之，以封不韦，以是推之，非专周公可知矣。
现代文：晋国从前给成周筑城，让舫王去居住；秦时又扩大了城区，封给吕不韦。照此推断起来，可想而知，河渠并非全是周公所开。
English: In the past, the State of Jin built a city for Cheng Zhou and allowed the King of Qi to live there; the State of Qin expanded the urban area and gave it to Lü Buwei. Based on this, it can be inferred that the canals were not all built by Zhou.

古文：亦谓之九曲渎，《河南十二县境簿》云：九曲渎在河南巩县西，西至洛阳。
现代文：阳渠又叫九曲读，《河南十二县境簿》说：九曲读在河南巩县以西，往西通到洛阳。
English: Yangqu Canal is also called Jiuqu Read. "Henan 12 Counties Boundary Book" says: Jiuqu Read is in the west of Gongxian, Henan, and goes west to Luoyang.

古文：又按傅畅《晋书》云：都水使者陈狼凿运渠，从洛口入注九曲至东阳门。
现代文：又按傅畅《晋书》说：都水使者陈狼开凿运渠，从洛口引水流经九曲，直到东阳门。
English: According to Fu Chang's "Jin Shu" (Book of the Jin Dynasty), the messenger of the capital's water, Chen Wol, dug a canal to transport water from Luokou, and the water flowed through nine bends until it reached Dongyang Gate.

古文：是以阮嗣宗《咏怀诗》所谓朝出上东门，遥望首阳岑：又言遥遥九曲间，裴徊欲何之者也。
现代文：所以阮嗣宗《咏怀诗》说：早上出来上东门，遥望高高的首阳山；又说：迢遥的九曲之间，徘徊着想往哪里走？
English: That's why Nguyn Trng Trng said in the "Song of Longing": "In the morning, go out to the East Gate and look at the lofty Shouyang Mountain in the distance." He also said: "Between the distant nine tunes, wandering, wondering where to go?"

古文：阳渠水南暨阊阖门，汉之上西门者也。
现代文：阳渠水往南通到阎阖门，就是汉时的上西门。
English: Yangquan water flows south to Yanmen, which was the Upper West Gate during the Han Dynasty.

古文：《汉宫记》曰：上西门所以不纯白者，汉家厄于戍，故以丹镂之。
现代文：《汉宫记》说：上西门没有涂成纯白色，是因为汉朝天子曾在西北被困，所以用红色来涂漆雕刻。
English: "Han Gong Ji" said: the Upper West Gate was not painted pure white, because the emperor of the Han Dynasty was trapped in the northwest, so it was painted and carved in red.

古文：太和迁都，徙门南侧。其水北乘高渠，枝分上下，历故石桥东入城，径望先寺，中有碑，碑侧法《子丹碑》作龙矩势，于今作则佳，方古犹劣。
现代文：太和年间迁都，把这座城门迁到南边去，渠水从北边乘着渠道地势较高，分成上下两条，经过旧石桥往东流入城中，流过望先寺。寺中有一块石碑，石碑边上，仿效《子丹碑》雕成蟠龙模样，就今天所作而论还算不错，但从仿古的角度看那就差了。
English: When the capital was moved in the Taiwa era, the city gate was moved to the south, and the water from the north took the higher channel, divided into two upper and lower channels, and flowed into the city through the old stone bridge to the east, passing through the temple. There is a stone monument in the temple. On the edge of the stone monument, it is modeled after the "Zidan Monument" and carved into the shape of a dragon. As far as today's work is concerned, it is quite good, but from the perspective of ancient times, it is poor.

古文：渠水又东历故金市南，直千秋门右，宫门也。
现代文：渠水又往东流经旧金市南边，正对千秋门，就是右边的宫门。
English: The canal water flows eastward through the south of the old Jin City, facing the Qianqiu Gate, which is the palace gate on the right.

古文：又枝流入石逗伏流，注灵芝九龙池。
现代文：支流又流入石砌的下水道，注入灵芝九龙池。
English: The tributary then flows into a stone sewer and pours into the Ganoderma Kowloon pond.

古文：魏太和中，皇都迁洛阳，经构宫极，修理街渠，务穷隐，发石视之，曾无毁坏。
现代文：魏太和年间迁都洛阳，规划修建宫殿，修理街道沟渠，要求探查所有隐蔽的处所，于是把盖在上面的石板打开来看，发现这条下水道完好无损。
English: During the reign of Emperor Wei Taihe, the capital was moved to Luoyang, the palace was planned to be built, the streets and ditches were repaired, and all hidden places were required to be explored. Therefore, the stone plate covered above was opened to see that the sewer was intact.

古文：又石工细密，非今之所拟，亦奇为精至也，遂因用之。
现代文：而且石工非常细致严密，不是今天所可比拟，真是出奇地精良，于是就照旧留下使用。
English: Moreover, the stonework was very meticulous and rigorous, not comparable to today, it was really surprisingly sophisticated, so it remained in use as before.

古文：其一水自千秋门南流径神虎门下，东对云龙门，二门衡栿之上，皆刻云龙风虎之状，以火齐薄之，及其晨光初起，夕景斜辉，霜文翠照，陆离眩目。
现代文：另一条从千秋门往南流经神虎门下，此门东对云龙门，两侧的横梁上都雕刻着云龙风虎的图案，以玫瑰石装饰。每当朝阳初出、夕照西斜的时候，白色的图案中闪耀着绚丽的光彩，斑驳灿烂，令人眼花缭乱。
English: Another stream flows south from Qianqiu Gate under Shenhu Gate. This gate faces Yunlong Gate to the east. The beams on both sides are carved with patterns of clouds, dragons, wind and tigers, decorated with rose stone. Whenever the morning sun rises and the evening sun sets, the white patterns shine with brilliant brilliance, mottled and dazzling.

古文：又南径通门、掖门西，又南流东转，径阊阖门南。
现代文：又往南流经通门、掖门西面，又南流，转向东方流经阖门南面。
English: It also flows south through Tongmen and west of Shimen. It also flows south and turns to the east through the south of Shimen.

古文：案《礼》，王有五门，谓皋门、库门、雉门、应门、路门，路门一曰毕门，亦曰虎门也。
现代文：按照《礼记》，帝王有五座门：叫皋门、库门、锥门、应门、路门―路门别名毕门，又叫虎门。
English: According to the "Rituals," the emperor has five gates: called the gate, the gate, the gate, the gate, the gate - the gate, also known as the gate, and the gate.

古文：魏明帝上法太极于格阳，南宫起太极殿于汉崇德殿之故处，改雉门为阊阖门。
现代文：魏明帝在洛阳南宫仿效太极而在汉崇德殿故址上建造太极殿，把锥门改为阎阖门。
English: Emperor Wei Ming built the Taiji Hall at the former site of the Han Chongde Hall in imitation of the Taiji Hall in the Southern Palace of Luoyang, and changed the cone gate to the Yanshan Gate.

古文：昔在汉世，洛阳宫殿门题，多是大篆，言是蔡邕诸子。
现代文：从前汉朝时候，洛阳宫殿门上的题字大多是大篆，据说是蔡琶等人所书。
English: During the former Han Dynasty, most of the inscriptions on the gates of Luoyang Palace were large urns, said to have been written by Caiwa and others.

古文：自董卓焚宫殿，魏太祖平荆州，汉吏部尚书安定梁孟皇善师宜官八分体，求以赎死。
现代文：自从董卓焚烧了宫殿，魏太祖平定荆州，汉吏部尚书安定梁孟皇擅长师宜官的八分体，请求以书法免他一死。
English: Since Dong Zhuo burned the palace, Wei Taizu conquered Jingzhou, and the Han cadres were still writing, Liang Menghuang excelled in the octal of the teacher and the official, and asked the calligraphy to spare his life.

古文：太祖善其法，常仰系帐中爱玩之，以为胜宜官。
现代文：太祖赏识他的书法，时常把他的字挂在帐中玩赏，以为胜过师宜官。
English: His great-grandfather appreciated his calligraphy, and often put his calligraphy on his bookshelf and played with it, thinking he was better than his teacher.

古文：《广雅》曰：阙，谓之象魏。
现代文：北宫的题字，都是梁鹊的手笔。
English: The inscriptions of the North Palace are all the handwriting of Liang Qi.

古文：《风俗通》曰：鲁昭公设两观于门，是谓之阙，从门，欮声，《尔雅》曰：观谓之阙。《说文》曰：阙，门观也。
现代文：南宫建成后，明帝叫侍中京兆韦诞用古篆来题字。迁都洛阳后，才叫中书舍人沈含馨用隶书来题字；景明、正始年间的。《尔雅》说：楼观称为网。《说文》说：网，就是门口的楼观。
English: After the completion of the South Palace, Emperor Ming asked the attendant of the Beijing Zhaowei Festival to inscribe the inscription with an ancient seal. After the capital was moved to Luoyang, it was only after the capital was moved to Luoyang that the person in charge of the Central Library, Shen Hanxiang, was asked to inscribe the inscription with an inscription; it was between the years of Jingming and Zhengshi. "Erya" said: the view of the building is called the net. "Saowen" said: the net is the view of the building at the entrance.

古文：《汉官典职》曰：偃师去洛四十五里，望朱雀阙，其上郁然与天连，是明峻极矣。
现代文：《汉官典职》说：堰师离洛阳四十五里，远望朱雀网，一派蓬蓬勃勃的气象，就像与天相连似的，真是高大极了。
English: "Han Guan Dian Rong" said: The weir division is forty-five miles away from Luoyang, looking far and wide, a group of pompous and vigorous weather, as if connected to the sky, is really high.

古文：《洛阳故宫名》有朱雀阙、白虎阙、苍龙阙、北阙、南宫阙也。
现代文：《洛阳故宫名》有朱雀阀、白虎网、苍龙网、北网、南宫网等。
English: "Names of the Forbidden City of Luoyang" has Suzaku Valve, Baihu Network, Soryu Network, North Network, South Palace Network and so on.

古文：《东观汉记》曰：更始发洛阳，李松奉引车马奔触北阙铁柱门，三马皆死。
现代文：《东观汉记》说：更始帝从洛阳出发，李松导引车驾，拉车的马忽然狂奔起来，撞到北网的铁柱门上，三匹马都死了，指的就是此网。
English: "Dongguan Han Ji" said: the first emperor set out from Luoyang, Li Song guided the car, the horse pulling the car suddenly ran wildly, hit the iron gate of the north net, and all three horses died, referring to this net.

古文：即斯阙也。
现代文：《白虎通》说：门为什么一定要有网呢？
English: "White Tiger Pass" said: Why does the door have to have a net?

古文：《白虎通》曰：门必有阙者何？
现代文：阀是门的一种装饰。
English: The valve is a kind of decoration of the door.

古文：阙者，所以饰门，别尊卑也。
现代文：是用以区分地位尊卑之别的。
English: It is used to distinguish the status of superiority and inferiority.

古文：今阊阖门外夹建巨阙，以应天宿，虽不如礼，犹象而魏之，上加复思，以易观矣。《广雅》曰：复思谓之屏。
现代文：现在间阖门外两边建造了巨网，与天上的星宿相对应，虽然没有依照礼法的规定，但也在这里颁布法令，上面加建拿思，以代替楼观•《广雅》说：拿思，指的是围屏。
English: Now, a huge net has been built on both sides of the gate, corresponding to the stars in the sky. Although it did not follow the rules of etiquette, it also issued a decree here, adding Naxi to replace the view of the building. "Guangya" said: Naxi refers to the screen.

古文：《释名》曰：屏，自障屏也；罦思在门外，罦复也。
现代文：《释名》说：屏是用来遮蔽自己的。军思立在门外，罕，就是复，臣子要进去报告时，到了这里可以再好好想一想。
English: "Explanation of the name" said: The screen is used to cover oneself. The army stands outside the door, and the Han is the Fu. When the vassal wants to go in and report, he can think about it when he gets here.

古文：臣将入请事于此，复重思之也。
现代文：汉朝末年四处纷纷起兵，把陵园的罕思都砸了，说是不使百姓复思汉朝。
English: At the end of the Han Dynasty, soldiers were raised everywhere, smashing the rare thoughts of the cemetery, saying that they would not make the people rethink the Han Dynasty.

古文：汉末兵起，坏园陵罦思，曰无使民复思汉也。故《盐铁论》曰：垣阙罦思。
现代文：《盐铁论》说：垣网罕思，这是说在边角上立屏风，架设起来的就是罕思。
English: "Salt and Iron Theory" says: the screen is erected on the corner, and it is the screen that is erected.

古文：言树屏隅角所架也。颖容又曰：阙者，上有所失，下得书之于阙，所以求论誉于人，故谓之阙矣。
现代文：颖容又说：立胭的用意是，在上的如有错失，臣下可以写在网上，是征求人们的批评的，所以叫网。
English: Ying Rong also said, "The intention of setting up a gong is that if there is a mistake in the above, the vassal can write it on the Internet. It is to solicit people's criticism, so it is called the Internet.

古文：今阙前水南道右，置登闻鼓以纳谏。
现代文：今天则在网前水南的道路右边放了一面登闻鼓来听取下面的批评意见。
English: Today, in front of the net, on the right side of the road to the south of the water, a drum was placed to listen to the following criticism.

古文：昔黄帝立明堂之议，尧有衢室之间，舜有告善之旌，禹有立鼓之讯，汤有总街之诽，武王有灵台之复，皆所以广设过误之备也。
现代文：从前黄帝曾商议建立明堂，尧在大路边造屋以广潜询，舜有族旗持以宣告善事，禹设鼓征求民间意见，汤在大街倾听百姓非议政事，武王在灵台接见秉报者：这些都是为了广泛征求批评意见而采取的措施。
English: Once upon a time, the Yellow Emperor discussed the establishment of a Ming Hall, built a house on the side of the road to solicit opinions, held a banner to announce good deeds, set up a drum to solicit people's opinions, listened to the people on the street to discuss political affairs, and received reporters at the spiritual platform: these are all measures taken to widely solicit criticism.

古文：者不亲拜焉。咸宁元年，洛阳大风，帝庙树折，青气属天，元王东渡，魏社代昌矣。
现代文：渠水又分支沿御道两旁往南流，从太尉、司徒两坊间流过，那条街叫铜驼街。从前魏明帝在间阖南街放置了铜驼等兽的铸像。陆机说：铜驼高九尺，脊背高出太尉坊。水西有永宁寺，创建于熙平年间洛阳刮大风，社坛的树折断了，一股青气直透天庭，于是元帝东渡，魏就取代普室而昌盛起来了。
English: The water of the canal branched out and flowed southward along both sides of the main road, passing between the two towns of Taiyi and Szeto. That street was called Copper Camel Street. Formerly, Emperor Ming of Wei placed a cast statue of a copper camel and other beasts in the South Street. The land machine said: the copper camel is nine feet high, and the back is higher than the Taiyi Village. To the west of the water, there is Yongning Temple. It was founded in the Heeping years, when a strong wind blew from Luoyang, the altar tree broke, and a breeze blew straight through the heavenly court. As a result, the Yuan Emperor went to

古文：渠水自铜驼街东径司马门南，魏明帝始筑，阙崩，压杀数百人，遂不复筑，故无阙门。
现代文：渠水从铜驼街往东流经司马门南边。魏明帝开始筑网时，门胭崩塌下来，压死了数百人，于是就不再建筑，所以没有胭。
English: The canal water flows from Tonglama Street to the east through the south of Sima Gate. When Wei Mingdi began to build the net, the lintel collapsed, crushing hundreds of people, so he stopped building, so there was no lintel.

古文：南屏中旧有置铜翁仲处，金狄既沦，故处亦褫，惟坏石存焉。
现代文：门南屏风内从前放着铜翁仲，以后铜人被移走，旧址也废纪了，只留下一堆乱石。
English: In the southern screen of the gate, there used to be a bronze statue of Weng Zhong. Later, the bronze statue was removed, and the old site was abandoned, leaving only a pile of rocks.

古文：自此南直宣阳门，经纬通达，皆列驰道，往来之禁，一同两汉。
现代文：从这里往南直通宣阳门，道路纵横通达，都铺了驰道，往来通行的规定，完全与两汉时一祥。
English: From here, the Xuanyang Gate is directly connected to the south, and the roads are accessible vertically and horizontally. All roads are paved, and the rules for travel are completely the same as those of the Han Dynasty.

古文：曹子建尝行御街，犯门禁，以此见薄。
现代文：曹子建曾从御街行走，违犯了门禁，因而受到冷落。
English: Cao Zijian once walked from the main street, violating the curfew, and was therefore left out in the cold.

古文：渠水又东径杜元凯所谓翟泉北，今无水。
现代文：渠水又往东流经杜元凯所谓翟泉的北面，现在已经无水了。
English: The canal water then flowed eastwards through the northern side of Duyuankai's so-called gourd spring, and now there is no water.

古文：坎方九丈六尺，深二丈余，似是人功而不类于泉陂，是验非之一证也。
现代文：那地方的坑洼方圆九丈六尺，深二丈余，看来像是人工挖掘成的，不像泉穴。表明不是翟泉，这是第一个证据。
English: The potholes in that area, with a circumference of nine feet six inches and a depth of more than two feet, appear to have been artificially excavated, unlike the spring holes. This is the first evidence that it is not a hot spring.

古文：又皇甫谧《帝王世纪》云：王室定遂徒居，成周小，不受王都，故坏翟泉而广之，泉源既塞，明无故处，是验非之二证也。
现代文：此外王甫谧《帝主世纪》说：皇室安定下来以后就迁都到成周，因成周太小，容纳不下皇家的都城，所以毁掉翟泉加以扩大。泉水已经填塞了，原来的地点分明早就不存在了，表明那不是翟泉。这是第二个证据。
English: In addition, Wang Fuxi's "Century of Emperors" said: After the royal family was settled, the capital was moved to Chengzhou. Because Chengzhou was too small to accommodate the royal capital, it was destroyed and expanded. The spring water has been filled, and the original location has clearly long ceased to exist, indicating that it is not the spring. This is the second evidence.

古文：杜预言：翟泉在太仓西南，既言西南，于洛阳不得为东北，是验非之三证也。
现代文：杜预说：翟泉在太仓西南。既说是西南，对洛阳说来就不应在东北，表明那不是翟泉，这是第三个证据。
English: Du Yu said: "Fengquan is in the southwest of Taicang. Even though it is said to be in the southwest, it should not be in the northeast for Luoyang, indicating that it is not the source of Fengquan. This is the third evidence.

古文：稽之地说，事几明矣，不得为翟泉也。
现代文：据地理典籍来考证，事情大致上可以搞清楚了：那不可能是翟泉。
English: According to the examination of geographical books, the matter can be roughly clarified: it can't be the spring.

古文：渠水历司空府前，径太仓南，出东阳门石桥下，注阳渠。
现代文：渠水流过司空府前，流经太仓南面，从东阳门石桥下流出，注入阳渠。
English: The canal water flows through the front of Sikuofu, flows through the south side of Taicang, flows out from under the Dongyangmen stone bridge, and is injected into the canal.

古文：谷水自阊阖门而南径土山东，水西三里有坂，坂上有土山，汉大将军梁冀所成，筑土为山，植木成苑，张璠《汉记》曰：山多峭坂，以象二崤，积金玉，采捕禽兽，以充其中，有人杀苑兔者，迭相寻逐，死者十三人。
现代文：谷水从间阖门往南流经土山东边。水西三里有一道山坡，坡上有上山，是汉朝大将军梁冀所造。梁冀积土成山，植树建造园林。张播《汉记》说：山岭陡坡很多，就拿它来象征东、西两座蜻山，在里面积聚了许多金银珠玉，又捕捉了各种飞禽走兽饲养在里面。有人杀了苑里的兔子，就不断地搜寻追捕，被杀的达十三人。
English: The valley water flows south from the valley gate through the east side of the earthen hill. There is a hillside three miles west of the water, with a hill on the slope, which was built by the Han Dynasty general Liang Ji. Liang Ji piled up the soil into mountains, planted trees and built gardens. Zhang Biao of "Han Ji" said: There are many steep mountain slopes, so they used it to symbolize the east and west mountains. A lot of gold, silver and precious stones were accumulated in it, and various birds and beasts were captured and kept in it. Someone killed the rabbits in the garden, and they were constantly searching and hunting, and up to thirteen people were killed

古文：南出径西阳门，旧汉氏之西明门也，亦曰雍门矣。
现代文：水往南流，经西阳门流出。西阳门就是汉时的西明门，也叫雍门。
English: The water flows to the south and flows out through Xiyangmen. Xiyangmen is the Ximingmen of the Han Dynasty, also known as Yongmen.

古文：旧门在南，太和中以故门邪出，故徙是门。东对东阳门。
现代文：旧门原在南面，太和年间因旧门斜出，所以把这座城门迁走，东边与东阳门相对。
English: The old gate used to be on the south side. During the Taiga era, the old gate sloped out, so this gate was moved away. The east side is opposite the Dongyang Gate.

古文：谷水又南径白马寺东。
现代文：锻水又往南流经白马寺东边。
English: The forging water then flows south through the eastern side of the White Horse Temple.

古文：昔汉明帝梦见大人，金色，项佩白光。
现代文：从前汉明帝梦见个金色巨人，颈上佩戴着白光。
English: Once upon a time, Emperor Han Mingdi dreamed of a golden giant wearing a white halo around his neck.

古文：以问群臣，或对曰：西方有神名曰佛，形如陛下所梦，得无是乎？
现代文：他询问诸大臣，有人回答道：西方有个大神，名叫佛，样子就同陛下梦见的一样，说不定就是佛呢？
English: He asked his ministers, and one replied: "In the West, there is a great god called Buddha. He looks just like the one your majesty dreamed of. Could he be the Buddha?"

古文：于是发使天竺，写致经像，始以榆盛经，白马负图，表之中夏。
现代文：于是就遣使去天竺，抄写佛经、描绘佛像带回。起初用榆木盒子装经卷，以白马载负佛像，在中夏予以宣扬。
English: Therefore, he sent an envoy to Tianzhu to copy Buddhist scriptures and draw Buddha images and bring them back. At first, the sutras were packed in a maple wood box and the Buddha images were carried on a white horse, and the sutras were preached in the mid-summer.

古文：故以白马为寺名。此榆后移在城内愍怀太子浮图中，近世复迁此寺，然金光流照，法轮东转，创自此矣。
现代文：所以就拿白马作为寺名，这些榆木经盒后来移到城内憨怀太子的宝塔中存放，近世又迁回到白马寺中。金光流照、法轮东转，就是从那时开始的。
English: Therefore, the name of the temple was changed to Hakuba. Later, these boxes were moved to a pagoda in the city, where they were stored. In modern times, they were moved back to Hakuba Temple. This is when the golden light began to shine and Falun began to spread eastward.

古文：谷水又南径平乐观东，李尤《平乐观赋》曰：乃设平乐之显观，章秘伟之奇珍。
现代文：谷水又往南流经平乐观东边。李尤《平乐观赋》说：于是建立了显赫的平乐观，把秘藏的奇珍公之于世。
English: The valley water also flows southwards to the east of Ping Guo. Li You, the author of "Ping Guo Fu," said: So he established the illustrious Ping Guo Fu and made the hidden treasures public.

古文：华峤《后汉书》曰：灵帝于平乐观下起大坛，上建十二重，五采华盖高十丈，坛东北为小坛，复建九重，华盖高九丈，列奇兵骑士数万人，天子住大盖下。
现代文：华娇《后汉书》说：灵帝在平乐观下筑了个大坛，坛上竖起十立重五彩华盖，高十丈；在大坛东北又筑了个小坛，又竖起九重华盖，高九丈。又调动了奇兵骑士数万人排成队伍，皇帝则坐在大华盖底下。
English: Hua Jiao "Hou Han Shu" said: Ling Di built a large altar under the optimism of Ping An, and erected a ten-tiered multi-colored flower cover on the altar, ten meters high; in the northeast of the altar, he built a small altar, and erected a nine-tiered flower cover, nine meters high. He also mobilized tens of thousands of soldiers and knights to form a line, and the emperor sat under the large flower cover.

古文：礼毕，天子躬擐甲，称无上将军，行阵三匝而还，设秘戏以示远人。
现代文：典礼完毕之后，皇帝亲自身穿恺甲，号称无上将军，在列阵中走了三圈然后回去，并演戏招待远方客人。
English: After the ceremony, the emperor himself dressed in armor, called himself the supreme general, walked three laps in the ranks and then went back, and acted to invite distant guests.

古文：故《东京赋》曰：其西则有平乐都场，示远之观，龙雀蟠蜿，天马半汉。
现代文：所以《东京赋》说：西边有平乐会场，有神兽龙雀蟠绕，大宛天马腾空，给远方来客观看。
English: Therefore, "Tokyo Fu" said: there is a peaceful music venue in the west, there are divine beasts, dragons and birds haunting, and there are horses flying in the sky, for visitors from far away to watch.

古文：应劭曰：飞廉神禽，能致风气，古人以良金铸其象。
现代文：应肋说：飞廉神禽能刮风，古人用优质金属给它铸像。
English: Ying Li said: the Flying Godbird can blow wind, the ancients used high-quality metal to cast it.

古文：明帝永平五年，长安迎取飞廉并铜马，置上西门外平乐观。
现代文：明帝永平五年，长安迎取飞廉和铜马，放在上西门外的平乐观里。
English: In the fifth year of Yongping of the Ming Dynasty, Chang'an welcomed Fei Lian and Bronze Horse, and placed them in Ping Optimism outside the Upper West Gate.

古文：今于上西门外无他基观，惟西明门外独有此台，巍然广秀，疑即平乐观也。
现代文：现在上西门外并没有别的楼观基址，只有西明门外留有这座土台，显得高大巍峨，也许就是平乐观了。
English: Now, there is no other view of the building outside the Upper West Gate, only this foundation outside the West Gate, which appears tall and towering, perhaps it is just plain optimistic.

古文：又言皇女稚殇，埋于台侧，故复名之曰皇女台。
现代文：又说皇帝的女儿幼时就夭折了，埋葬以台旁，所以又叫皇女台。
English: It is also said that the emperor's daughter died young and was buried next to the stage, so it is also called the Empress's stage.

古文：晋灼曰：飞廉，鹿身头如雀，有角而蛇尾豹文。
现代文：晋灼说：飞廉，身子是鹿，头却像雀，有角，长着蛇的尾巴，豹的斑纹。
English: Jinyao said: Fei Liang, the body is a deer, but the head is like a sparrow, horned, with a snake's tail, leopard stripes.

古文：董卓销为金，用铜马徙于建始殿东阶下，胡军丧乱，此象遂沦。
现代文：董卓把它熔化了，铸成钱币使用，而把铜马搬到建始殿东阶下。胡军入侵，战乱中铜马也丧失了。
English: Dong Zhuo melted it down and used it to mint coins, while the bronze horse was moved to the eastern steps of the Qianzhi Hall. Hu's army invaded, and the bronze horse was lost in the turmoil of war.

古文：谷水又南径西明门，故广阳门也。
现代文：谷水又往南流经西明门，就是旧时的广阳门。
English: The valley water also flows south through the Ximing Gate, which was the Guangyang Gate in the old days.

古文：门左枝渠东派入城，径太社前，又东径太庙南，又东于青阳门右下注阳渠。
现代文：此门左边，一条支渠往东分出，流入城中，经过太社前面，又往东流经太庙南面，又往东流，在青阳门右边注入阳渠。
English: To the left of this gate, a branch canal branches off to the east, flows into the middle of the city, passes in front of the Grand Shrine, flows eastward through the south of the Grand Temple, flows eastward again, and flows into the canal on the right side of the Qingyang Gate.

古文：谷水又南，东屈径津阳门南，故津门也。
现代文：鼓水又南流，转向东边流经津阳门南。这就是旧时的津门。
English: The gushing water flows south again, turning to the east and passing south of the Tsuyang Gate. This is the old Tsu Gate.

古文：昔洛水泛泆漂害者众，津阳城门校尉将筑以遏水，谏议大夫陈宣止之曰：王尊臣也，水绝其足，朝廷中兴，必不入矣。
现代文：从前洛水泛滥，被洪水冲走淹死的人很多，津阳城门校尉打算筑堤防水，谏议大夫陈宣劝阻他说：王尊是臣子，水漫到他的脚上就停止了，朝廷也就振兴起来，水一定不会入城的。
English: In the past, Luo was flooded, and many people were swept away and drowned by the flood. The captain of the Tsuyang city gate planned to build a dike for waterproofing, but the doctor Chen Xuan dissuaded him: Wang Zun was a courtier, and the water stopped when it reached his feet. The court was also revitalized, and the water would never enter the city.

古文：水乃造门而退。
现代文：果然水到城门就退了。
English: Sure enough, the water receded as far as the city gate.

古文：谷水又东径宣阳门南，故苑门也。
现代文：谷水又往东流经宣阳门南，这就是旧时的苑门。
English: The valley water also flows eastward through the south of Xuanyangmen, which is the old Yuanmen.

古文：皇都迁洛，移置于此，对阊阖门南，直洛水浮桁。故《东京赋》曰：溯洛背河，左伊右瀍者也。
现代文：迁都洛阳后，把城门移到这里，与间阖门相望，南面正对洛水浮桥，所以《东京赋》说：上溯洛水，背靠河水，左有伊水，右有擅水。
English: After the relocation of the capital to Luoyang, the city gate was moved here, facing the middle gate, and the south side was facing the Luoshui floating bridge, so "Tokyo Fu" said: upstream Luoshui, back to the river, to the left there is I water, to the right there is good water.

古文：夫洛阳考之中土，卜惟洛食，实为神也。
现代文：洛阳这地方，在中原地区进行考察，占卜时只有洛邑为吉，实在是个有神灵枯护的京都。
English: This place, Luoyang, was investigated in the Central Plains, and only Luoyang was considered auspicious during divination. It really is a Kyoto protected by the gods.

古文：门左即洛阳池处也。池东旧平城门所在矣，今塞。
现代文：门的左边就是洛阳池旧址，池东就是旧时平城门所在的地方，现在已经堵塞了。
English: On the left side of the gate is the old site of Luoyang Pond, and the east side of the pond is where the old gate of Heping City was located. It is now blocked.

古文：北对洛阳南宫，故蔡邕曰：平城门，正阳之门，与宫连属，郊祀法驾所由从出门之最尊者。
现代文：此门北对洛阳南宫，所以蔡琶说：平城门、正阳之门，与宫殿相连通，皇帝去郊外祭天地时，车驾都是从此门出去的，在诸门中最为尊贵。
English: This gate faces the southern palace of Luoyang to the north, so Caiwa said: the gate of Pingcheng, the gate of Zhengyang, is connected to the palace. When the emperor went to the suburbs to celebrate heaven and earth, the chariots went out from this gate, which is the most honorable of all the gates.

古文：《洛阳诸宫名》曰，南宫有謻台临照台。
现代文：《洛阳诸宫名》说：南宫有谁台与照台相对。
English: "The Names of the Palaces in Luoyang" said: the south palace has a platform opposite the photo platform.

古文：《东京赋》曰：其南则有謻门，曲榭邪阻城洫。
现代文：《东京赋》说：其南则有谁门曲榭，邪阻城恤。
English: "Tokyo Fu" said: "In the south, there are those who are evil and wicked.

古文：《注》云：謻门，冰室门也；阻，依也；洫，城下池也。
现代文：《注》说：谁门是藏冰室的门；阻，是依傍的意思；恤，就是城墙底下的护城河。
English: "Note" said: Who's door is the door to the ice-storage room; hindrance, is the meaning of dependence; and moat, is the moat under the city wall.

古文：皆屈曲邪行依城池为道。
现代文：谁门的台榭，都是弯弯曲曲地偏斜伸展，依傍着护城河铺路。
English: The platforms of all gates are curved and obliquely stretched, with the pavement running alongside the moat.

古文：故《说文》曰：隍，城池也。有水曰池，无水曰隍矣。
现代文：《说文》说：陛，就是护城河；有水称池，无水称陛。
English: "Shuowen" said: Majesty is the moat; with water, it is called a pond, and without water, it is called Majesty.

古文：謻门即宣阳门也，门内有宣阳冰室，《周礼》有冰人，日在北陆而藏之西陆，朝觌而出之。
现代文：谁门就是宣阳门，门内有宣阳冰室。《周礼》中有掌管冰室的人。太阳的轨道移到北方虚宿的位置时，就采冰入藏；移到西方晶宿的位置，黎明看到星星出现时，就取出藏冰。
English: Who's gate is the Xuanyang Gate, and inside the gate is the Xuanyang Ice Room. There is a person in charge of the ice room in the "Weekly Ritual." When the sun's orbit moves to the position of the northern imaginary place, it picks up ice and hides it; when it moves to the position of the western crystal place, when the dawn sees the stars appear, it takes out the hidden ice.

古文：冰室旧在宣阳门内，故得是名。
现代文：冰室从前在宣阳门内，所以叫宣阳冰室。
English: The ice room used to be inside the Xuanyang Gate, so it was called the Xuanyang Ice Room.

古文：门既拥塞，冰室又罢。
现代文：宣阳门早已封死，冰室也取消了。
English: Xuanyang Gate has long been sealed, and the ice room has also been cancelled.

古文：谷水又径灵台北，望云物也。
现代文：谷水又流经灵台北边，这座台是用以观测天文气象的。
English: The valley water also flows through the Taipei side, which is used to observe astronomical meteorology.

古文：汉光武所筑，高六丈，方二十步。
现代文：世祖曾在台上开设宴会，捉住一只涎鼠；谏议大夫第五子陵也曾住过这里。
English: The founder of the world once held a banquet on the stage and caught a mole; the fifth son of the Fifth Doctor also lived here.

古文：世祖尝宴于此台，得鼮鼠于台上，亦谏议大夫第五子陵之所居，伦少子也，以清正，洛阳无主人，乡里无田宅，寄止灵台，或十日不炊，司隶校尉南阳左雄，尚书庐江朱孟兴等，皆伦故孝廉功曹，各致礼饷，并辞不受，永建中卒。
现代文：第五子陵是第五伦的小儿子，以清廉刚正闻名。他的妻子不在洛阳，在家乡也没有田园宅第，就栖身于灵台，有时甚至接连十日不烧饭。司隶校尉南阳左雄，尚书庐江朱孟兴等，都是第五伦从前所推荐的孝廉和功曹，两人都送了礼品和食物给他，他都辞谢了，没有接受。他死于永建年间。
English: The tomb of the fifth son is the youngest son of the fifth Lun, known for his honesty and integrity. His wife was not in Luoyang, nor did she have a pastoral home in her hometown, so she lived in the tomb, sometimes even not cooking for ten days in a row. Sili Lieutenant Nanyang Zuoxiong, Shangshujiaojiangjiang Zhu Mengxing, etc. were all filial piety and meritorious service recommended by the fifth Lun in the past. Both of them sent gifts and food to him, but he declined and did not accept. He died in the Yongjian years.

古文：谷水又东径平昌门南，故平门也。
现代文：谷水文往东流经平昌门南面，就是旧时的平门。
English: The valley water flows eastward through the south side of the Pyeongchang Gate, which is the old flat gate.

古文：又径明堂北，汉光武中元元年立。
现代文：又流经明堂北面，明堂建于汉光武帝中元元年。
English: It also flows through the north side of Myeongdong, which was built in the first year of the reign of Emperor Wu of the Han Dynasty.

古文：寻其基构，上圆下方，九室重隅十二堂。
现代文：它的结构是上圆下方，内有九室、角屋和十二堂。
English: Its structure is from the top to the bottom of the circle, with nine rooms, a corner room and twelve halls.

古文：蔡邕《月令章句》同之，故引水于其下为辟雍也。
现代文：蔡琶《月令章句》说法也相同。从前引水到堂下，建成辟雍。
English: Caiwa's "Chapter of the Month" says the same thing. In the past, water was brought under the hall, and the hall was built up.

古文：谷水又东径开阳门南，《晋宫阁名》曰：故建阳门也，《汉官》曰：开阳门始成，未有名宿，昔有一柱来，在楼上。
现代文：谷水又往东流经开阳门南面。《晋宫阁名》说：这就是从前的建阳门。《汉官》说：开阳门初建成时，还没有命名，忽然有一根柱子在楼上出现。
English: The valley water also flows eastward through the south side of the Kaiyang Gate. "Jin Gong Kaku Mei" said: This is the former Jianyang Gate. "Hankan" said: When the Kaiyang Gate was first built, it had not yet been named, and suddenly a pillar appeared on the upper floor.

古文：琅琊开阳县上言：县南城门，一柱飞去。
现代文：琅哪开阳县上报：县南城门一根柱子飞去了。
English: Gongnakaiyang County reported that a pillar in the south gate of the county was blown away.

古文：光武皇帝使来，识视良是，遂坚缚之，因刻记年月日以名焉。
现代文：光武帝叫他们来辨认，果然就是那根飞走的柱子，于是就把它牢牢地捆住，并刻上年月日，名为开阳门。
English: Emperor Guangwu asked them to identify it, and sure enough, it was the pillar that had flown away, so he tied it securely and engraved the date and year, naming it the Gate of the Rising Sun.

古文：何汤字仲弓，尝为门候，上微行夜还，汤闭门不内，朝廷嘉之。
现代文：何汤字仲弓，曾当过守门人。皇上微服出行到夜间回来，何汤紧闭城门不让他进来，朝廷因而嘉奖他。
English: He Tangzhi Zhongyuan, once worked as a gatekeeper. When the emperor came back from a trip to the night, He Tang tightly closed the gate and did not let him in. The court therefore commended him.

古文：又东径国子太学石经北，《周礼》有国学，教成均之法。
现代文：谷水又往东流经国子太学石经北面。《周礼》有国学，教授礼仪法度。
English: The valley water also flows eastward through the Guozi Taigaku Stone to the north. "Zhouli" has Chinese classics and teaches etiquette.

古文：《学记》曰：古者，家有塾，党有痒，遂有序，国有学。
现代文：《学记》说：古时家庭有私塾，一党之中有库，一遂之中有序，国家则有国学。
English: "School Records" said: In ancient times, families had private schools, one party had a library, and everything was in order, while the state had the study of Chinese.

古文：亦有虞氏之上庠、下庠，夏后氏之东序、西序，殷人之左学、右学，周人之东胶、虞庠。
现代文：也就是虞舜时代的大学上库和小学下库，夏禹时的大学东序和小学西序，殷商时的大学右学和小学左学，周朝时的大学东胶和小学虞库。
English: That is to say, the upper library of the university and the lower library of the primary school in the era of Yu Xi, the east library of the university and the west library of the primary school in the era of Xia Yu, the right library of the university and the left library of the primary school in the era of Yin Shang, and the east library of the university and the left library of the primary school in the era of Zhou Dynasty.

古文：《王制》云：养国老于上庠，养庶老于下庠，故有太学、小学，教国之子弟焉，谓之国子。
现代文：《王制》说：把退休的卿大夫供养在上库，把士人的老者供养在下库，所以有太学、小学来教公卿大夫的子弟，称为国子。
English: The "Royal System" says: the retired noble doctors should be supported in the upper storehouse, and the old scholars should be supported in the lower storehouse. Therefore, there are universities and primary schools to teach the children of the noble doctors, who are called the sons of the country.

古文：汉魏以来，置太学于国子堂。
现代文：汉魏以来，在国子堂东边设置太学。
English: Since the Han and Wei dynasties, there has been a Taoist school on the east side of the National Palace Museum.

古文：东汉灵帝光和六年，刻石镂碑载五经，立于太学讲堂前，悉在东侧。
现代文：汉灵帝光和六年所立，碑文说：建武二十七年创建太学，年久逐渐毁坏。
English: It was built in the sixth year of Emperor Guangwu's reign. The inscription says, "Taiwu was founded in the 27th year of King Jianwu's reign, but it was gradually destroyed over the years."

古文：蔡邕以熹平四年，与五官中郎将堂溪典，光禄大夫杨赐，谏议大夫马日磾，议郎张驯、韩说，太史令单扬等，奏求正定《六经》文字。灵帝许之，邕乃自书丹于碑，使工镌刻，立于太学门外。
现代文：永建六年九月，诏书修建太学，刻碑记年，共费人工十一万二千，阳嘉元年八月竣工。碑的南面刻了颂词。
English: In September of the sixth year of the Yongjian era, the imperial edict was issued for the construction of Taigaku, and a monument was carved to record the year, with a total labor cost of 112,000. It was completed in August of the first year of the Yangjia era. A eulogy was carved on the south side of the monument.

古文：于是后儒晚学，咸取正焉。
现代文：正反两面刻的字都还完好无损。
English: The characters engraved on both sides are still intact.

古文：及碑始立，其观视及笔写者，车乘日千余辆，填塞街陌矣。
现代文：汉《石经》北面，有晋《辟雕行礼碑》，是泰始二年，王弥、刘耀打进洛阳，焚毁了二学，但遗址依稀仍在。
English: To the north of the Han Dynasty's "Book of Stone," there is Jin's "Monument for Carving and Performing Rites." It was in the second year of the reign of King Taizhi that Wang Yao and Liu Yao entered Luoyang and burned the Second Academy, but the ruins are still there.

古文：今碑上悉铭刻蔡邕等名。
现代文：谷水在城东南角分支北流，经过青阳门东面，就是旧时的清明门，又称税门，也叫芒门。
English: The valley water branches off to the north in the southeast corner of the city, passing through the east side of Qingyang Gate, which is the old Qingming Gate, also known as the Tax Gate, also known as the Mangmen.

古文：魏正始中，又立古、篆、隶《三字石经》，古文出于黄帝之世，仓颉本鸟迹为字，取其孳乳相生，故文字有六义焉。
现代文：又往北流经东阳门东边，就是旧时的中东门。
English: It also flows northward through the east side of Dongyang Gate, which was the old Middle East Gate.

古文：自秦用篆书，焚烧先典，古文绝矣。
现代文：又往北流经旧时的太仓西边。《洛阳地记》说：大城东有太仓，仓下运粮船只常以千计，说的就是此处。
English: "Luoyang Diary" said: "To the east of Dacheng, there is Taicang, and there are often thousands of grain ships under the warehouse, and this is where it is said.

古文：鲁恭王得孔子宅书，不知有古文，谓之科斗书，盖因科斗之名，遂效其形耳。
现代文：又往北流入洛阳沟。鼓水又东流，向左边流出积成池沼，又东流，向右边流出成为方湖。
English: It also flows north into Luoyang Ditch. The gushing water also flows east, and flows out to the left to accumulate into a pond, and flows east, and flows out to the right to become a square lake.

古文：言大篆出于周宣之时，史籀创著。
现代文：方湖东西一百九十步，南北七十步，从前水衡署就在这里。
English: It is 190 steps from east to west and 70 steps from north to south. The Bureau of Hydrography used to be located here.

古文：平王东迁，文字乖错，秦之李斯及胡母敬，又改籀书谓之小篆，故有大篆、小篆焉。
现代文：谷水又东流，向南转弯，然后折回往东流，这一段叫阮曲，据说是阮嗣宗故居的所在地。鼓水又往东注入鸿池破。《百官志》说：鸿池是池名，在洛阳以东二十里，有皿一人，薪棒二百石。
English: The valley water also flows eastward, turns south, and then turns back eastward. This section is called Ruan Qu, and is said to be the location of the former residence of Ruan Shizong. The gushing water also flows eastward into Hongchi Ba. "Hundreds of Officials" said: Hongchi is the name of the pool. Twenty miles east of Luoyang, there is a dish and a stick of 200 kilos.

古文：然许氏《字说》专释于篆，而不本古文，言古隶之书起于秦代，而篆字文繁，无会剧务，故用隶人之省，谓之隶书，或云即程邈于云阳增损者，是言隶者，篆捷也。
现代文：池东西一千步，南北一千一百步，四周有塘，池中又有东西走向的横塘，水流可以相通。所以李尤《鸿池破铭》说：鸿泽的破塘，是圣王所筑，引水往东流注，从城池中流出。
English: The pond is a thousand paces from east to west, and eleven hundred paces from north to south. There are ponds all around, and there is also a horizontal pond in the pond that goes from east to west, and the water flow can be connected. Therefore, Li Yu, "The Broken Pond of Hongze," said: The broken pond of Hongze was built by the holy king, and the water was diverted to the east and flowed out of the city pond.

古文：孙畅之尝见青州刺史傅宏仁说临淄人发古冢，得桐棺前和外隐为隶字，言齐太公六世孙，胡公之棺也。
现代文：水又东流，在左边汇合七里涧。晋《后略》说：成都王颖派吴人陆机为前锋都督，出兵讨伐京师。因为他轻率冒进，被洛阳军队乘机攻击，在鹿苑打了个大败仗，士兵自相践踏，在护城河和七里涧死了很多人。
English: The water also flows eastward, converging on the left side of the seven-mile estuary. Jin's "Afterword" said: Chengdu Wang Ying sent the Wu people's land machine as the vanguard governor, and sent troops to fight the Beijing division. Because he rashly rushed in, he was attacked by the Luoyang army, and fought a big defeat in Luyuan. The soldiers trampled each other, and killed many people in the moat and seven miles.

古文：惟三字是古，余同今书，证知隶自出古，非始于秦。魏初，传古文出邯郸淳，《石经》古文，转失淳法，树之于堂西，石长八尺，广四尺，列石于其下，碑石四十八枚，广三十丈。魏明帝又刊《典论》六碑，附于其次。陆机言，《太学赞》别一碑，在讲堂西，下列《石龟碑》，载蔡邕、韩说、堂溪典等名。《太学弟子赞》复一碑，在外门中。
现代文：把涧都填满了。
English: I've filled all the urns.

古文：今二碑并无。
现代文：指的就是这条涧。
English: It refers to this cormorant.

古文：《石经》东有一碑，是汉顺帝阳嘉元年立，碑文云：建武二十七年造太学，年积毁坏。
现代文：涧上有石桥，就是旅人桥。从前孙登不想在洛阳久住，他知道杨氏眼前虽然荣华富贵，但不会有好结果，因而想退隐到乡野山林里去，终于没没无闻地死去了，杨骏把他埋葬在这座石桥的东边。
English: There is a stone bridge on the moat, which is the traveler's bridge. Once upon a time, Sun Deng did not want to live in Luoyang for a long time. He knew that although Mr. Yang was prosperous and rich, he would not have a good outcome. Therefore, he wanted to retire to the countryside and mountains. He finally died without being heard of. Yang Wei buried him on the east side of this stone bridge.

古文：永建六年九月，诏书修太学，刻石记年，用作工徒十一万二千人，阳嘉元年八月作毕。
现代文：不久以后杨骏也死了。《搜神记》说：太康末年，京城洛阳开始唱《折杨》的歌，歌中有描写战争之苦的词句。
English: Soon after, Yang Hui also died. "The Search for God" says: At the end of Taikang, the capital Luoyang began to sing the song "Folding Yang," which contains words describing the suffering of war.

古文：碑南面刻颂，表里镂字，犹存不破。
现代文：杨骏后来被杀，太后也被幽禁而死，《折杨》真的应验了。
English: Yang Hui was later killed, and the empress dowager was also imprisoned and died. "Folding Yang" really came true.

古文：《汉石经》北有晋《辟雝行礼碑》，是太始二年立，其碑中折，但世代不同，物不停故，《石经》沦缺，存半毁几，驾言永久，谅用怃焉。
现代文：这里的几座桥都是用石块砌成的，巍峨壮丽，石工制作也极好，虽然随着时光的流逝而略有损毁，但行人来往仍然无碍。朱超石在《与兄书》说：桥离洛阳宫六七里，全用大石筑成，下面砌成圆拱门，以通水流，可容大船通过。
English: Several of the bridges here are made of stone, towering and magnificent, the masonry work is also excellent, although with the passage of time and slightly damaged, but pedestrians still have no problem.Zhu Chaoishi said in the "Brotherly Book": The bridge is sixty-seven miles from Luoyang Palace, built entirely of large stones, the bottom is built into a round arch, with water flow, can accommodate large ships.

古文：考古有三雝之文，今灵台太学，并无辟雝处。
现代文：桥上题字说：太康三年十一月初开工，每日需用七万五千人工，到次年四月底结束。
English: The inscription on the bridge said: Taikang started construction at the beginning of November in the third year, requiring seventy-five thousand laborers per day, and ended at the end of April the following year.

古文：晋永嘉中，王弥、刘曜入洛，焚毁二学，尚仿佛前基矣。
现代文：这座桥曾崩了几丈，以后重新进行了修补，现在所刻文字已经不存了。
English: The bridge had collapsed several times and was later repaired again, but the inscribed text no longer exists.

古文：谷水于城东南隅枝分北注，径青阳门东，故清明门也，亦曰税门，亦曰芒门。又北径东阳门东，故中东门也。
现代文：阳渠水又往东流，经汉广野君哪食其庙南。庙在北山上，就是成公绥所谓僵师西山。山上还留有旧庙基，庙宇朝东，门前有两尊石人相对而立，北侧石人胸前刻的字是：门亭长。
English: The water of the Yang Canal flows eastward again, passing through Han Hirono-kun, which feeds its temple to the south. The temple is on the North Mountain, which is the so-called West Mountain of Chenggongwu. The old temple foundation still remains on the mountain, the temple faces east, two stone figures stand opposite each other in front of the door, and the words engraved on the chest of the stone figure on the north side are: Menteijang.

古文：又北径故太仓西，《洛阳地记》曰：大城东有太仓，仓下运船常有千计。即是处也。
现代文：石人西面有两座石网，虽然已经破毁，但还有一丈多高。石网西边就是庙宇的旧基。庙基前面有石碑，文字已剥蚀缺损，看也看不清楚了。
English: On the west side of the stone man, there are two stone grids. Although they have been destroyed, they are still very high. The west side of the stone grid is the old foundation of the temple. There is a stone monument in front of the temple foundation. The writing has been eroded and damaged, and it is not clear to see.

古文：阙西，即庙故基也。基前有碑，文字剥缺，不复可识，子安仰澄芬于万古，赞清徽于庙像，文字厥集矣。阳渠水又东径毫殷南，昔盘庚所迁，改商曰殷，此始也。班固曰：尸乡，故殷汤所都者也。故亦曰汤亭。
现代文：子安景仰哪食其万古不朽的令名，对神像赞美他高洁坚贞的节操，但这篇碑文却残缺了。阳渠水又往东流经毫殷以南，从前盘庚迁都于此，把商改名为殷就是由此开始的。班固说：就是尸乡，从前曾是殷汤建都的地方，所以又称汤亭。
English: Zi'an admires his eternal immortal name and praises his noble and steadfast discipline to the gods, but this inscription is missing. The Yangqiao water flows eastward to the south of Miao Yin, and the capital was moved here from the former Pan Geng. The change of the name of the business to Yin began from this. Ban Gu said: it is the dead village, and it was once the place where Yin Tang built the capital, so it is also known as Tang Ting.

古文：薛瓒《汉书注》、皇甫谧《帝王世纪》，并以为非，以为帝喾都矣。
现代文：薛攒《汉书注》、皇甫谧《帝王世纪》都以为不是殷汤，而是帝誉建都的地方。
English: Xue Nan "Hanshu Annotation" and Wang Fuxi "Emperor's Century" both thought that it was not Yin Tang, but the place where the emperor built the capital.

古文：《晋太康记》、《地道记》，并言田横死于是亭，故改曰尸乡，非也。
现代文：《晋太康记》《地道记》都说田横死在此亭，所以改名尸乡，这说法并不正确。
English: "Jin Taikang Ji" and "Jindo Ji" both say that Tian Yangtze died in this pavilion, so he changed his name to Zhi Xiang, which is not correct.

古文：将晓，去，税驾逆旅，妪曰：君何宿而来？
现代文：天将破晓时，陆机就告别上路了，在一家旅店里歇息。
English: As dawn approached, the land plane said goodbye to the road and rested in a hotel.

古文：自东数十里无村落，止有山阳王家墓。机乃怪怅，还睇昨路，空野霾云，攒木蔽日，知所遇者，审王弼也。
现代文：老板娘问道：您昨晚在哪里住宿的？这里往东好几十里都没有村庄，只有山阳王家的坟墓呀卫陆机于是感到又惊异又惆怅，回头遥望昨日走过来的道路，只见一片空荒的原野和惨戚的阴云，高高的树丛荫天蔽日，知道昨晚所遇的定是王弼了。
English: The boss asked: Where did you stay last night? There are no villages here for dozens of miles to the east, only the tombs of the Shanyang royal family. Wei Lu Ji felt surprised and embarrassed. Looking back at the road I walked yesterday, I only saw an empty field and the gloomy clouds of the tragic relatives. The shade of the tall trees blocked the sun. I knew that what I met last night was definitely Wang Yao.

古文：此山即祝鸡翁之故居也。
现代文：这座山就是祝鸡翁的故居。
English: This mountain is the former residence of Zhu Qiong.

古文：《搜神记》曰：祝鸡翁者，洛阳人也，居尸乡北山下，养鸡百年余，鸡至于余头，皆有名字。欲取，呼之名，则种别而至。
现代文：《搜神记》说：祝鸡翁是洛阳人，住在尸乡北山下，养鸡百余年，鸡数达到一千余只，每只鸡都有名字，要想捉鸡时，只要叫它的名字，就会从鸡群里走到他面前。
English: "Searching for God" said: Zhu Qiong is a Luoyang man, living in the dead town of North Mountain, raising chickens for more than a hundred years, the number of chickens has reached more than a thousand, each chicken has a name, when you want to catch a chicken, as long as you call its name, it will come to him from the chicken flock.

古文：后之吴山，莫知所去矣。
现代文：后来他到了吴山，就不知去向了。
English: Later, when he arrived in Wushan, he did not know where he was going.

古文：谷水又东径偃师城南。
现代文：谷水又往东流经匾师城南面。
English: The valley water also flows eastward through the southern side of Shanshicheng.

古文：皇甫谧曰：帝喾作都于亳，偃师是也。
现代文：皇甫谧说：帝誉建都于毫，就是堰师。
English: Emperor Fuxi said: "Imperial honor is built on nothing but weirs."

古文：王莽之所谓师氏者也。谷水又东流注于洛水矣。
现代文：王莽称为师氏，靓水又东流，注入洛水。
English: Wang Mang is known as the master, and Surabaya's water flows eastward, infusing Luoshui.

古文：甘水出宏农宜阳县鹿蹄山，山在河南陆浑县故城西北，俗谓之纵山。
现代文：甘水发源于弘农郡宜阳县鹿蹄山，鹿蹄山在河南陆浑县老城西北，俗称纵山。
English: Sweet water originated in Hongnong County, Yiyang County, Mount Luge, Mount Luge is in the northwest of the old city of Luhun County, Henan Province, commonly known as the vertical mountain.

古文：水之所导，发于山曲之中，故世人目其所为甘掌焉。东北至河南县南，北入洛。
现代文：水从山弯中流出，所以世人把那地方称为甘掌。往东北流，到河南县以南，往北注人洛水。
English: The water flows out of the mountain bend, so the world calls that place "Ganpo." It flows to the northeast, to the south of Henan County, and to the north, it pours into Renluo Water.

古文：甘水发源东北流，北屈径一故城东，在非山上，世谓之石城也。
现代文：甘水发源后往东北流，向北转弯流经一座老城东边。城在非山上，世人称为石城。
English: After the source of the sweet water, it flows to the northeast, turning north and flowing through the east of an old city. The city is not on the mountain, but is known to the world as Stone City.

古文：京相璠曰：或云甘水西山上，夷污而平有故甘城，在河南城西二十五里。指谓是城也。
现代文：京相潘说：有人说，甘水所出的西山上面，凹陷而平坦，有旧甘城，在河南城以西二十五里，指的就是这座城。
English: Jing Xiangpan said, "Some people say that there is an old Gancheng on the top of the West Mountain from which the sweet water flows, which is concave and flat. Twenty-five miles west of Henan City, it refers to this city.

古文：余按甘水东十许里洛城南，有故甘城焉，北对河南故城，世谓之鉴洛城，鉴、甘声相近，既故甘城也，为王子带之故邑矣。是以昭叔有甘公之称焉。
现代文：我按甘水东面十来里的洛城南面有旧甘城，北与河南旧城相望，世人称为鉴洛城。鉴、甘读音相近，就是旧甘城，是从前王子带的食邑，所以昭叔有甘公之称。
English: According to my calculation, there is an old Gancheng to the south of Lucheng, which is about ten li to the east of Ganshui, and an old city of Henan to the north. The world calls it Jianluo. Jian and Gan have similar pronunciation, that is, the old Gancheng is a food town in the former prince's belt, so Zhao Shiu is known as Gan Gong.

古文：甘水又与非山水会，水出非山东谷，东流入于甘水。
现代文：甘水又与非山水汇合。非山水发源于非山东麓的山谷，东流注入甘水。
English: The sweet water also merges with the non-sandy water. The non-sandy water originates from the valley at the eastern foot of the non-sandy mountain, and the east stream injects the sweet water.

古文：甘水又于河南城西北入洛。
现代文：甘水又在河南城西北注入洛水。
English: Sweet water was also injected into Luoshui in the northwest of Henan City.

古文：《经》言县南，非也。
现代文：《水经》说从县南入洛，是搞错了。
English: "Suikei" said that it entered Luo from the south of the county, but it was a mistake.

古文：京相璠曰：今河南县西南有甘水，北入洛。
现代文：京相潘说：现在河南县西南有甘水，北流注入洛水。
English: Beijing's Minister Pan said: Now there is sweet water in the southwest of Henan County, and the north stream is injected into Luoshui.

古文：斯得之矣。
现代文：这就说对了。
English: That's right.

古文：漆水出扶风杜阳县俞山东，北入于渭。
现代文：漆水发源于扶风郡杜阳县俞山，东北流注人渭水。
English: The lacquered water originates from Lushan, Duyang County, Fufeng County, and the Northeast Stream pours people into the water.

古文：《山海经》曰：羭次之山，漆水出焉，北流注于渭。
现代文：《山海经》说：输次之山，漆水就发源在这里。北流注入渭水。
English: "Mountains and Seas Sutra" says: the lacquered water originates from the mountain next to the causeway. The northern current infuses the brackish water.

古文：盖自北而南矣。
现代文：这里是说从北往南流。
English: Here it is said to flow from north to south.

古文：《尚书。禹贡》、太史公《禹本纪》云：导渭水东北至径，又东过漆、沮入于河。
现代文：《尚书•禹贡》、太史公《禹本纪》说：疏导渭水往东北流到径水，又往东流过漆沮，注入河水。
English: "Shangshu • Yugong" and "Yubonji" by Taishigong said: the diversion of salty water flows to the northeast to the running water, and flows eastward through the lacquer distemper and into the river water.

古文：孔安国曰：漆、沮，一水名矣，亦曰洛水也，出冯翊北。
现代文：孔安国说：漆沮是水名，又叫洛水，发源于冯诩以北。
English: Kong Anguo said: Lacquer is the name of the water, also known as Luo water, originated from the north of Fenghuang.

古文：周太王去邠，度漆逾梁山，止岐下，故《诗云：民之初生，自土沮漆。
现代文：周太王离开邺，度过漆水，翻过梁山，就在岐山脚下停下来。所以《诗经》说：先人初创事业，从土水来到漆水滨。
English: Zhou Taiwang left Handan, went through Lingshui, crossed Liangshan, and stopped at the foot of Qishan. Therefore, the "Song of Songs" said: the ancestors of the start-up business, from soil and water to Lingshui beach.

古文：又曰：率西水浒，至于岐下。
现代文：又说：从那西的岸边，来到岐山脚下。
English: And he said, I came from the west coast to the foot of the mountain.

古文：是符《禹贡》、《本纪》之说。
现代文：这些话都与《禹贡》、《本纪》的说法相符。
English: These words are consistent with the statements of "Yugong" and "Heng Ji."

古文：许慎《说文》称，漆水出右扶风杜阳县岐山，东入渭，从水，黍声。
现代文：许慎《说文》说：漆水发源于右扶风郡杜阳县的岐山，东流注入渭水。
English: Xu Shen's "Narrative" says: the lacquer water originates from the Qishan Mountain in Duyang County, Right Fu Feng County, and the east stream is infused with brackish water.

古文：又云：一曰漆城池也。
现代文：漆字偏旁从水。音泰。又说：又名漆城池。
English: Beside the urushi, there is water. It is called Otai. It is also said that it is also called Urushi Castle Pond.

古文：潘岳《关中记》曰：关中有泾、渭、灞、浐、酆、鄗、漆、沮之水，酆、鄗、漆、沮四水，在长安西南鄠县，漆、沮皆南注，酆、鄗水北注。
现代文：潘岳《关中记》说：关中有径、渭、溺、沪、鄂、高下、漆、沮等水。鄂、高下、漆、沮四条水，在长安西南的鄂县，漆水、沮水都往南流奔，鄂水、高卜水则北注。
English: Pan Yue's "Diary of Guanzhong" said: Guanzhong has four rivers, namely, Longjing, Longjing, Dongzhong, Shanghai, E, Gaozhong, Lacquer and Dejecta. In E County, southwest of Chang'an, the Lacquer and Dejecta rivers all flow south, while the E and Gaob rivers flow north.

古文：《开山图》曰：丽山西北有温池。
现代文：《开山图》说：丽山西北有温池。
English: "Kaishan Map" says: There is a hot spring pool in the northwest of Lishan.

古文：温池西南八十里岐山，在杜阳北。
现代文：温池西南八十里，岐山在杜阳北边。
English: Eighty miles southwest of Wenchi, Qishan is north of Duyang.

古文：长安西有渠，谓之漆渠。
现代文：长安西面有一条渠道，叫漆渠。
English: On the west side of Chang'an, there is a channel called the lacquer canal.

古文：班固《地理志》云：漆水在漆县西。
现代文：班固《地理志》说：漆水在漆县西边。
English: Ban Gu's "Geography" said: Urushi is in the west of Urushi County.

古文：阚駰《十三州志》又云：漆水出漆县西，北至岐山，东入渭。
现代文：阐胭《十三州志》又说：漆水在漆县西边，北流到岐山，往东注入渭水。
English: The "History of the Thirteen Prefectures" also said: the lacquer water is in the west of the lacquer county, flowing north to Qishan, and flowing east into the brackish water.

古文：今有水出杜阳县岐山北漆溪，谓之漆渠，西南流注岐水。
现代文：现在有一条水，发源于杜阳县岐山北麓的漆溪，称为漆渠，往西南流，注入岐水。
English: At present, there is a stream of water, originating from the Litchi Creek at the northern foot of the Qishan Mountain in Duyang County, known as the Litchi Canal, which flows to the southwest and feeds into the Qishui River.

古文：但川土奇异，今说互出，考之经史，各有所据，识浅见浮，无以辨之矣。
现代文：但川流与地区差异很大，诸说纷纭，查核经史，又人人都有依据。我本人见识浅陋，也无从鉴别它们的是非了。
English: However, the flow of the river varies greatly from region to region, opinions are various, the history of the sutra is checked, and everyone has a basis. I myself have seen the shallowness, and there is no way to identify their rights and wrongs.

古文：庐水出京兆蓝田谷，北入于灞。
现代文：庐水水发源于京兆郡蓝田谷，北流注人灞水。
English: Surabaya's water originates from the Lantian Valley in Jingzhao County, and the north stream is the source of Surabaya's water.

古文：《地理志》曰：浐水出南陵县之蓝田谷，西北流，与一水合，水出西南莽谷，东北流注浐水。
现代文：《地理志》说：浐水发源于南陵县的蓝田谷，往西北流，汇合了一条水。这条水发源于西南方的莽谷，往东北流，注入浐水。
English: "Geography" said: Surabaya's water originates from the Lantian Valley in Nanling County, and flows to the northwest, bringing together a stream of water. This water originates from the Menggu Valley in the southwest, and flows to the northeast, injecting Surabaya's water.

古文：浐水又北历蓝田川，北流注于灞水。
现代文：浐水又往北流过蓝田川，北流注入灞水。
English: Surabaya water also flows north through the Lantian River, and the north stream injects Surabaya water.

古文：《地理志》曰：浐水北至霸陵入霸水。
现代文：《地理志》说：沪水往北流，到霸陵注入灞水。
English: "Geography" said: Shanghai water flows to the north, and it is injected into Badaling.

古文：俎水出北地直路县，东过冯翊祋祤县北，东人于洛。
现代文：俎水发源于北地郡直路县，往东流过冯翔郡投栩县北面，往东注人洛水。
English: Surabaya's water originates from Zhilu County, Beidi County, and flows eastward through the north of Toowo County, Fengxiang County, and discharges eastward into Renlu Water.

古文：《地理志》曰：沮出直路县西，东入洛。
现代文：《地理志》说：沮水发源于直路县西边，往东注入洛水。
English: "Geography" said: the depressing water originated in the west of Zhilu County and was injected into Luoshui to the east.

古文：今水自直路县东南，径谯石山东南流，历檀台川，俗谓之檀台水，屈而夹山西流，又西南径宜君川，世又谓之宜君水。
现代文：现在沮水从直路县东南流经谁石山，往东南流经檀台川，俗称檀台水；转弯沿山两边往西流，又往西南流经宜君川，世人又称为宜君水。
English: At present, the depressing water flows from the southeast of Zhilu County through the Queshi Mountain, flows southeast through the Dantai River, commonly known as the Dantai Water; turns west along the two sides of the mountain, and flows southwest through the Yijun River, also known as the Yijun Water.

古文：又得黄嵚水口，水西北出云阳县石门山黄嵚谷，东南流注宜君水。
现代文：又流到黄嵌水口，黄嵌水在西北方发源于云阳县石门山的黄嵌谷，往东南流，注入宜君水。
English: It also flows to the Huangzai water outlet. The Huangzai water originates from the Huangzai valley of Shimen Mountain in Yunyang County in the northwest and flows to the southeast, injecting Yijun water.

古文：又东南流径祋祤县故城西，县以汉景帝二年置，其水南合铜官水，水出县东北，西南径铜官川，谓之铜官水。又西南流径祋祤县东，西南流径其城南原下，而西南注宜君水。
现代文：又往东南流经役栩县老城西边―役栩县置于汉景帝二年前，南流与铜官水汇合。铜官水发源于县城东北，往西南流经铜官川，称为铜官水；又往西南流经投栩县东边，往西南流经县城南原下面，然后往西南注入宜君水。
English: It also flows to the southeast through the western side of the old town of Yanchu County - Yanchu County was placed in Han Jing two years ago, and the southern stream converges with the copper-guilded water. The copper-guilded water originates in the northeast of the county seat, flows to the southwest through the copper-guilded river, and is called the copper-guilded water; it also flows to the southwest through the eastern side of Touchu County, flows to the southwest through the bottom of the county seat Nanyuan, and then injects the Yijun water to the southwest.

古文：宜君水又南出土门山西，又谓之沮水。
现代文：宜君水往南从土门山西边流出，又称沮水。
English: Yijun water flows southward from the west side of the Tumen Mountains, also known as depressing water.

古文：又东南历土门南原下，东径怀德城南，城在北原上。
现代文：又往东南流过土门南原下，往东流经怀德城南，城在北原上面。
English: It also flows southeastward through the south of Tuyun, eastward through the south of Huai De, and the city is above the North Plain.

古文：又东径汉太上皇陵北，陵在南原上，沮水东注郑渠。
现代文：又往东流经汉太上皇陵北面，陵墓在南原上。沮水往东注入郑渠。
English: It also flows eastward through the northern side of the Mausoleum of the Han Empress Dowager, and the mausoleum is on the southern plain. The stagnant water flows eastward into the Zheng Canal.

古文：昔韩欲令秦无东伐，使水工郑国间秦凿泾引水，谓之郑渠，渠首上承泾水于中山西邸瓠口，所谓瓠中也。
现代文：从前韩国想让秦国不打到东方来，派了水利工程人员郑国去侦察秦国，他开渠引径水注入，称为郑渠。水渠上口在中山西面的邸瓤口承接径水，就是所谓瓤中。
English: Once upon a time, South Korea wanted to keep Qin from invading the East, so it sent water conservancy engineer Zheng Guo to scout Qin. He opened a canal to bring in water, known as the Zheng Canal. The upper end of the canal is in the west side of Zhongshan Mountain, and the lower end receives water, known as the middle of the canal.

古文：《尔雅》以为周焦获矣。
现代文：《尔雅》以为这是周的焦获。
English: "Lya" thought this was Zhou's inspiration.

古文：为渠并北山，东注洛三百余里，欲以溉田。
现代文：他傍着北山开渠，往东注入洛水，长三百余里，说是可以靠它来灌溉田地。
English: He opened a canal next to the North Mountain and injected Luo water to the east, with a length of more than three hundred miles, saying that it could be used to irrigate fields.

古文：中作而觉，秦欲杀郑国。
现代文：工程进行期间，被秦发现了。
English: During the project, it was discovered by Qin.

古文：郑国曰：始臣为间，然渠亦秦之利。
现代文：秦人想杀掉郑国，郑国说：我当初虽然是来做间谍，但开了这条渠道对秦国也有利。
English: The Qin people wanted to kill Zheng Guo. Zheng Guo said: Although I originally came to be a spy, opening this channel is also beneficial to Qin.

古文：卒使就渠，渠成而用注填阏之水，溉泽卤之地四万余顷，皆亩一钟，关中沃野，无复凶年，秦以富强，卒并诸侯，命曰郑渠。
现代文：于是秦就让他把渠道开好。渠道完工之后，引了带有淤泥的水来灌溉盐碱地四万余顷，每亩收获高达一钟，关中成为一片沃野，不再有荒年，秦国因而富强起来，最后吞并了诸侯。于是这条水渠就被命名为郑渠。
English: After the completion of the channel, water with silt was brought in to irrigate more than 40,000 hectares of saline land, with a harvest of up to one minute per mu. Guanzhong became a fertile field, and there were no more years of famine. As a result, Qin became rich and strong, and finally annexed the princes. Therefore, this canal was named Zheng Canal.

古文：渠渎东径宜秋城北，又东径中山南。
现代文：渠道往东通过宜秋城北面，又往东通过中山南面。
English: The channel runs eastward through the northern part of Yixiu City and eastward through the southern part of Zhongshan.

古文：《河渠书》曰：凿泾水自中山西。
现代文：《河渠书》说：从中山以西开凿径水。
English: "The Book of Canals" says: Digging channel water from west of Zhongshan.

古文：《封禅书》：汉武帝获宝鼎于汾阴，将荐之甘泉，鼎至中山，氤氲有黄云盖焉。
现代文：《封禅书》；汉武帝在汾阴得到宝鼎，想送到甘泉宫去献祭，到了中山时，升起一片黄云，弥漫笼罩在鼎上。
English: "Fu Zhen Shu"; Emperor Hanwu received Baoding in Shanyin and wanted to send it to Ganquan Palace to offer a sacrifice. When he arrived at Zhongshan, a yellow cloud rose and enveloped Baoding.

古文：徐广《史记音义》曰：关中有中山，非冀州者也。
现代文：徐广《史记音义》说：关中有中山，这不是冀州的中山。
English: Xu Guang "Historical Notes" said: Guanzhong has Zhongshan, this is not Zhongshan in Jizhou.

古文：指证此山，俗谓之仲山，非也。
现代文：这里指的就是此山，俗称仲山，是弄错了的。
English: The mountain referred to here, commonly known as Zhongshan, is a mistake.

古文：郑渠又东径舍车宫南绝冶谷水。
现代文：郑渠又往东流经舍车宫南面，穿过冶谷水。
English: The Zheng Canal also flows eastward through the southern side of the Shecha Palace, passing through the Yegu Water.

古文：郑渠故渎又东径嶻薛山南，池阳县故城北，又东绝清水。又东径北原下，浊水注焉，自浊水以上，今无水。
现代文：郑渠旧道又往东流经戳薛山南面、池阳县旧城北面，又往东穿过清水，又往东流经北原下，有浊水注入。从浊水入口处起，上流现在已经无水了。
English: Zhengqiu Old Road flows eastward through the south side of Pok Xue Mountain and the north side of the old city of Chiyang County, and then eastward through the Clear Water, and then eastward through the North Plains, with salty water injected. From the entrance of the salty water, the upstream is now dry.

古文：浊水上承云阳县东大黑泉，东南流，谓之浊谷水。又东南出原，注郑渠。
现代文：浊水上流承接云阳县以东的大黑泉，往东南流称为浊谷水，又往东南流出高地，注入郑渠。
English: The upstream flow of the Yunnan River is connected to the Daheiquan Spring to the east of Yunyang County. The southeastward flow is called the Yugu River, and it flows out of the highlands to the southeast and is injected into the Zheng Canal.

古文：又东历原径曲梁城北，又东径太上陵南原下，北屈径原东与沮水合，分为二水，一水东南出，即浊水也，至白渠与泽泉合，俗谓之漆水，又谓之为漆沮水。绝白渠，东径万年县故城北为栎阳渠，城，即栎阳宫也。
现代文：又往东通过高地，流经曲梁城北面，又往东流经太上陵南原下面，向北转弯流经高地以东，与沮水汇合。水又分成两条。一条往东南分出，就是浊水，到了白渠与泽泉汇合，俗称漆水，又称漆沮水，横穿过白渠，往东流经万年县旧城北面，叫栋阳渠，这座城就是栋阳宫所在地。
English: It flows eastward through the highlands, passing through the northern side of Qu Liang City, flowing eastward under the Southern Plains of Taishangling, turning northward and flowing east of the highlands, and merging with the Desolation Water. The water is divided into two. One flows southeastward, that is, the Surabaya Water, to the White Canal and the Zequan confluence, commonly known as the Lacquer Water, also known as the Lacquer Desolation Water, across the White Canal, flowing eastward through the northern side of the old city of Mannen County, called the Dongyang Canal, this city is the location of the Dongyang Palace.

古文：汉高帝葬皇考于是县，起坟陵，署邑号，改曰万年也。
现代文：汉高帝把他父亲葬在栋阳县，建造了陵墓，并把城名改为万年。
English: Emperor Han Gao buried his father in Dongyang County, built a mausoleum, and changed the name of the city to Wanlin.

古文：《地理志》曰：冯翊万年县，高帝置，王莽曰异赤也。
现代文：《地理志》说：冯诩郡万年县，汉高帝时设置，王莽称为异赤。
English: "Geography" said: Fengyun County, Wannen County, set up during the reign of Emperor Gao, Wang Mang is known as different red.

古文：故徐广《史记音义》曰：栎阳，今万年矣。
现代文：所以徐广《史记音义》说：栋阳，就是现在的万年。
English: Therefore, Xu Guang's "History of Music" said: Dongyang is the present 10,000 years.

古文：阚駰曰：县西有泾、渭，北有小河。谓此水也。
现代文：阉驰说：县西有径水、渭水，北面有小河，指的就是此水。
English: "In the west of the county, there are watercourses and streams, and in the north, there is a small river. It is this water that I am referring to," he said.

古文：其水又南屈，更名石川水，又西南径郭城西与白渠枝渠合，又南入于渭水也。
现代文：水又向南转弯，改名为石川水，又往西南流经郭藐城西面，与白渠的支渠汇合，又往南注入渭水。
English: The water turned south again, changed its name to Ishikawa water, and flowed southwest through the west side of Guoqiao City, merging with the branch of Baiqiao Canal, and injecting Surabaya water to the south.

古文：其一水东出，即沮水也，东与泽泉合，水出沮东泽中，与沮水隔原，相去十五里，俗谓是水为漆水也。
现代文：另一条往东流，就是沮水，东流与泽泉汇合。泽泉发源于沮水东边的沼泽中，与沮水隔着一片高地，相距十五里，俗称此水为漆水。
English: The other eastward current is the Despondent, and the eastward current merges with the Zequen. The Zequen originates in the swamp on the east side of the Despondent, separated from the Despondent by a highland, fifteen miles away, commonly known as the Lacquer Water.

古文：东流径薄昭墓南，冢在北原上。
现代文：水往东流经薄昭墓南，墓在北原上。
English: The water flows eastward through the south of Bo Zhao's tomb, and the tomb is on the North Plain.

古文：又径怀德城北，东南注郑渠，合沮水。
现代文：又流经怀德城北面，往东南注入郑渠，与沮水汇合。
English: It also flows through the north side of Huai De City, and flows into the Zheng Canal to the southeast, where it meets the Depu River.

古文：又自沮直绝注浊水，泵白渠合焉，故浊水得漆沮之名也。
现代文：又从沮水直穿而过，注入浊水，到白渠相汇合，所以浊水得了漆沮这个名称。
English: It also passes straight through the sedimentation water and injects the brackish water into the white channel, so the brackish water gets the name of lacquer sedimentation.

古文：沮循郑渠，东径当道城南。
现代文：沮水循着郑渠，往东流经当道城南边。
English: The muddy water followed the Zheng Canal and flowed eastward through the southern side of Dangdao.

古文：城在频阳县故城南，频阳宫也，秦厉公置。
现代文：当道城在频阳县老城南边，是频阳宫的所在地，秦厉公所置。
English: Dangdocheng is located in the south of the old city of Binyang County. It is the location of the Binyang Palace, which was built by Qin Liguang.

古文：城北有频山，山有汉武帝殿，以石架之。
现代文：城北有频山，山上有汉武帝殿，是用石材构架而成。
English: To the north of the city, there is the Fengshan Mountain, and on the mountain there is the Hanwu Imperial Palace, which is made of stone.

古文：县在山南，故曰频阳也。
现代文：县城在山南，所以叫频阳。
English: The county seat is in Shannan, so it is called Fengyang.

古文：应劭曰：县在频水之阳。
现代文：应肋说：县城在频水以北。
English: Ying Li said: The county seat is in the north of Changshui.

古文：今县之左右，无水以应之，所可当者，惟郑渠与沮水。
现代文：规在县城附近一带没有一条相应的水，有的只有郑渠与沮水罢了。
English: According to the regulation, there is no corresponding water in the vicinity of the county seat, and some are only Zhengqiu and Deshui.

古文：又东径莲芍县故城北，《十二州志》曰：县以草受名也，沮水又东径汉光武故城北，又东径粟邑县故城北，王莽更名粟城也。
现代文：水又往东流经莲芍县老城北面。《十三州志》说：该县是以草得名的。沮水又往东流经汉光武帝老城北面，又往东流经粟邑县老城北面，王莽把它改名为粟城。
English: The water also flowed eastward through the north side of the old city of Lianye County. "The History of the Thirteen States" said: The county was named after the grass. The water also flowed eastward through the north side of the old city of Han Guangwu Emperor, and eastward through the north side of the old city of Maoyu County. Wang Mang changed its name to Maocheng.

古文：后汉封骑都尉耿夔为侯国。
现代文：后汉把粟邑封给骑都尉耿夔，立为侯国。
English: Later, the Han Dynasty assigned the fief of Maoyu to the cavalry captain Geng Qi and established it as a vassal state.

古文：其水又东北流，注于洛水也。
现代文：水又往东北流，注入洛水。
English: The water flowed to the northeast, injecting Luoshui.

