古文：武都郡，武帝元鼎六年置。
现代文：武都郡，武帝元鼎六年设置。
English: Wudu County, established in the sixth year of Emperor Wu's reign.

古文：莽曰乐平。
现代文：王莽时叫乐平郡。
English: At the time of Wang Mang, it was called Leping County.

古文：户五万一千三百七十六，口二十三万五千五百六十。
现代文：有五万一千三百七十六户，二十三万五千五百六十口人。
English: There are 51,376 households and 235,560 people.

古文：县九：武都，东汉水受氐道水，一名沔，过江夏，谓之夏水，入江。天池大泽在县西。
现代文：有九个县：武都县，束汉水接受氐道水的水源，一叫沔水，经过江夏，称为夏水，流入长江、天池大泽在县的西面。
English: There are nine counties: Wudu County, the water source from which the Bund Han River receives water from the Yangtze River, called the Yangtze River, flows through the Xia River, called the Xia River, and flows into the Yangtze River, and Tianchi Osawa is in the west of the county.

古文：莽曰循虏。
现代文：王莽时叫循虏县。
English: Wang Mangshi called Xunru County.

古文：上禄，故道，莽曰善治。
现代文：上禄县，故道县，王莽时叫善治县。
English: Shanglu County, the former Dao County, and Wangmanzhou County are now called Zenzhi County.

古文：河池。泉街水南至沮入汉，行五百二十里。
现代文：河池县，泉街水向南到沮县流入汉水，行程五百二十里。
English: In Hechi County, the Spring Street Water flows south to Desheng County and flows into the Han River, a journey of 520 miles.

古文：莽曰乐平亭。
现代文：王莽时叫乐平亭县。
English: Wang Mangshi called Lepingting County.

古文：平乐道，沮，沮水出东狼谷，南至沙羡南入江，过郡五，行四千里，荆州川。
现代文：平乐道县，沮县，沮水发源于东狼谷，向南到沙羡县的南面流入长江，经过五个郡，行程四千里，是荆州的河流。
English: Pingle County, Depu County, Depu Water originates in the East Wolf Valley, flowing south to the south of Shaanxi County into the Yangtze River, passing through five counties, traveling four thousand miles, is the river of Jingzhou.

古文：嘉陵道，循成道，下辨道。
现代文：嘉陵道县，循成道县，下辨道县。
English: Jialing County, Xuncheng County, and Shibian County.

古文：莽曰杨德。
现代文：王莽时叫杨堕墨。
English: Wang Mangshi called Yang Fubo.

古文：陇西郡，秦置。莽曰厌戎。
现代文：陇西郡，秦时设置，王莽时叫厌戎郡。
English: Shaanxi County, set up in the Qin Dynasty, was called Yan Rong County in the Wang Mang Dynasty.

古文：户五万三千九百六十四，口二十三万六千八百二十四。
现代文：有五万三千九百六十四户，二十三万六干八百二十四口人。
English: There are 53,964 households, with 236,000 to 824 people.

古文：有铁官、盐官。
现代文：有铁官、盐官。
English: There are iron officials and salt officials.

古文：县十一：狄道，白石山在东。
现代文：有十一个县：狄道县，石山在东。
English: There are eleven counties: Dido County, Ishiyama in the east.

古文：莽曰操虏。
现代文：王莽时叫操虏县。
English: Wang Mangshi called the county of Manipur.

古文：上邽，安故，氐道，《禹贡》养水所出，至武都为汉。
现代文：上邦县，安故县，氐道县，《禹贡》上养水的发源地，到武都就成为汉水。
English: Shangbang County, Ankou County, Shantou County, the birthplace of water cultivation in "Yugong," will become Han water in Wudu.

古文：莽曰亭道。
现代文：王莽时叫亭道县。
English: Wang Mangshi called Tingting County.

古文：首阳，《禹贡》鸟鼠同穴山在西南，谓水所出，东至船司空入河，过郡四，行千八百七十里，雍州浸。
现代文：首阳县，《禹贡》上的乌鼠同穴山在西南，是?胃水的发源地，向东到船司空进入黄河，经过四个郡，行程一千八百七十里，是雍州的灌渠。
English: Shouyang County, "Yugong" on the mountain of the same name in the southwest, is the birthplace of gastric water, to the east to the ship empty into the Yellow River, through four counties, the journey of one thousand eight hundred and seventy miles, is the irrigation canal of Yongzhou.

古文：予道，莽曰德道。
现代文：予道县，王莽时叫德道县。
English: Yu Dao County, Wang Mang called De Dao County.

古文：大夏，莽曰顺夏。
现代文：大夏县，王莽时叫顺夏县。
English: Daxia County, formerly known as Shunxia County.

古文：羌道，羌水出塞外，南至阴平入白水，过郡三，行六百里。
现代文：羌道县，羌水流出塞外，向南到阴平县流入白水，经过三个郡，行程六百里。
English: In Shendao County, the water flows out of the dam and flows southward to Yinping County into Baishui, passing through three counties and traveling six hundred miles.

古文：襄武，莽曰相桓。
现代文：襄武县，王莽时叫相桓县。
English: Xiangwu County, which was called Xianghuan County at the time of Wang Mang.

古文：临洮，洮水出西羌中，北至枹罕东入河。
现代文：临洮县，洮水流出西羌中，向北到袍罕束面流入黄河。
English: In Linyi County, the water of the Yangtze River flows out of the middle of the West Yangtze River and flows into the Yellow River in the north to the Bund.

古文：《禹贡》西顷山在县西，南部都尉治也。
现代文：《禹贡》上的西顷山在县西，南部由都尉治理。
English: Mount Seahak on "Yugong" is in the west of the county, and the southern part is governed by the governor.

古文：西。
现代文：西县。
English: West County.

古文：《禹贡》嶓冢山，西汉所出，南入广汉白水，东南至江州入江，过郡四，行二千七百六十里。
现代文：《禹贡》上的幡冢山，是西汉水的发源地，向南流入广汉县的白水，向东南到江州县流入长江，经过四个郡，行程二千七百六十里。
English: Mount Fanlu on "Yugong" is the source of the West Han River. It flows southward into the White Water of Guanghan County and southeastward into the Yangtze River in Jiangzhou County, passing through four counties and traveling 2,760 miles.

古文：莽曰西治。
现代文：王莽时叫西治县。
English: Wang Mang called Xizhi County.

古文：金城郡，昭帝始元六年置。
现代文：金城郡，昭帝始元六年设置。
English: Jincheng County, founded in the sixth year of Emperor Zhao's reign.

古文：莽曰西海。
现代文：王莽时叫西海郡。
English: Wang Mangshi once called it Xihai County.

古文：户三万八千四百七十，口十四万九千六百四十八。
现代文：有三万八千四百七十户，十四万九千六百四十八口人。
English: There are 38,470 households and 149,648 people.

古文：县十三：允吾，乌亭逆水出参街谷，东至枝阳入湟。
现代文：有十三个县：允吾县，乌亭逆水流出参街谷，向东到枝阳县流入湟水。
English: There are thirteen counties: Yunwu County, Wuting backwaters flow out of Sanjie Valley, and eastward to Shiyang County flow into Surabaya.

古文：莽曰修远。
现代文：王莽时叫修远县。
English: Wang Mangshi called Xiuyuan County.

古文：浩亹，浩亹水出西塞外，东至允吾入湟水。
现代文：浩叠县，浩叠水流出西塞外，向东到允吾县流入湟水。
English: In Haojia County, the Haojia water flows out of the west of Sai and flows into the east of Yunwu County.

古文：莽曰兴武。
现代文：王莽时叫兴武县。
English: Wang Mangshi called Xingwu County.

古文：令居，涧水出西北塞外，至县西南，入郑伯津。
现代文：令居县，涧水流出西北塞外，到县的西南，流入郑伯津。
English: In Lingju County, Surabaya's water flows out of the northwest of Saiwai, to the southwest of the county, and flows into Zhengbojin.

古文：莽曰罕虏。
现代文：王莽时叫罕虏县。
English: At the time of Wang Mang, it was called Hanku County.

古文：枝阳，金城，莽曰金屏。
现代文：枝阳县，金城县，王莽时叫金屏县。
English: Zhiyang County, Jincheng County, Wangmanzhong called Jinping County.

古文：榆中，枹罕，白石，离水出西塞外，东至枹罕入河。
现代文：榆中县，抱罕县，白石县，离水流出西塞外，向东到袍罕县流入黄河。
English: In Bozhong County, Baohan County, and Baishi County, the water flows out of the west and flows into the Yellow River in the east to Baohan County.

古文：莽曰顺砾。
现代文：王莽时叫顺砾县。
English: Wang Mangshi called Shunbei County.

古文：河关，积石山在西南羌中。
现代文：河关县，积石山在西南羌中。
English: In Keguan County, Zhishishan is in the southwest of Yunnan.

古文：河水行塞外，东北入塞内，至章武入海，过郡十六，行九千四百里。
现代文：黄河水在塞外流动，向东北流入塞内，到章武县流入大海，经过十六个郡，行程九千四百里。
English: The water of the Yellow River flows outside of Senegal, flows to the northeast into Senegal, and flows into the sea at Zhangwu County, passing through 16 counties, a journey of 9,400 miles.

古文：破羌，宣帝神爵二年置。
现代文：破羌县，宣帝神爵二年设置。
English: Hani County, Xuan Di Jingzhu set up two years ago.

古文：安夷，允街，宣帝神爵二年置。
现代文：安夷县，允街县，宣帝神爵二年设置。
English: Anyi County, Yunjie County, Xuan Di Jingzhu set up in the past two years.

古文：莽曰修远。
现代文：王莽时叫修远县。
English: Wang Mangshi called Xiuyuan County.

古文：临羌。
现代文：临羌县。
English: Linfen County.

古文：西北至塞外，有西王母石室、仙海、盐池。
现代文：西北到塞外，有西王母石室、仙海、盐池。
English: From the northwest to the outside of Tibet, there are the West King's Stone Room, the Sea of Immortals, and the Salt Pond.

古文：北则湟水所出，东至允吾入河。
现代文：北面则是湟水的发源地，向东到允吾县流入黄河。
English: To the north is the source of the Surabaya River, which flows into the Yellow River as far east as Yungu County.

古文：西有须抵池，有弱水、昆仑山祠。
现代文：西面有须抵池，有弱水、昆仑山祠。
English: On the west side, there is Suwaike Pond, Weak Water and Kunlun Mountain Shrine.

古文：莽曰盐羌。
现代文：王莽时叫盐羌县。
English: Wang Mangshi called Yancheng County.

古文：天水郡，武帝元鼎三年置。
现代文：天水郡，武帝元鼎三年设置。
English: Tianshui County, Wudi Yuan Ding three years set up.

古文：莽曰填戎。
现代文：王莽时叫填戎郡。
English: Wang Mangshi called for the filling of Eulsa County.

古文：明帝改曰汉阳。
现代文：髓改为泌。
English: Change pith to secretion.

古文：户六万三百七十，口二十六万一千三百四十八。
现代文：有六万三百七十户，二十六万一千三百四十八口人。
English: There were 63,070 households with a total of 261,348 people.

古文：县十六：平襄，莽曰平相。
现代文：有十六个县：平襄县，王莽时叫平相县。
English: There are sixteen counties: Pingxiang County, Wang Mangshi called Pingxiang County.

古文：街泉，戎邑道，莽曰填戎亭。
现代文：街泉县，戎邑道县，王莽时叫填戎亭县。
English: Jiequan County, Wuzhong County, Wangmanzhi County are called Wuzhong County.

古文：望垣，莽曰望亭。
现代文：望垣县，阿阳县，王莽时叫望亭县。
English: Wanggang County, Ayang County, Wangmanzhi called Wangting County.

古文：罕开，绵诸道，阿阳，略阳道，冀，《禹贡》朱圄山在县南梧中聚。
现代文：罕开县，绵诸道略阳道县，《禹贡》上的圭旦山在县南的梧中聚。
English: Hankai County, Mianzhu Road and Yangdao County, Guidan Mountain on "Yugong" are gathered in Wuzhong in the south of the county.

古文：莽曰冀治。
现代文：王莽时叫冀治县。
English: Wang Mang called Jizhi County.

古文：勇士，属国都尉治满福。
现代文：勇士县，附属的侯国的都尉治理满福。
English: Warriors County, the vassal of the vassal state, is governed by the vassal of Manfu.

古文：莽曰纪德。
现代文：王莽时叫纪德县。
English: Wang Mangshi called Gide County.

古文：成纪，清水，莽曰识睦。
现代文：成纪县，清水县，王莽时叫识睦县。
English: Chengji County, Qingshui County, Wangmanzhi called Zhimu County.

古文：奉捷，陇，豲道，骑都尉治密艾亭。
现代文：奉捷县，陇县，砾道县，骑都尉治理密艾亭。
English: Fengjie County, Handan County, and Huludao County, the cavalry captain governs Mii Ting.

古文：兰干。
现代文：兰干县。
English: Langan County.

古文：莽曰兰盾。
现代文：王莽时叫兰盾县。
English: At the time of Wang Mang, it was called Lan Dun County.

古文：武威郡，故匈奴休屠王地。
现代文：武威郡，原来匈奴休屠王的地方。
English: Wuwei County, the original place where the Xiongnu assassinated the king.

古文：武帝太初四年开。
现代文：武帝太初四年设置。
English: It is set in the first four years of Emperor Wu's reign.

古文：莽曰张掖。
现代文：王莽时叫张掖郡。
English: Wang Mangshi called Zhangye County.

古文：户万七千五百八十一，口七万六千四百一十九。
现代文：有一万七千五百八十一户，七万六千四百一十九人。
English: There are 17,581 households and 76,419 people.

古文：县十：姑臧，南山，谷水所出，北至武威入海，行七百九十里。
现代文：有十个县：姑臧县，谷水发源于南山，向北到武威县流入大海，行程七百九十里。
English: There are ten counties: Guye County, Gu Shui originates from Nanshan, flows north to Wuwei County and flows into the sea, traveling 790 miles.

古文：张掖，武威，休屠泽在东北，古文以为猪野泽。
现代文：张掖县，武威县，休屠泽在东北，古代文字记载认为是猪壁泽。
English: Zhangye County, Wuwei County, and Xiu Tu Ze are in the northeast, and the ancient written records consider them to be pig wall lakes.

古文：休屠，莽曰晏然。
现代文：休屠县，王莽时叫晏然县。
English: Xiu Tuo County, Wang Mangshi called Yulan County.

古文：都尉治熊水障。
现代文：都尉治理熊水障。
English: The governor is in charge of the flood control.

古文：北部都尉治休屠城。
现代文：北部都尉治理休屠城。
English: The northern governor governs the city of Xiutu.

古文：揟次，莽曰播德。
现代文：揞次县，王莽时叫播德县。
English: Liji County, Wang Mangshi called Bode County.

古文：鸾乌，扑褱刂，莽曰敷虏。
现代文：鸾乌县，扑刺县，王莽时叫敷虏县。
English: Jiu County, Puzhang County, Wangmanzhi County are called Shikirup County.

古文：媪围，苍松，南山，松陕水所出，北至揟次入海。
现代文：媪围县，苍松县，柑陕水发源于南山，向北到揞次县流入大海。
English: The water of the Yanshan River originates from the Nanshan Mountains and flows northward to the sea in Ganzi County.

古文：莽曰射楚。
现代文：王莽时叫射楚县。
English: Wang Mangshi called Jiechu County.

古文：宣威。
现代文：宣威县。
English: Xuanwei County.

古文：张掖郡，故匈奴昆邪王地，武帝太初元年开。
现代文：张掖郡，以前匈奴昆邪王的地方，武帝太初元年设置。
English: Zhangye County, formerly the place of Xiongnu Kunzhuang, was set up in the first year of Emperor Wu's reign.

古文：莽曰设屏。
现代文：王莽时叫设屏县。
English: Wang Mangshi called Shieping County.

古文：户二万四千三百五十二，口八万八千七百三十一。
现代文：有二万四千三百五十二户，八万八千七百三十一口人。
English: There are 24,352 households and 88,731 people.

古文：县十：觻得，千金渠西至东涫入泽中。
现代文：有十个县：鲽得县，千金渠向西到乐涫流入湖泽中。
English: There are ten counties: Shunde County, Qianjin Canal flows westward to Leju and flows into the lake.

古文：羌谷水出羌中，东北至居延入海，过郡二，行二千一百里。
现代文：羌谷水从羌中流出，向东北到居延县流入大海，经过两个郡，行程两千一百里。
English: Shibuya water flows out of the reeds and flows into the sea in the northeast to Juyan County, passing through two counties and traveling 2,100 miles.

古文：莽曰官式。
现代文：王莽时叫官式县。
English: Wang Mang called the official county.

古文：昭武，莽曰渠武。
现代文：昭武县，王莽时叫渠武郡。
English: Zhaowu County was called Quwu County when Wang Mang was alive.

古文：删丹，桑钦以为道弱水自此，西至酒泉合黎。
现代文：删丹县，桑钦认为从这裹开始疏通弱水，向西到酒泉合黎。
English: In Qidan County, Sanqin believes that the weak water will be dredged from here, and it will flow westward to Jiuquan and Lili.

古文：莽曰贯虏。
现代文：王莽时叫贯虏县。
English: Wang Mangshi called Junrui County.

古文：氐池，莽曰否武。
现代文：氐池县，王莽时叫否武。
English: In Dianchi County, Wang Mang called Neobu.

古文：屋兰，莽曰传武。
现代文：屋兰县，王莽时叫传武。
English: In Yalan County, Wang Mang is called Chuanwu.

古文：日勒，都尉治泽索谷。
现代文：曰勒县，都尉的治所在泽索谷。
English: Saylor County, the governor's office is located in Zesso Valley.

古文：莽曰勒治。
现代文：王莽时叫勒治。
English: Wang Mangshi is called Lezhi.

古文：骊靬，莽曰揭虏。
现代文：骊轩县，王莽时叫揭虏。
English: In Juxuan County, Wang Mang called for a showdown.

古文：番和，农都尉治。
现代文：番和县，农都尉治理。
English: Banhe County, governed by an agronomist.

古文：莽曰罗虏。
现代文：王莽时叫罗虏县。
English: Wang Mang was called Luo Rui County.

古文：居延，居延泽在东北，古文以为流沙。
现代文：居延县，居延泽在东北，古文记载认为是流沙。
English: Juyan County, Juyan Lake in the northeast, ancient records considered it to be quicksand.

古文：都尉治，莽曰居成。
现代文：都尉治理。王莽时叫居成县。
English: Governed by the governor. Wang Mang called Jucheng County at that time.

古文：显美。
现代文：显美县。
English: Henmei County.

古文：酒泉郡，武帝太初元年开。
现代文：酒泉郡，武帝太初元年设置。
English: Jiuquan County, established in the first year of Emperor Wu's reign.

古文：莽曰辅平。
现代文：王莽时叫辅平郡。
English: Wang Mangshi called Fuoping County.

古文：户万八千一百三十七，口七万六千七百二十六。
现代文：有一万八千一百三十七户，七万六千七百二十六人。
English: There are 18,137 households and 76,726 people.

古文：县九：禄福，呼蚕水出南羌中，东北至会水入羌谷。
现代文：有九个县：禄福县，呼蚕水发源于南羌中，向东北到会水流入羌谷。
English: There are nine counties: Lufu County, the water of the call of the silkworm originates in the middle of Nanluo, and flows to the northeast to the water flowing into the valley.

古文：莽曰显德。
现代文：王莽时叫显德县县。
English: Wang Mangshi called Xiande County.

古文：表是，莽曰载武。
现代文：表是县，王莽时叫载武县。
English: The table is the county, and Wang Mang is called Zaowu County.

古文：乐涫，莽曰乐亭。
现代文：乐涫县，王莽时叫乐亭。
English: Leju County, Wang Mang is called Le Ting.

古文：天阝衣，玉门，莽曰辅平亭。
现代文：天哝县，玉门县，王莽时叫辅平亭。
English: Tianyu County, Yumen County, Wang Mang is called Fu Ping Ting.

古文：会水，北部都尉治偃泉障。
现代文：会水县，北部都尉治偃泉障。
English: In the northern part of the county, the governor of Wenshui County, Jizhong Quanbao.

古文：东部都尉治东部障。
现代文：东部都尉治束部障。
English: Eastern Governor Jisaku is leaving.

古文：莽曰萧武。
现代文：王莽时叫萧武县。
English: Wang Mangshi called Xiaowu County.

古文：池头，绥弥，乾齐。
现代文：池头县，绥弥县，干齐县。
English: Chitou County, Jimi County, and Ganqi County.

古文：西部都尉治西部障。
现代文：西部都尉治西部障。
English: The western governor governs the western region.

古文：莽曰测虏。
现代文：王莽时叫测虏瑟。
English: Wang Mangshi called out to Jie Kruse.

古文：敦煌郡，武帝后元年分酒泉置。
现代文：敦煌郡，武帝后元年分酒泉郡而设置。
English: Dunhuang County, and Jiuquan County in the first year of Emperor Wu's reign.

古文：正西关外有白龙堆沙，有蒲昌海。
现代文：正西关外有白龙堆沙，有蒲昌海。
English: Just west of the pass, there is the White Dragon Sandpile and the Puchang Sea.

古文：莽曰敦德。
现代文：王莽时叫敦德郡。
English: At the time of Wang Mang, it was called Dunde County.

古文：户万一千二百，口三万八千三百三十五。
现代文：有一万一千二百户，三万八千三百三十五口人。
English: There are 11,200 households with 38,335 people.

古文：县六：敦煌。中部都尉治步广候官。
现代文：有六个县：敦煌县，中部都尉治步广设候官。
English: There are six counties: Dunhuang County, the central governor has a wide range of candidates.

古文：杜林以为古瓜州地，生美瓜。
现代文：杜林认为是古代瓜州地，出产美瓜。
English: Du Lin thought that it was the ancient Guazhou land that produced the American melon.

古文：莽曰敦德。
现代文：王莽时叫敦德县。
English: At the time of Wang Mang, it was called Dunde County.

古文：冥安，南籍端水出南羌中，西北入其泽，溉民田。
现代文：冥安县，南面籍端水发源于南羌中，向西北流入湖泽，灌溉民田。
English: In Myoan County, the water at the southern end of the river originates in the middle of the southern reeds and flows into the lake to the northwest, irrigating people's fields.

古文：效穀，渊泉，广至，宜禾都尉治昆仑障。
现代文：效谷县，渊泉县，广至县，宜禾都尉治昆仑障。
English: Guigu County, Yuanquan County, Guangzhi County, Yihe County are all ruled by Kunlun.

古文：莽曰广桓。
现代文：王莽时叫广桓县。
English: Wang Mangshi called Guanghu County.

古文：龙勒。
现代文：龙勒县。
English: Yongle County.

古文：有阳关、玉门关，皆都尉治。
现代文：有阳关、玉门阗，都由都尉治理。
English: Yangguan and Yumenlu were both governed by captains.

古文：氐置水出南羌中，东北入泽，溉民田。
现代文：氐置水发源于南羌中，向东北流入湖泽，灌溉民田。
English: The suspended water originates in the middle of Nanlu and flows into the lake in the northeast to irrigate the people's fields.

古文：安定郡，武帝元鼎三年置。
现代文：安定郡，武帝元鼎三年设置。
English: Anding County, Wu Di Yuan Ding three years set up.

古文：户四万二千七百二十五，口十四万三千二百九十四。
现代文：有四万二千七百二十五户，十四万三千二百九十四口人。
English: There are 42,725 households and 143,294 people.

古文：县二十一：高平，莽曰铺睦。
现代文：有二十一个县：高平县，王莽时叫铺睦县。
English: There are twenty-one counties: Gaoping County, Wang Mangshi called Pudong County.

古文：复累，安俾，抚夷，莽曰抚宁。
现代文：复累县，安俾县，抚夷县，王莽时叫抚宁县。
English: Fulai County, Anbi County, Fuxi County, Wang Mangshi called Fuxing County.

古文：朝那，有端旬祠十五所，胡巫祝，又有湫渊祠。
现代文：朝那县，有端旬祠十五所，胡人的巫祝。还有湫渊祠。
English: In Asana County, there are fifteen Fudan Shunji shrines, Hu Ren's Wushu. There is also Shanyuan Shrine.

古文：泾阳，开头山在西，《禹贡》泾水所出，东南至阳陵入渭，过郡三，行千六十里，雍州川。
现代文：泾阳县，开头山在西面，《禹贡》上泾水的发源地，向东南到阳陵流入渭水，晋国三个郡，行程一千零六十里，是雍州的河流。
English: Poyang County, the beginning of the mountain in the west, "Yugong" the birthplace of the upper Surabaya, flowing southeast to Yangling into Surabaya, the three counties of Jin Province, a journey of one thousand and sixty miles, is the river of Yongzhou.

古文：临泾，莽曰监泾。
现代文：临泾县，王莽时叫监泾县。
English: Linyi County, Wang Mang is called Juncun County.

古文：卤，灈水出西。
现代文：卤县，洒水从西面流出。
English: In Halogen County, sprinkling water flows out from the west.

古文：乌氏，乌水出西，北入河。
现代文：乌氏县，乌水从西面流出，向北流入黄河。
English: In Wushi County, the black water flows out from the west and flows into the Yellow River to the north.

古文：都卢山在西。
现代文：都卢山在西面。
English: Dulux Mountain is in the west.

古文：莽曰乌亭。
现代文：王莽时叫乌亭县。
English: Wang Mangshi called Wuting County.

古文：阴密，《诗》密人国。
现代文：阴密县，《诗》上的密人国。
English: Yinmi County, the "poetry" of the country of the Mystics.

古文：有嚣安亭。
现代文：有嚣安亭县。
English: It is located in Anting County.

古文：安定，参，主骑都尉治。
现代文：安定县，参缣县，主骑都尉治理。
English: Anding County, Sangye County, the main cavalry captain governance.

古文：三水，属国都尉治。
现代文：三水县，附局侯国的都尉治理。
English: Sanshui County, administered by the governor of the Hokkoku District.

古文：有盐官。
现代文：有盐官。
English: There is a salt officer.

古文：莽曰广延亭。
现代文：王莽时叫广延亭县。
English: Wang Mangshi called Guangyan Ting County.

古文：阴槃，安武，莽曰安桓。
现代文：阴槃县，安武县，王莽时叫安桓县。
English: Yinchuan County, Anwu County, Wang Mangxu called Anhuan County.

古文：祖厉，莽曰乡礼。
现代文：祖厉县，王莽时叫乡礼县。
English: Zu Li County was called Xiang Li County in Wang Mang's time.

古文：爰得，眴卷，河水别出为河沟，东至富平北入河。
现代文：爰得县，晌卷县，黄河水分流出成为河沟，向东到富平县流入黄河。
English: In Shunde County and Zhouzhuan County, the Yellow River water outflow becomes a ditch, and flows into the Yellow River to the east to Fuping County.

古文：彭阳，鹑阴，月氏道。
现代文：彭阳县，鹑阴县，月氏道县。
English: Pengyang County, Shuyin County, and Yueji County.

古文：莽曰月顺。
现代文：王莽时叫别。
English: Wang Mangshi waved goodbye.

古文：北地郡，秦置。
现代文：顷县。北地郡，秦时设置。
English: He County, Beidi County, set up in the Qin Dynasty.

古文：莽曰威成。
现代文：王莽时叫威成郡。
English: Wang Mangshi called Weicheng County.

古文：户六万四千四百六十一，口二十一万六百八十八。
现代文：有六万四千四百六十一户，二十一万零六百八十八人。
English: There are 64,461 households and 210,688 people.

古文：县十九。马领，直路，沮水出西，东入洛。灵武，莽曰威成亭。
现代文：有十九个县：马领县，直路县，沮水向西流出，向东流入洛水：灵武县，王莽时叫威成亭。
English: There are nineteen counties: Ma Lian County, Zhi Lu County, the dejected water flows out to the west, and flows into Luoshui to the east: Lingwu County, Wang Mangshi is called Wei Cheng Ting.

古文：富平，北部都尉治神泉障。
现代文：富平县，北部都尉治神泉障。
English: Fuping County, in the north of the province, is a hot spring resort.

古文：浑怀都尉治塞外浑怀障。莽曰特武。
现代文：浑怀都尉治塞外的浑怀障：王莽时叫特武县。
English: Wang Mangshi called the county "Twu County" when he was in charge of the county.

古文：灵州，惠帝四年置。
现代文：灵州县，惠帝四年设置。
English: Lingzhou County, Huidi four years set up.

古文：有河奇苑、号非苑。莽曰令周。
现代文：有河奇苑、号非苑：王莽时叫令周县。
English: Yuhe Qianyuan and Guofeiyuan: Wang Mangxiu called Zhou County.

古文：眴衍，方渠，除道，莽曰通道。
现代文：晌衍县，方渠县，除道县，土莽时叫通道县。
English: Fenyang County, Fangqu County, Zengdao County, and Doushuang County are called channel counties.

古文：五街，莽曰吾街。鹑孤，归德，洛水出北蛮夷中，入河。
现代文：五街县，王莽时吾街县：鹑孤县，归德县，洛水从北面蛮夷中流出，流入黄河。
English: Wujie County, Wangmanzhijie County: Qiaokou County, Guide County, Luo water flows out of the north barbarians and flows into the Yellow River.

古文：有堵苑、白马苑。
现代文：有堕垄、旦昼垄。
English: There is a fallen ridge and a daytime ridge.

古文：回获，略畔道，莽曰延年道。
现代文：回获县，略畔道县，王菱时叫延年道县。
English: Huiguo County, Liaoban County, and Wangling County are called Ennen County.

古文：泥阳，莽曰泥阴。
现代文：泥阳县，王莽时叫泥阴县。
English: Mud Yang County, Wang Mang called Mud Yin County.

古文：郁郅，泥水出北蛮夷中。
现代文：郁郅县，泥水从北蛮夷中流出。
English: In Ikuhata County, muddy water flows from the middle of the North Barbarian Mountains.

古文：有牧师菀官。
现代文：有牧师菀官。
English: There are priest eunuchs.

古文：莽曰功著。
现代文：王莽时叫功着县。
English: Wang Mangshi called Gongge County.

古文：义渠道，莽曰义沟。弋居，有盐官。
现代文：义渠道县，王莽时叫义沟县：弋居县，有盐官。
English: Yigu Channel County, called Yigou County when Wang Mang was alive: Xingju County, has a salt official.

古文：大要，廉。
现代文：大变县，廉县。
English: Daechang County, Lian County.

古文：卑移山在西北。
现代文：卑移山在西北。
English: Mt. Biji is in the northwest.

古文：莽曰西河亭。
现代文：王莽时叫西河亭。
English: Wang Mangshi is called Xihe Ting.

古文：上郡，秦置，高帝元年更为翟国，七月复故。匈归都尉治塞外匈归障。属并州。
现代文：上郡，秦时设置，高帝元年改为翟国，后来又恢复原名：匈归都尉治理塞外的匈归障：属于并州。
English: Shang County, set up in the Qin Dynasty, was changed to Shandong Province in the first year of the Gao Dynasty, and later the original name was restored: the Hun governor governed the Hun governor outside the province: it belonged to the annexed province.

古文：户十万三千六百八十三，口六十万六千六百五十八。
现代文：有十万三千六百八十三户，六十万六千六百五卜八人。
English: There are 103,683 households and 606,658 people.

古文：县二十三：肤施，有五龙山、帝、原水、黄帝祠四所。
现代文：有二十三个县：肤施县，有五龙山、帝、原水、黄帝祠四所。
English: There are twenty-three counties: Kunshi County, Wulongshan, Imperial, Raw Water, and Huangdi Ancestral Hall.

古文：独乐，有盐民。
现代文：独乐县，有盐官。
English: In Dokle County, there is a salt official.

古文：阳周。桥山在南，有黄帝冢。
现代文：阳周县，桥山在南面，有黄帝冢。
English: In Yangzhou County, Qiaoshan is in the south, and there is Huangdi Mountain.

古文：莽曰上陵畴。
现代文：王莽时叫上陵峙。
English: Wang Mangshi called for a standoff at the tomb.

古文：木禾，平都，浅水，莽曰广信。
现代文：木禾县，平都县，浅水县，王莽时叫广信县。
English: Muhe County, Pingdu County, Shallow Water County, Wang Mangshi called Guangxin County.

古文：京室，莽曰积粟。
现代文：京室县，王莽时叫积粟县。
English: Kyomuro County, formerly known as Jiso County.

古文：洛都，莽曰卑顺。
现代文：洛都县，王莽时叫卑顺县。
English: Lodu County, formerly known as Beshun County.

古文：白土，圜水出西，东入河。莽曰黄土。
现代文：白土县，圜水从西流出，向东流入黄河：王莽时叫黄上县。
English: Baidu County, Surabaya water flows out from the west and flows into the Yellow River to the east: Wang Mangshi called Huangshan County.

古文：襄洛，莽曰上党亭。
现代文：襄洛县，王莽时叫上党亭。
English: In Yangluo County, Wang Mangshi went to the party booth.

古文：原都，漆垣，莽曰漆墙。
现代文：原都县，漆垣县，王莽时叫漆墙县。
English: Formerly known as Todo County, Urushigaki County, and Wangmanzhi County, it is now known as Urushikabe County.

古文：奢延，莽曰奢节。
现代文：奢延县，王莽时叫奢节县。
English: Luxurious Yan County, Wang Mangshi called Luxurious Festival County.

古文：雕阴，推邪，莽曰排邪。
现代文：雕阴县，推邪县，王莽时叫排邪县。
English: Zheyin County, Tuyao County, Wangmanzhi County are called Tuyao County.

古文：桢林，莽曰桢幹。
现代文：桢林县，王莽时叫桢干县。
English: Yulin County, Wang Mangshi called Yinggan County.

古文：高望，北部都尉治。
现代文：高望县，北部都尉治理。
English: Gaowang County, governed by the northern governor.

古文：莽曰坚甯。
现代文：王莽时叫坚宁县。
English: Wang Mangshi called Jianning County.

古文：雕阴道，龟兹，属国都尉治。
现代文：雕阴道县，龟兹县，属国都尉治理。
English: Jiaojing County and Guizi County are administered by provincial governors.

古文：有盐官。
现代文：有盐官。
English: There is a salt officer.

古文：定阳，高奴，有洧水，可。
现代文：定阳县，高奴县，有洧水，叮点燃。
English: In Jingyang County and Gaona County, there are waterlogged and smoldering.

古文：莽曰利平。
现代文：王莽时叫利平县。
English: Wang Mangshi called Liping County.

古文：望松，北部都尉治。
现代文：望松县，北部都尉治理。
English: The northern part of Bosong County is under the control of the governor.

古文：宜都。
现代文：宜都县。
English: Yidu County.

古文：莽曰坚宁小邑。
现代文：王莽时叫坚宁小邑。
English: Wang Mangshi called Jianning a small town.

古文：西河郡，武帝元朔四年置。
现代文：西河郡，亘造互塑四年设置。
English: Saihe County, Wuzhong inter-plastic four years set up.

古文：南部都尉治塞外翁龙、埤是。
现代文：南部都尉治理塞外的翁龙县、埤是县。
English: The southern governor administers the counties of Wenglong and Yingye outside of the capital.

古文：莽曰归新。属并州。
现代文：王菱时叫归新郡，属韭州。
English: Wang Lingshi was called back to Xin County, which belongs to Zhangzhou.

古文：户十三万六千三百九十，口六十九万八千八百三十六。
现代文：有十三万六千三百九十户，六十九万八千八百三十六口人。
English: There are 136,390 households and 698,836 people.

古文：县三十六：富昌，有盐官。
现代文：有三十六个县：富昌县，有盐官。
English: There are thirty-six counties: Fuchang County is the largest, with a salt official.

古文：莽曰富成。
现代文：王莽时叫富成县。
English: Wang Mangshi called Fucheng County.

古文：驺虞，鹄泽，平定，莽曰阴平亭。美稷，属国都尉治。
现代文：骝虞县，鹄泽县，平定县，王莽时叫阴平亭：美稷县，属国都尉治理。
English: Shanyu County, Heze County, Pingding County, Wang Mangshi called Yinpingting: Meili County, is under the provincial governorship.

古文：中阳，乐街，莽曰截虏。
现代文：中阳县，乐街县，王莽时叫截虏县。
English: Zhongyang County, Lejie County, Wang Mangshi County.

古文：徒经，莽曰廉耻。
现代文：徒经县，士莽时叫廉耻县。
English: It is called Jiancheng County when it is calm, and Jiancheng County when it is reckless.

古文：皋狼，大成，莽曰好成。
现代文：皋狼县，大成县，王莽时叫好成县。
English: Jackal County, Dacheng County, Wang Mengshi called Chengxing County.

古文：广田，莽曰广翰。
现代文：广田县，王莽时叫广翰县。
English: Guangda County was called Guanghan County in Wang Mang's time.

古文：圜阴，惠帝五年置。
现代文：圜阴县，惠帝五年设置。
English: Jinyin County, Huidi five-year plan.

古文：莽曰方阴。益阑，莽曰香阑。
现代文：王莽时叫方阴县，益阑县，王莽时叫香阑县。
English: Wang Mangshi called Fangyin County, Yixian County, Wang Mangshi called Xiangyuan County.

古文：平周，鸿门，有天封苑火井祠，火从地出也。
现代文：平周县，鸿门县，有天封苑火井祠，火从地底喷出。
English: In Pingzhou County and Hongmen County, there are Tianfuyuan Fire Well Shrines, where fire spews from the ground.

古文：蔺，宣武，莽曰讨貉。
现代文：蔺县，宣武县，王莽时叫讨貉县。
English: Minxian County, Xuanwu County, Wang Mang called Minxian County.

古文：千章，增山，有道西出眩雷塞，北部都尉治。
现代文：千章县，增山县，有道路向西面出眩雷塞，北部都尉治理。
English: In Qizhang County and Zengshan County, some roads are blocked by lightning to the west, and the northern part is under the control of the captain.

古文：圜阳，广衍，武车，莽曰桓车。
现代文：圜阳县，广衍县，武车县，王莽时叫桓车县。
English: Fenyang County, Guangyan County, Wuchue County, Wang Mangshi called Huanche County.

古文：虎猛，西部都尉治。
现代文：虎猛县，西部都尉治理。
English: Tohmoku County, governed by the western governor.

古文：离石，穀罗，武泽在西北。
现代文：离石县，谷罗县，武泽在西北。
English: Jinshi County, Gu Luo County, and Wu Ze are in the northwest.

古文：饶，莽曰饶衍。
现代文：饶县，王莽时叫饶衍县。
English: Rao County, formerly known as Raoyang County.

古文：方利，莽曰广德。
现代文：方利县，王莽时叫广德县。
English: Fangli County, Wang Mang called Guangde County.

古文：隰成，莽曰慈平亭。
现代文：隰成县，王莽时叫慈平亭。
English: Lucheng County, Wang Mang is called Ciping Pavilion.

古文：临水，莽曰监水。
现代文：临水县，王莽时叫监水县。
English: Linshui County, Wang Mang called Supervision County.

古文：土军，西都，莽曰五原亭。平陆，阴山，莽曰山宁。
现代文：土军县，西都县，王莽时叫五原亭：平陆县，阴山县，王莽时叫山宁县。
English: Tujun County, Xidu County, Wang Mangshi called Wuhan Pavilion: Pinglu County, Yinshan County, Wang Mangshi called Shanning County.

古文：觬是，莽曰伏觬。
现代文：鱿是县，王莽时叫伏脱县。
English: is a county, and Wang Mang is called Futo County.

古文：博陵，莽曰助桓。
现代文：博陵县，王莽时叫助桓县。
English: Boling County, formerly known as Shuixuan County.

古文：盐官。
现代文：盐官县。
English: It is located in Yanquan County.

古文：朔方郡，武帝元朔二年开。
现代文：朔方郡，武帝元朔二年设置。
English: Shuofang County was established in the second year of Emperor Wu's reign.

古文：西部都尉治窳浑。莽曰沟搜。
现代文：西部都尉治理窳浑：王莽时叫沟搜郡。
English: Western captain governs Gonghun: Wang Mang called Gousuo County.

古文：属并州。户三万四千三百三十八，口十三万六千六百二十八。
现代文：属于并州：有三万四千三百三十八户，十三万六千六百二十八口人。
English: Belonging to the merged prefecture: 34,338 households and 136,628 people.

古文：县十：三封，武帝元狩三年城。
现代文：有十个县：三封县，武帝元狩三年筑城。
English: There are ten counties: Sanfeng County, Wu Diyuan three years to build the city.

古文：朔方，金连盐泽、青盐泽皆在南。
现代文：朔方县，金连盐泽、青盐泽都在南。
English: Shuofang County, Jinlian Salt Lake and Qinglian Salt Lake are all in the south.

古文：莽曰武符。
现代文：王莽时叫武符县。
English: At the time of Wang Mang, it was called Wu Fu County.

古文：修都，临河，莽曰监河。
现代文：修都县，临河县，王莽时叫监河县。
English: Shudu County, Linhe County, Wang Mang is called Jianhe County.

古文：呼遒，窳浑，有道西北出鸡鹿塞。
现代文：呼遒县，窳浑县，有道路向西北；一鸡鹿塞。
English: Hulun County, Gongun County, there is a road to the northwest; a chicken deer plug.

古文：屠申泽在东。
现代文：屠申泽在束面。
English: Tu Shenze is in a straitjacket.

古文：莽曰极武。
现代文：王莽时叫极武县。
English: Wang Mang called Jiwu County.

古文：渠搜，中部都尉治。
现代文：渠搜县，中部都尉治理。
English: Duxu County, governed by the captain of the Central Region.

古文：莽曰沟搜。
现代文：王莽时叫沟搜县。
English: Wang Mangshi called Goso County.

古文：沃野，武帝元狩三年城。有盐官。
现代文：沃壁县，武帝元狩三年建城：有盐官。
English: Wobi County, Wudi Yuanhan three years to build a city: there is a salt officer.

古文：莽曰绥武。
现代文：王莽时叫绥武县。
English: Wang Mangxu called Xiongwu County.

古文：广牧，东部都尉治。
现代文：广牧县，东部都尉治理。
English: Guangmu County, governed by the eastern governor.

古文：莽曰盐官。
现代文：王莽时叫盐官。
English: Wang Mangshi called the salt officer.

古文：临戎。
现代文：临戎县。
English: It is located in Lin-Rong County.

古文：武帝元朔五年城。莽曰推武。
现代文：武帝元朔五年建城一王莽时叫推武县。
English: When Emperor Wu founded the city in the fifth year of the Yuan Shuo era, it was called Tsuiwu County.

古文：五原郡，秦九原郡，武帝元朔二年更名。
现代文：五原郡，秦时叫九原郡，武帝元朔：二年改名。
English: Wuyuan County, which was called Jiuyuan County during the Qin Dynasty, and Wuyuan County during the Yuan Dynasty, changed its name two years later.

古文：东部都尉治稒阳。
现代文：东部都尉治理桐阳县。
English: The eastern governor administers Tongyang County.

古文：莽曰获降。
现代文：王莽时叫获降县。
English: Wang Mangshi called for the county to be demoted.

古文：属并州。
现代文：属于并州。
English: It belongs to the merged state.

古文：户三万九千三百二十二，口二十三万一千三百二十八。
现代文：有三万九干三百二十二户，二十三万一千三百二十八口人。
English: There were 39,322 households, with 231,328 people.

古文：县十六：九原，莽曰成平。
现代文：有十六个县：九原县，王莽时叫成平县。
English: There are sixteen counties: Jiuyuan County, Wang Mangshi called Chengping County.

古文：固陵，莽曰固调。
现代文：固陵县，王莽时叫固调县。
English: Gouring County, known as Gudang County when Wang Mang was alive.

古文：五源，莽曰填河亭。
现代文：五原县，王莽时叫填河亭。
English: Wuhara County, Wang Mangshi is called Reclamation Pavilion.

古文：临沃，莽曰振武。
现代文：临沃县，王莽时叫振武县。
English: Linwo County, formerly known as Zhenwu County.

古文：文国，莽曰繁聚。
现代文：文国县，王莽时叫繁聚县。
English: Wenguo County, formerly known as Wangmanzhong County.

古文：河阴，蒱泽，属国都尉治。
现代文：河阴郡，蒲泽郡，属国都尉治理。
English: Hekin County, Bushe County, administered by provincial governors.

古文：南兴，莽曰南利。
现代文：南兴县，王莽时叫南利县。
English: Nanxing County was called Nanli County when Wang Mang was there.

古文：武都，莽曰桓都。
现代文：武都县，王莽时叫桓都县。
English: Wudu County, called Kandu County when Wang Mang was alive.

古文：宜梁，曼柏，莽曰延柏。
现代文：宜梁题，曼柏县，王莽时叫延柏县。
English: Yi Liangqi, Manbei County, Wang Mangshi called Yanbei County.

古文：成宜，中部都尉治原高，西部都尉治田辟。
现代文：成宜县，中部都尉治理区高，西部都尉治理田辟。
English: Chengyi County, the central governor governance area is high, and the western governor governance area is low.

古文：有盐官。
现代文：有盐官。
English: There is a salt officer.

古文：莽曰艾虏。
现代文：王莽时叫艾虏县。
English: Wang Mangshi called Ai Ru County.

古文：稒阳，北出石门障得光禄城，又西北得支就城，又西北得头曼城，又西北得虖河城，又西得宿虏城。
现代文：梱阳县，向北流出石门障形成光禄城，又西北形成支就城，又向西北得到头曼城，又向西北得到库河城，义向西得到宿虏城。
English: In Balingyang County, the stone gate barrier flows out to the north to form Guanglu City, and to the northwest to form Shizhu City, and to the northwest to get Touman City, and to the northwest to get Kuhe City, and to the west to get Yixing City.

古文：莽曰固阴。
现代文：王莽时叫固阴县。
English: Wang Mangshi called Guyin County.

古文：莫黑旦，西安阳，莽曰鄣安。
现代文：莫胆县，西安阳县，王莽时叫鄣安县。
English: Moji County, Xi'an Yang County, Wang Mangshi called Lu'an County.

古文：河目。
现代文：河目县。
English: Kawame prefecture.

古文：云中郡，秦置。
现代文：云中郡，秦时设置。
English: Yunzhong County, set up in the Qin Dynasty.

古文：莽曰受降。
现代文：王莽时叫受降郡。
English: Wang Mangshi called Jiaozhou County.

古文：属并州。
现代文：属于并州。
English: It belongs to the merged state.

古文：户三万八千三百三，口十七万三千二百七十。
现代文：有三万八千三百零三户，十七万三千二百七十口人。
English: There are 38,303 households and 173,270 people.

古文：县十一：云中。莽曰远服。
现代文：有十一个县：云中县，王莽时叫远服县。
English: There are eleven counties: Yunzhong County, Wang Mangshi called Yuanfu County.

古文：咸阳，莽曰贲武。
现代文：咸阳县，王莽时叫贲武县。
English: Xianyang County, formerly known as Xiongwu County.

古文：陶林，东部都尉治。
现代文：陶林县，东部都尉治理。
English: Taolin County, the eastern part is under the administration of the governor.

古文：桢陵，缘胡山在西北。
现代文：桢陵县，缘胡山在西北。
English: Fuling County, bordered by Mount Hu in the northwest.

古文：西部都尉治。
现代文：西部都尉治理。
English: Governor of the western part of the country.

古文：莽曰桢陆。
现代文：王莽时叫桢陆县。
English: Wang Mengshi called Minlu County.

古文：犊和，沙陵，莽曰希恩。
现代文：犊和县，沙陵县，王莽时叫希恩县。
English: Suwa County, Saling County, Wang Mangshuo called Shion County.

古文：原阳，沙南，北舆，中部都尉治，武泉，莽曰顺泉。
现代文：原阳县，沙南县，北舆县，中部都尉治理。武泉县，王莽时叫顺泉县。
English: Hara-yang County, Shan'an County, Beibei County, the central governors. Wuxuan County, Wangmanzhi called Shunquan County.

古文：阳寿。
现代文：阳寿县。
English: Yangshou County.

古文：莽曰常得。
现代文：王莽时叫常得县。
English: Wang Mangshi called Changde County.

古文：定襄郡，高帝置。
现代文：定襄郡，高帝时设置。
English: Dingxiang County, established in the time of Emperor Gao.

古文：莽曰得降。
现代文：王莽时叫得降郡。
English: Wang Mangshi called for the county to be downgraded.

古文：属并州。
现代文：属于并州。
English: It belongs to the merged state.

古文：户三万八千五百五十九，口十六万三千一百四十四。
现代文：有三万八千五百五十九户，十六万三千一百四十四口人。
English: There are 38,559 households and 163,144 people.

古文：县一十二：成乐，桐过，莽曰椅桐。
现代文：有十二个县：成乐县，桐过县，王莽时叫椅桐县。
English: There are twelve counties: Chengle County, Tonggu County, Wangmanzhong County.

古文：都武，莽曰通德。
现代文：都武县，王莽时叫通德县。
English: Duwu County, called Tongde County in Wang Mang's time.

古文：武进，白渠水出塞外，西至沙陵入河。
现代文：武进县，白渠水流出塞外，向西到沙陵流入黄河。
English: In Wujin County, the water of the White Canal flows out of the dam and flows into the Yellow River in the west to Saling.

古文：西部都尉治。
现代文：西部都尉治理。
English: Governor of the western part of the country.

古文：莽曰伐蛮。
现代文：王莽时叫伐蛮县。
English: Wang Mangshi called Faban County.

古文：襄阴，武皋，荒干水出塞外，西至沙陵入河。
现代文：襄阴县，武皋县，荒干水流出塞外，向西到沙陵流入黄河。
English: In Xiangyin County and Wuxi County, barren dry water flows out of the dam and flows into the Yellow River in the west to Saling.

古文：中部都尉治。
现代文：中部都尉治理。
English: Chubu's governorship is over.

古文：莽曰永武。
现代文：王莽时叫永武县。
English: Wang Mang called Yongwu County.

古文：骆，莽曰遮要。
现代文：骆县，王莽时叫遮要县。
English: Luo County, Wang Mangshi called Zhayao County.

古文：定陶，莽曰迎符。
现代文：定陶县，王莽时叫迎符县。
English: Dingtao County, Wang Mangshi called Yingfu County.

古文：武城，莽曰桓就。
现代文：武城县，王莽时叫桓就县。
English: Wucheng County, formerly known as Huanzhong County.

古文：武要，东部都尉治。
现代文：武要县，东部都尉治理。
English: Buyeo County, governed by the eastern governor.

古文：莽曰厌胡。
现代文：王莽时叫厌胡县。
English: Wang Mengshi was once called "Tired of Hu County."

古文：定襄，莽曰著武。
现代文：定襄县，王莽时叫着武县。
English: Dingxiang County, Wang Mangshi called Wuxiang County.

古文：复陆。
现代文：复陆县。
English: Foshu County.

古文：莽曰闻武。
现代文：王莽时叫闻武县。
English: Wang Mang called Wengwu County.

古文：雁门郡，秦置。
现代文：雁门郡，秦时设置。
English: Ganmen County, set up in the Qin Dynasty.

古文：句注山在阴馆。
现代文：句注山在阴馆。
English: The mountain is in the dungeon.

古文：莽曰填狄。
现代文：王莽时叫填狄郡。
English: Wang Mangshi called for the filling of Di County.

古文：属并州。
现代文：属于并州。
English: It belongs to the merged state.

古文：户七万三千一百三十八，口二十九万三千四百五十四。
现代文：有七万三千一百三十八户，二十九万三千四百五十四人。
English: There are 73,138 households and 2,993,454 people.

古文：县十四：善无，莽曰阴馆。
现代文：有十四个县：善无县，王莽时叫阴馆县。
English: There are fourteen counties: Zhenwu County, Wangmanzhi called Yinyuan County.

古文：沃阳，盐泽在东北，有长丞。
现代文：沃阳县，盐泽在东北，有长丞。
English: Voyang County, Yanchezawa in the northeast, has Changzheng.

古文：西部都尉治。
现代文：西部都尉治理。
English: Governor of the western part of the country.

古文：莽曰敬阳。
现代文：王莽时叫敬阳县。
English: Wang Mangshi called Jingyang County.

古文：繁畤，莽曰当要。
现代文：繁峙县，王莽时叫当要县。
English: Wang Mang is called Dangyao County.

古文：中陵，莽曰遮害。
现代文：中陵县，王莽时叫遮害县。
English: Zhongling County, Wang Mangshi called it Shade County.

古文：阴馆，楼烦乡。
现代文：阴馆县，有楼烦乡。
English: Yinyuan County, there is a building in the village.

古文：景帝后三年置。
现代文：景帝后三年设置。
English: It is set three years after the death of Emperor Jing.

古文：累头山，治水所出，东至泉州入海，过郡六，行千一百里。
现代文：治水发源于累头山，向东到泉州流入大海，经过六个郡，行程一千一百里。
English: The flood control originates from Yedou Mountain, flows east to Quanzhou and flows into the sea, passing through six counties, a journey of eleven hundred miles.

古文：莽曰富代。
现代文：王莽时叫富代县。
English: Wang Mangshi called Fudai County.

古文：楼烦，有盐官。
现代文：楼烦县，有盐官。
English: In Loudu County, there is a salt official.

古文：武州，莽曰桓州，汪陶，剧阳，莽曰善阳。
现代文：武州县，王莽时叫桓州县。洼陶县，剧阳县，王莽时叫善阳县。
English: Wuzhou County, known as Hanzhou County when Wang Mang was alive. Wadao County, known as Yuyang County, known as Zanyang County when Wang Mang was alive.

古文：崞，莽曰崞张。
现代文：崞县，王莽时叫崞张县。
English: Lushan County, formerly known as Lushan Zhang County.

古文：平城，东部都尉治。
现代文：平城县，东部都尉治理。
English: Pingcheng County, the eastern part is under the administration of the governor.

古文：莽曰平顺。
现代文：王莽时叫平顺县。
English: Wang Mangshi called Pingshun County.

古文：埒，莽曰填狄亭。
现代文：埒县，王莽时叫填狄亭。
English: In Jixian County, Wang Mangshi called Jiedi Ting.

古文：马邑，莽曰章昭。
现代文：马邑县，王莽时叫章昭县。
English: Ma'e County was called Zhang Zhao County when Wang Mang was alive.

古文：强阴。
现代文：彊阴县。
English: Shuyin County.

古文：诸闻泽在东北。
现代文：诸闻泽在东北。
English: Zhuwenze is in the northeast.

古文：莽曰伏阴。
现代文：王莽时叫伏阴县。
English: Wang Mangshi called Fuxin County.

古文：代郡，秦置。
现代文：代郡，秦时设置。
English: It was set up at the time of the Qing Dynasty.

古文：莽曰厌狄。
现代文：王莽时叫厌狄郡。
English: Wang Mangshi once said that he hated Di County.

古文：有五原关、常山关。
现代文：有五原关、常山关。
English: There are Gohyangwan Pass and Changshan Pass.

古文：属幽州。
现代文：属于幽州。
English: It belongs to Yuzhou.

古文：户五万六千七百七十一，口二十七万八千七百五十四。
现代文：有五万六千七百七十一户，二十七万八干七百五十四口人。
English: There are 56,771 households, with 278,754 people.

古文：县十八：桑乾，莽曰安德。
现代文：有十八个县：桑干县，王莽时叫安德县。
English: There are eighteen counties: Sanggan County, Wang Mangshi called Ande County.

古文：道人，莽曰道仁。
现代文：道人县，王莽时叫道仁县。
English: Dojin County was called Dojin County when Wang Mang was alive.

古文：当城，高柳，西部都尉治。
现代文：当城县，高柳县，西部都尉治理。
English: Dangcheng County, Gaoliu County, and the western part of the county are governed by prefects.

古文：马城，东部都尉治。
现代文：马城县，东部都尉治理。
English: Macheng County, governed by the eastern governor.

古文：班氏，秦地图书班氏。
现代文：班氏县，秦时地图上写的是班氏。
English: Ban's County, Qin Dynasty The map shows Ban's County.

古文：莽曰班副。
现代文：王莽时叫班副。
English: Wang Mangshi called the deputy.

古文：延陵，狋氏，莽曰狋聚。
现代文：延陵县，标氏县，王莽时叫标聚县。
English: Yanling County, Boji County, Wang Mang is called Boji County.

古文：且如，于延水出塞外，东至宁入沽。
现代文：且如县，于延水发源于塞外，向东到宁县流入沽水。
English: Moreover, as in the county, the water in Yancheng originates from outside the province and flows eastward to Ningxian and flows into Surabaya.

古文：中部都尉治。
现代文：中部都尉治理。
English: Chubu's governorship is over.

古文：平邑，莽曰平胡。
现代文：平邑县，王莽时叫乎胡县。
English: Pingyi County, Wang Mangshi called Hu Hu County.

古文：阳原，东安阳，莽曰竟安。
现代文：阳原县，束安阳县，王莽时叫竟安县。
English: Yangyuan County, Sok Anyang County, Wang Mangshi called Qing'an County.

古文：参合，平舒，祁夷水北至桑乾入沽。
现代文：参合县，平舒县，祁夷水向北到桑干流入沽水。
English: In Sanghe County and Pingshu County, the Qiyishui River flows north to the Sanggan River and flows into the Yishui River.

古文：莽曰平葆。
现代文：王莽时叫平葆县。
English: Wang Mangshi called Pingyao County.

古文：代，莽曰厌狄亭。
现代文：代县，王莽时叫厌狄亭。
English: Dai County, Wang Mengshi is called Disgusting Diting.

古文：灵丘。滱河东至文安入大河，过郡五，行九百四十里。
现代文：灵丘县，淀河向东到文安县流入大河，经过五个郡，行程九百四十里。
English: In Lingqiu County, the Yodo River flows eastward to Wen'an County and flows into the Great River, passing through five counties, a journey of nine hundred and forty miles.

古文：并州川。
现代文：是并州的河流。
English: It is the largest river in the state.

古文：广昌，涞水东南至容城入河，过郡三，行五百里，并州浸。
现代文：广昌县，涞水向东南到容城流入黄河，经过三个郡，行程五百里，是并州的灌渠。
English: In Guangchang County, Surabaya water flows into the Yellow River from the southeast to Rongcheng, passing through three counties and traveling 500 miles. It is an irrigation canal that connects the two counties.

古文：莽曰广屏。
现代文：王莽时叫广屏县。
English: Wang Mangshi called Guangping County.

古文：卤城，虖池河东至参户入虖池别，过郡九，行千三百四十里，并州川。
现代文：卤城县。库池河向东到参户流入库池支流，经过九个郡，行程一千三百四十里，是并州的河流。
English: Halecheng County. The Kuqi River flows into the Kuqi tributary as far east as Samhu, passing through nine counties and traveling thirteen hundred and forty miles. It is a river that connects the state.

古文：从河东至文安入海，过郡六，行千三百七十里。
现代文：从河东到文安县流入大海，经过六个郡，行程一千三百七十里。
English: From Hedong to Wen'an County, it flows into the sea, passing through six counties, a journey of thirteen hundred and seventy miles.

古文：莽曰鲁盾。
现代文：王莽时叫鲁盾县。
English: At the time of Wang Mang, it was called Rudun County.

古文：上谷郡，秦置。
现代文：上谷郡，秦时设置。
English: Shanggu County, set up in the Qin Dynasty.

古文：莽曰朔调。
现代文：王莽时叫朔调郡。
English: Wang Mangshi was called Shuo Diao County.

古文：属幽州。
现代文：属于幽州。
English: It belongs to Yuzhou.

古文：户三万六千八，口十一万七千七百六十二。
现代文：有三万六千零八户，十一万七千七百六十二口人。
English: There were 36,088 households with 117,762 people.

古文：县十五：沮阳，莽曰沮阴。
现代文：有十五个县：沮阳县，王莽时叫沮阴县。
English: There are fifteen counties: Depressed Yang County, Wang Mangshi called Depressed Yin County.

古文：泉上，莽曰塞泉。
现代文：泉上县，王莽时叫塞泉县。
English: Quanxiang County was called Saiquan County in Wang Mang's time.

古文：潘，莽曰树武。
现代文：潘县，王莽时叫树武县。
English: Pan County, Wang Mang called Shuwu County.

古文：军都，温馀水东至路，南入沽。
现代文：军都县，温余水向东到路县，向南流入沽水。
English: In Jundu County, the warm residual water flows eastward to Lu County and southward to Surabaya.

古文：居庸，有关。
现代文：居庸县，有关口。
English: Juyong County, the relevant mouth.

古文：雊瞀，夷舆，莽曰朔调亭。
现代文：雊瞀县，夷舆县，王莽时叫朔调亭。
English: Shao County, Yiwu County, Wang Mang is called Shuo Diao Ting.

古文：宁，西部都尉治。
现代文：宁县，西部都尉治理。
English: Ning County, governed by the western governor.

古文：莽曰博康。
现代文：王莽时叫博康县。
English: At the time of Wang Mang, it was called Bokang County.

古文：昌平，莽曰长昌。
现代文：昌平县，王莽时叫长昌县。
English: Changping County, called Changchang County in Wang Mang's time.

古文：广宁，莽曰广康。
现代文：广宁县，王莽时叫广康县。
English: Guangning County, called Guangkang County in Wang Mang's time.

古文：涿鹿，莽曰抪陆。
现代文：涿鹿县，王莽时叫怖陆县。
English: Elk County, Wang Mangshi called Scary Lu County.

古文：且居，阳乐水出东，南入沽。
现代文：且居县，阳乐水向东流出，南面流入沽水。
English: And in Jixian County, Yangle water flows out to the east and flows into Surabaya water in the south.

古文：莽曰久居。
现代文：王莽时叫久居县。
English: Wang Mang called Jiuji County.

古文：茹，莽曰穀武。
现代文：茹县，王莽时叫谷武县。
English: Ru County, Wang Mang called Guwu County.

古文：女祁，东部都尉治。
现代文：女祁县，束部都尉治理。
English: Onna County, governed by Captain Sokube.

古文：莽曰祁。
现代文：王莽时叫祁县。
English: Wang Mangshi is called Jixian.

古文：下落。
现代文：下落县。
English: It is located in Tsumo County.

古文：莽曰下忠。
现代文：王莽时叫下盅题。
English: Wang Mangshi called out the next question.

古文：渔阳郡，秦置。
现代文：渔阳郡，秦时设置。
English: Yuyang County, set up in the Qin Dynasty.

古文：莽曰通路。
现代文：王莽时叫通路郡。
English: Wang Mangshi called Tonglu County.

古文：属幽州。
现代文：属于幽州。
English: It belongs to Yuzhou.

古文：户六万八千八百二，口二十六万四千一百一十六。
现代文：有六万八千八百零二户，二十六万四千一百一十六口人。
English: There are 68,802 households and 264,116 people.

古文：县十二：渔阳，沽水出塞外。东南至泉州入海，行七百五十里。
现代文：有十二个县：渔阳县，沾水流出塞外，向东南到泉州流入大海，行程七百五十里。
English: There are twelve counties: Yuyang County, the dipping water flows out of the plug, flowing southeast to Quanzhou into the sea, a journey of seven hundred and fifty miles.

古文：有铁官。
现代文：有铁官。
English: There are iron officials.

古文：莽曰得渔。
现代文：王莽时叫得渔县。
English: Wang Mangshi called the county.

古文：狐奴，莽曰举符。
现代文：狐奴县，王莽时叫举符县。
English: Fox County, Wang Mangshi called the county.

古文：路，莽曰通路亭。
现代文：路县，王莽时叫通路亭。
English: Lu County, Wang Mang called Tonglu Pavilion.

古文：雍奴，泉州，有盐官。
现代文：雍奴县，泉州县，有盐官。
English: There are salt officials in Yongnu County and Quanzhou County.

古文：莽曰泉调。
现代文：王莽时叫泉调县。
English: Wang Mangshi called Izumi County.

古文：平谷，安乐，厗奚，莽曰敦德。
现代文：平谷县，安乐县，厍奚县，王莽时叫敦德县。
English: Pinggu County, Anle County, Handan County, Wang Mangshi called Dunde County.

古文：犷平，莽曰平犷。
现代文：犷平县，王莽时叫平犷县。
English: Suiping County was called Pingyao County at the time of Wang Mang.

古文：要阳，都尉治。
现代文：要阳县，都尉治理。
English: To Yang County, the governor governance.

古文：莽曰要术。
现代文：王莽时口要术县。
English: Wang Mang is always talking about the county.

古文：白檀，洫水出北蛮夷。
现代文：白檀县，洫水流蛮夷。
English: In Baidang County, the floodwaters are raging.

古文：滑盐。
现代文：滑盐县。
English: It is located in Nameri County.

古文：莽曰匡德。
现代文：王菱时叫匡龃。
English: Wang Lingshi was called Kuang Yao.

古文：右北平郡，秦置。
现代文：右北平郡，秦时设置。
English: Right Beiping County, set at the time of Qin Dynasty.

古文：莽曰北顺。
现代文：王莽时叫北顺郡。
English: Wang Mangshi called Beishun County.

古文：属幽州。
现代文：属于幽州。
English: It belongs to Yuzhou.

古文：户六万六千六百八十九，口三十二万七百八十。
现代文：有六万六千六百八十九户，三十二万七百八十口人。
English: There are 66,689 households and 322,780 people.

古文：县十六：平刚，无终，故无终子国。
现代文：有十六个县：平刚县，无终县，是以前的无终子国。
English: There are 16 counties: Pinggang County, Mufeng County, which is the former Mufeng County.

古文：浭水西至雍奴入海，过郡二，行六百五十里。
现代文：冱水向西到雍奴县流入大海，经过两个郡，行程六百五十里。
English: Surabaya's water flows west to the sea in Yongnu County, passing through two counties and traveling 650 miles.

古文：石成，延陵，莽曰铺武。
现代文：石成县，廷陵县，王莽时叫铺武县。
English: Ishicheng County, Tingling County, Wang Mangshi called Puwu County.

古文：俊靡，灅水南至无终东入庚。
现代文：俊靡县，漫水向南到无终东流入庚水。
English: In Junmai County, the floodwaters flowed southward to the endless east into the Ganges.

古文：莽曰俊麻。
现代文：王莽时叫俊麻县。
English: Wang Mangshi called Junma County.

古文：薋，都尉治。
现代文：旧县，都尉治理。
English: The old county was governed by a governor.

古文：莽曰裒睦。
现代文：王莽时叫哀睦县。
English: Wang Mangshi is called Aimu County.

古文：徐无，莽曰北顺亭。
现代文：徐无县，王莽时叫北顺亭。
English: Xu Wu County, Wang Mang called Beishunting.

古文：字，榆水出东。
现代文：字县，榆水从东面流出。
English: In Zhixian County, the floodwater flows out from the east.

古文：土根，白狼，莽曰伏狄。
现代文：上垠县，白狼县，王莽时叫伏狄县。
English: Shangluo County, Baiyun County, Wangmanzhi County and Wudi County.

古文：夕阳，有铁官。
现代文：夕阳县，有铁官。
English: In Yiyang County, there is an iron official.

古文：莽曰夕阴。
现代文：王莽时叫夕阴县。
English: Wang Mangshi called Yuyin County.

古文：昌城，莽曰淑武。
现代文：昌城县，王莽时。淑武县。
English: Changcheng County, Wang Mangshi. Shuwu County.

古文：骊成，大揭石山在县西南。
现代文：骊成县，大揭石山在县的西南面。
English: In Lucheng County, Dajie Stone Mountain is located in the southwest of the county.

古文：莽曰揭石。
现代文：王莽时叫揭石县。
English: Wang Mangshi called Jieshi County.

古文：广成，莽曰平虏。
现代文：广成县，王莽时叫平虏县。
English: Guangcheng County was called Pingru County when Wang Mang was alive.

古文：聚阳，莽曰笃睦。平明。
现代文：聚阳县，工莽时叫笃睦县、平明县。
English: Jiyang County, called Dukmut County and Pingming County when it is busy.

古文：莽曰平阳。
现代文：王莽时叫平阳县。
English: Wang Mangshi called Pingyang County.

古文：辽西郡，秦置。有小水四十八，并行三千四十六里。
现代文：辽西郡，秦时设置：有小河四十八条，并行三千零四十六里。
English: Liaoxi County, Qin Dynasty: There are 48 small rivers, running parallel for 3,046 miles.

古文：属幽州。
现代文：属于幽州。
English: It belongs to Yuzhou.

古文：户七万二千六百五十四，口三十五万二千三百二十五。
现代文：有七万二千六百五十四户，三十五万二千三百二十五口人。
English: There are 72,654 households and 352,325 people.

古文：县十四：且虑，有高庙。莽曰鉏虑。
现代文：有十四个县：且虑县，有高庙：王莽时叫组虑县。
English: There are fourteen counties: Qi Xian County, there is a high temple: Wang Mangshi called Qi Xian County.

古文：海阳，龙鲜水东入封大水。
现代文：海阳县，龙鲜水向东流入封大水。
English: In Haiyang County, Long fresh water flows eastward into Fengda water.

古文：封大水，缓虚水皆南入海。
现代文：封大水、缓虚水都向南流入大海。
English: Both the sealed large water and the slow empty water flowed southward into the sea.

古文：有盐官。
现代文：有盐官。
English: There is a salt officer.

古文：新安平。夷水东入塞外。
现代文：新安平县，夷水向东流入塞外。
English: In Xin'anping County, the floodwaters flowed eastward out of the country.

古文：柳城，马首山在西南。
现代文：柳城县，马首山在西南。
English: Liucheng County, Mashu Mountain is in the southwest.

古文：参柳水北入海。
现代文：参柳水向北流入大海。
English: The ginseng willow water flows north into the sea.

古文：西部都尉治。
现代文：西部都尉治理。
English: Governor of the western part of the country.

古文：令支，有孤竹城。
现代文：令支县，有孤竹城。
English: In Ling County, there is Lone Bamboo Town.

古文：莽曰令氏亭。
现代文：王莽时叫令氏亭。
English: Wang Mangshi called Ling Shi Ting.

古文：肥如，玄水东入濡水。
现代文：肥如县，玄水向东流入濡水。
English: Fertile as the county, the black water flows eastward into the wet water.

古文：濡水南入海阳。
现代文：濡水向南流入海阳水。
English: The wet water flows south into the open sea.

古文：又有卢水，南入玄。
现代文：还有卢水，向南流入玄水。
English: There is also Lu Shui, which flows south into Xuan Shui.

古文：莽曰肥而。
现代文：王莽时叫肥而县。
English: Wang Mengshi called Hebei County.

古文：宾从，莽曰勉武。
现代文：宾从县，王莽时叫勉武县。
English: Binzong County, Wang Mangshi called Premu County.

古文：交黎，渝水首受塞外，南入海。
现代文：交黎县，渝水首先从塞外接受水源，向南流入人海。
English: In Jiaoli County, Chongshui first received water from outside the country and flowed south into the sea of people.

古文：东部都尉治。
现代文：东部都尉治理。
English: The eastern region is under the control of the governor.

古文：莽曰禽虏。
现代文：王莽时叫禽虏县。
English: Wang Mangshi called Yiru County.

古文：阳乐，狐苏，唐就水至徒河入海。
现代文：阳乐县，狐苏县，唐就水到徒河流入大海。
English: In Yangle County and Juxu County, the Tang River flows into the sea.

古文：徒河，莽曰河福。
现代文：徒河县，王莽时叫河福县。
English: Tsuhe County was called Hefu County in Wang Mang's time.

古文：文成，莽曰言虏。
现代文：文成县，王莽时叫言虏县。
English: Wencheng County, once called Yanrui County.

古文：临渝，渝水首受白狼，东入塞外，又有侯水，北入渝。
现代文：临渝县，渝水首先接受白狼水的水源，向东流入塞外。还有侯水，向北流入渝水。
English: In Linwu County, the first water source to receive water from the White Wolf Water is the Yushui Water, which flows eastward out of the county. There is also the Hou Water, which flows northward into the Yushui Water.

古文：莽曰冯德。
现代文：王莽时叫冯德县。
English: Wang Mangshi called Fengde County.

古文：絫。
现代文：萦县。
English: Jixian County.

古文：下官水南入海。
现代文：官水向南流入人海。
English: The canal water flows south into the sea of people.

古文：又有揭石水、宾水，皆南入官。
现代文：还有揭石水、宾水，都向南流入官水。
English: There are also Jieshi water and Bing water, both of which flow southward into the official water.

古文：莽曰选武。
现代文：王莽时叫选武竖。
English: When Wang Mang called for a rally.

古文：辽东郡，秦置。
现代文：辽东郡，秦时设置。
English: Liaodong County, set up in the Qin Dynasty.

古文：属幽州。
现代文：属于幽州。
English: It belongs to Yuzhou.

古文：户五万五千九百七十二，口二十七万二千五百三十九。
现代文：有五万五千九百七十二户，二十七万二千五百三十九口人。
English: There are 55,972 households and 272,539 people.

古文：县十八：襄平。有牧师官。
现代文：有十八个县：襄平县，有牧师官。
English: There are eighteen counties: Yangping County, there are pastors.

古文：莽曰昌平。
现代文：王莽时叫昌平县。
English: Wang Mang called Changping County.

古文：新昌，无虑，西部都尉治。
现代文：新昌县，无虑县，西部都尉治理。
English: Xinchang County, Wuxian County, and the western part of the county are under the control of the governor.

古文：望平，大辽水出塞外，南至安市入海。行千二百五十里。
现代文：望平县，大辽水流出塞外，向南到安市县流人大海，行程一千二百五十里。
English: In Wangping County, the Daliao River flows out of the city and flows south to Anshi County, a journey of 1250 miles.

古文：莽曰长说。
现代文：王莽时叫长说县。
English: Wang Mangshi called for Changdian County.

古文：房，候城，中部都尉治。
现代文：房县，候城县，中部都尉治理。
English: Fang County, Hucheng County, and the central region will be governed by captains.

古文：辽队，莽曰顺睦。
现代文：辽队县，王莽时叫顺睦县。
English: Liaotian County, formerly known as Shunmu County.

古文：辽阳，大梁水西南至辽阳入辽。
现代文：辽阳县，大梁水向西南到辽阳县流入辽水。
English: In Liaoyang County, the Dalian Water flows southwest to Liaoyang County and flows into Liaoshui.

古文：莽曰辽阴。
现代文：王莽时叫辽阴县。
English: Wang Mangshi called Liaoning County.

古文：险渎，居就，室伪山，室伪水所出，北至襄平入梁也。
现代文：险渎县，居觎，室伪水发源于室伪山，向北到襄平流入梁水。
English: The Murohaku Water originates from Murohaku Mountain and flows north to Yangpyeong into the Liangshui River.

古文：高显，安市，武次，东部都尉治。
现代文：高显县，安市县，武次县，东部都尉治理。
English: Gao Xian County, Anshi County, Wuji County, the eastern capitals are under the administration.

古文：莽曰桓次。
现代文：王莽时叫桓次县。
English: Wang Mangshi called Kanji County.

古文：平郭，有铁官、盐官。
现代文：平郭县，有铁官、盐官。
English: Pingguo County, there are iron officials and salt officials.

古文：西安平，莽曰北安平。
现代文：西安平县，王莽时叫北安平县。
English: Xi'an Ping County was called Beian Ping County when Wang Mang was alive.

古文：文，莽曰文亭。
现代文：文县，王莽时叫文亭县。
English: Wen County was called Wen Ting County in Wang Mang's time.

古文：番汗，沛，水出塞外，西南入海。
现代文：番汁县，沛水流出塞外，向西南流入大海。
English: In Banju County, the water flowed out of the dam and flowed into the sea to the southwest.

古文：沓氏。
现代文：沓氏县。
English: Shinshi County.

古文：玄菟郡，武帝元封四年开。
现代文：玄菟郡，武帝元封四年设置。
English: Xuanzang County was established in the fourth year of Emperor Wu's reign.

古文：高句骊，莽曰下句骊。
现代文：高句骊，王莽时叫下句骊。
English: A high-pitched chirp, Wang Mang called the next chirp.

古文：属幽州。户四万五千六。口二十二万一千八百四十五。
现代文：属于幽州：有四万五千零六户，二十二万一千八百四十五人。
English: Belonging to Yuzhou: There are 45,066 households and 221,845 people.

古文：县三：高句骊，辽山，辽水所出，西南至辽队入大辽水。
现代文：有三个县：高句骊县，辽发源于产山，向西南到辽坠整流。
English: There are three counties: Gaogulun County, Liao Fa originates from Zhishan, and flows southwest to Liao Sheng.

古文：又有南苏水，西北经塞外。
现代文：又有直筮水，向西北流过塞外。
English: There is also water from the Dzongcheng River, which flows northwest across the delta.

古文：上殷台，莽曰下殷。
现代文：上殷台县，土莽时叫下殷县。
English: Shangyin Tai County, sometimes called Lower Yin County.

古文：西盖马。
现代文：西盖马县。
English: West Geima County.

古文：马訾水西北入盐难水，西南至西安平入海，过郡二，行二千一百里。
现代文：马訾水向西北流入盐难水，西南到西安平县流入大海，经过两个郡，行程：千一百里。
English: The Ma'anshui River flows northwest into the salt-difficult water, southwest to Xi'an Ping County and flows into the sea, passing through two counties, the journey: one thousand one hundred miles.

古文：莽曰玄菟亭。
现代文：王莽时叫玄菟亭。
English: Wang Mangshi is called Xuanzhongting.

古文：乐浪郡，武帝元封三年开。
现代文：乐浪郡，武帝元封二年设置。
English: Lelang County, established in the second year of Emperor Wu's reign.

古文：莽曰乐鲜。属幽州。
现代文：王莽时叫乐鲜郡，属于幽州。
English: Wang Mangshi called Leshan County, which belongs to Yuzhou.

古文：户六万二千八百一十二，口四十万六千七百四十八。
现代文：有六万二千八百一十二户，四十万六千七百四十八口人。
English: There are 62,812 households, with 467,488 people.

古文：有云鄣。县二十五：朝鲜，讑邯，浿水，水西至增地入海。
现代文：有云鄣，有二十五个县：朝鲜县，欣邯县，湏水县，水流向西到增地县流入大海。
English: There are twenty-five counties in Yunnan Province: Chosun County, Xin'an County, Ershui County. The water flows westward to Zengdi County and flows into the sea.

古文：莽曰乐鲜亭。
现代文：王莽时叫乐鲜亭县。
English: Wang Mangshi called Lexianting County.

古文：含资，带水西至带方入海。
现代文：含资县，带水向西到带方县流入大海。
English: In Hanji County, the water flowed westward to Bifang County and flowed into the sea.

古文：黏蝉，遂成，增地，莽曰增土。
现代文：黏蝉县，遂成县，增地县，王莽时叫增土县。
English: Guixian County, Suicheng County, Zengdi County, and Wangmanzhi County are all called Zengdi County.

古文：带方，驷望，海冥，莽曰海桓，列口，长岑，屯有，昭明，高部都尉治。
现代文：带方县，驷望县，海冥县，王莽时叫海桓县：列口县，长岑县，屯有县，昭明县，南部都尉治理。
English: Take Fang County, Gongwang County, Haidue County, Wang Mangshi called Haihuan County: Lekou County, Changtao County, Tunyu County, Zhaoming County, Nanbu County.

古文：镂方，提奚，浑弥，吞列，分黎山，列水所出。西至黏蝉入海，行八百二十里。
现代文：镂方县，提奚县，浑弥县，吞列县，列水发源于分黎山，向西到黏蝉县流入大海，行程八百：十里。
English: In Fangfang County, Dizeng County, Hunmi County, and Tonglei County, the column of water originates from the Fenli Mountain and flows westward to the sea in Qixian County, a journey of eight hundred and ten miles.

古文：东暆，不耐，东部都尉治。
现代文：东吨县，不而县，束部都尉治理。
English: Dongton County, Bua County, and Sokube County are governed by captains.

古文：蚕台，华丽，邪头昧，前莫，夫租。
现代文：蚕台县，华丽县，邪头昧县，前莫县，夫租县。
English: Jiantai County, Gaoli County, Yadoumai County, Qianmo County, Fusian County.

古文：南海郡，秦置。
现代文：南海郡，秦时设置。
English: Nanhai County, set up in the Qin Dynasty.

古文：秦败，尉佗王此地。
现代文：秦国败亡后，尉佗在这里称王。
English: After the defeat of Qin, Fuxi became king here.

古文：武帝元鼎六年开。
现代文：武帝元鼎六年设置。
English: It was set up in the sixth year of Emperor Wu's reign and changed its name.

古文：属交州。
现代文：属于交州。
English: It belongs to Jiaozhou.

古文：户万九千六百一十三，口九万四千二百五十三。
现代文：有一万九千六百一十三户，九万四千二百五十三口人。
English: There are 19,613 households and 94,253 people.

古文：有圃羞官。
现代文：有圃羞官。
English: There is no shame in being an official.

古文：县六：番禺，尉佗都。
现代文：有六个县：番禺县，是尉佗王的都城。
English: There are six counties: Panyu County, is the capital of Liao Dynasty.

古文：有盐官。
现代文：有盐官。
English: There is a salt officer.

古文：博罗，中宿，有洭浦官。
现代文：博罗县，中宿县，有沤浦官。
English: Borough County, Nakajuku County, there are post offices.

古文：龙川，四公，揭阳，莽曰南海亭。
现代文：龙川县，四会县，揭阳县。王莽时叫南海亭。
English: Longchuan County, Sihui County, Jieyang County. Wang Mang is called Nanhaitei.

古文：郁林郡，故秦桂林郡，属尉佗。
现代文：郁林郡，以前秦国的桂林郡，属于尉佗。
English: Yulin County, formerly Guilin County of Qin State, belongs to Fuxing.

古文：武帝元鼎六年开。
现代文：武帝元鼎六年设置，并改名。
English: It was set up in the sixth year of Emperor Wu's reign and changed its name.

古文：更名，有小溪川水七，并行三千一百一十里。
现代文：有小溪河水七条，并行三千一百一十里。
English: There are seven brooks and seven rivers, running parallel for 3,110 li.

古文：莽曰郁平。属交州。
现代文：王莽时叫郁平县，简于交州。
English: Wang Mangshi called Yuping County, abbreviated as Jiaozhou.

古文：户万二千四百一十五，口七万一千一百六十二。
现代文：有一万二千四百一十五户，七万一千一百六十二口人。
English: There are 12,415 households and 71,162 people.

古文：县十二：布山，安广，阿林，广郁，郁水首受夜郎豚水，东至四会入海，过郡四，行四千三十里。
现代文：有十二个县：布山县，安广县，阿林县，广郁县，郁水首先从夜郎豚水接受水源，向东到四会县流入大海，经过四个郡，行程四千零三十里。
English: There are twelve counties: Busan County, Anguang County, Aling County, Guangyu County. Yulishui first receives water from the Yelangpork Water and flows into the sea to the east to Sihui County, passing through four counties and traveling 4,030 miles.

古文：中留，桂林，潭中，莽曰中潭。
现代文：中留县，桂林县，潭中县，王莽时叫中潭县。
English: Zhongliu County, Guilin County, Tanzhong County, Wang Mangshi called Zhongtan County.

古文：临尘，朱涯水入领方。
现代文：临尘县，朱涯水流入领方。
English: In Linfen County, Zhuya water flows into the leader.

古文：又有斤南水。
现代文：又有斤南水。
English: There's also a jing of southern water.

古文：又有侵离水，行七百里。
现代文：还有侵离水，行程百里。
English: There is also the invasion from the water, a journey of a hundred miles.

古文：莽曰监尘。
现代文：王莽时叫监尘县。
English: Wang Mangshi called Guandu County.

古文：定周，周水首受无敛，东入潭，行七百九十里。
现代文：定周县，周水首先从无敛接受水源，向东流入潭。行程匕百九十里。
English: In Dingzhou County, the Zhou Water first receives water from the unrestrained source and flows into the lake to the east. The journey is 390 miles.

古文：增食，驩水首受牂柯东界，入朱涯水，行五百七十里。
现代文：增食县，骥水首先从烊柯束界接受了水源，流入朱涯水，行程五百七十里。
English: In Zengshui County, Surabaya first received water from the Shijiazhuang Kezoku area and flowed into Zhuya water, a journey of 570 miles.

古文：领方，斤南水入郁。
现代文：领方县，斤南水流入郁水。
English: In Lianfang County, the Jinnan River flows into the Yudu River.

古文：又有墧水。
现代文：还有墦水。
English: There's also Surabaya.

古文：都尉治。
现代文：都尉治理。
English: The lieutenant governs.

古文：雍鸡。
现代文：雍鸡县。
English: Yongji County.

古文：有关。
现代文：有关。
English: It's concerning.

古文：苍梧郡，武帝元鼎六年开。
现代文：苍梧郡，武帝元鼎六年设置。
English: Cangwu County was established in the sixth year of Emperor Wu's reign.

古文：莽曰新广，属交州。
现代文：王莽时叫新广郡。属于交州。
English: Wang Mang was called Xinguang County at the time. It belongs to Jiaozhou.

古文：有离水关。
现代文：有离水关。
English: There are water crossings.

古文：户二万四千三百七十九，口十四万六千一百六十。
现代文：有二万四千三百七十九户，十四万六千一百六十口人。
English: There are twenty-four thousand three hundred and seventy-nine households and one hundred forty-six thousand one hundred and sixty people.

古文：县十：广信，莽曰广信亭。
现代文：有十个县：广信县，王莽时叫广信亭。
English: There are ten counties: Guangxin County, Wang Mang is called Guangxin Pavilion.

古文：谢沐，有关。
现代文：谢沐县，有关。
English: Xiemu County, related.

古文：高要，有盐官。
现代文：高要县，有盐官。
English: Gaoyou County, there are salt officials.

古文：封阳，临贺，莽曰大贺。
现代文：封阳县，临贺县，王莽时叫大贺县。
English: Fengyang County, Linhe County, Wang Mang is called Daghe County.

古文：端溪，冯乘，富川，荔浦，有荔平关。
现代文：端溪县，冯乘县，富川县，荔蒲县，有荔平关。
English: Duanxi County, Feng Rong County, Buchuan County, Libo County, there are Liping Pass.

古文：猛陵。
现代文：猛陵县。
English: Mengling County.

古文：龙山，合水所出，南至布山入海。
现代文：合水发源于龙山，向南到布山流入大海。
English: The confluence originates from Longshan and flows into the sea as far south as Busan.

古文：莽曰猛陆。
现代文：王莽时叫猛陆县。
English: Wang Mangshi called Menglu County.

古文：交趾郡，武帝元鼎六年开，属交州。
现代文：交趾郡，武帝元鼎六年设置，属于交州。
English: Jiaozi County, established in the sixth year of Emperor Wu's reign, belongs to Jiaozhou.

古文：户九万二千四百四十，口七十四万六千二百三十七。
现代文：有九万二千四百四十户，七十四万六千二百三十七口人。
English: There are 92,440 households, with 746,237 people.

古文：县十：羸阝娄，有羞官。
现代文：有十个县：羸喽县，有羞官。
English: There are ten counties: Shixian County, Shiguan County.

古文：安定，苟屚，麋泠，都尉治。
现代文：安定县，苟届县，麓泠县，都尉治理。
English: Anding County, Guojie County, and Luhou County are governed by governors.

古文：曲易，此带，稽徐，西于，龙编，朱■。
现代文：曲易县，北带县，稽徐县，西于县，龙编县，朱载县。
English: Quyi County, Beibei County, Jinxu County, Xiyu County, Longyan County, Zhuzai County.

古文：合浦郡，武帝元鼎六年开，莽曰桓合。
现代文：合浦郡，武帝元鼎六年设置。王莽时叫桓合郡。
English: Hepu County was established in the sixth year of Emperor Wu's reign. It was called Kanhe County during Wang Mang's reign.

古文：属交州。
现代文：属于交州。
English: It belongs to Jiaozhou.

古文：户万五千三百九十八，口七万八千九百八十。
现代文：有一万五千三百九十八户，七万八千九百八十口人。
English: There are 15,398 households, with 78,980 people.

古文：县五：徐闻，高凉，合浦。有关。
现代文：有五个县：徐闻县，高凉县，合浦县，有关。
English: There are five counties: Xuwen County, Gaoliang County, and Hepu County.

古文：莽曰桓亭。
现代文：王莽时叫桓亭县。
English: Wang Mangshi was called Kantei.

古文：临允，牢水北入高要入郁，过郡三，行五百三十里。
现代文：临允县，牢水向北流入高要，再流入郁水，经过三个郡，行程五百三十里。
English: In Linjun County, the fast-flowing water flows northward into Gaoyang, and then flows into Yushui, passing through three counties, traveling 530 miles.

古文：莽曰大允。
现代文：王莽时叫大允县。
English: Wang Mangshi called Dayong County.

古文：朱卢，都尉治。
现代文：朱卢县。都尉治理。
English: Zhulu County. Governed by the governor of Zhulu.

古文：九真郡，武帝元鼎六年开。
现代文：九真郡，武帝元鼎六年设置。
English: Jiuzhen County, established in the sixth year of Emperor Wu's reign.

古文：有小水五十二，并行八千五百六十里。
现代文：有小河五十二条，并行八千五百六十里。
English: There are fifty-two small rivers, running parallel for 8,560 li.

古文：户三万五千七百四十三，口十六万六千一十三。
现代文：有三万五千七百四十三户，十六万六千零一十三人。
English: There are 35,743 households and 166,013 people.

古文：有界关。
现代文：有界关。
English: There is a border.

古文：县七：胥浦，莽曰驩成。
现代文：有七个县：胥浦县，王莽时叫驱成县。
English: There are seven counties: Xunpu County, Wang Mangshi called Fu Cheng County.

古文：居风，都庞，馀发，咸驩，无切，都尉治。
现代文：居风县，都庞县，余发县，咸骥县，无切县，都尉治理。
English: Ju Feng County, Du Pang County, Yu Fa County, Xian Ye County, Mucheng County, are governed by captains.

古文：无编。
现代文：无编县。
English: There are no prefectures.

古文：莽曰九真亭。
现代文：王莽时叫立真皇。
English: Wang Mangshi called for the establishment of a true emperor.

古文：日南郡，故秦象郡，武帝元鼎六年开，更名。
现代文：日南郡，以前秦国的象郡，武帝元鼎六年设置，并改名。
English: Nichinan County, formerly Xiang County of Qin, was established in the sixth year of Emperor Wu's reign and changed its name.

古文：有小水十六，并行三千一百八十里。
现代文：有河十六条，并行三千一百八十里。
English: There are 16 rivers, running parallel for 3,180 miles.

古文：属交州。
现代文：属于交州。
English: It belongs to Jiaozhou.

古文：户万五千四百六十，口六万九千四百八十五。
现代文：有一万五千四百六十户，六万九千四百八十五口人。
English: There are 15,460 households and 69,485 people.

古文：县五：朱吾，比景，卢容，西卷，水入海，有竹，可为杖。
现代文：有五个县：朱吾县，比景县，卢容县，西卷县，河流流入大海，有竹子，可作拐杖。
English: There are five counties: Zhuwu County, Bijing County, Lulong County, and Xizhuan County. The rivers flow into the sea, and there is bamboo, which can be used as crutches.

古文：莽曰日南亭。
现代文：王莽时叫日南亭。
English: Wang Mangshi is called Nichinantei.

古文：象林。
现代文：象林县。
English: Xianglin County.

古文：赵国，故秦邯郸郡，高帝四年为赵国。景帝三年复为邯郸郡，五年复故。
现代文：赵国，以前秦国的邯郸郡，高帝四年成为趟国，景帝三年恢复为邯郸郡，五年又恢复为原名。
English: Zhao Guo, formerly Qin Guo County, Gao Di became Tong Guo in four years, Jing Di was restored to Qo County in three years, and the original name was restored in five years.

古文：莽曰桓亭。
现代文：王莽时叫桓亭。
English: Wang Mangshi was called Kantei.

古文：属冀州。
现代文：属于冀州。
English: It belongs to Jizhou.

古文：户八万四千二百二，口三十四万九千九百五十二。
现代文：有八万四千二百零二户，三十四万九千九百五十二口人。
English: There are 84,202 households and 349,952 people.

古文：县四：邯郸。堵山，牛首水所出，东入白渠。
现代文：有四个县：邯郸县，牛首水发源于堵山，向东流入白渠。
English: There are four counties: Yuxian County, Niu Shou Water originates from the mountains and flows eastward into the White Canal.

古文：赵敬侯自中矣徙此。
现代文：赵敬侯从中牟迁到造裹。
English: Zhao Jinghou moved from Zhongmou to Zouwu.

古文：易阳，柏人，莽曰寿仁。
现代文：易阳县，柏人县，王莽时叫寿仁县。
English: Yiyang County, Bairen County, Wangmanzhong called Shouren County.

古文：襄国。
现代文：襄国县。
English: Xiangguo County.

古文：故刑国。
现代文：是以前的邢国。
English: It is the former Shikoku.

古文：西山，渠水所出，东北至任入浸。
现代文：渠水发源于西山，向东北到任县流入灌渠。
English: The canal water originates from the West Mountain and flows into the irrigation canal in the northeastern part of Ren County.

古文：又有蓼水、冯水，皆东至朝平入湡。
现代文：又有蓼水、冯水，都向束到朝平县流入涡水。
English: In addition, the Xuanshui and Fengshui rivers all flow into the turbid waters in the direction of Shu to Chaoping County.

古文：广平国，武帝征和二年置为平干国，宣帝五凤二年复故。
现代文：广平国，武帝征和二年设置为平干国，宣帝五凤二年恢复原名。
English: Guangping Province was renamed Pinggan Province in the second year of Emperor Wu's reign, and its original name was restored in the second year of Emperor Xuan's reign.

古文：莽曰富昌。
现代文：王莽时叫富昌郡。
English: At the time of Wang Mang, it was called Fuchang County.

古文：属冀州。
现代文：属于冀州。
English: It belongs to Jizhou.

古文：户二万七千九百八十四，口十九万八千五百五十八。
现代文：有二二万七千九百八十四户，十九万八千五百五十八口人。
English: There were 227,984 households with 198,558 people.

古文：县十六：广平，张，朝平，南和，列葭水东入氵虒。
现代文：有十六个县：广平县，张县，朝平县，南和县，列葭水向东流入洒水。
English: There are 16 counties: Guangping County, Zhang County, Chaoping County, Nanhe County, and the water from Lianye River flows eastward into the sprinkler.

古文：列人，莽曰列治。
现代文：列入县，王莽时叫列治县。
English: When it was listed as a county, Wang Mang called it Liji County.

古文：斥章，任，曲周，武帝建元四年置。
现代文：斥章县，任县，曲周县，武帝建元四年设置。
English: Kuzhang County, Ren County, Qu Zhou County, and Wudi Jianyuan were established in the fourth year of the Yuan Dynasty.

古文：莽曰直周。
现代文：王莽时叫直周县。
English: Wang Mangshi called Zhouzhou County.

古文：南曲，曲梁，侯国。
现代文：南曲县，曲梁县，是侯国。
English: Nanqu County, Quliang County, is Hou Guo.

古文：莽曰直梁。
现代文：王莽时叫直凿鳄。
English: Wang Mangshi called the crocodile.

古文：广乡，平利，平乡，阳台，侯国。
现代文：广乡县，平利县，平乡县，阳台县，是侯国。
English: Guangxiang County, Pingli County, Pingxiang County, and Balcony County are Hokkoku.

古文：广年，莽曰富昌。
现代文：广年县，王莽时叫富昌县。
English: Guangnian County was called Fuchang County when Wang Mang was alive.

古文：城乡。
现代文：城乡县。
English: urban and rural counties.

古文：真定国，武帝元鼎四年置。
现代文：真定国，武帝元鼎四年设置。
English: It is set in the fourth year of the reign of Emperor Wu of the State of Zhending.

古文：属冀州。
现代文：属于冀州。
English: It belongs to Jizhou.

古文：户三万七千一百二十六，口十七万八千六百一十六。
现代文：有三万七千一百二十六户，十七万八千六百一十六口人。
English: There are 37,126 households and 178,616 people.

古文：县四，真定，故东垣，高帝十一年更名。
现代文：有四个县：真定县，是原来的束垣县，高帝卜一年改名。
English: There are four counties: Jinding County is the original Sokagaki County, and Gao Dieb changed its name one year later.

古文：莽曰思治。
现代文：王莽时叫思治县。
English: Wang Mangshi called Shiji County.

古文：稾城，莽曰稾实。
现代文：稿城县，工莽时叫稿实县。
English: Monjo-shi County, sometimes called Monjo-shi County.

古文：肥累，胡肥子国，绵曼。
现代文：肥汇县，是以前的肥子国。绵曼县。
English: Feihui County, is the former Feizi country. Mianmen County.

古文：斯洨水首受太白渠，东至鄡入河。
现代文：斯汶水首先从太白渠接受水源，向东到垫毖流入董回。
English: The Swen Water first receives water from the Tai Bai Canal and flows into the Dong Hui River in the east to Jiaozuo.

古文：莽曰绵延。
现代文：王菱时叫钟至递。
English: Wang Lingshi called for the bell to be delivered.

古文：中山国，高帝郡，景帝三年为国。
现代文：中山国，高帝时的郡，景帝三年成为国。
English: Zhongshan Province, a county at the time of Emperor Gao, became a country three years after Emperor Jing.

古文：莽曰常山，属冀州。
现代文：王莽时叫常山国。属于冀州。
English: Wang Mangshi called Changshan Province. It belongs to Jizhou.

古文：户十六万八百七十三，口六十六万八千八十。
现代文：有十六万零八百七十三户，六十六万八千零八十人。
English: There are 160,873 households and 668,080 people.

古文：县十四：卢奴，北平，徐水东至高阳入博。
现代文：有十四个县：卢奴县，北平县，徐水向东到高阳流入博水。
English: There are fourteen counties: Lunu County, Beiping County, Xushui flows east to Gaoyang and flows into Boshui.

古文：又有卢水，亦至高阳入河。
现代文：还有卢水，也到高阳流入黄河。
English: There is also Lu Shui, which flows into the Yellow River in Gaoyang.

古文：有铁官。
现代文：有铁官。
English: There are iron officials.

古文：莽曰善和。
现代文：王莽时叫善和县。
English: Wang Mang called Zhenhe County.

古文：北新成，桑钦言易水出西北，东入滱，莽曰朔平，唐，尧山在南。
现代文：北新成县，桑钦说易水从西北流出，向东流入淀水。王莽时叫朔平县。唐县，尧山在南面。
English: North Xincheng County, Sanqin said that easy water flows out from the northwest and flows into stagnant water to the east. Wangmanzhi is called Shuoping County. Tang County, Shaoshan is in the south.

古文：莽曰和亲。
现代文：王莽时叫和亲县。
English: Wang Mengshu called out to He Jianxian.

古文：深泽，莽曰翼和。
现代文：深浬县，王莽时叫翼和县。
English: Shenshan County, Wang Mang called Yinghe County.

古文：苦陉，莽曰北陉。
现代文：苦陉县，王莽时叫北陉县。
English: Kuqi County was called Beilun County when Wang Mang was alive.

古文：安国，莽曰兴睦。
现代文：安国县，王莽时叫兴睦县。
English: Anguo County, Wang Mangshi called Xingmu County.

古文：曲逆，蒲阳山，蒲水所出，东入濡，又有苏水，亦东入濡，莽曰顺平。
现代文：曲逆县，蒲阳山是蒲水的发源地，向东流入濡水。还有苏水，也向东流入濡水。王莽时叫顺平县。
English: In Quguang County, Mount Puyang is the source of the Pudong River, which flows into the wet water to the east. There is also the Su River, which also flows into the wet water to the east. Wang Mangshi called Shunping County.

古文：望都，博水东至高阳入河。
现代文：望都县，博水向东到高阳流入黄河。
English: In Bodu County, the Boshui River flows into the Yellow River eastward to Gaoyang.

古文：莽曰顺调。
现代文：王莽时叫顺调县。
English: Wang Mangshi called Shunjiao County.

古文：新市，新处，毋极，陆成，安险。
现代文：新市县，新处县，毋极县，陆成县，安险县。
English: Xinshi County, Xinshu County, Bezoji County, Lucheng County, Anjing County.

古文：莽曰宁险。
现代文：王莽时叫宁险县。
English: Wang Mangshi called Ningyan County.

古文：信都国，景帝二年为广川国，宣帝甘露三年复故。
现代文：信都国，景帝二年为广川国，宣帝甘露三年恢复原名。
English: Xindu Province, Jingdi Province for two years, Guangchuan Province for two years, Xuandi Nectar Province for three years to restore the original name.

古文：莽曰新博。
现代文：王莽时叫新博。
English: Wang Mangshi called Xinbo.

古文：属冀州。
现代文：属于冀州。
English: It belongs to Jizhou.

古文：户六万五千五百五十六，口万三十万四千三百八十四。
现代文：有六万五千五百五十六户，三十万四千三百八十四口人。
English: There are 65,556 households, with 343,384 people.

古文：县十七：信都，王都。
现代文：有十七个县：信都县，是诸侯王的都城。
English: There are seventeen counties: Xindu County, the capital of the princes.

古文：故章河、故虖池皆在北，东入海。
现代文：原章河、原库池都在北面，向东流入大海。
English: The original Zhanghe River and the original reservoir are both in the north, flowing into the sea to the east.

古文：《禹贡》绛水亦入海。
现代文：《禹贡》的绛水也流入大海。
English: The salty water of "Yugong" also flows into the sea.

古文：莽曰新博亭。
现代文：王莽时叫新博亭。
English: Wang Mangshi is called Xin Bo Ting.

古文：历，莽曰历宁。
现代文：历县，王莽时叫历宁县。
English: Lixian County, Wang Mang called Lining County.

古文：扶柳，辟阳，莽曰乐信。
现代文：扶柳县，辟阳县，王莽时叫乐信县。
English: Fuliu County, Biyang County, Wang Mengzhou called Lexin County.

古文：南宫，莽曰序下。
现代文：南宫县，王莽时叫序下县。
English: Nangong County, Wang Mangshi called the next county.

古文：下博，莽曰闰博。
现代文：下博县，王莽时叫闰博县。
English: Shimebo County, Wang Mangshi called Yebo County.

古文：武邑，莽曰顺桓。
现代文：武邑县，王莽时叫顺桓县。
English: Wuyi County was called Shunhuan County in Wang Mang's time.

古文：观津，莽曰朔定亭。
现代文：观津县，王莽时叫朔定亭。
English: In Guanzin County, Wang Mang was once called Shuo Ding Ting.

古文：高提，广川，乐乡，侯国。
现代文：高堤县，广川县，乐乡县，是侯国。
English: Gaotie County, Guangchuan County, and Lexiang County are Hou Guo.

古文：莽曰乐丘。
现代文：王莽时叫乐丘县。
English: At the time of Wang Mang, it was called Leqiu County.

古文：平堤，侯国。
现代文：平堤县，是侯国。
English: Pingji County is a county seat.

古文：桃，莽曰桓分。
现代文：桃县，王莽时叫桓分县。
English: Taoxian, called Kanbun County when Wang Mang was alive.

古文：西梁，侯国。
现代文：西梁县，是国。
English: Xiliang County is the country's largest.

古文：昌成，侯国。
现代文：昌成县，是侯国。
English: Changcheng County is a county.

古文：东昌，侯国。莽曰田昌。
现代文：束昌县，是侯国，王莽时叫田昌县。
English: Sokchang County, is Hou Guo, Wang Mang is called Tianchang County.

古文：脩。
现代文：脩县。
English: Jixian County.

古文：莽曰脩治。
现代文：王莽时叫脩治县。
English: Wang Mangshi is called Ganji County.

古文：河间国，故赵，文帝二年别为国。
现代文：河间国，原来的赵国，文帝二年另立为诸侯国。
English: Kawama Province, formerly Zhao Province, was separately established as a vassal state by Emperor Wen two years later.

古文：莽曰朔定。
现代文：王莽时叫朔定。
English: Wang Mangshi is called Shuo Ding.

古文：户四万五千四十三，口十八万七千六百六十二。
现代文：有四万五千零四十三户，十八万七千六百六十二口人。
English: There are 45,043 households and 187,662 people.

古文：县四：乐成，虖池别水首受虖池河，东至东光入虖池河。
现代文：有四个县：乐成县，库池别水首先从库池河接受水源，向东到束光县流入库池河。
English: There are four counties: Lecheng County, Kuqi Beishui first receives water from the Kuqi River and flows into the Kuqi River to the east to Sokguang County.

古文：莽曰陆信。
现代文：王莽时叫陆信县。
English: At the time of Wang Mang, it was called Lu Xin County.

古文：候井，武隧，莽曰桓隧。
现代文：候井县，武隧县，王莽时叫桓隧县。
English: Houi County, Wu Tunnel County, Wang Mangshi called Huan Tunnel County.

古文：弓高。
现代文：弓高县。
English: Yumitaka County.

古文：虖池别河首受虖池河，东至平舒入海。
现代文：库池别河首先从摩池河接受水源，向东到干舒县流入大海。
English: The Kuchibe River first receives water from the Mochi River and flows eastward to the sea in Ganshu County.

古文：莽曰乐成。
现代文：王莽时叫乐成县。
English: Wang Mangshi called Lecheng County.

古文：广阳国。高帝燕国，昭帝元凤元年为广阳郡，宣帝本始元年更为国。
现代文：广阳国，高帝时的燕国，昭帝元凤元年成为广阳郡，宣帝本始元年改为国。
English: Guangyang Province, Yan Province at the time of Emperor Gao, became Guangyang County in the first year of Emperor Zhao's reign, and changed to a province in the first year of Emperor Xuan's reign.

古文：莽曰广有，户二万七百四十，口七万六百五十八。
现代文：王莽时叫广有国。有：二万零七百四十户，七万零六百五十八口人。
English: Wang Mang called Guangyuko at that time. There were 20,740 households and 70,658 people.

古文：县四：蓟，故燕国，召公所封。
现代文：有四个县：蓟县，原燕国，召公的封地。
English: There are four counties: Shixian County, Yuanyan Country, and Zhao Gong Fief.

古文：莽曰伐戎。
现代文：王莽时叫伐戎县。
English: Wang Mangshi called Vaerong County.

古文：方城。广阳，阴乡。
现代文：方城县，广阳县，阴乡县。
English: Fangcheng County, Guangyang County, Yinxiang County.

古文：莽曰阴顺。
现代文：王莽时叫阴顺县。
English: Wang Mangshi called Yin Shun County.

古文：甾川国，故齐，文帝十八年别为国。
现代文：甾川国，原齐国，文帝十八年另立为国。
English: In the 18th year of Emperor Wen's reign, Beichuan Province, formerly Qi Province, was established as a separate country.

古文：后并北海。
现代文：后来合并到北海郡。
English: It was later merged into Hokkai-gun.

古文：户五万二百八十九，口二十二万七千三十一。
现代文：有五万零二百八十九户，二十二万七千零三十一口人。
English: There were 50,289 households with 227,031 people.

古文：县三：剧，义山，蕤水所出，北至寿光入海。
现代文：有三个县：剧县，蕤水发源于义山，向北到寿光县流入大海。
English: There are three counties: Drama County, Surabaya originated from Yishan, flowing north to Shouguang County into the sea.

古文：莽曰俞。
现代文：王莽时叫俞县。
English: Wang Mangshi is called Jixian.

古文：东安平，菟头山，女水出，东北至临甾入巨定。
现代文：东安干县，女水发源于菟头山，东北到临甾县流入钜定。
English: In Gan County, Dong'an, the female water originates from Shantou Mountain and flows into Liding County in the northeast.

古文：楼乡。
现代文：楼乡县。
English: Louxiang County.

古文：胶东国，故齐，高帝元年别为国，五月复属齐国，文帝十六年复为国。
现代文：胶东国，原来的齐国，高帝元年另立为诸侯国，五月又重新属于齐国，文帝十六年恢复为诸侯国。
English: Jiaodong Province, formerly Qi Province, was separately established as a vassal state by Emperor Gao in the first year of the year. In May, it once again belonged to Qi Province. Emperor Wen restored it as a vassal state in the 16th year of the year.

古文：莽曰郁秩。
现代文：王莽时叫郁秩。
English: Wang Mangshi is called Ikuchitsu.

古文：户七万二千二，口三十二万三千三百三十一。
现代文：有七万二千零二户，三十二万三千三百三十一口人。
English: There are 72,002 households with 3,233,331 people.

古文：县八：即墨，有天室山祠。
现代文：有八个县：即墨县，有天室山祠。
English: There are eight counties: Jimo County, and Tenmuro Mountain Shrine.

古文：莽曰即善。
现代文：王莽时叫即善县。
English: Wang Mangshi called Jiezen County.

古文：昌武，下密，有三石山祠。
现代文：昌武县，下密县，有三石山祠。
English: In Changwu County and Shimimi County, there are three stone shrines.

古文：壮武，莽曰晓武。
现代文：壮武县，王莽时叫晓武县。
English: Zhuangwu County, formerly known as Xiaowu County.

古文：郁秩，有铁官。
现代文：郁秩县，有铁官。
English: Iku-Chichi prefecture has a railway official.

古文：挺，观阳，邹卢。
现代文：挺县，观阳县，邹卢县。
English: Ting County, Guanyang County, Minlu County.

古文：莽曰始斯。
现代文：王莽时叫始斯县。
English: Wang Mangshi called Shishi County.

古文：高密国，故齐，文帝十六年别为胶西国。
现代文：高密国，以前的齐国，文帝十六年另立为胶西国。
English: Gaomi Province, formerly Qi Province, was separately established as Jiaoxi Province by Emperor Wen in the 16th year.

古文：宣帝本始元年更为高密国。
现代文：宣帝本始元年改为高密国。
English: In the first year of Emperor Xuan's reign, it was changed to Gaomi Province.

古文：户四万五百三十一，口十九万二千五百三十六。
现代文：有四万零五百三十一户，十九万二千五百三十六口人。
English: There are 40,531 households and 192,536 people.

古文：县五：高密，莽曰章牟。
现代文：有五个县：高密县，王莽时叫章牟县。
English: There are five counties: Gaomi County, Wangmanzhi called Zhangmou County.

古文：昌安，石泉，莽曰养信。
现代文：昌安县，石泉县，王莽时叫养信县。
English: Chang'an County, Shiquan County, Wang Mangshi called Yangsin County.

古文：夷安，莽曰原亭。
现代文：夷安县，王莽时叫原亭县。
English: Yi'an County, known as Huan Ting County during the reign of Wang Mang.

古文：成乡。
现代文：成乡县。
English: Chengxiang County.

古文：莽曰顺成。
现代文：王莽时叫妪盛昼。
English: Wang Mengshi called for a peaceful noon.

古文：城阳国，故齐。
现代文：城阳国，以前的齐国。
English: Joyang Province, formerly Qi Province.

古文：文帝二年别为国。
现代文：文帝二年另立为诸侯国。
English: In the second year of Emperor Wen, it was established as a separate vassal state.

古文：莽曰莒陵。
现代文：王莽时叫莒陵。
English: Wang Mangshi is called Gongling.

古文：属兖州。
现代文：属于兖州。
English: It belongs to Zhangzhou.

古文：户五万六千六百四十二，口二十万五千七百八十四。
现代文：有五万六千六百四十二户，二十万五千七百八十四口人。
English: There are 56,642 households and 257,884 people.

古文：县四：莒，故国，盈姓，三十世为楚所灭。
现代文：有四个县：莒县，以前的诸侯国，盈姓，三一之时被楚国所灭。
English: There are four counties: Jixian County, the former vassal state, Yingxi County, which was completely destroyed by the State of Chu on the 31st day of the third month.

古文：少昊后。
现代文：是，吴的后代。
English: Yes, Wu's descendants.

古文：有铁官。莽曰莒陵。
现代文：有铁官，王莽时叫莒陵县。
English: There is an iron official, Wang Mangshi called Fuling County.

古文：阳都，东安，虑。
现代文：阳者县，束安县，虑县。
English: Yangzha County, Sokan County, Qian County.

古文：莽曰著善。
现代文：王莽时叫着善县。
English: Wang Mangshi called out "Zen County."

古文：淮阳国，高帝十一年置。
现代文：淮阳国，高帝十一年设置。
English: Huaiyang Province, established in the eleventh year of Emperor Gao.

古文：莽曰新平。
现代文：王莽时叫新平。
English: Wang Mangshi called Xinping.

古文：属兖州。
现代文：属于兖州。
English: It belongs to Zhangzhou.

古文：户十三万五千五百四十四，口九十八万一千四百二十三。
现代文：有十三万五千五百四十四户，九十八万一千四百二十三口人。
English: There are 135,544 households and 981 423 people.

古文：县九：陈，故国，舜后，胡公所封，为楚所灭。
现代文：有九个县：陈县，原来的诸侯国。舜的后代，胡公的封地，被楚国所减。
English: There are nine counties: Chen County, the original vassal state; the descendants of Zou, the fief of Hu Gong, was reduced by Chu.

古文：楚顷襄王自郢徙此。
现代文：楚顷襄王从郢迁到这裹。
English: King of Chu and Xiang moved here from Handan.

古文：莽曰陈陵。
现代文：王莽时叫陈陵县。
English: Wang Mang called Chenling County.

古文：苦，莽曰赖陵。
现代文：苦县，王莽时叫赖陵县。
English: Ku County, Wang Mangshi called Lai Ling County.

古文：阳夏。宁平，扶沟，涡水首受狼汤渠，东至向入淮，过郡三，行千里。
现代文：阳夏县，宁平县，扶沟县，涡水首先从狼汤渠接受水源，向东到向县流入淮水，经过三个郡，行程一千里。
English: In Yangxia County, Ningping County and Fuguo County, the swirling water first receives water from the wolf soup canal, flows eastward to Xiang County and flows into Huai Shui, passing through three counties, traveling a thousand miles.

古文：固始，圉，新平，柘。
现代文：固始县，圉县，新平县，柘县。
English: Gushi County, Jixian County, Xinping County, Jixian County.

古文：梁国，故秦砀郡，高帝五年为梁国。
现代文：梁国，原秦国的阳郡，高帝五年成为梁国。
English: Yang County of Liang Province, formerly Qin Province, became Liang Province in the fifth year of the reign of Emperor Gao.

古文：莽曰陈定。
现代文：正莽时叫陈定。
English: When it is reckless, it is called Chen Ding.

古文：属豫州。
现代文：属于豫州。
English: It belongs to Yuzhou.

古文：户三万八千七百九，口十万六千七百五十二。
现代文：有三万八干七百零九户，十万六千七百五十二人。
English: There are 38,709 households and 106,752 people.

古文：县八：砀，山出文石。
现代文：有八个县：阳县，出产纹石。
English: There are eight counties: Yang County, producing textured stone.

古文：莽曰节砀。
现代文：王莽时叫节碣县。
English: Wang Mangshi called Jieyi County.

古文：甾，故戴国。莽曰嘉穀。
现代文：甾县，原来的戴国一上莽时叫嘉谷县。
English: Ji County was originally called Jiayu County when Dai Guo was the first emperor to ascend to the throne.

古文：杼秋，莽曰予秋。
现代文：朽：秋县，王莽时叫予秋县。
English: Kuching: Qiu County, Wang Mang called Yu Qiu County at the beginning.

古文：蒙，获水首受甾获渠，东北至彭城入泗，过郡五，行五百五十里。
现代文：蒙县，获水首先从甾获渠接受水源，东北到彭城流入泗水，经过五个郡，行程五百五十里。
English: In Mengxian County, the water first receives water from the Guo Guo Canal, and flows into the northeast to Pengcheng, passing through five counties and traveling 550 miles.

古文：莽曰蒙思。
现代文：王莽时。叫蒙恩县。
English: Wang Mangshi. Called Mengn County.

古文：已氏，莽曰已善。
现代文：已氏县，王莽时叫已善县。
English: Yeji County was called Yezen County when Wang Mang was alive.

古文：虞，莽曰陈定亭。
现代文：虞县，王莽时叫陈定亭。
English: Yu County, Wang Mang called Chen Ding Ting.

古文：下邑，莽曰下洽。
现代文：下邑县，王莽时叫下洽县。
English: Xiaoyu County, Wang Mangshi called Xiaochao County.

古文：睢阳。
现代文：睢阳县。
English: Shenyang County.

古文：故宋国，微子所封。
现代文：原来的宋国，微子的封地。
English: The original Song Dynasty, the fiefdom of Micron.

古文：《禹贡》盟诸泽在东北。
现代文：《禹贡》上的盟诸泽在东北面。
English: Mengzhu Ze on "Yugong" is in the northeast.

古文：东平国，故梁国，景帝中六年别为济东国，武帝元鼎无年为大河郡，宣帝甘露二年为东平国。
现代文：束平国，原来是梁国，景帝中六年另立为济束国，武帝元鼎元年成为大河郡，宣帝甘露二年为柬平国。
English: Sokping Province was originally Liang Province. In the middle of the 6th year of the reign of Emperor Jing, it was separately established as Ji Sok Province. In the first year of the reign of Emperor Wu, it became Dahe County. In the second year of the reign of Emperor Xuan, it became Kamping Province.

古文：莽曰有盐。
现代文：王莽时叫有盐。
English: Wang Mangshi calls for salt.

古文：属兖州。
现代文：属于兖州。
English: It belongs to Zhangzhou.

古文：户十三万一千七百五十三，口六十万七千九百七十六。
现代文：有十三万一千七百五十三户，六十万七千九百七十六口人。
English: There are 131,753 households and 6,079,766 people.

古文：有铁官。
现代文：有铁官。
English: There are iron officials.

古文：县七：无盐，有郈乡。
现代文：有七个县：无盐县，有邱乡。
English: There are seven counties: Wuxi County and Qiu Township.

古文：莽曰有盐亭。
现代文：王莽时叫有盐亭。
English: Wang Mangshi called the salt pavilion.

古文：任城，故任国，太昊后，风姓。
现代文：任城县，原来的任国，太昊的后代，风姓。
English: Rencheng County, the original Ren Guo, the descendants of Tai Hao, the wind surname.

古文：莽曰延就亭。
现代文：王莽时叫延就亭。
English: Wang Mangshi called Yan Zhuting.

古文：东平陆，富城，莽曰成富。
现代文：东平陆县，富城县，王莽时叫成富县。
English: Dongping Lu County, Fucheng County, Wang Mangshi called Chengfu County.

古文：章，亢父，诗亭，故诗国。
现代文：章县，亢父县，诗亭，是原来的诗国。
English: Zhang County, Shifu County, Shitei, is the original poetry country.

古文：莽曰顺父。
现代文：王莽时父县。
English: Wang Mengshi's father's county.

古文：樊。
现代文：樊县。
English: Jixian County.

古文：鲁国，故秦薛郡，高后元年为鲁国。
现代文：鲁国，原来秦国的薛郡，高后元年成为鲁国。
English: Lu Province, formerly Xue County of Qin Province, became Lu Province in the first year after the founding of Gao.

古文：属豫州。
现代文：属于豫州。
English: It belongs to Yuzhou.

古文：户十一万八千四十五，口六十万七千三百八十一。
现代文：有十一万八千零四十五户，六十万七千三百八十一口人。
English: There were 118,045 households with 607,381 people.

古文：县六：鲁，伯禽所封。户五万二千。
现代文：有六个县：鲁县，伯禽的封地：有五万二千户。
English: There are six counties: Lu County, Bo Jiao's fiefdom: there are 52,000 households.

古文：有铁官。
现代文：有铁官。
English: There are iron officials.

古文：卞，泗水西南至方与入沛，过郡三，行五百里，青州川。
现代文：卞县，泅水西南到方与流入沛水，经过三个郡，行程五百里，是青州的河流。
English: Passing through three counties and traveling 500 miles, it is the longest river in Qingzhou.

古文：汶阳，莽曰汶亭。
现代文：汶阳县，王莽时叫汶亭县。
English: Wenyang County, known as Wenteing County in Wang Mang's time.

古文：蕃，南梁水西至胡陵入沛渠。
现代文：蕃县，南梁水向西到胡陵流入沛渠水。
English: In Handan County, the Nanliang River flows westward to the Huling River and flows into the Pei Canal.

古文：驺，故邾国。曹姓，二十九世为楚所灭。
现代文：鞠县，原邾国，曹姓，二十九代被楚国所灭。
English: The 29th generation of Marishan County, formerly Min Guo, surnamed Cao, was wiped out by Chu Guo.

古文：峄山在北。
现代文：哔山在北面。
English: Lushan is in the north.

古文：莽曰驺亭。
现代文：王莽时叫骝亭。
English: Wang Mangshi is called Shanting.

古文：薛。
现代文：薛县。
English: Xue County.

古文：夏车正奚仲所国。后迁于邳，汤相仲虺居之。
现代文：夏朝的车正奚仲的封国，后来迁到邳，汤的相仲虺居住在那裹。
English: The chariots of the Xia Dynasty were the fiefdoms of Jianzhong, and later moved to Tong, where Tang's relative Jianzhong lived.

古文：楚国，高帝置，宣帝地节元年更为彭城郡，黄龙元年复故。
现代文：楚国，高帝时设置，宣帝地节元年改为彭城郡，黄龙元年恢复原名。
English: Chu Province, established in the time of Emperor Gao, changed its name to Pengcheng County in the first year of the Emperor's Birthday, and its original name was restored in the first year of the Yellow Dragon.

古文：莽曰和乐。
现代文：王莽时叫和乐。
English: Wang Mang calls for harmony.

古文：属徐州。
现代文：属于徐州。
English: It belongs to Xuzhou.

古文：户十一万四千七百三十八，口四十九万七千八百四。
现代文：有十一万四千七百三十八户，四十九万七千八百零四人。
English: There are 114,738 households and 497,804 people.

古文：县七：彭城，古彭祖国。
现代文：有七个县：彭城县，原来的彭祖国。
English: There are seven counties: Pengcheng County, the original Peng motherland.

古文：户四万一百九十六。
现代文：有四万零一百九十六产。
English: There were 40,196 cows.

古文：有铁官。
现代文：有铁官。
English: There are iron officials.

古文：留，梧，莽曰吾治。
现代文：留县，梧县，王莽时叫吾治县。
English: Liuxian, Wuxian, Wangmanzhi are called Wuji County.

古文：傅阳，故逼阳国。
现代文：傅阳县，原来的偭阳国。
English: Fuyang County, formerly Fenyang Province.

古文：莽曰辅阳。
现代文：王莽时叫辅阳。
English: Wang Mangshi called Fuyang.

古文：吕，武原，莽曰和乐亭。
现代文：吕县，武原县，王莽时叫和乐亭县。
English: Lv County, Wuyuan County, Wang Mangshi called and Leting County.

古文：甾丘。
现代文：甾丘县。
English: Mengqiu County.

古文：莽曰善丘。
现代文：王莽时叫姜旦瑟。
English: Wang Mangshi is called Jiang Danser.

古文：泗水国，故东海郡，武帝元鼎四年别为泗水国。
现代文：泗水国，原束海郡，武帝元鼎四年另立为泅水国。
English: In the fourth year of Emperor Wu's reign, the former Sokhaigun of Surabaya was separated into Surabaya.

古文：莽曰水顺。
现代文：王莽时叫水顺郡。
English: Wang Mangshi called Suishun County.

古文：户二万五千二十五，口十一万九千一百一十四。
现代文：有二万五千零二十五户，十一万九千一百一十四口人。
English: There are 25,025 households and 119,114 people.

古文：县三：氵夌，莽曰生夌。
现代文：有三个县：浚县，王莽时叫生麦县。
English: There are three counties: Junxian County, Wang Mangshi called Shengmai County.

古文：泗阳，莽曰淮平亭。
现代文：泗阳县，王莽时叫淮平亭。
English: Poyang County, Wang Mang called Huai Ping Ting.

古文：于。
现代文：于县。
English: in the prefecture.

古文：莽曰于屏。
现代文：王莽时叫工区题。
English: Wang Mangshi called out the work area question.

古文：广陵国。高帝六年属荆州，十一年更属吴。景帝四年更名江都，武帝元狩三年更名广陵。
现代文：广陵国，高帝六年属于荆州，十一年改属于吴国，景帝四年改名为江都，武帝元狩三年改名为广陵。
English: Guangling Province, Gao Di belonged to Jingzhou for six years, changed to Wu Province in the eleventh year, changed its name to Jiangdu in the fourth year, and changed its name to Guangling in the third year of Emperor Wu's reign.

古文：莽曰江平。
现代文：王莽时叫江平。
English: Wang Mangshi called Jiang Ping.

古文：属徐州。
现代文：属于徐州。
English: It belongs to Xuzhou.

古文：户三万六千七百七十三，口十四万七百二十二。
现代文：有三万六千七百七十三户，十四万零七百二十二口人。
English: There are 36,773 households and 140,722 people.

古文：有铁官。
现代文：有铁官。
English: There are iron officials.

古文：县四：广陵，江都易王非、广陵厉王胥皆都比，并得鄣郡，而不得吴。
现代文：有四个县：广陵县，江都易王非、广陵厉王胥都在这裹建都，并得到鄣郡，但没有得到吴国。
English: There are four counties: Guangling County, Jiangdu Yi Wangfei, and Guangling Li Wangye all built their capitals here, and obtained the county of Yao, but did not obtain the country of Wu.

古文：莽曰安定，江都，有江水祠。
现代文：王莽时叫安定县。江都县，有江水祠。
English: Wang Mangshi was once called Anding County. In Jiangdu County, there is Jiangsu Ancestral Temple.

古文：渠水首受江，北至射阳入湖。
现代文：渠水首次从长江接受水源，向北到射阳流入湖泊。
English: For the first time, the canal water received water from the Yangtze River and flowed into the lake to the north to Sheyang.

古文：高邮，平安。
现代文：高邮县，平安县。
English: Gaoyou County, Heian County.

古文：莽曰杜乡。
现代文：王莽时叫杜乡县。
English: Wang Mangshi called Duxiang County.

古文：六安国。故楚，高帝元年别为衡山国，五年属淮南。文帝十六复为衡山，武帝元狩二年别为六安国。
现代文：六安国，原来的楚国，高帝元年另立为衡山国，五年属于淮南，文帝十六年重新为衡山国，武帝元狩二年另立为六安国。
English: Lu'an, originally Chu, was separated into Hengshan in the first year of Gao's reign, Huainan in the fifth year, Hengshan again in the sixteenth year of Wen's reign, and Lu'an again in the second year of Wu's reign.

古文：莽曰安风。
现代文：王莽时叫安风。
English: When the king is reckless, he calls for calm.

古文：户三万八千三百四十五，口十七万八千六百一十六。
现代文：有三万八千三百四十五户，十七万八干六百一十六口人。
English: There are thirty-eight thousand three hundred and forty-five households and one hundred seventy-eight thousand six hundred and sixteen people.

古文：县五：六，故国，皋繇后，偃姓，为楚所灭。
现代文：有五个县：六县，原是诸侯国，皋繇的后代，偃姓，被楚国所减。
English: There are five counties: six counties, originally the vassal states, the descendants of Yao, surnamed Yao, were reduced by the state of Chu.

古文：如溪水首受沘，东北至寿春入芍陂。
现代文：如溪水首先从沘水接受水源，向东北到寿春流入芍陂。
English: For example, the water of the stream first receives water from the water of the reed and flows into the reed from the northeast to Shuchun.

古文：蓼，故国，皋繇后，为楚所灭。
现代文：蓼县，原是诸侯国，皋繇的后代，被楚国所灭。
English: Min County, originally a vassal state, the descendants of Min, was annihilated by the State of Chu.

古文：安丰，《禹贡》大别山在西南。
现代文：安丰县，《禹贡》上的大别山在西南。
English: In Anfeng County, the Dabie Mountain on "Yugong" is in the southwest.

古文：莽曰美丰。
现代文：王莽时叫美丰县。
English: Wang Mangshi called Meifeng County.

古文：安风，莽曰安风亭。
现代文：安风县，王莽时叫安风亭。
English: Anfeng County, Wang Mangshi called Anfeng Pavilion.

古文：阳泉。
现代文：阳泉县。
English: Yangquan County.

古文：长沙国，秦郡，高帝五年为国。
现代文：长沙国，秦国的郡，高帝五年成为国。
English: Changsha Province, a county of Qin Province, became a country in the fifth year of Emperor Gao.

古文：莽曰填蛮。
现代文：王莽时叫填蛮国。
English: Wang Mangshi called for filling the barbarian country.

古文：属荆州。
现代文：属于荆州。
English: It belongs to Jingzhou.

古文：户四万三千四百七十，口二十三万五千八百二十五。
现代文：有四万三千四百七十户，二十三万五千八百二十五人。
English: There are 43,470 households and 235,825 people.

古文：县十三：临湘，莽曰抚睦。
现代文：有十三个县：临湘县，王莽时叫抚睦县。
English: There are thirteen counties: Linxiang County, Wangmanzhong called Fumu County.

古文：罗，连道，益阳，湘山在北。
现代文：罗县，连道县，益阳县，湘山在北面。
English: Luo County, Lian Dao County, Yiyang County, Xiangshan in the north.

古文：下隽，莽曰闰隽。
现代文：下隽县，王莽时叫闰隽县。
English: It is known as Jiaozuo County when it was under Wang Mang.

古文：攸，酃，承阳，湘南，《禹贡》衡山在东南，荆州山。
现代文：攸县，酃县，承阳县，湘南县，《禹贡》上的衡山在东南面，是荆州的山。
English: Yu County, Handan County, Chengyang County, Shonan County, Hengshan on "Yugong" is in the southeast, and is the highest mountain in Jingzhou.

古文：昭陵，荼陵。泥水西入湘，行七百里。
现代文：昭陵县，荼陵县，泥水向西流入湘水，行程七百里。
English: In Zhaoling County and Fuling County, muddy water flows westward into the Xiangshui River, a journey of seven hundred miles.

古文：莽曰声乡。
现代文：王莽时叫声乡县。
English: Wang Mangshi called out the name of his hometown and county.

古文：容陵，安成。
现代文：容陵县，安成县。
English: Yongling County, Ancheng County.

古文：庐水东至庐陵，入湖汉。
现代文：庐水向东到庐堕瑟流入塑选。
English: The water flows eastward to the Yangtze River, where it flows into the Yangtze River for plastic separation.

古文：莽曰思成。
现代文：王菱时叫墨盛钟。
English: Wang Lingshi called Mo Sheng Zhong.

古文：本秦京师为内史，分天下作三十六郡。
现代文：本来秦国的京师叫内史，把天下分为了三十六郡。
English: Originally, Qin's capital division was called Inner History, and the country was divided into 36 counties.

古文：汉兴，以其郡太大，稍复开置，又立诸侯王国。
现代文：汉朝建立后，由于秦朝的郡太大，就逐渐重新加以开辟设置，又建立了诸侯王的封国。
English: After the establishment of the Han Dynasty, because the counties of the Qin Dynasty were too large, they were gradually reopened and set up, and the fiefdoms of the princes were established.

古文：武帝开广三边。
现代文：武帝时广泛开拓三面边境土地。
English: Emperor Wu extensively explored the border lands on three sides.

古文：故自高祖增二十六，文、景各六，武帝二十八，昭帝一，讫于孝平，凡郡国一百三，县邑千三百一十四，道三十二，侯国二百四十一。
现代文：所以从高祖时起增加了二十六郡，文帝、景帝各增加了六郡，武帝时增加了二十八郡，昭帝时增加了一郡，到孝平帝时止，共有郡国一百零三个，县邑一千三百一十四个，道三十二个，侯国二百四十一个。
English: Therefore, from the time of Gaozu, 26 counties were added, six counties were added by Emperor Wen and six counties were added by Emperor Jing, 28 counties were added by Emperor Wu, and one county was added by Emperor Zhao. By the time of Emperor Xiaoping, there were a total of 103 counties, 1,314 counties, 32 provinces, and 241 counties.

古文：地东西九千三百二里。南北万三千三百六十八里。
现代文：七地东西向有九千三百零二里，南北向有一万三千三百六十八里。
English: Nine thousand three hundred and two miles east to west, and thirteen thousand three hundred and sixty-eight miles north to south.

古文：提封田一万万四千五百一十三万六千四百五顷，其一万万二百五十二万八千八百八十九顷，邑居道路，山川林泽，群不可垦，其三千二百二十九万九百四十七顷，可垦不可垦，定垦田八百二十七万五百三十六顷。
现代文：全部疆域内的田地共有一亿四千五百一十三万六千四百零五顷，其中一亿零二百五十二万八千八百八十九顷，是人们群居的地方和道路，以及山河林泽，都不可开垦，其中三千二百二十九万九百四十七顷，有可开垦的，有不可开垦的，确定开垦的田地有八百二十七万零五百三十六顷。
English: The total area of farmland within the entire territory is 145,130,136,405 hectares, of which 102,522,888,889 hectares are areas where people live in groups and roads, as well as mountains, rivers and forests, which cannot be cultivated. Of this, 32,299,947 hectares are areas that can be cultivated and areas that cannot be cultivated, and 8,275,536 hectares are definitely cultivated.

古文：民户千二百二十三万三千六十二，口五千九百五十九万四千九百七十八。
现代文：有民户一千二百二十三万三千零六十二，人口五千九百五十九万四千九百七十八。
English: There were 12,233,062 private households, with a population of 59,594,978.

古文：汉极盛矣。
现代文：汉朝达到了极盛。
English: The Han Dynasty reached its zenith.

古文：凡民函五常之性，而其刚柔缓急，音声不同，系水土之风气。故谓之风；好恶取舍，动静亡常，随君上之情欲，故谓之俗。
现代文：大凡百姓都含有五常的本性，而他们刚柔缓急，音和声有所不同，是由于水和土的风气不同，所以称为风；好恶取舍，动和静没有常态，跟随着君上的情欲，所以称为俗。
English: Ordinary people all contain the five permanent natures, but they have different priorities, different sounds and harmonies, due to the different customs of water and earth, so they are called wind; they have different likes and dislikes, there is no normal state of movement and stillness, and they follow the prince's lust, so they are called vulgar.

古文：孔子曰： 移风易俗，莫善于乐。 
现代文：孔子说： 移风易俗，没有比音乐更好的了。 
English: Confucius said: There is nothing better than music to change customs.

古文：言圣王在上，统理人伦，必移其木，而易其末，此混同天下一之乎中和，然后王教成也。
现代文：这是说圣王在上位，统一管理人间伦理，一定要改变他们的根本，转变他们的末节，这是把天下混同为一，加以中和，然后君王的教化就形成了。
English: This is to say that the holy king is on the throne, unified management of human ethics, must change their root, change their ending, this is to confuse the world into one, neutralize it, and then the king's edification is formed.

古文：汉承百王之末。国土变改，民人迁徙，成帝时刘向略言其地分，丞相张禹使属颍川朱赣条其风俗，犹未宣究，故辑而论之。终其本末著于篇。
现代文：汉朝继承百王的末端，国家土地改变了，人民迁徙了，成帝时刘向简单地述说了它的土地划分，丞相张禹让部属颖!朱赣分条陈述它们的风俗，还没有全部考察，所以集中起来进行评论，把它的本末全部写成篇章。
English: The Han Dynasty inherited the end of the hundred kings, the country's land changed, the people migrated. When Liu Xiang became emperor, he briefly described its land division, and the prime minister Zhang Yujang was Ying! Zhu Xi's article stated their customs, but they have not been fully examined, so they concentrated on commenting and wrote all its pros and cons into chapters.

古文：秦地，于天官东井、舆鬼之分野也。
现代文：秦国的土地，在天官束井、舆鬼的分野处。
English: The land of Qin is in the realm of heavenly officials, demons and ghosts.

古文：其界自弘农故关以西，京兆、抚风、冯翊、北地、上郡、西河、安定、天水、陇西，南有巴、蜀、广汉、犍为、武都，西有金城、武威、张掖、酒泉、敦煌，又西南有牂柯、越巂、益州，皆宜属焉。
现代文：它的界线是从弘农郡的旧关往西，有京兆郡、扶风郡、冯翊郡、北地郡、上郡、西河郡、安定郡、天水郡、陇西郡，往南有巴郡、蜀郡、广漠郡、犍为郡、武都郡，西面有金城郡、武威郡、张掖郡、酒泉郡、敦煌郡，还有向西南有群柯郡、越隽郡、益州郡，都应分属于它。
English: Its boundary is from the old pass of Hongnong County to the west, there are Jingzha County, Fufeng County, Fengyuan County, Beidi County, Shang County, Xihe County, Anding County, Tianshui County, Shaanxi County, to the south there are Ba County, Shu County, Guangmo County, Suwei County, Wudu County, to the west there are Jincheng County, Wuwei County, Zhangyuan County, Jiuquan County, Dunhuang County, and to the southwest there are Gunke County, Yueyuan County, Yizhou County, all should belong to it.

古文：秦之先曰柏益，出自帝颛顼，尧时助禹治水，为舜朕虞，养育草木鸟兽，赐姓嬴氏，历夏、殷为诸侯。
现代文：秦国的祖先叫柏益，出生于帝颛顼的家庭，尧时帮助大禹治水，是舜帝的朕虞官，养育草木鸟兽，赐给他蠃氏的姓，经过夏、商时为诸侯。
English: The ancestor of Qin was called Bai Yi. He was born in the family of Emperor Qian. When he was young, he helped Dayu to control the water. He was an official of Emperor Qian and raised plants, birds and beasts. He was given the surname of the Qian clan. After Xia and Shang, he became a prince.

古文：至周有造父，善驭习马，得华骝、绿耳之乘，幸于穆王，封于赵城，故更为赵氏。
现代文：到周朝时有造父，善于驾驭训练马匹，得到毛色像花一样红，耳朵是绿色的四匹马，受宠于穆王，被封到趟城，所以改姓为赵氏。
English: In the Zhou Dynasty, there was a father who was good at driving and training horses, and he got four horses with fur color as red as flowers and green ears. He was favored by King Mu and was sent to Tucheng, so he changed his surname to Zhao.

古文：后有非子，为周孝王养马氵幵、渭之间。
现代文：后来有非子，为周孝王在沂水和渭水之间养马。
English: Later, he raised horses for Zhou Xiao Wang between Surabaya and Surabaya.

古文：孝王曰： 昔伯益知禽兽，子孙不绝。 
现代文：孝王说： 以前伯益懂得禽兽，他的子孙也没有断绝。 
English: Xiao Wang said, "Previously, Bo Yi knew animals, and his descendants have not been cut off.

古文：乃封为附庸，邑之于秦，今陇西秦亭秦谷是也。
现代文：于是被封为诸侯的小国，在秦地建邑，现在陇西秦亭的秦谷就是。
English: As a result, it was made a vassal state of the princes, and a village was built in the Qin territory, which is now the Qin Valley of the West Qin Pavilion.

古文：至玄孙，氏为庄公，破西戎，有其地。
现代文：到玄孙时，就是庄公，打败了西戎，占有了它的土地。
English: When it came to the great-great-grandson, it was Zhuang Gong who defeated Xi Rong and took possession of its land.

古文：子襄公时，幽王为犬戎所败，平王东迁雒邑。
现代文：到庄公儿子襄公时，幽王被犬戎打败，平王束迁都到雒邑。
English: When Zhuang Gong's son Xiang Gong arrived, Yu Wang was defeated by Injun Rong, and Ping Wang was forced to move his capital to Zouyue.

古文：襄公将兵救周有功，赐受支阝、酆之地，列为诸侯。
现代文：襄公带兵救周朝有功，被赐给郊、酆的上地，列为诸侯。
English: Xiang Gong was credited with rescuing the Zhou Dynasty with his soldiers, and was given Shangdi, a suburb of Handan, as one of the provinces.

古文：后八世，穆公称伯，以河为竟。
现代文：八代后，穆公称霸，以黄河作为边境。
English: Eight generations later, Mu Gong reigned supreme, with the Yellow River as his border.

古文：十余世，孝公用商君，制辕田，开仟伯，东雄诸侯。
现代文：十多代后，孝公任用商君，制定辕田，开辟阡陌，向东称雄诸侯。
English: After more than ten generations, Xiaogong appointed merchants, laid out rice paddies, opened up rice fields, and became a great lord in the east.

古文：子惠公初称王，得上郡、西河。
现代文：儿子惠公刚一称王，就得到上郡、西河。
English: As soon as his son, Huigong, was proclaimed king, he was given Shang County and the West River.

古文：孙昭王开巴蜀，灭周，取九鼎。
现代文：孙子昭王开拓巴、蜀，消灭周朝，取得九鼎。
English: Grandson Zhao Wang explored Ba and Shu, eliminated the Zhou Dynasty, and obtained Jiuding.

古文：昭王曾孙政并六国。称皇帝，负力怙威，燔书坑儒，自任私智。
现代文：昭王曾孙嬴政吞并六国，称皇帝，倚仗威力，焚书坑儒，白行其事。
English: The great-grandson of King Zhao, Hezheng, annexed six countries, claimed to be emperor, relied on his power, burned books and pitted people against each other, and acted in vain.

古文：至子胡亥，天下畔之。
现代文：到儿子胡亥时，天下就反叛了他。
English: When it came to his son Hu Hai, the whole country rebelled against him.

古文：故秦地于《禹贡，时跨雍、梁二州，《诗·风》兼秦、豳两国。
现代文：原来秦国的土地在《禹贡》时横跨雍、梁二州，《诗》上的《风》中兼有秦、豳两国。
English: Originally, the land of Qin stretched across the two states of Yong and Liang at the time of "Yugong." In the poem "The Wind," there are both Qin and Qin states.

古文：昔后稷封斄，公刘处豳，大王徙支阝，文王作酆，武王治镐，其民有先王遗风，好稼墙，务本业，故《豳诗》言农桑衣食之本甚备。
现代文：以前后稷分封在帘，公刘居住在豳，大王迁徙到郧，文王建造了酆，武王治理镐，他们的百姓有先代君王的遣风，喜爱稼穑，致力于本业，所以《豳诗》上说的农桑衣食的根本相当完备。
English: Former emperors and emperors after emperors were all crowned, Prince Liu lived in Handan, great kings migrated to Handan, King Wen built Handan, King Wu governed Handan. Their people had the spirit of the previous emperors, loved to earn money, and were dedicated to their profession. Therefore, the foundation of agriculture, mulberry, clothing and food mentioned in the "Handan Poem" was quite complete.

古文：有鄠、杜竹林，南山檀柘，号称陆海，为九州膏腴。
现代文：有鄂、杜的竹林，南山的檀木和柘木，号称高陆的大海，是九州肥沃的地方。
English: There are bamboo forests in E and Du, and sandalwood and maple trees in Nanshan. Known as the highland sea, it is a fertile place in Kyushu.

古文：始皇之初，郑国穿渠，引泾水溉田，沃野千里，民以富饶。
现代文：秦始皇初期，郑国凿通水渠，引泾水来灌溉农田，肥沃的田野上千里，百姓因此富饶。
English: In the early days of Qin Shi Huang, Zheng Guo chiseled water channels and diverted water to irrigate farmland. There were thousands of miles of fertile fields, so the people were rich.

古文：汉兴，立都长安，徙齐诸田，楚昭、屈、景及诸功臣家于长陵。
现代文：汉朝建立后，在长安建都，迁徙齐国所有姓田的，楚国姓昭、屈、景的以及所有功臣的家属到长陵。
English: After the establishment of the Han Dynasty, the capital was built in Chang'an, and all surnamed Tian in Qi Province, surnamed Zhao, Qu, and Jing in Chu Province, as well as the families of all meritorious warriors moved to Changling.

古文：后世世徙吏二千石、高訾富人及豪桀并兼之家于诸陵。
现代文：后来世代都迁徙二千石官吏、多财的富人以及豪杰兼并的家属到各陵。
English: Later generations of 2,000 koku officials, wealthy people, and the families of heroes and heroines moved to each mausoleum.

古文：盖亦以强干弱支，非独为奉山园也。
现代文：大概也是用来加强主干，削弱枝节，并不单是为了事奉山地园陵。
English: It is probably also used to strengthen the trunk and weaken the branches, and not just to serve the mountain gardens.

古文：是故五方杂厝，风俗不纯，其世家则好礼文，富人则商贾为利，豪桀则游侠通奸。
现代文：因此五方错杂，风俗不纯正。世家就喜好礼仪文章，富人就靠买卖来获利，豪杰就行侠仗义，与奸人相通。
English: Therefore, the five parties are mixed, and the customs are not pure. The family favors etiquette articles, the rich rely on trading to make a profit, and the heroes are chivalrous and honest, and communicate with the traitors.

古文：濒南山，近夏阳，多阻险轻薄，易为盗贼，常为天下剧。
现代文：临近南山，靠近夏阳，有很多险阻，放荡的人容易成为盗贼，经常成为天下最动荡的地方。
English: Near Nanshan, close to Xiayang, there are many dangers, dissolute people are easy to become thieves, and often become the most turbulent place in the world.

古文：又郡国辐凑，浮食者多，民去本就末，列侯贵人车服僣上，众庶放效，羞不相及，嫁娶尤崇侈靡，送死过度。
现代文：还有郡国像车的辐凑一样，吃白食的人相当多，百姓丢掉根本，趋向末节，列侯和显贵的人车服僭越君上，众人仿效，毫不感到羞耻，嫁和娶更加崇尚奢侈，父母丧葬主事超过限度。
English: There are also counties and provinces that are like the spokes of a car, and there are quite a lot of people who eat for free. The people have lost their roots and are moving towards the end. The nobles and dignitaries have become more and more like kings. People follow suit and feel no shame. Marrying and marrying are more extravagant, and the funeral of parents exceeds the limit.

古文：天水、陇西，山多林木，民以板为室屋。
现代文：天水和陇西，山中盛产林木，百姓用木板来建造房屋。
English: Tianshui and Shaanxi, the mountains are rich in forests, and the people use wooden boards to build houses.

古文：及安定、北地、上郡、西河，皆迫近戎狄，修习战备，高上气力，以射猎为先。
现代文：至于安定、北地、上郡、西河，都靠近戎狄，讲求战备，崇尚气节与力量，以射猎为先进。
English: As for Ding'an, Beidai, Shang County and Xihe, they are all close to Rongdi, emphasizing combat readiness, advocating stamina and strength, and taking shooting as advanced.

古文：故《秦诗》曰 在其板屋 ；又曰 王于兴师，修我甲兵，与子偕行 。
现代文：所以《秦诗》说 在他们的木板屋里 ；又说 君王发动军队，我就整理锁甲和兵器，同儿子一同前行 。
English: That's why the "Qin" poem says, "I am in their wooden house," and "When the king raises an army, I will put together my armor and weapons and march forward with my son."

古文：及《车辚》、《四载》、《小戎》之篇，皆言车马田狩之事。
现代文：还有《车辚》、《四载》、《小戎》几篇，都是说车马打猎的事。
English: There are also several articles on "Chariot," "Four Years" and "Little Eunuchs," all of which are about chariot and horse hunting.

古文：汉兴，六郡良家子选给羽林、期门，以材力为官，名将多出焉。
现代文：汉朝建立后，前面六郡清白人家的儿子选拔供应羽林、期门，凭藉勇力为官，名将多数产生在这裹。
English: After the establishment of the Han Dynasty, the sons of the Qing white families in the first six counties were selected to supply the feather forest and the gate, and served as officials by virtue of their courage. Most famous generals were born here.

古文：孔子曰： 君子有勇而亡谊则为乱，小大有勇而亡谊则为盗。 
现代文：孔子说： 君子有勇力而没有义气就会不太乎，小人有勇力而没有义就会成为偷窃的人。 
English: Confucius said: "If a gentleman has courage but no righteousness, he will not be a gentleman. If a villain has courage but no righteousness, he will be a thief."

古文：故此数郡，民俗质木，不耻寇盗。
现代文：因此这几个郡，民间习俗质朴，不以盗贼感到耻辱。
English: Therefore, in these counties, folk customs are simple, and there is no shame in being a thief.

古文：自武威以西，本匈奴昆邪王、休屠王地，武帝时攘之，初置四郡，以通西域，鬲绝南羌、匈奴。
现代文：从武威郡往西，本来是匈奴昆邪王、休屠王的地方，武帝时侵夺了这片地，刚开始设置了四个郡，用来贯通西域，隔绝南羌和匈奴。
English: From Wuwei County to the west, it was originally the place of the Hun kings Kunzhao and Xiu Tuo. When Emperor Wu invaded this land, he initially set up four counties to penetrate the western region and isolate Nanlu and the Huns.

古文：其民或以关东下贫，或以报怨过当，或以誖逆亡道，家属徙焉。
现代文：这里的百姓有的因为关东极其贫困，有的因为报复怨恨超过限度，有的因为叛逆无道，家属被迁徙到这裹。
English: Some of the people here are extremely poor because of Kanto, some because of revenge and resentment exceeding the limit, some because of rebellion, and their families have been moved here.

古文：习俗颇殊，地广民稀，水草宜畜牧，故凉州之畜为天下饶。
现代文：习俗相差相当悬殊，土地广阔，百姓稀少，水草适合喂养牲畜，所以凉州的牲畜是天下最多的。
English: The customs vary widely, the land is vast, the people are rare, and the aquatic plants are suitable for feeding livestock, so Liangzhou has the largest number of livestock in the world.

古文：保边塞，二千石治之，咸以兵马为务；酒礼之会，上下通焉。吏民相亲。
现代文：保卫边塞，二千石官员来治理它，都以兵器和马匹作为业务；酒宴礼节的聚会，上下都相通，官民相互亲近。
English: Defending the border fortress, two thousand stone officials to govern it, all with weapons and horses as a business; wine banquet etiquette gatherings, both up and down, officials and citizens are close to each other.

古文：是以其俗风雨时节，谷籴常贱，少盗贼，有和气之应，贤于内郡。
现代文：因此这裹的习俗是风雨时节，谷卖的经常价很低，盗和贼都比较少，有和谐的气氛相对应，比内地的郡要通情理。
English: Therefore, the custom of this wrap is the rainy season, the regular price of the valley sale is very low, the thieves and thieves are relatively few, and there is a harmonious atmosphere corresponding to it, which is more reasonable than the counties in the mainland.

古文：此政宽厚，吏不苛刻之所致也。
现代文：这是政令宽厚，官吏不苛刻所带来的结果。
English: This is the result of the government's lenient decrees and the officials' laxity.

古文：巴、蜀、广汉本南夷，秦并以为郡，土地肥美，有江水沃野，山林竹木疏食果实之饶。
现代文：巴郡、蜀郡、广汉郡本来是南夷，秦朝吞并后就作为郡，土地肥沃，有江水灌溉田野，有山林竹木疏菜果实的富饶。
English: Ba County, Shu County and Guanghan County were originally Nanyi, and after the annexation by the Qin Dynasty, they were used as counties. The land is fertile, there is river water to irrigate fields, and there are mountains, forests, bamboo trees, and rich vegetables and fruits.

古文：南贾滇、棘僮，西近邛、莋马旄牛。
现代文：南面滇、焚多出僮仆，西面邛、榨多产马和牦牛。
English: In the south, ploughing and burning produce more yakitori, while in the west, ploughing and squeezing produce more horse and yakitori.

古文：民食稻鱼，亡凶年忧，俗不愁苦，而轻易淫泆，柔弱褊厄。
现代文：百姓以稻和鱼为食物，没有灾年的忧患，习俗就没有愁忧和辛苦，因此容易遇度放纵，体格柔弱，心胸偏狭。
English: The people eat rice and fish. Without the worries of the disaster year, the customs would not have worries and hardships. Therefore, it is easy to indulge, the physique is weak, and the mind is narrow.

古文：景、武间，文翁为蜀守，教民读书法令，未能笃信道德，反以好文刺讥，贵慕权势。
现代文：景帝、武帝间，文翁为蜀郡郡守，教导百姓读书和遵守法令，没有达到诚信道德，反而喜欢用文章来讽谏，崇尚羡慕权威和势力。
English: Between Emperor Jing and Emperor Wu, Wen Weng was the county magistrate of Shu County. He taught the people to read and abide by laws. However, he did not achieve honesty and morality. Instead, he liked to use articles to ridicule others and admired authority and power.

古文：及司马相如游宦京师诸侯，以文辞显于世。乡党慕循其迹。
现代文：等到司马相如离家在京师和诸侯处做官，以文章辞令显著于当世，乡里仰慕追循他的事迹。
English: Wait until Sima Xiangru leaves home to work as an official in the Beijing Division and the princes' office, with the words of the article prominent in the contemporary world, the village admires and follows his deeds.

古文：后有王褒、严遵，扬雄之徒，文章冠天下。
现代文：后来有王褒、严遵、扬雄之类的人，文章位居天下第一。
English: Later, there were people like Wang Bao, Yan Zun, Yang Xiong, and the article ranked first in the world.

古文：繇文翁倡其教，相如为之师，故孔子曰： 有教亡类。 
现代文：通过文翁倡导这种主张，司马相如作为榜样，所以孔子说： 施教不分对象。 
English: Confucius said: "Teaching is no respecter of persons.

古文：武都地杂氐，羌，及犍为、牂柯、越巂，皆西南外夷，武帝初开置。
现代文：武都郡的土地上杂居着氐人和羌人，还有犍为郡、胖柯郡、越仑郡，都是西南外面的夷族，武帝时开始设置。
English: On the land of Wudu County, there were mixed populations of Yao and Xiongnu people, as well as Yaowei County, Fatty Ke County, and Yuelun County, all of which were settled by the barbarians outside the southwest. They began to be established during the reign of Emperor Wu.

古文：民俗略与巴、蜀同，而武都近天水，俗颇似焉。
现代文：民俗大致同巴郡、蜀郡相同，而武都郡又靠近天水郡，民俗相当相似。
English: The folk customs are roughly the same as Ba County and Shu County, while Wudu County is close to Tianshui County, and the folk customs are quite similar.

古文：故秦地天下三分之一，而人众不过什三，然量其富居什六。
现代文：原来秦国的土地，占天下的三分之一，但人口不超过天下的十分之三，计算它的财富，却占天下的十分之六。
English: Originally, the land of Qin accounted for one-third of the world, but the population did not exceed three-tenths of the world. However, its wealth accounted for six-tenths of the world.

古文：吴札观乐，为之歌《秦》，曰： 此之谓夏声。
现代文：吴札观赏音乐，就创作《秦》这首歌，说： 造就叫做中原的音声。
English: Watching the music, Wu Fuda composed the song "Qin" and said, "Create the sound called Central Plains."

古文：夫能夏则大，大之至也，其周旧乎？ 
现代文：能亲善中原就盛大，是盛大的极至，这难道是周朝的旧样吗? 
English: To be able to be friendly with the Central Plains is grand, it is grand to the extreme. Is this the old style of the Zhou Dynasty?

古文：自井十度至柳三度，谓之鹑首之次，秦之分也。
现代文：从井十度到柳三度，称做鹑首的位置，是秦国的分星。
English: From the 10th degree of the well to the 3rd degree of the willow, known as the position of the dagger, is the dividing star of Qin.

古文：魏地，觜觿、参之分野也。
现代文：魏国的土地，是觜鱲星、参星的分野。
English: The land of Wei is the field of star anise and ginseng.

古文：其界自高陵以东，尽河东、河内，南有陈留及汝南之召陵、氵隐强、新汲、西华、长平，颍川之舞阳、郾、许、傿陵、河南之开封、中牟、阳武、酸枣、卷，皆魏分也。
现代文：它的疆界从高陵往东，一直到河东、河内的尽头，南面有陈留以及汝南的召陵、溜彊、新汲、西华、长平，颖川的舞阳、郾、许、伪陵，河南的开封、中牟、阳武、酸枣、卷，都是魏国管辖的地区。
English: Its borders stretch from Gaoling in the east to the end of Hedong and Hanoi, and to the south there are Chenlu and Zhaoling, Yulong, Xinqu, Xihua, and Changping in the south of the Ryu, Maiyang, Yao, Xu, and Guoling in Yingchuan, and Kaifeng, Zhongmou, Yangwu, and Zhouzhu in the south of Henan, all of which are areas under the jurisdiction of Wei.

古文：河内本殷之旧都，周既灭殷，分其畿内为三国，《诗·风》邶、庸、卫国是也。
现代文：河内本来是商朝的旧都城，周朝消灭殷朝后，把它京城以内的地方分为三国，《诗。风》中的邶、庸、卫国就是。
English: Hanoi was originally the old capital city of the Shang Dynasty. After the Zhou Dynasty eliminated the Yin Dynasty, it divided the area within the capital city into three countries. "Poetry. Wind" is about the three countries.

古文：鄁，以封纣子武庚；庸，管叔尹之；卫，蔡叔尹之：以临殷民，谓之三监。
现代文：邶国是用来分封纣王的儿子武庚的；庸国，由管叔治理；卫国，由蔡叔治理：用来监视商朝百姓，称做三监。
English: The State of Min was used to divide the fiefs of King Min's son, King Wu Geng; the State of Yong, was governed by Uncle Guan; the State of Wei, was governed by Uncle Cai: it was used to monitor the people of the Shang Dynasty, and was known as the Three Supervisors.

古文：故《书序》曰 武王崩，三监畔 ，周公诛之，尽以其地封弟康叔，号曰孟侯，以夹辅周室；迁邶、庸之民于洛邑，故邶、庸、卫三国之诗相与同风。
现代文：所以《书序》上说 武王崩，三监反叛 ，周公诛杀了他们，把他们的土地全部分封给周公的弟弟康叔，号称孟侯，用来在左右辅佐周室；把邶国、庸国的百姓迁到雒邑，因此邶、庸、卫三国的诗风格相同。
English: Therefore, the "Preface" says that King Wu collapsed, the three supervisors rebelled, Zhou Gongyi killed them, and their land was all assigned to Zhou Gongyi's brother, Uncle Kang, known as Meng Hou, to be used to assist Zhou's family on the left and right; the people of the three countries were moved to the three counties, so the three countries' poetry styles are the same.

古文：《邶诗》曰 在浚之下 ；《庸》曰 在浚之郊 ；《邶》又曰 亦流于淇 ， 河水洋洋 ，《庸》曰： 送我淇上 ， 在彼中河 。《卫》曰： 瞻彼其奥 ， 河水洋洋 。
现代文：《邶诗》说 在浚邑的地方 ，《庸诗》说 在浚邑的郊外 ；《邶诗》又说 也在淇水流淌 ， 河水浩荡 ，《庸诗》说 送我到淇水上游 ， 在那条河的中间 ，《卫诗》说 往淇水深处看 ， 河水浩荡 。
English: The "Song of Songs" says, "In the place of the dredge," the "Song of Songs" says, "On the outskirts of the dredge"; the "Song of Songs" also says, "Even in the dredge, the water is flowing," the "Song of Songs" says, "Take me to the upper reaches of the dredge," in the middle of the river, the "Song of Songs" says, "Look into the depths of the dredge," the water is flowing.

古文：故吴公子札聘鲁观周乐，闻《邶》、《庸》、《卫》之歌，曰： 美哉渊乎！
现代文：所以吴国的公子札被请到鲁国观赏周朝的音乐，听到邶国、庸国、卫国的歌，说： 太美太深奥了!
English: Therefore, the prince of the State of Wu was invited to the State of Lu to watch the music of the State of Zhou, listen to the songs of the State of Zhou, the State of Yongguo, and the State of Wei, and said: It is too beautiful and profound!

古文：吾闻康叔之德如是，是其《卫风》乎？ 
现代文：我听说康叔的德操像这样，难道这是《卫风》吗? 
English: I've heard that Uncle Kang's morality is like this. Is this from "The Winds of the West"?

古文：至十六世，懿公亡道，为狄所灭。
现代文：到十六代，懿公无道，被狄所灭。
English: By the sixteenth generation, the Xing Gong had no way out and was eliminated by the Di.

古文：齐桓公帅诸侯伐狄，而更封卫于河南曹、楚丘，是为文公。
现代文：齐桓公率领诸侯讨伐狄人，改封卫地到黄河南部的曹邑、楚丘邑，造就是文公。
English: Prince Qi Kuan led the princes to fight the Vardians, and changed the fief of Wei to Cao and Chuqiu in the south of the Yellow River, which was built by King Wen.

古文：而河内殷虚，更属于晋。
现代文：而河内的殷虚，改属于晋国。
English: But the grandeur of Hanoi belongs to Jin Province.

古文：康叔之风既歇，而纣之化犹存，故俗刚强，多豪桀侵夺，薄恩礼，好生分。
现代文：康叔的风范消失后，纣王的教化仍在，因此民俗刚强，豪杰侵夺的事多，缺少恩惠和礼节，喜欢叛逆。
English: After the demeanor of Uncle Kang disappeared, the indoctrination of King Gong was still going on. Therefore, the folk customs were strong, the heroes and heroines plundered a lot, lacked grace and etiquette, and liked to rebel.

古文：河东土地平易，有盐铁之饶，本唐尧所居，《诗·风》唐、魏之国也。
现代文：河东的土地平坦开阔，有丰富的盐铁，本来是唐尧居住的地方，是《诗。风》中的盘国、魏国。
English: The land to the east of the river is flat and open, with an abundance of salt and iron. Originally, it was the place where Tang Xuan lived, and it is the country of Pan and Wei in the "Poem. Wind."

古文：周武王子唐叔在母未生，武王梦帝谓己曰： 余名而子曰虞，将与之唐，属之参。 
现代文：周武王的儿子唐叔在母亲还没生下他时，武王梦见上天对自己说： 我给你的儿子取名叫卢，把唐这片地方给他，属于参旦。 
English: When Uncle Tang, the son of King Zhouwu, was still in the womb of his mother, King Wu dreamed that God said to him, "I have given your son the name Lu, and given him the land of Tang, which belongs to San'dan."

古文：乃生，名之曰虞。
现代文：等到庐超出生，就给他取名叫虞。
English: When Hao Chao was born, they named him Yu.

古文：至成王灭唐，而封叔虞。
现代文：到成王消灭唐国，就把它分封给扭虞。
English: When King Cheng eliminated Tang, he assigned it to Tsuiyu.

古文：唐有晋水，及叔虞子燮为晋侯云，故参为晋星。
现代文：卢厘有置丞，等到走喽的儿子銮成为置侯，所以参星就是晋国的星。
English: Lu Li had a son named Jia, and his son Jia became Jia Hou, so Shang Xing is the star of Jin.

古文：其民有先王遗教，君子深思。小人俭陋。
现代文：这裹的百姓有先王遗传下来的教化，君子周密思考，小人小气粗俗。
English: These people have inherited the enlightenment of the previous king, the gentleman thinks carefully, and the villain is petty and vulgar.

古文：故《唐诗·蟋蟀》、《山枢》、《葛生》之篇曰： 今我不乐，日月其迈 ； 宛其死矣，它人是媮 ； 百岁之后，归于其居 。
现代文：所以《唐诗》中的《蟋蟀》、《山枢》、《葛生》各篇说 现在我不行乐，岁月就要流逝了 ； 如果自己死了，别人就会高兴了 ； 百年以后，就回到他的坟墓了 。
English: That's why the "Tang Poem" says in each of its chapters, "The Dragonfly," "The Mountain Spire," and "The Gethsemane," "If I don't enjoy myself now, the years will pass by; if I die, others will be happy; after a hundred years, I will return to my grave."

古文：皆思奢俭之中，念死生之虑。
现代文：都考虑奢侈和节俭的适度，思考死和生的忧虑。
English: Both consider luxury and frugality in moderation, pondering the worries of life and death.

古文：吴札闻《唐》之歌，曰： 思深哉！
现代文：吴札听到唐国的歌，说： 思想太深刻了!
English: When Wu Zha heard the Chinese song, he said, "The thought is too profound!

古文：其有陶唐氏之遗民乎？ 
现代文：难道他们就是陶唐区的遗民吗? 
English: Could it be that they are the remaining residents of the Tao Tang District?

古文：魏国，亦姬姓也，在晋之南河曲，故其诗曰 彼汾一曲 ； 寘诸河之侧 。
现代文：魏国，也是姬姓，在晋国南面黄河的拐弯处，所以它的诗说 它是汾水的一处河曲 ； 把它放在董回的边上 。
English: Wei Guo, also surnamed Ji, is at the bend of the Yellow River in the south of Jin Guo, so its poem says that it is a river meander in Surabaya; put it on the edge of Dongbei.

古文：自唐叔十六世至献公，灭魏以封大夫毕万，灭耿以封大夫赵夙，及大夫韩武子食采于韩原，晋于是始大。
现代文：从：壹拯十六世到麸公，灭掉魏国用来分封大夫毕万，灭掉耿用来分封大夫盏周，等到大夫垄亘辽分封到整厘的平原，置国于是开始壮大。
English: From: Zheng Zheng, the 16th, to Zong Gong, the Wei state used to assign the doctor Bi Wan, and the Geng state used to assign the doctor Qian Zhou, until the doctor Ruan Weng Liao assigned the doctor to the plain of Zhe Li, and the state began to grow.

古文：至于文公，伯诸侯，尊周室，始有河内之士。
现代文：到了文公的时候，称霸诸侯，尊崇周室，开始有河内的上地。
English: By the time of Wengong, he had begun to dominate the princes and respect Zhou, and had begun to have the upper hand in Hanoi.

古文：吴札闻《魏》之歌，曰： 美哉沨々乎！
现代文：吴札听到《魏》歌，说： 太美了!乐声婉转悠扬。
English: Wu Fuda heard the "Wei" song and said: "It's so beautiful! The music is gentle and melodious.

古文：以德辅此，则明主也。 
现代文：用德来辅佐它，就是明主。 
English: The one who supports it with virtue is the clear master.

古文：文公后十六世为韩、魏、赵所灭，三家皆自立为诸侯，是为三晋。
现代文：主公十六代后被韩周、至困、趟国所灭，三家都自立为诸侯，造就是三置。
English: Sixteen generations later, the lord was killed by Han Zhou, Zizhi, and Wuchang, and all three families became independent lords, creating the three estates.

古文：赵与秦同祖，韩、魏皆姬姓也。
现代文：赵国和泰迩祖先相同，整国和魏国都是姬姓。
English: The ancestors of Zhao Guo and Tai Qi are the same, and the ancestors of Jing Guo and Wei Guo are both surnamed Ji.

古文：自毕万后十世称侯，至孙称王，徙都大梁，故魏一号为梁，七世为秦所灭。
现代文：从垦万过了十代后就称侯，到孙子时就称王，把都城迁到大梁，所以魏国又称作梁，七代后被秦国所灭。
English: After ten generations from Xuan Wan, it was called Hou, and when it came to the grandson, it was called Wang, and the capital was moved to Dalian. Therefore, Wei was also called Liang. Seven generations later, it was destroyed by Qin.

古文：周地，柳、七星、张之分野也。
现代文：周国的土地，是柳星、七星、张星的分野。
English: The land around the country is the field of Liu Xing, Qixing and Zhang Xing.

古文：今之河南雒阳、穀城、平阴、偃师、巩、缑氏，是其分也。
现代文：现在周公的昼幽、毅虚、芒壁、堡面、巩、銮氏，是它的地方。
English: Now Zhou Gong's Hiyu, Yi Hu, Meng Qiao, Baofeng, Gong, and Zou are the places where it grows.

古文：昔周公营雒邑，以为在于土中，诸侯蕃屏四方，故立京师。
现代文：以前旦公建造雏旦，认为变邑在土地中央，诸侯在四周捍卫，所以建立了京师。
English: In the past, the government built the castle, believing that the county was in the center of the land, and the lords defended it from all sides. Therefore, the Beijing Division was established.

古文：至幽王淫褒姒，以灭宗周，子平王东居雒邑。
现代文：到周幽王时同裹姒淫乱，以致灭亡，儿子周平王往东居住到雒邑。
English: By the time of King Zhou Yu, he had committed adultery with Baidi, which led to his downfall. His son, King Zhou Ping, went to live in the east, in Zouyun.

古文：其后五伯更帅诸侯以尊周室，故周于三代最为长久。
现代文：造之后五霸重新尊崇周室，所以周朝在三代中最为长久。
English: After the construction, the Five Overlords re-revered the Zhou dynasty, so the Zhou dynasty is the longest in three generations.

古文：八百余年至于赧王，乃为秦所兼。
现代文：八百多年到周赧王时，就被秦国兼并。
English: When King Zhou Enlai came to power more than 800 years ago, it was annexed by the State of Qin.

古文：初，雒邑与宗周通封畿，东西长而南北短，短长相覆为千里。
现代文：当初雒邑与宗周京都一带地域相通，东西长而南北短，短和长相差千里。
English: At the beginning, Shibuya and the area around Zonshu Kyoto were connected. The east and west were long, while the north and south were short. The short and long distances were thousands of miles apart.

古文：至襄王以河内赐晋文公，又为诸侯所侵，故其分地小。
现代文：至襄王时以河内赏赐给晋文公，又被诸侯所侵吞，所以它的份地就减少了。
English: At the time of King Xiang, Hanoi was awarded to Jinwen, and it was swallowed up by the lords, so its share was reduced.

古文：周人之失，巧伪趋利，贵财贱义，高富下贫，憙为商贾，不好仕宦。
现代文：周国人的过失，在于投机取巧，趋附利益，重视财富，轻视义气，尊重富人，轻视贫民，喜欢商人，不欢迎做官的。
English: The faults of the Zhou people lie in being opportunistic, pursuing profits, valuing wealth, despising loyalty, respecting the rich, despising the poor, liking businessmen, and not welcoming officials.

古文：自柳三度至张十二度，谓之鹑火之次，周之分也。
现代文：从柳星三度到张星十二度，称做鹑火的位置，是周朝的分星。
English: From Liu Xing 3 degrees to Zhang Xing 12 degrees, known as the bonfire position, is the branch star of the Zhou Dynasty.

古文：韩地，角、亢、氐之分野也。
现代文：韩国上地，是角星、亢星、氐星的分野。
English: South Korea is on the ground, and it is the field of Pleiades, Pleiades, Pleiades.

古文：韩分晋得南阳郡及颍川之父城、定陵、襄城、颍阳、颍阴、长社、阳翟、郏，东接汝南，西接弘农得新安、宜阳，皆韩分也。
现代文：韩国瓜分晋国得到南阳郡以及颖!的父城、定陵、襄城、颐阳、颖阴、长社、阳翟、郏，束面与汝南接壤，西面接上弘农郡后得到新安、宜阳，都是韩国的地方。
English: South Korea got Nanyang County after the division of Jin Province, as well as the Chicheng, Dingling, Yangcheng, Shenyang, Yingyin, Changsha, Yangpu, Handan of Ying!, Sokmen bordering on South Korea, and Xin'an and Yiyang after the westward transfer of Shanghongong County, all of which are places in South Korea.

古文：及《诗·风》陈、郑之国，与韩同星分焉。
现代文：还有《诗。风》中的陈国、郑国，与韩国的星分相同。
English: There are also Chen Guo and Zheng Guo in "Poetry. Wind," which have the same star rating as South Korea.

古文：郑国，今河南之新郑，本高辛氏火正祝融之虚也。
现代文：郑国，是现在河南的新郑，本来是高卒氏的火正官祝融的废墟。
English: Zheng Guo, now Xin Zheng in Henan, was originally the ruins of the high school graduate's fire official Zhu Rong.

古文：及成皋、荥阳，颍川之崇高、阳城，皆郑分也。
现代文：至于成皋、荣阳、颖川的崇高、阳城，都是郑国的地方。
English: As for Chengdu, Rongyang, Yingchuan's sublime, Yangcheng, they are all places in Zhengzhou.

古文：本周宣王弟友为周司徒，食采于宗周畿内，是为郑。
现代文：本来周宣王的弟弟友为周朝的司徒，分封在镝京的京城内，因此叫郑。
English: Originally, Zhou Xuan Wang's younger brother, Yu, was a scholar of the Zhou Dynasty, and was assigned to the capital city of Yanjing, hence the name Zheng.

古文：郑桓公问于史伯曰： 王室多故，何所可以逃死？ 
现代文：郑桓公向史伯请教说： 王室多变故，什么地方可以逃避一死? 
English: Zheng Huan Gong asked Shi Bo for advice and said: Since the royal family is changeable, where can one escape death?

古文：史伯曰： 四方之国，非王母弟甥舅则夷狄，不可入也。其济、洛、河、颍之间乎！
现代文：史伯说： 四方国土，不是王、母、弟、甥、舅的地方就是夷狄的地方，不可进入，大概济水、洛水、黄河、颖水之间可以!
English: Shi Bo said, "In the land of the four directions, whether it is the place of the king, mother, brother, nephew, or uncle, it is the place of the barbarians. It is not allowed to enter, but it is probably allowed between Jishui, Luoshui, the Yellow River, and Yingshui!

古文：子男之国，虢、会为大，恃势与险，崇侈贪冒，君若寄帑与贿，周乱而敝，必将背君；君以成周之众，奉辞伐罪，亡不克矣。 
现代文：子爵和男爵的国家中，以虢国和会国为最大，倚仗形势与险要，喜欢奢侈、贪图钱财，您如果寄托在钱财和贿赂上，周朝动荡而且衰敝，一定要背叛您；您以成周的人众，名正言顺地讨伐罪人，没有不能战胜的。 
English: Among the countries of viscounts and barons, Zhou and Hui states are the largest. They rely on the situation and the crisis, like luxury, and covet money. If you rely on money and bribery, the Zhou dynasty will be unstable and decline, and will surely betray you. With Zhou's people, you can legitimately fight against sinners, and there is nothing you cannot defeat.

古文：公曰： 南方不可乎？ 
现代文：郑桓公说： 南方不可以吗? 
English: Zheng Huan Gong said, "Isn't it allowed to go to the south?"

古文：对曰： 夫楚，重黎之后也，黎为高辛氏火正，昭显天地，以生柔嘉之材。
现代文：答道： 楚国是重黎的后代，重黎为高辛氏的火正官，光芒照耀天地，涌现温和而美善的人才。
English: He replied, "Chu Guo is the descendant of Chong Li. Chong Li is the fire official of the Gaoxin clan. The light shines in heaven and earth, and gentle and good talents emerge.

古文：姜、嬴、荆、羋，实与诸姬代相干也。
现代文：姜、赢、荆、芈，实质上同各姬代代产生冲突。
English: In essence, ginger, yang, ginger, and ginger have been in conflict with each other for generations.

古文：姜，伯夷之后也；嬴，伯益之后也。
现代文：姜，是伯夷的后代；蠃，是伯益的后代。
English: Jiang is a descendant of Bo Yi; Zou is a descendant of Bo Yi.

古文：伯夷能礼于神以佐尧，伯益能仪百物以佐舜，其后皆不失祠，而未有兴者，周衰将起，不可逼也。 
现代文：伯夷能尊敬神灵以辅佐尧，伯益能安定百物用来辅佐舜，他们的后代都没失去祭祀，但没有兴盛起来的人，周朝的衰败将要到来，不能去催逼它。 
English: Bo Yi can respect the gods to assist Zhou, and Bo Yi can stabilize hundreds of things to assist Zhou. Their descendants have not lost their sacrifices, but they have not prospered. The decline of the Zhou Dynasty will come, and it is impossible to force it.

古文：桓公从其言，乃东寄帑与贿，虢、会受之。
现代文：郑桓公听从了史伯的话，就把妻子与钱财寄托到束方，虢国、会国接受了他们。
English: Zheng Huan Gong listened to Shi Bo's words and entrusted his wife and money to Sok Fang. Sok Province and Hui Province accepted them.

古文：后三年，幽王败，桓公死，其子武公与平王东迁，卒定虢、会之地，右雒左泲，食溱、洧焉。
现代文：三年后，幽王衰败，桓公死了，他的儿子武公和平王向东迁移，终于安定号国、会国的土地，右边是雒，左边是沸，饮用溱水和洧水。
English: Three years later, Yu Wang fell into decline, Huan Gong died, and his son Wu Gong and Heping Wang migrated to the east. Finally, the land of the State of Stability and the State of Reunion was divided into the right side and the left side, and they drank brackish water and brackish water.

古文：土阝医而险，山居谷汲，男女亟聚会，故其俗淫。
现代文：土地狭窄险要，居住在山上，汲取谷中的水，男女经常聚会在一起，所以他们的习俗放荡。
English: The land is narrow and dangerous, they live in the mountains and draw water from the valley, and men and women often gather together, so their customs are debauched.

古文：《郑诗》曰： 出其东门，有女如云。 
现代文：《郑诗》说： 出了郑国的束门，那裹的女人像云一样。 
English: "Zheng Shi" said: Out of the casket door of Zheng Guo, the wrapped woman is like a cloud.

古文：又曰： 溱与洧方灌灌兮，士与女方秉菅兮。 
现代文：又说： 溱水与洧水浩浩荡荡，男人和女人拿着兰花。 
English: He also said: "There was a lot of splashing and splashing, with men and women holding orchids.

古文： 恂盱且乐，惟士与女，伊其相谑。 
现代文： 男子和女子都很诚信，他们在一起相互戏谚。 
English: Both men and women are honest, and they play tricks on each other.

古文：此其风也。
现代文：这是他们的风俗。
English: It's their custom.

古文：吴札闻《郑》之歌，曰： 美哉！
现代文：吴札听到郑国的歌，说： 太美了!
English: Wu Fuda heard Zheng Guo's song and said, "It's so beautiful!

古文：其细已甚，民弗堪也。
现代文：它太细弱了，百姓不能忍受。
English: It is too weak and the people can't stand it.

古文：是其先之乎？ 
现代文：这是它衰亡的先兆吗? 
English: Is this a harbinger of its demise?

古文：自武公后二十三世，为韩所灭。
现代文：从武公起，过了二十三代，被韩国所灭。
English: Twenty-three generations have passed since King Wu was killed by Korea.

古文：陈国，今淮阳之地。
现代文：陈国，是现在淮阳的地方。
English: Chen Guo is where Huaiyang is now.

古文：陈本太昊之虚，周武王封舜后妫满于陈，是为胡公，妻以元女大姬。
现代文：陈国本来是太吴的废墟，周武王把舜的后代妈满分封到陈国，因此叫胡公，把长女大姬作为妻子。
English: Chen Guo was originally the ruins of Taiwu. King Zhou Wu assigned all of the descendants of Yao to Chen Guo. Therefore, he was called Hu Gong and took the eldest daughter Da Ji as his wife.

古文：妇人尊贵，好祭祀，用史巫，故其俗巫鬼。
现代文：妇人受到尊贵，喜欢祭祀，任用史官和巫官，所以它的习俗是跳舞使鬼神降临。
English: The woman is respected, likes to make sacrifices, appoints historians and magicians, so its custom is to dance to make ghosts and gods descend.

古文：《陈诗》曰： 坎其击鼓，宛丘之下，亡冬亡夏，值其鹭羽。 
现代文：《陈诗》说： 击鼓声隆隆，在宛丘下面，无论冬夏，把白鹭羽毛制的舞具立着。 
English: "Chen Shi" said: The drumming is booming, and under the hill, whether in winter or summer, the dance equipment made of egret feathers is standing.

古文：又曰： 东门之枌，宛丘之栩，子仲之子，婆娑其下。 
现代文：又说： 在束门的白榆下，宛丘的栩树下，子仲的儿子，在树下婆娑起舞。 
English: He also said, "Under the birch trees of Sokumen, under the poplars of Wanchiu, under the trees of Zizhong, the sons of Zizhong danced."

古文：此其风也。
现代文：这是它们的风俗。
English: It's their custom.

古文：吴札闻《陈》之歌，曰： 国亡主，其能久乎！ 
现代文：吴札听到陈国的歌后，说： 国家没有君主，它能长久吗? 
English: After listening to Chen Guoqin's song, Wu Zha said: A country has no monarch, can it last long?

古文：自胡公后二十三世为楚所灭。
现代文：从胡公开始，过了二十三代后，被楚国所减。
English: Starting from Hu Gong, after 23 generations, it was reduced by the State of Chu.

古文：陈虽属楚，于天文自若其故。
现代文：陈国虽然属于楚国，但在天文上仍按自己的旧样。
English: Although Chen Guo belongs to Chu Guo, it still follows its old ways in astronomy.

古文：颍川、南阳，本夏禹之国。
现代文：颖国、南阳，本来是夏禹的国家。
English: Ying Guo and Nanyang were originally the states of Xia Yu.

古文：夏人上忠，其敝鄙朴。
现代文：夏国人忠于上级，他们的弊端是粗俗质朴。
English: The people of Xia are loyal to their superiors, and their drawback is their coarseness and simplicity.

古文：韩自武子后七世称侯，六世称王，五世而为秦所灭。
现代文：韩国从武子后面的七代开始称侯，过六代称王，五代被秦国所灭。
English: From the seventh generation after Takeshi, Korea began to be called Hou, after six generations it was called King, and five generations were destroyed by Qin.

古文：秦既灭韩，徙天下不轨之民于南阳，故其俗夸奢，上气力，好商贾渔猎，藏匿难制御也。
现代文：秦国灭掉韩国以后，把天下不守法的百姓迁徙到南阳，所以这里风俗奢侈，崇尚气节和力量，喜欢买卖渔猎，躲藏后难以控制。
English: After Qin wiped out Korea, they moved all the lawless people to Nanyang, so the customs here are extravagant, advocating temperament and strength, like to buy and sell, fish and hunt, and are difficult to control after hiding.

古文：宛。西通武关，东受江、淮，一都之会也。
现代文：宛，西面与武关相通，束面接受长江、淮河水源，是整个都城的交会点。
English: Wan, the west side is connected to Wuguan, and Sokmen receives water from the Yangtze River and Huaihe River. It is the meeting point of the entire capital city.

古文：宣帝时，郑弘、召信臣为南阳太守，治皆见纪。
现代文：宣帝的时候，郑弘、召信臣为南阳太守，治理的成绩都见于记载。
English: At the time of Emperor Xuan, Zheng Hong and Zhao Xincheng were the Nanyang Emperors, and their achievements in governance are recorded.

古文：信臣劝民农桑，去末归本，郡以殷富。
现代文：召信臣勉励百姓从事农桑业，离开末节，返回根本，郡中得以很富裕。
English: He called on his trusted vassals to encourage the people to engage in agricultural mulberry industry, leave the late harvest and return to the root, and the county became very rich.

古文：颍川，韩都。
现代文：颖川，是韩国的都城。
English: Yingchuan is the capital of South Korea.

古文：士有申子、韩非，刻害余烈，高仕宦，好文法，民以贪遴争讼生分为失。
现代文：士中有曳王、凿非刻薄遣留下来的功业，崇尚做官，喜欢法制，百姓因为贪吝争论叛逆，形成了他们的过失。
English: Among the nobles, there were those who followed the king and chiseled the achievements left behind by the non-mean officials, who advocated being an official and liked the legal system, while the people were greedy, argued, and rebelled, which formed their faults.

古文：韩延寿为太守，先之以敬让；黄霸继之，教化大行，狱或八年亡重罪囚。
现代文：整延寿为太守，首先实行敬让礼仪；黄霸加以继承，教化广泛流行，狱中有时八年没有重罪囚犯。
English: When Zhengyan Shou was crown prince, he first implemented the etiquette of deference; Huang He inherited it, and indoctrination was widespread. In prison, there were sometimes no felony prisoners for eight years.

古文：南阳好商贾，召父富以本业；颍川好争讼分异，黄、韩化以笃厚。 君子之德风了，小人之德草也 ，信矣！
现代文：南阳人喜欢做买卖，召信臣劝他们务农来致富；颖人喜欢争论分辩，黄霸、韩延寿用笃厚来教化。 君子的德行像风，小人的德行像草 ，确实是这样。
English: Nanyang people like to do business, and they call their trusted vassals to advise them to do farming to get rich; Ying people like to argue and debate, and Huangba and Han Yanshou use Du Fu to educate. The gentleman's virtue is like wind, and the villain's virtue is like grass, it is really so.

古文：自东井六度至亢六度，谓之寿星之次，郑之分野，与韩同分。
现代文：从束井六度到亢六度，称做寿星的位置，是郑国的分野，同韩国的分星相同。
English: From the six degrees of the cascade to the six degrees of the compass, known as the position of the birthday star, is the field of Zhengzhou, which is the same as the star in South Korea.

古文：赵地，昴，毕之分野。
现代文：赵国的上地，是昴星、毕星的分野。
English: Shangdi in Zhao Guo is a field of bright stars.

古文：赵分晋，得赵国。
现代文：趟分晋，得到赵国。
English: He won the first prize and gained the state of Zhao.

古文：北有信都、真定、常山、中山，又得涿郡之高阳、鄚、州乡；东有广平、巨鹿、清河、河间，又得渤海郡之东平舒、中邑、文安、束州，成平、章武，河以北也；南至浮水、繁阳、内黄、斥丘；西有太原、定襄、云中、五原、上党。
现代文：北面有信都、真定、常山、中山，又得到涿郡的高阳、郑、州乡；东面有广平、钜鹿、清河、河间，又得到渤海郡的束平舒、中邑、文安、束州、成平、章武，在黄河以北；向南到浮水、繁阳、内黄、斥丘；西面有太原、定襄、云中、五原、上党。
English: To the north are Xindu, Zhending, Changshan and Zhongshan, and to the south Gaoyang, Zheng and Shuzhou Township in Min County; to the east are Guangping, Elk, Qinghe and Hema, and to the north of the Yellow River are Sokpingshu, Zhongyup, Wen'an, Sokzhou, Chengping and Zhangwu in Bohai County; to the south are Fushui, Shenyang, Neihuang and Yanqiu in Min County; to the west are Taiyuan, Dingxiang, Yunzhong, Wuhangyuan and Shangdang.

古文：上党，本韩之别郡也，远韩近赵，后卒降赵，皆越分也。
现代文：上党，本来是韩国的边远郡，迷离韩国，靠近赵国，后来终于投降赵国，都是赵国的地方。
English: Shangdang, originally a remote county of South Korea, strayed from South Korea, close to Zhao, and finally surrendered to Zhao, are all places in Zhao.

古文：自赵夙后九世称侯，四世敬侯徙都邯郸，至曾孙武灵王称王，五世为秦所灭。
现代文：赵夙九代后称侯，四代后敬侯迁都到邯郸，到曾孙武灵王时称王，过了五代，被秦国所灭。
English: After the ninth generation of Zhao Xi, the capital was called Hou, and after the fourth generation, the capital was moved to Handan. When the great-grandson King Wuling became king, after five generations, he was destroyed by Qin.

古文：赵、中山地薄人众，犹有沙丘纣淫乱余民。
现代文：赵国、中山国地少人多，还有沙丘的纣王的放荡的遣民。
English: In Zhao and Zhongshan Provinces, there are more than a few people, and there are also the dissolute exiles of the king of sand dunes.

古文：丈夫相聚游戏，悲歌忼慨，起则椎剽掘冢，作奸巧，多弄物，为倡优。
现代文：成年男子聚在一起游乐嬉戏，慷慨悲歌，一动就杀人劫财，盗挖墓地，行为狡诈，好生事，多为歌舞杂技艺人。
English: Grown men get together to have fun and play, sing sad songs, kill people and plunder money at the drop of a hat, rob cemeteries, act cunningly, cause trouble, and are mostly song and dance acrobats.

古文：文子弹弦跕丽，游媚富贵，遍诸侯之后宫。
现代文：女子弹着琴弦，足尖轻轻着地而舞，到处献媚于富贵之人，充斥诸侯的后宫。
English: Women play the strings, dance with their toes lightly touching the ground, flatter the rich and famous everywhere, and fill the harems of princes.

古文：邯郸北通燕、涿，南有郑、卫，漳、河之间一都会也。
现代文：邯郸北面与燕地和涿地相通，南面有郑、卫，是漳、河之间的一个大城市。
English: To the north of Handan, it is connected to Yan and Handan, and to the south, it is connected to Zheng and Wei. It is a big city between Handan and He.

古文：其土广俗杂，大率精急，高气势，轻为奸。
现代文：这裹土地广阔，民俗复杂，大致是专诚急躁，崇尚气概与声势，轻视虚伪奸诈。
English: The land is vast, the folk customs are complex, and they are generally single-minded and impatient, advocating strength and influence, and despising hypocrisy and treachery.

古文：太原、上党又多晋公族子孙，以诈力相倾，矜夸功名，报仇过直，嫁取送死奢靡。
现代文：太原、上党地区又多是晋国公族的子孙，弄虚作假相互倾轧，夸大功名，报仇过当，嫁娶送葬奢侈浪费。
English: In the Taiyuan and Shangdang areas, most of them are the descendants of the public clans of Jin Province. They make false accusations, exaggerate their achievements, take revenge, and waste money on extravagant weddings and funerals.

古文：汉兴，号为难治，常择严猛之将，或任杀伐为威。
现代文：汉朝建立后，逭裹号称难以治理，经常选择威严凶猛的将领，有的以任意杀人来树立威信。
English: After the establishment of the Han Dynasty, the Zhou Dynasty claimed to be difficult to govern, often choosing powerful and ferocious generals, and sometimes arbitrarily killing people to establish prestige.

古文：父兄被诛，子弟怨愤，至告讦刺史二千石，或报杀其亲属。
现代文：父亲兄长被杀，儿子弟弟就怨恨，以致揭发刺史二千石的隐私，有的还报复杀死他们的亲属。
English: The father and elder brother were killed, and the son's younger brother became resentful, leading to the disclosure of the 2,000-koku private life of the assassin, and some even killed their relatives in revenge.

古文：钟、代、石、北，迫近胡寇，民俗懻忮，好气为奸，不事农商，自全晋时，已患其剽悍，而武灵王又益厉之。
现代文：钟地、代地、石地、北地，靠近胡敌，民间习俗强直刚愎，喜欢气节与狡诈，不从事农业和商业，在晋国统一的时候，就已对他们的轻捷骁勇感到担忧，到武灵王时，又更加厉害了。
English: Zhongdi, Dechi, Shidi, Beidi, close to Huyi, folk customs are strong and tough, like temperament and cunning, not engaged in agriculture and commerce. At the time of the unification of Jin, they were already worried about their lightness and courage, and when Wuling Wang, they were even more powerful.

古文：故冀州之部，盗贼常为它州剧。
现代文：所以冀州地区，盗贼经常比其它地方多。
English: Therefore, in the Jizhou region, there are often more thieves than in other places.

古文：定襄、云中、五原，本戎狄也，颇有赵、齐、卫、楚之徙。
现代文：定襄、云中、五原，本来是戎、狄的地方，经常有趟国、齐国、卫国、楚国的人迁徙到这裹。
English: Dingxiang, Yunzhong and Wuhuan were originally places of Rong and Di, and people from Wuchang, Qi, Wei and Chu often migrated to these areas.

古文：其民鄙朴，少礼文，好射猎。
现代文：这裹百姓简陋朴素，缺少礼仪修饰，喜欢打猎。
English: The people here are simple and unpretentious, they lack etiquette and decorum, and they like hunting.

古文：雁门亦同俗，于天文别属燕。
现代文：雁门一带习俗也相同，在天文上与燕地的归属不同。
English: The customs in the area around the Wild Goose Gate are also the same. Astronomically, it is different from the affiliation of Yanchi.

古文：燕地，尾、箕分野也。
现代文：燕国的上地，是尾星、箕星的分野。
English: Shangdi, in the country of the swallow, is the realm of the tail star and the hawk star.

古文：武王定殷，封召公于燕，其后三十六世与六国俱称王。
现代文：武王平定殷后，把召公封到燕国，这之后过了三十六代同六国一同称王。
English: After King Wu had subdued Yin, he made Zhao Guofeng the ruler of Yan. Thirty-six dynasties and six kingdoms later, Zhao Guofeng became king.

古文：东有渔阳、右北平、辽西、辽东，西有上谷、代郡、雁门，南得涿郡之易、容城、范阳、北新城、故安、涿县、良乡、新昌，及勃海之安次，皆燕分也。
现代文：束面有渔阳、右北平、辽西、辽东，西面有上谷、代郡、雁门，南面得到涿郡的易地、容城、范阳、北新城、故安、涿县、良乡、新昌，以及勃海的安次，都是燕国的地方。
English: Yanyang, Right Beiping, West Liaoning and East Liaoning are on the face of the bunch, Shangguan, Daigun and Ganmen are on the west face, and Yiji, Yongcheng, Fanyang, Beixincheng, Goyang, Jixian, Liangxiang and Xinchang are on the south face of the bunch, and Anji of Bohai is on the south face.

古文：乐浪、玄菟，亦宜属焉。
现代文：乐浪、玄菟，也都属于燕国。
English: Le Lang and Xuanzang also belong to Yan Guo.

古文：燕称王十世，秦欲灭六国，燕王太子丹遣勇士荆轲西刺秦王，不成而诛，秦遂举兵灭燕。
现代文：燕国称王十世，秦国想消灭六国，燕王太子丹派勇士荆轲西行刺杀秦王，没有成功而被杀，秦国于是起兵减掉了燕国。
English: Yan called himself the 10th king. Qin wanted to destroy the Six Kingdoms. Yan's son, Prince Dan, sent the warrior Jing Xuan west to assassinate Qin. He was unsuccessful and was killed. Qin then raised an army to subdue Yan.

古文：蓟，南通齐、赵，勃、碣之间一都会也。
现代文：蓟地，南面与齐国、趟国相通，是勃海和碣石之间的一个大城市。
English: Handan, which is connected to Qi Province and Wudu Province in the south, is a large city between Bohai Sea and Handan.

古文：初，太子丹宾养勇士，不爱后宫美女，民化以为俗，至今犹然。
现代文：当初太子丹以宾客礼节培养勇士，不喜爱后宫美女，民间转化成为习俗，到现在仍是这样。
English: At the beginning, Prince Dan cultivated warriors with guest etiquette, and did not like harem beauties, which was transformed into a folk custom and is still the case today.

古文：宾客相过，以妇侍宿，嫁取之夕，男女无别，反以为荣。
现代文：宾客相互拜访，以妇人陪侍住宿，嫁娶的晚上，男女没有区别，反而以为荣耀。
English: Guests visit each other, stay with a woman, and on the evening of the wedding, there is no difference between men and women, but they think it is an honor.

古文：后稍颇止，然终未改。
现代文：后来渐渐停止，但终于没有扭转。
English: Then it gradually stopped, but finally did not reverse.

古文：其俗愚悍少虑，轻薄无威，亦有所长，敢于急人，燕丹遗风也。
现代文：这裹的风俗是愚昧勇敢，缺少顾虑，轻浮刻薄，没有威严，也有他们的长处，敢于急人所急，是燕丹遣留下来的风气。
English: This kind of custom is foolish and brave, lacking scruples, frivolous and mean, without dignity, but also has their strengths, dares to be impatient, is the Yandan sent the remaining customs.

古文：上谷至辽东，地广民希，数被胡寇，俗与赵、代相类，有渔盐枣栗之饶。
现代文：上谷到辽东，土地广阔，人民稀少，几次遭受胡人的侵略，风俗同趟地、代地相类似，盛产鱼盐枣栗。
English: From Shanggu to Liaodong, the land is vast, the people are scarce, the Hu people have been invaded several times, the customs are similar to the same place and place, and the fish salt jujube is abundant.

古文：北隙乌丸、夫馀，东贾真番之利。
现代文：北面接近乌丸、夫余，束面谋取真番的利益。
English: In the north, it is close to Wumaru, Fuyu, and Sokumen to seek the benefits of Zhenfan.

古文：玄菟、乐浪，武帝时置，皆朝鲜、濊貉、句骊蛮夷。
现代文：玄菟、乐浪，是武帝时设立的，都是朝鲜、秽貉、句骊的蛮夷。
English: Xuanzang and Lelang were established during the reign of Emperor Wu. Both are barbaric barbarians of the North, filth, and vulgarity.

古文：殷道衰，箕子去之朝鲜，教其民以礼义，田蚕织作。
现代文：殷朝的道运衰落后，箕子离开前往朝鲜，教导他们的百姓礼节仪式，耕地养蚕织布。
English: After the decline of Taoism in the Yin Dynasty, the Jiazi left for North Korea to teach their people etiquette and ritual, cultivate land, raise silkworms, and weave cloth.

古文：乐浪朝鲜民犯禁八条：相杀以当时偿杀；相伤以谷偿；相盗者男没入为其家奴，女子为婢，欲自赎者，人五十万。
现代文：乐浪、朝鲜的百姓有八条违反禁令的事：杀人的人当时就被杀死偿罪；伤人用谷来偿罪；盗窃的人，男子就没收作为被盗家中的奴隶，女子作为奴婢，想自己用钱抵罪的，一人五十万。
English: According to the North Korean people, there are eight violations of the ban: those who kill are killed at that time to atone for the crime; those who injure others use grain to atone for the crime; those who steal, the men are confiscated as slaves in the stolen home, and the women as slaves, and those who want to use their own money to atone for the crime, one is five hundred thousand.

古文：虽免为民，欲犹羞之，嫁取无所雠，是以其民终不相盗，无门户之闭，妇人贞信不淫辟。
现代文：即使免罪成为百姓，民俗也为他们感到羞耻，嫁和娶不用做交易，因此这裹的百姓始终不相盗窃，不用关闭门户，妇人坚贞诚信不淫荡邪恶。
English: Even if they are exonerated and become commoners, folk customs are also ashamed of them. There is no need to make a deal to get married. Therefore, these commoners always do not steal from each other, do not have to close the door, and women are steadfast and honest, not lewd and evil.

古文：其田民饮食以笾豆，都邑颇放效吏及内郡贾人，往往以怀器食。
现代文：这裹种田的人以篷豆来饮食，都城和邑地都仿效官吏以及内郡的商人，往往用杯子来盛食物。
English: The farmers here eat with taro beans, and the capital city and towns follow the example of officials and inner-county merchants, and often use cups to hold food.

古文：郡初取吏于辽东，吏见民无闭臧，及贾人往者，夜则为盗，俗稍益薄。
现代文：郡中当初从辽东选取官吏，官吏看到百姓没有关闭隐藏的，等到商人去那裹后，夜晚就进行盗窃，民俗渐渐变得不厚道起来。
English: In the county, officials were initially selected from Liaodong. The officials saw that the people did not close and hide. When the merchants went there, they would steal at night, and the folk custom gradually became unkind.

古文：今于犯禁浸多，至六十余条。
现代文：现在违反禁令的事逐渐增多，达到六十多条。
English: Now the number of violations of the ban is gradually increasing, reaching more than sixty.

古文：可贵哉，仁贤之化也！
现代文：可贵啊，仁贤的教化!
English: How precious, the enlightenment of benevolence!

古文：然东夷天性柔顺，异于三方之外，故孔子悼道不行，设浮于海，欲居九夷，有以也夫！
现代文：但柬夷天性柔顺，区别于南、西、北三方之外，所以孔子哀痛道不能实行，假想乘船渡海，打算定居到九夷，真是名不虚传啊!
English: However, the Cambodian Yi people are naturally docile, different from the south, west and north, so Confucius's path of sorrow cannot be practiced. If you want to cross the sea by boat and plan to settle in Jiujiang, it's a true legend!

古文：乐浪海中有倭人，分为百余国，以岁时来献见云。
现代文：乐浪海中有倭人，分为一百多国，在每年来进贡时可以见到。
English: There are Wa people in the sea of Le Lang, which is divided into more than a hundred countries, and they can be seen every year when they come to pay tribute.

古文：自危四度至斗六度，谓之析木之次，燕之分也。
现代文：从危星四度到斗星六度，称作析木的位置，是燕国的分星。
English: From the 4th degree of the danger star to the 6th degree of the battle star, known as the location of the stump, is the division star of the swallow country.

古文：齐地，虚、危之分野也。
现代文：齐国的土地，在虚星和危星的分野处。
English: The land of Qi, in the field of false stars and dangerous stars.

古文：东有甾川、东莱、琅邪、高密、胶东，南有泰山、城阳，北有千乘，清河以南，勃海之高乐、高城、重合、阳信，西有济南、平原，皆齐分也。
现代文：束面有甾川、东莱、琅邪、高密、胶束，南面有泰山、城阳，北面有干乘，清河以南，是勃海的高乐、高城、重合、阳信，西面有济南、平原，都是齐国的地方。
English: On the surface of the bunch, there are Luchuan, Donglai, Shiyan, Gaomi, and Micelles; on the south side, there are Taishan and Chengyang; on the north side, there are Ganzheng; on the south side of Qinghe, there are Gaole, Gaocheng, Chaojing, and Yangxin in Bohai; and on the west side, there are Jinan and Plains, all of which are places in Qi Province.

古文：少昊之世有爽鸠氏，虞、夏时有季崱，汤时有逢公柏陵，殷末有薄姑氏，皆为诸侯，国此地。
现代文：少吴时代有爽鸠氏，虞、夏的时候有季勋，汤的时候有逢公柏陵，殷代未有薄姑氏，都是诸侯，在逭裹建立国家。
English: In the early Wu Dynasty, there was the Shuangjia clan, in the Yu and Xia Dynasties, there was the Ji Xun clan, in the Tang Dynasty, there was the Fenggongbailing clan, and in the Yin Dynasty, there was no Bo Gu clan. All of them were lords, and they established the country in Yunnan.

古文：至周成王时，薄姑氏与四国共作乱，成王灭之，以封师尚父，是为太公。
现代文：到周成王的时候，薄姑氏同四国共同作乱，成王消灭了他们，把师尚父分封在那裹，造就是太公。
English: By the time of Zhou Zheng Wang, the Bo Gu clan and the Four Kingdoms had jointly caused a disturbance. Zheng Wang eliminated them and sealed his teacher Shang Bao in a separate envelope, creating the Taigong.

古文：《诗·风》齐国是也。
现代文：《诗风》中的齐国就是。
English: Qi Guo in "Poetic Style" is the beginning.

古文：临甾名营丘，故《齐诗》曰， 子之营兮，遭我乎嶩之间兮。 
现代文：临甾名叫营丘，所以《齐诗》说： 你到营丘，和我在岛山相逢。 
English: Linyi is called Yingqiu, so "Qi Shi" said: You go to Yingqiu, and meet me at Shima Shan.

古文：又曰： 俟我于著乎而。 
现代文：又说： 请在着地等我。 
English: He also said, "Please wait for me on the landing."

古文：此亦其舒缓之体也。
现代文：这也是他们舒展和缓的风格。
English: This is also their style of stretching and relaxing.

古文：吴札闻《齐》之歌，曰： 泱泱乎，大风也哉！
现代文：吴札听到齐国的歌后，说： 盛大啊，像大风一样!
English: After hearing Qi Guo's song, Wu Fuda said, "It's grand, like a gale!

古文：其太公乎？
现代文：难道是太公吗?
English: Is it too public?

古文：国未可量也。 
现代文：国家不可估量。 
English: The future of this country is limitless.

古文：古有分土，亡分民。
现代文：古代有土地分割，没有人民的分割。
English: In ancient times, there was a division of land, but no division of people.

古文：太公以齐地负海舄卤，少五谷而人民寡，乃劝以女工之业，通鱼盐之利，而人物辐凑。
现代文：太公因为齐国的土地近海而形成瘠薄的盐咸地，缺少五谷，因而人口稀少，于是鼓励以女工的工作，畅通鱼盐的利益，人和物就像辐凑一样多了。
English: Because the land of Qi was close to the sea, the Taigong formed a thin salty land. There was a shortage of grain, so the population was sparse. Therefore, he encouraged the work of female laborers to smooth out the benefits of fish salt. There were as many people and things as there were cones.

古文：后十四世，桓公用管仲，设轻重以富国，合诸侯成伯功，身在陪臣而取三归。
现代文：过了十四代后，齐桓公任用管仲，设立轻重以富强国家，联合诸侯成就霸王功业，位在陪臣而娶了三姓的女子。
English: Fourteen generations later, Qi Huan appointed Guanzhong, established a strong and prosperous country, united the princes to achieve the goal of overpowering the king, and married a woman with three surnames while he was a vassal.

古文：故其俗弥侈，织作冰纨绮绣纯丽之物，号为冠带衣履天下。
现代文：因此这裹民俗更加奢侈，织做细洁雪白的丝织品和细绫绣花的丝织物以及精美华丽的衣物，号称是帽、带、衣、鞋的天下。
English: Therefore, this folk custom is more extravagant, weaving fine snow-white silk fabrics and fine embroidered silk fabrics and exquisite ornate clothing, known as the world of hats, belts, clothes and shoes.

古文：初，太公治齐，修道术，尊贤智，赏有功，故至今其土多好经术，矜功名，舒缓阔达而足智。
现代文：当初太公治理齐国，整治道德学术，尊重贤能智慧，奖赏有功的人，所以到现在这片土地上的人们大多喜欢经学，以功名感到骄傲，从容谦虚开阔豁达而足智多谋。
English: In the beginning, the Grand Duke governed Qi Guo, rectified the moral and academic, respected the virtuous and the wise, and rewarded the meritorious, so to this day, most people in this land like to study, are proud of their achievements, are calm, humble, open-minded, and resourceful.

古文：其失夸奢朋党，言与行缪，虚诈不情，急之则离散，缓之则放纵。
现代文：他们的弊端就是过分奢侈，勾结同类，言和行不相一致，虚伪狡诈，不合实情，危急时就离散，平缓时就放任自流。
English: Their drawbacks are excessive luxury, collusion of the same kind, inconsistency between words and deeds, hypocrisy and cunning, untruthfulness, dispersion in times of crisis, and self-indulgence in times of calm.

古文：始桓公兄襄公淫乱，姑姊妹不嫁，于是令国中民家长女不得嫁，名曰 巫儿 ，为家主祠，嫁者不利其家，民至今以为俗。
现代文：开始时，齐桓公的哥哥襄公淫乱，姑和姊妹不嫁，于是命令国中的百姓家的大女儿不得出嫁，名叫 巫见 ，在家中主持祭祀，出嫁的对家中不利，百姓到现在还作为风俗。
English: At the beginning, Qi Huan's brother, Xiangong, committed adultery, and his sister-in-law and sister-in-law refused to marry, so he ordered the eldest daughter of the common people in the country not to marry. Her name was Wudian, and she presided over the sacrificial rites at home. Marrying was not good for the family, and the common people still regard it as a custom.

古文：痛乎，道民之道，可不慎哉！
现代文：悲痛啊，引导人民的道德，能不谨慎吗!
English: Grief, can we not be prudent in guiding people's morals?

古文：昔太公始封，周公问： 何以治齐？ 
现代文：以前太公刚被分封时，周公问 用什么来治理齐国? 
English: In the past, when Taigong had just been divided, Zhou Gong asked what should be used to govern Qi.

古文：太公曰： 举贤而上功。 
现代文：太公说道： 选举贤能，奖励有功的人。 
English: The grand duke said, "Choose the virtuous and reward the meritorious."

古文：周公曰： 后世必有篡杀之臣。 
现代文：周公说： 后代一定有篡位谋杀的臣子。 
English: Zhou Gong said: The descendants must have a usurping and murdering vassal.

古文：其后二十九世为强臣田和所灭，而和自立为齐侯。
现代文：这之后二十九代被强臣田和所灭，田和自己立为齐侯。
English: After this, the 29th generation was wiped out by the powerful vassal Tianhe, and Tianhe himself was made a peer.

古文：初，和之先陈公子完有罪来奔齐，齐桓公以为大夫，更称田氏。
现代文：开始，田和的先人陈公子完因有罪投奔查，齐桓公任他为大夫，更改称呼为田氏。
English: At the beginning, Tianhe's ancestor Chen Gongzi was investigated for being guilty, and Qi Kuan publicly appointed him as a doctor, changing his name to Tian.

古文：九世至和而篡齐，至孙威王称王，五世为秦所灭。
现代文：九代后到田和时而篡夺齐国，到孙子威王时就称王，过了五代，被秦国消灭。
English: Nine generations later, he came to Tianhe and usurped Qi. When Sun Zi Wei became king, he was proclaimed king. Five generations later, he was eliminated by Qin.

古文：临甾，海、岱之间一都会也。其中具五民云。
现代文：临甾，是海和岱之间的一座大城市，其中五方的人民都全了。
English: Linyi is a big city between the sea and the mountains. People from all five sides of the city have been wiped out.

古文：鲁地，奎、娄之分野也。
现代文：鲁国的土地，是奎星和娄星的分野。
English: The land of Lu is the field of Kui Xing and Huan Xing.

古文：东至东海，南有泗水，至淮，得临淮之下相、睢陵、僮、取虑，皆鲁分也。
现代文：东到束海，南面有泗水，到淮水，得到临淮的下相、睢陵、僮、取虑，都是鲁国的地方。
English: To the east is the Sokha Sea, to the south is the Surabaya Water, to the south is the Huai Water, and to the south is the Lower Phase, Fuling, Yunnan, and Zhucheng, all of which are in Lu.

古文：周兴，以少昊之虚曲阜封周公子伯禽为鲁侯，以为周公主。
现代文：周朝建立后，把少昊的废墟曲阜封给周公的儿子伯禽作为鲁侯，以他为周公祭祀的主宰。
English: After the establishment of the Zhou Dynasty, the ruins of Shao Hao were given to Zhou Gong's son Bo Ying as Lu Hou, and he became the leader of Zhou Gong's sacrificial rites.

古文：其民有圣人之教化，故孔子曰 齐一变至于鲁，鲁一变至于道 ，言近正也。
现代文：这裹的人民有圣人的教化，所以孔子说 齐国一变到了鲁国，鲁国一变就达到了道 ，是说接近正道。
English: These people have been enlightened by sages, so Confucius said that once Qi became Lu, Lu became Tao, that is, close to the right path.

古文：濒洙泗之水，其民涉度，幼者扶老而代其任。
现代文：地方濒临洙水和泅水，这裹的百姓涉水渡河，年轻的扶着老人并替代他们背负东西。
English: On the edge of Surabaya and Surabaya, people wade across the river, the young supporting the elderly and carrying things for them.

古文：俗既益薄，长老不自安，与幼少相让，故曰： 鲁道衰，洙泗之间龂龂如也。 
现代文：民俗已变得更加刻薄后，年长的老人不能感到安全，就同年轻人相争吵，所以说： 鲁国道德衰败后，洙水和泅水之间断断争辩。 
English: As folk customs have become more caustic, the elderly cannot feel safe to quarrel with the young, so it is said: After the moral decline of the Lu nation, the debate between the Lu and the Lu was cut off.

古文：孔子闵王道将废，乃修六经，以述唐虞三代之道，弟子受业而通者七十有七人。
现代文：孔子哀痛五道即将衰败，就撰修六经，以记述唐、虞和三代的王道，弟子接受传授而精通的人有七十七个。
English: Confucius was saddened by the impending decline of the Five Classics, so he wrote the Six Classics to describe the three dynasties of Tang, Yu and Wang. Seventy-seven disciples received the teachings and became proficient.

古文：是以其民好学，上礼义，重廉耻。
现代文：因此造裹的百姓喜欢学习，崇尚礼义，重视廉耻。
English: Therefore, the Chinese people like to study, advocate courtesy, and attach importance to shamelessness.

古文：周公始封，太公问： 何以治鲁？ 
现代文：周公开始分封时，太公问 怎么去治理鲁国呢 ?
English: When Zhou Gong began to divide the fiefs, Tai Gong asked how to govern Lu?

古文：周公曰： 尊尊而亲亲。 
现代文：周公说： 尊重尊贵的人亲爱亲人。 
English: Zhou Gong said: Respect the honorable people, dear relatives.

古文：太公曰： 后世浸弱矣。 
现代文：太公说： 后代将逐渐变弱。 
English: Taiko said, "The next generation will gradually become weaker."

古文：故鲁自文公以后，禄去公室，政在大夫，季氏逐昭公，陵夷微弱，三十四世而为楚所灭。
现代文：因此鲁国从文公以后，官俸到了各诸侯，政权在大夫手中，季公驱逐了昭公，逐渐衰弱，过了三十四代被楚国所减。
English: As a result, after the reign of King Wen, the official salaries of the State of Lu were transferred to the various lords, the political power was in the hands of the doctors, the King of Qi expelled the King of Zhao, the State of Lu gradually weakened, and after thirty-four generations, it was reduced by the State of Chu.

古文：然本大国故自为分野。
现代文：但鲁国本来是大国，因此自己有自己的分野。
English: But Russia is a big country, so it has its own field.

古文：今去圣久远，周公遗化销微，孔氏庠序衰怀。
现代文：现在距离圣人已很久远了，周公遣留的教化逐渐微弱消亡，孔子的学校也已衰坏。
English: Now the distance from the sage has long been far away, the enlightenment of Zhou Gongyu gradually faded away, and the school of Confucius has also decayed.

古文：地陿民众，颇有桑麻之业，亡林泽之饶。
现代文：土地狭小，人众多，有很多桑麻的生产，没有山林湖泽的富饶。
English: The land is small, there are many people, there is a lot of mulberry production, and there is no richness of mountains, forests and lakes.

古文：俗俭啬爱财，趋商贾，好訾毁，多巧伪，丧祭之礼文备实寡，然其好学犹愈于它俗。
现代文：民俗吝啬贪财，热心做买卖，喜欢诽谤，多虚伪奸诈，丧祭的礼仪表面上齐备而实际上少，但他们的好学仍比其它地方的风俗要强。
English: The folk customs are miserly, greedy for money, eager to do business, fond of slander, more hypocritical and treacherous, the funeral rites are ostensibly complete but actually few, but their eagerness to learn is still stronger than the customs of other places.

古文：汉兴以来，鲁东海多至卿相。
现代文：汉朝建立以来，鲁国束海很多人到达卿相之位。
English: Since the establishment of the Han Dynasty, many people from Sokhai, the State of Lu, have reached the position of noble consort.

古文：东平、须昌、寿良，皆在济东，属鲁，非宋地也，当考。
现代文：东平、须昌、寿良，都在济水的束面，属于鲁国，不是宋国的地方，应当加以考证。
English: Dongping, Suchang and Shouliang are all in the area of Jishui, which belongs to the State of Lu, not the State of Song, and should be investigated.

古文：宋地，房、心之分野也。
现代文：宋国的土地，是房星、心星的分野。
English: The land of the Song Dynasty is the field of house stars and heart stars.

古文：今之沛、梁、楚、山阳、济阴、东平及东郡之须昌、寿张，皆宋分也。
现代文：现在的沛、梁、楚、山阳、济阴、束平以及束郡的须昌、寿张，都是宋国的地方。
English: Present-day Pei, Liang, Chu, Sanyang, Jiyin, Sokping, and Sok County's Suchang and Shuzhang are all places in Song.

古文：周封微子于宋，今之睢阳是也，本陶唐氏火正阏伯之虚也。
现代文：周王把微子封到宋，就是现在的睢阳，本来是陶唐氏的火正板伯的废墟。
English: Zhou Wang sealed the microorganism to Song, which is now Fenyang. Originally, it was the ruins of the Tao Tang Dynasty's Hezheng Panbo.

古文：济阴定陶，《诗·风》曹国也。
现代文：济阴的定陶，是《诗。风》中的曹国。
English: Jiyin's Jingtao is the kingdom of Cao in "Poetry. Wind."

古文：武王封弟叔振铎于曹，其后稍大，得山阳、陈留，二十余世为宋所灭。
现代文：武王把弟弟叔振铎分封到曹国，这之后渐渐变大，得到山阳、陈留，过了二十多代被宋国所灭。
English: King Wu assigned his younger brother, Uncle Zhen Rong, to Cao. After that, he gradually grew up and gained Sanyang and Chen Rui. After more than twenty generations, he was destroyed by Song.

古文：昔尧作游成阳，舜渔雷泽，汤止于亳，故其民犹有先王遗风，重厚多君子，好稼穑，恶衣食，以致畜藏。
现代文：以前尧从成阳开始旅游，舜在露泽捕鱼，汤在亳落脚，所以这裹的百姓仍有先王的遣风，厚道多君子，喜欢从事农业，不喜欢享受穿和吃，致力于蓄积收藏。
English: In the past, people started to travel from Chengyang, fished in Luzhe, and settled in Tonglu. Therefore, the people in this area still have the wind of the ancestors, are kind and gentlemanly, like to engage in agriculture, do not like to enjoy wearing and eating, and are committed to accumulating and collecting.

古文：宋自微子二十余世，至景公灭曹，灭曹后五世亦为齐、楚、魏所灭，三分其地。
现代文：宋国从微子起过了二十多代，到景公时消灭了曹国，消灭曹国后过了五代也被齐国、楚国、魏国所灭，把它的土地划成三份。
English: The Song Dynasty lasted for more than twenty generations from the time of Emperor Wu Zi, and by the time of King Jing, it had destroyed the State of Cao. Five generations after the destruction of the State of Cao, it was also destroyed by the State of Qi, the State of Chu, and the State of Wei, which divided its land into three parts.

古文：魏得其梁、陈留，齐得其济阴、东平，楚得其沛。
现代文：魏国得到了它的梁和陈留地区，齐国得到了它的济阴、东平地区，楚国得到了沛。
English: Wei got its Liang and Chenliu regions, Qi got its Jiyin and Dongping regions, and Chu got its Wupei.

古文：故今之楚彭城，本宋也，《春秋经》曰 围宋彭城 。
现代文：所以现在楚国的彭城，本来是宋国的地方，《春秋经》上说 包围宋国的彭城 。
English: Therefore, Pengcheng of Chu now is originally a place of Song, and it is said in the "Spring and Autumn Annals" that Pengcheng of Song was surrounded.

古文：宋虽灭，本大国，故自为分野。
现代文：宋国虽然被消灭了，但他本来是大国，所以自成分野。
English: Although the Song Dynasty was wiped out, it was originally a great power, so it became a field of its own.

古文：沛楚之失，急疾颛己，地薄民贫，而山阳好为奸盗。
现代文：沛和楚的弊端，是性格狭隘而专横，土地贫瘠，人民贫困，而山阳人喜欢违法盗窃。
English: The drawbacks of Pei and Chu are that they are narrow-minded and domineering, the land is barren, the people are poor, and the Shanyang people like to steal illegally.

古文：卫地，营室、东壁之分野也。
现代文：卫国的土地，是营室星、东壁星的分野。
English: The land of the defense of the country is the field of Ying Muro Star and East Wall Star.

古文：今之东郡及魏郡黎阳，河内之野王、朝歌，皆卫分也。
现代文：现在的东郡以及魏郡的黎阳，河内的野王、朝歌，都是卫国的地方。
English: The present Dong County and Liyang of Wei County, the wild king of Hanoi, and the morning song are all places to defend the country.

古文：卫本国既为狄所灭，文公徙封楚丘，三十余年，子成公徙于帝丘。
现代文：卫国本国被狄所灭后，文公迁徙到楚丘，三十多年后，儿子成公迁徙到帝丘。
English: After the destruction of the homeland by Di, Wenkong migrated to Chuqiu, and more than thirty years later, his son Chenggong migrated to Diqiu.

古文：故《春秋经》曰 卫迁于帝丘 ，今之濮阳是也。
现代文：所以《春秋经》上说 卫国迁移到了帝丘 ，就是现在的濮阳。
English: Therefore, the "Spring and Autumn Annals" said that the defense of the country moved to the Imperial Hill, which is now Shenyang.

古文：本颛琐之虚，故谓之帝丘。
现代文：本来是颛项的废墟，所以称做帝丘。
English: Originally, it was the ruins of Xiangxiang, so it was called the Imperial Hill.

古文：夏后之世，昆吾氏居之。
现代文：夏后时代，昆吾氏居住在那裹。
English: In the post-summer era, the Kunwus lived there.

古文：成公后十余世，为韩、魏所侵，尽亡其旁邑，独有濮阳。
现代文：成公十多代后，被韩国、魏国所侵略，周围的邑地全部丧失，衹剩下濮阳。
English: After more than ten generations of Chenggong, it was invaded by Korea and Wei, and all the surrounding towns and villages were lost, leaving only Shenyang.

古文：后秦灭濮阳，置东郡，徙之于野王。
现代文：后来秦国灭掉濮阳，设置束郡，把它迁到野王。
English: Later, Qin wiped out Fenyang, set up Sok County, and moved it to Yongwang.

古文：始皇既并天下，犹独置卫君，二世时乃废为庶人。
现代文：秦始皇吞并天下后，仍单独设立卫君，秦二世时就被废为平民。
English: After Qin Shihuang annexed the whole country, he still set up a separate bodyguard, but he was abolished as a commoner during Qin II.

古文：凡四十世，九百年，最后绝，故独为分野。
现代文：共四十代，九百年，最后灭绝，所以单独进行分野。
English: A total of forty generations, nine hundred years, and finally extinct, so the field is carried out separately.

古文：卫地有桑间濮上之阻，男女亦亟聚会，声色生焉，故俗称郑、卫之音。
现代文：卫国土地上有桑地间濮阳上的险要的地方，男女也常聚集在一起，就产生了音乐和女色，所以习俗上称郑卫之音。
English: In the land of the motherland, there are critical places on the sand dunes between the sand dunes, and men and women often gather together to produce music and women, so it is customarily known as Zheng Wei's sound.

古文：周末有子路、夏育，民人慕之，故其俗刚武，上气力。
现代文：周朝末期有子路、夏育，人民仰慕他们，所以这裹的风俗刚强勇武，崇尚气节和力量。
English: At the end of the Zhou Dynasty, there were Zilu and Xia Yu, and the people admired them. Therefore, this custom is strong and brave, advocating temperament and strength.

古文：汉兴，二千石治者亦以杀戮为威。
现代文：汉朝建立后，二千石官员来治理的也以杀戮来树立威信。
English: After the establishment of the Han Dynasty, officials with 2,000 koku to govern also used killing to establish prestige.

古文：宣帝时韩延寿为东郡太守，承圣恩，崇礼义，尊谏争，至今东郡号善为吏，延寿之化也。
现代文：宣帝的时候，韩延寿任束郡太守，秉承圣恩，崇尚礼义，尊重规劝争辩的人，到现在束郡号称善于做官，这是韩延寿的教化。
English: At the time of the proclamation of Emperor, Han Yan Shou was appointed as the governor of Shu County, adhering to the grace of God, advocating propriety, and respecting the people of persuasion and debate. To this day, Shu County is known for being good at being an official, which is the enlightenment of Han Yan Shou.

古文：其失颇奢靡，嫁取送死过度，而野王好气任侠，有濮上风。
现代文：他们的弊端就是很奢侈浪费，嫁娶送葬超过限度，但野王地区尊尚气节，打抱不平，有濮阳地区的风范。
English: Their drawback is that they are very extravagant and wasteful, marrying and sending funerals beyond the limit, but the wild king region respects the festival, embraces the uneven, and has the demeanor of the Poyang region.

古文：楚地，翼、轸之分野也。
现代文：楚国的土地，是翼星和轸星的分野。
English: The land of Chu is the domain of the pterosaurs and the armadillos.

古文：今之南郡、江夏、零陵、桂阳、武陵、长沙及汉中、汝南郡，尽楚分也。
现代文：现在的南郡、江夏、零陵、桂阳、武陵、长沙和漠中、汝南郡，都是楚国的分地。
English: The present Nan County, Jiangxia, Luling, Guiyang, Wuling, Changsha, Wuzhong and Runan counties are all subdivisions of Chu.

古文：周成王时，封文、武光师鬻熊之曾孙熊绎于荆蛮，为楚子，居丹阳。
现代文：周成王的时候，把文王、武王的前辈老师鬻熊的曾孙熊绎封到荆蛮，称楚子，定居在丹阳。
English: When Zhou Cheng Wang was king, he exiled Xiong Yu, the great-grandson of King Wen and King Wu's predecessor teacher Xiong Xiong, to Jingwu, calling him Chu Zi, and settled in Danyang.

古文：后十余世至熊达，是为武王，浸以强大。
现代文：过了十多代到熊达的时候，就是武王，逐渐变得强大。
English: After more than ten generations, when it came to Kumada, it was King Wu who gradually became powerful.

古文：后五世至严王，总帅诸侯，观兵周室，并吞江、汉之间，内灭陈、鲁之国。
现代文：过了五代到严王，他统率诸侯，检阅军队示周朝以兵威，吞并了长江、汉水之间的地方，内部消灭了陈国、鲁国。
English: After five generations, Yan Wang came to the throne. He led the princes, reviewed the army, and showed military power to the Zhou Dynasty. He annexed the areas between the Yangtze River and the Han River, and destroyed Chen and Lu inside.

古文：后十余世，顷襄王东徙于陈。
现代文：十多代后，顷襄王向东迁移到陈国。
English: After more than ten generations, King Xiang moved eastward to Chen Province.

古文：楚有江汉川泽山林之饶；江南地广，或火耕水耨。
现代文：楚国有长江、汉水、河流湖泽高山森林的富饶；江南地区土地广阔，有的地区进行着火耕水耨。
English: The Yangtze River, the Han River, rivers, lakes and alpine forests are abundant in Chuxi. The land in the south of the Yangtze River is vast, and in some areas fire-cultivation and water-logging are carried out.

古文：民食鱼稻，以渔猎山伐为业，果蓏蠃蛤，食物常足。
现代文：百姓以鱼和稻为食，以捕鱼打猎伐山取竹木作为本业，果蔬、蜗牛和蛤等食物经常很充足。
English: The people eat fish and rice, and their main occupation is fishing, hunting, and cutting down mountains to obtain bamboo. Fruits and vegetables, snails, and earthworms are often plentiful.

古文：故蓏偷生，而亡积聚，饮食还给，不忧冻饿，亦亡千金之家。
现代文：所以这裹的人苟且懒惰，没有积蓄，饮食供给跟得上就不担忧冻和饿，也没有家有千金的家庭。
English: Therefore, these people are lazy, have no savings, do not worry about cold and hunger if the food supply can keep up, and do not have a family with a lot of money.

古文：信巫鬼，重淫祀。
现代文：迷信巫鬼，重视不合礼制的祭祀。
English: They are superstitious about wizards and ghosts, and attach importance to rituals that do not conform to the rite system.

古文：而汉中淫失枝柱，与巴、蜀同俗。
现代文：汉中地区的人纵欲放荡，性格不顺从，同巴郡和蜀郡的风俗相同。
English: The people in the Hanzhong area indulge in debauchery and are not submissive, which is the same as the customs of Ba County and Shu County.

古文：汝南之别，皆急疾有气势。
现代文：汝南的区别，都是性情急躁，有气概和声势。
English: The difference between the two is that both of them are quick-tempered, spirited and energetic.

古文：江陵，故郢都，西通巫、巴，东有云梦之饶，亦一都会也。
现代文：江陵是原先的郢都，四面通巫山和巴郡，东面有云梦地区的富饶，也是一个大城市。
English: Gangneung was the original capital of the Joseon Dynasty. It is surrounded by Wushan and Ba County on all sides, and has the richness of the Yunmeng area in the east. It is also a big city.

古文：吴地，斗分野也。
现代文：吴国土地，是斗星的分野。
English: The land of the State of Wu is the domain of the fighting stars.

古文：今之会稽、九江、丹阳、豫章、庐江、广陵、六安，临淮郡，尽吴分也。
现代文：现在的会稽、九江、丹阳、豫章、庐江、广陵、六安、临淮郡，全是吴国的地方。
English: The current counties of Jiujiang, Danyang, Yuzhang, Minjiang, Guangling, Lu'an, and Linhuai are all in Wuzhong.

古文：殷道既衰，周大王亶父兴支阝梁之地，长子大伯，次曰仲雍，少曰公季。
现代文：殷朝衰败后，周大王宜父兴建了郊地和梁地，长子大伯，次子仲雍，少于公季。
English: After the decline of the Yin Dynasty, King Zhou the Great and his father built the suburbs and Liangdi. The eldest son, the great-uncle, and the second son, Zhongyong, were less than the king.

古文：公季有圣子昌，大王欲传国焉。
现代文：公季有一个聪明的儿子昌，周大王打算把国家传给他。
English: King Zhou had a clever son, Chang, and King Zhou planned to pass the country on to him.

古文：大伯、仲雍辞行采药，遂奔荆蛮。
现代文：大伯、仲雍告辞去采药，于是投奔荆蛮。
English: The great-uncle, Zhong Yong, resigned to take medicine, so he went to Jingmanzhou.

古文：公季嗣位，至昌为西伯，受命而王。
现代文：公季继位，到昌的时候为西伯，受天命而称王。
English: Kunki succeeded to the throne, and when he came to Chang, he was Xibe, who was called king by heaven.

古文：故孔子美而称曰： 大伯，可谓至德也已矣！
现代文：所以孔子赞美地称： 大伯，可以称得上是最有道德的了!
English: Therefore, Confucius praised: Uncle, you can be called the most moral!

古文：三以天下让，民无提而称焉。 
现代文：三次以天下相让，百姓没有不称道的。 
English: Three times with the whole world, the people did not fail.

古文：谓 虞仲夷逸，隐居放言，身中清，废中权。 
现代文：说 虞仲逃隐到蛮夷，隐居不言，身心清洁，所摒弃的合乎权道。 
English: He said that Yu Zhong fled to the barbarians, lived in seclusion, was physically and mentally clean, and abandoned what was right and proper.

古文：大伯初奔荆蛮，荆蛮归之，号曰句吴。
现代文：大伯当初投奔荆蛮，荆蛮归顺了他，号为句吴。
English: His great-uncle initially ran to Jing Man, and Jing Man submitted to him. His nickname was "Wu Wu."

古文：大伯卒，仲雍立，至曾孙周章，而武王克殷，因而封之。
现代文：大伯卒后，仲雍立位，到曾孙周章时，武王打败了殷，因此封了周章。
English: After the death of his great-uncle, Zhong Yong was enthroned, and when it came to the great-grandson Zhou Zhang, King Wu defeated Yin, and therefore sealed Zhou Zhang.

古文：又封周章弟中于河北，是为北吴，后世之谓之虞，十二世为晋所灭。
现代文：又把周章的弟弟周中分封到河北，这就是北吴，后世称它为虞，过了十二代被晋所灭。
English: He also sent Zhou Zhang's younger brother Zhou Zhong to Hebei, which is North Wu. Later generations called it Yue. After twelve generations, it was destroyed by the Jin Dynasty.

古文：后二世而荆蛮之吴子寿梦盛大称王。
现代文：遇了两代后，荆蛮的吴子寿梦强大起来，称为王。
English: Two generations later, the fierce Wu Zishou Meng became powerful and was called the king.

古文：其少子则季札，有贤材。
现代文：他的小儿子就是季札，有贤能之才。
English: His youngest son is Ji Suda, who is talented in martial arts.

古文：兄弟欲传国，札让而不受。
现代文：兄弟相互让位，季札辞让而不接受。
English: Brothers give way to each other, and the quarterback gives way and does not accept it.

古文：自寿梦称王六世，阖庐举伍子胥、孙武为将，战胜攻取，兴伯名于诸侯。
现代文：从寿梦称王起，过了六代，阖庐推举伍子胥、孙武为大将，打仗就取胜，进攻就夺取，在诸侯中建立起了霸名。
English: Since Shou Meng was proclaimed king, six generations have passed, and Wu Zixuan and Sun Wu have been promoted to generals. They have won victories in war and conquered in attack, and have established a dominant reputation among the lords.

古文：至子夫差，诛子胥，用宰嚭，为粤王句践所灭。
现代文：到儿子夫差时，诛杀了子胥，任用宰馅。被粤王勾践所灭。
English: When her son's husband died, she killed her son-in-law and appointed a butler. She was killed by the king of Guangdong.

古文：吴、粤之君皆好勇，故其民至今好用剑，轻死易发。
现代文：吴地、粤地的君主都喜好勇武，所以这裹的百姓到现在都喜欢用剑，轻死，容易冲动。
English: The emperors of Wuxi and Guangdong were fond of bravery, so the people here still like to use swords, die lightly, and are easily impulsive.

古文：粤既并吴，后六世为楚所灭。
现代文：粤国吞并吴国后，过了六代被楚国所减。
English: After Guangdong annexed Wu, it was reduced to Chu after six generations.

古文：后秦又击楚，徙寿春，至子为秦所灭。
现代文：后来秦朝又攻打楚国，楚国迁徙到寿春，到儿子的时候被秦朝所灭。
English: Later, the Qin Dynasty also attacked the State of Chu. The State of Chu migrated to Shuchun, and was destroyed by the Qin Dynasty when the son was born.

古文：寿春、合肥受南北湖皮革、鲍、木之输，亦一都会也。
现代文：寿春、合肥地区接受南北湖皮革、鲍鱼、树木的输给，也是一个大城市。
English: The Shuchun and Hefei regions, which receive leather, abalone and trees from the South and North Lakes, are also large cities.

古文：始楚贤臣屈原被谗放流，作《离骚》诸赋以自伤悼。
现代文：开始时楚国的贤臣屈原遭到谗言被放逐，创作《离骚》各赋来抒发自我的伤痛。
English: At the beginning, the wise retainer of Chu, Qu Yuan, was ostracized and exiled, creating "Leaving So" to express his own pain.

古文：后有宋玉、唐勒之属慕而述之，皆以显名。
现代文：后来有宋玉、唐勒之类仰慕称赞他，都因此而著名。
English: Later, the likes of Song Yu and Tang Le admired and praised him, which made them famous.

古文：汉兴，高祖王兄子濞于吴，招致天下之娱游子弟，枚乘、邹阳、严夫子之徒兴于文、景之际。
现代文：汉朝建立后，高祖王兄的儿子刘濞在吴国，招来天下游玩娱乐的子弟，枚乘、邹阳、严夫子之类的人在文、景时兴起。
English: After the establishment of the Han Dynasty, Liu Ye, the son of Gao Zu Wang's elder brother, invited his children to travel and entertain the world in the State of Wu. People such as Hizhong, Puyang, and Yanfuzi arose at the time of literature and culture.

古文：而淮南王安亦都寿春，招宾客著书。
现代文：淮南王刘安也在寿春定都，招聘宾客来著书。
English: Liu An, King of Huainan, is also in Shoushundingdu, inviting guests to write books.

古文：而吴有严助、朱买臣，贵显汉朝，文辞并发，故世传《楚辞》。
现代文：吴国有严助、朱买臣，在汉朝尊贵显名，文采辞章一同传播，所以世间流传着《楚辞》。
English: In the Han Dynasty, the dignitaries and eminent figures of the State of Wu, Yan Sui and Zhu Bai Sheng, and the literary words and phrases were disseminated together. Therefore, the "Chu Ci" has been passed down to the world.

古文：其失巧而少信。
现代文：他们的不足是奸巧失信。
English: Their shortcoming is treachery and dishonesty.

古文：初淮南王异国中民家有女者，以待游士而妻之，故至今多女而少男。
现代文：当初淮南王特别对待国中百姓家有女儿的，以等待有游士来娶她们，所以到现在女多男少。
English: At the beginning, King Huainan specially treated the people of the country who had daughters to wait for a wanderer to marry them, so now there are more women than men.

古文：本吴、粤与楚接比，数相并兼，故民俗略同。
现代文：本来吴国和粤国同楚国接壤，几次相互兼并，所以民俗大致相同。
English: Originally, the states of Wu and Guangdong shared a border with the state of Chu and several times annexed each other, so the folk customs are roughly the same.

古文：吴东有海盐章山之铜，三江五湖之利，亦江东之一都会也。
现代文：吴国束面有海盐和章山的铜，有三江、五湖的优势，也是江束的一个大城市。
English: Wuzhongzhuang has sea salt and Zhangshan copper, and has the advantages of the Three Rivers and Five Lakes. It is also a big city in Jiangzhuang.

古文：豫章出黄金，然堇堇物之所有，取之不足以更费。
现代文：豫章出产黄金，但黄金的储量不多，采取的金不足以用来奖赏。
English: Yuanzhang produces gold, but the gold reserves are small, and the gold taken is not enough to reward.

古文：江南卑湿，丈夫多夭。
现代文：江南地低潮湿，男子大多夭折。
English: The south of the Yangtze River has low humidity, and most of the men died young.

古文：公稽海外有东鳀人，分为二十余国，以岁时来献见云。
现代文：会稽海外有束鳃人，分为二十多国，在每年进贡的时候出现。
English: There are a number of overseas members of the Association, divided into more than 20 countries, who appear at the time of the annual tribute.

古文：粤地，牵牛、婺女之分野也。
现代文：粤国的土地，是牵牛星、婺女星的分野。
English: The land of Guangdong is the field of the Cowherd and the Cowherd's Daughter.

古文：今之苍梧、郁林、合浦、交阯、九真、南海、日南，皆粤分也。
现代文：现在的苍梧、郁林、合浦、交耻、九真、南海、日南，都是粤国的地方。
English: Today's Cangwu, Yulin, Hepu, Jiaoxi, Jiuzhen, Nanhai and Nichinan are all places in Guangdong.

古文：其君禹后，帝少康之庶子云，封于会稽，文身断发，以避蛟龙之害。
现代文：粤国的君主是大禹的后代，帝少康的庶子，分封到会稽，在身体上刺画有色的图案，剪断头发，以躲避蛟龙的伤害。
English: The monarch of Guangdong was a descendant of Dayu, the illegitimate son of Emperor Shōkang, and was assigned to the imperial court, where he was required to draw colorful designs on his body and cut his hair in order to avoid the harm of the dragon.

古文：后二十世，至句践称王，与吴王阖庐战，败之隽李。
现代文：过了二十代，到勾践的时候称为王，同吴王阖庐作战，被打败在隽李地方。
English: After twenty generations, he was called king at the time of Gojun. He fought against King Wu of Wu and was defeated in the Shili area.

古文：夫差立，句践乘胜复伐吴。吴大破之，栖会稽，臣服请平。
现代文：夫差登基后，勾践乘着胜利又讨伐吴国，吴国大败勾践，勾践栖身于会稽，称臣屈服，请求和平。
English: After Fu Zha ascended to the throne, Guo Jian took advantage of the victory and went on a crusade against the State of Wu. When the State of Wu suffered a great defeat, Guo Jian took refuge in Hui Ji, told his subjects to submit, and pleaded for peace.

古文：后用范蠡、大夫种计，遂伐灭吴，兼并其地。
现代文：后来勾践采用范蠡、大夫种的计谋，便讨伐灭掉了吴国，兼并了吴国的土地。
English: Later, using the stratagems of Fan Ye and Dafu Zong, they fought and eliminated the State of Wu and annexed the land of Wu.

古文：度淮与齐、晋诸侯会，致贡于周。
现代文：渡过淮河同齐国、晋国等诸侯相会，给周朝进贡。
English: After crossing the Huaihe River, the princes of Qi and Jin met and paid tribute to the Zhou Dynasty.

古文：周元王使使赐命为伯，诸侯毕贺。
现代文：周元王派遣使者赏赐并任命勾践为霸王，诸侯全都来庆贺。
English: King Zhou Yuan sent an envoy to reward and appoint Gochan as the overlord, and all the lords came to celebrate.

古文：后五世为楚所灭，子孙分散，君服于楚。
现代文：过了五世后，粤国被楚国所灭，子孙分散，众君主一样事奉楚国并服从它。
English: After the fifth generation, Guangdong was destroyed by Chu, and the descendants were scattered. Like all monarchs, they served and obeyed Chu.

古文：后十世，至闽君摇，佐诸侯平秦。
现代文：过了十代，到闽君摇的时候，辅佐诸侯平定了秦国。
English: After ten generations, when Emperor Zhaojun was at his wits' end, the vassal princes pacified Qin.

古文：汉兴，复立摇为越王。
现代文：汉朝建立后，重新立闽君摇为越王。
English: After the establishment of the Han Dynasty, he was reinstated as the king of Yue.

古文：是时，秦南海尉赵佗亦自王，传国至武帝时，尽灭以为郡云。
现代文：这时候，秦国的南海尉赵佗也自称为王，国家延续到武帝时，全都被消灭作为郡地。
English: At this time, Qin's naval lieutenant of the South China Sea, Zhao Wei, also claimed to be the king. When the state continued to Emperor Wu, it was all eliminated as a county.

古文：处近海，多犀、象、毒冒、珠玑、银、铜、果、布之凑，中国往商贾者多取富焉。
现代文：地方靠近大海，多犀牛、大象、玳瑁、珠玑、银、铜、果、布的聚合，中原到那裹去的商人大多谋取到富利。
English: The region is close to the sea, and is rich in rhinoceros, elephant, baboon, pearl mussel, silver, copper, fruit, and cloth. Most of the merchants from the Central Plains who went there were looking for rich profits.

古文：番禺，其一都会也。
现代文：番禺是它的一座大城市。
English: Panyu is one of its largest cities.

古文：自合浦徐闻南入海，得大州，东西南北方千里，武帝元封元年略以为儋耳、珠厓郡。
现代文：从合浦的徐闻向南进入大海，是大州。东西南北方圆千里，武帝元封元年夺取作为儋耳、珠厘郡。
English: From Xuwen of Hapu to the south into the sea, it is Dazhou. East-west, south-north, a thousand miles in circumference, Wudi Yuanfeng in the first year seized as Kunlun and Zhuli County.

古文：民皆服布如单被，穿中央为贯头。
现代文：百姓都单被着布，把衣服从头上穿进去。
English: The people were all clothed only, and they put their clothes on over their heads.

古文：男子耕农，种禾稻、纻麻，女子桑蚕织绩。
现代文：男子耕作务农，种植禾稻纡麻，女子养桑蚕纺织。
English: The men farmed, planting rice and nettle, while the women raised mulberry silkworms for textiles.

古文：亡马与虎，民有五畜，山多麈麖。
现代文：没有马和虎，百姓养牛、羊、猪、鸡、犬五畜，山中多尘麖。
English: There are no horses or tigers. The people raise cattle, sheep, pigs, chickens and dogs. There are many dust mites in the mountains.

古文：兵则矛、盾、刀，木弓弩、竹矢，或骨为镞。
现代文：兵器则有矛、盾、刀、木弓弩，竹矢，或者用骨箭锋。
English: Weapons include spears, shields, swords, wooden bows, bamboo arrows, or bone arrows.

古文：自初为郡县，吏卒中国人多侵陵之，故率数岁一反。
现代文：从刚开始为郡县，官吏士兵以及内地的人大多去欺辱他们，所以大致过几年就有一次反叛。
English: From the very beginning, government officials, soldiers, and people from the inland mostly bullied them, so after a few years, there was a rebellion.

古文：元帝时，遂罢弃之。
现代文：元帝的时候，便撤销抛弃了粤国。
English: At the time of Emperor Yuan, he revoked and abandoned Guangdong.

古文：自日南障塞、徐闻、合浦船行可五月，有都元国，又船行可四月，有邑卢没国；又船行可二十余日，有谌离国；步行可十余日，有夫甘都卢国。
现代文：从日南地区堡寨、徐闻、合浦乘船运行大约五个月，有都元国；又乘船运行大约四个月，有邑卢没国；又乘船运行大约二十多天，有谌离国；步行大约十多天，有夫甘都卢国。
English: From Bozhai, Xuwen and Hepu in the south of Japan, it took about five months by boat to travel to Duyuan Province; about four months by boat to travel to Oulu Province; about more than 20 days by boat to travel to Guizhou Province; and about more than 10 days by foot to travel to Fanggang Province.

古文：自夫甘都卢国船行可二月余，有黄支国，民俗略与珠厓相类。
现代文：从夫甘都卢国乘船走大约两个多月，有黄支国，民俗同珠庄郡大致相同。
English: It takes about more than two months to travel by boat from the country of Fuguangdulu to Huangzhi, whose folk customs are roughly the same as Zhuzhuang County.

古文：其州广大，户口多，多异物，自武帝以来皆献见。
现代文：这个州面积广大，户多，有很多奇怪的东西，从武帝以来都进贡过。
English: This state has a vast area, many households, many strange things, and has paid tribute since Emperor Wu.

古文：有译长，属黄门，与应募者俱入海市明珠、璧流离、奇石异物，赍黄金，杂缯而往。
现代文：有译长官，属于黄门官，与应征的人一同入海购买明珠、璧流离、奇石异物，带着黄金杂丝前往。
English: There was an interpreter, belonging to the Yellow Gate, who went to the sea with the conscripts to buy pearls, gems, strange stones and foreign objects, and went with gold filings.

古文：所至国皆禀食为耦，蛮夷贾船，转送致之。
现代文：所到国家都供给他们食物并跟他们一同前行，蛮夷的商船，辗转把他们运送到所要到的地方。
English: All the countries they passed through supplied them with food and went along with them, while the savage merchant ships ferried them to wherever they wanted to go.

古文：亦利交易，剽杀人。
现代文：也有追逐交易的利益，抢劫杀人的。
English: There is also the pursuit of trading interests, robbery and murder.

古文：又苦逢风波溺死，不者数年来还。
现代文：另外还有遭受风浪溺死的艰苦，没有这些艰苦的也要几年才能返回。
English: In addition, there are the hardships of suffering from wind and waves and drowning, without these hardships, it will take years to return.

古文：大珠至围二寸以下。
现代文：大珠最大的是二寸以下。
English: The largest bead is less than two inches.

古文：平帝元始中，王莽辅政，欲耀威德，厚遗黄支王，令遣使献生犀牛。
现代文：平帝元始中，王莽辅佐政治，想炫耀威武德行，厚厚地赏赐黄支王，让其派遣使者进献活着的犀牛。
English: In the early days of the Ping Dynasty, Wang Mang, a political aide, wanted to show off his military prowess, so he generously rewarded Huang Zhi Wang by having him send an envoy to present a live rhinoceros.

古文：自黄支船行可八月，到皮宗；船行可二月，到日南、象林界云。
现代文：从黄支乘船而行大约八个月，到达皮宗；船行大约两月，到达旦直、象挞的边界。
English: It took about eight months to travel by boat from Huangzhi to Pizong, and about two months to travel by boat to the border of Danzhong and Xianggang.

古文：黄支之南，有已程不国，汉之译使自此还矣。
现代文：童主厘的南面，有已程不国，汉朝的翻译使者从这袅就返回了。
English: To the south of Tongsulli, there is a land far away, from which the Han Dynasty's envoys returned.

