古文：秀之字伯奋，幼时，祖父敬弘爱其风采。
现代文：○王秀之王秀之字伯奋，幼年的时候，祖父王敬弘喜爱他的风采。
English: ○Wang Xiu of Wang Xiu of Baofeng. When he was young, his grandfather Wang Jinghong loved his style.

古文：仕宋爲太子舍人。
现代文：在宋朝做官担任太子舍人。
English: In the Song Dynasty, he held the post of crown prince.

古文：父卒，庐于墓侧，服阕，复职。
现代文：父亲去世，他在墓旁盖了一座茅庐，守丧结束，复职。
English: When his father died, he built a thatched hut next to the grave. After the funeral, he was reinstated.

古文：吏部尚书褚彦回欲与结婚，秀之不肯，以此频爲两府外兵参军。
现代文：吏部尚书褚彦回想让他和女儿结婚，王秀之不肯，因此他总是做两府的外兵参军。
English: Wang Xiuzhi did not want to marry his daughter, so he always joined the army as a foreign soldier from the two prefectures.

古文：时人以爲王晋平恐富求归。
现代文：后来担任晋平太守，当了一年要求回来，有人问他是什么缘故，他回答说： 这个郡土壤肥沃，珍宝财富日益增多，人们所迷恋的是财物，财物多了则祸患就会赶来，智者不贪恋财物，也不愿意招祸。
English: Later, he served as the governor of Jinping, and when he was asked to return after a year and someone asked him why, he replied: The soil of this county is fertile, treasures and wealth are increasing day by day. People are obsessed with wealth. If there is more wealth, disasters will come. Wise people do not covet wealth and are not willing to invite disaster.

古文：仕齐爲豫章王嶷骠骑长史。
现代文：我的家产已经足够，怎么可以久留，以致妨碍贤才的道路？ 
English: My family's property is enough, how can I stay for a long time, so as to hinder the path of the sages?

古文：嶷于荆州立学，以秀之领儒林祭酒。
现代文：他在齐朝做官担任豫章王萧嶷的骠骑长史。萧嶷在荆州建立学校，让王秀之兼任儒林祭酒。
English: He was an official in the Qi Dynasty and served as the rider of Yu Zhang Wang Xiaohui. Xiaohui established a school in Jingzhou, and let Wang Xiuzhi also serve as the Julin Festival wine.

古文：武帝即位，累迁侍中祭酒，转都官尚书。
现代文：武帝即位，逐步升迁为侍中祭酒，转任都官尚书。
English: Emperor Wu ascended to the throne, and he was gradually promoted to the position of chamberlain of the sacrificial wine, and was transferred to the post of capital official, Shangshu.

古文：秀之祖父敬弘性贞正，徐羡之、傅亮当朝，不与来往。
现代文：王秀之的祖父王敬弘性格忠贞正直，徐羡之、傅亮掌握朝中大权，他不和他们往来。
English: Wang Xiuzhi's grandfather, Wang Jinghong, was loyal and honest, while Xu Enzhi and Fu Liang held great power in the dynasty. He did not associate with them.

古文：及致仕隐吴兴，与秀之父瓒之书，深勖以静退。
现代文：退职后隐居在吴兴，他给王秀之的父亲王瓒之写信，常常用静退的思想鼓励他。
English: After retiring, he lived in seclusion in Wuxing. He wrote letters to Wang Xiushi's father, Wang Xizhong, and often encouraged him with the idea of retirement.

古文：瓒之爲五兵尚书，未尝诣一朝贵。
现代文：王瓒之担任五兵尚书，没有到过一个朝中贵人家中。
English: Wang Xizhi was in charge of the five soldiers, and he had never been to the home of a court noble.

古文：江湛谓何偃曰： 王瓒之今便是朝隐。 
现代文：江湛对何偃说： 王瓒之现在便是朝隐。 
English: Jiang Zhan said to He Ying: Wang Yingzhi is now a retired emperor.

古文：及柳元景、顔师伯贵要，瓒之竟不侯之。
现代文：后来柳元景、颜师伯富贵显要，王瓒之到底不问候他们。
English: Later, Liu Yuanjing and Yan Shi Bo were rich and important, and Wang Xizhi did not greet them at all.

古文：至秀之爲尚书，又不与王俭款接。
现代文：等到王秀之做了尚书，又不和王俭友好地结交。
English: Wait until Wang Xiuzhi made Shangshu, and do not make friends with Wang Jian.

古文：三世不事权贵，时人称之。
现代文：三代不侍奉权贵，当时的人们非常称赞。
English: Three generations did not serve the powerful and the rich, which was highly praised by the people at the time.

古文：转侍中，领射声校尉。
现代文：转任侍中，兼射声校尉。
English: He was transferred to the position of chamberlain, and also became a captain.

古文：出爲随王镇西长史、南郡内史。
现代文：后来出京担任随王镇西长史、南郡内史。
English: Later, he went to Beijing to work as a historian in the west of Wangzhen and a historian in the south of the county.

古文：后爲辅国将军、吴兴太守。
现代文：后来担任辅国将军、吴兴太守。
English: Later, he served as the general of the auxiliary state and Wu Xing, the de facto ruler.

古文：秀之先爲诸王长史、行事，便叹曰： 仲祖之识，见于已多。 
现代文：王秀之早先做诸王的长史、行事，就曾慨叹说： 仲祖的卓识，已经看到了很多的例证。 
English: Wang Xiuzhi, who had a long history and actions of kings, once sighed and said: Zhong Zu's insight has seen many examples.

古文：便无复仕进，止营理舍亭山宅，有终焉之志。
现代文：便不再去求升迁，只是经营舍亭山的宅院，有在这里终老的心愿。
English: He no longer sought promotion, but only managed the homestead on Mount Sheting. He had a long-cherished wish to live here.

古文：及除吴兴郡，隐业所在，心愿爲之。
现代文：后来被任命主持吴兴郡，这是一个隐居的处所，所以心里愿意担当这一职务。
English: Later, he was appointed to preside over Wuxing County, which is a secluded place, so he was willing to take on this position.

古文：到郡修旧山，移置辎重。
现代文：到郡上以后，修整旧山，转移安置物资。
English: After arriving in Gujo, they repaired the old mountain and transferred and resettled materials.

古文：隆昌元年卒，遗令 朱服不得入棺，祭则酒脯而已。
现代文：隆昌元年去世，遗令说： 朱红官服不能入棺材，祭祀只用酒和干肉即可。
English: Longchang died in the first year of the year, and his last will and testament said: Zhuhong's official uniform cannot go into the coffin, and only wine and dried meat can be used for the ritual.

古文：世人以仆妾直灵助哭，当由丧主不能淳至，欲以多声相乱。
现代文：世人们让仆人和妻妾在灵前值守痛哭，当是由于丧主不能纯朴闲静，想用多种声音相乱。
English: The world lets servants and wives and concubines stand on duty and weep before the deceased. It is because the bereaved cannot be simple and quiet, and want to use a variety of voices.

古文：魂而有灵，吾当笑之 。
现代文：魂魄如果有灵的话，我会感到好笑的。 
English: I would be amused if the soul had a spirit.

古文：諡曰简子。
现代文：谥号称他为简子。
English: His nickname was Janzo.

古文：延之字希季，升之子也。
现代文：○王延之王延之字希季，是王升之的儿子。
English: ○Wang Yan'sWang Yan's character, Hiji, is the son of Wang Sheng.

古文：少静默，不交人事。
现代文：少年时候很静默，不交结人事关系。
English: When he was a boy, he was very quiet and did not get involved in personal relationships.

古文：仕宋爲司徒左长史。
现代文：在宋朝做官担任司徒左长史。
English: In the Song Dynasty, he served as an official in the post of Siduzu Changshi.

古文：清贫，居宇穿漏，褚彦回以啓宋明帝，即敕材官爲起三间斋屋。
现代文：家中清贫，居住的房子破漏，褚彦回把这个情况报告了宋明帝，明帝便下令让材官为他盖了三间斋屋。
English: His family was poor, and the house they lived in was leaking. Yan Yan reported this to Emperor Song Ming, who ordered the quartermaster to build him three houses.

古文：历吏部尚书，尚书左仆射。
现代文：他历任过吏部尚书、尚书左仆射。
English: He has successively held the posts of secretary, secretary and left-hand man.

古文：宋德既衰，齐高帝辅政，朝野之情，人怀彼此。
现代文：宋朝的气运衰落，齐高帝辅政，朝野中的心理，人人都是非此即彼，倾向一方。
English: The decline of the Song Dynasty, Emperor Qigong's assistance to the government, the psychology of the court and the field, everyone is either this or that, tending to one side.

古文：延之与尚书令王僧虔中立无所去就。
现代文：王延之和尚书令王僧虔则是中立，没有偏向取舍。
English: Wang Yanzhi's monk, Wang Xiangqian, is neutral and has no bias.

古文：时人语曰： 二王居平，不送不迎。 
现代文：当时人们的谚语说： 二王居平，不送不迎。 
English: At that time, people's proverbs said: "If two kings live in the same place, it is not a good omen."

古文：高帝以此善之。
现代文：高帝因此认为他们很好。
English: That's why Gaudi thought they were so good.

古文：升明三年，出爲江州刺史，加都督。
现代文：升明三年，出京担任江州刺史，做都督。
English: Three years after ascending to the throne, he went to Beijing to serve as the governor of Jiangsu Province.

古文：齐建元元年，进号镇南将军。
现代文：齐朝建元元年，晋升封号为镇南将军。
English: In the first year of the first year of the Qi Dynasty, he was promoted and given the title of General Zhenan.

古文：延之与金紫光禄大夫阮韬俱宋领军将军刘湛外甥，并有早誉，湛甚爱之，曰： 韬后当爲第一，延之爲次也。 
现代文：王延之和金紫光禄大夫阮韬都是宋朝的领军将军刘湛的外甥，同样都是很早就有了声誉，刘湛十分喜爱他们，说： 阮韬以后应当为第一，延之为第二。 
English: Wang Yanzhi and Jin Zi Guanglu's doctor, Nguyn Xuân, were both nephews of the leading general of the Song Dynasty, Liu Zhan. They also had a reputation for a long time. Liu Zhan was very fond of them, saying: "Afterwards, Nguyn Xuân should be the first, and Nguyn Xuân should be the second."

古文：延之甚不平。
现代文：王延之非常不平。
English: Wang Yanzhi was very upset.

古文：每致饷下都，韬与朝士同例，高帝闻之，与延之书曰： 韬云卿未尝有别意，当由刘家月旦故邪。 
现代文：每次给建业进行馈赠，阮韬与朝士同例，高帝听说了，给王延之写信说： 阮韬说您并没有另外的意思，当是由于刘家品评的缘故。 
English: Every time he made a gift to Jianye, Nguyn Th was treated the same as the Emperor. When Emperor Gao heard about it, he wrote a letter to Wang Yanzhi, saying: Nguyn Th said that you did not have any other intention, but it was because of the Liu family's evaluation.

古文：韬字长明，陈留人，晋金紫光禄大夫裕玄孙也。
现代文：阮韬字长明，陈留人，是晋朝金紫光禄大夫阮裕的玄孙。
English: Nguyn Thc Long Minh, also known as Trn Lc, was the great-great-grandson of Nguyn Hu, a doctor of the Jin Dynasty.

古文：爲南兖州别驾，刺史江夏王义恭逆求资费钱，韬曰： 此朝廷物。 
现代文：担任南兖州别驾，刺史江夏王刘义恭违章要求消费用钱，阮韬说： 这是朝廷的财物。 
English: Addressing Liu Yigong, the king of the Xia Dynasty of the Southern Yunnan Province, who illegally demanded money for consumption, Ruan Yu said: This is the property of the imperial court.

古文：执不与。
现代文：坚持不给。
English: Insist on not giving in.

古文：宋孝武选侍中四人，并以风貌，王彧、谢庄爲一双，韬与何偃爲一双。
现代文：宋孝武帝选拔侍中四人，都依据风貌，王、谢庄为一双，阮韬与何偃为一双。
English: Emperor Song Xiaowu selected four attendants, all according to their appearance. Wang and Xie Zhuang were a pair, and Ruan Yu and He Yu were a pair.

古文：常充兼假，至始兴王师，卒。
现代文：常常充任兼职和暂署官员，到了始兴王的军中，去世。
English: He often served as a part-time and seconded officer, and died in the army of King Shixing.

古文：延之居身简素，清静寡欲，凡所经历，务存不扰。
现代文：王延之生活简单朴素，清静寡欲，凡是他所曾任职的地方，务求不搅扰百姓。
English: Wang Yan's life was simple and plain, quiet and austere. Wherever he served, he tried not to disturb the people.

古文：在江州，禄俸外一无所纳。
现代文：在江州，于俸禄以外一无收取。
English: In Jiangzhou, he received nothing except his salary.

古文：普曜子晏。晏字休默，一字士彦。
现代文：○王晏王晏字休默，一字士彦。
English: ○ Wang Qian Wang Qian's character hushed, one character Shihang.

古文：仕宋，初爲建安国左常侍，稍至车骑，晋熙王燮安西板晏主簿，时齐武帝爲长史，与晏相遇。
现代文：在宋朝做官，起初是建安国左常侍，渐渐升到车骑，晋熙王刘燮在安西任命王晏为主簿，当时齐武帝为长史，与王晏相遇。
English: In the Song Dynasty, he served as an official, first as the left attendant of Jianan Province, and gradually rose to the chariot and cavalry. King Liu Yi of Jinxi appointed Wang Qi as the main book in Anxi. At that time, Emperor Qi Wu was a long history, and he met Wang Qi.

古文：府转镇西，板晏爲记室。
现代文：军府转为镇西，又任命王晏为记室。
English: The military headquarters was transferred to the west of the town, and Wang Xi was appointed as the recorder.

古文：沈攸之事难，随武帝镇盆城。
现代文：沈攸之发难后，他跟随武帝镇守盆城。
English: After the outbreak of the Shen You Incident, he followed Emperor Wu to defend the city of Bon.

古文：齐高帝时威权虽重，而衆情犹有疑惑，晏便专心奉事，军旅书翰皆见委。
现代文：齐高帝当时虽然威权很重，但众人心里仍然疑惑，王晏则专心侍奉，军事文件都委托给他。
English: Although Qigong Emperor had a lot of authority at that time, people still had doubts in their hearts. Wang Xi devoted himself to serving, and military documents were entrusted to him.

古文：性甚便僻，渐见亲待，常参议机密。
现代文：他性情谄媚，逐渐受到宠信，常常参与议论机密。
English: He has a charming personality, is gradually becoming a favorite, and is often involved in discussing secrets.

古文：建元初，爲太子中庶子。
现代文：建元初年，他担任太子中庶子。
English: In the first year of the Jianyuan era, he served as the prince's middle child.

古文：武帝在东宫，专断朝事，多不闻啓，晏虑及罪，称疾自疏。
现代文：武帝在东宫，专断朝政，很多事情都不上报，王晏担心会获罪，便称病自动疏远他。
English: Emperor Wu was in the East Palace, dictating the policy of the court, and many things were not reported. Wang Yao was worried that he would be found guilty, so he said that the illness would automatically alienate him.

古文：武帝即位，爲长兼侍中，意任如旧。
现代文：武帝即位，他做长兼侍中，信任如旧。
English: When Emperor Wu ascended the throne, he served as chancellor and chamberlain, with the same level of trust as before.

古文：迁侍中祭酒。
现代文：升为侍中祭酒。
English: He was promoted to the rank of Samurai Junior Sake Master.

古文：遭母丧，起爲司徒左长史。
现代文：中间遭到了母亲的丧事，后来起用为司徒左长史。
English: In the middle of this, his mother's funeral took place, and he was later appointed as the head of the Stutthof Historical Society.

古文：晏父普曜藉晏势，多历通官。
现代文：王晏的父亲王普曜借着王晏的势力，做了许多显达官职。
English: Wang Hui's father, Wang Puyang, used Wang Hui's influence to obtain many high-ranking official positions.

古文：普曜卒，晏居丧有礼。
现代文：王普曜死后，王晏居丧有礼。
English: After Wang Puyang's death, Wang Shujiu was given a respectful funeral.

古文：永明六年，爲丹阳尹。
现代文：永明六年，担任丹阳尹。
English: Yongming served as Danyang Yin for six years.

古文：晏位任亲重，自豫章王嶷、尚书令王俭皆降意接之，而晏每以疏漏被责，连称疾。
现代文：王晏地位重要而且很受信赖，豫章王萧嶷、尚书令王俭等都放下架子和他结交，而王晏常常因为工作出现疏漏受到责备，所以连连称说有病。
English: Wang Yao's position was important and he was very trusted. Yu Zhang, Wang Xiao Yao, Shang Shuling, Wang Jian and others all put down their pride to make friends with him. Wang Yao was often criticized for his work omissions, so he often claimed to be ill.

古文：久之，转爲江州刺史，泣不愿出，留爲吏部尚书、太子右率，终以旧恩见宠。
现代文：时间久了，转为江州刺史。他哭着不愿外出，结果留下担任吏部尚书、太子右率，终于因为旧恩而受到宠幸。
English: After a long time, he was transferred to Jiangzhou Shishi. He cried and did not want to go out. As a result, he stayed to serve as the secretary of the administrative department and the right leader of the prince. Finally, he was favored because of his old favor.

古文：时尚书令王俭虽贵而疏，晏既领选，权行台阁，与俭颇不平。
现代文：当时尚书令王俭虽然官位高贵，却被疏远，王晏负责选拔官吏以后，权力管到台阁，和王俭很不融洽。
English: At that time, although Wang Jian was a high-ranking official, he was alienated. After Wang Xi was responsible for selecting officials, the power came to the cabinet, and Wang Jian did not get along well with him.

古文：俭卒，礼官欲依王导諡爲 文献 ，晏啓上曰： 导乃得此諡，但宋来不加素族。 
现代文：王俭去世，礼官想依照王导的先例给他追加谥号为 文献 ，王晏上奏说： 王导才能得到这样的谥号，但宋朝以来不加给素族。 
English: After Wang Jian's death, the etiquette official wanted to follow Wang Du's example and give him the additional title of "Wang Du" for literature. Wang Du said: "Only Wang Du can get such a title, but since the Song Dynasty, it has not been given to the Su people."

古文：谓亲人曰： 平头宪事已行矣。 
现代文：而对亲人说： 已经把他当成平民宰相了。 
English: But he told his relatives: "I already consider him a civilian prime minister."

古文：十一年，爲右仆射，领太孙右卫率。
现代文：永明十一年，为右仆射，兼任太孙右卫率。
English: In the eleventh year of the Yongming era, he became the right-hand man of the Emperor and concurrently served as the leader of the Imperial Guards.

古文：武帝崩，遗旨以尚书事付晏及徐孝嗣。
现代文：武帝去世，遗旨把尚书事交给王晏和徐孝嗣。
English: When Emperor Wu died, his last wishes were to hand over Shang Shuji to Wang Xi and Xu Xiaozhi.

古文：郁林即位，转左仆射。
现代文：郁林王即位，转为左仆射。
English: King Yulin ascended to the throne and became a left-handed ruler.

古文：及明帝谋废立，晏便回应推奉，转尚书令，封曲江县侯，给鼓吹一部，甲仗五十人入殿。
现代文：后来明帝谋划废立皇帝，王晏便响应推举，转为尚书令，封为曲江县侯，配给乐队一部、卫队五十人入殿。
English: Later, Emperor Ming planned to depose the emperor, and Wang Xi responded to the suggestion and was promoted to Shang Shuling, appointed as the governor of Qujiang County, and assigned a part of the orchestra and fifty guards to enter the palace.

古文：时明帝形势已布，而莫敢先言，萧谌兄弟握兵权，迟疑未决，晏频三夜微步诣谌议，时人以此窥之。
现代文：当时明帝形势已经公开，而没人敢于先说，萧谌兄弟握有兵权，迟疑不决，王晏接连三夜便装步行到萧谌家中商议，当时的人们因此观望着他们。
English: At that time, the situation of the Ming Dynasty had already become public, and no one dared to say first that the Xiao Yu brothers held military power and were hesitant to make a decision. Wang Hui casually walked to Xiao Yu's home three nights in a row to negotiate, so people at that time watched them.

古文：明帝与晏东府语及时事，晏抵掌曰： 公常言晏怯，今定如何？ 
现代文：明帝与王晏在东府谈到时事，王晏和他击掌说道： 您常说王晏怯懦，现在如何？ 
English: Emperor Ming and Wang Hui talked about current affairs in Dongfu. Wang Hui high-fived him and said: You often say that Wang Hui is cowardly, how about now?

古文：建武元年，进号骠骑大将军，给班剑二十人，又加兵百人，领太子少傅，进爵爲公。
现代文：建武元年，晋升官号为骠骑大将军，配给班剑二十人，又加兵一百人，兼太子少傅，晋升爵位为公。
English: In the first year of the Jianwu era, he was promoted to the rank of General of the Horse and Rider, given a squad of twenty swords, and another hundred soldiers. He was also made a prince and a minor official, and was promoted to a peerage.

古文：以魏军动，给兵千人。
现代文：因为魏军出动，配给兵士一千人。
English: Because the Wei army was dispatched, one thousand soldiers were given rations.

古文：晏笃于亲旧，爲时所称，至是自谓佐命惟新，言论常非武帝故事，衆始怪之。
现代文：王晏对亲戚旧友十分热情，为当时人所称赞，现在自认为辅佐维新，言谈之间常常非议武帝旧时的事情，众人才开始加以责怪。
English: Wang Yao was very enthusiastic about his relatives and old friends, which was praised by the people at that time. Now he considers himself to be a supporter of the reform and opening up. He often does not discuss the old days of Emperor Wu, and people began to blame him.

古文：明帝虽以事际须晏，而心相疑斥，料简武帝中诏，得与晏手诏三百馀纸，皆是论国家事。
现代文：明帝虽然在关键时刻需要王晏，但心里却怀疑排斥。他翻阅武帝时的诏令，得到给王晏的手诏三百余张，都是议论国家政事。
English: Although Emperor Ming needed Wang Qian at a critical moment, he suspected that he was being rejected. He read through the imperial edict issued by Emperor Wu and obtained more than three hundred handwritten edicts from Wang Qian, all of which discussed national politics.

古文：永明中，武帝欲以明帝代晏领选，晏啓曰： 鸾清干有馀，然不谙百氏，恐不可居此职。 
现代文：永明时期，武帝想让明帝代王晏兼管选举，王晏启奏说： 萧鸾精明干练有余，然而不熟悉诸姓百家，恐怕不能担任这一职务。 
English: During the Yongming period, Emperor Wu wanted the Ming Emperor to take charge of the election on behalf of Wang Xizang. Wang Xizang said: Xiao Xizang is smart and capable, but he is not familiar with hundreds of surnames, and I am afraid he cannot hold this position.

古文：乃止。
现代文：于是停下了。
English: He dismissed the idea.

古文：及见此诏，愈猜薄之。
现代文：等看见这张诏书后，明帝更加猜忌和鄙薄他。
English: After seeing this edict, Emperor Ming became even more suspicious and contemptuous of him.

古文：帝初即位，始安王遥光便劝诛晏，帝曰： 晏于我有勋，且未有罪。 
现代文：明帝初即位时，始安王萧遥光就劝他杀掉王晏，明帝说： 王晏对我有功勋，而且也没有罪过。 
English: When Emperor Ming first ascended to the throne, King Shi'an Xiao Yaoguang advised him to kill Wang Qian. Emperor Ming said: Wang Qian has done me a great service, and he has committed no crime.

古文：遥光曰： 晏尚不能爲武帝，安能爲陛下？ 
现代文：萧遥光说： 王晏尚且不能为武帝，怎能为陛下？ 
English: Xiao Yaoguang said, "Even though Wang Xi is not Emperor Wu, how can he be His Majesty?

古文：帝默然变色。
现代文：明帝默然地改变了脸色。
English: Ming Di silently changed his face.

古文：时帝常遣心腹左右陈世范等出涂巷采听异言，由是以晏爲事。
现代文：当时明帝常常派心腹左右陈世范等人外出到路途街巷中去探听反对言论，从此便以王晏为对象。
English: At that time, Emperor Ming often sent his right and left henchmen Chen Shifan and others to go out to the streets and lanes to listen for opposition speech, and from then on, Wang Qi was the target.

古文：晏性浮动，志欲无厌，自谓旦夕开府。
现代文：王晏性情浮躁，私欲无厌，自己声言旦夕之间就可以官至开府。
English: Wang Yao was impetuous and had insatiable selfish desires. He boasted that he would be able to become an official and run the government in no time.

古文：又望录尚书，每谓人曰： 徐公应爲令。 
现代文：又企望做录尚书，常常对别人说： 徐公应为尚书令。 
English: He also hoped to make a record of Shangshu, and often said to others: Xu Gong should be Shangshu.

古文：又和徐诗云： 槐序候方调。 
现代文：又和徐公诗云： 槐序候方调。 
English: Also with Xu Gongshi Yun: 序候方调.

古文：其名位在徐前，徐若三槐，则晏不言自显，人或讥之。
现代文：他的名位在徐公的前面，徐公如果有三槐，则王晏不言自明。有人便对他进行讥讽。
English: His name is in front of Xu Gong. If Xu Gong has three gongs, then Wang Qian is self-evident. Some people ridicule him.

古文：晏人望未重，又与上素疏，中兴初，虽以事计委任，而内相疑阻，晏无防意。
现代文：王晏的威望不重，又与皇上平素疏远，中兴初年，虽然为了政事而委任他，但内心却相疑虑，王晏没有防备的心理。
English: Wang Hui's prestige was not heavy, and he was estranged from the emperor. In the early years of ZTE, although he was appointed for political reasons, he had doubts in his heart. Wang Hui was not prepared.

古文：既居朝端，事多专决，内外要职，并用周旋门义，每与上争用人。
现代文：位居朝堂，事情多是独断专行，内外要职，都要用来安排亲信，常常与皇上争执用人。
English: When he was in the imperial court, he often made decisions on his own, and used important positions both at home and abroad to arrange his close confidants. He often quarreled with the emperor about who to employ.

古文：数呼相工自视，云当大贵。
现代文：他多次叫相面的人来给自己相面，说他要大贵。
English: He repeatedly asked people to meet him face-to-face, saying that he wanted to be very expensive.

古文：与客语，好屏人。
现代文：跟客人谈话，好支开旁人。
English: Talk to guests and keep others out of the way.

古文：上闻，疑晏欲反，遂有诛晏意。
现代文：皇上听说后，怀疑王晏要谋反，于是便有了诛杀王晏的心思。
English: After hearing this, the emperor suspected that Wang Xi was plotting a rebellion, so he had the idea of killing Wang Xi.

古文：有鲜于文粲与晏子德元往来，密探朝旨，告晏有异志。
现代文：有个人叫鲜于文粲，与王晏的儿子王德元往来，他秘密地探听到朝廷的旨意后，就告发王晏有异志。
English: There was a man named Xian Yu Wenyuan who had dealings with Wang Yao's son Wang Deyuan. After secretly listening to the will of the imperial court, he told Wang Yao that he had a different will.

古文：又左右单景隽、陈世范等采巫觋言啓上，云晏怀异图。
现代文：又有身边的单景俊、陈世范等人听了巫觋的话启奏皇上，说王晏怀有异图。
English: There were also those around him, such as Sankeijun and Chen Shifan, who listened to Wu Yao's words and told the emperor that Wang Yao had a different plan.

古文：是时南郊应亲奉，景隽等言晏因此与武帝故主帅于道中窃发。
现代文：这时要在南郊进行祭天，皇帝应该亲自到场，单景俊等人就说王晏要借此机会和武帝以前的主帅在中途偷偷发难。
English: At this time, the Festival of Heaven was to be held in the southern suburbs, and the emperor was to be present in person. Shan Jingjun and others said that Wang Xi would take this opportunity to secretly quarrel with the former coach of Emperor Wu.

古文：会兽犯郊坛，帝愈惧，未郊前一日，上乃停行，先报晏及徐孝嗣，孝嗣奉旨，而晏陈郊祀事大，必宜自力。
现代文：正巧赶上有野兽侵犯南郊的祭坛，皇帝越发害怕，在尚未郊祭的前一天，皇上便决定取消这一行动。首先报知了王晏和徐孝嗣，徐孝嗣领旨，而王晏则上言郊祀是件大事，皇上一定要亲自去办。
English: Just in time for a beast to invade the southern suburb's altar, the emperor became more and more afraid. On the day before the suburb's festival, the emperor decided to cancel this action. First, Wang Xi and Xu Xiaozhi were notified. Xu Xiaozhi received the order, while Wang Xi said that the suburb's worship was a big deal, and the emperor must do it himself.

古文：景隽言益见信，元会毕，乃召晏于华林省诛之。
现代文：单景俊的话更加得到证明。元旦会见群臣结束以后，便召见了王晏，在华林省把他杀死。
English: On New Year's Day, after the meeting with the ministers was over, he summoned Wang Qi and killed him in Hualin Province.

古文：下诏显其罪，称以河东王铉识用微弱，欲令守以虚器，并令收付廷尉。
现代文：下诏书公布了他的罪名，并说河东王萧铉识力微弱，想让他空居帝位，一并下令由廷尉收监。
English: The next imperial edict announced his crime, and said that Xiao Yu, the king of Hedong, was feeble-minded and wanted him to vacate the imperial throne, and ordered him to be imprisoned by a courtier.

古文：晏之爲员外郎也，父普曜斋前柏树忽变成梧桐，论者以爲梧桐虽有栖凤之美，而失后凋之节。
现代文：王晏做员外郎时，父亲王普曜斋房前的柏树忽然变为梧桐，谈论的人认为梧桐虽然有栖居凤凰的美妙，却失去最后凋落的节操。
English: When Wang Yao was a member of the family, the cypress tree in front of his father Wang Puyang's house suddenly turned into a sycamore tree. The people who talked about it thought that although the sycamore tree had the beauty of a phoenix, it had lost the strength of the last fall.

古文：及晏败，果如之。
现代文：等王晏败亡，果然是这样。
English: After Wang Yao's defeat, this is what happened.

古文：又未败前，见屋桷子悉是大蛇，就视之犹木也。
现代文：又在没有败亡以前，他见屋上的椽子都是大蛇，近前再看还是木头。
English: And before he was defeated, he saw that the rafters on the roof were large snakes, but when he looked closer, they were still wood.

古文：晏恶之，乃以纸裹桷子，犹纸内摇动，蔌蔌有声。
现代文：王晏很讨厌它们，便用纸把椽子裹上，还看见纸内在摇动，簌簌有声。
English: Wang Yao hated them very much, so he wrapped the dice with paper. He also saw that the paper was shaking and making noise.

古文：又于北山庙答赛夜还，晏醉，部伍人亦饮酒，羽仪错乱，前后十馀里中，不复禁制。
现代文：又曾在北山庙答赛神灵后夜间回来，王晏醉酒，部属也饮了酒，仪仗错乱，前后十几里中，不再能够控制。
English: He also came back in the night after answering the deities in the temple of Beishan. Wang Yao was drunk, his subordinates also drank wine, and the battle of honor was disordered. He was no longer able to control it for more than a dozen miles.

古文：识者云此不复久也。
现代文：懂得的人说这显示将不能长久。不久便败亡了。
English: Those in the know say the show won't last. It'll soon be over.

古文：未几而败。晏子德元，有意尚，位车骑长史。
现代文：王晏的儿子王德元，有意进取，位居车骑长史。
English: Wang Deyuan, Wang Yao's son, was an enterprising person with a long history in carriage driving.

古文：德元初名湛，武帝曰： 刘湛、江湛，并不善终，此非佳名也。 
现代文：王德元初名王湛，武帝说： 刘湛、江湛，都不是善终，这不是个好名字。 
English: Wang Deyuan was originally named Wang Zhan. Emperor Wu said, "Liu Zhan and Jiang Zhan are not auspicious names. This is not a good name."

古文：晏乃改之，至是及诛。
现代文：王晏便给他改了，到现在也被牵连杀死。
English: Wang Yao changed his mind, and now he has been implicated and killed.

古文：晏弟诩，位少府卿。
现代文：王晏的弟弟王诩，位居少府卿。
English: Wang Yao's younger brother, Wang Yao, was promoted to Shaofuqing.

古文：敕未登黄门郎，不得畜女伎，诩与射声校尉阴玄智坐畜伎免官，禁锢十年。
现代文：皇帝下令没当上黄门郎以前，不准蓄女伎，王诩和射声校尉阴玄智因为蓄伎而被免官，囚禁了十年。
English: The emperor decreed that no one was allowed to have a concubine before becoming Huangmen Lang. Wang Xi and Captain Yin Xuan Zhi were dismissed from their posts and imprisoned for ten years for having concubines.

古文：敕特原诩。
现代文：皇帝下令特别宽免了王诩。
English: The emperor ordered a special pardon for Wang Xuan.

古文：诩亦笃旧。
现代文：王诩也很重旧交。
English: Wang Yao is also a close friend.

古文：承圣末，陈武帝杀太尉王僧辩，遣文帝攻僧辩婿杜龛，龛告难于清，引兵援龛，大败陈文帝于吴兴，追奔至晋陵。时广州刺史欧阳頠亦同清援龛，中更改异，杀清而归陈武帝。子猛。
现代文：后来任命为广州刺史。王晏被杀后，皇上派人也把他杀死。○王猛
English: Later, he was appointed as the governor of Guangzhou. After Wang Xi was killed, the emperor also sent someone to kill him. ○ Wang Mengxing

古文：猛字世雄，本名勇。
现代文：王猛字世雄，本来名叫勇。
English: Wang Meng Zi Shixiong was originally named Yong.

古文：五岁而父清遇害，陈文帝军度浙江，访之，将加夷灭。
现代文：五岁的时候父亲王清遇害，陈文帝的军队渡过浙江，访察他们，准备加以杀灭。
English: When he was five years old, his father Wang Qing was killed, and the army of Chen Wendi crossed Zhejiang to visit them and prepare to kill them.

古文：母韦氏携之遁于会稽，遂免。
现代文：他的母亲韦氏带着他逃到了会稽，于是得以免祸。
English: His mother, Ms. Wei, escaped with him to the auditorium and was able to escape the disaster.

古文：及长勤学不倦，博涉经史，兼习孙、吴兵法。
现代文：长大以后，勤学不倦，博览经史，兼学孙子、吴起兵法。
English: After growing up, he studied tirelessly, was well-versed in the history of the classics, and also learned from his grandson, Wu Qi, the art of war.

古文：以父遇酷，终文帝之世不听音乐，蔬食布衣，以丧礼自处。
现代文：因为父亲的遭遇太苦，他在整个文帝时期始终不听音乐，蔬菜饭食布衣裳，以丧礼自处。
English: Because his father suffered so much, he never listened to music during the entire reign of Emperor Wen. He ate vegetables, wore cloth clothes, and did his own funeral rites.

古文：宣帝立，乃始求位。
现代文：宣帝即位，才开始求官。
English: Only after Emperor Xuancheng ascended the throne did he begin to seek office.

古文：太建初，释褐鄱阳王府中兵参军，再迁永阳王府录事参军。
现代文：太建初年，初入官场担任鄱阳王府中兵参军，再调任永阳王府录事参军。
English: In the first year of Tai Jian, when he first entered the government, he joined the army as a middle-ranking soldier in the Shanyang royal palace, and was later transferred to the Yongyang royal palace to join the army.

古文：猛慷慨常慕功名，先是上疏陈安边拓境之策，甚见嘉纳，至是诏随大都督吴明彻略地，以军功封应阳县子。
现代文：王猛性情慷慨，常常羡慕功名，在这以前曾经上书论说安边拓境的计策，很被嘉奖和采纳，到现在诏令他跟随大都督吴明彻去夺取土地，因为军功封为应阳县子。
English: Wang Meng was generous in nature and often envied military achievements. Before this, he had written a book on the strategy of expanding the borders of Anbian, which was highly commended and adopted. Now, he was ordered by the emperor to follow the great governor Wu Mingche to seize land, because military achievements made him the son of Yingyang County.

古文：累迁太子右卫率，徙晋陵太守。
现代文：逐步升迁为太子右卫率，调任晋陵太守。
English: He was gradually promoted to the position of the prince's right guard and transferred to the post of the governor of Jinling.

古文：威惠兼举，奸盗屏迹，富商野次，云 以付王府君 。
现代文：威恩兼用，奸人盗贼匿迹，富商遍地，人们都说 应该归功于王府君 。
English: People say that Wangfujun is to be credited with the use of magic, the disappearance of traitors and thieves, and the appearance of rich merchants everywhere.

古文：郡人歌之，以比汉之赵广汉。
现代文：郡中的人们歌唱他，把他比作汉代的赵广汉。
English: People in the county sing about him and compare him to Zhao Guanghan of the Han Dynasty.

古文：至德初，征爲左骁骑将军，加散骑常侍，深见信重。
现代文：至德初年，调他为左骁骑将军，担任左散骑常侍，深受信任和重视。
English: In the first year of Zhi De, he was transferred to the general of the left-hand cavalry and served as the left-hand cavalry attendant, which was deeply trusted and valued.

古文：时孔范、施文庆等并相与比周，害其梗直，议将出之而未有便。
现代文：当时孔范、施文庆等人结伙营私，陷害梗直的人，商议将要把王猛调出而没有合适的机会。
English: At that time, Kong Fan, Shi Wenqing and others ganged up on Wang Meng and tried to frame him, but there was no suitable opportunity to discuss Wang Meng's transfer.

古文：会广州刺史马靖不受征，乃除猛都督东衡州刺史，领始兴内史，与广州刺史陈方庆共取靖。
现代文：正巧广州刺史马靖不服从征调，于是便任命王猛为都督东衡州刺史，兼始兴内史，与广州刺史陈方靖共同攻取马靖。
English: It just so happened that Ma Jing, the governor of Guangzhou, did not obey the conscription, so Wang Meng was appointed as the governor of East Hengzhou, and he also began to promote domestic history, and he and Chen Fangjing, the governor of Guangzhou, jointly captured Ma Jing.

古文：猛至，即禽靖送建邺，进爵爲公，加光胜将军、平越中郎将、大都督，发广、桂等二十州兵讨岭外荒梗，所至皆平。
现代文：王猛到后，马上就捉住了马靖送交建邺，晋升爵位为公，担任光胜将军、平越中郎将、大都督，调发广、桂等二十州兵讨伐岭外蛮荒地区，所到之处都予以平定。
English: After Wang Meng arrived, he immediately captured Ma Jing and sent him to Jianye, promoted him to a knighthood, served as Guang Sheng general, Ping Yue middle commander, and grand governor, and dispatched twenty state soldiers such as Fahuang and Gui to fight in the wild areas outside the ridge. They were subdued everywhere they went.

古文：祯明二年，诏授镇南大将军、都督二十四州诸军事，寻命徙镇广州。
现代文：祯明二年，下诏任命他为镇南大将军、都督二十四州诸军事，不久改镇广州。
English: In the second year of the Ming Dynasty, the imperial edict appointed him as the general of the Southern Zhen, the military governor of 24 states, and soon changed the town to Guangzhou.

古文：未之镇，而隋师济江，猛总督所部赴援。
现代文：还没到任，而隋朝的军队渡过长江，王猛总督所辖部队赶赴增援。
English: He had not yet taken office, but the army of the Sui Dynasty crossed the Yangtze River, and the troops under the jurisdiction of Governor Wang Meng rushed to reinforce.

古文：时广州刺史临汝侯方庆、西衡州刺史衡阳王伯信并隶猛督府，各观望不至。
现代文：当时广州刺史临汝侯陈方庆、西衡州刺史衡阳王陈伯信都隶属于王猛都督府，各自观望不到。
English: At that time, Chen Fangqing, the governor of Guangzhou, and Chen Boxin, the governor of Hengyang, both belonged to Wang Mengdu's government, and they could not wait to see each other.

古文：猛使高州刺史戴智烈、清远太守曾孝远各以轻兵就斩之而发其兵。
现代文：王猛派高州刺史戴智烈、清远太守曾孝远各带轻兵前去杀死了他们而调发了他们的军队。
English: Wang Meng sent Gaozhou scribe Dai Zhirong and Qingyuan grand marshal Zeng Xiaoyuan with light soldiers to kill them and dispatch their troops.

古文：及闻台城不守，乃举哀素服，藉稿不食，叹曰： 申包胥独何人哉。 
现代文：等听到台城失守，便举哀穿上孝服，坐在草垫子上待罪不食，叹息说： 申包胥将是哪个人呢？ 
English: When he heard that Taicheng was lost, he put on his mourning clothes, sat on a grass mat, and said with a sigh, "Who will be the next Shen Baojun?"

古文：因勒兵缘江拒守，以固诚节。
现代文：于是率兵，沿长江拒守，以固守忠诚的节操。
English: As a result, he led the soldiers along the Yangtze River and refused to defend it, adhering to the principle of loyalty.

古文：及审后主不死，乃遣其部将辛昉驰驿赴京师归款。
现代文：等弄清楚了后主没有死，于是派他的部将辛筊乘驿站的快马到京城去表示忠诚。
English: After ascertaining that his master was not dead, he sent his subordinate, Xin Yao, to express his loyalty by riding a fast horse to the capital.

古文：隋文帝大悦，谓昉曰： 猛怀其旧主，送故情深，即是我之诚臣。
现代文：隋文帝非常高兴，对辛窻说： 王猛怀念他的旧主，送别故人情义深厚，就是我的忠诚大臣。
English: Sui Emperor Wen was very happy and said to Xin Zhuang: Wang Meng misses his old master, and his farewell is full of deep feelings. He is my loyal minister.

古文：保守一方，不劳兵甲，又是我之功臣。 
现代文：保守一方，不用耗费兵力，又是我的功臣。 
English: On the conservative side, there is no need to expend troops, and it is my meritorious deed.

古文：即日拜昉开府仪同三司，仍诏猛与行军总管韦洸便留岭表经略。
现代文：当天任命辛窻开府仪同三司，仍然诏令王猛与行军总管韦就留在岭南经管。
English: On the same day, he appointed Xin Xuan to be in charge of the ceremony and the three departments, but still ordered Wang Meng and Wei, the head of the march, to stay in Lingnan.

古文：猛母妻子先留建邺，因随后主入京，诏赐宅及什物甚厚，别赉物一千段，及遣玺书劳猛。
现代文：王猛的母亲妻子儿女先是留在建邺，然后随着后主入京，诏令赐给宅院和各种物品很多，另外赠予布帛一千段，并且派人带着盖有玉玺的书信慰劳王猛。
English: Wang Meng's mother, wife and children first stayed in Jianye, and then, with the arrival of his successor in Beijing, the imperial edict gave a lot of houses and various items, in addition to a thousand pieces of cloth, and sent people with letters covered with jade bracelets to comfort Wang Meng.

古文：仍讨平山越，驰驿奏闻。
现代文：他讨平了山越，通过驿马上奏朝廷。
English: He evened out the mountains and played the imperial court through the horseshoe.

古文：时文帝幸河东，会猛使至，大悦。
现代文：当时文帝视察河东，正好王猛的使者到来，十分高兴。
English: At that time, Emperor Wen inspected Hedong, just as Wang Mengru's envoy arrived, very happy.

古文：杨素贺，因曰： 昔汉武此地闻喜，用改县名，王猛今者告捷，远符前事。 
现代文：杨素庆贺，于是说： 从前汉武帝在这里听到喜讯，因而改了县名，王猛现在告捷，和从前的事远远相合。 
English: Yang Su congratulated and said, "Once upon a time, Emperor Wu of the Han Dynasty heard good news here and changed the name of the county. Wang Meng is now successful, which is a far cry from the past.

古文：于是又降玺书褒赏，以其长子缮爲开府仪同三司。
现代文：于是又下发玉玺书信奖赏，封他的长子王缮为开府仪同三司。
English: As a result, Emperor Taizong issued a letter of commendation awarding his eldest son, Wang Shu, the title of Kaifu Yi and Sanji.

古文：猛寻卒于广州，文帝闻而痛之，遣使吊祭，赠上开府仪同三司，封归仁县公。
现代文：王猛不久死在广州，文帝听到消息非常痛心，派遣使者前往吊祭，追赠开府仪同三司，封为归仁县公。
English: Wang Meng soon died in Guangzhou. Emperor Wen was very sad to hear the news. He sent an envoy to the hanging ceremony, posthumously presented him with the Kaifu ceremony and the three offices, and made him the governor of Guiren County.

古文：命其子缮袭，仍授普州刺史。
现代文：让他的儿子王缮承袭爵位，仍然授给他普州刺史。
English: Let his son Wang Shu inherit the title of nobility, still awarded him the Puzhou sashimi.

古文：仁寿元年，缮弟续表陈猛志，求葬关中，诏许之。
现代文：仁寿元年，王缮的弟弟王续上表陈述王猛的志向，请求埋葬在关中，诏令批准。
English: In the first year of his life, Wang Zhen's younger brother Wang Zheng made a written statement about Wang Meng's aspirations and requested to be buried in Guanzhong, which was approved by imperial decree.

古文：仍赠使持节、大将军、宋州刺史、三州诸军事，諡曰成。
现代文：又赠为使持节、大将军、宋州刺史、三州诸军事，谥号为成。
English: He was also given the posthumous names of Ji Ji Jie, Da Zhen, Song Zhou Zhishi, and San Zhou Zhu Military.

