古文：汉时，会稽句章人至东野还，暮，不及至家，见路旁小屋燃火，因投宿止。
现代文：在汉朝时，会稽郡句章县有一个人到东野去了回来，天快要黑了，还没有走到家。这时他看见路边一所小屋里点着灯火，因此就进去借宿休息。
English: During the Han Dynasty, there was a man from Juchang County who went to Higashino and came back. It was getting dark, and he hadn't reached home yet. At that time, he saw a light on in a roadside hut, so he went inside to rest.

古文：有一少女，不欲与丈人共宿，呼邻人家女自伴，夜共弹空篌。
现代文：在小屋里有一个少女，不想与丈夫同床睡觉，就招呼来一个邻居家的女子作伴，在夜里共同弹奏箜篌。
English: In the hut there is a girl who does not want to sleep in the same bed with her husband, so she invites a woman from the neighbourhood to be her companion and they play gongs together at night.

古文：问其姓名，女不答，弹弦而歌曰： 连绵葛上藤，一绥复一縆。
现代文：借宿的这个人问那个少女姓甚名谁，那个少女不作回答，而是一边弹奏箜篌一边歌唱道： 连绵不断向上爬的葛草藤，好像马车上挽手上车的一根根细粗绳。
English: When the lodger asked the maiden what her name was, she did not answer, but sang while playing the gong: "The ever-climbing kudzu vine is like a thick rope in a carriage.

古文：欲知我姓名，姓陈名阿登。 明至东郭外，有卖食母在肆中，此人寄坐，因说昨所见。
现代文：想要知道我的姓和名，姓陈名字叫阿登。 天亮之后这个人到了东城郭外，在集市上看见一个卖食物的老太婆，这个人就在老太婆面前小坐，因此而说起昨天夜里所碰见的事。
English: He wanted to know my surname and first name, his surname was Chen and his first name was Arden. After dawn, the man arrived outside the eastern city wall and saw an old woman selling food at the market. The man sat down in front of the old woman and thus spoke about what he had encountered the previous night.

古文：乃回向女家，都不见昨处，但有一冢尔。
现代文：老太婆听到 阿登 这个名字，惊叫道： 这是我的女儿，不久前已经死去，安葬在城外。 
English: When the old woman heard the name Aden, she exclaimed: This is my daughter, who died not long ago and is buried outside the city.

古文：庐江筝笛浦，浦有大舶，覆在水中，云是曹公舶船。
现代文：汉代庐江郡有个地方叫筝笛浦，浦中有艘大船，翻沉在水中，据说这是曹操所乘坐的船。
English: In the Han Dynasty, there was a place in Lijiang County called Zhengfei Pu. There was a large ship in the port that capsized in the water. It is said that this was the ship that Cao Cao rode in.

古文：尝有渔人，夜宿其旁，以船系之，但闻筝笛弦节之声及香气氤氲。渔人又梦人驱遣云： 勿近官船。 此人惊觉，即移船去。
现代文：曾经有一个打鱼人，把自己的渔船停靠在这艘大船旁夜宿，并把自己的渔船拴在大船上，就听见大船里传来筝和笛演奏的声音，以及嗅到浓郁的香气。打鱼人又梦见大船上有人来驱赶他： 不许靠近官船！ 打鱼人惊醒过来，急忙把自己的渔船开走。
English: Once upon a time, a fisherman moored his fishing boat next to this big ship for the night, and tied his fishing boat to the big ship. He heard the sound of kite and flute playing coming from the big ship, and smelled the rich aroma. The fisherman also dreamed of someone on the big ship driving him away: Don't go near the official ship! The fisherman woke up and hurriedly drove his fishing boat away.

古文：相传云曹公载数妓，船覆于此，今犹存焉。
现代文：所以人们都传说曹操装运着几名歌妓舞女的船翻沉在这里，至今这艘沉船还在水里。
English: That's why people say that Cao Cao's ship, which was carrying several courtesans, capsized and sank here. To this day, the sunken ship is still in the water.

古文：卢充猎，见獐便射，中之。
现代文：卢充外出打猎，看见一头獐鹿，拉弓就射，射中了獐鹿。
English: Lu Chong went out hunting, saw an elk, drew his bow and shot, hitting the elk.

古文：随逐，不觉远。忽见一里门如府舍，问铃下，铃下对曰： 崔少府府也。 进见少府，少府语充曰： 尊府君为索小女婚，故相迎耳。 三日婚毕，以车送充至家。
现代文：随后他就追赶，不知道追了多远，忽然看到一座高大的门，像是富豪的房舍。卢充问守门的仆人，守门的仆人对他说： 这是崔少府的府邸。 卢充进门去拜见崔少府，崔少府对卢充说： 府君您向我家小女求婚，所以我来迎接您。 三天里，卢充与崔家小女完婚后，崔少府用车把卢充送回了家。
English: Then he ran after him. He didn't know how far he had run. Suddenly, he saw a tall gate, like a rich man's house. Luchun asked the servant who was guarding the gate. The servant who was guarding the gate said to him, "This is the residence of Cui Shao-fu." Luchun entered the gate to meet Cui Shao-fu. Cui Shao-fu said to Luchun, "Fujun, you have proposed marriage to my daughter, so I have come to meet you." Three days later, after Luchun married Cui Shao-fu's daughter, Cui Shao-fu sent Luchun

古文：母问之，具以状对。
现代文：卢充的母亲问起这事，卢充如实对母亲作了禀报。
English: When Luchun's mother asked about this, Luchun truthfully lied to her mother.

古文：既与崔别后，四年之三月三日，充临水戏。遥见水边有犊车，乃往开车户。
现代文：卢充与崔家小女分别四年后的三月三日，到河边去游玩，远远看见河边有一辆牛犊车。
English: On March 3rd, four years after the separation of Lu Chong and the little girl from the Cui family, they went to the river to play and saw a bullock cart in the distance.

古文：见崔女与三岁儿共载，情意如初。
现代文：卢充就走上前去打开车门，看见崔家小女与三岁的儿子一起坐在车上。
English: Lu Chong walked forward to open the car door and saw the little daughter of the Cui family sitting in the car with her three-year-old son.

古文：抱儿还充，水与金鋺而别。
现代文：卢充与崔家小女的情意如初，崔家小女把儿子抱还给卢充，又赠送了一个金碗给卢充后离别而去。
English: The feelings between Lu Chun and the little daughter of the Cui family were the same as before. The little daughter of the Cui family hugged her son back to Lu Chun and gave a golden bowl to Lu Chun before leaving.

古文：荆州刺史殷仲堪，布衣时，在丹徒，忽梦见一人，自说己 是上虞人，死亡，浮丧飘流江中，明日当至。君有济物之仁，岂能见移？
现代文：晋朝荆州刺史殷仲堪在还是老百姓的时候，有一次在丹徒县，忽然梦到了一个人。这个人说自己是上虞人，已经死亡了，棺材漂流在江水中，明天就要漂流到这里。 您有救助别人的仁爱之心，怎么能眼看着我在江水中漂流呢？
English: When he was still a commoner, once in Dantu County, he suddenly dreamed of a person. This person said that he was a Shangyu person, he had died, the coffin was drifting in the river, and it would drift here tomorrow. You have a benevolent heart to help others, how can you watch me drift in the river?

古文：著高燥处，则恩及枯骨矣。 殷明日与诸人共江上，看见一棺，逐水流下，飘飘至殷坐处。
现代文：如果您把我安葬在高处干燥的地方，那么您的恩情就铭刻在我的枯骨里。 殷仲堪第二天就与几个人一起来到江边察看，果然看到一口棺材，随着江水漂流下来，漂流到了殷仲堪所坐的地方。
English: If you bury me in a high and dry place, then your kindness will be engraved in my dead bones.Yin Zhongkang went to the river the next day with several people to inspect it, and indeed saw a coffin, which drifted down with the river water to the place where Yin Zhongkang was sitting.

古文：须臾，岸上有物来，赤如百斛龠，长二丈许，径来向船，逊便大呼： 奴载我船，不与我牵，不得痛手！方便载公甘罗，今欲击我。
现代文：殷仲堪叫人把棺材打捞上来，棺材题额上所写的与梦中所说的完全一样。殷仲堪立即把棺材移到高冈上安葬，用酒饭进行祭祀。
English: Yin Zhongkang ordered someone to salvage the coffin. The inscription on the coffin was exactly the same as that in the dream. Yin Zhongkang immediately moved the coffin to a high hill for burial and held a ritual with wine and rice.

古文：今日即打坏奴甘罗。 言讫，忽然便失，于是遂进。晋元熙中，上党冯述为相府吏，将假归虎牢。
现代文：这天夜里，殷仲堪又梦见这个人前来向他谢恩。西晋时期北汉元熙年间，上党郡人冯述做了宰相府的官吏，将要回到虎牢去休假。
English: That night, Yin Zhongkan also dreamed that this man came to thank him. During the Western Jin Dynasty and the Northern Han Dynasty of Yuanxi, Feng Su, a Shangdang County resident, became an official of the Prime Minister's Office and was going to return to the tiger prison to take a vacation.

古文：忽逢四人，各持绳及杖，来赴述。
现代文：途中忽然碰到四个人，他们手中各拿着绳子和棍棒，走到冯述面前来。
English: On the way, they suddenly came across four people, each holding a rope and a club in their hands, who walked up to Feng Shu.

古文：述策马避，马不肯进。
现代文：冯述催马避让，马却不肯前进。
English: Feng Shu urged the horse to give way, but the horse refused to move forward.

古文：四人各捉马一足，倏然便到河上。
现代文：这四个人各自捉住一只马腿，转瞬之间就到达了河边。
English: The four men each grabbed a leg of the horse and in no time reached the river's edge.

古文：问述： 欲渡否？ 述曰： 水深不测，既无舟楫，如何得渡？
现代文：他们问冯述： 是否想渡过河去？ 冯述说： 水不知道有多深，既然没有渡船，怎么能够渡得过去呢？
English: They asked Feng Shu: Do you want to cross the river? Feng Shu said: The water does not know how deep it is, since there is no ferry, how can you cross it?

古文：君正欲见杀尔。 四人云： 不相杀，当持君赴官。 遂复捉马脚涉河而北。述但闻波浪声，而不觉水。
现代文：你们正想着把我给杀了。 这四个人说： 我们不是要杀你，而是要把你护送到官府去。 于是又捉住马腿向北岸涉水而过，冯述只听到波浪的声音，而感觉不到有水。
English: You were thinking of killing me. The four men said, "We don't want to kill you, but we want to escort you to the government office." So they grabbed the horse's leg and waded to the north shore. Feng Shu only heard the sound of waves, but didn't feel any water.

古文：垂至岸，四人相谓曰： 此人不净，那得将去。 时述有弟丧服，深恐鬼离之，便当溺水死，乃鞭马作势，径得登岸。
现代文：快要到达岸边的时候，这四个人互相说道： 这个人不干净，哪里能够把他给带过河去呢？ 当时冯述因为弟弟死了而身上穿有丧服，深怕这四个鬼抛下自己离去，自己就会落水淹死，于是就扬鞭打马作出自己走的姿态，径直得以登上河岸。
English: When they were about to reach the shore, the four people said to each other, "This man is not clean, where can we take him across the river?" At that time, Feng Shu, who was wearing mourning clothes because his brother had died, was deeply afraid that if the four ghosts left him, he would drown in the water. So he whipped his horse and made a gesture of walking on his own, and he was able to go straight to the riverbank.

古文：述辞谢曰： 既蒙恩德，何敢复烦劳。 
现代文：冯述向这四个人告辞谢道： 既然已经承蒙了你们的恩德，怎么敢再麻烦劳驾你们！ 
English: Feng Shu said goodbye to these four people and thanked them: Since I have already received your kindness, how dare I trouble you again!

古文：安丰侯王戎，字浚冲，琅邪临沂人也。
现代文：安丰侯王戎，字溶冲，系琅邪郡临沂县人。
English: Anfeng Hou Wang Rong, also known as Rong Chong, is a native of Linyi County, Shiyan County.

古文：尝赴人家殡殓。主人治棺未竟，送者悉入厅事上。安丰作车中卧。
现代文：他曾经有一次到别人家里去参加殡礼，主人家治办殓棺的事还没有完成，送殡的人全都进入厅堂中侍奉主人去了，而安丰侯王戎却躺在自己的车里。
English: He once went to someone else's home to attend a funeral. The host family had not yet finished arranging the coffin. The funeral attendants all went into the hall to serve the host, while Anfeng Hou Wang Rong was lying in his car.

古文：忽见空中有一异物，如鸟。
现代文：他忽然间看到天空中有一个奇异的东西，像鸟一样，盯着细看它却变得很大了。
English: He suddenly saw a strange thing in the sky, like a bird, stared at it and it became huge.

古文：熟视，转大渐近，见一乘赤马车，一人在中，著帻，赤衣，手持一斧，至地下车，径入王车中。
现代文：那东西渐渐来到近前，看见是一辆红马车，有一个人坐在车中，头上戴着头巾，身上穿着红色的衣服，手上拿着一柄斧头，到达地面后那人走下车来，径直进入安丰侯王戎的车中，移动了几案后才得以容下身来。
English: The thing gradually came closer, and he saw a red carriage, and a man sitting in it, with a turban on his head, red clothes on his body, and an axe in his hand. When he reached the ground, the man got out of the car and went straight into the car of Anfeng Hou Wang Rong. After moving a few cases, he was able to accommodate himself.

古文：回几容之，谓王曰： 君神明清照，物无隐情。
现代文：那人对安丰侯王戎说： 你的眼神明亮清澈，所看到的东西都无法隐藏一点情况。
English: The man said to Anfeng Hou Wang Rong: Your eyes are bright and clear, and nothing you see can hide anything.

古文：亦有事，故来相从。
现代文：但也有事会发生，所以前来跟从你。
English: But something's going to happen, so I'm coming with you.

古文：然当为君一言：凡人家殡殓葬送，苟非至亲，不可急往，良不获已，可乘赤车，令髯奴御之，及乘白马，则可禳之。 因谓戎： 君当致位三公。 语良久。
现代文：然而我要为你敬一言：凡是别人家丧殓出殡送葬的事情，假如不是非常亲密的亲友，不可急切赶去。如果自己得不到好运，可以乘坐青牛，叫长有颊毛的仆人驾御它；或者可以乘坐白马，这样就可以消除灾难。 那人又对他说： 你做官会达到 三公 的地位。 
English: However, I have a word of advice for you: If you are not a very close relative or friend, you should not rush to attend funerals that are held in other people's homes. If you do not have good luck, you can ride on a young bull and have a servant with cheek hair drive it; or you can ride on a white horse, which will eliminate the disaster. The man also said to him: You will reach the status of the Three Kings as an official.

古文：主人内棺当殡，众客悉入，此鬼亦入。
现代文：他们谈了很久。主人家将死者殓棺完成就要出殡了，来送殡的所有客人全都进入了灵堂，这个鬼也进去了。
English: They talked for a long time. As soon as the owner's family had finished burying the coffin, the funeral was about to take place. All the guests who had come to the funeral had entered the chapel, and the ghost had also gone in.

古文：既入户，鬼便持斧行棺墙上。
现代文：进了门之后，这个鬼就手持斧头在棺材帮墙上行走。
English: After entering the door, the ghost walked on the coffin wall with an axe in hand.

古文：有一亲趋棺，欲与亡人诀。鬼便以斧正打其额，即倒地。左右扶出。
现代文：有一个死者亲属赴向棺材，想要与死者诀别，这个鬼就用斧头正打在那亲属的前额，那亲属立刻就倒在了地上，左右的人将他扶了出去。
English: One of the deceased's relatives went to the coffin, wanting to say goodbye to the deceased, and the ghost hit the relative in the forehead with an axe. The relative immediately fell to the ground, and people around him helped him out.

古文：鬼于棺上，视戎而笑。
现代文：这个鬼在棺材上，看着安丰侯王戎发笑。
English: This ghost is on the coffin, looking at Anfeng Hou Wang Rong and laughing.

古文：众悉见鬼持斧而出。
现代文：所有客人全都看见这个鬼手持斧头走出去了。
English: All the guests saw the ghost walk out with an axe in his hand.

古文：李子豫，少善医方，当代称其通灵。
现代文：南朝宋文帝元嘉十四年，广陵郡有个叫盛道儿的人死亡了，把自己的独生女托付给妻子的弟弟申翼之。
English: In the 14th year of the Southern Song Dynasty, Guangling County, a man named Sheng Dao'er died and entrusted his only daughter to his wife's brother, Shen Yingzhi.

古文：许永为豫州刺史，镇历阳。
现代文：在三年守丧期满脱掉丧服后，申翼之把盛道儿的独生女嫁给了北乡的严齐息。
English: After taking off the mourning clothes at the end of the three-year mourning period, Shen Yizhi married the only daughter of Shen Tao to Yan Qiqi of Hokiang.

古文：其弟得病，心腹疼痛十余年，殆死。
现代文：严齐息是个很贫寒的人家，给了申翼之丰厚的彩礼，才得以成婚。
English: Yan Qi Xiu was from a very poor family, but he was able to get married thanks to Shen Ying's generous bride price.

古文：忽一夜，闻屏风后有鬼谓腹中鬼曰： 何不速杀之。
现代文：盛道儿忽然在天空中愤怒地说道： 我在快要断气身亡的时候，把我全家的命运托付给了你，你怎么能昧着良心见利忘义，把我的女儿嫁给贫寒人家成婚呢！ 
English: Sheng Dao'er suddenly said angrily in the sky, "I entrusted the fate of my entire family to you when I was about to die. How could you, with a clear conscience, marry my daughter to a poor man?"

古文：不然，李子豫当从此过。
现代文：申翼之听了就感到非常惶恐和后悔。
English: After listening to Shen Yingzhi, he felt very frightened and regretful.

古文：以赤丸打汝，汝其死矣。 腹中鬼对曰： 吾不畏之。 及旦，许永遂使人候子豫，果来。
现代文：有一个粗野的小孩子，在原野中放牛，有好几个小伙伴同行。他看见一个鬼依靠草丛隐藏在其间，四处设置捕鸟的网，想用这网来捉拿人。
English: There was once a rough little boy who was tending his cows in the meadow, and he had several companions with him. He saw a ghost who was hiding among them, leaning on the grass, and who was trying to catch people with his bird-catching net, which he had set up all around.

古文：百姓皆看之。会稽朱弼为国郎中令，营立第舍，未成而卒。
现代文：后面的网还没有设置完成，粗野小孩子就悄悄取下前面设置的网，仍然设置成捕鸟的网，却把这个鬼给绑住捉到了。会稽郡有个叫朱弼的人当了王国的郎中令，负责营造修建官舍府第，工程还没有完成就死去了。
English: The back net had not yet been set up, so the rough child quietly took down the front net, which was still set up as a bird-catching net, but he tied up and caught the ghost. There was a man in Hui County named Zhu Xi, who was the second-in-command of the kingdom, responsible for building and constructing the official residence, but he died before the project was completed.

古文：同郡谢子木代其事，以弼死亡，乃簿书多张功赏，长百余万，以其赃诬弼。而实自入。
现代文：同郡一个叫谢子木的人接替他的工作，他以为朱弼已经死亡了，就在账簿上多虚报工程费用，虚报了大约百万之多，用虚报的赃款来诬陷朱弼，而实际上私自装进了自己的腰包。
English: A man named Xie Zi Mu from the same county took over his work. He thought that Zhu Xiamen had died, so he overstated the project costs in the account books, overstated by about one million. He used the falsely reported stolen money to frame Zhu Xiamen, but in fact he put it into his own pocket.

古文：子木夜寝，忽闻有人道弼姓字者。
现代文：谢子木在有天夜里睡觉的时候，忽然听到有人在叫朱弼的姓名。
English: When Xie Ziki was sleeping one night, he suddenly heard someone calling Zhu Xi's name.

古文：鬼怒，故病汝儿尔。得以酒饭遗鬼，即差。 母如言而愈。
现代文：不一会儿朱弼就来到谢子木睡觉的屋前，对他说： 你以为我这把枯骨腐肉就一定能够被陷害，我一定会在某天夜里拿出我的账簿来核实对证。 刚说完，朱弼就不见了。
English: In a short time, Zhu Xi came to the front of the house where Xie Zi Mu was sleeping, and said to him: "You think that I, this dead meat, can definitely be framed, I will definitely take out my account book one night to verify the verification.

古文：顺阳范启，母丧当葬。
现代文：晋朝顺阳郡人范启，他的后母去世要安葬。
English: Fan Qi, a native of Shunyang County in the Jin Dynasty, was to be buried after the death of his stepmother.

古文：前母墓在顺阳，往视之，既至而坟垅杂沓，难可识别，不知何所。
现代文：他的亲生母亲的坟墓在顺阳，就前去察看。到了那里但见许多坟墓混杂，很难辨别，不知道哪个是自己亲生母亲的坟墓。
English: His biological mother's grave was in Shunyang, so he went to inspect it. When he got there, he found many graves mixed together, and it was difficult to distinguish which one was his biological mother's grave.

古文：袁彦仁时为豫州，往看之，因云： 闻有一人见鬼。 范即如言，令物色觅之。
现代文：当时袁彦伯在豫州谢尚府中做参军，前去帮忙察看，因此说道： 我听说有一个人能够看见鬼。 范启立即依照袁彦伯所说的话，叫人去查访寻找这人。
English: At that time, Yuan Yanbo was serving in the army in Xie Shangfu, Yuzhou, and went to help investigate, so he said: I heard that there was a person who could see ghosts. Fan Qi immediately followed Yuan Yanbo's words and asked people to investigate and find this person.

古文：比至，云： 墓中一人衣服颜状如此。 即开墓，棺物皆烂，冡中灰壤深尺余。意甚疑之。
现代文：等这人来到，这人就说： 这坟墓中的一个人穿着如此这般的衣服长着如此这般的容貌。 于是立即掘开坟墓，棺材和随葬物品都烂掉了，坟墓中的灰土已有一尺多厚，范启心中非常怀疑这是不是自己母亲的坟墓。
English: When the man arrived, the man said, "There is a person in this grave who wears such and such clothes and has such and such a face," so he immediately dug up the grave, the coffin and the grave goods were all rotten, the gray soil in the grave was already more than a foot thick, and Fan Qi was very suspicious in his heart that this was not his mother's grave.

古文：试令人以足拨灰中土，冀得旧物，果得一砖，铭云 范坚之妻 。然后信之。
现代文：他叫人试着用脚刨开灰中的泥土，希望能找到随葬的旧物品，果然就找到了一块砖，上面铭刻的字是 范坚之妻 ，然后范启才确信了。
English: He asked someone to try to scrape the soil in the ashes with their feet, hoping to find old items buried with them, and sure enough, they found a brick with the words "Fan Jian's wife" inscribed on it, and only then did Fan Qi become convinced.

古文：沙门竺法师，会稽人也，与北中郎王坦之周旋甚厚。
现代文：出家人竺法师，是会稽郡的人，与北中郎王坦之的交往非常深厚。
English: The monk, Zou Mage, was from Hui County, and he had a very close relationship with the Northern Middle Lord, Wang Tanrou.

古文：每共论死生罪福报应之事茫昧难明，因便共要，若有先死者，当相报。
现代文：他们每每在一起谈论生死罪福报应的事，都说不清楚道不明白，因此两人就共同约定：如果哪一个人先死亡，就应当到另一个人那里去报告。
English: Whenever they talked together about life and death, crime, blessing and retribution, they did not understand each other, so the two agreed together: if one died first, he should go to the other person to report.

古文：语后经年，王于庙中忽见法师来，日： 贫道以某月日命故，罪福皆不虚，应若影响。
现代文：过了一年之后，王坦之忽然在寺庙中看见竺法师走来说： 贫道我已经在某月某天死亡，罪孽与福缘都不是虚假的，报应就像影子随行音响随声一样。
English: A year later, Wang Tanzhi suddenly saw Zou Mage walking in the temple and said: "I have died on a certain day of a certain month. Sins and good fortune are not false. Retribution is like a shadow following the sound of a bell.

古文：檀越惟当勤修道德，以升跻神明耳。
现代文：檀越您只有勤奋苦修道德，才能升天跻身于神明的行列。
English: After all, only by diligently practicing morality can you ascend to the ranks of the gods.

古文：先与君要，先死者相报，故来相语。 言讫，忽然不见。
现代文：以前和您有过约定，我们两人谁先死亡的要向还没有死亡的报告，所以我特地来告诉您。 竺法师说完，忽然就不见了。
English: I had an agreement with you in the past that whichever of us died first would report to the one who was still alive, so I specifically came to tell you.

古文：坦之寻之亦卒。
现代文：王坦之不久之后也死去了。
English: Wang Tanzhi also died soon after.

古文：乐安刘池苟，家在夏口，忽有一鬼来住刘家。
现代文：晋朝乐安郡人刘池苟家住夏口，忽然有一个鬼来到刘家住下。
English: Liu Chigou, a resident of Le'an County in the Jin Dynasty, lived in Xiakou. Suddenly, a ghost came to live in Liu's house.

古文：初因暗彷佛见形如人，著白布裤。
现代文：最初的时候因为屋里黑暗不明只是仿佛看见那鬼的形状像人的模样，穿着白色的布裤。
English: At first, because the darkness in the room was unclear, it was only as if he saw the ghost in the shape of a man, wearing white trousers.

古文：自尔后，数日一来，不复隐形，便不去。
现代文：从此之后，那鬼几天来刘家一次；再后来那鬼不再隐藏自己的行迹，就再也不离开了。
English: After that, the ghost came to Liu's house once every few days. Later, the ghost stopped hiding its whereabouts and never left.

古文：喜偷食，不以为患，然且难之。初不敢呵骂。
现代文：那鬼喜欢偷东西吃，刘池苟虽然不以为祸患，但也很难以对付，最初的时候不敢责骂那鬼。
English: The ghost likes to steal things to eat. Although Liu Chigou did not think it was a scourge, it was difficult to deal with. At first, he did not dare to scold the ghost.

古文：吉翼子者，强梁不信鬼，至刘家，谓主人曰： 卿家鬼何在？
现代文：有个叫吉翼子的人，非常强悍不信鬼神。他来到刘家，对主人说道： 你家那个鬼在哪里？
English: There was a man named Ji Ying Zi, who was very strong and did not believe in ghosts and gods. He came to Liu's house and said to his master: Where is the ghost in your house?

古文：唤来，今为卿骂之。 即闻屋梁作声。
现代文：把它叫来，我今天为你痛骂它一顿。 随即就听见屋梁上面有响动的声音。
English: Call it and I'll scold it for you today, and then you'll hear a crashing sound above the rafters.

古文：时大有客，共仰视，便纷纭掷一物下，正著翼子面，视之，乃主人家妇女亵衣，恶犹著焉。
现代文：当时刘家有很多客人，大家都抬头观望。就在纷乱之中从屋梁上掉下一件东西来，恰好砸在吉翼子的脸上，大家一看，那件东西原来是主人家女人贴身穿的脏衣物，比一般的赃物还要脏。
English: At that time, there were many guests at Liu's house, and everyone looked up to watch. In the midst of the chaos, something fell from the roof beam and landed right on Ji Yingzi's face. At a glance, that thing turned out to be the dirty clothes worn by the woman of the owner's family, dirtier than ordinary stolen goods.

古文：众共大笑为乐。吉大惭，洗面而去。
现代文：大家一起哄然大笑作为取乐，吉翼子羞愧无比，洗了脸就离开了。
English: Everyone laughed together as a form of entertainment, and Yoshitsuko was so ashamed that she washed her face and left.

古文：有人语刘： 此鬼偷食，乃食尽，必有形之物，可以毒药中之。 刘即于他家煮冶葛，取二升汁，密赍还家。
现代文：有人给刘池苟出主意： 这鬼偷东西吃，你就把食物全部用完，这鬼必定变有形的东西而现身，你就可以用毒药让它中毒。 刘池苟立即到别人家里去熬煮野葛藤，拿了两升野葛藤熬的汁，秘密地带回了自己的家。
English: Someone suggested to Liu Chiguo: If the ghost steals something to eat, you will run out of food; if the ghost appears in a tangible form, you can use poison to poison it. Liu Chiguo immediately went to someone's home to boil wild ginger, took two liters of wild ginger juice, and secretly took it back to his home.

古文：向夜，举家作粥糜，食余一瓯，因泻葛汁著中，置于几上，以盆覆之。
现代文：快到天黑的时候，全家人熬粥吃，吃后留下一盆，就把葛藤汁倒进粥里，放在矮桌上，用一个盆子把它盖着。
English: When it was almost dark, the whole family would boil porridge and eat it. After eating, they would leave a basin, pour kudzu juice into the porridge, put it on a low table, and cover it with a basin.

古文：人定后，闻鬼从外来，发盆啖糜。
现代文：刘家人睡觉之后，就听见那鬼从外面进来，揭开盆子就喝起粥来。
English: After the Liu family went to bed, they heard the ghost come in from outside. They opened the basin and drank the porridge.

古文：既讫，便掷破瓯走去。
现代文：吃完后，那鬼就摔破盆子走了。
English: After eating, the ghost broke the basin and left.

古文：须臾间，在屋头吐，嗔怒非常，便棒打窗户。
现代文：不一会儿那鬼就在房顶上呕吐，非常恼怒，就用木棒砸门窗。
English: Soon after, the ghost vomited on the roof of the house and, very angry, smashed the doors and windows with a wooden stick.

古文：刘先已防备，与斗。亦不敢入。
现代文：刘池苟早已经有所防备，就与那鬼搏斗，那鬼也不敢进屋来。
English: Liu Chiguo had already prepared, so he fought with the ghost, and the ghost did not dare to enter the house.

古文：至四更，然后遂绝。
现代文：到了夜里四更的时候，那鬼然后就气绝消失了。
English: When it was four o'clock in the morning, the ghost died and disappeared.

