古文：知伯帅赵、韩、魏而伐范中行氏，灭之。
现代文：智伯率领赵国、韩国、魏国的军队进攻范氏、申行氏，灭亡了他们。
English: Zhi Bo led the armies of Zhao, Korea, and Wei to attack the Fan and Sheng Xing clans and destroyed them.

古文：休数年，使人请地于韩。
现代文：休息了几年，派人向韩国索取土地。
English: After a few years of rest, they sent someone to South Korea to ask for land.

古文：韩康子欲勿与，段规谏曰： 不可。
现代文：韩康子想要不给他，段规劝谏说： 不可以。
English: Han Yasuko wanted to refuse to give it to him, but Duan Ji persuaded her and said, "No, you can't."

古文：夫知伯之为人也，好利而鸷复，来请地不与，必加兵于韩矣。
现代文：智伯的为人，贪图货利而又凶狠暴庚，他派人来索取土地不给，一定对我们韩国派兵侵凌。
English: Zhibo was greedy for profit and violent. He sent people to demand land but refused to give it. He must have sent troops to invade South Korea.

古文：君其与之。
现代文：君王您还是给他。
English: Your Majesty, give it to him.

古文：与之彼狃，又将请地于他国，他国不听，必乡之以兵；然则韩可以免于患难，而待事之变。 康子曰： 善。 
现代文：给了他，他就会舜以为常，又将会向其它国家索取土地，其它国不听从，智伯一定用兵侵略它；这样一来，那么韩国可以免除患难，坐待事情的发展变化。 韩康子说： 好。 
English: If he gave it to him, he would think it was normal, and he would ask for land from other countries. If other countries did not listen, Zhibo would certainly invade it with soldiers. In this way, South Korea could avoid suffering and wait for the development of things. Han Kangzi said: Good.

古文：使使者致万家之邑一于知伯。
现代文：派使者送一个万家城邑给智伯。
English: He sent an envoy to send a million cities to Zhibo.

古文：知伯说，又使人请地于魏，魏宣子欲勿与。
现代文：智伯很高兴，又派人向魏国索取土地，魏宣子想要不给他。
English: Zhibo was very happy and sent someone to Wei to ask for land, but Wei Xuan Zi refused to give it to him.

古文：赵葭谏曰： 彼请地于韩，韩与之。
现代文：赵葭劝谏说： 他向韩国索取土地，韩国给了他。
English: He asked for land from South Korea, and South Korea gave it to him.

古文：请地于魏，魏弗与，则是魏内自强，而外怒知伯也。
现代文：他向魏国索取土地，魏国不给，那么这是魏国内中自以为强盛，而对外却激怒了智伯。
English: He asked for land from the state of Wei, but the state of Wei did not give it to him, so this was a case of the state of Wei considering itself to be powerful, but it infuriated Zhibo.

古文：然则其错兵于魏必矣!不如与之。 宣子曰： 诺。 
现代文：这样一来，那么智伯一定要对魏国用兵了不如给他土地。 魏宣子说： 好。 
English: In this way, if Zhibo must use soldiers against Wei, it is better to give him land. Wei Xuan Zi said: Good.

古文：因使人致万家之邑一于知伯。
现代文：因此派人送一个万家的城邑给智伯。
English: Therefore, they sent someone to send a city of ten thousand families to Zhibo.

古文：知伯说，又使人之赵，请蔡、皋狼之地，赵襄子弗与。
现代文：智伯非常高兴，又派人到赵国去，索取蔺城、皋狼两个地方，赵襄子不给他。
English: Zhibo was very happy, and sent someone to Zhao Province to ask for the two places of Shicheng and Jialou, but Zhao Xiangzi refused to give it to him.

古文：知伯因阴结韩、魏，将以伐赵。
现代文：智伯困此暗中勾结韩国、魏国，准备领兵进攻赵国。
English: Therefore, Zhibo secretly colluded with Korea and Wei and prepared to lead troops to attack Zhao.

古文：赵襄子召张孟谈而告之曰： 夫知伯之为人，阳亲而阴疏，三使韩、魏，而寡人弗与焉，其移兵寡人必矣。
现代文：赵襄子召来张孟谈告诉他说： 那个智伯的为人，表面上跟你亲近内心里却很疏远，他三次派人到韩、魏去，可是我都没有参加，他要移兵攻打我是一定的了。
English: Zhao Xiangzi called Zhang Meng to talk to him and told him: That wise man is a person who is close to you on the surface but very distant in his heart. He sent people to Korea and Wei three times, but I did not participate. He will definitely move troops to attack me.

古文：今吾安居而可? 
现代文：现在我驻扎在什么地方防御他才好？ 
English: Now where should I be stationed to defend against him?

古文：张孟谈曰： 夫董阏安于，简主之才臣也，世治晋阳，而尹泽循之，其余政教犹存，君其定居晋阳。 
现代文：张盂谈说： 董安于是先主筒子的能干之臣，一辈子治理晋阳，而且尹锋也遵循他治理的方法，他们政治教化的遗绩还存在，您还是定居在晋阳。 赵襄子说； 好。 
English: Zhang Xuan said, "Dong An was the able vassal of the previous lord, Tsutsuji, and ruled Jinyang for his entire life, and Yin Feng also followed his method of governance. Their legacy of political education still exists, and you still settled in Jinyang." Zhao Xiangzi said, "Good."

古文：君曰： 诺。 乃使延陵生将车骑先之晋阳，君因从之。
现代文：于是就派延陵生率领车骑先到晋阳，赵襄子随后也跟了去。
English: So he sent Yanling Sheng to ride to Jinyang first, with Zhao Xiangzi following.

古文：至，行城郭，案府库，视仓廪，召张孟谈曰： 吾城郭之完，府库足用，仓廪实矣，无矢奈何? 
现代文：到晋阳以后，巡视城郭，察看府库：检查粮仓，召见张孟谈说： 我看城郭已经很完善，府库的物资足够使用，粮仓已经装满，可是没有箭怎么办？ 
English: After arriving in Jinyang, he inspected the city walls, inspected the government storehouse, inspected the granary, and summoned Zhang Meng to say: I think the city walls are already perfect, the materials in the government storehouse are sufficient for use, the granary is already full, but what if there are no arrows?

古文：张孟谈曰： 臣闻董子之治晋阳也，公宫之垣，皆以狄蒿苫楚廧之，其高至丈余，君发而用之。 
现代文：张孟谈说：我听说董子治理晋阳的时绥，凡是公寓的墙壁，都是用获蒿槽楚筑的，墙壁的高度达一丈多，您可以打开使用这些东西。 
English: Zhang Meng said: I heard that when Dong Zi governed Jinyang, all the walls of the apartment were built with carved grooves. The height of the walls was much higher. You can open and use these things.

古文：于是发而试之，其坚则箘簬之劲不能过也。
现代文：于是打开一试，它们的坚硬程度就是美竹也不能超过。
English: So I opened them up and tried them out. Their hardness cannot be surpassed by that of bamboo shoots.

古文：君曰： 足矣，吾铜少若何？ 
现代文：赵襄子说： 足够了，但是我们缺少铜怎么办？ 
English: Zhao Xiangzi said: Enough, but what if we lack copper?

古文：张孟谈曰： 臣闻董子之治晋阳也，公宫之室，皆以炼铜为柱质，请发而用之，则有余铜矣。 
现代文：张孟谈说： 我听说董子治理晋阳的时候，凡是公宫的室中，都是用冶炼的铜傲柱质的，请您打开使用它，那么就有剩余的铜了。 
English: Zhang Meng said: I heard that when Dong Zi governed Jinyang, all the rooms of the public palace were made of smelted copper. Please open it and use it, then there will be surplus copper.

古文：君曰： 善。 
现代文：赵襄子说： 好。 
English: As a result, the construction of the city was stopped.

古文：号令以定，备守以具。
现代文：号令已经定好，防御的物资已经完全具备。
English: The signal has been given, and the means of defence are in place.

古文：三国之兵乘晋阳城，遂战。
现代文：三国的军队登晋阳城，双方就开始交战。
English: The armies of the three countries entered Jinyang City, and the two sides began to fight.

古文：三月不能拔，因舒军而围之，决晋水而灌之。
现代文：三个月没能攻克，因此展开军队包围了它，决开晋水堤岸丙灌晋阳。
English: For three months, they were unable to conquer it, so they surrounded it with troops and broke through the Jin water embankment to flood Jinyang.

古文：围晋阳三年，城中巢居而处，悬釜而炊，财食将尽，士卒病羸。
现代文：包围晋阳三年，城中的人在高处搭了巢住着，悬挂着锅做饭，财物食品将要用光，土兵有病身体瘦弱。
English: After three years of encircling Jinyang, the people in the city have built a nest on a high place to live, hanging pots to cook, property and food will run out, and the soldiers are sick and thin.

古文：襄子谓张孟谈曰： 粮食匮，城力尽，士大夫病，吾不能守矣。
现代文：赵襄子对张孟谈说： 粮食缺乏，财力将尽，士大夫生病，我不能坚守了。
English: Zhao Xiangzi said to Zhang Meng: "There is a shortage of food, financial resources are running out, the shidafu is ill, I can no longer hold fast.

古文：欲以城下，何如? 
现代文：想要率领缄中的人马投降，怎么样？ 
English: If you want to lead the people in the cocoon to surrender, how about it?

古文：张孟谈曰： 臣闻之，亡不能存，危不能安，则无为贵知士也。
现代文：张盂谈说： 臣下听说这样的话，国家灭亡不能使它复存，国家危险不能使它安定：那么就不用看重智士了。
English: Zhang Xuan said: My subjects have heard that the destruction of a country cannot bring it back to life, and the danger of a country cannot make it stable. Then there is no need to pay attention to wise men.

古文：君释此计，勿复言也。
现代文：请您放弃这个计划，不要再说了。
English: Please abandon this plan and stop talking about it.

古文：臣请见韩、魏之君。 
现代文：隐下请求进觅韩国、韩国之君。 
English: I implore you to go to South Korea, Mr. Korea.

古文：襄子曰： 诺。 
现代文：赵襄子说： 好。 
English: Zhao Xiangzi said: Good.

古文：张孟谈于是阴见韩、魏之君曰： 臣闻唇亡则齿寒，今知伯帅二国之君伐赵，赵将亡矣，亡则二君为之次矣。 
现代文：张孟谈于是暗中进见韩、魏之君说， 臣下听说嘴唇没有了，那么牙齿就要受寒，观在智伯率领二囤之君进攻赵国，赵国将要灭亡了，赵国灭亡那么二君也要依次跟着灭亡。 
English: Zhang Meng then secretly went to see Han and Wei Zhijun and said, "Our vassals have heard that if the lips are gone, then the teeth will suffer from the cold. Seeing that Zhi Bo led the two princes to attack Zhao, Zhao will perish, and if Zhao perishes, then the two princes will also perish in turn."

古文：二君曰： 我知其然。
现代文：两位围君说： 我们知道是这样的。
English: The two Wai Jun said: We know that this is the case.

古文：夫知伯为人也，麁中而少亲，我谋未遂而知，则其祸必至，为之奈何? 
现代文：那智伯的为人，内心严厉而很少亲近别人，我们的计谋没有成功而被他知道，那么大祸一定来到，对这件事怎么办？ 
English: What shall we do with the man Zhi Bo, who is hard-hearted and seldom close to others, and who knows that if our stratagem does not succeed, then a great calamity is sure to come?

古文：张孟谈曰： 谋出二君之口，入臣之耳，人莫之知也。 
现代文：张孟谈说： 计谋从两位国君的曰里说出，进入遂下的耳朵，没有什么人知道。 
English: Zhang Meng said: "The plot was told from the words of the two sovereigns, and no one knows how it got into Sui's ears.

古文：二君即与张孟谈阴约三军，与之期日，夜，遣入晋阳。
现代文：二君就和张盂谈私下约定三军的行动，决定日期，夜晚，便把他送回晋阳。
English: The two princes talked with Zhang Ye and privately agreed on the actions of the three armies, decided on the date and the night, and then sent him back to Jinyang.

古文：张孟谈以报襄子，襄子再拜之。
现代文：张盂谈把情况报告给赵襄子，赵襄子再次拜谢了他。
English: Zhang Yu talked about reporting the situation to Zhao Xiangzi, and Zhao Xiangzi thanked him again.

古文：张孟谈因朝知伯而出，遇知过辕门之外。
现代文：张孟谈为了不使智伯疑心朝见出来，在辕门外遇见了智过。
English: Zhang Meng said that in order not to make Zhibo suspicious, he met Zhibo outside the gate.

古文：知过入见知伯曰： 二主殆将有变。 
现代文：智过进去见智伯说： 韩魏之君恐怕要发动兵变。 智伯说： 为什么？ 
English: Zhi walked in and said to Zhi Bo, "I'm afraid Han Wei Zi Jun is going to start a mutiny." Zhi Bo said, "Why?

古文：君曰： 何如? 对曰： 臣遇张孟谈于辕门之外，其志矜，其行高。 
现代文：智过回答说： 臣下在辕门之外遇到张孟谈，看见他神情很傲慢，走路脚拾得很高。 
English: Zhiguo replied: "A vassal met Zhang Mengyan outside the gate and saw that he was very arrogant and walked with his feet raised very high.

古文：知伯曰： 不然。
现代文：智伯说： 不会这样的。
English: Zhibo said, "It won't be like that.

古文：吾与二主约谨矣，破赵三分其地，寡人所亲之，必不欺也。
现代文：我和韩魏之君已经订立盟约了，破赵之后三家平分它的土地，这是我亲口说的，他们一定不会欺骗我。
English: Han Weizhong and I have already made a covenant. After defeating Zhao, the three families will divide its land equally. This is what I said myself. They will not deceive me.

古文：子释之，勿出于口。 
现代文：请您放弃不应有的想法，这种话不要从您嘴里说出来。 
English: Please give up your unwarranted thoughts, and don't utter such words.

古文：知过出见二主，入说知伯曰： 二主色动而意变，必背君，不如令杀之。 
现代文：智过出来拜见了韩魏之君，又进去游说智伯说： 二君神色两样意志改变，一定会背叛您，不如观在杀了他们。 
English: Zhi came out to visit Han Weizhi, and went in again to lobby Zhi Bo, saying: "The two princes look like they've changed their minds and will definitely betray you. It's better to watch them being killed."

古文：知伯曰： 兵箸晋阳三年矣，旦暮当拔之而飨其利，乃有他心?
现代文：智伯说： 军队包围晋阳三年了，早晚便可占领而享受它的利益，却在这时有了别的心思？
English: Zhibo said: The army has been encircling Jinyang for three years, and sooner or later they can occupy it and enjoy its benefits, but at this time they have other thoughts?

古文：不可，子慎勿复言。 
现代文：这是不可能的，您千万不要再说什么了。 
English: That's impossible. You mustn't say anything more.

古文：知过曰： 不杀则遂亲之。 
现代文：智过说： 不杀那么就要亲近他们。 
English: Zhi Ke said: If you don't kill them, then you should get close to them.

古文：知伯曰： 亲之奈何? 
现代文：智镳说： 怎么样亲近他们？ 
English: Zhisheng said: How about getting close to them?

古文：知过曰： 魏宣子之谋臣曰赵葭，康子之谋臣曰段规，是皆能移其君之计。
现代文：智过说： 魏宣子的谋臣叫赵葭，韩康子钓谋臣叫段规，这都是能改变他们君主计策的人。
English: Zhi Guo said: Wei Xuan Zi's adviser is called Zhao Jun, Han Kang Zi's adviser is called Duan Gui, these are all people who can change their monarch's strategy.

古文：君其与二君约，破赵则封二子者各万家之县一，如是则二主之心可不变，而君得其所欲矣。 
现代文：您还是跟这两位约定，攻破赵国各封给二位一个万家的县，如果这样韩魏之君的心意就会不改变，而您也可以得到自己所想要的土地了。 
English: You still agreed with the two of them to break through Zhao Guofeng and give the two of them a million counties. If this happens, Han Weizhong's mind will not change, and you can get the land you want.

古文：知伯曰： 破赵而三分其地，又封二子者各万之县一，则吾所得者少，不可。 
现代文：智伯脱： 攻破越国三家平分它的土地，可是又封给他们二位各一个万家的县，那么、我们所得到的土地就少了，不能这样做。 
English: Zhibert: If we break through the three families of Yue Guo and divide its land equally, but then give them each a county of 10,000 families, then we will get less land and cannot do this.

古文：知过见君之不用也，言之不听，出，更其姓为辅氏，遂去不见。
现代文：智过见君王不能用他约计谍，不听他的话，出来以后，改他的姓为辅氏，于是就自动离开不去见智伯了。
English: After Zhi Guo saw that the king could not use him as a spy, and did not listen to his words, he changed his surname to Fu Zhi, so he voluntarily left to avoid seeing Zhi Bo.

古文：张孟谈闻之，入见襄子曰： 臣遇知过于辕门之外，其视有疑臣之心，入见知伯，出更其姓。
现代文：张孟谈听到这件事，进去拜见赵襄子说： 臣下在辕门之外遇到知过，他看我的样子，是对臣下有怀疑之心，进去拜见智伯，出来以后更改了自己的姓氏。
English: Zhang Meng said that when he heard about this, he went in to see Zhao Xiangzi and said: I knew that my vassal met him outside the gate. The way he looked at me, he was suspicious of his vassal. He went in to see Zhi Bo, and changed his surname after he came out.

古文：今暮不击，必后之矣。 襄子曰： 诺。 
现代文：今夜不进攻智伯，智伯一定后悔，事情就来不及了。 赵襄子说： 好。 
English: If he doesn't attack Zhibo tonight, Zhibo will surely regret it, and it will be too late. Zhao Xiangzi said: Good.

古文：使张孟谈见韩、魏之君曰： 夜期杀守堤之吏，而决水灌知伯军。 
现代文：派张盂谈去见韩国、魏国之君，约定今天夜晚杀死把守堤岸的吏卒，并掘开晋水的堤岸淹智伯的军队。
English: He sent Zhang Ye to talk to the kings of Korea and Wei, and they agreed to kill the officials guarding the embankment tonight, and to dig up the embankment of Jin water to drown Zhibo's army.

古文：知伯军救水而乱，韩、魏翼而击之，襄子将卒犯其前，大败知伯军而禽知伯。
现代文：智伯的军队因为救水大乱，韩国、魏国的军队像张开的翅膀一样左右夹击，赵襄子率领军队正面进攻，把智伯的军队打得大败并活捉了智伯。
English: Because of the water-saving chaos, the troops of South Korea and Wei attacked Zhibo's army from left to right like open wings. Zhao Xiangzi led the frontal attack, defeated Zhibo's army and captured Zhibo alive.

古文：知伯身死，国亡地分，为天下笑，此贪欲无厌也。
现代文：智伯身死，国亡地分，被天下人所讥笑，这是他贪得无厌的缘故。
English: It was because of his insatiable greed that Zhibo died, his country was destroyed, and he was ridiculed by the world.

古文：夫不听知过，亦所以亡也。
现代文：那不听智过的计谋，也是他所以灭亡的原阂之一。
English: That unwise stratagem was one of the causes of his downfall.

古文：知氏尽灭，唯辅氏存焉。
现代文：智氏被全部灭掉，唯独辅氏存在。
English: All members of the Chizhi clan were exterminated, with the exception of the Fu clan.

