古文：初十日晨餐后，大把事复来候往木家院。
现代文：初十日早饭后，大把事又来恭候我们前往木家院。
English: After breakfast on the 10th day of the first month, a lot of things were waiting for us to go to Mokya-in.

古文：通事具骑，而大把事忽去，久待不至，乃行。
现代文：通事备好马，而大把事忽然离去，等了很久都没来，于是出发。
English: The horses were prepared for the journey, but suddenly a large number of them left. After waiting for a long time, they didn't come, so we set off.

古文：东向半里，街转南北，北去乃象眠山南垂，通安州治所托，南去乃大道。
现代文：向东走半里，街道转成南北走向，往北去是象眠山南垂，通安州治所所在地，往南去是大路。
English: Walking half a mile to the east, the street turns into a north-south direction. To the north is the southern slope of Xiangmingshan, the location of the Anzhou government, and to the south is the main road.

古文：半里，去东桥，于是循溪南岸东南行。
现代文：半里，过东桥，于是顺溪水南岸往东南行。
English: Half a mile, over the East Bridge, and then along the south bank of the stream to the southeast.

古文：三里，有柳两三株，在路右塍间，是为土人送行之地。
现代文：三里，有两三棵柳树，在路右边的田间，这是当地人送行的地方。
English: Three miles, two or three willow trees, in a field on the right side of the road, this is where the locals see you off.

古文：其北有坞，东北辟甚遥。
现代文：北面有山坞，往东北方敞开得很远。
English: There is a dock to the north, and it is very open to the northeast.

古文：盖雪山之支，东垂南下者两重，初为翠屏、象眠，与解脱、十和一夹而成白沙坞；再为吴烈东山，与翠屏、象眠再夹而成此坞，其北入与白沙等。
现代文：原来雪山的支脉，东垂往南延伸为两层，第一层为翠屏山、象眠山，和解脱林、十和院首先夹成白沙坞；第二层为吴烈东山，和翠屏山、象眠山又夹成这道山坞，其北部入口处和白沙坞平行。
English: Originally a branch of the Snowy Mountains, it extends from east to south in two layers. The first layer is made up of Cui Ping Mountain, Xiangmingshan Mountain, Entanglement Forest and Shuwa Yuan, which are first sandwiched into Baisha Dock. The second layer is made up of Wulingdong Mountain, and Cui Ping Mountain and Xiangmingshan, which are also sandwiched into this dock. Its northern entrance is parallel to Baisha Dock.

古文：其北度脊处，即金沙江逼雪山之麓而东者。
现代文：山坞北面翻越山脊的地方，则金沙江逼近雪山麓后就向东流了。
English: The Jinsha River flows eastward after approaching the foot of the Xue Mountain when it crosses the ridge to the north of the mountain dock.

古文：东山之外，则江流南转矣。
现代文：东山之外，则江水转向南流。
English: Beyond Dongshan, the river turns south.

古文：脊南即此坞，中有溪自东山出，灌溉田畴更广。
现代文：脊南就是这道山坞，坞中有东山流出的溪水，灌溉田地的范围很广。
English: South of the spine is the dock. There is a stream flowing from Dongshan in the dock, and there is a wide range of irrigated fields.

古文：由此坞东北逾脊渡江，即香罗之道也。
现代文：从这道坞往东北翻越山脊过江，就是去香罗甸长官司的路。
English: From this dock to the northeast, over the ridge and across the river, is the road to the Shangrodian Chief Magistrate.

古文：坞中溪东南与玉河会于三生桥之东。又有水西南自文笔山，沿南山而东转，随东圆冈之下，经三生桥而东与二水会。于是三水合而成漾共江之源焉。
现代文：坞中的溪水往东南流到三生桥东与玉河汇合，又有西南流来的水从文笔山沿南山向东转，顺东圆冈而下，经过三生桥然后往东流与二水汇合，于是三股水合成漾共江的源头。
English: The stream in the dock flows southeast to the east of Sansheng Bridge to meet the Jade River, and the water flowing from the southwest turns east from the Wenpen Mountain along the Nanshan Mountain, descends along the east circular hill, passes the Sansheng Bridge and then flows east to meet the two waters, so the three waters are combined to form the source of the Yunnan River.

古文：东圆冈者，为丽郡东南第一重锁钥。
现代文：东圆冈是丽江府东南第一军事要地。
English: Dongyuangang is the most important military site in the southeast of Lijiang.

古文：盖有大脊自西来，穹为木家院后高峰大脊，从此南趋鹤庆。
现代文：有主峰山脉从西边伸来，育隆为木家院背后的高峰大脉，从这里往南伸向鹤庆府。
English: There is the main peak of the mountain range stretching from the west, and Yulong is the main peak behind Mijiain. From here, it stretches south to Heqingfu.

古文：其东下者为邱塘关，其东北下者，环转而为此冈，直逼东山之麓，束三水为一，沿东山南下而出邱塘东峡，自七和、冯密而达鹤庆。
现代文：往东延伸的是邱塘关，往东北延伸的，环绕为此东圆冈，直通东山之麓，约束三股水为一股水，沿东山往南流然后出邱塘关东峡，经过七和、冯密然后到鹤庆府。
English: The one that extends to the east is Qiu Tangguan, and the one that extends to the northeast is surrounded by the East Round Hill, and goes straight to the foot of the East Mountain. The three streams of water are constrained to be one stream of water. It flows southward along the East Mountain and then out of the East Gorge of Qiu Tangguan, passing through Qihe and Fengmi, and then to Heqingfu.

古文：冈首回环向郡，南山之溪经其下，巩桥度之，曰三生桥。
现代文：冈首回绕对着府治，南山的溪水从下面流过，建巩桥度溪，名三生桥。
English: The head of the hill faces Fuzhi, the stream of Nanshan flows below, and Gongqiao Duxi, the famous Sansheng Bridge, is built.

古文：桥北有二坊，两三家为守者。
现代文：桥北有二座坊，两三家人守着。
English: There are two temples north of the bridge, guarded by two or three families.

古文：自柳塘至此，又五里矣。
现代文：从柳塘到这里，又走了五里。
English: It's another five miles from Liutang to here.

古文：其北皆良畴，而南则登坡焉。
现代文：北面都是良田，而南面则登坡。
English: The north side is all good fields, while the south side is uphill.

古文：一里，升坡之巅，平行其上。
现代文：一里，登上坡顶，在顶上平行。
English: One mile, climb to the top of the slope and walk parallel to the top.

古文：右俯其坡内抱，下辟平坞，直北接郡治，眺其坡，斜削东下，与东山夹溪南流。
现代文：往右俯视其坡内抱，坡下敞开平坦的山坞，一直向北延伸，和府治相接，眺望其坡，斜斜地往东削下去，和东山夹住溪水往南流。
English: Looking down to the right, you can see the slope within the slope, the open flat dock below the slope, extending all the way to the north, adjacent to the prefecture, looking out over the slope, cutting diagonally to the east, and the creek flowing south with the east mountain.

古文：坡间每有村庐，就洼傍坎，桃花柳色，罨映高下。
现代文：坡间处处有村舍，就着洼地，傍靠着坎，桃花红、柳色绿，高高低低地掩映着。
English: Between the slopes, there are village houses everywhere, right next to the depression, next to the ridge, peach blossom red, willow green, high and low hidden.

古文：三里，稍下就洼，有水成痕，自西而东下于溪。又南逾一坡，度板桥而南，则木家院在是矣。
现代文：三里，渐渐下到洼地，有流水痕迹，从西往东流下溪中，又往南翻越一道坡，过木桥然后往南，于是就到木家院了。
English: Three miles, gradually down to the depression, there are traces of running water, flowing from west to east down the stream, and then south over a slope, over the wooden bridge and then south, so I came to Mijia Courtyard.

古文：先是途中屡有飞骑南行，盖木公先使其子至院待余，而又屡令人来，示其款接之礼也。
现代文：在这之前，途中常常有快马往南走，原来木公先派他的儿子到木家院等待我，而且又多次命令人来，表示其款待的诚意。
English: Prior to this, there were often fast horses going south on the way. Originally, the wood god first sent his son to Mokya-in to wait for me, and he repeatedly ordered people to come and show their sincerity of hospitality.

古文：途中与通事者辄唧唧语，余不之省察看。
现代文：途中来的人和通事就说民族语言，我听不懂。
English: People who came on the way and their couriers spoke the national language, which I didn't understand.

古文：比余至，而大把事已先至矣，迎入门。其门南向甚敝，前有大石狮，四面墙垣之外，俱巨木参霄。
现代文：等我走到时，大把事已经先到了，迎接我进门，门朝南，十分宽敞，门前有大石狮，四周墙垣之外，都是高耸入云的巨树。
English: When I arrived, a large number of things had already arrived first, to welcome me into the door, the door facing south, very spacious, there is a large stone lion in front of the door, and beyond the walls all around, are towering giant trees.

古文：甫入，四君出迎，入门两重，厅事亦敞。
现代文：刚一进门，四君出来迎接，进了两道门，客厅很宽敞。
English: As soon as they entered the door, the four princes came out to greet them. They entered through two doors, and the living room was very spacious.

古文：从其右又入内厅，乃拜座进茶。
现代文：从客厅右边又进入内厅，才行礼入座进茶。
English: Enter the inner hall from the right side of the living room, and then make a bow and sit down for tea.

古文：即揖入西侧门，搭松棚于西庑之前，下藉以松毛，以示重礼也。
现代文：很快又请进西侧门，在西厢房前搭松棚，地下用松毛铺垫，以表示重礼。
English: Soon, please enter the west side door, set up a pine shed in front of the west wing room, and pave the basement with pine wool to show respect.

古文：大把事设二卓即 桌 ，坐定，即献纸笔，袖中出一小封，曰： 家主以郎君新进诸生，虽事笔砚，而此中无名师，未窥中原文脉，求为赐教一篇，使知所法程，以为终身佩服。 
现代文：大把事设置两张桌子，坐定后，立即献上纸笔，从袖中取出一个小信封，说： 我家主人因为他的儿子刚刚考入学宫，虽然从事写作，但这里没有名师指导，不能看到中原的文章风格，请为他赐教一篇，让他知道章法格式，以使他终身不忘。 
English: He set up two tables with great care. After sitting down, he immediately presented a pen and paper, took out a small envelope from his sleeve, and said: My master, because his son has just passed the entrance examination, although he is engaged in writing, but there is no famous teacher guidance, can not see Nakahara's article style, please teach him a piece, let him know the syntax format, so that he will never forget.

古文：余颔之。
现代文：我点头同意。
English: I nodded in agreement.

古文：拆其封，乃木公求余作文，并为其子斧正修改。
现代文：拆开信封，是木公请我写文章，并为他的儿子修改文章。
English: When I opened the envelope, it was Mr. Mok who asked me to write an article and revise it for his son.

古文：书后写一题曰： 雅颂各得其所。 
现代文：信后写有一个标题： 雅颂各得其所。 
English: At the end of the letter he wrote a heading: "Each hymn has its place."

古文：余与四君，即就座拈毫执笔，二把事退候阶下。
现代文：我把题目交给四君，立即就座执笔，二把事退到台阶下恭候。
English: I gave the topic to the four of us, immediately sat down to write, and the other two retreated to the steps to wait.

古文：下午，文各就。余阅其作，颇清亮。
现代文：下午，我和四君的文章都写好了，我阅读他的文章，很清爽明快。
English: In the afternoon, Shijun and I had finished writing our articles. I read his article, which was very clear and crisp.

古文：二把事复以主命求细为批阅。
现代文：二把事又把主人的命令告知，请细心为四君批阅。
English: The second thing is to inform the owner's order. Please read it carefully for the four princes.

古文：余将为举笔，二把事曰： 馁饥饿久矣，请少迟之。
现代文：我准备为他提笔修改，二把事说： 饿久了，请稍微等一会改。
English: I was about to take up my pen to correct him, but then I said, "I've been hungry for a long time, please wait a bit."

古文：后有茶花，为南中之冠，请往一观而就席。 
现代文：后面有茶花，为云南省第一，请去观赏一番然后入席。 
English: There is a camellia in the back, which is the first in Yunnan Province. Please watch it first and then take a seat.

古文：盖其主命指示也，余乃从之。
现代文：大概是他主人的命令，我于是听从。
English: It was probably his master's orders, so I obeyed.

古文：由其右转过一厅，左有巨楼，楼前茶树，盘荫数亩，高与楼齐。
现代文：从松棚右转过一间厅，左边有高楼，楼前的茶树，盘绕遮盖了数亩地，高和楼平行。
English: From the pine shed, turn right past a hall. There is a high-rise building on the left. The tea tree in front of the building is twisted and covers several acres of land. The high-rise building is parallel to the building.

古文：其本径尺者三四株丛起，四旁萎蕤下垂，下覆甚密，不能中窥。
现代文：直径一尺的茶树分出三四株，茂盛的枝叶垂向四周，覆盖得十分严密，看不到中间。
English: A tea tree with a diameter of one foot is divided into three or four branches, and the lush branches and leaves hang all around, covered very tightly, so you can't see the middle.

古文：其花尚未全舒，止数十朵，高缀丛叶中，虽大而不能近觑观看。
现代文：茶花还没完全开，只有几十朵，高高地缀在丛密的枝叶中，虽然大却不能近看。
English: The camellia has not yet fully opened, there are only a few dozen, high up in the dense branches and leaves, although large, they cannot be seen up close.

古文：且花少叶盛，未见灿烂之妙，若待月终，便成火树霞林，借因为此间地寒，花较迟也。
现代文：而且花少叶多，看不到红花灿烂的美景，如果等到月底，便成为火树霞林，可惜这里气候寒冷，花开得比较晚。
English: Moreover, there are fewer flowers and more leaves, so you can't see the splendid beauty of the saffron. If you wait until the end of the month, it will become a fire tree forest. Unfortunately, the climate here is cold, and the flowers bloom relatively late.

古文：把事言，此树植与老把事年相似，屈指六十余。
现代文：把事说，这棵树和老把事的年纪相似，屈指计算有六十多年了。
English: As a matter of fact, this tree is similar in age to the old tree. It is a little more than sixty years old.

古文：余初疑为数百年物，而岂知气机发旺，其妙如此。
现代文：我当初怀疑是几百年的树，却哪里知道是气机发达兴旺，长得如此的好。
English: At first I suspected that it was a tree that was hundreds of years old, but who knew that it was a camphor tree that thrived and grew so well.

古文：已还松棚，则设席已就。
现代文：不久回到松棚，而宴席已经摆好。
English: Soon they returned to the pine box, and the banquet was ready.

古文：四君献款，复有红毡、丽锁之惠。
现代文：四君殷勤地向客人敬酒，又有红毡、丽锁作为赠礼。
English: The four princes made a toast to the guests, and gave them gifts of red gongs and beautiful locks.

古文：二把事亦设席坐阶下，每献酒则趋而上焉。
现代文：二把事亦设了座位坐在台阶下，每次敬酒就急忙上前。
English: Two stewards were also seated at the foot of the steps, and they hurried forward with each toast.

古文：柔猪乃五六斤小猪，以米饭喂成者，其骨俱柔脆，全体炙之，乃切片食。
现代文：四君二十多岁，身材瘦高，皮肤白净，很清秀英俊，不像边疆土生土长的人，而且说话清楚动听，礼仪举止都得体。
English: Shijun is in his twenties. He is tall and thin, with fair skin. He is very handsome and handsome, unlike the people who were born and raised in the frontier. He speaks clearly and pleasantly, and his manners are proper.

古文：牦牛舌似猪舌而大，甘脆有异味。
现代文：他对我说北岩映红影的奇异现象。
English: He told me about the strange phenomenon of the red shadow of the North Rock.

古文：惜余时已醉饱，不能多尝也。因为余言： 其地多牦牛，尾大而有力，亦能负重，北地山中人，无田可耕，惟纳牦牛银为税。 
现代文：当时我想从九和去剑川州，四君说： 这条路虽然险要但实际上近，只是现在迁徙那些出天花的人到九和，到处是死亡和污秽的气味，因而路上行人断绝，不如从鹤庆府走方便，美味中有柔猪、耗牛舌，四君都对我解释，一条一条地很动听。并且对我说，这个地方耗牛很多，耗牛尾巴大而且有力气，也能驮负重物，北部的山里人，没有田可耕，就缴纳耗牛银作为税。
English: At that time, I wanted to go from Jiuhe to Jianchuan, and the four princes said: Although this road is dangerous, it is actually close. However, those who have smallpox are now migrating to Jiuhe. There is a smell of death and filth everywhere, so pedestrians are cut off on the road. It is convenient to go from Heqingfu. There are tender pigs and cow tongues in the delicacy. The four princes all explained to me, one by one is very beautiful. And they told me that this place consumes a lot of cattle. The cow tail is large and powerful, and it can carry heavy loads. The mountain people in the north, who have no fields to

古文：盖鹤庆以北多牦牛，顺宁以南多象，南北各有一异兽，惟中隔大理一郡，西抵永晶、腾越，其西渐狭，中皆人民，而异兽各不一产。
现代文：大致鹤庆府以北耗牛多，顺宁府以南大象多，南北各有一种异兽，只是中间隔着大理府，往西到永昌府、腾越州，其西渐渐狭隘，其巾都有人，却不再有各种异兽了。
English: Generally speaking, there are more cattle in the north of Heqing Prefecture, more elephants in the south of Shuning Prefecture, and one kind of exotic animal in each of the north and south, but in the middle there is Dali Prefecture, and to the west there is Yongchang Prefecture and Tengyue Prefecture. The west is gradually narrow, and there are people in the area, but there are no longer any exotic animals.

古文：腾越之西，则有红毛野人，是亦人中之耗、象也。
现代文：腾越州以西，则有红毛野人，这也是兽中如同耗牛、大象，属奇异的一类。
English: To the west of Tengyue Prefecture, there are red-haired wild people, which is also a strange kind of animal, like cattle and elephants.

古文：抵暮乃散。
现代文：宴席到傍晚才散。
English: The banquet lasted until the early evening.

古文：二把事领余文去，以四君文畀余，曰： 灯下乞细为削抹修改，明晨欲早呈主人也。 
现代文：二把事把我的文章拿走，把四君的文章交给我，说： 请在灯下细心为他修改，明天早晨准备早早呈报主人。 
English: The second thing he did was to take away my article and give me Shijun's article, saying, "Please revise it carefully for him under the lamp, and be ready to submit it to your master early tomorrow morning."

古文：余颔之。
现代文：我点头答应。
English: I nodded in agreement.

古文：四君送余出大门，亦驰还郡治，仍以骑令通事送余。
现代文：四君送我出大门，也骑马赶回府治，仍然让通事送我骑马回去。
English: The four princes sent me out of the gate and also rode back to Fuzhi, but still let the messenger ride me back.

古文：东南二里，宿村氓家。
现代文：往东南走二里，住在村民家。
English: Two miles to the southeast, he lives in a villager's house.

古文：余挑灯评文，就卧其西庑。
现代文：我点灯评改文章，在西厢房睡觉。
English: I lit a lamp to review the article and slept in the west wing.

古文：十一日昧爽，通事取所评文送木家院，就院中取钣至，已近午矣。
现代文：十一日天亮，通事把我评改过的文章拿去送木家院，从院中取饭回来时，已经将近中午了。
English: At dawn on the 11th day of the month, I took my revised article to the Mijia Courthouse. When I came back from the courthouse to pick up my meal, it was nearly noon.

古文：觅负担者，久之得一人，遂南行。
现代文：寻找挑行李的人，很久才找到一人，于是往南走。
English: It took a long time to find someone to pick up the luggage, so they headed south.

古文：二里，抵南山下。
现代文：二里，到南山下。
English: Two miles, to the south of the mountain.

古文：循山东南一里，下越一坑底，仍东南上二里，出邱塘关。
现代文：沿山往东南走一里，往下越过一个坑底，仍然往东南上二里，出邱塘关。
English: Walk south-east along the mountain for one mile, go down past the bottom of a pit, and continue south-east for two miles, leaving Qiu Tangguan.

古文：关内数家居之，有把事迎余献茶。
现代文：关内有几家人居住，有把事迎接我，献上茶水。
English: There are several families living in Kwanai, and they greeted me and offered me tea.

古文：其关横屋三楹，南向踞岭上，第南下颇削，而关门则无甚险隘也。
现代文：邱塘关横列着三间房屋，朝南，坐落在岭上，只是往南下去较陡，而关门则不是很险隘。
English: Qiu Tangguan is a row of three houses, facing south, located on the ridge, but it is steeper to the south, and the gate is not very narrow.

古文：其岭自西大脊分支东突，与东山对夹漾共江于下，关门东脊临江之嘴，竖塔于上。为丽东南第二重锁钥。
现代文：其岭是西部主峰山脉往东突出的分支，和东山相对，下面夹着漾共江，关门东边的山脊对着江口，上面竖有塔，是丽江府东南边的第二道军事要地。
English: Its ridge is a branch of the western main peak mountain range protruding to the east, opposite the Dongshan Mountain, with the Qigong River below. The ridge on the east side of the gate faces the river mouth, with a tower on top. It is the second military important place in the southeast of Lijiang Prefecture.

古文：隔江之东山，至是亦雄奋而起，若与西大峰共为犄角者。
现代文：隔着江的东山，延伸到这里也雄伟地奋起，像是要和西部主峰共为特角。
English: The east mountain across the river, extending to here, also rises majestically, as if to share a special angle with the main peak in the west.

古文：关人指其东麓，即金沙江南下，转而东南，趋浪沧、顺州之间者。
现代文：守关的人指着东山麓，说就是金沙江往南转，然后往东南流到浪沧卫、顺州之间的地方。
English: The guard pointed to the eastern foot of the mountain, saying that it was the place where the Jinsha River turned south and then flowed southeast to Langcangwei and Shunzhou.

古文：此地有路，半日逾此岭，又一日半而东南抵浪沧卫。
现代文：这里有路，半天翻越此岭，再走一天半就到东南边的浪沧卫。
English: There is a road here. It takes half a day to climb over this ridge, and another day and a half to get to Langcangwei in the southeast.

古文：出关，辞通事以骑返，余遂同担夫仍南向就小道下山。
现代文：出邱塘关，和通事辞别，让骑马返回，我就和挑夫仍然往南从小路下山。
English: After leaving Qiu Tangguan, I said goodbye to my companion and let him return on horseback. I and my porter still went south down the mountain from the path.

古文：其道皆纯石嵯峨，践隙攀峰而下，二里，乃抵其麓。
现代文：小路全是又高又陡的石山，踩着缝隙，攀援石峰而下，二里，才到山麓。
English: The path is all high and steep stone mountains, stepping on the gap, climbing down the stone peak, two miles, only to the foot of the mountain.

古文：遂西南陟桥，桥西有坡，南向随之。
现代文：于是往西南登上桥，桥西有坡。往南顺坡走。
English: So I walked southwest to the bridge, there was a slope to the west of the bridge, and I walked south along the slope.

古文：半里，复下坡，西有坞南开，而中无水。
现代文：半里，又下坡，西边有向南敞开的山坞，但坞中没有水。
English: Half a mile, then downhill, to the west there is a dock open to the south, but there is no water in the dock.

古文：又半里，横陟之，由西坡上半里，依西大山之麓转而东南行。
现代文：又走半里，横穿山坞，沿西坡上半里，傍靠西部大山麓转向东南行。
English: Walk another half-mile, cross the dock, walk along the upper half of the west slope, and turn to the southeast near the western foot of the mountain.

古文：一里余，路左复起石山，与西山对夹，路行其中。
现代文：一里多，路左边又耸起石山，和西部山对峙，道路从其中穿过。
English: After more than a kilometer, the left side of the road is dominated by the Stone Mountain, which faces the West Mountain, and the road passes through it.

古文：二里，逾脊南下，脊右有石崖下嵌，而东半石峰，尤为巀嶪。
现代文：二里，翻越山脊往南下，山脊右边有下陷的石崖，而东边的石峰，特别高大险峻。
English: After two miles, we climbed over the ridge to the south. On the right side of the ridge, there was a sagging rock cliff, while the stone peak on the east side was particularly tall and precipitous.

古文：南一里，东峰始降，复随西坡盘而西南。
现代文：往南走一里，东峰才降低下来，又顺西坡绕向西南走。
English: Walk one mile to the south, the east peak will be lowered, and then walk along the west slope to the southwest.

古文：二里，其支复东突，再南逾之。
现代文：二里，又有向东突出的支脉，再往南翻越支脉。
English: After two miles, there is another branch that protrudes to the east, and further south, there is another branch.

古文：下半里，还顾东突峰南，有崖嵌空成门，返步探之，虽有两门，而洞俱不深。
现代文：下半里，回头看向东突出的山峰南面，崖石凹陷进去，形成门洞，于是返回去查看，虽然有两个门洞，但洞都不深。
English: In the second half, looking back to the south of the peak that protrudes to the east, the cliff sinks in, forming a doorway, so I returned to check. Although there are two doorways, the holes are not deep.

古文：又循西山而南，一里余，三四家倚西山下，于是复见漾共江出峡而下盘其麓，峡中始环叠为田。村之前，已引水为渠，循山而南，抵七和矣。
现代文：又沿西山往南走，一里多，有三四家人住在西山下，于是又看到漾共江出峡谷后绕西山麓流，峡谷中开始层叠环绕为田，村前已经引水为渠，顺山往南流，流到七和。
English: I also walked south along the West Mountain for more than a mile. There were three or four families living at the foot of the West Mountain. Then I saw the Qigong River flow out of the canyon and around the foot of the West Mountain. In the canyon, it began to overlap and surround the fields. The water in front of the village had been diverted into a canal. It flowed south along the mountain and flowed to Qihe.

古文：随渠盘西山东突之嘴，又三里而抵七和。七和者，丽郡之外郛城也，聚落倚西山颇盛。
现代文：沿着水渠盘绕西山往东突出的山口，又走三里到达七和，七和有如丽江府的外城，傍靠在西山下的村落很繁盛。
English: Along the canals winding around the West Mountain to the east protruding mountain pass, and walk three miles to reach the seven and, seven and such as the outer city of Lijiang Prefecture, the villages adjacent to the West Mountain are very prosperous.

古文：其下坞中，水田夹江，木公之次子居此，其宅亦东向。
现代文：下面的坞中，江两岸都是水田，木公的次子住在这里，住宅也是向东。
English: In the dock below, there are rice paddies on both sides of the river. Kogō's second son lives here, and the house faces east.

古文：由其前又南半里，为税局，收税者居之。
现代文：从宅前经过，又往南走半里，到税局，收税的人住在这里。
English: Passing in front of the house, I walked half a mile south to the tax office, where the tax collectors live.

古文：又南渐下一里，复过一村，乃西南上坡。
现代文：又往南渐渐下一里，又经过一个村庄，于是往西南上坡。
English: Another mile to the south, another village, and then uphill to the southwest.

古文：一里，陟坡顶，其上甚平。
现代文：一里，登上坡顶，顶上很平坦。
English: One mile, climb to the top of the slope, the top is very flat.

古文：由其上平行而南，二里，有数家居坡脊，是为七和哨，则丽江南尽之鄙边疆也，故设哨焉。
现代文：从顶上往南平走，二里，有数家人住在坡脊，这是七和哨，为丽江府南部的边境，所以在这里设哨。
English: From the top to Nanping, walk two miles, there are several families living in the slope ridge, this is the seven and sentry, the southern border of Lijiang Prefecture, so set up a sentry here.

古文：哨南又半里，有路自东南横过西北者，为三岔黄泥冈。
现代文：往哨南又走半里，有道路从东南横向西北，是三岔黄泥冈。
English: Walk another half mile to the south of the sentry post, there is a road from the southeast to the northwest, it is Sanqi Huangdi Hill.

古文：盖是坡自西大山下垂，由此亘而东南，横路随其脊斜去，脊西遂下陷成峡，黑龙潭当其下焉。
现代文：原来这道坡从西部大山往下垂，到这里横贯东南，道路顺坡脊斜下去，脊西面于是下陷为峡谷，黑龙潭位于其下。
English: Originally, this slope sloped down from the western mountains, and from here it ran across the southeast, and the road sloped down the ridge. The west side of the ridge then sank into a canyon, and Heilongtan is located below it.

古文：大道由峡东直南，鹤庆、丽江之界，随此坡脊而分。
现代文：大路沿峡谷东部一直往南，鹤庆府、丽江府的边界，顺着这道坡脊分。
English: The highway runs along the eastern part of the canyon all the way south to the border of Heqing and Lijiang Provinces, following the ridge of the slope.

古文：故脊西下陷处，自西盘而南至冯密，其下已属鹤庆；脊东盘亘处南下冯密东，其内犹属丽江，此东西两界大山内之横界也。
现代文：所以脊西面下陷的峡谷，从西往南绕到冯密，其下已经属于鹤庆府；脊东面盘绕南下到冯密东面的地方，其内还属于丽江府，这道脊是东西两部大山内的横界。
English: Therefore, the sagging canyon on the west side of the ridge, from west to south around Fengmi, already belongs to Heqing Prefecture; the place where the east side of the ridge coils down to the east side of Fengmi, also belongs to Lijiang Prefecture. This ridge is the boundary between the two mountains.

古文：于是西瞰峡内，松箐遥连，路依东脊南向渐下，六里而至冯密。
现代文：于是往西俯瞰峡谷内，松警遥遥相连，道路沿东脊往南逐渐下，走六里到冯密。
English: So I looked down the canyon to the west, the pine cones were far and away connected, and the road gradually went south along the east ridge, walking six miles to Fengmi.

古文：日才过午，觅宿店，漫投一楼上，乃陈生某家也，向曾于悉檀相晤者。
现代文：时间才过中午，找店住宿，随意住到一家楼上，是陈生的家，从前在悉檀寺见过面。
English: It was just after noon, and they were looking for a place to stay. They went to live upstairs in a random house. It was Chen Sheng's house. They had met before at Siddan Temple.

古文：担人卸担去，余炊饭其家，欲往青玄洞。
现代文：挑夫放下行李离去，我在他家做饭，准备去青玄洞。
English: The porter put down his luggage and left. I cooked dinner at his house and prepared to go to Qingyuan Cave.

古文：陈生止余曰： 明日登程，可即从此往。
现代文：陈生制止我说： 明天启程，可以就从这里去。
English: Chen Sheng stopped me and said, "If you leave tomorrow, you can go from here."

古文：今日晚，可一探东山之麓乎？ 
现代文：今天下午，愿去探一次东山麓吗？ 
English: Would you like to explore the eastern foot of the mountain this afternoon?

古文：遂同东陟坞塍。
现代文：于是一同往东穿过坞中田埂。
English: So we went east together through the Nakata dock.

古文：盖此坞即自黑龙潭南下，至此东向而出者，坞北则黄泥冈之坡，直垂而逼东山之麓，江亦东逊若逗而出于门者，故坞东之界，直以此门而分。
现代文：原来这就是从黑龙潭往南延伸，到这里转向东伸出去山坞，坞北是黄泥冈坡，一直垂下去逼近东山麓，漾共江也往东退，似乎停留后才流出冈口，所以山坞东部，只以此冈口区分。
English: Originally, this was the dock that extended from Heilongtan to the south, turned to the east here and stretched out to the east. To the north of the dock was the yellow mud hill slope, which continued to hang down and approached the eastern foothills. The Minjiang River also retreated to the east, and seemed to stop before flowing out of the Okaguchi, so the eastern dock was only distinguished by this Okaguchi.

古文：由坞东行一里，即与漾共江遇。
现代文：沿坞往东走一里，就和漾共江相遇。
English: If you walk one mile east along the dock, you will meet the Minjiang River.

古文：溯之东北半里，有木桥横江上。
现代文：溯江往东北走半里，有木桥横跨江。
English: There is a wooden bridge across the river half a mile to the northeast.

古文：从桥东度，木凡四接。
现代文：往东过桥，木桥一共接了四段。
English: Crossing the bridge to the east, the wooden bridge has a total of four sections.

古文：循东岸溯之而北，半里，登东陇，其上复盘陇成畦，辟田甚广。
现代文：沿东岸溯江往北走，半里，登东陇，陇上又绕着陇形成田畦，开辟有很宽广的田地。
English: Walking along the east bank of the Chu River to the north, half a mile, climbing the east pier, on the pier and around the pier to form a paddock, opening up a very wide field.

古文：又北一里，直对黄泥之嘴，东界尖峰最耸，是为笔架峰，正西与冯密后堆谷峰相对焉。
现代文：又往北走一里，直对黄泥冈口，东部的尖峰最高，这是笔架峰，正西和冯密背后的堆谷峰相对。
English: Another mile to the north, straight to Huangdi Okaguchi, the highest peak in the east, this is the pen stand peak, directly opposite the west and the stack valley peak behind Fengmi.

古文：陈生父冢正在其陇之上，时将议迁，故来相度。
现代文：陈生父亲的坟正在陇上，此时商议准备迁坟，所以前来测量。
English: Chen Sheng's father's grave was being dug, and at this time they were discussing preparations for moving the grave, so they came to take measurements.

古文：余劝其勿迁，惟来脉处引水开渠，横截其后，若引从墓右，环流于前，是即旋转之法。
现代文：我劝他不要迁，在山脉伸来的地方开渠引水，从坟后横断开，如果把水引到顺坟西，从坟前绕流，这就是旋转之法。
English: I advised him not to relocate, but to open a canal in the area where the mountains jut out and divert the water, crossing from behind the grave. If the water is diverted to the west of the grave and flows around the grave, this is the method of rotation.

古文：陈生是之。
现代文：陈生认为说得对。
English: Chen Sheng thinks he is right.

古文：仍从木桥度江，共三里，还寓。
现代文：仍然从木桥上渡江，一共走三里，返回住处。
English: He still crossed the river from the wooden bridge, walked a total of three miles, and returned to his residence.

古文：陈生取酒献酌。
现代文：陈生取出酒敬我。
English: Chen Sheng took out the wine and toasted me.

古文：余嘱其觅远行担夫，陈言明日可得，不必嘱也。
现代文：我嘱托他找能远行的挑夫，他说明天能找到，不必嘱托。
English: I asked him to find a porter who could travel long distances, and he said he could find one tomorrow, no need to ask.

古文：十二日陈为余觅夫，皆下种翻田，不便远去，已领银，复来辞。
现代文：十二日陈生为我找挑夫，都要耕田播种，不便远行，领了银钱，又来推辞。
English: On the twelfth day, Chen Sheng went to look for a porter for me. They all wanted to plow and sow fields. It was inconvenient to travel far. He took the money and refused again.

古文：既饭，展转久之，得一人曰赵贵，遂行。
现代文：饭后，展转了很久，找到一个叫赵贵的，于是出发。
English: After the meal, we wandered around for a long time, found a man named Zhao Guizhi, and set off.

古文：余以纯一所馈瓯二鼎一，酬陈生之贳酒。
现代文：我把纯一和尚赠送的二个贩、一个鼎用来酬谢向陈生赊欠的酒。
English: I used the gift of two vendors and a trinket given by a pure monk to reward Chen Sheng for the wine he owed.

古文：从其居之西涉一涧，既截坞而西北，一里余，登西坡，已逼堆谷峰下。
现代文：从他家的西面过一道沟涧，横穿山坞后往西北走，一里多，登西坡，已经逼近堆谷峰下。
English: From the west side of his house across a gully, across the dock and then northwest, more than a mile, up the west slope, already approaching the bottom of the heap valley peak.

古文：坡上引水为渠南注，架木而度，即南循东下之脊而上，半里，得平冈。
现代文：坡上挖渠引水往南流，搭木头越过水渠，就往南沿着往东延伸的山脊而上，半里，到平冈。
English: A canal was dug on the slope to divert the water to the south stream, and they used wood to cross the canal and went south along the ridge extending to the east, half a mile, to Hiraoka.

古文：由冈上西行半里，直逼西山下，有庙临冈而峙。
现代文：沿冈上往西行半里，直逼西山下。有座庙对着冈峙立。
English: Half a mile west along the ridge, straight down to the west of the mountain. There is a temple facing the ridge.

古文：庙南东下腋底，有庙祀龙王，南临一池，甚广而澄澈，乃香米龙潭也。
现代文：庙的南面往东下到冈底，有祭龙王的庙，向南的对着一池水，十分宽广清澈，是香米龙潭。
English: To the south of the temple, to the east down to the bottom of the hill, there is a temple dedicated to the Dragon King. To the south, opposite a pool of water, very wide and clear, is the Fragrant Rice Dragon Pool.

古文：庙南西上层崖，有洞东向辟门，其上回崖突兀，即青玄洞也。
现代文：庙的南面往东登上层崖，有洞门向东的山洞，洞上崖石迂回、突立，就是青玄洞。
English: To the south of the temple, there is a cliff to the east, a cave with a door to the east, and cliff stones around and protruding from the cave, which is Qingyuan Cave.

古文：二庙俱不入，西蹑山直上，半里，抵崖下，则洞门有垂石中悬，门辟为二，左大而右小。
现代文：两座庙都没进，往西一直朝上登山，半里，到崖下，就看到洞口有垂下来的石头悬在正中，把洞门一分为二，左边大而右边小。
English: I didn't enter either of the two temples. I kept climbing westward and upward. Halfway to the bottom of the cliff, I saw a stone hanging down from the mouth of the cave in the middle, splitting the cave door in two, large on the left and small on the right.

古文：有僧倚中垂之石，结庐其外，又环石于左门之下，以为外门。
现代文：有僧人傍靠垂在正中间的石头，在洞外建盖房屋，又在左门下环绕石头，作为外门。
English: Some monks built a house outside the cave by leaning against the stone hanging in the middle, and surrounded the stone under the left door as an outer door.

古文：由环石窦间入，登左门，其门大开，西向直入，置佛座当其中。
现代文：从环绕的石洞中进去，登上左门，门很开阔，往西直入，洞正中设有佛座。
English: Enter from the surrounding stone cave and go up to the left door, the door is wide open, go straight to the west, there is a Buddha's seat in the middle of the cave.

古文：佛座前稍左，其顶上透，引天光一缕下坠，高盖数十丈也。
现代文：佛座前稍左边，洞顶透空，引入一缕天光坠下来，大约有几十丈高。
English: In front of the Buddha's seat, slightly to the left, the top of the cave is open to the air, and a ray of sunlight falls down. It is about several tens of meters high.

古文：其右则外悬之壁当其前，中旁达而南，即豁为右门，门稍东南向，下悬石壁，可眺而不可行也。
现代文：佛座前右边则是向外悬的崖壁，中间往南通到旁边，就裂开为右门，右门稍微向东南，下面石壁悬空，可以眺望而不能行走。
English: In front of the Buddha's seat, on the right, there is a cliff wall that hangs outwards. The middle leads southwards to the side, and then it splits to become the right door. The right door is slightly south-east, and the stone wall below is suspended. You can look out but not walk.

古文：盖佛座之前，悬石外屏，既觉回环，而旁达两门，上通一窍，更为明彻，此其前胜也。
现代文：原来佛座之前，石壁往外悬空，形成屏障，已经让人觉得迂回环绕，而旁边通着两道门，上面通着一个孔，更感到明亮透彻，这是佛座前面的佳境。
English: Originally, before the Buddha's seat, the stone wall hung outside, forming a barrier, which already made people feel that they were surrounded by detours, while two doors opened next to it, and a hole opened above it, which made it feel brighter and more thorough. This is the beautiful landscape in front of the Buddha's seat.

古文：佛座以后，有巨碑中立，刻诗于上。
现代文：佛座后面，中间立着巨碑，碑上刻有诗。
English: Behind the Buddha's seat, in the middle, there is a huge monument with a poem inscribed on it.

古文：由此而内，便须秉炬。
现代文：从这里往内走，必须持火把。
English: To go inside from here, you must carry a torch.

古文：乃令担人秉炬前，见内洞亦分两门，则右大而左小。
现代文：于是让挑夫拿着火把朝前走，看见内洞也分开两道门，是右边大而左边小。
English: So he let the porter go forward with the torch, and saw that the inner cave also had two separate doors, the large one on the right and the small one on the left.

古文：先循左壁攀左隙上跻，既登一崖，其上夹而成隙。
现代文：先沿左壁攀援左边的缝隙往上登，登上一层崖后，上面夹成缝隙。
English: Climb along the left wall first and climb up the gap on the left. After climbing up a cliff, there is a gap on the top.

古文：披隙入，转而南向，有穴下坠甚深。
现代文：穿缝隙进去，转向南，有个陷得很深的洞。
English: Went in through a crack, turned south, and there was a very deep hole.

古文：先投炬烛其底，以为阱也，乃撑隙支空而下，三丈，至其底；稍南见有光遥透，以为通别窦矣；再前谛视，光自东入，始悟即右门所入之大窦也。
现代文：先将火把投下去照见洞底，以为是阱，于是撑着缝隙腾空而下，下了三丈深，到达洞底；稍微往南看见有光从远处透进来，以为是通着另一个洞；再往前仔细看，光是从东边透进来的，才省悟就是从右门进来的大洞。
English: First, he threw the torch down to illuminate the bottom of the cave, thinking it was a trap, so he supported the gap and floated down, descending three feet deep to reach the bottom of the cave; a little to the south, he saw light coming through from a distance, thinking it was through another hole; further ahead, he looked carefully, the light came through from the east, only to realize that it was a big hole coming in from the right door.

古文：复转而西入，内有小门渐下，乃伏而穷之。
现代文：又转向西进去，内有小洞，渐渐低矮，于是爬伏着去穷究。
English: He turned to the west and went in. There was a small hole in it, getting lower and lower, so he crawled and crouched down to investigate.

古文：数丈，愈隘不能进，乃倒退而出。
现代文：几丈后，更加狭窄得不能进去，于是倒退出来。
English: After a few strides, it became too narrow to get in, so he backed out.

古文：循右崖之壁，从其西南，复得一门。
现代文：沿着右崖壁而入，从崖壁西南又找到一个洞口。
English: I entered along the right cliff wall and found a cave entrance from the southwest of the cliff wall.

古文：初亦小，其内稍开，数丈后，亦愈隘而渐伏，亦不能进，复倒退而出，即前之有光遥透处也。
现代文：洞开初也小，洞内逐渐开阔，下了几丈后，就越来越狭窄而且渐渐低伏，也不能进入，又倒退出来，就是先前有光从远处透入的地方。
English: The opening of the cave was small at first, and the cave gradually widened. After descending a few meters, it became more and more narrow and gradually sunk, and it was impossible to enter, and it retreated out again. It was the place where light had previously penetrated from afar.

古文：向明东蹈，左右审顾，石虽婉蜒而崖无别窍。
现代文：向着明亮处往东走，左看右盼，崖石虽然蜿蜒但崖上没有其它洞。
English: Walk east towards the bright place, look left and right. Although the cliff is winding, there are no other holes on the cliff.

古文：遂至大碑后录其诗，并出前洞，以梯悬垂石内后崖，亦录其诗。
现代文：于是到巨碑后录碑上的诗，并从前洞出去，把梯子悬靠在垂石内的后崖上，也录了崖上的诗。
English: So he went to the back of the monument to record the poem on the monument, and went out from the front hole, hung the ladder on the back cliff inside the hanging rock, and also recorded the poem on the cliff.

古文：僧瀹茶就，引满而出下洞前，则有桃当门，犹未全放也。
现代文：僧人泡好茶送来，一饮而尽后出到下洞前，洞口有桃花，还没有完全开放。
English: The monk brewed tea and brought it. After drinking it, he went out to the lower cave. There were peach blossoms at the mouth of the cave, but it was not completely open.

古文：是洞前后分岐窈窕，前之罨透漏，后之层叠崡岈，擅斯二美，而外有回崖上拥，碧浸下涵，亦胜绝之地。
现代文：这个洞前后分岔、幽远深邃，前面透漏掩映，后面层叠深远，一个洞拥有两种美景，而且洞外有迂回的崖石往上拥起，山下有碧玉般的水池，也是绝妙的胜境。
English: This cave is bifurcated, remote and deep, with leakage and reflection in the front, and deep cascading in the back. A cave has two kinds of beauty, and there are winding cliffs outside the cave, and there is a jade-like pool at the bottom of the mountain, which is also a wonderful scenery.

古文：既下，至平冈，余欲北探黑龙潭，担者言： 黑龙潭路当从黄泥冈西下，不然，亦须从冯密后溯流入。
现代文：下山后，到达平冈，我想往北去探黑龙潭，挑夫说： 去黑龙潭的路应当从黄泥冈往西下，不这样走，也必须从冯密背后溯流进去。
English: After descending the mountain and arriving at Pinggang, I wanted to go north to explore the Black Dragon Pool. The porter said, "The way to the Black Dragon Pool should be from Huangdi Mountain to the west. If you don't go this way, you must also follow the stream behind Fengmi.

古文：此山之麓，无通道可行。
现代文：这座山的山麓，没有路可以通行。
English: At the foot of this mountain, there is no road.

古文：盖此中有二龙潭，北峡为黑龙潭，此下为香米龙潭，皆有洞自西山出，前汇为潭，其胜如一轨，不烦两探。 
现代文：因为这里有两处龙潭，北边峡谷的是黑龙谭，这里下去是香米龙潭，都是水从西山流出，在洞前汇成龙潭，其胜景如出一辙，不用烦劳探两处。 
English: Because there are two Longtan here, the northern canyon is the Black Dragon Tan, and the down here is the Fragrant Rice Longtan. Both are water flowing out of the West Mountain and merging into the Longtan in front of the cave. The scenery is exactly the same, so you don't have to bother to explore the two places.

古文：余然之，遂南向趋香米。
现代文：我认为说得对，于是往南去香米龙潭。
English: I thought I was right, so I went south to the Xiangmi Longtan.

古文：其潭大数十亩，渊然澄碧。
现代文：龙潭有几十亩大，水深得又清又蓝。
English: Longtan is dozens of mu in size, and the water is so deep and clear and blue.

古文：盖即平冈之脊，东向南环，与西山挟潭于中，止西南通一峡容水去。
现代文：原来就是平冈的脊，向东南环绕，和西山相夹，龙潭夹在其中，只有西南边敞开一道峡谷容许水流出去。
English: Originally, it was the ridge of Hiraoka, encircling to the southeast, sandwiched between the West Mountain and Longtan, with only a canyon opening up on the southwest side to allow water to flow out.

古文：路从潭西循西山而南，山崖忽迸，水从中溢于潭，乃横石度崖口。
现代文：道路顺潭西沿西山往南走，山崖忽然裂开，水从其中溢出，流入潭中，于是横有石块度过裂开的崖口。
English: Walking along the west side of the lake and along the west mountain to the south, the mountain cliff suddenly cracked. Water overflowed from it and flowed into the lake, so there were stones across the cracked cliff.

古文：崖前巨石支门，水分潆巨石之隙，横石亦分度之。
现代文：崖前巨石支撑门口，水从巨石缝隙中分流，横石也分别度过去。
English: A boulder in front of the cliff supports the entrance, water is diverted from the gap in the boulder, and the cross-beam is also passed separately.

古文：其石高下不一，东瞰澄波，西悬倒壁，洞流漱其下，崖树络其上，幽趣萦人，不暇他顾。
现代文：这些横石高低不一，东边俯瞰清澄的水波，西边崖壁倒悬，洞中的水流在崖壁下冲刷，崖壁上树林缠绕，幽趣令人牵挂，无暇他顾。
English: These cross-stones vary in height. The east side overlooks the clear water waves, the west side cliff wall is upside down, the water flow in the cave is washed under the cliff wall, the cliff wall is surrounded by trees, the tranquility is worrying, and he has no time to pay attention.

古文：已乃披隙入洞，洞中巨石斜骞，分流堰派，曲折交旋，一洞而水石错落，上如悬幕，下若分莲，蹈其瓣中，方疑片隔，仰其顶上，又觉玄同。
现代文：后来就钻缝隙进洞，洞中巨石斜立，水分流衍派，曲折交错，一个洞却水石错落，顶上如同布幕高悬，下面如同莲花分瓣，踩在莲花瓣中，正怀疑为何片片相隔，仰望顶上，又觉洞中大空。
English: Later, he drilled a gap into the hole. The boulder in the hole is inclined, the water flow is derivative, and the twists and turns are interlaced. One hole, however, the water stones are staggered. The top is like a curtain hanging high, the bottom is like a lotus petal, stepping in the lotus petal, he is wondering why the pieces are separated, looking up at the top, and feeling the sky in the hole.

古文：入数丈，后壁犹有余光，而水自下穴出，无容扪入矣。
现代文：进去数丈，后面的崖壁上还有余光，但水从洞下涌出，不能摸索着进去了。
English: There was still some light on the cliff wall behind me, but water was gushing out from under the cave, and I couldn't feel my way into it.

古文：出洞，依西山南行二里，有数家倚山而居。
现代文：出洞，沿西山往南走二里，有数家人靠山而居。
English: Out of the cave, walk two miles south along the West Mountain, there are several families living close to the mountain.

古文：由其前又南一里，转而西行一里，又逼西山之麓。
现代文：从房舍前过，又往南走一里，转西走一里，又靠近西山麓。
English: After passing the house, walk south for another mile, turn west for another mile, and walk closer to the west foot of the mountain.

古文：复南行二里，则西山中断，两崖对夹如门，上下逼凑，其中亦有路。
现代文：再往南行二里，于是西山从中断开，两边山崖如门对夹，上下离得很近，其中也有路，攀援而上。
English: Another two miles to the south, so the West Mountain breaks away from the break, the cliffs on both sides are like a door to the door, the top and bottom are very close, and there is also a road, climbing up.

古文：缘之上，盖此崖乃丽江南尽之界，川内平畴，鹤庆独下透而北，两界高山，丽江俱前踞西南，以两山之后，犹麽些之俗耳。
现代文：原来这山崖是丽江府南部边界的尽头，平川内田地整齐，鹤庆府独自从下面穿到北面，两边的高山，丽江府都从前面往南面靠，因此两边的山后，还有磨萝的风俗。
English: Originally, this mountain cliff was the end of the southern border of Lijiang Prefecture. The fields in the Pingchuan River were neatly arranged, and Heqing Prefecture alone penetrated from the bottom to the north. The mountains on both sides, and Lijiang Prefecture, all leaned southward from the front. Therefore, there was a custom of grinding at the back of the mountains on both sides.

古文：自此而南，东西界后亦俱儸儸，属鹤庆土官高千户矣。
现代文：从这里往南，东西部山后也都是课锣，属于鹤庆府的土官高千户。
English: From here to the south, both the east and west sides of the mountain are also class, belonging to the local officials of Heqing Prefecture.

古文：又南二里，一溪自西山下出，余溯而穷之。
现代文：又往南走二里，一股溪水从西山下流出，我溯流穷究。
English: Another two miles to the south, a stream flowed out from the west of the mountain, and I traced the flow.

古文：稍转北半里，其水分两穴东向出，皆溢自石下，无大窍也。
现代文：逐渐转北走半里，溪水分别从两个洞向东流出，都是从石头下溢出来，没有大洞。
English: Gradually turning north and walking half a mile, the stream water flows out of two holes to the east, both overflowing from under the stone, with no large holes.

古文：乃逾出水石上，由水之西，循山南行。
现代文：于是越过出水石往上走，从水西面沿山往南行。
English: So I went up over the outflowing rock and walked from the west side of the water along the mountain to the south.

古文：半里，有洞连裂三门，倚崖东向，洞深丈余，高亦如之，三门各峙，中不相通，而石色殷红，前则桃花点缀，颇有霞痕锦幅之意，但其洞不中透，为可惜耳。
现代文：半里，有洞，接连裂开三道门，靠崖向东，洞有一丈多深，高度也相同，三道门各自峙立，中间不互相连通，而且石色殷红，洞前有桃花点缀，很有霞痕锦幅的意境，只是各个洞不中通，感到可惜。
English: Half a mile, there is a hole, three doors are successively cracked, leaning against the cliff to the east, the hole has a height and depth, and the height is the same. The three doors stand independently, the middle is not connected to each other, and the stone is bright red. There are peach blossoms dotted in front of the hole, and there is a lot of haze. It is a pity that the holes are not connected.

古文：崖右，其支峰自上东向，环臂而下，腋中冲砂坠砾，北转而倾于崖前。
现代文：崖石右边，有一座山峰从上面往东延伸，绕臂而下，环抱中冲坠下砂砾，往北转而将砂砾倾倒在崖前。
English: On the right side of the cliff, there is a mountain that extends from the top to the east, descends around the arm, rushes down the gravel in the embrace, and turns north to dump the gravel in front of the cliff.

古文：腋底亦有一洞，南登环臂之脊，始回眺见之，似亦不深，乃舍之。
现代文：峰侧底部也有一个洞，往南登上绕臂之峰的峰脊，于是回头眺望洞，似乎也不太深，便舍去不探。
English: There is also a hole at the bottom of the side of the peak. I went south to climb the ridge of the peak around the arm, so I looked back at the hole. It didn't seem too deep, so I didn't want to explore it.

古文：南逾臂脊，东南下半里，有村庐十数家，倚西山之嘴，是为四庄。
现代文：往南越过峰脊，往东南下半里，有个十几家人的村舍，靠在西山口，这是四庄。
English: To the south, over the ridge of the peak, to the lower half of the southeast, there is a village of more than a dozen families, leaning against the west pass, which is Shizhuang.

古文：其南腋中，有龙潭一围，大百余亩，直逼西山，西山石崖，插潭而下。
现代文：山峰南侧中，有一片龙潭，一百多亩大，一直逼近西山，西山的石崖，插入龙潭往下延伸。
English: On the south side of the mountain peak, there is a dragon pool, more than 100 mu in size, which has been approaching the West Mountain. The stone cliff of the West Mountain is inserted into the dragon pool and extends downward.

古文：路盘崖上凌其南，又一里，循潭东岸南绕之，泄水之堰，在其东南，悬坑下坠，即东出而注于小板桥者也。
现代文：道路盘绕石崖而上，登上石崖南面，又走一里，沿龙潭东岸往南环绕，泄水的堤坝，在龙潭东南，水坠入深坑，就往东流到小板桥。
English: The road winds up the cliff, climbs to the south of the cliff, and walks another mile, circling south along the east coast of Longtan, the levee, in the southeast of Longtan, the water falls into a deep pit, and flows east to Xiaobanqiao.

古文：其西北腋崖回转，石脚倒插，复东起一崖，突潭中如拇指，结槛其上，不知中祀何神，其下即潭水所自出也，亦不知水穴之大小。
现代文：山峰西北侧山崖回转，石脚倒插，又往东耸起一座崖壁，在潭中如拇指突起，上面建有栅栏，不知其中祭祀什么神，下面就是潭水流出之处，也不知水洞的大小。
English: The mountain cliff on the northwest side of the peak rotates, the stone foot is inverted, and a cliff wall rises to the east. It protrudes like a thumb in the pool, with a fence on top. I don't know what god is worshiped in it. Below is where the pool water flows out, and I don't know the size of the water cave.

古文：然其境水石潆回，峰崖倒突，而水尤晶莹晃漾，更胜香米之景，惜已从潭东一里，抵泄水之堰，不便从西崖逾险而上矣。
现代文：然而这里水流回旋，石头盘绕，峰崖倒耸，而且水波尤为晶莹荡漾，比香米龙潭的风景更优美，可惜已经顺潭东走了一里，到了泄水的堤坝，不便从西崖攀越险阻而上了。
English: However, here the water circulates, the stones are coiled, the peaks and cliffs are upside down, and the water waves are particularly crystal clear and rippling, more beautiful than the scenery of the Xiangmi Longtan. Unfortunately, I have walked a mile along the east side of the lake to the levee, and it is inconvenient to climb from the west cliff.

古文：由其南循西山又二里，有石山一支，自西山东向突川中，其西南转腋处，有古庙当其间，前多巨石嶙峋，如芙蓉簇萼，其色青殷，而质廉利，不似北来之石，色赭而质厉也。
现代文：从堤坝往南顺西山又走二里，有一石山支脉从西山往东在平川中突起，石山西南转弯处，中间有古庙，前面有很多嶙峋的巨石，如莲花簇拥的花瓣，颜色是青色和赤黑色，石质锋利，不像从北边过来见到的石头，颜色赫而石质平整。
English: From the dam, walk south along the Xishan for another two miles. There is a Shishishan tributary protruding from the Xishan to the east in the middle of the Pingchuan. At the southwest turn of the Shishan, there is an ancient temple in the middle. In front of it, there are many jagged boulders, such as the petals of lotus flowers. The color is blue and red-black. The stone is sharp, unlike the stone seen from the north. The color is bright and the stone is flat.

古文：入叩无人，就庑而饭。
现代文：进庙叩门，没有人，就在走廊上吃饭。
English: Enter the temple, knock on the door, no one is there, just eat in the corridor.

古文：既乃循东突之峰东行半里，转而南盘其嘴。
现代文：之后沿着向东突起的山峰往东行半里，转向南绕过峰嘴。
English: After that, walk half a mile east along the mountain peak that juts out to the east, and turn south to go around the peak.

古文：其嘴东临平川，后耸石峰，嘴下石骨棱棱，如侧刃列锷，水流一线，穿于其间，汩汩南行，心异之。
现代文：峰嘴东面对着平川，背后耸起石峰，峰嘴下部石头棱角分明，如同侧放的刀愕，有一股细流，从石头间穿过，泪泪地往南流，我感到奇怪。
English: The east side of the peak mouth faces the Hirakawa River, with a stone peak behind it. The lower part of the peak mouth is clearly angular, like a sideways sword, and there is a thin stream that passes through the stones and flows south with tears. I feel strange.

古文：仰眺其后耸石峰，万萼云丛，千葩蜃结，以为必有灵境。
现代文：抬头眺望背后耸立的石峰，万花云集，千朵凝聚，以为一定有灵境。
English: Looking up at the towering stone peaks behind, a myriad of flowers, thousands of condensation, I thought there must be a spiritual realm.

古文：担者曰： 近构一寺，曰鹤鸣，不识有人栖否。 
现代文：挑夫说： 最近建盖了一座寺庙，名鹤鸣庵，不知道是否有人居住。 
English: Zhaifu said: Recently, a temple was built, Meizhemingan, but I don't know if it is inhabited.

古文：余乃令担仆前行，独返而蹑其上，披绡蹈瓣半里，陟峰头而庵在焉。
现代文：我于是让挑夫、顾仆朝前走，我独自返回去攀登石峰，披开石峭，踩着石花瓣行半里，登上峰头寺庵所在之处。
English: So I let the porter and the attendant go ahead, and I returned alone to climb the stone peak, pull the rock cliff, step on the stone petals for half a mile, and climb to the location of the peak temple hermitage.

古文：其门东北向，中有堂三楹，供西方大士，左有棱祀文昌，俱不大，而饰垩未完。
现代文：庵门向东北，中间有三间堂，供奉西方的观音菩萨，左边的楼祭祀文昌神，都不大，而且没有粉刷完毕。
English: The door of the hermitage faces northeast, and there are three halls in the middle, which are dedicated to the Western goddess of mercy, Guanyin, and the building on the left, which is dedicated to the god Wenchang. They are not large, and the painting is not finished.

古文：有一道者栖其间。
现代文：有一个道人住在里面。
English: There's a Taoist living in it.

古文：盖二年前，居人见山头有鸣鹤之异，而道者适至，募建此庵，故乡人感而名之，道者留余迟一宿，余以担仆已前，力辞之，不待其炊茶而别。
现代文：原来二年前，居民看到山头上有鹤鸣的异事，而道人恰巧来到，便募钱盖成这座庵，所以乡人因感应而取名为鹤鸣庵。道人留我住一宿，我因为挑夫、仆人已经朝前走了，竭力推辞，没等他烧茶就告别了。
English: Originally, two years ago, the residents saw a strange occurrence of cranes singing on the mountain, and a Taoist happened to come and collected money to build this hermitage, so the villagers named it Tsurumine-an. The Taoist stayed with me for one night, and because my porter and servant had already left, I tried my best to decline, and said goodbye before he could make tea.

古文：其庵之南，村庐倚西山下者甚盛。
现代文：鹤鸣庵南，傍靠在西山下的村舍很大。
English: To the south of Tsurumine-an, there is a large village house next to it at the foot of the west mountain.

古文：三里余，又有危峰自西山东突，与鹤鸣之峰南北如双臂前舒，但鹤鸣嶙峋而缭绕，此峰耸拔而拱立为异耳。
现代文：走三里多，又有陡峰从西山向东突出，与鹤鸣庵所在的山峰如同双臂向前舒展，只是鹤鸣峰嶙峋而缭绕，这座峰耸拔而拱立，各不相同。
English: After walking for more than three miles, there is a steep peak protruding from the west mountain to the east. It is different from the mountain peak where the Crane Chimney is located, which stretches forward like two arms. However, the Crane Chimney is dizzying and dizzying, and this peak is towering and arched.

古文：是峰名石寨，前有村名石寨村。
现代文：此峰名石寨峰，峰前有村庄，名石寨村。
English: This peak is known as Shizhai Peak. There is a village in front of the peak, known as Shizhai Village.

古文：有一龙泉自峰下出，汇水为潭，小于四庄，东乃环堤为堰，水从堰东注壑去，即东出于大板桥者也。
现代文：有一股泉水从峰下流出，汇成龙潭，比四庄的小，东边绕潭筑堤坝，水顺堤坝东从沟壑流走，就是往东从大板桥流出的水。
English: There is a spring water flowing out from under the peak, merging into Longtan, smaller than Shizhuang, building a dam around the lake on the east side, and the water flowing east of the dam from the gully is the water flowing east from the large board bridge.

古文：半里，越堤之南，复循西山南行，其地渐莽，无田塍，村庐之北，想无水源故也。
现代文：半里，越到堤坝南，又顺西山往南行，这一带渐渐荒凉，没有田地、村舍依托，想来是没有水源的原因。
English: Half a mile further, south of the dam, and further south along the western mountains, the area gradually became desolate, with no fields or villages to rely on, which is presumably the reason why there is no water source.

古文：八里，始有溪东注，路东转而南渡之，于是东望为演武场北村，西望为西龙潭大村，盖此水即西龙潭所分注者也。
现代文：走八里，才有澳往东流，道路转东走而往南渡溪，于是东边看得到演武场北村，西边看到西龙潭大村，原来此溪水是西龙潭分流出来的。
English: After walking for eight miles, it was only possible for the Mao to flow eastward. The road turned east and went to Nandu Creek. As a result, the north village of the martial arts stadium could be seen on the east side, and the large village of Xilongtan could be seen on the west side. Originally, this stream water was diverted from Xilongtan.

古文：西龙潭亦当西山东突之腋，汇水颇大，东北流者为此水，中为城北大路口水，东南引者为城中之水，其利为一郡之冠云。
现代文：西龙潭也位于西山向东突出的峰侧，汇集的水比较大，往东北流出的是这溪水，往中流的是鹤庆府城北大路口的水，往东南引出的为城中的水，其利在鹤庆府为第一。
English: Xilongtan is also located on the side of the peak of the West Mountain that protrudes to the east. The water collected is relatively large. The water flowing out to the northeast is the water of this stream, the water flowing to the middle is the water at the intersection of the north road of Heqing Prefecture, and the water flowing out to the southeast is the water in the city. Its advantage is the first in Heqing Prefecture.

古文：又南二里，出大路。
现代文：又往南走二里，出到大路。
English: Walk two miles south to the main road.

古文：正当大路所向之处，其东有竹丛村庐，即来时所遵道也。
现代文：正处在大路所对着的地方，东有竹丛村舍，就是来时所走的路。
English: It's right on the opposite side of the main road. To the east is the bamboo-clustered village house, which is the road I took when I came here.

古文：从大路南四里余，而抵鹤庆北关，托宿于关外，乃入北门，是为旧城。
现代文：顺大路往南走四里多，就到鹤庆府北关，在关外寄宿，于是进北门，这是旧城。
English: After walking south along the main road for more than four miles, we arrived at Heqingfu Beiguan, stayed outside the gate, and then entered the north gate, which is the old city.

古文：南半里，转而西，为御前守御所在焉。
现代文：往南走半里，转向西，是御前守御所所在地。
English: Half a mile to the south, turning west, is the location of the Imperial Palace.

古文：摩尼山复吾师之子张生家，北向而居，入叩之，往去摩尼未返也。
现代文：摩尼庵复吾法师的儿子张生家面北居住，进去敲门，张生去摩尼庵还没回来。
English: Zhang Sheng, the son of Fuguo Mage, lived in the north of the house. He went in and knocked on the door, but Zhang Sheng did not come back from the Mani An.

古文：又转南，再入城门，是为新城。
现代文：又转南走，再进城门，这是新城。
English: Turn south again and enter the city gate. This is the new city.

古文：始知鹤庆城二重，南新北旧，南拓宽阔而北束。
现代文：才知道鹤庆府有两座城，南城新北城旧，南城宽北城窄。
English: It was only then that I learned that there are two cities in Heqing Prefecture. Nancheng is the old and new Beicheng, while Nancheng is wide and Beicheng is narrow.

古文：此山自丽江东山南向下，南尽于金沙江。
现代文：进入新城，就顺府署向东南行，半里，往东转到府学前，朝南有大街，集市房舍都比较繁盛。
English: Entering the new city, go southeast along the prefectural office, half a mile, turn east to the pre-school, there are streets to the south, and the market buildings are relatively prosperous.

古文：中夹平川，自七和南下。
现代文：不久仍然往北出两道城门，进入住所而饭刚熟，于是吃饭后休息。
English: Soon the two gates of the city were still to the north, and the meal was just ripe when they entered the residence, so they rested after eating.

古文：但七和之南，又有三岔黄泥冈，自西而横逼东山。
现代文：鹤庆府西部傍靠的大山，是南主峰山脉，东部面向的大山，是石宝高峰，中间夹着平川，从七和往南伸下来。只是七和南面又有三岔黄泥冈，从西向东，横逼东山。
English: The large mountain near the western part of Heqing Prefecture is the south main peak mountain range, and the large mountain facing the east is the Shibao peak, with the Hirakawa River in the middle, stretching southward from the seven and south. However, there are also three ridges of yellow mud on the seven and south, from west to east, forcing the east mountain horizontally.

古文：故其川以冯密南新屯为甸头，直下而南，共五十里，有象眠山西自西大脊东属于石宝山。
现代文：所以这平川以冯密南的新屯作为甸头，一直往南伸下来，一共五十里，西边有从西部主峰往东延伸和石宝山相连的象眠山。
English: Therefore, the Pingchuan River, with Feng Minan's Xintun as its head, has been extending southward for a total of fifty miles. On the west side, there is the Xiangmingshan Mountain, which extends eastward from the western main peak and is connected to Shibaoshan Mountain.

古文：石宝山西与剑川同名，《一统志》称为峰顶山，从志为是。
现代文：石宝山和西边剑川州的石宝山同名，《一统志》称为峰顶山，依从志书才对。
English: Shibaoshan has the same name as Shibaoshan in the western state of Jianchuan. It is called the peak of Shibaoshan in the General History. It is best to follow the General History.

古文：象眠山与丽江同名，《一统志》称为龙珠山，亦当从志为是。
现代文：象眠山和丽江府的同名，《一统志》称为龙珠山，也应当依从志书才对。
English: Xiangmingshan is the same name as Lijiang Prefecture, and it is called Longzhu Mountain in the "History of Lijiang." You should also follow the history book.

古文：漾共江贯于中川，南抵象眠，分注众窍，合于山腹，南泄为一派，合枫木之水，东南入金沙江。
现代文：漾共江从平川中穿过，往南流到象眠山，分别流入各洞穴中，然后在山腹中汇合，往南流为一股，与枫木水会合，从东南注入金沙江。
English: The Qigong River flows through the middle of the Pingchuan River and flows southward to the Xiangmingshan Mountain, flowing into the caves separately, and then merging in the mountainside. The southward flow is a single stream, meeting with the maple water and flowing into the Jinsha River from the southeast.

古文：两旁东有五泉，出石宝之下；西有黑龙、西龙诸潭，出西大山下。
现代文：平川两旁东部有五处泉水，从石宝山下流出；西部有黑龙潭、西龙潭等，从西部大山下流出。
English: On both sides of the Hirakawa River, there are five springs in the east, flowing out from under Shibaoshan Mountain; in the west, there are Heilongtan, Xilongtan, etc., flowing out from under the western mountains.

古文：故川中田禾丰美，甲于诸郡。
现代文：所以平川中土地肥沃、禾稼丰茂，在各府中为第一。
English: Therefore, the fertile land and abundant crops in Hirakawa are the best in all prefectures.

