古文：孝献皇帝己建安六年
现代文：起，止，一共五年。汉纪五十六汉献帝建安六年
English: It lasted for a total of five years. In the Fifty-Six Han Dynasty, Emperor Jianan reigned for six years.

古文：春，三月，丁卯朔，日有食之。
现代文：春季，三月，丁卯，出现日食。
English: Spring, March, Dingwu, there is a solar eclipse.

古文：曹操就谷于安民。
现代文：曹操率军移驻到粮食丰足的安民地区。
English: Cao Cao and his army moved to the Anmin region, where there was plenty of grain.

古文：以袁绍新破，欲以其间击刘表。
现代文：曹操认为袁绍才被击败，打算利用这个间隙去进攻刘表。
English: Cao Cao thought that Yuan Shao had just been defeated and planned to use this gap to attack Liu Biao.

古文：荀彧曰： 绍既新败，其众离心，宜乘其困，遂定之。
现代文：荀说： 袁绍刚吃了一场败仗，军心涣散，应该乘他尚未摆脱困境之机，一扫而平。
English: Zou said: Yuan Shao has just suffered a defeat, his morale is low, and he should take advantage of the opportunity that he has not yet got out of the predicament, and sweep it away.

古文：而欲远师江、汉，若绍收其馀烬，承虚以出人后，则公事去矣。 
现代文：而您却要远征长江、汉水之间，如果袁绍收拾残部，乘虚从后面突袭，则您的事业将付诸流水。 
English: You, on the other hand, are going on an expedition between the Yangtze River and the Han River. If Yuan Shao picks up the pieces and makes a surprise attack from behind, your career will be in tatters.

古文：操乃止。
现代文：曹操便停止了远征荆州的打算。
English: Cao Cao finally gave up.

古文：夏，四月，操扬兵河上，击袁绍仓亭军，破之。
现代文：夏季，四月，曹操率军沿黄河行进，炫耀军威，进攻袁绍驻在仓亭的军队，打败袁绍军。
English: In the summer, in April, Cao Cao and his army marched along the Yellow River, flaunted their military power, attacked Yuan Shao's army stationed in Cangting, and defeated Yuan Shao's army.

古文：秋，九月，操还许。
现代文：秋季，九月，曹操回到许都。
English: In the autumn, in September, Cao Cao returned to Xudu.

古文：操自击刘备于汝南，备奔刘表，龚都等皆散。
现代文：曹操亲自率军到汝南进攻刘备，刘备败走，到荆州投靠刘表，龚都等人都四散而逃。
English: Cao Cao personally led an army to Yunnan to attack Liu Bei, Liu Bei was defeated and fled, Liu Bei went to Jingzhou to support Liu Bei, and Xindu and others fled in all directions.

古文：表闻备至，自出郊迎，以上宾礼待之，益其兵，使屯新野。
现代文：刘表听到刘备来的消息，亲自到郊外来迎接，用上宾的礼节接待刘备，又给刘备增加一些部队，让刘备驻扎在新野。
English: When Liu Biao heard the news of Liu Bei's arrival, he personally went to the suburbs to meet him, received Liu Bei with the etiquette of a guest, and added some troops to Liu Bei, so that Liu Bei was stationed in Xinye.

古文：备在荆州数年，尝于表坐起至厕，慨然流涕。
现代文：刘备在荆州住几年。曾有一次，他在会见刘表时起身上厕所，感慨地流下泪来。
English: Liu Bei lived in Jingzhou for several years. Once, when he met Liu Biao, he got up to go to the toilet and shed tears with emotion.

古文：表怪，问备，备曰： 平常身不离鞍，髀肉皆消。
现代文：刘表感到奇怪，问他是什么原因，刘备说： 我平常身不离马鞍，大腿内侧没有什么肉。
English: Liu Biao felt strange and asked him what the reason was. Liu Bei said: I usually stay in the saddle, and there is not much meat on the inner thigh.

古文：今不复骑，髀里肉生。
现代文：如今不再骑马，大腿内侧长出了肉。
English: Now that I no longer ride horses, the inner thighs have developed flesh.

古文：日月如流，老将至矣，而功业不建，是以悲耳。 
现代文：日月如同流水，人已经快老了，但功业没有建立，所以悲伤。 
English: The sun and the moon are like flowing water. People are getting old, but their merits are not established, so they are sad.

古文：曹操遣夏侯渊、张辽围昌豨于东海，数月，粮尽，议引军还。
现代文：曹操派遣夏侯渊、张辽率军在东海围攻昌，数月未能攻下，曹军粮草已尽，将领们商议撤军。
English: Cao Cao dispatched Xia Houyuan and Zhang Liao to lead an army to besiege Chang in the East China Sea, but they failed to capture it for several months. Cao's army had run out of grain and grass, and the generals discussed withdrawing the army.

古文：辽谓渊曰： 数日已来，每行诸围，豨辄属目视辽，又其射矢更稀。
现代文：张辽对夏侯渊说： 几天以来，我每次巡视阵地，昌的目光总追随着我，而且他们的箭也比以前射得更少。
English: Zhang Liao said to Xia Houyuan: Since a few days ago, every time I inspected the positions, Chang's eyes always followed me, and they also shot fewer arrows than before.

古文：此必豨计犹豫，故不力战。
现代文：这必定是昌心中犹豫，所以未尽全力作战。
English: This must be Chang's hesitation, so he did not fight to the best of his ability.

古文：辽欲挑与语，倘可诱也。 
现代文：我准备引动他交谈，或许能诱使他归降。 
English: I was going to get him to talk, maybe get him to back down.

古文：乃使谓豨曰： 公有命，使辽传之。 
现代文：于是，张辽派人对昌说： 曹公有命令，让张辽传达给你。 
English: So they sent a messenger to Chang Qi, saying, "Cao Gong has ordered me to convey this to you."

古文：豨果下与辽语。
现代文：昌果然下城与张辽交谈。
English: Chang went down to the city to talk with Zhang Liao.

古文：辽为说操神武，方以德怀四方，先附者受大赏，豨乃许降。
现代文：张辽向他盛赞曹操的谋略武功，说曹操正广施恩德，招纳四方豪杰，先归附的可受到重赏。昌便答应投降。
English: Zhang Liao praised Cao Cao's strategy and military exploits to him, saying that Cao Cao was doing a great favor by recruiting heroes from the four directions, and that the first to surrender would receive a great reward. Chang then agreed to surrender.

古文：辽遂单身上三公山，入豨家，拜妻子，豨欢喜，随辽诣操。操遣豨还。
现代文：张辽就孤身一人上三公山，到昌家中，会见他的妻子，昌十分高兴，随张辽一起去拜见曹操，曹操命昌返回原处。
English: Zhang Liao went alone to the Three Kingdoms Mountains, to Chang's home, and met his wife. Chang was very happy, and went with Zhang Liao to meet Cao Cao. Cao Cao ordered Chang to return to his original place.

古文：赵韪围刘璋于成都。东州人恐见诛灭，相与力战，韪遂败退，追至江州，杀之。
现代文：赵韪率军在成都包围刘璋，东州人恐怕受到屠杀，都拼死作战，杀退赵韪，并追击到江州将他杀死。
English: Zhao Wei led his army to encircle Liu Wei in Chengdu. The Dongzhou people feared that they would be slaughtered. They fought to the death, drove Zhao Wei back, and pursued him to Jiangzhou to kill him.

古文：庞羲惧，遣吏程祁宣旨于其父汉昌令畿，索賨兵。
现代文：庞羲听说赵韪被杀，心中恐惧，派属官程祁传达命令给他父亲汉昌县令程畿，征调人队伍。
English: When Pang Yao heard that Zhao Yao had been killed, he was terrified. He ordered his subordinate officer, Cheng Yao, to convey the order to his father, the Hanchang County magistrate Cheng Gui, to form a recruiting team.

古文：畿曰： 郡合部曲，本不为乱，纵有谗谀，要在尽诚，若遂怀异志，不敢闻命。 
现代文：程畿说： 郡里召集队伍，本不是为了叛乱，纵然有人进谗言加以陷害，也只能对上表白我们的忠诚，如果因此而怀有异心，则我不敢遵从命令。 
English: Cheng Gui said, "The gathering of troops in the county was not originally for the purpose of rebellion. Even if someone insinuates and frames us, we can only express our loyalty to the above. If there is a different intention because of this, then I dare not follow the order.

古文：羲更使祁说之，畿曰： 我受牧恩，当为尽节；汝为郡吏，自宜效力。
现代文：庞羲又派程祁去劝说程畿，程畿说： 我受到刘州牧的大恩，应当为他尽节；而你身为郡的官员，自当为庞太守效力。
English: Pang Xuan also sent Cheng Yao to persuade Cheng Gui. Cheng Gui said, "I have been greatly blessed by Liu Zhoumu, and I should do my best for him; and you, as a county official, should serve as Pang's eunuch."

古文：不义之事，有死不为。 
现代文：不义的事情，我宁死也不会去做！ 
English: I would rather die than do something unjust!

古文：羲怒，使人谓畿曰： 不从太守，祸将及家！ 
现代文：庞羲大怒，派人对程畿说： 如果你不服从太守，将给你全家带来灾祸。 
English: Enraged, Pang sent a message to Chenggi: "If you disobey the governor, it will bring disaster to your entire family."

古文：畿曰： 乐羊食子，非无父子之恩，大义然也。
现代文：程畿说： 乐羊吃下他儿子的肉，并不是没有父子间的恩情。而是为了维护君臣大义。
English: Cheng Gui said, "Le Yang ate his son's meat, not because there was no affection between father and son, but to uphold the great principles of the monarchy and the state.

古文：今虽羹祁以赐畿，畿啜之矣。 
现代文：如今，即使庞太守把程祁煮成肉羹来赐给我，我也会吃下去。 
English: Now, even if Pang Tae-soo were to boil Cheng Quan into broth and give it to me, I would still eat it.

古文：羲乃厚谢于璋。
现代文：庞羲无奈，便送上重礼，向刘璋道歉。
English: Unable to do anything else, Pang Ying sent a heavy gift and apologized to Liu Ying.

古文：璋擢畿为江阳太守。
现代文：刘璋提拨程畿担任江阳郡太守。
English: Liu Bei selected Chenggi to serve as the governor of Jiangyang County.

古文：朝廷闻益州乱，以五官中郎将牛亶为益州刺史。征璋为卿，不至。
现代文：朝廷听说益州局势混乱，任命五官中郎将牛为益州刺史，征召刘璋入京担任卿，刘璋不去。
English: Hearing that the situation in Yizhou was chaotic, the imperial court appointed the five-ranked middle-ranking official Zeng Niu as the governor of Yizhou, and summoned Liu Bei to Beijing to serve as the governor, but Liu Bei did not go.

古文：张鲁以鬼道教民，使病者自首其过，为之请祷，实无益于治病，然小人昏愚，竞共事之。
现代文：张鲁用鬼神之道教化百姓。他让病人自己坦白所犯的过失，再由他为病人向上天祈祷。这种方法实际上并不能治病，但那些愚昧的人却深信不疑，争着一同信奉张鲁。
English: Zhang Lu used the way of ghosts and gods to enlighten the people. He let the patients themselves confess the mistakes they had made, and then he prayed to the heavens for the patients. This method could not actually cure the disease, but those ignorant people were convinced and fought together to believe in Zhang Lu.

古文：犯法者，三原，然后乃行刑。
现代文：对犯法的人，张鲁饶恕三次，然后才施用刑法。
English: Those who violate the law can be pardoned for the first three times, and if they reoffend, they will be punished.

古文：不置长吏，皆以祭酒为治。
现代文：不设置官吏，而全部由天师道中的首领祭酒来管理各级行政事务。
English: There are no government officials, and all administrative affairs at all levels are managed by the leaders of the Tenshido sect.

古文：民、夷便乐之，流移寄在其地者，不敢不奉其道。
现代文：当地的百姓以及夷人对张鲁的制度都很欢迎，外地流亡到汉中地区的人，也不敢不信奉天师道。
English: The local people as well as the Yi people were very welcoming of Zhang Lu's system, and the people who had been exiled to the Hanzhong region did not dare to disbelieve in the teachings of Tianshi.

古文：后遂袭取巴郡，朝廷力不能征，遂就宠鲁为镇民中郎将，领汉宁太守，通贡献而已。
现代文：后来，张鲁又夺取巴郡。朝廷无力进行征讨，只好安抚张鲁，任命他为镇民中郎将，兼任汉宁郡太守。张鲁对特朝廷，只是进贡当地土特产而已。
English: Later, Zhang Lu also seized Ba County. The imperial court was powerless to carry out the requisition, so it had no choice but to appease Zhang Lu, appointing him as the townspeople's middle-ranking officer and also serving as the governor of Hanning County. Zhang Lu only paid tribute to the imperial court with local special products.

古文：民有地中得玉印者，群下欲尊鲁为汉宁王。
现代文：民间有人从地里掘出一颗玉印，张鲁的部下打算尊称张鲁为汉宁王。
English: Some local people found a piece of jade seal in the field, and the believers wanted to support Zhang Lu as the king of Hanning.

古文：功曹巴西阎圃谏曰： 汉川之民，户出十万，财富土沃，四面险固。
现代文：功曹、巴西人阎圃劝阻张鲁说： 汉水流域有十万户百姓，土地肥沃，物产丰富，四面地势险要，利于固守。
English: Gong Cao and Brazilian Yan Pu dissuaded Zhang Lu, saying: There are one hundred thousand households in the Han River basin, the land is fertile, the products are abundant, and the terrain is dangerous on all sides, which is conducive to adherence.

古文：上匡天子，则为桓、文，次及窦融，不失富贵。
现代文：上辅佐天子，可望建成齐桓公、晋文公那样的功业；次一等的，也可像窦融那样，不失去富贵。
English: It is hoped that Shang Fu Zi Tian Zi will accomplish the same feats as Qi Huan and Jin Wen Gong; and that the second-ranked may, like Dou Rong, not lose his wealth and dignity.

古文：今承制署置，势足斩断，不烦于王。
现代文：如今，作为皇帝的代表来行使职权，形势上已完全独立自主，不必要王爵的称号。
English: Today, as the representative of the emperor to exercise his powers, the situation has been completely independent and does not need the title of prince.

古文：愿且不称，勿为祸先。 
现代文：希望您能暂不称王，先不要惹祸。 
English: I hope you can hold off on proclaiming yourself king for the time being and don't get into trouble first.

古文：鲁从之。
现代文：张鲁听从了阎圃的意见。
English: Zhang Lu adopted his opinion.

古文：孝献皇帝己建安七年
现代文：建安七年
English: Seven years of Jianan

古文：春，正月，曹操军谯，遂至浚仪，治睢阳渠。
现代文：春季，正月，曹操率军驻在谯县，又进驻浚仪，挖掘睢阳渠。
English: In the spring and the first month of the year, Cao Cao and his army stationed in Min County, and also stationed in Dredge to excavate the Minyang Canal.

古文：遣使以太牢祀桥玄。
现代文：曹操派使者用太牢的规格祭祀已故太尉桥玄。
English: Cao Cao sent an emissary to sacrifice the late Tai Fong Qiao Xuan with Tai Fong's specifications.

古文：进军官渡。
现代文：曹军前进到官渡。
English: Then, he was promoted to the rank of officer.

古文：袁绍自军败，惭愤，发病呕血；夏，五月，薨。
现代文：袁绍自从官渡战败之后，羞愧愤恨，发病吐血。夏季，五月，袁绍去世。
English: After the defeat at Guandu, Yuan Shao was so ashamed and angry that he vomited blood. In the summer, in May, Yuan Shao passed away.

古文：初，绍有三子：谭、熙、尚。
现代文：袁绍有三个儿子：袁谭、袁熙、袁尚。
English: Yuan Shao had three sons: Yuan Tan, Yuan Xi and Yuan Shang.

古文：绍后妻刘氏爱尚，数称于绍。
现代文：袁绍后妻刘氏偏爱袁尚，经常在袁绍面前称赞袁尚。
English: Yuan Shao's second wife, Liu, preferred Yuan Shang, and often praised Yuan Shang in front of Yuan Shao.

古文：绍欲以为后，而未显言之。乃以谭继兄后，出为青州刺史。
现代文：袁绍想让袁尚作自己的继承人，但没有明说，就把长子袁谭过继给自己已死去的哥哥，让他离开邺城，去担任青州刺史。
English: Yuan Shao wanted Yuan Shang to be his successor, but without explicitly saying so, he passed on the eldest son Yuan Tan to his dead brother, and let him leave Shicheng to serve as a historian of Qingzhou.

古文：沮授谏曰： 世称万人逐兔，一人获之，贪者悉止，分定故也。
现代文：沮援劝阻袁绍说： 世人常说：一万个人追逐一只野兔，一个人捉到后，其他人即使贪心，也全停止下来，这是因为所有权已经确定。
English: "People have always said that there are ten thousand people chasing a rabbit, one person gets the rabbit, and everyone else who wants to get it has to give up. This is because the winner has already been determined.

古文：谭长子，当为嗣，而斥使居外，祸其始此矣。 
现代文：袁谭是您的长子，应当做继承人，而您却把他排斥在外，灾祸将由此开始。 
English: Yuan Tan is your eldest son and should be the heir, but you have excluded him, and the disaster will begin.

古文：绍曰： 吾欲令诸子各据一州，以视其能。 
现代文：袁绍说： 我想让儿子们各自主持一州的事务，以考察他们的能力。 
English: Yuan Shao said: I want the children to each govern a prefecture so that their talents can be seen.

古文：于是以中子熙为幽州刺史，外甥高幹为并州刺史。
现代文：于是，他委派次子袁熙为幽州刺史，外甥高干为并州刺史。
English: As a result, he appointed his second son Yuan Xi as the governor of Yuzhou, and his nephew Gao Gan as the governor of Jianzhou.

古文：逄纪、审配素为谭所疾，辛评、郭图皆附于谭，而与配、纪有隙。
现代文：逢纪、审配一向被袁谭所忌恨，辛评、郭图则拥护袁谭，而与逢纪、审配有矛盾。
English: Yuan Tan has always hated Feng Ji and Qiaodi, while Xin Cao and Guo Tu have supported Yuan Tan, which is contradictory to Feng Ji and Qiaodi.

古文：及绍薨，众以谭长，欲立之。
现代文：等到袁绍死后，众人都认为袁谭是长子，打算拥立他继承袁绍。
English: After Yuan Shao's death, everyone thought that Yuan Tan was the eldest son and planned to make him Yuan Shao's successor.

古文：配等恐谭立而评等为害，遂矫绍遗命，奉尚为嗣。
现代文：审配等人恐怕袁谭掌权后，会受到辛评等人的报复，就假传袁绍的遗命，尊奉袁尚做袁绍的继承人。
English: After Yuan Tan's accession to the throne, the matchmakers and others were afraid that the critics and others would harm themselves, so they pretended to entrust Yuan Shao's death and supported Yuan Shang as the successor.

古文：谭至，不得立，自称车骑将军，屯黎阳。
现代文：袁谭自青州赶来奔丧，不能接替父亲的职位，就自称车骑将军，驻军黎阳。
English: Yuan Tan came from Qingzhou to attend the funeral. Unable to take over his father's position, he called himself a cavalry general and garrisoned Liyang.

古文：尚少与之兵，而使逄纪随之。
现代文：袁尚拨给袁谭很少一部分兵力，而让逢纪去跟随他。
English: Yuan Shang gave Yuan Tan a small number of troops, and let Feng Ji follow him.

古文：谭求益兵，审配等又议不与。
现代文：袁谭请求再增加兵力，审配等人商议后又予以拒绝。
English: Yuan Tan requested to increase the number of troops, which was rejected after deliberation by the vetting committee and others.

古文：谭怒，杀逄纪。
现代文：袁诃大怒，杀死逢纪。
English: Yuan Shao flew into a rage and killed Feng Ji.

古文：秋，九月，曹操渡河攻谭。
现代文：秋季，九月，曹操渡过黄河，进攻袁谭。
English: In the autumn, in September, Cao Cao crossed the Yellow River and attacked Yuan Tan.

古文：谭告急于尚，尚留审配守鄴，自将助谭，与操相拒。
现代文：袁谭向袁尚求救。袁尚留审配守邺城，亲自率军去救袁谭，与曹操对抗。
English: Yuan Tan asked Yuan Shang for help. Yuan Shang stayed behind to guard Lucheng and personally led an army to rescue Yuan Tan and fight against Cao Cao.

古文：连战，谭、尚数败，退而固守。
现代文：两军交战数次，袁谭、袁尚连续失败，只好退守营寨。
English: The two armies fought several times, and Yuan Tan and Yuan Shang continuously failed, so they had to retreat to the camp.

古文：尚遣所置河东太守郭援，与高幹、匈奴南单于共攻河东，发使与关中诸将马腾等连兵，腾等阴许之，援所经城邑皆下。
现代文：袁尚派遣他所委任的河东郡太守郭援，与高干、匈奴南单于一起进攻河东郡。袁尚又派使者到关中去，与马腾等将领们联系共同起兵，马腾等都暗中答应。
English: Yuan Shang sent Guo Yuan, the appointed governor of Hedong County, to attack Hedong County together with Gao Gan and Xiongnu Nan Shan. Yuan Shang also sent an envoy to Guanzhong to contact generals such as Ma Teng to jointly raise an army, and Ma Teng and others secretly agreed.

古文：河东郡吏贾逵守绛，援攻之急；城将溃，父老与援约，不害逵乃降，援许之。
现代文：郭援率军进攻，一路所经过的县城都被攻下或者归降。河东郡官员贾逵守卫绛县，郭援猛攻不止，城将陷落时，城中父老与郭援约定：不杀害贾逵，他们就投降。郭援答应了。
English: Guo Yuan attacked with his army, and all the county towns he passed along the way were either conquered or surrendered. Jia Jun, an official of Hedong County, stood guard over Handan County. Guo Yuan kept attacking, and when the city was about to fall, the elders in the city agreed with Guo Yuan that they would surrender without killing Jia Jun. Guo Yuan agreed.

古文：援欲使逵为将，以兵劫之，逵不动。
现代文：郭援想让贾逵做他的将领，用武力相胁迫，贾逵毫不动摇。
English: Guo Yuan wanted Jia Jun to be his general, and used force to coerce him. Jia Jun did not waver.

古文：左右引逵使叩头，逵叱之曰： 安有国家长吏为贼叩头！ 
现代文：左右的人拉贾逵的衣服，让他叩头，贾逵厉声叱责说： 哪有国家官员向贼人叩头的道理！ 
English: The attendants on the right and left of Lahai Jiaqi wanted him to be beheaded. Jiaqi shouted at them, "What kind of state official beheads a thief!

古文：援怒，将斩之，或伏其上以救之。
现代文：郭援大怒，就要杀死贾逵，有人伏在贾逵身上，以保护他。
English: Guo Yuan flew into a rage and was about to kill Jia Chen. Someone was lying on top of Jia Chen to protect him.

古文：绛吏民闻将杀逵，皆乘城呼曰： 负约杀我贤君，宁俱死耳！ 
现代文：绛县的官民们听说要杀死贾逵，都登上城墙，高声喊道： 如果背弃誓言，杀害我们的好长官，宁可大家一起拼死！ 
English: When the officials and citizens of Jiaxing County heard that Jia Jia was to be killed, they all climbed onto the city wall and shouted loudly: "If you renege on your oath and kill our good officer, it would be better if we all die together!"

古文：乃困于壶关，著土窖中，盖以车轮。
现代文：于是郭援把贾逵抽到壶关，关在地窖里，用车轮盖住洞口。
English: Guo Yuan then dragged Jia Yao to Juguan, locked him in a cellar, and covered the opening of the cave with a wheel.

古文：逵谓守者曰： 此间无健儿邪，而使义士死此中乎？ 
现代文：贾逵对看守们说： 此间难道没有一个英雄好汉，而使义士死在地窖里吗？ 
English: Jia Wei said to the guards: Isn't there a hero here, and did the righteous die in the cellar?

古文：有祝公道者，适闻其言，乃夜往，盗引出逵，折械遣去，不语其姓名。
现代文：有一个叫祝公道的壮士，正好听到贾逵的话，就在夜里前去把贾逵偷偷救出来，打开刑具，放贾逵逃走，没有讲出自己的姓名。
English: A valiant man named Zhu Gongdao, who happened to hear Jia Jun's words, went to secretly rescue Jia Jun in the middle of the night, opened the torture device, and let Jia Jun escape without telling his name.

古文：曹操使司隶校尉钟繇围南单于于平阳，未拔而援至。
现代文：曹操派司隶校尉钟繇在平阳包围南匈奴单于，未能攻陷，而对方援军已经到达。
English: Cao Cao sent Sili Lieutenant Zhong Qi to besiege Southern Xiongnu in Pingyang, but failed to capture it, while the other side's reinforcements had already arrived.

古文：繇使新丰令冯翊张既说马腾，为言利害。
现代文：钟繇派新丰县令、冯翊人张既劝说马腾，为他分析利害。
English: Zhong Rong sent Xinfeng County Governor and Feng Rongren Zhang to persuade Ma Teng and analyze the interests for him.

古文：腾疑未决。
现代文：马腾听后，犹豫不决。
English: After listening, Ma Teng hesitated.

古文：傅幹说腾曰： 古人有言 顺道者昌，逆德者亡 ，曹公奉天子诛暴乱，法明政治，上下用命，可谓顺道矣。袁氏恃其强大，背弃王命，驱胡虏以陵中国，可谓逆德矣。
现代文：部下将领傅干对马腾说： 古人说过： 顺德者昌，逆德者亡。 曹操尊奉天子，平定暴乱，法纪严谨，政治清明，上下听从命令，可以称为顺德；袁氏家话族倚仗势力强大，犯上作乱，勾结匈奴来侵掠中国，可以称为逆德。
English: Fu Gan, his subordinate general, said to Ma Teng: The ancients said: Those who follow the German way prosper, those who go against the German way die. Cao Cao worshipped the Son of Heaven, quelled riots, had strict legal discipline, clear politics, and obeyed orders from above and below, which can be called Shunde; the Yuan family, which relied on powerful military forces, committed crimes and caused turmoil, and colluded with the Xiongnu to invade and plunder China, can be called Shunde.

古文：今将军既事有道，不尽其力，阴怀两端，欲以坐观成败；吾恐成败既定，奉辞责罪，将军先为诛首矣！ 
现代文：如今将军已尊奉朝廷，却又暗中骑墙，想坐观成败。我恐怕等到成败定下来之后，曹操奉旨问罪征讨，将军将第一个被杀！ 
English: Now the general has honored the imperial court, but secretly rides the wall and wants to sit and watch the success or failure. I am afraid that after the success or failure is determined, Cao Cao will issue an order to investigate the crime, and the general will be the first to be killed!

古文：于是腾惧。
现代文：马腾听后十分恐惧。
English: Ma Teng was very scared after listening to it.

古文：幹因曰： 智者转祸为福。
现代文：傅干乘机建议说： 明智的人能转祸为福。
English: Fu Gan took the opportunity to suggest: Wise people can turn misfortune into blessing.

古文：今曹公与袁氏相持，而高幹、郭援合攻河东。曹公虽有万全之计，不能禁河东之不危也。
现代文：如今，曹操与袁氏家族相持不下，而高干、郭援合力进攻河东郡，曹操虽然有万全之计，也无为挽救河东郡的危局。
English: Today, Cao Cao and the Yuan family cannot stand each other, and Gao Gan and Guo Yuan jointly attack Hedong County. Although Cao Cao has a perfect plan, it cannot save the perilous situation in Hedong County.

古文：将军诚能引兵讨援，内外击之，其势必举。
现代文：将军假如能在此危急关头领军征讨郭援，内外夹击，必能取胜。
English: If the general can lead the army to enlist Guo's support at this critical juncture and make a pincer attack both at home and abroad, he will surely win.

古文：是将军一举，断袁氏之臂，解一方之急，曹公必重德将军，将军功名无与比矣。 
现代文：将军这一举动，既斩断袁氏家族的臂膀，又解救了河东郡的危急，曹操必然深深感激将军，将军的功名将无人能够相比。 
English: This act of the general not only cut off the arm of the Yuan family, but also rescued the critical situation in Hedong County. Cao Cao must be deeply grateful to the general. No one can compare to the general's achievements.

古文：腾乃遣子超将兵万馀人与繇会。
现代文：于是，马腾派儿子马超率军一万余人与钟繇会合。
English: As a result, Ma Teng sent his son Ma Chao to lead an army of more than ten thousand people to meet with Zhong Yao.

古文：初，诸将以郭援众盛，欲释平阳去。
现代文：起初，将领们看到郭援军势强盛，想放弃平阳离去。
English: At first, the generals saw that Guo's reinforcements were strong and wanted to abandon Pingyang and leave.

古文：钟繇曰： 袁氏方强，援之来，关中阴与之通，所以未悉叛者，顾吾威名故耳。
现代文：钟繇说： 袁氏的势力正强，郭援这次来，关中的势力暗中与他相勾结，他们所以没有全部背叛朝廷，只因为顾虑我的威名罢了。
English: Zhong Qi said, "The Yuan clan's power is strong, Guo Yuan has come this time, and Guanzhong's power is secretly colluding with him. That's why they didn't all betray the imperial court, only because they were worried about my prestige."

古文：若弃而去，示之以弱，所在之民，谁非寇仇？纵吾欲归，其得至乎？
现代文：如果弃平阳而离去，向郭援示弱，则各地的百姓都会成为敌人，即使我想回去，又怎么能退得回去呢？
English: If I abandon Pingyang and go away, if I show weakness to Guo Yuancheng, then people from all over the country will become enemies. Even if I want to go back, how can I go back?

古文：此为未战先自败也。
现代文：这是未作战而先自败退。
English: This is a self-defeating retreat without fighting.

古文：且援刚愎好胜，必易吾军，若渡汾为营，及其未济击之，可大克也。 
现代文：而且郭援刚愎好胜，必然看不起我军，如果他渡过汾河来扎营，趁他未渡完时，我们突然袭击，可获大胜。 
English: Moreover, since Guo Yuan of Gondor was eager to win, he would inevitably look down on our army. If he crossed the Wei River to set up camp, we could make a surprise attack before he had finished crossing the river, and we could win a great victory.

古文：援至，果径前渡汾，众止之，不从。
现代文：郭援到达后，果然直接前行渡河，部下纷纷劝阻，但郭援不听。
English: After Guo Yuan arrived, he went straight ahead to cross the river. His subordinates tried to dissuade him, but Guo Yuan would not listen.

古文：济水未半，繇击，大破之。
现代文：当他部下渡过没有一半时，钟繇率军奋击，大破郭援。
English: When his subordinates were less than halfway across the river, Zhong Hui led the army to fight hard and break through the walls.

古文：战罢，众人皆言援死而不得其首。
现代文：战斗结束后，钟繇部下诸将都说郭援已被杀死，但没有找到郭援的人头。
English: After the battle, the generals under Zhong Hui all said that Guo Yuan had been killed, but no head of Guo Yuan was found.

古文：援，繇之甥也。
现代文：郭援是钟繇的外甥。
English: Guo Yuan is Zhong Yao's nephew.

古文：晚后，马超校尉南安庞德，于鞬中出一头，繇见之而哭。
现代文：后来，马超部下的校尉、南安人庞德从装弓箭的袋子里取出一个人头，钟繇见到后哭了，原来那正是郭援的人头。
English: Later, the captain of Ma Chao's unit, Pound, a Nan'an native, took out a human head from a bag of bows and arrows. When Zhong Yao saw it, he cried. It turned out to be Guo Yuan's head.

古文：德谢繇，繇曰： 援虽我甥，乃国贼也，卿何谢之有！ 
现代文：庞德向钟繇道歉，钟繇说： 郭援虽是我的外甥，但他是背叛朝廷的逆贼，你有什么可道歉的！ 
English: Pound apologized to Zhong Juan. Zhong Juan said: Although Guo Yuan is my nephew, he is a traitor who betrayed the imperial court. What do you have to apologize for?

古文：南单于遂降。
现代文：南匈奴单于看到援军已败，便投降了。
English: The Southern Huns surrendered as soon as they saw that the reinforcements had been defeated.

古文：刘表使刘备北侵，至叶，曹操遣夏侯惇、于禁等拒之。
现代文：刘表派刘备向北进攻，到达叶县。曹操派夏侯、于禁等前去抵挡。
English: Liu He sent Liu Bei to attack to the north, reaching Ye County. Cao Cao sent Xia Hou, Yu Kan and others to resist.

古文：备一旦烧屯去，惇等追之。
现代文：刘备突然放火烧去自己军营，向后撤退。夏侯等率军追赶。
English: Liu Bei suddenly set fire to his own military camp and retreated backwards. Xia Hou and others led the army in pursuit.

古文：裨将军巨鹿李典曰： 贼无故退，疑必有伏。
现代文：裨将军、巨鹿人李典说： 刘备无故撤退，我怀疑定有埋伏。
English: Liu Bei retreated without any reason, and I suspect that there must have been an ambush.

古文：南道窄狭，草木深，不可追也。 
现代文：南边道路狭窄，草木深密，不能追赶。 
English: The road on the south side is narrow and the vegetation is dense, so you can't catch up.

古文：惇等不听，使典留守而追之，果入伏里，兵大败。
现代文：夏侯等不听，命令李典留守而自己领兵追赶，果然陷入埋伏，大败。
English: Xia Hou did not listen, and ordered Li Dian to stay behind while he led the troops to chase after him. As it turned out, he was ambushed and defeated.

古文：典往救之，备乃退。
现代文：李典率军援救，刘备才撤军。
English: Li Dian led the army to rescue, Liu Bicai withdrew.

古文：曹操下书责孙权任子，权召群僚会议，张昭、秦松等犹豫不决。
现代文：曹操发下公文，要孙权派自己的弟弟或儿子到朝廷来作官。孙权召集众官员进行会商，张昭、秦松等人犹豫不决。
English: Cao Cao issued an official document, asking Sun Quan to send his younger brother or son to the imperial court to serve as an official. Sun Quan called together a number of officials for consultations, but Zhang Zhao, Qin Song and others hesitated.

古文：权引周瑜诣吴夫人前定议，瑜曰： 昔楚国初封，不满百里之地。
现代文：孙权领周瑜来见自己母亲吴夫人，在她面前作最后决定。周瑜说： 从前，楚国开始受封于周朝时，统治的区域方圆不到一百里。
English: Sun Quan brought Zhou Yu to see his mother, Lady Wu, and made the final decision in front of her. Zhou Yu said: Once upon a time, when the State of Chu began to be ruled by the Zhou Dynasty, the area ruled was less than a hundred miles in circumference.

古文：继嗣贤能，广土开境，遂据荆、扬，至于南海，传业延祚，九百馀年。
现代文：后继的国君贤明能干，开拓疆土，遂占有荆州与扬州，王业相传延续，达九百多年。
English: Subsequent emperors were wise and capable, and explored the territory, and then occupied Jingzhou and Yangzhou, and the royal heritage continued for more than nine hundred years.

古文：今将军承父兄馀资，兼六郡之众，兵精粮多，将士用命，铸山为铜，煮海为盐，境内富饶，人不思乱，有何逼迫而欲送质！
现代文：如今，将军承袭父、兄的基业，拥有六郡的地盘与人力，兵精粮足，将士听命。上山开采铜矿，沿海炼制食盐，境内富庶，人心安定，有什么压力使咱们要送人质？
English: Today, the general inherits the legacy of his father and brother, has the territory and manpower of six counties, the soldiers are well-fed, and the generals are obedient. Going up the mountain to mine copper, refining salt along the coast, the territory is prosperous, and the people are stable. What kind of pressure makes us want to send hostages?

古文：质一入，不得不与曹氏相首尾，与相首尾，则命召不得不往，如此，便见制于人也。
现代文：人质一送去，就不能不与曹操紧密联系，既然紧密联系，那么朝廷下令征召时就不能不前往。这样，就会被人所控制。
English: As soon as the hostages were sent away, they had to be in close contact with Cao Cao. Since they were in close contact, they had to go when the imperial court ordered conscription. In this way, they would be controlled by others.

古文：极不过一侯印，仆从十馀人，车数乘，马数匹，岂与南面称孤同哉！
现代文：最多不过是得一个侯印，有十几个仆从，几辆车，几匹马，难道与面向南方而称孤道寡相同吗！
English: The most you can get is a seal, a dozen or so servants, a few cars, a few horses. Is that the same as facing south and being called a loner?

古文：不如勿遣，徐观其变。
现代文：不如不送人质，慢慢观察事态变化。
English: It is better not to send hostages and slowly observe the changes in the situation.

古文：若曹氏能率义以正天下，将军事之未晚；若图为暴乱，彼自亡之不暇，焉能害人！ 
现代文：如果曹操真能以君臣大义来治理天下，将军再侍奉他也不晚。如果他图谋不轨，犯上作乱，他救自己都顾不上，又怎么能害人？ 
English: If Cao Cao is really able to rule the world with dignity and justice, it is not too late for the generals to serve him again. If he plots and commits disorder, he will not be able to save himself, and how can he harm others?

古文：吴夫人曰： 公瑾议是也。
现代文：吴夫人对孙权说： 周瑜说得很对。
English: Mrs. Wu said to Sun Quan: Zhou Yu is quite right.

古文：公瑾与伯符同年，小一月耳，我视之如子也，汝其兄事之。 
现代文：他与你哥哥孙策同年，只小一个月。我把作看作自己的儿子，你要当作哥哥来尊敬他。 
English: He is the same age as your brother, Sun Ce, and is only one month younger. I regard Sako as my own son, and you should respect him as a brother.

古文：遂不送质。
现代文：因此决定不送人质。
English: Therefore, it was decided not to send the hostages.

古文：孝献皇帝己建安八年
现代文：建安八年
English: Jianan eight years old

古文：春，二月，曹操攻黎阳，与袁谭、袁尚战于城下，谭、尚败走，还鄴。
现代文：春季，二月，曹操进攻黎阳，与袁谭、袁尚在黎阳城下展开大战，袁谭、袁尚败走，退回邺城。
English: In the spring, in February, Cao Cao attacked Liyang and fought with Yuan Tan and Yuan Shang at the foot of Liyang Castle. Yuan Tan and Yuan Shang were defeated and returned to Fucheng.

古文：夏，四月，操追至鄴，收其麦。
现代文：夏季，四月，曹操大军追到邺城，收割了地里的小麦。
English: In the summer, in April, Cao Cao's army chased the camels to Lucheng and harvested the wheat in the fields.

古文：诸将欲乘胜遂攻之，郭嘉曰： 袁绍爱此二子，莫適立也。
现代文：曹军将领都提出要乘胜攻打邺城，郭嘉说： 袁绍生前喜欢这两个儿子，没能决定让谁作继承人。
English: The generals of Cao's army all proposed to take advantage of the victory to attack Lucheng. Guo Jia said: Yuan Shao liked these two sons when he was alive, but he could not decide who would be his successor.

古文：今权力相侔，各有党与，急之则相保，缓之则争心生。
现代文：如今，他们权力相等，各有党羽辅佐。情况危急，就相互援救；局势稍有缓和，就又会争权夺利。
English: Today, they are equal in power, each with party and faction assistants. If the situation is critical, they will help each other; if the situation eases slightly, they will compete for power and profit.

古文：不如南向荆州以待其变，变成而后击之，可一举定也。 操曰： 善！ 
现代文：不如先向南进取荆州，等待他们兄弟内讧，然后再进攻，可以一举平定。 曹操说： 好！ 
English: It would be better to advance south to Jingzhou first, wait for their brothers to quarrel, and then attack again, so that it could be settled at one stroke. Cao Cao said: Good!

古文：五月，操还许，留其将贾信屯黎阳。
现代文：五月，曹操回到许都，留部将贾信驻守黎阳。
English: In May, Cao Cao returned to Xudu, leaving Jiaxin stationed in Liyang.

古文：谭谓尚曰： 我铠甲不精，故前为曹操所败。
现代文：袁谭对袁尚说： 我的部下铠甲不够精良，所以先前被曹军击败。
English: Yuan Tan said to Yuan Shang: My men's armor is not good enough, so they were defeated by Cao's army before.

古文：今操军退，人怀归志，及其未济，出兵掩之，可令大溃，此策不可失也。 
现代文：现在曹军撤退，人人思归，在他们未完全渡过黄河以前，出兵追击，可使他全军溃散，这种时机，万万不可错过。 
English: Now that Cao's army is retreating, everyone is thinking of returning home. Before they have completely crossed the Yellow River, sending troops to chase them could cause his entire army to break up. This is an opportunity that must not be missed.

古文：尚疑之，既不益兵，又不易甲。
现代文：袁尚疑心袁谭另有打算，既不增加他的兵马，也不肯给他部下更换铠甲。
English: Yuan Shang suspected that Yuan Tan had other plans. He would not increase the number of his soldiers, nor would he allow his men to change their armor.

古文：谭大怒，郭图、辛评因谓谭曰： 使先公出将军为兄后者，皆审配之谋也。 
现代文：袁谭大怒，郭图、辛评乘机对袁谭说： 使已故袁公把你过继给哥哥的，全是审配的主意。 
English: Yuan Tan was furious. Guo Tu and Xin Guan took the opportunity to say to Yuan Tan: The idea of having the late Yuan Gong hand you over to your brother was all about matchmaking.

古文：谭遂引兵攻尚，战于门外。谭败，引兵还南皮。
现代文：袁谭就率军进攻袁尚，在邺城门外大战起来，袁谭战败，率军退回南皮。
English: Yuan Tan led the army to attack Yuan Shang, and a big battle broke out outside the gate of Licheng. Yuan Tan was defeated and led the army back to Nanpi.

古文：别驾北海王修率吏民自青州往救谭。
现代文：袁谭的别驾、北海人王，率领官吏和百姓从青州来援救袁谭。
English: Yuan Tan's second-in-command, the king of the North Sea people, led officials and people from Qingzhou to rescue Yuan Tan.

古文：谭欲更还攻尚，修曰： 兄弟者，左右手也。
现代文：袁谭打算再次进攻袁尚，王劝阻说： 兄弟之间的关系，好比是人的左、右手。
English: Yuan Tan planned to attack Yuan Shang again, but Wang dissuaded him, saying, "The relationship between brothers is like that between a man's left hand and right hand.

古文：譬人将斗而断其右手，曰 我必胜 ，其可乎？
现代文：假如上个人要与别人争斗，先砍断自己的右手，还说 我一定能胜 ，难道对吗？
English: If the previous person wants to fight with others, he should first cut off his right hand, and then say, "I am sure to win," isn't that right?

古文：夫弃兄弟而不亲，天下其谁亲之！
现代文：抛弃兄弟而不亲近，天下还有谁能亲近？
English: Abandoning brothers, not being close to each other, who else in the world would be close?

古文：彼谗人离间骨肉以求一朝之利，愿塞耳勿听也。
现代文：那些进谗言的小人，离间别人的骨肉，只是为了追求眼前的一点小利，希望您塞住耳朵，不要听信。
English: Those small people who are involved in gossiping, alienating the bones and flesh of others, just in pursuit of a little profit in front of you, hope that you plug your ears and do not listen.

古文：若斩佞臣数人，复相亲睦，以御四方，可横行于天下。 
现代文：如果能下决心杀掉几个奸佞小人，与兄弟重相和睦，齐心协力，抵御四方，可以横行于天下。 
English: If you can make up your mind to kill a few villains, make peace with your brothers, and work together to resist the four sides, you can run rampant in the world.

古文：谭不从。
现代文：袁谭不听。
English: Yuan Tan did not listen.

古文：谭将刘询起兵漯阴以叛谭，诸城皆应之。
现代文：袁谭部将刘询在漯阴起兵，背叛袁谭，各城全都响应。
English: Yuan Tan's department raised an army against Liu Zhen in Shuyin, betraying Yuan Tan, and all the cities responded.

古文：谭叹曰： 今举州皆叛，岂孤之不德邪？ 
现代文：袁谭叹息说： 如今全州都叛变，难道是我缺少恩德吗？ 
English: Yuan Tan sighed and said, "Nowadays, the whole state has mutinied. Do I lack grace?

古文：王修曰： 东莱太守管统，虽在海表，此人不反，必来。 
现代文：王说： 东莱郡太守管统，虽然远在海滨，但这个人不会反叛，一定前来追随。 
English: Wang said: Although he is far away from the seashore, the governor of Donglai County, this man will not rebel, he will definitely come to follow.

古文：后十馀日，统果弃其妻子来赴谭，妻子为贼所杀。
现代文：又过了十余天，管统果然抛弃家眷来投奔袁谭，他的家眷被叛军杀死。
English: More than ten days later, the governor abandoned his family to join Yuan Tan, and his family was killed by the rebels.

古文：谭更以统为乐安太守。
现代文：袁谭又委任管统为乐安郡太守。
English: Yuan Tan also appointed Guan Tong as the governor of Le'an County.

古文：秋，八月，操击刘表，军于西平。
现代文：秋季，八月，曹操进攻刘表，大军驻扎西平。
English: In the autumn, in August, Cao Cao attacked Liu Biao, and a large army was stationed in Xiping.

古文：袁尚自将攻袁谭，大破之。谭奔平原，婴城固守。
现代文：袁尚亲自统帅大军进攻袁谭，袁谭大败，逃到平原，据城固守。
English: Yuan Shang personally led an army to attack Yuan Tan. Yuan Tan was defeated and fled to the plains, where he held on to the city.

古文：尚围之急，谭遣辛评弟毘诣曹操请救。
现代文：袁尚将城围住，发动猛攻。袁谭派辛评的弟弟辛毗到曹操那里求救。
English: Yuan Shang encircled the city and launched a fierce attack. Yuan Tan sent his younger brother Xin Bi to Cao Cao for help.

古文：刘表以书谏谭曰： 君子违难不适仇国，交绝不出恶声，况忘先人之仇，弃亲戚之好，而为万世之戒，遗同盟之耻哉！
现代文：刘表写信劝袁谭说： 君子即使避难，也不会逃到敌国；即使与人绝交，也不会进行辱骂。况且你忘掉父亲的仇恨，抛弃了兄弟之情，而作出这种万世都会引以为戒的事情，使同盟之人都为你感到耻辱。
English: Liu Bei wrote a letter to advise Yuan Tan, saying: "Even if a gentleman takes refuge, he will not flee to the enemy country; even if he breaks off relations with people, he will not abuse them. Moreover, you have forgotten your father's hatred and abandoned brotherly love, and have done such a thing that will be admonished for all time, so that all the allies will feel ashamed of you.

古文：若冀州有不弟之傲，仁君当降志辱身，以济事为务，事定之后，使天下平其曲直，不亦为高义邪？ 
现代文：如果袁尚有不尊重兄长的傲慢举动，你也该委曲求全，以大局为重。等到大局已定，再由天下人来评论曲直，不也是高风亮节吗？ 
English: If Yuan Shang has the arrogance of not respecting his elder brother, you should also seek perfection in the overall situation. When the overall situation has been determined, then the world will comment on the overall situation. Isn't it also a high wind and bright festival?

古文：又与尚书曰： 金、木、水、火以刚柔相济，然后克得其和，能为民用。
现代文：刘表又给袁尚写信，说： 金、木、水、火四种物质，以刚柔互配，才能相辅相成，为人所用。
English: Liu Biao also wrote a letter to Yuan Shang, saying: Gold, wood, water and fire are four kinds of substances, and they can only be used by humans if they complement each other with hardness and softness.

古文：今青州天性峭急，迷于曲直。仁君度数弘广，绰然有馀，当以大包小，以优容劣，先除曹操以卒先公之恨，事定之后，乃议曲直之计，不亦善乎！
现代文：袁谭天性急躁，不能明辨是非，你器量宽弘，包容他还绰绰有余，应当以大容小，以优容劣，先除去曹操，以了却你父亲的遗恨。等到大事已定，再来评论谁是谁非，不好吗？
English: Yuan Tan is impatient by nature and cannot distinguish between right and wrong. You are broad-minded and can tolerate him more than enough. You should first remove Cao Cao with the help of big and small, good and bad, and remove your father's hatred. Isn't it better to wait until the big event has been decided and then comment on who is right and who is wrong?

古文：若迷而不反，则胡夷将有讥诮之言，况我同盟，复能戮力为君之役哉？
现代文：如果执迷不悟，则胡人夷人都会讥笑你们，何况我们这些盟友，还会再尽力为你作战吗！
English: If you persist, the barbarians will laugh at you, and what's more, our allies will do their best to fight for you!

古文：此韩卢、东郭自困于前面遗田父之获者也。 
现代文：这正是韩卢狗和东郭兔互相追逐，先行自困，而耕田老农不劳而获的故事的再现！ 
English: This is exactly the reenactment of the story of Han Lu Dog and Dong Guo Hare chasing each other, getting into trouble first, and the old farmer getting out of it without any effort!

古文：谭、尚皆不从。
现代文：袁谭、袁尚都不听刘表的劝解。
English: Neither Yuan Tan nor Yuan Shang listened to Liu Biao's persuasion.

古文：辛毘至西平见曹操，致谭意，群下多以为刘表强，宜先平之，谭、尚不足忧也。
现代文：辛毗到西平拜见曹操，转达袁谭求救的请求。曹操部下官员多认为刘表势大，应当先消灭刘表，袁谭、袁尚自相残杀，不足忧虑。
English: Xin Pi went to Xiping to see Cao Cao and conveyed Yuan Tan's request for help. Most of Cao Cao's subordinate officials believed that Liu Bei was very powerful and should be eliminated first. Yuan Tan and Yuan Shang killed each other, but they were not worried enough.

古文：荀攸曰： 天下方有事，而刘表坐保江、汉之间，其无四方之志可知矣。
现代文：荀攸说： 目前，正是天下英雄争霸之机，而刘表坐守江、汉之间，可知他胸无占有四方的大志。
English: Zou You said: At present, it is the opportunity for the world's heroes to compete for supremacy, and Liu Yibei sits between the river and the Han Dynasty. It can be seen that he has no ambition to occupy the four directions.

古文：袁氏据四州之地，带甲数十万，绍以宽厚得众心；使二子和睦以守其成业，则天下之难未息也。
现代文：袁氏家族占据四州之地，有兵马数十万，袁绍以宽厚而得民心，假如他的两个儿子和睦相处，共守已有的基业，则天下灾难不能平息。
English: The Yuan family occupied the land of Shizhou, with hundreds of thousands of soldiers and horses. Yuan Shao won the hearts of the people with his generosity. If his two sons lived in harmony and jointly protected the existing foundation, the world's disaster could not be calmed.

古文：今兄弟遘恶，其势不两全，若有所并则力专，力专则难图也。
现代文：如今他们兄弟相争，势不两立，如果一个人吞并了另一个人，则力量就会集中起来，力量集中后，再想进取就困难了。
English: Now they are brothers fighting against each other. If one annexes the other, the forces will be concentrated, and after the concentration of forces, it will be difficult to advance.

古文：及其乱而取之，天下定矣，此时不可失也。 
现代文：应该乘他们相持不下时动手夺取，天下就可以平定了。这个机会不能失去。 
English: Take advantage of their civil strife to conquer them, and the world will be leveled. This opportunity must not be lost.

古文：操从之。
现代文：曹操表示同意。
English: Cao Cao followed his advice.

古文：后数日，操更欲先平荆州，使谭、尚自相敝，辛毘望操色，知有变，以语郭嘉。
现代文：过了几天，曹操又打算先平定荆州，让袁谭、袁尚自相削弱。辛毗观察曹操脸色，知道他又改变主意，就去告诉郭嘉。
English: A few days later, Cao Cao again planned to first pacify Jingzhou and let Yuan Tan and Yuan Shang weaken themselves. Xin Bi observed Cao Cao's face and knew that he had changed his mind, so he went to tell Guo Jia.

古文：嘉曰操，操谓毘曰： 谭必可信，尚必可克不？ 
现代文：郭嘉报告曹操，曹操对辛毗说： 袁谭是否一定可信？袁尚是否一定能被攻克？ 
English: Guo Jia reported to Cao Cao, and Cao Cao said to Xin Pi: Is Yuan Tan definitely trustworthy? Can Yuan Shang definitely be conquered?

古文：毘对曰： 明公无问信与诈也，直当论其势耳。
现代文：辛毗说： 您不要问是否有许，只应看整个形势的发展变化。
English: Xinvi said, "Don't ask whether it is permissible or not, just look at the development and change of the whole situation.

古文：袁氏本兄弟相伐，非谓他人能间其间，乃谓天下可定于己也。
现代文：袁谭、袁尚兄弟相争，并未考虑到别人会乘机利用，只是认为天下可由自己平定。
English: Brothers Yuan Tan and Yuan Shang fought each other, not considering that others would take advantage of the opportunity, but thinking that the world could be pacified by themselves.

古文：今一旦求救于明公，此可知也。显甫见显思困而不能取，此力竭也。
现代文：如今，袁谭向您求救，表明他已走投无路；袁尚看到袁谭陷入困境，却不能一举攻破袁谭，说明袁尚也已智穷力竭。
English: Today, Yuan Tan asked you for help, indicating that he had no choice; Yuan Shang saw that Yuan Tan was in trouble, but could not break through Yuan Tan in one fell swoop, indicating that Yuan Shang was also exhausted.

古文：兵革败于外，谋臣诛于内，兄弟谗阋，国分为二，连年战伐，介胄生虮虱，加以旱蝗，饥馑并臻；天灾应于上，人事困于下，民无愚智，皆知土崩瓦解，此乃天亡尚之时也。
现代文：他们的形势是军队在外战败，谋士在内被杀，兄弟内讧，土地割裂，连年征战，将士的甲胄里都长出虱子。再加上旱灾与蝗灾，造成饥荒，天灾人祸，上下交应，百姓无论智慧或是愚笨，都已知道袁氏统治将要土崩瓦解，这正是上天灭亡袁尚的时机。
English: Their situation was as follows: the army was defeated in a foreign war, the advisers were killed inside, the brothers quarreled with each other, the land was divided, the war lasted for years, and lice grew in the armor of the generals. In addition, droughts and locust plagues caused famine, natural disasters and man-made disasters, and the people were in conflict with each other. No matter whether they were wise or stupid, the people already knew that Yuan's rule would crumble and disintegrate. This was precisely the time for heaven to destroy Yuan Shang.

古文：今往攻鄴，尚不还救，即不能自守；还救，即谭踵其后。
现代文：如今您去攻打邺城，袁尚不撤军回救，邺城就不能自守；袁尚返回救援，袁谭就会在后攻击。
English: Now you go to attack Lucheng. If Yuan Shang does not withdraw to rescue, Lucheng will not be able to defend itself. If Yuan Shang returns to rescue, Yuan Tan will attack from behind.

古文：以明公之威，应困穷之敌，击疲敝之寇，无异迅风之振秋叶矣。
现代文：以您的军威，对付穷困之敌，进击疲惫之军，犹如疾风去吹落秋叶一般。
English: Using your military power to deal with an impoverished enemy and attack a tired army is like a gale blowing down autumn leaves.

古文：天以尚与明公，明公不取而伐荆州，荆州丰乐，国未有衅。
现代文：上天把袁尚赏赐给您，您却不去进攻袁尚，而要讨伐荆州。荆州富裕安乐，没有机会可供您利用。
English: Heaven has rewarded you with Yuan Shang, but instead of attacking Yuan Shang, you want to attack Jingzhou. Jingzhou is rich and safe, and there is no opportunity for you to take advantage of it.

古文：仲虺有言， 取乱侮亡 。
现代文：从前仲虺说： 敌人有内乱则夺取，敌人有覆亡迹象则侵入。 
English: Once upon a time, Zhonglu said: If there is a civil disturbance, the enemy will seize it; if there is a sign of collapse, the enemy will invade.

古文：方今二袁不务远略而内相图，可谓乱矣；居者无食，行者无粮，可谓亡矣。
现代文：如今，袁氏兄弟不顾长远大局，自相攻击，可称为内乱；居民饥饿，行人无粮，可称为覆亡的迹象。
English: Now the two brothers of the Yuan family, instead of thinking of a far-reaching strategy, are plotting against each other internally, and it can be said that they are in a state of chaos; the people in the city have no food, and the soldiers of the marching army have no dry grain, and it can be said that they are about to perish.

古文：朝不谋夕，民命靡继，而不绥之，欲待他年；他年或登，又自知亡而改修厥德，失所以用兵之要矣。
现代文：黄河以北的百姓朝不虑夕，性命全无保障，而您不立即去安抚，却要等到以后。以后如果赶上丰收，袁氏兄弟又醒悟到已濒于危亡而痛改前非，则您就将失去用兵的机会。
English: The people north of the Yellow River do not worry about anything, their lives are completely insecure, and if you do not appease them immediately, you will have to wait until later. Later, if the harvest catches up, and the Yuan brothers wake up to the fact that they are in danger and make amends, then you will lose the opportunity to use soldiers.

古文：今因其请救而抚之，利莫大焉。
现代文：现在，利用袁谭求救而去援助，对您是最有利的。
English: Now that Yuan Tan is calling for help and you are appeasing him, there is no greater benefit.

古文：且四方之寇，莫大于河北，河北平，则六军盛而天下震矣。 操曰： 善！ 
现代文：而且您的敌人，没有比占据黄河以北的袁氏更强大的了。您平定黄河以北后，就军威大盛，震动天下了。 曹操说： 对！ 
English: Moreover, there is no enemy of yours more powerful than the Yuan clan, which occupies the area north of the Yellow River. After you have pacified the area north of the Yellow River, your army will be so powerful that it will shake the world. Cao Cao said, "That's right!

古文：乃许谭平。
现代文：于是，答应出兵救援袁谭。
English: As a result, it promised to send troops to rescue Yuan Tan.

古文：冬，十月，操至黎阳。
现代文：冬季，十月，曹操进军到黎阳。
English: In winter, in October, Cao Cao marched into Liyang.

古文：尚闻操渡河，乃释平原还鄴。
现代文：袁尚听到曹军渡过黄河的消息，解除对平原的包围，撤回邺城。
English: Yuan Shang heard the news that Cao's army had crossed the Yellow River, lifted the siege of the plain, and withdrew to Lucheng.

古文：尚将吕旷、高翔畔归曹操，谭复阴刻将军印以假旷、翔。
现代文：正在这时，山区的土著居民山越再度起兵反抗，孙权只好撤军。
English: It was at this time that the indigenous residents of the mountainous region of Shan Yue once again rose up to resist, and Sun Quan had to withdraw his troops.

古文：操知谭诈，乃为子整娉谭女以安之，而引军还。孙权西伐黄祖，破其舟军，惟城未克，而山寇复动。权还，过豫章，使征虏中郎将吕范平鄱阳、会稽，荡寇中郎将程普讨乐安，建昌都尉太史慈领海昏，以别部司马黄盖、韩当、周泰、吕蒙等守剧县令长，讨山越，悉平之。
现代文：孙权经过豫章郡，派征虏中郎将吕范平定鄱阳、会稽，荡寇中郎将程普进讨乐安，由建昌都尉太史慈兼管海昏县事务，委任别部司马黄盖、韩当、周泰、吕蒙等分别兼任山越聚剧县的县令和县长，分别率军讨伐山越，完全平定了山越的反抗。建安、汉兴、南平三县百姓起来反抗，每县都聚集起一万余人。
English: After passing through Yuzhang County, Sun Quan sent the recruiting middle-man, Lv Fan, to pacify Shenyang and Huiqi, and the roving middle-man, Cheng Pu Jin, to pacify Le'an. He also appointed the Jianchang lieutenant, Taishi Ci, to be in charge of Haikou County affairs, and appointed the other departments, Sima Huang Gai, Handang, Zhou Tai, and Lv Meng, to be the county magistrate and the county governor of Shan Yue Juxing County, respectively. They led the army to fight against Shan Yue, and completely quelled the resistance of Shan Yue. The people of Jian

古文：建安、汉兴、南平民作乱，聚众各万馀人，权使南部都尉会稽贺齐进讨，皆平之，复立县邑，料出兵万人；拜齐平东校尉。
现代文：孙权派南部都尉、会稽人贺齐讨伐，全部平定。重建县城，挑选出精兵一万余人，晋升贺齐为平东校尉。
English: Sun Quan sent He Qi, the captain of Nanbu and the auditor of the association, to fight, and everything was settled. The county seat was rebuilt, more than 10,000 elite soldiers were selected, and He Qi was promoted to the rank of Pingdong school captain.

古文：孝献皇帝己建安九年
现代文：建安九年
English: Ninth year of Jianan

古文：春，正月，曹操济河，遏淇水入白沟以通粮道。
现代文：春季，正月，曹操渡过黄河。曹操派人堵住淇水，使共流入白沟，以便运输军粮。
English: In the spring, in the first month, Cao Cao crossed the Yellow River. Cao Cao sent people to block the water and make it flow into the White Ditch in order to transport military grain.

古文：二月，袁尚复攻袁谭于平原，留其将审配、苏由守鄴。
现代文：二月，袁尚又到平原去进攻袁谭，留部将审配、苏由镇守邺城。
English: In February, Yuan Shang went to the plains to attack Yuan Tan again. Remaining troops were assigned to the trial, and Su Yu was assigned to defend Lucheng.

古文：曹操进军至洹水，苏由欲为内应，谋泄，出奔操。
现代文：曹操进军到洹水，苏由打算为曹操作内应，因密谋泄露，苏由就出城投奔曹操。
English: Cao Cao marched into Surabaya. Su Yu, who planned to handle internal affairs for Cao, left the city to join Cao Cao after the conspiracy was exposed.

古文：操进至鄴，为土山、地道以攻之。
现代文：曹操大军到达邺城后，上筑土山，下挖地道，发动进攻。
English: After Cao Cao's army arrived at Lucheng, they built a dirt hill, dug a tunnel, and launched an attack.

古文：尚武安长尹楷屯毛城，以通上党粮道。
现代文：袁尚委任的武安县县长尹楷驻军毛城，以保护通向上党的粮道。
English: Yin Kai, the governor of Wu'an County, who was appointed by Yuan Shang, stationed troops in Maocheng to protect the grain route leading to the party.

古文：夏，四月，操留曹洪攻鄴，自将击楷，破之而还。
现代文：夏季，四月，曹操留曹洪继续攻打邺城，亲自统军进攻尹楷，击败尹楷后回师。
English: In the summer, in April, Cao Cao left Cao Hong to continue to attack Lucheng, personally led the army to attack Yin Kai, and defeated Yin Kai's rearguard.

古文：又击尚将沮鹄于邯郸，拔之。
现代文：又去进攻镇守邯郸的袁尚部将沮鹄，攻陷邯郸。
English: Yuan Shangbu, who went to attack the garrison, would be disheartened and fall into the trap.

古文：易阳令韩范、涉长梁岐皆举县降。
现代文：易阳县县令韩范、涉县县长梁岐都献出县城，投降曹操。
English: Han Fan, the county magistrate of Yiyang County, and Liang Qi, the governor of Shu County, both surrendered the county seat to Cao Cao.

古文：徐晃言于操曰： 二袁未破，诸城未下者倾耳而听，宜旌赏二县以示诸城。 
现代文：徐晃对曹操说： 袁氏兄弟还未被打败，未归降的诸城都在侧耳倾听，应该表彰奖赏这两个县的官员，为那些城作个榜样。 
English: Xu Huan said to Cao Cao: The Yuan brothers have not yet been defeated, and the cities that have not surrendered are listening. The officials of these two counties should be commended and rewarded to set an example for those cities.

古文：操从之，范、岐皆赐爵关内侯。
现代文：曹操听从了，将韩范、梁岐都封为关内侯。
English: Cao Cao obeyed, and Han Fan and Liang Qi were both made Guan Nai Hou.

古文：黑山贼帅张燕遣使求助，操拜平北将军。
现代文：黑山军首领张燕派使者来拜见曹操，请求派军协助曹操进攻袁氏兄弟，曹操委任他为平北将军。
English: Zhang Yan, the leader of the Montenegrin army, sent an envoy to pay homage to Cao Cao and asked him to send troops to assist Cao Cao in attacking the Yuan brothers. Cao Cao appointed him as the general of the North.

古文：五月，操毁土山、地道，凿堑围城，周回四十里，初令浅，示若可越。
现代文：五月，曹操毁去土山、地道，开凿壕沟，包围邺城，围圈达四十里。最初让挖得很浅，看去好像可以越过。
English: In May, Cao Cao destroyed the earthen mounds and tunnels, dug trenches, and encircled Lucheng, with a perimeter of forty miles. At first, the trenches were very shallow, and it looked as if they could be crossed.

古文：配望见，笑之，不出争利。
现代文：审配在城上看见，放声大笑，没有派兵出来破坏。
English: When the overseers of the city saw this, they roared with laughter and did not send their troops out to destroy the city.

古文：操一夜浚之，广深二丈，引漳水以灌之；城中饿死者过半。
现代文：曹操派人乘夜疏浚，一夜之间，挖成深二丈、宽二丈的深壕，把漳河水引入壕沟，完全断绝了邺城内外的联系。城中人饿死大半。
English: Cao Cao sent people to dredge at night. Overnight, they dug a trench two meters deep and two meters wide, and diverted the water of the Min River into the trench, completely severing the connection between the inside and outside of Min City. Most of the people in the city starved to death.

古文：秋，七月，尚将兵万馀人还救鄴；未到，欲令审配知外动止，先使主簿巨鹿李孚入城。
现代文：秋季，七月，袁尚率军一万人回救邺城。在未到前，想让审配了解外面的形势，先派主簿、巨鹿人李孚入城。
English: In the autumn, in July, Yuan Shang led an army of ten thousand men back to rescue Lucheng. Before arriving, in order to let the reviewers understand the external situation, he first sent the master book and the giant deer man Li Fu into the city.

古文：孚斫问事杖，系著马边，自著平上帻，将三骑，投暮诣鄴下；自称都督，历北围，循表而东，步步呵责守围将士，随轻重行其罚。
现代文：李孚砍下树枝作为责打人的刑杖，系在马旁，自己戴上武官用的头巾，率领三名骑兵，黄昏时到达邺城。李孚自称为都督，从北边进入围城的曹军大营，顺着标志，向东巡查，一路上不断叱责守围的将士，根据违反军中法纪的轻重，分别给予处罚。
English: Li Fu cut down a tree branch to use as a cane for beating people, tied it to his horse, put on a military officer's headscarf, led three cavalrymen, and arrived in Handan at dusk. Li Fu called himself the governor, entered Cao's army camp from the north side of the besieged city, followed the sign, and inspected to the east. Along the way, he constantly reprimanded the soldiers guarding the encirclement, and punished them according to the severity of the violation of military discipline.

古文：遂历操营，前至南围，当章门，复责怒守围者，收缚之。
现代文：经过曹操大营前，巡视到城南，对着邺城正南的章门，李孚又大声责骂守围将士，把他们捆绑起来。
English: After passing in front of Cao Cao's encampment, Li Fu inspected the south of the city. He also loudly scolded and tied up the soldiers guarding the Zhangmen Gate, which faces the south of the city.

古文：因开其围，驰到城下，呼城上人，城上人以绳引，孚得入。
现代文：然后，李孚乘机批开营门，急驰到城下，向城上呼喊，城上的守军放下绳子，把李孚等吊上城去。
English: Then, Li Fu took the opportunity to open the gate of the camp, rushed to the bottom of the city, shouted to the city, the defenders on the city put down the rope and hung Li Fu and others on the city.

古文：配等见孚，悲喜，鼓噪称万岁。
现代文：审配等看见李孚，悲喜交加，高声欢呼 万岁 ！
English: The judges saw Li Fu, mixed with sadness and joy, and cheered loudly. Long live!

古文：守围者以状闻，操笑曰： 此非徒得入也，方且复出。 
现代文：守城将士向曹操汇报，曹操笑着说： 这个人不但能进城，还会再出来。 
English: The soldiers guarding the city reported to Cao Cao, who smiled and said, "This man can not only enter the city, but also come out again."

古文：孚知外围益急，不可复冒，乃请配悉出城中老弱以省谷，夜，简别数千人，皆使持白幡，从三门并出降。
现代文：他孚知道外边围困得更紧，不能再假冒曹军出城，就请审配把城中的老弱全都放出城去，以节省粮食。晚上，挑选出老弱数千人，让他们全都手持白旗，从三个城门一同出去向曹军投降。
English: He Fu knew that the siege outside was tighter and that he could no longer pretend to be Cao's army and leave the city, so he asked the judge to release all the old and weak people in the city to save food. In the evening, he selected thousands of old and weak people and let them all hold white flags and go out to surrender to Cao's army from the three city gates.

古文：孚复将三骑作降人服，随辈夜出，突围得去。
现代文：李孚又带领那三个骑兵也打扮成投降人的样子，杂在人群中，乘夜突围而去。
English: Li Fu and his three cavalrymen, also dressed as surrendering soldiers, mingled with the crowd and broke out of the encirclement at night.

古文：尚兵既至，诸将皆以为： 此归师，人自为战，不如避之。 
现代文：袁尚的援军到达以后，曹军将领们都认为： 这是思归之军，人人都将拼死作战，不如先避开。 
English: After Yuan Shang's reinforcements arrived, the generals of Cao's army all thought: This is a returning army, everyone will fight to the death, it is better to avoid it.

古文：操曰： 尚从大道来，当避之；若循西山来者，此成禽耳。 
现代文：曹操说： 袁尚如果从大路来，应当避开；如果沿着西山来，则将被我们击败。 
English: Cao Cao said, "If Yuan Shang comes from the main road, he should avoid it; if he comes along the West Mountain, he will be defeated by us.

古文：尚果循西山来，东至阳平亭，去鄴十七里，临滏水为营。
现代文：袁尚果然沿着西山向邺城出发，在距邺城十七里的阳平亭，在滏水边扎营。
English: Yuan Shang did indeed set out along the West Mountain towards Lucheng, and camped at Yangping Pavilion, 17 miles from Lucheng, on the edge of Lucheng.

古文：夜，举火以示城中，城中亦举火相应。
现代文：晚上，点火告知城中守军，城中也点火相应。
English: In the evening, the defenders in the city were informed of the ignition, and the city was also ignited accordingly.

古文：配出兵城北，欲与尚对决围。
现代文：审配率军出城，驻在城北，准备与袁尚内外夹击，冲破曹军的包围。
English: He led his army out of the city and wanted to fight against Cao's army together with Yuan Shang.

古文：操逆击之，败还，尚亦破走，依曲漳为营，操遂围之。
现代文：曹操迎击审配，审配抵挡不住，退回城里。袁尚也被曹军击败，退到漳河拐弯处安营。
English: Cao Cao met the audition, the audition could not resist and retreated back to the city. Yuan Shang was also defeated by Cao's army and retreated to camp at the bend of the Li River.

古文：未合，尚惧，遣使求降；操不听，围之益急。
现代文：曹操于是包围袁尚营寨，还未安全围住时，袁尚畏惧，派使者向曹操请求投降，曹操拒绝接受，加紧部署包围。
English: Cao Cao then encircled Yuan Shang's encampment. When the encirclement was not yet secure, Yuan Shang was afraid and sent an envoy to Cao Cao to request surrender. Cao Cao refused to accept and intensified the deployment of the encirclement.

古文：尚夜遁，保祁山，操复进围之。尚将马延、张顗等临陈降，众大溃，尚奔中山。
现代文：袁尚乘夜逃走，退守祁山。曹操又进军包围，袁尚部将马延、张等临阵投降，袁尚全军溃散，袁尚逃往中山。
English: Yuan Shang fled by night and retreated to Lushan. Cao Cao marched in and encircled him. Yuan Shang's troops surrendered Ma Yan, Zhang and others in the front line. Yuan Shang's entire army was dispersed and Yuan Shang fled to Zhongshan.

古文：尽收其辎重，得尚印绶、节钺及衣物，以示城中，城中崩沮。
现代文：曹军俘获了袁尚的全部辎重，得到袁尚的印绶、节杖、黄钺以及衣物等，拿去给邺城守军看，守军斗志顿时崩溃。
English: Cao's army captured Yuan Shang's entire treasure, got Yuan Shang's seal, festival staff, yellow scepter and clothes, etc., and took them to the Lucheng defenders. The defenders' fighting spirit suddenly collapsed.

古文：审配令士卒曰： 坚守死战！
现代文：审配命令将士们说： 坚守死战！
English: The trial order to the soldiers said: stick to the death battle!

古文：操军疲矣，幽州方至，何忧无主！ 
现代文：曹操已经疲惫不堪了，袁熙率领的幽州援军就要来到，我们还怕没有人来作主吗！ 
English: Cao Cao is already exhausted, and the Yuzhou reinforcements led by Yuan Xi are about to arrive. Are we afraid that no one will take the initiative?

古文：操出行围，配伏弩射之，几中。
现代文：曹操出营巡视围城部队，审配埋伏强弩射击，几乎射中曹操。
English: Cao Cao went out of the camp to inspect the besieging troops. He was given a trial of ambush and strong-arm shooting. Cao Cao was almost shot.

古文：配兄子荣为东门校尉，八月，戊寅，荣夜开门内操兵。
现代文：审配哥哥的儿子审荣为邺城东门校尉。八月，戊寅，审荣乘夜打开城门，放曹军入城。
English: In August, Wu Yin and his brother's son, Xu Rong, opened the city gate at night and let Cao's army enter the city.

古文：配拒战城中，操兵生获之。
现代文：审配在城中抵抗，被曹军生擒。
English: He resisted in the city and was captured alive by Cao Jun.

古文：辛评家系鄴狱，辛毘驰往，欲解之，已悉为配所杀。
现代文：辛评的家眷被关在邺城监狱中，辛毗赶去，打算救护他们，但全家都已被审配下令杀死。
English: Xin Hui's family members were locked up in the Lushan Prison. Xin Hui rushed to help them, but the entire family had been ordered to be killed.

古文：操兵缚配诣帐下，毘逆以马鞭击其头，骂之曰： 奴，汝今日真死矣！ 
现代文：曹军士兵把审配绑起来带到大帐，辛毗迎面用马鞭猛抽审配头部，大骂他说： 奴才，你今天死定了！ 
English: The soldiers of Cao's army tied up the referee and brought him to the big account. Xin Pi met him with a horsewhip and whipped the referee's head, shouting at him: "Slave, you are doomed today!"

古文：配顾曰： 狗辈，正由汝曹破我冀州，恨不得杀汝也！
现代文：审配瞪着辛毗说： 狗东西，正是由于你们这些人，冀州才遭到曹军蹂躏，我恨不能亲手杀死你。
English: The judge stared at Xin Bi and said, "You dog, it is because of you people that Jizhou was ravaged by Cao's army. I wish I could kill you with my own hands."

古文：且汝今日能杀生我邪？ 
现代文：而且，你今天能决定我的生死吗！ 
English: Moreover, can you decide my life or death today!

古文：有顷，操引见，谓配曰： 曩日孤之行围，何弩之多也！ 
现代文：过了一会儿，曹操接见审配，对他说： 那天我巡视围城部队，你怎么有那么多弓弩！ 
English: After a while, Cao Cao met the matchmaker and said to him, "The day I inspected the besieging troops, how come you have so many bows and arrows!"

古文：配曰： 犹恨其少！ 
现代文：审配说： 我还恨弓弩少！ 
English: The judge said, "I still hate the bow and arrow!"

古文：操曰： 卿忠于袁氏，亦自不得不尔。 
现代文：曹操说： 你效忠于袁氏，也不得不那样做。 
English: Cao Cao said: If you are loyal to the Yuan clan, you have to do that.

古文：意欲活之。
现代文：有心宽恕审配。
English: There is a spirit of forgiveness at the trial.

古文：配意气壮烈，终不桡辞，而辛毘等号哭不已，遂斩之。
现代文：但审配意气壮烈，始终不说一句屈服求饶的话，而辛毗等人在旁号哭不止，曹操遂下令杀死审配。
English: However, the referee was full of vigor and never uttered a single word of submission or begging for mercy, while Xin Pi and others were crying on the sidelines. Cao Cao then ordered the referee to be killed.

古文：冀州人张子谦先降，素与配不善，笑谓配曰： 正南，卿竟何如我？ 
现代文：冀州人张子谦先投降了曹操，他一向与审配关系不好，笑着对审配说： 审配，你到底比我怎么样？ 
English: Zhang Ziqian, a Jizhou native, was the first to surrender to Cao Cao. He had always had a bad relationship with the referee, and said to the referee with a smile: "Referee, how are you compared to me?

古文：配厉声曰： 汝为降虏，审配为忠臣。虽死，岂羡汝生邪！ 
现代文：审配厉声叱责他说： 你是投降的俘虏，而我是忠臣，虽然一死，难道羡慕你活吗！ 
English: The adjudicator scolded him sharply, "You are a surrendered prisoner, but I am a loyal subject. Even if you die, do you envy your life?

古文：临行刑，叱持兵者令北向，曰： 我君在北也。 
现代文：等到行刑时，审配大声命令刽子手让自己面向北方，说： 我的君主在北方。 
English: When it came time for the execution, the judge loudly ordered the executioner to face north, saying, "My lord is in the north."

古文：操乃临祀绍墓，哭之流涕；慰劳绍妻，还其家人宝物，赐杂缯絮，禀食之。
现代文：曹操亲自去袁绍墓前祭祀，痛哭流涕。安慰袁绍的妻子，退还袁家的金银财宝，并赐给绸缎丝绵等，发给生活费用。
English: Cao Cao himself went to Yuan Shao's tomb to offer sacrifices and shed tears. He consoled Yuan Shao's wife, returned the Yuan family's gold, silver and treasures, and gave them silk and satin, etc. to pay living expenses.

古文：初，袁绍与操共起兵，绍问操曰： 若事不辑，则方面何所可据？ 
现代文：起初，袁绍与曹操共同起兵讨伐董卓，袁绍问曹操说： 假如大事不成，有什么地方可以据守？ 
English: At first, Yuan Shao and Cao Cao jointly raised an army to fight against Dong Zhuo. Yuan Shao asked Cao Cao: "If the great event does not come to pass, what place can be defended?"

古文：操曰： 足下意以为何如？ 
现代文：曹操说： 你的意思如何？ 
English: Cao Cao said: What do you mean?

古文：绍曰： 吾南据河，北阻燕、代，兼戎狄之众，南向以争天下，庶可以济乎！ 
现代文：袁绍说： 我南据黄河，北方依靠燕、代地区，召集北方蛮族兵力，向南争夺天下，大概可以成功吧！ 
English: Yuan Shao said: I am south of the Yellow River, and rely on the Yan and Dai regions in the north. I will gather the barbarian troops in the north and compete for the world in the south. I can probably succeed!

古文：操曰： 吾任天下之智力，以道御之，无所不可。 
现代文：曹操说： 我任用天下的贤能智士，加以正确指导，在什么地方都成。 
English: Cao Cao said, "I will appoint wise and capable sages from all over the world to provide the right guidance, and they will succeed everywhere.

古文：九月，诏以操领冀州牧；操让还兗州。
现代文：九月，献帝下诏，任命曹操兼任冀州牧。
English: In September, Emperor Gaozong issued an edict, appointing Cao Cao to concurrently serve as the governor of Jizhou.

古文：初，袁尚遣从事安平牵招至上党督军粮，未还，尚走中山，招说高幹以并州迎尚，并力观变，幹不从。
现代文：曹操接受此职后，辞去所兼兖州牧的职务。起初，袁尚派从事、安平人牵招到上党去监督运输军粮，牵招还没有回来，袁尚已逃到中山。牵招劝说并州刺史高干迎接袁尚到并州来，合力以观察局势变化，高干不听。
English: After Cao Cao accepted this post, he resigned from the post of the provincial governor of Xizhou. At first, Yuan Shang sent and recruited Anping people to supervise the transportation of military grain to Shangdang. However, Yuan Shang had not yet returned, and Yuan Shang had already fled to Zhongshan. He persuaded and recruited high-ranking cadres from the state to meet Yuan Shang when he came to Xizhou, and they worked together to observe the changes in the situation, but the high-ranking cadres would not listen.

古文：招乃东诣曹操，操复以为冀州从事。
现代文：牵招于是到东方投奔曹操，曹操仍任用他为冀州从事。
English: He went to the East to join Cao Cao. Cao Cao still appointed him to work in Jizhou.

古文：又辟崔琰为别驾，操谓琰曰： 昨案户籍，可得三十万众，故为大州也。 
现代文：曹操又延聘崔琰为别驾，对崔琰说： 昨天，我翻阅冀州的户籍，可以征召到三十万人，所以是个大州。 
English: Cao Cao also hired Cui Yao as a second driver, and said to Cui Yao: Yesterday, I looked through the household registration of Jizhou, I can recruit 300,000 people, so it is a big state.

古文：琰对曰： 今九州幅裂，二袁兄弟亲寻干戈，冀方蒸庶，暴骨原野，未闻王师存问风俗，救其涂炭，而校计甲兵，唯此为先，斯岂鄙州士女所望于明公哉！ 
现代文：崔琰回答说： 如今天下分崩离析，袁氏兄弟自相残杀，冀州的百姓陷于水深火热之中，死尸遍布原野而无人掩埋。如今朝廷大军进驻冀州，没有听到有慰问民间疾苦，拯救百姓的举动，反而先计算兵员的数量，唯独将此放在首位，这岂是敝州百姓对您的期望呢！ 
English: Cui Rong replied: If the Yuan brothers fell apart today, the Yuan brothers killed each other, and the people of Jizhou fell into a deep fire, and the dead bodies were all over the fields and no one buried them. Now the imperial army has entered Jizhou, and they have not heard of any actions to comfort the suffering of the people and save the people. Instead, they first counted the number of soldiers, but only put this in the first place. Is this what the people of Zhangzhou expect from you?

古文：操改容谢之。
现代文：曹操改变态度，郑重地向崔琰道歉。
English: Cao Cao changed his attitude and solemnly apologized to Choi Min.

古文：许攸恃功骄嫚，尝于众坐呼操小字曰： 某甲，卿非我，不得冀州也！ 
现代文：许攸仗恃功劳，态度傲慢，曾在众人坐在一起的场合中，喊着曹操的小名说： 曹阿瞒，要不是我，你得不到冀州！ 
English: Xu Yuanzhang was proud of his achievements and arrogant. He once called out Cao Cao's nickname when everyone was sitting together, saying: "Cao Ahzhen, if it weren't for me, you wouldn't have Jizhou!"

古文：操笑曰： 汝言是也。 
现代文：曹操笑着说： 你说得对。 
English: Cao Cao smiled and said, "You're right.

古文：然内不乐，后竟杀之。
现代文：但心里感到不高兴，后来竟杀掉了许攸。
English: But he felt unhappy in his heart and later killed Xu You.

古文：冬，十月，有星孛于东井。
现代文：冬季，十月，有异星出现在东井星旁。
English: In the winter, in October, a strange star appeared next to the Higashii star.

古文：高幹以并州降，操复以幹为并州刺史。
现代文：高幹归降曹操，献出并州，曹操仍任命他为并州刺史。
English: Gao Jian returned to Cao Cao and offered to annex the state, but Cao Cao still appointed him to make history by annexing the state.

古文：曹操之围鄴也，袁谭复背之，略取甘陵、安平、勃海、河间。
现代文：曹操围攻邺城时，原已归降曹操的袁谭又背叛曹操，攻取甘陵、安平、勃海、河间。
English: When Cao Cao besieged and attacked Yingcheng, Yuan Tan, who had already surrendered to Cao Cao, betrayed Cao Cao and captured Ganling, Anping, Bohai and Hema.

古文：攻袁尚于中山，尚败，走故安，从袁熙；谭悉收其众，还屯龙凑。
现代文：袁谭又进攻据守中山的袁尚，袁尚抵挡不住，败走故安，投奔幽州刺史袁熙。袁谭将袁尚的残部全部收编，回军驻扎龙凑。
English: Yuan Tan also attacked Yuan Shang, who was guarding Zhongshan. Yuan Shang could not resist Yuan Tan's attack. Yuan Shang was defeated and fled to Yuan Xi, the governor of Yuzhou. Yuan Tan collected all the remnants of Yuan Shang and stationed the returning troops in Longqin.

古文：操与谭书，责以负约，与之绝婚，女还，然后进讨。
现代文：曹操写信给袁谭，责备他违背誓约，与他断绝婚姻关系，把袁谭女儿送回后，出军讨伐袁谭。
English: Cao Cao wrote a letter to Yuan Tan, reproaching him for breaking his oath, breaking off the marriage relationship with him, sending Yuan Tan's daughter back, and then marching out to fight Yuan Tan.

古文：十二月，操军其门，谭拔平原，走保南皮，临清河而屯。
现代文：十二月，曹军到达其门，袁谭自平原撤出，退守南皮，在清河沿岸布防。
English: In December, Cao's army arrived at his gate. Yuan Tan withdrew from the plain, retreated to Nanpi, and set up defenses along the Qinghe River.

古文：操入平原，略定诸县。
现代文：曹操进入平原。占领诸县。
English: Cao Cao entered the plain and occupied the counties.

古文：曹操表公孙度为武威将军，封永宁乡侯。
现代文：曹操上表推荐公孙度为武威将军，封永宁乡侯。
English: Cao Cao recommended Gong Sun Du as General Wu Wei and assigned him to Yongning Township.

古文：度曰： 我王辽东，何永宁也！ 
现代文：公孙度说： 我已在辽东为王，永宁乡侯算什么？ 
English: Gongsundu said: I have been king in Liaodong, what is Yongning Township?

古文：藏印绶于武库。
现代文：把曹操派人送来的印绶收藏到武器库中。
English: Cao Cao sent someone to collect the printed money into the arsenal.

古文：是岁，度卒，子康嗣位，以永宁乡侯封其弟恭。
现代文：这一年，公孙度去世，他儿子公孙康继位。公孙康把永宁乡侯的爵位封给自己的弟弟公孙恭。
English: In the same year, Gongsundu died and was succeeded by his son Gongsun Kang, who conferred the title of Yongning Township Marquis on his younger brother Gongsun Qiong.

古文：操以牵招尝为袁氏领乌桓，遣诣柳城，抚慰乌桓。
现代文：曹操因牵招曾经受袁绍委任管理乌桓骑兵，因此派他去柳城，安抚乌桓部落。
English: Cao Cao had been appointed by Yuan Shao to manage the Wuhuan cavalry for recruiting, so he sent him to Liucheng to pacify the Wuhuan tribe.

古文：值峭王严五千骑欲助袁谭，又，公孙康遣使韩忠假峭王单于印绶。
现代文：正赶上乌桓峭王动员五千名骑兵，准备去援助袁谭。另外，公孙康也派使者韩忠给峭王送来单于印绶。
English: Just in time, King Wuhuanqiao mobilized five thousand cavalry ready to aid Yuan Tan. In addition, King Sun Kang also sent an envoy, Han Zhong, to King Wuhuanqiao to send him money.

古文：峭王大会群长，忠亦在坐。
现代文：峭王召集各部落酋长会商，韩忠也在座。
English: Qiao Wang convened a personnel meeting, and Han Zhong was also present.

古文：峭王问招： 昔袁公言受天子之命，假我为单于；今曹公复言当更白天子，假我真单于；辽东复持印绶来。
现代文：峭王问牵招说： 从前，袁绍说奉天子之使，委任我为单于；如今，曹操又说要再上表奏请天子，委任我为真单于；如今，曹操又说要再上表奏请天子，委任我为真单于；而辽东又派人送来单于的印绶。
English: Qiao Wang asked: Once upon a time, Yuan Shao said that he was ordered by the Son of Heaven to appoint me as the only one; but now Cao Cao also said that he was ordered by the Son of Heaven to appoint me as the only one. At the same time, the Liaodong governor also came with the seal.

古文：如此，谁当为正？ 
现代文：这样，谁应当是真的？ 
English: In this light, who should be authentic?

古文：招答曰： 昔袁公承制，得有所拜假。中间违错天子命，曹公代之，言当白天子，更假真单于，是也。
现代文：牵招回答说： 从前，袁绍代表天子发号施令，有权封授官爵；后来他违背天子旨意，曹操取代了他，说要奏明天子，重新封你为真单于。
English: He replied, "Once upon a time, Yuan Shao gave orders on behalf of Heaven's Son, and had the power to confer titles of nobility; later, he went against Heaven's Son's will, and Cao Cao replaced him, saying that he wanted to play the role of Heaven's Son, and re-christen you as the true and only one.

古文：辽东下郡，何得擅称拜假也！ 
现代文：辽东不过是一个偏远的小郡，能擅自封授官爵！ 
English: Liaodong is no more than a small, remote county that can give itself a title of nobility!

古文：忠曰： 我辽东在沧海之东，拥兵百馀万，又有扶馀、濊貊之用。
现代文：韩忠说： 我辽东在沧海之东，拥有雄兵百万，夫馀国以及貊部都听命于我。
English: Han Zhong said: My Liaodong is in the east of the sea of vicissitudes, I have a million soldiers, the rest of the country and the south are all under my command.

古文：当今之势，强者为右，曹操何得独为是也！ 
现代文：当今的形势，是强者为首，曹操怎么能唯我独尊！ 
English: In today's situation, the strong take the lead. How can Cao Cao be respected only by me?

古文：招呵忠曰： 曹公允恭明哲，翼戴天子，伐叛柔服，宁静四海。
现代文：牵招大声呵斥韩忠说： 曹公以诚信待人，恭谨明智，辅佐天子，讨伐叛逆，安抚顺服，平定全国的混乱。
English: Han Zhong shouted loudly: Cao Gong treats people with integrity, is respectful and wise, assists the Son of Heaven, combats rebellion, pacifies obedience, and calms the chaos across the country.

古文：汝君臣顽嚣，今恃险远，背违天命，欲擅拜假，侮弄神器；方当屠戮，何敢慢易咎毁大人！ 
现代文：你们辽东上下都顽劣奸诈，嚣张跋扈。如今倚仗地形险要而又远离中原，就背叛朝廷，竟敢擅自封授官爵，侮弄天子，应当处以极刑，怎么敢侮辱诋毁曹公这样的朝中大臣！ 
English: All of you in and around Liaodong are vicious, treacherous, and arrogant. Nowadays, relying on the dangerous terrain and far away from the Central Plains, you have betrayed the imperial court, how dare you arbitrarily confer titles and peerages, mock the Son of Heaven, and should be punished with capital punishment. How dare you insult and defame a minister of the central government like Cao Gong!

古文：便捉忠头顿筑，拔刀欲斩之。
现代文：牵招上前揪住韩忠的头发，把他的头往地上叩按，抽出佩刀，打算杀死韩忠。
English: He then slammed Han Zhong's head into the wall and pulled out a knife to kill him.

古文：峭王惊怖，徒跣抱招，以救请忠，左右失色。
现代文：峭王又惊又怕，光着脚奔过去，抱住牵招，请牵招饶了韩忠。左右之人，都大惊失色。
English: King Koga was terrified. He quickly dragged his bare feet to hold the rope and begged for Han Zhong's life. The people around him were also overwhelmed with fear. King Koga retreated to his seat and told King Koga about the pros and cons of success and failure.

古文：招乃还坐，为峭王等说成败之效，祸福所归；皆下席跪伏，敬受敕教，便辞辽东之使，罢所严骑。
现代文：牵招这才回到座位，为峭王等人分析成败祸福的原因与后果，峭王等酋长们都离开座位，向牵招跪拜，恭敬地接受朝廷命令。峭王等于是把辽东的使臣打发回去，解散了已集结准备援助袁谭的骑兵。
English: It was only then that Tongzha returned to his seat to analyze the causes and consequences of success, failure and misfortune for King Qiao and others. The chiefs, including King Qiao, all left their seats, bowed to Tongzha and respectfully accepted the imperial order. King Qiao sent the envoys from Liaodong back and disbanded the cavalry that had been assembled to assist Yuan Tan.

古文：丹杨大都督妫览、郡丞戴员杀太守孙翊。
现代文：丹阳郡大都督妫览、郡丞戴员杀死太守孙翊。
English: Danyang County's grand governor, Guan Xuan, and county magistrates killed the governor, Sun Yat-sen.

古文：将军孙河屯京城，驰赴宛陵，览、员复杀之；遣人迎扬州刺史刘馥，令往历阳，以丹杨应之。
现代文：将军孙河驻在京城，听到消息后赶赴宛陵，又被妫览、戴员杀死。妫览、戴员等派人去迎接朝廷任命的扬州刺史刘馥，让他住在历阳，他们就以丹阳郡归顺朝廷。
English: General Sun He was stationed in Beijing. After hearing the news, he rushed to Wanling and was killed by Guanxiang and Daijian. Guanxiang and Daijian sent people to meet Liu Ye, the Yangzhou official appointed by the imperial court, and asked him to live in Liyang. They surrendered Danyang County to the imperial court.

古文：览入居军府中，欲逼取翊妻徐氏。
现代文：妫览迁到原先孙翊居住的府第中，打算强迫孙翊的妻子徐氏嫁给自己。
English: Gongshan moved to the middle of the prefecture where Sun Yat-sen originally lived, intending to force Sun Yat-sen's wife, Xu, to marry him.

古文：徐氏绐之曰： 乞须晦日，设祭除服，然后听命。 
现代文：徐氏骗他说： 请您等到这个月底，我祭奠丈夫、脱去丧服之后，再听从您的命令。 
English: Ms. Xu lied to him and said, "Please wait until the end of this month, after I have paid tribute to my husband and taken off my mourning clothes, before I follow your order."

古文：览许之。
现代文：妫览同意了。
English: The survey agreed.

古文：徐氏潜使所亲语翊亲近旧将孙高、傅婴等与共图览，高、婴涕泣许诺，密呼翊时侍养者二十馀人与盟誓合谋。
现代文：徐氏暗中派人与孙翊原来的亲近部将孙高、傅婴等策划共除妫览、戴员。孙高、傅婴流着泪许诺，他们秘密找来孙翊原先的侍卫武士二十余人，共同盟誓，作好安排。
English: Sun Gao and Fu Ying promised with tears that they would secretly find more than 20 of Sun Yat-sen's former bodyguards, swear an oath together, and make arrangements.

古文：到晦日，设祭。
现代文：到月底，徐氏摆设香案，祭奠亡夫，尽情痛哭。
English: By the end of the month, Ms. Xu set up incense, paid tribute to her late husband, and wept bitterly.

古文：徐氏哭泣尽哀，毕，乃除服，薰香沐浴，言笑欢悦。
现代文：祭奠完毕后，就脱下丧服，熏香洗澡，言谈笑语十分欢悦。
English: After the memorial service was over, they took off their mourning clothes, bathed in incense, and chatted and laughed with great joy.

古文：大小悽怆，怪其如此。
现代文：郡府上下的人们，心中都深为悲痛，怪徐氏不该这样。
English: People up and down the county are deeply saddened, and Mr. Xu should not be blamed for this.

古文：览密觇，无复疑意。
现代文：妫览派人秘密观察后，不再怀疑。
English: After sending a person to observe secretly, they no longer doubted.

古文：徐氏呼高、婴置户内，使人召览入。
现代文：徐氏把孙高、傅婴安排在自己房中，然后派人去请妫览进来。
English: Mr. Xu arranged for Sun Gao and Fu Ying to stay in his room, and then sent someone to invite them in.

古文：徐氏出户拜览，适得一拜，徐大呼： 二君可起！ 
现代文：徐氏出门拜见妫览，中拜了一拜，徐氏大叫： 两位将军，可以动手了！ 
English: Mr. Xu went out to see the inspector, bowed for a while, Mr. Xu shouted: Two generals, you can start!

古文：高、婴俱出，共杀览，馀人即就外杀员。
现代文：孙高、傅婴一起出来，共同杀死了妫览，其余的人立即在外边杀死戴员。
English: Sun Gao and Fu Ying came out together and jointly killed the inspector, and the rest of the people immediately killed the attendant outside.

古文：徐氏乃还縗绖，奉览、员首以祭翊墓，举军震骇。
现代文：徐氏于是又换上丧服，用妫览、戴员的人头，祭奠孙翊。全军无不震骇。
English: The Xu clan then changed into mourning clothes and paid tribute to Sun Yat-sen with the heads of soldiers and officers. The whole army was shocked.

古文：孙权闻乱，从椒丘还。至丹杨，悉族诛览、员馀党，擢高、婴为牙门，其馀赏赐有差。
现代文：孙权听到变乱的消息，立即从椒丘回军，到丹阳后，把妫览、戴员余党的全家老小以及亲属统统杀死。提拨孙高、傅婴为牙门，其他有功人员，也都受到不同的党赐。
English: When Sun Quan heard the news of the turmoil, he immediately returned to the army from Jiaokou and, after arriving in Danyang, he killed the entire family, including the elders and children, as well as relatives. Sun Gao and Fu Ying were designated as the gatekeepers, and other meritorious personnel were also given different gifts by the Party.

古文：河子韶，年十七，收河馀众屯京城。
现代文：孙河的儿子孙韶，年仅十七岁，收集孙河的余部守卫京城。
English: Sun He's son, Sun Ye, only seventeen years old, collects the remains of Sun He and guards the capital.

古文：权引军发吴，夜至京城下营，试攻惊之；兵皆乘城，传檄备警，欢声动地，颇射外人。
现代文：孙权率军返回吴郡，晚上到达京城城下安营。孙权为了考察孙韶的能力，假装攻城来惊吓他。孙韶的军队全都登城防守，传递号令，戒备森严，呼声动地，箭矢纷纷向外射出。
English: Sun Quan led the army back to Wu County, and arrived at the foot of the capital city in the evening to set up camp. In order to investigate the ability of Sun Yat-sen, Sun Quan pretended to attack the city to scare him. Sun Yat-sen's army all went to the city to defend, pass on the signal, the guard was strict, the shouts were moving, and the arrows were shot out.

古文：权使晓谕，乃止。
现代文：孙权派人说明情况，城上才停止。
English: Sun Quan sent someone to explain the situation, and the procession only stopped at the castle.

古文：明日见韶，拜承列校尉，统河部曲。
现代文：第二天，孙权接见孙韶，委任他为承烈校尉，统率孙河的部曲。
English: The next day, Sun Quan met with Sun Yao and appointed him as the lieutenant of Cheng Rong, leading Sun He's troops.

古文：孝献皇帝己建安十年
现代文：建安十年
English: Ten years of building security

古文：春，正月，曹操攻南皮，袁谭出战，士卒多死。
现代文：春季，正月，曹操进攻南皮，袁谭率军出战，曹军伤亡惨重。
English: In the spring, the first month, Cao Cao attacked Nanpi, Yuan Tan led the army into battle, Cao's army suffered heavy casualties.

古文：操欲缓之，议郎曹纯曰： 今县师深入，难以持久，若进不能克，退必丧威。 
现代文：曹操准备稍微减缓攻势，议郎曹纯说： 如今，咱们孤军深入，难以持久，如果进不能攻克敌城，一后退就会大损军威。 
English: Cao Cao prepared to slow down the offensive a little, and Cao Chun, the negotiator, said: "Today, our lone army is deep, it is difficult to last. If we can't conquer the enemy city, we will lose our military prestige if we retreat.

古文：乃自执桴鼓以率攻者，遂克之。
现代文：曹操于是亲自擂动战鼓，命令部下进攻，遂攻陷南皮。
English: Cao Cao then personally beat the war drums, ordered his subordinates to attack, and then invaded Nanpi.

古文：谭出走，追斩之。
现代文：袁谭出逃，被曹军追上，杀死。
English: Yuan Tan fled and was caught and killed by Cao's army.

古文：李孚自称冀州主簿，求见操曰： 今城中弱强相陵，人心扰乱，以为宜令新降为内所识信者宣传明教。 
现代文：李孚自称冀州主簿。求见曹操，对曹操说： 现在城中秩序骚乱，百姓不分强弱，相互攻杀，人心惶惶。我认为，应当派遣新近归降而又为城内所认识信任的人去传达您的命令。 
English: Li Fu claimed to be the master of Jizhou. He asked to see Cao Cao and said to Cao Cao: At present, order in the city is in turmoil. The people, no matter how strong or weak they are, are attacking and killing each other, and their hearts are in turmoil. I think that you should send someone who has recently surrendered and who is known and trusted in the city to convey your orders.

古文：操即使孚往入城，告谕吏民，使各安故业，不得相侵，城中乃安。
现代文：曹操立即派李孚入城，告诉城中官民，让他们各安故业，不得互相侵犯，城中才安定下来。
English: Cao Cao immediately sent Li Fu into the city to tell the officials and people in the city that they should not encroach on each other, and that the city should settle down.

古文：操于是斩郭图等及其妻子。
现代文：曹操于是斩杀袁谭的谋士郭图等及其妻子儿女。
English: Cao Cao then killed Yuan Tan's advisor Guo Tu and his wife and children.

古文：袁谭使王修运粮于乐安，闻谭急，将所领兵往赴之，至高密，闻谭死，下马号哭曰： 无君焉归！ 
现代文：袁谭先派王到乐安去运输粮草，王听到袁谭情况危急，赶快率领部队前去援助，走到高密，听到袁谭的死讯，下马号哭说： 没有了主人，我到哪里去呢！ 
English: Yuan Tan first sent Wang to Le'an to transport grain and grass. When Wang heard that Yuan Tan was in a critical situation, he quickly led the troops to go to his aid. When he reached Gaomi, he heard the news of Yuan Tan's death, dismounted his horse and cried, "Without my master, where can I go?"

古文：遂诣曹操，乞收葬谭尸，操许之，复使修还乐安，督军粮。
现代文：就去拜见曹操，请求让他收葬袁谭的尸体，曹操答应了，仍派王到乐安去督运军粮。
English: He went to see Cao Cao and asked him to bury Yuan Tan's body. Cao Cao agreed, but still sent Wang to Le An to supervise the transportation of grain.

古文：谭所部诸城皆服，唯乐安太守管统不下。
现代文：当时，袁谭属下的各城都已归顺曹操，只有乐安郡太守管统未降。
English: At that time, all the cities under Yuan Tan had already surrendered to Cao Cao, except for Le'an County.

古文：操命修取统首，修以统亡国忠臣，解其缚，使诣操，操悦而赦之，辟修为司空掾。
现代文：曹操命令王击斩管统统的人头。王认为管统是效忠故主的忠臣，捉住管统后，解开捆绑他的绳索，让他去拜见曹操。曹操大为高兴，赦免管统，并延聘王为司空掾。
English: Cao Cao ordered the king to strike off the heads of all of Guan Yu's men. The king considered Guan Yu to be a loyal subject who was loyal to the old lord. After capturing Guan Yu, he untied the ropes that bound him and let him go to meet Cao Cao. Cao Cao was overjoyed and pardoned Guan Yu and appointed Wang to be the second-in-command.

古文：郭嘉说操多辟青、冀、幽、并名士以为掾属，使人心归附，操从之。
现代文：郭嘉劝说曹操多延聘青、冀、幽、并四州的名士作为属官，使人心归附，曹操采纳了他的意见。
English: Guo Jia persuaded Cao Cao to hire more famous people from Qing, Hebei, Yu and Shizhou as subordinate officials, and Cao Cao accepted his opinion.

古文：官渡之战，袁绍使陈琳为檄书，数操罪恶，连及家世，极其丑诋。
现代文：官渡之战前，袁绍命令陈琳撰写讨伐曹操的檄文，历数曹操的罪恶，并攻击曹家的祖先，极尽丑化诋毁之能事。
English: Before the Battle of Guandu, Yuan Shao ordered Chen Lin to write an obituary of the crusade against Cao Cao, to count Cao Cao's sins, and to attack Cao's ancestors, and to do everything possible to defame and discredit them.

古文：及袁氏败，琳归操，操曰： 卿昔为本初移书，但可罪状孤身，何乃上及父祖邪！ 
现代文：等到袁绍失败后，陈琳投降曹操，曹操对他说： 你从前为袁结写檄文，只该攻击我本人，为什么要向上攻击到我的父亲、祖父？ 
English: After Yuan Shao's defeat, Chen Lin surrendered to Cao Cao. Cao Cao said to him: You used to write an obituary for Yuan Jie. You should only attack me personally. Why attack my father and grandfather?

古文：琳谢罪，操释之，使与陈留阮瑀俱管记室。
现代文：陈琳谢罪，曹操便赦免他，派他与陈留人阮一同担任主管撰写奏章的记室。
English: When Chen Lin Xie was found guilty, Cao Cao pardoned him and sent him to work with Chen Rui Ren as the head of the music composition office.

古文：先是渔阳王松据涿郡，郡人刘放说松以地归操，操辟放参司空军事。
现代文：先前，渔阳人王松占据涿郡，涿郡人刘放劝说王松以涿郡归降曹操，曹操延聘刘放参议司空府军务。
English: Previously, Wang Song, a fisherman from Yuyang, occupied Min County, Liu Fang, a man from Min County, persuaded Wang Song to surrender Min County to Cao Cao, and Cao Cao retained Liu Fang as a councillor for the Military Affairs Department of the Air Force.

古文：袁熙为其将焦触、张南所攻，与尚俱奔辽西乌桓。
现代文：袁熙受到他自己部将焦触、张南的攻击，与袁尚一起投奔辽西郡的乌桓部落。
English: Yuan Xi was attacked by his own generals, Jiaozhu and Zhang Nan, and together with Yuan Shang, he fled to the Wuhuan tribe in West Liao County.

古文：触自号幽州刺史，驱率诸郡太守令长，背袁向曹，陈兵数万，杀白马而盟，令曰： 敢违者斩！ 
现代文：焦触自称幽州刺史，胁迫所属各郡、县的长官，都背叛袁氏，归顺曹操。焦触等集结数万人的部队，杀死白马，歃血为盟，下令说： 有敢于违抗者，一律斩首。 
English: Jiaozhu, who claimed to be the governor of Yuzhou, coerced the governors of the counties and counties to which they belonged to betray the Yuan clan and surrender to Cao Cao. Jiaozhu and others gathered tens of thousands of troops, killed Bai Ma, shed blood as allies, and ordered: Anyone who dares to resist will be beheaded.

古文：众莫敢仰视，各以次歃。
现代文：众人在威逼之下，都不敢抬头，各自按顺序歃血盟誓。
English: The crowd, under duress, did not dare to raise their heads and swore blood oaths one after the other.

古文：别驾代郡韩珩曰： 吾受袁公父子厚恩，今其破亡，智不能救，勇不能死，于义阙矣。
现代文：别驾、代郡人韩珩说： 我受到袁氏父子的厚恩，如今袁氏已经破亡，我的智谋不能拯救他们，又没有勇气去死节，于君臣大义已经有缺欠。
English: Han Zheng, a representative of the county, said, "I have been favored by the Yuan clan father and son. Now the Yuan clan has been ruined. My wisdom can't save them, and I don't have the courage to die. There is already a deficiency in the great righteousness of kings and ministers."

古文：若乃北面曹氏，所不能为也。 
现代文：如果再去归顺曹操，就更为失节，我不能作这样的事。 
English: If I were to submit to Cao Cao again, it would be even more unseemly. I cannot do such a thing.

古文：一坐为珩失色。
现代文：在场的人都被吓得变了颜色，生怕焦触会立刻杀死韩珩。
English: Everyone present turned pale at his words.

古文：触曰： 夫举大事，当立大义，事之济否，不待一人，可卒珩志，以厉事君。 
现代文：焦触说： 发动大事，应立大义，事情的成败，不在乎一个人，我们可以成全韩珩的志愿，以勉励忠心事主的人。 
English: Jiao Tou said: To launch a great event, it is necessary to establish a great righteousness, the success or failure of the event does not matter to one person, we can fulfill Han Zheng's will to encourage the people who are loyal to the master.

古文：乃舍之。
现代文：于是，听任韩珩离去。
English: After hearing this, Qi Hou released him.

古文：触等遂降曹操，皆封为列侯。
现代文：焦触等就全部归降曹操，都被封为列侯。
English: Jiao Tou and the others all surrendered to Cao Cao and were all made vassals.

古文：夏，四月，黑山贼帅张燕率其众十馀万降，封安国亭侯。
现代文：夏季，四月，黑山军首领张燕率领部下十余万人归降曹操，他被封安国亭侯。
English: In the summer, in April, the leader of the Montenegrin army, Zhang Yan, led more than one hundred thousand of his subordinates to surrender to Cao Cao, and he was crowned Prince of An.

古文：故安赵犊、霍奴等杀幽州刺史及涿郡太守，三郡乌桓攻鲜于辅于犷平。
现代文：故安人赵犊、霍奴等杀死幽州刺史和涿郡太守。辽西、辽东、右北平等三郡的乌桓部落进攻鲜于辅据守的犷平。
English: The late An people Zhao Qian and Huo Nu killed Yuzhou Zishi and the governor of Qian County. The Wuhuan tribe of Liaoxi, Liaodong and Northwestern Equator counties attacked Suiping, which was supported by the governor.

古文：秋，八月，操讨犊等，斩之；乃渡潞水救犷平，乌桓走出塞。
现代文：秋季，八月，曹操大军讨伐赵犊等，杀死赵犊等人。于是，曹军又渡过潞水去援救犷平，乌桓部落退到塞外。
English: In the autumn, in August, Cao Cao's army fought against Zhao Xuan and others, and killed Zhao Xuan and others. Therefore, Cao's army also crossed the Surabaya River to rescue Suiping, and the Wuhuan tribe retreated outside of Tibet.

古文：冬，十月，高幹闻操讨乌桓，复以并州叛，执上党太守，举兵守壶关口。
现代文：冬季，十月，驻守并州的高干听到曹操讨伐乌桓的消息，又背叛曹操，逮捕上党郡太守，派兵拒守壶关口。
English: In the winter, in October, the high-ranking officials stationed in Nianzhou heard the news of Cao Cao's crusade against Wuhuan, and betrayed Cao Cao, arrested Shangdang County's governor, and refused to send soldiers to guard Juguan Pass.

古文：操遣其将乐进、李典击之。河内张晟，众万馀人，寇崤、渑间，弘农张琰起兵以应之。
现代文：曹操派部将乐进、李典进击，河内人张晟聚集起一万余人，侵掠崤山、渑池一带，弘农人张琰起兵响应张晟。
English: Cao Cao sent the troops of Le Jin and Li Dian to attack, the Hanoi people of Zhang Ye gathered more than ten thousand people to invade and plunder the areas of Shaoshan and Dianchi, and the Hongnong people of Zhang Ye raised an army to respond to Zhang Ye.

古文：河东太守王邑被征，郡掾卫固及中郎将范先等诣司隶校尉钟繇，请留之。繇不许。
现代文：河东郡太守王邑受到朝廷征召，郡掾卫固与中郎将范先等去拜见司隶校尉钟繇，请求让王邑留任，钟繇未同意。
English: Wang Yue, the grand marshal of Hedong County, was called up by the imperial court, and the county magistrate Wei Gu and the vice-commander Fan Xian waited for him to go and meet the sub-lieutenant of the regiment, Zhong Qi, to request that Wang Yue be allowed to remain in office, but Zhong Qi did not agree.

古文：固等外以请邑为名，而内实与高幹通牒。
现代文：卫固等表面上是请求挽留王邑，实际上却暗中与高干勾结。
English: On the surface, Wei Gu and others are requesting to retain Wang Yue, but in fact they are secretly colluding with Gao Gan.

古文：曹操谓荀彧曰： 关西诸将，外服内贰，张晟寇乱殽、渑，南通刘表，固等因之，将为深害。
现代文：曹操对荀说： 函谷关以西的将领们，表面上服从朝廷，却怀有二心。张晟等侵犯崤山、渑池一带，向南与荆州的刘表联合，卫固等乘机起事，将会成为我们的心腹大患。
English: Cao Cao said to Yao: The generals west of the Hangu Pass, on the face of it, obey the imperial court, but they harbor double-mindedness. Zhang Ye and others encroached on the Lushan and Dianchi areas, Liu Biao allied with Jingzhou to the south, and Weigu and others took advantage of the opportunity to rise up, and they will become our greatest threat.

古文：当今河东，天下之要地也，君为我举贤才以镇之。 
现代文：现在河东郡是天下的冲要之地，你为我推荐一个贤能的人才，来镇守河东。 
English: Now that Hedong County is the most important place in the world, you recommend a capable person for me to guard Hedong.

古文：彧曰： 西平太守京兆杜畿，勇足以当难，智足以应变。 
现代文：荀说： 西平郡太守、京兆人杜畿，他的勇气足以承当危难，智谋足以应付变化莫测的局势。 
English: Zou said: Dugi, the grand marshal of Xiping County and a citizen of Beijing and Shandong Province, is courageous enough to bear the danger and resourceful enough to cope with the unpredictable situation.

古文：操乃以畿为河东太守。
现代文：曹操就任命杜畿为河东郡太守。
English: Cao Cao then appointed Du Gui as the governor of Hedong County.

古文：钟繇促王邑交符，邑佩印绶，径从河北诣许自归。
现代文：钟繇催促王邑办理移交，王邑却携带印绶，自己直接从河东郡属下的河北县去许都，向朝廷报到。
English: Zhong Qi urged Wang Yip to handle the transfer, but Wang Yip carried the seal and went directly from Hebei County, which belongs to Hedong County, to Xudu to report to the imperial court.

古文：卫固等使兵数千人绝陕津，杜畿至，数月不得渡。
现代文：卫固等派兵数千人切断黄河上的陕津渡口，杜畿到达河边，几个月不能渡过黄河。
English: Wei Gu and others sent thousands of soldiers to cut off the Shaanxi-Tianjin ferry on the Yellow River. Dugui reached the river and could not cross the Yellow River for several months.

古文：操遣夏侯惇讨固等，未至，畿曰： 河东有三万户，非皆欲为乱也。
现代文：曹操派遣夏侯率军讨伐卫固等，还未开到，杜畿说： 河东郡有三万户百姓，并不是都想背叛朝廷。
English: Cao Cao dispatched Xia Hou to lead an army to fight against Wei Gu, but before they arrived, Du Gui said: There are thirty thousand households in Hedong County, and not all of them want to betray the imperial court.

古文：今兵迫之急，欲为善者无主，必惧而听于固。固等势专，必以死战。
现代文：现在大军如果逼迫太急，想要顺从朝廷的人无人引导，必然因畏惧而听从卫固的指挥，卫固等人的势力会更加强大。
English: Now, if the persecution of the great army is too urgent, and those who want to obey the imperial court are unguided, they will inevitably obey the command of Weigu out of fear. The power of Weigu and others will be more powerful.

古文：讨之不胜，为难未已；讨之而胜，是残一郡之民也。
现代文：大军讨伐不能取胜，就难于结束这场灾难；即使征伐得胜，也会使一郡的百姓都受到残害。
English: If a large-scale military campaign cannot be won, it will be difficult to end this disaster; even if the campaign is won, it will cause the people of a county to be destroyed.

古文：且固等未显绝王命，外以请故君为名，必不害新君。
现代文：而且卫固等人没有公开背叛朝廷，表面上以要求旧长官留任为理由，必然不会谋害新长官。
English: Moreover, Weigu and others did not show that they must resist the imperial edict. To the outside world, it was in the name of delaying the original Taishou, and it would not hurt the new Taishou.

古文：吾单车直往，出其不意，固为人多计而无断，必伪受吾。
现代文：我只乘一辆车直接去上任，出其不意，卫固为人谋略虽多，但缺乏决断，必然会假意接纳我。
English: I only took one car to go directly to the office. To my surprise, Wei Guo had many strategies, but lacked determination, and would inevitably accept me.

古文：吾得居郡一月，以计縻之，足矣。 
现代文：我只要能在郡中待一个月的时间，用计策稳住他，就足够了。 
English: I only need to be able to stay in the county for a month and keep him stable with strategies. That's enough.

古文：遂诡道从郖津度。
现代文：于是，杜畿绕道从津渡过黄河。
English: As a result, the Dugi Bypass crossed the Yellow River from Tsu.

古文：范先欲杀畿以威众，且观畿去就，于门下斩杀主簿已下三十馀人，畿举动自若。
现代文：范先想杀死杜畿，以威胁部众。后来决定先观察杜畿的态度，就在郡府的门前杀死主簿以下三十余人。杜畿毫不在乎，言谈举止都没有改变常态。
English: Fan Xian wanted to kill Dugui and threatened his subordinates. Later, he decided to observe Dugui's attitude first and killed more than 30 people, including the headmaster, in front of the county government. Dugui didn't care at all, and his speech and behavior didn't change from the norm.

古文：于是固曰： 杀之无损，徒有恶名；且制之在我。 
现代文：因此，卫固说： 杀了他并没有好处，只会招来恶名，而且他是被控制在咱们手里。 
English: Therefore, Weigu said, "There is no benefit in killing him, it will only bring bad reputation, and he is controlled in our hands."

古文：遂奉之。畿谓固、先曰： 卫、范，河东之望也，吾仰成而已。
现代文：于是，卫固等人就正式尊奉杜畿为河东郡的太守。杜畿对卫固、范先说： 你们卫家、范家，是河东郡的两大望族，我要仰仗你们来办事。
English: As a result, Weigu and others officially honored Dugi as the governor of Hedong County. Dugi said to Weigu and Fansen: You, the Weigu family and the Fansen family, are the two most respected families in Hedong County, and I will rely on you to do things.

古文：然君固有定义，成败同之，大事当共平议。 
现代文：然而咱们有长官、部属的确定名分，今后要有福共享，有难同担，遇到大事要共同商量。 
English: However, we have a certain number of officers and subordinates. In the future, we must share the blessings, share the burdens, and discuss major issues together.

古文：以固为都督，行丞事，领功曹。将校吏兵三千馀人，皆范先督之。
现代文：杜畿委任卫固为都督，代理郡丞的职务，又兼任功曹；全郡的大小将领及兵士有三千多人，都由范先指挥。
English: Dugui appointed Weigu as the governor of the county, acting as the county magistrate, and also served as a meritorious officer; there are more than 3,000 generals and soldiers in the county, all commanded by Fan Xian.

古文：固等喜，虽阳事畿，不以为意。
现代文：卫固等心中大喜，虽然表面上服从杜畿，实际上没把他当回事。
English: Weigu and the others were very happy. Although they pretended to serve Dugui, they didn't really care about him.

古文：固欲大发兵，畿患之，说固曰： 今大发兵，众情必扰，不如徐以赀募兵。 
现代文：卫固要大举征发全郡百姓当兵，杜畿担心这样会使他的力量大为增长，就对卫固说： 如今要是大量征发百姓，会使民心骚动，不如采用募兵的方式慢慢来。 
English: Weigu wanted to conscript a large number of people from the whole county as soldiers. Dugui was worried that this would greatly increase his power, so he said to Weigu, "If we conscript a large number of people now, it will stir up the people's hearts. It is better to use the method of conscripting soldiers slowly."

古文：固以为然，从之，得兵甚少。
现代文：卫固认为有理，同意杜畿的方法，但募到的士兵很少。
English: Weigu thought it was reasonable and agreed with Dugui's method, but few soldiers were recruited.

古文：畿又喻固等曰： 人情顾家，诸将掾史，可分遣休息，急缓召之不难。 
现代文：杜畿又对卫固说： 顾念家庭，是人之常情，各级将领和郡中文职官吏，可以让他们轮流休息，到情况需要时，再征召他们，也不困难。 
English: Dugui also said to Weigu: It is human nature to be concerned about one's family. Generals at all levels and county-level Chinese officials can take turns to rest them, and it is not difficult to conscript them again when the situation requires.

古文：固等恶逆众心，又从之。
现代文：卫固等不愿因拒绝杜畿的建议而招来众人的怨恨，也同意了。
English: Wei Gu and others were worried that they had gone against the will of the people and followed Dugui's words.

古文：于是善人在外，阴为己援；恶人分散，各还其家。
现代文：这样，善人在外边可以暗中相助，而与卫固等同谋的恶人都各自回家。
English: In this way, the good people can secretly help each other outside, while the evil people who conspire with Wei Gu and others all go home separately.

古文：会白骑攻东垣，高幹入濩泽。
现代文：正在这时，有一股号称白骑的武装力量进攻东垣，高干也率军进入泽。
English: At this time, a group of armed forces known as the White Horsemen attacked Donggaki, and Gao Gan also led the army into Ze.

古文：畿知诸县附己，乃出，单将数十骑，赴坚壁而守之，吏民多举城助畿者，比数十日，得四千馀人。
现代文：杜畿知道诸县都已归附自己，就离开郡城，只身率领数十名骑兵，选择一个坚固的营寨进行防守。属下各县的官吏与百姓都纷纷占据城池，援助杜畿。到几十天后，杜畿已有四千多人。
English: Knowing that all the counties had been annexed to him, Dugui left the county seat, led dozens of cavalry alone, and chose a strong camp to defend. Officials and people from all the counties under his control occupied the castle one after another to help Dugui. A few dozen days later, there were more than four thousand people in Dugui.

古文：固等与高幹、张晟共攻畿，不下，略诸县，无所得。
现代文：卫固与高干、张晟合兵进攻杜畿据守的营寨，未能攻下；又去周围各县抢掠粮草，也没有收获。
English: Wei Gu, Gao Gan and Zhang Ye jointly attacked the encampment defended by Dugi, but failed to capture it; they also went to the surrounding counties to loot grain and grass, but there was no harvest.

古文：曹操使议郎张既西征关中诸将马腾等，皆引兵会击晟等，破之，斩固、琰等首，其馀党与皆赦之。
现代文：曹操派议郎张既西得，去关中征调马腾等将领平定叛乱，他们都出兵联合进攻张晟等，大获全胜，斩杀卫固、张琰等人，赦免了其余的党羽。
English: Cao Cao sent his mediator Zhang Ye Xi to Guanzhong to recruit and transfer Ma Teng and other generals to quell the rebellion. They all sent troops to jointly attack Zhang Ye and others, won a complete victory, killed Weigu, Zhang Ye and others, and pardoned the rest of the party.

古文：于是杜畿治河东，务崇宽惠。
现代文：从此，杜畿治理河东郡，以宽大为主，广施仁惠。
English: Since then, Dudong County has been governed by Du Gui, who has been generous and benevolent.

古文：民有辞讼，畿为陈义理，遣归谛思之，父老皆自相责怒，不敢讼。
现代文：百姓有来打官司的，杜畿为他们讲解仁义道德，分析事理，让他们回去好好考虑。父老们都自相责备，不敢再去告状。
English: When people came to sue, Du Gui explained to them the principles of benevolence and morality, analyzed the facts, and asked them to go back and think about it. The parents blamed each other and did not dare to sue again.

古文：劝耕桑，课畜牧，百姓家家丰实。
现代文：杜畿劝勉百姓努力耕田，种桑养蚕，鼓励他们饲养牲畜，使得家家都富裕起来。
English: Dugui exhorted the people to work hard to cultivate fields, grow mulberry and raise silkworms, encourage them to raise livestock, and make their families rich.

古文：然后兴学校，举孝弟，修戎事，讲武备，河东遂安。
现代文：然后，又兴建学堂，推举孝顺父母、友爱兄弟的人；修造城防，制作武器，加强作战训练；河东郡便安定下来。
English: Then, they built a school and promoted those who were filial to their parents and loved their brothers and sisters; they built city defenses, made weapons, and strengthened combat training; and Hedong County stabilized.

古文：畿在河东十六年，常为天下最。
现代文：杜畿在河东郡任职十六年，政绩常常为天下第一。
English: Dugui served as the governor of Hedong County for 16 years, and his political performance was often the best in the world.

古文：秘书监、侍中荀悦作《申鉴》五篇，奏之。
现代文：秘书监、侍中荀悦，撰写《申鉴》五篇，上奏给献帝。
English: Secretary supervisor, chambermaid Mi Yue, wrote five articles of "Shen Jian" and submitted them to Emperor Xian.

古文：悦，爽之兄子也。
现代文：荀悦是荀爽哥哥的儿子。
English: Hao Yue is the son of Hao Shuang's elder brother.

古文：时政在曹氏，天子恭己，悦志在献替，而谋无所用，故作是书。
现代文：当时，政权掌握在曹操手中，献帝只是表面上的最高统治者，荀悦有志为朝廷贡献自己的才干，但他的谋略都无处施展，所以著述此书。
English: At that time, the political power was in the hands of Cao Cao, and Emperor Xian was only the supreme ruler on the surface. Mu Yue had the ambition to contribute his talents to the imperial court, but his strategies were nowhere to be applied, so he wrote this book.

古文：其大略曰：为政之术，先屏四患，乃崇五政。
现代文：书中的主要内容是： 治理天下的办法，首先是消灭 四患 ，然后要推行 五致 。
English: The main content of the book is: the way to govern the world, first of all, is to eliminate the four diseases, and then to implement the five principles.

古文：伪乱欲，私坏法，放越轨，奢败制：四者不除，则政末由行矣，是为四患。
现代文：以虚伪败坏风谷。用私心破坏法纪，行为放荡而超越正常规定，奢侈靡费而损坏国家制度，不消灭这四种现象，就无法推行政令，所以称之为 四患 。
English: Hypocrisy corrupts the valley of winds. Selfishness undermines legal discipline, debauchery exceeds normal regulations, and extravagance damages the national system. Without eliminating these four phenomena, it is impossible to promote executive orders, so they are called the four plagues.

古文：兴农桑以养其生，审好恶以正其俗，宣文教以章其化，立武备以秉其威，明常罚以统其法，是谓五政。
现代文：振兴农业与桑蚕业，以保障百姓生活；分辨善恶，以纠正民间习俗；推行文化教育，以改善社会风气；建立武备，以维持朝廷的威严；赏罚分明，以统一法令，这就是 五政 。
English: Revitalizing agriculture and the mulberry silkworm industry to ensure the livelihood of the people; distinguishing between good and evil to correct folk customs; promoting cultural education to improve social morals; establishing armed forces to maintain the majesty of the imperial court; clear rewards and punishments to unify laws and regulations, these are the five policies.

古文：人不畏死，不可惧以罪；人不乐生，不可劝以善。
现代文：百姓不怕死，就不要以刑罚来恐吓他们；百姓没有生趣，就不可能劝导他们向善。
English: If the people do not fear death, do not threaten them with punishment; if the people have no zest for life, it is impossible to persuade them to do good.

古文：故在上者，先丰民财以定其志，是谓养生。
现代文：所以，身居高位的人，要先使百姓富足起来。使他人安居乐业，这就是保障民生。
English: Therefore, people in high positions must first make the people rich. To make others live and work in peace, this is to ensure the people's livelihood.

古文：善恶要乎功罪，毁誉效于准验，听言责事，举名察实，无或作伪以荡众心。
现代文：对于善、恶，要以功、罪为标准来判定；对于毁谤与赞誉，要用实际效果来进行检验。
English: For good and evil, it is necessary to judge by the standard of merit and sin; for slander and praise, it is necessary to use the actual effect to carry out the inspection.

古文：故欲无奸怪，民无淫风，是谓正俗。荣辱者，赏罚之精华也。
现代文：对人不仅要听他的言论，更要观察他的行为；不被他的名声所困扰，要考察他是否名实相符；不能让虚伪狡诈的人得逞，免得人们去纷纷仿效。因此，没有奸怪的习俗，民间没有乱之风，这就是纠正民俗。
English: With regard to a person, we should not only listen to his speech, but also observe his behavior; we should not be troubled by his reputation, but should examine whether his name is true; we should not let the hypocritical and cunning person succeed, lest people follow suit. Therefore, there is no treacherous custom, and the folk have no chaotic style. This is the correction of folk customs.

古文：故礼教荣辱以加君子，化其情也；桎梏鞭扑以加小人，化其形也。
现代文：奖励与羞辱是赏赐、惩罚的核心，所以礼教规定，荣誉与羞辱只能施加于君子，以改变他们的内心；枷锁与鞭笞则专用来对付小人，以改变他们的行为。
English: Reward and humiliation are the core of reward and punishment, so the etiquette stipulates that honor and humiliation can only be imposed on gentlemen to change their hearts; shackles and whips are exclusively used to deal with villains to change their behavior.

古文：若教化之废，推中人而坠于小人之域，教化之行，引中人而纳于君子之涂，是谓章化。
现代文：如果不推行教化，就会使中等资质的人也堕落成小人；而推行教化，就能使这些中等资质的人升为君子；这就是改善社会风气。
English: If there is no indoctrination, it will make the middle-class people also degenerate into villains; and if there is indoctrination, it will make these middle-class people become gentlemen; this is to improve the social morale.

古文：在上者必有武备以戒不虞，安居则寄之内政，有事则用之军旅，是谓秉威。
现代文：作为统治者，必然要拥有军队，以防备不能预料的变化，平时用来管理内政，战时则效命疆场，这就是维持威严。
English: As a ruler, it is necessary to have an army to guard against unforeseen changes, to manage domestic affairs in peacetime, and to fight in wartime. This is to maintain dignity.

古文：赏罚，政之柄也。
现代文：赏赐与惩罚，是执政的权柄。
English: Reward and punishment are political means.

古文：人主不妄赏，非爱其财也，赏妄行，则善不劝矣；不妄罚，非矜其人也，罚妄行，则恶不惩矣。赏不劝，谓之止善，罚不惩，谓之纵恶。
现代文：君王不随意赏赐，并不是爱息财物，而是因为，随意赏赐，就不能用赏赐来劝导人们行善；君王五不随意惩罚，并不是姑息怜悯，而是因为，随意惩罚，就不能使惩罚来打击犯罪。
English: The king does not reward at will, not because he loves wealth and possessions, but because, if he rewards at will, he cannot use the reward to persuade people to do good; the king does not punish at will, not because he is indulgent and compassionate, but because, if he punishes at will, he cannot use the punishment to fight crime.

古文：在上者能不止下为善，不纵下为恶，则国法立矣。是谓统法。
现代文：赏赐而没有起到劝导的作用，就是阻止人们行善；惩罚而没有起倒打击的作用，就是纵容人们作恶。作为统治者，能够不阻止下面的人行善，不纵容下面的人作恶，则国法确立，这就是统一法令。
English: When a monarch is able not to prevent the people below from doing good and not to indulge the people below in doing evil, the country's legal discipline will be established. This is called unification of laws.

古文：四患既蠲，五政又立，行之以诚，守之以固，简而不怠，疏而不失，垂拱揖让，而海内平矣。
现代文：除去了 四患 ，又建立了 五政 ，诚心诚意地执行，长期坚持，简要而不懈怠，疏阔而不遗漏。这样，不需劳神费心，天下就能太平了。 
English: Eliminate the four diseases, and establish the five policies, sincerely implement, long-term adhere to, concise but not slack, broad but not omitted. In this way, without much effort, the world can be peaceful.

