古文：十有二年春，王三月，纪叔姬归于酅。
现代文：十二年春季，周历正月，纪国国君的夫人叔姬回到酅方。
English: In the spring of the twelfth year, in the first month of the lunar calendar, Ji Guo Guojun's wife, Shuhi, returned to Shifang.

古文：夏四月。
现代文：夏季四月，无事。
English: In the summer, in April, nothing.

古文：秋八月甲午，宋万弑其君捷，及其大夫仇牧。
现代文：秋季八月甲午日，宋国的南宫长万在蒙泽杀死了宋闵公，和大夫仇牧。
English: On the afternoon of the first day of August in autumn, Wan, the Southern Palace Master of the Song Dynasty, killed Song Xuan Gong in Mengze, and the doctor took revenge on Mu.

古文：冬十月，宋万出奔陈。
现代文：冬季十月，宋国的南宫长万逃到了陈国。
English: In the winter of October, Nan Gong Chang Wan of Song fled to Chen.

古文：十二年秋，宋万弑闵公于蒙泽。
现代文：十二年秋季，宋国的南宫长万在蒙泽杀死了宋闵公。
English: In the autumn of the twelfth year, the head of the Southern Court of the Song Dynasty, Wan, killed Song Xuan Gong in Mengze.

古文：遇仇牧于门，批而杀之。
现代文：他在城门口遇到仇牧，反手便打死了他。
English: He met his enemy at the gate of the city and killed him with his backhand.

古文：遇大宰督于东宫之西，又杀之。
现代文：在东宫的西面遇到太宰华督，又杀了他。
English: He met Dazai Huadu on the west side of the East Palace and killed him.

古文：立子游。
现代文：拥立子游为国君。
English: Oshidate Ziyu became the sovereign.

古文：群公子奔萧，公子御说奔亳。南宫牛、猛获帅师围亳。
现代文：公子们都逃亡到萧邑，而公子御说逃亡到亳地，南宫牛、猛获率领军队包围了亳地。
English: The nobles all fled to Xiao'i, and the nobles said that they fled to Handan. Nan Gong Niu and Meng Guo led the army to surround Handan.

古文：冬十月，萧叔大心及戴、武、宣、穆、庄之族，以曹师伐之。
现代文：冬季，十月，萧叔大心和宋戴公、武公、宣公、穆公、庄公的族人借调曹国的军队付伐南宫牛和猛获。
English: In the winter, in October, Xiao Shudaxin and Song Dai Gong, Wu Gong, Xuan Gong, Mu Gong and Zhuang Gong's relatives were seconded to Cao's army to attack the Southern Palace and captured the cattle.

古文：杀南宫牛于师，杀子游于宋，立桓公。
现代文：在阵前杀死了南宫牛，在宋国都城杀死了子游，拥立宋桓公为国君。
English: He killed Nan Gong Niu before the battle, killed Ziyu in the capital city of Song, and supported Song Huan Gong as the king.

古文：猛获奔卫；南宫万奔陈，以乘车辇其母，一日而至。
现代文：猛获逃亡到卫国，南宫长万逃亡到陈国，长万自己驾车拉着他母亲，一天就到达了。
English: Nan Gong Chowan fled to Chen Province, and Chowan himself drove his mother and arrived one day later.

古文：宋人请猛获于卫。
现代文：宋国人到卫国请求归还猛获。
English: Song people came to the defense of the country to request the return of the loot.

古文：卫人欲勿与，石祁子曰： 不可。
现代文：卫国人想不给他们。石祁子说： 不行。
English: The defenders of the country wanted to give it to them, but Ishizuko said, "No, we can't."

古文：天下之恶一也，恶于宋而保于我，保之何补？
现代文：普天下的邪恶都是一样可恶的，在宋国作恶而在我国受到保护，保护了他有什么好处？
English: All the evil in the world is equally abominable. If a person commits evil in Song and is protected in our country, what is the benefit of protecting him?

古文：得一夫而失一国，与恶而弃好，非谋也。 
现代文：得到一个人而失去一个国家，结交邪恶的人而丢掉友好的国家，这不是好主意。 
English: It is not a good idea to gain a man and lose a country, to associate with evil men and throw away a friendly country.

古文：卫人归之。
现代文：卫国人把猛获归还给了宋国。
English: The defenders of the country returned the booty to Song.

古文：亦请南宫万于陈，以赂。
现代文：宋国又到陈国请求归还南宫长万，并且施以贿赂。
English: Song also went to Chen to request the return of Nan Gong Changwan and offered bribes.

古文：陈人使妇人饮之酒，而以犀革裹之，比及宋，手足皆见。
现代文：陈国人让女人劝南宫长万饮酒，灌醉了他就用犀牛皮把他包了起来。等到达宋国时，南宫长万的手脚都露出来了。
English: Chen asked the woman to persuade Nan Gong Chang Wan to drink alcohol, and when he was drunk, she wrapped him in rhinoceros hide. By the time he reached Song, Nan Gong Chang Wan's hands and feet were exposed.

古文：宋人皆醢之。
现代文：宋国人把猛获和南宫长万剁成了肉酱。
English: The Song people turned the booty and the Nan Gong Chang Wan Jie into meat sauce.

