古文：道至高无上，至深无下，平乎准，直乎绳，圆乎规，方乎矩，包裹宇宙而无表里，洞同覆载而无所碍。
现代文：道高到没有顶点，深到没有底部；它比水准平，比墨绳直，比规圆，比矩方；它包容宇宙天地无内外之分，混沌覆载万物没有阻碍。
English: The Tao is so high that it has no top, and so deep that it has no bottom; it is flatter than a level, straighter than an ink rope, rounder than a circle, and squarer than a square; it embraces the universe with no distinction between inside and outside, and covers all things with no obstacles.

古文：是故体道者，不哀不乐，不喜不怒，其坐无虑，其寝无梦，物来而名，事来而应。
现代文：所以领悟 道 体的人能不哀不乐、不喜不怒，坐时无思虑、睡时不做梦，物体来到能叫得出名称，事物发生能应对自如。
English: Therefore, a person who understands the Tao can be neither sad nor happy, neither happy nor angry, have no worries when sitting, no dreams when sleeping, can call out the name of an object when it comes, and can deal with things freely when they happen.

古文：主者，国之心，心治则百节皆安，心扰则百节皆乱。
现代文：君主是国家的心脏，心脏健全正常，全身的脉络就畅通安康，心脏功能紊乱，全身的血脉也随之紊乱。
English: The monarch is the heart of the country. If the heart is healthy and normal, the whole body will be healthy. If the heart is dysfunctional, the whole body will be dysfunctional.

古文：故其心治者，支体相遗也；其国治者，君臣相忘也。
现代文：所以，一个人的心脏如果正常，肢体也就相安无事；同样，一个国家治理得好，君臣之间就各守其位，各司其职。
English: Therefore, if a person's heart is normal, the limbs will be at peace with each other; similarly, if a country is well governed, each of the princes and ministers will keep their place and perform their duties.

古文：黄帝曰： 芒芒昧昧，从天之道，与元同气。 
现代文：黄帝说得好： 至德者纯厚广大，能承顺上天的道德，精气能与上天的元气相通。 
English: The Yellow Emperor said it well: Those who are truly virtuous are pure and broad-minded, and can uphold the morality of heaven, and the essence can communicate with the vitality of heaven.

古文：故至德者，言同略，事同指，上下一心，无岐道旁见者，遏障之于邪，开道之于善，而民乡方矣。
现代文：所以，至德者其谋略与臣民意见相吻合，办事的旨意与臣民意思相一致，这样君主与臣民同心同德，没有意见上的分歧和偏邪见解，也就能堵塞歪门邪道，开启行善之道，使人民都能朝正道上走。
English: Therefore, a truly virtuous person's strategy coincides with the opinions of his subjects, and his will to do things coincides with the will of his subjects. In this way, the monarch and his subjects are of the same mind and have no differences of opinion or perverse opinions. They can also block the crooked door and the evil way, open the way of doing good, and enable the people to walk on the right path.

古文：故《易》曰： 同人于野，利涉大川。 
现代文：所以《易经》上说： 君主在郊外聚集民众准备出征，由于上下一心，就一定能跋涉山川渡过难关而取得胜利。 
English: Therefore, "I Ching" said: The monarch gathered the people in the suburbs to prepare for the campaign, and because of his single-mindedness, he would surely be able to trek through the mountains and rivers to overcome difficulties and achieve victory.

古文：道者，物之所导也；德者，性之所扶也；仁者，积恩之见证也；义者，比于人心而合于众适者也。
现代文：道是万物的先导；德是对人本性的扶助；仁是积聚恩德的见证；义是合和人心、合乎众人的心愿。
English: Tao is the forerunner of all things; virtue is the support of human nature; benevolence is the testimony of the accumulation of benevolence; righteousness is the harmony of the human heart and the desire of all people.

古文：故道灭而德用，德衰而仁义生。
现代文：所以道被泯灭就以德来取代，德衰微了就产生了仁义。
English: Therefore, when the Tao was annihilated, virtue came to replace it, and when virtue waned, benevolence arose.

古文：故上世体道而不德，中世守德而弗坏也，末世绳绳乎唯恐失仁义。
现代文：因此，远古圣人之治是依靠 道 而不靠德，中古圣王之治是谨守 德 而不怀仁爱之美。近代君王治国是小心谨慎抱持仁义而恐怕失去 仁义 。
English: Therefore, the rule of the ancient sages is to rely on the Tao and not rely on virtue, the rule of the medieval holy kings is to adhere to virtue and not cherish the beauty of benevolence, and the rule of modern kings is to carefully embrace benevolence and fear losing benevolence.

古文：君子非仁义无以生，失仁义，则失其所以生；小人非嗜欲无以活，失嗜欲，则失其所以活。
现代文：君子没有了仁义就无法生存下去，丧失了仁义就丧失了生存的条件；小人没有了嗜欲就无法生存下去，丧失了嗜欲就等于要他的命。
English: A gentleman can't survive without benevolence and righteousness, and a peasant can't survive without benevolence and righteousness; a villain can't survive without greed, and losing greed is tantamount to taking his life.

古文：故君子惧失仁义，小人惧失利。观其所惧，知各殊矣。
现代文：所以君子害怕失掉仁义，小人则害怕失去利益；观察他们所害怕什么，就知道了君子与小人的不同了。
English: Therefore, a gentleman is afraid of losing benevolence, while a villain is afraid of losing profit; observe what they are afraid of, and you will know the difference between a gentleman and a villain.

古文：易曰： 即鹿无虞，惟入于林中，君子几不如舍，往吝。 
现代文：《周易·屯卦》说： 追逐鹿而得不到向导的帮助，就是追进深山老林也得不到。君子知道追逐不到手不如舍弃，因为继续追逐深入，危险就在前头。 
English: "Zhou Yi Tun Gua" said: "If you chase a deer without the help of a guide, you will not be able to chase it into the deep mountains and old forests. A gentleman knows that it is better to give up chasing, because if you continue to chase deeper, the danger is ahead.

古文：其施厚者其报美，其怨大者其祸深。
现代文：如果施予别人丰厚，那么得到的别人的回报也丰厚；如果结怨深大，那么招致的祸害也必然深大。
English: If one gives generously to others, one will receive generously in return; if one harbors deep grudges, one is sure to incur deep evils.

古文：薄施而厚望，畜怨而无患者，古今未之有也。
现代文：施予别人的相当浅薄而得到厚报、积怨深厚却无灾患，从古到今还没碰到过这样的事。
English: From ancient times to the present, there has never been anything like this.

古文：是故圣人察其所以往，则知其所以来者。
现代文：所以圣人知道自己怎样和人交往，也就知道别人将怎样回报自己。
English: Therefore, a sage knows how he interacts with people, and also knows how others will reward him.

古文：圣人之道，犹中衢而致尊邪：过者斟酌，多少不同，各得其所宜。是故得一人，所以得百人也。
现代文：圣人为人处事的方法，就像在四通八达的道路中央设置酒樽，以酒款待行人，行人喝酒多少，按自己的酒量来决定，喝多喝少以每人的适量为标准。所以能够赢得一个人的心，也就能因此影响百人来拥戴。
English: The saint's way of dealing with people is like setting up a wine barrel in the middle of a road that goes in all directions, and treating pedestrians with wine. How much pedestrians drink is determined by their own amount of alcohol, and how much to drink is determined by the appropriate amount for each person. Therefore, if you can win the heart of one person, you can also influence hundreds of people to support you.

古文：人以其所愿于上，以交其下，谁弗戴？
现代文：如果一个人能够用他希望上司对待他的态度来对待自己的下属，那么他的下属谁不爱戴他？
English: If a man can treat his subordinates the way he wants his boss to treat him, who among his subordinates will not love him?

古文：以其所欲于下，以事其上，谁弗喜？
现代文：如果一个人能够用他要求下属对待他的态度来对待自己的上司，那么他的上司又有哪个不喜欢？
English: If a person can treat his boss the way he asks his subordinates to treat him, then who doesn't like his boss?

古文：《诗》云： 媚兹一人，应侯慎德。 
现代文：《诗经》说： 能从爱护每个人做起，所以能够积聚成崇高的功德。 
English: "The Book of Songs" says: If you can start with loving everyone, you can accumulate lofty merits.

古文：慎德大矣，一人小矣。能善小，其能善大矣。
现代文：崇高的功德是伟大的，关爱人的善举是微不足道的；但正因为能从积累每一件小的善行开始，才能形成崇高的美德。
English: Noble merits are great, acts of kindness are small; but it is precisely because we can begin by accumulating every small act of kindness that we can form noble virtues.

古文：君子见过忘罚，故能谏；见贤忘贱，故能让；见不足忘贫，故能施。
现代文：君子看到他人的过失就忘掉了批评他人可能会招致责罚，所以他敢于直言进谏；君子看到贤才便忘记举荐贤才可能会使别人地位超过自己，所以他乐意让贤；君子看到衣足不足者会忘记给济别人会穷了自己，所以他能慷慨解囊给予施舍。
English: The gentleman sees the faults of others and forgets that criticizing others may incur punishment, so he dares to be outspoken; the gentleman sees the virtuous and forgets to recommend the virtuous and the virtuous may cause others to surpass him, so he is willing to let the virtuous; the gentleman sees that the underdressed will forget to give to others and will impoverish himself, so he can generously give alms.

古文：情系于中，行形于外。
现代文：内心维系着真情，就会在外在行动中表现出来。
English: If you maintain a true feeling inside, it will manifest itself in your external actions.

古文：凡行戴情，虽过无怨；不戴其情，虽忠来恶。
现代文：凡是言行饱含真情、流露真意，即使有过过失，别人也不会怨恨；言不由衷、行为虚假，就是装出忠诚的样子，也会让人讨厌、憎恶。
English: Any words and deeds that are full of true feelings and reveal true intentions, even if there are mistakes, will not be resented by others; insincere words and false actions, that is, pretending to be loyal, will also make people dislike and hate.

古文：后稷广利天下，犹不自矜。禹无废功，无废财，自视犹觖如也。
现代文：后稷为天下人谋利，但从不自我夸耀；夏禹治水没有白费民力也没有白用钱财，但他从不自满。
English: Houyi made profits for the people of the world, but never boasted about it; Xia Yu did not waste people's efforts or money to control water, but he was never complacent.

古文：满如陷，实如虚，尽之者也。
现代文：他们就是这样在完满中看到缺陷，在充实中看到不足，所以能使自己尽善尽美起来。
English: In this way, they can see the imperfections in the perfection and the insufficiencies in the fullness, so they can make themselves perfect.

古文：凡人各贤其所说，而说其所快。
现代文：一般而言，人们都欣赏自己所喜欢的人，而所喜欢的又是自己感到愉快的人和物。
English: In general, people admire people they like, and like people and things they enjoy.

古文：世莫不举贤，或以治，或以乱，非自遁，求同乎己者也。
现代文：世上没有人不举荐自以为贤能的人，但所举荐出的人，有的能把事情办好，有的却把事情搞砸了；这些并不是举荐人时自己欺骗自己，而是所举荐的人只求合适自己的口味。
English: There is no one in the world who does not recommend people who think they are capable, but the recommended people, some can do things well, some have messed things up; these are not the recommenders who deceive themselves, but the recommended people only seek to suit their own tastes.

古文：己未必得贤，而求与己同者，而欲得贤，亦不几矣！
现代文：可是当你自己的水平并不是很高的情况下，按你自己的水平去寻求人才时，所得的人才就并不一定是真正的贤才。
English: But when your own level is not very high, when you seek talent according to your own level, the talent you get is not necessarily a true genius.

古文：使尧度舜则可，使桀度尧，是犹以升量石也。
现代文：这就好比，让尧去鉴识度量舜，当然是可以的；但如果让桀去衡量识别尧，就好像用升去量石一样，是没法量清的。
English: It's like asking a mole to identify and measure a mole, which is of course possible; but if you ask a mole to measure and identify a mole, it's like using a lifting stone, which is impossible to measure.

古文：今谓狐狸，则必不知狐，又不知狸。非未尝见狐者，必未尝见狸也。狐、狸非异，同类也。
现代文：现在一般人都在说 狐狸 ，实际上他们既不知道 狐 是什么、也不知道 狸 是何物；他们不是没有见过 狐 ，就一定是没有见过 狸 。 狐 与 狸 不是异类，但因习性相近而属同一大类。
English: Nowadays, most people are talking about foxes, but in fact they don't know what a fox is, nor do they know what a wildebeest is; if they haven't seen a fox, they must not have seen a wildebeest. Foxes and wildebeests are not different species, but because of their similar habits, they belong to the same large category.

古文：而谓狐狸，则不知狐、狸。
现代文：可是日常中的人混称 狐狸 ，可见他们根本不知什么是 狐 、什么是 狸 。
English: However, people in everyday life use the mixed name "fox," which shows that they simply do not know what a fox is and what a coot is.

古文：是故谓不肖者贤，则必不知贤；谓贤者不肖，则必不知不肖者矣。
现代文：所以，把不贤的人称为 贤人 ，就足见他一定不明白什么叫 贤 ；反过来将贤才说成是 不贤 ，那也能知道他一定不明白什么叫 不贤 。
English: Therefore, calling a non-virtuous person a "virtuous person" shows that he must not understand what "virtuous" is; conversely, calling a virtuous person a "non-virtuous person" shows that he must not understand what "non-virtuous" is.

古文：圣人在上，则民乐其治；在下，则民慕其意。
现代文：圣人处于上位，那么百姓乐意接受他的管理；圣人即使不在位上，百姓也会仰慕他的思想和志向。
English: If the sage is in a high position, then the people are willing to accept his management; even if the sage is not in a high position, the people will admire his thoughts and aspirations.

古文：小人在上位，如寝关曝纩，不得须臾宁。
现代文：而小人处于统治地位，那么百姓就像睡在机器的发动机上、或像穿着棉袄暴晒，不会有片刻安宁。
English: While the villain is in the driving seat, the people are like sleeping on the engine of a machine, or like wearing cotton socks in the sun, and will not have a moment's peace.

古文：故《易》曰： 乘马班如，泣血涟如。 
现代文：所以《易经》说： 骑马徘徊不安，面临血泪淋淋的险境。 
English: Therefore, the "I Ching" says: Riding a horse is restless and faces the danger of being drenched in blood and tears.

古文：言小人处非其位，不可长也。
现代文：是说小人处在他不该处的位置，导致百姓的日子难过，同时小人也不可以长久处于统治地位。
English: That is to say, the villain is in a position he should not be in, causing the people to have a hard time. At the same time, the villain should not be in a dominant position for a long time.

古文：物莫无所不用，天雄乌喙，药之凶毒也，良医以活人；侏儒鼓师，人之困慰者也，人主以备乐。
现代文：物没有什么是无用的，天雄和乌头尽管是草药中的剧毒药，但良医却能用这种剧毒药来救治人的性命。侏儒和盲人，是人中间最困窘愁郁的人，但君主却用他们作乐官和乐师。
English: Nothing is useless; the morning glory and the aconite, though they are the most poisonous of herbs, yet a good physician can use this poison to save a man's life; the dwarf and the blind man are the most wretched of men, yet princes employ them as music-makers and musicians.

古文：是故圣人制其剟材，无所不用矣。
现代文：所以君主圣人对待人物如同巧匠裁取砍削木材一样，没有人是会被舍弃的。
English: That is why the Monarch Saint treats his characters like a craftsman carves a block of wood. No one is left behind.

古文：勇士一呼，三军皆辟，其出之也诚。
现代文：勇士一声呼喊，三军为之退避，这是因为他的呼喊发自肺腑的真诚。
English: A warrior shouts and three armies retreat because his shouts come from the heart.

古文：故倡而不和，意而不戴，中心必有不合者也。
现代文：所以，有领唱的人、却没有人应和，上有此意图、却没有人领会执行，这些都必定是因为双方的内心思想感情没有得到交流融洽。
English: Therefore, if there is a leader, but no one responds, if there is an intention, but no one understands the implementation, it must be because the inner thoughts and feelings of both sides have not been communicated and harmonized.

古文：故舜不降席而王天下者，求诸己也。
现代文：所以，舜不离开坐席而能匡正天下，这是因为他自身要求严格。
English: Therefore, it is because of his own strict requirements that he is able to rectify the world without leaving his seat.

古文：故上多故,则民多诈矣，身曲而景直者，未之闻也。
现代文：所以，处在上位的君主大臣喜爱玩弄权术，屈居下位的人也必定跟着玩弄智巧、变得狡诈起来。
English: Therefore, the monarch's ministers in the upper ranks like to play power games, and those in the lower ranks must also play cleverly and become cunning.

古文：说之所不至者，容貌至焉；容貌之所不至者，感忽至焉。
现代文：正因为这样，所以还从来没有听说过身子弯曲但影子却是直的的事情。无法用言辞表达的，却可以靠表情动作来表达；用表情动作不能表达的，却能用至诚的精神来感化别人。
English: Because of this, it has never been heard of that the body is bent but the shadow is straight. What cannot be expressed with words, can be expressed with facial expressions; what cannot be expressed with facial expressions, can inspire others with a sincere spirit.

古文：感乎心，明乎智，发而成形，精之至也。可以形势接，而不可以昭誋。
现代文：内心世界产生了真情，意识随之明智起来，必定会流露于表面，这就是至诚的精神所至；人正是用这种至诚的精神来影响、感化别人，而不是用一种苍白空洞的说教来告诫别人。
English: The inner world gives rise to the true feelings, the consciousness then becomes wise and must come to the surface. This is where the sincere spirit comes from; it is with this sincere spirit that one influences and influences others, and not with a pale and empty preaching to warn others.

古文：戎、翟之马，皆可以驰驱，或近或远，唯造父能尽其力；三苗之民，皆可使忠信，或贤或不肖，唯唐、虞能齐其美。必有不传者。
现代文：戎、翟出产的良马，都是善于奔驰的，不论远近，但只有像造父这样的御手才能让马儿充分发挥出它们全部的力气；三苗族的人民，都是能被教化得忠诚老实，不论贤愚，但只有像尧舜这样的圣主才能使他们具有这样的品德一一这说明像造父和尧舜他们必定有着无法言传的奥妙法术。
English: The good horses produced by Rong and Zou are all good at galloping, no matter how far or near, but only a hand like Zoufu can make the horses give full play to their full strength; the people of Sanmiao can be educated to be loyal and honest, no matter whether they are wise or foolish, but only a saint like Zou can make them have such a character - this shows that like Zoufu and Zou, they must have a secret magic that cannot be told.

古文：中行缪伯手搏虎，而不能生也，盖力优而克不能及也。
现代文：中行缪伯尽管能徒手与老虎搏斗，但是不能驯养老虎，这是因为他只具备力气而不具备驯养老虎的才能。
English: Although Zhong Xing Muo Bo can fight tigers with his bare hands, he cannot tame tigers. This is because he only has the strength but not the ability to tame tigers.

古文：用百人之所能，则得百人之力；举千人之所爱，则得千人之心。辟若伐树而引其本，千枝万叶则莫得弗从也。
现代文：能够运用百人的才能，就能得到百人的力量；办理一件上千人关爱的事，就能得到上千人的拥戴之心；这就好比砍伐大树、拖累到树的根部，这样树的千枝万叶也不得不跟着拖累。
English: If you can use the talent of a hundred people, you can get the strength of a hundred people; if you can manage a matter that is cared for by a thousand people, you can get the support of a thousand people; this is like cutting down a large tree and dragging it to the root of the tree, so that the thousands of leaves of the tree have to be dragged along.

古文：慈父之爱子，非为报也，不可内解于心；圣人之养民，非求用也，性不能已。
现代文：慈父关爱儿子，并非是想得到子女的报答，而是因为无法抛开内心的那颗爱心。
English: A loving father cares for his son, not because he wants to be repaid by his child, but because he can't let go of the love in his heart.

古文：若火之自热，冰之自寒。夫有何修焉！
现代文：同样，圣人养育百姓，并非是想奴役百姓，而是在尽爱民的天职；这就如同火的本性是热，冰的本性是寒的一样，用不着特地加以修炼。
English: In the same way, the sages raised the people, not with the intention of enslaving the people, but fulfilling the divine duty of loving the people; just as the nature of fire is hot and the nature of ice is cold, there is no need to specially cultivate it.

古文：及恃其力，赖其功者，若失火舟中。
现代文：等到需要依靠子女赡养、百姓出力时，他们也会自然而然尽孝尽忠，这就像江中之舟失火一样，全体船员和乘客都会一起尽力灭火。
English: When they need to rely on their children's support and the people's efforts, they will naturally be filial and loyal. This is like a boat in the river that catches fire, and all the crew and passengers will do their best to extinguish the fire.

古文：故君子见始，其知终矣。
现代文：所以君子在事物的开始就能知道事物的结果了。
English: Therefore, a gentleman can know the outcome of things at the beginning of things.

古文：媒妁誉人，而莫之德也；取庸而强饭之，莫之爱也。虽亲父慈母，不加于此，有以为，则恩不接矣。故送往者，非所以迎来也；施死者，非专为生也。
现代文：媒人撮合婚事，婚姻的男女双方都不会感激媒人，因为知道媒人称誉双方撮合婚事只是为了钱财；雇佣农工的东家劝佣工吃饱，不会使佣工感激东家，因为知道东家劝他们吃饱只是为了让他们以后多卖力气多做事情。正因为这样，所以即使是父母亲，如在关爱子女过程中充斥了某种私心而不具备真诚的爱心，那么，作为子女也不必一定要牢记养育之恩。所以，赠送厚礼给客人，不能怀有企盼客人某天回赠的想法；同样，对死者加以厚葬，不应只求死者在天之灵能保佑现在活着的人。
English: When a matchmaker arranges a marriage, both the man and woman of the marriage will not be grateful to the matchmaker, because they know that the matchmaker praises the two parties for arranging the marriage only for money; the owner of the farm workers will not make the helpers grateful to the owner, because they know that the owner advises them to eat enough just to make them work harder and do more things in the future. Because of this, even if the parents are full of some selfishness and do not have sincere love in the process of caring for their children, then, as children, they do not have to keep in mind the nurturing grace. Therefore, giving gifts to guests should not harbor the idea of

古文：诚出于己，则所动者远矣。
现代文：如果真的出自一颗至诚的心，那么所感化的作用就会相当深远的。
English: If it really comes from a sincere heart, then the effect of the inspiration will be quite profound.

古文：锦绣登庙，贵文也；圭璋在前，尚质也。
现代文：披戴锦绣进入庙堂，这是推重文饰；而摆放圭璋玉器，则是表示内在质朴纯情。
English: Wearing brocade into the temple hall is to emphasize the artistic decoration, while the display of precious and semiprecious stones is to express the inherent simplicity and purity.

古文：文不胜质，之谓君子。
现代文：不以文饰的东西掩胜过质朴的纯情，这才称得上君子。
English: It is only a gentleman who does not hide behind literary embellishments rather than simple, pure feelings.

古文：故终年为车，无三寸之，不可以驱驰；匠人斫户，无一尺之楗，不可以闭藏。
现代文：所以一年的时间来制作一部车子，但又惟独缺少一根三寸长的车辖，那么车就无法正常运行；木匠做门，但到时又惟独缺少一根五寸长的门闩，那么门就无法关闭紧合。
English: Therefore, it takes one year to make a car, but it only lacks a three-inch-long car cover, so the car cannot operate normally; the carpenter makes a door, but at that time it only lacks a five-inch-long latch, so the door cannot close tightly.

古文：故君子行斯乎其所结。
现代文：所以君子做事就一定要考虑到事情的最终结局。
English: Therefore, when a gentleman does things, he must consider the final outcome of the matter.

古文：心之精者，可以神化，而不可以导人；目之精者，可以消泽，而不可以昭誋。在混冥之中，不可谕于人。
现代文：精诚真心可以用来神妙地感化他人，但不可用来说教他人；明亮精粹的眼睛可以在无形中察知事物，但无法用它来教导告诫他人。
English: A pure heart can be used to magically influence others, but it cannot be used to teach others; a bright, pure eye can perceive things invisibly, but it cannot be used to teach and admonish others.

古文：故舜不降席而天下治，桀不下陛而天下乱，盖情甚乎叫呼也。
现代文：心和眼的这种功能既无形迹、也无法把握，不能使人知道这其中的奥妙。所以舜不离坐席而天下大治，桀不下台阶而天下大乱，这些都是由于感情的影响作用所致，并且远远要超过人的呼喊作用。
English: This function of the heart and the eyes is invisible and cannot be grasped, and it is impossible for people to know the secret of it. Therefore, if you do not leave the table, the world will be in chaos, and if you do not go down the steps, the world will be in chaos. These are all due to the influence of emotions, and far exceed the role of human shouting.

古文：无诸己，求诸人，古今未之闻也。
现代文：自己无法做到的事，却要求别人做到，这在古今都是闻所未闻的事。
English: To ask others to do what you cannot do yourself is unheard of in all ages.

古文：同言而民信，信在言前也；同令而民化，诚在令外也。
现代文：百姓赞同你的言论并且说话诚实，是由于你在对百姓作说教前一向说话诚实；百姓服从执行你的命令并且被教化好，是由于你的发号施令也同样出于真诚。
English: The people agree with your words and speak honestly because you always speak honestly before preaching to the people; the people obey and carry out your orders and are well-educated because your commanding is also sincere.

古文：圣人在上，民迁而化，情以先之也。
现代文：圣人处于上位，百姓归顺并被感化，同样是由于圣人对百姓动之真情实感。
English: The fact that the saint is in a higher position and the people submit and are influenced is also due to the saint's true feelings for the people.

古文：动于上，不应于下者，情与令殊也。
现代文：反过来，君王处在高位发布政令而下面百姓不相应，这是由于君王的真情与政令不一致。
English: On the other hand, when a king in a high position issues a decree and the people below do not respond, it is because the king's true feelings are not consistent with the decree.

古文：故《易》曰： 亢龙有悔。 
现代文：所以《易经》会说这样的话： 身处高位的君主为自己的骄傲横蛮带来的恶果而后悔。 
English: Therefore, the "I Ching" will say something like this: A high-ranking monarch regrets the evil consequences of his pride and arrogance.

古文：三月婴儿，未知利害也，而慈母之爱谕焉者，情也。
现代文：三个月大的婴儿，还不如利害关系，但慈母的爱心却能感受到，这是由于母子间的真情相通所致。
English: A three-month-old baby is not so much a stake, but a mother's love can be felt, which is due to the true feelings between mother and child.

古文：故言之用者，昭昭乎小哉！不言之用者，旷旷乎大哉！
现代文：由此看来，言教的作用真是小之又小，而不言之教的功效却是大之又大！
English: From this perspective, the role of preaching is really small and small, but the effect of not preaching is great and great!

古文：身君子之言，信也；中君子之意，忠也。
现代文：能够亲身践履君子说的话，这叫 信 ；能够符合君子的意向，这叫 忠 。 忠 和 信 在内心形成后，就会对外界产生感化作用。
English: To be able to put into practice what a gentleman says in person is called faith; to be able to conform to a gentleman's intention is called loyalty.

古文：忠信形于内，感动应于外，故禹执干戚，舞于两阶之间，而三苗服。
现代文：所以禹手执盾牌、大斧在宫廷台阶前跳起古舞，表示为德治而武力征讨，使作乱的三苗很快就臣服。
English: Therefore, Yu, holding a shield and a large axe, danced an ancient dance in front of the palace steps, indicating that he would use force for the sake of virtue. The three seedlings that caused the disturbance were quickly subdued.

古文：鹰翔川，鱼鳖沈，飞鸟扬，必远害也。
现代文：老鹰在江河上空盘旋飞翔，使鱼鳖慌忙沉入水底、鸟也高飞远走，这些都在于它们能感知到老鹰有伤害之心，所以远远地躲避起来。
English: The eagle hovers over the river, causing the fish's beak to plunge into the water, and the birds fly away. All of this is because they can sense that the eagle has a hurtful heart, so they avoid it at a distance.

古文：子之死父也，臣之死君也，世有行之者矣，非出死以要名也，恩心之藏于中，而不能违其难也。
现代文：儿子能为父亲去死、大臣能为君主舍命，这些事情每个朝代都有，这当然不是为了以死来邀取名利，而实在是他们内心有感恩之情。所以不怕也不想躲避这种死难。
English: A son can die for his father, a minister can give his life for the monarch, these things happen in every dynasty. Of course, this is not to invite fame and fortune with death, but they really have gratitude in their hearts. So they are not afraid and do not want to avoid this kind of death.

古文：故人之甘甘，非正为跖也，而跖焉往。君子之惨怛，非正为伪形也，谕乎人心。
现代文：所以，人们情愿去做一件自己想做的事情，这并非是为了实现某种意愿和目的，可这种意愿常常会实现；同样，君子的忧伤悲痛，也并非只是做做样子，因而能够使人理解通晓。
English: Therefore, people prefer to do something they want to do, it is not to achieve a certain will and purpose, but this will often be realized; similarly, the sorrow of a gentleman is not just a pretense, so it can make people understand.

古文：非从外入，自中出者也。义正乎君，仁亲乎父。
现代文：这些都在于他们的这种情感不是迫于外力，而是真的产生于内心世界。 义 的重要性要超过君王的重要性，同样， 仁 的位置应置父亲之上。
English: All of this is because their feelings are not forced by external forces, but truly arise from the inner world. Righteousness is more important than the importance of the king, in the same way, the position of benevolence should be placed above the father.

古文：故君之于臣也，能死生之，不能使为苟简易；父之于子也，能发起之，不能使无忧寻。
现代文：所以，君王对臣下，可以有权决定他们的生死，但不能让重 义 的臣下迎合君主而改变道义；父亲对儿子，可以呼来唤去使用他们，但不能让讲仁行孝道的儿子不为父母亲忧虑挂念。
English: Therefore, the king can have the power to decide the life and death of his subjects, but he cannot make his loyal subjects change their morals to suit the monarch; the father can call his sons to use them, but he cannot make his benevolent and filial sons not worry about their parents.

古文：故义胜君，仁胜父，则君尊而臣忠，父慈而子孝。
现代文：所以，我们将 义 和 仁 置于君与父之上，由此也导致社会是君尊而臣忠、父慈而子孝。
English: Therefore, we place righteousness and benevolence above the king and father, which also leads to a society that is monarch-honoring but subject-loyal, father-loving but filial.

古文：圣人在上，化育如神。
现代文：圣人在上位，他的教化应验如神灵。
English: The sage is superior, and his enlightenment is like that of a god.

古文：太上曰： 我其性与！ 
现代文：远古的明主说： 我只是顺其自然、无为而治治理天下。 
English: The ancient sage said, "I just let nature take its course and govern the world without doing anything."

古文：其次曰： 微彼，其如此乎！ 
现代文：以后的德治社会中的五帝说： 没有百姓的拥护，天下哪能治理得如此太平。 
English: Later, the five emperors in the virtuous society said: Without the support of the people, how can the world be governed so peacefully?

古文：故《诗》曰： 执辔如组。 
现代文：所以《诗经》如此说： 手执驾御缰绳，如同丝线织帛。 
English: That is why the "Song of Songs" says, "The hand that holds the reins is like the thread that weaves a tapestry."

古文：《易》曰： 含章可贞。 
现代文：《易经》上说： 怀有高尚情操，行为就能走上正道。 
English: "I Ching" said: If you have a noble sentiment, your behavior will be on the right path.

古文：运于近，成文于远。
现代文：所以说能够注意自身的修养，就能获得深远的美好结果。
English: Therefore, if you can pay attention to your own cultivation, you can get far-reaching and beautiful results.

古文：夫察所夜行，周公惭乎景，故君子慎其独也。
现代文：也因为这样，周公能在黑夜里省察自己的行为，做到身正影正毫不愧色。这就是君子的 慎独 。
English: Because of this, Zhou Gong was able to reflect on his actions in the dark, so that he was not ashamed. This is the gentleman's prudence.

古文：释近斯远，塞矣。闻善易，以正身难。
现代文：反过来说，不注意自身的修养，却想企盼远大目标的实现，行不通的这是。知道行善的道理是容易的，但亲身行善就难了。
English: On the other hand, if you do not pay attention to self-cultivation, but want to hope for the realization of lofty goals, this is not feasible. It is easy to know the principle of doing good, but it is difficult to do good in person.

古文：夫子见禾之三变也，滔滔然曰： 狐向丘而死，我其首禾乎！ 
现代文：孔夫子看到庄稼由种子变成禾苗、又长出穗谷的生长过程后，感慨地说： 狐狸头朝着山丘而死，那么人类也不应忘本吧？ 
English: After seeing the growth process of crops from seeds to seedlings and ears of corn, Confucius said with emotion: If the fox dies with its head facing the hill, then mankind should not forget this, right?

古文：故君子见善则痛其身焉。
现代文：所以君子看到善事，就感到自身也应从善去恶。
English: Therefore, when a gentleman sees a good deed, he feels that he should also turn from good to evil.

古文：身苟正，怀远易矣。
现代文：自身如果正直，那么安抚远方的人就容易了。
English: If you're honest with yourself, it's easier to placate people far away.

古文：故《诗》曰： 弗躬弗亲，庶民弗信。 
现代文：所以《诗经》就这样说： 君主如果不能亲自行正道，那么百姓就不可能信赖他。 
English: Therefore, the "Song of Songs" says: If the ruler can't take the right path himself, then the people can't trust him.

古文：小人之从事也，曰苟得，君子曰苟义。
现代文：小人办事叫做只求得到好处就行，君子办事则只求符合道义。
English: A villain's business is only to get benefits, while a gentleman's business is only to conform to morality.

古文：所求者同，所期者异乎！
现代文：他们在追求这一点上是相同的，但追求的目标则是不一样的。
English: Their pursuit of this is the same, but the goals they pursue are different.

古文：击舟水中，鱼沈而鸟扬，同闻而殊事，其情一也。
现代文：由船上摇桨击水的响声导致鱼沉入水底、鸟飞往高处，在这里听到的响声是一样的，而躲避的地方则是不同的，但鱼鸟都为了避害则是一致的。
English: The sound of the boat's paddle hitting the water causes fish to sink to the bottom of the water and birds to fly high. The sound heard here is the same, and the place to avoid is different, but the fish and birds are all the same in order to avoid harm.

古文：僖负羁以壶餐表其闾。赵宣孟以束脯免其躯，礼不隆，而德有余，仁心之感恩接而よ怛生。
现代文：春秋时曹国的僖负羁因送一壶饭给晋公子重耳而被重耳立表旌表彰僖负羁的功德；赵盾因送一束干肉救济过灵辄而后却又受到灵辄的保护。
English: In the Spring and Autumn Period, Zhao Junbo of Cao Guo was awarded the Medal of Merit of Zhao Junbo for sending a pot of rice to the grave of Jin Gongzi; Zhao Dun was awarded the Medal of Merit of Zhao Junbo for sending a bunch of dried meat to the coffin for relief, but was later protected by the coffin.

古文：故其入人深。俱之叫呼也，在家老则为恩厚，其在责人则生争斗。
现代文：僖负羁和赵盾所赠送给他人的物品并不丰厚，但得到的回报却相当厚重，这是因为他们的行为出于仁爱之心，并以恩德待人和怜悯之情油然而生，所以使受恩者刻骨铭心、永不忘记。
English: The gifts given to others by Zhaozhuang and Zhao Dun are not rich, but the rewards they receive are quite heavy. This is because their actions are out of a heart of benevolence, and they are born with a sense of kindness and compassion, so they make the beneficiaries remember and never forget.

古文：故曰：兵莫憯于意志，莫邪为下；寇莫大于阴阳，枹鼓为小。圣人为善，非以求名，而名从之。名不与利期，而利归之。
现代文：同样是吆五喝六的大声呼喊，在家中如是长辈对晚辈如此，则被认为是对晚辈的爱护；如果用这种呼喊对待陌生外头人，则有可能会引起争吵并为之争斗殴打。所以说： 兵器锋利所造成的威力比不上以情感化的威力；如此一比，就是莫邪宝剑也显得钝愚不堪了。
English: The same is true of loud shouting, in the home, if the elders do this to the younger generation, it is considered to be love for the younger generation; if you use this kind of shouting to strangers outside, it may cause quarrels and be beaten for it. Therefore, it is said: The power caused by sharp weapons is not comparable to emotional power; in such a comparison, even the evil sword is blunt and stupid.

古文：故人之忧喜，非为蹗，蹗焉往生也。故至人不容。
现代文：同样，武力攻打的功效也比不上神奇兵法的功效；如此一比，击鼓进军就真的是小事一桩、不在话下。 
English: In the same way, the effectiveness of armed attack is not as good as the effectiveness of magical warfare; in such a comparison, drumming into the army is really a trifle, not to mention.

古文：故若眯而抚，若跌而据。圣人之为治，漠然不见贤焉，终而后知其可大也。
现代文：圣人为善行善，并不是为了什么名，但恰恰会使名望随之而来，求名也并不是为了利，但利禄又会自然归于他。
English: A saint does good for the sake of doing good, not for the sake of any name, but precisely so that fame will follow. Seeking a name is not for the sake of profit, but the reward will naturally come to him.

古文：若日之行，骐骥不能与之争远。
现代文：所以一个人发自内心的忧喜，产生和表现出来后并不希望能感染别人，但感染的作用却会自然而然产生。
English: Therefore, after a person's heartfelt sorrow arises and manifests, he does not hope to infect others, but the effect of infection will naturally occur.

古文：今夫夜有求，与瞽师并，东方开，斯照矣。
现代文：人们在暗夜里寻找东西就像盲人一样，但等到东方旭日升起，就将一切照得光明通亮。
English: People search for things in the dark night like a blind man, but when the rising sun rises in the east, it will illuminate everything.

古文：动而有益，则损随之。
现代文：任何人的举动都会带来利益，但它的反面一一损害也会随之而来。
English: Any person's action will bring benefits, but its negative side - damage - will also follow.

古文：故《易》曰： 剥之不可遂尽也。故受之以复。 
现代文：所以《易经》这样说： 事物的衰败剥落不是无尽头的，正因为这样，所以《序卦》将代表复生的《复卦》来承接《剥卦》。 
English: Therefore, the "I Ching" says: The decline and fall of things is not endless, and it is for this reason that the "Introduction" will represent the revival of the "Commentary" to succeed the "Commentary."

古文：积薄为厚，积卑为高，故君子日孳孳以成辉，小人日怏怏以至辱。
现代文：薄的积多了可以变厚，低的积多了可以变高。所以君子每天勤勉地行善以成光辉的美德，小人每天因贪心不足而怏怏不乐，以致品德败坏而受辱。
English: Therefore, a gentleman diligently performs good deeds every day to become a shining virtue, and a villain is unhappy every day due to lack of greed, resulting in moral corruption and humiliation.

古文：其消息也，离朱弗能见也。
现代文：这里面变化的道理，就是像离朱那样的人也看不清楚。
English: The reason for this change is that people like Zhu Liang can't see clearly.

古文：文王闻善如不及，宿不善如不祥。非为日不足也，其忧寻推之也。
现代文：周文王听到善事可行，唯恐自己赶不上，而对自己的不善之处，如果留宿一晚都会感到不安详，这并不是只为偶然不足而不满意，而是深深忧虑如长此下去将变得不可收拾。
English: When Zhou Wenwang heard that good deeds are possible, he feared that he would not be able to catch up, and he would feel uneasy about his bad points if he stayed overnight. This is not just a lack of satisfaction, but a deep worry that if this continues, it will become unmanageable.

古文：故《诗》曰： 周虽旧邦，其命维新。 
现代文：所以《诗经》说： 周国虽然是古老之邦，但它的国运却正在新兴。 
English: Therefore, the "Song of Songs" says: Although Zhou is an ancient country, its national movement is emerging.

古文：怀情抱质，天弗能杀，地弗能霾也。声扬天地之间，配日月之光，甘乐之者也。
现代文：怀着真情，拥抱质朴，上天不能扼杀，大地无法埋没，声威传播于天地之间，可与太阳、月亮的光辉相比配，这是美好而又快乐的事啊。
English: With true feelings, embracing simplicity, the heavens cannot be stifled, the earth cannot be buried, the voice spreads between heaven and earth, and can be compared with the brilliance of the sun and the moon. This is a wonderful and happy thing.

古文：苟向善，虽过无怨；苟不向善，虽忠来患。
现代文：如果能向善从善，虽然做错事。别人不会埋怨；如果不能向善从善，即使忠诚也会招致祸患。
English: If you can be good and do good, even if you do something wrong, others will not complain; if you can't be good and do good, even loyalty will lead to disaster.

古文：故怨人不如自怨，求诸人不如求诸己得也。
现代文：所以怨天尤人不如埋怨自责自己，要求别人不如要求自己。
English: Therefore, it is better to blame oneself than to blame others, and it is better to ask others than to ask oneself.

古文：声自召也，貌自示也，名自命也，文自官也，无非己者。
现代文：声音是自己发出来的，容貌模样是自己显示出来的，名声好坏是自己确定下来的，文辞言语也是自己日长势久确定的，没有什么不取决于自己的努力。
English: The voice is made by oneself, the appearance is shown by oneself, the reputation is determined by oneself, the words are determined by oneself, and nothing depends on one's own efforts.

古文：操锐以刺，操刃以击，何怨乎人？
现代文：拿着锐利的刀剑攻击刺伤他人，惹下如此大的祸怎么可以怨别人不避让你的刀剑？
English: Attacking and stabbing others with a sharp sword, causing such a big disaster, how can you blame others for not avoiding your sword?

古文：故管子文锦也，虽丑登庙；子产练染也，美而不尊。虚而能满，淡而有味，被褐怀玉者。
现代文：所以管子尽管平时有不少不拘小节的丑行，但他胸怀立功名扬天下的壮志，终于能锦衣玉食，政绩被记载在齐国的宗庙里；子产尽管平时仁慈宽厚，但此美德不过被人贬为妇人之心、如人之母，最终自己也享受不到尊严富贵。
English: Therefore, although Guanzi usually had a lot of unscrupulous misdeeds, he had the ambition to make a name for himself in the world, and finally he was able to have the best of everything, and his achievements were recorded in the ancestral temple of Qi; although Guanzi was usually kind and generous, but this virtue was only relegated to the heart of a woman, like the mother of a man, and ultimately he could not enjoy dignity and wealth.

古文：故两心不可以得一人，一心可以得百人。
现代文：很多时候，看上去空荡荡，实际上却很充实，咋一口品尝清淡无味，细细品尝却回味无穷，那些身着粗布短衣却怀揣宝玉的人就是这样。
English: Many times, it looks empty, but in fact it is very full, for example, a mouthful tastes light and tasteless, but if you taste it carefully, the aftertaste is endless, those who are wearing coarse cloth shorts but carrying precious stones are like that.

古文：男子树兰，美而不芳，继子得食，肥而不泽，情不相与往来也。
现代文：所以，心有二心、情不专一的人连一个朋友都难以得到，而那些诚心专一、感情专一的人却能得到上百人的喜欢。
English: Therefore, people who have two hearts and are not single-minded are difficult to get even one friend, while those who are single-minded and single-minded can get the likes of hundreds of people.

古文：生所假也，死所归也。故宏演直仁而立死，王子闾张掖而受刃，不以所托害所归也。
现代文：男子汉种出的兰草，看似艳丽却无芳香；由后娘养的小孩，看似壮实却无神采，这是因为双方都缺乏内在天生的情分沟通和培育滋润。生命只是人世间的一种寄寓物，死亡才是必然的归宿。
English: The orchid grown by a man seems to be beautiful but has no fragrance; the child raised by a daughter seems to be solid but has no charm. This is because both sides lack the innate feelings of communication and nurturing. Life is just a parasite in the human world, and death is the inevitable destination.

古文：故世治则以义卫身，世乱则以身卫义。
现代文：所以弘演为了申张仁义而毫不犹豫地站着捐躯牺牲，王子闾为扶助正义而毫无惧色地蒙受刀砍剑刺，他们都不为偷生而妨害到死得其所。
English: Therefore, Hongyuan did not hesitate to stand up and sacrifice his life in order to promote benevolence and justice, and the princes and princesses were not afraid to be stabbed with swords and swords in order to support justice. They were not disturbed for stealing a living and died in their place.

古文：死之日，行之终也，故君子慎一用之。
现代文：所以处于治世则用义来维护自己的洁身自好，处于乱世则用自身来维护正义，乃至不惜牺牲生命。
English: Therefore, in a reigning world, they use righteousness to maintain their chastity, and in a chaotic world, they use themselves to maintain justice, even at the cost of their lives.

古文：无勇者，非先慑也，难至而失其守也；贪婪者，非先欲也，见利而忘其害也。
现代文：这条原则要坚持到死的那天为止。所以君子在这生死问题上是毫不含糊的。没有勇气的人，并不是先天就胆怯恐惧的，只是到灾难来临时才丧失了应有的操守；贪婪的人，也并不是生来就欲壑难填，只是看到了利益而忘掉了贪利的危害。
English: This principle should be adhered to until the day of death. Therefore, a gentleman is unequivocal in this matter of life and death. People without courage are not born with fear and fear, but only lose their due integrity when disaster comes; greedy people are not born with desire, but only see the benefits and forget the harm of greed.

古文：虞公见垂棘之璧，而不知虢祸之及己也。
现代文：虞国国君在看到了晋国送上的垂棘璧石时就忘掉了虢国亡国的灾难将很快会殃及自身这一点。
English: When Yu Guo Guojun saw the thorn stone sent by Jin Guo, he forgot that the disaster of Jin Guo's downfall would soon affect him.

古文：故至道之人，不可遏夺也。
现代文：所以只有达到 道 的境界的人，才不会改变，也无法遏止他的信念。
English: Therefore, only those who have reached the realm of the Tao will not change, nor will they be able to stop their belief.

古文：人之欲荣也，以为己也，于彼何益？
现代文：一般人都想得到荣耀好处，也都是为了自己，对别人是没有什么好处的。
English: Ordinary people all want glory and benefits, and they are all for themselves, there is no benefit for others.

古文：圣人之行义也，其忧寻出乎中也，于己何以利？
现代文：圣人做善事行义事，这忧思出自圣人的内心，所以对他本人有什么好处？
English: A saint does good and acts righteously. This sorrow comes from the saint's heart, so what good is it to him?

古文：故帝王者多矣，而三王独称；贫贱者多矣，而伯夷独举。
现代文：所以自古以来做帝王的够多的了，但只有汤王、夏禹、文王受人称颂；社会上贫贱的人够多的了，但只有伯夷被抬举得很高。
English: Therefore, there have been many emperors since ancient times, but only Tang Wang, Xia Yu, and Wen Wang have been praised by people; there are many poor people in society, but only Bo Yi has been highly exalted.

古文：以贵为圣乎？则圣者众矣；以贱为仁乎？则贱者多矣。
现代文：如果现在我们将凡地位尊贵者都等同于圣人的话，那么天下的圣人就该多得不得了了；如果现在我们将地位贫贱者都等同于仁者的话，那么天下的仁者就该多得不得了了。
English: If we now equate all those of high status with saints, then the number of saints in the world would be enormous; if we now equate all those of low status with the benevolent, then the number of the benevolent in the world would be enormous.

古文：何圣人之寡也。
现代文：但实际上圣人、仁者少之又少，这是为何原因呢？
English: But in reality, saints and benevolent people are few and far between. Why is this?

古文：独专之意乐哉！忽乎日滔滔以自新，忘老之及己也。始乎叔季，归乎伯孟，必此积也。不身遁，斯亦不遁人。
现代文：这是因为要想成为圣人、仁者，你就得专心致志、全心全意、心甘情愿地行善从善，如滔滔奔流的江河，每天都得有发展、长进和进步，乃至关注行善而忘乎衰老将降临自身，开始时收获不大，最终的成果则很大很多，这种为圣人做仁者的过程也是长期坚持不懈行善从善的积累过程，一般人又谁能做到这点？
English: This is because if you want to become a saint and a benevolent person, you have to be dedicated, wholehearted, and willing to do good and follow goodness. Like a rushing river, there must be development, growth, and progress every day. Even if you focus on doing good and forget that aging will come to you, the harvest will be small at the beginning, and the final results will be great. This process of being a benevolent person for a saint is also an accumulation process of long-term perseverance in doing good and doing good. Who can do this?

古文：故若行独梁，不为无人不兢其容。
现代文：不欺骗自己，也就不会欺骗别人和被别人欺骗，就像过独木桥，他不会因为没有旁人就不显得谨慎小心的样子。
English: If he does not deceive himself, he will not deceive others and will not be deceived by others. Just like crossing a wooden bridge, he will not appear cautious and careful because there is no one else.

古文：故使人信己者易，而蒙衣自信者难。
现代文：不过让旁人相信自己容易，而蒙上眼睛相信自己困难。
English: But it's easy to make others believe in you, but it's hard to believe in yourself blindfolded.

古文：情先动，动无不得；无不得，则无莙，发莙而后快。
现代文：凡人的情感都首先在内心世界形成并活动起来，活动着的情感均会通过一定的方式流露出来，流露或宣泄出来以后就不会凝结壅塞在内，心情也就畅快愉悦。
English: The emotions of ordinary people are first formed and activated in the inner world. The emotions that are activated will be revealed in a certain way. After they are revealed or released, they will not condense and become stuffy, and the mood will be happy and joyful.

古文：故唐、虞之举错也，非以偕情也，快己而天下治；桀、纣非正贼之也，快己而百事废。
现代文：所以，尧舜的言行举措，不只是伴以尧舜他们的真情实感，而且还使尧舜他们自己因情感散发心情畅快、民众百姓也因受之感染而达到天下大治。
English: Therefore, their words and actions are not only accompanied by their true feelings, but also make them feel happy because of their emotions, and the people are also infected by them to achieve world domination.

古文：喜憎议而治乱分矣。圣人之行，无所合，无所离，譬若鼓，无所与调，无所不比。丝管金石，小大修短有叙，异声而和；君臣上下，官职有差，殊事而调。
现代文：它应当是好比 鼓 ，没有什么和它相调和，但也没有什么和它相不合，在鼓点的控制下，琴瑟箫笛、金钟石磬，大大小小、长长短短都能井然有序，各种声音互相协调应和，奏出美妙的乐曲。同样，君主身处上位，群臣自处下位，尽管官职各不相同、事务各有区别，但配合协调得就像一支乐章。
English: It should be like a drum, nothing is in tune with it, but nothing is out of tune with it. Under the control of the drum, the lyre and flute, the bell and gong, the large and small, the long and short can be in good order, and all kinds of sounds harmonize with each other and play a wonderful music. Similarly, the monarch is in the upper position, and the ministers are in the lower position. Although the official positions are different and the affairs are different, they are coordinated like a piece of music.

古文：夫织者日以进，耕者日以却，事相反，成功一也。
现代文：这就像织布是向前进展的，翻耕是往后倒退的，劳动的方式不一样，但成功事情是相同的。
English: It is as if the weaving is progressing and the ploughing is regressing, the way of working is different, but the success is the same.

古文：申喜闻乞人之歌而悲，出而视之，其母也。
现代文：申喜由听到乞丐的歌而能动了悲情，出门一看，歌唱者竟然是失散多年的母亲。
English: Shen Xi was moved by the beggar's song, and when she went out, the singer turned out to be her long-lost mother.

古文：艾陵之战也，夫差曰： 夷声阳，句吴其庶乎！ 
现代文：先秦艾陵之战，吴王夫差说： 我们吴军的士气高昂、呼喊声激昂喜悦，吴国准能打胜仗。 
English: In the pre-Qin Ailing War, Wu Wangfusha said: Our Wu Army's morale is high, the shouts are passionate and joyful, and Wu is sure to win the war.

古文：同是声而取信焉异。有诸情也。
现代文：同样是声音，但从中获得的信息却是不同的，这是因为声音中含有不同的情感。
English: It is the same sound, but the information obtained from it is different, because the sound contains different emotions.

古文：故心哀而歌不乐，心乐而哭不哀。
现代文：所以心情悲哀，这歌声就不欢乐；内心快乐，那么即使哭泣也不哀痛。
English: Therefore, if the heart is sad, the song is not happy; if the heart is happy, then even crying is not sad.

古文：夫子曰： 弦则是也，其声非也。 
现代文：也正因为这样，所以当闵子骞在守完三年孝后拿琴弹奏时，孔子会说这样的话： 琴还是这把琴，但弹出的琴声音调却不一样了。 
English: It is precisely for this reason that Confucius would say the following when Zou Zixuan took up the harp to play after three years of filial piety: The harp is still the same harp, but the tone of the harp that is played is different.

古文：文者，所以接物也，情系于中而欲发外者也。
现代文：所谓礼仪形式是用来和人交往的，但这外在的礼仪形式必定要有情感系于中。它们二者是内容和形式的统一。
English: The so-called etiquette form is used to communicate with people, but this external etiquette form must have emotion attached to it. They are both a unity of content and form.

古文：以文灭情，则失情；以情灭文，则失文。
现代文：如果只讲礼仪形式忽视内在的情感，就会表现得失情虚伪；如果只讲内在情感忽略礼仪形式，就会显得文雅不足。
English: If you only talk about the form of etiquette and ignore the inner feelings, you will appear heartless and hypocritical; if you only talk about the inner feelings and ignore the form of etiquette, you will appear to lack elegance.

古文：文情理通，则凤麟极矣。言至德之怀远也。
现代文：如果能形式和内容的统一，即以必要的礼仪形式来表达内在的真情实感，这凤凰和麒麟都会降临庭院；这是说怀有善德的情感能感化远方的人。
English: If the form and content can be unified, that is, if the inner true feelings can be expressed in the necessary etiquette form, both the phoenix and the unicorn will come to the courtyard; this is to say that the virtuous feelings can influence the distant people.

古文：输子阳谓其子曰： 良工渐乎矩凿之中。 
现代文：输子阳对他的儿子说： 高明的匠工应熟习运用矩凿这些技艺 。
English: Fang Ziyang said to his son: A skilled craftsman should be familiar with the use of these techniques.

古文：矩凿之中，固无物而不周。
现代文：能掌握这些矩凿技艺，就没有什么事不能办得周全圆满。
English: If you can master these chiseling skills, there is nothing you can't do well.

古文：圣王以治民，造父以治马，医骆以治病。同材而各自取焉。
现代文：圣王就是凭着它来管理民众，造父就是靠着它来调理车马，医骆就是根据它来诊治疾病的，他们均是从匠工运用矩凿的技艺中吸取一定的方法和治术的。
English: The holy king used it to govern the people, the founding father used it to adjust the chariot and horse, and the doctor used it to diagnose and treat diseases. They all learned certain methods and treatments from the skills of craftsmen using the chisel.

古文：上意而民载，诚中者也。未言而信，弗召而至，或先之也，忣于不己知者，不自知也。
现代文：君王的意图使下面的人很快就接受领会并执行，这是因为发自内心世界的真诚之情感化了大家。还没说什么，就取得了互相的信任；也没有发什么号召，就使人主动前往，这是因为事先就有了感应和默契。有些人总是埋怨人家不了解自己，实际上有这种认识的人首先是缺乏自知之明。
English: The king's intention is quickly understood and carried out by the people below, because the sincerity from the inner world has emotionalized everyone. Without saying anything, mutual trust has been gained; without issuing any call, people take the initiative to go, because there is a priori induction and tacit understanding. Some people always complain that others do not understand themselves, in fact, people who have this understanding are primarily lacking in self-knowledge.

古文：矜怛生于不足，华诬生于矜。
现代文：所以之所以骄傲，实际上在于自身只是半罐子水；而之所以浮夸虚华又在于自傲骄横。
English: Therefore, the reason why they are proud is actually that they are only half full of water; and the reason why they are pompous and vain is that they are arrogant.

古文：诚中之人，乐而不忣，如鸮好声，熊之好经。夫有谁为矜。
现代文：内心真诚的人，他的快乐发自内心自然而然，如同鸮鸟喜欢歌唱、狗熊喜欢树上悬吊一样，它们又哪有故作姿态保持矜持的成分？
English: For a sincere person, his happiness comes naturally from within, just as an ostrich likes to sing and a bear likes to hang from a tree. Do they have the element of pretending to be reserved?

古文：春女思，秋士悲，而知物化矣。号而哭，叽而哀，而知声动矣；容貌颜色，理诎倨佝，徇知情伪矣。
现代文：春女感阳则思春，秋士感阴则悲秋，从中也能知道季节物候的变化；有时嚎啕大哭，有时悲叹而哀，从中也能知道其人的声音和心态间的关系；而某人容颜及身体动作，从中也能反映其人的意识和情感。
English: The spring woman's feeling of yang is puberty, the autumn man's feeling of yin is sad autumn, from which we can also know the changes in seasonal phenomena; sometimes crying, sometimes lamenting and mourning, from which we can also know the relationship between one's voice and mentality; and one's face and body movements, from which we can also reflect one's consciousness and emotions.

古文：故圣人栗栗乎其内，而至乎至极矣。
现代文：正因为这样，所以圣人总是战战兢兢、小心翼翼、毫不松懈，从而使自己修养达到极高的境界。
English: Because of this, sages are always cautious, careful, and tireless, so that they can cultivate themselves to a very high level.

古文：功名遂成，天也；循理受顺，人也。
现代文：功成名就，取决于天命；循顺事理，则靠人力。
English: Achievement depends on the fate of heaven; following the course of reason, it depends on manpower.

古文：太公望、周公旦，天非为武王造之也；崇侯、恶来，天非为纣生之也；有其世，有其人也。
现代文：姜太公吕望、周公姬旦，不是上天专门为武王而造出的；崇侯虎、恶来，也不是上天特意为纣王而生出的；这是在于有那种世道，便有那种人产生。
English: Jiang Taigong Lvang and Zhou Gong Hidan were not specially created by Heaven for King Wu; neither were Chonghuo and Qilu specially created by Heaven for King Yao; it is because of the kind of world and the kind of people.

古文：教本乎君子，小人被其泽；利本乎小人，君子享其功。
现代文：君子的天职是实行教化治理，小人就能承受到他们的恩泽；小人的职责则是生产财富、提供物质利益，能让君子享用。
English: The natural duty of a gentleman is to carry out enlightenment and governance, and a villain can receive their grace; the duty of a villain is to produce wealth and provide material benefits, which can be enjoyed by a gentleman.

古文：昔东户季子之世，道路不拾遗，耒耜余粮宿诸首，使君子小人各得其宜也。
现代文：过去君王东户季子的时代，路不拾遗，农具、粮食留在田头过夜也不会遗失，这是在于东户季子让君子、小人各守自己的职责。
English: In the era of the monarch Higashido Kiko, the road would not be lost, and agricultural tools and grain would not be lost if they were left in the field overnight. This is because Higashido Kiko let the gentleman and the villain each keep their duties.

古文：故一人有庆，兆民赖之。
现代文：所以说一国国君秉有美德，亿万国民也就有了依靠。
English: Therefore, if a country's sovereign upholds virtue, hundreds of millions of citizens will have something to rely on.

古文：凡高者贵其左，故下之于上曰左之，臣辞也；下者贵其右，故上之于下曰右之，君让也。
现代文：凡君位高贵都以 左 方为尊，所以臣下对君主来说是 辅佐 ，这是臣的谦辞；在下位的都以 右 方为贵，所以君主对臣下就说是 佑助 ，这是君的谦让。
English: All high-ranking lords respect the left side, so the highest-ranking vassal is an assistant to the monarch, which is the humbleness of the vassal; the lower-ranking ones respect the right side, so the monarch says "help" to the vassal, which is the humbleness of the monarch.

古文：故上左迁，则失其所尊也；臣右还，则失其所贵矣。
现代文：所以，如果君主迁离 左 位，就会失去他的尊严；臣下离别 右 位，就会失去他的贵重。
English: Therefore, if the monarch moves away from the left position, he will lose his dignity; if the vassal leaves the right position, he will lose his preciousness.

古文：小快害道，斯须害仪。
现代文：贪图一时的痛快会伤害道义，只图眼前利益会损害原则。
English: Coveting momentary pleasure will hurt morals, and only looking for immediate benefits will damage principles.

古文：子产腾辞，狱繁而无邪，失诸情者，则塞于辞矣。
现代文：这些就好比撒置网，抓着了网绳就能张开所有的网眼。
English: These are like casting a net, and by grasping the net rope, you can open all the meshes.

古文：成国之道，工无伪事，农无遗力，士无隐行，官无失法。譬若设网者，引其纲而万目开矣。舜、禹不再受命，尧、舜传大焉，先形乎小也。
现代文：舜、禹不再受天命而登基，是由于尧传位给舜，舜再传位给禹；尧为舜创立了基业，舜又继承宏扬了这基业，而这些基业都是从小的方面慢慢积累起来的。
English: Yu and Yu no longer ascended to the throne by the mandate of heaven, because Yu passed the position to Yu, and Yu passed the position to Yu; Yu created a foundation for Yu, and Yu inherited and expanded this foundation, and these foundations were slowly accumulated from small aspects.

古文：刑于寡妻，至于兄弟，禅于家国，而天下从风。
现代文：这就像他们在家为正妻做出表率，又示范于兄弟，再影响传播遍整个国家，这样天下也就形成了好风气，好习俗。
English: It's as if they set an example for their legitimate wives at home, and then demonstrate it to their brothers, and then influence and spread it throughout the entire country. In this way, a good culture and good customs have formed around the world.

古文：故戎兵以大知小，人以小知大。
现代文：所以，兵器知道大的，就能推知小的，对人来说则是从小处就可知道他的以后。
English: Therefore, if a weapon knows the big, it can deduce the small, but for a person, it can know him from the small.

古文：君子之道，近而不可以至，卑而不可以登，无载焉而不胜，大而章，远而隆，知此之道，不可求于人，斯得诸己也。
现代文：君子治世之道，看似近处也无法控制，低处也登不上去，可是却无所不能容载，无事不能胜任，越久越显伟大，越远越显崇高。要掌握这种治世之道，不能求助于别人，而只能从自身做起。
English: A gentleman's way of governing the world may seem to be uncontrollable in the near, and unclimbable in the low, but it can tolerate anything, and is capable of anything. The longer it lasts, the greater it becomes, and the farther away it is, the more sublime it becomes. To master this way of governing the world, one cannot turn to others for help, but can only start from oneself.

古文：释己而求诸人，去之远矣。
现代文：离开自己而求之于人，那就离它太远了。
English: It is too far away to leave oneself and seek it from others.

古文：君子者，乐有余而名不足，小人乐不足而名有余。
现代文：君子快乐有余而名誉不足，而小人则是快乐不足而名誉有余。
English: A gentleman has more than enough happiness but not enough honor, while a villain has more than enough happiness but not enough honor.

古文：观于有余不足之相去，昭然远矣。
现代文：看看他们之间的有余和不足，就能知道他们间的差距。
English: Look at the surplus and shortage between them, you can know the gap between them.

古文：含而弗吐，在情而不萌者，未之闻也。
现代文：内心形成情感而不吐露、有真情而不流露在外，这种情况还没听说过。
English: I have never heard of a situation where emotions are formed in the heart but not revealed, or where there are true feelings but they are not revealed.

古文：君子思义而不虑利，小人贪利而不顾义。
现代文：君子考虑的是义而忽略的是利，而小人贪求的是利而不顾义。
English: A gentleman considers righteousness and ignores profit, while a villain covets profit regardless of righteousness.

古文：子曰： 钧之哭也，曰： 子予奈何兮乘我何 其哀则同，其所以哀则异。 
现代文：孔子说： 子予说同样是哭，有什么不一样。我对他说： 子予，你这样的问题怎么奈何得了我呢！尽管他们的哭是一样的，但哀哭的原因却是不一样的呀！  
English: I said to him, "My child, how can you ask me such a question? Although their cries are the same, the reasons for their lamentation are different!"

古文：故哀乐之袭人情也深矣。
现代文：所以哀和乐触及侵入人的感情是多么地深呀。
English: So how deeply do the lament and the melody touch the intruding emotions?

古文：凿地漂池，非止以劳苦民也。各从其跖而乱生焉。
现代文：有些人想池子，另些人又想将池子填上，这些人并不一定存心想折腾百姓、劳役民众，只是各自按自己的意愿去做而搞出的乱子。
English: Some people want a pool, others want to fill it up. These people don't necessarily want to upset the people, the working people, but they just want to do what they want and create chaos.

古文：其载情一也，施人则异矣。
现代文：这就说明每人都具有的意愿和情感是一样的，但给别人造成的影响却是不一样的。
English: This means that everyone has the same will and emotions, but the impact on others is different.

古文：故唐、虞日孳孳以致于王，桀、纣日怏怏以致于死，不知后世之讥己也。
现代文：所以尧舜每天都孜孜不倦地修养德行，终于达到天下大治；桀纣每天贪心不足郁闷不乐而导致死亡，还不知后世人在讥笑自己。
English: Therefore, I diligently cultivate virtue every day, and finally achieve world domination; I am depressed and unhappy every day due to lack of greed, leading to death, yet I do not know that future generations are laughing at themselves.

古文：凡人情，说其所苦即乐，失其所乐则哀。故知生之乐，必知死之哀。
现代文：大凡人之常情是这样的：解脱了痛苦的事便快乐，丧失了快乐的事和物就感到哀伤，所以知道生的欢乐，就一定知道死的悲哀。
English: The common feeling of ordinary people is as follows: when they are relieved of painful things, they are happy; when they lose happy things and objects, they feel sad. Therefore, if you know the joy of life, you must know the sadness of death.

古文：有义者不可欺以利，有勇者不可劫以惧，如饥渴者不可欺以虚器也。
现代文：对于坚守道义的人是不能用利去诱骗他的，对于勇敢的人就别想以恐惧来威胁他，就像对饥渴者不能用空罐子来蒙骗他一样。
English: You cannot tempt a virtuous man with interest, nor threaten a brave man with fear, any more than you can tempt a thirsty man with an empty jug.

古文：人多欲亏义，多忧害智，多惧害勇。
现代文：人的贪望多了，道义就会亏损；忧虑多了就会损害智慧，畏惧多了就会伤害勇气。
English: The more covetous a man is, the less moral he is; the more anxious he is, the less wise he is; the more afraid he is, the less courageous he is.

古文：嫚生乎小人，蛮夷皆能之；善生乎君子，诱然与日月争光，天下弗能遏夺。
现代文：傲慢蛮横产生在小人身上，不开化的蛮夷都是这样做的；善良仁慈产生在君子身上，这些美德可与日月争光辉，天下没有什么东西能遏止改变它。
English: Arrogance and insolence are born in villains, and uncivilized barbarians do the same; kindness and mercy are born in gentlemen, and these virtues can compete with the sun and the moon for glory, and nothing in the world can stop it from changing.

古文：故治国乐其所以存，亡国亦乐其所以亡也。
现代文：所以达到大治的国家的国君喜欢的是使国家赖以长治久安的美德，亡国的国君喜爱的是致使国家灭亡的东西。
English: Therefore, the sovereign of a country that has achieved great prosperity likes the virtues that enable the country to enjoy long-term stability, while the sovereign of a country that is in decline likes the things that lead to the country's demise.

古文：金锡不消释则不流刑，上忧寻不诚则不法民。
现代文：铁矿物不能溶化成液态，就不能浇入模子，君主的忧思不诚恳就无法规范民众。
English: The iron mineral cannot be melted into a liquid, it cannot be poured into a mold, and the monarch's melancholy and insincerity cannot regulate the people.

古文：忧寻不在民，则是绝民之系也。
现代文：忧思的不是广大百姓的事，也就无法和民众取得联系。
English: They are not concerned about the people, so they can't get in touch with them.

古文：君反本，而民系固也。
现代文：君主如能返归到治国的根本，那么与民众的联系就牢固了。
English: If the monarch can return to the basics of governing the country, then the connection with the people will be strong.

古文：至德小节备，大节举。
现代文：君主最好的德行是既注重大节，也不忽略任何小节。
English: A prince's best virtue is to attend to the great points without neglecting any of the minor ones.

古文：齐桓举而不密，晋文密而不举。
现代文：齐桓公注重大节而不注意小节，晋文公与此相反，是不注意大节而注重小节。
English: Qi Kuan Gong noted the major section without paying attention to the minor section, while Jin Wen Gong, on the contrary, did not pay attention to the major section but paid attention to the minor section.

古文：晋文得之乎闺内，失之乎境外；齐桓失之乎闺内，而得之乎本朝。
现代文：所以晋文公宫内的事处理得很好，但和各国的国际关系处理得不好；齐桓公对内宫的事处理失误，但对本朝朝政治理得很好。
English: Therefore, matters within the palace of Prince Jinwen were handled well, but international relations with other countries were not handled well; Prince Qi Huan handled the affairs of the inner palace incorrectly, but handled the politics of this dynasty well.

古文：水下流而广大，君下臣而聪明。
现代文：水朝低处流而越积越浩淼，君王如能谦恭下问便能聪明。
English: As water flows from a low place, it accumulates and becomes more and more vast. If a king can humbly ask questions, he can be wise.

古文：君不与臣争功，而治道通矣。
现代文：君王不争抢下属大臣职责分内的事，这治国的道路就通畅了。
English: If the monarch does not compete with subordinate ministers in matters within their duties, the road to governing the country will be smooth.

古文：管夷吾、百里奚经而成之，齐桓、秦穆受而听之。
现代文：管夷吾和百里奚策划国家大事成功，是在于齐桓公和秦穆公能听取采纳他们的主张。
English: The success of Guan Yiguo and Bai Lijuan in planning national events is due to the fact that Qi Huan Gong and Qin Mu Gong were able to listen to and adopt their ideas.

古文：照惑者，以东为西，惑也；见日而寤矣。
现代文：告诉迷路者时将东当成西，因为自己还没弄清楚，到太阳出来才醒悟过来。
English: When telling a lost person, treat the east as the west, because you haven't figured it out yet, and wake up when the sun comes out.

古文：卫武侯谓其臣曰： 小子无谓我老而羸我，有过必谒之。 
现代文：卫武侯对他的下属大臣们说： 年青人不要看我年迈而以为我不中用，就让我这样衰败下去。
English: Wei Wu Hou said to his subordinate ministers: "Young people, don't look at me as an old man and think I'm useless, let me decline like this.

古文：是武侯如弗羸之必得羸。
现代文：你们还是要发现我的过错，并给我指明。 
English: You still have to find my fault and point it out to me.

古文：故老而弗舍，通乎存亡之论者也。人无能作也，有能为也；有能为也，而无能成也。
现代文：人不能从无中创造出些什么，但有能力做些可做的事；有能力做些可做的事，但没有能力决定最终事情的成功。
English: Man cannot create something out of nothing, but has the ability to do something that can be done; has the ability to do something that can be done, but does not have the ability to determine the ultimate success of things.

古文：人之为，天成之。
现代文：人只能顺应天理做事，并由天来决定成功。
English: People can only do things in accordance with the laws of nature, and success is determined by nature.

古文：终身为善，非天不行；终身为不善，非天不亡。
现代文：人一辈子为善行善，但没有天时条件就行不通；人一辈子为恶行恶，但没有天时条件就不会灭亡。
English: People spend their whole lives doing good for the sake of goodness, but without the right conditions, it will not work; people spend their whole lives doing evil for the sake of evil, but without the right conditions, they will not perish.

古文：故善否，我也；祸福，非我也。
现代文：所以行善行恶，取决于人本身；但是福是祸，则不是由人所能决定的。
English: Therefore, to do good or to do evil depends on man himself; but whether it is good or evil is not for man to decide.

古文：故君子顺其在己者而已矣。
现代文：因此君子非常谨慎地对待自己所能做的事罢了。
English: Therefore, a gentleman must be very careful about what he can do.

古文：性者，所受于天也；命者，所遭于时也。
现代文：人本性秉赋于天；而命运，就要与你所逢的世道时运一致起来。
English: Human nature is endowed by heaven; and destiny must be consistent with the world and the times you encounter.

古文：有其材，不遇其世，天也。
现代文：有才能而遇不上好世道，这就是天命。
English: It is the fate of a man to have talent and not to succeed in the world.

古文：太公何力，比干何罪，循性而行指，或害或利。
现代文：姜太公有何力量？比干又有何罪过？他们都由各自秉赋的特性而实行自己的志向，但一个得利、一个遇害。
English: What is the strength of Jiang Taigong? What are the sins of Bi Gan? They all carry out their own aspirations by virtue of their own characteristics, but one gains and one is killed.

古文：求之有道，得之在命。
现代文：追求实现自己的志向是各有各的做法，而能否达到自己的理想则在于天命。
English: Pursuing the realization of one's own aspirations is a matter of individual practice, and whether one can achieve one's own ideal depends on the fate of the world.

古文：故君子能为善，而不能必其得福；不忍为非，而未能必免其祸。
现代文：所以君子能为善行善，但却不能一定得到幸福；同样，不忍心做恶事坏事，但也不是一定能避免灾祸。
English: Therefore, a gentleman can do good for good, but he cannot necessarily get happiness; likewise, he cannot bear to do evil, but he cannot necessarily avoid disaster.

古文：君，根本也；臣，枝叶也。
现代文：君王是根本，群臣是枝叶。
English: The monarch is the foundation, and the ministers are the branches.

古文：根本不美，枝叶茂者，未之闻也。
现代文：根不健壮而枝叶却繁茂，这是从来没有听说过的事。
English: It's unheard of to have roots that aren't strong but branches that are.

古文：有道之世，以人与国；无道之世，以国与人。
现代文：有道之世，是将人给予国家；无道之世，是将国家 送 给他人。
English: In a just world, people are given to the state; in an unjust world, the state is given to others.

古文：尧王天下而忧不解，授舜而忧释。
现代文：尧统治天下时忧虑没有解除过，后来将政权平安移交授给舜后，忧虑才解脱。
English: Anxiety had not been relieved when Nie ruled the world, and it was only relieved after the peaceful transfer of power to Nie.

古文：忧而守之，而乐与贤终，不私其利矣。
现代文：忧虑缠身时尧毫不松懈地坚守君位，最后又乐于将君位传授给贤人，始终不将天下的利益占为私有。
English: When he was beset by worries, he never slackened in upholding the throne, and in the end, he was happy to pass the throne on to a wise man. He never appropriated the interests of the world as his own.

古文：凡万物有所施之，无小不可；为无所用之，碧瑜粪土也。
现代文：凡物都是有用的，没有什么东西因小而不能用的；如果不懂得它的用处，那么碧玉也会成粪土。
English: Everything is useful, nothing is useless because it is small; if you do not understand its use, then the jasper will turn into dung.

古文：人之情，于害之中争取小焉，于利之中争取大焉。
现代文：人之常情，总是对祸害力求挑小的，而对利益好处总力图捞大的。
English: It is human nature to always look for the lesser of evils and the greater of benefits.

古文：故同味而嗜厚膊者，必其甘之者也；同师而超群者，必其乐之者也。
现代文：所以同样味道的熟肉，人总是喜欢吃大块的肉，那一定是个觉得大块肉好吃的人。同拜一个老师而又能超群的学生，那一定是一个以学习为快乐的人。
English: Therefore, people always like to eat large pieces of meat with the same taste. It must be a person who thinks that large pieces of meat are delicious. It must be a person who worships a teacher and is a superior student. It must be a person who is happy to learn.

古文：弗甘弗乐，而能为表者，未之闻也。
现代文：不乐意去做一件事，却能做得好，这是从来没有听说过的事。
English: It's unheard of to do something you don't like and do it well.

古文：君子时则进，得之以义，何幸之有！
现代文：君子处世，碰到好时运好机遇便进取，凭着道义得到重用，这是没有什么可值得庆幸的。
English: In the life of a gentleman, when there is a good time, good luck and good opportunity, he will forge ahead and get reused by virtue of morality. This is nothing to be happy about.

古文：不时则退，让之以义，何不幸之有！
现代文：世道不好时运不好就避开，避开也是符合道义，又有什么不幸可言！
English: When the world is not good, when the luck is not good, avoid it, avoiding it is also in line with morality, and what misfortune can be said!

古文：故伯夷饿死首阳之下，犹不自悔，弃其所贱，得其所贵也。
现代文：所以伯夷饿死首阳山，也并不后悔，因为他抛弃了他所鄙贱的东西，而保持了他所认为可珍贵的东西。
English: Therefore, Bo Yi starved himself to death on Shouyang Mountain, and he did not regret it, because he abandoned what he despised and kept what he considered precious.

古文：福之萌也绵绵，祸之生也分分。
现代文：幸福萌生时是相当细微，如游丝；灾祸初发之时也是相当微弱，如尘埃。
English: When happiness begins, it is very thin, like gossamer; when disaster first strikes, it is also very weak, like dust.

古文：祸福之始萌微，故民嫚之。唯圣人见其始而知其终。故传曰： 鲁酒薄而邯郸围，羊羹不斟而宋国危。 
现代文：因为祸福萌发之时总是细微不明显，所以百姓忽略不当一回事，而只有圣人才能做到见微知著，预见事物的未来，所以古书中说到： 鲁国送楚王的酒不如赵国献的酒醇厚，可赵国邯郸反而被楚军包围；华元宰羊慰劳部队，因忘了多舀点给御手，结果被御手出卖，遭郑军擒捉而危及宋国。 
English: Because misfortune and blessing are always subtle and not obvious at the time of germination, so the people ignore the wrong thing, and only a sage can see the subtleties and foresee the future of things, so the ancient book said: The wine sent by the State of Lu to King Chu is not as mellow as the wine offered by the State of Zhao, but Zhao Guoqin was surrounded by the Chu army; Huayuan slaughtered sheep consolation troops, because they forgot to give more points to the Emperor, as a result, they were betrayed by the Emperor, and were captured by the Zheng army, endangering the Song Dynasty.

古文：明主之赏罚，非以为己也，以为国也。
现代文：英明的君主实行赏罚，不是为了自己，而是为了国家利益。
English: A wise prince rewards and punishes, not for himself, but for the good of the state.

古文：适于己而无功于国者，不施赏焉；逆于己便于国者，不加罚焉。
现代文：符合自己的心意但对国家无功劳的人，便不给予赏赐；违背自己的心意但对国家有贡献的人，便不加惩罚。
English: Those who are in accordance with their own will, but do not contribute to the country, will not be rewarded; those who are against their will, but contribute to the country, will not be punished.

古文：故楚庄谓共雍曰： 有德者受吾爵禄，有功者受吾田宅。
现代文：所以楚庄王对共雍说： 有德的人接受我赐封的爵禄，有功的人接受我赏赐的田宅。
English: Therefore, the king of Chuzhuang said to Gongyong: "The virtuous accept the peerage I bestow, and the meritorious accept the farmhouse I reward."

古文：是二者，女无一焉，吾无以与女。 
现代文：而这二条没有一条符合，所以我无法赏你。 
English: And none of these two things match, so I can't award you.

古文：可谓不逾于理乎！
现代文：楚庄王的这些话可以称得上不违背常理呀！
English: These words of Chu Zhuang Wang can be said to be not contrary to common sense!

古文：其谢之也，犹未之莫与。周政至，殷政善，夏政行。行政善，善未必至也。
现代文：楚庄王拒绝了共雍的邀赏，没有赏赐给他任何东西，但给了他一种要争取获赏的勉励，也算是一种赏赐。周代达到道治标准，殷商政治是好的，好的政治又未必能达到道治的标准。
English: The King of Chuzhuang refused Gongyong's offer of a reward. Nothing was given to him, but he was given encouragement to strive for a reward, which was also a reward. Zhou Dynasty achieved the standard of moral governance. Shang politics is good, but good politics may not be able to achieve the standard of moral governance.

古文：至至之人，不慕乎行，不惭乎善。含德履道，而上下相乐也，不知其所由然。
现代文：具有至德水平的圣王是不会满足于行的通的政治，也不会只限于只要是 好的 能问心无愧就够了，他是蕴怀着德而遵循着道，能使君民融洽愉快而臣民却不知这快乐是君王给的。
English: A saintly king with the highest level of morality will not be satisfied with the current politics, nor will he be limited to just being good. It is enough to have a clear conscience. He will follow the path with virtue, and can make the prince and the people harmonious and happy, but the subjects do not know that this happiness is given by the prince.

古文：有国者多矣，而齐桓、晋文独名；泰山之上有七十坛焉，而三王独道。
现代文：占据天下，拥有君位的君王是够多的了，但只有齐桓公、晋文公出名；泰山上留有的古代七十二个帝王祭坛，但只有三王为人称颂。
English: There are enough kings who occupy the world and hold the throne, but only Prince Qi Huan and Prince Jinwen are famous; there are seventy-two ancient royal altars left on Mount Tai, but only three kings are praised by people.

古文：君不求诸臣，臣不假之君，修近弥远，而后世称其大。
现代文：君王不对臣下提出苛烦的要求，臣下也不凡事依托君王。
English: The monarch does not make onerous demands on his subjects, nor do his subjects rely on him for anything.

古文：不越邻而成章，而莫能至焉。故孝己之礼可为也，而莫能夺之名也。
现代文：从自己身边的每件小事做起，就能产生深远的影响，而且后世的人也会称颂他的伟大，这样不出家门就能成就事业、彰显光明，当然很少有人能达到这种境地。
English: Starting from every little thing around him, he can have a far-reaching impact, and later generations will praise his greatness. In this way, he can achieve a career and shine without leaving home. Of course, few people can achieve this.

古文：必不得其所怀也。义载乎宜之谓君子，宜遗乎义之谓小人。
现代文：所以殷高宗之子孝己在被流放中仍坚持礼节，一般的人也能做到这点，但无法能超过他的美名，这是因为一般的人无法拥有像孝己这样的胸怀和境界。
English: Therefore, the son of the Yin Gaozong, Xiaoji, still insisted on etiquette during his exile. Ordinary people can do this, but they can't surpass his reputation. This is because ordinary people can't have a mind and realm like Xiaoji.

古文：通智得而不劳，其次劳而不病，其下病而不劳。
现代文：行为适宜而充满义节的是君子，贪图私利而忘乎义节的是小人。
English: It is the gentleman who behaves appropriately and is full of righteousness, and the villain who is greedy for self-interest and forgets righteousness.

古文：古人味而弗贪也，今人贪而弗味。
现代文：具有智慧的人有所获得而不辛苦，次一等的人是辛劳但不劳累不堪，再次一等的人是终身劳累痛苦而又不愿辛劳。
English: A person of wisdom gains something without working hard, a second-class person works hard but is not overworked, and a first-class person works hard and suffers for life but does not want to work hard.

古文：歌之修其音也，音之不足于其美者也。金石丝竹，助而奏之，犹未足以至于极也。
现代文：古人品尝滋味而不贪食，今人贪食而不懂品尝，制作歌乐来修饰一般的声音，但是修饰出来的音乐还是难以达到教化的作用，就是配上金石丝竹协助演奏，还不足以达到教化的最高境界。
English: The ancients tasted the taste without being greedy, modern people are greedy but do not know how to taste, and make songs to modify the general sound, but the modified music is still difficult to achieve the role of education, that is, it is not enough to achieve the highest level of education with the help of gold stone silk bamboo.

古文：人能尊道行义，喜怒取予，欲如草之从风。
现代文：使人们尊崇道、实行义，那么改变他们的喜怒、取予情，就像草随风倒一样容易。
English: If you make people respect the way and practice righteousness, it will be as easy to change their emotions as it is for the grass to fall with the wind.

古文：召公桑蚕耕种之时，驰狱出拘，使百姓皆得反业修职。文王辞千里之地，而请去炮烙之刑。
现代文：周朝召公在养蚕、耕种的季节里放宽刑狱、将在押犯释放出来，使百姓都能返回家园从事农业生产；周文王让出千里封地，以此作为条件请求纣王废除炮烙之刑。
English: Zhou Zhaozhong called for the relaxation of prison sentences during the silkworm-raising and farming seasons, and the release of prisoners so that the people could return to their homes to engage in agricultural production; King Zhouwen gave up thousands of fiefs as a condition for requesting the king to abolish the punishment of cannon fire.

古文：故圣人之举事也，进退不失时，若夏就絺绤，上车授绥之谓也。
现代文：所以圣人办事处事，均能做到进退不失时机，这就如同夏天换穿葛衣、上车拉着绳索一样自然而然。
English: Therefore, the sage's office can do everything without missing the opportunity, which is as natural as changing clothes in the summer and getting on the car with a rope.

古文：老子学商容，见舌而知守柔矣；列子学壶子，观景柱而知持后矣。
现代文：老子拜商容为师，商容张开嘴吐出舌，使老子从中领悟到 守柔 的道理；列子向壶子学习，从形影相生，形亡影不伤的现象悟出 持守为后 的道理。
English: Lao Zi followed Shang Rong as his teacher. Shang Rong opened his mouth and spit out his tongue, so that Lao Zi could understand the principle of keeping a soft heart; Lei Zi learned from the pot, and realized the principle of keeping a soft heart from the phenomenon of being born in the same shape and not being hurt by the passing of the shadow.

古文：故圣人不为物先，而常制之，其类若积薪樵，后者在上。
现代文：所以圣人不处事物之先，然而却能控制万物，这有点像堆积柴薪，后放的却压在先放的上面。
English: Therefore, the sage does not precede things, yet he is able to control all things. This is a bit like piling up firewood, but the latter is placed on top of the former.

古文：人以义爱，以党群，以群强。
现代文：人应该以基本的道义去爱人，用善良正直的语言去团结人，依靠群体的力量来强盛自己。
English: People should love others with basic morality, use kind and honest language to unite people, and rely on the power of the group to strengthen themselves.

古文：是故德之所施者博，则威之所行者远；义之所加者浅，则武之所制者小矣。
现代文：所以，如果德泽恩爱施布广泛，这威力就遍及深远；如果缺乏仁义，想用武力镇服人的作用就很小了。
English: Therefore, if Dzeen's love of giving is widespread, this power will be far-reaching; if there is a lack of benevolence, the role of trying to subdue people by force will be small.

古文：铎以声自毁，膏浊以明自铄，虎豹之文来射，猿之捷来措。
现代文：吴国产的铃铎因为发音响亮而终被自己的铎舌撞破，蜡烛油灯因为能照明而终将自己熔尽销毁。虎豹因有美丽的皮毛而招来射杀，猿猴因为敏捷而招刺杀。
English: The bell made in Wu was finally broken by its own beak because of its loud sound, the candle oil lamp was eventually destroyed because it could be lit, the tiger and leopard were invited to shoot because of their beautiful fur, and the monkey was invited to stab because of its agility.

古文：故子路以勇死，苌弘以智困。
现代文：所以子路因为骁勇而死于卫国的战争，苌弘因为智谋聪慧而被杀害。
English: Therefore, Zilu died in the war to defend the country because of his bravery, and Zihong was killed because of his wisdom and cleverness.

古文：能以智知，而未能以智不知也。
现代文：这些人都是能依靠智力去认识事物，但却不能做到虽有大智而自知之明。
English: These people are able to rely on intelligence to know things, but they cannot achieve self-knowledge despite their great wisdom.

古文：故行险者不得履绳，出林者不得直道，夜行瞑目而前其手，事有所至，而明有所害。
现代文：所以走在险道上的人是不能走直路的，穿过深山老林的人总要走不少弯路，夜间行走时眼睛看不清，只得伸出双手摸索着行进。事物各有它适宜的范围，聪明有时也未必有用处。
English: Therefore, a person walking on a dangerous road cannot take a straight path, and a person walking through deep mountains and old forests always has to take many detours. When walking at night, the eyes cannot see clearly, and one has to stretch out the hands and grope along. Each thing has its appropriate scope, and cleverness is sometimes not necessarily useful.

古文：人能贯冥冥入于昭昭，可与言至矣。
现代文：人如果是通过黑暗迷惑而达到光明悟醒的，是可以和他谈论至道的。
English: If a person has attained enlightenment through the deception of darkness, it is possible to talk with him about the way of truth.

古文：鹊巢知风之所起，獭穴知水之高下，晖目知晏，阴谐知雨，为是谓人智不如鸟兽，则不然。
现代文：鸟鹊筑巢知道风向而选择合适的位置，水獭建穴是根据水位的高低来决定的，雄鸩叫鸣将预报天要放晴，雌鸩鸣唱将预报天要下雨。从中就可知人的智慧不如鸟兽的看法是不对的。
English: The birds build their nests knowing the wind direction and choose a suitable location, the otters build their holes according to the water level, the male crickets chirp to predict the weather will be fine, and the female crickets chirp to predict the weather will be rainy. From this, it can be seen that the view that human wisdom is not as good as that of birds and beasts is wrong.

古文：故通于一伎，察于一辞，可与曲说，未可与广应也。
现代文：因为这些鸟兽出于身体本能的 聪明 总是有限的。
English: Because the "intelligence" of these birds and beasts is always limited due to their physical instincts.

古文：宁戚击牛角而歌，桓公举以大政；雍门子以哭见孟尝君，涕流沾缨。
现代文：所以只是通晓一种技艺、只能分辨片言只语的真伪，这样的人只能与他说些浅陋的道理，而不能与他作广泛的应对。宁戚敲击牛角而悲歌，感动了齐桓公，被齐桓公任命为大田官。雍门子以哀歌使孟尝君悲从心起，流下眼泪以至打湿帽带。
English: Therefore, he is only familiar with one kind of skill, and can only distinguish the truth or falsity of a few words. Such a person can only talk with him about some shallow reason, but cannot make a broad response to him. Rather than beating the horns of the bull, he sang a tragic song, which moved King Qihuan, and he was appointed to Datian by King Qihuan. With his sad song, Yongmenzi made Meng Yu Jun sad from the heart, shed tears and even wet his hatband.

古文：歌哭，众人之所能为也，一发声，入人耳，感人心，情之至者也。
现代文：悲歌、痛哭对一般性的人来说是都会的；但一发悲声就能使人听了动真情，那就要有精诚的感情才行。
English: For ordinary people, it is common to hear sad songs and weeping; however, a sad voice can make people listen to the true feelings, which requires sincere feelings.

古文：故唐、虞之法可效也。其谕人心，不可及也。
现代文：所以唐尧、虞舜的治国方法可以仿效，但他们用情感化人心的效果是常人无法企及的。
English: Therefore, the methods of governing the country of Tang Xi and Yu Xi can be imitated, but the effect of their use of emotion and humanism is beyond the reach of ordinary people.

古文：简公以懦杀，子阳以猛劫，皆不得其道者也。
现代文：齐简公因为懦弱而被陈成常杀害，子阳因为施行猛政而遭劫难，这些都是因为他们不得其道的原因。
English: Qi Jian Gong was killed by Chen Cheng Chang because of his cowardice, and Ziyang suffered a disaster because of the implementation of a brutal regime. These are all reasons why they did not have their way.

古文：故歌而不比于律者，其清浊一也；绳之外与绳之内，皆失直者也。
现代文：所以唱歌如果不合音律，那么他的歌声就会变得清浊不分；墨绳不能切中、三点一线，就不能取直。
English: Therefore, if a singer does not sing in tune, then his singing will become clear and indistinguishable; the ink rope can not be cut in the middle, three points and one line, it can not be straightened.

古文：纣为象箸而箕子叽，鲁以偶人葬而孔子叹，见所始则知所终。
现代文：纣王用象牙筷而使箕子哀叹不已，并预感到纣王的贪欲将导致国家灭亡；鲁国用木偶人殉葬使孔子心痛叹息，诅咒不仁者将绝子绝孙。
English: Shao Wang used ivory chopsticks to make Shao Zi moan, and foresaw that Shao Wang's greed would lead to the country's demise; Lu used puppets to make Confucius sigh with heartache, and cursed those who were not merciful would have no children or grandchildren.

古文：故水出于山，入于海；稼生乎野，而藏乎仓。
现代文：所以圣人看到事物的征兆就能预知到事物的结局。发源于高山的江河流水必定要注入大海，庄稼长在田野，最后一定会归入贮藏到粮仓。
English: Therefore, the sage can see the signs of things and predict the outcome of things. The river water originating from the mountains must be injected into the sea, the crops grow in the fields, and finally they must be stored in the granary.

古文：圣人见其所生，则知其所归矣。
现代文：正是圣人看到事物如何生成，就将知道事物会如何归宿。
English: It is the sage who, having seen how things come into being, will know how they will go out.

古文：水浊者鱼噞，令苛者民乱。城峭者必崩，岸青者必陀。
现代文：河水混浊鱼儿就会口露出水面喘气，法令苛繁百姓就会混乱，城墙陡峭必定会崩溃，堤岸高峻必定崩塌。
English: If the river is turbid, the fish will come up to the surface to breathe. If the laws are too strict, the people will be confused. If the city wall is too steep, it will collapse. If the embankment is too high, it will collapse.

古文：故商鞅立法而支解，吴起刻削而车裂。
现代文：所以，商鞅制定苛法而招致自己被肢解，吴起施行酷法而遭车裂。
English: Therefore, Shang Kui formulated a harsh law and caused himself to be dismembered, and Wu Qi implemented a harsh law and was chariot-crashed.

古文：治国譬若张瑟，大弦，则小弦绝矣。
现代文：治理国家好像调琴瑟，大弦绷得太急则小弦就会断绝。
English: Governing a country is like tuning a lute. If the strings are too tight, the strings will break.

古文：故急辔数策者，非千里之御也。
现代文：所以一味勒紧缰绳，不断挥动鞭子的人，不是一个能驾御千里的御手。
English: Therefore, a person who tightens the reins and constantly waves the whip is not a hand that can drive a thousand miles.

古文：有声之声，不过百里；无声之声，施于四海。
现代文：能够听得见的声音，传播不过百里地；而没有响声的声音，可以传遍四海。
English: An audible voice can travel no more than a hundred miles, but a soundless voice can travel to the four corners of the earth.

古文：是故禄过其功者损，名过其实者蔽。
现代文：所以，俸禄已远远超出他的贡献的人，就必定会受到伤害；名过其实的人也必定会受到蒙蔽。
English: Therefore, a person whose salary has far exceeded his contribution is bound to be harmed; a person with an exaggerated reputation is also bound to be deceived.

古文：情行合而名副之，祸福不虚至矣。
现代文：如果贡献和品德合乎实际再加上与之相适的名誉，一般性来说，祸患不会无缘无故降临到他头上。
English: If the contribution and character are realistic, coupled with a suitable reputation, generally speaking, the disaster will not come to his head for no reason.

古文：身有丑梦，不胜正行；国有妖祥，不胜善政。
现代文：人有噩梦缠身，就无法胜任正常行动；国有恶事先见之徵，就无法胜任善政的实施。
English: A person who is haunted by nightmares is not competent to act normally; a person who has a premonition of the evils of the state is not competent to implement good governance.

古文：是故前有轩冕之赏，不可以无功取也；后有斧钺之禁，不可以无罪蒙也。
现代文：所以前面放着高官厚禄的赏赐，是不可以靠无功来获取它的。后面有严刑峻法，也不可能因无罪而蒙受诛罚。
English: Therefore, the reward of a high-ranking official's generous reward is placed in front, and it is not possible to obtain it by relying on no merit. There is a severe punishment behind, and it is not possible to be punished for innocence.

古文：素修正者，弗离道也。
现代文：你平时修身养性保持正直纯洁，做一个正派人而不偏离正道，就会相安无事。
English: If you cultivate your self-discipline, maintain honesty and purity, and be a decent person without deviating from the right path, you will be safe.

古文：君子不谓小善不足为也而舍之，小善积而为大善；不谓小不善为无伤也而为之，小不善积而为大不善。
现代文：君子不以为小的善事不值得做而就舍弃它，因为小善积累起来也就能成为大善；也不以为小的坏事做做也无妨而去做，因为小恶积累起来也就成为大恶。
English: A gentleman does not think that a small good deed is not worth doing and discard it, because a small good deed can accumulate to become a great good deed; nor does he think that a small bad deed can also be done, because a small evil deed can accumulate to become a great evil deed.

古文：是故积羽沈舟，群轻折轴。故君子禁于微。壹快不足以成善，积快而为德；壹恨不足以成非，积恨而成怨。
现代文：所以说，羽毛堆积到一定程度也能将船压沉，很多轻东西放在车上也能将车轴压断，所以君子是绝对禁止自己做微小的坏事的，这就是平时说的君子谨戒于微细之处。做一件令人愉快的好事还不足以形成美德，但坚持做好事，日长势久就能形成好的品德；做一件令人悔恨的坏事还不足以败坏品德，但经常做坏事就会成恶棍。
English: Therefore, feathers piled up to a certain extent can also sink a ship, and many light things placed on a car can also crush the axle, so a gentleman absolutely forbids himself to do small bad things. This is what is usually called a gentleman who is wary of subtleties. Doing a pleasant good deed is not enough to form a virtue, but insisting on doing a good deed for a long time can form a good character; doing a regrettable bad deed is not enough to corrupt the character, but often doing a bad thing will become a villain.

古文：故三代之称，千岁之积誉也；桀、纣之谤，千岁之积毁也。
现代文：所以夏禹、商汤、周文王周武王的善政美德，受千秋万代人称赞，夏桀、纣王的恶行暴政，遭千年万代人唾骂。
English: Therefore, the good political virtues of Xia Yu, Shang Tang, Zhou Wen Wang and Zhou Wu Wang have been praised by thousands of generations, and the evil tyranny of Xia Yu and Zou Wang has been reviled by thousands of generations.

古文：天有四时，人有四用。
现代文：天有春夏秋冬四个季节，人有四种可用的器官。
English: There are four seasons, spring, summer, autumn and winter, and people have four kinds of usable organs.

古文：何谓四用？
现代文：何谓四种有用的器官呢？
English: What are the four useful organs?

古文：视而形之，莫明于目；听而精之，莫聪于耳；重而闭之，莫固于口；含而藏之，莫深于心。
现代文：一是眼睛，没有什么能像眼睛那样明察秋毫；二是耳朵，没有什么能像耳朵那样听得那样精确；三是嘴，没有什么能像嘴巴那样闭守牢靠；四是心，没有什么能像心那样深含莫测。
English: One is the eye, nothing can see as clearly as the eye; the second is the ear, nothing can hear as accurately as the ear; the third is the mouth, nothing can be as closed and reliable as the mouth; the fourth is the heart, nothing can be as deep as the heart.

古文：目见其形，耳听其声，口言其诚，而心致之精，则万物之化咸有极矣。
现代文：眼睛能看清事物的形状，耳朵能听清事物的声响，嘴巴能说出真情话，而心则能达到精妙的境地，这样万物的化育变化便全能被掌握了。
English: The eyes can see the shape of things clearly, the ears can hear the sound of things clearly, the mouth can speak the truth, and the heart can reach a delicate state. In this way, the chemical and biological changes of all things are all-powerful.

古文：地以德广，君以德尊，上也；地以义广，君以义尊，次也；地以强广，君以强尊，下也。
现代文：国家的领域是靠德政来扩展的，君王的尊严是靠德政来提高的，这是上等的治国之道；而国家的领土是靠义来扩大的，君主的威望是靠义来提升的，这是次一等的治国之道；国家的领土是靠武力强权来扩张的，君王的威严是靠武力强权维持的，这是下等的治国之道。
English: The realm of the country is expanded by virtue, the dignity of the monarch is enhanced by virtue, which is the superior way of governing the country; and the territory of the country is expanded by righteousness, the prestige of the monarch is enhanced by righteousness, which is the second-class way of governing the country; the territory of the country is expanded by force and power, the majesty of the monarch is maintained by force and power, which is the inferior way of governing the country.

古文：故粹者王，驳者霸，无一焉者亡。
现代文：所以治国之道纯粹是德治的可以尊奉为王，治国之术驳杂的可以称霸为王，而这两方面都不具备的只能是亡国了。
English: Therefore, the way of governing the country is purely moral and can be honored as a king, and the art of governing the country can be called a king, and what both of these aspects do not have can only be the ruin of the country.

古文：昔二皇凤皇至于庭，三代至乎门，周室至乎泽。
现代文：过去伏羲、神农两位圣王治理天下，凤凰都飞临皇室的庭院；夏禹、商汤、周文王管理天下时，凤凰能飞临皇室的大门口；周朝以后，凤凰飞到郊外的湖泽中。
English: In the past, when Fuxi and Shennong, two holy kings, governed the world, the phoenixes flew to the courtyard of the royal family; when Xia Yu, Shang Tang and King Zhou Wen governed the world, the phoenixes could fly to the entrance of the royal family; after the Zhou Dynasty, the phoenixes flew to the lakes in the suburbs.

古文：德弥粗，所至弥远；德弥精，所至弥近。
现代文：这正是君王德行越粗糙，凤凰飞临的地方越远；君王的德行越精粹，凤凰飞临的地方越亲近。
English: It is precisely this: the coarser the king's virtue, the farther the phoenix flies; the more refined the king's virtue, the closer the phoenix flies.

古文：君子诚仁，施亦仁，不施亦仁；小人诚不仁，施亦不仁，不施亦不仁。
现代文：内心具有仁爱的君子，施恩于人时是仁爱的，就是不施予人也是仁爱的；内心根本不具备仁爱的小人，就是施小恩小惠于人也是不仁爱的，如不施予人就更不仁爱了。
English: A gentleman with benevolence in his heart is benevolent when he is kind to others, and he is benevolent even if he does not give to others; a small person who does not have benevolence in his heart at all is not benevolent even if he gives small favors to others, and he is even less benevolent if he does not give to others.

古文：善之由我，与其由人若，仁德之盛者也，故情胜欲者昌，欲胜情者亡。
现代文：君子自己身上有的善行美德，也像别人身上有的善行美德一样，因为他能感染别人，这就是君子仁德盛大的地方。所以崇高情操战胜贪欲则昌盛，贪欲战胜情操则丧亡。
English: The virtue of benevolence that a gentleman has in himself is the same as the virtue of benevolence that others have, because he can infect others. This is where the gentleman's benevolence is great. Therefore, when the noble sentiment overcomes greed, it prospers, and when greed overcomes sentiment, it perishes.

古文：欲知天道，察其数；欲行地道，物其树；欲知人道，从其欲。
现代文：要想知道天道，就要观察天道的运行；要想知道大地之道，就要观察大地上所种植的物类；要想知道人之道，就要考察人的欲念。
English: If you want to know the way of heaven, you must observe the movement of heaven; if you want to know the way of the earth, you must observe the species planted on the earth; if you want to know the way of man, you must examine the desires of man.

古文：勿惊勿骇，万物将自理；勿挠勿撄，万物将自清。
现代文：不必惊慌也不用恐惧，万物自会自生自灭；不去骚扰也不要触犯，万物自会清静安宁。
English: There is no need to panic, no need to fear, all things will be self-sustaining and self-destructive; do not harass or offend, all things will be calm and peaceful.

古文：察一曲者，不可与言化；审一时者，不可与言大。
现代文：只看到事物一角一隅的人，是不能和他讨论万物的变化的；只关注一段短暂时间的人，是不能和他谈论天地之大的。
English: Those who only see things from corner to corner cannot discuss the changes of all things with him; those who only pay attention to a short period of time cannot talk about the world with him.

古文：日不知夜，月不知昼，日月为明而弗能兼也，唯天地能函之。
现代文：白天月亮不露脸，黑夜太阳不露头，所以是 日不知夜，月不知昼 ；尽管它们都能给人间带来光明，可是都无法兼容对方的功效，唯有天地才能包容万物。
English: During the day, the moon does not show its face, and at night, the sun does not show its head, so the day does not know the night, and the moon does not know the day. Although both of them can bring light to the human world, they cannot be compatible with each other's effects. Only heaven and earth can contain all things.

古文：能包天地，曰唯无形者也。
现代文：而能包容天地的，又只能是无形的道。
English: But what can contain heaven and earth can only be an invisible path.

古文：骄溢之君无忠臣，口慧之人无必信。
现代文：骄横霸道的君主不会有忠臣，信口开河乱许诺的人不会讲信用。
English: Arrogant and domineering monarchs will not have loyal subjects, and those who make empty promises will not be trusted.

古文：交拱之木，无把之枝；寻常之沟，无吞舟之鱼。
现代文：缠绕而长的藤类树木长不出一握粗的枝干，狭小的水沟不会有能吞舟的大鱼。
English: Twisted and long rattan trees can not grow a handful of thick branches and trunks, narrow ditches will not have big fish that can swallow boats.

古文：根浅则末短，本伤则枝枯。
现代文：根浅的树木必然是长出短的树干；根如受伤则枝叶也就枯萎。
English: Trees with shallow roots inevitably grow short trunks; if the roots are injured, the branches and leaves will wither.

古文：福生于无为，患生于多欲，害生于弗备，秽生于弗耨。
现代文：福来自于无为，祸生于多欲；灾害来自无防备，荒芜是因为没除草。
English: Happiness comes from inaction, misfortune comes from too much desire; disasters come from unpreparedness, and desolation comes from not weeding.

古文：圣人为善若恐不及，备祸若恐不免。
现代文：圣人为善行善唯恐赶不及、防备祸患唯恐避不开。
English: A saint can do good only if he is afraid of not being able to catch up, and can't avoid disaster unless he is afraid of it.

古文：蒙尘而欲毋眯，涉水而欲无濡，不可得也。
现代文：灰尘蒙脸却不想眯眼，涉水过河又想不打湿脚，这种事是不可能的。
English: It is impossible to cover one's face with dust and not want to close one's eyes, to wade across a river and not want to get wet feet.

古文：是故知己者不怨人，知命者不怨天。
现代文：所以有自知之明的人是不会胡乱埋怨人的，知天命者是不会胡乱埋怨天的。
English: Therefore, a person with self-knowledge will not randomly complain about others, and a person with knowledge of fate will not randomly complain about God.

古文：福由己发，祸由己生。
现代文：幸福由自己创造，灾祸是自己招惹。
English: Happiness is created by oneself, disaster is provoked by oneself.

