古文：黄帝问于少俞曰：余闻百疾之始期也，必生于风雨寒暑，循毫毛而入腠理，或复还，或留止，或为风肿汗出，或为消瘅，或为寒热，或为留痹，或为积聚。
现代文：黄帝问少俞道：我听说各种疾病在开始发生的时候，都是由于风雨寒暑等邪气，沿着皮肤、毛孔侵入腠理。有的发生传变，有的邪气停留在体内某一部位，有的形成以水肿、汗出为主症的风厥病，有的成为消瘅病，有的成为寒热病，有的导致长期不愈的痹症，有的发生胃肠的积聚病。
English: Huang Di asked Shao Xuan Dao: I heard that all kinds of diseases are caused by evil spirits such as wind, rain, cold and heat, which invade the body along the skin and pores. Some are transformed, some evil spirits stay in a certain part of the body, some form rheumatic diseases with edema and sweating as the main symptoms, some become rickets, some become colds and fevers, some lead to long-term incurable paralysis, and some develop gastrointestinal accumulation diseases.

古文：奇邪淫溢，不可胜数，愿闻其故。
现代文：邪气侵入人体后，进一步发展演变，会造成无以数计的各种各样的疾病，我想了解其中的道理。
English: After the evil spirit invades the human body, it will further develop and evolve, causing countless diseases of all kinds. I want to understand the reason.

古文：夫同时得病，或病此，或病彼，意者，天之为人生风乎，何其异也？
现代文：人同时生病，有的得这种病，有的得那种病，是因为自然界对不同的人产生了不同的风邪吗，为什么各人得的病不同呢？
English: Do people get sick at the same time, some get this disease, some get that disease, is it because nature has produced different colds for different people, why are the diseases different for each person?

古文：少俞曰：夫天之生风者，非以私百姓也，其行公平正直，犯者得之，避者得无殆，非求人而人自犯之。
现代文：少俞回答说：自然界产生的邪气，不是专对某一个人的，邪气的影响对任何人都是不偏不倚的，只有被邪气侵犯的人才会发生疾病，能够躲避邪气的人就不会发生危险。疾病的发生，不是自然界的邪气有意侵袭人体，而是人不能躲避而感受了它。
English: Shao Xuan replied: The evil spirit produced by nature is not exclusive to a certain person. The influence of the evil spirit is impartial to anyone. Only those who are invaded by the evil spirit will have a disease, and those who can avoid the evil spirit will not be in danger. The occurrence of disease is not the evil spirit of nature intentionally invading the human body, but people can not avoid it and feel it.

古文：黄帝曰：一时遇风，同时得病，其病各异，愿闻其故。
现代文：黄帝说：相同的时间感受邪气而又同时患病，但所患的疾病却不相同，我想了解是什么缘故。
English: Huang Di said: I felt the evil spirit for the same amount of time and got sick at the same time, but the diseases I suffered from were different. I want to know why.

古文：少俞曰：善乎哉问！
现代文：少俞答道：问得好啊！
English: Shao Xuan replied: That's a good question!

古文：请论以比匠人。匠人磨斧斤、砺刀，削斵材木。
现代文：请让我以工匠砍伐树木为例来说明这个问题。
English: Let me illustrate this with the example of a craftsman cutting down trees.

古文：木之阴阳，尚有坚脆，坚者不入，脆者皮弛，至其交节，而缺斤斧焉。
现代文：工匠磨快了刀斧去砍伐木材，树木本身的阴面和阳面，有坚硬与松脆的不同。坚硬的不易砍入，松脆的容易被砍伐劈裂，砍在树木枝扠结节的地方，坚硬得连刀斧的刃都会崩损而出现缺口。
English: The craftsman sharpened the axe to cut the wood. The dark and light sides of the trees themselves are different from the hard and crunchy ones. The hard ones are not easy to cut into, the crunchy ones are easily cut and split, and cut in the place where the tree branches and knots are, so hard that even the blade of the axe will collapse and a gap will appear.

古文：夫一木之中，坚脆不同，坚者则刚，脆者易伤，况其材木之不同，皮之厚薄，汁之多少，而各异耶。
现代文：同一棵树木的不同部位也有坚硬、松脆的区别，坚硬的地方不易被刀斧砍伐，松脆的地方就容易被砍伤，何况那些不同的树木，树皮的厚薄、所含汁液的多少也都不相同。
English: Different parts of the same tree also have different hardness and brittleness. Hard places are not easy to be cut with a knife and axe, and brittle places are easy to be cut. What's more, the thickness of the bark and the amount of sap contained in different trees are also different.

古文：夫木之蚤花先生叶者，遇春霜烈风，则花落而叶萎；久曝大旱，则脆木薄皮者，枝条汁少而叶萎；久阴淫雨，则薄皮多汁者，皮渍而漉；卒风暴起，则刚脆之木，枝折杌伤；秋霜疾风，则刚脆之木，根摇而叶落。
现代文：在树木中，开花长叶较早的，遇早春的寒霜和大风，就会花凋叶枯；木质松脆、树皮薄的，遭长久曝晒或大旱，就会枝条汁液减少、树叶枯萎；树皮薄而汁液多的，逢长期阴雨连绵，就会树皮溃烂，水湿漉漉；狂风突起，那些本来质地刚硬的树木，就会枝条折断，树干受伤；如遇秋天的冰霜疾风，刚脆树木的树根就会动摇，树叶飘落。
English: Among trees, those with early flowering and long leaves will experience early spring frosts and high winds, and their flowers and leaves will wither; those with crunchy wood and thin bark will suffer from long-term exposure or drought, and their branches and sap will decrease and their leaves will wither; those with thin bark and a lot of sap will suffer from long-term rain and rain, and their bark will fester and the water will be wet; those with a hard texture will have their branches broken and their trunks injured when a strong wind blows; if there is an autumn frost and wind, the roots of the brittle trees will shake and the leaves will fall.

古文：凡此五者，各有所伤，况于人乎！
现代文：以上这五种自然界的变化，连树木都会受到各种损伤，更何况人呢！
English: The above five kinds of changes in the natural world, even trees will be subject to all kinds of damage, let alone people!

古文：黄帝曰：以人应木，奈何？
现代文：黄帝问：将人与树木相比是怎样一种情况呢？
English: Huangdi asked: What kind of situation is it to compare people to trees?

古文：少俞答曰：木之所伤也，皆伤其枝。枝之刚脆而坚，未成伤也。
现代文：少俞回答说：树木的损伤，主要表现为伤及树枝，如果树枝坚硬刚强就不会被伤害。
English: Shao Wei replied, "The damage of trees is mainly manifested as damage to branches. If the branches are hard and strong, they will not be harmed.

古文：人之有常病也，亦因其骨节皮肤腠理之不坚固者，邪之所舍也，故常为病也。
现代文：人体也是因为骨节、皮肤、腠理等部位不够坚固，邪气侵入而停留在这些地方，才会经常发生疾病。
English: The human body is also because the bones, skin, joints and other parts of the body are not strong enough, and the evil spirits invade and stay in these places, which is why diseases often occur.

古文：黄帝曰：人之善病风厥漉汗者，何以候之？
现代文：黄帝问：易患风厥病而汗出不止的人，有什么征候吗？
English: The Yellow Emperor asked: What are the symptoms of a person who is prone to wind and sweats a lot?

古文：少俞答曰：肉不坚，腠理疏，则善病风。
现代文：少俞回答说：肌肉不坚实，腠理疏松的人，易患风厥病。
English: Shao Xuan replied, "People whose muscles are not firm and whose reason is loose are prone to wind and disease.

古文：黄帝曰：何以候肉之不坚也？
现代文：黄帝说：凭什么特征来诊断肌肉不坚实呢？
English: Huang Di said: What characteristics should be used to diagnose that the muscles are not solid?

古文：少俞答曰：腘肉不坚，而无分理。
现代文：少俞回答说：肌肉结集隆起的部位不坚实，皮肤的纹理不明显。
English: Xiao Yao replied: The area where the muscle mass bulges is not solid, and the skin texture is not obvious.

古文：理者麤理，麤理而皮不致者，腠理疏。
现代文：即使皮肤纹理清楚但却很粗糙，皮肤粗糙而不致密，腠理也就疏松。
English: Even if the skin texture is clear but rough, the skin is rough but not dense, and the texture is loose.

古文：此言其浑然者。
现代文：这些说的是观察肌肉是否坚实的大致情况。
English: These are just general observations to see if the muscles are firm.

古文：黄帝曰：人之善病消瘅者，何以候之？
现代文：黄帝说：易患消瘅病的人，有什么征候吗？
English: The Yellow Emperor said, "For those who are susceptible to rickets, what are the symptoms?

古文：少俞答曰：五脏皆柔弱者，善病消瘅。
现代文：少俞答道：五脏都很柔弱的人，就容易患消瘅病。
English: Shao Qi replied: People whose five internal organs are very weak and tender are prone to suffering from the disease of eliminating qi.

古文：黄帝曰：何以知五脏之柔弱也？
现代文：黄帝说：凭什么知晓五脏是柔弱的呢？
English: The Yellow Emperor said, "How do you know that the five viscera are weak?

古文：少俞答曰：夫柔弱者，必有刚强，刚强多怒，柔者易伤也。
现代文：少俞回答道：五脏柔弱的人，必定有刚强的性情，性情刚强就容易发怒，柔弱的五脏就容易被情志变化所伤。
English: Shao Yao replied: People with weak and tender guts must have a strong temperament. A strong temperament is easy to get angry, and a weak and tender guts are easily hurt by emotional changes.

古文：黄帝曰：何以候柔弱之与刚强？
现代文：黄帝说：凭什么特征来确诊这种有柔弱的五脏与刚强的性情的人呢？
English: Huang Di said, "What characteristics should be used to diagnose this kind of person who has soft and weak internal organs and a strong temperament?"

古文：少俞答曰：此人薄皮肤，而目坚固以深者，长冲直肠，其心刚，刚则多怒，怒则气上逆，胸中蓄积，血气逆留，髋皮充肌，血脉不行，转而为热，热则消肌肤，故为消瘅。
现代文：少俞答道：这类人皮肤薄，两眼直视锐利，眼睛深陷目眶中，两眉长而且竖直。这样的人，性情刚强，就容易发怒，发怒会使气上逆而蓄积在胸中，气血运行失常而留滞，使皮肤、肌肉宽松充胀，血脉运行不畅，郁积而生热，热能伤耗津液而使肌肤消瘦，所以形成消瘅病。
English: Shao Qi replied: This kind of person has thin skin, sharp eyes, deep-set eyes, long and straight eyebrows. Such a person, with a strong temperament, is prone to anger. Anger will cause the qi to accumulate in the chest, the qi and blood to stagnate, the skin and muscles to become loose and swollen, the blood vessels to run poorly, the heat to build up and heat, and the heat energy injury to consume the fluid and make the skin thin, thus forming the disease of eliminating qi.

古文：此言其人暴刚而肌肉弱者也。
现代文：以上所讲的，就是性情刚暴而肌肉瘦弱一类人的情况。
English: What has been described above is the case of a person with a violent temperament and weak muscles.

古文：黄帝曰：人之善病寒热者，何以候之？
现代文：黄帝说：易患寒热病的人，有什么征候吗？
English: Huang Di said: People who are susceptible to cold and fever, what are the symptoms?

古文：少俞答曰：小骨弱肉者，善病寒热。
现代文：少俞答道：骨骼细小、肌肉瘦弱的人，容易患寒热病。
English: Shao Wei replied: People with small bones and weak muscles are prone to colds and fevers.

古文：黄帝曰：何以候骨之小大，肉之坚脆，色之不一也？
现代文：黄帝说：凭什么特征来判断骨骼的大小、肌肉的坚硬和柔弱、气色的不同呢？
English: Huangdi said: What characteristics are used to judge the size of bones, the hardness and softness of muscles, and the difference in appearance?

古文：少俞答曰：颧骨者，骨之本也。颧大则骨大，颧小则骨小。
现代文：少俞答道：颧骨是人体骨骼表现的基本标志，颧骨大的，全身骨骼就大，颧骨小的，全身骨骼就小。
English: Shao Qi replied: The shinbone is the basic symbol of human skeletal performance. If the shinbone is large, the whole body skeleton will be large. If the shinbone is small, the whole body skeleton will be small.

古文：皮肤薄而其肉无䐃，其臂懦懦然，其地色殆然，不与其天同色，污然独异，此其候也。
现代文：皮肤薄而肌肉瘦弱没有隆起肌肉的，两臂软弱无力，地阁部位的色泽黑暗没有光泽，与天庭部位的色泽不一致，地阁的黑暗与其他部位的色泽都不同，这就是肌肉强弱，色泽不一致的外部表现。
English: If the skin is thin and the muscles are thin and weak without bulging muscles, the arms are weak and feeble, the color of the dungeon part is dark and dull, and the color of the heavenly garden part is inconsistent, and the darkness of the dungeon is different from the color of other parts, this is the external manifestation of muscle strength and weakness, and inconsistent color.

古文：然后臂薄者，其髓不满，故善病寒热也。
现代文：此外，臂部肌肉消瘦的，阴精不足而骨髓空虚，所以容易患寒热病。
English: In addition, the muscles of the arm are emaciated, the yin is insufficient and the bone marrow is empty, so it is easy to suffer from cold and fever.

古文：黄帝曰：何以候人之善病痹者？
现代文：黄帝说：怎样诊察人体易于患痹症呢？
English: Huang Di said: How to diagnose the human body prone to polio?

古文：少俞答曰：麤理而肉不坚者，善病痹。
现代文：少俞回答道：皮肤纹理粗疏，肌肉不坚实的人，易患痹病。
English: Shao Wei replied: People with rough skin texture and weak muscles are prone to paralysis.

古文：黄帝曰：痹之高下有处乎？
现代文：黄帝问：患痹症的部位，高下有固定的地方吗？
English: Huang Di asked: Is there a fixed place at the top and bottom of the affected area?

古文：少俞答曰：欲知其高下者，各视其部。
现代文：少俞回答道：若想知道痹症部位的高下，就要观察五脏的反映，心肺之痹在高，肝肾脾之痹在下。
English: Shao Wei replied: If you want to know the height of the paralysis site, you should observe the reflection of the five viscera. The heart and lung paralysis is at the top, and the liver, kidney and spleen paralysis is at the bottom.

古文：黄帝曰：人之善病肠中积聚者，何以候之？
现代文：黄帝问：易患肠中积聚病的人，有什么征候吗？
English: Huang Di asked: What are the symptoms of people who are prone to intestinal accumulation disease?

古文：少俞答曰：皮肤薄而不泽，肉不坚而淖泽，如此，则肠胃恶，恶则邪气留止，积聚乃伤。
现代文：少俞答道：皮肤薄而不润泽，肌肉不坚实却有滑润感，出现这种现象说明肠胃功能差，肠胃功能差则邪气便留滞在身体之中，积聚起来就会发作。
English: Shao Xuan replied: The skin is thin but not moist, the muscles are not solid but have a slippery feeling. The occurrence of this phenomenon indicates poor gastrointestinal function. If the gastrointestinal function is poor, the evil spirit will stay in the body, accumulate and then attack.

古文：脾胃之间，寒温不次，邪气稍至，蓄积留止，大聚乃起。
现代文：脾胃之间，由于饮食的冷热不当，邪气就会逐渐侵袭脾胃，进一步形成蓄积停留，发生严重的积聚病。
English: Between the spleen and stomach, due to improper hot and cold diet, the evil qi will gradually invade the spleen and stomach, further forming an accumulation stay, and a serious accumulation disease will occur.

古文：黄帝曰：余闻病形，已知之矣！愿闻其时。
现代文：黄帝说：我听了以上疾病的外部表现，已经知道从外部表现诊察疾病的常识，还想听一听时令与疾病的关系。
English: Huang Di said: I have listened to the above-mentioned external manifestations of diseases, and have already known the common sense of diagnosing diseases from external manifestations. I also want to listen to the relationship between season and disease.

古文：少俞答曰：先立其年，以知其时，时高则起，时下则殆。虽不陷下，当年有冲道，其病必起，是谓因形而生病。
现代文：少俞答道：首先要确定代表某一年的天干、地支，从干支来推算每年的客气加临于主气时的顺逆情况，如果客气胜主气疾病就减轻，主气胜客气疾病就危重。
English: Shao Wei replied: First of all, it is necessary to determine the heavenly stem and earthly branch that represent a certain year. From the heavenly stem and earthly branch, it is necessary to calculate the annual favorable and unfavorable conditions when the benevolent spirit is added to the dominant spirit. If the benevolent spirit prevails over the dominant spirit, the disease will be alleviated, and if the dominant spirit prevails over the benevolent spirit, the disease will be critical.

古文：五变之纪也。
现代文：这些就是五变的一般规律。
English: These are the general rules of the five changes.

