古文：○宇文述云定兴宇文述，字伯通，代郡武川人也。
现代文：○宇文述宇文述，字伯通，代郡武川人。
English: ○ Uwentsuru Uwentsuru, alias Bertone, from Takegawa, Daigun.

古文：本姓破野头，役属鲜卑俟豆归，后从其主为宇文氏。
现代文：他家本姓破野头，归鲜卑俟豆归奴役，后来随他家的主子姓宇文。
English: His family's original family name was Hatano no kami, but he was enslaved to fresh peas, and later he took the surname of the master of his family, Uwen.

古文：父盛，周上柱国。
现代文：父亲宇文盛，北周上柱国。
English: His father, Uwen Sheng, was from the Northern Zhou Shangzhu Kingdom.

古文：述少骁锐，便弓马。
现代文：宇文述小时就很骁勇，熟习弓马。
English: According to Yuwen, he was brave and courageous as a boy, and was good at riding horses and archery.

古文：年十一时，有相者谓述曰： 公子善自爱，后当位极人臣。 
现代文：十一岁时，有个看相的对他说： 公子好生自爱，以后会位极人臣。 
English: When he was eleven years old, one of his parents said to him: "He is a good son, loves himself, and will be a great statesman in the future."

古文：周武帝时，以父军功，起家拜开府。
现代文：北周武帝时，因他父亲的军功，他开始当开府。
English: During the reign of Emperor Zhou Wu, because of his father's military exploits, Wu Wenshu started from his hometown and was awarded the title of Kaifu.

古文：述性恭谨沈密，周大冢宰宇文护甚爱之，以本官领护亲信。
现代文：宇文述生性谦恭严密，北周的大冢宰宇文护，非常喜欢他。让他以本官身份当自己的亲信。
English: According to Uwen, he was born with a humble and strict nature. He was very fond of Uwen Guo, the grand vizier of Northern Zhou, and let him be his confidant as his own official.

古文：及帝亲总万机，召为左宫伯，累迁英果中大夫，赐爵博陵郡公，寻改封濮阳郡公。
现代文：到周武帝亲理万机时，召他任左宫伯，累功升任英果中大夫，赐他博陵郡公的爵位，不久改封为仆阳郡公。
English: When Emperor Zhou Wu personally took charge of the situation, he called him to serve as the left palace count, and he was promoted to the post of Yingguo junior doctor, and he was given the title of Boling County Duke, and soon he was changed to the title of Poyang County Duke.

古文：高祖为丞相，尉迥作乱相州，述以行军总管率步骑三千，从韦孝宽击之。
现代文：隋高祖为北周丞相后，尉迟迥在相州造反，宇文述以行军总管的身份，率领三千步兵骑兵，随韦孝宽讨敌。
English: After Sui Gaozu became the Northern Zhou Dynasty's prime minister, his lieutenant Yi Xi rebelled in Xiangzhou. Wu Wenshu, as the commander-in-chief, led 3,000 infantry and cavalry and fought against the enemy with Wei Xiaokang.

古文：军至河阳，迥遣将李俊攻怀州，述别击俊军，破之。
现代文：部队到了河阳，尉迟迥派部将李隽进攻怀州。宇文述单独进攻李隽军，打败了他。
English: When the troops arrived in Kheyang, Lieutenant Chi Yan sent a detachment to attack Li Qian in Waizhou. Yu Wenshu attacked Li Qian's army single-handedly and defeated him.

古文：又与诸将击尉惇于永桥，述先锋陷阵，俘馘甚众。
现代文：宇文述又和诸将一起，在永桥进攻尉迟惇，宇文述冲锋陷阵，俘虏了很多敌人。
English: Together with the generals, Uwenshu delayed the attack on Yongqiao. Uwenshu charged into the battle and captured many enemies.

古文：平尉迥，每战有功，超拜上柱国，进爵褒国公，赐缣三千匹。
现代文：在平定尉迟迥的战争中，宇文述每次作战都有战功，朝廷越级提拔他当上柱国，封他为褒国公，赐他缣帛三千匹。
English: In the war to suppress the delay of the commander, Uwen said that every battle had its merits, and the imperial court promoted him to the pillar country, made him a national hero, and gave him three thousand yakitori.

古文：开皇初，拜右卫大将军。
现代文：开皇初年，授他右卫大将军。
English: In the first year of the emperor's reign, he was awarded the title of Ue no taisho (Major General of the Right Division of Inner Palace Guards).

古文：平陈之役，复以行军总管率众三万，自六合而济。
现代文：在平定陈国的战争中，又让他以行军总管身份，率兵三万，从六合渡江。
English: In the war to pacify Chen Guo, he also allowed him to cross the river from Liuhe with 30,000 soldiers as the commander-in-chief.

古文：时韩擒、贺若弼两军趣丹阳，述进据石头，以为声援。
现代文：当时，韩擒虎、贺若弼两军奔向丹阳，宇文述进据石头城，以互相声援。
English: At that time, Han Xinghu and He Ruoqi's two armies rushed to Danyang, and Wu Wenshu entered Stone Town to support each other.

古文：陈主既擒，而萧瓛、萧岩据东吴之地，拥兵拒守。
现代文：陈后主被抓以后，萧瓛、萧岩占据东吴之地，拥兵拒守。
English: After Chen Houcheng was arrested, Xiao Yu and Xiao Yan occupied the land of Dongwu and refused to defend it.

古文：述领行军总管元契、张默言等讨之，水陆兼进。
现代文：宇文述率领行军总管元契、张默言等部人马进讨，水陆并进。
English: Yu Wenshu led the general manager of the marching army, Yuan Qi, Zhang Meiyan and other members to advance the discussion, and the water and land advanced together.

古文：落丛公燕荣以舟师自海至，亦受述节度。
现代文：落丛公燕荣率水军从海上赶到，也受宇文述指挥。
English: The naval forces arrived from the sea under the leadership of Yang Rong, who was also commanded by Wu Wenshu.

古文：上下诏曰： 公鸿勋大业，名高望重，奉国之诚，久所知悉。
现代文：皇上下诏说： 你功勋很大，名望很高，忠心奉国，我早就知道。
English: The imperial edict said: I have known for a long time that you have great merits, a high reputation, and have served the country loyally.

古文：金陵之寇，既已清荡，而吴会之地，东路为遥，萧岩、萧瓛，并在其处。
现代文：金陵的贼人既已消灭，但吴州、会稽等地，在很远的东方，萧岩、萧瓛，都在那里。
English: The thieves of Jinling have already been wiped out, but in Wuzhou, Huizhou and other places, in the far east, Xiao Yan and Xiao Yao, are all there.

古文：公率将戎旅，抚慰彼方，振扬国威，宣布朝化。
现代文：你要率领部队，安抚那里，扬我国威，宣布教化。
English: You have to lead the troops, pacify there, promote our country's prestige, and proclaim enlightenment.

古文：以公明略，乘胜而往，风行电扫，自当稽服。
现代文：凭着你的谋略，乘胜前进，就像风扫残云、电闪雷鸣一样，那里肯定会驯服。
English: With your strategy, take advantage of the victory and move forward, just like the wind sweeping the clouds, lightning and thunder, there will certainly be tamed.

古文：若使干戈不用，黎庶获安，方副朕怀，公之力也。 
现代文：如果不用干戈，那里的百姓能得到安宁，这才符合我的心意，也是你的大功。 
English: If there is no need to go to war, the people there can have peace. This is what I want, and it is also your great merit.

古文：陈永新侯陈君范自晋陵奔瓛，并军合势。
现代文：陈国的永新侯陈君范从晋陵投奔萧瓛，并军合力。
English: Chen Junfan, the Yongxin marquis of Chen Province, rushed from Jinling to Xiaohui and joined forces.

古文：见述军且至，瓛惧，立栅于晋陵城东，又绝塘道，留兵拒述。
现代文：看见宇文述的部队快到了，萧瓛害怕，树栅栏于晋陵城东，又断绝水道，留兵抵抗宇文述。
English: Seeing that Yu Wenshu's troops were about to arrive, Xiao Yao was afraid. He set up a tree fence in the east of Jinling City, cut off the water supply, and left soldiers to resist Yu Wenshu.

古文：瓛自义兴入太湖，图掩述后。
现代文：萧瓛从义兴到太湖，想掩袭宇文述。
English: Xiao Yao went from Yixing to Taihu Lake in an attempt to cover up Yu Wenshu.

古文：述进破其栅，回兵击瓛，大败之，斩瓛司马曹勒叉。
现代文：宇文述攻破其栅栏，回兵打击萧瓛，大破萧军，斩了萧瓛的司马曹勒叉。
English: Yu Wen describes breaking through its fence, returning soldiers striking Xiao Yao, defeating Xiao Jun, and cutting off Xiao Yao's Sima Cao Le Fork.

古文：前军复陷吴州，瓛以馀众保包山，燕荣击破之。
现代文：先头部队又攻下了吴州，萧瓛让余部保卫包山，燕荣打破了他的余部。
English: The vanguard also captured Wuzhou. Xiao Gan let the rest defend Baoshan, and Yan Rong defeated the rest.

古文：述进至奉公埭，萧岩、陈君范等以会稽请降。
现代文：宇文述进兵到奉公埭，萧岩、陈君范等人，献出会稽请求投降。
English: Uwen recounted the march of soldiers to Bongongtao, Xiao Yan, Chen Jun Fan and others, and presented a petition to request surrender.

古文：述许之，二人面缚路左，吴会悉平。
现代文：宇文述同意了他们。两个人捆着，站在路的左边，吴州、会稽全部平定。
English: Yu Wenshu agreed with them. The two men were tied up and stood on the left side of the road. Wuzhou and the auditorium were completely subdued.

古文：以功拜一子开府，赐物三千段，拜安州总管。
现代文：宇文述因军功授一个儿子开府，赐缣帛三千段，授他安州总管。
English: Yu Wenshu awarded a son with the title of the founder of the prefecture for his military service, bestowed him with three thousand dan and made him the chief administrator of Anzhou.

古文：时晋王广镇扬州，甚善于述，欲述近己，因奏为寿州刺史总管。
现代文：当时晋王杨广镇守扬州，对宇文述很好，想宇文述贴近自己，因此奏请封他为寿州刺史总管。
English: At that time, Yang Guangzhen, the king of Jin, was in charge of Yangzhou. He was very fond of Wu Wenshu and wanted to be close to him. Therefore, he requested that he be appointed as the chief administrator of the history of Shoushu.

古文：王时阴有夺宗之志，请计于述，述曰： 皇太子失爱已久，令德不闻于天下。
现代文：晋王那时就有夺取太子之位的用意，向宇文述讨教，宇文述说： 皇太子早就失去了皇上的宠爱，他的美德不闻于天下。
English: At that time, Jin Wang had the intention of seizing the position of the crown prince, and asked Uwen about his advice. Uwen said: The crown prince has long lost the emperor's favor, and his virtues are not known to the world.

古文：大王仁孝著称，才能盖世，数经将领，深有大功。
现代文：大王您以仁孝著称，才能盖世，几经将领，很有大功。
English: Great King, you are famous for your benevolence and filial piety. Only then can you become world famous. You have been a general several times, which is a great achievement.

古文：主上之与内宫，咸所钟爱，四海之望，实归于大王。然废立者，国家之大事，处人父子骨肉之间，诚非易谋也。
现代文：皇上和内宫，都很爱您。天下人都看着您大王。但是废立是国家的大事，我处在他人的父子骨肉之间，实在不方便出谋划策。
English: Your Majesty and the Imperial Household love you very much. The whole world is watching you, Your Majesty. However, the abdication of the throne is an important matter for the country. I am in the middle of other people's flesh and blood, and it is really inconvenient to come up with a plan.

古文：然能移主上者，唯杨素耳。
现代文：但能改变皇上意愿的，只有杨素一个人罢了。
English: But Yang Su was the only one who could change the emperor's will.

古文：素之谋者，唯其弟约。
现代文：但为杨素出主意的，只有他的弟弟杨约。
English: However, only his younger brother Yang Yo came up with the idea for Yang Su.

古文：述雅知约，请朝京师，与约相见，共图废立。 
现代文：我很了解杨约，请让我到京师去，与杨约相见，一起谋划废立的事。 
English: I know Yangyou very well. Please let me go to Beijing to meet with Yangyou and work together to plan the abolition.

古文：晋王大悦，多赍金宝，资述入关。
现代文：晋王很高兴，准备了很多金宝，资助宇文述入关赴京。
English: Jin Wang was very pleased and gave Uwenshu a lot of gold, silver and treasure to fund Uwenshu's trip to Beijing.

古文：述数请约，盛陈器玩，与之酣暢，因而共博，每佯不胜，所赍金宝尽输之。
现代文：宇文述几次请杨约，摆出很多宝物，与他喝得大醉，然后与他赌博，每次都假装不能赢，所带的金宝全都输给了他。
English: Yu Wenzhong asked Yang for a date several times, displayed a lot of treasures, got drunk with him, and then gambled with him. Each time, he pretended that he could not win, and all the gold and treasures he brought were lost to him.

古文：约所得既多，稍以谢述。
现代文：杨约得了很多金宝，稍稍谢谢宇文述。
English: Yang You got a lot of treasure, and expressed a little gratitude to Yu Wenshu.

古文：述因曰： 此晋王之赐，令述与公为欢乐耳。 约大惊曰： 何为者？ 
现代文：宇文述乘机说： 这是晋王赐给我的，让我和你玩玩罢了。 杨约大惊说： 这是为什么呢？ 
English: Yu Wenshu took the opportunity to say, "This was given to me by the King of Jin, just let me play with you." Yang Yao was shocked and said, "Why is that?

古文：述因为王申意。
现代文：宇文述就为晋王说明用意。
English: Yuwen then explained Jin Wang's intention on his behalf.

古文：约然其说，退言于素，素亦从之。
现代文：杨约同意晋王的说法，回去对杨素说了，杨素也听从。
English: Yang You agreed with Jin Wang's statement, went back and told Yang Su, and Yang Su also obeyed.

古文：于是素每与述谋事。
现代文：于是杨素常与宇文述谋划这事。
English: As a result, Yang Sujong and Uwen discussed the plan.

古文：晋王与述情好益密，命述子士及尚南阳公主，前后赏赐不可胜计。
现代文：晋王与宇文述感情更亲密，命宇文述的儿子宇文士及娶南阳公主，前后给宇文家的赏赐不计其数。
English: Jin Wang and Uwenshu had a closer relationship. He ordered Uwenshu's son, Uwenshi, to marry Nanyang Princess, and gave countless rewards to the Uwens.

古文：及晋王为皇太子，以述为左卫率。
现代文：晋王为皇太子后，让宇文述任左卫率。
English: After Jin Wang became the crown prince, he appointed Wu Wenshu as the left guard.

古文：旧令，率官第四品，上以述素贵，遂进率品为第三，其见重如此。
现代文：按老规矩，左卫率为四品官。皇上因宇文述一向官高，于是把左卫率定为三品官。他就是这样被看重。
English: According to the old rules, the left guard was a four-rank officer. The emperor, who had always been high-ranking because of Uwenshu, set the left guard to be a three-rank officer. This is how he was valued.

古文：炀帝嗣位，拜左卫大将军，改封许国公。
现代文：炀帝继位后，授宇文述左卫大将军，改封他为许国公。
English: After Emperor Shun succeeded to the throne, he bestowed the title of Yu Wenshu Zuo Dai-senior general, and changed his title to Xu Guogong.

古文：大业三年，加开府仪同三司，每冬正朝会，辄给鼓吹一部。
现代文：大业三年，加授他为开府仪同三司。每年冬至日朝廷聚会，就给他一部鼓吹。
English: After three years of hard work, he was awarded the title of Kaifu Yi Tong San Shi. Every year, on the winter solstice, when the imperial court gathers, he is given a chance to preach.

古文：从幸榆林，时铁勒契弊歌棱攻败吐谷浑，其部携散，遂遣使请降求救。
现代文：他随炀帝到榆林，当时，铁勒的契弊歌棱，打败了吐谷浑，吐谷浑部被打散，于是派使者来请求投降。
English: He followed Emperor Qian to Yulin. At that time, Tiler's Chexu Songren defeated Tuyugun, and Tuyugun was dispersed, so he sent an envoy to request surrender.

古文：帝令述以兵屯西平之临羌城，抚纳降附。
现代文：炀帝命令宇文述率兵驻扎在西平的临羌城，接受投降。
English: Emperor Qian ordered Uwen Du and his soldiers to stay in Linyi City in Xiping and accept the surrender.

古文：吐谷浑见述拥强兵，惧不敢降，遂西遁。
现代文：吐谷浑见宇文述拥有强兵，就不敢来投降，于是向西逃走。
English: Seeing that Yu Wenshu had a strong army, he was terrified and did not dare to surrender, so he fled to the west.

古文：述领鹰扬郎将梁元礼、张峻、崔师等追之，至曼头城，攻拔之，斩三千馀级。
现代文：宇文述率领鹰扬郎将梁元礼、张峻、崔师等，追赶他们，到了曼头城，攻占了它，斩首三千多级。
English: Yu Wenshu, led by Ying Yanglang, chased Liang Yuanli, Zhang Jun, Cui Shi, etc. and chased them to Mantou City, captured it, and beheaded more than three thousand levels.

古文：乘胜至赤水城，复拔之。
现代文：乘胜追到赤水城，又攻占了该城。
English: Yu Wenshu took advantage of the victory to advance to the first Red Water City, and then captured the Red Water City.

古文：其馀党走屯丘尼川，述进击，大破之，获其王公、尚书、将军二百人，前后虏男女四千口而还。
现代文：他们的余党逃到丘尼川驻扎，宇文述进击，大破吐谷浑，活捉他们的王公、尚书、将军二百人，前后俘虏他们的男女人口四千口，这才退兵。
English: The rest of their party fled to the Chuni River, where they were stationed. Yu Wenshu attacked and destroyed the valley, capturing 200 of their princes, scholars, and generals alive, and capturing 4,000 of their men and women before and after. Only then did they withdraw.

古文：浑主南走雪山，其故地皆空。
现代文：吐谷浑国主往南逃到雪山，他的故地都空荡荡的。
English: The lord of Tugu, Hunnan, fled south to the Snowy Mountains, and there is no trace of him in any of the places he once belonged to.

古文：帝大悦。
现代文：炀帝很高兴。
English: The emperor was very happy to hear this.

古文：明年，从帝西幸，巡至金山，登燕支，述每为斥候。
现代文：次年，随炀帝巡幸西方，到了金山，登上燕支山，宇文述总是当侦察。
English: The following year, he accompanied Emperor Qian on a tour of the West. He went to Jinshan Mountain and climbed Yanzhi Mountain. Wu Wenshu always acted as a scout.

古文：时浑贼复寇张掖，进击走之。
现代文：当时吐谷浑又进犯张掖，宇文述进兵打跑了他们。
English: At that time, Tugu Hun attacked Zhang Ye again, and Uwen Shu's soldiers beat them away.

古文：还至江都宫，敕述与苏威常典选举，参预朝政。
现代文：回到江都宫，炀帝让宇文述和苏威一起，掌管选举，参预朝政。
English: Back at the Jiangdu Palace, Gong Ling Yu Wenshu and Su Wei often presided over the election of officials and participated in pre-imperial politics.

古文：述时贵重，委任与苏威等，其亲爱则过之。
现代文：当时，宇文述很显贵，他的委任虽与苏威相同，但与炀帝的感情则超过了他。
English: At that time, Yu Wenshu was very distinguished. Although his appointment was the same as that of Su Wei, his feelings for Emperor Xuan surpassed him.

古文：帝所得远方贡献及四时口味，辄见班赐，中使相望于道。
现代文：炀帝得到了远方的贡献和四季的食物，总是赐给宇文述。到宇文述家去的宫中使者很多，相望于道。
English: The tributes from afar and the food of the four seasons received by Emperor Xuan were given to Wu Wenshu when there was a morning meeting, and the messengers from the palace who went to inquire were very frequent.

古文：述善于供奉，俯仰折旋，容止便辟，宿卫者咸取则焉。
现代文：宇文述很善于侍奉炀帝，一低头一抬头，一举手一投足，其举止总是很得体，皇宫中的宿卫都效仿他。
English: Yu Wenshu was very good at serving Emperor Gong. He bowed his head and raised his head, and raised his hand and foot. His manners were always very proper. The guards in the imperial palace followed his example.

古文：又有巧思，凡有所装饰，皆出人意表。
现代文：他又有巧思，凡是想装饰自己一下，其作法总是出人意料。
English: He also has a clever mind, and whenever he wants to decorate himself, his actions are always unexpected.

古文：数以奇服异物进献宫掖，由是帝弥悦焉。
现代文：他几次把奇服异物献给宫廷，因此炀帝更喜欢他。
English: Several times he presented strange objects to the court, so Emperor Xuan liked him more.

古文：时述贵幸，言无不从，势倾朝廷。
现代文：当时，宇文述显贵得宠，言无不听，势倾朝廷。
English: At that time, Yu Wenshu was favored by the nobles, listened to everything they said, and exerted great influence on the imperial court.

古文：左卫将军张瑾与述连官，尝有评议，偶不中意，述张目叱之，瑾惶惧而走，文武百僚莫敢违忤。
现代文：左卫将军张瑾与宇文述是同僚，曾经评议一些事情，张瑾的话稍不中他的意，他马上就怒目喝斥张瑾。张瑾惧怕他而跑走。文武百官没谁敢违逆他。
English: Zhang Ye and Yu Wenshu, the left guard generals, were colleagues. They once discussed some matters. Zhang Ye's words did not hit his mind, and he immediately shouted at Zhang Ye. Zhang Ye was afraid of him and ran away. No one in the military would dare to disobey him.

古文：然性贪鄙，知人有珍异之物，必求取之。
现代文：但他生性贪婪，知道人家有珍奇之物，一定要得到。
English: But he is greedy by nature and knows that if someone has something rare, he must get it.

古文：富商大贾及陇右诸胡子弟，述皆接以恩意，呼之为兒。
现代文：富商大贾和陇右诸胡人的子弟，宇文述都给他们一点恩惠，叫他们为 儿 。
English: The rich merchant Dajia and the sons of the Zhuhu people of Zouyou were all given a little favor by Yu Wenshu, who called them his sons.

古文：由是竞加馈遗，金宝累积。
现代文：因此，他们竞相赠送东西给他，他家的金宝堆积如山。
English: As a result, they all scrambled to give away their possessions, and gold and silver treasures piled up like a mountain.

古文：后庭曳罗绮者数百，家僮千馀人，皆控良马，被服金玉。
现代文：宇文述家后院里穿罗绮的几百人，家僮一千多，这些人都骑着好马，穿金佩玉。
English: In the backyard of Yu Wenshu's home, there are hundreds of people wearing straw hats and more than a thousand family crests. These people are all riding good horses and wearing gold and jade.

古文：述之宠遇，当时莫与为比。
现代文：宇文述的宠幸，当时无人可比。
English: A favorite of Yu Wenshu, there was no one comparable at the time.

古文：及征高丽，述为扶馀道军将。
现代文：到征讨高丽时，宇文述任扶余道的军将。
English: When he went to conquer Korea, he was appointed as the military commander of Fuyu Province.

古文：临发，帝谓述曰： 礼，七十者行役以妇人从，公宜以家累自随。
现代文：将出发时，炀帝对他说： 按礼，七十岁的人行军打仗，要带妇人同行。你应该带上家人。
English: When he was about to set out, Emperor Xuan said to him, "According to the etiquette, a seventy-year-old man marching to war should take a woman along. You should take your family with you."

古文：古称妇人不入军，谓临战时耳。
现代文：古时妇人不随军，那是说在战场上。
English: In ancient times, it was said that women could not join the army, and this was said in times of war.

古文：至于营垒之间，无所伤也。
现代文：至于在军营里头，那没什么妨碍。
English: As for being in the barracks, that's no problem.

古文：项籍虞姬，即其故事。 
现代文：项羽带虞姬，就是故事。 
English: The egret with its feathers is the story.

古文：述与九军至鸭绿水，粮尽，议欲班师。
现代文：宇文述与部队到了鸭绿江，粮食完了，商议想班师回朝。
English: Yu Wenshu and the 9th Route Army horses went to Yalu Water, the military food was exhausted, they discussed the preparation of the squadron and returned.

古文：诸将多异同，述又不测帝意。
现代文：诸将议论纷纷，宇文述又不知炀帝的用意。
English: The generals had different opinions, and Wu Wen did not know the Emperor's intention.

古文：会乙支文德来诣其营，述先与于仲文俱奉密旨，令诱执文德。
现代文：刚好乙支文德到隋军大营来假装投降，宇文述先前和于仲文都得到了炀帝的密旨，让他们诱捕乙支文德。
English: When Eulji Mende came to the camp, both Yu Wenshu and Yu Zhongwen had previously received a secret order to trap Eulji Mende.

古文：既而缓纵，文德逃归，语在《仲文传》。
现代文：后来又放了乙支文德，让他逃走，这事记载在《于仲文传》里。
English: Later, he released Eulji Mende and let him escape, which was recorded in "Yu Zhongwen Biography."

古文：述内不自安，遂与诸将渡水追之。
现代文：宇文述心里不安，于是与诸将渡江追赶。
English: Yu Wenshu was uneasy in his heart, so he chased across the river with the generals.

古文：时文德见述军中多饥色，欲疲述众，每斗便北。
现代文：当时乙支文德见宇文述军多有饥饿之色，想拖垮宇文述的部队，因此每次一打就跑。
English: At that time, Eulji Mende saw that most of the sergeants of the Uwentsu army were starving, and he wanted to make the Uwentsu army tired, and each battle was pretended to be a failure.

古文：述一日之中七战皆捷，既恃骤胜，又内逼群议，于是遂进，东济萨水，去平壤城三十里，因山为营。
现代文：宇文述一天之中七战七捷，既仗着获胜，又因内部诸将议论所逼，于是就追敌，往东渡过萨水，离平壤只有三十里，就山扎营。
English: Yuwen described seven battles and seven victories in one day. Not only did he win, but he was also forced by internal discussions among generals, so he chased the enemy, crossed the Sasui River to the east, only thirty miles from Pyongyang, and set up camp in the mountains.

古文：文德复遣使伪降，请述曰： 若旋师者，当奉高元朝行在所。 
现代文：乙支文德又派使者来假装投降，请求宇文述说： 隋师如果班师，我们将把高元送到行宫去朝拜天子。 
English: Eulji Mende also sent an envoy pretending to be a surrender, requesting from Uwentsu, "If you withdraw your troops, we will send Gao Yuan to meet you where the emperor is."

古文：述见士卒疲敝，不可复战，又平壤险固，卒难致力，遂因其诈而还。
现代文：宇文述见部队疲劳，不可再战，加上平壤险固，难以力取，就明知其诈降也退兵。
English: Seeing that the troops were fatigued and could no longer fight, and that Pyongyang was dangerous and difficult to take by force, Umen retreated, knowing that he had committed treachery.

古文：众半济，贼击后军，于是大溃，不可禁止，九军败绩，一日一夜，还至鸭绿水，行四百五十里。
现代文：部队半渡，贼人进攻后部，于是隋军溃败，无法禁止。官军败绩，一天一夜，跑到鸭绿江，行军四百五十里。
English: The troops were half-way across the river, and the thieves attacked the rear. As a result, the Sui army was routed and could not be stopped. The defeated government army ran to the Yalu River and marched 450 miles in one day and one night.

古文：初，渡辽九军三十万五千人，及还至辽东城，唯二千七百人。
现代文：起初，到辽东的隋军有三十万五千人，回到辽东城时，只剩二千七百人。
English: At first, there were three hundred and five thousand Sui troops in Liaodong. When they returned to Liaodong City, there were only twenty-seven hundred left.

古文：帝大怒，以述等属吏。
现代文：炀帝震怒，把宇文述等人交给司法部门处置。
English: Emperor Xuan was furious and handed over Yu Wenshu and others to the judicial department for disposition.

古文：至东都，除名为民。
现代文：到东都后，将宇文述除名，让他当老百姓。
English: After arriving in the eastern capital, Yu Wenshu was removed from his post and made a commoner.

古文：明年，帝有事辽东，复述官爵，待之如初。
现代文：次年，炀帝讨伐辽东，恢复宇文述的官爵，待之如初。
English: The following year, Emperor Qian fought against Liaodong and restored the official title of Yu Wenshu, and the situation remained the same.

古文：从至辽东，与将军杨义臣率兵复临鸭绿水。
现代文：他随炀帝到了辽东，和将军杨义臣率兵又到鸭绿江。
English: Yu Wenshu followed Emperor Qian to Liaodong, and he and General Yang Yichen led the troops to the edge of the Yalu River.

古文：会杨玄感作乱，帝召述班师，令驰驿赴河阳，发诸郡兵以讨玄感。
现代文：碰上杨玄感作乱，炀帝召宇文述班师，让他赶赴河阳，调动各郡士兵以讨伐杨玄感。
English: When confronted with Yang Xuanxuan's disturbance, Emperor Qian called for Yuwen's reporting team, and ordered him to rush to Heyang and mobilize soldiers from all counties to fight against Yang Xuanxuan.

古文：时玄感逼东都，闻述军将至，惧而西遁，将图关中。
现代文：当时杨玄感逼近东都，听说宇文述的部队快到了，害怕而西逃，将要夺取关中。
English: At that time, Yang Xuan sensed that Dongdu was approaching, and heard that the troops described by Yu Wen were about to arrive. He was afraid and fled west, intending to capture Guanzhong.

古文：述与刑部尚书卫玄、左御卫将军来护兒、武卫将军屈突通等蹑之。至阌乡皇天原，与玄感相及。
现代文：宇文述与刑部尚书卫玄、左御卫将军来护儿、武卫将军屈突通等跟踪追击，追到阌乡的皇天原，赶上了杨玄感。
English: Yu Wenshu and the criminal department Shang Shu Wei Xuan, General Zuo Wei came to protect the child, and General Wu Wei followed and chased, and chased to the Emperor Tianyuan in Xiangxiang, and caught up with Yang Xuanxuan.

古文：述与来护兒列阵当其前，遣屈突通以奇兵击其后，大破之，遂斩玄感，传首行在所。
现代文：宇文述与来护儿在杨军前面摆开阵势，派屈突通用奇兵袭击他的背后，大破杨军，于是杀了杨玄感，把首级送到行宫。
English: Yu Wenshu and his bodyguard set up a position in front of the Yang army, and the Partisans attacked him from behind, defeating the Yang army, and then killed Yang Xuanxuan and sent his head to the imperial palace.

古文：赐物数千段。
现代文：炀帝赐他布帛几千段。
English: Emperor Qian gave him several thousand pieces of cloth.

古文：复从东征，至怀远而还。
现代文：他又随炀帝东征，到怀远而回来。
English: He also followed the Eastern Expedition of Emperor Xizong and went back as far as he wanted.

古文：突厥之围雁门，帝惧，述请溃围而出。
现代文：突厥人包围雁门，炀帝惧怕。宇文述请求突围出去。
English: The Turks encircle the Wild Goose Gate, Emperor Xizang is afraid. Yu Wenshu requests to break out of the encirclement.

古文：樊子盖固谏不可，帝乃止。
现代文：樊子盖死劝，炀帝才作罢。
English: Persuade the mule to die, and the emperor to stop.

古文：及围解，车驾次太原，议者多劝帝还京师，帝有难色。
现代文：解围后，炀帝到了太原，大臣们多劝炀帝回京，炀帝面有为难之色。
English: After the siege was lifted, Emperor Gong went to Taiyuan. The ministers tried to persuade Emperor Gong to return to Beijing, but Emperor Gong was reluctant.

古文：述因奏曰： 从官妻子多在东都，便道向洛阳，自潼关而入可也。 
现代文：宇文述因便上奏说： 随行官员的妻子儿女多在东都，就顺便向洛阳去吧，从潼关回长安就可以了。 
English: "The wives and children of the accompanying officials are mostly in Dongdu, so let's go to Luoyang by the way. It's fine to go back to Chang'an from Shaoguan.

古文：帝从之。
现代文：炀帝听了他的话。
English: The emperor obeyed.

古文：是岁，至东都，述又观望帝意，劝幸江都，帝大悦。
现代文：这年，炀帝到了东都。宇文述又察颜观色，劝炀帝到江都去，炀帝很高兴。
English: This year, Emperor Gong went to Dongdu. Wu Wenshu also observed his appearance and appearance, and advised Emperor Gong to go to Jiangdu. Emperor Gong was very happy.

古文：述于江都遇疾，中使相望，帝将亲临视之，群臣苦谏乃止。
现代文：宇文述在江都生病，去看望他的宫中使者，络绎不绝，相望于道。炀帝想亲自去看他，群臣苦劝才作罢。
English: Uwen recounts that he fell ill in Jiangdu, and envoys from the palace came to visit him. They were incessant, and looked at each other in the same way. Emperor Zhao wanted to see him in person, but the courtiers had to persuade him not to.

古文：遂遣司宫魏氏问述曰： 必有不讳，欲何所言？ 
现代文：于是派司宫魏氏问宇文述说： 如一定要说什么，你想说什么？ 
English: So, he asked Wu Wenshu: If you must say something, what do you want to say?

古文：述二子化及、智及，时并得罪于家，述因奏曰： 化及臣之长子，早预籓邸，愿陛下哀怜之。 
现代文：宇文述的两个儿子宇文化及、宇文智及，当时都因犯罪而呆在家里，宇文述因此上奏说： 化及是我的长子，很早就到晋王府第做事，望陛下可怜可怜他。 
English: Uwenshu's two sons, U Bunka and U Wenshu, both stayed at home at that time due to crime. Therefore, Uwenshu said in his report, "Hwange is my eldest son, he came to work in the palace of the king of Jin very early. I hope His Majesty will have mercy on him."

古文：帝闻，泫然曰： 吾不忘也。 
现代文：炀帝听了，泫然落泪说： 我不会忘记的。 
English: After listening to it, Emperor Zhai burst into tears and said, "I won't forget it."

古文：及薨，帝为之废朝，赠司徒、尚书令、十郡太守，班剑四十人，辒京车，前后部鼓吹，谥曰恭，帝令黄门侍郎裴矩祭以太牢，鸿胪监护丧事。
现代文：他去世后，炀帝为此不上朝，追赠他为司徒、尚书令、十郡太守，另赐持班剑者四十人，鍂车京车，前后部的鼓吹。谥号叫 恭 。炀帝让黄门侍郎裴矩，以太牢之礼祭之，又让鸿胪监护丧事。
English: After his death, Emperor Qian did not go to the imperial court for this reason. He posthumously bestowed upon him the titles of Stowe, Shang Shuling, and the governor of ten counties, as well as forty swordsmen, the imperial carriage, and the propaganda of the front and rear parts. The call sign is "Kong." Emperor Qian gave the Yellow Gate attendant Pei Jian, the ceremonial offering of the imperial carriage, and the guardianship of the funeral to Hong Qi.

古文：子化及，别有传。
现代文：他儿子宇文化及，另外有传。
English: His son, U Bunka, also passed down the tradition.

古文：云定兴者，附会于述。
现代文：云定兴，是个附会宇文述的人。
English: Yun Dingxing is a person who is affiliated with the Association of World Literature.

古文：初，定兴女为皇太子勇昭训，及勇废，除名配少府。
现代文：起初云定兴的姑娘当皇太子杨勇的昭训，杨勇被废太子之位后，他女儿被除名，配给少府。
English: At first, Yun Dingxing's girl was crown prince Yang Yong's disciple. After Yang Yong was dethroned as crown prince, his daughter was removed from the list and assigned to a minor prefecture.

古文：定兴先得昭训明珠络帐，私赂于述，自是数共交游。
现代文：云定兴先得到女儿昭训的明珠络帐，私下送给宇文述，从此后几次一起游玩。
English: Yun Dingxing first got the pearl account of his daughter Zhaoxun, privately gave it to Yu Wenshu, and since then they have played together several times.

古文：定兴每时节必有赂遗，并以音乐干述。
现代文：云定兴每到逢年过节，都有东西送给宇文述，并用音乐作手段贴近宇文述。
English: Every time Yun Dingxing comes to the festival, he has something to give to Yu Wenshu, and uses music as a means to get close to Yu Wenshu.

古文：述素好著奇服，炫耀时人。
现代文：宇文述一向爱穿奇服，炫耀给人家看。
English: Yu Wenshu has always loved to wear strange clothes and show off to others.

古文：定兴为制马鞯，于后角上缺方三寸，以露白色。
现代文：云定兴就为他特制马鞍垫子，在后角上缺一块三寸见方大小，以露出白色。
English: Yun Dingxing made a special saddle pad for him, with a three-inch square missing in the back corner to expose the white.

古文：世轻薄者争放学之，谓为许公缺势。
现代文：那些轻薄之徒竞相仿效，叫做 许公缺势 。
English: Those frivolous people compete to imitate each other, which is called "hypocrisy."

古文：又遇天寒，定兴曰： 入内宿卫，必当耳冷。 
现代文：又，遇到天气寒冷，云定兴说： 您老人家到宫中值夜班，耳朵一定很冷。 
English: In addition, when encountering cold weather, Yun Dingxing said: Your old man went to the palace for the night shift, his ears must be very cold.

古文：述曰： 然。 
现代文：宇文述说： 是啊。 
English: Yuwen said, "Yes."

古文：乃制裌头巾，令深袙耳。
现代文：云定兴就特制衤夹头巾，让宇文述护住耳朵。
English: Yun Dingxing put on a specially-made headscarf with earflaps to protect her ears.

古文：又学之，名为许公袙势。
现代文：轻薄之徒又效仿他，叫做什么 许公衤白势 。
English: The frivolous followed his example and called what they did "hypocrisy."

古文：述大悦曰： 云兄所作，必能变俗。
现代文：宇文述很高兴，说： 云兄所做，必能变俗。
English: Yu Wenshu was very pleased and said: What Yun brother has done will surely change the world.

古文：我闻作事可法，故不虚也。 
现代文：我听说有的人做的事值得效法，果然不假。 
English: I heard that some people do things that are worth emulating, and it's true.

古文：后帝将事四夷，大造兵器，述荐之，因敕少府工匠并取其节度。
现代文：后来炀帝将要进攻周边的夷人，大造兵器，宇文述推荐云定兴，皇上就下令，让少府工匠都听他调度。
English: Later, Emperor Yao was about to attack the surrounding barbarians, and Yuwen recommended Yun Dingxing to build large weapons. The emperor then ordered that all craftsmen in Shofu obey his orders.

古文：述欲为之求官，谓定兴曰： 兄所制器仗并合上心，而不得官者，为长宁兄弟犹未死耳。 
现代文：宇文述想为他求官，对他说： 你所监制的兵器，都合乎皇上的心，但不得当官，是因为长宁兄弟还没有死。 
English: Yu Wenshu said that he wanted to seek a post for him, and said to him: The weapons you have supervised are in line with the emperor's heart, but you are not allowed to be an official, because the Changning brothers are not dead.

古文：定兴曰： 此无用物，何不劝上杀之。 
现代文：云定兴说： 这些没用的东西，何不劝皇上杀了他们？ 
English: Yun Dingxing said: These useless things, why not persuade the emperor to kill them?

古文：述因奏曰： 房陵诸子，年并成立。
现代文：宇文述因此上奏说： 房陵王的儿子们都已长大了。
English: As a result, Umenshu wrote: The sons of the Funakure king have all grown up.

古文：今欲动兵征讨，若将从驾，则守掌为难；若留一处，又恐不可。
现代文：如今正欲兴兵征讨，若让他们随皇上，那么管束他们又很难；如把他们留在哪个地方，又怕不好。
English: Now they are trying to raise an army, and if they let them follow the emperor, it will be difficult to control them; if they leave them somewhere, it will be bad.

古文：进退无用，请早处分。 
现代文：进退无用，请早作处理。 
English: It's not easy to get in and out, so please do it early.

古文：帝从之，因鸩杀长宁，又遣以下七弟分配岭表，仍遣间使于路尽杀之。
现代文：炀帝从其计，因此毒死长宁，又将他以下的七个弟弟分别流放岭南，另派人在路上全部杀死他们。
English: Emperor Qian followed his plan and poisoned Changning to death. He also exiled his seven younger brothers to Lingnan separately, and sent someone to kill them all on the way.

古文：五年，大阅军实，帝称甲仗为佳。
现代文：大业五年，大阅兵，炀帝称赞甲仗很好。
English: After five years of great achievements and a grand military parade, Emperor Qian praised the war as a good one.

古文：述奏曰： 并云定兴之功也。 
现代文：宇文述说： 这都是云定兴的功劳。 
English: Yu Wen said: This is all the credit of Yun Dingxing.

古文：擢授少府丞。
现代文：炀帝就提拔他当少府丞。
English: Emperor Yao promoted him to Shofu no jo.

古文：寻代何稠为少监，转卫尉少卿，迁左御卫将军，仍知少府事。
现代文：不久，他又代替何稠当少监，转任卫尉少卿，后升任左御卫将军，仍兼管少府之事。
English: Soon after, he replaced He Chouzo as Junior Inspector, and was transferred to the position of Lieutenant of the Imperial Guards, and later promoted to General of the Left Division of the Imperial Guards, while still being in charge of the Junior Prefectural Government.

古文：十一年，授左屯卫大将军。
现代文：大业十一年，授云定兴左屯卫大将军。
English: In the eleventh year of the Great Leap Forward, Ding Xing Zuotunwei was awarded the rank of general.

古文：凡述所荐达，皆至大官。
现代文：凡是宇文述所推荐的，都当了大官。
English: All those recommended by Yu Wenzhuo became high-ranking officials.

古文：赵行枢以太常乐户，家财亿计，述谓为兄，多受其贿。
现代文：赵行枢以太常乐户的身份，家产数以亿计。宇文述称他为儿，受了他很多贿赂。
English: Zhao Xingzhu had the status of a frequent gambler, with a family fortune of hundreds of millions. Yuwen described him as his son and received many bribes from him.

古文：称其骁勇，起家为折冲郎将。
现代文：宇文述就说他骁勇，他就当了折冲郎将。
English: According to Uwen, he was so brave that he became a retainer of Orichori.

古文：○郭衍
现代文：○郭衍
English: ○ Guo Yan

古文：郭衍，字彦文，自云太原介休人也。
现代文：郭衍字彦文，自称是太原介休人。
English: Guo Yan, alias Yanwen, claimed to be Taiyuan's successor.

古文：父以舍人从魏武帝入关，其后官至侍中。
现代文：父亲郭崇，以舍人身份随魏武帝入关，其后官至侍中。
English: His father, Guo Chong, entered the imperial palace with Emperor Wu of Wei as a layman, and later rose to the rank of chamberlain.

古文：衍少骁武，善骑射。
现代文：郭衍小时就很骁勇，善于骑马射箭。
English: As a boy, Guo Yan was brave and good at horseback archery.

古文：周陈王纯引为左右，累迁大都督。
现代文：北周陈王宇文纯引之为左右，累功升至大都督。
English: Northern Zhou Chen Wang Yu Wenzhong cited it as his right and left, and rose to the rank of grand governor.

古文：时齐氏未平，衍奉诏于天水募人，以镇东境，得乐徙千馀家，屯于陕城。
现代文：当时北齐未平，郭衍奉诏到天水募集人马，以镇守东边，得以迁徙一千多家，住在陕城。
English: At that time, the north of Qi was not flat, and Guo Yan went to Tianshui to recruit people and horses to guard the east side of the town, and was able to migrate more than a thousand people to live in Shaanxi.

古文：拜使持节、车骑大将军、仪同三司。
现代文：拜授使持节、车骑大将军、仪同三司。
English: Pay homage to the three divisions of the festival, the general of the chariot and cavalry, and the ceremony.

古文：每有寇至，辄率所领御之，一岁数告捷，颇为齐人所惮。
现代文：每有贼人到，他就率领人马抵抗，一年中几次告捷，颇为北齐人所惧怕。
English: Whenever thieves arrive, he leads the resistance, and several times a year he is successful, which is quite feared by the North Qi people.

古文：王益亲任之。
现代文：陈王宇文纯更加亲近他。
English: Chen Wang Yu Wenzhong became even closer to him.

古文：建德中，周武帝出幸云阳，衍朝于行所，时议欲伐齐，衍请为前锋。
现代文：建德中，北周武帝出京巡幸云阳，郭衍在行在所拜谒皇上。当时正议论讨伐北齐，郭衍请求当前锋。
English: In Jiande, the Northern Zhou Emperor went to Beijing to visit Yunyang, and Guo Yan was on his way to pay homage to the Qian Emperor. At that time, they were discussing the campaign against the Northern Qi, and Guo Yan requested to be at the forefront.

古文：攻河阴城，授仪同大将军。
现代文：攻打河阴城，授他仪同大将军。
English: He attacked the city of Heyin and was awarded the title of general.

古文：武帝围晋州，虑齐兵来援，令衍从陈王守千里径。
现代文：周武帝包围晋州，担心北齐兵来援，令郭衍随陈王宇文纯守千里径。
English: Emperor Zhou surrounded Jinzhou and, fearing that the Northern Qi soldiers would come to help, ordered Guo Yan to follow Chen Wang Yuwen Chun to defend the thousand-mile path.

古文：又从武帝与齐主大战于晋州，追齐师至高壁，败之。
现代文：他又随周武帝在晋州与齐后主大战，追击齐军到高壁，打败齐军。
English: He also followed Emperor Zhou in the major war with Qi in Jinzhou, chased the Qi army to the high wall, and defeated the Qi army.

古文：仍从平并州，以功加授开府，封武强县公，邑一千二百户，赐姓叱罗氏。
现代文：又随皇上平定并州，因功加授开府，封为武强县公，食邑一千二百户，赐姓叱罗氏。
English: In addition, with the emperor's pacification and annexation of the prefecture, he was awarded the post of prefectural governor of Wuqiang County, with 1,200 households, and was given the surname of Zhao Luo.

古文：宣政元年，为右中军熊渠中大夫。
现代文：宣政元年，任右中军熊渠中大夫。
English: In the first year of the proclamation of the Republic of China, he became an officer of the Right Middle Army and a junior doctor of Xiongqiu.

古文：尉迥之起逆，从韦孝宽战于武陟，进战于相州。
现代文：尉迟迥作乱时，郭衍随韦孝宽到武陟作战，进而在相州作战。
English: Guo Yan followed Wei Xiaokang to Wuyi to fight, and then went on to fight in Xiangzhou.

古文：先是，迥遣弟子勤为青州总管，率青、齐之众来助迥。
现代文：此前，尉迟迥派弟弟之子尉迟勤为青州总管，率青州、齐州的部队来帮助尉迟迥。
English: Previously, the younger brother of the younger brother of the younger brother of the younger brother of the younger brother of the younger brother of the younger brother of the younger brother of the younger brother of the younger brother of the younger brother of the younger brother of the younger brother of the younger brother of the younger brother.

古文：迥败，勤与迥子惇、祐等欲东奔青州。
现代文：尉迟迥失败后，尉迟勤与尉迟迥的儿子尉迟、尉迟等人，想东奔青州。
English: After the failure of 尉迟, 尉迟勤 and 尉迟's sons, 尉迟 and 尉迟, wanted to go to Qingzhou.

古文：衍将精骑一千追破之，执祐于阵，勤遂遁走，而惇亦逃逸。
现代文：郭衍率精兵一千追击并打破敌军，在阵前活捉尉迟。尉迟勤于是逃走，而尉迟也逃跑了。
English: Guo Yan led a thousand elite soldiers to pursue and defeat the enemy army, and captured the lieutenant alive before the battle. The lieutenant then fled, and the lieutenant also fled.

古文：衍至济州，入据其城，又击其馀党于济北，累战破之，执送京师。
现代文：郭衍到济州，占据其城，又在济北攻击贼人的余党，几战而破之，将贼首抓送京师。
English: Guo Yan went to Jeju, occupied its city, and attacked the remaining party of thieves in Jeju North. After several battles, he defeated them and sent the thief's head to the Beijing division.

古文：超授上柱国，封武山郡公。赏物七千段。
现代文：朝廷越级提拔他当上柱国，封他为武山郡公，赏他布帛七千段。
English: The imperial court promoted him to the highest rank, made him the governor of Busan County, and awarded him 7,000 baht in cloth.

古文：密劝高祖杀周室诸王，早行禅代。由是大被亲昵。
现代文：他又密劝隋高祖杀北周诸王，早点让北周禅让，因此大被亲近。
English: He also urged Sui Gao Zu to kill the kings of Northern Zhou and let Northern Zhou be conquered early, so he was very close to him.

古文：开皇元年，敕复旧姓为郭氏。
现代文：开皇元年，皇上让郭衍恢复郭姓。
English: In the first year of the emperor's reign, the emperor allowed Guo Yan to restore the Guo surname.

古文：突厥犯塞，以衍为行军总管，领兵屯于平凉。
现代文：突厥进犯边塞，以郭衍为行军总管，领兵驻扎在平凉。
English: The Turks invaded the border fortress, with Guo Yan as the commander-in-chief, and the leaders were stationed in Pingliang.

古文：数岁，虏不入。
现代文：几年之中，突厥人都不敢进犯。
English: For several years, the Turks did not dare to attack.

古文：征为开漕渠大监。
现代文：调他当开漕渠大监。
English: He was conscripted as the superintendent of canal construction.

古文：部率水工，凿渠引渭水，经大兴城北，东至于潼关，漕运四百馀里。关内赖之，名之曰富民渠。
现代文：他率领水工，凿渠引渭水，经大兴城北，东到潼关，漕运四百多里，关内依赖它，把它叫作 富民渠 。
English: He led the waterworks, dug a canal and diverted the water, passing through the north of Daxing City and east to Shaoguan, paddling more than four hundred miles. Guanai relied on it and called it the rich people's canal.

古文：五年，授瀛州刺史。
现代文：开皇五年，授他瀛州刺史。
English: In the fifth year of the emperor's reign, he was awarded the title of the history of Zhangzhou.

古文：遇秋霖大水，其属县多漂没，民皆上高树，依大家。
现代文：遇上秋日发水，所属各县多遭水淹，老百姓都爬上高树，依托大坟。
English: In the event of flooding on an autumn day, most of the counties were flooded, and the common people climbed up tall trees and leaned on large graves.

古文：衍亲备船伐，并赍粮拯救之，民多获济。
现代文：郭衍亲自准备船筏，并备粮食，拯救百姓，百姓多被救起。
English: Guo Yan personally prepared the boat anchor and prepared grain to save the people, and many people were rescued.

古文：衍先开仓赈恤，后始闻奏。
现代文：郭衍先开官仓赈灾，以后才上奏朝廷。
English: Guo Yan first opened a warehouse to help the victims of the disaster, and then reported to the imperial court.

古文：上大善之，选授朔州总管。
现代文：皇上非常赞赏，选调他当朔州总管。
English: The emperor was very appreciative and selected him to be the governor of Shuozhou.

古文：所部有恆安镇，北接蕃境，常劳转运。
现代文：朔州辖有恒安镇，北接蕃境，常要转运东西去。
English: It has jurisdiction over Heng'an Town, which shares a border with Shiyi to the north, and often has to transport grain and hay.

古文：衍乃选沃饶地，置屯田，岁剩粟万馀石，民免转输之劳。
现代文：郭衍于是选些肥沃的地方，开始屯田，一年富余一万多石粮食，百姓免去了转运之苦。
English: Guo Yan then chose some fertile places and began to farm the land, producing more than ten thousand kilos of grain a year, and the people were spared the hardships of transportation.

古文：又筑桑乾镇，皆称旨。
现代文：他又修筑桑乾镇，都符合皇上旨意。
English: He also built Sangqian Town. These are all in line with the meaning of Emperor Wen.

古文：十年，从晋王广出镇扬州。
现代文：开皇十年，他随晋王杨广出镇扬州。
English: In the tenth year of the Emperor's reign, he went out to guard Yangzhou with Yang Guang, the King of Jin.

古文：遇江表构逆，命衍为总管，领精锐万人先屯京口。
现代文：遇上江南造反，命郭衍任总管，率精兵万人先住京口。
English: In the event of a rebellion in the south of the Yangtze River, Guo Yan was appointed as the general manager, and he led 10,000 elite soldiers to live in Beijing.

古文：于贵洲南与贼战，败之，生擒魁帅，大获舟楫粮储，以充军实，乃讨东阳、永嘉、宣城、黟、歙诸洞，尽平之。
现代文：在贵洲南，与反贼交战，打败反贼，活捉贼帅，得了很多船只粮食，以补充部队。他于是又讨伐东阳、永嘉、宣城、黟、歙等洞，都削平了他们。
English: In the south of Guizhou Province, he fought with the anti-thieves, defeated the anti-thieves, captured the thief commander alive, and obtained a lot of ships and grain to supplement the troops. He then fought Dongyang, Yongjia, Xuancheng, Yao, Yao and other caves, and leveled them.

古文：授蒋州刺史。
现代文：授他为蒋州刺史。
English: He was awarded the title of the history of Jiangzhou.

古文：衍临下甚踞，事上奸谄。
现代文：郭衍对下很骄横，对上讨好谄媚。
English: Guo Yan is very arrogant to his subordinates and obsequious to his superiors.

古文：晋王爱昵之，宴赐隆厚。
现代文：晋王杨广很喜欢亲近他，饮宴、赏赐都很多。
English: Yang Guang, the King of Jin, loved him dearly and rewarded him very richly with banquets.

古文：迁洪州总管。
现代文：升任洪州总管。
English: He was appointed as the Governor of Hongzhou.

古文：王有夺宗之谋，托衍心腹，遣宇文述以情告之。
现代文：晋王有夺取太子之位的计谋，把郭衍当心腹，派宇文述告诉他这一计谋。
English: Jin Wang considered Guo Yan as his confidant and sent Wu Wenshu to tell Guo Yan the truth.

古文：衍大喜曰： 若所谋事果，自可为皇太子。
现代文：郭衍大喜，说： 若所谋之事成，自可为皇太子。
English: Guo Yan was overjoyed and said, "If what I have planned comes to fruition, I can become crown prince."

古文：如其不谐，亦须据淮海，复梁、陈之旧。
现代文：如不成，也要占据淮海，恢复梁国、陈国的旧地。
English: If not, we will occupy Huaihai and restore the old lands of Liang and Chen.

古文：副君酒客，其如我何？ 
现代文：那时我也是副君家里的酒客，谁又奈得我何？ 
English: At that time, I was also a drinker in my father-in-law's family, and who could blame me?

古文：王因召衍，阴共计议。
现代文：晋王因此召来郭衍，偷偷地一起商议。
English: Jin Wang then summoned Guo Yan and secretly discussed the matter with him.

古文：又恐人疑无故来往，托以衍妻患瘿，王妃萧氏有术能疗之。
现代文：又怕别人怀疑他们无故来往，就假托说，郭衍的妻子得了瘿病，萧王妃有办法治疗。
English: In addition, for fear that others might suspect that they were seeing each other for no reason, they pretended that Guo Yan's wife had contracted leprosy and that Xiao Wangfei had the means to cure her.

古文：以状奏高祖，高祖听衍共妻向江都，往来无度。
现代文：把这些报告高祖，高祖听任郭衍和他的妻子去江都，这么来来往往，无所节制。
English: Gaozhu, Gaozhu let Guo Yan and his wife go to Jiangdu to report these things, and they came and went like this without restraint.

古文：衍又诈称桂州俚反，王乃奏衍行兵讨之。由是大修甲仗，阴养士卒。
现代文：郭衍又谎称桂州的俚人造反，晋王于是奏请朝廷让郭衍发兵讨 敌 ，因此大造武器军帐，偷偷地养了很多士卒。
English: Guo Yan also falsely claimed that the people of Guizhou revolted against him. The Jin king then petitioned the imperial court to let Guo Yan send troops to fight the enemy. Therefore, he made a large number of weapons and secretly raised many soldiers.

古文：及王入为太子，征授左监门率，转左宗卫率。
现代文：晋王入京当太子后，调他当了左监门率，转任左宗卫率。
English: After Jin Wang entered Beijing as the crown prince, he was transferred to the position of the left guard and became the leader of the left guard.

古文：高祖于仁寿宫将大渐，太子与杨素矫诏，令衍、宇文述领东宫兵，帖上台宿卫，门禁并由之。
现代文：高祖在仁寿宫将死，太子杨广与杨素篡改遗诏，让郭衍、宇文述率领东宫卫兵，靠近上台站岗，门禁全由他们掌握。
English: Gao Zu was about to die in the Renshou Palace, and the princes Yang Guang and Yang Su tampered with the last will and testament to let Guo Yan and Wu Wenshu lead the East Palace guards to stand guard near the stage, and the access control was all controlled by them.

古文：及上崩，汉王起逆，而京师空虚，使衍驰还，总兵居守。
现代文：高祖去世后，汉王造反，而京城空虚，杨广让郭衍飞速回去，领兵防守。
English: Emperor Wen passed away, the Han king rebelled, and the capital was empty. Guo Yan was allowed to quickly return to the capital and lead the soldiers and horses to defend it.

古文：大业元年，拜左武卫大将军。
现代文：大业元年，授郭衍左武卫大将军。
English: In the first year of the Taiei era, Guo Yan was appointed as General Zuowei.

古文：帝幸江都，令衍统左军，改授光禄大夫。
现代文：炀帝巡幸江都，令郭衍统领左军，改授他光禄大夫。
English: Emperor Qian toured the Yangtze River and ordered Guo Yan to lead the left army. He was awarded the title of Guanglu Doctor.

古文：又从讨吐谷浑，出金山道，纳绛二万馀户。
现代文：他又随炀帝征讨吐谷浑，出金山道，招纳降民二万多户。
English: He also went out of Jinshan Road with Emperor Qian to recruit more than 20,000 people from Tuyugun.

古文：衍能揣上意，阿谀顺旨。
现代文：郭衍能揣摸炀帝的意图，阿谀奉承，顺从旨意。
English: Guo Yan was able to fathom the Emperor's intentions, flatter him, and obey his will.

古文：帝每谓人曰： 唯有郭衍，心与朕同。 
现代文：炀帝常对人说： 只有郭衍，心与我同。 
English: Emperor Qian often said to people, "Only Guo Yan has the same heart as me."

古文：又尝劝帝取乐，五日一视事，无得效高祖空自劬劳。
现代文：他又曾劝炀帝自己行乐，五天一上朝，不要像高祖那样白白地劳累。
English: Guo Yan had also advised Emperor Xuan to seek happiness, and not to follow the example of Emperor Gao Baibai and work hard.

古文：帝从之，益称其孝顺。
现代文：炀帝听了他的话，越发夸他孝顺。
English: Emperor Yao followed his advice and praised Guo Yan even more.

古文：初，新令行，衍封爵从例除。
现代文：当初，新的政令推行，郭衍的爵禄按通例被废除。
English: Initially, when the new order was implemented, Guo Yan's knighthood was exempted in accordance with the old practice.

古文：六年，以恩幸封真定侯。
现代文：大业六年，因他得到宠幸，而被封为真定侯。
English: After six years of hard work, because he was favored, he was given the title of "Zhending Hou."

古文：七年，从往江都，卒。
现代文：七年，随炀帝到江都，死了。
English: In the seventh year, he followed Emperor Xizong to Jiangdu and died.

古文：赠左卫大将军，赗赐甚厚，谥曰襄。
现代文：炀帝追赠他左卫大将军，赐予很多，谥号叫 襄 。
English: Emperor Qian posthumously bestowed upon him the title of General of the Left Division of the Imperial Guards and many other honors. His nickname was Xiang.

古文：长子臻，武牙郎将。
现代文：长子郭臻，任武牙郎将。
English: The eldest son, Guo Zhen, was a military commander.

古文：次子嗣本，孝昌县令。
现代文：次子郭嗣本，任孝昌县令。
English: His second son, Guo Zhiben, was appointed as the governor of Xiaochang County.

