古文：谯定，字天授，涪陵人。
现代文：谯定字天授，涪陵人。
English: 定字天授,陵人.

古文：少喜学佛，析其理归于儒。
现代文：幼年喜欢学习佛学，把佛教的理论解析归于儒家。
English: He liked to study Buddhism at a young age, attributing the theoretical analysis of Buddhism to Confucianism.

古文：后学《易》于郭曩氏，自 见乃谓之象 一语以入。
现代文：后来向郭曩氏学习《易》学，从 见乃谓之象 一句入门。
English: Later, he learned "Yi" from Guo Yu, starting with "Seeing is the same as saying."

古文：郭曩氏者，世家南平，始祖在汉为严君平之师，世传《易》学，盖象数之学也。
现代文：郭曩氏，世代家居南平，始祖在汉代时为严君平的老师，世传《易》学，大概是象数之学。
English: Mr. Guo Wei, a Nanping family for generations, whose ancestor was a teacher of Yan Junping in the Han Dynasty, is said to have studied Yi, which is probably the study of the elephant.

古文：定一日至汴，闻伊川程颐讲道于洛，洁衣往见，弃其学而学焉。
现代文：谯定一天到达汴州，听说伊川程颐在洛阳讲道，穿着干净衣服前往拜见，弃其《易》学而学习程氏之学。
English: On the day he arrived in Luzhou, he heard that Ichuan Chengyu was preaching in Luoyang. He went to see him in clean clothes and abandoned his study of Yi to study the study of Cheng.

古文：遂得闻精义，造诣愈至，浩然而归。
现代文：于是得闻程学精义，造诣愈加深厚，盛大而迫归。
English: As a result, Wencheng learned the essence of learning, the more profound the accomplishment, the greater the return.

古文：其后颐贬涪，实定之乡也，北山有岩，师友游泳其中，涪人名之曰读易洞。
现代文：其后程颐被贬谪涪州，确为谯定的家乡，北山有石崖，师友前往其间，涪州人为它取名为读易洞。
English: Later, Chengyi was relegated to Zhangzhou, which was indeed the hometown of Zhangding. There was a rock cliff in the north mountain, and his teacher and friend went there. Zhangzhou people named it Yueyidong.

古文：靖康初，吕好问荐之，钦宗召为崇政殿说书，以论弗合，辞不就。
现代文：靖康初年，吕好问推荐谯定，钦宗召他为崇政殿说书，因议论不相合，辞谢不赴任。
English: In the first year of Jingkang, Lü Hao asked for the recommendation of Yu Ding, and Qin Zong called him to give a speech at the Su Zheng Palace. Due to the discord, he did not go to the post.

古文：高宗即位，定犹在汴，右丞许翰又荐之，诏宗泽津遣诣行在。
现代文：高宗即皇帝位，谯定还在汴州，右丞许翰又推荐他，诏令宗泽由津渡送他到行在。
English: Gao Zong was the emperor, and Yu Ding was still in Zhangzhou. Xu Han, the right-hand man, recommended him, and ordered Zong Ze to send him from Tsu to Xing.

古文：至惟扬，寓邸舍，窭甚，一中贵人偶与邻，馈之食不受，与之衣亦不受，委金而去，定袖而归之，其自立之操类此。
现代文：到达维扬，寓居旅舍，非常贫寒，皇帝所宠幸的一个宦官碰巧与他是邻居，赠给他食物不接受，给他衣物也不接受，留下金钱而离去，谯定把它纳于袖内还给了他，其自立的操行就像这样。
English: Arriving in Viyan, he lived in a hostel and was very poor. A favoured eunuch of the emperor happened to be his neighbour. He did not accept the food given to him, nor did he accept the clothes given to him. He left the money and returned it to the emperor. This is how he behaved independently.

古文：上将用之，会金兵至，失定所在。
现代文：皇帝打算任用他，适逢金兵来到，失去谯定所在的地方。
English: The emperor planned to appoint him, but when the golden soldiers came, he lost his anchor.

古文：复归蜀，爱青城大面之胜，栖遁其中，蜀人指其地曰谯岩。敬定而不敢名，称之曰谯夫子，有绘像祀之者，久而不衰。
现代文：谯定再返回蜀地，喜爱青城山大面的景胜，隐居在山中，蜀人指他所在的地方叫谯岩，敬爱谯定而不敢直呼其名，称他为谯夫子，有绘其肖像而祭祀的，久而不衰。
English: Lu Ding then returned to Shu, loved the scenic beauty of the Qingcheng Mountains, and lived in seclusion in the mountains. The Shu people referred to the place where he was located as Shao Yan. They loved Lu Ding but did not dare to call him by his first name. They called him the woodcutter. They had his portrait painted and made a sacrifice to him, and he never faded away.

古文：徐俯荐其贤，上特召之，固辞；又命守臣以礼津遣，庠辞疾不至，以寿终。
现代文：谯定《易》学得之于程颐，传授给胡宪、刘勉之，而冯时行、张行成就得到谯定的其他学问。
English: Lu Ding's "Yi" was learned from Cheng Yu and passed on to Hu Xian and Liu Cunzhi, while Feng Shixing and Zhang Xing achieved other knowledge.

古文：刘勉之，字致中，建州崇安人。
现代文：谯定后不知所终，樵夫牧童往往有看见他的，世人传说他成了仙。刘勉之字致中，建州崇安人。
English: After Liu Ding died, his fate is unknown. The woodcutter, the shepherd boy, often saw him, and the world's legend says that he became a fairy god. Liu Tsunem's character is Zhi Zhong, and he was from Jianzhou, Chong'an.

古文：自幼强学，日诵数千言。
现代文：自幼努力学习，一天背诵几千句。
English: He studied hard from a young age, reciting several thousand sentences a day.

古文：逾冠，以乡举诣太学。
现代文：过了二十岁，因乡举进入太学。
English: After the age of twenty, he entered Taigaku (secondary school) as a result of the township examination.

古文：时蔡京用事，禁止毋得挟元祐书，自是伊、洛之学不行。
现代文：当时蔡京专权，禁止不得挟带元书籍，从此伊、洛之学不能传布。
English: At that time, Caijing had exclusive rights, and it was forbidden to take the original books with them. From then on, the teachings of I and Luo could not be spread.

古文：勉之求得其书，每深夜，同舍生皆寐，乃潜抄而默诵之。
现代文：刘勉之求得伊、洛之书，每到深夜，同宿舍的学生都睡了，就偷偷抄写而默默背诵。
English: Every late night, when the students in the same dormitory are asleep, they secretly copy and silently recite the book of Liu Tsun's request.

古文：谯定至京师，勉之闻其从程颐游，邃《易》学，遂师事之。
现代文：谯定到达京城，刘勉之听说他跟从程颐交游，精于《易》学，于是师事谯定。
English: When Yu Ding arrived in Beijing, Liu Tsuneh heard that he was a friend of Cheng Yao and was good at "Yi" studies, so he became Yu Ding's teacher.

古文：已而厌科举业，揖诸生归，见刘安世、杨时，皆请业焉。
现代文：不久刘勉之厌恶科举业，告别诸生返归，见到刘安世、杨时，都去他们那里请教学业。
English: Not long after, Liu Cunzhi's aversion to academic studies began, and he bid farewell to the return of all beings. When he saw Liu Anshi and Yang, he went to them to ask for teaching.

古文：及至家，即邑近郊结草为堂，读书其中，力耕自给，澹然无求于世。
现代文：等回到家里，就在县城近郊构屋为书堂，读书其中，力耕自给，身心淡泊，于世无求。
English: After returning home, he built a house on the outskirts of the county seat as a library, where he read, cultivated self-sufficiency, and was indifferent to his body and mind, seeking nothing in the world.

古文：与胡宪、刘子翚相往来，日以讲论切磋为事。
现代文：与胡宪、刘子翼互相往来，每天以讲论切磋学问为事。
English: He interacted with Hu Xian and Liu Ziying, and engaged in lectures and cultural exchanges every day.

古文：绍兴间，中书舍人吕本中疏其行义志业以闻，特召诣阙。
现代文：绍兴年间，中书舍人吕本中疏奏刘勉之的行义志业以闻，朝廷特召他前往宫廷。
English: During his years in Shaoxing, Liu Tsunenzhi, a pupil of the Chinese school of calligraphy, was known for his charity work. The imperial court specially summoned him to the court.

古文：秦桧方主和，虑勉之见上持正论，乃不引见，但令策试后省给札而已。
现代文：秦桧正主张和议，担心刘勉之见到皇帝后坚持主战主张，于是不予引见，只令在后省策试发给笔札而已。
English: Qin Yu was advocating peace talks, and was worried that Liu Tsunenzhi would insist on the main war proposal after seeing the emperor, so he did not introduce him, but only ordered the provincial policy to be tried out to the pen.

古文：勉之知不与桧合，即谢病归。
现代文：刘勉之知道与秦桧合不来，就谢病归家。
English: Liu Tsunenzhi knew that he could not get along with Qin Yu, so he returned home.

古文：杜门十余年，学者踵至，随其材品，为说圣贤教学之门及前言往行之懿。
现代文：闭门谢客十多年，求学的人连续不断，按照他们的才能品德，为他们讲说圣贤教学的门径以及圣贤以往言行的美德。
English: After more than ten years of thanking guests behind closed doors, the students were continuously told about the path of teaching the sages and the virtues of the words and deeds of the sages in the past according to their talents and virtues.

古文：所居有白水，人号曰白水先生。
现代文：刘勉之所居住的地方有白水河，人们称他叫白水先生。
English: There is a white water river in the place where Liu Tsun Zhi lived. People called him Mr. White Water.

古文：贤士大夫自赵鼎以下皆敬慕与交。
现代文：贤士大夫自赵鼎以下都对他尊敬仰慕愿意与他交往。
English: From Zhao Ding onward, all the doctors respected and admired him and were willing to associate with him.

古文：后秦桧益横，鼎窜死，诸贤禁锢，勉之竟不复出。
现代文：后来秦桧日益专横，赵鼎被流窜而死，许多贤士大夫被禁锢，刘勉之最终不再出仕。
English: Later, Qin Yu became increasingly tyrannical, Zhao Ding was exiled and died, many sages and doctors were imprisoned, and Liu Cunzhi eventually ceased to serve.

古文：勉之一介不妄取。
现代文：刘勉之丝毫不妄求取。
English: Liu Tsunemoto did not make any pretentious demands.

古文：方宪之以馆职召也，适秦桧讳言之后，宪与王十朋、冯方、查籥、李浩相继论事，太学士为《五贤诗》以歌之。
现代文：妻子的娘家富有，没有子嗣，谋划把资产全部归于女儿，刘勉之不接受，把这些资产赠给同族的贤能之人，命他们祭祀。他的朋友朱松去世，把后事嘱托给他，而且训诫儿子朱熹受学于他。
English: His wife's daughter's family was rich and had no children, so they planned to transfer all their assets to their daughter. Liu Tsuneh did not accept this, and instead gave these assets to wise men of the same race, ordering them to make a sacrifice. When his friend Zhu Song died, he entrusted the succession to him, and also instructed his son Zhu Xi to learn from him.

古文：人始信宪之不苟出，而惜其在位仅半年，不究其底蕴云。绍兴三十二年，卒，年七十七。
现代文：刘勉之经营管理朱家，又像儿子侄子一样教导朱熹。朱熹得到道学，从刘勉之开始。绍兴十九年，刘勉之去世，享年五十九岁。
English: Liu Tsunehi managed the Zhu family and taught Zhu Xi like a son or nephew. Zhu Xi received Taoism from Liu Tsunehi. Liu Tsunehi died in 19th year of Shaoxing at the age of 59.

古文：郭雍，字子和，其先洛阳人。
现代文：郭雍字子和，他的先世是洛阳人。
English: Guo Yongzhi and his ancestors were from Luoyang.

古文：父忠孝，官至太中大夫，师事程颐，著《易说》，号兼山先生，自有传。
现代文：父亲郭忠孝，官至太中大夫，以师礼相待程颐，撰写《易说》，别号兼山先生，自己有传。
English: His father, Guo Zhongxiao, was a high-ranking official and a middle-ranking doctor. He treated Cheng Yao as a mentor and wrote "Easy to Say." He was also known as Mr. Kanesan, and his name has been passed down.

古文：雍传其父学，通世务，隐居峡州，放浪长杨山谷间，号白云先生。
现代文：郭雍继承了父学，通晓时务，隐居峡州，在长扬山谷之间放纵不受拘束，别号白云先生。
English: Guo Yong has inherited his father's learning, is well-versed in current affairs, lives in seclusion in the canyon, and indulges without restraint between the Changyang Valley, alias Mr. Baiyun.

古文：乾道中，以峡守任清臣、湖北帅张孝祥荐于朝，旌召不起，赐号冲晦处士。
现代文：乾道年中，因峡州太守任清臣、湖北安抚使张孝祥向朝廷推荐，旌表召用不去，赐号冲晦处士。
English: In the middle of the dry season, Zhang Xiaoxiang was recommended to the imperial court by Xiaozhou Taishou as a Qing minister and Hubei appeasement envoy, and he was not allowed to use the watch, and was given the title of Chongyi clerk.

古文：孝宗稔知其贤，每对辅臣称道之，命所在州郡岁时致礼存问。
现代文：孝宗熟知郭雍贤能，每每对辅佐大臣称赞他，命令所在州郡每年季节时令致礼存问。
English: Xiaozong was familiar with Guo Yongxian. He praised him to the Vice-Minister of the State Council, and ordered the state and county to pay tribute to him every season.

古文：后更封颐正先生，令部使者遣官就问雍所欲言，备录缴进。
现代文：后来改封颐正先生，命令监司派遣官员前去询问郭雍所想说的话，全部记录交进朝廷。
English: Later, he changed the title of Mr. Yu Zheng, ordered the Supervision Department to send officials to inquire about what Guo Yong wanted to say, and submitted all records to the imperial court.

古文：于是，雍年八十有三矣。
现代文：这时，郭雍年纪有八十三岁了。
English: At this time, Guo Yong was 83 years old.

古文：淳熙初，学者裒集程颢、程颐、张载、游酢、杨时及忠孝、雍凡七家，为《大易粹言》行于世。
现代文：淳熙初年，求学的人辑集程颢、程颐、张载、游酢、杨时以及郭忠孝、郭雍共七家，为《大易粹言》传布于世。
English: In the first year of Aung Hee, there were a total of seven schools of students, including Cheng Ho, Cheng Ho, Zhang Zai, You Zui, Yang Shih, Guo Zhongxiao and Guo Yong, and it was known as "Da Yi Ji Gen."

古文：其述雍之说曰：
现代文：此书记述郭雍的学说说：
English: Describing Guo Yong's doctrine, the secretary said:

古文：《易》贯通三才，包括万理。
现代文：《易》贯通天地人，包括万理。
English: "Yi" penetrates heaven and earth, including Wanli.

古文：伏羲氏之画，得于天而明天。
现代文：伏羲氏画八卦，得于上天而使天显明。
English: Fuxi's painting of the Eight Trigrams was inspired by the heavens and made the heavens appear.

古文：文王之画，得于人而明人。
现代文：文王的功德，得于人而使人显明。
English: The merits of King Wen are gained from people and made manifest to people.

古文：羲画为天，天，君道也，故五之在人为君。
现代文：伏羲氏为上天画八卦，天，是君王的意志，所以至尊中正的五对人来说是君王。
English: The Fuxi family drew eight tales for heaven, and heaven is the will of the king, so the Supreme Middle Correct Five is the king for people.

古文：文重为地，地，臣道也，故二之在人为臣。
现代文：文王的功德为大地，地，是做臣民之道，所以具备中庸德行的二对人来说是臣民。
English: King Wen's merit is the earth, the earth is the best way to be a subject, so the two people with moderate virtue are subjects.

古文：以上下二卦别而言之如此。
现代文：以五、二上下二卦分别而言之就是这样。
English: With five, two and two, respectively, this is how it goes.

古文：合六爻而言之，则三四皆人道也，故谓之中爻。
现代文：综合六爻来说，那么九三、九四卦都是人道，所以叫作中爻。
English: In terms of comprehensive six-syllables, then the nine-three and nine-four syllables are humanities, so they are called middle syllables.

古文：《乾》，元亨利贞，初曰四德。
现代文：《乾》卦，万物创始的伟大根元，通行无阻，祥和有益，无所不正，而且执著，起初叫四德。
English: The Qian, the great foundation of the founding of all things, is unimpeded, peaceful and beneficial, infallible, and persistent. At first, it was called the four virtues.

古文：后又曰乾元，始而亨者也。
现代文：后来又叫乾元，是开始通行无阻。
English: Later it was called Qianyuan, and it was the beginning of unimpeded traffic.

古文：利牝马贞，利君子贞。是以四德为二义亦可矣。
现代文：只有像柔顺健行的母马般，执著于正道，才会有利，君子只有安详地执著于正道，才会吉祥。因此四德作为乾、坤二义也是可以的。
English: Only if one sticks to the right path, like a mare strolling along smoothly, will one be beneficial, and only if one sticks to the right path in a peaceful manner will one be auspicious. Therefore, the four virtues can also be used as the two meanings of "Ken" and "Kun."

古文：乾，阳物也。
现代文：乾，是阳健的东西。
English: Dry, is a masculine thing.

古文：坤，阴物也。
现代文：坤，是阴柔的东西。
English: Kun is a feminine thing.

古文：由《乾》一卦论之，则元与亨阳之类，利与贞阴之类也。
现代文：按《乾》一卦来说，那么元与亨是阳健之类，利与贞是阴柔之类。
English: According to the story of "Kian," Yuan and Heng are masculine and vigorous, while Li and Zhen are feminine and tender.

古文：是犹春夏秋冬虽为四时，由阴阳观之，则春夏为阳，秋冬为阴也。
现代文：这就像春夏秋冬虽然作为四季，按阴阳来看，那么春夏为阳，秋冬为阴。
English: This is just like spring, summer, autumn and winter, although they are the four seasons, according to yin and yang, spring and summer are yang, and autumn and winter are yin.

古文：天之所谓元亨利贞者，如立天之道，阴与阳之类也。
现代文：天的功能之所以说元亨利贞，就像立天的道理，是属阴与阳之类。
English: The reason why the function of heaven is said to be the original Henry Zhen, just like the reason for the establishment of heaven, is the yin and yang.

古文：地之所谓元亨利贞者，如立地之道，柔与刚之类也。
现代文：地的功能之所以说元亨利贞，就像立地的是阴柔与阳刚之类。
English: The reason why the function of the earth is said to be the original Henry Zhen, just as the location is feminine and masculine.

古文：人之所谓元亨利贞者，如立人之道，仁与义之类也。
现代文：人之所以说元亨利贞，就像立人的道理，是仁与义之类。
English: The reason why people say Yuan Henrizhen, just like the principle of establishing people, is benevolence and righteousness.

古文：又《坤》之六五，坤虽臣道，五实君位，虽以柔德，不害其为君；犹《乾》之九二，虽有君德，不害其为臣。
现代文：又《坤》卦的六五，坤虽然是臣道，五其实是君王的位置，虽然用柔德，但不妨害其为君王，就像《乾》卦的九二，虽然具有君王的德行，但不妨害他为君王。
English: In addition, in the 65th chapter of "Kun," although Kun is a subject, the 5th chapter is actually the position of the king. Although he uses judo, it does not prevent him from being a king, just like the 92nd chapter of "Ken," although he has the virtue of a king, it does not prevent him from being a king.

古文：故乾有两君，德无两君；坤有两臣，德无两臣。
现代文：所以乾有二君，德无两君；坤有两臣，德无二臣。
English: Therefore, Qian has two princes, and virtue has no two princes; Kun has two ministers, and virtue has no two ministers.

古文：六五以柔居尊，下下之君也。
现代文：六五爻以柔德居于尊位，是最屈己尊人的君王。
English: The 65-year-old emperor is the most self-deprecating and dignified ruler.

古文：江海所以能为百谷王者，以其善下下也。
现代文：江河大海之所以能够成为众多溪流之王，是因为它善于屈己尊人。
English: The reason why the river and the sea can become the king of many streams is because it is good at bowing down to others.

古文：下下本坤德也。
现代文：屈己尊人本来是坤的德性。
English: It was originally Kun's virtue to defer to his superiors.

古文：黄，中色也，色之至美也；裳，下服也，是以至美之德而下人也。
现代文：黄色，是中色，颜色中最完美的色；裳，是下衣，这是用最完美的德行而尊人屈己。
English: Yellow is the middle colour, the most perfect of colours; petticoats, the underclothes, the most perfect of virtues.

古文：其发明精到如此。
现代文：郭雍的创新精到到这样的程度。
English: Guo Yong's innovation is refined to such an extent.

古文：淳熙十四年。
现代文：淳熙十四年，去世。
English: In the fourteenth year of Aung Hee, he passed away.

