古文：王法智李佐时韦皋窦参李伯禽肖复第李纳崔汾卒秘
现代文：王法智李佐时韦皋窦参李伯禽肖复第李纳崔汾卒秘
English: Wang Fazhi, Li Zuo, Wei Wei, Dou Zhen, Li Boqiang, Xiao Fu Di, Li Na, Cui Wei, Zhou Jian

古文：王法智
现代文：王法智
English: Wang Fazhi

古文：桐庐女子王法智者，幼事郎子神。
现代文：桐庐县有个姑娘叫王法智，小时就供奉郎子神。
English: In Tonglu County, there is a girl named Wang Fazhi, who worships the god at all hours.

古文：大历中，忽闻神作大人语声，法智之父问：此言非圣贤乎？
现代文：大历年间，有一天忽然听见神像发出大人的说话声。法智的父亲问：是圣贤在说话吗？
English: During the year of the Great Calendar, one day he suddenly heard the statue of a god uttering a great man's voice. The father of Fuzhi asked: Is it the sage who is speaking?

古文：曰：然。
现代文：神像说，是的。
English: The general said yes.

古文：我姓滕，名传胤。本京兆万年人，宅在崇贤坊。
现代文：我叫滕传胤，在人世间的时候，是京兆万年人，家住崇贤坊。
English: My name is Teng Chuan-yin. When I was alive, I lived in Chongxianfang.

古文：本与法智有因缘。
现代文：我和法智姑娘前世有缘。
English: I had a past life connection with the Law and Wisdom girl.

古文：与酬对，深得物理，前后州县甚重之。
现代文：与他唱和，深得世理。附近从州官到县令，都很敬重他。
English: The people around him, from prefectural officials to county magistrates, all respect him.

古文：桐庐县令郑锋，好奇之士，常呼法智至舍。令屈滕十二郎，久之方至。其辨对言语，深有士风，锋听之不倦。
现代文：桐庐县当时的县令叫郑锋，也是个传学之士，曾经把法智请到府宅，让她请滕十二郎，很久才来，郎子神对诗或辨论经书，谈锋很健，才华横溢象饱学之士一样，县令都听入迷了。
English: The county magistrate of Tonglu County at that time was called Zheng Feng, who was also a scholar. He once invited Dangzhi to the mansion, and asked her to invite Teng Juro. It took him a long time to come, but he was able to talk about poetry or discuss scriptures. He was very vigorous and talented. Like a scholar, the county magistrate was fascinated by what he heard.

古文：每见词人，谈经诵诗，欢言终日。
现代文：他只要遇到会作诗的人，就和他作诗朗诵，终日欢谈。
English: Whenever he met someone who could write poetry, he would recite poetry to him and talk to him all day long.

古文：常有客僧诣法智乞丐者，神与交言，赠诗云：卓立不求名出家，长怀片志在青霞。
现代文：曾经有个游方和尚找法智姑娘化缘，郎子神和那僧人谈得很投缘，并赠和尚一首诗：卓立不求名出家，长怀片志在青霞。
English: Once upon a time, there was a wandering monk who was looking for a match with a girl from Fa Chi. The god and the monk struck up a good relationship and gave the monk a poem: Zhuo Li did not seek fame and became a monk, but he cherished his dream of becoming a monk in his youth.

古文：今日英雄气冲盖，谁能久坐宝莲花。
现代文：今日英雄气冲盖，谁能久坐宝莲花，和僧人开了个善意的玩笑。
English: Today, the hero, who can sit for a long time on the lotus flower, and the monk made a good-natured joke.

古文：又曾为诗赠人云：平生才不足，立身信有余。
现代文：又曾经赠人一首诗：平生才不足，立身信有余。
English: He also once presented a poem to someone: "Lifelong talent is not enough, standing up is more than enough."

古文：自叹无大故，君子莫相疏。
现代文：自叹无大故，君子莫相疏。
English: There is no great reason for self-deprecation, and a gentleman is never absent.

古文：六年二月二十五日疲，戴孚与左卫兵曹徐晃、龙泉令崔向、丹阳县丞李从训、邑人韩谓苏修，集于锋宅。
现代文：表达了他的情操。大历六年二月二十五日夜晚，戴孚、左卫兵曹徐晃、龙泉县令崔向、丹阳县丞李从训，还有县里的士人韩谓、苏修等人，聚会在桐庐县令郑锋府上，正好法智也来到，令召滕传胤。
English: On the evening of February 25th, the sixth year of the great calendar, Dai Fu, the left guard Cao Xu Qiang, the Longquan County leader Cui Xiang, the Danyang County leader Li Congxun, and the county officials Han Zuo and Su Xiu gathered at the Tonglu County leader Zheng Feng's mansion. It just so happened that Dazhi also came and summoned Teng Chuanyin.

古文：会法智至，令召滕传胤，久之方至，与晃等酬献数百言。因谓诸贤：请人各诵一章。诵毕，众求其诗，率然便诵二首云：浦口潮来初淼漫，莲舟摇荡采花难。
现代文：过了一段时间才到，徐晃等人对了几百字的诗后，就请诸贤每人各献诵一首，大家做完了，就要求郎子神作诗，他张口就朗诵起来：浦口潮来初淼浸，莲舟摇荡采花难。
English: It took some time before they arrived. After Xu Xiao and others had composed a poem of several hundred words, they asked the sages to each recite a poem. When everyone had finished, they asked the god to compose a poem. He opened his mouth and began to recite: The tidal wave of Pukou comes for the first time, the lotus boat is rocking, and it is difficult to pick flowers.

古文：春心不惬空归去，会待潮平更折看。
现代文：春心不惬空归去，会待潮平更折看。
English: The spring heart will not return empty-handed, it will wait until the tide is flat.

古文：云：众人莫厮笑。
现代文：诵完说：大家别笑，我再诵一首。
English: After the recitation, he said, "Don't laugh, I'll recite one more."

古文：又诵云：忽然湖上片云飞，不觉舟中雨湿衣。
现代文：又吟道：忽然湖上片云飞，不觉舟中雨湿衣。
English: He also chanted, "Suddenly, a piece of cloud flew over the lake, and I didn't notice the rain and wet clothes in the boat.

古文：折得莲花浑忘却，空将荷叶盖头归。
现代文：折得莲花浑忘却，空将荷叶盖头归。
English: The folded lotus flower is forgotten, and the empty lotus leaf cover returns.

古文：自云：此作亦颇蹀躞。
现代文：然后谦虚地说：写得很浅陋。
English: Then he said modestly: "It's very poorly written."

古文：又嘱法智弟与锋献酬数百言，乃去。
现代文：又让法智接着和县令郑锋酬对了几百字的诗，才离去。
English: He also let Fa Zhi and county magistrate Zheng Feng Rong read a few hundred words of poetry before leaving.

古文：李佐时
现代文：李佐时
English: Li Zuoxi

古文：山阴县尉李佐时者，以大历二年遇劳，病数十日中愈，自会稽至龙丘。会宗人述为令，佐时止令厅数日。
现代文：山阴县尉李佐时在大历二年患了重病，过了几十天稍见好转，从会稽到龙丘，正是同宗李述当县令，就留了佐时在县衙住了几天。
English: Sanyin County Lieutenant Li Zuoxi suffered from a serious illness in the second year of the lunar calendar. After a few dozen days, he saw a slight improvement. From the meeting to Longqiu, it was the same Li Shu as the county magistrate who kept Sashi in the county for a few days.

古文：夕复与客李举，明灯而坐。忽见衣绯紫等二十人，悉秉戎器，趋谒庭下。
现代文：一天晚上，李佐时在灯下和客人李举亲谈，忽然有二十多个穿红衣紫袍手执兵器的人来到廊下。
English: One evening, when Li Zuoxi was chatting with his guest Li Juchuan under the lamp, suddenly more than twenty people wearing red clothes and purple robes and holding weapons came to the corridor.

古文：佐时问何人，答曰：鬼兵也。
现代文：佐时问他们是什么人，回答说：是鬼卒。
English: When Sasaki asked who they were, he replied, "They are ghost soldiers."

古文：大王用君为判官，特奉命迎候，以充驱使。
现代文：大王任命你做判官，特派我们迎接，我们听候你的差遣。
English: The great king has appointed you as judge, and has sent us to meet you. We are at your service.

古文：佐时曰：己在哀制，为是非礼。
现代文：佐时说：我正在丧期，接受这样的职务不合仪礼。
English: Sasaki said, "I am in my deathbed, and it is not proper to accept such a position.

古文：且王何以得知有我？
现代文：况且你们大王怎么会知道我这个人呢？
English: Besides, how would your Majesty know who I am?

古文：答云：是武义县令窦堪举君。
现代文：回答说，是武义县令窦堪举荐了你。
English: He replied that it was Wuyi County Governor Dou Kanju who recommended you.

古文：佐时云：堪不相知，何故见举？
现代文：佐时又问：根本不认识我，怎么会举荐我？
English: Sasaki also asked, "How can you recommend me when you don't know me at all?"

古文：答云：恩命已行，难以辞绝。
现代文：回答说大王已经下了命令，推迟不了。
English: He replied that the great king had given the order and it could not be delayed.

古文：须臾堪至，礼谒，蕴籍如平人，坐谓佐时曰：王求一子婿，兼令取甲族，所以奉举，亦由缘业使然。佐时固辞不果。
现代文：不一会，窦堪也到了，很温文尔雅地施礼，宽和有涵养地像平常人一样地和他说：大王想招个女婿，并让女婿兼管贵族的事分所以我举荐了你。也是你原来就有这个缘份。李佐时仍然坚决不答应。
English: Not long after, Dou Kan also arrived, bowed very suave and elegant, and spoke to him in a broad and tolerant manner like an ordinary person: the great king wanted to recruit a son-in-law, and let the son-in-law also manage the affairs of the aristocracy, so I recommended you. You also originally had this fate. Li Zuoxi still resolutely did not agree.

古文：须臾王女亦至，芬香芳馥，车骑云合。
现代文：不一会儿大王的女儿也来了，她的车骑如云，身上散发着芬香的气息。
English: Soon the king's daughter arrived, riding in a chariot like a cloud and smelling of incense.

古文：佐时下阶迎拜，见女容姿服御，心颇悦之。
现代文：李佐时赶快走下台阶拜见。佐时见大王的女儿美艳华贵，心里产生了爱慕之意。
English: Li Zuoxi hurried down the steps to see her. When Zuoxi saw the beauty of the great king's daughter, his heart was filled with admiration.

古文：堪谓佐时曰：人谁不死，如君盖稀。无宜数辞，以致王怒。
现代文：这时窦堪对佐时说，人谁能不死，但像你有如此福分的太少了，别再推辞了，不然会让大王生气的。
English: At this time, Doukan said to Soseki, "No one can not die, but there are too few blessings like you. Don't refuse again, or you will make the king angry."

古文：佐时知终不免。
现代文：李佐时知道在数难逃了。
English: Li Zuoxi knew there was no way out.

古文：久之，王女与堪去，留将从二百余人，祗承判官。
现代文：过了半天，大王的女儿和窦堪都不见了，留下二百多随从，随从们恭敬地侍护着李佐时去上任当判官。
English: After half a day, the king's daughter and Dou Kan disappeared, leaving more than two hundred attendants. The attendants respectfully waited for Li Zuo to take office as a judge.

古文：翌日，述并弟造，同诣佐时。佐时且说始末，云：既以不活，为求一顿食。
现代文：第二天，李述和他弟弟李造一起来看李佐时，佐时就对他们说了这些事，然后说，反正我已活不成了，给我弄些好吃的吧。
English: The next day, when Li Shu and his brother Li Zuo came to see Li Zuo together, Zuo told them these things, and then said, "I can't live anymore anyway, let's get me something good to eat."

古文：述为致盛馔。
现代文：李述就备了一桌盛宴。
English: Li Shu prepared a feast.

古文：佐时食雉臛，忽云：不见碗。呵左右：何以收羹？
现代文：佐时正在吃野鸡肉羹，忽然碗就没有了，喝斥左右：为什么把肉羹给撤了？
English: Satoshi was eating pheasant meat soup, when suddenly the bowl was gone. There was an outcry: Why was the meat soup taken away?

古文：仆于食案，便卒。
现代文：说完一头扑在桌上就死了。
English: After saying this, he threw his head down on the table and died.

古文：其妻郑氏在会稽，丧船至之夕，婢忽作佐时灵语云：王女已别嫁，但遣我送妻还。
现代文：李佐时的灵柩装上船运回家乡会稽，船到家乡的那天晚上，他妻子身旁一个丫环突然被佐时的魂灵附体。佐时的魂灵说：大王的女儿已嫁给了别人，现在是让我把妻子送回家乡。
English: Li Zuoqi's coffin was loaded onto a ship to be transported back to his hometown. On the night the ship arrived in his hometown, a maidservant next to his wife was suddenly possessed by the spirit of Zuoqi. The spirit of Zuoqi said: the king's daughter has married someone else, now let me send my wife back to my hometown.

古文：言甚凄怆也。
现代文：说话的声音十分悲伤。
English: The voice is very sad.

古文：韦皋
现代文：韦皋
English: Wei Xuan

古文：韦皋初薄游剑外，西川节度使兵部尚书平章事张延赏以女妻之，既而恶焉，厌薄之情日露。
现代文：韦皋当年很穷，漫游到剑门关外时，西川节度使、兵部尚书相国张延赏把自己的女儿嫁给了他。
English: Wei Wei was very poor at that time. When he wandered outside of Jianmen Pass, he was married to his daughter by Zhang Yan Rong, an envoy of the Nishikawa Sect and the Minister of Military Affairs.

古文：公郁郁不得志，时入幕府，与宾朋从游，且摅其忿。
现代文：但没过多久就看不上他了，而且越来越厌恶得表露出来了。韦皋闷闷不乐，觉得自己很不得志。经常在幕府和宾客朋友一起出游，而表明自己的不满。
English: However, it didn't take long for her to lose interest in him, and her dislike for him became more and more obvious. Wei Wei was depressed and felt like a failure. She often expressed her dissatisfaction by going on trips to the shogunate together with guests and friends.

古文：延赏愈恶之，谓皋曰：幕僚无非时奇，延赏尚敬惮之，韦郎无事，不必数到。
现代文：这使得相国更加厌恶他了，对韦皋说，幕僚无不是当今的奇才，连我都有些敬而畏之，你没事时不用天天到幕府里去。
English: This made his countrymen even more disgusted with him. He said to Wei Wei, "Staff officers are nothing but today's prodigies. Even I have some respect and awe for them. You don't have to go to the shogunate every day when you're not busy.

古文：其轻之如此。
现代文：可见岳父多么看不起他。
English: You can see how much his father-in-law despises him.

古文：他日，其妻尤悯之曰：男儿固有四方志，今厌贱如此不知，欢然度日，奇哉！
现代文：后来，连他妻子都同情地对他说：男儿志在四方。现在我父亲这么歧视你，你竟感觉不到，还高高兴兴的，真太怪了。
English: Later, even his wife said to him sympathetically, "It's strange that my father would discriminate against you in such a way that you don't feel it, and you're happy about it.

古文：妾辞家事君子，荒隅一间茅屋，亦君之居；炊菽羹藜，箪食瓢饮，亦君之食。何必忍愧强安，为有血气者所笑。
现代文：我那怕离开相府，随你而去，那怕在荒野里住一间破草房，砍柴烧饭，挖野菜充饥活得舒心，何必像现在这样忍气吞声，被有血性的男儿耻笑呢！
English: Even if I were to leave my father-in-law's house and follow you, even if I were to live in a broken grass hut in the wilderness, cutting wood and cooking, digging vegetables to satisfy my hunger, why should I have to swallow my breath like this and be laughed at by bloodthirsty men!

古文：于是入告张行意，延赏遗帛五十疋。
现代文：于是妻子就自己的父亲，要随韦皋出走。张延赏就给了五十匹绸缎让他们走。
English: So his wife wanted to run away with Wei Yao, her own father. Zhang Yanbo gave them fifty silkworms to let them go.

古文：夫人薄之，不敢言。
现代文：张延赏的夫人虽觉得给得太少，也不敢说什么。
English: Zhang Yanbo's wife did not dare to say anything, although she felt that the reward was too small.

古文：时有女巫在焉，见皋入西院，问夫人曰：向之绿衣入西院者为谁？
现代文：当时有个女巫在相府，看见韦皋到西院去，就问相国夫人，刚才到西院去的那位穿绿衣的人是谁？
English: At that time, there was a witch in the palace, and when she saw Wei Wei leaving for the West Courtyard, she asked the lady of the neighboring country, "Who is that person in green who just left for the West Courtyard?"

古文：曰：韦郎。
现代文：老夫人说，是我女婿韦郎。
English: The old lady said it was my son-in-law, Weiro.

古文：曰：此人极贵，位过宰相远矣。其禄将发，不久亦镇此，宜殊待之。
现代文：巫婆说，这个人极尊贵，他的官运马上就要来了，官位比老爷还高得多呢，而且不久就会派镇此地，你们应该好好对待他。
English: The witch said, "This man is very distinguished, his promotion is coming soon, his official rank is much higher than my lord's, and he will soon be sent to this place. You should treat him well."

古文：问其所以，曰：贵人之所行，必有阴吏。
现代文：老夫人问何以见得。巫婆说，凡是贵人，行走时必有阴间的官员护从。
English: The old lady asked how she knew this. The witch said that when a noble person walks, he is always accompanied by officials from the underworld.

古文：相国之侍一二十人耳，如韦郎者，乃百余人。
现代文：你家相国随从的阴间官员不过一二十人，而我看见韦郎的随从有一百多哩！
English: Your in-law's entourage of netherworld officials is no more than a dozen or two, while I saw Wei Lang's entourage more than a hundred miles away!

古文：夫人闻之大喜，遽言于延赏，延赏怒曰：赠薄请益可矣，奈何假托巫妖，以相调乎？
现代文：夫人听后大喜，赶快跑去告诉张延赏。张延赏大怒说，要是嫌我送他们的东西太少可以再商量，用不着假借巫婆的胡说来骗我！
English: After hearing this, his wife was overjoyed and quickly ran to tell Zhang Yanbo. Zhang Yanbo angrily said that if he didn't like the fact that I sent them too little, they could discuss it again. There was no need to lie to me by pretending to be a witch!

古文：韦行月余日到歧，歧帅以西川之贵婿，延置幕中，奏大理评事。
现代文：韦皋终于带着妻子离相府出走，经月余到了歧山。歧山的长官因为韦皋是节度使的贵婿，先请他到幕府任职，又奏请任命他为大理评事，专管刑狱。
English: Wei Wei finally took his wife and ran away from Xiangfu, and after a few months they arrived at Qishan. The governor of Qishan, because Wei Wei was the son-in-law of the regent, first asked him to serve in the shogunate, and then asked him to be appointed as the chief critic, specializing in prisons.

古文：寻以鞫狱平允，加监察，以陇州刺史卒出知州事。
现代文：由于他对狱政管理得出色，审案公正，又升任为监察。后来，陇州刺史死了，他又补任了知州。
English: Because of his outstanding performance in prison administration and fair trial, he was promoted to the position of supervisor. Later, when Zhangzhou Zishi died, he was replaced by Zhizhou.

古文：俄而朱泚乱，驾幸奉天。
现代文：不久朱泚造反，皇上离京到奉天。
English: Soon after, Zhu Xi rebelled, and the emperor left Beijing for Mukden.

古文：陇州有泚旧卒五百人，兵马使牛云光主之。
现代文：这时陇州有朱泚的旧部五百人，头儿是兵马使牛云光。
English: At this time, there were five hundred members of Zhu Xi's old unit in Zhangzhou, and the leader was Niu Yunguang.

古文：云光谋作乱，不克，率其众奔朱泚。道遇泚使，以伪诏除皋御史中丞，因与之俱还。
现代文：牛云光想作乱没成，就带兵投奔了朱泚，在路上遇见朱泚派的使者，使者拿着朱泚的伪诏，任命韦皋为御史中丞。
English: When Niu Yunguang's attempt to create a disturbance failed, he led his troops to join Zhu Xi. On the way, he met an emissary of Zhu Xi's faction. The emissary took Zhu Xi's forged edict and appointed Wei Xi as the Vice-Minister of History.

古文：皋受其命，谓云光曰：受命必无疑矣，可悉纳器械，以明不相诈。
现代文：他们一齐回来见到韦皋，韦皋假装接受了任命后对牛云光说，我接受了任命，你们就该信任我，请你的部队都把武器收起来，这才说明你们也信任我。
English: They all came back to see Wei Xuan. After pretending to accept the appointment, Wei Xuan said to Niu Yunguang, "I have accepted the appointment, you should trust me. Ask your troops to put away their weapons. This shows that you also trust me."

古文：云光从之。翌日大飨，伏甲尽杀之，立坛盟诸将。
现代文：牛云光就照办了，第二天韦皋摆酒宴犒赏军队，事先埋伏好了人，把反叛的军人都杀光了，然后又设祭坛和诸将盟誓归顺朝廷。
English: Niu Yunguang did as he was told. The next day, Wei Gan held a wine banquet to reward the troops. He prepared an ambush in advance and killed all the rebel soldiers. Then he set up an altar and all the generals swore to obey the imperial court.

古文：泚复许皋凤翔节度，皋斩其使。行在闻之，人心皆奋，乃除陇州刺史奉义军节度使。
现代文：朱泚知道了，又派使者来给韦皋加官升任凤翔节度使，韦皋就把使者杀掉，皇上的行宫中听说此事，人心大振，皇上就任韦皋为陇州刺史兼奉义军节度使。
English: Zhu Xi found out and sent an envoy to promote Wei Xi to the post of Fengxiang's festival envoy. Wei Xi killed the envoy. When the emperor's entourage heard about this, their hearts were greatly moved. The emperor appointed Wei Xi as the governor of Zhangzhou and the festival envoy of the rebel army.

古文：及驾还宫，乃授兵部尚书西川节度使。
现代文：朱泚之乱平息后，圣驾还宫，韦皋升任兵部尚书西川节度使。
English: After the Zhu Xi Rebellion was quelled, the saint returned to the palace, and Wei Wei was promoted to the military department of the West River.

古文：延赏闻之，将自抉其目，以惩不知人。
现代文：他的岳父张延赏听说后，真想把自己的眼珠子抠出来，以罚自己当初不识人。
English: After hearing about his father-in-law Zhang Yanbo, he really wanted to gouge out his own eyeballs to punish himself for not knowing people at the beginning.

古文：窦参
现代文：窦参
English: Sinus ginseng

古文：窦参常为蒲圻县令，县有神祠，前后令宰皆祀之，窦至即欲除毁，有日矣。
现代文：窦参曾做过蒲圻县令。县里有座神庙，每任县令都去祭祀。窦参到任后，却打算拆除它，已有很长一段时间了。
English: Dou Zhan was once the county magistrate of Baguo County. There is a temple in the county, and every county magistrate goes to worship. However, Dou Zhan has been planning to demolish it for a long time since he took office.

古文：梦神谓己曰：欲毁吾所居，吾害公未得者，盖以公当为相。
现代文：有一天，窦参梦见神对他说：你要毁我的房子。我可告诉你，其实我早就能害了你，只因为你将来能当相国，所以才没动你。
English: One day, Dou San dreamt that God said to him, "You're going to destroy my house. I can tell you that I could have harmed you long ago, but I didn't move you because you could become a partner country in the future."

古文：然幸且相存，自知与君往来，可以预知休咎。
现代文：希望你也把我的房子留着。我们以后常来往，我可以预知你将来的一切。
English: I hope you'll keep my house, too. We'll come and go a lot in the future, and I can predict everything about your future.

古文：既惊觉，乃自入祠祭酹，以兄事之。
现代文：窦参惊醒来后，就进庙祭祀，把庙神看做自己的兄长。
English: After Dou San was startled awake, he went to the temple to offer sacrifices, and regarded the temple god as his elder brother.

古文：后凡有迁命，皆先报之，颇与神交焉。
现代文：以后凡是有升迁调动，神都先向他报告，他和神交情很亲密。
English: In the future, whenever there is a promotion or transfer, God will report to him first. He and God have a very close relationship.

古文：其神欲相见，必具盛馔于空室之内，围以帘幕。
现代文：神如果想见窦参。必然在一个空屋里摆上酒席，周围用帐幕围上。
English: If the gods wanted to see Dou Sang, they would have to set up a banquet in an empty room and surround it with a tent.

古文：窦入之后，左右闻二人笑语声。
现代文：窦进去之后，人们能听到里面传出笑语声。
English: After Dou entered, people could hear laughter coming from inside.

古文：窦为郴州别驾，官舍有空院，窦因闭之。俄闻有呼声三四，寻之则无人。窦心动，乃具服仰问之曰：得非几兄乎？
现代文：窦参贬郴川别驾时，官宅里有一个空院子，就把它关闭了，这时听到院中有人喊了几声，找了半天也没有人，就整好衣冠向天拜问：是我的兄长又来了吗？
English: At the time of Dou's departure, there was an empty courtyard in the official residence, so it was closed. At this time, someone in the courtyard shouted a few times. After searching for half a day, there was no one, so he straightened his clothes and bowed to the sky and asked: Is my brother here again?

古文：曰：是也。
现代文：空中回答说，正是我。
English: He replied: "Exactly."

古文：君宜促理家事，三两日内有北使到，君不免矣。
现代文：你快些料理一下家务，三两天内朝廷的北使就来，这次你不免一死。
English: If you hurry up with the housework, the imperial envoy from the north will arrive in three or two days, and this time you will die.

古文：窦依言处之讫。坐待使。不数日，王人遽至，果有后命。
现代文：窦就赶快料理收了等着，不两天北使王臣很快到了，果然有邕州赐死的命运。
English: Dou hurriedly received the food and waited. Within two days, the Northern Envoy Wang Chen soon arrived, and indeed the fate of Zhangzhou was given to death.

古文：李伯禽
现代文：李伯禽
English: Li Bo-chi

古文：贞元五年，李伯子伯禽，充嘉兴监徐浦下场籴盐官。
现代文：贞元五年，李伯的儿子伯禽在嘉兴监徐浦下场籴盐官。
English: In the fifth year of the Zhengyuan era, Li Bo's son, Bo Jian, became a salt officer in Jiaxing Prison Xu Pu.

古文：场界有蔡侍郎庙，伯禽因谒庙。
现代文：盐场界内有个蔡侍郎庙。
English: There is a Cai Jirong Temple within the salt field.

古文：顾见庙中神女数人，中有美丽者，因戏言曰：娶妇得如此，足矣。
现代文：伯禽到庙里去，看见堂上有几个泥塑神女像，其中有一个很美，就开玩笑说：我要能娶上这样美的女子为妻就心满意足了。
English: When he went to the temple and saw several clay statues of goddesses in the hall, one of which was very beautiful, he joked, "I would be satisfied if I could marry such a beautiful woman as my wife."

古文：遂沥酒祝语之。
现代文：说罢还朝地下洒酒祝告。
English: Let's just say I'll be celebrating with a drink in the morning.

古文：后数日，正昼视事，忽闻门外有车骑声。
现代文：过了几天，他正在办事，忽然门外传来车马声。
English: A few days later, he was doing some work and suddenly there was a commotion outside his door.

古文：伯禽惊起，良久，具服迎于门，乃折旋而入。
现代文：于是惊讶地起身，穿好衣服出门迎接。
English: So he got up in surprise, got dressed and went out to meet her.

古文：人吏惊愕，莫知其由。乃命酒肴，久之，祗叙而去。后乃语蔡侍郎来。
现代文：然后很快又回到屋，让快摆酒宴，过了很久，又和人说着话走出去，大家十分惊奇，因为不知他和谁喝酒谈话，后来才听他说，是庙神蔡侍郎来过。
English: After a long time, he went out again, talking to someone. Everyone was very surprised, because they didn't know who he was drinking and talking to. It was only later that they heard him say that the temple deity, Cai Jirong, had come.

古文：明日又来，傍人并不之见。伯禽迎于门庭，言叙云：幸蒙见录，得事高门。
现代文：第二天，蔡侍郎又来了，谁也看不见，伯禽却在门外迎接，并听见伯禽对蔡侍所说，承蒙你看得起我，使我能进入你高贵的门第。
English: The next day, Cai Zirong came again. No one could see him, but the bird greeted him outside the gate. He heard the bird say to Cai Zirong, "Thank you for looking down on me, so that I can enter your noble gate."

古文：再拜而坐，竟夕饮食而去。
现代文：接着又拜了才坐下，一直喝了一夜的酒蔡侍郎才走。
English: Then he bowed again before sitting down, and Cai Jirong, who had been drinking wine all night, left.

古文：伯禽乃告其家曰：吾已许蔡侍郎论亲。
现代文：然后伯禽就告诉家里人说：我已做了蔡侍郎的女婿了。
English: Then he told his family, "I've become Cai Jirong's son-in-law.

古文：治家事，别亲党，数日而卒。
现代文：接着料理好家事，和亲友们告了别，几天后就死去了。
English: Then he did his chores, said goodbye to his friends and relatives, and died a few days later.

古文：肖复第
现代文：肖复第
English: Xiao Fudai

古文：肖复亲弟，少慕道不仕。
现代文：肖复的弟弟少年时不求仕途，好道家修练之术，经常吃灵芝丹桂，能弹琴。
English: Xiao Fu's younger brother did not seek a career when he was a teenager. He was good at practicing Taoism, often ate Ganoderma lucidum, and could play the piano.

古文：服食芝桂，能琴，尤善南风。
现代文：弹得最好的是古曲《南风》。
English: The best-played piece is the ancient song "South Wind."

古文：因游衡湘，维舟江岸。见一老人，负书携琴。
现代文：有一次他游湖南衡阳，把船靠在江岸，见一个老翁背着书抱着琴。
English: Once when he was on a trip to Hengyang, Hunan Province, he moored his boat on the riverbank and saw an old man carrying a book and a piano.

古文：肖生揖坐曰：父善琴，得南风耶？
现代文：肖生拜了老翁坐下问：老伯会弹琴，那会不会弹《南风》呢？
English: Xiao Sheng bowed to the old man, sat down and asked: The old man can play the piano, will he be able to play "South Wind"?

古文：曰：素善此。
现代文：老翁说，我就善于弹《南风》。
English: The old man said that I was good at playing "South Wind."

古文：因请抚之，尤妙绝，遂尽传其法。
现代文：肖生求老翁弹，一听，弹得太绝妙了，就向老翁请教把弹这个曲子的决窍都传给了自己。
English: Xiao Sheng asked the old man to play it, and when he heard it, he thought it was so wonderful, so he asked the old man for advice and passed on to himself the knowledge of how to play this piece.

古文：饮酒数杯，问其所居，笑而不答。
现代文：与老翁喝酒时问他家在哪儿，老翁只是笑笑不回答。
English: When drinking with the old man, he asked him where his home was. The old man just smiled and did not answer.

古文：及北归，至沅江口，上岸理南风。
现代文：后来肖生北上回家，到了沅江口，停船上岸，弹起了《南风》曲。
English: Later, Xiao Sheng went north to go home, arrived at the mouth of the Minjiang River, stopped the boat on the shore, and played the "South Wind" tune.

古文：有女子双鬟，挈一小竹笼曰：娘子在近好琴，欲走报也。
现代文：这时有个梳着双髻的女子，手里提着小竹篮，对肖生说：我家娘子就在附近，她也喜欢琴，我现在就去告诉她。
English: At this time, a woman with a double-bobbed hairdo, carrying a small bamboo basket in her hand, said to Xiao Sheng: My daughter is nearby, she also likes the piano, I will go and tell her now.

古文：肖问何来此，曰：采果耳。
现代文：肖生问她来这儿做什么，她说来采果子。
English: Xiao Sheng asked her what she was here to do, and she said to pick fruit.

古文：去顷却回，曰：娘子召君。
现代文：女子走了不一会又回来了，说：我家娘子请您前去。
English: After the woman left, she returned a short while later and said, "My daughter asked you to come.

古文：肖久在船，颇思闲行，遂许之。
现代文：肖生坐了很久的船，正想闲逛一逛，就答应了。
English: Xiao Sheng had been on the boat for a long time and just wanted to take a stroll, so he agreed.

古文：俄有苍头棹画舸至。
现代文：不大工夫就有个老仆摇着一只华丽的船来了。
English: It didn't take long for an old servant to arrive, rocking a magnificent boat.

古文：肖登之，行一里余，有门馆甚华。
现代文：肖生上了船走了一里多地上岸，进了一座华贵的府宅。
English: Xiao Sheng got on the boat, walked more than a mile ashore, and entered a luxurious mansion.

古文：召生升堂，见二美人于上，前拜。
现代文：里面请肖生到厅堂去，看见有两个美人在上面坐着，就拜见了。
English: Inside, he invited Xiao Sheng to go to the hall, and when he saw two beautiful women sitting there, he asked to see them.

古文：美人曰：无怪相迎，知君善南风，某亦素爱，久不习理，忘其半，愿得传受。
现代文：美人说：请不要怪罪我们接你来。知道你《南风》曲弹得好，我们也喜欢弹这个曲子，只是很久没练习了，忘了一半了，想请你教一教。
English: Beauty said: "Please don't blame us for picking you up. Knowing that you play the "South Wind" well, we also like to play this piece, but we haven't practiced it for a long time and have forgotten half of it, so we'd like to ask you to teach us."

古文：生遂为奏，美人亦命取琴。
现代文：肖生就弹了起来，美人也取来了琴。
English: Xiao Sheng started to play, and the beautiful woman also took the harp.

古文：肖弹毕，二美人及左右皆掩泣。
现代文：一曲《南风》弹过后，两位美人和左右的人都感动得流泪了。
English: After a piece of "South Wind" was played, the two beauties and the people around them were moved to tears.

古文：问生授于何人，乃言老父，具言其状。
现代文：美人问是谁传授的琴艺，肖生说是一位老翁，并描述了老者的相貌。
English: The beauty asked who was teaching the piano, Xiao Sheng said it was an old man, and described the old man's appearance.

古文：美人流涕曰：舜也。
现代文：美人又哭了起来说：那老翁就是舜啊！
English: Beauty burst into tears again and said, "That old man is a baboon!"

古文：此亦上帝遣君子受之，传于某，某即舜二妃。
现代文：这也是上天的旨意把这绝技传给你，在让你传给我们。我们就是舜的两个妃子。
English: It is also God's will to pass this great skill on to you, and for you to pass it on to us. We are the two concubines of the dragonfly.

古文：舜九天为司徒已千年，别受此曲，年多忘之。
现代文：舜在天界当司徒，我们已分别千年之久。当年我们学会这个曲子，由于年头太多也忘掉了。
English: We have been separated for a thousand years. We learned this piece that year, but because of the years, we have forgotten it.

古文：遂留生啜茶数碗。
现代文：然后留肖生喝了几碗茶，肖生就告辞了。
English: Then Xiao Sheng drank a few bowls of tea, and Xiao Sheng said goodbye.

古文：生辞去，曰：珍重厚惠。然亦不欲言之于人。
现代文：美人嘱咐道，千万珍重你所学到的技艺，也不要对任何人说这件事。
English: The beautiful woman told her to treasure what she had learned and not to tell anyone about it.

古文：遂出门，复乘画舸，至弹琴之所。
现代文：肖生就又乘上这船回到了他弹琴的原地。
English: Xiao Sheng boarded the ship again and returned to the place where he played the piano.

古文：明日寻之，都不见矣。
现代文：肖生第二天再去找，什么都没有了。
English: Xiao Sheng went to look for it again the next day, but there was nothing left.

古文：李纳
现代文：李纳
English: by Li Na

古文：贞元初，平卢帅李纳病笃，遣押衙王祐，祷于岱岳。
现代文：贞元初年，平卢帅李纳病重，派当押衙的王祐替他到泰山庙里祈祷。
English: In the first year of the Zhengyuan era, the commander of the Pinglu army, Li Na, was seriously ill. Wang Yu, who was assigned to escort him, went to pray for him in the temple of Mount Tai.

古文：斋戒而往，及岳之西南，遥见山上有四五人，衣碧汗衫半臂。
现代文：王祐吃了素沐浴了就起身了。到了泰山西南，远远看见山上有四五个人，穿绿色的露臂汗衫。
English: Wang Yu took a shower and got up. When he got to the southwest of Mount Tai, he saw four or five people on the mountain, wearing green open-arm sweatshirts.

古文：其余三四人，杂色服饰，乃从者也。碧衣持弹弓，弹古树上山鸟。一发而中，鸟堕树，从者争掩捉。
现代文：其余的服色很杂，看来是侍从。穿绿衣的人用弹弓射古树上的山鸟，一下就打中，鸟从树上掉下来，随从们抢上去捉鸟。
English: The rest of them are dressed in very mixed colours and appear to be attendants. The man in green shoots a mountain bird from an ancient tree with a slingshot and hits it right away. The bird falls from the tree and the attendants rush to catch it.

古文：王祐见前到山下人，尽下车却盖，向山齐拜。
现代文：王祐看见先到山下的人，都下车并除下伞盖，向着大山叩头齐拜。
English: Wang Yu saw that the people who came down the mountain first all got off the bus and took off their umbrella covers, bowing their heads to the mountain.

古文：比祐欲到，路人皆止祐下车：此三郎子、七郎子也。
现代文：等王祐到了山前时，朝拜的人都让王祐止步下车，说那就是泰山神的三公子七公子。
English: When Wang Yu arrived at the front of the mountain, the worshipers asked Wang Yu to stop and get off, saying that it was the three sons and seven sons of Mount Tai.

古文：遂拜碧衣人。
现代文：王祐一听，赶快向绿衣人叩拜。
English: Listen to Wang Yuichi, and quickly bow to the man in green.

古文：从者挥路人，令上车，路人踌躇，碧衣人自挥手，又令人上。
现代文：这时绿衣人的随从就驱赶路上的人，叫他们上车。绿衣人也挥手让人们快上车。
English: At this time, the entourage of the man in green drove away the people on the road and told them to get on the bus. The man in green also waved for people to get on the bus quickly.

古文：持弹弓，于殿西南，以弹弓斫地俯视，如有所伺。
现代文：后来他用弹弓砍地，一面砍一面低头看，好象在等什么。
English: Then he slashed at the ground with his slingshot, slashing as he looked down, as if waiting for something.

古文：见王祐，乃召之前曰：何为来？
现代文：看见王祐后，就召他往前来，问他做什么来了。
English: When she saw Wang Yu, she called him forward and asked him what he was doing.

古文：祐具以对。
现代文：王祐就实话实说。
English: Wang Yu just told the truth.

古文：碧衣曰：君本使已来矣，何必更为此行。
现代文：绿衣人说，你的主人已经在这里了，你何必还来为他祈求呢。
English: The man in green said, "Your master is already here, why do you need to pray for him?"

古文：要见使者乎？
现代文：你想看见你主人吗？
English: Do you want to see your master?

古文：遂命一人曰：引王祐见本使。
现代文：说着就命令一个人说：你领他去见他的主人。
English: And he commanded a certain man, saying, Carry him to his master.

古文：遂开西院门引入，见李纳荷校灭耳，踞席坐于庭。
现代文：那人领着王祐开了庙的西院门。王祐一看，主人李纳着刑具，耳朵已被割掉，正蹲在那里。
English: The man led Wang Yu to open the west gate of the temple. Wang Yu saw that his master, Li Na, was squatting there with a torture device and his ear had been cut off.

古文：王祐惊泣前伏，抱纳左脚，噬其肤。
现代文：王祐哭着趴到他面前，抱起李纳的左脚，咬了一口。
English: Wang Yu, crying, lay down in front of him, picked up Li Na's left foot, and took a bite.

古文：引者曰：王祐可退。
现代文：领他来的人说：王祐快退下！
English: The man who brought him said, "Wang Yu, hurry up and leave!"

古文：却引出。
现代文：把他领出了西院。
English: They led him out of the West Courtyard.

古文：碧衣犹在殿阶，谓祐曰：要见新使邪？
现代文：那绿衣人又问：想不想见见你的新主人？
English: The man in green asked again: Would you like to meet your new master?

古文：又命一人从东来，形状短阔，神彩可爱。碧衣曰：此君新使也。祐拜讫无言。
现代文：说着就从东面叫过来一个个子很矮很有风度的人对王祐说，这位就是你的新主人。王祐拜了一下，但干张嘴，半天也说不出话来。
English: As he spoke, a very short, very elegant man called from the east and said to Wang Yu, "This is your new master." Wang Yu bowed for a moment, but his mouth was so dry that he couldn't speak for half a day.

古文：祐似欠嚏而迟者久之，忽无所见，唯苍苔松柏，悄然严静。乃荐奠而回。
现代文：这时，眼前的一切忽然全都消失，只见庙里苍松翠柏，十分肃静，就赶快上了供祭祀了一番，然后就赶路回来。
English: At this time, everything in front of my eyes suddenly disappeared. I only saw the pines and cypresses in the temple, which was very quiet. I quickly went to offer sacrifices, and then rushed back.

古文：见纳，纳呼入卧内。
现代文：见了李纳后，李纳把他叫到内室，问王祐情况怎样。
English: After seeing Li Na, Li Na called him to the inner room and asked Wang Yu how things were going.

古文：问王祐，祐但以荐奠毕，掷樗蒲投，具得吉兆告纳。纳曰：祐何不实言？
现代文：王祐说已经祭祀过了，也抽了签占了卜，都很吉利。李纳说，为什么不把实情告诉我？
English: Wang Yu said that they had already made a sacrifice, and they had also drawn lots to tell fortunes, which was very lucky. Li Na said, "Why don't you tell me the truth?"

古文：何故噬吾足？
现代文：你为什么咬我的脚？
English: Why did you bite my foot?

古文：于是举足，乃祐所噬足迹。
现代文：说着伸出脚来，王祐果然看见脚上留着自己咬的牙印。
English: As he said this, he stretched out his foot, and Wang Yu saw the bite marks on his foot.

古文：祐顿首，具以实告。
现代文：王祐赶快叩头告罪，把实情都说了出来。
English: Wang Yu quickly bowed down and pleaded guilty and told the truth.

古文：纳曰：适见新使为谁？
现代文：李纳说：你看见的新主人是谁？
English: Li Na said: Who is the new owner you saw?

古文：祐曰：见则识，不知其名也。
现代文：王祐说：我不知道他的名字，但看见本人我能认出来。
English: Wang Yu said, "I don't know his name, but I can recognize him when I see him."

古文：纳乃召三人出，至师古，曰：此是也。
现代文：李纳就叫出三个人来。王祐就指出其中的帅古就是。
English: Li Na called out three people. Wang Yu pointed out that one of them was Shuai Gu.

古文：纲遂授以后事，言毕而卒。
现代文：李纳就向师古交待后事，交待完了立刻就死了。
English: Li Na told Shigu about the aftermath, and died immediately after telling him.

古文：王祐初见纳荷校，问曰：仆射何故如此？
现代文：当时在庙里王祐看见李纳戴着刑具时，曾问他：老爷为什么这样惨？
English: At that time, when Wang Yu saw Li Na wearing a torture device in the temple, he asked him: Why is the master so miserable?

古文：纳曰：平生为臣之辜也，盖不得已如何。
现代文：李纳说：这是因为我平日做官犯下的罪孽，现在我还有什么可说的呢？
English: Li Na said, "This is because of the sins I committed in my daily life as an official. What else can I say now?"

古文：崔汾
现代文：崔汾
English: Choi Min-soo

古文：澧泉尉崔汾，仲兄居长安崇贤里。
现代文：澧泉县尉崔汾的二哥住在长安崇贤里。
English: The second brother of Quanquan County Lieutenant Cui Yao lived in Chongxian Village, Chang'an.

古文：夏夜，乘凉于庭际。
现代文：夏天夜晚，在院子边上乘凉。
English: On a summer evening, enjoying the cool breeze on the edge of the courtyard.

古文：月色方午，风过，觉有异香。俄闻南垣土动簌簌，崔生意其蛇鼠也。
现代文：月上中天时，一阵风飘来一股奇特的香气，同时听见南墙上的土唰唰地掉落，心想大概是蛇鼠之类，却忽然看见一个道士。
English: When the moon was in the middle of the sky, a gust of wind brought a strange aroma. At the same time, I heard the mound on the south wall fall, thinking it was probably a snake or rat, but suddenly I saw a Taoist.

古文：忽见一道士，大言曰：大好月色。崔惊惧避之。
现代文：那道士大声说，多好的月色啊！崔生吓得赶快躲进屋里。
English: The Taoist loudly said, "What a beautiful moon! Cui Sheng was so scared that he quickly hid inside the house."

古文：道士缓步庭中，年可四十，风仪清古。
现代文：道士却慢慢走到院中，看样有四十岁，风度优雅很象古代人。
English: However, the Taoist priest slowly walked into the courtyard, looking like a forty-year-old, with an elegant demeanor very much like the ancients.

古文：良久，妓女十余。排大门而入，轻绡翠翘，艳色绝世。
现代文：过了半天又有十几个能歌善舞的女子推开大门进了院，个个穿着转纱的衣服，戴着珠翠首饰，娇艳绝伦。
English: Half a day later, more than a dozen women who could sing and dance pushed open the gate and entered the courtyard. They were all dressed in embroidered clothes, wearing pearlescent jewelry, and were extremely beautiful.

古文：有从者具香茵，列坐月下。
现代文：仆从铺下坐垫，大家都坐在月下。
English: The servants spread out cushions, and everyone sat under the moon.

古文：崔生疑其妖魅，以枕击门惊之。
现代文：崔生怀疑是些妖怪，就用枕头敲打门吓他们。
English: Suspecting they were monsters, Cui Sheng banged on the door with a pillow to scare them away.

古文：道士小顾，怒曰：我以此差静，复贪月色。初无延伫之意，敢此粗率。
现代文：道士四外稍稍看了一下，生气地说，我看这里安静，想在这里赏一赏月，并没有长住在这里的意思，为什么这么粗鲁无礼！
English: The Taoist priest glanced around and said angrily, "I think it's quiet here. I want to enjoy the moon here. I don't mean to live here for a long time. Why are you so rude!"

古文：乃厉声曰：此处有地界耶？
现代文：又怒喝一声，这里有没有管事的？
English: He shouted angrily, "Isn't there anyone in charge here?"

古文：欻有二人，长才三尺，巨首儋耳，唯伏其前。
现代文：立刻就有两个大头小耳三尺多长的小鬼冒出来，伏在道士面前。
English: Immediately, two three-foot-tall, big-headed, small-eared imps emerged and prostrated themselves in front of the Taoist.

古文：道士颐指崔生所止曰：此人合有亲属入阴籍，可领来。
现代文：道士指指崔生所在的屋子说，这家有没有在阴间的人，给我带来！
English: The Taoist pointed to the room where Cui Sheng was staying and said, "Is there someone in the underworld in this house? Bring him to me!"

古文：二人趋出。俄见其父母及兄悉至，卫者数人，捽拽批抶之。道士叱曰：我在此，敢纵子无礼乎？
现代文：两个鬼跪下去，不一会就把崔生已经死去多年的父母和大哥带了上来，周围押送的人拳打脚踢又推又拽。道士责骂说，我在这里，你们竟敢纵容儿子放肆吗？
English: The two ghosts knelt down, and soon brought up Cui Sheng's parents and elder brother, who had been dead for many years. The people who escorted them around punched, kicked, pushed, and pulled. The priest scolded, "Here I am, how dare you indulge your son's impudence?"

古文：父母叩头曰：幽明隔绝，诲责不及。
现代文：崔生的父母叩头说，阴阳隔绝，我们想教育责备都是不可能的呀。
English: Cui Sheng's parents kowtowed and said that it was impossible for us to educate and reproach if the yin and yang were isolated.

古文：道人叱遣之。复顾二鬼曰：捉此疑人来。
现代文：道士让把他们押下去，又对两个鬼说，把那个可疑的家伙带来！
English: The Taoist asked them to hold them down, and told the two ghosts to bring the suspicious guy!

古文：二鬼跳及门，以赤物如弹丸，遥投崔生口中，乃细赤绠也。
现代文：二鬼跳到门边，拿了一个象弹丸般的红色东西，远远的扔进崔生的嘴里，原来是红色的细绳子，崔生就象鱼似地被钩出来了。
English: The two ghosts jumped to the door, took a red thing like a projectile, and threw it far into Cui Sheng's mouth. It turned out to be a red string. Cui Sheng was hooked out like a fish.

古文：遂钓出于庭，又叱辱。崔惊失音，不得自理，崔仆妾悉哭泣。
现代文：道士对崔生辱骂斥责，崔生吓得说不出话来，没法为自己辩护。崔家的僮仆妻妾也都哭号起来。
English: The Taoist abused and reprimanded Cui Sheng. Cui Sheng was too scared to speak and could not defend himself. The servants, wives and concubines of the Cui family also cried.

古文：其妓罗拜曰：彼凡人，因讶仙官无状而至，似非大过。
现代文：这时，道士周围的一位舞伎求情说，他是个凡人，仙官您突然到这里，怎能不害怕，这不算什么大错，原谅了他吧。
English: At this time, one of the dancers around the Taoist begged for mercy, saying, "He is a mortal. You, an immortal, have suddenly come here. How can you not be afraid? This is not a big mistake. Please forgive him."

古文：怒解，乃拂衣由大门而去。
现代文：道士才不生气了，一甩衣袖出门而去。
English: The Taoist did not get angry and left the house with a wave of his sleeve.

古文：崔某病如中恶，五六日方差。
现代文：崔生大病了一场，五六天才稍稍好转。
English: Cui Sheng fell seriously ill and took five or six days to get better.

古文：因迎祭酒醮谢，亦无他。
现代文：病后立刻设道场摆酒祭祀谢罪，后来再没发生什么事。
English: Immediately after his illness, he set up a dojo to hold a wine-sacrifice to atone for his sins. Later, nothing happened.

古文：崔生初隔隙见亡兄，以帛抹唇，如损状。
现代文：当时，崔生从门缝里往外偷看时，发现小鬼把他的亡兄带上来时，亡兄用手帕擦嘴唇，好象嘴唇破了，仆人们也很奇怪。
English: At that time, when Cui Sheng peeked out from the crack of the door, he found that when the imp brought up his deceased brother, the deceased brother wiped his lips with a handkerchief, as if his lips were broken, and the servants were also strange.

古文：仆使共讶之，一婢泣曰：儿郎就木之时，而衣忘开口。其时匆匆就剪，误伤下吻。
现代文：这时一个丫环哭着说，当时他装入棺材时，盖脸的而衣忘了开口，我匆忙给剪开，剪子误伤了他的下唇，别人并没看见。
English: At this time, a maid cried and said that when he was loaded into the coffin, he covered his face and forgot to open his mouth, I hastily cut it open, the scissors accidentally injured his lower lip, others did not see it.

古文：然旁人无见者，不知幽冥中二十余年，尤负此苦。
现代文：没想到他在阴间二十多年了伤口还没好，还在受罪啊！
English: I had no idea that he had been in the underworld for more than twenty years, that his wound was still not healed, and that he was still suffering!

古文：辛秘
现代文：辛秘
English: Sinful secret

古文：辛秘五经擢第后，常州赴婚。
现代文：辛秘赶考五次考中后，到常州去结婚。
English: After cramming for the exam five times, she went to Changzhou to get married.

古文：行至陕，因息于树阴。
现代文：走到陕县时，在树阴下歇息。
English: When I got to Shaanxi, I rested under the shade of a tree.

古文：旁有乞儿箕坐，痂面虮衣。
现代文：旁边有一个小乞丐蹲坐着，满脸疮疤，衣服上净是虱子。
English: Next to him, a small beggar squats, his face covered with scars, his clothes covered with lice.

古文：访辛行止，辛不对即去，乞儿迹随之。
现代文：乞丐问辛要到那里去，辛不理他起身走了，乞丐就也跟着走。
English: The beggar asked Sin where he wanted to go. Sin ignored him, got up and left, and the beggar followed.

古文：辛马劣，不能相远，乞儿强言不已。
现代文：辛秘的马不好，走不快，那乞丐一直跟着和他说话。
English: Spicy horse is not good, not easy to walk, the beggar has been talking to him.

古文：前及一绿衣者，辛揖而与之俱行里余。
现代文：这时前面有个穿绿的人，辛秘赶上他互相认识后就一同走。
English: At this time, there is a person wearing green in front of him. After getting to know each other, they walk together.

古文：绿衣者忽前马骤去，辛怪之，独言：此人何忽如是？
现代文：走了一里多地，那绿衣人忽然打马急驰而去。辛秘很奇怪，自言自语说，这人忙的是什么！
English: After walking for more than a mile, the man in green suddenly whipped his horse and galloped away. It was very strange, he said to himself, what is this man busy with!

古文：乞儿曰：彼时至，岂自由乎？
现代文：那小乞丐搭话说：他到点了就能自由吗？
English: The little beggar said, "Will he be free when the time comes?"

古文：辛觉语异，始问之曰：君言时至何也？
现代文：辛秘觉得这话挺怪，就问乞丐，你说什么到时间了？
English: She secretly thought this was a strange thing to say, so she asked the beggar, "What do you mean it's time?"

古文：乞儿曰：少顷当自知之。
现代文：乞丐说，等一会儿你自然会知道。
English: The beggar said, wait a minute, you'll find out.

古文：将及店，见数十人拥店门，问之，乃绿衣者卒矣。
现代文：辛秘刚到一个旅店前，见几十个人拥在店门前，一问，说是那个绿衣人死了。
English: Just before arriving at an inn, Xin Bai saw dozens of people huddled in front of the door of the inn. When she asked, she was told that the man in green had died.

古文：辛惊异，遽卑下之，因解衣衣之，脱乘乘之。
现代文：辛秘十分惊讶，顿时就对乞丐十分客气，脱下自己的衣服给乞丐穿，又把自己的马让给乞丐骑。
English: Surprised, she was very polite to the beggar. She took off her clothes and let the beggar wear them. She also let the beggar ride her horse.

古文：乞儿初无谢意，语言往往有精义。
现代文：乞丐没有感谢，但常对辛秘说些意味深长的话。
English: Beggars don't say thank you, but they often say something meaningful to the poor.

古文：至汴，谓辛曰：某止是矣，公所适何事也？
现代文：到了汴州，乞丐对辛秘说，我就到此停下了。
English: When they arrived in Zhangzhou, the beggar said to Xinhai, "I'll stop here."

古文：辛以娶约语之。
现代文：你去那要干什么呀？
English: What are you doing there?

古文：乞儿笑曰：公士人，业不可止此行。
现代文：辛秘就说自己要去结婚。乞丐笑了笑说，你是读书人，当然不会信我的话而不去结婚。
English: The beggar smiled and said, "You're a reader, of course you won't believe me and not get married."

古文：然非君妻，公婚期甚远。
现代文：但我告诉你，你要和他结婚的女人并不是你的妻子，你的婚期还远着呢。
English: But I tell you, the woman you are going to marry is not your wife, and your wedding day is still far away.

古文：隔一日，乃扛一器酒与辛别，指相国寺刹曰：及午而焚，可迟此而别。
现代文：第二天，乞丐扛了一坛子酒来为辛秘饯别，并指着附近的相国寺说，今天中午它就会着火，它着火后你再走。
English: The next day, the beggar carried a jar of wine to say goodbye to Xinpi, and pointed to the nearby Shokoku Temple, saying that it would catch fire at noon today, and that you would leave after it caught fire.

古文：如期，刹无故火发，坏其相轮。
现代文：到了中午，相国寺无缘无故的着了火，火把相国神象的相轮都烧坏了。
English: At noon, Shokoku-ji Temple caught fire for no reason at all, and the fire destroyed the wheel of the Shokoku deity.

古文：临去，以绫帊复赠辛，带有一结，语辛：异时有疑，当发视也。
现代文：临分别时，小乞丐送给辛秘一个绸手帕做的包，包用带子捆着。
English: When they were about to part, the little beggar gave her a bag made of a silk handkerchief, tied with a ribbon.

古文：积二十余年，辛为谓南尉，始婚裴氏。
现代文：乞丐说，以后你如果有什么不明白的事，就打开这个包看吧。过了二十年，辛秘任谓南尉时，才与一个姓裴的女子结婚。
English: The beggar said, "In the future, if there is anything you don't understand, just open this bag and read it." Twenty years later, when Xinhai was appointed as a Southern Lieutenant, he married a woman with the surname Pei.

古文：洎裴生日，会亲宾客，忽忆乞儿之言。解帊复结，得幅纸，大如手板，署曰：辛秘妻河东裴氏，某月日生。
现代文：裴氏过生日时，辛秘请来宾客亲友，忽然想起当年小乞丐的话，就把那绸包打开，里面是手掌大的一块纸片，上面写着辛秘妻河东裴氏，某月某日生一点也不差。
English: On Pei's birthday, Xin secretly invited guests including relatives and friends. Suddenly remembering the words of the little beggar of that year, he opened the silk bag. Inside was a palm-sized piece of paper, on which was written Xin's wife, Hedong Pei, who was born on a certain day of a certain month.

古文：乃其日也。辛计别乞儿之日，妻尚未生。
现代文：再一算，辛秘当年遇见小乞丐时，妻子还没出生呢。
English: By the way, my wife hadn't been born yet when I met the little beggar.

