古文：开运元年秋七月辛未朔，帝御崇元殿，大赦天下，改天福九年为开运元年。
现代文：开运元年秋七月一日，少帝驾临崇元殿，大赦天下，改天福九年为开运元年。
English: On the first day of July in the autumn of the first year of the movement, the young emperor drove to the Chongyuan Palace to grant amnesty to the world and change the nine years of good fortune to the first year of the movement.

古文：河北诸州，曾经契丹蹂践处，与免今年秋税。
现代文：河北各州，曾经被契丹践踏的地方，免除今年秋税。
English: The provinces of Hebei, once trampled on by the Khitan, are exempt from this year's autumn tax.

古文：诸军将士等第各赐优给。
现代文：各军将士依等第各赐予优厚的礼物，各州郡征借钱币布帛，赦书到达的当日起，停止征收。
English: The generals and soldiers of each army will be given generous gifts according to their ranks, and each state and county will borrow money and cloth, and stop collecting from the day the pardon letter arrives.

古文：诸州率借钱帛，赦书到日，画时罢征，出一千贯已上者与免科徭，一万贯已上者与授本州上佐云。是日宣赦未毕，会大雷雨，匆遽而罢。
现代文：借出一千贯以上的人免除科税徭役，借出一万贯以上的人授予本州上佐等等。这天宣谕赦书还未结束，碰上雷阵大雨，只好匆匆收场。
English: Those who lent more than 1,000 kan were exempted from tax collection, and those who lent more than 10,000 kan were awarded the title of Honshu colonel, and so on. On this day, the announcement of forgiveness was not yet over, but when it was raining heavily, it had to be closed in a hurry.

古文：丙戌，以前金州节度使田武为沧州节度使兼北面行营步军右厢都指挥使，以前相州节度使郭谨为鄜州节度使。十二月己亥朔，幸皋门，射中白兔。
现代文：当时京城被雷震死的有几百人，明德门内震落了石龙的头部，有识之士认为石是皇族的姓，这可能是非常不祥的预兆。八月一日，少帝委派十五位将领抵御契丹。九月一日，日蚀。二十三日，太原上奏，代州刺史白文珂在七里烽击败契丹，斩杀了千余名敌兵，活捉将校七十几人。十二月一日，少帝幸临皋门，射中白兔。
English: At that time, several hundred people in Beijing were killed by lightning, and the head of the stone dragon shook inside the Mingde Gate. People of insight believed that the stone was the surname of the royal family, which could be a very ominous omen. On August 1, the young emperor appointed fifteen generals to resist the Khitan. On September 1, the eclipse. On the 23rd, Taiyuan played, and the daizhou assassin Shi Baiwenke defeated the Khitan in seven miles, killed more than a thousand enemy soldiers, and captured more than seventy officers alive. On December 1, the young emperor was lucky to reach the gate and shot the white rabbit.

古文：癸丑，福州节度使硃文进加同平章事，封闽国王。
现代文：十五日，福州节度使朱文进加官同平章事，封为闽国王。
English: On the 15th day of the Fuzhou Festival, Zhu Wenjin was promoted to the same level as the official and was named the king of the country.

古文：丁巳，青州杨光远降。
现代文：二十九日，青州杨光远投降。
English: On the 29th, Yang Guangyuan of Qingzhou surrendered.

古文：光远子承勋等斩观察判官邱涛、牙将白延祚、杨赡、杜延寿等首级，送于招讨使李守贞，乃纵火大噪，劫其父处于私第，以城纳款，遣即墨县令王德柔贡表待罪。
现代文：杨光远的儿子杨承勋等斩下观察判官邱涛，牙将白延祚、杨赡、杜延寿等的头颅，送往招讨使李守贞，又放火大声呐喊，劫持他的父亲杨光远，关入私宅，开城归顺，并派即墨县令王德柔进表等候治罪。
English: Yang Guangyuan's son, Yang Chengxun, and others cut down the observation judge, Qiu Tao, and sent the heads of Bai Yanjun, Yang Yan, Du Yanshu, etc. to recruit Li Shuzhen, and set fire to shout loudly, kidnapped his father, Yang Guangyuan, locked up in a private house, surrendered, and sent Jimo County to Wang De Rong to wait for the crime.

古文：杨光远亦遣节度判官杨麟奉表请死。诏释之。
现代文：杨光远也派节度判官杨麟进表请求处斩，少帝下诏予以赦免。
English: Yang Guangyuan also sent Yang Linjin, the judge of the festival, to request the execution, and the young emperor issued an edict to pardon him.

古文：是月，契丹耶律德光与赵延寿领全军入寇，围恆州，分兵陷鼓城、藁城、元氏、高邑、昭庆、宁晋、蒲泽、栾城、柏乡等县，前锋至邢州，河北诸州告急。诏张从恩、马全节、安审琦率师屯邢州，赵在礼屯鄴都。
现代文：闰十二月二日，任命杨承信为右羽林将军，杨承祚为右骁骑卫将军，他们都是杨光远的儿子，先前到京城请求治罪，所以特恩授这些官职。五日，李守贞上奏，杨光远去世，当初，杨光远上表归顺朝廷之后，少帝因为杨光远刚归附朝廷，打算设法保全他，舆论认为： 岂有反叛罪状滔天而获赦免的道理！ 
English: On the second day of leap December, Yang Chengxin was appointed as the general of the right feather forest and Yang Chengyao as the general of the right eagle cavalry. They were both sons of Yang Guangyuan, who had previously gone to Beijing to plead for punishment, so Tern conferred these official positions. On the fifth day, Li Shouzhen played the first violin, and Yang Guangyuan died. At the beginning, after Yang Guangyuan returned to the imperial court, the young emperor intended to try to protect him because Yang Guangyuan had just returned to the imperial court. Public opinion thought: Is there a reason for being pardoned for the heinous crime of rebellion?

古文：开运二年春正月戊戌朔，帝不受朝贺，不豫故也。
现代文：于是少帝命令李守贞就便处置，李守贞便派人杀死了杨光远，并以病逝上奏朝廷。开运二年春正月一日，少帝没有接受百官朝贺，是因为身体不适的原因。
English: As a result, the young emperor ordered Li Shouzhen to deal with it. Li Shouzhen then sent someone to kill Yang Guangyuan and reported his death to the imperial court. On the first day of the second year of the Spring Festival, the young emperor did not accept the congratulations of the officials, because of physical discomfort.

古文：己亥，张从恩部领兵士自邢州退至相州，人情震恐。
现代文：二日，张从恩带领军队从邢州退守相州，人心震惊。
English: On the second day, Zhang Congen led the army to retreat from Zhangzhou to the defense of Xiangzhou, shocking the people.

古文：赵在礼还屯澶州，马全节归鄴都，遣右神武统军张彦泽屯黎阳，诏西京留守景延广将兵守胡梁渡。
现代文：赵在礼回守澶州，马全节回归邺都，少帝派右神武统军张彦泽驻守黎阳，下令让西京留守景延广率兵驻守胡梁渡。
English: Zhao stayed in Bozhou during the Li Hui Festival, Ma Quanzhong returned to Badu, the young emperor sent Zhang Yanze of the United Right Divine Martial Army to stay in Liyang, and ordered Jing Yanguang to stay in Xijing and lead his troops to stay in Hu Liangdu.

古文：契丹寇邢州。
现代文：契丹侵犯邢州。
English: Khitan invade Zhangzhou.

古文：诏滑州节度使皇甫遇率兵赴邢州，马全节赴相州。
现代文：六日，滑州上奏，这个月的二日到四日，相州路烽火不传。
English: On the 6th day of the month, the music was played in Slanting, and from the 2nd to the 4th day of the month, no bonfires were lit in Sanzhou Road.

古文：至鄴都，遇辽军数万，且战且却，至榆林店，辽军继至，遇与彦超力战百余合，遇马毙步战，安审琦引骑兵逾水以救，辽军乃还。是夜，张从恩引军退保黎阳，唯留五百人守安阳河桥。
现代文：八日，少帝康复进用常膳。契丹侵犯氵名、磁两州以及邺都的西北州界，所在官员向朝廷告急。十五日，朝廷军队与契丹在相州北部的安阳河上相持不下，皇甫遇、慕容彦超率领前锋与敌军骑兵在榆林店展开战斗，皇甫遇的战马被流矢射中，仅幸免于难。这天夜里，张从恩带兵退保黎阳，只留下五百人驻守安阳河桥梁。
English: On the 8th, the young emperor recovered and began to eat regular meals. The Khitan invaded the borders of the two provinces of Shannang and Magang and the northwestern province of Shandong, and the officials there sent an urgent message to the imperial court. On the 15th, the imperial army and the Khitan were unable to hold out on the Anyang River in the northern part of the same province. The emperor met with Murong Yanchao, who led the vanguard and fought with the enemy cavalry in the Yulin store. The horse that the emperor met with was shot by a stream of arrows, and only survived. On this night, Zhang Congun took the soldiers back to Liang

古文：既而知州符彦伦与军校谋曰： 此夜纷纭，人无固志，五百疲兵，安能守桥！ 
现代文：接着知州符彦伦与军校商议 ：这天夜晚战火纷乱，将士没有坚守的志向，五百疲惫士兵，怎能守住桥梁！ 
English: Next, Chizhou Fuyanlong and the military school discussed: this night, the war was in chaos, the soldiers did not have the ambition to hold on, five hundred tired soldiers, how could they hold the bridge!

古文：即抽入相州，婴城为备。
现代文：便抽身进入相州，绕城设防。
English: He then withdrew to Sangju and set up a defense around the city.

古文：至曙，贼军万余骑已阵于安阳河北，彦伦令城上扬旗鼓噪，贼不之测。
现代文：到天亮，贼兵一万多人已经在安阳河的北岸摆开阵势。符彦伦命令城墙上摇旗呐喊，贼兵不能猜测其中奥秘。
English: By dawn, more than ten thousand soldiers had taken up positions on the north bank of the Anyang River. Fu Yimin ordered the flags on the city walls to be waved and shouted. The soldiers could not guess the secret.

古文：至辰时，渡河而南，悉阵甲骑于城下，如攻城之状。
现代文：到上午八时，贼兵渡过安阳河向南进犯，把甲兵骑士陈列在城下，有如攻城之状。
English: By eight o'clock in the morning, the bandits had crossed the Anyang River and advanced southward, displaying the cavalry under the city, as if they were attacking the city.

古文：彦伦曰： 此敌将走矣。 
现代文：符彦伦说： 这些敌兵将要逃跑了。 
English: Fu Yanlun said, "These enemy soldiers are about to flee."

古文：乃出甲士五百于城北，张弓弩以待之，契丹果引去。
现代文：于是派五百甲士从城北出击，张开了弓弩来等待贼兵，契丹果然退兵离去。
English: So he sent five hundred soldiers from the north of the city to attack, opened their bows and arrows to wait for the bandits, and Qidan did indeed withdraw.

古文：当皇甫遇榆林战时，至晚敌众自相惊曰： 晋军悉至矣。 
现代文：当皇甫遇在榆林作战的时候，到了晚上敌兵相互惊扰说： 晋朝军队全部到达了。 
English: When the emperor and empress were fighting in Yulin, in the evening the enemy soldiers disturbed each other and said, "The entire Jin dynasty army has arrived."

古文：癸亥，以枢密直学士李穀为三司副使，判留司三司公事。
现代文：契丹国主在邯郸听说这一消息，就引兵向北逃去了，朝廷军队保住了黎阳。
English: When the Khitan sovereign heard this news in Zhai, he led his army north and fled. The imperial army saved Liyang.

古文：乙丑，车驾发离京师。是月，京城北壕春冰之上有文，若大树花叶，凡数十株，宛若图画，观者如堵。
现代文：二十四日，相州上奏，契丹抽兵后撤，那里乡村逃避贼寇的老百姓，已经被打发派遣回各自的家乡经营耕种。开始，少帝因不适初愈，不能亲率军旅出征，紧接着张从恩、马全节相继奏报贼兵充斥，恒州杜威奏告形势危急，少帝说 ：这群贼寇不平定，实难安寝，当率众一战，以救朔方百姓，如果迟疑不决，苟且偷安，那么大河以北，就会沦为寇贼的土地了。 
English: On the 24th, the news was reported from Sangju and the Khitan withdrew their troops. The villagers who had fled from the bandits had been sent back to their hometowns to work in agriculture. At first, the young emperor could not lead the army to go to war because he was not feeling well. Soon after, Zhang Cong'en and Ma Quanzi reported in succession that the army was full of bandits. Du Wei from Hengzhou reported that the situation was critical. The young emperor said, "This band of bandits is not stable and it is really difficult to sleep peacefully. We should lead a war to save the people of Shuo. If we hesitate and do nothing, then the north of

古文：二月戊辰朔，车驾次滑州。
现代文：当天就命各将点阅兵士，商定出征计策。二十四日，少帝下诏御驾亲征。二月一日，御驾到达滑州。
English: On the same day, he ordered all generals to read the soldiers and agree on a strategy for conscription. On the 24th, the young emperor issued an imperial edict to personally enlist. On February 1, he arrived in Leshou.

古文：己巳，渡浮桥，幸黎阳劳军，至晚还滑州。
现代文：二日，渡过浮桥，到黎阳慰劳部队，晚上才回滑州。
English: On the second day, they crossed the pontoon bridge to the Liyang labor camp, and only returned to Liaozhou in the evening.

古文：以沧州节度使田武充东北面行营都部署。
现代文：任沧州节度使田武为东北面行营都部署。
English: The appointment of Cangzhou Festival made Tianwu deploy to the northeast.

古文：甲戌，幸澶州，以景延广为随驾马步军都钤辖。
现代文：七日，到达澶州，以景延广为随驾马步军都钤辖。
English: On the seventh day, they arrived in Bozhou, with Jingyuanguang as the starting point for the horse-drawn infantry.

古文：丙子，大阅诸军于戚城，帝亲临之。
现代文：九日，在戚城大阅各军，少帝亲临。
English: On the 9th, there was a grand review of the armies in Qi Cheng, which the young emperor attended in person.

古文：戊寅，北面行营副招讨使马全节、行营都监李守贞、右神武统军张彦泽等以前军先发。
现代文：十一日，北面行营副招讨使马全节、行营都监李守贞、右神武统军张彦泽等率领前军先出发。
English: On the 11th day of the month, the Northern Campaign Deputy Summoning Envoy Ma Quanzhi, the Campaign Commissioner Li Shuzhen, and the Right Shenwu Unification Army Zhang Yanze led the front army to set off.

古文：己卯，以许州节度使符彦卿为北面行营马军都指挥使，以左神武统军潘环为北面行营步军都指挥使。
现代文：十二日，以许州节度使符彦卿为北面行营马军都指挥使。以左神武统军潘环为北面行营步军都指挥使。
English: On the twelfth day of the Xuzhou Festival, Fu Yanqing was appointed as the commander of the horse army marching north, and Pan Huan of the Zuo Shenwu United Army was appointed as the commander of the foot army marching north.

古文：辛巳，幸杨村故垒。
现代文：十四日，驾临杨村旧时战场。
English: On the 14th, they arrived at the old battlefield of Yangcun.

古文：符彦卿、皇甫遇、李殷率诸军进发。
现代文：符彦卿、皇甫遇、李殷率领各军进发。
English: Fu Yanqing, Wang Fu Rong and Li Yin led the armies to march forward.

古文：以左散骑常侍边光范为枢密直学士。
现代文：诏令黄河以北各州，凡契丹贼寇所经过的地方，官民遭受杀害的，由所在地收埋，酌情祭奠。
English: The imperial edict ordered that officials and civilians who were killed in the provinces north of the Yellow River and in the places where the Qidan bandits passed through should be buried according to their location, with appropriate memorials.

古文：诏河北诸州，应蕃骑经由之地，吏民遭杀害者，委所在收瘗，量事祭奠。诏恆州杜威与马全节等会合进军。
现代文：诏令恒州杜威与马全节等会合进军。
English: The imperial edict ordered Hengzhou Dewei and Ma Quanzhong to march together.

古文：丙戌，幸铁丘阅马，因幸赵在礼、李从温军。
现代文：十九日，驾临铁丘检阅战马，顺便看望赵在礼、李从温部队。
English: On the 19th, he arrived at the Iron Hill to inspect the horses, and also visited the troops of Zhao Zaili and Li Congwen.

古文：是日大雪。
现代文：当日大雪。
English: It snowed heavily that day.

古文：戊子，安审琦、梁汉璋领兵北征。
现代文：二十一日，安审琦、梁汉璋领兵北征。
English: On the twenty-first day, An Ji and Liang Han led the Northern Expedition.

古文：府州防御使折从阮奏，部领兵士攻围契丹胜州，降之，见进兵趋朔州。
现代文：府州防御使折从阮上奏，率领士兵围攻契丹胜州，降伏了他们，现进军朔州。
English: Fuzhou's defense envoy, Nguyn Văn Thiệu, led the soldiers to besiege Qui Tn Sn Province, surrendered to them, and is now marching into Su Province.

古文：甲午，以河中节度使安审琦为北面行营马步军都虞候，许州节度使符彦卿充马步军左厢都指挥使，滑州节度使皇甫遇充马步军右厢都指挥使，侍卫马军都指挥使梁汉璋充马军左右厢都指挥使，侍卫步军都指挥使李殷充步军左右厢都指挥使，左神武统军张彦泽充马军左右厢都排阵使，右神武统军潘环充步军左右厢排阵使。
现代文：二十七日，以河中节度使安审琦为北面行营马军步军都虞候，许州节度使符彦卿兼马步军左厢都指挥使，滑州节度使皇甫遇兼马步军右厢都指挥使，侍卫马步军都指挥使梁汉璋兼马军左右厢都指挥使，侍卫步军都指挥使李殷兼步军左右厢都指挥使，左神武统军潘彦泽兼马军左右厢都排阵使，右神武统军潘环兼步军左右厢排阵使。
English: On the 27th, with the mid-Hebei Festival, the Anxiu Festival made Anji County the northward marching horse army marching troop commander, the Huzhou Festival made Fu Yanqing and the horse marching troop left compartment commander, the Slanting Festival made Huang Fu and the horse marching troop right compartment commander, the bodyguard horse marching troop all commander made Liang Han and the horse army left and right compartment commander, the bodyguard marching troop all commander made Li Yin and the horse marching troop left and right compartment commander, the left Shenwu Unification Army Pan Yan Ze and the horse army left and right compartment commander, the right Shenwu Unification Army Pan

古文：丙申，以端明殿学士、尚书户部侍郎冯玉为户部尚书，充枢密使。
现代文：二十九日，以端明殿学士、尚书户部侍郎冯玉为户部尚书、兼枢密使。
English: On the 29th, Feng Yu, a scholar of Duanming Palace and an attendant of the Household Division of the Imperial Household Agency, was appointed as the Household Division of the Imperial Household Agency and a Privy Counsellor.

古文：三月戊戌，契丹陷祁州，刺史沈斌死之。
现代文：三月二日，契丹攻陷祁州，祁州刺史沈斌殉国。
English: On March 2nd, the Khitan invaded and occupied Zhangzhou. Shenbin, the governor of Zhangzhou, was martyred.

古文：乙巳，左补阙袁范先陷契丹，自贼中逃归。
现代文：九日，左补阙袁范先原陷于契丹，现从契丹逃回。
English: On the 9th, Yuan Fanxian, a left-handed batsman, was originally trapped in Khitan and has now fled back from Khitan.

古文：杜威奏，与李守贞、马全节、安审琦、皇甫遇部领大军赴定州。
现代文：杜威上奏，与李守贞、马全节、安审琦、皇甫遇率领大军奔赴定州。
English: Dewey led a large army to Dingzhou with Li Shuzhen, Ma Quanzhi, An Ti, and Huang Fuyu.

古文：易州刺史安审约奏，二月三日夜，差壮丁斫敌营，杀敌十余人。
现代文：易州刺史安审约报告，二月三日夜，派丁壮士兵斫杀敌营，杀死贼军一千多人。
English: According to the report of the Yizhou Zhishian Interrogation, on the evening of February 3, Ding Zhuang sent soldiers to fight and kill the enemy camp, killing more than a thousand thieves.

古文：是日，以符彦卿为北面行营马步军左右厢都排阵使，以皇甫遇为北面行营马步军左厢排阵使，以王周为马步军右厢排阵使。
现代文：同日，以符彦卿为北面行营马步军左右厢都排阵使，以皇甫遇为北面行营马步军左厢排阵使，以王周为马步军右厢排阵使。
English: On the same day, Fu Yanqing was appointed as the envoy for both the left and right side of the horse-and-foot troops marching to the north, Huan Fu Rong as the envoy for the left side of the horse-and-foot troops marching to the north, and Wang Zhou as the envoy for the right side of the horse-and-foot troops.

古文：丁未，畋于戚城，还幸景延广、安审信军。
现代文：十一日，在戚城狩猎。回时看望景延广、安审信部队。
English: On the 11th day, he went hunting in Qicheng. On his way back, he visited the troops of Jing Yanguang and An Jianxin.

古文：庚戌，王师攻泰州，刺史晋庭谦以城降。
现代文：十四日，晋军攻打泰州，泰州刺史晋庭谦献城投降。
English: On the 14th, the Jin army attacked Taizhou, and the city of Taizhou capitulated.

古文：易州奏，郎山塞将孙方简破契丹千余人，斩其将嘉哩相公，掳其妻以献。
现代文：易州上奏，郎山边塞将领孙方简打败契丹一千多人，杀死蕃将谐里相公，俘获他妻子献上。
English: At the Battle of Yizhou, Sun Fangyan, the general of the Langshan Border Defense Force, defeated more than a thousand Khitan soldiers, killed the warlord Yan Xili, and captured his wife to present to the emperor.

古文：甲寅，杜威奏，收复满城，获契丹首领默埒相公，并蕃汉兵士二千人。
现代文：十八日，杜威上奏，收复满城，俘获契丹首领没剌相公，以及蕃汉兵士二千人。
English: On the 18th, Dewey gave the go-ahead to recapture Manchukuo, capturing the Khitan leader, Muxing Xiangguo, as well as 2,000 Han soldiers.

古文：以前户部尚书李怿为兵部尚书。
现代文：十九日，杜威又上奏，收复遂城。
English: On the 19th, Dewey played again, and the city was recaptured.

古文：乙卯，杜威奏，收复遂城。
现代文：二十日再奏，大军从遂城退到满城。
English: On the 20th day, the great army retreated from Suicheng to Mancheng.

古文：丙辰奏，大军自遂城却退至满城。时敌将赵延寿部曲来降，言： 契丹主昨至古北口，幽州走报，汉军大下，收却泰州。寻下令诸部，令辎重入塞，轻骑却回。
现代文：当时贼将赵延寿投降的部下说 ：契丹国主昨天到达古北口、幽州时听到飞报，晋军大量杀来收复泰州，于是立即下令各部，令将辎重驮回塞外，轻骑退回。
English: At that time, the subordinates who surrendered Zhao Yanshou to the thieves said: When the Khitan sovereign arrived in Gubeikou and Yuzhou yesterday, he heard a report that the Jin army had killed a large number of people to recover Taizhou, so he immediately ordered the ministries to order the heavy ploughs to be taken back outside the province and the light horses to be returned.

古文：契丹率五万余骑，来势极盛，明日前锋必至，请为之备。 
现代文：契丹王率领五万多骑兵，来势汹汹，明天前锋部队必到，请做准备。 
English: The Khitan king is leading more than fifty thousand cavalry, and they are threatening. The vanguard troops will arrive tomorrow. Please prepare.

古文：杜威、李守贞谋曰： 我师粮运不继，深入贼疆，而逢大敌，亡之道也。
现代文：杜威，李守贞商议说 ：我军粮运跟不上，深入贼寇疆土，而遇上大敌，这是灭亡之道。
English: Dewey and Li Shouzhen discussed and said: Our army can't keep up with the grain transport, we go deep into the territory of the thieves and invaders, and encounter a great enemy, this is the way to ruin.

古文：不如退还泰州，观其兵势强弱而御之。 
现代文：不如退回泰州，视其兵力的强弱再抵御他。 
English: It would be better to retreat to Taizhou and then resist him according to the strength of his troops.

古文：军士皆以为然。
现代文：军士们都以为是。
English: The sergeants all thought it was.

古文：是日，还满城。
现代文：这天，退回满城。
English: On this day, I returned to Mangcheng.

古文：丁巳，至泰州。
现代文：二十一日，到泰州。
English: On the 21st, I arrived in Taizhou.

古文：戊午，契丹前锋已至。
现代文：二十二日，契丹前锋已到。
English: On the 22nd, the Khitan striker arrived.

古文：己未，大军发泰州而南，契丹踵其后。
现代文：二十三日，晋军离开泰州南回，契丹人跟踪而来。
English: On the 23rd, the Jin army left Taizhou for Nanhui, and the Khitan followed them.

古文：是日，次阳城。
现代文：当天，驻扎阳城。
English: On the same day, stationed in Yangcheng.

古文：庚申，敌骑如墙而来，我步军为方阵以御之。选劲骑击敌，斗二十余合，南行十余里，贼势稍却，渡白沟而去。
现代文：二十四日，契丹骑兵如城墙般压来，晋军步兵布设方阵抵御，挑选劲骑击贼，交战二十余合，南行十多里，贼势稍微退却，渡过白沟离去。
English: On the twenty-fourth day, the Khitan cavalry pressed forward like a city wall, and the infantry of the Jin army set up a square formation to resist, and selected a strong cavalry to attack the thieves. The battle lasted for more than twenty rounds and more than ten miles to the south. The thieves retreated slightly and crossed the white ditch to leave.

古文：辛酉，杜威召诸将议曰： 北主自来，实为勍敌，若不血战，吾辈何以求免。 
现代文：二十五日，杜威召集各将商议说 ：契丹国主亲自前来，实是我们的劲敌，若不血战一场，我们如何避开他们。 
English: On the 25th, Dewey called his generals together to discuss: "If the Khitan sovereign comes in person, he is indeed our great enemy. How can we avoid them without a bloody battle?"

古文：诸将然之。
现代文：诸将以为然。
English: The generals think so.

古文：是日，敌骑还绕官军，相去数里。
现代文：当日，敌人骑兵包围晋军，相隔数里。
English: On the same day, the enemy cavalry surrounded the Jin army, separated by several miles.

古文：敌众围绕，渐束其营。《宋史·药元福传》：晋师列方阵，设拒马为行寨，契丹以奇兵出阵后，断粮道。是日，东北风猛，扬尘折树。契丹主坐车中谓众曰： 汉军尽来，只有此耳，今日并可生擒，然后平定天下。 
现代文：第二天，晋军列阵而行，两军转战，杀声惊天动地，才行十多里，军中人马饥饿疲乏。二十七日，大军到白团卫村下营，人马都干渴，营中挖井，刚挖到水井就坍坏，兵士们取来泥巴挤出水来喝。这天，东北刮大风，扬起灰尘折断树木，契丹国主坐在战车中对部众说： 晋军全来，也仅如此罢了，今天都可活捉他们，然后再平定天下。 
English: The next day, the Jin army lined up and marched. The two armies turned to battle, the sound of killing was earth-shattering, and it took more than ten miles to march. The men and horses in the army were hungry and tired. On the 27th, the army went to the camp of Baiyunwei village. The men and horses were thirsty. A well was dug in the camp. As soon as the well was dug, it collapsed, and the soldiers took mud to squeeze out the water to drink. On this day, a strong wind blew from the northeast, raising dust and breaking trees. The Khitan sovereign sat in a chariot and said to the members: The Jin army has

古文：令下马拔鹿角，飞矢雨集。军士大呼曰： 招讨使何不用军，而令士卒虚死！ 
现代文：于是令下马拔起寨营鹿角，飞箭如雨聚集，晋军士兵大叫道 ：招讨使为何不进军，而让士卒枉死！ 
English: So he ordered his horse to pull up the camp antlers, and the arrows gathered like rain, and the Jin soldiers shouted: Why did you not march into the army, but let the soldiers die in vain!

古文：诸将咸请击之。杜威曰： 候风势稍慢，观其进退。 
现代文：众将都请出击，杜威说： 等风势稍缓，看情况再定进退。 
English: All generals are invited to attack, Dewey said: wait for the wind to slow down a bit, and then advance and retreat according to the situation.

古文：元福乃率麾下开拒马出战，诸将继至，契丹大败。
现代文：李守贞说： 这风有助于我，他们人多我们人少，在这天暗风狂之中，敌人不知我军有多少，如要等风停，我们就没有活着回去的了。 
English: Li Shouzhen said, "This wind is helpful to me. They have more men than we do. On this dark and stormy day, the enemy doesn't know how many troops we have. If we wait for the wind to die down, we won't make it back alive."

古文：时步骑齐进，追袭二十余里。至阳城东，贼军稍稍成列，我骑复击之，乃渡河而去。
现代文：于是高呼各军奋力杀贼，张彦泽、符彦卿、皇甫遇等领骑军奋勇攻击，风势更加猛烈，沙尘蔽日如夜，敌军于是大败。这时步军骑军齐头并进，直到阳城以东，贼军逐渐形成阵势，晋军骑兵又进攻他们，敌军于是渡过黄河而去。
English: As a result, all the armies shouted that they would fight hard to kill the thieves. Zhang Yanze, Fu Yanqing, and Wang Fu Rong led the cavalry to attack bravely. The wind was more violent, and the sand and dust covered the day like night. The enemy army was then defeated. At this time, the infantry and cavalry marched side by side until the east of Yangcheng. The thief army gradually formed a formation. The cavalry of the Jin army attacked them again, and the enemy army crossed the Yellow River.

古文：守贞曰： 今日危急极矣，幸诸君奋命，吾事获济。
现代文：李守贞说 ：今天危险极了，幸亏诸君奋勇拼命，我们才得胜。
English: Li Shouzhen said, "Today was extremely dangerous. Fortunately, thanks to your valiant efforts, we were able to win."

古文：两日以来，人马渴乏，今吃水之后，脚重难行，速宜收军定州，保全而还，上策也。 
现代文：两天以来，人马干渴疲乏，现在喝水之后，脚重难以行走，应赶快收军到定州，保全而回，这是上策。 
English: Since two days ago, people and horses have been thirsty and tired. Now, after drinking water, their feet are heavy and it is difficult to walk. It is best to quickly gather troops to Dingzhou and return safely.

古文：由是诸将整众而还。
现代文：因此各将整顿部队而回。
English: As a result, each returned to reorganize their forces.

古文：是时，契丹主坐车中，及败走，车行十余里，追兵既急，获一橐驼，乘之而走。
现代文：这时契丹国主坐在车上，当败逃时，乘马走了十多里，后面追兵又急，找到一匹骆驼，骑上它逃走。
English: At this time, the head of the Khitan state was sitting in a car. When he was defeated and fled, he walked more than ten miles on horseback, chasing the soldiers in the back and hurrying to find a camel and ride it to escape.

古文：乙丑，杜威等大军自定州班师入恆州。
现代文：二十八日，杜威等大军从定州班师，回到恒州。
English: On the 28th, Dewey and other troops returned to Hengzhou from Dingzhou.

古文：夏四月丙子，以车驾将还京，差官往西京告天地宗庙社稷。
现代文：夏四月十一日，因少帝将要回京，便派官吏前往西京禀告天地祭祀宗庙社稷。
English: On the 11th day of the 4th month of the summer, because the young emperor was about to return to Kyoto, officials were sent to West Kyoto to announce the opening of the Heaven and Earth Festival and the founding of a temple and shrine.

古文：辛巳，驾发澶州。
现代文：十六日，少帝从澶州出发回京。
English: On the 16th, the young emperor set out from Zhangzhou to return to Beijing.

古文：甲申，至京师，曲赦在京禁囚。
现代文：十九日，到达京师，赦免在京关押囚徒。
English: On the 19th, he arrived in Beijing and pardoned the prisoners held in Beijing.

