古文：蒋琬字公琰、零陵湘乡人也。
现代文：蒋琬，字公琰，零陵郡湘乡县人。
English: Jiang Yao, also known as Gong Yao, was from Xiangxiang County, Liling County.

古文：弱冠与外弟泉陵刘敏俱知名。
现代文：二十岁时跟表弟泉陵人刘敏一同出名。
English: He became famous at the age of 20 together with his cousin Liu Min, a native of Quanling.

古文：琬以州书佐随先主入蜀，除广都长。
现代文：蒋琬以州中书佐的身份跟随刘备进入蜀地，担任广都县县长。
English: Jiang Wei followed Liu Bei into Shu as the assistant secretary of the State Central Committee and served as the head of Guangdu County.

古文：先主尝因游观奄至广都，见琬众事不理，时又沈醉，先主大怒，将加罪戮。军师将军诸葛亮请曰： 蒋琬，社稷之器，非百里之才也。其为政以安民为本，不以脩饰为先，愿主公重加察之。 
现代文：刘备曾经在外出游玩时，突然来到广都县，看到蒋琬对各项事务都没有理睬，当时又喝得大醉，刘备很生气，就要将他问罪斩杀，军师将军诸葛亮请求说： 蒋琬有社稷之才，他的才干不只是管理一个百里的小县城，他的政策以安民为本，不以做表面文章为先，希望主公能好好加以考察。 
English: Once, when Liu Bei was out for a walk, he suddenly came to Guangdu County. He saw that Chiang Kai-shek had paid no attention to various matters. At that time, he was very drunk. Liu Bei was very angry and wanted to kill him. The army general Zhuge Liang pleaded: "Chiang Kai-shek has the ability to socialize. His ability is not just to manage a small county seat a hundred miles away. His policy is based on the safety of the people and does not focus on making superficial articles. I hope the Lord can examine it well."

古文：先主雅敬亮，乃不加罪，仓卒但免官而已。
现代文：刘备向来敬重诸葛亮，就没有给他治罪，只是在仓促间罢免他的官职而已。
English: Liu Bei had always held Zhuge Liang in high esteem, so he did not punish him, but hastily dismissed him from his post.

古文：琬见推之后，夜梦有一牛头在门前，流血滂沱，意甚恶之，呼问占梦赵直。直曰： 夫见血者，事分明也。牛角及鼻， 公 字之象，君位必当至公，大吉之徵也。 
现代文：蒋琬被免官之后，在夜里梦到有一头牛在门前，血流如注，蒋琬心中很厌恶，就叫来占梦的赵直问其中的缘由，赵直说： 见血是指事情分明，牛角和鼻子是公的意思，您的官位一定会到三公，这是大吉的征兆。 
English: After Chiang Kai-shek was removed from office, he dreamed in the night that there was a cow in front of his door, and the blood flowed like a note. Chiang Kai-shek was disgusted in his heart, so he called Zhao Zhi, who interpreted the dream, to ask the reason. Zhao Zhi said: Seeing the blood means that the matter is clear, and the horns and nose are public. Your official position will certainly reach the three kings, which is a sign of good luck.

古文：顷之，为什邡令。
现代文：不久他就担任了什邡县县令。
English: Soon he served as the Shifang County magistrate.

古文：先主为汉中王，琬入为尚书郎。
现代文：刘备自立为汉中王，蒋琬入朝担任尚书郎。
English: Liu Bei established himself as the king of the Han Dynasty, and Chiang Kai-shek entered the imperial court as Shang Shuro.

古文：建兴元年，丞相亮开府，辟琬为东曹掾。
现代文：建兴元年，丞相诸葛亮开建府衙，征召蒋琬为东曹掾。
English: In the first year of Jianxing, the chancellor Zhuge Liang began to build the prefectural government and recruited Jiang Yu as the East Cao Yu.

古文：举茂才，琬固让刘邕、阴化、庞延、廖淳，亮教答曰： 思惟背亲舍德，以殄百姓，众人既不隐於心，实又使远近不解其义，是以君宜显其功举，以明此选之清重也。 
现代文：蒋琬被推举为茂才，他坚决的让给刘邕、阴化、庞延、廖淳等人，诸葛亮在教令中回复说： 想到您离乡背井，为百姓奔走，众人内心不安，又不能让远近之人了解您的心意，所以应该显示出您的功劳来，表示这样的选拔是清廉和贵重的。 
English: Zhuge Liang replied in his edict: "Thinking of you leaving your hometown and running for the people, everyone is uneasy in their hearts, and you can't let people near and far know your intentions. Therefore, you should show your merit and show that such a selection is honest and valuable.

古文：迁为参军。
现代文：蒋晚升为参军。
English: Chiang was late to join the army.

古文：五年，亮住汉中，琬与长史张裔统留府事。
现代文：建兴五年，诸葛亮驻守汉中，蒋琬跟长史张裔同管府中事宜。
English: During the five years of Jianxing, Zhuge Liang was stationed in Hanzhong, and Chiang Kai-shek and Changshi Zhang Rong were in charge of the affairs of Fuzhong.

古文：八年，代裔为长史，加抚军将军。
现代文：建兴八年，蒋琬代替张裔担任长史，加为府军将军。
English: In the eighth year of Jianxing, Chiang Kai-shek replaced Zhang Zi as the long history, and was added as the general of the prefectural army.

古文：亮数外出，琬常足食足兵以相供给。
现代文：诸葛亮数次外出，蒋琬经常供应足够的粮食士兵。
English: Zhuge Liang went out several times, and Chiang Kai-shek often supplied soldiers with enough grain.

古文：亮每言： 公琰讬志忠雅，当与吾共赞王业者也。 
现代文：诸葛亮经常说： 公琰的志向在于忠贞雅正，他会和我一起帮助成就帝王之业的。 
English: Zhuge Liang often said: Gong Liang's aspiration is to be loyal and honest, and he will help me achieve the emperor's cause.

古文：密表后主曰： 臣若不幸，后事宜以付琬。 
现代文：暗中上表给后主说： 臣如果遭遇不幸，后事应该托付给蒋琬。 
English: He secretly wrote to his successor: If a vassal should meet with misfortune, he should entrust the aftermath to Chiang Kai-shek.

古文：亮卒，以琬为尚书令，俄而加行都护，假节，领益州刺史，迁大将军，录尚书事，封安阳亭侯。
现代文：诸葛亮去世后，朝廷任命蒋琬为尚书令，不久又加官行都护，让他持符节，兼任益州刺史，升任为大将军，录尚书事，封为安阳亭侯。
English: After the death of Zhuge Liang, the imperial court appointed Chiang Kai-shek as Shang Shuling (尚書令), and soon he was promoted to Guanxing (官行都護) to hold the Fu Festival (符节), concurrently held the post of Yizhou Sashishi (益州刺史), was promoted to General, recorded Shang Shuling (尚書事), and was given the title of Anyang Tinghou (安阳亭侯).

古文：时新丧元帅，远近危悚。琬出类拔萃，处群僚之右，既无戚容，又无喜色，神守举止，有如平日，由是众望渐服，延熙元年，诏琬曰： 寇难未弭，曹叡骄凶，辽东三郡苦其暴虐，遂相纠结，与之离隔。
现代文：当时元帅刚去世，远近的人都非常担忧，蒋琬出类拔萃，处于百官之上，既没有悲戚的神情，也没有欢悦的神色举止，神态一如往常，所以众人都渐渐佩服他。延熙元年，后主诏令蒋琬说： 贼寇还没消除，曹叡骄横凶蛮，辽东三郡苦于他的暴虐无道，所以互相联合，与魏朝分离。
English: At that time, the marshal had just died, and people near and far were very worried. Chiang Kai-shek was outstanding, above a hundred officials. He had neither a mournful look nor a joyful demeanor, and his demeanor was as usual, so everyone gradually admired him. In the first year of Yanxi, the empress ordered Chiang Kai-shek to say: The bandit has not been eliminated, Cao E is arrogant and ferocious, and the three counties in Liaodong suffer from his tyranny, so they are united and separated from the Wei Dynasty.

古文：叡大兴众役，还相攻伐。
现代文：曹叡大肆出兵，与其互相攻打。
English: Cao E sent out troops in large numbers, and they fought against each other.

古文：曩秦之亡，胜、广首难，今有此变，斯乃天时。
现代文：过去秦朝灭亡，陈胜、吴广首先发难，现在有了这样的变故，这是天意呀。
English: In the past, when the Qin Dynasty fell, Chen Sheng and Wu Guang were the first to face difficulties. Now, such a turn of events has occurred. This is the will of Heaven.

古文：君其治严，总帅诸军屯住汉中，须吴举动，东西掎角，以乘其衅。 
现代文：您应该治军严明，统率各军驻守汉中，一旦东吴有所出兵，就两国就构成东西犄角之势，伺机进攻。 
English: You should govern the army strictly and lead the army to garrison Hanzhong. Once Dongwu sends troops, the two countries will form an east-west angle and wait for an opportunity to attack.

古文：又命琬开府，明年就加为大司马。
现代文：又命蒋琬开建府衙，第二年就加官为大司马。
English: He also ordered Chiang Kai-shek to build a prefectural government, and the next year he was promoted to the post of chief secretary.

古文：东曹掾杨戏素性简略，琬与言论，时不应答。
现代文：东曹掾杨戏向来性情简单，蒋琬和他谈论，他有时也不回答。
English: Eastern Cao Pi Yang Ju has always been simple-minded. Jiang Chen talks to him, but he sometimes doesn't answer.

古文：或欲构戏於琬曰： 公与戏语而不见应，戏之慢上，不亦甚乎！ 
现代文：有人想在蒋琬面前构陷他说： 您和杨旭讲话，而他不回答，是对上级怠慢，不也太过分了吗？ 
English: Some people wanted to frame him in front of Chiang Kai-shek, saying, "You spoke to Yang Xu, but he didn't answer. Isn't that too much of a snub to your superiors?

古文：琬曰： 人心不同，各如其面；面从后言，古人之所诫也。
现代文：蒋琬说： 人心不同，就像容貌有差异，当面应承，背后非议，这是古人所告诫的。
English: Jiang Wei said: People's hearts are different, just like people's appearances are different. It is admonished by the ancients that people should be honest in front of others, but not criticize them behind their backs.

古文：戏欲赞吾是耶，则非其本心，欲反吾言，则显吾之非，是以默然，是戏之快也。 
现代文：杨戏想要赞成我的话，那就不是他的本心，如果要反对我的话，那就显出我的过错，所以沉默不答，这是杨戏的诚实啊。 
English: If Yang Xiu wants to approve of my words, then it is not his true heart. If he wants to oppose me, then it shows my fault, so he is silent and does not answer. This is Yang Xiu's honesty.

古文：又督农杨敏曾毁琬曰： 作事愦愦，诚非及前人。 
现代文：又有督农杨敏经常曾经诽谤蒋琬说： 做事昏庸，实在比不上前人。 
English: In addition, Yang Min, an inspector of farmers, often slandered Chiang Kai-shek, saying, "He is not as good at doing things as his predecessors.

古文：或以白琬，主者请推治敏，琬曰： 吾实不如前人，无可推也。 
现代文：有人将这件事告诉蒋琬，主管官员，请求去追究治理杨敏的过失，蒋琬说： 我确实比不上前人，不需要追究。 
English: Someone told Jiang Yu, the responsible official, about this and asked him to investigate Yang Min's misconduct. Jiang Yu said, "I'm really not as good as my predecessors, there's no need to investigate."

古文：主者重据听不推，则乞问其愦愦之状。琬曰： 苟其不如，则事不当理，事不当理，则愦愦矣。复何问邪？ 
现代文：主管人再次陈说而蒋琬没有允许追究，后又请求蒋琬去问说他昏庸的状况，蒋琬说： 如果确实比不上，那处事就不合理，处事不合理那就是昏庸，还有什么要问的呢？ 
English: The person in charge again said that Jiang Yu did not allow the investigation, and then asked Jiang Yu to ask him about his dullness. Jiang Yu said: If it is indeed incomparable, then the situation is unreasonable. If the situation is unreasonable, then it is dullness. What else is there to ask?

古文：后敏坐事系狱，众人犹惧其必死，琬心无適莫，得免重罪。
现代文：后来杨敏因事被收押下狱，众人都担心他一定会被处死，但蒋琬心中没有留有成见，所以杨敏得以免于重罪。
English: Later, Yang Min was detained and sent to prison for the incident. Everyone was worried that he would definitely be executed, but Chiang Kai-shek did not have any prejudice in his heart, so Yang Min was able to avoid a serious crime.

古文：其好恶存道，皆此类也。
现代文：蒋琬的好恶都符合道义，大都如此。
English: Chiang Kai-shek's likes and dislikes were all in line with morality, for the most part.

古文：琬以为昔诸葛亮数闚秦川，道险运艰，竟不能克，不若乘水东下。
现代文：蒋琬认为过去诸葛亮多次出兵秦川，道路艰险，最终不能攻克，不如顺水东下。
English: Jiang Wei believed that Zhuge Liang had sent troops to Qin River many times in the past. The road was arduous and dangerous, and ultimately could not be overcome. It was better to go east along the water.

古文：乃多作舟船，欲由汉，沔袭魏兴、上庸。
现代文：于是就制作了很多战船，想要从汉水、沔水地区攻打魏朝的魏兴、上庸一带。
English: As a result, many warships were made to attack the Wei Xing and Shangyong areas of the Wei Dynasty from the Hanshui and Surabaya regions.

古文：会旧疾连动，未时得行。
现代文：适逢他旧病接连发作，没有能及时实行。
English: It coincided with a series of attacks of his old illness, and he was not able to carry it out in time.

古文：而众论咸谓如不克捷，还路甚难，非长策也。
现代文：而众人议论都认为如果不能迅速获胜，返回的路十分艰难，这不是长久之计。
English: And there's been a lot of talk that if we don't get a quick win, it's going to be a tough road back, and it's not going to be sustainable.

古文：於是遣尚书令费祎、中监军姜维等喻指。
现代文：于是就派尚书令费祎、中监军姜维等将意思转达给蒋琬。
English: As a result, he sent Shang Shuling, Fei Yao, Central Supervisor Jiang Wei and others to convey his intention to Jiang Yao.

古文：琬承命上疏曰： 芟秽弭难，臣职是掌。
现代文：蒋琬接受大家的意见，并上书后主说： 平息国难，这是我为人臣子的职责。
English: Chiang Kai-shek accepted everyone's opinions, and after submitting the letter, the Lord said: To quell the national calamity, this is my duty as a courtier.

古文：自臣奉辞汉中，已经六年，臣既闇弱，加婴疾疢，规方无成，夙夜忧惨。
现代文：现在我奉命驻守汉中已有六年，我既然昏庸懦弱再加上疾病缠身，计划方略不能实现，夙夜忧心。
English: Now that I have been stationed at Hanzhong Middle School for six years, since I am dim-witted, cowardly and riddled with disease, my plans cannot be realized, and I am worried day and night.

古文：今魏跨带九州，根蒂滋蔓，平除未易。
现代文：现在曹魏横跨九州，根深蒂固，很难顺利铲除。
English: Cao Wei now stretches across Kyushu and is deeply entrenched, making it difficult to successfully eradicate.

古文：若东西并力，首尾掎角，虽未能速得如志，且当分裂蚕食，先摧其支党。
现代文：如果吴蜀两国合力首尾形成掎角之势，虽然不能迅速实现成功的志向，尚且可以对魏国分裂蚕食，摧毁他的党羽。
English: If the two countries of Wu and Shu work together to form a cornered situation, although they cannot quickly achieve the goal of success, they can still erode Wei's division and destroy his party.

古文：然吴期二三，连不克果，俯仰惟艰，实忘寝食。
现代文：但是吴国约定的时间接二连三的改变，几次不能实现，确实左右为难，令人寝食难安。
English: However, the successive changes in the time agreed by the State of Wu, several times unable to be realized, are indeed a dilemma, making it difficult to sleep and eat.

古文：辄与费祎等议，以凉州胡塞之要，进退有资，贼之所惜；且羌、胡乃心思汉如渴，又昔偏军入羌，郭淮破走，算其长短，以为事首，宜以姜维为凉州刺史。
现代文：于是我与费伊等人商议，认为凉州胡人地区是要塞之道，进退都有依靠，是敌人很重视的地方。况且羌人胡人都非常仰慕汉朝，又有过去部队进入羌族部落，郭槐失败逃走，计算其中的得失，认为凉州是最重要的事情，应该任命姜维为凉州刺史。
English: So I discussed with Fei and others, and thought that the Liangzhou Hu people's area was the way to the fortress, and the advance and retreat were all dependent, and it was a place that the enemy attached great importance to. Moreover, the Liang people and the Hu people greatly admired the Han Dynasty, and in the past, the troops entered the Yi tribe, Guo Wei failed to escape, and calculated the gains and losses, and thought that Liangzhou was the most important thing, and Jiang Wei should be appointed as the historian of Liangzhou.

古文：若维征行，衔持河右，臣当帅军为维镇继。
现代文：如果姜维出征，把持河右地区，臣就率军为姜维增加支援。
English: If Jiang Wei goes to war and gains control of the Hehu region, the minister will lead the army to increase support for Jiang Wei.

古文：今涪水陆四通，惟急是应，若东北有虞，赴之不难。 
现代文：现在涪县水路四通，可以应急，如果东北有变故，再赶赴也不难。 
English: Now there are four waterways in Jixian County, which can be used in an emergency. If there is a change in the northeast, it will not be difficult to rush there.

古文：由是琬遂还住涪。
现代文：因此蒋琬就返回驻守涪县。
English: Therefore, Chiang Kai-shek returned to garrison Min County.

古文：疾转增剧，至九年卒，谥曰恭。
现代文：后因病情加重，延熙九年去世，谥号为恭。
English: Later, due to the aggravation of her illness, she passed away in the ninth year of Yanxi, and her nickname was Cong.

古文：子斌嗣，为绥武将军、汉城护军。
现代文：蒋琬的儿子蒋斌继承爵位，担任绥武将军、汉城护军。
English: Jiang Bin, the son of Chiang Kai-shek, succeeded to the title of nobility and served as the general of the Xiongwu army and the guardian of Seoul.

古文：魏大将军锺会至汉城，与斌书曰： 巴蜀贤智文武之士多矣。至於足下、诸葛思远，譬诸草木，吾气类也。
现代文：魏国大将军钟会到了汉城，给蒋斌写信说： 巴蜀之地，贤明智慧文武双全的士人很多，至于您、诸葛思远，就像草木一样，跟我是同类之人。
English: The Wei general Zhong Hui arrived in Seoul and wrote a letter to Jiang Bin saying: In the land of Bashu, there are many wise, intelligent, literate and martial scholars. As for you, Zhuge Siyuan, you are just like plants and trees, and you are the same kind of person as me.

古文：桑梓之敬，古今所敦。
现代文：敬重先贤，是古代所看重的。
English: Respecting the sages was important in ancient times.

古文：西到，欲奉瞻尊大君公侯墓，当洒扫坟茔，奉祠致敬。
现代文：现在我从西而来，想要瞻仰尊父的墓地，应当打扫蒋琬的坟地并祭祀以表敬意，希望您告诉我所在的地方。 
English: Now that I have come from the west, I want to visit the cemetery of my father. I should clean the cemetery of Chiang Kai-shek and make a sacrifice as a sign of respect. I hope you can tell me where I am.

古文：愿告其所在！ 斌答书曰： 知惟臭味意眷之隆，雅讬通流，未拒来谓也。亡考昔遭疾疢，亡於涪县，卜云其吉，遂安厝之。知君西迈，乃欲屈驾脩敬坟墓。
现代文：蒋斌回复说： 你我性情相投，与我是知己，您的书信送来，我不好拒绝您的好意，亡父当年因病在涪县去世，卜者都说那是风水宝地，于是将他安葬在那里，现在知道您西来蜀地，想要屈尊前往墓地探视并祭扫坟墓。
English: Jiang Bin replied: You and I are of the same temperament, and I am a confidant. Your letter has been sent, and it is hard for me to refuse your kindness. My late father passed away due to illness in Handan County that year. The soothsayers said that it was a feng shui treasure, so they buried him there. Now I know that you have come to Shoudi, I would like to visit the cemetery and sweep the grave.

古文：视予犹父，颜子之仁也，闻命感怆，以增情思。 
现代文：颜回视孔子如父亲，这是他的人格啊，我知道您的命令，非常感伤，更增加我的情思。 
English: Yan Hui regards Confucius as his father. This is his personality. I know your order is very sentimental, and it increases my feelings.

古文：会得斌书报，嘉叹意义，及至涪，如其书云。
现代文：钟会得到蒋斌的书信回复，感叹他的高义，等他到了涪县，都像信里所说的那样做。
English: Zhong would get a reply to Jiang Bin's letter, lamenting his high-mindedness, and when he arrived in Jixian, he would do as the letter said.

古文：后主既降邓艾，斌诣会於涪，待以交友之礼。
现代文：后主刘禅投降邓艾后，蒋斌到涪县投降钟会。钟会待他以朋友之礼。
English: Later, after Liu Zen surrendered to Deng Ai, Jiang Bin went to the Bell Association in Handan County to surrender. The Bell Association treated him as a friend.

古文：随会至成都，为乱兵所杀。
现代文：蒋斌跟随钟会到了成都，被乱兵杀害。
English: Jiang Bin followed the bell to Chengdu and was killed by the soldiers.

古文：斌弟显，为太子仆，会亦爱其才学，与斌同时死。
现代文：蒋斌的弟弟蒋显，是太子仆，钟会也看中他的才学，但与蒋斌同时去世。
English: Jiang Bin's younger brother, Jiang Xian, was a servant of the crown prince, and Zhonghui was also impressed by his talent, but he died at the same time as Jiang Bin.

古文：刘敏，左护军、扬威将军，与镇北大将军王平俱镇汉中。
现代文：刘敏，左护军，扬威将军，跟镇北大将军王平一同镇守汉中。
English: Liu Min, the left guard, General Yang Wei, together with Wang Ping, the general of Zhenbei University, guarded Hanzhong.

古文：魏遣大将军曹爽袭蜀时，议者或谓但可守城，不出拒敌，必自引退。
现代文：魏朝遣大将军曹爽攻打蜀国时，商议的人有人认为，只可以守城，不应该出城抗敌，敌军一定会自动退回。
English: When Cao Shuang, a high-ranking general of the Wei Dynasty, was sent to attack the State of Shu, the negotiators thought that they could only defend the city, and should not go out of the city to resist the enemy, and the enemy army would return automatically.

古文：敏以为男女布野，农谷栖亩，若听敌入，则大事去矣。
现代文：刘敏认为，男女百姓布满田野，粮食都在田地中，如果允许敌人入城，那大势已去呀。
English: Liu Min believes that the fields are full of men and women, and the grain is in the fields. If the enemy is allowed to enter the city, the momentum will be lost.

古文：遂帅所领与平据兴势，多张旗帜，弥亘百馀里。
现代文：于是就率领自己的部下跟王平据守兴势山，插满旗帜，连绵一百多里。
English: So he led his subordinates and Wang Ping to defend Mount Xingchi, planting flags all over the place, stretching for more than a hundred miles.

古文：会大将军费祎从成都至，魏军即退，敏以功封云亭侯。
现代文：适逢大将军费祎从成都赶来，魏军随即撤退，刘敏因功劳被封为云亭侯。
English: When General Fei Jun arrived from Chengdu, the Wei army immediately retreated, and Liu Min was awarded the title of Prince of Yunting for his services.

古文：费祎字文伟，江夏鄳人也。
现代文：费祎，字文伟，江夏郡杨县人。
English: Fei Yao, Zi Wen Wei, from Yang County, Jiangxia County.

古文：少孤，依族父伯仁。
现代文：年少时父亲去世，依靠堂伯父费伯仁生活。
English: When he was young, his father died, and he lived off his cousin Fei Bo Ren.

古文：伯仁姑，益州牧刘璋之母也。璋遣使迎仁，仁将祎游学入蜀。
现代文：费伯仁的姑姑是益州牧刘璋的母亲，刘璋派使者迎接伯仁，伯仁带着费祎到蜀地游学。
English: Fei Bolin's aunt was the mother of Liu Ye, the governor of Yizhou. Liu Ye sent an envoy to meet Fei Bolin, who took Fei Bolin to study in Shoudi.

古文：会先主定蜀，祎遂留益土，与汝南许叔龙、南郡董允齐名。
现代文：适逢刘备平定蜀地，费祎就留在了益州，跟汝南许叔龙，南郡人董允齐名。
English: When Liu Bei conquered Shu, Fei Yao stayed in Yizhou. He was on a par with Ru Nan Xu Shulong and Nan County native Dong Yun.

古文：时许靖丧子，允与祎欲共会其葬所。
现代文：当时许靖儿子去世，董允和费祎打算一起去参加葬礼。
English: At that time, Xu Jing's son died, and Dong Yun and Fei Yao planned to go to the funeral together.

古文：允白父和请车，和遣开后鹿车给之。
现代文：董允向父亲董合请求要一辆车，他的父亲就给他们派了一辆后面开门的鹿车。
English: When Dong Yun asked his father, Dong He, for a car, his father sent them a deer car with the back door open.

古文：允有难载之色，祎便从前先上。
现代文：董允脸上显示出不愿意坐这种车的神态，费祎率先登上。
English: The expression on Dong Yun's face showed that he did not want to ride in such a car. Fei Yao boarded the car first.

古文：及至丧所，诸葛亮及诸贵人悉集，车乘甚鲜，允犹神色未泰，而祎晏然自若。
现代文：等到了目的地，诸葛亮等显贵人物都到了场，他们的车马服饰都很鲜艳，下车后董允的神色依然还没有平和，而费祎泰然自若。
English: When they arrived at their destination, Zhuge Liang and other dignitaries arrived on the scene. Their chariots and horses were all brightly decorated. After getting off the bus, Dong Yun's expression was still not peaceful, while Fei Yao was calm and self-possessed.

古文：持车人还，和问之，知其如此，乃谓允曰： 吾常疑汝於文伟优劣未别也，而今而后，吾意了矣。 
现代文：驾车的人返回后，董和向他询问表现，知道他们两个的状况，就对董允说： 我经常认为你跟文伟的才干优劣没有什么区别，从现在往后我的想法就清楚了。 
English: After the driver returned, Dong He asked him about his performance. Knowing the situation of the two of them, he said to Dong Yun: I often think that there is no difference between you and Wen Wei's talents. From now on, my thoughts are clear.

古文：先主立太子，祎与允俱为舍人，迁庶子。
现代文：刘备册立太子，董允和费祎都是舍人，后来升为庶子。
English: Liu Bichang was crowned prince, and both Dong Yun and Fei Yao were concubines, and later became stepchildren.

古文：后主践位，为黄门侍郎。丞相亮南征还，群寮於数十里逢迎，年位多在祎右，而亮特命祎同载，由是众人莫不易观。
现代文：后主刘禅登基后，费祎担任黄门侍郎，丞相诸葛亮南征返回，朝中百官，都在城外数十里处迎接，他们的年资官位大多在费祎之上，而诸葛亮只让费祎和他同乘一辆车，所以众人都对她刮目相看。
English: After Liu Zhen ascended to the throne, Fei Yao served as the Yellow Gate waiter, and the chancellor Zhuge Liang returned from the Southern Expedition. The hundreds of officials in the court were all greeted dozens of miles outside the city. Most of their seniority ranks were above Fei Yao, and Zhuge Liang only let Fei Yao ride with him in a car, so everyone was impressed with her.

古文：亮以初从南归，以祎为昭信校尉使吴。孙权性既滑稽，嘲啁无方，诸葛恪、羊衟等才博果辩，论难锋至，祎辞顺义笃，据理以答，终不能屈。
现代文：诸葛亮因为刚从南方返回，派费祎为昭信校尉出使东吴，孙权性情幽默诙谐，而且调侃无所拘束，诸葛恪、羊衟等人都学问渊博，果断善辩，费祎的言辞和语气、旨意都非常的笃定，据理力争，最终没有被说服。
English: Zhuge Liang, because he had just returned from the south, sent Fei Yao to dispatch Dongwu for Captain Zhaoxin. Sun Quan's temperament was humorous and witty, and the ridicule was unrestrained. Zhuge Ke and Yang Yao were very knowledgeable, decisive and eloquent. Fei Yao's words and tone, and intentions were very determined. They argued with each other, and in the end they were not convinced.

古文：权甚器之，谓祎曰： 君天下淑德，必当股肱蜀朝，恐不能数来也。 
现代文：孙权非常看重他，对他说： 您是天下有才德的人，一定是蜀朝的肱骨之臣，恐怕不能再来东吴了。 
English: Sun Quan thought very highly of him and said to him, "You are a talented person in the world, and you must be a loyal vassal of the Shu Dynasty. I'm afraid I can't come to Dongwu again."

古文：还，迁为侍中。
现代文：费祎返回蜀国后，升任为侍中。
English: After Fei Yao returned to Shu, he was promoted to the rank of chamberlain.

古文：亮北住汉中，请祎为参军。
现代文：诸葛亮率军往北驻守汉中，请任费祎为参军。
English: Zhuge Liang led the army to the north to garrison Hanzhong, and invited Fei Yao to join the army.

古文：以奉使称旨，频烦至吴。
现代文：费祎奉命行事都符合皇帝心意，多次出使东吴。
English: Fei Jiong was ordered to act in accordance with the emperor's wishes, and he sent envoys to Dongwu several times.

古文：建兴八年，转为中护军，后又为司马。
现代文：建兴八年，费祎转任为中护军，后来又担任司马。
English: In the eighth year of Jianxing, Fei Jun was transferred to the Middle Protection Army, and later served as Sima.

古文：值军师魏延与长史杨仪相憎恶，每至并坐争论，延或举刃拟仪，仪泣涕横集。
现代文：正直军师魏延与长史杨仪互相憎恨，经常并坐一起就互相争论，魏延有时还举起刀向杨仪比划，杨仪就泪流满面。
English: Honest military strategist Wei Yan and Long Shi Yang Yi hated each other. They often sat together and argued with each other. Wei Yan sometimes held up a knife to compare Yang Yi, and Yang Yi burst into tears.

古文：祎常入其坐间，谏喻分别，终亮之世，各尽延、仪之用者，祎匡救之力也。
现代文：费祎经常坐在他们中间调解，向他们表明是非黑白，所以在诸葛亮还活着时，都能够发挥魏延，杨仪两人的长处，都是费祎补救的功劳。
English: Fei Yao often sat in the middle of them to mediate and show them the black and white, so when Zhuge Liang was still alive, both Wei Yan and Yang Yi were able to play to their strengths, both of which were the merit of Fei Yao's remedy.

古文：亮卒，祎为后军师。
现代文：诸葛亮去世后，费祎担任后军师。
English: After Zhuge Liang's death, Fei Yao served as a rear-admiral.

古文：顷之，代蒋琬为尚书令。琬自汉中还涪，祎迁大将军，录尚书事。
现代文：不久，费祎代替蒋琬担任尚书令，蒋琬从汉中返回涪县，费祎升任为大将军，录尚书事。
English: Soon, Fei Jian replaced Jiang Jian as Shang Shuling, Jiang Jian returned from Hanzhong to Jixian, Fei Jian was promoted to general, and recorded Shang Shuling.

古文：延熙七年，魏军次于兴势，假祎节，率众往御之。
现代文：延熙七年，魏朝军队进兵到兴势山，后主流刘禅让费祎持符节率军前往抵御。
English: In the seventh year of Yanxi, the Wei Dynasty army marched into Mount Xingsi, after which the mainstream Liu Zhen let Fei Xuan hold the rune and lead the army to resist.

古文：光禄大夫来敏至祎许别，求共围棋。
现代文：光禄大夫来敏到费祎处送别，请求和他一起下围棋。
English: Dr. Guanglu came to see Fei Min off and asked him to play Go with him.

古文：于时羽檄交驰。人马擐甲，严驾已讫，祎与敏留意对戏，色无厌倦。
现代文：当时请报纷纷传来，人马都已准备充分，严整准备出发，费祎跟来敏依然留意下棋之事，脸上没有厌倦的神色。
English: At that time, the invitations came one after another. Everyone was well prepared and ready to go. Fei Yao and Lai Min still paid attention to the game of chess. There was no tired look on their faces.

古文：敏曰： 向聊观试君耳！君信可人，必能办贼者也。 
现代文：来敏说： 我只是试探一下你罢了，您确实让人放心，一定能打败敌军。 
English: Limin said, "I'm just testing you. You're really reassuring, and you're sure to defeat the enemy."

古文：祎至，敌遂退，封成乡侯。
现代文：费祎到后，魏军就撤退了，随后被封为成乡侯。
English: After Fei Yao arrived, the Wei army retreated, and he was subsequently made a townsman.

古文：琬固让州职，祎复领益州刺史。
现代文：蒋琬坚决请求让出他在州中的官职，费祎又兼任益州刺史。
English: Jiang Yu firmly requested to give up his official position in the prefecture, while Fei Yu also served as the prefect of Yizhou.

古文：祎当国功名，略与琬比。
现代文：费祎主持国事时的名望功绩，大概与蒋琬相同。
English: Fei Jiong presided over the state affairs, and his fame and achievements were probably the same as those of Jiang Jiong.

古文：十一年，出住汉中。
现代文：延熙十一年，费祎出兵驻守汉中。
English: In the eleventh year of Yanxi, Fei Long sent troops to garrison Hanzhong.

古文：自琬及祎，虽自身在外，庆赏刑威，皆遥先谘断，然后乃行，其推任如此。
现代文：从蒋琬但费祎，虽然自身在外地，但京中的赏罚刑责都先咨询他们，然后再判断，后主对他们的倚重信赖到如此地步。
English: From Chiang Kai-shek to Deng Fei, although they are in other places, the rewards, punishments, and punishments in Beijing are first consulted with them, and then judged. This is the extent to which their successors rely on them.

古文：后十四年夏，还成都，成都望气者云都邑无宰相位，故冬复北屯汉寿。
现代文：后来延熙十四年夏，费祎返回成都，成都中善于观察天象云气的人说都城中没有宰相之位，所以冬天他又往北驻守汉寿。
English: Later, in the summer of the fourteenth year of Yanxi, Fei Yao returned to Chengdu. People in Chengdu who were good at observing the sky and clouds said that there was no prime minister in the capital, so in winter he went north to guard Han Shou.

古文：延熙十五年，命祎开府。
现代文：延熙十五年，后主令费祎建牙开府。
English: In the fifteenth year of Yanxi, Emperor Fei ordered Fei Jianya to open the capital.

古文：十六年岁首大会，魏降人郭脩在坐。
现代文：延熙十六年岁首大会，魏国投降之人郭脩在座。
English: Yanxi was 16 years old at the time of the first meeting, and Guo Gan, the man who surrendered Wei, was present.

古文：祎欢饮沈醉，为脩手刃所害，谥曰敬侯。
现代文：费祎尽情欢畅，饮酒沉醉，被郭脩用刀杀害，谥号为靖侯。
English: Fei Yao was as happy as he could be, drinking heavily, and was killed by Guo Yao with a knife. His nickname was Jing Hou.

古文：子承嗣，为黄门侍郎。
现代文：他的儿子费承继承爵位，担任黄门侍郎。
English: His son succeeded to the title and served as the Yellow Gate's chamberlain.

古文：承弟恭，尚公主。祎长女配太子璿为妃。
现代文：费承的弟弟费龚娶公主为妻，费祎的长女配给太子刘睿为妃。
English: Fei Cheng's younger brother Fei Yao married the princess, and Fei Yao's eldest daughter became the wife of Prince Liu Rui.

古文：姜维字伯约，天水冀人也。
现代文：姜维，字伯约，天水郡冀县人。
English: Jiang Wei, surnamed Boyo, from Jizhou County, Tianshui County.

古文：少孤，与母居。
现代文：年少时父亲去世，跟母亲一起生活。
English: His father died when he was young, and he lived with his mother.

古文：好郑氏学。仕郡上计掾，州辟为从事。
现代文：他喜好郑玄的经学，后来出仕，担任郡中的计吏，州中征召他担任从事。
English: He liked Zheng Xuan's study of economics, and later served as a clerk in the county, and was recruited by the state to serve as a cadre.

古文：以父冏昔为郡功曹，值羌、戎叛乱，身卫郡将，没於战场，赐维官中郎，参本郡军事。
现代文：姜维的父亲姜冏过去担任过郡中的功曹，正值羌人、戎人反叛，他挺身护卫郡守，战死于战场，所以郡中赐姜维为官中郎，参与本郡的军事。
English: In the past, Jiang Wei's father, Jiang Wei, served as the county's gong cao. When the Xiong people and the Yong people rebelled, he stood up to protect the county's governor and died on the battlefield. Therefore, the county gave Jiang Wei to be the official middle man and participate in the county's military.

古文：建兴六年，丞相诸葛亮军向祁山，时天水太守適出案行，维及功曹梁绪、主簿尹赏、主记梁虔等从行。
现代文：建兴六年，丞相诸葛亮出兵祁山，当时天水太守外出巡视，姜维和功曹梁绪、主簿尹赏、主记梁虔等随同出行。
English: In the sixth year of Jianxing, the chancellor Zhuge Liang went out to Shaoshan. At that time, Tianshui Taishou went out to inspect, and Jiang Wei and Gong Cao Liangxu, the chief secretary Yin Bao, and the chief secretary Liang Qian, etc. accompanied the trip.

古文：太守闻蜀军垂至，而诸县响应，疑维等皆有异心，於是夜亡保上邽。
现代文：太守得知蜀军将要来到，而各县纷纷响应，怀疑姜维等人都有异心，于是连夜逃亡前去守卫上邽。
English: The daimyō learned that the Shu army was about to arrive, and all the counties responded in succession, suspecting that Jiang Wei and others had ulterior motives, so he fled overnight to guard Shangyu.

古文：维等觉太守去，追迟，至城门，城门已闭，不纳。
现代文：姜维等人发觉太守离开，追赶不及，等到了城门处，城门已经关闭，不让他们进城。
English: Jiang Wei and others found that the guards had left and they couldn't catch up, so they waited at the city gate. The gate was closed and they were not allowed to enter the city.

古文：维等相率还冀，冀亦不入维。
现代文：姜维等又一同返回冀县，冀县也不接纳他们。
English: Jiang Wei and others returned to Jixian together, but Jixian did not accept them.

古文：维等乃俱诣诸葛亮。
现代文：姜伟等人就一起去投靠诸葛亮。
English: Jiang Wei and others went to Zhuge Liang together.

古文：会马谡败於街亭，亮拔将西县千馀家及维等还，故维遂与母相失。
现代文：适逢马谡在街亭战败，诸葛亮带领西县一千多户和姜维等人率兵返回，所以姜维和母亲失散。
English: With the defeat of Ma Wei in Jie Ting, Zhuge Liang led more than a thousand households in West County and Jiang Wei and other soldiers to return, so Jiang Wei and his mother were separated.

古文：亮辟维为仓曹掾，加奉义将军，封当阳亭侯，时年二十七。
现代文：诸葛亮征召姜维为仓曹掾，加官奉义将军，封为当阳亭侯，当时姜维二十七岁。
English: Zhuge Liang conscripted Jiang Wei as Cang Cao Yao, promoted him to Bongyi General, and appointed him as Dangyang Tinghou. At that time, Jiang Wei was 27 years old.

古文：亮与留府长史张裔、参军蒋琬书曰： 姜伯约忠勤时事，思虑精密，考其所有，永南、季常诸人不如也。其人，凉州上士也。 
现代文：诸葛亮与留府长史张裔、参军蒋琬写信说： 姜伯约对时事非常的忠心勤奋，思虑周全，考察他的德行，永南、季常等人都比不上他，这个人是凉州的上等之人。 
English: Zhuge Liang wrote to Zhang Zi, the governor of Liufu, and Chiang Kai-shek, who joined the army, saying: Jiang Boyo is very loyal and diligent in current affairs, thoughtful and thorough, and his moral conduct has been examined. Yongnan, Ji Chang and others are not as good as him. This person is a superior person in Liangzhou.

古文：又曰： 须先教中虎步兵五六千人。姜伯约甚敏於军事，既有胆义，深解兵意。此人心存汉室，而才兼於人，毕教军事，当遣诣宫，觐见主上。 
现代文：又说： 应当先交给他五六千虎步兵，姜伯约对军事非常的聪明，既有胆义，又非常了解用兵之道，此人心怀胆识而才智过人，将军事大权交给他，应当派他入宫觐见皇上。 
English: He also said: Five or six thousand tiger infantry should be given to him first. Jiang Boyo was very smart about military affairs. He was courageous and had a great understanding of how to use soldiers. He was courageous and intelligent. The military power should be given to him. He should be sent to the imperial court to meet the emperor.

古文：后迁中监军征西将军。
现代文：后来姜维被升任为中监军、征西将军。
English: Later, Jiang Wei was promoted to the general of the Central Supervision Army and the Western Expeditionary Force.

古文：十二年，亮卒，维还成都，为右监军辅汉将军，统诸军，进封平襄侯。
现代文：建兴十二年，诸葛亮去世，姜维返回成都，担任右监军、辅汉将军，统率各军，又晋封为平襄侯。
English: In the twelfth year of Jianxing, Zhuge Liang died, and Jiang Wei returned to Chengdu to serve as the right supervisor of the army and the general of Fu Han, leading all the armies, and was promoted to Pingxiang.

古文：延熙元年，随大将军蒋琬住汉中。
现代文：延熙元年，姜维跟随大将军蒋琬驻守汉中。
English: In the first year of Yanxi, Jiang Wei was stationed in Hanzhong with General Jiang Wei.

古文：琬既迁大司马，以维为司马，数率偏军西入。
现代文：蒋琬升为大司马后，任命姜维为司马，多次率领部分军队西入。
English: After Chiang Kai-shek became the grand steward, he appointed Jiang Wei as the steward, and led part of the army into the West many times.

古文：六年，迁镇西大将军，领凉州刺史。
现代文：延熙六年，姜维升任为镇西大将军，兼任凉州刺史。
English: In the sixth year of Yanxi, Jiang Wei was promoted to the general of Zhenxi, and also served as the chief historian of Liangzhou.

古文：十年，迁卫将军，与大将军费祎共录尚书事。
现代文：延熙十年，升任为卫将军，与大将军费祎一起担任录尚书事。
English: In the tenth year of Yanxi, he was promoted to Wei general, and served as a record clerk together with the great general Fei Yao.

古文：是岁，汶山平康夷反，维率众讨定之。又出陇西、南安、金城界，与魏大将军郭淮、夏侯霸等战於洮西。
现代文：当年，汶山郡的平康县少数民族叛乱，姜维率军征讨并平定他们，又出兵陇西、南安、金城边界，与魏朝大将军郭淮、夏侯霸等人在洮西交战。
English: In that year, when ethnic minorities in Pingkang County in Wenshan County rebelled, Jiang Wei led the army to subjugate and quell them. He also sent troops to the borders of Shaanxi, Nan'an and Jincheng to fight against Wei Dynasty generals Guo Huai and Xia Houba in Shaanxi.

古文：胡王治无戴等举部落降，维将还安处之。
现代文：胡王治无戴等人率部落投降，姜维带领他们回到地方安居，并安抚他们。
English: Hu Wangzhiwu Dai and others led the tribe to surrender, and Jiang Wei led them back to the countryside to live peacefully and pacify them.

古文：十二年，假维节，复出西平，不克而还。
现代文：延熙十二年，后主让姜维持符节再次出兵西平，没有攻克就返回了。
English: In the twelfth year of Yanxi, the late lord let Jiang maintain the rune festival and sent troops to Xiping again, and returned without conquering.

古文：维自以练西方风俗，兼负其才武，欲诱诸羌、胡以为羽翼，谓自陇以西可断而有也。
现代文：姜维自认为自己熟悉西方的民俗风土，并且对自己身负才学武艺很自负，想要招揽羌人、胡人作为辅助，认为这样从陇地以西的地方就可以占据了。
English: Jiang Wei thought that he was familiar with the folk customs of the West, and he was very proud of himself for being able to learn martial arts. He wanted to recruit the Xiongren and Hu people as an auxiliary, and thought that this way he could occupy the place west of Xiongdi.

古文：每欲兴军大举，费祎常裁制不从，与其兵不过万人。
现代文：姜维每次想要大举出兵，费祎经常劝阻而不予听从，给他的士兵不超过一万人。
English: Every time Jiang Wei wanted to send a large number of soldiers, Fei Yao often dissuaded him and would not listen, giving him no more than ten thousand soldiers.

古文：十六年春，祎卒。
现代文：延熙十六年春，费祎去世。
English: In the spring of the 16th year of Yanxi, Fei Yao passed away.

古文：夏，维率数万人出石营，经董亭，围南安，魏雍州刺史陈泰解围至洛门，维粮尽退还。
现代文：同年夏天姜维率领数万人马出兵石营，经过董亭，围困南安，魏朝雍州刺史陈泰，到洛门解除包围，姜维因粮草食尽而退还。
English: In the summer of the same year, Jiang Wei led tens of thousands of men and horses out of the Stone Camp, passed Dongting, besieged Nan'an, the Wei Dynasty Yongzhou stabbed Chen Tai, and went to Lomen to lift the siege. Jiang Wei returned because he had run out of grain and grass.

古文：明年，加督中外军事。
现代文：第二年，朝廷加封姜维督中外军事。
English: In the following year, the imperial court appointed Jiang Viduo as a foreign military attaché.

古文：复出陇西，守狄道长李简举城降。
现代文：姜维又出兵陇西，代理狄道县县长李简献城投降。
English: Jiang Wei also sent troops to Shaanxi, and Li Jiancheng, the acting governor of Dido County, surrendered.

古文：进围襄武，与魏将徐质交锋，斩首破敌，魏军败退。
现代文：姜维出兵包围襄武县，与魏国将军徐质交战，斩首破敌，魏军战败退回。
English: Jiang Wei sent troops to encircle Xiangwu County, fought with the Wei general Xu Chien, decapitated the enemy, and the Wei army was defeated and retreated.

古文：维乘胜多所降下，拔河关、狄道、临洮三县民还，后十八年，复与车骑将军夏侯霸等俱出狄道，大破魏雍州刺史王经於洮西，经众死者数万人。
现代文：姜维趁着良好形势出兵俘虏敌军，攻占河关、狄道、临洮三县，并将百姓迁移后退回。后来延熙十八年，姜维又和车骑将军夏侯霸等人共同出兵狄道，在洮西大破魏朝的雍州刺史王经，王经部下死伤数万人。
English: Taking advantage of the favorable situation, Jiang Wei sent troops to capture the enemy army, captured the three counties of Heguan, Di, and Linyi, and returned after relocating the people. Later, in the 18th year of Yanxi, Jiang Wei, together with the cavalry general Xia Houba and others, sent troops to Di, and stabbed Wang Jing in Yongzhou, Shaanxi, which broke the Wei Dynasty. Tens of thousands of Wang Jing's subordinates were killed and injured.

古文：经退保狄道城，维围之。
现代文：王经就退回守卫狄道城，姜维围困。
English: Wang Jing retreated to guard Dido City, and Jiang Wei besieged it.

古文：魏征西将军陈泰进兵解围，维卻住锺题。
现代文：魏朝征西将军陈泰出兵解围，姜维退往钟题。
English: Chen Tai, the general of the Western Expedition of the Wei Dynasty, sent troops to relieve the siege, and Jiang Wei retreated to Zhongtai.

古文：十九年春，就迁维为大将军。
现代文：延熙十九年春，朝廷就地升姜维为大将军。
English: In the spring of the 19th year of Yanxi, the imperial court promoted Jiang Wei to general on the spot.

古文：更整勒戎马，与镇西大将军胡济期会上邽，济失誓不至，故维为魏大将邓艾所破於段谷，星散流离，死者甚众。
现代文：又整顿兵马，和镇西大将军胡济相约在上邽会合，胡济失约不来，所以姜维被魏国大将邓艾在段谷攻破，士兵四处离散，士兵死伤众多。
English: He also rectified the soldiers and horses, and made an appointment with the Zhenxi general Hu Jizhong to meet in Shangluo. Hu Jizhong failed to come, so Jiang Wei was defeated by the Wei general Deng Ai in Duanwu. The soldiers were scattered everywhere, and many soldiers were killed and injured.

古文：众庶由是怨讟，而陇已西亦骚动不宁，维谢过引负，求自贬削。为后将军，行大将军事。
现代文：众人由此生出怨恨，而陇地以西地区也骚动不安，姜维引咎自责，请求削减官职，后来担任后将军，行使大将军职权。
English: This caused resentment among the people, and the area west of Handan was also agitated and uneasy. Jiang Wei blamed himself and asked for a reduction in official positions. Later, he served as a post-general and exercised the powers of a general.

古文：二十年，魏征东大将军诸葛诞反於淮南，分关中兵东下。维欲乘虚向秦川，复率数万人出骆谷，径至沈岭。
现代文：延熙二十年，魏朝征东大将军诸葛诞在淮南反叛，将关中的士兵分出东行，姜维想要趁虚出兵秦川，又率领数万人出兵骆谷，大军径直到了沈岭。
English: In the 20th year of Yanxi, Zhuge Zi, the general of the Wei Dynasty's expedition to the East, rebelled in Huainan, separating the soldiers from Guanzhong to go east. Jiang Wei wanted to take advantage of the Qin River, and led tens of thousands of soldiers to Luogu, and the large army went straight to Shenling.

古文：时长城积谷甚多而守兵乃少，闻维方到，众皆惶惧。
现代文：当时，魏国在长城储备的粮食很多，而守兵很少，得知姜维率部队将要赶到，众人都非常惊恐。
English: At that time, Wei had a lot of grain reserves on the Great Wall, but very few guards. When it was learned that Jiang Wei's troops were about to arrive, everyone was very frightened.

古文：魏大将军司马望拒之，邓艾亦自陇右，皆军于长城。
现代文：魏朝大将军司马望迎击，邓艾也重从陇右出兵，都驻军长城。
English: The Wei Dynasty general Sima Wang counterattacked, and Deng Ai also sent troops from the right side of the Yangtze River, both stationed at the Great Wall.

古文：维前住芒水，皆倚山为营。
现代文：姜维率军前往芒水，都依靠山势安营扎寨。
English: Jiang Wei led the army to Mangshui, and they all camped in the mountains.

古文：望、艾傍渭坚围，维数下挑战，望、艾不应。
现代文：司马望、邓艾沿着渭水坚守，姜维多次率兵下山挑战，司马望、邓艾都没有回应。
English: Sima Wang and Deng Ai held fast along the Surabaya River. Jiang Wei repeatedly led his soldiers down the mountain to challenge, but Sima Wang and Deng Ai did not respond.

古文：景耀元年，维闻诞破败，乃还成都。复拜大将军。
现代文：景耀元年，姜维得知诸葛诞战败，就返回成都，再次被任命为大将军。
English: In the first year of the Jingyao Dynasty, Jiang Wei returned to Chengdu after learning of Zhuge Zheng's defeat and was once again appointed as a general.

古文：初，先主留魏延镇汉中，皆实兵诸围以御外敌，敌若来攻，使不得入。
现代文：当初，刘备留下魏延镇守汉中，都是重兵坚守各营在以抵御外敌，敌军如果进攻，让他们不能越过防御。
English: At the beginning, Liu Bei left Wei Yan Town to defend Han, and all the heavy soldiers were holding on to the battalions to resist the foreign enemy. If the enemy attacked, they could not get past the defense.

古文：及兴势之役，王平捍拒曹爽，皆承此制。
现代文：等到兴势山战役，王平抗击曹爽，都是沿用这种办法。
English: By the time of the Battle of Mount Xingye, when Wang Ping fought against Cao Shuang, this method was still in use.

古文：维建议，以为错守诸围，虽合周易 重门 之义，然適可御敌，不获大利。
现代文：姜维建议，交错防守虽然合乎周易 重门 的道理，但只能防御敌人，不能获取更大的好处。
English: Jiang Wei suggested that although the staggered defense is consistent with the principle of Zhou Yi heavy gate, it can only defend the enemy and cannot obtain greater benefits.

古文：不若使闻敌至，诸围皆敛兵聚谷，退就汉、乐二城，使敌不得入平，且重关镇守以捍之。
现代文：不如等到得知敌军前来，各营地在收兵，储备粮食退回，汉、乐二城防守，使敌人不能进入平地，并且以镇守关隘来抵御敌人。
English: It is better to wait until it is known that the enemy army is coming, the camps are collecting troops, the reserve grain is returned, the Han and Le two cities are defended, so that the enemy can not enter the plain, and the town guards the pass to resist the enemy.

古文：有事之日，令游军并进以伺其虚。
现代文：等到有事之时，就派游击部队一同前进，趁其不备攻打。
English: When something happens, they will send guerrilla forces to advance together and take advantage of the situation to attack.

古文：敌攻关不克，野无散谷，千里县粮，自然疲乏。
现代文：敌军进攻关口不能进入，四处又没有粮食，从千里之外运输粮食，自然疲弊。
English: The enemy's attack gate could not be entered, there was no grain anywhere, and transporting grain from thousands of miles away was naturally exhausting.

古文：引退之日，然后诸城并出，与游军并力搏之，此殄敌之术也。
现代文：等到他们退却时，然后各城再一起出兵，与游击部队一同奋战，这是灭敌的战术。
English: Wait until they retreat, and then each city will send troops together to fight with the guerrilla forces. This is the tactic of destroying the enemy.

古文：於是令督汉中胡济卻住汉寿，监军王含守乐城，护军蒋斌守汉城，又於西安、建威、武卫、石门、武城、建昌、临远皆立围守。
现代文：于是，让督守汉中的胡济退往汉寿驻守，监军王含守卫乐城，护军蒋斌守卫汉城，又在西安、建威、武卫、石门、武城、建昌、临远等地都设置防御工事。
English: As a result, Hu Zi, the governor of Hanzhong, was ordered to retreat to Han Shou, the overseer Wang Han guarded Lecheng, the escort Jiang Bin guarded Seoul, and fortifications were set up in Xi'an, Jianwei, Wuwei, Shimen, Wucheng, Jianchang, Linyuan and other places.

古文：五年，维率众出汉、侯和，为邓艾所破，还住沓中。
现代文：景耀五年，姜维率兵出汉城、侯和城，被邓艾攻破，返回助手沓中。
English: In the fifth year of Jingyao, Jiang Wei led his troops out of Seoul and Houhe, was defeated by Deng Ai, and returned to his assistant Zhuozhong.

古文：维本羁旅讬国，累年攻战，功绩不立，而宦官黄皓等弄权於内，右大将军阎宇与皓协比，而皓阴欲废维树宇。
现代文：姜维本来是只身拖国，羁旅他乡，连年攻战，没有立下功劳，而宦官黄皓等人在朝内玩弄权术，右将军阎宇等和黄皓串通一气，而黄皓暗中想要废掉姜维扶持阎宇。
English: Jiang Wei originally dragged the country alone, traveled to other townships, and attacked the war for years, without any merit, while the eunuch Huang Qi and others played power games in the imperial court, the right general Yan Yu and others colluded with Huang Qi, and Huang Qi secretly wanted to abolish Jiang Wei and support Yan Yu.

古文：维亦疑之。故自危惧，不复还成都。
现代文：姜维也怀疑黄皓，所以自己感到危机，不再返回成都。
English: Jiang Wei suspected Huang Qi, so he felt a crisis and no longer returned to Chengdu.

古文：六年，维表后主： 闻锺会治兵关中，欲规进取，宜并遣张翼、廖化督诸军分护阳安关口、阴平桥头以防未然。 
现代文：景耀六年，姜维上表后主说： 得知钟会在关中整兵，想要进攻我国，应该同时派遣张翼和廖化等人，率领各军分别守卫阳安关口，阴平桥头，以防患未然。 
English: Six years later, after Jiang Wei ascended to the throne, the Lord said, "I have learned that the bell will be set up in Guanzhong, and if you want to attack our country, you should send Zhang Ying and Liao Hua and others at the same time to lead the armies to guard Yang'an Pass and Yinping Bridgehead respectively, in case of emergency.

古文：皓徵信鬼巫，谓敌终不自致，启后主寝其事，而群臣不知。
现代文：黄皓崇信鬼神之术，说敌人最终不能攻破，上奏后主停止这件事，而朝臣们并不知道。
English: Huang Qi believed in the magic of ghosts and gods, saying that the enemy could not break through in the end. After the performance, the Lord stopped the matter, and the courtiers did not know.

古文：及锺会将向骆谷，邓艾将入沓中，然后乃遣右车骑廖化诣沓中为维援，左车骑张翼、辅国大将军董厥等诣阳安关口以为诸围外助。
现代文：等到钟会将要出兵骆谷，邓艾将要前往沓中，然后才派遣右车骑将军廖化到踏沓中作为姜维的后援，左车骑张翼、辅国大将军董厥等到阳安关口作为各部队的外援。
English: Wait until the bell club will send troops to Luogu, Deng Ai will go to Tongzhong, and then send the right car to ride General Liao Hua to Tongzhong as Jiang Wei's back-up, the left car to ride Zhang Ying, Assistant National General Dong Jue to Yangan Pass as foreign aid for all troops.

古文：比至阴平，闻魏将诸葛绪向建威，故住待之。
现代文：等到部队到了阴平，得知魏朝将领诸葛绪出兵建威，所以前往驻守下来等待敌人。
English: When the troops arrived at Yinping, they learned that Zhugexu, the general of the Wei Dynasty, had sent troops to build up his power, so they went to the garrison to wait for the enemy.

古文：月馀，维为邓艾所摧，还住阴平。
现代文：过了一个多月，姜维被邓艾攻破，退守阴平。
English: After more than a month, Jiang Wei was defeated by Deng Ai and retreated to Yinping.

古文：锺会攻围汉、乐二城，遣别将进攻关口，蒋舒开城出降，傅佥格斗而死。
现代文：钟会围攻汉乐二城，派将领进攻关口，蒋舒开城投降，傅佥战败身死。
English: The Bell Association besieged the two cities of Hanle, sent generals to attack the pass, Jiang Shukai surrendered, and Fu Yao was defeated and died.

古文：会攻乐城，不能克，闻关口已下，长驱而前。
现代文：钟会攻打乐城，没有攻克，得知关口已经被攻下，就长驱直入。
English: The bell ringers attacked Lecheng, but did not conquer it. When they learned that the pass had already been conquered, they drove straight in.

古文：翼、厥甫至汉寿，维、化亦舍阴平而退，適与翼、厥合，皆退保剑阁以拒会。
现代文：张翼、董厥等刚到汉寿，姜维、廖化也放弃阴平退兵，刚好和张翼董厥等会和，都退回剑阁保守以抗击钟会。
English: Zhang Ying, Dong Jue and others had just arrived in Hanshou, and Jiang Wei and Liao Hua had also given up the Yinping retreat. Just as Zhang Ying and Dong Jue and others joined forces, they all retreated back to Jiange Conservancy to resist the bell association.

古文：会与维书曰： 公侯以文武之德，怀迈世之略，功济巴、汉，声畅华夏，远近莫不归名。
现代文：钟会给姜维写信说： 公侯您文武全才，有超世的谋略，功绩远扬巴蜀之地，天下皆知，远近都非常推崇您。
English: Zhong Hui wrote to Jiang Wei, "Prince, you are an all-round man of letters and martial arts, you have a superlative strategy, your exploits are known far and wide in the land of Bashu, and you are highly respected far and wide.

古文：每惟畴昔，尝同大化，吴札、郑乔，能喻斯好。 
现代文：每当念及过往，我们都得到魏朝的恩德，吴季札、郑子产的友谊，可以用来比喻我们的交情。 
English: Whenever we think about the past, we all get the friendship of the Wei Dynasty's Ende, Wu Jizha and Zheng Zishan, which can be used as a metaphor for our friendship.

古文：维不答书，列营守险。
现代文：姜维没有回复书信，整顿军队，守卫地势。
English: Jiang Wei did not reply to the letter, reorganizing the army and guarding the terrain.

古文：会不能克，粮运县远，将议还归。
现代文：钟会没有能攻克，运输粮草又非常遥远，打算要退军。
English: The bell association has not been able to conquer the crane, and the transportation of grain and grass is very far away, and intends to withdraw.

古文：而邓艾自阴平由景谷道傍入，遂破诸葛瞻於绵竹。
现代文：邓艾从阴平由景谷道旁边小路进入，在绵竹攻破诸葛瞻。
English: Deng Ai entered the small road next to Jinggu Road from Yinping, and broke through Zhugezhan in Mianzhu.

古文：后主请降於艾，艾前据成都。
现代文：后主刘禅向邓艾请求投降，邓艾率军前进，占据成都。
English: Afterward, Liu Zen, the master, asked Deng Ai to surrender, and Deng Ai led the army forward to occupy Chengdu.

古文：维等初闻瞻破，或闻后主欲固守成都，或闻欲东入吴，或闻欲南入建宁，於是引军由广汉、郪道以审虚实。
现代文：姜维等人刚刚得知诸葛瞻被攻破，有人说后主想要固守成都，有人说后主想要前往东吴，有人说后主想要往南进入建宁，于是姜维率军从广汉、萋道而入查探情况虚实。
English: Jiang Wei and others had just learned that Zhugezhan had been breached. Some said that the successor wanted to hold on to Chengdu, some said that the successor wanted to go to East Wu, and some said that the successor wanted to go south to enter Jianning. So Jiang Wei led the army from Guanghan and Shantou to investigate the situation.

古文：寻被后主敕令，乃投戈放甲，诣会於涪军前，将士咸怒，拔刀砍石。
现代文：不久受到后主诏令，就放下武器，解除铠甲，到涪县拜见钟会，将士都非常愤怒，以至于拔刀砍石头。
English: Soon after receiving the Emperor's edict, they laid down their weapons, took off their armor, and went to see the bell-ringing ceremony in Handan County. The soldiers were so angry that they drew their swords and slashed stones.

古文：会厚待维等，皆权还其印号节盖。
现代文：钟会对姜维等人非常厚待，将他们的印号节盖暂时还给他。
English: The Bell Association treated Jiang Wei and others very generously, temporarily returning their seal to him.

古文：会与维出则同轝，坐则同席，谓长史杜预曰： 以伯约比中土名士，公休、太初不能胜也。 
现代文：钟会和姜维出门就同坐一辆车，宴席就同坐一张席，对长史杜预说： 用姜伯约来比中原的名士，即使是诸葛诞、夏侯玄也不能超过他。 
English: Zhong Hui and Jiang Wei rode in the same car when they went out, and they sat at the same table at the banquet. He said to Chang Shidu in advance: Use Jiang Boyo to compare famous people in Central Plains, even Zhuge Xi, Xia Hou Xuan can't surpass him.

古文：会既构邓艾，艾槛车徵，因将维等诣成都，自称益州牧以叛。
现代文：钟会诬陷邓艾之后，邓艾被用囚车押往京城，钟会也带着姜维等人到了成都，自称益州牧，反叛魏国。
English: After the Bell Association framed Deng Ai, Deng Ai was driven to Beijing in a prison van. The Bell Association also took Jiang Wei and others to Chengdu, claiming to be Yizhou Mu and rebelling against Wei.

古文：欲授维兵五万人，使为前驱。魏将士愤怒，杀会及维，维妻子皆伏诛。
现代文：钟会要给姜维五万人，让他作为前锋，魏朝将士都非常愤怒，杀了钟会和姜维，姜维的妻子儿女都被诛杀。
English: The Bell Association wanted to give Jiang Wei fifty thousand rupees to make him a striker. The Wei Dynasty generals were very angry and killed the Bell Association and Jiang Wei. Jiang Wei's wife and children were all killed.

古文：郤正著论论维曰： 姜伯约据上将之重，处群臣之右，宅舍弊薄，资财无馀，侧室无妾媵之亵，后庭无声乐之娱，衣服取供，舆马取备，饮食节制，不奢不约，官给费用，随手消尽；察其所以然者，非以激贪厉浊，抑情自割也，直谓如是为足，不在多求。
现代文：郤正写文章谈论姜维说： 姜伯约居于上将的重任，处在朝臣之上，而居处简陋，家无余财，没有沉迷妾室的享乐，庭院中没有声色的游乐，服饰车马仅求足够使用，饮食节约，不奢华不铺张，官府给的费用，随时用尽不留。分析他之所以这样做，不是为了鼓励贪欲者的意志，只是满足于现有条件，没有过多要求。
English: Zou Zheng is writing an article about Jiang Wei, saying: Jiang Bo is about to live in the heavy responsibility of the admiral, is above the courtier, but the residence is simple, the family has no spare money, does not indulge in the pleasure of the concubine's room, there is no vocal play in the courtyard, the clothing car and horse only require sufficient use, the diet is economical, not luxurious and not ostentatious, and the expenses given by the government are exhausted at any time. Analyze why he did this, not to encourage the will of the greedy, but to be satisfied with the existing conditions, without excessive demands.

古文：凡人之谈，常誉成毁败，扶高抑下，咸以姜维投厝无所，身死宗灭，以是贬削，不复料擿，异乎春秋褒贬之义矣。
现代文：凡人谈论，经常赞扬成功者而贬低失败者，扶持在高位者而贬低在下位者，都认为姜维投靠蜀国，而最后导致生死族灭，所以对他加以贬斥，而不进行具体分析，这是跟《春秋》中褒贬人物的道理相悖的。
English: Ordinary people talk about, often praising the winners and belittling the losers, supporting those in high positions and belittling those in lower positions, all think that Jiang Wei's support for Shu, and finally lead to the extinction of the tribe, so they disparage him without specific analysis, which is contrary to the principle of praising and disparaging characters in "Spring and Autumn."

古文：如姜维之乐学不倦，清素节约，自一时之仪表也。 
现代文：像姜伟这样好学不倦，清廉素朴，勤俭节约的，应当是一时的表率。 
English: A tireless learner, honest and simple, diligent and thrifty person like Jiang Wei should be a role model.

古文：维昔所俱至蜀，梁绪官至大鸿胪，尹赏执金吾，梁虔大长秋，皆先蜀亡没。
现代文：当年和姜维一起进入蜀国的人，梁绪官至大鸿胪，尹赏做了执金吾，梁虔担任大长秋，都在蜀国灭亡之前去世了。
English: The people who entered Shu with Jiang Wei that year, from Liang Xukan to Dahongyu, from Yin Huan to Jingwu, and from Liang Qian to Dai Changqiu, all died before the fall of Shu.

古文：评曰：蒋琬方整有威重，费祎宽济而博爱，咸承诸葛之成规，因循而不革，是以边境无虞，邦家和一，然犹未尽治小之宜，居静之理也。
现代文：评曰：蒋琬仪容修整有威严，费祎宽宏大度而博爱众人，都沿袭诸葛亮的规则，没有变革，所以边境没有战乱，家国统一，但是没有能掌握治理小国的方法，以及清净无为的道理。
English: The commentary said: Chiang Kai-shek's appearance is dignified, his efforts are magnanimous and he loves everyone. They all follow the rules of Zhuge Liang. There is no change, so there is no war on the border, the unification of the motherland, but there is no way to control a small country, and the principle of purity and inaction.

古文：姜维粗有文武，志立功名，而玩众黩旅，明断不周，终致陨毙。老子有云： 治大国者犹烹小鲜。 
现代文：姜维有文韬武略,立志于功名,但是玩忽职守,穷兵黩武,判断不周,终于导致身亡老子云： 治理大国就像烹煮小菜。 
English: Jiang Wei was well-educated and well-armed, and aspired to fame. However, he neglected his duties, was a poor soldier, and had poor judgment, which ultimately led to his death. Lao Ziyun: Governing a large country is like cooking a small dish.

古文：况於区区蕞尔，而可屡扰乎哉？
现代文：何况区区蜀国小地，又怎么能多次出兵呢？
English: What's more, it's just a small area in Shu Province, so how can they send out troops so many times?

