古文：子言之： 君子之道，辟则坊与，坊民之所不足者也。 
现代文：孔子说： 君子的治民之道，打个比方来说，就好像防止河水漫溢堤防！
English: Confucius said: A gentleman's way of governing the people is, metaphorically speaking, like preventing a river from overflowing its banks!

古文：大为之坊，民犹逾之。
现代文：它是为了防止百姓出现过失。
English: It is to prevent people from making mistakes.

古文：故君子礼以坊德，刑以坊淫，命以坊欲。
现代文：即使严密地设置堤防，百姓中还是有越规的。所以君子用礼来防止道德上的过失，用刑来防止邪恶的行为，用教令来防止贪婪的欲望。 
English: Even if the embankment is set up tightly, there are still people who exceed the rules. Therefore, the gentleman uses courtesy to prevent moral lapses, punishment to prevent evil acts, and edicts to prevent greedy desires.

古文：子云： 小人贫斯约，富斯骄；约斯盗，骄斯乱。 
现代文：孔子说： 小人贫穷便感到窘迫，富裕便会有骄横之气；贫穷就会去偷盗，有了骄横之气就会犯上作乱。
English: Confucius said, "Poor people are embarrassed when they are poor, and arrogant when they are rich; poor people steal when they are poor, and rebellious when they are arrogant."

古文：礼者，因人之情而为之节文，以为民坊者也。
现代文：所谓礼，就是顺应人的这种情况而为之制定控制的标准，以作为防止百姓越轨的堤防。
English: The so-called rite is a standard of control developed in response to this human situation, as a dike to prevent people from going off the rails.

古文：故圣人之制富贵也使民富不足以骄，贫不至于约，贵不慊于上，故乱益亡。
现代文：所以，圣人制定出了一套富贵贫贱的标准，使富起来的百姓不足以骄横，贫下去的百姓不至于穷困，取得一定社会地位的人不至于对上级不满，所以犯上作乱的事就曰趋减少。 
English: Therefore, the sage formulated a set of standards for rich and poor, so that the people who become rich are not arrogant enough, the people who become poor are not impoverished, and those who have achieved a certain social status are not dissatisfied with their superiors. Therefore, the number of people who commit riots is said to be decreasing.

古文：子云： 贫而好乐，富而好礼，众而以宁者，天下其几矣。
现代文：孔子说： 贫穷而能乐天知命，富贵而能彬彬有礼，一家族人多势众而能安守本分，普天之下能做到的人可以说是寥寥无几。
English: Confucius said: "If you are poor, you can be happy; if you are rich, you can be courteous; if you are a member of a large family, you can fulfill your duties safely. In the whole world, there are very few people who can do this.

古文：《诗》云： 民之贪乱，宁为荼毒。 
现代文：《诗经》上就说： 有些百姓贪心作乱，心安理得地去残害他人。 
English: "The Book of Songs" says: Some people are greedy and want to make trouble, and they have the peace of mind to harm others.

古文：故制：国不过千乘，都城不过百雉，家富不过百乘。
现代文：所以做出规定，诸侯的兵车不得超过千乘，国都的城墙不得超过百锥，卿大夫之家的兵车不得超过百乘。
English: Therefore, it was stipulated that the chariots of the princes should not exceed one thousand, the walls of the capital should not exceed one hundred, and the chariots of the noble doctor's family should not exceed one hundred.

古文：以此坊民，诸侯犹有畔者。
现代文：用这种办法来防备百姓、诸侯，哪里还有敢叛乱的？ 
English: Using this method to prevent the people and lords, where else would they dare to rebel?

古文：子云： 夫礼者，所以章疑别微，以为民坊者也。 
现代文：孔子说： 礼是用来裁决断定那些疑惑不定、隐晦不明的事情。
English: Confucius said: "Ritual is used to adjudicate and determine those things that are uncertain and obscure.

古文：故贵贱有等，衣服有别，朝廷有位，则民有所让。
现代文：所以人的贵贱有等级，衣服的色彩、图案有差别朝廷上有固定的班位，这样一来，老百姓就知道谁该让谁了。 
English: Therefore, people's nobility has a level, the color and pattern of clothes are different, and there is a fixed class in the court. In this way, the common people know who should let whom.

古文：子云： 天无二日，土无二王，家无二主，尊无二上，示民有君臣之别也。 
现代文：孔子说： 天上没有两个太阳，一国没有两个国王，一家没有两个家长，最高的权威只有一个，这是要向百姓显示有君臣之别。
English: Confucius said: There are not two suns in the sky, one country does not have two kings, one family does not have two parents, and there is only one highest authority. This is to show the people that there is a difference between a ruler and a subject.

古文：《春秋》不称楚越之王丧，礼君不称天，大夫不称君，恐民之惑也。
现代文：楚、越之君潜号称王，其国君死，《春秋》贬之，不书其葬；按照礼的规定，诸侯不得像天子那样称天，大夫不得像诸侯那样称君。
English: Chu and Yue submerged kings called themselves kings, their sovereigns died, "Spring and Autumn" denigrated them, and they were not buried; according to the rules of etiquette, the lords should not call themselves gods like the heavenly sons, and the doctors should not call themselves lords like the lords.

古文：《诗》云： 相彼盍旦，尚犹患之。 
现代文：这就是担心百姓对上下级关系产生迷惑。《诗经》上说： 你看那盎旦鸟儿的鸣叫，人们尚且讨厌它！ 
English: This is the fear that the people will be confused about the relationship between superiors and subordinates. "Song of Songs" said: Look at the chirping of the birds, people still hate it!

古文：子云： 君不与同姓同车，与异姓同车不同服，示民不嫌也。 
现代文：更何况对那些膺越犯上的人呢！ 孔子说： 国君不与同姓的人同车，与异姓的人可以同车，但不可穿相同的服装，这是要让臣民避嫌。
English: Confucius said, "The sovereign does not ride in the same carriage with people of the same surname, and may ride in the same carriage with people of different surnames, but may not wear the same clothes. This is to avoid offending his subjects."

古文：以此坊民，民犹得同姓以弒其君。
现代文：用这种方法来防范，臣民中还有同姓拭其君的。 
English: Using this method to prevent, there are also subjects with the same surname as Wuchijun.

古文：子云： 君子辞贵不辞贱，辞富不辞贫，则乱益亡。 
现代文：孔子说： 分配酒肉，应该反复辞让，然后接受粗陋的一份；即使这样，民众仍然会冒犯长者。
English: Confucius said: In the distribution of meat and wine, it is necessary to make repeated concessions, and then accept a rough share; even so, the people will still offend the elders.

古文：故君子与其使食浮于人也，宁使人浮于食。
现代文：筵席之上，让来让去，君子才坐在下首，就这样还有人潜越尊者。
English: On top of the table, give and take, a gentleman only sits at the head, and that's how people sneak past the reverend.

古文：子云： 觞酒豆肉让而受恶，民犹犯齿；衽席之上让而坐下，民犹犯贵；朝廷之位让而就贱，民犹犯君。 《诗》云： 民之无良，相怨一方；受爵不让，至于已斯亡。 
现代文：朝廷上的班位，让来让去，君子才立于贱位，就这样还有人潜越君上。《诗经》上说： 如今人们心不良，遇事只知怨对方；接受官爵不谦让，事关自己道理忘。 
English: The ranks in the imperial court are shifted from one to another, and the nobles are only elevated to a lower rank, so there are still people who sneak up on the princes. "The Book of Songs" said: Nowadays, people are not good at heart, and only know how to complain about each other in times of trouble; they are not humble enough to accept officials and nobles, and forget the truth when it comes to themselves.

古文：子云： 君子贵人而贱己，先人而后己，则民作让。 
现代文：孔子说： 君子尊重别人而贬抑自己，先人而后己，这样一来在百姓中就会兴起谦让的风气。
English: Confucius said: A gentleman respects others but belittles himself, putting others before himself. In this way, a culture of modesty will arise among the people.

古文：故称人之君曰君，自称其君曰寡君。
现代文：所以称呼别人的国君叫国君，称呼自己的国君叫寡君。 
English: Therefore, the sovereign who addresses others is called the sovereign, and the sovereign who addresses himself is called the sovereign.

古文：子云： 利禄，先死者而后生者，则民不偝；先亡者而后存者，则民可以托。 
现代文：孔子说： 利益和荣誉，应该先给死者，后给生者，这样一来，百姓就不会背弃死者；先给在国外为国事奔走的人，后给留在国内的人，这样一来，老百姓就感到国君可以信托。
English: Confucius said, "Benefits and honors should be given first to the dead and then to the living, so that the people will not turn their backs on the dead; first to those who go abroad for state affairs, and then to those who stay at home, so that the people will feel that the sovereign can be trusted.

古文：《诗》云： 先君之思，以畜寡人。 
现代文：《诗经》上说： 你应该思念死去的先君，赡养我这未亡人。 
English: "The Book of Songs" says: "You should think of your dead forefather and support me, a widow.

古文：以此坊民，民犹偝死而号无告。
现代文：用这种方法防范百姓，百姓还有背弃死者而死者的家属却哭告无门的。 
English: This method is used to prevent the people from turning their backs on the deceased, while the deceased's family members are left with nowhere to turn.

古文：子云： 有国家者，贵人而贱禄，则民兴让；尚技而贱车，则民兴艺。 
现代文：孔子说: 治理国家的人，重视人的品德，对有德的人，不吝啬封以爵禄；那么民众就会盛兴礼让。崇尚人的技能，对有能的人不吝啬赐以车服；那么民众就会学习技艺。
English: Confucius said: Those who govern the country should attach importance to people's virtue, and those who have virtue should not be stingy in awarding peerage; then the people will flourish in courtesy. Admire people's skills, and do not be stingy in giving car clothes to capable people; then the people will learn skills.

古文：故君子约言，小人先言。
现代文：所以君子是少说话，多干事；小人则是事还没做，就先说大话。 
English: Therefore, a gentleman should talk less and do more; a villain should talk a lot before doing anything.

古文：子云： 上酌民言，则下天上施；上不酌民言，则犯也；下不天上施，则乱也。 
现代文：孔子说: 在上位的人斟酌听取民众的意愿，民众就会把上面施行的政治看得像天意一样。在上位的人不听取民众的意愿，民众就要犯上；民众不把上面的政治看得像天意，就要作乱。
English: Confucius said: If the people at the top listen to the wishes of the people, the people will regard the politics carried out above as the will of heaven. If the people at the top do not listen to the wishes of the people, the people will commit crimes; if the people do not regard the politics above as the will of heaven, they will make trouble.

古文：故君子信让以莅百姓，则民之报礼重。
现代文：所以君子以信用和礼让来统治百姓，民众也会重重地以礼相报。
English: Therefore, a gentleman rules the people with trust and courtesy, and the people will reciprocate with courtesy.

古文：《诗》云： 先民有言，询于刍荛。 
现代文：《诗经》上说: 先人有遗训，在上者要咨询及于樵夫。  
English: "The Book of Songs" says: The ancients said something like this, you should seek advice from those who cut grass and chop wood.

古文：子云： 善则称人，过则称己，则民不争；善则称人，过则称己，则怨益亡。 
现代文：孔子说: 有善行则归功于他人，有过错则归咎于自己，这样民众就不会发生争执。有善行则归功于他人，有过错则归咎于自己，这样怨恨就会日益减少。
English: Confucius said: Good deeds should be attributed to others, and faults should be attributed to oneself, so that people will not quarrel; good deeds should be attributed to others, and faults should be attributed to oneself, so that resentment will decrease day by day.

古文：《诗》云： 尔卜尔筮，履无咎言。 
现代文：《诗经》上说: 你占卜，你算卦，卦体上面无坏话。  
English: "The Book of Songs" says: You are divining, you are calculating divination, and there are no bad words on the divination board.

古文：子云： 善则称人，过则称己，则民让善。 
现代文：孔子说: 有善行则归功于他人，有过错则归咎于自己。
English: Confucius said: If you do a good deed, give credit to others; if you make a mistake, blame yourself.

古文：《诗》云： 考卜惟王，度是镐京；惟龟正之，武王成之。 
现代文：这样民众就会在荣誉面前谦让。《诗经》上说: 武王考察占卜，决定建都镐京；龟能正其吉兆，武王完成大事。  
English: The "Song of Songs" says: King Wu examined divination and decided to build a capital city; the turtle can be a good omen, and King Wu can accomplish great things.

古文：子云： 善则称君，过则称己，则民作忠。 
现代文：孔子说: 有善行则归功于君主，有过错则归咎于自己，民众就会激发忠君之心。
English: Confucius said: If there is a good deed, it will be attributed to the monarch, if there is a fault, it will be attributed to oneself, and the people will be inspired to be loyal to the monarch.

古文：《君陈》曰： 尔有嘉谋嘉猷，入告尔君于内，女乃顺之于外，曰：此谋此猷，惟我君之德。
现代文：《君陈》篇说； 你有好主意好方法，进去告诉你的君主，然后你再到外面去施行 ，并且说: 这主意、这办法，都是我们君主的功德。 啊!
English: You have a good idea, a good method, you go in and tell your sovereign, and then you go out and do it, and say, "This idea, this method, is the merit of our sovereign."

古文：于乎！是惟良显哉。 
现代文：只有我们善良的君主才能这样光明伟大啊! 这便是归功于君主。 
English: Only our kind monarch can be so bright and great! This is due to the monarch.

古文：子云： 善则称亲，过则称己，则民作孝。 
现代文：孔子说: 有善行则归功于父母，有过错则归咎于自己。这样民众便会提倡孝道。
English: Confucius said, "If you do a good deed, give credit to your parents, but if you make a mistake, blame yourself. In this way, people will promote filial piety."

古文：《大誓》曰： 予克纣，非予武，惟朕文考无罪；纣克予，非朕文考有罪，惟予小子无良。 
现代文：《大誓》上说: 如果我打败了商纣，那并不是我的武功，而是由于我的父亲本来没有过错，如果商纣打败了我，那并不是我父亲有过错，而是我没有善良的德行。  
English: In "The Great Oath," he said: "If I defeat Shangguan, it is not because of my martial skills, but because my father did not make a mistake. If Shangguan defeats me, it is not because of my father's mistake, but because I do not have the virtue of kindness."

古文：子云： 君子弛其亲之过，而敬其美。 
现代文：孔子说: 君子忘掉父母的过错，而敬重父母的美德。 
English: Confucius said: A gentleman should forget the faults of his parents, but respect their virtues.

古文：《论语》曰： 三年无改于父之道，可谓孝矣。 
现代文：《论语》上说: 三年不改变父亲生前的主张，可以算是孝了。 
English: "Analects" said: If you don't change your father's opinion for three years, you can be considered a filial son.

古文：高宗云： 三年其惟不言，言乃讙。 
现代文：所以高宗说: 在父亲死后三年不发表言论。一旦发表言论，天下都感到欢乐。 
English: Therefore, Gao Zong said: After the death of his father, he would not speak for three years. Once he spoke, the whole world felt happy.

古文：子云： 从命不忿，微谏不倦，劳而不怨，可谓孝矣。 《诗》云： 孝子不匮。 
现代文：孔子说: 服从父母的命令，不怠慢，即使父母有过错，也只能慢慢地温和地劝谏。为父母担当劳苦而毫无怨言，这样就可称得上是孝了。《诗经》上说: 孝子的孝心是无穷的。  
English: Confucius said: "Obey your parents' orders, do not neglect them, and even if your parents are at fault, you can only slowly and gently persuade them. If you work hard for your parents and do not complain, then you can be called a filial son. "The Book of Songs" said: "The filial piety of a filial son is endless."

古文：子云： 睦于父母之党，可谓孝矣。
现代文：孔子说： 能够与父母的亲人也和睦相处，才可以称作孝。
English: Confucius said: If you can get along well with your parents' relatives, you can be called a filial son.

古文：故君子因睦以合族。 
现代文：所以君子经常招待族人聚餐以加强。
English: Therefore, the gentleman often invited members of the tribe to dinner to strengthen the bond.

古文：《诗》云： 此令兄弟，绰绰有裕；不令兄弟，交相为愈。 
现代文：《诗经》上说： 兄弟关系良好，彼此融洽无间；兄弟关系恶劣，彼此互相指责。  
English: "The Book of Songs" says: Brothers have a good relationship and get along well with each other; brothers have a bad relationship and blame each other.

古文：子云： 于父之执，可以乘其车，不可以衣其衣。
现代文：孔子说： 对于父亲的同志，可以乘他的车子，但不可以穿他的衣服。
English: Confucius said, "If you are a comrade of your father, you may ride in his carriage, but you may not wear his clothes."

古文：君子以广孝也。 
现代文：君子这样作，就是把对父亲的孝道扩展到父亲的同辈。 
English: When a gentleman does this, he is extending his filial duty to his father to his father's peers.

古文：子云： 小人皆能养其亲，君子不敬，何以辨？ 
现代文：孔子说： 连小人都能够养活他的双亲，作为君子，如果也是只能养活而不知孝敬，那与小人还有什么区别呢！ 
English: Confucius said: Even a small man can support his parents. As a gentleman, if he can only support them and does not know how to show filial piety, what is the difference between him and a small man?

古文：子云： 父子不同位，以厚敬也。 
现代文：孔子说： 父亲与儿子，不能处在尊卑相同的位置上，以此来强调对父亲的敬重。
English: Confucius said: Fathers and sons cannot be in the same position of superiority and inferiority, in order to emphasize the respect for the father.

古文：《书》云： 厥辟不辟，忝厥祖。 
现代文：《尚书》上说： 做国君的不像个做国君的样子，那就是辱没他的先祖。  
English: "Shangshu" said: "Being a sovereign is not like being a sovereign, that is to humiliate his ancestors.

古文：子云： 父母在，不称老，言孝不言慈；闺门之内，戏而不叹。 
现代文：孔子说： 父母健在，做儿子的不敢自称老。平常要爹讲究对父母如何孝顺，不要讲究做父母的应该怎样心疼自己。
English: Confucius said: Parents are still alive, and sons dare not call themselves old. Usually, fathers should pay attention to how to be filial to their parents, not how to be a parent.

古文：君子以此坊民，民犹薄于孝而厚于慈。
现代文：家门之内，只可引逗父母高兴，不可在父母面前哀声叹气。君子用这些礼节来规范百姓，百姓还有讲究孝道的少，企求父母慈爱的多。 
English: Within the family, you can only make your parents happy, and you must not lament in front of your parents. Gentlemen use these etiquettes to regulate the people, and the people still pay less attention to filial piety, and seek more parental love.

古文：子云： 长民者，朝廷敬老，则民作孝。 
现代文：孔子说： 身为天子、诸侯，如果能够在朝廷上做到敬老，那么百姓就会兴起孝顺之风。 
English: Confucius said: As the son of heaven and the prince of princes, if you can respect the elderly in the imperial court, then the people will rise up the filial piety.

古文：子云： 祭祀之有尸也，宗庙之主也，示民有事也。
现代文：孔子说： 祭祀时候有尸，宗庙中设立神主，这是向人们指出应该尊奉的对象。
English: Confucius said: When there is a corpse at the time of sacrifice, and a god is established in the ancestral temple, this is to point out to people the object that should be worshipped.

古文：修宗庙，敬祀事，教民追孝也。 
现代文：修建宗庙，恭恭敬敬地进行祭祀，这是教育百姓不要忘掉死去的亲人。
English: The construction of the ancestral temple and the respectful offering of sacrifices are meant to educate the people not to forget their dead relatives.

古文：以此坊民，民犹忘其亲。
现代文：用这种办法来教育百姓，百姓还有忘掉亲人的。 
English: Use this method to educate the people, and the people will forget their relatives.

古文：子云： 敬则用祭器。
现代文：孔子说： 为了表示对宾客的尊敬，就可以用祭器来款待。
English: Confucius said: In order to show respect for the guests, you can use the altar to entertain.

古文：故君子不以菲废礼，不以美没礼。 
现代文：所以，君子不因家道贫穷而废除礼，也不因家道殷实而超过礼。
English: Therefore, a gentleman does not abolish the etiquette because his family is poor, nor does he exceed the etiquette because his family is affluent.

古文：故食礼：主人亲馈，则客祭；主人不亲馈，则客不祭。
现代文：所以食礼规定，主人亲自给客人布菜，客人就祭；主人不亲自给客人布菜，客人就不祭。
English: Therefore, according to the rules of the meal, if the host personally gives the guests the dish, the guests will make the offering; if the host does not personally give the guests the dish, the guests will not make the offering.

古文：故君子茍无礼，虽美不食焉。
现代文：所以，君子如果遇到无理的接待，即令是佳肴美味也不去吃。
English: Therefore, if a gentleman encounters unreasonable reception, he will not eat even if the dish is delicious.

古文：《易》曰： 东邻杀牛，不如西邻之禴祭，实受其福。 
现代文：《易经》上说： 殷封国中的杀牛之祭，还不如文王国中的杀猪之祭，能够真正地得到神的保佑。
English: "I Ching" said: The sacrifice of killing a cow in the Yinfu Kingdom is not as good as the sacrifice of killing a pig in the Wen Kingdom, and can truly receive God's blessing.

古文：《诗》云： 既醉以酒，既饱以德。 
现代文：《诗经》上说： 君子的设宴待客，不但要让把酒喝好，而且要充分展示美德。 
English: "The Book of Songs" says: When entertaining guests at a gentleman's banquet, not only should the wine be drunk well, but also the virtues should be fully demonstrated.

古文：以此示民，民犹争利而忘义。
现代文：用这种办法来教育百姓，百姓还有争利而忘义的。 
English: Using this method to educate the people, the people still have to fight for profits and forget about righteousness.

古文：子云： 七日戒，三日齐，承一人焉以为尸，过之者趋走，以教敬也。 
现代文：孔子说： 国君在祭祀的前十天内，头七天散斋，后三天致斋；又奉事一人以为尸，大夫士遇到他都要回避。
English: Confucius said, "During the first ten days of the sacrificial rites, the sovereign should break the fast for the first seven days, and then break the fast for the last three days.

古文：醴酒在室，醍酒在堂，澄酒在下，示民不淫也。
现代文：这是教导人们要对神恭敬。醛酒放在室内，醒酒放在堂上，澄酒放在堂下，味薄的放在上面，味厚的放在下面，这是教育人们不要贪味。
English: This is to teach people to respect God. Aldehyde wine is placed indoors, sober wine is placed in the hall, clear wine is placed in the hall, thinly flavored wine is placed on top, and thickly flavored wine is placed on the bottom. This is to teach people not to be greedy.

古文：尸饮三，众宾饮一，示民有上下也。
现代文：向尸敬酒三次，向宾敬酒只一次，这是教育人们要知道尊卑。
English: To toast a corpse three times, and a guest only once, is to teach respect.

古文：因其酒肉，聚其宗族，以教民睦也。
现代文：借着祭祀剩下的酒肉，聚集合族的人会餐，这是教育人们要和睦相处。
English: By sacrificing the leftover meat and wine and gathering the people of the tribe for a meal, this is to educate people to live in harmony.

古文：故堂上观乎室，堂下观乎上。
现代文：所以堂上的人以室内的人为楷模，堂下的人又以堂上的人为楷模。
English: Therefore, the people in the hall take the people in the room as a model, and the people in the hall take the people in the hall as a model.

古文：《诗》云： 礼仪卒度，笑语卒获。 
现代文：《诗经》上说： 礼仪都合乎法度，谈笑也很有分寸。  
English: "The Book of Songs" says: The etiquette is in accordance with the law, and the conversation and laughter are also very measured.

古文：子云： 宾礼每进以让，丧礼每加以远。 
现代文：孔子说： 行宾礼时，每逢进门、升堂都要互相谦让；而行丧礼时，每一个仪式的完成，都意味着死者离家更加遥远。
English: Confucius said, "In the course of a banquet, every time the guests enter the hall, they should be courteous to each other; while in the course of a funeral, the completion of every ceremony means that the deceased is further away from home.

古文：浴于中溜，饭于牖下，小敛于户内，大敛于阼，殡于客位，祖于庭，葬于墓，所以示远也。
现代文：人死以后，首先是在室中浴尸，接着是在南窗之下饭含，然后在门内举行小敛，在昨阶举行大敛，在西阶停殡，迁枢于家庙之中举行祖奠，最后葬于墓穴，借以表示死者离开生者愈来愈远了。
English: After a person's death, the corpse is first bathed in the room, then the meal is held under the south window, then the small funeral is held inside the door, the big funeral is held in the last step, the funeral is held in the west step, the ancestor's memorial service is held in the family temple, and finally buried in the grave, so as to show that the dead are farther and farther away from the living.

古文：殷人吊于圹，周人吊于家，示民不偝也。
现代文：殷人在墓地上吊慰死者家属，周人是在死者家属从墓地返回家中以后才进行吊慰，这是教育人们不要忘记死者。 
English: Yin people offer condolences to the families of the deceased at the cemetery, while Zhou people offer condolences only after the families of the deceased have returned home from the cemetery. This is to educate people not to forget the dead.

古文：子云： 死，民之卒事也，吾从周。 
现代文：孔子说： 死是人生的最后一件大事，周人的送死之礼比较完备，所以我赞成周人的办法。
English: Confucius said: Death is the last great event in life. Zhou Ren's gift of death is relatively complete, so I agree with Zhou Ren's method.

古文：以此坊民，诸侯犹有薨而不葬者。
现代文：用这种办法来规范人们，诸侯还有死了以后不能如期下葬的。 
English: Using this method to regulate people, lords can not be buried as scheduled after death.

古文：子云： 升自客阶，受吊于宾位，教民追孝也。 
现代文：孔子说： 葬毕回家以后，孝子还坚持从西阶升堂，在宾位受吊。这是教育人们不要马上忘记亲人。
English: Confucius said, "After returning home from the funeral, the filial son insisted on ascending the hall from the west step and hanging himself in the guest seat. This is to educate people not to immediately forget their relatives.

古文：未没丧不称君，示民不争也。故鲁《春秋》记晋丧曰： 杀其君之子奚齐及其君卓。 
现代文：所以，鲁国的《春秋》在记载晋国的丧事时说： 晋国大臣里克杀死了晋国国君的儿子奚齐，及其国君卓。 
English: Therefore, Lu's "Spring and Autumn" said when recording Jin Guo's funeral: Jin Guo's minister Rick killed Jin Guo's son He Qi and Jin Guo's son Zhuo.

古文：以此坊民，子犹有弒其父者。
现代文：用这种办法教育人们，还有儿子杀死他父亲的。 
English: That's how you educate people, and how a son killed his father.

古文：子云： 孝以事君，弟以事长 ，示民不贰也，故君子有君不谋仕，唯卜之日称二君。
现代文：孔子说： 用孝道来侍奉国君，用涕道来侍奉尊长，这是教育人们对上不要怀有二心。所以，国君之子在国君健在时不谋求任何官职，只有在代替国君占卜时才可以自称 国君的副手 。
English: Confucius said: "To serve the sovereign with filial piety, and to serve the patriarch with aversion, is to educate people not to harbor double-mindedness. Therefore, the sovereign's son does not seek any official position while the sovereign is alive, and can only call himself the sovereign's deputy when he replaces the sovereign in divination."

古文：丧父三年，丧君三年，示民不疑也。
现代文：父亲死了守丧三年，国君死了也守丧三年，这是向百姓表示，国君的尊严与父亲完全一样，毋庸置疑。
English: When the father died, there was a three-year mourning period, and when the sovereign died, there was also a three-year mourning period. This indicated to the people that the dignity of the sovereign was exactly the same as that of the father, beyond any doubt.

古文：父母在，不敢有其身，不敢私其财，示民有上下也。
现代文：父母健在之时，作儿子的就不敢认为身体是自己的，也不敢置备私产，这是教育人们要知道上下尊卑。
English: When parents are alive, sons do not dare to think that the body is their own, nor do they dare to prepare private property. This is to educate people to know the superiority and inferiority.

古文：故天子四海之内无客礼，莫敢为主焉。
现代文：所以天子在四海之内没有作客的礼仪，因为没有哪个人敢当他的主人。
English: That is why the Son of Heaven does not have the etiquette of being a guest in the four seas, because no one dares to be his master.

古文：故君适其臣，升自阼阶，即位于堂，示民不敢有其室也。
现代文：所以国君到了臣下家里，升自主阶，即位于堂，这是教育百姓不要把家就看成是自己的。
English: Therefore, when the sovereign came to the vassal's home, he was promoted to the independent level, that is, he was placed in the hall. This is to educate the people not to regard the home as their own.

古文：父母在，馈献不及车马，示民不敢专也。
现代文：父母健在，向别人赠送东西，小件东西还可以，像车马那样的大件就不可以，这是教育百姓不敢自作主张。
English: Parents are alive, and they give things to others. Small things are OK, but big things like cars and horses are not. This is to educate the people not to dare to make their own opinions.

古文：以此坊民，民犹忘其亲而贰其君。
现代文：用这种办法来教育百姓，百姓还有忘掉父母和对国君怀有二心的。 
English: Using this method to educate the people, the people also forget their parents and harbor ill will toward the king.

