古文：郑玄真玄兔曹元理赵达贞观秘记一行邢和璞满师马处谦袁弘御
现代文：郑玄真玄兔曹元理赵达贞观秘记一行邢和璞满师马处谦袁弘御
English: Zheng Xuan, Zhen Xuan, Hare Cao, Yuan Li, Zhao, Dazhongguan, Secret of the Way of Wisdom

古文：郑玄
现代文：郑玄
English: Zheng Xuan

古文：汉郑玄在马融门下。三年不相见，高足弟子传授而已。
现代文：郑玄，汉朝人。郑玄拜马融为师学习算学，三年没有见到师父马融的面。
English: Zheng Xuan, Han Dynasty. Zheng Xuan studied mathematics under Ma Rong, but did not see his master for three years.

古文：常算浑天不合，问诸弟子，弟子莫能解。
现代文：马融只是让他的一个学得较好的学生教郑玄而已。一次，马融计算浑天算的不符合，问他的弟子们，没有一个能算出来的。有个弟子说郑玄能算。
English: Ma Rong just let one of his better-educated students teach Zheng Xuan. Once, Ma Rong found that his calculations did not match the calculations of the heavens and asked his disciples. None of them could figure it out. One disciple said that Zheng Xuan could calculate.

古文：或言玄。融召令算，一转便决。众咸骇服。
现代文：马融立即将郑玄召来让他计算，一转眼的工夫就算出来了，大家都既感到吃惊又佩服。
English: Ma Rong immediately called Zheng Xuan to let him calculate, and the work came out in a blink of an eye. Everyone was both surprised and impressed.

古文：及玄业成辞归，融心忌焉。
现代文：等到郑玄学业学成后辞别老师回归故里时，马融心里忌恨郑玄。
English: When Zheng Xuan returned to his hometown after his graduation, Ma Rong hated Zheng Xuan in his heart.

古文：玄亦疑有追者，乃坐桥下。在水上据屐。
现代文：郑玄也怀疑有人追赶他。于是坐在一座桥的下面，将穿着木屐的脚放在水面上。
English: Zheng Xuan also suspected that someone was chasing him, so he sat under a bridge and put his raft-clad feet on the water.

古文：融果转式逐之。告左右曰：玄在土下水上而据木，此必死矣。
现代文：马融果然用式这种卜具推算出他离去的方位，带领人去追杀郑玄。看见郑玄后，对跟他一起来追杀郑玄的人说：郑玄在土下水上而依靠着木，这回他必定得死。
English: After seeing Zheng Xuan, Ma Rong said to the people who came with him to kill Zheng Xuan, "Zheng Xuan is on the ground, on the water, and leaning on a tree. This time he will surely die."

古文：遂罢追。玄竟以免。
现代文：于是不杀郑玄，转身离去。
English: So instead of killing Zheng Xuan, he turned around and left.

古文：一说：郑康成师马融，三载无闻，融鄙而遣还。
现代文：郑玄方免一死。还有一种说法：郑玄跟马融学习算学，三年时间过去了，没有什么成就，马融鄙视他将他赶出师门。
English: Zheng Xuan was spared from death. There is also a saying: Zheng Xuan studied mathematics with Ma Rong, three years passed, nothing was achieved, Ma Rong despised him and kicked him out of the school.

古文：玄过树阴假寐。见一老父，以刀开腹心。谓曰：子可以学矣。
现代文：郑玄在回去的路上经过一株大树，便在树荫下闭眼休息一会儿。看见走来一位老翁，用刀割开他的肚腹看看他的心，说：你还是可以学成的。
English: On his way back, Zheng Xuan passed by a big tree, closed his eyes and rested for a while in the shade. He saw an old man come, cut open his stomach with a knife to see his heart, and said: "You can still learn it."

古文：于是寤而即返。遂精洞典籍。
现代文：于是，郑玄醒来后马上又回去重新跟马融学算学，很快便精通了所有的精典书籍。
English: As a result, after Zheng Xuan woke up, he immediately went back to study mathematics with Ma Rong again, and quickly mastered all the classic books.

古文：融叹曰：诗书礼乐，皆已东矣。
现代文：马融感叹地说：诗书礼乐，郑融都精通啦！
English: Ma Rong said with a sigh: Zheng Rong is well-versed in poems, books and music!

古文：潜欲杀玄，玄知而窃去。
现代文：心中暗暗产生杀机。郑玄觉察出老师有杀他的想法，偷偷离去。
English: Zheng Xuan sensed that the teacher had the idea of killing him and secretly left.

古文：融推式以算玄，玄当在土木上。
现代文：马融用计数的竹制筹码，推算出郑玄此时的方位应在土木上。
English: Ma Rong used the counted bamboo chips to calculate that Zheng Xuan's position at this time should be on the earthwork.

古文：躬骑马袭之。
现代文：亲自骑马去偷偷杀他。
English: He himself rode out to kill him in secret.

古文：玄入一桥下，俯伏柱上。
现代文：郑玄见老师骑马追来，慌忙跑到一座桥下，全身卧伏在桥柱子上躲藏起来。
English: When Zheng Xuan saw the teacher chasing him on horseback, he hurriedly ran under a bridge, crouched down on the bridge pillar and hid.

古文：融踟踌桥侧云：土木之间。此则当矣。
现代文：马融追到近前，下马来回寻找，不见郑玄，自言自语地说：郑玄此时应当在土木之间，就是这个地方啊。
English: Ma Rong chased him until he was close, dismounted and searched back and forth, but did not see Zheng Xuan, and said to himself: Zheng Xuan should be between the earthworks at this time, this is the place.

古文：有水非也。
现代文：这里还有水，看来不在这儿。
English: There's still water here, but it doesn't look like it's here.

古文：从此而归。
现代文：于是，马融骑马走了。
English: So Ma Rong rode away.

古文：玄用免焉。
现代文：郑玄躲避过了一场死亡。
English: Zheng Xuan dodged a death.

古文：又郑康成以永建二年七月戊寅生。
现代文：又：郑玄生于汉顺帝永建二年七月五日寅时。
English: Also: Zheng Xuan was born on the 5th day of the 7th month of the 2nd year of the reign of Emperor Han Shun.

古文：玄八九岁能下算乘除。年十一二随母还家。腊日宴会。
现代文：他长到八九岁时就能用筹码进行乘除法的运算，十一二岁随母亲回到家里，正逢腊月宴会。
English: When he was eight or nine years old, he was able to multiply and divide with a chip. At the age of eleven or twelve, he returned home with his mother, just in time for the Lunar New Year banquet.

古文：同时十许人皆美服盛饰，语言通了。玄独漠然，状如不及。
现代文：同席的十多个人，个个衣着华美，能说会道，唯独郑玄神情漠然，一言不发。
English: There are more than ten people at the table, all of whom are dressed gorgeously and can speak well, except for Zheng Xuan, who is indifferent and does not say a word.

古文：母私督数之。
现代文：母亲暗中几次督促郑玄，让他也跟同席人说说话。
English: His mother secretly urged Zheng Xuan several times to speak to his seatmate.

古文：乃曰：此非玄之所志也。
现代文：郑玄说：说话闲聊练嘴皮子，这不是我的志向。
English: Zheng Xuan said, "Talking and gossiping is not my ambition.

古文：真玄兔
现代文：真玄兔
English: The True Rabbit

古文：汉安定皇甫嵩、真玄兔，曹元理，并善算术，皆成帝时人。
现代文：汉朝时安定人皇甫嵩、真玄兔、曹元理，都精通算术，都是汉成帝时期的人。
English: During the Han Dynasty, emperors Fu Song, Zhen Xuanqiu and Cao Yuanli, all of whom were well versed in arithmetic, lived during the Han Dynasty.

古文：真常目算其年寿七十三，于绥和元年正月二十五日晡时死。书其屋壁以记之。
现代文：一次，真玄兔目算他的年寿是七十三岁，应当在绥和元年正月二十五日申时死去，并将这个日子写在屋内墙壁记下来。
English: On one occasion, he calculated that he was seventy-three years old and should have died on the twenty-fifth day of the first month of the first month of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year, and wrote down this day on the walls of the house.

古文：二十四日晡时死。
现代文：因此没有告诉你。
English: That's why I didn't tell you.

古文：其妻曰：见算时常下一算。
现代文：现在，你果然早一天到了死期啊！
English: Now, you have indeed reached the time of death one day earlier!

古文：欲以告之，虑脱有旨，故不告，今果先一日也。
现代文：真玄兔又对妻子说：北邙山上有坟墓。坟墓旁边长着一株楸树。
English: He also said to his wife, "There is a grave on Beilun Mountain. There is an elm tree next to the grave.

古文：真又曰：北邙青冢上孤槚之西四丈所，凿之入七尺。吾欲葬此地。及真死，依言往掘，得古时空槨，即以葬焉。
现代文：在楸树西侧四丈远的地方，往下挖七尺深，我死以后就将我埋葬在那里吧。待到真玄兔死后，家人按照他指示的方向位置去挖，挖到七尺深时，发现古时候的一具空槨，就将他下葬在这具空槨里了。
English: In a place four feet away on the west side of the eucalyptus tree, dig down seven feet deep, and bury me there after I die. After the death of the true hare, the family followed the direction and position he indicated to dig. When they dug down seven feet deep, they found an ancient coffin and buried him in this coffin.

古文：曹元理
现代文：曹元理
English: Cao Yuanli

古文：曹元理尝从真玄兔友人陈广汉。
现代文：曹元理有一次到真玄兔的朋友陈广汉家。
English: Cao Yuanli once went to the home of Chen Guanghan, a friend of Zhen Xuanqiu.

古文：广汉曰：吾有二囷米，忘其硕数。
现代文：陈广汉说：我有二囷米，忘记有多少石了。
English: Chen Guanghan said, "I have two bushels of rice, but I have forgotten how many stones there are.

古文：子为吾计之。
现代文：你为我计算一下。
English: Do the math for me.

古文：元理以食著十余转曰：东囷七百四十九石二斗七合，西囷六百九十七石八斗。
现代文：曹元理用吃饭的筷子量了十多圈，说：东囷有米七百四十九石二斗七合，西囷有米六百九十七石八斗。
English: Cao Yuanli measured more than ten circles with chopsticks used for eating, and said: Donglu has 749 kilos of rice, and Westlu has 697 kilos of rice.

古文：遂大署囷门。
现代文：于是陈广汉将囷门关好贴上封条。
English: So Chen Guanghan closed the gate and put a seal on it.

古文：后出米。西囷六百九十七石七斗九升。
现代文：后来往外出米，西囷出了六百九十七石七斗九升。
English: Later, rice was exported to foreign countries, and the West Bank produced 697 koku, 7 dou and 9 liters.

古文：中有一鼠，大堪一升。
现代文：囷中有一只老鼠，大约有一升那么大。
English: There's a mouse in the beak, about a litre in size.

古文：东囷不差圭合。
现代文：东囷不差厘毫。
English: Donglu is no different.

古文：元理后岁复遇广汉，广汉以米数告之。
现代文：第二年，曹元理又遇到了陈广汉。陈广汉将出囷时量的米的石数告诉曹元理。
English: The following year, Cao Yuanli met Chen Guanghan again. Chen Guanghan told Cao Yuanli the number of meters of stone needed to make a broom.

古文：元理以手击床曰：遂不知鼠之食米，不如剥面皮矣。
现代文：曹元理用手拍床说：怎么就不知道老鼠吃米？我的脸皮其厚，不如将它剥去了。
English: Cao Yuanli patted the bed with his hand and said, "How can you not know that mice eat rice? My skin is thick, it's better to peel it off."

古文：广汉为之取酒。鹿脯数脔。
现代文：陈广汉取来了酒和几块鹿肉干，请曹元理边算边喝酒。
English: Chen Guanghan brought wine and a few pieces of dried venison, and asked Cao Yuan to drink while counting.

古文：元理复算曰：甘蔗二十五区，应收一千五百三十六枚。
现代文：曹元理又用筹码计算后说：甘蔗田二十五畦，应该收一千五百三十六枚。
English: Cao Yuanli also used the chip to calculate and said: the sugar cane field is worth twenty-five baht, and it should collect fifteen hundred and thirty-six pieces.

古文：蹲鸱三十七亩，应收六百七十三石。
现代文：大芋三十七亩，应收六百七十三石。
English: Thirty-seven mu of large potatoes, receivables of 673 koku.

古文：千牛产二百犊。
现代文：有一千头牛，生产二百头牛犊。
English: There are a thousand cows, producing two hundred calves.

古文：万鸡将五万刍。
现代文：有一万只鸡，将孵出五万只鸡雏。
English: If there are 10,000 chickens, 50,000 chicks will be hatched.

古文：羊豕鹅鸭，皆道其数。果蓏殽核，悉知其所。
现代文：羊猪鹅鸭，都说出它们的数目；瓜果蔬菜果实，都知道它们有多少。
English: Goats, pigs, geese and ducks all tell their numbers; melons, fruits, vegetables and fruits all know how many they are.

古文：乃曰：此资业之广，何供具之褊。
现代文：又说：你有这么多的家业，怎么拿出这么少的食物来招待我？
English: And he said, How is it that thou, being full, hast given me but little food?

古文：广汉惭曰：有仓卒客。
现代文：陈广汉惭愧地说：仓里有不招待客人。
English: Chen Guanghan said with shame: "We don't invite guests in the warehouse.

古文：无仓卒主人。
现代文：如果招待客人，等到仓里吃没有了，主人也没什么吃的了。
English: If you invite guests, by the time there is nothing left to eat in the barn, the host will have nothing left to eat.

古文：元理曰：俎上蒸肫一头，厨中荔枝一盘，皆可以为设。
现代文：曹元理说：你有那么多的猪鸡鸭鹅，有那么多的瓜果蔬菜，盛上一头蒸肫，再盛上一盘荔枝，不都可以招待我吗？
English: Cao Yuanli said: You have so many pigs, chickens, ducks and geese, so many fruits and vegetables, a bowl of steamed dumplings, and a plate of lychees, can't you invite me?

古文：广汉再拜谢罪。入取，尽日为欢。
现代文：陈广汉再次揖拜谢罪，进到厨房里重新取来菜肴，两人一起高高兴兴地喝酒，一直喝到晚上方散。
English: Chen Guanghan again prayed for forgiveness, went into the kitchen to retrieve the dishes, and the two happily drank together until the evening.

古文：其术后传南季。南季传项滔。项滔传子陆。
现代文：曹元理的算学，后来传给了傅南季；傅南季又传给了项滔；项滔又传给了傅南季的儿子傅陆。
English: Cao Yuanli's mathematics was later passed on to Fu Nanji; Fu Nanji passed it on to Xiang Tao; Xiang Tao passed it on to Fu Nanji's son Fu Lu.

古文：皆得其分数，而失其立妙焉。
现代文：但是这些人都只学到了曹元理的分数，而没有真正继承下来他在算学上的建树。
English: However, these people only learned Cao Yuanli's scores, but did not really inherit his achievements in mathematics.

古文：赵达
现代文：赵达
English: Zhao Da Zong

古文：吴太平二年，长沙大饥。杀人不可胜数。
现代文：吴国会稽王孙亮太平二年，长沙发生大饥荒，杀人不计其数，孙权派赵达去占算。
English: In the second year of King Sun Liang's reign of peace, a great famine occurred in Changsha, and countless people were killed. Sun Quan sent Zhao Da to investigate.

古文：孙权使赵达占之云：天地川泽相通，如人四体，鼻衂灸脚而愈。
现代文：赵达占算后说：天地川泽相互连通，就象人的四肢互相连通似的。
English: Zhao Dazhan said after the calculation: The heaven and earth are connected to each other, just like the human limbs are connected to each other.

古文：今余干水口，常暴起一洲。
现代文：鼻子出血了，灸脚就会医好它。
English: If your nose is bleeding, moxibustion will cure it.

古文：形如鳖，食彼郡风气。可祠而掘之。
现代文：现在余干县水口突然升起一渚沙洲，形状象鳖，将这个地方的风水给吃掉了，可以在祭祀后将这渚鳖形沙洲挖掉。
English: Now, a sandbar shaped like a cormorant has suddenly appeared at the mouth of the river in Yugang County. The wind and water of this place have eaten it up. This cormorant-shaped sandbar can be dug out after the ritual.

古文：权乃遣人祭以太牢，断其背。
现代文：于是孙权派人用牛、羊、猪三样牺牲为这渚沙洲举行了祭祀，然而让人掘断了它的脊背。
English: As a result, Sun Quan sent people to sacrifice cattle, sheep and pigs to hold a ritual for the sandbar, but they were forced to dig out the back of the cow.

古文：故老传云。饥遂上。
现代文：据从前的老人们说，掘断了后饥荒就解除了。
English: According to the old-timers of the past, the famine was lifted after the mine was broken.

古文：其水在饶州余干县也。
现代文：挖出的这条河渠就在饶州的余干县境内。
English: The excavated canal is located in Yugan County, Raozhou.

古文：贞观秘记
现代文：贞观秘记
English: The Secret of Chastity

古文：唐贞观中秘记云：唐三世后，有女主武王代有天下。
现代文：唐太宗贞观年间，有本秘记上说：唐朝三世后，有女主武王取代李姓而有天下。
English: During the reign of Emperor Taizong of the Tang Dynasty, it was said in a secret book: After the third generation of the Tang Dynasty, there was a mistress, King Wu, who replaced the surname Li and ruled the world.

古文：太宗密召李淳风访之。
现代文：唐太宗密召李淳风察访这件事。
English: Emperor Taizong of Tang secretly summoned Li Junfeng to investigate the matter.

古文：淳风奏言：臣据玄像，推算已定。
现代文：李淳风上奏太宗说：我根据天象，已经推算出来了。
English: Li Junfeng said: I have calculated everything according to the celestial elephant.

古文：其人已生在陛下宫内。从今不满四十年，当有天下。诛杀子孙殆尽。
现代文：这个女人现在就在皇帝你的后宫里，从现在算起不满四十年她当得天下，将您的皇子皇孙几乎杀尽了。
English: This woman is now in the emperor's harem. In less than forty years from now, she will be the ruler of the world, and she will have almost killed off your prince and grandson.

古文：太宗曰：疑似者杀之，何如？
现代文：唐太宗说：怀疑谁象就将她杀死，怎么样？
English: Tang Taizong said, "How about killing anyone who suspects her?"

古文：淳风曰：天之所命，必无禳避之法。
现代文：李淳风说：这是上天命定如此，没有什么祭神之法能躲避过去的。
English: Li Chunfeng said, "This was ordained by Heaven. There is no way of worshipping God that can avoid the past.

古文：王者不死，枉及无辜。
现代文：如果采用杀死的办法，将来成主的你杀不了她，被杀的都是无辜的人。
English: If you use the method of killing, you will not be able to kill her in the future. All those killed are innocent people.

古文：且据占已长成，在陛下宫内为眷属。
现代文：况且，根据我的占算这个女人已经长大成人，就在您的后宫中为嫔妃。
English: Moreover, according to my calculations, this woman is already an adult and is a concubine in your harem.

古文：更四十年又当衰老，老则仁慈。恐伤陛下子孙不多。
现代文：过了四十年后她将衰老。人老了会产生仁慈的心肠，恐怕不会伤害您太多的皇子皇孙的。
English: After forty years, she will grow old. When people grow old, they will develop a kind heart. I'm afraid she won't hurt too many of your sons and grandsons.

古文：今若杀之为仇，更生少壮，必加严毒。为害转甚。
现代文：现在若将她杀了结下仇怨，再生个新的女人，必将更加严厉狠毒，而且危害也将更严重的。
English: If you kill her now to settle a grudge and regenerate a new woman, it will certainly be more severe and vicious, and the harm will be more serious.

古文：遂止。一行
现代文：于是，唐太宗终止了杀死嫌疑者的念头。一行
English: As a result, Tang Taizong terminated the idea of killing the suspect.

古文：沙门一行，俗姓张名遂，郯公公瑾之曾孙。
现代文：僧人一行，俗姓张名遂，是郯公张公瑾的曾孙。
English: The group of monks, with the common name Zhang Nansui, are the great-grandsons of Zhang Gongjun.

古文：年少出家，以聪敏学行，见重于代。
现代文：一行和尚从小就出家为僧人，用他自己的聪慧与才智，为当代人所看重。
English: A line of monks have been ordained as monks since childhood, using their own wisdom and talent to be valued by contemporary people.

古文：玄宗诏于光大殿改撰历经。后又移就丽正殿，与学士参校。
现代文：唐玄宗将他召入光大殿改写历书，后来又移住在丽正殿，跟翰林学士们一起检验校核。
English: Tang Xuan Zong called him to the Guangda Hall to rewrite the calendar, and later he moved to the Lisheng Hall to check the proofreading with the scholars from Hanlin.

古文：一行乃撰《开元大衍历》一卷，《历议》十卷，《历成》十二卷，《历书》二十四卷，《七政长历》三卷。凡五部五十卷。未及奏上而卒。
现代文：于是一行和尚撰写成了《开元大衍历》一卷，《历议》十卷、《历成》十二卷、《历书》二十四卷、《七政长历》三卷，一共五部五十卷，未来得及上报给玄宗皇帝他就病逝了。
English: So a line of monks composed the "Kaiyuan Great Yuan Calendar" one volume, the "Calendar Discussion" ten volumes, the "Licheng" twelve volumes, the "Calendar Book" twenty-four volumes, and the "Seven Political Long Calendar" three volumes, a total of five fifty volumes. He died of illness before he could report to Emperor Xuanzong.

古文：张说奏上之，诏令行用。
现代文：宰相张说将一行和尚的遗著上报给玄宗皇帝后，玄宗下诏书命令使用一行撰写的新历。
English: After Prime Minister Zhang said that he would report the monk's posthumous work to Emperor Xuanzong, Xuanzong issued an edict ordering the use of the new calendar written by Xuanzong.

古文：初，一行造黄道游仪以进。
现代文：初时，一行和尚制造了一部黄道游仪进献皇上。
English: At the beginning, a group of monks made a zodiac clock to present to the emperor.

古文：御制《游仪铭》付太史监，将向灵台上，用以测候。分遣太史官大相元太等，驰驿往安南、朗、衮等州，测候日影。
现代文：玄宗皇帝亲自在上面撰写了《游仪铭》后，交付给太史监，将它放置在观测天象的灵台上，用来测量时辰，并且分别派遣太史官大相、元太等人，乘驿车赶往安南、朗、衮等州，去测量日影。
English: After Emperor Xuanzong personally wrote the "Traveling Epitaph" on it, he handed it over to the eunuch overseer, placed it on the celestial observation platform to measure the time, and separately dispatched the eunuch official Daso, the eunuch Yuan, and others to rush to Annan, Lang, Handan and other states by carriage to measure the shadow of the sun.

古文：同以二分二至之日午时，量日影，皆数年方定。
现代文：同时在春分、秋分，夏至、冬至这天的午时，测量日影，都测量好几年才定下来。
English: At the same time, at noon on the day of the vernal equinox, autumnal equinox, summer solstice, and winter solstice, the measurement of the sun shadow is measured for several years before it is settled.

古文：安南极高二十一度六分，冬至日影长七尺九寸三分，春秋二分长二尺九寸三分，夏至日在表南三寸一分，蔚州横野军北极高四十度，冬至日影长一丈五尺八分，春秋二分长六尺六寸二分，夏至影在表北二尺二寸九分。
现代文：安南州极高二十一度六分，冬至那天日影长七尺九寸二分，春分、秋分长二尺九寸三分，夏至这天日影在表南长三寸一分。蔚州横野军北极高四十度，冬至日影长一丈五尺八分，春分、秋分长六尺六寸二分，夏至日影在表北长二尺二寸九分。
English: On the day of the winter solstice, the sun's shadow is 7 feet, 9 inches and 2 minutes long. On the day of the spring and autumn equinoxes, the sun's shadow is 2 feet, 9 inches and 3 minutes long. On the day of the summer solstice, the sun's shadow is 3 inches and 1 minute long in the south of the table. On the day of the winter solstice, the sun's shadow is 7 feet, 9 inches and 2 minutes long. On the day of the summer solstice, the sun's shadow is 3 inches and 1 minute long in the south of the table.

古文：此二所为中土南北之极。
现代文：这两个地方是中华国土的南极与北极。
English: These two places are the South Pole and the North Pole of China.

古文：朗、衮、太原等州，并差互不同。用勾股法算之云：大约南北极，相去才八万余里。
现代文：朗、衮、太原等州，差的各不相同，用勾股法计算，说：大约南北极，相距才八万多里。
English: Lang, Handan, Taiyuan and other states, the difference is different, calculated by the method of cross-shareholding, said: about the north and south, the distance is only more than eighty thousand miles.

古文：修历人陈玄景亦善算。叹曰：古人云， 以管窥天，以蠡测海 。以为不可得而致也。
现代文：修历书的人陈玄景也精通算学，感叹地说：古人说，用管来观察天象，用瓢来测量海水，认为是办不到的事情。
English: Chen Xuanjing, a person who has studied the classics, is also proficient in arithmetic, and said with a sigh: The ancients said that using a tube to observe celestial objects and using a plow to measure seawater were things that were considered impossible.

古文：今以丈尺之术而测天地之大，岂可得哉？
现代文：现在一行僧人用丈、尺为单位来测量天地的大小，怎么可以测量出来呢？
English: Now, a group of monks are measuring the size of heaven and earth in units of length and meter. How can they measure it?

古文：若依此而言，则天地岂得为大也。
现代文：若按一行僧的说话，天与地又怎么能称得上大呢？
English: According to the words of a line of monks, how can heaven and earth be called great?

古文：其后参校一行《历经》，并精密，迄今行用。
现代文：后来，陈玄景参加检查校核一行僧人撰写的《历经》，使它更加精密，直到现在使用的还是这部《历经》。
English: Later, Chen Xuanjing participated in the inspection of the "Lingjing" written by a group of monks to make it more precise. Until now, this "Lingjing" is still used.

古文：邢和璞
现代文：邢和璞
English: and

古文：邢和璞好黄老之道，善心算。作《颍阳书疏》。
现代文：邢和璞爱好谈黄帝、老子的道学，擅长心算，曾经撰写过一本《颍阳书疏》。
English: Zou and Zou like to talk about the Taoism of the Yellow Emperor and Laozi, are good at mental arithmetic, and once wrote a book, "Zou Yang Shuro."

古文：有叩奇旋入空，或言有草，初未尝覩。
现代文：他能够依靠奇异的飞旋功夫升入天空，还有人说他会占卜。
English: He can soar into the sky on the strength of a strange spinning motion, and others say he can tell fortunes.

古文：段成式见山人郑昉说：崔司马者寄居荆州，与邢有旧。
现代文：开始没有发现他这些特异的功能。段成式一次遇见隐士郑昉讲了这样一个故事：有位姓崔的司马居住在荆州，是邢和璞的一位朋友。
English: At first, he did not discover these special functions. Duan Chengshih once met the hermit Zheng Yao and told such a story: There is a Sima surnamed Cui who lives in Jingzhou and is a friend of Yao and Yao.

古文：崔病积年且死，心常恃于邢。
现代文：崔患病多年，快要死了，心里常想，如果邢和璞在就好了。
English: Cui had been ill for many years and was about to die. He often thought that it would be better if Zhai and Zhai were still alive.

古文：崔一日觉卧室北墙，有人劚声。命左右视之，都无所见。
现代文：一天，崔司马觉得住屋的北墙外有人挖掘的声响，让仆人去看，都没看见什么。
English: One day, Triesma heard the sound of someone digging outside the northern wall of the house. He asked his servants to look, but they didn't see anything.

古文：卧空室之北，家人所居也。
现代文：他卧室北面的空屋，住着家人仆夫。
English: To the north of his bedroom, in an empty house, lives the family's butler.

古文：如此七日，劚不已。
现代文：一连七天，崔司马都似乎听到有人在掘墙。
English: For seven days in a row, Triesma seemed to hear someone digging in the wall.

古文：墙忽透，明如一粟。
现代文：忽然他看到北墙掘透，露出米粒大小的洞。
English: Suddenly, he saw that the northern wall had been drilled through, revealing a hole the size of a grain of rice.

古文：问左右，复不见。
现代文：他问手下人，还是没有看见什么。
English: He asked his men if they had seen anything.

古文：经一日，穴大如盘。
现代文：又过了一天。北墙上的小洞掘成磨盘那么大了。
English: Another day passed. A small hole in the north wall had been dug into a grindstone so big.

古文：崔窥之。墙外乃野外耳。
现代文：崔司马由洞向外面看，外面是野地啊。
English: Triesma looks out of the cave. It's a field outside.

古文：有数人荷锹钁，立于穴侧。
现代文：有几个人手执锹钁站在洞口两边。
English: A few people stood on either side of the mouth of the cave, holding shovels.

古文：崔问之：皆云，邢真人处分开此。
现代文：崔司马问他们这是干什么？都回答说：邢真人让我们将这掘开。
English: When Triesma asked them what it was, they all replied, "Let's dig it up."

古文：司马厄重，倍费功力。
现代文：崔司马你的灾难很重，让我们加倍耗费气力。
English: Triesma, your disaster is very heavy, let's double our efforts.

古文：有顷，导驺五六。悉平帻朱衣。辟曰：真人至。
现代文：过了一会儿，有五六个人驾车来到近前，都穿着大红衣裳戴着平巾帽子，大声喝道：真人驾到！
English: After a while, five or six people approached in a car, all wearing bright red clothes and flat caps, shouting: "The real people have arrived!"

古文：见邢舆中，白幍垂绶，执五明扇，侍卫数十，去穴数步而止。谓崔曰：公算尽，仆为公再三论，得延一纪。
现代文：崔司马看见邢和璞从车棚里走出来。只见他头戴白色的帽子，帽后垂着绶带，手拿一把五明扇，几十个卫兵簇拥着走到离墙洞几步的地方停下来，对崔司马说：你的期数本来已尽，我到阴曹那里去过了，再三为你理论，他们才答应再延长你十二年阳寿。
English: Triesma saw Zou and Zou coming out of the car shed. He was wearing a white cap, with a ribbon hanging from the back of the cap, and a five-pointed fan in his hand. Dozens of guards flocked to a place a few steps away from the wall cave and stopped and said to Triesma: Your term has already expired. I went to the devil and argued for you again and again, and they agreed to extend your twelve-year-old birthday.

古文：自此无若也。
现代文：从此之后你不会再有病痛之苦了。
English: After that, you will no longer suffer from pain.

古文：言毕，壁合如旧。
现代文：说罢，墙上的洞合上了象原先一样。
English: With that, the hole in the wall closed up as it had before.

古文：旬日病愈，又曾居终南。
现代文：过了十多天，崔司马的病也就完全好了。
English: After more than ten days, Triesma's illness was completely cured.

古文：好道者多卜筑依之。崔曙年少亦随焉。
现代文：邢和璞曾经住在终南山，许多求道的人都来到这里自己动手修建一座茅屋住下来，跟他一起修道。有个叫崔曙的年轻人，也来跟邢和璞学道。
English: Zou and Zou used to live in Zonan Mountain, and many seekers came here to build a hut with their own hands to live and practice with him. A young man named Cui Shu also came to study with Zou and Zou.

古文：伐薪汲泉，皆是名士。
现代文：在这里，担任砍柴担水的，都是些有名望的士人。
English: Here, the wood-choppers and water-carriers are all well-known scholars.

古文：邢尝谓其徒曰：三五日有一异客，君等可为予各办一味也。
现代文：一天，邢和璞跟徒弟们说：过三五天，有一位奇异的客人到咱们这里来。
English: One day, Yao and Yao said to their disciples, "In three or five days, a strange guest will come to our home.

古文：数日，备诸水陆，遂张筵于一亭。
现代文：你们每个人要为客人准备好一份菜肴。过了几天，山珍海味都准备齐全了，于是在一间亭子里摆下了宴席。
English: Each of you had to prepare a dish for the guests. After a few days, the mountain delicacies and seafood were all prepared, and the banquet was set up in a pavilion.

古文：戒无妄窥，众皆闭户，不敢謦欬。
现代文：邢和璞事先告戒大家不要随便乱看。于是大家都将窗户、门关严，都不敢咳嗽一声。
English: Toad and Toad warned everyone in advance not to look around. So everyone closed the windows and doors tightly and did not dare to cough.

古文：邢下山延一客。
现代文：邢和璞到山下去请来了一位客人。
English: Toad and Toad went down the mountain to invite a guest.

古文：长五尺，阔三尺，首居其半。
现代文：这个人身高五尺，宽三尺，脑袋占身体的一半。
English: This man is five feet tall, three feet wide, and his head takes up half of his body.

古文：绯衣宽博，横执象笏。
现代文：身穿大红衣裳，又宽又大，手中横拿着象牙笏板。
English: Dressed in a large red dress, wide and large, holding an ivory cutting board in her hands.

古文：其睫疏长，色若削瓜。鼓髯大笑，吻角侵耳。与邢剧谈，多非人间事故也。
现代文：他的眼睫毛稀而长，脸是青绿色，嘴角快到耳朵那儿，跟邢和璞谈得非常热烈，谈的多半都不是人世间的事。
English: His eyelashes were long and thin, his face was lime-green, the corners of his mouth came close to his ears, and he was talking very animatedly to Toad and Toad, and most of what they were talking about was not of this world.

古文：崔曙不耐，因走而过庭。
现代文：崔曙在屋内呆得有些不耐厌了，走出屋来穿过庭院。
English: Cui Akebono was getting a little tired of staying indoors, so he left the house and walked across the courtyard.

古文：客熟视，顾邢曰：此非泰山老师耶？
现代文：这位奇异的客人仔细看看他，对邢和璞说：这不是泰山老师么？
English: The strange guest took a good look at him and said to Toad and Toad, "Isn't that Teacher Tarzan?"

古文：应曰是。
现代文：邢和璞回答说：是的。
English: "Yes," said Toad and Toad.

古文：客复曰：更一转则失之千里矣，可惜。
现代文：客人又说：再一转世跟他原来差有千里那么远啊！真可惜！
English: The guest also said, "Another reincarnation is thousands of miles away from him! What a shame!"

古文：及暮而去，邢命崔曙谓曰：向客上帝戏臣也，言泰山老师，颇记无？
现代文：到傍晚了，这位客人才告辞下山，邢和璞让崔曙到他身边，说：这位客人是上帝的戏臣，他刚才说你是泰山老师转世，你还记得吗？
English: It was late in the evening before the guest left to go down the mountain. Zou and Zou asked Cui Shou to come to him and said, "This guest is God's actor. He just said that you are the reincarnation of Teacher Taishan. Do you remember?"

古文：崔垂泣言：某实泰山老师后身，不复忆。
现代文：崔曙流着眼泪说：我确实是泰山老师转世。但是，对从前的事情一点也不记得了。
English: With tears streaming down his face, Cui Shuguang said, "I am indeed the reincarnation of Teacher Taishan. However, I don't remember anything about what happened before.

古文：少常听先人言之，房琯太尉祈邢算终身之事，邢言若由东南止西北，禄命卒矣。
现代文：小时候，一次听先人讲，太尉房琯让邢和璞为他卜算一下自己什么时候寿终。邢和璞告诉他：你从东南回到西北的时候，就是你的寿、禄终止的日子。
English: When he was a child, he once heard from his predecessors that Lieutenant Fong Yao asked Yao and Yao Zhuang to calculate for him when he would end his life. Yao and Yao told him: When you return from the southeast to the northwest, that is the day when your life and fortune will end.

古文：降魄之处，非馆非寺，非途非署。
现代文：你死的地方，不是驿馆，也不是寺院。不是在途中，也不是在衙署内。
English: The place where you die is not a gong hall, nor a temple. It is not on the way, nor in the gong center.

古文：病起于鱼飧，休材龟兹板。
现代文：你的病从吃鱼开始，你死后将用龟兹板为棺。
English: Your illness started from eating fish. When you die, you will be buried in a coffin made of tortoise shell.

古文：后房自袁州除汉州。罢归，至阆州，舍于紫极宫。适顾工治木。
现代文：后来，房琯自袁州改任汉州，辞职后返回故里时途径阆州，住在紫极宫道观里，正赶上观里雇几位木匠师傅做器具。
English: Later, Fong Yao changed his post from Yuanzhou to Hanzhou, and when he returned to his hometown after resigning, he took the route of Bozhou and lived in the Taoist Temple of Zijiu Palace. He was just in time to hire several carpenters to make utensils.

古文：房怪其木理成形。
现代文：房琯觉得木板的纹理特殊，询问道士。
English: Fusang thought the texture of the wooden board was special, so he asked a Taoist priest.

古文：问之，道士称：数月前，有贾客施数断龟兹板，今治为屠苏也。
现代文：道士说：几个月前，有位商人施舍给道观几块龟兹板，现在用它打个屏障。
English: The Taoist said: A few months ago, a merchant gave Taoism a few pieces of tortoise plate, and now it is used to build a barrier.

古文：房始忆邢之言。
现代文：房琯这才想起多年前邢和璞给他卜算生死后告诉他的那些话。
English: It was only then that Fang Yao remembered the words that Yao and Yao had told him many years ago after Bo Xianrong's death.

古文：有顷，刺史具鲙邀房。
现代文：过了一会儿，阆州刺史准备好了鱼宴邀请房琯。
English: After a while, Zhangzhou Sashih prepared a fish feast to invite Fang Tao.

古文：房叹曰：邢君神人也。
现代文：房琯叹息一声，说：邢和璞真是神人啊！
English: Fang Yao sighed and said, "Fang Yao and Fang Yao are really gods!

古文：乃具白于刺史，且以龟兹板为讬。
现代文：于是，将事情的缘委讲给刺史听，并且托付阆州刺史，他死后一定用龟兹板为棺入殓。
English: As a result, he told the committee about the circumstances of the matter to Zhi Shi, and entrusted Zhengzhou Zhi Shi, and after his death, he must use the tortoise plate as the coffin.

古文：其夕，病鲙而终。
现代文：这天晚上，房琯终因吃鱼得病死了。
English: That night, Fang Yao finally died of illness from eating fish.

古文：满师
现代文：满师
English: Full of teachers

古文：西京太平坊法寿寺有满师善九宫。
现代文：位于西京长安太平坊内的法寿寺，有个僧人叫满师，擅长推算九宫八卦。
English: Located in Chang'an Taipingfang of West Beijing, Faju Temple has a monk named Man Shih, who is good at calculating the nine palaces of the Eight Trigrams.

古文：大理卿王璿尝问之。
现代文：一次，大理卿王璿让他给推算一下前程。
English: On one occasion, Dalicheng Wang Yao asked him to calculate his future.

古文：师云：公某月当改官，似是中书门下，甚近玉阶。
现代文：满师推算后说：你某月当变更官职，似乎是到中书门下，特别靠近皇上。
English: After calculation, Master Man said, "When you change your official position in a certain month, it seems that you will come under the gate of Chinese literature, especially close to the emperor.

古文：璿自谓黄门侍郎未可得也。给舍又已过矣。
现代文：王璿自己估算说：任黄门侍郎是不太可能的，任给事中或者中书舍人已经过了。
English: Wang Yao himself estimated that: it is unlikely to be appointed as the Yellow Gate waiter, and it has already passed the time to appoint someone who is in the middle of things or who has given up Chinese calligraphy.

古文：后果改为金吾将军，常侍玉阶。
现代文：能改任个什么官呢？后来，王璿改任金吾将军，经常站在玉阶前守卫皇上。
English: What kind of official can be changed? Later, Wang Xi was changed to General Kingo, and often stood in front of the jade steps to guard the emperor.

古文：满公又云：王鉷一家尽成白骨。
现代文：满师的推算果然应验了。满师又说道：王鉷一家人都得死去变成一堆白骨。
English: Master Man's prediction came true. Master Man also said: Wang Yao's entire family would have to die and turn into a pile of bones.

古文：有所克皆验。
现代文：后来，果然遇到凶事全家都死去了。
English: Later, the whole family died in a freak accident.

古文：马处谦
现代文：马处谦
English: Ma Chuanqian

古文：扶风马处谦病瞽，厥父俾其学易，以求衣食。
现代文：扶风人马处谦因患疾病双眼失明，他父亲让他学习易经，用它来谋生。
English: His father made him study the I Ching, which he used to earn a living, after he lost his sight due to an illness.

古文：尝于安陆鬻筮自给。
现代文：一次，马处谦在安陆卖卜。
English: On one occasion, Ma Chuanqian was selling crabs in Anlu.

古文：有一人谒筮，谓马生曰：子之筮未臻其妙。我有秘法，子能从我学之乎？
现代文：过来一个人看他占卜后，对他说：你占卜的技艺还没有达到绝妙的程度，我有不为他人所知的占卜秘法，你愿意跟我学习吗？
English: A man came over to watch his divination and said to him: Your divination skills have not yet reached an excellent level. I have a secret divination method that is not known to others. Would you like to learn from me?

古文：马生乃随往。郡境有陶仙观，受星算之诀，凡一十七行。
现代文：马处谦就跟这个人来到安陆郡内的陶仙观，这个人在观中传授他占卜秘法，一共十七种。
English: Ma Chuanqian went with this man to the Taoist Temple in Anlu County, where this man taught him seventeen divination methods.

古文：因请其爵里。
现代文：马处谦问这个人任什么官职，家在哪里？
English: Ma Duanqian asked what official position this person held, and where was his home?

古文：乃云：胡其姓而恬其名。诫之曰：子有官禄，终至五十二岁。
现代文：这个人回答说：我叫胡恬，接着告诫马处谦，你命中能作官食皇家奉禄，能活到五十二岁。
English: The man replied, "My name is Hu Yao," and went on to tell Ma Duqian that it is your destiny to serve as the official food of the royal family and to live to be 52 years old.

古文：幸勿道我行止于王侯之门。
现代文：请不要将我的来历、去向告诉官宦人家。
English: Please don't tell the officials about my background and whereabouts.

古文：马生得诀，言事甚验。
现代文：马处谦跟胡恬学到占卜的秘法后，每次占卜预测都很灵验。
English: After learning the secret of divination from Ma Shuchuan and Hu Yaobang, each time the divination prediction is very effective.

古文：赵匡明弃荆入蜀，因随至成都。
现代文：赵匡明离开荆州到蜀，马处谦也随同前往。
English: Zhao Kuangming left Jingzhou for Shu, and Ma Shuqian also went with him.

古文：王先主尝令杜光庭先生，密问享寿几何。
现代文：到了成都后，一次蜀王派杜光庭密秘让马处谦占卜他能享多少阳寿。
English: After arriving in Chengdu, Shu Wang once sent Du Guangting to secretly ask Ma Duxian to predict how many years of life he could enjoy.

古文：对曰：主上受元阳之气。四斤八两。
现代文：马处谦卜完说：蜀王受元阳之气四斤八两。
English: Ma Duan Qianbu finished by saying: "Shu Wang was greatly influenced by Yuan Yang's qi.

古文：果七十二而崩。
现代文：后来，蜀王果然活到七十二岁。
English: Later, King Shu did indeed live to the age of seventy-two.

古文：四斤八两，即七十二两也。
现代文：四斤八两，既七十二两啊！
English: Four pounds eight ounces, that's seventy-two ounces!

古文：马生官至中郎金紫，亦五十二而殒。
现代文：马处谦官至中郎金紫，也是五十二岁那年去世的。
English: Jin Zi, a humble official and middle-ranking official in the Horse Department, also died at the age of fifty-two.

古文：袁弘御
现代文：袁弘御
English: Yuan Honggui

古文：后唐袁弘御为云中从事，尤精算术。
现代文：后唐袁弘御官任云中从事，尤其精通算术。
English: After the Tang Dynasty, Yuan Hong, a high-ranking official, was engaged in cloud computing and was particularly proficient in arithmetic.

古文：同府令算庭下桐树叶数。
现代文：同府的同事让他计算一下院子里一株桐树有多少片叶子。
English: A colleague from the same prefecture asked him to calculate how many leaves there are on a single tree in the yard.

古文：即自起量树，去地七尺，围之。取围径之数布算。
现代文：他立即丈量桐树，在离桐树七尺远围树画一个圆，量取圆的直径的尺寸进行运算。
English: He immediately measured the paulownia tree, drew a circle around the tree seven feet away from the paulownia tree, and calculated the size of the diameter of the circle.

古文：良久曰：若干叶。
现代文：过了许久，说：约有若干片树叶。
English: After a long time, he said, "There are some leaves on the tree."

古文：众不能覆。命撼去二十二叶，复使算。
现代文：同事们没法查核，让人撼掉二十二片叶子，又叫他算。
English: His colleagues couldn't check, so they made him shake out 22 leaves and asked him to count them.

古文：曰：已少向者二十一叶矣。
现代文：袁弘御说：照比刚才少了二十一片树叶。
English: Yuan Hongyou said, "Twenty-one leaves are missing compared to just now.

古文：审视之，两叶差小，止当一叶耳。
现代文：检查一下，掉落的叶中有两片略小点，当成一叶了。
English: Check it out, there are two small dots in the fallen leaf, which are considered to be one leaf.

古文：节度使张敬达有二玉碗，弘御量其广深，算之曰：此碗明年五月十六日巳时当破。
现代文：节度使张敬达有两只玉碗，袁弘御量了一下碗的深度与宽度，运算之后说：这两只碗明年五月十六日巳时一定会碎裂的。
English: Yuan Hong measured the depth and width of the bowls and said, "These two bowls will definitely break at the stroke of midnight on May 16th next year."

古文：敬达闻之曰：吾敬藏之，能破否？
现代文：张敬达听了后说：我将它们小心地藏起来，看它们还能破碎吗？
English: Zhang Jingda said after listening: I carefully hid them to see if they could still be broken?

古文：即命贮大笼，籍以衣絮，鏁之库中。
现代文：随即让人将两只玉碗用衣絮等物包裹好，装在一个大竹笼里面，放在库房中。
English: The two jade bowls were then wrapped in clothes lint and other materials, placed in a large bamboo cage, and placed in the storeroom.

古文：至期，库屋梁折，正压其笼，二碗俱碎。
现代文：到了来年五月十六日巳时，库房的屋梁突然折断了，掉下来刚好压在藏碗的竹笼上，两只玉碗都被砸碎了。
English: At the eleventh hour of the sixteenth day of the fifth month of the next year, the roof beam of the warehouse suddenly broke, falling down and just crushing the bamboo cage where the bowls were kept. Both jade bowls were smashed.

古文：太仆少卿薛文美同府亲见。
现代文：太仆少卿薛文美同在府中，亲眼见到这件事情。
English: The maid of honor, Xue Wenmei, was also in the palace and saw this with her own eyes.

