古文：二十有七年春，公会杞伯姬于洮。
现代文：二十七年春季，鲁庄公在洮地和杞伯姬会见。
English: In the spring of the 27th year, Lu Zhuang Gong met with Zou Bo Ji in Handan.

古文：夏六月，公会齐侯、宋公、陈侯、郑伯，同盟于幽。
现代文：夏季六月，鲁庄公与齐桓公、宋桓公、陈宣公、郑文公在幽地结盟。
English: In the summer of June, Lu Zhuang allied with Qi Huan, Song Huan, Chen Xuan and Zheng Wen in a secluded place.

古文：秋，公子友如陈，葬原仲。
现代文：秋季，公子友到达陈国，安葬原仲。
English: In the autumn, the prince's friends arrived in Chen Province to bury him.

古文：冬，杞伯姬来。
现代文：冬季，杞伯姬回鲁国。
English: In winter, Zou Boji returned to Lu.

古文：莒庆来逆叔姬。
现代文：莒庆到鲁国来迎接叔姬。
English: Yao Qing came to Lu Province to meet Shuhei.

古文：杞伯来朝。
现代文：杞伯来鲁国朝见鲁庄公。
English: Prince Shokan came to see the Emperor of Lu.

古文：公会齐侯于城濮。
现代文：鲁庄公在卫国的城濮会见齐侯。
English: Prince Luzhuang met with Qi Hou at the city gate of the imperial capital.

古文：二十七年春，公会杞伯姬于洮，非事也。
现代文：二十七年春季，鲁庄公和杞伯姬在洮地会见，与国家大事无关。
English: In the spring of the 27th year, Lu Zhuang Gong and Zou Bo Ji met in Handan, which had nothing to do with national events.

古文：天子非展义不巡守，诸侯非民事不举，卿非君命不越竟。
现代文：天子不是为了宣扬德义不出去视察，诸侯不是为了百姓的事情不能出行，卿没有国君的命令不能越过国境。
English: The Son of Heaven does not not go out to inspect in order to promote virtue and righteousness, the lords cannot travel for the sake of the people, and the lord cannot cross the border without the order of the sovereign.

古文：夏，同盟于幽，陈、郑服也。
现代文：夏季，鲁庄公和齐桓公、宋桓公、陈宣公、郑文公在幽地一起结盟，由于陈国和郑国都顺服了。
English: In the summer, Lu Zhuang, Qi Huan, Song Huan, Chen Xuan and Zheng Weng formed an alliance together in a secluded place, as both Chen and Zheng submitted.

古文：秋，公子友如陈，葬原仲，非礼也。
现代文：秋季，公子友到陈国安葬原仲，这不合于礼。
English: In the autumn, friends of the prince came to Chen Guoan to bury the original family, which was not proper.

古文：原仲，季友之旧也。
现代文：原仲，只是季友私人的老朋友。
English: Genchu is just a personal old friend of Ji You.

古文：冬，杞伯姬来，归宁也。
现代文：冬季，杞伯姬来，这是回娘家。
English: In winter, Zou Boji comes, this is back to her mother's house.

古文：凡诸侯之女，归宁曰来，出曰来归。夫人归宁曰如某，出曰归于某。
现代文：凡是诸侯的女儿，回娘家叫做 来 ，被夫家休弃叫做 来归 ，本国国君的夫人回娘家叫做 如某 ，被休弃叫做 归于某 。
English: Any daughter of a vassal is called "Coming" when she returns to her mother's house, "Coming" when she is abandoned by her husband's family, "Coming" when she returns to her mother's house, "Coming" when she is abandoned by her husband's family, "Coming" when she returns to her mother's house, and "Coming" when she is abandoned by her husband's family.

古文：晋侯将伐虢，士蒍曰： 不可。
现代文：晋献公准备进攻虢国。士蒍说： 不行。
English: Jin Xiangguo is preparing to attack Shandong. Shizhao says, "No."

古文：虢公骄，若骤得胜于我，必弃其民，无众而后伐之，欲御我，谁与？
现代文：虢公骄傲，如果突然和我国交战而得胜，就必定会丢弃他的百姓。
English: The Duke of Xing is so proud that if he were to suddenly go to war with our country and win, he would definitely abandon his people.

古文：夫礼乐慈爱，战所畜也。
现代文：礼、乐、慈、爱，这是作战所应当事先具备的。
English: Reverence, joy, kindness, and love, these are what a combatant should possess in advance.

古文：夫民让事乐和，爱亲哀丧而后可用也。
现代文：百姓谦让、和协、对亲属爱护，对丧事哀痛，这才可以使用。
English: It can only be used by the people who are humble, cooperative, caring for their relatives, and grieving for the dead.

古文：虢弗畜也，亟战将饥。 
现代文：现在虢国不具备这些，多次对外作战，百姓会气馁的。 
English: Now China does not have these, many times fighting abroad, the people will be discouraged.

古文：王使召伯廖赐齐侯命，且请伐卫，以其立子颓也。
现代文：周惠王派遣召伯廖赐命齐桓公，并要求他进攻卫国，因为卫国曾拥立子穨做周天子。
English: King Zhou Hui sent an envoy to summon Bo Liao to give the order to Prince Qi Huan, and asked him to attack the defenders, because the defenders had supported Zizhi Yao as Zhou Tianzi.

