古文：畏严大武，曰维四方畏威，乃宁。
现代文：威武神圣的战事。只有畏惧它的威严，四方才能安宁。
English: A mighty and holy war. Only by fearing its majesty can the four quarters be at peace.

古文：天作武，修戎兵，以助义正违。
现代文：上天安排武事，整治军队兵器，以匡扶正义矫正不义来顺从天意。
English: Heaven arranges the martial arts, rectifies the army's weapons, and obeys the will of heaven by rectifying injustice with the help of justice.

古文：顺天行五官，官候厥政，谓有所亡。
现代文：设五官，为其有失，五官当恪守其职。
English: If there are five officials, it is their fault, and the five officials should strictly abide by their duties.

古文：城郭沟渠，高厚是量。
现代文：敌人的城墙护城河，要测量它的高度深度。
English: The enemy's wall is a moat, and its height and depth must be measured.

古文：既践戎野，备慎其殃，敬其严君，乃战赦。
现代文：已经进入敌人境要处处警戒可能发生的灾祸。认真对待战事，决定是战还是不战。
English: Having entered the enemy's territory, we should be on the alert for possible disasters everywhere. We should take the war seriously and decide whether to fight or not.

古文：十艺必明，加之以十因，靡敌不荒。
现代文：十种作战艺术要明白，再加上十种作战的依靠，那就没有敌人不败逃的。
English: If you understand the ten arts of war and rely on the ten arts of war, then there is no enemy that cannot be defeated.

古文：阵若云布，侵若风行，轻车翼卫，在戎二方。
现代文：布阵要像行云一样密实，进攻要像风行一样迅疾。战车如羽翼护卫在中军两旁。
English: The deployment should be as dense as the clouds, and the attack should be as swift as the wind. The chariots are like winged guards on both sides of the Chinese army.

古文：我师之穷，靡人不刚。
现代文：即使我们的军队走到困境，也没有人不勇武刚强。
English: Even if our army is in a difficult situation, there is no one who is not brave and strong.

古文：十艺：一大援，二明从，三余子，四长兴，五伐人，六刑余，七三疑，八闲书，九用少，十兴怨。
现代文：十艺是：一，告知外有大援；二，告知后有增随；三，告知有庶子从军；四，告知是为长久兴盛；五，告知是讨伐有罪；六，告知徒隶可立功赎罪；七，会使用三种疑兵之计；八，会使用反间之书；九，会指挥少而精的部队；十，会给敌国制造怨恨。
English: The ten skills are: one, inform that there is a large amount of foreign aid; two, inform that there is an increase in following; three, inform that there is an illegitimate son in the army; four, inform that it is for long-term prosperity; five, inform that it is a crime to fight; six, inform that the followers can make merit to atone for the crime; seven, will use three kinds of suspicious tactics; eight, will use the book of the enemy; nine, will command a small but fine army; ten, will create resentment to the enemy country.

古文：十因：一树仁，二胜欲，三宾客，四通旅，五亲戚，六无告，七同事，八程巧，九□能，十利事。
现代文：十因是：一，树立仁德；二，战胜私欲；三，使臣游士；四，通旅商人；五，同姓姻亲；六，孤人寡妇；七，共事同僚；八，合于法式的技巧；九，身怀技能之人；十，精良的器物。
English: The ten reasons are: one, to establish benevolence; two, to overcome selfishness; three, envoys and wanderers; four, traveling merchants; five, in-laws with the same surname; six, widows and widowers; seven, colleagues; eight, skills that fit into the French style; nine, people with skills; ten, fine utensils.

古文：艺因伐用，是谓强转，应天顺时，时有寒暑，风雨饥疾，民乃不处，移散不败，农乃商贾，委以淫乐，赂以美女。
现代文：十艺、十因交互使用，这就叫有强大的辅助。
English: When the ten arts and the ten causes are used interactively, this is called a powerful auxiliary.

古文：主人若杖，□至城下，高堙临内，日夜不解。
现代文：如果敌国君主拒不接受，就把军队开到他的城下。用高堙窥视城内，日夜都不放松。
English: If the enemy monarch refuses to accept, he will drive the army to his city. Peep inside the city with stilts, and do not relax day and night.

古文：方阵并功，云何能御。
现代文：两列队伍一同进攻，他又如何抵挡?
English: Two teams attacking together, how could he resist?

古文：虽易必敬，是谓明武。
现代文：即使容易攻下，也一定要认真对待，这才叫做明武。
English: Even if it is easy to attack, it must be taken seriously, which is called Mingwu.

古文：城高城高难平，湮之以土，开之以走路，俄传器橹。
现代文：城墙很高难于平视，就用土来填塞。把他们的逃路留出，手持兵器的士兵如蚁附壁地攻城。
English: The walls were so high that it was difficult to see straight ahead, so they were filled with earth. Leaving their escape routes open, soldiers with weapons in their hands attacked the city like ants clinging to the walls.

古文：因风行火障水，水下惠，用元元，文诲其寡。旁隧外权，堕城湮溪，老弱单处，其辩乃离。
现代文：或顺风放火用火攻，或障火决河用水攻。或从旁边挖隧道，城外燃烽火，或拆毁城墙填塞护城河，让他们的长辈与幼弱单独居处，他们的计谋就不能完成。
English: Or they set fire to the wind and attack with fire, or they set fire to the dam and attack with water, or they dig a tunnel from the side and set a bonfire outside the city, or they tear down the city wall and fill the moat, and let their elders live alone with their young and weak, and their plot cannot be completed.

古文：既克和服，使众咸宜，竟其金革，是谓大夷。
现代文：攻城之后，要柔和服人；役使民众也要适当。仁爱地对待百姓，不欺侮他们的鳏寡。战事到此终了，这样才叫大夷。
English: After the siege of the city, it is necessary to serve the people with gentleness; it is also necessary to serve the people properly. Treat the people with kindness, do not bully their widows and widowers. The war is over, this is how the Taiyi are called.

