古文：儒者论曰： 天地故生人。 
现代文：儒者评论说： 天地有意识地创造了人。 
English: Confucians commented: Heaven and earth consciously created human beings.

古文：此言妄也。
现代文：这话荒诞不实。
English: That's a ridiculous thing to say.

古文：夫天地合气，人偶自生也；犹夫妇合气，子则自生也。
现代文：认为天上与地上的气相结合，人就偶然地自己产生了，如同丈夫与妻子的气相结合，孩子就自己出生一样。
English: It was thought that the combination of the heavenly and earthly breaths produced a person by chance, just as the combination of the husband's and wife's breaths produced a child.

古文：夫妇合气，非当时欲得生子；情欲动而合，合而生子矣。
现代文：其实，丈夫与妻子的气相结合，并不是当时想生孩子，而是情欲冲动在一起，在一起就生下了孩子。
English: As a matter of fact, the husband and wife's combining of their energies did not mean that they wanted to have a child at that time, but rather that their sexual impulses came together and they gave birth to a child together.

古文：且夫妇不故生子，以知天地不故生人也。
现代文：夫妻尚且不有意识地生孩子，由此可知天地也不会有意识地创造人。
English: Couples do not consciously give birth to children, so we know that heaven and earth do not consciously create people.

古文：然则人生於天地也，犹鱼之於渊，饥虱之於人也。
现代文：这样说来，人生在天地之间，就像鱼生在深水里，虱子下蛋长在人身上一样，是凭借气而出生，是同种类东西相繁殖。
English: In this way, life between heaven and earth, just as a fish is born in deep water and a louse lays eggs on a human body, is born by virtue of qi and is propagated by the same kind of thing.

古文：因气而生，种类相产，万物生天地之间，皆一实也。传曰：天地不故生人，人偶自生。
现代文：万物产生于天地之间，都是同样的情况。有人说： 天地不是有意识地创造人，而是人偶然自己产生的。
English: Some people say: Heaven and earth did not consciously create human beings, but human beings created themselves by chance.

古文：若此，论事者何故云 天地为炉，万物为铜，阴阳为火，造化为工 乎？
现代文：若是这样，议论这类事情的人为什么说 天地像熔炉，万物像炼出来的铜，阴阳二气像炭火，自然变化像冶炼工人 呢？
English: If this is so, why do people who discuss such things say that heaven and earth are like a furnace, all things are like refined copper, yin and yang are like coal, and natural changes are like smelting workers?

古文：案陶冶者之用烁铜燔器，故为之也。
现代文：考察一下，制陶和冶炼工人他们是用火冶炼锻烧器物，器物是有意做成的。
English: Consider that potters and smelters use fire to smelt pottery, which is intentionally made.

古文：而云天地不故生人，人偶自生耳，可谓陶冶者不故为器而器偶自成乎？
现代文：现在却说天地不是有意识地创造人，而是人偶然自己产生的，难道说制陶和冶炼工人不有意做器物，器物会偶然自己形成吗？
English: Now it is said that heaven and earth did not consciously create man, but that man created himself by chance. Can it be said that potters and smelters do not intentionally make objects, but that objects form themselves by chance?

古文：夫比不应事，未可谓喻；文不称实，未可谓是也。
现代文：可见，打比方与事实不相应，不能算讲清楚了；写文章与事实不符合，也不能说是正确的。 
English: It can be seen that the metaphor does not correspond to the facts and cannot be said to be clear; the writing of the article does not correspond to the facts and cannot be said to be correct.

古文：曰： 是喻人禀气不能纯一，若烁铜之下形，燔器之得火也，非谓天地生人与陶冶同也。 
现代文：我以为：上面这些比喻只能说明人承受自然之气是不可能完全一样，就像熔化的铜注进模子，烧制的陶器所得到的火一样各不相同，而并不是说天地创造人跟制陶器和冶炼铜一样是有意识的。
English: I thought: the above-mentioned metaphors only show that it is impossible for man to withstand the breath of nature in exactly the same way, just as the molten copper poured into the mold and the fire obtained by the fired pottery are different, and not that the creator of heaven and earth is as conscious as the potter and the smelting of copper.

古文：兴喻人皆引人事。
现代文：打比方，人们都是引用人和事作比喻。
English: By analogy, people use people and things as metaphors.

古文：人事有体，不可断绝。
现代文：每个人、每件事，都是一个整体，不能把它们截然分开来作片面理解。
English: Each person, each thing, is a whole, and cannot be separated from each other for one-sided understanding.

古文：以目视头，头不得不动；以手相足，足不得不摇。
现代文：用眼睛看头顶的东西，头不能不动；用手量脚底的长短，脚不能不动。
English: If you look at the top of your head with your eyes, you can't move your head; if you measure the length of the soles of your feet with your hands, you can't move your feet.

古文：目与头同形，手与足同体。
现代文：因为眼睛跟头同在一个身体上，手与脚也同在一个身体上都是相互关联的。
English: For as the eyes and the head are in one body, so are the hands and the feet in one body.

古文：今夫陶冶者，初埏埴作器，必模范为形，故作之也；燃炭生火，必调和炉灶，故为之也。
现代文：现今制陶和冶炼工人最初用水搅拌粘土作器物，一定要把坯子或模子做成器形，这是有意作的；然后烧炭生火，一定要管好炉灶，掌握好火候，这也是有意识做的。
English: Today's pottery and smelting workers first stir the clay products with water, and must make the blank or mold into a shape, which is intentional; then burn the charcoal to make a fire, and must control the stove and master the heat, which is also done consciously.

古文：及铜烁不能皆成，器燔不能尽善，不能故生也。
现代文：至于铜器冶炼不能都成功，陶器烧制不能都精美，这是因为它们不能都完全由人有意识地生产出来。
English: As for copperware, not all smelting can be successful, and pottery firing can not be exquisite, this is because they can not all be consciously produced by man.

古文：夫天不能故生人，则其生万物，亦不能故也。
现代文：天不能有意识地创造出人，那么它创造万物，也不可能是有意识的。
English: If God cannot consciously create a human being, then he cannot create all things consciously.

古文：天地合气，物偶自生矣。
现代文：天上与地上的气相互结合，万物便偶然地自己产生了。
English: The heavens and the earth's atmosphere combined with each other, and all things came into being by chance.

古文：夫耕耘播种，故为之也；及其成与不熟，偶自然也。
现代文：翻土，除草，播种，是有意识这样做的，至于庄稼成熟不成熟，则是偶然由自然决定的。
English: Turning over the soil, weeding, and sowing seeds is done consciously, but whether the crops are ripe or not is determined by nature.

古文：何以验之？
现代文：拿什么来证明？
English: What proof do you have?

古文：如天故生万物，当令其相亲爱，不当令之相贼害也。
现代文：如果天是有意识地创造万物，应当叫它们相亲相爱，不应当让它们相互残害。
English: If heaven consciously created all things, they should be made to love each other, and they should not be allowed to destroy each other.

古文：或曰：五行之气，天生万物。
现代文：有人说： 金、木、水、火、土五种气体，是天用来创造万物的。
English: Some people say: Gold, wood, water, fire and earth are the five gasses that the heavens use to create all things.

古文：以万物含五行之气，五行之气更相贼害。
现代文：因此万物中包含了这五种气体，这五种气体相互循环克制所以万物间也相互残害。 
English: Therefore, these five gases are contained in all things, and these five gases circulate and restrain each other, so all things also destroy each other.

古文：曰：天自当以一行之气生万物，令之相亲爱，不当令五行之气反使相贼害也。
现代文：我以为：如果天能有意识地创造万物，天就应当只用一种气体造就万物，叫它们之间相亲相爱，不应当让五种气体，反复使之相互克制伤害。
English: I thought: if heaven can consciously create all things, heaven should use only one gas to create all things, so that they are kind to each other, and should not allow five gases to repeatedly restrain each other from harm.

古文：或曰：欲为之用，故令相贼害；贼害相成也。
现代文：有人说： 天想使万物成为可用的东西，所以才让它们互相残害。
English: Some people say: God wanted to make all things useful, so he made them destroy each other.

古文：故天用五行之气生万物，人用万物作万事。
现代文：使万物互相残害，正是为了让它们相互依存。因此天用五行之气造就万物，人又用万物做成各种各样的事。
English: He made all things mutually destructive precisely in order to make them mutually dependent. Therefore, Heaven uses the five elements to create all things, and man uses all things to do all kinds of things.

古文：不能相制，不能相使，不相贼害，不成为用。
现代文：可见不能互相制约，就不能互相有用；不能相互残害，就不能各自成为有用的东西。
English: It can be seen that if they cannot restrain each other, they cannot be mutually useful; if they cannot harm each other, they cannot each become something useful.

古文：金不贼木，木不成用。火不烁金，金不成器。
现代文：金不伤害木，木不能成为有用之物；火不冶炼金，金不会成为器皿。
English: Gold does not injure wood, and wood cannot become a useful thing; fire does not smelt gold, and gold cannot become a vessel.

古文：故诸物相贼相利，含血之虫相胜服、相啮噬、相啖食者，皆五行气使之然也。 
现代文：所以各种物体相互残害又相互产生有利效果。有血的动物，互相取胜，制服对方，互相对咬，互相吞食，这都是五行之气使它们如此的。 
English: Therefore, all kinds of objects destroy each other and produce beneficial effects on each other.Blooded animals win each other, subdue each other, bite each other, and devour each other, all of which are caused by the five elements.

古文：曰： 天生万物欲令相为用，不得不相贼害也。则生虎狼蝮蛇及蜂虿之虫，皆贼害人，天又欲使人为之用邪？
现代文：我要问：天造就万物想使它们相互成为有用的东西，不能不互相残害，于是就产生虎、狼、蝮蛇以及蜂、虿之类动物，全都来残害人，那么天是不是又想让人成为它们享用之物呢？
English: I would like to ask: If God created all things and wanted them to be useful to each other, and they cannot help but harm each other, then He created tigers, wolves, boa constrictors, as well as bees, crickets and other animals, all of which come to harm people, then doesn't God also want people to become objects of enjoyment for them?

古文：且一人之身，含五行之气，故一人之行，有五常之操。
现代文：一个人的身体里，有五行之气，所以一个人的行为，有仁、义、礼、智、信五种操行。
English: In a person's body, there are five kinds of qi, so a person's behavior includes benevolence, righteousness, courtesy, wisdom, and faith.

古文：五常，五行之道也。
现代文：仁、义、礼、智、信五种道德规范，也是金、木、水、火、土五行的道义。
English: The five moral norms of benevolence, righteousness, propriety, wisdom, and faith are also the moral principles of the five elements of gold, wood, water, fire, and earth.

古文：五藏在内，五行气俱。
现代文：五脏在人体内，所以人体五行之气都具备。
English: The five viscera are in the human body, so the human body has the five elements.

古文：如论者之言，含血之虫，怀五行之气，辄相贼害。
现代文：照议论者的说法，有血的动物，都有五行之气，就相互残害。
English: According to the commentators, all blood animals have the five elements, and they kill each other.

古文：一人之身，胸怀五藏，自相贼也；一人之操，行义之心，自相害也。
现代文：那么一个人的身体，具有五脏，难道它们各自也要互相伤害吗？一个人的操行中，具有仁和义两个道德观念，难道也要自相危害吗？
English: So a person's body, with five internal organs, do they each have to harm each other? In a person's actions, with two moral concepts of benevolence and righteousness, do they also have to harm each other?

古文：且五行之气相贼害，含血之虫相胜服，其验何在？
现代文：再说，金、木、水、火、土五种气相互残害，有血动物相互取胜，制服对方，又在什么地方有过验证呢？
English: Besides, the five elements of gold, wood, water, fire and earth destroy each other, and the blood animals defeat each other and subdue each other. Where have they been verified?

古文：曰：寅，木也，其禽虎也；戍，土也，其禽犬也。
现代文：有人说： 寅属木，其动物属虎。戌属土，其动物属犬。
English: Some people say: the tiger belongs to the wood, its animal belongs to the tiger, the earthworm belongs to the soil, and its animal belongs to the dog.

古文：丑、未，亦土也，丑禽牛，未禽羊也。
现代文：丑、未也属土，丑的动物属牛，未的动物属羊。
English: Ugly and ugly animals also belong to the earth, ugly animals belong to cattle, and ugly animals belong to sheep.

古文：木胜土，故犬与牛羊为虎所服也。
现代文：木克制土，所以犬与牛羊都被虎所制服。
English: Wood is stronger than earth, so dogs, cattle and sheep are all subdued by tigers.

古文：亥水也，其禽豕也；巳，火也，其禽蛇也；子亦水也，其禽鼠也。
现代文：亥属水，其动物属猪。巳属火，其动物属蛇。子也属水，其动物属鼠。
English: The boar belongs to water, and its animal belongs to the pig. The snake belongs to fire, and its animal belongs to the snake. The son also belongs to water, and its animal belongs to the rat.

古文：午亦火也，其禽马也。
现代文：午也属火，其动物属马。
English: The afternoon is also fire, and its animal is horse.

古文：水胜火，故豕食蛇；火为水所害，故马食鼠屎而腹胀。
现代文：水克制火，所以猪吃蛇。火被水害，所以马吃鼠屎就腹胀。
English: Water controls fire, so pigs eat snakes. Fire is harmed by water, so horses eat rat droppings and become bloated.

古文：曰：审如论者之言，含血之虫，亦有不相胜之效。
现代文：我以为：果真像议论者说的，有血的动物，也有相互争斗取胜的证明。
English: I thought: if it's true, as the critics say, that animals that have blood also have evidence of fighting each other and winning.

古文：午，马也，子，鼠也，酉，鸡也，卯兔也。水胜火，鼠何不逐马？
现代文：午属马。子属鼠。酉属鸡。卯属兔。水克制火，鼠为什么不去追赶马？
English: The horse belongs to the morning, the rat belongs to the afternoon, the chicken belongs to the evening, and the rabbit belongs to the evening. Water restrains fire, so why doesn't the rat chase the horse?

古文：金胜木，鸡何不啄兔？
现代文：金克制木，鸡为什么不去啄食兔子？
English: Why doesn't the chicken eat the rabbit?

古文：亥，豕也，丑，牛也。
现代文：亥属牛。
English: The cow belongs to the boar family.

古文：土胜水，牛羊何不杀豕？巳，蛇也。申，猴也。
现代文：未属羊。
English: They are not sheep.

古文：火胜金，蛇何不食獼猴？
现代文：丑属牛。土克制水，牛羊为什么不杀死猪？
English: Ugly belongs to cattle. Why don't the cattle and sheep kill the pigs?

古文：獼猴者，畏鼠也。
现代文：巳属蛇。申属猴。
English: The snake belongs to the snake. The monkey belongs to the monkey.

古文：啮獼猴者，犬也。
现代文：火克制金，蛇为什么不吃猕猴？猕猴怕鼠。
English: Fire restrains gold, why don't snakes eat macaques? Macaques are afraid of mice.

古文：鼠，水。
现代文：鼠属水，猕猴属金。
English: Rats belong to water, and macaques belong to gold.

古文：獼猴，金也。
现代文：水不能克制金，那猕猴为什么害怕老鼠？
English: Water cannot restrain gold, so why is the macaque afraid of mice?

古文：水不胜金，獼猴何故畏鼠也？戍，土也，申，猴也。
现代文：咬猕猴的是狗。戌属土。申属金。土不能克制金，猴又为什么怕狗呢？
English: It is the dog that bites the macaque. The toad belongs to the earth. The appeal belongs to the gold. The earth cannot restrain the gold, so why is the monkey afraid of the dog?

古文：土不胜金，猴何故畏犬？东方，木也，其星仓龙也。
现代文：东方属木，其星属苍龙。西方属金，其星属白虎。
English: The East belongs to wood, and its star belongs to the dragon. The West belongs to gold, and its star belongs to the white tiger.

古文：西方，金也，其星白虎也；南方，火也，其星硃鸟也。
现代文：南方属火，其星属朱鸟。北方属水，其星属玄武。
English: The south is fire, and its star is the scarlet bird. The north is water, and its star is Xuanwu.

古文：北方，水也，其星玄武也。天有四星之精，降生四兽之体。
现代文：天有苍龙、白虎、朱鸟、玄武 四星 的精气，所以在地上造就出龙、虎、鸟、龟 四兽 的身体。
English: Heaven has the essence of the four stars - the celestial dragon, the white tiger, the vermilion bird, and the black dragon. Therefore, the bodies of the four beasts - the dragon, the tiger, the bird, and the turtle - are created on earth.

古文：含血之虫，以四兽为长，四兽含五行之气最较郑鼇案龙虎交不相贼，鸟龟会不相害。
现代文：有血动物，以四兽为头领，因为四兽所具有五行之气最显著。考察龙与虎相遇不会相互残害，鸟与龟碰上也不会相互伤害。
English: Blood animals, with the four beasts as the leader, because the four beasts have the most prominent five elements.

古文：以四兽验之，以十二辰之禽效之，五行之虫以气性相刻，则尤不相应。
现代文：用四兽来验证，用十二地支代表的动物来考察，所谓具有五行之气的动物按五行的性质要相互克制，就更加不符合事实。
English: Using the four beasts to verify, using the animals representing the twelve elements to investigate, the so-called animals with the five elements should restrain each other according to the nature of the five elements, which is even more inconsistent with the facts.

