古文：郊特牲，而社稷大牢。
现代文：郊祀祭天时用一头牛，而祭祀土神和谷神时要用牛、羊、猪三牲。
English: In the case of the suburb's worship of the god of heaven, a cow is used, while in the case of the worship of the god of the soil and the god of the valley, three animals are used: a cow, a sheep and a pig.

古文：天子适诸侯，诸侯膳用犊；诸侯适天子，天子赐之礼大牢；贵诚之义也。
现代文：天子到诸侯国，诸侯供膳只用一头小牛。而诸侯朝见天子，天子设宴则用牛、羊、猪三牲。
English: When the heavenly son came to the land of the princes, only a calf was used for the meal of the princes. However, when the princes came to see the heavenly son, the heavenly son used cattle, sheep, and pigs for the banquet.

古文：故天子牲孕弗食也，祭帝弗用也。
现代文：这是因为尊重真诚之心的缘故。所以天子不吃怀孕的牲畜，祭祀上帝也不用怀孕的牲畜。
English: This is out of respect for the sincerity of the heart. Therefore, the heavenly son does not eat pregnant animals, nor do pregnant animals need to be sacrificed to God.

古文：大路繁缨一就，先路三就，次路五就。
现代文：祭祀所乘用的车是大路，驾车的马，只有一条马缨；其次是先路，驾车的马有三条马缨；再次是次路，驾车的马则有五条马缨。
English: The chariot used in the sacrifice is the main road, and the driving horse has only one stirrup; the second is the first road, and the driving horse has three stirrups; and the second road, and the driving horse has five stirrups.

古文：郊血，大飨腥，三献爓，一献熟；至敬不飨味而贵气臭也。
现代文：诸侯举行盛宴招待来访宾客，如果是国君回敬国君的酒，则只须坐在原有的三重席上，不须变动。
English: Princes held feasts to invite visiting guests. If it was the sovereign's wine in return, they only had to sit on the original three-tiered table and did not have to change.

古文：诸侯为宾，灌用郁鬯。灌用臭也，大飨，尚腶修而已矣。大飨，君三重席而酢焉。三献之介，君专席而酢焉。此降尊以就卑也。
现代文：如果是大夫来访，主国国君向大夫的随员敬酒，主国国君就要把自己的三重席子改为一重席子，使与大夫随员的座席相等，这叫做 降尊以就卑 。
English: If the doctor is visiting, and the host country's sovereign makes a toast to the doctor's attendant, the host country's sovereign must change his triple seat to a single seat, so that it is equal to the seat of the doctor's attendant. This is called "lowering one's dignity to lower one's status."

古文：飨禘有乐，而食尝无乐，阴阳之义也。
现代文：春夏二季祭祖，举行飨礼，有音乐伴奏；秋冬二季祭祖，举行食礼，没有音乐伴奏。这是因为春夏属阳，秋冬属阴。
English: In the spring and summer, the ancestor of the festival is held with musical accompaniment; in the autumn and winter, the ancestor of the festival is held without musical accompaniment. This is because spring and summer are yang and autumn and winter are yin.

古文：凡饮，养阳气也；凡食，养阴气也。
现代文：凡是饮酒，意在保养阳气；凡是吃饭，意在保养阴气。
English: All drinking is intended to maintain the yang; all eating is intended to maintain the yin.

古文：故春禘而秋尝；春飨孤子，秋食耆老，其义一也。
现代文：所以春夏祭祖用飨礼，而秋冬祭祖用食礼。春天用飨礼招待烈士遗孤，秋天用食礼招待烈士父祖，其道理和上边讲的一样。
English: Therefore, the ancestors of the spring and summer festivals used the bowl ritual, while the ancestors of the autumn and winter festivals used the meal ritual. The spring used the bowl ritual to invite the martyrs and orphans, and the autumn used the meal ritual to invite the martyrs and ancestors. The reason is the same as the above.

古文：而食尝无乐。饮，养阳气也，故有乐；食，养阴气也，故无声。
现代文：而春夏二季祭祖的飨礼使用音乐，秋冬二季祭祖的食礼不用音乐。飨礼以饮酒为主，意在保养阳气，所以有音乐；食礼以吃饭为主，意在保养阴气，所以没有音乐。
English: While the spring and summer rites of the ancestors use music, the autumn and winter rites of the ancestors do not use music. The rites of the ancestors are mainly drinking, which is intended to maintain the yang, so there is music; the rites are mainly eating, which is intended to maintain the yin, so there is no music.

古文：凡声，阳也。
现代文：凡是音乐，都属阳类。
English: All music is masculine.

古文：鼎俎奇而笾豆偶，阴阳之义也。笾豆之实，水土之品也。
现代文：鼎和姐的数目总是单数，芝和豆的数目总是偶数，这是因为鼎姐是盛放牲体的，牲体是动物，属于阳类；而篷豆中盛放的多是植物，植物属于阴类。
English: The number of dinghe sisters is always singular, and the number of zhi and beans is always even. This is because dinghe sisters are stocked with animals, and animals are animals, belonging to the masculine category; while the stocked beans are mostly plants, and plants belong to the feminine category.

古文：不敢用亵味而贵多品，所以交于旦明之义也。
现代文：篷豆中盛放的食品，都是水中所生，土中所长，属于阴类。
English: The foods contained in taro are all crabs that are born in the water and grow in the soil. They belong to the crab family.

古文：宾入大门而奏《肆夏》，示易以敬也。
现代文：祭品既不敢用生人认为味美可口者，也不敢追求品种繁多，因为祭品是用来供奉神灵的。
English: Sacrifices neither dare to use those that are considered delicious by outsiders, nor do they dare to pursue a wide variety, because sacrifices are used to offer to the gods.

古文：卒爵而乐阕，孔子屡叹之。
现代文：夫子大宴来朝的诸侯，当客人进入宗庙大门时，乐队奏起迎宾曲《肆夏》。
English: When the guests entered the main gate of the ancestral temple, the orchestra played the welcome song "Summer."

古文：奠酬而工升歌，发德也。
现代文：宾主入席，又开始奏乐，酒过一巡，乐曲也恰好终了。
English: When the guests were seated, the music began again. After the wine had been served, the music ended.

古文：歌者在上，匏竹在下，贵人声也。
现代文：歌手在堂上，伴奏的乐工在堂下，这是表示人的歌声为贵。
English: The singer is in the hall, the accompanying musicians are in the hall, which means that people's singing is precious.

古文：乐由阳来者也，礼由阴作者也，阴阳和而万物得。
现代文：乐曲是有声音可以听见的，属阳；而礼仪是人的德行的外部表现，属阴。乐曲的阳和礼仪的阴协调一致，万物就能各得其所。
English: Music, which is audible, belongs to the yang, while etiquette, which is the external expression of human virtue, belongs to the yin. When the yang of music and the yin of etiquette are in harmony, everything can find its place.

古文：旅币无方，所以别土地之宜而节远迩之期也。
现代文：各国诸侯的贡品没有具体规定，原则上是贡献本国的土特产，各国朝聘的次数也要根据他距离天子所在的远近而定。
English: There is no specific provision for the tribute of the princes of various countries. In principle, it is to contribute the local special products of their own countries. The number of times he is appointed to the court of various countries should also be determined according to his distance from the Son of Heaven.

古文：龟为前列，先知也，以钟次之，以和居参之也。
现代文：在展览诸侯贡品时，龟放在最靠前的位置，因为龟有先知的本领。其次是金属，因为金性柔和，所以把它放在龟和其他贡品中间。
English: In the exhibition of the tributes of the lords, the turtle was placed in the first place, because the turtle had the ability to prophesy, followed by the metal, because it was soft, so it was placed between the turtle and other tributes.

古文：虎豹之皮，示服猛也。
现代文：贡品中的虎豹之皮，是表示天子、诸侯能够镇服四方最威猛的东西。
English: The skin of the tiger and leopard in the tribute is something that indicates that the heavenly sons and princes can subdue the most powerful thing in the four directions.

古文：束帛加璧，往德也。
现代文：至于束帛加璧的见面礼，是表示诸侯向往天子的美德。
English: As for the bouquet of flowers, it is the virtue of the princes to yearn for the son of heaven.

古文：庭燎之百，由齐桓公始也。
现代文：庭中的照明火炬使用一百个，拟于天子，这是从齐桓公开始的。
English: One hundred lighting torches are used in the garden, designed to represent the heavenly son, which began with King Qi Huan Rong.

古文：大夫之奏《肆夏》也，由赵文子始也。
现代文：奏《肆夏》迎宾是诸侯之礼，如令大夫也奏《肆夏》迎宾，这是从晋国大夫赵武开始的。
English: It is the courtesy of the princes to play "Wu Xia" to welcome guests. For example, doctors also play "Wu Xia" to welcome guests. This began with the doctor of Jin Province, Zhao Wu.

古文：朝觐，大夫之私觌，非礼也。
现代文：诸侯朝见天子。大夫奉君命出使而以私人名义进见外国国君，这是不合礼的。
English: Princes go to see the Son of Heaven. It is not proper for a doctor to go to see a foreign sovereign in his private capacity, having been sent by the sovereign.

古文：大夫执圭而使，所以申信也；不敢私觌，所以致敬也；而庭实私觌，何为乎诸侯之庭？
现代文：大夫出使之所以须要执圭，就是要证明自己是奉君命出使的。不敢以私人名义晋见国君，就是为了表示尊敬自己的国君。如果大夫私人备礼作为庭实，又以私人名义晋见，那怎能像个诸侯之庭呢？
English: The reason why the doctor's emissary needs to be punctual is to prove that he is sent by order of the sovereign. If he does not dare to meet the sovereign in his private name, it is to show respect for his sovereign. If the doctor privately prepares a gift as a court gift and meets the sovereign in his private name, how can it be like a court of princes?

古文：为人臣者，无外交，不敢贰君也。
现代文：作为臣子，不能背着国君与外国交往，否则就是与国君相抗衡了。
English: As a courtier, you can't carry on foreign relations behind your sovereign's back. Otherwise, you'll be competing with your sovereign.

古文：大夫而飨君，非礼也。
现代文：大夫宴请国君，不合乎礼，因为这表明臣强君弱。
English: It is not proper for a doctor to invite the sovereign to a banquet, because it shows that the sovereign is weak.

古文：大夫强而君杀之，义也；由三桓始也。
现代文：大夫的势力超过了国君，国君可以杀掉大夫，这没有什么疑问。
English: The doctor has more power than the sovereign, and the sovereign can kill the doctor, there is no doubt about that.

古文：天子无客礼，莫敢为主焉。
现代文：天子没有做客人的礼仪，因为普天之下，莫非王臣，没有哪个人敢当天子的主人。
English: The Son of Heaven did not have the etiquette of being a guest, because under the whole world, there is no king or vassal, and no one dares to be the Son of Heaven's master.

古文：君适其臣，升自阼阶，不敢有其室也。觐礼，天子不下堂而见诸侯。
现代文：国君到臣子家里去，臣子要请国君从昨阶升堂，以表明臣子不敢自以为是此家的主人、诸侯朝见天子，按规矩天子不下堂迎接诸侯。
English: The sovereign went to the vassal's house, and the vassal wanted to invite the sovereign to come up from the last step, to show that the vassal did not dare to think that he was the master of this house, and that the vassals could not see the emperor in the morning. According to the rules, the emperor did not go down to the hall to meet the vassals.

古文：下堂而见诸侯，天子之失礼也，由夷王以下。
现代文：下堂迎接诸侯，这是天子的失礼，这是从周夷王以后才有的事。
English: To go down to the hall to greet the princes, this is the son of heaven's discourtesy, this is something that has only happened since King Zhou Yi.

古文：诸侯之宫县，而祭以白牡，击玉磬，朱干设锡，冕而舞《大武》，乘大路，诸侯之僭礼也。
现代文：作为诸侯而使用天子的宫悬，祭天用白色的公牛，敲击玉磐，红色盾牌的后面用黄金装饰，戴冕而舞《大武》，乘大格，这都是作为诸侯而潜用天子之礼。
English: As lords, they used the palace hanging of the Son of Heaven, the white bull for the sacrifice to Heaven, the hammering of the jade rock, the back of the red shield decorated with gold, the crowning and dancing of the "Great Warrior," and the use of the capital letter, all of which were the gifts of the Son of Heaven as lords.

古文：台门而旅树，反坫，绣黼，丹朱中衣，大夫之僭礼也。故天子微，诸侯僭；大夫强，诸侯胁。
现代文：大夫的大门建成宫阀状的，大门内又设屏风，堂上也设置放还空酒杯的土台子，用大红绸子作中衣，并且在领缘上还绣有斧形图案，这属于身为大夫而僧用诸侯之礼。所以，夫子的势力微弱，诸侯就僧拟天子；大夫的势力强大，诸侯的地位就受到威胁。
English: The gate of the doctor is built in the shape of a palace valve, a screen is set up inside the gate, a base for returning an empty wine glass is also set up on the hall, a large red silk is used as a middle coat, and an axe-shaped pattern is embroidered on the collar. This belongs to the ritual of the princes as a doctor. Therefore, if the power of the doctor is weak, the princes will imitate the son of heaven; if the power of the doctor is strong, the status of the princes will be threatened.

古文：于此相贵以等，相觌以货，相赂以利，而天下之礼乱矣。
现代文：在这种情况下，诸侯、大夫皆无视王命、君命，爵禄由己，大夫也以财货私自与外国交通，贿赂公行，唯利是图，天下的礼也就乱套了。
English: Under these circumstances, the lords and doctors all ignored the king's and prince's orders, and the knighthoods were given to themselves. The doctors also used wealth and goods to communicate privately with foreign countries, bribed officials, and sought profit. The world's etiquette was also out of order.

古文：诸侯不敢祖天子，大夫不敢祖诸侯。
现代文：诸侯是庶子，不能像天子那样拥有祖庙；大夫是庶子，不能像诸侯那样拥有祖庙。
English: Princes are illegitimate children and cannot have ancestral temples like heavenly sons; doctors are illegitimate children and cannot have ancestral temples like princes.

古文：而公庙之设于私家，非礼也，由三桓始也。
现代文：今天有把诸侯的祖庙设置于大夫家中者，那是不合礼的，这种事是从鲁国的三桓开始的。
English: Today, there are those who set up the ancestral temple of princes in the doctor's home, which is not proper. This kind of thing began in the Three Kingdoms of Lu.

古文：天子存二代之后，犹尊贤也，尊贤不过二代。
现代文：天子要封前两个朝代的后裔为国君，准许他们以天子之礼祭祖，这是尊重前代贤者。
English: The Son of Heaven wants to crown the descendants of the first two dynasties as sovereigns, allowing them to offer sacrifices to the ancestors with the rites of the Son of Heaven. This is respect for the wise men of the previous generation.

古文：诸侯不臣寓公。
现代文：但这种尊贤也只以前两个朝代为限，再远的朝代就不好说了。
English: However, this kind of veneration was limited to the previous two dynasties, and it is difficult to say how far back the dynasties go.

古文：故古者寓公不继世。君之南乡，答阳之义也。
现代文：对于流亡到他国的国君，诸侯不敢以臣礼相待，但这种优待只限于流亡的国君本人，其子孙就不再享有了。
English: For a sovereign exiled to another country, the lords did not dare to treat each other with courtesies, but this kind of preferential treatment was limited to the exiled sovereign himself, and his descendants no longer enjoyed it.

古文：臣之北面，答君也。大夫之臣不稽首，非尊家臣，以辟君也。大夫有献弗亲，君有赐不面拜，为君之答己也。
现代文：国君的座位朝南，这表示他是对天负责的；臣子朝见国君要面北而拜，这表示他是对国君负责的，大夫家里的臣仆不对大夫行叩头礼，这并非是尊重这些臣仆，而是由于叩头是大夫拜君之礼，大夫要避开自拟国君的嫌疑。大夫有所进献于国君，不亲自出面，而是派家臣送去；国君对大夫有所赏赐，大夫也不须当面拜谢。这都是为了避免国君的答拜。
English: The seat of the sovereign faces south, which means that he is responsible to the heavens; the vassals should bow to the sovereign when they see him, which means that he is responsible to the sovereign. The servants in the doctor's family do not bow to the doctor. This is not to respect these servants, but because the kowtow is the doctor's bow to the sovereign, the doctor wants to avoid the suspicion of imitating the sovereign. The doctor has made a donation to the sovereign, but does not appear in person, but sends a vassal; the sovereign has given a reward to the doctor, and the doctor does not have to bow in person. This is all to avoid the sovereign's

古文：乡人禓，孔子朝服立于阼，存室神也。
现代文：乡里人举行驱除疫鬼之祭，孔子穿着朝服站在百家昨阶上面，为的是让自家的神灵有所依附，不被惊扰。
English: The villagers held a festival to drive away the pestilence. Confucius, dressed in imperial robes, stood at the top of the last step of a hundred houses, so that the gods of his family could attach themselves and not be disturbed.

古文：孔子曰： 射之以乐也，何以听，何以射？ 
现代文：孔子说： 举行射礼时有音乐来协调射者的仪容举止，因此听到什么样的音乐，就知道该怎样射。 
English: Confucius said: There is music at the time of the shooting ceremony to coordinate the shooter's appearance and demeanor, so what kind of music you hear, you know how to shoot.

古文：孔子曰： 士，使之射，不能，则辞以疾。
现代文：孔子说： 作为士，被邀请参加射礼，如果不会射也不能说自己不会，而要托辞说自己有病。
English: Confucius said: As a scholar, if you are invited to participate in the shooting ceremony, if you can't shoot, you can't say that you can't, but you have to use the excuse that you are ill.

古文：县弧之义也。 孔子曰： 三日齐，一日用之，犹恐不敬；二日伐鼓，何居？ 孔子曰： 绎之于库门内，祊之于东方，朝市之于西方，失之矣。 
现代文：因为男子一生下来门口就悬挂过弓矢，这表示会射是男子汉的本分。 孔子说： 祭前致斋三天，然后举行祭祀，就这样还唯恐裹读神明，而现在三天之内却有两天打鼓，真不知是何道理理 孔子说： 在库门内举行绎祭，又到庙门外的东边去求神，这就像朝市本在东方而设于西方，都是把地点搞错了。 
English: Confucius said, "Before the festival, people fasted for three days, and then held a religious service, and in this way, they were afraid to read about the gods, but now, within three days, there are two days of drumming. I really don't know what the reason is." Confucius said, "Holding a religious service inside the temple gate, and then going to the east side outside the temple gate to pray to the gods, is just like holding a morning market in the east and setting it in the west. Both are mistaken about the location."

古文：社祭土而主阴气也。
现代文：社祭是祭土神，而土是阴气。
English: The social festival is a celebration of the earth god, and the earth is gloomy.

古文：君南乡于北墉下，答阴之义也。
现代文：祭社时国君南面而立于社坛的北墙外边，其用意是表示对着阴面。
English: At the time of the shrine festival, Kunigimi stood on the outside of the north wall of the altar, facing south. His intention was to show that he was facing the dark side.

古文：日用甲，用日之始也。
现代文：社祭总是用甲日，也就是一旬的头一天。
English: The social festival is always held on the first day of the month.

古文：天子大社必受霜露风雨，以达天地之气也。
现代文：天子大社的祭坛，上面没有任何遮盖，一定要叫它能够接触霜露风雨，这样才可以使夭地之气贯通。
English: The altar of the Tenshi-taisha Shrine, which has no cover on it, must be able to be exposed to frost, dew, wind and rain, so that the breath of the earth can penetrate.

古文：是故丧国之社屋之，不受天阳也。
现代文：至于亡国之社，其社坛上面就要加上一层覆盖物，为的是不让它接触上天的阳气。
English: As for the shrine of the dead country, a layer of covering should be added to the top of the altar, in order to prevent it from coming into contact with the heavenly yang.

古文：薄社北牖，使阴明也。
现代文：毫社只在北面开个小窗，也是为了让它只能接触来自阴处的光明。
English: The mill only has a small window on the north side, so that it can only be exposed to light from the shade.

古文：社所以神地之道也。
现代文：举行社祭，是尊敬土神的一种表示。
English: Holding a shrine festival is a way of showing respect for the local deities.

古文：地载万物，天垂象。
现代文：大地孕育万物，上天垂示法象。
English: The earth gives birth to all things, and the heavens show the patterns.

古文：取财于地，取法于天，是以尊天而亲地也，故教民美报焉。
现代文：种种生活资料都是取之于地，种种伦理法则都是效法于天，所以人们对天是尊敬而对地是热爱，百姓要尽量完美地报答土神。
English: All kinds of living resources are taken from the earth, and all kinds of ethical rules are modeled on heaven, so people respect heaven and love the earth, and the people should repay the earth god as perfectly as possible.

古文：家主中溜而国主社，示本也。唯为社事，单出里。唯为社田，国人毕作。
现代文：对于家来说，在中雷祭土神是主要的；对于国来说，在社坛祭土神是主要的，因为土地是一家一国赖以生存的根本。
English: For a family, the earth deity is the most important thing to be enshrined in the middle of thunder; for a country, the earth deity is the most important thing to be enshrined in the shrine, because the land is the foundation of a country's survival.

古文：唯社，丘乘共粢盛，所以报本反始也。
现代文：因此，凡当里中举行社祭时，里中的家家户户都要出人帮忙。
English: Therefore, when a social festival is held in the village, every family in the village must send someone to help.

古文：季春出火，为焚也。
现代文：仲春二月放火，是为了烧去田野的杂草。
English: Zhongchun set the fire in February to burn the weeds in the field.

古文：然后简其车赋，而历其卒伍，而君亲誓社，以习军旅。
现代文：然后点验各地应交的车赋，检阅部队，国君亲自参加为社樱提供禽兽的田猎，并且当众约法，宣布注意事项，就开始操练部队。
English: Then, the chariots that should be handed over from various regions were inspected, the troops were reviewed, the sovereign himself participated in the field hunt that provided animals for the shakura, and the troops began to practice the law and announce the precautions in public.

古文：左之右之，坐之起之，以观其习变也；而流示之禽，而盐诸利，以观其不犯命也。
现代文：指挥部队时而向左，时而向右，时而跪下，时而起立，以观察部队的熟练应变程度。操练结束，把禽兽赶至阵前开始打猎，并且宣布打到的大兽归公，用于祭社，小兽归己，以鼓励人们争先恐后，以观察人们是否违犯命令。
English: At the end of the drill, they drove the animals to the front and began to hunt, and announced that the big beasts were returned to the public for use in the festival, and the small beasts were returned to themselves, to encourage people to scramble to see if people violated the order.

古文：求服其志，不贪其得，故以战则克，以祭则受福。
现代文：这样做的目的，一方面是为了鼓舞士卒的斗志，一方面是为了不要士卒贪图私利。经过这样训练的士卒，用之于战场则战无不胜，用之于祭祀则一定能得到神的赐福。
English: The purpose of this was, on the one hand, to encourage the fighting spirit of the soldiers, and on the other hand, to prevent the soldiers from seeking personal gain. Soldiers who have undergone such training will be invincible on the battlefield, and will surely receive God's blessing when used in sacrifice.

古文：天子适四方，先柴。
现代文：天子到四方巡守，在所到之处的名山要先播柴告天。
English: When the Son of Heaven comes to patrol the four directions, he must first scatter wood on the famous mountains wherever he goes.

古文：郊之祭也，迎长日之至也，大报天而主日也。
现代文：郊外祭天，是为了迎接冬至的到来，是为了普遍回报上天诸神而以日为主。
English: The Suburban Festival is held to welcome the arrival of the winter solstice, and to reward the gods of heaven in general, with the sun as the main focus.

古文：兆于南郊，就阳位也。
现代文：郊祭的地方选择在南郊，因为南方是阳位。
English: The place of the suburb festival was chosen in the southern suburbs, because the south is the yang position.

古文：扫地而祭，于其质也。器用陶匏，以象天地之性也。
现代文：瘾不在坛上进行，因为再高的坛也高不过天，所以清扫地面就可以行礼，这叫顺其自然。祭祀所用的器皿都是陶制的，不假雕琢，这是效法天地的自然之性。
English: Addiction is not carried out on the altar, because no matter how high the altar is, it is not as high as heaven, so you can clean the floor and make a bow, which is natural. The utensils used for the ritual are made of pottery, not fake carving, which is the nature of heaven and earth.

古文：于郊，故谓之郊。
现代文：祭天是在郊，所以祭天又叫郊。
English: The festival is in the suburbs, so the festival is also called the suburbs.

古文：牲用骍，尚赤也；用犊，贵诚也。郊之用辛也，周之始郊日以至。
现代文：祭天的牺牲用赤色牛犊，这是因为周代崇尚赤色。用牛犊作牺牲，是因为牛犊尚无化牡之情，其童贞可贵。
English: The red calf is used for the sacrifice to the deities because the red color was revered by the Zhou Dynasty. The bull calf is used for the sacrifice because the bull calf has not yet lost its virginity.

古文：卜郊，受命于祖庙，作龟于祢宫，尊祖亲考之义也。卜之日，王立于泽，亲听誓命，受教谏之义也。
现代文：郊之所以选用辛日，是因为周代的第一次郊礼是在冬至，那天恰巧是辛日，后人就因袭了下来。
English: The reason why the suburb was chosen on a bad day was because the first suburb festival of the Zhou Dynasty was held on the winter solstice. That day happened to be a bad day, and later generations were affected by it.

古文：献命库门之内，戒百官也。大庙之命，戒百姓也。
现代文：占卜郊天的日期，必先告察子始祖之庙，然后才在父庙中占卜，这表示对始祖是尊对父庙是亲。
English: The date of divination in the countryside must first be reported to the temple of the son's ancestor, and then divination in the father's temple, which means that respect for the ancestor is relative to the father's temple.

古文：祭之日，王皮弁以听祭报，示民严上也。
现代文：卜人占卜的那天，天子立于泽宫，亲自聆听有司宣布的应该注意事项，这表示连天子也要接受教诲约束。
English: On the day of the fortuneteller's divination, the heavenly son stood in the palace and personally listened to the matters that should be taken care of, which meant that even the heavenly son had to accept discipline.

古文：丧者不哭，不敢凶服，汜扫反道，乡为田烛。
现代文：天子从泽宫回来，在王宫的库门之内重申应该注意的事项，这样做意在告诫百官；又在太庙内重申应该注意的事项，这样做意在告诫亲属。
English: When the heavenly son returned from the palace, he reiterated the matters that should be paid attention to within the gate of the palace, with the intention of admonishing the officials; he also reiterated the matters that should be paid attention to within the Great Temple, with the intention of admonishing the relatives.

古文：弗命而民听上。祭之日，王被衮以象天，戴冕，璪十有二旒，则天数也。
现代文：郊祭那天的早晨，天子穿着皮弃服听取有关官员报告郊祭的准备情况，这是向民众表示对天帝要格外尊敬。在通往南郊的道路两旁，谁家死了人也不敢哭，也不敢披麻带孝，道路要经过打扫，路面要铺上新土，乡民都在地头点燃火炬。
English: On the morning of the Suburban Festival, the heavenly son, wearing a discarded leather garment, listened to the relevant officials report on the preparation of the Suburban Festival. This was to show the people that they should have special respect for the heavenly emperor. On both sides of the road leading to the southern suburbs, no one dared to cry or wear a hemp belt, the road had to be cleaned, the road surface had to be paved with new soil, and the villagers were lighting torches at the ground.

古文：乘素车，贵其质也。
现代文：这些都是百姓的自觉行动，用不着上边下命令。
English: These are the conscious actions of the people, and there is no need for orders from above.

古文：旗十有二旒，龙章而设日月，以象天也。
现代文：车上的旗子有十二根飘带，上面画着龙和日月的图案，这也是取法上天之义。
English: The flag on the car has twelve streamers, with a dragon and a sun and moon pattern painted on it, which is also a heavenly meaning.

古文：天垂象，圣人则之。郊所以明天道也。
现代文：上天垂示日月星辰等等法象，圣人一一效法，郊天之礼就是为了让人们都知道效法天道的。
English: The heavens show the sun, the moon, the stars and other phenomena, the saints imitate one by one, and the gift of the countryside is to let people know how to imitate the heavenly way.

古文：帝牛不吉，以为稷牛。
现代文：祭天的牛如果由于某种原因不便使用，那就用祭后樱的牛来代替。
English: If, for some reason, it is inconvenient to use the sacred cow, then the cow from the post-sacrifice cherry blossom should be used instead.

古文：帝牛必在涤三月，稷牛唯具。
现代文：祭天所用的牛必须在清洁的牛舍里精心饲养三个月，而祭后樱所用的牛只要有一头就行，哪怕是临时拉来的。
English: The cattle used for the festival must be carefully raised in a clean barn for three months, but only one cow is needed for the post-festival cherry blossom, even if it is brought in temporarily.

古文：所以别事天神与人鬼也。万物本乎天，人本乎祖，此所以配上帝也。郊之祭也，大报本反始也。
现代文：从这上面可以看出祭祀天神和祭祀人鬼是有区别的 世上的万物都是天生的，世上的人也都是老祖宗一代一代传下来的，这就是祭天时为什么要让始祖配享的原因。郊天之祭，就是一次对天对始祖的普遍回报。
English: From the above, it can be seen that there is a difference between sacrificing to the gods and sacrificing to ghosts. Everything in the world is born, and people in the world are also passed down from generation to generation. This is the reason why the ancestors should be allowed to share in the sacrifice to the gods. The sacrifice to the gods is a universal return to the gods for the ancestors.

古文：天子大蜡八。
现代文：天子的蜡祭，主要祭八种神。
English: The wax festival of the son of heaven, the main festival of eight gods.

古文：伊耆氏始为蜡，蜡也者，索也。岁十二月，合聚万物而索飨之也。
现代文：从伊誊氏开始才有蜡祭。蜡字的含义，从词源学上来讲就是索的意思，因为按古音 蜡 与 索 叠韵，读音相近。
English: The meaning of the wax character, from the etymological point of view, is the meaning of the rope, because according to the ancient rhyme, wax and rope are similar in pronunciation.

古文：蜡之祭也：主先啬，而祭司啬也。
现代文：说具体点，就是在周历的十二月农事终了，把一切和农作物有关的神都找来祭祀一番。
English: To be specific, it was in December of the lunar calendar, when farming was over, that all the gods related to agricultural crops were brought in for sacrifice.

古文：祭百种以报啬也。飨农及邮表畷，禽兽，仁之至、义之尽也。
现代文：蜡祭的神灵，主要是，始创农业的先音，附带而及主管农事的司音。
English: The deities of the wax festival are, in the main, the precursors of the founding of agriculture, and, incidentally, the deities in charge of agriculture.

古文：古之君子，使之必报之。
现代文：祭祀谷神，就是报答先音和司音的。
English: Sacrificing to the Valley God is the reward for the first syllable and the second syllable.

古文：迎猫，为其食田鼠也；迎虎，为其食田豕也，迎而祭之也。
现代文：还要祭田官之神、祭田间庐舍和叶陌之神，祭包括虎猫在内的禽兽，从报恩的角度上说，真可以说是仁至义尽了。
English: In addition, it is necessary to offer sacrifices to the god of the field official, the god of the field oasis and the god of the leaf, and the god of the beast, including the tiger and the cat. From the perspective of repayment, it can truly be said that the benevolence is exhausted.

古文：祭坊与水庸，事也。曰 土反其宅 ，水归其壑，昆虫毋作，草木归其泽。
现代文：蜡祭的祝祠中有这样的话： 希望堤防安然无事，沟渠不要漫溢；病虫害不要发生，荒草野树不要生于良田。 
English: There is this saying in the temple for the wax festival: I hope that the dike will be safe and sound, the ditch will not overflow; diseases and pests will not occur, and wild plants and trees will not be born in good fields.

古文：皮弁素服而祭。
现代文：天子身着皮弃素服参加蜡祭。
English: Tenzin dressed in a discarded leather garment to take part in the wax festival.

古文：素服，以送终也。葛带榛杖，丧杀也。
现代文：之所以穿素服，是因为有助于农事的万物都衰老了，这就等于为其送终。但是腰系葛带，手执棒杖，这种礼数又比丧礼略低。
English: The reason for wearing plain clothes is that everything that helps with farming is getting old, which is tantamount to sending it to its end. However, a loincloth around the waist and a cane in the hand are slightly lower than a funeral.

古文：蜡之祭，仁之至、义之尽也。
现代文：就蜡祭的这种礼数而言，真 可谓是仁至义尽了。
English: As far as the number of ceremonies for the wax festival is concerned, it really is the best of both worlds.

古文：黄衣黄冠而祭，息田夫也。
现代文：身穿黄衣头戴草笠来参加蜡祭的人，都是终年劳碌难得有闲的农夫。
English: The people who come to the wax festival dressed in yellow and wearing straw hats are farmers who work hard all year round and rarely have any time off.

古文：野夫黄冠；黄冠，草服也。
现代文：农夫头戴黄冠身穿黄衣，是因为季秋草木黄落，服象其色的缘故。
English: The farmer wears a yellow crown on his head and a yellow robe on his body, because the grass and trees turn yellow in the autumn, and the clothes look like their color.

古文：大罗氏，天子之掌鸟兽者也，诸侯贡属焉。
现代文：大罗氏，这是负责为天子掌管鸟兽的官，诸侯进贡的鸟兽由他接管。
English: Great Luo clan, this is the official responsible for controlling the birds and beasts for the heavenly son, and the birds and beasts of the princes will be taken over by him.

古文：草笠而至，尊野服也。
现代文：进贡的使者是戴着草笠而来，这表示对捕捉到鸟兽的野人的尊重。
English: The messenger of tribute came wearing a straw hat, which showed respect for the wild man who caught the birds and beasts.

古文：罗氏致鹿与女，而诏客告也。以戒诸侯曰： 好田好女者亡其国。 
现代文：大罗氏搬出鹿和女子让使者们看，并且要他们捎话给自己的国君，告诫他们说： 喜好声色狗马的人一定要亡国。
English: The Great Luo brought out the deer and the girl for the envoys to see, and asked them to speak to their sovereign, admonishing them: "Those who like loud dogs and horses must perish."

古文：天子树瓜华，不敛藏之种也。
现代文：天子种的瓜鲍，其种子既不收回也不收藏，以免与民争利。 
English: The seeds of the celestial melon seed are neither withdrawn nor collected, so as not to compete with the people.

古文：八蜡以记四方。
现代文：八蜡有探明四方年成的作用。
English: Eight waxes have proven to have the effect of four square years.

古文：四方年不顺成，八蜡不通，以谨民财也。
现代文：如果四方风不调雨不顺年不成，就不举行八蜡之祭，这样还可以让百姓少花一笔钱。
English: If the four winds do not adjust the rain and the year does not go well, the Eight Wax Festival will not be held, so that the people can spend less money.

古文：顺成之方，其蜡乃通，以移民也。
现代文：东南西北四方，哪一方风调雨顺年成好，哪一方才举行蜡祭，老百姓也好借此机会痛饮一番，松弛一下一年的紧张劳动。
English: Southeast, northwest and four directions, which side of the wind and rain is good year-round, which side holds the wax festival, the common people can also take this opportunity to drink a lot and relax the year's intense labor.

古文：既蜡而收，民息已。
现代文：蜡祭之后，就把谷物收藏起来，让农民休养生息。
English: After the wax festival, the grain was collected to allow the farmers to recuperate.

古文：故既蜡，君子不兴功。
现代文：所以蜡祭以后，君子就不再大兴土木征召民众。
English: Therefore, after the Wax Festival, the nobles would no longer carry out large-scale civil engineering and conscript the people.

古文：恒豆之菹，水草之和气也；其醢，陆产之物也。
现代文：祭祀的时候，在朝事之豆中盛放的腌菜，都是由生长茂盛的水草加工制成的；而豆中的肉酱，几却是陆地所产之物制成的。
English: At the time of the sacrifice, the stew that was placed in the morning beans was made from lush aquatic plants; while the meat sauce in the beans was made from land-based products.

古文：加豆，陆产也；其醢，水物也。
现代文：祭末醋尸所献的豆，其中盛放的腌菜是陆地产品，而其中盛放的肉酱却是水中产品。
English: At the end of the festival, the bean offered by the vinegar carcass, in which the stew is placed, is a land product, while the meat sauce is a water product.

古文：笾豆之荐，水土之品也，不敢用常亵味而贵多品，所以交于神明之义也，非食味之道也。
现代文：篷豆中盛放的祭品，不是水中所生就是土中所长。这些祭品不敢制作得近乎活人的口味，也不敢讲究品种的繁多，因为这是献给神明享用的，而不是为了叫活人大饱口福。
English: The offerings in the middle of the taro are either born in the water or grown in the soil. These offerings dare not be made to taste close to the living, nor do they dare to pay attention to the variety of varieties, because this is for the gods to enjoy, not for the living to enjoy.

古文：先王之荐，可食也而不可耆也。
现代文：祭祀先王的供品，吃也可以吃，但味道欠佳：活人并不爱吃。
English: The offerings made to the dead king can be eaten, but they do not taste good: living people do not like to eat them.

古文：卷冕路车，可陈也而不可好也。
现代文：祭祀时所穿的衰龙袍，所戴的冕，所乘的大路，尊贵是够尊贵了，陈列还可以，但平常并不好穿好坐。
English: The dragon robe worn at the time of the sacrifice, the crown worn, and the road taken are noble enough, and can be displayed, but they are usually not easy to wear and sit on.

古文：武壮，而不可乐也。
现代文：《大武》之舞虽然气势雄壮，但真正娱乐时也不用它。
English: Although the dance of the "Great Warrior" is powerful, it is not used for real entertainment.

古文：宗庙之威，而不可安也。
现代文：宗庙的建筑虽则巍峨壮观，但也不能平时寝处其中。
English: Although the architecture of the ancestral temple is magnificent, it is not possible to sleep in it in normal times.

古文：宗庙之器，可用也而不可便其利也，所以交于神明者，不可以同于所安乐之义也。
现代文：宗庙祭祀时所用的器皿，活人也未尝不可以用，但说到方便适用就差得远了。道理就在于，用来和神明打交道的东西是讲究朴实的，它和活人所追求的安适欢乐大相径庭。
English: The utensils used in ancestral temple sacrifices can be used by living people, but when it comes to ease of use, they are far from it. The reason is that the things used to deal with the gods are simple, and they are very different from the peace and joy that living people pursue.

古文：酒醴之美，玄酒明水之尚，贵五味之本也。
现代文：酒酸虽然香甜可口，但在祭祀时却是以寡味的玄酒明水作为上品。这是以味寡为贵，而味寡乃是五味的根本。
English: Although tartaric acid is sweet and delicious, it is used as the topping in sacrificial rites with a weak-tasting clear liquor. This is because of its poor taste, and poor taste is the root of the five tastes.

古文：黼黻文绣之美，疏布之尚，反女功之始也。
现代文：绣有脯敝图案的织品固然好看，但祭祀时却使用粗布蒙盖酒尊，因为粗布乃是最原始的纺织品。
English: Although fabrics embroidered with patterns of cocoons are good-looking, coarse cloth is used to cover the sacrificial offering, because coarse cloth is the most primitive textile.

古文：莞簟之安，而蒲越稿鞂之尚，明之也。大羹不和，贵其质也。
现代文：下面一层蒲席，上面再加一层竹席，活人寝卧其上自然非常舒服；而祭祀时只用一层蒲席或者铺上一层庄稼的秸秆就可以了，因为这是神明所用的啊。祭神的牛肉汤不加任何调料，这是以原汤原味为贵。
English: There is a layer of cushion below, and another layer of bamboo on top, which is naturally very comfortable for a living person to sleep on; and when making a sacrifice, it is enough to use only one layer of cushion or spread a layer of straw, because this is what the gods use. The beef soup used to worship the gods does not add any seasoning, which is based on the original flavor of the soup.

古文：大圭不琢，美其质也。
现代文：天子所用的大圭不加任何雕饰，这是以其本身的质朴为贵。
English: The radish used by the heavenly son does not add any carvings, which is valuable for its own simplicity.

古文：丹漆雕几之美，素车之乘，尊其朴也，贵其质而已矣。
现代文：在车上雕出或凹或凸的图案，并且漆得红彤彤的，这自然好看不过，但祭天时却用毫无雕饰的车辆，这是尊重其朴质，贵重其本色而已。
English: Carving a concave or convex pattern on the car, and painting it red, is naturally good-looking, but when sacrificing to the heavens, they use a vehicle without any carving. This is to respect its simplicity and value its true nature.

古文：所以交于神明者，不可同于所安亵之甚也。
现代文：总而言之，凡是用以祭祀神明的东西，不可以活人所追求的舒服华丽去衡量。
English: All in all, everything that is used to worship the gods cannot be measured by the comfort and splendor that living people pursue.

古文：如是而后宜。鼎俎奇而笾豆偶，阴阳之义也。
现代文：鼎姐的数目总是单数而篷豆的数目总是偶数，这是取阴阳相配之义。
English: The number of Ding sisters is always singular and the number of canvas beans is always even, which is the meaning of matching yin and yang.

古文：黄目，郁气之上尊也。
现代文：黄目这种酒尊，是用来盛放郁毯的上等酒尊。
English: The yellow-eyed sake is a superior sake that is used to hold a tulip blanket.

古文：黄者中也；目者气之清明者也。
现代文：黄色，在五行当中居于中央；目，是人五官当中洞察外界的器官。
English: Yellow, in the middle of the five elements; the eye, is the organ of insight into the outside world among the five senses.

古文：言酌于中而清明于外也，祭天，扫地而祭焉，于其质而已矣。
现代文：这就是说，斟酒于其中而能清澈透亮于外。祭天，只要把地打扫干净就可以了，这也不外乎以质朴为贵罢了。
English: That is to say, if you pour wine into it, it will be clear and bright on the outside. For the sake of heaven, it is enough to clean the ground, which is nothing more than valuing simplicity.

古文：酰醢之美，而煎盐之尚，贵天产也。
现代文：以醋调制的肉酱虽然味美，而祭祀时却把煎盐放在前列，这是因为盐来自大自然，所以可贵。
English: Although the meat sauce made with vinegar is delicious, salt is placed at the front of the offering. This is because salt comes from nature, so it is valuable.

古文：割刀之用，而鸾刀之贵，贵其义也。声和而后断也。
现代文：人们日常使用的刀锋利称手，但祭祀 时杀牲却偏要使用莺刀，因为莺刀上有铃，铃声和谐然后才能割断。
English: The knives that people use on a daily basis are sharp enough for their hands, but when it comes to sacrificing animals, they prefer to use a sickle, because the sickle has a bell, and the bell sounds harmoniously before it can be cut.

古文：冠义：始冠之，缁布之冠也。
现代文：冠礼的意义：第一次加的冠，是细布冠。
English: Significance of the crowning ceremony: The first crown to be added is a fine cloth crown.

古文：大古冠布，齐则缁之。
现代文：远古的时候人们是以白布为冠，到了斋戒时再把它染成黑色的。
English: In ancient times, people wore a white cloth as a crown, and dyed it black when fasting.

古文：其緌也，孔子曰： 吾未之闻也。
现代文：至于细布冠是否有缕，孔子说： 我从来没有听说过细布冠有缕。
English: As to whether the thin cloth crown has wisps, Confucius said: I have never heard of a thin cloth crown having wisps.

古文：冠而敝之可也。 
现代文：细布冠在第一次加冠戴过之后，就可以弃而不用了。 
English: The fine cloth crown can be discarded after the first crowning.

古文：适子冠于阼，以着代也。
现代文：为嫡子加冠，是在昨阶上近于主人的位置进行，这表示嫡子是未来的继承人。
English: The crowning of the legitimate son is carried out in the last step, close to the position of the master, which means that the legitimate son is the future heir.

古文：醮于客位，加有成也。
现代文：在客位对冠者行醛礼，这表示他已受到了成人的尊重。
English: In the guest seat, the winner is given a formaldehyde salute, which indicates that he has been respected by adults.

古文：三加弥尊，喻其志也。
现代文：三次加冠，一次比一次尊贵，这是要启发冠者立志向上。
English: To be crowned three times, each time more prestigious than the last, is to inspire the champion to have higher aspirations.

古文：冠而字之，敬其名也。委貌，周道也。
现代文：加冠时给冠者取一个字，从此以后就要以字相称而避讳其名，这表示对父母所取之名的敬重。
English: When adding a crown, a word is given to the winner. From now on, the name should be commensurate with the word and should be avoided. This shows respect for the name given by the parents.

古文：章甫，殷道也。毋追，夏后氏之道也。
现代文：委貌是周代日常所戴的冠，章甫是殷代日常所戴的冠，毋追是夏代日常所戴的冠。
English: It is the crown worn by Zhu Zhou, the crown worn by Zhang Fu in the Yin Dynasty, and the crown worn by Xia Dynasty.

古文：周弁，殷冔，夏收。
现代文：斋戒和祭祀所戴的冠，周代戴弃，殷代戴辱，夏代戴收。
English: The crown worn for fasting and sacrifice was abandoned by the Zhou dynasty, humiliated by the Yin dynasty, and collected by the Xia dynasty.

古文：三王共皮弁素积。
现代文：至于皮弃和腰间有皱褶的素裳，则是三代所共同的。
English: As for the discarded skins and the petticoats with folds around the waist, they are common to all three generations.

古文：无大夫冠礼，而有其昏礼。
现代文：上古时没有大夫的冠礼，但是有大夫的婚礼。
English: In ancient times, there was no doctor's coronation, but there was a doctor's wedding.

古文：古者，五十而后爵，何大夫冠礼之有？
现代文：因为上古时五十以后才能受爵为大夫，而冠礼是在二十岁时进行的，在这种情况下怎么可能有大夫的冠礼呢？
English: Since in ancient times doctors could only be knighted after the age of fifty, and the coronation took place at the age of twenty, how could there be a doctor's coronation under these circumstances?

古文：诸侯之有冠礼，夏之末造也。
现代文：诸侯有冠礼，那是夏代末年才有的事。
English: Princes had coronation ceremonies, but that only happened at the end of the summer dynasty.

古文：天子之元子，士也。天下无生而贵者也。
现代文：天子的长子举行冠礼也用士礼，这说明天下没有生下来就尊贵的人。
English: When the eldest son of the Son of Heaven is crowned, he also uses the priestly rite, which shows that there are no noble people born in the world.

古文：继世以立诸侯，象贤也。以官爵人，德之杀也。死而谥，今也；古者生无爵，死无谥。
现代文：之所以让诸侯的子孙继位为诸侯，是为了让他们效法自己祖宗的贤德，而不是说他们生下来就尊贵。至于说以官爵授人，也是因为他有功德；功德大的授以大官，功德小的授以小官，也不是看他出身是否尊贵。
English: The reason why the descendants of lords succeed to the throne as lords is to let them emulate the virtue of their ancestors, not to say that they are noble by birth. As for the conferral of peerage, it is also because he has merit; great merit is awarded to high officials, small merit is awarded to minor officials, and it does not depend on whether he is noble by birth.

古文：礼之所尊，尊其义也。失其义，陈其数，祝史之事也。
现代文：一如今不论什么样的人死了，都可以弄到一个溢号。
English: Nowadays, no matter what kind of person has died, you can get a bonus.

古文：故其数可陈也，其义难知也。
现代文：古代可不一样，如果活着时没有爵位，死后就不给他加溢号。
English: In ancient times it was different. If a person did not have a title when he was alive, he was not given a title when he died.

古文：知其义而敬守之，天子之所以治天下也。
现代文：礼之所以值得尊重，是尊重它的深刻含义。如果不明了其深刻含义，而只会机械地模仿其形式和作法，那就是一般意义上的礼。
English: The reason why etiquette is worthy of respect is to respect its profound meaning. If you do not know its profound meaning, but only mechanically imitate its form and practice, that is etiquette in the general sense.

古文：天地合而后万物兴焉。
现代文：所以说，礼的具体作法和形式是容易学会的，而其深刻的含义就难于领会了。
English: Therefore, the specific manners and forms of etiquette are easy to learn, but its profound meaning is difficult to grasp.

古文：夫昏礼，万世之始也。
现代文：领会礼的深刻含义并且恭敬地遵守执行，这就是天子治理天下的良方。
English: Understanding the profound meaning of the rite and respectfully abiding by its implementation is the best way for the Son of Heaven to govern the world.

古文：取于异姓，所以附远厚别也。币必诚，辞无不腆。
现代文：男方向女方献纳的礼品一定要诚信不欺，讲究实用，男方的使者在赠送聘礼时也不要说 礼物太菲薄了 这类客气话，要直言相告，开诚相见。
English: The gifts offered by the man to the woman must be honest and practical, and the man's messenger should not say that the gift is too cheap when giving the engagement gift. Such kind words should be told to each other and be honest.

古文：告之以直信；信，事人也；信，妇德也。
现代文：这表示诚信是做人的立身之本，也是作媳妇应有的本分。
English: This indicates that integrity is the foundation of being a person, and it is also the duty of a daughter-in-law.

古文：壹与之齐，终身不改。故夫死不嫁。
现代文：只要和丈夫在同牢的仪式上同吃了一碗菜，同喝了一杯酒，那就生是夫家的人，死是夫家的鬼，所以丈夫死了也不再嫁。
English: As long as she and her husband ate a bowl of vegetables and drank a glass of wine together at the ceremony in the same prison, she was born a member of her husband's family and died a ghost of her husband's family, so she would not marry again after her husband died.

古文：男子亲迎，男先于女，刚柔之义也。
现代文：成亲的那天，男子亲自到女家迎娶，从女家出来以后，男的要先走一走，女的随后跟着，这表示阳刚阴柔的意思。
English: On the day of marriage, the man himself went to the woman's house to get married. After coming out of the woman's house, the man should walk first, followed by the woman, which means masculine and feminine.

古文：天先乎地，君先乎臣，其义一也。
现代文：这就好比天先于地，君先于臣，其道理是一样的。
English: This is akin to the principle that heaven comes before the earth and the sovereign comes before the vassal.

古文：执挚以相见，敬章别也。男女有别，然后父子亲，父子亲然后义生，义生然后礼作，礼作然后万物安。
现代文：迎亲的时候，男子到了女家，先拜过岳父，然后放下礼品，这才和新娘施礼相见，这样做是要彰明男女之别。男女有别，然后才有父子之亲；父子相亲，然后才有君臣之义；君臣有义，然后才有礼；有了礼，然后才万物各得其所，天下太平。
English: At the time of marriage, when a man arrives at a woman's house, he first bows to his father-in-law, and then puts down the gifts. Only then does he meet the bride with courtesies. This is done to highlight the difference between men and women. If there is a difference between men and women, then there is a father-son relationship; if there is a father-son relationship, then there is a prince-servant relationship; if there is a prince-servant relationship, then there is a courtly relationship; if there is a courtly relationship, then there is a courtly relationship; if there is a courtly relationship, then everything has its place,

古文：无别无义，禽兽之道也。
现代文：如果男女无别，无亲疏之分，那岂不是禽兽之行了吗！
English: If there is no difference between men and women, no estrangement, then isn't that the work of beasts?

古文：婿亲御授绥，亲之也。亲之也者，亲之也。
现代文：从女方家中出来，婿亲自为新娘赶车，让车子往前走三圈，然后又亲自把登车的引绳交给新娘，这样做是表示对新娘的亲爱。
English: Coming out of the woman's home, the husband-in-law personally drove the car for the bride, let the car go forward three times, and then personally handed the boarding rope to the bride, doing so is to show his love for the bride.

古文：敬而亲之，先王之所以得天下也。
现代文：新郎对新娘表示亲爱，作为回报，新娘自然也亲爱新郎。
English: The groom expresses his love for the bride, and in return, the bride naturally loves the groom.

古文：出乎大门而先，男帅女，女从男，夫妇之义由此始也。
现代文：对新娘又敬又爱，把这种敬爱推而广之，有的先主就是凭借这点得到天下的。从女家大门出来以后男的就一直在前，男的领着女的，女的跟着男的，夫唱妇随的表现就由此开始。
English: There is both respect and love for the bride, and this respect is spread far and wide. Some ancestors gained the world by virtue of this. After coming out of the gate of the woman's house, the man is always in front, the man leads the woman, the woman follows the man, and the performance of the husband singing and the woman following begins from this.

古文：妇人，从人者也；幼从父兄，嫁从夫，夫死从子。
现代文：所谓 妇人 ，就是服从别人的人。幼小时服从父兄，出嫁后服从丈夫，丈夫死了则服从儿子。
English: A woman is one who obeys others. When she is young, she obeys her father and brother; when she is married, she obeys her husband; and when her husband dies, she obeys her son.

古文：夫也者，夫也；夫也者，以知帅人者也。
现代文：所谓 夫 ，就是师傅的意思。作为师傅，自然要以智慧领导别人。
English: The so-called husband means master. As a master, it is natural to lead others with wisdom.

古文：玄冕斋戒，鬼神阴阳也。
现代文：迎亲之前，新郎要身着祭服，斋戒沐浴，察告祖先和天地。
English: Before welcoming a relative, the groom should wear a ceremonial robe, fast, bathe, and report to the ancestors and heaven and earth.

古文：将以为社稷主，为先祖后，而可以不致敬乎？
现代文：试想，成亲之后，新娘就成了内当家的，生男育女，繁衍后代，事体如此重大，怎能不虔诚地祭告天地祖宗呢。
English: Just imagine, after getting married, the bride becomes the head of the household, giving birth to sons and daughters, and reproducing offspring. The matter is so important, how can we not piously worship the ancestors of heaven and earth?

古文：共牢而食，同尊卑也。
现代文：成亲的当晚，在新房里，夫妇同吃一个碗里的菜，其含义是夫妇平等，尊卑相同。
English: On the night of marriage, in the new room, the couple eat a bowl of dishes together, which means that the couple are equal and have the same dignity.

古文：故妇人无爵，从夫之爵，坐以夫之齿。
现代文：所以妇人是没有爵位的，丈夫有了爵位，妻子就跟着作命妇，这叫夫贵妇荣；就是席间座次的安排，也是以丈夫的辈分和年龄为准。
English: Therefore, a woman does not have a title of nobility, but if a husband has a title of nobility, his wife will follow him as a wife, which is called the wife's honor. The arrangement of the seats between the tables is also based on the husband's generation and age.

古文：器用陶匏，尚礼然也。
现代文：远古时的食器用的都是没有装饰的陶器，当时崇尚的风气就是如此。
English: In ancient times, undecorated pottery was used for tableware, which was the prevailing style.

古文：三王作牢用陶匏。
现代文：夏商周三代始有共牢之礼，其食器就沿用陶器。
English: Xia Shangzhong, the third generation, had the privilege of being imprisoned together from the beginning, and his tableware continued to use pottery.

古文：厥明，妇盥馈。舅姑卒食，妇馂余，私之也。
现代文：成亲次日的黎明，新娘先拜见公婆，然后洗手，向公婆进献食品，表示新妇开始履行孝养的义务；而公公婆婆吃毕，把剩下的食物赐给新妇，表示对新妇的疼爱。
English: At dawn on the second day after becoming a parent, the bride first paid respects to her in-laws, then washed her hands and presented food to her in-laws, indicating that the bride began to fulfill her obligation of filial piety; while her in-laws finished eating and gave the remaining food to the bride, expressing their love for the bride.

古文：舅姑降自西阶，妇降自阼阶，授之室也。
现代文：礼毕，公婆先从西阶下堂，然后新妇从昨阶下堂，这表示主持家务的权利将要授予新妇了。
English: After the ceremony, the mother-in-law will first walk down the hall from the west step, and then the bride will walk down the hall from the last step, which means that the right to preside over the housework will be granted to the bride.

古文：昏礼不用乐，幽阴之义也。乐，阳气也。
现代文：结婚典礼上不兴奏乐，因为婚礼属于幽阴之事，而音乐则属于阳气。
English: There is no music at the wedding ceremony, because the wedding is a gloomy thing, and music is a yang thing.

古文：昏礼不贺，人之序也。有虞氏之祭也，尚用气；血腥爓祭，用气也。
现代文：举行婚礼，也不邀请亲朋好友前来祝贺，因为结婚就意味着新陈代谢，下一代将要产生，上一代将要衰亡啊。虞舜时的祭祀，贵尚腥气。
English: When a wedding is held, relatives and friends are not invited to come and congratulate, because getting married means metabolism, the next generation will be born, and the previous generation will decline and die. Sacrifices at the time of the egrets are expensive.

古文：殷人尚声，臭味未成，涤荡其声；乐三阕，然后出迎牲。
现代文：所以祭祀的时候，先是用鲜血，接着用生肉，再接着用半生不熟的肉，他们就是用这些祭品散发的腥气来敬神的。殷人的祭祀，贵尚声音。
English: Therefore, when making sacrifices, they first use blood, then raw meat, and then half-baked meat, and they use the stench emitted by these offerings to worship God.

古文：声音之号，所以诏告于天地之间也。
现代文：在尚未宰杀牺牲之前，先声音或高或低地奏乐，乐曲奏过三章，然后才出门迎接牺牲。
English: Before slaughtering the sacrifice, the first sound is either high or low, and the music is played for three chapters before going out to meet the sacrifice.

古文：周人尚臭，灌用鬯臭，郁合鬯；臭，阴达于渊泉。灌以圭璋，用玉气也。
现代文：这乐曲的声音，就是用来召唤天地之间的鬼神前来受飨。周人的祭祀，贵尚芳香之气，所以在祭祀开始的时候，他们用兽酒浇地，以笆酒的香气召神降临。
English: The sound of this piece of music is used to summon the spirits between heaven and earth to come and be sacrificed. The sacrifices of the Zhou people are very fragrant, so at the beginning of the sacrifice, they poured animal wine on the ground and called the gods to descend with the aroma of the wine.

古文：既灌，然后迎牲，致阴气也。
现代文：泡有郁金香草的兽酒芳香异常，用它来浇地降神，其香气可以透入地的深层。
English: Animal wine infused with tulips is unusually fragrant. It is used to anoint the ground, and its aroma penetrates deep into the earth.

古文：萧合黍稷；臭，阳达于墙屋。
现代文：再说，酌酒浇地用的勺子是以圭璋作柄，其用意也在于利用玉的洁润之气。
English: In addition, the spoon used for pouring wine is made of jade, and its intention is to use the clean and moist air of jade.

古文：故既奠，然后焫萧合膻芗。
现代文：先以酒浇地降神，然后才出门迎接牺牲，这是为了召致地府的阴气。
English: In order to invoke the gloomy atmosphere of the underworld, the god is first doused with wine and then goes out to meet the sacrifice.

古文：凡祭，慎诸此。魂气归于天，形魄归于地。
现代文：人死了以后，其灵魂上升于天，其躯壳下降于地。
English: When a person dies, his soul ascends to heaven and his body descends to earth.

古文：故祭，求诸阴阳之义也。
现代文：所以在祭祀降神时，既须要到天曹去请，也须要到地府去请。
English: Therefore, when offering sacrifices to the gods, it is necessary to go to Tenso-mura to ask, and it is also necessary to go to Chifu to ask.

古文：殷人先求诸阳，周人先求诸阴。
现代文：殷人是先到天曹请神，周人是先到地府请神。
English: Yin people go to Tenso first to pray to God, and Zhou people go to Difu first to pray to God.

古文：诏祝于室，坐尸于堂，用牲于庭，升首于室。
现代文：宗庙之祭，未杀牲时，在室中举行告神之祭；杀牲之后，则在堂上设祭飨尸。在庭中杀牲时要举行告祭，献首于室时也要举行告祭。
English: At the ancestral temple's festival, when no animal is killed, a memorial service is held in the room; after the animal is killed, a funeral pyre is set up in the hall. When an animal is killed in the courtyard, a memorial service is held, and when a head is offered in the room, a memorial service is also held.

古文：直祭，祝于主；索祭，祝于祊。不知神之所在，于彼乎？
现代文：正祭时，祝官以祝辞告于神主；寻求众神之祭则在庙门外举行。
English: At the time of the main festival, the celebrant addresses the deity with a congratulatory speech; the festival of seeking the gods is held outside the temple gate.

古文：于此乎？
现代文：在这么多的地方设祭：由室内而堂上，由堂上而庭中，由庭中而门外，就是因为不知道神究竟在哪里。在那边呢？还是在这边呢？
English: To offer sacrifices in so many places: from the inner room to the outer court, from the outer court to the inner court, from the inner court to the outer court, is because they do not know where God is. Is it over there? Or is it over here?

古文：或诸远人乎？
现代文：或是在离人更远的地方？
English: Or further away from people?

古文：祭于祊，尚曰求诸远者与？
现代文：连庙门外都设祭，应该说请神也请得够远了吧？
English: Even outside the temple gate, there are festivals. It should be said that it is far enough to invite the gods, right?

古文：祊之为言倞也，肵之为言敬也。
现代文：庙门外之祭之所以叫做 访 ，是因为访有远的意思。所姐之所以称 所 ，是因为所有敬的意思。
English: The reason why the festival outside the temple gate is called "Visit" is because "visit" has a distant meaning.

古文：富也者，福也，首也者，直也。
现代文：什么叫福？
English: What is good fortune?

古文：相，飨之也。
现代文：万事具备就是福。
English: Having everything is a blessing.

古文：嘏，长也，大也。
现代文：为什么要 升首于室 因为首是牲体之正，是牲体的最尊贵部分。
English: Why should the head be elevated above the rest of the body? Because the head is the most important part of the animal.

古文：尸，陈也。
现代文：所谓相，就是劝导尸享用供品。
English: The so-called phase is to persuade the corpse to enjoy the offerings.

古文：毛血，告幽全之物也。
现代文：所谓暇，有长久和广大的意思。
English: The term "leisure" has a long-term and broad meaning.

古文：告幽全之物者，贵纯之道也。血祭，盛气也。祭肺肝心，贵气主也。
现代文：至于以肺、肝、心作为供品祭神，是看重它们是滋生生气的器官。
English: As for offering the lungs, liver, and heart as an offering to the gods, it is important that they are vital organs.

古文：祭黍稷加肺，祭齐加明水，报阴也。
现代文：用黍樱加肺祭祀，用五齐加明水祭祀，这是为了报答阴气。
English: In order to repay the gloomy spirit, the lung is sacrificed with the fused cherry and the bright water is sacrificed with the five-pointed star.

古文：取膟菺燔燎，升首，报阳也。
现代文：把香篙抹上牲血和肠间脂肪，点燃让其冒烟，以及用牲首作为供品，这是为了报答阳气。
English: In order to repay the yang qi, they smeared champagne with animal blood and intestinal fat, lit it to make it smoke, and used the head of an animal as an offering.

古文：明水涚齐，贵新也。
现代文：用收集的露水冲淡五齐，是看重它的清洁透明。
English: Using the collected dew to dilute five times, it is clean and transparent.

古文：凡涚，新之也。
现代文：凡是加水冲淡，都是为了提高酒的清洁透明度。
English: When water is added and diluted, it is to improve the clarity of the wine.

古文：其谓之明水也，由主人之絜着此水也。
现代文：至于把露水称作明水，是取义于主人的明洁之心就像露水显示的那样。
English: As for calling the dew clear water, it is taken from the meaning of the owner's clear heart as shown by the dew.

古文：君再拜稽首，肉袒亲割，敬之至也。
现代文：国君在祭祀时要行再拜稽首之礼，要袒露左臂，亲自分解牲体，这是表示对神的极端尊敬。
English: At the time of the sacrifice, the sovereign should perform the bowing of the head, expose the left arm, and personally untie the animal, which is an expression of extreme respect for the gods.

古文：敬之至也，服也。
现代文：极端尊敬，就意味着服从。
English: Extreme respect means obedience.

古文：拜，服也；稽首，服之甚也；肉袒，服之尽也。祭称孝孙孝子，以其义称也；称曾孙某，谓国家也。
现代文：俯身下拜是表示服从；稽首则表示加倍服从；袒露左臂，那是表示毫无保留的完全服从。祭于祖庙，自称 孝孙 ；祭于父庙，自称 孝子 。诸侯、卿大夫在祭祀曾祖以上的祖先时，统统自称 曾孙某 。
English: Bowing down is a sign of obedience; bowing the head is a sign of redoubled obedience; exposing the left arm is a sign of complete and unreserved obedience. If it is dedicated to the ancestor's temple, it claims to be a filial son; if it is dedicated to the father's temple, it claims to be a filial son. Princes and nobles all claim to be a great-grandson when they sacrifice ancestors older than great-grandfathers.

古文：祭祀之相，主人自致其敬，尽其嘉，而无与让也。
现代文：祭祀中的相，只须劝尸吃好喝好，毋须劝尸谦让，因为主人的目的就是要表达他对神的虔敬。
English: In sacrificial rituals, it is only necessary to persuade the corpse to eat and drink well, and there is no need to persuade the corpse to be humble, because the owner's purpose is to express his reverence for God.

古文：腥肆爓腍祭，岂知神之所飨也？主人自尽其敬而已矣。
现代文：祭祀时，或进献生肉，或进献肢解后的牲体，或进献半生不熟的肉，或进献熟肉，也搞不清楚神究竟享用了哪一样，对于主人来说总算是对祖宗尽了孝敬之心罢了。
English: At the time of sacrifice, either raw meat is offered, or the dismembered body of an animal is offered, or half-baked meat is offered, or cooked meat is offered, and it is not clear which one the god has used. For the owner, it is just a matter of showing filial piety to the ancestors.

古文：举斝角，诏妥尸。古者，尸无事则立，有事而后坐也。
现代文：把尸迎入室内之后，当尸入席并举起放在他面前的酒杯时，祝要提示主人对尸行礼，请尸安坐。古时候，尸一般都是立着，只有在饮酒吃饭时才坐着。
English: After welcoming the corpse into the room, when the corpse enters the table and raises the wine glass placed in front of him, the host should be prompted to salute the corpse and ask the corpse to sit down. In ancient times, the corpse was generally standing, only sitting when drinking and eating.

古文：尸，神象也。
现代文：尸是神的代表。
English: The corpse is the representative of God.

古文：祝，将命也。
现代文：祝是沟通神和人的传话者。
English: Blessed is the one who communicates between God and man.

古文：缩酌用茅，明酌也。醆酒涚于清，汁献涚于醆酒；犹明清与醆酒于旧泽之酒也。
现代文：对于五齐中的泛齐、醋齐，因其混浊，要先用事酒冲淡，再用茅草过滤，使其透明可用。对于盎齐以下三齐，因其较清，不用过滤，只须用清酒冲淡一下就行了。至于郁色，用盎齐来冲淡。
English: For Pan Qi and Vinegar Qi in the Five Qi, because of their turbidity, it is necessary to first dilute them with wine and then filter them with thatch to make them transparent and usable. For San Qi below the Ounce, because it is clearer, there is no need to filter, just dilute it with sake. As for the dull color, dilute it with Ounce.

古文：祭有祈焉，有报焉，有由辟焉。齐之玄也，以阴幽思也。
现代文：古代的这些作法，就像如今的事酒、清酒与盎齐都要和陈年老窖搀兑一样。祭祀有三种作用，一是祈福，二是报恩，三是消灾。斋服之所以是黑色，是因为黑色属阴，能够使人静下心来思念鬼神。
English: These ancient practices, like today's sake, sake, and unzhi, are the same as the old cellar rites. Sacrifices have three functions, one is to pray for good fortune, the second is to repay kindness, and the third is to eliminate disasters. The reason why the saffron robe is black is because black is yin, which can make people calm down and think about ghosts and gods.

古文：故君子三日齐，必见其所祭者。
现代文：所以，君子如果专心致志的致斋三日，到了祭时，就能仿佛看到了自己要祭的神灵。
English: Therefore, if a gentleman fasts for three days with dedication, when it comes to the festival, he will be able to see the god he wants to sacrifice.

