古文：德者，内也。
现代文：德，是内部所具有的。
English: Virtue is what one has inside.

古文：得者，外也。 上德不德 ，言其神不淫于外也。
现代文：得，是从外部获取的。《老子》中 上德不德 这句话，是说具有上德的人的精神不游离自身。
English: In "Lao Zi," "superior virtue" and "inferior virtue" are taken from the outside. This sentence means that the spirit of a person with superior virtue does not drift away from himself.

古文：神不淫于外，则身全。
现代文：精神不外露，自身就能保全。
English: If the spirit is not exposed, it can be preserved by itself.

古文：身全之谓德。德者，得身也。
现代文：自身能够保全，也就叫做 德 。 德 即得到自身。
English: To be able to preserve oneself is called virtue; virtue is to obtain oneself.

古文：凡德者，以无为集，以无欲成，以不思安，以不用固。
现代文：凡是德，都是以无为来积聚，以无欲来成就，以不思虑来得到安定，以不使用来得到巩固的。
English: All virtues are accumulated through inaction, achieved through dispassion, stabilized through thoughtlessness, and consolidated through disuse.

古文：为之欲之，则德无舍；德无舍，则不全。
现代文：如果有为、有欲，德就无所归宿；德无所归宿，就不完整了。
English: If there is action and desire, virtue has no destination; if virtue has no destination, it is not complete.

古文：用之思之，则不固；不固，则无功；无功，则生于德。
现代文：如果使用了，思虑了，德就不能牢固；不牢固，就没有功效；没有功效是由于自以为有德。
English: If it is used and considered, virtue is not solid; if it is not solid, it is not effective; if it is not effective, it is because it is thought to have virtue.

古文：德则无德，不德则有德。
现代文：自以为有德，就没有德；不自以为有德，就保全了德。
English: If you think you have virtue, you don't have it; if you don't think you have it, you preserve it.

古文：故曰： 上德不德，是以有德。 
现代文：所以《老子》说： 上德不自以为有德，因此才有德。 
English: That's why "Lao Zi" said: The superior virtue does not think it has virtue, therefore it has virtue.

古文：所以贵无为无思为虚者，谓其意无所制也。夫无术者，故以无为无思为虚也。
现代文：推崇无为、无思作为虚的原因，是说人的心意不受任何牵制，那种不懂道术的人，故意用无为、无思来表现虚。
English: The reason for praising inaction and thoughtlessness as nothingness is that people's minds are not restrained by anything, and those who do not understand Taoism deliberately use inaction and thoughtlessness to show nothingness.

古文：夫故以无为无思为虚者，其意常不忘虚，是制于为虚也。
现代文：故意用无为无思来表现虚的人，他的心意常常不忘记虚，这就是被虚所牵制了。
English: A person who deliberately uses inaction and thoughtlessness to express emptiness, his mind often does not forget emptiness, that is, he is held back by emptiness.

古文：虚者，谓其意无所制也。
现代文：虚是说他的心意不受牵制。
English: The lie is that his mind is unfettered.

古文：今制于为虚，是不虚也。
现代文：现在被虚所牵制，就是不虚了。
English: Now, if you are held back by the false, you are no longer false.

古文：虚者之无为也，不以无为为有常。
现代文：真正做到虚的人，在对待无为上，不把无为当作经常要注意的事。
English: People who are truly virtuous do not regard inaction as a matter of constant attention when dealing with inaction.

古文：不以无为为有常，则虚；虚，则德盛；德盛之为上德。
现代文：不把无为当作经常要注意的事，就虚了；虚了，德就充足；德充足了，也就叫做上德。
English: If you don't regard inaction as a matter of constant attention, you will be vain; if you are vain, virtue will be sufficient; if virtue is sufficient, it will be called superior virtue.

古文：故曰： 上德无为而无不为也。 仁者，谓其中心欣然爱人也；其喜人之有福，而恶人之有祸也；生心之所不能已也，非求其报也。
现代文：所以《老子》说： 上德无为而又无所不为。 仁是说内心自发地去爱人，是说喜欢别人得到幸福而不喜欢别人遭到祸害；是抑制不住的内在感情冲动，并不是为了求得别人的报答。
English: Therefore, "Lao Zi" said: "The superior virtue does nothing and does everything." "Ren" means to love others spontaneously from the heart, it means to like others to be happy and not to like others to be harmed; it is an irrepressible inner emotional impulse, not to seek the reward of others.

古文：故曰： 上仁为之而无以为也。 
现代文：所以《老子》说： 上仁有所表现的话，并不是怀着目的而去表现的。 
English: Therefore, "Lao Zi" said: If Shangren has any performance, it is not done with a purpose.

古文：义者，君臣上下之事，父子贵贱之差也，知交朋友之接也，亲疏内外之分也。
现代文：义是指君臣上下的联系，父子贵贱的差异，知交朋友的交往，亲疏内外的分别。
English: Yi refers to the connection between the emperor and his subjects, the difference between the nobility and the commoners, the interaction between acquaintances and friends, and the difference between the close and distant relatives.

古文：臣事君宜，下怀上宜，子事父宜，贱敬贵宜，知交朋友之相助也宜，亲者内而疏者外宜。
现代文：臣子侍奉君主适宜，下属依恋上司适宜，孩子侍奉父亲适宜，卑贱礼敬尊贵适宜，知交朋友互助适宜，内亲外疏适宜。
English: It is appropriate for a vassal to serve the monarch, for a subordinate to be attached to his superior, for a child to serve his father, for a lowly person to show respect to a high-ranking person, for acquaintances and friends to help each other, and for relatives to be estranged from each other.

古文：义者，谓其宜也，宜而为之。
现代文：义就是说处理各种关系很适宜，适宜的才去做。
English: That is to say, it is very appropriate to deal with various relationships, and only do what is appropriate.

古文：故曰： 上义为之而有以为也。 
现代文：所以《老子》说： 上义表现出来，是怀着目的而去表现的。 
English: That's why "Lao Zi" said, "When the higher meaning is expressed, it is expressed with a purpose."

古文：礼者，所以貌情也，群义之文章也，君臣父子之交也，贵贱贤不肖之所以别也。
现代文：礼是体现内心感情的，是各种义的有条理的表现，是用来规定君臣、父子之间的关系的。是表明贵贱、贤不肖之间的区别的。
English: Etiquette is the embodiment of inner feelings, it is the systematic expression of all kinds of righteousness, it is used to determine the relationship between monarch and subject, father and son, and it is used to show the difference between noble and humble, and virtuous and ignoble.

古文：中心怀而不谕，故疾趋卑拜而明之；实心爱而不知，故好言繁辞以信之。礼者，外饰之所以谕内也。
现代文：内心依恋而不能表达，所以用疾趋卑拜等动作来加以表明；心里确实有所爱慕而对方却不了解，所以用美好动听的言辞来加以申述，礼是用来表明内心感情的外部文饰。所以说，礼是用来体现内心感情的。
English: Inner attachment cannot be expressed, so it is expressed with actions such as prostration; there is indeed love in the heart, but the other party does not understand it, so it is expressed with beautiful and beautiful words. Etiquette is used to show the inner feelings of external decoration. Therefore, etiquette is used to reflect inner feelings.

古文：故曰：礼以貌情也。凡人之为外物动也，不知其为身之礼也。
现代文：凡人受外界事物的影响而有所动作，并不懂得这种动作就是他自身的礼。
English: An ordinary person is influenced by external things and makes an action, without understanding that this action is his own ritual.

古文：众人之为礼也，以尊他人也，故时劝时衰。
现代文：一般人的行礼，是用来尊重别人的，所以有时认真，有时马虎。
English: The manners of ordinary people are used to respect others, so they are sometimes serious and sometimes careless.

古文：君子之为礼，以为其身；以为其身，故神之为上礼；上礼神而众人贰，故不能相应；不能相应，故曰： 上礼为之而莫之应。 众人虽贰，圣人之复恭敬尽手足之礼也不衰。
现代文：君子的行礼，是为了他自身的需要；为了自身的需要，所以专心一意地对待它而使它成为上礼；上礼专心一意而一般人却三心二意，所以两方面不能相应；两方面不能相应，所以《老子》说： 上礼实行了却没有人响应。 一般人虽是三心二意，圣人仍然保持恭敬，一举一动都遵守礼，毫不懈怠。
English: The eulogy of a gentleman is for his own needs; for his own needs, so he treats it with single-mindedness and makes it a eulogy; the eulogy is single-minded and the average person is half-hearted, so the two aspects cannot correspond; the two aspects cannot correspond, so "Lao Zi" said: The eulogy was implemented but no one responded. Although the average person is half-hearted, the saint still maintains respect, obeys the eulogy every move, and does not slacken.

古文：故曰： 攘臂而仍之。 
现代文：所以《老子》说圣人 竭尽全力继续行礼 。
English: Therefore, "Lao Zi" said that the saint made every effort to continue the salute.

古文：道有积而积有功；德者，道之功。
现代文：道有所积聚，而积聚又有所功效；德也就是道的功效。
English: Tao has accumulation, and accumulation has efficacy; virtue is the efficacy of Tao.

古文：功有实而实有光；仁者，德之光。
现代文：功效有实际表观，有实际表观就有光辉；仁也就是德的光辉。
English: Efficacy has practical appearance, and practical appearance has brilliance; benevolence is the brilliance of virtue.

古文：光有泽而泽有事；义者，仁之事也。
现代文：光辉有它的色泽，色泽有表现它的事情；义也就是表现仁的事情。
English: Splendor has its hue, hue has the things that express it; righteousness is the thing that expresses benevolence.

古文：事有礼而礼有文；礼者，义之文也。
现代文：事情有礼的规定，礼有文采的外观；礼也就是义的文采外观。
English: Things have rules of etiquette, and etiquette has an elegant appearance; etiquette is the elegant appearance of righteousness.

古文：故曰： 失道而后失德，失德而后失仁，失仁而后失义，失义而后失礼。 
现代文：所以《老子》说： 失去道之后，就失掉了德；失去德之后，就失掉了仁；失去仁之后，就失掉了义；失去义之后，就失掉了礼。 
English: Therefore, "Lao Zi" said: After losing the Tao, one loses virtue; after losing virtue, one loses benevolence; after losing benevolence, one loses righteousness; after losing righteousness, one loses propriety.

古文：礼为情貌者也，文为质饰者也。
现代文：礼是情感的描绘，文采是本质的修饰。
English: Etiquette is the depiction of emotion, and literature is the embellishment of essence.

古文：夫君子取情而去貌，好质而恶饰。
现代文：君子采纳情感而舍弃描绘，喜欢本质而厌恶修饰。
English: The gentleman adopts emotion and abandons depiction, likes essence and abhors embellishment.

古文：夫恃貌而论情者，其情恶也；须饰而论质者，其质衰也。
现代文：依靠描绘来阐明情感的，这种情感就是恶的；依靠修饰来阐明本质的，这种本质就是糟的。
English: To rely on depiction to illustrate an emotion is evil; to rely on embellishment to illustrate an essence is bad.

古文：何以论之？和氏之璧，不饰以五采；隋侯之珠，不饰以银黄。其质至美，物不足以饰之。夫物之待饰而后行者，其质不美也。
现代文：和氏壁，不用五彩修饰；隋侯珠，不用金银修饰。它们的本质极美，别的东西不足以修饰它们，事物等待修饰然后流行的，它的本质不美。
English: And Ujibei, do not use five-color decoration; Sui and Houzhu, do not use gold and silver decoration. Their essence is extremely beautiful, other things are not enough to decorate them, things waiting for decoration and then popular, its essence is not beautiful.

古文：是以父子之间，其礼朴而不明，故曰： 理薄也。 凡物不并盛，阴阳是也；理相夺予，威德是也；实厚者貌薄，父子之礼是也。
现代文：因此父子之间的礼纯朴自然而不拘形式，所以说，礼是淡薄的。一切事物不能同时旺盛，阴阳就是这样；事理总是正反相互排斥的，威和德就是这样；实情深厚的外貌就淡薄，父子之间的礼就是这样。
English: Therefore, the etiquette between father and son is simple and natural, regardless of the form. Therefore, the etiquette is light. All things cannot be vigorous at the same time, yin and yang is like this; things are always positive and negative mutually exclusive, dignity and virtue are like this; the appearance of deep truth is light, and the etiquette between father and son is like this.

古文：由是观之，礼繁者，实心衰也。
现代文：由此看来，礼节繁琐是内心真实感情衰竭的表现。
English: From this perspective, cumbersome etiquette is a manifestation of inner emotional exhaustion.

古文：然则为礼者，事通人之朴心者也。
现代文：既是这样，那么行礼这事，正是为了沟通人们朴实的心意。
English: If this is the case, then it is precisely in order to communicate people's simple minds that this ritual is performed.

古文：众人之为礼也，人应则轻欢，不应则责怨。今为礼者事通人之朴心而资之以相责之分，能毋争乎？
现代文：一般人的行礼，别人回礼就轻快欢乐，不回礼就责怪怨恨，现在行礼的人本想从事于沟通人们朴实的心意，但却给众人提供了指责自己的借口，能不发生争执吗？
English: Ordinary people's salute, others return the salute with lightness and joy, and those who do not return the salute blame resentment. Now, the people who perform the salute are supposed to be engaged in communicating people's simple minds, but they have provided everyone with an excuse to blame themselves. Can there be no dispute?

古文：有争则乱，故曰： 夫礼者，忠信之薄也，而乱之首乎。 
现代文：有争执就乱，所以《老子》说： 礼是忠、信淡薄的表现，是产生争乱的开端。 
English: If there is a dispute, there will be chaos, so "Lao Zi" said: The performance that courtesy is loyalty and sincerity is weak is the beginning of conflict.

古文：先物行先理动之谓前识。
现代文：在事物没有出现之前和事理没有表现出来之前就行动，叫做前识。
English: It is called foresight to act before the things appear and before the causes manifest themselves.

古文：前识者，无缘而妄意度也。
现代文：前识是没有依据而作出的胡乱猜度。
English: Foreknowledge is a wild guess with no basis.

古文：何以论之？
现代文：詹何说： 对。
English: Why do you say that?

古文：詹何坐，弟子侍，牛鸣于门外。
现代文：这是头黑牛。但白色在它角上。 
English: This is a black cow, but it has white on its horns.

古文：弟子曰： 是黑牛也在而白其题。 詹何曰： 然，是黑牛也，而白在其角。 使人视之，果黑牛而以布裹其角。
现代文：叫人去看，果然是黑牛而用布包着它的角。
English: He called out for someone to take a look, and sure enough, it was a black cow with its horn wrapped in cloth.

古文：以詹子之术，婴众人之心，华焉殆矣！
现代文：用詹何的方法来扰乱众人的心，华而不实啊。
English: Using every trick in the book to mess with people's hearts, it's all very flashy.

古文：故曰： 道之华也。 尝试释詹子之察，而使五尺之愚童子视之，亦知其黑牛而以布裹其角也。故以詹子之察，苦心伤神，而后与五尺之愚童子同功，是以曰： 愚之首也。 故曰： 前识者，道之华也，而愚之首也。 
现代文：太危险了！所以说前识 是道的虚华的表现。 不妨放弃詹何的明察，而叫五尺愚童去看，也知道是黑牛而用白布包着它的角。所以用詹何的明察，劳心伤神，然后才能和五尺愚童同等效果，因此说前识 是愚意的开端 。所以《老子》说； 前识是道的虚华的表现，是愚蠢的开端。 
English: It is too dangerous! Therefore, foresight is a manifestation of the vanity of Tao. It is as well to give up the foresight of Zhan He and ask a five-foot-tall fool to look at it, and also know that it is a black cow and wrap its horn with a white cloth. Therefore, with the foresight of Zhan He, work hard, and then be able to have the same effect as a five-foot-tall fool. Therefore, foresight is the beginning of stupidity. Therefore, "Lao Zi" said; Foresight is the manifestation of the vanity of Tao, is the beginning of stupidity.

古文：所谓 大丈夫 者，谓其智之大也。
现代文：《老子》中所说的 大丈夫 ，是说他的智慧很高。
English: In "Lao Zi," when it says that he is a good husband, it means that his wisdom is very high.

古文：所谓 处其厚而不处其薄 者，行情实而去礼貌也。
现代文：所说的 立身淳厚而不立身轻薄 ，是说表观真情实感而去掉外表的礼貌。
English: What is meant by standing up straight and strong, rather than standing up light and thin, is the appearance of sincerity and the removal of the appearance of politeness.

古文：所谓 处其实不处其华 者，必缘理，不径绝也。
现代文：所说的 立身朴实而不立身虚华 ，是说必须遵循事理而不简单跨越事理。
English: What is meant by standing up for simplicity rather than standing up for vanity is that we must follow the facts rather than simply leapfrog them.

古文：所谓 去彼取此 者，去貌、径绝而取缘理、好情实也。
现代文：所说的 去掉那个，采取这个 ，是说去掉礼貌、简单跨越事理而采取遵循事理、喜欢真情实感。
English: What is meant by "get rid of that and adopt this" is to get rid of politeness, to simply go beyond reason and adopt the principle of following reason, and to like the feeling of reality.

古文：故曰： 去彼取此。 
现代文：所以《老子》说： 去掉那个，采取这个。 
English: So "Lao Zi" said: remove that, take this.

古文：人有祸，则心畏恐；心畏恐，则行端直；行端直，则思虑熟；思虑熟，则得事理。
现代文：人有祸害，内心就恐惧；内心恐惧，行为就正直；行为正直，思虑就成熟；思虑成熟，就能得到事物的规律。
English: If a person has a calamity, his heart will be fearful; if his heart is fearful, his behavior will be upright; if his behavior is upright, his thoughts will be mature; if his thoughts are mature, he will be able to obtain the law of things.

古文：行端直，则无祸害；无祸害，则尽天年。
现代文：行为正直，就没有祸害；没有祸害，就能尽享天年。
English: If you behave honestly, there will be no evil; if there is no evil, you will be able to enjoy life to the full.

古文：得事理，则必成功。
现代文：得到事理，就一定能成就功业。
English: If you obtain the truth, you will surely be able to achieve the merits.

古文：尽天年，则全而寿。
现代文：尽享天年，就能全身而长寿。
English: If you enjoy your life to the full, you can live a long life with your whole body.

古文：必成功，则富与贵。
现代文：一定成就功业，就富有而显贵。
English: If you have certain achievements, you will be rich and distinguished.

古文：全寿富贵之谓福。
现代文：全寿富贵叫做福。
English: A long and prosperous life is called happiness.

古文：而福本于有祸。
现代文：而福本源于有祸。
English: But luck comes from misfortune.

古文：故曰： 祸兮福之所倚。 以成其功也。
现代文：所以《老子》说： 祸啊，是福所依存的地方。 
English: Therefore, "Lao Zi" said: Woe is the place where happiness depends.

古文：人有福，则富贵至；富贵至，则衣食美；衣食美，则骄心生；骄心生，则行邪僻而动弃理。行邪僻，则身夭死；动弃理，则无成功。
现代文：即由此成就了人们的功业。人有福，富贵就来到；富贵来到，衣食就美好；衣食美好，骄心就产生；骄心产生，就会行为邪僻而举动悖理；行为邪僻，自身就会早死；举动悖理，就不会成就功业。
English: If a person is blessed, then wealth will come; if wealth comes, then clothing and food will be beautiful; if clothing and food are beautiful, then pride will arise; if pride arises, then he will act in an unholy way and act unreasonably; if he acts in an unholy way, then he will die early; if he acts unreasonably, then he will not accomplish his work.

古文：夫内有死夭之难而外无成功之名者，大祸也。
现代文：内有早死的灾难而外无成功的名声，也就成了大祸。
English: To have the misfortune of early death without the fame of success was a great misfortune.

古文：而祸本生于有福。
现代文：而祸根源于有福。
English: But the root of evil lies in good fortune.

古文：故曰： 福兮祸之所伏。 
现代文：所以《老子》说： 福啊，是祸所潜伏的地方。 
English: Therefore, "Lao Zi" said: "Fortune is the place where evil lurks."

古文：夫缘道理以从事者，无不能成。
现代文：按照事物的法则办事的人，没有不成功的。
English: There is no such thing as an unsuccessful person who acts according to the laws of things.

古文：无不能成者，大能成天子之势尊，而小易得卿相将军之赏禄。
现代文：没有不成功的，大功能成就天子的权势尊严，小功容易取得卿相将军的赏赐俸禄。
English: There is no such thing as unsuccessful, great function achieves the power and dignity of the son of heaven, and small achievement is easy to obtain the reward and salary of the general secretary.

古文：夫弃道理而妄举动者，虽上有天子诸侯之势尊，而下有猗顿、陶硃、卜祝之富，犹失其民人而亡其财资也。
现代文：违背事物法则而轻举妄动的，即使上有天子诸侯的权势尊严，下有猜顿、陶朱以及卜祝的富有，还是会失去百姓而丧失财产的。
English: Those who act rashly in violation of the laws of things, even if they have the power and dignity of heavenly sons and princes on top, and the wealth of fortune-telling, Tao Zhu and wish-granting on the bottom, will still lose the people and lose their property.

古文：众人之轻弃道理而易妄举动者，不知其祸福之深大而道阔远若是也，故谕人曰： 孰知其极。 
现代文：大家之所以轻易地违背事物法则而轻举妄动，是由于不懂得祸福转化的道理广阔深远得像这个样子，所以《老子》告诉人们说： 谁知道它的究竟？ 
English: The reason why people easily violate the laws of things and act rashly is because they do not understand that the principle of the transformation of good and evil is so broad and far-reaching. Therefore, "Lao Zi" tells people: Who knows its ultimate?

古文：人莫不欲富贵全寿，而未有能免于贫贱死夭之祸也。
现代文：人们没有不想富贵全寿的，但没有谁能免于贫贱早死的灾祸。
English: There is no one who does not want to be rich and live a full life, but no one can escape the scourge of poverty and early death.

古文：心欲富贵全寿，而今贫贱死夭，是不能至于其所欲至也。
现代文：心里想富贵全寿，而现在却贫贱早死，这是没能达到他想达到的目的。
English: In his heart, he wanted to live a rich and full life, but now he wants to die a poor and early death, which is not able to achieve the goal he wanted to achieve.

古文：今众人之不能至于其所欲至，故曰： 迷。 众人之所不能至于其所欲至也，自天地之剖判以至于今。故曰： 人之迷也，其日故以久矣。 
现代文：凡是离开他想走的路而乱走的，就叫做迷惑；迷惑就不能到达他想到达的地方了，现在众人不能到达想要到达的地方，所以叫 迷 。众人不能到达想要到达的地方，从开天辟地直到现在，都是这样，所以《老子》说： 人们陷入迷途，日子确是很长久了。 
English: Anyone who wanders away from the path he wants to take is called a wanderer; a wanderer cannot reach the place he wants to reach. Now people cannot reach the place they want to reach, so they are called wanderers. People cannot reach the place they want to reach. It has been like this from the dawn of time until now, so "Lao Zi" said: People are lost, the days are indeed very long.

古文：所谓方者，内外相应也，言行相称也。
现代文：所谓方正，是指表里一致，言行一致。
English: The so-called "Founding Principle" refers to the principle of "conformity in word and deed."

古文：所谓廉者，必生死之命也，轻恬资财也。所谓直者，义必公正，公心不偏党也。
现代文：所谓廉正，是指舍生忘死，看轻资财。所谓正直，是指在道义上一定公正，有公心而不偏私。
English: The so-called integrity refers to sacrificing life and forgetting death, and looking down on capital and wealth. The so-called honesty refers to being morally fair, having a fair mind and not being selfish.

古文：所谓光者，官爵尊贵，衣裘壮丽也。
现代文：所谓光耀，是指官爵尊贵，衣裘华丽。
English: The so-called brilliance refers to the nobility of the nobility and the gorgeous clothes.

古文：今有道之士，虽中外信顺，不以诽谤穷堕；虽死节轻财，不以侮罢羞贪；虽义端不党，不以去邪罪私；虽势尊衣美，不以夸贱欺贫。
现代文：现在掌握了道的人，虽然内心和外表都真诚和顺，但并不以此议论困苦堕落的人；虽然能舍生忘死轻视资财，但并不以此侮辱软弱的人，耻笑贪利的人；虽然品行端正不结党营私，但并不以此嫌弃邪僻的人、责怪自私的人；虽然地位尊贵衣着华美，但并不以此藐视卑贱的人，欺侮贫穷的人。
English: Those who have mastered the way now, although they are sincere and obedient in heart and appearance, do not use it to talk about those who are downtrodden; although they can spare their lives and despise wealth, they do not use it to insult those who are weak and ridicule those who are greedy; although they are upright and do not engage in partisan activities, they do not use it to hate those who are perverse and blame those who are selfish; although they are well-dressed, they do not use it to despise those who are lowly and bully those who are poor.

古文：其故何也？
现代文：其原因是什么？
English: What is the reason for this?

古文：使失路者而肯听习问知，即不成迷也。
现代文：假如迷路的人肯听从熟悉情况的人，请教懂得的人，就不会迷路了。
English: If those who are lost would listen to those who are familiar with the situation and consult those who understand, they would not be lost.

古文：今众人之所以欲成功而反为败者，生于不知道理，而不肯问知而听能。
现代文：现在一般人希望成功却反而失败的原因，是由于不懂得道理而又不肯去向懂得的人请教，不肯听从能人的意见。
English: Nowadays, the reason why ordinary people hope to succeed but fail is that they do not understand the truth and are unwilling to seek advice from people who do, and are unwilling to listen to the opinions of competent people.

古文：众人不肯问知听能，而圣人强以其祸败适之，则怨。
现代文：一般人不肯请教懂得的人和听从能干的人，而圣人硬要拿他们出的乱子加以责备，就会惹出怨恨来了。
English: Ordinary people do not want to consult the wise and listen to the competent, and the sage's insistence on blaming them for the mess they have made will cause resentment.

古文：众人多而圣人寡，寡之不胜众，数也。
现代文：一般人多而圣人少，圣人不能压过一般人，是必然的道理。
English: There are more ordinary people and fewer saints, and it is an inevitable truth that saints cannot overpower ordinary people.

古文：今举动而与天下之为仇，非全身长生之道也，是以行轨节而举之也。故曰： 方而不割，廉而不刿，直而不肆，光而不耀。 
现代文：如果一举一动都和天下的人作对，那就不是保全自身求得长寿的办法了，因此圣人用遵循法度来引导人们。所以《老子》说： 圣人要方正，但不割伤人；有棱角，但不刺伤人；正直，但不放纵；有光采，但不炫耀。 
English: If one's every move is against the people of the world, then it is not a way to preserve oneself and seek longevity. Therefore, the sage guides people by following the law. Therefore, "Lao Zi" said: The sage should be square, but not cut people; have edges and corners, but not stab people; be honest, but not indulge; have brilliance, but not show off.

古文：聪明睿智，天也；动静思虑，人也。人也者，乘于天明以视，寄于天聪以听，托于天智以思虑。
现代文：听力、视力和智力是自然生成的，它们的动静思虑是人为的，人为的是指，要依靠自然生成的视力去看，依靠自然生成的听力去听，依靠自然生成的智力去思考。
English: Hearing, sight and intelligence are naturally generated. Their movements and thoughts are man-made. Man-made means that we must rely on naturally generated vision to see, rely on naturally generated hearing to listen, and rely on naturally generated intelligence to think.

古文：故视强，则目不明；听甚，则耳不聪；思虑过度，则智识乱。
现代文：所以视力用得过度，眼睛就不明；听力用得过度，耳朵就不灵；思虑过度，智力的认识功能就混乱。
English: Therefore, if the eyesight is overused, the eyes will not be clear; if the hearing is overused, the ears will not work; if the thoughts are overused, the cognitive function of the intellect will be confused.

古文：目不明，则不能决黑白之分；耳不聪，则不能别清浊之声；智识乱，则不能审得失之地。
现代文：眼睛不明，就不能判断黑白界限；耳朵不灵，就不能区别清浊声音；智力的认识功能混乱，就不能弄清得失根据。
English: If the eyes are not clear, it is impossible to judge the black-and-white boundary; if the ears are not working, it is impossible to distinguish between clear and unclear sounds; if the cognitive function of the intellect is confused, it is impossible to figure out what is right and what is wrong.

古文：目不能决黑白之色则谓之盲；耳不能别清浊之声则谓之聋；心不能审得失之地则谓之狂。
现代文：眼睛不能判断黑白颜色就叫做盲，耳朵不能区别清浊声音就叫做聋，心智不能弄清得失根据就叫做狂。
English: An eye that cannot distinguish between black and white is called blind, an ear that cannot distinguish between clear and unclear sounds is called deaf, and a mind that cannot figure out whether it is right or wrong is called insane.

古文：盲则不能避昼日之险，聋则不能知雷霆之害，狂则不能免人间法令之祸。
现代文：盲就不能躲避白天的危险，聋就不能知道雷霆的危害，狂就不能免于社会法令予以惩罚的灾祸。
English: The blind cannot avoid the dangers of the day, the deaf cannot know the dangers of thunder, the mad cannot be exempt from the scourge of social laws.

古文：书之所谓 治人 者，适动静之节，省思虑之费也。
现代文：《老子》所说的 治人 ，是说的适应动静的节律，节省脑力的消耗。
English: "Lao Zi" said that "managing people" means adapting to the rhythm of movement and movement, and saving the consumption of mental energy.

古文：所谓 事天 者，不极聪明之力，不尽智识之任。
现代文：所说的 事天 ，是说的不要用尽听力、视力，不要用过智力认识功能的限度。
English: What is meant by "the day of judgment" is that one should not use up one's hearing and eyesight, and that one should not use up the limit of one's intellectual cognition.

古文：苟极尽，则费神多；费神多，则盲聋悖狂之祸至，是以啬之。
现代文：如果完全用尽，就会过度费神；过度费神，盲聋狂乱的祸害就会到来，因此要节省。
English: If it is completely exhausted, it will be overworked; if it is overworked, the scourge of blindness, deafness and madness will come, so it is necessary to save.

古文：啬之者，爱其精神，啬其智识也。故曰： 治人事天莫如啬。 
现代文：节省是指爱惜精神，节省脑力。所以《老子》说： 治人事天没有比得上节省的。 
English: Economy refers to cherishing the spirit and saving mental energy. Therefore, "Lao Zi" said: There is nothing comparable to economy in governing people.

古文：众人之用神也躁，躁则多费，多费之谓侈。
现代文：众人用神浮躁，浮躁就浪费，浪费叫做侈。
English: People use God to be impetuous, and impetuousness leads to waste, and waste is called luxury.

古文：圣人之用神也静，静则少费，少费之谓啬。
现代文：圣人用神安静，安静就少费，少费叫做音。
English: A saint uses God to be quiet. Quietness requires less effort. Less effort is called sound.

古文：啬之谓术也，生于道理。
现代文：节省作为一种方法，产生于大小规律。
English: Economy as a method arises from the law of large and small.

古文：夫能啬也，是从于道而服于理者也。众人离于患，陷于祸，犹未知退，而不服从道理。
现代文：能够节省，也就是服从于大小规律。众人遭受灾患，陷入祸害，仍不知退，而不服从大小规律。
English: To be able to economize is to be subject to the law of large and small. When people suffer disasters and fall into calamities, they still do not retreat, but do not obey the law of large and small.

古文：圣人虽未见祸患之形，虚无服从于道理，以称蚤服。
现代文：圣人虽然不曾看见祸患的苗头，就虚静无为地服从于大小规律，这叫 早服 。
English: Although the sage has not seen the germ of evil, he silently obeys the law of small and large, which is called early clothing.

古文：故曰： 夫谓啬，是以蚤服。 知治人者，其思虑静；知事天者，其孔窍虚。
现代文：所以《老子》说： 正因为圣人节省，所以能够早服。 懂得 治人 的人，他的思虑安静；懂得 事天 的人，他的器官畅通。
English: Therefore, "Lao Zi" said: It is precisely because the sage is thrifty that he can get dressed early; those who know how to govern people, his thoughts are quiet; those who know things, his organs are smooth.

古文：思虑静，故德不去；孔窍虚，则和气日入。
现代文：思虑安静，旧德就不会丧失；器官畅通，精气就每天摄入。
English: If one's thoughts are calm, one will not lose one's old virtue; if one's organs are unimpeded, one's essence will be ingested every day.

古文：故曰： 重积德。 夫能令故德不去，新和气日至者，蚤服者也。
现代文：所以说 不断积德。 能使旧德不失，新的精每天到来的人，就是 早服 的人。
English: Therefore, it is said, "Continuously accumulate virtue." The person who can keep the old virtue intact and the new virtue coming every day is the person who is an early riser.

古文：故曰： 蚤服，是谓重积德。 积德而后神静，神静而后和多，和多而后计得，计得而后能御万物，能御万物则战易胜敌，战易胜敌而论必盖世，论必盖世，故曰 无不克。 无不克本于重积德，故曰 重积德，则无不克。 战易胜敌，则兼有天下；论必盖世，则民人从。
现代文：所以《老子》说： 早服，指的是不断积德。 积德然后神静；神静然后精气多；精气多然后计谋得当；计谋得当然后能驾驭万物；能驾驭万物，打仗就容易胜敌；打仗容易胜敌，理论就必然称雄于世；理论必然称雄于世，所以说 无往不胜。 无往不胜本于不断积德，所以《老子》说： 不断积德就无往不胜。 打仗容易战胜敌人，就会拥有天下；理论必然称雄于世，民众就会服从。
English: Therefore, "Lao Zi" said: "Getting dressed early" refers to the continuous accumulation of virtue; the accumulation of virtue is then calm; the calmness is then more energy; the energy is more and the strategy is appropriate; the strategy is appropriate and then it can control all things; if it can control all things, it is easy to win the war; if it is easy to win the war, the theory is bound to be superior to the world; the theory is bound to be superior to the world, so it is said to be invincible; the invincibility is inherent in the continuous accumulation of virtue, so "Lao Zi" said: The continuous accumulation of virtue is inv

古文：进兼有天下而退从民人，其术远，则众人莫见其端末。莫见其端末，是以莫知其极。故曰： 无不克，则莫知其极。 
现代文：进可以拥有天下，退可以使民众服从，这种法术非常深远，众人也就看不到它的首尾；看不到它的首尾，因此不能知道它的究底，所以《老子》说： 无往不胜，就没有人知道他的究底。 
English: To advance can possess the world, to retreat can make the people obey. This spell is very far-reaching, and people can't see the end of it; they can't see the end of it, so they can't know the bottom of it. That's why "Lao Zi" said: No one knows the bottom of his investigation.

古文：凡有国而后亡之，有身而后殃之，不可谓能有其国、能保其身。
现代文：凡拥有国家然后却丢掉了的，拥有身体然后却伤害了的，不好说是能够拥有国家、能够保全身体。
English: Anyone who has a country and then loses it, or has a body and then injures it, can hardly be said to be able to have a country and preserve his body.

古文：夫能有其国，必能安其社稷；能保其身，必能终其天年；而后可谓能有其国、能保其身矣。
现代文：能够拥有国家的人，一定能够安定国家；能够保全身体的人，一定能够享尽天年；然后才好说是能拥有国家、能保全身体了。
English: A person who can own a country will surely be able to stabilize the country; a person who can preserve his body will surely be able to enjoy his life to the fullest; only then can it be said that he can own a country and preserve his body.

古文：夫能有其国、保其身者，必且体道。
现代文：能拥有国家、保全身体的人，一定会按照根本规律行动。
English: Those who can own the country and preserve their bodies will surely act in accordance with the fundamental laws.

古文：体道，则其智深；其智深，则其会远；其会远，众人莫能见其所极。
现代文：按照根本规律行动，他的智慧就一定很深；智慧很深了，他的计谋就一定很高超；计谋很高超，一般人没有谁能看到他的究底。
English: If he acts according to the fundamental law, his wisdom must be very deep; if his wisdom is very deep, his strategy must be very high; if his strategy is very high, no ordinary person can see the bottom of him.

古文：唯夫能令人不见其事极，不见其事极者为保其身、有其国。故曰： 莫知其极。
现代文：只有那种能让人看不到究底的人，也才能保全身体、拥有国家。所以《老子》说： 没有人知道他的究底。 
English: Only those who can make people not see the bottom can also preserve their body and have a country. Therefore, "Lao Zi" said: No one knows his bottom.

古文：莫知其极，则可以有国。 
现代文： 没有人知道他的究底，就可以拥有国家了。 
English: If no one knows who he is, he can own the country.

古文：所谓 有国之母 ：母者，道也；道也者，生于所以有国之术；所以有国之术，故谓之 有国之母。 夫道以与世周旋者，其建生也长，持禄也久。
现代文：所谓 有国之母 。母，就是道；道产生于来保有国家的方法；因为是保有国家的方法，所以叫做 有国之母 ，即 保有国家的根本 。用道来对待世事的，他的生命就会长久，保持禄位就能久远。
English: The so-called mother of a country. The mother is the way; the way comes from the method of maintaining the country; because it is the method of maintaining the country, it is called the mother of a country, that is, the foundation of maintaining the country. If you use the way to deal with the world, your life will be long and you will be able to maintain your position for a long time.

古文：故曰： 有国之母，可以长久。 树木有曼根，有直根。
现代文：所以《老子》说： 有国之母，可以长久。 树木有蔓根，有主根。
English: Therefore, "Lao Zi" said: "If you have a mother country, you can last a long time.

古文：直根者，书之所谓 柢 也。
现代文：主根就是《老子》所说的 抵 。
English: The main root is what "Lao Zi" called "Ram."

古文：柢也者，木之所以建生也；曼根者，木之所以持生也。
现代文：抵是树木赖以生长的建立者，蔓根是树木赖以生长的保持者。
English: The trunk is the builder on which the tree grows, and the roots are the preserver on which the tree grows.

古文：德也者，人之所以建生也；禄也者，人之所以持生也。
现代文：德是人类赖以生存的建立者，禄是人类赖以生存的保持者。
English: Virtue is the founder of human survival, and merit is the preserver of human survival.

古文：今建于理者，其持禄也久，故曰： 深其根。 体其道者，其生日长，故曰： 固其柢。 柢固，则生长；根深，则视久，故曰： 深其根，固其柢，长生久视之道也。 
现代文：假如能立于事理，那么他持禄也就长久，所以说 加深它的蔓根 。
English: If it can be based on reason, then it will last for a long time, so it is said to deepen its roots.

古文：工人数变业则失其功，作者数摇徙则亡其功。
现代文：能按照根本规律办事，他的生命也就长久，所以说 巩固它的主根 。
English: If he can act in accordance with the fundamental law, his life will be long, so it is said to consolidate its main root.

古文：一人之作，日亡半日，十日则亡五人之功矣；万人之作，日亡半日，十日则亡五万人之功矣。
现代文：主根巩固了 ，生命就长久；蔓根加深了，生活就长久，所以《老子》说： 加深它的蔓根，巩固它的主根，是长生久存的道理。 
English: If the main root is strengthened, life will be long; if the taproot is deepened, life will be long, so "Lao Zi" said: Deepen its taproot, strengthen its main root, is the principle of long life.

古文：然则数变业者，其人弥众，其亏弥大矣。
现代文：工人屡屡变换职业就丢失功效，劳作者屡屡变动就丢失功效。
English: Workers lose efficiency when they repeatedly change occupations, and workers lose efficiency when they repeatedly change employers.

古文：凡法令更则利害易，利害易则民务变，民务变谓之变业。
现代文：一个人的劳作，一天丢失半天，十天就丢失五个人的功效了；一万人的劳作，一天丢失半天，十天就丢失五万人的功效了。既然如此，那么屡屡变换作业的人，人数越多，损失就越大。
English: If one man's work is lost for a day and a half, in ten days the efficiency of five men is lost; if ten thousand men's work is lost for a day and a half, in ten days the efficiency of fifty thousand men is lost.

古文：故以理观之，事大众而数摇之，则少成功；藏大器而数徙之，则多败伤；烹小鲜而数挠之，则贼其宰；治大国而数变法，则民苦之。
现代文：凡是法令变更了，利害情况也就跟着改变；利害情况改变了，民众从事的作业也就跟着变化；从事的作业有了变化，就叫做变换作业。所以按照道理来看，役使大众而屡屡让他们发生变动，功效就会很小；收藏贵重器物而屡屡加以挪动，损毁就会很大；烹煮小鱼而屡屡加以翻动，就伤害它的光泽；治理大国而屡屡改动法令，百姓就会受到坑害。
English: Whenever the laws and regulations are changed, the interests of the people will also be changed; when the interests of the people are changed, the work they do will also be changed; when the work they do is changed, it is called transformation work. Therefore, according to the principle, if you serve the public and repeatedly make them change, the effect will be small; if you collect precious objects and repeatedly move them, the damage will be great; if you cook small fish and repeatedly turn it over, it will damage its luster; if you govern a large country and repeatedly change the laws and regulations, the people will be harmed.

古文：是以有道之君贵静，不重变法。
现代文：因此懂得治国原则的君主把安定看得很宝贵，法令确定以后，一再轻易变更。
English: Therefore, the monarch, who understands the principles of governance, regards stability as very valuable. After the decree is determined, it is easily changed again and again.

古文：故曰： 治大国者若烹小鲜。 
现代文：所以《老子》说： 治理大国就像烹煮小鱼一样。 
English: Therefore, "Lao Zi" said: Governing a big country is like cooking a small fish.

古文：人处疾则贵医，有祸则畏鬼。
现代文：人在生病时就尊重医生，遇有祸患时就害怕鬼神。
English: People respect doctors when they are ill, and fear ghosts and gods when they are in trouble.

古文：圣人在上，则民少欲；民少欲，则血气治而举动理；举动理则少祸害。
现代文：圣人在上，民众欲望就少；民众欲望少，血气就调畅，举动就合理。举动合理，祸害就少。
English: If a saint is on high, the people's desire will be less; if the people's desire is less, the blood and spirit will be smooth, the action will be reasonable; if the action is reasonable, the scourge will be less.

古文：夫内无痤疽瘅痔之害，而外无刑罚法诛之祸者，其轻恬鬼也甚。
现代文：体内没有痤疽瘅痔等疾病的危害，身外没有刑罚诛戮的祸患，这样的人就会把鬼神看得很轻淡。
English: Without the harm of diseases such as gangrene and hemorrhoids in the body, and without the scourge of punishment and killing outside the body, such people will regard ghosts and gods very lightly.

古文：故曰： 以道莅天下，其鬼不神。 治世之民，不与鬼神相害也。
现代文：所以《老子》说： 按照法则治理天下，鬼神也就不灵了。 安定社会里的百姓，不和鬼神相互伤害。
English: Therefore, "Lao Zi" said: If you govern the world according to the law, ghosts and gods will not work. The people in a stable society do not hurt each other with ghosts and gods.

古文：故曰： 非其鬼不神也，其神不伤人也。 鬼祟也疾人之谓鬼伤人，人逐除之之谓人伤鬼也。民犯法令之谓民伤上，上刑戮民之谓上伤民。
现代文：所以《老子》说： 不是说鬼神不灵了，是说即使灵也伤害不了人。 鬼作怪使人生病叫做鬼伤人，人驱逐鬼神叫做人伤鬼，民众违犯法令叫做民伤君，君主刑戮民众叫做君伤民。
English: Therefore, "Lao Zi" said: It's not that ghosts and gods don't exist, it's that even spirits can't hurt people. Ghosts and monsters that make people sick are called ghosts and ghosts, people who expel ghosts and gods are called people who hurt ghosts, people who violate laws are called people who hurt you, and monarchs who torture people are called you who hurt people.

古文：民不犯法，则上亦不行刑；上不行刑之谓上不伤人，故曰： 圣人亦不伤民。 上不与民相害，而人不与鬼相伤，故曰： 两不相伤。 民不敢犯法，则上内不用刑罚，而外不事利其产业。
现代文：民众不犯法，则君主不行刑；君主不行刑叫做君不伤人。所以《老子》说： 圣人也不伤害民众。 君主与民众不相互伤害，而人们与鬼神不互相伤害，所以说 两方面互不相伤。 民众不敢犯法，君主对内就不用刑罚；对外不从事于贪占民众的财物。
English: If the people do not break the law, then the monarch does not punish; if the monarch does not punish, it is called the prince does not hurt people. Therefore, "Lao Zi" said: The saint does not hurt the people. The monarch and the people do not hurt each other, and the people and the ghosts and gods do not hurt each other, so the two sides do not hurt each other. If the people do not dare to break the law, the monarch does not have to impose punishment on the inside; it does not engage in the embezzlement of the people's property to the outside world.

古文：上内不用刑罚，而外不事利其产业，则民蕃息。
现代文：君主对内不用刑罚，对外不从事于贪占民众的财物，民众就生息兴旺。
English: If the monarch does not use punishment internally, and does not engage in embezzlement of the people's property externally, the people will prosper.

古文：民蕃息而畜积盛。
现代文：民众生息兴旺，积蓄就会丰富。
English: If people's living standard is prosperous, their savings will be abundant.

古文：民蕃息而畜积盛之谓有德。
现代文：民众生息兴旺，积蓄丰富，也就叫做有德。
English: The people are prosperous and rich in savings, which is also called virtuous.

古文：凡所谓祟者，魂魄去而精神乱，精神乱则无德。
现代文：凡是所谓鬼怪作祟，就是丧魂落魄而精神错乱。精神错乱便属于无德。
English: All so-called ghostly hauntings are downcast and deranged. Derangement belongs to no-virtue.

古文：鬼不祟人则魂魄不去，魂魄不去而精神不乱，精神不乱之谓有德。
现代文：鬼不作怪则魂魄不丧，魂魄不丧则精神不乱，精神不乱便属于有德。
English: If the ghost does not make a monster, then the soul is not lost, if the soul is not lost, then the spirit is not disturbed, and if the spirit is not disturbed, then it belongs to the virtuous.

古文：上盛畜积而鬼不乱其精神，则德尽在于民矣。
现代文：君主使民众蓄积丰富，鬼也不来扰乱民众精神，那么德都在民众中了。
English: If the monarch makes the people accumulate wealth, and the ghosts do not come to disturb the spirit of the people, then virtue is in the people.

古文：故曰： 两不相伤，则德交归焉。 言其德上下交盛而俱归于民也。
现代文：所以《老子》说： 君主、鬼神不加害民众，那么德就殊途同归了。 即是说，上下两方面的德一齐兴盛起来而同归于民众。
English: Therefore, "Lao Zi" said: If the monarch, ghosts and gods do not harm the people, then virtue will return to the same path.That is to say, the virtues of the upper and lower aspects will flourish together and return to the people.

古文：有道之君，外无怨仇于邻敌，而内有德泽于人民。
现代文：有道的君主，在外和相邻的敌国没有怨仇。在内对人民有恩德。
English: A virtuous monarch has no grudge against the neighboring enemy countries abroad, and is kind to the people at home.

古文：夫外无怨仇于邻敌者，其遇诸侯也外有礼义。
现代文：在外和邻敌没有怨仇，他对待诸侯就表现出有礼义。
English: He had no grudge against his foreign and neighboring enemies, and he treated the princes with courtesy.

古文：内有德泽于人民者，其治人事也务本。
现代文：在内对人民有恩德，他治理社会事务就致力于根本。
English: He is kind to the people at home, and he is fundamentally committed to the governance of social affairs.

古文：遇诸侯有礼义，则役希起；治民事务本，则淫奢止。
现代文：对待诸侯有礼义，战争就很少发生；治理社会事务致力于根本，过度的奢侈就会被制止。
English: Treat the lords with courtesy, and war will rarely occur; govern social affairs with dedication to the fundamentals, and excessive luxury will be stopped.

古文：凡马之所以大用者，外供甲兵而内给淫奢也。
现代文：一般说来，马的大用处是对外满足打仗需要，对内供给淫佚奢华的需要。
English: Generally speaking, the great use of horses is to meet the needs of war abroad and to supply the needs of obscene luxury at home.

古文：今有道之君，外希用甲兵，而内禁淫奢。
现代文：现在有道的君主，对外很少用兵打仗，对内禁止过度的奢侈。
English: Now there is a virtuous monarch, who rarely uses soldiers to fight abroad and forbids excessive luxury at home.

古文：上不事马于战斗逐北，而民不以马远通淫物，所积力唯田畴。
现代文：君主不用马进行战争追击败敌，民众不用马到处游荡运输货物，所积蓄起来的力量只用于农耕。
English: The monarch did not use horses to pursue and defeat the enemy in war, the people did not use horses to wander around and transport goods, and the accumulated power was only used for farming.

古文：积力于田畴，必且粪灌。
现代文：积聚的力量用于农耕，必将从事施肥、灌溉。
English: The accumulated power will be used for farming, and will certainly be engaged in fertilization and irrigation.

古文：故曰： 天下有道，却走马以粪也。 
现代文：所以《老子》说： 天下太平，就会把奔跑的马歇下来从事施肥。 
English: Therefore, "Lao Zi" said: If the world is peaceful, it will stop running to fertilize.

古文：人君无道，则内暴虐其民而外侵欺其邻国。
现代文：君主无道，对内就暴虐百姓，对外就侵凌邻国。
English: Monarchs have no morals. They tyrannize the people at home and invade neighboring countries abroad.

古文：内暴虐，则民产绝；外侵欺，则兵数起。
现代文：对内暴虐，百姓产业就断了；对外侵凌，战争就会屡屡发生。
English: If there is violence at home, the people's industry will be destroyed; if there is violence abroad, there will be war again and again.

古文：民产绝，则畜生少；兵数起，则士卒尽。
现代文：百姓产业断了，牲畜就会减少；士兵屡屡作战，士卒就会耗尽。
English: If the industry of the people is cut off, the livestock will decrease; if the soldiers fight repeatedly, the soldiers will be exhausted.

古文：畜生少，则戎马乏；士卒尽，则军危殆。
现代文：牲畜减少，战马就会缺乏；士卒耗尽，军情就会危险。
English: If the number of cattle decreases, there will be a shortage of horses; if the number of soldiers decreases, the military situation will be dangerous.

古文：戎马乏，则桴马出；军危殆，则近臣役。
现代文：战马缺乏，快生小驹的母马就要出征；军情危险，君主的近臣就要服役。
English: There is a shortage of war horses, so the mare, which is about to give birth to a foal, will be sent to war; the military situation is dangerous, and the monarch's closest ministers will have to serve.

古文：马者，军之大用；郊者，言其近也。
现代文：马在军事上有巨大作用，郊外是说距离很近。
English: Horses play a huge role in the military, and the countryside is very close.

古文：今所以给军之具于谞马近臣。故曰： 天下无道，戎马生于郊矣。 
现代文：现在用来供给军队的是孕马近臣，所以《老子》说： 天下不太平，战马就在郊外产驹。 
English: Now, pregnant horses are used to supply the army, so "Lao Zi" said: The world is not peaceful, war horses give birth in the suburbs.

古文：人有欲，则计会乱；计会乱，而有欲甚；有欲甚，则邪心胜；邪心胜，则事经绝；事经绝，则祸难生。
现代文：人有欲望，计算就混乱，计算混乱，就更有欲望；更有欲望，邪心就占上风；邪心占上风，办事的准则就没有了；准则没有了，灾难就会发生。
English: If people have desires, the calculation will be chaotic, and if the calculation is chaotic, there will be more desires; if there are more desires, the evil heart will prevail; if the evil heart prevails, there will be no guidelines for work; if there are no guidelines, disasters will occur.

古文：由是观之，祸难生于邪心，邪心诱于可欲。
现代文：由此看来，灾难产生于邪心，邪心产生于欲望。
English: From this perspective, calamity is born from the evil heart, and the evil heart is born from desire.

古文：可欲之类，进则教良民为奸，退则令善人有祸。
现代文：可引起欲望的那类东西，进一层说可以使好人为奸，退一层说也可以使善人遭祸。
English: The kind of thing that can arouse desire can make a good person a traitor, and it can also make a good person a disaster.

古文：奸起，则上侵弱君；祸至，则民人多伤。然则可欲之类，上侵弱君而下伤人民。
现代文：奸起，向上就会侵害削弱君主而向下就会伤害百姓，向上侵害削弱君主而向下伤害百姓，是大罪。
English: It is a serious crime to undermine the monarchy and hurt the people, and to undermine the monarchy and hurt the people is a serious crime.

古文：夫上侵弱君而下伤人民者，大罪也。
现代文：所以《老子》说： 祸患没有比可引起欲望的东西更大的了。 
English: Therefore, "Lao Zi" said: There is no greater evil than something that can cause desire.

古文：故曰： 祸莫大于可欲。 是以圣人不引五色，不淫于声乐；明君贱玩好而去淫丽。
现代文：因此圣人不受五色的引诱，不沉溺于声乐；明君轻视珍贵的玩物，抛弃过分华丽的东西。
English: Therefore, the sage is not seduced by the five colors and does not indulge in vocal music; the wise man despises precious playthings and abandons excessively gorgeous things.

古文：人无毛羽，不衣则不犯寒；上不属天而下不著地，以肠胃为根本，不食则不能活；是以不免于欲利之心。
现代文：人没有毛羽，不穿衣就不能战胜寒冷；上不接天而下不着地，把肠胃作为根本，不吃饭就不能生存，因此不能免除贪利之心。
English: People do not have feathers, they cannot overcome the cold without clothing; they do not go up to the sky and down to the ground, they take the intestine and stomach as the foundation, and they cannot survive without eating, so they cannot be exempt from greed.

古文：欲利之心不除，其身之忧也。
现代文：贪利之心不除，是自身的忧患。
English: Greed is not excluded, it is one's own sorrow.

古文：故圣人衣足以犯寒，食足以充虚，则不忧矣。
现代文：所以圣人穿衣足够胜寒，吃饭足够充饥，就不忧虑了。
English: Therefore, the sage dressed enough to beat the cold, ate enough to satisfy his hunger, and did not worry.

古文：众人则不然，大为诸侯，小余千金之资，其欲得之忧不除也。
现代文：普通人却不这样，大到做了诸侯，小到积存干金资财，贪得的忧愁仍不能解除。
English: However, this is not the case for ordinary people. They may be big enough to become princes, or small enough to accumulate money and resources, but they still cannot get rid of the sorrow of greed.

古文：胥靡有免，死罪时活，今不知足者之忧终身不解。
现代文：轻罪得以赦免，死罪得以活命，现在一些不知足者的忧愁却终身不能解脱。
English: Misdemeanors can be pardoned, capital crimes can live, and now the sorrows of some insatiable people cannot be relieved for life.

古文：故曰： 祸莫大于不知足。 
现代文：所以《老子》说： 祸害没有比不知足更大的。 
English: Therefore, "Lao Zi" said: There is no greater calamity than not being satisfied.

古文：故欲利甚于忧，忧则疾生；疾生而智慧衰；智慧衰，则失度量；失度量，则妄举动；妄举动，则祸害至；祸害至而疾婴内；疾婴内，则痛，祸薄外；则苦。苦痛杂于肠胃之间；苦痛杂于肠胃之间，则伤人也惨。惨则退而自咎，退而自咎也生于欲利。
现代文：所以贪利比忧愁更厉害。忧愁就得病；得病就智力减退；智力减退，就失去准则；失去准则，就胡乱行事；胡乱行事，祸害就降临；祸害降临，疾病就缠绕内心；疾病缠绕内心；病痛就向外侵扰；病痛向外侵扰，苦痛就聚集在肠胃之间；苦痛聚集在肠胃之间，伤害人就惨痛；惨痛就退而自责；退而自责是由贪利产生的。
English: Therefore, greed is more powerful than sorrow. Sorrow leads to illness; illness leads to mental decline; mental decline leads to loss of discipline; loss of discipline leads to reckless behavior; reckless behavior leads to disaster; disaster occurs, disease is entangled in the heart; disease is entangled in the heart; pain invades the outside; pain invades the outside, pain is concentrated between the intestines and the stomach; pain is concentrated between the intestines and the stomach, harming people is painful; pain is withdrawn and self-blame; withdrawal and self-blame are caused by greed.

古文：故曰： 咎莫惨于欲利。 
现代文：所以《老子》说： 罪责没有比贪利更惨痛的了。 
English: Therefore, "Lao Zi" said: There is no guilt more painful than greed.

古文：道者，万物之所然也，万理之所稽也。
现代文：道是万物生成的根本动力，是万理构成形式的总汇。
English: Tao is the fundamental driving force behind the creation of all things, and is the sum of all the forms of the universe.

古文：理者，成物之文也；道者，万物之所以成也。
现代文：理是构成万物的外在形式，道是生成万物的根本原因。
English: Reason is the external form that constitutes all things, and Tao is the fundamental reason for the creation of all things.

古文：故曰： 道，理之者也。 物有理，不可以相薄；物有理不可以相薄，故理之为物之制。
现代文：所以说，道是条理化了的东西。万物各有其理，彼此不会相侵，所以理成为万物的制约力量。
English: Therefore, the Tao is an organized thing. All things have their own reason, and they will not interfere with each other, so reason becomes the constraining force of all things.

古文：万物各异理，万物各异理而道尽。稽万物之理，故不得不化；不得不化，故无常操。
现代文：万物之理各自不同，而道却完全集中了万物之理，所以道不能不随具体事物发生变化。因为不得不发生变化，所以没有固定的规则。
English: The principles of all things are different from each other, but the Tao has completely concentrated the principles of all things, so the Tao cannot but change with specific things. Because it has to change, there are no fixed rules.

古文：无常操，是以死生气禀焉，万智斟酌焉，万事废兴焉。
现代文：没有固定的规则，因而存亡之气由道赋予，一切智慧由道发授，万事废兴由道决定。
English: There are no fixed rules. Therefore, the spirit of survival is given by the Tao, all wisdom is imparted by the Tao, and everything is decided by the Tao.

古文：天得之以高，地得之以藏，维斗得之以成其威，日月得之以恆其光，五常得之以常其位，列星得之以端其行，四时得之以御其变气，轩辕得之以擅四方，赤松得之与天地统，圣人得之以成文章。
现代文：天得道而高升，地得道而蕴藏，维系众星的北斗得道而形成威势，太阳、月亮得道而永放光芒，金、木、水、土、火五大行星得道而常处位次，众星得道而正确运行，四季得道而控制节气，黄帝得道而统治四方，赤松子得道与天地同寿，圣人得道而创造文明。
English: Heaven obtained the Way and rose high, the earth obtained the Way and was preserved, the Big Dipper, which maintains the stars, obtained the Way and became powerful, the sun and the moon obtained the Way and shone forever, the five planets of gold, wood, water, earth and fire obtained the Way and were always in the same place, the stars obtained the Way and moved correctly, the four seasons obtained the Way and controlled the solar terms, the Yellow Emperor obtained the Way and ruled the four directions, the Red Pine Nut obtained the Way and lived with heaven and earth, and the saints obtained the Way and created civilization.

古文：道，与尧、舜俱智，与接舆俱狂，与桀、纣俱灭，与汤、武俱昌。
现代文：道，与唐尧虞舜同在便表现为智慧，与狂人接舆同在便表现为狂放，与夏桀殷纣同在便表现为灭亡，与商汤周武同在便表现为昌盛。
English: According to the Tao, if you are with Tang, you will be wise; if you are with madmen, you will be wild; if you are with Xia, you will be ruined; and if you are with Shang, you will be prosperous.

古文：以为近乎，游于四极；以为远乎，常在吾侧；以为暗乎，其光昭昭；以为明乎，其物冥冥；而功成天地，和化雷霆，宇内之物，恃之以成。
现代文：认为它近吧，它能远行四极；认为它远吧，它能常处身边；认为它暗淡吧，它光辉照耀；认为它明亮吧，它昏昏冥冥。它的功效造就天地，它的积聚化为雷霆，宇宙内的万事万物都要依靠它而存在。
English: Think of it as close, it can travel to the four poles; think of it as far away, it can always be around; think of it as dim, it shines brightly; think of it as bright, it is dim. Its effect creates heaven and earth, its accumulation turns into thunder, and everything in the universe depends on it to exist.

古文：凡道之情，不制不形，柔弱随时，与理相应。
现代文：凡属道的真情，不制作，不外露，柔弱和顺，随时运行，与理相应。
English: All the true feelings of the Tao are not fabricated, not exposed, gentle and smooth, and run at any time, corresponding to reason.

古文：万物得之以死，得之以生；万事得之以败，得之以成。
现代文：万物因得道而死亡，因得道而生存；万事因得道而失败，因得道而成功。
English: All things die because of acquiring the Way, and live because of acquiring the Way; all things fail because of acquiring the Way, and succeed because of acquiring the Way.

古文：道譬诸若水，溺者多饮之即死，渴者适饮之即生；譬之若剑戟，愚人以行忿则祸生，圣人以诛暴则福成。
现代文：道，打个比方，就像水一样，溺水者多喝了就会死亡，渴的人适量饮用了就会生存。再打个比方，道就像剑朝一样，愚人拿来行凶泄愤就会惹祸，圣人拿来诛杀暴徒就会造福。
English: The Tao, metaphorically speaking, is like water. If a drowning man drinks too much of it, he will die. If a thirsty man drinks just the right amount, he will survive. To use another analogy, the Tao is like a sword, if a fool uses it to vent his anger, he will get into trouble. If a saint uses it to kill a ruffian, he will make a fortune.

古文：故得之以死，得之以生，得之以败，得之以成。
现代文：所以说因得道而死，因得道而生，因得道而失败，因得道而成功。
English: Therefore, it is said that one dies from acquiring the Way, one lives from acquiring the Way, one fails from acquiring the Way, and one succeeds from acquiring the Way.

古文：人希见生象也，而得死象之骨，案其图以想其生也，故诸人之所以意想者皆谓之 象 也。
现代文：人们很少能见到活象，却能得到死象的骨路。依据死象骨路的模样来想象活象的样子，所以人们据以想象的东西都叫做 象 。
English: It is rare for people to see a live elephant, but they can get the skeleton of a dead elephant. According to the appearance of the skeleton of a dead elephant to imagine the appearance of a living elephant, so the things that people imagine are called elephants.

古文：今道虽不可得闻见，圣人执其见功以处见其形，故曰： 无状之状，无物之象 。
现代文：现在道虽然听不到看不见，圣人根据它所显现的功效来推得它的形状，所以《老子》说： 道是没有显露形状的形状，没有具体事物的物象。 
English: Now, although the Tao cannot be seen or heard, sages deduce its shape according to the effect it manifests. Therefore, "Lao Zi" said: "The Tao is a shape that does not reveal its shape, it does not have the appearance of a concrete thing.

古文：凡理者，方圆、短长、粗靡、坚脆之分也，故理定而后可得道也。
现代文：作为概念的理，就是指万物的方圆、短长、粗细、坚脆的区别，所以理确定以后才可能进一步获得规律。
English: As a conceptual principle, it refers to the difference between the square, short, thick and thin, and hardness of all things. Therefore, it is only possible to obtain further laws after the principle is determined.

古文：故定理有存亡，有死生，有盛衰。
现代文：因此，确定了的理仍有存亡、生死和盛衰的变化。
English: Therefore, the determined reason still has the changes of survival, life and death, and rise and fall.

古文：夫物之一存一亡，乍死乍死，初盛而后衰者，不可谓常。
现代文：万物有存有亡，忽生忽死，先盛后衰的变化，不能叫做永恒。
English: All things have existence and death, sudden birth and sudden death, changes from prosperity to decline, and cannot be called eternal.

古文：唯夫与天地之剖判也俱生，至天地之消散也不死不衰者谓 常 。
现代文：只有那种和天地的开辟一起产生，到天地消散仍然不死不衰的，才能叫做永恒。
English: Only that which comes into being with the creation of heaven and earth, and remains invincible until the dissolution of heaven and earth, can be called eternal.

古文：而常者，无攸易，无定理。
现代文：永恒，就是没有变化，没有定理。
English: Eternity is no change, no theorem.

古文：无定理，非在于常所，是以不可道也。
现代文：没有定理，不处在固定的场所，因此无法说明。
English: There is no theorem, it is not in a fixed place, so it cannot be explained.

古文：圣人观其玄虚，用其周行，强字之曰 道 ，然而可论。
现代文：圣人观察到永恒规律的玄虚，依据永恒规律的普遍作用，勉强把它命名为 道 ，然后才能够加以论说。
English: The sage observed the mystery of the eternal law, and based on the universal function of the eternal law, he reluctantly named it the Tao before he could discuss it.

古文：故曰： 道之可道，非常道也 。
现代文：所以《老子》说： 道如能说明，就不是永恒的道了。 
English: Therefore, "Lao Zi" said: If the way can be explained, it is not the eternal way.

古文：人始于生而卒于死。始之谓出，卒之谓入。故曰： 出生入死 。
现代文：人以出生开始，以死亡结束，开始叫出，结束叫入，所以说： 出生入死。 
English: Man begins with birth and ends with death. He begins by crying out and ends by crying in. Therefore it is said: "From birth to death."

古文：人之身三百六十节，四肢、九窍其大具也。
现代文：人的身上有三百六十个部件，四肢和九窍是其中的重要部件。
English: There are three hundred and sixty parts in the human body, of which the limbs and genitals are the most important.

古文：四肢九窍十有三者，十有三者之动静尽属于生焉。
现代文：四肢和九窍共十三件，这十三个部件的一动一静都属于生存的范围。
English: There are a total of thirteen limbs and nine organs, and the movement and stillness of these thirteen parts all belong to the scope of survival.

古文：属之谓徒也，故曰：生之徒也十有三者。
现代文：属也就是类，所以说，属于生存一类的有十三件。
English: Genus is also a class, so there are thirteen cases that belong to the survival class.

古文：至死也，十有三具者皆还而属之于死，死之徒亦有十三。 故曰： 生之徒十有三，死之徒十有三。 凡民之生生而和固动，动尽则损也；而动不止，是损而不止也。
现代文：等到人死以后，这十三个部件都反过来属于死亡的范围，属于死亡一类的也有十三件。
English: After the death of a person, these thirteen parts all belong to the scope of death, and there are also thirteen items that belong to the category of death.

古文：损而不止则生尽，生尽之谓死，则十有三具者皆为死死地也。
现代文：所以说； 生存一类有十三件，死亡一类有十三件。 民众生息不止，而活人本来就要动，动得过度就要受损害；不停地动，也就是不停地损害。
English: Therefore, there are thirteen cases of survival, and thirteen cases of death. The people do not stop living, and the living must move, and if they move too much, they will be damaged; if they keep moving, they will keep damaging.

古文：故曰： 民之生，生而动，动皆之死地，亦十有三。 
现代文：损害不停止，生命就耗尽了；生命耗尽了就叫做死，那么这十三件都为不断走向死亡准备了条件。所以《老子》说： 民众活着，活着就要动，动了都要走向死亡，都体现在这十三件上面。 
English: If the damage does not stop, the life will be exhausted; if the life is exhausted, it is called death, then these thirteen things have all prepared the conditions for the continuous death. Therefore, "Lao Zi" said: The people are alive, and if they are alive, they must move, and if they move, they must go to death, all of which are reflected in these thirteen things.

古文：是以圣人爱精神而贵处静。
现代文：因此圣人爱惜精神而重视置身子虚静状态。
English: Therefore, the sage cherished the spirit and valued the state of being in a state of emptiness.

古文：不爱精神不贵处静，此甚大于兕虎之害。
现代文：不爱惜精神，不重视置身虚静，是要比野牛猛虎的危害还要大的。
English: Not cherishing the spirit, not attaching importance to being idle, is even more harmful than bison tigers.

古文：夫兕虎有域，动静有时。
现代文：野牛和猛虎有一定的活动区域，动和静有一定的时间。
English: Bison and tigers have a certain area of activity, and there is a certain time for movement and rest.

古文：避其域，省其时，则免其兕虎之害矣。
现代文：避开它们的活动区域，观察它们的活动时间，就可以免除野牛和老虎的危害了。
English: Avoiding their areas of activity and observing their periods of activity can help to avoid the dangers of bison and tigers.

古文：民独知兕虎之有爪角也，而莫知万物之尽有爪角也，不免于万物之害。
现代文：百姓只知道野牛和猛虎有坚爪利角，却不知道万物都有坚爪利角，就不能免遭万物的侵害。
English: People only know that bison and tigers have sharp claws, but they don't know that all things have sharp claws, so they can't be protected from all things.

古文：何以论之？
现代文：为什么这样说？
English: Why do you say that?

古文：时雨降集，旷野闲静，而以昏晨犯山川，则风露之爪角害之。
现代文：季雨降落汇集，旷野一片清静，如果在黄昏和清晨跋山涉水，风露的爪角就会侵害他。
English: The monsoon rains fall and gather, the wilderness is quiet, and if you wade through the mountains at dusk and early morning, the claws of the wind and dew will encroach on him.

古文：事上不忠，轻犯禁令，则刑法之爪角害之。
现代文：侍奉主上不忠诚，轻易违犯禁令，刑法的爪角就会侵害他。
English: If a servant is not loyal to his master and easily violates the ban, the claws of the criminal law will encroach on him.

古文：处乡不节，憎爱无度，则争斗之爪角害之。
现代文：住在乡里不检点，爱憎没有标准，争斗的爪角就会侵害他。
English: If you live in the countryside, you will be indiscreet, love and hate will have no standard, and the claws of fighting will encroach on him.

古文：嗜欲无限，动静不节，则痤疽之爪角害之。
现代文：贪图享乐没有限度，行为举止不检点，毒疮的爪角就会侵害他。
English: There is no limit to the craving for pleasure, and if he behaves improperly, the claws of poisonous sores will invade him.

古文：好用其私智而弃道理，则纲罗之爪角害之。
现代文：喜用个人智巧而背弃事理物情，法网的爪角就会侵害他。
English: If he likes to use personal cleverness and abandon reason and circumstances, the claws of the legal net will encroach on him.

古文：兕虎有域，而万害有原，避其域，塞其原，则免于诸害矣。
现代文：野牛和猛虎有它们的活动区域，各种祸害也都有它们的根源，如果避开猛兽的活动区域，堵塞祸害的根源，就可以免遭各种祸害了。
English: Bison and tigers have their areas of activity, and all kinds of disasters also have their causes. If you avoid the areas of activity of wild beasts and block the causes of disasters, you can avoid all kinds of disasters.

古文：凡兵革者，所以备害也。
现代文：所有兵器盔甲都是用来防备侵害的。
English: All weapons and armor are used to defend against aggression.

古文：重生者，虽入军无忿争之心；无忿争之心，则无所用救害之备。
现代文：重视生命的人，纵然当兵也没有忿怒争斗的心思；没有忿怒争斗的心思，就无处使用避免祸害的防备措施。
English: People who value life, even if they are soldiers, do not have the mind of anger and struggle; without the mind of anger and struggle, there is nowhere to use precautions to avoid harm.

古文：此非独谓野处之军也。
现代文：这不只是说处在野外的军队。
English: This is not just about troops in the field.

古文：圣人之游世也，无害人之心，无害人之心，则必无人害，无人害，则不备人。
现代文：圣人在世上活动，没有害人的心思，必然就没人害他；没人害他，就不用防备别人。
English: If a saint is active in the world and has no thoughts of harming others, it is inevitable that no one will harm him; if no one harms him, there is no need to be on guard against others.

古文：故曰： 陆行不遇兕虎。 入山不恃备以救害，故曰： 入军不备甲兵。 远诸害，故曰 虎无所措其爪，兵无所容其刃；不设备而必无害，天地之道理也。体天地之道，故曰： 无死地焉。 动无死地，而谓之 善摄生 矣。
现代文：所以《老子》说： 陆地上走路不会碰到野牛和猛虎 。进入山林不依仗防备措施来避免祸害，所以说 加入军队不用准备武器 。远离各种祸害，所以说： 野牛没有地方使用它的利角，猛虎没有地方施展它的坚爪，兵器没有地方用它的锋刃。 不采取措施而必然没有祸害，是自然的通理。体验自然的通理，所以说 不会陷入死亡的境地 。活动不会接近死地，就叫做 善于养生 。
English: Therefore, "Lao Zi" said: Walking on land will not encounter bison and tigers. Entering the mountains and forests does not rely on precautionary measures to avoid disasters, so it is said that joining the army does not need to prepare weapons. Away from all kinds of disasters, so it is said: The bison has no place to use its sharp horns, the tiger has no place to exercise its strong claws, and the weapon has no place to use its sharp blade. Without taking measures and inevitably without disasters, it is the logic of nature. Experience the logic of nature, so it will not fall into the realm of death. Activities will not be close to death, it is called good at

古文：爱子者慈于子，重生者慈于身，贵功者慈于事。
现代文：喜欢孩子的对孩子慈爱，重视生命的对身体爱惜，看重功业的对事务珍惜。
English: If you like children, you should be kind to them. If you value life, you should cherish your body. If you value work, you should cherish your business.

古文：慈母之于弱子也，务致其福；务致其福，则事除其祸；事除其祸，则思虑熟；思虑熟，则得事理；得事理，则必成功；必成；工，则其行之也不疑；不疑之谓勇。
现代文：慈母对于幼子；致力于给他幸福；致力于给他幸福，就从事于免除他的祸害；从事于免除他的祸害，就考虑周详：考虑周详，就获得事理；获得事理，就必定成功；必定成功，实行起来就不犹豫；不犹豫叫做勇敢。
English: A loving mother is devoted to her child; devoted to giving him happiness; devoted to giving him happiness, she is engaged in relieving his ills; engaged in relieving his ills, she is thoughtful; thoughtful, she gains reason; gaining reason, she is sure to succeed; sure to succeed, she does not hesitate to implement; not hesitating is called brave.

古文：圣人之于万事也，尽如慈母之为弱子虑也，故见必行之道。
现代文：圣人对于万事万物，全部都像慈母为幼于考虑一般，所以看到了一定要实行的道理。
English: For all things, all things are like a mother to a child, so he saw the truth that must be implemented.

古文：见必行之道则其从事亦不疑；不疑之谓勇。
现代文：看到一定要实行的道理就明察，他干事情就不犹豫；不犹豫叫做勇敢。
English: He does not hesitate to do things when he sees that they must be carried out; not hesitating is called being brave.

古文：不疑生于慈，故曰： 慈，故能勇。 
现代文：不犹豫产生于慈爱，所以《老子》说： 因为慈爱，所以就能勇敢。 
English: Do not hesitate to arise from love, so "Lao Zi" said: Because of love, so you can be brave.

古文：周公曰： 冬日之闭冻也不固，则春夏之长草木也不茂。 天地不能常侈常费，而况于人乎？
现代文：周公说： 冬天里冰封地冻如果不很坚固，春夏时草木的生长就不会茂盛。 天地尚且不能经常浪费和消耗，何况人呢？
English: Zhou Gong said: If the frozen ground is not very solid in winter, the growth of plants and trees will not be lush in spring and summer. Heaven and earth can not always waste and consume, let alone people?

古文：故万物必有盛衰，万事必有弛张，国家必有文武，官治必有赏罚。
现代文：所以万物必定有兴盛和衰微，万事必定有松弛和紧张，国家官员必定有文有武，官府办事必定有赏有罚。
English: Therefore, all things must have prosperity and decline, all things must have relaxation and tension, state officials must have literature and military, and government work must have reward and punishment.

古文：是以智士俭用其财则家富，圣人爱宝其神则精盛，人君重战其卒则民众，民众则国广。
现代文：因此聪明的人节俭地使用财产，家庭就富裕；圣明的人珍视他的精神，精力就旺盛；做君主的不轻易用兵打仗，人民就众多；人民众多，国土就宽广。
English: Therefore, a wise man uses his property sparingly, and his family will be rich; a holy man treasures his spirit, and his energy will be strong; a monarch does not easily use soldiers to fight, and the people are numerous; the people are numerous, and the country is broad.

古文：是以举之曰： 俭，故能广。 
现代文：因此《老子》称道说： 因为节俭，所以能够宽广。 
English: Therefore, "Lao Zi" praised and said: Because of frugality, it can be broad.

古文：凡物之有形者易裁也，易割也。
现代文：大凡有形状的物体就容易裁断，容易分割。
English: Large objects with a shape are easy to cut and easy to divide.

古文：何以论之？
现代文：为什么这样说？
English: Why do you say that?

古文：有形，则有短长；有短长，则有小大；有小大，则有方圆；有方圆，则有坚脆；有坚脆，则有轻重；有轻重，则有白黑。
现代文：有形状，就有长短；有长短，就有大小；杏大小，就有方圆；有方圆，就有坚脆；有坚脆，就有轻重；有轻重，就有黑白。
English: If there is a shape, there is a length; if there is a length, there is a size; if there is an apricot size, there is a square; if there is a square, there is a hardness; if there is a hardness, there is a lightness; if there is a lightness, there is black and white.

古文：短长、大小、方圆、坚脆、轻重、白黑之谓理。
现代文：长短、大小、方圆、坚脆、轻重、黑白就叫做理。
English: Long and short, large and small, square and round, hard and brittle, light and heavy, black and white are all called reason.

古文：理定而物易割也。
现代文：理确定之后，事物就容易分析。
English: Once reason is established, things are easy to analyse.

古文：故议于大庭而后言则立，权议之士知之矣。
现代文：所以在朝廷里议事，后发言的人的主张就能够成立，善于权衡各种议论的人是懂得这点的。
English: Therefore, in the imperial court's deliberation, the opinions of those who spoke later can be established, and those who are good at weighing various arguments understand this.

古文：故欲成方圆而随其规矩，则万事之功形矣。
现代文：所以要想画成方圆而能遵循规矩，那么一切事物的功效就都显现出来了。
English: So if you want to draw a square circle and can follow the rules, then the effect of all things is revealed.

古文：而万物莫不有规矩，议言之士，计会规矩也。
现代文：而万物无不存在规矩，出谋献策的人，就是考虑如何合于规矩。
English: But there are no rules for everything, and the person who comes up with a plan is to consider how to comply with the rules.

古文：圣人尽随于万物之规矩，故曰： 不敢为天下先。 不敢为天下先，则事无不事，功无不功，而议必盖世，欲无处大官，其可得乎？
现代文：圣人遵循一切事物的一切规矩，所以说 不敢走在天下人的前面 。不敢走在天下人的前面，事情就没有做不好的，功业就没有建立不起来的，而议论必定超越世人，圣人要想不处在重要职位上，这可能吗？
English: A saint follows all the rules of all things, so it is said that he does not dare to walk in front of the people of the world. If he does not dare to walk in front of the people of the world, things will not be done badly, achievements will not be built up, and discussions will certainly surpass the world. If a saint does not want to be in an important position, is this possible?

古文：处大官之谓为成事长。
现代文：处在重要职位上就是说成为办事的首领。
English: To be in an important position is to be the head of affairs.

古文：是以故曰： 不敢为天下先，故能为成事长。 
现代文：因此《老子》说： 不敢走在天下人的前面，所以能成为办事的首领。 
English: Therefore, "Lao Zi" said: I dare not walk in front of the world, so I can become the leader of affairs.

古文：慈于子者不敢绝衣食，慈于身者不敢离法度，慈于方圆者不敢舍规矩。
现代文：对孩子慈爱的人，不敢断绝子女的衣食；爱惜身体的人，不敢背离法度；看中方圆的人，不敢丢掉规矩。
English: Those who are kind to their children dare not cut off their children's food and clothing; those who cherish their bodies dare not deviate from the law; those who look at the Chinese zodiac dare not lose their discipline.

古文：故曰： 慈，于战则胜，以守则固。 夫能自全也而尽随于万物之理者，必且有天生。
现代文：所以遇到战事能爱惜士兵和下级军官，战斗就能取胜；爱惜器械，就能固守城池。所以《老子》说： 慈爱，用于战争就能取胜，用于防御就能固守。 能保全自己而完全遵循事物法则的人，一定会有天性。
English: Therefore, in the event of war, if you can cherish the soldiers and junior officers, you can win the battle; cherish the equipment, you can keep the castle. Therefore, "Lao Zi" said: Love, if used in war, can win, if used for defense, can keep. If you can protect yourself and fully follow the laws of things, you will definitely have nature.

古文：天生也者，生心也，故天下之道尽之生也。
现代文：天性也就是遵循自然法则的思想，所以天下的道都要通过这种思想反映出来。
English: Nature is also the thought of following the laws of nature, so the way of the world must be reflected through this thought.

古文：若以慈卫之也，事必万全，而举无不当，则谓之宝矣。
现代文：假如用慈爱来护卫它，事情就万无一失，而措施没有不妥当的，那么也就可以称之为宝了。
English: If it is protected with love, it is safe, and the measures are not improper, then it can be called a treasure.

古文：故曰： 吾有三宝，持而宝之。 
现代文：所以《老子》说： 我有三件宝贝，掌握并珍视它。 
English: Therefore, "Lao Zi" said: I have three treasures, master and cherish it.

古文：书之所谓 大道 也者，端道也。
现代文：《老子》书中所说的大道，指的是 正道 。
English: The "high road" mentioned in the book "Lao Zi" refers to the right road.

古文：所谓 貌施 也者，邪道也。
现代文：所说的 施 ，指的是邪道。
English: The word "shih" refers to the evil way.

古文：所谓 径大 也者，佳丽也。
现代文：所谓把小路当作大路，是因为这种小径精美华丽。
English: The so-called use of small roads as highways is due to the fact that such paths are beautifully ornate.

古文：佳丽也者，邪道之分也。 朝甚除 也者，狱讼繁也。
现代文：而所谓精美华丽，也就是邪道的一部分。所谓官府很脏，是指的诉讼案件繁多。
English: And the so-called exquisite and gorgeous, that is, part of the evil way. The so-called government is dirty, refers to a large number of litigation cases.

古文：狱讼繁，则田荒；田荒，则府仓虚；府仓虚，则国贫；国贫，而民俗淫侈；民俗淫侈，则衣食之业绝；衣食之业绝，则民不得无饰巧诈；饰巧诈，则知采文；知采文之谓 服文采 。
现代文：诉讼案件繁多，天地就荒芜；田地荒芜，仓库就空虚；仓库空虚国家就贫困；国家贫困，民俗就淫逸奢侈；民俗淫逸奢侈，农织行业就会荒废；农织行业荒废，民众就不得不粉饰偷奸取巧；粉饰偷奸取巧，就知道了漂亮；知道了漂亮，也就是说 穿着华丽 。
English: If there are many lawsuits, heaven and earth will be desolate; if the fields are desolate, the warehouses will be empty; if the warehouses are empty, the country will be poor; if the country is poor, the folk customs will be lascivious and extravagant; if the folk customs are lascivious and extravagant, the agricultural weaving industry will be abandoned; if the agricultural weaving industry is abandoned, the people will have to whitewash their deviousness; if they whitewash their deviousness, they will know that they are beautiful; if they know that they are beautiful, that is to say, they will dress gorgeously.

古文：狱讼繁仓廪虚，而有以淫侈为俗，则国之伤也，若以利剑刺之。
现代文：诉讼案件繁多，仓库空虚，而又让淫逸奢侈形成风俗，那么国家受到的伤害也就像拿了利剑刺它一样。
English: When lawsuits abound, storehouses are empty, and debauchery and luxury have become the order of the day, the nation is hurt as if it had been stabbed with a sword.

古文：故曰： 带利剑。 诸夫饰智故以至于伤国者，其私家必富；私家必富，故曰： 资货有馀。 国有若是者，则愚民不得无术而效之；效之，则小盗生。
现代文：所以说 佩带着利剑 。以上那些粉饰偷奸取巧以至于伤害国家的，私家必定富有；私家必定富有，所以说 财货有余 。国家有像这个样子的，那么愚民就不得不想办法来仿效它；仿效了它，小盗贼也就会产生出来。
English: Therefore, it is said, "Wear a sharp sword." The above-mentioned whitewashing and deception to harm the country, the private sector must be rich; the private sector must be rich, so it is said that there are more goods. If the country is like this, then the fools will have to find a way to imitate it; if they imitate it, petty thieves will also be produced.

古文：由是观之，大奸作则小盗随，大奸唱则小盗和。
现代文：由此看来，大奸兴起，小盗就跟着产生；大奸起唱，小盗就跟着附和。
English: From this, it can be seen that when the bandits rise, the petty thieves follow; when the bandits sing, the petty thieves join in.

古文：竽也者，五声之长者也，故竽先则钟瑟皆随，竽唱则诸乐皆和。
现代文：竿是各种乐器的领头乐器，所以竿领了头，钟呀瑟呀的就都来伴随；竿先演奏起来，各种乐器就都来附和。
English: The flute is the leading instrument of all kinds of musical instruments, so when the flute leads, the bells come to accompany; when the flute is played first, all kinds of musical instruments come to accompany.

古文：今大奸作则俗之民唱，俗之民唱则小盗必和。
现代文：现在大奸兴起了，一般民众就跟着来唱；一般民众唱了，小盗就必然起而附和。
English: Now that the bandits are on the rise, the common people will sing along; when the common people sing, the petty thieves will inevitably join in.

古文：故 服文采，带利剑，厌饮食，而货资有馀者，是之谓盗竽矣。 
现代文：所以《老子》说： 穿着华丽，佩带利剑，饮食充足，财货有余，这样的人也就可以称之为强盗头子了。 
English: Therefore, "Lao Zi" said: If you are well-dressed, wear a sharp sword, have enough food and drink, and have more than enough goods, such a person can also be called a robber chief.

古文：人无愚智，莫不有趋舍。
现代文：人不论是愚昧还是聪明，都会有追求舍弃。
English: Whether people are stupid or smart, they will pursue and give up.

古文：恬淡平安，莫不知祸福之所由来。
现代文：人们在清静寡欲和平淡安闲的时候，没有不知道祸福是如何来的。
English: When people are in a state of tranquillity and indifference, they do not know how misfortune and good fortune come.

古文：得于好恶，怵于淫物，而后变乱。
现代文：为好恶感情所支配，为奢侈东西所诱惑，然后才引起思想变化并发生混乱。
English: Dominated by likes and dislikes, lured by luxuries, it then induces thought changes and confusion.

古文：所以然者，引于外物，乱于玩好也。
现代文：之所以如此，是因为被外界事物所引诱，被珍贵玩物所扰乱。
English: This is because they are seduced by external things and disturbed by precious playthings.

古文：恬淡有趋舍之义，平安知祸福之计。
现代文：清静寡欲就能设立取舍的准则，平淡安闲就懂得恰当地计虑祸福。
English: Calm and dispassionate can set up the criterion of choice, and plain and easy can know how to properly consider misfortune and fortune.

古文：而今也玩好变之，外物引之；引之而往，故曰 拔 。
现代文：而现在有珍贵的玩物打动他，有外界的事物引诱他；一经引诱，他就跟着走，所以《老子》就叫它 拔 。
English: But now a precious toy moves him, something from the outside tempts him; once tempted, he follows, so "Lao Zi" tells him to pull it out.

古文：至圣人不然：一建其趋舍，虽见所好之物，不能引，不能引之谓 不拔 ；一于其情，虽有可欲之类，神不为动，神不为动之谓 不脱 。
现代文：至于圣人，就不是这样。圣人牢固地确立取舍标准，虽然看到爱好的东西，也不会被引诱；不会被引诱就叫做 不拔 ；圣人的情性专一，虽然存在着引起欲望的东西，精神却不为所动；精神不为所动就叫做 不脱 。
English: As for the sage, this is not the case. The sage firmly establishes the standard of choice, and although he sees something he likes, he will not be seduced; if he is not seduced, he is called not pulling out; the saint's emotion is single-minded, although there is something that causes desire, the spirit is not moved; the spirit is not moved is called not pulling out.

古文：为人子孙者，体此道以守宗庙，宗庙不灭之谓 祭祀不绝 。
现代文：做子孙的人，体察这一道理来守护宗庙；宗庙不灭，就叫做 祭把不绝 。
English: Those who are descendants should observe this principle to guard the ancestral temple; if the ancestral temple does not perish, it is called "sacrifice without ceasing."

古文：身以积精为德，家以资财为德，乡国天下皆以民为德。
现代文：身体以积累精气为德，家庭以积蓄财产为德，乡里国家、天下都以保养民众为德。
English: The body regards the accumulation of energy as virtue, the family regards the accumulation of property as virtue, and the country and the world regard the maintenance of the people as virtue.

古文：治家者，无用之物不能动其计，则资有馀，故曰： 修之家，其德有馀。 治乡者行此节，则家之有馀者益众，故曰： 修之乡，其德乃长。 治邦者行此节，则乡之有德者益众，故曰： 修之邦，其德乃丰。 莅天下者行此节，则民之生莫不受其泽，故曰： 修之天下，其德乃普。 修身者以此别君子小人，治乡治邦莅天下者名以此科适观息耗，则万不失一。
现代文：现在勤于自身修养，外界事物不能扰乱他的精神，所以《老子》说： 修养施行到自己身上，他的德就会真。 所谓真，就是守护得很牢固。治理家庭，没有用的东西不能改变他的计划，就会资财有余，所以《老子》说： 修养贯彻到家庭，他的德就有赢余。 治理乡里的人实行了这一条，那家庭有赢余的就会更多，所以《老子》说： 贯彻到乡里，他的德就增长。 治理国家的人实行了这一条，那么乡里有德的人就会更多，所以《老子》说： 贯彻到国家，他的德就丰富。 统治天下的人实行了这，一条，民众的生存无不受到他的恩惠，所以《老子》说： 贯彻到天下，他的德就普及广大。 修身的人用这项原则来区别君子小人，治乡、治国以至统治天下的人各自用这一项目来对照观察兴衰，就能够万无一失。
English: Now he is diligent in self-cultivation, and external things cannot disturb his spirit, so "Lao Zi" said: If cultivation is carried out on himself, his virtue will be true. The so-called true is that it is guarded very firmly. Governing the family, if there is nothing useful that cannot change his plan, there will be enough capital and wealth, so "Lao Zi" said: If cultivation is carried out to the family, his virtue will have a surplus. Governing the countryside, people will implement this rule, and the family will have more surplus, so "Lao Zi" said: If implemented to the countryside, his virtue will increase. Governing the country, people will

古文：故曰： 以身观身，以家观家，以乡观乡，以邦观邦，以天下观天下。
现代文：所以《老子》说： 用自身来观察自身，用家庭来观察家庭，用乡里来观察乡里，用国家来观察国家，用天下来观察天下。
English: Therefore, "Lao Zi" said: Use yourself to observe yourself, use the family to observe the family, use the countryside to observe the countryside, use the country to observe the country, and use the world to observe the world.

古文：吾奚以知天下之然也？
现代文：我凭什么知道天下是这样的呢？
English: How do I know the world is like this?

古文：以此。 
现代文：就用的这个方法。 
English: This is the method used.

