古文：子韦赵廓樊英杨由介象郭璞庾诜张子信管辂筹禅师
现代文：子韦赵廓樊英杨由介像郭璞庾诜张子信管辂筹禅师
English: Zi Wei, Zhao Guo Wei, Ying Yang, Ying Zi Wei, Zhao Guo Wei, Zhang Zi Wei, Zhang Zi Wei, Zhao Guo Wei, Zhang Zi Wei, Zhao Guo Wei, Zhang Zi Wei,

古文：李淳风袁天纲安禄山术士桑道茂乡校叟相骨人田良逸蒋含弘
现代文：李淳风袁天纲安禄山术士桑道茂乡校叟相骨人田良逸蒋含弘
English: Li Chunfeng, Yuan Tiangang, Anlu Mountain, Sorcerer, Sando, Maoxiang School, Zou Zi, Tian Liangyi, Jiang Hanhong

古文：子韦
现代文：子韦
English: Zi Wei

古文：子韦，宋景公之史。
现代文：子韦是宋景公的史官。
English: Zi Wei was Song Jinggong's historian.

古文：当景公之世，有善星文者，许以上大夫位，处于层楼延阁之上，以望气象，设以珍食，施以珍衣。
现代文：景公在位的时候，凡有擅长天文星相之道的方士，就封他上大夫的官位，让他住在楼阁上观察天文气像，供给他美食佳肴和珍奇服装。
English: When Jing Gong was on the throne, all the magicians who were good at astronomy and astrology gave him the official rank of doctor, let him live in the attic to observe the astronomical atmosphere, and provided him with delicious food and exquisite clothing.

古文：食则有渠餐之凫，煎以桂醴，丛庭之鴳，承以蜜渠，淇漳之醴，脯以青茄。九江之珠穟。
现代文：吃的有桂花美酒烹制的水鸟，用淇漳名酒和蜜汁甘露泡制的山禽，荷粳制作的果脯，九江出产的精米。
English: They ate waterfowl cooked with osmanthus wine, wildfowl made with ginger wine and honey sauce, fruit dumplings made with lotus root, and polished rice produced in Jiujiang.

古文：爨以兰苏，华清夏结。
现代文：制作这些东西时，烧的是香草，用的水则是用精致的丝带从清华井中汲取的精华。
English: When making these things, the incense is vanilla, and the water used is the essence drawn from the Qinghua Well with a delicate ribbon.

古文：鹿以纤缟，饔人视时而扣钟，伺食而击磬。
现代文：进餐时，有人在一旁敲打着钟磬等乐器，演奏出美妙动听的乐曲。
English: During the meal, someone was beating a gong and other musical instruments on the sidelines, playing a beautiful melody.

古文：悬四时之衣，春夏以金玉为饰，秋冬以翡翠为温。
现代文：旁边挂着可供四季穿着的华贵衣服，春装与夏装上镶金嵌玉，秋装与冬装上则点缀着珍奇的翡翠羽毛。
English: Next to them hang luxurious clothes that can be worn throughout the four seasons, with spring and summer outfits inlaid with gold and jade, and autumn and winter outfits embellished with rare jade feathers.

古文：烧异香于坛台之上。
现代文：在观察天像的坛台上还点燃起奇异的香烛。
English: A strange incense candle is also lit on the altar for observing the heavenly image.

古文：忽有野人被草笈，扣关而进曰： 闻君爱阴阳五行玄象经纬之秘，请见。 
现代文：有一天，忽见一个山野之人，身披蓑衣，敲开大门走了进来，对宋景公说： 听说您对阴阳五行天文地理之类的奥秘很感兴趣，今日特来拜见。 
English: One day, he suddenly saw a man from the mountains, dressed in a long robe, knocking on the door and coming in. He said to Song Jinggong: I heard that you are very interested in the mysteries of yin and yang, astro-geography, and so on. I have come to see you today.

古文：景公延之崇堂。
现代文：景公将他请到高堂之上。
English: King Gyeongbok invited him to the high court.

古文：语则及未来之兆，次及已往之事，万不失一。
现代文：此人在谈话中既能预见未来，又能推知往事，所言极为准确。
English: This person can not only foresee the future, but also infer the past in a conversation, and what he says is extremely accurate.

古文：夜则观星望气，昼则执算披图，不服宝衣，不甘奇食。
现代文：他在夜晚观察星相天气的变化，白天则拿着历书分析、推算，既不穿戴华贵的衣服，也不食用珍奇的食物。
English: He observes the changes in the starry weather at night, and analyzes and calculates with an almanac during the day. He neither wears expensive clothes nor eats rare food.

古文：景公谢曰： 今宋国丧乱，微君何以辅之？ 
现代文：景公十分感激，说： 当今宋国面临祸乱之苦，请问您将如何辅佐我？ 
English: Jing Gong was very grateful and said: Today, the Song Dynasty is facing the suffering of calamity. How will you help me?

古文：野人曰： 德之不均，乱将及矣，修德以乘仁，则天应之祥，人仰其化。 
现代文：此人说： 德政推行得不普遍、不均衡，祸乱就会降临，如能遍行德政，实行仁义之举，就能天下祥和，黎民受到教化。 
English: This person said: If the implementation of virtue politics is not universal and unbalanced, disasters will come. If virtue politics can be practiced everywhere and acts of benevolence and righteousness can be carried out, the world can be peaceful and the people can be enlightened.

古文：景公服其言，赐姓曰子氏，名之曰韦也。
现代文：景公佩服他的言论，便赐给他姓氏为 子 ，起了个名字叫 韦 。
English: King Jing admired his words and gave him the surname of Zong, and gave him the name Wei.

古文：录曰，宋子韦世司天部，妙观星律。
现代文：据史料记载，子韦在宋国世代掌管天文星相方面的工作，出色地观察星相变化的规律。
English: According to historical records, Zi Wei was in charge of the work of astronomy and astrology in the Song Dynasty, and excellently observed the laws of the change of the star phase.

古文：抑亦梓慎、裨灶之徒也。
现代文：他大概也是梓慎与裨灶的徒弟。
English: He is probably also a disciple of Zi Shen and Tu Zhao.

古文：景公待之若神，礼以上列，服以绝世之衣。
现代文：景公奉他如神明，以上礼相待，供给他世上稀有的衣服和饮食。
English: King Jing worshipped him as a god and treated him with the utmost courtesy, providing him with clothes and food that were rare in the world.

古文：膳以殊方之味，虽复三清天厨之旨，华蕤龙衮之服，斯固为陋矣。
现代文：这衣服与饮食之珍贵，就连天上的神仙所吃的东西与公卿帝王的礼服也显得逊色。
English: This dress and food are so precious that even the food eaten by celestial deities is inferior to the gowns of noble emperors.

古文：春秋生以赐姓，亦缘事显族，乃号为司星氏。
现代文：春秋愿存活氏族就赐姓，也因善观星相天文成为显赫的家族，被称为专管星相天文的人。
English: If the Spring and Autumn Clan wished to survive, they would be given a surname, and because they were good at stargazing and astronomy, they became a prominent family and were known as the people who were in charge of stargazing and astronomy.

古文：至国之末，著阴阳之书，其事出班固艺文志也。赵廓
现代文：宋国末年，他撰写了有关阴阳五行的著作。上述关于子韦的事情，出自班固的《艺文志》。赵廓
English: At the end of the Song Dynasty, he wrote a book about yin and yang and the five elements. The above-mentioned story about Zi Wei comes from Ban Gu's "Art and Literature." Zhaogu

古文：武昌赵廓，齐人也。
现代文：现住武昌的赵廓，是齐国人。
English: Zhao Guo, who currently lives in Wuchang, is a native of Qi.

古文：学道于吴永石公，三年，廓求归，公曰： 子道未备，安可归哉？ 
现代文：他跟吴国人永石先生学习道术，学满三年时，赵廓要求回齐，先生不满地说： 你的道术还没有全部学到手，怎么可以回去呢？ 
English: He studied Daoism with Mr. Yongshi, a native of Wuxi. After three years of study, Zhao Kuo asked him to return to him. The master was dissatisfied and said, "You haven't learned all of the Daoism yet. How can you go back?"

古文：乃遣之。
现代文：说完，便将他打发走了。
English: And when he had thus spoken, he sent him away.

古文：及齐行极，方止息，同息吏以为法犯者，将收之。
现代文：赵廓来到齐地，走累了便停下休息，一位同他在一起休息的官吏以为他是个罪犯，要捉拿他。
English: When Zhao Guo came to Qi, he was tired and stopped to rest. An official who was resting with him thought he was a criminal and wanted to arrest him.

古文：廓走百余步，变为青鹿。
现代文：赵廓跑出百余步远，摇身一变成为一只青鹿。
English: Zhao Guo ran more than a hundred paces away and turned into a blue deer.

古文：吏逐之。
现代文：官吏紧紧追逐。
English: The officers gave chase.

古文：遂走入曲巷中。倦甚，乃蹲憩之。
现代文：赵廓跑进一条弯弯曲曲的胡同，因为太疲倦就蹲下来休息。
English: Zhao Kuo ran into a winding alley, and because he was so tired, he squatted down to rest.

古文：吏见而又逐之，复变为白虎，急奔，见聚粪，入其中，变为鼠。
现代文：官吏见状又追了上来。赵廓摇身一变又成为一只白虎，急忙奔逃。前面有一个粪堆，他便钻了进去，立即变成一只老鼠。
English: When the official saw the notice, he chased after him. Zhao Kuang turned into a white tiger and ran away. There was a dung heap in front of him, so he got into it and immediately turned into a mouse.

古文：吏悟曰： 此人能变，斯必是也。 
现代文：官吏顿然明白过来，自语道： 这个人是会变的，这只老鼠一定就是他！ 
English: The official suddenly understood and said to himself: This man can change, this mouse must be him!

古文：遂取鼠缚之，则廓形复焉，遂以付狱。
现代文：他把老鼠捉住，用绳子缚了。赵廓此时也恢复了原形，官吏就将他捉进了监牢。
English: He caught the mouse and tied it with a rope. Zhao Kuo also regained his original form at this time, and the officials caught him and put him in prison.

古文：法应弃市，永石公闻之，叹曰： 吾之咎也。 
现代文：按照律令，赵廓当判为暴尸街头。永石先生听到消息后叹道： 这是我的过错呀！ 
English: According to the law, Zhao Guo should be sentenced to the street of corpses. After hearing the news, Mr. Yongshi sighed: This is my fault!

古文：乃往见齐王曰： 吾闻大国有囚，能变形者。 
现代文：他便急忙去见齐王，见到齐王后说： 听说贵国有一个囚徒，就是能变形的那个，我要见见他。 
English: He hurried to see King Qi. When he saw Queen Qi, he said, "I heard that there is a prisoner in your country, the one who can change shape. I want to see him."

古文：王乃召廓，勒兵围之。
现代文：齐王派人将赵廓带出牢房，并令兵士将他团团围住。
English: King Qi sent someone to take Zhao Guo out of his cell and ordered soldiers to surround him.

古文：廓按前化为鼠，公从坐翻然为老鸱，攫鼠而去，遂飞入云中。
现代文：赵廓按照前面的方法变化为一只老鼠，永石先生便从自己的座位上翻然变为一只老鹰，捉住老鼠就跑，展开双翅飞入云端。
English: Zhao Kuo changed into a mouse according to the previous method, and Mr. Yongshi suddenly changed from his seat into an eagle, caught the mouse and ran, spread his wings and flew into the clouds.

古文：樊英
现代文：樊英
English: Zou Ying

古文：汉樊英，善图纬，洞达幽微。永太中，见帝。
现代文：汉代有个叫樊英的，通晓阴阳地理，熟知其中的奥妙。永太年间他拜见了皇帝。
English: In the Han Dynasty, there was a man named Qu Ying, who was familiar with the yin and yang of geography, and was familiar with the mysteries of it. He visited the emperor during the Yongtai years.

古文：因向西南噀之，诏问其故，对曰： 成都今日火。 
现代文：樊英喝口水冲西南方向喷去，皇帝问他为什么这样做，他说： 因为西南方向的成都今天有火灾。 
English: The emperor asked him why he did so, and he said, "Because there is a fire in Chengdu to the southwest today."

古文：后蜀郡言火灾，正符其日。
现代文：后来蜀郡太守报告那里发生过火灾，他所说的日期与樊英喷水的日期正好符合。
English: Later, the governor of Shu County reported that there was a fire there, and the date he said was exactly the same as the date of the water spraying in Zouying.

古文：又云，时有雨从东北来，故火不大为害。
现代文：他还说，当时有雨水从东北方面袭来，所以火灾并没有造成多大的伤害。
English: He also said that there was rainwater coming from the northeast at that time, so the fire did not cause much damage.

古文：英尝忽被发拔刀，斫击舍中，妻怪问其故，英曰： 郗生遇贼。 
现代文：樊英曾经突然披散着头发，拿起刀在家里乱砍，妻子感到莫名其妙，问他为什么这样，樊英说： 郗在道上遇着贼了！ 
English: Hao Ying once suddenly wore her hair loose and picked up a knife to slash around the house. His wife felt puzzled and asked him why. Hao Ying said, "I met a thief on the road!"

古文：郗生者名巡，是英弟子，时远行。
现代文：郗的名字叫巡，郗巡是樊英的弟子，当时正外出远行。
English: Zou's name was Jun. He was a disciple of Zou Ying and was on a long journey at the time.

古文：后还说，于道中逢贼，赖一被发老人相救，故得全免。
现代文：他回来后跟人们说，他在途中遇上了贼，幸亏有一位披散着头发的老人相救，所以没发生任何危险。
English: When he returned, he told people that he had encountered a thief on the way, but thanks to the help of an old man with disheveled hair, there was no danger.

古文：永建时，殿上钟自鸣，帝甚忧之，公卿莫能解，乃问英，英曰： 蜀岷山崩，母崩子故鸣。
现代文：永建年间，宫殿上有一架钟没人敲击就自己发响，皇帝对此甚为疑虑，公卿大臣们谁也不能解释，于是便询问樊英，樊英说： 蜀岷一带发生山崩了，母亲崩所以儿子鸣。
English: During the Yongjian era, there was a bell in the palace that rang by itself when no one struck it. The emperor was very suspicious of this, and none of the nobles and ministers could explain it, so they asked Xing Ying. Xing Ying said: There was a landslide in the Shuxi area, and the mother died, so the son rang the bell.

古文：非圣朝灾也。 
现代文：这不是当今圣朝要有什么灾祸。 
English: This is not some kind of calamity for today's Holy Temple.

古文：寻奏蜀山崩。
现代文：时隔不久，果然有人向朝报告了蜀地山崩的消息。
English: Not long after, someone reported the news of the landslide in Shudi to the North Korean government.

古文：杨由
现代文：杨由
English: Yang Yu

古文：后汉杨由，善占候，郡文学掾。
现代文：后汉时的杨由，能根据自然现像占卜吉凶预测未来。担任郡属文学掾职务。
English: Yang Yu, who lived in the late Han Dynasty, was able to predict the future based on natural phenomena and divination. He served as the county's literary magistrate.

古文：曾从人饮。敕御者曰： 酒若三行，便宜严驾。 
现代文：有一次，跟着别人出去喝酒，他命令赶车人道： 酒过三巡时，一定把车马准备停当。 
English: Once, when he was out drinking with others, he ordered the driver: "When you've had three rounds of alcohol, be sure to prepare the car and horse to stop."

古文：既而趋去。
现代文：等到酒过三巡时他乘车跑了。
English: After three rounds of drinks, he fled in a car.

古文：此斗兵之象也。 
现代文：他走了之后，主人家里忽然有人互相砍杀起来。
English: After he left, someone in the owner's house suddenly started to hack each other to death.

古文：其言多类此。
现代文：有人问他为什么能够预先知道这件事，杨由说： 事前有鸠鸟在社祠前的树上打架，这是要发生械斗的预兆。 他的话大都与此类似。
English: When asked why he was able to know about this in advance, Yang Yu said, "There were storks fighting on the tree in front of the shrine beforehand, which is a sign of a battle.

古文：介象
现代文：介像
English: Media Appearances

古文：吴介象字元则。
现代文：吴国人介像，字元则。
English: The image of the people of Wu is introduced, and the characters are introduced.

古文：与吴王论脍，何者最美，象曰： 海中鲻鱼为上。请于殿前作方坎，汲水满之。 
现代文：一日，他与国王讨论切碎的鱼肉中以哪一种味道最好，介像说： 海里的鲻鱼是无与伦比的，请您在宫殿前面挖一个方形的坑，再灌满水。 
English: One day he was discussing with the king which of the minced fish had the best taste, and he said, "The eel in the sea is incomparable. Please dig a square pit in front of the palace and fill it with water."

古文：象垂纶於坎中，食顷，得鲻鱼，作脍。
现代文：国王便令人挖坑灌水。介像将一根丝线垂钓于坑中，约一顿饭的时间，便钓得一条大鲻鱼，于是将鱼切碎为脍。
English: The king had a pit dug and filled with water. It was like fishing with a silk line in a pit. About the time of a meal, he caught a large eel and then chopped the fish into chunks.

古文：郭璞
现代文：郭璞
English: Guo Wei

古文：晋陈述字嗣祖，有美名，为大将军掾，甚见爱重。
现代文：晋代有个叫陈述的，字嗣祖，很有名气，在大将军属下任职，颇受喜爱和器重。
English: In the Jin Dynasty, there was a famous person called Zhi Zu, who served under the great generals. He was well-liked and respected.

古文：及亡，郭璞往哭之，甚哀，乃呼曰： 嗣祖，焉知非福。 
现代文：他死后，郭璞前去哭丧，哭得十分哀伤，并呼叫说： 嗣祖啊，你这一死，怎知不是逃避祸乱的福份呢！ 
English: After his death, Guo Yao went to mourn and weep. He cried with great sorrow and called out, "Father-in-law, how do you know that your death is not a blessing to escape the calamity?

古文：俄而大将军作乱，如其言。
现代文：不久，大将军果然起兵作乱，正如郭璞所说的那样。
English: Not long after, the general did indeed raise an army to start a riot, just as Guo Yao had said.

古文：庾诜
现代文：庾诜
English: 

古文：齐新野庾诜，少孤，以读书自业，玄象算数，皆所妙绝。
现代文：北齐新野人庾诜，自幼父母双亡，以勤奋读书当作自己的职业，对于玄学、天文、数算等学问，都有很深的造诣。
English: Beiqi Xinzhuang, whose parents both died when he was young, took diligent reading as his profession, and had a deep knowledge of metaphysics, astronomy, and mathematics.

古文：武献公萧颖胄疾笃，谓诜曰： 推其历数，当无辜否？ 
现代文：武献公萧颖胄病危之际，对庾诜说： 按照历法推算，我该没有什么罪过吧？ 
English: When the military donator Xiao Yingjun was critically ill, he said to Zou: According to the calendar, shouldn't I be guilty of something?

古文：答曰： 镇星在襄阳，荆州自少福，明府归终于乱代。
现代文：庾诜答道： 因为有镇星出现在襄阳，荆州的福祥之气自然较少，您将在祸乱年代归终。
English: Zou replied: Because a town star appeared in Xiangyang, the auspiciousness of Jingzhou is naturally less, and you will end up in the age of calamity.

古文：齐名伊霍，足贵子孙。
现代文：但您可与伊霍齐名，富贵足以衍及子孙。
English: But you can be rich enough to have children with Ihozi.

古文：有何恨哉。 
现代文：您还有什么值得遗憾的呢！ 
English: You have nothing to be sorry about!

古文：公曰： 君得之矣。但昏主狂虐，人思尧舜。
现代文：武献公说： 您说的很有道理，但是当今昏暴的君主狂妄暴虐，黎民思念尧舜之治。
English: Wu Xingguo said: What you said is very reasonable, but today's dizzy monarchs are arrogant and tyrannical, and the people are yearning for the rule of a tyrant.

古文：恨不见清廓天下，息马华山也。 
现代文：我所遗憾的是不能亲眼看到天下太平、黎民安息的局面啊！ 
English: What I regret is that I cannot see with my own eyes the situation of world peace and the repose of the Lebanese people!

古文：歔欷而终。
现代文：说完，感慨长叹而逝。
English: With that, the emotion faded away with a long sigh.

古文：果如其言。
现代文：事实果然跟庾诜说的一样。
English: He really nailed it.

古文：颖胄，赤斧之子。
现代文：萧颖胄，乃是赤斧的儿子。
English: Xiao Yingyao is the son of Red Axe.

古文：张子信
现代文：张子信
English: Zhang Zixin

古文：齐琅琊王俨杀和士开也。
现代文：齐国的琅琊王，名俨，是他杀害了和士开这个人。
English: It was he who killed this man, Hoshikai, the famous king of the Qin in the state of Qi.

古文：武卫奚永洛与河内人张子信对坐，忽有鹊鸣，斗于庭而堕焉。
现代文：一天武卫奚永洛正与河内人张子信对坐面谈，庭院里树上忽有乌鹊叫唤，而且边叫边斗，终于掉在地上。
English: One day, when Wuwei Yingluo was having a face-to-face interview with Zhang Zixin, a native of Hanoi, there was a sudden cry of a blackbird on a tree in the courtyard. The bird screamed and fought, and finally fell to the ground.

古文：子信曰： 鹊声不善，向夕若有风从西南来，历树间，拂堂角。必有口舌事。今夜若有人相召，慎不得往。 
现代文：子信说： 乌鹊的叫声不是吉祥之兆。傍晚如果有风从西南刮来，掠过树梢，吹拂房檐，那就必定会有关于口舌的事，今晚上如果有人来召唤你，千万当心不要跟他去。 
English: Zixin said, "The call of the blackbird is not an auspicious sign. In the evening, if the wind blows from the southwest, sweeping over the treetops and blowing the eaves, then there must be something about the tongue. If someone comes to summon you tonight, be careful not to go with him.

古文：子信既去，果有风至，俨使召永洛，且云敕唤。
现代文：子信离开永洛家后，果然刮起了风，琅琊王派人来召唤永洛，来人还说是皇帝有令叫他即刻就去。
English: After Zixin left Yongluo's house, the wind really picked up. King Yao sent someone to summon Yongluo, who also said that the emperor had ordered him to go immediately.

古文：永洛欲赴，其妻劝令勿出。
现代文：永洛打算跟来人去，妻子便在一旁劝说他千万不可出门。
English: Yongluo planned to go with the man, but his wife persuaded him not to leave the house.

古文：因称马坠折腰，遂免于难。
现代文：永洛于是谎称从马上跌落腰部受伤，不能前去赴命。
English: Yongluo then falsely claimed that he had fallen from a horse and injured his lower back, so he could not go to his death.

古文：管辂
现代文：结果逃避了这场灾难。管辂
English: Duct tape

古文：魏管辂曾至郭恩家，忽有飞鸠来止梁上，鸣甚悲切。
现代文：魏人管辂有一天来到郭恩家，忽见一只鸠鸟飞来停留在房梁上，发出悲悲切切的叫声。
English: One day, Guo En, a Wei man, came to Guo En's house and suddenly saw an ostrich flying and staying on the beam of the house, emitting a mournful cry.

古文：辂云： 当有客从东来相探候，携豕及酒，因有小故耳。 
现代文：管辂便说： 今天定会有客人从东方前来探望您。并且带着猪肉与酒，因为您家里要发生点事故。 
English: Guan Yu then said, "Today, a guest from the East will come to visit you, bringing pork and wine, because there is going to be an accident in your home."

古文：至晚，一如其言。
现代文：到了晚上，真像管辂说的那样，郭恩家里来了一位住在东面的客人。
English: In the evening, just as Guan Yu said, a guest from the east came to Guo En's house.

古文：恩令节酒慎燔。
现代文：郭恩便令斟酒炒菜，以礼相待。
English: Guo En then ordered the wine to be poured and the dishes to be cooked, and they treated each other with courtesy.

古文：既而射鹞作食，箭发从篱间，误中数岁女子，流血惊怖。
现代文：然后，他弯弓搭箭要射几只雀鹰下饭，箭从篱墙中射出去，却射中了一个几岁的女孩，女孩流血不止，神情惊慌恐惧。
English: Then, he bent his bow and arrows to shoot a few finches for dinner. The arrow shot out of the fence, but hit a few-year-old girl, who was bleeding profusely and looked panicked and afraid.

古文：筹禅师
现代文：筹禅师
English: Cho Zenji

古文：隋炀帝宴秘书少监诸葛颖于观文殿，帝分御杯以赐颖。
现代文：有一天，隋炀帝在观文殿宴请秘书少监诸葛颖，他将御用的酒杯分出一只送给诸葛颖。
English: One day, Emperor Sui Xuan held a banquet at the Guanwen Hall for his secretary, the minor procurator Zhuge Ying. He gave Zhuge Ying one of his official wine glasses.

古文：乃曰： 朕昔有筹禅师，为之合诸药，总纳一竹筒药内，取以帽簪插筒药中，七日乃拔取。
现代文：然后讲了一个关于筹禅师的故事。隋炀帝说： 过去我有个筹禅师，他为我把几种药材混合在一起，一块儿装进一支竹筒里，将帽上的簪子拿来插在竹筒中，过了七天便拔出来。
English: Then he told a story about a qigong master. Sui Xuan said: In the past, I had a qigong master. He mixed several herbs together for me, put them together in a bamboo tube, inserted the hooks from his hat into the bamboo tube, and pulled it out after seven days.

古文：以对宾客饮酒，杯至，取簪以画酒，中断。
现代文：我拿这支簪子跟宾客一起喝酒，一杯酒端上来，我便用簪子在酒中一划，杯里的酒便从中间分开。
English: I take this pair of tweezers and drink with the guests. When a glass of wine is served, I make a mark in the wine with the tweezers and the wine in the glass separates from the middle.

古文：饮一边尽，一边尚满，以劝宾客，观者皆以为大圣稀有之事。 
现代文：我将一边的酒喝干，另一边的酒仍然满满的，便将它拿来劝宾客喝。看到这种场面的人，都说这是大圣皇朝稀有的奇事。 
English: I drank the wine dry on one side, and the other side was still full, so I used it to persuade the guests to drink. People who saw this scene said that this was a rare miracle of the Great Sage Dynasty.

古文：李淳风
现代文：李淳风
English: Li Junfeng

古文：唐太史李淳风，校新历，太阳合朔，当蚀既，于占不吉。
现代文：唐朝有个太史叫李淳风，有一次，他在校对新岁历书时，发现朔日将出现日蚀，这是不吉祥的预兆。
English: There was a great historian in the Tang Dynasty named Li Chunfeng. Once, when he was proofreading a New Year's calendar, he discovered that there would be a solar eclipse on the New Year's Day. This was an ill omen.

古文：太宗不悦曰： 日或不食，卿将何以自处？ 
现代文：太宗很不高兴，说： 日蚀如不出现，那时看你如何处置自己？ 
English: Taizong was very unhappy and said, "If the eclipse does not occur, how will you handle yourself then?"

古文：曰： 如有不蚀，臣请死之。 
现代文：李淳风说： 如果没有日蚀，我甘愿受死。 
English: Li Junfeng said: If there is no eclipse, I am willing to die.

古文：及期，帝候于庭，谓淳风曰： 吾放汝与妻子别之。 
现代文：到了那天，皇帝便来到庭院等候看结果，并对李淳风说： 我暂且放你回家一趟，好与老婆孩子告别。 淳风说： 现在还不到时候。 
English: On that day, the emperor came to the courtyard to wait to see the result, and said to Li Junfeng: I will let you go home for the time being, so that you can say goodbye to your wife and children.Junfeng said: Now is not the time.

古文：对曰： 尚早。 刻日指影于壁： 至此则蚀。 
现代文：说着便在墙上划了一条标记： 等到日光照到这里时，日蚀就会出现。 
English: As he spoke, he scratched a mark on the wall: When the sun shines here, the eclipse will appear.

古文：如言而蚀。不差毫发。
现代文：日蚀果然出现了，跟他说的时间丝毫不差。
English: The eclipse did indeed appear, and it was just as he had said.

古文：太史与张率同侍帝，更有暴风自南至。李以为南五里当有哭者，张以为有音乐。
现代文：李淳风与张率都在皇帝身边服侍，又有一次，一阵暴风从南面刮来，李淳风认为在南面五里远的地方一定有人在哭，张率则认为那里一定有音乐声。
English: Li Chunfeng and Zhang Quan both served at the emperor's side. On another occasion, a storm blew from the south. Li Chunfeng thought that someone must be crying five miles away in the south, while Zhang Quan thought that there must be music.

古文：左右驰马观之，则遇送葬者。有鼓吹。
现代文：皇帝身边的人便骑马跑去查看，结果碰上一支哭着送葬队伍，队伍里面又有吹鼓手奏着哀乐。
English: The people around the emperor ran on horseback to investigate, and as a result they came across a weeping funeral procession, in which there was also a drummer playing mournful music.

古文：又尝奏曰： 北斗七星当化为人，明日至西市饮酒，宜令候取。 
现代文：李淳风有一次奏禀皇帝说： 七个北斗星要变成人，明天将去西市喝酒。可以派人守候在那里，将他们抓获。 
English: On one occasion, Li Chunfeng sent a message to the emperor, saying: "The seven dippers want to turn into humans, and tomorrow they will go to Xi'an to drink. You can send someone to wait there and capture them."

古文：太宗从之，乃使人往候。
现代文：太宗相信了他的话，便派人前去守候。
English: Taizong believed his words and sent someone to wait for him.

古文：有婆罗门僧七人。入自金光门，至西市酒肆，登楼，命取酒一石。持碗饮之，须臾酒尽，复添一石。
现代文：见有七个婆罗门僧人从金光门进城，到了西市酒楼，上了楼，向店主人要了一石酒，端起碗来就喝，时间不长便把一石酒喝光了，于是又添了一石。
English: He saw seven brahmin monks enter the city from the Cotai Gate, go to the West Town Tavern, go up the stairs, ask the owner for a stone of wine, take the bowl and drink it. Before long, they had drunk a stone of wine, and then added another stone.

古文：使者登楼，宣敕曰： 今请师等至宫。 
现代文：皇帝派来的使者走上楼来，宣读了皇帝的诏书，说： 现在请各位大师到皇宫去一趟。 
English: The emissary sent by the emperor came upstairs, read out the emperor's edict, and said: "Now, masters, please go to the imperial palace.

古文：胡僧相顾而笑曰： 必李淳风小儿言我也。 
现代文：僧人互相看了看，然后笑道： 一定是李淳风这小子说我们什么了。
English: The monks looked at each other and then laughed, "It must have been Li Chunfeng, this kid, who said something about us."

古文：因谓曰： 待穷此酒，与子偕行。 
现代文：于是便对使者说： 等把酒喝完了，我们跟你一块儿走。 
English: So they said to the messenger, "Let's go with you as soon as you have finished drinking."

古文：饮毕下楼，使者先下，回顾已失胡僧。
现代文：喝完酒后他们便要下楼，使者在前面带路先下去了，当使者回头看他们几个时，僧人已踪影全无。
English: After drinking, they wanted to go downstairs. The messenger led the way down first. When the messenger looked back at them, there was no trace of the monks.

古文：因奏闻，太宗异焉。
现代文：使者回去将以上情形如实奏禀皇上，太宗听后甚为惊异。
English: When the envoy returned and reported the above situation to the Emperor, Emperor Taizong was very surprised.

古文：初僧饮酒，未入其直，及收具，于座下得钱二千。
现代文：当初僧人喝酒时，并未交酒钱，但当店主收拾器具时，在僧人的座位下面竟发现有钱两千。
English: At first, when the monk was drinking, he didn't pay for the alcohol, but when the owner of the bar put away the utensils, he found two thousand rupees under the monk's seat.

古文：袁天纲
现代文：袁天纲
English: Yuan Tiangang

古文：唐则天之在襁褓也，益州人袁天纲能相。
现代文：在武则天还是个吃奶的婴儿时，有一个益州人叫袁天纲，会相面。
English: When Wu Zetian was still a suckling baby, there was a person from Yizhou called Yuan Tiangang who met him.

古文：士彟令相妻杨氏，天纲曰： 夫人当生贵子。 
现代文：则天的父亲武士彟让袁天纲给妻子杨氏相面，天纲说： 夫人一定生贵子。 
English: Then the father of heaven, the samurai Zou, asked Yuan Tiangang to meet his wife, the Yang family. Tiangang said, "My wife must have given birth to a noble son."

古文：乃尽召其子相之。
现代文：于是便将他的儿子都叫到跟前让袁天纲一个一个地相。
English: So he called his sons to his side and asked Yuan Tiangang to take the photos one by one.

古文：谓元庆、元爽曰： 可至刺史，终亦屯否。 
现代文：袁天纲对元庆、元爽说： 二位公子的官职能升到刺史，后来的结局将会艰难。 
English: Yuan Tiangang said to Yuan Qing and Yuan Shuang: The official functions of the two princes have risen to the level of history, and the future outcome will be difficult.

古文：见韩国夫人曰： 此女大贵，不利其夫。 
现代文：袁天纲看见韩国夫人便说： 这位女孩将来一定大为显贵，但对她丈夫不利。 
English: When Yuan Tiangang saw the Korean lady, he said, "This girl will certainly be very prominent in the future, but it will not be good for her husband.

古文：则天时在怀抱，衣男子衣服，乳母抱至。
现代文：则天当时正抱在怀里，穿着男孩子的衣服，奶妈把她也抱来了。
English: She was in her arms, dressed in boy's clothes, when the wet nurse brought her in.

古文：天纲举目一视，大惊曰： 龙睛凤颈，贵之极也。
现代文：袁天纲抬眼一看，大为吃惊，说： 这个孩子长了龙的眼睛和凤的脖子，富贵极了。
English: Yuan Tiangang raised his eyes in surprise and said, "This child has the eyes of a dragon and the neck of a phoenix. He is extremely wealthy."

古文：若是女，当为天下主。 
现代文：如果是个女的，将来一定成为天下之君主。 
English: If it is a woman, she will surely become the ruler of the world in the future.

古文：安禄山术士
现代文：安禄山术士
English: The Sorcerer of Mount Anlu

古文：唐安禄山多置道术人，谓术士曰： 我对天子亦无恐惧，唯见李相则神机悚战，即李林甫。 
现代文：唐代，安禄山大量收罗通晓道术的人，对手下的术士说： 我连皇帝都不惧怕，唯独见到李林甫丞相却心惊胆战。 
English: In the Tang Dynasty, Anlu Mountain attracted a large number of practitioners of Taoism. The sorcerer said to his opponent: I am not even afraid of the emperor, but when I saw Premier Li Linfu, my heart was terrified.

古文：术士曰： 公有阴兵五百人，皆铜头铁额，常在左右，何得畏李相公。 
现代文：术士说： 您私下养了五百名兵士，个个铜头铁臂，经常守卫在您的左右，怎么能怕他李相公呢！ 
English: The sorcerer said, "You have privately raised five hundred soldiers, each with a brazen head and an iron arm, who constantly stand guard on your right and left. How can you be afraid of him, Li Xianggong?"

古文：又谓禄山曰： 吾安得见之？ 
现代文：又向禄山说： 我怎样才能见到他？ 
English: She also said to Lushan, "How can I see him?"

古文：禄山因表请宴宰相，令术士于帘下窥之。
现代文：禄山便向他表明要宴请宰相，让术士在帘子外面偷偷观看。
English: Lu Shan then told him that he wanted to invite the prime minister to a banquet, and let the sorcerer watch secretly from outside the curtain.

古文：惊曰： 吾初见报相公来，有双鬟二青衣，捧香炉先入，仆射侍卫铜头铁额之类。皆穿屋逾垣而走。
现代文：术士看到李相公后，十分惊讶，对禄山说： 我刚听见传报相公到来，便有两名青衣女子手捧香炉先走进门来，接着是仆射侍卫，个个铜头铁臂，都能穿屋越墙而行。
English: The sorcerer was very surprised to see the arrival of Prince Li Xiang and said to Lushan, "I just heard the news that the prince was coming, and two women in blue with incense burners in their hands walked through the door first, followed by servants and guards, all of whom were able to walk through the house and over the wall.

古文：某亦不知其故。当是仙官暂谪居人间也。 
现代文：我也不知其缘故，大概是仙官暂时被贬来到人间吧。 
English: I don't know the reason, but it's probably because the faeries have been temporarily relegated to the human world.

古文：桑道茂
现代文：桑道茂
English: Sando Shigeru

古文：唐盛唐令李鹏遇桑道茂。
现代文：唐代盛唐县令李鹏，一天遇着桑道茂。
English: Li Peng, the governor of Tang County in the Tang Dynasty, met Sando Mao one day.

古文：曰： 长官只此一邑而已，贤郎二人，大者位极人臣，次者殆于数镇，子孙百世。 
现代文：桑道茂说： 您只掌管一个县而已，您的两个儿子，长者将来位及人臣，次者将来也镇守数处，子孙相衍，富贵百年。 
English: Sando Shigeru said: You are only in charge of one county. Your two sons, the elder one will be a minister, the younger one will be the governor of several towns, and your descendants will be rich for a hundred years.

古文：后如其言。长子石，出入将相，子孙二世及第。
现代文：后来果然像他说的那样，长子李石，兼备文武之才，子孙两代科举考试均中选。
English: Later, as he said, the eldest son, Li Shi, was both a scholar and a warrior, and both generations of his descendants were selected for the imperial examinations.

古文：至次子福，历七镇，终于使相。凡八男，三人及第至尚书给谏郡牧，诸孙皆朱紫。
现代文：次子李福，镇守过七个地方，后来终于当了使相，八个儿子有三个考试中选，官至尚书给谏郡牧。孙子们也都是五品三品以上的大官。
English: The second son, Li Fu, served as a town guard in seven places, and later finally became an envoy. Eight of his sons were selected in three examinations, and the title of official was given to the herdsman of Yixian County. His grandchildren are also high-ranking officials with five grades and three grades or higher.

古文：建中元年，道茂请城奉天为王者居。
现代文：建中元年，道茂请求在奉天修城供君王居住。
English: In the first year of Jianzhong, Domo requested that a castle be built in Bongtian for the king to live in.

古文：列象龟别，内分六街，德宗素神道茂言，遂命京尹严郢发众数千，与六军士杂往城之。
现代文：列像龟别，内分六街，德宗一向把道茂的话奉为神明，便命令京尹严郢发派劳工数千，跟六军士卒一起去筑城。
English: After the statues were removed, there were six streets. Emperor Dezong, who had always revered the words of Tao Shao as divine, ordered Emperor Jing Yin to send thousands of laborers to build the city together with the six soldiers.

古文：时属盛夏，而土功大起，人不知其故。
现代文：时值盛夏，大兴土木，人们都不知道其中幸的原故。
English: It was the height of summer, and there was a lot of construction going on. People didn't know the reason for it.

古文：至播迁都彼，乃验。
现代文：等到迁都到那里时，才知修筑奉天城的用处。
English: It was only when the capital was moved there that the usefulness of building Bong Tiancheng became clear.

古文：朱泚之乱，德宗幸奉天，时沿边藩镇，皆已举兵扈跸。泚自率凶渠，直至城下。
现代文：朱泚作乱时，德宗幸驾奉天，当时沿边各个藩镇，都已派兵保护皇帝的车驾，朱泚率领凶贼直到城下。
English: At the time of Zhu Xi's rebellion, Emperor Dezong had the good fortune to ride with Emperor Feng Tian. At that time, all the towns along the border had sent troops to protect the emperor's chariot, and Zhu Xi led the thieves to the outskirts of the city.

古文：有西明寺僧，陷在贼中，性甚机巧，教造攻城云梯，高九十余尺，上施板屋楼橹，可以下瞰城中。
现代文：有个西明寺的和尚陷入贼阵之中，他心性机巧，叫人制造攻城的云梯，梯高九十多尺，上搭板屋楼栏，可以向下鸟瞰城中的情况。
English: There was a monk at the Ximing Temple who was caught in the middle of the phalanx of thieves. He was resourceful and ordered someone to build a ladder to storm the city. The ladder was more than ninety feet high, and it was supported by the balustrade of a prefabricated house, allowing a bird's-eye view of the situation in the city.

古文：浑瑊、李晟奏曰： 贼锋既盛，云梯甚壮，若纵近城，恐不能御。
现代文：浑瑊、李晟奏禀皇上说： 贼兵来势凶猛，攻城云梯十分坚固，如果放纵他们靠近城边，恐怕无法抵御。
English: The emperor said, "The invading bandits are fierce and the siege ramparts are very strong. If they are allowed to get close to the city, I'm afraid they will not be able to resist.

古文：及其尚远，请以锐兵挫之。 
现代文：在他们离的还远的时候，请派精锐部队挫败他们。 
English: While they are still far away, please send elite troops to defeat them.

古文：遂率王师五千，列阵而出，于时束蕴居后，约战酣而燎。
现代文：于是，率领王师五千人马，列阵出城，同时捆好乱麻放在后面，当战斗激烈时点火燃烧。
English: As a result, Wang led a division of five thousand horses, marched out of the city in formation, and at the same time tied up the jumble of hemp and put it in the back. When the battle was fierce, it ignited and burned.

古文：风势不便，火莫能举。
现代文：因风势不利，没能点起火来。
English: Due to unfavourable wind conditions, it was not possible to start the fire.

古文：二公酹酒祝词曰： 贼泚包藏祸心，窃弄凶德，敢以狂孽，来犯乘舆。
现代文：瑊、晟二公洒酒祭奠口念祷词道： 逆贼朱泚包藏祸心，窃国弄权行凶伤德，致以狂孽之徒。来犯皇帝的车驾。
English: ,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,

古文：今拥众胁君，将逼城垒。
现代文：如今拥众胁迫君主，即将逼近城垒。
English: Now the crowd is threatening the monarch, and is about to approach the ramparts.

古文：某等誓输忠节，志殄妖氛。
现代文：我等宣誓尽忠尽节，立志扫除妖氛。
English: We all swore to be loyal to the end, determined to sweep away the demonic atmosphere.

古文：若社稷再安，威灵未泯，当使云梯就爇，逆党冰销。
现代文：如果社稷再安，威灵未泯，当使云梯着火，逆党冰消。
English: If the society is no longer peaceful and prosperous, the ladder should be set on fire, and the inverse party should be eliminated.

古文：于是词情慷慨，人百其勇。
现代文：祷词如此激情慷慨，将士增加了百倍的勇气。
English: The prayer was so passionate and generous that it increased his courage a hundredfold.

古文：俄而风势遽回，鼓噪而进，火烈风猛，烟埃涨天，梯烬贼奔。
现代文：风势立即回转，王师鼓噪而进，火烈风猛，烟尘冲天，云梯化为灰烬，贼兵纷纷溃逃。
English: The wind immediately swirled, Wang Shih roared forward, the fire was fierce, the smoke and dust soared into the sky, the ladder was reduced to ashes, and the bandits fled.

古文：德宗御城楼以观，中外咸称万岁。
现代文：德宗登上城楼观看，城内城外山呼万岁。
English: Dezong went up to the castle tower to watch, and shouted "Long live the mountains" outside the city.

古文：及克京国，二公勋积为首，宠锡茅土。
现代文：等到收复京城后，浑、李二公勋积卓著，居于首位，皇帝恩宠，封赐王侯。
English: After the recapture of Beijing, Hun and Li Er were highly decorated and ranked first in the emperor's favor, and were given the title of prince.

古文：匡扶社稷，终始一致。
现代文：他们为了匡扶社稷，效忠尽职，始终如一。
English: In order to support the company, they have been consistent in their loyalty and dedication.

古文：李西平有子四人，皆分节制，忠崇荣显。
现代文：李西平有四个儿子，也都分别指挥管辖一部分军队，忠勇崇高荣耀显赫。
English: Li Xiping had four sons, each of whom commanded and governed a part of the army. They were all loyal, brave, noble and glorious.

古文：初。晟于左贲效职，久未迁超。
现代文：当初，李晟任职于左贲，很长时间未能升迁。
English: At first, Li Qian served in Zuoqian, but was unable to be promoted for a long time.

古文：闻桑道茂善相，赍绢一匹，凌晨而往，时倾信者甚众，造诣多不即见之。
现代文：听说桑道茂会相面，携带丝绢一匹，凌晨就去求见他，当时相信他的人特别多，去拜见的人多数不能当即见到他。
English: I heard that Sando Mao would meet people face-to-face, carry a silkworm, and go to see him in the early morning. At that time, there were a lot of people who believed in him, and most people who went to see him could not see him immediately.

古文：闻李在门，亲自迎接，施设淆醴，情意甚专。
现代文：他听说李晟在门口求见，便亲自出门迎接，并在家里摆上酒菜，殷勤接待。
English: He heard that Li Yao was at the door to see him, so he went out to meet him in person, and set out wine and vegetables at home for a gracious reception.

古文：既而谓曰： 他日建立勋庸，贵甚无比。
现代文：过了一会儿便对李说： 他日您将建树功勋，富贵无与伦比。
English: After a while, he said to Li, "One day, you will make great achievements, and you will be rich beyond compare.

古文：或事权在手，当以性命为托。 
现代文：有件事情的大权掌握在您手里，我当以自己的性命相托。 
English: There is a matter of great power in your hands. I should entrust my life to you.

古文：李莫测其言。但惭唯而已。
现代文：李晟猜不透他话里的意思，只好惭愧地点头称是而已。
English: Li Yao couldn't figure out what he meant and had to nod his head in shame.

古文：请回所贶缣，换李公身上汗衫，仍请于衿上书名，云他日见此相忆。
现代文：桑道茂请他收回所送的丝绢，要换取李公身上的汗衫，但只请他在汗衫上写下自己的名字，并说他日见此时可以互相回忆起今天的事来。
English: Sandomao asked him to take back the silk pajamas he had sent in exchange for the sweatshirt on Li Gong's body, but only asked him to write his name on the sweatshirt, and said that he thought that at this time they could remember today's events.

古文：及泚叛，道茂陷贼庭，既克京师，从乱者悉皆就戮。
现代文：等到朱泚叛乱，道茂陷落在逆贼的院子里，后来收复了京师，跟从作乱的人一律就地杀戮。
English: By the time of Zhu Xi's rebellion, Dao Mao had fallen into the courtyard of the traitors. Later, he recovered the capital division and killed everyone who followed the troublemakers on the spot.

古文：时李受命斩决，道茂将欲就刑，请致词，遂以汗衫为请。
现代文：当时李晟受命掌管斩决一事，道茂将要赴刑，请求跟李晟说几句话，于是提起了李晟汗衫的事。
English: At that time, Li Yao was ordered to take charge of the beheading, and Dao Mao was about to go to the execution, and he asked to say a few words to Li Yao, so he brought up the matter of Li Yao's shirt.

古文：李公奏以非罪，特原之。
现代文：李公以无罪的名义奏明皇上，道茂得到了特殊宽赦。
English: Li Gong appealed to Emperor Ming in the name of innocence, and Domo received a special pardon.

古文：司徒杜佑曾为杨炎判官，故卢杞见忌，欲出之，杜见道茂曰： 年内出官，则福寿无疆。 
现代文：司徒杜佑曾经是杨炎的判官，所以卢杞忌恨他，他想出走，杜见到道茂后，道茂对他说： 年内出官，则福寿无疆。 
English: Stu Du You was once the judge of Yang Yan, so Lu Xun hated him and he wanted to run away. After Du saw Dao Mao, Dao Mao said to him, "If you become an official within the year, your life will be full of happiness."

古文：既而自某官，九十余日出为某官，官名遗忘，福寿果然。
现代文：后来，杜开始做某某官，九十余日出为某某官。官名遗忘了，他的福与寿果如道茂所言。
English: Later, Du began to be a so-and-so official, and more than ninety sunrises were so-and-so officials. I forgot the official's name, but his happiness and longevity were as Tao Mao said.

古文：乡校叟
现代文：乡校叟
English: Township School District

古文：唐宰相窦易直，初名秘，家贫，就乡校授业。
现代文：唐朝宰相窦易直，原名叫秘，家境贫寒，在乡校读书。
English: The prime minister of the Tang Dynasty, Dou Yizhi, whose original name was Ji, came from a poor family and studied at a village school.

古文：而叟有道术，人不之知。
现代文：乡校里有个打更的老头，他有道术，别人都不知。
English: In the village school, there is an old man who plays chess. He has a martial art that no one else knows about.

古文：一日向暮，风雪暴至。学徒归不得，宿于漏屋下。
现代文：一天傍晚，风雪暴至，学生们不能回家，便住宿在破漏的屋子里。
English: One evening, a snowstorm came, and the students could not go home, so they stayed in a leaky house.

古文：寒争附火，惟窦寝于侧。
现代文：因为天冷，大家都争着往火堆旁边挤，唯独窦秘睡在一边。
English: Because it was cold, everyone jostled to get next to the fire, but Dou secretly slept on the side.

古文：夜分，叟自扶窦起曰： 窦秘，君后为人臣，贵寿之机，勉励自爱也。 
现代文：夜深时，老头亲自将窦扶起来说： 窦秘，你以后定为大官，富贵长寿之极，你要勤奋刻苦，自重自爱。 
English: In the middle of the night, the old man personally held Dou up and said: Dou, you will be a high-ranking official in the future, rich and long-lived, you must be diligent and hard-working, and have self-respect.

古文：及德宗幸奉天，方举进士，亦随驾而西，乘蹇驴至开远，人稠路隘。城扉将阖，公惧势不可进。
现代文：等到德宗幸驾奉天时，窦刚举为进士，也随驾西迁，他坐一头跛驴来到开远，因为人多路窄，城门又要关闭，窦公害怕这种情况下势必进不了城。
English: When Dezong was fortunate enough to be elevated to the imperial court, Dou had just been promoted to the highest rank and moved west with him. He came to Kaifeng on a donkey, because the road was narrow and the gate was about to be closed. Dou was afraid that he would not be able to enter the city under such circumstances.

古文：忽一人叱驴，兼捶其后，得疾驰而出。
现代文：忽然有人大声喝叱他的驴，同时捶打驴的后背，驴便飞奔而出了人群。
English: Suddenly someone loudly scolded his donkey, while beating the donkey's back, and the donkey galloped out of the crowd.

古文：顾见二黑衣卒，呼曰： 秀才已后莫忘闾情。 
现代文：回头看见两个穿黑衣服士卒，向他高声呼叫道： 请秀才往后不要忘记在乡下时的情分。 
English: Looking back, he saw two black-clad soldiers, who called out to him in a loud voice: "Please Xiu Cai, don't forget the situation when you were in the countryside.

古文：及升朝，访得其子，提挈于吏中甚达。
现代文：等他升为朝廷宰相后，打听到了这两个当年救他于危难的士卒，对他俩大力提拔。
English: After he was promoted to the post of Imperial Chancellor, he inquired about the two soldiers who had saved him from danger that year, and promoted them both vigorously.

古文：相骨人
现代文：相骨人
English: Sibling

古文：唐贞元末，有相骨山人，瞽双目。
现代文：唐朝贞元末年，有个能看骨相的人，双目失明。
English: In the last years of the reign of Emperor Zhenyuan of the Tang Dynasty, there was a blind man who could read bones.

古文：人求相，以手扪之，必知贵贱。
现代文：有人求他相骨时，他用手摸摸你，必知你或贵或贱。
English: When he is asked for a dowry, he will touch you with his hand and find out whether you are rich or poor.

古文：房次卿方勇于趋进，率先访之，及出户时，后谒者盈巷。
现代文：有个叫房次卿的正努力上进以求显达，便第一个去拜访相骨人，等他相完走出门来时，后到的人已经排满了整条胡同。
English: A man by the name of the Vice-Minister of the Interior, who was trying hard to get ahead in order to be recognized, was the first to visit the matchmaker, and by the time he had finished the match and walked out the door, the people who came later had already lined up the entire alley.

古文：睹次卿已出，迎问之曰： 如何？ 
现代文：人们看见次卿已经出来了，就迎上去问他道： 怎么样了？ 
English: When the people saw that the Vice-Admiral had come out, they greeted him and asked him, "How are you?

古文：答曰： 不足言，不足言，且道个瘦长杜秀才位极人臣，何必更云。 
现代文：他答道： 不值得说，不值得说，他说有个疲长的杜秀才位极人臣，何必再说别人？ 
English: He replied, "It's not worth mentioning. It's not worth mentioning. He said that there was a long-serving Du Xiuquan who was an extremely respected person. Why mention others?

古文：或有退者。
现代文：有人听后就回去不再让他相了。
English: When someone hears about it, they go back and don't let him take pictures anymore.

古文：后杜循果带相印镇西蜀也。
现代文：后来，杜循果然带着相印去镇守西蜀去了。
English: Later, Du Xuan took the seal with him to the town of Xishu.

古文：田良逸蒋含弘
现代文：田良逸蒋含弘
English: Tian Liangyi and Jiang Hanhong

古文：唐元和初，南岳道士田良逸、蒋含弘，皆道业绝高，远近钦敬。时号田蒋君。
现代文：唐朝元和初年，南岳道士田良逸和蒋含弘都道业绝高，远近敬佩，时人合称他们为田蒋君。
English: In the first year of the Yuan and Tang dynasties, Nanyue Taoists Tian Liangyu and Jiang Hanhong were both highly respected for their outstanding achievements in Taoism. At that time, they were collectively known as Tian Jiangjun.

古文：以虚无为心，和煦待物。
现代文：他们以清静虚无为心境，和煦待物。
English: They live in a state of serenity and nothingness, and treat everyone with kindness.

古文：不事浮饰，而天格清峻，人见者褊吝尽去。
现代文：不事浮饰，天性高洁峻朗，见到他们的人自己的偏狭吝啬之心即被荡涤净尽。
English: No matter the decoration, the nature is high and pure, and those who see them are cleansed of their narrow and miserly hearts.

古文：侍郎吕渭、杨凭。相继廉问湖南，皆北面师事。
现代文：侍郎吕渭、杨凭，相继到湖南查访，都把他当老师对待。
English: His attendants, Lv Ying and Yang Biao, visited Hunan successively and treated him as a teacher.

古文：潭州大旱，祈雨不获，或请邀致。
现代文：潭州大旱，祈雨又不得，有人便请求邀请田蒋。
English: There is a drought in Tanzhou, and it is not possible to pray for rain, so someone asked to invite Tian Jiang.

古文：杨曰： 田先生岂为人祈雨者耶？ 
现代文：杨凭说： 田先生难道是给人家祈雨的人么？ 
English: Yang Biao said: Is Mr. Tian someone who prays for rain?

古文：不得已迎之。先生蓬首弊服，欣然就车，到郡亦终无言，即日雨降，所居岳观，建黄箓坛场。
现代文：出于不得已，只好去迎杨先生，先生蓬头旧衣，欣然上车，到了潭州郡后也一直不说话，当天雨就降下来了，他所居住的岳观，建造了黄箓坛场。
English: Out of necessity, I had to go to meet Mr. Yang. He was wearing old clothes and was happy to get on the bus. After arriving in Tanzhou County, he didn't speak for a long time. On the same day, the rain fell, and his daughter-in-law, who lived there, built the Huangpi Altar.

古文：法具已陈列而天阴晦，弟子请祈晴，田亦无言，岸帻垂发而坐。
现代文：法具已陈列好了，正要作法场，天空却阴暗起来，弟子请他祈求天晴，田也是不说话，头巾掀在一边，披散着头发坐在那里。
English: The Dharma implements had been set out, and the Dharma field was about to be set up. However, the sky turned dark. The disciple asked him to pray for a clear sky. Tian did not speak, but sat there with her headscarf pulled aside and her hair hanging loose.

古文：及行斋，左右代整冠履，扶升坛，天即开霁。
现代文：等到斋戒时，身边的人替他整理好鞋帽，扶他登坛，天空即刻变晴了。
English: When it was time for him to break his fast, the people around him arranged his shoes and hat for him, helped him onto the altar, and the sky immediately became clear.

古文：常有村姥，持碧绡襦以奉，对众便服之，坐者窃笑，不以介意。
现代文：时常有农村老妇拿来绿色丝织短衣送给他，他便当着众人的面穿上，在坐的人见状都忍不住偷偷地笑，他也不介意。
English: Sometimes an old woman from the countryside would bring him a green silk jacket, and he would put it on in front of everyone, and he didn't mind if the people sitting there couldn't help but secretly laugh.

古文：杨常迎至潭州。
现代文：杨凭常常派人迎接他到潭州去。
English: Yang Bie would often send someone to meet him when he went to Tanzhou.

古文：田方跣足，使至，乘小舟便行，侍者以履袜追及于衙门，即坐阶砌着袜，傍若无人。
现代文：田正光着脚，使者一到，他登上小船就走，侍童便提着鞋袜追到衙门，田接过来坐在台阶上就穿袜子，旁若无人。
English: Tian Zheng was barefoot. As soon as the messenger arrived, he boarded the boat and left. The attendant then chased him to the gate with his shoes and socks. Tian took over and sat on the steps and put on his socks, as if no one was around.

古文：杨再拜，亦不止之。
现代文：杨凭一再礼拜，他也不制止。
English: Yang Biao repeatedly prayed, and he did not stop.

古文：时喜饮酒。而言不及吉凶是非。
现代文：他喜欢喝酒，根本不提吉凶是非的事。
English: He likes to drink and doesn't talk about the pros and cons at all.

古文：及杨自京尹谪临贺尉，使候田，遗银器，受之，便悉付门人作法会。
现代文：杨凭自京尹贬谪临贺尉，派使者看望田良逸，赠他以银器，他毫不推让就收下，然后全部送给门人作法会时用。
English: Yang Biao sent an emissary to visit Tian Liangyi from Beijing, and presented him with silverware. He accepted it without any resistance, and then gave it all to the doorkeeper for use during the Dharma meeting.

古文：使还曰： 报汝阿郎，勿深忧也，未几量移杭州长史。 
现代文：使者要往回走，他说： 告诉你家少爷，不要太忧伤了，估计等不多久就会移迁杭州长史。 
English: The messenger wants to go back, he said: Tell your young master, don't be too sad, it is estimated that the governor of Hangzhou will be relocated soon.

古文：未尝干人，人至亦不逆，性不多记人官位姓第。
现代文：田方逸从不干涉别人，别人到了也不反对，生性不大在意别人的官位姓氏和门第。
English: Tian Fangyi never interfered with others, and did not object when others arrived. By nature, he did not care much about other people's official ranks, surnames and families.

古文：与吕渭分最深，后郎中吕温刺衡州，因来谒之，左右先告以使君是侍郎之子，及温入，下床拊其背曰： 你是吕渭儿子耶。 
现代文：他与吕渭的情分最深，后来郎中吕温为衡州刺史，因故特来拜访他，身边的人先告诉他来访者是侍郎吕渭的儿子，等吕温进门后，他下床拍着吕温的后背说： 你是吕渭的儿子呀。 
English: He had the deepest affection for Lyu Wei. Later, his brother-in-law Lyu Wen, who was the chief historian of Hengzhou, came to visit him for some reason. The people around him first told him that the visitor was the son of his servant Lyu Wei. After Lyu Wen entered the door, he got out of bed, patted Lyu Wen's back and said, "You are the son of Lyu Wei."

古文：温泫然降阶，田亦不止。
现代文：吕温含着眼泪走下台阶向他告辞，田也不挽留他。
English: With tears in his eyes, Lü Wen walked down the steps to say goodbye to him, and Tian did not hold him back.

古文：其真朴如此。
现代文：田就是这样直朴单纯自然。
English: That's how simple, straightforward and natural rice farming is.

古文：母为喜王寺尼，尼众皆呼先生为师。
现代文：田的母亲是喜王寺的僧尼，众僧尼都称呼田先生为师傅。
English: Tian's mother was a monk and nun at Xiwang Temple, and all the monks and nuns called Mr. Tian their master.

古文：常日负薪两束奉母，或有故不及往，即弟子代送之。
现代文：田常常是每天背两捆柴禾送给母亲，有时因故来不及去，就让弟子代为送去。
English: Tian would often carry two bundles of firewood to her mother every day. Sometimes, when she was too late to go, she would ask a disciple to take her place.

古文：或传寺尼早起见一虎在田媪门外走，因以告媪。
现代文：传说寺尼早上起来看见一只老虎在田的母亲门前走，便去告诉她老人家。
English: According to legend, Terani woke up in the morning and saw a tiger walking in front of her mother's door, so she went to tell the old man.

古文：曰： 止应是小师使送柴来，不足畏也。 
现代文：田老太太说： 那只能是小师傅的使者给我送柴来，用不着害怕。 
English: Old Mrs. Tian said, "It can only be the messenger of the little master bringing me firewood. There is no need to be afraid.

古文：蒋君混元之器，虽不及田，而修持趣尚，亦相类。
现代文：蒋混元之才器虽然赶不上田，但是修善操持志趣崇尚，也与他相似。
English: Although Jiang Jianyuan's talent is not as good as Tian's, he is also similar to him in cultivating good conduct and advocating interests.

古文：兄事于田，号为莫逆。
现代文：他以兄长事于田，称为莫逆之交。
English: He took his elder brother to work in the fields and was known as a loyal friend.

古文：蒋始善符术，自晦其道，人莫之知。
现代文：蒋原来善长符箓之术，因为他隐藏自己的道术，所以别人都不知道。
English: Jiang was originally good at the art of the long-tailed phoenix, because he hid his own Taoism, so others did not know.

古文：后居九真观，曾命弟子至县市斋物，不及期还，诘其故，云于山口见一巨兽当路，良久不去，以故迟滞。
现代文：后来居住九真观，曾命弟子到县城买斋物，弟子没有及时返回，蒋盘问原因，弟子说在山口见一只巨兽挡道，好长时间没有离去，所以回来晚了。
English: Later, when Jiu Zhen Guan was in residence, he ordered a disciple to go to the county seat to buy food. The disciple did not return in time, and Jiang asked the reason. The disciple said that he saw a huge beast blocking the road in the mountain pass and did not leave for a long time, so he came back late.

古文：蒋曰： 我在此庇伊已多时，何敢如是？ 
现代文：蒋说： 我在这里庇护它已经多时，它怎么敢于这样做？ 
English: Jiang said: I have been sheltering it here for a long time, how dare it do this?

古文：即以一符置所见处。
现代文：便把一张符放在弟子所见有巨兽的那个地方。
English: He then placed a mark on the spot where the disciple had seen the beast.

古文：明日，兽踣符下。
现代文：第二天，那个巨兽竟倒毙在符下。
English: The next day, the giant beast actually fell to its death.

古文：蒋闻之曰： 我本以符却之，使其不来，岂知不能自脱。
现代文：蒋听说之后说： 我本想用符把它赶跑，使它不要再来，哪里知道它竟不能逃脱。
English: After hearing this, Jiang said, "I wanted to chase it away with a flag so that it wouldn't come back, but who knew it couldn't escape."

古文：既以害物，安用术为？ 
现代文：既然符术可以伤害生物，这法术还有何用？ 
English: Since the charm can harm creatures, what is the use of this spell?

古文：取符本焚之，自此绝不复留意。
现代文：他取出一本符来点火烧了，从此之后他绝不再留心于此道。
English: He took out a book of omens and lit it on fire, and from then on he never paid attention to it again.

古文：有欧阳平者。行业亦高，又兄事蒋，于田君即邻入室。
现代文：有个叫欧阳平的，道业也很高，他又以蒋为兄长，对于田君就算是刚刚接近入室。
English: There was a man named Ouyang Ping, who was also highly skilled in Taoism. He also had Chiang as his elder brother. For Tian Jun, he was just about to enter the house.

古文：平一夕梦三金炉自天而下。若有所召。
现代文：欧阳平在一天晚上梦见三只金炉从天而降，好像要召见什么。
English: One night, Ouyang Ping dreamed that three golden stoves fell from the sky, as if to summon something.

古文：既寤，谮告人曰。二先生不久去矣，我继之。 
现代文：醒来后，偷偷地告诉别人说： 两位先生不久就要离开人世了，我也要接着离去。 
English: After waking up, he secretly told others: "The two gentlemen will soon pass away, and I will follow.

古文：俄而田蜕去，蒋次之，平亦逝。
现代文：很快，田即死去，蒋次之，欧阳平也逝去了。
English: Soon after, Tian died, followed by Jiang and Ouyang Ping.

古文：桐柏山陈寡言、徐灵府、冯云翼三人，皆田之弟子，衡山周混沌，蒋之门人。
现代文：桐柏山的陈寡言、徐灵府、冯云翼三个人，都是田良逸的弟子，衡山的周混沌，是蒋含弘的门人。
English: The three men of Tongbaishan, Chen Jiyan, Xu Lingfu, and Feng Yunyi, were all disciples of Tian Liangyi, and Zhou Chaos of Hengshan was a disciple of Jiang Hanhong.

古文：陈徐在东南，品第比田蒋，而冯在欧阳之列。
现代文：陈与徐在东南一带，品位名声可与田蒋比，而冯云翼应在欧阳平之列。
English: Chen and Xu are in the southeast, and their reputation is comparable to that of Tian Jiang, while Feng Yunyi should be among the best in Ouyangping.

古文：周自幼入道，利法清严，今为南岳首冠。
现代文：周混沌自幼入道，利法清严，如今是南岳的魁首。
English: Zhou Chaos has been a disciple since he was a child, and he is now the leader of Nanyue.

