古文：十有六年春正月，公会宋公、蔡侯、卫侯于曹。
现代文：十六年春正月，桓公在曹国与宋公、蔡侯、卫侯会面。
English: In the first month of the 16th year of the Spring, Prince Kan met with Prince Song, Prince Cai and Prince Wei in Cao.

古文：夏四月，公会宋公、卫侯、陈侯、蔡侯伐郑。
现代文：夏季四月，桓公与宋公、卫侯、陈侯、蔡侯联合进攻郑国。
English: In the summer of April, Huan Gong and Song Gong, Wei Hou, Chen Hou, and Cai Hou jointly attacked Zheng Guo.

古文：秋七月，公至自伐郑。
现代文：秋季七月，桓公进攻郑国回到国内。
English: In the autumn of July, Emperor Kan attacked Zheng and returned to China.

古文：冬，城向。
现代文：冬季，在向地筑城。
English: In winter, the city is built towards the ground.

古文：十有一月，卫侯朔出奔齐。
现代文：十一月，卫惠公朔逃到齐国。
English: In November, Wei Huigong fled to Qi.

古文：十六年春正月，会于曹，谋伐郑也。
现代文：十六年春季，正月，鲁桓公和宋庄公、蔡桓侯、卫惠公在曹国会见，又策划进攻郑国。
English: In the spring of the 16th year, in the first month, Lu Huan and Song Zhuang, Cai Huan and Wei Hui met in Cao, and planned to attack Zheng.

古文：夏，伐郑。
现代文：夏季，进攻郑国。
English: Zheng attacked in the summer.

古文：秋七月，公至自伐郑，以饮至之礼也。
现代文：秋季七月，桓公进攻郑国回到国内，举行了祭告宗庙、大宴臣下的礼仪。
English: In the autumn of July, when Emperor Kan attacked Zheng and returned to China, he held a ceremony to celebrate the founding of the temple and a grand banquet for his vassals.

古文：冬，城向。
现代文：冬季，在向地筑城。
English: In winter, the city is built towards the ground.

古文：书时也。初，卫宣公烝于夷姜，生急子，属诸右公子。
现代文：《春秋》所以记载这件事，是由于不妨碍农时。当初，卫宣公和父亲的姬妾夷姜私通，生了急子。
English: "Spring and Autumn" recorded this event because it did not interfere with farming time. At first, We Xuan Gong and his father's concubine, Yijang, had an affair and gave birth to a premature baby.

古文：为之娶于齐而美，公取之，生寿及朔，属寿于左公子。
现代文：卫宣公把急子托给右公子抚养，又为他在齐国娶妻，这个女人很美，卫宣公就自己娶了她，生了寿和朔，把寿嘱托给左公子。
English: Wei Xuan Gong entrusted the care of his son to his right son, and married a beautiful woman for him in Qi. Wei Xuan Gong married her himself, and gave birth to Shouhe Shuo, entrusting his life to his left son.

古文：夷姜缢。
现代文：夷姜自己吊死了。
English: He Jiang hanged himself.

古文：宣姜与公子朔构急子。
现代文：宣姜和公子朔诬陷急子。
English: Xuan Jiang and his son-in-law Shuo framed the child.

古文：公使诸齐，使盗待诸莘，将杀之。
现代文：卫宣公派急子出使到齐国，指使坏人在莘地等着，打算杀死他。
English: Wei Xuan Gong sent a courier to Qi Province to tell the villain to wait at the crossroads, intending to kill him.

古文：寿子告之，使行。
现代文：寿子把这件事告诉急子，让他逃走。
English: Hisako tells this to Kyuko and lets him escape.

古文：不可，曰： 弃父之命，恶用子矣！
现代文：急子不同意说： 丢掉父亲的命令，哪里还用得着儿子！
English: Chieko disagreed and said: Throw away the father's order, what need is there for a son!

古文：及行，饮以酒。
现代文：如果世界上有没有父亲的国家就可以逃到那里去了。 
English: If there is a fatherless country in the world, they can flee there.

古文：寿子载其旌以先，盗杀之。
现代文：等到临走，寿子用酒把急子灌醉。
English: When it was time to leave, Shouko got Kyuko drunk with wine.

古文：急子至，曰： 我之求也。
现代文：寿子车上插着太子的旗帜走在前面，坏人就杀了寿子。急子赶到，说： 他们要杀的是我。
English: The prince's flag was displayed on the prince's carriage as it went ahead, and the villain killed the prince. Kyuko arrived and said, "They want to kill me."

古文：此何罪？
现代文：他有什么罪？
English: What is his crime?

古文：请杀我乎！ 
现代文：请杀死我吧！ 
English: Please kill me!

古文：又杀之。
现代文：坏人又杀了急子。
English: The villain has killed Keiko again.

古文：二公子故怨惠公。
现代文：左、右两公子因此怨恨惠公。
English: As a result, the two boys on the left and right resent Megumi.

古文：十一月，左公子洩、右公子职立公子黔牟。
现代文：十一月，左公子泄、右公子职立公子黔牟为国君。
English: In November, the left courtier, Ketsu, and the right courtier, Fuchitsukushi, appointed the prince, Shimu, as the sovereign.

古文：惠公奔齐。
现代文：卫惠公逃亡到齐国。
English: Emperor Wei fled to Qi.

