古文：王应熊，字非熊，巴县人。
现代文：王应熊，字非熊，四川巴县人。
English: Wang Ying Xiong, nicknamed "Non Xiong," is from Bacheng County, Sichuan.

古文：万历四十一年进士。天启中，历官詹事，以忧归。
现代文：万历四十一年进士，天启年间，担任詹事，因父母丧礼回家。
English: He entered the priesthood in the 41st year of the lunar calendar. During the year of the apocalypse, he served as a Zhanji, and returned home because of his parents' funeral.

古文：崇祯三年，召拜礼部右侍郎。
现代文：崇祯三年召见任命为礼部右侍郎。
English: Three years later, he was summoned and appointed as the Right Attendant of the Ministry of Ceremonies.

古文：明年冬，帝遣宦官出守边镇，应熊上言： 陛下焦劳求治，何一不倚信群臣，乃群臣不肯任劳任怨，致陛下万不获已，权遣近侍监理。
现代文：第二年冬天，皇帝派宦官出守边镇，王应熊上疏说： 陛下焦躁烦劳为求得政绩，为什么不一一依靠群臣呢？群臣不肯任劳任怨，使陛下万不得已，权且派遣身旁近侍监督管理。
English: In the winter of the second year, the emperor sent eunuchs to guard the border town, and Wang Yingxiong said: His Majesty is anxious and troublesome in order to obtain political achievements, why not rely on his ministers one by one? The ministers refused to work for him, so that his Majesty had no choice but to send his close attendants to supervise and manage.

古文：书之青史，谓有圣明不世出之主，而群工不克仰承，直当愧死。
现代文：书写在青史中，说有圣明不出世的皇上，但是群臣不能仰望其成功，真应当羞愧而死。
English: It is written in the history of the youth that there was an emperor who did not live to see the light of day, but the courtiers could not look up to his success, and they really should have died of shame.

古文：且自神宗以来，士习人心不知职掌何事，有举《会典》律例告之者，反讶为申、韩刑名。
现代文：况且从神宗以来，士族官吏竟然不知道自己应当掌管什么事，有人举出《会典》的律例告诉他，反而诧异以为是申不害、韩非的刑名之学。
English: Moreover, from the time of the Shinshu sect, the officers and officials of the warrior class did not even know what they should be in charge of. Someone brought up the rules of the "Code" to tell him, but he was surprised and thought it was not harmful, but the study of Han Fei's criminal name.

古文：近日诸臣之病，非临事不担当之故，乃平时未讲求之过也；亦非因循于夙习之故，实愆忘于旧章之过也。 
现代文：近来各臣的缺点，不是事到临头不敢承担的缘故，而是平时没有严格要求的过失；也不是因循旧习的缘故，实际是遗忘了过去的规章制度的过错。 
English: The shortcomings of the ministers in recent times are not due to the fact that they are afraid to take responsibility, but the fault of not having strict requirements in peacetime; nor is it due to old habits, but is actually the fault of forgetting the rules and regulations of the past.

古文：语皆迎帝意，遂蒙眷注。
现代文：话语都迎合皇帝的意图，于是受到皇帝的特别照顾宠爱。
English: The words were all in line with the emperor's intention, so he received the emperor's special care and favor.

古文：尝酗酒，诟尚书黄汝良，为给事中冯元飙所劾，汝良为之隐，乃解。
现代文：曾经酗酒，骂尚书黄汝良，被给事中冯元飙揭发了。黄汝良替他隐瞒，事情才算排解了。
English: Huang Ruliang once drank heavily and cursed Shangshu Huang Ruliang, which was revealed by Feng Yuan Rong during the incident. Huang Ruliang hid it for him, and the matter was resolved.

古文：五年，进左侍郎，元飙发其贪污状，帝不省。
现代文：崇祯五年提升左侍郎，冯元飙揭发他贪污的情形，皇帝不察。
English: In the five years since Chongzhen promoted Zuo Jirong, Feng Yuan Rong revealed the circumstances of his corruption, but the emperor did not notice.

古文：应熊博学多才，熟谙典故，而性谿刻强很，人多畏之。
现代文：王应熊博学多才，熟知典故，而性格刚强，很不讲情面，很多人都怕他。
English: Wang Ying Xiong is an erudite and versatile person, familiar with allusions, and has a strong character, very unsympathetic, and many people are afraid of him.

古文：周延儒、温体仁援以自助，咸与亲善。
现代文：周延儒、温体仁拉拢他帮助自己，都跟他很友好。
English: Zhou Yanru and Wen Tianzhen coaxed him to help themselves, and they were very friendly with him.

古文：及延儒罢，体仁援益力。
现代文：等到周延儒被罢免，温体仁拉拢他更加卖力。
English: When Zhou Yanru was ousted, Wen Tingren tried even harder to win him over.

古文：六年冬，廷推阁臣，应熊望轻不与，特旨擢礼部尚书兼东阁大学士，与何吾驺并入参机务。
现代文：崇祯六年冬天，朝廷推举阁臣，王应熊声望不够没有被推举，皇帝特别下旨提拔他为礼部尚书兼东阁大学士，跟何吾驺一起参与机要。
English: In the winter of the sixth year of the reign of Emperor Chongzhen, the imperial court nominated a cabinet minister, but Wang Yingxiong was not nominated because he was not famous enough. The emperor specially issued an order to promote him as a member of the Ministry of Ceremonies and a scholar of Donggak University, and he participated in the ceremony together with He Wuxi.

古文：命下，朝野胥骇。
现代文：命令下达，朝廷内外都吃了一惊。
English: When the order was issued, both inside and outside the court were taken aback.

古文：给事中章正宸劾之曰： 应熊强愎自张，纵横为习，小才足覆短，小辨足济贪，今大用，必且芟除异己，报复恩仇，混淆毁誉。
现代文：给事中章正宸弹劾他说： 王应熊刚愎自用，一向无所忌惮，小才足以护短，小辩足以助贪。现在让他担当大任，一定会铲除异己，报复仇敌，混淆是非。
English: On the subject of Zhang Zhengqi's impeachment, he said: "Wang Ying Xiong has always been unscrupulous in his use of violence. A small talent is enough to protect a shortcoming, and a small argument is enough to aid corruption. Now let him take on a big task, and he will surely eradicate dissidents, take revenge on enemies, and confuse right and wrong.

古文：况狼籍封靡，沦于市行。
现代文：请皇上收回成命，另外选择忠良之人。
English: Ask the emperor to revoke his order, and choose someone else who is loyal.

古文：愿收还成命，别选忠良。且讹言谓左右先容，由他途以进，使天下薰心捷足之徒驰骋而起，为圣德累不小。 
现代文：而且传言说皇帝优待左右的亲信，通过走后门得到提拔，让天下利欲熏心、捷足先登的小人日益活跃，连累圣德不小啊。 
English: Moreover, it is rumored that the emperor gave preferential treatment to his cronies on the right and the left, and promoted them through the back door, so that the world's greedy, quick-footed villains are increasingly active, which is not a small implication of sanctity.

古文：帝大怒，下正宸诏狱，削籍归。
现代文：皇帝大怒，下诏将章正宸打入监狱，剥夺官籍赶回家。
English: The emperor was furious and ordered Zhang Zhengya to be put in prison, stripped of his official status and sent home.

古文：有劝应熊为文彦博者，应熊咈然，佯具疏引退，语多愤激。
现代文：有人劝王应熊做文彦博，王应熊很不高兴，假装上疏请求辞职。
English: Some people advised Wang Yingxiong to do Fenyangbo. Wang Yingxiong was very unhappy and pretended to resign.

古文：屡为给事中范淑泰、御史吴履中所攻，帝皆不问。
现代文：有很多激愤的话，多次被给事中范淑泰、御史吴履中攻击，皇帝都不过问。
English: There was a lot of indignation, and he was repeatedly attacked by Fan Shu-tai and Gu Shi Wu-lu during the incident. The emperor did not ask questions.

古文：八年正月，流贼陷凤阳，毁皇陵。
现代文：崇祯八年正月，流贼攻陷凤阳，捣毁皇陵。
English: In the first month of the eighth year of the Chongzhen Emperor's reign, the rebels invaded Fengyang and destroyed the imperial mausoleum.

古文：巡抚杨一鹏，应熊座主；巡按吴振缨，体仁姻也。
现代文：巡抚杨一鹏是王应熊的座主，巡按吴振缨是温体仁的亲家。
English: The inspector Yang Yipeng is the host of Wang Ying Xiong, and the inspector Wu Zhenqi is the relative of Wen Tianzhen.

古文：二人恐帝震怒，留一鹏、振缨疏未上，俟恢复报同奏之，遂拟旨令抚按戴罪。
现代文：二人担心皇帝震怒，扣留杨一鹏、吴振缨的奏疏不报告皇帝。等到收复的报告来后，同时上报。于是草拟圣旨命令巡抚、巡按戴罪立功。
English: Fearing the emperor's wrath, the two men did not inform the emperor of the delay in detaining Yang Yipeng and Wu Zhenyao. They waited until the report of the recovery came, and then reported it at the same time. So they drafted the Holy Will to order the governor and the patrol to bear the crime and do good deeds.

古文：主事郑尔说、胡江交章诋应熊、体仁朋比误国，帝怒谪二人，而给事中何楷、许誉卿、范淑泰，御史张缵曾、吴履中、张肯堂言之不已。
现代文：主事郑尔说、胡江轮流上疏诋毁王应熊、温体仁狼狈为奸，耽误国事，皇帝愤怒地将他二人贬职，而给事中何楷、许誉卿、范淑泰，御史张缵霄、吴履中、张肯堂不停地发表意见。
English: Director Zheng Er said that Hu Jiang took turns slandering Wang Ying Xiong and Wen Tie Renzhong as traitors, delaying state affairs. The emperor angrily demoted the two of them, while He Kai, Xu Rongqing, Fan Shuyetai, and Gu Shi Zhang Rongxiao, Wu Lizhong, and Zhang Kendang constantly expressed their opinions.

古文：淑泰言： 一鹏《恢复疏》以正月二十一日，《核察失事情形疏》以正月二十八日，天下有未失事先恢复者哉？
现代文：范淑泰说： 杨一鹏的《恢复疏》在正月二十一日，《核察失事情形疏》在正月二十八日，天底下还有尚未出事就先恢复的吗？
English: Fan Shu-tai said: Yang Yipeng's "Recovery" was on the 21st day of the first month, and "Nuclear Detection and Loss of Things" was on the 28th day of the first month. Is there anything under heaven that has not yet been restored?

古文：应熊改填月日，欺诳之罪难辞。 
现代文：王应熊改填日、月，难逃欺诈瞒骗的罪名。 
English: Wang Ying Xiong changed the date and month, and was convicted of fraud.

古文：且劾其他受贿事。
现代文：并且揭发他接受贿赂的事情。
English: And expose him for accepting bribes.

古文：帝顾应熊厚，皆不听，而镌楷、缵曾秩，慰谕应熊。
现代文：皇帝对王应熊特别关照，都不听，而降了何楷、张缵霄的官级，安慰王应熊。
English: The emperor paid special attention to Wang Yingxiong and did not listen to him, but lowered the official rank of He Kai and Zhang Xixiao to comfort Wang Yingxiong.

古文：应熊亦屡疏辩，谓： 座主门生，谊不容薄，敢辞比之名。
现代文：王应熊也多次上疏争辩，说： 座主门生，交情不能太薄，冒昧地推辞勾结的罪名。
English: Wang Yingxiong also repeatedly raised the issue of collusion, saying: "A protégé of the host should not have too little friendship, and should not be so presumptuous as to dismiss the charge of collusion.

古文：票拟实臣起草，敢辞误之罪。 
现代文：票拟实际是微臣起草的，冒昧推辞误国的罪责。 
English: The fake ballot was actually drafted by a Weizhen official, who had the temerity to deny any responsibility for misleading the country.

古文：楷益愤，屡疏纠之，最后复疏言： 故事，奏章非发抄，外人无由闻；非奉旨，邸报不许抄传。
现代文：何楷更加愤怒，多次上疏检举他，最后又上疏说： 按过去惯例，奏疏不抄发，外人是无法知道的，不接到圣旨，邸报是不许传抄的。
English: He was even angrier. He was reprimanded several times, and finally he was reprimanded again, saying, "According to the past practice, it is not allowed to copy the residence newspaper unless it is copied and sent, and it is not possible for outsiders to know about it, and it is not allowed to copy the residence newspaper unless it is received.

古文：臣疏六月初十日上，十四日始奉明旨，应熊乃于十三日奏辩，旨尚未下，应熊何由知？臣不解者一。
现代文：微臣的奏疏六月初十日上报，十四日才接到皇上的圣旨，王应熊却在十三日奏辩。圣旨尚未下发，王应熊如何知道，这是微臣不理解之一。
English: On the 10th day of early June, the report of the report of the report of the report of the report of the report of the report of the report of the report of the report of the report of the report of the report of the report of the report of the report of the report of the report of the report of the report of the report of the report of the report of the report of the report of the report of the report of the report of the report of the report of the report of the report of the report of the report of the report of the report of the report

古文：且旨下必由六科抄发。
现代文：况圣旨下发一定要由六科抄写分发。
English: The holy edict must be copied and distributed by the Six Science Circles.

古文：臣疏十四日下，而百户赵光修先送锦衣堂上官，则疏可不由科抄矣。
现代文：微臣的奏疏十四日下发，而百户赵光修先送给锦衣堂上官，那么奏疏可以不经过科部抄写了。
English: On the fourteenth day of the month, Zhao Guangxu of the Hundred Households first sent the Sonography of the Minor Subjects to the Superior of Jinling Hall, so the Sonography could be copied without going through the Science Department.

古文：臣不解者二。 
现代文：这是微臣不理解之二。 
English: This is the second thing Weixin doesn't understand.

古文：应熊始惧，具疏引罪。
现代文：王应熊才害怕起来，上疏承认错误。
English: Wang Yingxiong was scared and admitted his mistake.

古文：帝下其家人及直日中书七人于狱。
现代文：皇帝将他的家人和值日中书七人法办。
English: The emperor punished his family and the seven people who were on duty at the time.

古文：狱具，家人戍边，中书贬二秩。
现代文：官司齐备，将家人充边，中书贬职二级。
English: The officials are ready, the family members have been filled in, and the Chinese book has been downgraded to the second level.

古文：应熊乃屡疏乞休去，乘传赐道里费，行人护行。
现代文：王应熊于是多次上疏乞求辞职，乘驿车回家，赐给他旅差费，派行人护送。
English: Wang Ying Xiong then repeatedly begged Shang Su to resign, took a tuk-tuk home, gave him travel expenses, and sent a pedestrian escort.

古文：帝亦知应熊不协人望，特己所拔擢，不欲以人言去也。
现代文：皇帝也知道王应熊跟别人关系不融洽，只不过是自己亲手提拔的，不想因为别人的议论赶走他。
English: The emperor also knew that Wang Ying Xiong's relationship with others was not harmonious, but he had promoted him with his own hands and did not want to drive him away because of others' discussions.

古文：十二年遣官存问。
现代文：崇祯十二年派官员去调查。
English: Chongzhen sent officials to investigate in 2012.

古文：其弟应熙横于乡，乡人诣阙击登闻鼓，列状至四百八十余条，赃一百七十余万，词连应熊。
现代文：他的弟弟王应熙横行乡里，同乡人到官府门前击鼓伸冤，列举罪状多达四百八十多条，窝藏赃款一百七十万两，言词牵连到王应熊。
English: His younger brother, Wang Yingxi, went rampant in the village. Fellow villagers went to the government office to play drums to seek justice, listing more than 480 charges, hiding 1.7 million taels of stolen money, and implicating Wang Yingxiong.

古文：诏下抚按勘究。
现代文：下诏让抚按调查追究。
English: The next step is to investigate according to the investigation.

古文：会应熊复召，事得解。
现代文：正好王应熊又一次被召回，事情得以消解。
English: Just as Wang Yingxiong was recalled again, the matter was resolved.

古文：时延儒再相，患言者攻己，独念应熊刚很，可藉以制之，力言于帝。
现代文：这时周延儒第二次为相，担心别人攻击自己，唯独惦念王应熊刚强，可以利用制服别人，极力向皇帝推荐。
English: At this time, Zhou Yanru took the lead for the second time, fearing that others would attack him. However, he thought that Wang Ying Xiong was strong and could use it to subdue others, and he strongly recommended him to the emperor.

古文：十五年冬，遣行人召应熊。
现代文：崇祯十五年冬天，派行人召见王应熊。
English: In the winter of the fifteenth year of Chongzhen, Wang Yingxiong was summoned by a party of passers-by.

古文：明年六月，应熊未至，延儒已罢归。
现代文：第二年六月，王应熊还没有到，周延儒已被罢免回家。
English: In June of the following year, Wang Yingxiong had not yet arrived, and Zhou Yanru had already been sent home.

古文：给事中龚鼎孳密疏言： 陛下召应熊，必因其秉国之日，众口交攻，以为孤立无党；孰知其同年密契，肺腑深联，恃延儒在也。
现代文：给事中龚鼎孳密奏说： 陛下召见王应熊，一定是因为他主持朝政的时候，众人轮流攻击他，以为他孤立没有同党，谁知他跟周延儒交往密切，肝胆相照。
English: On the matter, Zou Dingqian said: Your Majesty summoned Wang Yingxiong, it must be because when he presided over the government, people took turns to attack him, thinking that he was isolated and had no party. Who knows if he was in close contact with Zhou Yanru and had the same heart and soul.

古文：臣去年入都，闻应熊贿延儒为再召计。
现代文：微臣去年进入北京，听说王应熊贿赂周延儒作为再次召回朝廷的阴谋。
English: Last year, Weichen entered Beijing and heard that Wang Yingxiong had bribed Zhou Yanru as part of a plot to recall the imperial court.

古文：延儒对众大言，至尊欲起巴县。
现代文：周延儒对大家宣称，皇上将要起用巴县人。
English: Zhou Yanru declared to everyone that the emperor would appoint someone from Ba County.

古文：巴县者，应熊也。
现代文：巴县人即指王应熊。
English: Ba County people refer to Wang Ying Xiong.

古文：未几，召命果下。
现代文：不久，召见王应熊的命令果然下达。
English: Soon, Wang Yingxiong's summons was issued.

古文：以政本重地，私相援引，是延儒虽去犹未去，天下事何堪再误！ 
现代文：政府本是重要的地方，他们却互相援引私党，这时周延儒人虽然离开了，但他的影响还存在，国家大事怎经得起再耽误了！ 
English: The government is supposed to be an important place, but they invoke private parties against each other. At this time, although Zhou Yan Confucian left, his influence still exists. How can a national event stand any more delays!

古文：帝得疏心动，留未下。
现代文：皇帝看到奏疏心里怀疑起来，留下奏疏没有下发。
English: When the emperor saw Song So, he became suspicious and left Song So without a haircut.

古文：已而延儒被逮，不即赴，俟应熊至，始尾之行。
现代文：不久周延儒被逮捕，却仍滞留京城，等王应熊来，一同前往。
English: Soon after, Zhou Yanru was arrested, but he remained in Beijing, waiting for Wang Yingxiong to come and go with him.

古文：一日，帝顾中官曰： 延儒何久不至？ 
现代文：一天，皇帝回头对宦官说： 周延儒为什么还不来？ 
English: One day, the emperor turned to the eunuch and said, "Why hasn't Zhou Yanru come yet?

古文：对曰： 需王应熊先入耳。 
现代文：回答说： 等王应熊先来。 
English: And he answered, Let the king arise first.

古文：帝益疑之。
现代文：皇帝更加怀疑了。
English: The emperor became even more suspicious.

古文：九月，应熊至，宿朝房。请入对，不许；请归田，许之，乃惭沮而返。
现代文：九月，王应熊到京，住在朝房里，请求朝见皇帝，不同意，请求回去种田，皇帝同意了，他于是惭愧沮丧地回去了。
English: In September, Wang Ying Xiong arrived in Beijing and stayed in the imperial room. He asked to see the emperor, but was turned down. He asked to go back and farm. The emperor agreed, and he returned ashamed and dejected.

古文：十七年三月，京师陷。
现代文：崇祯十七年三月，京师失陷。
English: In March of the seventeenth year of Chongzhen, the capital fell.

古文：五月，福王立于南京。
现代文：五月福王在南京即位。
English: In May, King Fu ascended to the throne in Nanjing.

古文：八月，张献忠陷四川。
现代文：八月，张献忠占领四川。
English: In August, Zhang Xianzhong occupied Sichuan.

古文：乃改应熊兵部尚书兼文渊阁大学士，总督川、湖、云、贵军务，专办川寇。
现代文：于是改任王应熊为兵部尚书兼文渊阁大学士，总督川、湖、云、贵军务，专门对付四川的农民军。
English: As a result, Wang Yingxiong was appointed as the Military Secretary of the Ministry of Military Affairs and a scholar of Wenyuan Pavilion University, and the Governor of Sichuan, Hubei, Yunnan and Guizhou Military Affairs, specifically to deal with the peasant army in Sichuan.

古文：时川中诸郡，惟遵义未下，应熊入守之，缟素誓师，开幕府，传檄讨贼。
现代文：这时四川各府，只有遵义还在政府手中，王应熊进入遵义驻守。白衣誓师，开幕府，传布檄文声讨敌人。
English: At this time, of all the prefectures in Sichuan, only Zunyi was still in the hands of the government. Wang Ying Xiong entered Zunyi and garrisoned it. A white-clad oath-taker, he opened the prefectural government, and disseminated proclamations denouncing the enemy.

古文：明年奏上方略，请敕川陕、湖贵两总督，郧阳、湖广、贵州、云南四巡抚出师合讨，并劾四川巡抚马体乾纵兵淫掠，革职提问。
现代文：第二年向皇帝报告方法谋略，请求下令川陕、湖贵二总督，郧阳、湖广、贵州、云南四巡抚出师联合讨伐。并揭发四川巡抚马乾纵容士兵奸淫抢劫，将他革职审问。
English: In the second year, he reported to the emperor on methods and strategies, and requested that the two governors of Sichuan and Shaanxi and Hugu, and the four governors of Poyang, Hukang, Guizhou and Yunnan should be ordered to form a joint expedition. He also exposed the governor of Sichuan, Ma Qian, for conniving with soldiers to commit rape and robbery, and he was dismissed from his post and interrogated.

古文：命未达而南都亡，体乾居职如故。
现代文：命令未下达而南京失陷，马乾仍旧做他的四川巡抚。
English: When the order was not given and Nanjing fell, Ma Qian still became his Sichuan governor.

古文：已而献忠死，诸将杨展等各据州县自雄，应熊不能制。其部将曾英最有功，复重庆，屡破贼兵。
现代文：不久张献忠死，杨展等将领各自占据州县称霸一方，王应熊无能为力，他的部将曾英功劳最大，收复重庆，多次打败敌人。
English: Soon after, Zhang Xianzhong died, and Yang Zhan and other generals each occupied one side of the state and county hegemony. Wang Yingxiong was powerless. His subordinate Zeng Ying made the greatest contribution, recovered Chongqing, and defeated the enemy many times.

古文：王祥亦出师綦江相犄角。
现代文：王祥亦从綦江出师，跟曾英形成掎角之势。
English: Wang Xiang also came from the Li River and formed a rivalry with Zeng Ying.

古文：祥才武不及英，而应熊委任过之。
现代文：王祥的才能武力赶不上曾英，但王应熊重用王祥超过了曾英。
English: Wang Xiang's talent and strength could not keep up with Zeng Ying, but Wang Ying Xiong used Wang Xiang more than Zeng Ying.

古文：永明王以原官召之，为给事中金堡、大理寺少卿赵昱等所攻。
现代文：又过了一年的十月，张献忠的余党孙可望、李定国等人南奔重庆，曾英战死。孙可望攻占遵义，王应熊逃往永宁山中，不久死在毕节卫。
English: A year later, in October, Zhang Xianzhong's remaining followers, including Sun Kuan and Li Dingguo, fled south to Chongqing. Zeng Ying was killed in the battle. Sun Kuan was expected to capture Zunyi, while Wang Yingxiong fled to the middle of the Yongning Mountains and soon died in Bijiewei.

古文：引疾辞去，卒于家。张至发，淄川人。
现代文：他的一个儿子王阳禧，在战争中死亡，最终没有后代。张至发，淄川人。
English: One of his sons, Wang Yangxi, died in the war and eventually had no descendants.

古文：万历二十九年进士。
现代文：万历二十九年进士。
English: He entered the priesthood in the 29th year of Wanli.

古文：历知玉田、遵化。
现代文：历任玉田、遵化知县。
English: Successive governors of Tamada and Zunkaichi.

古文：行取，授礼部主事，改御史。
现代文：经人推荐考察调任京官，授职礼部主事，改任御史。
English: He was recommended to be transferred to the Beijing office, the head of the conferment ceremony department, and was reassigned to the imperial historian.

古文：时齐、楚、浙三党方炽，至发，齐党也，上疏陈内降之弊。因言： 陛下恶结党，而秉揆者先不能超然门户外。
现代文：当时齐、楚、浙三大派系势力正兴盛。张至发是齐派，上疏陈述内耗的弊病，于是说： 陛下讨厌拉帮结派，而掌权的宰相先不能超然独立于门户之外。
English: At that time, the three major factions of Qi, Chu and Zhejiang were flourishing. Zhang Zifan was a Qi faction, Shang Suo stated the ills of internal consumption, and then said: His Majesty hates to pull together factions, and the prime minister in power cannot be independent from the portal.

古文：顷读科臣疏云： 日来慰谕辅臣温旨，辅臣与司礼自相参定，方听御批。 
现代文：前不久读到科臣的奏疏说： 近来慰谕辅臣温旨，辅臣跟司礼监自相参定，才接受皇上的御批。 
English: Not long ago, I read Kosen's report, which said, "Recently, it is necessary to solicit the consent of the vassal, and the vassal must consult with the chief etiquette inspector before accepting the emperor's approval.

古文：果若人言，天下事尚可问耶？ 
现代文：果然如此，国家大事还能管理吗？ 
English: Is this really the case, and can national affairs still be managed?

古文：语皆刺叶向高，帝不报。
现代文：话语都是指责叶向高的，皇帝不理睬。
English: The words were all accusations against Ye Xianggao, but the emperor ignored them.

古文：时言官争排东林，户部郎中李朴不平，抗疏争。
现代文：当时言官争相排斥东林党人，户部郎中李朴不平，上疏争辩。
English: At that time, officials were vying to exclude the Donglin Party members, and the head of the household, Li Pak, was not happy and argued with Shang Su.

古文：至发遂劾朴背公死党，诳语欺君，帝亦不报。
现代文：张至发于是弹劾李朴背叛公理，庇护同党，谎言欺君，皇帝也不理睬。
English: Zhang Zhifa then impeached Li Pak for betraying justice, sheltering the same party, lying and deceiving the emperor, and the emperor ignored it.

古文：寻出按河南。福王之藩洛阳，中使相望于道。至发以礼裁之，无敢横。
现代文：不久派出巡按河南，福王的封地洛阳，宦官的势力猖獗，张至发以礼裁决，没有人敢横行霸道。
English: He soon sent patrols to Henan and Luoyang, the fiefdom of King Fu, where the power of eunuchs was rampant. Zhang Zhifa issued rulings with courtesy, and no one dared to be domineering.

古文：宗禄不给，为置义田，以赡贫者。
现代文：宗禄得不到供给，为福王置义田，救济贫困的人。
English: Zonglu could not get supplies, so he set up Yitian for the King of Good Fortune to help the poor.

古文：四十三年，豫省饥，请留饷备振，又请改折漕粮，皆报闻。
现代文：万历四十三年，河南省发生饥荒，请求留饷用作救济，又请求漕粮改折，皇上都予回答，称病回家休养。
English: In the forty-third year of Wanli, a famine occurred in Henan Province. The emperor replied that he was ill and went home to recuperate.

古文：还朝，引病归。天启元年，进大理寺丞。
现代文：天启元年提升为大理寺丞。
English: He was promoted to Dariji-jo in 1891.

古文：三年请终养。
现代文：三年请求回家侍养老人。
English: Three years of pleading to go home and take care of the elderly.

古文：魏忠贤党荐之，矫旨令吏部擢用，至发方养亲不出。
现代文：魏忠贤党羽举荐他，假传圣旨命令吏部提拔任用，张至发正在照顾双亲，没有出来做官。
English: He was recommended by Wei Zhongxian's party cadres, and promoted and appointed by the False Mission Order of the Ministry of Personnel. Zhang Zhifa was taking care of his parents and did not come out to work as an official.

古文：崇祯五年，起顺天府丞，进光禄卿。
现代文：崇祯五年起用为顺天府丞，提升为光禄卿。
English: In the fifth year of his reign, he was promoted to Shuntenfu-jo and elevated to Koroku-kyo.

古文：精核积弊，多所厘正，遂受帝知。
现代文：精心核实多年的弊病，有很多改正，于是受到皇帝的器重。
English: After carefully verifying the shortcomings for many years and making many corrections, it was valued by the emperor.

古文：八年春，迁刑部右侍郎。
现代文：八年春天，提升为刑部右侍郎。
English: In the spring of 1978, he was promoted to the position of the Right Attendant of the Criminal Investigation Department.

古文：六月，帝将增置阁臣，以翰林不习世务，思用他官参之，召廷臣数十人，各授一疏，令拟旨。
现代文：六月，皇帝将要增设阁臣。认为翰林不习世务，想任用其他官员参与。召见数十位廷臣，各自交给一道奏疏，让他们拟旨。
English: In June, the emperor was going to appoint an additional cabinet minister. He thought that Hanlin was not used to doing business and wanted to appoint other officials to participate. He summoned dozens of courtiers and gave each of them a report and asked them to draft it.

古文：遂擢至发礼部左侍郎兼东阁大学士，与文震孟同入直。
现代文：于是提拔张至发为礼部左侍郎兼东阁大学士，跟文震孟一起进殿堂入值，侍奉皇上。
English: As a result, Zhang Zhifa was promoted to the left attendant of the ceremonial department and a scholar of Donggak University, entered the hall of fame together with Wen Zhen Meng, and served the emperor.

古文：自世宗朝许赞后，外僚入阁，自至发始。
现代文：自从世宗朝许缵以后，外僚进入内阁，从张至发开始。
English: Since the reign of King Sejong, foreign ministers have entered the cabinet, starting with Zhang Zhifa.

古文：时温体仁为首辅，钱士升、王应熊、何吾驺次之。
现代文：这时温体仁当首辅，钱士升、王应熊、何吾驺其次。
English: At this time, Wen Tianzhen was the first assistant, followed by Qian Shisheng, Wang Ying Xiong, and He Wuxuan.

古文：越二年，体仁辈尽去，至发遂为首辅。
现代文：过了二年，温体仁等人都离职了，张至发于是当上了首辅。
English: After two years, Wen Tianzhen and others left the post, and Zhang Zhifa became the first assistant.

古文：万历中，申时行、王锡爵先后柄政，大旨相绍述，谓之 传衣钵 。
现代文：万历年间，申时行、王锡爵先后掌权，大的旨意前后继承，称为 传衣钵 。
English: During the Wanli era, Shenshi Xing and Wang Xizhe successively took power, and the great will was inherited back and forth, known as the succession of clothes.

古文：至发代体仁，一切守其所为，而才智机变逊之，以位次居首，非帝之所注也。
现代文：张至发代替温体仁，一切都按照温体仁的方法办理，而才智机变赶不上温体仁，因为位次为第一，不是皇帝关注的对象。
English: Zhang Zhifa took the place of Emperor Wu, and everything was handled in accordance with Emperor Wu's methods. However, Zai Zhiqi could not catch up with Emperor Wu, because he was first in line and was not the object of the emperor's attention.

古文：尝简东宫讲官，摈黄道周，为给事中冯元飙所刺。
现代文：曾选择东宫太子的讲官，排斥黄道周，被给事中冯元飙指责。
English: He once chose the lecturer of the East Palace Prince, rejected the Zodiac Week, and was criticized by Feng Yuan Rong.

古文：至发怒，两疏诋道周，而极颂体仁孤执不欺，复为编修吴伟业所劾。
现代文：张至发发怒，两次上疏诋毁黄道周，而极力称赞温体仁坚持自己的主张不欺骗别人，又被编修吴伟业弹劾。
English: Zhang Zhi flew into a rage, denigrated the Zodiac Week twice, and praised Wen Tianzhen for insisting on his own ideas and not deceiving others. He was also impeached by editor Wu Weiye.

古文：讲官项煜论至发把持考选，庇儿女姻任浚而抑成勇。
现代文：讲官项煜议论张至发把持考试选举，庇护儿女亲家任浚而压制成周。
English: Lecturer Zhang Zhifa held a discussion on the election of the examination, and the children were protected by their parents and made into a week.

古文：至发上章辩，帝遂逐煜去。
现代文：张至发上疏辩解，皇帝于是把项煜赶走了。
English: Zhang Zhifa made a feeble excuse, and the emperor then drove Xiang Yu away.

古文：内阁中书黄应恩悍戾，体仁、至发辈倚任之，恃势恣横。
现代文：内阁中书黄应恩凶狠暴戾，温体仁、张至发依靠任用他，恃势骄横。
English: In the cabinet, Huang Ying'en was fierce and violent, while Wen Tizhen and Zhang Zhifa relied on his appointment and were arrogant.

古文：及为正字，不当复为东宫侍书，恐帝与太子开讲同日也。
现代文：既然已担任正字一职，按理不应当再任东宫侍书，恐怕皇上与太子在同一天开讲。
English: Since he has already assumed the position of Zhengzhi, he should not be appointed as the attendant of the East Palace again. I am afraid that the emperor and the prince will start speaking on the same day.

古文：至发不谙故事，令兼之。
现代文：张至发不熟悉先朝的事情，让他兼任。
English: Zhang Zhifa was not familiar with the events of the previous day, so he was given the additional post.

古文：应恩不能兼，讲官撰讲义送应恩缮录，拒不纳。
现代文：黄应恩不能兼任，讲官撰写讲义送给黄应恩缮写抄录，黄庆恩拒不接受。
English: Huang Ying'en could not serve concurrently. The lecturer wrote a handout and gave it to Huang Ying'en to copy, but Huang Qing'en refused to accept it.

古文：检讨杨士聪论之，至发揭寝其疏，士聪复上书阁中，极论其事，至发终庇之。
现代文：检讨杨士聪议论这事，张至发将他的奏疏扣压了。杨士聪又写信给内阁，极力追究这件事，张至发始终庇护黄应恩。
English: After reviewing Yang Shicong's discussion of this matter, Zhang Zhifa suppressed his complaint. Yang Shicong also wrote to the cabinet to vigorously investigate this matter. Zhang Zhifa always protected Huang Ying'en.

古文：会复故总督杨鹤官，许给诰命，应恩当撰文。
现代文：正好恢复原总督杨鹤的官职，答应给他诰命，黄应恩应当撰写诰文。
English: Huang Ying'en should write an obituary for the former Governor Yang He, who has just been reinstated to his post, promising to spare his life.

古文：因其子嗣昌得君，力为洗雪。
现代文：因为他的儿子杨嗣昌是皇帝的红人，黄应恩极力为杨鹤开脱。
English: Because his son Yang Shichang was the emperor's favorite, Huang Ying'en tried his best to exonerate Yang He.

古文：忤旨，将加罪，至发拟公揭救。
现代文：违背皇上的旨意，将要给他定罪，张至发打算用集体的名义挽救他。
English: He will be convicted of violating the emperor's will, and Zhang Zhifa intends to save him in the name of the collective.

古文：同官孔贞运、傅冠曰： 曩许士柔事，吾辈未尝救，独救应恩何也？ 
现代文：同僚孔贞运、傅冠说： 先前许士柔有类似的事情，我们不曾挽救，为什么偏偏挽救黄应恩呢？ 
English: Colleagues Kong Zhengyun and Fu Guanzhong said: "Previously, there was a similar thing with Xu Shijiao, we did not save her, so why save Huang Ying'en?

古文：至发咈然曰： 公等不救，我自救之。 
现代文：张至发很不高兴地说： 你们不救他，我自己救他。 
English: Zhang Zhifa was very unhappy and said, "If you don't save him, I'll save him myself."

古文：连上三揭。
现代文：接连三次上疏。
English: They went up three times in a row.

古文：帝不听，特降谕削应恩籍，嗣昌疏救，亦不听。
现代文：皇帝不听，特降谕旨削去黄应恩的官籍。杨嗣昌上疏为他说情，皇帝也不听。
English: The emperor did not listen, and issued a special order to reduce Huang Ying'en's official status. Yang Shichang went to intercede for him, but the emperor did not listen.

古文：无何，大理寺副曹荃发应恩赇请事，词连至发。
现代文：不久，大理寺副曹荃揭发黄应恩贿赂的事情，牵连到张至发。
English: Soon, the deputy of Dali Temple, Cao Tsuen, exposed Huang Ying'en's bribery and implicated Zhang Zhifa.

古文：至发愤，连疏请勘。
现代文：张至发很气愤，接连上疏请求调查。
English: Zhang Zhifa was very angry and repeatedly asked for an investigation.

古文：帝虽优旨褒答，卒下应恩狱。
现代文：皇帝虽然很温和地答复了他，最终还是将黄应恩下狱。
English: Although the emperor answered him very gently, he eventually sent Huang Ying'en to prison.

古文：至发乃具疏，自谓当去者三，而未尝引疾，忽得旨回籍调理，时人传笑，以为遵旨患病云。
现代文：张至发于是上疏，自以为有三条理由应当离职，但未曾称病。忽然得皇帝圣旨回家休养，当时有人嘲笑他，认为他是遵皇帝圣旨而得病的。
English: Zhang Zhifa then went to work. He thought that there were three reasons why he should leave his job, but he never called in sick. Suddenly, he received the emperor's order to go home and recuperate. At that time, some people mocked him, saying that he was following the emperor's order and got sick.

古文：至发颇清强。
现代文：张至发很清高刚强。
English: Zhang Zhifa is very clear, tall and strong.

古文：起自外吏，诸翰林多不服，又始终恶异己，不能虚公延揽。
现代文：从外吏起家，各翰林都不服他。他又始终讨厌跟自己意见不一致的人，不能够虚心听取别人的意见。
English: From the beginning of his career as a foreign official, he was disliked by everyone. He always hated people who disagreed with him and could not listen to the opinions of others with an open mind.

古文：帝亦恶其泄漏机密，听之去。
现代文：皇帝也不喜欢他泄漏机密，就听凭他离职。
English: The emperor didn't like him leaking secrets either, so he let him resign.

古文：且不遣行人护行，但令乘传，赐道里费六十金、彩币二表里，视首辅去国彝典，仅得半焉。
现代文：而且不派行人护送，只让他乘驿车回家。赐给他旅费六十两，彩色丝织品表里二套，对照首辅离职的常例，仅得其中一半。
English: Moreover, he did not send a pedestrian escort, but only let him take a tuk-tuk home. He was given sixty-two travel expenses and two sets of colorful silk fabrics. In contrast to the usual practice of the departure of the chief assistant, he only got half of them.

古文：既归，捐赀改建淄城，赐敕优奖。
现代文：回家后，捐钱改建淄城，皇帝传令奖励他。
English: After returning home, he donated money to rebuild Lucheng, and the emperor sent a message to reward him.

古文：俄以徽号礼成，遣官存问。
现代文：不久完成徽号的礼仪，派遣官员慰问他。
English: Soon after the completion of the badge ceremony, officials were dispatched to console him.

古文：宇亮竟以此去位，而国观代为首辅矣。
现代文：崇祯十四年夏天，皇帝想起用旧臣，特下令召见周延儒、贺逢圣和张至发，唯独张至发四次上疏推辞。
English: In the summer of the 14th year of Chongzhen, the emperor thought of using the old vassals, and specially ordered to summon Zhou Yanru, He Fengsheng and Zhang Zhifa. However, Zhang Zhifa made four excuses.

古文：已而定失事者五案，宇亮终免议。
现代文：第二年七月病死，先前多次加封太子太傅、礼部尚书、文渊阁大学士。死后，赠少保，祭奠下葬，按制度荫封他的儿子。
English: He died of illness in July of the following year. He had previously been awarded the titles of Crown Prince Taifu (太子太傅), Minister of the Ministry of Rites and Literature (礼部尚書) and University Scholar (文渊阁大学士) several times. After his death, he was given the title of Shōho (少保) and was buried with a memorial service, and his son was awarded the title of Shōfu (影封) according to the system.

古文：久之，卒于家。薛国观，韩城人。
现代文：薛国观，韩城人。
English: Xue Guoqun, from Hancheng.

古文：万历四十七年进士。授莱州推官。
现代文：万历四十七年进士，授职莱州推官。
English: In the 47th year of Wanli, he was promoted to the post of Laizhou magistrate.

古文：天启四年，擢户部给事中，数有建白。
现代文：天启四年提拔为户部给事中，多有建树。
English: In the four years since the Great Awakening, he has been promoted to the head of the household department.

古文：魏忠贤擅权，朝士争击东林。
现代文：魏忠贤专权，朝廷官员争相攻击东林党。
English: Wei Zhongxian had absolute power, and officials of the imperial court were competing to attack the Donglin Party.

古文：国观所劾御史游士任、操江都御史熊明遇、保定巡抚张凤翔、兵部侍郎萧近高、刑部尚书乔允升，皆东林也。
现代文：薛国观所弹劾的御史游士任、操江都御史熊明遇、保定巡抚张凤翔、兵部侍郎萧近高、刑部尚书乔允升，都是东林党人。
English: Xue Guojun's impeached imperial historian You Shi Ren, imperial historian Xiong Mingyu, governor of Baoding Zhang Fengxiang, secretary of the military department Xiao Chieng Gao, and secretary of the criminal department Shangshu Qiao Yunsheng were all Donglin Party members.

古文：寻迁兵科右给事中，于疆事亦多所论奏。
现代文：不久提升为兵科右给事中，对于边疆事务也有很多奏论。
English: He was soon promoted to the right wing of the military science, and there were many theories about the frontier affairs.

古文：忠贤遣内臣出镇，偕同官疏争。
现代文：魏忠贤派宦官出镇，他跟同僚一起上疏争论。
English: Wei Zhongxian sent the eunuch out of the town, and he and his colleagues quarreled with each other.

古文：七年，再迁刑科都给事中。
现代文：七年又提升为刑科都给事中。
English: Seven years later, it was upgraded to a criminal division.

古文：崇祯改元，忠贤遗党有欲用王化贞，宽高，出胡嘉栋者，国观力持不可。
现代文：崇祯元年，魏忠贤的余党想起用王化贞，宽免萧近高，赶走胡嘉栋，薛国观极力反对。
English: In the first year of Chongzhen, the remaining party of Wei Zhongxian thought of using Wang Huazhen, pardoning Xiao Qian Gao, and driving away Hu Jiadong, and Xue Guokuan strongly opposed it.

古文：奉命祭北镇医无闾，还言关内外营伍虚耗、将吏侵克之弊，因荐大将满桂才。
现代文：奉命祭北镇医无闾，回来后说关内关外部队无故消耗，将官侵吞克扣军饷的弊病，于是推荐大将满桂的才干。
English: He was ordered to sacrifice the North Town doctor Wuzhen, and when he returned, he said that the troops inside and outside Guanzhong were consumed for no reason, and the generals had absorbed the maladies of the military cadres, so he recommended the talent of General Man Gui.

古文：帝褒以忠谠，令指将吏侵克者名，列上副将王应晖等六人，诏俱属之吏。
现代文：皇帝表扬他忠诚正直，命令他指出侵吞克扣军饷的将官的名字。薛国观列上副将王应晖等六人，下诏将他们全部下狱。
English: The emperor praised him for his loyalty and honesty, and ordered him to point out the names of the generals who had embezzled the military pay. Six people, including Vice-General Wang Yingyao, were listed on Xue Guoguan's list, and he ordered them all to be sent to prison.

古文：陕西盗起，偕乡人仕于朝者，请设防速剿，并追论故巡抚乔应甲纳贿纵盗罪。
现代文：陕西盗起，偕同同乡在朝廷做官的人，请求边防快速围剿，并追究原巡抚乔应甲接受贿赂放任盗匪的罪责。
English: When the Shaanxi banditry broke out, he and his fellow townsmen, who were officials at the imperial court, requested the border guards to quickly surround the bandits and investigate the former governor Qiao Yingjia for accepting bribes and letting the bandits go free.

古文：削应甲籍，籍其赃。
现代文：剥夺了乔应甲的官籍，没收他的赃款。
English: He deprived Qiao Yingjia of his official registration and confiscated his stolen money.

古文：国观先附忠贤，至是大治忠贤党，为南京御史袁耀然所劾。
现代文：薛国观先依附魏忠贤，到这时大力惩处魏忠贤的党徒，被南京御史袁耀然弹劾了。
English: Xue Guoqiang first adhered to Wei Zhongxian, then vigorously punished Wei Zhongxian's party members, and was impeached by the Nanjing governor Yuan Yaoran.

古文：国观惧，且虞挂察典，思所以挠之，乃劾吏科都给事中沈惟炳、兵科给事中许誉卿，言： 两人主盟东林，与瞿式耜掌握枚卜。
现代文：薛国观害怕，并且担心牵涉到考核官吏的大典，想方法阻挠他，于是弹劾吏科都给事中沈惟炳、兵科给事中许誉卿，说： 二人是东林党的盟主，跟瞿式耜一起掌握官吏的选拔。
English: Xue Guoguan was afraid, and worried that the examination of officials would be involved, and wanted to find a way to obstruct him, so he impeached Shen Weiqi, who was in charge of the civil service, and Xu Rongqing, who was in charge of the military, saying: The two are the leaders of the Donglin Party, and they control the selection of officials together with Yu Shikai.

古文：文华召对，陛下恶章允儒妄言，严旨处分。
现代文：文华殿召对，陛下讨厌章允儒胡说八道，下旨处分他。
English: The Palace of Literature summoned him, saying that His Majesty detested Zhang Yunru's nonsense, and ordered him to be punished.

古文：誉卿乃持一疏授惟炳，使同官刘斯珣邀臣列名，臣拒不应，遂使耀然劾臣。
现代文：许誉卿于是拿着一道奏疏给沈惟炳，让同僚刘斯王来邀请微臣签名，微臣拒不答应，这才使得袁耀然弹劾微臣。
English: Xu Rongqing then took a piece of calligraphy to Shen Weiqi, and asked his colleague Liu Wang to invite the minor minister to sign. The minor minister refused to agree, which made Yuan Yaoran impeach the minor minister.

古文：臣自立有品，不入东林，遂罹其害。
现代文：微臣自立有品德，不加入东林党，于是遭到他们陷害。
English: Weixin is self-reliant and virtuous, and did not join the Donglin Party, so he was framed by them.

古文：今朝局惟论东林异同向背，借崔、魏为题，报仇倾陷。
现代文：现在朝廷只议论东林党，看谁向着它或不向着它，借崔可灼、魏忠贤为题，报复陷害跟他们意见不一致的人。
English: Now the imperial court only talks about the Donglin Party, to see who is against it or not against it, using Cui Kegui, Wei Zhongxian as the theme, to retaliate against those who do not agree with them.

古文：今又把持京察，而式耜以被斥之人，久居郭外，遥制察典，举朝无敢言。 
现代文：现在又把持考核京官的权力，而瞿式耜这个被排斥的人，长期居在城外，遥控着官吏考核的大典，满朝廷的人没有一个敢说话的。 
English: Now he also holds the power to evaluate officials in Beijing, while the ostracized person, Gong Shikang, has been living outside the city for a long time, remotely controlling the grand ceremony of the evaluation of officials. No one in the court dares to speak.

古文：末诋耀然贿刘鸿训得御史。
现代文：最后诬告袁耀然贿赂刘鸿训谋取御史的职位。
English: Finally, he falsely accused Yuan Yaoran of bribing Liu Hongxun to obtain the position of imperial historian.

古文：帝虽以挠察典责之，国观卒免察。
现代文：皇上虽然责备他扰乱考核大典，但薛国观终究免于检查。
English: Although the emperor reproached him for disturbing the examination ceremony, Xue Guokuan was eventually exempted from the examination.

古文：然清议不容，旋以终养去。
现代文：然而公众的评论容不下他，不久因归养父亲回家乡。
English: However, public opinion turned against him and he soon returned home to be raised by his father.

古文：三年秋，用御史陈其猷荐，起兵科都给事中。
现代文：崇祯三年秋天，因御史陈其猷的推荐，起用为兵科都给事中。
English: In the autumn of the third year of the reign of Emperor Chongzhen, due to the recommendation of Grand Historian Chen Qichen, he was appointed as the commander of the military science.

古文：遭母忧，服阕，起礼科都给事中，迁太常少卿。
现代文：母亲去世，服完丧礼，起用为礼科都给事中，提升太常少卿。
English: After his mother's death, after the funeral, he was appointed as the Vice-Minister of Ceremonies, and promoted to Vice-Minister of Education.

古文：九年，擢左佥都御史。
现代文：九年提拔为左佥都御史。
English: Nine years later, he was promoted to Zuozhu Miyoshi.

古文：明年八月，拜礼部左侍郎兼东阁大学士，入参机务。
现代文：第二年八月授职礼部左侍郎兼东阁大学士，参与机要事务。
English: In August of the following year, he was appointed as the Left Attendant of the Ministry of Ceremonies and a scholar of the East Pavilion University, participating in important affairs.

古文：国观为人阴鸷谿刻，不学少文。
现代文：薛国观为人阴险尖刻，不学无术，少文采。
English: Xue Guokuan is a sinister and sharp-tongued person, uneducated and unskilled, with little literary talent.

古文：温体仁因其素仇东林，密荐于帝，遂超擢大用之。
现代文：温体仁因为他一向仇视东林党人，秘密地向皇帝推荐，从此得到破格提拔，委以重任。
English: Wen Tianzhen, because he always hated the Donglin Party members, secretly recommended him to the emperor. From then on, he received an unprecedented promotion and was entrusted with an important task.

古文：十一年六月，进礼部尚书。
现代文：十一年六月提升礼部尚书。
English: In June of the eleventh year, he was promoted to the Ministry of Ceremonies.

古文：其冬，首辅刘宇亮出督师，国观与杨嗣昌比，构罢宇亮。明年二月代其位。
现代文：这年冬天，首辅刘宇亮出京督师。薛国观跟杨嗣昌相勾结，陷害罢免了刘宇亮，第二年二月代替他成为首辅。
English: In the winter of that year, First Assistant Liu Yuliang was appointed as the Beijing supervisor. Xue Guoguang colluded with Yang Shichang to frame and remove Liu Yuliang, and replaced him as First Assistant in February of the following year.

古文：叙剿寇功，加太子太保、户部尚书，进文渊阁；叙城守功，加少保、吏部尚书，进武英殿。
现代文：记录剿灭土匪的功劳，加封太子太保、户部尚书，进入文渊阁，记录守城的功劳，加封少保、吏部尚书，进入武英殿。
English: Record the merits of extinguishing bandits, add the seal of the Crown Prince Taibo, the household of Shangshu, enter the Wenyuan Pavilion, record the merits of defending the city, add the seal of the Minor Protector, the cadre of Shangshu, and enter the Wuying Hall.

古文：先为首辅者，体仁最当帝意，居位久。
现代文：早先做首辅的人当中，温体仁最适合皇帝的心意，当首辅的时间最长。
English: Among those who had served as the first assistant to the emperor, Wen Tianzhen was the most suited to the emperor's wishes and served as the first assistant to the emperor for the longest time.

古文：及张至发、孔贞运、刘宇亮继之，皆非帝意所属，故旋罢去。
现代文：等到张至发、孔贞运、刘宇亮做首辅，都不是皇帝满意的人选，所以时间不长就罢免了。
English: When Zhang Zhifa, Kong Zhengyun, and Liu Yuliang became the first assistant, none of them were satisfactory candidates for the emperor, so they were dismissed in a short time.

古文：国观得志，一踵体仁所为，导帝以深刻，而才智弥不及，操守亦弗如。
现代文：薛国观当首辅，一切都按照温体仁的所作所为来实行，引导皇帝严峻刻薄，而才智不及温体仁很多，操守也不如他。
English: When Xue Guokuan was the first assistant, everything was carried out in accordance with the actions of Wen Tianzhen, and the emperor was guided by sternness and meanness, but his intelligence was much less than that of Wen Tianzhen, and his integrity was not as good as him.

古文：帝初颇信响之，久而觉其奸，遂及于祸。
现代文：皇帝开始信任他，接近他，时间长了才发现他的邪恶，于是灾祸就降临了。
English: The emperor began to trust him, to be close to him, and it took a long time to discover his evil, and then the disaster came.

古文：始帝燕见国观，语及朝士贪婪。
现代文：当初皇帝设宴召见薛国观，提起朝臣的贪婪。
English: At first, the emperor held a banquet to invite Xue Guoqun and brought up the greed of the courtiers.

古文：国观对曰： 使厂卫得人，安敢如是。 
现代文：薛国观回答说： 假使厂、卫得到合适人选，谁敢贪婪。 
English: Xue Guojun replied, "If the factory and Wei get the right candidate, who would dare to be greedy?

古文：东厂太监王德化在侧，汗流沾背，于是专察其阴事。
现代文：东厂太监王德化在旁边，吓得汗流浃背，从此专门侦察他的隐事。
English: Wang Dehua, the eunuch of the East Factory, was next to him, scared and sweating profusely. From then on, he devoted himself to investigating his secret affairs.

古文：国观任中书王陛彦，而恶中书周国兴、杨余洪，以漏诏旨、招权利劾之，并下诏狱。
现代文：薛国观任用中书王陛彦，而憎恨中书周国兴、杨余洪，因为泄漏诏旨，招致一些有权势的人的弹劾，将他二人下入诏狱。
English: Xue Guoguang appointed the prince Zhou Guoxing, but he hated the prince Zhou Guoxing and Yang Yuhong, because they leaked the edict, which led to the impeachment of some powerful people, and they were both sent to the imperial prison.

古文：两人老矣，毙廷杖下，其家人密缉国观通贿事，报东厂。
现代文：二人老了，死于廷杖之下，他们的家人秘密收集薛国观行贿受贿的事实，报告东厂。
English: The two were old and died under the imperial scepter. Their families secretly collected the facts of Xue Guoguan's bribe-taking and reported it to the East Factory.

古文：而国观前匿史褷所寄银，周、杨两家又诱褷苍头首告。
现代文：而薛国观早先隐藏史翲寄的银子，周国兴、杨余洪两家的人又诱导史翲家的仆役告发这事。
English: However, Xue Guoguan had earlier hidden the silver sent by Shi Ye, and Zhou Guoxing and Yang Yuhong also induced the servants of the Shi Ye family to report this.

古文：由是诸事悉上闻，帝意渐移。
现代文：皇帝因此得知各种事情，逐渐就不满意他了。
English: The emperor learned all kinds of things from this, and he gradually became dissatisfied with him.

古文：史褷者，清苑人。
现代文：史翲是清苑人。
English: Shi Yan is from Qingyuan.

古文：为御史无行，善结纳中官，为王永光死党。
现代文：当御史时品行恶劣，喜欢巴结宫中宦官，是王永光的死党。
English: When he was the imperial historian, he behaved badly and liked to curry favor with the eunuchs in the palace. He was Wang Yongguang's best friend.

古文：巡按淮、扬，括库中赃罚银十余万入己橐。
现代文：巡按淮、扬，搜刮国库中没收的赃款、罚款十多万两银子装入自己的腰包。
English: He patrolled Huaihai and Yang, scavenged the stolen money confiscated from the national treasury, and fined more than 100,000 taels of silver into his own pocket.

古文：摄巡盐，又掩取前官张锡命贮库银二十余万。
现代文：辅助巡视盐政又全部拿走前任盐官张锡命贮存的库银二十多万两。
English: The auxiliary inspection of the salt policy also took away all the more than 200,000 taels of treasury silver stored by the former salt official Zhang Ximing.

古文：及以少卿家居，检讨杨士聪劾吏部尚书田唯嘉纳周汝弼金八千推延绥巡抚，褷居间，并发褷盗盐课事。
现代文：等到他以少卿的身份在家闲居，检讨杨士聪弹劾吏部尚书田唯嘉接受周汝弼八千两黄金的贿赂推举他做延绥巡抚，史翲是介绍人，并揭发史翲盗取盐款的事情。
English: Wait until he idles at home as a minor lord, reviews Yang Shicong's impeachment of the cadre, Shang Shuta Weijia, for accepting a bribe of 8,000 taels of gold from Zhou Rong, nominates him as the governor of Yancheng, Shi Yan is the introducer, and exposes Shi Yan's theft of salt money.

古文：褷得旨自陈，遂讦士聪，而盐课则请敕淮、扬监督中官杨显名核奏。
现代文：史翲得旨表白这事，而有关盐款的事情则请求下诏让淮、扬监督宦官杨显名核实报告。
English: Shi Yan had the intention to confess this matter, and the matter of the salt payment was requested to issue a decree to let Huai and Yang supervise the eunuch Yang Xianming to verify the report.

古文：俄而锡命子沆讦褷，给事中刘焜芳复劾褷侵盗有据。
现代文：不久张锡命的儿子张沆攻击史翲，给事中张火昆芳弹劾史翲侵吞盗取公款是有证据的。
English: Not long after, Zhang Ximing's son, Zhang Hui, attacked Shi Yan. There is evidence that Zhang Hui Kunfang impeached Shi Yan for embezzlement and theft of public funds.

古文：又尝勒富人于承祖万金，事发，则遣家人赍重赀谋于黠吏，图改旧籍。
现代文：还曾勒索富人于承祖万两银子，事情败露，史翲就派家人携重金又和狡猾的官员商量，企图改变原来的记载。
English: He also tried to extort 10,000 taels of silver from a rich man, Yu Chengzu, but the affair was exposed, and Shi Yan sent his family members with a lot of money to negotiate with the cunning officials in an attempt to change the original record.

古文：帝乃怒，褫褷职，褷急携数万金入都，主国观邸。
现代文：皇帝发怒了，于是将史翲革职。史翲急忙携带数万两银子进入北京，居在薛国观的官邸。
English: The emperor was furious, so he dismissed Shi Yan. Shi Yan hurriedly carried tens of thousands of taels of silver into Beijing and lived in the official residence of Xue Guozun.

古文：谋既定，出疏攻焜芳及其弟炳芳、炜芳。
现代文：阴谋确定后，出来上疏攻击张火昆芳和他的弟弟张炳芳、张炜芳。
English: After the conspiracy was determined, Shangso came out to attack Zhang Huikunfang and his brother Zhang Yifang and Zhang Yifang.

古文：阁臣多徇褷，拟严旨，帝不听，止夺焜芳官候讯。
现代文：很多阁臣都顺从史翲，草拟严旨。皇帝不同意，只是剥夺了张火昆芳的官职等候审讯。
English: The emperor did not agree, but stripped Zhang Huo Kunfang of his official position pending trial.

古文：及显名核疏上，力为褷解，而不能讳者六万金；褷下狱。
现代文：等到杨显名核实的奏疏报告上来，极力为史翲辩解，但还有六万两银子没办法隐瞒，将史翲下狱。
English: When Yang Xianming's verified report came up, he tried his best to defend Shi Yan, but there was still sixty thousand taels of silver that he couldn't hide, and he sent Shi Yan to prison.

古文：会有兵事，狱久不结，瘐死。
现代文：正好发生战争，官司长时间不能结案，在狱中死了。
English: Just as the war broke out, the court case could not be closed for a long time, and he died in prison.

古文：都人籍籍谓褷所携赀尽为国观有，家人证之，事大著。
现代文：都城的人纷纷传言，说史翲携带的银子都被薛国观据为己有。他的家人证实了这事，事情闹大了。
English: People in the capital city started to spread rumours that all the silver that Shi Yan was carrying had been appropriated by Xue Guoguan. His family members confirmed this, and things got out of hand.

古文：国观犹力辨褷赃为党人构陷，帝不听。
现代文：薛国观还极力辩解，说史翲的赃款是党人陷害他，皇帝不听。
English: Xue Guoqun also tried his best to defend himself, saying that Shi Yan's stolen money was the result of the Party members framing him, but the emperor would not listen.

古文：帝初忧国用不足，国观请借助，言： 在外群僚，臣等任之；在内戚畹，非独断不可。 
现代文：皇帝当初担心国家财政不够支出，薛国观请求借款，说： 在外的群僚百官的借款，由我等承担；在内的皇亲国戚的借款，非由皇上决断不可。 
English: At first, the emperor was worried that the country's finances were not enough to cover the expenses. Xue Guoguan requested a loan, saying, "The loan of the foreign colleagues and officials shall be borne by us; the loan of the imperial relatives, including the imperial relatives, must be decided by the emperor."

古文：因以武清侯李国瑞为言。
现代文：于是拿武清侯李国瑞做榜样。
English: So he took Li Guorui, a military governor of Qing, as an example.

古文：国瑞者，孝定太后兄孙，帝曾祖母家也。
现代文：李国瑞是孝定太后哥哥的孙子，皇帝祖母的家属。
English: Li Guorui was the grandson of the elder brother of Empress Dowager Xiaoding and a member of the family of the emperor's grandmother.

古文：国瑞薄庶兄国臣，国臣愤，诡言 父赀四十万，臣当得其半，今请助国为军赀 。
现代文：李国瑞薄待庶兄李国臣，李国臣气愤不过，欺骗说： 父亲有资产四十万两，微臣应当得到一半，现在请求拿出来资助国家作为军费。 
English: Li Guorai treated his brother-in-law, Li Guoshen, poorly. Li Guoshen was furious, but he lied and said: My father has assets of 400,000 taels, Weixin should get half of it, and now I am asking him to take it out to fund the country as military expenses.

古文：帝初未允，因国观言，欲尽借所言四十万者，不应则勒期严追。
现代文：皇帝开始没有答应他的请求。听了薛国观的话，想全部借他所说的四十万两银子，如不答应就限期严加追查。
English: At first, the emperor did not agree to his request. After listening to Xue Guoguan's words, he wanted to borrow all the 400,000 taels of silver he said. If he did not agree, he would strictly follow up the deadline.

古文：或教国瑞匿赀勿献，拆毁居第，陈什器通衢鬻之，示无所有。
现代文：有人教李国瑞隐藏财产不交，拆毁房屋，将家俱器物陈列到大街上去卖，表示自己没有什么资财。
English: Some people told Li Guorui to hide his property and not to hand it over, to demolish the house, and to display the furniture and utensils on the street for sale, saying that he had no wealth.

古文：嘉定伯周奎与有连，代为请。
现代文：嘉定伯周奎跟他有联系，代他出钱。
English: Jiading Bo Zhoukui was in contact with him and paid the money on his behalf.

古文：帝怒，夺国瑞爵，国瑞悸死。
现代文：皇帝发怒，剥夺了李国瑞的封爵，李国瑞受惊吓死了。
English: The emperor was angry and deprived Li Guorai of his knighthood. Li Guorai was shocked and scared to death.

古文：有司追不已，戚畹皆自危。
现代文：有关部门追究不已，皇亲国戚人人自危。
English: Relevant departments continue to investigate, and the emperor's relatives and relatives of the country are in danger.

古文：因皇五子病，交通宦官宫妾，倡言孝定太后已为九莲菩萨，空中责帝薄外家，诸皇子尽当殀，降神于皇五子。
现代文：利用皇帝第五子的病情，勾结宦官宫女，传言孝定太后已升仙为九莲菩萨，在天上责备皇帝轻视外戚，皇帝的每个儿子都将夭折，神降临到皇帝第五子的身上。
English: Taking advantage of the Emperor's fifth son's illness and colluding with the eunuch's concubine, the rumor spread that the Empress Dowager Xiaoding had been elevated to the status of Nine-Lotus Bodhisattva. In heaven, she reproached the Emperor for despising his relatives. Each of the Emperor's sons would die prematurely, and the gods would descend upon the Emperor's fifth son.

古文：俄皇子卒，帝大恐，急封国瑞七岁儿存善为侯，尽还所纳金银，而追恨国观，待隙而发。
现代文：不久皇帝第五子死，皇帝非常害怕，急忙封李国瑞七岁的儿子存善为侯，将他交纳的金银全部归还了，而怀恨薛国观，等待时机发作。
English: Soon after, the emperor's fifth son died, and the emperor was very afraid. He hurriedly made Li Guorai's seven-year-old son, Cun Shan, his heir, and returned all the gold and silver he had paid for. Instead, he harbored a grudge against Xue Guoguan and waited for the right time to act.

古文：国观素恶行人吴昌时。及考选，昌时虞国观抑己，因其门人以求见。
现代文：薛国观一向讨厌行人吴昌时，等到考察选拔时，吴昌时担心薛国观压制自己，凭借他的门人求见薛国观。
English: Xue Guoqun has always hated the pedestrian Wu Changjun. When the inspection and selection were carried out, Wu Changjun was worried that Xue Guoqun would suppress himself and rely on his protégé to see Xue Guoqun.

古文：国观伪与交欢，拟第一，当得吏科。
现代文：薛国观假装跟他很友好，答应准备给他第一名，在吏科做官。
English: Xue Guoguan pretended to be very friendly with him and promised to prepare to give him the first place and work as an official in the cadre department.

古文：迨命下，乃得礼部主事。
现代文：等到任命下来，只得到礼部主事的官职。
English: When he was appointed, he was only given the post of head of the ceremonial department.

古文：昌时大恨，以为卖己，与所善东厂理刑吴道正谋，发丁忧侍郎蔡奕琛行贿国观事。
现代文：吴昌时非常痛恨他，认为他出卖了自己，跟好朋友东厂理刑吴道正商量，揭发丁忧侍郎蔡奕琛行贿薛国观的事实。
English: Wu Changshi hated him very much and thought that he had betrayed himself. He discussed with his good friend Wu Daozheng, the manager of the East Factory, to expose the fact that Ding Zhao's servant, Cai Yixuan, had bribed Xue Guoqun.

古文：帝闻之，益疑。
现代文：皇帝听说，更加怀疑薛国观。
English: Hearing this, the emperor was even more suspicious of Xue Guoqun.

古文：十三年六月，杨嗣昌出督师，有所陈奏。
现代文：崇祯十三年六月，杨嗣昌外出督师报告了一些事情。
English: In June of the thirteenth year of Chongzhen, Yang Shichang, an out-of-town supervisor, reported some things.

古文：帝令拟谕，国观乃拟旨以进。
现代文：皇帝命令草拟谕旨，薛国观于是草拟谕旨进呈。
English: The emperor ordered to draft an edict, and Xue Guokuan drafted and submitted the edict.

古文：帝遂发怒，下五府九卿科道议奏。
现代文：皇帝于是发怒，交给五府九卿科道讨论。
English: The emperor then became angry and gave the discussion of science and technology to the five prefectures and nine nobles.

古文：掌都督府魏国公徐允祯、吏部尚书傅永淳等不测帝意，议颇轻，请令致仕或闲住。
现代文：掌都督府魏国公徐允祯、吏部尚书傅永淳等人不知道皇帝的意图，议论很轻，请求命令他致仕或闲住。
English: The person in charge of the governor's office of Wei Guogong, Xu Yunjun, and the person in charge of the personnel department, Shang Shufu Yongchun, did not know the emperor's intention, and the discussion was very light, and they requested that he be ordered to serve or stay idle.

古文：帝度科道必言之，独给事中袁恺会议不署名，且疏论永淳徇私状，而微诋国观藐肆妒嫉。
现代文：皇帝猜到科道一定会这样说，唯独给事中袁恺没有在意见书上签名，并且上疏追究傅永淳以泄私人感情包庇的罪状，而稍微诋毁薛国观轻狂放肆，嫉妒成性。
English: The emperor guessed that Ke Dao would certainly say this, except that in this particular case, Yuan Shao did not sign the opinion letter, and he did not pursue Fu Yong Chun for the crime of concealing his private feelings, but slightly slandered Xue Guocun's light-hearted arrogance and jealousy.

古文：帝不怿，抵疏于地曰： 成何纠疏！ 
现代文：皇帝不高兴，将奏疏扔到地上说： 这叫什么检举报告！ 
English: Unhappy, the emperor threw the report on the ground and said, "What kind of report is this?

古文：遂夺国观职，放之归，怒犹未已。
现代文：于是剥夺薛国观的官职，让他回家，皇帝的愤怒还没有平息。
English: So he deprived Xue Guocun of his official position and let him go home. The emperor's anger has not yet subsided.

古文：国观出都，重车累累，侦事者复以闻。
现代文：薛国观离开北京城，车队浩荡，侦探向皇帝报告了。
English: Xue Guoguan left Beijing, the motorcade was huge, and the detective reported to the emperor.

古文：而东厂所遣伺国观邸者，值陛彦至，执之，得其招摇通贿状。词所连及，永淳、奕琛暨通政使李梦辰、刑部主事朱永佑等十一人。
现代文：东厂派到薛国观府邸的侦察员正好碰上王陛彦到来，抓住他，获得他招摇过市、串通贿赂的情况，供词牵连到傅永淳、蔡奕琛以及通政使李梦辰、刑说主事朱永佑等十一人。
English: The scouts sent by the East Factory to Xue Guoguan's residence just happened to come across Wang Shihong, caught him, and obtained the information that he swaggered through the city and colluded in bribery. The confession implicated Fu Yongchun, Cai Yixuan, as well as the political envoy Li Mengchen and the head of the police, Zhu Yongyou, and eleven others.

古文：命下陛彦诏狱穷治。
现代文：命令将王陛彦交司法部门追问。
English: The order was given to bring His Majesty Wang to the judicial department for questioning.

古文：顷之，恺再疏，尽发国观纳贿诸事，永淳、奕琛与焉。
现代文：不久，袁恺再次上疏，一举揭发薛国观受贿的种种恶行，傅永淳、蔡奕琛参与其间。
English: Soon after, Yuan Shao again went to the village to expose the various evil deeds of Xue Guokun's bribery, with Fu Yongjun and Cai Yixuan taking part.

古文：国观连疏力辨，诋恺受昌时指使，帝不纳。
现代文：薛国观接连上疏辩解，诋毁袁恺受吴昌时指使，皇帝不采纳。
English: The Emperor did not accept Xue Guoqun's successive lame excuses and denigration of Yuan Shikun at the behest of Wu Chang.

古文：至十月，陛彦狱未成，帝以行贿有据，即命弃市，而遣使逮国观。
现代文：到了十月，王陛彦的案子没有了结，皇帝以为他行贿有真凭实据，立即命令将他弃市，并派使者逮捕薛国观。
English: By October, Wang Shizhihiko's case had not been closed. The emperor thought that there was real evidence that he had paid bribes, immediately ordered him to leave the city, and sent an envoy to arrest Xue Guoguan.

古文：国观迁延久不赴，明年七月入都。
现代文：薛国观拖延时间，第二年七月进入都城。
English: Xue Guokuan delayed the time and entered the capital in July of the following year.

古文：令待命外邸，不以属吏，国观自谓必不死。
现代文：命令他在外邸待命，不把他交给官吏，薛国观自认为一定不会死。
English: He ordered him to be on standby at his residence and not to hand him over to officials. Xue Guoguan believed that he would not die.

古文：八月初八日夕，监刑者至门，犹鼾睡。及闻诏使皆绯衣，蹶然曰： 吾死矣！ 
现代文：八月初八夜晚，监刑的人来到他门口，薛国观还在酣睡中，等到听说来人都穿着红衣服，急急忙忙地说： 我要死了。 
English: On the night of the eighth day of the eighth month of August, the prison guards came to his door. Xue Guokuan was still in a deep sleep. When he heard that everyone was wearing red clothes, he hurriedly said, "I'm going to die."

古文：仓皇觅小帽不得，取苍头帽覆之。宣诏毕，顿首不能出声，但言 吴昌时杀我 ，乃就缢。
现代文：匆忙之间找不到自己的小帽，随便拿了顶佣人的帽子扣在头上。宣读诏书完毕，叩头不能出声，只是说： 吴昌时杀我。 于是被吊死。
English: In his haste, he couldn't find his own small cap, so he took a servant's cap and put it on his head. When the edict was read out, he couldn't make a sound, but only said, "Kill me when Wu Chang" and was hanged.

古文：明日，使者还奏。
现代文：第二天，使者回报。
English: The next day, the envoy returned.

古文：又明日许收敛，悬梁者两日矣。
现代文：又过了一天，同意收尸装殓，吊在屋梁上已经有两天了。
English: Another day passed, and they agreed to have the corpse decorated. It had been hanging on the roof beam for two days.

古文：辅臣戮死，自世庙夏言后，此再见云。
现代文：辅臣被羞辱而死的，从世宗夏言之后，这是第二人。
English: This is the second vassal to die of humiliation, after Shizong Xiayan.

古文：法司坐其赃九千，没入田六百亩，故宅一区。
现代文：司法部门判他赃款九千两，没收田地六百亩，住宅一区。
English: The judicial department sentenced him to pay a fine of 9,000 taels, confiscate 600 mu of farmland, and confine him to a residential area.

古文：国观险忮，然罪不至死，帝徒以私愤杀之，赃又悬坐，人颇有冤之者。
现代文：薛国观阴险嫉妒，然而还不至于定他死罪。皇帝仅仅因为私愤就杀了他，因为贪赃之事也不能落实，有人觉得挺冤。
English: Xue Guoqun was insidiously jealous, but he was not sentenced to death. The emperor killed him just because of his private anger, because the matter of greed could not be implemented. Some people felt it was a great misfortune.

