古文：◎职官三
现代文：职官三
English: Staff Officer Three

古文：○太常寺附提督四夷馆光禄寺太仆寺鸿胪寺尚宝司六科中书舍人行人司钦天监太医院上林苑监五城兵马司顺天府附宛平大兴二县武学僧道录司教坊司宦官女官
现代文：太常寺附提督四夷馆光禄寺太仆寺鸿胪寺尚宝司六科中书舍人行人司钦天监太医院上林苑监五城兵马司顺天府附宛平大兴二县武学僧道录司教坊司宦官女官
English: Taizhoji Temple with Admiral Shii Hall, Koroku-ji Temple, Taipo-ji Temple, Hongan-ji Temple, Shangbo-ji, Six-subject Middle School, Pedestrian Hall, Qin-tian Supervisor, Taishin Hospital, Shanglin-yuan Supervisor, Goseong-gu, Shunten-fu, Anping, Daxing, Two-county Wushu Monk, Taoist Priest, Teacher's Office, Priestess, Female Officer

古文：太常寺。卿一人，少卿二人，寺丞二人。
现代文：太常寺，卿一人，正三品，少卿二人，正四品，寺丞二人，正六品。
English: Taijo-ji Temple, one Kyo, three Shoshin, two Shokyo, four Shoshin, two Terajo, six Shoshin.

古文：其属，典簿厅，典簿二人，博士二人，协律郎二人，赞礼郎九人，司乐二十人。
现代文：它的下属，典簿厅，典簿二人，正七品，博士二人，正七品，协律郎二人，正八品。嘉靖年间增加至五人。
English: Its subordinate, the register office, the register two people, Shoshichibo, the doctor two people, Shoshichibo, the conciliator two people, Shoshichibo. During the Jiajing period, it increased to five people.

古文：天坛、地坛、朝日坛、夕月坛、先农坛、帝王庙、祈谷殿、长陵、献陵、景陵、裕陵、茂陵、泰陵、显陵、康陵、永陵、昭陵各祠祭署，俱奉祀一人，祀丞二人。牺牲所，吏目一人。太常，掌祭祀礼乐之事，总其官属，籍其政令，以听于礼部。
现代文：赞礼郎九人，正九品，塞塑年间增加至三十三人，后来革除二人。司乐二十人，从九品，嘉靖年间增加至三十九人，后来革除五人。天坛、地坛、朝日坛、夕月坛、先农坛、帝王庙、祈谷殿、长陵、献陵、景陵、裕陵、茂陵、泰陵、显陵、康陵、永陵、昭陵各祠祭署，都设奉祀一人，从七品，祀丞二人，从八品。牺牲所，吏目一人，从九品。太常掌管祭祀礼乐之事，总管他的下属，登记其政令，以听命于礼部。
English: Nine people were appointed to the post of praiseworthy person in the ninth grade, which increased to thirty-three people in the year of Sipo, and later two people were removed. Twenty people were appointed to the post of celebratory person in the ninth grade, which increased to thirty-nine people in the year of Jiajing, and later five people were removed. For each ancestral hall, there was one person to be enshrined, from the seventh grade, two people to be enshrined, from the eighth grade. For the sacrificial hall, there was one person to be enshrined, from the ninth grade. Taizang was in charge of the ritual music.

古文：凡天神、地祇、人鬼，岁祭有常。
现代文：所有天神、地只、人鬼，每年祭祀有常制。
English: All the heavenly deities, earthly beings, and ghosts and goblins have a regular annual ritual.

古文：先冬十二月朔，奏进明年祭日，天子御奉天殿受之，乃颁于诸司。
现代文：头年冬季十二月朔日，上奏进呈第二年的祭日，天子驾临奉天殿接受，于是颁发给有关部门。
English: On the first day of December in the winter of the first year, the report was submitted to the second year's festival, and the heavenly son came to accept it, so it was awarded to the relevant departments.

古文：天子亲祭，则赞相礼仪。
现代文：天子亲自祭祀，便由司仪赞唱导引礼仪。
English: The Son of Heaven himself performs the sacrifice, and the officiating priest leads the ceremony with a hymn.

古文：大臣摄事，亦如之。
现代文：大臣代理祭事，也如此。
English: The same is true for the festival of the acting minister.

古文：凡国有册立、册封、冠婚、营缮、征讨、大丧诸典礼，岁时旱涝大灾变，则请告宗庙社稷。
现代文：凡是国家有册立、册封、冠婚、兴建工程、征讨、大丧各种典礼，每年一定季节旱滂大灾变，便奏请告祭宗庙社稷。
English: Whenever a country has a ceremony of enthronement, a ceremony of conferring title, a ceremonial wedding, a construction project, a requisition, or a great funeral, and there is a drought or a major disaster in a certain season every year, an invitation to the festival of the patriarchal temple and shrine will be issued.

古文：荐新则移光禄寺供其品物。
现代文：以时鲜祭品祭献便发文光禄寺供应祭祀所用的物品。
English: With the donation of time and fresh offerings, Bungo-roku-ji Temple was able to supply the items used for the rituals.

古文：祭祀先期请省牲，进祝版、铜人，上殿奏请斋戒，亲署御名。
现代文：祭祀之前奏请视察祭牲，进奉祝版、铜人，上殿奏请斋戒，亲自书写御名。
English: Before the ritual, please inspect the sacrificial animal, present a congratulatory plate and a bronze statue, pray for fasting, and write your name in person.

古文：省牲偕光禄卿。
现代文：视察祭牲要偕同光禄卿。
English: The inspection of the sacrificial animals should be carried out by Tong Guanglu.

古文：惟大祀车驾亲省，大臣日一省之。
现代文：祇有大型祭祀皇上御驾亲临视察，大臣每天视察一次。
English: Only large-scale religious ceremonies are inspected in person by the emperor, while ministers visit once a day.

古文：凡祭，涤器、爨埋、香烛、玉帛，整拂神幄，必恭洁。
现代文：凡是祭祀，洗涤祭器、烧埋祭品、香烛、玉帛，整理神鬼帷幄，必须恭敬整洁。
English: In all rituals, the washing of the sacrificial vessels, the burning of the offerings, the incense candles, the jade urns, and the arranging of the sacred and profane curtains must be respectful and tidy.

古文：掌燎、看燎、读祝、奏礼、对引、司香、进俎、举麾、陈设、收支、导引、设位、典仪、通赞、奉帛、执爵、司樽、司罍洗，卿贰属各领其事，罔有不共。
现代文：掌管燎祭、看管燎柴、读祝辞、奏进礼仪、对引、司香、进献俎、举麾帜、陈设物品、收支账目、引导仪式、安排位置、典礼仪节、通赞唱、奉玉帛、执酒爵、司樽、司迭洗，卿副职僚属各自主管其事，样样要供应齐备。
English: The person in charge of the wreath-laying ceremony, the person in charge of the wreath-laying ceremony, the person in charge of the wreath-laying ceremony, the person in charge of the wreath-laying ceremony, the person in charge of the wreath-laying ceremony, the person in charge of the wreath-laying ceremony, the person in charge of the wreath-laying ceremony, the person in charge of the wreath-laying ceremony, the person in charge of the wreath-laying ceremony, the person in charge of the wreath-laying ceremony, the person in charge of the wre

古文：凡玉四等：曰苍璧，曰黄琮，曰赤璋、白琥，曰两圭有邸。
现代文：所有的玉有四等：一是苍璧，以祀天，二是黄琮，以祀地，三是赤璋、白琥，以祀朝日、夕月，四是两圭有邸，以祭太社、太稷。
English: All jade has four grades: the first is Cang Bi, which is used to worship heaven, the second is Huang Qi, which is used to worship earth, the third is Red Qi, White Qi, which is used to worship the morning sun and the evening moon, and the fourth is Two Gui, which is used to worship Taisha and Taiko.

古文：帛五等：曰郊祀制帛，曰奉先制帛，曰礼神制帛，曰展亲制帛，曰报功制帛，牲四等：曰犊，曰牛，曰太牢，曰少牢。
现代文：帛有五等：一是郊祀制帛，祭祀天地，二是奉先制帛，祭祀祖先，三是礼神制帛，祭祀社稷、群神、帝王、孔子，四是展亲制帛，祭享亲王，五是报功制帛，祭杞功臣。祭牲有四等：一是犊，二是牛，三是太牢，四是少牢。
English: There are five grades of yakitori: the first is the yakitori of suburban worship, the yakitori of worship of heaven and earth; the second is the yakitori of worship, the yakitori of worship of ancestors; the third is the yakitori of worship of gods, the yakitori of worship of society, gods, emperors, and Confucius; the fourth is the yakitori of performance, the yakitori of worship of princes; the fifth is the yakitori of performance, the yakitori of worship of meritorious subjects; and the fourth is the yakitori of sacrifice: the

古文：色尚骍或黝。
现代文：颜色崇尚辟或黝黑。
English: The colour should be bright or dark.

古文：大祀入涤三月，中祀一月，小祀一旬。
现代文：大祀送入洗涤三月，中祀送入洗涤一月，小祀送入洗涤一句。
English: The big ones are sent for washing in March, the middle ones are sent for washing in January, and the small ones are sent for washing in March.

古文：乐四等：曰九奏，曰八奏，曰七奏，曰六奏。
现代文：乐有四等：一是九奏，用于祭祀天地，二是八奏，祭祀神祇、太岁，三是七奏，祭祀大明、太社、太稷、帝王，四是六奏，祭祀夜明、帝社、帝稷、宗庙、丑王。
English: There are four grades of music: the first is nine-part, used for the worship of heaven and earth; the second is eight-part, for the worship of gods and ancestors; the third is seven-part, for the worship of Daming, Taisha, Taiko, and Emperor; and the fourth is six-part, for the worship of Yomei, Taisha, Emperor, ancestral temple, and Ugly King.

古文：舞二：曰文舞，曰武舞。
现代文：舞有两种：一是文舞，一是武舞。
English: There are two kinds of dances: one is the wreath dance, and the other is the martial dance.

古文：乐器不徙。
现代文：乐器不搬动。
English: The musical instruments are not moved.

古文：陵园之祭无乐。
现代文：陵园的祭典没有乐礼。
English: There is no music at the festival in the cemetery.

古文：岁终合祭五礼之神，则少卿摄事。
现代文：年终合祭五祀的神祇，便由少卿代理事务。
English: The five deities enshrined in the year-end festival were represented by Shokyo.

古文：初，吴元年置太常司，设卿，少卿，丞，典簿、协律郎、博士，赞礼郎。
现代文：起初，昊元年设置太常司，设卿，正三品，少卿，正四品，丞，正五品，典簿、协律郎、博士，正七品，赞礼郎，从八品。
English: At first, in the first year of the Heian period, there was a Grand Secretary, a Secretary, a Senior Third Rank, a Junior Secretary, a Senior Fourth Rank, a Junior Secretary, a Senior Fifth Rank, a Registrar, a Conciliator, a Doctor, a Senior Seventh Rank, a Commendation, and an Eighth Rank.

古文：洪武初，置各祠祭署，设署令、署丞。
现代文：送武初年，设置各祠祭署，设置署令、署丞。
English: In the first year of Emperor Wu's reign, each ancestral hall and festival office was set up, with an order and a secretary.

古文：十三年，更定协律郎等官品秩。
现代文：十三年，重新确定协律郎等官品级。
English: Thirteen years later, the official ranks of the conciliator and others were re-determined.

古文：三十四年改各署令为奉祀，署丞为祀丞。
现代文：协律郎正八品，赞礼郎正九品，司乐从九品。二十四年，改各署令为奉祀，署丞为祀丞。
English: In 24 years, it was changed that the post of Gyoritsuro was eight grades higher, the post of Sanreiro was nine grades higher, and the post of Siraku was nine grades higher.

古文：二十年改司为寺，官制仍旧。
现代文：三十年，改司为寺，官制仍旧。
English: Thirty years later, it was converted into a temple, but the bureaucratic system remained.

古文：建文中，增设赞礼郎二人，太祝一人，以及各祠祭署俱有更革。
现代文：二十五年，已定司丞正六品。建文年间，增设赞礼郎二人，太祝一人，以及各祠祭署都有变革。
English: Twenty-five years have passed since the establishment of the office, and during the years of the establishment of the document, two additional chanreiro and one more taizhu have been added, and there have been changes in each ancestral shrine and festival office.

古文：成祖初，惟易天坛为天地坛，馀悉复洪武间制。洪熙元年置牺牲所，吏目典掌文移。
现代文：洪熙元年，设置牺牲所，吏目掌管公文。此前，洪武三年设置神牲所，设麇牲令、大使、副使等官。
English: In the first year of Hongxi, a sacrificial hall was set up, and officials were in charge of official documents. Previously, Hongwu set up a sacrificial hall in the third year, and set up officials such as a sacrificial officer, an ambassador, and a vice-envoy.

古文：世宗厘祀典，分天地坛为天坛、地坛，山川坛、耤田祠祭署为神祇坛，大祀殿为祈谷殿，增置朝日、夕月二坛，各设祠祭署。
现代文：四年革除。世宗整顿端正祭祀典制，分天地坛为天坛、地坛，山川坛、藉田祠祭署为神只坛，大祀殿焉祈谷殿，增设朝日、夕月二坛，各设祠祭署。
English: Four years later, the Sect rectified the correct ritual ceremony system, dividing the Heaven and Earth Altar into the Heaven Altar, the Earth Altar, the Mountain and River Altar, and the Hontian Shrine Festival Office into the God Altar, the Great Worship Hall, and the Prayer Hall, and adding two altars for the rising sun and the setting moon, each with a shrine festival office.

古文：又增设协律郎、赞礼郎、司乐等员。万历四年，改神祇坛为先农坛。
现代文：万历六年恢复设置，如同台鱼年间旧制。万历四年，改神只坛为先农坛。
English: After six years, the setting was restored, just like the old system during the Taifu era. After four years, the god altar was changed to the farmer altar.

古文：提督四夷馆。少卿一人，掌译书之事。
现代文：提督四夷馆，少卿一人，正四品，掌管翻译书籍之事。
English: Admiral Shii-kan, one Shokei, Shoshihon, in charge of translating books.

古文：自永乐五年，外国朝贡，特设蒙古、女直、西番、西天、回回、百夷、高昌、缅甸八馆，置译字生、通事，通译语言文字。
现代文：从永乐五年，外国朝见进贡，特设蒙古、女真、西番、西天、回回、百夷、高昌、缅甸八馆，设置译字生、通事，通事起初隶属通政使司，翻译语言文字。
English: In the fifth year of the Yongle Emperor, the foreign imperial court paid tribute to set up eight special offices in Mongolia, Nanzhen, Sipan, Xitian, Huihe, Baiyi, Gaochang and Myanmar, and set up translators and interpreters. The interpreters and interpreters were initially subordinated to the diplomatic envoy, and translated the language and characters.

古文：正德中，增设八百馆。
现代文：正德年间，增设八百馆。
English: During the Zhengde era, an additional 800 museums were built.

古文：万历中，又增设暹罗馆。
现代文：八百国兰者哥进贡。万历年间，又增设暹罗馆。
English: Eight hundred countries paid tribute. During the Wanli period, the Siamese Pavilion was added.

古文：初设四夷馆隶翰林院，选国子监生习译。
现代文：起初设四夷馆隶属翰林院，挑选国子监监生学习翻译。
English: At the beginning, the Shiyi Museum was affiliated with the Hanlin Academy, and the students of the National Children's Supervision Center were selected to study translation.

古文：宣德元年，兼选官民子弟，委官教肄，学士稽考程课。
现代文：宣德元年，兼选官家平民子弟，委派官员教习，学士考核规定的内容和课程。
English: In the first year of the promulgation of the Constitution of the People's Republic of China, the sons and daughters of officials and commoners were elected, officials were appointed to teach, and the content and curriculum of the bachelor's examination were set.

古文：弘治七年，始增设太常寺卿、少卿各一员为提督，遂改隶太常。
现代文：参加考试的，与乡、会试题名科甲一样出身。后来祇是杂流。
English: Those who took the exam came from the same background as the townspeople and members of the examination committee. Later, they were just miscellaneous.

古文：嘉靖中，裁卿，止少卿一人。光禄寺。
现代文：那些在馆的，转升都在鸿胪寺。光禄寺，卿一人，从三品，少卿二人，正五品，寺丞二人，从六品。
English: Those in the hall were all promoted to Honjo-ji Temple. At Koroku-ji Temple, one chancellor was promoted to Sanbon, two junior chancellors were promoted to Shogo-bon, two senior chancellors were promoted to Terajo, and six junior chancellors were promoted to Terajo.

古文：卿一人，少卿二人，寺丞二人，其属，典簿厅，典簿二人，录事一人，大官、珍羞、良酝、掌醢四署，各署正一人，署丞四人，监事四人，司牲司，大使一人，副使一人，司牧局，大使一人，银库，大使一人。
现代文：它的下属，典簿厅，典簿二人，从七品，录事一人，从八品。大官、珍馑、良酝、掌醢四署，各有署正一人，从六品，署丞四人，从七品，监事四人，从八品。司牲司，大使一人，从九品，副使一人，后来革除。司牧局，大使一人，从九品，嘉靖七年革除。银库，大使一人。
English: Its subordinates, the Record Office, two recorders, from the seventh grade, one recorder, from the eighth grade; the four offices of the Grand Officer, the Clerk of the Privy Council, the Clerk of the Privy Council, the Clerk of the Privy Council, and the Clerk of the Privy Council, each with one official, from the sixth grade, four clerks, from the seventh grade, four supervisors, from the eighth grade; the Secretary of Animal Husbandry, one ambassador, from the ninth grade, one deputy envoy, later dismissed; the Secretary of Pastoral Affairs, one ambassador, from the ninth grade, dismissed in the seventh year of

古文：卿，掌祭享、宴劳、酒醴、膳羞之事，率少卿、寺丞官属，辨其名数，会其出入，量其丰约，以听于礼部。
现代文：卿掌管祭享、宴赏犒劳、酒醴、珍馑美食的事务，统管少卿、寺丞等下属，辨明他们的名位礼敷，计算其出入，衡量其丰厚简约，以听命于礼部。
English: The chancellor is in charge of the affairs of celebration, banqueting, wine tasting, and gourmet delicacies. He supervises subordinates such as junior chancellors and temple chancellors, identifies their ceremonial rites, calculates their entries and exits, measures their richness and simplicity, and obeys the orders of the ceremonial department.

古文：凡祭祀，同太常省牲；天子亲祭，进饮福受胙；荐新，循月令献其品物；丧葬供奠馔。
现代文：凡是祭祀，会同太常视察祭牲；天子亲自祭祀，进奉祭神的酒肉；荐新，按节令进献各种时鲜食品；丧葬供应祭奠食品。
English: Whenever there is a sacrificial rite, the emperor and the empress often inspect the sacrificial animals; the heavenly son himself performs the sacrificial rite and offers the sacrificial god wine and meat; the emperor recommends new foods and presents various seasonal fresh foods according to the festival regulations; funerals supply sacrificial foods.

古文：所用牲、果、菜物，取之上林苑；不给，市诸民，视时估十加一，其市直季支天财库。
现代文：所用牲畜、水果、蔬菜等物品，从上林苑取用；供应不上，便从民间购买，比照市价加十分之一，那些购物款每季度从天财库支取。
English: The livestock, fruits, vegetables and other items used are obtained from Shanglinyuan. If the supply is not available, they are purchased from the private sector, plus one-tenth of the market price, and those purchases are withdrawn quarterly from the Treasury.

古文：四方贡献果鲜厨料，省纳惟谨。
现代文：各地贡献果鲜厨房用料，省察收取十分谨慎。
English: All regions contribute ingredients for the fresh fruit kitchen, and receive them with great care.

古文：器皿移工部及募工兼作之，岁省其成败。
现代文：器皿移交工部及招募工匠共同制作，每年审察制作及毁坏数目。
English: The vessels are handed over to the work department and craftsmen are recruited to jointly produce them, and the number of production and destruction is reviewed every year.

古文：凡筵宴酒食及外使、降人，俱差其等而供给焉。
现代文：凡是筵席酒食及外来使节、归降之人，都分等级差别而供给他们。
English: All the banquets, the food and drink, the foreign envoys, and the returnees were all provided to them according to their rank.

古文：传奉宣索，籍记而覆奏之。
现代文：传奉进献的，皇帝下旨索要的，登记并回覆上奏。
English: Those presented by the emperor, and those requested by the emperor, are registered and replied to.

古文：监以科道官一员，察其出入，纠禁其奸弊。
现代文：以科道官一员监察，查核财物的收支，纠察禁止其作奸舞弊。
English: With a member of the Science and Technology Commission to supervise, check the income and expenditure of property, and picket to prohibit them from cheating.

古文：岁四月至九月，凡御用物及祭祀之品皆用冰。
现代文：每年四月至九月，凡是御用物品以及祭祀物品都用冰保护。
English: From April to September every year, all royal items and sacrificial items are protected with ice.

古文：大官，供祭品宫膳、节令筵席、蕃使宴犒之事。
现代文：大官署主管供给祭品和宫申膳食、节日时令的筵席、犒劳宴请番国使者的事务。
English: It is the responsibility of the head of the Grand Government Office to provide offerings and meals for the imperial court, as well as seasonal feasts and banquets for the envoys.

古文：珍羞，供宫膳肴核之事。
现代文：珍馑署主管供给宫中膳食肉类、果类食品的事务。
English: He was in charge of supplying the imperial court with meat and fruit.

古文：良酝，供酒醴之事。
现代文：良酝署主管供给美酒的事务。
English: He is also in charge of the business of supplying fine wine.

古文：掌醢，供饧、油、醯、酱、梅、盐之事。
现代文：掌醢署主管供给糖、油、醋、酱、梅、盐的事务。
English: He was in charge of the supply of sugar, oil, vinegar, sauce, plums and salt.

古文：司牲养牲，视其肥瘠而蠲涤之。
现代文：司牲司豢养牲畜，视其肥瘦而屠宰洗涤。
English: Siddhartha Siddhartha kept livestock and slaughtered and washed them according to their weight.

古文：司牧亦如之。
现代文：司牧局也如此。
English: The same applies to the Pastoral Office.

古文：初，吴元年置宣徽院，设院使，同知，院判，典簿。
现代文：起初，昊元年，设置宣徽院，设院使，正三品，同知，正四品，院判，正五品，典簿，正七品。
English: At the beginning, in the first year of the Heian period, the Xuanhui Academy was set up, and the envoy of the academy was set up, with the rank of the third grade, the same grade, the fourth grade, the court judgment, the fifth grade, the directory, and the seventh grade.

古文：以尚食、尚醴二局隶之。
现代文：以尚食、尚醴二局隶属于它。
English: The two bureaus of Shang Cuisine and Shang Cuisine are subordinate to it.

古文：洪武元年改为光禄寺，设光禄卿，少卿，寺丞，主簿。
现代文：各局设大使，从六品，副使，从七品。洪武元年改焉光禄寺，设光禄卿，正四品，少卿，正五品，寺丞，正六品，主簿，正八品。
English: Each bureau set up an ambassador, from the sixth grade, a deputy envoy, from the seventh grade. In the first year of Hongwu, it was renamed Guanglu Temple, and set up Guanglu Sir, Senior Fourth Grade, Junior Sir, Senior Fifth Grade, Terajo, Senior Sixth Grade, Master, and Senior Eighth Grade.

古文：所属尚食等局，又移太常司供需库隶之。
现代文：所属尚食等局，又移交太常司供需库隶属于它。
English: It belongs to the Food and Beverage Bureau, and has been transferred to the Department of Supply and Demand, which is subordinate to it.

古文：二年，设直长四人，遇百官赐食御前者，则令供事。
现代文：局库官品仍旧。二年，设直长四人，遇上百官在御前赐食的，便命令他们供奉办事。
English: In the second year, four direct superintendents were appointed, and when hundreds of officials gave out food in front of the emperor, he ordered them to perform their duties.

古文：四年，置法酒库。
现代文：四年，设置法酒库。
English: Four years later, the brewery was established.

古文：八年，改寺为司，升卿秩，以寺丞为司丞，主簿为典簿，增设录事。
现代文：设内酒坊大使，从八品，副使，从九品。八年，改寺为司，升卿的官阶，卿官阶从三品，少卿从四品，以寺丞为司丞，从六品，主簿为典簿，从七品，增设录事，从八品。
English: In the eighth year, the temple was changed to a department, the official rank of the promotion was changed from three to four, the official rank of the promotion was changed from three to four, the official rank of the promotion was changed from four to four, the official rank of the promotion was changed from three to four, the official rank of the promotion was changed from four to four, the official rank of the promotion was changed from three to four, the official rank of the promotion was changed from four to four, the official rank of the promotion was changed from three to four, the official rank of the promotion was changed from four to four, the official rank of the promotion was changed from four to four, the official rank of the

古文：又置所属大官、珍羞、良酝、掌醢四署，每署令一人，丞一人，监事一人。孳牧所，大使一人，副使一人。十年，定光禄司散官品秩。
现代文：到这时确定官阶，由内官授予的，依照内官散官授职。流动的非土著、非世袭的官担任的，依照文官散官授职，由庖厨授任的，卿为从三品，授官尚膳大夫；少卿焉正五品，授官奉膳大夫；司丞焉从六品，授官司膳郎；各署丞为从七品，授官掌膳郎；监事焉从八品，授官执膳郎。
English: At this time, the official ranks were determined, and the highest rank awarded by the inner officer was assigned according to the inner officer's rank. The mobile non-indigenous, non-hereditary officials were assigned according to the civil officer's rank and assigned by the eunuch, and the lord was from the third grade and awarded the position of Shang Jian Daifu; the junior lord was from the fifth grade and awarded the position of Feng Jian Daifu; the secretary was from the sixth grade and awarded the position of secretary Jianro; the officers were from the seventh grade and awarded the position of chief secretary Jianro; the supervisor was from the eighth grade and awarded the position of

古文：寻罢各局库，置司牲司，又改孳牧所为司牧司。
现代文：不久罢除各局库，设置司牲司，又改孳牧所为司牧司。
English: Soon after, all the bureaus were abolished, and a secretary for animal husbandry was set up, and the herdsman's office was changed to a secretary for animal husbandry.

古文：三十年，复改为光禄寺，官制仍旧。
现代文：后来为司牧局。三十年，又改为光禄寺，官制仍旧。
English: Later, it was called the Pastoral Office. Thirty years later, it was changed to Koroku-ji Temple, but the official system remained.

古文：建文中，升少卿、寺丞品秩。
现代文：少卿已定正五品。建文年间，升少卿、寺丞官阶品级。
English: During the Jianwen era, Shosho-kyo (Junior Secretary) and Terajo (Chamberlain) were promoted to official court ranks.

古文：增设司圃所，改司牲司为孳牲所。
现代文：少卿升为四品，寺丞升焉五品。增设司圃所，改司牲司马孳牲所，提升它的品级。
English: Shokyo was raised to the fourth grade, and Terajyo was raised to the fifth grade. A nursery school was added, and the horse-breeding school was upgraded to the highest grade.

古文：成祖复旧制。
现代文：成祖恢复旧制。
English: Chengzu restored the old system.

古文：正统六年，裁四署冗员。
现代文：裁署正四人，署丞五人，监事七人。
English: There are four senior officials, five junior officials, and seven supervisors.

古文：嘉靖七年，革司牧局。
现代文：嘉靖七年，革除司牧局。
English: In the seventh year of Jiajing, the pastoral bureau was abolished.

古文：万历二年，添设银库大使一人。
现代文：万历二年，添设银库大使一人。
English: In the past two years, one more ambassador has been added to the bank.

古文：太仆寺。卿一人，少卿二人，寺丞四人。其属，主簿厅，主簿一人。
现代文：太仆寺，卿一人，从三品，少卿二人，正四品，正堡十一年增设一人。
English: In the eleventh year of Taichu-ji Temple's existence, one peerage, three promotions, two junior peerages, four senior peerages, and one senior castle were added.

古文：常盈库，大使一人。
现代文：寺丞四人，正六品。它的下属，主簿厅，主簿一人，从七品。
English: There are four chief priests and six priests, and their subordinates, the chief bookkeeper and one chief bookkeeper, make up seven priests.

古文：所辖，各牧监，监正一人，监副一人，录事一人。
现代文：常盈库，大使一人。所管辖的有，各牧监，监正一人，正九品，监副一人，从九品，录事一人，后来监正、监副、录事都革除。
English: Chang Ying Ku, one ambassador. Those under his jurisdiction were: each pastoral overseer, overseer-general one, overseer-general nine, overseer-deputy one, from the nine overseers, record-keeper one, later overseer-general, overseer-deputy, record-keeper were all removed.

古文：各群，群长一人。
现代文：各群，群长一人，后来革除。
English: Each group had a group leader, who was later dismissed.

古文：卿，掌牧马之政令，以听于兵部。
现代文：卿掌管牧马的政令，以听命于兵部。
English: Sir is in charge of the government order of the wrangler, to obey the orders of the military.

古文：少卿一人佐寺事，一人督营马，一人督畿马。
现代文：少卿一人辅助太仆寺事务，一人督管军营马，一人督管京畿马。
English: One Shaoqing assisted in the affairs of the Taipo Temple, one was in charge of the military camp horse, and one was in charge of the Gyeonggi horse.

古文：寺丞分理京卫、畿内及山东、河南六郡孳牧、寄牧马匹。
现代文：寺丞分管京卫、京郊内以及山东、河南六郡养牧、寄养马匹。
English: Terajo is in charge of raising and fostering horses in Beijing, the suburbs of Beijing, and six counties in Shandong and Henan.

古文：凡军民孳牧，视其丁产，授之种马。
现代文：济南、兖州、束昌、开封、彰德、卫辉。凡是军民饲养牧马，根据他的人手产业，给予他种马。
English: Jinan, Zhangzhou, Sokchang, Kaifeng, Changde, Weihui. All the soldiers and civilians raise horses and give them stallions according to their manpower.

古文：牡十之二，牝十之八，为一群。
现代文：公马十分之二，母马十分之八，为一群。
English: Two-tenths of the stallions and eight-tenths of the mares form a herd.

古文：岁征其驹，曰备用马，齐其力以给将士。
现代文：南方以四匹母马、一匹公马焉一群。每年征用他的马驹，称为备用马，整治其马力供给将士。
English: Nanfang led a group of four mares and one stallion. Every year, his stable was requisitioned, known as a spare horse, and its horsepower was used to supply soldiers.

古文：将士足，则寄牧于畿内府州县，肥瘠登耗，籍其毛齿而时阅之。
现代文：将士够用，则寄养放牧于京郊地区的府州县，肥瘦增加损耗，登记它的毛色年龄而不时查看。
English: If it is old enough, it will be fostered and grazed in Fuzhou County in the suburbs of Beijing. If it is too thin, it will lose weight, and its coat color age will be registered and checked from time to time.

古文：三岁偕御史一人印烙，选其健良而汰其羸劣。
现代文：长到三年偕同御史一人印烙印，挑选那些健壮的好马而淘汰那些体弱的劣马。
English: He grew up to be a three-year-old, and he was the only one to make a mark, selecting the strong and good horses and eliminating the weak and inferior horses.

古文：其草场已垦成田者，岁敛其租金，灾祲则出之以佐市马。
现代文：那些草场已经开垦成农田的，每年收取它的租金，遇到灾害便取出以资助买马。
English: Those pastures have been reclaimed into farmland, collect its rent every year, and in the event of a disaster, they are taken out to finance the purchase of horses.

古文：其赔偿折纳，则征马金输兵部。
现代文：那些赔偿折合交纳，便征收马金交纳给兵部。
English: If those compensations are combined and paid, the maximum amount of money will be collected and paid to the military department.

古文：主簿典勾省文移。
现代文：主簿掌管检察公文。
English: The general ledger is in charge of the procuratorial documents.

古文：大使典贮库马金。
现代文：大使掌管库存马金。
English: The ambassador is in charge of stockpiling gold bullion.

古文：初，洪武四年置群牧监于答答失里营所，随水草利便立官署，专司牧养。
现代文：起初，洪武四年，设置群牧监于答答失里营所，跟随水草便利建官署，专门掌管放牧喂养。
English: At the beginning, in the fourth year of Hongwu, the herd herdsman supervisor was set up at the camp in Daduo Village, and the government office was built following the convenience of aquatic plants, specifically in charge of grazing and feeding.

古文：六年，更置群牧监于滁州，旋改为太仆寺，秩从三品，设卿、少卿、寺丞，又设首领官知事、主簿各一人。
现代文：六年，又在滁州设置群牧监，不久改为太仆寺，官阶从三品，设卿、少卿、寺丞，又设首领官知事、主簿各一人。
English: In the sixth year, a group pastoral overseer was also set up in Zhangzhou, which was soon changed to Daju Temple. The official ranks were reduced from three to three, and there was a chief, a junior chief, and a temple chancellor, as well as a leader, an official governor, and a chief steward.

古文：七年，增设牧监、群官二十七处，隶太仆寺。
现代文：七午，增设牧监、群官二十七处，隶属太仆寺。
English: At 7 a.m., an additional 27 offices of pastoral supervisors and group officials were set up, affiliated with Taipu Temple.

古文：寻定群牧监品秩。
现代文：不久定群牧监官阶品级。
English: The grade of the herdsman inspector will be determined soon.

古文：十年，增置滁阳等各牧监及所属各群。
现代文：令，正五品；丞，正六品；镇抚，从六品；群头十人，吏目一人，省注。十年，增加设置滁阳等各牧监以及所属各群。
English: 令,正五品;丞,正六品;镇抚,从六品;群头十人,吏目 ɗaya,省注. In ten years, the number of pastoral supervisors such as Fenyang and the groups they belong to will be increased.

古文：改牧监令、丞为监正、监副。
现代文：改牧监令、丞为监正、监副。
English: The director of pasture management will be changed, and joe will become the director and deputy director.

古文：二十二年，定滁阳等十二牧监，每监设监正一人，监副二人，录事一人。
现代文：监正，从八品；监副，正九品；御良，从九品。后来又定监正为正九品。二十二年，规定滁阳等十二牧监，每监设监正一人，监副二人，录事一人。
English: Supervisor, from eight products; Deputy Supervisor, from nine products; Goryo, from nine products. Later, it was decided that Supervisor would be from nine products. In 1922, it was stipulated that there would be twelve pastoral supervisors such as Shenyang, with one supervisor, two supervisors, and one recorder.

古文：来安等一百二十七群，每群设群长一人。
现代文：仪凤、仙坛、立信、归政、丰庆、安兴、游山、永宁八群，隶属溧水监。
English: Yifeng, Siantan, Lixin, Guizheng, Fengqing, Anxing, Yushan, Yongning eight groups, affiliated to the Water Conservancy Bureau of Fujian Province.

古文：二十三年，增置江东、当涂二牧监及所属各群。
现代文：互塑、永保、化洽、姑熟、繁昌、多福、丹阳、德政八群，隶属当涂监。
English: Mutual plastic, Yongbo, Kacho, Guju, Prosperous, Dafu, Danyang, Dezheng eight groups, under the supervision of painting.

古文：又罢乌衣等五十四群，改置永安等七群，定为牧监十四，群九十有七。二十八年，悉罢群牧监，以其马隶有司牧养。
现代文：枣林、海亭、伏龙、龙河、会龙、九龙、万龙七群，隶属舒城监。二十八年，全部罢除群牧监，把它的马匹隶属有关部门牧养。
English: Zaolin, Haiting, Fulong, Longhe, Heulong, Jiulong, and Wanlong seven groups, belonging to Shucheng supervisor. In 28 years, all herd herdsmen were dismissed, and their horses were shepherded under the relevant departments.

古文：三十年，置行太仆寺于北平，秩如太仆寺。
现代文：三十年，设置行太仆寺于北平，官阶如同太仆寺。
English: Thirty years later, the Taipo Temple was established in Peiping, and the official ranks were the same as those of the Taipo Temple.

古文：建文中，升寺丞品秩，又改其首领官职名，增设录事，及典厩、典牧二署，骕騻等十八群，滁阳等八牧监，龙山等九十二群。
现代文：建文年间，提升寺丞官阶品级，以前六品，升为五品。又改它的首领官官职名称，增设录事，以及典厩、典牧二署，锈駚等十八群，滁阳等八牧监，龙山等九十二群。
English: During the Jianwen period, the official grade level of the temple was raised from six to five, and the official title of the head of the temple was changed, and records were added, as well as eighteen groups such as the stable, the second herding station, the rusty herd, eight herdsmen such as Fenyang, and ninety-two groups such as Longshan.

古文：成祖复旧制。
现代文：成祖恢复旧有制度。
English: Chengzu restored the old system.

古文：永乐元年，改北平行太仆寺为北京行太仆寺。
现代文：永乐元年，改北平行太仆寺为北京行太仆寺。
English: In the first year of Yongle, the North Parallel Taipu Temple was changed to Beijing Xing Taipu Temple.

古文：十八年定都北京，遂以行太仆寺为太仆寺。
现代文：十八年，定都北京，于是以行太仆寺为太仆寺。
English: In the 18th year, Beijing was designated as the capital, so it was decided to rename Taipo Temple to Taipo Temple.

古文：洪熙元年，复称北京行太仆寺。
现代文：洪熙元年，恢复称为北京行太仆寺。
English: In the first year of Hongxi, it was restored as Beijing Xing Taipu Temple.

古文：正统六年，定为太仆寺。
现代文：正统六年确定焉太仆寺。
English: It has been six years since the establishment of the orthodoxy of En Taipo Temple.

古文：其旧在滁州者，改为南京太仆寺。
现代文：以前在滁州的，改为南京太仆寺。
English: Formerly in Ganzhou, it was changed to Nanjing Taipu Temple.

古文：鸿胪寺。卿一人，左、右少卿各一人，左、右寺丞各一人。
现代文：鸿胪寺，卿一人，正四品，左、右少卿各一人，从五品，左、右寺丞各一人，从六品。
English: Honjo-ji Temple, one Kyo, four Sho, one Left, one Right Sho, five Sho, one Left, one Right Jojo, six Sho.

古文：其属，主簿厅，主簿一人。
现代文：它的下属，主簿厅，主簿一人，从八品。
English: Its subordinate, the main book office, the main book is one person, from eight products.

古文：司仪、司宾二署，各署丞一人，鸣赞四人，序班五十人。
现代文：司仪、司宾二署，各有署丞一人，正九品，鸣赞四人，从九品，后来增设五人。
English: The two offices of the Master of Ceremonies and the Master of Ceremonies each had a secretary, and the nine official prizes were awarded to four people, and the nine official prizes were awarded to another four people, and five additional people were later added.

古文：鸿胪，掌朝会、宾客、吉凶仪礼之事。
现代文：鸿胪掌管朝会、宾客、吉凶礼仪的事务。
English: Hongyu is in charge of the affairs of the morning assembly, guests, and auspicious and inauspicious etiquette.

古文：凡国家大典礼、郊庙、祭祀、朝会、宴飨、经筵、册封、进历、进春、传制、奏捷，各供其事。
现代文：所有国家大型典礼、郊庙、祭祀、朝会、宴会、御前讲席、册封、进呈日历、进春、传达制令、报告捷报，各自履行其责。
English: All large-scale national ceremonies, suburban temples, religious services, imperial conferences, banquets, lectures before the emperor, the sealing of documents, the submission of calendars, the arrival of spring, the transmission of decrees, reports and reports, each fulfill their responsibilities.

古文：外吏朝觐，诸蕃入贡，与夫百官使臣之复命、谢恩，若见若辞者，并鸿胪引奏。
现代文：外地官入朝觐见，各蕃王入朝进贡，以及百官使臣的复命、谢恩，有的召见有的推辞，都由鸿胪上奏引见。
English: Foreign officials came to the Imperial Court to pay tribute, as well as hundreds of officials and envoys received orders and thanks, some were summoned and some were rebuffed, all of which were introduced by Hongxuan Shangso.

古文：岁正旦、上元、重午、重九、长至赐假、赐宴，四月赐字扇、寿缕，十一月赐戴暖耳，陪祀毕，颁胙赐，皆赞百官行礼。
现代文：每年正旦、上元、重午、重九、长至赐假、赐宴，四月赏赐字扇、寿缕，十一月赏赐戴暖耳，陪祀完毕，颁赐胙肉，都要赞唱百官行礼。
English: Every year, on the first day of the lunar month, the first day of the lunar month, the first day of the lunar month, the first day of the lunar month, the first day of the lunar month, the first day of the lunar month, the first day of the lunar month, the first day of the lunar month, the first day of the lunar month, the first day of the lunar month, the first day of the lunar month, the first day of the lunar month, the first day of the lunar month, the first day of the lunar month, the first day of the lunar month, the first day of the lunar month, the first day of the lunar month, the first day of the lunar month,

古文：司仪，典陈设、引奏，外吏来朝，必先演仪于寺。
现代文：司仪掌管陈设、引奏，外官来京朝见，必须先在鸿胪寺演练仪式。
English: The master of ceremonies is in charge of setting up and playing the music. Foreign ministers who come to Beijing to meet the emperor must first rehearse the ceremony at Hongye Temple.

古文：司宾，典外国朝贡之使，辨其等而教其拜跪仪节。
现代文：司宾掌管外国朝贡的使节，辨明他的等级而教导他们拜跪的仪节。
English: The steward presided over the envoys of foreign tributes, discerned his rank and taught them the ritual of kneeling.

古文：鸣赞，典赞仪礼。
现代文：呜赞掌管赞唱导引礼仪。
English: Wuzan presides over the chanting guide etiquette.

古文：凡内赞、通赞、对赞、接赞、传赞咸职之。
现代文：所有内赞、通赞、对赞、接赞、传赞都要履行职责。
English: All internal praise, general praise, counter-praise, receiving praise, and spreading praise must perform their duties.

古文：序班，典侍班、齐班、纠仪及传赞。
现代文：序班掌管侍班、齐班、纠正礼仪以及传达赞唱。
English: The orderly class presides over the attendant class, the uniform class, corrects the etiquette and conveys the praise.

古文：初，吴元年置侍仪司，秩从五品。
现代文：开初，吴元年设置侍仪司，官阶从五品。
English: At the beginning, in the first year of the Wu Dynasty, the Office of the Attendant of Ceremonies was set up, and the official rank was raised from the fifth grade.

古文：洪武四年定侍仪使，引进使，奉班都知，通赞、通事舍人，俱为七品以下官。
现代文：洪武四年，定为侍仪使，从七品，引进使，正八品，奉班都知，正九品，通赞、通事舍人，从九品，都是七品以下官员。
English: In the fourth year of Hongwu, it was determined to be the servant of the ceremony, from the seventh grade, the introduction of the envoy, the eighth grade, the duty of the class to know, the ninth grade, the general praise, the passer-by, from the ninth grade, are the officials below the seventh grade.

古文：九年，改为殿庭仪礼司，设使一人，副三人，丞奉一人，鸣赞二人，序班十六人，九关通事使一人，副六人。
现代文：九年，改为殿庭仪礼司，设置使一人，正七品，副职三人，正八品，承奉一人，从八品，鸣赞二人，正九品，序班十六人，从九品，九关通事使一人，正八品，副职六人，从八品。
English: In the ninth year, it was changed to the palace and garden ceremony and etiquette department, with one official, seven grades, three vice-officials, eight grades, one servant, eight grades, two praisers, nine grades, sixteen students, nine grades, one official, eight grades, six vice-officials, eight grades.

古文：十三年，改使为司正，分左、右司副各一人，增序班至四十四人，革承奉，增设司仪四人。
现代文：十三年，改使为司正，分左、右司副各一人，增加序班至四十四人，革除承奉，增设司仪四人。
English: Thirteen years later, the post was changed to the position of chief steward, with one deputy for each of the left and right divisions, the number of officers was increased to forty-four, the position of successor was abolished, and four additional stewards were appointed.

古文：二十二年，增设左、右司丞四人。
现代文：二十二年，增设左、右司丞四人，正九品。
English: In 1922, four new Left and Right Secretaries of the Privy Council were created, with the rank of the ninth grade.

古文：三十年，始改为鸿胪寺，升秩正四品，设官六十二员。
现代文：三十年，开始改为鸿胪寺，提升品级为正四品，设官员六十二人。
English: Thirty years later, it was changed to Hongye Temple, and the promotion level was raised to positive four, and 62 officials were established.

古文：又设外夷通事隶焉。
现代文：卿以下人数、品级如同上文所列。又设外夷通事隶属于它。
English: The number of persons and ranks below Kyo are as listed above. In addition, Geyotsu-tsuji is subordinate to it.

古文：建文中，升少卿以下品秩。
现代文：建文年间，升少卿以下品级。
English: During the Kenmon era, he was promoted to Shosho-kyo (Junior Secretary) and below.

古文：罢司仪、司宾二署，而以行人隶鸿胪寺。
现代文：罢除司仪、司宾二署，而以行人隶属鸿胪寺。
English: The two offices of Master of Ceremonies and Master of Ceremonies were abolished, and the two offices became subordinate to Honjo-ji Temple.

古文：成祖初，悉复旧制。
现代文：成祖初年，全都恢复旧制。
English: In the first year of Chengzu, they all resumed the old system.

古文：尚宝司。卿一人，少卿一人，司丞三人。
现代文：尚宝司，卿一人，正五品，少卿一人，从五品，司丞三人，正六品。
English: Shang Baoji, one chancellor, five senior officials, one junior chancellor, five junior officials, three vice-chancellors, six senior officials.

古文：掌宝玺、符牌、印章，而辨其所用。
现代文：呈元年只是设一人，后增加二人。掌管宝玺、符牌、印章，而辨明其使用范围。
English: In the first year of the present era, only one person was set up, and later two people were added. They are in charge of treasure chests, signs, and seals, and identify their scope of use.

古文：宝二十有四。旧宝十有七，嘉靖十八年增制者七。
现代文：宝玺有二十四枚，旧寅十七枚，嘉靖十八年，增加制造的有七枚。
English: There are 24 pieces of Baojun, 17 pieces of old Yin, 18 pieces of Jiajing, and 7 pieces of increased production.

古文：曰 皇帝奉天之宝 ，为唐、宋传玺，祀天地用之。
现代文：称为 皇帝奉天之宝 ，为唐、宋传玺，祭祀天地使用它。
English: Known as "Emperor Feng Tian's Treasure," it was used by Tang and Song dynasties to worship heaven and earth.

古文：若诏与赦，则用 皇帝之宝 ；册封、赐劳，则用 皇帝行宝 ；诏亲王、大臣及调兵，则用 皇帝信宝 ；上尊号，则用 皇帝尊亲之宝 ；谕亲王，则用 皇帝亲亲之宝 。
现代文：若是诏诰和赦令，便用 皇帝之宝 ；册封、赏赐犒劳，则用 皇帝行实 ；诏令亲王、大臣以及调兵，便用 皇帝信宝 ；上加尊号，便用 皇帝尊亲之宝 ；告谕亲王，便用 皇帝亲亲之宝 。
English: If it is an imperial edict and a pardon order, then use the treasure of the emperor; if it is a decree and a reward, then use the treasure of the emperor; if it is a decree and a reward, then use the treasure of the emperor; if it is a decree and a reward, then use the treasure of the emperor; if it is a decree and a reward, then use the treasure of the emperor; if it is a decree and a pardon order, then use the treasure of the emperor; if it is a decree and a reward, then use the treasure of the emperor; if it is a decree and a pardon order, then use the treasure of the emperor; if it is a decree and a

古文：其 天子之宝 ，以祀山川、鬼神； 天子行宝 ，以封外国及赐劳； 天子信宝 ，以招外服及征发。
现代文：其中 天子之宝 ，用于祭祀山川、鬼神； 天子行宝 ，用于册封外国及赏赐犒劳； 天子信宝 ，用于招抚边远蛮荒之人及征调。
English: Among them, the treasure of the heavenly son is used for the worship of mountains, rivers, and ghosts; the heavenly son's treasure is used for the canonization of foreign countries and the reward of reward; the heavenly son's treasure is used for the attraction of remote and wild people and the recruitment.

古文：诏用 制诰之宝 ；敕用 敕命之宝 ；奖励臣工，用 广运之宝 ；敕谕朝觐官，用 敬天勤民之宝 。
现代文：诏令用 制诰之宝 ；敕令用 敕命之宝 ；奖励大臣，用 广运之宝 ；敕令谕告来京朝见的官员，用 敬天勤民之宝 。
English: The imperial edict used the "treasure of making the imperial seal"; the imperial edict used the "treasure of saving lives"; the edict rewarded ministers, using the "treasure of widespread good luck"; the imperial edict announced officials who came to Beijing to see the imperial court, using the "treasure of honoring the heavens and diligently serving the people."

古文：若 御前之宝 ， 表章经史之宝 ， 钦文之宝 ，则图书文史等用之。
现代文：若是 御前之宝 ， 表章经史之宝 ， 钦文之宝 ，便图书文史等使用它们。
English: If it is a treasure of the Imperial Court, a treasure of the epitaph, a treasure of the history of literature, a treasure of the Qin Dynasty, then the book of literature and history will use them.

古文：世宗增制，为 奉天承运大明天子宝 ，为 大明受命之宝 ，为 巡狩天下之宝 ，为 垂训之宝 ，为 命德之宝 ，为 讨罪安民之宝 ，为 敕正万民之宝。 。
现代文：世宗增加制作，制 奉天承运大明天子宝 ，制 大明受命之宝 ，制 巡狩天下之宝 ，制 垂训之宝 ，制 命德之宝 ，制 讨罪安民之实 ，制 敕正万民之宝 。
English: The Sejong Dynasty increased production, and established the system of entrusting the transportation of great treasures to the heavens, the system of the treasure of the Great Ming Dynasty, the system of the treasure of the treasure of the world, the system of the treasure of learning, the system of the treasure of the virtue of life, the system of the truth of the safety of the people, and the system of the treasure of the people.

古文：太子之宝一，曰 皇太子之宝 。
现代文：太子的宝印一枚，称焉 皇太子之宝 。
English: A piece of the crown prince's seal, known as the crown prince's treasure.

古文：凡宝之用，必奏请而待发。
现代文：所有寅玺的使用，必须上奏请示而后准备发用。
English: All use of the gong must be requested and then prepared for use.

古文：每大朝会，本司官二员，以宝导驾，俟升座，各置宝于案，立待殿中。
现代文：每当大型朝会，本司官员二人，以宝玺引导车驾，等侯皇帝升座，各自放置宾玺在龙案上，站立等候在殿中。
English: Whenever there is a large-scale imperial court meeting, two officials from this department will lead the chariot with the treasure chariot, wait for the emperor to ascend to the throne, place the guest chariot on the dragon, and stand and wait in the hall.

古文：礼毕，捧宝分行，至中极殿，置案而出。
现代文：行礼完毕，捧宾玺分行排列，到中极殿，置放在龙案上而后出来。
English: After the ceremony is over, the guests are lined up in a row, taken to the Chukyo-den, placed on the dragon and then brought out.

古文：驾出幸，则奉以从焉。
现代文：御驾出巡，便奉宝玺跟随。
English: When he went out on patrol, Bong Bao-tao followed him.

古文：岁终，移钦天监，择日和香物入水，洗宝于皇极门。
现代文：年终，移交钦天监，选择吉日和香料入水，在皇极门洗涤宝玺。
English: At the end of the year, it was handed over to Qin Tianjun, who chose the auspicious day and the spice into the water, and washed the treasure at the imperial gate.

古文：籍奏一岁用宝之数。
现代文：登记上奏一年来使用宝玺的次数。
English: Record the number of times you have used Baojun in the past year.

古文：凡请宝、用宝、捧宝、随宝、洗宝、缴宝，皆与内官尚宝监俱。
现代文：凡是请宝、用宝、捧宝、随宝、洗宝、缴宝，都和内官尚宝监在一起。
English: All requests for treasure, the use of treasure, the holding of treasure, the following of treasure, the washing of treasure, and the paying of treasure are all carried out together with the steward, Shang Baozhong.

古文：凡金牌之号五，以给勋戚侍卫之扈从及班直者、巡朝者、夜宿卫者：曰仁，其形龙，公、侯、伯、驸马都尉佩之；曰义，其形虎，勋卫指挥佩之；曰礼，其形麟，千户佩之；曰智，其形狮，百户佩之；曰信，其形祥云，将军佩之。
现代文：所有金牌的标识有五种，用来颁发给功勋大臣外戚侍卫中的随从的以及值班的、巡视朝中的、夜晚住宿官中保卫的：称焉仁，它的形状为龙，公、侯、伯、驸马都尉佩带它；称焉义，它的形状焉虎，勋臣京卫指挥佩带它；称为礼，它的形状为麟，干户佩带它；称为智，它的形状为狮，百户佩带它；称为信，它的形状为祥云，将军佩带它。
English: There are five kinds of marks for all the gold medals, which are used to be awarded to the attendants of the guards of the maternal relatives of the Minister of Merit and the guards of the guards on duty, the patrols of the morning and the night accommodation officers: It is called Yanren, its shape is dragon, the prince, the lord, the mayor and the captain of the cavalry wear it; It is called Yanyi, its shape is tiger, and the commander of the Beijing Guards wear it; It is called Li, its shape is Lin, and the cadres wear it; It is called Zhi, its shape is lion, and the hundreds wear it; It is called Xin, its shape is

古文：半字铜符之号四，以给巡城寺卫官：曰承，曰东，曰西，曰北。
现代文：半字铜符的标识四种，以颁发给巡城寺卫官：称为承，称为东，称为西，称为北。
English: There are four kinds of half-character bronze symbols, which are awarded to the guards of the city tour temple: called "承," "东," "西" and "北."

古文：巡者左半，守者右半，合契而点察焉。
现代文：巡察者持左半部分，守卫者持右半部分，合符而检察验证它们。
English: The inspector holds the left half, the guard holds the right half, and checks and verifies them.

古文：令牌之号六：曰申，以给金吾诸卫之警夜者；曰木，曰金，曰土，曰火，曰水，以给五城之警夜者。
现代文：令牌的标识六种：称为申，以颁发给金吾各卫的夜间警卫者；称为木，称为金，称为土，称为火，称焉水，以颁发给五城的夜间警卫者。
English: There are six kinds of signs for tokens: known as "Shen," issued to the night guards of the Five Cities; known as "Wood," "Gold," "Earth," "Fire" and "Water," issued to the night guards of the Five Cities.

古文：铜牌之号一，以稽守卒，曰勇。
现代文：铜牌的标识一种，用来稽察守卫士卒，称为勇。
English: One kind of bronze badge, used to inspect the guards, is called Yong.

古文：牙牌之号五，以察朝参：公、侯、伯曰勋，驸马都尉曰亲，文官曰文，武官曰武，教坊司曰乐。
现代文：牙牌的标识五种，用来检察上朝参拜：公、侯、伯为勋，驸马都尉为亲，文官为文，武官为武，教坊司为乐。
English: There are five kinds of markings on the tooth plate, which are used to inspect the visit to the Shang Dynasty: the title of prince, lord, and noble is honor, the title of lieutenant of the horse is relative, the title of civil officer is letter, the title of military officer is warrior, and the title of teacher is joy.

古文：嘉靖中，总编曰官字某号，朝参佩以出入，不则门者止之。
现代文：嘉靖年间，总编为官字某号，入朝参拜时佩带出入，不佩带者守门人便禁止他出入。
English: During the Jiajing period, the editor-in-chief was an official with a certain number. When entering the court and visiting, he wore a badge to enter and exit. If he did not wear a badge, the gatekeeper would prohibit him from entering and exiting.

古文：私相借者，论如律。
现代文：私下相借的，按法令论处。
English: Private borrowing shall be dealt with in accordance with the law.

古文：有故，纳之内府。
现代文：有亡故，上缴于内府。
English: There was a death, and it was handed over to Naifu.

古文：祭牌之号三：陪，祀官曰陪，供事官曰供，执事人曰执。
现代文：祭牌的标识三种：陪祀官焉陪。供事官为供，执事人为孰。
English: There are three kinds of markings on the offering plate: the officiating priest accompanies the offering, the officiating minister serves as the officiant, and the officiating deacon serves as the priest.

古文：双鱼铜牌之号二：曰严，以肃直卫锦衣校尉之止直者；曰善，以饰光禄胥役之供事者。
现代文：双鱼铜牌的标识二种：称为严，用来整肃值班警卫锦衣校尉的停留值班的人；称为善，用来整治光禄寺小吏的供事者。
English: There are two kinds of signs for the bronze pisces: one is called Yan, which is used to purify the guards on duty, and the other is called Zen, which is used to purify the servants of the minor officials of the Guanglu Temple.

古文：符验之号五：曰马，曰水，曰达，曰通，曰信。
现代文：符验的标识五种：称为马，称为水，称为达，称为通，称为信。
English: There are five kinds of symbols for verification: known as ma, known as water, known as da, known as tong, known as letter.

古文：亲王之藩及文武出镇抚、行人通使命者，则给之。
现代文：亲王到藩国及文武官员出任镇抚、行人通使命的，便颁发给他们。
English: Princes were awarded the title when they came to the domain and civil and military officials to serve as magistrates and passers-by.

古文：御史出巡察则给印，事竣，咸验而纳之。
现代文：御史出京巡察便颁发印信，公务完毕，全部验证收藏。
English: When the inspector of the Imperial History Museum went to Beijing, he issued the seal letter, the official duties were completed, and the entire collection was verified.

古文：稽出入之令，而辨其数，其职至迩，其事至重也。
现代文：核察出入的命令，而置办其次数，其职位最亲近，其事务最重要。
English: The number of inspection and inspection orders, their positions are the closest, and their affairs are the most important.

古文：太祖初，设符玺郎，秩正七品。
现代文：太祖初年，设符玺郎，官阶正七品。
English: In the first year of the great-grandfather, he was given the title of "Fu Yulong" (符郎) and the official rank of "Senior Seventh Rank."

古文：吴元年改尚宝司卿，秩正五品，以侍从儒臣、勋卫领之，非有才能不得调。
现代文：吴元年，改焉尚宝司卿，官阶正五品，用侍从儒臣、功勋侍卫兼任此职，如丛堕以散骑舍人、黄观以侍中、塑莹以庶子为卿。如果没有才能不得调任。
English: In the first year of the Wu Dynasty, he was promoted to Shangbo Secretary, with the official rank of Senior Fifth Rank, and concurrently served as an attendant of Confucianism and a guard of honor. For example, Congpo was appointed as a horseback rider, Huang Guan as an attendant, and Pu Ying as an illegitimate child. If there was no talent, he could not be transferred.

古文：勋卫大臣子弟奉旨乃得补丞。
现代文：功勋侍卫大臣的子弟奉圣旨纔得以补任丞。
English: The son of the meritorious Minister of the Imperial Guard, Hōshō Chikaku, was able to fill the post of chō.

古文：其后多以恩荫寄禄，无常员。
现代文：那以后多以恩宠封荫寄托俸禄，没有常设人员。
English: Since then, it has mostly been a grace-and-favour arrangement, with no permanent staff.

古文：吏、户、礼、兵、刑、工六科。
现代文：吏、户、礼、兵、刑、工六科。
English: There are six subjects: officials, households, rituals, soldiers, punishments, and engineering.

古文：各都给事中一人，左、右给事中各一人。
现代文：各有都给事中一人，正七品、左、右给事中各一人，从七品。
English: Each of them gave one person in the matter, and the front seven, left, and right gave one person in the matter, from seven.

古文：给事中，吏科四人，户科八人，礼科六人，兵科十人，刑科八人，工科四人。
现代文：给事中，吏科四人，户科八人，礼科六人，兵科十人，刑科八人，工科四人，都是从七品。
English: In the case, four people from the public affairs department, eight people from the household science department, six people from the etiquette department, ten people from the military science department, eight people from the criminal science department, and four people from the engineering science department, all from the seventh grade.

古文：六科，掌侍从、规谏、补阙、拾遗、稽察六部百司之事。
现代文：六科，掌管侍从、规劝进谏、弥补阙失、纠正过失、稽察六部百司的事务。
English: Six departments, in charge of the attendants, exhortation, make up for mistakes, correct mistakes, and inspect the affairs of the six departments.

古文：凡制敕宣行，大事覆奏，小事署而颁之；有失，封还执奏。
现代文：凡是制诰敕令宣布实行，大事回复上奏，小事签署然后颁布；有阙失，封还执奏。
English: Whenever an imperial edict is promulgated and implemented, major matters are reported and reported, minor matters are signed and then promulgated; if there is a mistake, the seal is also performed.

古文：凡内外所上章疏下，分类抄出，参署付部，驳正其违误。
现代文：所有内外上呈的奏章奏疏下发，分类抄出，检核签署交付各部，驳正那些有错误的地方。
English: All internal and external transcripts submitted shall be transcribed, classified and copied out, checked and signed and delivered to all departments, and those with errors shall be corrected.

古文：吏科，凡吏部引选，则掌科同至御前请旨。
现代文：吏科，凡是吏部引荐推选，则掌科即都给事中，因为掌管本科印信，故而命名，六科同，一同到皇帝面前请求圣旨。
English: In the civil service department, all those who were recommended and selected by the civil service department were in the middle of the matter, because they were in charge of printing letters for undergraduates, hence the name. Together with the six departments, they went to the emperor to request the imperial edict.

古文：外官领文凭，皆先赴科画字。
现代文：外官领取文书凭信，都先到本科签字画押。
English: Foreign officials receive documents by letter, all of which must first be signed and stamped at the undergraduate school.

古文：内外官考察自陈后，则与各科具奏。
现代文：内外官考察自述后，便与各科共同上奏。
English: After the home and foreign affairs officials' self-description of the inspection, they and the various departments jointly made a report.

古文：拾遗纠其不职者。
现代文：拾遣纠弹那些不称职的。
English: Round up the incompetents.

古文：户科，监光禄寺岁入金谷，甲字等十库钱钞杂物，与各科兼莅之，皆三月而代。
现代文：户科，监察光禄寺每年收入的钱粮，甲字库等十库中钱钞杂物，与各科兼临巡察，都是每三个月就轮换。
English: Household science, monitoring the money and grain of the annual income of Guanglu Temple, A-character library and other ten libraries of money and banknotes and sundry items, as well as all disciplines, are rotated every three months.

古文：内外有陈乞田土、隐占侵夺者，纠之。
现代文：内外有陈请乞求田土、隐瞒强占侵夺的，便纠弹他们。
English: If anyone at home or abroad begs for farmland or conceals land grabbing, they will be reprimanded.

古文：礼科，监订礼部仪制，凡大臣曾经纠劾削夺、有玷士论者纪录之，以核赠谥之典。
现代文：礼科，监督制订礼部仪式制度，凡是大臣曾经被纠察弹劾削官免职、有辱士林淆誉的便记录它，用以核察赠谧的典制。
English: In the etiquette department, supervise the development of the etiquette department's ceremony system. Whenever a minister has been picketed, impeached, removed from office, or humiliated, record it to verify the awarding system.

古文：兵科，凡武臣贴黄诰敕，本科一人监视。
现代文：兵科，凡是武臣贴黄诰敕，本科一人监视。
English: In the field of military science, it is common for a military officer to post a yellow sign, and an undergraduate to monitor it.

古文：其引选画凭之制，如吏科。
现代文：那些引荐推选昼押签字的制度，全如吏科。
English: The system of signing the nomination papers at lunchtime is completely out of date.

古文：刑科，每岁二月下旬，上前一年南北罪囚之数，岁终类上一岁蔽狱之数，阅十日一上实在罪囚之数，皆凭法司移报而奏御焉。
现代文：刑科，每年二月下旬，上报前一年南北罪囚的数目，年终分类上报一年审判案件的数目，过了十天全部上报实在罪囚的数目，都依据司法部门公文而上奏给皇帝。
English: In late February of each year, the Criminal Investigation Department reported to the emperor the number of prisoners convicted of crimes in the north and south in the previous year, the number of cases tried in the previous year according to the year-end classification, and the number of prisoners convicted of actual crimes, all of which were reported ten days later, according to the official document of the judicial department.

古文：工科，阅试军器局，同御史巡视节慎库，与各科稽查宝源局。
现代文：工科，检核查问军器局，同御史巡枧节慎库，与各科查核宝源局。
English: Engineering, Inspection, Verification and Inspection of Military Equipment Bureau, Inspection and Inspection of Historical Relics and Treasures, and Inspection and Verification of Nuclear Resources Bureau.

古文：而主德阙违，朝政失得，百官贤佞，各科或单疏专达，或公疏联署奏闻。
现代文：而皇帝德行的阙失违误，朝政的得失，百官的贤能奸邪，各科或者单独上疏专门上达，或者公开上疏联名上奏使皇帝知晓。
English: However, the emperor's virtues and faults, the gains and losses of the imperial government, the virtues and vices of a hundred officials, all disciplines were either individually or publicly reported to the emperor.

古文：凡日朝，六科轮一人立殿左右，珥笔记旨。
现代文：虽然分别隶属六科，其事情确属重大的，各科都可以通奏。
English: Although it is divided into six subjects, the matter is really important, and all subjects can be played together.

古文：凡题奏，日附科籍，五日一送内阁，备编纂。
现代文：祇不过事情专属某科，就列某科为首。凡是每天朝见，六科轮流派一人站立宫殿左右，插笔于冠侧记录皇上旨意。
English: However, if the matter pertains exclusively to a certain department, that department is listed first. Usually, every morning, the six departments take turns to send one person to stand around the palace, inserting a pen in the crown side to record the emperor's will.

古文：其诸司奉旨处分事目，五日一注销，核稽缓。
现代文：凡是题奏，每天附录在该科册籍，每五天送一次到内阁，备用编纂。那些各司奉旨处理事务的条目，每五天注销一次，需核实稽察便暂缓注销。
English: The daily appendix of the subject book is sent to the cabinet every five days for backup compilation. Those items that are handled by departments according to instructions are cancelled every five days, and if they need to be verified and inspected, the cancellation will be suspended.

古文：内官传旨必覆奏，复得旨而后行。
现代文：内官传旨必须覆奏，再次得到圣旨而后实行。
English: The order given by the steward must be replayed, and after the order is received again, it must be carried out.

古文：乡试充考试官，会试充同考官，殿试充受卷官。
现代文：乡试充任考试官，会试充任同考官，殿试充任受卷官。
English: The township probationer is appointed as the examiner, the association probationer is appointed as the examiner, and the palace probationer is appointed as the examiner.

古文：册封宗室、诸蕃或告谕外国，充正、副使。
现代文：册封宗室、各藩王或告谕外国，充任正、副使。
English: He was appointed as the chief envoy and deputy envoy of the emperor, the emperor's wife, the kings of various domains, and foreign countries.

古文：朝参门籍，六科流掌之。
现代文：朝见参拜入门名册，六科轮流掌管。
English: The roster of beginners for the morning visit to the shrine is managed by the six departments in turn.

古文：登闻鼓楼，日一人，皆锦衣卫官监莅。
现代文：登闻鼓楼，每天一人，都由锦衣卫官员萑临监察。
English: At the Dengwen Drum Tower, every day one person is visited by a brocade-wearing official.

古文：受牒，则具题本封上。
现代文：洪武元年，以监察御史一人监察登闻鼓，后来令六科与锦衣卫轮流值守。
English: In the first year of Hongwu, one person was appointed to supervise the inspector of history to supervise Deng Wengu, and later the six disciplines and the brocade guard took turns on duty.

古文：遇决囚，有投牒讼冤者，则判停刑请旨。
现代文：接到呈文，便准备题本密封上奏。遇到处决罪囚，有投递文书诉讼冤情的，便判停刑请求圣旨。
English: Upon receipt of the submission, the manuscript is prepared and sealed for publication. In the event of an execution of a criminal prisoner, if there is a complaint about the delivery of the written proceedings, the sentence is suspended and a decree is requested.

古文：凡大事廷议，大臣廷推，大狱廷鞫，六掌科皆预焉。
现代文：凡是大事当廷议论，大臣当廷推举，大狱当廷审理，六科主管官员都参预进去。
English: For all major events to be discussed in court, for ministers to be elected in court, and for major crimes to be tried in court, the officials in charge of the six disciplines must participate in advance.

古文：明初，统设给事中，正五品，后数更其秩。
现代文：明代初年，统一设置给事中，正五品，后来多次变更它的品级，与起居注同。
English: In the first year of the Ming Dynasty, it was uniformly set in the middle of things, and it was the fifth grade. Later, it changed its grade several times, and it was the same as the living note.

古文：洪武六年，设给事中十二人，秩正七品，始分为六科，每科二人，铸给事中印一，推年长者一人掌之。
现代文：洪武六年，设给事中十二人，官阶正七品，开始分为六科，每科二人，铸造给事中印一枚，推举年长的一人掌管印章。
English: In the sixth year of Hongwu, twelve people were appointed to the middle ranks, and the official rank was raised to the seventh grade. At first, it was divided into six subjects, with two people in each subject. One seal was cast for the middle ranks, and the eldest person was elected to be in charge of the seal.

古文：九年，定给事中十人。
现代文：九年，确定给事中十人。
English: Nine years later, it was determined that ten people would be charged.

古文：十年，隶承敕监。
现代文：十年，隶属于承敕监。
English: For ten years, it has been under the supervision of the Ministry of Public Security.

古文：十二年，改隶通政司。
现代文：十二年，改为隶属通政司。
English: In 2012, it was changed to be subordinate to the Ministry of Communications.

古文：十三年，置谏院，左、右司谏各一人，左、右正言各二人。
现代文：十三年，设置谏院，左、右司谏各一人，正七品，左、右正言各二人，从七品。
English: In the thirteenth year, Shingon-in was established, with one left and one right Shingon priest at the beginning, and two left and two right Shingon priests at the end.

古文：十五年，又置谏议大夫。
现代文：十五年，又设置谏议大夫。
English: Fifteen years later, the post of doctor of deliberation was established.

古文：寻皆罢。二十二年，改给事中为源士，增至八十一人。未几，复为给事中。
现代文：皇上认为正好符合古代元士的数目，改焉元士。到这时，又因六科为政事的本源，改为源士。不久，恢复为给事中。
English: The emperor thought that the number of genshi corresponded exactly to the number of genshi in ancient times, and changed the name to genshi. At this time, because the six sciences were the source of politics, it was changed to genshi. Soon, it was restored to genshujo.

古文：二十四年，更定科员，每科都给事中一人，正八品。
现代文：二十四年，重新定各科人数，每科都给事中一人，正八品。
English: Twenty-four years later, the number of people in each subject was re-determined, and each subject was given one person, a regular eighth grade.

古文：左、右给事中二人，从八品。
现代文：左、右给事中二人，从八品。
English: Left and right are given to two people in the middle, starting from the eighth grade.

古文：给事中共四十人，正九品。
现代文：给事中共四十人，正九品。
English: A total of forty people were assigned to the case, including nine officers.

古文：建文中，改都给事中，正七品，给事中，从七品，不置左、右给事中。
现代文：各科分设人数，如前所列。建文年间，改都给事中，正七品，给事中，从七品，不设置左、右给事中。
English: The number of people assigned to each section is as listed above. During the construction of the text, the capital was changed to the middle of the matter, positive seven products, in the middle of the matter, from seven products, without setting left and right to the middle of the matter.

古文：增设拾遗、补阙。
现代文：增设拾遣、补阙。
English: Addition of pick-up and drop-off points.

古文：成祖初，革拾遗、补阙，仍置左、右给事中，亦从七品。
现代文：成祖初年，革除拾遗、补阙，仍旧设置左、右给事中，也是从七品。
English: In the first year of the founder, the leather was removed from the scavenging and filling, and it was still set to the left and right, and it was also from the seven products.

古文：寻改六科，置于午门外直房莅事。
现代文：不久改为六科，设在午门外值班房办事。
English: Soon it was changed to six departments, located in the duty room outside the afternoon gate.

古文：宣德八年，增户科给事中，专理黄册。中书科。中书舍人二十人，直文华殿东房中书舍人，直武英殿西房中书舍人，内阁诰敕房中书舍人，制敕房中书舍人。
现代文：中书科，中书舍人二十人，从七品。值文华殿柬房中书舍人，值武英殿西房中书舍人，内阁诰敕房中书舍人，制敕房中书舍人，都是从七品，无定员。
English: In Chinese calligraphy, there are 20 calligraphers from seven grades. The calligraphers in the Cambrian Room of the Wenhua Hall, the calligraphers in the West Room of the Wuying Hall, the calligraphers in the Cabinet Room, and the calligraphers in the Printing Room are all from seven grades, with no fixed number.

古文：中书科舍人掌书写诰敕、制诏、银册、铁券等事。
现代文：中书科舍人负责书写诰敕、制诏、银册、铁券等事务。
English: The person in charge of the Chinese calligraphy department is responsible for matters such as writing badges, imperial edicts, silver books, and iron coupons.

古文：凡草请诸翰林，宝请诸内府，左券及勘籍，归诸古今通集库。
现代文：所有草稿从翰林院领取，宝玺从内府请用，左券及勘合文簿，归之于古今通集库。
English: All drafts should be collected from the Hanlin Academy, and treasures should be collected from the Inner Prefectural Government. Leftover coupons and reference books should be returned to the Ancient and Modern Collections Library.

古文：诰敕，勘合籍，初用二十八宿，后用《急就章》为号。
现代文：诰敕，公、侯、伯及一品至五品为诰命，六品至九品焉敕命，勘合簿籍，起初用二十八宿编号，后来用《急就章》中的文字编号。
English: ,公,侯,伯 and 一品 to五品 are 命, while 六品 to 九品焉 is 命, according to the book of records. At first, they were numbered according to the 28th chapter, and later they were numbered according to the characters in the "Emergency Chapter."

古文：诰敕之号，曰仁、义、礼、智，公、侯、伯、蕃王、一品、二品用之；曰十二支，曰文、行、忠、信，文官三品以下用之；曰千字文，武官、续诰用之。
现代文：诰敕的编号，有的类编号称为仁、义、礼、智，公、侯、伯、藩王、一品、二品使用；有的类编号称为十二支，称为文、行、忠、信，文官三品以下使用；有的类按千字文编号，武官、续诰使用。
English: For the number of characters, some class numbers are called Jin, Yi, Li, Zhi, Gong, Hou, Bo, Han Wang, Ipin, and IIpin; some class numbers are called Twelve Branches, called Wen, Xing, Zhong, and Xin, and are used for civil servants with three characters or less; some class numbers are called Thousand Character Numbers, and are used for military officers and successive characters.

古文：皆以千号为满，满则复始。
现代文：都以干号焉满额，满额则重新开始。
English: They all start with the stem and end with the stem, and then start again with the stem.

古文：王府及驸马都尉不编号，土官以文武类编。
现代文：王府以及驸马都尉不编号，土官按文武类编号。
English: The royal palace and the commander of the imperial horse are not numbered, but the local officials are numbered according to the categories of literature and martial arts.

古文：凡大朝会，则侍班。
现代文：凡是大型朝会，便侍从朝班。
English: Whenever there is a large-scale imperial court gathering, the attendants follow the morning shift.

古文：东宫令节朝贺，则导驾侍班于文华殿。
现代文：东宫太子的时令节日朝贺，便引导太子车驾并侍从于文华殿。
English: When the Crown Prince of the Eastern Court held the morning greeting for the seasonal festival, he guided the crown prince in his carriage and waited on him at the Palace of Literature.

古文：册封宗室，则充副使。
现代文：册封宗室，便充任副使。
English: He was appointed as vice-envoy.

古文：大祀南郊，则随驾而供事。
现代文：那些乡试、会试、殿试，问或有差遣，充任都如六科人员。
English: Those township examinations, association examinations, and palace examinations, whether they are asked or sent, are like six subjects.

古文：员无正贰，印用年深者掌之。
现代文：大型祭祀于南郊，便跟睫皇帝车驾而供奉其事。官员之间没有正副，印信由年长资历深的人掌管。
English: Large-scale sacrificial rites were held in the southern suburbs, and people followed the emperor's car to offer their services. There was no chief or deputy among the officials, and the seal was managed by an older and more experienced person.

古文：文华殿舍人，职掌奉旨书写书籍。
现代文：文华殿舍人职掌遵奉圣旨书写书籍。
English: The Palace of Literature has given up its staff to write books in accordance with the Holy Will.

古文：武英殿舍人，职掌奉旨篆写册宝、图书、册页。
现代文：武英殿舍人，职掌遵奉圣旨篆写册宝、图书、册页。
English: According to the sacred edict, the officials of the Imperial Household Agency, who are the custodians of the Imperial Household, are to write down the treasures, books and pages of the anthology.

古文：内阁诰敕房舍人，掌书办文官诰敕，番译敕书，并外国文书、揭帖，兵部纪功、勘合底簿。
现代文：内阁诰敕房舍人，职掌书写办理文官诰敕，翻译敕书，以及外国文书、揭帖，兵部记功、验对底簿。
English: He was a member of the Cabinet Office, and his duties included writing and handling official documents, translating official documents, as well as foreign documents, unveiling postcards, recording achievements in the military, and checking and correcting ledgers.

古文：制敕房舍人，掌书办制敕、诏书、诰命、册表、宝文、玉牒、讲章、碑额、题奏、揭帖一应机密文书，各王府敕符底簿。
现代文：制敕房舍人，职掌书写办理制敕、诏书、诰命、册表、宝文、公文、讲章、碑额、题奏、揭帖等所有的机密文书，各王府敕符底簿。
English: It is the duty of the official in charge of imperial edicts to write and handle all confidential documents such as imperial edicts, imperial decrees, imperial edicts, catalogues, treasures, official documents, sermons, plaques, epitaphs, and proclamations, as well as the bottom books of imperial edicts.

古文：洪武七年，初设直省舍人十人，秩从八品，隶中书省。
现代文：洪武七年开始设直省舍人十人，官阶为从八品，隶属中书省。
English: In the seventh year of Hongwu's reign, the province of Zhizhong was established, with a staff of ten and eight official ranks. It was subordinate to the province of Zhongshu.

古文：九年，为中书舍人，改正七品，寻又改从七品。
现代文：九年，为中书舍人，改为正七品，不久又改为从七品。
English: In the ninth year, he gave up Chinese calligraphy and was promoted to the rank of Senior Seventh Rank. He was promoted to Junior Seventh Rank soon after.

古文：十年，与给事中皆隶承敕监。
现代文：十年，与给事中一起都隶属承敕监。
English: For the past ten years, it has been under the supervision of the State Administration for Work Safety.

古文：建文中，革中书舍人，改为侍书，升正七品，入文翰馆，隶翰林院。
现代文：建文年间，革除中书舍人，改为侍书，升为正七品，入文翰馆，隶属翰林院。
English: During the Jianwen period, he was expelled from the position of junior scribe, changed to attendant scribe, promoted to the rank of Senior Seventh Rank, and entered the Wenhan Museum, affiliated to the Hanlin Academy.

古文：成祖复旧制。
现代文：成祖恢复旧制。
English: Chengzu restored the old system.

古文：寻设中书科署于午门外，定设中书舍人二十人。
现代文：不久在午门外设中书科官署。定设中书舍人二十人。
English: Soon, the Chinese Calligraphy Office was set up outside the afternoon gate. Twenty people were assigned to the Chinese calligraphy room.

古文：宣德间，内阁置诰敕、制敕两房，皆设中书舍人。
现代文：那些恩宠封荫带俸的，不在名额内。宣德年间，内阁设置诰敕、制敕两房，都设中书舍人。
English: During the Xuande era, the cabinet set up two offices, the imperial secretary and the secretary, both of which were staffed by middle school teachers.

古文：嘉靖二十年，选各部主事，大理寺评事，带原衔直诰敕、制敕两房。
现代文：嘉靖二十年，选拔各部主事，大理寺评事，带原先职衔值班于诰敕、制敕两房。
English: In the 20th year of Jiajing, he was selected as the head of each department and the commentator of Dali Temple. With his original title, he was on duty in the two rooms of the main hall and the main hall.

古文：四十四年，两房员缺，令吏部考选举人为中书舍人。
现代文：四十四年，两房人员有缺，命令吏部考试选拔举人为中书舍人。
English: In 1944, when there was a shortage of personnel in the two houses, he ordered the cadre department to conduct an examination to select and nominate people to be middle school students.

古文：隆庆元年，令两房办事官不得升列九卿。
现代文：隆庆元年，命令两房办事官不得升列九卿。
English: In the first year of the Longqing era, the officials of the two chambers were ordered not to be promoted to the nine nobles.

古文：按洪武间，置承敕监、司文监、考功监，参掌给授诰敕之事。
现代文：按洪武年间，设置承敕监、洪武九年设置，设令一人，正六品；丞二人，从六品。
English: According to the years of Hongwu, it was set up to have a deputy superintendent, and in the ninth year of Hongwu, it was set up to have one person in charge of the first six grades, and two people in charge of the second six grades.

古文：永乐初，命内阁学士典机务，诏册、制诰皆属之。
现代文：不久改令为正七品，丞为正八品。十年，改令、丞为承敕郎，设二人，从七品。
English: Soon, the order was changed to Shoshichihon and Jo to Shoshichihon. Ten years later, the order was changed to Jo to Jochiro, and two people were appointed to Shoshichihon.

古文：而誊副、缮正皆中书舍人入办，事竣辄出。
现代文：给事中、中书舍人都隶属于它。后来罢除司文监、洪武九年设置，设令一人，正六品；丞二人，从六品。不久改为令正七品，丞正八品。十年罢除。
English: In the middle of the matter, both the Chinese and the foreign scholars were subordinated to it. Later, the Scripts Supervisor and the Hongwu were removed, and nine years were set, and one person was appointed to the position of Senior Sixth Rank, and two people were appointed to the position of Junior Sixth Rank. Soon it was changed to Senior Seventh Rank, and Junior Eighth Rank, and ten years were removed.

古文：宣德初，始选能书者处于阁之西小房，谓之西制敕房。而诸学士掌诰敕者居阁东，具稿付中书缮进，谓之东诰敕房。
现代文：如果是知制诰官衔，只有大学士与各学士可充任。正统以后，学士不能看诰敕，内阁全都委托给中书、序班、译字等官，于是内阁又有东诰敕房。
English: In the case of the intellectual system, only university scholars and bachelors could serve as eunuchs. After the establishment of orthodoxy, the bachelors could not see the eunuchs, and the cabinet was all entrusted to the officials in charge of Chinese calligraphy, sequential classes, and transliteration. As a result, the cabinet also had an East Eunuchs' Office.

古文：正统后，学士不能视诰敕，内阁悉委于中书、序班、译字等官，于是内阁又有东诰敕房。其直文华、武英两殿供御笔札者，初为内官职，继以中书分直，后亦专举能书者。
现代文：因型铉不与辅臣一同进食开始。嘉靖末年，又以翰林史官掌管外制，而武官诰救仍然由其下属办理。若诏令赦免、敕令革除之类，必须用合臣，翰林众臣不能参预。那些值守文华、武英两殿供奉御用笔札的，起初为内官的职责，后来用中书分别当值，后来也专门起用擅长书写的人。
English: At the end of the Jiajing Dynasty, the Hanlin Historian was put in charge of the external system, while the military attaché's relief was still handled by his subordinates. If the Emperor issued an amnesty, the Hanlin Ministers could not participate in the advance. Those who were on duty at the Wenhua and Wuying Dynasties to offer the royal pens were initially assigned to the duties of the inner officer, later they were assigned to the duties of the middle book, and later they were specially assigned to people who were good at writing.

古文：大约舍人有两途，由进士部选者，得迁科道部属，其直两殿、两房舍人，不必由部选，自甲科、监生、生儒、布衣能书者，俱可为之。
现代文：大概舍人有两条途径，由进士部选的，可以迁任科道部属，那些值班于两殿、两房的舍人，不必由部选，从甲科、监生、儒士、布衣擅长书写的，都可以担任此职。
English: There are probably two ways for the transfer of students. Those who are selected by the admission department can be transferred to the department of science and technology. Those who are on duty in the two halls and two rooms do not have to be selected by the department. They can take this position from the department of A, supervising students, Confucian scholars, and clothed people who are good at writing.

古文：不由科甲者，初授序班，及试中书舍人，不得迁科道部属，后虽加衔九列，仍带衔办事。
现代文：不从科甲选拔的，初授序班，到考试中书舍人，不得升迁任科道部属，以后即使加衔九列，仍然带官街办事。
English: Those who are not selected from Science A or Science B, and who are not in the preliminary course, and who do not pass the examination, are not allowed to be promoted to the subordinate of the science and technology department. Even if they are promoted nine ranks, they will still have to work in the official street.

古文：洪武初，又有承天门待诏一人，阁门使四人，观察使十人，后俱革。
现代文：楷书出身的，有的加封太常卿官衔，沈度、沈凿、荡星等有加封至翰林学士、礼部尚书的。洪武初年，又有承天门待诏一人，合门使四人，观察使十人，后来都革除。
English: In the first year of Hongwu, there was also one person from the Gate of Heaven, four people from the Gate of Heaven, and ten people from the Gate of Heaven sent to observe, but later they were all expelled.

古文：行人司。司正一人，左、右司副各一人，行人三十七人。
现代文：行人司，司正一人，正七品，左、右司副各一人，从七品，行人三十七人，正八品。
English: Pedestrian Division, one chief officer, seven first-grade officers, one deputy chief officer for each of the left and right divisions, from seven grades, 37 pedestrians, eight first-grade officers.

古文：职专捧节、奉使之事。
现代文：职责专管捧节、奉使的事务。
English: Responsibilities: In charge of the affairs of the festival and the envoys.

古文：凡颁行诏赦，册封宗室，抚谕诸蕃，征聘贤才，与夫赏赐、慰问、赈济、军旅、祭祀，咸叙差焉。每岁朝审，则行人持节传旨法司，遣戍囚徒，送五府填精微册，批缴内府。
现代文：凡是颁行诏书赦免，册封宗室，抚谕各藩王，征召聘用贤才，以及赏赐、慰问、赈救灾难、军旅、祭祀，都要担任差事每年朝廷派官员复审死刑案，则行人持节传达圣旨给司法部门，遣送监管囚徒戍边，送五府填写精微簿册，批答缴还内府。
English: Every time an imperial edict is issued to grant amnesty, seal a family's ancestral house, issue an edict to the kings of various domains, call up and employ sages, as well as reward, offer condolences, provide disaster relief, go on a military trip, and hold a religious service, they all have to carry out their duties. Every year, the imperial court sends officials to review the death penalty cases, and the pedestrians hold the festival to convey the holy will to the judicial department, send the prisoners under supervision to Fuxian, send them to the five prefectures to fill in the fine booklets, and return the approvals to the inner prefectures.

古文：初，洪武十三年置行人司，设行人，秩正九品。
现代文：起初，洪武十三年设置行人司，设行人官，官阶正九品。
English: At first, in the thirteenth year of Hongwu, a Pedestrian Division was set up, a Pedestrian Officer was set up, and the official ranks were nine grades.

古文：左、右行人，从九品。
现代文：左、右行人，从九品。
English: Left and right pedestrians, from Jiuping.

古文：寻改行人为司正，左、右行人为左、右司副，更设行人三百四十五人。
现代文：不久改行人为司正，左、右行人为左、右司副，又设行人三百四十五人。
English: Soon, the pedestrians were changed to the chief, the left and right pedestrians to the left and right deputy chief, and there were also three hundred and forty-five pedestrians.

古文：二十七年升品秩，以所任行人多孝廉人材，奉使率不称旨，定设行人司官四十员，咸以进士为之。
现代文：二十七年，提升品级，因为所任行人多为孝廉人才，奉命出使大多不合圣意。确定设置行人司官四十员，都以进士担任此职。
English: In the 27th year, the grade was upgraded, because most of the appointed officials were filial piety talents, and most of the envoys were not in accordance with the holy will. It was decided to set up forty officials, all of whom were promoted to this position.

古文：非奉旨，不得擅遣，行人之职始重。
现代文：除非奉旨，不得擅自派遣，行人的职位开始重要。
English: Unless instructed, they may not be dispatched without authorization, and the position of pedestrians becomes important.

古文：建文中，罢行人司，而以行人隶鸿胪寺。
现代文：建文年间，罢除行人司，而以行人隶属鸿胪寺。
English: During the Jianwen period, the Pedestrian Division was abolished, and Pedestrians were affiliated with Hongyu Temple.

古文：成祖复旧制。
现代文：成祖恢复旧有制度。
English: Chengzu restored the old system.

古文：钦天监。监正一人，监副二人。
现代文：钦天监，监正一人，正五品，监副二人，正六品。
English: Qin Tian Guan, Guan Zheng 1 person, Zheng 5 products, Guan Vice 2 people, Zheng 6 products.

古文：其属，主簿厅，主簿一人，春、夏、中、秋、冬官正各一人，五官灵台郎八人，五官保章正二人，五官挈壶正二人，五官监候三人，五官司历二人，五官司晨八人，漏刻博士六人。
现代文：它的下属有，主簿厅，主簿一人，正八品，春、夏、中、秋、冬官正各一人，正六品，五官灵台郎八人，从七品，后来革除四人，五官保章正二人，亚八品，后来革除一人，五官挈壶正二人，从八品，后来革除一人，五官监候三人，正九品，后来革除一人，五官司历二人，正九品，五官司晨八人，从九品，后来革除六人，漏刻博士六人，从九品，后来革除五人。
English: Its subordinates include the main book office, the main book one person, the official eight products, the spring, summer, middle, autumn and winter officials one person each, the official six products, the five officials of the spiritual platform eight people, from the seven products, later removed four people, the five officials of the guarantee two people, the sub-eight products, later removed one person, the five officials of the jars two people, from the eight products, later removed one person, the five officials of the supervision three people, the official nine products, later removed one person, the five officials of the calendar two people, the official nine products, the five officials of the morning eight people, from the nine products, later

古文：监正、副，掌察天文、定历数、占候、推步之事。
现代文：监正、副掌管观察天文、制定历数、视天象变化以推测人事吉凶、推测天文历法的事务。
English: Supervisors and deputy supervisors supervise the observation of astronomy, the establishment of calendar numbers, the speculation of personnel fortunes and fortunes according to the changes in the sky, and the speculation of the astronomical calendar.

古文：凡日月、星辰、风云、气色，率其属而测候焉。
现代文：凡是日月、星辰、风云、气候天色，率领他的下属进行推测。
English: He led his subordinates to speculate about the sun, the moon, the stars, the wind and clouds, and the weather.

古文：有变异，密疏以闻。
现代文：有异常变化，便密封上疏报告皇帝。
English: If there is any abnormal change, it will be sealed and reported to the emperor.

古文：凡习业分四科：曰天文，曰漏刻，曰回回，曰历。
现代文：所有研习学业分四科：称焉天文、漏刻、回回、历。
English: All the studies are divided into four subjects: Astronomy, Notation, Calculation and Calendars.

古文：自五官正下至天文生、阴阳人，各分科肄业。
现代文：从五官正以下至天文生、研习阴阳五行学问的阴阳生，各自分科研习学业。
English: From five senses students to astronomy students, and from yin and yang students to yin and yang five elements students, each one should do his or her own research and study.

古文：每岁冬至日，呈奏明岁《大统历》，移送礼部颁行。
现代文：每年冬至日，呈进上奏第二年的《大统历》，成化十五年，改颁第二年历法于十月朔日，转送礼部颁布施行。
English: Every year on the winter solstice, the "Great General Calendar" of the second year is presented, and it has been completed for fifteen years. The second year's calendar will be reissued on the first day of October, and the transfer of gifts will be promulgated and implemented.

古文：其《御览月令历》、《七政躔度历》、《六壬遁甲历》、《四季天象录》，并先期进呈。
现代文：那些《御览月令历》、《七政躔度历》、《六壬遁甲历》、《四季天象录》，一并提前进呈。
English: Those "Monthly Calendar," "Seven Political Calendars," "Six Lunar Calendars" and "Four Seasons of the Zodiac" were all submitted in advance.

古文：凡历注，御历注三十事，民历三十二事，壬遁历七十二事。
现代文：所有年历注解，御用年历注解三十事，如祭祀、颁诏、行幸等类，民用年历三十二事，壬遁历七十二事。
English: Annotations for all calendars, including 30 annotations for the imperial calendar, such as rituals, imperial edicts, and auspicious occasions, 32 for the civil calendar, and 72 for the lunar calendar.

古文：凡祭日，前一年会选以进，移知太常。
现代文：凡是祭祀之日，前一年一同选好进呈，转交公文告知太常寺。
English: Whenever it is the day of the ritual, the previous year is selected and submitted together, and the official document is sent to inform Taijo-ji Temple.

古文：凡营建、征讨、冠婚、山陵之事，则选地而择日。
现代文：凡是营建、征讨、加冠完婚、营建帝王陵墓的事务，便选择地方并选择吉日。
English: In all matters of construction, requisition, crowning, and construction of the imperial mausoleum, choose the place and choose the auspicious day.

古文：立春，则预候气于东郊。
现代文：立春，便在柬郊预测节气变化。
English: At the beginning of spring, changes in the solar terms were predicted in the suburbs of Cambodia.

古文：大朝贺，于文楼设定时鼓、漏刻报时，司晨、鸡唱，各供其事。
现代文：大型朝贺，在文楼设置定时鼓、漏刻报告时辰，司晨、鹦唱，各自供奉其事。
English: Large-scale morning greetings, in the literary building set up a regular drum, leaking report hour, morning division, parrot singing, each dedicated to its own cause.

古文：日月交食，先期算其分秒时刻、起复方位以闻，下礼部，移内外诸司救之，仍按占书条奏。
现代文：日月亏蚀，提前测算它的分秒时刻、起始恢复方位而告知皇上，下发礼部，发文给内外各司挽救，仍旧按照占卜书条奏。
English: The eclipse of the sun and the moon, the minute and second time of its measurement in advance, the start of the recovery of the position and inform the emperor, the Ministry of Ceremonies issued a document to all departments at home and abroad to save, still played according to the divination book.

古文：监官毋得改他官，子孙毋得徙他业。
现代文：如果亏蚀不足一分，与《回回历》即使亏蚀一分以上，便上奏但不挽救。监官不得改任其它官职，子孙不得转从其它行业。
English: If the loss is less than one point, even if the loss is more than one point, it will be played up but not saved. Supervisors may not be reassigned to other official positions, and descendants may not be transferred from other industries.

古文：乏人，则移礼部访取而试用焉。
现代文：缺少人员，便转交公文给礼部访察选取并试用。
English: If there is a shortage of personnel, the official document will be forwarded to the Ministry of Ceremonies for inspection, selection and trial use.

古文：五官正推历法，定四时。司历、监候佐之。
现代文：五官正推演历法，确定四季司历、监候辅助他们。
English: The five departments are working out the calendar, determining the four-season calendar, and supervising and assisting them.

古文：灵台郎辨日月星辰之躔次、分野，以占候天文之变。
现代文：灵台郎辨别日月星辰的运行轨迹、分野，用来测算天文的变化。
English: Ling Tai Lang can distinguish the orbits and fields of the sun, moon and stars, and is used to measure changes in astronomy.

古文：观象台四面，面四天文生，轮司测候。
现代文：观象台四面，每面天文生四名，轮流主管测算。
English: There are four astronomy students on each of the four sides of the observatory, and the supervisors take turns to do the measurement.

古文：保章正专志天文之变，定其吉凶之占。
现代文：保章正专门记载天文的变化，确定吉凶的预测。
English: The seal is specifically recording the changes in astronomy and determining the prediction of good and bad luck.

古文：挈壶正知刻漏。
现代文：挈壶正掌管刻漏。
English: The cauldron is in charge of the cauldron.

古文：孔壶为漏，浮箭为刻，以考中星昏旦之次。
现代文：壶上钻孔作为漏，浮箭作为刻度，用来计量中星早晨黄昏的位次。
English: A hole is drilled in the pot as a leak, and a floating arrow is used as a scale to measure the position of the morning twilight in the middle of the star.

古文：漏刻博士定时以漏，换时以牌，报更以鼓，警晨昏以钟鼓。
现代文：漏刻博士用漏刻测定时刻，用牌转换时辰，用鼓报更，用钟鼓警示晨昏。司晨辅佐他。
English: Dr. Leak Dr. Leak measures the time with a leak, uses a card to convert the hour, uses a drum to announce the hour, and uses a bell and drum to warn of morning twilight. Sichen assists him.

古文：司晨佐之。明初，即置太史监，设太史令，通判太史监事，佥判太史监事，校事郎，五官正，灵台郎，保章正、副，挈壶正，掌历，管勾等官。
现代文：明朝初年，便设置太史监，设太史令，通判太史监事，愈判太史监事，校事郎，五官正，灵台郎，保章正、副，挈壶正，掌历，管勾等官。
English: In the first year of the Ming Dynasty, Taishi Supervisor was set up, Taishi Order was set up, Tongan Taishi Supervisor, Yuanzan Taishi Supervisor, Keijiro, Gokanjo, Lingdairo, Hoshongjo, Vice, Shokojo, Shoureki, Guanhaku, and other officials.

古文：以刘基为太史令。
现代文：以刘基为太史令。
English: With Liu Ji as Tai Shi Ling.

古文：吴元年，改监为院，秩正三品。
现代文：昊元年，改监为院，官阶正三品。
English: In the first year of Hao, he was transferred from prison to a mental hospital, and was promoted to the third-ranked official.

古文：洪武元年，征元太史张佑、张沂等十四人，改太史院为司天监，设监令一人，少监二人，监丞一人，主簿一人，主事一人，五官正五人，五官副五人，灵台郎二人，保章正二人，监候三人，司辰八人，漏刻博士六人。
现代文：院使，正三品；同知，正四品；院判，正五品；五官正，正六品；典簿、雨旸司、时叔郎、纪候郎，正七品；灵台郎、保章正，正八品；副，从八品；掌历、管勾，从九品。洪武元年，征召元太史张佑、张沂等十四人，改太史院为司天监，设监令一人，正三品，少监二人，正四品，监丞一人，正六品，主簿一人，正七品，主事一人，正八品，五官正五人，正五品，五官副五人，正六品，灵台郎二人，正七品，保章正二人，从七品，监候三人，正八品，司辰八人，正九品，漏刻博士六人，从九品。
English: In the first year of Hongwu, fourteen people, including Zhang You and Zhang Xi, the former Grand Historian, were conscripted, and the Grand Historian's Office was changed to the Office of Heaven's Supervisor, with one Supervisor, Senior Third Rank, two Junior Supervisors, Senior Fourth Rank, one Supervisor, Senior Sixth Rank, one Chief Bookkeeper, Senior Seventh Rank, one person in charge of affairs, Senior Eighth Rank,

古文：又置回回司天监，设监令一人，少监二人，监丞二人。
现代文：又设置旦旦司天监，设监令一人，正四品，少监二人，正五品，监丞二人，正六品。
English: In addition, the Diocese of Tianyuan was set up, with one superintendent, senior fourth grade, two junior superintendents, senior fifth grade, two supervisors, and senior sixth grade.

古文：征元回回司天监郑阿里等议历。
现代文：征召元回回司天监郑阿里等参议历法。
English: Conscription of Yuan Dynasty emperors Zheng Ali and other celestial supervisors.

古文：三年，改司天监为钦天监。
现代文：三年，改司天监为钦天监。
English: Three years later, he was promoted to the post of Qin Heavenly Supervisor.

古文：四年，诏监官职专司天，非特旨不得升调。
现代文：四年，下诏监官职责专管天文，非特别圣旨不得升调。
English: In four years, the duties of the overseer will be exclusively in charge of astronomy, and may not be promoted without special approval.

古文：又定监官散官。
现代文：又规定监官授予有官名而无固定职事的散官等级。
English: It also stipulates that the supervising officer shall award the rank of non-commissioned officer who has an official title but no fixed duties.

古文：十四年，改钦天监为正五品，设令一人，丞一人，俱从品级授以文职散官。
现代文：监令，焉正仪大夫；少监，为分朔大夫；五官司，为司玄大夫；监丞，为灵台郎；五官保章正，为平秩郎；五官灵台郎，为司正郎；五官挈壶正，为挈壶郎。十四年，改钦天监为正五品，设令一人，丞一人，属官五官正以下，人数如前所列，都根据品级授以文职散官。
English: The superintendent was named Zheng Yi Daifu; the junior superintendent was named Bu Shuo Daifu; the five officials were named Sigen Daifu; the assistant superintendent was named Ling Tairo; the five officials were named Bao Zheng Zheng Zheng Zheng Zheng Zheng Zheng Zheng Zheng Zheng Zheng Zheng Zheng Zheng Zheng Zheng Zheng Zheng Zheng Zheng Zheng Zheng Zheng Zheng Zheng Zheng Zheng Zheng Zheng Zheng Zheng Zheng Zheng Zheng Zheng Zheng Zheng Zheng Zheng Zheng Zheng Zheng Zheng Zheng Z

古文：二十二年，改令为监正，丞为监副。
现代文：二十二年，改令为监正，丞为监副。
English: Twenty-two years later, he was promoted to supervisor and joe was promoted to deputy supervisor.

古文：三十一年，罢回回钦天监，以其历法隶本监。
现代文：三十一年，罢除回回钦天监，以回回历法隶属本监。
English: In the 31st year, the Hui-Hui-Qin Heavenly Supervisor was removed and subordinated to this supervisor by the Hui-Hui calendar.

古文：明初，又置稽疑司，以掌卜筮，未几罢。
现代文：不久罢除。太医院，院使一人，正五品，院判二人，正六品。
English: Soon to be dismissed. Tai Hospital, one of the hospital's envoys, five-star, two of the court's judges, six-star.

古文：太医院。院使一人，院判二人。
现代文：它的下属，御医四人，正八品后来增至十八人，隆庆五年，固定设十人。
English: Its subordinates, the Imperial Physician four people, the eight official products later increased to eighteen people, the Longqing five years, fixed ten people.

古文：其属，御医四人，生药库、惠民药局，各大使一人，副使一人。
现代文：吏目一人，从九品，隆庆五年，固定设十人。生药库、惠民药局，各大使一人，副使一人。
English: There shall be one official in charge, with a fixed number of ten persons from the 9th grade to the 5th year of the Longqing era. There shall be one ambassador and one vice-ambassador for each of the herbal medicine library and the pharmacy for the benefit of the people.

古文：太医院掌医疗之法。
现代文：太医院掌管医疗的方法。
English: Too many hospitals are in charge of medical treatment.

古文：凡医术十三科，医官、医生、医士，专科肄业：曰大方脉，曰小方脉，曰妇人，曰疮疡，曰针灸，曰眼，曰口齿，曰接骨，曰伤寒，曰咽喉，曰金镞，曰按摩，曰祝由。
现代文：所有医术十三科，医官、医生、医士，专科肄业：称焉大方脉科、小方脉科、妇人科、疮疡科、针灸科、眼科、口齿科、接骨科、伤寒科、咽喉科、金镞科、按摩科、用祝祷符咒治病的祝由科。
English: All of the thirteen medical disciplines, medical officers, doctors, and physicians, as well as the following specialties: general medicine, minor medicine, gynecology, ulcerology, acupuncture, ophthalmology, orthodontics, osteopathy, typhoid, pharyngology, orthodontics, massage, and the treatment of diseases with prayer spells.

古文：凡医家子弟，择师而教之。
现代文：凡是医家的子弟，挑选教师来教导他们。
English: All you sons of physicians, select for yourselves teachers to instruct you.

古文：三年、五年一试、再试、三试，乃黜陟之。
现代文：三年、五年考试一次、两次、三次，然后提升或黜退。
English: Three-year, five-year exams once, twice, three times, and then promotion or relegation.

古文：凡药，辨其土宜，择其良楛，慎其条制而用之。
现代文：所有药物，辨明它的产地，选择那些良好之材，谨慎加工而使用它们。
English: All drugs, identify its origin, select those good materials, process them carefully and use them.

古文：四方解纳药品，院官收贮生药库，时其燥湿，礼部委官一员稽察之。
现代文：各地运来上缴的药品，院官收纳贮存在生药库，按时检查它的干燥潮湿，礼部委派官员一名稽核考察。
English: The medicine delivered and handed over from all over the country was stored in the raw medicine warehouse by the hospital officials, and its dryness and moisture were checked on time. The Ministry of Ceremonies appointed an official to conduct an inspection.

古文：诊视御脉，使、判、御医参看校同，会内臣就内局选药，连名封记药剂，具本开写药性、证治之法以奏。
现代文：诊断皇帝脉理，使、判、御医参互察看统一意见，会同内臣到内局选取药品，联名密封记下药名剂量，准备奏本写下药性、诊治的方法上奏。
English: Diagnosing the emperor's pulse, the envoy, the judge, and the imperial physician inspected each other to see the unified opinion, and together with the vassal went to the inner bureau to select the medicine, jointly sealed and recorded the name of the medicine and the dosage, and prepared a transcript to write down the medicinal properties and the method of diagnosis and treatment.

古文：烹调御药，院官与内臣监视。
现代文：烹调皇帝服用的药，院官与内臣监视。
English: The cloistered official and the vassal monitor the preparation of the medicine for the emperor.

古文：每二剂合为一，候熟，分二器，一御医、内臣先尝，一进御。
现代文：每二剂合为一剂，等到煎好，分作两个容器，一个容器的药御医、内臣先尝，一个容器的药进奉皇上。
English: Every two doses are combined into one dose, and when it is fried, it is divided into two containers, one container of the medicine is tasted by the doctor and the vassal, and one container of the medicine is presented to the emperor.

古文：仍置历簿，用内印钤记，细载年月缘由，以凭考察。
现代文：仍然设置年历簿，用内印加盖印章，详细记载年月缘由，以便依据考察。
English: The almanac is still set up, stamped with the inner seal, and the year and reason are recorded in detail for inspection.

古文：王府请医，本院奉旨遣官或医士往。
现代文：王府请求医治，本院奉圣旨派遣官员或医士前往。
English: The royal palace requested medical treatment, and our hospital sent officials or doctors to the hospital in accordance with the royal edict.

古文：文武大臣及外国君长有疾，亦奉旨往视。
现代文：文武大臣以及外国君长有疾病，也奉圣旨前往看枧。
English: The Minister of Education, Culture, Sports, Science and Technology, as well as foreign dignitaries who were ill, also went to see the cocoon according to the holy will.

古文：其治疗可否，皆具本覆奏。
现代文：能否治疗，都上奏本覆奏。
English: Whether or not it can be treated is a matter of public record.

古文：外府州县置惠民药局。
现代文：外府州县设置惠民药局。
English: The Pharmacy Bureau for the Benefit of the People will be set up in other prefectures and counties.

古文：边关卫所及人聚处，各设医生、医士或医官，俱由本院试遣。
现代文：边关卫所以及人群聚居处所，各设医生、医士或医官，都由本院考试选拔派遣。
English: The doctors, medical assistants or medical officers of the border guard stations and crowded living places are selected and dispatched by our hospital.

古文：岁终，会察其功过而殿最之，以凭黜陟。
现代文：年终，总结考察他们的功过然后确定最好或最差，以此作为升降职位的凭据。
English: At the end of the year, a summary examines their achievements and then determines the best or the worst, which is used as evidence for promotion and relegation.

古文：太祖初，置医学提举司，设提举，同提举，副提举，医学教授，学正、官医、提领。
现代文：太祖初年，设置医学提举司，设置提举，从五品，同提举，从六品，副提举，从七品，医学教授，正九品，学正、官医、提领，从九品。
English: In the first year of the great-grandfather, the medical promotion division was set up, the promotion was set up, from the fifth grade, the same promotion, from the sixth grade, the deputy promotion, from the seventh grade, the professor of medicine, the senior ninth grade, the student, the official doctor, the leader, from the ninth grade.

古文：寻改为太医监，设少监，监丞。
现代文：不久改焉太医监，设步监，正四品，监丞，正六品。
English: Soon after, he was promoted to medical superintendent, set up a step supervisor, senior fourth grade, superintendent, senior sixth grade.

古文：吴元年，改监为院，设院使，秩正三品，同知，正四品，院判，正五品，典簿，正七品。
现代文：昱元年，改监为院，设院使，官阶正三品，同知，正四品，院判，正五品，典簿，止七品。
English: In the first year of the Heian period, the prison was reformed into an academy, an envoy to the academy was set up, and the official ranks were Shosanpon (Senior Third Rank), Tongzhi (Senior Fourth Rank), Inban (Senior Fifth Rank), and Rensho (Senior Seventh Rank).

古文：洪武三年，置惠民药局，府设提领，州县设官医。
现代文：御臀局，官阶正六品，设尚药、奉御二人，直长二人，药童十人，都用内官、内使充任。
English: The Empress Dowager's Office, with the official rank of Senior Sixth Rank, set up Shangyue, Bongyou, two direct superiors, and ten apothecaries, all of whom were appointed as inner officials and inner envoys.

古文：凡军民之贫病者，给之医药。
现代文：设御医四人，以太医院医士充任。
English: Four royal physicians were appointed, and a physician from the Aether Hospital assumed the post.

古文：六年，置御药局于内府，始设御医。
现代文：所有收受各地贡献名药以及储蓄药品，奉御一人掌管。
English: All of the famous drugs that have received contributions from various regions, as well as the drugs that have been saved, will be managed by one person.

古文：十四年，改太医院为正五品，设令一人，丞一人，吏目一人。
现代文：所有供奉皇上药物，医官到内局炮制，太医院官员诊断。十四年，改太医院为正五品，设令一人，丞一人，吏目一人。
English: All medicines offered to the emperor were concocted by medical officers at the internal affairs bureau, and diagnosed by officials at the Imperial Hospital. In 1914, the Imperial Hospital was changed to a five-star hospital, with one director, one secretary, and one chief clerk.

古文：属官御医四人，俱如文职授散官。
现代文：属官御医四人，都如同文职授予散官。
English: There are four government-affiliated doctors, all of whom have been awarded the title of Sangan as if they were civil servants.

古文：二十二年，复改令为院使，丞为院判。
现代文：二十二年，恢复改令为院使，丞为院判。
English: Twenty-two years later, the order was reinstated as an envoy to the emperor, and the joe as an imperial edict.

古文：嘉靖十五年，改御药房为圣济殿，又设御药库，诏御医轮直供事。
现代文：嘉靖十五年，改御药房为圣济殿，又设御药库，诏令御医轮流值班供职。
English: In the 15th year of the Jiajing Emperor, the Imperial Pharmacy was transformed into the St. Francis Hall, the Imperial Pharmacopoeia was established, and the Imperial Physician was ordered to take turns on duty.

古文：上林苑监。左、右监正各一人，左、右监副各一人，左、右监丞各一人。
现代文：上林苑监，左、右监正各一人，正五品，左、右监副各一人，正六品，监正、监副后来不常设，以监丞代理职务。
English: Shanglin Garden Supervisor, left and right supervisors one each, five supervisors, left and right supervisors one each, six supervisors. Supervisors and supervisors were later not permanent, with supervisors acting as agents.

古文：其属，典簿厅，典簿一人。
现代文：左、右监丞各一人，正七品。它的下属，典簿厅，典簿一人，正九品。
English: The left and right supervisors, one each, are ranked 7th. Its subordinate, the record office, is ranked 9th.

古文：良牧、蕃育、林衡、嘉蔬四署，各典署一人，署丞一人，录事一人。
现代文：良牧、蕃育、林衡、嘉蔬四署，各有典署一人，正七品，署丞一人，正八品，录事一人，正九品。
English: In the four departments of Liangmu, Zouyu, Linheng and Jiayu, there was one person from the Customs and Excise Department, holding the rank of the seventh grade, one person from the Customs and Excise Department, holding the rank of the eighth grade, and one person from the Records Department, holding the rank of the ninth grade.

古文：监正掌苑囿、园池、牧畜、树种之事。
现代文：监正掌管园林、园池、畜牧、栽种的事务。
English: The supervisor is in charge of the garden, garden pond, animal husbandry and planting.

古文：凡禽兽、草木、蔬果，率其属督其养户、栽户，以时经理其养地、栽地而畜植之，以供祭祀、宾客、宫府之膳羞。
现代文：所有禽兽、草木、蔬果，率领他的下属督促那些养殖户、栽种户，按时经营管理他们的养殖地、栽种地，而豢养种植，以供祭祀、宴请宾客、宫廷官府的食品。
English: All animals, plants, vegetables and fruits, led by his subordinates, urged those breeders and growers to operate and manage their breeding grounds and planting grounds on time, and raise and grow food for sacrifices, banquet guests, and palace government food.

古文：凡苑地，东至白河，西至西山，南至武清，北至居庸关，西南至浑河，并禁围猎。
现代文：所有宫苑之地，束至白河，西至西山，南至武清，北至居庸关，西南至浑河，都禁止围猎。
English: All the palace grounds, from Sok to Baihe, west to Xishan, south to Wuqing, north to Juyongguan, and southwest to Hunhe, are prohibited from hunting.

古文：良牧，牧牛羊豕，蕃育，育鹅鸭鸡，皆籍其牝牡之数，而课孳卵焉。
现代文：良牧牧养牛羊猎，蕃育养殖鹅鸭鹦，都登记牲畜雌雄的数目，并且考课牲畜的繁殖。
English: The number of males and females of livestock is registered, and the breeding of livestock is examined in Good Pastoralism, Cattle and Sheep Breeding, and Goose, Duck and Parrot Breeding.

古文：林衡，典果实、花木，嘉蔬，典莳艺瓜菜，皆计其町畦、树植之数，而以时苞进焉。
现代文：林衡掌管果实、花木，嘉蔬主管种植瓜菜，都计算管辖的田亩、种植的数目，并且按时收集进奉。
English: Lin Heng, who is in charge of fruits, flowers and trees, and Jiayu, who is in charge of planting melons and vegetables, both calculate the number of acres and plants under their jurisdiction, and collect them on time.

古文：洪武二十五年，议开上林院，度地城南。
现代文：洪武二十五年，商议开辟上林院，在城南测量土地。
English: In the 25th year of Hongwu, the opening of Shanglin Academy was discussed, and the land was surveyed in the south of the city.

古文：比图上，太祖谓有妨民业，遂止。
现代文：从生董出连接立，西面连接河岸。画图上奏，太祖说对百姓生活有妨碍，于是作罢。
English: It is connected to the riverbank on the west side, and is connected to the riverbank from the east side. When the picture was played, the great-grandfather said that it was a hindrance to the people's life, so he stopped it.

古文：永乐五年，始置上林苑监，设良牧、蕃育、嘉蔬、林衡、川衡、冰鉴及典察左右前后十属署。
现代文：永乐五年，开始设置上林苑监，设良牧蕃育、嘉蔬、林衡、川衡、冰鉴及典察左右前后十个下属官署。
English: Yongle five years, began to set up Shanglin Garden Supervisor, set up around ten subordinate government offices, including Liangmu Zhiyu, Jiahuo, Linheng, Chuanheng, Bingjian and Densha.

古文：洪熙中，并为蕃育、嘉蔬二署。
现代文：洪熙年间，合并为蕃育、嘉蔬二署。
English: During the Hongxi era, it was merged into the Second Department of the Ministry of Education and the Second Department of the Ministry of Vegetables and Fruits.

古文：宣德十年，始定四署。
现代文：把良牧、川衡并入蕃育，冰鉴、林衡并入嘉蔬，典察四署分别并入。
English: Ryomachi and Kawahira will be merged into Goryu, Hyokken and Rinkohira will be merged into Jiazhuang, and the four inspection stations will be merged separately.

古文：正德间，增设监督内臣共九十九员。
现代文：宣德十年，开始确定为四署。正德年间，增设监督内臣共九十九人。
English: In the 10th year of Xuande, it was initially determined to be four departments. During the Zhengde period, a total of ninety-nine supervisors were added.

古文：嘉靖元年，裁汰八十员，革蕃育、嘉蔬二署典署，林衡、嘉蔬二署录事。
现代文：嘉靖元年，裁汰八十人，革除蕃育、嘉蔬二署典署以及林衡、嘉蔬二署录事。
English: In the first year of Jiajing, 80 people were laid off, and the Bureau of Education, the Bureau of Vegetables and Fruits, the Bureau of Forestry, and the Bureau of Vegetables and Fruits were abolished.

古文：中、东、西、南、北五城兵马指挥司。
现代文：中、东、西、南、北五城兵马指挥司。
English: Central, East, West, South and North Five Cities Military Horse Command Division.

古文：各指挥一人，副指挥四人，吏目一人。
现代文：各有指挥一人，正六品，副指挥四人，正七品，吏目一人。
English: Each has one conductor, six official ranks, four deputy conductors, seven official ranks, and one official.

古文：指挥，巡捕盗贼，疏理街道沟渠及囚犯、火禁之事。
现代文：指挥巡捕盗贼，疏理街道沟渠及囚犯、禁止烟火的事务。
English: Command patrols to catch thieves, clean up streets, ditches and prisoners, and ban fireworks.

古文：凡京城内外，各画境而分领之。
现代文：所有京城内外各自划分区域而分别管辖。
English: All areas inside and outside the capital are divided into their own areas and are governed separately.

古文：境内有游民、奸民则逮治。
现代文：境内有游民、奸民就逮捕治罪。
English: If there are vagrants or vagabonds in the territory, they will be arrested and punished.

古文：若车驾亲郊，则率夫里供事。
现代文：如果皇帝车驾亲临郊外，就率领夫里供奉事务。
English: If the emperor drives himself to the suburbs, he will lead his husband to offer services.

古文：明初，置兵马指挥司，设都指挥、副都指挥、知事。
现代文：所有亲、郡王妃的父亲没有官职的，亲王授兵马指挥，郡王授副指挥，不管理事务。明朝初年：设置兵马指挥司，设都指挥、副都指挥、知事。
English: In the first year of the Ming Dynasty, the Military Horse Commanding Division was established, and the Capital Commanding Officer, Deputy Capital Commanding Officer, and Governor were established.

古文：后改设指挥使、副指挥使，各城门设兵马。
现代文：后来改设指挥使、副指挥使，各城门设兵马。
English: Later, the post of commander and deputy commander were established, and soldiers and horses were stationed at each city gate.

古文：洪武元年，命在京兵马指挥司并管市司，每三日一次校勘街市斛斗、秤尺，稽考牙侩姓名，时其物价。
现代文：洪武元年，命令在京兵马指挥司一并管理市司，每三天查核一次街市斛斗、秤尺，考查商人姓名，掌管物价。
English: In the first year of Hongwu's reign, he ordered that the Beijing Military Horse Commanding Division should also manage the Municipal Division, inspect the market every three days, check the names of merchants, and control prices.

古文：五年，又设兵马指挥司分司于中都。
现代文：五年，又设兵马指挥司分司于中都。
English: Five years later, a sub-branch of the Terracotta Warriors and Horses Commanding Division was set up in the capital.

古文：十年，定京城及中都兵马指挥司秩俱正六品。
现代文：十年，确定京城及中都兵马指挥司官阶都为正六品。
English: Ten years later, it was determined that the official ranks of the commanders of the Beijing and Zhongdu armies and horses were all Senior Sixth Rank.

古文：改为指挥、副指挥，职专京城巡捕等事，革知事。
现代文：在此之前官阶为正四品。改为指挥、副指挥，职责专管京城巡捕等事，革除知事。
English: Prior to this, the official rank was Senior Fourth Rank. It was changed to Commander, Deputy Commander, with the duties of being in charge of patrolling the capital and other matters, and the governor was removed.

古文：二十三年，定设五城兵马指挥司，俱增设吏目。
现代文：二十三年，确定设五城兵马指挥司，只有中城只称中兵马指挥司，全部增设吏目。
English: In the 23rd year, it was decided to set up the five-city Terracotta Warriors and Horses Commanding Division, only the middle city was only called the middle Terracotta Warriors and Horses Commanding Division, and all officers were added.

古文：建文中，改为兵马司，改指挥、副指挥为兵马、副兵马。
现代文：建文年间，改为兵马司，改指挥、副指挥为兵马、副兵马。
English: During the Jianwen period, it was changed to the Division of the Army and the Horse, and the command and deputy command were changed to the Army and the Horse and the Deputy Army and the Horse.

古文：永乐元年复旧。
现代文：永乐元年，恢复旧制。
English: In the first year of Yongle, the old system was restored.

古文：二年，设北京兵马指挥司。
现代文：二年，设北京兵马指挥司。
English: Two years later, the Beijing Military Horse Command Division was established.

古文：嘉靖四十一年，诏巡视五城御史，每年终，将各城兵马指挥会本举劾。
现代文：嘉靖四十一年，下诏命令巡视五城御史，每到年终，将各城兵马指挥会聚奏本举荐参劾。
English: In the 41st year of Jiajing, he issued an imperial edict to inspect the imperial histories of the five cities, and at the end of each year, to recommend and impeach the collection of records of the soldiers' and horses' commanding associations of each city.

古文：隆庆间，御史赵可怀言： 五城兵马司官，宜取科贡正途，职检验死伤，理刑名盗贼，如两京知县。
现代文：隆庆年间，御史趟可怀说： 五城兵马司官员，应该选取枓考贡举正途出身的人，负责检验死伤，查办诉讼盗贼，如同两京知县。
English: At the time of the Longqing Festival, Gu Shifu Kehai said: The officials of the Five Cities Terracotta Warriors and Horses Division should select people who are from the right path, be responsible for the examination of death and injury, and investigate and prosecute thieves, just like the two Beijing counties.

古文：不职者，巡城御史纠劾之。 
现代文：不称职的，巡城御史纠察弹劾他。 
English: He's incompetent. Let's impeach him.

古文：顺天府。府尹一人，府丞一人，治中一人，通判六人，推官一人，儒学教授一人，训导一人。
现代文：顺天府，府尹一人，正三品，府丞一人，正四品，治中一人，正五品，通判六人，正六品，台靖后革除三人，推官一人，从六品，儒学教授一人，从九品，训导一人。
English: Shun Tianfu, one Fu Yin, one Zheng Sanpin, one Fu Zhao, one Zheng 4pin, one Zhi Zhong, one Zheng 5pin, six Zong Zhan, one Zheng 6pin, three Taizhong, one Sui Guan, six Zong Zhan, one Confucian professor, nine Zong Zhan, one tutor.

古文：其属，经历司，经历一人，知事一人。
现代文：它的下属，经历司，经历一人，从七品，知事一人，从八品。
English: Its subordinates, experienced division, experienced one person, from seven products, governor one person, from eight products.

古文：照磨所，照磨一人，检校一人。
现代文：照磨所，照磨一人，从九品，检校一人。
English: Sunning mill, sunning one person, from nine products, inspection one person.

古文：所辖，宛平、大兴二县，各知县一人，县丞二人，主簿无定员，典史一人。
现代文：所管辖的地方，宛平、大兴二县，各有知县一人，正六品，县丞二人，正七品，主簿没有额定人数，正八品，典史一人。
English: In the places under his jurisdiction, Wanping and Daxing counties, one person from each of Zhixian county, six persons from county magistrate, two persons from county magistrate, seven persons from county magistrate, no assigned number of people in the master book, eight persons from county magistrate, and one person from county historian.

古文：司狱司，司狱一人。
现代文：司狱司，司狱一人，从九品。
English: A prison warden, a prison warden, from the ninth grade.

古文：都税司，大使一人，副使一人。
现代文：都税司，大使一人，从九品，副使一人。
English: There was a tax inspector in each capital, an ambassador, a vice-premier, and a vice-envoy.

古文：宣课司，税课司，各大使一人。税课分司，各副使一人。
现代文：宣课司，共四个，正阳门外、正阳门、亟家湾、卢荡煎，税课司，共二个，安定门外、安定门，各大使一人，从九品税课分司，共二个，蛊文闩、德胜门，各副使一人。
English: There are a total of four announcement departments, including Zhengyangmenwai, Zhengyangmenwa, Ejiawan and Luhuangren, two tax departments, one ambassador each outside and inside the Stable Gate, two sub-departments from Jiuping Tax Department, and one vice-envoy each at the Gongwenlu and Deshengmen.

古文：递军所、批验所，各大使一人。
现代文：递军所、批殓所各有大使一人。
English: There will be one ambassador from each of the Sending Office and the Approving Office.

古文：府尹，掌京府之政令。
现代文：府尹掌管京府的政令。
English: Fu Yin is in charge of the Beijing government.

古文：宣化和人，劝农问俗，均贡赋，节征徭，谨祭祀，阅实户口，纠治豪强，隐恤穷困，疏理狱讼，务知百姓之疾苦。
现代文：宣行教化团结百姓，鼓励农事访问风俗，平均贡赋，节制征用徭役，恭谨地进行祭祀，阅核实户籍人口，纠察惩治豪强，体恤穷困，疏通理顺诉讼，务必了解百姓的疾苦。
English: We should carry out propaganda and education to unite the people, encourage the custom of visiting farms, increase the average tribute, restrain the requisition of laborers, respectfully perform religious rites, read and verify the population of household registration, picket and punish the brave and the strong, sympathize with the poor, and clear up and rationalize the lawsuits. It is imperative to understand the hardships of the people.

古文：岁立春，迎春、进春，祭先农之神。
现代文：每年立春，迎春、进春，祭祀先农之神。
English: Every year at the beginning of spring, in the run-up to spring and in the run-up to spring, a sacrifice is made to the god of farmers.

古文：月朔望，早朝，奏老人坊厢听宣谕。
现代文：每月朔日望日早晨，聚集老人在街市听候宣谕。
English: On the morning of the first day of every month, the elderly gather in the market to listen to the proclamation.

古文：孟春、孟冬，率其僚属行乡饮酒礼。
现代文：初春、初冬，率领他的僚属举行乡饮酒礼。
English: In early spring and early winter, he led his colleagues to hold the village drinking ceremony.

古文：凡勋戚家人文引，每三月一奏。
现代文：所有功勋外戚家人通行凭证，每三月上奏一次。
English: The pass certificates of all meritorious relatives will be uploaded once every three months.

古文：市易平其物价。
现代文：市场交易核准其物价。
English: The market transaction approves its price.

古文：遇内官监征派物料，虽有印信、揭帖，必补牍面奏。
现代文：遇内官太监征派物料，即使有印信、揭帖，也必须补奏牍当面奏明。
English: In the case of materials requisitioned by the inner official eunuch, even if there is a stamped letter or a postcard, it must be supplemented and reported in person.

古文：若天子耕耤，行三推礼，则奉青箱播种于后。
现代文：如果天子举行耕藉礼，举行三推礼，就捧青箱播谷种于后。
English: If the son of heaven holds a ploughing ceremony, holds a three-push ceremony, he will hold a seed box to sow grain in the back.

古文：礼毕，率庶人终亩。
现代文：行礼完毕，率领百姓完成耕作。
English: After the salute, he led the people to complete the farming.

古文：府丞，贰京府，兼领学校。
现代文：府丞辅佐京府，兼管学校。
English: He was also in charge of schools in Sakyo Prefecture.

古文：治中，参理府事，以佐尹丞。
现代文：治中参与管理府事，以辅佐尹丞。
English: Zhi Zhong participated in the management of prefectural affairs, assisted by Yin Zheng.

古文：通判，分理粮储、马政、军匠、薪炭、河渠、堤涂之事。
现代文：通判分管粮食储备、马政、军匠、薪炭、河渠、堤坝的事务。
English: The magistrate was in charge of grain reserves, horse politics, military artisans, firewood and charcoal, canals, and dams.

古文：推官，理刑名，察属吏。
现代文：推官治理诉讼，考察属吏。
English: The magistrate administers the proceedings, and the examining magistrate is absent.

古文：二县，职掌如外县，以近莅辇下，故品秩特优。
现代文：二县职掌如同京外的县，因为接近皇上，所以此官品级特别优待。
English: The official duties of the two counties are similar to those of the counties outside Beijing. Because they are close to the emperor, they are given special preferential treatment.

古文：顺天府即旧北平府。
现代文：顺天府就是旧北平府。
English: Shuntianfu is the old Beipingfu.

古文：洪武二年置北平行省。
现代文：洪武二年，设置北平行省。
English: In the second year of Hongwu, the North Parallel Province was established.

古文：九年改为北平布政司，皆以北平为会府。
现代文：九年，改为北平布政司，都以北平为会府。
English: Nine years later, it was changed to Beiping Bu Seiji, with Beiping as the headquarters.

古文：永乐初，改为顺天府。
现代文：永乐初年，改为顺天府。
English: In the first year of Yongle, it was changed to Shuntianfu.

古文：十年，升为府尹，秩正三品，设官如应天府。
现代文：十年，升为府尹，官阶正三品，设置官员如同应天府。
English: Ten years later, he was promoted to Fuyin, official rank of Senior Third Rank, and officials were set up as if they were in the heavenly capital.

古文：武学。京卫武学，教授一人，训导一人。卫武学，教授一人，训导二人或一人。
现代文：顺天府通判，旧有六人，其中一人管粮食，一人管马政，一人清军，一人管工匠，一人管河道，一人管柴炭。
English: According to the decision of Shun Tianfu, there used to be six people, one of whom was in charge of grain, one of whom was in charge of horse politics, one of whom was in charge of the Qing army, one of whom was in charge of craftsmen, one of whom was in charge of rivers, and one of whom was in charge of charcoal.

古文：掌教京卫各卫幼官及应袭舍人与武生，以待科举、武举、会举，而听于兵部。
现代文：嘉靖八年，革除管河、管柴炭二人。
English: In the eighth year of the Jiajing Dynasty, two people were removed from the river and the charcoal.

古文：其无武学者，凡诸武生则隶儒学。建文四年始置京卫武学，设教授一人。
现代文：万历九年，革除清军、管工匠二人。十一年，又设一人，兼管军匠。建文四年，开始设置京卫武学，设教授一人。
English: In the ninth year of Wanli, the Qing army and two pipe artisans were removed. In the eleventh year, another person was appointed as a pipe artisan. In the fourth year of Jianwen, Beijing Martial Arts was established and a professor was appointed.

古文：启忠等十斋，各训导二人。
现代文：设启忠等十斋，各训导二人。
English: There are ten schools, including Kaizhong, and each school has two instructors.

古文：永乐中罢，正统六年复设。
现代文：永乐年间罢除，正统六年，恢复设置。
English: During the Yongle era, it was removed, and after six years of orthodoxy, it was reinstated.

古文：后渐置各卫武军，设官如儒学之制。
现代文：后来逐渐设置各卫武学，设官如同儒学的制度。
English: Later, various schools of martial arts were gradually established, and officials were appointed in a system similar to that of Confucianism.

古文：僧录司。左、右善世二人，左、右阐教二人，左右讲经二人，左、右觉义二人。
现代文：僧录司，左、右善世二人，正六品，左、右阐教二人，从六品，左、右讲经二人，正八品，左、右觉义二人，从八品。
English: There are two reciters, left and right, for the world of good; six priests, left and right, for exposition; six priests, left and right, for sermons; eight priests, left and right, for enlightenment; eight priests, left and right, for enlightenment.

古文：导录司。左、右正一二人，左、右演法二人，左、右至灵二人，左、右玄义二人。
现代文：导录司，左、右正一官二人，正六品，左、右演法二人，从六品，左、右至灵二人，正八品，左、右玄义二人，从八品。
English: Guidebook division, left and right, one official, two people, six products, left and right, two performers, six products, left and right, two performers, eight products, left and right, two mystics, eight products.

古文：神乐观提点一人，知观一人，龙虎山正一真人一人。
现代文：隆庆年间革除真人，只称提点。
English: During the Longqing era, the real person was eliminated, which is only referred to as raising the point.

古文：法官、赞教、掌书各二人。
现代文：万历初年恢复。法官、赞教、掌书各二人。
English: It was restored in the first year of the Wanli era. There were two judges, two teachers, and two scribes.

古文：阁皂山、三茅山各灵官一人，太和山提点一人。
现代文：阁皂山、三茅山各设灵官一人，正八品。太和山提点一人。
English: There is one spiritual officer for each of the three mountains, namely, the Soap Mountain and the Samye Mountain, and one for the Taihe Mountain.

古文：僧、道录司掌天下僧道。
现代文：僧、道录司掌管天下僧道。
English: Monks and dharma recorders are in charge of the world's dharma.

古文：在外府州县有僧纲、道纪等司，分掌其事，俱选精通经典、戒行端洁者为之。
现代文：在地方府州县有僧纲、道纪等司，分管其事，全都选拔精通经典、戒行端正高洁的人担任。
English: In local prefectures and counties, there are departments in charge of monastic programs and discipline, and all of them are staffed by people who are proficient in the classics and have good moral character.

古文：神乐观掌乐舞，以备大祀天地、神祇及宗庙、社稷之祭，隶太常寺，与道录司无统属。
现代文：神乐观掌管乐舞，以备大规模祭祀天地、神只及宗庙、社稷的祭典，隶属太常寺，与道录司没有辖属关系。
English: The god optimistically presides over music and dance to prepare for large-scale sacrifices to heaven and earth, gods only and ancestral temples, and social festivals. It belongs to Taiji Temple, and has no jurisdictional relationship with Dokuroshi.

古文：洪武元年，立善世、玄教二院。
现代文：洪武元年，立善世、玄教二院。
English: In the first year of Hongwu, Zenshi was established, and the Second House of Xuanjiao was built.

古文：四年革。
现代文：四年，革除。
English: Four years, fired.

古文：五年，给僧道度牒。
现代文：五年，给予僧道度牒。
English: Five years later, he was given an ultimatum to renounce his monastic life.

古文：十一年，建神乐观于郊祀坛西，设提点、知观。十五年，始置僧录司、道录司。
现代文：凡是遇朝会，提点列于僧录司左善世之下，道录司左正一之上。十五年，开始设置僧录司、道录司。
English: Whenever there is a meeting of the Council of Elders, the points to be raised are listed below the record keeper, Zuzensei, and above the record keeper, Zu Shoichi. Fifteen years have passed since the record keeper and the record keeper were set up.

古文：僧凡三等：曰禅，曰讲，曰教。
现代文：各设官如前所列。僧人共分三等：一是禅，二是讲，三是教。
English: Monks are divided into three classes: one is for Zen, the second is for preaching, and the third is for teaching.

古文：道凡二等：曰全真，曰正一。
现代文：道士共分二等：一是全真，二是正一。
English: Taoists are divided into two classes: one is all true, and the other is positive.

古文：设官不给俸，隶礼部。
现代文：设官职，不给予俸禄，隶属礼部。
English: An official post was established, no salary was given, and it was subordinated to the Ministry of Ceremonies.

古文：二十四年，清理释、道二教，限僧三年一度给牒。
现代文：二十四年，清理佛、道二教，限令僧人每三年给予一次度牒。
English: In the 24th year, the Buddhist and Taoist sects were purged, and the monks were ordered to give an ultimatum once every three years.

古文：凡各府州县寺观，但存宽大者一所，并居之。
现代文：所有各府州县寺庙道观，只保留宽大的一所，合并居住。
English: Of all the Taoist temples in all the prefectures and counties, only one large one has been preserved, and it has been merged and inhabited.

古文：凡僧道，府不得过四十人，州三十人，县二十人。
现代文：所有僧道，府不得超过四十人，州三十人，县二十人。
English: The total number of monks and nuns in a province must not exceed forty, in a prefecture thirty, and in a county twenty.

古文：民年非四十以上、女年非五十以上者，不得出家。
现代文：百姓男子年龄不足四十以上、妇女年龄不足五十以上的，不准出家。
English: Men under the age of forty and women under the age of fifty are not allowed to enter the priesthood.

古文：二十八年，令天下僧道赴京考试给牒，不通经典者黜之。
现代文：二十八年，命令天下僧道赴京考试给予度牒，不通经典的便罢黜他。
English: In the 28th year, he ordered the world's monks to go to Beijing to take the exam and give him a certificate. If he did not pass the exam, he would be dismissed.

古文：其后，释氏有法王、佛子、大国师等封号，道士有大真人、高士，高士等封号，赐银印蟒玉，加太常卿、礼部尚书及宫保衔，至有封伯爵者，皆一时宠幸，非制也。
现代文：那以后，程区有法王、佛子、大国师等封号，道士有大真人、高士等封号，赐银印蟒玉，加封太常卿、礼部尚书及宫保衔，甚至有封伯爵的，都是一时宠幸之人，并不是固定的制度。
English: Since then, Cheng Quan has been given titles such as "His Holiness," "Buddha's son" and "Great Teacher of the Nation," Taoist priests have been given titles such as "Great Man" and "High Priest," and have been given silver-engraved beads. He has also been given titles such as "Grand Secretary of the State," "Honorary Member of the Ministry of Rites" and "Guardian of the Imperial Palace," and has even been given the title of "Count." All of these titles were given to people who were favored at the time, and are not part of a fixed system.

古文：教坊司。奉銮一人，左、右韶舞各一人，左、右司乐各一人，掌乐舞承应。
现代文：教坊司，奉銮一人，正九品，左、右韶舞各一人，左、右司乐各一人，都为从九品。
English: The teacher of the school, one person of the bong, is nine grades, one person of the left and right gong dance, one person of the left and right music, are nine grades.

古文：以乐户充之，隶礼部。
现代文：掌管乐舞应召表演侍奉。以乐户充当，隶属礼部。
English: Servant in charge of music and dance call-in performances. Acts as entertainer, belongs to the ceremonial department.

古文：宦官。十二监。
现代文：嘉靖年间，又设显陵供祀教坊司，设左、右司乐各一人。
English: During the reign of Emperor Jiajing, the Xianling Mausoleum was also set up for the worship of the teacher, and the left and right music departments were each set up.

古文：司礼监，内官监，御用监，司设监，御马监，神宫监，尚膳监，尚宝监，印绶监，直殿监，尚衣监，都知监。
现代文：宦官，十二监：每监各有太监一人，正四品，左、右少监各一人，从四品，左、右监丞各一人，正五品，典簿一人，正六品，长随、奉御没有固定人数，从六品。
English: Eunuchs, twelve supervisors: each supervisor has one eunuch, senior fourth grade, one left and right junior supervisor each, from fourth grade, one left and right supervisor each, senior fifth grade, one record book, senior sixth grade, no fixed number of attendants and servants, from sixth grade.

古文：四司。
现代文：这是洪武旧翩。
English: This is the old Hongwu dance.

古文：惜薪司，钟鼓司，宝钞司，混堂司。八局。
现代文：后来日渐变革，详见下列各条。
English: Later, it gradually changed, as detailed in the following articles.

古文：兵仗局，银作局，浣衣局，巾帽局，针工局，内织染局，酒醋面局，司苑局。
现代文：镇守，镇守太监始于洪熙，遍设于正统，所有各省各镇无不有镇守太监，至嘉靖八年后纔革除。
English: Town guards, town guard eunuchs began in Hongxi and were set up everywhere in orthodoxy. All provinces and towns had town guard eunuchs. They were abolished after eight years of Jiajing.

古文：东宫春和门，后门，左、右门，皇城、京城内外诸门，提督东厂，提督西厂，提督京营，文书房，礼仪房，中书房，御前近侍，南京守备，天寿山守备，湖广承天府守备，织造，镇守，镇守太监始于洪熙，遍设于正统，凡各省各镇无不有镇守太监，至嘉靖八年后始革。
现代文：市舶，广东、福建、浙江三市舶司各设太监提督，后来罢除浙江、福建二司，只存广东司。监督仓场，各仓、各场全都设监督太监。
English: The shipping departments of the three cities of Shanghai, Guangdong, Fujian and Zhejiang each set up a eunuch admiral. Later, the second department of Zhejiang and Fujian was dismissed, leaving only the Guangdong department. Supervision of warehouses, each warehouse and each field all set up supervision eunuchs.

古文：市舶，监督仓场，诸陵神宫监，其外之监军、采办、粮税、矿关等使，不常设者，不可胜纪也。
现代文：各陵神宫监，各陵都设神官监太监守卫陵寝。那些在外的监军、采办、粮税、矿、关等使节，不经常设置的，记不胜记。
English: Each mausoleum has a shrine overseer, and each mausoleum has a priest overseer and eunuch guarding the tomb. Those outside overseers, procurement, grain tax, mine, customs and other envoys, which are not often set up, are memorable.

古文：初，吴元年置内史监，设监令，丞，正五品，奉御，内史，典簿。
现代文：起初，吴元年设置内史监，设监令，正四品，丞，正五品，奉御，从五品，内史，正七品，典簿，正八品。
English: At first, in the first year of the Wu Dynasty, the Supervisor of Internal History was set up, the Supervision Order was set up, the Senior Fourth Class, the Junior Fourth Class, the Senior Fifth Class, the Obedience Order, the Junior Fifth Class, the Senior Seventh Class, the Internal History, the Directory, and the Senior Eighth Class.

古文：皇门官设皇门使，副。
现代文：皇门官设皇门使，正五品，副，从五品。
English: The imperial gate officials set up imperial gate envoys, the first five grades, the second five grades, and the third five grades.

古文：后改置内使监、御用监，各设令一人，丞二人，奉御，典簿。
现代文：后改为设置内使监、御用监，各设令一人，正三品，乏区二人，从三品，奉御，正六品，典簿，正七品。
English: Later, it was changed to set up an internal envoy supervisor and a royal inspector, with one person at the top of each order, a senior third, and two people at the bottom, a junior third, an honorary third, a senior sixth, a directory, and a senior seventh.

古文：皇门官门正，副，春宫门官正，副，御马司司正，副，尚宝兼守殿、尚冠、尚衣、尚佩、尚履、尚药、纪事等奉御。
现代文：皇门官门正，正四品，副，从四品，壹宫门官正，正五品，副，从五品，御马司司正，正五品，副，从五品，尚宝兼守殿、尚冠、尚衣、尚佩、尚履、尚药、纪事等奉御，都为正六品。
English: The official of the imperial gate, the official of the imperial gate, the official of the imperial gate, the official of the imperial gate, the official of the imperial gate, the official of the imperial gate, the official of the imperial gate, the official of the imperial gate, the official of the imperial gate, the official of the imperial gate, the official of the imperial gate, the official of the imperial gate, the official of the imperial gate, the official of the imperial gate, the official of the imperial gate, the official of the imperial gate, the official of the imperial gate, the official of the imperial gate, the official of the imperial gate, the official of the imperial gate, the official of the imperial gate, the

古文：洪武二年，定置内使监奉御六十人，尚宝一人，尚冠七人，尚衣十人，尚佩九人，尚药七人，纪事二人，执膳四人，司脯二人，司香四人，太庙司香四人，涓洁二人。
现代文：洪武二年，确定下来设置内使监奉御六十人，尚宝一人，尚冠七人，尚衣十人，尚佩九人，尚药七人，纪事二人，执膳四人，司脯二人，司香四人，太庙司香四人，涓洁二人。
English: In the second year of Hongwu, it was determined to set up 60 emissary supervisors, one Shang Bao, seven Shang Guan, ten Shang Yi, nine Shang Pei, seven Shang Yue, two Chronicles, four Keeper of the Table, two Priests, four Incense Keepers, four Temple Incense Keepers, and two Anjie.

古文：置尚酒、尚醋、尚面、尚染四局，局设正一人，副二人。
现代文：设置尚酒、尚醋、尚面、尚染四局，各局设正一入，副二人。
English: There are four departments: Shang wine, Shang vinegar, Shang noodles, and Shang dyeing. Each department has one full-time and two part-time employees.

古文：置御马、御用二司，司设正一人，副二人。
现代文：设置御马、御用二司，各司设正一人，副二人。
English: There will be a chief steward and two officers of the Imperial Household Agency, with one official and two deputies in each office.

古文：内府库设大使一人，副使二人。
现代文：内府库设大使一人，副使二人。
English: An ambassador and two deputy envoys were appointed to the Inner Prefectural Treasury.

古文：内仓监设令一人，丞二人。
现代文：内仓监设令一人，丞二人。
English: One inner warehouse supervisor was appointed, and two assistants were appointed.

古文：及置东宫典玺、典翰、典膳、典服、典药、典乘兵六局，局设局郎一人，丞一人。
现代文：以及设置东宫典玺、典翰、典膳、典服、典药、典乘兵六局，各局设局郎一人，丞一人。
English: and set up six bureaus in the East Palace, including the Bureau of Engraving and Printing, the Bureau of Engraving and Printing, the Bureau of Engraving and Printing, the Bureau of Engraving and Printing, the Bureau of Engraving and Printing, the Bureau of Engraving and Printing, the Bureau of Engraving and Printing, the Bureau of Engraving and Printing, the Bureau of Engraving and Printing, the Bureau of Engraving and Printing, and the Bureau of Engraving and Printing.

古文：又置门官，午门等十三门，各设门正一人，副一人。
现代文：又设置门官，午门等十三门，各设门正一人，副一人。
English: There are also thirteen gates, including the noon gate, each of which has one gate keeper and one assistant keeper.

古文：东宫门官，春和门等四门，各设门正一人，副一人。
现代文：束宫门官，春和门等四门，各设门正一人，副一人。
English: There are four gates, including the Sokun palace gate, the Chunhe gate, and so on. Each gate has one person in charge and one person in charge.

古文：三年，置王府承奉司。
现代文：三年，设置王府承奉司。
English: Three years later, the post of the royal palace successor was established.

古文：改内使监、御用监，秩皆从三品，皇门官秩从四品。
现代文：设承奉一人，承奉副二人，典宝、典服、典膳三所，各设正一人，副一人，门官设门正一人，副一人。改内使监、御用监品级都为从三品，令从三品，丞正四品，皇门官品级从四品。
English: There shall be one person to serve as heir, two persons to serve as deputy, and three places to receive treasures, ceremonial clothing, and ceremonial meals, with one person to serve as chief and one person to serve as deputy, and one person to serve as gate officer, with one person to serve as chief gate officer and one person to serve as deputy.

古文：四年，复悉差其品秩，授以散官。
现代文：内仓监为内府仓，以监令焉大使，监丞为副使。
English: The inner warehouse supervisor is the inner warehouse, with the supervisor as the ambassador and the supervisor as the deputy envoy.

古文：又考前代纠劾内官之法，置内正司，设司正一人，司副一人，专纠内官失仪及不法者。
现代文：内府库焉承运库。仍旧设大使、副使。不久设置纪事司，以宦官张翊为司正，品级正七品。又考证前代纠举弹劾内官的法令，设置内正司，设司正一人，正七品，司副一人，从七品，专门纠察内官不合仪节及不守法的人。
English: There were still ambassadors and deputy envoys. Soon, the Chronicle Department was set up, with eunuch Zhang Xi as the director and a grade of the seventh grade. Also, according to the laws of the previous generation of impeachment of officials, the directorate was set up, with one director, seven grades, and one deputy director, from the seventh grade, to specifically picket officials who did not comply with the ceremony and who did not abide by the law.

古文：旋改为典礼司，又改为典礼纪察司，升其品秩。
现代文：随即改焉典礼司，又改为典礼纪察司，提高其官位品级司正升正六品，司副升从六品。
English: Subsequently, the Department of Ceremonies was changed into the Department of Ceremonies and Discipline Inspection, and the official ranks of the Department of Ceremonies and Discipline Inspection were raised to Senior Sixth Rank, and the Deputy Department of Ceremonies and Discipline Inspection was raised to Senior Sixth Rank.

古文：十年，置神宫内使监，设监令，丞，司香奉御，典簿。
现代文：十年，设置神宫内使监，设监令，正五品，丞，从五品，司香奉御，正七品，典簿，从九品。
English: In the 10th year, the overseer of the imperial court was set up, and the overseer's orders were set up, starting from the 5th rank, to the 7th rank, to the 9th rank, to the 5th rank, to the 5th rank, to the 5th rank, to the 6th rank, to the 7th rank, to the 9th rank.

古文：天地坛、神坛各祠祭署，设署令，丞，司香奉御。
现代文：天地坛、神坛各祠祭署，设署令，正七品，丞，从七品，司香奉御，正八品。
English: Heaven and earth altar, the altar of each ancestral hall, the establishment of the order, positive seven products, 丞, from seven products, the incense offering, positive eight products.

古文：甲、乙、丙、丁、戊五库，各设大使，副使，及皇城门官端门等十六门，各设门正，副，十二年，更置尚衣、尚冠、尚履三监，针工、皮作、巾帽三局。
现代文：甲、乙、丙、丁、戊五库，各设大使，正七品，副使，从七品。以及皇城门官端门等十六门，各设门正，正七品，副，从七品。十二年，重新设置尚衣、尚冠、尚履三监，针工、皮作、巾帽三局。
English: A, B, C, D, and E five storehouses, each with an ambassador, a senior seventh grade, and a deputy envoy, a junior seventh grade. And 16 gates, including the gate of the imperial city, each with a gate senior, senior seventh grade, and a deputy, junior seventh grade. In 12 years, the three supervisors of Shang Yi, Shang Guan, and Shang Li were re-established, and the three bureaus of needlework, leatherwork, and headwear were re-established.

古文：改尚佩局为尚佩监。
现代文：改尚佩局为尚佩监。
English: Change Shangpei Bureau to Shangpei Supervisor.

古文：十六年，置内府宝钞广源、广惠二库，职掌出纳楮币，入则广源库掌之，出则广惠库掌之。十七年，更定内官诸监、库、局品职。
现代文：宝钞广惠库，设大使二人，正九品；副使二人，从九品。都是不世袭的流动性官员、内官兼用。十七年，重新制定内官各监、库、局品级职位。
English: The Hoan Kuan Hui Library was established, with two ambassadors at the highest grade and two vice-ambassadors at the lowest grade. Both were non-hereditary circulation officials and concurrently served as officials of the Ministry of the Interior. In 1917, the positions of officials of the Ministry of the Interior at the supervisory, treasury, and bureau levels were re-established.

古文：内官监，设令一人，丞二人，典簿一人。
现代文：内官监，设令一人，正六品，丞二人，从六品，典簿一人，正九品。
English: An internal inspector, one person in charge, six grades, two clerks, six grades, one person in the register, nine grades.

古文：神宫监，设令一人，丞一人，奉御一人，尚宝监，设令一人，丞一人。
现代文：神宫监，设令一人，正七品，丞一人，从七品，奉御一人，正八品。尚宝监，设令一人，正七品，丞一人，从七品。
English: Jingu no kami, set one person, Shichihon, Jo one person, from Shichihon, Bungyo one person, Shichihon. Shoho no kami, set one person, Shichihon, Jo one person, from Shichihon, Bungyo one person, Shichihon.

古文：尚衣监，设令一人，丞一人。奉御四人。
现代文：尚衣监，设令一人，正七品，丞一人，从七品，奉御四人，正八品。
English: Shang clothing inspector, set order one person, senior seven grade, Zhao one person, from seven grade, Bongyou four people, senior eight grade.

古文：尚膳监，设令一人，丞一人。
现代文：尚膳监，设令一人，正七品，丞一人，从七品。
English: Shang Zhen Guan, set one person, Zheng seven products, Zheng one person, from seven products.

古文：司设监，设令一人，丞一人，奉御四人，司礼监，设令一人，丞一人，御马监，设令一人，丞一人，直殿监，设令一人，丞四人，小内使十五人。
现代文：司设监，设令一人，正七品，丞一人，从七品，奉御四人，正八品。司礼监，设令一人，正七品，丞一人，从七品。御马监，设令一人，正七品，丞一人，从七品。直殿监，设令一人，正七品，丞四人，从七品，小肉使十五人。
English: There was a supervisor for the division, one person for the order, senior seventh grade, one person for the yakitori, from the seventh grade, four people for the obsequies, senior eighth grade. There was a supervisor for the ceremony, one person for the order, senior seventh grade, one person for the yakitori, from the seventh grade. There was a supervisor for the horse, one person for the order, senior seventh grade, one person for the yakitori, from the seventh grade. There was a supervisor for the palace, one person for the order, senior seventh grade, four people for the yakitori, from the seventh grade, four people for the obsequies,

古文：宫门承制，设奉御五人。
现代文：宫门侍奉皇上，设奉御五人，正八品。
English: The palace gate serves the emperor, and there are five servants, eight in all.

古文：宫门守门官，设门正一人，副四人。
现代文：官门守门官，设门正一人，正八品，副四人，从八品。
English: The gatekeeper of the official gate, the gatekeeper is one person, the official eight products, the deputy four people, from the eight products.

古文：内承运库，设大使一人，副使二人。
现代文：内承运库，设大使一人，正九品，副使二人，从九品。
English: In the inner carrier depot, there is one ambassador, who is in charge of nine products, and two vice-ambassadors, who are in charge of nine products.

古文：司钥库，设大使一人，副使四人。
现代文：司钥库，设大使一人，正九品，副使四人，从丸品。
English: The keeper of the keyring library, consisting of one ambassador, nine regular keyrings, four vice-ambassadors, and one round keyring.

古文：巾帽局，设大使一人，副使一人，针工局，设大使一人，副使一人，织染局，设大使一人，副使一人。
现代文：巾帽局，设大使一人，正九品，副使一人，从九品。针工局，设大使一人，正九品，副使一人，从九品。织染局，设大使一人，正九品，副使一人，从九品。
English: For the Bureau of Silk Scarves and Hats, there will be one ambassador, nine grades up, and one vice-envoy, nine grades down. For the Bureau of Needlework, there will be one ambassador, nine grades up, and one vice-envoy, nine grades down. For the Bureau of Weaving and Dyeing, there will be one ambassador, nine grades up, and one vice-envoy, nine grades down.

古文：颜料局，设大使一人。
现代文：颜料局，设大使一人，正九品。
English: The Pigment Bureau was established, with one ambassador and nine products.

古文：司苑局，设大使一人。
现代文：司苑局，设大使一人，正九品。
English: Siyuan Bureau, set up an ambassador, a nine-star general.

古文：司牧局，设大使一人。
现代文：司牧局，设大使一人，正九品。
English: Pastoral Bureau, set up an ambassador, a nine-star.

古文：皆于内官内选用。
现代文：都从内官中选用。
English: All of them were selected from the inner circle.

古文：二十八年，重定内官监、司、库、局与诸门官，并东宫六局、王府承奉等官职秩。
现代文：二十八年，重新设定内官监、司、库、局与各门官，以及束宫六局、王府承奉等官职责品级。
English: In 2008, the duties and ranks of officials such as the supervisors of internal affairs, secretaries, treasurers, and bureaus and their subordinates, as well as the six bureaus of the Palace of the Grand Dukes, and the officials of the Imperial Household Agency were re-established.

古文：凡内官监十一：曰神宫监，曰尚宝监，曰孝陵神宫监，曰尚膳监，曰尚衣监，曰司设监，曰内官监，曰司礼监，曰御马监，曰印绶监，曰直殿监，皆设太监一人，左、右少监各一人，左、右监丞各一人，典簿一人，又设长随、奉御。
现代文：所有内官监十一个：称为神宫监、尚宝监、孝陵神宫监、尚膳监、尚衣监、司设监、内官监、司礼监、御马监、印绶监、直殿监，都各设太监一人，正四品，左、右少监各一人，从四品，左、右监丞各一人，正五品，典簿一人，正六品，又设长随、奉御，正六品。
English: All of the eleven supervisors: known as the palace supervisor, the treasure supervisor, the filial piety palace supervisor, the meal supervisor, the clothing supervisor, the setting up supervisor, the official supervisor, the ceremony supervisor, the horse supervisor, the seal supervisor, and the palace supervisor, each have one eunuch, four grades, one left and one right junior supervisor, four grades, one left and one right supervisor, five grades, one bookkeeper, six grades, and one attendant and attendant, six grades.

古文：各门官七：午门、东华门、西华门、玄武门、奉天门、左顺门、右顺门，皆设门正一人，门副一人。
现代文：各门七门官：午门、束华门、西华门、玄武门、奉天门、左顺门、右顺门，都各设门正一人，正四品，门副一人，从四品。
English: The seven gate officials of each gate: the Midday Gate, the Sokhua Gate, the West China Gate, the Xuanwu Gate, the Bong Tian Gate, the Left Shun Gate, and the Right Shun Gate, are each set up with one person in charge of the gate, four persons in charge of the gate, one person in charge of the gate, and four persons in charge of the gate.

古文：司二：曰钟鼓司，曰惜薪司，皆设司正一人，左、右司副各一人。
现代文：二司：为钟鼓司、惜薪司、都各设司正一人，正五品，左、右司副各一人，从五品。
English: Second Division: For the Bell and Drum Division and the Fire Prevention Division, there shall be one full-fledged division chief and five full-fledged subordinates, and one deputy left and right division chief and five full-fledged subordinates.

古文：局库九：曰兵仗局，曰内织染局，曰针工局，曰巾帽局，曰司苑局，曰酒醋面局，曰内承运库，曰司钥库，曰内府供用库。
现代文：局库九：兵仗局、内织染局、针工局、巾帽局、司苑局、酒醋面局、内承运库、司钥库、内府供用库。
English: Local storehouse nine: Bureau of War, Bureau of Inner Weaving and Dyeing, Bureau of Needlework, Bureau of Handkerchiefs and Hats, Bureau of Gardens, Bureau of Vinegar and Vinegar Noodles, Bureau of Inner Carriers, Bureau of Keys, and Bureau of Inner Prefectures.

古文：每局库皆设大使一人，左、右副使各一人。
现代文：每个局库都各设大使一人，正五品，左、右副使各一人，从五品。
English: Each of the bureaus has one ambassador, five from the first rank, and one each from the left and right, five from the second rank.

古文：东宫典玺、典药、典膳、典服、典兵、典乘六局，各设局郎一人，局丞二人，惟典玺局增设纪事、奉御。
现代文：东宫典玺、典药、典膳、典服、典兵、典乘六局，各设局郎一人，正五品，局丞二人，从五品，只有典玺局增设纪事、奉御，正六品。
English: The East Palace had six bureaus, including the Bureau of Engraving and Printing, the Bureau of Medicine, the Bureau of Tableware, the Bureau of Ceremonial Costumes, the Bureau of Ceremonial Troops, and the Bureau of Ceremonial Transportation. Each bureau had one bureaus sergeant, who held the rank of Senior Fifth Rank, and two bureaus sergeants, who held the rank of Junior Fifth Rank. Only the Bureau of Engraving and Printing added the bureaus of Chronicle and Homage, who held the rank of Senior Sixth Rank.

古文：亲王府承奉司设承奉正，承奉副。
现代文：亲王府承奉司设承奉正，正六品，承奉副，从六品。
English: The Prince's Office's Office of Obedience is divided into Obedience, Obedience, Obedience, and Obedience.

古文：所三：曰典宝所，设典宝正一人，副一人。
现代文：三所：为典宾所，设典宝正一入，正六品，副一人，从六品。
English: Three places: for the ceremonial guest house, set up the ceremonial treasure is one-in, six-in, one-out, six-in.

古文：曰典膳所，设典膳正一人，副一人。
现代文：为典膳所，设典膳正一人，正六品，副一人，从六品。
English: For the ceremonial meal, the ceremonial meal is set up as one person, six dishes, and one person, six dishes.

古文：曰典服所，设典服正一人，副一人。
现代文：为典服所，设典服正一人，正六品，副一人，从六品。
English: As a ceremonial dress shop, the ceremonial dress is set up as one person, six items, and one person from six items.

古文：门官，设门正一人，门副一人。
现代文：门官，设门正一人，正六品，门副一人，徒六品。
English: Gate officer, set one person as the gate chief, six persons as the gate chief, one person as the gate deputy, six persons as the gate deputy.

古文：又设内使十人，各公主位下设中使司，司正、司副各一人。
现代文：又设内使十人，司冠一人，司衣三人，司佩一人，司履一人，司药二人，司矢二人。各公主位下设中使司，司正、司副各一人。
English: There were also ten Inner Emissaries, one Crowned Emissary, three Clothed Emissaries, one Praying Emissary, one Walking Emissary, two Medicine Emissaries, and two Arrow Emissaries. Each princess was assigned a Middle Emissary, one Chief Emissary, and one Deputy Chief Emissary.

古文：三十年，置都知监，设太监一人，左、右少监各一人，左、右监丞各一人，典簿一人。
现代文：三十年，设置都知监，设太监一人，正四品，左、右少监各一人，从四品，左、右监丞各一人，正五品，典簿一人，正六品。
English: For thirty years, there was a tutor-in-charge, a eunuch-in-charge, a senior fourth-grade official, a junior left and right supervisor each, a junior fourth-grade official, a junior left and right supervisor each, a senior fifth-grade official, and a bookkeeper, a senior sixth-grade official.

古文：又置银作局，设大使一人，副使一人。
现代文：又设置银作局，设大使一人，正五品，副使一人，从五品。
English: He also set up a silver-making bureau, with one ambassador, five ministers, and one vice-envoy, five ministers.

古文：太祖尝谓侍臣曰： 朕观《周礼》，奄寺不及百人。
现代文：太祖曾经对侍臣说： 朕闵看《周礼》，宦官不足一百人。
English: The great-grandfather once said to a courtier: "I have just read the Zhouli, and there are less than a hundred eunuchs.

古文：后世至逾数千，因用阶乱。
现代文：后代多至超过敷千人，因而成为祸害的缘由。
English: The offspring can number up to more than a thousand, thus becoming the cause of the scourge.

古文：此曹止可供洒扫，给使令，非别有委任，毋令过多。 
现代文：此辈人只可供洒扫，给使唤，若不是另有委任，不要使他们人数太多。 
English: This generation of people can only be used to sweep and sweep, to give orders, if not otherwise appointed, do not make them too numerous.

古文：又言： 此曹善者千百中不一二，恶者常千百。
现代文：又说： 此辈良善之人千百人中没有一两个，为恶之人常常有千百人。
English: He also said: "There are not one or two good people among the hundreds of thousands in this generation, but there are often hundreds of thousands of evil people.

古文：若用为耳目，即耳目蔽；用为心腹，即心腹病。
现代文：如若用焉耳目，则见闻被他们蒙蔽；用为心腹，则成为心腹大患。
English: If you use blind eyes and ears, you will be deceived by them; if you use them as a confidant, you will become a confidant.

古文：驭之之道，在使之畏法，不可使有功。
现代文：驾驭他们的办法，在于使他们敬畏法令，不能使他们居功自傲。
English: The way to control them is to make them fear the law, not to make them proud.

古文：畏法则检束，有功则骄恣。 
现代文：敬畏法令则检点自律，居功自傲则骄横放纵。 
English: Reverence for the law is self-discipline, and self-congratulation is arrogant indulgence.

古文：有内侍事帝最久，微言及政事，立斥之，终其身不召。
现代文：有名内侍侍奉皇帝最久，暗中谈及政事，马上斥退他，终其一生不再召见。
English: A famous chambermaid, who had served the emperor for the longest time, secretly talked about politics and immediately rebuffed him, never to be seen again in his entire life.

古文：因定制，内侍毋许识字。
现代文：因此定下制度，内侍不允许识字。
English: Therefore, a system was set up in which chambermaids were not allowed to be literate.

古文：洪武十七年铸铁牌，文曰： 内臣不得干预政事，犯者斩 ，置宫门中。
现代文：洪武十七年，铸造铁牌，铭文说， 内臣不得干预政事，违犯者斩首 ，放置在官门中央。
English: In the seventeenth year of Hongwu, an iron plate was cast, with an inscription saying that the Inner Minister must not interfere in political affairs, and violators would be beheaded, and placed in the center of the official gate.

古文：又敕诸司毋得与内官监文移往来。
现代文：又敕令各部门不得与内官监有公文往来。
English: In addition, all departments were ordered not to have official correspondence with the inner official supervision.

古文：然二十五年命聂庆童往河州敕谕茶马，中官奉使行事已自此始。
现代文：然而在二十五年，命聂庆童前往河州敕谕茶马之事，宦官奉旨出使办事已从这时开始。
English: However, in the 25th year, when the eunuch Qing Tong was ordered to go to Hezhou to order tea and horses, the eunuch has been dispatched by order since then.

古文：成祖亦尝云： 朕一遵太祖训，无御宝文书，即一军一民，中官不得擅调发。 
现代文：成祖也曾经说： 朕完全遵从太祖教诲，没有御用宝玺文书，即或是一个士兵一个平民，宦官不得擅自调用遣发。 
English: Cheng Zu also once said: "I completely follow the teachings of my great-grandfather. Without a royal treasure document, that is, either a soldier or a civilian, eunuchs may not be summoned and dispatched without authorization.

古文：有私役应天工匠者，立命锦衣逮治。
现代文：有私自役使应天工匠的，当即命锦衣卫逮捕治罪。
English: If there are any self-serving craftsmen, they shall be immediately arrested and prosecuted.

古文：顾中官四出，实始永乐时。
现代文：然而宦官出使各地，实在是开始于水乐年间。
English: However, the dispatch of eunuchs to various places really began during the Water Festival.

古文：元年，李兴等赍敕劳暹罗国王，此奉使外国之始也。
现代文：元年，李兴等奉敕慰问暹罗国国王，这是奉旨出使外国的开始。
English: In the first year of the year, Li Xing and others offered condolences to the King of Siam, which was the beginning of the dispatch of foreign envoys by order.

古文：三年，命郑和等率兵二万，行赏西洋古里、满剌诸国，此将兵之始也。
现代文：三年，命令郑和等率兵二莴，出行赏赐西洋古里、满剌各国，这是统率军队的开始。
English: In the third year, Zheng He and others were ordered to lead two armies and travel to reward the countries of Western antiquity and Manchukuo. This was the beginning of commanding the army.

古文：八年，敕王安等监都督谭青等军，马靖巡视甘肃，此监军、巡视之始也。
现代文：八年，敕令王安等监察都督谭青等人所率军队，马靖巡视甘肃，这是宦官监军、巡视的开始。
English: In the eighth year, the eunuch Wang An and others inspected the army led by the governor Tan Qing and others, and Ma Jing inspected Gansu. This was the beginning of the eunuch's supervision of the army and inspection.

古文：及洪熙元年，以郑和领下番官军守备南京，遂相沿不改。
现代文：到洪熙元年，以郑和统领下番官军守备南京，于是沿袭不改变。
English: In the first year of Hongxi, it was Zheng He who led the army to defend Nanjing, so the lineage did not change.

古文：敕王安镇守甘肃，而各省镇皆设镇守矣。
现代文：敕令王安镇守甘肃，然后各行省军镇全都设镇守，了。
English: The imperial edict ordered Wang An Town to guard Gansu, and then all the provincial military towns set up town guards.

古文：宣德四年，特设内书堂，命大学士陈山专授小内使书，而太祖不许识字读书之制，由此而废。
现代文：宣德四年，特别设内书堂，命令大学士陈山专门教授小内使写字，而太祖定的不许识字读书的制度，从此就废除了。
English: In the fourth year of Xuande, a special inner library was set up, and Chen Shan, a university scholar, was ordered to specially teach the minor inner envoy to write, and the system of not being allowed to read and study, which was set by the great ancestor, was abolished.

古文：赐王瑾、金英印记，则与诸密勿大臣同。
现代文：赐王瑾、金英印信牌记，则与各机要大臣相同。
English: Those who were awarded the letters of Wang Qian and Jin Ying Ying are the same as the important ministers.

古文：赐金英、范弘等免死诏，则又无异勋臣之铁券也。
现代文：赐金英、范弘等免死诏，则又无异于功勋大臣的铁券。
English: Granting Kim Young and Fan Hong amnesty from death is tantamount to giving them an iron certificate from the Minister of Merit.

古文：英之王振，宪之汪直，武之刘瑾，熹之魏忠贤，太阿倒握，威福下移。
现代文：英宗时的王振，宪宗时的汪直，武宗时的刘瑾，熹宗时的魏忠贤，权柄授人，皇权控制于宦官之手，威福下移于合人。
English: Wang Zhen during the reign of Emperor Yingzong, Wang Zhi during the reign of Emperor Jianzong, Liu Zhen during the reign of Emperor Wu, Wei Zhongxian during the reign of Emperor Xizong, authority was conferred on people, imperial power was controlled by eunuchs, and power and wealth were transferred to commoners.

古文：神宗矿税之使，无一方不罹厥害。
现代文：神宗矿税使的派遣，没有一个地方不深受其害。
English: There is no place that is not deeply affected by the dispatch of the Shenzong Mining Tax Envoy.

古文：其他怙势薰灼，不可胜纪。
现代文：其他倚仗宦官势力残害天下的事，不可尽记。
English: Other events that relied on the power of eunuchs to devastate the world are too numerous to mention.

古文：而荫弟、荫侄、封伯、封公，则挠官制之大者。
现代文：继而封荫弟、封荫侄、封伯、封公，则是扰乱官制最厉害的。
English: Subsequent fongyin brothers, fongyin nephews, fongbo, and fonggu are the most disruptive of the official system.

古文：庄烈帝初翦大憝，中外颂圣。
现代文：庄烈帝起初剪除宦官大恶，朝廷内外称颂圣明。
English: At first, Emperor Zhuangde eliminated eunuchs, which was a great evil, and praised Shengming both inside and outside the court.

古文：既而镇守、出征、督饷、坐营等事，无一不命中官为之，而明亦遂亡矣。
现代文：随后镇守、出征、督饷、坐营等事，无一不命宦官办理，因此明朝也就这样灭亡了。
English: Subsequently, there were no eunuchs left alive to manage the affairs of the town guard, going to war, supervising the troops, and sitting in the camp, and so the Ming Dynasty also perished in this way.

古文：女官。
现代文：尚宫局，尚官二人，正五品。
English: Shangguan Bureau, two Shang officials, five court dignitaries.

古文：六局。
现代文：六尚相同。
English: Six are the same.

古文：尚宫局，领司四：司记，司言，司簿，司闱。
现代文：尚宫掌管导引中宫。所有六局收发文书簿籍，都要盖章签署。
English: Shang Gong is in charge of guiding Zhong Gong. All the books of documents received and sent by the six bureaus must be stamped and signed.

古文：尚仪局，领司四：司籍，司乐，司宾，司赞，彤史。
现代文：如果在宫外征用办事，便替她们请旨，公文交付内官监。
English: If they are requisitioned to work outside the palace, they will apply for a warrant on their behalf, and the official document will be handed over to the internal affairs inspector.

古文：尚服局，领司四：司宝，司衣，司饰，司仗，尚食局，领司四：司膳，司酝，司药，司饎。
现代文：内官监收到公文，发放到官外。管辖四个司：司记，司记二人，正六品；典记二人，正七品；掌记二人，正八品。
English: The internal inspector receives official documents and distributes them outside the office. He supervises four departments: secretary, two secretaries, six official grades; two clerks, seven official grades; two clerks, eight official grades.

古文：尚寝局，领司四：司设，司舆，司苑，司灯。
现代文：掌管宫内各司文书簿籍，收发文书登记下来，签署印章，然后发付执行。女史六人，执掌文书，总计二十四司，二十四典，二十四掌，品级相同。
English: In charge of the book of records of all the clerks in the palace, she registered the documents sent and received, signed the seals, and then issued them for execution. There were six women in charge of the documents, a total of 24 clerks, 24 scribes, and 24 palms, with the same grade.

古文：尚功局，领司四：司制，司珍，司彩，司计，宫正司。
现代文：尚仪局增设彤史，正六品。宫正司增设典正，正七品。
English: The Bureau of Ceremonies added the title of Grand Historian, posthumously awarded the sixth rank. The Imperial Household Agency added the title of Grand Historian, posthumously awarded the seventh rank.

