古文：起昭阳协洽，尽阏逢涒滩，凡二年。
现代文：起，止，一共两年。淮阳王更始元年
English: for a total of two years. In the first year of the reign of King Huaiyang

古文：淮阳王更始元年春，正月，甲子朔，汉兵与下江兵共攻甄阜、梁丘赐，斩之，杀士卒二万馀人。
现代文：春季，正月甲子朔，汉军与下江兵一同攻打向甄阜、梁丘赐军，斩甄阜、梁丘赐，杀士卒二万余人。
English: In the spring, in the first month of the year, the Chinese army and the soldiers of the Lower River jointly attacked the troops of Zhenfu and Liangqiu, and killed more than 20,000 soldiers of Zhenfu and Liangqiu.

古文：王莽纳言将军严尤、秩宗将军陈茂引兵欲据宛，刘縯与战于淯阳下，大破之，遂围宛。
现代文：王莽的纳言将军严尤、秩宗将军陈茂率军前进，打算驻防宛城。刘与他们在阳会战，大破严尤、陈茂军，于是包围宛城。
English: Wang Mang's Nagan generals Yan Yu and Chichizong general Chen Mao led the army forward, intending to garrison Wancheng. Liu fought with them in Yang, defeated Yan Yu and Chen Mao's army, and then encircled Wancheng.

古文：先是，青、徐贼众虽数十万人，讫无文书、号令、旌旗、部曲。
现代文：在此之前，青州和徐州的盗贼虽有几十万人，但一直没有文书、号令、旗帜、军队组织。
English: Prior to this, although there were hundreds of thousands of thieves in Qingzhou and Xuzhou, there were no documents, orders, flags, or military organizations.

古文：及汉兵起，皆称将军，攻城略地，移书称说。
现代文：但等到汉兵起事，大家都自称将军，进攻城市，夺取土地，传递文书，声讨王莽的罪恶。
English: But when the Han soldiers rose up, they all called themselves generals, attacked cities, seized land, passed on documents, and denounced Wang Mang's crimes.

古文：莽闻之，始惧。
现代文：王莽听到了，开始担心害怕起来。
English: Wang Meng heard this and began to feel worried and afraid.

古文：舂陵戴侯曾孙玄在平林兵中，号更始将军。
现代文：舂陵戴侯刘熊渠的曾孙刘玄，在平林兵中，称更始将军。
English: Liu Xuan, the great-grandson of Liu Xunqiu, the daimyo of Fuling, was known as the first general among the soldiers of Pinglin.

古文：时汉兵已十馀万，诸将议以兵多而无所统一，欲立刘氏以从人望。
现代文：这时汉兵已有十余万人，将领们议论，军队虽多，却没有共同的领袖。于是打算拥立一位汉朝的刘姓皇族，以便顺从大家的希望。
English: At this time, there were more than one hundred thousand Han soldiers, and the generals argued that although there were many troops, there was no common leader. Therefore, they planned to appoint a Han dynasty member of the imperial family with the surname Liu in order to comply with everyone's wishes.

古文：南阳豪桀及王常等皆欲立刘縯；而新市、平林将帅乐放纵，惮縯威明，贪玄懦弱，先共定策立之，然后召縯示其议。
现代文：南阳郡的豪杰与下江兵王常等，都主张立刘。而新市兵、平林兵的将领乐于放纵，害怕刘的威武严明，贪图刘玄的懦弱，抢先共同定下策略拥立刘玄，造成既成事实，然后召来刘告知决议。
English: The heroes of Nanyang County and the soldiers of the Lower River, such as Wang Chang, all advocated the appointment of Liu. However, the generals of the Xincheng soldiers and the Pinglin soldiers were happy to indulge, afraid of Liu's powerful and rigorous, covet Liu Xuan's cowardice, and preemptively jointly set the strategy to support Liu Xuan, creating a fait accompli, and then summoned Liu to inform the resolution.

古文：縯曰： 诸将军幸欲尊立宗室，甚厚，然今赤眉起青、徐，众数十万，闻南阳立宗室，恐赤眉复有所立，王莽未灭而宗室相攻，是疑天下而自损权，非所以破莽也。
现代文：刘说： 各位将军要尊立刘姓皇族，对我们太厚爱了！然而现在赤眉在青州、徐州崛起，拥有数十万人，听到南阳拥立刘姓皇族的消息，恐怕他们也会拥立一位刘姓皇族。王莽还没有消灭，而刘姓皇族互相进攻，这将使天下疑心而损害自己的力量，不是消灭王莽的办法。
English: Liu said, "All generals should respect and support the Liu imperial family, they love us too much! However, now the Red Eyebrows are rising in Qingzhou and Xuzhou, with hundreds of thousands of people. Hearing the news that Nanyang supports the Liu imperial family, I am afraid that they will also support a Liu imperial family. Wang Mang has not yet been eliminated, and the Liu imperial family is attacking each other. This will make the world suspicious and damage their own strength. It is not a way to eliminate Wang Mang.

古文：舂陵去宛三百里耳，遽自尊立，为天下准的，使后人得承吾敝，非计之善者也。
现代文：而且，舂陵离宛城不过三百里，仓猝自称皇帝，成为天下攻击的目标，让后来人承受衰败，不是好的计谋。
English: Moreover, Fuling is only three hundred miles away from Wancheng, and it is not a good strategy to suddenly claim to be the emperor, become the target of the world's attack, and let later generations suffer decline.

古文：不如且称王以号令，王势亦足以斩诸将。
现代文：不如暂且称王以发号施令，国王的权力也足以斩杀将领。
English: For the time being, it is better to say that the king issues orders, and the king's power is enough to kill generals.

古文：若赤眉所立者贤，相率而往从之，必不夺吾爵位。
现代文：如果赤眉拥立的人贤能，我们就一起前去投奔归附他，绝不会剥夺我们的官爵的。
English: If the person with red eyebrows is capable, we will go forward together to join him, and we will never deprive him of our peerage.

古文：若无所立，破莽，降赤眉，然后举尊号，亦未晚也。 
现代文：如果赤眉没有立皇帝，那么，等我们消灭了王莽，收服了赤眉，然后再称皇帝，也不算晚。 将领们大都说： 好！ 
English: If Red-brow did not set up an emperor, then it is not too late to wait until we have eliminated Wang Mang, subdued Red-brow, and then call him an emperor. The generals mostly said: Good!

古文：诸将多曰： 善！ 张卬拔剑击地曰： 疑事无功，今日之议，不得有二！ 
现代文：张却拔出宝剑，砍击地面，说： 对自己做的事情，抱着怀疑态度，一定不能成功。今天这项决定，不允许有第二种想法！ 
English: Zhang, however, drew his sword and slashed at the ground, saying, "If you are skeptical about what you are doing, you will not succeed. Today's decision does not allow for second thoughts!"

古文：众皆从之。
现代文：众人都赞成。
English: Everyone listened to Smalen.

古文：二月，辛巳朔，设坛场于淯水上沙中，玄即皇帝位，南面立，朝群臣；羞愧流汗，举手不能言。
现代文：二月辛巳朔，在水畔沙滩中设置坛场，刘玄登极，面向南方站立，接受群臣朝拜。他感到羞愧，满脸流汗，只举手而说不出话来。
English: As early as February, an altar was set up on the beach by the water, and Liu Xuan ascended the pole, stood facing the south, and received the worship of the courtiers. He felt ashamed, his face was covered with sweat, and he could only raise his hand and could not speak.

古文：于是大赦，改元，以族父良为国三老，王匡为定国上公，王凤为成国上公，硃鲔为大司马，刘縯为大司徒，陈牧为大司空，馀皆九卿将军。
现代文：于是宣布大赦，改变年号，任命堂叔刘良当国三老，王匡当定国上公，王凤当成国上公，朱鲔当大司马，刘当大司徒，陈牧当大司空，其他将领都当九卿将军。
English: So they declared an amnesty, changed the year, and appointed Uncle Liu Liang as the three elders of the country, Wang Kuang as the crown prince, Wang Feng as the crown prince, Zhu Xi as the grand steward, Liu as the grand steward, Chen Mu as the grand steward, and other generals as the nine generals.

古文：由是豪桀失望，多不服。
现代文：从此，英雄豪杰感到失望，多有不服。
English: Since then, heroes and heroes have been disappointed, and many are not satisfied.

古文：王莽欲外示自安，乃染其须发，立杜陵史谌女为皇后；置后宫，位号视公、卿、大夫、元士者凡百二十人。
现代文：王莽想要显示自己的心情是安定的，于是染黑了胡子和头发，立杜陵人史谌的女儿作皇后。此外还设置后宫，遴选嫔妃一百二十人，地位封号分别比照公、卿、大夫、元士。
English: Wang Mang wanted to show that he was in a stable mood, so he dyed his beard and hair black, and made the daughter of the Duling man Shi Yan the empress. In addition, he also set up a harem and selected one hundred and twenty concubines, with the status titles of Duke, Sir, Doctor, and Yuan Shih.

古文：莽赦天下，诏： 王匡、哀章等讨青、徐盗贼，严尤、陈茂等讨前队丑虏，明告以生活、丹青之信。复迷惑不解散，将遣大司空、隆新公将百万之师劋绝之矣。 
现代文：王莽大赦天下，宣布诏命： 王匡、哀章等讨伐青州、徐州地区的盗贼，严尤、陈茂等讨伐前队地区的盗贼，明白地向他们宣告来降者不杀、守约不变；如果仍然迷惑而不解散，即将派遣大司空、隆新公王邑带领百万大军剿灭他们。 
English: Wang Mang pardoned the world and announced the imperial command: Wang Kuang, Lai Zhang and other thieves who fought in the Qingzhou and Xuzhou regions, Yan You, Chen Mao and other thieves who fought in the vanguard area, clearly announced to them that they would not kill the people who came and went, and that they would keep the agreement unchanged; if they were still confused and did not disband, they would send the Daishi Kuang and Longxin Gongwang E with a million-strong army to annihilate them.

古文：三月，王凤与太常偏将军刘秀等徇昆阳、定陵、郾，皆下之。
现代文：三月，王凤和太常偏将军刘秀等率领汉军攻掠昆阳、定陵、郾等城，都予攻克。
English: In March, Wang Feng and General Liu Xiu led the Chinese army to attack and plunder Kunyang, Dingling, Handan and other cities.

古文：王莽闻严尤、陈茂败，乃遣司空王邑驰传，与司徒王寻发兵平定山东。
现代文：王莽知道了严尤、陈茂失败，就派遣司空王邑乘坐传车急速出发，和司徒王寻一起发兵去平定崤山以东地区。
English: Wang Mang knew the failure of Yan You and Chen Mao, so he dispatched Siku Wangyi to take a rapid departure on a passing train, and sent an army to pacify the area east of Lushan with Sitou Wangxuan.

古文：征诸明兵法六十三家以备军吏，以长人巨母霸为垒尉，又驱诸猛兽虎、豹、犀、象之属以助威武。
现代文：同时征召通晓六十三家兵法的人为军官，任用巨人巨毋霸为垒尉，又赶来虎、豹、犀、象等猛兽以助军威。
English: At the same time, they conscripted people who were familiar with the sixty-three military methods as officers, appointed a giant giant as a base officer, and brought in tigers, leopards, rhinoceroses, elephants and other ferocious beasts to help the military prestige.

古文：邑至洛阳，州郡各选精兵，牧守自将，定会者四十二万人，号百万；馀在道者，旌旗、辎重，千里不绝。
现代文：王邑到了洛阳，各州郡选派精锐的士兵，由州郡的长官亲自带领，定期会集起来的有四十三万人，号称百万；其余的正在路上走，旌旗、辎重千里不绝。
English: When Wangyi arrived in Luoyang, each prefecture and county selected and dispatched elite soldiers, led by the prefect of the prefecture and county in person. There were 430,000 people who gathered regularly, known as a million; the rest were on the road, carrying flags and banners for thousands of miles.

古文：夏，五月，寻、邑南出颍川，与严尤、陈茂合。
现代文：夏季，五月，王寻、王邑离开颍川南下，同严尤、陈茂会合。
English: In the summer, in May, Wang Xun and Wang Yue left Suichuan to go south, and met with Yan You and Chen Mao.

古文：诸将见寻、邑兵盛，皆反走，入昆阳，惶怖，忧念妻孥，欲散归诸城。
现代文：汉军的将领们看到王寻、王邑兵多势众，都往回跑，进入昆阳城，惊慌不安，担忧老婆孩子，想从这里分散而到其他城邑去。
English: When the generals of the Chinese army saw Wang Xuan and Wang's soldiers in large numbers, they all ran back and entered Kunyang City, panicked, worried about their wives and children, and wanted to disperse from here and go to other cities.

古文：刘秀曰： 今兵谷既少而外寇强大，并力御之，功庶可立；如欲分散，势无俱全。
现代文：刘秀对他们说： 现在城内兵、粮既少，而城外敌军又强大，合力抵抗敌军，也许可以立功；如果分散，势必不能一一保全。
English: Liu Xiu said to them: At present, the soldiers and grain inside the city are scarce, while the enemy forces outside the city are strong. If they work together to resist the enemy forces, they may be able to make a contribution; if they are dispersed, they will not be able to be preserved one by one.

古文：且宛城未拔，不能相救；昆阳即拔，一日之间，诸部亦灭矣。
现代文：况且刘部队还没有攻下宛城，不能前来救援；假如昆阳被敌军占领，只要一天的功夫，我军各部也就都完了。
English: Moreover, Liu's troops have not yet captured the destination city and cannot come to the rescue; if Kunyang is occupied by the enemy, as long as one day's effort, all departments of our army will be finished.

古文：今不同心胆，共举功名，反欲守妻子财物邪！ 
现代文：现在怎么能不同心胆，共举大业，反而想要守着妻子财物呢？ 
English: Now how can you not have the courage to make a big career, but instead want to protect your wife and property?

古文：诸将怒曰： 刘将军何敢如是！ 
现代文：将领们发怒说： 刘将军怎么敢这样说！ 
English: The generals said angrily, "How dare General Liu say such a thing!

古文：秀笑而起。
现代文：刘秀笑而起身。
English: Liu Xiuxiu laughed and got up.

古文：会候骑还，言： 大兵且至城北，军陈数百里，不见其后。 
现代文：正在此时，侦察的骑兵回来，报告说： 敌人大军即将来到城的北面，军阵达几百里，看不到它的尾巴。 
English: Just then, the scouting cavalry returned and reported: The enemy army is approaching the north of the city, the army is several hundred miles away, and its tail cannot be seen.

古文：诸将素轻秀，及迫急，乃相谓曰： 更请刘将军计之。 
现代文：将领们一向轻视刘秀，到了这样紧急的时候，才互相议论道： 再去请刘将军谋划这件事。 
English: The generals had always despised Liu Xiu. It was only at such an urgent time that they discussed with each other, saying, "Let's ask General Liu to plan this again."

古文：秀复为图画成败，诸将皆曰： 诺。 
现代文：刘秀又给将领们描述成败因素，将领们都说： 是的。 
English: Liu Xiu also described the factors of success and failure to the generals, and the generals all said: Yes.

古文：时城中唯有八九千人，秀使王凤与廷尉大将军王常守昆阳，夜与五威将军李轶等十三骑出城南门，于外收兵。
现代文：这时城中只有八九千人，刘秀让王凤和廷尉大将军王常守卫昆阳，自己夜里同五威将军李轶等十三人骑马驰出昆阳城的南门，在外面收集士兵。
English: At this time, there were only 89,000 people in the city. Liu Xiu had Wang Feng and the imperial lieutenant general Wang Chang guard Kunyang. At night, Liu Xiu, together with the Wuwei general Li Yan and 13 others, rode out of the south gate of Kunyang City to collect soldiers outside.

古文：时莽兵到城下者且十万，秀等几不得出。
现代文：当时开到昆阳城下的王莽军将近十万，刘秀等人几乎不能出去。
English: At that time, Wang Mang's army under Kunyang was nearly one hundred thousand, and Liu Xiu and others could hardly go out.

古文：寻、邑纵兵围昆阳，严尤说邑曰： 昆阳城小而坚，今假号者在宛，亟进大兵，彼必奔走。宛败，昆阳自服。 
现代文：王寻、王邑纵兵包围昆阳，严尤向王邑献策说： 昆阳城小而坚固，现在假冒皇帝名号的刘玄在宛城，我们大军迅速向那里进兵，他必定奔逃；宛城方面的汉军一旦失败，昆阳城里的汉军自然向我军降服。 
English: Wang Huan and Wang Yip encircled Kunyang with longitudinal soldiers, and Yan Yip in particular proposed a plan to Wang Yip, saying: Kunyang City is small and strong. Liu Xuan, who is now impersonating the name of the emperor, is in Wancheng. Our army will quickly march there, and he will certainly run away. If the Chinese army in Wancheng is defeated, the Chinese army in Kunyang City will naturally surrender to our army.

古文：邑曰： 吾昔围翟义，坐不生得以见责让。今将百万之众，遇城而不能下，非所以示威也。
现代文：王邑说： 我以前围攻翟义，因没有活捉住他而受到责备，如今带领百万之众，遇城而不能攻下，这就不能显示军威了。
English: Wangyi said, "I used to besiege Zhaiyi, and I was reproached for not capturing it alive, but now I am leading a million people. If I encounter a city and cannot capture it, then I cannot show my military power.

古文：当先屠此城，蹀血而进，前歌后舞，顾不快邪！ 
现代文：应当先攻陷屠杀此城，踏着血泊前进，前歌后舞，难道不痛快吗？ 
English: Shouldn't it be a pleasure to capture and slaughter this city first, to advance on a pool of blood, and to dance before and after?

古文：遂围之数十重，列营百数，钲鼓之声闻数十里，或为地道、冲輣撞城；积弩乱发，矢下如雨，城中负户而汲。
现代文：于是把昆阳包围了几十重，列营上百个，钲鼓之声响彻几十里，还挖掘地道，用战车撞城；用许多弓弩向城内乱射，矢下如雨，城内的人为了躲避飞矢，背着门板出外打水。
English: As a result, they encircled Kunyang in dozens of layers, hundreds of battalions, and the sound of drums echoed for dozens of miles. They also dug tunnels and rammed the city with chariots. They used many bows and arrows to fire indiscriminately into the city, and the arrows fell like rain. In order to avoid flying arrows, the people in the city went out to fetch water with their backs to the door.

古文：王凤等乞降，不许。
现代文：王凤等乞求投降，不被理睬。
English: Wang Feng and others asked to be demoted, but were not allowed.

古文：寻、邑自以为功在漏刻，不以军事为忧。
现代文：王寻、王邑自以为片刻就可成功，不担心军事上会出其它事故。
English: Wang Huan and Wang Yu thought that they could succeed in a moment, and did not worry about other military accidents.

古文：严尤曰： 《兵法》： 围城为之阙 ，宜使得逸出以怖宛下。 
现代文：严尤建议说： 《兵法》上写着： 围城要留下缺口 ，应让被围之敌得以逃出，从而使围攻宛城的绿林军害怕。 
English: Yan Yu suggested: "The "Law of War" says: "A besieged city should leave a gap, and the besieged enemy should be allowed to escape, so that the Green Forest Army, which is besieging the city, will be afraid."

古文：邑又不听。
现代文：王邑又不听取这个建议。
English: Wangyur did not listen.

古文：棘阳守长岑彭与前队贰严说共守宛城，汉兵攻之数月，城中人相食，乃举城降。
现代文：棘阳守长岑彭和前队副将严说同守宛城，汉军围攻了几个月，城中因为缺粮而人吃人，于是全城报降。
English: Sheng Peng, the head of the Spineyang garrison, and the vice-commander of the vanguard, said that the Han army had besieged the city for several months. Due to the lack of grain, people in the city were eating each other, so the whole city surrendered.

古文：更始入都之。
现代文：更始皇帝进城，并在宛城建都。
English: The first emperor entered the city and built the capital in Wancheng.

古文：诸将欲杀彭，刘縯曰： 彭，郡之大吏，执心坚守，是其节也。
现代文：将领们打算杀掉岑彭，刘说： 岑彭是郡的大官，决心固守，是有气节的表现。
English: The generals are planning to kill Nie Peng, Liu said: Nie Peng is a high-ranking official of the county, and he is determined to hold on, which is a manifestation of his temperament.

古文：今举大事，当表义士，不如封之。 
现代文：现在我们办大事，应当表彰义士，不如封他。 
English: Now that we are holding a major event, we should commend the righteous, it is better to give him a title.

古文：更始乃封彭为归德侯。
现代文：更始帝就封岑彭为归德侯。
English: At the beginning of the Qing Dynasty, Emperor Gaozong designated Zi Peng as a returning vassal.

古文：刘秀至郾、定陵，悉发诸营兵。诸将贪惜财物，欲分兵守之。
现代文：刘秀到了郾、定陵等地，调发各营的全部军队；将领们贪惜财物，想要分出一部分兵士留守。
English: Liu Xiu went to Shao, Dingling and other places and transferred the entire army of each battalion; the generals were greedy for wealth and wanted to allocate a part of the soldiers to stay behind.

古文：秀曰： 今若破敌，珍宝万倍，大功可成；如为所败，首领无馀，何财物之有！ 
现代文：刘秀说： 现在如果打垮敌人，有万倍的珍宝，大功可成；如果被敌人打败，头都被杀掉了，还有什么财物！ 
English: Liu Xiu said, "Nowadays, if you defeat the enemy, you will have ten thousand times more precious treasures, and great achievements can be made; if you are defeated by the enemy, your head will be killed, and what kind of property will you have!

古文：乃悉发之。
现代文：于是征发了全部军队。
English: As a result, the entire army was conscripted.

古文：六月，己卯朔，秀与诸营俱进，自将步骑千馀为前锋，去大军四五里而陈；寻、邑亦遣兵数千合成，秀奔之，斩首数十级。
现代文：六月己卯朔，刘秀和各营部队一同出发，亲自带领步兵和骑兵一千多人为先头部队，在距离王莽大军四五里远的地方摆开阵势。王寻、王邑也派几千人来交战，刘秀带兵冲了过去，斩了几十人首级。
English: In June, Liu Xiu and the battalions set out together, personally leading more than a thousand infantry and cavalry as the vanguard, and set up a position four or five miles away from Wang Mang's army. Wang Xuan and Wang Yip also sent several thousand people to fight, and Liu Xiu led the soldiers to rush over and behead dozens of people.

古文：诸将喜曰： 刘将军平生见小敌怯，今见大敌勇，甚可怪也！
现代文：将领们高兴地说： 刘将军平时看到弱小的敌军都胆怯，现在见到强敌反而英勇，太奇怪了！
English: The generals said happily: It is strange that General Liu, who is usually timid when he sees a weak enemy army, is now brave when he sees a strong enemy!

古文：且复居前，请助将军！ 
现代文：还是我们在前面吧，请让我们协助将军！ 
English: We are still in the front, please let us assist the general!

古文：秀复进，寻、邑兵却，诸部共乘之，斩首数百千级。
现代文：刘秀又向前进兵，王寻、王邑的部队退却；汉军各部一同冲杀过去，斩了数百上千个首级。
English: Liu Xiu also retreated to the troops of the advancing soldiers, Wang Huan and Wang Yip; all the departments of the Chinese army rushed forward together and cut off hundreds of thousands of heads.

古文：连胜，遂前，诸将胆气益壮，无不一当百，秀乃与敢死者三千人从城西水上冲其中坚。
现代文：汉军接连获胜，继续进兵，将领们胆气更壮，没有一个不是以一当百。刘秀就和敢于牺牲的三千人从城西水岸边攻击王莽军的主将营垒。
English: The Chinese army won successively and continued to advance, the generals were more courageous, and no one was not a hundred. Liu Xiu and the three thousand people who dared to sacrifice attacked the main camp of Wang Mang's army from the west coast of the city.

古文：寻、邑易之，自将万馀人行陈，敕诸营皆按部毋得动，独迎与汉兵战，不利，大军不敢擅相救。寻、邑陈乱，汉兵乘锐崩之，遂杀王寻。
现代文：王寻、王邑轻视汉军，亲自带领一万余人巡行军阵，戒令各营都按兵不动，单独迎上来同汉军交战，不利，大部队又不敢擅自相救；王寻、王邑所部阵乱，汉军乘机击溃敌军，终于杀了王寻。
English: Wang Huan and Wang Yip despised the Chinese army, and personally led more than ten thousand people to march the army formation. They ordered all battalions to stand still and fight against the Chinese army alone, which was disadvantageous, and the large troops did not dare to save themselves. Wang Huan and Wang Yip's headquarters were in disarray, and the Chinese army took the opportunity to defeat the enemy army and finally killed Wang Huan.

古文：城中亦鼓噪而出，中外合势，震呼动天地。莽兵大溃，走者相腾践，伏尸百馀里。
现代文：昆阳城中的汉军也击鼓大喊而冲杀出来，里应外合，呼声震天动地；王莽军大溃，逃跑者互相践踏，倒在地上的尸体遍布一百多里。
English: The Chinese troops in the city of Kunyang also beat drums and shouted and rushed out to kill. The inside echoed the outside, and the shouts shook the earth; Wang Mang's army was routed, the escapees trampled each other, and the bodies that fell to the ground were spread over more than a hundred miles.

古文：会大雷、风、屋瓦皆飞，雨下如注，滍川盛溢，虎豹皆股战，士卒赴水溺死者以万数，水为不流。
现代文：适值迅雷、大风，屋瓦全都被风刮得乱飞，大雨好似从天上倒灌下来，水暴涨，虎豹都吓得发抖，掉入水中溺死的士兵上万，河水因此不能流动。
English: At the right time, thunder and lightning, high winds, the roof tiles were all blown away by the wind, the heavy rain seemed to pour down from the sky, the water surged, the tigers and leopards were trembling with fear, and tens of thousands of soldiers drowned in the water, so the river could not flow.

古文：王邑、严尤、陈茂轻骑乘死人度水逃去，尽获其军实辎重，不可胜算，举之连月不尽，或燔烧其馀。
现代文：王邑、严尤、陈茂等以轻骑踏着死人渡过水逃走。汉军获得王莽军抛下的全部军用物资，不可胜计，接连几个月都运不完，有些余下的就被烧掉。
English: Wang Yu, Yan You, Chen Mao, and others fled across the water on horseback, stepping on the dead. It was impossible for the Chinese army to obtain all the military supplies left behind by Wang Mang's army. It took several months to transport them all, and some of the remaining supplies were burned.

古文：士卒奔走，各还其郡，王邑独与所将长安勇敢数千人还洛阳，关中闻之震恐。
现代文：王莽军的士兵奔跑，各还故乡，只有王邑和他带领的长安勇士几千人回到洛阳，关中听到这个消息十分惊惧。
English: The soldiers of Wang Mang's army ran and returned to their hometowns. Only Wang Yip and several thousand Chang'an warriors led by him returned to Luoyang. Guanzhong was very alarmed to hear this news.

古文：于是海内豪桀翕然响应，皆杀其牧守，自称将军，用汉年号以待诏命。旬月之间，遍于天下。
现代文：于是海内豪杰一致响应，都杀掉当地的州郡长官，自称将军，用更始年号，等待更始皇帝的诏命；一个月之内，这种形势遍于天下。
English: As a result, the heroes of the sea unanimously responded, all killed the local prefect of the state and county, claimed to be a general, and waited for the emperor's imperial decree with a new era name; within a month, this situation was all over the world.

古文：莽闻汉兵言莽鸩杀孝平皇帝，乃会公卿于王路堂，开所为平帝请命金縢之策，泣以示群臣。
现代文：王莽听说汉军说他用鸩酒毒杀了汉平帝，便集合公卿到王路堂，打开收藏在金柜中的他替平帝请求解除疾病、愿以身代死的策书，流着泪出示给群臣看。
English: Wang Mang heard that the Han army said that he had poisoned Emperor Han Ping with gourd wine, so he gathered the nobles to Wang Lu Hall, opened the book he had collected in the gold cabinet to ask for the relief of Emperor Ping's illness and was willing to die in his place, and showed it to the courtiers with tears.

古文：刘秀复徇颍川，攻父城不下，屯兵巾车乡。
现代文：刘秀再向颍川一带夺取土地，进攻父城，未能攻克，大军驻扎巾车乡。
English: Liu Xiu then seized land in the vicinity of the Li River, attacked his father's city, failed to conquer it, and stationed a large army in Hanzhe Township.

古文：颍川郡掾冯异监五县，为汉兵所获。
现代文：颍川郡掾冯异督察五县，被汉兵生擒。
English: Feng Yin, inspector of five counties in Luochuan County, was captured alive by Han soldiers.

古文：异曰： 异有老母在父城，愿归，据五城以效功报德！ 
现代文：冯异说： 我有老母在父城，我愿意回去，献上这五座县城，以功来报答恩德。 
English: Feng Ying said: I have my mother in my hometown, I am willing to go back and offer these five counties to repay their kindness.

古文：秀许之。
现代文：刘秀许诺。
English: Liu Xiu promised.

古文：异归，谓父城长苗萌曰： 诸将多暴横，独刘将军所到不虏略，观其言语举止，非庸人也。 
现代文：冯异回去后，告诉父城县长苗萌说： 刘玄的将领们多数凶暴蛮横，只有刘秀将军所到的地方，不抢劫人和财物。看他的言谈举止，不是一个平庸之人。 
English: After Feng Yiyi returned, she told Miao Meng, the governor of Chicheng County, that: Most of Liu Xuan's generals were violent and rude. Only General Liu Xiu did not rob people and property in the places he visited. Judging by his speech and behavior, he was not a mediocre person.

古文：遂与萌率五县以降。
现代文：于是和苗萌一起率领五县军民投降。
English: So, together with Miao Meng, he led the military and civilians of the five counties to surrender.

古文：新市、平林诸将以刘縯兄弟威名益盛，阴劝更始除之。
现代文：新市兵、平林兵的将领们因为刘兄弟威名日盛，秘密建议更始帝刘玄除掉他俩。
English: The generals of the Xincheng soldiers and the Pinglin soldiers secretly suggested to Emperor Liu Xuan to get rid of the Liu brothers because of their growing fame.

古文：秀谓縯曰： 事欲不善。 
现代文：刘秀对刘说： 看情况，更始帝打算跟我们过不去。 
English: Liu Xiu said to Liu, "Looking at the situation, the Emperor intends to get even with us.

古文：縯笑曰： 常如是耳。 
现代文：刘笑着说： 一向就是如此。 
English: Liu smiled and said, "It's always been like this."

古文：更始大会诸将，取縯宝剑视之。
现代文：不久，刘玄集合全体将领，教刘拿出他的宝剑，接过来仔细观察。
English: Soon, Liu Xuan gathered all the generals and told Liu to take out his sword and observe carefully.

古文：绣衣御史申徒建随献玉玦，更始不敢发。
现代文：这时，绣衣御史申徒建跟着呈上玉，暗示更始帝早下决断，但更始不敢发动。
English: At this time, the Empress Dowager Empress Shentu Jian followed suit, suggesting that the Emperor should make an early decision, but he did not dare to start.

古文：縯舅樊宏谓縯曰： 建得无有范增之意乎？ 
现代文：刘的舅舅樊宏对刘说： 申徒建莫非有范增的意图？ 
English: Liu's uncle Zou Hong said to Liu: Is it possible that the petitioners have the intention of increasing the number of followers?

古文：縯不应。
现代文：刘不作回答。
English: Liu did not answer.

古文：李轶初与縯兄弟善，后更谄事新贵。秀戒縯曰： 此人不可复信。 
现代文：李轶最初跟刘兄弟感情很好，可是后来转而谄媚拥有权柄的新贵，刘秀告诫刘： 对这个人不能再信任了！ 
English: Li Yao initially had a good relationship with the Liu brothers, but later turned into a sycophant of the upstart with power. Liu Xiu warned Liu: You can no longer trust this person!

古文：縯不从。
现代文：刘不听从。
English: Liu didn't listen.

古文：縯部将刘稷，勇冠三军，闻更始立，怒曰： 本起兵图大事者，伯升兄弟也。
现代文：刘的部将刘稷，勇冠三军，听说刘玄即位的消息，大怒说： 当初起兵图谋大事的，是刘兄弟。
English: Liu's subordinate Liu Xuan, the most courageous of the three generals, heard the news of Liu Xuan's accession to the throne and said angrily: "It was the Liu brothers who started the war to plot something big.

古文：今更始何为者邪！ 
现代文：而今更始是干什么的呢！ 
English: And what does he do now?

古文：更始以稷为抗威将军，稷不肯拜。
现代文：刘玄任命刘稷当抗威将军，刘稷不肯拜受这一任命。
English: Liu Xuan appointed Liu Ye as a general to resist the tyranny. Liu Ye refused to accept this appointment.

古文：更始乃与诸将陈兵数千人，先收稷，将诛之，縯固争。
现代文：刘玄于是与将领们部署数千军队，先逮捕刘稷，准备诛杀。刘坚持反对。
English: Liu Xuan and his generals then deployed thousands of troops, first arresting Liu Yao and preparing to kill him. Liu persisted in his opposition.

古文：李轶、硃鲔因劝更始并执縯，即日杀之。
现代文：李轶、朱鲔趁机建议刘玄同时逮捕刘，并于当天跟刘稷一齐斩首。
English: Li Yu and Zhu Xi took the opportunity to suggest to Liu Xuan to arrest Liu at the same time, and on the same day, they beheaded him together with Liu Yu.

古文：以族兄光禄勋赐为大司徒。
现代文：刘玄任命堂兄光禄勋刘赐当大司徒。
English: Liu Xuan appointed his cousin, Guanglu Xun Liu Zi, to be the grand disciple.

古文：秀闻之，自父城驰诣宛谢。
现代文：刘秀听到这个消息，从父城夺回宛城，向刘玄请罪。
English: Hearing this news, Liu Xiu recaptured Wancheng from his father and pleaded guilty to Liu Xuan.

古文：司徒官属迎吊秀，秀不与交私语，惟深引过而已，未尝自伐昆阳之功；又不敢为縯服丧，饮食言笑如平常。
现代文：司徒所属官员迎接刘秀，表示哀悼，刘秀不与他们谈一句私话，唯有深自责备而已，不曾自己夸耀保卫昆阳的战功，又不敢为刘服丧；饮食言谈欢笑跟平常一样。
English: Liu Xiu was greeted by officials from the Stuxi Military Region, who expressed their condolences. Liu Xiu did not say a single word to them, except for a deep self-reproach. He did not boast of his war exploits in the defense of Kunyang, nor did he dare to mourn for Liu. They ate, talked and laughed as usual.

古文：更始以是惭，拜秀为破虏大将军，封武信侯。
现代文：刘玄因此惭愧，任命刘秀当破虏大将军，封武信侯。
English: As a result, Liu Xuan was ashamed and appointed Liu Xiu to be the general to defeat the invaders.

古文：道士西门君惠谓王莽卫将军王涉曰： 谶文刘氏当复兴，国师公姓名是也。 
现代文：道士西门君惠对王莽的卫将军王涉说： 谶文说刘姓应当复兴，国师公的姓名就是。 
English: The moralist Ximen Junhui said to Wang Zhan, Wang Zhan's guard general: "Yingwen said that the surname Liu should be revived, which is the name of the national teacher.

古文：涉遂与国师公刘秀、大司马董忠、司中大赘孙亻及谋以所部兵劫莽降汉，以全宗族。
现代文：王涉于是与国师公刘秀、大司马董忠、司中大赘孙商量，准备用所属的部队劫持王莽，投降更始政权，以保全自己的家族。
English: Wang Zhan then discussed with Liu Xiu, the Grand Master, Ma Dongzhong, the Grand Master's great-grandson, and prepared to use his troops to kidnap Wang Mang, surrender and change the regime in order to protect his family.

古文：秋，七月，亻及以其谋告莽，莽召忠诘责，因格杀之，使虎贲以斩马剑剉忠，收其宗族，以醇醯、毒药、白刃、丛棘并一坎而埋之；秀、涉皆自杀。
现代文：秋季，七月，孙向王莽告密。王莽召见董忠责问，趁机当场格杀，命虎贲武士用斩马剑剁董忠的尸体，逮捕董忠的家族，用浓醋、毒药、利刀、荆棘合成一穴埋葬了他们。刘秀和王涉都自杀了。
English: In the autumn, in July, Sun informed Wang Mang. Wang Mang summoned Dong Zhong to interrogate him, and took the opportunity to kill him on the spot. He ordered the soldiers to cut off Dong Zhong's body with a sword, arrested Dong Zhong's family, and buried them in a hole made of vinegar, poison, sharp knives, and thorns. Liu Xiu and Wang Wanzhong both committed suicide.

古文：莽以其骨肉、旧臣，恶其内溃，故隐其诛。
现代文：王莽因为这两个人是至亲和老部下，嫌厌人家说他的内部崩溃了，所以不公开宣布对他们的惩罚。
English: Wang Mang did not publicly announce the punishment of the two men because they were close relatives and old subordinates, and he did not want people to say that he had suffered an internal collapse.

古文：莽以军师外破，大臣内畔，左右亡所信，不能复远念郡国，乃召王邑还，为大司马，以大长秋张邯为大司徒，崔发为大司空，司中寿容苗訢为国师。
现代文：王莽因为军队在外面打了败仗，大臣们又在内部叛变，身边没有人可信任了，不能够再考虑远方的郡国，于是召王邑回来，任命为大司马。同时，任命大长秋张邯担任大司徒，崔发担任大司空，司中寿容苗担任国师。
English: Because Wang Mang's army had lost the battle outside, and his ministers had mutinied inside, there was no one to trust around him, and he could no longer think about the distant county, so he called Wang Yue back and appointed him as the grand steward. At the same time, he appointed Grand Elder Qiu Zhangye as the grand steward, Cui Fa as the grand steward of the sky, and Shou Rong Miao as the national teacher.

古文：莽忧懑不能食，但饮酒，啖鳆鱼；读军书倦，因冯几寐，不复就枕矣。
现代文：王莽忧闷得吃不下饭了，只喝酒，吃鳆鱼。阅读军书疲倦了，便靠着几案打盹儿，不再上床睡觉了。
English: Wang Meng was so depressed that he couldn't eat. He only drank alcohol and ate catfish. When he got tired of reading military books, he took a few naps and stopped going to bed.

古文：成纪隗崔、隗义、上邽杨广、冀人周宗同起兵以应汉，众数千人，攻平襄，杀莽镇戎大尹李育。
现代文：成纪人隗崔和隗义、上人杨广、冀人周宗同时聚众起兵，响应刘玄的汉军。他们进攻平襄，击杀王莽镇戎大尹李育。
English: In response to Liu Xuan's attack on the Han army, the scholars of the Cheng Dynasty, Jie Cui and Jie Yi, and the priests Yang Guang and Zhou Zong of Hebei gathered together and raised an army at the same time. They attacked Pingxiang and killed Wang Mangzhen Eun Da Yin Li Yu.

古文：崔兄子嚣，素有名，好经书，崔等共推为上将军。崔为白虎将军，义为左将军。
现代文：隗崔哥哥的儿子隗嚣一向有很好名声，喜爱儒家经典，隗崔等共同推举隗嚣当上将军，隗崔当白虎将军，隗义当左将军。
English: Gong Cui's brother's son Gong Han always had a good reputation, loved Confucian classics, Gong Cui and others jointly nominated Gong Han to be the first general, Gong Cui to be the white tiger general, and Gong Yi to be the left general.

古文：嚣遣使聘平陵方望，以为军师。
现代文：隗嚣派遣使者聘请平陵人方望担任军师。
English: There was a clamor to send an envoy to hire the Pingling people to serve as military instructors.

古文：望说嚣立高庙于邑东。
现代文：方望建议隗嚣，在平襄东郊兴建汉高祖刘邦祭庙。
English: Fangwang proposed to build the Han Gao Zu Liu Bang Festival Temple in the eastern suburb of Pingxiang.

古文：己巳，祀高祖、太宗、世宗，嚣等皆称臣执事，杀马同盟，以兴辅刘宗；移檄郡国，数莽罪恶。
现代文：己巳，祭祀汉高祖、太宗、世宗，隗嚣等都称臣执事，杀马盟誓，同心合力辅佐刘姓皇族。
English: At that time, the worshipers of Han Gao Zu, Taizong, Shizong, and Yan Han, all claimed to be vassal deacons, swore to kill horses, and worked together to assist the Liu imperial family.

古文：勒兵十万，击杀雍州牧陈庆、安定大尹王向。
现代文：向各郡、各封国传递文告，声讨王莽罪行。统率军队十万，击杀雍州牧陈庆、安定大尹王向。
English: He sent a message to all counties and fiefdoms to denounce Wang's reckless crimes, and led 100,000 troops to kill Yongzhou herdsman Chen Qing and stable chief Yin Wangxiang.

古文：分遣诸将徇陇西、武都、金城、武威、张掖、酒泉、敦煌，皆下之。
现代文：然后，分别派出将领，攻打陇西、武都、金城、武威、张掖、酒泉、敦煌，全部攻克。
English: Then, the generals were sent separately to attack Shaanxi, Wudu, Jincheng, Wuwei, Zhangye, Jiuquan and Dunhuang, and conquered them all.

古文：初，茂陵公孙述为清水长，有能名；迁导江卒正，治临邛。
现代文：最初，茂陵公孙述当清水县长，以才能干练闻名于世。后调升导江郡卒正，郡府设于临邛。
English: In the beginning, Muryong Gongsun Su was the governor of Qingshui County, and was famous for his ability. Later, he was promoted to the post of county magistrate of Guojiang County, and the county seat was located in Linyi.

古文：汉兵起，南阳宗成、商人王岑起兵徇汉中以应汉，杀王莽庸部牧宋遵，众合数万人。
现代文：汉兵崛起时，南阳人宗成、商县人王岑也起兵响应，夺取汉中，杀死王莽庸部牧宋遵，集结数万人。
English: When the Han soldiers were on the rise, Zongcheng from Nanyang and Wang Yao from Shang County also raised an army in response, captured Hanzhong, killed Wang Mangyongbe, Mu Songzun, and gathered tens of thousands of people.

古文：述遣使迎成等，成等至成都，虏掠暴横。
现代文：公孙述派人迎接宗成等。宗成等到成都，劫夺抢掠，残暴蛮横。
English: Gongsun Su sent people to meet Zongcheng and so on. Zongcheng arrived in Chengdu, robbed and plundered, and was brutal and rude.

古文：述召群中豪桀谓曰： 天下同苦新室，思刘氏久矣，故闻汉将军到，驰迎道路。
现代文：公孙述召集郡中豪杰，对他们说： 天下人不堪新朝的迫害，怀念汉朝很久了，所以听说汉朝的将军来到，奔走相告，到道路上迎接。
English: According to Gongsun, he called together the heroes of the county and said to them: The people of the world are unable to bear the persecution of the new dynasty and have long been nostalgic for the Han Dynasty. Therefore, when they heard that the general of the Han Dynasty had come, they ran to tell each other and meet him on the road.

古文：今百姓无辜而妇子系获，此寇贼，非义兵也。 
现代文：而今人民无罪，妻子儿女却受到凌辱，这些人是强盗，而不是义军。 
English: And now the people are not guilty, but their wives and children are being abused and humiliated. These people are robbers, not rebels.

古文：乃使人诈称汉使者，假述辅汉将军、蜀郡太守兼益州牧印绶；选精兵西击成等，杀之，并其众。
现代文：于是，派人假冒更始政权的使者，授予公孙述辅汉将军、蜀郡太守兼益州牧的印信。公孙述选派精兵西击宗成等，把他们杀死，兼并了他们的部队。
English: As a result, someone was sent to pretend to be an emissary of the new regime and grant a seal letter to Gongsun Shufu, the general of Han Dynasty, the governor of Shu County and the governor of Yizhou. Gongsun Shufu selected elite soldiers such as Xi Yuzongcheng, killed them, and annexed their troops.

古文：前钟武侯刘望起兵汝南，严尤、陈茂往归之；八月，望即帝位，以尤为大司马，茂为丞相。
现代文：前汉朝钟武侯刘望在汝南起兵，严尤、陈茂前往归附。八月，刘望登极，任命严尤当大司马，陈茂当丞相。
English: Liu Bang, the prince of Zhongwu in the former Han Dynasty, raised an army in the south of Yunnan, and Yan You and Chen Mao went to join him. In August, Liu Bang ascended to the throne and appointed Yan You as the grand steward and Chen Mao as the prime minister.

古文：王莽使太师王匡、国将哀章守洛阳。更始遣定国上公王匡攻洛阳，西屏大将军申屠建、丞相司直李松攻武关，三辅震动。
现代文：王莽命太师王匡、国将哀章守卫洛阳，更始皇帝派遣定国上公王匡进攻洛阳，西屏大将军申屠建、丞相司直李松进攻武关，三辅地区为之震动。
English: Wang Mang ordered the Grand Master Wang Kuang and the Generalissimo to guard Luoyang with the sign of mourning. Moreover, the First Emperor dispatched the Grand Duke Guan Kuang to attack Luoyang. The General of Xiping, Shen Tu Jian, and the Minister of War, Zhi Li Song, attacked Wuguan. The Sanfu region was shaken.

古文：析人邓晔、于匡起兵南乡以应汉，攻武关都尉硃萌，萌降；进攻右队大夫宋纲，杀之；西拔湖。
现代文：析县人邓晔和于匡在南乡起兵以响应汉军，进攻武关都尉朱萌，朱萌投降；进攻右队大夫宋纲，把宋纲杀掉；向西挺进，攻陷湖县。
English: Deng Yuhe and Yu Kuang, who were from Anqing County, raised an army in Nanxiang in response to the Chinese army, attacked Zhu Meng, the captain of Wuguan, and Zhu Meng surrendered; attacked Song Gang, the doctor of the right team, and killed Song Gang; advanced westward and invaded Huxian.

古文：莽愈忧，不知所出。
现代文：王莽更加忧虑，不知所措。
English: Wang Meng was even more worried and didn't know how to deal with it.

古文：崔发言： 古者国有大灾，则哭以厌之。
现代文：崔发说： 古时候国家有了大灾难，就用哭向上天告哀来战胜它。
English: Cui Fa said: In ancient times, when a country had a great disaster, it used to cry and mourn to heaven to overcome it.

古文：宜告天以求救。 
现代文：应该祷告上天祈求救助。 
English: We should pray to the heavens for help.

古文：莽乃率群臣至南郊，陈其符命本末，仰天大哭，气尽，伏而叩头。
现代文：王莽于是率领群臣到南郊，陈述他承受符命的首尾经过，仰天大哭，声嘶气绝，伏地叩头。
English: Wang Mang then led a group of courtiers to the southern suburb, stating that he had passed through the beginning and end of the life of the bearer, crying loudly, hoarse, and bowing to the ground.

古文：诸生、小民旦夕会哭，为设飧粥；甚悲哀者，除以为郎，郎至五千馀人。
现代文：众儒生和老百姓每天早晚会集起来哭，给他们准备了稀饭。哭得非常悲哀的人，被任命作郎官，郎官达到五千多人。
English: Every morning and evening, all the Confucian students and ordinary people would gather to cry, and porridge was prepared for them. Those who cried very sadly were appointed as stewards, and there were more than five thousand stewards.

古文：莽拜将军九人，皆以虎为号，将北军精兵数万人以东，内其妻子宫中以为质。
现代文：王莽任命将军九人，都用 虎 作为将军的名号，率领禁卫军精锐士兵几万人向东方开去，把他们的妻子儿女收容到皇宫里作为人质。
English: Wang Mang appointed nine generals, all of whom used "tiger" as the general's title, and led tens of thousands of elite soldiers of the Imperial Guard to the east, taking their wives and children to the imperial palace as hostages.

古文：时省中黄金尚六十馀万斤，它财物称是，莽愈爱之，赐九虎士人四千钱；众重怨，无斗意。
现代文：这时宫中储存的黄金还有六十多万斤，其他的贵重珍宝差不多也是这个数目，王莽更加爱不释手，对九虎将军部属，每人仅赏赐四千钱。大家很怨恨，毫无斗志。
English: At this time, there were still more than 600,000 jin of gold stored in the palace, and other precious treasures were almost the same amount. Wang Mang was even more adamant. He only rewarded the nine tiger generals and their subordinates with 4,000 yuan each. Everyone was very resentful and had no fighting spirit.

古文：九虎至华阴回谿，距隘自守。
现代文：九虎将军到达华阴县回，扼守险要。
English: General Jiuhu arrived back in Huayin County and held the key.

古文：于匡、邓晔击之，六虎败走；二虎诣阙归死，莽使使责死者安在，皆自杀；其四虎亡。
现代文：于匡、邓晔率军攻击他们，六位虎将军战败逃走，其中两位虎将军回到朝廷接受死刑处分，王莽让使者责问他们死的人在哪里，于是二人自杀，其他四位虎将军逃亡。
English: Yu Kuang and Deng Xuan led their armies to attack them. Six tiger generals were defeated and fled. Two of the tiger generals returned to the imperial court to receive the death penalty. Wang Mang asked the envoy to ask them where the dead people were, so two of them committed suicide and the other four tiger generals fled.

古文：三虎收散卒保渭口京师仓。
现代文：还有三位虎将军收集散兵，保卫渭口京师仓。
English: There are also three tiger generals who gather scattered soldiers to defend the Hukou Kyo-shikura.

古文：邓晔开武关迎汉兵。
现代文：邓晔打开武关关门，迎接汉兵。
English: Deng Xuan opened the gate of Wuguan to welcome the Chinese soldiers.

古文：李松将三千馀人至湖，与晔等共攻京师仓，未下。
现代文：李松率三千人抵达湖县，与邓晔等会合，共同进攻京师仓，没有攻下。
English: Li Song led three thousand people arrived in Huxian, met with Deng Yao and others, and jointly attacked Beijing Shicang, but failed to capture it.

古文：晔以弘农掾王宪为校尉，将数百人北度渭，入左冯翊界。
现代文：邓晔任命弘农掾王宪当校尉，率领数百人北渡渭河，进入左冯翊境内。
English: Deng Xiao appointed Hong Nongqian Wang Xian as a lieutenant, and led hundreds of people to cross the Fenhe River to the north and enter the territory of Zuo Fengyu.

古文：李松遣偏将军韩臣等径西至新丰击破莽波水将军，追奔至长门宫。
现代文：李松派遣偏将军韩臣等，一直向西推进到新丰，攻击王莽波水将军窦融。窦融败退，韩臣追击，直抵长门宫。
English: Li Song dispatched partial general Han Chen and others, and pushed westward to Xinfeng, attacking Wang Mangbo Shui general Dou Rong. Dou Rong was defeated, and Han Chen pursued, reaching the Nagato Palace.

古文：王宪北至频阳，所过迎降。
现代文：王宪部队推进到频阳，沿途地方官府都迎而降服。
English: Wang Xian went north to Fengyang County, and all the local officials he passed came to welcome the surrender.

古文：诸县大姓名各起兵称汉将，率众随宪。
现代文：各县大姓分别起兵，自称是汉朝将军，率领部众追随王宪。
English: The grand families of each county separately raised an army, claimed to be Han Dynasty generals, and led the troops to follow Wang Xian.

古文：李松、邓晔引军至华阴，而长安旁兵四会城下；又闻天水隗氏方到，皆争欲先入城，贪立大功、卤掠之利。
现代文：李松、邓晔率军抵达华阴时，长安附近的部队已从四方汇集到城下。大家听说天水隗家军也将抵达，都争着要第一个入城，贪图建立大功和抢劫财宝。
English: When the army led by Li Song and Deng Wei arrived in Huayin, the troops near Chang'an had already gathered under the city from four directions. Everyone heard that the army of Tianshui Xingjia would also arrive, and they were all competing to be the first to enter the city, eager to build great achievements and rob treasures.

古文：莽赦城中囚徒，皆授兵，杀豨，饮其血，与誓曰： 有不为新室者，社鬼记之！ 
现代文：王莽赦免城里监狱的犯人，都发给武器，杀猪饮血，跟他们立誓说： 如有不为新朝效力的人，社鬼记住他！ 
English: Wang Mang pardoned the prisoners in the city prison, gave them all weapons, killed pigs and drank blood, and swore to them: If there is anyone who does not serve the new dynasty, remember him!

古文：使更始将军史谌将之。
现代文：让更始将军史谌率领着他们。
English: Let Gen. Shi Yan lead them.

古文：度渭桥，皆散走；谌空还。
现代文：这些人渡过渭桥，都四散逃跑了，只剩史谌一个人回来。
English: These people crossed the bridge and fled in all directions, leaving only Shi Yan to return.

古文：众兵发掘莽妻、子、父、祖冢，烧其棺椁及九庙、明堂、辟雍，火照城中。
现代文：各路士兵挖掘王莽的妻子、儿子、父亲、祖父的坟墓，焚烧他们的棺材以及九庙、明堂和辟雍，火光映照城中。
English: Soldiers from all directions dug up the graves of Wang Mang's wife, son, father, and grandfather, and burned their coffins as well as the Nine Temples, the Ming Hall, and the Bailong. The flames reflected on the city.

古文：九月，戊申朔，兵从宣平城门入。
现代文：九月戊申朔，攻城军队从宣平门入城。
English: In September, the siege army entered the city from the Xuanping Gate.

古文：张邯逢兵见杀；王邑、王林、王巡、带足恽等分将兵距击北阙下，会日暮，官府、邸第尽奔亡。
现代文：张邯遇到士兵，被杀。王邑、王林、王巡和恽等人分别带兵在北阙下抗击。恰好天黑，官府和豪门大宅的人全都逃跑了。
English: Zhang Xuan encountered soldiers and was killed. Wang Yip, Wang Lin, Wang Jun and Zou separately led soldiers to fight against the Northern Wei. Just as it was getting dark, people from the government and the mansions of the rich all fled.

古文：己酉，城中少年硃弟、张鱼等恐见卤掠，趋讙并和，烧作室门，斧敬法闼，呼曰： 反虏王莽，何不出降！ 
现代文：己酉，城里青年朱弟和张鱼等人恐怕遭抢劫，奔跑喧晔，聚集成群，焚烧尚方工场门，用斧子劈开敬法殿的小门，喊道： 反贼王莽，怎么不出来投降？ 
English: Ji Yan, the young people in the city, Zhu Di and Zhang Yu, and others were afraid of being robbed, ran noisily, gathered in groups, burned the Shangfang workshop door, and used an axe to split the small door of the hall of worship, shouting: Anti-thief Wang Mang, why not come out and surrender?

古文：火及掖庭、承明，黄皇室主所居。
现代文：大火蔓延到掖庭、承明殿，这里是黄皇室主居住的地方。
English: The fire spread to the Summer Palace and the Chengming Palace, where the head of the Yellow Imperial Family lived.

古文：黄皇室主曰： 何面目以见汉家！ 
现代文：黄皇室主说： 我还有什么脸面再见汉朝人？ 
English: The head of the Yellow Imperial Family said, "What face do I have left to say goodbye to the Han Dynasty?"

古文：自投火中而死。
现代文：自己纵身投入火中而死。
English: He jumped into the fire and killed himself.

古文：莽避火宣室前殿，火辄随之。
现代文：王莽避火到了未央宫宣室前殿，火总是跟着他。
English: Wang Mang fled the fire to the front hall of the Xuanwu residence. The fire always followed him.

古文：莽绀袀服，持虞帝匕首，天文郎按式于前，莽旋席随斗柄而坐，曰： 天生德于予，汉兵其如予何！ 
现代文：王莽穿着全套天青色的衣服，拿着虞帝匕首。天文郎在前面按着占测时日的，王莽转动坐席随着斗柄所指的方向坐着，说道： 上天把这样的品德赋予我，汉军能把我怎么样？ 
English: Wang Mang was wearing a full set of sky-blue clothes and holding a dagger of Emperor Yudi. Tianmen Lang was in front of him, measuring the time. Wang Mang turned the seat and sat in the direction indicated by the handle of the bucket, saying: Heaven has given me such a character, what can the Chinese army do to me?

古文：庚戌，旦明，群臣扶掖莽自前殿之渐台，欲阻池水，公卿从官尚千馀人随之。
现代文：庚戌，天快亮了，群臣搀扶着王莽，从前殿去渐台，公卿等随从官吏还有一千多人跟着他。
English: The sun was about to rise, and a group of courtiers supported Wang Mang as he walked from the front hall to the platform. He was accompanied by courtiers and officials, as well as more than a thousand people.

古文：王邑昼夜战，罢极，士死伤略尽；驰入宫，间关至渐台，见其子侍中睦解衣冠欲逃，邑叱之，令还，父子共守莽。
现代文：王邑白天黑夜都在战斗，疲倦极了，士兵死伤快完了，他飞马进入宫中，辗转来到了渐台，看见他的儿子侍中王睦脱下衣帽想要逃走，王邑喝住他，让他转回，父子俩一同守卫着王莽。
English: Wangyi fought all day and night. He was very tired. The soldiers were about to be killed and wounded. He entered the palace on his flying horse. He turned around and came to Zhantai. He saw his son, the chamberlain Wangmut, take off his coat and hat and try to escape. Wangyi stopped him and asked him to turn back. The father and son guarded Wangmut together.

古文：军人入殿中，闻莽在渐台，众共围之数百重。
现代文：兵士进入殿中，听说王莽在渐台，众人将其包围了数百重。
English: The soldiers entered the hall and heard that Wang Mang was in Zhentai. Hundreds of people surrounded him.

古文：台上犹与相射，矢尽，短兵接。
现代文：台上仍用弓箭与包围的士兵对射，箭用尽了，便短兵相接。
English: Still on the platform, he used his bow and arrow to shoot at the encircled soldiers. When he ran out of arrows, he came up short.

古文：王邑父子、带足恽、王巡战死，莽入室。
现代文：王邑父子、恽、王巡战斗而死，王莽躲进内室。
English: Wang's father and son, Wang Yu, and Wang Ju died in the battle, and Wang Mang hid in the inner room.

古文：下餔时，众兵上台，苗訢、唐尊、王盛等皆死。
现代文：下午五时三刻，大批士兵上了渐台，苗、唐尊、王盛等人都死在台上。
English: At 5:03 p.m., a large number of soldiers climbed onto the platform. Miao, Tang Zun, Wang Sheng and others all died on the platform.

古文：商人杜吴杀莽，校尉东海公宾就斩莽首；军人分莽身，节解脔分，争相杀者数十人。
现代文：商县人杜吴杀死了王莽，校尉东海人公宾就砍下了王莽的脑袋。兵士们分裂了王莽的身躯，四肢关节、肌肉被切割成许多块，争着去砍杀的有几十人。
English: Du Wu from Shangxian County killed Wang Mang, and Lieutenant Donghai from Gongbin cut off Wang Mang's head. The soldiers split Wang Mang's body, limbs, joints, and muscles were cut into many pieces, and there were dozens of people competing to cut and kill.

古文：公宾就持莽首诣王宪。
现代文：公宾就拿着王莽的脑袋前往王宪那里。
English: The official took Wang Mang's head and went to Wang Xian.

古文：宪自称汉大将军，城中兵数十万皆属焉。
现代文：王宪自称汉朝的大将军，城里的军队几十万人都归属了他。
English: Wang Xian called himself the great general of the Han Dynasty, and hundreds of thousands of troops in the city belonged to him.

古文：舍东宫，妻莽后宫，乘其车服。
现代文：王宪住在长乐宫，把王莽的妃嫔都作为妻妾，使用王莽的车马、衣服和器物。
English: Wang Xian lived in the Changle Palace, took Wang Mang's concubines as his wives, and used Wang Mang's cars, horses, clothes and utensils.

古文：癸丑，李松、邓晔入长安，将军赵萌、申屠建亦至。
现代文：癸丑，李松、邓晔进入长安，将军赵萌和申屠建也来到。
English: At the same time, Li Song and Deng Wei entered Chang'an, and the generals Zhao Meng and Shen Tu Jian also came.

古文：以王宪得玺绶不上，多挟宫女，建天子鼓旗，收斩之。
现代文：因为王宪缴获了御玺没有上交，私藏了许多宫女，使用了天子的仪仗，便把他捉来杀掉了。
English: Because Wang Xian had captured the imperial eunuch and did not hand him over, he secretly hid many of his concubines, and used the honor of the son of heaven to capture and kill him.

古文：传莽首诣宛，县于市。百姓共提击之，或切食其舌。
现代文：传送王莽的脑袋前往宛城，挂在街市示众，百姓都去掷击它，有人切下他的舌头来吃了。
English: They sent Wang Mang's head to Wancheng, hung it in the street market for the public to see, the people all went to hit it, and someone cut off his tongue to eat it.

古文：班固赞曰：王莽始起外戚，折节力行以要名誉，及居位辅政，勤劳国家，直道而行，岂所谓 色取仁而行违 者邪！
现代文：班固赞曰：王莽最初以外戚起家，降低身份，勉力而行，以博取名誉。等到他登上高位，辅佐朝政，为国家辛勤工作，本着正直的原则行事。
English: Ban Guzan said: Wang Mang initially started from a relative, lowered his status, worked hard to gain fame, until he ascended to a high position, assisted the government, worked hard for the country, and acted in accordance with the principle of honesty.

古文：莽既不仁而有佞邪之材，又乘四父历世之权，遭汉中微，国统三绝，而太后寿考，为之宗主，故得肆其奸慝以成篡盗之祸。
现代文：难道他就是孔子所说的 表面上仁义，行动中却违背它 的人吗？王莽本来没有仁义的品德，却有奸佞邪恶的才能，又利用四个伯父、叔父经历了元帝、成帝两代所掌握的权力，遇到汉朝中途衰落，皇位三代没有继承人，而皇太后王政君寿命很长，为他作主，因此得以施逞奸诈邪恶的手段，从而造成篡夺政权，窃取皇位的灾祸。
English: Is he the one who is benevolent and righteous on the surface, but violates it in his actions, as described by Confucius? Wang Mang originally did not have the virtue of benevolence and righteousness, but he had the talent of treachery and evil. He also used four uncles and uncles to experience the power held by two generations of Yuan Emperor and Cheng Emperor. He encountered the mid-way decline of the Han Dynasty. There was no heir to the throne for three generations, and the Empress Dowager Wang Zhengjun had a long life and ruled for him. Therefore, he was able to resort to treacherous and evil means, thus causing the disaster of usurping power and stealing

古文：推是言之，亦天时，非人力之致矣！
现代文：根据这些事实推论起来，这也是天命，不是人力所能作得到的！
English: On the basis of these facts, it can be deduced that this is also the destiny of heaven, which cannot be done by man!

古文：及其窃位南面，颠覆之势险于桀、纣，而莽晏然自以黄、虞复出也，乃始恣睢，奋其威诈，毒流诸夏，乱延蛮貉，犹未足逞其欲焉。
现代文：等到窃取了皇帝的宝座，败亡的趋势比夏桀、商纣的时候还要危险，而王莽却安然地认为自己就是黄帝、虞舜再世复出。于是开始放纵暴戾，滥施威力诈术，流毒全国，灾祸蔓延到外族，还不足以满足他的欲望。
English: By the time he stole the emperor's throne, the trend of his downfall was even more dangerous than that of the Xia and Shang dynasties. However, Wang Mang calmly thought that he was the Yellow Emperor, and that he was the reincarnation of Gu Yao. Therefore, he began to indulge in violence, abuse power and trickery, poison the whole country, and the disaster spread to foreign tribes, but it was not enough to satisfy his desire.

古文：是以四海之内，嚣然丧其乐生之心，中外愤怨，远近俱发，城池不守，支体分裂，遂令天下城邑为虚，害遍生民，自书传所载乱臣贼子，考其祸败，未有如莽之甚者也！
现代文：因此天下陷于忧愁，人民丧失了乐生的心意，朝廷和地方都怨愤，远近同时反叛，城池失守，躯体分裂，终于使得全国的城市变成废墟，害尽了百姓。根据书籍传述上所记载的乱臣贼子以来，考察他们引起的苦难，与失败的凄惨，从没有一个超过王莽。
English: As a result, the world was plunged into sorrow, the people lost the will to enjoy life, the imperial court and localities were resentful, far and near simultaneously rebelled, the city was lost, the body was divided, and finally the cities of the whole country became ruins, and the people were exhausted. According to the books recorded in the books, since the chaotic vassals and thieves, no one has ever exceeded Wang Mang in examining the suffering caused by them, and the misery of failure.

古文：昔秦燔《诗》、《书》以立私议，莽诵《六艺》以文奸言，同归殊涂，俱用灭亡。皆圣王之驱除云尔。
现代文：从前秦朝焚毁《诗经》、《书经》等典籍从而确立自己的一家主张，王莽引用《六经》来装饰谬论，他们走的路不同，而目的完全一样，都由此而导致灭亡，全是为圣明的帝王开道铺路罢了！
English: The former Qin Dynasty burned the "Song of Songs," "Book of Songs" and other classics to establish their own claim, and Wang Mang quoted the "Six Classics" to decorate the fallacy. Their paths are different, but the purpose is exactly the same. All of this leads to destruction. All of this is just to pave the way for the Emperor of the Holy Light!

古文：定国上公王匡拔洛阳，生缚莽太师王匡、哀章，皆斩之。
现代文：定国上公王匡攻陷洛阳，生擒新莽太师王匡、国将哀章，将他们全都斩首。
English: Wang Kuang, the last prince of the State of Dinggu, invaded Luoyang, and the new reckless grandmaster Wang Kuang and the general of the State of Yingzhang were captured alive, and they were all beheaded.

古文：冬，十月，奋威大将军刘信击杀刘望于汝南，并诛严尤、陈茂，郡县皆降。
现代文：冬季，十月，奋威大将军刘信在汝南击杀刘望，并诛杀严尤、陈茂。所属郡县全都降服。
English: In the winter, in October, Liu Xin, the general of Fenwei, killed Liu Wang, Yan You and Chen Mao in the south of the country. All the counties he belonged to surrendered.

古文：更始将都洛阳，以刘秀行司隶校尉，使前整修宫府。
现代文：刘玄将要建都洛阳，任命刘秀代理司隶校尉，派他先到洛阳修建宫殿官府。
English: Liu Xuan was going to build the capital Luoyang, and appointed Liu Xiu as the acting lieutenant of the Sili, and sent him first to Luoyang to build a palace and government office.

古文：秀乃致僚属，作文移，从事司察，一如旧章。
现代文：刘秀于是设置下属官吏，用正式公文通知地方官府，处理政事完全按照西汉旧制。
English: Liu Xiu then set up subordinate officials, notified local government offices with official documents, and dealt with political affairs in full accordance with the Western Han Dynasty old system.

古文：时三辅吏士东迎更始，见诸将过，皆冠帻而服妇人衣，莫不笑之。
现代文：当时三辅的官员们派代表到洛阳迎接更始刘玄，看见将领们经过，都用布包头，穿着女人的衣裳，没有不耻笑的。
English: At that time, the officials of the three auxiliary provinces sent representatives to Luoyang to meet Liu Xuan, and when they saw the generals passing by, they all wrapped their heads in cloth and wore women's clothes.

古文：及见司隶僚属，皆欢喜不自胜，老吏或垂涕曰： 不图今日复见汉官威仪！ 
现代文：等到看见司隶校尉的下属官员，都高兴得不能自制，有些年纪大的官员流泪说： 想不到今天重新看到了汉朝官员威武的仪表！ 
English: When they saw Lieutenant Sili's subordinate officials, they were so happy that they could not control themselves. Some older officials shed tears and said, "I can't believe that I saw the powerful appearance of Han Dynasty officials again today!"

古文：由是识者皆属心焉。
现代文：从此，有见识的人都归心刘秀。
English: Since then, people with insight have been drawn to Liu Xiu.

古文：更始北都洛阳，分遣使者徇郡国，曰： 先降者复爵位！ 
现代文：刘玄北上定都洛阳，分别派出使节到各郡各封国巡行，宣布： 先投降的，恢复他的封爵和官位。 
English: Liu Xuan marched north to Luoyang, the capital of Shangding, and sent envoys to every county and fiefdom to announce: Whoever surrenders first will have his knighthood and official rank restored.

古文：使者至上谷，上谷太守扶风耿况迎，上印绶；使者纳之，一宿，无还意。
现代文：使节到了上谷，上谷太守扶凤人耿况迎接，缴纳印信，使节接受。可是，过了一夜，并无发还的意思。
English: When the envoys arrived in Shanggu, Shanggu Taishu Fu Fengren Gen Cun greeted them, paid for the seal letter, and accepted the envoys. However, after one night, there was no intention of returning.

古文：功曹寇恂勒兵入见使者，请之，使者不与，曰： 天王使者，功曹欲胁之邪！ 
现代文：郡功曹寇恂率兵拜访使节，请求发还印信。使节不给，说： 我是皇帝的使臣，你打算威胁吗？ 
English: The county gong Cao Kouyi and his soldiers visited the envoy and requested the return of the letter. The envoy refused, saying: "I am an envoy of the emperor, are you planning to threaten me?

古文：恂曰： 非敢胁使君，窃伤计之不详也。
现代文：寇恂说： 我并不敢威胁阁下，只是替你的思虑不够周密而感到惋惜。
English: Koro said, "I don't dare to threaten you, but I feel sorry for you for not thinking things through carefully enough.

古文：今天下初定，使君建节衔命，郡国莫不延颈倾耳。
现代文：而今天下刚刚安定，阁下代表皇帝驾临，各郡各封国没有不伸长脖子洗耳恭听的。
English: Today, however, the situation has just stabilized, and Your Excellency has arrived on behalf of the emperor. Counties and fiefdoms have no choice but to crane their necks and listen attentively.

古文：今始至上谷而先堕大信，将复何以号令他郡乎！ 
现代文：可是现在才到上谷，便先自毁信誉，还有什么方法再对别的郡国发号施令？ 
English: However, it is only now that it has reached the upper valley, and it will first destroy its own credibility. How else can it give orders to other counties?

古文：使者不应。
现代文：使节不作答复。
English: The envoy did not reply.

古文：恂叱左右以使者命召况；况至，恂进取印绶带况。
现代文：寇恂大声呵斥左右随从，教他们用使节名义召唤耿况。等到耿况来到，寇恂自己把印信交给耿况。
English: Kou Ye loudly rebuked his followers on both sides, instructing them to summon Geng Zhou in the name of the envoy. When Geng Zhou arrived, Kou Ye himself handed the sealed letter to Geng Zhou.

古文：使者不得已，乃承制诏之，况受而归。
现代文：使节无可奈何，只好用皇帝名义下诏，耿况受命后告辞。
English: As a last resort, the envoy upheld the emperor's will to restore Geng Jiao to his post. Geng Jiao accepted the post and returned.

古文：宛人彭宠、吴汉亡命在渔阳，乡人韩鸿为更始使，徇北州，承制拜宠偏将军，行渔阳太守事，以汉为安乐令。
现代文：宛城人彭宠、吴汉逃亡到渔阳。同乡韩鸿，担任更始政府使节，前往北方州郡巡行，用皇帝名义下诏，任命彭宠当偏将军，代理渔阳太守，任命吴汉当安乐县令。
English: Han Hong, a fellow villager, served as the envoy of the new government and went on a tour to Beizhou County, and issued an edict in the name of the emperor, appointing Peng Ciao as the general, acting as the governor of Yuyang, and appointing Wu Han as the governor of Anle County.

古文：更始遣使降赤眉。
现代文：更始皇帝刘玄派人说降赤眉。
English: Liu Xuan, the first emperor, sent people to say that the red eyebrows were lowered.

古文：樊崇等闻汉室复兴，即留其兵，将渠帅二十馀人随使者至洛阳，更始皆封为列侯。
现代文：樊崇等听说汉朝复兴，便留下部众，率将领二十余人，随同使节来到洛阳。刘玄把他们都封为列侯。
English: When Gong Chong and others heard about the revival of the Han Dynasty, they left behind their subordinates, leading more than twenty generals, and accompanied the envoys to Luoyang. Liu Xuan made them all princes.

古文：崇等既未有国邑，而留众稍有离叛者，乃复亡归其营。
现代文：可是，樊崇等既没有采邑，而留在原地的部众又逐渐有背叛离去的，于是又逃回他的营地。
English: However, Xizong and the others did not take the towns, and the subordinates who remained in the same place gradually betrayed and left, so he fled back to his camp.

古文：王莽庐江连率颍川李宪据郡自守，称淮南王。
现代文：王莽朝中的庐江连率颍川人李宪占据本郡自守，自称淮南王。
English: The Lijiang Company of Wang Mang's dynasty, led by Li Xian, a native of Beichuan, occupied the county to defend itself and called itself the King of Huainan.

古文：故梁王立之子永诣洛阳；更始封为梁王，都睢阳。
现代文：前汉朝梁王刘立的儿子刘永到洛阳朝见刘玄，刘玄封刘永为梁王，首府设在睢阳。
English: Liu Yong, the son of Liu Li, the king of Liang in the former Han Dynasty, went to Luoyang to meet Liu Xuan, and Liu Xuan appointed Liu Yong as the king of Liang. The capital was located in Shenyang.

古文：更始欲令亲近大将徇河北，大司徒赐言： 诸家子独有文叔可用。 
现代文：刘玄打算派亲信大将巡行河北，大司徒刘赐说： 南阳刘姓宗族子弟中，只有刘秀可以胜任。 
English: Liu Xuan planned to send his close confidant general to parade in Hebei, and the chief disciple Liu Zi said: Among the sons of the Nanyang Liu clan, only Liu Xiu can be competent.

古文：硃鲔等以为不可，更始狐疑，赐深劝之。更始乃以刘秀行大司马事，持节北渡河，镇慰州郡。
现代文：朱鲔等认为不可以，刘玄疑惑不决。刘赐恳切规劝他，刘玄才任命刘秀代理大司马，持节北渡黄河，镇抚慰问各州郡。
English: Zhu Xi and others thought it was unacceptable, but Liu Xuan was undecided. Liu Zhi earnestly advised him, and Liu Xuan appointed Liu Xiu as the acting grand steward, held a festival in the north of the Yellow River, and sent condolences to all states and counties.

古文：以大司徒赐为丞相，令先入关修宗庙、宫室。
现代文：刘玄赐封大司徒刘赐当丞相，命令他先进入函谷关内，修建宗庙、宫室。
English: Liu Xuan Zhi appointed Liu Zi, a great disciple, as chancellor, and ordered him to first enter the Hanyu Pass to build the ancestral temple and palace.

古文：大司马秀至河北，所过郡县，考察官吏，黜陟能否，平遣囚徒，除王莽苛政，复汉官名。
现代文：大司马刘秀到达黄河以北在所经的郡县，考察官吏政绩，根据能力的大小任用或罢免，公平审理诉讼刑狱，废除王莽残酷的政令，恢复汉朝官名制度。
English: Chief Secretary Ma Liuxiu arrived in the counties north of the Yellow River to inspect the performance of officials, appoint or remove them according to their ability, fairly adjudicate lawsuits, abolish Wang Mang's cruel decrees, and restore the official name system of the Han Dynasty.

古文：吏民喜悦，争持牛酒迎劳，秀皆不受。
现代文：官民喜悦，争先恐后地拿着牛肉与美酒迎接慰劳。刘秀一律不接受。
English: The government and the people were delighted and scrambled to welcome the consolation with beef and wine. Liu Xiu did not accept any of them.

古文：南阳邓禹杖策追秀，及于鄴。
现代文：南阳人邓禹执鞭驱马而行，追赶刘秀，直追到邺城才追到。
English: Deng Yu, a person from Nanyang, drove his horse with a whip and chased Liu Xiu. He did not catch up with him until he reached Shicheng.

古文：秀曰： 我得专封拜，生远来，宁欲仕乎？ 
现代文：刘秀说： 我有权封爵任官，先生这么远前来，难道想进入仕途？ 
English: Liu Xiu said, "I have the right to be knighted and appointed as an official. If you have come this far, do you really want to enter the career?

古文：禹曰： 不愿也。 
现代文：邓禹说： 不愿意。 
English: Deng Yu said: I don't want to.

古文：秀曰： 即如是，何欲为？ 
现代文：刘秀说： 既然如此，你想干什么？ 
English: Liu Xiu said: So, what do you want to do?

古文：禹曰： 但愿明公威德加于四海，禹得效其尺寸，垂功名于竹帛耳！ 
现代文：邓禹说： 只愿阁下的威望和恩德普及四海，我能在你的属下尽一尺一寸之力，使我的声名记载在史书上而已。 
English: Deng Yu said, "I only wish that Your Excellency's prestige and benevolence spread to the four corners of the world. I can only do my best to make my reputation recorded in the history books.

古文：秀笑，因留宿间语。
现代文：刘秀笑起来，于是留邓禹住下，私下交谈。
English: Liu Xiu started to laugh, so Deng Yu stayed behind to have a private conversation.

古文：禹进说曰： 今山东未安，赤眉、青犊之属动以万数。
现代文：邓禹建议说： 如今，崤山以东还没有安定，赤眉和青犊的人马都有数以万计。
English: Deng Yu suggested: Today, there is no stability east of Lushan, and there are tens of thousands of red-browed and green-browed people and horses.

古文：更始既是常才而不自听断，诸将皆庸人屈起，志在财币，争用威力。朝夕自快而已，非有忠良明智、深虑远图，欲尊主安民者也。
现代文：刘玄本是一个平凡人物，而且又不亲自处理政事，所以将领都是庸碌之辈，靠着机运爬到高位，志向在于发财，争着卖弄权势，从早到晚自我快乐罢了，没有忠诚正直，没有聪明智慧，没有深思熟虑，没有远大眼光，不是想要尊主安民的人。
English: Liu Xuan was an ordinary person, and he did not personally deal with political affairs. Therefore, the generals are mediocre people. They climbed to high positions by chance. Their ambition is to get rich, compete for power, and enjoy themselves from morning to night. They are not loyal, honest, clever, wise, thoughtful, or far-sighted. They are not people who want to respect the Lord and the people.

古文：历观往古圣人之兴，二科而已，天时与人事也。
现代文：观察古代圣明君王的兴起，不过两个条件：天时和人事。
English: Observe the rise of ancient sage kings, but there are two conditions: time and personnel.

古文：今以天时观之，更始既立而灾变方兴；以人事观之，帝王大业非凡夫所任，分崩离析，形势可见。
现代文：现在从天时来看，刘玄即位后，天象变异却兴起了；从人事来看，帝王大业，不是平凡人物所能胜任的。土崩瓦解的形势，已经可见。
English: Now, from the perspective of time and space, after Liu Xuan's accession to the throne, the celestial phenomenon of mutation has arisen; from the perspective of personnel, the emperor's great cause is not something that ordinary people can do. The situation of collapse is already visible.

古文：明公虽建籓辅之功，犹恐无所成立也。
现代文：阁下虽然立下了辅佐的功勋，但恐怕还是没有什么成就。
English: Although Your Excellency has made a great contribution as an assistant, I am afraid that there is still no achievement.

古文：况明公素有盛德大功，为天下所向服，军政齐肃，赏罚明信。
现代文：况且您一向具有盛大的德能和功勋，受到天下人的向往和敬佩。无论带兵或从政，纪律严肃，赏罚公开而守信。
English: Moreover, you have always possessed great virtues and merits, and have been admired and admired by people all over the world. Whether leading soldiers or engaging in politics, you are serious about discipline, openly reward and punish, and keep your word.

古文：为今之计，莫如延揽英雄，务悦民心，立高祖之业，救万民之命。
现代文：当今之计，不如招揽英雄，务求取悦民心，创立高祖当年的功业，拯救万民的生命。
English: Today's strategy is not as good as recruiting heroes to please the people's hearts, creating the work of Gao Zu that year, and saving the lives of all people.

古文：以公而虑，天下不足定也。 
现代文：以阁下的远虑，天下不难统一。 
English: With Your Excellency's foresight, it is not difficult to unify the world.

古文：秀大悦，因令禹常宿止于中，与定计议。
现代文：刘秀非常高兴，因而命邓禹在营中下榻，和他进行磋商。
English: Liu Xiu was very happy, so he ordered Deng Yu to stay in the camp and hold consultations with him.

古文：每任使诸将，多访于禹，皆当其才。
现代文：刘秀每次任命或派出将领，多征求邓禹的意见。
English: Whenever Liu Xiu appointed or dispatched generals, he often sought Deng Yu's opinion.

古文：秀自兄縯之死，每独居辄不御酒肉，枕席有涕泣处，主簿冯异独叩头宽譬，秀止之曰： 卿勿妄言！ 
现代文：邓禹对将领的判断都与他们的才能相称。刘秀自从哥哥刘被杀，每逢单独居住，总是不吃酒肉，枕席上有他悲泣的泪痕。主簿冯异单独叩头进言宽慰。刘秀阻止他说： 你可别乱讲！ 
English: Deng Yu's judgment of generals is commensurate with their talent. Liu Xiu, since his brother Liu was killed, whenever he lives alone, always does not eat meat and wine, and there are tears of his grief and tears on the pillow seat. Master Feng Ying alone kowtows and speaks words of relief. Liu Xiu stops him and says: You can't talk like that!

古文：异因进说曰： 更始政乱，百姓无所依戴。
现代文：冯异趁机建议说： 更始帝政治混乱，百姓无所依服拥戴。
English: Feng Yixin took the opportunity to suggest: "Once again, the emperor is in political turmoil, and the people have no choice but to support him.

古文：夫人久饥渴，易为充饱。
现代文：一个人饥渴得太久，容易使他吃饱。
English: If a man is hungry and thirsty for too long, it is easy to fill him up.

古文：今公专命方面，宜分遣官属徇行郡县，宣布惠泽。 
现代文：而今阁下得以不待命令而独行事于自己控制的一大块土地，应该分别派遣官属巡行郡县，传播善政恩德。 
English: Now that you are able to act independently of orders in a large piece of land under your control, you should send officials to patrol counties separately to spread good governance and virtue.

古文：秀纳之。
现代文：刘秀采纳了他的建议。
English: Liu Xiu accepted his suggestion.

古文：骑都尉宋子耿纯谒秀于邯郸，退，见官属将兵法度不与它将同，遂自结纳。
现代文：骑都尉宋子人耿纯在邯郸晋见刘秀。退下后，发现刘秀的官属带领军队的法令制度，跟其他将领不同，于是留下来跟刘秀结交。
English: Captain Song Zijin Geng Chun met Liu Xiu in Shujin. After retiring, he found that the legal system of Liu Xiu's officials leading the army was different from that of other generals, so he stayed and made friends with Liu Xiu.

古文：故赵缪王子林说秀决列人河水以灌赤眉，秀不从；去之真定。
现代文：汉朝已故赵缪王刘元的儿子刘林，建议刘秀，在列人县境内决开黄河，用以淹没赤眉军。刘秀没有听从，前往真定。
English: Liu Lin, the son of Liu Yuan, the late Zhao Mui Wang of the Han Dynasty, suggested to Liu Xiu that the Yellow River should be opened in the territory of Liren County to flood the Red Eyebrows Army. Liu Xiu did not listen and went to Zhending.

古文：林素任侠于赵、魏间。
现代文：刘林在赵、魏之间，一向讲义气，好打抱不平。
English: Between Zhao and Wei, Liu Lin has always been a loyalist, and is good at settling disputes.

古文：王莽时，长安中有自称成帝子子舆者，莽杀之。
现代文：新朝时，有人自称是汉成帝的儿子刘子舆，王莽把他处死了。
English: During the new dynasty, someone claimed to be Liu Ziwu, the son of Emperor Han, and Wang Mang put him to death.

古文：邯郸卜者王郎缘是诈称真子舆，云 母故成帝讴者，尝见黄气从上下，遂任身；赵后欲害之，伪易它人子，以故得全。 
现代文：此时，邯郸一位占卜先生王郎因此谎称他才是真正的刘子舆。他解释说： 母亲本是成帝的歌女，曾经看见一股黄气罩到身上，就怀了孕。赵后打算谋害她，幸而用别人家的婴儿顶替，所以能保全一命。 
English: At this time, Wang Lang, a soothsayer, falsely claimed that he was the real Liu Zi Mei. He explained: The mother was a singer of Emperor Chengdi, once saw a yellow gas cover to her body, and became pregnant. Queen Zhao planned to kill her, but fortunately replaced it with a baby from another family, so she was able to save her life.

古文：林等信之，与赵国大豪李育、张参等谋共立郎。
现代文：刘林等相信这项解释，与赵国有影响力的豪杰李育、张参等谋划共同拥戴王郎当皇帝。
English: Liu Lin and others believed this explanation, and plotted with Zhao's influential heroes Li Yu and Zhang San to jointly support Wang Lang as emperor.

古文：会民间传赤眉将渡河，林等因此宣言 赤眉当立刘子舆 ，以观众心，百姓多信之。
现代文：恰好此时民间传说赤眉将渡过黄河，刘林等趁此机会传播谣言： 赤眉当立刘子舆， 以试探众人的反应，而百姓大多数相信不疑。
English: Just at this time, the folklore of the red eyebrows will cross the Yellow River, and Liu Lin and others take this opportunity to spread rumors: the red eyebrows stand up to Liu Zixiu, to test the reaction of the masses, and the majority of the people believe it.

古文：十二月，林等率车骑数百晨入邯郸城，止于王宫，立郎为天子；分遣将帅徇下幽、冀，移檄州郡，赵国以北、辽东以西皆望风响应。
现代文：十二月，刘林等率领车骑数百人，于早晨进入邯郸城，在赵王王宫停下来，立王郎当皇帝。然后，分别派出将领，向幽州、冀州夺取土地，把文告分送各州、各郡。赵国以北、辽东以西，都望风响应。
English: In December, Liu Lin and others led hundreds of people by car and bicycle to enter Shicheng in the morning, stopping at the Zhao Wang Wang Palace to establish Wang Lang as emperor. Then, they separately sent generals to seize land in Yuzhou and Jizhou, and sent the announcement to all states and counties. North of Zhao Province and west of Liaodong, they were waiting for the wind to respond.

古文：淮阳王更始二年
现代文：更始二年
English: Two years from now

古文：春，正月，大司马秀以王郎新盛，乃北徇蓟。
现代文：春季，正月，大司马刘秀因为王郎刚刚崛起，正处于兴盛状态，于是北向蓟州夺取土地。
English: In the spring, the first month of the year, because Wang Lang had just risen and was in a prosperous state, the chief steward Ma Liu Xiu went north to Luzhou to seize land.

古文：申屠建、李松自长安迎更始迁都。
现代文：申屠建、李松自长安迎接刘玄迁都。
English: Shen Tu Jian and Li Song came from Chang'an to welcome Liu Xuan's move to the capital.

古文：二月，更始发洛阳。
现代文：二月，刘玄从洛阳出发。
English: In February, Liu Xuan set off from Luoyang.

古文：初，三辅豪桀假号诛莽者，人人皆望封侯。
现代文：当初，三辅的英雄人物借用汉将军号诛杀了王莽，人人都盼望封侯。
English: At first, the hero of Sanfu borrowed the title of Han general to kill Wang Mang, and everyone was looking forward to the enthronement.

古文：申屠建既斩王宪，又扬言 三辅儿大黠，共杀其主。 
现代文：申屠建既把王宪杀了，又宣扬说： 三辅男子太凶狠狡黠，一起杀死了他们的首领。 
English: Shen Tu Jian not only killed Wang Xianlu, but also preached that: the three auxiliary men were too fierce and cunning, and together they killed their leader.

古文：吏民惶恐，属县屯聚；建等不能下。
现代文：官员百姓一片恐慌，三辅所属各县聚兵自保，申屠建等不能攻下。
English: Officials and common people were in a panic. The counties belonging to Sanfu gathered troops to protect themselves. Shen Tuo Jian and others could not be captured.

古文：更始至长安，乃下诏大赦，非王莽子，他皆除其罪，于是三辅悉平。
现代文：刘玄到了长安，才下诏大赦，除王莽后代外，其他都免其罪，于是三辅尽得安定。
English: When Liu Xuan arrived in Chang'an, he issued a general amnesty. Except for Wang Mang's descendants, all others were absolved of their crimes, so the three auxiliary provinces were stabilized.

古文：时长安唯未央宫被焚，其馀宫室、供帐、仓库、官府皆案堵如故，市里不改于旧。
现代文：当时长安只有未央宫被焚，其余宫室、供具张设、仓库、官府，都安然无恙，犹如以前，城市街巷和原来一样没有改变。
English: At that time, only the Weiyang Palace in Chang'an was burned, the rest of the palace rooms, supply stores, warehouses, and government offices were all safe and sound. As before, the city streets and lanes have not changed.

古文：更始居长乐宫，升前殿，郎吏以次列庭中。
现代文：刘玄在长乐宫居住，登上前殿，官吏们按照次序，排列在正殿前的院子里。
English: Liu Xuan lived in Changle Palace and went up to the front hall. The officials lined up in the courtyard in front of the main hall in order.

古文：更始羞怍，俯首刮席，不敢视。
现代文：刘玄羞愧惭怍，俯下头用手刮席，不敢看人。
English: Liu Xuan was ashamed, bowed his head and scraped the table with his hand, not daring to look at anyone.

古文：诸将后至者，更始问： 虏掠得几何？ 
现代文：将领们有后到的，刘玄问： 抢了多少东西？ 
English: When the generals arrived later, Liu Xuan asked: How many things did they rob?

古文：左右侍官皆宫省久吏，惊愕相视。
现代文：左右侍官都是宫禁中的旧吏，对此惊愕不已，相视无语。
English: The attendants on both sides were old officials under palace ban. They were stunned and speechless.

古文：李松与棘阳赵萌说更始宜悉王诸功臣；硃鲔争之，以为高祖约，非刘氏不王。
现代文：李松与棘阳人赵萌建议刘玄尽封功臣为王。朱鲔与他们争辩，认为汉高祖刘邦事先说定，不是刘姓皇族不能当王。
English: Li Song and Zhao Meng, a member of the Xianyang people, suggested that Liu Xuan should appoint a meritorious subject as king. Zhu Xi argued with them, saying that Liu Bang, the ancestor of the Han Dynasty, had decided in advance that no royal family with the surname of Liu could become king.

古文：更始乃先封诸宗室：祉为定陶王，庆为燕王，歙为元氏王，嘉为汉中王，赐为宛王，信为汝阴王，然后立王匡为泚阳王，王凤为宜城王，硃鲔为胶东王，王常为邓王，申屠建为平氏王，陈牧为阴平王，卫尉大将军张卬为淮阳王，执金吾、大将军廖湛为穰王，尚书胡殷为随王，柱天大将军李通为西平王，五威中郎将李轶为舞阴王，水衡大将军成丹为襄邑王，骠骑大将军宗佻为颍阴王，尹尊为郾王。
现代文：刘玄于是首先赐封刘姓宗族：刘祉当定陶王，刘庆当燕王，刘歙当元氏王，刘嘉当汉中王，刘赐当宛王，刘信当汝阴王。然后立王匡当阳王，王凤当宜城王，朱鲔当胶东王，王常当邓王，申屠建当平氏王，陈牧当阴平王，卫尉大将军张当淮阳王，执金吾大将军廖湛当穰王，尚书胡殷当随王，柱天大将军李通当西平王，五威中郎将李轶当舞阴王，水衡大将军成丹当襄邑王，骠骑大将军宗佻当颍阴王，尹尊当郾王。
English: Liu Xuan then first granted titles to Liu's family members: Liu Zhi as the king of Ding Tao, Liu Qing as the king of Yan, Liu Zhi as the king of Yuan, Liu Ji as the king of Han, Liu Zi as the king of Wan, Liu Xin as the king of Ruyin. Then, he established Wang Kuang as the king of Yang, Wang Feng as the king of Yicheng, Zhu Xi as the king of Jiaodong, Wang Chang as the king of Deng, Shen Tu Jian as the king of Ping, Chen Mu as the king of Yin, Lieutenant General Zhang as the king of Huaiyang, General of Jinwu as the king of Z

古文：唯硃鲔辞不受。
现代文：只有朱鲔推辞不肯接受。
English: Only Zhu Xi refused to accept the resignation.

古文：乃以鲔为左大司马，宛王赐为前大司马，使与李轶等镇抚关东。
现代文：于是任命朱鲔当左大司马，宛王刘赐当前大司马，让他们与李轶等人安抚函谷关以东地区。
English: As a result, Zhu Xi was appointed as the left grand steward, and Wang Liu gave him the current grand steward, so that they and Li Xi and others could pacify the area east of Hanyu Pass.

古文：又使李通镇荆州，王常行南阳太守事。
现代文：又让李通镇守荆州，王常代理南阳太守。
English: He also allowed Li Tongzhen to guard Jingzhou, and Wang Chang to act as Nanyang's governor.

古文：以李松为丞相，赵萌为右大司马，共秉内任。
现代文：任命李松当丞相，赵萌当右大司马，共同承担朝廷之内的责任。
English: He appointed Li Song as chancellor and Zhao Meng as major secretary of the right, jointly assuming the responsibilities within the imperial court.

古文：更始纳赵萌女为夫人，故委政于萌，日夜饮宴后庭。
现代文：刘玄娶赵萌女儿当夫人，所以把政事都给赵萌去管，日夜在后宫饮宴。
English: Liu Xuan married Zhao Meng's daughter as his wife, so he put Zhao Meng in charge of political affairs and held banquets in the harem day and night.

古文：群臣欲言事，辄醉不能见，时不得已，乃令侍中坐帷内与语。
现代文：臣属们想向君主奏闻或议论政事，刘玄总是因醉酒而不能相见，有时不得已，就命侍中坐帐幕之中与群臣说话。
English: When a group of vassals had a false report, he was too drunk to receive them. If he had to, he would have an attendant sit inside the curtain and have a dialogue with his vassals.

古文：韩夫人尤嗜酒，每侍饮，见常侍奏事，辄怒曰： 帝方对我饮，正用此时持事来邪！ 
现代文：韩夫人尤其爱好喝酒，每当侍奉刘玄喝酒，见中常侍向天子奏事，总是发怒说： 皇上正和我喝酒，你偏利用这时奏事呀！ 
English: Mrs. Han was particularly fond of drinking. Whenever Liu Xuan, the attendant, was drinking, the attendant would always get angry and say, "The emperor is drinking with me, and you are taking advantage of this time to make a speech!"

古文：起，抵破书案。
现代文：于是起身，击破书案。
English: So he got up and defeated the book case.

古文：赵萌专权，生杀自恣。
现代文：赵萌专擅大权，自己随意杀人。
English: Zhao Meng exclusively wields supreme power and kills at will.

古文：郎吏有说萌放纵者，更始怒，拔剑斩之，自是无敢复言。
现代文：郎官中有人说赵萌放纵，刘玄大怒，拔剑斩杀了那个人，从此没有人敢再说赵萌的不是。
English: One of the officials said that Zhao Meng was indulgent. Liu Xuan was furious and killed the person with a sword. Since then, no one dared to say that Zhao Meng was not.

古文：以至群小、膳夫皆滥授官爵，长安为之语曰： 灶下养，中郎将；烂羊胃，骑都尉；烂羊头，关内侯。 
现代文：以至众小人、厨子，都被滥授官爵。长安人把这件事编成歌谣： 灶下炊烹忙，升为中郎将。烹煮烂羊胃，当了骑都尉。烹煮烂羊头，当了关内侯。 
English: The people of Chang'an made up a song about this event: "Cooking under the stove, he was promoted to middle manager. Cooking a rotten sheep's stomach, he became a cavalry captain. Cooking a rotten sheep's head, he became a Kansai lord."

古文：军师将军李淑上书谏曰： 陛下定业，虽因下江、平林之势，斯盖临时济用，不可施之既安。
现代文：军师将军李涉上书规劝说： 陛下创业，虽然是利用下江兵、平林兵的势力，但这是临时措施，不可把它施用于已经安定的时期。
English: General Li Wanzhang of the Military Division advised: Your Majesty, although you are using the power of the soldiers of the Lower River and the soldiers of the Plain Forest to start a business, this is a temporary measure, and it should not be applied to a period that is already stable.

古文：唯名与器，圣人所重。今加非其人，望其裨益万分，犹缘木求鱼，升山采珠。
现代文：只有名份与车服仪制，是圣人所看重的，现在给了不应该给的人，希望他们有万分益处，这犹如上树找鱼，登山采珠。
English: Only the name and the ceremonial dress are valued by the sages, and now they are given to those who should not be given, hoping that they will be of great benefit. This is like looking for fish on a tree or collecting pearls on a mountain.

古文：海内望此，有以窥度汉祚！ 
现代文：四海之内看到这样，会有人暗中窥伺汉朝的皇位。 
English: If the four seas saw this, someone would secretly spy on the imperial throne of the Han Dynasty.

古文：更始怒，囚之。
现代文：刘玄大怒，把他囚禁起来。
English: Liu Xuan was furious and imprisoned him.

古文：诸将在外者皆专行诛赏，各置牧守；州郡交错，不知所从。
现代文：将领们在朝廷外的都自行赏罚，各设官吏，各州、各郡交叉错杂，不知服从谁好。
English: The generals reward and punish themselves outside the imperial court. Each has its own officials, and the states and counties intermingle. They do not know who to obey.

古文：由是关中离心，四海怨叛。
现代文：因此关中地区离心，全国怨恨叛乱。
English: Therefore, the Guanzhong area was centrifuged, and the whole country resented the rebellion.

古文：更始征隗嚣及其叔父崔、义等，嚣将行，方望以为更始成败未可知，固止之。嚣不听，望以书辞谢而去。
现代文：刘玄征召隗嚣和他的叔父隗崔、隗义等人。隗嚣将要出发，方望因为刘玄成败尚不可知道，坚决地制止他，隗嚣不听他的建议，方望留下一封书信，告辞而去。
English: Liu Xuan conscripted Yan Han and his uncles Xing Cui and Yan Yi, among others. Yan Han was about to set out, Fang Fang could not know whether Liu Xuan would succeed or fail, so he resolutely stopped him. Yan Han did not listen to his advice. Fang Fang left a letter saying goodbye and left.

古文：嚣等至长安，更始以嚣为右将军，崔、义皆即旧号。
现代文：隗嚣等到达长安，刘玄任命隗嚣当右将军，对隗崔、隗义都按旧有的称号赐封。
English: When Gong Hanran and others arrived in Chang'an, Liu Xuan appointed Gong Hanran as the right-hand general. Gong Cui and Gong Yi were both given titles according to the old titles.

古文：耿况遣其子弇奉奏诣长安，弇时年二十一。
现代文：耿况派遣他的儿子耿带着上呈奏章到长安，耿当时二十一岁。
English: Geng Zhou sent his son Geng, who was 21 years old at the time, to Chang'an with the song.

古文：行至宋子，会王郎起，弇从吏孙仓、卫包曰： 刘子舆，成帝正统；舍此不归，远行安之！ 
现代文：走到宋子，正值王郎起事，耿的从官孙仓、卫包说： 刘子舆乃是汉成帝一脉相传的嫡子，舍弃他不归附，远行到哪里去？ 
English: When he came to Songzi, Wang Lang was in the middle of an uprising, and Geng's officials Sun Cang and Wei Bao said: Liu Ziyou is the legitimate son of Han Chengdi. If he does not return, where will he go?

古文：弇按剑曰： 子舆弊贼，卒为降虏耳！
现代文：耿用手握着剑柄说： 刘子舆是个欺骗蒙混的贼子，最终要成为投降的俘虏。
English: Holding the hilt of his sword in his hand, Geng said, "Liu Ziyou is a deceitful, conniving thief who will eventually become a captive who surrenders.

古文：我至长安，与国家陈渔阳、上谷兵马，归发突骑，以辚乌合之众，如摧枯折腐耳。
现代文：我到长安，向朝廷叙说上谷郡和渔阳郡的兵马状况，回去后征发能冲突军队的骑兵，用来践踏那些乌合之众，犹如摧枯拉朽一般。
English: When I went to Chang'an, I told the imperial court about the state of the soldiers and horses in Shanggu County and Yuyang County. After I returned, I enlisted the cavalry, who were able to clash with the army, and used them to trample on the rabble, as if they were withering and decaying.

古文：观公等不识去就，族灭不久也！ 
现代文：看你等没有择主而从的眼光，灭族之祸不远了！ 
English: Look at you who do not have the vision of choosing the Lord, the disaster of extermination is not far away!

古文：仓、包遂亡，降王郎。
现代文：孙仓、卫包于是逃亡，投降了王郎。
English: Sun Cang and Weibao then fled and surrendered to Wang Lang.

古文：弇闻大司马秀在卢奴，乃驰北上谒；秀留署长史，与俱北至蓟。
现代文：耿听说大司马刘秀在卢奴，于是骑马奔驰北上拜见。刘秀让他留在府中任长史，与他一块儿北上到达蓟。
English: Geng heard that the chief steward, Ma Liu Xiu, was in Lunu, so he rode a horse-drawn carriage north to meet him. Liu Xiu asked him to stay in the capital to serve as the chief steward, and together they rode north to Handan.

古文：王郎移檄购秀十万户，秀令功曹令史颍川王霸至市中募人击王郎，市人皆大笑，举手邪揄之，霸惭懅而反。
现代文：王郎命人传递檄书，用十万户的采邑作悬赏，擒杀刘秀。刘秀命令大司马功曹令史颍川人王霸到市中召募人打击王郎。市人都发声大笑，举手挖苦他，王霸惭愧而回。
English: Wang Lang ordered someone to pass on the forged document and offered a reward of 100,000 households to kill Liu Xiu. Liu Xiu ordered the chief magistrate Ma Gong Cao to order the Shichuan man Wang Ba to go to the city center to recruit people to fight Wang Lang. The citizens laughed loudly, raised their hands to ridicule him, and Wang Ba returned ashamed.

古文：秀将南归，耿弇曰： 今兵从南方来，不可南行。
现代文：刘秀即将南归，耿说： 如今兵从南方来，不可以南行。
English: Liu Xiu is about to return to the south, Geng said: Now soldiers come from the south, they can't go south.

古文：渔阳太守彭宠，公之邑人；上谷太守，即弇父也。
现代文：渔阳太守彭宠，是您的同乡；上谷太守，是我的父亲。
English: Peng Jiao, the governor of Yuyang, is a fellow villager of the prince; Shanggui governor, is my father.

古文：发此两郡控弦万骑，邯郸不足虑也。 
现代文：征发这两郡弓箭骑兵一万人，王郎就不值得忧虑了。 
English: Conscript 10,000 archers and cavalrymen from these two counties, and Wang Lang will not have to worry.

古文：秀官属腹心皆不肯，曰： 死尚南首，奈何北行入囊中！ 
现代文：刘秀的属官和亲信都不肯，说： 人死了，头还要向着南方，为何向北进发入人囊中？ 
English: Liu Xiu's subordinates and confidants refused to do so, saying: When a person dies, his head should still face south. Why should it be sent north into the body bag?

古文：秀指弇曰： 是我北道主人也。 
现代文：刘秀指着耿说： 这是我北路的主人。 
English: Liu Xiu pointed to Geng and said, "This is the owner of the North Road."

古文：会故广阳王子接起兵蓟中以应郎，城内扰乱，言邯郸使者方到，二千石以下皆出迎。
现代文：正巧原广阳王的儿子刘接在蓟中起兵，以响应王郎，城内搅扰，混乱不堪，传说王郎的使节刚到，二千石及以下的官吏都出来迎接。
English: It just so happened that Liu Zhi, the son of the former Guangyang King, raised an army in the middle of the city to respond to Wang Lang. The city was disturbed and chaotic. Legend has it that Wang Lang's envoys had just arrived, and officials of 2,000 koku and below came out to greet them.

古文：于是秀趣驾而出，至南城门，门已闭。
现代文：于是刘秀急催车辆而出，到南城门，城门已经关闭。
English: So Liu Xiu hurriedly rushed out of the vehicle and went to the south gate. The gate was already closed.

古文：攻之，得出。
现代文：攻击南城门，才得出城。
English: Only by attacking the south gate did they leave the city.

古文：遂晨夜南驰，不敢入城邑，舍食道傍。
现代文：于是昼夜向南奔驰，不敢进入城市，食宿都在路旁。
English: As a result, they drove south day and night, not daring to enter the city. Their accommodation and meals were on the side of the road.

古文：至芜蒌亭，时天寒烈，冯异上豆粥。
现代文：到芜蒌亭，当时天气酷寒，冯异呈上豆粥。
English: At that time, the weather was extremely cold, and Feng Yixing served bean porridge.

古文：至饶阳，官属皆乏食。
现代文：到饶阳，属官都缺乏食品。
English: Arriving in Raoyang, the officers and soldiers had nothing to eat.

古文：秀乃自称邯郸使者，入传舍，传吏方进食，从者饥，争夺之。
现代文：刘秀于是自称邯郸的使节，进入客馆。客馆的官吏正在吃饭，刘秀的随从饥饿难忍，争抢食物。
English: So Liu Xiu, claiming to be the envoy of Zhai, entered the guest house. The officials of the guest house were eating, and Liu Xiu's followers were starving and scrambling for food.

古文：传吏疑其伪，乃椎鼓数十通，绐言 邯郸将军至 ，官属皆失色。
现代文：官吏怀疑刘秀是假使节，于是用棒槌敲打鼓数十遍，欺哄说： 邯郸将军到。 刘秀的属官都吓得变了脸色。
English: The officials suspected Liu Xiu of being a fake envoy, so they beat the drum dozens of times with a mallet and said, "General Zhai has arrived." Liu Xiu's subordinate officials turned pale with fright.

古文：秀升车欲驰，既而惧不免，徐还坐，曰： 请邯郸将军入。 
现代文：刘秀登车打算逃走，随后又怕逃不掉，慢慢回到座位上，说： 请邯郸将军进来。 
English: Liu Xiuxiong boarded the bus with the intention of escaping, and then, fearing that he would not be able to escape, he slowly returned to his seat and said, "Please let General Zou come in."

古文：久，乃驾去。
现代文：过了很久，才乘车辆离开。
English: It was a long time before they left in a vehicle.

古文：晨夜兼行，蒙犯霜雪，面皆破裂。
现代文：日夜兼程，顶霜冒雪，满面裂痕。
English: Day and night, with snow on the top of the frost and cracks all over.

古文：至下曲阳，传闻王郎兵在后，从者皆恐。
现代文：刘秀等到了下曲阳，传言王郎追兵在后，随从的官员都很害怕。
English: Liu Xiu waited until the following day, and rumor had it that Wang Lang was chasing the soldiers. The officials who followed him were very afraid.

古文：至滹沱河，候吏还白 河水流澌，无船，不可济 。
现代文：到滹沱河，探听消息的官员回来说： 河水解冻，冰随水流，没有船，不可以渡。 
English: An official who went to the Li River to listen to the news came back and said: The river is thawing, the ice is flowing with the water, there is no boat, you can't cross.

古文：秀使王霸往视之。
现代文：刘秀派王霸前往观看。
English: Liu Xiu sent Wang He to watch.

古文：霸恐惊众，欲且前，阻水还，即诡曰： 冰坚可度。 
现代文：王霸恐怕惊吓众人，打算暂且向前，受到水的阻挡再回来，就狡诈地说： 河水结冰，坚实可渡。 
English: Wang Ba, fearing that he might frighten the crowd, decided to go ahead for the time being, but when the water blocked his way and he had to come back, he cunningly said, "The river is frozen, it is solid and can be crossed."

古文：官属皆喜。
现代文：属官都很高兴。
English: The officials were very happy.

古文：秀笑曰： 候吏果妄语也。 
现代文：刘秀笑着说： 去探听的官吏果然瞎说！ 
English: Liu Xiu said with a smile: The officials who went to listen in were really talking nonsense!

古文：遂前。
现代文：于是向前。
English: Then forward.

古文：比至河，河冰亦合，乃令王霸护度，未毕数骑而冰解。
现代文：等到了河畔，河水却也结冰了。刘秀命令王霸监护渡河，只剩下几个骑马的人还没有到达河对岸时，冰就融解了。
English: When they reached the riverbank, the water had frozen. Liu Xiu ordered Wang Ba to supervise the crossing of the river, and when only a few riders had not yet reached the other side of the river, the ice melted.

古文：至南宫，遇大风雨，秀引车入道傍空舍，冯异抱薪，邓禹爇火，秀对灶燎衣，冯异复进麦饭。
现代文：到了南宫，遇到大风雨，刘秀引车进入路旁的空房，冯异抱来柴草，邓禹点燃火，刘秀对灶烤衣，冯异又呈上麦饭。
English: When they arrived at the Southern Palace, they encountered heavy wind and rain. Liu Xiu led the car into an empty room on the side of the road. Feng Yinyi carried firewood, Deng Yu lit a fire, Liu Xiu baked clothes on the stove, and Feng Yinyi served wheat rice.

古文：进至下博城西，惶惑不知所之。
现代文：刘秀等人前进到下博城西，惊惶迷惑，不知道往哪里去。
English: Liu Xiu and others advanced to the west of Shimohe City, panicked and confused, not knowing where to go.

古文：有白衣老父在道旁，指曰： 努力！
现代文：有身着白衣的老人在路旁，指着前面说： 努力干吧！
English: There was an old man dressed in white on the side of the road, pointing ahead and saying: Work hard!

古文：信都郡为长安城守，去此八十里。 
现代文：信都郡是长安的门户，离这里还有八十里。 
English: Xindu County is the gateway to Chang'an, which is eighty miles away.

古文：秀即驰赴之。
现代文：刘秀立即奔赴那里。
English: Liu Xiu immediately rushed there.

古文：是时郡国皆已降王郎，独信都太守南阳任光、和戎太守信都邳肜不肯从。
现代文：当时各郡国都已投降王郎，只有信都太守南阳人任光、和戎太守信都人邳肜不肯归附。
English: At that time, all the counties and provinces had already surrendered to Wang Lang, and only Ren Guang, the governor of Nanyang and the governor of Hwase, refused to surrender.

古文：光自以孤城独守，恐不能全，闻秀至，大喜，吏民皆称万岁。
现代文：任光自己认为独守孤城，恐怕不能保全，听说刘秀到来，非常高兴，官民齐呼万岁。
English: Ren Guang himself thought that he could not protect the lonely city alone. He was very happy to hear that Liu Xiu had arrived. Long live the government and the people.

古文：邳肜亦自和戎来会，议者多言可因信都兵自送，西还长安。
现代文：邳肜也从和戎来相会。议论的人多数说可以依靠信都兵护送，西回长安。
English: Most of the people said that they could rely on the escort of the Xindu soldiers to go west to Chang'an.

古文：邳肜曰： 吏民歌吟思汉久矣，故更始举尊号而天下响应，三辅清宫除道以迎之。
现代文：邳肜说： 官民歌咏思念汉朝很久了，所以刘玄举起尊贵的称号而天下响应，三辅清理宫室，修治道路，来迎接他。
English: Zou said: The officials and the people have been thinking about the Han Dynasty for a long time, so Liu Xuan held up his honorable title and the world responded. The Three Assistants cleaned the palace and repaired the roads to welcome him.

古文：今卜者王郎，假名因势，驱集乌合之众，遂振燕、赵之地，无有根本之固。
现代文：今占卜先生王郎，冒充汉成帝庶子之名，顺应着事物发展的趋势，驱赶汇集乌合之众，于是声振燕、赵之地，但并无坚固的基础。
English: Now, Mr. Wang Lang, a fortuneteller, pretends to be the name of the illegitimate son of Emperor Han Chengdu, conforms to the trend of development of things, drives away and gathers the rabble, and then claims to be the land of Zhenyan and Zhao, but there is no solid foundation.

古文：明公奋二郡之兵以讨之，何患不克！
现代文：您使信都、和戎两郡的军队彭起劲来讨伐王郎，为什么担忧不能取胜！
English: You have made the army of Shintou and the two counties of Hwaseong fight against Wang Lang, why worry if you can't win!

古文：今释此而归，岂徒空失河北，必更惊动三辅，堕损威重，非计之得者也。
现代文：现在放弃这样的条件而归，岂不是白白地失去了黄河以北，而且势将惊动三辅，大损您的威信，不是良策。
English: If you give up such a condition and return now, you will have lost everything north of the Yellow River in vain. Moreover, you are likely to alarm the three auxiliaries, which will greatly damage your prestige. This is not a good strategy.

古文：若明公无复征伐之意，则虽信都之兵，犹难会也。
现代文：如果阁下没有讨伐王郎的意图，那么即使是信都的地方部队，也难以召集。
English: If you have no intention of fighting Wang Lang, then even the local troops of Xindu will be difficult to muster.

古文：何者？
现代文：为什么？
English: Why is that?

古文：明公既西，则邯郸势成，民不肯捐父母、背成主而千里送公，其离散亡逃可必也！ 
现代文：阁下既然西行，邯郸方面就控制了局势。百姓不肯抛弃父母妻子，背叛现成的主人，千里迢迢去护送您。他们离散逃亡是必然的。 
English: Since your excellency has left for the West, the Kuomintang side has taken control of the situation. The people are not willing to abandon their parents and wives, betray their existing masters, and travel thousands of miles to escort you. It is inevitable that they will disperse and flee.

古文：秀乃止。
现代文：刘秀于是决定不走。
English: Liu Xiu then decided not to go.

古文：秀以二郡兵弱，欲入城头子路、力子都军中，任光以为不可。
现代文：刘秀因为两郡的兵力太弱，打算投奔城头子路、力子都的部队。任光认为不可以。
English: Because Liu Xiu's forces in the two counties were too weak, he planned to join the forces in Chengtouzi Road and Lixiu City. Ren Guang thought this was unacceptable.

古文：乃发傍县，得精兵四千人，拜任光为左大将军，信都都尉李忠为右大将军，邳肜为后大将军、和戎太守如故，信都令万修为偏将军，皆封列侯。
现代文：于是下令征集邻县丁壮，得精锐部队四千人，任命任光当左大将军，信都都尉李忠当右大将军，邳肜当后大将军，仍兼和戎太守，信都令万当偏将军，都封列侯。
English: He then ordered the recruitment of 4,000 elite troops from the neighboring county of Dingzhuang, and appointed Ren Guang as the left general, Xindu captain Li Zhong as the right general, Zou as the rear general, still concurrently as the commander of the army, and Xindu commander Wan as the rear general, all of whom were given the title of marquess.

古文：留南阳宗广领信都太守事；使任光、李忠、万修将兵以从，邳肜将兵居前。
现代文：刘秀任命南阳人宗广暂任信都太守，让任光、李忠、万跟随自己向王郎反击。邳肜带兵充当前锋。
English: Liu Xiu appointed Nanyang man Zong Guang as the temporary governor of Xindu, and let Ren Guang, Li Zhong, and Wan follow him to fight back against Wang Lang. He led the front.

古文：任光乃多作檄文曰： 大司马刘公将城头子路、力子都兵百万众从东方来，击诸反虏！ 
现代文：任光于是大量编写声讨文告说： 大司马刘秀率城头子路、力子都的大军百万，从东方前来，讨伐叛逆！ 
English: Therefore, Ren Guang wrote a large number of commentaries, saying: Grand Master Ma Liu Xiu led a million-strong army from the east to fight against the rebels!

古文：遣骑驰至巨鹿界中。
现代文：派骑兵到钜鹿郡内散发。
English: Send the cavalry to spread out in the middle of Elk County.

古文：吏民得檄，传相告语。
现代文：官民看到文告后，互相传播。
English: Officials and the public received the message and passed it on to each other.

古文：秀投暮入堂阳界，多张骑火，弥满泽中，堂阳即降；又击贳县，降之。
现代文：刘秀到晚上抵达堂阳县界，命许多骑兵打起火把，水畔一片光亮，堂阳县误以为大军压境，马上投降。刘秀又进击贳县，贳县也投降了。
English: Liu Xiu arrived at the border of Doyang County in the evening, ordered many cavalrymen to light torches, and the waterfront was bright. Doyang County mistakenly thought that a large army was pressing the border, and immediately surrendered. Liu Xiu also entered Handan County, and Handan County also surrendered.

古文：城头子路者，东平爰曾也，寇掠河、济间，有众二十馀万，力子都有众六七万，故秀欲依之。
现代文：城头子路本是东平郡人爰曾，在黄河、济水一带抢劫掳掠，有部众二十余万人，而力子都也有部众六七万人，所以刘秀曾想前往投靠。
English: The head of the city was originally from Dongping County, and there were more than 200,000 people who robbed and plundered in the Yellow River and Jishui areas, and there were also more than 670,000 people from Lixiu, so Liu Xiu wanted to go to the refuge.

古文：昌城人刘植聚兵数千人据昌城，迎秀；秀以植为骁骑将军。
现代文：昌城人刘植集结士兵数千人，占据昌城，迎接刘秀。刘秀任命刘植当骁骑将军。
English: Liu Zhi, a native of Changcheng, gathered thousands of soldiers and occupied Changcheng to welcome Liu Xiu, who appointed Liu Zhi as the general of the cavalry.

古文：耿纯率宗族宾客二千馀人，老病者皆载木自随，迎秀于育；拜纯为前将军。
现代文：耿纯率领宗族宾客二千余人，年老患病的都随身带着棺木，在育地迎接刘秀。刘秀任命耿纯当前将军。
English: Geng Chun led more than 2,000 guests from his clan, including the elderly and the sick, who carried coffins with them to meet Liu Xiu in his birthplace. Liu Xiu appointed Geng Chun as the current general.

古文：进攻下曲阳，降之。
现代文：进攻下曲阳，下曲阳投降。
English: Quyang attacked, and Quyang surrendered.

古文：众稍合，至数万人，复北击中山。
现代文：刘秀的部队渐渐汇合，达数万人。再向北进攻中山。
English: Liu Xiu's troops gradually converged, reaching tens of thousands. They then attacked Zhongshan to the north.

古文：耿纯恐宗家怀异心，乃使从弟宿归，烧庐舍以绝其反顾之望。
现代文：耿纯恐怕宗族怀有二心，就派他的堂弟耿回到故乡，烧掉了房舍，以断绝他们的反顾之心。
English: Geng Chun, fearing that his clan might have second thoughts, sent his cousin Geng to return to his hometown and burn down the house in order to break their rebellious spirit.

古文：秀进拔卢奴，所过发奔命兵，移檄边郡共击邯郸；郡县还复响应。
现代文：刘秀进军，攻陷卢奴。在所经过的郡县，征发急用的非常部队，向沿边郡县发布文告，号召共击邯郸，各郡县纷纷响应。
English: Liu Xiu marched to capture Lu Nu. In the counties and counties he passed through, he conscripted and dispatched emergency emergency troops, issued a proclamation to the counties along the border, and called for a joint attack, and the counties responded in succession.

古文：时真定王杨起兵附王郎，众十馀万，秀遣刘植说杨，杨乃降。
现代文：这时真定王刘杨起兵投靠王郎，部众十余万人。刘秀派刘植游说刘杨，刘杨便投降了。
English: At this time, Liu Yang, the king of Zhending, raised an army to support Wang Lang, with more than 100,000 soldiers. Liu Xiu sent Liu Zhi to lobby Liu Yang, and Liu Yang surrendered.

古文：秀因留真定，纳杨甥郭氏为夫人以结之。
现代文：刘秀于是进入真定，并娶刘杨的甥女郭氏当夫人，用以团结刘杨。
English: Liu Xiu then entered Zhending and married Liu Yang's niece, Guo Shi, in order to unite Liu Yang.

古文：进击元氏、防子，皆下之。
现代文：继续前进，攻击元氏、防子，都攻下了。
English: Continue to move forward, attack Genji, defense, all captured.

古文：至鄗，击斩王郎将李恽；至柏人，复破郎将李育。
现代文：到达县，击杀王郎的将军李恽。进抵柏人，又击败王郎的将军李育。
English: Arriving in Dadu County, he killed Wang Lang's general Li Yan. Entering Dadu, he defeated Wang Lang's general Li Yu.

古文：育还保城；攻之，不下。
现代文：李育撤退，固守柏人城。刘秀进攻，未能攻下。
English: Li Yu retreated and held fast to Pakren City. Liu Xiu attacked and failed to capture it.

古文：南郑人延岑起兵据汉中，汉中王嘉击降之，有众数十万。
现代文：南郑人延岑起兵占据汉中。汉中王刘嘉进击，延岑投降。刘嘉部众多至数十万。
English: Nan Zheng's men from Yancheng raised an army to occupy Hanzhong. Liu Jia, the king of Hanzhong, marched into Yancheng and surrendered. Liu Jia's forces numbered several hundred thousand.

古文：校尉南阳贾复见更始政乱，乃说嘉曰： 今天下未定，而大王安守所保，所保得无不可保乎？ 
现代文：校尉南阳人贾复，眼见更始朝廷政治混乱，向刘嘉建议： 如今天下还没安定，大王却对你目前所有的东西心满意足。
English: Jia Fu, a school captain from Nanyang, saw the political turmoil in the imperial court at the beginning of the year, and suggested to Liu Jia: If today is not stable, the great king is satisfied with everything you have at present.

古文：嘉曰： 卿言大，非吾任也。
现代文：这些东西就没有不保的可能吗？ 刘嘉说： 您说大话，不是我所能任用的。
English: Is it possible to insure these things? Liu Jia said: You are talking nonsense, which is not what I can do.

古文：大司马在河北，必能相用。 
现代文：大司马刘秀在黄河以北，一定能任用您。 
English: Chief Secretary Ma Liuxiu is north of the Yellow River, so he will definitely be able to appoint you.

古文：乃为书荐复及长史南阳陈俊于刘秀。
现代文：于是写信给刘秀，推荐贾复与长史南阳人陈俊。
English: Therefore, he wrote to Liu Xiu, recommending Jia Fu and the long-serving Nanyang person Chen Jun.

古文：复等见秀于柏人，秀以复为破虏将军，俊为安集掾。
现代文：贾复等抵达柏人，刘秀任命贾复当破虏将军，陈俊当安集掾。
English: When Jia Fu and others arrived in Ba Rong, Liu Xiu appointed Jia Fu as the general to break the enemy, and Chen Jun as the leader of Anji.

古文：秀舍中儿犯法，军市令颍川祭遵格杀之，秀怒，命收遵。
现代文：刘秀家里的年轻仆人犯了法，军市令颍川人祭遵把他打死了。刘秀大怒，命人逮捕了祭遵。
English: A young servant in Liu Xiu's family broke the law, and the military government ordered the Yichuan man, Saizong, to beat him to death. Liu Xiu was furious and ordered someone to arrest Saizong.

古文：主簿陈副谏曰： 明公常欲众军整齐，今遵奉法不避，是教令所行也。 
现代文：主簿陈副劝谏说： 您常要求军队军纪整肃，现在祭遵执法毫不回避，这是您的教令得到了贯彻执行呀！ 
English: Chen Zihuan, the chief clerk, said: You have often demanded that the military discipline of the army be rectified, and now you do not shy away from enforcing the law. This is your edict that has been implemented!

古文：乃贳之，以为刺奸将军，谓诸将曰： 当备祭遵！
现代文：刘秀于是饶恕了祭遵，用他担任刺奸将军。刘秀跟众将说： 你们应该小心祭遵！
English: Liu Xiu then pardoned Saizhun and used him as an assassin general. Liu Xiu said to the generals: You should be careful with Saizhun!

古文：吾舍中儿犯法尚杀之，必不私诸卿也。 
现代文：我家里的小仆人犯法，尚且给杀了，他必定不会偏袒你们。 
English: If my servant, a young man in my household, has committed a crime and is put to death, he will not be loyal to you.

古文：初，王莽既杀鲍宣，上党都尉路平欲杀其子永；太守苟谏保护之，永由是得全。
现代文：最初，王莽诬杀鲍宣以后，上党郡都尉路平便打算杀鲍宣的儿子鲍永。郡太守苟谏进行保护，鲍永才得以活命。
English: At first, after Wang Mang falsely killed Bao Xuan, Lu Ping, the captain of Shangdang County, planned to kill Bao Xuan's son, Bao Yong. The county magistrate, Guo Gan, protected him, and Bao Yong was able to live.

古文：更始征永为尚书仆射，行大将军事，将兵安集河东、并州，得自置偏裨。
现代文：刘玄征召鲍永，任命为尚书仆射，代理大将军，率领军队安抚河东郡及并州所属郡县，可以自行任命偏将和裨将。
English: Liu Xuan conscripted Bao Yong, appointed him as Shang Shuxu's assistant, acting general, and led the army to pacify Hedong County and counties affiliated with the state. He could appoint his own general and deputy general.

古文：永至河东，击青犊，大破之。
现代文：鲍永到河东郡，攻击青犊，大获全胜。
English: Bao Yong went to Hedong County to attack Qingtao and won a complete victory.

古文：以冯衍为立汉将军，屯太原，与上党太守田邑等缮甲养士，以扞卫并土。
现代文：任命冯衍当立汉将军，驻守太原，与上党太守田邑等修理装备，供养并训练士兵，以捍卫并州疆土。
English: He appointed Feng Yan as the Han general, stationed in Taiyuan, and repaired equipment, provided for and trained soldiers with the upper-party Taiyuan governor Tianyi to defend the territory of the annexation.

古文：或说大司马秀以守柏人不如定巨鹿，秀乃引兵东北拔广阿。
现代文：有人向大司马刘秀建议，用柏人当基地，不如用钜鹿。于是刘秀率军向东北进发，攻陷广阿。
English: Someone suggested to the commander-in-chief Ma Liuxiu that it would be better to use Baoji as a base than to use Yangtze Deer. So Liuxiu led the army to the northeast to attack and conquer Guang'a.

古文：秀披舆地图，指示邓禹曰： 天下郡国如是，今始乃得其一。
现代文：刘秀翻阅地图，指给邓禹看，说： 天下郡国如此之多，到今天我才得到其中的一个。
English: Liu Xiu flipped through the map, pointed to Deng Yu, and said: There are so many counties and states in the world, and I only got one of them today.

古文：子前言以吾虑天下不足定，何也？ 
现代文：你先前认为我忧虑天下不能平定是多余的，为什么？ 
English: You previously thought my worries about the world not being able to be pacified were superfluous. Why?

古文：禹曰： 方今海内殽乱，人思明君，犹赤子之慕慈母。
现代文：邓禹回答说： 现在天下混乱，人民想要英明的君王，好象初生的婴儿思慕慈母。
English: Deng Yu replied: Now that the world is in chaos, the people want a wise king, just like a newborn baby yearns for a loving mother.

古文：古之兴者在德薄厚，不以大小也。 
现代文：古代兴起的帝王，只在他品德的厚薄，不在他地盘的大小。 
English: The emperors who arose in ancient times were distinguished only by the thickness and thinness of their character, not by the size of their territory.

古文：蓟中之乱，耿弇与刘秀相失，北走昌平，就其父况，因说况击邯郸。
现代文：蓟中之乱时，耿与刘秀失散，向北逃到昌平，回到他父亲耿况那里，趁机劝说耿况攻击邯郸。
English: During the Warring States period, Geng lost contact with Liu Xiu and fled north to Changping. He returned to his father, Geng Zhou, and took the opportunity to persuade Geng Zhou to attack Zhou.

古文：时王郎遣将徇渔阳、上谷，急发其兵。北州疑惑，多欲从之。
现代文：而这时候，王郎派出的将领，正在渔阳、上谷夺取土地，并紧急征调那里的部队，北方沿边郡县疑惑，但多数都打算服从。
English: At this time, the generals sent by Wang Lang were in the process of seizing land in Yuyang and Shanggu and urgently conscripting the troops there. The counties along the border in the north were suspicious, but most of them intended to obey.

古文：上谷功曹寇恂、门下掾闵业说况曰： 邯郸拔起，难可信向。
现代文：上谷郡功曹寇恂、门下掾闵业向耿况建议说： 邯郸仓猝崛起，前途难测。
English: Shanggu County gong Cao Kouyi and his disciple Xingye suggested to Geng Zhou that: "Xingcang's sudden rise is unpredictable.

古文：大司马，刘伯升母弟，尊贤下士，可以归之。 
现代文：而大司马刘秀，是刘的亲弟弟，礼贤下士，我们可以归附他。 
English: And the chief officer, Ma Liu Xiu, is Liu's own brother, Corporal Li Xian, we can attribute to him.

古文：况曰： 邯郸方盛，力不能独拒，如何？ 
现代文：耿况说： 邯郸的势力正兴盛，我们不能单独抵抗，应该怎么办？ 
English: Geng said: "The forces of the puppet regime are flourishing. We cannot resist alone. What should we do?

古文：对曰： 今上谷完实，控弦万骑，可以详择去就。
现代文：寇恂说： 现在上谷郡完好充实，拥有射箭骑兵一万人，可以认真选择自己的前途。
English: Kou Ye said: Now that Shanggu County is well-developed and has 10,000 archery cavalry, you can seriously choose your future.

古文：恂请东约渔阳，齐心合众，邯郸不足图也！ 
现代文：我愿意前往东方的渔阳，与彭宠约定，同心合力，就用不着把邯郸放在心上。 
English: I am willing to go to Yuyang in the East, and make an appointment with Peng Jia, and work together, so I don't have to worry about it.

古文：况然之，遣恂东约彭宠，欲各发突骑二千匹、步兵千人诣大司马秀。
现代文：耿况同意，派寇恂东行进见彭宠，互相约定，打算每郡出动骑兵突击队两千人、步兵一千人，到大司马刘秀那里去支援他。
English: Geng agreed, and sent Guo Jun to travel east to meet Peng Cun. They mutually agreed to dispatch a cavalry commando of two thousand men and an infantryman of one thousand men from each county to go to the commander Ma Liu Xiu to support him.

古文：安乐令吴汉、护军盖延、狐奴令王梁亦劝宠从秀，宠以为然，而官属皆欲附王郎，宠不能夺。
现代文：安乐令吴汉、护军盖延、狐奴令王梁也劝彭宠归附刘秀，彭宠同意。可是，郡府的下属官员都愿归附王郎，彭宠不能决定。
English: An Le Ling Wu Han, Guoyan Guoyan, and Fox Slave Ling Wang Liang also advised Peng Ciao to be attached to Liu Xiu, and Peng Ciao agreed. However, the subordinate officials of the county government were willing to be attached to Wang Lang, and Peng Ciao could not decide.

古文：汉出止外亭，遇一儒生，召而食之，问以所闻。
现代文：吴汉到城外巡查，在一个行人停留宿食的处所，遇到一位儒生，请来一块进餐，询问他听到的消息。
English: Wu Han inspected outside the city and met a Confucian scholar at a place where pedestrians stopped for a meal. He invited the man to join him for a meal and asked him about the news he had heard.

古文：生言： 大司马刘公，所过为郡县所称，邯郸举尊号者，实非刘氏。 
现代文：儒生说： 大司马刘秀，受到他所经过的郡县的官民的称赞；而在邯郸举起尊贵称号的人，实际上不是刘氏子弟。 
English: The Confucian scholar said: Daishi Ma Liuxiu was praised by the officials and people of the counties and counties he passed through; and the person who held up the honorary title in Handan was actually not the son of Liu.

古文：汉大喜，即诈为秀书，移檄渔阳，使生赍以诣宠，令具以所闻说之。
现代文：吴汉非常高兴，立即伪造了一份刘秀致送渔阳郡的文告，教那儒生拿着送给彭宠，让他把听到的消息告诉彭宠。
English: Wu Han was very happy and immediately forged a copy of Liu Xiu's message to Yuyang County, and told the Confucian scholar to take it and give it to Peng Cai, and let him tell Peng Cai the news he had heard.

古文：会寇恂至，宠乃发步骑三千人，以吴汉行长史，与盖延、王梁将之，南攻蓟，杀王郎大将赵闳。
现代文：恰好寇恂到达，彭宠于是派出步骑兵三千人，命吴汉代理长史，与盖延、王梁共同率领部队，南下进攻蓟县，杀死王郎大将赵闳。
English: Just as Emperor Gao arrived, Peng Cun then sent 3,000 infantry and cavalry, ordered Wu Han to act as his deputy, and led the troops together with Gai Yan and Wang Liang to attack Min County in the south, killing Wang Lang and General Zhao Jun.

古文：寇恂还，遂与上谷长史景丹及耿弇将兵俱南，与渔阳军合，所过击斩王郎大将、九卿、校尉以下，凡斩首三万级，定涿郡、中山、巨鹿、清河、河间凡二十二县。
现代文：寇恂返回上谷，便与上谷长史景丹以及耿率军一同南下，与渔阳部队会合，所经过的地方，斩杀王郎任命的大将、九卿、校尉及以下，共计三万人，夺取涿郡、中山、巨鹿、清河、河间等二十二县。
English: When he returned to Shanggu, he marched south with Shanggu's warlord Shijing Dan and Geng's army to meet the Yuyang army. They killed the general, nine nobles, lieutenant and others appointed by Wang Lang, a total of 30,000 people, and captured 22 counties, including Lushun County, Zhongshan County, Julu County, Qinghe County, and Hama County.

古文：前及广阿，闻城中车骑甚众，丹等勒兵问曰： 此何兵？ 
现代文：前锋到达广阿，听说城里兵马很多，景丹等停兵打听道： 这是什么人的军队？ 
English: When the forward reached Guang'a, he heard that there were a lot of soldiers and horses in the city. Jing Dan stopped and asked: Whose army is this?

古文：曰： 大司马刘公也。 
现代文：回答说： 是大司马刘秀的。 
English: He replied: It was the chief secretary, Ma Liuxiu.

古文：诸将喜，即进至城下。
现代文：将领们喜悦，立即来到城下。
English: The generals were delighted and immediately went to the castle.

古文：城下初传言二郡兵为邯郸来，众皆恐。
现代文：广阿城下最初谣传上谷、渔阳二郡的军队是王郎派来的，大家都很恐慌。
English: At first, rumours spread in the town of Guang'a that the troops from Shanggu and Yuyang counties had been sent by Wang Lang. Everyone panicked.

古文：刘秀自登西城楼勒兵问之；耿弇拜于城下，即召入，具言发兵状。
现代文：刘秀整治军队，亲自登上西城楼，询问来意。耿就在城下拜见。
English: Liu Xiu tidied up the army and went up to the West Tower to inquire about the situation. Geng went to see him at the foot of the castle.

古文：秀乃悉召景丹等入，笑曰： 邯鄣将帅数言我发渔阳、上谷兵，吾聊应言 我亦发之 ，何意二郡良为吾来！
现代文：刘秀立即请他进城，耿说明了两郡发兵经过，刘秀于是把景丹等将领全部请到城中，笑着说： 邯郸将领屡次说： 我们征发了渔阳、上谷部队。 我姑且应付说： 我也征发了渔阳、上谷部队。 想不到两郡真的为我而来！
English: Liu Xiu immediately asked him to enter the city, and Geng explained that the two counties had sent troops. Liu Xiu then invited all the generals such as Jing Dan to the city, and said with a smile: General Zou repeatedly said: We have sent the Yuyang and Shangguan troops. Let me say: I have also sent the Yuyang and Shangguan troops. I can't believe that the two counties really came for me!

古文：方与士大夫共此功名耳。 
现代文：我正要与各位官员共同建立功名。 
English: I'm about to make my mark with the officials.

古文：乃以景丹、寇恂、耿弇、盖延、吴汉、王梁皆为偏将军，使还领其兵，加耿况、彭宠大将军；封况、宠、丹、延皆为列侯。
现代文：于是任命景丹、寇恂、耿、盖延、吴汉、王梁都当偏将军，让他们回去统领自己的部队。擢升耿况、彭宠为大将军。封耿况、彭宠、景丹、盖延四人列侯。
English: Therefore, he appointed Jingdan, Kou Rong, Geng, Gai Yan, Wu Han, and Wang Liang as partial generals, and let them return to command their own troops. He promoted Geng Zhou and Peng Zhou to general. He made Geng Zhou, Peng Zhou, Jingdan, and Gai Yan four vassals.

古文：吴汉为人，质厚少文，造次不能以辞自达，然沉勇有智略，邓禹数荐之于秀，秀渐亲重之。
现代文：吴汉为人朴实忠厚，不善言辞，遇到遇急情况，辞不达意，然而沉着而有谋略。邓禹多次向刘秀推荐，刘秀逐渐对他亲近器重。
English: Wu Han is a simple and loyal person, not good at words, in case of emergency, his words are not satisfactory, but he is calm and has a strategy. Deng Yu recommended him to Liu Xiu many times, and Liu Xiu gradually became close to him.

古文：更始遣尚书令谢躬率六将军讨王郎，不能下。
现代文：刘玄派尚书令谢躬率领六位将军讨伐王郎，没有进展。
English: Liu Xuan sent Shang Shuling Xie Mu to lead six generals to fight Wang Lang, but there was no progress.

古文：秀至，与之合军，东围巨鹿，月馀未下。
现代文：刘秀到，两军相合，向东围攻钜鹿，一月有余不能取胜。
English: When Liu Xiu arrived, the two armies met and besieged Mule Deer to the east. They were unable to win for more than a month.

古文：王郎遣将攻信都，大姓马宠等开城内之。
现代文：王郎派将攻信都，城中大姓马宠等打开城门迎接。
English: The Wang Lang faction will attack the capital, and the big name in the city, Ma Ding, will open the city gate to welcome them.

古文：更始遣兵攻破信都，秀使李忠还，行太守事。
现代文：刘玄派兵攻破信都，刘秀让李忠返回信都，代理太守。
English: Liu Xuan sent troops to break through the capital, and Liu Xiu let Li Zhong return to the capital as acting governor.

古文：王郎遣将倪宏、刘奉率数万人救巨鹿，秀逆战于南，不利。
现代文：王郎派遣将领倪宏、刘奉率数万人救钜鹿，刘秀在南迎战，不顺利。
English: Wang Lang dispatched generals Ni Hong and Liu Bong to rescue tens of thousands of elk, and Liu Xiu went to fight in the south, but it did not go well.

古文：景丹等纵突骑击之，宏等大败。
现代文：景丹等人发骑兵突击部队进行攻击，倪宏等大败。
English: Jing Dan and others sent cavalry assault troops to attack, Ni Hong and others suffered a crushing defeat.

古文：秀曰： 吾闻突骑天下精兵，今见其战，乐可言邪？ 
现代文：刘秀说： 我听说骑兵突击部队是天下的精兵，今天看见它战斗，高兴得不能用言语来表达。 
English: Liu Xiu said, "I heard that the cavalry assault troops are the best soldiers in the world. Seeing them fight today, I am so happy that I cannot express it in words.

古文：耿纯言于秀曰： 久守巨鹿，士众疲弊；不如及大兵精锐，进攻邯郸。若王郎已诛，巨鹿不战自服矣。 
现代文：耿纯向刘秀建议： 我们长期围守钜鹿，官兵将会疲惫。不如趁大军士气旺盛进攻邯郸，如果王郎被诛，钜鹿用不着战斗自会服从。 
English: Geng Chun suggested to Liu Xiu: We have been besieging Mule Deer for a long time, the officers and soldiers will be tired. It is better to take advantage of the strong morale of the army to attack Mule Deer. If Wang Lang is captured, Mule Deer will obey without fighting.

古文：秀从之。
现代文：刘秀采纳。
English: Adopted by Liu Xiu.

古文：夏，四月，留将军邓满守巨鹿。
现代文：夏季，四月，刘秀留下将军邓满继续围困钜鹿。
English: In the summer, in April, Liu Xiu left General Deng Man to continue the siege of Elk.

古文：进军邯郸，连战，破之。
现代文：自率大军向邯郸挺进，连续战斗，打败敌人。
English: The self-ruled army marched to Handan, fought continuously, and defeated the enemy.

古文：郎乃使其谏大夫杜威请降。
现代文：王郎于是派谏大夫杜威请求投降。
English: Wang Lang then sent Dr. Dewey to beg for surrender.

古文：威雅称郎实成帝遗体，秀曰： 设使成帝复生，天下不可得，况诈子舆者乎！ 
现代文：杜威强调王郎确实是汉成帝刘骜的嫡亲骨肉，刘秀说： 假使汉成帝复活，也不能得到天下，何况他的冒牌儿子？ 
English: Dewey stressed that Wang Lang is indeed the flesh and blood of the legitimate relative of Hancheng Emperor Liu Bei. Liu Xiu said: If Hancheng Emperor is resurrected, he will not be able to obtain the world, let alone his fake son?

古文：威请求万户侯，秀曰： 顾得全身可矣！ 
现代文：杜威请求封王郎万户侯，刘秀说： 饶他不死已经够了。 
English: Dewey requested that Wang Lang be made the prince of all households, and Liu Xiu said, "It is enough to spare his life.

古文：威怒而去。
现代文：杜威大怒离去。
English: Dewey stormed out.

古文：秀急攻之，二十馀日。
现代文：刘秀发动猛烈攻击，历时二十余日。
English: Liu Xiu launched a fierce attack, which lasted for more than 20 days.

古文：五月，甲辰，郎少傅李立开门内汉兵，遂拔邯郸。
现代文：五日甲辰，王郎少傅李立打开城门让汉兵入内，于是邯郸陷落。
English: On the 5th day of the 1st month, Wang Lang Shao Fu Li Li opened the city gate to let the Han soldiers enter, and then the city fell.

古文：郎夜亡走，王霸追斩之。
现代文：王郎乘夜逃走，王霸追捕擒获，就地斩首。
English: Wang Lang fled by night, Wang Ba chased and captured him, and beheaded him on the spot.

古文：秀收郎文书，得吏民与郎交关谤毁者数千章。
现代文：刘秀检查王郎的文书，发现有自己的官吏与平民的奏章数千，奏章上除了向王郎表示效忠外，还有谤毁刘秀的内容。
English: Liu Xiu checked Wang Lang's documents and found that he had thousands of official and civilian records. In addition to showing loyalty to Wang Lang, the records also contained slander against Liu Xiu.

古文：秀不省，会诸将军烧之，曰： 令反侧子自安！ 
现代文：刘秀并不察看，他集合全体将领，用火烧毁奏章，说： 使背叛的人安心。 
English: Liu Xiu didn't notice. He gathered all the generals, burned the record with fire, and said, "Let the traitors rest easy."

古文：秀部分吏卒各隶诸军，士皆言愿属大树将军。
现代文：刘秀把新官兵分配给各将领。大家都说愿属大树将军。
English: Liu Xiu assigned the new officers and soldiers to the generals. Everyone said they wanted to be General Daesoo.

古文：大树将军者，偏将军冯异也，为人谦退不伐，敕吏士非交战受敌，常行诸营之后。
现代文：所谓大树将军是指偏将军冯异。冯异为人谦逊退让，不夸耀自己的才能、功劳，他命令他的部队，除非跟敌人交战或遭受敌人的攻击，通常要排在别的部队的后面。
English: The so-called big tree general refers to the partial general Feng Ying. Feng Ying is a humble and yielding person, does not boast of his talents and merits, he orders his troops, unless they fight with the enemy or are attacked by the enemy, usually have to line up behind other troops.

古文：每所止舍，诸将并坐论功，异常独屏树下，故军中号曰： 大树将军 。
现代文：每到一个地方停留，当将领们坐在一起谈论功劳时，冯异常常独自躲到树下。所以军中称他 大树将军 。
English: Whenever he stopped at a place, when the generals sat together and talked about their merits, Feng Ying would often hide under a tree by himself. So the army called him General Big Tree.

古文：护军宛人硃祜从容言于秀曰： 长安政乱，公有日角之相，此天命也！ 
现代文：护军宛城人朱祜向刘秀建议： 长安政令混乱，阁下有帝王的相貌，这是天命！ 
English: Zhu Xi to Liu Xiu: The Chang'an government is in chaos. Your excellency has the appearance of an emperor. This is the destiny of heaven!

古文：秀曰： 召刺奸收护军！ 
现代文：刘秀说： 快教刺奸来逮捕护军！ 
English: Liu Xiu said: Quickly teach the thugs to arrest the escort!

古文：祜乃不敢复言。
现代文：朱祜不敢再开口。
English: Zhu Xi did not dare to speak again.

古文：更始遣使立秀为萧王，悉令罢兵，与诸将有功者诣行在所。
现代文：刘玄派遣使节封刘秀当萧王，下令所有部队一律复员。命刘秀与有功将领，一同到长安。
English: Liu Xuan sent an envoy to Liu Xiu, who was then the king of Xiao, and ordered all troops to be demobilized. Liu Xiu was ordered to go to Chang'an together with meritorious generals.

古文：遣苗曾为幽州牧，韦顺为上谷太守，蔡充为渔阳太守，并北之部。
现代文：派苗曾当幽州牧，韦顺当上谷太守，蔡充当渔阳太守，同时到北方赴任。
English: Pai Miao once served as the governor of Yuzhou, Wei Shun as the governor of Shanggu, Cai as the governor of Yuyang, and at the same time he went to the north.

古文：萧王居邯郸宫，昼卧温明殿，耿弇入，造床下请间，因说曰： 吏士死伤者多，请归上谷益兵。 
现代文：刘秀住在邯郸赵王宫，白天在温明殿睡觉。耿闯入，来到床前请求单独谈话。乘机说： 官兵死伤太多，请准许我回上谷补充兵员。 
English: Liu Xiu lived in the Palace of King Zhao of Qin, and slept in Wenming Hall during the day. Geng broke in, came to the bedside and asked for a separate conversation. He took the opportunity to say: There are too many dead and wounded officers and soldiers, please allow me to go back to Shanggu to replenish the number of soldiers.

古文：萧王曰： 王郎已破，河北略平，复用兵何为？ 
现代文：刘秀说： 王郎已经消灭，黄河以北略微平定，还用兵干什么？ 
English: Liu Xiu said, "Wang Lang has been eliminated, and the north of the Yellow River has been slightly pacified. Why are we still using soldiers?

古文：弇曰： 王郎虽破，天下兵革乃始耳。
现代文：耿说： 王郎虽被打败，天下争战却刚刚开始。
English: Geng said: Although Wang Lang was defeated, the world war has just begun.

古文：今使者从西方来，欲罢兵，不可听也。
现代文：现在，朝廷的使节从西方来，要让我们的士兵复员，不可听从。
English: Now, the envoys of the imperial court are coming from the West to demobilize our soldiers, and we must not listen to them.

古文：铜马、赤眉之属数十辈，辈数十百万人，所向无前，圣公不能办也，败必不久。 
现代文：铜马、赤眉一类的部队有数十支，而每一支都有数十万人，甚至一百万人，所向无敌。刘玄没有能力应付，不久就会溃败。 
English: There are dozens of troops such as the Bronze Horse and the Red Eyebrow, and each one has hundreds of thousands, even a million people, which are invincible. Liu Xuan is unable to cope and will soon be defeated.

古文：萧王起坐曰： 卿失言，我斩卿！ 
现代文：刘秀从床上起来坐下说： 你说了不该说的话，我杀了你！ 
English: Liu Xiu got up from the bed, sat down and said, "You said something you shouldn't have said, I'll kill you!"

古文：弇曰： 大王哀厚弇如父子，故敢披赤心。 
现代文：耿说： 大王怜爱厚待我如同父子，所以我敢赤诚相待。 
English: Geng said, "The Great King treated me with compassion and kindness as if I were his son, so I dared to treat him with sincerity.

古文：萧王曰： 我戏卿耳，何以言之？ 
现代文：刘秀说： 我和你开玩笑罢了，你为什么这样说？ 
English: Liu Xiu said, "I was just joking with you. Why did you say that?"

古文：弇曰： 百姓患苦王莽，复思刘氏，闻汉兵起，莫不欢喜，如去虎口得归慈母。
现代文：耿说： 全国百姓被王莽害得很苦，因而再次思念刘氏，听说汉兵崛起，无不高兴，如同逃脱虎口，回到慈母那里一样。
English: Geng said: The people of the whole country have suffered a lot from Wang Mang, so they once again miss Mr. Liu, and when they hear that the Han soldiers are rising, they are not unhappy, just as if they had escaped the tiger's mouth and returned to their mother.

古文：今更始为天子，而诸将擅命于山东，贵戚纵横于都内，虏掠自恣，元元叩心，更思莽朝，是以知其必败也。
现代文：现在刘玄当皇帝，将领们在崤山以东不受节制，皇亲国戚在长安胡作非为，随意抢劫掠夺，百姓捶打胸口，转而思念王莽新朝。因此，我知道刘玄必定失败。
English: Now that Liu Xuan is the emperor, the generals are unrestrained in the east of Lushan, and the relatives of the emperor in Chang'an commit crimes, rob and plunder at will, the people beat their chests, and turn to miss Wang Mang's new dynasty. Therefore, I know that Liu Xuan must fail.

古文：公功名已著，以义征伐，天下可传檄而定也。
现代文：您的丰功英名传播海内，为了正义进行征伐，天下可以靠传递文告而安定。
English: Your great exploits and fame spread across the sea, and you fought for justice. The world can be stable by passing messages.

古文：天下至重，公可自取，毋令他姓得之。 
现代文：天下最重要的是政权您应该自己取得，莫让非刘姓皇族的人占有！ 
English: The most important thing in the world is that you should acquire political power yourself, and do not allow anyone who is not a member of the imperial family with the surname Liu to occupy it!

古文：萧王乃辞以河北未平，不就征，始贰于更始。
现代文：刘秀于是以河北还没有平定为推辞的理由，没有接受征召，开始与刘玄离异。
English: Therefore, Liu Xiu did not accept the call-up on the grounds that Hebei had not yet been leveled as a reason for refusal, and began to diverge from Liu Xuan.

古文：是时，诸贼铜马、大彤、高湖、重连、铁胫、大枪、尤来、上江、青犊、五校、五幡、五楼、富平、获索等各领部曲，众合数百万人，所在寇掠。
现代文：当时，各路盗贼铜马、大彤、高湖、重连、铁胫、大枪、尤来、上江、青犊、五校、五幡、五楼、富平、获索等，各自率领部曲，总数有数百万人，在当地抢夺掳掠。
English: At that time, the bandits of various routes, such as the Bronze Horse, the Great Plough, the High Lake, the Second Link, the Iron Plough, the Great Gun, the You Lai, the Upper River, the Blue Plough, the Five Schools, the Wuchang, the Fifth Floor, the Buping, and the Guso, each led a detachment, with a total of millions of people, to rob and plunder in the local area.

古文：萧王欲击之，乃拜吴汉、耿弇俱为大将军，持节北发幽州十郡突骑。
现代文：刘秀打算进攻他们，于是任命吴汉、耿同时当大将军，持节征调幽州所属十郡的骑兵突击部队。
English: Liu Xiu planned to attack them, so he appointed Wu Han and Geng to be generals at the same time, and transferred the cavalry assault troops of the ten counties belonging to Yuzhou.

古文：苗曾闻之，阴敕诸郡不得应调。
现代文：幽州牧苗曾听到这个消息，暗中吩咐各郡不服从征调。
English: Yuzhou Mucunao had heard the news and secretly ordered all counties not to obey the transfer.

古文：吴汉将二十骑先驰至无终，曾出迎于路，汉即收曾，斩之。
现代文：吴汉率二十余骑兵先行驰马到达幽州无终县。苗曾出城在路上迎接吴汉，吴汉当即逮捕苗曾，将他斩杀。
English: Wu Han led more than 20 cavalrymen to reach Yuzhou Wuzhen County ahead of others. Miao Zeng left the city to meet Wu Han on the road, and Wu Han immediately arrested Miao Zeng and killed him.

古文：耿弇到上谷，亦收韦顺、蔡充，斩之。
现代文：耿到上谷，又逮捕韦顺、蔡充，将他们斩杀。
English: Geng went to Shanggu, arrested Wei Shun and Cai Chong, and killed them.

古文：北州震骇，于是悉发其兵。
现代文：北方州郡震惊，于是全都发兵听候调遣。
English: Beifang County was shocked, so they all sent troops to await deployment.

古文：秋，萧王击铜马于鄡，吴汉将突骑来会清阳，士马甚盛，汉悉上兵簿于莫府，请所付与，不敢自私，王益重之。
现代文：秋季，刘秀在县进击铜马。吴汉率领骑兵突击部队，赶到清阳跟刘秀会合，兵马十分雄壮。吴汉把全军官兵名册呈报给幕府，然后再请拨付，不敢有私心，刘秀对他愈发器重。
English: In the autumn, Liu Xiu attacked the Bronze Horse in the county. Wu Han led the cavalry assault force and rushed to Qingyang to meet Liu Xiu. The soldiers and horses were very strong. Wu Han submitted the roster of all officers and soldiers to the shogunate, and then asked for payment. He did not dare to be selfish, and Liu Xiu became increasingly heavy on him.

古文：王以偏将军沛国硃浮为大将军、幽州牧，使治蓟城。
现代文：刘秀任命偏将军沛人朱浮当大将军，兼幽州牧，把州府设在蓟城。
English: Liu Xiu appointed Zhu Fu, who was a partial general, to be the general and also the governor of Yuzhou, and set up the state capital in Handan.

古文：铜马食尽，夜遁，萧王追击于馆陶，大破之。
现代文：铜马粮食吃完了，乘夜逃跑，刘秀追击到馆陶，大败铜马。
English: The bronze horse ran out of food and fled in the night. Liu Xiu chased it to the Museum of Tao, and defeated the bronze horse.

古文：受降未尽，而高湖、重连从东南来，与铜马馀众合。
现代文：刘秀受降尚未完毕，而高湖、重连从东南来，与还没有投降的铜马残军汇合。
English: Liu Xiu's surrender was not yet complete, and Gaohu and Chonglian came from the southeast to join the remnants of the Bronze Horse Army that had not yet surrendered.

古文：萧王复与大战于蒲阳，悉破降之，封其渠帅为列侯。
现代文：刘秀尾在蒲阳再次与铜马等大战，铜马等全都战败投降。刘秀把他们的首领封为列侯。
English: Liu Xiuwei once again fought against the Bronze Horses in Puyang. The Bronze Horses were all defeated and surrendered. Liu Xiu crowned their leaders as lords.

古文：诸将未能信贼，降者亦不自安。
现代文：刘秀的部将们不敢相信降将们的诚意，而降将们内心也不能自安。
English: Liu Xiu's generals could not believe the sincerity of the surrendering generals, and the surrendering generals could not be at peace with themselves.

古文：王知其意，敕令降者各归营勒兵，自乘轻骑按行部陈。
现代文：刘秀了解他们的想法，命令降将们各自回到他们的军营整顿好部队，自己则轻装乘马，巡视部署。
English: Liu Xiu understood their thoughts and ordered the generals to go back to their barracks to reorganize their troops, while he rode lightly on horseback to inspect the deployment.

古文：降者更相语曰： 萧王推赤心置人腹中，安得不投死乎！ 
现代文：降将们互相说道： 萧王对我们推心置腹，我们怎么能不为他效命？ 
English: The surrendering generals said to each other: Xiao Wang has put his heart and soul into us, how can we not serve him?

古文：由是皆服。
现代文：因此大家都心悦诚服。
English: That's why everyone is so pleased.

古文：悉以降人分配诸将，众遂数十万。
现代文：刘秀把投降的部队都分配给各将领，部众于是达到数十万。
English: Liu Xiu distributed the surrendered troops to the generals, and the number of subordinates reached hundreds of thousands.

古文：赤眉别帅与青犊、上江、大彤、铁胫、五幡十馀万众在射犬，萧王引兵进击，大破之。
现代文：赤眉的一位分支部队的首领与青犊、上江、大彤、铁胫、五幡，约有十余万人，在射犬集结，刘秀率军进击，大获全胜。
English: The leader of a branch unit of the Red Eyebrows, together with the Qingcheng, Shangjiang, Daguo, Tieguo, and Wuhan, about more than 100,000 people, gathered in Shaoxing, and Liu Xiu led the army to attack and won a complete victory.

古文：南徇河内，河内太守韩歆降。
现代文：于是向南夺取河内，河内太守韩歆投降。
English: As a result, Hanoi was captured to the south, and Hanoi's governor, Han Xuan, surrendered.

古文：初，谢躬与萧王共灭王郎，数与萧王违戾，常欲袭萧王，畏其兵强而止。
现代文：最初，谢躬与刘秀曾一同消灭王郎，但谢躬与刘秀多次冲突对立，谢躬时常想袭击刘秀，却因为畏惧刘秀兵力强大而不敢发动。
English: At first, Xie Mu and Liu Xiu worked together to eliminate Wang Lang, but Xie Mu and Liu Xiu repeatedly clashed and opposed each other. Xie Mu often wanted to attack Liu Xiu, but did not dare to do so because he was afraid of Liu Xiu's powerful army.

古文：虽俱在邯郸，遂分城而处，然萧王每有以慰安之。
现代文：两支部队，虽都在邯郸，却分城而处，然而刘秀不时对谢军慰问安抚。
English: Although both troops were in Handan, they were separated from each other. However, Liu Xiu occasionally consoled and pacified Xie Jun.

古文：躬勤于吏职，萧王常称之曰： 谢尚书，真吏也！ 
现代文：谢躬对于行政工作非常勤奋，刘秀经常称赞： 谢尚书是真正的官吏！ 
English: Xie Mu is very diligent in administrative work, Liu Xiu often praised: Xie Shangshu is a true official!

古文：故不自疑。
现代文：谢躬因此不再自己猜疑。
English: As a result, Xie Mu no longer doubts himself.

古文：其妻知之，常戒之曰： 君与刘公积不相能，而信其虚谈，终受制矣。 
现代文：他的妻子听说了这件事，经常告诫他： 你跟刘秀有积怨，势不两立，可是你却相信他那套虚言，最终会受到挟制的。 
English: His wife heard about this and often admonished him: You and Liu Xiu have a long-standing grudge and cannot stand each other, but you believe his lies and will eventually be blackmailed.

古文：躬不纳。
现代文：谢躬不接受。
English: No thanks.

古文：既而躬率其兵数万还屯于鄴。
现代文：稍后，谢躬率领他的数万部队返回，屯驻邺城。
English: Later, Xie Mian led his tens of thousands of troops back and stationed in Lucheng.

古文：及萧王南击青犊，使躬邀击尤来于隆虑山，躬兵大败。
现代文：等到刘秀南击青犊，让谢躬在隆虑山截击尤来，谢躬的军队大败。
English: Wait until Liu Xiunan hits Qingcheng, let Xie Mu intercept Yu in Longxi Mountain, and Xie Mu's army will be defeated.

古文：萧王因躬在外，使吴汉与刺奸大将军岑彭袭据鄴城。
现代文：刘秀利用谢躬领兵在外，让吴汉与刺奸大将军岑彭袭击占据了邺城。
English: Liu Xiu took advantage of Xie Mu's absence to lead the troops, and let Wu Han and the traitor general Zou Peng attack and occupy the city of Handan.

古文：躬不知，轻骑还鄴，汉等收斩之，其众悉降。
现代文：谢躬不知道邺城的变化，率领轻装骑兵返回邺城，吴汉等把谢躬逮捕斩首，他的部队全部投降。
English: Xie Mu did not know the changes in Lucheng, and led the light cavalry back to Lucheng. Wu Han and others arrested and beheaded Xie Mu, and all his troops surrendered.

古文：更始遣柱功侯李宝、益州刺史张忠将兵万馀人徇蜀、汉。
现代文：刘玄派柱功侯李宝、益州刺史李忠率军万余人，夺取汉中郡、蜀郡。
English: Liu Xuan sent more than ten thousand soldiers, led by Li Bao, a meritorious general, and Li Zhong, a scholar from Yizhou, to seize Hanzhong County and Shu County.

古文：公孙述遣其弟恢击宝、忠于绵竹，大破走之。
现代文：公孙述派他的弟弟公孙恢在绵竹迎击李宝、李忠，大败敌军，李宝、李忠逃跑。
English: Gongsun Su sent his younger brother Gongsun Huai to meet Li Bao and Li Zhong in Mianzhu, defeating the enemy army, and Li Bao and Li Zhong fled.

古文：述遂自立为蜀王，都成都，民、夷皆附之。
现代文：公孙述于是自立为蜀王，建都成都。当地百姓和夷族全都归附于他。
English: According to his grandson, he then established himself as the King of Shu and built the capital city of Chengdu. The local people and the barbarians all joined him.

古文：冬，更始遣中郎将归德侯飒、大司马护军陈遵使匈奴，授单于汉旧制玺绶，因送云、当馀亲属、贵人、从者还匈奴。
现代文：冬季，刘玄派中郎将归德侯刘飒、大司马护军陈遵出使匈奴，向单于颁发与汉朝旧制相同的印信，并就此把栾提云与他丈夫须卜当剩下的亲属、贵族、随从送回匈奴。
English: In the winter, Liu Xuan sent the vassal Liu Xuan, the vassal Liu Xuan, and the vassal Chen Zun, the vassal Chen Zun, to the Xiongnu, to issue the same seal letter as the old Han Dynasty, and to send the remaining relatives, nobles, and attendants of Zhai Tiyun and his husband Subutang back to the Xiongnu.

古文：单于舆骄，谓遵、飒曰： 匈奴本与汉为兄弟，匈奴中乱，孝宣皇帝辅立呼韩邪单于，故称臣以尊汉。
现代文：匈奴单于栾提舆态度傲慢，对陈遵、刘飒说： 匈奴与汉朝本来是兄弟，匈奴中期发生内乱，孝宣皇帝帮助立呼韩邪单于，所以匈奴称臣，以尊敬汉朝。
English: Zheng Yu was very arrogant and said to Chen Zun and Wang Xi: The Xiongnu and the Han Dynasty were originally brothers. When there was a civil war between the Xiongnu and the Han Dynasty, Emperor Xiaoxuan helped to call Han and Zheng Yu to the throne. Therefore, we called ourselves the Han Dynasty's vassals to show our respect.

古文：今汉亦大乱，为王莽所篡，匈奴亦出兵击莽，空其边境，令天下骚动思汉；莽卒以败而汉复兴，亦我力也，当复尊我！ 
现代文：而今汉朝也有大乱，被王莽所篡夺，匈奴也曾出兵攻击王莽，使边境荡然一空，引起天下骚动，产生 人心思汉 的后果，王莽最终失败，汉王朝复兴，这也是靠我们匈奴的力量，汉朝应该反过来尊我！ 
English: And now the Han Dynasty is also in turmoil, usurped by Wang Mang. The Xiongnu also sent troops to attack Wang Mang, emptying the border, causing turmoil around the world, and producing the consequences of people's thoughts. Wang Mang eventually failed, and the Han Dynasty was revived. This is also due to the strength of our Xiongnu. The Han Dynasty should, in turn, respect me!

古文：遵与相撑拒，单于终持此言。
现代文：陈遵守住立场，进行辩驳，但单于始终坚持他的这种观点。
English: Chen kept his position and argued, but he always insisted on his point of view.

古文：赤眉樊崇等将兵入颍川，分其众为二部，崇与逢安为一部，徐宣、谢禄、杨音为一部。
现代文：赤眉首领樊崇等率军进入颍川，把他的部众分为两部分：樊崇、逢安率领一部分，徐宣、谢禄、杨音率领另一部分。
English: Red-browed leader Gong Chong led the army into the Min River, and divided his followers into two parts: Gong Chong and Feng An led one part, and Xu Xuan, Xie Lu and Yang Yin led the other part.

古文：赤眉虽数战胜，而疲敝厌兵，皆日夜愁泣，思欲东归。
现代文：赤眉军虽然不断打胜仗，但已精疲力尽，对战争感到厌倦，都日夜哭泣，想要回到东方。
English: Although the Red Eyebrows kept winning battles, they were exhausted and tired of the war. They cried day and night and wanted to return to the East.

古文：崇等计议，虑众东向必散，不如西攻长安。
现代文：樊崇等商议，担心部众回到东方必然一哄而散，不如向西攻击长安。
English: Yan Chong and others deliberated, considering that once the east returned, the troops would inevitably disperse, and it would be better to attack Chang'an from the west.

古文：于是崇、安自武关，宣等从陆浑关，两道俱入。
现代文：于是，樊崇、逢安从武关，徐宣等从陆浑关，分两路一同向长安进军。
English: As a result, Gong Chong and Feng An marched to Chang'an from Wuguan, and Xu Xuan and others marched from Lufun.

古文：更始使王匡、成丹与抗威将军刘均等分据河东、弘农以拒之。
现代文：刘玄命王匡、成丹和抗威将军刘均等人，分别驻防河东、弘农，堵截赤眉军。
English: Liu Xuan ordered Wang Kuang, Cheng Tan, and Liu Jun, the general of the resistance, to block the Red Eyebrow Army by garrisoning Hedong and Hongnong, respectively.

古文：萧王将北徇燕、赵，度赤眉必破长安，又欲乘衅并关中，而未知所寄，乃拜邓禹为前将军，中分麾下精兵二万人，遣西入关，令自选偏裨以下可与俱者。
现代文：刘秀将要向北夺取燕、赵，估计赤眉军必然攻破长安，所以又打算利用更始朝与赤眉军相争并吞关中，但不知道把任务交给谁好。于是任命邓禹当前将军，分出麾下精兵二万人，派他西入函谷关，并让他自己选择可以同行的偏将裨将及以下幕僚。
English: Liu Xiu was going to capture Yan and Zhao to the north, and he estimated that the Red Eyed Army would inevitably break through Chang'an, so he also planned to use the beginning of the war with the Red Eyed Army to fight and absorb Guanzhong, but he did not know who to give the task to. So he appointed the current general Deng Yu, selected 20,000 elite soldiers under his command, sent him west to Hanzhong Pass, and let him choose the following staff officers who could accompany him.

古文：时硃鲔、李轶、田立、陈侨将兵号三十万，与河南太守武勃共守洛阳；鲍永、田邑在并州。
现代文：这时，更始朝将领朱鲔、李轶、田立、陈侨率军号称三十万，与河南郡太守武勃共同守卫洛阳。另外两位将领鲍永、田邑则驻军并州。
English: At this time, Zhu Xi, Li Xi, Tian Li and Chen Qiao, generals at the beginning of the dynasty, led an army of 300,000, and guarded Luoyang together with the governor of Henan County, Wubo. The other two generals, Baoyong and Tianyi, stationed troops and joined the state.

古文：萧王以河内险要富实，欲择诸将守河内者而难其人，问于邓禹。
现代文：刘秀因河内郡地势险要，物产丰富而充实，打算在将领中物色一位守河内的人而难于物色到，便向邓禹询问。
English: Liu Xiu inquired Deng Yu, as he intended to find a person to guard Hanoi among the generals, but it was difficult to find one due to the precarious location of Hanoi County and the rich and plentiful products.

古文：邓禹曰： 寇恂文武备足，有牧民御众之才，非此子莫可使也！ 
现代文：邓禹说： 寇恂文武全才，有统御众人的能力，除了他再没有合适的人。 
English: Deng Yu said: Kou Ye was a man of all-round talent, with the ability to govern the masses. There was no one more suitable than him.

古文：乃拜恂河内太守，行大将军事。
现代文：刘秀于是任命寇恂当河内郡太守，并代理大将军职务。
English: Liu Xiu then appointed Guo Jian as the governor of Hanoi County and assumed the post of acting general.

古文：萧王谓恂曰： 昔高祖留萧何关中，吾今委公以河内。
现代文：他对寇恂说： 从前，高祖把关中交给萧何，而今我把河内交给你。
English: He said to Kou Ye: Once upon a time, Gaozu handed over Guanzhong to Xiao He, but now I am handing over Hanoi to you.

古文：当给足军粮，率厉士马，防遏它兵，勿令北度而已！ 
现代文：应当保证军粮供应，训练兵马，阻挡其他军队，不要让他们北渡黄河。 
English: It is necessary to ensure the supply of military food, train soldiers and horses, block other armies, and do not let them cross the Yellow River.

古文：拜冯异为孟津将军，统魏郡、河内兵于河上，以拒洛阳。
现代文：又任命冯异当孟津将军，在黄河之畔统辖魏郡、河内郡的军队，以抗拒洛阳方面的进攻。
English: He also appointed Feng Yi as General Meng Jin to command the armies of Wei County and Hanoi County on the banks of the Yellow River to resist the attack from Luoyang.

古文：萧王亲送邓禹至野王，禹既西，萧王乃复引兵而北。
现代文：刘秀亲自送邓禹到野王。邓禹向西出发以后，刘秀才率军北上。
English: Liu Xiu personally escorted Deng Yu to Nio. After Deng Yu's departure to the west, Liu Xiu led the army to the north.

古文：寇恂调糇粮、治器械以供军；军虽远征，未尝乏绝。
现代文：寇恂征集粮食，制造武器，以供应军需。大军虽然远征，物资却从不匮乏。
English: The robber barons collected grain and manufactured weapons to supply the war effort. Although the large army was on an expedition, there was never a shortage of supplies.

古文：隗崔、隗义谋叛归天水。
现代文：隗崔、隗义密谋背叛更始朝，返回天水。
English: Gong Cui and Gong Yi conspired to betray the Han Dynasty and returned to Tianshui.

古文：隗嚣恐并及祸，乃告之。
现代文：隗嚣恐怕事情败露而自己被牵连，于是向朝廷检举。
English: He was afraid that the affair would be exposed and he would be implicated, so he reported the matter to the imperial court.

古文：更始诛崔、义，以嚣为御史大夫。
现代文：刘玄诛杀隗崔、隗义，任命隗嚣当御史大夫。
English: Liu Xuanqian killed Yan Cui and Yan Yi, and appointed Yan Han as imperial historian.

古文：梁王永据国起兵，招诸郡豪桀，沛人周建等并署为将帅，攻下济阴、山阳、沛、楚、淮阳、汝南，凡得二十八城。
现代文：梁王刘永，凭依他的封国起兵，招揽各郡英雄豪杰。沛人周建等都被任命当将帅，攻陷济阴、山阳、沛、楚、淮阳、汝南等地，共占领二十八城。
English: Liang Wang Liu Yong, by virtue of his feudal state, raised an army and recruited heroes and heroines from all counties. Pei Ren Zhou Jian and others were appointed as generals, and invaded Jilin, Sanyang, Pei, Chu, Huaiyang, Runan and other places, occupying a total of 28 cities.

古文：又遣使拜西防贼帅山阳佼强为横行将军，东海贼帅董宪为翼汉大将军，琅邪贼帅张步为辅汉大将军，督青、徐二州，与之连兵，遂专据东方。
现代文：又派遣使者任命西防贼首领山阳人佼强当横行将军，东海贼首领董宪当翼汉大将军，琅邪贼首领张步当辅汉大将军，监管青州、徐州两州，将军队合并，于是在东方称霸。
English: He also sent envoys to appoint the West Coast Thief Leader Shanyang Jiaoqiang as a rampant general, the East Sea Thief Leader Dong Xian as a winged Han general, and the evil Thief Leader Zhang Bu as a supplementary Han general to supervise Qingzhou and Xuzhou, merge the army, and then dominate in the East.

古文：已阝人秦丰起兵于黎丘，攻得已阝、宜城等十馀县，有众万人，自号楚黎王。
现代文：人秦丰在黎丘起兵，攻陷县、宜城等十余县，有部众一万人，自称楚黎王。
English: Qin Feng raised an army in Liqiu, conquered more than ten counties, including Yicheng, with a total of ten thousand people, and called himself King Chu Li.

古文：汝南田戎攻陷夷陵，自称扫地大将军；转寇郡县，众数万人。
现代文：汝南人田戎攻陷夷陵，自称扫地大将军，转战劫掠各郡县，有部众数万人。
English: The people from the south of the Ryukyus invaded and captured the Yili Tombs. They called themselves the sweeping generals. They went to war and plundered every county. There were tens of thousands of them.

