古文：宋子曰：天有五气，是生五味。
现代文：宋先生说：自然界有五种气，于是相应地产生了五种味道。
English: Mr. Song said: There are five kinds of qi in nature, and five kinds of taste are produced accordingly.

古文：润下作咸，王访箕子而首闻其义焉。
现代文：水性向下渗透并具有咸味这一事，周武王访问箕子后才开始懂得了这个道理。
English: Zhou Wu Wang began to understand this truth only after he visited Zizi that water permeates downwards and has a salty taste.

古文：口之于味也，辛酸甘苦经年绝一无恙。独食盐禁戒旬日，则缚鸡胜匹倦怠恹然。
现代文：对于人来说，五味中的辣、酸、甜、苦，长期缺少其中任何一种对人的身体都没有多大影响，唯独盐，十天不吃，人就会像得了重病一样无精打采、软弱无力，甚至连只鸡也抓不住。
English: For humans, the five tastes of spicy, sour, sweet and bitter, the long-term lack of any of which has little effect on the human body, except salt. If you don't eat for ten days, you will be as listless and weak as if you had a serious illness. You can't even catch a chicken.

古文：岂非 天一生水 ，而此味为生人生气之源哉？
现代文：这岂不正是说明首先是因为 天一生水 ，即自然界产生了水，而水中产生的咸味正是人生命力的源泉吗？
English: Doesn't this mean that water is produced by nature, and the salty taste produced by water is the source of human vitality?

古文：四海之中，五服而外，为蔬为谷，皆有寂灭之乡，而斥卤则巧生以待。
现代文：全国各地，无论是在京郊、内地，还是僻远的边疆，到处都有不长蔬菜和谷物等庄稼的不毛之地，然而即便在这些地方，食盐也能巧妙分布各处以待人们享用。
English: All over the country, whether in the suburbs of Beijing, in the interior, or in the remote border regions, there are barren places where vegetables and cereals do not grow. However, even in these places, salt can be skillfully distributed everywhere for people to enjoy.

古文：孰知其所已然。
现代文：有谁能知道这是怎么个道理呢？
English: Does anyone know why this is?

古文：○盐产
现代文：盐产
English: Salt production

古文：凡盐产最不一，海、池、井、土、崖、砂石，略分六种，而东夷树叶，西戎光明不与焉。
现代文：盐的种类很多。大体上可以分为海盐、池盐、井盐、土盐、崖盐和砂石盐等六种，但是东部少数民族地区出产的树叶盐和西部少数民族地区出产的光明盐还不包括在其中。
English: There are many kinds of salt, which can be roughly divided into six kinds, including sea salt, pond salt, well salt, soil salt, cliff salt and sandstone salt, but the leaf salt produced in the eastern ethnic minority areas and the bright salt produced in the western ethnic minority areas are not included.

古文：赤县之内，海卤居十之八，而其二为井、池、土碱。
现代文：在我国的广阔幅员之中，海盐占了八成，其他两成是井盐、池盐和土盐。
English: In the vast expanse of our country, sea salt accounts for 80%, and the other 20% are well salt, pool salt and soil salt.

古文：或假人力，或由天造。
现代文：这些食盐有的要靠人力加工制取，有的则是天然生成，可以直接实用的。
English: Some of these salts have to be prepared by manual processing, while others are naturally produced and can be used directly.

古文：总之，一经舟车穷窘，则造物应付出焉。○海水盐
现代文：总之，凡是在交通运输不便、外地食盐难以运到的地方，大自然也是会提供食盐的。海水盐
English: In short, wherever transportation is inconvenient and it is difficult to transport salt from other places, nature will also provide salt.

古文：凡海水自具咸质，海滨地高者名潮墩，下者名草荡，地皆产盐。
现代文：海水本身就具有盐分这种咸质。海滨地势高的地方叫做潮墩，地势低的地方叫做草荡，这些地方都能出产盐。
English: The seawater itself has salt, a salty substance, and the high-lying areas along the seashore are called tidal flats, while the low-lying areas are called grasslands. All of these areas can produce salt.

古文：同一海卤传神，而取法则异。
现代文：同样是用海盐，但制取海盐所用的方法却各不相同。
English: Sea salt is also used, but the methods used to produce sea salt vary.

古文：一法高堰地，潮波不没者，地可种盐。种户各有区画经界，不相侵越。
现代文：一种方法是在海潮不能浸漫的岸边高地上取盐，各户都有自己的地段和界线，互不侵占。
English: One way is to collect salt on the coastal highlands, where the tide cannot penetrate. Each household has its own plot and boundary, and they do not encroach on each other.

古文：度诘朝无雨，则今日广布稻麦稿灰及芦茅灰寸许于地上，压使平匀。
现代文：估计第二天会天晴，于是就在当天将一寸多厚的稻、麦稿灰及芦苇、茅草灰遍地撒上、压紧并使其平匀。
English: It was estimated that it would be fine the next day, so on the same day, they sprinkled one-inch-thick rice, wheat ash and reed and thatch ash all over the ground, pressed it and made it even.

古文：明晨露气冲腾，则其下盐茅勃发，日中晴霁，灰、盐一并扫起淋煎。
现代文：第二天早上，地下湿气和露气都很重，灰下已经结满了盐茅。等到雾散天晴，过了中午就可以将灰和盐一起扫起来，拿去淋洗和煎炼。
English: The next morning, the underground humidity and dew were very heavy, and the ash was already covered with salt. When the fog cleared, after noon, the ash and salt could be swept up together and taken for rinsing and refining.

古文：一法潮波浅被地，不用灰压。候潮一过，明日天晴，半日晒出盐霜，疾趋扫起煎炼。
现代文：另一种方法是，在潮水浅浅的地方，不用撒灰，只等潮水过后，如果第二天天晴，半天就能晒出盐霜来，然后赶快扫起来，加以煎炼。
English: Another method is to wait for the tide to pass, and if the weather is fine the next day, the salt can be exposed for half a day, and then quickly swept up and refined.

古文：一法逼海潮深地，先掘深坑，横架竹木，上铺席苇，又铺沙于苇席上。
现代文：还有一种方法是在能被海潮淹没的地方预先挖掘一个深坑，上面横架竹或木棒，竹木上铺苇席，苇席上铺沙。
English: Another method is to dig a deep pit in advance in a place that can be flooded by the tide, with bamboo or wooden rods on the top, bamboo and wood on the table, and sand on the table.

古文：俟潮灭顶冲过，卤气由沙渗下坑中，撤去沙、苇，以灯烛之，卤气冲灯即灭，取卤水煎炼。
现代文：当海潮盖顶淹过深坑时，卤气便通过沙子渗入坑内，将沙子和苇席撤去，用灯向坑里照一照，当卤气能把灯冲灭的时候，就可以取卤水出来煎炼了。
English: When the tide covers the top of the deep pit, the halogen gas seeps into the pit through the sand, removes the sand and the table, and shines a light into the pit. When the halogen gas can extinguish the light, the brine can be taken out and distilled.

古文：总之功在晴霁，若淫雨连旬，则谓之盐荒。
现代文：总之，成功的关键在于能否天晴，如果阴雨连绵多日，盐被迫停产，这就叫做 盐荒 。
English: In short, the key to success is whether the weather is fine. If it rains for several days in a row and salt production is forced to stop, this is called a salt shortage.

古文：又淮场地面有日晒自然生霜如马牙者，谓之大晒盐。不由煎炼，扫起即食。
现代文：在江苏淮扬一带的盐场，人们靠日光把海水晒干，这种经过日晒而自然凝结的盐霜好像马牙似的，就叫做 大晒盐 ，不需要再次煎炼，扫起来就可以食用了。
English: In the salt fields around Huaiyang in Jiangsu, people rely on sunlight to dry the seawater. This salt cream, which condenses naturally after being exposed to the sun, is like horse teeth. It is called big sun-dried salt. It does not need to be refined again, it can be swept up and eaten.

古文：海水顺风飘来断草，勾取煎炼名蓬盐。
现代文：此外，利用海水中顺风漂来的海草，人们捞起来熬炼而制出的盐叫做 蓬盐 。
English: In addition, the salt that is made by using the seaweed that floats downwind in seawater and is caught and refined by people is called peng salt.

古文：凡淋煎法，掘坑二个，一浅一深。
现代文：盐的淋洗和煎炼的方法是挖一浅一深两个坑。
English: The method of rinsing and refining salt is to dig two pits, one shallow and one deep.

古文：浅者尺许，以竹木架芦席于上，将扫来盐料铺于席上。四围隆起作一堤当形，中以海水灌淋，渗下浅坑中。深者深七八尺，受浅坑所淋之汁，然后入锅煎炼。
现代文：浅的坑深约一尺左右，上面架上竹或木，在上面铺芦席，将扫起来的盐料，铺在席子上面，四周堆得高些，做成堤坝形，中间用海水淋灌，盐卤水便可以渗到浅坑之中；深的坑约七到八尺深，接受浅坑淋灌下的盐水，然后倒入锅里煎炼。
English: Shallow pits are about a foot deep, with bamboo or wood on the top, and reed mats are laid on top. The salt that has been swept up is laid on top of the mats and piled higher on all sides to form a dike. The middle is flooded with seawater so that the brine can seep into the shallow pit. Deep pits are about seven to eight feet deep and receive the brine from the shallow pit, and are then poured into a pan for brewing.

古文：凡煎盐锅古谓之牢盆，亦有两种制度。
现代文：煎盐的锅古时候叫做 牢盆 ，这种牢盆的周长有好几丈，直径也有一丈多，只有两种规格和形制。
English: In ancient times, a salt pan was called a cell basin. This cell basin has a circumference of several meters and a diameter of several meters. There are only two sizes and shapes.

古文：其盆周阔数丈，径亦丈许。用铁者以铁打成叶片，铁钉栓合，其底平如盂，其四周高尺二寸，其合缝处一以卤汁结塞，永无隙漏。
现代文：其中一种是用铁做的，把铁捶打成薄片，一片片用铁钉拴合而成，盆的底部像盂那样平，盆深约一尺二寸，接口处经过卤汁结晶后堵塞住，就不会再漏了。
English: One of them is made of iron. The anvil is beaten into thin slices, and the pieces are riveted together with nails. The bottom of the basin is flat like an anvil, the basin is about one foot two inches deep, and the interface is blocked after the brine has crystallized, so it will not leak again.

古文：其下列灶燃薪，多者十二三眼，少者七八眼，共煎此盘。
现代文：牢盆下面砌灶烧柴，灶眼多的能有十二三个，灶眼少的也有七八个，用柴火同时烧煮一个锅。
English: A stove is built underneath the cell to burn wood. The stove can have up to twelve or thirteen burners, and up to seven or eight burners. A pot is simultaneously cooked with the wood.

古文：南海有编竹为者，将竹编成阔丈深尺，糊以蜃灰，附于釜背。
现代文：南海地区还有另外一种制法，那是用竹篾编成一个锅围的，锅围的直径约一丈、深约一尺。在锅围上糊上蛤蜊灰并衔接在锅的边上。
English: In the South China Sea region, there is another method, which is to use bamboo shoots to weave a cocoon around a pot. The diameter of the cocoon is about one foot high and about one foot deep. The cocoon is covered with ash and connected to the edge of the pot.

古文：火燃釜底，滚沸延及成盐。
现代文：锅下烧火到使卤水沸腾，一直到逐渐结成盐。
English: Heat under the pan until the brine boils, until it gradually forms salt.

古文：亦名盐盆，然不若铁叶镶成之便也。
现代文：这种盆也叫做 盐盆 ，但总的来说不如用铁片做成的锅那样方便省事。
English: This kind of basin is also called a "salt basin," but in general it is not as convenient and easy as a pan made of iron sheets.

古文：凡煎卤未即凝结，将皂角椎碎，和粟米糠二味，卤沸之时投入其中搅和，盐即顷刻结成。
现代文：煎炼盐卤汁的时候，如果没有即时凝结，可以将皂角舂碎掺和小米糠一起投入沸腾的卤水里搅拌均匀，盐分便会很快地结晶成盐粒。
English: When decocting brine, if there is no instant condensation, you can mix the crushed soap horns mixed with millet bran into the boiling brine and stir it evenly. The salt will quickly crystallize into salt grains.

古文：盖皂角结盐犹石膏之结腐也。
现代文：加入皂角而使盐凝结，就好像做豆腐时使用石膏一样。
English: It's like using plaster of Paris to make tofu.

古文：凡盐淮扬场者，质重而黑。其他质轻而白。
现代文：淮安、扬州的盐场里生产的盐分量比较重，颜色也较黑，其他盐场出产的盐就比较轻，颜色也相对较白。
English: The salt produced by the salt farms in Huai'an and Yangzhou is relatively heavy in weight and dark in color, while the salt produced by other salt farms is relatively light and relatively white.

古文：以量较之。淮场者一升重十两，则广、浙、长芦者只重六七两。
现代文：以重量作比较，淮扬的盐每升有十两重，广东、浙江和渤海附近长芦盐场的盐每升只有六七两重。
English: For comparison by weight, salt from Huaiyang has ten to two parts per litre, while salt from the Changlu salt field near Guangdong, Zhejiang and the Bohai Sea has only six to seven parts per litre.

古文：凡蓬草盐不可常期，或数年一至，或一月数至。
现代文：蓬草盐的来源不太可靠，蓬草有时好几年来一次，也有时一个月就来好几次，因此不能经常指望它。
English: The source of pengcao salt is not very reliable. Pengcao sometimes comes once every few years, and sometimes several times a month, so you can't always count on it.

古文：凡盐见水即化，见风即卤，见火愈坚。
现代文：盐遇到水后就会溶解，遇到风后就会流盐卤，碰上火却愈发坚硬。
English: Salt dissolves when it meets water, flows when it meets wind, and hardens when it meets fire.

古文：凡收藏不必用仓廪，盐性畏风不畏湿，地下叠稿三寸，任从卑湿无伤。
现代文：储藏盐不必用仓库。盐的特性是怕风吹但不怕地湿，只要在地上铺三寸来厚的稻草秆，任凭地势低湿也没有什么妨害的。
English: It is not necessary to use a warehouse to store salt. The characteristic of salt is that it is afraid of wind but not of ground moisture. As long as a straw bed three inches thick is laid on the ground, it will not be disturbed by low humidity.

古文：周遭以土砖泥隙，上盖茅草尺许，百年如故也。
现代文：如果周围再用砖砌上，缝隙用泥封堵上，上面盖上一尺多厚的茅草，这样即使放置一百年也不会发生变质。
English: If the surrounding area is then bricked up, the gaps sealed with mud and covered with a foot-thick layer of thatch, it will not deteriorate even if it is left for a hundred years.

古文：○池盐
现代文：池盐
English: Pond salt

古文：凡池盐，宇内有二，一出宁夏，供食边镇；一出山西解池，供晋、豫诸郡县。
现代文：池盐在国内主要有两处产地：一处是在宁夏，出产的食盐供边远地区食用；另一处是山西解池，出产的食盐供山西、河南各郡县食用。
English: There are two main sources of pond salt in China: one is in Ningxia, where the salt is produced for consumption in remote areas; the other is in Shanxi, where the salt is produced for consumption in Shanxi and Henan counties.

古文：解池界安邑、猗氏、临晋之间，其池外有城堞，周遭禁御。
现代文：解池位于河南安邑、猗氏和临晋之间，它的四周筑有城墙用来防卫保护盐池。
English: The brine pool is located in An'yun, Henan Province, between Jinshi and Linjin. A city wall was built around it to defend and protect the brine pool.

古文：池水深聚处，其色绿沉。
现代文：池水深的地方，水呈现为深绿色。
English: Where the pool is deep, the water appears dark green.

古文：土人种盐者池傍耕地为畦陇，引清水入所耕畦中，忌浊水，参入即淤淀盐脉。
现代文：当地制盐的人，在池旁耕地耕成畦垄，把池内清水引入畦垄之中。但是要注意提防浊水流入，否则就将造成泥沙淤积盐脉。
English: The local salt producers plough the land next to the pond into ridges, bringing the clear water of the pond into the ridges. However, beware of the inflow of salty water, otherwise it will cause siltation of the salt veins.

古文：凡引水种盐，春间即为之，久则水成赤色。
现代文：每到春季就要开始引池水制盐，时间太晚了水就会变成红色。
English: Every spring, they have to start drawing water from the pond to make salt. If it's too late, the water will turn red.

古文：待夏秋之交，南风大起，则一宵结成，名曰颗盐，即古志所谓大盐也。
现代文：等到夏秋之交南风劲吹的时候，一夜之间就能凝结成盐，这种盐名叫 颗盐 ，也就是古书上所说的 大盐 。
English: When the south wind blows strongly at the turn of summer and autumn, it can condense into salt overnight. This salt is called grain salt, which is also called big salt in ancient books.

古文：以海水煎者细碎，而此成粒颗，故得大名。
现代文：因为海水煎炼的盐细碎，而池盐则成颗粒状，所以得到了 大盐 的称号。
English: Because seawater-distilled salt is finely ground, while pool salt is granular, it has earned the title of "large salt."

古文：其盐凝结之后，扫起即成食味。
现代文：池盐一经凝结成形后就可扫起供人食用。
English: Once the pool salt has been condensed and formed, it can be swept up for human consumption.

古文：种盐之人。积扫一石交官，得钱数十文而已。
现代文：制盐的人，制成一石盐上交给官府，也不过只得几十文铜钱而已。
English: The salt-makers, who made a stone of salt and handed it over to the government, only got a few dozen coppers.

古文：其海丰、深州引海水入池晒成者，凝结之时扫食不加人力，与解盐同。
现代文：在海丰和深州地区，把海水引入池内晒成的盐，凝结后扫起就可食用了，而不需再煎炼加工，这一点和池盐是一样的。
English: In the Haifeng and Shenzhou areas, the salt made by introducing seawater into the pool is edible after it coagulates and is swept up, without the need for further refining and processing. This is the same as the pool salt.

古文：但成盐时日，与不藉南风则大异也。
现代文：但成盐的时间，以及它不需依靠南风吹这两点，就跟池盐大不相同了。
English: But the time it takes to become salt, and the fact that it doesn't have to rely on the south wind to blow, are two things that are very different from pool salt.

古文：○井盐
现代文：井盐
English: Well salt

古文：凡滇、蜀两省远离海滨，舟车艰通，形势高上，其咸脉即韫藏地中。
现代文：云南和四川两地，距离海滨很远，交通也不便利，地势也高，因此那两个省的盐就蕴藏在当地的地下。
English: Yunnan and Sichuan are far away from the seashore, transportation is not convenient, and the terrain is high. Therefore, the salt of those two provinces is stored in the local underground.

古文：凡蜀中石山去河不远者，多可造井取盐。
现代文：在四川离河不远的石山上，大多都可以凿井取盐。
English: In most of the stone hills not far from the river in Sichuan, wells can be drilled to extract salt.

古文：盐井周围不过数寸，其上口一小盂覆之有余，深必十丈以外乃得卤性，故造井功费甚难。
现代文：盐井的圆周不过几寸，盐井的上口用一个小盂便能盖上，而盐井的深度必须要达到十丈以上，才能到盐卤水层，因此凿井的代价很大，要花费很长时间，也很艰难。
English: The circumference of the salt well is only a few inches, and the upper mouth of the salt well can be covered with a small shovel, and the depth of the salt well must reach more than ten feet to reach the salt brine layer, so the cost of drilling the well is very high, it takes a long time, and it is also difficult.

古文：其器冶铁锥，如碓嘴形，其尖使极刚利，向石山舂凿成孔。
现代文：凿井的工具，使用的是铁锥，铁锥的形状很像碓嘴，要把铁锥的尖端做得非常坚固锋利，才能用它在石上冲凿成孔。
English: The tool used for drilling wells is an iron cone. The shape of the cone is very much like a beak. The tip of the cone must be very strong and sharp before it can be used to drill holes in the stone.

古文：其身破竹缠绳，夹悬此锥。
现代文：铁锥的锥身是用破开两半的竹片夹住，再用绳缠紧做成的。
English: The cone of the iron cone is made by clamping a piece of bamboo with its two halves broken and then tightly wrapping it with rope.

古文：每舂深入数尺，则又以竹接其身使引而长。
现代文：每凿进数尺深，就要用竹竿子把它接上以增加它的身长。
English: Every time the chisel goes a few feet deeper, he has to connect it with a bamboo pole to increase its height.

古文：初入丈许，或以足踏锥梢，如舂米形。
现代文：起初的这一丈多深，可以用脚踏碓梢，就像舂米那样。
English: At first, it was so deep that you could walk on it, just like sticky rice.

古文：太深则用手捧持顿下。所舂石成碎粉，随以长竹接引，悬铁盏挖之而上。
现代文：再深一些就用两手将铁锥举高然后再用力夯下去，这可能把石头舂得粉碎，随后把长竹接在一起再捆上铁勺，把碎石挖出来。
English: The deeper you go, use both hands to lift the iron cone high and then force it down, which may smash the stone, then connect the long bamboo together and then tie up the iron spoon to dig out the gravel.

古文：大抵深者半载，浅者月余，乃得一井成就。
现代文：打一眼深井大约需要半年左右的时间，而打一眼浅井一个多月就能够成功了。
English: It takes about half a year to drill a deep well, while it takes more than a month to drill a shallow well.

古文：盖井中空阔，则卤乞游散，不克结盐故也。
现代文：如果井眼凿的过大，卤气就会游散，以致不能凝结成盐。
English: If the borehole is too large, the halogen gas will be dispersed so that it cannot condense into salt.

古文：井及泉后，择美竹长丈者，凿净其中节，留底不去。其喉下安消息，吸水入筒，用长ㄌ系竹沉下，其中水满。
现代文：当盐井凿到卤水层能打出水后，挑选一根长约一丈的好竹子，将竹内的节都凿穿，只保留最底下的一节，并在竹节的下端安一个吸水的单向阀门以便汲取盐水入筒。用长绳拴上这根竹筒，将它沉到井底之下，竹筒内就会汲满了盐水。
English: When the salt well is drilled to the brine layer and can produce water, select a good bamboo about one meter long, drill through all the joints in the bamboo, retaining only the lowest section, and install a water-absorbing one-way valve at the lower end of the bamboo joint to draw the brine inlet. Tie the bamboo tube with a long rope and sink it to the bottom of the well, and the bamboo tube will be filled with brine.

古文：井上悬桔槔、辘轳诸具，制盘驾牛。牛曳盘转，辘轳绞ㄌ，汲水而上。
现代文：井上安装桔槔或辘轳等提水工具。操作方法是套上牛，用牛拉动转盘而带动辘轳绞绳把盐水汲上来。
English: Water-lifting tools such as orange rafts or rafts are installed on the well. The method of operation is to put a cow on, use the cow to pull the turntable and drive the reed winch to draw up the salt water.

古文：入于釜中煎炼，顷刻结盐，色成至白。
现代文：然后将卤水倒进锅里煎炼，很快就能凝结成雪白的盐了。
English: The brine is then poured into a pan and distilled, quickly condensing into snow-white salt.

古文：西川有火井，事奇甚。
现代文：在四川西部有一种火井，非常神奇。
English: In western Sichuan, there is a kind of fire well that is very magical.

古文：其井居然冷水，绝无火气，但以长竹剖开去节合缝漆布，一头插入井底，其上曲接，以口紧对釜脐，注卤水釜中。只见火意烘烘，水即滚沸。
现代文：井里居然全是冷水，没有一点热气。但只要剖开一根长竹去掉中间的节，用漆、布等材料把竹管接合好，一头插入井底，另一头用弯曲的管接到锅底正中央处，再往锅里倒进盐水，只见热气腾腾，盐水片刻就会沸腾起来。
English: The well is actually full of cold water, without any hot air. But as long as you cut a long bamboo to remove the middle knot, use paint, cloth and other materials to connect the bamboo tube, insert one end into the bottom of the well, use a curved tube to connect the other end to the bottom of the pot at the center, and then pour salt water into the pot, you will see hot steam, and the salt water will boil for a while.

古文：启竹而视之，绝无半点焦炎意。
现代文：打开竹管再次观看，却没有半点烧焦的痕迹。
English: I opened the bamboo tube and watched it again, but there was not a trace of charring.

古文：未见火形而用火神，此世间大奇事也，凡川、滇盐井逃课掩盖至易，不可穷诘。
现代文：看不到火却有火的功用，真是世界上一大奇事啊！四川、云南两省的盐井，非常容易逃避关税，追查起来很困难。
English: A salt mine in Sichuan and Yunnan provinces, it is very easy to evade tariffs, and very difficult to trace.

古文：○末盐
现代文：末盐
English: Waxed salt

古文：凡地碱煎盐，除并州末盐外，长芦分司地土人，亦有刮削煎成者，带杂黑色，味不甚佳。○崖盐
现代文：用地碱熬盐，除了山西并州产的粉末盐之外，河北渤海湾一带的人也常从地上刮下土来熬盐。这种用土熬出的盐常有杂质，而且颜色较黑，味道也不好。崖盐
English: In addition to the powdered salt produced in Shanxi Province, people in the Bohai Bay area of Hebei also often scrape soil from the ground to boil salt. This salt boiled with soil often has impurities, and its color is darker and its taste is not good. Cliff salt

古文：凡西省阶、凤等州邑，海井交穷。其岩穴自生盐，色如红土，恣人刮取，不假煎炼。
现代文：在陕西的阶州、凤县这些地方，既没有海盐又没有井盐，但是当地的岩洞里却出产食盐，看上去很像红土块儿，任凭人们直接刮取食用，不必经过炼制。
English: In places such as Zhouzhou and Fengxian in Shaanxi, there is neither sea salt nor well salt, but the local rock caves produce table salt, which looks very much like red soil blocks, allowing people to scrape directly for food without having to go through refining.

