古文：圣宗五十六年春正月乙丑，如长泺。二月庚子，夏国遣使来贡。
现代文：统和十六年春正月初五，至长泊。二月十一日，夏国派使者前来进贡。
English: On the 5th day of the 1st month of the 16th year of the Spring and the 1st day of the 1st month of the 16th year of the Heian period, he went to Nagatoro. On the 11th day of the 2nd month, Xia sent an envoy to pay tribute.

古文：丙午，以监门卫上将军耶律喜罗为中台省左相。
现代文：十七日，以监门卫上将军耶律喜罗为中台省左相。
English: On the 17th, the left minister of Zhongtai Province was appointed to be the general of the prison guards, Yeruxiro.

古文：三月甲子，女直遣使来贡。
现代文：三月初五，女真派使者来进贡。
English: On the fifth day of the third month, Jurchen sent an envoy to pay tribute.

古文：乙亥，鼻骨德酋长来贡。
现代文：十六日，鼻骨德酋长前来进贡。
English: On the sixteenth day, the chief of Nanzhuode came to pay tribute.

古文：夏四月癸卯，振崇德宫所隶州县民之被水者。
现代文：夏四月十五日，赈济崇德宫所辖州县遭受水灾的百姓。
English: On the 15th day of the 4th month of the summer, the people who suffered from floods in the prefectures under the jurisdiction of the Gongji Chongde Palace came.

古文：丁未，罢民输官俸，给自内帑。己酉，祈雨。
现代文：十九日，停止百姓输纳官员俸禄，官员俸禄一律从国库拨给。二十一日，祈雨。
English: On the 19th, the people stopped paying officials' salaries, and all officials' salaries were allocated from the state treasury. On the 21st, it was time to pray for rain.

古文：乙卯，如木叶山。
现代文：二十七日，到木叶山。
English: On the 27th, I went to Mujiyama.

古文：五月甲子，祭白马神。
现代文：五月初七，祭祀白马神。
English: On the seventh day of the fifth month, the worship of the white horse god ceased.

古文：丁卯，祠木叶山，告来岁南伐。
现代文：初十，祭祀木叶山，告以来年南征之事。
English: On the 10th day of the first month, a ceremony was held at Mt. Koba to announce the start of the Southern Expedition.

古文：庚辰，铁骊来贡。
现代文：二十三日，铁骊前来进贡。
English: On the 23rd, the shovel came to pay tribute.

古文：乙酉，还上京。
现代文：二十八日，回上京。
English: On the 28th, he returned to Tokyo.

古文：妇人年逾九十者赐物。
现代文：赐给年龄超过九十岁的妇女财物。
English: property to women over the age of ninety.

古文：六月戊子朔，致奠于祖、怀二陵。
现代文：六月初一，置祭品祭祀祖、怀二陵。
English: On the first day of June, offerings are made to the mausoleums of the patriarchs and empresses.

古文：是月，清暑炭山。
现代文：同月，在炭山避暑。
English: In the same month, he went to Sumiyama for summer vacation.

古文：秋七月丁巳朔，录囚，听政。
现代文：秋七月初一，查看犯人口供，上朝听政。
English: On the first day of the seventh month of autumn, the prisoners' confessions will be examined, and they will go to the palace to listen to the government.

古文：八月丁亥朔，东幸。
现代文：八月初一，东幸。
English: On the first day of August, Dongxing.

古文：九月丁巳朔，驻跸得胜口。
现代文：九月初一，歇驾于得胜口。
English: On the first day of September, we were on the verge of victory.

古文：冬十一月，遣使册高丽国王诵。
现代文：冬十一月，派使者前往册封高丽国王诵。
English: In the winter of November, an envoy was sent to the enthronement of the King of Korea.

古文：十二月丙戌朔，宋国王休哥薨，辍朝五日。
现代文：十二月初一，宋国王耶律休哥逝世，皇上为之停止上朝五天。
English: On the first day of December, the Song King Yelu Xiu Ge passed away, which caused the emperor to stop attending court for five days.

古文：进封皇弟恒王隆庆为梁国王、南京留守，郑王隆祐为吴国王。
现代文：进封皇弟恒王隆庆为梁国王、南京留守，郑王隆佑为吴国王。
English: His younger brother, Heng Wang Longqing, was crowned King of Liang and remained in Nanjing, while Zheng Wang Longyou was crowned King of Wu.

古文：是年，放进士杨又玄等二人。
现代文：这一年，放榜录取进士杨又玄等二人及第。
English: This year, Yang Mata Xuan, who was admitted to the school, ranked second and third.

古文：十七年春正月乙卯朔，如长春宫。夏四月，如炭山清暑。
现代文：十七年春正月初一，至长春宫。夏四月，至炭山避暑。
English: On the first day of the first month of the seventeenth spring, he went to the Changchun Palace. In the summer, in April, he went to the Coal Mountain to escape the summer heat.

古文：六月，兀惹乌昭庆来。
现代文：六月，兀惹乌昭度至辽。
English: In June, the severity of the typhoon reached as far as Liao.

古文：秋七月，以伐宋诏谕诸道。九月庚辰朔，幸南京。
现代文：秋七月，晓谕诸道即将征伐宋国。九月初一，临幸南京。
English: In the autumn and July, it was announced that all roads would soon lead to the conquest of Song. On the first day of September, it was time for Nanjing.

古文：乙亥，南伐。
现代文：二十日，南伐。
English: On the 20th, the Southern Expedition began.

古文：癸卯，射鬼箭。
现代文：二十四日，射鬼箭。
English: On the 24th, the ghost arrows were fired.

古文：北院枢密使魏王耶律斜轸薨。以韩德让兼知北院枢密使事。
现代文：北院枢密使魏王耶律斜轸逝世，皇上任命韩德让兼任知北院枢密使事。
English: After the death of Wei King Ye Lu, the imperial envoy to the Northern Yuan Dynasty, the emperor appointed Han Dejan as the envoy to the Northern Yuan Dynasty.

古文：冬十月癸酉，攻遂城，不克，遣萧继远攻狼山镇石砦，破之。
现代文：冬十月二十四日，进攻遂城，没有攻克。派萧继远进攻狼山镇石砦，攻破了它。
English: In winter, on October 24th, the attack was successful and the city was not conquered. Xiao Jiyuan attacked the Wolf Mountain Town Stone Fort and broke it.

古文：次瀛州，与宋军战，擒其将康昭裔、宋顺，获兵仗、器甲无算。
现代文：到达瀛州，与宋军交战，生擒宋军守将康昭裔、宋顺，获得兵器甲仗无数。
English: Arriving in Bozhou, he fought against the Song army. The surviving Song army commanders, Kang Zhaoxiang and Song Shun, won countless battles with weapons.

古文：进攻乐寿县，拔之。
现代文：攻克乐寿县。
English: and conquered Leju County.

古文：次遂城，敌众临水以拒，纵骑兵突之，杀戮殆尽。
现代文：大军到达遂城，敌军临水拒战，我军派骑兵突击，将守军杀戮殆尽。
English: The large army reached Suicheng, the enemy army was facing the water and refused to fight, our army sent cavalry to attack, killing the defenders.

古文：是年，放进士初锡等四人及第。
现代文：这一年，放榜取进士初锡等四人及第。
English: In the same year, four students including Chusei, a promising student, were ranked first and second.

古文：十八年春正月，还次南京，赏有功将士，罚不用命者。
现代文：十八年春正月，回驻南京，赏赐有功将士，惩罚不服从命令者。
English: In the first month of the 18th year of Spring, he returned to Nanjing to reward meritorious soldiers and punish those who disobeyed orders.

古文：诏诸军各还本道，二月，幸延芳淀。
现代文：下诏令诸军各自回到本道。二月，临幸延芳淀。
English: He issued an edict ordering all the troops to return to the main road. In February, Linxing extended to Fangyong.

古文：夏四月己未，驻跸于清泉淀。
现代文：夏四月十二日，歇驾于清泉淀。
English: On the twelfth day of the fourth month of summer, he rested at Seisen-yodo.

古文：五月丁酉，清暑炭山。
现代文：五月二十一日，在炭山避暑。
English: On May 21st, I spent the summer in Su Shan.

古文：六月，阻卜叛酋鹘碾之弟铁剌不率部众来附，鹘碾无所归，遂降，诏诛之。
现代文：六月，阻卜叛乱酋长鹘碾之弟铁剌不率领部众降附，鹘碾无路可走，于是也投降，皇上下诏诛杀了他。
English: In June, Tie Zhen, the younger brother of the rebel chief Zhenren, did not lead the troops to surrender. Zhenren had nowhere to go, so he also surrendered, and the emperor had him killed.

古文：秋七月，驻跸于汤泉。
现代文：秋七月，歇驾于汤泉。
English: In autumn and July, it rests in Tangquan.

古文：九月乙亥朔，驻跸黑河。
现代文：九月初一，歇驾于黑河。
English: On the first day of September, he stopped in Heihe.

古文：冬十一月甲戌朔，授西平王李继迁子德昭朔方军节度使。
现代文：冬十一月初一，任命西平王李继迁之子李德昭为朔方军节度使。
English: On the first day of November in winter, Li Dezhao, the son of Xiping King Li Jiji, was appointed as the military envoy of the Shuo side.

古文：十二月，回鹘来贡。
现代文：十二月，回鹘前来进贡。
English: In December, Hui Xuan came to pay tribute.

古文：是年，放进士南承保等三人及第。
现代文：这一年，放榜录取进士南承保等三人及第。
English: In this year, the number of students admitted to South Underwriting rose to three and the first place.

古文：十九年春正月辛巳，以祗候郎君班详稳观音为奚六部大王。
现代文：十九年春正月初八，任命祗候郎君班详稳观音为奚六部大王。
English: On the eighth day of the first month of the 19th year of the Spring, he appointed Gonghou Langjun to be the king of the Six Divisions of Guanyin.

古文：甲申，回鹘进梵僧名医。
现代文：十一日，回鹘进献梵僧和名医。
English: On the 11th day of the eclipse, the offering of the brahmin monks and famous doctors began.

古文：三月乙亥，夏国遣李文贵来贡。
现代文：三月初三，夏国派李文贵前来朝贡。
English: On the third day of the third month of March, Xia Guo sent Li Wengui to pay tribute.

古文：乙酉，西南面招讨司奏党项捷。
现代文：十三日，西南面招讨使奏称征伐党项获得胜利。
English: On the 13th, the southwestern side of the recruitment and dispatch of the call for the conquest of the party won the victory.

古文：壬辰，皇后萧氏以罪降为贵妃。赐大丞相韩德让名德昌。
现代文：二十日，皇后萧氏因犯罪被降为贵妃，给大丞相韩德让赐名为德昌。
English: On the 20th, Empress Xiao was reduced to a noble consort for her crimes, and Han Dejan, the grand chancellor, was given the name Dechang.

古文：夏四月乙巳，幸吴国王隆祐第视疾。
现代文：夏四月初四，临幸吴国王隆佑宅第探问他的病情。
English: On the 4th day of the 4th month of the 4th month of the 4th month of the 4th month of the 4th month of the 4th month of the 4th month of the 4th month of the 4th month of the 4th month of the 4th month of the 4th month of the 4th month of the 4th month of the 4th month of the 4th month of the 4th month of the 4th month of the 4th month of the 4th month of the 4th month of the 4th month of the 4th month of the 4th month of the 4th month of the 4th month of the 4th month of the 4th month of the 5

古文：丙午，问安皇太后。
现代文：初五，向皇太后请安。
English: On the fifth day of the first month, please give my greetings to the Empress Dowager.

古文：五月癸酉，清暑炭山。
现代文：五月初二，在炭山避暑。
English: On the second day of the fifth month of the year, I went to Sumiyama to spend the summer.

古文：丙戌，册萧氏为齐天皇后。
现代文：十五日，册封萧氏为齐天皇后。
English: On the 15th, Xiao was proclaimed Empress of Qi.

古文：庚寅，以千拽剌详稳耶律王奴为乙室大王。
现代文：十九日，任命千拽剌详稳耶律王奴为乙室大王。
English: On the 19th day of the month, he appointed the slave of King Ye Lu as the second Great King.

古文：辛卯，以青牛白马祭天地。
现代文：二十日，用青牛白马祭祀天地。
English: On the 20th, the heaven and earth were sacrificed with a young bull and a white horse.

古文：六月乙巳，以所俘宋将康昭裔为昭顺军节度使。
现代文：六月初五，任命被俘宋将康昭裔为昭顺军节度使。
English: On the 5th day of the 6th month, the captured Song general, Kang Zhaoxuan, was appointed as the military envoy of the Zhaoxun army.

古文：戊午，夏国奏下宋恒、环、庆等三州，赐诏褒之。
现代文：十八日，夏国奏称已攻下宋恒、环、庆等三州，得到皇上赐诏褒奖。
English: On the 18th, Xia Guo reported that he had conquered Song Heng, Huan, Qing and other three states, and received the Emperor's commendation.

古文：秋七月丙戌，以东京统军使耶律奴瓜为南府宰相。
现代文：秋七月十七日，以东京统军使耶律奴瓜为南府宰相。
English: On the 17th day of the 7th month of the autumn, the envoy of the Tokyo unified army, Yerutogua, became the prime minister of Nanfu.

古文：八月庚戌，达卢骨部来贡。
现代文：八月十一日，达卢骨部前来进贡。
English: On August 11th, Dalu's remains arrived to pay their respects.

古文：九月己巳朔，问安皇太后。
现代文：九月初一，向皇太后请安。
English: On the first day of September, please give my greetings to the Empress Dowager.

古文：戊子，驻跸昌平。
现代文：二十日，歇驾于昌平。
English: On the 20th, he stopped in Changping.

古文：庚寅，西南面招讨司奏讨吐谷浑捷。
现代文：二十二日，西南面招讨使奏称讨伐吐谷浑取得胜利。
English: On the 22nd, the southwestern side invited the envoys to call for a crusade against Tugu Hun and achieved victory.

古文：辛卯，幸南京。
现代文：二十三日，临幸南京。
English: On the 23rd, I visited Nanjing.

古文：冬十月己亥，南伐。
现代文：冬十月初一，南伐。
English: In winter, on the first day of October, the Southern Expedition begins.

古文：壬寅，次盐沟。
现代文：初四，到达盐沟。
English: On the fourth day of my junior year, I reached the salt ditch.

古文：徙封吴国王隆祐为楚国王，留守京师。
现代文：改封吴国王隆佑为楚国王，让他留守京师。
English: He changed the title of King Longyou of Wu to King Chu, and allowed him to stay in Beijing.

古文：丁未，梁国王隆庆统先锋军以进。
现代文：初九，梁国王隆庆率领头部队进发。
English: On the 9th day of the 9th month, King Longqing of Liang led the troops to advance.

古文：辛亥，射鬼箭。
现代文：十三日，射鬼箭。
English: On the 13th, the ghost archery begins.

古文：壬子，以青牛白马祭天地。
现代文：十四日，用青牛白马祭祀天地。
English: On the 14th, heaven and earth were sacrificed with a young bull and a white horse.

古文：甲寅，辽军与宋兵战于遂城，败之。
现代文：十六日，辽军与宋军在遂城交战，击败宋军。
English: On the 16th, the Liao Army and the Song Army fought in Suicheng and defeated the Song Army.

古文：庚申，以黑白羊祭天地。
现代文：二十二日，用黑白羊祭祀天地。
English: On the 22nd, black and white sheep were used to sacrifice heaven and earth.

古文：丙寅，次满城，以泥淖班师。
现代文：二十八日，到达满城，因道路泥泞，班师。
English: On the 28th, we arrived in Mancheng. Due to the muddy road, our class was late.

古文：十一月庚午，射鬼箭。
现代文：十一月初三，射鬼箭。
English: On the third day of the first month of November, shooting arrows at ghosts.

古文：丙子，宋兵出淤口、益津关来侵，侦候谋洼、虞人招古击败之。
现代文：初九，宋兵出淤口、益津关前来侵扰，侦侯谋洼、虞人招古击败宋军。
English: In the early 9th century, the Song soldiers came from Jucou and Yizhongguan to invade, and the Song army was defeated by the reconnaissance of Hou Mowa and the recruitment of Yougu.

古文：己卯，观渔儒门泺。
现代文：十二日，在儒门泊观看捕鱼。
English: On the 12th, watch the fisherman fishing in Rumenpo.

古文：闰月己酉，鼻骨德来贡。
现代文：闰十一月十二日，鼻骨德前来进贡。
English: On the twelfth day of the eleventh lunar month, Nanshengde came to pay tribute.

古文：己未，减关市税。
现代文：二十二日，减免关市税。
English: On the 22nd, the reduction and exemption of customs and city tax.

古文：十二月庚辰，免南京、平州租税。
现代文：十二月十三日，免除南京、平州租税。
English: On December 13, Nanjing and Pingzhou were exempted from tax.

古文：二十年春正月庚子，如延芳淀。
现代文：二十年春正月初四，至延芳淀。
English: On the fourth day of the first month of the spring of the 20th year, I went to Yanfangyodo.

古文：癸丑，东方五色虹见。
现代文：十七日，东方出现五色彩虹。
English: On the 17th, a five-color rainbow appeared in the east.

古文：诏安抚西南面向化诸部。
现代文：下诏安抚西南面归顺诸部。
English: The following edict was issued to pacify the southwestern part of the country and bring it under the control of the central government.

古文：甲寅，夏国遣使贡马、驼。
现代文：十八日，夏国派使者进贡马、骆驼。
English: On the 18th, Xia Guo sent an envoy to bring in the tribute horses and camels.

古文：辛酉，女直宰相夷离底来贡。
现代文：二十五日，女真宰相夷离底前来进贡。
English: On the 25th, Empress Zhen, the prime minister, came from the bottom to pay tribute.

古文：二月丁丑，女直遣其子来朝。
现代文：二月十一日，女真派其子前来朝觐。
English: On February 11th, Nyoman sent her son to the Imperial Court.

古文：高丽遣使贺伐宋捷。
现代文：高丽派使者祝贺辽伐宋获胜。
English: The envoys of the Koryo faction congratulated the Liao and Song dynasties on their victory.

古文：三月甲寅，遣北府宰相萧继远等南伐。
现代文：三月十八日，派北府宰相萧继远等南伐。
English: On March 18th, he sent Xiao Jiyuan, the prime minister of Beifu, and others to the Southern Expedition.

古文：壬戌，驻跸鸳鸯泺。
现代文：二十六日，歇驾于鸳鸯泊。
English: On the 26th, she stopped at Oshidomari.

古文：夏四月丙寅朔，文班太保达里底败宋兵于梁门。
现代文：夏四月初一，文班太保达里底在梁门击败宋军。
English: On the first day of the fourth month of summer, Wenban Taibo Daridi defeated the Song Army in Liangmen.

古文：甲戌，南京统军使萧挞凛破宋军于泰州。
现代文：初九，南京统军使萧挞凛在泰州击败宋军。
English: On the 9th day of the first month, the Nanjing United Army sent Xiao Yulin to defeat the Song Army in Taizhou.

古文：乙酉，南征将校献俘。赐爵赏有差。
现代文：二十日，南征将领进献俘虏，赐给他们封爵财物各有等差。
English: On the 20th, the generals of the Southern Expedition marched in to offer sacrifices to the captives, and gave them knighthoods, property, and other things.

古文：戊子，铁骊遣使来贡。
现代文：二十三日，铁骊派使者前来进贡。
English: On the 23rd, the Spade sent an envoy to pay tribute.

古文：五月乙卯，幸炭山清暑。
现代文：五月二十日，临幸炭山避暑。
English: On May 20th, I went to Linxing Coal Mountain for summer vacation.

古文：六月，夏国遣刘仁勖来告下灵州。
现代文：六月，夏国派刘仁勖前来报告攻下了宋的灵州。
English: In June, Xia Guo sent Liu Renyu to report that he had captured Song's Lingshou.

古文：秋七月甲午朔，日有食之。
现代文：秋七月初一，日食。
English: Autumn, the first day of July, a solar eclipse.

古文：丁酉，以邢抱朴为南院枢密使。
现代文：初四，任命邢抱朴为南院枢密使。
English: On the fourth day of his junior year, he appointed Gong Bao Pak as the envoy of the Southern Yuan.

古文：辛丑，高丽遣使来贡本国地里图。
现代文：初八，高丽派使者献上本国《地里图》。
English: On the first day of the eighth month, Goryeo sent an envoy to present a map of the country.

古文：九月癸巳朔，谒显陵，告南伐捷。
现代文：九月初一，拜谒显陵，上告祖先南征胜利的消息。
English: On the first day of September, the news of the victory of the Southern Expedition was announced to the ancestors at the Mausoleum of Puyi Xian.

古文：冬十月癸亥朔，至自显陵。
现代文：冬十月初一，自显陵回宫。
English: On the first day of October in winter, Zixianling returned to the palace.

古文：十二月，奚王府五帐六节度献七金山土河川地，赐金币。
现代文：十二月，奚王府五帐六节度献上七金山土河川土地，赐给他们金币。
English: In December, Shao Wangfu presented seven gold mines of soil and river land in five sets of six festivals, and gave them gold coins.

古文：是岁，南京、平州麦秀两歧。
现代文：这一年，南京、平州一麦抽两穗。
English: In that year, Nanjing and Pingzhou each had two ears of wheat.

古文：放进士邢祥等六人及第。
现代文：放榜录取进士邢祥等六人及第。
English: Six and a half of the admitted students, including Gong Xiang, made it onto the list.

古文：二十一年春正月，如鸳鸯泺。
现代文：二十一年春正月，至鸳鸯泊。
English: In the first month of spring of the twenty-first year, to Oshidomari.

古文：三月壬辰，诏修日历官毋书细事。
现代文：三月初二，诏令修《日历》官员不要记载琐事。
English: On the second day of the third month, the emperor ordered officials to amend the "calendar" and not to record trivial matters.

古文：甲午，朝皇太后。
现代文：初四，朝见皇太后。
English: On the 29th, the Emperor met with the Empress Dowager.

古文：戊午，铁骊来贡。
现代文：二十八日，铁骊前来进贡。
English: On the 28th, the shovel came to pay tribute.

古文：夏四月乙丑，女直遣使来贡。
现代文：夏四月初六，女真派使者前来进贡。
English: On the 6th day of the 4th month of the summer, Jurchen sent an envoy to pay tribute.

古文：戊辰，兀惹、渤海、凛里米、越里笃、越里吉等五部遣使来贡。
现代文：初九，兀惹、渤海、奥里米、越里笃、越里吉等五部派使者前来进贡。
English: On the first day of the ninth month, five provinces, including Buryatia, Bohai, Orimi, Yeritutsu, and Yerikichi, sent envoys to pay tribute.

古文：是月，耶律奴瓜、萧挞凛获宋将王继忠于望都。
现代文：同月，耶律奴瓜、萧挞凛在望都擒获宋将王继忠。
English: In the same month, Yerutungua and Xiao Yarin won the Song general Wang Jizhong in Boduo.

古文：五月庚寅朔，清暑炭山。
现代文：五月初一，在炭山避暑。
English: On the first day of May, I spent the summer in Suishan.

古文：丁巳，西平王李继迁薨，其子德昭遣使来告。
现代文：二十八日，西平王李继迁逝世，其子李德昭派使者前来禀报。
English: On the 28th, the king of Xiping, Li Jiqian, died, and his son, Li Dezhao, sent an envoy to deliver the news.

古文：六月己卯，赠继迁尚书令，遣西上阁门使丁振吊慰。
现代文：六月二十一日，追赠李继迁为尚书令，派西上阁门使丁振前往吊唁慰问。
English: On June 21, Li Jiqian was posthumously awarded the title of Shang Shuling, and sent the Western Shanggakmen Envoy Ding Zhen to Xi'an for condolences and condolences.

古文：辛巳，党项来贡。
现代文：二十三日，党项前来朝见。
English: On the 23rd, the party members came to see the emperor.

古文：乙酉，阻卜铁剌里率诸部来降。
现代文：二十七日，阻卜铁剌里率诸部前来降附。
English: On the 27th, Zangbo Tieyuli led various departments to come to the annexation.

古文：是月，修可敦城。
现代文：同月，修治可敦城。
English: In the same month, the city of Koton was repaired.

古文：秋七月庚戌，阻卜、乌古来贡。
现代文：秋七月二十二日，阻卜、乌古前来进贡。
English: On the 22nd day of the 7th month of autumn, Dzhibu and Ugu came to pay tribute.

古文：甲寅，以奚王府监军耶律室鲁为南院大王。
现代文：二十六日，任命奚王府监军耶律室鲁为南院大王。
English: On the 26th, he appointed the military supervisor of the Shao royal court, Yeluxurlu, as the great king of the Southern Court.

古文：八月乙酉，阻卜铁剌里来朝。
现代文：八月二十八日，阻卜铁剌里前来朝见。
English: On August 28th, he came to see me in the morning.

古文：丙戌，朝皇太后。
现代文：二十九日，朝见皇太后。
English: On the 29th, the Emperor met with the Empress Dowager.

古文：九月己亥，夏国李德昭遣使来谢吊赠。
现代文：九月十二日，夏国李德昭派使者前来感谢辽国的吊唁馈赠。
English: On September 12, Li Dezhao of Xia Province sent an envoy to thank Liao Province for its condolence gift.

古文：癸丑，幸女河汤泉，改其名曰松林。
现代文：二十六日，临幸女河汤泉，将它改名为松林。
English: On the 26th, Linxing Meihe Tangquan, it was renamed as Pine Forest.

古文：冬十月丁巳朔，驻跸七渡河。
现代文：冬十月初一，歇驾于七渡河。
English: In winter, on the first day of October, it stops at Shichifuji River.

古文：戊辰，以楚国王隆祐为西南面招讨使。
现代文：十二日，任命楚国王隆佑为西南面招讨使。
English: On the 12th, King Longyou of Chu was appointed as the envoy to the southwest.

古文：十一月壬辰，故于越耶律休哥之子道士奴、高九等谋叛，伏诛。
现代文：十一月初六，已故于越耶律休哥之子道士奴、高九等谋反，被诛杀。
English: On the 6th day of the 11th month of the lunar calendar, Dao Shinu, the son of the late Yue Ye Lu Xiu Ge, and Gao Jiu and others plotted a rebellion and were beaten to death.

古文：丙申，通括南院部民。
现代文：初十，全面检括南院所属部民户籍。
English: On the 10th day of the first month of the year, a comprehensive inspection of the people's household registration of the department affiliated to the Southern Yuan was carried out.

古文：十二月癸未，罢三京诸道贡。
现代文：十二月二十八日，免除三京诸道的贡税。
English: On December 28th, the tributes of the three capitals were exempted.

古文：二十二年春正月丁亥，如鸳鸯泺。
现代文：二十二年春正月初二，至鸳鸯泊。
English: On the 2nd day of the 1st month of the 2nd month of the 1st month of the 2nd year of the 2nd year of the 3rd year of the 2nd year of the 3rd year of the 4th year of the 5th year of the 5th year of the 6th year of the 6th year of the 7th year of the 8th year of the 9th year of the 9th year of the 10th year of the 11th year of the 11th year of the 12th year of the 11th year of the 12th year of the 12th year of the 13th year of the 12th year of the 13th year of the 13th year of the 14

古文：二月乙卯朔，女直遣使来贡。
现代文：二月初一，女真派使者前来进贡。
English: On the first day of February, Jurchen sent an envoy to pay tribute.

古文：丙寅，南院枢密使邢抱朴薨，辍朝三日。
现代文：十二日，南院枢密使邢抱朴逝世，皇上为之停止上朝三天。
English: On the 12th, the Privy Counsellor of the Southern Yuan Dynasty, Zou Baopu, passed away, causing the emperor to suspend his visits to the court for three days.

古文：三月己丑，罢番部贺千龄节及冬至、重五贡。
现代文：三月初五，免除蕃部逢千龄节的贡贺和冬至、重五节的朝贡。
English: On the fifth day of the third month of the lunar calendar, tributes to the Millennium Festival and the winter solstice, as well as tributes to the Imperial Court for the Five Great Festivals, will be exempted.

古文：乙未，西夏李德昭遣使上继迁遗物。
现代文：十一日，西夏李德昭派使者进献李继迁的遗物。
English: On the 11th day, Western Xia Li Dezhao sent an envoy to present the relics of Li Jijiang.

古文：夏四月丁卯，朝皇太后。
现代文：夏四月十四日，皇上朝见皇太后。
English: On the 14th day of the 4th month of the summer, the Imperial Court went to see the Empress Dowager.

古文：五月，清暑炭山。
现代文：五月，在炭山避暑。
English: In May, summering in Su Shan.

古文：六月戊午，以可敦城为镇州，军曰建安。
现代文：六月初五，以可敦城为镇州，军曰建安。
English: On the 5th day of the 6th month, the army proclaimed Jian'an, with Kedon Town as the township.

古文：秋七月甲申，遣使封夏国李德昭为西平王。
现代文：秋七月初二，派使者封夏国李继迁为西平王。
English: In autumn, on the second day of July, he sent an envoy to crown Li Jichen of Xia as the king of Xiping.

古文：丁亥，兀惹、蒲奴里、剖阿里、越里笃、奥里米等部来贡。
现代文：初五，兀惹、蒲奴里、剖阿里、越里笃、奥里米等部前来朝贡。
English: On the fifth day of the first month of the year, the tributes from the provinces of Buryatia, Putuo, Jia Ali, Yue Lidu, and Orimi began to arrive.

古文：八月丙辰，党项来贡。
现代文：八月初四，党项前来进贡。
English: On the 4th day of the 8th month, the party came to pay tribute.

古文：庚申，阻卜酋铁剌里来朝。
现代文：初八，阻卜酋长铁剌里前来朝贡。
English: On the 8th day of the 1st month of the 1st year of the 1st month of the 1st year of the 2nd year of the 3rd year of the 3rd year of the 4th year of the 5th year of the 6th year of the 7th year of the 8th year of the 8th year of the 9th year of the 9th year of the 10th year of the 11th year of the 11th year of the 11th year of the 12th year of the 11th year of the 12th year of the 11th year of the 12th year of the 12th year of the 13th year of the 11th year of the 12th year of the 13

古文：戊辰，铁剌里求婚，不许。
现代文：十六日，铁剌里向辽求婚，没有得到允许。
English: On the 16th, Tie Xiuli proposed marriage to Liao Rong, but he did not get permission.

古文：丙子，驻跸犬牙山。
现代文：二十四日，歇驾于犬牙山。
English: On the 24th, it stopped at Inugashiyama.

古文：九月己丑，以南伐谕高丽。
现代文：九月初八，将南征消息通知高丽。
English: On the 8th day of the 9th month, the news of the Southern Expedition was notified to Korea.

古文：丙午，幸南京。
现代文：二十五日，临幸南京。
English: On the 25th, I visited Nanjing.

古文：女直遣使献所获乌昭庆妻子。
现代文：女真派使者进献被他们俘虏的乌昭度的妻子儿女。
English: The Empress Zhen sent an envoy to present the wives and children of Wu Zhaodu, who had been captured by them.

古文：丁未，致祭于太宗皇帝庙。
现代文：二十六日，设祭品祭祀太宗皇帝庙。
English: On the 26th, offerings were set up to worship Emperor Taizong's temple.

古文：以北院大王磨鲁古、太尉老君奴监北、南王府兵。
现代文：命令北院大王磨鲁古、太尉老君奴分别统领北、南王府军队。
English: He ordered the Northern Grand Prince Ma Rugu and the Lieutenant Laojunnu to lead the northern and southern royal armies respectively.

古文：庚戌，命楚国王隆祐留守京师。
现代文：二十九日，命令楚国王隆佑留守京师。
English: On the 29th, King Longyou of Chu was ordered to stay in the capital.

古文：闰月己未，南伐。
现代文：闰九月初八，南伐。
English: On the eighth day of the ninth month, the Southern Expedition began.

古文：癸亥，次固安。
现代文：十二日，驻于固安。
English: On the 12th, it was stationed in Gu'an.

古文：以所获谍者射鬼箭。
现代文：用鬼箭射杀宋军俘虏。
English: Shot Song prisoners with ghost arrows.

古文：甲子，以青牛白马祭天地。
现代文：十三日，用青牛白马祭祀天地。
English: On the 13th, heaven and earth were sacrificed with a young bull and a white horse.

古文：丙寅，辽师与宋兵战于唐兴，大破之。
现代文：十五日，辽军与宋军在唐兴交战，大败宋军。
English: On the 15th, the Liao Army and the Song Army fought in Tangxing, defeating the Song Army.

古文：丁卯，萧挞凛与宋军战于遂城，败之。
现代文：十六日，萧挞凛与宋军在遂城交战，击败宋军。
English: On the 16th, Xiao Yuling and the Song Army fought in Suicheng, defeating the Song Army.

古文：庚午，军于望都。
现代文：十九日，驻军于望都。
English: On the 19th, the troops stationed in the capital left.

古文：冬十月乙酉，以黑白羊祭天地。
现代文：冬十月初五，用黑白羊祭祀天地。
English: In winter, on the fifth day of the tenth month, black and white sheep are used to worship heaven and earth.

古文：丙戌，攻瀛州，不克。
现代文：初六，进攻瀛州，未克。
English: Sixth year of junior high school, attack Zhangzhou, Wei Ke.

古文：甲午，下祁州，赉降兵以酒脯。祭天地。
现代文：十四日，攻下祁州，赏赉投降兵士。用酒脯祭祀天地。
English: On the 14th, he conquered Bozhou and rewarded the soldiers who surrendered. He sacrificed heaven and earth with wine.

古文：己酉，西平王李德昭遣使谢封册。
现代文：二十九日，西平王李德昭派使者前来感谢册封。
English: On the 29th, the king of Xiping, Li Dezhao, sent an envoy to thank the seal.

古文：十一月癸亥，马军都指挥使耶律课里遇宋兵于洺州，击退之。
现代文：十一月十三日，马军都指挥使耶律课里在氵名州遭遇宋兵，击退之。
English: On November 13th, the commanding officer of the Ma Army sent Ye Liuxuli to encounter the Song soldiers in Shennai Prefecture and repel them.

古文：甲子，东京留守萧排押获宋魏府官吏田逢吉、郭守荣、常显、刘绰等以献。
现代文：十四日，东京留守萧排押献上擒获的宋魏府官吏田逢吉、郭守荣、常显、刘绰等。
English: On the 14th, Xiao Pai, who was in Tokyo, presented the captured Song and Wei government officials, including Tian Fengji, Guo Shurong, Chang Xian, and Liu Cao.

古文：丁卯，南院大王善补奏宋遣人遗王继忠弓矢，密请求和。
现代文：十七日，南院大王奏称宋派人送给王继忠弓箭，秘密地请求讲和。
English: On the 17th, the king of the Southern Court announced that Song had sent someone to give Wang Jizhong a bow and arrow and secretly asked for peace.

古文：诏继忠与使会，许和。
现代文：皇上下诏命令王继忠与宋使相见，答应他们讲和的请求。
English: The emperor issued an imperial edict ordering Wang Jizhong to meet with the Song envoys and agree to their request to make peace.

古文：庚午，攻破德清军。
现代文：二十日，攻破德清军。
English: On the 20th, the German-Qing army was defeated.

古文：壬申，次澶渊。
现代文：二十二日，皇上驻于澶渊。
English: On the 22nd, the emperor was stationed in Shanyuan.

古文：萧挞凛中伏弩死。
现代文：萧挞凛中埋伏被弓弩射死。
English: Xiao Yuling was ambushed and shot to death with a crossbow.

古文：乙亥，攻破通利军。
现代文：二十五日，攻破通利军。
English: On the 25th, the Tongli army was defeated.

古文：丁丑，宋遣崇仪副使曹利用请和，即遣飞龙使韩杞持书报聘。
现代文：二十七日，宋派崇仪副使曹利用请求讲和。皇上当即派飞龙使韩杞带着国书回访。
English: On the 27th, Song sent the vice-envoy of Chongyi Cao to request peace. The emperor immediately sent the flying dragon to send Han Xuan back to visit with the national anthem.

古文：十二月庚辰朔，日有食之，既。
现代文：十二月初一，日食，为日全食。
English: On the first day of December, a solar eclipse, a total solar eclipse.

古文：癸未，宋复遣曹利用来，以无还地之意，遣监门卫大将军姚柬之持书往报。
现代文：初四，宋再次派曹利用来求和，因宋没有归还土地之意，辽派监门卫大将军姚柬之带着书信回访。
English: On the fourth day of the first month of the year, Song again sent Cao Cao to sue for peace. Since Song did not intend to return the land, Liao sent the gatekeeper general Yao Kamzhi to return the visit with a letter.

古文：戊子，宋遣李继昌请和，以太后为叔母，愿岁输银十万两，绢二十万匹。
现代文：初九，宋派李继昌前来请和，宋君愿称太后为叔母，并愿每年交纳银十万两、绢二十万匹。
English: At the beginning of the ninth month of the year, Song sent Li Jichang to ask for peace, and Song Jun was willing to call the empress dowager an aunt, and was willing to pay 100,000 taels of silver and 200,000 horses every year.

古文：许之，即遣閤门使丁振持书报聘。
现代文：皇上答应了宋求和的要求，立即派阁门使丁振带着书信回访。
English: The emperor agreed to Song Xuhe's request and immediately sent the imperial envoy Ding Zhen with a letter to pay a return visit.

古文：己丑，诏诸军解严。
现代文：初十，下诏诸军解除戒严状态。
English: On the 10th day of the first month of the year, the troops were ordered to lift the state of martial law.

古文：是月，班师。
现代文：同月，班师。
English: In the same month, the class teacher left.

古文：皇太后赐大丞相齐王韩德昌姓耶律，徙王晋。
现代文：皇太后给大丞相齐王韩德昌赐姓耶律，改封为晋王。
English: The empress dowager gave the name Ye Luo to the grand chancellor Qi Wang Han Dechang and changed his title to Jin Wang.

古文：是年，放进士李可封等三人。
现代文：这一年，放榜录取进士李可封等三人及第。
English: This year, Li Kefeng and three other students were admitted to the list.

古文：二十三年春正月戊午，还次南京。
现代文：二十三年春正月初九，皇上回南京。
English: On the ninth day of the first month of the 23rd year of the Spring, the emperor returned to Nanjing.

古文：庚申，大飨将卒，爵赏有差。
现代文：二十一日，大举犒赏将士，赐给他们官爵财物各有等差。
English: On the twenty-first day, generously rewarded the soldiers, gave them peerage and property, each with equal difference.

古文：二月丙戌，复置榷场于振武军。
现代文：二月初八，在振武军重新设置互市榷场。
English: On the eighth day of the second month of the year, the exchange market was re-established in Zhenwu Junction.

古文：丁巳，夏国遣使告下宋青城。
现代文：三月初，夏国派使者来报告攻下了宋的青城。
English: At the beginning of March, Xia Guo sent an envoy to report that he had captured Song's Qingcheng.

古文：辛酉，朝皇太后。
现代文：十三日，皇上朝见皇太后。
English: On the 13th, the Emperor met with the Empress Dowager.

古文：以惕隐化哥为南院大王，行军都监老君奴为惕隐。
现代文：任命惕隐化哥为南院大王，行军都监老君奴为惕隐。
English: He appointed Ti Kinhwa as the king of the Southern Court, and Ti Kinhwa as the governor of the capital.

古文：乙丑，振党项部。
现代文：十七日，赈济党项部。
English: On the 17th, the financial aid department of the party was formed.

古文：丁卯，回鹘来贡。
现代文：十九日，回鹘前来朝贡。
English: On the 19th, Emperor Huizong came to pay tribute.

古文：丁丑，改易州飞狐招安使为安抚使。
现代文：二十九日，改称易州飞狐招安使为安抚使。
English: On the 29th, it was renamed the Yizhou Flying Fox Recruitment Envoy as the Pacifying Envoy.

古文：夏四月丙戌，女直及阿萨兰回鹘各遣使来贡。
现代文：夏四月初九，女真和阿萨兰回鹘均派使者前来进贡。
English: On the 9th day of the 4th month of the summer, Nyanzhen and Asalan Hui sent envoys to pay tribute.

古文：乙未，铁骊来贡。
现代文：十八日，铁骊前来进贡。
English: On the 18th, the shovel came to pay tribute.

古文：己亥，党项来侵。
现代文：二十二日，党项前来侵犯。
English: On the 22nd, the party came to invade.

古文：五月戊申朔，宋遣孙仅等来贺皇太后生辰。
现代文：五月初一，宋派孙仅等前来祝贺皇太后生日。
English: On the first day of May, Song Paisun came to congratulate the Empress Dowager on her birthday.

古文：乙卯，以金帛赐阵亡将士家。
现代文：初八，赐给阵亡将士家属金帛。
English: On the eighth day of the first month, the families of the fallen soldiers were given gold ingots.

古文：丙寅，高丽以与宋和，遣使来贺。六月壬辰，清暑炭山。
现代文：十九日，高丽派使者前来祝贺我国与宋讲和。六月十六日，在炭山消夏。
English: On the 19th, Koryo sent an envoy to congratulate our country on making peace with Song, and on the 16th of June, they spent the summer in Namsan.

古文：甲午，阻卜酋铁剌里遣使贺与宋和。
现代文：十八日，阻卜酋长铁剌里派使者前来祝贺我国与宋言和。
English: On the 18th, the chief of Dangb, Tieyuli, sent an envoy to congratulate China and Songyan on the peace.

古文：己亥，达旦国九部遣使来聘。
现代文：二十三日，鞑靼国九部派使者来访。
English: On the 23rd, envoys from nine regions of Tatarstan came to visit.

古文：秋七月癸丑，问安皇太后。
现代文：秋七月初七，皇上向皇太后问安。
English: On the 7th day of the 7th month in the autumn, the Emperor sent his greetings to the Empress Dowager.

古文：戊午，党项来贡。
现代文：十二日，党项前来朝贡。
English: On the 12th, the party came to pay tribute.

古文：辛酉，以青牛白马祭天地。
现代文：十五日，用青牛白马祭祀天地。
English: On the fifteenth day, the heavens and the earth were sacrificed with a young bull and a white horse.

古文：壬戌，乌古来贡。
现代文：十六日，乌古前来朝贡。
English: On the 16th, Ugu came to pay tribute.

古文：丁卯，女直遣使来贡。
现代文：二十一日，女真派使者来进贡。
English: On the twenty-first day, Jurchen sent an envoy to pay tribute.

古文：阿萨兰回鹘遣使来请先留使者，皆遣之。
现代文：阿萨兰回鹘派使者前来请求送回先前被留下的朝贡使者，于是将他们全部遣送回国。
English: The Uighurs of Asaran sent an envoy to request the return of the tributary envoys that had been left behind, and they were all sent back to their country.

古文：九月甲戌，遣太尉阿里、太傅杨六贺宋主生辰。
现代文：九月二十九日，派太尉阿里、太傅杨六前去祝贺宋主生辰。
English: On September 29th, he sent Lieutenant Ali and Master Yang Li to congratulate Song on his birthday.

古文：冬十月丙子朔，鼻骨德来贡。
现代文：冬十月初一，鼻骨德前来朝贡。
English: On the first day of October in winter, the nobility came to pay tribute.

古文：戊子，朝皇太后。
现代文：十三日，皇上朝见皇太后。
English: On the 13th, the Emperor met with the Empress Dowager.

古文：甲午，驻跸七渡河。
现代文：十九日，出巡途中歇驾于七渡河。
English: On the 19th, on his way to the inspection, he stopped at Shichidahe.

古文：癸卯，宋岁币始至，后为常。
现代文：二十八日，宋所纳岁币初次送到，以后每年交纳一次，成为常例。
English: On the 28th, Song Sona's New Year's gift was delivered for the first time. From then on, it will be paid once a year, becoming a regular practice.

古文：十一月戊申，上遣太保合住、颁给使韩简，太后遣太师盆奴、政事舍人高正使宋贺正旦。
现代文：十一月初四，皇上派太保合住、颁给使韩，太后派太师盆奴、政事舍人高正出使宋国祝贺宋大年初一正旦。
English: On the 4th day of the 11th month of the year, the emperor sent Taibo to live with and present to the envoy Han, and the empress dowager sent Taishi Bonnu and Gaozheng, who was indifferent to politics, to send an envoy to Song to congratulate Song on the first day of the first month of the Song Dynasty.

古文：辛亥，观渔桑乾河。
现代文：初七，在桑干河观看捕鱼。
English: On the seventh day of the new year, watch the fisherman catch fish in the Sangan River.

古文：丁巳，诏大丞相耶律德昌出宫籍，属于横帐。
现代文：十三日，诏令出大丞相耶律德昌之宫籍，隶属于横帐。
English: On the thirteenth day of the month, the imperial edict issued that the grand chancellor, Yerut Dechang, was a member of the imperial household and was affiliated with the yakuza.

古文：十二月丙申，宋遣周渐等来贺千龄节。
现代文：十二月二十二日，宋派周渐等人前来庆贺千龄节。
English: On December 22, Zhou Qian and others from the Song Dynasty came to celebrate the Millennium Festival.

古文：丁酉，复遣张若谷等来贺正旦。
现代文：二十三日，又派遣张若谷等人前来祝贺大年初一正旦。
English: On the 23rd, Zhang Wakatani and others were sent to congratulate the New Year's Day.

古文：二十四年春正月，如鸳鸯泺。
现代文：二十四年春正月，到鸳鸯泊。
English: In the first month of the spring of the twenty-fourth year, I went to Oshidomari.

古文：夏五月壬寅朔，幸炭山清暑。
现代文：夏五月初一，临幸炭山避暑。
English: On the first day of summer in May, Linxing Coal Mountain is a summer resort.

古文：幽皇太妃胡辇于怀州，囚夫人夷懒于南京，馀党皆生瘗之。
现代文：将皇太妃胡辇幽禁于怀州，将夫人夷懒囚禁于南京，将她们的余党全部活埋。
English: He imprisoned Empress Dowager Hu Yao in Huizhou and Empress Dowager Yi Lazy in Nanjing, and buried the rest of their party alive.

古文：秋七月辛丑朔，南幸。
现代文：秋七月初一，南幸。
English: On the first day of the seventh month of autumn, Southern happiness.

古文：八月丙戌，改南京宫宣教门为元和，外三门为南端，左掖门为万春，右掖门为千秋。
现代文：八月十六日，改称南京宫宣教门为元和门，外三门为南端门，左掖门为万春门，右掖门为千秋门。
English: On August 16th, the name of Nanjing Palace's Mission Gate was changed to Yuanhe Gate, the three outer gates to Nanfang Gate, the left gate to Bunchun Gate, and the right gate to Qianqiu Gate.

古文：是月，沙州敦煌王曹寿遣使进大食国马及美玉，以对衣、银器等物赐之。
现代文：同月，沙州敦煌王曹寿派使者进献大食国马匹和美玉，皇上则赐给他们对衣、银器等物品。
English: In the same month, the king of Dunhuang in Shazhou, Cao Shou, sent an envoy to present the horses and precious stones of the big-eating country, and the emperor gave them clothes, silverware and other items.

古文：九月，幸南京。
现代文：九月，临幸南京。
English: In September, he visited Nanjing.

古文：冬十月庚午朔，帝率群臣上皇太后尊号曰睿德神略应运启化承天皇太后，群臣上皇帝尊号曰至德广孝昭圣天辅皇帝。
现代文：冬十月初一，皇帝率群臣给皇太后上尊号为睿德神略应运启化承天皇太后，群臣则给皇帝上尊号为至德广孝昭圣天辅皇帝。
English: On the first day of October in winter, the emperor and his courtiers gave the empress dowager the honorific title of Rui De Shenliao Shi Yun Kai, the successor to the empress dowager, and the courtiers gave the emperor the honorific title of Zhiguang Xiaozhao Sheng Tianyu Emperor.

古文：大赦。
现代文：大赦天下。
English: Amnesty for criminals.

古文：是年，放进士杨佶等二十三人及第。
现代文：这一年，放榜录进士杨佶等二十三人及第。
English: In this year, there were twenty-three new members, including Yang Jie, who entered the list.

古文：二十五年春正月，建中京。
现代文：二十五年春正月，修建中京。
English: In the first month of the spring of the 25th year of the Heian period, Chukyo was built.

古文：二月，如鸳鸯泺。
现代文：二月，到鸳鸯泊。
English: February, to Oshidomari.

古文：夏四月，清暑炭山。
现代文：夏四月，到炭山避暑。
English: Summer In April, I went to Suishan to escape the heat.

古文：六月，赐皇太妃胡辇死于幽所。
现代文：六月，将皇太妃胡辇赐死于幽州。
English: In June, Empress Dowager Hu Jintao died in Yuzhou.

古文：秋七月壬申，西平王李德昭母薨，遣使吊祭。
现代文：秋七月初八，西平王李德昭母亲逝世，我国派使者前往吊唁祭祀。
English: On the 8th day of the 7th month of autumn, the mother of Xiping King Li Dezhao passed away, and China sent an envoy to offer condolences.

古文：甲戌，遣使起复。
现代文：初十，派使者起复李德昭。
English: On the tenth day of the first month, an envoy was sent to recover Li Dezhao.

古文：九月，西北路招讨使萧图玉讨阻卜，破之。
现代文：九月，西北路招讨使萧图玉讨伐阻卜，获胜。
English: In September, the Northwest Road Invitation made Xiao Tuyu fight against the obstruction and won.

古文：冬十月丙申，驻跸中京。
现代文：冬十月初三，歇驾于中京。
English: On the third day of the tenth month of winter, it stopped in Chukyo.

古文：十二月乙酉，振饶州饥民。
现代文：十二月十七日，赈济饶州饥民。
English: Feeding the hungry in Raozhou on December 17th.

古文：二十六年春二月，如长泺。
现代文：二十六年春二月，到长泊。
English: In the spring and February of the twenty-sixth year, he went to Nagatoro.

古文：夏四月辛卯朔，祠木叶山。
现代文：夏四月初一，祠祭木叶山。
English: In summer, on the first day of April, the ancestral hall festival is held on Mujiyama.

古文：五月庚申朔，还上京。丙寅，高丽进龙须草席。
现代文：三月初一，回上京。初七，高丽进献龙须草席。
English: On the first day of March, I went back to Tokyo. On the seventh day of the first month, Goryeo presented me with a long grass seat.

古文：己巳，遣使贺中京成。
现代文：初十，派使者前去祝贺中京城建成。
English: On the tenth day of the first month, he sent an envoy to congratulate Zhongjing City on its completion.

古文：庚午，致祭祖、怀二陵。
现代文：十一日，陈列祭品祭祀祖、怀二陵。
English: On the 11th day, the display of offerings to the ancestor and Huai Er Mausoleum ended.

古文：辛未，驻跸怀州。
现代文：十二日，歇驾于怀州。
English: On the 12th, it stopped in Waizhou.

古文：秋七月，增太祖、太宗、让国皇帝、世宗谥，仍谥皇太弟李胡曰钦顺皇帝。
现代文：秋七月，增加太祖、太宗、让国皇帝、世宗谥号，又谥皇太弟李胡为钦顺皇帝。
English: In autumn and July, Emperor Taizu, Emperor Taizong, Emperor Zangguo, Emperor Shizong, and Emperor Shizong's younger brother Li Hu were added as Emperor Qinshun.

古文：冬十月戊子朔，幸中京。
现代文：冬十月初一，临幸中京。
English: On the first day of October in winter, Linxing Zhongjing.

古文：十二月，萧图玉奏讨甘州回鹘，降其王耶剌里，抚慰而还。
现代文：十二月，萧图玉奏称讨伐甘州回鹘，招降其王耶剌里，加以抚慰后回师。
English: In December, Xiao Tu Yuxiao called for a crackdown on Gansu Uighurs, invited their king Ye Xili to surrender, and comforted him after he returned.

古文：是年，放进士史克忠等一十三人。
现代文：这一年，放榜录进士史克忠等十三人及第。
English: In this year, there were 13 people who were promoted to Shikizhong and so on.

古文：二十七年春正月，钓鱼土河。
现代文：二十七年春正月，在土河钓鱼。
English: In the first month of spring in the 27th year, I went fishing in the Tu River.

古文：猎于瑞鹿原。
现代文：出猎于瑞鹿原。
English: Went hunting in Ruikahara.

古文：夏四月丙戌朔，驻跸中京，营建宫室。
现代文：夏四月初一，歇驾于中京，营建宫室。
English: On the first day of the fourth month of summer, he stopped in Chukyo to build a palace.

古文：庚戌，废霸州处置司。
现代文：二十五日，撤销霸州处置司。
English: On the 25th, the Bozhou Disposal Division was revoked.

古文：秋七月甲寅朔，霖雨，潢、土、斡剌、阴凉四河皆溢，漂没民舍。
现代文：秋七月初一，大雨连绵，潢河、土河、斡剌河、阴凉河均泛滥成灾，淹没民舍。
English: On the first day of autumn in July, there was continuous heavy rain, and the Wei River, the Tu River, the Yuxi River, and the Yinli River all flooded, flooding the houses.

古文：八月甲申，北幸。
现代文：八月初二，北幸。
English: On the second day of the eighth lunar month, Beixing.

古文：冬十一月壬子朔，行柴册礼。
现代文：冬十一月初一，举行柴册礼。
English: In winter, on the first day of November, a firecracker ceremony is held.

古文：十二月乙酉，南幸。
现代文：十二月初五，南幸。
English: On the fifth day of the twelfth month, Nanxing.

古文：皇太后不豫。
现代文：皇太后病重。
English: The Empress Dowager is seriously ill.

古文：戊子，肆赦。
现代文：初八，对犯人赦免或缓刑。
English: On the first day of the eighth month, the prisoner is pardoned or his sentence is suspended.

古文：辛卯，皇太后崩于行宫。
现代文：十一日，皇太后在行宫驾崩。
English: On the 11th day, the Empress Dowager passed away in the palace.

古文：壬辰，遣使报哀于宋、夏、高丽。
现代文：十二日，派使者前往宋、夏、高丽报哀。
English: On the 12th, envoys were sent to Song, Xia and Goryeo to pay their respects.

古文：戊申，如中京。
现代文：二十八日，至中京。
English: On the 28th, to Chukyo.

古文：己酉，诏免贺千龄节。
现代文：二十九日，诏令免予祝贺千龄节。
English: On the 29th, the imperial edict exempted congratulations on the Millennium Day.

古文：是岁，御前引试刘二宜等三人。
现代文：这一年，皇上对刘二宜等三人进行殿试。
English: In that year, the emperor put Liu Eryi and three others to the imperial examination.

