古文：献文皇帝七男。
现代文：献文皇帝有七个儿子。
English: Emperor Xianwen had seven sons.

古文：李思皇后生孝文皇帝。
现代文：李思皇后生孝文皇帝。
English: Empress Li Si gives birth to Emperor Xiaowen.

古文：封昭仪生咸阳王禧。
现代文：封为昭仪生咸阳王元禧。
English: He was named Xianyang Wang Yuanxi, the son of Zhao Yi.

古文：韩贵人生赵郡灵王干、高阳文穆王雍。
现代文：韩贵人生赵郡灵王元干、高阳文穆王元雍。
English: In Han Gui's life, Zhao Gu Ling Wang Yuan Gan, Gao Yang Wen Mu Wang Yuan Yong.

古文：孟椒房生广陵惠王羽。
现代文：孟椒房生广陵惠王元羽。
English: Meng Jiao Fang Sheng Guang Ling Hui Wang Yuan Yu.

古文：潘贵人生彭城武宣王勰。
现代文：潘贵人生彭城武宣王元勰。
English: The life of Pan Gui is narrated by Pengcheng Wuxuan Wang Yuanqi.

古文：高椒房生北海平王详。
现代文：高椒房生北海平王元详。
English: Gao Jiao Fang Sheng Beihai Ping Wang Yuan Zhao.

古文：勰别有传。
现代文：元勰另外有传记。
English: Yuan Shao also has a biography.

古文：咸阳王禧，字永寿。
现代文：咸阳王元禧，字永寿。
English: Xianyang Wang Yuanxi, the word Yongshou.

古文：太和九年封，加侍中、骠骑大将军、中都大官。
现代文：太和九年封，加授侍中、骠骑大将军、中都大官。
English: He was promoted to Taihe nine years later, and was additionally awarded the titles of Jizhong (Junior Chamberlain), Zhengyi Taisen (Major General of Cavalry), and Zhongdu Daikan (Major General of the Capital).

古文：文明太后令曰： 自非生知，皆由学诲。皇子皇孙，训教不立，温故求新，盖有阙矣。
现代文：文明太后下令说： 除非生而知之，都由学习教诲，皇子皇孙，教导没有树立，温习旧知识求得新体会，还有缺略。
English: The Empress Dowager Bunmei ordered, "Unless one is born with knowledge, it is all through study and instruction. Princes and grandsons, instruction is not established, and there are shortcomings in reviewing old knowledge to gain new experience.

古文：可于闲静之所，别置学馆，选忠信博闻之士为之师傅，以匠成之。 
现代文：可以在悠闲安静的地方，另外设置学馆，选择忠诚信实见闻广博的人做老师，来培养造就他们。 
English: It is possible to set up a school hall in a leisurely and quiet place and choose a loyal, trustworthy and knowledgeable person as a teacher to train and educate them.

古文：高祖以诸弟典三都，诫禧等曰： 汝等国之至亲，皆幼年任重，三都折狱，特宜用心。
现代文：高祖以几个弟弟掌管三个都城，告诫元禧等人说： 你们是国家最亲近的人，都年纪小而责任重，三个都城的判案，特别应该用尽心思。
English: Gao Zu, who is in charge of the three capital cities with several younger brothers, admonished Yuan Xiyu and others, saying, "You are the closest people to the country. You are all young and have heavy responsibilities. In the case of the three capital cities, you should especially exhaust your thoughts.

古文：夫未能操刀而使割锦，非伤锦之尤，实授刀之责。
现代文：不能拿刀而派人割裂锦缎，不是损伤锦缎者的遇错，实为给刀者的责任。
English: If a person has not yet learned to use a knife, let him cut brocade. This is not the fault of the person who cut the brocade. The actual responsibility should be borne by the person who gave the knife.

古文：皆可修身慎行，勿有乖爽。 
现代文：都应修养身心谨慎行动，不要有过失差错。 
English: All should cultivate their mind and body, act prudently, and do not make mistakes.

古文：文明太后亦诫禧等曰： 汝兄继承先业，统御万机，战战兢兢，恆恐不称。
现代文：文明太后也告诫元禧等人说： 你们的哥哥继承先人业绩，掌管各项事务，警惧小心，总是担心不能胜任。
English: The empress dowager of civilization also admonished the people of the first jubilee, saying: Your elder brothers will inherit the achievements of their predecessors, be in charge of various affairs, be wary and cautious, and always worry about not being competent.

古文：汝所治虽小，亦宜克念。 
现代文：你们所治理的地方虽然小，也应细心思虑。 
English: Though the place you are to govern is small, you should consider it carefully.

古文：高祖又曰： 周文王小心翼翼，聿怀多福。
现代文：高祖又说： 周文王小心翼翼，心中求取福祉。
English: Gao Zu also said: Zhou Wenwang is cautious and seeks well-being in his heart.

古文：如有周公之才，使骄且吝，其余不足观。
现代文：如果有周公的才能，假使他骄傲而且吝啬，其余的德行就不值得一谈。
English: If Zhou Guo has talent, if he is proud and stingy, the rest of the virtues are not worth talking about.

古文：汝等宜小心畏慎，勿自骄怠。 
现代文：你们应该小心谨慎，不要自我骄傲懈怠。 
English: You should be careful not to be complacent.

古文：出为使持节、开府、冀州刺史，高祖饯于南郊。
现代文：元禧外任使持节、开府、冀州刺史，高祖在南郊为他饯行。
English: The foreign envoy of the first anniversary of the founding of the People's Republic of China (PRC), Gao Zu, visited the southern suburb of Jizhou to commemorate the founding of the People's Republic of China.

古文：又以济阴王郁枉法赐死之事，遣使告禧，因而诫之。
现代文：又把济阴王元郁违法被赐自杀的事，派遣使者告诉元禧，藉此告诫他。
English: He also sent an envoy to Yuan Xie to warn him about the illegal suicide of King Yuan Yu of Jiyin.

古文：后禧朝京师，高祖谓王公曰： 皇太后平日以朝仪阙然，遂命百官更欲撰缉，今将毕修遗志，卿等谓可行不？
现代文：后来元禧到京城朝见，高祖对王公们说： 皇太后往日因朝廷礼仪缺略，于是命令百官要再撰作编辑，现在将要完成太后遗愿，各位以为可行否?
English: Later, when the empress dowager met with the imperial court in Beijing, Gao Zu said to the princes: The empress dowager had omitted the imperial court etiquette in the past, so she ordered the officials to write and edit again. Now, they are going to fulfill the empress dowager's last wish. Do you think it is feasible?

古文：当各尽对，无以面从。 
现代文：应各加回答，不要表面顺从。 
English: You should answer each one separately, and don't pretend to be obedient.

古文：禧对曰： 仪制之事，用舍各随其时，而民可使由之，不可使知之。
现代文：元禧回答说： 礼仪制度的事情，使用舍去各依据时代，然而民众可以使他们遵循制度，不能够使他们知道所以然。
English: Yuan Xi replied, "Regarding the ceremonial system, it is based on the use of different times, but the people can make them follow the system, but they can't make them know why.

古文：臣谓宜述元志，备行朝式。 
现代文：臣下以为应继承先人志向，完备地施行朝廷仪式。 
English: The vassals thought that they should inherit the aspirations of their predecessors and carry out the imperial ceremony perfectly.

古文：高祖然之。
现代文：高祖赞同他的话。
English: Gaozu thought it was right.

古文：诏曰： 仲尼在乡党，犹尚恂恂；周文王为世子，卑躬求道。禧等虽连萼宸晖，得不尊尚师傅也？
现代文：下韶说： 仲尼在乡里，还显得谦卑恭顺，周文王做世子，谦虚恭敬地求取道理，元禧等人虽然并蒂沐浴皇室光辉，能不尊敬崇尚老师吗?
English: He said, "Zhongni, in the countryside, still appears humble and obedient. Zhou Wen Wang, as a son-in-law, humbly and respectfully seeks the truth. Although Yuanxi and others also bathe in the glory of the royal family, can they not respect and worship teachers?

古文：故为置之，以加令德。
现代文：所以为他们设置老师，以增加美好的德行。
English: So they set up a teacher for them to increase good morals.

古文：延尉卿李冲可咸阳王师。 
现代文：廷尉卿李冲可做咸阳王的老师。 
English: The imperial lieutenant Li Chong can be the teacher of King Xianyang.

古文：禧将还州，高祖亲饯之，赋诗叙意，加禧都督冀、相、兗、东兗、南豫、东荆六州诸军事。
现代文：元禧将要回到州中，高祖亲自为他饯行，赋诗表达心意，加授元禧为都督冀、相、兖、束兖、南豫、东荆六州诸军事。
English: Yuanxi will return to the middle of the state, Gao Zu will personally accompany him and express his thoughts in a poem. Yuanxi will be awarded to the military of six states, including the governor of Hebei, So, Min, Sok, Nanyu and Dongjing.

古文：于是，王国舍人应取八族及清修之门，禧取任城王隶户为之，深为高祖所责。
现代文：造时，王国舍人应该录取八个家族和清高有修养的门户中人，元禧录取任城王的隶属户担任，深受高祖的责难。
English: At the time of construction, eight families and highly cultured portal middlemen should be admitted to the kingdom. At the turn of the millennium, the subordinate households of the king of the city should be admitted, which was deeply criticized by Gao Zu.

古文：诏曰： 夫婚姻之义，曩叶攸崇；求贤择偶，绵代斯慎。故刚柔著于《易经》，《鹊巢》载于《诗》典，所以重夫妇之道，美尸鸠之德，作配君子，流芳后昆者也。
现代文：诏令说：婚姻的意义，往日所尊崇，求取贤人选择佳偶，历代所慎重，所以刚柔标举于《易经》，《鹊巢》记载在《诗经》中，是用来强调夫妇的道理，赞美用心专一的德行，匹配君子，流传美名到后代的。
English: The edict said: "The significance of marriage has been revered in the past. Wise men and women have been carefully selected to choose the right partner throughout the ages. That is why "Gang Jiu" is mentioned in the "I Ching" and "Dragon's Nest" is recorded in the "Song of Songs." They are used to emphasize the truth of the couple, praise the virtue of single-mindedness, match the gentleman, and spread the good name to future generations.

古文：然则婚者，合二姓之好，结他族之亲，上以事宗庙，下以继后世，必敬慎重正而后亲之。
现代文：那么婚姻，和合两个姓氏的友好，联结其他宗族的亲密，上用以侍奉宗庙，下用以延续后代，一定要恭敬谨慎稳重端庄而后亲近。
English: So marriage, the friendship of the two surnames, the closeness of the other clans, the upper to serve the ancestral temple, and the lower to continue the descendants, must be respectful, prudent, stable and dignified, and then close.

古文：夫妇既亲，然后父子君臣、礼义忠孝，于斯备矣。
现代文：夫妇亲近了，然后父子君臣、礼义忠孝，于是就完备了。
English: The couple became close, and then the father-son relationship, courtesy, loyalty, and filial piety developed, and then it was complete.

古文：太祖龙飞九五，始稽远则，而拨乱创业，日昃不暇。
现代文：太祖登位，开始稽考远古准则，而治理乱世开创大业，日夜没有闲暇。
English: The great-grandfather ascended the throne, began to review the ancient principles, and the governance of the chaotic world created a great cause, day and night there is no leisure.

古文：至于诸王娉合之仪，宗室婚姻之戒，或得贤淑，或乖好逑。
现代文：至于诸王下聘成婚的礼仪，宗室婚姻的鉴戒，有时得到贤明善良的妻子，有时是不和谐的配偶。
English: As for the etiquette for the marriage of kings and queens, sometimes you get a wise and kind wife, sometimes a discordant spouse.

古文：自兹以后，其风渐缺，皆人乏窈窕，族非百两，拟匹卑滥，舅氏轻微，违典滞俗，深用为叹。
现代文：从这以后，风尚逐渐缺略，都是人不美好，家族不富足，选择配偶低贱无标准，外戚微弱，违背典章凝塞风俗，深深为此感叹。
English: Since then, the fashion has gradually missed the mark, all people are not beautiful, the family is not rich, the choice of spouse is low and without standards, the relatives are weak, and the customs are frozen in violation of the regulations. I deeply regret this.

古文：以皇子茂年，宜简令正，前者所纳，可为妾媵。
现代文：因皇子成年，应该挑选美好端庄的，原先所纳的，可做诗妾。
English: Since the prince has come of age, it is necessary to choose a beautiful and dignified mistress. The one who was originally accepted may become a concubine.

古文：将以此年为六弟娉室。
现代文：将在今年为六个弟弟娶妻室。
English: will marry off his six younger brothers this year.

古文：长弟咸阳王禧可娉故颍川太守陇西李辅女，次弟河南王干可娉故中散代郡穆明乐女，次弟广陵王羽可娉骠骑谘议参军荥阳郑平城女，次弟颍川王雍可娉故中书博士范阳卢神宝女，次弟始平王勰可娉廷尉卿陇西李冲女，季弟北海王详可娉吏部郎中荥阳郑懿女。 
现代文：长弟咸阳王元禧可娶已故颖川太守陇西人李辅的女儿，三弟河南王元干可娶已故中散大夫代郡人穆明乐的女儿，四弟广陵王元羽可娶骠骑谘议参军荣阳人郑平城的女儿，五弟颖川王元雍可娶已故中书博士范阳人卢神宝的女儿，六弟始平王元勰可娶廷尉卿陇西人李冲的女儿，小弟北海王元详可娶吏部郎中荣阳人郑懿的女儿。
English: The eldest brother, Xianyang Wang Yuanxi, can marry the daughter of the late Yingchuan Daju Li Zuo, a native of Shaanxi; the third brother, Henan Wang Yuan Gan, can marry the daughter of the late Zhongshan Doctor Mu Mingle, a representative of the county; the fourth brother, Guangling Wang Yuan Yu, can marry the daughter of Zheng Pingcheng, a Rongyang citizen who participated in the military in the advisory capacity; the fifth brother, Yingchuan King Yuan Yong, can marry the daughter of the late Chinese scholar Fan Yang, a native of Lu Shenbao; the sixth brother, Shi Ping Wang Yuan Zi, can marry the daughter

古文：有司奏冀州人苏僧瓘等三千人，称禧清明有惠政，请世胙冀州。
现代文：有关官员上奏冀州人苏僧璀等三千人，称说元禧清廉正派有德政，请求世代分封在冀州。
English: Relevant officials appealed to 3,000 Jizhou people, including Su Sangye, saying that the Yuan Dynasty, the Qing Dynasty, and the righteous faction had a virtuous government, and requested that the generation be assigned to Jizhou.

古文：诏曰： 利建虽古，未必今宜；经野由君，理非下请。
现代文：诏令说： 封建诸侯虽久远，未必合乎当今实际；划分疆界出自君主，依理不由下民请求。
English: The edict said: Although feudal vassals have existed for a long time, they do not necessarily correspond to today's reality; the division of borders comes from the monarch and cannot be requested by the people.

古文：邑采之封，自有别式。 
现代文：食邑的封授，自然有另外的准则。 
English: Naturally, there are other criteria for the awarding of a gourmet village.

古文：入除司州牧、都督司豫荆郢洛东荆六州诸军事，开府如故，赐帛二千匹、粟五千斛。
现代文：元禧入京被授任司州牧、都督司豫荆郢洛束荆六州诸军事，开府照旧，赐予帛二千匹、粟五千斛。
English: In the first year of the Heian period, when he entered the capital, he was appointed as the military governor of six prefectures and the governor of the capital, and was given two thousand yakitori and five thousand gourds.

古文：诏以禧元弟之重，食邑三千户，自余五王皆食邑二千户。
现代文：高祖下诏因元禧大弟弟的尊贵身份，食邑为三千户，其余五王的食邑都为二千户。
English: Under Emperor Gaozhu, because of his honorable status as the eldest brother of the Yuanxi Emperor, there were three thousand households in the food towns, and the remaining five kings had two thousand households in the food towns.

古文：高祖引见朝臣，诏之曰： 卿等欲令魏朝齐美于殷周，为令汉晋独擅于上代？ 
现代文：高祖接见朝廷大臣，诏令他们说： 你们是想使魏朝同殷、周美名相等，还是想使汉、晋独享美名于前代? 
English: Gaozu met with the ministers of the imperial court and ordered them: "Do you want to make the Wei dynasty equal to the Yin and Zhou dynasties, or do you want the Han and Jin dynasties to enjoy the good name of the previous generation?

古文：禧曰： 陛下圣明御运，实愿迈迹前王。 
现代文：元禧说： 陛下英明统御天下，实在希望超越前代帝王。 
English: Yuanxi said, "Your Majesty has wisely ruled the world, and I really hope to surpass the previous emperor.

古文：高祖曰： 若然，将以何事致之？
现代文：高祖说： 如果这样，将用什么事达到呢?
English: Gao Zu said: If so, what will be used to achieve it?

古文：为欲修身改俗，为欲仍染前事？ 
现代文：是要修养身心改变习俗，还是要因循前代行事呢? 
English: Is it to cultivate the mind and body and change customs, or is it to follow the previous generation?

古文：禧对曰： 宜应改旧，以成日新之美。 
现代文：元禧说： 应该改变旧习俗，来成就曰更新的美好。 
English: Yuanxi said: It is necessary to change the old customs to achieve the new beauty.

古文：高祖曰： 为欲止在一身，为欲传之子孙？ 
现代文：高祖说： 是要止在一代身上，还是要传承到子孙? 
English: Gaozu said, "Should it be limited to one generation, or should it be passed down to one's descendants?"

古文：禧对曰： 既卜世灵长，愿欲传之来叶。 
现代文：元禧回答说： 既然预测传国世数长久，希望要传到后代。 
English: Yuan Xi replied: Since the number of generations to inherit the country is predicted to be long, I hope it will be passed down to future generations.

古文：高祖曰： 若然，必须改作，卿等当各从之，不得违也。 
现代文：高祖说： 如果这样，必须改变制度，你们应各自遵从它们，不能违反。 
English: Gaozu said, "If this is the case, we must change the system. You should each follow them and not violate them."

古文：禧对曰： 上命下从，如风靡草。 
现代文：元禧回答说： 上面的命令下面服从，如风吹而草倒伏。 
English: Yuan Xi replied: "Above orders are to be obeyed, like the wind blowing and the grass falling down.

古文：高祖曰： 自上古以来及诸经籍，焉有不先正名，而得行礼乎？
现代文：高祖说： 从上古以来以及各部经书，哪有不先辨正名分，而能实行礼制的呢?
English: Gao Zu said: Since ancient times, and in all the scriptures, which ones can implement the etiquette without first distinguishing the right name?

古文：今欲断诸北语，一从正音。
现代文：现在要禁止北方语言，一律依从纯正的语音。
English: Now I want to ban the use of Xianbei and use Chinese instead.

古文：年三十以上，习性已久，容或不可卒革；三十以下，见在朝廷之人，语音不听仍旧。
现代文：年纪在三十岁以上的，养成习惯已经很久，或许不能马上改变；三十岁以下的，现在朝廷中的人，语音不准许依照旧。
English: If you are over thirty years old, you have been accustomed to it for a long time and may not be able to change it immediately; if you are under thirty and currently in the imperial court, you are not allowed to use the old pronunciation.

古文：若有故为，当降爵黜官。
现代文：如果有人故意违反，应当降爵位免官职。
English: If there are deliberate violators, they should be demoted in rank and removed from office.

古文：各宜深戒。
现代文：各自应该深深警戒。
English: Everyone should be on high alert.

古文：如此渐习，风化可新。
现代文：这样逐渐习惯，风尚教化可以更新。
English: In this way, people will gradually get used to it, and the culture and education can be updated.

古文：若仍旧俗，恐数世之后，伊洛之下复成被发之人。
现代文：如果不改旧俗，恐怕几代以后，伊水、洛水一带仍为披发左衽之人。
English: If we do not change the old custom, I am afraid that after several generations, people in the Yishui and Luoshui areas will still be wearing their hair loose.

古文：王公卿士，咸以然不？ 
现代文：王公卿大夫，都以为如此吗? 
English: Dr. Wang Gongqing, do you all think so?

古文：禧对曰： 实如圣旨，宜应改易。 
现代文：元擅回答说： 的确如圣上旨意，应该改变。 
English: Yuan Shao replied, "Indeed, as the divine will, it should be changed."

古文：高祖曰： 朕尝与李冲论此。冲言： 四方之语，竟知谁是？
现代文：高祖说： 我曾经和李冲谈论这件事，奎迚说： 四方的语言，哪裹知道谁的正确?
English: Gaozu said, "I once talked to Li Chong about this matter," Qui Yan said, "The language of the four sides, who knows who is right?"

古文：帝者言之，即为正矣，何必改旧从新。 冲之此言，应合死罪。 
现代文：皇帝说的话，就是纯正的，何必改变旧的依从新的呢，李冲说这段话，应处以死罪。 
English: What the emperor said is pure, why change the old and follow the new, Li Chong said this passage, should be sentenced to death.

古文：乃谓冲曰： 卿实负社稷，合令御史牵下。 
现代文：于是对李冲说： 你实在辜负了国家，该命御史拉你下去。 
English: He then said to Li Chong: "You have really failed the country. You should be removed from office."

古文：冲免冠陈谢。
现代文：李冲取下官帽道歉。
English: Li Chong immediately took off his headdress to show his remorse.

古文：又引见王公卿士，责留京之官曰： 昨望见妇女之服，仍为夹领小袖。
现代文：高祖又接见王公卿大夫，责备留在京城的官员说： 昨天看见妇女的衣服，依然是夹领小袖。
English: Gaozu also met with Dr. Wang Gongqing and scolded the officials who remained in Beijing, saying: "Yesterday, when I saw women's clothes, they still had short sleeves with a collar.

古文：我徂东山，虽不三年，既离寒暑，卿等何为而违前诏？ 
现代文：我到东山，虽然不到三年，已经过了一个寒暑，你们为什么要违背从前的诏书呢? 
English: Although I have been in Dongshan for less than three years, I have already gone through a cold spell. Why do you want to go against the previous edict?

古文：禧对曰： 陛下圣过尧舜，光化中原。臣虽仰禀明规，每事乖互，将何以宣布皇经，敷赞帝则？
现代文：元禧回答说： 陛下圣明超过尧舜，光辉照耀中原，臣下虽然上禀明确的规定，事情每每违犯，将如何宣扬皇上方略，传布陛下规则呢?
English: Yuan Xi replied, "Your Majesty's holiness surpasses that of the imperial edict, and your glory shines on the Central Plains. Although your subjects violate the clear provisions of the imperial edict, how will they propagate the imperial edict and spread your Majesty's rules?

古文：舛违之罪，实合刑宪。 
现代文：舛误违犯的罪遇，实在该受刑罚。 
English: The crime of instigating a violation by mistake should actually be punished.

古文：高祖曰： 若朕言非，卿等当须庭论，如何入则顺旨，退有不从？
现代文：高祖说： 如果我的话不正确，你们应该当廷议论，为什么进殿就顺从旨意，退下后就不顺从?
English: Gaozu said, "If my words are not correct, you should discuss it in court. Why is it that when you enter the hall, you obey the will, but when you leave, you do not obey?

古文：昔舜语禹：汝无面从，退有后言。
现代文：从前舜对禹说，你不要表面顺从，退下后有话讲，造就是说的你们吧? 
English: Once upon a time, I said to Yu, you don't want to be obedient on the surface, step back and have something to say. You are the ones who are saying it, right?

古文：其卿等之谓乎？ 寻以禧长兼太尉公。
现代文：不久任命元禧长兼太尉公。
English: He was soon appointed Yuan Xi Chang and Taifeng Gong.

古文：后高祖幸禧第，谓司空穆亮、仆射李冲曰： 既有天地，又有君臣，太尉位居台铉，在冢宰之上，三槐九棘，不可久空。
现代文：后来高祖前往元禧的宅第，对司空穆亮、仆射李冲说： 有了天地，又有君臣，太尉位处宰相要任，在行政长官之上，三公九卿，不能长久空着。
English: Later, Gao Zu went to Yuan Xiyi's residence and said to Siku Murao Liang and his attendant Li Chong, "With heaven and earth, there are lords and vassals. The first lieutenant and the prime minister must be appointed. Above the chief executive, there are three princes and nine nobles. It cannot be empty for a long time."

古文：元弟禧虽在事不长，而戚连皇极，且长兼太尉，以和饪鼎。
现代文：大弟弟元禧虽然在职时间不长，而以皇亲国戚的身份，并且长兼太尉，来协调宰辅大臣。
English: Although his elder brother, Yuan Xi, had not been in office for long, he served as the co-ordinating vice-minister with the status of a relative of the emperor, and was also the first and second lieutenants.

古文：朕常恐君有空授之名，臣贻彼己之刺。今幸其宅，徒屈二宾，良以为愧。 
现代文：我时常担心君主有空授职位的名声，臣下留有亲疏之分的不满，现在前往元禧宅第，委屈二位作陪，实在感到惭愧。 
English: I have often worried about the reputation of the monarch having vacant positions, and the dissatisfaction of the vassals who have been left behind. Now, I am ashamed to go to Yuan Xiyu's house and accompany the two grievances.

古文：高祖有事于方泽，质明，群臣问起居。
现代文：高祖在方泽祭祀，天刚亮的时候，群臣询问起居。
English: Gao Zu was at the Fonze festival, and when it was just getting light, the courtiers asked about his whereabouts.

古文：高祖曰： 昨日方泽，殊自大暑，遇天云廕密，行人差得无弊。 
现代文：高祖说： 昨天的方泽，本来很炎热，遇上天上云彩密布，行人基本上不难受。 
English: Gao Zu said: Yesterday's Fangze was very hot, and when the sky was covered with clouds, pedestrians were basically not uncomfortable.

古文：禧对曰： 陛下德感天地，故云物凝彩，虽复雨师氵丽扫，风伯清尘，岂过于此！ 
现代文：元禧回答说： 陛下德行感动天地，所以云朵凝结生彩，即使雨师浇水扫除，风伯清洗灰尘，哪能超过遣? 
English: Yuan Xi replied, "Your Majesty's virtue has moved heaven and earth, so the clouds condense into vivid colors. Even if the rain master pours water and sweeps away, and the wind master cleanses the dust, how can it exceed sending?

古文：高祖曰： 伊洛南北之中，此乃天地氤氲，阴阳风雨之所交会，自然之应，非寡德所能致此。 
现代文：高祖说： 伊水、洛水在南北的中间，这是天地气体聚合，阴阳风雨交会，自然的反应，不是寡弱的德行所能导致如此的。 
English: Gao Zu said: Yishui and Luoshui are in the middle of the north and south. This is the gas aggregation of heaven and earth, the meeting of yin and yang, wind and rain. It is a natural reaction. It is not a weak virtue that can lead to this.

古文：高祖笃于兄弟，以禧次长，礼遇优隆，然亦知其性贪，每加切诫，虽当时遵奉，而终不改操。
现代文：高祖对兄弟笃厚，因元禧年岁仅次自己。礼遇优厚隆重，不过也知道他性格贪婪，时常加以深切的告诫，虽然当时遵守奉行，而终究不改变操行。
English: Gao Zu was very kind to his brother, second only to himself because of his age at the time of the first jubilee. He treated him with great courtesy, but he also knew that his character was greedy. He often gave him strong admonitions, and although he obeyed at the time, he did not change his behavior in the end.

古文：禧表曰： 国朝偃武崇文，偏舍来久，州镇兵人，或有雄勇，不闲武艺。
现代文：元禧上奏疏说： 国朝停止武备崇尚文教，片面地舍弃武备已久，州镇的兵士，有的勇敢，不熟习武艺。
English: In his report on the first anniversary of the founding of the People's Republic of China, Song Zuo said: It has been a long time since the country and the DPRK stopped arming and advocated literature and education, and unilaterally abandoned armament. Some soldiers in Zhouzhen are brave, but they are not familiar with martial arts.

古文：今取岁暮之暇，番上之日，训其兵法。
现代文：现在利用岁末的空闲，轮次值班的子，教给他们兵法。
English: Now he uses his free time at the end of the year to teach the children on duty how to fight.

古文：弓矢干槊，三分并教，使人闲其能，临事无阙。 
现代文：弓箭盾矛，分成三部一起教授，使人们熟悉技能，遇事没有缺略。 
English: Bow, arrow, shield and spear, divided into three parts and taught together, so that people are familiar with the skills, there is no shortage of things to do.

古文：诏曰： 虽云教武，未练其方，既逼北行，卒闻教武，脱生群惑，且可停之。 
现代文：诏令说： 虽说练武，没有训练军阵，已接近向北行进，突然听说练武，或许引起众人的疑惑，可暂且停下来。 
English: The edict said: Although it is a military drill, there is no military formation to train, and we are close to marching north, if we suddenly hear of a military drill, it may arouse the suspicion of many people, and we may temporarily stop.

古文：后从平汉阳，以克南阳之勋，加侍中，正太尉。
现代文：元禧后来跟随平定汉阳，因攻克南阳的功勋，加授侍中，为正式的太尉。
English: Yuanxi later followed the pacification of Hanyang, and because of the merits of conquering Nanyang, he was awarded the title of chamberlain and became a full-fledged captain.

古文：及高祖崩，禧受遗辅政。
现代文：等到高祖逝世，元禧受遣诏辅佐政事。
English: After Gaozu's death, Genxi was sent to be an assistant to the emperor.

古文：虽为宰辅之首，而从容推委，无所是非，而潜受贿赂，阴为威惠者，禧特甚焉。
现代文：他虽居宰辅大臣的首位，却犹豫推卸责任，没有是非，而暗中收受贿赂，私下树威信施恩惠的，格外突出。
English: Although he is the first vice-minister, he hesitates to shirk his responsibilities. There is no right or wrong, but those who secretly accept bribes and give favors in secret are particularly prominent.

古文：是年，八座奏增邑千户，世宗从之，固辞不受。
现代文：这一年，尚书省长官上奏增加元禧食邑一千户，世宗听从他们的奏议，元禧坚决推辞不接受。
English: In that year, the governor of Shangshu Province submitted a petition to increase the number of Yuanxi food villages by one thousand. Shizong listened to their petition, and resolutely refused to accept Yuanxi's refusal.

古文：禧性骄奢，贪淫财色，姬妾数十，意尚不已，衣被绣绮，车乘鲜丽，犹远有简娉，以恣其情。
现代文：元禧性格骄傲奢侈，贪恋财产女色，妃妾几十人，心中还不满足，衣被是锦绣绫罗，车辆鲜艳美丽，还到远处挑选美女，来放纵情欲。
English: At the turn of the millennium, he was proud and extravagant, coveted women's property, had dozens of concubines, and was not satisfied in his heart. His quilt was richly embroidered, his car was bright and beautiful, and he went far away to select beautiful women to indulge his sexual desires.

古文：由是昧求货贿，奴婢千数，田业盐铁遍于远近，臣吏僮隶，相继经营。
现代文：因此贪求财货，奴婢以千计数，田产盐铁遍布远近，臣属故吏和奴仆，相继为他经营。
English: As a result, he was greedy for money and goods, had thousands of slaves and maidservants, produced salt and iron far and wide, and had vassals, former officials, and servants working for him.

古文：世宗颇恶之。
现代文：世宗很厌恶他。
English: Sejong detested him.

古文：景明二年春，禧等为将礿祭入斋，世宗诏领军于烈，率左右召禧等入于光极殿。
现代文：景明二年春季，元禧等人将要祭祀进入斋室，世宗诏令领军于烈，率领左右的人召集元禧等人进入光极殿。
English: In the spring of the second year of the Jingming Dynasty, Yuan Xiyi and others were about to make a sacrifice and enter the fasting room. The emperor issued an edict to lead the army to the martyrs, leading the people around to summon Yuan Xiyi and others to enter the Hall of Light.

古文：诏曰： 恪虽寡昧，忝承宝历，比缠尪疹，实凭诸父，苟延视息，奄涉三龄。
现代文：诏令说： 我虽然德薄愚昧，愧继大位，近年体弱多病，依赖各位叔父，苟且延缓生命，忽然已过三年。
English: The imperial edict said: Although I am a weak and stupid person, I am ashamed to succeed to the throne, in recent years I have been weak and sickly, I rely on my uncles, and I have delayed my life, suddenly it has been three years.

古文：父等归逊殷勤，今便亲摄百揆，且还府司，当别处分。 
现代文：叔父等归政退位心意恳切，现在我便亲自统领百官，各位暂且回到府第，我当另加安排。 
English: My uncle's return to politics and abdication are sincerely in my heart, and now I will personally lead hundreds of officials. Everyone should return to the capital for the time being, and I should make other arrangements.

古文：寻诏曰： 朕以寡昧，夙罹闵凶，忧茕在疚，罔知攸济。
现代文：不久诏令说： 我因德薄愚昧，早遭忧丧之事，忧愁孤独在病中，不知道如何度过。
English: Soon after, he issued the following edict: "Due to my poor morals and stupidity, I have long been plagued by sadness. I am sad and lonely in my illness, and I do not know how to get through it.

古文：实赖先帝圣德，遗泽所覃，宰辅忠贤，劬劳王室，用能抚和上下，肃清内外。
现代文：依赖先帝圣明的德行，遣下的恩泽所延续，宰辅忠诚贤明，为王室辛劳，因此能安抚协调上下，整肃京城内外。
English: Relying on the virtuous conduct of the former emperor Shenming, the emissary's benevolence continued, and the deputy governor was loyal and wise, and worked hard for the royal family. Therefore, he was able to appease and coordinate the upper and lower levels, and rectify the inner and outer areas of Beijing.

古文：乃式遵复子，归政告逊，辞理恳至，邈然难夺。
现代文：继而遵循旧制交权给我，还权退位，辞意恳切，高远难以改变。
English: Then, in accordance with the old system, he transferred power to me, returned the power and abdicated. His resignation was sincere, and it was extremely difficult to change.

古文：便当励兹空乏，亲览机务。
现代文：我就要鼓起薄弱的能力，亲自处理事务。
English: I shall have to muster my feeble powers and take matters into my own hands.

古文：王尊惟元叔，道性渊凝，可进位太保，领太尉；司空北海王季父英明，声略茂举，可大将军、录尚书事。 
现代文：王以长叔的尊贵，道德品性深湛凝集，可升为太保，兼任太尉；司空北海王小叔父杰出而有远见，声威谋略都很高，可任大将军、录尚书事。 
English: Wang took the dignity of the eldest uncle, the moral character was deeply concentrated, and he could be promoted to the Tai Bao, and also served as a captain; Siku Beihai Wang's little uncle was outstanding and far-sighted, and his reputation and strategy were very high, and he could be appointed as a general and record records.

古文：世宗既览政，禧意不安。
现代文：世宗亲自处理政事后，元禧心中不安。
English: After dealing with the political situation personally, Sejong was uneasy in his heart.

古文：而其国齐帅刘小苟，每称左右言欲诛禧。
现代文：而他封国的斋帅刘小苟，时常称说皇帝左右的人讲要杀元禧。
English: However, Liu Xiaogu, the commander of the imperial army, often said that people around the emperor wanted to kill Yuan Xiyi.

古文：禧闻而叹曰： 我不负心，天家岂应如此！ 
现代文：元禧听说后叹息说： 我不违背良心。皇帝怎么能如此! 
English: After hearing about the New Year's celebration, he sighed and said, "I won't violate my conscience. How could the emperor do such a thing!

古文：由是常怀忧惧。
现代文：因此时常心怀忧虑恐惧。
English: Therefore, they are always worried and fearful.

古文：加以赵脩专宠，王公罕得进见。
现代文：加上趟脩独受宠信，王公很难得以进宫见面。
English: In addition to the favored letter, it is difficult for the prince to enter the palace to meet.

古文：禧遂与其妃兄兼给事黄门侍郎李伯尚谋反。
现代文：元禧于是和他妃子的哥哥兼给事黄门侍郎李伯尚圃谋反叛。
English: Yuanxi and his concubine's brother and attendant of the Yellow Gate, Li Bo Shangpu, plotted a rebellion.

古文：时世宗幸小平津，禧在城西小宅。
现代文：当时世宗前往小平津，元禧住在城西小宅中。
English: At that time, Sejong went to Kodaira-tsu, and Genji lived in a small house in the west of the city.

古文：初欲勒兵直入金墉，众怀沮异，禧心因缓。
现代文：起初想指挥兵士直接进入金墉，众人情绪低落，意见分歧，元禧的心意因而暂缓下来。
English: At first, he wanted to command the soldiers to directly enter Jinlu, but the mood of the people was depressed, opinions were divided, and Yuan Xie's intention was delayed.

古文：自旦达晡，计不能决，遂约不泄而散。
现代文：从早晨到下午，商议不能决断，于是约定不泄露而散去。
English: From morning to afternoon, the deliberation could not be decided, so the agreement was not disclosed and dispersed.

古文：武兴王杨集始出便驰告，而禧意不疑。
现代文：武兴王杨集始出来后就奔驰报告，而元禧心中不怀疑。
English: After the Wu Xing Wang Yang collection was first published, it was reported to Benz, and Yuan Xi did not doubt it in his heart.

古文：乃与臣妾向汇池别墅，遣小苟奉启，云 检行田牧 。
现代文：就和臣妾赶往洪池别墅，派遣小苟送上书函，说是 巡视农田牧场 。
English: He and his vassal hurried to Hongchi Villa and sent Xiaogu to deliver a letter, saying that they would inspect the farmland and pastures.

古文：小苟至邙岭，已逢军人，怪小苟赤衣，将欲杀害。
现代文：小苟到达邙岭，已经遇到军人，奇怪小苟穿着红衣服，就要杀害他。
English: When Xiaogu arrived in Fuling, he had already met a soldier. Xiaogu was strangely dressed in red, and he was about to kill him.

古文：小苟困迫，言欲告反，乃缓之。
现代文：小苟急迫之下，说要报告反叛，就没有杀他。
English: Liu Xiaogu had a stroke of genius in the midst of his predicament, saying that he was going to report the plot to overthrow the Yuan Dynasty, but the soldiers did not kill him.

古文：禧是夜宿于洪池，大风暴雨，拔树折木。
现代文：元禧这天夜裹住在洪池，狂风暴雨，拔起树根折断树枝。
English: On the night of the first anniversary of the founding of the People's Republic of China, we lived in a flood-prone area. The storm raged, uprooting trees and breaking their branches.

古文：禧不知事露。
现代文：元禧不知道事情泄露。
English: Yuanxi didn't know about the leak.

古文：其夜，或说禧曰： 殿下集众图事，见意而停，恐必漏泄，今夕何宜自宽。
现代文：这天夜晚，有人劝元禧说： 殿下聚集众人圃谋起事，显现意图后而停下来，恐怕一定会泄露，今天晚上哪宜自己宽心?
English: That night, someone advised Yuan Xiyi, saying: "Your highness, if you gather many people to start a riot, show your intention and then stop, I'm afraid it will be leaked. How should you relieve yourself tonight?"

古文：恐危祸将至。 
现代文：恐怕危难祸患将要到了。 
English: I'm afraid there's going to be a disaster.

古文：禧曰： 有此躯命，应知自惜，岂待人言。 
现代文：元禧说： 有这副身躯，应该知道自己爱惜，哪裹等待别人说? 
English: Yuanxi said: With this body, you should know what you cherish, why wait for others to say?

古文：又说曰： 殿下兒妇已渡河，两头不相知，今俯眉自安，不其危乎！ 
现代文：别人又劝他说： 殿下的儿子媳妇已经渡过黄河，两边互相不知道，现在低头自感安全，不是很危险吗? 
English: Others also advised him: "Your Highness's son and daughter-in-law have already crossed the Yellow River. The two sides do not know each other. Now they bow their heads and feel safe. Isn't that very dangerous?"

古文：禧曰： 初遣去日，今如行人渡河，听我动静。
现代文：元禧说： 起初派遣他们离开时，命他们像行人一样渡过黄河，听候我的动静。
English: Yuanxi said: At first, when I sent them away, I ordered them to cross the Yellow River like pedestrians and wait for my movements.

古文：我久已遣人追之，计今应还。 
现代文：我很久就已派人追赶他们，估计现在应该返回了。 
English: I've been chasing them for a long time and I think it's time to go back.

古文：而尹仵期与禧长子通已入河内郡，列兵仗，放囚徒。
现代文：而尹仵期和元禧的长子元通已经进入河内郡，摆列兵器，释放囚犯。
English: Meanwhile, the eldest son of Yin Bingzhi and Yuan Xi, Yuan Tong, has entered Hanoi County, displayed weapons and released prisoners.

古文：而将士所在追禧。
现代文：然而将领士兵已在各处追捕元禧。
English: However, generals and soldiers have been chasing Yuan Xie everywhere.

古文：禧自洪池东南走，僮仆不过数人，左右从禧者，唯兼防阁尹龙虎。
现代文：元禧从洪池向东南奔跑，奴仆不过几人，左右的人跟随元禧的，仅有兼防合尹龙虎。
English: Yuan Xie ran from Hongchi to the southeast, with only a few servants. The people around him followed Yuan Xie, with only Yin Longhu acting as a guard.

古文：禧忧迫不知所为，谓龙虎曰： 吾愦愦不能堪，试作一谜，当思解之，以释毒闷。 
现代文：元禧忧愁急迫不知怎么办，对龙虎说： 我烦乱不能忍受，你试作一个谜语，我当思虑破解，来消除烦闷。 
English: I don't know what to do, I said to the dragon and tiger: I can't stand being upset, you try to make a riddle, I should solve the worries to eliminate the boredom.

古文：龙虎欻忆旧谜云： 眠则俱眠，起则俱起，贪如豺狼，赃不入己。 
现代文：龙虎忽然回忆起旧谜语说： 睡就一同睡，起就一同起，贪婪如豺狼，脏物不入己。 
English: Dragon and tiger suddenly recalled the old riddle and said: sleep together, rise together, greed is like a wolf, and filth does not enter oneself.

古文：都不有心于规刺也。
现代文：一点儿都没有规劝讽刺的心思。
English: There was no attempt to dissuade the irony.

古文：禧亦不以为讽己，因解之曰： 此是眼也。 
现代文：元禧也不认为他是讽刺自己，就破解说： 这是眼睛。 
English: Yuanxi didn't think he was being sarcastic, so he cracked and said, "It's the eyes."

古文：而龙虎谓之是箸。
现代文：而龙虎说它是筷子。
English: But Longhu said it was chopsticks.

古文：渡洛水，至柏谷坞，从者唯禧二舅及龙虎而已。
现代文：渡过洛水，到达柏谷坞，跟随的仅元禧的两个舅舅和龙虎而已。
English: After crossing the Luoshui River and arriving at the Kashiwa Valley dock, only Yuan Xi's two uncles and Longhu followed.

古文：顾谓龙虎曰： 凡夫尚有节义，相为取死，汝可勉心，作与太尉公同死计。 
现代文：元禧回头对龙虎说： 一般的人还有节操义气，一起赴死，你可以激励内心，作和太尉公一同去死的打算。 
English: Looking back, Yuanxi said to Longhu: Ordinary people still have the spirit of self-restraint and righteousness, and go to death together. You can inspire your heart and make a plan to die together with the captain.

古文：龙虎曰： 龙虎东野常人，遭殿下宽明，接处左右。
现代文：龙虎说： 我是村野平常的人，遇到殿下宽厚英明，在左右侍奉。
English: Longhu said, "I am an ordinary person from the village. When I met His Imperial Highness, he was generous and wise, and I served him left and right.

古文：今属危难，恨无远计匡济圣躬，若与殿下同命，虽死犹生。 
现代文：现在遇上危难，遣憾没有远大的计策，辅助圣体，如果和殿下同命运，虽死如生。 
English: Now that we are in a critical situation, I regret that there is no grand strategy to assist the Blessed Sacrament. If we share the same fate as His Royal Highness, we will be as good as dead.

古文：俄而禧被擒获，送华林都亭。
现代文：不久元台被擒获，押送到华林都亭。
English: Not long after, Wendaai was captured and taken to the Waring Du Ting.

古文：世宗亲问事源，著千斤锁格龙虎，羽林掌卫之。
现代文：世宗亲自询问事情起源，用千斤锁缚住龙虎，派羽林郎掌管守卫。
English: Sejong personally inquired about the origin of the matter, chained the dragon and tiger with a jack, and sent Uebayashi-ro to take charge of the guards.

古文：初，高祖闲宴，从容言于禧等： 我后子孙，邂逅不逮，汝等观望辅取之理，无令他人有也。 
现代文：当初，高祖闲居设宴，舒缓地对元禧等人说： 我今后的子孙，碰到不足做君主的，你们观察辅助收取的道理，不要让别人占有。 
English: At the beginning, Gao Zu lounged and held a banquet, and said to Yuan Xiyu and others in a soothing manner: My future descendants, if you encounter a shortage of monarchs, you should observe the principle of auxiliary collection, and do not let others occupy it.

古文：禧临尽，虽言不次第，犹尚泣涕，追述先旨，然畏迫丧志，不能慷慨有所感激也。
现代文：元禧临死，虽然言语没有头绪，还是流着眼泪，追述高祖旨意，不过由于害怕死亡的心思，不能慷慨陈词而感动别人。
English: On the eve of his death, although he had no clue what to say, Yuan Xi still shed tears as he recounted the will of Gao Zu. However, because of his fear of death, he was unable to speak generously and move others.

古文：及与诸妹公主等诀，言及一二爱妾。公主哭且骂之云： 坐多取此婢辈，贪逐财物，畏罪作反，致今日之事，何复嘱问此等！ 
现代文：等到和一些妹妹公主等人诀别时，说到一两个爱妾公主一边哭一边骂他说： 因多娶这些婢女，贪图财物而获罪，畏罪而造反，导致今日的事情，为什么还嘱托询问这些人! 
English: When he was saying good-bye to some of his younger sisters and princesses, he mentioned one or two beloved princesses, who cried and scolded him: "For marrying so many maidservants, for coveting wealth and committing crimes, and for rebelling out of fear of sin, which led to today's events, why are you still asking these people!

古文：禧愧而无言，遂赐死私第。
现代文：元禧惭愧而无话可讲，于是被赐令在私人宅第中自杀。
English: Embarrassed and speechless, Yuan Xi was ordered to commit suicide in a private home.

古文：其宫人歌曰： 可怜咸阳王，奈何作事误。
现代文：他的宫女作歌辞说： 可怜咸阳王，为何作事误。
English: His lady-in-waiting wrote a poem saying: "Poor King Xianyang, why did you make a mistake?"

古文：金床玉几不能眠，夜蹋霜与露。
现代文：金床玉几不能睡，夜踏霜和露。
English: The gold bed almost can't sleep, the night tread frost and dew.

古文：洛水湛湛弥岸长，行人那得渡？ 
现代文：洛水深深岸边长，行人哪能随意渡。 
English: Luo Shui has a long, deep bank, which pedestrians can cross at will.

古文：其歌遂流至江表，北人在南者，虽富贵，弦管奏之，莫不洒泣。
现代文：这首歌流传到长江以南，北方人到了南方的，虽然富贵，用管弦演奏它，没有不流泪的。
English: This song spread to the south of the Yangtze River, and the northerners came to the south, although they were rich and noble, they played it with an orchestra, and no one shed tears.

古文：同谋诛斩者数十人，潜瘗禧于北邙。
现代文：和元禧合谋的被诛杀几十人，秘密地将元禧埋葬在北亡。
English: Dozens of people who conspired with Yuan Xie were killed, and Yuan Xie was secretly buried in Beidou.

古文：绝其诸子属籍。
现代文：削去元禧几个儿子的名籍。
English: The names of several sons of Yuanxi were removed from the register.

古文：禧之诸女，微给资产奴婢，自余家财，悉以分赉高肇、赵脩二家。
现代文：元禧的几个女儿，略微给予资产奴婢，家中其余的财物，全部用来分别赏赐高肇、赵脩二家。
English: A few daughters of Yuanxi were given a small amount of property slaves, and the rest of the family's property was all used to reward Gao Zhao and Zhao Xi respectively.

古文：其余赐内外百官，逮于流外，多者百余匹，下至十匹。
现代文：剩余的赐给内外百官，以至于九品以外，多的一百多匹，少的十匹。
English: The rest was given to hundreds of officials both at home and abroad, so that in addition to the nine prizes, there were more than a hundred horses and less than ten horses.

古文：于后，禧诸子每乏衣食，独彭城王勰岁中再三赈给之。
现代文：此后，元禧的儿子们时常衣食缺乏，惟独彭城王元勰一年之中再三救济供给他们。
English: After that, Yuan Xi's sons often lacked food and clothing, but Pengcheng Wang Yuanjun repeatedly provided them with relief throughout the year.

古文：禧有子八人。
现代文：元禧有儿子八人
English: Yuanxi has eight sons

古文：长子通，字昙和。
现代文：长子元通，字昙和。
English: The eldest son, Motonori, is pronounced as 和.

古文：窃入河内，太守陆琇初与通情，既闻禧败，乃杀之。
现代文：偷偷进入河内，太守陆璘起初和元通有交情，听说元禧失败后，就杀了他。
English: He secretly entered Hanoi. At first, the eunuch Lu Xun had a friendship with Yuan Tong. When he heard that Yuan Xiu had failed, he killed him.

古文：通弟翼，字仲和。
现代文：元通的弟弟元翼，字仲和。
English: The younger brother of Mototsune, Mototsune Tsubasa, goes by the name Nakakazu.

古文：后会赦，诣阙上书，求葬其父。
现代文：后来遇大赦，到朝廷上奏疏，请求埋葬他的父亲。
English: Later, when he was granted amnesty, he went to the imperial court to appeal to the emperor, requesting that his father be buried.

古文：频年泣请，世宗不许。
现代文：接连几年哭泣请求，世宗不准许。
English: After several years of crying and pleading, Sejong would not allow it.

古文：翼乃与弟昌、晔奔于萧衍。
现代文：元翼于是和弟弟元昌、元晔投奔萧衍。
English: Therefore, Yuan Ying and his younger brothers, Yuan Chang and Yuan Qi, joined Ben Xiaoyan.

古文：翼与昌，申屠氏出。
现代文：元翼和元昌，是申屠氏所生。
English: Yuan Ying and Yuan Chang were born from the Shen Tuo clan.

古文：晔，李妃所生也。
现代文：元晔，是李妃所生。
English: Yuan Xuan was the son of Li Fei.

古文：翼容貌魁壮，风制可观，衍甚重之，封为咸阳王。
现代文：元翼身体魁梧强壮，风度可观，萧衍十分器重他，封他为咸阳王。
English: Yuan Ying's body was large and strong, and his manners were admirable. Xiao Yan held him in high esteem and made him the King of Xianyang.

古文：翼让其嫡弟晔，衍不许。
现代文：元翼让给嫡弟元晔，萧衍不准许。
English: Yuan Ying concedes to his brother-in-law Yuan Qi, but Xiao Yan is not allowed to leave.

古文：后以为信武将军、青冀二州刺史，镇郁州。
现代文：后来任命元翼为信武将军、青冀二州刺史，镇守郁州。
English: Later, Yuan Ying was appointed as the general of Xinwu, the governor of the two states of Qinghai and Hebei, and the town guard of Yuzhou.

古文：翼谋举州入国，为衍所移。
现代文：元翼谋划献出郁州归入本国，被萧衍所迁移。
English: Yuan Ying planned to give Iuzhou to China and it was moved by Xiao Yan.

古文：昌为衍直阁将军。
现代文：元昌担任萧衍的直合将军。
English: Yuanchang served as Xiao Yan's Zhihe general.

古文：翼弟显和，昌弟树，后亦奔于衍。
现代文：元翼的弟弟显和，元昌的弟弟元树，后来也投奔萧衍。
English: Yuan Ying's younger brother, Xian He, and Yuan Chang's younger brother, Yuan Shu, later joined Xiao Yan.

古文：显和卒于江南。
现代文：显和死在长江以南。
English: Xianhe died south of the Yangtze River.

古文：树，字秀和。
现代文：元树，字秀和。
English: Motoki, the character Hidekazu.

古文：美姿貌，善吐纳，兼有将略。
现代文：有美好的容貌，善于谈吐，具有将帅的谋略。
English: She has a beautiful face, is good at talking, and has a clever strategy.

古文：衍尤器之，封为魏郡王，后改封鄴王。数为将领，窥觎边服。
现代文：萧衍格外器重他，封他为魏郡王，后来改封为邺王，几度担任将领，窥伺边境。
English: Xiao Yan was particularly fond of him. He was given the title of Wei County King, and later changed it to Shao King. He served as a general several times and spied on the border.

古文：时扬州降衍，兵武既众，衍将湛僧珍，虑其翻异，尽欲杀之。
现代文：当时扬州投降萧衍，兵士很多，萧衍的将领湛僧珍，担心他们改变主意，想全部杀了他们。
English: At that time, Yangzhou had surrendered to Xiao Yan, and there were many soldiers. Xiao Yan's general, Zhan Sozhen, was worried that they would change their minds and wanted to kill them all.

古文：树以家国，遂皆听还。
现代文：元树因家族国度的原因，都被准许返回。
English: The original trees were all allowed to return because of the family's nationality.

古文：衍以树为镇西将军、郢州刺史。
现代文：萧衍任命元树为镇西将军、郢州刺史。
English: Xiao Yan appointed Yuan Shu as the general of Zhenxi and the governor of Zhangzhou.

古文：尔朱荣之害百官也，树闻之，乃请衍讨荣。
现代文：尔朱荣杀害百官，元树听说后，就请求萧衍讨伐尔朱荣。
English: Zhu Rong killed hundreds of officials. After hearing this, Yuan Shu asked Xiao Yan to fight Zhu Rong.

古文：衍乃资其士马，侵扰境上。
现代文：萧衍于是资助他兵马，侵扰边境。
English: Xiao Yan then financed his soldiers and horses to invade the border.

古文：前废帝时，窃据谯城。
现代文：前废帝时，他盗取谯城。
English: When the former emperor was dethroned, he stole Lucheng.

古文：出帝初，诏御史中尉樊子鹄为行台，率徐州刺史、大都督杜德以讨之。
现代文：出帝初年，韶令御史中尉樊子鹄担任行台，率领徐州刺史、大都督杜德去讨伐他。
English: In the first year after the emperor's abdication, the emperor ordered the imperial historian Lieutenant Zou Ziqi to serve as a guidebook, and led the Xuzhou imperial historian and the great governor Du De to fight him.

古文：树城守不下，子鹄使金紫光禄大夫张安期往说之，树乃请委城还南，子鹄许之。
现代文：元树据城固守攻不下来，子鹄派金紫光禄大夫张安期前去游说他，元树于是请求放弃城池回到南方，子鹄答应了他。
English: According to Motoki, the city could not be captured, and Zi Gan sent Jin Zi Guanglu Doctor Zhang An period to lobby him. Motoki then asked to abandon the city and return to the south, and Zi Gan agreed.

古文：树恃誓约，不为战备。杜德袭击之，擒树送京师，禁于永宁佛寺，未几赐死。
现代文：元树仗恃誓约，不做交战准备，杜德袭击他，擒获元树押送到京城，囚禁在永宁佛寺，没过多久赐令他自杀。
English: Yuan Shu swore an oath not to prepare for war, Du De attacked him, captured Yuan Shu and escorted him to Beijing, imprisoned him in Yongning Buddhist Temple, and not long after ordered him to commit suicide.

古文：孝静时，其子贞，自建业赴鄴，启求葬树，许之。
现代文：孝静遗时，亘树的儿子丞贞，从建业赶往鄴城，上书请求安葬元树，答应了他。
English: At the time of her death, Wataki's son, Jozen, rushed to Shicheng from Jianye to write a letter requesting the burial of Motoki, which was accepted.

古文：诏赠树侍中、都督青徐兗扬豫五州诸军事、太师、司徒公、尚书令、扬州刺史。
现代文：下诏追赠元蛮为侍中、都督青徐兗扬豫五州诸军事、太师、司徒公、尚书令、荡业刺史。
English: The following edict posthumously awarded Yuan Man as a chamberlain, the military of the five states, the grand master, the scholar, the scholar, the scholar, and the historian.

古文：贞既葬，还于江南。
现代文：亘旦在安葬亘翅后，回到长江以南。
English: After burying Watanabe, Watanabe returned south of the Yangtze River.

古文：晔，字世茂。
现代文：元晔，字世茂。
English: Motonari, also known as Shimo.

古文：衍封为桑乾王，拜散骑常侍。
现代文：萧衍封他为桑干王，任命他为散骑常侍。
English: Xiao Yan enthroned him as the King of Sangkang and appointed him as a knight errant.

古文：卒于秣陵。
现代文：在秣陵去世。
English: He died in Fuling.

古文：初，正光中诏曰： 周德崇厚，蔡仲享国；汉道仁恕，淮南毕王。
现代文：当初，正光年间韶令说： 周朝德行崇高深厚，蔡仲享有封国；汉朝道义仁厚宽恕，进直至长久受封上。
English: At first, during the reign of Zheng Guang, the imperial edict said: Zhou Dynasty's virtue is lofty and profound, Cai Zhong enjoys the title of the country; Han Dynasty's morality and benevolence are forgiven, and they will continue to receive the title for a long time.

古文：皆所以申恩懿戚，蠲荡旧衅，义彰曩叶，咏流前史。
现代文：都是表达恩情给至亲，荡除旧日的嫌隙，正义昭彰于往代，歌颂流传于前史。
English: They are all expressions of gratitude to relatives, elimination of old grudges, justice in the past, and praise in the past.

古文：顷者，咸阳、京兆王自贻祸败，事由间惑，犹有可矜。
现代文：不久前，咸阳王、京兆王自己招致祸患失败，事情出于离间迷惑，还有可怜惜的。
English: Not long ago, Xianyang Wang and Jingzhao Wang themselves caused the disaster of failure, the matter was out of confusion, and it was pitiful.

古文：两门诸子，并可听附属籍。 
现代文：两家的儿子，都可准许附注名籍。 
English: The sons of both families can be allowed to have their names added to the family register.

古文：后复禧王爵，葬以王礼。
现代文：后来恢复元禧的王爵，用王的礼仪安葬。
English: Later, the crown prince of the first jubilee was restored, and he was buried with the etiquette of a king.

古文：诏晔弟坦袭，改封敷城王，邑八百户。
现代文：诏令元晔的弟弟元坦继承爵位，改封为敷城王，食邑八百户。
English: The imperial edict decreed that the younger brother of Yuan Shao, Yuan Tan, would succeed to the title of nobility, and he was given the title of Shiki Castle King. Eight hundred households in Shiki Village were affected.

古文：坦傲佷凶粗，从叔安丰王延明责之曰： 汝凶悖性与身而长，昔有宋东海王祎志性凡劣，时人号曰 驴王 。我熟观汝所作，亦恐不免驴号。 
现代文：互坦傲慢残忍凶恶粗暴，堂叔安丰王延明责备他说： 你凶恶狂悖的性格和身体同时增长，从前宋国束海王刘樟志向性格平庸低下，当时人称他叫 驴王 ，我反复看你所作所为，也恐怕免不了驴的名号。 
English: He was arrogant, cruel, ferocious, and rude. Uncle Anfeng Wang Yanming scolded him, saying, "Your ferocious and rebellious character and body have grown at the same time. From the former Song Dynasty, the sea king Liu Xizhi had a mediocre and low-spirited character. At that time, people called him the Donkey King. I have repeatedly seen what you have done, and I'm afraid I can't avoid the donkey's name.

古文：庄帝初，还复本封。
现代文：庄帝初年，恢复本来的封爵。
English: In the first year of Emperor Zhuang, the original knighthood was restored.

古文：武定中，为太师。
现代文：武定年间，担任太师。
English: During the Wuding era, he served as Grand Master.

古文：齐受禅，爵例降。
现代文：齐国接受惮让，爵位依例降低。
English: If all accept Zen, the crown will fall as usual.

古文：坦弟昶，起家通直散骑常侍、琅邪县开国公，邑五百户。
现代文：元坦的弟弟元昶，出仕通直散骑常侍、琅邪县开国公，食邑五百户。
English: The younger brother of Guntan, Gundang, was a regular attendant at the imperial court and the founding father of Gundang County. There are more than 500 households in Gundang.

古文：庄帝初，特封太原王。
现代文：庄帝初年，特地封为太原王。
English: In the first year of Emperor Zhuang, he was specially named the King of Taiyuan.

古文：累迁鸿胪卿，超拜车骑大将军、仪同三司。
现代文：屡经升迁至鸿胪卿，越级任命为车骑大将军、仪同三司。
English: He was repeatedly promoted to Hongyuqing, and was appointed to the General of Cavalry and Cavalry and the Third Division of the Ministry of Ceremonies.

古文：天平二年薨，赠太尉公。
现代文：玉垩二年逝世，追赠太尉公。
English: Tamakazura died two years later and was posthumously awarded the rank of captain.

古文：子善慧，袭。
现代文：儿子善慧，继承爵位。
English: His son, Zenhui, succeeded to the peerage.

古文：齐受禅，爵例降。
现代文：齐国接受掸让，爵位依例降低。
English: If all accept Zen, the crown will fall as usual.

古文：赵郡王干，字思直。
现代文：赵郡王元干，字思直。
English: Zhao County Wang Yuan Gan, the character thought straight.

古文：太和九年，封河南王，加卫大将军，除侍中、中都大官。
现代文：太和九年，封为河南王，加授卫大将军，授任侍中、中都大官。
English: In the ninth year of the Taiwa era, he was named the King of Henan, promoted to the rank of General of the Imperial Guards, and appointed to the posts of Junior Chamberlain and Grand Officer of the Central Capital.

古文：寻授车骑将军、左光禄大夫，领吏部尚书。
现代文：不久授任车骑将军、左光禄大夫，兼任吏部尚书。
English: He was soon promoted to General of Cavalry and Chariots, Doctor of the Left Hand, and also held the post of Secretary of the General Staff.

古文：所生母薨，高祖诏曰： 太妃韩氏薨逝，情以伤恸。
现代文：元干的生母逝世，高祖下韶说： 太妃韩氏逝世，感情悲伤哀恸。
English: After the death of Yuan Gan's birth mother, Gao Zu said: "The death of Tofei Han is a sad and sorrowful event.

古文：太妃先朝之世，位拟九嫔，豫班上族，诞我同气。
现代文：太妃在前朝时，地位列在九嫔，班次在上等，生下我的弟弟。
English: In the time of the Yuan Dynasty, Tohei was ranked in the ninth grade, with a higher class, and she gave birth to my brother.

古文：念此孤稚，但用感恻。明当暂往临哭，可敕外备办。 
现代文：顾念他的孤独幼小，为之感叹悲切，明天将暂时前往哭吊，可下令外府置办。 
English: In consideration of his loneliness and smallness, he is saddened by it. Tomorrow, he will temporarily go to the crying hanging, and may order the foreign government to buy it.

古文：遣侍御史假节监护丧事，赠彩八百匹。
现代文：派遣侍御史假节监察料理丧事，赠送各色丝织品八百匹。
English: He dispatched attendants to supervise the funeral and offered 800 pieces of silk fabric of various colors.

古文：诏曰： 季世多务，情缘理夺。
现代文：韶令说： 末代事务多，情感因事理而削夺。
English: The imperial edict said: The last generation has more affairs, and emotions are reduced by reason.

古文：干既居要任，铨衡是荷，岂容遂其私志，致旷所司。
现代文：元干位居要职，担负选拔官员的责任，哪容实现私人志向，致使职责旷废呢?
English: Former cadres hold important positions and bear the responsibility of selecting officials. How can they realize their personal ambitions and cause their duties to be wasted?

古文：可遣黄门郎敦谕，令勉从王事，朕寻当与之相见。 
现代文：可派遣黄门郎敦促晓谕，命他勉力处理国事，我不久将同他见面。 
English: You can send Huangmenlang to urge the envoy and order him to do his best to handle state affairs. I will meet with him soon.

古文：拜使持节、都督南豫郢东荆三州诸军事、征南大将军、开府、豫州刺史。
现代文：任命元干为使持节、都督南豫郢东荆三州诸军事、征南大将军、开府、豫州刺史。
English: He appointed Yuan Gan as the envoy of the festival, the military governor of South Yunnan and East Jing three states, the general of the Southern Expedition, the governor of Kaifu and the governor of Yunnan.

古文：及车驾南伐，以干为使持节、车骑大将军、都督关右诸军事，给铜虎符十，别赐诗书。
现代文：等到皇帝向南讨伐，任命元干为使持节、车骑大将军、都督关右诸军事，给予十个铜虎符，另外赐给《诗》、《书》。
English: When the emperor went to fight in the south, he appointed Yuan Gang as the envoy of the festival, the general of cavalry and cavalry, and the military governor of Guan Yu, and gave him ten bronze tiger charms, as well as "Poetry" and "Book."

古文：高祖笃爱诸弟，以干总戎别道，诫之曰： 司空穆亮年器可师，散骑常侍卢渊才堪询访，汝其师之。 
现代文：高祖深爱几个弟弟，命令元干总领别部兵马，告诫他说： 司空穆亮的年岁度量可以为师，散骑常侍卢渊的才能足够询问访求，你应以他们为师。 
English: Gaozu deeply loved several younger brothers, ordered the chief of the original cadres to lead the soldiers and horses of other departments, and warned him: Siku Mu Liang's age measurement can be used as a teacher, and Lu Yuan's ability to ride around is enough to inquire and visit, you should use them as a teacher.

古文：寻以萧赜死，班师。
现代文：不久因萧赜死去，撤军。
English: Soon after, Xiao Yao died, and the troops withdrew.

古文：迁洛，改封赵郡王，除都督冀定瀛三州诸军事、征东大将军、冀州刺史，开府如故，赐杂物五百段，又密赐黄金十斤。
现代文：迁都到洛阳，改封为赵郡王，授任都督冀宝瀛三州诸军事、征束大将军、冀州刺史，开府照旧，赐给各种物品五百段，又秘密赐予黄金十斤。
English: He moved the capital to Luoyang and changed his title to Zhao Gu Wang. He was appointed as the military governor of the three states of Hebei and Shandong, the general of conscription, and the historian of Hebei Province. As before, he gave 500 pieces of money to all kinds of goods, and secretly gave 10 catties of gold.

古文：高祖亲饯于近郊，诏干曰： 夫刑狱之理，先哲所难，然既有邦国，得不自励也。
现代文：高祖亲自在近郊饯行，诏令元干说： 诉讼的道理，先代哲人也颇为难，然而有了国家后，能不自我激励吗?
English: Gaozu himself was walking in the suburbs, and the magistrate told Yuan Gan: "The principle of litigation is quite difficult for the previous generation of philosophers. However, after having a country, can you not motivate yourself?

古文：汝，我之懿弟，当十修厥德，光宗有魏，深思远图，如临深履薄。
现代文：你，是我的亲弟弟，应该修养你的德行，为魏国增光，深入的思考长远的谋划，如同面临深渊脚踩薄冰。
English: You, my own brother, should cultivate your virtue, add to the glory of the State of Wei, and think deeply about long-term planning, as if you were treading on thin ice in the face of the abyss.

古文：若恃亲重，不务世政，国有常宪，方增悲感。 
现代文：如果仗恃亲近高位，不料理世俗政事，国家有固定的法度，将增加悲伤的感觉。 
English: If you are close to high-ranking people, do not care about worldly politics, and the country has fixed laws, it will increase the feeling of sadness.

古文：高祖诏以李凭为长史，唐茂为司马，卢尚之为谘议参军以匡弼之。
现代文：高祖下诏任命李凭为长史，唐茂为司马，卢尚之为谘议参军来辅佐他。
English: Gaozhu issued an edict appointing Li Biao as Changshi, Tang Mao as Sima, and Lu Shangguo as an advisor to join the army to assist him.

古文：而凭等谏诤，干殊不纳。
现代文：然而李凭等人规劝，元干总不接受。
English: However, Li Biao and others advised that Yuan Gan would not accept it.

古文：州表斩盗马人，于律过重，而尚书以干初临，纵而不劾。
现代文：州中上奏杀死偷盗马匹的人，于法律过分严厉，然而尚书因元干初次到州中，放纵而不举劾。
English: The prefectural government appealed to the imperial court, saying that Yuan Gan had beheaded the horse thief, and that the punishment was too severe. However, since Yuan Gan had just become a prefectural governor, Shang Shu was set aside without impeachment.

古文：诏曰： 夫刑以节人，罪必无滥，故刑罚不中，民无措足。
现代文：诏令说： 刑法用来节制人，罪行一定不能过度，所以刑罚不适中，民众就无法放置手脚。
English: The edict said: Criminal law is used to restrain people, and crimes must not be excessive, so if the punishment is not moderate, the public will not be able to rest.

古文：若必以威杀为良，则应泛通众牧。
现代文：如果一定以威刑杀人为良好，就应该各刺史同样如此。
English: If it is good to kill a person by coercion, it should be the same for every stabbing.

古文：苟须有禁，何得不稽之正典？
现代文：如果需要有禁令，怎么能不稽考法典?
English: If there needs to be a ban, how can there not be a review of the code?

古文：又律令条宪，无听新君加戮之文；典礼旧章，不著始临专威之美。
现代文：另外律令条格，没有准许新君主加倍杀人的文字；典章礼制，没有写下对初到州郡专杀立威的赞美。
English: In addition, there was no written permission for the new monarch to kill twice as many people, and there was no written praise for the first-time assassin.

古文：尚书曲阿朕意，实伤皇度。
现代文：尚书曲意迎合我的心意，实际损伤皇室法度。
English: Shang Shuxu's intention is to cater to my heart's desire and actually damage the imperial family's rule.

古文：干暗于治理，律外重刑，并可推闻。 
现代文：元干不明致治道理，法律外加重刑罚，都可推究报告。 
English: If the cause is unknown, the reason for the punishment and the extra-legal penalty may be investigated and reported.

古文：后转特进、司州牧。
现代文：后来改任特进、司州牧。
English: Later, it was changed to "Special Advancement" and "Sishu Maki."

古文：车驾南讨，诏干都督中外诸军事，给鼓吹一部，甲士三百人，出入殿门。
现代文：皇帝向南讨伐，韶令元干为都督中外诸军事，给予鼓吹一部，披甲的兵士三百人，可出进宫殿大门。
English: During the Emperor's Southern Expedition, he ordered the former governors-general of all military forces, both foreign and domestic, to give a portion of the army, three hundred soldiers, the freedom to leave the palace gates.

古文：干贪淫不遵典法，御史中尉李彪将纠劾之。
现代文：元干贪婪淫乱不遵守法典，御史中尉李彪将要纠举弹劾他。
English: The originator of greed, debauchery and non-compliance with the code, Lieutenant Li Biao, is going to impeach him.

古文：会遇干于尚书下舍，因屏左右而谓干曰： 殿下，比有风闻，即欲起弹，恐损圣明委托之旨，若改往修来，彪当不言；脱不悛改，夕闻旦发。 
现代文：正好在尚书下省遇见元干，就摒退左右的人而对元干说： 殿下，近来有风声传闻，就要起而弹劾，恐怕损伤圣上托付的旨意，如果改正过往错误端正今后行为，我将不进言，如果不改正，晚上听到早上就报告。 
English: Just when he met Yuan Gan in the province of Shangshu, he dismissed the people on his right and left and said to Yuan Gan: Your highness, recently there have been rumors that impeachment is imminent, and I am afraid that it will damage the will entrusted to me by His Holiness. If you correct the past mistakes and correct your future behavior, I will not speak, and if you do not correct it, I will report it in the morning when I hear it in the evening.

古文：而干悠然不以为意，彪乃表弹之。
现代文：然而元干悠然自得不放在心上，奎彪就上奏弹劾他。
English: However, Yuan Gan did not care about this, and Qui Biao went ahead and impeached him.

古文：高祖省之忿惋，诏干与北海王详，俱随太子诣行在所。
现代文：产担阅览奏疏气愤惋惜，诏令元干和北海王元详，都随同太子前往出行时的住处。
English: The procurator's reading of the edict was met with indignation and regret, and both Emperor Yuan Gan and King Yuan of the North Sea accompanied the crown prince to his place of residence.

古文：既至，详独得朝见，干不蒙引接。
现代文：到达后，元详单独得以朝见，元干不被接见。
English: After arriving, the original details were able to see each other in the morning, but the original reasons were not received.

古文：密令左右察其意色，知无忧悔，乃亲数其过，杖之一百，免所居官，以王还第。
现代文：直祖秘密派人观察他的神情气色，知道他没有忧愁后悔，就亲自列举他的过错，打了他一百棒，免除他所担任的官职，以王的身份回到家中。
English: His great-grandfather secretly sent someone to observe his demeanor, and knowing that he had no sorrow or regret, he personally enumerated his faults, beat him a hundred times, relieved him of his official duties, and returned home as king.

古文：二十三年薨，年三十一。
现代文：二十三年逝世，时年三十一岁。
English: He died in 1923, at the age of 31.

古文：给东园秘器、敛服十五称，赠帛三千匹，谥曰灵王，陪葬长陵。
现代文：赐给棺材一副、收殓的衣服十五套，赠送帛三干匹，谧号为灵王，在长陵陪葬。
English: He gave the coffin a pair of clothes, fifteen sets of clothes for the coffin, and three horses for the coffin. His posthumous name was Lingwang, and he was buried in Changling.

古文：子谧，世宗初袭封。
现代文：儿子元谧，世宗初继承封爵。
English: His son, Motohiro, became the first heir to the title of peer.

古文：干妃穆氏表谧母赵等悖礼愆常，不逊日甚，尊卑义阻，母子道绝。
现代文：元干的妃子穆氐上奏五箠的母亲赵压等人违背礼节常道，不恭敬曰益严重，尊卑的义理受阻，母子的道德断绝。
English: The imperial concubine Mu Xuan, the mother of Wu Xuan, Zhao Quan and others violated the etiquette, disrespect and said that it was serious, the principle of superiority and inferiority was blocked, and the morality of the mother and son was severed.

古文：诏曰： 妾之于女君，犹妇人事舅姑，君臣之礼，义无乖二。
现代文：韶令说： 侍妾对于主妇，如同媳妇侍奉公婆，君臣的礼节，义理没有不同。
English: The edict said: A concubine is to a housewife as a daughter-in-law is to a mother-in-law, and there is no difference in the etiquette and principles between the two.

古文：妾子之于君母，礼加如子之恭，何得黩我风政！
现代文：侍妾的儿子对于嫡母，礼节超过养子的恭敬，哪能玷污我国的风俗政令呢?
English: The son of a concubine is more respectful to his mother-in-law than his adopted son. How can our country's customs and decrees be tarnished?

古文：可付宗正，依礼治罪。 
现代文：可以交付宗正，依据礼制治罪。 
English: It can be handed over to the patriarch and punished according to the rules of etiquette.

古文：谧在母丧，听音声饮戏，为御史中尉李平所弹。
现代文：元谧在为母亲服丧期间，听音乐饮酒戏耍，被御史中尉李平所弹劾。
English: During the period of mourning for his mother, Yuan Xuan listened to music, drank alcohol and played around. He was impeached by the imperial lieutenant Li Ping.

古文：遇赦，复封。
现代文：遇到大赦，恢复封爵。
English: When faced with an amnesty order, he reinstated his original knighthood.

古文：除通直散骑常侍，加龙骧将军，迁太子中庶子，出为冠军将军、岐州刺史。
现代文：授任通直散骑常侍，加授龙骧将军，调任太子中庶子，外任冠军将军、岐州刺史。
English: He was awarded the title of Tsuchizhina Sanshiki no Tsuneishi, given the additional title of Longyu Shogun, transferred to the position of Prince's middle child, appointed to the position of Champion Shogun, and appointed to the position of Kishu Sashi.

古文：谧性严，暴虐下人。
现代文：元谧性格苛刻，对手下人粗暴。
English: Yuan Xuan was a harsh character, and he was rough with his subordinates.

古文：肃宗初，台使元延到其州界，以驿逻无兵，摄帅检核。
现代文：肃宗初年，朝廷使者元延到他的州界中，因驿站巡逻没有兵士，聚集头领检查。
English: In the first year of Su Zong, the imperial envoy Yuan Yan extended to his state border, because there were no soldiers patrolling the post, the leaders gathered to inspect.

古文：队主高保愿列言所有之兵，王皆私役。
现代文：队主高保愿陈述所有的兵士，赵郡王都私自役使。
English: Team leader Gao Baozhen said that all the soldiers, including Zhao Guowang, were self-serving.

古文：谧闻而大怒，鞭保愿等五人各二百。
现代文：元谧听说后大怒，鞭打保愿等五人各二百下。
English: After hearing this, Yuan Shao flew into a rage and lashed five people, including Bao Rong, with 200 lashes each.

古文：数日之间，谧召近州夫，闭城四门，内外严固，搜掩城中，楚掠备至。
现代文：几天之间，元谧召集靠近州城的男丁，关闭城的四门，内外严密固守，搜索城中，拷打无所不用其极。
English: Over the course of a few days, Yuan Shao gathered men close to the state capital, closed the four gates of the city, closely guarded both inside and outside, searched the city, and tortured them in every possible way.

古文：又无事而斩六人。
现代文：又无缘无故而杀死六人。
English: He also killed six people for no reason.

古文：合城凶惧，众遂大呼屯门。
现代文：全城人恐惧，众人就大声呼叫聚集在城门。
English: And the fear of all the city was great: and they cried with a loud voice, and gathered themselves together at the gate.

古文：谧怖，登楼毁梯以自固。
现代文：元谧害怕，登上城楼毁去梯子来固守。
English: Geng Yao was scared, so he climbed upstairs and destroyed the ladder to protect himself.

古文：土人散走，城人分守四门。
现代文：当地人四散逃跑，州民分别守卫四门。
English: Locals fled in all directions, and state residents separately guarded four gates.

古文：灵太后遣游击将军王靖驰驿谕之。
现代文：灵太后派遣游击将军王靖乘驿站的马奔驰前去晓谕他们。
English: The empress dowager sent the guerrilla general Wang Jing in a horse-drawn carriage to tell them.

古文：城人既见靖至，开门谢罪，奉送管籥。
现代文：市民看到王靖到来，打开城门认罪，送上钥匙。
English: When the citizens saw Wang Jing coming, they opened the city gate, confessed, and gave him the key.

古文：乃罢谧州。
现代文：于是免除元谧的州职。
English: As a result, the state post of the former emperor was exempted.

古文：还，除大司农卿。
现代文：返回，授任大司农卿。
English: He returned and was given the post of Chief Secretary of the Ministry of Agriculture.

古文：又除散骑常侍、平北将军、幽州刺史。
现代文：又授任散骑常侍、平北将军、幽州刺史。
English: He was also awarded the positions of straggler, general of the North, and governor of Yuzhou.

古文：谧妃胡氏，灵太后从女也。
现代文：元谧的妃子胡氏，是灵太后的侄女。
English: The concubine of Yuan Xuan, Hu Shi, was the niece of the Empress Dowager.

古文：未发，坐殴其妃免官。
现代文：元谧还未出发，因殴打妃子被免除官职。
English: Yuan Shao had not yet set out when he was removed from office for beating his concubine.

古文：后除都官尚书，加安南将军。
现代文：后来授任都官尚书，加授安南将军。
English: Later, he was awarded the title of Metropolitan Shangshu and the additional title of General Annan.

古文：正光四年薨。
现代文：正光四年逝世。
English: Masamitsu died four years later.

古文：给东园秘器、朝服一具、衣一袭，赠帛五百匹。
现代文：赐给棺材、礼服一套、衣服一套，赠帛五百匹。
English: He gave her a coffin, a wedding dress and a suit of clothes, as well as 500 yakitori.

古文：高阳王雍，干之母弟，启论谧，故超赠假侍中、征南将军、司州牧，谥曰贞景。
现代文：高阳王元雍，是元干的同母弟，上书为元谧论说，所以越级追赠假侍中、征南将军、司州牧，谧号为贞景。
English: Goyang Wang Yuan Yong was the younger brother of the same mother of Yuan Gan, and the letter was written as "Yuan Gan" (元论說), so he was posthumously given the titles of "False Junior Chamberlain," "Lieutenant General of the Southern Expedition," and "Governor of Shizhou" (司州牧), and his posthumous name was "Zhenjing."

古文：子毓，字子春，袭。
现代文：儿子元毓，字子春，继承爵位。
English: His son, Geng Zi, also known as Zi Chun, succeeded to the peerage.

古文：庄帝初，河阴遇害。赠卫大将军、仪同三司、青州刺史，谥曰宣恭。
现代文：庄帝初年，在河阴遇害，追赠卫大将军、仪同三司、青州刺史，谧号为宣恭。
English: In the first year of Emperor Zhuang, he was killed in Heyin. He was posthumously awarded the titles of General Wei, General Yi, General Sanji, and General Qingzhou. His nickname was Xuanqiong.

古文：无子，诏以谧弟谳子寘字景融为后，袭爵。
现代文：没有儿子，诏令以元谧的弟弟元谳的儿子元寅字景融为后嗣，继承爵位。
English: Since he had no son, he decreed that his younger brother and son, Yuan Ying and Yuan Ying's son, Yuan Ying and Yuan Ying's son, Yuan Ying and Yuan Ying's son, would succeed to the peerage.

古文：及寘伯谌复封赵郡，改封平昌王。
现代文：等到元真的伯父元谌又封为赵郡王，元实改封为平昌王。
English: When the time came, Yuan Zhen's uncle, Yuan Shun, was named the King of Zhao County, and Yuan Shih was renamed the King of PyeongChang.

古文：齐受禅，爵例降。
现代文：齐国接受挥让，爵位依例降低。
English: If all accept Zen, the crown will fall as usual.

古文：谧兄谌，字兴伯，性平和。
现代文：元谧的哥哥元谌，字兴伯，性格平静和顺。
English: Geng Yao's older brother, Geng Yao, alias Xing Bo, is calm and easy-going.

古文：自通直正员郎，迁太子庶子、司空司马、鸿胪少卿。
现代文：从通直正员郎，升太子庶子、司空司马、鸿胪少卿。
English: From Tsunenao Shokanro, the illegitimate son of the crown prince, Tsukuda Sima, and Hongyao Shokei.

古文：迁后将军、肆州刺史，固辞不拜。
现代文：调任后将军、肆州刺史，坚决推辞不受任。
English: After being reassigned, the general, who is known as the history of Wuzhou, resolutely refused to accept the appointment.

古文：改授平南将军、光禄少卿。转黄门侍郎，进号安南将军、光禄大夫。
现代文：改任他为平南将军、光禄少卿调黄门侍郎，升军号为安南将军、光禄大夫。
English: He was reappointed as a general of Pingnan and a junior secretary of Guanglu to the position of Huangmen waiter, and was promoted to the ranks of general of Annan and doctor of Guanglu.

古文：出为散骑常侍、中军将军、相州刺史。
现代文：外任散骑常侍、中军将军、相州刺史。
English: Foreign straggler, general of the Chinese army, and Soshu sashimi.

古文：罢州，除宗正卿、都官尚书。
现代文：罢除州职，授任宗正卿、都官尚书。
English: He was dismissed from his state post, and was appointed to the posts of Sojo-kyo and Tokyo Governor Shojo.

古文：以亲例封上蔡县开国公，食邑四百户，让而不受。
现代文：因亲近依条例封为上蔡县开国公，食邑四百产，推让而不接受。
English: Because of the closeness, according to the regulations, it was sealed as the founding of Shangcai County, with 400 food products, but it was not accepted.

古文：庄帝初，拜车骑将军、仪同三司、尚书左仆射；封魏郡王，食邑一千户。
现代文：庄帝初年，任命他为车骑将军、仪同三司、尚书左仆射；封为魏郡王，食邑一千户。
English: In the first year of Emperor Zhuang, he was appointed as the general of chariot and cavalry, the third secretary of etiquette and etiquette, and the third secretary of calligraphy and calligraphy; he was named the king of Wei County and had a thousand households.

古文：又加侍中。
现代文：又加授侍中。
English: The Imperial Court also appointed him as a member of the Imperial Household Agency.

古文：谌本年长，应袭王封，其父灵王宠爱其弟谧，以为世子。
现代文：元谌本来年龄大，应该继承王爵，他的父亲灵王宠爱他的弟弟元谧，作为世子。
English: Geng Yao was too old to inherit the title of prince, and his father Ling Wang favored his younger brother, Geng Yao, as his heir.

古文：庄帝诏复谌封赵郡王。
现代文：庄帝下诏恢复元谌为趟郡王。
English: Emperor Zhuang issued an edict to reinstate Yuan Zang as the King of Zhao County.

古文：进号骠骑大将军，加开府，迁司空公。
现代文：升军号为骠骑大将军，加授开府，升司空公。
English: He was promoted to the rank of General of Cavalry, awarded the title of Grand Marshal of the People's Liberation Army, and promoted to General of the Air Force.

古文：出帝时，转太保、司州牧、太尉公，又迁太师，录尚书事。
现代文：出帝时，改任太保、司州牧、太尉公，又升太师、录尚书事。
English: When he left the imperial court, he was appointed as Taiho, Sishu Maki, and Taijo-ko, and was promoted to Taiji and Rokusho Shoji.

古文：孝静初，为大司马。三年薨，赠假黄钺、侍中、都督、冀州刺史，谥曰孝懿。
现代文：孝静帝初年，担任大司马，三年逝世，追赠假黄铁、侍中、都督、冀州刺史，谧号为孝懿。
English: In the first year of Emperor Xiaojing, he served as the chief steward, and died three years later, posthumously awarded the title of Huang Tie, Chamberlain, Governor of the Capital, and Jizhou Historian. His posthumous name was Xiaojing.

古文：谌无他才识，历位虽重，时人忽之。
现代文：元谌没有其他才干，任过的职位虽然高，但当时的人轻视他。
English: Yuan Shao had no other talents, so although he held important positions many times, people did not attach much importance to him at that time.

古文：子炜，袭。
现代文：儿子元炜，继承爵位。
English: His son, Yuan Shao, succeeded to the title.

古文：齐受禅，爵例降。
现代文：变国接受惮让，爵位依例降低。
English: If all accept Zen, the crown will fall as usual.

古文：谧弟谭，颇强立，少为宗室所推敬。
现代文：元谧的弟弟元谭，能够自强自立，年轻时被宗室所推崇敬重。
English: The younger brother of Yuan Shao, Yuan Tan, was able to stand up for himself and was highly respected by his family when he was young.

古文：自羽林监出为高阳太守，为政严断，豪右畏之。
现代文：从羽林监外任高阳太守，为政严明果断，豪强畏惧他。
English: Gaoyang Taishu, who was appointed from the position of Ulin Supervisor, was strict and decisive in politics, and the powerful feared him.

古文：肃宗初，入为直阁将军，历太仆、宗正少卿，加冠军将军。
现代文：肃宗初年，召入任直合将军，历任太仆、宗正少卿，加授冠军将军。
English: In the first year of Su Zong's reign, he was called to the post of General Zhaohui, successively served as Taigu, Zong Zheng Shaoqing, and was awarded the title of General.

古文：元法僧外叛，诏谭为持节、假左将军、别将以讨之。
现代文：元洼僧向外反叛，诏令亘望为持节、假左将军、别部将领去讨伐他。
English: The former Wa monk rebelled against the outside world, and Wang Wang was ordered by the emperor to go and fight against him, along with the false left general and other generals.

古文：徐州平，迁光禄少卿、行南兗州事、征虏将军、泾州刺史。
现代文：徐州平定，升光禄少卿、行南兖业事、征虏将军、迳姐刺史。
English: Xuzhou was pacified, Shiguanglu became a minor lord, Xingnan was engaged in business, he was a conscripted general, and his sister was stabbed.

古文：入为武卫将军。
现代文：召入任武卫将军。
English: Summoned to the post of General Takei.

古文：寻诏谭为都督以讨杜洛周，次于军都，为洛周所败。
现代文：不久韶令五谭为都督去讨伐拄盔周，停驻在军都，被姻打败。
English: Soon after, the Emperor ordered Wu Tan to go to the capital to fight for the duke, and he was stationed in the capital. He was defeated by Rui.

古文：还，除安西将军、秦州刺史。
现代文：返回，授任安西将军、秦州刺史。
English: Returning, he was awarded the titles of Anxi General and Qinzhou Historian.

古文：卒，赠抚军将军、仪同三司、青州刺史。
现代文：去世，追赠抚军将军、仪同三司、青州刺史
English: Passed away, posthumously awarded the General of the General Staff of the General Staff of the Korean People's Army, the Third Secretary of the General Staff of the Korean People's Army, and the Grand Historian of Qingzhou

古文：谌弟谳，为人贪暴无礼。
现代文：元谌的弟弟元谳，为人贪婪暴虐没有礼节。
English: The younger brother of Yuan Shao, Yuan Shao, was greedy, violent and had no manners.

古文：自羽林监迁司徒主簿。
现代文：从羽林监升为司徒主簿。
English: He was promoted from the position of Uebayashi supervisor to the position of Sito master.

古文：肃宗时，除正员郎，稍迁左将军、太中大夫；封平乡县开国男，邑二百户。
现代文：肃宗塞时，授任正员郎，逐渐升任为左将军、太中大夫；封为卫经逊开国男，食邑二百户。
English: At the time of Emperor Suzong's death, he was appointed to the position of official attendant, and was gradually promoted to the position of Left General and Grand Vice Admiral; he was given the title of the son of the founder of the Wei Dynasty, and had 200 households.

古文：庄帝初，河阴遇害。
现代文：庄帝初年，在河阴遇害。
English: In the first year of Emperor Zhuang, he was killed in Hebei Province.

古文：赠车骑大将军、仪同三司、定州刺史。
现代文：追赠车骑大将军、仪同三司、定州刺史。
English: After the gift car ride, the general, the three divisions of the ceremony, and the history of Dingzhou stabbing.

古文：子景暄，直阁将军。
现代文：儿子景暄，担任直合将军。
English: Son of King Gyeongsoo, he served as General Jeongho.

古文：从出帝没于关西。
现代文：跟随出帝死在关西。
English: He died in Kansai after becoming emperor.

古文：谳弟譿，羽林监、直阁将军。
现代文：元谳的弟弟元讥，担任羽林监、直合将军。
English: Mototsune's younger brother, Mototsune, served as a forest inspector and a general of the Tadakata clan.

古文：早卒，赗帛五百匹，赠镇远将军、恆州刺史。
现代文：很早去世，赠帛五百匹，追赠镇远将军、恆州刺史。
English: He died very early, gave away 500 donkeys, and bequeathed generals Zhenyuan and Hengzhou Zhishi.

古文：广陵王羽，字叔翻。
现代文：广陵王元羽，字叔翻。
English: Guangling Wang Yuan Yu, the word uncle turn.

古文：太和九年封，加侍中、征东大将军，为外都大官。
现代文：太和九年封，加授侍中、征东大将军，任外都大官。
English: He was given the title of Taiwa nine years later, and was additionally awarded the titles of Samurai Junior High School and Eastern Expeditionary Senior General. He also served as a senior foreign official.

古文：羽少而聪慧，有断狱之称。
现代文：元羽年轻时聪明有才智，有善于判案的称誉。
English: When he was young, Yuan Yu was smart and talented, and had a reputation for being good at judging cases.

古文：后罢三都，羽为大理，加卫将军，典决京师狱讼，微有声誉。
现代文：后来罢除三都，元羽担任大理，加卫将军，掌管京城的诉讼，稍微有声名赞誉。
English: Later, the three capitals were ousted, and Yuan Yu served as Dali and Gawei generals, in charge of the litigation of the capital, with a little fame and praise.

古文：迁特进、尚书左仆射，又为太子太保、录尚书事。
现代文：升为特进、尚书左仆射，又担任太子太保、录尚书事。
English: He was promoted to the special promotion, the left-hand servant of Shang Shuxu, and also served as the prince's eunuch, and recorded Shang Shuxi.

古文：高祖将南讨，遗羽持节安抚六镇，发其突骑，夷人宁悦。
现代文：高祖将要向南征讨，派遣元羽秉持符节安抚六镇，调发他们精锐的骑兵，夷族人安定欢悦。
English: Gao Zu will go to the south to fight, send Yuan Yu to uphold the Rune Festival to pacify the six towns, dispatch their elite cavalry, and the Yi people will be stable and happy.

古文：还领廷尉卿。
现代文：返回兼任廷尉卿。
English: After returning to Kyoto, he was appointed as a courtier.

古文：车驾既发，羽与太尉丕留守，加使持节，语在《丕传》。
现代文：皇帝出发后，元羽和太尉元丕留下守卫，加授使持节，记载在《元丕传》。
English: After the emperor's departure, Yuan Yu and Lieutenant Yuan Xi remained on guard and were awarded the Envoy's Day, which is recorded in the "Yuan Yu Biography."

古文：高祖友爱诸弟，及将别，不忍早分，诏羽从至雁门，乃令羽归。
现代文：高祖亲近喜爱弟弟们，等到将要分别，不忍心遇早分手，诏令元羽跟从到雁门，才命元羽返回。
English: Gao Zu was close to and loved his brothers. When they were about to separate, he couldn't bear to break up early, so he ordered Yuan Yu to follow him to the Wild Goose Gate, and only then did he order Yuan Yu to return.

古文：望其称效，故赐如意以表心。
现代文：希望元羽称职效力，所以赐了一个如意来表达心愿。
English: He hoped that Yuan Yu would do a good job, so he gave him a wish to express his wishes.

古文：迁都议定，诏羽兼太尉，告于庙社。
现代文：迁都的决议确定后，韶令元羽兼任太尉，祭告宗庙社稷。
English: After the decision to move the capital was finalized, the imperial command made Genba concurrently a captain, and he became the priest of the family temple and shrine.

古文：迁京之后，北蕃人夷多有未悟。
现代文：迁移京城以后，北部边境的民众夷族多有不理解者。
English: After the relocation of the capital, the people of the northern border of the barbarian tribes mostly do not understand.

古文：羽镇抚代京，内外肃然，高祖嘉之。
现代文：元羽镇守安抚代京，内外安定，高祖赞许他。
English: The governor of the town of Motowa pacified the capital, bringing internal and external stability, and Emperor Gaozu praised him.

古文：十八年春，羽表辞廷尉，不许。
现代文：十八年春，元羽上奏辞去廷尉，不准许。
English: In the spring of the 18th year of the Yuan Dynasty, he resigned as a courtier and was not allowed to return.

古文：羽奏： 外考令文，每岁终，州镇列牧守治状。
现代文：元羽上奏： 外地考察的令文，每年结束，州镇列出牧守的治理情况。
English: Yuan Yu's report: At the end of each year's field inspection, the state town lists the governance of the herdsmen.

古文：及至再考，随其品第，以彰黜陟。
现代文：等到第二次考察，依据等级，来加以废黜提升。
English: When the performance is re-evaluated, it is used to determine the grade, indicating promotion or demotion.

古文：去十五年中，在京百僚，尽已经考为三等。
现代文：过去的十五年中，在京的百官。已经全部考察分为三等。
English: In the past fifteen years, the hundreds of officials in Beijing have all been divided into three classes.

古文：此年便是三载，虽外有成令，而内令未班。
现代文：今年就是第三年，虽然外地有了既定的法令，而京城内的法令却没有颁布。
English: This year is the third year, although there is an established law in the field, but the law in the capital has not been promulgated.

古文：内外考察，理应同等。
现代文：内外的考察，按道理应该同等对待。
English: Internal and external inspections should be the same.

古文：臣辄推准外考，以定京官治行。 
现代文：臣下依照外地考察类推，来确定京城官员的政绩德行。 
English: The vassals determined the political performance and virtue of the officials of the capital city by analogy with the field inspection.

古文：诏曰： 虽内考未宣，绩已久著，故《明堂》、《月令》载公卿大夫论考属官之治，职区分著。
现代文：诏令说： 虽然京城内官员考察的法令没有颁布，考课实早已着明，所以《明堂》、《月令》记载公卿大夫考评属官的政续，职务责任区分明确。
English: The edict said: Although the decree on the inspection of officials in Beijing has not been promulgated, the fact of the examination has long been clear, so the "Clearing Hall" and "Monthly Order" record the political succession of the court noble doctor examination and evaluation officials, and the division of duties and responsibilities is clear.

古文：三公疑
现代文：三公。
English: Three princes.

古文：尚书三载殿最之义，此之考内，已为明矣。
现代文：疑尚书三年中考定先后的意义，造就是考察内官，已经明确了。
English: The significance of the examination in the middle of the three years of doubting the book, which is the investigation of the officials, has been made clear.

古文：但论考之事，理在不轻，问绩之方，应关朕听，辄尔轻发，殊为躁也。
现代文：不过考评的事，按道理不是小事，查问政绩的方法。应经由我的认可，随意轻率制定，尤为急躁。
English: However, the matter of evaluation is not a small matter according to the principle, and the method of inquiring about political performance should be approved by me, and should be formulated at will, especially in a hasty manner.

古文：每考之义，应在年终，既云此年，何得春初也！
现代文：每次考察的义理，应该在年终，既说是今年，怎能在春季开头呢?
English: The principle of each inspection should be at the end of the year. Even if it is this year, how can it begin in the spring?

古文：今始维夏，且待至秋后。 
现代文：现在刚到夏季，暂且等到秋季以后。 
English: Now that summer has just arrived, let's wait until after the fall.

古文：高祖临朝堂议政事，谓羽曰： 迁都洛阳，事格天地，但汝之迷，徒未开沉鄣耳。
现代文：高祖前往朝廷商议政事，对元羽说： 迁都到洛阳，事情感通于天地，衹是你的迷惑，还没拨开深深的阻隔而已。
English: Gaozu went to the imperial court to discuss political affairs, and said to Yuan Yu: "Moving the capital to Luoyang, the sense of things is common to heaven and earth, and it is your trouble, you have not yet removed the deep barrier.

古文：朕家有四海，往来何难？
现代文：我家族拥有四海，来往有什么困难?
English: My family owns the four seas. What are the difficulties in traveling back and forth?

古文：朕初发洛阳，教示永寿，皆谓分别。
现代文：我刚从洛阳出发时，发令给永寿，都说分别。
English: When I just set off from Luoyang, I sent an order to Yongshou, and they both said their goodbyes.

古文：比自来后，诸处分之事，已差前敕。
现代文：自来洛阳后，各项安排的事务，已大略见于先前命令。
English: Since coming to Luoyang, the matters of various arrangements have been outlined in the previous order.

古文：今举大功，宁为虚费？
现代文：现在举办大事，难道是凭空浪费?
English: Is it a waste of money to hold a big event now?

古文：且朕无周召之弟，岂容晏安日逸。
现代文：而且我没有周公、召公那样的弟弟，哪能平安恬逸?
English: And I don't have a younger brother like Zhou Gong or Zhao Gong. How can I escape safely?

古文：今便北巡，迁留之事，当称朕怀。 
现代文：现在就要向北巡视，迁移留守的事情，应满足我的心意。 
English: Now I have to make a tour to the north, and the relocation of things left behind should satisfy my heart.

古文：后高祖临朝堂，谓群臣曰： 两仪既辟，人生其间，故上天不言，树君以代。
现代文：后来高祖上朝时，对群臣说： 天地开辟，人生长在其中，所以上天不说话，设立君主来代替它。
English: Later, when Gao Zu ascended the throne, he said to his courtiers, "The heavens and the earth were created, and man grew up in them. Therefore, do not speak of heaven, but set up a monarch to replace it."

古文：是以《书》称三考之绩，《礼》云考成之章。
现代文：因此《尚书》称三年考察的政绩，《周礼》说考核官吏的成绩。
English: Therefore, "Shang Shu" said that the political achievements of the three-year inspection, and "Zhou Li" said that the achievements of the assessment of officials.

古文：自皇王以降，斯道靡易。
现代文：自从三皇五帝以来，这个做法没有改变。
English: This practice has not changed since the time of the three kings and five emperors.

古文：朕以寡德，猥荷洪基，思与百辟，允厘庶务。
现代文：我以薄弱的德行，获得宏大的基业，思虑和百官治理各种事务。
English: With my weak virtue, I have obtained a grand inheritance, and I manage all kinds of affairs with my thoughts and my officials.

古文：然朕识乏知人，不能使朝绝素餐之饥，野无《考盘》之刺，夙宵寤寐，载怀怵惕。
现代文：然而我缺乏知人的见识，不能使朝廷断绝白吃饭的讥笑，民间没有《考盘》的讽刺，日夜之间，心怀恐惧。
English: However, I lack the insight of acquaintances, I can't make the imperial court cut off the ridicule of eating for free, the people don't have the irony of "exam," and I am afraid day and night.

古文：卿等皆是朝贤国彦，匡弼是寄，各率乃心，以旌考绩之义。
现代文：你们都是朝廷贤才国家美士，受辅佐的重任，各尽你们的忠心，来显明考核政绩的义理。
English: You are all sages of the imperial court and beauties of the country. Assisted and assisted by the heavy responsibility, each of you will do your best to show the truth of the assessment of government performance.

古文：如乖忠正，国有常刑。
现代文：如果违背忠诚正直，国家有固定的刑罚。
English: The state has fixed penalties for breach of loyalty and honesty.

古文：贤者虽疏必进，不肖者虽亲必黜。 
现代文：贤明的虽然关系疏远必定擢升，不正派的虽然关系亲近必定废黜。 
English: The wise, though estranged, must be promoted; the wicked, though close, must be deposed.

古文：顾谓羽曰： 上下二等，可为三品，中等但为一品。
现代文：回头对元羽说： 上下二等，可分为三级，中等仅为一级。
English: He turned back to Yuan Yu and said, "Upper and lower are second class, which can be divided into three levels, and medium is only first class.

古文：所以然者，上下是黜陟之科，故旌丝发之美，中等守本，事可大通。 
现代文：之所以如此，上下是升降的科目，所以表彰细小的美事，中等保本，事情可大致通观。 
English: The reason for this is that up and down are ascending and descending subjects, so the recognition of small beauties, medium capital preservation, things can be roughly viewed.

古文：羽先呈廷尉五局司直。
现代文：元羽原先呈报廷尉五局司直。
English: Originally, Genba was reported to be a court lieutenant of the 5th Division, Shisho.

古文：高祖曰： 夫刑狱之难，实惟自古，必也断讼，夫子所称。
现代文：高祖说： 刑罚断案的艰难，实在始于远古，必定要判决诉讼，为了夫子所称说。
English: Gao Zu said: The difficulty of deciding criminal punishment cases really began in ancient times. It is necessary to adjudicate lawsuits, for the sake of what the master said.

古文：然五局所司，专主刑狱，比闻诸风听，多论五局不精。
现代文：然而五局所掌管的，是专管刑罚断案，近来听到各种传说，多评论五局不精密。
English: However, what the five bureaus are in charge of is specifically in charge of sentencing and adjudicating cases. Recently, various legends have been heard, with many commenting that the five bureaus are not precise.

古文：知人之难，朕岂独决，当与群臣同之。
现代文：了解人很困难，我哪能独自决断?应当和群臣共同论定。
English: It is very difficult to understand people. How can I make a decision on my own? I should discuss it with my ministers.

古文：卿等各陈所闻。 
现代文：你们各自陈述所见所闻。 
English: Your respective statements are based on what you saw and heard.

古文：高祖谓羽及少卿邓述曰： 五局司直，卿等以何为品？ 
现代文：高祖对五型和少卿塑述说： 五局司直，你们以为分为几级? 
English: Gao Zu said to the five types and Shaoqing Shuxing: "Five bureaus are straight, how many levels do you think are divided?

古文：羽对曰： 诸司直并简圣心。
现代文：元羽回答说： 各司直都据圣上心意选择。
English: Yuan Yu replied, "Each of you should choose according to the Lord's will.

古文：往者，百官初置，擢为狱官，听讼察辞，无大差越。
现代文：从前，百官开始设置，擢升为狱官，听取诉讼考察言辞，没有大的差池。
English: Once upon a time, officials began to be set up, promoted to prison officers, listened to lawsuits and examined words, and there was no big difference.

古文：所以为二等者，或以视事甫尔，或以见机迟速，朝廷既有九品之制，故计其丝发之差，以为品第。
现代文：所以分为两等，是因为有的刚处理事务，有的判断时机有快慢。朝廷既然有了九品的制度，所以计算细小的差别，来分成等级。
English: Therefore, it is divided into two classes, because some are just dealing with affairs, and some have a fast judgment time. Since the imperial court has a nine-grade system, it calculates small differences to divide into grades.

古文：统论所得，大都相似。 
现代文：总体评论得失，大都差不多。 
English: Overall, the comments on gains and losses are mostly similar.

古文：高祖曰： 朕顷年以其人识见可取，故简司狱官，小优劣不足为差。
现代文：高祖说： 我近年因这些人见识值得赞许，所以挑选为管理讼狱的官，小的优缺点不值得分等级。
English: Gao Zu said: I have recently been selected as a prison management officer because of my commendable insight into these people. Small advantages and disadvantages are not worth grading.

古文：然廷尉所司，人命之本事，须心平性正、抑强哀弱、不避贵势、直情折狱者可为上等。
现代文：然而廷尉所管的，是人民性命的大事，必须内心公平性情端正、抑制豪强哀怜弱者、不躲避尊贵权势、以实事求是判案的才可算上等。
English: However, what the imperial lieutenant is in charge of is an important matter of people's lives, and he must be fair-minded and upright, restrain the strong and pity the weak, do not avoid honor and power, and judge cases by seeking truth from facts.

古文：今正欲听采风谣，虚实难悉；正欲不采，事无所据。
现代文：现在一意要听取传闻，真假难以辨清；一意要不采纳，事情没有依据。
English: At present, there is an eagerness to listen to hearsay, and it is difficult to discern whether it is true or false; there is an eagerness to reject it, and there is no basis for the matter.

古文：然人言恶者未必是恶，言善者不必是善。
现代文：然而别人说坏的不一定是坏，说好的不一定是好。
English: However, what others say is bad is not necessarily bad, and what they say is good is not necessarily good.

古文：所以然者，或断讼不避豪贵，故人以为恶；或将势抑贱，贵人以为好。
现代文：之所以如此，有的判案不躲避豪门贵族，所以人们以为他坏；有的依附权势抑制低贱者，尊贵的人以为他好。
English: The reason for this is that some judgments do not avoid the wealthy aristocrats, so people think he is bad; some rely on power to suppress the lowly, and the honorable people think he is good.

古文：然开朕之听，皆贵者言，是以迟回三复，良由于此。
现代文：不过传到我耳中的，都是尊贵者的话，所以迟疑反覆，实在是由于这一点。
English: But the words that have come to my ears are the words of an honorable man, so it is really because of this that I hesitate to repeat them.

古文：局事须冰清玉洁，明扬褒贬。
现代文：局中事务必须像冰那样清明像玉那样纯洁，加以升降褒贬。
English: Bureau affairs must be as clear as ice and as pure as jade, and they must be promoted and demoted.

古文：卿等既是亲典，邪正得失，悉所具之，可精辨以闻。 
现代文：你们既然亲自掌管，正派邪恶所得所失，应该全都了解，可精审辨别加以报告。 
English: Since you are personally in charge, you should know everything about the loss of honest and evil gains, and you can accurately identify and report it.

古文：邓述对曰： 陛下行赏得人，余者甘心；若赏不尽能，无以劝励。
现代文：邓述回答说： 陛下施行赏赐得到合适的人，其余的人心中服气；如果赏赐不和他的能力相称，就无法劝勉激励。
English: Dangshu replied, "Your Majesty's practice is to reward the right person, and the rest of the people are convinced in their hearts; if the reward is not commensurate with his ability, it is impossible to persuade and inspire.

古文：如臣愚见，愿不行赏。 
现代文：依臣下愚蠢的见解，希望不施行赏赐。 
English: According to the stupid opinions of his subordinates, he hoped that no reward would be given.

古文：高祖曰： 朕昔置此官，许三年考绩，必行赏罚。
现代文：高祖说： 我从前设置这个官，答应三年考核政绩，一定施行赏赐惩罚。
English: Gao Zu said: I set up this official in the past, and promised a three-year assessment of political performance, and will definitely implement rewards and punishments.

古文：既经今考，若无黜陟，恐正直者莫肯用心，邪曲者无以改肃。
现代文：经过现在的考核后，如果没有废黜擢升，恐怕正直的人不肯尽心，邪僻的人无法改正。
English: After the current assessment, if there is no dethronement and promotion, I am afraid that honest people will not be willing to do their best, and evil people cannot be corrected.

古文：自非释之于公，何能尽其至理？
现代文：除非以公道加以解释，哪能完全表达最高的义理?
English: How can the highest truth be fully expressed unless it is interpreted with justice?

古文：虽不可精其微致，且望粗有殿最。
现代文：虽然不能精研微妙意趣，姑且希望粗略分出高下。
English: Although it is not possible to study the subtleties of taste, it is hoped that a rough distinction can be made between high and low.

古文：诸尚书更与群官善量所以。 
现代文：各位尚书再和群官妥善思量具体做法。 
English: All of you should write to the group officials and properly consider the specific approach.

古文：高祖谓尚书等曰： 朕仰纂乾构，君临万宇。
现代文：高祖对尚书等官员说： 我上继先辈基业，统御天下。
English: Gaozhu said to officials such as Shangshu: I am the successor to my forefathers and will rule the world.

古文：往者稽古典章，树兹百职。
现代文：以前稽考古代典章制度，设置这众多的职任。
English: Previously, the ancient award system was reviewed to set up this large number of positions.

古文：然尚书之任，枢机是司，岂惟总括百揆，缉和人务而已，朕之得失，实在于斯。
现代文：然而尚书的职责，掌管中枢机要，哪裹仅总领百官，协调人事而已?我的得失，都在于这裹。
English: However, the duties of the secretary, the cardinal in charge of the central office, what is only the chief officer, the coordination of personnel? My gains and losses are all in this.

古文：自卿等在任，年垂二周，未尝言朕之一失，献可否之片规，又不尝进一贤而退一不肖，此二事罪之大者。 
现代文：自从你们在位，岁月将近两年，没有说过我的一个过失，献上否决的一点规劝，又不曾推举一个贤士而贬退一个不正派的人，这两件事是罪恶中的重大者。 
English: In the nearly two years since you have been in office, you have not spoken of a single fault of mine, have not offered a single rebuke of disapproval, and have not promoted a wise man and disparaged an unjust man. These two things are the greatest of sins.

古文：高祖又谓羽曰： 汝之浅薄，固不足以况晋之巨源。
现代文：高祖又对元羽说： 你的浅薄，本来不值得用来比况晋朝的山巨源。
English: Gao Zu also said to Yuan Yu: Your shallowness is not worthy to be used as a comparison to the great mountains of the Jin Dynasty.

古文：考之今世，民斯下矣。
现代文：考察当今之世，你要算下等的人了。
English: When you look at the world today, you have to count the people who are left behind.

古文：汝始为廷尉，及初作尚书，内外瞻望，以吾有弟。
现代文：你开始任廷尉，等到做尚书，内外仰望，认为我有弟弟。
English: You start out as a courtier, and by the time you're a prince, you look up to me and think I have a brother.

古文：自往秋南旆之后，近小人，远君子，在公阿党，亏我皇宪，出入无章，动乖礼则。
现代文：自从去年秋季向南出兵以后，你亲近小人，疏远君子，在公事中阿谀结党，亏损我皇室法度，出入没有章程，行动违背礼法。
English: Since you sent troops to the south last autumn, you have been close to villains, estranged from gentlemen, courted the party in public affairs, lost our royal laws, entered and left without regulations, and acted contrary to etiquette.

古文：计汝所行，应在下下之第。 
现代文：综合你的行为，应该列在下下的等级。 
English: Combine your actions and you should be listed in the lower tier.

古文：高祖又谓羽曰： 汝既是宸极之弟，而居枢端之任。
现代文：高祖又对元羽说： 你既是皇帝的弟弟，又处于中枢之首的职位。
English: Gaozu also said to Yuan Yu, "You are not only the emperor's younger brother, but you are also in the position of the head of the center.

古文：汝自在职以来，功勤之绩，不闻于朝；阿党之音，频干朕听。
现代文：你自从在任以来立功勤奋的业绩，在朝廷没有听到过；阿谀结党的声闻，频繁传到我的耳中。
English: Your meritorious and diligent performance since taking office has not been heard in the imperial court; the rumor of the party of appeasement has frequently reached my ears.

古文：汝之过失，已备积于前，不复能别叙。
现代文：你的过失，已经完备地列举在前面，不能再另外叙述。
English: Your faults, which have been fully enumerated above, cannot be described otherwise.

古文：今黜汝录尚书、廷尉，但居特进、太保。 
现代文：现在罢免你的录尚书事、廷尉，仅任特进、太保。 
English: Now, I am releasing you from the posts of record keeper and courtier, reserving only the posts of special envoy and eunuch.

古文：又谓尚书令陆睿曰： 叔翻在省之初，甚有善称，自近以来，偏颇懈怠。
现代文：又对尚书令陆散说： 叔翻在尚书省的起初，很有好名声，从近年以来，既不公平又懈怠。
English: He also said to Lu San, the Shang Shuling: At the beginning of Shang Shuling, Shuling had a very good reputation. In recent years, it has been both unfair and slack.

古文：岂不由卿等随其邪伪之心，不能相导以义，虽不成大责，已致小罚。
现代文：难道不是因为你们放任他邪恶诈伪的心，不能以道义加以辅助?虽然没酿成大责任，已导致小处罚。
English: Is it not because you have indulged his wicked and deceitful heart, and have not been able to assist him with morality? Although it has not led to great responsibility, it has led to small punishment.

古文：今夺卿尚书令禄一周。 
现代文：现在剥夺你尚书令一年的俸禄。 
English: You are now fined one year's salary.

古文：谓左仆射元赞曰： 卿夙德老成，久居机要，不能光赞物务，奖励同僚，贼人之谓，岂不在卿！
现代文：对左仆射元赞说： 你年高有德老练成熟，长久位居机要职务，不能辅助事务，激励同僚，贼人的称谓，难道不在你身上?
English: He said to his left-hand man, Shei Yuanzan, "You are old, virtuous, experienced and mature. You have been holding important positions for a long time. You can't help with affairs, inspire your colleagues. Don't you deserve the title of thief?

古文：计叔翻之黜，卿应大辟，但以咎归一人，不复相罪。
现代文：核计叔翻的废黜，你应受死刑，不过以过失归于一人，不再加罪。
English: You should be sentenced to death for the overthrow of the nuclear plan, but you should be punished for one person's fault, and there will be no additional punishment.

古文：又为少师，未见所授，今介卿少师之任，削录一周。 
现代文：又担任少师，没有履行职责，现在解除你少师的职位，剥夺一年的俸禄。 
English: You also served as a junior teacher and did not perform your duties. Now you will be relieved of your position as a junior teacher and deprived of one year's salary.

古文：诏吏部尚书澄曰： 叔父既非端右，又非座元，岂宜滥归众过也。
现代文：诏令吏部尚书元澄说： 叔父既不是尚书省长官，又不是八座元首，哪应将各种过错滥加在你身上呢?
English: "My uncle is neither the governor of Shangshu Province nor the head of the eight dynasties," said Shangshu Yuancheng, the official in charge of the imperial edict. "Why should all kinds of faults be imposed on you?

古文：然观叔父神志骄傲，少保之任，似不能存意。
现代文：然而看到叔父神情傲慢，少保的责任，似乎没有留意。
English: However, when he saw his uncle's haughty expression, he did not seem to pay attention to the responsibility of the minor.

古文：可解少保。 
现代文：可解除少保职务。 
English: He can be relieved of his duties as a minor.

古文：谓长兼尚书于杲曰： 卿履历卑浅，超升名任，不能勤谨夙夜，数辞以疾。
现代文：对长兼尚书于果说： 你履历低微，越级升任显要职位，不能日夜辛勤恭谨，屡次以有病而推辞。
English: He wrote to his headmaster, Jian Shang, in the end: Your resume is low, you have been promoted to important positions, you can't be diligent and respectful day and night, and you have repeatedly resigned due to illness.

古文：长兼之职，位亚正员。今解卿长兼，可光禄大夫、守尚书，削禄一周。 
现代文：长兼的职务，地位仅次于正式员吏，现在解除你长兼的职务，可任光禄大夫、代理尚书，剥夺一年的俸禄。 
English: The position of the superintendent is second only to that of a regular employee. If you remove the superintendent now, you may be deprived of a year's salary and may be appointed as a doctor of Guanglu and acting superintendent of Shangshu.

古文：又谓守尚书尉羽曰： 卿在集书，殊无忧存左史之事，今降为长兼常侍，亦削禄一周。 
现代文：又对代理尚书尉羽说： 你在尚书省，一点也不操心保存左史的事务现在降为长兼常侍，也剥夺一年的俸禄。 
English: He also said to the acting Shangshu lieutenant Yu: You are in Shangshu Province, you are not at all concerned about the preservation of the left history, now you are reduced to the chief and the attendant, and you are also deprived of a year's salary.

古文：又谓守尚书卢渊曰： 卿始为守尚书，未合考绩。
现代文：又对代理尚书卢渊说： 你刚开始做代理尚书，不够考核政绩。
English: He also said to Lu Yuan, the agent of Shangshu: You have just started working as an agent of Shangshu, and it is not enough to evaluate political performance.

古文：然卿在集书，虽非高功，为一省文学之士，尝不以左史在意。如此之咎，罪无所归。
现代文：然而你在尚书省，虽然不是高位，作为一省之中的文学之士，竞不把左史放在心上，这样的过失，罪行没有归宿。
English: However, although you are not in a high position in Shangshu Province, as a literary person in the province, you do not pay attention to the history of the left, and there is no place for such a mistake and crime.

古文：今降卿长兼王师，守常侍、尚书如故，夺常侍禄一周。 
现代文：现在降你为长兼王师，代理常侍、尚书照旧，剥夺常侍一年的俸禄。 
English: Now, you will be demoted to the position of chief and king's teacher, but you will retain the positions of regular attendant and secretary, and you will be fined the regular attendant's salary for one year.

古文：谓左丞公孙良、右丞乞伏义受曰： 二丞之任，所以协赞尚书，光宣出纳，而卿等不能正心直言，规佐尚书，论卿之罪，应合大辟。
现代文：对左丞公孙良、右丞乞伏义受说： 二丞的责任，是用来协助尚书，光大宣扬王命，然而你们不能诚心直言，辅助尚书，判你们的罪过，应处以死刑。
English: He said to Sun Liang, the secretary of the left, and Kibo Yi, the secretary of the right, "The duty of the two secretaries is to assist the king in writing and gloriously proclaiming the king's order. However, if you cannot speak honestly and assist the king in writing, your crime will be judged and you will be sentenced to death.

古文：但以尚书之失，事钟叔翻，故不能别致贬责。
现代文：衹是因为尚书的过失，事情牵连叔翻，所以不能另外加以贬官责罚。
English: It is because of Shang Shu's fault that the matter involved a double-crossing, so it cannot be punished with a demotion.

古文：二丞可以白衣守本官，冠服禄恤，尽皆削夺。
现代文：二丞可穿平民服装代理本官职责，衣帽俸禄和差役，全都剥夺。
English: Second lieutenants can wear civilian clothes, but they will be stripped of their duties as deputy officers, their salary and duties.

古文：若三年有成，还复本任；如其无成，则永归南亩。 
现代文：如果三年内有成绩，恢复本来职务；如果没有成绩，就永远回到乡间。 
English: If there are achievements in three years, they will return to their original posts; if there are no achievements, they will return to farming in their hometowns forever.

古文：又谓散骑常侍元景曰： 卿等自任集书，合省逋坠，致使王言遗滞，起居不修。如此之咎，责在于卿。
现代文：又对散骑常侍元景说： 你们自从在尚书省任职，全省失职堕落，致使广陵王言论失载，行为不修饰，这样的过失，责任在于你。
English: He also said to the strolling equerry Yuan Jie: "Since you took office in Shangshu Province, the whole province has fallen into dereliction of duty, resulting in Guangling Wang's speech being unloaded and his behavior not being refined. The responsibility for such a mistake lies with you.

古文：今降为中大夫、守常侍，夺禄一周。 
现代文：现在降你的职位为中大夫、代理常侍，剥夺一年的俸禄。 
English: He has now been demoted to junior doctor, but retains his position as a regular attendant, and has been fined one year's salary.

古文：谓谏议大夫李彦曰： 卿虽处谏议之官，实人不称职，可去谏议，退为元士。 
现代文：对谏议大夫李彦说： 你虽然担任谏议的官职，实在是人不称职，可去掉谏议二字，降为元士。 
English: He said to Li Yan, the doctor of debate: Although you hold the official position of debate, you are really incompetent. You can remove the word "debate" and be reduced to the rank of genshi.

古文：又谓中庶子游肇等曰： 自建承华，已经一稔，然东宫之官，无直言之士，虽未经三载，事须考黜。
现代文：又对中庶子游肇等人说： 自从建造承华宫，已经历一年，然而柬宫的官员，没有说直话的人，虽然没过三年，事情必须考核罢黜。
English: He also said to Yu Zhao and others: It has been one year since the construction of Chenghua Palace, but the officials of the Cambodian Palace, who did not speak frankly, although it has not been three years, the matter must be examined and dismissed.

古文：肇及中舍人李平识学可观，可为中；安乐王诠可为下中，解东华之任，退为员外散骑常侍；冯夙可为下下，免中庶子，免爵两任，员外常侍如故；中舍人闾贤保可为下下，退为武骑常侍。 
现代文：游肇和中舍人李平见识学问比较好，可列为中等；安乐王元诠可列为下中等，解除束华的职位，降为员外散骑常侍；冯夙可列为下下等，免除中庶子，免去爵位两任，员外常侍照旧；中舍人间贤保可为下下等，降为武骑常侍。 
English: Li Ping, a member of Yu Zhao and Zhong She, has better knowledge and education, and can be classified as medium; An Le Wang Yuan Yin can be classified as lower medium, relieved of the position of Zuchua, and reduced to the rank of non-commissioned officer, non-commissioned officer; Feng Qi can be classified as lower lower rank, exempted from the middle bastard, exempted from the two positions of peerage, non-commissioned officer as before; Zhong She can be the lower rank, and reduced to the rank of non-commissioned officer.

古文：又谓公孙良曰： 顷年用人，多乖观才之授。
现代文：又对公孙良说： 近年用人，多违背观察人才而授官。
English: He also said to Gongsun Liang: In recent years, more and more people have been employed, and more and more positions have been awarded contrary to the observation of talents.

古文：实是武人，而授以文官，黜同大例，于理未均。
现代文：本是武人，而授给文官，废黜同于通行条例，就道理而言不均衡。
English: Originally, it was a warrior, but it was given to a civil official, and the dethronement was the same as the traffic regulations, which was unbalanced in terms of reason.

古文：诸如此比，黜官如初。 
现代文：诸如此类的人，免除现任官职恢复当初职位。 
English: Such persons shall be relieved of their current posts and reinstated to their previous positions.

古文：高祖引陆睿、元赞等于前曰： 北人每言北人何用知书，朕闻此，深用怃然。
现代文：高祖召唤陆散、元赞等人到面前说： 北方人时常说何必需要读书，我听到这种话，深为茫然。
English: Gao Zu summoned Lu San, Yuan Zan and others to his presence and said, "Northerners often say, 'Why do you need to study?' When I hear such words, I am at a loss.

古文：今知书者甚众，岂皆圣人。
现代文：现在读书的人很多，哪裹都是圣人?
English: There are a lot of people who study now, but are they all saints?

古文：朕自行礼九年，置官三载，正欲开导兆人，致之礼教。
现代文：我自实行礼制九年，设置官吏三年，正是想要开导百姓，达到礼教。
English: I have been practicing the etiquette system for nine years and setting up officials for three years, precisely to enlighten the people and achieve etiquette.

古文：朕为天子，何假中原，欲令卿等子孙，博见多知。
现代文：我做天子，何必到中原，是想使你们的子孙，增广见闻知识。
English: As the Son of Heaven, why do I have to go to the Central Plains? I want your children to expand their knowledge.

古文：若永居恆北，值不好文主，卿等子孙，不免面墙也。 
现代文：如果永远居住在恒山以北，遇上不喜好文教的君主，你们的子孙，不免会一无所见。 
English: If you live north of the Hengshan Mountains forever, if you meet a monarch who does not like literature and education, your children and grandchildren will inevitably see nothing.

古文：陆睿对曰： 实如明诏，金氏若不入仕汉朝，七世知名，亦不可得也。 
现代文：陆龈回答说： 实在有如明诏，金氏如果不入汉朝为官，七代知名，也不可得到。 
English: Lu Wei replied, "It's really like a clear edict. If the Kim family doesn't enter the Han Dynasty and become an official, they won't be able to become famous for seven generations."

古文：高祖大悦。
现代文：高祖非常喜悦。
English: Gaozu Daye.

古文：及五等开建，羽食勃海之东光二千户。
现代文：等到设置五等诸侯，元羽食邑勃海的东光二干户。
English: Wait until the fifth-class lords are set up, and the two leading families of Dongguang in Yuanfei Food Town Bohai will emerge.

古文：车驾南伐，羽进号卫将军，除使持节、都督青齐光南青四州诸军事、征东大将军、开府、青州刺史。
现代文：皇帝向南征伐，元羽升军号为卫将军，授任使持节、都督青齐光南青四州诸军事、征东大将军、开府、青州刺史。
English: The emperor marched southward, and Yuan Yu's military title was Wei General. He was appointed as the envoy of the Qing Dynasty, the governor of Qing Dynasty, the military commander of the Southern Qing Dynasty, the military commander of the Eastern Qing Dynasty, the military commander of the Eastern Qing Dynasty, the military commander of the Northern Qing Dynasty, and the military commander of the Northern Qing Dynasty.

古文：以留守代京之功，增邑五百户。
现代文：因留守代京的功劳。增加食邑五百户。
English: Due to the merit of staying in Kyoto, the number of restaurants increased by 500 households.

古文：高祖幸羽第，与诸弟言曰： 朕昨亲受人讼，始知广陵之明了。 
现代文：高祖前往元羽的第宅，对几个弟弟说： 我昨天亲自听取别人的诉讼，才知道广陵王的精明。 
English: Gaozu went to Yuan Yu's residence and said to several younger brothers, "I only learned of Guangling Wang's shrewdness after listening to someone else's lawsuit in person yesterday.

古文：咸阳王禧对曰： 臣年为广陵兄，明为广陵弟。 
现代文：咸阳王元禧回答说： 我的年岁是广陵王的哥哥，精明是广陵王的弟弟。 
English: King Yuanxi of Xianyang replied: My age is the elder brother of King Guangling, and my wisdom is the younger brother of King Guangling.

古文：高祖曰： 我为汝兄，汝为羽昆，汝复何恨？ 
现代文：高担说： 我是你的哥哥，你是元羽的哥哥，你还有什么遗憾? 
English: Gaotan said: I am your elder brother, you are Yuan Yu's elder brother, do you have any regrets?

古文：又曰： 叔翻沉疴绵惙，遂有辰岁，我每为深忧，恐其不振。
现代文：又说： 叔翻积久难治的病连绵不止，竟有十多年，我时常为他深深担忧，恐怕他不能恢复。
English: He also said: My uncle has been suffering from a long-term incurable disease for more than ten years. I am often deeply worried about him. I am afraid that he will not recover.

古文：今得痊愈，晚成婚媾，且喜其吉庆，故命驾耳。 
现代文：今日得以痊愈，很晚完成婚配，欣喜他的吉祥庆典，所以前来。 
English: Today he was able to recover, marry late, and enjoy his auspicious celebration, so come.

古文：高祖亲饯之华林园。
现代文：高祖在华林园亲自为元羽饯行。
English: Gao Zu personally marched in the parade for Yuan Yu in the Hualin Garden.

古文：后诏羽曰： 吾因天历运，乘时树功，开荆拓沔，威振楚越。
现代文：后来诏令元羽说： 我顺应上天命运，乘着时机建立功劳，开辟荆山拓展沔水，声威震撼三楚百越。
English: Later, the emperor ordered Yuan Yu to say: I conform to God's destiny, take advantage of the opportunity to establish merit, open up the mountains of jade and expand the rivers, and my fame has shocked more than three hundred countries.

古文：时暨三炎，息驾汝颍。
现代文：时间到了夏天，在汝水颖水歇息车马。
English: The time has come for summer, and the horses and carriages are resting in Ru Shui Ying Shui.

古文：势临荆徐，声遏江外，未容解甲，凯入三川。
现代文：兵势临近荆州、徐州，声威传遍长江以南，不能解除兵甲，凯旋进入三川。
English: The troops were close to Jingzhou and Xuzhou, and their message spread all over the south of the Yangtze River. They could not disarm the troops, and they entered the Sanchuan River in triumph.

古文：纂兵修律，俟秋方举。
现代文：聚兵演武，等秋季再出动。
English: Gather soldiers to perform martial arts, wait for the autumn and then go out.

古文：海服之寄，故惟宗良，善开经策，宁我东夏。
现代文：海滨的重任，本靠宗室良才，妥善筹划攻取策略，安宁我束部疆域。
English: The important task of the seashore depends on the talent of the family, proper planning of the strategy, and the tranquility of our Sokobe territory.

古文：敬慎汝仪，勿坠嘉问，唯酒唯田，可不戒欤！ 
现代文：恭敬谨慎你的礼仪，不要毁坏好名声，惟有饮酒狩猎，能不警戒吗! 
English: Respect and be careful of your manners, don't ruin a good reputation, but when drinking and hunting, be on your guard!

古文：加散骑常侍，进号车骑大将军，余如故。
现代文：加授散骑常侍，进军号为车骑大将军，其余职位照旧。
English: In addition, there will be a number of non-commissioned officers for horseback riding, and the marching order will be General of the Cavalry. The rest of the positions will remain the same.

古文：世宗即位，迁司州牧，常侍如故。
现代文：世宗即位，元羽调任司州牧，常侍照旧。
English: Sejong ascended to the throne, and Motoha was transferred to the position of Shishu-maki (governor-general of the state), while the regular attendants remained as before.

古文：羽频表辞牧，至于三四，诏不许。
现代文：元羽接连上奏疏推辞州牧，直到三四次，韶令不准许。
English: Yuan Yu successively submitted his resignation from the post of provincial governor, until three or four times, the imperial edict did not allow him to do so.

古文：世宗览政，引羽入内，面授司徒。羽辞曰： 彦和本自不愿，而陛下强与。
现代文：世宗处理政事，征召元羽进入宫内，当面授予司徒元羽推辞说： 彦和本来不愿意，而陛下强制授予。
English: Sejong dealt with political affairs, conscripted Yuan Yu to enter the palace, and granted Yuan Yu to Sito in person, saying: "Hikowa originally did not want to do it, but His Majesty forced him to do it.

古文：今新去此官而以臣代之，必招物议。
现代文：现在他刚离开这个官职而用臣下接替他，必定招致人们议论。
English: Now that he has just left the post, replacing him with a subordinate is bound to be controversial.

古文：季豫既转，取之无嫌。
现代文：季豫既改任，选取他没有疑惑。
English: Since Ji Yu was reassigned, he had no doubts about his selection.

古文：请为司空。 
现代文：我请求做司空。 
English: I asked to be a flight attendant.

古文：世宗犹强焉，固辞，乃许之。
现代文：世宗还是强制他，元羽坚决推辞，才答应了他。
English: However, Sejong forced him to do so, and only after Yuan Yu firmly refused did he agree.

古文：羽先淫员外郎冯俊兴妻，夜因私游，为俊兴所击。
现代文：元羽原先奸淫员外郎冯俊兴的妻子，因夜间私自出游，被俊兴殴打。
English: The wife of Feng Junxing, Yuan Yu's adulterer father-in-law, was beaten by Junxing for traveling at night without permission.

古文：积日秘匿，薨于府，年三十二。
现代文：连日隐秘躲藏，在府中逝世，这年三十二岁。
English: He hid secretly for days, and died in the middle of the capital, at the age of thirty-two.

古文：世宗亲临，哀恸，诏给东园温明秘器、朝服一具、衣一袭、钱六十万、布一千匹、蜡三百斤，大鸿胪护丧事。
现代文：世宗亲自前往，哀伤悲恸，下诏赐给棺材、朝廷礼服一套、衣服一套、钱六卜万、布一千匹、蜡三百斤，大鸿胪料理丧事。
English: King Sejong went there in person, grieved and lamented, and issued an edict to give a coffin, a set of court dress, a set of clothes, six million baht, a thousand pieces of cloth, three hundred pounds of wax, and a great feast for the funeral.

古文：大殓，帝亲临之，举哀都亭。
现代文：入棺时，皇帝亲自前去，在都亭举办丧事。
English: When the coffin was put into the coffin, the emperor himself went ahead and held a funeral in the Imperial Pavilion.

古文：赠使持节、侍中、骠骑大将军、司徒公、冀州刺史，给羽葆鼓吹、班剑四十人，谥曰惠。
现代文：追赠使持节、侍中、骠骑大将军、司徒公、冀州刺史，赠给仪仗鼓吹、班剑四十人，谧号为惠。
English: The posthumous gifts included the emissaries of Ji Jie, the chamberlains, the cavalry general, the governor of Jizhou Province, and the historian of Jizhou Province, as well as the gifts of the ceremonial war propaganda, the team of 40 swords, and the honorary title.

古文：及葬，帝亲临送。
现代文：等到安葬，皇帝亲自前往送行。
English: After the burial, the emperor himself went to see him off.

古文：子恭袭。语在《纪》。
现代文：儿子元恭继承爵位记载在《本纪》中。
English: The succession of the title of nobility to his son, Yuan Qiao, is recorded in the "Analects."

古文：恭兄欣，字庆乐。
现代文：元恭的哥哥元欣，字庆乐。
English: The brother of Yuan Gong, Yuan Xin, is called Qingle.

古文：性粗率，好鹰犬。
现代文：性格粗俗轻率，喜好养鹰和狗。
English: His character is vulgar and imprudent, and he likes to keep eagles and dogs.

古文：肃宗初，除通直散骑常侍、北中郎将。
现代文：肃宗初年，授任他为通直散骑常侍、北中郎将。
English: In the first year of Suzong's reign, he was appointed as Tsuchizhongzanzhixing (通直散騎常侍) and Kitanakurōshō (北中郎将).

古文：出为冠军将军、荆州刺史，转征虏将军、齐州刺史。
现代文：外出任冠军将军、荆州刺史，改任征虏将军、齐州刺史。
English: He was appointed as the champion general, Jingzhou stabbing history, and was reappointed as the conscript general, Qizhou stabbing history.

古文：欣在二州，颇得人和。
现代文：元欣在二州，很得人心。
English: Yuanxin is very popular in Erzhou.

古文：又为征东将军、太仆卿。
现代文：又担任征束将军、太仆卿。
English: He also served as a conscript general and a great retainer.

古文：考庄初，封沛郡王，邑一千户，后改封淮阳王。
现代文：孝庄帝初年，封为沛郡王，食邑一千户，后来改封为淮阳王。
English: In the first year of Emperor Xiaozhuang, he was given the title of King of Pei County with a thousand households in the county. Later, he was given the title of King of Huaiyang.

古文：出帝时，加太师、开府。
现代文：出帝时，加授太师、开府。
English: When he became emperor, he was awarded the title of Grand Master and founded a government.

古文：复封广陵王。
现代文：又封为广陵王。
English: He was also given the title of Guangling Wang.

古文：除太傅、司州牧，寻除大司马。
现代文：授任太傅、司州牧，不久授任大司马。
English: He was appointed Taifu, Sishu Maki, and soon after, Daishima.

古文：随出帝没于关中。
现代文：跟随出帝死在关中。
English: Following the emperor's death in the pass.

古文：欣弟永业，普泰元年，特封高密郡王，食邑二千户。武定末，金紫光禄大夫。
现代文：元欣的弟弟永业，普泰元年，特地封为高密!旺，食邑二千户亘迈末年，担任金紫光禄大夫。
English: In the first year of Putai, Yongye, the younger brother of Yuan Xin, was specially awarded the title of Gaomi!Wang, and served as the doctor of Jin Zi Guanglu in the last years of his life.

古文：齐受禅，爵例降。
现代文：查厘接受惮让，爵位依例降低。
English: If all accept Zen, the crown will fall as usual.

古文：高阳王雍，字思穆，少而倜傥不恆。
现代文：高阳王元雍，字思穆，年轻时风流洒脱不同寻常。
English: Gaoyang Wang Yuan Yong, the character Simu, when he was young, he was unusually free and easy-going.

古文：高祖曰： 吾亦未能测此兒之深浅，然观其任真率素，或年器晚成也。 
现代文：高祖说： 我也不能测知这男儿的深浅，然而观察他的自然坦率，或许会大器晚成。 
English: Gaozu said, "I can't fathom the depths of this man, but by observing his natural frankness, he may be a late bloomer."

古文：太和九年，封颍川王，加侍中、征南大将军。
现代文：太翅九年，封为颢川王，加授侍中、征南大将军。
English: In the ninth year of Tae-hyeon, he was named King of Yeoncheon, awarded the title of Junior Chamberlain, and the title of General of the Expedition to the South.

古文：或说雍曰： 诸王皆待士以营声誉，王何以独否？ 
现代文：有人劝元雍说： 各王都接待士人来获取声誉，大王为什么独独不这样? 
English: Some people advised Yuan Yong to say: All kings receive scholars to gain reputation, why should the great king not do the same?

古文：雍曰： 吾天子之子，位为诸王，用声名何为？ 
现代文：元雍说： 我是天子的儿子，地位为王，要声名做什么? 
English: Yuan Yong said: I am the son of the son of heaven, the position is king, what should I do to make a name for myself?

古文：久之，拜中护军，领镇北大将军。
现代文：很久以后，任命他为中护军，兼镇北大将军。
English: After a long time, he was appointed as the middle guard and the general of Zhenbei University.

古文：改封高阳。
现代文：改封为高阳王。
English: He was given the title of Goyang Wang.

古文：奉迁七庙神主于洛阳。
现代文：奉命迁徙七庙牌位到盗屋。
English: He was ordered to relocate the seven temple plaques to the robber's house.

古文：五等开建，食邑二千户。
现代文：设置五等诸侯，食邑二千户。
English: Five-class lordships were set up, and 2,000 households in food villages were originally detailed.

古文：车驾南伐，雍行镇军大将军，总摄留事。
现代文：皇帝向南征伐，元雍代理镇军大将军，总领留守事务。
English: The emperor went to the south to conquer, and Yuan Yong acted as the general of the town army, and the commander-in-chief stayed behind.

古文：迁卫尉，加散骑常侍，除使持节、镇北将军、相州刺史，常侍如故。
现代文：调任卫尉，加授散骑常侍，授任使持节、镇北将军、相州刺史，常侍照旧。
English: He was transferred to the rank of lieutenant of the Imperial Guards, and was additionally awarded the rank of stagiaire, and was also awarded the ranks of envoy, general of Zhenbei, and chief historian of Xiangzhou, but remained a regular attendant.

古文：高祖诫雍曰： 相州乃是旧都，自非朝贤德望无由居此，是以使汝作牧。
现代文：高祖告诫五壅说： 扭业是旧时都城，除非朝廷贤士有德行名望的人不能在这里任职，所以派你做州牧。
English: Gao Zu admonished Wu Xi, saying: "Trenye was the capital city in the old days. Unless you were a court sage, people with virtue and fame could not serve here. Therefore, I sent you to be the provincial shepherd.

古文：为牧之道，亦难亦易。
现代文：做州牧的方法，也困难也容易。
English: The method of making state herdsmen is both difficult and easy.

古文：其身正，不令而行，故便是易。
现代文：自身端正，不施号令而实行，所以就是容易。
English: It is easy because it is self-correcting, and it is implemented without giving orders.

古文：其身不正，虽令不从，故便是难。
现代文：自身不端正，即使发令也不服从，所以就是困难。
English: If you are not correct, and you do not obey even if you issue an order, then you are in trouble.

古文：又当爱贤士，存信约，无用人言而轻与夺也。 
现代文：又应当敬爱贤士，保持信用约定，不能因人议论而轻易给予剥夺。 
English: It is also necessary to respect the sages, maintain the trust agreement, and cannot be easily deprived because of people's discussion.

古文：进号征北将军。
现代文：升军号为征北将军。
English: He was promoted to General of the Northern Expedition.

古文：世宗初，迁使持节、都督冀相瀛三州诸军事、征北大将军、开府、冀州刺史，常侍如故。
现代文：世宗初年，调任使持节、都督冀相瀛三州诸军事、征北大将军、开府、冀州刺史，常侍照旧。
English: In the first year of the reign of King Sejong, he was appointed as the envoy to hold the festival, the governor of Hebei Province, the military commander of the three provinces, the general of the Northern Expedition, the governor of Kaifu Province and the governor of Hebei Province, and the regular attendant as before.

古文：雍在二州，微有声称。
现代文：雍在二州，稍微有声誉。
English: Yong in two states, a little bit of a reputation.

古文：入拜骠骑大将军、司州牧。
现代文：征召他任命为骠骑大将军、司州牧。
English: He was conscripted and appointed as the general of the imperial cavalry and the provincial magistrate.

古文：世宗时幸雍第，皆尽家人之礼。
现代文：世宗时而前往雍第宅，都全用家人的礼节。
English: The world's dynasties occasionally went to the Yongdi House, and they all used the etiquette of the family.

古文：迁司空公，议定律令，雍常入参大议。
现代文：升为司空公，商议确定律令，五壅时常入宫参与大事的谋议。
English: He was promoted to the position of Siku Gong, and deliberated on the establishment of the Ritsuryo code. Wuzhen often entered the palace to participate in the deliberation of major events.

古文：转太尉公，加侍中。
现代文：改任太尉公，加授侍中。
English: He was promoted to the rank of captain and given the additional rank of chamberlain.

古文：时雍以旱故，再表逊位，优诏不许。
现代文：这时互壅因旱灾的缘故，两次上奏退位，皇帝以温和的言辞拒绝了他的辞呈。
English: At this time, because of the drought, the emperor rejected his resignation with gentle words.

古文：除太保，领太尉，侍中如故。
现代文：授任太保，兼任太尉，侍中照旧。
English: He was given the post of Taiho, concurrently serving as Taijo, and remained in the position of Samurai Junior Officer.

古文：世宗行考陟之法，雍表曰：
现代文：世宗实行考察擢升的办法，元雍上奏疏说：
English: Shizong implemented the method of examination and promotion, and Yuan Yong said:

古文：窃惟三载考绩，百王通典。
现代文：私下以为三年考察成绩，是百王通行的典章。
English: Privately, I thought that the results of the three-year inspection were the crowning achievement.

古文：今任事上中者，三年升一阶。散官上第者，四载登一级。
现代文：现在任职在上中等级的，三年升一阶，无固定职事的官员在上等的，四年升一级。
English: Currently, officials holding posts at the upper middle level will be promoted to the first level in three years, while officials with no fixed posts will be promoted to the next higher level in four years.

古文：闲冗之官，本非虚置，或以贤能而进，或因累勤而举。
现代文：清闪的官员，本来不是虚设，有的因贤明能干而晋升，有的因长期勤恳而推举。
English: Brilliant officials are not fictitious. Some are promoted for their wisdom and ability, while others are chosen for their long-term diligence.

古文：如其无能，不应忝兹高选。
现代文：如他们没有能力，不应愧列这高标准的人选中。
English: If they are not capable, they should not be included in this high standard of candidates.

古文：既其以能进之朝伍，或任官外戍，远使绝域，催督逋悬，察检州镇，皆是散官，以充剧使。
现代文：他们既以才能升到朝廷官员中，有的在京城以外的营镇裹任职，遥远地出使阻隔的疆域，催办督促拖欠的租赋，考察检核州镇，都是清闲官员，充任繁杂的差遣。
English: They were promoted to officials of the imperial court by virtue of their talent, and some of them served in the towns outside the capital, dispatched to distant territories, urged the supervision of arrears of rent, and inspected the inspection of the towns. They were idle officials, fulfilling complicated assignments.

古文：及于考陟，排同闲伍。
现代文：等到考察擢升，贬入到清闲的行列。
English: Wait until the inspection is promoted, it will be relegated to the ranks of leisure.

古文：检散官之人，非才皆劣；称事之辈，未必悉贤。
现代文：检查无固定职事的人，不是才能都差，称职的人，不一定都贤明。
English: Checking people without a fixed job is not a bad talent, and those who are competent are not necessarily wise.

古文：而考闲以多年，课烦以少岁，上乖天泽之均，下生不等之苦。
现代文：然而考察清闲官员依据多年的时间，考察事务烦琐的官员依据较少的岁月，在上违背上天恩泽的普降，在下产生不同等对待的痛苦。
English: However, inspecting idle officials on the basis of years of time, inspecting officials with cumbersome affairs on the basis of fewer years, violates God's grace on the top and produces the pain of unequal treatment on the bottom.

古文：又寻景明之格，无折考之文；正始之奏，有与夺之级。
现代文：又探寻景明年间的规则，没有折算考察的条文；正始年间的奏议，有给与夺取的级别。
English: In addition, there is no provision for the conversion of the investigation into the rules for the exploration of the scene between the next year and the next year; the appeal during the beginning of the year has the level of giving and taking.

古文：明参差之考，非圣慈之心；改典易常，乃有司之意。
现代文：表明不统一的考察，不是出自圣上仁慈的心思；改变典章常规，是有关官员的意愿。
English: Investigations that reveal inconsistencies do not come from a benevolent heart; it is the will of the relevant officials to change the rules and regulations.

古文：又寻考级之奏，委于任事之手；涉议科勤，绝于散官之笔。
现代文：又探寻考察等级的上奏，委托在担任固定职事者的手中；涉及到评定勤劳，绝不出自清闲官员的笔端。
English: It is also necessary to explore the top grade of the inspection level, which is entrusted to the hands of those who hold fixed posts; it involves the evaluation of hard work, and never comes from the pen of leisure officials.

古文：遂使在事者得展自勤之能，散辈者独绝披衿之所。
现代文：于是使在职的人得以施展自我勤恳的才能，无固定职事的人独独没有推诚相与的地方。
English: As a result, those who are employed are able to display their diligent talents, while those who do not have a fixed job have no place for sincerity.

古文：抑以上下之闲，限以旨格之判，致使近侍禁职，抱槃屈之辞；禁卫武夫，怀不申之恨。
现代文：以上下的清闲加以抑制，以旨意规则的评定加以限定，致使身旁侍卫宫中官吏，抱有委屈的言论；守卫宫廷的武人，怀有不能申述的遗憾。
English: The leisure of the above and below is restrained and limited by the evaluation of the will rule, so that the officials in the palace guarding the palace have grievances; the warriors guarding the palace have regrets that cannot be expressed.

古文：欲克平四海，何以获诸？
现代文：想要平定四海，凭什么达到呢?
English: If you want to pacify the four seas, how can you achieve it?

古文：又散官在直，一玷成尤；衔使愆失，差毫即坐。
现代文：另外清闲官员值勤，一个闪失就成罪过；奉命出使有过失，差错一点点就治罪。
English: In addition, a leisurely official is on duty, and a slip-up is a crime; if he is ordered to make a mistake, he will be punished for the slightest mistake.

古文：徽纆所逮，未以事闲优之；节庆之赉，不以禄微加赏。
现代文：囚禁所及的事情，不因职事闲散而优待；节喜庆的赏赐，不因俸禄轻微而增加赐予。
English: In matters related to imprisonment, do not give preferential treatment because of idleness in work; do not increase the reward for festivals and celebrations because the salary is small.

古文：罪殿之犯，未殊任事；考陟之机，推年不等。
现代文：罪过的处罚，和担任职事者没有不同；考察擢升的机会，年代不相等。
English: The punishment for crimes is the same as for those who hold office; the opportunities for promotion are not equal in age.

古文：臣闻君举必书，书而不法，后代何观？
现代文：臣下听说君主的行事一定记载，记载不合规范，后世如何观察?
English: Subjects have heard that the actions of the monarch must be recorded, but the records are not up to standard. How will future generations observe this?

古文：《诗》云： 王事靡盐，不遑启处 。又曰： 岂不怀归，畏此简书 。
现代文：《诗经》说 王家差事做不完，哪有时间去休息 ，又说 难道不想回家乡，国家誓约不敢忘 。
English: The "Song of Songs" says that the royal family's errands are never finished, and there is no time to rest, and it also says that if you don't want to go home, you can't forget the national pledge.

古文：依依杨柳，以叙治兵之役；霏霏雨雪，又申振旅之勤。
现代文：茂盛的杨柳，用来叙述出征的战事；纷纷的大雪，又申述整顿部队的辛勤。
English: The luxuriant willow trees are used to describe the war; the heavy snows are used to describe the hard work of the rectification troops.

古文：若折往来日月，便是《采薇》之诗废，《杕杜》之歌罢。
现代文：如果扣除来往的时间，就是《采薇》的诗篇废弃，《杖杜》的歌辞罢除。
English: If we deduct the time spent in and out of each other's company, then the poem in "Cherry Blossoms" will be discarded, and the lyrics in "The Cane" will be deleted.

古文：又任事之官，吉凶请假，定省扫拜，动历十旬，或因患重请，动辄经岁。
现代文：另外担任职事的官员，遇吉事丧事请假，省视服侍，祭扫参拜，动不动经历一百天，有的因病不断请假，动不动超过一年。
English: In addition, the officials who served as officials took time off for auspicious events and funerals, served as provincial governors, attended festivals, and went through a hundred days without moving, and some continued to take time off due to illness, without moving for more than a year.

古文：征役在途，勤泰百倍。
现代文：出征在途中，辛劳安泰超出一百倍。
English: On the way to the expedition, the hard work and safety exceeded a hundred times.

古文：苦乐之势，非任事之伦；在家私闲，非理务之日，论优语剧，先宜折之。
现代文：痛苦欢乐的情势，不是任职事者的同类；在家私下闲散，不是料理事务的日子。评论优越说到繁重，先应扣除他们的时间。
English: Painful and joyful situations are not the same as those in office; idling at home is not a day of financial affairs. When it comes to heavy work, their time should be deducted first.

古文：武人本挽上格者为羽林，次格者为虎贲，下格者为直从。
现代文：武人本来牵引上格的担任羽林，中格的担任虎贲，下格的担任直从。
English: Originally, the warrior was supposed to lead the upper echelon as the leader, the middle echelon as the vassal, and the lower echelon as the direct follower.

古文：或累纪征戍，靡所不涉；或带甲连年，负重千里；或经战损伤；或年老衰竭。
现代文：有的多年征战戍守，没有什么地方没到过；有的连年披戴皑甲，负重到千里之外；有的经过战斗受到损伤；有的年老体力衰竭。
English: Some have been fighting for many years, and there is no place they haven't been to; some have worn armor for years and years, carrying loads thousands of miles away; some have been injured in battle; some are old and have physical exhaustion.

古文：今试以本格，责其如初，有爽于先，退阶夺级。
现代文：现在试用本格，要求他们像当初一样，有和先前不同的，就退还削夺级别。
English: Now, with the full-scale trial, they are required to return the scraping level as they did at the beginning, which is different from before.

古文：此便责以不衰，理未通也。
现代文：这就是要求他们不衰退，在道理上是不通的。
English: This is to require them not to decline, which is logically incoherent.

古文：又蕃使之人，必抽朝彦。
现代文：另外出使蕃邦的人，必定抽取朝廷有声望者。
English: In addition, those who sent envoys from Shan State were bound to draw from the ranks of those with prestige in the imperial court.

古文：或历险千余，或履危万里，登有死亡之忧，咸怀不返之戚，魂骨奉忠，以尸将命。
现代文：有的经历险阻一千多处，有的走遇危难地段上万里，不时有死亡的忧虑，都怀着不返回的悲痛，以灵魂骨肉奉行忠诚，以死完成使命。
English: Some have experienced more than a thousand obstacles, some have walked tens of thousands of miles in dangerous areas, from time to time there are worries about death, all with the sorrow of not returning, with the soul and flesh to pursue loyalty, to complete the mission with death.

古文：先朝赏格，酬以爵品；今朝改式，止及阶劳。
现代文：先朝赏赐规则，以爵位品秩为报酬；现在改变标准，衹到官阶劳绩。
English: In the past, the awarding rules were based on the reward of knighthood, grade and rank; now, the standard has been changed, and the award is based on the official rank.

古文：折以代考，有乖使望。
现代文：折算后来代替考察，违背了使者愿望。
English: The conversion was later substituted for an inspection, against the wishes of the envoy.

古文：非所以奖励《皇华》而敦崇《四牡》者也。
现代文：这不是用来奖励《皇华》而推崇《四牡》的做法。
English: This is not a way to reward "Majestic" while praising "Four Old Men."

古文：复寻正始之格：泛后任事上中者，三年升一阶；泛前任事上中者，六年进一级。
现代文：再探索正始年间的规则：普加后任职者列在上中等的，三年升一阶；普加前任职列在上中等的，六年升一级。
English: Re-explore the rules of the first year: the post-Puja officials are listed in the upper middle, and they will be promoted to the first level in three years; the post-Puja officials are listed in the upper middle, and they will be promoted to the first level in six years.

古文：三年一考，自古通经。
现代文：三年一次考察。是自古以来通行的制度。
English: A triennial inspection is a system that has been in place since ancient times.

古文：今以泛前六年升一阶，检无愆犯，倍年成级。
现代文：现在以普加前六年升一阶，检查没有过失，成倍的年代加级。
English: Now it is the first six years of Pu Jia that are promoted to the first grade, and there is no fault in the inspection, and the age is doubled.

古文：以此推之，明以泛代考。
现代文：以此推论，表明是以普加代替考察。
English: With this inference, it is shown that the investigation is based on Puca instead.

古文：新除一日，同沾阶荣，下第之人因泛上陟，上第之士由泛而退。
现代文：刚授任一天，一同沾濡官阶的荣耀，列下等的人因普加而上升，列上等的官员由普加而退后。
English: On the first day of the appointment, they were all drenched in the glory of the official rank. The lower-ranking officials rose because of Puja, and the higher-ranking officials retreated from Puja.

古文：臣又见部尉资品，本居流外，刊诸明令，行之已久。
现代文：臣下又见到部尉的地位品级，本来处于九品以外，颁布在明确的法令中，实行已经很久。
English: The vassal also saw that the status and grade of the lieutenant, which was originally outside the nine grades, was promulgated in a clear decree and has been implemented for a long time.

古文：然近为里巷多盗，以其威轻不肃，欲进品清流，以压奸宄。
现代文：然而近来因为里巷盗贼多，以部尉声威轻不严厉，想升品级到清流中，来制服奸猾的人。
English: However, recently, because there are many thieves in the alley, the lieutenant's voice is light and not severe, and he wants to upgrade to the clear stream to subdue the treacherous people.

古文：甄琛启云： 为法者施而观之，不便则改。 
现代文：甄琛上奏说： 订立法令者施行后加以观察，不便利就改正。 
English: Zhen Rong said in his report: The person who made the order should observe it after it is implemented, and correct it if it is not convenient.

古文：窃谓斯言有可采用，圣慈昭览，更高宰尉之秩。
现代文：私下以为这话有可采用的地方，圣上仁慈阅览后，另行提高了宰尉的级别。
English: Privately, he thought there was a place for this saying, and after reading it, His Holiness raised the rank of the ensign.

古文：今考格始宣，怀怨者众，臣窃观之，亦谓不可，有光国典，改之何难？
现代文：现在考察的规则刚宣布，心怀不满的人很多。臣下私下观察，也以为不可以，衹要光大国家法典，改正它有什么困难?
English: The rules for the current inspection have just been announced, and there are many people who are dissatisfied. It is not acceptable for a vassal to observe in private, but if we want to improve the national code, what are the difficulties in correcting it?

古文：世宗乃引雍共论时务。
现代文：世宗于是召见元雍共同讨论当时事务。
English: Sejong then summoned Yuan Yong to discuss the current affairs.

古文：肃宗初，诏雍入居太极西柏堂，谘决大政，给亲信二十人。
现代文：肃宗初年，诏令元雍入宫住在太极西柏堂，咨询决断大政，给予亲信二十人。
English: In the first year of Su Zong, the emperor ordered Yuan Yong to enter the palace and live in the Taiji Xibai Hall, consult and decide on major policies, and give 20 people to his close friends.

古文：又诏雍为宗师，进太傅、侍中，领太尉公，王如故。
现代文：又诏令元雍担任宗师，升任太傅、侍中，兼任太尉公，王爵照旧。
English: He also decreed that Yuan Yong should serve as grand master, promoted to taifu and chamberlain, and concurrently appointed to taifu and duke, with the title of prince as before.

古文：别敕将作，营国子学寺，给雍居之。
现代文：另外下令将作大匠，营造国子学寺，给予元雍居住。
English: In addition, it was ordered to make a great craftsman, build a Kuniko-gaku-ji Temple, and give Yuan Yong a residence.

古文：领军于忠擅权专恣，仆射郭祚劝雍出之。
现代文：领军于忠揽权专横，仆射郭祚劝元雍调走他。
English: The leader of the army, Yu Zhongzhuang, was domineering, and his subordinate, Guo Zhen, persuaded Yuan Yong to transfer him.

古文：忠怒，矫诏杀祚及尚书裴植，废雍以王归第。
现代文：于忠发怒，假托韶令杀死郭祚和尚书裴植，罢免元雍的职位以王的身份回到第宅。
English: Yu Zhong became enraged and ordered the killing of Guo Zhen and the monk Shu Pei Zhi under false pretenses. He dismissed Yuan Yong from his post and returned to the palace as king.

古文：朝有大事，使黄门郎就谘访之。
现代文：朝廷有大事，派黄门郎前去咨询访问他。
English: The imperial court had an important matter and sent Huang Men Lang to consult and interview him.

古文：忠寻复矫诏，将欲杀雍，以问侍中崔光，光拒之，乃止。
现代文：于忠不久又假托诏令，将要杀元雍，就这事询问侍中崔光，崔光抗拒他，才作罢。
English: Soon after, Yu Zhong issued a fake edict that he was going to kill Yuan Yong. He asked the chamberlain, Cui Guang, about this, but Cui Guang resisted him.

古文：未几，灵太后临朝，出忠为翼州刺史。
现代文：不久，灵太后临朝听政，调出于忠任冀州刺史。
English: Soon after, Lingdai Hou Lin listened to the government and was transferred to serve as the loyal governor of Jizhou Province.

古文：雍表曰：
现代文：元雍上奏疏说：
English: Yuan Yong Shang Song So said:

古文：臣初入柏堂，见诏旨之行，一由门下，而臣出君行，不以悛意。
现代文：臣下刚进柏堂，看到诏书旨意的施行，全部出自门下省，然而臣出君行，没有悔改之心。
English: When the vassals just entered the hall, they saw that the implementation of the will of the edict was all from the subordinate provinces. However, the vassals did not have the heart to repent.

古文：每览伤矜，视之惨目，深知不可，不能禁制。
现代文：每每读过后伤心哀怜，看到后情绪悲切，深深地知道不可以，不能够禁止。
English: Every time I read it, I feel sad and pitiful, and when I see it, I feel sad. I know deeply that it is not allowed and cannot be banned.

古文：臣之罪一也。
现代文：这是臣下的第一个罪过。
English: This is the first sin of a vassal.

古文：臣近忝内枢，兼尸师傅，宜保护圣躬，温清晨夕。
现代文：臣下近来愧处中枢机构，兼之充任师傅，应该保护圣上身体，关心圣上早晚的冷热。
English: Subordinates, who have recently become the central body of the office, and also serve as teachers, should protect the saint's body and care about the cold and heat of the saint in the morning and evening.

古文：而于忠身居武司，禁勒自在，限以内外，朝谒简绝。
现代文：而于忠身任武职，统领随意，阻隔内外，使朝见拜谒简略断绝。
English: On the other hand, the commander-in-chief arbitrarily separated the inside and outside of the military from the loyal soldiers, so that they could not visit the imperial court.

古文：皇居寝食，所在不知，社稷安危，又亦不预，出入柏堂，尸立而已。
现代文：皇上的居处饮食，各处不知道，国家的安危，也不参预，出进柏堂，如僵尸站立而已。
English: The emperor's place of residence and diet are not known everywhere, and the country's safety is not anticipated. When entering and exiting the hall, they just stand there like zombies.

古文：臣之罪二也。
现代文：这是臣下的第二个罪过。
English: This is the second sin of a vassal.

古文：忠规欲杀臣，赖在事执拒。
现代文：于忠策划要杀死臣下，依赖执政大臣坚决阻止。
English: Yuzhong plans to kill his vassals, and relies on the ruling minister to resolutely stop him.

古文：又令仆卿相，任情进黜，迁官授职，多不经旬，斥退贤良，专纳心腹，威振百僚，势倾朝野。
现代文：另外令仆卿相，随意提升罢免，调任授予宫职，多不经过十来天，贬退贤士良才，专意接纳心腹，威风震撼百官，势力倾满朝野。
English: In addition, it took no more than ten days to promote and dismiss servants and ministers at will, to transfer them to palace posts, to demote sages and talents, and to deliberately accept confidants. The prestige shook all the officials, and the power poured into the court and the field.

古文：臣见其如此，欲出忠为雍州刺史，镇抚关右，在心未行，反为忠废。
现代文：臣下见到情况如此，想调出于忠担任雍州刺史，镇守安抚函谷关以西，在心中还没施行，反被于忠废黜。
English: When his vassals saw the situation, they wanted to transfer out of loyalty to serve as the leader of Yongzhou, the town guard to pacify the west of Hantan Pass, but in their hearts it had not been implemented, but was overthrown by loyalty.

古文：忝官尸禄，孤负恩私。
现代文：我愧居官位空受俸禄，辜负恩爱私情。
English: I am ashamed to hold an official position, receive a salary in vain, and betray my love and personal feelings.

古文：臣之罪三也。
现代文：这是臣下的第三个罪过。
English: This is the third sin of a vassal.

古文：先帝升遐，储宫纂统，斯乃君父之恆谟，臣子之永则，加赏之义，自古无之。
现代文：先帝逝世，储君继位，这是君父的固定策谋，臣子的永久准则，加以赏赐的道理，自古就没有。
English: The death of the previous emperor and the succession of the crown prince, this is the fixed strategy of the sovereign father and the permanent standard of the courtiers, and the reason for rewarding them has not existed since ancient times.

古文：忠既人臣，受恩先帝，丧祸之际，竭节是常，迎陛下于东宫，臣下之恆事，如其不尔，更欲何为？
现代文：于忠既为臣属，受先帝恩惠，丧亡的时候，竭尽节操是正常的道义，到束宫迎接陛下，是臣下平常的事务，如果不这样，还要做什么?
English: Since Yu Zhong was a vassal, he was favored by the former emperor, and when he died, it was normal and moral to do his best to be conservative. It was the normal business of a vassal to go to the palace to meet his majesty. If not, what else could he do?

古文：而忠意气凌云，坐要封爵。
现代文：然而于忠欲念高入云霄，坐着邀取封爵。
English: However, Yu's desire for loyalty soared into the sky, and he was invited to receive a knighthood.

古文：尔日抑之，交恐为祸。
现代文：往日抑制了他，相交锋恐怕造成祸患。
English: He has been restrained in the past, and the confrontation is likely to cause trouble.

古文：臣以权臣所欲，不敢辄违，即集王公卿士，议其多少。
现代文：臣下囚权臣的欲望，不敢违背他，就召集王公卿大夫，议论户邑的多少。
English: If the vassal did not dare to go against the vassal's wishes, he would call together the princes and doctors to discuss the number of households.

古文：清河王臣泽，先帝懿弟，识度宽明，临众唱议，非以勤而赏之，惮违权臣之旨，望颜而授。
现代文：清河王臣元惮，是先帝的亲弟弟，见识度量宽广明朗，当众发表议论，不因勤劳而赏赐他，害怕违背权臣的旨意，看他的脸色而授爵位。
English: Qinghe Wang Zhen Yuan Shuo, the younger brother of the former emperor, had a broad and clear vision. He made a public speech, but did not reward him for his hard work. He was afraid of violating the will of the powerful minister and awarded him a knighthood by looking at his face.

古文：臣知不可，因而从之。
现代文：臣下知道不可以，却随波逐流而顺从他。
English: His vassals knew it was wrong, but they went with the flow and obeyed him.

古文：臣之罪四也。
现代文：这是臣下的第四个罪遇。
English: This is the fourth crime committed by a vassal.

古文：忠秉权门下，且居宰执，又总禁旅，为崇训卫尉，身兼内外，横干宫掖。
现代文：于忠在门下省掌权，并且担任宰辅，又总管宫廷军队，任崇训宫卫尉，身兼内外职务，蛮横干预宫中事情。
English: Yu Zhong held power in the province under his tutelage, and served as the first assistant, and also the general manager of the palace army, serving as the palace guard officer, holding both internal and external positions, and arbitrarily intervening in palace affairs.

古文：臣之罪五也。
现代文：这是臣下的第五个罪过。
English: This is the fifth sin of a vassal.

古文：古者重罪，必令三公会，期至旬日，所以重死刑也。
现代文：古代遇重大罪遇，必定命三公相会，期限到十天，是看重死刑的缘故。
English: In ancient times, in the event of a serious crime, the three magistrates must meet, and the time limit is up to ten days. This is due to the importance of the death penalty.

古文：先帝登极，十有七年，细人犯刑，犹宽宪墨，朝廷贵仕，不戮一人。今陛下践阼，年未半周，杀仆射、尚书，如夭一草，是忠秉权矫旨，擅行诛戮。
现代文：先帝登位，十七年中，小民犯罪，还宽大处理，朝廷高官，不杀一人现在陛下登位，时间不到半年，杀死仆射、尚书，如同锄一根草，这是于忠掌权假称韶令，擅自施行杀戮。
English: In the seventeen years since the previous emperor ascended to the throne, petty crimes committed by commoners were treated leniently, and high-ranking officials of the imperial court did not kill a single person. Now that His Majesty has ascended to the throne, less than half a year has passed, and the killing of courtiers and scholars is like the cutting of a single blade of grass. This is a case of loyally holding power, pretending to be a royal order, and arbitrarily carrying out killings.

古文：臣知不能救，臣之罪六也。
现代文：臣下知道而不能救助，这是臣下的第六个罪过。
English: It is the sixth sin of a vassal that he knows and cannot help.

古文：臣位荷师相，年未及终，难恕之罪，显露非一，何情以处，何颜以生？虽经恩宥，犹有余责，谨反私门，伏听司败。
现代文：臣下获得太傅宰相地位，时间不到一年，难以宽恕的罪过，显露出来的不仅一种，以什么情形而居处，有什么脸面而生存，虽然经过恩典原宥，还有多余的责任，恭谨回到家中，伏地听凭法官发落。
English: It has been less than a year since the vassal was elevated to the position of Taifu chancellor. The unforgivable sin is not only revealed in the way he lived and the face he wore, but also in the fact that, although he was pardoned by grace, he still had extra responsibilities. He should respectfully return home and humbly submit to the judge.

古文：灵太后感忠保护之勋，不问其罪。增雍封一千户，除侍中、太师，又加使持节，以本官领司州牧。
现代文：灵太后感激于忠保护自己的功勋，不追究他的罪过，增加元雍的封邑一千户，授任他为侍中、太师，又加授使持节，以本身官职兼任司州牧。
English: The spiritual empress dowager was grateful for his loyalty to protect his own merits, not to investigate his sins, to increase the number of fiefs in the Yuan Dynasty by a thousand, to appoint him as an attendant, a master, and to award him with the title of envoy, and to concurrently serve as a prefect in his own official capacity.

古文：雍表请：王公以下贱妾，悉不听用织成锦绣、金玉珠玑，违者以违旨论；奴婢悉不得衣绫绮缬，止于缦缯而已；奴则布服，并不得以金银为钗带，犯者鞭一百。
现代文：元雍上奏疏请求：王公以下的侍妾，全部不准使用穿戴织成的锦绣服饰、金玉珠宝，违犯的人以违犯圣旨判罪；奴婢全部不能穿绫罗印花丝织品衣服，衹能是没有纹彩的丝织品而已，奴仆穿布衣服，都不能用金银制成钗带，违犯的人抽打一百鞭。
English: At the time of the Yuan Dynasty, the following requests were made: All the concubines below the prince were not allowed to wear embroidered clothes and gold and jade jewelry, and those who violated the rules were convicted of violating the holy will; all the slaves and maidservants were not allowed to wear silk clothes printed with enamel, but only silk clothes without patterns; slaves could not wear cloth clothes, nor could they use gold and silver to make ribbons, and those who violated the rules were whipped a hundred times.

古文：太后从之，而不能久行也。诏雍乘步挽出入掖门。
现代文：太后采纳他的建议，而不能长久实行诏令元雍乘坐人拉车出进宫中的旁门。
English: The empress dowager accepted his suggestion, but could not long carry out the imperial edict of the Yuan Yong Dynasty to enter and leave the palace by the side gate in a carriage.

古文：又以本官录尚书事。
现代文：又以本身官职兼录尚书事。
English: He also used his official position to record records.

古文：雍频表辞逊，优答不许，诏侍中敦谕。
现代文：元雍接连上奏疏推辞，诏书以美好的言辞加以否定，韶令侍中敦促晓谕。
English: Yuan Yong successively made a hasty refusal, the imperial edict denied it with fine words, and the imperial command urged the attendants to speak out.

古文：诏雍朝夕侍讲。
现代文：诏令元雍早晚侍奉讲授。
English: The emperor ordered Yuan Yong to serve as a lecturer in the morning and evening.

古文：肃宗览政，除使持节、司州牧、侍中、太师、录尚书如故。
现代文：肃宗处理朝政，授任元雍为使持节、司州牧，侍中、太师、录尚书照旧。
English: Su Zong dealt with the court politics, and appointed Yuan Yong as the envoy of the festival, the governor of the state, the chamberlain, the teacher, and the recorder as before.

古文：肃宗加元服，雍兼太保，与兼太尉崔光摄行冠礼。
现代文：肃宗行冠礼，元雍兼太保，和兼太尉崔光辅助施行加冠礼。
English: Su Zong performed the coronation, and Yuan Yong Keng Taibo and Keng Taifu Cui Guang assisted in performing the coronation.

古文：诏雍乘车出入大司马门，进位丞相，给羽葆鼓吹，倍加班剑，余悉如故。
现代文：诏令元雍乘车出入大司马门，升职位为丞相。赐给仪仗鼓吹，加倍授予饰有花纹的木剑，其余全部照旧。
English: The edict ordered Yuan Yong to enter and leave Taishimamen by car, to be promoted to the post of chancellor, to be given the honor of preaching, to double the number of wooden swords decorated with patterns, and all the rest as before.

古文：又赐帛八百匹，与一千人供具，催令速拜。
现代文：又赐帛八百匹，和一千人摆设酒宴的器具，催促元雍马上受命。
English: He also gave him eight hundred donkeys and a thousand people to set up the equipment for the banquet, urging Yuan Yong to accept the order immediately.

古文：诏雍依齐郡顺王简太和故事，朝讫引坐，特优拜伏之礼。
现代文：诏令元雍依照齐郡顺王元简在太和年问的旧例，朝见后引入座位，特地优待减去叩拜伏地的礼仪。
English: In accordance with the old example of Shun Wang Yuanjian's visit to Taihe in Qi County, the emperor ordered the Yuan Yong Dynasty to introduce a seat after the morning meeting, special preferential treatment minus the etiquette of kowtowing to Voldemort.

古文：总摄内外，与元叉同决庶政。
现代文：总领内外官员，和元叉共同决断各项政事。
English: He was in charge of major domestic and foreign affairs, and handled day-to-day government affairs together with Yuan Xuan.

古文：岁禄万余，粟至四万，伎侍盈房，诸子榼冕，荣贵之盛，昆弟莫及焉。
现代文：一年俸禄一万多匹，谷粟到四万石，歌女侍妾满屋，儿子们以上等珠装饰帽子，荣耀尊贵的显赫，兄弟中没有谁赶得上他。
English: An annual salary of more than ten thousand horses, a corn crop of up to forty thousand koku, a house full of songstresses and concubines, beaded hats adorned with beads for sons and above, glory and dignity, no brother can match him.

古文：元妃卢氏薨后，更纳博陵崔显妹，甚有色宠，欲以为妃。
现代文：第一位妃子卢氏逝世后，元雍另娶博陵人崔显的妹妹，十分有姿色受宠幸，想作为妃子。
English: After the death of the first concubine Lu, Yuan Yong married the younger sister of Cui Xian from Boling. She was very pretty and was favored and wanted to be a concubine.

古文：世宗初以崔氏世号 东崔 ，地寒望劣，难之，久乃听许。
现代文：世宗起初因崔氏世代号称 东崔 ，地位寒微声望低下，不想同意，很久才准许。
English: At first, Sejong, who was known as Dongcui due to the rise of Choe's generation, did not want to agree because of his low status and low reputation, and it took him a long time to agree.

古文：延昌已后，多幸妓侍，近百许人，而疏弃崔氏，别房幽禁，不得关豫内政，仅给衣食而已。
现代文：延昌以后，元雍多交合歌女侍妾，将近百许人，而疏远抛弃崔氏，用另外的房屋囚禁，不能参与家政，仅仅给予衣食而已。
English: After Yanchang, Yuan Yong had more than a hundred mistresses and concubines, but he abandoned the Cui clan, imprisoned them in another house, and did not allow them to participate in housekeeping. He only gave them food and clothing.

古文：至乃左右无复婢使，子女欲省其母，必启闻，许乃得见。
现代文：以致身旁不再有婢女杂使，子女想探问母亲，一定要报告，准许后才能见面。
English: So that there is no longer a maid-servant by her side, and if the children want to ask their mother, they must report it, and they can only meet after permission.

古文：未几，崔暴薨，多云雍殴杀之也。
现代文：不久，崔氏突然逝世，人们多说是元雍殴打杀了她。
English: Soon after, Ms. Cui died suddenly, and it was widely believed that Mr. Yuan Yong had beaten her to death.

古文：灵太后许赐其女妓，未及送之，雍遣其阉竖丁鹅自至宫内，料简四口，冒以还第。
现代文：灵太后答应赐给元雍歌舞女艺人，没有等到送来，元雍就派遣手下宦官丁鹅自己到宫中，挑选了四人，假冒赏赐而回到第宅。
English: Empress Dowager Ling promised to give Yuan Yong a female song and dance artist, and did not wait for it to be sent, Yuan Yong sent his eunuch Ding Ge to the palace, selected four people, pretended to be rewarded and returned to the first house.

古文：太后责其专擅，追停之。
现代文：太后责备元雍擅自行事，追回并停止赐予。
English: The empress dowager reproached Yuan Yong for abusing his power and ordered him to stop using it.

古文：孝昌初，诏曰： 比相府弗开，阴阳未变。
现代文：孝昌初年，诏书说： 近来丞相府没有开设，阴阳没有变化。
English: In the first year of Xiaochang, the imperial edict said: Recently, the prime minister's office has not been opened, and the yin and yang have not changed.

古文：王秉哲居宗，勋望隆重，道庇苍生，威被华裔，体国犹家，匪躬在节，可开府置佐史。 
现代文：王秉持明智处于首位，功勋声望隆盛重大，道德庇护百姓，威风遍及华夏边地，体贴国家如同家庭，尽忠而有节操，可以开府设置佐史。 
English: Wang Bingzhi was wise in the first place, his achievements and reputation were great, his morality protected the people, his prestige spread to the outskirts of China, he was considerate of the country like a family, he was loyal and disciplined, and he could set up a government and set a history.

古文：寻罢司徒，以为丞相府。
现代文：不久罢除司徒，作为丞相府。
English: Soon after, Sito was dismissed, and it remained as the Prime Minister's Office.

古文：孝庄初，尔朱荣欲害朝士，遂云雍将谋逆，于河阴遇害。
现代文：孝庄帝初年，余朱荣想杀害朝廷官员，就说元雍将策划作乱，元雍在河阴遇害。
English: In the first year of Emperor Xiaozhuang, when Yu Zhu Rong wanted to kill an official of the imperial court, he said that Yuan Yong would plan a riot, and Yuan Yong was killed in Heyin.

古文：赠假黄钺、相国，谥文穆王。
现代文：追赠元雍为假黄铁、相国，谧号为文穆王。
English: The posthumous gift of Yuan Yong is a fake yellow iron, a sister country, and the nickname is King Wenmu.

古文：雍识怀短浅，又无学业，虽位居朝首，不为时情所推。
现代文：元雍见识短浅，又没有学问，虽然位居朝官首位，不为当时人心所推重。
English: Yuan Yong was short-sighted and did not read. Although he was the head of the imperial court, he was not respected by the world.

古文：既以亲尊，地当宰辅，自熙平以后，朝政褫落，不能守政匡弼，唯唯而已。
现代文：他以皇亲而尊贵，地位处于宰辅，从熙平年间以后，朝廷大权被剥夺旁落，他不能坚守正道匡正辅助，衹恭敬顺从而已。
English: He was honored as a close relative of the emperor, and his position was at the second-in-command. After the Heiping era, the power of the imperial court was stripped away, and he was unable to adhere to the righteous path of rectitude and assistance, and thus he became deferential and obedient.

古文：及清河王怿之死，元叉专政，天下大责归焉。
现代文：等到清河王元恽死后，元叉专断朝政，天下人将责任归咎于他。
English: After the death of King Yuan of Qinghe, the Yuan dynasty became despotic, and the whole world blamed Yuan Yong.

古文：嫡子泰，字昌，颇有时誉。
现代文：嫡子五台，字旦，很有名声。
English: His eldest son, Wutai, is a famous poet.

古文：为中书侍郎，寻迁通直散骑常侍、镇东将军、太常卿。
现代文：担任中书侍郎，不久升为通直散骑常侍、镇束将军、太常卿。
English: He served as Chusho-sajiro (chamberlain), and was soon promoted to Tsuchizane-sanchi-jojosaji, Zenzaku-shogun, and Taizokyo.

古文：与雍同时遇害。
现代文：和元雍同时被杀害。
English: He was killed at the same time as Yuan Yong.

古文：追赠侍中、特进、骠骑大将军、太尉公、武州刺史、高阳王，谥曰文孝。
现代文：追赠他为侍中、特进、骠骑大将军、太尉公、武州刺史、高阳王，谧号为文孝。
English: He was posthumously awarded the titles of Samurai Junior Officer, Special Envoy, Cavalry General, Second Lieutenant, Governor of Buzhou, Prince of Gaoyang, and his posthumous name was Wen Xiao.

古文：子斌，袭。
现代文：儿子元斌，继承爵位。
English: His son, Yuan Bin, succeeded to the peerage.

古文：武定中，官至尚书右仆射。
现代文：武定年间，官位到尚书右仆射。
English: During the Wuding era, the official rank went to Shangshu Yuhudong.

古文：齐受禅，爵例降。
现代文：齐国接受禅让，爵位依例降低。
English: If all accept Zen, the crown will fall as usual.

古文：泰兄端，字宣雅。
现代文：元泰的哥哥元端，字宣雅。
English: Motoyasu's older brother, Motohata, plays the role of Xuan Ya.

古文：美容貌，颇涉书史。
现代文：容貌美丽，阅读了许多图书。
English: She is beautiful and has read a lot of books.

古文：起家散骑侍郎。
现代文：出仕为散骑侍郎。
English: The attendant was a samurai horseman.

古文：累迁通直常侍、鸿胪、太常少卿、散骑常侍。
现代文：屡经升迁到通直常侍，鸿胪、太常少卿、散骑常侍。
English: He was repeatedly promoted to the position of Tsunezane no suke, Hongye, Taicho no shojo, and Sanzai no suke.

古文：出为安东将军、青州刺史。
现代文：外出任安束将军、青州刺史。
English: Outside, he served as the general of Anzuka and the governor of Aoshu.

古文：是时萧衍遣将寇逼徐扬，除端抚军将军、金紫光禄大夫、使持节、东南道大使，处分军机。
现代文：这时萧衍派遣将领侵犯逼近徐州、扬州，朝廷授任元端为抚军将军、金紫光禄大夫、使持节、东南道大使，处理军队事务。
English: At this time, Xiao Yan sent generals to encroach on the approaching Xuzhou and Yangzhou, and the imperial court appointed Yuan Duan as the general of Fuzhou army, the doctor of Jin Zi Guanglu, the envoy of Ji Jie, and the ambassador of Southeast Province to deal with military affairs.

古文：贼平，拜镇军将军、兗州刺史。
现代文：贼寇平定后，被任命为镇军将军、兖州刺史。
English: After the bandits were subdued, he was appointed as the general of the town army and the chief historian of Zhangzhou.

古文：俄而衍将复寇徐兗，围逼州城。
现代文：不久萧衍的将领再次侵犯徐州、兖州，包围逼近州城。
English: Soon after, Xiao Yan's generals invaded Xuzhou and Ganzhou again, encircling and approaching Suzhou.

古文：端率在州文武拒守，得全。
现代文：元端率领州中文武官员抵御，得以保全。
English: Yuanduan led the state's Chinese military officials to resist and was saved.

古文：以功封安德县开国公，食邑五百户。
现代文：因功勋被封为安德县开国公，食邑五百产。
English: For his meritorious service, he was named the founding father of Ande County, with 500 products from his hometown.

古文：还，除都官尚书。
现代文：返回，授任都官尚书。
English: He returned and was appointed to the post of Tokyo Metropolitan Government by Shosho.

古文：与雍俱遇害。
现代文：和元雍一起被杀害。
English: He was killed together with Yuan Yong.

古文：赠车骑大将军、仪同三司、相州刺史。
现代文：追赠他为车骑大将军、仪同三司、相州刺史。
English: He was posthumously awarded the titles of General of Chariot and Cavalry, Grand Marshal of the People's Liberation Army, Grand Marshal of the People's Liberation Army, and Marshal of the People's Liberation Army.

古文：子峻，袭爵。
现代文：儿子元峻，继承爵位。
English: His son, Genjun, succeeded to the peerage.

古文：齐受禅，例降。
现代文：齐国接受禅让，爵位依例降低。
English: After accepting the compromise, the peerage was reduced as usual.

古文：泰弟睿，字子哲。
现代文：元泰的弟弟元敔，字子哲。
English: Motoyasu's younger brother, Motonari, is called Zetsu.

古文：轻忽荣利，爱玩琴书。
现代文：看轻荣耀利益，爱好耽玩琴瑟书籍。
English: Light on glory and profit, fond of lingering over books.

古文：起家拜通直散骑侍郎，迁卫尉少卿，转光禄少卿，封济北郡王。
现代文：出仕为通直散骑侍郎，升卫尉少卿，改任光禄少卿，封济北郡王。
English: He was promoted to the position of Tsuchida Sanzhiyajiro, promoted to the position of Weifu Shokei, was appointed to the position of Guanglu Shokei, and became the King of Fuzhi North County.

古文：与雍俱遇害。
现代文：和元雍一起被杀害。
English: He was killed together with Yuan Yong.

古文：赠车骑大将军、司空公、雍州刺史。
现代文：追赠他为车骑大将军、司空公、雍州刺史。
English: He was posthumously awarded the titles of General of Chariot and Cavalry, General of Cavalry and Air Force, and General of Yongzhou.

古文：子徽，普泰中，袭爵。
现代文：儿子元徽，普泰年间，继承爵位。
English: His son, Yuan Hui, succeeded to the peerage in the Putai era.

古文：起家通直郎。
现代文：出仕为通直郎。
English: The attendant is Tsuchinairo.

古文：武定五年，坐与元瑾等谋反，伏法。
现代文：武定五年，因和元瑾等人谋划反叛，受刑而死。
English: In the fifth year of Wuding's reign, he was sentenced to death for plotting a rebellion with Geng Yao and others.

古文：睿弟诞，字文发。
现代文：元数的弟弟元诞，字文发。
English: The younger brother of the yuan, the yuan, was born, and the characters were issued.

古文：少聪惠，有风仪。
现代文：年轻时聪明机智，有风度仪表。
English: In his youth, he was clever and witty, with good manners.

古文：起家通直郎，迁中书侍郎、通直散骑常侍。
现代文：出仕为通直郎，升中书侍郎、通直散骑常侍。
English: His attendants were Tsuchinairo, a junior high school secretary, and Tsuchinaizanjo, a regular attendant.

古文：封新阳县开国伯，食邑三百户。
现代文：封为新阳县开国伯，食邑三百户。
English: Feng is the founder of Xinyang County, and there are three hundred households in the food village.

古文：加龙骧将军。
现代文：加授龙骧将军。
English: He was additionally awarded the rank of General Longzheng.

古文：进封昌乐王，食邑七百户。迁平南将军、散骑常侍、黄门侍郎。
现代文：晋封爵为昌乐王，食邑七百户调任平南将军、散骑常侍、黄门侍郎。
English: He was promoted to the peerage as the king of Changle, and the 700 households in the food village were transferred to the general of Pingnan, the horseback riding attendant, and the yellow gate attendant.

古文：孝静初，拜侍中、车骑大将军、仪同三司、司州牧。
现代文：孝静帝初年，任命他为侍中、车骑大将军、仪同三司、司州牧。
English: In the first year of Emperor Xiaojing, he was appointed as a chamberlain, general of chariot and cavalry, the third secretary of etiquette and etiquette, and the governor of Shizhou.

古文：天平三年薨，赠使持节、侍中、太保、司徒公、尚书令，将军、牧如故，谥曰文献。
现代文：天平三年逝世，追赠使持节、侍中、太保、司徒公、尚书令，将军、州牧照旧，谧号为文献。
English: Tenpyo died three years later, and was posthumously given the titles of Jichisai, Samurai, Taibo, Shitokugo, Shoshorei, Shogun, and Shushu Maki, and his posthumous nickname was Literature.

古文：无子，以斌第二子子亮为后。
现代文：没有儿子，以元斌的第二个儿子子亮为后嗣。
English: There was no son, with Yuanbin's second son, Ziliang, as the heir.

古文：诞弟勒叉，勒叉弟亘，亘弟伏陀，伏陀弟弥陀，弥陀弟僧育，僧育弟居罗。
现代文：元诞的弟弟勒叉，勒叉的弟弟元亘，元亘的弟弟伏陀，伏陀的弟弟弥陀，弥陀的弟弟僧育，僧育的弟弟居罗。
English: Le Fork, the younger brother of Genzos, Le Fork's younger brother, Won Won, Won Won's younger brother, Voodoo, Voodoo's younger brother, Mido, Mido's younger brother, So You, So You's younger brother, Kylo.

古文：出帝初，勒叉封阳平县，亘封濮阳县，伏陀封武阳县，弥陀封新阳县，僧育封顿丘县，居罗封卫县，并开国伯，食邑四百户。
现代文：出帝初年，勒叉封在阳平县，元亘封在濮阳县，伏陀封在武阳县，弥陀封在新阳县，僧育封在顿丘县，居罗封在卫县，都为开国伯，食邑四百户。
English: In the first year of the emperor's enthronement, Le Zhaofeng was in Yangping County, Yuan Waofeng was in Shuyang County, Vudafeng was in Wuyang County, Midafeng was in Xinyang County, So Yuofeng was in Dongqiu County, and Gyulao Feng was in Wei County. All of them were founding emperors and had 400 households.

古文：天平中，并除镇远将军、散骑侍郎。
现代文：天平年间，都授任镇远将军、散骑侍郎。
English: During the Tenpyo era, they were all awarded the positions of Zhenyuan Shogun and Sanzhiyajiro.

古文：僧育走关西，国除。
现代文：僧育逃到函谷关以西，封国被削除。
English: Soyu fled to the west of the Hakodate pass, and his fiefdom was removed.

古文：其余齐受禅，爵例降。
现代文：其余的在齐国接受惮让后，爵位依例降低。
English: The rest of the peerage was reduced in accordance with the rules after Qi accepted the abdication.

古文：北海王详，字季豫。
现代文：北海王元详，字季豫。
English: The king of the North Sea, Yuan Ji, is called Ji Yu.

古文：美姿容，善举止。
现代文：姿态容貌美丽，举止高雅。
English: She has a beautiful appearance and elegant manners.

古文：太和九年封，加侍中、征北大将军。
现代文：太和九年封，加授侍中、征北大将军。
English: He was promoted to Taihe nine years later, and was additionally awarded the titles of Junior Chamberlain and General of the Northern Expeditionary Force.

古文：后拜光禄大夫，解侍中、将军。
现代文：后来被任命为光禄大夫，解除侍中、将军职位。
English: Later, he was appointed as a doctor of Guanglu, and relieved of his positions as a chamberlain and a general.

古文：又兼侍中。
现代文：后又兼侍中。
English: Later, he also served as a junior attendant.

古文：从高祖南伐，为散骑常侍。
现代文：跟随高祖向南征伐，担任散骑常侍。
English: He followed Gao Zu to the south and served as a straggler.

古文：高祖自洛北巡，详常与侍中、彭城王勰并在舆辇，陪侍左右。
现代文：高祖从洛阳向北巡视，元详时常和侍中、彭城王元勰都在车辆中，陪同侍奉在左右。
English: Gao Zu made a tour from Luoyang to the north, and Geng Yao was often in the vehicle with the chamberlain and Pengcheng Wang Yuanjun, and the attendants were on the right and left.

古文：至高宗射铭之所，高祖停驾，诏诸弟及侍臣，皆试射远近，唯详箭不及高宗箭所十余步。
现代文：到高宗射击立碑的地方，高祖停下车辆，诏令几个弟弟和侍臣，都试着射出有多远，仅元详的箭衹差高宗的箭十多步远。
English: When Gaozong arrived at the place where the monument was erected, Gaozong stopped the vehicle and ordered several younger brothers and attendants to try to shoot as far as possible. Only the original arrowhead was more than ten steps away from Gaozong's arrow.

古文：高祖嘉之，拊掌欣笑，遂诏勒铭，亲自为制。
现代文：高祖赞许他。拍手欢笑，于是下诏刻石立碑，亲自写制书。
English: Gaozu applauded him, clapped his hands and laughed, so he decided to carve a stone monument and write a book himself.

古文：五等开建，食邑二千户。
现代文：设置五等诸侯，元详获食邑二千户。
English: Five-class lordships were set up, and 2,000 households in food villages were originally detailed.

古文：迁侍中，转秘书监。
现代文：调任侍中，改任秘书监。
English: He was transferred to the position of Samurai Junior High School, and was reassigned to the position of secretary supervisor.

古文：车驾南伐，详行中领军，留守，给鼓吹一部，甲仗三百人，兼督营构之务。
现代文：皇帝向南征伐，元详代理中领军，留守京城，赐给鼓吹一部，披甲执兵器的卫士三百人，兼督察修建的事务。
English: The emperor went on a campaign to the south, and Yuan Zhao, acting as the leader of the central army, stayed behind in the capital and gave a part of the land to the propagandists, three hundred guards in armor and weapons, and an inspector to supervise the construction.

古文：高祖赐详玺书曰： 比游神何业也？
现代文：高祖赐给元详的文书说： 近来游神于什么事业?
English: The document given to Yuan Yuan by Gao Zu said: What has God been up to recently?

古文：丘坟六籍，何事非娱？善正风猷，肃是禁旅。 
现代文：古籍六经，哪部书不能娱乐，妥善端正风纪，整肃这支禁卫部队。 
English: The ancient books of the Six Classics, which book can not entertain, properly correct the etiquette, and purify this guard force.

古文：详后朝于行宫，高祖引见之。
现代文：元谨后来到行宫朝见，高祖接见他。
English: Afterward, Yuan Zheng went to the imperial palace for a morning meeting, and Gao Zu received him.

古文：详庆平沔北，高祖曰： 朕以畿南未清，神麾暂动，沔北数城，并皆柔服，此乃将士之效，非朕之功。 
现代文：元详庆贺平定迎匕以北，直担说： 我因京城南面没有肃清，神勇的军队暂时出动，沔水以北的几座城池，都柔顺归服，这是将领士兵的效命，不是我的功劳。 
English: The original details of the celebration of Hepingding north of Yingbin, Zhitang said: I did not clear the south side of the capital, the brave army temporarily dispatched, and several cities north of Surabaya were subdued. This is the service life of the general soldiers, not my merit.

古文：详对曰： 陛下德迈唐虞，功微周汉，自南之风，于是乎始。 
现代文：五谨回答说： 陛下德行超过唐尧、虞舜，功绩超出因朝、连住，到南方的风尚，从这裹开始。 
English: Wujin replied, "Your majesty's virtue surpasses that of Tang Xuan and Gu Xuan, and your achievements surpass that of Tang Xuan and Gu Xuan, and the tradition of living together in the south started from here.

古文：详还洛，高祖饯之，诏详曰： 昔者，淮夷叛命，故有三年之举；鬼方不令，乃致淹载之师。
现代文：互谨回盗隆，直担为他饯行，诏令元详说： 从前，进裹叛变抗命，所以有三年的战斗；鬼友不接受命令，以致有几年的出征。
English: The imperial edict of the Yuan Dynasty said in detail: In the past, there was a rebellion against the order, so there was a three-year battle; the ghost friends did not accept the order, so there were several years of expedition.

古文：况江吴窃命，于今十纪，朕必欲荡涤南海，然后言归。
现代文：何况长江呈地自称帝王，到现在一百年，我一定要扫荡南部海域，然后回归。
English: What's more, the Yangtze River arrogantly claims to be the emperor. One hundred years from now, I will definitely sweep the southern seas and then return.

古文：今夏停此，故与汝相见，善守京邑，副我所怀。 
现代文：现在夏天停留在这里，所以和你相见，好好守卫京城，满足我的心意。 
English: Now I stay here in the summer, so I can meet you, guard the capital well, and satisfy my heart.

古文：赵郡王干薨，以详行司州牧。
现代文：赵虽王互干逝世，任命互详代行司州牧。
English: Although Zhao Wanghuagang passed away, he appointed Zhou Jiao as acting provincial governor.

古文：除护军将军，兼尚书左仆射。
现代文：授任护车将军，兼任尚书左仆射。
English: He was awarded the post of general of the escort, and concurrently held the post of Shoshu Zuopu Sho.

古文：高祖临崩，顾命详为司空辅政。
现代文：高祖逝世前，遗命元详担任司空辅佐朝政。
English: Before Gaozu's death, his last will and testament specified that he would serve as the imperial court's second-in-command.

古文：世宗即位，以详营构之勤，增邑一千户。
现代文：世宗即位，因元详有修建城池的功勋，增加食邑一千户。
English: When Sejong ascended the throne, he was given credit for the construction of the castle, increasing the number of households by a thousand.

古文：详以帝居谅暗，不受。
现代文：元详因皇帝在服丧期间，不接受。
English: The original details were not accepted because the emperor was in mourning.

古文：世宗览政，迁侍中、大将军、录尚书事。
现代文：世宗处理朝政，元详调任侍中、大将军、录尚书事。
English: The Sejong dealt with the imperial court politics, and the Yuan dynasty officials were appointed to the positions of chamberlains, generals, and recorders.

古文：咸阳王禧之谋反也，详表求解任。
现代文：咸阳王元禧图谋反叛，元详上奏疏请求解除职位。
English: Xianyang Wang Yuanxi plotted to rebel, and the details of the case were reported to the government to request that he be relieved of his post.

古文：诏曰： 一人之身，愆不累德，形乖性别，忠逆固殊。
现代文：诏书说： 出自一个人的事情，罪过不牵累德行，形貌不同性情有别，忠诚叛逆本来殊异。
English: The edict said: "From one person's affairs, sin does not affect virtue, different appearances have different temperaments, and loyalty and treason are inherently different.

古文：是以父殛子兴，义高唐世；弟戮兄登，迹显周鲁。
现代文：所以父亲被杀儿子兴盛，义理高悬唐尧时代；弟弟受戮哥哥荣升，事迹显见周朝鲁国。
English: Therefore, when the father was killed, the son prospered, and the righteousness was high during the Tang Dynasty; when the younger brother was killed, the elder brother was promoted, and the deeds were evident in the Zhou Dynasty and the Lu Kingdom.

古文：禧之与国，异体同气，既肆无君之逆，安顾弟友之亲。
现代文：元禧和国家，不同体而同血缘，既肆行目无君主的叛逆，哪顾兄弟间的亲密。
English: The New Year's Day and the country, different in body but related by blood, have already carried out the rebellion without a monarch, regardless of the closeness between brothers.

古文：叔父忠显二朝，诚贯庙社，实勖赞冲昧，保乂鸿猷，岂容以微介之虑，忘阿衡之重？貂章即已敕还，愿不再述。
现代文：叔父的忠心显著于两朝，诚意盈满于宗庙，协助我这年幼无知者，保卫宏大的基业，哪容因微小的顾虑，忘记宰辅的重任，印章饰物已经下令送回，希望不再申述。
English: My uncle's loyalty is obvious to the two dynasties, and his sincerity abounds in the ancestral temple, helping me, a young and ignorant person, to protect the grand heritage, which does not allow for minor concerns, forgetting the important task of the assistant, the seal decoration has been ordered to be sent back, and I hope to no longer complain.

古文：祚属眇躬，言及斯事，临纸惭恨，惋慨兼深。 
现代文：皇位属于渺小的我，谈到这件事，面临纸张惭愧遗憾，惋惜感慨都深。 
English: The throne belongs to small me, and when it comes to this matter, I feel ashamed and regret in the face of the paper, and my regret and emotion are deep.

古文：详重表陈解，诏复不许。
现代文：元详又上奏疏陈述解职，诏书义不准许。
English: It is not allowed to issue a formal notice of dismissal.

古文：除太傅，领司徒，侍中、录尚书事如故。
现代文：授任太傅，兼任司徒，侍中、绿尚书事照旧。
English: He was appointed taifu, and concurrently served as sito, chamberlain, and secretary as before.

古文：详固辞，诏遣敦劝，乃受。
现代文：元详执意推辞，诏令派人敦促劝解，才接受。
English: The original details insisted on withdrawing, and the imperial edict sent someone to urge persuasion before accepting.

古文：详与八座奏曰： 窃惟奸劫难除，为蠹日久，群盗作患，有国攸病。故五刑为用，犹陷触网之诛；道几胜残，宁息狗窃之响。
现代文：元详和尚书省八座上奏说： 私下以为奸乱劫掠难以消除，为害已久，盗贼群起作乱，是国家的忧患所以五种刑罚施用，还有人陷入法网遭诛杀；道德隐微遏制凶残的人，宁息偷盗的行为。
English: Yuanxiao Monk of the Eight Prefectures of Shuzhou Province said: Privately, I thought that it was difficult to eliminate the robbery and plunder, and the harm had been done for a long time. Thieves rioted in groups, which was a national sorrow, so five kinds of punishments were imposed. There were also people who were caught in the net of the law and were killed. Morality vaguely restrained the murderous people, and they preferred to steal.

古文：是以班制垂式，名为治本，整纟罔提目，政之大要。
现代文：所以颁布制令下发条例，名分是治理的根本，纲举目张，是政务的关键。
English: Therefore, the promulgation of the regulations on the issuance of orders is the foundation of governance, and the outline is the key to government affairs.

古文：谨寻夺禄事条，班已周岁。
现代文：恭谨探寻剥夺俸禄的条款，颁布已满一年。
English: It has been over a year since the clause to respectfully explore the deprivation of salary was promulgated.

古文：然京邑尹、令，善恶易闻；边州远守，或难听审，皆上下同情，迭相掩没。
现代文：然而京城的尹、令，善恶容易得知；边远的州牧郡守，有的就难确知，都上下一条心，互相掩盖。
English: However, the yin and yang of the capital city, good and evil, are easy to know; the outlying counties, some of which are difficult to know for sure, are all one mind, covering each other.

古文：设有贼发，隐而不言，或以劫为偷，或遏掠成盗，更令贼发难知，攘窃惟甚。臣等参议，若依制削夺，则县无期月之宰；附条贬黜，郡靡岁稔之守。
现代文：假使有贼寇发生，隐秘不报告，有的以抢劫为偷盗，有的阻止掳掠而成偷盗，更使贼寇发生难以知道，偷窃更为严重臣下等人同议论，如果依照制令剥夺俸禄，那么县里没有一整月的县令；根据条例贬降废黜，郡上没有满一年的太守。
English: If there is a bandit attack, it is not reported secretly, some use robbery as theft, some prevent looting and become thieves, and it is even more difficult to know that a bandit attack has occurred, and theft is more serious. Subordinates and others argue with each other. If salary is deprived in accordance with the order, then there is no county order for a whole month in the county; according to the regulations, the title is demoted and abolished, and there is no county governor for more than one year.

古文：此制必行，所谓法令滋章，盗贼多有。昔黄龚变风，不由削禄；张赵称美，岂惮贬退。
现代文：这个制度如一定施行，就是所谓的 法令越分明，盗贼反倒越多，从前黄霸、龚遂改变风尚，不由于剥夺俸禄；张敞、赵广汉受到称赞，哪裹是量惧贬降废黜?
English: If this system is definitely implemented, the so-called decrees will become more and more clear, but the thieves will become more and more. In the past, Huangba and Zou changed the fashion, not because of the deprivation of salary; Zhang Zhangran and Zhao Guanghan were praised, what is the fear of degrading and dethroning?

古文：然绥导之体，得失在人。
现代文：然而安抚的规则，得失在于人。
English: However, the rule of appeasement is that the gain or loss is up to the people.

古文：乃可重选慎官，依律劾禁，不宜轻改法令，削黜群司。
现代文：以为可以重新选拔谨慎的官员，依照法律弹劾禁锢，不应轻意修改法令，废黜众多官员。
English: We should not lightly amend the law and depose many officials if we think that we can re-select cautious officials and impeach and imprison them in accordance with the law.

古文：今请改制条，还附律处。
现代文：现在请求修改制令条例，回附法律条文。
English: It is now requesting that the ordinance be amended to include the legal provisions.

古文：其励己公清，赏有常典，风谣黩贿，案为考第。 
现代文：凡激励自己公平清廉者，赏赐有不变的典章，风间贪污受贿的，检查后考定等级。 
English: Those who motivate themselves to be fair and clean will be rewarded with unchanging awards, while those who are corrupt and take bribes will be graded after inspection.

古文：世宗从之。
现代文：世宗听从了这个建议。
English: Sejong accepted his opinion.

古文：详之拜命，其夜暴风震电，拔其庭中桐树大十围，倒立本处。
现代文：元详接受任命，这天夜晚狂风大作电闪雷鸣，拔起了庭院中十围粗的大桐树，倒立在原处。
English: On the night that Genjo accepted the appointment, a violent wind, accompanied by lightning and thunder, uprooted a large, ten-circumference thick paulownia tree in the courtyard, leaving it upside down in its original place.

古文：初，世宗之览政也，详闻彭城王勰有震主之虑，而欲夺其司徒，大惧物议，故为大将军，至是乃居之。
现代文：当初，世宗掌握政事，元详听说彭城王元勰有震撼君主的顾虑，而想剥夺他的司徒，非常担心别人议论，所以任大将军，到这时才任司徒。
English: At first, Shizong was in charge of political affairs. It was rumored that Pengcheng Wang Yuanjun had concerns about shocking the monarch, and wanted to deprive him of his steward. He was very worried about others talking about it, so he was appointed general, and only then he was appointed steward.

古文：天威如此，识者知其不终。
现代文：上天的威风如此，有见识的人知道元详不能善终。
English: Such is the majesty of heaven, that those who have insight know that it cannot end well.

古文：世宗讲武于鄴，详与右仆身高肇、领军于劲留守京师。
现代文：世宗在邺城练兵，元详和右仆射高肇、领军于劲留守京城。
English: Sejong trained his soldiers in Yeongseong, while Genjo and his right-hand man, Sho Gaozhao, and the leader, Yu Jin, stayed in the capital.

古文：初，太和末，详以少弟延爱；景明初，复以季父崇宠。位望兼极，百僚惮之。
现代文：当初，太和末年，元详以小弟弟的身份获得喜爱，景明初年，又以小叔叔的身份受尊崇宠信，地位名望都到极点，百官畏惧他。
English: At the beginning, in the last years of the reign of Empress Dowager Cixi, Yuan Zhao was loved as a little brother, and in the first years of the reign of Emperor Jingming, he was respected as a little uncle. His status and reputation were at their peak, and he was feared by all officials.

古文：而贪冒无厌，多所取纳；公私营贩，侵剥远近；嬖狎群小，所在请托。
现代文：然而贪婪没有满足，收受贿赂很多；公私经营贩卖，侵占剥削远近的人；宠爱亲近小人，各处私相嘱托。
English: However, his greed was not satisfied, and he accepted many bribes; he engaged in public and private business and trafficking, embezzled and exploited people near and far; he favored and befriended villains, and imposed his will on others everywhere.

古文：珍丽充盈，声色侈纵，建饰第宇，开起山池，所费巨万矣。
现代文：珍奇美丽的物品堆积，声乐女色奢侈放纵，建筑装饰第宅，垒山掘池，费用上万万。
English: The accumulation of rare and beautiful objects, the extravagant indulgence of female vocalists, the architectural decoration of the first house, the excavation of the foundation hill, the cost of tens of thousands of dollars.

古文：又于东掖门外，大路之南，驱逼细人，规占第宅。
现代文：又在柬掖门外，大路的南面，驱逐逼迫小民，夺占房屋。
English: In addition, in the south of the main road, outside the gate of Kham, they expelled and persecuted the common people and occupied the houses.

古文：至有丧柩在堂，请延至葬而不见许，乃令舆榇巷次，行路哀嗟。
现代文：以至有灵柩在屋中，请求延长到安葬而不被准许，于是派人用车载棺材到里巷，过路的人哀伤嗟叹。
English: So much so that there was a coffin in the house, and a request to extend it for burial was not granted, so they sent someone with a truck-mounted coffin to the alley, and people passing by were sad and lamenting.

古文：详母高太妃，颇亦助为威虐，亲命殴击，怨响嗷嗷。
现代文：元详的母亲高太妃，也颇协助他作威作福，亲自命人殴打别人，怨恨的声音接连不断。
English: His well-known mother, Gao Taifei, also helped him a lot to be a tyrant, personally ordered people to beat others, and the voices of resentment continued.

古文：妃，宋王刘昶女，不见答礼。
现代文：妃子，是宋王刘昶的女儿，不被重视。
English: The concubine, the daughter of the Song King Liu Bei, was not valued.

古文：宠妾范氏，爱等伉俪，及其死也，痛不自胜，乃至葬讫，犹毁遂视之。
现代文：宠爱的侍妾范氏，喜爱同于夫妻，到她死的时候，忍受不住悲痛，以致安葬完毕，还毁弃墓道而看她。
English: When the beloved concubine Fan, who was loved by both husband and wife, died, she could not bear the grief, so she was buried in peace, and the cemetery was destroyed to see her.

古文：表请赠平昌县君。
现代文：上奏请求追赠平昌县君。
English: Request for posthumous award of Pyeongchang County Grandmaster.

古文：详又蒸于安定王燮妃高氏，高氏即茹皓妻姊。
现代文：元详又和母辈的安定王元燮的妃子高氏淫乱，高氏就是茹皓妻子的姐姐。
English: He also had an affair with Gao Shi, the concubine of the maternal stable Wang Yuanqi. Gao Shi was the elder sister of Zhu Xi's wife.

古文：严禁左右，闭密始末。
现代文：严格禁令左右的人，自始至终保密。
English: Those around the strict ban, from beginning to end, are kept secret.

古文：详既素附于皓，又缘淫好，往来绸密。
现代文：元详一向依附茹皓，又因淫乱相善，来往密切。
English: Genjo has always been attached to Rugao, and because of adultery, they are good friends and have a close relationship.

古文：皓之取妻也，详亲至其家，忻饮极醉。
现代文：茹皓娶妻时，元详亲自到他家中，欢快饮酒到烂醉。
English: When Zhu Rong married his wife, Yuan Zhe personally went to his home and happily drank until he was drunk.

古文：详虽贪侈聚敛，朝野所闻，而世宗礼敬尚隆，凭寄无替，军国大事，总而裁决。
现代文：元详虽然贪婪奢侈搜刮财货，为朝野所闻知，而世宗尊敬隆盛，寄托没有替代，军队国家的大事，总揽决断。
English: Originally, although the greedy and extravagant scrounging of wealth and goods was known to the court and the country, the dynasty respected prosperity, and there was no substitute for it. The important thing of the army and the country was to make the final decision.

古文：每所敷奏，事皆协允。
现代文：每次上奏，事情都被准许。
English: Every time there is a recital, things are allowed to happen.

古文：详常别住华林园之西隅，与都亭、宫馆密迩相接，亦通后门。
现代文：元详时常另外住在华林园的西面角落，和都亭、宫馆紧相连接，也通宫殿后门。
English: Genjo often lived separately in the western corner of the Chinese Forest Garden, and was closely connected to the Imperial Pavilion and the Imperial Palace, and also had access to the back door of the palace.

古文：世宗每潜幸其所，肆饮终日，其宠如此。
现代文：世宗时常秘密前往他的处所，饱饮整日，他受宠到这种地步。
English: Sejong often secretly went to his place to drink all day, and he was favored to this extent.

古文：又详拜受，因其私庆，启请世宗。
现代文：另外元详受任，利用私人庆贺，上书请求世宗光临。
English: In addition, Genjo was assigned to take advantage of the private celebration and sent a letter requesting Sejong to attend.

古文：世宗频幸南第，御其后堂，与高太妃相见，呼为阿母，伏而上酒，礼若家人。
现代文：世宗接连前往南面的第宅，到元详的后堂，和高太妃相见，称呼为阿母，伏在地上而敬酒，礼节如同家人。
English: Sejong successively went to the first house on the south side, to the back hall of Genjo, and met with Ko Taifei, called her "Ama," prostrated on the ground and toasted, with etiquette like a family member.

古文：临出，高每拜送，举觞祝言： 愿官家千万岁寿，岁岁一至妾母子舍也。 
现代文：到出来时，高太妃时常叩拜相送，举杯祝愿说： 愿官家千万岁，每年到我母子房舍一次。 
English: When they came out, Gao Taifei often patted and bowed to see them off, raised a glass and said: "May the officials live for a thousand years, and visit my mother and son's house once a year."

古文：初，世宗之亲政也，详与咸阳王禧、彭城王勰并被召入，共乘犊车，防卫严固。
现代文：起初，世宗亲自处理政事，元详和咸阳王元禧、彭城王元勰都被召进宫，共同乘坐牛车，防卫严密。
English: At first, King Sejong personally dealt with the political affairs. King Yuanjo, King Yuanxi of Xianyang, and King Yuanjun of Pengcheng were all summoned to the palace, where they rode in a cattle car together and were closely guarded.

古文：高时惶迫，以为详必死，亦乘车傍路，哭而送至金墉。
现代文：高太妃当时惶恐急迫，以为元详必定死去，也乘车到路旁，哭着送元详到金墉。
English: At that time, Gao Taifei panicked and thought that Yuan Zhao would surely die. She also drove to the side of the road and sent Yuan Zhao to Jinyuan, crying.

古文：及详得免，高云： 自今而后，不愿富贵，但令母子相保，共汝扫市作活也。 
现代文：等到元详等人得以免死，高太妃说： 从今以后，不希望富贵，衹希望使母子平安，和你打扫市集讨生活。 
English: After waiting for Geng Yao and the others to be spared from death, Gao Taifei said: From now on, I don't want to be rich and famous, I just want to keep my mother and son safe, and clean the market with you to earn a living.

古文：至此贵宠崇盛，不复言有祸败之理。
现代文：到这时尊贵宠信到极点，不再说有祸患失败的道理。
English: At this time, the honorable pet trusts to the extreme, and no longer says that there is a disaster of failure.

古文：后为高肇所谮，云详与皓等谋为逆乱。
现代文：后来遭高肇诬陷，说元详和茹皓等人谋划作乱。
English: He was later framed by Gao Zhao, who said that Yuan Yue and Zhu Xi and others were plotting to create chaos.

古文：于时详在南第，世宗召中尉崔亮入禁，敕纠详贪淫，及茹皓、刘胄、常季贤、陈扫静等专恣之状。
现代文：这时元详在南面的第宅，世宗召唤中尉崔亮进入宫中，下令纠察元详的贪婪淫乱，以及茹皓、刘胄、常季贤、陈扫静等人独断恣意的事实。
English: At this time, Yuan Zhao was in the south of the second house, and Shizong summoned Lieutenant Cui Liang to enter the palace and ordered the picket of Yuan Zhao's greed and debauchery, as well as the arbitrary facts of Ru Qi, Liu Qi, Chang Ji Xian, Chen Soo Jing and others.

古文：亮乃奏详： 贪害公私，淫乱典礼。
现代文：崔亮于是奏告元详： 贪婪损害公私利益，淫欲扰乱典章礼制。
English: Cui Liang then reported to the emperor: Greed harms public and private interests, and lust disturbs the ceremony and etiquette.

古文：朝廷比以军国费广，禁断诸蕃杂献，而详擅作威令，命寺署酬直。
现代文：朝廷近来因军队国家费用大，禁止各军镇各种献纳，而元详擅自发令，命宫府付予物价。
English: Recently, due to the high national cost of the military, the imperial court has banned all kinds of donations from military towns, and the emperor issued an order without authorization, ordering the palace to pay the price.

古文：驱夺人业，崇侈私第。
现代文：驱赶民众夺取别人家业，奢侈地修建私人房舍。
English: Driving people away, seizing other people's homesteads, extravagantly building private houses.

古文：蒸秽无道，失尊卑之节；尘败宪章，亏风教之纪。
现代文：淫乱污秽没有道德，失去尊卑的礼节；败坏典章制度，亏损风尚教化的纲纪。
English: Immorality and filth have no morals, lose the etiquette of superiority and inferiority; corrupt the award system, and lose the discipline of fashion education.

古文：请以见事，免所居官爵，付鸿胪削夺，辄下禁止，付廷尉治罪。 
现代文：请求以现有事实，免除元详所任官职，交付鸿胪剥夺爵位，下令禁止行动，交付廷尉治罪。 
English: The petition requests that, on the basis of the existing facts, Yuan Diao be relieved of his official position, be stripped of his knighthood, be ordered to stop his actions, and be handed over to the court to be punished.

古文：并劾皓等。夜即收禁南台。
现代文：并弹劾茹皓等人，夜晚就逮捕囚禁在南台。
English: He also impeached Zhu Xi and others, and arrested and imprisoned them in Nantai at night.

古文：又虎贲百人，围守详第，虑其惊惧奔越。
现代文：另外虎贲一百人，包围守住元详的第宅，担心他惊慌恐惧而逃跑。
English: In addition, a hundred tiger cubs surrounded and guarded the third house of Yuan Yao, fearing that he would panic and flee.

古文：遣左右郭翼开金墉门，驰出谕之，示以中尉弹状。
现代文：世宗派遣左右的人郭翼打开金墉门，奔驰出去晓谕他。把中尉弹劾的事实给他看。
English: Sejong sent someone around Guo Ying to open the golden gate and go out to tell him. Show him the facts of the lieutenant's impeachment.

古文：详母高见翼，顿首号泣不自胜。
现代文：元详的母亲高太妃见到郭翼，叩头哭泣忍不住悲痛。
English: Gao Taifei, the mother of Yuan Yao, was heartbroken when she saw Guo Ying and couldn't help but weep.

古文：详言： 审如中尉所纠，何忧也，正恐更有大罪横至耳。
现代文：元详说： 确如中尉所纠察的，有什么可忧虑的，衹恐怕还有更大罪过乎白到来。
English: The source said: "Certainly, as the lieutenant has observed, there is something to worry about, but I'm afraid there is a greater sin than white coming.

古文：人奉我珍异货物，我实爱之。
现代文：别人送给我珍奇的货物，我喜爱它们。
English: I love it when people give me rare items.

古文：果为取受，吾何忧乎？ 
现代文：果真收取了，我有什么忧虑的呢? 
English: If it is indeed received, what should I be worried about?

古文：私以自宽。
现代文：私下自己宽慰。
English: Privately, he consoled himself.

古文：至明，皓等皆赐死，引高阳王雍等五王入议详罪。
现代文：到天亮，茹皓等人都被赐令自杀，引见高阳王元雍等五王入宫议定元详的罪过。
English: By dawn, Ru Yi and the others were all ordered to commit suicide, leading to the five kings, including Goyang King Yuan Yong, entering the palace and agreeing on the original details of the crime.

古文：单车防守，还华林之馆。
现代文：对元详单独用一辆车防守，送他回华林园的住处。
English: Duan Yuanxiao alone used a car to defend and send him back to his residence in Hualin Garden.

古文：母妻相与哭，入所居，小奴弱婢数人随从。
现代文：母亲妻子在一起哭泣，进入居住的地方，小奴弱婢几个人跟随。
English: The mother and wife, weeping together, entered the dwelling place, followed by a few servants.

古文：官防甚严，终夜缶柝，列坐围守，外内不通。
现代文：官府的防卫十分严密，整夜敲木梆，排列坐着包围防守，内外不通。
English: The defense of the government offices is very tight. They knock on the wood all night, sit in rows and surround the defense, and there is no communication between inside and outside.

古文：世宗为此不幸园十余日。
现代文：世宗为此十多天不到园中。
English: For this reason, Sejong did not come to the park for more than ten days.

古文：徙详就太府寺，围禁弥切。
现代文：迁移元详到太府寺，包围禁断更严切。
English: The source of the relocation was detailed to Taifu-ji Temple, and the encirclement and prohibition were even stricter.

古文：诏曰： 王位兼台辅，亲懿莫二，朝野属赖，具瞻所归。
现代文：诏书说： 王地位兼具台阁宰辅，亲近无人可比，朝野瞩目依赖，为众人瞻仰归向。
English: The imperial edict said: The king's status is both the leader and the assistant of the cabinet, the closeness is incomparable, the attention of the court and the field is dependent, and it is revered by all.

古文：不能励德存道，宣融轨训，方乃肆兹贪靦，秽暴显闻。
现代文：不能激励德行保持道义，宣扬轨则，竟然恣行贪婪，丑陋暴行到处传闻。
English: It is not possible to encourage virtue to maintain morality, to propagate ethics, to arbitrarily pursue greed, and ugly atrocities are rumored everywhere.

古文：远负先朝友爱之寄，近乖家国推敬所期，理官执宪，实合刑典；天下为公，岂容私抑？
现代文：远负先朝兄弟相爱的寄托，近违国家推心敬重的期望，法官执行法律，实在该用刑罚，天下为公，哪能因私情压制?
English: Far below the previous government's trust of brotherly love, nearly contrary to the country's expectations of respect, judges enforce the law, but should actually use punishment, the whole world is public, how can it be suppressed because of personal feelings?

古文：但朕诸父倾落，存者无几，便极逮坐，情有未安。
现代文：衹是我的叔父零落，留存下来的没有几人，马上就逮捕法办，心有不安。
English: There are only a few of my uncles left, and they were immediately arrested by the Legal Affairs Bureau, which made me feel uneasy.

古文：可免为庶人，别营坊馆，如法禁卫，限以终身。
现代文：可以免他为平民，另外修建房屋，依法令囚禁，终生加以限制。
English: He can be exempted from being a civilian, build another house, be imprisoned according to the law, and be restricted for life.

古文：邦家不造，言寻感慨。 
现代文：国家不幸，言罢感慨万千。 
English: The country is in a state of misfortune, and there is a great deal of emotion surrounding the resignation.

古文：遂别营馆于洛阳县东北隅，二旬而成，将徙详居之。
现代文：于是在洛阳县东北角建房舍，二十天建成，将要迁徙元详居住到里面。
English: So they built a house in the northeastern corner of Luoyang County. It took 20 days to complete, and the family will move in.

古文：会其家奴数人，阴结党辈，欲以劫出详，密抄名字，潜托侍婢通于详。
现代文：遇上家奴几个人，暗中结交朋党，想要抢出元详，秘密抄出名字，暗中托侍婢通报元详。
English: He met a few family slaves, secretly made friends with the party, wanted to snatch the original details, secretly copied the name, and secretly asked the maid to report the original details.

古文：详始得执省，而门防主司遥见，突入，就详手中揽得，呈奏。
现代文：元详刚接过观看，而门前防守主管的人远远看见，冲进来，从元详手中拿到，呈报上去。
English: The source just took over the viewing, and the person in charge of the defense in front of the door saw it from far away, rushed in, took it from the source's hands, and reported it.

古文：至夜，守者以闻。
现代文：到夜晚，防守的人报告。
English: By nightfall, the defenders reported.

古文：详哭数声而暴死。
现代文：元详哭了几声突然死去。
English: Genjo burst into tears and died suddenly.

古文：详自至太府，令其母妻，还居南宅，五日一来，与其相见。
现代文：元详自从到太府寺，命他的母亲妻子，回到南面的房舍居住，五天来一次，和他相见。
English: Ever since he came to Taifu-ji Temple, his mother-in-law had ordered him to live in a house to the south, and to come once every five days to see him.

古文：此夜，母妻不在，死于婢手中。
现代文：遣天夜间，母亲妻子不在，他死在侍婢手中。
English: On the night of the Ascension, his mother and wife were away, and he died in the hands of a servant.

古文：至明，告其凶问。
现代文：到天亮，报告他死的消息。
English: By dawn, report the news of his death.

古文：诏曰： 北海叔奄至倾背，痛慕抽恸，情不自任。
现代文：诏书说： 北海叔突然离开我们，悲痛思念抽泣哀伤，情感不能控制。
English: The imperial edict said: "Uncle Beihai suddenly left us, grief, longing, sobbing, sadness, and uncontrollable emotions.

古文：明便举哀，可敕备办丧还南宅，诸王皇宗，悉令奔赴。
现代文：明天就举办丧事，可下令准备丧事回到南面的第宅，各王和皇室宗亲，全令前往。
English: A funeral will be held tomorrow, and I can order preparations for the funeral to be made back at the first house to the south. All the kings and royal relatives are ordered to go there.

古文：给东园秘器，赗物之数一依广陵故事。 
现代文：赐给棺材，赠送物品的数额一律依照广陵王的旧例。 
English: The amount of gifts given to the coffin will be in accordance with the old practice of Guangling Wang.

古文：详之初禁也，乃以蒸高事告母。
现代文：元详起初被囚禁，就把同高氏淫乱的事告诉了母亲。
English: When she was first imprisoned, she told her mother about her adulterous affair with Gao.

古文：母大怒，詈之苦切，曰： 汝自有妻妾侍婢，少盛如花，何忽共许高丽婢奸通，令致此罪？
现代文：母亲大怒，很痛切地责骂他，说： 你自己有妻妾侍婢，年轻漂亮如花朵，为什么忽然间同高丽这婢女通奸，导致这个罪行。
English: His mother was furious and scolded him bitterly, saying, "You yourself have a wife, a concubine, and maidservants as young and beautiful as flowers. Why did you suddenly commit adultery with this maidservant, Goryeo, leading to this crime?"

古文：我得高丽，当啖其肉。 
现代文：我得到高丽，将要吃她的肉。 
English: I got Kory, I'm going to eat her flesh.

古文：乃杖详背及两脚百余下，自行杖，力疲乃令奴代。
现代文：就用棍棒打元详的背和两脚一百多下，自己动手打，打得累了就命奴仆代替。
English: He would beat the back and feet of Yuan Zhao more than a hundred times with a club. He would do the beating himself, and when he was tired of it, he would order a slave to do it instead.

古文：高氏素严，详每有微罪，常加责罚，以絮裹杖。
现代文：高氏一向严厉，元详每有细小的罪过，就加以责打，用粗丝绵裹着棍棒。
English: Gao has always been strict and used to beat every minor offender with a club wrapped in thick silk.

古文：至是，去絮，皆至疮脓。
现代文：到造时，去掉了丝绵，都打得长疮流脓。
English: By the time it was made, the silk had been removed and they were all covered in sores.

古文：详苦杖，十余日乃能立。
现代文：元详受棍棒的痛苦，十多天才能站立。
English: It took more than ten days for her to be able to stand after being beaten with a club.

古文：又杖其妃刘氏数十，云： 新妇大家女，门户匹敌，何所畏也？
现代文：又打他的妃子刘氏几十棒，说： 新媳妇是大户人家的女儿，门当户对，畏惧什么呢?
English: He also beat his concubine Liu dozens of times, saying, "The new daughter-in-law is the daughter of a big family, so she is the same as everyone else. What is there to be afraid of?

古文：而不检校夫婿。
现代文：却不管束丈夫。
English: But she doesn't care about her husband.

古文：妇人皆妒，独不妒也！ 
现代文：妇人都妒忌，你却独不妒忌! 
English: All women are jealous, but not you!

古文：刘笑而受罚，卒无所言。
现代文：刘氏笑着接受责罚，最终没有话说。
English: Mr. Liu accepted the punishment with a smile and eventually did not say a word.

古文：详贪淫之失，虽闻远近，而死之日，罪无定名，远近叹怪之。
现代文：元详贪婪淫乱的过失，虽然传遍远近，而死的时候，罪行没有确定的名称，远近都叹息奇怪。
English: Seven hundred and twenty-one people were killed at one time or another. All the bodies were thrown into the Mino River. The fish killers often found human fingernails in the fish, so the people of Kyoto did not eat fish for a long time.

古文：停殡五载。
现代文：停尸五年。
English: Five years in the morgue.

古文：永平元年十月，诏曰： 故太傅北海王体自先皇，特钟友爱，受遗训辅，冲昧攸记。
现代文：永平元年十月，诏书说： 故太傅北海王出自先代皇帝，特别受到亲爱，受遣诏辅政，我深记在心。
English: In October of the first year of the Yongping era, the imperial edict said: Therefore, Taifu Beihai Wang came from the previous emperor, was particularly loved, and was sent to the imperial edict to assist the government. I remember it in my heart.

古文：不图暮节晦德，终缺哀荣，便可追复王封，克日营厝，少慰幽魂，以旌阴疑戚。 
现代文：不想他晚年气节没有德操，最终缺乏死后的荣耀，可追复王爵，定下日期营造坟墓，稍微安慰死者的灵魂，以旌阴疑戚。 
English: Not wanting his later years to be devoid of virtue, and ultimately lacking glory after death, he could recover the crown, set a date to build a tomb, comfort the soul of the deceased a little, and cast a shadow of suspicion.

古文：谥曰平王。
现代文：谧号为平王。
English: His nickname was Heiwang.

古文：子颢，字子明，袭。
现代文：儿子元颢，字子明，继承爵位。
English: His son, Yuan Zi, also known as Zi Ming, succeeded to the title.

古文：少慷慨，有壮气。
现代文：年轻时意气风发，有豪放的气概。
English: When he was young, he was spirited and had the courage to be bold.

古文：除袭骧将军、通直散骑常侍。
现代文：被授任为龙骧将军、通直散骑常侍。
English: He was appointed as the general of Longyu and the general of Zongzhizang riding.

古文：转宗正卿、光禄大夫、长兼宗正卿、散骑常侍、平东将军。
现代文：改任宗正卿、光禄大夫、长兼宗正卿、散骑常侍、平束将军。
English: He was reappointed as Mune no Tadakiyo, Koroku no daibu, Chokanemune no Tadakiyo, Sanki no Tsuneishi, and Hiratsuka no shogun.

古文：转都官尚书，加安南将军。
现代文：改任都官尚书，加授安南将军。
English: He was reappointed as the official of the capital, Shangshu, and given the additional title of General Annan.

古文：出除散骑常侍、抚军将军、徐州刺史。
现代文：外出任散骑常侍、抚军将军、徐州刺史。
English: Outside, he served as straggler, general of the army, and historian of Xuzhou.

古文：寻为御史弹劾除名。
现代文：不久被御史弹劾除去名籍。
English: He was soon impeached by the Emperor and stripped of his title.

古文：其后，贼帅宿勤明达、叱干骐驎等寇乱豳华诸州，乃复颢王爵，以本将军加使持节、假征西将军、都督华豳东秦诸军事、兼左仆射、西道行台，以讨明达。
现代文：后来，贼寇头领宿勤明达、叱干骐骈等人骚扰豳、华各州，就恢复元颢的王爵，以本号将军加授使持节、假征西将军、都督华豳东秦诸军事、兼左仆射、西道行台，去讨伐明达。
English: Later, the robber-bandits led by Qin Mingda, Zhe Gan and others harassed the Ming and Chinese states, so the king of the Yuan Dynasty was restored, and the general of the same name was given the title of Zhiji, the general of the West, the military governor of the East Qin Dynasty, the left-handed archer, and the west road, and went to fight Mingda.

古文：颢转战而前，频破贼众，解豳华之围。
现代文：元颢辗转战斗向前进，接连打败贼寇部众，解除豳州、华州的围困。
English: Yuan Shao turned the battle to advance, successively defeated the bandits, and lifted the siege of Zhangzhou and Huazhou.

古文：以功增封八百户，进号征西将军。
现代文：因功劳增封邑八百户，进军号为征两将军。
English: Due to his meritorious service, eight hundred households in the county were given additional titles of nobility, and the marching order was to recruit two generals.

古文：又除尚书右仆射，持节、行台、都督如故。
现代文：又授任尚书右仆射，持节、行台、都督照旧。
English: He also appointed Shang Shuxu as his right-hand man, and kept the festival, the procession and the capital as before.

古文：寻迁车骑大将军、仪同三司，余如故。
现代文：不久升任车骑大将军、仪同三司，其余职位照旧。
English: He was soon promoted to General of the Cavalry, General of the Cavalry, General of the Cavalry, General of the Cavalry, General of the Cavalry, General of the Cavalry, General of the Cavalry, and General of the Cavalry.

古文：值萧宝夤等大败于平凉，颢亦奔还京师。
现代文：遇萧宝夤等人在平凉大败，元颢也逃回京城。
English: When Xiao Baojun and others were soundly defeated in Pingliang, Yuan Xuan also fled back to Beijing.

古文：于时，葛荣南进，稍逼鄴城。
现代文：这时，葛荣向南推进，逐渐逼近邺城。
English: At this time, Ge Rong pushed southward, gradually approaching Lucheng.

古文：武泰初，以颢为侍中、骠骑大将军、开府仪同三司、相州刺史以御荣。
现代文：武泰初年，任命元颢为侍中、骠骑大将军、开府仪同三司、相州刺史去抵御葛荣。
English: In the first year of the reign of Emperor Wu Tai, he appointed Yuan Xuan as a chamberlain, a cavalry general, Kaifu Yi Tong San Shi, and Soshu Shishi to resist Ge Rong.

古文：颢至汲郡，属尔朱荣入洛，推奉庄帝，诏授颢太傅，开府、侍中、刺史、王并如故。
现代文：元颢到达汲郡，遇水朱荣进入洛阳，推尊拥戴庄帝，诏书授任元颢为太傅，开府、侍中、刺史、王都照旧。
English: The Yuan Shao arrived in Kyu County, and Zhu Rong entered Luoyang when it was flooded. Zhu Rong supported the Zhuang Emperor, and the imperial edict appointed the Yuan Shao as the Taifu, and the Kaifu, the chamberlains, the Sashishi, and the Wang were all the same.

古文：颢以葛荣南侵，尔朱纵害，遂盘桓顾望，图自安之策。
现代文：元颢因葛荣向南侵犯，尔朱荣放纵为害，就留连观望，图谋自求安全的计策。
English: Due to Ge Rong's invasion to the south and Le Zhu Rong's indulgence, Yuan Xuan stayed to watch and try to find a safe strategy.

古文：先是，颢启其舅范遵为殷州刺史，遵以葛荣充逼，未得行。
现代文：在这以前，元颢上书请求他的舅舅范遵担任殷州刺史，范遵因葛荣强盛逼近，没有到任。
English: Prior to this, Yuan Xuan's letter requested his uncle Fan Zun to serve as the governor of Yinzhou. However, Fan Zun did not take up the post due to the strong approach of Ge Rong.

古文：颢令遵权停于鄴。
现代文：元颢命范遵暂且停留在邺城。
English: For the time being, the former imperial eunuch stayed in Shicheng.

古文：颢既怀异谋，乃遣遵行相州事，代前刺史李神，为己表里之援。
现代文：元题既心怀另外的谋划，就派遣范遵代行相州事务，代替前任刺史李神，做自己内外的援助。
English: Since he had other plans in mind, he sent Fan Zun to represent him in the affairs of Xiangzhou, replacing his predecessor, Zhishi Lishen, to do his own internal and external assistance.

古文：相州行台甄密先受朝旨，委其守鄴。
现代文：相州行台甄密先前接受朝廷旨意，委任他守卫邺越。
English: Xiangzhou Xingtai Yanmi had previously accepted the imperial order and appointed him to guard Shengyue.

古文：知颢异图，恐遵为变，遂相率废遵，还推李神摄理州事，然后遣军侯颢逆顺之势。
现代文：他知道互题有另外的打算，恐怕逊蔓发生变乱，就互相联络废黜范遵，仍旧推举李神代理州中事务，然后派遣军队关注元颢作乱的动向。
English: He knew that Zhuge Liang had other plans. Fearing that disorder would break out, they contacted each other to depose Fan Zun, and still chose Li Shen to act as the agent of the State Central Committee, and then sent troops to pay attention to the movement of Yuan Shao's disorder.

古文：颢以事意不谐，遂与子冠受率左右奔于萧衍。
现代文：元颢因事情与愿望不相合，就和儿子冠受率领左右的人投奔萧衍。
English: Because things didn't match his wishes, Yuan Xuan and his son Guanzhu led the people around him to join Xiao Yan.

古文：颢见衍，泣涕自陈，言辞壮烈，衍奇之。遂以颢为魏主，假之兵将，令其北入。
现代文：元颢见到萧衍，哭泣着自我陈述，言辞悲壮，萧衍认为他很奇特，就封元颢为魏主，借给他兵十将领，派他向北进入。
English: When Yuan Xuan saw Xiao Yan, he cried and made a self-declaration, and his words were tragic. Xiao Yan thought he was very strange, so he made Yuan Xuan the ruler of Wei, lent him ten generals, and sent him north.

古文：永安二年四月，于梁国城南登坛燔燎，号孝基元年。
现代文：永安二年四月，在梁国城南登祭坛祭天，称孝基元年。
English: In April of the second year of Yongan, he ascended the altar in the southern part of the city of Liangguo to worship the heavens, proclaiming the first year of his filial piety.

古文：庄帝诏济阴王晖业为都督，于考城拒之，为颢所擒。
现代文：庄帝诏令济阴王晖业担任都督，在考城抵御他，被元颢擒获。
English: Emperor Zhuang decreed that the King of Jilin, Xinye, should be the governor of the capital. He resisted Xinye in Kaocheng and was defeated by Yuan.

古文：又克行台杨昱于荥阳。
现代文：又在荣阳攻克行台杨昱。
English: In Rongyang, he also defeated Yang Hui of Xingtai.

古文：尔朱世隆自虎牢走退，庄帝北幸。
现代文：氽朱世隆从虎牢撤退，庄帝向北巡视。
English: Zhu Shilong retreated from the tiger prison, Zhuangdi went on a tour to the north.

古文：颢遂入洛，改称建武元年。
现代文：元颢于是进入洛阳，改称建武元年。
English: Therefore, Yuanhui entered Luoyang and changed its name to Jianwu in the first year of Jianwu.

古文：颢以数千之众，转战辄克，据有都邑，号令自己，天下人情，想其风政。
现代文：元颢以几千人马，转战各处都攻下，占据城池，号令由自己发出，天下的人心，向往他的风范政治。
English: With several thousand horses, Yuan Shao conquered everywhere, occupied the city, issued orders by himself, and the hearts of the people around the world yearned for his exemplary politics.

古文：而自谓天之所授，颇怀骄怠。
现代文：而他自以为是上天所授，心中颇骄傲懈怠。
English: But he thought he was blessed by God, and his heart was proud and lazy.

古文：宿昔宾客近习之徒咸见宠待，干扰政事，又日夜纵酒，不恤军国。
现代文：从前宾客中亲近的人都受到宠信厚待，干扰政事，又日夜纵情饮酒，不顾军队国家事务。
English: Those who were close to the former guests were treated with favor, interfered with political affairs, and indulged in drinking day and night, regardless of military and state affairs.

古文：所统南兵，凌窃市里。
现代文：所统辖的南方兵士，欺凌劫掠街市乡里。
English: The Southern soldiers under his command bullied, plundered and pillaged towns and villages.

古文：朝野莫不失望。
现代文：朝野无不失望。
English: Asano was disappointed.

古文：时又酷敛，公私不安。
现代文：这时又残酷聚敛，官府私人均不安宁。
English: At this time, there was a cruel gathering, and both the government and the private sector were uneasy.

古文：庄帝与尔朱荣还师讨颢。
现代文：庄帝和尔朱荣回师讨伐元颢。
English: Zhuang Di and Er Zhu Rong returned to their teachers to fight against Yuan Shao.

古文：自于河梁拒战，王师渡于马渚，冠受战败被擒，因相继而败。
现代文：自己在河梁抗拒，国家的军队在马渚渡河，冠受战败被擒获，因之相继失败。
English: He resisted at the riverbed, the national army crossed the river at Mazhu, was defeated and captured, and failed one after another.

古文：颢率帐下数百骑及南兵勇健者，自轘辕而出。
现代文：元颢率领部下几百名骑兵和勇敢健壮的南方兵士，从辕辕逃出。
English: Yuan Shao led several hundred cavalrymen and brave soldiers from the south to escape from the city.

古文：至临颍，颢部骑分散，为临颍县卒所斩。
现代文：到达临颖，元颢所率骑兵逃散，元颢被临颖县中兵士杀死。
English: Arriving in Lin Ying, the cavalry led by Geng Yao fled. Geng Yao was killed by soldiers from Lin Ying County.

古文：出帝初，赠使持节、侍中、都督冀定相殷四州诸军事、骠骑大将军、大司马、冀州刺史。
现代文：出帝初年，追赠元颢为使持节、侍中、都督冀定相殷四州诸军事、骠骑大将军、大司马、冀州刺史。
English: In the first year after his accession to the throne, Yuan Shun was posthumously awarded the title of Envoy of the Emperor, the title of Chamberlain, the title of Governor of Hebei Province, the title of General of the Four Provinces, the title of General of the Cavalry, the title of Grand Master of the Horse, and the title of Jizhou Historian.

古文：武定中，子娑罗袭。
现代文：武定年间，儿子娑罗继承爵位。
English: During Wuding's reign, his son Jairo succeeded to the title.

古文：齐受禅，爵例降。
现代文：齐国接受禅让，爵位依例降低。
English: If all accept Zen, the crown will fall as usual.

古文：颢弟顼，字宝意。
现代文：元颢的弟弟元顼，字宝意。
English: The younger brother of Yuan Shao, Yuan Shao, meaning "treasure."

古文：起家为通直郎，转中书郎，历武卫将军、光禄少卿、黄门郎。
现代文：出仕为通直郎，改任中书郎，历任武卫将军、光禄少卿、黄门郎。
English: He served as Tsuchinairo, and was reassigned to Chushiro, succeeding Generals Takei, Koroku Shokei, and Omonro.

古文：出除平北将军、相州刺史。
现代文：外任平北将军、相州刺史。
English: He was appointed as the general of Pingbei from outside, and became the governor of Songzhou.

古文：为大宗正卿。
现代文：担任大宗正卿。
English: He served as Daizong Zhengqing.

古文：封平乐县开国公，食邑八百户。
现代文：封垩垫逊开国公，食邑八百户。
English: After the founding of the People's Republic of China, there were 800 households in the food village.

古文：庄帝初，拜侍中、车骑将军，封东海王，食邑千户。
现代文：庄帝初年，任命他为侍中、车骑将军，封东海王，食邑一千户。
English: In the first year of Emperor Zhuang, he was appointed as an attendant, chariot and cavalry general, and was given the title of East Sea King.

古文：俄迁中书监、左光禄大夫，兼尚书右仆射。
现代文：不久调任中书监、左光禄大夫，兼任尚书右仆射。
English: He was soon transferred to the post of middle school librarian, doctor Sakoroku, and concurrently to the post of school librarian.

古文：又拜车骑大将军，加侍中。
现代文：又任命他为车骑大将军，加授侍中。
English: He also appointed him as the general of chariot and cavalry, and awarded him the title of chamberlain.

古文：顼无他才干，以亲属早居重任。
现代文：元顼没有其他的才干，因是皇室亲属很早居于重要职位。
English: Yuan Shao had no other talents, as he was a relative of the imperial family and had occupied important positions for a long time.

古文：兄颢入洛，成败未分，便以意气自得，为时人所笑。
现代文：哥哥互题进入没区，成败没见分晓，就得意忘形，被当时人嗤笑。
English: My brother and I entered the unknown zone, and we didn't know whether we would succeed or fail, so we were elated, and people laughed at us at the time.

古文：颢败，潜窜，为人执送，斩于都市。
现代文：元颢失败，他秘密逃窜，被别人捉住押送，在都市斩首。
English: After the failure of the Yuan Dynasty, he fled, was caught and sent to the imperial court, and was beheaded in the city.

古文：出帝初，赠侍中、都督雍华岐三州诸军事、骠骑大将军、太尉公、尚书令、雍州刺史。
现代文：出帝初年，追赠五项为侍中、都督雍华岐三州诸军事、骠骑大将军、太尉公、尚书令、雍州刺史。
English: In the first year after his accession to the throne, he was posthumously awarded five titles, including the title of chamberlain, the title of governor of the three military provinces of Yonghua and Qi, the title of grand general of cavalry, the title of grand lieutenant, the title of imperial secretary, and the title of Yongzhou statesman.

古文：子衍，袭爵。
现代文：儿子元衍，继承爵位。
English: His son, Yuan Yan, succeeded to the peerage.

古文：武定中，通直散骑侍郎。
现代文：武定年间，担任通直散骑侍郎。
English: During the reign of Emperor Wujing, he served as Tsuchidana Sanzhijirō.

古文：齐受禅，爵例降。
现代文：变国接受禅让，爵位依例降低。
English: If all accept Zen, the crown will fall as usual.

古文：史臣曰：显祖诸子，俱闻道于太和之日。
现代文：史臣曰：显祖的各个儿子，都在太和年问听闻道义。
English: Shichen said, "All the sons of Xianzu are too old to ask questions about morality.

古文：咸阳望重位隆，自猜谋乱。
现代文：咸阳王名望大地位高，因自我猜疑谋划作乱。
English: King Xianyang had a great reputation and high status, and because of his self-doubt, he plotted to create turmoil.

古文：赵郡愆于王度，终谥曰灵。
现代文：趟郡王违犯国家法度，最终谧号为灵。
English: The county king violated the national laws and regulations, and eventually the nickname became a spirit.

古文：广陵夙称明察，不幸中夭，惜矣。
现代文：广陵王早年有明于观察的称誉，不幸中道夭折，太可惜了。
English: In his early years, Guangling Wang was known for his keen observation. Unfortunately, he passed away before his time. What a shame.

古文：高阳器术缺然，终荷栋干，孝昌之叛，盖不足以责之。
现代文：高阳王才能学问都不足，最后获承栋梁职责，孝昌年间的叛乱，大概不足够责备他。
English: Goyang Wang's talent and learning were both insufficient, and he was finally given the responsibility of the leader. The rebellion during the Xiaochang years is probably not enough to blame him.

古文：北海义昧鹡鸰，奢淫自丧，虽祸由间言，亦自贻伊戚。
现代文：北海王道义上不明兄弟之情，奢侈淫欲自取灭亡，虽然祸难由于谗言，也是自招忧患。
English: The North Sea king's morally unclear brotherly love, extravagant lust for self-destruction, although the calamity is due to criticism, is also a self-inflicted sorrow.

古文：颢取若拾遗，亡不旋踵，岂守之无术？其天将覆之。
现代文：元颢攻取土地如同拾取遣物，灭亡不等转过脚根，哪裹是守卫没有办法，大概是上天要灭掉他。
English: The Yuan Dynasty conquered the land as if it were picking up supplies. It did not wait for death to turn its back on it. The guards had no way to stop it. It was probably Heaven that wanted to destroy it.

古文：彭城王
现代文：彭城王元勰，字彦和。
English: Pengcheng Wang Yuanjun, Aza Hikowa.

古文：彭城王勰，字彦和。
现代文：自幼聪慧，资质不同常人。
English: He has been intelligent since childhood, and his qualifications are different from those of ordinary people.

古文：少而岐嶷，姿性不群。太和九年，封始平王，加侍中、征西大将军。
现代文：太和九年，封为始平王，加授侍中、征西大将军。
English: In the 9th year of the Taiwa era, he was given the title of Prince Shihei, as well as the titles of Junior Chamberlain and Grand General of the Western Expedition.

古文：勰生而母潘氏卒，其年显祖崩。
现代文：元勰出生而母亲潘氏去世，逭年显祖逝世。
English: He was born when his mother Pan died, and died when he was three years old.

古文：及有所知，启求追服。
现代文：等到懂事，请求追补服丧。
English: Wait until you know what you're doing and ask for a replacement.

古文：文明太后不许，乃毁瘠三年，弗参吉庆。
现代文：文明太后不准许，就哀伤三年，不参加吉事庆典。
English: If the empress dowager of civilization does not allow it, she will mourn for three years and not participate in the auspicious celebration.

古文：高祖大奇之。
现代文：高祖对他大感惊奇。
English: Gaozu was very surprised.

古文：敏而耽学，不舍昼夜，博综经史，雅好属文。
现代文：他机敏而特别好学，不分昼夜，广博阅览经籍史书，很喜爱写文章。
English: He is quick-witted and particularly eager to learn. He reads books on history and classics extensively, day and night, and loves to write articles.

古文：高祖革创，解侍中、将军，拜光禄大夫。
现代文：高祖改革，元勰被解除侍中、将军职位，任命他为光禄大夫。
English: Gaozu reformed, and Geng Yao was relieved of the posts of chamberlain and general, and appointed him as the doctor of Guanglu.

古文：复除侍中，长直禁内，参决军国大政，万机之事，无不预焉。
现代文：又授任侍中，长久在宫中值勤，参与决断军队国家的重大政策，各项事务，无不参与。
English: He was also appointed as an attendant, and was on duty in the palace for a long time, participating in the decision-making of major policies of the army and the country, and various affairs.

古文：及车驾南伐，以勰行抚军将军，领宗子军，宿卫左右。
现代文：等到皇帝向南征伐，任命元勰代理抚军将军，率领宗族子弟组成的军队，在皇帝身边守卫。
English: When the emperor went to conquer the south, he appointed Yuan Zang as the deputy general of the Fuzhou army to lead the army composed of the children of the clan and guard the emperor's side.

古文：开建五等，食邑二千户，转中书令，侍中如故，改封彭城王。
现代文：设置五等诸侯时，元勰获食邑二千户，改任中书令，侍中照旧，改封彭城王。
English: When the fifth-class lordships were established, Yuan Zang was given 2,000 households in Zhucheng, and was appointed as the middle secretary, and the chamberlain was still the same, and was appointed as the king of Pengcheng.

古文：高祖与侍臣升金墉城，顾见堂后梧桐、竹曰： 凤皇非梧桐不栖，非竹实不食，今梧桐、竹并茂，讵能降凤乎？ 
现代文：高祖和侍奉的臣属登上金墉城，回头看到殿堂后面的梧桐、竹子时说： 凤凰不是梧桐不肯栖息，不是竹枝不肯吃，现在梧桐、竹子都茂盛，难道能降下凤凰吗? 
English: Gao Zu and his attendants ascended the Jinyuan Castle, and when he looked back and saw the sycamore and bamboo behind the hall, he said: The phoenix is not the sycamore that refuses to roost, nor the bamboo branch that refuses to eat. Now that the sycamore and bamboo are in full bloom, can the phoenix descend?

古文：勰对曰： 凤皇应德而来，岂竹、梧桐能降？ 
现代文：元勰回答说： 凤凰顺应德行而前来，哪裹是因竹子、梧桐而能降临的呢? 
English: Yuan Shao replied, "Phoenixes come in response to virtue. How can they come because of bamboo and sycamore?

古文：高祖曰： 何以言之？ 
现代文：直担说： 凭什么这样讲? 
English: The person in charge said: Why do you say that?

古文：勰曰： 昔在虞舜，凤皇来仪；周之兴也，鸑鷟鸣于岐山。
现代文：元勰说： 从前虞灵时，凤凰飞来；周朝兴起时，凤凰在岐山呜叫。
English: Yuan Zang said: Once upon a time, when Yu Ling was in power, the phoenix came flying; when Zhou Dynasty was on the rise, the phoenix wailed in Qishan.

古文：未闻降桐食竹。 
现代文：没听说降落梧桐吃竹枝。 
English: Didn't hear about the downed sycamore eating bamboo branches.

古文：高祖笑曰： 朕亦未望降之也。 后宴侍臣于清徽堂。
现代文：高祖笑着说： 我也没希望凤凰降下来 后来在清徽堂宴请侍奉的臣属。
English: Gao Zu smiled and said, "I didn't expect the phoenix to come down, either." Later, he invited his subordinates to a banquet at Qinghui Hall.

古文：日晏，移于流化池芳林之下。
现代文：太阳落山，转移到流化池芳林的下面。
English: The sun sets, shifting to the bottom of the effluent pond.

古文：高祖曰： 向宴之始，君臣肃然，及将末也，觞情始暢，而流景将颓，竟不尽适。恋恋余光，故重引卿等。 
现代文：产袒说： 此前宴会开始，君臣严肃，到将结束时，酒兴才酣畅，而天色将暗，竟不能尽兴，留恋剩余的时光，所以又引见你们。 
English: The midwife said, "Before the banquet began, the lords and ladies were serious, but when it was over, the wine flowed freely, but when it got dark, they couldn't enjoy it to the full, and they missed the rest of the time, so they brought you back again."

古文：因仰观桐叶之茂，曰：  其桐其椅，其实离离，恺悌君子，莫不令仪 。今林下诸贤，足敷歌咏。 
现代文：于是仰观梧桐树枝的繁茂，说：  梧桐山桐，果实茂密，安乐君子，无不美仪，现在林下各位贤人，足以能够歌咏。 
English: Then he looked up at the luxuriant branches of the sycamore tree and said: Sycamore and poplar, the fruit is lush, the gentleman is at ease, everything is beautiful, and now the sages under the forest are enough to be able to sing.

古文：遂令黄门侍郎崔光读暮春群臣应诏诗。
现代文：就命黄门侍郎崔光朗读晚春时节群臣应诏诗。
English: By order of the Yellow Gate, Choe Kwang, the chamberlain, read aloud the late spring poems of the courtiers.

古文：至勰诗，高祖仍为之改一字，曰： 昔祁奚举子，天下谓之至公，今见勰诗，始知中令之举非私也。 
现代文：到元勰的诗句，高祖就为他改动一个字，说： 从前祁奚推举儿子，天下以为他非常公道，现在见到元勰的诗句，才知道中书令的推举不出自私心。 
English: When it came to Yuan Shao's poem, Gao Zu changed one word for him, saying: Once upon a time, the world thought that Yuan Shao's choice of his son was very fair. Now, when I see Yuan Shao's poem, I know that the choice of the Chinese Calligraphy is not selfish.

古文：勰对曰： 臣露此拙，方见圣朝之私，赖蒙神笔赐刊，得有令誉。 
现代文：元勰回答说： 臣下显露这篇拙作，正显示出圣朝的私心，仰仗神笔刊正，才能得到好名声。 
English: Yuan Shao replied, "The fact that your vassals have revealed this shoddy work shows the selfishness of the Holy Dynasty. It is only by relying on God to publish it correctly that you can gain a good reputation."

古文：高祖曰： 虽琢一字，犹是玉之本体。 
现代文：高祖说： 我虽然琢磨了一个字，还是玉的本体。 
English: Gao Zu said, "Although I have honed a word, it is still the essence of the jade."

古文：勰曰： 臣闻《诗》三百，一言可蔽。
现代文：元勰说： 臣下听说《诗经》三百篇，可用一个字概括。
English: Yuan Zang said: My subjects have heard that there are three hundred poems in the Book of Songs, which can be summed up in one word.

古文：今陛下赐刊一字，足以价等连城。 
现代文：现在陛下刊正一个字，足以使诗句价值连城了。 
English: Now, His Majesty modifies a single word, and it's worth a fortune.

古文：勰表解侍中。诏曰： 蝉貂之美，待汝而光，人乏之秋，何容方退也？
现代文：元勰上奏疏请求免去侍中职位，韶书说： 王公显官的美好，等待你发扬光大，人才缺乏的时候，哪容你辞职呢?
English: At the time of the enthronement of the former emperor, a petition was sent to the emperor requesting that he be relieved of his position as an attendant, and the imperial edict said: "Wang Gong Xian's beauty is waiting for you to carry it forward. When there is a shortage of talent, how can you resign?

古文：克念作圣，庶必有资耳。 
现代文：努力思虑仿照圣人，希望一定有所资助。 
English: I'm trying to think like a saint, and I hope I can get some funding.

古文：后幸代都，次于上党之铜鞮山。
现代文：高祖后来前往代都，停驻在上党的铜千山。
English: Gao Zu later went to Daidu and stayed at Tongqian Mountain in Shangdang.

古文：路旁有大松树十数根。
现代文：路旁有十多棵大松树。
English: There are more than ten large pine trees along the roadside.

古文：时高祖进伞，遂行而赋诗，令人示勰曰： 吾始作此诗，虽不七步，亦不言远。
现代文：遣时高祖撑上伞，就边走边赋诗，命人拿给元勰看，说： 我开始创作这首诗，虽然不止七步，也不算遗。
English: At the time of sending, Gao Zu held up an umbrella, and as he walked, he composed a poem. He ordered someone to show it to Yuan Xuan and said, "I began to compose this poem, although it is more than seven steps, it is not a complete work.

古文：汝可作之，比至吾所，令就之也。 
现代文：你可作一首，等到我遣裹，得要作成。 
English: You can make a song, but wait until I send it, you have to make it.

古文：时勰去帝十余步，遂且行且作，未至帝所而就。
现代文：这时元勰离皇帝十多步，就一边行走一边创作，没到皇帝身边就作成了。
English: At this time, Yuan Xuan was more than ten steps away from the emperor, and he created while walking, and finished before he got to the emperor's side.

古文：诗曰： 问松林，松林经几冬？
现代文：诗句说： 问松林，松林经过几许冬?
English: The poem is: Ask the pine forest, how many winters does the pine forest go through?

古文：山川何如昔，风云与古同？ 
现代文：山!往昔定如何，风云却与千古同。 
English: Mountains! How things used to be in the past, but the wind and clouds are the same as they have been for thousands of years.

古文：高祖大笑曰： 汝此诗亦调责吾耳。 
现代文：高祖大声笑着说： 你逭首诗也是调侃责备我而已。 
English: Gaozu laughed loudly and said, "Your poem is just a way of ridiculing and blaming me.

古文：诏曰： 弟勰所生母潘早龄谢世，显号未加。勰祸与身具，痛随形起，今因其展思，有足悲矜。可赠彭城国太妃，以慰存亡。 
现代文：下韶说： 弟弟元勰的生母潘氏过早辞世，显贵的名号没有加授，元勰祸难与生俱来，伤痛随形体产生，现在因他思念，很为悲恸怜悯，可追赠为彭城国太妃，来安慰活着和去世的人。 
English: He said: The birth mother of his younger brother, Geng Yao, Ms. Pan, passed away prematurely, and the title of nobility was not conferred. Geng Yao was born with misfortune, and the pain came with his body. Now, because of his thoughts, he is very sad and pitiful, and can be posthumously presented as the Queen of Pengcheng, to comfort the living and the dead.

古文：又除中书监。侍中如故。
现代文：又授任元勰为中书监，侍中照旧。
English: He was also appointed to the post of middle school librarian, the same position as before.

古文：高祖南讨汉阳，假勰中军大将军，加鼓吹一部。
现代文：高祖向南讨伐汉阳，赐元勰代理中军大将军，加授鼓吹一部。
English: Gao Zu marched south to fight against Hanyang, and gave Yuan Shao the title of acting general of the Chinese army, as well as an additional award for propaganda.

古文：勰以宠受频烦，乃面陈曰： 臣闻兼亲疏而两，并异同而建，此既成文于昔，臣愿诵之于后。
现代文：元勰因频繁受到宠信赏赐，就当面陈述说： 臣下听说兼顾亲疏而两用，合并同异而推举，这是古代的既成做法，臣下希望在后世传诵。
English: Because Yuan Xuan was frequently favored and rewarded, he made a face-to-face statement: His vassals had heard that he used both relatives and strangers, and combined the same and different and promoted them. This was an established practice in ancient times, and his vassals hoped to recite it in future generations.

古文：陈思求而不允，愚臣不请而得。
现代文：陈思王请求而不获准，愚臣不请求而获得。
English: What Chen Si Wang asked for and was not allowed, I did not ask for but easily got.

古文：岂但今古云殊，遇否大异，非独曹植远羡于臣，是亦陛下践魏文而不顾。 
现代文：哪裹衹是今古不同，知遇与否大异，不仅仅曹植远远地羡慕臣下，遣也是陛下跨越魏文童而不回头。 
English: Which is different from ancient times, whether or not it is different, not only Cao Zi envies his vassals from afar, but also sends his majesty across Wei Wen Tong without looking back.

古文：高祖大笑，执勰手曰： 二曹才名相忌，吾与汝以道德相亲，缘此而言，无惭前烈。
现代文：高祖大笑，握住元勰的手说： 二曹因才华名声互相妒忌，我和你以道德互相亲近，据此说来，与前代豪杰相比没有惭愧。
English: Gao Zu laughed loudly, grasped the hand of Yuan Xuan and said: Two Cao are jealous of each other because of their talent and reputation, and you and I are close to each other in morality. According to this, compared with the previous generation of heroes, there is no shame.

古文：汝但克己复礼，更何多及。 
现代文：你尽管约束自己使一切言行合乎礼制，还有谁赶得上呢? 
English: If you discipline yourself to observe proper etiquette in everything you do and say, who can keep up with you?

古文：高祖亲讲丧服于清徽堂，从容谓群臣曰： 彦和、季豫等年在蒙稚，早登缨绂，失过庭之训，并未习礼，每欲令我一解丧服。
现代文：高祖亲自在清徽堂讲解丧服制度，安逸舒缓地对群臣说： 彦和、季豫等人年岁幼小，早登朝班，失去慈父的教导，都没有学习礼仪，时常想要我讲解丧服。
English: Gao Zu himself explained the mourning dress system in Qinghui Hall, and said to the courtiers in a relaxed and soothing manner: Yan He, Ji Yu and others are young and small, they have been in the imperial service for a long time, they have lost the guidance of their father, they have not learned the etiquette, and they often want me to explain the mourning dress.

古文：自审义解浮疏，抑而不许。
现代文：我自感对文义理解肤浅粗略，拖下来没有同意。
English: I feel that my understanding of the meaning of the text is superficial and rough, and I do not agree with dragging it down.

古文：顷因酒醉坐，脱尔言从，故屈朝彦，遂亲传说。
现代文：近日因酒醉坐在一起，轻率答应了他们，所以委屈朝廷贤士，便将亲自解说。
English: Recently, due to drunkenness, they sat together and rashly agreed to them, so the aggrieved court sage will personally explain.

古文：将临讲坐，惭战交情。 
现代文：将要登上讲台，惭愧与畏惧交织于心中。 
English: I'm about to step up to the podium, feeling a mixture of shame and fear.

古文：御史中尉李彪对曰： 自古及今，未有天子讲礼。
现代文：御史中丞李彪回答说： 从古代到现代，没有天子讲说礼仪的。
English: Grand Historian Li Biao replied: From ancient times to modern times, no heavenly son has spoken about etiquette.

古文：陛下圣叡渊明，事超百代，臣得亲承音旨，千载一时。 
现代文：陛下圣明深湛，事情超越百代，臣下得以亲自秉承旨意，是千载难逢的。 
English: Your majesty is all-knowing and all-powerful, things transcend a hundred generations, and it is rare for a subject to be able to personally carry out your will.

古文：从征沔北，赐帛三千匹。
现代文：元勰跟随征伐沔水以北，赐帛三千匹。
English: The Yuan Dynasty followed the conquest north of the Yanshui River and gave 3,000 horses to the Qing Dynasty.

古文：除使持节、都督南征诸军事、中军大将军、开府。
现代文：授任使持节、都督南征诸军事、中军大将军、开府。
English: He was appointed to the post of envoy, the governor of the south was conscripted into the military, the general of the Chinese army, and the capital was opened.

古文：又诏曰： 明便交敌，可敕将士肃尔军仪。 
现代文：高祖又下诏说： 天明就交战，可命令将领士兵整顿军容。 
English: Gao Zu also issued an edict saying: If war breaks out at dawn, you can order the generals and soldiers to rectify the military situation.

古文：勰于是亲勒大众。
现代文：元勰于是亲自统领大军。
English: Yuan Shao personally led the troops.

古文：须臾，有二大鸟从南而来，一向行宫，一向幕府，各为人所获。
现代文：不一会儿，有两只大乌从南方飞来，一只飞向行宫，一只飞向幕府，都被人捕获。
English: Soon, two great cormorants flew in from the south, one flew to the Imperial Palace, one flew to the Shogunate, and both were captured.

古文：勰言于高祖曰： 始有一鸟，望旗颠仆，臣谓大吉。 
现代文：元勰对高祖说： 开始有只鸟，望着旌旗倒下，臣下以为大吉。 
English: Yuan Shao said to Gao Zu: At the beginning, there was a bird that looked at the banner and fell down, and his vassals thought it was good luck.

古文：高祖戏之曰： 鸟之畏威，岂独中军之略也，吾亦分其一尔。
现代文：高祖同他开玩笑说： 鸟畏惧军威，难道衹是中军大将军的谋略吗?我也分到了一只。
English: Gao Zu joked with him and said, "Birds are afraid of military power. Is it a strategy of the Chinese generals? I also got one."

古文：此乃大善，兵法咸说。 
现代文：这是大好事，兵法书上都这样说。 
English: This is indeed a great thing. This is what is said in military law.

古文：至明，便大破崔慧景、萧衍。
现代文：到天明，就大败崔慧景、萧衍。
English: By dawn, they had defeated the armies of Cui Huijing and Xiao Yan.

古文：其夜大雨，高祖曰： 昔闻国军获胜，每逢云雨。
现代文：这天夜晚下大雨，高祖说： 我听说国家军队获取胜利，时常遇上云雨。
English: It rained heavily that night, Gaozhu said: I heard that the national army won the victory, and often encountered clouds and rain.

古文：今破新野、南阳及摧此贼，果降时润。
现代文：现在攻破新野、南阳和摧毁这些贼寇，果然降落时雨。
English: Now we have broken through Shino and Nanyang and destroyed these bandits, and the rain has indeed fallen.

古文：诚哉斯言！ 
现代文：逭话是可信的。 
English: The rumours are credible.

古文：勰对曰： 水德之应，远称天心。 
现代文：元勰回答说： 水德的应运而兴，远合上天心意。 
English: Yuan Zang replied: It should be in line with the virtue of water and far away from the heart of heaven.

古文：高祖令勰为露布，勰辞曰： 臣闻露布者，布于四海，露之耳目，必须宣扬威略以示天下。
现代文：高祖命元勰写一篇布告，元勰推辞说： 臣下听说布告，是发到四海，显露到人们耳目中的，必须宣扬声威谋略，来给天下人看。
English: Gao Zu ordered Yuan Shao to write a proclamation, and Yuan Shao replied, "As your vassals have heard, proclamations are sent to the four seas and are revealed to the people's ears and eyes. It is necessary to publicize your strategy and show it to the world.

古文：臣小才，岂足大用？ 
现代文：臣下的小才能，哪堪大用途? 
English: Of what great use is the small talent of a vassal?

古文：高祖曰： 汝岂独亲诏，亦为才达，但可为之。 
现代文：高祖说： 你岂止是亲为诏命，也是因文才通达，尽可动手写作吧。 
English: Gaozu said, "You are not only personally responsible for the edict, but you are also well-versed in literature. You may as well start writing."

古文：及就，尤类帝文。有人见者，咸谓御笔。
现代文：等到写成，特别像皇帝的文章，有见到的人，都说是皇帝手笔。
English: After it was written, especially the articles that looked like the emperor's, everyone who saw it said it was the emperor's handwriting.

古文：高祖曰： 汝所为者，人谓吾制，非兄则弟，谁能辨之？ 
现代文：高祖说： 你所写的，别人说是我所作，不是哥哥就是弟弟，谁能辨别? 
English: Gaozu said, "What you have written, others say I have done, whether it is a brother or a younger brother, who can tell the difference?

古文：勰对曰： 子夏被蚩于先圣，臣又荷责于来今。 
现代文：元勰回答说： 子夏在先代圣人面前受到嗤笑。
English: Yuan Zang replied, "Zoxia was ridiculed in front of the ancient sages.

古文：及至豫州，高祖为家人书于勰曰： 教风密微，礼政严严，若不深心日劝，何以敬诸？
现代文：臣下又将在今后受到责备。 等到达豫州，高祖以家人身份写信给元勰说： 教化风尚密切细微，礼乐刑政威严庄重如果不从内心深处曰加勉励，如何能恭敬行事?
English: After arriving in Yuzhou, Gaozu wrote to Yuan Shao as a member of his family, saying, "If you don't encourage and encourage from the bottom of your heart, how can you act respectfully?

古文：每欲立一宗师，肃我元族。
现代文：时常想设置一个宗师，来整肃我元氏家族。
English: I often want to set up a guru to purify my original family.

古文：汝亲则宸极，位乃中监，风标才器，实足师范。
现代文：你论亲情是宗室亲王，论地位是中书监，风度才干，足以成为楷模。
English: In terms of kinship, you are the prince of the family, in terms of status, you are the Chinese librarian, and your demeanor and talent are enough to become a model.

古文：屡有口敕，仍执冲逊，难违清挹，荏苒至今。
现代文：时有口头命令，你都谦逊推辞，我难以违背你的谦下，拖延到现在。
English: When there is a verbal order, you humbly refuse it. It is difficult for me to go against your humility and delay it until now.

古文：宗制之重，舍汝谁寄？
现代文：宗室礼制的重任，除了你还能寄托给谁?
English: Apart from you, who else can be entrusted with the heavy responsibility of the patriarchal system?

古文：便委以宗仪，责成汝躬，有不遵教典，随事以闻，吾别肃治之。
现代文：现在就把宗室礼仪委托给你，督责你完成任务，有不遵从教化典章的，随时报告，我另外整肃治理。
English: I will now entrust you with the ancestral room etiquette, supervise you to complete the task, and report at any time if you do not comply with the edification regulations. I will also rectify the governance.

古文：若宗室有愆，隐而不举，钟罚汝躬。
现代文：如果宗室有罪过，隐瞒不检举，将集中责罚你。
English: If you are guilty of concealing information and not reporting it, you will be collectively punished.

古文：纲维相厉，庶有劝改。
现代文：以法度相激励，希望劝勉改正。
English: Encourage them with the law and hope to persuade them to make corrections.

古文：吾朝闻夕逝，不为恨也。 
现代文：我早晨听闻道理晚上辞世，不算遗憾。 
English: I heard in the morning that he had died in the evening, and I don't regret it.

古文：勰翌日面陈曰： 奉诏令专主宗制，纠举非违。
现代文：元勰次当面陈述说： 奉诏令专门主持宗室礼制，纠察检举违法行为。
English: Yuan Shiji made a statement in person, saying: By imperial decree, I will exclusively preside over the family's ceremonial system, and I will picket and report illegal acts.

古文：臣闻 其身正不令而行，其身不正虽令不从 。
现代文：臣下听说 自身行为端正不发令而执行，自身行为不端正即使发令也不顺从 。
English: Subordinates have heard that one's proper conduct is to carry out orders without issuing them, and one's improper conduct is to disobey orders even after they have been issued.

古文：臣处宗乏长幼之顺，接物无国士之礼，每因启请，已蒙哀借。
现代文：臣下在宗室中缺乏长幼的顺序，接人待物没有杰出人才的礼节，时常利用请求，已经得到哀怜照顾。
English: Subordinates in the family room lack the order of eldest and youngest, do not have the etiquette of outstanding talents to receive people, often use requests, and have been pitifully taken care of.

古文：不谓今诏，终不矜免。
现代文：没想到今日诏书，终究不能同情免除。
English: I didn't expect today's imperial edict, after all, I can't be exempted from sympathy.

古文：犹愿圣慈，赐垂蠲遂。 
现代文：我仍然希望圣上仁慈，给予免职。 
English: I still hope that the Almighty will have mercy on me and grant me a dismissal.

古文：高祖曰： 汝谐，往钦哉。 
现代文：高祖说： 你协调众人，前往慎重行事吧。 
English: Gaozu said, "You should coordinate everyone and proceed with caution.

古文：勰表以一岁国秩、职俸、亲恤以裨军国。诏曰： 割身存国，理为远矣。
现代文：五龌上奏疏将一年的封国租税、官职俸禄、亲近施与用来补助军队国家的开支，韶书说： 切割自身保存国家，道理上是远大的。
English: The five-sentence report said that one year's national tax, official salary, and family allowance would be used to subsidize the country's military expenditure. The imperial edict said: "Cutting oneself to preserve the country is theoretically far-reaching."

古文：但汝以我亲，乃减己助国。
现代文：不过你因与我亲近，才节省自己补助国家。
English: But because you are so close to me, you have spared yourself from subsidizing the state.

古文：职俸便停，亲、国二事，听三分受一。 
现代文：官职俸禄可停交，亲近、封国二事，准许三分接受一分。 
English: An official's salary can be suspended for two reasons, closeness and nationalization, and three points are allowed for accepting one point.

古文：高祖不豫，勰内侍医药，外总军国之务，遐迩肃然，人无异议。
现代文：高祖患病，五巡在内侍奉医药，外面总领军队国家的事务，远近整肃，人们没有不同的议论。
English: Gao Zu is ill, the Fifth Circuit is in charge of medicine inside, the commander-in-chief of the army is in charge of the country's affairs outside, and rectification is near and far, people have no different discussions.

古文：徐謇，当世之上医也。先是，假还洛阳，及召至，勰引之别所，泣涕执手而谓之曰： 君今世元化，至尊气力危惙，愿君竭心，专思方治。
现代文：是当时的上等医生，这之前，请假回盗厘，等到召唤到来，亘赵领他到另外处所，哭泣流泪握着手而对他说： 您是当今时代的元化，皇帝气力疲乏危险，希望您竭尽心力，专心致志治疗。
English: He was the best doctor at that time. Before that, he had asked for leave to return to Paili. When the summons came, Wuzhao led him to another place, wept and held his hand and said to him: You are the embodiment of today's era, the emperor is in danger of exhaustion, I hope you will do your best and concentrate on treatment.

古文：若圣体日康，令四海有赖，当获意外之赏；不然，便有不测之诛，非但荣辱，乃存亡由此。
现代文：如果圣上身体益康复，使四海有依赖，你将获得意外的赏赐；不然，就有不可预测的诛杀，不但事关荣辱，而且生死由遣而定。
English: If the saint's body recovers well and makes the four seas dependent, you will receive an unexpected reward; otherwise, there will be an unpredictable battle, which is not only a matter of honor and disgrace, but also a matter of life and death.

古文：君其勉之！ 
现代文：您可要努力啊! 
English: Do your best!

古文：左右见者，莫不呜咽。
现代文：左右见到的人，无不悲伤哭泣。
English: All the people I saw on the left and right were sad and crying.

古文：及引入，謇便欲进治。
现代文：等到带进去，筐昼就要准备用药。
English: Once they are brought in, the baskets are prepared for use during the day.

古文：勰以高祖神力虚弱，唯令以食味消息。
现代文：元勰因高祖神志气力虚弱，仅命用有味道的食品保养。
English: Due to Gao Zu Shenzhi's weak strength, Yuan Qi only needed to use food with flavor for maintenance.

古文：勰乃密为坛于汝水之滨，依周公故事，告天地、显祖请命，乞以身代。
现代文：元勰暗中在这丞边设祭坛，依照周公旧例，祭告天地、显祖请求延长直塑性命，乞求用自身代替受死。
English: In the middle of the Yuan Dynasty, an altar was set up on the side of this temple, and according to the old custom of Zhou Gong, the altar told the world and the ancestors to request the extension of the life of direct plasticity, and begged to be used as a substitute for death.

古文：高祖翊日有瘳损。
现代文：高祖次日疾病稍退。
English: Gao Zu's illness subsided slightly the next day.

古文：自悬瓠幸鄴，勰常侍坐舆辇，昼夜不离于侧，饮食必先尝之，而后手自进御。
现代文：从悬瓠前往邺城，元勰时常在车中侍奉陪坐，日夜不离高祖身旁，饮食必定先尝，然后亲手送上。
English: From Hanging Rock to Lucheng, Geng Yao often serves and accompanies Lucheng in the car. Day and night, he never leaves Gao Zu's side. He must taste the food first, and then personally serve it.

古文：车驾还京，会百僚于宣极堂，行饮至策勋之礼。
现代文：皇帝回到京城，在宣极堂会见百官，施行合祭论功的礼仪。
English: The emperor returned to the capital, met with hundreds of officials in the Xuanji Hall, and performed the ritual of the closing ceremony.

古文：命舍人宣旨： 勰翼弼六师，纂戎荆楚，沔北之勋，每毗庙算。
现代文：命令舍人宣布旨意： 元勰辅佐六军，出兵荆楚之地，沔水以北的功勋，时常协助谋划。
English: He ordered his subordinates to declare their intentions: Yuan Shao assisted the Sixth Army, dispatched troops to Jingchu Land, and performed feats north of Surabaya, and often assisted in planning.

古文：从讨新野，有克城之谋；受命邓城，致大捷之效。
现代文：跟随讨伐新野，有攻克城池的策略；在邓城受命，有大胜的报效。
English: Following the crusade to Xinye, there is a strategy to conquer the city; in Dengcheng, there is a great victory.

古文：功为群将之最也。
现代文：功劳是众将中最高的。
English: Merit is the highest among generals.

古文：别当授赏，不替厥庸。 
现代文：将另外授任赏赐，不替代他的功劳。 
English: The award will be given in addition to, and not as a substitute for, his services.

古文：高祖谓勰曰： 吾与汝等，早罹艰苦，中逢契阔，每谓情义随事而疏。
现代文：高祖对元勰说： 我和你们几人，早年遭受艰难困苦，后来遇上离散，时常以为情谊随事情而疏远。
English: Gao Zu said to Yuan Xuan: I and several of you suffered hardships and difficulties in the early years, and later encountered separation, often thinking that friendship would be alienated with things.

古文：比缠患经岁，危如寒叶，非汝孔怀，情敦忠孝，孰能动止躬亲，必先药膳？
现代文：近来患病一年，危险如同寒冬的树叶，不是你这弟弟，情系忠孝，谁能事必躬亲，先尝药物膳食。
English: Recently, I have been ill for a year. The danger is like the leaves of a cold winter. I am not your younger brother. I am loyal and filial. Anyone who can do anything must bow to relatives and try the medicine diet first.

古文：每寻此事，感思殊远。 
现代文：时常寻思这件事，感想深远。 
English: I think about it all the time and it's very profound.

古文：勰悲泣对曰： 臣等宿遭不天，酷恨长世，赖陛下抚育，得参人伍。
现代文：元勰哭泣回答说： 臣下等人往日遭遇父亲早逝，很遗憾长留世间，依靠陛下抚养，得以厕身人群之中。
English: Yuan Xuan wept and replied, "It's a pity that our subjects, who suffered the early death of their fathers in the past, have to remain in this world for a long time, dependent on His Majesty for their upbringing, and forced to mingle with the crowd.

古文：岂谓上灵无鉴，复使圣躬违和，万国所悬，苍生系气。
现代文：哪裹想到上天没有鉴别，又使圣上身体欠安，万国悬念，百姓屏住呼吸。
English: Who would have thought that there was no discernment in heaven, which made the saint's body unwell, the suspense of all nations, and the people holding their breath.

古文：寝兴之劳，岂申荼蓼！ 
现代文：起早睡晚的辛劳，哪能申述心中的痛苦? 
English: The toil of getting up early and going to bed late, how can I describe the pain in my heart?

古文：以破慧景等勋，增邑五百户。
现代文：因打败慧景等人的功勋，增加食邑五百户。
English: Due to the achievement of defeating Hui Jing and others, the number of food villages increased by 500 households.

古文：又诏曰： 朕形疲稚年，心劳长岁，积思成疴，顿发汝颍。
现代文：高祖又下诏说： 我幼年身体单薄，长大后心中操劳，因长期思虑过度而生病，突然在汝水颖水发作。
English: Gao Zu also said, "When I was young, my body was thin. When I grew up, my mind was overworked, and I became ill due to long-term over-thinking. Suddenly, I had an attack.

古文：第六弟勰，孝均周弟，感侔姬旦，遗食舍寐，动止必亲，敦医劝膳，诚力俱竭，致兹保康，实赖同气。
现代文：第六弟元勰，孝顺和周王的弟弟相等，感应同姬旦可比，忘记饮食放弃睡眠，一切都亲自动手，敦促医生劝勉进膳，诚意力量都用尽，导致我康复，实在依靠弟弟。
English: The sixth brother, Yuan Qi, was as dutiful as Zhou Wang's younger brother, and his sensory perception was comparable to that of Hetan. He forgot to eat and gave up sleep, did everything by himself, urged the doctor to encourage him to eat, and exhausted all his sincerity and strength, leading to my recovery. He really relied on his younger brother.

古文：又秉务缉政，百司是凭，纲维折衷，万揆获济。
现代文：另外秉持事务协调政令，百官凭藉，折衷法度，各项事务得以成就。
English: In addition, upholding the coordination of affairs decree, with the help of hundreds of officials, compromise laws and regulations, various affairs can be achieved.

古文：抚师于霖浩之辰，处戎于荐逼之日。
现代文：在雨水时节安抚军队，在敌军进逼之曰指挥战斗。
English: To pacify the army in the rainy season, to command the battle when the enemy is advancing.

古文：安外静内，功臣大道。
现代文：安定外部平静内部，是功臣的主要内容。
English: Stable outside and calm inside is the main content of a meritorious subject.

古文：侍省之绩，可以孔怀无褒；翼亮之勤，实乃勋存社稷。
现代文：侍奉照料的劳绩，可因兄弟之情不加褒奖；辅佐光大的勤恳，实在是功在国家。
English: The performance of serving and caring may not be rewarded because of brotherly feelings; the diligence of assisting Guangda is really a credit to the country.

古文：宜有酬赏，以旌国功，可增邑一千户。 
现代文：应该有所报答赏赐，来彰明国家的功绩，可以增加食邑一千户。 
English: There should be a reward to highlight the country's achievements, which could increase the number of households receiving food by a thousand.

古文：勰辞曰： 臣受遇缘亲，荣枯事等，以此获赏，殊乖情愿，乞追成旨，用息谤言。 
现代文：推辞说： 臣下受知遇是缘于亲近，盛衰的事情相等，以此获得赏赐，很违背心愿，乞求收回成命，来平息诽谤的言论。 
English: The rebuttal said: "A subject is known to be due to proximity, the rise and fall of things are equal, in order to obtain a reward, it is contrary to the wishes, begging to take back the life, to quell the slanderous speech.

古文：诏曰： 汝在私能孝，处公必忠，比来勤忧，足布朝野，但可祗膺。 
现代文：诏书说： 你在家中能孝悌，处在官府一定忠诚，近来辛勤忧虑，足以传遍朝野，衹可恭谨接受。 
English: The imperial edict said: You can be filial at home, loyal in the government, recently hardworking and worried, enough to spread all over the country, and you can respectfully accept it.

古文：寻以勰为司徒、太子太傅，侍中如故。
现代文：不久任命元勰为司徒、太子太傅，侍中照旧。
English: Not long after, he appointed Motohiro as the tutor and the prince as the grand tutor, and the chamberlains remained the same.

古文：俄而萧宝卷将陈显达内冠，高祖复亲讨之。
现代文：不久萧宣鲞的将领颅题达进犯，直担又亲自讨伐他。
English: Not long after, Xiao Xuanqian's general Zhengtida attacked, and Zhishang personally fought him.

古文：诏勰使持节、都督中外诸军事、总摄六师。
现代文：诏令五翅为使持节、都督中外诸军事，总领六军。
English: The imperial edict designated the five generals as the envoys of the festival, the governors of the capital and the foreign military, and the leaders of the six armies.

古文：是时，高祖不豫。
现代文：遣时，高祖患病。
English: At the appointed time, Gao Zu fell ill.

古文：勰辞曰： 臣侍疾无暇，六军须有所托，事不两兴，情力又竭。
现代文：元勰推辞说： 臣下侍奉疾病没有时间，六军必须有所委托，事情不能两件同时进行，心力又衰竭。
English: Yuan Shun said, "There is no time for a subordinate to serve because of illness, the Six Armies must be commissioned, two things cannot be done at the same time, and the heart is exhausted.

古文：更请一王总当军要。 
现代文：请求另派一位亲王总领军队大事。 
English: A request was made to send another prince to lead the army.

古文：高祖曰： 戎务、侍疾，皆凭于汝。
现代文：高祖说： 军队事务、侍奉疾病，都依仗你。
English: Gao Zu said, "Military affairs, service and illness all depend on you.

古文：牵疴如此，吾深虑不济。
现代文：疾病如此，我深深忧虑不能好转。
English: The illness is such that I am deeply worried that I will not get better.

古文：安六军、保社稷者，舍汝而谁？
现代文：安定六军、保卫国家的人，舍掉你还有谁?
English: Stable six armed forces, people who defend the country, who else would you give up?

古文：何容方便请人，以违心寄。
现代文：哪容随便请求，来违背心中的寄托。
English: Who would allow a request to go against their heart's desire.

古文：宗祐所赖，唯在于汝。
现代文：宗庙国家所依赖的，仅在你身上。
English: What the ancestral temple and the country rely on is only on you.

古文：诸葛孔明、霍子孟异姓受托，而况汝乎！ 
现代文：诸葛孔明、霍子孟以异姓而受托付，何况是你呢! 
English: Zhuge Kongming and Huo Zi Meng were entrusted with different surnames, let alone you!

古文：行次淯阳，高祖谓勰曰： 吾患转恶，汝其努力。 
现代文：途中停驻清阳，高祖对元勰说： 我的病加重，你可要努力。 
English: On the way, stopping in Qingyang, Gao Zu said to Yuan Qi: My illness is getting worse, you must work hard.

古文：车驾至马圈，去贼营数里，显达等出战，诸将大破之。
现代文：皇帝到达马圈，离贼寇营垒几里，显达等人出营交战，各将领大败显达。
English: The emperor arrived at the stables, a few miles from the camp of the thieves and robbers. Xinda and others went out to fight, and the generals were defeated.

古文：勰部分诸军，将攻贼垒，其夜奔退。
现代文：元勰调度各军，将要攻打贼寇营垒，造天夜裹撤退。
English: The Yuan Shao dispatched all the armies, and they were going to attack the encampment of thieves and robbers, and withdraw at dusk.

古文：高祖疾甚，谓勰曰： 修短命也，死生大分，今吾气力危惙，当成不济矣。
现代文：高祖病得厉害，对元勰说： 长短是命中注定，死生有大限，我的气力疲乏危险，将不能救治了。
English: Gao Zu was very ill and said to Yuan Xuan: "The length of my life is predetermined by fate. There is a limit to life and death. My strength is dangerously exhausted and I will not be able to be cured.

古文：虽败显达，国家安危，在此一举，社稷所仗，唯在汝身。
现代文：虽然打败显达，国家的安危，在这次行动，国家所依仗的，仅在你一人。
English: Although the defeat of Xanda, the safety of the country, in this action, the country relies on you alone.

古文：霍子孟以异姓受付，况汝亲贤，可不勉也！ 
现代文：霍子孟以异姓而受托付，何况你亲近贤明，能不勉励吗! 
English: Huo Zi Meng was entrusted with a different surname, and what's more, you are close and wise, can you not encourage him!

古文：勰泣曰： 士于布衣，犹为知己尽命，况臣托灵先皇，联晖陛下，诚应竭股肱之力，加之以忠贞。
现代文：元勰哭泣说： 士人在做平民时，还为知己者效命，何况臣下出自先帝，和陛下联结光辉，实在应竭尽股肱的力量，献出忠心。
English: Yuan Xuan wept and said, "When being a commoner, a scholar also serves his confidant, not to mention the fact that a vassal comes from the former emperor and is associated with the glory of his majesty. He should really exert his strength and devote his loyalty.

古文：但臣出入喉膂，每跨时要，及于宠灵辉赫，闻之遐迩。
现代文：不过臣下出入于喉舌部门，每每身居要职，等到宠信显赫，闻名远近。
English: However, vassals come and go in the mouthpiece department, each holding an important position, until the favorite is prominent, known far and wide.

古文：复参宰匠，机政毕归，震主之声，见忌必矣。
现代文：又参与辅政，机要政务都归名下，震撼君主的声音，受疑忌是必然的。
English: He also participated in the auxiliary government, and all the important government affairs were attributed to him. The monarch's voice was shaken, and it was inevitable that he would be suspected.

古文：此乃周旦遁逃，成王疑惑，陛下爱臣，便为未尽始终之美。
现代文：这是周公旦逃避，成王疑惑的同类情形，陛下喜爱臣下，造就没有达到始终如一的美好。
English: This is the same kind of situation that Zhou Gongdan evaded and Chengwang doubted. His Majesty loved his vassals, but he did not achieve consistent beauty.

古文：臣非所以恶华捐势，非所以辞勤请逸，正希仰成陛下日镜之明，下念愚臣忘退之祸。 
现代文：臣下不是厌恶荣华捐弃势力，不是推辞重任请求安逸，祇是希望仰赖陛下如日照耀的英明，下念愚臣忘记退让的祸患。 
English: It is not that the vassals detest the glory and give up their power, nor that they renounce their heavy responsibilities and ask for ease. It is only that they hope to rely on His Majesty's wisdom, which shines like the sun, and remind the foolish vassals to forget the calamity of retreat.

古文：高祖久之曰： 吾寻思汝言，理实难夺。 
现代文：过了很久高祖说： 我寻思你的话，道理实在难以否定。 
English: After a long time, Gaozu said, "I've thought about what you said, and it's hard to deny the truth.

古文：乃手诏世宗曰： 汝第六叔父勰，清规懋赏，与白云俱洁；厌荣舍绂，以松竹为心。
现代文：就亲手诏令世宗说： 你的六叔父元勰，美好的规范盛大的德行，和白云同样纯洁；厌恶荣华舍弃职位，有松树竹子般的心。
English: With his own hand, he ordered Shizong to say: Your sixth uncle, Yuan Shao, has a beautiful standard, a grand virtue, and is as pure as a white cloud; he abhors glory and renunciation of position, and has a heart like a pine tree and a bamboo.

古文：吾少与绸缪，提携道趣。
现代文：我自幼和他交往，以道德志趣互相提携。
English: I've been in contact with him since I was a child, and we've bonded over our mutual interest in morality.

古文：每请解朝缨，恬真丘壑，吾以长兄之重，未忍离远。
现代文：他时常请求解除朝廷官职，恬淡率真于山壑之间，我以长兄的重任，不忍心他远离。
English: He often asked to be relieved of his duties as an official of the Imperial Court. His meekness was truly astounding. As the eldest brother, I couldn't bear for him to stay away.

古文：何容仍屈素业，长婴世网。
现代文：哪能再委屈他任世间职务，长期受世俗羁绊。
English: How can he be wronged again by being appointed to a worldly post and being bound by the secular world for a long time.

古文：吾百年之后，其听勰辞蝉舍冕，遂其冲挹之性。
现代文：我死了以后，可准许元勰脱去朝官服饰，满足他谦虚自抑的性格。
English: After my death, I may allow Yuan Xuan to take off his official robes to satisfy his modest and self-controlled character.

古文：无使成王之朝，翻疑姬旦之圣，不亦善乎？
现代文：不要使成王的朝廷，反而怀疑姬旦的圣明，不也是很好的吗?
English: Isn't it a good idea not to make the court of the crowned king angry, but rather to doubt the sacredness of Hidan?

古文：汝为孝子，勿违吾敕。 
现代文：你是孝子，不要违背了我的命令。 
English: You are a filial son, don't disobey my order.

古文：及高祖崩于行宫，遏秘丧事，独与右仆射、任城王澄及左右数人为计，奉迁高祖于安车中，勰等出入如平常，视疾进膳，可决外奏。
现代文：等到高祖在行宫逝世，保守丧事秘密，仅和右仆射、任城王元澄以及左右的几个人商议对策，将高祖迁放到坐乘的小车中，元勰等人出入如同往，探望疾病送进饮食，处理外面的奏事。
English: When Gao Zu passed away in the palace, he kept the funeral a secret, and only discussed the countermeasures with Zuoxia, Rencheng Wang Yuancheng, and a few people around him. Gao Zu was moved to a small car, and Geng Yao and others went in and out as before, visiting the disease into the diet, and dealing with the outside report.

古文：累日达宛城，乃夜进安车于郡事，得加敛榇，还载卧舆。
现代文：几天后到达宛城，就在夜间将坐乘的小车推进郡中的厅堂，得以收殓放进棺材，用卧车载回。
English: A few days later, they arrived in Wancheng, and in the night, they pushed the car they were riding in to the county hall, where they were able to put it in a coffin and carry it back in a sleeping car.

古文：六军内外莫有知者。
现代文：六军内外没有人知道。
English: No one inside or outside the Sixth Army knew about it.

古文：遣中书舍人张儒，奉诏徵世宗会驾。
现代文：派遣中书舍人张儒，带着诏书征召世宗来见皇帝。
English: Zhang Ru, a Chinese scholar, was dispatched with an imperial edict to summon Shizong to meet the emperor.

古文：梓宫至鲁阳，乃发丧行服。
现代文：棺材到了鲁阳，才发布丧事穿丧服。
English: It was only when the coffin was transported to Luyang that they began to mourn and wear mourning clothes.

古文：世宗即位，勰跪授高祖遗敕数纸。
现代文：世宗即位，元勰跪下交付高祖写有遣令的几张纸。
English: When King Sejong ascended the throne, Empress Dowager Yuan knelt down and handed Gao Zu a few pieces of paper with the imperial decree.

古文：咸阳王禧疑勰为变，停在鲁阳郡外，久之乃入。
现代文：咸阳王元禧怀疑元勰发动变乱，停留在鲁阳郡外面，很久以后才入城。
English: King Yuanxi of Xianyang suspected that Yuan Shao had started the rebellion, so he stayed outside Luyang County and only entered the city much later.

古文：谓勰曰： 汝非但辛勤，亦危险至极。 
现代文：对元勰说： 你不但辛苦勤劳，也危险到极点。 
English: He said to Yuan Xuan, "You are not only working very hard, but you are also in great danger.

古文：勰恨之，对曰： 兄识高年长，故知有夷险；彦和握蛇骑虎，不觉艰难。 
现代文：元勰怨恨他，回答说： 哥哥见识高年纪大，所以知道有危险，我是握蛇骑虎，不觉得艰难。 
English: Yuan Xuan resented him and replied, "My brother knows that I am old, so he knows there is danger. I hold a snake and ride a tiger, but I don't find it difficult.

古文：禧曰： 汝恨吾后至耳！ 
现代文：元禧说： 你是恨我后到而已! 
English: Yuanxi said, "You only came here after you hated me!"

古文：自高祖不豫，勰常居中，亲侍医药，夙夜不离左右，至于衣带罕解，乱首垢面。
现代文：自从高祖患病，元勰时常住在行宫中，亲自侍奉医药，口夜不离高祖的身边，以至于衣带很少解开，蓬头垢面。
English: Ever since Gao Zu fell ill, Geng Yao often lived in the palace, personally serving medicine, and never left Gao Zu's side at night, so much so that his clothes were rarely untied and his hair was unkempt.

古文：帝患久多忿，因之以迁怒。
现代文：皇帝病得久了爱发怒，因之迁怒他人。
English: When the emperor had been ill for a long time, he was prone to anger.

古文：勰每被诮詈，言至厉切；威责近侍，动将诛斩。
现代文：元勰时常被讥讽责骂，言辞严厉，痛斥身边侍奉人员，动不动将要诛杀。
English: Yuan Xuan was often ridiculed and scolded, his words were harsh, he berated the attendants around him, and he was always ready to fight and kill.

古文：勰承颜悉心，多所匡济。
现代文：元勰尽心地承接颜色，多有补助救护。
English: Yuan Xuan bore these with all his heart, and tried his best to remedy and protect them.

古文：及高祖升遐，陈显达奔遁始尔，虑凶问泄漏，致有逼迫。勰内虽悲恸，外示吉容，出入俯仰，神貌无异。
现代文：等到高祖逝世，陈显达刚逃奔，担心高祖死亡的消息泄露，以致受逼迫，元勰内心虽然悲伤，外表上显示出吉祥的面容，出入举动，神态容貌和平常没有不同。
English: When Gaozu died, Chen Xianda had just fled, fearing that the news of Gaozu's death would be leaked, so he was persecuted. Although Yuan Xuan was sad inside, his appearance showed an auspicious face, his movements and appearance were no different from usual.

古文：及至鲁阳也，东宫官属，多疑勰有异志，窃怀防惧。
现代文：等到到了鲁阳，束宫的官属，多怀疑元勰有二心，暗中怀有防范畏惧心理。
English: When they arrived in Luyang, the officials of Sokgong suspected that Yuan Xuan was double-minded and secretly harbored a mentality of fear and precaution.

古文：而勰推诚尽礼，卒无纤介。
现代文：而元勰以诚意相待全依礼法，没有一点过失。
English: However, Geng Yao treated each other with sincerity according to the etiquette, without any fault.

古文：勰上高祖谥议： 谨案谥法，协时肇享曰 孝 ，五宗安之曰 孝 ，道德博闻曰 文 ，经纬天地曰 文 ，仰惟大行皇帝，义实该之，宜上尊号为孝文皇帝，庙曰高祖，陵曰长陵。 
现代文：元勰奏上高祖溢号的议论说： 恭谨查阅谧法，按时祭祀为 孝，五宗安宁为 孝 ，道德广博传闻为 文 ，规划治理天地为 文 ，仰惟大行皇帝，道义实在相应，应该上尊号为孝文皇帝，庙号为壶担，陵墓为旦陆。 
English: The discussion of the Emperor Gaozong played on the gong said: Respectfully consult the gong method, sacrifice on time for filial piety, five peace for filial piety, morality for extensive rumors, planning for the governance of heaven and earth for literature, appeal to the Emperor Da Xing, morality is corresponding, should be the highest honor for the Emperor Xiaowen, the temple for the pot, and the mausoleum for the tomb.

古文：世宗从之。
现代文：世塞听从了他的奏议。
English: Sejong accepted his opinion.

古文：既葬，世宗固以勰为宰辅。
现代文：安葬高祖后，世宗执意任命元勰为宰辅。
English: After burying Gao Zu, Shizong persisted in appointing Yuan Qi as Zai Fu.

古文：勰频口陈遗旨，请遂素怀。
现代文：元垦频繁日头陈述直趄遣旨，请求满足一向的心意。
English: Yuan Zang repeatedly dictated the last will and testament of Emperor Xiaowen, requesting that his past wishes be fulfilled.

古文：世宗对勰悲恸，每不许之。
现代文：世塞面对元超悲伤哀恸，每每不答应他。
English: In the face of Yuan's great sorrow and grief, the world did not agree with him.

古文：勰频烦表闻，辞义恳切。
现代文：元避频繁上奏疏报告，辞义恳切。
English: Yuan Xuan frequently reported the loss, and his words were earnest.

古文：世宗难违遗敕，遂其雅情，犹逼以外任，乃以勰为使持节、侍中、都督冀定幽瀛营安平七州诸军事、骠骑大将军、开府、定州刺史。
现代文：世宗难以违背高担遣令，就满足他的雅志，但仍逼他在外地为官，就任命元勰为使持节、侍中、都督冀定幽适营室垩七州诸军事、骠骑大将军、开府、定业刺史。
English: It was difficult for Shizong to disobey Gaozhan's dispatch order, so he satisfied his ambition, but still forced him to serve as an official in a foreign country. He appointed Yuan Zong as envoy, chamberlain, governor of Hebei Province, military commander of seven provinces, cavalry general, governor of the capital, and historian.

古文：勰仍陈让，又面申前意，世宗固执不许，乃述职。
现代文：元勰便上奏陈述辞让，又当面申述以前的意思，世宗执意坚持不准许，元勰才就职。
English: Yuan Shao then made a statement of resignation, and in person stated his previous intention. Shizong insisted that he would not allow it, and Yuan Shao took office.

古文：尚书令王肃等奏： 臣等闻旌功表德，道贵前王；庸勋亲亲，义高盛典。
现代文：尚书令王肃等人上奏： 臣下等人听说表彰功德，道理崇尚于前代君王；酬劳功勋亲近亲人，意义高悬于神圣典章。
English: Shangshu ordered Wang Su and others to recite: Subordinates and others heard about the commendation of merit, and the principle was revered in the previous monarch; the reward for merit was close to relatives, and the significance was high in the sacred award.

古文：是故姬旦翼周，光宅曲阜；东平宰汉，宠绝列蕃。
现代文：所以姬旦辅佐周朝，拥有曲阜；束平王辅佐汉朝，宠信超过各藩国。
English: Therefore, Hidan, an assistant of the Zhou Dynasty, owned Qufu; Sokping, an assistant of the Han Dynasty, was favored by more than all the provinces.

古文：彭城王勰景思内昭，英风外发，协廓乾规，扫氛汉沔。
现代文：彭城王元勰重大的谋略在心中昭明，英迈的风度在身外显示，协助廓清天下规范，扫除汉水沔水的凶气。
English: Pengcheng Wangyuanqian's great strategy is clear in his heart, and his elegant demeanor shows on the outside, helping to clarify the world's standards and sweep away the viciousness of Han Shui.

古文：属先帝在天，凤旌旋旆，静一六师，肃宁南服。
现代文：遇先帝逝世，胜利退兵，安定六军，宁静南方疆域。
English: The death of the former emperor, the victorious retreat, the stability of the Six Armies, and the tranquility of the southern territory.

古文：登圣皇于天衢，开有魏之灵祐，论道中铉，王猷以穆，七德丕宣，九功在咏。
现代文：托升圣皇于天道，开拓魏国的福祉，在宰辅之位论治道，国家策略端庄盛美，七种德行广为传扬，九种功绩民众歌咏。
English: The Holy Emperor's ascension to heaven, the development of the welfare of Wei, the discussion of governance in the position of vice-premier, the national strategy of dignified and beautiful, the seven kinds of virtues are widely spread, and the nine kinds of merits are sung by the people.

古文：臣等参详，宜增邑一千五百户。 
现代文：臣下等人在一起商议，元勰应增加食邑一千五百户。 
English: Subordinates and others discussed together that the Yuan Dynasty should increase the number of counties by 1,500.

古文：诏曰： 览奏，倍增崩绝，未足以上酬勋德，且可如奏。 
现代文：诏书说： 阅览奏疏，倍增伤悲，往日封授不足以报答功勋德行，可如奏疏所言封赏。 
English: The edict said: "Reading Song Soo multiplies one's sorrow. In the past, the award is not enough to reward meritorious deeds, but it can be awarded as Song Soo said.

古文：勰频表固让，世宗许之。
现代文：元勰接连上奏疏执意推让，世宗答应了他。
English: Yuan Xuan continued to insist on making concessions, and Shizong agreed.

古文：世宗与勰书曰： 恪奉辞暨今，悲恋哽咽，岁月易远，便迫暮冬，每思闻道，奉承风教。
现代文：世宗给元勰写信说： 我奉遣令到现在，悲伤思念气结喉塞，岁月流逝，便接近冬末，时常思虑闻听道理，承受教导。
English: Sejong wrote a letter to Yuan Shikai saying: I have been following the order to this day, my throat is choked with sadness and longing, the years have passed, it is close to the end of winter, I often think, listen to the truth, and receive instruction.

古文：父既辞荣闲外，无容顿违至德。
现代文：叔父谢绝荣华闲居于外，我可不容许突然离开大德之人。
English: Uncle Xie refused to let Ronghua stay idle outside, and I would not allow anyone to suddenly leave Dade.

古文：出蕃累朔，荒驰实深。
现代文：外出藩国几月，心中遥远的思念实在深沉。
English: I have been away from the domain for several months, and the distant thoughts in my heart are really deep.

古文：今遣主书刘道斌奉宣悲恋，愿父来望，必当郕京。
现代文：现在派遣主书刘道斌宣布悲伤的思念，希望叔父前来探望，一定要赶到京城。
English: Now Liu Daobin, the chief writer of the dispatch, announced his sad thoughts, hoping that his uncle would come to visit, and that he must rush to Beijing.

古文：展泄哀穷，指不云远。 
现代文：使我得以宣泄哀伤，指望时间不远。 
English: So that I may give vent to my grief, hoping that the time is not far off.

古文：勰乃朝于京师。
现代文：元勰于是到京城朝见。
English: Therefore, Yuan Shao went to the capital to see her in the morning.

古文：景明初，萧宝卷豫州刺史裴叔业以寿春内属，诏勰都督南征诸军事，余官如故，与尚书令王肃迎接寿春。
现代文：景明初年，萧宝卷的豫州刺史裴叔业献出寿壹归附，诏令五勰为都督南征诸军事，其余官职照旧，和尚书令王肃前往寿春迎接。
English: In the first year of the reign of King Jingming, Yu Zhou, the scribe of the Xiao Bao Scroll, presented Shou Yi to the emperor. The emperor ordered Wu Xi to be conscripted into the military as the governor of the south, and the rest of the official positions remained the same. The monk ordered Wang Su to go to Shou Chun to welcome the new year.

古文：诏曰： 五教治枢，古难其选，自非亲贤兼切，莫应斯举。
现代文：韶书说： 五种伦理道德是治理的枢机，古代重视合适人选，除非亲近贤明兼具，不能承受这一任务。
English: Zou Shu said: Five kinds of ethics and morals are the cardinal points of governance. The ancients attach great importance to the right candidate, and unless they are both close and wise, they cannot bear this task.

古文：王以明德懋亲，任属保傅，出居蕃陕，入御衮章，内外克谐，民神攸属。
现代文：王以清明的德行显贵的亲属，职任为师傅，外出居住陕地藩国，入京统领朝纲，内外和谐，民众神明归往。
English: The king, with his clear-cut virtue, distinguished relatives, and his position as a teacher, went abroad to live in the Shaanxi province, entered Beijing to lead the imperial program, harmony at home and abroad, and the return of the people's gods.

古文：今董率戎麾，威号宜重，可复授司徒，以光望实。 
现代文：现在率领军队，声威名号应加重，可再授予司徒，以扩大威望实权。 
English: Now leading the army, the prestige name should be increased, and can be re-awarded to the officers to expand the prestige and real power.

古文：又诏勰以本官领扬州刺史。
现代文：又诏令元勰以本来官职兼任扬州刺史。
English: He also ordered Yuan Zheng to take up his official post and serve as Yangzhou's chief historian.

古文：勰简刑导礼，与民休息，州境无虞，遐迩安静。
现代文：元勰减省刑罚以礼制加以引导，给与民众休养生息，州境中没有事故，远近安宁。
English: The Yuan Dynasty reduced provincial punishments and guided them with etiquette, giving the people rest and recuperation. There were no accidents in the state, and there was peace far and near.

古文：扬州所统建安戍主胡景略犹为宝卷拒守不下，勰水陆讨之，景略面缚出降。
现代文：提业所统辖的建窒戍守头领翅量监仍然为宜鲞坚守不投降，元趋从水陆两路讨伐他，景喳反绑自己出城投降。
English: The surveyor-general of Jianyuan, under the jurisdiction of the Survey Office, still insisted on Yiqi's non-surrender. Yuancheng fought against him from land and sea, and Jingqi retreated out of the city and surrendered.

古文：自勰之至寿春，东定城戍，至于阳石，西降建安，山蛮顺命，斩首获生，以数万计。
现代文：自从元勰到了寿春，东面干定城池据点，直到隧互，西面降服至谴，山蛮顺从命令，斩下首级擒获俘虏，以数万计。
English: From the time of the Yuan Dynasty to the Shuchun Dynasty, the Eastern Han Dynasty held the stronghold of Chengchi, until the Western Han Dynasty surrendered to the Western Han Dynasty, the Western Han Dynasty obeyed the order and beheaded tens of thousands of captives.

古文：进位大司马，领司徒，余如故。
现代文：元勰升为大司马，兼任司徒，其余职位照旧。
English: Yuan Xuan was promoted to the position of chief secretary and concurrently held the position of secretary, while the other positions remained unchanged.

古文：增邑八百户。
现代文：增加食邑八百户。
English: Increase the number of restaurants to 800.

古文：又宝卷遣将陈伯之屯于肥口，胡松又据梁城，水军相继二百余里。
现代文：宝卷又派遣将领陈伯之驻守肥口，胡松又占据梁城，水军相接达二百多里。
English: The treasure scroll also dispatched the general Chen Bo Zhou to garrison Hekou, and Hu Song occupied Liangcheng. The naval forces were more than two hundred miles apart.

古文：勰部分将士，分攻诸营。伯之、胡松率众出战，诸将击之，斩首九千，俘获一万。
现代文：元勰调度将领士兵，分别攻打各营，伯之、胡松率领部众出城交战，各将领攻打他们，斩首九千级，俘获一万人。
English: Yuan Shao dispatched generals and soldiers to attack each battalion separately. Bo Zhi and Hu Song led the troops out of the city to fight. Each general attacked them, beheaded nine thousand and captured ten thousand.

古文：伯之等仅以身免，屯于烽火。
现代文：伯之等人仅孤身逃脱，驻守在烽火。
English: Bo and the others escaped alone and stayed at the campfire.

古文：勰又分命诸将频战，伯之计穷宵遁。
现代文：元勰又分别命令各将领频繁作战，伯之计策用尽后夜晚逃跑。
English: Yuan Shao also separately ordered the generals to fight frequently, and fled at night after exhausting Bo's strategy.

古文：淮南平。诏曰： 王戚尊上辅，德勋莫二，孤心昧识，训保攸凭。
现代文：淮水以南平定，诏书说： 王服属尊贵地位为宰辅，德行功勋没有第二人超过，我孤单的心怀愚昧的见识，凭藉王的教导保护。
English: Huai Shui south of Pingding, the imperial edict said: The king's clothing belongs to the honorable position of Zhaifu, and there is no second person who is more virtuous and meritorious. I am alone in my heart with foolish knowledge, protected by the king's teaching.

古文：比以寿春初开，镇压任重，故令王亲董元戎，远抚淮外。
现代文：近来因寿春刚开拓，镇抚的任务重大，所以命王亲自统领军队，远到淮水以南安抚。
English: Recently, due to the fact that Shouchun has just opened up, the task of pacifying is very important, so the king personally led the army to pacify far south of Huai Shui.

古文：冒兹炎蒸，衡盖飘摇，经略逾时，必有亏损。
现代文：顶着烈日暴晒，车盖飘动，攻取经历时节，一定有亏损。
English: Facing the scorching sun, the cover of the car fluttering, capturing the season of experience, there must be a loss.

古文：淹违诣觌，夙夜系情。
现代文：长久分离不相见，日夜牵挂在心。
English: Separated for a long time, they do not see each other, and they are concerned about each other day and night.

古文：兼制胜宣规，威效兼著，公私允称，义所钦嘉。
现代文：加上克敌制胜宣扬规范，声威成效都显著，公私称道，按道理应嘉奖。
English: Coupled with the standard of defeating the enemy and winning, the prestige and effectiveness are remarkable, commendable in public and private, and should be commended according to reason.

古文：虽凯旋有期，无申延属，可遣给事黄门侍郎郑道昭就彼祗劳。 
现代文：虽然不日就要胜利返回，仍无法表达思念，可派遣给事黄门侍郎郑道昭前去那裹恭敬慰劳。 
English: Although he would soon return victorious, he still could not express his thoughts. He could send Zheng Dao Zhao, the steward of the Yellow Gate, to pay his respects and condolences.

古文：徵勰还朝。
现代文：征召元勰回朝廷。
English: Yuan Xuan was summoned back to the imperial court.

古文：勰政崇宽裕，丝毫不犯，淮南士庶，追其余惠，至今思之。
现代文：元勰行政崇尚宽大，丝毫不侵犯，淮水以南的官吏民众，追述他留下的恩惠，至今思念他。
English: The Yuan Dynasty administration advocated leniency and did not infringe in the slightest. Officials and people south of Huai Shui, recounting the favors he left behind, still miss him.

古文：初，勰之定寿春也，获萧宝卷汝阴太守王果、豫州治中庾稷等数人，勰倾衿礼之，常参坐席。
现代文：起初，元勰平定寿春时，擒获萧实卷的汝阴太守王墨、逸业治中座捏等几人，亘垦诚挚地礼待他们，时常让他们参与同坐。
English: At the beginning, when Yuan Shun was celebrating his birthday, Ru Yin Taishou Wang Mo, Yingye Zhi Zhongzheng, and several others who had won the Xiao Si scroll, treated them with sincere courtesy and often let them participate in the same sitting.

古文：果承间进曰： 果等契阔生平，皓首播越，顾瞻西夕，余光几何。
现代文：王果利用闲暇进言说： 我们几人长期分离，白头流亡，回头瞻望西方的夕阳，剩下的光阴不多。
English: Wang Guo took advantage of his leisure time to say: Several of us have been separated for a long time, living in exile, looking back at the western sunset, and there is not much time left.

古文：今遭圣化，正应力兹愚老，申展尺寸，但在南百口，生死分张，乞还江外，以申德泽。 
现代文：现在遭遇圣人教化，正应尽自己的愚笨高龄，施展微小的才能，不过在南方家中百人，生死分离，乞求回到长江南，来展示魏厘的恩泽。 
English: Now that he has been enlightened by a sage, he should make the most of his foolish old age and exercise his tiny talent, but there are hundreds of people in his southern home, separated by life and death, begging him to return to the south of the Yangtze River to show Wei Li's grace.

古文：勰矜而许之。
现代文：互勰同情而答应了他们。
English: With mutual sympathy, they agreed.

古文：果又谢曰： 殿下赐处，有过国士。
现代文：王呈又感谢说： 殿下相待，超过国家杰出人才。
English: Wang Cheng also expressed his gratitude, saying, "Your Royal Highness's treatment of each other surpasses that of the country's outstanding talents.

古文：果等今还，仰负慈泽，请听仁驾振旅，反迹江外。 
现代文：我们几人现在返回，上受仁慈的恩德，请让我们期待您出兵，我们在长江南接应。 
English: A few of us are now returning. By the grace of God, please let us look forward to your dispatch of troops. We will meet you in the south of the Yangtze River.

古文：至此乃还。
现代文：到遣时王墨等人才返回。
English: So they all went back.

古文：其为远人所怀如此。
现代文：元勰就是这样地为远方人所思念。
English: That is how much he is missed by those far away.

古文：勰至京师，世宗临东堂引见，诏勰曰： 比凤皇未至，苍黎二化，故仰屈尊谟，绥怀边附。
现代文：亘勰到达京城，世塞前往塞堂接见，韶令元越说： 近来凤凰没到，为苍生黎民的教化，所以委屈尊贵的谋略，安抚怀柔边境归附者。
English: When Guan Yu arrived in Beijing and Shisei went to Shedang to meet him, Guan Ling Yuan Yue said: Recently, the phoenix has not arrived, for the enlightenment of the common people, so it is an unjustified noble strategy to appease the Huairou border adherents.

古文：而寇竖昏迷，敢斗淮楚。
现代文：然而敌寇昏乱迷惑，竟敢在淮楚地区交战。
English: However, the enemy raiders were confused and confused, and dared to fight in the Huaichu area.

古文：叔父英略高明，应机殄定，凯旋今辰，伏慰悲伫。 
现代文：叔父策略高明，随机消灭平定他们，在今日凯旋，足以慰藉悲伤的思念。 
English: Uncle's strategy is brilliant, randomly eliminate and pacify them, and today's triumphant return is enough to console the sad thoughts.

古文：勰谢曰： 臣忝充戎帅，抚安新故，而不能宣武导恩，威怀遐迩。
现代文：元勰道谢说： 臣下愧任主帅，安抚新旧归附的人，而不能宣扬军威导以恩德，以威风怀柔远近。
English: Yuan Xuan thanked him and said, "It is shameful for a subordinate to serve as commander-in-chief to appease the new and old adherents, but it is not acceptable to preach that the army should be guided by benevolence, and that it should be far-sighted and soft-hearted.

古文：致小竖伯之，驱率蚁徒，侵扰边堡。
现代文：以致小贼伯之，驱赶带领部众，侵犯边境城堡。
English: As a result, the petty thieves drove the leaders away and invaded the border castle.

古文：非唯仰惭天颜，实亦俯愧朝列。
现代文：不仅上惭陛下，实在也下愧朝官。
English: I am not only ashamed of Your Majesty, but I am also truly ashamed of the Imperial Court.

古文：春秋责帅，臣实当之。
现代文：《春秋》之中指责主帅，臣下实在相应。
English: In "Spring and Autumn," the head coach is blamed, and the subordinates are really corresponding.

古文：赖陛下慈深舍过，故使愚臣获免罪责。 
现代文：仰赖陛下仁慈深厚舍弃罪过，所以使愚臣得以免去罪责。 
English: Relying on His Majesty's benevolence and profound renunciation of sin, so that fools can be absolved of guilt.

古文：勰频表辞大司马、领司徒及所增邑，乞还中山。
现代文：元勰频繁上奏推辞大司马、兼任司徒和所增食邑，请求回到中山。
English: Yuan Xuan frequently petitioned to resign from the post of grand steward, concurrently serving as steward and mayor, and requested to return to Zhongshan.

古文：有诏不许。
现代文：诏令不准许。
English: The edict does not allow it.

古文：乃除录尚书、侍中，司徒如故。
现代文：随之授任元勰为录尚书、侍中，司徒照旧。
English: As a result, Motonari was appointed as a member of the Privy Council and a chamberlain, while Sito remained as before.

古文：固辞不免。
现代文：元勰坚决推辞而不能免职。
English: Yuan Xuan resolutely refused and could not be dismissed.

古文：勰雅好恬素，不以势利婴心。高祖重其事干，絷维不许。
现代文：元勰一向喜好恬静，不把权势利益放在，高祖看重他的办事能力，挽留他不同意。
English: Yuan Shao always liked tranquility and did not put power interests first. Gao Zu valued his ability to do things and did not agree to retain him.

古文：虽临崩遗诏，复世宗留连，每乖情愿，常凄然叹息。以诏旨殷勤，僶俛应命。
现代文：虽然逝世前留下遣诏，世宗又挽留，元勰每每违背心愿。他时常悲伤叹息，而因为诏书旨意殷切，就勉为其难接受任命。
English: Although he left an imperial edict before his death, and Shizong retained him, Yuan Xuan always went against his wishes. He was often sad and sighed, and because the imperial edict was eager, he reluctantly accepted the appointment.

古文：时咸阳王禧渐以骄矜，颇有不法。北海王详阴言于世宗，世宗深忌之。
现代文：当时咸阳王元禧逐渐骄傲自大，经常有违法行为，北海王元详暗中报告世宗，世宗很怨恨他。
English: At that time, King Yuan of Xianyang became increasingly arrogant and often committed illegal acts. King Yuan of the North Sea secretly reported to King Sejong in detail, and King Sejong resented him very much.

古文：又言勰大得人情，不宜久在宰辅，劝世宗遵高祖遗敕。
现代文：又说元勰很得人心，不适宜长久在宰辅职位上，劝说世宗遵循高祖的遣令。
English: He also said that Yuan Xuan was very popular and was not suitable to hold the position of deputy for a long time, and persuaded Shizong to follow Gao Zu's order.

古文：禧等又出领军于烈为恆州，非烈情愿，固强之，烈深以为忿。
现代文：元禧等人又调领军于烈外出任恒州刺史，这不是于烈所情愿的，互擅等人执意勉强他，于烈深为怨恨。
English: Yuanxi and others also sent Yu Lie to lead the army to go out to serve as a historian of Hengzhou. This was not what Yu Lie wanted, but others insisted on forcing him, and Yu Lie was deeply resentful.

古文：烈子忠尝在左右，密令忠言于世宗云： 诸王等意不可测，宜废之，早自览政。 
现代文：于烈的儿子于忠曾经在世宗的左右，于烈秘密地指使王盅报告世塞说： 诸王等人的想法不可预测，应该废黜他们，陛下早日自己处理政事。 
English: Yu Rong's son Yu Zhong was once at the side of the Sejong. Yu Rong secretly instructed Wang Yao to report to the Sejong saying, "The thoughts of kings and others are unpredictable. They should be deposed. Your Majesty should deal with political affairs on your own as soon as possible."

古文：时将礿祭，王公并斋于庙东坊。
现代文：造时将要祭祀，王公都在宗庙东面的房中斋戒。
English: At this time, preparations were being made for the Spring Feast of the Spoon, and the princes were all fasting in the East Courtyard of the Tai Temple.

古文：世宗遣于烈将宿卫壮士六十余人召禧、勰、详等，引入，见之于光极殿。
现代文：世宗派遣王型带领守卫宫廷的壮士六十多人召唤元遗、五越、亘谨等人，引进去，在光极殿见面。
English: King Sejong dispatched more than sixty strong men to guard the palace, led by the king's model, and summoned Yuan Zi, Wu Yue, Wang Ji, and others, and brought them in to meet at the Hall of Light.

古文：世宗谓勰曰： 顷来南北务殷，不容仰遂冲操。
现代文：世塞对元勰说： 近来南北事务繁多，不容满足您淡泊的情操。
English: Shisei said to Yuan Shao, "Recently, there have been many affairs between the north and the south, and it is impossible to satisfy your indifference.

古文：恪是何人，而敢久违先敕。
现代文：我是什么人，而敢长久违背先人遣令?
English: Who am I to defy the mandate of my ancestors for so long?

古文：今遂叔父高蹈之意。 
现代文：现在满足叔父隐居的意愿。 
English: From now on, I will fulfill my uncle's wish of practicing chastity.

古文：勰谢曰： 先帝不以臣虚薄，曲垂罔己之泽，出入绸缪，公私无舍。
现代文：元勰道谢说： 先帝不以臣下才能微薄，多方赐予无穷尽的恩泽，出入情意绵绵，公私事情不舍弃。
English: Yuan Xuan said with gratitude: The former emperor did not regard the talents of his subjects as meager. He bestowed endless favors on many people, and there were constant comings and goings. He did not give up public and private affairs.

古文：自陛下龙飞九五，屡求解落，既为宰辅所抑，亦不为陛下所许。
现代文：自从陛下登上皇位，臣下屡次请求免去职位，既为宰辅所压下，也不为陛下所许可。
English: Since His Majesty ascended to the throne, his subjects have repeatedly requested that he be relieved of his post, neither by pressure from the Vice-Admiral nor by His Majesty's permission.

古文：先岁夏中，重尘天听，时蒙优借，出为定州。
现代文：前年夏天，反复报告陛下，其时受到优待，外出任定州刺史。
English: In the summer of the previous year, he repeatedly reported to His Majesty, received preferential treatment at that time, and went to Dingzhou to make history.

古文：往年还洛阳，敕总戎淮肥，虽无功效，幸免罪戾。
现代文：去年回盗屋，命令臣下总领兵马到淮水肥水，虽然没有功绩成效，有幸免去罪过。
English: Last year, he ordered his vassal, the commander-in-chief, to go to Huai Shui Fei Shui to rob a house. Although there was no achievement, he was spared the crime.

古文：云归未几，复委臣以非据之任。
现代文：返回不久，又委任臣下不当据有的职任。
English: Soon after his return, he appointed vassals to positions that were not rightfully his.

古文：臣频烦干请，具简圣听。
现代文：臣下频繁请求，都报告陛下得知。
English: His Majesty has been informed of the frequent requests from his subjects.

古文：陛下孝深无改，仰遵先诏，上成睿明之美，下遂微臣之志，感惟今往，悲喜交深。 
现代文：陛下孝心深厚没有改变，遵循先帝诏令，在上成就圣明的美德，在下满足微臣的志向，感念今昔，悲喜交集。 
English: His Majesty's profound filial piety has not changed. He has followed the Emperor's edict, achieved the sacred virtue above, and satisfied the aspirations of the minor vassals below. He is full of nostalgia for the past and present, and is a mixture of joy and sorrow.

古文：乃诏曰： 王宿尚闲静，志捐世务，先帝爱亮之至，弗夺此情，遗敕炳然，许遂冲退。
现代文：世宗于是下诏说： 王往日崇尚清闲静寂，立志捐弃世间事务，先帝喜爱明察至极，不剥夺这一想法，遣令昭然，准许淡泊退避。
English: Sejong then issued the following edict: In the past, the king advocated peace and quiet, determined to give up worldly affairs, and the former emperor loved to see things clearly. He did not deprive him of this idea, and the order was clear, allowing him to retreat.

古文：雅操不移，朕亦未敢违夺。
现代文：王一向的情操不改变，我也不敢违背。
English: Wang's traditional sentiments will not change, and I dare not go against them.

古文：今乃释位归第，丘园是营。高尚之节，确尔贞固；《贲》、《履》之操，邈焉难追。
现代文：王现在就退位回到第宅，营建园圃，高尚的节操，确为坚贞牢固，《贲》、《履》的操守，遥远难以追回。
English: The king will now abdicate and return to the Second Mansion to build a garden. His noble self-restraint is indeed firm and solid, and the ethics of "sitting" and "walking" are far away and difficult to recover.

古文：而王宅初构，财力多阙，成立之期，岁月莫就。
现代文：而王的第宅刚建造，财力缺乏很多，建成的期限，一年半载不能够完成。
English: But the king's second house had just been built, and there was a great lack of financial resources. The deadline for completion was a year and a half, and it could not be completed.

古文：可量遣工役，分给材瓦，禀王所好，速令制办，务从简素，以称王心。 
现代文：可酌量派遣工匠差役，赐给材料砖瓦，依王所喜好，速令置办，务必做到简约朴素，以满足王的心意。 
English: He may dispatch craftsmen at his discretion, give materials such as bricks and tiles according to the king's preferences, and order them to be made quickly. They must be simple and plain to meet the king's wishes.

古文：勰因是作《蝇赋》以谕怀，恶谗构也。
现代文：元勰因此撰作《蝇赋》来表达感想，厌恶谗言诬陷。
English: Therefore, Yuan Xuan wrote "Fly Fu" to express his feelings, and he detested the slander.

古文：又以勰为太师，勰遂固辞。
现代文：世宗又任命元勰为太师，元勰便坚决推辞。
English: The Imperial Court also appointed Yuan Shao as Grand Master, but Yuan Shao refused to accept the appointment.

古文：诏曰： 盖二仪分象，君臣之位形焉；上下既位，唱和之义生焉。
现代文：韶书说： 天地分离，君臣的地位形成；上下地位既定，唱和的义理产生了。
English: The Analects says: Heaven and earth were separated, the status of monarchs and ministers was formed; the upper and lower statuses were established, and the principle of singing harmony arose.

古文：自古统天位主，曷常不赖明师，仗贤辅，而后燮和阴阳，彝伦民物者哉？
现代文：自古以来统领天下的君主，何尝不是依赖明师，靠着贤良的辅佐，然后调和阴阳，规范民众的呢?
English: The monarchs who have ruled the world since ancient times, why do they not rely on a wise teacher, rely on a wise assistant, and then reconcile the yin and yang and standardize the people?

古文：往而不返者，先民诚有之，斯所谓独善其身而乱大伦，山林之士耳。
现代文：隐居而不返回的，先民中确有这种人，造就是所谓的完善自身而扰乱纲常，山林之士而已。
English: Those who live in seclusion and do not return, there are indeed such people among the ancients. They are created by the so-called perfection of themselves and disturb the normal, they are just people of the mountains and forests.

古文：贤人君子则不然也。
现代文：贤人君子就不是这样。
English: That's not how a gentleman behaves.

古文：屈己以安民，艰身以济物，所谓以先知觉后知，同尘而与天下俱洁者也。
现代文：委屈自己来安定民众，艰苦自身来救济百姓，这是所谓的以先知者启发后知者，同受尘土而和天下一起清洁的人。
English: Those who aggrieved themselves to stabilize the people, those who worked hard to relieve the people, these are the so-called people who were inspired by the prophets and learned from them, and those who were affected by the dust and cleansed together with the world.

古文：朕猥以冲年，纂临宝历，实赖叔父匡济之功，诚宜永兼将相，以纲维内外。
现代文：我惭愧地以幼小年纪，继承大位，实在依赖叔父匡正救助的功劳，叔父的确应永久兼任将相，来维护内外秩序。
English: I am ashamed to have inherited the throne at such a young age, and I really rely on the merit of my uncle's help. My uncle should really serve as the commander-in-chief permanently to maintain internal and external order.

古文：但逼夺先旨，惮违冲挹，俯志割心，以遂高素。
现代文：衹是逼于改变先帝旨意，害怕违背叔父淡泊心愿，我抑制主张，来满足您的情怀。
English: Because I am forced to change the will of the former emperor, and I am afraid of going against the wishes of Uncle Tanpo, I restrain my opinion to satisfy your feelings.

古文：自比水旱乖和，阴阳失序，是以屈王论道，庶燮兹玉烛。
现代文：近来水旱不和顺，阴阳失调，所以委屈王出来评论治道，希望协和四季气候。
English: Recently, floods and droughts are not harmonious, yin and yang are out of balance, so the grievance king came out to comment on the governance, hoping to harmonize the four seasons.

古文：且师宰从容，无废清尚。
现代文：而且太师舒缓，不废弃清闲高尚。
English: Moreover, Taishi is soothing, not wasteful, leisurely and noble.

古文：故周旦复辟而居之，尚父期颐以终位。
现代文：所以周公旦再登位而居其职，尚父百岁而终其位。
English: Therefore, Zhou Gongtan ascended the throne again and held his post, while his father was 100 years old and ended his reign.

古文：王义兼家国，理绝独高，可遣侍中敦谕。 
现代文：王的大义兼具家族祖国，道理上当遣弃独自高尚，可派遣侍中敦促晓谕。 
English: The king's great righteousness is both the family and the motherland, and it should be abandoned on the principle of being noble alone. A chamberlain can be dispatched to urge the envoy.

古文：世宗又修家人书于勰曰： 恪言：奉还告承，犹执冲逊，恪实暗寡，政术多秕，匡弼之寄，仰属亲尊。
现代文：世宗又以家人身份写信给元勰说： 元恪谨述：使者奉命返回报告，叔父仍然坚持淡泊情怀，我实在昏昧少德行，施政方略多有错缪，匡正辅佐的寄托，仰赖尊贵的亲人。
English: In his capacity as a family member, Sejong also wrote a letter to Yuan Shao, saying, "Yuan Shao would like to state that: the envoy was ordered to return the report, my uncle still insists on being indifferent, I am really dim-witted and lacking in virtue, the policy-makers are more likely to make mistakes, I rely on Kuang Zheng's assistant, and I rely on my respected relatives.

古文：父德望兼重，师训所归，岂得近遗家国，远崇清尚也。
现代文：叔父德行声望都很高，师傅教导的责任归向于您，岂能近抛家族祖国，远崇清闲高尚呢?
English: Your uncle's virtue and conduct have a high reputation, and the responsibility of master teaching falls to you. Can you be close to the family and the motherland, and far away from the noble and noble?

古文：便愿纡降，时副倾注之心。 
现代文：希望屈尊前来，满足我全力关注的心意。 
English: I hope you will deign to come and meet my full attention.

古文：勰不得已而应命。
现代文：元勰不得已而接受任命。
English: Yuan Shao accepted the appointment as a last resort.

古文：世宗后频幸勰第。
现代文：世宗后来频繁前往元勰的第宅。
English: Later, Sejong frequently went to the second house of Yuan Shao.

古文：及京兆、广平暴虐不法，诏宿卫队主率羽林虎贲，幽守诸王于其第。
现代文：等到京兆王、广平王暴虐不守法度，诏令守卫宫廷的队主率领羽林虎贲，囚禁各王在他们的第宅中。
English: When King Jingzhao and King Guangping became violent and disobeyed the law, the emperor ordered the captain of the palace guard team to lead the Feather Forest Tiger Clan and imprison the kings in their mansions.

古文：勰上表切谏，世宗不纳。
现代文：元勰上奏疏恳切规劝，世宗不采纳。
English: At the enthronement of the Yuan Dynasty, Suo So earnestly exhorted, but the Sejong did not accept.

古文：勰既无山水之适，又绝知己之游，唯对妻子，郁郁不乐。
现代文：元勰既没有山水的登临，又失去知己的交游，仅面对妻子儿女，闷闷不乐。
English: Without mountains and rivers to visit, and having lost the companionship of his friends, Yuan Xuan was unhappy facing only his wife and children.

古文：议定律令，勰与高阳王雍、八座、朝士有才学者五日一集，参论轨制应否之宜。
现代文：商议决定律令，元勰和高阳王元雍、尚书省八座、有才学的朝廷官员五会集一次，参与讨论有关制度的合适与否。
English: The deliberation decided on the ritsuryo code, and the emperors of the Yuan and Goyang dynasties, the emperors of the Yuan and Goyang dynasties, the eight emperors of the Shang and Song dynasties, and the learned officials of the imperial court gathered once to participate in the discussion of the suitability of the relevant system.

古文：而勰夙侍高祖，兼聪达博闻，凡所裁决，时彦归仰。
现代文：而元勰从前侍奉高祖，并且聪明博闻，凡他所裁定的，当时英杰归向景仰。
English: However, Yuan Xuan had served Gao Zu in the past, and he was intelligent and well-informed. Whatever he decided, at that time, the hero was revered.

古文：加以美容貌，善风仪，端严若神，折旋合度，出入言笑，观者忘疲。
现代文：加上美好的容貌，有风度，端庄严肃如神明，判断调和合于法度，出进谈笑，看到的人忘记疲倦。
English: In addition, he is good-looking, personable, dignified and serious as a god, his judgment is in accordance with the law, he goes in and out to talk and laugh, and those who see him forget their tiredness.

古文：又加侍中。
现代文：又加授元勰为侍中。
English: The Imperial Court also appointed him as a member of the Imperial Household Agency.

古文：勰敦尚文史，物务之暇，披览不辍。
现代文：元勰喜爱文史，政事之余，读书不问断。
English: Yuan Xuan loved literature and history, and in addition to politics, he was an avid reader.

古文：撰自古帝王贤达至于魏世子孙，三十卷，名曰《要略》。
现代文：撰写自古以来的帝王贤人直到魏代子孙，共三十卷，书名叫《要略》。
English: Written by emperors and sages from ancient times to the descendants of the Wei Dynasty, a total of thirty volumes, the book is called "Outline."

古文：小心谨慎，初无过失，虽闲居宴处，亦无慢色惰容。
现代文：他小心谨慎，毫无过失，虽然闲居家中，也没有傲慢的神色和懈怠的面容。
English: He is cautious and careful, without fault, and although he is idle at home, he does not have a haughty look or a slack face.

古文：爱敬儒彦，倾心礼待。
现代文：尊敬儒士英杰，全心地以礼相待。
English: Respect Confucianist heroes, and treat each other with courtesy.

古文：清正俭素，门无私谒。
现代文：清廉正直节俭朴素，门庭没有私人的请托。
English: He is able to be honest and fair, and there has never been a visitor to the palace to ask for a favor for a private matter.

古文：性仁孝，言于朝廷，以其舅潘僧固为冀州乐陵太守。
现代文：元勰性格仁慈孝顺，禀报朝廷，任命他的舅舅潘僧固为冀州乐陵太守。
English: Geng Yao was kind and dutiful. He reported to the imperial court and appointed his uncle, Pan Sangu, as the chief abbot of Jizhou Le Mausoleum.

古文：京兆王愉构逆，僧固见逼从之。
现代文：京兆王元愉作乱，僧固受逼迫顺从他。
English: King Yuan Rong of Jingzhao made a disturbance, and the monk was forced to obey him.

古文：尚书令高肇性既凶愎，贼害贤俊。
现代文：尚书令高肇性格凶残刚愎，杀害贤明杰出人士。
English: Shang Shuling Gao Zhao had the character of a ferocious tyrant, killing wise and outstanding people.

古文：又肇之兄女，入为夫人。顺皇后崩，世宗欲以为后，勰固执以为不可。
现代文：另外高肇的哥哥的女儿，入宫为夫人，顺皇后逝世，世宗想立她为皇后，元勰坚持认为不可以。
English: In addition, the daughter of Gao Zhao's brother, entered the palace as his wife, Shun the queen died, Shizong wanted to make her the queen, and Yuan Xuan insisted that it was not possible.

古文：肇于是屡谮勰于世宗，世宗不纳。
现代文：高肇于是在世宗面前屡次诬陷元勰，世宗不听从。
English: Gao Zhao repeatedly slandered Yuan Shao in front of Shizong, but Shizong did not listen.

古文：因僧固之同愉逆，肇诬勰北与愉通，南招蛮贼。
现代文：因僧固附和元愉作乱，高肇诬蠛元勰北和元愉勾结，南面招集蛮人贼寇。
English: Due to the disturbance caused by the monk's attachment to Wanyuan Yu, Gao Zhaozhong falsely accused Wanyuan Yu of colluding with Wanyuan Yu in the north, and summoned barbarian bandits in the south.

古文：勰国郎中令魏偃、前防阁高祖珍希肇提携，构成共事。
现代文：元勰封国的郎中令魏偃、前防合高祖珍希望高肇提携自己，设计完成这件事。
English: Gao Zhao's vassals Wei Wei and Gao Zuzhen hoped that Gao Zhao would partner with them to complete the project.

古文：肇初令侍中元晖以奏世宗，晖不从，令左卫元珍言之。
现代文：高肇起初令侍中元晖奏报世宗，元晖不顺从，高肇令左卫元珍报告这件事。
English: At first, Gao Zhao ordered the attendant to report the matter to Yuan Shizong, but Yuan Shizong did not obey, and Gao Zhao ordered Zuo Yuanzhen to report the matter.

古文：世宗访之于晖，晖明勰无此。
现代文：世宗询问元晖，元晖说明元勰没有这事。
English: The Sejong asked Yuan Shao, and Yuan Shao explained that Yuan Shao did not do this.

古文：世宗更以问肇，肇以魏偃、祖珍为证，世宗乃信之。
现代文：世宗再就这事询问高肇，高肇以魏偃、祖珍为证人，世宗就相信了造件事。
English: Sejong then questioned Gao Zhao about the matter. Gao Zhao used Wei Wei and Zu Zhen as witnesses, and Sejong believed the fabrication.

古文：永平元年九月，召勰及高阳王雍、广阳王嘉、清河王怿、广平王怀及高肇等入。
现代文：永平元年九月，召唤元勰和高阳王元雍、广阳王元嘉、清河王元悍、广平王元怀和高肇等人入宫。
English: In September of the first year of Yongping, Yuan Shao and Goyang King Yuan Yong, Guangyang King Yuan Jia, Qinghe King Yuan Han, Guangping King Yuan Huai and Gao Zhao were summoned to the palace.

古文：时勰妃方产，勰乃固辞不赴。
现代文：造时元勰的妃子正分娩，元勰就坚决推辞不前去。
English: When Geng Yao's concubine was giving birth, Geng Yao resolutely refused to go.

古文：中使相继，不得已乃令命驾，意甚忧惧，与妃诀而登车。
现代文：宫中使者接连不断，不得已就命驾车，心中十分忧虑畏惧，和妃子诀别而登车。
English: Envoys from the Imperial Court kept arriving one after another. They had no choice but to drive to their deaths, their hearts full of worry and fear. They said goodbye to their concubines and boarded the car.

古文：入东掖门，度一小桥，牛不肯进，遂击之。
现代文：进入东掖门，过一个小桥，牛不肯前进，就抽打它，过了很久。
English: Entering the East Gate, across a small bridge, the cow did not want to go forward, so he whipped it, and it took a long time.

古文：良久，更有使者责勰来迟，乃令去牛，人挽而进，宴于禁中。
现代文：又有使者责备元勰来得晚，就下令去掉牛，用人拉进去，在宫中饮宴。
English: Another messenger reproached Yuan Shao for being late, so he ordered that the oxen be removed, and a servant was brought in to hold a banquet in the palace.

古文：至夜皆醉，各就别所消息。
现代文：到了夜晚都喝醉了，各自到另外的地方休息。
English: By the end of the night, they were all drunk, and each of them went to a different place to rest.

古文：俄而元珍将武士赍毒酒而至。
现代文：不久元珍带着武士送毒酒前来。
English: Before long, Yuan Zhen arrived with a samurai to deliver poisoned wine.

古文：勰曰： 吾忠于朝廷，何罪见杀！
现代文：元勰说： 我忠于朝廷，犯了什么罪遭杀害!
English: Yuan Zang said: I was loyal to the imperial court, what crime did I commit to be killed!

古文：一见至尊，死无恨也。 
现代文：见至尊一面，死也没有遣憾。 
English: As far as the Supreme Personality of Godhead is concerned, there is no regret in death.

古文：珍曰： 至尊何可复见！
现代文：元珍说： 至尊怎么能再见!
English: Yuan Zhen said, "Where can I still see the emperor!"

古文：王但饮酒。 
现代文：王仅饮酒而已。 
English: Wang only drank alcohol.

古文：勰曰： 至尊圣明，不应无事杀我，求与告我罪者一对曲直。 
现代文：元勰说： 至尊圣明，不应该无缘无故杀我，请求同告发我罪状的人当面分辩曲直。 
English: Yuan Zang said, "Supreme Sage, you should not kill me for no reason. I request you to have a face-to-face debate with my accusers.

古文：武士以刀镮筑勰二下。
现代文：武士用刀锾击打了元勰两下。
English: The samurai struck the yakitori twice with his sword.

古文：勰大言曰： 皇天！
现代文：元勰大声地说： 皇天!
English: Yuan Shao said loudly: "Emperor!

古文：忠而见杀。 
现代文：忠诚而被杀。 
English: He was killed for his loyalty.

古文：武士又以刀镮筑勰。
现代文：武士又用刀缳击打元勰。
English: The samurai then struck the former shogun with his sword.

古文：勰乃饮毒酒，武士就杀之。
现代文：元勰于是饮下毒酒，武士杀了他。
English: Genjo then drank the poisoned wine, and the samurai killed him.

古文：向晨，以褥裹尸，舆从屏门而出，载尸归第，云王因饮而薨。
现代文：到了早晨，用被褥裹尸体，装在车上从小门出来，载着尸体回到第宅，说是王因饮酒而逝世。
English: In the morning, they came out of the small door with the body wrapped in a blanket and loaded onto a car, and returned to the first house with the body, saying that Wang died from drinking.

古文：勰妃李氏，司空冲之女也，号哭大言曰： 高肇枉理杀人，天道有灵，汝还当恶死。 
现代文：元勰的妃子李氏，是司空李冲的女儿，号啕大哭说： 高肇冤枉杀人，天道有灵验，你不久将不得好死。 
English: Ms. Li, the concubine of Geng Yao and the daughter of Sikuo Li Chong, cried loudly and said: Gao Zhao killed unjustly. Heaven's way is effective. You will soon die a painful death.

古文：及肇以罪见杀，论者知有报应焉。
现代文：等到高肇因罪被杀，议论的人知道是有报应的。
English: By the time Gao Zhao was killed for his crime, the commentators knew that there would be retribution.

古文：世宗为举哀于东堂，给东园第一秘器、朝服一袭、赙钱八十万、布二千匹、蜡五百斤，大鸿胪护丧事。
现代文：世宗在束堂为元勰发布丧事，赐给棺材、礼服一套、赠钱八十万、布二千匹、蜡五百斤，由大鸿胪料理丧事。
English: The Sejong issued a funeral notice for Geng Yao at Sokudo. He gave him a coffin, a set of ceremonial robes, 800,000 yuan in cash, 2,000 pieces of cloth, and 500 jin of wax. Da Hong Yao prepared the funeral meal.

古文：勰既有大功于国，无罪见害，百姓冤之。
现代文：元勰对国家有大功绩，无罪被杀害，百姓为他感到冤枉。
English: Yuan Xuan had great achievements for the country. He was killed without guilt, and the people felt that he had been wronged.

古文：行路士女，流涕而言曰： 高令公枉杀如此贤王！ 
现代文：道路上行走的男女，流着眼泪说： 高令公竟冤枉杀死如此贤明的亲王! 
English: Men and women walking on the road shed tears and say: "How dare the high command unjustly kill such a wise prince!"

古文：在朝贵贱，莫不丧气。
现代文：朝中无论地位高低的官员，无不垂头丧气。
English: All officials in the DPRK, regardless of their high or low status, were crestfallen.

古文：追崇假黄钺、使持节、都督中外诸军事，司徒公、侍中、太师，王如故。
现代文：追崇元勰为假黄铀、使持节、都督中外诸军事，司徒公、侍中、太师、王爵照旧。
English: The pursuit of reverence for Yuan Shao is a false yellow uranium, envoys holding festivals, military governors in and out of the capital, as well as the prince, chamberlains, grand masters, and princes.

古文：给銮辂九旒、虎贲班剑百人、前后部羽葆鼓吹、辒辌车。
现代文：赐给天子的车辆旌旗、虎贲带剑兵士一百人、前后部仪仗鼓吹、丧车。
English: The chariot bearing a banner and a hundred soldiers with swords and vise-grips, front and rear, was given to the heavenly son.

古文：有司奏太常卿刘芳议勰谥曰： 王挺德弱龄，诞资至孝，睿性过人，学不师授。
现代文：有关官员上奏太常卿刘芳议论元勰的谧号说： 王自幼德行优异，天资纯孝，聪明过人，求学不必老师教授。
English: The relevant officials spoke to Liu Fang, the Permanent Secretary of the Supreme People's Procuratorate, about the nickname of Yuan Shao, saying: Wang has been excellent in virtue since childhood, his talent is pure filial piety, he is clever, and he does not need a teacher to study.

古文：卓尔之操，发自天然；不群之美，幼而独出。
现代文：杰出的操行，出自于本性；不同一般的美德，自幼而突出。
English: Outstanding performance comes from nature; different from the general virtues, outstanding from childhood.

古文：及入参政务，纶纟孛有光；爰登中铉，敷明五教。
现代文：等到入宫参与政事，制令有光彩；到了宰辅地位，宣扬五种伦理道德。
English: When he entered the palace and participated in government affairs, he was brilliant at making orders; when he reached the position of vice-premier, he preached the five kinds of ethics.

古文：汉北告危，皇赫问罪，王内亲药膳，外总六师。
现代文：汉塞北告急，皇帝兴师问罪，王在内侍奉医药膳食，在外总领六军。
English: Han Xie Bei was alarmed, Emperor Xing asked for punishment, Wang served medicine and meals at home, and led six armies abroad.

古文：及宫车晏驾，上下哀惨。
现代文：等到皇帝逝世，上下哀伤惨痛。
English: When the emperor died, there was a great outpouring of grief.

古文：奋猛衔戚，英略潜通，翼卫灵舆，整戎振旆。
现代文：王奋发勇猛收敛悲恸，英明的谋略隐秘施行，保卫灵车，整顿车队返回。
English: Wang made great efforts to avert the tragedy, secretly implemented a wise strategy, protected the hearse, and rectified the return of the motorcade.

古文：历次宛谢，迄于鲁阳，送往奉居，无惭周霍。禀遗作辅，远至迩安。
现代文：途经宛谢地区，到达垦肠，送别死者拥戴在世的人，不惭愧于周公霆光，禀承遣令做宰辅，远方归附近处安宁。
English: Passing through the Wanxie area, arriving at Jinsi, seeing off the dead and embracing the living, not ashamed of Zhou Gongtongguang, inheriting the order to be the deputy, and returning to the vicinity from afar.

古文：分陕恆方，流咏燕赵；廓靖江西，威慑南越。
现代文：出镇陆地、垣山地区，赞颂传遍憋赵；肃清长江以西，声威震慑南越一带。
English: Out of the town on land and in the mountainous areas, the praise spread all over Shizhao; in the west of the Yangtze River, the area around South Vietnam was shocked.

古文：入厘百揆，庶绩咸熙。履勤不惮，在功愈挹。
现代文：入京总领百官，各种事务都兴办起来，勤劳不怕难，有功更谦逊。
English: There are hundreds of officials who have entered Beijing, and all kinds of affairs have been set up. They are not afraid of hard work, and they are more humble when they have merit.

古文：温恭恺悌，忠雅宽仁，兴居有度，善终笃始。
现代文：温顺恭敬和乐简易，忠诚儒雅宽厚仁慈，举止有法度，善始又善终。
English: Meekness, respect, harmony, simplicity, loyalty, gentleness, generosity, benevolence, proper manners, a good beginning and a good ending.

古文：高尚厥心，功成身退。
现代文：心怀高尚，大功告成而身退。
English: With a noble heart, he retired after achieving great success.

古文：义亮圣衷，美光世典。
现代文：道义启迪圣上心胸，美德光大世间典章。
English: Morality enlightens the sacred heart, virtue enlightens the great world.

古文：依谥法，保大定功曰 武 ，善问周达曰 宣 。谥曰 武宣王 。 
现代文：依照谧法，保卫君主平定天下称为 武 ，善于询问周到通达称为 宣，请定谧号为武宣王。 
English: According to the law, the person who protects the monarch and pacifies the world is called Wu, and the person who is good at inquiring and thoughtful is called Xuan. Please set the nickname as King Wu Xuan.

古文：及庄帝即位，追号文穆皇帝，妃李氏为文穆皇后，迁神主于太庙。称肃祖。
现代文：等到庄帝即位，追尊为文穆皇帝，妃子李氏为文穆皇后，迁移牌位到太庙，庙号为肃祖。
English: By the time Emperor Zhuang ascended the throne, Duanxun was crowned the Emperor of Wenmu, his wife Li was crowned Empress of Wenmu, the tablets were moved to the Grand Temple, and the temple name was Suzu.

古文：语在《临淮王彧传》。
现代文：记载在《临淮王或传》。
English: Recorded in "Lin Huai Wang or Biography."

古文：前废帝时，去其神主。
现代文：前废帝时，迁走牌位。
English: When the former emperor was dethroned, the ranks were moved.

古文：嫡子劭，字子讷，袭封。
现代文：嫡子元劭，字子讷，继承封爵。
English: Motonari's legitimate son, Motonari, nicknamed Zina, inherited the title of nobility.

古文：善武艺，少有气节。
现代文：通晓武艺，年轻时有气节。
English: He is familiar with martial arts and had a temper when he was young.

古文：肃宗初，萧衍遣将犯边，劭上表曰： 伪竖游魂，窥觎边境，劳兵兼时，日有千金之费。
现代文：肃宗初年，萧衍派遣将领侵犯边境，元劭上奏疏说： 僭越的小人魂魄游动，窥伺边境，辛劳兵士几个月，每天有上千两黄金的耗费。
English: In the first year of Su Zong's reign, Xiao Yan dispatched generals to violate the border, and Yuan Xuan said to Song Zuo: "The souls of the villains of Su Yue are swimming, spying on the border. The soldiers have been working hard for several months, spending more than a thousand taels of gold every day.

古文：臣仰籍先资，绍飨厚秩，思以埃尘，用裨山海。
现代文：臣下上凭先人资历，继承丰厚的秩俸，思量以微小的奉献，来补助山海般的开支。
English: The vassals rely on the seniority of their predecessors, inherit rich salaries, and think of small contributions to subsidize mountain-like expenses.

古文：臣国封徐州，去军差近，谨奉粟九千斛、绢六百匹、国吏二百人，以充军用。 
现代文：臣下的封国在徐州，离军队很近，谨献粟九千斛、绢六百匹、国中吏士二百人，来充当军中用度。 
English: The vassal's fiefdom is in Xuzhou, very close to the army. I would like to offer 9,000 millet, 600 yakitori, and 200 middle-ranking officials to serve as middle-ranking officials.

古文：灵太后嘉其至意，而不许之。
现代文：灵太后赞许他的纯正心意，而不准许。
English: The Reverend Mother praised his pure intentions, but did not allow him to do so.

古文：起家宗正少卿。
现代文：出仕为宗正少卿。
English: Muneyoshi Shokei was appointed to the post.

古文：又除使持节、假散骑常侍、平东将军、青州刺史。
现代文：又授任他为使持节、代理散骑常侍、平东将军、青少 史。
English: He was also appointed as the envoy of the festival, the acting horseback riding attendant, the general of Pingdong, and the youth history.

古文：于时，齐州民刘均、房顷等，扇动三齐。
现代文：这时，齐州平民刘均、房顷等人，煽动三齐地区民众。
English: At this time, Liu Jun, Fang He and other civilians from Qizhou incited the people in the Sanqi area.

古文：萧衍遣将彭群、王辩等搔扰边陲，劭频有防拒之效。
现代文：萧衍派遣将领彭群、王跶等人骚扰边境，元劭接连有防守抵御的成效。
English: Xiao Yan dispatched generals Peng Qun, Wang Hui and others to harass the border, and Yuan Hui successively had the effect of defensive resistance.

古文：孝昌末，灵太后失德，四方纷扰，劭遂有异志。
现代文：芝昌末年，灵太后失去德行，四方动乱，元劭于是有二心。
English: At the end of Xiaochang's life, Lingtao lost the hearts of the people, and the four sides were in chaos. Therefore, Yuan Xuan had a different heart.

古文：为安丰王延明所启，乃徵入为御史中尉。
现代文：被安丰王延明所荐举，于是征召入京任御史中尉。
English: He was recommended for promotion by Anfeng Wang Yanming, and was then conscripted to Beijing as a lieutenant of the imperial historian.

古文：庄帝即位，尊为无上王。
现代文：庄帝即位，尊元劭为无上王。
English: Emperor Zhuang ascended the throne and was given the title "Supreme King."

古文：寻遇害河阴。
现代文：不久在过阴遇害。
English: He was killed soon after in Heyin.

古文：追谥曰孝宣皇帝，妻李氏为文恭皇后。
现代文：追谧他为孝宣皇帝，妻子李氏为文恭皇后。
English: Chouyi was Emperor Xiaoxuan, and his wife, Li, was Empress Wenqong.

古文：有二子。
现代文：有两个儿子。
English: They have two sons.

古文：韶字世胄，袭，武定末，司州牧。
现代文：元超字世宜，继承爵位。亘迈末年，担任塱蛆牧。
English: Yuan Zhaozhi Shiyi, inherited the peerage. In his later years, he served as the chief of the herdsmen.

古文：齐受禅，爵例降。
现代文：变埋接受禅让，爵位依例降低。
English: If all accept Zen, the crown will fall as usual.

古文：韶弟袭，字世绍。
现代文：元超的弟弟元垄，字世钮。
English: Yuanchao's younger brother, Yuan Reng, was nicknamed Shizenng.

古文：武定初，封武安王，邑一千户。
现代文：亘迈初年，被封为武安干，食邑一千户。
English: In the first year of its existence, it was given the title of Wu'an Gan and served 1,000 households.

古文：武定末，中书侍郎。
现代文：武定末年，任中书侍郎。
English: In the last years of the reign of Emperor Wuding, he served as a secretary.

古文：齐受禅，爵例降。
现代文：变厘接受惮让，爵位依例降低。
English: If all accept Zen, the crown will fall as usual.

古文：劭兄子直，字方言。
现代文：互助的哥哥王直，字左直。
English: Wang Zhi, the elder brother of mutual aid, is called Zuo Zhi.

古文：少知名，为清河文献王所赏爱。
现代文：年轻时出名，被清河文献王所赏识喜爱。
English: He became famous at a young age and was appreciated and loved by the Qinghe Literature King.

古文：起家除散骑侍郎，转中书侍郎。
现代文：出仕任散骑侍郎，改任中书侍郎。
English: He was assigned to the post of Sanki-sadaira and later to the post of Chusho-sadaira.

古文：后除通直散骑常侍，迁给事黄门侍郎。
现代文：后来授任通直散骑常侍，升给事黄门侍郎。
English: Later, he was awarded the position of Tsuchizuchika Sanzhirai no Tsuneishi, and was promoted to the position of Shimonimon no Samurai.

古文：灵太后诏曰： 故太师、彭城武宣王道隆德盛，功高微管，协契先朝，导扬末命。
现代文：灵太后下诏说： 已故太师、彭城武宣王道德隆盛，功勋卓著，协调先朝，开启后代命运。
English: The Empress Dowager Ling issued an edict saying, "The late Grand Master, King Pengcheng Wuxuan, was a man of great moral stature and distinguished service. He coordinated the previous dynasty and opened up the destiny of future generations.

古文：扶疴济难，效汉北之诚；送往奉居，尽鲁南之节。
现代文：抱病救难，报效莲丞以北的忠诚；送别死者侍奉生者，竭尽叠肠以南的节操。
English: Embracing illness and rescuing the distressed, repaying the loyalty of the north to the north; seeing off the dead to serve the living, making every effort to save the south of the intestine.

古文：宗社赖之以安，皇基由之永固。
现代文：宗庙依赖他而安宁，皇室基业因为他而永久牢固。
English: The ancestral temple relies on him for peace, and the imperial family foundation is permanently solid because of him.

古文：而谦光守约，屡捴增邑之赏；辞多受少，终保初锡之封。
现代文：而他谦逊持守简约，屡次抑制增加食邑的赏赐；推辞多接受少，终归保持初封的户邑。
English: But he humbly adhered to simplicity, repeatedly restraining from increasing the reward of food and wine; he accepted more rejections than not, and finally kept the first seal.

古文：非所谓追旧报恩、念勋酬德者也。
现代文：这不是追念旧日报答恩情、思念功勋酬谢德行的做法。
English: This is not the practice of recalling the old daily to return favors, to think about the merits and to thank the virtuous deeds.

古文：可以前后所封户，别封三子为县公，食邑各一千户，庶以少慰仁魂，微申朝典。 
现代文：可以前后所封户邑，另外封三个儿子为县公，食邑各为一千户，希望以此略微慰藉仁厚的灵魂，些许申述朝廷典章。 
English: It is possible to seal the fiefdoms consecutively, and to seal three sons as prefectural governors, with each fiefdom having a thousand households. I hope that this will be a small consolation to the benevolent souls, and a little explanation of the imperial edicts.

古文：子直封真定县开国公。
现代文：子直被封为真定县开国公。
English: Zizhi Zizhi was appointed as the founding father of Jinding County.

古文：出为冠军将军、梁州刺史。未几遇患，优游南郑，无他政绩。
现代文：外出任冠军将军、梁州刺史不久患病，在南郑悠闲自得，没有其他政绩。
English: As the champion general, Liang Zhou Jishi soon fell ill, and spent his time in leisurely self-indulgence in Nan Zheng, with no other achievements.

古文：徵还京师，病卒。
现代文：征召回京城，病死。
English: He was called back to Kyoto and died of illness.

古文：赠散骑常侍、安南将军、都官尚书、冀州刺史。
现代文：追赠他为散骑常侍、安南将军、都官尚书、冀州刺史。
English: He was posthumously awarded the titles of strolling equerry, general of Annan, official of the capital, and historian of Jizhou.

古文：孝庄践阼，追封陈留王，邑二千户，赠假黄钺、太师、大司马、太尉，加前后部羽葆鼓吹。
现代文：孝庄帝即位，追封他为陈留王，食邑二千户，追赠假黄铁、太师、大司马、太尉，加授前后部仪仗鼓吹。
English: Emperor Xiaozhuang ascended to the throne, and he was posthumously named Chen Liu Wang, with food for two thousand households, posthumously awarded the title of Huang Tie, Grand Master, Grand Steward, and Second Lieutenant, and awarded the title of Front and Rear Ceremonial Drummer.

古文：子宽，字思猛，袭王爵。
现代文：儿子元宽，字思猛，继承王爵。
English: His son, Yuan Kuan, surnamed Simeng, succeeded to the title of prince.

古文：除散骑常侍、平南将军。
现代文：授任散骑常侍、平南将军。
English: He was appointed as a samurai and general of the South Korean army.

古文：寻除侍中、抚军将军。
现代文：不久授任侍中、抚军将军。
English: He was soon promoted to Samurai Middle Rank and General of the Armies.

古文：永安三年，尔朱兆害之于晋阳。
现代文：永安三年，尔朱兆在晋阳杀害他。
English: In the third year of Yongan, Er Zhu Zhao killed him in Jinyang.

古文：无后，国除。
现代文：没有后代，封国削除。
English: If there are no descendants, the fiefdom is deleted.

古文：出帝初，追赠使持节、散骑常侍、都督青齐济三州诸军事、卫大将军、青州刺史，重赠司徒公。
现代文：出帝初年，追赠他为使持节、散骑常侍、都督青齐济三州诸军事、卫大将军、青州刺史，再赠司徒公。
English: In the first year after his accession to the throne, he was posthumously given the titles of the Emissary of the Emperor, the Knight of the Horse, the Military Governor of the Three Provinces, the General of the Guards, and the Historian of the State of Qingdao, and he was also given the title of the Prince of the Three Provinces.

古文：弟刚，字金明，庄帝初，封浮阳王，邑千户。
现代文：弟弟元刚，字金明。庄帝初年，封为浮阳王，食邑一千户。
English: His younger brother, Yuan Gang, was called Jinming. In the first year of Emperor Zhuang, he was given the title of "Floating Sun King" and became the ruler of a thousand households.

古文：武定末，宗正少卿。
现代文：武定末年，任宗正少卿。
English: In the last years of Wuding's life, he was appointed as Zongzheng Shaoqing.

古文：齐受禅，爵例降。
现代文：齐国接受禅让，爵位依例降低。
English: If all accept Zen, the crown will fall as usual.

古文：刚弟质，庄帝初，林虑王，邑千户。
现代文：元刚的弟弟元质，庄帝初年，封为林虑王，食邑一千户。
English: Yuan Gang's younger brother, Yuan Quan, in the first year of Emperor Zhuang, was given the title of Lin Xian Wang (林虑王), and had a thousand households.

古文：永安三年薨。
现代文：永安三年逝世。
English: Yongan passed away three years later.

古文：出帝时，赠车骑大将军、左光禄大夫、仪同三司。
现代文：出帝时，追赠他为车骑大将军、左光禄大夫、仪同三司。
English: At the time of his abdication, he was posthumously awarded the titles of General of Chariot and Cavalry, Doctor of the Left Hand, and Third Secretary of the Ministry of Ceremonies.

古文：劭弟子正，美貌，性宽和。
现代文：元劭的弟弟子正，容貌美好，性格宽厚和顺。
English: Geng Yao's younger brother, Disciple Zheng, is good-looking and has a kind and gentle personality.

古文：肃宗初，封霸城县公，邑一千户。
现代文：肃宗初年，封为霸城县公，食邑一千户。
English: In the first year of Su Zong's reign, he was appointed as the magistrate of Ba Cheng County, with a thousand households in the food village.

古文：历散骑侍郎、太常少卿。
现代文：历任散骑侍郎、太常少卿。
English: Successive Sanki-jirō and Taizō-shōkyō.

古文：庄帝即位，除尚书令，封始平王。
现代文：庄帝即位，授任他为尚书令，封始平王。
English: Emperor Zhuang ascended the throne and appointed him as Shang Shuling (尚書令), the first emperor of the Heian period.

古文：与兄劭俱遇害。
现代文：和哥哥元劭一起被杀害。
English: He was killed together with his brother, Geng Yao.

古文：赠假黄钺、侍中、都督中外诸军事、大将军、录尚书事，相、王如故，鸾辂九旒、黄屋左纛、前后部羽葆鼓吹、虎贲班剑一百人，谥曰贞。
现代文：追赠假黄铍、侍中、都督中外诸军事、大将军、录尚书事、相，王爵照旧，赐给皇帝车辆旌旗、车盖装饰、前后部仪仗鼓吹、虎贲带剑卫士一百人，谧号为贞。
English: As before, the king and the emperors presented the emperor with a vehicle with a banner, car cover decoration, front and rear ceremonial propaganda, and a hundred guards with swords and a tiger's beak, whose nickname was Zhen.

古文：子钦，字世道，袭。
现代文：儿子元钦，字世道，继承爵位。
English: His son Yuan Qin, surnamed Shidao, succeeded to the title.

古文：武定中，散骑侍郎。
现代文：武定年间，任散骑侍郎。
English: During the reign of Emperor Wujing, he served as a samurai.

古文：齐受禅，爵例降。
现代文：齐国接受禅让，爵位依例降低。
English: If all accept Zen, the crown will fall as usual.

古文：史臣曰：武宣王孝以为质，忠而树行，文谋武略，自得怀抱，绸缪太和之世，岂徒然哉！
现代文：史臣日：武宣王以孝顺为本质，忠诚建树德行，文韬武略，自得于心中，协调于塞勉年间，哪是偶然的呢!
English: Shishen Day: King Wu Xuan took filial piety as the essence, loyalty to build a virtuous line, wit and tact, self-satisfaction in the heart, and coordination in the year of Saemian, what a coincidence!

古文：至夫在安处危之操，送往事居之节，周旦匪他之义，霍光异姓之诚，事兼之矣。
现代文：至于居处安危时的操守，送别死者侍奉生者的气节，旦公旦无二心的道义，星光异姓的诚意，事情兼而有之。
English: As for the ethics of living in a safe place when in danger, the spirit of seeing off the dead and serving the living, the public-spirited morality, the sincerity of the stars, and so on.

古文：功高震主，德隆动俗，间言一入，卒不全志。
现代文：功劳大震撼君主，德行盛骇动世俗，谗言一献上，最终不能保全志向。
English: Great merit shakes the monarch, great virtue shakes the world, and no amount of words can save one's aspirations.

古文：乌呼！
现代文：唉!
English: Alas!

古文：周成、汉昭亦未易遇也。
现代文：周成王、汉昭帝那样的君主也不容易遇到啊。
English: It's not easy to meet a monarch like Zhou Cheng Wang or Han Zhao Di.

