古文：智术之子，博雅之人，藻溢于辞，辩盈乎气。苑囿文情，故日新殊致。
现代文：聪明才智、博学高雅的人，他们的言辞富有文采，他们的气质充满着才华，所以在写作上赋采抒情，能不断取得各种不同的新成就。
English: Intelligent, erudite and elegant people, their words are full of poetry, their temperament is full of talent, so they are lyrical in writing and can constantly achieve various new achievements.

古文：宋玉含才，颇亦负俗，始造对问，以申其志，放怀寥廓，气实使文。
现代文：楚国宋玉才高，颇为一般人所不理解，首先写作了《对楚王问》，用以表白他的高志；舒展其胸怀于辽阔的太空，正是凭着气质来支配文辞。
English: Song Yucai of the State of Chu was highly talented, which is quite incomprehensible to the general public. He first wrote "Questions to the King of Chu" to demonstrate his high aspirations; stretching his mind into the vastness of space, it was by temperament that he dominated literature.

古文：及枚乘攡艳，首制《七发》，腴辞云构，夸丽风骇。
现代文：到汉初枚乘进行艳丽的描写，开始创作了《七发》，丰富的文采，如彩云结成，华丽的描写，像和风四起。
English: At the beginning of the Han Dynasty, he began to make vivid descriptions, and began to create "Seven Hair," a rich literature, such as the formation of colorful clouds, gorgeous descriptions, like the four winds.

古文：盖七窍所发，发乎嗜欲，始邪末正，所以戒膏粱之子也。
现代文：人的眼耳口鼻所引起的，是各种各样的嗜欲；《七发》开始讲不正当的嗜欲，最后讲正当的愿望，是为了用以告戒贵族子弟。
English: The eyes, ears, mouth, and nose of man give rise to all kinds of desires. "The Seven-Fingered One" began to talk about illegitimate desires, and finally about legitimate desires, in order to use them to admonish the sons of nobles.

古文：扬雄覃思文阁，业深综述，碎文琐语，肇为《连珠》，其辞虽小而明润矣。
现代文：曾经在天禄阁进行深入思考的扬雄，擅长于深刻的著述；他用一些短小零碎的文辞，最早写了《连珠》，这种作品虽较短小，却具有明快润泽的特点。
English: Yang Xiong, who used to think deeply at Tianlu Ge, is good at profound writing; he first wrote "Renju" with some short and fragmentary words. Although this work is relatively short, it has the characteristics of bright and smooth.

古文：凡此三者，文章之枝派，暇豫之末造也。
现代文：以上三种文体，是文章的支流，闲暇时用以为娱的次要作品。
English: The above three styles are tributaries of the article, and are secondary works to be used for entertainment during leisure time.

古文：自《对问》以后，东方朔效而广之，名为《客难》，托古慰志，疏而有辨。
现代文：从宋玉写了《对问》以后，西汉东方朔仿效写作并加以扩大，写成了叫做《答客难》的作品；借托古人来安慰自己的情志，虽然写得粗疏，对自己的思想却有较好的辨析。
English: After Song Yu wrote "Interrogation," the Western Han Dynasty and the Eastern Shuo copied the writing and expanded it into a work called "Difficulty in Answering Customers"; by relying on the ancients to comfort their own sentiments, although written roughly, they have a better analysis of their own thoughts.

古文：扬雄《解嘲》，杂以谐谑，回环自释，颇亦为工。
现代文：扬雄所写《解嘲》，其中夹杂一些诙谐嬉笑的话，为自己反复辩解，写得也还不错。
English: Yang Xiong's "De-mockery," which contains some witty and playful words, repeatedly defends itself, and is also well written.

古文：班固《宾戏》，含懿采之华；崔骃《达旨》，吐典言之裁；张衡《应间》，密而兼雅；崔寔《答讥》，整而微质；蔡邕《释诲》，体奥而文炳；景纯《客傲》，情见而采蔚：虽迭相祖述，然属篇之高者也。
现代文：东汉班固的《答宾戏》，具有美好的文采；崔骃的《达旨》，表达了符合常道的体制；张衡的《应间》，写得严密而雅正；崔寔的《答讥》，写得较为齐整却略微质朴；蔡邕的《释诲》，内容深刻而文辞明亮；东晋郭璞的《客傲》，情志鲜明而文采丰富：以上各家虽是相互摹仿，但都是这方面写得较好的作者。
English: Eastern Han Dynasty Banggu's "Answering the Guests" has a beautiful literary style; Cui Zhuang's "Reaching the Goal" expresses a system that conforms to the common way; Zhang Heng's "Answering the Call" is written strictly and elegantly; Cui Zhuang's "Answering the Joke" is written more neatly but slightly rustic; Cai Zhuang's "Explanation" is profound in content and bright in words; Eastern Jin Dynasty Guo Zhuang's "Guest Pride" is sentimental and rich in literary style: although the above-mentioned families imitate each other, they are all authors who write

古文：至于陈思《客问》，辞高而理疏；庾敳《客咨》，意荣而文悴。
现代文：此外如陈思的《问客》，文辞不错而内容疏略；庾骃的《客咨》，内容较强而文辞太弱。
English: In addition, such as Chen Si's "Asking Guests," the wording is good but the content is sketchy; Zou's "Guest Report," the content is strong but the wording is too weak.

古文：斯类甚众，无所取才矣。
现代文：像这样的作品还很多，已没有什么可取的成就了。
English: There are many more works like this, and there are no more achievements to be proud of.

古文：原夫兹文之设，乃发愤以表志。
现代文：本来这种文体的创立，是为了抒发内心的烦闷，从而表达作者的情志。
English: Originally, this style was created in order to express the inner boredom, thus expressing the author's sentiments.

古文：身挫凭乎道胜，时屯寄于情泰，莫不渊岳其心，麟凤其采，此立体之大要也。
现代文：无论是在作者不顺利时借以表现其高尚的道德，或是在困难时寄寓其泰然的心情，都要有高深的思想，奇特的文采，这就是这种文体的主要写作特点。
English: Whether the author uses it to show his high morals when things are not going well, or to convey his calm mood when things are difficult, he must have a profound thought and a unique style of writing. This is the main writing characteristic of this style.

古文：自《七发》以下，作者继踵，观枚氏首唱，信独拔而伟丽矣。
现代文：从枚乘写了《七发》以后，这种文体的作者继续不断。枚乘首先写的《七发》，看来真是超群出众、十分壮丽了。
English: The authors of this style have continued since Hachijo wrote "Shichifaru." "Shichifaru," first written by Hachijo, seems to be truly outstanding and magnificent.

古文：及傅毅《七激》，会清要之工；崔骃《七依》，入博雅之巧；张衡《七辨》，结采绵靡；崔瑗《七厉》，植义纯正；陈思《七启》，取美于宏壮；仲宣《七释》，致辨于事理。
现代文：到东汉傅毅的《七激》，会聚了明白而简要的优点；崔骃的《七依》，写成广博而雅正的妙文；张衡的《七辩》，文采柔和而细致；崔瑗的《七苏》，立义纯正；曹植的《七启》，在宏伟壮丽上取胜；王粲的《七释》，致力于对事理的辨析。
English: To the Eastern Han Dynasty, Fu Yi's "Seven Stirring Words" brought together clear and concise advantages; Cui Xi's "Seven Adhering Words" was written into a broad and elegant poem; Zhang Heng's "Seven Arguments" was written in a soft and detailed style; Cui Xi's "Seven Su" was written in a pure style; Cao Zhi's "Seven Enlightening Words" was written in a grand and magnificent style; and Wang Xi's "Seven Explanations" was dedicated to the analysis of facts.

古文：自桓麟《七说》以下，左思《七讽》以上，枝附影从，十有馀家。
现代文：从汉末桓麟写《七说》以后，到西晋左思的《七讽》之前，其间摹仿学习写过这种文体的，还有十多家。
English: From the end of the Han Dynasty, after Huanlin wrote "Seven Sayings," to the Western Jin Dynasty, before Zuo Si's "Seven Ironies," there were more than ten people who imitated and studied this style.

古文：或文丽而义暌，或理粹而辞驳。
现代文：他们的作品，有的文辞华丽而内容不正确，有的内容精粹，却又文辞杂乱。
English: Their works, some of the words are gorgeous and the content is incorrect, some of the content is pure, but the words are messy.

古文：观其大抵所归，莫不高谈宫馆，壮语畋猎。穷瑰奇之服馔，极蛊媚之声色。甘意摇骨髓，艳词洞魂识，虽始之以淫侈，而终之以居正。然讽一劝百，势不自反。
现代文：从这种文体的大概趋向来看，不外是高谈宫室的壮丽，大写田猎的盛况，尽量描绘衣服饮食的珍奇，极力形容音乐美女的动人；美好的用意感人至深，艳丽的文辞惊心动魄；虽然以夸张的描写开始，以谏正的用意结束，但正面的讽谏太少而反面的劝诱过多，这种趋势已不能返回。
English: From the perspective of the general trend of this style, it is nothing more than talking about the magnificence of the palace room, writing about the grandeur of hunting, trying to describe the rarity of clothes and food, and trying to describe the beauty of music; the beautiful intention is deeply moving, and the colorful words are thrilling; although it begins with an exaggerated description and ends with a positive intention, the positive irony is too little and the negative persuasion is too much. This trend can no longer be returned.

古文：子云所谓 犹骋郑卫之声，曲终而奏雅 者也。
现代文：正如扬雄所说：这是首先 大肆宣扬郑国和卫国的淫乐，曲子末了才缀以典正的雅乐 。
English: As Yang Xiong said: This is the first to promote the erotic music of Zhengzhou and the defense of the country, and it is only at the end of the piece that it is embellished with elegant music.

古文：唯《七厉》叙贤，归以儒道，虽文非拔群，而意实卓尔矣。
现代文：只有崔瑗的《七苏》，叙述贤明而归结于儒家之道，虽然文辞不很突出，但意义是卓越的。
English: Only Cui Yao's "Seven Su," which is wisely narrated and attributed to the Confucian way, although the words are not very prominent, but the meaning is outstanding.

古文：自《连珠》以下，拟者间出。
现代文：从扬雄写了《连珠》以后，摹拟这种作品的也偶有出现。
English: Since Yang Xiong wrote "String of Pearls," imitations of this work have also occasionally appeared.

古文：杜笃、贾逵之曹，刘珍、潘勖之辈，欲穿明珠，多贯鱼目。
现代文：如东汉的杜笃、贾逵之辈，刘珍、潘勖之流，虽然想穿明 珠 ，却往往是连贯的鱼眼睛。
English: For example, the Eastern Han Dynasty's Du Du, Jia Yu's generation, Liu Zhen, Pan Yu's generation, although they want to pierce the pearl, they are often coherent fish eyes.

古文：可谓寿陵匍匐，非复邯郸之步；里丑捧心，不关西施之颦矣。
现代文：这就正如去邯郸学走路的寿陵人，他爬着回去，当然不是邯郸人的走法；学西施心痛时皱眉的丑女，她捧着心装做心痛的样子，也和西施皱眉头的美态毫不相干了。
English: This is just like the Shouling man who went to learn to walk with crutches. He crawled back, of course, not the cripple's way of walking; the ugly woman who learned to frown when Xi Shi was in pain, she held her heart and pretended to be in pain, and the beauty of Xi Shi's frown had nothing to do with it.

古文：唯士衡运思，理新文敏，而裁章置句，广于旧篇，岂慕朱仲四寸之珰乎！
现代文：只有陆机所写《演连珠》，道理新颖，文辞敏捷；但在篇章字句的处理上，却比过去的篇幅扩大得多。这岂不是羡慕仙人朱仲的四寸大珠！
English: Only the "Conducting a String of Pearls," written by Lu Ji, is novel in theory and quick in words; but in terms of the treatment of chapters and sentences, it is much larger than in the past. Isn't this the four-inch pearl that envies the fairy Zhu Zhong!

古文：夫文小易周，思闲可赡。
现代文：这种文体比较短小，易于写得紧凑，经过深思熟虑，就能写得内容丰富。
English: This style is relatively short, easy to write compactly, and can be written richly after careful consideration.

古文：足使义明而词净，事圆而音泽，磊磊自转，可称珠耳。
现代文：必须把意义表达明显而又文词简净，事理完备而又音韵和谐，好像许多圆石转动不已，这就可以叫做 珠 了。
English: It is necessary to express the meaning clearly and concisely, the facts are complete and the music is harmonious. Like many round stones, it can be called a bead.

古文：详夫汉来杂文，名号多品。
现代文：仔细考察从汉代以来的杂文，名称类别甚多。
English: A careful examination of miscellaneous writings from the Han Dynasty onwards shows that there are many categories of names.

古文：或典诰誓问，或览略篇章，或曲操弄引，或吟讽谣咏。
现代文：有的叫典、诰、誓、问，有的叫览、略、篇、章，有的叫曲、操、弄、引，有的叫吟、讽、谣、咏等等，总括这些名目，都属于杂文一类。
English: Some are called classics, classics, oaths, and questions, some are called excerpts, excerpts, articles, and chapters, some are called songs, rhymes, rhymes, and quotes, some are called chants, ironies, ballads, and rhymes, and so on. Taken together, these items all belong to the category of miscellaneous writings.

古文：总括其名，并归杂文之区；甄别其义，各入讨论之域。类聚有贯，故不曲述也。
现代文：审查其不同的意义，可以分别归入有关文体中去讨论；因为要对各种有联系的文体分类集中论述，所以这里不作详论。总结：
English: The examination of their different meanings can be discussed separately in the relevant style; since it is necessary to concentrate on various related style classifications, it will not be discussed in detail here.

古文：赞曰∶伟矣前修，学坚才饱。
现代文：前代优秀作者真是伟大，学识雄厚，才能高超。
English: The outstanding authors of the previous generation were truly great, with profound knowledge and superb talent.

古文：负文馀力，飞靡弄巧。
现代文：他们以从事写作的余力，舞文弄墨，写得优美奇巧。
English: They used their spare time to write, danced with ink, and wrote beautifully and skillfully.

古文：枝辞攒映，嚖若参昴。
现代文：各种杂文相互辉映，好像小小的群星照耀。
English: All kinds of miscellaneous writings reflect each other, as if small stars are shining.

古文：慕颦之心，于焉只搅。
现代文：可是后来摹仿者的作品，就只有令人心烦意扰！
English: But later, the imitator's work is nothing but disturbing!

