古文：汉武帝乳母尝于外犯事，帝欲申宪，乳母求救东方朔。
现代文：汉武帝的奶妈曾经在外面犯了罪，武帝将要按法令治罪，奶妈去向东方朔求救。
English: Emperor Wu's wet nurse once committed a crime outside. Emperor Wu is going to punish the crime according to the law. The wet nurse went to Dongfang Shuo for help.

古文：朔曰： 此非唇舌所争，尔必望济者，将去时但当屡顾帝，慎勿言！
现代文：东方朔说： 这不是靠唇舌能争得来的事，你想一定要把事办成的话，临走时，只可连连回头望着皇帝，千万不要说话。
English: Dongfang Shuo said, "This is not a matter that can be fought over with words. If you want to make sure that you get things done, when you leave, you can only look back at the emperor, and don't talk.

古文：此或可万一冀耳。 
现代文：这样也许能有万一的希望呢。 
English: Then there might be some hope.

古文：乳母既至，朔亦侍侧，因谓曰： 汝痴耳！帝岂复忆汝乳哺时恩邪？ 
现代文：奶妈进来辞行时，东方朔也陪侍在皇帝身边，奶妈照东方朔所说频频回顾武帝，东方朔就对她说： 你是犯傻呀！皇上难道还会想起你喂奶时的恩情吗！ 
English: When the wet nurse came in to resign, Dongfang Shuo also accompanied the emperor. According to Dongfang Shuo, the wet nurse frequently reviewed Emperor Wu, and Dongfang Shuo said to her: You are a fool! Will the emperor still remember your kindness when you were breastfeeding?

古文：帝虽才雄心忍，亦深有情恋，乃凄然愍之，即敕免罪。
现代文：武帝虽然才智杰出，心肠刚硬，也不免引起深切的依恋之情，就悲伤地怜悯起奶妈来了，立刻下令免她的罪。
English: Although Emperor Wu was brilliant and hard-hearted, he could not help but feel a deep attachment to her. He pitied the wet nurse with sadness and immediately ordered to absolve her of her sin.

古文：京房与汉元帝共论，因问帝： 幽、厉之君何以亡？
现代文：京房和汉元帝在一起议论，趁机问元帝： 周幽王和周厉王为什么灭亡？
English: Kyofang and Han Emperor Yuan discussed together and took the opportunity to ask Emperor Yuan: Why did King Zhou Yu and King Zhou Li perish?

古文：所任何人？ 
现代文：他们所任用的是些什么人？ 
English: Who are they appointing?

古文：答曰： 其任人不忠。 
现代文：元帝回答说： 他们任用的人不忠。 
English: Emperor Yuan replied, "The person they appointed is disloyal."

古文：房曰： 知不忠而任之，何邪？ 
现代文：京房又问； 明知他不忠，还要任用，这是什么原因呢？ 
English: Kyofusa asked again, "What is the reason for appointing someone knowing that he is unfaithful?"

古文：曰： 亡国之君，各贤其臣，岂知不忠而任之？ 
现代文：元帝说： 亡国的君主，各自都认为他的臣下是贤能的。哪里是明知不忠还要任用他呢！ 
English: Emperor Yuan said, "The monarchs of defeated countries all think that their vassals are virtuous. Who would knowingly be disloyal and still appoint them?"

古文：房稽首曰： 将恐今之视古，亦犹后之视今也。 
现代文：京房于是拜伏在地，说道： 就怕我们今天看古人，也像后代的人看我们今天一样啊。 
English: Kyofusa then prostrated himself on the ground and said, "I'm afraid that if we look at the ancients today, it will be the same as if future generations look at us today."

古文：陈元方遭父丧，哭泣哀恸，躯体骨立。
现代文：陈元方遭遇到丧父的不幸，哭泣悲恸，身体骨瘦如柴。
English: Chen Yuanfang suffered the misfortune of losing his father, wept with grief, and his body was as thin as wood.

古文：其母愍之，窃以锦被蒙上。
现代文：他母亲心疼他，在他睡觉的时候，偷偷地用条锦缎被子给他盖上。
English: His mother took pity on him and secretly covered him with a brocade quilt while he slept.

古文：郭林宗吊而见之，谓曰： 卿海内之俊才，四方是则，如何当丧，锦被蒙上？
现代文：郭林宗去吊丧，看见他盖着锦缎被子，就对他说： 你是国内的杰出人物，各地的人都学习你，怎么能在服丧期间盖锦缎被子？
English: Guo Linzong went to the funeral, saw him covered with a brocade quilt, and said to him: You are an outstanding figure in the country, people from all over the country study you, how can you cover a brocade quilt during the funeral?

古文：孔子曰： 衣夫锦也，食夫稻也，于汝安乎？ 
现代文：孔子说： 穿着那花缎子衣服，吃着那大米白饭，你心里踏实吗？ 
English: Confucius said: Wearing that flower embroidered dress, eating that white rice, are you sure of yourself?

古文：吾不取也！ 
现代文：我不认为这种做法是可取的。 
English: I don't think that's desirable.

古文：奋衣而去。
现代文：说完就拂袖而去。
English: After saying this, he whisked away.

古文：自后宾客绝百所日。
现代文：自此以后有百来天宾客都不来吊唁了。
English: Since then, guests have not come to offer condolences for hundreds of days.

古文：孙休好射雉，至其时则晨去夕反。
现代文：孙休喜欢射野鸡，到了射猎野鸡的季节，就早去晚归。
English: Sun Xiu likes to shoot pheasants. When the pheasant shooting season comes, he will go early and return late.

古文：群臣莫不止谏： 此为小物，何足甚耽？ 
现代文：群臣谁都劝止他说： 这是小东西，哪里值得过分迷恋！ 
English: All the courtiers tried to dissuade him, saying, "It's a small thing, what's there to be overly enamored of!"

古文：休曰： 虽为小物，耿介过人，朕所以好之。 
现代文：孙休说： 虽然是小东西，可是比人还耿直，我因此喜欢它。 
English: Sun Xiu said: Although it is a small thing, it is more upright than a person, so I like it.

古文：孙皓问丞相陆凯曰： 卿一宗在朝有几人？ 
现代文：孙皓问丞相陆凯说： 你们那个家族在朝中做官的有多少人？ 
English: Sun Yat-sen asked Premier Lu Kai, "How many people from your family have served in the government?

古文：陆曰： 二相、五侯、将军十余人。 
现代文：陆凯说： 两个丞相，五个侯爵、十几个将军。 孙皓说： 真兴旺啊！ 
English: Lu Kai said: Two prime ministers, five marquesses, and a dozen generals. Sun Yat-sen said: Truly prosperous!

古文：皓曰： 盛哉！ 陆曰： 君贤臣忠，国之盛也。父慈子孝，家之盛也。
现代文：陆凯说： 君主贤明，臣下尽忠，这是国家兴旺的象征；父母慈爱，儿女孝顺，这是家庭兴旺的象征。
English: Lu Kai said: A wise monarch and loyal subjects are the symbols of a prosperous country; loving parents and dutiful children are the symbols of a prosperous family.

古文：今政荒民弊，覆亡是惧，臣何敢言盛！ 
现代文：现在政务荒废，百姓困苦，臣唯恐国家灭亡，还敢说什么兴旺啊！ 
English: Now that government affairs are in ruins, the people are suffering, and the vassals are afraid of the country's demise, how can they dare to speak of prosperity!

古文：何晏、邓扬令管辂作卦，云： 不知位至三公不？ 
现代文：何晏、邓颺叫管辂给他们占一卦，说： 不知道我们的官位能不能升到三公？ 
English: He Yao and Deng Yao asked Guan Yao to give them a piece of advice, saying, "I don't know if our official rank can be raised to the Three Kingdoms.

古文：卦成，辂称引古义，深以戒之。
现代文：卦成以后，管辂引证古书的义理，意味深长地劝戒他们。
English: After Goucheng, Guan Yu quoted the principles of the ancient book to meaningfully admonish them.

古文：扬曰： 此老生之常谈。 
现代文：邓颺说： 你这是老生常谈。 
English: Deng Yao said, "You are talking like an old man.

古文：晏曰： 知几其神乎！古人以为难。交疏吐诚，今人以为难。
现代文：何晏说： 了解事物变化的征兆大概是很微妙的吧，古人认为这很困难；交情很浅而说话却吐露真心，现代人认为这很困难。
English: He Wei said: Understanding the signs of change in things is probably very subtle, the ancients thought it was very difficult; friendships are very shallow but speak their hearts out, modern people think it is very difficult.

古文：今君一面尽二难之道，可谓 明德惟馨 。
现代文：现在您才一面之交就全部说出了这两个难题的解决办法，可以说是 明德惟馨 。
English: Now, you have just said all the solutions to these two difficult problems at the same time, which can be said to be the essence of wisdom.

古文：诗不云乎： 中心藏之，何日忘之！  
现代文：《诗经》上不是说过吗： 中心藏之，乞何日忘之！ 
English: Isn't it said in the Book of Songs: Hide it in the center, and don't forget it for a day!

古文：晋武帝既不悟太子之愚，必有传后意。
现代文：我一定牢记着你说的话。 晋武帝既然不明白太子愚蠢，就有意要把帝位传给他。
English: I must remember what you said. Since Emperor Jinwu does not understand that the crown prince is stupid, he intends to pass the throne to him.

古文：诸名臣亦多献直言。
现代文：众位名臣也多有直言强谏的。
English: Many eminent ministers are also outspoken.

古文：帝尝在陵云台上坐，卫瓘在侧，欲申其怀，因如醉跪帝前，以手抚床曰： 此坐可惜。 
现代文：一次，武帝在陵云台上坐着，卫瓘陪侍在旁，想趁机申述自己的心意，便装做喝醉酒一样跪在武帝面前，用手拍着武帝的座床说： 这个座位可惜呀！ 
English: On one occasion, Emperor Wu was sitting on the Lingyuntai, accompanied by Emperor Wei, who wanted to take advantage of the opportunity to express his thoughts, so he dressed up like a drunk and knelt in front of Emperor Wu, patting Emperor Wu's bed with his hand and saying, "This seat is a pity!

古文：帝虽悟，因笑曰： 公醉邪？ 
现代文：武帝虽然明白他的用意，还是笑着说： 您醉了吗？ 
English: Although Emperor Wu understood his intention, he still smiled and said: Are you drunk?

古文：王夷甫妇郭泰宁女，才拙而性刚，聚敛无厌，干豫人事。
现代文：王夷甫的妻子是郭泰宁的女儿，笨拙而又性情倔强，贪得无厌，喜欢干涉别人的事。
English: Wang Yifu's wife was Guo Taining's daughter, clumsy and stubborn, insatiably greedy, and fond of meddling in other people's affairs.

古文：夷甫患之而不能禁。
现代文：王夷甫对她很伤脑筋却又制止不了。
English: Wang Yifu was very nervous about her but couldn't stop her.

古文：时其乡人幽州刺史李阳，京都大侠，犹汉之楼护，郭氏惮之。
现代文：当时他的同乡、幽州刺史李阳，是京都的一个大侠客，如同汉代的楼护，王夷甫妻子郭氏很怕他。
English: At that time, his fellow countryman, Yuzhou poet Li Yang, was a great knight in Kyoto, like a Han dynasty guardian. Wang Yifu's wife, Guo, was very afraid of him.

古文：夷甫骤谏之，乃曰： 非但我言卿不可，李阳亦谓卿不可。 
现代文：王夷甫常常劝戒他妻子，就跟她说： 不只我说你不能这样做，李阳也认为你不能这样做。 
English: Wang Yifu often admonished his wife, so he told her: "Not only did I say you can't do this, Li Yang also thinks you can't do this.

古文：郭氏小为之损。
现代文：郭氏因此才稍为收敛了一点。
English: As a result, Mr. Guo has been able to slow down a bit.

古文：王夷甫雅尚玄远，常嫉其妇贪浊，口未尝言 钱 字。
现代文：王夷甫一向崇尚玄理，常常憎恨他妻子的贪婪卑污，口里不曾说过 钱 字。
English: Wang Yifu had always advocated wisdom, and often hated his wife's greed and meanness. He had never said the word "money" in his mouth.

古文：妇欲试之，令婢以钱绕床，不得行。
现代文：他妻子想试试他，就叫婢女拿钱来围着睡床放着，让他不能走路。
English: When his wife wanted to test him, she had her maidservant take some money and put it around his bed, so that he could not walk.

古文：夷甫晨起，见钱阂行，呼婢曰： 举却阿堵物。 
现代文：王夷甫早晨起床，看见钱碍着自己走路，就招呼婢女说： 拿掉这些东西！ 
English: When Wang Yifu got up in the morning and saw that the money was getting in the way of his walking, he called out to his maid and said, "Take these things off!"

古文：王平子年十四、五，见王夷甫妻郭氏贪欲，令婢路上儋粪。
现代文：王平子十四五岁时，看见王夷甫的妻子郭氏很贪心，竟叫婢女到路上捡粪。
English: When Wang Pingzi was fourteen or fifteen years old, he saw that Wang Yifu's wife, Guo, was very greedy and actually asked her maid to pick up excrement on the road.

古文：平子谏之，并言不可。
现代文：平子劝阻她，并且说明这样不行。
English: Hirako dissuaded her and explained that this was not possible.

古文：郭大怒，谓平子曰： 昔夫人临终，以小郎嘱新妇，不以新妇嘱小郎！ 
现代文：郭氏大怒，对平子说： 以前婆婆临终的时候，把你托付给我，并没有把我托付给你。 
English: Mr. Guo was furious and said to Ms. Hirako, "Before, when my mother-in-law was dying, she entrusted you to me, but she did not entrust me to you.

古文：急捉衣裾，将与杖。
现代文：说完就一把抓住平子的衣服，要拿棍子打他。
English: After saying that, he grabbed Hirako's clothes and wanted to hit him with a stick.

古文：平子饶力，争得脱，踰窗而走。
现代文：平子力气大，挣扎开，才得以脱身，跳窗而逃了。
English: Hirako was very strong and struggled to get away before he was able to escape by jumping out of the window.

古文：元帝过江犹好酒，王茂弘与帝有旧，常流涕谏。帝许之，命酌酒，一酣，从是遂断。
现代文：晋元帝到江南后还是喜欢喝酒，王茂弘和元帝向来有交情，常常流着泪规劝他，元帝终于答应了，就叫倒酒来喝个痛快，从此以后就戒了酒。
English: After Emperor Jin and Emperor Yuan went to the south of the Yangtze River, they still liked to drink. Wang Maohong and Emperor Yuan had always been friends, and he often tried to persuade him with tears. Emperor Yuan finally agreed and asked him to pour wine for a good time. Since then, he has quit drinking.

古文：谢鲲为豫章太守，从大将军下至石头。
现代文：谢鲲任豫章太守的时候，随大将军王敦东下，到了石头城。
English: When Xie Jun was appointed as the governor of Yuzhang, he followed the general Wang Dun to the east and arrived at Stone City.

古文：敦谓鲲曰： 余不得复为盛德之事矣。 
现代文：王敦对谢鲲说： 我不能再做那种道德高尚的事了！ 
English: Wang Dun said to Xie Yao: I can't do that kind of moral high-minded thing anymore!

古文：鲲曰： 何为其然？
现代文：谢鲲说： 为什么要说这样的话？
English: Xie Yao said, "Why would you say such a thing?

古文：但使自今已后，日亡日去耳！ 
现代文：只要从今以后，让以前的猜嫌一天天忘掉就是了。 
English: Just from now on, let the previous suspicions be forgotten day by day.

古文：敦又称疾不朝，鲲谕敦曰： 近者，明公之举，虽欲大存社稷，然四海之内，实怀未达。
现代文：王敦又托病不去朝见，谢鲲劝告他说： 近来您的举动虽然是想极力地保存国家，可是全国的人还不了解您的真实意图。
English: Wang Dun also asked to be excused from going to see the emperor, and Xie Jun advised him: Although your recent actions are to preserve the country as much as possible, people across the country still do not understand your true intentions.

古文：若能朝天子，使群臣释然，万物之心，于是乃服。
现代文：如果能去朝见天子，使群臣放下心来，众人的心才会敬佩您。
English: If you can go to the Imperial Court to meet the Son of Heaven and make the courtiers lose heart, then everyone's heart will admire you.

古文：仗民望以从众怀，尽冲退以奉主上，如斯，则勋侔一匡，名垂千载。 
现代文：掌握人民的愿望来顺从众人的心意，全都用谦让之心来侍奉君主，这样做，功勋就可以等同一匡天下，也能够名垂千古。 
English: By grasping the wishes of the people, obeying the will of the people, and all serving the monarch with a humble heart, the merits can wait for the same monarch, and can also be famous for thousands of years.

古文：时人以为名言。
现代文：当时的人认为这是名言。
English: People at the time thought it was a great quote.

古文：元皇帝时，廷尉张闿在小市居，私作都门，早闭晚开。
现代文：晋元帝时，廷尉张闿住在小市场上，他私自设置街道大门，每天关门很早，开门却很晚。
English: During the reign of Emperor Jin Yuan, the courtier Zhang Ye lived in a small market. He set up the street gate himself, closing the door very early every day, but opening the door very late.

古文：群小患之，诣州府诉，不得理，遂至檛登闻鼓，犹不被判。
现代文：附近的百姓为这事很发愁，就到州衙门去告状，衙门不受理；终于弄到去击登闻鼓，还是得不到裁决。
English: The people in the vicinity were very worried about this matter, so they went to the state court to sue, but the court did not accept the case; finally, they got to go and beat the drum, but they still did not get a ruling.

古文：闻贺司空出，至破冈，连名诣贺诉。
现代文：大家听说司空贺循外出，到了破冈，就连名到他那里告状。
English: Everyone heard that Siku Hequn went out, and when they got to the other side of the hill, they went to him to complain.

古文：贺曰： 身被徵作礼官，不关此事。 
现代文：贺循说： 我被调做礼官，和这事无关。 
English: He Xun said, "I was transferred to be a etiquette officer, which has nothing to do with this matter.

古文：群小叩头曰： 若府君复不见治，便无所诉。 
现代文：百姓给他磕头说： 如果府君也不管我们，我们就没有地方申诉了。 
English: The people shook their heads at him and said, "If the prefect doesn't care about us, we have no place to appeal."

古文：贺未语，令且去，见张廷尉当为及之。
现代文：贺循没有说什么，只叫大家暂时退下去，说以后见到张廷尉一走替大家问起这件事。
English: He Xun didn't say anything, just told everyone to step back temporarily, saying that he would ask everyone about the matter after he saw Zhang Tingli leaving.

古文：张闻，即毁门，自至方山迎贺。
现代文：张闿听说后，立刻把门拆了，而且亲自到方山去迎接贺循。
English: After hearing this, Zhang Ye immediately tore down the door and went to Fangshan to meet He Xuan in person.

古文：贺出见辞之曰： 此不必见关，但与君门情，相为惜之。 
现代文：贺循拿出状辞给他看，说： 这件事本用不着我过问，只是和您是世交，为了您才舍不得扔掉它。 
English: He Xun took out the letter and showed it to him, saying, "I don't need to inquire about this matter, but I am a friend of yours, and I can't bear to throw it away for your sake.

古文：张愧谢曰： 小人有如此，始不即知，早已毁坏。 
现代文：张闿惭愧地谢罪说： 百姓有这样的要求，当初没有立刻了解到，门早已拆了。 
English: Zhang Ye said with shame: "The people had such a request, but they did not immediately understand that the door had already been torn down.

古文：郗太尉晚节好谈，既雅非所经，而甚矜之。
现代文：太尉郗鉴晚年喜欢谈论，所谈的事既不是他向来所考虑的，又很自负。
English: In his later years, Captain Hao Jian liked to talk. The things he talked about were not what he had always considered, and he was very conceited.

古文：后朝觐，以王丞相末年多可恨，每见，必欲苦相规诫。
现代文：后来朝见皇帝的时候，因为丞相王导晚年做了许多值得遗憾的事，所以每次见到王导，定要苦苦劝戒他。
English: Later, when the imperial court met with the emperor, because the chancellor Wang Du had done many regrettable things in his later years, so every time he saw Wang Du, he would have to work hard to dissuade him.

古文：王公知其意，每引作它言。
现代文：王导知道郗鉴的意图，就常常用别的话来引开。
English: Wang Du knew the intention of Hao Jian, so he often used other words to distract him.

古文：临还镇，故命驾诣丞相。丞相翘须厉色，上坐便言： 方当乖别，必欲言其所见。 
现代文：后来郗鉴快要回到所镇守的地方，特意坐车去看望王导，他翘着胡子，脸色严肃，一落座就说： 快要分手了，我一定要把我所看到的事说出来。 
English: Later, when Gong Jian was about to return to the place he was guarding, he deliberately took a car to visit Wang Du. His beard was upturned and his face was serious. As soon as he sat down, he said, "We are about to break up, I must tell you what I saw."

古文：意满口重，辞殊不流。
现代文：他很自满，口气很重，可是话说得特别不顺当。
English: He's very self-satisfied, he's very emphatic, but he's not saying the right things.

古文：王公摄其次曰： 后面未期，亦欲尽所怀，愿公勿复谈。 
现代文：王导纠正他说话的层次，然后说： 后会无定期，我也想尽量说出我的意见，就是希望您以后不要再谈论。 
English: Wang Du corrected the level of his speech, and then said: "There will be no regular meeting later, I also want to express my opinion as much as possible, that is, I hope you will not talk about it in the future."

古文：郗遂大瞋，冰衿而出，不得一言。
现代文：郗鉴于是非常生气，心情冰冷地走了，一句话也说不出来。
English: Given was very angry and walked away coldly, unable to say a word.

古文：王丞相为扬州，遣八部从事之职。
现代文：丞相王导任扬州刺史时，派遣八个部从事到各郡任职。
English: When the chancellor Wang Guotian was appointed Yangzhou chief historian, he sent eight departments to serve in each county.

古文：顾和时为下传还，同时俱见。
现代文：顾和当时也随着到郡里去，回来以后，大家一起谒见王导。
English: Gu He also went to the county at that time. After returning, everyone went to see Wang Du together.

古文：诸从事各奏二千石官长得失，至和独无言。
现代文：部从事们各启奏郡守的优劣，轮到顾和，唯独他没有发言。
English: It was Gu He's turn to speak, but he did not speak.

古文：王问顾曰： 卿何所闻？ 
现代文：王导问顾和： 你听到什么了？ 
English: Wang Du asked Gu He: What did you hear?

古文：答曰： 明公作辅，宁使网漏吞舟，何缘采听风闻，以为察察之政？ 
现代文：顾和回答说： 明公任大臣，宁可让吞舟之鱼漏网，怎么能寻访传闻，凭这些来推行清明的政治呢！ 
English: Gu He replied: As a minister of the Ming Dynasty, I would rather let the fish of the boat slip through the net. How can I investigate rumors and use them to promote a clear politics?

古文：丞相咨嗟称佳，诸从事自视缺然也。
现代文：王导赞叹着连声说好，众从事也自愧不如。
English: Wang Du sighed and said that he was in favor of it, and everyone was ashamed to be engaged in it.

古文：苏峻东征沈充，请吏部郎陆迈与俱。
现代文：苏峻起兵东下讨伐沈充，请吏部郎陆迈和他一起出征。
English: Su Jun raised an army to go east to attack Shenchong, and asked the chief of the general staff, Lang Lumai, to go out with him.

古文：将至吴，密敕左右，令入阊门放火以示威。
现代文：快要到吴地的时候，苏峻秘密吩咐手下的人，叫他们进阊门去放火来显示军威。
English: When he was about to reach Wu, Su Jun secretly ordered his men to enter the city gate and set it on fire to show their military might.

古文：陆知其意，谓峻曰： 吴治平未久，必将有乱。
现代文：陆迈明白苏峻的意图，对他说： 吴地刚太平了不长时间，这样做一走会引起骚乱。
English: Lu Mai understood Su Jun's intention and said to him, "Wu Di Gang has not been peaceful for a long time. If you leave like this, it will cause a riot.

古文：若为乱阶，请从我家始。 
现代文：如果要制造骚乱的借口，请从我家开始放火。 
English: If you want an excuse to riot, start a fire in my house.

古文：峻遂止。
现代文：苏峻这才作罢。
English: Su Jun had to give it up.

古文：陆玩拜司空，有人诣之，索美酒，得，便自起，泻箸梁柱间地，祝曰： 当今乏才，以尔为柱石之用，莫倾人栋梁。 
现代文：陆玩就任司空，有位客人去看望他，向他要一杯美酒，酒拿来了，客人便站起来在顶梁柱旁边的地上奠酒，祝告说： 当前缺少好材料，才用你做柱石，你千万不要让人家的栋梁塌下来。 
English: A guest came to visit him and asked him for a glass of wine. The wine was brought, and the guest stood up and poured the wine on the ground next to the top beam column, and congratulated him, saying, "Currently, there is a lack of good materials, so I used you to make the column stone. You must not let the pillars of the family fall down."

古文：玩笑曰： 戢卿良箴。 
现代文：陆玩听了笑着说： 我记住你的忠告。 
English: Lu Yuanyuan listened and said with a smile: I will remember your advice.

古文：小庾在荆州，公朝大会，问诸僚佐曰： 我欲为汉高、魏武何如？ 
现代文：庾翼在荆州任职时，在一次僚属拜见长官的聚会上，问僚属们说： 我想做汉高祖、魏武帝那样的人，你们看怎么样？ 
English: When Gong Ying served in Jingzhou, he asked his subordinates at a meeting where his colleagues and subordinates came to see him: "I want to be a person like Han Gaozu and Wei Wudi. What do you think?"

古文：一坐莫答，长史江虨曰： 愿明公为桓、文之事，不愿作汉高、魏武也。 
现代文：满座的人没有谁敢回答。这时长史江虨说： 希望明公效法齐桓、晋文的事业，不希望您效法汉高、魏武。 
English: No one in the full house dared to answer. At this time, Changshi Jiangjun said: I hope that Ming Gong will follow the example of Qi Huan and Jinwen's career, and I don't want you to follow the example of Henkel and Wei Wu.

古文：罗君章为桓宣武从事，谢镇西作江夏，往检校之。
现代文：罗君章任桓温手下的从事，当时镇西将军谢尚任江夏相，桓温派罗君章到江夏检查谢尚的工作。
English: Luo Junzhang was engaged in the work of Kuan Wen's subordinates. At that time, Zhenxi General Xie Shang was appointed Minister of Jiangxi Province, and Kuan Wen sent Luo Junzhang to Jiangxi Province to inspect Xie Shang's work.

古文：罗既至，初不问郡事；径就谢数日，饮酒而还。
现代文：罗君章到江夏后，从不问郡里的政事，径直到谢尚那里喝了几天酒就回去了。
English: After Luo Junzhang came to Jiangxia, he never asked about the county's political affairs. He went straight to Xie Shang's place, drank wine for a few days, and then went back.

古文：桓公问有何事？君章云： 不审公谓谢尚何似人？ 
现代文：桓温问他江夏有什么事，罗君章反问道： 不知道您认为谢尚是怎样的人？ 
English: Huan Wen asked him what was wrong with Jiang Xia, and Luo Junzhang asked back: I don't know what kind of person you think Xie Shang is.

古文：桓公曰： 仁祖是胜我许人。 
现代文：桓温说： 仁祖是胜过我一些的人。 
English: Kuan Wen said, "Jin Zu is a better person than me.

古文：君章云： 岂有胜公人而行非者，故一无所问。 
现代文：罗君章便说： 哪里有胜过您的人而会去做不合理的事呢，所以政事我一点也不问。 
English: Luo Junzhang then said: Where is there a person who is better than you and will do unreasonable things, so I do not ask about politics at all.

古文：桓公奇其意而不责也。
现代文：桓温认为他的想法很奇特，也就不责怪他。
English: Kuan Wen thought his idea was strange and did not blame him.

古文：王右军与王敬仁、许玄度并善。
现代文：右军将军王羲之和王敬仁、许玄度两人都很友好。
English: The two right-wing generals, Wang Xizhi, Wang Jingren and Xu Xundu, were very friendly.

古文：二人亡后，右军为论议更克。
现代文：两人死后，王羲之对他们的评论却更加刻薄。
English: After their deaths, Wang Shanzhi's comments about them were even more scathing.

古文：孔岩诫之曰： 明府昔与王、许周旋有情，及逝没之后，无慎终之好，民所不取。 
现代文：孔岩告诫他说： 明府以前和王、许交往，很有情谊，到他们逝世之后，却没有始终如一的友情，这是我所不取的。 
English: Kong Yan cautioned him, "Before the Ming government, I had a great friendship with Wang and Xu, but after they passed away, there was no consistent friendship, which I don't like.

古文：右军甚愧。
现代文：王羲之听了非常惭愧。
English: Wang Xizhi was very ashamed to hear this.

古文：谢中郎在寿春败，临奔走，犹求玉帖镫。
现代文：西中郎将谢万在寿春溃败了，临逃跑时，还要讲究用贵重的玉帖镫。
English: Xi Zhong Lang defeated Xie Wan in Shuchun, and when he was about to escape, he had to pay attention to the use of precious jade brooches.

古文：太傅在军，前后初无损益之言。
现代文：太傅谢安跟随他在军中，始终也没有提过什么意见。
English: Grandfather Xie An followed him in the army and never raised any objections.

古文：尔日犹云： 当今岂须烦此？ 
现代文：这时仍然只说： 现在哪里还需要找这个麻烦！ 
English: At this time, they still only said: Now where else do we need to look for this trouble!

古文：王大语东亭： 卿乃复论成不恶，那得与僧弥戏！ 
现代文：王大对东亭侯王珣说： 对你的定评原来就是不错，哪能和僧弥赌胜呢！ 
English: Wang Da said to Dongting Hou Wang Yao: Your evaluation turned out to be good. How can you win a bet with a monk?

古文：殷觊病困，看人政见半面。
现代文：殷觊病重，看人只能看见半面。
English: Yin Qi is seriously ill, and people can only see half of his face.

古文：殷荆州兴晋阳之甲，往与觊别，涕零，属以消息所患。
现代文：荆州刺史殷仲堪当时正要起兵内伐，去和殷觊告别，看见他病成那样，就哭了，嘱咐他好好养病。
English: At that time, Jingzhou Zishi Yin Zhongkan was about to set off on an internal campaign to bid farewell to Yin Qi. Seeing him so ill, he cried and ordered him to take good care of his illness.

古文：觊答曰： 我病自当差，正忧汝患耳！ 
现代文：殷觊回答说： 我的病自会好的，我只担心你的病呀！ 
English: Yin Yao replied: My illness will get better, I am only worried about your illness!

古文：远公在庐山中，虽老，讲论不辍。
现代文：惠远和尚住在庐山里，虽然年老了，还不断地宣讲佛经。
English: Huiyuan Monk lives in Lushan. Although he is old, he continues to preach Buddhist scriptures.

古文：弟子中或有堕者，远公曰： 桑榆之光，理无远照；但愿朝阳之晖，与时并明耳。 
现代文：弟子中有人不肯好好学，惠远就说： 我像傍晚的落日余辉，按理说不会照得久远了，但愿你们像早晨的阳光，越来越亮呀！ 
English: One of the disciples did not want to study hard, so Huiyuan said, "I am like the afterglow of the sunset in the evening. It is not supposed to shine for a long time. I hope you are like the morning sun, getting brighter and brighter!"

古文：执经登坐，讽诵朗畅，词色甚苦。
现代文：于是拿着佛经，登上讲坛，诵经响亮而流畅，言辞神态非常恳切。
English: So he took the sutra and ascended the pulpit, chanting loudly and fluently, with a very earnest expression.

古文：高足之徒，皆肃然增敬。
现代文：高足弟子，都更加肃然起敬。
English: Gaozu's disciples were even more awestruck.

古文：桓南郡好猎，每田狩，车骑甚盛。五六十里中，旌旗蔽隰。
现代文：南郡公桓玄喜欢打猎。每逢打猎的时候，车马非常多，五六十里的地面，旗帜铺天盖地。
English: Nam-gun's King Huan Xuan liked to hunt. Whenever he went hunting, there were so many chariots and horses that the ground 50 or 60 miles away was covered with flags.

古文：骋良马，驰击若飞，双甄所指，不避陵壑。
现代文：良马奔驰，像飞一样追击着野物；侧翼队伍所向之处，不管山坡山沟，概不回避。
English: A good horse gallops, chasing a wild animal as if it were flying; wherever the flanking troops go, no matter the hillside or ravine, they do not shy away.

古文：或行陈不整，兔腾逸，参佐无不被系束。
现代文：有时队列不整齐，或者让獐兔等野物逃脱了，下属官吏没有不被捆起来的。
English: Sometimes the queue is not orderly, or wild animals such as jackrabbits have escaped, and subordinate officials have not been tied up.

古文：桓道恭，玄之族也，时为贼曹参军，颇敢直言。
现代文：桓道恭是桓玄的族人，当时任贼曹参军，颇敢直话直说。
English: Huan Dao-gyong was a member of Huan Xuan's clan. At that time, he allowed the thief Cao to join the army, and he dared to speak frankly.

古文：常自带绛绵绳箸腰中，玄问 此何为？ 
现代文：打猎时常常腰里带着一条红绵绳，桓玄问他： 这是干什么用的？ 
English: When hunting, he often carries a red rope around his waist. Huan Xuan asked him, "What is this for?"

古文：答曰： 公猎，好缚人士，会当被缚，手不能堪芒也。 
现代文：道恭回答说： 您打猎的时候，喜欢捆人，我总会被捆的，怕两只手受不了那粗绳上的芒刺啊。 
English: "When you're hunting, you like to tie people up. I'll always be tied up, I'm afraid my hands won't be able to bear the thorns on the thick rope."

古文：玄自此小差。
现代文：从此以后，桓玄捆人的事就稍为少些了。
English: Since then, there have been slightly fewer incidents of Kangen tying up people.

古文：王绪、王国宝相为唇齿，并上下权要。
现代文：王绪和王国宝互相勾结，一起倚仗权势，扰乱国政。
English: Wang Xu and Wang Guobao colluded with each other, and together they wielded power and disrupted state affairs.

古文：王大不平其如此，乃谓绪曰： 汝为此欻欻，曾不虑狱吏之为贵乎？ 
现代文：王大很不满意他们的所作所为，便对王绪说： 你做这种轻举妄动的事，竟然没有考虑到终有一天会感到狱吏尊贵吗？ 
English: Wang Da was very dissatisfied with what they had done, so he said to Wang Xu, "Do you do such reckless things without considering that one day you will feel respected as a prison officer?"

古文：桓玄欲以谢太傅宅为营，谢混曰： 召伯之仁，犹惠及甘棠；文靖之德，更不保五亩之宅。 
现代文：桓玄想把太傅谢安的住宅要来修府第，谢混对他说： 召伯的仁爱，尚且能给甘棠树带来好处；文靖的恩德，难道再也保不住五亩大小的住宅吗？ 
English: Huan Xuan wanted to renovate the residence of Grand Master Xie An, and Xie Ming said to him: "The benevolence of Zhao Bo can still bring benefits to the sweet orange tree; the kindness of Wenjing, can it no longer keep a five-acre-sized residence?

古文：玄惭而止。
现代文：桓玄听了很惭愧，就不再提了。
English: Hearing this, Kuan Xuan was very ashamed, so he didn't mention it again.

