古文：凡为将之道，要在甘苦共众。
现代文：凡是为将帅者的法则，最重要的地方在于能与士兵同甘共苦。
English: The most important part of any general's code is to be able to work with soldiers through thick and thin.

古文：如遇危险之地，不可舍众而自全，不可临难而苟免，护卫周旋，同其生死。
现代文：倘若在战争中遇到危险，将帅不可以抛弃自己的士兵独自逃生，不可以面临危难而苟且偷生，要为了保护部众同敌人周旋，与士兵同生死共战斗。
English: In the event of danger in war, the commander-in-chief must not abandon his soldiers to escape alone, must not face danger and live secretly, but must negotiate with the enemy in order to protect the troops, and fight with the soldiers for life and death.

古文：如此，则三军之士岂忘己哉？
现代文：将帅如能做到这样，那么，三军将士又怎能在危难中忘掉将帅呢？
English: If the commander-in-chief can do this, then how can the soldiers of the three armies forget the commander-in-chief in a crisis?

古文：法曰： 见危难，无忘其众。 
现代文：诚如兵法所说： 将帅面临危难之境地，不能只顾自己安全而忘记自己的士兵。 
English: As it is said in the art of war, when a general faces a perilous situation, he should not only care about his own safety, but also forget his soldiers.

古文：魏，曹操征孙权还，张辽、乐进、李典将七千余人屯合肥。
现代文：三国时期，魏公曹操率军攻打孙权回来，派遣大将张辽、乐进和李典等率兵七千多人驻守在合肥。
English: During the Three Kingdoms period, Wei Gong Cao Cao led the army to attack Sun Quan and returned, sending generals Zhang Liao, Lejin and Li Dian and more than seven thousand soldiers stationed in Hefei.

古文：操征张鲁，教与护军薛悌书，题其函曰： 敌至乃发。 
现代文：其后，曹操出征讨伐张鲁时，他给驻守合肥的护军薛悌写了封信，封面题写道： 敌人来到时方可拆看。 
English: Later, when Cao Cao went to fight against Zhang Lu, he wrote a letter to Xue Yao, the escort stationed in Hefei, with the cover title: When the enemy comes, it can be removed.

古文：俄而，权帅众围合肥，乃发此教曰： 若孙权至者，张、李将军出战、乐将军守城，护军勿与战。 
现代文：不久，孙权率领大军前来围攻合肥，薛悌与张辽等将这件书而指示打开，上面写道： 如果孙权领兵来进攻，张、李二将军出战，乐将军守城，护军薛悌不要参战。 
English: Soon after, Sun Quan led a large army to besiege Hefei. Xue Yu and Zhang Liao opened the book with instructions. It read: If Sun Quan leads an army to attack, Generals Zhang and Li Er will go to war, General Le will defend the city, and the escort Xue Yu should not participate in the war.

古文：诸将皆疑，辽曰： 公远征在外，比敌至此，破我必矣，是以指教。
现代文：诸多将领对此指示都感到迷惑不解。但张辽却心领神会地说： 曹公亲率大军远征在外，等到救兵来到这里时，敌军势必已经把我们打败了。
English: Many generals were puzzled by this instruction, but Zhang Liao was able to understand and said: Cao Gonglian led a large army on an expedition, and by the time the rescuers came here, the enemy would have defeated us.

古文：及其未合，逆击之，折其盛势，以安众心，然后可守也。
现代文：所以曹公指示我们，乘敌军对我尚未形成合围态势之前就迎面攻击它，挫煞敌人的嚣张气焰，以安定我们的军心，然后才可以守住此城。
English: Therefore, Cao Gong instructed us to take advantage of the enemy's army to attack it head-on before it has formed a siege posture against me, to frustrate the enemy's arrogance, to stabilize our military spirit, and then we can defend this city.

古文：胜负之机，在此一举，诸君何疑？ 
现代文：今日成败的关键，全在此一举。各位还有什么疑惑吗？ 
English: The key to today's success or failure is all in this one move. Do you have any doubts?

古文：李典意与辽同。
现代文：李典意见与张辽的看法相同。
English: Li Dian's opinion is the same as Zhang Liao's.

古文：于是，辽夜募敢从，得八百人，椎牛享士，明日大战。
现代文：于是，张辽当夜就召募了八百名敢死之士，杀牛犒劳他们，准备在第二天出城大战孙权军。
English: As a result, Zhang Liao called up eight hundred men who were willing to die that night, worked them to death, and prepared to leave the city the next day to fight the Sun Quan army.

古文：平旦，辽披甲出战，先登陷阵，杀贼数十人，斩二将，大呼自名，冲阵至权麾下。
现代文：次日黎明时分，张辽身披铠甲率兵出战，他率先冲破敌阵，杀死数十名敌人，斩杀敌军两员大将，大声呼喊自己姓名在敌阵中猛打猛冲，直至冲到孙权指挥旗下。
English: At dawn the next day, Zhang Liao dressed in armor and led the troops into battle. He took the lead in breaking through the enemy lines, killing dozens of enemies, killing two generals of the enemy army, and shouting his own name loudly. He stormed through the enemy lines until he reached the banner of Sun Quan.

古文：权大惊，众未知所以，走登高。
现代文：孙权大吃一惊，众将不知所措，慌忙跑上一座高土丘。
English: Sun Quan was taken aback, the crowd was at a loss, and he hurriedly ran up a high mound.

古文：权以长戟自守，辽叱权下，权不敢动，乃聚兵围辽数重，辽左右突围，直前急击，围开，辽将麾下数十人得出，余众呼号曰： 将军弃舍我耶？ 
现代文：孙权用长戟护卫自身，张辽大声喝叱孙权下来应战，孙权却不敢出来。后来当他望见张辽所率部众不多时，才调集大军将张辽所部重重包围。张辽挥军左突右冲，奋力向前迅猛冲杀，终于冲破包围圈，带领数十名勇士冲出包围圈。其余尚未冲出包围圈的部众大声呼喊道： 将军是要丢弃我们吗？ 
English: Sun Quan protected himself with a long scepter, Zhang Liao shouted and scolded Sun Quan to come down to fight, but Sun Quan did not dare to come out. Later, when he saw that Zhang Liao's camp was not large, he mobilized a large army to surround Zhang Liao's camp. Zhang Liao's army rushed left and right, fought hard and rushed forward, and finally broke through the encirclement and led dozens of warriors to break out of the encirclement. The remaining soldiers who had not yet broken out of the encirclement shouted loudly: Is the general going to abandon us?

古文：辽复入围，拔出余众，权军无敢当者。
现代文：张辽听到呼喊声，立即回身再次冲入包围圈，将受困的余众全部救出来，孙权部队竟然没有敢于阻挡的。
English: Zhang Liao heard the shouts, immediately turned around and rushed into the encirclement again, rescuing all the trapped people. Sun Quan's troops did not dare to stop them.

古文：自旦至日中，吴人夺气。
现代文：这一战从黎明持续到中午，吴军士气衰竭。
English: The battle lasted from dawn to noon, and Wu Jun's morale was exhausted.

古文：辽修守备，众心乃安，悦服。
现代文：张辽得胜返回合肥营地，加修守备工事，自此军心更加稳定，诸将对张辽更加心悦诚服。
English: Zhang Liao returned to the Hefei camp in triumph, and the fortification work was repaired. Since then, the military spirit has been more stable, and everyone will be more pleased with Zhang Liao.

古文：权守合肥旬日，城不得拔，乃退。
现代文：孙权率军围攻合肥十多天，城池没有攻克，不得不撤围退军。
English: The army led by Sun Quan besieged Hefei for more than ten days, but failed to conquer the city and had to withdraw.

古文：辽率诸将追击，几获权。
现代文：张辽乘机率军追击，差一点活捉孙权。
English: Zhang Liao took the opportunity to pursue the army and almost captured Sun Quan alive.

