古文：毕自严，字景曾，淄川人。
现代文：毕自严，字景曾，淄川人。
English: Bi Zi Yan, Zeng Zi Jie, Lu Chuan Ren.

古文：万历二十年进士。
现代文：万历二十年进士。
English: After twenty years of hard work, he passed the junior high school entrance examination.

古文：除松江推官。年少有才干，征授刑部主事。
现代文：初任松江推官，年纪轻轻就很有才干，被朝廷召用为刑部主事。
English: The first Matsue magistrate, who was very talented at a young age, was called by the imperial court to be the head of the criminal department.

古文：历工部员外郎中，迁淮徐道参议。
现代文：后来做过工部员外郎中，升为淮徐道参议。
English: Later, he served as a member of the Ministry of Industry and Trade, and was promoted to be a councilor of Huaixu Road.

古文：内艰阕，分守冀宁。
现代文：回家为母亲守完丧后，被派往守卫冀宁。
English: After returning home to mourn his mother, he was sent to guard Jining.

古文：改河东副使，引疾去。
现代文：又改官河东副使，请病假离任了。
English: He was also promoted to the post of deputy envoy to Hedong and left the post on sick leave.

古文：起洮岷兵备参政。
现代文：后来又被起用，做洮岷兵备参政。
English: Later, he was appointed to serve as an envoy to prepare for participation in politics.

古文：以按察使徙治榆林西路，进右布政使。
现代文：又以按察使的名义调去治理榆林西路，然后当上了右布政使。
English: He was also transferred to govern the West Yulin Road in the name of the inspector, and then became the right cloth political envoy.

古文：泰昌时，召为太仆卿。
现代文：泰昌年间，朝廷召他做了太仆卿。
English: During the reign of Emperor Taichang, the imperial court called him to be a servant.

古文：天启元年四月，辽阳覆。廷议设天津巡抚，专饬海防，改自严右佥都御史以往。
现代文：天启元年四月，辽阳覆没，朝廷决定设置一名天津巡抚，专门整顿海防，让自严改官右佥都御史前往上任。
English: In April of the first year of the Apocalypse, when Liaoyang was submerged, the imperial court decided to appoint a Tianjin inspector, specifically to rectify the coastal defense, and let the self-imposed official, the Right Magistrate, go to take office.

古文：置水军，缮战舰，备戎器。
现代文：到任后，自严建立了水军，修造战船，装备武器。
English: After taking office, he established the navy, built warships and equipped weapons with self-discipline.

古文：及熊廷弼建三方布置策，天津居其一，增设镇海诸营，用戚继光遗法，水军先习陆战，军由是可用。
现代文：等熊廷弼提出三方布署兵力的策略后，天津是其中一个方面，所以增设了镇海等兵营。自严运用戚继光传下的办法，让水军先训练陆战，因此他的部队很可用。
English: After Xiong Tingyao proposed the strategy of three-way deployment of troops, Tianjin was one of the areas, so Zhenhai and other military camps were added. He used the method passed down from his relatives to let the navy first train for land warfare, so his troops were very useful.

古文：魏忠贤令锦衣千户刘侨逮天津废将，自严以无驾帖疏论之，报闻。
现代文：魏忠贤派锦衣千户刘侨来逮捕天津被罢了官的将领，自严用他们没有皇上的批示为由上书批评忠贤，熹宗回复说知道了。
English: Wei Zhongxian sent a thousand Liu Qiao in brocade to arrest Tianjin's ousted generals, and self-criticized Zhongxian in a letter on the grounds that they did not have the emperor's orders. Xizong replied that he knew.

古文：四方所募兵日逃亡，用自严言，摄其亲属补伍。
现代文：从各地征来的士兵天天逃跑，朝廷采纳自严的建议，吸收士兵的家属来补入部队。
English: Soldiers conscripted from all over the country were fleeing every day, and the imperial court adopted the self-disciplined suggestion of absorbing the soldiers' families to supplement the troops.

古文：兵部主事来斯行有武略，自严请为监军。山东白莲妖贼起，令斯行率五千人往，功多。
现代文：兵部主事来斯行有军事才略，自严请让他当了自己的监军，山东的白莲妖贼起来作乱，自严让斯行率领五千兵力前往平定，功劳很大。
English: The head of the military department, Si Xing, was a military genius. Zi Yan asked him to be his supervisor. Shandong's White Lotus Demon Thieves rose up to create turmoil. Zi Yan allowed Si Xing to lead five thousand troops to pacify the situation, which was a great achievement.

古文：初，万历四十六年，辽左用兵，议行登、莱海运。
现代文：早先，万历四十六年时，辽东用兵，朝廷决定开通登州、莱阳的海运。
English: Earlier, in the 46th year of Wanli, when Liaodong used troops, the imperial court decided to open the sea transportation of Dengzhou and Laiyang.

古文：明年二月，特设户部侍郎一人，兼右佥都御史，出督辽饷，语详《李长庚传》。及是，长庚迁，乃命自严代。
现代文：第二年二月特设户部侍郎一人兼右佥都御史，前去总督辽东兵饷。到这时李长庚提升了，朝廷就命令自严接任。
English: In February of the following year, one of the special retainers of the household and the right-hand man of Miyoshi, went to the governor of Liaodongbei. At this time, Li Changgong was promoted, and the imperial court ordered Zi Yan to take over.

古文：叙前平贼功，进右都御史兼户部左侍郎。
现代文：评定他以前平定贼寇的功劳，朝廷把他提升为右都御史兼户部左侍郎。
English: In recognition of his previous service in suppressing the bandits, the imperial court promoted him to the post of the Right Metropolitan Historian and the Left Attendant of the Household Division.

古文：时议省天津巡抚，令督饷侍郎兼领其事，即以委自严。
现代文：当时朝廷决定废除天津巡抚，让督饷侍郎兼领巡抚事务，就把它一并交给了自严。
English: At that time, the imperial court decided to abolish the Tianjin procuratorate and let the governor and the steward take charge of the procuratorate affairs, and handed it over to Zi Yan.

古文：又议讨朝鲜，自严言不可遽讨，当俟请贡输诚，东征效力，徐许其封耳。
现代文：朝廷又决定要讨伐朝鲜，自严说不能立即讨伐它，应当等它请求上贡，表示忠诚，为我们的东征效力，现在只要慢些答应给它加封就是了。
English: The imperial court also decided to invade Korea, saying that they could not invade it immediately, but should wait for it to ask for tribute, show its loyalty, and serve our eastward campaign. Now, all they had to do was promise to seal it more slowly.

古文：京师数地震，因言内批宜慎，恩泽宜节，人才宜惜，内操宜罢，语甚切直。
现代文：京师几次发生地震，自严借此上书讲出自宫廷里的批答应当慎重，加恩于臣下应该有所节制，对人才应该爱惜，宫廷里的操练应该停止，话说得很切实。
English: Several earthquakes have occurred in Beijing, and the self-restraint used to write a letter saying that the criticism from the court should be cautious, the gratitude to the vassals should be restrained, the talent should be cherished, and the exercise in the court should be stopped. The words are very practical.

古文：自严在事数年，综核撙节，公私赖之。
现代文：自严在职几年，对军饷全面核算，注意减省，公私两方都靠着他受益匪浅。
English: After several years of self-discipline in office, he has comprehensively calculated the military budget and paid attention to savings. Both the public and private sectors have benefited a lot from him.

古文：五年，以右都御史掌南京都察院。
现代文：五年，自严以右都御史的身份掌管了南京都察院。
English: In five years, Ziyan took charge of the Nankin Kyoto Satsuma-in as Utsunomiya's governor.

古文：明年正月，就改户部尚书。
现代文：第二年正月里就原地改官任户部尚书。
English: In the first month of the second year, he was promoted to the position of household secretary.

古文：忠贤议鬻南太仆牧马草场，助殿工。
现代文：忠贤决定卖掉南京太仆寺牧马的草场来资助修殿工程。
English: Zhongxian decided to sell the horse pasture of Nanjing Taipu Temple to fund the renovation project.

古文：自严持不可，遂引疾归。
现代文：自严坚持不同意，就请病假回乡去了。
English: When he did not agree, he took sick leave and went back to his hometown.

古文：崇祯元年，召拜户部尚书。
现代文：崇祯元年，召自严当了户部尚书。
English: In the first year of the reign of Emperor Chongzhen, he was summoned from Yan to become the head of the household.

古文：自严以度支大绌，请核逋赋，督屯田，严考成，汰冗卒，停蓟、密、昌、永四镇新增盐菜银二十二万，俱报可。
现代文：自严因为财政支出极为困难，请清查拖欠的田赋，开垦屯田，严格成绩考评，裁减多余的士兵，停发蓟州、密云、昌平、永平四镇新增加的二十二万两盐菜银，庄烈帝都批示同意了。
English: Because the financial expenditure is extremely difficult, please check the arrears of farmland, reclaim the abandoned fields, strictly evaluate the results, reduce the surplus soldiers, and stop issuing the newly added 220,000 taels of salted cabbage silver in the four towns of Zhangzhou, Miyun, Changping and Yongping. The solemn emperor agreed to the instructions.

古文：二年三月，疏言： 诸边年例，自辽饷外，为银三百二十七万八千有奇。
现代文：二年三月，自严上书说： 各边镇往年的例子，除辽饷外，其他军饷是三百二十七万八千多两银子。
English: In March of the second year, Ziyan wrote: In the case of each side town in previous years, except for Liao Ye, the other war booty was 3.278 million more than two silver coins.

古文：今蓟、密诸镇节省三十三万，尚应二百九十四万八千。
现代文：现在蓟州、密云等镇省下三十三万，还应付出二百九十四万八千。
English: Now, towns such as Zhangzhou and Miyun have saved 330,000 yuan, but they still have to pay 2.948 million yuan.

古文：统计京边岁入之数，田赋百六十九万二千，盐课百一十万三千，关税十六万一千，杂税十万三千，事例约二十万，凡三百二十六万五千有奇。
现代文：统计京边每年收入的数字，田赋是一百六十九万二千，盐课是一百一十万三千，关税是十六万一千，杂税是十万三千，事例约二十万，总共是三百二十六万五千多两。
English: According to the statistics of the annual income of Beijing, the rice allowance is 1.692 million yuan, the salt allowance is 1.103 million yuan, the tariff is 161,000 yuan, the miscellaneous tax is 103,000 yuan, the case is about 200,000 yuan, and the total is 3.265 million yuan.

古文：而逋负相沿，所入不满二百万，即尽充边饷，尚无赢余。
现代文：可是历年拖欠，一年中实际收入不满二百万，就是全部充作边饷也没有赢余。
English: However, the arrears over the years, the actual income of less than two million in one year, even if it is all used as a border fence, there is no surplus.

古文：乃京支杂项八十四万，辽东提塘三十余万，蓟、辽抚赏十四万，辽东旧饷改新饷二十万，出浮于入，已一百十三万六千。
现代文：可是京城支取的各项费用每年是八十四万，辽东提塘费用三十多万，蓟州、辽东抚赏费用十四万，辽东旧饷改新饷增加的是二十万，支出大于收入，已达一百十三万六千两。
English: However, the various expenses paid by Beijing City are 840,000 yuan per year, the expenses of Liaodong Titang are more than 300,000 yuan, the reward expenses of Luzhou and Liaodong are 140,000 yuan, and the increase of Liaodong old capital to new capital is 200,000 yuan. The expenditure exceeds the income and has reached 1.136 million yuan.

古文：况内供召买，宣、大抚赏，及一切不时之需，又有出常额外者。
现代文：况且还有供给宫廷召买的费用，宣府、大同的抚赏金以及一切不时之需，也有超出常额的情况。
English: Moreover, the expenses of supplying the court's summons, the proclamation of the government, the reward of Datong and all the needs from time to time, also exceed the fixed amount.

古文：乞敕下廷臣，各陈所见。 
现代文：请陛下传令廷臣，让大家就财政收支问题各陈己见！ 
English: Your Majesty, please order your courtiers to let everyone express their own views on the issue of fiscal revenue and expenditure!

古文：于是廷臣争效计画。自严择其可者，先列上十二事，曰增盐引，议鼓铸，括杂税，核隐田，税寺产，核牙行，停修仓廒，止葺公署，南马协济，崇文铺税，京运拨兑，板木折价。
现代文：于是廷臣争着提出各自的主张，自严选择其中可行的办法，先列出十二条意见交上，分别是增卖盐引，讨论铸造钱币，集中各项杂税，清查不缴租的田亩，征收寺庙产业税，核定牙行税率，停止修建仓库，停止维修、兴建公署，增收南京的马匹协办税、崇文门店铺税，调整京运拨兑比率、板木折价比率。
English: Therefore, the courtiers fought to put forward their own propositions, and self-disciplinedly chose a feasible method among them. First, they listed twelve opinions to submit, which were to increase the sale of salt, discuss the minting of coins, concentrate various miscellaneous taxes, check the fields and acres that did not pay rent, levy a temple industry tax, approve a dental tax rate, stop the construction of warehouses, stop the maintenance and construction of public offices, increase the collection of Nanjing's horse co-operation tax and Chongwen door store tax, adjust the Beijing traffic allocation ratio and the wood discount rate.

古文：已，复列上十二事，曰增关税，捐公费，鬻生祠，酌市税，汰冗役，核虚冒，加抵赎，班军折银，吏胥纳班，河滨滩荡，京东水田，殿工冠带。
现代文：后来又列了十二条意见，分别是增加关税、捐献公费、出卖生祠、重定市税、裁减冗役、清查虚冒、加收赎罪款、班军折银、吏胥纳班银、出售河滨滩荡、京东水田、殿工冠带。
English: Later, another 12 opinions were listed, including the increase of tariffs, the donation of public fees, the sale of ancestral shrines, the re-determination of municipal taxes, the reduction of redundant labor, the investigation of fraud, the increase of redemption money, the army's silver, the official's silver, the sale of riverside beaches, Jingdong rice paddies, and the crowns of palace workers.

古文：帝悉允行。
现代文：庄烈帝都予以批准执行。
English: All of them were approved and implemented by Emperor Zhuang.

古文：诏辑《赋役全书》。自严言： 《全书》之作，自行一条鞭始，距今已四十五年。
现代文：庄烈帝又命令编定《赋役全书》，自严说： 《全书》的编写，是从实行一条鞭法开始的，距今已经四十五年了。
English: Zhuge Liang also ordered the compilation of the "Complete Book of Enforcement," and said with self-restraint: "The compilation of the "Complete Book" began with the implementation of a whip method, and it has been forty-five years since then.

古文：有一事而此多彼少者，其弊为混派；有司听奸吏暗洒瓜分，其弊为花派。
现代文：有同一条规定而现在多那时少的，它的弊病是混派；官府听凭奸吏随意瓜分，它的弊病是花派。
English: There is a provision of the same article, but now there are more and fewer of them, and its malady is mixed faction; the government is subject to the arbitrary division of treacherous officials, and its malady is flower faction.

古文：当大为申饬。 
现代文：对此应当大力整顿。 
English: This should be vigorously rectified.

古文：因条八式以献。帝即命颁之天下。
现代文：进而做出八条规定呈请，庄烈帝就命令颁布全国。
English: In addition, eight regulations were proposed, and Emperor Zhuangde issued an order to the whole country.

古文：给事中汪始亨极论盗屯损饷之弊。
现代文：给事中汪始亨极力批评当时盗取屯粮损失军饷的弊端。
English: During the incident, Wang Shiheng strongly criticized the drawbacks of stealing the military pay for the loss of grain.

古文：自严言： 相沿已久，难于核实。
现代文：自严说： 这个问题相沿已久，难于核实。
English: Zi Yan said: This problem has been around for a long time, and it is difficult to verify.

古文：请无论军种民种，一照民田起科。 
现代文：请无论军种民种，一律照民田征收田赋！ 
English: Irrespective of the type of army or the type of people, please levy the rice field tax according to the size of the people's fields!

古文：帝是其议。
现代文：庄烈帝同意了他的意见。
English: Zhuo Ledei agreed with his opinion.

古文：先是，忠贤乱政，边饷多缺，自严给发如期。
现代文：在此之前，魏忠贤乱政，边饷多缺，自严这时却按期供应。
English: Prior to this, Wei Zhongxian had a chaotic government, and there was a shortage of border fences, but self-restraint prevailed and supplies were made on schedule.

古文：又疏言： 最耗财者无如客饷。
现代文：自严还曾经上书说： 最浪费钱财的莫过于客兵的银饷。
English: Self-restraint also once wrote: There is no greater waste of money than the silver ingots of guest soldiers.

古文：诸镇年例合三百二十七万，而客饷居三之一，宜大裁省。
现代文：各边镇每年的例额总共是三百二十七万两，客兵的银饷就占了三分之一，应该狠心把它减下来。
English: The annual quota of each border town is a total of 3.277 million taels, and the guest soldiers' money accounts for one-third of it. It should be cut down ruthlessly.

古文：其次则有抚赏、召买、修筑诸费，皆不可不节。 
现代文：其次就是抚赏、召买、修筑等费用，都不能不节省。 
English: Secondly, it is necessary to save on expenses such as reward, recruitment, and construction.

古文：帝褒纳之。
现代文：庄烈帝以赞扬的口气接受了。
English: The Sejong endorsed and adopted this opinion.

古文：其冬，京师被兵，帝忧劳国事，旨中夜数发。
现代文：这年冬天，京师受到攻打，庄烈帝忧劳国事，半夜里能发出几道圣旨过来。
English: In the winter of that year, the capital was under attack, and Emperor Zhuang was so worried about the affairs of state that he was able to issue several sacred decrees in the middle of the night.

古文：自严奏答无滞，不敢安寝，头目臃肿，事幸无乏。
现代文：自严做出的回答毫无迟疑，不敢放下心来睡觉，因此脑袋、眼睛都肿了，幸好没有什么缺少的东西。
English: The self-disciplined answer did not hesitate, did not dare to put down his heart to sleep, so his head and eyes were swollen, fortunately there was nothing missing.

古文：明年夏，以六罪自劾，乞罢，优旨慰留。
现代文：第二年夏天，他以六条罪过自我批评，请求离职，庄烈帝好心地加以安慰、挽留。
English: In the summer of the following year, he criticized himself with six sins and asked to leave his post. Zhuang Rong Di kindly consoled and retained him.

古文：先以考满加太子少保，叙遵、永克复功，再进太子太保。
现代文：以前因为考满自严已加官太子少保，现在朝廷评定遵化、永平战胜敌人得到收复的功劳，又给他加官为太子太保。
English: Previously, because he had passed the self-discipline examination, he had been promoted to the position of the Crown Prince's Junior Bodyguard. Now, the Imperial Court has evaluated the merits of Zunhua and Yongping's victory over the enemy, and he has been promoted to the position of the Crown Prince's Bodyguard.

古文：兵部尚书梁廷栋请增天下田赋，自严不能止。
现代文：兵部尚书梁廷栋请加收全国的田赋，自严没能加以制止。
English: Shangshu Liang Tingdong of the Ministry of Military Affairs requested to increase the collection of rice fields throughout the country, but he was unable to stop it.

古文：于是旧增五百二十万之外，更增百六十五万有奇，天下益耗矣。
现代文：于是除原先增加过的五百二十万之外，又加收一百六十五万多，天下百姓更加困耗了。
English: As a result, in addition to the original increase of 5.2 million yuan, an additional 1.65 million yuan was collected, making the people of the world even more exhausted.

古文：已，陈时务十事，意主利民，帝悉采纳。
现代文：后来自严就当时政务提出了十条意见，主旨是为了利民，庄烈帝都采纳了。
English: Later, Zeng Yan put forward ten opinions on the government affairs at that time, the main purpose of which was to benefit the people, which were all adopted by Emperor Zhuo.

古文：又以兵饷日增，屡请清核，而兵部及督抚率为寝阁。
现代文：又因为兵饷一天天增加，自严几次请求加以清查，可是兵部及总督、巡抚大都把这件事给搁在一边。
English: Also, because the number of soldiers was increasing day by day, I made several requests to investigate, but the military department, the governor and the inspector mostly put the matter aside.

古文：复乞汰内地无用之兵，帝即令严饬，然不能尽行也。
现代文：自严又请求裁减内地用不着的军队，庄烈帝就传令严加整顿，但是并不能全面推行下去。
English: Self-disciplined and requesting the reduction of unnecessary troops in the interior, Emperor Solemn ordered a strict reorganization, but it could not be fully implemented.

古文：御史余应桂劾自严殿试读卷，首荐陈于泰，乃辅臣周延儒姻娅。
现代文：御史余应桂弹劾自严在殿试读卷时推荐陈于泰为第一。于泰是辅臣周延儒的儿女亲家。
English: When the imperial historian Yu Ying Gui impeached Zi Yan from reading the exam paper in the hall, he recommended Chen Yutai as the first. Yutai was the son and daughter of the assistant minister Zhou Yanru.

古文：自严引疾乞休，疏四上，不允。
现代文：自严称病请求退休，书上了四次，庄烈帝不同意。
English: He wrote four times that he was seriously ill and asked to retire, but Emperor Zhuang disagreed.

古文：时有诏，县令将行取者，户部先核其钱谷。
现代文：当时朝廷有令，县令要报请吏部升用时，户部要先核算他的钱谷征收情况。
English: At that time, there was an order from the imperial court that when a county magistrate wanted to report to the cadre department for promotion, the household department should first calculate the situation of his Qiantang collection.

古文：华亭知县郑友元已入为御史，先任青浦，逋金花银二千九百。
现代文：华亭知县郑友元已经入朝当上御史，以前担任青浦知县时欠收二千九百两金花银。
English: Zheng Youyuan of Huating County has already entered the imperial history of the dynasty. Previously, when he was in charge of Qingpu County, he failed to collect 2900 pieces of gold and silver.

古文：帝以诘户部，自严言友元已输十之七贮太仓。
现代文：庄烈帝向户部质问这件事，自严说友元已经交了十分之七存在太仓里。
English: Zhuang Rongdi questioned the head of the household about this matter, and said with self-restraint that Yuyuan had already handed over seven-tenths of it to Taicang.

古文：帝令主库者核实，无有，帝怒责自严。
现代文：庄烈帝让管仓库的人核实，没有，就怒气冲冲地批评自严。
English: Zhuang Rongdi asked the person in charge of the warehouse to check, but when he didn't, he angrily criticized the self-restraint.

古文：自严饰词辨，帝益怒，遂下自严狱，遣使逮友元。
现代文：自严转弯抹角地辩解，庄烈帝更恼了，就把他打入监狱，又派使者去逮捕友元。
English: Zhuang Rong was even more annoyed, so he threw him into prison and sent an envoy to arrest Tomo Yuan.

古文：御史李若谠疏救，不纳。
现代文：御史李若谠上书论救，庄烈帝不听。
English: Emperor Zhuang didn't listen to Li Ruojuan, who wrote a book on salvation.

古文：逾月，给事中吴甘来复抗疏论救，帝乃释之。
现代文：过了一个月，给事中吴甘来又抗章论救，庄烈帝才把他释放出来。
English: After a month, Wu Gan came to the rescue again, and Zhuang Rongdi released him.

古文：八年五月，叙四川平贼功，复官，致仕。
现代文：八年五月，朝廷评定四川平贼的功劳时，恢复了自严的官籍，让他退休了。
English: In May of the eighth year, when the court evaluated the merits of the Sichuan petty thief, it restored the self-discipline of the official, and let him retire.

古文：又三年卒，赐恤如制。
现代文：又过了三年，自严去世，朝廷按规定给他赐以恤典。
English: Three years later, when Zi Yan passed away, the imperial court granted him a pension in accordance with regulations.

