古文：杨最，字殿之，射洪人。正德十二年进士。
现代文：杨最，字殿之，射洪人。正德十二年进士。
English: Yang Chaoyu, a member of the Zidong, was a member of the Shao Hong. He entered the priesthood in the 12th year of Zhengde.

古文：授工部主事。
现代文：授官工部主事。
English: He is now in charge of the engineering department.

古文：督逋山西，悯其民贫，不俟奏报辄返。
现代文：督收山西的拖欠，怜悯这个地方百姓的贫苦，不等候奏报就返回来。
English: Collect Shanxi's arrears, pity the poverty of the people in this place, and return without waiting for the report.

古文：尚书李鐩劾之，有诏复往。
现代文：尚书李钅遂弹劾他，有诏令他再前往。
English: Shangshu Li Yan then impeached him and ordered him to go there again.

古文：最乃与巡按御史牛天麟极陈岁灾民困状，请缓其徵。从之。
现代文：杨最向巡按御史牛天麟极力陈讲当年的灾害民困的情况，请求对他们进行缓征，皇帝听从了他们的话。
English: Yang Zhaozhong met with the inspector-general of history, Niu Tianlin, and tried his best to explain the situation of the disaster and hardship of that year, and requested that they be deferred, and the emperor listened to their words.

古文：历郎中，治水淮、扬。
现代文：历官工部郎中，在淮、扬治水。
English: He was a junior official in the Ministry of Industry and Trade, and was in charge of water management in Huai and Yang.

古文：值世宗即位，上言： 宝应氾光湖西南高，东北下。运舟行湖中三十余里。
现代文：碰上世宗即位的时候，他上奏说： 宝应、汜光湖西南高，东北低，运输舟船行湖中有三十多里。
English: At the time of Emperor Shizong's accession to the throne, he said in his report: Baoying and Luguang Lake are high in the southwest and low in the northeast, and there are more than thirty miles in the lake for transportation by boat.

古文：而东北堤岸不逾三尺，雨霪风厉，辄冲决，阴阻运舟，监城、兴化、通、泰良田悉遭其害。
现代文：东北堤岸不超过三尺，雨霪风厉，很容易就被冲决，阻坏粮船，盐城、兴化、通、泰良田全部遭受其害。
English: The northeastern embankment does not exceed three feet, the rain and wind are fierce, it is easy to be washed away, blocking grain ships, and Yancheng, Xinghua, Tong and Taiyuan all suffer from it.

古文：宜如往年白圭修筑高邮康济湖，专敕大臣加修内河，培旧堤为外障，可百年无患，是为上策。
现代文：应当像往年白圭修筑高邮康济湖一样，专派大臣加以修理内河，给旧堤培土作为外障，才能百年无患，这是上策。
English: It is necessary to send a special minister to repair the inland river, just as Bai Gui did in previous years to repair and build the high-post Kangji Lake, and to prepare soil for the old embankment as an external obstacle, so that it can be safe for a hundred years. This is the best strategy.

古文：其次于缘河树杙数重，稍障风波，而增旧堤，毋使庳薄，亦足支数年。
现代文：其次在河边打树桩数重，稍微阻障风波，而增大旧堤，不要让它低矮单薄，也足以支持数年。
English: Secondly, build a number of tree stumps along the river, slightly blocking the storm, and enlarge the old dike, do not let it be low and thin, it is also enough to support several years.

古文：若但窒隙补阙，苟冀无事，一遇霪潦，荡为巨浸，是为无策。 
现代文：如果只阻塞缝隙修补豁口，苟且希求无事，一旦遇上大水，成为汪洋那就无计可施了。 
English: If you only block the cracks and repair the gaps, and hope for nothing, once you encounter heavy water, it will become a vast ocean and there is nothing you can do.

古文：部议用其中策焉。
现代文：部里讨论后用他的中策。
English: After discussion within the ministry, he came up with his middle way.

古文：出为宁波知府。
现代文：他出任宁波知府。
English: He served as the governor of Ningbo.

古文：请罢浙东贡币，诏悉以银充，民以为便。
现代文：请求免去浙东贡币，皇帝下诏都用银子充当，百姓认为方便。
English: The people thought it was convenient to ask for the exemption of the East Zhejiang tribute coins, and the emperor's edicts were all made of silver.

古文：累迁贵州按察使，入为太仆卿。
现代文：累迁贵州按察使，调入朝廷任太仆卿。
English: He was successively moved to Guizhou as an inspector and transferred to the imperial court as a servant of the emperor.

古文：世宗好神仙。给事中顾存仁、高金、王纳言皆以直谏得罪。
现代文：世宗喜好神仙，给事中顾存仁、高金、王纳言都因直谏而获罪。
English: King Sejong was fond of immortals, and Gu Cunren, Gao Jin, and Wang Nagan were all found guilty of cheating.

古文：会方士段朝用者，以所炼白金器百余因郭勋以进，云以盛饮食物，供斋醮，即神仙可致也。
现代文：正碰上叫段朝用的方士，用他所炼的白金器皿一百多件赁借郭勋来进献给皇上，说用这些东西来盛饮食之物，供祭斋醮，那么神仙就能来到。
English: Just then, there was a fortune-teller called Duan, who used more than a hundred pieces of platinum ware he had made to borrow from Guo Xun to present to the emperor. He said that if these things were used to hold food and drink for the sacrificial meal, then the immortal would be able to come.

古文：帝立召与语，大悦。
现代文：皇帝当即召见他并与他谈话，非常愉快。
English: The emperor immediately summoned him and had a very pleasant conversation with him.

古文：朝用言：帝深居无与外人接，则黄金可成，不死药可得。
现代文：段朝用说，皇帝深居内宫不与外人接触，那么黄金可成，不死的药物可得。
English: Emperor Duan used to say that if the emperor lived deep in the inner palace and did not come into contact with outsiders, then gold could be made and the drug of immortality could be obtained.

古文：帝益悦，谕廷臣令太子监国， 朕少假一二年，亲政如初。 
现代文：皇帝更加高兴，下谕知晓廷臣说让太子监国， 朕只稍微休假一两年，就亲自理政如初 。
English: The emperor was even more pleased. Knowing that the courtiers said to let the crown prince supervise the country, I only took a short vacation for one or two years, and I personally managed the government as before.

古文：举朝愕不敢言。
现代文：满朝文武大臣都惊愕而不敢说话。
English: The Manchurian Minister of Culture and Martial Arts was stunned and did not dare to speak.

古文：最抗疏谏曰： 陛下春秋方壮，乃圣谕及此，不过得一方士，欲服食求神仙耳。
现代文：杨最抗疏规劝说 ：陛下正在壮年，竟下如此圣谕，不过只因得到一个方士，想服食求神仙。
English: Yang was the most resistant to persuasion: His Majesty is in his prime, and he has issued such a sacred edict, but only because he got a sorcerer, and he wants to pray to the gods.

古文：神仙乃山栖澡练者所为，岂有高居黄屋紫闼，兖衣玉食，而能白日翀举者？
现代文：神仙是山栖澡炼的人所做的，哪有高居黄屋紫门，衮衣玉食，而能白日飞升的人。
English: Immortals are made by people who live in the mountains and take baths. There are no people who live in high-rise buildings, wear fine clothes and eat fine food, but who can soar in the daytime.

古文：臣虽至愚，不敢奉诏。 
现代文：我虽然非常愚鲁，但不敢奉诏。 
English: Although I am very stupid, I dare not obey the edict.

古文：帝大怒，立下诏狱，重杖之，杖未毕而死。
现代文：皇帝大怒，当即将他打下诏狱，用重杖拷打他，杖还没有打完就已死去。
English: The emperor was furious, and when he was about to send him to the imperial prison, he tortured him with a heavy cane. He died before the cane was finished.

古文：最既死，监国议亦罢。
现代文：杨最既然死去，监国的提议也就作罢。
English: Now that Yang most is dead, the proposal of the supervising state will also be abandoned.

古文：请斥太常卿陈道瀛等，坐下诏狱，谪湖广布政司照磨。
现代文：第二年，郭勋因罪死在狱中。段朝用的伪诈被发觉，也伏诛。
English: The following year, Guo Xun died in prison for his crime. The fraud used by the Duan Dynasty was discovered, and he was also arrested.

古文：累官陕西佥事。冯恩，字子仁，松江华亭人。
现代文：隆庆元年，赠杨最右副都御史，谥号忠节。冯恩，字子仁，松江华亭人。
English: In the first year of Longqing, Yang was presented with the right-most vice-governor of the capital, with the posthumous name of Zhongjie.

古文：幼孤，家贫，母吴氏亲督教之。
现代文：幼年是孤儿，家庭贫穷，他的母亲亲自督教他学习。
English: He was orphaned at a young age, his family was poor, and his mother personally supervised his studies.

古文：比长，知力学。
现代文：等到年龄大一点，知道竭力学习。
English: Wait until you are a bit older and know how to study hard.

古文：除夜无米且雨，室尽湿，恩读书床上自若。
现代文：除夕之夜无米下锅而且天在下雨，房室尽湿，冯恩在床上读书神情自若。
English: On New Year's Eve, there was no rice in the pot and it was raining, the room was damp, and Feng En was reading in bed with a confident air.

古文：登嘉靖五年进士，除行人。
现代文：登嘉靖五年进士，授官行人。
English: In the fifth year of Deng Jiajing, he was promoted to an officer.

古文：出劳两广总督王守仁，遂执贽为弟子。
现代文：出外慰劳两广总督王守仁，向王守仁执礼为弟子。
English: He went out to console Wang Shouren, the governor of the two provinces, and bowed to Wang Shouren as his disciple.

古文：擢南京御史。
现代文：不久提升他为南京御史。
English: He was promoted to the post of Nanjing Imperial Historian.

古文：故事，御史有所执讯，不具狱以移刑部，刑部狱具，不复牒报。
现代文：按过去的惯例，御史有时审理案件，不定案就移交给刑部，刑部定案后，不再向御史通报。
English: According to the past practice, the magistrate sometimes hears the case, and the uncertain case is transferred to the criminal department. After the criminal department finalizes the case, it will no longer be reported to the magistrate.

古文：恩请尚书仍报御史。诸曹郎讙，谓御史属吏我。
现代文：冯恩请尚书仍然向御史通报，诸位曹郎喧哗，说御史以我等为属吏。
English: Feng En asked Shang Shu to still report to You Shi, all of you clamor, saying that You Shi regards us as subordinate officials.

古文：恩曰： 非敢然也。欲知事本末，得相检核耳。 
现代文：冯恩说： 不敢这样，想知道事情的本末，好进行检查核实。 
English: Feng En said: I dare not do this, I want to know the bottom line of the matter, so that I can check and verify.

古文：尚书无以难。
现代文：尚书不能拿什么来为难他。
English: Shangshu couldn't use anything to embarrass him.

古文：已，巡视上江。
现代文：之后，巡视上江。
English: After that, they inspected the Shangjiang River.

古文：指挥张绅杀人，立置之辟。
现代文：指挥张绅杀人，冯恩立即将他处死。
English: Feng En immediately put him to death for ordering the murder of Zhang Sheng.

古文：大计朝觐吏，南台例先纠。
现代文：考察赴朝廷觐见官吏，南台照例先行检举。
English: The inspection team went to the Imperial Court to meet with officials. As usual, Nantai reported the case first.

古文：都御史汪鋐擅权，请如北台，既毕事，始许论列。
现代文：都御史汪钅宏专权，请求到北台去，等到事情完毕，才允许论列。
English: The governor of the capital, Wang Qianhong, requested to go to the North Tower and wait until the matter was over before allowing the discussion.

古文：恩与给事中林土元等疏争之，得如故。
现代文：冯恩和给事中林士元等人上疏争辩这件事，才使得恢复原来程序。
English: It was only after Feng En and Lin Shiyuan and others involved in the case argued about the matter that the original procedure was restored.

古文：帝用阁臣议分建南北郊，且欲令皇后蚕北郊，诏廷臣各陈所见，而诏中屡斥异议者为邪徒。
现代文：皇帝采用阁臣的建议分建南北郊祀，并且想让皇后行蚕礼于北郊，诏令廷臣各抒己见，但诏令中屡次斥责持有异议的人为邪徒。
English: The emperor adopted the recommendation of the cabinet minister to separate the north and south suburbs, and wanted the queen to perform the silkworm ritual in the northern suburbs. The imperial edict ordered the courtiers to express their own opinions, but the imperial edict repeatedly reprimanded those who held dissent as heretics.

古文：恩上言： 人臣进言甚难，明诏令直谏，又诋之为邪徒，安所适从哉？
现代文：冯恩上言说 ：人臣进言非常困难，明诏下令直谏，又诋毁直谏的人为邪徒，让人适从哪一个呢？
English: Feng En said, "It is very difficult for a vassal to make suggestions. He clearly ordered Naosuke, and slandered Naosuke as a heretic. Which one should people follow?"

古文：此非陛下意，必左右奸佞欲信其说者阴诋之耳。
现代文：这不是陛下的意思，一定是左右奸佞的人想借其说而暗中诋毁的缘故。
English: This was not His Majesty's intention, but it must have been the result of people on both the right and the left who wanted to use his words to slander him.

古文：今士风日下，以缄默为老成，以謇谔为矫激，已难乎其忠直矣。
现代文：而今士风日下，以缄默不语为老成，以语言正直为矫激，已经祸及到忠直的人。
English: But nowadays, the demeanour of the scholar, with silence as a virtue and honesty as an irritant, has become the bane of the honest.

古文：若预恐有异议，而逆诋之为邪，则必雷同附和，而后可也。
现代文：如果事先担心有异议，而逆诋之为邪，那么必定是雷同附和，然后才行。
English: If you fear dissent in advance, and denigrate it as evil, then it must be unanimity, and then you can do it.

古文：况天地合祀已百余年，岂宜轻改？
现代文：况且天地合在一起祭祀已有一百多年，怎么能轻易改变？
English: Besides, it has been more than a hundred years since heaven and earth were united in sacrifice, so how can it be easily changed?

古文：《礼》： 男不言内，女不言外 。
现代文：《礼》说 ：男不言内，女不言外。 
English: "Ri" says: a man does not say anything, a woman does not say anything.

古文：皇后深居九重，岂宜远出郊野？
现代文：皇后深居九重，岂适合远出郊野？
English: The Empress lives nine stories deep. Is it appropriate for her to travel far from the countryside?

古文：愿速罢二议，毋为好事希宠者所误。 
现代文：希望陛下迅速罢去二项提议，不要被讨好您的人所误。 
English: I hope that Your Majesty will quickly dismiss the two proposals and not be fooled by those who are trying to please you.

古文：恩草疏时，自意得重谴。
现代文：冯恩写疏章时，自己估计要得到重罚。
English: When Feng En wrote the apology, he expected to be heavily punished.

古文：乃疏奏，帝不之罪，恩于是益感奋。
现代文：等到疏上奏后，皇帝不给他加罪，冯恩因此更加感奋。
English: The emperor did not add to his punishment until after the sermon, which made Feng En even more excited.

古文：十一年冬，彗星见，诏求直言。
现代文：十一年冬天，彗星出现，皇帝下诏书征求直言。
English: In the winter of the eleventh year, a comet appeared, and the emperor issued an edict to solicit candid opinions.

古文：恩以天道远，人道迩，乃备指大臣邪正，谓：
现代文：冯恩以天道远、人道近，来详细指称大臣的邪正，他说：
English: Feng En pointed out the minister's wickedness in detail, saying, "Heaven is far away, and humanity is near."

古文：大学士李时小心谦抑，解棼拨乱非其所长。
现代文： 大学士李时小心谦抑，解拨纷乱不是他的长处。
English: Li Shiji, a university scholar, is cautious and modest. Dealing with chaos is not his forte.

古文：翟銮附势持禄，惟事模棱。
现代文：翟銮附势持禄，惟事模棱。
English: 附势持禄,惟事ambiguity.

古文：户部尚书许赞谨厚和易，虽乏剸断，不经之费必无。
现代文：户部尚书许赞谨厚和易，虽然缺乏果断，必定没有不必要的开支花费。
English: Although it lacks decisiveness, there must be no unnecessary expenditure.

古文：礼部尚书夏言，多蓄之学，不羁之才，驾驭任之，庶几救时宰相。
现代文：礼部尚书夏言，很有学问，是豪放的才士，驾驭任用他，可能是救时的宰相。
English: The head of the etiquette department, Shang Shuxiayan, is very learned and talented. If he is appointed, he may be the prime minister to save the day.

古文：兵部尚书王宪刚直不屈，通达有为。
现代文：兵部尚书王宪刚直不屈，通达有为。
English: Shangshu Wangxian, a member of the Ministry of Military Affairs, is unyielding and straightforward.

古文：刑部尚书王时中进退昧几，委靡不振。
现代文：刑部尚书王时中，不知进退，委靡不振。
English: When the head of the Criminal Investigation Department, Shang Shuxu, was in middle school, he didn't know whether to advance or retreat.

古文：工部尚书赵璜廉介自持，制节谨度。
现代文：工部尚书赵璜廉介自持，制节谨严。
English: Zhao Yulian, secretary of the Ministry of Industry and Trade, is self-supporting and has a strict system.

古文：吏部尚书左侍郎周用才学有余，直谅不足。
现代文：吏部尚书左侍郎周用，才学有余，正直诚实不足。
English: The clerk, Shangshu Zuozhirong Zhou Ying, only has enough knowledge, but not enough honesty.

古文：右侍郎许诰讲论便捷，学术迂邪。
现代文：右侍郎许诰讲论便捷，学术迂腐不正。
English: The Right Attendant Xu Xi's lectures are convenient, and academic pedantry is unfair.

古文：礼部左侍郎湛若水聚徒讲学，素行未合人心。
现代文：礼部左侍郎湛若水聚徒讲学，素行未合人心。
English: The left-hand attendant of the ceremonial department, Tan Wakamizu, gave a lecture to a group of students, which did not go down well with the people.

古文：右侍郎顾鼎臣警悟疏通，不局偏长，器足任重。
现代文：右侍郎顾鼎臣警悟疏通，不局限于偏长，是足以重任之器。
English: Gu Dingchen, the right-hand man of Gu Dingchen, is alert and diligent, not limited to the long side, and is a heavy-duty tool.

古文：兵部左侍郎钱如京安静有操守。
现代文：兵部左侍郎钱如京安静有操守。
English: The left-hand attendant of the military department, Qian Ruzhong, is quiet and has good manners.

古文：右侍郎黄宗时虽擅文学，因人成事。
现代文：右侍郎黄宗时虽然擅长文学，但因人成事。
English: Although his right-hand man, Huang Zongshi, was good at literature, he did not succeed because of other people.

古文：刑部左侍郎闻渊存心正大，处事精详，可寄以股肱。
现代文：刑部左侍郎闻渊存心正直无私，处事精详，可以寄托以辅佐之任。
English: Menya, the left-hand man of the criminal investigation department, is honest and selfless, and his work is detailed. He can be entrusted with the role of assistant.

古文：右侍郎朱廷声笃实不浮，谦约有守。
现代文：右侍郎朱廷声笃实不浮，谦虚俭约有操守。
English: The right-hand waiter, Zhu Ting, has a solid and steady voice, and is modest, frugal and conscientious.

古文：工部左侍郎黎奭滑稽浅近，才亦有为。
现代文：工部左侍郎黎滑稽浮浅，才也有为。
English: The left-hand man of the engineering department, Lai, is funny and superficial, but he also has his moments.

古文：右侍郎林〈木昂〉才器可取，通达不执。
现代文：右侍郎林廷木昂才学气度不凡，通达而不拘泥。 
English: His right-hand man, Lin Ting Muangcai, has an extraordinary academic temperament and is open-minded but not rigid.

古文：而极论大学士张孚敬、方献夫，右都御史汪鋐三人之奸，谓：
现代文：而极力疏论大学士张孚敬、方献夫，右都御史汪钅宏的奸诈，他说：
English: But he tried his best to avoid discussing the treachery of the university scholars Zhang Fu Jing, Fang Xianfu, and the Right Metropolitan Wang Binghong. He said:

古文：孚敬刚恶凶险，媢嫉反侧。
现代文： 张孚敬刚恶凶险，嫉妒多变。
English: Zhang Fujing is stubborn, evil, dangerous, jealous and changeable.

古文：近都给事中魏良弼已痛言之，不容复赘。
现代文：近来都给事中已经痛说了他，用不着重复。
English: I've been saying it a lot lately, so I don't need to repeat it.

古文：献夫外饰谨厚，内实诈奸。
现代文：方献夫外表看起来谨厚，内心实际上奸诈。
English: Fang Xianfu looks dignified on the outside, but he is actually deceitful on the inside.

古文：前在吏部，私乡曲，报恩雠，靡所不至。
现代文：以前在吏部，私庇乡里，报恩复仇，无所不至。
English: In the past, in the cadre department, in the private refuge township, the return of favor and revenge, everywhere.

古文：昨岁伪以病去，陛下遣使征之，礼意恳至。
现代文：去年伪称有病离去，陛下派遣使者征他回来，礼意恳切。
English: Last year, he pretended to be ill and left. His Majesty sent an envoy to ask him to return, and he did so with all due respect.

古文：彼方倨傲偃蹇，入山读书，直俟传旨别用，然后忻然就道。
现代文：他却态度傲慢，入山读书，一直等到传旨另外任用他，然后才高兴地上路。
English: He, on the other hand, had a haughty attitude, went into the mountains to study, and waited until he received the order to be appointed to another post, before he was happy to set out on his journey.

古文：夫以吏部尚书别用，非入阁而何？
现代文：以吏部尚书另外使用，不是想入阁又是什么呢？
English: What's the use of holding the post of cadre if you don't want to be in the cabinet?

古文：此献夫之病所以痊也。
现代文：这就是方献夫的疾病痊愈的原因。
English: This is the reason why Fang Xianfu's illness was cured.

古文：今又遣兼掌吏部，必将呼引朋类，播弄威福，不大坏国事不止。
现代文：现在又派遣他兼管吏部，他必将呼引朋友同类，执掌威福之权，不大坏国事不会停止。
English: Now he is sending him to be in charge of the Ministry of Civil Affairs. He will certainly bring friends of the same kind, hold the power of authority, and the country's affairs will not stop.

古文：若鋐，则如鬼如蜮，不可方物。
现代文：像汪钅宏，则如鬼怪，不可比述。
English: Like Wang Binghong, it is like a ghost, it cannot be compared.

古文：所仇惟忠良，所图惟报复。
现代文：他所仇恨的只有忠良，他所图谋的只有报复。
English: The only thing he hates is loyalty, the only thing he plots is revenge.

古文：今日奏降某官，明日奏调某官，非其所憎恶则宰相之所憎恶也。
现代文：今日上奏降某官，明日上奏调某官，这些官员不是他所憎恨的就是宰相所憎恨的。
English: Today he reports on the demotion of a certain official, tomorrow he reports on the transfer of a certain official, these officials are either hated by him or hated by the Prime Minister.

古文：臣不意陛下寄鋐以腹心，而鋐逞奸务私乃至此极。
现代文：我想不到陛下将汪钅宏寄托为心腹，而汪钅宏逞奸务私以至于达到如此极端。
English: I couldn't imagine that His Majesty would entrust Wang Binghong as a confidant, and that Wang Binghong would go to such extremes to do his dirty work.

古文：且都察院为纲纪之首。
现代文：而督察院处于纲纪的首位。
English: The Inspectorate is at the top of the hierarchy.

古文：陛下不早易之以忠厚正直之人，万一御史衔命而出，效其锲薄以希称职，为天下生民害，可胜言哉！
现代文：陛下如果不早用忠厚正直的人代替他，万一御史领命外出，效法他的刻薄来希求称职，为害天下生民百姓，能承担天下之言吗？
English: If His Majesty does not replace him with a loyal and honest person as soon as possible, in the unlikely event that the Imperial Historian is ordered to go out and emulate his meanness to seek a competent position, to the detriment of the people of the world, can he bear the word of the world?

古文：故臣谓孚敬，根本之彗也；鋐，腹心之彗也；献夫，门庭之彗也。
现代文：所以我说张孚敬是根本的彗星；汪钅宏是腹心的彗星；方献夫是门庭的彗星。
English: Therefore, I say that Zhang Fujing is the fundamental comet; Wang Shihong is the comet of the confidant; Fang Xianfu is the comet of the gate.

古文：三彗不去，百官不和，庶政不平，虽欲弭灾，不可得已。
现代文：这三颗彗星不除去，百官不和，庶政不平，虽然想消弭天灾，不可能获得成功。 
English: If these three comets are not removed, there will be discord among government officials, and the general political situation will not be smooth. Even if you want to eliminate natural disasters, you cannot succeed.

古文：帝得疏大怒，逮下锦衣狱，究主使名。
现代文：皇帝得到疏章后大怒，将他逮捕下锦衣狱，追究主使他的姓名。
English: The emperor was furious after he was relieved of the title, and had him arrested and sent to the brocade prison, and the name of his chief envoy was investigated.

古文：恩日受搒掠，濒死者数，语卒不变。
现代文：冯恩一天天遭受拷打，多次濒临死亡，他的话始终没有改变。
English: Feng En was tortured day in and day out and came close to death many times, but his words never changed.

古文：惟言御史宋邦辅尝过南京，谈及朝政暨诸大臣得失。
现代文：只是说御史宋邦辅曾经到过南京，谈到朝政和诸大臣的得失。
English: It only says that the Imperial Historian Song Bangyou had been to Nanjing and talked about the gains and losses of the imperial government and the ministers.

古文：遂并逮邦辅下狱，夺职。
现代文：于是一并逮捕宋邦辅并且下狱，夺去他的官职。
English: So they arrested Song Bangsuo at the same time and put him in prison, taking away his official position.

古文：明年春移恩刑部狱。
现代文：第二年春天将冯恩转移到刑部狱中。
English: In the spring of the following year, Feng En was transferred to the prison of the Ministry of Justice.

古文：帝欲坐以上言大臣德政律，致之死。
现代文：皇帝想按妄自上言大臣德政律问他的罪，致他于死地。
English: The emperor wanted to put him to death for the crime of being a self-proclaimed minister.

古文：尚书王时中等言： 恩疏毁誉相半，非专颂大臣，宜减戍。 
现代文：尚书王时中等人说： 冯恩的疏章毁誉各有一半，不是专颂大臣，应当减罪戍边。 
English: Shang Shu Wang said in the middle of the day: Feng En's slander and defamation each have a half, it is not a special praise minister, it should be reduced.

古文：帝愈怒，曰： 恩非专指孚敬三臣也，徒以大礼故，仇君无上，死有余罪。
现代文：皇帝更加恼怒，说： 冯恩不是专门指责张孚敬三个臣子，只因为大礼的缘故，仇君无上，死有余罪。
English: The emperor was even more angry, saying: Feng En did not specifically accuse Zhang Fu Jing's three courtiers, only because of the gift, the enemy is supreme, and the death is more than enough.

古文：时中乃欲欺公鬻狱耶？ 
现代文：王时中是想欺公鬻狱吗？ 
English: Did Wang Shizhong want to cheat the public and go to prison?

古文：遂褫时中职，夺侍郎闻渊俸，贬郎中张国维、员外郎孙云极边杂职，而恩竟论死。
现代文：于是革除王时中的官职，夺去侍郎闻渊的俸禄，贬郎中张国维、员外郎孙云，调到极边任杂职，而冯恩竟被判死刑。
English: As a result, the official position of Wang Shizhong was removed, the salary of the attendant Wen Yuan was taken away, the attendant Zhang Guowei and the attendant Sunyun were demoted, and they were transferred to the extreme side to perform miscellaneous duties, and Feng En was actually sentenced to death.

古文：长子行可年十三，伏阙讼冤。
现代文：冯恩的长子冯行可十三岁，伏在殿阙讼冤。
English: Feng Xingke, the eldest son of Feng En, was thirteen years old, and he was in court to settle a grievance.

古文：日夜匍匐长安街，见冠盖者过，辄攀舆号呼乞救，终无敢言者。
现代文：日夜匍匐长安街，见到有冠盖的官员经过，就攀车呼号乞求搭救，终究没有敢说话的人。
English: On Chang'an Street, day and night, seeing the crowned officials pass by, they climbed on the car to call for help. After all, there was no one who dared to speak.

古文：时鋐已迁吏部尚书，而王廷相代为都御史。
现代文：当时汪钅宏已迁吏部尚书，而王廷相代他任都御史。
English: At that time, Wang Qianhong had moved to the Department of Records and Records, and the king's courtier took his place as the Metropolitan Historian.

古文：以恩所坐未当，疏请宽之，不听。
现代文：因为冯恩被问的罪名不适当，王廷相上疏请求宽恕他，皇帝不听。
English: Because the crime for which Feng En was questioned was not appropriate, Wang Ding Xiang Shang Zong asked the emperor to pardon him, but the emperor did not listen.

古文：比朝审，鋐当主笔，东向坐，恩独向阙跪。
现代文：等到朝审，汪钅宏担任主笔，面向东而坐，冯恩独向殿阙而跪。
English: When it came to the court hearing, Wang Qianhong was the chief judge, sitting facing east, while Feng En knelt alone facing the hall.

古文：鋐令卒拽之西面，恩起立不屈。
现代文：汪钅宏命令士兵拽冯恩面向西，冯恩起立不屈。
English: Wang Shuhong ordered the soldiers to drag Feng En to face west. Feng En stood up and refused to give in.

古文：卒呵之，恩怒叱卒，卒皆靡。
现代文：士兵呵斥他，冯恩怒叱士兵，士兵都委靡下去。
English: The soldiers shouted at him, and Feng En angrily scolded the soldiers, and the soldiers were all defeated.

古文：鋐曰： 汝屡上疏欲杀我，我今先杀汝。 
现代文：汪钅宏说： 你屡次上疏想杀我，我现在先杀你。 
English: Wang Shuhong said: You have repeatedly tried to kill me, I will kill you first.

古文：恩叱曰： 圣天子在上，汝为大臣，欲以私怨杀言官耶？
现代文：冯恩喝叱说： 圣天子在上，你身为大臣，想以私怨杀害言官吗？
English: Feng En scolded, "Holy heavens above, as a minister, do you want to kill the spokesman out of personal grudge?

古文：且此何地，而对百僚公言之，何无忌惮也！
现代文：而且这是什么地方，面对百僚诸公说这样的话，为什么没有忌惮呢？
English: Moreover, what kind of place is this, and why are there no scruples about saying such things in the face of hundreds of officials?

古文：吾死为厉鬼击汝。 
现代文：我死为厉鬼也要击杀你。 
English: I'll fight to the death to kill you.

古文：鋐怒曰： 汝以廉直自负，而狱中多受人餽遗，何也？ 
现代文：汪钅宏怒声说： 你以廉耻自负，而在狱中多受别人馈赠，是为什么呢？ 
English: Wang Qianhong said angrily, "You pride yourself on being shameless, but while in prison you received many gifts from others. Why is that?

古文：恩曰： 患难相恤，古之义也。
现代文：冯恩说： 患难相恤，是古来之义。
English: Feng En said: Compassion for each other's hardships is an ancient principle.

古文：岂若汝受金钱，鬻官爵耶？ 
现代文：哪像你接受金钱卖官爵呢？ 
English: How can you accept money from a traitor?

古文：因历数其事，诋鋐不已。
现代文：于是列举他的数件事，揭发汪钅宏不止。
English: He then listed several of his affairs, exposing Wang Binghong more than once.

古文：鋐益怒，推案起，欲殴之。
现代文：汪钅宏更加恼怒，推案而起，想殴打他。
English: Wang Qianhong became even more angry and wanted to beat him up.

古文：恩声亦愈厉。
现代文：冯恩声音也更加严厉。
English: Feng En's voice was also harsher.

古文：都御史王廷相、尚书夏言引大体为缓解。
现代文：都御史王廷相、尚书夏言援引廷臣大体为他们缓解。
English: The Metropolitan Governor, Wang Tingxiang, and Shangshu Xiayan quoted courtiers as easing the situation for them.

古文：鋐稍止，然犹署情真。
现代文：汪钅宏稍微止怒，但犹署案情真实。
English: Wang Qianhong's anger subsided a little, but the justice department's case is real.

古文：恩出长安门，士民观者如堵。
现代文：冯恩出长安门，士民来观看他的人像围墙一样多。
English: Feng En went out of Chang'an Gate, and the number of people who came to watch him was like a wall.

古文：皆叹曰： 是御史，非但口如铁，其膝、其胆、其骨皆铁也。 
现代文：都叹息说 ：这个御史，不但口如铁，他的膝、他的胆、他的骨头都像铁。 
English: They all sighed and said, "This emperor not only has a mouth like iron, but his knees, his guts, and his bones are like iron."

古文：因称 四铁御史 。
现代文：所以称他为 四铁御史 。
English: That's why he's known as the Four-Iron Emperor.

古文：恩母吴氏击登闻鼓讼冤。
现代文：冯恩的母亲吴氏击登闻鼓讼冤。
English: Feng En's mother, Ms. Wu, took up the cause.

古文：不省。
现代文：皇帝不省悟。
English: Why do you want to enlist so rashly?

古文：又明年，行可上书请代父死，不许。
现代文：第三年，冯行可上书请求代父而死，皇帝不许。
English: In the third year, Feng Xing could write to the emperor to request that he die in his father's place, but the emperor would not allow it.

古文：其冬，事益迫，行可乃刺臂血书疏，自缚阙下，谓： 臣父幼而失怙。
现代文：这一年冬天，事情更加紧迫，冯行可于是刺臂书写疏章，自己捆缚自己到殿阙下，他说： 我父亲自幼就失去依靠。
English: In the winter of this year, things were more pressing, so Feng Xingkang wrote a resignation letter with a thorn in his arm and tied himself to the palace. He said: My father has lost his reliance since he was young.

古文：祖母吴氏守节教育，底于成立，得为御史。
现代文：祖母吴氏守节教育他，才得以成人，得为御史。
English: It was his grandmother, Wu Shoujie, who taught him how to become an adult and a prince.

古文：举家受禄，图报无地，私忧过计，陷于大辟。
现代文：全家受俸禄，图报无地，私忧过分，隐于大辟之罪。
English: The whole family receives a salary, the picture report has no land, the private worries are excessive, and the crime of big-spending is hidden.

古文：祖母吴年已八十余，忧伤之深，仅余气息。
现代文：祖母吴氏年纪已有八十多岁了，忧伤之深，只剩下一点气息。
English: Ms. Wu's grandmother is over 80 years old. She is deeply saddened and only has a little breath left.

古文：若臣父今日死，祖母吴亦必以今日死。
现代文：如果我父亲今日死去，祖母吴氏必定在今日死。
English: If my father dies today, my grandmother Wu will surely die today.

古文：臣父死，臣祖母复死，臣茕然一孤，必不独生。
现代文：我父亲死，我祖母又死，我就是茕然一孤，必定不会独生。
English: My father is dead, my grandmother is dead, I'm all alone, I can't be alone.

古文：冀陛下哀怜，置臣辟，而赦臣父，苟延母子二人之命。
现代文：希望陛下哀怜，置我的罪，而赦免我的父亲，苟延祖母和父亲二人的性命。
English: I hope that Your Majesty will take pity on me, forgive my sins and pardon my father, and prolong the lives of my grandmother and father.

古文：陛下僇臣，不伤臣心。
现代文：陛下杀我，不伤我的心。
English: Your Majesty, kill me without breaking my heart.

古文：臣被僇，不伤陛下法。
现代文：我被杀，不伤陛下的法。
English: I was killed without harming your majesty's law.

古文：谨延颈以俟白刃。 
现代文：我谨伸着脖子来等待白刃。 
English: I'm willing to stick my neck out and wait for the white blade.

古文：通政使陈经为入奏。
现代文：通政使陈经为他入奏皇上。
English: The secretary of state, Chen Jing, introduced him to the emperor.

古文：帝览之恻然，令法司再议。
现代文：皇帝看了以后很悲痛，下令法司再讨论。
English: The emperor was very sad after watching it and ordered the legal department to discuss it again.

古文：尚书聂贤与都御史廷相言，前所引律，情与法不相丽，宜用奏事不实律，输赎还职，帝不许。
现代文：尚书聂贤和都御史王廷相说，情和法不能成双，适宜用奏事不实律，输赎还职，皇帝不许。
English: Shang Shuxuanxian and Wang Tingxiang, the governor of the capital, said that love and law cannot be a pair, it is appropriate to use non-realistic laws, and the emperor is not allowed to redeem and return the post.

古文：乃言恩情重律轻，请戍之边徼。制可。
现代文：于是他们说冯恩情重律轻，请求让他守戍边关，皇帝下令许可。
English: So they said that Feng En's feelings were more important than the law, and asked him to guard the border, and the emperor ordered permission.

古文：遂遣戍雷州。
现代文：派遣冯恩戍守雷州。
English: Feng Enya was dispatched to defend Leizhou.

古文：而鋐亦后两月罢矣。
现代文：而汪钅宏也在后两月被罢官职。
English: And Wang Binghong was also removed from office in the last two months.

古文：越六年，遇赦还。
现代文：过了六年，遇赦归还。
English: After six years, he was pardoned and returned.

古文：家居，专为德于乡。
现代文：居在家中，专为乡亲们做德事。
English: He lives at home and does charity work for the people of his village.

古文：穆宗即位，录先朝直言。
现代文：穆宗即位，录先朝的直言之人。
English: Mu Zong ascended to the throne, a person who recorded the direct speech of the previous dynasty.

古文：恩年已七十余，即家拜大理寺丞，致仕。
现代文：冯恩年纪已有七十多岁，即家拜大理寺丞，退休。
English: Feng En is more than seventy years old, that is to say, he is retired.

古文：神色无变。
现代文：又听从有司的话，表彰冯行可为孝子。
English: He also listened to the words of Yu Shi and commended Feng Xing for being a filial son.

古文：隆庆初，赠太常少卿。杨爵，字伯珍，富平人。
现代文：冯恩八十一岁死去。杨爵，字伯珍，富平人。
English: Feng En died at the age of 81. Yang Jie, also known as Bo Zhen, was a wealthy man.

古文：年二十始读书。
现代文：年纪二十岁才开始读书。
English: He only began to study at the age of twenty.

古文：家贫，燃薪代烛。
现代文：家庭贫困，烧柴薪代替灯烛。
English: Families are poor and burn firewood instead of candles.

古文：耕陇上，辄挟册以诵。
现代文：在陇上耕种，总是挟带书册来读。
English: He cultivated on the plough and always brought a book to read.

古文：兄为吏，忤知县系狱。
现代文：兄长做官，忤逆知县被拘囚狱中。
English: His elder brother was a government official, and he was detained and imprisoned in Shoucheng County.

古文：爵投牒直之，并系。
现代文：杨爵投书辩冤，一并被拘囚。
English: Yang Jie wrote a letter to plead his case, and was taken into custody.

古文：会代者至，爵上书讼冤。
现代文：等到下任知县来后，杨爵上书诉讼冤屈。
English: After waiting for the next magistrate to arrive, Yang Jie filed a complaint.

古文：代者称奇士，立释之，资以膏火。
现代文：新任知县称杨爵为奇士，当即释放他，并资助他生活费。
English: The new magistrate called Yang Jie a miracle worker, released him immediately, and subsidized his living expenses.

古文：益奋于学，立意为奇节。
现代文：杨爵更加发奋学习，立志表现奇节。
English: Yang Jie became more eager to study and determined to perform well.

古文：从同郡韩邦奇游，遂以学行名。
现代文：跟随同郡韩邦奇游，于是以学行成名。
English: He toured with Han Bangqi of the same county, and became famous for his school performance.

古文：登嘉靖八年进士，授行人。
现代文：登嘉靖八年进士，授官行人。
English: In the eighth year of Dengjiajing, he was promoted to an officer and given the title of pedestrian.

古文：帝方崇饰礼文，爵因使王府还，上言： 臣奉使湖广，睹民多菜色，挈筐操刃，割道殍食之。
现代文：皇帝正崇饰文章，杨爵根据出使王府得来的情况，上言说： 我奉命出使湖广，目睹庶民多菜色，提着筐拿着刀，割道路上饿死的人肉吃。
English: Emperor Zhengzong decorated the article, and Yang Jie said the following based on the information obtained from the royal envoy: I was ordered to dispatch Hukang, witnessed the common people eating a variety of dishes, carrying baskets with knives, and eating the flesh of people who died of starvation on the road.

古文：假令周公制作，尽复于今，何补老赢饥寒之众！ 
现代文：假如让周公作文之意，全部在今天得到恢复，对老羸饥寒的众人有什么补益呢？ 
English: If the meaning of Zhou Gong's composition were to be fully restored today, what benefits would it bring to the hungry and cold people of Laos?

古文：奏入，被俞旨。
现代文：奏章呈入，皇帝表示许可。
English: The imperial rescript was presented, and the emperor gave his permission.

古文：久之，擢御史，以母老乞归养。
现代文：过了很久，被提升为御史，因母老请求回家乡供养。
English: After a long time, he was promoted to goshi, because his mother and father asked him to go back to his hometown to support them.

古文：母丧，庐墓，冬月笋生。
现代文：母亲死后，杨爵在墓旁结草庐居住，冬月长出笋子。
English: After his mother's death, Yang Jie lived next to the grave with a grasshopper. In the winter months, the grasshopper sprouted.

古文：推车粪田，妻馌于旁，见者不知其御史也。
现代文：杨爵推粪上田间，妻子送饭至田里，看见他的人不知道他是御史。
English: Yang Jie shoveled manure onto the fields, his wife brought rice to the fields, and those who saw him did not know that he was an imperial historian.

古文：服阕，起故官。
现代文：服孝期满，他被原官起用。
English: At the end of his term of service, he was appointed to his former post.

古文：帝经年不视朝。
现代文：皇帝长年不视朝政。
English: For many years, the emperor did not pay any attention to the imperial government.

古文：岁频旱，日夕建斋醮，修雷坛，屡兴工作。
现代文：这一年旱灾频繁，朝夕建立斋醮，修筑雷坛，屡兴工役。
English: Droughts were frequent in this year. In the morning and in the evening, people set up yurts, built minarets, and held construction work.

古文：方士陶仲文加宫保，而太仆卿杨最谏死，翊国公郭勋尚承宠用事。
现代文：方士陶仲文加官宫保，而太仆卿杨最因规劝被处死，翊国公郭勋还承宠当权。
English: Fang Shi Tao Zhongwen was promoted to the position of palace guard, while Yang Shi, the courtier, was executed for persuasion, and Guo Xun, the Duke of Shandong, was also favored to assume power.

古文：二十年元日，微雪。
现代文：二十年元旦，下小雪。
English: Twenty years ago, on New Year's Day, light snow fell.

古文：大学士夏言、尚书严嵩等作颂称贺。
现代文：大学士夏言、尚书严嵩等人作颂称贺。
English: University scholars Xia Yan and Shang Shu Yan Rong and others made eulogies and congratulations.

古文：爵抚膺太息，中宵不能寐。
现代文：杨爵抚胸叹息，半夜不能入睡。
English: Yang Jie stroked his chest and sighed, unable to fall asleep in the middle of the night.

古文：逾月乃上书极谏曰：
现代文：过了一月就上书极力规劝说：
English: After a month, he sent a letter to try to persuade them:

古文：今天下大势，如人衰病已极。
现代文： 现在天下大势，像人衰败已达到极端。
English: Now, the world is facing a great trend, and the decline of mankind has reached an extreme.

古文：腹心百骸，莫不受患。
现代文：全身的腹心百骸，没有不受到祸害的。
English: There is no such thing as a corpse without suffering from the scourge.

古文：即欲拯之，无措手地。
现代文：即使想拯救他，也手足无措。
English: Even if you want to save him, you are helpless.

古文：方且奔竞成俗，赇赂公行，遇灾变而不忧，非祥瑞而称贺，谗谄面谀，流为欺罔，士风人心，颓壤极矣。
现代文：而且私门请托已成为风俗，赂贿公开流行，遇到灾变而不忧虑，不是祥瑞而称颂祝贺，谗谄之言当面阿谀，流为欺君罔上，士风人心，颓废毁坏达到了极点。
English: Moreover, personal requests have become a custom, bribery and bribery are openly popular, when disaster occurs, there is no worry, it is not auspicious but congratulatory, the words of the wicked are in front of the face of the righteous, the current is on the top of the bully, the moral is in the hearts of the people, and the decadence and destruction have reached the extreme.

古文：诤臣拂士日益远，而快情恣意之事无敢龃龉于其间，此天下大忧也。
现代文：诤谏之臣、正直之士日益远去，对于矫情恣意的事情没有人敢从中进行抵触，这是天下的大忧。
English: Servants of the state and honest people are disappearing day by day, and no one dares to oppose arbitrary things, which is a big worry for the world.

古文：去年自夏入秋，恒旸不雨。
现代文：去年从夏天进入秋天时，总是天晴不下雨。
English: Last year, when we went from summer to autumn, it was always sunny with no rain.

古文：畿辅千里，已无秋禾。
现代文：畿辅千里，已经没有秋禾。
English: There is no autumn wheat in Kifu for thousands of miles.

古文：既而一冬无雪，元日微雪即止。
现代文：既而一整个冬天都没有降雪，元日只下了一点就停止了。
English: Even though there was no snowfall all winter, it only snowed a little on New Year's Day and then stopped.

古文：民失所望，忧旱之心远近相同。
现代文：农民大失所望，担心旱情的心理普遍相同。
English: Farmers are very disappointed and worried about the drought, and their psychology is generally the same.

古文：此正撤乐减膳，忧惧不宁之时，而辅臣言等方以为符瑞，而称颂之。
现代文：这正是撤乐减膳，忧惧不安的时候，但辅臣夏言等人都以为是好兆头，而称颂它。
English: This is exactly the time to cut back on entertainment and meals, and to be anxious, but the aide-de-camp Xia Yan and others thought it was a good omen and praised it.

古文：欺天欺人，不已甚乎！
现代文：欺天欺人，不是太厉害了吗？
English: Isn't it terrible to deceive the heavens and deceive people?

古文：翊国公勋，中外皆知为大奸大蠹，陛下宠之，使谂恶肆毒，群狡趋赴，善类退处。
现代文：翊国公郭勋，朝廷内外都知道是大奸大蛀虫，陛下宠爱他，让他逞恶肆毒。群奸都向他靠拢，好人都远离他。
English: Guo Xun, the Duke of Guozhou, was known both inside and outside the court as a great traitor and a big maggot. His Majesty loved him and allowed him to be vicious and venomous. The traitors all moved closer to him, and the good people stayed away from him.

古文：此任用匪人，足以失人心而致危乱者，一也。
现代文：这种用人不当，足以失去人心而导致危乱发生，是第一点。
English: This kind of improper employment, enough to lose the people's hearts and lead to the occurrence of crisis, is the first point.

古文：臣巡视南城，一月中冻馁死八十人。
现代文： 我巡视南城，看到一月中冻死饿死的有八十人。
English: I toured the south of the city and saw eighty people who had died of cold and hunger in the middle of January.

古文：五城共计，未知有几。
现代文：五城共计，不知有多少。
English: A total of five cities, I don't know how many.

古文：孰非陛下赤子，欲延须臾之生而不能。
现代文：哪个不是陛下的赤子，但想延长片刻生命都不能够。
English: Which is not your majesty's baby, but if you want to extend your life for a moment, you can't.

古文：而土木之功，十年未止。
现代文：而土木工程十年都没有停止过。
English: But civil engineering has not stopped for ten years.

古文：工部属官增设至数十员，又遣官远修雷坛。
现代文：工部的属官增设到数十人，又派官远修雷坛。
English: The number of subordinate officials of the Ministry of Works has increased to dozens, and officials have been sent far away to repair the minefields.

古文：以一方士之故，朘民膏血而不知恤，是岂不可以已乎？
现代文：因为一个方士的缘故，剥削民膏民血而不知体恤，这难道不能停止吗？
English: For the sake of a sorcerer, can we not stop exploiting the people and their blood without any compassion?

古文：况今北寇跳梁，内盗窃发，加以频年灾沴，上下交空，尚可劳民糜费，结怨天下哉？
现代文：况且现在北方敌寇跳梁，国内盗贼兴起，加上连年发生灾害，上下交空，还能劳民浪费，结怨天下吗？
English: Moreover, now that the northern enemy bandits are jumping the beam and the domestic thieves are on the rise, coupled with the disasters that have occurred year after year, can the laborers and the people waste their time and make the world grudge?

古文：此兴作未已，足以失人心而致危乱者，二也。
现代文：这种无益工程不停，足以失去人心而导致危乱发生，是第二点。
English: The second point is that this kind of useless project never stops, which is enough to lose people's hearts and lead to the occurrence of crises.

古文：陛下即位之初，励精有为，尝以《敬一箴》颁示天下矣。
现代文： 陛下即位之初，励精有为，曾经以《敬一箴》颁布告示天下。
English: At the beginning of His Majesty's accession to the throne, His Excellency was very energetic, and once announced to the world with the proclamation of the "Rule of Respect."

古文：乃数年以来，朝御希简，经筵旷废。
现代文：但数年以来，很少上朝，经筵讲席久废。
English: However, in the past few years, he has rarely been to the DPRK, and his seat at the Great Hall of the People has long been vacant.

古文：大小臣庶，朝参辞谢，未得一睹圣容。
现代文：大小臣众，朝参辞谢，不能一睹皇上圣容。
English: Great and small vassals, thank you for coming to the Imperial Court, but you cannot see the Emperor's sacred face.

古文：敷陈复逆，未得一聆天语。
现代文：反复陈言，却不能一听天子之话语。
English: Repeatedly making statements, but unable to listen to the words of the Son of God.

古文：恐人心日益怠媮，中外日益涣散，非隆古君臣都俞吁咈、协恭图治之气象也。
现代文：恐怕人心日益松懈苟且，朝廷内外日益涣散，不是古代君臣论政问答和睦相处、协力图治的气象。
English: I am afraid that the people's hearts are becoming more and more lax, and the Imperial Court and outside are becoming more and more scattered. This is not the atmosphere of the ancient times, when the monarchs and courtiers discussed politics, got along well, and worked together to govern.

古文：此朝讲不亲，足以失人心而致危乱者，三也。
现代文：这种不亲临朝廷商讨，足以失去人心而导致危乱发生，是第三点。
English: The third point is that this kind of discussion without coming to the imperial court is enough to lose people's hearts and lead to a crisis.

古文：左道惑众，圣王必诛。
现代文： 以前旁门左道惑众，圣王必定加诛他们。
English: In the past, people were led astray by the side door, and the holy king must have punished them.

古文：今异言异服列于朝苑，金紫赤绂赏及方外。
现代文：现在异言异服列于朝苑，金紫赤绂的赏赐及至方外之人。
English: Now, dissent is listed in the Imperial Court, the award of the Golden Purple and Red Ribbon and those who are outside the party.

古文：臣闻上之所好，下必有甚。
现代文：坐而论道的保傅职位，现在举荐给与奇邪之徒。流品的混乱无以复加。
English: The position of tutor, which is discussed in silence, is now recommended to those who are strange and evil. There is no way to add to the confusion of first-class products.

古文：近者妖盗繁兴，诛之不息。风声所及，人起异议。贻四方之笑，取百世之讥，非细故也。
现代文：陛下诚心与公卿贤士日论治道，那么心正身修，天地鬼神无不保，怎用这种妖诞邪妄的方法，列之于宫禁，来牵累您的身子呢？贻笑四方，被百世讥讽，不是小事啊。
English: Your Majesty, if you sincerely follow the path of the nobles and sages, then your mind will be upright and your body will be cultivated, and all things in heaven and earth will be protected. How can you use such a magical and evil method, which is listed as a palace ban, to entangle your body? It is not a small matter to be mocked and ridiculed by the whole world.

古文：此信用方术，足以失人心而致危乱者，四也。
现代文：这种信奉采用方术，足以失去人心而导致危乱发生，是第四点。
English: The fourth point is that this kind of belief uses tactics that are enough to lose people's hearts and lead to the occurrence of crises.

古文：陛下临御之初，延访忠谋，虚怀纳谏。
现代文： 陛下登基的初期，延访忠谋，虚怀纳谏。
English: In the early days of His Majesty's accession to the throne, he extended a visit to a loyal advisor, and accepted the invitation with open arms.

古文：一时臣工言过激切，获罪多有。
现代文：一时大臣官吏言词过于激切，有很多人获罪。
English: At one time, the words of ministers and officials were too violent, and many people were convicted.

古文：自此以来，臣下震于天威，怀危虑祸，未闻复有犯颜直谏以为沃心助者。
现代文：从此以后，臣下震于天威，怀危虑祸，没有听说再有犯颜直谏以为尽心相助的人。
English: From then on, the vassal trembled with fear and anxiety. He did not hear of anyone who committed the crime of helping others.

古文：往岁，太仆卿杨最言出而身殒，近日赞善罗洪先等皆以言罢斥。
现代文：往年，太仆卿杨最话说出而身受死，近来赞善罗洪先等人都因为言词而被罢官贬斥。
English: In previous years, Yang, the most outspoken servant of the Emperor, suffered death. Recently, Zanzan Luo Hongxian and others have been dismissed and disparaged for their words.

古文：国体治道，所损甚多。
现代文：国体治道，受到损害的有很多。
English: There are a lot of people who have been harmed by the way the National Sports Festival has been run.

古文：臣非为最等惜也。
现代文：我并不是为杨最等人惋惜。
English: I don't feel sorry for Yang.

古文：古今有国家者，未有不以任谏而兴，拒谏而亡。
现代文：古今掌管国家的，没有不是以听从谏而兴，拒谏而亡。
English: Those who have been in charge of the country from ancient times to the present have not succeeded by listening to the shamans, but have succeeded by rejecting the shamans.

古文：忠荩杜口，则谗谀交进，安危休戚无由得闻。
现代文：忠臣的口被堵塞，那么谗谀的人一起进宫，安危休戚无从得闻。
English: The mouths of loyal retainers were gagged, so that no one could enter the palace with them, and no one could hear if they were safe.

古文：此阻抑言路，足以失人心而致危乱者，五也。
现代文：这种阻止压抑言路，足以失去人心而导致危乱发生，是第五点。
English: This way of preventing and suppressing speech, which is enough to lose people's hearts and lead to a crisis, is the fifth point.

古文：望陛下念祖宗创业之艰难，思今日守成为不易，览臣所奏，赐之施行，宗社幸甚。
现代文： 希望陛下顾念祖宗创业的艰难，想想今日守成的不易，览看我的奏章，让它得到施行，宗社幸甚。 
English: I hope that His Majesty will think about the hardships of his ancestor's entrepreneurship, think about the difficulties of today's protection, read my playbook, and let it be implemented, so that the company will be more fortunate.

古文：先是，七年三月，灵宝县黄河清，帝遣使祭河神。
现代文：在这以前，七年三月，灵宝县黄河水清，皇帝派遣使者祭祀河神。
English: Prior to this, in March of the seventh year, the water of the Yellow River in Lingbao County was clear, and the emperor sent an envoy to worship the river god.

古文：大学士杨一清、张璁等屡疏请贺，御史鄞人周相抗疏言： 河未清，不足亏陛下德。
现代文：大学士杨一清、张璁等人多次上疏请求庆贺，御史鄞人周相抗疏说： 黄河没有清，也不足以损坏陛下的德。
English: University scholars Yang Yixing, Zhang Xuan and others repeatedly went up to the emperor to request congratulations, and the imperial historian Zhou Xiang said: The Yellow River is not clear, and it is not enough to damage his majesty's virtue.

古文：今好谀喜事之臣张大文饰之，佞风一开，献媚者将接踵。
现代文：现在好谀喜事的臣子夸大文饰这件事，谄媚之风一开，献媚的人将接踵而至。
English: Now, courtiers who like to gloat are exaggerating and embellishing this matter. Once the wind of flattery blows, the flatterers will follow.

古文：愿罢祭告，止称贺，诏天下臣民毋奏祥瑞，水旱蝗蝻即时以闻。 
现代文：希望罢去祭告，制止称贺，诏令天下臣民不要奏祥瑞之事，那么就会即时听到水旱蝗蝻等灾害的消息。 
English: It is hoped that if we cancel the announcement of the festival, stop the celebration, and order the subjects of the world not to report the auspicious event, then we will immediately hear the news of floods, droughts, locusts and other disasters.

古文：帝大怒，下相诏狱拷掠之，复杖于廷，谪韶州经历。
现代文：皇帝大怒，将周相下诏狱进行拷打，又在朝廷上杖打，谪贬为韶州经历。
English: The emperor was so angry that he tortured Zhou Xiang in the imperial prison, and beat him with a cane in the imperial court, and relegated him to the state of Zhangzhou.

古文：而诸庆典亦止不行。
现代文：而诸庆典也停止不施行。
English: Celebrations have also been suspended.

古文：及帝中年，益恶言者，中外相戒无敢触忌讳。
现代文：等到皇帝中年，更加恶恨直言的人，朝廷内外相互告诫不敢触及皇帝的忌讳。
English: By the time the emperor was middle-aged, he hated outspoken people even more, and both inside and outside the court warned each other not to dare to touch the emperor's taboo.

古文：爵疏诋符瑞，且词过切直。
现代文：杨爵上疏诋毁符瑞，而且言词过于切直。
English: Yang Jie slandered Fu Rui, and his words were too direct.

古文：帝震怒，立下诏狱搒掠，血肉狼籍，关以五木，死一夕复甦。
现代文：皇帝震怒，当即将他下诏狱进行拷打，血肉狼藉，枷以刑具，死了一夜又苏醒过来。
English: The emperor was furious, and when he was about to send him to the imperial prison, he tortured him until he was a mangled mass of flesh and blood, shackled with instruments of torture. He died overnight and then woke up.

古文：所司请送法司拟罪，帝不许，命严锢之。
现代文：所司请求送到法司拟罪，皇帝不许，命令严加禁锢。
English: His request was sent to the legal department of the imperial court, but the emperor did not allow it and ordered him to be severely punished.

古文：狱卒以帝意不测，屏其家人，不许纳饮食。
现代文：狱卒因皇帝的意思不能猜测，屏去他的家人，不许他接受饮食。
English: The jailer, unable to guess the emperor's intentions, turned his family away and did not allow him to eat.

古文：屡滨于死，处之泰然。
现代文：他多次濒临死亡，但还处之泰然。
English: He has been close to death many times, but he is still at peace.

古文：既而主事周天佑、御史浦鋐以救爵，先后箠死狱中，自是无敢救者。
现代文：既而主事周天佐、御史浦钅宏因为营救杨爵，先后被鞭子打死在狱中，从此没有敢营救杨爵的人。
English: Even though Zhou Tianza and Mishiura Qianhong, who were in charge of rescuing Yang Jie, were whipped and died in prison, no one dared to rescue Yang Jie after that.

古文：逾年，工部员外郎刘魁，再逾年，给事中周怡，皆以言事同系，历五年不释。
现代文：过了一年，工部员外郎刘魁，再过一年，给事中周怡，都因为言事被同拘囚，历时五年不被释放。
English: A year later, Liu Kui, the son-in-law of a member of the Ministry of Industry and Trade, and Zhou Yi, a middle-ranking official, were both taken into custody for the same reason, and they were not released for five years.

古文：至二十四年八月，有神降于乩。
现代文：到二十四年八月，有神降于扶乩。
English: By August of the twenty-fourth year, there were spirits descending on Fushun.

古文：帝感其言，立出三人狱。
现代文：皇帝被扶乩的话所感动，当即将上述三人放出牢狱。
English: The emperor was so moved by Fuxuan's words that he immediately released the three men from prison.

古文：未逾月，尚书熊浃疏言乩仙之妄。
现代文：还没有过一个月，尚书熊浃上疏言说乩仙的妄谬。
English: Less than a month has passed, and Shang Shuxiong has not hesitated to say that it is absurd to worship the immortals.

古文：帝怒曰： 我固知释爵，诸妄言归过者纷至矣。 
现代文：皇帝发怒说 ：我本来就知道释放杨爵，诸妄言归过的人就会纷纷到来。 
English: The emperor said angrily, "I already knew that if I released Yang Jie, all those who had made false accusations would come one after another.

古文：复令东厂追执之。
现代文：又下令东厂追捉杨爵。
English: He also ordered the East Factory to catch Yang Jie.

古文：爵抵家甫十日，校尉至。
现代文：杨爵到家刚刚十天，校尉到达。
English: Just ten days after Yang Jie arrived home, the school captain arrived.

古文：与共麦饭毕，即就道。
现代文：他们一起吃完麦饭后，就上道到京。
English: After they finished eating the barley meal together, they went on the road to Beijing.

古文：尉曰： 盍处置家事？ 
现代文：校尉说： 何不处置家事？ 
English: The school captain said, "Why don't you take care of the housework?"

古文：爵立屏前呼妇曰： 朝廷逮我，我去矣。 
现代文：杨爵立在屏风前呼喊他的妇人说： 朝廷逮捕我，我去了。 
English: Yang Jie stood in front of the screen and called out to his wife, saying: "The court has arrested me, I have to go.

古文：竟去不顾，左右观者为泣下。
现代文：竟然离去而没有回看，左右看到的人都泣然泪下。
English: He actually left without looking back, and people on both sides burst into tears.

古文：比三人至，复同系镇抚狱，桎梏加严，饮食屡绝，适有天幸得不死。
现代文：等到三人到达后，又同拘囚在镇抚狱中，桎梏加严，饮食多次断绝，算有天幸才得以不死。
English: After the three of them arrived, they were again detained with the prisoners in Zhenfu Prison, where they were subjected to stricter discipline and their food and drink were cut off several times. It was only by a stroke of luck that they did not die.

古文：二十六年十一月，大高玄殿灾，帝祷于露台。
现代文：二十六年十一月，大高玄殿发生灾祸，皇帝在露台祷告。
English: In November of the twenty-sixth year, a disaster occurred in the Great High Court, and the emperor prayed on the terrace.

古文：火光中若有呼三人忠臣者，遂传诏急释之。
现代文：火光中像有呼喊三人是忠臣的，于是传诏令急速释放他们。
English: In the light of the fire, there seemed to be a shout that the three were loyal subjects, so the herald ordered them to be quickly released.

古文：居家二年，一日晨起，大鸟集于舍。
现代文：杨爵在家居住二年，一天早晨起来，有大鸟集聚在他的家舍。
English: Yang Jie has been living at home for two years. One morning, he got up to find large birds gathering at his home.

古文：爵曰： 伯起之祥至矣。 
现代文：杨爵说 ：伯起之祥到来了。 
English: Yang Jie said, "Bokichinosho has arrived."

古文：果三日而卒。
现代文：果然三天后死去。
English: Sure enough, he died three days later.

古文：隆庆初，复官，赠光禄卿，任一子。
现代文：隆庆初年，杨爵被恢复官名，赠光禄卿，任他的一个儿子为官。
English: In the first year of Longqing, Yang Jie was restored to his official title, given the title of Guangluqing, and one of his sons was appointed as an official.

古文：万历中，赐谥忠介。
现代文：万历年中期赐谥号忠介。
English: In the middle of the Wanli era, he was given the posthumous title of Taisuke.

古文：爵之初入狱也，帝令东厂伺爵言动，五日一奏。
现代文：杨爵在开始入狱的时候，皇帝命令东厂监视侦察杨爵的语言行动，五天汇报一次。
English: At the beginning of Yang Jie's imprisonment, the emperor ordered the East Factory to monitor and reconnaissance Yang Jie's language actions, and report once every five days.

古文：校尉周宣稍左右之，受谴。
现代文：校尉周宣略为照顾杨爵，而受到谴责。
English: School captain Zhou Xuanliao was reprimanded for taking care of Yang Jie.

古文：其再至，治厂事太监徐府奏报。
现代文：管理东厂事务的太监徐府再三来奏报杨爵的语言行动这件事。
English: The eunuch Xu Fu, who managed the affairs of the East Factory, repeatedly reported the matter of Yang Jie's language action.

古文：帝以密谕不宜宣，亦重得罪。
现代文：皇帝因密谕不应当公开，将徐府治重罪。
English: Because the emperor's secret order was not to be made public, Xu Fuzhi was convicted of a serious crime.

古文：天启初，谥忠愍。周怡，字顺之，太平县人。
现代文：杨爵先后拘囚七年，天天和周怡、刘魁切磋讨论，忘掉了他们的困苦。杨爵所著的《周易辨说》、《中庸解》，就是在狱中完成的。周怡，字顺之，太平县人。
English: Yang Jie was imprisoned for seven years, and he discussed with Zhou Yi and Liu Kui every day, forgetting their hardships. Yang Jie's "Zhou Yi Dian He" and "Zhongyang Jie" were written in prison. Zhou Yi, also known as Zhishun, was from Taiping County.

古文：为诸生时，尝曰： 鼎镬不避，沟壑不忘，可以称士矣。
现代文：在做诸生时，曾说过： 油锅之刑不避，沟壑之死不忘本志，可以称士了。
English: During his lifetime, he once said, "You can't avoid the punishment of the oil pan, and you can't forget the death of the gully, so you can be called a hero."

古文：不然，皆伪也。 
现代文：不是这样，都是虚伪的。 
English: It's not like that, it's all fake.

古文：从学于王畿、邹守益。
现代文：跟王畿、邹守益学习。
English: He studied under Wang Gui and Zou Shouyi.

古文：登嘉靖十七年进士，除顺德推官。
现代文：考上嘉靖十七年进士。授顺德推官。
English: He was admitted to the Jiajing 17th year. He was awarded the Shunde magistrate.

古文：举卓异，擢吏科给事中。
现代文：举选卓异才士，他被提升为吏科给事中。
English: He was selected as a person of outstanding talent, and was promoted to the position of a clerk.

古文：疏劾尚书李如圭、张瓒、刘天和。
现代文：上疏弹劾尚书李如圭、张瓒、刘天和。
English: Shang Shu impeached Li Rugui, Zhang Ye, and Liu Tianhe.

古文：天和致仕去，如圭还籍待勘，瓒留如故。
现代文：刘天和辞官离去，李如圭回到原籍等待检查，张瓒留用如前。
English: Liu Tian and the judge left, Li Rugui returned to his hometown to wait for an inspection, and Zhang Xuan stayed on as before.

古文：顷之，劾湖广巡抚陆杰、工部尚书甘为霖、采木尚书樊继祖。
现代文：不久，周怡弹劾湖广巡抚陆杰、工部尚书甘为霖、采木尚书樊继祖。
English: Soon after, Zhou Yi impeached Lu Jie, the inspector general of Hunan and Guangxi, Shang Shuxu, the minister of industry, and Shang Shuxu, the minister of forestry, as his successors.

古文：立朝仅一岁，所摧击，率当事有势力大臣。
现代文：立朝才一年，被周怡摧击的，一概是当权有势力的大臣。
English: It was only a year after the founding of the dynasty, and it was always the powerful ministers in power who were destroyed by Zhou Yi.

古文：在廷多侧目，怡益奋不顾。
现代文：在朝廷的大臣多半对他侧目，周怡更加奋而不顾。
English: In the imperial court, most of the ministers looked sideways at him, and Zhou Yi was even more reckless.

古文：二十二年六月，吏部尚书许赞率其属王与龄、周鈇讦大学士翟銮、严嵩私属事。
现代文：二十二年六月，吏部尚书许赞带领他的属下王与龄、周钅夫揭发攻击大学士翟銮、严嵩私属事。
English: In June of the 22nd year, the head of the personnel department, Shangshu Xuzan, led his subordinates Wang Youling and Zhou Yufu to expose the attack on university scholars and Yan Song's private affairs.

古文：帝方响嵩，反责赞，逐与龄等。
现代文：皇帝正向着严嵩，反而责罚许赞，驱逐王与龄等人。
English: The emperor was moving towards strictness, but instead he punished Xu Zan and expelled Wang Yoling and others.

古文：怡上疏曰：
现代文：周怡上疏说：
English: Zhou Yi Shangsuo said:

古文：人臣以尽心报国家为忠，协力济事为和。
现代文： 人臣以尽心报效国家为忠，协力济事为和。
English: The vassals are loyal to serve the country with all their hearts, and work together to make peace.

古文：未有公卿大臣争于朝、文武大臣争于边，而能修内治、廪外侮者也。
现代文：没有公卿大臣诤谏于朝廷、文武大臣诤谏于边事，即能修内治、防御外侮的事。
English: If there are no Kugyo-daijin (Minister of the Imperial Court) in the Imperial Court and no Monmu-daijin (Minister of Education, Culture, Sports, Science and Technology) on the sidelines, then it is possible to improve internal governance and defend against external threats.

古文：大学士銮、嵩与尚书赞互相诋讦，而总兵官张凤、周尚文又与总制侍郎翟鹏、督饷侍郎赵廷瑞交恶，此最不祥事，误国孰甚？
现代文：大学士翟銮、严嵩和尚书许赞互相诋毁攻击，而总兵官张凤、周文又与总制侍郎翟鹏、督饷侍郎赵廷瑞互相过不去，这是最不祥的事情，误国有什么比这更厉害的呢？
English: It is the most ominous thing that the university scholar, Yan Song, and the monk, Xu Zan, slander and attack each other, while the general officers, Zhang Feng and Zhou Wen, cannot get along with the general attendant, Zou Peng, and the superintendent attendant, Zhao Tingrui. What is more terrible than this?

古文：今陛下日事祷祠而四方灾祲未销，岁开输银之例而府库未充，累颁蠲租之令而百姓未苏，时下选将练士之命而边境未宁。
现代文： 现在陛下天天从事祷祠，但四方灾害没有消除，岁开输银的先例而府库没有得到充实，多次颁布免租的命令而百姓并未得复苏，经常下令选将练兵而边境未曾得到安宁。
English: At present, His Majesty is engaged in daily prayers, but the disasters in the four directions have not been eliminated, the government treasury has not been enriched due to the precedent of transferring money from the beginning of the year, the rent-free order has been issued many times, but the people have not been revived, the general election has been ordered frequently, and the border has not been tranquilized.

古文：内则财货匮而百役兴，外则寇敌横而九边耗。
现代文：国内财货匮乏而百役兴起，而国外则敌寇横行，九边损亏。
English: Due to the shortage of goods and money at home, the rise of gangs, while foreign invaders are rampant, leading to losses on all sides.

古文：乃銮、嵩恁藉宠灵，背公营私，弄播威福，市恩酬怨。
现代文：翟銮、严嵩凭藉皇上的宠幸，背公营私，执掌威福，卖恩报怨。
English: Zou and Yan Song took advantage of the emperor's favor to run their own businesses, wield power and wealth, and return favors.

古文：夫辅臣真知人贤不肖，宜明告吏部进之退之，不宜挟势徇私，属之进退。
现代文：辅臣如果真正明了人的贤还是不肖，应当明告吏部将他们进官或退官，不应当挟势徇私，而决定其进退。
English: If aides-de-camp truly understand whether a person is virtuous or not, they should clearly inform the cadre department to promote or demote them. They should not use blackmail and favoritism to decide their promotion or demotion.

古文：嵩威灵气焰，凌轹百司。
现代文：严嵩气焰嚣张，欺凌百司。
English: Strict, arrogant, and bullying.

古文：凡有陈奏，奔走其门，先得意旨而后敢闻于陛下。
现代文：凡是有陈奏的人，总是跑到他的家里，先获得他的意图然后才敢向陛下奏闻。
English: Anyone with experience would always run to his house to get his intentions before daring to inform His Majesty.

古文：中外不畏陛下，惟畏嵩久矣。
现代文：朝廷内外不畏怕陛下，只畏怕严嵩已经很久了。
English: It's been a long time since anyone inside or outside the Imperial Court has been afraid of His Majesty, only of Yan Rong.

古文：銮淟涊委靡，讃虽小心谨畏，然不能以直气正色销权贵要求之心，柔亦甚矣。
现代文：翟銮污浊委靡，许赞虽然小心谨畏，但不能用正直的气色消除权贵贪求之心，柔软得过分了。
English: Although Xu Zan was cautious and cautious, he could not use his honest appearance to eliminate the greed of the powerful. He was too soft.

古文：且直言敢谏之臣，于权臣不利，于朝廷则大利也。
现代文： 虽然直言敢谏的臣子，对权贵不利，对朝廷则是大利。
English: Although outspoken courtiers are unfavorable to the powerful, they are good for the imperial court.

古文：御史谢瑜、童汉臣以劾嵩故，嵩皆假他事罪之。
现代文：御史谢瑜、童汉臣因弹劾严嵩的缘故，严嵩都假借其他的事情将他们入罪。
English: Due to the impeachment of Yan Song, both Goshi Xie Yu and Tong Han Sen were removed from their posts. Yan Song falsely accused them of other things.

古文：谏诤之臣自此箝口，虽有梼杌、驩兜，谁复言之？
现代文：谏诤的臣子自此被钳制住口，虽然有木兀、兜，谁又说这件事呢？ 
English: Since then, the vassal of Shun has been gagged and silenced. Although he has a muzzle and a helmet, who will speak about this matter?

古文：帝览疏大怒，降诏责其谤讪，令对状。
现代文：皇帝看了疏章后大怒，下诏令谴责他是诽谤，叫他上殿诉述供词。
English: The emperor was furious after seeing Sosho, and issued a decree condemning him for slander and ordering him to go to court to make a confession.

古文：杖之阙下，锢诏狱者再。
现代文：在殿前的阙下用杖拷打，再次禁锢在诏狱中。
English: He was beaten with a cane under the yoke in front of the palace and imprisoned again in the imperial prison.

古文：隆庆元年起故官。
现代文：隆庆元年起用为故官。
English: He has been a retired official since the first year of the Longqing era.

古文：未上，擢太常少卿。
现代文：未上任，被提升为太常少卿。
English: Before taking office, he was promoted to the position of Taijo Shokei.

古文：陈新政五事，语多刺中贵。
现代文：周怡陈讲新政五事，语言多讽刺中宫贵人。
English: Zhou Yi Chen spoke about the five New Deal issues, using many words to satirize the nobility.

古文：时近习方导上宴游，由是忤旨，出为登莱兵备佥事。
现代文：当时皇帝身边的人正在道上宴游，因此忤逆圣旨，被贬出任登、莱兵备佥事。
English: At that time, the people around the emperor were on their way to a banquet, so they disobeyed the holy will and were demoted to the ranks of the Deng and Lai armies.

古文：而三人处之如前，无几微尤怨。
现代文：给事中岑用宾为周怡诉讼冤屈，皇帝不采纳他的话。
English: The emperor did not accept Zhou Yi's claim that he was a guest of the emperor.

古文：又三年，与爵、怡同释，寻卒。
现代文：改任南京国子监司业。又被召封为太常少卿，未上任就死去了。
English: He was transferred to the post of Nanjing Provincial Son Supervisor. He was also appointed to the post of Taizhong Shaoqing, but he died before taking up the post.

古文：隆庆初，赠恤如制。
现代文：天启初年，追赠谥号恭节。
English: In the first year of the Apocalypse, the posthumous posthumous posthumous posthumous posthumous.

古文：沈束，字宗安，会稽人。
现代文：沈束，字宗安，会稽人。
English: Shenzhu, Zhaozong'an, the auditor.

古文：父侭，邠州知州。
现代文：父亲沈侭，邠州知州。
English: His father is from Shenyang, and his mother is from Zhangzhou and Zhizhou.

古文：束登嘉靖二十三年进士，除徽州推官，擢礼科给事中。
现代文：沈束考上嘉靖二十三年进士，授徽州推官。被提升为礼科给事中。
English: Shen Zuo was admitted to the Jiajing Twenty-three-year-old Young Scholar, awarded the Hebei State. He was promoted to the etiquette class.

古文：时大学士严嵩擅政。
现代文：当时大学士严嵩独揽政权。
English: At that time, Yan Song, a university graduate, dominated the government.

古文：大同总兵官周尚文卒，请恤典，严嵩格不予。
现代文：大同总兵官周尚文死去，请求朝廷给予恤典，严嵩阻止而不给予。
English: Datong general officer Zhou Shangwen died and asked the court to give him a certificate of commendation, but the court refused to do so.

古文：束言： 尚文为将，忠义自许。
现代文：沈束说 ：周尚文作为将，以忠义自许。
English: Shen Zuo said: Zhou Shangwen, as a general, prided himself on his loyalty.

古文：曹家庄之役，奇功也。
现代文：曹家庄那一战役，他建了奇功。
English: In the battle of Caojiazhuang, he made a miraculous achievement.

古文：虽晋秩，未酬勋，宜赠封爵延子孙。
现代文：虽然晋升了俸禄，但没有酬劳他的功勋，应该赠封爵位给他并延及他的子孙。
English: Although he has been promoted with a salary, he has not been rewarded for his merits. He should be given a knighthood and his descendants should be given a knighthood.

古文：他如董旸、江瀚，力抗强敌，继之以死。
现代文：其他的像董、江瀚，力抗强敌，继之以死。
English: Others, like Dong and Jianghan, resisted the strong enemy and died as a result.

古文：虽已庙祀，宜赐祭，以彰死事忠。
现代文：虽然已经立庙祀，但应该赐祭，来表彰死者的事忠。
English: Although a temple has been built to enshrine him, a sacrifice should be offered in recognition of the deceased's loyalty.

古文：今当事之臣，任意予夺，冒滥或悻蒙，忠勤反捐弃，何以鼓士气，激军心？ 
现代文：现在当权的臣子，任意给与或剥夺，冒滥或幸蒙，忠勤的官吏反而被抛弃，用什么鼓舞士气，激励军心？ 
English: The courtiers in power now, arbitrarily give or deprive, abuse or favor, loyal officials, on the other hand, are abandoned, with what to boost morale and inspire the military spirit?

古文：疏奏，嵩大恚，激帝怒，下吏部都察院议。
现代文：疏章奏入，严嵩怀愤，故意激怒皇帝，将疏章下到吏部都察院讨论。
English: When the imperial edict was issued, Yan Song, full of indignation, deliberately angered the emperor, and sent the imperial edict to the Imperial Palace for discussion.

古文：闻渊、屠侨等言束无他肠，第疏狂当治。
现代文：闻渊、屠侨等人说沈束没有其他居心，只是疏狂应当治罪。
English: Wen Yuan, Tu Qiao and others said that Shen Zucao did not have any other intention, but that he should be punished for being deranged.

古文：帝愈怒，夺渊、侨俸，下束诏狱。
现代文：皇帝越发恼怒，夺去闻渊、屠侨的俸禄，将沈束打下诏狱。
English: The emperor became more and more angry, took away the salary of Wen Yuan and Tu Qiao, and sent Shen Zuo to the imperial prison.

古文：已，刑部坐束奏事不实，输赎还职。
现代文：之后，刑部判沈束奏事不实之罪，输钱赎还本职。
English: After that, the criminal justice department sentenced Shen Zucao to the crime of falsifying the record and losing money to redeem his duty.

古文：特命杖于廷，仍锢诏狱。
现代文：特命在朝廷杖打沈束，仍然将他禁锢在诏狱里。
English: He was specially ordered to beat Shenzhuang with a cane in the imperial court, but he was still imprisoned in the imperial prison.

古文：时束入谏垣未半岁也。
现代文：这时沈束做谏官不到半年。
English: At this time, Shen Zuo had been a eunuch for less than half a year.

古文：逾年，俺答薄都城。
现代文：过了一年，俺答迫近都城。
English: A year later, I was approaching the capital.

古文：司业赵贞吉以请宽束得罪，自是无敢言者。
现代文：司业赵贞吉因请求宽恕沈束而被问罪，从此就没有人再敢说这件事。
English: Since then, no one dares to talk about it.

古文：束系久，衣食屡绝，惟日读《周易》为疏解。
现代文：沈束被拘囚很久，衣食多次断绝，只有天天读《周易》自为疏解。
English: Shen Zucu was detained for a long time, his food and clothing were cut off many times, and he could only relieve himself by reading "Zhou Yi" every day.

古文：后同邑沈练劾嵩，嵩疑与束同族为报复，令狱吏械其手足。
现代文：后来他的同乡沈炼弹劾严嵩，严嵩怀疑沈炼是沈束的同族，为同族进行报复，下令狱卒官将沈束的手脚械铐起来。
English: Later, Yan Song was impeached by his fellow villager, Shen Lian. Yan Song suspected that Shen Lian was a member of the same ethnic group as Shen Zhou. In retaliation, he ordered the jailer to shackle Shen Zhou's hands and feet.

古文：徐阶劝，得免。
现代文：因徐阶的劝阻，才得以免去。
English: Due to the dissuasion of Xu Jia, he was able to escape.

古文：迨嵩去位，束在狱十六年矣，妻张氏上书言： 臣夫家有老亲，年八十有九，衰病侵寻，朝不计夕。
现代文：等到严嵩被解除职位时，沈束在狱中已有十六年了，他的妻子上书说 ：我的夫家有年老的亲人，年纪八十九岁，衰病不断相侵，朝不保夕。
English: By the time Yan Song was relieved of his post, Shen Zuo had been in prison for sixteen years. His wife wrote: My husband's family has elderly relatives, aged eighty-nine, who are constantly falling ill and are not safe day and night.

古文：往臣因束无子，为置妾潘氏。
现代文：从前我因为沈束没有儿子，为他纳妾潘氏。
English: Once upon a time, I did not have a son because of Shen Zucu, so I married his concubine Pan.

古文：比至京师，束已系狱，潘矢志不他适。
现代文：等到达京师，沈束已经被拘囚入狱，潘氏矢志不他去。
English: By the time he arrived in Beijing, Shen Zucu had already been taken into custody and imprisoned, and Pan had no choice but to go.

古文：乃相与寄居旅舍，纺织以供夫衣食。
现代文：于是我和她一起寄居在旅舍，靠纺织来供丈夫的衣食。
English: So I stayed with her in a hostel and supported my husband with textiles.

古文：岁月积深，凄楚万状。
现代文：岁月积深，凄楚万状。
English: Over the years, it's grown tremendously.

古文：欲归奉舅，则夫之饘粥无资。
现代文：想回家侍奉公公，那么丈夫的稀粥就没有供给。
English: If you want to go home and serve your grandfather, then your husband's gruel will not be provided.

古文：欲留养夫，则舅又旦暮待尽。
现代文：想留下来养供丈夫，那么公公又旦暮待尽。
English: If he wanted to stay and support his husband, his father-in-law had to wait.

古文：辗转思维，进退无策。
现代文：翻来覆去地考虑，觉得进退无策。
English: Thinking about it over and over again, I felt that there was no way forward or backward.

古文：臣愿代夫系狱，令夫得送父终年，仍还赴系，实陛下莫大之德也。 
现代文：我愿代丈夫被拘囚入狱，让丈夫能送老父终年，之后再回来被拘囚，这实是陛下莫大的恩德。 
English: I would like to be taken to prison as a prisoner on behalf of my husband, so that my husband can send my father to prison for the rest of the year, and then come back to be taken prisoner, which is really a great favor to His Majesty.

古文：法司亦为请，帝终不许。
现代文：法司也为沈束请求，皇帝还是不许。
English: The emperor did not allow it, even though the legal department requested it for Shen Zhuang.

古文：帝深疾言官，以廷杖遣戍未足遏其言，乃长系以困之。
现代文：皇帝非常痛恨言官，因为廷杖遣戍边关还不足以遏止他们，就长期拘囚来困住他们。
English: The emperor hated the gossips very much, because the imperial scepter was not enough to stop them, so he imprisoned them for a long time.

古文：而日令狱卒奏其语言食息，谓之监帖。
现代文：但天天让狱卒上奏他们的语言吃食休息等情况，这叫做监帖。
English: But every day, they let the guards play their language to eat, rest, etc. This is called supervision.

古文：或无所得，虽谐语亦以闻。
现代文：有时无所得，虽然是谐语也向皇上报告。
English: Sometimes there is no income, although it is a humorous report to the emperor.

古文：一日，鹊噪于束前，束谩曰： 岂有喜及罪人耶？ 
现代文：一天，喜鹊在沈束前面鼓噪，沈束谩骂地说 ：哪有喜及罪人呢？ 
English: One day, the magpies made a lot of noise in front of Shen Zucu. Shen Zucu scolded and said, "Who cares about sinners?

古文：卒以奏，帝心动。
现代文：狱卒将这向皇帝奏报，皇帝心有所动。
English: The jailer reported this to the emperor, who was moved.

古文：会户部司务何以尚疏救主事海瑞，帝大怒，杖之，锢诏狱，而释束还其家。
现代文：正巧户部事务何以尚上疏营救主事海瑞，皇帝大怒，用杖责打，并将他禁锢在诏狱中，而将沈束释放回家。
English: It just so happened that the emperor was furious with the household affairs department for not doing enough to rescue the main subject, Hai Rui. He beat him with a cane and imprisoned him in the imperial prison, but released Shen Zhou to go home.

古文：束还，父已前卒。
现代文：沈束回到家中，父亲已先死。
English: When Shen Zuo returned home, his father had already passed away.

古文：束枕块饮水，佯狂自废。
现代文：沈束枕土块饮水，佯作发狂自废。
English: Shenzhu pillow soil clod drinking water, straw making mad self-waste.

古文：甫两月，世宗崩，穆宗嗣位。
现代文：刚刚两个月，世宗死，穆宗继位。
English: Just two months ago, Shizong died and Muzong succeeded him.

古文：起故官，不赴。
现代文：起用沈束为原官职，沈束不到任。
English: Shen Zuo was appointed to his former post, but he did not take up the post.

古文：丧除，召为都给事中。
现代文：服孝期满，被召封为都给事中。
English: After his term of filial piety expired, he was summoned to the capital.

古文：旋擢南京右通政。
现代文：不久又提升为南京右通政。
English: Soon after, he was promoted to the top of the Nanjing U-turn government.

古文：复辞疾。
现代文：又以病辞官。
English: He resigned from his post on grounds of ill health.

古文：布衣蔬食，终老于家。
现代文：穿粗布衣吃粗食，终老在家。
English: They wear coarse clothes, eat coarse food, and always end up at home.

古文：束系狱十八年。
现代文：沈束被拘囚入狱十八年。
English: Shen Zuo was jailed for 18 years.

古文：比出，潘氏犹处子也，然束竟无子。
现代文：等到他出狱时，潘氏还是处女，但沈束竟然没有儿子。
English: By the time he was released from prison, Mr. Pan was still a virgin, but Mr. Shen didn't have a son.

古文：沈炼，字纯甫，会稽人。
现代文：沈炼，字纯甫，会稽人。
English: Shen Zhen, the character Chun Fu, the auditor.

古文：嘉靖十七年进士。
现代文：嘉靖十七年进士。
English: He passed the middle school entrance examination in the 17th year of Jiajing.

古文：除溧阳知县。
现代文：授官溧阳知县。
English: He was awarded a post in Suiyang County.

古文：用伉倨，忤御史，调茬平。
现代文：由于刚直傲慢，忤逆御史，被调到茌平。
English: Due to his arrogance and stubbornness, he was transferred to Suiping.

古文：父忧去，补清丰，入为锦衣卫经历。
现代文：父死后他离去，补在清丰，调入朝廷为锦衣卫经历。
English: After his father's death, he left and lived in Qingfeng. He was transferred to the imperial court and became a brocade weaver.

古文：炼为人刚直，嫉恶如仇，然颇疏狂。
现代文：沈炼为人刚直，嫉恶如仇，但颇为狂放不羁。
English: Shen Zhen is an upright person, jealous as an enemy, but quite wild and uninhibited.

古文：每饮酒辄箕踞笑傲，旁若无人。
现代文：每次饮酒就箕踞笑傲，旁若无人。
English: Every time he drinks, he laughs with pride, as if no one is watching.

古文：锦衣帅陆炳善遇之。
现代文：锦衣帅陆炳对他很好。
English: He was treated very well by coach Lu Wei.

古文：炳与严嵩父子交至深，以故炼亦数从世蕃饮。
现代文：陆炳与严嵩父子交情深厚，所以沈炼也多次和严世蕃一同饮酒。
English: Lu Yao and Yan Song's father and son had a deep friendship, so Shen Zhen also drank alcohol with Yan Shi Yao many times.

古文：世蕃以酒虐客，炼心不平，辄为反之，世蕃惮不敢较。
现代文：严世蕃用酒虐待客人，沈炼心有不平，总是同他唱反调，严世蕃畏惧而不敢和沈炼计较。
English: Yan Shijun abused his guests with alcohol, and Shen Rongcheng had a grudge and always spoke against him. Yan Shijun was afraid and did not dare to argue with Shen Rongcheng.

古文：会俺答犯京师，致书乞贡，多嫚语。
现代文：正遇上俺答侵犯京师，致书求贡，有许多轻慢的话。
English: Just when I was about to invade the capital, I sent a letter asking for tribute, and there were a lot of insults.

古文：下廷臣博议，司业赵贞吉请勿许。
现代文：下到廷臣广泛讨论，司业赵贞吉请朝廷不要答应。
English: It was widely discussed among courtiers, and the official, Zhao Zhengyi, asked the imperial court not to agree.

古文：廷臣无敢是贞吉者，独炼是之。
现代文：廷臣没有人敢支持赵贞吉的，惟独沈炼支持他。
English: None of the courtiers dared to support Zhao Zhengyi, only Shen Zhen supported him.

古文：吏部尚书夏邦谟曰： 若何官？ 
现代文：吏部尚书夏邦谟说： 你是什么官？ 
English: Shangshu Shabangmo, the head of the personnel department, said: What kind of official are you?

古文：炼曰： 锦衣卫经历沈炼也。
现代文：沈炼说 ：我是锦衣卫经历沈炼。
English: Shen Zhen said: I am Jin Rongwei who has been through Shen Zhen.

古文：大臣不言，故小吏言之。 
现代文：大臣不说，所以小吏说这件事。 
English: The minister wouldn't say, so the minor official said it.

古文：遂罢议。
现代文：于是罢去廷议。
English: So they stopped talking.

古文：炼愤国无人，致寇猖狂，疏请以万骑护陵寝，万骑护通州军储，而合勤王师十余万人，击其惰归，可大得志。
现代文：沈炼愤慨于国家无人，致使敌寇猖狂，上疏请求用万骑保护陵寝，万骑保护通州的军队储粮，而集合勤王军队十多万人，在敌人疲劳时发起攻击，会取得大胜利。
English: There is no one to temper the indignation of the country, causing the enemy bandits to be rampant. Shang So requested the use of horse-drawn carriages to protect the mausoleum, horse-drawn carriages to protect the grain reserves of the Tongzhou army, and the gathering of more than 100,000 loyal troops to launch an attack when the enemy is tired will achieve a great victory.

古文：帝弗省。
现代文：皇帝没有省悟。
English: The emperor did not reflect.

古文：嵩贵幸用事，边臣争致贿遗。
现代文：严嵩被皇上贵宠而当权，边臣竞相贿赂送东西给他。
English: Yan Song was favored by the emperor and rose to power, and his vassals competed to bribe him with gifts.

古文：及失事惧罪，益辇金贿嵩，贿日以重。
现代文：等到失事后惧怕得罪，更加运送金银贿赂严嵩，贿赂一天重于一天。
English: Wait until after the accident afraid of offending, more to transport gold and silver bribery severe, bribe every day more than a day.

古文：炼时时搤腕。
现代文：沈炼时时扼腕感叹。
English: Shen Lian always sighed.

古文：一日从尚宝丞张逊业饮，酒半及嵩，因慷慨骂詈，流涕交颐。
现代文：一天跟尚宝丞张逊业饮酒，酒喝到一半就谈到严嵩，因慷慨怒骂，涕流满面。
English: One day, he was drinking alcohol with Shang Baozheng Zhang Xunye. Halfway through the drink, he talked about Yan Song, and scolded him for his generosity.

古文：遂上疏言： 昨岁俺答犯顺，陛下奋扬神武，欲乘时北伐，此文武群臣所愿戮力者也。
现代文：于是上疏说 ：去年俺答侵犯顺天，陛下奋扬神武，想乘时北伐，这是文武群臣所希望竭忠效力的。
English: Then Shang Zuo said, "Last year, I decided to invade Shun Tian, and His Majesty was so excited that he wanted to take advantage of the Northern Expedition. This is what the courtiers hope to do.

古文：然制胜必先庙算，庙算必先为天下除奸邪，然后外寇可平。
现代文：但是要制胜必先进行朝廷计议，计议必定要先为天下除去奸邪，然后外寇可以得到平定。
English: However, in order to win, the imperial court must first carry out deliberation. The deliberation must first remove the treachery and evil for the world, and then the foreign invaders can be subdued.

古文：今大学士嵩，贪婪之性疾入膏肓，愚鄙之心顽于铁石。
现代文：现在大学士严嵩，贪婪之性的毛病已达膏肓，笨拙浅陋之心顽如铁石。
English: Now, college graduates are strict, the malady of greed has reached an all-time high, and clumsy and shallow hearts are as hard as iron.

古文：当主忧臣辱之时，不闻延访贤豪，咨询方略，惟与子世蕃规图自便。
现代文：在皇上忧虑臣民受外寇之辱的时候，没有听说他延访贤豪，咨询方略，只与他的儿子严世蕃规划图谋自己的私利。
English: At a time when the emperor was worried that his subjects would be humiliated by foreign invaders, he did not hear that he had extended his visit to the sages and consulted with them on strategies. He only planned and schemed with his son Yan Shiyan for his own selfish interests.

古文：忠谋则多方沮之，谀谄则曲意引之。
现代文：多方阻止忠诚谋略的上告，而曲意引荐谀谄之小人。
English: Many parties have blocked the appeal of the loyalty strategy, and the villain of the song has been introduced.

古文：要贿鬻官，沽恩结客。
现代文：索贿卖官，沽恩结客。
English: Soliciting bribes from sales clerks, treating guests with disdain.

古文：朝廷赏一人，曰： 由我赏之 ；罚一人，曰： 由我罚之 。
现代文：朝廷赏赐一人，他说 由我赏他 ；朝廷罚一人，他说 由我罚他 。
English: When the imperial court rewards someone, he says I should reward him; when the imperial court punishes someone, he says I should punish him.

古文：人皆伺严氏之爱恶，而不知朝廷之恩威，尚忍言哉！
现代文：人们都窥伺严嵩的爱恶，而不知朝廷的恩威，哪个敢议论他？
English: People speculate on the likes and dislikes of Emperor Jimmu, but without knowing the imperial court's favor, who would dare to discuss him?

古文：姑举其罪之大者言之。
现代文：现在姑且列举他罪状中大的来说吧。
English: Let me now enumerate his major crimes.

古文：纳将帅之贿，以启边陲之衅，一也。
现代文：收纳将帅的贿赂，破坏边陲的安宁，这是第一点。
English: Collecting bribes from generals and destroying the tranquility of the borderlands, this is the first point.

古文：受诸王餽遗，每事阴为之地，二也。
现代文：接受诸王的馈赠，每事都暗中予以庇护，这是第二点。
English: The second is to receive the gifts of kings, and to keep back nothing that is secret.

古文：揽吏部之权，虽州县小吏亦皆货取，致官方大坏，三也。
现代文：收揽吏部之权，虽然是州县的小官吏也要以贿赂获得，致使做官应守的常道大受破坏，这是第三点。
English: The third point is that the power to bribe officials, even if they are minor officials from prefectures and counties, has been obtained through bribery, which has caused great damage to the normal way of doing official duties.

古文：索抚按之岁例，致有司递相承奉，而闾阎之财日削，四也。
现代文：每年向抚按索取成为惯例，致使有司递相承奉，而闾阎百姓之财一天天减少，这是第四点。
English: The fourth point is that it has become a common practice to ask for subsidies every year, which has led to the succession of officials and servants, while the wealth of the people is decreasing day by day.

古文：阴制谏官，俾不敢直言，五也。
现代文：暗中制抑谏官，使人不敢直言，这是第五点。
English: The fifth point is to secretly suppress eunuchs, so that people will not dare to speak out.

古文：妒贤嫉能，一忤其意，必致之死，六也。
现代文：嫉妒贤能，只要有人一忤逆他的意思，必定被致之死地，这是第六点。
English: The sixth point is that he envies the virtuous, and as long as someone goes against his will, he will surely be put to death.

古文：纵子受财，敛怨天下，七也。
现代文：纵容儿子接受财物，使天下人怨恨，这是第七点。
English: The seventh point is to allow his son to receive wealth, which will make the world hate him.

古文：运财还家，月无虚日，致道途驿骚，八也。
现代文：运财物回到家乡，无日不有，致使道途驿站骚扰，这是第八点。
English: The eighth point is that the transportation of property back to the hometown is a day-to-day affair, resulting in the harassment of the way stations.

古文：久居政府，擅宠害政，九也。
现代文：久居政府，擅宠害政，这是第九点。
English: The ninth point is that the government has been in power for a long time, and favors and harms the government.

古文：不能协谋天讨，上贻君父忧，十也。 
现代文：不能协助谋图讨伐敌贼，致贻害君父忧虑，这是第十点。 
English: The tenth point is that it is not possible to assist in the attempt to fight against the enemy and cause harm to the emperor and his father.

古文：因并论邦谟谄谀黩货状。
现代文：同时还一并论及夏邦谟谀谄黩货的情况。
English: At the same time, the situation of Xia Bangmu's hoarding of goods was also discussed.

古文：请均罢斥，以谢天下。
现代文：请求将他们都罢斥掉，以谢天下。
English: The request is to expel them all, for the sake of the world.

古文：帝大怒，搒之数十，谪佃保安。
现代文：皇帝大怒，将他拷打数十，贬谪到保安去种田。
English: The emperor flew into a rage, tortured him dozens of times, and relegated him to work as a security guard.

古文：既至，未有馆舍。
现代文：他去后，没有馆舍。
English: When he left, there was no building.

古文：贾人某询知其得罪故，徙家舍之。
现代文：有商人询问到他得罪的缘故，搬家让舍给他。
English: A businessman inquired about the reason for his offense and offered him the opportunity to move.

古文：里长老亦日致薪米，遣子弟就学。
现代文：里长老也天天送柴米给他，派遣子弟跟他学习。
English: The village elders also send him firewood and rice every day, and send their children to study with him.

古文：炼语以忠义大节，皆大喜。
现代文：沈炼谈说忠义大节，大家都非常高兴。
English: Shen Zhen talked about the Loyalty Festival, and everyone was very happy.

古文：塞外人素戆直，又谂知嵩恶，争詈嵩以快炼。
现代文：塞外的人一向忠厚直爽，又熟知严嵩的奸恶，争着骂严嵩来讨沈炼的高兴。
English: People outside of Tibet have always been loyal and straightforward, and they are familiar with Yan Song's treachery, competing to abuse Yan Song to win the pleasure of Shen Zhen.

古文：炼亦大喜，日相与詈嵩父子为常。
现代文：沈炼大喜，天天与他们一起骂严嵩父子是常有的事。
English: It is common for Shen Zhen to be overjoyed and to curse Yan Song and his son together with them every day.

古文：且缚草为人，象李林甫、秦桧及嵩，醉则聚子弟攒射之。
现代文：而且束缚草人，像李林甫、秦桧和严嵩，酒醉后就聚集子弟钻射他们。
English: Moreover, they tied up grass people, such as Li Linfu, Qin Yu and Yan Song, and after getting drunk, they gathered their children to drill and shoot them.

古文：或踔骑居庸关口，南向戟手詈嵩，复痛哭乃归。
现代文：或者骑马越过居庸关口，面向南伸手指骂严嵩，又痛哭后才回来。
English: Or riding a horse across the Juyeong Pass, facing south, stretching his fingers and cursing Jang Song, only to return after crying bitterly.

古文：语稍稍闻京师，嵩大恨，思有以报炼。
现代文：这些话逐渐传到京师，严嵩非常痛恨他，思考着用什么来报复沈炼。
English: These words gradually spread to the Beijing division, Yan Song hated him very much, thinking about what to use to take revenge on Shen Qing.

古文：先是，许论总督宣、大，常杀良民冒功，炼贻书诮让。
现代文：在这以前，许论总督宣、大，经常杀良民冒功，沈炼致书责备他。
English: Prior to this, Xu denounced the governor Xuan Da, saying that he often killed good people and took credit for it, and sent him a letter to reprimand him.

古文：后嵩党杨顺为总督。
现代文：后来严嵩的党徒杨顺做总督。
English: Later, Yang Shun, a strict party member, became the governor.

古文：会俺答入寇，破应州四十余堡，惧罪，欲上首功自解，纵吏士遮杀避兵人，逾于论。
现代文：正好俺答入侵，破应州四十多堡。杨顺惧怕得罪，想上敌人首级论功自解，听从吏士诛杀逃避兵战的人，还超过许论。
English: Yang Shun was afraid of offending, he wanted to get on the enemy's head, he wanted to get the credit, he wanted to listen to the officials, he wanted to kill the people who were escaping the war, and he wanted to exceed the promise.

古文：炼遗书责之加切。
现代文：沈炼遗书责谴他更加急切。
English: The chastening suicide note condemns him more urgently.

古文：又作文祭死事者，词多刺顺。
现代文：又作文祭祀死了的人，言词多讽刺杨顺。
English: In addition, the composition worships dead people, and the words are mostly satirical of Yang Shun.

古文：顺大怒，走私人白世蕃，言炼结死士击剑习射，意叵测。
现代文：杨顺大怒，让私人找严世蕃，说沈炼结士击剑习射，居心叵测。
English: Yang Shun was furious, and asked a private person to find Yan Shiyan. He said that Shen had been practicing fencing and practicing shooting, and that he had deliberately miscalculated.

古文：世蕃以属巡按御史李凤毛。
现代文：严世蕃将这嘱托巡按御史李凤毛。
English: Yan Shiyan entrusted this task to the historian Li Fengmao.

古文：凤毛谬谢曰： 有之，已阴散其党矣。 
现代文：李凤毛荒谬自责说： 有这种事，已经暗中散去他的党徒。 
English: Li Fengmao ridiculously reproached himself, saying: With such a thing, he has secretly dispersed his party members.

古文：既而代凤毛者路楷，亦嵩党也。
现代文：既而代李凤毛的人是路楷，也是严嵩的党徒。
English: The person who replaced Li Fengmao was both a roadblock and a strict party member.

古文：世蕃属与顺合图之，许厚报。
现代文：严世蕃嘱咐他和杨顺一起图谋这件事，许诺给他们厚报。
English: Yan Shisheng ordered him and Yang Shun to conspire together and promised them a reward.

古文：两人日夜谋所以中炼者。
现代文：他们两人日夜谋图如何中伤沈炼的事。
English: The two of them have been plotting day and night on how to smear Shen Zhen.

古文：会蔚州妖人阎浩等素以白莲教惑众，出入漠北，泄边情为患。
现代文：正巧蔚州的妖人阎浩等人一向用白莲教蛊惑众人，出入漠北，泄露边情为患。
English: It just so happens that the sorcerer Yan Hao and others in Ulshu have always used the White Lotus Religion to bewitch people, entering and leaving the north, and leaking the border situation.

古文：官军捕获之，词所连及甚众。
现代文：官军捕获他们，词所连及的人很多。
English: The government army captured them, and there are many people connected to the word.

古文：顺喜，谓楷曰： 是足以报严公子矣。 
现代文：杨顺大喜，对路楷说： 这足以报告严公子。 
English: Yang Shun was overjoyed and said to Lu Kai: This is enough to report Yan Gongzi.

古文：窜炼名其中，诬浩等师事炼，听其指挥，具狱上。
现代文：撰改沈炼的名在其中，诬蔑阎浩等人师事沈炼，听从沈炼指挥，具狱上奏。
English: Among them are the names of those who compiled and reformed Shen Zhen, those who slandered Yan Hao and others as teachers of Shen Zhen, those who obeyed Shen Zhen's command, and those who went to prison.

古文：嵩父子大喜。
现代文：严嵩父子大喜。
English: Yan Song and his son were overjoyed.

古文：前总督论适长兵部，竟覆如其奏。
现代文：前总督许论这时正掌管兵部，竟回覆如其奏。
English: Former Governor Xu Rong, who was in charge of the military department at the time, responded in kind.

古文：斩炼宣府市，戍子襄极边。
现代文：斩沈炼于宣府街市，将他儿子沈襄戍守极边。
English: He trained his son Shen Xiang in Xuanfu Street Market and sent his son Shen Xiang to guard the border.

古文：予顺一子锦衣千户，楷待铨五品卿寺。
现代文：给予杨顺一子锦衣千户，路楷等人待选五品卿寺。
English: Yang Shun, the only son, will be given a thousand households of brocade clothes, and Lu Kai and others will be selected for five temples.

古文：时三十六年九月也。
现代文：这时是三十六年九月。
English: It was September of '36.

古文：顺曰： 严公薄我赏，意岂未惬乎？ 
现代文：杨顺说： 严公薄我赏，意岂不满足吗？ 
English: Yang Shun said, "I appreciate the strictness and modesty, isn't that enough?

古文：取炼子衮、褒杖杀之，更移檄逮襄。
现代文：拿沈炼的儿子沈衮、沈褒，用杖打死，再移檄令逮捕沈襄。
English: He beat Shen Rong and Shen Bao, the sons of Shen Rongren, to death with a cane, and then ordered the arrest of Shen Xiang.

古文：襄至，掠讯方急，会顺、楷以他事逮，乃免。
现代文：沈襄到达后，拷打审讯正急，恰巧杨顺因他事被逮捕，沈襄才得以免死。
English: After Shen Xiang arrived, the torture interrogation was urgent. It just so happened that Yang Shun was arrested for something else, and only then was Shen Xiang spared from death.

古文：后嵩败，世蕃坐诛。
现代文：后来严嵩败露，严世蕃被诛。
English: Later, Yan Song was defeated and Yan Shiyan was captured.

古文：临刑时，炼所教保安子弟在太学者，以一帛署炼姓名官爵于其上，持入市。
现代文：临刑的时候，沈炼所教的保安子弟在太学的人，用一锦帛写上沈炼姓名官爵，持举入市。
English: At the time of sentencing, the security guard's son, who was taught by Shen Zhen, wrote the name of Shen Zhen with a brocade and entered the city.

古文：观世蕃断头讫，大呼曰： 沈公可瞑目矣。 
现代文：看到严世蕃断头完毕，大呼说： 沈公可以瞑目了。 
English: Seeing Yan Shihong's severed head, he shouted: "Shen Gong can rest in peace.

古文：因恸哭而去。
现代文：接着恸哭离去。
English: Then he left, crying.

古文：隆庆初，诏褒言事者。
现代文：隆庆年初期，皇帝下诏令褒赏言事的人。
English: At the beginning of the Year of the Dragon, the emperor issued a decree to reward those who spoke out.

古文：赠炼光禄少卿，任一子官。
现代文：赠沈炼光禄少卿，任用他一个儿子为官。
English: He presented Shen Zhenguanglu with the title of Shaoqing, and appointed one of his sons as an official.

古文：襄乃上书，言顺、楷杀人媚奸状。
现代文：沈襄于是上书，陈述杨顺、路楷杀人媚奸的情况。
English: Shen Xiang then submitted a letter, stating the situation of Yang Shun and Lu Kai's murderous adultery.

古文：给事中魏时亮、陈瓒亦相继论之。
现代文：给事中魏时亮、陈瓒也相继疏论这件事。
English: Wei Shiliang and Chen Yao also discussed this matter successively.

古文：遂下顺、楷吏，论死。
现代文：于是将杨顺、路楷交付官员审理，处以死罪。
English: As a result, Yang Shun and Lu Kai were handed over to officials for trial and sentenced to death.

古文：天启初，谥忠愍。
现代文：天启初年，赠沈炼谥号忠愍。
English: In the first year of the Apocalypse, he was given the posthumous title of "Zhong Yao" (忠).

古文：杨继盛，字仲芳，容城人。
现代文：杨继盛，字仲芳，容城人。
English: Yang Jisheng, Zi Zhongfang, Yong Chengren.

古文：七岁失母。
现代文：七岁母亲死亡。
English: Seven-year-old mother dies.

古文：庶母妒，使牧牛。
现代文：继母妒嫉他，让他放牛。
English: His stepmother was jealous and made him her cowherd.

古文：继盛经里塾，睹里中儿读书，心好之。
现代文：杨继盛经过里塾，看见里面的儿童读书，心好之。
English: Yang Jisheng passed by a village school, saw the children inside reading, and liked it.

古文：因语兄，请得从塾师学。
现代文：因而对他的哥哥说，请求能够跟从塾师学习。
English: So he asked his brother to let him study with a tutor.

古文：兄曰： 若幼，何学？ 
现代文：哥哥说： 你还小，学什么？ 
English: My brother said, "You're still young, what are you going to study?

古文：继盛曰： 幼者任牧牛，乃不任学耶？ 
现代文：杨继盛说： 年龄小能放牛，就不能学习吗？ 
English: Yang Jisheng said, "If you can herd cattle at a young age, can't you study?

古文：兄言于父，听之学，然牧不废也。
现代文：哥哥将这些对父亲说了，父亲让他学习，但还要牧牛。
English: My brother told this to my father, who told him to study, but also to be a cowherd.

古文：年十三岁，始得从师学。
现代文：杨继盛十三岁时，才能够从师学习。
English: When Yang Jisheng was thirteen years old, he was able to learn from his teacher.

古文：家贫，益自刻厉。
现代文：家庭贫困，学习越发刻苦自厉。
English: His family was poor, so he studied harder and harder.

古文：举乡试，卒业国子监，徐阶丞赏之。
现代文：乡试中举，毕业国子监，徐阶很欣赏他。
English: He won the township junior high school examination and graduated from the National Children's Supervision Center. Xu Qi admired him very much.

古文：嘉靖二十六年登进士。
现代文：嘉靖二十六年考上进士。
English: In the 26th year of Jiajing's reign, he was admitted to the priesthood.

古文：授南京吏部主事。
现代文：授官南京吏部主事。
English: He was given a post as the head of the Nanjing cadre department.

古文：从尚书韩邦奇游，覃思律吕之学，手制十二律，吹之声毕和。
现代文：跟从尚书韩邦奇游，深思乐律的学问，亲手制十二律，吹奏时声音均极和美。
English: Han Bangqi toured with Shang Shu, pondered the knowledge of music rhythms, made twelve rhythms with his own hands, and the sound was extremely gentle and beautiful when playing.

古文：邦奇大喜，尽以所学授之，继盛名益著。
现代文：韩邦奇大喜，将自己所学的全部传授给他，从此杨继盛更加有名。
English: Han Bangqi was overjoyed and taught him everything he had learned. Since then, Yang Jisheng has become even more famous.

古文：召改兵部员外郎。
现代文：召回改任兵部员外郎。
English: Gairo, a member of the military, was recalled and reassigned.

古文：俺答躏京师，咸宁侯仇鸾以勤王故有宠。
现代文：俺答蹂躏京师，咸宁侯仇鸾因勤王的缘故，皇上宠爱他。
English: The emperor favored him because of his loyalty to the emperor and because he had ravaged the capital.

古文：帝命鸾为大将军，倚以办寇。
现代文：皇帝任命仇鸾为大将军，依靠他来处理敌寇之事。
English: The emperor appointed the enemy general and relied on him to deal with the enemy.

古文：鸾中情怯，畏寇甚。
现代文：仇鸾内心惧怯，很害怕敌寇。
English: The enemy is afraid, very afraid of the enemy.

古文：方请开互市市马，冀与俺答媾，幸无战斗，固恩宠。
现代文：于是请求开互市进行马匹交易，希望和俺答讲和，侥幸无战斗，以此得到皇上的恩宠。
English: So he asked for a horse-trading market to be opened, hoping to make peace with me and get the emperor's favor by having no battle.

古文：继盛以为雠耻未雪，遽议和示弱，大辱国，乃奏言十不可、五谬。
现代文：杨继盛以为仇耻未雪，就议和示弱，是对国家的重大耻辱，于是向皇上奏言十不可、五谬。
English: Yang Jisheng thought that it would be a great shame for the country if he were to discuss and show weakness before the disgrace was over, so he made a report to the emperor, listing ten impossibilities and five absurdities.

古文：大略谓：
现代文：大略是说：
English: In a nutshell:

古文：互市者，和亲别名也。
现代文： 互市是和亲的别名。
English: Mutual market is another name for kinship.

古文：俺答蹂躏我陵寝，虔刘我赤子。
现代文：俺答蹂躏我陵寝，杀害我赤子。
English: I'm going to ransack my tomb, kill my baby.

古文：天下大雠也，而先之和。不可一。
现代文：这是天下的大仇，大仇未报先求和，这是一不可。
English: This is a great enemy of the world, and it is impossible for a great enemy to make peace without first making peace.

古文：往下诏北伐，天下晓然知圣意，日夜征缮助兵食。
现代文：过去下诏令进行北伐，天下晓然知道圣意，日夜征集食物以助军粮。
English: In the past, when the imperial edict was issued to carry out the Northern Expedition, the whole world knew the sacred intention, and collected food day and night to help the army.

古文：忽更之曰和，失信于天下。
现代文：忽然改变说讲和，这样就失信于天下。
English: To suddenly change the tone of peace talks is a breach of trust with the world.

古文：不可二。
现代文：这是二不可。
English: This is a must.

古文：以堂堂中国，与之互市，冠履倒置。
现代文：以堂堂中国，与他们进行互市，头足倒置。
English: With China, they are trading with them, head and feet upside down.

古文：不可三。
现代文：这是三不可。
English: This is a must.

古文：海内豪杰争磨砺待试，一旦委置无用。异时欲号召，谁复兴起？
现代文：海内豪杰争相磨砺等待以试身手，一旦委置无用，过时想号召，谁再兴起听命？
English: Domestic heroes compete to sharpen and wait to try their hand. Once they are appointed useless, outdated and want to call, who will rise again to follow orders?

古文：不可四。
现代文：这是四不可。
English: This is the reason why Article 4 is not feasible.

古文：使边镇将帅以和议故，美衣媮食，驰懈兵事。
现代文：使边镇将帅因和议的缘故，美衣乐食，弛懈兵事。
English: So that the border town will be handsome because of the peace talks, beautiful clothes and food, relaxed military affairs.

古文：不可五。
现代文：这是五不可。
English: This is why Article 5 is unworkable.

古文：往时边卒私通境外，吏率裁禁，今乃导之使与通。
现代文：过去边卒私通境外，吏官一概裁决禁止，而今却诱使他们与敌人相通。
English: In the past, border guards and officials were prohibited from illicit communication with the outside world, but now they are being induced to communicate with the enemy.

古文：不可六。
现代文：这是六不可。
English: It's a six-way tie.

古文：盗贼伏莽，徒慑国威不敢肆耳，今知朝廷畏怯，睥睨之渐必开。
现代文：盗贼伏于丛莽，仅仅是害怕国威不敢放肆，现在知道朝廷畏怯外寇，他的睥睨必定逐渐出现。
English: Thieves used to hide in the bushes. They were only afraid of the national prestige and dared not act recklessly. Now that they know that the imperial court is afraid of foreign invaders, their arrogance is bound to gradually emerge.

古文：不可七。
现代文：这是七不可。
English: This is a must.

古文：俺答往岁深入，乘我无备故也。
现代文：俺答往年深入侵我，是乘我无备的缘故。
English: In previous years, I've been attacked more deeply because of my unpreparedness.

古文：备之一岁，以互市终。彼谓国有人乎？
现代文：备战一年，因互市而告终，他们会说我们国家有人吗？
English: After a year of preparing for war, which ended with an exchange of markets, will they say that there is no one in our country?

古文：不可八。
现代文：这是八不可。
English: This is an absolute must.

古文：或俺答负约不至；至矣，或阴谋伏兵突入；或今日市，明日复寇；或以下马索上直。
现代文：或者俺答负约不到；就是到了，或阴谋伏兵突入；或今天互市，明天又实行对我们的侵略；或者用下等的马匹索要上等的价钱。
English: Or I fail to keep my promise; or I just arrive, or we are ambushed; or we trade today and tomorrow they invade us again; or we use inferior horses to demand a better price.

古文：不可九。
现代文：这是九不可。
English: This is a must.

古文：岁帛数十万，得马数万匹。
现代文：一年布帛数十万，得马数万匹。
English: Each year, hundreds of thousands of cloth are produced, and tens of thousands of horses are bred.

古文：十年以后，帛将不继。
现代文：十年以后，布帛将不继。
English: Ten years from now, Boao will be no more.

古文：不可十。
现代文：这是十不可。
English: This is an absolute must.

古文：议者曰： 吾外为市以羁縻之，而内修我甲。 
现代文： 议者说 我外为市来羁縻他们，而内修我甲兵 。
English: The councillor said, "Outside, I am a city guard, but inside, I am an armored soldier."

古文：此一谬也。
现代文：这是第一谬。
English: This is the first fallacy.

古文：夫寇欲无厌，其以衅终明甚。
现代文：敌寇贪得无厌，他们以挑起祸端为最终目的是非常明显的。
English: The enemy bandits are insatiably greedy, and their ultimate goal of stirring up trouble is very obvious.

古文：苟内修武备，安事羁縻？
现代文：如果内修武备，怎么还要从事羁縻？
English: If the internal military training, how to also engage in guanxi?

古文：曰： 吾阴市，以益我马 。
现代文：说 我暗借互市，来买到需要的马匹 。
English: He said, "I borrowed money from the market to buy the horses I needed."

古文：此二谬也。
现代文：这是第二谬。
English: This is the second fallacy.

古文：夫和则不战，马将焉用？
现代文：讲和就不进行战争，马将做什么用呢？
English: If there is no war when peace is declared, what is the use of a horse?

古文：且彼宁肯予我良马哉？
现代文：而且他们肯给我们良马吗？
English: And will they give us good horses?

古文：曰： 市不已，彼且入贡 。
现代文：说 市不停止，他们还要向我们入贡 。
English: He said that the city would not stop and that they would still have to pay us tribute.

古文：此三谬也。
现代文：这是第三谬。
English: This is the third fallacy.

古文：夫贡之赏不赀，是名美而实大损也。
现代文：纳贡抵不上赏赐，这是名声好听而实际上大亏损。
English: The tribute is not worth the reward, which is a great loss in fact, but a good reputation.

古文：曰： 俺答利我市，必无失信 。
现代文：说 俺答从我市能获利，必定不会失信 。
English: I will not be dishonest when I say that I can make a profit from my city.

古文：此四谬也。
现代文：这是第四谬。
English: This is the fourth fallacy.

古文：吾之市，能尽给其众乎？
现代文：我们的市场，能够给他们全部众人以好处吗？
English: Will our market be able to benefit all of them?

古文：能信不给者之无入掠乎？
现代文：能相信没有得到好处的人没有入侵抢掠的吗？
English: Can you believe that people who didn't benefit didn't invade and loot?

古文：曰： 佳兵不祥 。此五谬也。
现代文：说 好用兵不祥 ，这是第五谬。
English: It is a fallacy to say that it is bad to use troops.

古文：敌加己而应之，何佳也？
现代文：敌人将战争加在我们身上，我们只是应战，这算什么好用兵呢？
English: The enemy has brought the war to us, and we are just responding to the war. How is this a good use of troops?

古文：人身四肢皆痈疽，毒日内攻，而惮用药石可乎？
现代文：人身四肢都长满疮疽，病毒日益攻心，能害怕使用药物吗？
English: The human body and limbs are covered with gangrene, the virus is increasingly attacking the heart, can you be afraid of using drugs?

古文：夫此十不可、五谬，明显易见。
现代文： 这十不可、五谬是显明易见的。
English: These ten impossibilities and five fallacies are plain to see.

古文：盖有为陛下主其事者，故公卿大夫知而莫为一言。
现代文：大概有为陛下主其事的人，所以公卿大夫知道而不说一句话。
English: There is probably someone who is in charge of the matter for His Majesty, so the noble doctor knows without saying a word.

古文：陛下宜奋独断，悉按诸言互市者，发明诏选将练兵。
现代文：陛下应该奋起独断，尽将所有说互市的人问罪，发布明诏选将练兵。
English: His majesty should rise up arbitrarily, thoroughly question all those who say that it is a mutual market, and issue a clear edict to select the drill.

古文：不出十年，臣请为陛下竿俺答之首于藁街，以示天下万世。
现代文：不出十年，我保证为陛下将俺答的首级挂于竿上放在草街，以告示天下万世。 
English: In less than ten years, I promise to hang my severed head on a pole and place it on the grass in front of His Majesty, as a sign to the world.

古文：疏入，帝颇心动，下鸾及成国公朱希忠，大学士严嵩、徐阶、吕本，兵部尚书赵锦，侍郎聂豹、张时彻议。
现代文：疏章呈入，皇帝颇为心动，将这个建议下到仇鸾和成国公朱希忠，大学士严嵩、徐阶、吕本，兵部尚书赵锦，侍郎聂豹、张时彻讨论。
English: The Emperor was quite moved by the suggestion, and discussed the proposal with his vassals, Zhu Xizhong, the Duke of Chengguo, the university graduates Yan Song, Xu Ji, and Lv Ben, the military commander Zhao Jin, and his attendants, Zhaobao and Zhang Shicun.

古文：鸾攘臂詈曰： 竖子目不睹寇，宜其易之。 
现代文：仇鸾攘臂相骂说： 小子没有看到敌寇的厉害应当将他撤职。 
English: Enemies hurled insults at each other, saying: The boy did not see the severity of the enemy's invasion and should be removed from his post.

古文：诸大臣遂言遣官已行，势难中止。
现代文：诸位大臣于是说派遣的官员已经走了，势难中途废止。
English: The ministers then said that the dispatched officials had already left, and it would be difficult to cancel it halfway.

古文：帝尚犹豫，鸾复进密疏。乃下继盛诏狱，贬狄道典史。
现代文：皇帝还在犹豫，仇鸾又进宫密疏，于是将杨继盛下诏狱，后贬为狄道典史。
English: The emperor was still hesitating, and his enemies had infiltrated the imperial court. Therefore, Yang Jisheng was sent to the imperial prison, and later he was relegated to the annals of history.

古文：其地杂番，俗罕知诗书。
现代文：狄道这个地方番人与汉人杂居，文化落后罕知诗书。
English: According to Dido, the guardians of this place are mixed with Han Chinese, and the culture is backward and poetry books are rare.

古文：继盛简子弟秀者百余人，聘三经师教之。
现代文：杨继盛从他们的子弟中选拔优秀的一百多人，聘请三经老师教他们。
English: Yang Jisheng selected more than a hundred outstanding people from among their children and hired a teacher of the Three Classics to teach them.

古文：鬻所乘马，出妇服装，市田资诸生。
现代文：卖掉他所乘的马匹，卖出夫人的服装，买田资助诸生。
English: He sold the horses he rode, sold his wife's clothes, and bought land to help others.

古文：县有煤山，为番人所据，民仰薪二百里外。
现代文：这个县有煤山，被番人占据，农民依靠二百里外的柴薪。
English: There are coal mines in this county that are occupied by guards, and farmers rely on firewood from two hundred miles away.

古文：继盛召番人谕之，咸服曰： 杨公即须我曹穹帐亦舍之，况煤山耶？ 
现代文：杨继盛召集番人并说服他们，他们都心悦诚服地说 ：杨公即使需要我辈居屋也舍得，何况煤山呢？ 
English: Yang Jisheng gathered the guards and persuaded them, and they all said with sincerity: Yang Gong is willing even if he needs our generation's HOS, let alone the coal mine?

古文：番民信爱之，呼曰 杨父 。
现代文：番民非常信赖爱戴他，称他为 杨父 。
English: The guards loved and trusted him very much, and called him Father Yang.

古文：已而俺答数败约入寇，鸾奸大露，疽发背死，戮其尸。
现代文：以后俺答多次毁约入侵，仇鸾的奸恶大为暴露，毒疽发背而死，其尸被戮。
English: After that, I promised to destroy and invade many times, the evil of the enemy was greatly exposed, the gangrene died, and his body was slaughtered.

古文：帝乃思继盛言，稍迁诸城知县。
现代文：皇帝于是想到杨继盛的话，稍迁杨继盛为诸诚知县。
English: The emperor then thought of Yang Jisheng's words and moved Yang Jisheng to Zhucheng County.

古文：月余调南京户部主事，三日迁刑部员外郎。
现代文：一个多月调到南京任户部主事，三天后迁为刑部员外郎。
English: More than a month later, he was transferred to Nanjing as the head of the household department, and three days later, he was transferred to the criminal department as the second-in-command.

古文：当是时，严嵩最用事。
现代文：在这个时候，严嵩正当权。
English: At this time, the legitimate rights of Yan Song.

古文：恨鸾凌己，心善继盛首攻鸾，欲骤贵之，复改兵部武选司。
现代文：严嵩恨仇鸾侵犯自己，心中高兴杨继盛首攻仇鸾，想骤然使杨继盛显贵，又将杨继盛改为兵部武选司。
English: Yan Song hated the enemy's encroachment on himself and was glad that Yang Jisheng was the first to attack the enemy. He wanted to suddenly make Yang Jisheng prominent and change Yang Jisheng into the Military Department's Military Selection Division.

古文：而继盛恶嵩甚于鸾。
现代文：但杨继盛憎恶严嵩超过仇鸾。
English: But Yang Jisheng's loathing of Yan Song exceeded that of his enemies.

古文：且念起谪籍，一岁四迁官，思所以报国。
现代文：而且想起被谪籍后，一年之内四次迁官，考虑如何报效国家。
English: Moreover, I remembered that after I was demoted, I was transferred four times within a year to consider how to serve the country.

古文：抵任甫一月，草奏劾嵩，斋三日乃上奏曰：
现代文：上任刚一个月，就草拟奏章弹劾严嵩，斋戒三日才上奏说：
English: Just one month after taking office, he drafted a report to impeach Yan Song. He fasted for three days before reporting:

古文：臣孤直罪臣，蒙天地恩，超擢不次。夙夜祗惧，思图报称，盖未有急于请诛贼臣者也。
现代文： 我是孤直的罪臣，蒙天地之恩，多次得到越级提升，思恩图报，认为没有比请求诛贼臣更急迫的了。
English: I am a lonely and upright vassal, blessed by heaven and earth, I have been promoted many times, and I think that there is nothing more urgent than asking a vassal.

古文：方今外贼惟俺答，内贼惟严嵩，未有内贼不去，而可除外贼者。
现代文：现在外贼惟有俺答，内贼惟有严嵩，没有内贼不除去，而能除去外贼的。
English: Now, the only outsider is me, and the only insider is Yan Song. There is no insider who cannot be eliminated, but there is someone who can eliminate the outsider.

古文：去年春雷久不声，占曰： 大臣专政 。
现代文：去年春雷久不发声，占卜说 大臣专政 。
English: Last spring, the thunder did not make a sound for a long time, and the divination said that the minister's dictatorship was established.

古文：冬日下有赤色，占曰： 下有叛臣 。
现代文：冬天太阳底下有赤红色，占卜说 下有叛臣 。
English: In winter, there are red worms under the sun, and there are traitors under divination.

古文：又四方地震，日月交食。
现代文：又四方地震，日食月食出现。
English: There were earthquakes in all directions, and a solar eclipse and a lunar eclipse occurred.

古文：臣以为灾皆嵩致，请以嵩十大罪为陛下陈之。
现代文：我认为灾害的出现都是严嵩所致，请让我向陛下陈述严嵩的十大罪状。
English: I believe that all disasters are caused by austerity. Please allow me to present to Your Majesty a list of austerity's ten major faults.

古文：高皇帝罢丞相，设立殿阁之臣，备顾问视制草而已，嵩乃俨然以丞相自居。
现代文： 高皇帝罢去丞相，设立殿阁之臣，备顾问起草文书罢了，但严嵩俨然以丞相自居。
English: Emperor Gao dismissed the prime minister, set up a cabinet of ministers, and prepared advisers to draft documents, but Yan Song still considered himself the prime minister.

古文：凡府部题覆，先面白而后草奏。
现代文：凡是府部题覆，先向严嵩面陈而后才草奏。
English: Whenever a prefectural or ministerial title is overturned, it is first presented to Yan Song and then played.

古文：百官请命，奔走直房如市。
现代文：百官请命，奔走到严嵩处像闹市一般。
English: Hundreds of officials pleaded for their lives, rushing to Yanqiao like it was a bustling city.

古文：无丞相名，而有丞相权。
现代文：无丞相的名义，而有丞相的权力。
English: There is no title of chancellor, but there is the power of chancellor.

古文：天下知有嵩，不知有陛下。
现代文：天下都知道有严嵩，不知道有陛下。
English: The whole world knows about Yan Rong, but they don't know about His Majesty.

古文：是坏祖宗之成法。大罪一也。
现代文：这种破坏祖宗的成法，是第一大罪状。
English: This destruction of the ancestral code is the first major crime.

古文：陛下用一人，嵩曰 我荐也 ；斥一人，曰 此非我所亲，故罢之 。
现代文： 陛下用一人，严嵩说 我推荐的 ；陛下贬斥一人，严嵩说 这人不是我的亲信，所以罢斥他 。
English: His Majesty used one person, Yan Song said, whom I recommended; His Majesty disparaged one person, Yan Song said, this person is not my close confidant, so he dismissed him.

古文：陛下宥一人，嵩曰 我救也 ；罚一人，曰 此得罪于我，故报之 。
现代文：陛下原宥一人，严嵩说 是我救的 ；陛下罚一人，严嵩说 这人把我得罪了，所以要报复他 。
English: His Majesty originally pardoned one person, and Yan Song said that it was I who saved him; His Majesty punished one person, and Yan Song said that this person had offended me, so he wanted to take revenge on him.

古文：伺陛下喜怒以恣威福。
现代文：严嵩窥伺陛下的喜怒来放肆地作威作福。
English: Yan Song spied on His Majesty's joy and anger to arrogantly act as a tyrant.

古文：群臣感嵩甚于感陛下，畏嵩甚于畏陛下。
现代文：群臣感恩严嵩超过陛下，畏惧严嵩甚于畏惧陛下。
English: The courtiers are more grateful to Shigematsu than to His Majesty, and more afraid of Shigematsu than of His Majesty.

古文：是窃君上之大权。大罪二也。
现代文：这种窃君上的大权，是第二大罪状。
English: This usurpation of power is the second most serious charge.

古文：陛下有善政，嵩必令世蕃告人曰： 主上不及此，我议而成之 。
现代文： 陛下有善政，严嵩必定让他的儿子严世蕃告诉别人说 主上不能够做到这一点，是因我的建议才成为这样 。
English: His Majesty has a good government, Yan Song must have his son Yan Shijun tell others that the Lord can not do this, it is because of my suggestion that it became so.

古文：又以所进揭帖刊刻行世，名曰《嘉靖疏议》，欲天下以陛下之善尽归于嵩。
现代文：又将他的进言揭帖刊刻流传世上，起名为《嘉靖疏议》，想天下将陛下的善政全部归功于严嵩。
English: He also published his speech unveiling post and circulated it to the world, naming it "Jiajing's Deliberation," hoping that the world would attribute all of His Majesty's good governance to Yan Song.

古文：是掩君上之治功。大罪三也。
现代文：这种掩盖君上的治功，是第三大罪状。
English: This kind of cover-up is the third major crime.

古文：陛下令嵩司票拟，盖其职也。
现代文： 陛下让严嵩司管票拟，这是他的职责。
English: His Majesty asked Yan Song to draft the ballot, which is his duty.

古文：嵩何取而令子世蕃代拟？又何取而约诸义子赵文华辈群聚而代拟？
现代文：严嵩何必要让他的儿子严世蕃代拟，又何必用他的诸位义子赵文华等人聚集在一起来代拟呢？
English: Why did Yan Song need to have his son Yan Shih-tao act as a stand-in, and why did he need to gather together his sons-in-law Zhao Wenhua and others to act as a stand-in?

古文：题疏方上，天语已传。
现代文：题疏才呈上，但内容却已经向外流传。
English: The questions have only just been submitted, but the content has already been circulated.

古文：如沈炼劾嵩疏，陛下以命吕本，本即潜送世蕃所，令其拟上。
现代文：像沈炼弹劾严嵩的疏章，陛下让吕本提出处理意见，而吕本却暗中将疏章送到严嵩处，让严嵩拟上。
English: For example, His Majesty allowed Luben to make a suggestion on how to deal with the petition to impeach Yan Song, but Luben secretly sent the petition to Yan Song and let Yan Song draft it.

古文：是嵩以臣而窃君之权，世蕃复以子而盗父之柄，故京师有 大丞相、小丞相 之谣。
现代文：这是严嵩以臣而窃君的权，严世蕃又以子来窃父的权，所以京城有 大丞相、小丞相 的民谣。
English: This is the right of Yan Song to use his vassal to steal the prince, and the right of Yan Shihong to use his son to steal the father, so there are folk songs of the Grand and Junior Ministers in Beijing.

古文：是纵奸子之僣窃。大罪四也。
现代文：这种纵容儿子僭窃权职的行为是第四大罪状。
English: This act of condoning his son's plagiarism is the fourth major charge.

古文：严效忠、严鹄，乳臭子耳，未尝一涉行伍。
现代文： 严效忠、严鹄是乳臭未干的毛孩子，他们未曾一涉行伍。
English: Yan Loyalty and Yan Yao are wet-behind-the-ears children who have never been in the military.

古文：嵩先令效忠冒两广功，授锦衣所镇抚矣。
现代文：严嵩先让严效忠冒两广战功，被授官锦衣所镇抚。
English: Yan Song first let Yan allegiance to risk two broad war achievements, and was awarded the post of Jin clothing.

古文：效忠以病告，鹄袭兄职。
现代文：严效忠因病告退，他的弟弟严鹄承袭兄职。
English: Yan Loyalty retired due to illness, and his younger brother Yan Xuan took over his position.

古文：又冒琼州功，擢千户。
现代文：又冒琼州战功，被提升为千户。
English: It was also promoted to a thousand households for its war exploits in Qiongzhou.

古文：以故总督欧阳必进躐掌工部，总兵陈圭几统后府，巡按黄如桂亦骤亚太仆。
现代文：因此之故总督欧阳必进越级掌管工部，总兵陈圭再统管后府，巡按黄如桂也骤然为太仆。
English: Therefore, Governor Ouyang had to be promoted to be in charge of the engineering department, General Chen Gui was put in charge of Houfu, and Inspector Huang Rugui suddenly became a servant.

古文：既藉私党以官其子孙，又因子孙以拔其私党。
现代文：严嵩既藉他的私党来让他的子孙做官，又因子孙来提拔他的私党。
English: Yan Song not only used his private party to get his children and grandchildren to become officials, but also used his grandchildren to promote his private party.

古文：是冒朝廷之军功。大罪五也。
现代文：这种冒朝廷的军功，是第五大罪状。
English: This kind of military exploits against the imperial court is the fifth major crime.

古文：逆鸾先已下狱论罪，贿世蕃三千金，荐为大将。
现代文： 逆臣仇鸾先前已被下狱论罪，他贿赂严世蕃三千金，被荐为大将。
English: The renegade vassal, Qiu Yao, had previously been sentenced to prison. He bribed Yan Shijie 3,000 gold and was recommended as a general.

古文：鸾冒擒哈舟丹儿功，世蕃亦得增秩。
现代文：仇鸾冒擒哈舟儿的战功，严世蕃也得到增加薪俸。
English: Yan Shiyan also received an increase in salary for his war service.

古文：嵩父子自夸能荐鸾矣，及知陛下有疑鸾心，复互相排诋，以泯前迹。
现代文：严嵩父子自夸推荐仇鸾之能，等到知道陛下有怀疑仇鸾的心意，又与仇鸾相互排挤诋毁，以此来泯灭前迹。
English: Yan Song and his son boasted of their ability to recommend enemies, and when they knew that His Majesty was suspicious of enemies, they mutually excluded and slandered each other, in order to erase the antecedents.

古文：鸾勾贼，而嵩、世蕃复勾鸾。
现代文：仇鸾勾结敌贼，而严嵩、严世蕃又勾结仇鸾。
English: Enemies collude with the enemy, while strictness and severity collude with the enemy.

古文：是引背逆之奸臣。大罪六也。
现代文：这种引荐背逆的奸臣，是第六大罪状。
English: This recommendation of a traitorous and treacherous vassal is the sixth major charge.

古文：前俺答深入，击其惰归，此一大机也。
现代文： 先前俺答深入内地抢掠，我军击其疲劳之时，这是一大战机。
English: Earlier, I told you to go deep into the inland to loot, and when our army hit its fatigue, this is a big fighter.

古文：兵部尚书丁汝夔问计于嵩，嵩戒无战。
现代文：兵部尚书丁汝夔向严嵩问计，严嵩告诫他不要出战。
English: Shangshu Ding Ruxuan of the Military Department asked Yan Song for advice, and Yan Song warned him not to go to war.

古文：及汝夔逮治，嵩复以论救绐之。
现代文：等到丁汝夔被逮捕治罪，严嵩又用营救他来哄骗他。
English: When Ding Ruxuan was arrested and punished, Yan Song tried to trick him by rescuing him.

古文：汝夔临死大呼曰：嵩误我。
现代文：丁汝夔临死的时候大呼说 ：严嵩误我。 
English: When Ding Ruxuan was on the verge of death, he shouted out: "I've been severely punished.

古文：是误国家之军机。大罪七也。
现代文：这种贻误国家的军机，是第七大罪状。
English: This delay of the country's military aircraft is the seventh major crime.

古文：郎中徐学诗劾嵩革任矣，复欲斥其兄中书舍人应丰。
现代文： 郎中徐学诗因弹劾严嵩被革除职位，严嵩还想斥责他的兄长中书舍人徐应丰。
English: His son-in-law, Xu Xueshi, was removed from his post for impeaching Yan Song. Yan Song also wanted to reprimand his brother-in-law, Xu Yingfeng.

古文：给事厉汝进劾嵩谪典史矣，复以考察令吏部削其籍。
现代文：给事中厉汝进弹劾严嵩被谪为典史，严嵩又用考察的名义让吏部削去他的官籍。
English: The impeachment of Yan Song by Li Rujin in the middle of the incident was recorded in history. Yan Song also used the name of investigation to have the cadre department remove his official registration.

古文：内外之臣，被中伤者何可胜计？
现代文：朝廷内外的大臣，被严嵩中伤的人数也数不过来。
English: The number of ministers inside and outside the imperial court who were slandered by Yan Song is also countless.

古文：是专黜陟之大柄。大罪八也。
现代文：这种独专任免的大权，是第八大罪状。
English: This kind of absolute power of appointment and removal is the eighth major crime.

古文：凡文武迁擢，不论可否，但衡金之多寡而畀之。
现代文： 凡是文武官臣的升迁，不论能还是不能，只按贿赂金钱的多少来衡量给与他们官职。
English: The promotion of civil and military officials and ministers, whether they can or cannot, is only measured by the amount of bribe money given to them.

古文：将弁惟贿嵩，不得不朘削士卒；有司惟贿嵩，不得不掊克百姓。
现代文：将领想贿赂严嵩，不得不剥削士卒；有司想贿赂严嵩，不得不用苛捐杂税剥削百姓。
English: The generals wanted to bribe Yan Song, so they had to exploit the soldiers; the aristocrats wanted to bribe Yan Song, so they had to exploit the people with heavy taxes.

古文：士卒失所，百姓流离，毒遍海内。
现代文：士卒和百姓流离失所，严嵩之毒遍及海内。
English: The soldiers and civilians were displaced, and the poison of Yan Song spread all over the sea.

古文：臣恐今日之患不在境外而在域中。
现代文：我担心今天的祸患不在境外而在域中。
English: I fear that today's scourge is not external but internal.

古文：是失天下之人心。大罪九也。
现代文：这失天下之人心，是第九大罪状。
English: This loss of the world's people's hearts is the ninth major crime.

古文：自嵩用事，风俗大变。
现代文： 自从严嵩当权，风俗大变。
English: Since Yan Song came to power, customs have changed dramatically.

古文：贿赂者荐及盗跖，疏拙者黜逮夷、齐。
现代文：连盗跖之类的人物也因贿赂而能得到引荐，粗拙的人被贬黜甚至牵连到叔夷、伯齐这样的人物。
English: Even thieves and the like could be recommended because of bribery. Rough-and-tumble people were disparaged, and even people like Shu Yi and Ba Qi were implicated.

古文：守法度者为迂疏，巧弥缝者为才能。
现代文：守法度的人被认为是迂疏，巧弥缝的人被认为有才能。
English: Law-abiding people are considered devious, and those who are good at sewing are considered talented.

古文：励节介者为矫激，善奔者为练事。
现代文：有节操的耿直之士被认为是矫激，善于奔走的被认为是通晓世故。
English: An upright person with self-discipline is considered to be aggressive, and one who is good at running is considered to be well-versed in the world.

古文：自古风俗之坏，未有甚于今日者。
现代文：自古风俗之坏，没有超过今天的。
English: Since ancient times, customs have never been worse than they are today.

古文：盖嵩好利，天下皆尚贪。
现代文：严嵩好利，天下都崇尚贪婪。
English: Rigorous and profitable, the world is advocating greed.

古文：嵩好谀，天下皆尚谄。
现代文：严嵩好谀，天下都崇尚谄媚。
English: Strict and good manners, the whole world is advocating charming.

古文：源之弗洁，流何以澄？
现代文：源不清洁，流怎么能澄清？
English: If the source is not clean, how can the flow be clarified?

古文：是敝天下之风俗。大罪十也。
现代文：这种敝坏天下的风俗，是第十大罪状。
English: This kind of slander against the customs of the world is the tenth major crime.

古文：嵩有是十罪，而又济之以五奸。
现代文： 严嵩有这十大罪状，而又济成以五奸。
English: Yan Song was charged with these ten crimes, and Jicheng was charged with five counts of treason.

古文：知左右侍从之能察意旨也，厚贿结纳。
现代文：知道左右侍从能察了皇上意旨的人，严嵩就厚贿结纳。
English: Those who knew that the left and right attendants were able to observe the emperor's will were bribed heavily.

古文：凡陛下言动举措，莫不报嵩。
现代文：陛下的全部言动举措，无不报告给严嵩。
English: All of His Majesty's words and actions are reported to Yan Song.

古文：是陛下之左右皆贼嵩之间谍也。
现代文：这样陛下的左右都是贼臣严嵩的间谍。
English: As a result, His Majesty's right and left sides are full of treacherous spies.

古文：以通政司之主出纳也，用赵文华为使。
现代文：因通政司是主出纳的，所以严嵩用赵文华为使。
English: Since Tsong was the chief cashier, Yan Song used Zhao Wenhua as the messenger.

古文：凡有疏至，先送嵩阅竟，然后入御。
现代文：凡有疏章到达，先送给严嵩看完，然后再给皇上。
English: Whenever a posthumous medal arrived, it was first given to Yan Song to read, and then to the emperor.

古文：王宗茂劾嵩之章停五日乃上，故嵩得展转遮饰。
现代文：王宗茂弹劾严嵩的疏章停放五天后才交给皇上，所以严嵩能够辗转遮饰。
English: Wang Zongmao impeached Yansong's Soshang, and it was parked for five days before it was handed over to the emperor, so Yansong was able to disguise it.

古文：是陛下之喉舌乃贼嵩之鹰犬也。
现代文：这样陛下的喉舌乃是贼臣严嵩的鹰犬。
English: His majesty's mouthpiece is thus a stern eagle-dog of a vassal.

古文：畏厂卫之缉访也，令子世蕃结为婚姻。
现代文：严嵩害怕厂卫缉访他，让儿子严世蕃和他们结为婚姻。
English: Yan Song was afraid that the guards of the factory would visit him, so he let his son Yan Shiyan marry them.

古文：陛下试诘嵩诸孙之妇，皆谁氏乎？
现代文：陛下尝试诘问一下严嵩诸位孙子的媳妇，都是些什么人？
English: Your Majesty, try asking the daughters-in-law of Yan Song's grandchildren, who are they?

古文：是陛下之爪牙皆贼嵩之瓜葛也。
现代文：这样陛下的爪牙都与严嵩有瓜葛。
English: As a result, all of His Majesty's minions are related to Yan Song.

古文：畏科道之多言也，进士非其私属，不得预中书、行人选。
现代文：严嵩害怕科道的多言，进士不是他的属下，不得预作为中书行人的人选。
English: Yan Song is afraid of the many words of science and technology, Jin Shi is not his subordinate, and must not be pre-selected as a candidate for the pedestrians of Chinese books.

古文：推官、知县非通贿，不得预给事、御史选。
现代文：推官、知县没有向他行贿，不得预作为给事中、御史的人选。
English: If the magistrate or magistrate's son-in-law has not paid a bribe to him, he may not be pre-selected as the person to be appointed as the judge in the case.

古文：既选之后，入则杯酒结欢，出则餽饣尽相属。
现代文：已经被选中之后，入朝廷严嵩就和他们杯酒结欢，到外地就馈赠相嘱。
English: After having been selected, Yan Song entered the imperial court and celebrated with them over a glass of wine. When he went abroad, he promised to give gifts to them.

古文：所有爱憎，授之论刺。
现代文：所有爱憎，授之论刺。
English: All the love-hate, give-and-take arguments.

古文：历俸五六年，无所建白，即擢京卿。
现代文：这样的人受俸五六年，无所建树言白，就被提升为京卿。
English: Such a person received a salary for five or six years, and after nothing was done or said, he was promoted to Keikyo.

古文：诸臣忍负国家，不敢忤权臣。
现代文：诸臣忍心负国家，不敢忤逆权臣。
English: The courtiers were reluctant to defy the state and did not dare to rebel against the powerful ministers.

古文：是陛下之耳目皆贼嵩之奴隶也。
现代文：这样陛下的耳目都是贼臣严嵩的奴隶。
English: In this way, His Majesty's eyes and ears are the slaves of a tyrannical vassal.

古文：科道虽入笼络，而部寺中或有如徐学诗之辈亦可惧也，令子世蕃择其有才望者，罗置门下。
现代文：科道虽然被他笼络，而部寺中或许有像徐学诗这样的人也很可怕，所以让他的儿子严世蕃选择其中有才望的人，罗置为他的门下。
English: Although he was seduced by science and technology, it was scary that there might be someone like Xu Xueshi in the temple, so he asked his son Yan Shijun to choose a talented person and place him under his tutelage.

古文：凡有事欲行者，先令报嵩，预为布置，连络蟠结，深根固蒂，各部堂司大半皆其羽翼。
现代文：凡有事想施行的，先让他们报告严嵩，预先做好布置，联络蟠结，深根固蒂，各部堂司大半都是他的羽翼。
English: If there is anything they want to do, they should first report it to Yan Song, prepare the layout in advance, connect the knots, and have deep roots. Most of the ministers are his wings.

古文：是陛下之臣工皆贼嵩之心膂也。
现代文：这样陛下的臣子都是贼臣严嵩的心膂。
English: As a result, all of His Majesty's vassals have the heart of a thief.

古文：陛下奈何爱一贼臣，而忍百万苍生陷于涂炭哉？
现代文：陛下如何爱一贼臣，而忍心让百万苍生陷于涂炭呢？
English: How can His Majesty love a vassal and tolerate millions of lives being ruined?

古文：至如大学士徐阶蒙陛下特擢，乃亦每事依违，不敢持正，不可不谓之负国也。
现代文： 至如大学士徐阶承蒙陛下特别提升，也还每事依违，不敢主持正义，不可不说是他负国。
English: As far as the university scholar Xu Zhicheng was specially promoted by His Majesty, he also defied everything, dared not preside over justice, and it must be said that he was a traitor to the country.

古文：愿陛下听臣之言，察嵩之奸。
现代文：希望陛下听信我的话，察知严嵩的奸邪。
English: I hope that Your Majesty will listen to my words and be aware of the treachery of Jang Song.

古文：或召问裕、景二王，或询诸阁臣。
现代文：或者召问裕、景二王子，或者询问诸位阁臣。
English: Or summon Prince Yu or Prince Keiji, or ask your cabinet ministers.

古文：重则置宪，轻则勒致仕。
现代文：严嵩罪重则置以宪律，轻则勒令他辞职。
English: If he is found guilty of high treason, he will be punished according to the Constitution; if he is found guilty of low treason, he will be ordered to resign.

古文：内贼既去，外贼自除。
现代文：内贼既然被除去，外贼也就自然而然被除去。
English: Since the insider has been removed, the outsider will naturally be removed.

古文：虽俺答亦必畏陛下圣断，不战而丧胆矣。
现代文：即使是俺答也必定畏怕陛下的圣断，不战而丧胆啊。 
English: Even I must be afraid of your majesty's sacred decision, and I would lose heart without a fight.

古文：疏入，帝已怒。
现代文：疏章呈入，皇帝已经发怒。
English: The Emperor was furious.

古文：嵩见召问二王语，喜谓可指此为罪，密构于帝。
现代文：严嵩看见有召问二王的话，高兴地说可以指这为罪，于是秘密与皇上交接。
English: When Yan Song saw that the two kings had been summoned, he was pleased to say that this could be considered a crime, so he secretly met with the emperor.

古文：帝益大怒，下继盛诏狱，诘何故引二王。
现代文：皇帝更加大怒，将杨继盛下诏狱，诘问为什么引二王。
English: The emperor was even more enraged. He sent Yang Jisheng to prison and asked why he had brought the two kings.

古文：继盛曰： 非二王谁不慑嵩者！ 
现代文：杨继盛说 ：不是二王谁不慑怕严嵩呢？ 
English: Yang Jisheng said, "Isn't it the two kings who are not afraid of Yansong?"

古文：狱上，乃杖之百，令刑部定罪。
现代文：狱上，被杖打一百，让刑部定罪。
English: In prison, he was beaten with a cane a hundred times to convict him.

古文：侍郎王学益，嵩党也。
现代文：侍郎王学益是严嵩的党徒。
English: His servant, Wang Xueyik, was a strict Party member.

古文：受嵩属，欲坐诈传亲王令旨律绞，郎中史朝宾持之。
现代文：他受严嵩的嘱咐，想问杨继盛诈传亲王令旨律的罪将他绞死，郎中史朝宾坚持不同意。
English: He was ordered by Yan Song to ask Yang Jisheng to hang him for the crime of defrauding the prince, but his son-in-law Chaobin did not agree.

古文：嵩怒，谪之外。
现代文：严嵩愤怒，将他谪出朝廷。
English: Yan was so angry that he threw him out of the court.

古文：于是尚书何鳌不敢违，竟如嵩指成狱，然帝犹未欲杀之也。
现代文：于是尚书何鳌不敢违抗严嵩，竟然像严嵩所指的那样定案，但皇帝还不想杀杨继盛。
English: As a result, Shang Shuxu did not dare to defy Yan Song, and the final decision was made as Yan Song had indicated, but the emperor still did not want to kill Yang Jisheng.

古文：系三载，有为营救于嵩者。
现代文：他被拘囚三年，有人向严嵩营救杨继盛。
English: He was imprisoned for three years, and someone approached Yan Song to rescue Yang Jisheng.

古文：其党胡植、鄢懋卿怵之曰： 公不睹养虎者耶，将自贻患。 
现代文：严嵩的党徒胡植、鄢懋卿警惕地说： 公不见养虎的人，将自贻祸患。 
English: Hu Zhi, a stern-faced Party member, and Zou Qing said warily: "Those who do not raise tigers in public will be a self-inflicted disaster."

古文：嵩颔之。
现代文：严嵩点头。
English: Yan Song nodded.

古文：会都御史张经、李天宠坐大辟。
现代文：正遇上都御史张经、李天宠坐大辟之罪。
English: Zhang Jing and Li Tianchi, the two emperors of the capital, are facing the crime of sitting on the throne.

古文：嵩揣帝意必杀二人，比秋审，因附继盛名并奏，得报。
现代文：严嵩揣测皇帝的意图必定杀死二人，等到秋审的时候，就附杨继盛的名一并奏上，得到了皇上批复。
English: Yan Song surmised that the emperor's intention must have been to kill the two men. When it came time for the autumn trial, he attached Yang Jisheng's name to the report and received the emperor's approval.

古文：其妻张氏伏阙上书，言： 臣夫继盛误闻市井之言，尚狃书生之见，遂发狂论。
现代文：杨继盛的妻子张氏伏在殿阙上上书说 ：我的丈夫杨继盛误听市井之言，还习惯于书生之见，于是抒发狂论。
English: Yang Jisheng's wife Zhang prostrated herself on the dais and wrote: "My husband Yang Jisheng misheard the words of Ichii and was still accustomed to the views of scholars, so he expressed a crazy theory.

古文：圣明不即加戮，俾从吏议。
现代文：圣明不即加戮，使从吏议。
English: Sanctification does not mean adding to the slaughter, so that officials discuss.

古文：两经奏谳，俱荷宽恩。
现代文：两次经过上奏被审判定罪，都承受皇上的宽宥之恩。
English: After being tried and convicted twice, he received the emperor's grace of forgiveness.

古文：今忽阑入张经疏尾，奉旨处决。
现代文：现在突然阑入张经的疏尾，奉旨处决。
English: Now, all of a sudden, he's at the end of the book, and he's being executed.

古文：臣仰惟圣德，昆虫草木皆欲得所，岂惜一回宸顾，下垂覆盆？
现代文：我仰望的只有圣德，草木昆虫都想得到处所，岂惜回首一次，下察沉冤。
English: All I look up to is holiness. All the plants, trees and insects want to get a place. I don't mind looking back once and inspecting my misfortune.

古文：倘以罪重，必不可赦，愿即斩臣妾首，以代夫诛。
现代文：倘若因为罪重，必不可赦，希望立即斩臣妾我的首级，来代夫诛。
English: If, because of the seriousness of the crime, there is no forgiveness, I hope to immediately cut off the head of my vassal and concubine, to replace my husband.

古文：夫虽远御魑魅，必能为疆场效死，以报君父。 
现代文：我的丈夫虽然远御魑魅，必能战死疆场，来报效君父。 
English: Although my husband is far away, he will surely die on the battlefield to repay his father's service.

古文：嵩屏不奏，遂以三十四年十月朔弃西市，年四十。
现代文：严嵩将此书扣下不奏，于是在三十四年十月初一杨继盛在西市被执行死刑，尸体暴露街头，这时四十岁。
English: Yan Song put the book under lock and key and did not play it, so at the beginning of October in 34 A.D., Yang Jisheng was executed in Xicheng, and his body was exposed on the street. He was 40 years old at the time.

古文：临刑赋诗曰： 浩气还太虚，丹心照千古。
现代文：杨继盛临刑时赋诗说： 浩气还太虚，丹心照千古。
English: When Yang Jisheng was about to be sentenced, he said in a poem: "Magnanimity is still too weak, but the heart is eternal."

古文：生平未报恩，留作忠魂补。 
现代文：生平未报恩，留作忠魂补。 
English: Life did not return the favor, left as a loyal soul supplement.

古文：天下相与涕泣传颂之。
现代文：天下相互涕泣传颂这件事。
English: The whole world is weeping and wailing over this.

古文：初，继盛之将杖也，或遗之蚺蛇胆。
现代文：起初，杨继盛将被杖打时，有的人赠给他蟒蛇胆。
English: At first, when Yang Jisheng was beaten with a cane, some people gave him a boa constrictor.

古文：却之曰： 椒山自有胆，何蚺蛇为！ 
现代文：杨继盛推却说 ：椒山自有胆，要蟒蛇胆干什么！ 
English: However, Yang Jisheng said, "Pepper Mountain has its own gall, what do you want to do with snake gall?"

古文：椒山，继盛别号也。
现代文：椒山是杨继盛的别名。
English: Jiaoshan is another name for Yang Jisheng.

古文：及入狱，创甚。
现代文：等到入狱后，创伤很厉害。
English: By the time I got to prison, the trauma was too much.

古文：夜半而苏，碎磁碗，手割腐肉。
现代文：半夜苏醒过来，摔碎瓷碗，用手拿碎片割腐肉。
English: He woke up in the middle of the night, smashed the porcelain bowl, and cut the carrion with his hands.

古文：肉尽，筋挂膜，复手截去。
现代文：肉被割尽，筋挂膜，又用手截去。
English: The meat is cut, the sinew is wrapped, and it is removed by hand.

古文：狱卒执灯颤欲坠，继盛意气自如。
现代文：狱卒拿着灯颤抖欲坠。杨继盛意气自如。
English: The jailer is trembling with the lamp. Yang Jisheng is at ease.

古文：朝审时，观者塞衢，皆叹息，有泣下者。
现代文：朝审时，观看他的人堵塞大路，都很叹息，还有为他哭泣的人。
English: At his trial, those who watched him block the road sighed and wept for him.

古文：恺，字次元，松江华亭人。
现代文：这以后七年，严嵩败露。穆宗即位，抚恤直谏的诸臣，以杨继盛为首。
English: Seven years after this, Yan Song was defeated. Mu Zong ascended to the throne, and Yang Jisheng became the head of the vassals who supported him.

古文：嘉靖二十六年进士。
现代文：赠太常少卿，谥号忠愍，予以祭葬，任命他一子为官。
English: He became a priest in the 26th year of Jiajing.

古文：杨允绳，字翼少，松江华亭人。
现代文：之后，又听从御史郝言的话，在保定为他建祠，定名旌忠。杨允绳，字翼少，松江华亭人。
English: After that, he also listened to the words of the imperial historian and built a shrine for him in Baoding, naming it Shizhongzhong. Yang Yunzhe, with few words, was from Huating in Matsue.

古文：嘉靖二十三年进士。
现代文：嘉靖二十三年进士。
English: In the 23rd year of Jiajing, he passed the entrance examination.

古文：授行人。
现代文：授官行人。
English: Awarded to pedestrians.

古文：久之，擢兵科给事中。
现代文：过了很久，被提升为兵科给事中。
English: After a long time, he was promoted to the rank of general.

古文：严嵩独相，有诏廷推阁员。
现代文：严嵩独为相国，有诏令朝廷推选阁员。
English: Yan Song was the only son-in-law of the emperor, and the imperial court had to choose the cabinet members by imperial decree.

古文：允绳偕同官王德、沈束、陈慎简辅臣、收录遗佚二事。
现代文：杨允绳和同官王德、沈束一起陈述慎选辅臣、收录遗佚二事。
English: Yang Yunzue and his colleagues Wang De and Shen Zuo jointly stated the two things of careful selection of subordinates and inclusion of widows.

古文：未几，奉命会英国公张溶、抚宁侯朱岳、定西侯蒋传等简应袭子弟于阅武场。
现代文：不久，奉命会集英国公张溶、抚宁侯朱岳、定西侯蒋传等人在阅武场选应袭子弟。
English: Soon after, he was ordered to gather the British officials Zhang Rong, Zhu Yue of Fuxing, Jiang Chuan of Dingxi, and others at the parade ground to choose a successor.

古文：指挥郑玺忽传寇至，溶等皆惧走，允绳独不动，因奏之。褫玺职，夺溶、岳营务，罚传等俸，由是知名。
现代文：指挥郑玺突然传讯说敌寇来了，张溶等人都因惧怕而逃走，只有杨允绳不动，因此他将这件事奏报皇上，郑玺被解职，张溶、朱岳被夺去营务，罚蒋传等人俸禄，因此杨允绳知名了。
English: The commander, Zheng Rong, suddenly received a message that the enemy bandits had arrived, and Zhang Rong and the others fled in fear. Only Yang Yun Rong did not move, so he reported the matter to the emperor. Zheng Rong was dismissed, Zhang Rong and Zhu Yue were deprived of camp duties, and Jiang Chuan and the others were fined their salaries. As a result, Yang Yun Rong became famous.

古文：又劾罢兵部尚书赵廷瑞。
现代文：杨允绳又弹劾罢去兵部尚书赵廷瑞。
English: Yang Yunzhe also impeached and dismissed the military secretary Zhao Tingrui.

古文：居谏垣未几，疏屡上。
现代文：居守御史不久，疏章却多次呈上。
English: Although he did not stay long, he was awarded the Medal of Honor several times.

古文：言提学宪臣宜简行谊，府州县职宜量地烦简为三等，皆报可。
现代文：说提学宪臣应当注意操行道义，府州县职应当根据地方繁简分为三等，皇帝都批复准可。
English: He said that the gendarmes should pay attention to the moral conduct, and the prefectural and county posts should be divided into three grades according to the local complex and simple, and the emperor can approve and approve.

古文：俺答入犯，朝议急兵事。
现代文：俺答入犯，朝廷讨论紧急兵事。
English: I pleaded guilty, and the Imperial Court discussed urgent military matters.

古文：允绳请令五军都督府、府军前卫及锦衣卫堂上官，每遇考选军政之岁，各具疏自陈，听科道官拾遗；腾骧四卫及锦衣卫指挥以下，听兵部考察。
现代文：杨允绳请求让五军督都府、府军前卫和锦衣卫堂上官，每遇考选军政之年，各具疏章自己陈述，听科道官补充；腾骧四卫及锦衣卫指挥以下，听兵部考察。
English: Yang Yunzhe requested that the five military governors of the prefectural capital, the vanguard of the prefectural army, and the superior officer of the imperial palace guard should, in each case of the year of the election of the military government, each have their own statement and be supplemented by the science and technology officer; the commander of the imperial palace guard and the imperial palace guard should listen to the inspection of the military department.

古文：诏皆从之，著为令。
现代文：皇帝下诏令采纳他的意见，并确定为条例。
English: The emperor issued a decree to adopt his opinion and determine it as a regulation.

古文：已，又陈御边四事，报可。
现代文：之后，又上陈御边四事，皇上批复许可。
English: After that, four matters were brought to the Emperor's attention, and the Emperor gave his approval.

古文：再迁户科左给事中。
现代文：再迁户科左给事中。
English: Sun Yingkui is in the process of relocating to the left side of the house.

古文：谢病归。
现代文：因病辞官回到家乡。
English: Due to illness, the judge returned to his hometown.

古文：久之，起故官。
现代文：过了许久，被起用为原官职。
English: After a long time, he was appointed to the same post again.

古文：三十四年九月上疏言倭患，因推弊原，谓： 近者督抚命令不行于有司，非官不尊、权不重也。
现代文：三十四年九月杨允绳上疏说倭寇的祸患，由此推到祸弊的根源说： 近来督抚的命令不被有司执行，不是官不尊、权不重的缘故。
English: In September of the year thirty-four, Yang Yun spread rumors about the woes of the wokou, and from this he deduced the source of the woes, saying: Recently, the orders of the overseers have not been carried out by the officers, and this is not due to the lack of respect for the officials or the lack of authority.

古文：督抚莅任，例赂权要，名 谢礼 。
现代文：督抚到位，按惯例要贿赂权要，这称为 谢礼 。
English: Once supervision is in place, it is customary to bribe the authority, which is called "thank you."

古文：有所奏请，佐以苞苴，名 候礼 。
现代文：如果有所奏请，则要佐以贿赂，这名叫 候礼 。
English: If there is a request, it must be accompanied by a bribe, which is called a greeting.

古文：及俸满营迁，避难求去，犯罪欲弥缝，失事希芘覆，输贿载道，为数不赀。
现代文：那些任满营迁的、避难请求离去的、犯罪想弥补过失的、失事希望遮蔽掩盖的，更是输贿载道，为数不可估量。
English: Those who have been relocated, those who have left after requesting asylum, those who have committed crimes to make up for their mistakes, and those who have hoped to cover up the accident, have even been bribed. The number is immeasurable.

古文：督抚取诸有司，有司取诸小民。
现代文：督抚取之于诸位有司，有司取之于诸小民。
English: You have a steward to supervise you, and you have a steward to take care of you.

古文：有司德色以事上，督抚壎颜以接下。
现代文：有司以恩德之色以事上，督抚以愧色接下。
English: There is a division with the color of grace, and the superintendent with the color of shame.

古文：上下相蒙，风俗莫振。
现代文：上下相蒙，风俗不振。
English: The upper and lower castes are alike, and customs are stagnant.

古文：不肖吏又乾没其间，指一科十。
现代文：不肖的官吏又侵吞其间，上面要一份，他就十倍征收。
English: The unscrupulous official gobbled it up. If he wanted more, he had to charge ten times as much.

古文：孑遗待尽之民必将挺而为盗，陷忧不止海岛间也。 
现代文：孑遗待尽的贫民必将铤而走险去做强盗，隐忧不止海岛之间。 
English: The destitute will be tempted to become robbers, and there are more than islands to worry about.

古文：其冬巡视光禄。
现代文：这一年冬天巡视光禄。
English: In the winter of that year, he inspected Kōroku.

古文：光禄丞胡膏伪增物直，允绳与同事御史张巽言劾之。
现代文：光禄丞胡膏伪增物价，杨允绳和同事御史张巽言弹劾他。
English: Guang Lucheng was accused of falsifying price increases, and Yang Yunzhe and his colleague, Mishi Zhang, decided to impeach him.

古文：下法司按验。
现代文：胡膏被下到法司考察核实。
English: The case was sent to the Department of Justice for investigation and verification.

古文：膏窘，言： 玄典隆重，所用品物，不敢徒取充数。
现代文：胡膏窘迫，说： 祭祀隆重，所用物品，不敢只取来充数。
English: Hu Yan was embarrassed and said, "The sacrificial rites are grand, and the items used dare not just be taken to make up the number.

古文：允绳憎臣简别太精，斥言醮斋之用，取具可耳，何必精择？其欺谤玄修如此。 
现代文：杨允绳憎恶我选择太精，斥言醮斋之用，取具就可以了，何必精选，他欺谤修德之业竟是如此。 
English: Yang Yunzhe hated my choice of too fine, scolded the use of fasting, picking up tools is fine, why choose carefully, he deceived the cause of cultivating virtue.

古文：帝遂大怒，下允绳及膏诏狱。
现代文：皇帝大怒，将杨允绳和胡膏下诏狱。
English: The emperor was furious and sent Yang Yunzhu and Hu An to prison.

古文：刑部尚书何鳌当允绳仪仗内诉事不实律绞，帝命仍与巽言杖于廷。
现代文：刑部尚书何鳌以杨允绳倚仗内诉事不实律的罪要绞死他，皇帝仍命令将杨允绳和张巽言在朝廷上杖打。
English: The Ministry of Justice still wanted to hang Yang Yunzhu for the crime of relying on Yang Yunzhu to make a false complaint, but the emperor still ordered Yang Yunzhu and Zhang Xuanyan to be beaten with a cane in the court.

古文：巽言夺三官。膏调外任。
现代文：张巽言被剥夺三官，胡膏被调出朝廷外任。
English: Zhang Xuanyan was deprived of his three offices, and Hu Pu was transferred to a position outside the imperial court.

古文：居五年，允绳竟死西市。
现代文：过了五年，杨允绳竟被处死于西市。
English: Five years later, Yang Yunzhuang was executed and died in Xi'an.

古文：先是，有马从谦者，以谤醮斋杖死。
现代文：在这以前，有个叫马从谦的人，因诽谤醮斋被杖打死。
English: Before that, a man named Ma Conghen was beaten to death with a cane for slandering fasting.

古文：穆宗即位，赠允绳光禄少卿，予一子官。
现代文：穆宗即位，赠杨允绳光禄少卿，给予他一子官职。
English: When Mu Zong ascended the throne, he gave Yang Yunzue the title of Guanglu Shaoqing and gave him a government post.

古文：天启初，谥忠恪。
现代文：天启年初期，谥号忠恪。
English: In the early days of the Year of the Apocalypse, the nickname "Chukaku" appeared.

古文：膏寻以贪墨被劾，诛。
现代文：胡膏不久因贪墨而被弹劾，伏诛。
English: Hupo was soon impeached for being greedy for ink and fled the country.

