古文：黎明即起，洒扫庭除，要内外整洁；既昏便息，关锁门户，必亲自检点。
现代文：每天天刚刚亮就要起床，先洒水打湿庭堂内外的地面然后扫地，使庭堂内外整洁；天刚刚黑的时候就休息，并亲自查看一下要关锁的门户。
English: Every day, I get up just after dawn, first sprinkle water to wet the ground inside and outside the courtyard, and then sweep the ground to make the courtyard neat inside and outside; I rest just after dark, and personally check the gate to be locked.

古文：一粥一饭，当思来处不易；半丝半缕，恒念物力维艰。
现代文：对于每一顿饭，我们都要想到来之不易；对于衣服的半根丝或半条线，我们也要常常想着这些物资的产生是多么的艰难。
English: For every meal, we should think about how hard it is to get it; for half a thread or half a line of clothing, we should also often think about how difficult it is to produce these materials.

古文：宜未雨而绸缪，毋临渴而掘井。
现代文：凡事先要准备，下雨前，要先把房子修补完善，不要等到口渴的时候才来掘井。
English: If you want to prepare in advance, you must first repair and improve the house before it rains. Don't wait until you are thirsty to dig a well.

古文：自奉必须俭约，宴客切勿流连。
现代文：自己生活上一定要勤俭节约，宴会宾客的时候一定不要沉迷不止。
English: You must be thrifty and frugal in your own life, and you must not indulge when you are a banquet guest.

古文：器具质而洁，瓦缶胜金玉；饮食约而精，园蔬愈珍馐。
现代文：使用的器具质朴而干净，就算是用泥土做的瓦器，也比金玉制的好；食品节约而精美，虽是园里种的蔬菜，也胜于山珍海味。
English: The utensils used are simple and clean, even if they are earthenware made of clay, they are better than those made of gold; the food is economical and exquisite, although it is vegetables grown in the garden, it is better than the mountain seafood.

古文：勿营华屋，勿谋良田。
现代文：不要营造华丽的房屋，不要图买肥沃的田地。
English: Do not build fine houses, do not buy fields of grain.

古文：三姑六婆，实淫盗之媒；婢美妾娇，非闺房之福。
现代文：三姑六婆这类人做的事情都不正派，家养美丽的婢女和娇艳的姬妾，这不是家庭的幸福。
English: Three aunts and six grandmothers are doing things that are not decent. Beautiful domestic servants and beautiful concubines, this is not the happiness of the family.

古文：童仆勿用俊美，妻妾切忌艳妆。
现代文：家僮、奴仆，不可雇用英俊美貌的，妻妾切不可有艳丽的妆饰。
English: Household servants and slaves may not be hired if they are handsome or good-looking, and wives and concubines must not wear gaudy makeup.

古文：祖宗虽远，祭祀不可不诚；子孙虽愚，经书不可不读。
现代文：祖宗虽然离我们年代久远了，但是祭祀时却仍要虔诚；子孙即使愚笨，教育也是不容怠慢的，一定让他们多读经典著作。
English: Although our ancestors are long gone, they still need to be pious when making sacrifices; even if their descendants are stupid, education is not to be neglected, and they must be made to read more classic works.

古文：居身务期质朴，教子要有义方。勿贪意外之财，勿饮过量之酒。
现代文：自己生活节俭，以做人的正道来教育子孙。不要贪不属于你的钱财，不要饮酒过量。
English: Live frugally yourself, and educate your children and grandchildren in the right way of life. Don't be greedy for money that doesn't belong to you, and don't drink too much alcohol.

古文：与肩挑贸易，毋占便宜；见贫苦亲邻，须加温恤。
现代文：和做小生意的挑贩们做买卖，不要占他们的便宜；看到穷苦的亲戚或邻居，要关心他们，并且要给他们有金钱或其它的援助。
English: Do business with petty traders, and do not take advantage of them; if you see poor relatives or neighbors, be concerned for them, and give them money or other assistance.

古文：刻薄成家，理无久享；伦常乖舛,立见消亡。
现代文：对人刻薄而发家的，绝对不会长久的享受。行事违背伦常的人，那么离毁灭的日子就不远了。
English: He who makes a fortune by being mean to others will not enjoy it for long, and he who acts immorally is not far from perdition.

古文：兄弟叔侄，须分多润寡；长幼内外，宜法肃辞严。
现代文：兄弟叔侄之间要互相帮助，富有的要资助贫穷的；长幼辈分之下，礼法应该谨严，谈话应该庄重。
English: Brothers and cousins should help each other, the rich should subsidize the poor; among the elders and the young, the etiquette should be cautious, and the conversation should be solemn.

古文：听妇言，乖骨肉，岂是丈夫？
现代文：听信妇人挑拨，而伤了骨肉之情，那里配做一个大丈夫呢？
English: Listen to the woman's provocation, and hurt the feelings of the flesh and blood, where is there a match?

古文：重资财，薄父母，不成人子。
现代文：看重钱财，而薄待父母，不是为人子女的道理。
English: To value money and treat one's parents poorly is not the way to treat one's children.

古文：嫁女择佳婿，毋索重聘；娶媳求淑女，勿计厚奁。
现代文：嫁女儿，要为她选择贤良的夫婿，不要索取大量的贵重聘礼；娶媳妇，要求娶贤淑的女子，不要贪图丰厚的嫁妆。
English: When marrying a daughter, choose a virtuous husband for her, and do not ask for a large amount of valuable gifts; when marrying a daughter-in-law, ask for a virtuous woman, and do not covet a rich dowry.

古文：见富贵而生谄容者，最可耻；遇贫穷而作骄态者，贱莫甚。
现代文：看到富贵的人，便做出巴结讨好的样子，是最可耻的，遇着贫穷的人，便作出骄傲的态度，是最鄙贱不过的。
English: When they see a rich person, they make a fawning appearance, which is the most shameful, and when they meet a poor person, they make a proud attitude, which is the most despicable.

古文：居家戒争讼，讼则终凶；处世戒多言，言多必失。
现代文：居家过日子要尽量避免争斗诉讼，不然就会有不好的结果。为人处世不可多说话，言多必失。
English: If you live at home, you should try to avoid disputes and lawsuits, otherwise there will be bad results. When dealing with people, you should not talk too much. If you talk too much, you will lose.

古文：勿恃势力而凌逼孤寡，毋贪口腹而恣杀生禽。
现代文：不可用势力来欺凌压迫孤儿寡妇，不要贪口腹之欲而任意地宰杀牛羊鸡鸭等动物。
English: Do not use force to bully and oppress orphans and widows, and do not arbitrarily slaughter cows, sheep, chickens, ducks and other animals out of greed.

古文：乖僻自是，悔误必多；颓惰自甘，家道难成。
现代文：性格古怪，自以为是的人，必会因常常做错事而懊悔；颓废懒惰，沉溺不悟，很难成家立业。
English: People with eccentric personality and self-righteousness will surely regret doing wrong things often; decadent laziness, indulgence, it is difficult to start a family and establish a career.

古文：狎昵恶少，久必受其累；屈志老成，急则可相依。
现代文：亲近不良的少年，日子久了，必定会受牵累；恭敬自谦，虚心地与那些阅历多而善于处事的人交往，遇到急难的时候，就可以受到他的指导或帮助。
English: If you are close to a delinquent teenager, you will surely be affected by it after a long time; if you are respectful and humble, and humbly interact with those who have a lot of experience and are good at handling things, you can receive his guidance or help when you are in an emergency.

古文：轻听发言，安知非人之谮诉?
现代文：易相信别人说的话，如何知道那不是诬蔑人的坏话呢？
English: Easy to believe what others say, how do you know it's not slanderous gossip?

古文：当忍耐三思；因事相争，焉知非我之不是？
现代文：要再三思考。因事相争，要冷静反省自己，因为怎知道不是我的过错？
English: To think again and again. Because of the conflict, to calmly reflect on themselves, because how do I know it's not my fault?

古文：需平心暗想。施惠勿念，受恩莫忘。
现代文：对人施了恩惠，不要老是记在心里；接受了他人的恩惠，一定要常记在心，找机会报答。
English: When you do a favor for someone, don't always keep it in mind; when you accept a favor from someone, you must always keep it in mind and look for opportunities to repay it.

古文：凡事当留馀地，得意不宜再往。
现代文：做任何事情当留有余地；得意以后，就要适可而止。
English: There should be room for doing anything; when you are good at something, you should stop when you are good at it.

古文：人有喜庆，不可生妒忌心；人有祸患，不可生喜幸心。
现代文：他人有了喜庆的事情，不可有妒忌之心；他人有了祸患，不要觉得幸灾乐祸。
English: Do not be envious of the prosperity of others, nor rejoice at their calamities.

古文：善欲人见，不是真善；恶恐人知，便是大恶。
现代文：做了好事想要别人知道，就不是真正的善人。做了坏事唯恐被人知道，就是真的恶人。
English: He is not a truly good man who does good and wants others to know it; he is a truly evil man who does evil and does not want others to know it.

古文：见色而起淫心，报在妻女；匿怨而用暗箭，祸延子孙。
现代文：看到美色就起邪心的，将来就会报应在自己的妻女身上；怀怨在心而暗中伤害人的，将会替自己的子孙留下祸根。
English: Those who see beauty and become evil-minded will be punished by their wives and children in the future; those who harbor grudges and secretly harm others will leave a bane for their children and grandchildren.

古文：家门和顺，虽饔飧不继，亦有馀欢；国课早完，即囊橐无馀，自得至乐。
现代文：家里和睦，就算缺衣少食，也觉得快乐；尽快缴完赋税，即使口袋没有剩余也自得其乐。
English: If there is harmony at home, even if there is a shortage of clothes and food, they will feel happy; if they pay their taxes as soon as possible, they will enjoy themselves even if there is no surplus in their pockets.

古文：读书志在圣贤，非徒科第；为官心存君国，岂计身家？
现代文：读圣贤书，目的在学圣贤的行为，不只是为了获取功名；做官要有忠君爱国的思想，怎么可以考虑自己和家人的享受？
English: Reading the book of sages, the purpose is to learn the behavior of sages, not just to gain fame; to be an official, you must have the thought of loyalty and patriotism, how can you consider the enjoyment of yourself and your family?

古文：守分安命，顺时听天；为人若此，庶乎近焉。
现代文：守住本分，顺应天命。做人能够这样，那就差不多接近最佳境界了。
English: Stick to your duty and follow your destiny. If you can live like this, then you are almost close to the best realm.

