古文：宋子贤胡僧祖珍俭叶道士河南妖主梁州妖主明崇俨刘靖妻鼎师李慈德叶法善罗公远北山道者东明观道士东岩寺僧荆术士梵僧难陀太白老僧
现代文：宋子贤胡僧祖珍俭叶道士河南妖主梁州妖主明崇俨刘靖妻鼎师李慈德叶法善罗公远北山道者东明观道士东岩寺僧荆术士梵僧难陀太白老僧
English: Song Zixian Hu monk Zu Zhen Jian Ye Taoist Henan Demon Lord Liangzhou Demon Lord Ming Chongzhang Liu Jing's wife Ding Shi Li Cid Ye Fa Zhen Luo Gongyuan Beishan Daoist Dong Mingguan Daoist Dongyan Temple monk Jing warlock Bon monk Nandu Taibai old monk

古文：宋子贤
现代文：宋子贤
English: Song Zixian

古文：隋炀帝大业九年，唐县人宋子贤善为幻术。
现代文：隋炀帝大业九年的时候，唐县人宋子贤善于搞幻术。
English: In the ninth year of Emperor Sui's reign, Song Zixian, a man from Tang County, was good at performing illusions.

古文：每夜楼上有光明，能变作佛形，自称弥勒佛出世。
现代文：他住的楼上，每天夜里都有光亮，他能把自己变成佛的样子，并自称弥勒佛出世。
English: Upstairs, where he lives, there is light every night. He can transform himself into a Buddha and claims to have been born as Maitreya.

古文：又悬镜于堂中，壁上尽为兽形。
现代文：他还把镜子悬挂在堂中，墙上显出的都是各种野兽的样子。
English: He also hung a mirror in the hall, on the wall of which all kinds of beasts could be seen.

古文：有人来礼谒者，转其镜，遣观来生像，或作蛇兽形。
现代文：有人前来拜谒，把那面镜子一翻，便使之看到自己来世的模样，有的竟然是毒蛇和野兽。
English: Some people come to pay homage and turn the mirror upside down to see what their afterlife will be like, and some of them are actually snakes and beasts.

古文：子贤辄告之罪业。
现代文：宋子贤就告诉他来世的罪恶和业绩。
English: Song Zixian told him about the evils and merits of the afterlife.

古文：当更礼念，乃转人形示之。
现代文：当再一祈祷之后，就转出人的样子给他看。
English: After another prayer, she turned into a human form and showed it to him.

古文：远近惑信，聚数千百人，遂潜作乱。
现代文：远远近近的人们，都被宋子贤迷惑住了，聚众几千人，准备闹事作乱。
English: People from near and far were all bewitched by Song Zixian, gathering thousands of people and preparing to cause trouble.

古文：事泄。官捕之。
现代文：不久，事情泄露了，官军来逮捕宋子贤。
English: Soon, the affair leaked out, and the government army came to arrest Song Zixian.

古文：夜至，绕其所居。
现代文：晚上，官军赶到之后便把他的住所包围起来。
English: In the evening, government troops arrived and surrounded his residence.

古文：但见火坑，兵不敢进。
现代文：但一见有火坑，士兵便不敢上前。
English: But at the first sight of a fire pit, the soldiers did not dare to advance.

古文：其将曰：此地素无坑，止妖妄耳。
现代文：领队的将军说：这地方平常日子没有坑，我们要平息妖孽的妄为。
English: The general leading the team said, "This place doesn't normally have pits. We want to put a stop to the witchcraft."

古文：及进，复无火，遂擒斩之。
现代文：说罢率众而进，再也看不见火坑了。宋子贤被擒住后斩首示众。
English: Song Zixian was chained and beheaded in front of the crowd.

古文：胡僧
现代文：胡僧
English: The White Monk

古文：唐贞观中，西域献胡僧。
现代文：唐代贞观年间，西域献来一个僧人。
English: During the reign of Zhenguan in the Tang Dynasty, a monk came from the western region.

古文：咒术能死人，能生人。
现代文：他颇有法术，能用咒语致人死命，也能用咒语再让他复活。
English: He is quite magical, and can use spells to kill people, and can also use spells to bring him back to life.

古文：太宗令于飞骑中取壮勇者试之。
现代文：唐太宗令于飞骑中带一个壮汉来试验。
English: Emperor Taizong of Tang Dynasty ordered to take a strong man on a flying horse to test it.

古文：如言而死，如言而生。
现代文：结果，正如胡僧所说的那样，让他死他就死，让他活他就活。
English: As a result, as the monk said, let him die, let him die, let him live, let him live.

古文：帝以告太常少卿傅奕。奕曰：此邪法也。
现代文：太宗皇帝对太常少卿傅奕说了此事，傅奕道：这是邪术啊。
English: Emperor Taizong told the matter to Shaoqing Fu Yi, and Fu Yi said, "This is sorcery."

古文：臣闻邪不犯正，若便咒臣，必不能行。
现代文：我听说邪不犯正，如果让他来咒我，一定不会成功。
English: I've heard that evil does not commit righteousness, if I let him curse me, it will not succeed.

古文：帝召僧咒奕，奕对之无所觉。
现代文：太宗立即让胡僧咒傅奕。傅奕站在胡僧对面，却毫无感觉。
English: Taizong immediately asked the monk to cast a spell on Fu Yi. Fu Yi stood in front of the monk, but felt nothing.

古文：须臾，胡僧忽然自倒，若为所击，便不复苏矣。
现代文：一会儿，胡僧忽然自己倒下了，仿佛被什么狠狠击中，再也没有苏醒。
English: After a while, the monk suddenly fell down on his own, as if he had been hit hard by something, and never woke up.

古文：祖珍俭
现代文：祖珍俭
English: Zu Zhenjian

古文：唐咸亨中，赵州祖珍俭有妖术。
现代文：唐高宗咸亨年间，赵州的祖珍俭会妖术。
English: During the reign of Emperor Gaozong of Tang, Zhao Zhou's ancestor Zhen Jian would perform magic.

古文：悬水瓮于梁上，以刀砍之，绳断而瓮不落。
现代文：他把一个水瓮悬挂在房梁上，然后用刀去砍，绳子砍断了而水瓮却不落下来。
English: He hung a leech from a beam and cut it with a knife. The rope broke, but the leech did not fall.

古文：又于空房内密闭门，置一瓮水，横刀其上。
现代文：还有一次，他在空房子里紧闭门户，搬进一瓮水，然后把刀横放在上面。
English: On another occasion, he closed the door of an empty house, carried in a bucket of water and placed the knife on top of it.

古文：人良久入看，见俭支解五段，水瓮皆是血。
现代文：过了好久，人们进去一看，只见祖珍俭已经肢解成五段，水瓮里全是血！
English: After a long time, people went in and saw that Zu Zhenjian had been dismembered into five parts, and the leech was full of blood!

古文：人去之后，平复如初。
现代文：人们走后，他又恢复了原来的样子。
English: After the people left, he went back to his old ways.

古文：冬月极寒。石臼冰冻，咒之拔出。
现代文：冬天极冷，石臼冻在了冰上；他一念咒语，就把石臼拔了起来。
English: It was very cold in winter, and the stone mill froze on the ice; as soon as he recited the spell, he pulled the stone mill up.

古文：卖卜于信都市，日取百钱，盖君平之法也。
现代文：后来，他到都市里算卦挣钱，每天都能挣百余钱，依靠的是严君平那套法术。
English: Later, he went to the city to earn money by calculating divination, and he could earn more than a hundred dollars every day, relying on Yan Junping's spell.

古文：后被人纠告，引向市斩之，颜色自若，了无惧，命纸笔作词，精彩不挠。
现代文：不久被人告发，押向闹市斩首示众。他脸不变色，坦然自若，一点也不害怕，并让人拿来纸笔作词一首，写得十分精彩，思路丝毫不乱。
English: Soon after, he was denounced and sent to the city to be beheaded. His face did not change color, he was calm and self-assured, he was not afraid at all, and he was asked to write a poem with a pen and paper. It was very well written, and his thoughts were not confused at all.

古文：叶道士
现代文：叶道士
English: Ye Taoist

古文：唐陵空观叶道士，咒刀。
现代文：唐代，陵空观有个叶道士。
English: In the Tang Dynasty, there was a Taoist monk named Ye.

古文：尽力斩病人肚，横桃柳于腹上，桃柳断而肉不伤。
现代文：他拿着刀念咒语，将桃柳枝横放在病人肚子上，然后尽全力砍下去，桃柳枝断了而病人一点也未受伤。
English: He took a knife and recited a spell, placed the willow branch on the patient's stomach, and then cut it down as hard as he could. The willow branch broke and the patient was not injured at all.

古文：后将双刀砍一女子，应手两段，血流遍地。
现代文：后来，他又拿着双刀砍向一个女子，结果手举刀落，那女子当即被砍成两段，血流遍地。
English: Later, he slashed a woman with a pair of knives. As a result, his hand fell, and the woman was immediately cut into two pieces, and blood flowed all over the ground.

古文：家人大哭。
现代文：见状，女子的家人大哭。
English: Upon reading the complaint, the woman's family burst into tears.

古文：道士取续之，喷水而咒。
现代文：叶道士将女子的两段身子连在一起，喷上水之后念起咒语来。
English: Ye Taoist tied the two sections of the woman's body together, sprayed water on them and then recited a spell.

古文：须臾，平复如故。
现代文：一会儿，那女子便苏醒过来，跟原来一模一样。
English: Moments later, the woman wakes up looking exactly the same.

古文：河南妖主
现代文：河南妖主
English: Henan Demon Lord

古文：唐河南府立德坊及南方西坊，皆有胡妖神庙。
现代文：唐代，河南府的立德坊及南市西坊，都有胡妖的神庙。
English: In the Tang Dynasty, both Lidefang in Henan Province and Xifang in Nan City had Huyan temples.

古文：每岁，商胡祈福，烹猪杀羊，琵琶鼓苗，酣歌醉舞。酬神之后，募一胡为妖主。看者施钱并与之。
现代文：每年，人们都杀猪宰羊，奏起各种乐器，载歌载舞，开怀畅饮，乞求胡妖赐福。酬敬完神之后，征募一西域人做妖主，观众施舍一些钱给他。
English: Every year, people kill pigs and slaughter sheep, play various musical instruments, sing and dance, drink heartily, and pray for the blessing of the demon. After the worship, a person from the Western Regions is recruited to be the demon lord, and the audience gives him some money.

古文：其妖主取一横刀，利同霜雪，吹毛不过。
现代文：这妖主拿出一把刀，锋利无比，吹毛立断。
English: The demon lord took out a knife, incredibly sharp, bristling with determination.

古文：以刀刺腹，刃出于背，仍乱扰肠肚流血。
现代文：他把这刀刺入腹中，刀尖从后背穿出来，再把刀搅个不停，肠肚流血不止。
English: He stabbed the knife into his stomach, the tip of the knife came out through his back, and then he kept stirring the knife, and his stomach kept bleeding.

古文：食顷，喷水咒之，平复如故。
现代文：吃喝之后有顷，他将伤口喷上水再念咒语，当即恢复原样。
English: A moment after eating and drinking, he sprayed the wound with water and recited a spell, and it immediately returned to its original state.

古文：此盖西域之幻法也。
现代文：这就是西域的幻术呵。
English: This is the magic of the West.

古文：梁州妖主
现代文：梁州妖主
English: The Demon Lord of Liangzhou

古文：唐梁州妖神祠。
现代文：唐代，梁州有座妖神祠。
English: In the Tang Dynasty, there was a demon shrine in Liangzhou.

古文：至祈祷日，妖主以利铁，从额上钉之，直洞腋下，即出门。身轻若飞，须臾数百里。
现代文：每到祈祷日这一天，妖主就将钉子之类的利铁从额头钉进去，再从腋下穿出来，然后立即出门，身子轻得如同飞起来一般，一会儿就能走几百里。
English: Every day on the day of prayer, the demon lord would drive nails into his forehead and then out from under his armpits, and then immediately go out, his body as light as if he were flying, and he could walk hundreds of miles in an instant.

古文：至西妖神前，舞一曲，即却至旧妖所，乃拔钉，一无所损。
现代文：到西妖神祠前，舞上一曲，然后返回到原来的妖神祠，把钉子拔出来，结果一点也没有损伤。
English: They went to the West Demon Shrine, danced to a song, and then returned to the original Demon Shrine to pull out the nail. The result was no damage at all.

古文：卧十余日，平复如初。
现代文：他卧床十几天后，便恢复了原来的样子。
English: After a dozen days in bed, he was back to his old self.

古文：莫知其所以然也。
现代文：不知道这究竟是怎么回事儿。
English: I don't know what's going on.

古文：明崇俨
现代文：明崇俨
English: Ming Chongzhen

古文：唐明崇俨有术法。
现代文：唐代，有个叫明崇俨的人颇有法术。
English: In the Tang Dynasty, there was a man named Ming Chongyu who was quite skilled in magic.

古文：大帝试之，为地窖，遣妓奏乐。
现代文：大帝唐玄宗想考考他，便令数名歌妓到地窖里奏乐。
English: Emperor Tang Xuan Zong wanted to test him, so he ordered several courtesans to play music in the cellar.

古文：引俨至，谓曰：此地常闻弦管，是何祥也？卿能止之？
现代文：然后，大帝将明崇俨召来，对他说道：这地方常听见有人奏乐，是不是有何不祥？你能制止吗？
English: Then the great emperor summoned Ming Chongzhen and said to him: "This place often hears someone playing music. Is there something ominous? Can you stop it?

古文：俨曰：诺。
现代文：明崇俨道：是。
English: Ming Chongxuan: Yes.

古文：遂书二桃符，于其上钉之，其声寂然。
现代文：随即画了两个桃符，钉在那地窖上面，管弦之声戛然而止。
English: Then two peach pennants were drawn and nailed above the cellar, and the orchestra stopped.

古文：上笑，唤妓人问，云：见二龙头，张口向下，遂怖俱不敢奏乐也。
现代文：大帝笑了，唤歌妓们来问原因。歌妓回答说：方才看见两个龙头，张口向下，吓得我们不敢奏乐了！
English: The emperor laughed and called the courtesans to ask the reason. The courtesans replied: "We just saw two dragons with their mouths open, and we were so scared that we didn't dare to play the music!"

古文：上大悦。
现代文：大帝听罢，非常高兴。
English: Emperor Xuanzong was very happy.

古文：刘靖妻
现代文：刘靖妻
English: Liu Jing's wife

古文：唐蜀县令刘靖妻患。
现代文：唐代，蜀之县令刘靖的妻子病倒了。
English: In the Tang Dynasty, the wife of Liu Jing, the ruler of Shu County, fell ill.

古文：正谏大夫明崇俨诊之曰：须得生龙肝，食之必愈。
现代文：正谏大夫明崇俨为她诊脉后说：必须得有生龙肝呵，吃了病就会好的。
English: After diagnosing her pulse, Dr. Zhengqi Ming Chongyu said, "You must have raw dragon liver. If you eat it, you will get better."

古文：靖以为不可得。
现代文：刘靖认为无法得到。
English: Liu Jing thought it was impossible.

古文：俨乃书符，乘风放之上天。须臾有龙下，入瓮水中，剔取肝，食之而差。
现代文：明崇俨就画了一道符，乘着风放上天去，一会功夫，便有一条龙下来，钻进了水瓮之中。明崇俨将龙肝剔出来，请刘靖妻子吞食，吃了病便好了。
English: Ming Chongzhen then drew a sign and sent it up to the sky with the wind. After a while, a dragon came down and got into the water. Ming Chongzhen picked out the dragon's liver and asked Liu Jing's wife to swallow it. If she got sick, she would be fine.

古文：大帝盛夏须雪及枇杷、龙眼子。
现代文：唐大帝玄宗在盛夏想要雪花和枇杷龙眼等水果。
English: Emperor Xuanzong of Tang Dynasty wanted fruits such as snowflakes and dragon's eyes in midsummer.

古文：俨坐顷间，往阴山取雪，至岭取果子，并到。食之无别。
现代文：明崇俨就在端坐不语的那一刻间，从阴山取来雪花，从岭南取来水果，一并送到大帝面前，大帝食之，味道不错。
English: At the very moment when Ming Chongzhen was sitting in silence, he brought snowflakes from the Yinshan Mountains and fruits from Lingnan and brought them to the emperor. The emperor liked the taste of the food.

古文：时瓜未熟，上思之，俨索百钱将去。须臾，得一大瓜。云：缑氏老人园内得之。
现代文：当时瓜尚未熟，大帝想吃，明崇俨要了百钱而去，有顷，果然带回一个大瓜，并说这是在缑氏老人瓜园里买的。
English: At that time, the melon was not yet ripe, the great emperor wanted to eat it, Ming Chongyu asked for a hundred money and left. One day, he brought back a large melon, and said that it was bought in the old man's melon garden.

古文：上追老人至，问之；云：土埋一瓜，拟进。适看，唯得百钱耳。
现代文：大帝急忙追上老人询问是否属实，老人回答说，那瓜是在土里埋着的，再往下看，只得到了一百钱。
English: The emperor hurried to catch up with the old man and asked if it was true. The old man replied that the melon was buried in the ground. Looking further down, he only got a hundred coins.

古文：俨独卧堂中，夜被刺死，刀子仍在心上。
现代文：后来，明崇俨自己单独睡在床上，被人刺死了，刀子一直插在心上。
English: Later, Ming Chongyao was sleeping alone in his bed when he was stabbed to death. The knife was still in his heart.

古文：敕求贼甚急，竟无踪绪。
现代文：大帝下敕令捉拿凶手，尽管催得十分紧，但竟未有一点线索。
English: The emperor issued an order to catch the murderer, but despite the urgency, there was not a single clue.

古文：或以为俨役鬼劳动，被鬼杀之。
现代文：有人认为明崇俨把小鬼们役使得太劳苦了，小鬼们忍无可忍，便把他杀死了。
English: Some people think that Ming Chongzhen made the little devils work too hard, and the little devils could not bear it, so they killed him.

古文：孔子曰：攻乎异端，斯害也已。
现代文：孔子说：想除掉异端，则等于害自己。
English: Confucius said, "If you want to get rid of heresy, you will only harm yourself."

古文：信哉！
现代文：这真是一句至理名言啊。
English: This is indeed the case!

古文：鼎师
现代文：鼎师
English: Master of Ceremonies

古文：唐则天朝，有鼎师者，瀛博野人，有奇行。
现代文：唐代，武则天主持朝政的时候，瀛州博野县有位鼎师，具有神奇的本事。
English: During the Tang Dynasty, when the Emperor Wu Zetian was in power, there was a sorcerer in Bozhou's Bono County who had a magical ability.

古文：太平公主进，则天试之。
现代文：一日，太平公主向母亲推荐他。
English: One day, Princess Taiping recommended him to her mother.

古文：以银瓮盛酒三斗，一举而饮尽。
现代文：武则天想试试鼎师，便令人用银瓮装了三斗酒，结果他一饮而尽。
English: When Wu Zetian wanted to test Ding Shi, he had him fill three buckets of wine with silver ingots. As a result, he drank it all.

古文：又曰：臣能食酱。
现代文：他又说道：我能吃酱。
English: He added: "I can eat sauce.

古文：即令以银瓮盛酱一斗，鼎师以匙抄之，须臾即竭。
现代文：武则天又让人用银瓮装来一斗酱。鼎师用匙子舀着吃，一会儿便吃光了。
English: Wu Zetian also asked someone to use a silver ladle to fill a bucket of sauce. Ding Shi ate it with a spoon, and it was gone in a moment.

古文：则天欲与官。鼎曰：情愿出家。
现代文：武则天想让他做官，他却说：我情愿出家当和尚。
English: Wu Zetian wanted him to become an official, but he said: I would rather become a monk.

古文：即与剃头。
现代文：武则天当即命人给他削了发。
English: Wu Zetian immediately ordered someone to cut his hair.

古文：后则天之复辟也。
现代文：后来，武则天复辟，重新主朝。
English: Later, Emperor Wu Zetian restored it to the throne.

古文：鼎曰：如来螺髻，菩萨宝首。
现代文：鼎师说：如来佛和观音菩萨都是留着头发的。
English: Teacher Ding said: Both the Buddha and the Goddess of Mercy have hair.

古文：若能修道，何必剃除。
现代文：如果能一心修炼，参禅悟道，何必一定要把头发剃掉呢？
English: If one can cultivate with one's whole heart and attain enlightenment through meditation, why must one shave off one's hair?

古文：遂长发，使张潜决一百。
现代文：后来他便留起长发，武则天让张潜责打鼎师一百刑杖。
English: Later, he grew his hair long, and Wu Zetian ordered Zhang to beat Ding Shi with a hundred canes.

古文：不废行动，亦无疮痍，时人莫测。
现代文：但并不影响他的行动，身上却不生疮痍。当时的人们都困惑不解。
English: But it didn't affect his actions, and he didn't suffer any injuries. People at the time were puzzled.

古文：李慈德
现代文：李慈德
English: Li Cide

古文：唐大足年中，有妖妄人李慈德，自云能行符书厌。
现代文：唐代，大足年间，有个妖道的人叫李慈德，自称能画符行咒。
English: During the Tang Dynasty, there was a demon hunter named Li Cid, who claimed to be able to draw and cast spells.

古文：则天于内安置。
现代文：武则天把他安置在内宫。
English: Wu Zetian placed him in the Inner Court.

古文：布豆成兵马，画地为江河。
现代文：他把豆粒撒在地上当兵马，在地上画江河关隘。
English: He sprinkled bean grains on the ground as soldiers and horses, and painted rivers and gorges on the ground.

古文：与给使相知，削竹为枪，缠被为甲，三更于内反。
现代文：他和给事中串通，削竹子作枪刺，缠被子当盔甲，三更天在内宫造反。
English: He colluded with the officials, whittled bamboo to make gunpowder, wrapped quilts as armor, and rebelled in the inner palace on three different days.

古文：宫人扰乱，相投者十二三。
现代文：内宫里的人被惊扰，混乱不堪，并有十二三个人投奔了李慈德。
English: The people in the Inner Court were alarmed and confused, and twelve or thirteen of them ran to Li Cid.

古文：羽林将军杨玄基闻内里声叫，领兵斩关而入，杀慈德阉竖数十人。
现代文：御林军将领杨玄基听见内宫传来哭喊声，带兵斩关闯了进去，杀了李慈德及宦官等数十人。
English: Yang Xuanji, the general of the Guolin Army, heard cries and shouts coming from the inner palace and led his soldiers to break into the palace, killing Li Cid and dozens of eunuchs.

古文：惜哉，慈德以厌为容，以厌而丧。
现代文：真是遗憾呵，李慈德是因巫术而获荣华，也是因巫术而丧命。
English: It's a pity, Li Cid was glorified by witchcraft and died by witchcraft.

古文：叶法善
现代文：叶法善
English: by Ye Fa-zen

古文：唐孝和帝，令内道场僧与道士，各述所能，久而不决。
现代文：唐代，孝和皇帝让在宫内做道场的和尚与道士各显其能。好久，分不出高低。
English: In the Tang Dynasty, Emperor Xiaohe allowed the monks and Taoists who worked in the palace dojo to show their abilities. For a long time, there was no distinction between high and low.

古文：玄都观叶法善，取胡桃二升，并壳食之并尽。
现代文：玄都观的道士叶法善让人拿来胡桃二升，连壳带仁全部吃光了。
English: Ye Fa-zen, a Taoist of Xuandu Confucianism, had two liters of walnuts brought to him, and all of the nuts with their shells and kernels had been eaten.

古文：僧仍不伏。
现代文：和尚们仍然不服气。
English: The monks remain unconvinced.

古文：法善烧一铁钵赫赤，两手欲合老僧头上。僧唱贼，袈裟掩头而走。
现代文：叶法善又烧一铁钵通红的火，两手捧着欲往一位老和尚头上扣，老和尚喊了声要杀人了，用袈裟蒙住脑袋逃走了。
English: Ye Fa-shan also lit a red-hot iron hammer, and with both hands he wanted to hit an old monk on the head. The old monk shouted that he wanted to kill someone, covered his head with a shackle, and ran away.

古文：孝和抚掌大笑。
现代文：见状，孝和皇帝拍掌大笑。
English: Seeing the letter, Xiao and the emperor clapped their hands and laughed.

古文：罗公远
现代文：罗公远
English: Luo Gongyuan

古文：唐道士罗公远，幼时不慧。遂入梁山数年，忽有异见，言事皆中。
现代文：唐代，道士罗公远小时候并不聪明，可自从进了梁山数年之后，忽然间有了特殊的本领，无论猜什么事都能够猜对。
English: In the Tang Dynasty, the Taoist priest Luo Gongyuan was not smart when he was a child, but since he entered Liangshan several years later, he suddenly had a special ability to guess correctly no matter what he guessed.

古文：敕追入京。
现代文：于是，他奉旨进京。
English: As a result, he was ordered to go to Kyoto.

古文：先天中，皇太子设斋，远从太子乞金银器物，太子靳固不与。
现代文：玄宗先天年间，皇太子设素宴招待他。他向太子讨要金银器物，太子十分吝啬，坚决不给。
English: During the reign of Emperor Xuanzong the day before yesterday, the crown prince invited him to a banquet. He asked the prince for gold and silverware, but the prince was very stingy and refused to give it.

古文：远曰：少时自取。
现代文：罗公远说：一会儿，我自己去拿。
English: Luo Gongyuan said, "In a moment, I'll go and get it myself."

古文：太子自封署房门。
现代文：太子急忙关紧房门。
English: The prince hastily closed the door.

古文：须臾开视，器物一无所见。
现代文：有顷，再打开一看，那些金银器物全都不见了。
English: A moment later, when he opened it again, all the gold and silver objects were gone.

古文：东房见封闭，往视之，器物并在其中。
现代文：东宫原本是锁着的，进去一看，那些器物全都在这儿呢！
English: The East Palace was originally locked, but if you go inside, you will see that all the artifacts are here!

古文：又借太子所乘马，太子怒，不与。
现代文：罗公远又向太子借他的马骑，太子火了，说什么也不借给他。
English: Luo Gongyuan also borrowed his horse and rider from the prince. The prince was furious and would not lend him anything.

古文：远曰：已取得来，见于后园中放在。
现代文：罗公远说：马已经被我牵来了，正在后园里拴着。
English: Luo Gongyuan said, "The horse has been brought here by me and is being ridden in the backyard.

古文：太子急往枥上检看，马在如故。
现代文：太子急忙跑到后园马槽边验看，他的马果然在这里，而且还是原来的样子。
English: The prince hurried to the edge of the manger in the backyard to check and see that his horse was indeed here, and it was still in its original form.

古文：侍御史袁守一，将食器数枚，就罗公远看年命，奴擎衣袱在门外。
现代文：侍御史袁守一拿来不少食品，请罗公远算命，让仆人拿着衣服和头巾等候在门口。
English: Attendant Shi Yuan Shouyi brought a lot of food, asked Luo Gongyuan to tell fortunes, and asked the servants to wait at the door with clothes and headscarves.

古文：不觉须臾，在远公衣箱中。
现代文：不觉眨眼之间，袁守一的衣服和头巾竟然进了罗公远的衣箱里。
English: In the blink of an eye, Yuan Shouyi's clothes and headscarf ended up in Luo Gongyuan's suitcase.

古文：诸人大惊，莫知其然。
现代文：众人大惊，不知道这是怎么回事。
English: Everyone was shocked and didn't know what was going on.

古文：北山道者
现代文：北山道者
English: Hokusan Dojja

古文：唐张守珪之镇范阳。
现代文：唐代，张守珪镇守范阳的时候。
English: During the Tang Dynasty, Zhang Shouzhen guarded Fanyang.

古文：檀州密云令有女，年十七，姿色绝人。
现代文：檀州密云县令有个女儿，十七岁，长得绝顶美貌。
English: The governor of Miyun County in Danzhou has a 17-year-old daughter who is extremely beautiful.

古文：女病逾年，医不愈。
现代文：她病倒一年多了，怎么也治不好。
English: She has been ill for more than a year and cannot be cured.

古文：密云北山中有道者，衣黄衣，在山数百年，称有道术。
现代文：密云县北山里有个道士，穿黄衣服，在山里好几百年了，都说他颇有道术。
English: There is a Taoist monk in Beishan, Miyun County, who wears yellow clothes and has been in the mountains for hundreds of years. He is said to be quite skilled in Taoism.

古文：令自至山请之。道人既至，与之方，女病立已。
现代文：县令亲自进山去请，那道士才走下山来，给了他一个药方，女儿的病随即痊愈。
English: The county magistrate personally went into the mountain to ask, the Taoist came down the mountain, gave him a prescription, and the daughter's illness was immediately cured.

古文：令喜，厚其货财。
现代文：县令大喜，赏给他一大批财物，同时，还留他住了一个多月。
English: The county magistrate was overjoyed and rewarded him with a large amount of property. At the same time, he kept him for more than a month.

古文：居月余，女夜卧，有人与之寝而私焉。
现代文：在这期间，县令的女儿晚上睡觉时，总有人进来同她躺在一起并发生关系。
English: During this period, when the daughter of the county magistrate went to bed at night, someone always came in to lie with her and have sex.

古文：其人每至，女则昏魇。
现代文：那人每天晚上来的时候，她都象在梦中被什么压住而不能动。
English: Every night when the man came, she felt as if she were in a dream, pinned down and unable to move.

古文：及明人去，女复如常。
现代文：天亮后那人走了，她才恢复如常。
English: When the man left after dawn, she resumed her normal routine.

古文：如是数夕，女惧告母。母以告令。
现代文：就这样一连好几个晚上，县令的女儿很害怕，便告诉了母亲，母亲又告诉了父亲。
English: In this way, for several nights in a row, the daughter of the county magistrate was very scared and told her mother, and her mother told her father.

古文：乃移床近己，夜而伺之。
现代文：县令让人把女儿的床移到自己隔壁，到了晚上在一旁窥视。
English: The county magistrate made the man move his daughter's bed next to his own and watch from the sidelines at night.

古文：觉床动，掩焉，擒一人，遽命灯至，乃北山道者。
现代文：忽然，他看见那床在动，悄悄扑上前去，抓住一个人，令手下拿灯来看，原来竟是那位北山道士！
English: Suddenly, he saw that the bed was moving. He quietly rushed forward, grabbed a person, and ordered his men to take a lamp and look. It turned out to be the North Mountain Taoist!

古文：令缚而讯之。
现代文：县令命人将他绑住便开始审讯。
English: The county magistrate ordered someone to tie him up, and the trial began.

古文：道者泣曰：吾命当终，被惑乃尔。
现代文：道士哭着说道：我的生命该完结了，这是因为自己经不住诱惑呵。
English: The Taoist cried and said, "My life should be over, it's because I can't resist temptation."

古文：吾居北山六百余载，未常到人间，吾今垂千岁矣。
现代文：我在北山住了六百多年，未曾到过人间，现在眼看就要一千岁了。
English: I have lived in Kitayama for more than six hundred years, and I have never been to the human world. I am now almost a thousand years old.

古文：昨蒙召殷勤，所以到县。
现代文：前些日子，见你诚心诚意请我，所以才来到县上。
English: A few days ago, I saw you sincerely invite me, so I came to the county.

古文：及见公女，意大悦之，自抑不可，于是往来。
现代文：看见你女儿之后，心中十分喜悦，再也控制不住，便天天与她交欢。
English: After seeing your daughter, he was so overjoyed that he couldn't control himself any longer and had sex with her every day.

古文：吾有道术，常昼日能隐其形，所以家人不见。
现代文：我有道术，白天常常施用隐身法，所以你的家人们看不见。
English: I have Daoism, and during the day I often use stealth, so your family can't see me.

古文：今遇此厄，夫复何言。
现代文：今天遭此一劫，我也是无话可说。
English: After today's disaster, I also have nothing to say.

古文：令竟杀之。
现代文：县令终于把他杀了。
English: The county magistrate finally killed him.

古文：东明观道士
现代文：东明观道士
English: Dongmingguan Taoist Temple

古文：唐开元中，宫禁有美人，忽夜梦被人邀去，纵酒密会，极欢而归，归辄流汗倦怠。
现代文：唐代开元年间，皇宫里有一个美人，忽然间作梦被人邀到一个地方，秘密幽会，纵酒作乐，行完男女之事才归来，醒来之后大汗淋漓，神情倦怠。
English: In the first year of the Tang Dynasty, there was a beautiful woman in the imperial palace. Suddenly, in a dream, she was invited to a place. They had a secret rendezvous, drank and made music, and only returned when they had finished the men's and women's affairs. When she woke up, she was drenched in sweat and looked tired.

古文：后因从容奏于帝，帝曰：此必术士所为也。
现代文：后来，她果断地将此事奏明皇帝。皇帝说；这一定是术士所干的。
English: Then she brought the matter to the Emperor's attention, and the Emperor said, "It must have been done by a sorcerer."

古文：汝若复往，但随宜以物识之。
现代文：你如果再被邀去，要见机行事，取个物证才好识别。
English: If you are invited again, you should act opportunistically and take physical evidence to identify yourself.

古文：其夕熟寐，飘然又往。
现代文：当天晚上，美人熟睡之后，飘飘然又被邀了去。
English: That evening, after the beauty was fast asleep, she was invited to go again.

古文：美人半醉，见石砚在前，乃密印手文於曲房屏风之上。
现代文：喝到半醉时，美人看见面前摆着一方砚台，便悄悄在屏风上按下一个指印。
English: When she was half-drunk, the beauty saw a ring in front of her and quietly pressed a thumbprint on the screen.

古文：寤而具启。
现代文：醒来之后，她又对皇帝如实禀告。
English: When she woke up, she told the emperor the truth.

古文：帝乃潜以物色，令于诸宫观中求之。
现代文：皇帝派人暗中寻访，并让他们在各宫的道观中查找。
English: The emperor secretly sent someone to investigate and asked them to look up Taoism in each palace.

古文：果于东明观得其屏风，手文尚在，所居道士已遁矣。
现代文：很快在东明观里找到了那个印着美人指纹的屏风，而住在这里的道士却已经逃跑了。
English: They soon found the screen with the fingerprints of the beautiful woman in Dongmingguan, but the Taoist priest who lived here had already fled.

古文：东岩寺僧
现代文：东岩寺僧
English: A monk of Toiwa-ji Temple

古文：博陵崔简少敏惠，好异术。
现代文：博陵郡的崔简小时候聪敏过人，喜欢学异术。
English: As a child, Cui Jian from Boling County was extremely intelligent and liked to study magic.

古文：尝遇道士张元肃晓以道要，使役神物，坐通变化。
现代文：他曾经拜道士张元肃为师，张授之以要领，崔简渐渐学会役使神灵及凭空变化等本事。
English: He was once a disciple of the Taoist Zhang Yuan Su. Zhang taught him the essentials, and Cui Jian gradually learned to serve the gods and change things out of thin air.

古文：唐天宝二载如蜀郡。
现代文：唐天宝二年，崔简来到蜀郡。
English: In the second year of Tang Tianbao, Cui Jian came to Shu County.

古文：郡有吕谊者，遇简而厚币以遗，意有所为。
现代文：郡里有个叫吕谊的人，遇到崔简后送给他一大笔钱，好象有事相求。
English: There was a man in the county named Lu Yi who, after meeting Cui Jian, gave him a large sum of money, as if he wanted something from her.

古文：简问所欲，乃曰：继代有女，未尝见人，闺帷之中，一夕而失。
现代文：崔简问道：你要我干什么？吕谊回答说：我有一个女儿，未曾见过外人，一直深居闺帷之中，可是却在一个晚上失踪了。
English: Cui Jian asked, "What do you want me to do?" Lu Yi replied, "I have a daughter who has never met a stranger and has always lived in the shadows, but she disappeared one night.

古文：意者明公蕴非常之术，愿知所捕，瞑目无恨矣。简曰：易耳。
现代文：我知道你身藏异术。想求你把她找回来，这样我便死而无憾了。崔简说：这很容易。
English: I know you're hiding the magic. I want you to find her so I can die with no regrets. Cui Jian said, "It's easy.

古文：即于别室，夜设几席，焚名香以降神灵。
现代文：当即到吕谊的一间屋内，夜里摆上几案，烧香祈祷神灵下降。
English: He immediately went to a room in Lyuyi, where he set up several cases at night, burned incense and prayed for the gods to descend.

古文：简令吕生伏剑于户，若胡僧来可执之求女，慎无伤也。
现代文：崔简让吕谊拿着剑站在门口，说如果胡僧进来就抓住向他要女儿，但注意不要伤他。
English: Cui Jian asked Lyu Yi to stand at the door with a sword, saying that if Hu Mon came in, she would grab him and ask him for her daughter, but be careful not to hurt him.

古文：简书符呵之，符飞出。
现代文：崔简画了一张符，吹了一口气，那符便飞出门外。
English: Cui Jian drew a sign, blew a breath, and the sign flew out of the door.

古文：食顷间，风声拔树发屋。忽闻一甲卒进曰：神兵备，愿王所用。
现代文：一顿饭的工夫，只听风声大作，树摇屋动，忽然闯进一个戴盔甲的士兵报告说：神兵已到，请大王调遣！
English: During a meal, just listening to the wind and the trees shaking the house, suddenly a soldier in armor bursts in and reports: The divine soldier has arrived, please dispatch him!

古文：简曰：主人某日失女，可捕来。
现代文：崔简说我的主人在一天把女儿丢了，快去把她找回来。
English: Cui Jian said that my husband had lost his daughter one day. Please go and get her back.

古文：卒曰：唯东山上人，每日以咒水取人，得非是乎？
现代文：士兵说：只听说东山有个和尚，每天咒水捉人，难道说是他干的吗？
English: The soldier said, "I've only heard that there is a monk in Higashiyama who spells water to catch people every day. Is it possible that he did it?"

古文：简曰：若然，可速捕来。
现代文：崔简说；如果真是这样，可尽快将他抓来！
English: Cui Jian said; if this is really the case, you can catch him as soon as possible!

古文：卒去，须臾还曰：东山上人闻之骇怒，将下金刚伐君，奈何简曰：无苦。
现代文：士兵转身而去。顷刻便又返回来说：东山那个和尚听到消息之后，又是惊骇又是恼怒，要请金刚来讨伐你，有什么办法？
English: The soldier turned around and left. He returned immediately and said, "That monk in Dongshan was shocked and angry when he heard the news. How can you ask King Kong to come and fight you?"

古文：又书符飞之。
现代文：崔简说了声没关系，又画了张符吹上天去。
English: Cui Jian said, "It doesn't matter what you say," and drew a sign and blew it up into the sky.

古文：倏忽有神兵万计，皆奇形异状，执剑戟列庭。
现代文：倏忽之间，天上下来数以万计的神兵，一个个奇形怪状，执着剑戟等兵器站在门前。
English: All of a sudden, tens of thousands of divine soldiers descended from the sky, one after another in strange shapes, holding swords and other weapons and standing in front of the door.

古文：俄而西北上见一金刚来，长数十丈，张目叱简兵。
现代文：一会儿，西北方的天上下来一个金刚，几十丈高，横眉立目地叱责崔简。
English: A moment later, a King Kong, several tens of meters tall, descended from the sky in the northwest and scolded Cui Jian with a straight face.

古文：简兵俯伏不敢动。
现代文：神兵们全都卧倒不敢动。
English: The divine soldiers all lay down and dared not move.

古文：简剑步于坛前，神兵忽隐，即见金刚骇矣！
现代文：崔简握剑走到祭坛前，神兵们忽然间隐去，那金刚也吓得不见踪影。
English: Cui Jian held a sword and walked to the altar. The divine soldiers suddenly disappeared, and King Kong was too scared to be seen.

古文：久之无所见。忽有一物，猪头人形，著豹皮水褌，云：上人愿起居仙官。
现代文：有顷，又来了一个猪头人身的怪物，穿着豹皮水裤，他说；和尚愿意前来拜见仙官。
English: Suddenly, a monster with a pig's head appeared, wearing leopard skin swimming trunks, he said; the monk would like to come and meet the genie.

古文：简踞坐而命之。
现代文：崔简盘腿大坐命令他。
English: Cui Jian ordered him to sit cross-legged.

古文：紫衣胡僧趋入。简让曰：僧盗主人女，安敢妄有役使！
现代文：这时，穿着紫衣服的胡僧走了进来，崔简叱责道：你把我家主人的女儿偷了去，怎么还敢役使鬼神作怪？
English: At this time, a monk dressed in purple came in, and Cui Jian scolded him: "You stole my landlord's daughter, how dare you play the role of a demon?

古文：初僧拒诈。
现代文：开始，胡僧不认帐，一副假惺惺的样子。
English: At the beginning, Hu Zeng did not acknowledge the account, and looked like a phony.

古文：吕生忽于户间跃出，执而尤之。
现代文：吕谊忽然间从门后跃出，执剑逼向他，怒不可遏。
English: Lu Yi suddenly jumped out from behind the door, holding a sword and forcing it towards him, his anger uncontrollable.

古文：僧迫不隐，即曰：伏矣！
现代文：那胡僧见逃不掉，被迫认罪：我服了！
English: Seeing that he could not escape, the monk was forced to confess: I've done it!

古文：贫道行大力法，盖圣者致耳，非僧所求。
现代文：贫道行大力法，那金刚就来了，不是我祈求的呵。
English: If you practice the Great Law of Poverty, then King Kong will come. That's not what I'm praying for.

古文：今即归之，无苦相逼。
现代文：现在他已经回去，你就不要再逼我了。
English: Now that he's back, you don't have to push me anymore.

古文：向非仙宫之命，君岂望乎？
现代文：刚才如果不是仙官崔简令我交出那女子，你还能要回女儿吗？
English: Just now, if it wasn't for the fairy official Cui Jian ordering me to hand over the woman, would you still be able to get your daughter back?

古文：愿令圣者取来。
现代文：好吧，我让那金刚把你的女儿带来。
English: All right, I'll have that Kong bring your daughter.

古文：俄顷，见猪头负女至，冥然如睡。
现代文：俄顷，只见那猪头人身的怪物把吕谊的女儿背了回来。这女子昏然如睡。
English: Suddenly, the monster with a pig's head was seen carrying Lu Yi's daughter back. The woman was drowsy.

古文：简曰：宜取井花水为桃汤，洗之即醒。
现代文：崔简说：应该取井花水做桃汤，给她洗一洗就能醒来。
English: Cui Jian said, "You should make peach soup with water from the well, and you can wake her up after washing her."

古文：遂自陈云：初睡中，梦一物猪头人身摄去，不知行近远，至一小房中，见胡僧相凌。
现代文：吕谊的女儿醒来之后，随即告诉崔简：我刚刚睡着的时候，梦见自己被一个猪头人身的怪物掳去，不知走了多远，来到一个小房子里，被胡僧欺凌。
English: After Lv Yi's daughter woke up, she immediately told Cui Jian: When I just fell asleep, I dreamed that I was abducted by a monster with a pig's head. I don't know how far I walked, I came to a small house and was bullied by a monk.

古文：问何处，乃云天上也，便禁闭无得出。
现代文：我问这是什么地方，他说这是天上，便把我幽禁起来出去不得。
English: I asked him where it was, and he said it was in the sky, and then he locked me up and wouldn't let me out.

古文：是夜。有兵骑造门，猪头又至，云： 崔真人有命。方得归。
现代文：这天晚上，有一军骑来到门前，那猪头人身的怪物也来了。他说， 崔真人有令 ，才得回来。
English: That night, an army of horsemen came to the door, and the pig-headed monster also came. He said that Cui Zhengyi had to order him to come back.

古文：然某来时，私于僧房门上涂少脂粉，有三指迹，若以此寻可获。
现代文：我来时，偷偷在胡僧的房门上涂了少量脂粉，留下三个指印，如果按此线索查找，一定能够找到。
English: When I came, I surreptitiously smeared a small amount of talcum powder on the door of the monk's house, leaving three fingerprints. If you follow this clue, you will definitely be able to find it.

古文：吕生厚遗简，而阴求僧门所记。
现代文：吕谊重重地酬谢了崔简，并在暗地里寻查那胡僧门上的指印。
English: Lv Yiyi thanked Cui Jian profusely and secretly searched for the fingerprints on the door of the monk.

古文：余数月，游东岩寺，入曲房，忽见指迹于门右扇，遽追之，僧宿昔已去，莫知所之。
现代文：数月之后，吕谊等游东岩寺，入内室，忽然看见女儿的三个指印正在那右扇门上。随即开始搜捕，那胡僧早逃跑了，不知道逃向何处。
English: A few months later, Lu Yi and others visited Dongyan Temple, entered the inner room, and suddenly saw his daughter's three fingerprints on the right door. A manhunt was immediately launched. The monk had already fled, and he didn't know where to go.

古文：寺与吕生居处，可十里有余耳。
现代文：这座寺院与吕谊的家，相隔有十余里路。
English: More than ten miles separate this temple from Lu Yi's home.

古文：荆术士
现代文：荆术士
English: Jing the Sorcerer

古文：唐大历中，有荆士从南来，止于陟圯寺。
现代文：唐代大历年间，有个姓荆的术士从南方而来，住在陟圯寺。
English: During the Tang Dynasty, there was a sorcerer named Jing who came from the south and lived in the Temple of Heaven.

古文：好酒，少有醒时。
现代文：他喜欢喝酒，一喝就醉，很少有醒着的时候。
English: He likes to drink, gets drunk as soon as he drinks, and is rarely awake.

古文：因寺中大斋会，人众数千，术士忽曰：余有一技。可代拤瓦磕珠之欢也。
现代文：一日，寺中举行大斋会，来了好几千人。荆术士忽然说道：我有一个特殊的本领，比用手拍碎瓦片或从地洞里变出一串珠子好看。
English: One day, there was a great feast in the temple, and several thousand people came. The sorcerer suddenly said, "I have a special ability that is more beautiful than smashing tiles with my hands or conjuring a string of beads from a cave."

古文：乃合彩色于一器中，驔步抓目。徐祝数十言，方饮水再三，噀壁上。
现代文：说罢，他便将各种颜色的染料调和在一个器皿里，跨前一步抬起目光，慢慢地祝祷几十句，才喝下好几口水喷到墙上。
English: As soon as he said it, he mixed the dyes of various colors in a container, stepped forward, raised his eyes, and slowly said dozens of prayers before drinking several sips of water and spraying it on the wall.

古文：成维摩问疾变相，五色相宜，如新写，逮半日余，色渐薄，至暮都灭。惟金粟纶巾鹙子衣上一花，经两日犹在。
现代文：墙上显出神佛维摩诘访问人间疾苦的图像，各种颜色互相衬映，如同刚画的一样。过大半天，那色彩渐渐变淡，傍晚便消失了，只有金粟如来维摩诘身上的纶巾鹙子衣上的一朵小花，过了两天还依然存在。
English: On the wall, there is an image of the deity and Buddha Vimalakirti visiting the human suffering, and the various colors contrast with each other, as if they were just painted. After half a day, the color gradually faded, and in the evening it disappeared, only a small flower on the scarf and satin dress on the body of Vimalakirti still exists after two days.

古文：梵僧难陀
现代文：梵僧难陀
English: The Buddhist monk Nanda

古文：唐丞相魏公张延赏，在蜀时，有梵僧难陀得如幻三昧，入水火，贯金石，变化无穷。
现代文：唐朝的丞相魏公张延赏，在蜀郡做官的时候，有一个叫难陀的印度和尚悟得了幻术的要领，入水火，穿金石，无所不能，变化无穷。
English: Wei Gong Zhang Yan, the chancellor of the Tang Dynasty, said that when he was an official in Shu County, there was an Indian monk named Nanda who had realized the essentials of magic, entering water and fire, wearing gold and stone, omnipotent, and infinite changes.

古文：初入蜀，与三尼俱行，或大醉狂歌，戍将将断之。
现代文：他刚刚来到蜀郡，与三位尼姑同行，甚至喝得大醉狂歌起来。
English: He had just arrived in Shu County, accompanied by three nuns, and even got drunk and began to sing.

古文：乃僧至，且曰：某寄迹桑门，别有药术。
现代文：一位军队的将领见状，想把他们分开。难陀迎上前去，说：我出身于沙门，所以别有道术。
English: An army general saw the letter and wanted to separate them. Nanda stepped forward and said, "I was born in Shamen, so I don't know any Taoism."

古文：因指三尼。此妙于歌管。
现代文：然后指指那三个尼姑：她们都善于歌舞乐器。
English: Then point to the three nuns: they are all good at singing and dancing.

古文：戍将反敬之，遂留连，为办酒。
现代文：于是，那将领反倒有几分敬意，并将他们留住，置办一座酒席，晚上同他们开怀畅饮。
English: On the other hand, the general had some respect for them and kept them on, setting up a banquet and drinking heartily with them in the evening.

古文：夜会客与剧饮，僧假裲裆巾帼。市铅黛，饰其三尼。
现代文：难陀和尚借来了女人的衣服和头巾，又买来胭粉，把三个尼姑打扮起来。
English: Gundotra the monk borrowed the women's clothes and headscarves, and also bought ginger powder to dress up the three nuns.

古文：及坐，含睇调笑，逸态绝世。
现代文：坐下之后，他同尼姑们眉来眼去地调笑着，风流绝世。
English: After sitting down, he flirted with the nuns and flirted with the nuns.

古文：饮将阑，僧谓尼曰：可谓押衙踏某曲也。
现代文：酒快喝完时，难陀对尼姑们说：咱们踏着一个曲子行拍，跳一段如何？
English: When the wine was almost finished, Nanda said to the nuns, "Let's dance to a piece of music. How about a dance?"

古文：因徐进对舞，曳绪回雪，迅赴摩趺，技又绝伦也。良久，曲终而舞不已。
现代文：于是，她们便缓缓起舞。难陀的舞姿健美激越。他跳着跳着，忽然又打坐于地，真是技艺绝伦。良久，曲终而舞不停。
English: As a result, they slowly began to dance. Nanda's dancing posture became more and more athletic. He danced and danced, and suddenly he was meditating on the floor again. It was truly an extraordinary skill. For a long time, he danced non-stop until the end of the piece.

古文：僧喝曰：妇女风耶？
现代文：难陀喝道：这些女人疯了！
English: Nanda said, "These women are crazy!"

古文：忽起取戍将佩刀，众谓酒狂，惊走，僧乃拔刀砍之，皆踣于地，血及数尺。
现代文：忽然拿起那位将领的佩刀。
English: Suddenly he picked up the general's sword.

古文：戍将大惧，呼左右缚僧。
现代文：众人都以为他喝醉了，耍酒疯，四散而逃。
English: Everyone thought he was drunk, acting crazy and running away.

古文：僧笑曰：无草草。徐举尼，三枝筇枝也，血乃酒耳。
现代文：难陀拔刀追砍，大家都吓得跌倒在地上，血溅出好几尺远。
English: Nandu pulled out his knife and chased after him. Everyone was so scared that they fell to the ground, and blood splattered several feet away.

古文：又尝在饮会，令人断其头，钉耳于柱，无血。
现代文：那位将领惊恐起来。喊手下人把难陀捆起来。难陀笑道：你不要惊慌。
English: The commander panicked. He called his men to tie Nanda up. Nanda laughed and said, "Don't panic."

古文：成都有百姓，供养数日，僧不欲住，闭关留之，僧因走入壁间，百姓遽牵，渐入，惟余袈裟角，顷亦不见。
现代文：难陀于是走到墙壁上，主人急忙去拽，他却渐渐钻进墙里，只剩下一个袈裟角。一会儿，袈裟角也不见了。
English: Nanda then walked up to the wall, and his master hurried to pull him up, but he gradually got into the wall, leaving only one horn. In a moment, the horn was gone.

古文：来日壁上有画僧焉，其状形似，日月渐薄。
现代文：第二天，他的画像出现在墙上，与本人酷似。
English: The next day, his picture appeared on the wall, looking exactly like him.

古文：积七日，空有黑迹，至八日，黑迹亦灭，已在彭州矣。后不知所之。
现代文：随着时光的移动，画像的颜色渐渐变淡。第七天，空有黑迹；第八天，黑迹也消失。这时候，难陀早已到了彭州，后来便不知去向。
English: With the passage of time, the color of the image gradually faded. On the seventh day, there was a dark spot in the sky; on the eighth day, the dark spot also disappeared. At this time, Nanda had already arrived in Pengzhou, and later he did not know where to go.

古文：太白老僧
现代文：太白老僧
English: The Old White Monk

古文：大唐中，有平阳路氏子，性好奇。
现代文：大唐年间，平阳路某人有个儿子，好奇心颇强。
English: During the Tang Dynasty, someone on Pingyang Road had a son who was very curious.

古文：少从道士游，后庐于太白山。
现代文：他小时候跟随道士云游，后来在太白山上住下来。
English: When he was a child, he traveled with Taoist monks, and later he lived in Taibai Mountain.

古文：尝一日，有老僧叩门，路君延坐，与语久之。
现代文：一天，有位老僧来敲门，路君请他进来入坐，二人畅谈好长时间。
English: One day, an old monk knocked on the door. Lu Jun invited him to come in and sit down. The two had a long talk.

古文：僧曰：檀越好奇者，然未能臻玄奥之枢，徒为居深山中。莫若袭轻裘，驰骏马，游朝市，可不快平生志，宁能与麋鹿为伍乎？
现代文：老僧说：施主是个喜好猎奇的人，但还没能领会玄妙奥秘的关键，白白地住在深山之中，莫如穿皮衣，骑骏马，行游于都市，去实现平生的志愿，怎么能在此与麋鹿等野兽为伍呢？
English: The old monk said, "The benefactor is a person who likes to go on adventures, but he has not yet been able to grasp the key to the mysterious mystery. He lives in the mountains in vain. There is no other way than to wear a fur coat, ride a steed, travel in the city, and realize his lifelong wish. How can he be in the company of wild animals such as elk here?"

古文：路君谢曰：吾师之言，若真有道者。
现代文：路君表示感谢，说：听了师傅您的话，好像真是个得道之人。
English: Lu Jun expressed his gratitude, saying, "After listening to your words, it seems that you are truly a man of virtue."

古文：然而不能示我玄妙之迹，何为张虚词以自炫耶？
现代文：但是不能把你的玄机展示给我，岂不是虚张声势自我炫耀吗？
English: But if you can't show me your secret, isn't that just bluffing and showing off?

古文：僧曰：请弟子观我玄妙之迹。
现代文：老僧说：好，请你看我的玄机。
English: The old monk said, "Well, please look at my riddle.

古文：言讫，即于衣中出一合子，径寸余，其色黑而光。
现代文：说完，当即从衣服里拿出一个小盒，直径仅一寸多，闪着黑亮的光泽。
English: With that, he immediately took out of his clothes a small box, just over an inch in diameter, with a shiny black luster.

古文：既启之，即以身入，俄而化为一鸟，飞冲天。
现代文：打开之后，他便钻了进去，旋即化作一只鸟腾空而起，飞入蓝天。
English: After opening it, he got in and immediately turned into a bird and took off into the blue sky.

