古文：己卯三月初一日何长君以骑至文庙前，再馈赠送餐为包，乃出南门。
现代文：己卯年三月初一日何长君骑马送到文庙前，再次馈赠包好的食品给我旅途中食用，于是走出南门。
English: On the first day of March in the same year, He Changjun rode a horse to Wenmiao, and again gave me a gift of packaged food to eat during the journey, so he walked out of the south gate.

古文：一里，过演武场，大道东南去，乃由岐西南循西山行。
现代文：行一里，经过演武场，大道向东南方延伸而去，于是从岔道向西南方沿西山前行。
English: After walking one mile and passing through the martial arts arena, the avenue extended to the southeast, so I walked from the main road to the southwest along the West Mountain.

古文：四里，西山南尽，有水自西峡出，即凤羽之流也，其水颇大。
现代文：四里，到了西山南面的尽头，有溪水从西面的峡谷中流出来，这就是凤羽溪的流水了，溪水流量很大。
English: Four miles away, at the southern end of the West Mountain, there is a stream flowing out of the western canyon. This is the flow of Fengyu Creek. The stream has a large flow.

古文：南即天马山横夹之，与西山南尽处相峙若门，水出其中，东注茈湖南坡塍间，抵练城而南入普陀崆。
现代文：南面是天马山横夹住溪流，与西山南面尽头的山峰相对耸立着，就像是两扇门，溪水从其中流出，向东注入苑碧湖南面山坡的田畦之间，抵练城后，再向南流入普陀峻峡谷。
English: To the south, Tianma Mountain is flanked by a stream, which stands opposite the peak at the southern end of Xishan Mountain. It is like two doors, from which the stream water flows out, flows eastward into the fields on the southern slope of Yuanbi Lake, flows behind the city, and then flows southward into the Putuo Grand Canyon.

古文：路循西山南尽处溯水而入，五里，北崖忽石峰壁立，耸首西顾即朝西面，其内坞稍开，有村当耸首下坞中，是名山关。
现代文：路顺着西山南面尽头处逆水进去，五里路，北面的山崖忽然间石峰壁立，山头高耸，向西面回头望，见山崖内有一处山坞较为开阔，一个村庄坐落在山头高耸处下方的山坞中，这里名叫山关。
English: The road runs along the southern end of the West Mountain and enters the backwater, Wuli Road, the northern cliff suddenly has stone peaks and walls, the mountain is towering, looking back to the west, there is a relatively open dock in the cliff, a village is located in the dock below the towering mountain, here is called the mountain pass.

古文：耸首之上，有神宇踞石巅，望之突兀甚，盖即县后山，自三台分支南下，此其西南尽处也。
现代文：山头高耸处的上方，有座神庙盘踞在石峰顶，远望石峰，十分高峻。这大概就是浪弯县后山，从三台山分出支脉向南延伸而下，这里是它西南方的尽头处。
English: Above the towering top of the mountain, there is a temple perched on the top of the stone peak, overlooking the stone peak, very high. This is probably the back mountain of Langyan County, extending southward from the branch of Sandai Mountain, and here is its southwest end.

古文：其内大脊稍西曲，南与天马夹成东西坞。
现代文：后山里侧大山脊稍向西弯曲，南边与天马山相夹，形成东西向的山坞。
English: The large ridge on the west side of the back mountain is slightly curved, and the south side is sandwiched between Tianma Mountain, forming an east-west dock.

古文：循溪北崖间又三里余，西抵大脊之下，于是折而南，一里，渡涧，东循东山南行。
现代文：沿溪水北岸的山崖间又走了三里多，向西抵达大山脊之下，从这里折向南行，一里，渡过一条涧水，往东顺东山向南行。
English: I walked more than three miles between the cliffs along the north bank of the stream, reached the west under the big ridge, turned south from here, one mile, crossed a stream, and went east along Dongshan to the south.

古文：一里，为闷江门哨，有守哨者在路旁。
现代文：一里路，是闷江门哨，在路旁有守卫哨卡的兵士。
English: A mile down the road is the Mujiang Gate sentry post, with soldiers manning guard posts along the roadside.

古文：又南二里，有小山当峡而踞，扼水之吭，凤羽之水南来，铁甲场之涧西出，合而捣东崖下。
现代文：又向南走二里，有座小山正当峡谷中间盘踞着，扼住流水的咽喉，凤羽溪水从南面流来，铁甲场的涧水向西流出来，合流后直捣东面的山崖之下。
English: Another two miles to the south, there is a small mountain right in the middle of the canyon, choking the flow of water. The water of Fengyu Creek flows from the south, and the rushing water of the iron armor field flows out to the west. After the confluence, it flows directly under the cliff in the east.

古文：路乃缘崖袭其上，二里，出扼吭之南，村居当坡东，若绾其口者。由是村南山坞大开，西为凤羽，东为启始后山，夹成南北大坞，其势甚开。
现代文：路于是顺着重重叠叠的山崖延伸，二里，走出扼住流水咽喉小山的南边，在山坡东面有村庄房屋，就像是控扼流水出口的样子，从此村往南，山坞十分开阔，西面是凤羽山，东边是启始后山，两山相夹形成南北向的大山坞，地势非常开阔。
English: The road then extends along the heavily overlapping cliffs, two miles, out of the south side of the hill that chokes the flow of water, there are village houses on the east side of the hillside, like the appearance of a controlled choke water outlet, from this village to the south, the dock is very open, the west is Fenghu Mountain, the east is the beginning of the back mountain, the two mountains are sandwiched to form a large north-south dock, the terrain is very open.

古文：三流贯其中，南自上驷，北抵于此，约二十里，皆良田接塍，绾谷成村。
现代文：三条水流流贯山坞中，南面从上驯村起，北面抵达这里，方圆约二十里，都是良田，畦径相连接，盘结的山谷形成村落。
English: Three streams of water run through the dockyard. From the village of Shang Taming in the south to here in the north, it is about twenty miles in circumference. All are good fields, connected by paths, and intertwined valleys form villages.

古文：曲峡通幽入，灵皋夹水居，古之朱陈村、桃花源，寥落已尽，而犹留此一奥，亦大奇事也。
现代文：通过弯弯曲曲的峡谷可以进入幽静的地方，流水相夹灵秀的高阜处散布着村庄房屋。古代的朱陈村、桃花源，已经寥落而完全消逝了，而现在还留存着这一片古朴的山区腹地，也是一件大奇事啊！
English: Through the meandering canyon, you can enter a quiet place, and there are village houses scattered around the flowing water. The ancient Zhu Chen Village and Taohua Yuan have been scarce and completely disappeared, but now there is still this quaint mountainous hinterland, which is also a great miracle!

古文：循东山而南，为新生邑，共五里，折而西度坞中。
现代文：顺着东山向南行，是新生邑，共有五里路，折向西横越在坞中。
English: Going south along Dongshan, it is Xinsheng Eup, a total of five miles, and turning west, it is in the dock.

古文：截坞五里，抵西山凤羽之下，是为舍上盘，古之凤羽县也。
现代文：横截山坞走五里，抵达凤羽山的支脉西山下，这里是舍上盘，是古代的凤羽县了。
English: Cross the dock, walk five miles, and arrive at the west foot of Fenghuashan's branch. This is Shangpan, the ancient Fenghu County.

古文：今有巡司，一流一土，土尹姓。
现代文：现在这里设有巡检司，一个是流官一个是土官，土官姓尹。
English: Now there is a chief inspector here, one is a retired official and one is a local official, the local official's surname is Yin.

古文：名忠，哥懋亭，为吕辉使梦熊之婿。吕梦熊先驰使导为居停，而尹以捕缉往后山，其内人出饭待客，甚丰。
现代文：吕梦熊先就派使者骑马来充当向导并安排住宿，而尹土官因为缉拿罪犯去了后山，他的妻子拿出饭食招待客人，十分丰盛。
English: Lv Meng Xiong first sent an emissary on horseback to act as a guide and arrange accommodation, while Yin Tuo Guan went to the back of the mountain to arrest criminals. His wife brought out meals to invite guests, which was very rich.

古文：薄暮尹返，更具酌，设鼓吹焉。
现代文：傍晚，尹土官返家，重新备办酒宴，安排了乐队奏乐佐餐。
English: In the evening, Yin Tuo Guan returned home, prepared the wine banquet again, and arranged the orchestra to play music with the meal.

古文：是夜大雨，迨晓而雪满西山。
现代文：这天夜里下大雨，到天亮时皑皑白雪已铺满了西山。
English: It rained heavily that night. By dawn, the West Mountain was covered with white snow.

古文：初二日晨餐后，尹具数骑，邀余游西山。
现代文：初二日早餐之后，尹忠备好几匹坐骑，邀请我游览西山。
English: After breakfast on the second day of the first semester, Yin Zhongbei prepared several horses and invited me to visit the West Mountain.

古文：盖西山即凤羽之东垂也，条冈数十支，俱东向蜿蜒而下，北为土主坪，南为白王寨。
现代文：原来西山就是凤羽山往东下垂的山峦，条状的山冈有数十条支脉，全都向东蜿蜒下延，北面是土主坪，南面是白王寨。
English: Originally, the West Mountain was the eastward-drooping ridge of Fenghuashan. The strip-shaped mountain had dozens of branches, all of which snaked down to the east. To the north was Tudouping, and to the south was Baiwangzhai.

古文：是日饭于白王寨北支帝释寺中。
现代文：这一天，在白王寨北面支脉上的帝释寺中用饭。
English: On this day, we had a meal at the Dijie Temple on the northern branch of Baowangzhai.

古文：其支连叠三寺，而俱无僧居，言亦以避寇去也。
现代文：这一支脉之上，连续重叠地建有三座寺庙，可全都没有僧人居住，说是也是因为躲避盗贼离开了。
English: On top of this branch, there are three temples built consecutively and overlapping each other, but none of them are inhabited by monks, who are said to have left because they were hiding from thieves.

古文：从土主庙更西上十五里，即关坪，为凤羽绝顶。
现代文：从土主庙再向西上爬十五里，就是关坪，是凤羽山的最高峰。
English: Fifteen miles further west from the local temple is Guanping, the highest peak of Fenghuashan.

古文：初三日尹备骑，命四人导游清源洞，晨餐后即行。
现代文：它南面的白王庙后面，山势更是高峻，遥望它满山白雪皑皑，银光闪闪，可来不及去攀登。初三日尹忠备好坐骑，命令四个人领路去游览清源洞，早餐后，立即出发。
English: Behind the White King Temple on its southern side, the mountain is even more steep. Looking at it from afar, it is full of snow-capped mountains, glittering silver, but it is too late to climb. On the third day of the first month, Yin Zhong prepared a good mount and ordered four people to lead the way to visit the Qingyuan Cave. After breakfast, they set off immediately.

古文：循西山南行五里，过一村，有山横亘坞南，大坞至是南尽而分为二峡，西峡路由马子哨通漾濞，有一水出其中；东峡路由花甸哨出洪珪山，有二水出其中，其山盖南自马子哨分支北突者。
现代文：顺着西山向南行五里，经过一个村庄，有座山横亘在山坞南边，大山坞至此到了南面的尽头，而后分成两条峡谷。西边峡谷中的路从马子哨通向漾滇，有一条溪水从峡中流出；东边峡谷中的路从花甸哨通到洪硅山，有两股溪水从峡中流出。那座山大概是从马子哨南面分出来的支脉向北突起而形成的。
English: Five miles south along the West Mountain, passing through a village, there is a mountain on the south side of the dock. The large dock has now reached the end of the south side, and then it is divided into two canyons. The road in the canyon on the west side leads from Ma Zi Sentinel to Zou, and a stream flows out of the canyon; the road in the canyon on the east side leads from Huadian Sentinel to Hong Si Mountain, and two streams flow out of the canyon. The mountain was probably formed by the northward protrusion of the branch from the south side of Ma Zi Sentinel.

古文：由其北麓二里，东降而涉坞，过上驷村，渡三涧，三里，东抵一村，复上坡循东山南行。
现代文：从此山的北麓前行二里，向东下走，涉过山坞，经过上驯村，渡过三条山涧，三里路，向东抵达一个村庄，再上坡顺着东山往南行。
English: From the northern foot of this mountain, walk two miles, go eastward and down, wade through the dock, pass through the village of Shang Jie, cross three mountains, three miles, eastward to a village, and then uphill along the Dongshan to the south.

古文：一里余，渡东涧之西，乃南蹑坡冈，则东之蜡坪厂山其厂出矿，山之东即邓川州。与西之横亘山又夹成小坞。
现代文：一里多路，渡到东边山涧的西岸，于是从南面上登陡坡、山冈，就见东面的蜡坪厂山与西面横亘的山又相夹形成小山坞。
English: After traveling more than a mile, we reached the west coast of the eastern mountains, and then climbed a steep slope and a mountain from the south. We saw the east side of the Wuxing Factory Mountain and the west side of the mountain clamped together to form a small dock.

古文：南行里余，乃折而东逾一坳，共一里，东向下，忽见一水自壑底出，即东涧之上流，出自洞下者也。
现代文：向南行一里多，才折向东越过一个山坳，共一里，向东下走，忽然看见一条溪水从壑谷底流出，这就是东涧水的上游，从清源洞下流出的那股溪水了。
English: After traveling more than a mile to the south, I turned to the east and crossed a mountain ridge for a total of one mile. Walking eastward, I suddenly saw a stream flowing out from the bottom of Shugu Valley. This is the upper reaches of the East Shugu Water, the stream water flowing out from under the Qingyuan Cave.

古文：亟下壑底，睹其水自南穴出，涌而北流成溪。
现代文：急速下到壑谷底，看见那股水从南边的洞穴中流出来，向北涌流成溪。
English: Rushing down to the bottom of the ravine, he saw the water flowing out of the cave on the south side and flowing north into the creek.

古文：其上崖间一穴，大仅二三尺，亦北向，上书 清源洞 三字，为邓川缙绅杨南金笔。
现代文：溪水上方的山崖间有一洞穴，大处仅有二三尺，洞口也是朝北，上方刻着 清源洞 三个字，是邓川州官绅杨南金的手笔。
English: There is a cave between the cliffs above the stream. Most of it is only two or three feet deep. The mouth of the cave is also north-facing. Above it is engraved the three characters of Qingyuan Cave. They were written by Yang Nanjin, a government official from Dengchuan.

古文：导者二，一人负松明竹浸松油制成的火把一筐，一人然同 燃 松明为炬以入。
现代文：溪水不从上洞流出，从洞口下走进入洞中，也见不到流水。那进洞的地方狭窄倾斜，深深下坠，恰似茶陵的后洞。导游的两个人，一人背着一筐松明，一人点燃松明作火把以便进洞。
English: The stream does not flow out of the upper cave, and you cannot see the flowing water when you walk into the cave from under the cave mouth. The place where you enter the cave is narrow, sloping, and has a deep drop, just like the back cave of a tea mausoleum. Two tour guides, one carrying a basket of torches, one lighting a torch to make a torch in order to enter the cave.

古文：南入数丈，路分为二，下穿者为穴，上跻者为楼。
现代文：进洞向南走数丈，路分成两条，从下面穿越过去就是洞穴，往上攀登的地方就像是楼。
English: After entering the cave, walk a few meters to the south. The path splits into two. The passage from below is the cave, and the place where you climb up is like a building.

古文：楼之上复分二穴。
现代文：楼的上方再分为两个洞穴。
English: The upper part of the building is divided into two caves.

古文：穿右穴而进，其下甚削，陷峡颇深，即下穿所入之峡也，以壁削路阻，不得达。
现代文：穿过右边的洞穴进去，它下面非常陡削，下陷的峡谷很深，那就是从下面穿越进去的峡谷了，因为石壁陡削道路险阻而不能到达。
English: Enter through the cave on the right, it is very steep below, the sunken canyon is very deep, that is, the canyon that is entered from below, because the stone wall steep road is dangerous and can not be reached.

古文：乃返穿左穴而进，其内曲折骈夹，高不及丈，阔亦如之，而中多直竖之柱，或连枝剖楹，或中盘旁丛，分合间错，披隙透窾意，颇觉灵异，但石质甚莹白，而为松炬所薰，皆黑若烟煤，着手即腻不可脱。
现代文：于是返回来穿过左边的洞穴进去，洞穴内曲曲折折石壁并列相夹，高不到一丈，宽处也是如此，而洞中有很多直竖的石柱，有的像相连的树枝，有的像厅堂前剖开的柱子，有的中间是一根大石柱而四旁围护着许多草丛似的小石柱，或分或合，间隔交错，或披露出缝隙，或透露出空洞的地方，令人觉得非常神奇怪异。只是石质十分晶莹洁白，却被松明火把的黑烟所薰染，全都黑得像烟煤一样，手一触摸就油腻得无法去掉。
English: So he went back and entered the cave on the left. Inside the cave, the twists and turns of the stone walls are side by side, less than a foot high, and the width is the same, and there are many upright stone pillars in the cave, some like connected branches, some like columns cut open in front of the hall, some in the middle is a large stone pillar and surrounded by many small stone pillars like grass, or divided or closed, interlaced, or revealing gaps, or revealing cavities. It feels very strange. But the stone is very crystal clear and white, but it is stained by the black smoke of the torches, all black like soot, and it is greasy to

古文：盖其洞既不高旷，烟雾莫散，而土人又惯用松明，便于伛偻，而益增其煤腻。
现代文：因为这个洞既不高大宽广，烟雾无法散出去，而当地人又习惯于用松明照明，以便于弯腰曲背行进，从而更增多了洞内的黑烟腻垢。
English: Because this cave is neither tall nor wide, the smoke cannot be dispersed, and the local people are accustomed to lighting with torches to make it easier to bend over and walk backwards, thus increasing the amount of black soot in the cave.

古文：盖先是有识者谓余曰： 是洞须岁首即游为妙，过二月辄为烟所黑。 
现代文：先前，曾有一位有见识的人告诉我说： 这个洞，一定要在年头就去游览为妙，过了二月，就被烟火薰黑了。 
English: Earlier, someone with insight told me: "It's a good idea to visit this cave at the beginning of the year. After February, it will be blackened by fireworks."

古文：余问其故，曰： 洞内经年，人莫之入，烟之旧染者，既渐退而白，乳即钟乳石之新生者，亦渐垂而长，故一当新岁，人竟游之，光景甚异。
现代文：我探问其中缘故，他说： 洞内经过一年的时间，无人进入洞中，旧时所薰染上去的黑烟，已逐渐褪色而变白，新生长的钟乳石，也渐渐下垂得长长的了，所以一到新年，人们竞相游洞，洞中的光景十分奇异。
English: When I asked him why, he said: After a year has passed in the cave, no one has entered the cave. The old black smoke has gradually faded and turned white, and the newly grown stalactites have gradually sagged. Therefore, when the New Year comes, people compete to swim in the cave. The scene in the cave is very strange.

古文：从此至二月，游者已多，新生之乳，既被采折，再染之垢，愈益薰蒸，但能点染衣服，无复领其光华矣。 
现代文：从新年到二月，游洞的人已经很多了，新生的钟乳石既已被打断、采摘去，再薰染上烟垢，就愈加使人感到热气薰腾、黑暗气闷，只能染脏衣服，再也无法去领略石洞的光彩了。 
English: From the New Year to February, there are already a lot of people visiting the cave. Since the newly born stalactites have been interrupted, picked off, and then stained with soot, it makes people feel more and more hot, dark and stuffy. They can only dye dirty clothes, and they can no longer appreciate the glory of the stone cave.

古文：余不以其言为然。
现代文：我不以他说的话为然。
English: I don't believe a word he says.

古文：至是而知洞以低故，其乳易采，遂折取无余，其烟易染，遂薰蒸有积，其言诚不诬也。
现代文：到这时才知道清源洞因为低矮的缘故，洞中的钟乳石容易采摘，就都被打断拿走，没有剩余的，松明的火烟容易薰染，于是烟雾升腾，不断积多，他的话确实没有骗人。
English: It was only then that I learned that the stalactites in Qingyuan Cave were easy to pick up because of its low height, so they were all broken off and taken away. There was nothing left, and the smoke from the torches was easily smudged. As a result, the smoke rose and continued to accumulate. His words were not deceptive.

古文：透柱隙南入，渐有水贮柱底盘中。
现代文：穿过石柱间的缝隙朝南深入，渐渐地有水贮存在石柱底部的石盘中。
English: Through the gap between the stone pillars to the south, water is gradually stored in the stone plate at the bottom of the pillar.

古文：其盘皆石底回环，大如盆盎，颇似粤西洞中仙田之类，但不能如其多也。
现代文：石盘都是石柱底部回环而成的，大小像盆盎一祥，很像粤西石洞中的仙田一类，只是没有像那里那么多罢了。
English: The stone plates are all made of rings at the bottom of the stone pillar, the size of which is like a bowl. It is very similar to the Xiantian type in the stone caves in western Guangdong, but there are not as many as there.

古文：约进半里，又坠穴西下，其深四五尺，复夹而南北，下平上凑，高与阔亦不及丈，南入三丈而止，北入十余丈，亦窘缩狭窄短小不能进。
现代文：大约前进了半里，又下坠到洞穴中向西下走，洞深四五尺，石壁相夹又分为南北两条岔路，洞穴底下平坦而上部紧凑，高与宽也都不到一丈。朝南进去三丈便止步了，向北走进十多丈，也因道路狭窄，受到困迫而紧缩身体，不能再前进。
English: After walking for about half a mile, he fell down into the cave and walked westward. The cave was four or five feet deep, and the stone walls were sandwiched between the north and south forks. The bottom of the cave was flat and the upper part was compact, and the height and width were less than one height. When he entered the south, he stopped at three heights, and walked northward for more than ten heights. Because the road was narrow, he was constrained and could not move forward.

古文：乃复出，升坠穴之上，寻其南隙，更披隘以入。
现代文：这才重新退出来，爬上坠下来的那个洞穴的上方，寻找它南面的缝隙，再穿过隘道进去。
English: Only then did he back out, climb to the top of the cave he had fallen into, find a gap to the south of it, and then enter through the narrow passage.

古文：入数丈，洞渐低，乳柱渐逼，俯膝透隙，匍匐愈难。
现代文：进去数丈，洞逐渐变低，钟乳石柱渐渐逼过来，只好曲膝俯身穿越缝隙，后来连伏地爬行都越来越困难了。
English: After entering a few meters, the hole gradually became lower, and the stalactite column gradually forced me to bend my knees to cross the gap. Later, it became more and more difficult to crawl continuously.

古文：复返而出，由楼下坑内批隙东转，又入数十丈，其内高阔与南入者同，而乳柱不能比胜。
现代文：这才再沿原路返回，从像楼的那地方下面的坑谷中穿过缝隙朝东转，又进去数十丈，里面高、宽与从南边进去的地方相同，而钟乳石柱的优美胜景却不能相比。
English: Only then did he return along the original path, passing through a gap in the valley below the place resembling the tower, turning east, and entering dozens of heights, the same height and width as the place from the south, but the beauty of the stalactite column cannot be compared.

古文：既穷，乃西从下坑透穴出。
现代文：已经走到尽头，这才从西面由下边的坑中穿过洞穴出来。
English: After reaching the end of the cave, you have to go through the lower pit on the west side.

古文：由坑仰眺，其上稍觉崆峒，即入时由楼上俯瞰处。
现代文：从坑中仰头眺望，上方稍稍像山洞那样空的地方就是刚进洞时从像楼的那地方上面俯视的处所。
English: Looking up from the pit, the place that is slightly empty like a cave above is the place you look down from when you first enter the cave.

古文：既下穴出，渐见天光，乃升崖出口，满身皆染淄ｚī黑色蒙垢矣。
现代文：从下面的洞穴中出来后，渐渐地看见天光，于是爬上石崖走出清源洞口，满身上下都被染成黑色蒙上污垢了。
English: After coming out of the cave below, he gradually saw the light of the sky, so he climbed up the cliff and walked out of the Qingyuan cave. He was covered with black dirt all over.

古文：乃下濯足水穴之口，踞石而浣洗。
现代文：于是下山在水洞口坐在水边的石头上洗脚洗衣。
English: So he went down the mountain to the mouth of the water cave, sat on a stone by the water's edge and washed his feet.

古文：水从乱穴中汩汩出，遂成大溪北去，清冷澈骨。
现代文：流水从众多散乱的洞穴中泪泊流出来，便汇成一条大溪向北流去，溪水清澈，寒冷彻骨。
English: The water flows from the many scattered caves in tears, and then converges into a large stream flowing north. The water is clear and cold to the bone.

古文：所留二人，炊黄粱于洞外者亦熟。
现代文：留在洞外的那两个人，也已经把黄小米煮熟。
English: The two people who stayed outside the cave had also cooked the yellow millet.

古文：以所携酒脯肉食品，箕踞两脚张开而坐啖洞前，仰见天光如洗，四山如城，甚惬幽兴。
现代文：拿出带来的好酒、肉干，很随意地坐在洞前吃了起来。仰望那如洗的蓝夭，四周的群山好像城墙一样围护着，十分惬意，使我探幽寻胜的兴致大起。
English: I took out the good wine and dried meat that I had brought with me, sat down in front of the cave and ate it. Looking up at the clear blue sky, surrounded by the mountains like a city wall, it was very pleasant, and my interest in exploring and winning grew.

古文：饭后，仍逾西坳，稍南遵花甸路，遂横涉中溪，西上横亘山之东坂。
现代文：饭后，仍然越过西边的山坳，稍转向南沿着通往花甸坝的路前行。于是涉水横渡中溪，向西爬横亘之山东面的山坡。
English: After the meal, I still crossed the mountains on the west and turned slightly south along the road to Huadian Dam. So I waded across Zhongxi Creek and climbed the eastern slope of the mountain to the west.

古文：沿山陟陇，五里下，出上驷村之西，仍循西山北行。
现代文：顺着山势登上土陇，五里路后下坡，绕到上驯村的西边，仍旧顺着西山往北行。
English: Climb up the mound along the mountain, go downhill after five miles, go around the west side of Shangjiaoming village, and still follow the west mountain to the north.

古文：一里，过一村，遂由小径遵西山陇半搜剔搜寻挑选幽奥，上下冈坂十余里，抵暮，还宿于尹宅。
现代文：一里，经过一座村庄，于是由小路沿西山土陇的半腰上行进，逐一认真搜寻幽奇隐密的胜景。在山冈陡坡间上上下下地行走了十多里，到日落时分，返回到尹忠的宅院住宿。
English: After one mile, they passed through a village, and then walked along the small road halfway up the mound of the West Mountain, carefully searching for the mysterious hidden scenic spots one by one. They walked more than ten miles up and down between the steep slopes of the mountains, and returned to Yin Zhong's mansion for accommodation at sunset.

古文：初四日尹备数骑，循西山而北。
现代文：初四日尹忠备好数匹马，我们顺西山向北走。
English: On the fourth day of the first lunar month, Yin Zhong prepared several horses, and we walked north along the West Mountain.

古文：三里，盘西山东出之嘴。
现代文：三里，绕过西山向东伸出的山嘴。
English: Three miles, around the west mountain to the east jutting out of the promontory.

古文：又北半里，忽见山麓有数树撑空，出马足下，其下水声淙淙出树间，则泉穴自山底东透隙而出也。
现代文：又向北行半里，忽然看见山麓有几棵树高撑在空中，出现在马足之下，树下涂涂的流水声从树丛间传出来，那么，洞穴里的泉水是从山底部向东渗过缝隙后流出来的。
English: Half a mile further north, I suddenly saw several trees at the foot of the mountain, propped up high in the air, appearing under the horse's feet. The sound of running water painted under the trees came from between the trees. Then, the spring water in the cave seeped eastward from the bottom of the mountain and flowed out through the gap.

古文：又北半里，有坑自北山陷坠成峡，涉之。
现代文：又向北行半里，有条坑谷从北山下陷，坠落形成峡谷，越过峡谷，稍稍转向东，又绕过一道山嘴，再走三里就到达波大邑。
English: Another half-mile to the north, there is a pit valley from the North Mountain sagging, falling to form a canyon, crossing the canyon, turning slightly to the east, and bypassing a mountain mouth, and then walking three miles to reach Podae.

古文：稍东，又盘一嘴，又三里而至波大邑，倚西山而聚庐，亦此间大聚落也。由村北坠坑而下，横涉一涧，又北上逾冈，三里而下，是为铁甲场，有溪自西山东注，村庐夹之。
现代文：波大邑村背靠西山，庐舍聚集，也算是这一带的大村落了。从村北下坠的坑谷中再往下走，涉水横渡一条山涧，又向北翻越山冈，三里后下坡，这是铁甲场，有溪水从西山向东流注，村舍分散溪流两边。
English: The village of Bodaeup, with its back to the West Mountain and cluster of houses, is also considered a large village in this area. From the valley that plunges down to the north of the village, go further down, wade across a mountain ridge, and then turn north over the mountain ridge. After three miles, go downhill. This is the iron armor field, with streams flowing from the West Mountain to the east, and the village houses scattered on both sides of the stream.

古文：前闷江门南当峡扼水，小山又东踞，为此中水口，南北环山两支，复交于前，又若别成一洞天者。
现代文：前方有闷江门哨南临峡口，扼住流水；又有一座小山盘踞在东面，是这里的河口；南北两支环形山峦，再相互交错于前方，又使这地方像另一个天地。
English: In front of us, there is the Mujiangmen sentry post to the south of the mouth of the gorge, holding back the flowing water; there is also a small mountain to the east, which is the mouth of the river here; two ring-shaped mountains to the north and south, which are interlaced with each other in front, make this place look like another world.

古文：过溪，上北山。
现代文：渡过溪流，爬上北山。
English: Cross the stream and climb the North Mountain.

古文：北山自西山横拖而来，为铁甲场龙砂，实凤羽第三重砂也，东束溪流，最为紧固，其西南之麓即铁甲，东北之麓即闷江门，凤羽一川，全以此为锁钥焉。
现代文：北山是从西山横向下垂延伸而来的，是铁甲场的龙砂，实际上又是凤羽山的第三重砂岩，它东面约束着溪流，最为紧要坚固，它西南面的山麓就是铁甲场，东北面的山麓下是闷江门嗜，凤羽坝子一片平川，完全是以此为锁钥的。
English: The North Mountain extends horizontally from the West Mountain. It is the dragon sand of the Tiejia Field. It is actually the third heavy sandstone of the Fenghu Mountain. It restricts the stream on the east side and is the most important and solid. The southwest foot of the mountain is the Tiejia Field, the northeast foot is the Mujiang Gate, and the Fenghu Dam is a piece of the Pingchuan River. This is completely the key.

古文：骑登其上。
现代文：骑马登上北山。
English: Riding up the North Mountain.

古文：还饭于铁甲场居民家。
现代文：返回沐在铁甲场的居民家里吃饭。
English: Returned to eat at the home of a resident who was immersed in the iron armor field.

古文：置二樽于架上，下煨以火，插藤于中而递吸之，屡添而味不减此处即描述钩藤饮酒法。
现代文：他们在架子上放置二只盛酒的蹲，下面用微火慢慢地煮，把钩藤条插进蹲中，主客依次传递着吸饮蹲中白酒，屡次加水进去，但酒味并未减淡。
English: They placed two wine-filled squats on the shelf, slowly cooked the bottom with low heat, inserted the hook rattan into the squat, and the host and guest successively passed the white wine into the squat, and repeatedly added water, but the taste of the wine did not diminish.

古文：其村氓即村民，氓作汉子讲惯走缅甸，皆多彝货，以孩儿茶即儿茶，又称黑儿茶，清热化痰，生津止渴点水飨客，茶色若胭脂而无味。
现代文：这个村子的村民习质于跑缅甸做生意，每家都有许多边地民族的货物。他们用开水泡孩儿茶招释客人，茶水的颜色像胭脂一样鲜红，却没有任何味道。
English: The villagers of this village have a habit of running to Myanmar to do business, and each house has a lot of goods from the outlying ethnic groups. They invite guests with boiled water and tea. The color of the tea is bright red like rouge, but it has no taste.

古文：下午，仍从波大邑盘泉穴山嘴，复西上探其腋中小圆山。
现代文：下午，仍从援大邑绕过流泉洞穴上方的山嘴，又往西上山，探历山腋中的小圆封。
English: In the afternoon, I still went around the mountain mouth above the flowing spring cave from Yan Dayu, and went up the mountain to the west to explore Xiao Yuanfeng in the mountains.

古文：风雨大至，沾濡而返。
现代文：返途中风雨猛烈袭来，衣服都湿透了。
English: On the way back, the wind and rain hit hard, and my clothes were soaked.

古文：初五日晨起欲别，尹君以是日清明，留宴于茔山，即土主庙北新茔也。
现代文：初五日旱晨起床想要告别，尹君因为这一天是清明节，挽留在坟山设宴款衣，就是土主庙北面新开的墓地。
English: On the morning of the fifth day of the first lunar month, Yin Jun got up in the morning and wanted to say goodbye. Because this day was the Tomb-Sweeping Day, he stayed in the cemetery to set up a banquet dress, which was the newly opened cemetery north of the landlord's temple.

古文：坐庙前观祭扫者纷纷，奢者携一猪，就茔间火炕之而祭；贫者携一鸡，就茔间吊杀之，亦烹以祭。
现代文：坐在庙门前观看祭祀扫墓的人纷纷无扰，奢侈的人带来一头猪，就地在坟莹间挖坑升火烧熟后拿来祭礼；贫穷的人带来一只鸡，就地在坟莹间杀鸡吊祭，也是煮熟后拿来祭祀。
English: Those who sat in front of the temple gate to watch the sacrificial sweeping of the tomb were not disturbed. The extravagant people brought a pig and dug a pit between the graves and cooked it to bring it to the sacrifice. The poor people brought a chicken and killed it between the graves and cooked it to bring it to the sacrifice.

古文：回忆先茔自己祖先之墓，已三违春露指自己长年在外，已有三年未去祭扫了不觉怃然悲哀惆怅！亟返而卧。
现代文：回想起祖先的坟莹，已离别三载，不能在春天举行露天祭祀，万知不觉悲哀惆怅起来！急忙返回来睡下。
English: Recalling the ancestor's grave Ying, has been separated for three years, can not hold open-air sacrifices in the spring, imperceptibly sad! Hurry back to sleep.

古文：初六日余欲别，而尹君谓前邀其岳吕梦熊，期今日至，必再暂停。
现代文：初六日我想告另？可尹君说先前邀请了他岳父吕梦熊，约定今天来到，必定要再暂竹停留。
English: On the sixth day of the first lunar month, I wanted to make a different announcement, but Yin Jun said that he had previously invited his father-in-law, Lü Meng Xiong, and they had agreed to come today.

古文：适村有诸生许姓者，邀登凤羽南高岭，随之。
现代文：恰好村中有个姓许的儒生，约我去登凤羽山的南高岭，就跟队他前往。
English: There just happened to be a Confucian scholar in the village with the surname Xu. He invited me to go to Nangangling on Fenghuashan Mountain, and I went with him.

古文：下午返而吕君果至，相见甚欢。
现代文：下午返回后吕君果然来到了，互相见面十分欢喜。
English: After returning in the afternoon, Lü Jun did indeed come, and they were very happy to see each other.

古文：初七日尹君仍备骑，同梦熊再为清源洞之游。
现代文：初七日尹君仍旧准备交坐骑，同吕梦熊再次去游清源洞。
English: On the seventh day of the first lunar month, Yin Jun was still preparing to ride a horse, and he and Lv Meng Xiong went to visit Qingyuan Cave again.

古文：先从白米村截川而东，五里，遵东山南行。
现代文：先从白米村横截平川往东走，五生沿东山向南行。
English: First, they walked east from Baimei Village across the Hirakawa River, and then they walked south along Dongshan Mountain.

古文：山麓有骑龙景帝庙，庙北有泉一穴，自崖下涌出，崖石嵌磊，巨木盘纠大树盘根错节，清泉漱其下，古藤络其上，境甚清幽。
现代文：又向南五里后抵达清源洞。
English: After another five miles to the south, we arrived at Qingyuan Cave.

古文：土人之耕者，见数骑至，以为追捕者，俱释耜ｓì亦称耒耜，一种原始翻工具而趋山走险，呼之返。下午，余苦索别，吕君代为尹留甚笃。
现代文：不再深入进去，饱揽洞前的抽生。仍然向西渡过中溪，观遍了西山的地形胜景后返回来。下午，我苦苦告别，吕君代尹忠挽留我十分诚恳。
English: I didn't go deep into the cave any more, I was too busy picking mushrooms in front of the cave. I still crossed the Middle Creek to the west and returned after seeing the beautiful scenery of the West Mountain. In the afternoon, I said my goodbyes, and Lü Jundei Yin Zhong kept me very sincerely.

古文：是日宴张氏两公子。
现代文：这一天宴请张家的两位公子。
English: On this day, the two nobles of the Zhang family were invited to the banquet.

古文：客去，犹与吕君洗盏更酌，陈乐为胡舞，曰紧急鼓。
现代文：客人离开后，乃与吕君洗过杯盏再饮，安排了乐人表演胡人的歌舞，称为紧急彭。
English: After the guests left, Nao and Lv Jun washed their cups and arranged musicians to perform Hu Ren's song and dance, known as the emergency Peng Rong.

古文：初八日同梦熊早饭后别尹君。
现代文：初八日同吕梦熊早饭后告别了尹君。
English: On the eighth day of the first month, after breakfast with Lv Mengxiong, he said goodbye to Yin Jun.

古文：三十五里，抵浪穹南门。
现代文：行三十五里，抵达浪弯县城的南门。
English: Thirty-five miles later, we arrived at the south gate of Langyan County.

古文：梦熊别去，期中旬晤榆城大理的别称。
现代文：梦熊告别去了，约定本月中旬在大理城会面。
English: Meng Xiong said goodbye and agreed to meet in Dali City in the middle of this month.

古文：余入文庙，命顾仆借炊于护明寺，而后往候何六安。
现代文：我走入文庙，命令顾仆在护明寺借火煮饭，然后前去问候何六安。
English: I walked into the Temple of Literature, ordered the attendant to cook rice over the fire in the Temple of Protection, and then went to greet He Liu An.

古文：何公待余不至，己先一日趋榆城矣。
现代文：何公等我不见来，已经在前一天赶去大理城了。
English: He waited for me not to come, and had already rushed to Dali City the day before.

古文：余乃促何长君定夫，为明日行计。
现代文：我就催促何长爵议定脚夫，为明天动身做准备。
English: I urged him to agree on a porter and prepare for tomorrow's departure.

古文：何长君留酌书馆，复汲汤泉为浴而卧。
现代文：何长君留我在书馆饮酒，又取头温泉水沐浴后躺下了。
English: He Changjun let me stay in the library to drink alcohol, and then took a bath in the hot spring water and lay down.

古文：初九日早饭于何处。
现代文：初九日在姓何的处所吃早饭。
English: On the 9th day of the first month, I had breakfast at a place called Ho.

古文：比行，阴云四合，大有雨意，何长君、次君仍以盒饯于南郊。
现代文：到上路时，阴云四面合拢，大有下雨的阵势，何长君、次君仍然用盒子带了酒食在南郊饯行。
English: When they got on the road, the clouds were closing in on all sides and there was a strong chance of rain. He Changjun and Zijun were still walking around the southern suburbs with boxes of wine and food.

古文：南行三里，则凤羽溪自西而东注，架木桥度之，又南里余，抵天马山麓，乃循而东行，风雨渐至。
现代文：往南行三里，就见凤羽溪自西往东流注，架看木桥渡过溪流。又向南走一里多，抵达天马山山麓，于是沿山麓往东行，风雨渐渐来临。
English: Three miles to the south, I saw Fengyu Creek flowing from west to east, and I saw a wooden bridge crossing the stream. I walked more than a mile to the south and arrived at the foot of Tianma Mountain, so I walked along the foot of the mountain to the east, and the wind and rain gradually came.

古文：东里余，有小阜踞峡口之北，曰练城，置浮屠即佛塔于上，为县学之案。
现代文：向东走一里多，有座小土山盘踞在峡口为北边，叫做练城，上面建有佛塔，是县里学校的案山。
English: After walking more than a mile to the east, there is a small hill to the north of the mouth of the gorge. It is called Liancheng. There is a pagoda on it, which is the mountain of the county school.

古文：此县普陀崆水口，既极逼束，而又天生此一阜，中悬以锁钥相当于控制之机关之。
现代文：这个县的聋陀峻河口，既已极为狭窄，而此地又天生一座土山，悬在中央女顽钥一般。
English: The mouth of the Gunduzhun River in this county is already extremely narrow, but this place is also a natural hill, hanging in the middle like a skeleton.

古文：茈碧湖、洱源海及观音山之水出于阜东，凤羽山之水出于阜西，俱合于阜南，是为三江口。
现代文：龙碧湖、洱源海及观音山的水从土山东边流出去，凤月山的水从土山西边流出去，全都在土山南面汇合，这就是三江。
English: The waters of Longbi Lake, Luguang Sea and Guanyinshan flow out from the east side of Dushan, and the waters of Fengyue Mountain flow out from the west side of Dushan. They all converge on the south side of Dushan, which is the Sanjiang River.

古文：由其西望之而行，又二里，将南入峡，先有木桥跨其上流，度桥而东，应山铺之路自东北逾横山来会，遂南入峡口。
现代文：由三江口西边望着它前行，又走二里，即将在南边进入峡谷，先有一座木桥横跨在溪水上游，越到桥东，应山铺来的路从东尤方越过横卧的山前来合会，于是向南走入峡口。
English: Looking at it from the west side of the Sanjiang estuary, I walked another two miles and was about to enter the canyon on the south side. First, there was a wooden bridge across the upper reaches of the stream, and then to the east of the bridge, the road paved by the mountain crossed the lying mountain from the east and came to the meeting, so I walked south into the canyon.

古文：是峡东山即灵应山西下之支，西山即天马山东尽之处，两山逼凑，急流捣其中，为浪穹诸水所由出。
现代文：这个峡谷东面酌山就是灵应山向西下延的支脉，西边的山就是天马山在东方的尽头处，两面的山紧逼凑拢过来，急流冲捣在峡中，是浪弯县各条水流经由的去路。
English: The mountain on the east side of this canyon is the branch of Lingyingshan extending to the west, the mountain on the west is Tianma Mountain at the end of the east, the mountains on both sides are close together, the rapids are in the canyon, and it is the way to go through all the streams in Langyan County.

古文：路从桥东，即随流南入峡口。
现代文：道路从桥东头起，立即顺着流水往南通入峡口。
English: The road starts from the east end of the bridge and immediately follows the flowing water to the south entrance of the gorge.

古文：有数家当峡而居，是为巡检司。
现代文：有数家人临峡居住，这是巡检司。
English: Several families live in Linxia. This is the inspection division.

古文：时风雨交横，少避于跨桥楼上。
现代文：此时风雨交加，雨水横流，暂时在跨桥楼上避雨。
English: At this time, the wind and rain are intermittent, the rain is cross-flowing, and it is temporarily sheltered from the rain on the bridge.

古文：楼圮不能蔽，寒甚。
现代文：楼已坍塌不能蔽风雨，寒冷极了。
English: The building has collapsed and we can't shelter from the wind and rain. It's extremely cold.

古文：南望峡中，风阵如舞；北眺凌云诸峰，出没闪烁。
现代文：向南望峡中，狂风阵阵，如像在起舞；往北远眺凌云等诸峰，忽隐忽现。
English: Looking south into the gorge, the gusts of wind seem to dance; looking north, the distant peaks such as Lingyun, appear and disappear.

古文：坐久之，雨不止，乃强担夫行。
现代文：坐了很久，雨势不停，只得强迫挑夫上路。
English: After sitting for a long time, with the rain continuing, we had to force the porter onto the road.

古文：初从东崖南向行普陀崆中，一里，峡转而西曲，路亦西随之。
现代文：最初从东面的山崖下向南行走在普陀峻中，一里后，峡谷转向西弯曲，路也顺着峡谷向西延伸。
English: At first, I walked from the eastern cliff to the south in Putuo. After one mile, the canyon turned to the west, and the road also extended along the canyon to the west.

古文：一里，复转而南，一里，有一家倚东崖而居。
现代文：一里，再转向南，一里，有一家人背靠东面的山崖居住。
English: One mile, then turn south, one mile, there is a family living on the cliff with its back to the east.

古文：按《郡志》，有龙马洞在峡中，疑即其处，而雨甚不及问。
现代文：根据《郡志》，在峡谷中有个龙马洞，怀疑就是此处，但是雨下得非常大来不及打听。
English: According to the County Register, there is a cave in the canyon, which is suspected to be the location, but it rained too hard to investigate.

古文：又南，江流捣崆中愈骤，崆中石耸突而激湍，或为横槛以扼之，或为夹门以束之，或为龃龉，或为剑戟，或为犀象，或为鸷鸟，百态以极其搏截之势；而水终不为所阻，或跨而出之，或穿而过之，或挟而潆之，百状以尽超越之观。
现代文：又往南走，江流冲捣在普陀峻中愈加急速，普陀峻中岩石高耸突立而激起湍急的水流，有的如横卧的门槛扼住流水，有的如夹立的门扇束住水流，有的如参差不齐的牙齿，有的如刀枪剑戟，有的如犀牛大象，有的如凶猛的苍鹰，千姿百态，极尽它们各自搏击拦截的气势；但流水始终未被它们阻住，有时跨过岩石流出去，有时穿过岩石流去，有时夹住岩石漾徊而流，千百种状态，尽情展示了超越障碍的景观。
English: Going south again, the rushing of the river became more and more rapid in the middle of the Putuo Mountains. The rocks in the middle of the Putuo Mountains were towering and protruding, stirring up the rapid water flow. Some were like a horizontal threshold to choke the flowing water, some were like a clamped door flap to hold the water flow, some were like jagged teeth, some were like swords and daggers, some were like rhinoceros elephants, and some were like fierce eagles. There were thousands of poses, all of which had the potential to fight and intercept each other. But the flowing water was never blocked by them. Sometimes it

古文：时沸流倾足下，大雨注头上，两崖夹身，一线透腋，转觉神王王同 旺 ，神王即精神旺盛。
现代文：此时沸腾的激流倾泻在脚下，大雨浇注在头上，两侧的山崖夹住身体，仅有一线宽的通路穿过山侧，反而觉得精神旺盛。
English: At this time, the boiling torrent pours at the foot, the heavy rain pours on the head, the mountain cliffs on both sides clamp the body, only a line-wide passage through the mountain side, but I feel energetic.

古文：二里，顾西崖之底，有小穴当危崖下，东向与波流吞吐，心以为异。
现代文：二里路，回头看见西边山崖的底下，有个小洞正在高险的山崖之下，朝向东方，吞吐着波涛洪流，心里认为很奇异。
English: Two miles away, I looked back and saw the bottom of the cliff on the west side, there was a small hole under the high-risk cliff, facing east, swallowing the waves of the torrent, and I thought it was very strange.

古文：过而问热水洞何在，始知即此穴也。
现代文：走过后打听热水洞在哪里，这才知道就是这个洞穴了。
English: After walking past, I asked where the hot water cave was, only to find out that it was this cave.

古文：先是，土人言普陀崆中有热水洞，门甚隘而中颇宽，其水自洞底涌出如沸汤烧开的水。
现代文：这之前，当地人说起在普陀峻中有个热水洞，洞口非常窄但洞中很宽敞，洞内的水从洞底涌出来如沸腾的开水。
English: Before that, the locals mentioned that there was a hot water cave in Putuoshan. The mouth of the cave was very narrow, but the cave was very spacious. The water in the cave gushed out from the bottom of the cave like boiling water.

古文：人入洞门，为热气所蒸，无不浃汗，有疾者辄愈。
现代文：人进入洞口，被热气薰蒸，无不汗流侠背，有病的人马上就痊愈了。
English: People enter the mouth of the cave and are steamed by the hot air, sweating profusely. Those who are ill are healed immediately.

古文：九炁台止可煮卵，而此可糜肉。余时寒甚，然穴在崆底甚深，且已过，不及下也。
现代文：我此时冷极了，但是洞穴在普陀峻底下非常深，并且已经走过了头，来不及下去了。
English: I'm very cold now, but the cave is very deep under Putuo, and it's too late to go down.

古文：又南一里，峡乃尽，前散为坞，水乃出崆，而路乃下坡。
现代文：又往南一里，峡谷这才到了头，前方散开成为山坞，水流于是流出普陀峻，而路乃是下坡。
English: A mile further south, the canyon comes to an end, the front spreads out to become a dock, the water then flows out of Putuo, and the road is downhill.

古文：半里抵坞，是为下山口。
现代文：半里后抵达山坞，这里是下山口。
English: Half a mile later, we arrived at the dock. This is the lower mountain pass.

古文：盖崆东之山，即灵应南垂，至是南尽，余脉逊而东，乃南衍为西山湾之脊；崆西之山，南自邓川西逆流而上；中开为南北大坞，而弥苴佉江贯其中焉。
现代文：普陀峻东面的山，就是灵应山的南垂，到这里就是南边的尽头，余脉向东退去，于是南面延伸为西山湾的山脊；普陀峻西面的山，南边从邓川州西面逆流上延；中间辟为南北向的大山坞，而弥直仕江流贯在山坞中。
English: The mountain to the east of Putuo is the south slope of Lingye Mountain, and here is the end of the south side. The remaining veins recede to the east, so the south side extends to the ridge of Xishan Bay; the mountain to the west of Putuo extends upstream from the west side of Dengchuan Prefecture; the middle is a large north-south dock, and the Yanzhi River flows through the dock.

古文：峡口之南，有村当坞，是为邓川州境，于是江两岸垂杨夹堤。
现代文：峡口的南边，有村庄位于山坞中，这里是邓川州的辖境，从这里起，江流两岸下垂的杨柳夹住河堤。
English: On the south side of the mouth of the canyon, there is a village located in a dock. This is the jurisdiction of Dengchuan Prefecture. From here, the drooping willow trees on both sides of the river catch the river bank.

古文：路从东岸行，六里余而抵中所。
现代文：路从东岸行，六里多后到达中所。
English: The road runs from the east bank, and after more than six miles, it reaches the middle.

古文：时衣已湿透，风雨不止，乃觅逆旅，沸汤为饭。
现代文：此时衣服已经湿透，风雨不停，只好找旅店，烧开水做饭。
English: By this time, my clothes were soaking wet and the wind and rain were incessant. I had no choice but to find a hotel and boil water for cooking.

古文：刘君出酒慰寒，遂宿其前楼。
现代文：进村叩拜刘陶石。刘君拿出酒来驱寒，于是住宿在他的前楼上。
English: Entering the village, he bowed to Liu Tao Shi. Liu Jun took out wine to drive away the cold, so he stayed on his front floor.

古文：出杨太史《二十四气歌》相示，书法带赵吴兴，而有媚逸柔媚飘逸之致。
现代文：刘君拿出杨太史的《二十四气歌》给我观看，书法杂带有赵孟顺、吴道子的意趣，而且有妩媚飘逸的风格。
English: Liu Jun took out Yang Taishi's "Twenty-four Air Songs" to show me. The calligraphy has the meaning of Zhao Mengshun and Wu Daozi, and has a charming and elegant style.

