古文：起强圉大渊献十二月，尽昭阳大荒落，凡六年有奇。
现代文：起强圉大渊献十二月，尽昭阳大荒落，凡六年有奇。
English: It's strange that it's been six years since the mighty Taiyuan fell in December and the great desolation of Yangyang began.

古文：玄宗至道大圣大明孝皇帝下之上
现代文：玄宗至道大圣大明孝皇帝下之上
English: Xuanzong Zhi Dao Dao Sheng Da Ming Xiao Emperor

古文：天宝六年丁亥，公元七四七年十二月，己巳，上以仙芝为安西四镇节度使，征灵察入朝，灵察大惧。
现代文：唐玄宗天宝六载十二月，己巳，玄宗任命高仙芝为安西四镇节度使，征夫蒙灵入朝，夫蒙灵十分害怕。
English: In December of the 6th year of Tang Xuan Zong's reign, Xuan Zong appointed Gao Xianzhi as the festival envoy of the four towns in Anxi. He invited Meng Ling to the imperial court. Meng Ling was very afraid.

古文：仙芝见灵察，趋走如故，灵察益惧。
现代文：而高仙芝见到夫蒙灵时，还像过去那样用小步疾走表示恭敬，夫蒙灵愈发恐惧。
English: But when Gao Xianzhi saw her husband Mengling, she still walked with a short step to show respect, as she had done in the past. The husband Mengling became more and more afraid.

古文：副都护京兆程千里、押牙毕思琛及行官王滔等，皆平日构仙芝于灵察者也，仙芝面责千里、思琛曰： 公面虽男子，心如妇人，何也？ 
现代文：副都护京兆程千里、押牙毕思琛与行官王滔等人平常都在夫蒙灵前面进高仙芝的谗言，这时高仙芝当面责骂程千里与毕思琛说： 你们面貌如男人，而心胸狭窄如妇人，这是什么原因呢？ 
English: The vice-governor of the capital, Jingzhao Cheng Qianli, the vice-governor of the capital, Fang Bi Siyu, and the governor Wang Tao, and so on, usually criticized Gao Xianzhi in front of their husbands. At this time, Gao Xianzhi scolded Cheng Qianli and Bi Siyu in person, saying: You look like men, but you are narrow-minded like women. What is the reason for this?

古文：又捽滔等，欲笞之，既而皆释之，谓曰： 吾素所恨于汝者，欲不言，恐汝怀忧；今既言之，则无事矣。 
现代文：又揪住王滔等人想要鞭打他们，但不久就把他们都放了，并说： 我平常就恨你们，本来不想说出来，那是怕你们恐惧忧愁，现在我已经说出来了，你们就不要再放在心上了。 
English: He also grabbed Wang Tao and the others and wanted to whip them, but soon released them all and said, "I usually hate you, I didn't want to say it, it was for fear of your fear and sorrow, but now that I've said it, don't worry about it anymore."

古文：军中乃安。
现代文：于是军府才得以安定。
English: As a result, the military government was stabilized.

古文：初，仙芝为都知兵马使，猗氏人封常清，少孤贫，细瘦颣目，一足偏短，求为仙芝傔，不纳。
现代文：起初，高仙芝任都知兵马使时，猗氏人封常清出身贫穷，年幼时就成为孤儿，身体瘦小，眼睛有毛病，而且跛足。他请求作高仙芝的侍从，高仙芝不要。
English: At the beginning, when Gao Xianzhi was the military commander of the Tudor army, Gao Xianzhi was born poor and became an orphan at a young age. His body was thin and small, his eyes were defective, and he was lame. He asked to be Gao Xianzhi's attendant, but Gao Xianzhi refused.

古文：常清日候仙芝出入，不离其门，凡数十日，仙芝不得已留之。
现代文：封常清就每天在高仙芝的军府门口等候他出入，数十天都不离开，高仙芝没有办法，只好把他留下。
English: Feng Changqing waited for him to come and go at the gate of Gao Xianzhi's military headquarters every day, and did not leave for dozens of days. Gao Xianzhi had no choice but to leave him behind.

古文：会达奚部叛走，夫蒙灵察使仙芝追之，斩获略尽。
现代文：适逢达奚部落反叛，夫蒙灵派高仙芝率兵追击，全部杀获。
English: When the Dahui tribe rebelled, Fu Mengling sent Gao Xianzhi to lead the troops in pursuit, and all of them were killed.

古文：常清私作捷书以示仙芝，皆仙芝心所欲言者，由是一府奇之。
现代文：封常清就私下作了报捷的文书让高仙芝看，文书中所写的正是高仙芝所要说的，从此军府中的人都对封常清另眼相看。
English: Gao Xianzhi was allowed to read the document that Fong Changqing had privately written to report his success. What was written in the document was exactly what Gao Xianzhi wanted to say. From then on, everyone in the military government looked at Fong Changqing with different eyes.

古文：仙芝为节度使，即署常清判官；仙芝出征，常为留后。
现代文：高仙芝被任命为节度使后，即任命封常清为节度判官，每逢高仙芝出战征讨，总是命封常清为留后。
English: After Gao Xianzhi was appointed as the festival envoy, he appointed Feng Changqing as the festival judge. Whenever Gao Xianzhi went out to fight, he always ordered Feng Changqing to stay behind.

古文：仙芝乳母子郑德诠为郎将，仙芝遇之如兄弟，使典家事，威行军中。
现代文：高仙芝奶妈的儿子郑德诠为郎将，高仙芝待他如亲兄弟，使他掌管自己的家事，而且在军中颇有威权。
English: Zheng De, the son of Gao Xianzhi's wet nurse, was interpreted as the son-in-law. Gao Xianzhi treated him like a brother, let him manage his own family affairs, and was quite authoritative in the army.

古文：常清尝出，德诠走马自后突之而过。
现代文：封常清有一次出门，郑德诠从后面跑马冲过封常清的身边。
English: Once, when Fong Changqing went out, Zheng Deyan's horse ran past Fong Changqing from behind.

古文：常清至使院，使召德诠，每过一门，辄阖之，既至，常清离度谓曰： 常清本出寒微，郎将所知。
现代文：封常清到了使院，派人把郑德诠召来，每经过一道门，就让人把门关住，见面后，封常清起来对郑德诠说道： 我本出身低微，这是你所知道的。
English: When Fong Changqing arrived at the embassy, he sent someone to summon Zheng Deyin. Every time a door was passed, the door was closed. After meeting, Fong Changqing stood up and said to Zheng Deyin: I am from a lowly background, as you know.

古文：今日中丞命为留后，郎将何得于众中相陵突！ 
现代文：现在高中丞任命我为留后，你怎么能够在大庭广众之下凌辱我呢！ 
English: Now that the president of the high school has appointed me to stay, how can you humiliate me in front of the public!

古文：因叱之曰： 郎将须暂死以肃军政！ 
现代文：并喝斥他说： 我要立刻把你打死以严肃军纪。 
English: And he shouted at him: "I will immediately beat you to death with strict military discipline."

古文：遂杖之六十，面仆地曳出。
现代文：于是就杖打了郑德诠六十下，郑德诠面朝下倒在地上，然后被拉了出去。
English: So he beat Zheng Deyi with a cane for sixty strokes. Zheng Deyi fell face down on the ground, and was then dragged out.

古文：仙芝妻及乳母于门外叫哭救之，不及，因以状白仙芝。仙芝览之，惊曰： 已死邪？ 
现代文：高仙芝的妻子和奶妈在门外号啕大哭，想要救郑德诠，但已来不及了，他们又把情况告诉了高仙芝，高仙芝看过郑德诠，吃惊地说： 已经死了吗！ 
English: Gao Xianzhi's wife and wet nurse wailed loudly outside the door, trying to save Zheng Deyi, but it was too late, they told Gao Xianzhi the situation again. Gao Xianzhi saw Zheng Deyi and said in surprise: Is he dead?

古文：及见常清，遂不复言，常清亦不之谢。
现代文：等见到封常清时，便不再提起这件事，封常清也不谢罪。
English: When he saw Fong Changqing, he did not bring up the matter again, and Fong Changqing did not apologize.

古文：军中畏之惕息。
现代文：因此军中士卒都十分畏惧封常清。
English: As a result, the army sergeants and soldiers were very afraid of Fu Changqing.

古文：自唐兴以来，边帅皆用忠厚名臣，不久任，不遥领，不兼统，功名著者往往入为宰相。
现代文：从唐朝建立以来，边防将帅用的都是忠厚名臣，不让久任，不让在朝中遥领，不让同时任数职，功名显著的常常入朝为宰相。
English: Since the establishment of the Tang Dynasty, the border guard generals have been loyal and famous courtiers. They are not allowed to serve for a long time, they are not allowed to be a distant leader in the court, and they are not allowed to hold several positions at the same time. Those with significant achievements often enter the court as prime ministers.

古文：其四夷之将，虽才略如阿史那社尔、契苾何力犹不专大将之任，皆以大臣为使以制之。
现代文：四方夷族的将领，虽然才略像阿史那社尔、契何力那样的名将，也不让他们为一方大将，都任命朝中大臣为使职来节制他们。
English: Although the generals of the Shifang barbarians were only slightly like the famous generals such as Ashnasher and Che Ho Li, they did not allow them to be one-sided generals. They all appointed the Minister of the DPRK and China as an envoy to restrain them.

古文：及开元中，天子有吞四夷之志，为边将者十馀年不易，始久任矣；皇子则庆、忠诸王，宰相则萧嵩、牛仙客，始遥领矣；盖嘉运、王忠嗣专制数道，始兼统矣。
现代文：到了开元年间，天子有并吞周边民族的志向，为边将的人十多年都不替换，边将开始久任；皇子中有庆王、忠王等人，宰相中有萧嵩、牛仙客等人，开始遥领边将之职；盖嘉运、王忠嗣等一人节制数道之兵，开始兼职统领军队。
English: By the beginning of the first year of the year, Tianzi had the ambition to annex the surrounding ethnic groups. For more than ten years, there was no replacement for the border generals, and the border generals began to serve for a long time; among the princes, there were Qing Wang, Zhong Wang and others, among the prime ministers, there were Xiao Song, Niu Xianke and others, and they began to lead the border generals; Ge Jiayun, Wang Zhongzhi and others restrained several soldiers and began to lead the army part-time.

古文：李林甫欲杜边帅入相之路，以胡人不知书，乃奏言： 文臣为将，怯当矢石，不若用寒畯胡人；胡人则勇决习战，寒族则孤立无党，陛下诚心恩洽其心，彼必能为朝廷尽死。 
现代文：李林甫想要杜绝边将入朝为宰相的路，因胡人没有文化，就上奏说： 文臣为将帅，怯懦不敢作战，不如用出身低贱从事过农耕的胡人。胡人都勇敢好战，出身低贱而孤立没有党援，陛下如果真能够用恩惠笼络他们，他们一定能够为朝廷尽力死战。 
English: Li Linfu wanted to block the way for the generalissimo to enter the imperial court as the prime minister, because the Hu people had no culture, so he made a report saying: Wensen is a general, cowardly and dare not fight, it is better to use the Hu people who have been engaged in farming from a lowly background. The Hu people are brave and warlike, from a lowly background and isolated without party support, if His Majesty can really entice them with favors, they will certainly be able to fight to the death for the imperial court.

古文：上悦其言，始用安禄山。
现代文：玄宗觉得李林甫的话很有道理，就重用了安禄山。
English: Xuanzong thought that Li Linfu's words were very reasonable, so he made heavy use of Anlu Mountain.

古文：至是，诸道节度使尽用胡人，精兵咸戍北边，天下之势偏重，卒使禄山倾覆天下，皆出于林甫专宠固位之谋也。
现代文：这时，各镇节度使都是用胡人，精兵强将都戍守在北方边疆，形成里轻外重的局面，最后安禄山得以发动叛乱，几乎推翻唐朝的天下，这都是因为李林甫追求专宠和巩固自己地位的阴谋所致。
English: At this time, all the town festivals were held by Hu people, and the best soldiers and generals were stationed in the northern frontier, forming a situation of light and heavy. Finally, Anlu Mountain was able to launch a rebellion and almost overthrow the world of the Tang Dynasty. This was all due to Li Linfu's pursuit of exclusive favor and the conspiracy to consolidate his position.

古文：天宝七年戊子，公元七四八年夏，四月，辛丑，左监门大将军、知内侍省事高力士加骠骑大将军。
现代文：七载夏季，四月辛丑，左监门大将军、知内侍省事高力士加官为骠骑大将军。
English: In the summer of the seventh year, in April, the left guard gate general, the secretary of the province, and the golfer were promoted to the general of the cavalry.

古文：力士承恩岁久，中外畏之。太子亦呼之为兄，诸王公呼之为翁，驸马辈直谓之爷，自李林甫、安禄山辈皆因之以取将相。
现代文：高力士侍候玄宗已有许多年了，深受玄宗赏识，朝野内外都敬畏他，就连太子也称他为兄，诸王公主则称他为翁，驸马辈的称他为爷。李林甫、安禄山都是靠他而被任命为将帅宰相。
English: Koryoshi had been serving Emperor Xuanzong for many years. He was highly appreciated by Emperor Xuanzong and was revered both at home and abroad. Even the crown prince called him elder brother, the princes and princesses called him uncle, and the courtiers called him grandpa. Li Linfu and An Lushan were both appointed as generals and prime ministers thanks to him.

古文：其家富厚不赀。
现代文：他家中十分富有，财产难以计算。
English: His family is so rich that it is difficult to calculate their wealth.

古文：于西京作宝寿寺，寺钟成，力士作斋以庆之，举朝毕集。击钟一杵，施钱百缗，有求媚者至二十杵，少者不减十杵。
现代文：他在西京建宝寿寺，寺钟铸成后，高力士举行斋会庆祝，朝中百官都来与会，击钟一次，施钱一百缗，有故意献媚的一连撞击二十下，少的也不下于十下。
English: He built the Baozhou Temple in West Beijing. After the temple bell was cast, Gao Lixi held a feast to celebrate. Hundreds of officials from all over the country came to attend the meeting. They struck the bell once, gave a hundred baht, and there was a series of twenty strokes, no less than ten, of deliberate flattery.

古文：然性和谨少过，善观时俯仰，不敢骄横，故天子终亲任之，士大夫亦不疾恶也。
现代文：但是高力士性情温和谨慎，少有过错，善于观察时势行事，不敢骄横，所以玄宗始终信任他，士大夫们也不嫉恨他。
English: However, Koryoshi was gentle and prudent, rarely made mistakes, was good at observing the situation and acting, and did not dare to be arrogant. Therefore, Xuanzong always trusted him, and the scholars did not hate him.

古文：五月，壬午，群臣上尊号曰开元天宝圣文神武应道皇帝；赦天下，免百姓来载租庸，择后魏子孙一人为三恪。
现代文：五月壬午，群臣上唐玄宗尊号为开元天宝圣文神武应道皇帝，大赦天下，免去百姓明年的租庸，选择后魏子孙一人为三恪。
English: At noon of May, a group of high-ranking officials of the Tang Dynasty named Emperor Xuanzong as the founder of Tianbao, Shenwen, Shenwu, and Yingdao. He granted amnesty to the whole world, exempted the people from the next year's rent, and selected one descendant of the Wei Dynasty as the third generation.

古文：六月，庚子，赐安禄山铁券。
现代文：六月庚子，赐给安禄山享有特权的铁券。
English: In June, Geng Zi granted Anlu Mountain a privileged iron certificate.

古文：度支郎中兼侍御史杨钊善窥上意所爱恶而迎之，以聚敛骤迁，岁中领十五馀使。
现代文：度支郎中兼侍御史杨钊善于窥伺玄宗的好恶而奉迎他的心意，因为能聚财敛钱而得到破格提拔，一年之中，就一身兼领十五多个使职。
English: Duozhiro middle-ranking official and attendant Shi Yangtao was good at spying on the likes and dislikes of Xuanzong and served his wishes. Because he was able to accumulate wealth and money, he received an unprecedented promotion. In one year, he received more than 15 assignments.

古文：甲辰，迁给事中，兼御史中丞，专判度支事，恩幸日隆。
现代文：甲辰，又被任命为给事中，兼御史中丞，专门掌管度支事，恩宠日盛。
English: Jia Chen, was also appointed to be in charge of affairs, concurrently with the Vice President of History, specifically in charge of government affairs, and was favored by Sun Sheng.

古文：苏冕论曰：设官分职，各有司存。
现代文：苏冕论曰：设立官吏，分别职责，各有自己的责任。
English: The Su Guan Theory says: set up officials, separate duties, each with their own responsibilities.

古文：政有恒而易守，事归本而难失，经远之理，舍此奚据！
现代文：行政制度有常规就容易管理，事情归于根本就难有过失，从经邦治国的长远利益考虑，除此之外，还有什么可以依据的呢！
English: The administrative system is easy to manage if there is a routine, and it is difficult to make mistakes if things are attributed to the root. Considering the long-term interests of state governance, what else can be based on?

古文：洎奸臣广言利以邀恩，多立使以示宠，刻下民以厚敛，张虚数以献状；上心荡而益奢，人望怨而成祸；使天子有司守其位而无其事，爱厚禄而虚其用。
现代文：自从奸臣虚夸财利以求恩宠，皇帝也多立使职以示宠爱，刻剥平民百姓厚敛聚财，广张虚数以奉献于上。从此皇帝心意放荡而生活更加奢侈，人民心怀怨恨而成祸患。以至皇帝和各级官吏尸位素餐，享受厚禄而不负其责。
English: Since the treacherous vassals have been boasting of their wealth and interests in order to gain favor, and the emperor has been showing his favor by taking on more and more duties, robbing the common people of their wealth, and devoting more and more money to the emperor, the emperor has become more and more extravagant, and the people have become more and more resentful. So much so that the emperor and the officials at all levels have been dining on the dead bodies of the dead, enjoying the rich rewards without taking responsibility.

古文：宇文融首唱其端，杨慎矜、王鉷继遵其轨，杨国忠终成其乱。
现代文：宇文融首开此端，杨慎矜与王紧随其后，至杨国忠而终成祸乱。
English: Uwen Rong was the first to do so, followed by Yang Shanyu and Wang, and finally Yang Guozhong.

古文：仲尼云： 宁有盗臣，而无聚敛之臣。 
现代文：孔子曾经说过：宁可有盗臣而不可有聚敛之臣。
English: Confucius once said: "It is better to have a rogue vassal than to have a vassal who gathers together."

古文：诚哉是言！
现代文：此话真是至理名言！
English: This is indeed true.

古文：前车既覆，后辙未改，求达化本，不亦难乎！
现代文：前车已覆，后人不鉴，要想达到教化流行这一根本，不是太难了吗！
English: The previous trend has been reversed, and future generations will not learn from it. If we want to achieve the fundamental goal of enlightenment and popularity, isn't it too difficult?

古文：冬，十月，庚戌，上幸华清宫。
现代文：冬季，十月庚戌，玄宗前往华清宫。
English: In the winter, in October, Xuanzong went to the Huaqing Palace.

古文：十一月，癸未，以贵妃姊适崔氏者为韩国夫人，适裴氏者为虢国夫人，适柳氏者为秦国夫人。
现代文：十一月癸未，玄宗封杨贵妃嫁给崔氏的姐姐为韩国夫人，嫁给裴氏的姐姐为虢国夫人，嫁给柳氏的姐姐为秦国夫人。
English: In November of the same year, Emperor Xuanzong married Yang Guifei to Cui's sister as the wife of Korea, to Pei's sister as the wife of Shandong, and to Liu's sister as the wife of Qin.

古文：三人皆有才色，上呼之为姨，出入宫掖，并承恩泽，势倾天下。
现代文：三夫人都生得貌美色绝，唐玄宗称她们为姨，能够随便出入宫禁，受到玄宗的恩宠，权势无比。
English: All three wives were born with great beauty. Emperor Xuanzong called them aunts, and they were allowed to enter and leave the palace at will. They were favored by Emperor Xuanzong and wielded incomparable power.

古文：每命妇入见，玉真公主等皆让不敢就位。
现代文：每当受有封号的命妇入宫中晋见玄宗时，就是玉真公主等人也要给他们让位。
English: Whenever an empress with a title entered the palace to meet Emperor Xuanzong, even Princess Yuzhen and others had to give way to them.

古文：三姊与銛、锜五家，凡有请托，府县承迎，峻于制敕；四方赂遗，辐凑其门，惟恐居后，朝夕如市。
现代文：三夫人与杨、杨五家，凡是有所要求，府县的官吏立刻承办，执行起来，比皇帝所下的制敕还要严厉。
English: The Third Lady and the Yang and Yang Five Families, whenever they had a request, the prefectural and county officials immediately undertook and implemented it, which was even stricter than the control imposed by the emperor.

古文：十宅诸王及百孙院婚嫁，皆先以钱千缗赂韩、虢使请，无不如志。
现代文：全国各地贿赠的东西，充满屋室，人人都争先恐后地巴结贿赂他们，从早到晚门庭若市。十王宅中的诸王与百孙院中的皇孙有了婚嫁大事，都要用钱一千缗贿赂韩国夫人和虢国夫人，让她们向玄宗求情，结果无不如意。
English: Bribes from all over the country filled the house, everyone was scrambling to curry favor and bribe them, and the door was open from morning to night. When the kings in the Ten Kings' House and the royal grandchildren in the Hundred Grandchildren's Home had a wedding event, they had to bribe the Korean lady and the Shogoku lady with a thousand baht so that they would plead with Hyonjong, and the result was more than satisfactory.

古文：上所赐与及四方献遗，五家如一。
现代文：玄宗赏赐及四方奉献给杨氏五家的物品全都一样。
English: The items given by Xuanzong and donated by the four parties to the five Yang families are all the same.

古文：竞开第舍，极其壮丽，一堂之费，运逾千万；既成，见它人有胜己者，辄毁而改为。
现代文：他们竞相建造宅第，极为壮丽豪华，一间厅堂的耗费常常超过一千万钱。建成以后，如果看见别人所建的超过自己，就毁掉重建。
English: They compete in building mansions of great magnificence and luxury, with a hall often costing more than ten million dollars. Once completed, if they see that others have built more than they have, they destroy and rebuild.

古文：虢国尤为豪荡，一旦，帅工徒突入韦嗣立宅，即撤去旧屋，自为新第，但授韦氏以隙地十亩而已。
现代文：虢国夫人尤其奢侈，有一天早晨，她亲自带领一帮工匠闯入韦嗣立的家中，当即拆掉了他的旧房，在原地为自己建了新的宅第，只将一块十亩大的空地给了韦氏。
English: Mrs. Wei Guo was particularly extravagant. One morning, she personally led a group of craftsmen to break into Wei Zili's home, immediately demolished his old house, built a new house for herself in the same place, and only gave a ten-acre open space to Mr. Wei.

古文：中堂既成，召工圬墁，约钱二百万；复求赏技，虢国以绛罗五百段赏之，嗤而不顾，曰： 请取蝼蚁、蜥蜴，记其数置堂中，苟失一物，不敢受直。 
现代文：中堂建成后，召工匠抹灰铺地，仅此一项就大概花费了二百万缗钱。工匠又要求赏赐技艺钱，虢国夫人就赏了五百段绛红色的绫罗，工匠对此之以鼻，轻蔑地说： 请拿来一些蝼蚁和蜥蜴，记住他们的只数，然后放置在堂中，如果丢失掉一只，我都不敢接受赏物。 
English: After the completion of the middle hall, craftsmen were called to plaster the floor, which alone cost about two million baht. The craftsman also asked for a reward of skill money, and the wife of the country was awarded five hundred red baht. The craftsman sniffed at this and said contemptuously: Please bring some ants and lizards, remember their number, and then place them in the hall. If one is lost, I dare not accept the reward.

古文：十二月，戊戌，或言玄元皇帝降于朝元阁，制改会昌县曰昭应，废新丰入昭应。
现代文：十二月戊戌，有人说玄元皇帝老子降身于华清宫朝元阁，玄宗就下制改会昌县为昭应县，又废新丰县而并入昭应县。
English: At the end of December, some people said that Emperor Xuanzong's son Emperor Xuanzong abdicated at the Imperial Palace of the Qing Dynasty, and Xuanzong changed Chang County to Zhaoying County, and abolished Xinfeng County and merged it into Zhaoying County.

古文：辛酉，上还宫。
现代文：辛酉，玄宗返回宫中。
English: Soon after, Emperor Xuanzong returned to the palace.

古文：哥舒翰筑神威军于青海上，吐蕃至，翰击破之。
现代文：陇右节度使哥舒翰于青海筑神威军城，吐蕃军队来攻，被哥舒翰打败。
English: The right-hand ruler sent Goshukhan to build the military city of Shenwei in Qinghai, and the Tujian army attacked and was defeated by Goshukhan.

古文：又筑城于青海中龙驹岛，谓之应龙城，吐蕃屏迹不敢近青海。
现代文：又在青海中的龙驹岛上筑了应龙城，从此吐蕃军队再也不敢来青海附近侵扰。
English: He also built Yinglong City on Longjing Island in Qinghai. From then on, the Tubo army no longer dared to invade the vicinity of Qinghai.

古文：是岁，云南王归义卒，子阁罗凤嗣，以其子凤迦异为阳瓜州刺史。
现代文：这一年，云南王蒙归义去世，他的儿子阁罗凤继位，玄宗就任命他的儿子凤迦异为阳瓜州刺史。
English: In the same year, King Meng Qiuyi of Yunnan died, and his son Ge Luo Feng succeeded to the throne. Xuanzong then appointed his son Feng Jia Yi as Yangguazhou's crown prince.

古文：天宝八年己丑，公元七四九年春，二月，戊申，引百官观左藏，赐帛有差。
现代文：八载春季，二月戊申，玄宗带领百官参观左藏库，并赏赐给他们数量不同的布帛。
English: In the spring of the eighth year, in February, Xuanzong led a hundred officials to visit the left repository, and gave them a different number of cloth bags.

古文：是时州县殷富，仓库积粟帛，动以万计。
现代文：当时唐朝的州县殷实副有，仓库中所积蓄的粮食布帛数以万计。
English: At that time, the prefectures and counties of the Tang Dynasty were well-stocked, with tens of thousands of grain bales stored in warehouses.

古文：杨钊奏请所在粜变为轻货，及征丁租地税皆变布帛输京师；屡奏帑藏充牣，古今罕俦，故上帅群臣观之，赐钊紫衣金鱼以赏之。
现代文：杨钊又奏请把各地征收的粮食卖出变成钱帛，并把所征收的丁租和地税改变为征收布帛运到京师。杨钊又多次上奏说国库中钱帛充实，古今罕见，所以玄宗带领群臣来观看，并赐杨钊紫衣和金鱼袋以嘉赏他。
English: Yang Xuan also requested that the grain collected from various regions be sold and converted into money, and that the ding rents and land taxes collected be changed into the collection of cloth money and transported to Beijing. Yang Xuan also repeatedly reported that the state treasury was full of money, which was rare in ancient times, so Xuanzong led the courtiers to watch, and gave Yang Xuan a purple robe and a goldfish bag to reward him.

古文：上以国用丰衍，故视金帛如粪壤，赏赐贵宠之家，无有限极。
现代文：玄宗认为国家富有，钱物丰富，所以视金帛如粪土，毫不吝惜，赏赐王公贵族时，常常没有限度。
English: Xuanzong believed that the country was rich and money was plentiful. Therefore, he regarded gold ingots as dung and did not spare them. When he rewarded princes and aristocrats, there was often no limit.

古文：三月，朔方节度等使张齐丘于中受降城西北五百馀里木刺山筑横塞军，以振远军使郑人郭子仪为横塞军使。
现代文：三月，朔方节度等使张齐丘在中受降城西北五百余里的木剌山筑横塞城，并任命振远军使郑县人郭子仪为横塞军使。
English: In March, the Shuo and Fang dynasties ordered Zhang Qiqiu to build a fortified city in Muxinshan, more than five hundred miles northwest of the defeated city of Zhongshan, and appointed Guo Ziyi, a military envoy from Zheng County, as a military envoy to the fortified city.

古文：夏，四月，咸宁太守赵奉璋告李林甫罪二十馀条；状未达，林甫知之，讽御史逮捕，以为妖言，杖杀之。
现代文：夏季，四月，咸宁太守赵奉璋上告李林甫罪行二十余条。状子还未到达京师，李林甫已经得知，就暗中让御史逮捕了赵奉璋，声称所上的是妖言，并杖杀了他。
English: In the summer, in April, Zhao Fengyao, the governor of Xianning, sued Li Linfu for more than 20 crimes. The complaint had not yet reached the Beijing division, and Li Linfu had already learned that he had secretly ordered the imperial historian to arrest Zhao Fengyao, claiming that the complaint was a witchcraft, and killed him with a cane.

古文：先是，折冲府皆有木契、铜鱼，朝廷征发，下敕书、契、鱼，都督、郡府参验皆合，然后遣之。
现代文：先前，府兵制下的折冲府都有木契、铜鱼，朝廷如果要征发府兵，就颁下敕书、木契和铜鱼，经都督府和郡府检验，木契、铜鱼都对合，然后才能发兵。
English: In the past, under the prefectural military system, Entong Prefecture had wood certificates and bronze fish. If the imperial court wanted to conscript prefectural soldiers, it would issue an imperial edict, wood certificates and bronze fish. After inspection by the prefectural governor's office and the county government, the wood certificates and bronze fish would all match before the troops could be dispatched.

古文：自募置彍骑，府兵日益堕坏，死及逃亡者，有司不复点补；其六驮马牛、器械、糗粮，耗散略尽。
现代文：自从招募了骑以后，府兵日益衰落，其中有死的，有跑的，官吏不再清点补充。府兵装备的六驮马牛、武器和干粮也都消耗散尽。
English: Since the recruitment of the cavalry, the provincial soldiers have been declining day by day. Among them, there are dead and runaway soldiers, and the officials no longer count and replenish. The six-horse oxen, weapons and dried grain equipped by the provincial soldiers have also been exhausted.

古文：府兵入宿卫者，谓之侍官，言其为天子侍卫也。
现代文：原来府兵入朝宿卫者被称为侍官，意思是去保卫天子。
English: Originally, the prefectural soldiers who entered the morning inn were called attendants, meaning to defend the heavenly son.

古文：其后本卫多以假人，役使如奴隶，长安人羞之，至以相诟病。
现代文：后来宿卫的府兵多雇人顶替，军官也像奴隶一样役使士兵，以至长安城中的人以做侍官为耻辱，把他们作为戏笑时辱骂的对象。
English: Later, most of the soldiers hired replacements for the guards, and the officers also served the soldiers like slaves, so much so that people in Chang'an City considered it a disgrace to be an attendant, and used them as objects of abuse when joking.

古文：其戍边者，又多为边将苦使，利其死而没其财。
现代文：而被派往边疆戍边的府兵也多被边将当做苦力役使，为的是这些府兵死后边将可以吞掉他们的财产。
English: And the soldiers sent to the border regions were mostly treated as coolies by the generals, so that the generals could swallow up their property after their death.

古文：由是应为府兵者皆逃匿，至是无兵可交。
现代文：所以那些应该当府兵的人纷纷逃亡，这时各折冲府已没有兵员可交。
English: As a result, those who were supposed to be soldiers fled one after another, and by this time there were no more soldiers to hand over to the government.

古文：五月，癸酉，李林甫奏停折冲府上下鱼书；是后府兵徒有官吏而已。
现代文：五月癸酉，李林甫奏请停止折冲府上下的铜鱼和敕书，从此府兵只保留原来的官吏。
English: On the first day of May, Li Linfu requested that the bronze fish and the imperial seal be stopped from rushing up and down the capital. From then on, only the original officials remained in the capital.

古文：其折冲、果毅，又历年不迁，士大夫亦耻为之。
现代文：又因为府兵的折冲都尉和果毅都尉多年得不到升迁，士大夫们都以做这类官为耻辱。
English: In addition, because Captain Orichon and Captain Guo Yi of the provincial soldiers have not been promoted for many years, the officers are ashamed to be such officers.

古文：其彍骑之法，天宝以后，稍亦变废，应募者皆市井负贩、无赖子弟，未尝习兵。
现代文：招募骑的办法，从天宝年间以后，也逐渐变化，并被荒废，应募的人都是一些市中商贩和刁猾之辈，未经过严格的训练。
English: The method of recruiting riders also gradually changed after the Tenpo era and was abandoned. The people who were recruited were merchants and cunning people in the city who had not undergone strict training.

古文：时承平日久，议者多谓中国兵可销，于是民间挟兵器者有禁；子弟为武官，父兄摈不齿。
现代文：当时天下太平日久，大多数人都认为中国可以裁掉军队，因此在民间禁止私人携带兵器，子弟做武官的，父母兄弟都瞧不起他们。
English: At that time, the country had been at peace for a long time, and most people thought that China could cut down the army. Therefore, it was forbidden for civilians to carry weapons. If their children were military attachés, their parents and brothers looked down on them.

古文：猛将精兵，皆聚于西北边，中国无武备矣。
现代文：唐朝的猛将精兵都聚集在西北方，而国内空虚，没有任何武备。
English: The Tang Dynasty's fierce elite soldiers were all gathered in the northwest, and the country was empty, without any armament.

古文：太白山人李浑等上言见神人，言金星洞有玉板石记圣主福寿之符；命御史中丞王鉷入仙游谷求而获之。
现代文：太白山人李浑等人上言说看见了神人，神人说金星洞中有玉板石记载圣主福寿的符命，玄宗就派御史中丞王往仙游谷去搜寻，果然找到了。
English: Li Hun and others from the Taibai Mountains claimed to have seen the godman, and the godman said that there was a jade tablet in the Venus Cave that recorded the fate of the patron saint, Fu Shou. Xuanzong then sent the historian, Zhongzheng Wang, to search for him in the Valley of Immortals, and he was indeed found.

古文：上以符瑞相继，皆祖宗休烈，六月，戊申，上圣祖号曰大道玄元皇帝，上高祖谥曰神尧大圣皇帝，大宗谥曰文武大圣皇帝，高宗谥曰天皇大圣皇帝，中宗谥曰孝和大圣皇帝，睿宗谥曰玄真大圣皇帝，窦太后以下皆加谥曰顺圣皇后。
现代文：玄宗认为不断出现的这些吉祥征兆，都是因为祖先的福禄和威烈，六月戊申，上圣祖老子号为大道玄元皇帝，上高祖李渊谥号为神尧大圣皇帝，太宗李世民谥号为文武大圣皇帝，高宗李治谥号为天皇大圣皇帝，中宗李显谥号为孝和大圣皇帝，睿宗李旦谥号为玄真大圣皇帝，高祖窦太后以下的皇后都加谥号为顺圣皇后。
English: Emperor Xuanzong believed that these constantly appearing auspicious signs were all due to the fortune and power of his ancestors. In June, Emperor Xuanzong was given the title of Shang Shenzu Laozi, Emperor Dao Xuan Yuan, Emperor Gaozong Li Yuanqi was given the title of Shenzhu Daxing Emperor, Emperor Taizong Li Shimin was given the title of Wenwu Daxing Emperor, Emperor Gaozong Li Zhiqi was given the title of Emperor Daxing Emperor, Emperor Zhongzong Li Xianqi was given the title of Xiao and Daxing Emperor, Emperor Ruizong Li Danqi was given the title of Xuanzhen Daxing Emperor

古文：辛亥，刑部尚书、京兆尹萧炅坐赃左迁汝阴太守。
现代文：辛亥，刑部尚书、京兆尹萧炅因为贪污钱财，被贬为汝阴太守。
English: Xinhai, Shang Shu of the Criminal Investigation Department, and Jing Zhao, Yin Xiaoqi, were demoted to the position of Ruyin Daju for embezzling money and property.

古文：上命陇右节度使哥舒翰帅陇右、河西及突厥阿布思兵，益以朔方、河东兵，凡六万三千，攻吐蕃石堡城。其城三面险绝，惟一径可上，吐蕃但以数百人守之，多贮粮食，积檑木及石，唐兵前后屡攻之，不能克。
现代文：玄宗命令陇右节度使哥舒翰率领陇右、河西及突厥阿布思兵，再加上朔方、河东兵，共计六万三千人，去攻打吐蕃石堡城，石堡城三面临险，只有一条道路可上，吐蕃只有数百人守卫，贮藏了大量粮食，又堆积檑木和石块，唐朝军队多次攻击都遭到失败。
English: Xuanzong ordered Zhu Yu Jiedu to send Guo Shuhang, who led the troops from Zhu Yu, Hexi and the Turkish Abu Si, together with the troops from Shuo and Hedong, a total of 63,000 soldiers, to attack the Tujiaokou Fortress. The fortress was in danger, there was only one road to go up, only a few hundred people were guarding Tujiaokou, a large amount of grain was stored, and there was a pile of logs and stones. The Tang Dynasty army failed in many attacks.

古文：翰进攻数日不拔，召裨将高秀岩、张守瑜，欲斩之，二人请三日期可克；如期拔之，获吐蕃铁刃悉诺罗等四百人，唐士卒死者数万，果如王忠嗣之言。
现代文：哥舒翰率军进攻了数天，仍然不能攻克，于是就召来副将高秀岩和张守瑜，要杀掉他们，二人请求宽限三天，声称一定攻克。三天后果然攻下了石堡城，俘虏了吐蕃将领铁刃悉诺罗等四百人，而唐朝的士卒死了数万，果然像王忠嗣所说的那样。
English: Goshukhan led the army to attack for several days, but still could not conquer the city, so he summoned Vice Generals Gao Xiuyan and Zhang Shouyu to kill them. The two requested a three-day grace period, claiming that they would definitely conquer the city. Three days later, they conquered Shibao City, captured four hundred people such as the Tubo general Tie Bian Si Noro, and tens of thousands of Tang Dynasty taxi drivers died, as Wang Zhongzhi said.

古文：顷之，翰又遣兵于赤岭西开屯田，以谪卒二千戍龙驹岛；冬冰合，吐蕃大集，戍者尽没。
现代文：不久，哥舒翰又派人于赤岭西部开垦屯田，并派遣了二千犯罪充军的士卒去守卫龙驹岛。冬天结冰封冻以后，吐蕃大军来攻，将守卫的士卒全部消灭。
English: Soon after, Goshukhan sent another force to establish a garrison in the western part of Akhaling, and dispatched two thousand criminals to guard the island. After it was frozen over in winter, the Tuvan army attacked and wiped out all the soldiers.

古文：闰月，乙丑，以石堡城为神武军，又于剑南西山索磨川置保宁都护府。
现代文：闰月乙丑，唐朝在石堡城设置神武军，又于剑南西山索磨川设置保宁都护府。
English: On the second day of the leap month, the Tang Dynasty set up the Shenwu Army in Shibao Castle, and also set up the Boryeong Capital Protectorate in Soma River, the western mountain of Jianan.

古文：丙寅，上谒太清宫。
现代文：丙寅，玄宗朝谒太清宫。
English: Cui Yin, Emperor Xuanzong of the Tang Dynasty, at the Taiqing Palace.

古文：丁卯，群臣上尊号曰开元天地大宝圣文神武应道皇帝，赦天下。
现代文：丁卯，群臣上玄宗尊号为开元天地大宝圣文神武应道皇帝，大赦天下。
English: Dingwu, a group of courtiers ascended to the throne of Emperor Xuanzong, who was known as the great treasure of heaven and earth, the holy text, the god of war, and the emperor, and was pardoned by the world.

古文：禘、祫自今于太清宫圣祖前设位序正。
现代文：从今以后，进行、两种祭祀时，在太清宫圣祖老子前按顺序设置神位。
English: From now on, when performing the two kinds of religious rites, the deities will be set up in order in front of the Taiqing Palace Holy Ancestor.

古文：秋，七月，册突骑施移拨为十姓可汗。
现代文：秋季，七月，唐朝册封突骑施移拨为十姓可汗。
English: In the autumn, in July, the Tang Dynasty issued the imperial edict of "Ten Surnames of the Khans."

古文：八月，乙亥，护蜜王罗真檀入朝，请留宿卫；许之，拜左武卫将军。
现代文：八月乙亥，护密王罗真檀入朝，并请求留下来为朝廷宿卫，玄宗答应他的要求，并拜他为左武卫将军。
English: In August of Yihai, Luo Zhendan, the guardian of the imperial secrets, entered the imperial court, and asked to stay on as the imperial bodyguard. Xuanzong agreed to his request, and worshiped him as the General of the Left Division.

古文：冬，十月，乙丑，上幸华清宫。
现代文：冬季，十月乙丑，玄宗前往华清宫。
English: In the winter, in the second month of October, Xuanzong went to Huaqing Palace.

古文：十一月，乙未，吐火罗叶护失里怛伽罗遣使表称： 朅师王亲附吐蕃，因苦小勃律镇军，阻其粮道。
现代文：十一月乙未，吐火罗叶护失里怛伽罗派遣使者上表说： 师王依附于叶蕃，故意困扰小勃律镇兵，断绝了他们的粮道。
English: In November of the second month of the second month, Tu Huo Luo Ye sent an envoy to Lijia Luo, saying: "Shi Wang has attached himself to Ye Luo, deliberately harassed Xiao Bo Luo's soldiers, and cut off their food supply.

古文：臣思破凶徒，望发安西兵，以来岁正月至小勃律，六月至大勃律。 
现代文：我想要打败师军队，希望能够发安西镇兵来助战，明年正月到小勃律，六月到大勃律。 
English: I want to defeat the division army, and I hope to be able to send soldiers from Anxi Town to assist in the war, to Xiao Borui in the first month of next year, and to Daya Borui in June.

古文：上许之。
现代文：玄宗同意。
English: Emperor Jing agreed with this opinion.

古文：天宝九年庚寅，公元七五零年
现代文：九载春季，正月己亥，玄宗返回宫中。
English: In the spring of the ninth year, in the first month of Ji Hai, Xuanzong returned to the palace.

古文：春，正月，己亥，上还宫。
现代文：群臣多次上表请玄宗到西岳华山筑坛祭天，玄宗同意。
English: The group of courtiers repeatedly asked Xuanzong to go to the Temple of Heaven on West Mount Huashan, and Xuanzong agreed.

古文：群臣屡表请封西岳，许之。
现代文：二月，杨贵妃又因为触怒了玄宗，被送回杨家。
English: In February, Yang Guifei was sent back to the Yang family because she had angered Xuanzong.

古文：二月，杨贵妃复忤旨，送归私第。户部郎中吉温因宦官言于上曰： 妇人识虑不远，违忤圣心，陛下何爱宫中一席之地，不使之就死，岂忍辱之于外舍邪？ 
现代文：这时户部郎中吉温让宦官对玄宗说： 杨贵妃作为妇道人家，见识短浅，违背了圣上的心意，但陛下为何要爱惜宫中一席之地，不让她死在宫中，而要让她在宫外丢陛下的人呢？ 
English: At this time, the eunuch told Emperor Xuanzong: Yang Guifei, as a woman, was short-sighted and violated the sacred intention, but why did His Majesty want to cherish a place in the palace, not letting her die in the palace, but letting her lose His Majesty's people outside the palace?

古文：上亦悔之，遣中使赐以御膳。
现代文：玄宗听后，十分后悔，就派宦官把自己吃的饭赐给贵妃。
English: After listening to this, Xuanzong felt very regretful, so he sent a eunuch to give the meal he had eaten to the noblewoman.

古文：妃对使者涕泣曰： 妾罪当死，陛下幸不杀而归之。
现代文：杨贵妃十分感动，痛哭流涕地对宦官说： 我得罪了陛下，罪该万死，而陛下宽宏大量不杀我，还让我回家。
English: Yang Guifei was deeply moved and said to the eunuch with tears streaming down her face: "I have offended Your Majesty, a crime worthy of death, and Your Majesty was magnanimous enough not to kill me and let me go home.

古文：今当永离掖庭，金玉珍玩，皆陛下所赐，不足为献，惟发者父母所与，敢以荐诚。 
现代文：现在要永远离开宫中，不得与陛下相见，金玉等珍宝玩物，都是陛下赐给我的，难以献给陛下，只有头发是父母所给与我的，把它献给陛下以表示我的诚心。 
English: Now I have to leave the palace forever, and I am not allowed to meet His Majesty. His Majesty has given me precious things such as gold and jade, which are difficult to give to His Majesty. Only my hair was given to me by my parents, and I gave it to His Majesty to show my sincerity.

古文：乃剪发一缭而献之。
现代文：于是就剪下一撮自己的头发让人献给玄宗。
English: So he had a clump of his own hair cut off and dedicated it to Xuanzong.

古文：上遽使高力士召还，宠待益深。
现代文：玄宗见后立刻派高力士把杨贵妃召回宫中，从此更加宠爱。
English: After the meeting, Emperor Xuanzong immediately sent Gao Lixi to call Yang Guifei back to the palace, and she became even more beloved.

古文：时诸贵戚竞以进食相尚，上命宦官姚思艺为检校进食使，水陆珍羞数千盘，一盘费中人十家之产。
现代文：当时王公贵族、皇亲国戚都竞相向玄宗进献食物，玄宗就任命宦官姚思艺为检校进食使，所进献的水中和陆地上所产的美味佳肴有数千盘，一盘的费用就等于中等人家十户的财产。
English: At that time, the princes and aristocrats, the relatives of the emperor and the country all competed to donate food to Xuanzong. Xuanzong appointed the eunuch Yao Siyi as the school inspection eating envoy. The delicious dishes produced in water and on land that were donated were thousands of plates, and the cost of one plate was equal to the property of ten average households.

古文：中书舍人窦华尝退朝，值公主进食，列于中衢，传呼按辔出其间，宫苑小儿数百奋梃于前，华仅以身免。
现代文：中书舍人窦华有一次退朝，正遇上公主进献食物，列队于街中央，传呼骑马的人，出入其间，数百名宫苑小儿举着棍棒走在前面，窦华差一点挨了他们的打。
English: Once, Dou Hua, a scholar of the Chinese classics, was retreating to the palace when he met a princess coming to offer food. They were lined up in the middle of the street, calling out to people on horseback. As they went in and out, hundreds of palace children were walking in front of them, holding sticks. Dou Hua was almost beaten by them.

古文：安西节度使高仙芝破朅师，虏其王勃特没。
现代文：安西节度使高仙芝打败了师军队，俘虏了师王勃特没。
English: The Anxi Festival enabled Gao Xianzhi to defeat the division army and capture the division king Botero.

古文：三月，庚子，立勃特没之兄素迦为朅师王。
现代文：三月庚子，唐朝立勃特没的哥哥素迦为师王。
English: In March, Geng Zi, the Tang Dynasty appointed Botero's deceased brother, Suga, as the king.

古文：上命御史大夫王鉷凿华山路，设坛场于其上。
现代文：玄宗命令御史大夫王开凿上华山的道路，于山顶上设置祭坛场。这年春天，关中大旱。
English: Emperor Xuanzong ordered the Grand Historian Wang to dig a road up Mount Hua and set up an altar on the top of the mountain. In the spring of this year, Guanzhong suffered a severe drought.

古文：是春，关中旱，辛亥，岳祠灾；制罢封西岳。
现代文：辛亥，华山上的西岳祠遭受火灾，玄宗下制书取消在西岳祭天的打算。
English: In Xinhai, Xiyue Ancestral Hall on Huashan suffered a fire, and Xuanzong cancelled the plan to hold the festival on Xiyue.

古文：夏，四月，己巳，御史中丞宋浑坐赃巨万，流潮阳。
现代文：夏季，四月己巳，御史大夫宋浑因为贪污巨额钱财，被流放到潮阳。
English: In the summer, in April, Dr. Song Hun was exiled to Chaoyang for embezzling a huge amount of money.

古文：初，吉温因李林甫得进；及兵部侍郎兼御史中丞杨钊恩遇浸深，温遂去林甫而附之，为钊画代林甫执政之策。
现代文：先前，吉温因为李林甫的提拔而受到重用，后来兵部侍郎兼御史中丞杨钊逐渐受到唐玄宗的器重，吉温就背叛李林甫而投向杨钊，又为杨钊谋划取代李林甫的计策。
English: Previously, Jiwen had been promoted by Li Linfu. Later, Yang Xuan, the attendant of the military department and the vice-president of the history department, gradually came under the influence of Tang Xuan Zong. Jiwen betrayed Li Linfu and joined Yang Xuan. He also planned a strategy for Yang Xuan to replace Li Linfu.

古文：萧炅及浑，皆林甫所厚也，求得其罪，使钊奏而逐之，以剪其心腹，林甫不能救也。
现代文：萧炅与宋浑都是李林甫的亲信，所以吉温就专门寻求他们的罪证，让杨钊上奏玄宗赶走他们，以翦除李林甫的心腹，李林甫也无法相救。
English: Xiao Yao and Song Hun were both close confidants of Li Linfu, so Ji Wen Rong specifically sought evidence of their crimes, and had Yang Yao Shangsoo Xuan Zong drive them away in order to remove Li Linfu's henchmen. Li Linfu could not save himself.

古文：五月，乙卯，赐安禄山爵东平郡王。
现代文：五月乙卯，玄宗赐安禄山东平郡王爵位。
English: In May, Emperor Xuanzong bestowed the title of Prince of Dongping County on Anlu.

古文：唐将帅封王自此始。
现代文：这是唐朝的将帅首次封王。
English: This was the first time that a general of the Tang Dynasty was crowned king.

古文：秋，七月，乙亥，置广文馆于国子监，以教诸生习进士者。
现代文：秋季，七月乙亥，于国子监中设置广文馆，教授国子监考进士的学生。
English: In the autumn, in July, the Guangwen Hall was set up in the Guozihuan Middle School to teach the students of the Guozihuan Examination.

古文：八月，丁巳，以安禄山兼河北道采访处置使。
现代文：八月丁巳，玄宗任命安禄山兼河北道采访处置使。
English: In August, Emperor Xuanzong appointed An Lushan and the Hebei Provincial Interrogation and Disposition Envoy.

古文：朔方节度使张齐丘给粮失宜，军士怒，殴其判官；兵马使郭子仪以身捍齐丘，乃得免。
现代文：因朔方节度使张齐丘给军士发放军粮不公平，军士大怒，殴打了他的判官。兵马使郭子仪用身体挡在张齐丘的前面，张齐丘才没有挨打。
English: Zhang Qiqiu was unfairly made to hand out military rations to the sergeant because of the military holiday. The sergeant was furious and beat up his judge. The soldiers and horses made Guo Ziyi block Zhang Qiqiu's way with her body, but Zhang Qiqiu was not beaten.

古文：癸亥，齐丘左迁济阴太守，以河西节度使安思顺权知朔方节度事。
现代文：癸亥，张齐丘被降官为济阴太守，朝廷任命河西节度使安思顺暂时代理朔方节度使。
English: In the Heian period, Zhang Qiqiu was demoted to the position of Jiyin Daju, and the imperial court appointed An Sishun as the Hexi festival envoy and Li Shuo as the Fang festival envoy.

古文：辛卯，处士崔昌上言： 国家宜承周、汉，以土代火；周、隋皆闰位，不当以其子孙为二王後。 
现代文：辛卯，隐士崔昌上言说： 我们唐朝应该继承周朝与汉朝，用土德代替火德。而北周与隋朝都不是正统的王朝，不应该用他们的子孙后代为二王后。 
English: Xinwu, the hermit Cui Chang said: Our Tang Dynasty should inherit the Zhou Dynasty and the Han Dynasty, and replace the fire virtue with the earth virtue. And the Northern Zhou Dynasty and the Sui Dynasty are not orthodox dynasties, and their descendants should not be used as the two queens.

古文：事下公卿集议。
现代文：玄宗让公卿们议论此事。
English: Xuanzong let the nobles discuss the matter.

古文：集贤院学士卫包上言： 集议之夜，四星聚于尾，天意昭然。 
现代文：集贤殿学士卫包上言说： 公卿们讨论此事的那天夜里，四象星聚集于二十八宿之一的尾宿，天意已经很清楚了。 
English: "On the night when the court nobles were discussing this matter, the four elephant stars gathered at the end of one of the twenty-eight quarters. The will of heaven was already clear.

古文：上乃命求殷、周、汉後为三恪，废韩、介、巂公；以昌为左赞善大夫，包为虞部员外郎。
现代文：于是唐玄宗命令寻求商朝、周朝和汉朝的后代为三恪，废掉了北魏的后代韩公、后周的后代介公和隋朝的后代公。又任命崔昌为左赞善大夫，卫包为虞部员外郎。
English: As a result, Emperor Xuanzong of the Tang Dynasty ordered that the descendants of the Shang, Zhou and Han dynasties should be sought for three generations, abolishing the descendants of the Northern Wei Dynasty, Han Gong, the descendants of the Later Zhou Dynasty, Jie Gong, and the descendants of the Sui Dynasty. He also appointed Cui Chang as Zuo Zanzhong Doctor, and Wei Bao as the Foreign Minister of the State Council.

古文：冬，十月，庚申，上幸华清宫。
现代文：冬季，十月庚申，唐玄宗前往华清宫。
English: In the winter, in October, Emperor Gaoshen and Emperor Xuanzong went to the Huaqing Palace.

古文：太白山人王玄翼上言见玄元皇帝，言宝仙洞有妙宝真符。
现代文：太白山人王玄翼上言说看见了玄元皇帝老子，并对他说宝仙洞中有妙宝真符。
English: The Taibai Mountain man Wang Xuan Ying said that he saw Emperor Xuan Yuan's son Laozi and told him that there was a miraculous treasure in Baoshen Cave.

古文：命刑部尚书张均等往求，得之。
现代文：于是唐玄宗就命令刑部尚书张均等去搜寻，果然搜得。
English: As a result, Tang Xuan Zong ordered the Criminal Investigation Department to search for Shang Shuzhang evenly, and it was found.

古文：时上尊道教，慕长生，故所在争言符瑞，群臣表贺无虚月。
现代文：当时玄宗尊奉道教，羡慕长生不死之术，所以各地的人竞相奉献吉祥的符命，群臣也不断地上表恭贺。
English: At that time, Xuanzong worshipped Taoism and was envious of the art of immortality, so people from all over the country competed to offer auspicious life charms, and the courtiers also constantly congratulated each other.

古文：李林甫等皆请舍宅为观以祝圣寿，上悦。
现代文：李林甫等人都请求捐舍宅第为道观，借以祝福玄宗万寿无疆，玄宗十分喜悦。
English: Li Linfu and others all asked for donations of houses and apartments for Taoism, to bless Xuanzong with eternal life without borders. Xuanzong was very pleased.

古文：安禄山屡诱奚、契丹，为设会，饮以莨菪酒，醉而坑之，动数千人，函其酋长之首以献，前后数四。
现代文：安禄山多次引诱奚人和契丹人，假装设宴招待他们，让他们饮用毒草莨菪浸泡过的酒，等醉倒后，就把他们活埋，一次常常达数千人，然后把他们酋长的头颅装进盒子中，献给朝廷，前后有许多次。
English: Mount Anlu repeatedly lured the Xiongnu and Khitan people, inviting them to feigned feasts, making them drink wine soaked in poisonous herbs, and when they got drunk, they buried them alive, often thousands of people at a time, and then packed the heads of their chiefs into boxes and presented them to the court, many times back and forth.

古文：至是请入朝，上命有司先为起第于昭应。
现代文：这时安禄山请求入朝，玄宗命令有关官员先在昭应县为安禄山建起宅第。
English: At this time, Anlu Mountain requested to enter the imperial court, and Emperor Xuanzong ordered the relevant officials to first build a residence for Anlu Mountain in Zhaoying County.

古文：禄山至戏水，杨钊兄弟姊妹皆往迎之，冠盖蔽野；上自幸望春宫以待之。
现代文：安禄山到了戏水，杨钊兄弟姐妹都去迎接，迎接的队伍浩浩荡荡，以至车盖似乎遮满了原野。玄宗也来到望春宫等待安禄山。
English: When Anlu Mountain arrived at Sheung Shui, Yang Hui's brothers and sisters all went to meet it. The welcoming procession was so large that the car cover seemed to cover the plain. Xuanzong also came to Wangchun Palace to wait for Anlu Mountain.

古文：辛未，禄山献奚俘八千人，上命考课之日书上上考。
现代文：辛未，安禄山献上奚族俘虏八千人，玄宗命令考察官吏政绩时为安禄山记最高一级的上上考。
English: In Xinwei, Anlu Mountain presented eight thousand prisoners of the Yi people, and when Xuanzong ordered to inspect the performance of government officials, it was the highest level of Anlu Mountain record.

古文：前此听禄山于上谷铸钱五垆，禄山乃献钱样千缗。
现代文：以前玄宗允许安禄山于上谷起五炉铸造钱币，这时安禄山献上所铸钱的样品一千缗。
English: In the past, Emperor Xuanzong allowed Anlu Mountain to mint coins in five furnaces in the upper valley. At this time, Anlu Mountain presented a sample of the minted money of one thousand baht.

古文：杨钊，张易之之甥也，奏乞昭雪易之兄弟。
现代文：杨钊是张易之的外甥，上奏玄宗为张易之兄弟平反昭雪。
English: Yang Xuan is Zhang Yi's nephew, and Xuanzong is the brother of Zhang Yi's brother, Pingfan Zhaoxue.

古文：庚辰，制引易之兄弟迎中宗于房陵之功，复其官爵，仍赐一子官。
现代文：庚辰，玄宗下制书援引张易之兄弟曾经在房陵迎接中宗为帝的功劳，恢复他们的官爵，并赐一个儿子为官。
English: Geng Chen, a book publisher under Emperor Xuanzong, quoted Zhang Yi's brothers as having received the merit of Emperor Zhongzong in the mausoleum, restored their official titles, and given a son as an official.

古文：钊以图谶有 金刀 ，请更名；上赐名国忠。
现代文：杨钊认为预卜吉凶的图谶中有 金刀 二字，不吉利，请改自己的名，玄宗赐名为国忠。
English: Yang Xuan thought that there was a golden sword in the fortunetelling picture, which was unlucky. Please change your name. Xuanzong gave you the name Guozhong.

古文：十二月，乙亥，上还宫。
现代文：十二月乙亥，玄宗返回宫中。
English: In December, Emperor Xuanzong returned to the palace.

古文：关西游弈使王难得击吐蕃，克五桥，拔树敦城，以难得为白水军使。
现代文：关西游弈使王难得率兵攻打吐蕃，攻克了五桥和树敦城，朝廷任命他为白水军使。
English: The Kansai Game made it possible for Wang to lead his troops to attack Tujing, and he conquered Wuhiao and Shudong. The imperial court appointed him as the White Water Envoy.

古文：安西四镇节度使高仙芝伪与石国约和，引兵袭之，虏其王及部众以归，悉杀其老弱。
现代文：安西四镇节度使高仙芝假意与石国约和，率兵袭击了石国，俘虏了石国的国王和民众返回，然后把其中的老弱病残者全部杀掉。
English: The Anxi Four Towns Festival made Gao Xianzhi pretend to make peace with Shikoku. He led an army to attack Shikoku, captured the king and people of Shikoku, and then killed all the old, weak and sick people.

古文：仙芝性贪，掠得瑟瑟十馀斛，黄金五六橐驼，其馀口马杂货称是，皆入其家。
现代文：高仙芝本性贪婪，掠夺了碧珠十余斛，黄金五六骆驼，其他的马匹杂货等不计其数，全部拿回家中，据为己有。
English: Gao Xianzhi was greedy by nature. He plundered more than ten pieces of jasper, five or six camels of gold, and countless other horses and miscellaneous goods. He took everything home and kept it for himself.

古文：杨国忠德鲜于仲通，荐为剑南节度使。
现代文：杨国忠因为感激鲜于仲通，就推荐他为剑南节度使。
English: Yang Guozhong, because he was so grateful to Zhongtong, recommended him as the Jianan Festival envoy.

古文：仲通性褊急，失蛮夷心。
现代文：而鲜于仲通性情急躁，不会安抚，失掉了蛮夷人心。
English: On the other hand, it is rare for a mediator to be impatient, unable to placate, and lose the hearts of the barbarians.

古文：故事，南诏常与妻子俱谒都督，过云南，云南太守张虔陀皆私之。
现代文：按照过去的惯例，南诏王要经常带着妻子一起晋见都督，经过云南，云南太守张虔陀每次都要奸污他们的妻子。
English: According to the past practice, the Nanzhao king would often take his wife to meet the governor-general, and after passing through Yunnan, the Yunnan governor Zhang Qindu would rape their wives every time.

古文：又多所征求，南诏王阁罗凤不应，虔陀遣人詈辱之，仍密奏其罪。
现代文：又要求征送财物，南诏王罗凤不答应，张虔陀就派人辱骂他，还暗中向朝廷奏报他的罪行。
English: He also demanded the collection of property, but the Nanzhao king Luo Feng did not agree, so Zhang Qindu sent someone to abuse him, and secretly reported his crime to the imperial court.

古文：阁罗凤忿怨，是岁，发兵反，攻陷云南，杀虔陀，取夷州三十二。
现代文：罗凤十分愤恨，这一年，发兵反叛，攻陷了云南郡，杀死了张虔陀，并攻占了原来归附于唐朝的西南夷的三十二个州。
English: Luo Feng was very angry. In this year, he rebelled and invaded Yunnan County, killed Zhang Xindu, and occupied the thirty-two prefectures of Southwest Yunnan that were originally attached to the Tang Dynasty.

古文：天宝十年辛卯，公元七五一年
现代文：十载春季，正月壬辰，玄宗向太清宫进献祭品。癸巳，向太庙献食。
English: In the spring of the tenth year, in the first month of Imjin, Xuanzong went to the Taiqing Palace to offer sacrifices.

古文：春，正月，壬辰，上朝献太清宫；癸巳，朝享太庙；甲子，合祀天地于南郊，赦天下，免天下今载地税。
现代文：甲子，合祭天地于南郊，并大赦天下，免除天下百姓今年的地税。
English: At the same time, the Heaven and Earth Festival will be held in the southern suburbs, and the world will be amnestied, and the people of the world will be exempted from this year's land tax.

古文：丁酉，命李林甫遥领朔方节度使，以户部侍郎李知留后事。
现代文：丁酉，玄宗任命李林甫兼任朔方节度使，而让户部侍郎李知留后事。
English: According to Ding Xi, Emperor Xuanzong appointed Li Linfu to concurrently serve as the regent of the Shuo side, and let the household servant Li Zhiru stay behind.

古文：庚子，杨氏五宅夜游，与广平公主从者争西市门，杨氏奴挥鞭及公主衣，公主坠马，驸马程昌裔下扶之，亦被数鞭。
现代文：庚子，杨氏五家因为夜里游览，与广平公主的侍从争过西市门，杨氏的家奴挥鞭打中公主的衣服，公主从马上坠落下来，驸马程昌裔下马扶广平公主，也被鞭打了几下。
English: Geng Zi, the five families of the Yang family, because of the night tour, fought with the attendants of Princess Guangping over the West City Gate. The slaves of the Yang family whipped the clothes of the princess, the princess fell down from the horse, and the Chengchang descendant dismounted to help Princess Guangping, and was also whipped a few times.

古文：公主泣诉于上，上为之杖杀杨氏奴。
现代文：广平公主向玄宗哭诉此事，玄宗命令杖杀杨氏的家奴。
English: Princess Guangping cried out to Xuanzong about the matter, and Xuanzong ordered the scepter to kill the Yang family slave.

古文：明日，免昌裔官，不听朝谒。
现代文：第二天，又免掉了驸马程昌裔的官职，不充许他再来朝见。
English: The next day, he also removed the official position of Gongma Chengchang, and did not allow him to come to the court again.

古文：上命有司为安禄山起第于亲仁坊，敕令但穷壮丽，不限财力。
现代文：其中有帖白檀香木床两个，都是长一丈，宽六尺；用银平脱工艺制成的屏风，长宽一丈六尺。
English: Among them, there are two white sandalwood beds, both of which are one meter long and six meters wide; a screen made of silver-plating process, one meter long and six meters wide.

古文：既成，具幄帟器皿，充牣其中，有贴白檀床二，皆长丈，阔六尺；银平脱屏风，帐一方一丈八尺；于厨厩之物皆饰以金银，金饭罂二，银淘盆二，皆受五斗，织银丝筐及笊篱各一；他物称是。
现代文：厨房和马厩中所用的物品也都用金银装饰，其中有金饭罂两个，银淘盆两个，都能装五斗粮，还有织银丝筐和笊篱各一个。
English: The items used in the kitchen and stables were also decorated with gold and silver, including two gold rice cookers, two silver trowels, which can hold five buckets of grain, as well as a woven silver basket and a hedge.

古文：虽禁中服御之物，殆不及也。
现代文：其他器物还有许多。就是宫禁中皇上所使用的器物，大概都比不上。
English: There are many other utensils. Even the utensils used by the emperor during the imperial ban are probably not comparable.

古文：上每令中使为禄山护役，筑第及储偫赐物，常戒之曰： 胡眼大，勿令笑我。 
现代文：玄宗命令宦官监工，在建造宅第和制作屋中所用的器物时，玄宗常常告戒监工的宦官说： 胡人大方，不要让他笑我小气。 
English: Xuanzong ordered the eunuchs to supervise the workmen. When building the residence and the utensils used in the workshop, Xuanzong often told the eunuchs who were supervising the workmen, "Be generous, don't let him laugh at my stinginess."

古文：禄山入新第，置酒，乞降墨敕请宰相至第。
现代文：安禄山住进新建的宅第后，设置酒宴，并请求玄宗下敕书让宰相至宅第赴宴。
English: After An Lushan moved into the newly built mansion, he held a wine banquet and requested Emperor Xuanzong to issue an imperial edict to have the prime minister come to the mansion for the banquet.

古文：是日，上欲于楼下击球，遽为罢戏，命宰相赴之。
现代文：这一天，玄宗原来准备在楼下击，却立刻取消了游戏，命令宰相去赴会。
English: On this day, Hyunjong had originally planned to play chess downstairs, but immediately cancelled the game and ordered the prime minister to go to the meeting.

古文：日遣诸杨与之选胜游宴，侑以梨园教坊乐。
现代文：又每天让杨家的人与安禄山选择风景优美的地方游玩宴会，并让梨园弟子和教坊乐队陪伴。
English: Every day, they let the Yang family and Anlu Mountain choose a scenic place to play a banquet, and let the Li Yuan disciples and the teaching orchestra accompany them.

古文：上每食一物稍美，或后苑校猎获鲜禽，辄遣中使走马赐之，络驿于路。
现代文：玄宗每吃到一种鲜美的食物，或者在后苑中猎获了鲜禽，都要派宦官骑马赐给安禄山，以至走马络绎，不绝于路。
English: Whenever Xuanzong ate a kind of delicious food, or caught a fresh bird in the backyard, he would send eunuchs on horseback to give it to Anlu Mountain, and even rode on horseback, constantly on the road.

古文：甲辰，禄山生日，上及贵妃赐衣服、宝器、酒馔甚厚。
现代文：甲辰，安禄山生日，玄宗和杨贵妃赏赐给安禄山许多衣服、珍宝器物以及丰盛的酒菜食物。
English: At the time of Anlu Shan's birthday, Emperor Xuanzong and Empress Yang Guifei gave Anlu Shan many clothes, precious utensils, and rich food and drink.

古文：后三日，召禄山入禁中，贵妃以锦绣为大襁褓，裹禄山，使宫人以彩舆舁之。
现代文：过了三天，又把安禄山召进宫中，杨贵妃用锦绣做成的大襁褓裹住安禄山，让宫女用彩轿抬起。
English: Three days later, Anlu Shan was summoned to the palace again. Yang Guifei wrapped Anlu Shan in a large cocoon made of brocade and asked the palace maid to lift it with a sedan chair.

古文：上闻后宫喧笑，问其故，左右以贵妃三日洗禄儿对。
现代文：唐玄宗听见后宫中的欢声笑语，就问是在干什么，左右的人说是贵妃为儿子安禄山三天洗身。
English: When Tang Xuan Zong heard the cheers and laughter in the harem, he asked what they were doing. The people around him said that the empress was washing herself for three days for her son, Anlu Mountain.

古文：上自往观之，喜，赐贵妃洗儿金银钱，复厚赐禄山，尽欢而罢。
现代文：玄宗亲自去观看，十分高兴，赏赐给杨贵妃洗儿金银钱，又重赏安禄山，尽兴而散。
English: Xuanzong went to see it in person and was very pleased. He rewarded Yang Guifei with gold and silver coins, and also rewarded Anlu Mountain. They had a great time.

古文：自是禄山出入宫掖不禁，或与贵妃对食，或通宵不出，颇有丑声闻于外，上亦不疑也。
现代文：从此安禄山可以自由出入宫中，不加禁止，有时与杨贵妃同桌而食，有时一夜不出宫，宫外的许多人都知道这件丑事，而玄宗却不怀疑。
English: From then on, An Lushan could freely enter and leave the palace without any prohibition, sometimes eating at the same table with Yang Guifei, sometimes not leaving the palace at night. Many people outside the palace knew about this scandal, but Xuanzong did not doubt it.

古文：安西节度使高仙芝入朝，献所擒突骑施可汗、吐蕃酋长、石国王、朅师王。
现代文：安西节度使高仙芝入朝，献上所俘获的突骑施可汗、吐蕃酋长、石国王和师王。
English: The Anxi Festival brought Gao Xianzhi to the imperial court, and he presented the captured horse rider Shikhan, the chief of Tubo, the stone king and the teacher king.

古文：加仙芝开府仪同三司。
现代文：玄宗命加高仙芝开府仪同三司。
English: Xuanzong's order added Gao Xianzhi Kaifu Yi to the three departments.

古文：寻以仙芝为河西节度使，代安思顺；思顺讽群胡割耳剺面请留己，制复留思顺于河西。
现代文：不久，玄宗又任命高仙芝为河西节度使，以代替安思顺。安思顺暗中让一群胡人用刀割掉耳朵划破脸皮的方式请求留下自己，玄宗又下制书仍让安思顺为河西节度使。
English: Soon after, Xuanzong also appointed Gao Xianzhi as the Hexi Festival envoy to replace An Shun. An Shun secretly asked a group of Hu people to cut off their ears with a knife and cut their faces to ask to stay, and Xuanzong still let An Shun be the Hexi Festival envoy.

古文：安禄山求兼河东节度。
现代文：安禄山请求兼任河东节度使。
English: At the request of Anlu Mountain, he also served as the envoy of the Hedong Festival.

古文：二月，丙辰，以河东节度使韩休珉为左羽林将军，以禄山代之。
现代文：二月丙辰，唐玄宗任命河东节度使韩休珉为左羽林将军，由安禄山代任河东节度使。
English: In February, Emperor Xuanzong of Tang appointed Han Xiuqi as General Zuo Yulin of the Hedong Festival, and An Lushan as the representative of the Hedong Festival.

古文：户部郎中吉温见禄山有宠，又附之，约为兄弟，说禄山曰： 李右丞相虽以时事亲三兄，必不肯以兄为相；温虽蒙驱使，终不得超擢。
现代文：户部郎中吉温见安禄山受到玄宗的宠信，就又依附于安禄山，与他结拜为兄弟。并对安禄山说： 李右丞相现在虽然与你亲善，但是一定不会推荐你为宰相。我虽然为他效力受他驱使，但终久得不到提拔。
English: Seeing that Anlu Shan was favored by Emperor Xuanzong, Jiwen, a retainer of the Household Division, attached himself to Anlu Shan and worshiped him as a brother. He also said to Anlu Shan, "Although he is on friendly terms with you now, Premier Li Yuzheng will definitely not recommend you as the prime minister. Although I work for him and am driven by him, I will not be promoted for a long time."

古文：兄若荐温于上，温即奏兄堪大任，共排林甫出之，为相必矣。 
现代文：你如果能够向皇上推荐我，我就向皇上上奏说你能够担当大任，我们联合起来排斥李林甫出朝，你就一定能够当宰相。 
English: If you can recommend me to the emperor, I will report to the emperor that you can play a big role, we will unite to exclude Li Linfu from the court, you will certainly be able to become prime minister.

古文：禄山悦其言，数称温才于上，上亦忘曩日之言。
现代文：安禄山觉得吉温的话很有道理，所以多次在玄宗面前说吉温有才能，玄宗也忘记了过去所说的话。
English: An Lushan thought Jiwen's words were very reasonable, so he repeatedly said in front of Xuanzong that Jiwen had talent. Xuanzong also forgot what he had said in the past.

古文：会禄山领河东，因奏温为节度副使、知留后，以大理司直张通儒为留后判官，河东事悉以委之。
现代文：这时安禄山兼任河东节度使，就上奏吉温为节度副使、知留后事，并任命大理司直张通儒为留后判官，把河东镇的政事全权委托给他们。
English: At this time, An Lushan also served as the Hedong Festival envoy, so he sent Ji Wen as the deputy festival envoy, and appointed Dari S. Zhichang Tongru as the magistrate, and entrusted them with the full power of political affairs in Hedong Town.

古文：是时，杨国忠为御史中丞，方承恩用事。
现代文：这时杨国忠为御史中丞，正受到玄宗的重用。
English: At this time, Yang Guozhong was a goshi chujo and was being heavily used by Xuanzong.

古文：禄山登降殿阶，国忠常扶掖之。
现代文：安禄山上下殿前的台阶时，杨国忠常扶着他。
English: Yang Guozhong often supported him when he walked up and down the steps in front of the Anlu Mountain.

古文：禄山与王鉷俱为大夫，鉷权任亚于李林甫。
现代文：安禄山与王都为御史大夫，王的权位仅次于李林甫。
English: An Lushan and the king were both goshi taifu, and the king's authority was second only to that of Li Linfu.

古文：禄山见林甫，礼貌颇倨。
现代文：安禄山看见李林甫时，态度十分傲慢。
English: When An Lushan saw Li Linfu, his attitude was very arrogant.

古文：林甫阳以他事召王大夫，鉷至，趋拜甚谨，禄山不觉自失，容貌益恭。
现代文：李林甫就假装有事召来王，王见到李林甫时，态度十分谦恭。安禄山不自觉地有所失态，态度也恭敬起来。
English: Li Linfu pretended to have something to do and summoned Wang. When Wang saw Li Linfu, his attitude was very humble. Unconsciously, An Lushan made a mistake and his attitude became respectful.

古文：林甫与禄山语，每揣知其情，先言之，禄山惊服。
现代文：李林甫与安禄山谈话时，总是揣摸他的心意，先说了出来，使安禄山惊讶叹服。
English: When Li Linfu talked with An Lushan, he always guessed his thoughts and said them first, which surprised and impressed An Lushan.

古文：禄山于公卿皆慢侮之，独惮林甫，每见，虽盛冬，常汗沾衣。
现代文：安禄山对于其他公卿朝士都十分傲慢，有时还侮辱他们，但独独害怕李林甫，每当见到李林甫时，虽然是寒冬季节，也汗流沾衣。
English: An Lushan was very arrogant towards other court nobles and courtiers, and sometimes insulted them, but he was afraid of Li Linfu. Whenever he saw Li Linfu, even though it was the cold winter season, he was drenched in sweat.

古文：林甫乃引与坐于中书厅，抚以温言，自解披袍以覆之。
现代文：而李林甫却把安禄引进中书省办事的厅中坐下，用好言相慰问，并解下自己的披袍给安禄山穿上。
English: Li Linfu, on the other hand, sat down in the office where Anlu was introduced to the People's Republic of China and the People's Republic of China, offered his condolences in kind, and took off his robe to put it on Anlu Shan.

古文：禄山忻荷，言无不尽，谓林甫为十郎。
现代文：安禄山十分感激，对李林甫无话不谈，并称李林甫为十郎。
English: An Lushan was very grateful and spoke highly of Li Linfu, calling him "Juro."

古文：既归范阳，刘骆谷每自长安来，必问： 十郎何言？ 
现代文：安禄山回到范阳后，刘骆谷每次从长安回来，安禄山一定要问： 十郎说什么了吗？ 
English: After Anlu Shan returned to Fanyang, every time Liu Luogu returned from Chang'an, Anlu Shan must ask: Did Juro say anything?

古文：得美言则喜；或但云 语安大夫，须好检校！ 
现代文：如果听到李林甫赞扬他，就十分高兴。如果听到李林甫说： 告诉安大夫，要检点一些！ 
English: If you hear Li Linfu praise him, you will be very happy. If you hear Li Linfu say: Tell Dr. An to be more careful!

古文：辄反手据床曰： 噫嘻，我死矣！ 
现代文：安禄山就反手握着床说： 噫嘻，我活不成了！ 
English: An Lushan gripped the bed with his backhand and said, "Oh no, I can't live!

古文：禄山既兼领三镇，赏刑己出，日益骄恣。
现代文：安禄山一身兼任范阳、平卢、河东三镇节度使，手握大权，赏罚由己，日益骄横。
English: An Lushan concurrently served as the festival envoy of Fanyang, Pinglu and Hedong three towns, holding great power, rewarding and punishing himself, and becoming increasingly arrogant.

古文：自以曩时不拜太子，见上春秋高，颇内惧；又见武备堕驰，有轻中国之心。
现代文：自认为过去见太子没有下拜，而如今玄宗年事已高，十分惧怕。又看到唐朝的武备松弛，有轻视朝廷之心。
English: He thought that in the past, the prince did not bow down, but now that Xuanzong is old, he is very afraid. He also saw that the Tang Dynasty's military preparedness was slack, and he despised the imperial court.

古文：孔目官严庄、掌书记高尚因为之解图谶，劝之作乱。
现代文：孔目官严庄和掌书记高尚又借机为他讲解预卜吉凶祸福的图谶，劝他起兵叛乱。
English: The Confucius official Yan Zhuang and the secretary Gao Shang also took the opportunity to explain to him the prediction of evil and good fortune, and advised him to start a rebellion.

古文：禄山养同罗、奚、契丹降者八千馀人，谓之 曳落河 。
现代文：安禄山豢养了投降的同罗、奚和契丹士兵八千多人，称为 曳落河 。
English: The Anlu Mountains are home to more than 8,000 surrendered Tonglu, Shan and Khitan soldiers, known as the "Dragging River."

古文：曳落河者，胡言壮士也。
现代文：曳落河，胡语就是壮士的意思。
English: Dragging down the river, Hu language is the meaning of strong men.

古文：及家僮百馀人，皆骁勇善战，一可当百。
现代文：还有家奴一百余人。这些人个个都骁勇善战，一可当百。
English: There are also more than a hundred domestic slaves. All of these people are brave and good at fighting, one can be a hundred.

古文：又畜战马数万匹，多聚兵仗，分遣商胡诣诸道贩鬻，岁输珍货数百万。
现代文：又畜养战马数万匹，大量地聚集武器，分派胡商到各地去做买卖，每年输送珍宝货物价值数百万缗钱。
English: He also bred tens of thousands of war horses, amassed a large number of weapons, dispatched Hu merchants to do business all over the country, and transported precious goods worth millions of baht every year.

古文：私作绯紫袍、鱼袋、以百万计。
现代文：暗中制作绯色、紫色袍子和金鱼袋等，数以百万计。
English: Millions of scarlet and purple robes and goldfish bags have been secretly made.

古文：以高尚、严庄、张通儒及将军孙孝哲为腹心，史思明、安守忠、李归仁、蔡希德、牛廷玠、向润容、李庭望、崔乾祐、尹子奇、何千年、武令珣、能元皓、田承嗣、田乾真、阿史那承庆为爪牙。
现代文：以高尚、严庄、张通儒及将军孙孝哲等人作为自己的心腹，史思明、安守忠、李归仁、蔡希德、牛廷、向润容、李庭望、崔乾、尹子奇、何千年、武令、能元皓、田承嗣、田乾真、阿史那承庆等将领作为爪牙。
English: He regarded Gao Shang, Yan Zhuang, Zhang Tongru and the general Sun Xiao Zhe as his confidants, and the generals Shi Siming, An Shourong, Li Guiren, Cai Xide, Niu Ting, Xiang Runrong, Li Tingwang, Cui Qian, Yin Ziqi, Qianlong, Wu Ling, Nengyuan, Tian Chengzhi, Tian Qian Zhen, and Ashina Chengqing as his minions.

古文：尚，雍权人，本名不危，颇有辞学，薄游河朔，贫困不得志，常叹曰： 高不危当举大事而死，岂能啮草根求活邪！ 
现代文：高尚是雍奴县人，原来名叫不危，很有才学，青年时漫游河朔地区，贫困不得志，常常感叹说： 我高不危宁可干惊天动地的大事而死，也不愿贫穷一生吃草根而生活下去！ 
English: Gao Gao is a native of Yongnu County. His original name was Niu Jian, and he was very talented. When he was young, he roamed the Hexuo region, but he was discouraged by poverty. He often lamented, "I'd rather die doing something earth-shattering than live in poverty eating grass for the rest of my life!"

古文：禄山引置幕府，出入卧内。
现代文：后来被安禄山引为幕僚，可以出入安禄山的寝室。
English: Later, he was introduced by An Lushan as a staff member, and he could enter and leave An Lushan's bedroom.

古文：尚典笺奏，庄治簿书。
现代文：高尚专掌草写笺表奏疏，严庄专掌文书。
English: The high-class calligraphy of the palm is sparse and the calligraphy of the palm is solemn.

古文：通儒，万岁之子；孝哲，契丹出。
现代文：张通儒是张万岁的儿子。孙孝哲是契丹族人。
English: Zhang Tongru is the son of Zhang Wanling. Sun Xiaozhe is from the Qidan ethnic group.

古文：承嗣世为卢龙小校，禄山以为前锋兵马使，治军严整。
现代文：田承嗣世世代代做卢龙地方小校一类的军官，安禄山任命他为前锋兵马使。
English: Tian Chengzhi has been an officer of the Lulong local primary school for generations. An Lushan appointed him as a forward envoy.

古文：尝大雪，禄山按行诸营，至承嗣营，寂若无人，入阅士卒，无一人不在者，禄山以是重之。
现代文：有一次天下大雪，安禄山去检查军营，来到田承嗣的营中，寂静无声，好似无人，而在营中检阅士卒，没有一人不在，所以受到安禄山的器重。
English: Once, when there was a heavy snowfall, Anlu Mountain went to inspect the military camp. When it came to Tian Chengzhi's camp, it was silent, as if no one was there. When it came to inspect the soldiers in the camp, no one was absent, so it was weighed down by Anlu Mountain.

古文：夏，四月，壬午，剑南节度使鲜于仲通讨南诏蛮，大败于泸南。
现代文：夏季，四月壬午，剑南节度使鲜于仲通率兵讨伐南诏蛮，在泸水南面被南诏打得大败。
English: In the summer, in the afternoon of April, the Jian Nan Festival made the soldiers led by Xian Yu Zhongtong to fight the Nan Zhaobang, and they were defeated by the Nan Zhaobang in the south of Surabaya.

古文：时仲通将兵八万，分二道出戎、巂州，至曲州、靖州。
现代文：当时鲜于仲通把八万大军分成两路，分别从戎州和州出发，到了曲州和靖州。
English: At that time, Mianyu Zhongtong divided the 80,000-strong army into two routes, departing from Eunshu and Zhou to Quzhou and Jingzhou respectively.

古文：南诏王阁罗凤遣使谢罪，请还所俘掠，城云南而去，且曰： 今吐蕃大兵压境，若不许我，我将归命吐蕃，云南非唐有也。 
现代文：南诏王罗凤派使者来谢罪，请求归还所掠夺俘获的物品人众，筑好云南城而撤退，并说： 现在吐蕃大兵压境，如果不充许我求和，我将归附于吐蕃，这样云南就不会是唐朝的了。 
English: Luo Feng, the king of Nanzhao, sent an envoy to apologize, request the return of the plundered and captured goods and people, build a good Yunnan city and retreat, and said: Now the soldiers of Tubo are pressing the border, if I am not allowed to sue for peace, I will be attached to Tubo, so Yunnan will not be Tang Dynasty.

古文：仲通不许，囚其使。
现代文：鲜于仲通不答应，并囚禁所派来的使者。
English: Mian Yu Zhongtong did not agree, and imprisoned the envoy.

古文：进军至西洱河，与阁罗凤战，军大败，士卒死者六万人，仲通仅以身免。
现代文：然后进兵到了西洱河，与罗凤的军队交战，唐兵大败，士卒死了六万余人，鲜于仲通也差一点战死。
English: Then the marching troops went to the West Fen River and fought with Luo Feng's army. The Tang soldiers were defeated, and more than sixty thousand soldiers and officers were killed. Xiang Yu and Zhong Tong almost died in the battle.

古文：杨国忠掩其败状，仍叙其战功。
现代文：杨国忠却掩盖鲜于仲通的败军之事，仍然为他记叙战功。
English: Yang Guozhong, however, covered up the defeat of the army, which was rare in Zhongtong, and still recorded his war exploits.

古文：阁罗凤敛战尸，筑为京观，遂北臣于吐蕃。
现代文：罗凤把唐军士卒的尸体收敛起来，筑成一座高大的山丘，供人观看，于是向北臣服于吐蕃。
English: Luo Feng gathered up the dead bodies of the Tang soldiers and built a tall hill for people to see, and then submitted to Bei Xian in Tuyun.

古文：蛮语谓弟为 钟 ，吐蕃命阁罗凤为 赞普钟 ，号曰东帝，给以金印。
现代文：蛮语称弟弟为 钟 ，吐蕃就称罗凤为 赞普钟 ，号为东帝，并授给他金印。
English: The barbarian language called his younger brother "Zhong," while the Tibetans called Luo Feng "Zampu Zhong" and gave him the title of "Eastern Emperor" and a gold seal.

古文：阁罗凤刻碑于国门，言于不得已而叛唐，且曰： 我世世事唐，受其封赏，后世容复归唐，当指碑以示唐使者，知吾之叛非本心也。 
现代文：罗凤于国城门口镌刻石碑，说自己叛唐是出于无奈，并说： 我们南诏世世代代臣服于唐朝，受唐朝的封爵，后世还要归附唐朝，到那时可向唐朝的使者指示此碑，知道我背叛唐朝并不是出于本心的愿望。 
English: Luo Feng engraved a stone monument at the gate of the National City, saying that he betrayed the Tang Dynasty out of helplessness, and said: We Nanzhao have been subject to the Tang Dynasty for generations, have been knighted by the Tang Dynasty, and will be attached to the Tang Dynasty in future generations. At that time, you can show this monument to the Tang Dynasty's emissary, knowing that my betrayal of the Tang Dynasty is not out of my heart's desire.

古文：制大募两京及河南、北兵以击南诏；人闻云南多瘴疠，未战士卒死者什八九，莫肯应募。
现代文：玄宗下制书在两京和河南、河北地区召募军队去讨击南诏。人们听说云南地方流行瘴疠这种传染病，不及交战，士卒就要死掉十之八九，没有人肯去应募。
English: Under Emperor Xuanzong, book publishers in Beijing, Henan, and Hebei began to recruit soldiers to fight the Nanzhao. It was rumored that this infectious disease was prevalent in Yunnan, and that nine out of ten soldiers would die before they could fight. No one wanted to enlist.

古文：杨国忠遣御史分道捕人，连枷送诣军所。
现代文：杨国忠就派遣御史到各道去捉人，用枷连锁起来送往军营。
English: Yang Guozhong sent his envoys to various provinces to capture people, chain them up with shackles and send them to military camps.

古文：旧制，百姓有勋者免征役，时调兵既多，国忠奏先取高勋。
现代文：按照过去的制度，有功的百姓可以免除兵役，而此时因征兵量多，杨国忠就上奏请求只许功劳大的百姓免除兵役。
English: According to the previous system, meritorious people could be exempted from military service, but at this time, due to the large number of conscripts, Yang Guozhong requested that only people with great merit be exempted from military service.

古文：于是行者愁怨，父母妻子送之，所在哭声振野。
现代文：被征发的人忧愁怨恨，父母妻子都来送别，嚎哭之声连天。
English: Those who were conscripted were sad and resentful, their parents and wives came to see them off, and the sound of wailing went on for days.

古文：高仙芝之虏石国王也，石国王子逃诣诸胡，具告仙芝欺诱贪暴之状。
现代文：高仙芝俘虏了石国王后，石国王的儿子逃到了胡人部落，将高仙芝欺压和贪暴的情况告诉了胡人。
English: After Gao Xianzhi captured the Stone King, the Stone King's son fled to the Hu tribe and told the Hu people about Gao Xianzhi's oppression and corruption.

古文：诸胡皆怒，潜引大食欲共攻四镇。
现代文：诸胡部落大怒，就暗中联合大食国军队想一起进攻安西四镇。
English: The Zhuhu tribes were so angry that they secretly joined forces with the armies of the big food-eating countries to attack the four towns in Anxi.

古文：仙芝闻之，将蕃、汉三万众击大食，深入七百馀里，至恒罗斯城，与大食遇。相持五日，葛罗禄部众叛，与大食夹攻唐军，仙芝大败，士卒死亡略尽，所馀才数千人。
现代文：高仙芝听说后，亲自率领蕃兵和汉兵三万去攻打大食，深入大食国境内七百余里，到了恒罗斯城，与大食军队相遇，两军对峙了五天，这时葛罗禄部落的军队叛唐，与大食军前后夹击，高仙芝的军队被打得大败，士卒几乎全部战死，留下来的仅有几千人。
English: After Gao Xianzhi heard about this, he personally led thirty thousand soldiers from the Han and the Yao to attack Dafu. He went more than seven hundred miles deep into the territory of Dafu. He reached the city of Henrose and met the Dafu army. The two armies confronted each other for five days. At this time, the army of the Gloru tribe rebelled against the Tang Dynasty and clashed with the Dafu army. Gao Xianzhi's army was badly defeated. Almost all the soldiers were killed in battle, and only a few thousand remained.

古文：右威卫将军李嗣业劝仙芝宵遁，道路阻隘，拔汗那部众在前，人畜塞路；嗣业前驱，奋大梃击之，人马俱毙，仙芝乃得过。
现代文：右威卫将军李嗣业劝高仙芝乘深夜逃跑。因为道路狭窄，拔汗那部落兵在前面，人畜塞路，前进不得，李嗣业就奋勇上前，挥起一根大棍子乱打，人马都被打死，高仙芝才得以通过。
English: General of the Right Division of Wei, Li Shiye, advised Gao Xianzhi to flee in the middle of the night. Because the road was narrow and the tribal soldiers were in front, blocking the way for people and animals, it was impossible to move forward. Li Shiye bravely stepped forward, waved a big stick and beat people and horses indiscriminately. People and horses were killed, and Gao Xianzhi was able to pass.

古文：将士相失，别将汧阳段秀实闻嗣业之声，诟曰： 避敌先奔，无勇也；全己弃众，不仁也。
现代文：将领与士卒都失去联系，别将阳人段秀实听见李嗣业的喊叫声，就大骂道： 躲避敌人而自己先逃命，是胆小缺乏勇气；保全自己而丢掉士卒，是不仁义。
English: Both the general and the soldiers lost contact. When the young man, Duan Xiushi, heard Li Shigye's shouts, he cursed loudly: To avoid the enemy and run for your life first is cowardice and lack of courage; to save yourself and lose the soldiers is unkindness.

古文：幸而得达，独无愧乎！ 
现代文：就是有幸能够逃回，难道自己不感到羞愧吗？ 
English: Aren't you ashamed that you were lucky enough to escape?

古文：嗣业执其手谢之，留拒追兵，收散卒，得俱免。
现代文：李嗣业听见后，握着段秀实的手表示谢意，并主动留在后面抗拒追兵，收罗散卒，没有战死的士卒才得以逃脱。
English: After hearing this, Li Shizhen shook Duan Xiusheng's hand to express his gratitude, and took the initiative to stay behind to resist the pursuit and collect the scattered soldiers. The soldiers who did not die in battle were able to escape.

古文：还至安西，言于仙芝，以秀实兼都知兵马使，为己判官。
现代文：回到安西，李嗣业把此事告诉了高仙芝，高仙芝就任命段秀实兼任都知兵马使，作自己的判官。
English: Back in Anxi, Li Siye told this to Gao Xianzhi, and Gao Xianzhi appointed Duan Hsiu-sheng to serve concurrently as the envoy of the Central Military Commission, to be his own judge.

古文：八月，丙辰，武库火，烧兵器三十七万。
现代文：八月丙辰，武库失火，烧毁兵器三十七万件。
English: In August, the arsenal caught fire, destroying 370,000 weapons.

古文：安禄山将三道兵六万以讨契丹，以奚骑二千为乡导，过平卢千馀里，至土护真水，遇雨。
现代文：安禄山亲自率领范阳、河东、平卢三镇兵六万去讨伐契丹，用奚族骑兵二千作为向导。过了平卢一千余里，到了土护真水，遇到大雨。
English: An Lushan personally led 60,000 soldiers from the three towns of Fanyang, Hedong and Pinglu to fight against the Khitan, using 2,000 Yao cavalry as guides. After more than 1,000 miles of Pinglu, they arrived at Dugu Mashui and encountered heavy rain.

古文：禄山引兵昼夜兼行三百馀里，至契丹牙帐，契丹大骇。
现代文：安禄山率兵昼夜兼程行军三百余里，来到契丹大本营，契丹十分惊骇。
English: An Lushan led the soldiers on a day and night march of more than three hundred miles, and arrived at Khitan's base camp. Khitan was very shocked.

古文：时久雨，弓驽筋胶皆弛，大将何思德言于禄山曰： 吾兵虽多，远来疲弊，实不可用，不如按甲息兵以临之，不过三日，虏必降。 
现代文：当时因为大雨连绵，弓箭和弩机的筋胶都因霖雨而松驰，大将何思德对安禄山说： 我们虽然兵多，但长途奔袭，士卒疲劳，战斗力不强，不如暂时休兵不要交战，只与敌人对阵，这样不过三天，敌人必定投降。 
English: At that time, due to the continuous heavy rain, the sinews of bows and arrows and harpoons were loosened due to the rain. General Ho Si De said to An Lushan: Although we have more soldiers, but long-distance attacks, the soldiers are tired and the combat effectiveness is not strong. It is better to take a temporary leave of absence and not engage in battle, but only confront the enemy. In this way, after three days, the enemy will certainly surrender.

古文：禄山怒、欲斩之，思德请前驱效死。
现代文：安禄山听后大怒，要杀掉何思德，何思德请求愿为锋以效死力。
English: After hearing this, Anlu Shan flew into a rage and wanted to kill He Side. He Side begged him to use his deadly force.

古文：思德貌类禄山，虏争击，杀之，以为已得禄山，勇气增倍。
现代文：何思德长像与安禄山相似，契丹争着攻打，杀了他，以为已经杀了安禄山，所以士气大盛。
English: The portrait of He Sidde is similar to that of Anlu Mountain. Khitan fought and killed him, thinking that he had killed Anlu Mountain, so morale was high.

古文：奚复叛，与契丹合，夹击唐兵，杀伤殆尽。
现代文：这时奚族也背叛了唐军，与契丹合兵，前后夹击，唐军死伤殆尽。
English: At this time, the Yi people also betrayed the Tang army, joined forces with the Khitan, and clashed back and forth. The Tang army was exhausted.

古文：射禄山，中鞍，折冠簪，失履，独与麾下二十骑走；会夜，追骑解，得入师州，归罪于左贤王哥解、河东兵马使鱼承仙而斩之。
现代文：安禄山的马鞍也被射中，还折断了帽簪，丢掉了鞋子，仅与部下二十个骑兵逃走。因为天黑，追击的骑兵松懈下来，安禄山才得以逃入师州城。安禄山把战败的罪过归咎于左贤王哥解和河东兵马使鱼承仙，并杀了他们。
English: Anlu Shan's saddle was also shot, he also broke his hat brim, lost his shoes, and fled with only twenty of his cavalry. Because it was dark, the pursuing cavalry slackened down, and Anlu Shan was able to escape into the city of Shizhou. Anlu Shan blamed the defeat on Zuoxian Wang Brothers and Hedong soldiers and horses, and killed them.

古文：平卢兵马使史思明惧，逃入山谷近二旬，收散卒，得七百人。
现代文：平卢兵马使史思明惧怕，逃入山谷将近二十天，收罗散兵七百人。
English: The Pinglu soldiers and horses made Shi Siming afraid, and he fled into the valley for nearly twenty days, collecting seven hundred scattered soldiers from Luo.

古文：平卢守将史定方将精兵二千救禄山，契丹引去，禄山乃得免。
现代文：平卢守将史定方率领精兵二千救安禄山，契丹退兵，安禄山才得以逃脱。
English: The governor of Pinglu, Shi Dingfang, led 2,000 elite soldiers to rescue Anlu Mountain. When Khitan withdrew, Anlu Mountain was able to escape.

古文：至平卢，麾下皆亡，不知所出。
现代文：到了平卢城，部下的士卒都已战死，不知如何办才好。
English: When he arrived at Pinglu City, all of his subordinates had been killed in the war, and he didn't know what to do.

古文：史思明出见禄山，禄山喜，起，执其手曰： 吾得汝，复何忧！ 
现代文：这时史思明从山谷中来见安禄山，安禄山大喜，站起来握着史思明的手说： 我有了你，还有什么发愁的呢！ 
English: At this time, Shi Siming came from the valley to see Anlu Mountain. Anlu Mountain was happy, stood up, held Shi Siming's hand and said: I have you, what else is there to worry about!

古文：思明退，谓人曰： 向使早出，已与哥解并斩矣。 
现代文：史思明退出后对其他人说： 如果我早一点出来，就会与哥解一起被杀死。 
English: After withdrawing, Shi Siming said to the others, "If I had come out earlier, I would have been killed together with my brother."

古文：契丹围师州，禄山使思明击却之。
现代文：契丹兵包围了师州城，安禄山派史思明打退了契丹。
English: The Khitan soldiers encircled the city of Shizhou, and Shi Siming of the An Lushan faction repulsed the Khitan.

古文：冬，十月，壬子，上幸华清宫。
现代文：冬季，十月壬子，玄宗前往华清宫。
English: In winter, October Renzi, Xuanzong went to the Huaqing Palace.

古文：杨国忠使鲜于仲通表请己遥领剑南；十一月，丙午，以国忠领剑南节度使。
现代文：杨国忠让鲜于仲通上表请求让自己兼领剑南节度使。十一月丙午，玄宗命杨国忠兼领剑南节度使。
English: Yang Guozhong asked Zhongtong to make a request for him to be appointed as the envoy to the Jiannan Festival. In the afternoon of November 6th, Xuanzong ordered Yang Guozhong to be appointed as the envoy to the Jiannan Festival.

古文：天宝十一年壬辰，公元七五二年
现代文：十一载春季，正月丁亥，玄宗返回宫中。
English: In the spring of the eleventh year, the first month of Dinghai, Xuanzong returned to the palace.

古文：春，正月，丁亥，上还宫。二月，庚午，命有司出粟帛及库钱数十万缗于两市易恶钱。
现代文：二月庚午，玄宗命令有关部门拿出粮食、布帛及国库中的钱数十万缗，把东西两市中流行的劣钱换回来。
English: In the late afternoon of February, Xuanzong ordered the relevant departments to take out hundreds of thousands of baht worth of grain, cloth and money from the state treasury and exchange it for the inferior money that was popular in the two cities.

古文：先是，江、淮多恶钱，贵戚大商往往以良钱一易恶钱五，载入长安，市井不胜其弊，故李林甫奏请禁之，官为易取，期一月，不输官者罪之。
现代文：先前，江淮地区质地恶劣的钱币流行，王公贵戚和一些大商人常常用一个好钱换五个劣钱，然后带进长安，市场难以承受这种弊端，造成混乱，所以李林甫上奏请求禁止，让官方兑换，限期一个月，不交官者问罪。
English: Previously, coins with bad texture were popular in the Jianghuai region. Wang Gongguo's relatives and some big businessmen often exchanged one good money for five inferior money, and then brought them into Chang'an. The market could not bear this disadvantage, causing chaos. Therefore, Li Linfu made a request to ban the official exchange, with a deadline of one month, and did not submit to officials for questioning.

古文：于是商贾嚣然，不以为便。
现代文：这一禁令使商人恐慌，不利于商业交换。
English: The ban has alarmed traders and discouraged commercial exchanges.

古文：众共遮杨国忠马自言，国忠为之言于上，乃更命非铅锡所铸及穿穴者，皆听用之如故。
现代文：许多人拦住杨国忠的马诉苦，杨国忠因此告诉了玄宗，于是玄宗又下令，准许那些不是由铅锡铸成的钱币和有孔的钱币，继续使用流通。
English: Many people stopped Yang Guozhong's horse to complain, and Yang Guozhong told Xuanzong about it, so Xuanzong ordered to allow those coins that were not made of lead and tin and had holes to continue to circulate.

古文：三月，安禄山发蕃、汉步骑二十万击契丹，欲以雪去秋之耻。
现代文：三月，安禄山发蕃人和汉人步骑兵二十万进攻契丹，想要报去年秋天的兵败之仇。
English: In March, two hundred thousand foot cavalrymen from Anlu and Han attacked Khitan, wanting to avenge last autumn's military defeat.

古文：初，突厥阿布思来降，上厚礼之，赐姓名李献忠，累迁朔方节度副使，赐爵奉信王。
现代文：当初突厥阿布思来降唐，玄宗很重视他，赐姓名为李献忠，连续升任朔方节度副使，赐奉信王爵位。
English: At the beginning, the Turk Abu Si came to the Tang Dynasty, and Xuanzong attached great importance to him. He gave him the surname Li Xianzhong, and he was successively promoted to the vice-envoy of the Suo Fang Festival, and was given the title of Fengxin Wang.

古文：献忠有才略，不为安禄山下，禄山恨之；至是，奏请献忠帅同罗数万骑，与俱击契丹。
现代文：李献忠十分有才干，不服安禄山，所以安禄山嫉恨他。这时，安禄山就上奏请李献忠率领同罗数万骑兵与他一起进攻契丹。
English: Li Xianzhong was very talented and was not satisfied with Anlu Shan, so Anlu Shan was jealous of him. At this time, Anlu Shan asked Li Xianzhong to lead tens of thousands of cavalry together with Luo to attack Khitan.

古文：献忠恐为禄山所害，白留后张，请奏留不行，不许。
现代文：李献忠怕安禄山陷害他，就告诉留后张，请他上奏不与安禄山一同去作战，张不答应。
English: Li Xianzhong was afraid that Anlu Mountain would frame him, so he told Zhuo Zhang, asking him not to go to war with Anlu Mountain. Zhang did not agree.

古文：献忠乃帅所部大掠仓库，叛归漠北，禄山遂顿兵不进。
现代文：于是李献忠就率领部下大肆掠夺仓库中的物资，叛逃回漠北，于是安禄山停兵不进。
English: As a result, Li Xianzhong led his subordinates to plunder the materials in the warehouse, defected back to the north of the desert, and the Anlu Mountain was halted.

古文：乙巳，改吏部为文部，兵部为武部，刑部为宪部。
现代文：乙巳，改吏部名为文部，兵部名为武部，刑部名为宪部。
English: It is time to rename the Ministry of Justice as the Ministry of Education, the Ministry of Military Affairs as the Ministry of Armed Forces, and the Ministry of Justice as the Ministry of Constitution.

古文：户部侍郎兼御史大夫、京光尹王鉷，权宠日盛，领二十馀使。
现代文：户部侍郎、御史大夫、京兆尹王受到玄宗的宠信，威权日盛，一身兼任二十多个使职。
English: He was favored by Emperor Xuanzong as a household attendant, goshi taifu, and King Jingzhao Yin, and held more than 20 posts concurrently, including the authoritative position of Nichimori.

古文：宅旁为使院，文案盈积，吏求署一字，累日不得前；中使赐赍不绝于门，虽李林甫亦畏避之。
现代文：自己的宅第旁边就是使院，案头积满了文书，官吏想要他签署一下，等几天都排不到。皇上让宦官不断地给他赏赐物品，络绎不绝于门，就是李林甫也畏惧他的权势。
English: Next to his own residence was the envoy's residence. The desk was piled high with paperwork. Officials wanted him to sign something, but there was no time to wait for several days. The emperor had eunuchs constantly give him gifts, and they were constantly at his door. Even Li Linfu was afraid of his power.

古文：林甫子岫为将作监，鉷子淮为卫尉少卿，俱供奉禁中。
现代文：李林甫的儿子李岫任将作监，王的儿子王准任卫尉少卿，都在宫中作供奉官。
English: Li Linfu's son, Li Junren, would serve as a prison warden, and the king's son, Wang Junren, would serve as a junior palace guard.

古文：淮陵侮岫，岫常下之。
现代文：而王准常常侮辱李岫，李岫总是让着他。
English: But Wang Jun often insults Li Yao, and Li Yao always lets him have his way.

古文：然鉷事林甫谨，林甫虽忌其宠，不忍害也。
现代文：但王对李林甫还是十分恭敬，李林甫虽然妒嫉他受到皇上的宠信，但不忍加害于他。
English: However, the king was still very respectful of Li Linfu, and although Li Linfu was jealous of the favor he received from the emperor, he could not bear to harm him.

古文：准尝帅其徒过驸马都尉王繇，繇望尘拜伏；准挟弹命于繇冠，折其玉簪，以为戏笑。
现代文：王准曾经领着自己的一帮党羽经过驸马都尉王繇的身旁，王繇望着他伏身下拜。王准拿起弹弓射中了王繇的帽子，折断了玉制发夹，作为戏笑。
English: Wang Jun once led a group of his own party members past the side of the horse captain Wang Qi. Wang Qi looked at him and bowed down. Wang Qi picked up the slingshot and shot Wang Qi's hat, breaking the jade hairpin as a joke.

古文：既而繇延准置酒，繇所尚永穆公主，上之爱女也，为准亲执刀匕。
现代文：不久，王繇又设置酒宴招待王准，王繇的妻子永穆公主是玄宗的女儿，为王准亲自下厨做饭。
English: Soon after, Wang Yao also hosted a banquet for Wang Jun. Wang Yao's wife, Princess Yongmu, was the daughter of Emperor Xuanzong, and personally cooked for Wang Jun.

古文：准去，或谓繇曰： 鼠虽挟其父势，君乃使公主为之具食，有如上闻，无乃非宜？ 
现代文：王准离去后，有人对王繇说： 像王准这样的鼠辈小人，虽然有他父亲的权势，但你让公主为他亲自做饭，如果皇上知道了，岂不是不合适？ 
English: After Wang Jun left, someone said to Wang Yao: Although a rat like Wang Jun has the power of his father, you let the princess personally cook for him. If the emperor knew about it, wouldn't it be inappropriate?

古文：繇曰： 上虽怒无害，至于七郎，死生所系，不敢不尔。 
现代文：王繇说： 皇上就是知道了发怒也没有什么，而王七郎，对于我来说是生命所系，所以不敢不那样巴结他。 
English: Wang Yao said, "Even if the emperor knew, there is nothing to be angry about. As for Wang Shichiro, for me, he is my life, so I dare not flatter him like that."

古文：鉷弟户部郎中銲，凶险不法，召术士任海川，问： 我有王者之相否？ 
现代文：王的弟弟户部郎中王是个凶险不法之徒，召方术之士任海川问道： 你看我有没有当王的面相？ 
English: The king's younger brother, the head of the household, was a dangerous outlaw, so he called in the conjurer, Ren Kaikawa, and asked, "Do you think I have what it takes to be king?"

古文：海川惧，亡匿。
现代文：任海川惧怕，就逃走藏了起来。
English: Afraid, Ren Haichuan ran away and hid.

古文：鉷恐事泄，捕得，托以他事杖杀之。
现代文：王恐怕此事被泄露出去，就搜捕到任海川，假托其他的事用棍棒打死了他。
English: Wang was afraid that the matter would be leaked out, so he searched and arrested Ren Haichuan, and killed him with a club under the pretext of other matters.

古文：王府司马韦会，安定公主之子，王繇之同产也，话之私庭。
现代文：王府司马韦会，是安定公主的儿子，王繇的同母异父兄弟，私下对人说了这件事。
English: Wang Fu's steward, Mawei Hui, the son of Princess Anning and half-brother of Wang Yao, told people about this in private.

古文：鉷又使长安尉贾季邻收会系狱，缢杀之，繇不敢言。
现代文：王知道后，就让长安县尉贾季邻把韦会抓进监狱中，然后勒死了他。王繇不敢说话。
English: After Wang learned of this, he had Chang'an County Lieutenant Jia Jirong take Wei Hui to prison and then strangle him. Wang Yulong did not dare to speak.

古文：銲所善刑縡，与龙武万骑谋杀龙武将军，以其兵作乱，杀李林甫、陈希烈、杨国忠；前期二日，有告之者。
现代文：与王焊关系密切的邢与龙武军万骑营准备谋杀龙武将军，率兵作乱，杀李林甫、陈希烈与杨国忠。事发前两天，有人告发了这件事。
English: Two days before the incident, someone reported the matter to the Longwu Army's Wanjie Battalion, which had close ties with Wang Weld, and was preparing to murder General Longwu and lead the troops into a riot, killing Li Linfu, Chen Xilai and Yang Guozhong.

古文：夏，四月，乙酉，上临朝，以告状面授鉷，使捕之。
现代文：夏季，四月乙酉，玄宗上朝，把状子当面交给王，让他去捉人。
English: In the summer, in April, when Emperor Xuanzong ascended to the throne, he handed the letter to the king in person and asked him to catch someone.

古文：鉷意銲在縡所，先遣人召之。日晏，乃命贾季邻等捕縡。
现代文：王想到弟弟王焊可能在邢家里，就先让人把他叫了回来，到了天快黑的时候，才命令贾季邻等逮捕了邢。
English: Thinking that his younger brother Wang Weng might be at Gong's home, Wang first had someone call him back, and when it was almost dark, he ordered Jia Ji's neighbors to arrest Gong.

古文：縡居金城坊，季邻等至门，縡帅其党数十人持弓刀格斗突出。
现代文：邢居住在金城坊，贾季邻等到了他门口，邢领着他的党羽数十人手持弓箭刀剑边走边战闯了出来。
English: Gong lives in Jinchengfang. Jia Jichen waited for him at the door. Gong led dozens of his followers armed with bows, arrows and swords to break out.

古文：鉷与杨国忠引兵继至，縡党曰： 勿伤大夫人。 
现代文：王与杨国忠率兵从后面赶到，邢的党羽说： 不要伤了王大夫的人马。 
English: Wang and Yang Guozhong arrived from behind with their soldiers. The party members said, "Don't hurt Dr. Wang's horse and carriage."

古文：国忠之傔密谓国忠曰： 贼有号，不可战也。 
现代文：杨国忠的侍从暗中对杨国忠说： 叛贼有暗号，不能与他们交战。 
English: Yang Guozhong's attendant secretly said to Yang Guozhong: The traitors have a code, you can't fight them.

古文：縡斗且走，至皇城西南隅。
现代文：邢边战边走，到了皇城西南角。
English: They walked side by side, and arrived at the southwest corner of the Imperial City.

古文：会高力士引飞龙禁军四百至，击縡，捕其党，皆擒之。
现代文：这时高力士率领飞龙禁军四百来到，攻杀了邢，并逮捕了他的党羽。
English: At this time, Gao Lixi led the flying dragon forbidden army of four hundred to come, attacked and killed Yao, and arrested his followers.

古文：国忠以状白上，曰： 鉷必预谋。 
现代文：杨国忠把情况告诉了玄宗，并说： 王一定参预了这一阴谋。 
English: Yang Guozhong told the situation to Xuanzong, and said: Wang must have participated in this conspiracy.

古文：上以鉷任遇深，不应同逆；李林甫亦为之辨解。
现代文：而玄宗认为王深受他的信任，不应该有叛逆行为，李林甫也为他辩解。
English: However, Xuanzong believed that Wang was deeply trusted by him and should not have rebelled. Li Linfu also defended him.

古文：上乃命特原銲不问，然意欲鉷表请罪之；使国忠讽之，鉷不忍，上怒。
现代文：于是玄宗特下令赦免王不问他的罪，但想要王自己主动上表请治兄弟的罪，并让杨国忠暗示他，但王觉得不忍心这样做，玄宗大怒。
English: As a result, Emperor Xuanzong ordered to pardon Wang without asking him about his crime, but wanted Wang to take the initiative to ask for the punishment of his brother's crime, and let Yang Guozhong hint him, but Wang felt that he could not bear to do so, and Emperor Xuanzong was furious.

古文：会陈希烈极言鉷大逆当诛，戊子，敕希烈与国忠鞫之，仍以国忠兼京兆尹。
现代文：适逢陈希烈极力说王犯了大逆罪，应该杀掉他，戊子，玄宗下敕命陈希烈与杨国忠审讯王，并任命杨国忠兼京兆尹。
English: When Chen Xilai insisted that Wang had committed high treason and should be killed, Wu Zi and Xuanzong ordered Chen Xilai and Yang Guozhong to interrogate Wang, and appointed Yang Guozhong and Jing Zhaoyun.

古文：于是任海川、韦会等事皆发，狱具，鉷赐自尽，銲杖死于朝堂。鉷子准、偁流岭南，寻杀之。
现代文：因此任海川和韦会的案件都暴露了出来，证据确凿，王被玄宗赐自杀，王焊被棍棒打死于朝堂，王的儿子王准与王流放岭南，不久也被杀死。
English: As a result, the cases of Ren Haichuan and Wei Hui were all exposed, and the evidence was conclusive. Wang was given suicide by Xuanzong, Wang Weld was clubbed to death in the imperial court, and Wang's sons Wang Jun and Wang were exiled to Lingnan and soon killed.

古文：有司籍其第舍，数日不能遍。鉷宾佐莫敢窥其门，独采访判官裴冕收其尸葬之。
现代文：有关部门去查抄他的家，几天都抄不完，王的部下都躲开怕受到牵连，只有采访判官裴冕收葬了他的尸体。
English: Relevant departments went to search his home, but they couldn't finish the search for several days. Wang's subordinates all avoided the search for fear of being implicated. Only the interviewing judge, Pei Guan, buried his body.

古文：初，李林甫以陈希烈易制，引为相，政事常随林甫左右，晚节遂与林甫为敌，林甫惧。
现代文：起初，李林甫认为陈希烈容易控制，所以推荐为宰相。陈希烈对朝中大事，常常听李林甫的，但到了后来，却与李林甫为敌作对，李林甫惧怕。
English: At first, Li Linfu thought that Chen Xilai was easy to control, so he recommended him as prime minister. Chen Xilai often listened to Li Linfu on the major events in the DPRK and China, but later, he opposed Li Linfu as an enemy, and Li Linfu was afraid.

古文：会李献忠叛，林甫乃请解朔方节制，且荐河西节度使安思顺自代；庚子，以思顺为朔方节度使。
现代文：适逢李献忠叛逃，李林甫就请求辞掉所兼任的朔方节度使职，并且推荐河西节度使安思顺代替自己。庚子，玄宗任命安思顺为朔方节度使。
English: When Li Xianzhong defected, Li Linfu asked An Sishun to resign from the post of Shuo Fang and recommended that he be replaced by An Sishun from Hexi. Geng Zi and Xuanzong appointed An Sishun as Shuo Fang.

古文：五月，戊申，庆王琮薨，赠靖德太子。
现代文：五月戊申，庆王李琮去世，赠谥号为靖德太子。
English: In May of Wushin, Qing Wang Lijun passed away, and he was given the posthumous title of Prince Jingde.

古文：丙辰，京兆尹杨国忠加御史大夫、京畿、关内采访等使，凡王鉷所绾使务，悉归国忠。
现代文：丙辰，玄宗任命京兆尹杨国忠为御史大夫、京畿及关内采访等使，凡是王原来所兼领的使职，都归杨国忠。
English: At the same time, Emperor Xuanzong appointed Yang Guozhong, the son of Emperor Jingzha Yin, as the Imperial Historian, Gyeonggi and Guanzhong Corresponding Envoy. Yang Guozhong assumed all the duties that Wang had previously held concurrently.

古文：初，李林甫以国忠微才，且贵妃之族，故善遇之。
现代文：起初，李林甫认为杨国忠才能不大，并且是杨贵妃的同族，所以重用了他。
English: At first, Li Linfu thought that Yang Guozhong's talent was not great, and he was a member of the same family as Yang Guifei, so he made heavy use of him.

古文：国忠与王鉷为中丞，鉷用林甫荐为大夫，故国忠不悦，遂深探刑縡狱，令引林甫交私鉷兄弟及阿布思事状，陈希烈、哥舒翰从而证之；上由是疏林甫。
现代文：杨国忠与王都是御史中丞，后来王靠李林甫的推荐任御史大夫，所以引起杨国忠的不满。于是杨国忠深究邢的案件，并令案犯说李林甫与王兄弟有私交以及阿布思叛逃的事情与李林甫有牵连，陈希烈与哥舒翰也从中间证明此事，玄宗因此疏远李林甫。
English: Yang Guozhong and Wang were both goshi chujo, and later Wang was appointed goshi taifu on the recommendation of Li Linfu, which aroused Yang Guozhong's dissatisfaction. Therefore, Yang Guozhong deeply investigated Zou's case, and ordered the criminal to say that Li Linfu had a personal friendship with the Wang brothers and that the Abu Si defection was related to Li Linfu. Chen Xilei and Guo Shuhan also proved the matter from the middle, so Xuanzong alienated Li Linfu.

古文：国忠贵震天下，始与林甫为仇敌矣。
现代文：杨国忠的权力威震天下，开始与李林甫相抗衡。
English: Yang Guozhong's power shook the world, and he began to compete with Li Linfu.

古文：六月，甲子，杨国忠奏吐蕃兵六十万救南诏，剑南兵击破之于云南，克敌隰州等三城，捕虏六千三百，以道远，简壮者千馀人及酋长降者献之。
现代文：六月甲子，杨国忠上奏说吐蕃发兵六十万增援南诏，被剑南兵打败于云南，并攻下了隰州等三城，俘虏敌人六千三百名，因为道路遥远，挑选其中年青力壮的一千多人及他们投降的酋长献给朝廷。
English: In June, Yang Guozhong reported that the Tubo sent 600,000 soldiers to reinforce the Nanzhao. They were defeated by the Jiannan soldiers in Yunnan, and captured three cities including Zhangzhou. They captured 6,300 enemies. Because the road was far away, they selected more than 1,000 young and strong people and their surrendered chiefs to present to the imperial court.

古文：秋，八月，乙丑，上复幸左藏，赐群臣帛。
现代文：秋季，八月乙丑，玄宗又去观看左藏库，赏赐群臣布帛。
English: In the autumn, in the second month of August, Emperor Xuanzong went to see the left repository and rewarded the courtiers with cloth bags.

古文：癸巳，杨国忠奏有凤皇见左藏库屋，出纳判官魏仲犀言凤集库西通训门。
现代文：癸巳，杨国忠上奏说在左藏库的屋顶上看见了凤凰，出纳判官魏仲犀说看见一群凤凰聚集在左藏库西的通训门上。
English: Meanwhile, Yang Guozhong reported that he saw a phoenix on the roof of Zuo Tibetan Library, and Wei Zhongxiao, the cashier adjudicator, said that he saw a group of phoenixes gathered on the Tongxun Gate of Zuo Tibetan Library.

古文：九月，阿布思入寇，围永清栅，栅使张元轨拒却之。
现代文：九月，阿布思帅领部下入侵，包围了永清栅，被栅使张元轨击退。
English: In September, Abu Sisai's subordinates invaded and surrounded Yongqing Grate. Zhang Yuanlu was repelled by the grate.

古文：冬，十月，戊寅，上幸华清宫。
现代文：冬季，十月戊寅，玄宗前往华清宫。
English: In the winter, in October, Wu Yin and Xuanzong went to the Huaqing Palace.

古文：己亥，改通训门曰凤集门；魏仲犀迁殿中侍御史，杨国忠属吏率以凤皇优得调。
现代文：己亥，玄宗命令改通训门为凤集门，将魏仲犀升为殿中侍御史，杨国忠的部下都因为说看见了凤凰而得到优先升迁。
English: At the same time, Emperor Xuanzong ordered to change the gate of training to the gate of phoenix gathering, and promoted Wei Zhongxiao to the history of the palace, and Yang Guozhong's subordinates all got priority promotion because they said they saw the phoenix.

古文：南诏数寇边，蜀人请杨国忠赴镇；左仆射兼右相李林甫奏遣之。
现代文：南诏多次入侵唐朝的边疆，蜀人请求派杨国忠前往剑南镇。左仆射兼右相李林甫上奏玄宗，请派杨国忠往蜀地。
English: Nanzhao repeatedly invaded the borders of the Tang Dynasty. The people of Shu requested that Yang Guozhong be sent to the town of Jiannan. Li Linfu, the left-hand servant and the right-hand minister of Xuan Zong, requested that Yang Guozhong be sent to Shu.

古文：国忠将行，泣辞上，言必为林甫所害，贵妃亦为之请。
现代文：杨国忠临行前哭泣着与玄宗辞别，并说此行一定会被李林甫害死，杨贵妃也为他说情。
English: Before his departure, Yang Guozhong wept and said goodbye to Xuanzong, and said that Li Linfu would definitely kill him on this trip, and Yang Guifei also interceded for him.

古文：上谓国忠曰： 卿暂到蜀区处军事，朕屈指待卿，还当入相。 
现代文：玄宗对杨国忠说： 你暂时到蜀中处理一下军政大事，我屈指计日等着你回来，然后任命你为宰相。 
English: Xuanzong said to Yang Guozhong: You should temporarily go to Shuzhong to deal with military and political affairs. I will wait for you to come back for a few days and then appoint you as prime minister.

古文：林甫时已有疾，忧懑不知所为，巫言一见上可小愈。
现代文：这时李林甫已重病在身，心中忧伤烦闷，不知道怎么办才好，巫人告诉他说，看见皇上病情就可以好转。
English: At this time, Li Linfu was seriously ill. He was sad and depressed and did not know what to do. The sorcerer told him that he could get better if he saw the emperor's condition.

古文：上欲就视之，左右固谏。
现代文：玄宗想去看望李林甫，左右的人坚持劝阻。
English: Xuanzong wanted to visit Li Linfu, but the people around him insisted on dissuading him.

古文：上乃命林甫出庭中，上登降圣阁遥望，以红巾招之。
现代文：于是玄宗就命令李林甫从屋里出来到庭院中，玄宗登上降圣阁远远地看他，挥起红色的围巾向他招手。
English: Therefore, Xuanzong ordered Li Linfu to come out of the house into the courtyard. Xuanzong boarded the pavilion to watch him from a distance, waving his red scarf and beckoning to him.

古文：林甫不能拜，使人代拜。
现代文：李林甫已不能下拜，就让人代他向玄宗下拜。
English: Li Linfu could no longer bow, so he asked someone to bow to Xuanzong on his behalf.

古文：国忠比至蜀，上遣中使召还，至昭应，谒林甫，拜于床下。
现代文：杨国忠刚到蜀中，玄宗就派宦官把他召了回来。杨国忠到昭应县，去见李林甫，拜倒在床下。
English: As soon as Yang Guozhong arrived at Shu Middle School, Xuanzong sent a eunuch to summon him back. Yang Guozhong went to Zhaoying County to see Li Linfu and prostrated himself under the bed.

古文：林甫流涕谓曰： 林甫死矣，公必为相，以后事累公！ 
现代文：李林甫流着眼泪对杨国忠说： 我活不长了，我死后您必定要当宰相，后事就拜托您了。 
English: With tears streaming down his face, Li Linfu said to Yang Guozhong, "I don't have long to live. After my death, you will definitely become the prime minister. I'll ask you to take care of the rest."

古文：国忠谢不敢当，汗流覆面。
现代文：杨国忠表示感谢，并说不敢当，汗流满面。
English: Yang Guozhong expressed his thanks and said that he did not dare to do so, and his face was covered in sweat.

古文：十一月，丁卯，林甫薨。
现代文：十一月丁卯，李林甫故去。
English: November Dingwu, Li Linfu passed away.

古文：上晚年自恃承平，以为天下无复可忧，遂深居禁中，专以声色自娱，悉委政事于林甫。
现代文：玄宗晚年自认为天下太平，没有可以忧愁的事了，于是居于深宫之中，沉湎于声色犬马，寻求欢娱，把政事都委托给李林甫。
English: In his later years, Xuanzong thought that the world was at peace and there was nothing to be sad about, so he lived in the middle of the Deep Palace, indulged in the sound of dogs and horses, sought pleasure, and entrusted the affairs of state to Li Linfu.

古文：林甫媚事左右，迎合上意，以固其宠；杜绝言路，掩蔽聪明，以成其奸；妒贤疾能，排抑胜己，以保其位；屡起大狱，诛逐贵臣，以张其势。
现代文：李林甫巴结讨好玄宗左右的人，故意迎合玄宗的心意，以巩固自己受宠信的地位；杜绝堵塞向玄宗进谏的门路，蒙蔽玄宗，以施展自己的奸滑的权术；嫉妒贤能之士，排斥压抑才能胜过自己的人，以保持自己的地位；多次制造冤假错案，杀戮驱逐朝中大臣，以护大自己的权势。
English: Li Linfuba courted the people around and around Xuanzong, deliberately pandering to Xuanzong's wishes in order to consolidate his favored status; blocked the doorway to Xuanzong, blinded Xuanzong, and exercised his treacherous power tactics; envied the talented people, rejected and suppressed those who could outperform him, in order to maintain his position; repeatedly created unjust and false cases, killed and expelled the ministers of the DPRK and China, in order to protect his power.

古文：自皇太子以下，畏之侧足。
现代文：皇太子以下的人，都畏之如虎。
English: People below the rank of crown prince are feared like tigers.

古文：凡在相位十九年，养成天下之乱，而上不之寤也。
现代文：李林甫当宰相共十九年，造成了天下大乱的局势，而玄宗还不省悟。
English: Li Linfu served as prime minister for a total of nineteen years, causing a chaotic situation in the world, and Xuanzong still did not come to his senses.

古文：庚申，以杨国忠为右相，兼文部尚书，其判使并如故。
现代文：庚申，玄宗任命杨国忠为右相，兼文部尚书，仍兼任以前的使职。
English: Goshun, Xuanzong appointed Yang Guozhong as the minister of the right, and also the minister of education, still holding the previous post.

古文：国忠为人强辩而轻躁，无威仪。
现代文：杨国忠为人争强好胜，但性情浮躁，没有威严的仪表。
English: Yang Guozhong is competitive and eager to win, but he is impetuous and does not have a dignified appearance.

古文：既为相，以天下为己任，裁决机务，果敢不疑；居朝廷，攘裾扼腕，公卿以下，颐指气使，莫不震慑。
现代文：既为宰相，自认为大权在握，以天下为己任，处理国家军政大事，刚愎自用，草率从事。在朝廷上常常捋起袖子，对王公大臣颐指气使，以至人人惊恐。
English: Even though he was the prime minister, he thought that he held great power and that it was his duty to rule the world. He handled the country's military and political affairs with arrogance and haste. At the imperial court, he often rolled up his sleeves and dictated to the prince ministers, so that everyone was alarmed.

古文：自侍御史至为相，凡领四十馀使。
现代文：杨国忠从兼侍御史到任宰相，总共兼领四十多个使职。
English: Yang Guozhong went from concurrently serving as imperial historian to serving as prime minister. In total, he concurrently held more than forty posts.

古文：台省官有才行时名，不为己用者，皆出之。
现代文：台省中有才能和名声的人，如果不听他的话，就都想方设法将其贬为地方官。
English: If people with talent and reputation in Taiwan do not listen to him, they will try their best to demote them to local officials.

古文：或劝陕郡进士张彖谒国忠，曰： 见之，富贵立可图。 
现代文：有人劝陕郡进士张彖去晋见杨国忠，并说： 如果去拜见他，马上就可以富贵。 
English: Some people advised Zhang Ye, the Shaanxi County Young Scholar, to go to Jin to see Yang Guozhong, and said: If you go to see him, you can immediately become rich.

古文：彖曰： 吾辈依杨右相如泰山，吾以为冰山耳！
现代文：张彖说： 你们认为依靠杨右相就像泰山那样稳固，但我却认为是一座冰山！
English: Zhang Ye said: You think that relying on Yang Youxiang is as solid as Mount Tai, but I think it is an iceberg!

古文：若皎日既出，吾辈得无失所恃乎！ 
现代文：如果烈日高照，你们难道不怕冰山消融而失去依靠吗！ 
English: If the scorching sun shines, aren't you afraid that the iceberg will melt and you will lose your support?

古文：遂隐居嵩山。
现代文：于是就隐居于嵩山中。
English: So he went into seclusion in the mountains of Song.

古文：国忠以司勋员外郎崔圆为剑南留后，征魏郡太守吉温为御史中丞，充京畿、关内采访等使。
现代文：杨国忠任命司勋员外郎崔圆为剑南留后，征魏郡太守吉温为御史中丞，兼京畿、关内采访等使。
English: After Yang Guozhong appointed his son-in-law Cui Yuan, who was a member of the Honor Division, to stay in Jianan, he appointed Ji Wen, the grand marshal of Wei County, as the vice-commander of history, and also as the envoy to Gyeonggi and Guanzhong.

古文：温诣范阳辞安禄山，禄山令其子庆绪送至境，为温控马出驿数十步。
现代文：吉温临行前到范阳向安禄山告别，安禄山让他的儿子安庆绪一直把吉温送出境，并为吉温牵着马送出驿站大门数十步。
English: Before leaving, Jiwen went to Fanyang to bid farewell to Anlu Shan. Anlu Shan had his son An Qingxu escort Jiwen all the way out of the country, and he led Jiwen out of the gate of the station on a horse for dozens of steps.

古文：温至长安，凡朝廷动静，辄报禄山，信宿而达。
现代文：吉温到了长安后，对明廷中的一举一动，都向安禄山报告，消息两天两夜就可以到达。
English: After Jiwen arrived in Chang'an, he reported to Anlu Mountain every move of Mingting, and the news could arrive in two days and two nights.

古文：十二月，杨国忠欲收人望，建议： 文部选人，无问贤不肖，选深者留之，依资据阙注官。 
现代文：十二月，杨国忠为了收买人心，建议说： 文部选拔官吏，不管贤明与否，选择有资历的留下，依照声望和功绩任命一定的职位。 
English: In December, Yang Guozhong, in order to win the hearts and minds of the people, suggested that: the Ministry of Education should select officials, whether wise or not, select those with seniority to stay, and appoint certain positions according to reputation and merit.

古文：滞淹者翕然称之。
现代文：那些长期得不到升迁的官吏都赞成这一建议。
English: Officials who have not been promoted for a long time are in favor of this proposal.

古文：国忠凡所施置，皆曲徇时人所欲，故颇得众誉。
现代文：凡杨国忠所施行的政策，都曲意迎合人们的愿望，所以受到一些人的称颂。
English: All the policies implemented by Yang Guozhong are designed to meet people's wishes, so they have been praised by some people.

古文：甲申，以平卢兵马使史思明兼北平太守，充卢龙军使。
现代文：甲申，玄宗命平卢兵马使史思明兼任北平太守，并为卢龙军使。
English: Gao Shin, Xuanzong ordered the military envoy of Pinglu and Lulong, Shi Siming, to concurrently serve as the governor of Beiping, and he was also the military envoy of Lulong.

古文：丁亥，上还宫。
现代文：丁亥，玄宗返回宫中。
English: Dinghai, Xuanzong returned to the palace.

古文：丁酉，以安西行军司马封常清为安西四镇节度使。
现代文：丁酉，玄宗任命安西行军司马封常清为安西四镇节度使。
English: Ding Xi, Xuanzong appointed Anxi marching army Sima Feng Changqing as Anxi four towns festival envoy.

古文：哥舒翰素与安禄山、安思顺不协，上常和解之，使为兄弟。
现代文：哥舒翰素来与安禄山、安思顺有矛盾，玄宗常常为他们调解，使他们结拜为兄弟。
English: Goshukhan had always had conflicts with An Lushan and An Sishun. Xuanzong often mediated between them so that they could become brothers.

古文：是冬，三人俱入朝，上使高力士宴之于城东。
现代文：这年冬天，三人同入朝，玄宗让高力士在城东设宴招待他们。
English: This winter, the three of them entered the imperial court together, and Emperor Xuanzong asked Gao Lixing to host a banquet for them in the east of the city.

古文：禄山谓翰曰： 我父胡，母突厥，公父突厥，母胡，族类颇同，何得不相亲？ 
现代文：席间安禄山对哥舒翰说： 我的父亲是胡人，母亲是突厥人，您的父亲是突厥人，母亲是胡人，我们的族类十分相近，为什么不互相亲善呢？ 
English: During the meal, An Lushan said to Goshukhan: My father is a Hu, my mother is a Turk, your father is a Turk, your mother is a Hu, our races are very close, why not be friendly to each other?

古文：翰曰： 古人云：狐向窟嗥不祥，为其忘本故也。
现代文：哥舒翰说： 古人说狐狸向着自己的洞窟嚎叫不吉祥，是因为忘本的原故。
English: Goshukhan said: The ancients said that it was not auspicious for a fox to howl at his cave because he had forgotten his books.

古文：兄苟见亲，翰敢不尽心！ 
现代文：老兄如果能够与我亲善，我怎么敢不尽心呢！ 
English: Dude, if you can be friendly with me, how dare I not do my best!

古文：禄山以为讥其胡也，大怒，骂翰曰： 突厥敢尔！ 
现代文：安禄山认为哥舒翰讥讽他胡人，极为愤怒，骂哥舒翰道： 你这个突厥竟敢这样无礼！ 
English: An Lushan thought that Goshukhan was mocking him, and he was extremely angry. He scolded Goshukhan, saying, "You Turk, how dare you be so rude!

古文：翰欲应之，力士目翰，翰乃止，阳醉而散，自是为怨愈深。
现代文：哥舒翰正想要回骂，看见高力士用眼睛示意他，就没有回嘴，假装喝醉了酒而散席，从此积怨愈深。
English: Goshukhan was about to scold back, but when he saw that Kolya was winking at him, he didn't reply, pretending to be drunk and leaving the table. From then on, the resentment deepened.

古文：棣王琰有二孺人，争宠，其一使巫书符置琰履中以求媚。
现代文：棣王李琰有两个孺人，争风吃醋，其中一个暗中让巫师写了一道符放在李琰的鞋子里，借以讨好。
English: The dragon king, Lihong, had two jealous rivals. One of them secretly asked a sorcerer to write a charm in Lihong's shoe to win his favor.

古文：琰与监院宦者有隙，宦者知之，密奏琰祝诅上；上使人掩其履而获之，大怒。
现代文：李琰与监视他们的宦官有矛盾，宦官知道了这件事，就秘密地向玄宗上奏说李琰诅咒皇上，于是玄宗就派人突然搜查了李琰的鞋子，果然搜到了符，心中大怒。
English: When the eunuchs found out about this, they secretly reported to Emperor Xuanzong that Li Gan had cursed the emperor. Therefore, Emperor Xuanzong sent someone to search Li Gan's shoes, and they found the charms. He was furious.

古文：琰顿首谢： 臣实不知有符。 
现代文：李琰叩头谢罪说： 我实在不知道这件事。 
English: "I really didn't know about it," said Xie Sin, Li Yan's flunky.

古文：上使鞫之，果孺人所为。
现代文：玄宗派人审问，原来是孺人干的。
English: Xuanzong sent someone to interrogate him, and it turned out that it was Xuanren who did it.

古文：上犹疑琰知之，囚于鹰狗坊，绝朝请，忧愤而薨。
现代文：但玄宗还是怀李琰知道此事，就把他囚禁在鹰狗坊中，不再让他上朝请安，李琰忧愤而死。
English: However, Xuanzong still knew that Huai Li Rong knew about this, so he imprisoned him in the Eagle and Dog Courtyard, and no longer allowed him to go to the court to ask for peace. Li Rong died of grief and anger.

古文：故事，兵、吏部尚书知政事者，选事悉委侍郎以下，三注三唱，仍过门下省审，自春及夏，其事乃毕。
现代文：按照过去的制度，兵部和吏部尚书如果兼任宰相，就把科举考试的事委托给侍郎以下的官吏去主持，经过三项考试而通过的，才送给门下省审查，从春天一直到夏天，才能完毕。
English: According to the previous system, if the Minister of Military Affairs and the Minister of Personnel were concurrently appointed as the Prime Minister, they would entrust the examination of the imperial examinations to the officials below the chamberlain to preside over. After passing three examinations, they would be sent to the provincial review under the door, and it would take from spring to summer to complete.

古文：及杨国忠以宰相领文部尚书，欲自示精敏，乃遣令史先于私第密定名阙。
现代文：到杨国忠以宰相兼领文部尚书时，想要显示自己精明能干，就让有关官吏先在自己的家里暗中把名字确定下来。
English: When Yang Guozhong became prime minister and minister of education, he wanted to show that he was shrewd and capable, so he asked the relevant officials to secretly confirm his name in his home.

古文：天宝十二年癸巳，公元七五三年
现代文：十二载
English: 12 years

古文：春，正月，壬戌，国忠召左相陈希烈及给事中、诸司长官皆集尚书都堂，唱注选人，一日而毕，曰： 今左相、给事中俱在座，已过门下矣。 
现代文：春季，正月壬戌，杨国忠召左相陈希烈及给事中、各部门的长官都聚集于尚书都堂，决定入选的人，只用了一天就结束了，他说： 现在左相和给事中都在这里，就等于通过了门下省的审查。 
English: In the spring, in the first month of the year, Yang Guozhong summoned the left minister Chen Xili and the minister of internal affairs, and the heads of various departments gathered in Shangshudu Hall. The person who decided to be selected took only one day to finish. He said: Now the left minister and the minister of internal affairs are here, it is equivalent to passing the examination of the subordinate province.

古文：其间资格差缪甚众，无敢言者。
现代文：所选的人水平差距很大，但没有人敢于提意见。
English: The calibre of those chosen varies widely, but no one dares to offer an opinion.

古文：于是门下不复过官，侍郎但掌试判而已。
现代文：因此门下省不再审查被选为官的人，侍郎只主考判文而已。
English: As a result, subordinate ministries no longer scrutinize people who have been elected as officials, and only chamberlains are in charge of examining and judging documents.

古文：侍郎韦见素、张倚趋走门庭，与主事无异。
现代文：侍郎韦见素和张倚跑腿办事，与吏部主事没有两样。
English: Servant Wei Mingsu and Zhang Jie run errands, which is no different from being in charge of the personnel department.

古文：见素，凑之子也。
现代文：韦见素是韦凑的儿子。
English: Wei Jinsu is the son of Wei Qin.

古文：京兆尹鲜于仲通讽选人请为国忠刻颂，立于省门，制仲通撰其辞；上为改定数字，仲通以金填之。
现代文：京兆尹鲜于仲通暗示入选的人请为杨国忠刻颂辞，立于尚书省门口，玄宗下制让鲜于仲通撰写颂辞，亲自改定了几个字，鲜于仲通用黄金填写。
English: Jing Zhao, Yin Xiang and Zhongtong suggested that the selected people should carve a eulogy for Yang Guozhong, which was erected at the entrance of Shangshu Province. Xuanzong ordered Xiang Xiang to write a eulogy for Zhongtong, personally changed a few words, and Xiang Xiang to fill it with gold.

古文：杨国忠使人说安禄山诬李林甫与阿布思谋反，禄山使阿布思部落降者诣阙，诬告林甫与阿布思约为父子。
现代文：杨国忠派人劝安禄山，让他诬告李林甫与阿布思谋反，安禄山就让阿布思部落投降的人到朝廷，诬告说李林甫与阿布思曾经结为父子关系。
English: Yang Guozhong sent someone to persuade Anlu Shan to falsely accuse Li Linfu of plotting a rebellion with Abu Si. Anlu Shan then had the surrendering members of the Abu Si tribe go to the imperial court and falsely accuse Li Linfu of having fathered a child with Abu Si.

古文：上信之，下吏按问；林甫婿谏议大夫杨齐宣惧为所累，附国忠意证成之。
现代文：玄宗相信了，就派官吏去调查。李林甫的女婿谏议大夫杨齐宣恐怕自己受到牵连，就按照杨国忠的意图证明说有此事。
English: Xuanzong believed it and sent officials to investigate. Li Linfu's son-in-law, Yang Qixuan, advised the doctor that if he feared he would be implicated, he would prove that the matter was in accordance with Yang Guozhong's intention.

古文：时林甫尚未葬，二月，癸未，制削林甫官爵；子孙有官者除名，流岭南及黔中，给随身衣及粮食，自馀资产并没官；近亲及党与坐贬者五十馀人。
现代文：当时李林甫还没有埋葬，二月癸未，玄宗下制书削去李林甫的官爵，子孙中有官职者被罢免，流放到岭南和黔中，只给随身穿的衣服和所吃的粮食，其余的财产全部没收。李林甫的亲戚和党羽因这一案件被贬官的达五十余人。
English: At that time, Li Linfu had not yet been buried. In February of the same year, Xuanzong's book production department stripped Li Linfu of his title of nobility. The descendants of those who held official positions were dismissed and exiled to Lingnan and Handan. They were only given the clothes they were wearing and the food they ate, and the rest of their property was confiscated. More than fifty of Li Linfu's relatives and party members were demoted because of this case.

古文：剖林甫棺，抉取含珠，褫金紫，更以小棺如庶人礼葬之。
现代文：又剖开李林甫的棺材，取出了口中所含的珍珠，脱掉金紫衣服，换上了一个小棺材，按照一般平民的礼仪埋葬了他。
English: He also opened Li Linfu's coffin, took out the pearls contained in his mouth, took off his gold and purple clothes, put on a small coffin, and buried him according to the etiquette of ordinary civilians.

古文：己亥，赐陈希烈爵许国公，杨国忠爵魏国公，赏其成林甫之狱也。
现代文：己亥，玄宗赐陈希烈许国公爵位，杨国忠魏国公爵位，以奖赏他们揭发和处置李林甫案件一事。
English: In addition, Emperor Xuanzong gave Chen Xili the title of Duke of Xu Province and Yang Guozhong the title of Duke of Wei Province to reward them for exposing and handling Li Linfu's case.

古文：夏，五月，己酉，复以魏、周、隋后为三恪，杨国忠欲攻李林甫之短也。
现代文：夏季，五月己酉，重新确定以北魏、北周和隋朝的后代为三恪，这是杨国忠故意要揭李林甫的短。
English: In the summer, in May, the descendants of the Northern Wei, Northern Zhou and Sui Dynasties were re-determined to be the three, which was a deliberate attempt by Yang Guozhong to expose Li Linfu's shortcomings.

古文：卫包以助邪贬夜郎尉，崔昌贬乌雷尉。
现代文：卫包因为助长邪恶被贬为夜郎县尉，崔昌被贬为乌雷县尉。
English: Wei Bao was demoted to Yelang County Lieutenant for promoting evil, and Cui Chang was demoted to Ulei County Lieutenant.

古文：阿布思为回纥所破，安禄山诱其部落而降之，由是禄山精兵，天下莫及。
现代文：阿布思被回纥打败，安禄山乘机诱降了他的部落，从此安禄山的军队兵强马壮，天下无敌。
English: Abuth was defeated by the Uighurs, and Anlu Mountain took the opportunity to seduce his tribe. Since then, the army of Anlu Mountain has been strong and invincible.

古文：壬辰，以左武卫大将军何复光将岭南五府兵击南诏。
现代文：壬辰，玄宗命令左武卫大将军何复光率领岭南五府的军队攻打南诏。
English: In Imjin, Emperor Xuanzong ordered General He Fuguang of Zuowei to lead the armies of the five southern prefectures of Lingnan to attack Nanzhao.

古文：安禄山以李林甫狡猾逾己，故畏服之。
现代文：安禄山因为李林甫的狡猾超过自己，所以对他十分畏服。
English: Because Li Linfu's cunning surpassed his own, An Lushan was very much intimidated by him.

古文：及杨国忠为相，禄山视之蔑如也，由是有隙。
现代文：到杨国忠为宰相，安禄山十分看不起他，因此二人有矛盾。
English: When Yang Guozhong became the prime minister, An Lushan despised him very much, so the two had a conflict.

古文：国忠屡言禄山有反状，上不听。
现代文：杨国忠多次说安禄山要谋反，但玄宗不听。
English: Yang Guozhong repeatedly said that Anlu Mountain should rebel, but Xuanzong did not listen.

古文：陇右节度使哥舒翰击吐蕃，拔洪济、大漠门等城，悉收九曲部落。
现代文：陇右节度使哥舒翰率军攻打吐蕃，攻克了吐蕃的洪济、大漠门等城，降服了九曲的全部部落。
English: He ordered his brother Shu Han and his army to attack Tuyun at the right time, and conquered the cities of Hongji and Daming of Tuyun, and subjugated all the tribes of the Nine Provinces.

古文：初，高丽人王思礼与翰俱为押牙，事王忠嗣。
现代文：起初，高丽人王思礼与哥舒翰都在王忠嗣的部下作押牙。
English: At the beginning, the Koreans Wang Sirei and Goshukhan both served as aides to Wang Zhongzhi's subordinates.

古文：翰为节度使，思礼为兵马使兼河源军使。
现代文：哥舒翰为节度使，王思礼为兵马使兼河源军使。
English: Goshukhan was the festival envoy, and Wang Sili was the envoy of the soldiers and horses and the envoy of Heyuan.

古文：翰击九曲，思礼后期；翰将斩之，既而复召释之。
现代文：哥舒翰率军攻打九曲部落，王思礼延误了军期，哥舒翰先想要杀他，不久又把他叫来释放了。
English: Goshukhan led the army to attack the Jiuqu tribe, Wang Sili delayed the military period, Goshukhan first wanted to kill him, and soon called him to release him.

古文：思礼徐曰： 斩则遂斩，复召何为！ 
现代文：王思礼镇静地说： 要杀就杀，又把我叫来干什么！ 
English: Wang Sili said calmly: If you want to kill, then kill, why did you call me here!

古文：杨国忠欲厚结翰与共排安禄山，奏以翰兼河西节度使。
现代文：杨国忠想联结哥舒翰共同对付安禄山，就奏请玄宗任命哥舒兼任河西节度使。
English: Yang Guozhong wanted to unite with his brother Shu Han to jointly deal with Anlu Mountain, so he asked Xuanzong to appoint his brother Shu to serve as the Hexi Festival envoy.

古文：秋，八月，戊戌，赐翰爵西平郡王。
现代文：秋季，八月戊戌，玄宗又赐哥舒翰西平郡王爵位。
English: In the autumn, in August, Emperor Xuanzong bestowed the title of Prince of Xiping County to his brother Shuhan.

古文：翰表侍御史裴冕为河西行军司马。
现代文：哥舒翰上表奏请任命侍御史裴冕为河西行军司马。
English: Go Shuhan, please appoint the attendant Shi Pei Guan as the leader of the troops marching to Hexi.

古文：是时中国盛强，自安远门西尽唐境凡万二千里，闾阎相望，桑麻翳野，天下称富庶者无如陇右。
现代文：这时唐朝强盛，从长安城西的安远门向西一万二千里都是唐朝的领土，村落相望，桑麻被野，天下最富饶的地区都不如陇右。
English: At this time, the Tang Dynasty was strong. From the Anyuan Gate west of Chang'an City to the west, twelve thousand miles were the territory of the Tang Dynasty. The villages looked at each other, the mulberry fields, and the richest areas in the world were not as good as the right.

古文：翰每遣使入奏，常乘白橐驼，日驰五百里。
现代文：哥舒翰每次派使者入朝奏事，总是乘白骆驼，一天行五百里。
English: Whenever Goshukhan sent an envoy to the court to report, he always rode a white camel, traveling five hundred miles a day.

古文：九月，甲辰，以突骑施黑姓可汗登里伊罗蜜施为突骑施可汗。
现代文：九月甲辰，朝廷封突骑施黑姓可汗登里伊罗蜜施为突骑施可汗。
English: At the first hour of September, the imperial court appointed the horse rider Shi He, surnamed Khan Dengli Iromi, as the horse rider Shi Khan.

古文：北庭都护程千里追阿布思至碛西，以书谕葛逻禄，使相应。
现代文：北庭都护程千里追击阿布思到了碛西，写信告谕葛逻禄，让他接应。
English: Bei Ting Du Guocheng chased Abu Sisi thousands of miles to Shaanxi, and wrote a letter to Ge Lulu, asking him to respond.

古文：阿布思穷迫，归葛逻禄，葛逻禄叶护执之，并其妻子、麾下数千人送之。
现代文：这时阿布思无路可走，就投向葛逻禄，葛逻禄把他抓了起来，连同他的妻子、儿子及部下数千人送交程千里。
English: At this time, Abu Sisi had nowhere to go, so he threw himself at Geloglu. Geloglu caught him and sent him thousands of miles away, together with his wife, son and thousands of subordinates.

古文：甲寅，加葛逻禄叶护顿毘伽开府仪同三司，赐爵金山王。
现代文：甲寅，朝廷加封葛逻禄叶护顿毗伽开府仪同三司，赐爵位金山王。
English: In the year of Jia Yin, the court added Ge Luo, Lu Ye, Dong Pi, Jia Kaifu, Tong San Shi, and gave him the title of King of Jinshan.

古文：杨国忠与虢国夫人居第相邻，昼夜往来，无复期度，或并辔走马入朝，不施障幕，道路为之掩目。
现代文：杨国忠的宅第与虢国夫人相邻，因此二人昼夜往来，不用相约，有时竟并马一起入朝，也不用障幕遮蔽，路边的人都觉得羞耻而无法看下去。
English: Yang Guozhong's residence is adjacent to that of Lady Zeng Guo. Therefore, the two of them go back and forth day and night without having to make an appointment. Sometimes, they even enter the imperial palace together, without having to be shielded by a barrier. People on the roadside feel ashamed and can't look on.

古文：三夫人将从车驾幸华清宫，会于国忠第；车马仆从，充溢数坊，锦绣珠玉，鲜华夺目。
现代文：韩国、虢国和秦国三夫人将要跟随玄宗前往华清宫，在杨国忠的家中相会，所跟从的车马仆从，浩浩荡荡，占满了城中数坊之地，所穿的锦衣绣服和佩带的珍珠宝玉，鲜艳夺目。
English: The three queens of Korea, Shandong Province and Qin Province will follow Xuanzong to the Huaqing Palace and meet at the home of Yang Guozhong. The car and horse servants they follow are huge and occupy several square meters in the city. The embroidered clothes they wear and the pearl jewels they wear are bright and eye-catching.

古文：国忠谓客曰： 吾本寒家，一旦缘椒房至此，未知税驾之所，然念终不能致令名，不若且极乐耳。 
现代文：杨国忠曾经对客人说： 我本出身贫苦人家庭，只是因为贵妃的关系才有了今天的地位，不知道以后会有什么结果，但想到终究留不下好的声誉，还不如及时行乐。 
English: Yang Guozhong once said to a guest: I originally came from a poor family. It is only because of the relationship with the empress that I have today's status. I don't know what will happen in the future, but if I think that I can't keep a good reputation after all, I might as well enjoy myself in time.

古文：杨氏五家，队各为一色衣以相别，五家合队，粲若云锦；国忠仍以剑南旌节引于其前。
现代文：杨氏五家，每家为一队，每队都穿着一种颜色的衣服相区别，然后五家合为一队，远远望见，灿烂如云锦。杨国忠还让剑南节度使的仪仗在队伍前面领路。
English: The five families of the Yang clan, each family is a team, each team is wearing a different color of clothes, and then the five families are combined into one team, which can be seen from far away, shining like cloud brocade. Yang Guozhong also let the ceremonial battle of the Jiannan Festival lead the way in front of the team.

古文：国忠子暄举明经，学业荒陋，不及格。
现代文：杨国忠的儿子杨暄考明经科，因为学业浅陋，没有及格。
English: Yang Guozhong's son, Yang Hui, failed to pass the entrance examination of the Chinese language and literature department because of his poor academic performance.

古文：礼部侍郎达奚珣畏国忠权势，遣其子昭应尉抚先白之。
现代文：礼部侍郎达奚因为畏惧杨国忠的权势，就让他的儿子昭应县尉达奚抚先去告诉杨国忠。
English: The attendant of the ceremonial department, Daju, was afraid of the power of Yang Guozhong, so he asked his son, Zhao Ying County Lieutenant Dajufu, to go first to tell Yang Guozhong.

古文：抚伺国忠入朝上马，趋至马下；国忠意其子必中选，有喜色。
现代文：达奚抚趁杨国忠正要上马入朝时，来到马旁。杨国忠想他的儿子一定能够中选，面露喜色。
English: Dafu took advantage of the fact that Yang Guozhong was about to enter the imperial court on a horse, and came to the horse's side. Yang Guozhong thought that his son would certainly be able to win the election, and his face was beaming with joy.

古文：抚曰： 大人白相公，郎君所试，不中程式，然亦未敢落也。 
现代文：达奚抚告诉杨国忠说： 我家大人让我告诉相公，您家郎君的答卷不符合程式，没有考中，但是也不敢让他落选。 
English: Dafeng told Yang Guozhong: My parents asked me to tell my brother-in-law that your brother-in-law's answer sheet did not meet the program, he did not pass the middle school exam, but I did not dare to let him lose the election.

古文：国忠怒曰： 我子何患不富贵，乃令鼠辈相卖！ 
现代文：杨国忠愤怒地说： 我的儿子何愁不能富贵，而让你们这些鼠辈人物来卖弄！ 
English: Yang Guozhong said angrily, "My son can't be rich, but let you rat-faced people show off!

古文：策马不顾而去。
现代文：说完催马头也不回地走了。
English: After saying that, he left without looking back.

古文：抚惶遽，书白其父曰： 彼恃挟贵势，令人惨嗟，安可复与论曲直！ 
现代文：达奚抚十分惊慌，就写信告诉他的父亲说： 杨国忠依恃权势，口出狂言，实在使人叹息，怎么能够与他论是非曲直呢！ 
English: Da Yufu was very alarmed and wrote a letter to his father, saying: "Yang Guozhong is clinging to power and uttering wild words. It really makes people sigh. How can we discuss the rights and wrongs with him?"

古文：遂置暄上第。
现代文：于是达奚就把杨暄列入优等。
English: As a result, Daguang listed Yang Hui as a superior.

古文：及暄为户部侍郎，珣始自礼部迁吏部，暄与所亲言，犹叹己之淹回，珣之迅疾。
现代文：及杨暄做了户部侍郎，达奚才从礼部侍郎升为吏部侍郎，而杨暄与关系亲密的人交谈时，还叹恨自己晋升太慢，达奚晋升快。
English: And Yang Hui became a household attendant, and Dadun was promoted from a ceremonial attendant to an administrative attendant, and when Yang Hui talked to people with close relationships, he also lamented that he was promoted too slowly, and Dadun was promoted quickly.

古文：国忠既居要地，中外饷遗辐凑，积缣至三千万匹。
现代文：杨国忠因为身居要职，朝野内外向他送礼的人不绝其门，仅家中堆积的丝织品就有三千万匹。
English: Because Yang Guozhong held an important position, people inside and outside the court gave him gifts. There were 30 million pieces of silk fabric piled up in his home alone.

古文：上在华清宫，欲夜出游，龙武大将军陈玄礼谏曰： 宫外即旷野，安可不备不虞！
现代文：玄宗在华清宫想要夜晚出游，龙武大将军陈玄礼进谏说： 华清宫外就是野地，怎么能够不考虑安全呢！
English: When Xuanzong wanted to go out at night in the Huaqing Palace, Longwu Grand General Chen Xuanli said: "Outside the Huaqing Palace is a field, how can you not consider safety!

古文：陛下必欲夜游，请归城阙。 
现代文：陛下如果一定想要出游，请回城去。 
English: Your Majesty, if you must travel, please come back to the city.

古文：上为之引还。
现代文：玄宗因此回宫。
English: As a result, Emperor Xuanzong returned to the palace.

古文：是岁，安西节度使封常清击大勃律，至菩萨劳城，前锋屡捷，常清乘胜逐之。
现代文：这一年，安西节度使封常清率兵进攻大勃律，到了菩萨劳城，先头部队多次获胜，封常清就乘胜追击。
English: In this year, the Anxi Festival made Fong Changqing and his soldiers attack Dabro, and when they arrived at the city of Bodhisattva Lao, the leading troops won many times, and Fong Changqing took advantage of the victory to pursue.

古文：斥候府果毅段秀实谏曰： 虏兵羸而屡北，诱我也；请搜左右山林。 
现代文：这时斥候府要毅段秀实进谏说： 敌人兵力弱而多次败逃，这是引诱我们，请派兵搜查两边的山林。 
English: At this time, the scouting prefect, Yi Duan Xiuzhi, came to the gate and said, "The enemy's army is weak and has been defeated and fled many times. This is to lure us. Please send soldiers to search the mountains and forests on both sides.

古文：常清从之，果获伏兵，遂大破之，受降而还。
现代文：封常清听从了段秀实的劝告，派兵搜寻，果然有伏兵，于是大败大勃律，受降而回。
English: Feng Changqing listened to Duan Xiusheng's advice, sent troops to search, and indeed there was an ambush. As a result, he suffered a great defeat and was forced to retreat.

古文：中书舍人宋昱知选事，前进士广平刘乃以选法未善，上书于昱，以为： 禹、稷、皋陶同居舜朝，犹曰载采有九德，考绩以九载。
现代文：中书舍人宋昱主持科举考试，前进士广平人刘乃认为科举选人的方法并不合理，就上书宋昱说： 大禹、后稷和皋陶三位圣贤都在虞舜一朝做官，他们还说日日都要吸取人们九种美善的德行，用九年的时间考察一个人的能力。
English: Song Xi, a scholar of Chinese classics, presided over the imperial examination, and Liu Nai, a scholar of Chinese classics, thought that the method of selecting people by imperial examination was not reasonable, so he wrote to Song Xi saying: Dayu, Houyi and Jintao, three sages, all served as officials in the reign of Yu Xi. They also said that they had to absorb nine kinds of virtuous virtues from people every day, and use nine years to examine a person's ability.

古文：近代主司，察言于一幅之判，观行于一揖之间，何古今迟速不侔之甚哉！
现代文：而现在掌管选人的官吏却根据一篇判文就决定一个人的文字水平，根据一个作揖就判断一个人的行为是否合乎礼仪，古今选官的快慢差距竟会这么大吗！
English: But now the officials in charge of selecting people decide a person's level of literacy based on a sentence, and judge whether a person's behavior is in line with etiquette based on a single action. Can the difference between the speed of selecting officials in the past and the present be so great?

古文：借使周公、孔子今处铨廷，考其辞华，则不及徐、庾，观其利口，则不若啬夫，何暇论圣贤之事业乎！ 
现代文：假如让周公、孔子站在今天的考堂上，考他们的文章，则比不过南朝的徐陵和庾信，看他们的口才，则比不过汉代的啬夫，哪有机会论说圣贤的事业呢！ 
English: If Zhou Gong and Confucius were to stand in today's examination hall, and their essays were tested, they would be no better than Xu Ling and Xuan Xin of the Southern Dynasty, and their eloquence would be no better than the miser of the Han Dynasty. How could they have the opportunity to discuss the cause of saints and sages!

