古文：起昭阳单瘀七月，尽旃蒙大荒落十月，凡二年有奇。
现代文：起昭阳单瘀七月，尽旃蒙大荒落十月，凡二年有奇。
English: From Zhaoyang in July to Mengda in October, every two years is a strange year.

古文：代宗睿文孝武皇帝上之下
现代文：代宗睿文孝武皇帝上之下
English: Emperor Wenzhong and Emperor Wenzhong

古文：广德元年癸卯，公元七六三年秋，七月，壬寅，群臣上尊号曰宝应元圣文武孝皇帝。
现代文：唐代宗广德元年秋季，七月壬寅，大臣们为唐代宗进献尊号，称作宝应元圣文武孝皇帝。
English: In the autumn of the first year of the Tang Dynasty Zong Guangde, July Ren Yin, the ministers gave the Tang Dynasty Zong Jin the title of honor, called the Emperor Bao Ying Yuan Shengwen Wu Xiao.

古文：壬子，赦天下，改元。
现代文：壬子，大赦天下，改年号为广德。
English: Ren Zi, amnesty to the world, changed his name to Guang De.

古文：诸将讨史朝义者进官阶、加爵邑有差。
现代文：征讨史朝义有功的将领加官进爵，封赏食邑，各有等差。
English: The generals who have made meritorious contributions to the conquest of the historical morning have been promoted to the rank of knight, and have been rewarded with food, each with a difference.

古文：册回纥可汗为颉咄登蜜施合俱录英义建功毘伽可汗，可敦为娑墨光亲丽华毘伽可敦；左、右杀以下，皆加封赏。
现代文：又册封回纥可汗为颉咄登蜜施合俱录英义建功毗伽可汗，册封回纥可敦为娑墨光亲丽华毗伽可敦，回纥左杀、右杀官职以下的将领也都有封赏。
English: In addition, Huigang Khan was awarded the title of "Honorable" and "Meritorious" General, Huigang Khan was awarded the title of "Honorable" General, Huigang Khan was awarded the title of "Honorable" General, Huigang Khan was awarded the title of "Honorable" General, Huigang Khan was awarded the title of "Honorable" General, Huigang Khan was awarded the title of "Honorable" General, Huigang Khan was awarded the title of "Honorable" General and Huigang Khan was awarded the title of "Honorable" General.

古文：戊辰，杨绾上贡举条目：秀才问经义二十条，对策五道；国子监举人，令博士荐于祭酒，祭酒试通者升之于省，如乡贡法。
现代文：戊辰，杨绾提出新的科举考试条例：秀才问经义二十条，对策五道。国子监推举的人才，首先让博士向国子祭酒推荐，通过国子监祭酒考试后，再送到尚书省，如同科举制度中乡贡法一样。
English: Wuchen and Yang Hui proposed new regulations for the imperial examination: 20 questions on the meaning of the sutras and five countermeasures for the gifted. The talent recommended by the provincial overseer of education should first be recommended by the doctor to the provincial overseer of education, and after passing the examination of the provincial overseer of education, it will be sent to Shangshu, just like the rural tribute in the imperial examination system.

古文：明法，委刑部考试。
现代文：明法科的考试，则委托刑部进行。
English: For the examination of criminal law, the Criminal Investigation Department was entrusted to conduct the examination.

古文：或以为明经、进士，行之已久，不可遽改。
现代文：有人认为明经、进士二科的考试实施已久，不可以突然改变。
English: Some people think that the examinations of the Ming Dynasty and the Jin Shi two subjects have been implemented for a long time, and cannot be suddenly changed.

古文：事虽不行。识者是之。
现代文：杨绾的建议虽然未能实施，但有识之士却认为它是切实可行的。
English: Although Yang Hui's suggestion could not be implemented, people with insight believed that it was feasible.

古文：以仆固瑒为朔方行营节度使。
现代文：代宗任命仆固为朔方行营节度使。
English: The daimyō appointed a servant, Gu, to be the envoy to the festival in the camp of the Shuo faction.

古文：吐蕃入大震关，陷兰、廓、河、鄯、洮、岷、秦、成、渭等州，尽取河西、陇右之地。
现代文：吐蕃侵入大震关，攻陷兰州、廓州、河州、州、洮州、岷州、秦州、成州、渭州等地，河西、陇右地区均为吐蕃占领。
English: Tubo invaded Dazhongguan and occupied Lanzhou, Guozhou, Hezhou, Zhou, Zhangzhou, Quanzhou, Qinzhou, Chengzhou, Zhangzhou and other places, and occupied Hexi and Shijiu regions.

古文：唐自武德以来，开拓边境，地连西域，皆置都督、府、州、县。
现代文：自从武德年间以来，唐朝向外开拓疆域，地域与西域相连。在这些地区都设置了都督、府、州、县等。
English: Since the Wude period, the Tang Dynasty has been expanding its territory, and the region is connected to the western region. In these regions, governors, prefectures, states, and counties have been set up.

古文：开元中，置朔方、陇右、河西、安西、北庭诸节度使以统之，岁发山东丁壮为戍卒，缯帛为军资，开屯田，供糗粮，设监牧，畜马牛，军城戍逻，万里相望。
现代文：开元年间，朝廷设置朔方、陇右、河西、安西、北庭各节度使管理西北地区，每年征发崤山以东的壮丁为戍守士卒，丝织品为军费，开荒屯田，为军队提供食粮，设置监牧，蓄养牛马，军城和巡逻哨所，万里相望。
English: During the first year of the 21st century, the imperial court set up the provinces of Shuofang, Shiyu, Hexi, Anxi and Beiting to administer the northwest region. Every year, the young men from the east of Lushan were conscripted as soldiers, silk fabrics were used for military expenses, wastelands were cleared, grain was provided for the army, shepherds were set up, cattle and horses were raised, and military towns and patrol posts were built.

古文：及安禄山反，边兵精锐者皆征发入援，谓之行营，所留兵单弱，胡虏稍蚕食之；数年间，西北数十州相继沦没，自凤翔以西，邠州以北，皆为左衽矣。
现代文：及至安禄山反叛，边镇的精锐部队都被抽调回来援救朝廷，称为行营。
English: As far as the Anlu Mountain rebellion, the elite troops of the border towns were all drawn back to rescue the imperial court, known as the "camping."

古文：初，仆固怀恩受诏与回纥可汗相见于太原；河东节度使辛云京以可汗乃怀恩婿，恐其合谋袭军府，闭城自守，亦不犒师。
现代文：剩下留守边镇的部队势单力薄，吐蕃军队便逐渐地将他们蚕食。数年时间，西北地区数十州相继沦陷，自凤翔以西，州以北，均为吐蕃军队所占领。当初，仆固怀恩奉肃宗诏令在太原与回纥可汗会晤，因为回纥可汗是仆固怀恩的女婿，河东节度使辛云京害怕他们合谋袭击军府，所以关闭城门，守备森严，也不去犒劳他们的部队。
English: For several years, dozens of prefectures in the northwest region fell one after another. From west of Fengxiang and north of the prefectures, they were all occupied by the Tubo army. At the beginning, Min Gu Wai En met with the Uygur Khan in Taiyuan by order of the Emperor Su, because the Uygur Khan was the son-in-law of Min Gu Wai En. The Hedong Festival made Xin Yunjing afraid that they would conspire to attack the military headquarters, so they closed the city gates, guarded them strictly, and did not reward their troops.

古文：及史朝义既平，诏怀恩送可汗出塞，往来过太原，云京亦闭城不与相闻。
现代文：史朝义被平定后，仆固怀恩奉诏送回纥可汗北出边塞，往来途中经过太原，辛云京都闭城不见。
English: After Shichongyi was subdued, the servant Gu Wai En was sent back to the northern outpost of Shih Khan by imperial edict. He passed through Taiyuan on his way to and from Shichongyi, and he did not see the closed city of Kyoto.

古文：怀恩怒，具表其状，不报。
现代文：仆固怀恩恼羞成怒，向代宗一一禀报，但是没有得到答复。
English: The servant, Gu Wai En, became angry and reported to the daimyō one by one, but received no reply.

古文：怀恩将朔方兵数万屯汾州，使其子御史大夫瑒将万人屯榆次，裨将李光逸等屯祈县，李怀光等屯晋州，张维岳等屯沁州。
现代文：仆固怀恩率领朔方镇兵数万人驻扎汾州，派遣其子御史大夫仆固率领士兵一万人驻扎榆次，副将李光逸、李怀光、张维岳等分别驻扎祁县、晋州、沁州。
English: Min Gu Wai Yan led tens of thousands of soldiers from Shuo Fang Zhen to be stationed in Ganzhou, and sent his son, Grand Historian Min Gu Zuo, to be stationed in Ganzhi with ten thousand soldiers. Vice Generals Li Guangyi, Li Huai Guang and Zhang Weiyue were stationed in Ganzhou, Jinzhou and Ganzhou respectively.

古文：怀光，本勃海靺鞨也，姓茹，为朔方将，以功赐姓。
现代文：李怀光本是勃海人，姓茹，是朔方将领，因功而被赐姓为李。
English: Li Huaiguang was originally from Bohai, surnamed Ru, and was a general of the Shuo faction. He was given the surname Li because of his merits.

古文：中使骆奉仙至太原，云京厚结之，为言怀恩与回纥连谋，反状已露。
现代文：中使骆奉仙到达太原，辛云京与他深深结纳，对他说仆固怀恩与回纥共谋叛乱，谋反的迹象已经暴露。
English: The Chinese envoy Luo Fengxian arrived in Taiyuan, and Xin Yunjing was deeply impressed with him, and told him that the servant Gu Wai and Hui Yao had conspired to rebel, and that the signs of rebellion had been exposed.

古文：奉仙还，过怀恩，怀恩与饮于母前，母数让奉仙曰： 汝与吾儿约为兄弟，今又亲云京，何两面也！ 
现代文：骆奉仙在返京途中经过仆固怀恩的驻地，仆固怀恩当着自己母亲的面设宴款待骆奉仙。宴席中，仆固怀恩的母亲多次责问骆奉仙说： 你与我儿子是结拜兄弟，如今又和辛云京亲近，你为什么要两面结交呢！ 
English: On the way back to Beijing, Luo Fengxian passed through the residence of the servant Gu Wai Yan. In front of his mother, Gu Wai Yan held a banquet to entertain Luo Fengxian. During the banquet, Gu Wai Yan's mother repeatedly scolded Luo Fengxian, saying: You and my son are brothers by marriage, and now you are close to Xin Yunjing. Why do you want to make friends on both sides?

古文：酒酣，怀恩起舞，奉仙赠以缠头彩。
现代文：酒喝到尽兴时，仆固怀恩起身舞蹈，骆奉仙将缠头彩物赠送给他。
English: When the wine was drunk to its fullest, the servant Gu Wai Yan got up to dance, and Luo Fengxian presented him with a head-wrapped ornament.

古文：怀恩欲酬之，曰： 来日端午，当更乐饮一日。 
现代文：仆固怀恩想要酬谢，说道： 到端午节时，我们再开怀痛饮一天。 
English: Minion Gu Huain wanted to repay the favor, saying: By the time of the Dragon Boat Festival, we will have another day of heavy drinking.

古文：奉仙固请行，怀恩匿其马，奉仙谓左右曰： 朝来责我，又匿我马，将杀我也。 
现代文：骆奉仙坚持请求要返回京师，仆固怀恩便将他的马藏匿起来，骆奉仙对随从说： 早晨，仆固怀恩的母亲来责问我，仆固怀恩又藏了我的马，他们将要杀掉我了。 
English: Luo Fengxian insisted on his request to return to Beijing, and his servant Gu Wai Yan hid his horse. Luo Fengxian said to his servant: In the morning, Gu Wai Yan's mother came to scold me. Gu Wai Yan also hid my horse. They are going to kill me.

古文：夜，逾垣而走；怀恩惊，遽以其马追还之。
现代文：夜里，骆奉仙跳墙而逃。仆固怀恩大惊，赶紧追上去将马还给他。
English: In the night, Luo Fengxian jumped over the wall and ran away. The servant Gu Wai En was shocked and quickly chased after him to return the horse to him.

古文：八月，癸未，奉仙至长安，奏怀恩谋反；怀恩亦具奏其状，请诛云京、奉仙；上两无所问，优诏和解之。
现代文：八月癸未，骆奉仙回到长安，上奏说仆固怀恩图谋造反；仆固怀恩也将全部情况上奏代宗，请求杀掉辛云京、骆奉仙。代宗不问双方情由，颁发优抚诏书让他们和解。
English: At the end of August, Luo Fengxian returned to Chang'an and reported to Emperor Daizong that Minion Gu Wai En was plotting a rebellion; Minion Gu Wai En also reported the entire situation to Emperor Daizong and asked him to kill Xin Yunjing and Luo Fengxian. Emperor Daizong did not ask the reasons of both sides, but issued an imperial edict to let them reconcile.

古文：怀恩自以兵兴以来，所在力战，一门死王事者四十六人，女嫁绝域，说谕回纥，再收两京，平定河南、北，功无与比，而为人构陷，愤怨殊深，上书自讼，以为： 臣昨奉诏送可汗归国，倾竭家资，俾之上道。
现代文：仆固怀恩自认为，从他兴师讨伐叛军以来，每次战斗他都竭力拼杀，一家为报效朝廷而牺牲的家属就达四十六人，女儿远嫁回纥，又劝说回纥出兵，再度收复西京长安、东都洛阳，平息河南、河北地区的叛乱，功绩谁也无法相比。但是，如今蒙受谗人的诬陷，怨愤重重。他上书为自己辩解，认为： 先前奉诏送回纥可汗回国，我倾家荡产，才使得回纥可汗踏上归途。
English: Minion Gu Wai Yan thought to himself that since he raised an army to fight against the rebels, he had fought hard in every battle. There were forty-six members of his family who had died in service to the imperial court. His daughter had married Hui Xuan, and he had persuaded Hui Xuan to send troops to recapture the western capital Chang'an and the eastern capital Luoyang, and to quell the rebellion in the Henan and Hebei regions. No one could compare to his achievements. However, now he was being framed by those who wanted to frame him, and he was very angry. He wrote a letter to defend himself, saying: I had previously sent Hui X

古文：行至山北，云京、奉仙闭城不出祗迎，仍令潜行窃盗。
现代文：但是我们路经太原时，辛云京、骆奉仙不仅紧闭城门，不出来恭迎，还命令部下悄悄地出来盗窃财物。
English: However, when we passed through Taiyuan, Xin Yunjing and Luo Fengxian not only closed the city gate and did not come out to welcome us, but also ordered their subordinates to quietly come out to steal property.

古文：回纥怨怒，亟欲纵兵，臣力为弥缝，方得出塞。
现代文：这一切引起了回纥人的愤怒，屡次打算纵兵掳掠，幸亏我竭力劝阻，缓和矛盾，方使得他们出塞回国。
English: All this aroused the anger of the Uighurs, who repeatedly planned to kidnap and plunder the soldiers. Fortunately, I did my best to dissuade them and ease the contradictions, which made them leave Tibet and return to their country.

古文：云京、奉仙恐臣先有奏论，遂复妄称设备，与李抱玉共相组织。
现代文：辛云京、骆奉仙害怕我先上奏论理，于是妄称回纥人设置军备，又与李抱玉相互勾结罗织我的罪名。
English: Xin Yunjing and Luo Fengxian were afraid that I would come up with an argument first, so they falsely claimed that the Uighurs had set up armaments, and colluded with Li Baoyu to fabricate my charges.

古文：臣静而思之，其罪有六：昔同罗叛乱，臣为先帝扫清河曲，一也；臣男玢为同罗所虏，得间亡归，臣斩之以令众士，二也；臣有二女，远嫁外夷，为国和亲，荡平寇敌，三也；臣与男瑒不顾死亡，为国效命，四也；河北新附，节度使皆握强兵，臣抚绥以安反侧，五也；臣说谕回纥，使赴急难，天下既平，送之归国，六也。
现代文：我冷静下来，默默地思索着，我的罪状有六条：第一，过去同罗叛乱，我为先帝扫清了河曲。第二，我儿子仆固玢被同罗俘虏，后来乘机逃回，我将他处斩以号令将士。第三，我有二个女儿远嫁外夷，为了国家而和亲，以消灭叛军。第四，我与儿子仆固不顾生死，为国效命。第五，河北叛军近来归附朝廷，节度使手中仍然掌握重兵，我前去抚慰，安定军心，使他们不再反叛。第六，我劝说回纥，使他们出兵解救朝廷的危难，天下已经平定，我又送他们回国。
English: I calmed down and silently pondered. There were six charges against me: First, I had rebelled against Tongluo in the past, and I had cleared the river for the former emperor. Second, my son Gu Yao was captured by Tongluo, but later he took the opportunity to escape and I executed him as a signal soldier. Third, I had two daughters who were married to foreigners, and for the sake of the country, I reconciled with my relatives in order to eliminate the rebels. Fourth, my son Gu Yao and I served the country regardless of life and death. Fifth, the Hebei rebels had recently joined the imperial court, and I still had heavy soldiers in my hands. I

古文：臣既负六罪，诚合万诛，惟当吞恨九泉，衔冤千古，复何诉哉！
现代文：我既然有六条罪状，确实应当杀头，只该饮恨九泉、含冤千古，还有什么可说的呢！
English: Since I have six charges against me, I really should kill myself. I should only drink from the fountain of hatred and bear the wrongs of thousands of years. What else is there to say?

古文：臣受恩至重，夙夜思奉天颜，但以来瑱受诛，朝廷不示其罪，诸道节度，谁不疑惧！
现代文：我深受朝廷的大恩，夙夜都想着到陛下身边侍奉。然而来被杀，朝廷没有公布他的罪状，诸道节度使谁不疑虑恐惧呢！
English: I am deeply indebted to the Imperial Court, and day and night I think about serving at His Majesty's side. However, when he was killed, the Imperial Court did not announce his charges, and everyone was filled with fear.

古文：近闻诏追数人，尽皆不至，实畏中官谗口，虚受陛下诛夷；岂惟群臣不忠，正为回邪在侧。
现代文：近来听说陛下颁诏要召回几个人，但是，他们都不敢来。这实际上是他们畏惧宦官的谗言，害怕枉遭陛下的杀戮。难道是大臣们不忠诚吗？恰恰相反，这正是因为邪恶的宦官伴随在陛下的身边的缘故。
English: I have recently heard that His Majesty issued a decree to recall several people, but they did not dare to come. This is actually because they are afraid of the eunuchs' criticism and fear of being killed by His Majesty in vain. Are the ministers not loyal? On the contrary, it is precisely because of the evil eunuchs accompanying His Majesty.

古文：且臣前后所奏骆奉仙，词情非不摭实，陛下竟无处置，宠任弥深；皆由同类比周，蒙蔽圣听。
现代文：况且，我前后上奏控告骆奉仙，所言均是事实，但是，陛下不仅不处置骆奉仙，而且愈加宠幸。这都是由于象骆奉仙一类人结党营私，蒙蔽陛下视听的缘故。
English: Moreover, what I have repeatedly said in my complaint against Luo Fengxian is all true, but His Majesty not only does not deal with Luo Fengxian, but also favors him more and more. This is all due to the fact that people like Luo Fengxian are partisan and blind His Majesty's eyes and ears.

古文：窃闻四方遣人奏事，陛下皆云与骠骑议之，曾不委宰相可否，或稽留数月不还，远近益加疑阻。
现代文：我私下听说地方上每次派遣使者上奏言事，陛下都说要与骠骑大将军程元振商议，却从来不曾委托宰相来决定事情是否可行。有时，陛下让使者滞留数月而不能返回，使得地方上更加疑虑。
English: Privately, I heard that every time His Majesty sent an envoy to the provinces to make a speech, His Majesty said that he wanted to consult with General Cheng Yuan Zhen, but never entrusted the prime minister to decide whether the matter was feasible. Sometimes, His Majesty let the envoy stay for several months and could not return, which made the provinces more suspicious.

古文：如臣朔方将士，功效最高，为先帝中兴主人，乃陛下蒙尘故吏，曾不别加优奖，反信谗嫉之词。
现代文：比如我所统领的朔方将士，功劳最大，是先帝中兴的中坚人物，又是陛下蒙尘落难时的旧部，陛下却未曾另外给予嘉奖，反而听信那些诬陷嫉妒之辞。
English: For example, the soldiers of the Shuo faction under my command, who have made the greatest contribution, are the backbone of the previous emperor's rejuvenation, and the old department when His Majesty was in trouble. However, His Majesty did not give any other awards, but instead listened to the words of those who framed and envied.

古文：子仪先已被猜，臣今又遭诋毁，弓藏鸟尽，信匪虚言。
现代文：先前郭子仪已被猜疑，如今我又遭到诋毁。古语说鸟尽弓藏，我相信此话一点不假。
English: Previously, Guo Ziyi had been suspected, and now I am being slandered. The old saying that a bird can hide as much as a bow and arrow, I believe this to be true.

古文：陛下信其矫诬，何殊指鹿为马！
现代文：陛下相信那些托言诬陷之词，这与指鹿为马有什么不同呢？
English: What is the difference between your majesty's belief in these false accusations and calling a stag a horse?

古文：倘不纳愚恳，且贵因循，臣实不敢保家，陛下岂能安国！
现代文：倘若陛下不采纳我诚恳的意见，并且依然如故的话，我实在不敢保家，陛下又岂能安国！
English: If Your Majesty does not accept my sincere opinion and continues as before, I really do not dare to keep my home, and Your Majesty will not be able to keep the country safe!

古文：忠言利行，惟陛下图之。
现代文：忠言有利于行事，只有请陛下考虑了。
English: Your Majesty has only to take into consideration the fact that loyal counsel is conducive to action.

古文：臣欲公然入朝，恐将士留沮。
现代文：我想公然入朝，恐怕部下会阻拦我。
English: I want to enter the imperial court openly, but I'm afraid my subordinates will stop me.

古文：今托巡晋、绛，于彼迁延，乞陛下特遣一介至绛州问臣，臣即与之同发。 
现代文：现在我假托巡视晋州、绛州，在那里逗留拖延。我恳求陛下特派一人到绛州问候我，我就与他一同入朝。 
English: Now I pretend to inspect Jinzhou and Zhangzhou, and stay there to procrastinate. I implore Your Majesty to send someone to Zhangzhou to greet me, and I will enter the imperial court with him.

古文：九月，壬戌，上遣裴遵庆诣怀恩谕旨，且察其去就。
现代文：九月壬戌，代宗派裴遵庆到仆固怀恩那儿去宣谕圣旨，并且观察他的去留动向。
English: At the end of September, the representative of the sect, Pei Zunqing, went to the servant, Gu Wai Yan, to proclaim the holy will and observe his movements.

古文：怀恩见遵庆，抱其足号泣拆冤。
现代文：仆固怀恩一见到裴遵庆，立即抱住他的脚，痛哭流涕，诉说冤屈。
English: As soon as the servant Gu Wai En saw Pei Zunqing, he immediately hugged his feet, cried bitterly, and complained.

古文：遵庆为言圣恩优厚，讽令入朝，怀恩许诺。
现代文：裴遵庆对他说，皇上恩重如山，并劝令他入朝觐见皇上。
English: Pei Zunqing told him that the emperor's gratitude was as great as a mountain, and persuaded him to enter the imperial court to see the emperor.

古文：副将范志诚以为不可，曰： 公信其甘言，入则为来瑱，不复还矣！ 
现代文：仆固怀恩表示赞同。但是，仆固怀恩的副将范志诚认为这样不行，劝说道： 如果你相信他的甜言蜜语，入朝如同来一样，就不可能再回来了！ 
English: However, Fan Zhicheng, the vice-commander of the Minion of Guwahine, thought that this was not possible, and persuaded him: If you believe his sweet words, enter the court as you came, you will not be able to return!

古文：明日，怀恩见遵庆，以惧死为辞，请令一子入朝，志诚又以为不可，遵庆乃还。
现代文：第二天，仆固怀恩拜见裴遵庆，以怕死为由，请求让他的一个儿子随同裴遵庆入朝。范志诚又认为不可以这样做，裴遵庆只好回去了。
English: The next day, the servant Gu Wai'en went to see Pei Zunqing and, on the grounds that he was afraid of death, requested that one of his sons accompany Pei Zunqing to the imperial court. Fan Zhicheng also thought that this was unacceptable, and Pei Zunqing had to go back.

古文：御史大夫王翊使回纥还，怀恩先与可汗往来，恐翊泄其事，遂留之。
现代文：御使大夫王翊出使回纥回来，仆固怀恩早先与回纥可汗往来，害怕王翊泄露这些事，于是将他扣留。
English: He sent an envoy from the doctor Wang Qi to Hui Qi to bring him back. The servant Gu Wai En had been in contact with Hui Qi Khan earlier, and was afraid that Wang Qi would reveal these things, so he detained him.

古文：吐蕃之初入寇也，边将告急，程元振皆不以闻。
现代文：吐蕃军队入侵唐朝，边镇将领告急，但是程元振不向代宗禀报。
English: The Tubo army invaded the Tang Dynasty, and the border town general led the emergency, but Cheng Yuan Zhen did not report to the daizong.

古文：冬，十月，吐蕃寇泾州，刺史高晖以城降之，遂为之乡导，引吐蕃深入；过邠州，上始闻之。
现代文：冬季，十月，吐蕃军队进犯泾州，泾州刺史高晖举城投降。于是，高晖为吐蕃军队作向导，引导他们向内地深入。
English: In the winter, in October, the Tubo army invaded Bozhou, and the Bozhou chief Gao Jun held the city and surrendered. Therefore, Gao Jun acted as a guide for the Tubo army and led them deep into the inland.

古文：辛未，寇奉天、武功，京师震骇。
现代文：吐蕃军队经过州时，代宗才知道这个消息。辛未，吐蕃军队进犯奉天、武功，京师大为震惊。
English: The Daizong only learned of the news when the Tubo army passed through the prefecture. Beijing Normal University was shocked when the Tubo army invaded Bongtian and Wugong.

古文：诏以雍王适为关内元帅，郭子仪为副元帅，出镇咸阳以御之。
现代文：代宗下诏任命雍王李适为关内元帅，郭子仪为副元帅，出镇咸阳抵御吐蕃军队的进攻。
English: Under the Emperor's edict, Yang Wang Lisi was appointed as Guanai Marshal, and Guo Ziyi as Vice-Marshal. They went to Xianyang to resist the attack of the Tubo army.

古文：子仪闲废日久，部曲离散，至是召募，得二十骑而行，至咸阳，吐蕃帅吐谷浑、党项、氐、羌二十馀万众，弥漫数十里，已自司竹园渡渭，循山而东。
现代文：郭子仪闲居京师已久，部下早已离散。这时，郭子仪才临时招募，征得骑兵二十人启程。到咸阳时，吐蕃率领吐谷浑、党项、氐、羌等各族军队二十多万人，漫山遍野，前后达数十里，已经从司竹园渡过渭河，顺着山脉向东涌来。
English: Guo Ziyi had been idle in Beijing for a long time, and his subordinates had already dispersed. At this time, Guo Ziyi was only temporarily recruited, and twenty cavalrymen were enlisted to set off. When he arrived in Xianyang, he led more than two hundred thousand troops of various ethnic groups, such as Tu Guhun, Danzhao, Yao, Yao, and so on. The mountains were full of fields, and there were dozens of miles in front and behind. He had already crossed the Li River from Sizhuyuan and followed the mountains to the east.

古文：子仪使判官中书舍人王延昌入奏，请益兵，程元振遏之，竟不召见。
现代文：郭子仪派遣判官中书舍人王延昌入朝奏报军情，请求增兵支援。程元振阻拦，王延昌竟然没有被代宗召见。
English: Guo Ziyi dispatched the magistrate Wang Yanchang, a scholar, to the court to report the military situation to the emperor and request additional troops. Cheng Yuan Zhen blocked this, and Wang Yanchang was not even summoned by the deputy emperor.

古文：癸酉，渭北行营兵马使吕月将将精卒二千，破吐蕃于盩厔之西。
现代文：癸酉，渭北行营兵马使吕月将率领精锐部队二千人，在以西打败了吐蕃军队。
English: At that time, Lv Yue, who led an elite force of two thousand soldiers, defeated the Tuyn army in the west.

古文：乙亥，吐蕃寇盩厔，月将复与力战，兵尽，为虏所擒。
现代文：乙亥，吐蕃军队进犯，吕月将再次与敌军拼死作战，士兵全部战死，吕月将也为吐蕃军队擒获。
English: In the second year of the Heian period, the Tubo army invaded, and Lv Yue once again fought to the death with the enemy army. All the soldiers died in the battle, and Lv Yue was also captured by the Tubo army.

古文：上方治兵，而吐蕃已度便桥，仓猝不知所为。
现代文：代宗正在操练军队，这时，吐蕃军队已经跨过便桥，代宗临事仓促，不知所措。
English: Daizong was training his army, when the Tuyn army had already crossed the bridge. Daizong was in a hurry and at a loss.

古文：丙子，出幸陕州，官吏藏窜，六军逃散。
现代文：丙子，代宗逃往陕州，官吏躲藏逃窜，禁军部队则一哄而散。
English: Bongzi and Daizong fled to Shaanxi, government officials hid and fled, and the forbidden army troops scattered.

古文：郭子仪闻之，遽自咸阳归长安，比至，车驾已去。
现代文：郭子仪闻听此事，急忙从咸阳赶回长安，等到长安时，代宗已经走了。
English: Hearing of this, Guo Ziyi hurried from Xianyang back to Chang'an. By the time he reached Chang'an, Daizong had already left.

古文：上才出苑门，渡浐水，射生将王献忠拥四百骑叛还长安，胁丰王珙等十王西迎吐蕃。
现代文：代宗才出宫苑门，渡过水，射生将王献忠就率领四百骑兵叛降后返回长安，胁迫丰王李珙等十王西去迎接吐蕃军队。
English: On behalf of the emperor, he went out of the palace gate, crossed the water, shot Wang Xianzhong, led 400 cavalrymen to rebel and returned to Chang'an, and forced Feng Wang Li Xi and other ten kings to go to meet the Tubo army.

古文：遇子仪于开远门内，子仪叱之，献忠下马，谓子仪曰： 今主上东迁，社稷无主，令公身为元帅，废立在一言耳。 
现代文：当他们走到开远门内时，遇上郭子仪。郭子仪大声呵斥，王献忠跳下马来，跟郭子仪说道： 如今皇上已经东迁，国家无主，您身为元帅，皇上的废立就在于您一句话了！ 
English: When they walked to the far door, they met Guo Ziyi. Guo Ziyi shouted loudly, Wang Xianzhong jumped off his horse and said to Guo Ziyi: Now the emperor has moved to the east, the country has no master, you are a marshal, the emperor's ruin is in your word!

古文：子仪未应。珙越次言曰： 公何不言！ 
现代文：郭子仪没有回答，李珙上前说道： 你为什么不说话！ 
English: Guo Ziyi did not answer, but Li Yao stepped forward and said: Why don't you speak!

古文：子仪责让之，以兵援送行在。
现代文：郭子仪训斥他们一番，然后派兵护送他们前往行在。
English: Guo Ziyi reprimanded them, and then sent soldiers to escort them to their destination.

古文：丁丑，车驾至华州，官吏奔散，无复供拟，扈从将士不免冻馁。
现代文：丁丑，代宗到达华州，这时，州府官吏早已逃散，无法为代宗一行提供食宿，随从将士不免饥寒交迫。
English: When Emperor Dingwu and Emperor Daizong arrived in Huazhou, the officials of the state government had already dispersed and were unable to provide food and lodging for Emperor Daizong and his entourage. The attendants were forced to endure the cold and hunger.

古文：会观军容使鱼朝恩将神策军自陕来迎，上乃幸朝恩营。
现代文：幸亏碰上观军容使鱼朝恩率领神策军从陕州前来迎驾，于是代宗前往鱼朝恩的营帐。
English: Fortunately, the sight of the troops made Yu Chaon lead the army from Shaanxi to meet them, so the daizong went to Yu Chaon's camp.

古文：丰王珙见上于潼关，上不之责，退至幕中，有不逊语；群臣奏请诛之，乃赐死。
现代文：丰王李珙在潼关拜见代宗，代宗没有责怪他。然而，他珙退回到营帐中，出言不逊。大臣们上奏建议杀掉李珙，于是，代宗将他赐死。
English: In Shouguan, the king of Feng, Li Qian, paid a visit to the daimyō, who did not blame him. However, he retreated to his camp and said some harsh words. The ministers proposed to kill Li Qian, so the daimyō put him to death.

古文：戊寅，吐蕃入长安，高晖与吐蕃大将马重英等立故邠王守礼之孙广武王承宏为帝，改元，置百官，以前翰林学士于可封等为相。吐蕃剽掠府库市里，焚闾舍，长安中萧然一空。
现代文：戊寅，吐蕃军队进入长安，高晖与吐蕃大将马重英等立已故王李守礼之孙李承宏为皇帝，更改年号，设置百官，任命前翰林学士于可封等人为宰相，吐蕃军队大肆抢劫府库市里的财物，焚毁居宅，长安城中一片萧条。
English: Wu Yin, Tu Wei's army entered Chang'an, Gao Wei and Tu Wei's general Ma Chung Ying and others made Li Chenghong, the grandson of the late King Li Shouli, the emperor, changed the year, set up hundreds of officials, appointed former Hanlin Scholar Yu Kefeng and others as prime ministers, Tu Wei's army looted the property of the prefectural treasury and burned the houses, and Chang'an was in a depression.

古文：苗晋卿病卧家，遣人舆入，迫胁之，晋卿闭口不言，虏不敢杀。于是六军散者所在剽掠，士民避乱，皆入山谷。
现代文：苗晋卿正病卧在家，吐蕃派人将他抬来，胁迫他出任伪职，苗晋卿闭口不言，吐蕃也不敢杀他，此时溃散的禁军也到处抢劫，士人平民纷纷逃入山谷，躲避战乱。
English: Miao Jinqing was ill at home, and Tubo sent someone to carry him and coerce him to assume a false position. Miao Jinqing did not say anything, and Tubo did not dare to kill him. At this time, the scattered forbidden army also robbed everywhere, and the scholars and civilians fled into the valley one after another to escape the war.

古文：辛巳，上至陕，百官稍有至者。
现代文：辛巳，代宗到达陕州，一些官员也有逐渐到达的。
English: Soon, the daizong arrived in Shaanxi, and some officials also gradually arrived.

古文：郭子仪引三十骑自御宿川循山而东，谓王延昌曰： 六军将士逃溃者多在商州，今速往收之，并发武关防兵，数日间，北出蓝田以向长安，吐蕃必遁。 
现代文：郭子仪率领三十名骑兵从御宿川沿着山麓向东开来。郭子仪对王延昌说： 溃逃的禁军将士多在商州，如今，我们应当迅速前去收容他们，同时，征调防守武关的军队。几天之内，我军北出兰田，直指长安，吐蕃军队必定会望风而逃的。 
English: Guo Ziyi led thirty cavalrymen from the Onjuku River to the east along the foot of the mountain. Guo Ziyi said to Wang Yanchang: Most of the fleeing forbidden soldiers are in Shangzhou. Now, we should quickly move forward to accommodate them, and at the same time, conscript the army to defend Wuguan. Within a few days, our army will leave Lantian in the north and head straight for Chang'an. The Tubo army will certainly run away from the wind.

古文：过蓝田，遇元帅都虞候臧希让、凤翔节度使高升，得兵近千人。
现代文：郭子仪经过兰田时，遇到元帅都虞候臧希让、凤翔节度使高升，又得到近千名士兵。
English: When Guo Ziyi passed through Lantian, he met Marshal Du Yu, Feng Xiang and Xidu Gao, and gained nearly a thousand soldiers.

古文：子仪与延昌谋曰： 溃兵至商州，官吏必逃匿而人乱。 
现代文：郭子仪和王延昌商量说： 溃逃的士兵到达商州，当地官吏一定会躲藏起来，那么当地就会人心大乱。 
English: Guo Ziyi and Wang Yanchang discussed and said: When the fleeing soldiers arrive in Shangzhou, the local officials will certainly hide, then the local people will be in turmoil.

古文：使延昌自直径入商州抚谕之。
现代文：郭子仪派王延昌抄近路去商州安抚人心。
English: Guo Ziyi sent Wang Yanchang to take a shortcut to Shangzhou to appease the people.

古文：诸将方纵兵暴掠，闻子仪至，皆大喜听命。
现代文：诸将正在纵兵虏掠，听说郭子仪要来，都非常欣喜，甘愿听命。
English: The generals were plundering and pillaging, and when they heard that Guo Ziyi was coming, they were very happy and willing to obey.

古文：子仪恐吐蕃逼乘舆，留军七盘，三日乃行，比至商州，行收兵，并武关防兵合四千人，军势稍振。
现代文：郭子仪恐怕吐蕃军队去进去逼代宗的驻地，让军队停留在七盘。三日后，郭子仪才率军启程。等到达商州，郭子仪就收容残兵，与武关守军合起来共达四千人，这时军队的力量稍有振作。
English: Guo Ziyi was afraid that the Tubo army would go in and force Daizong's garrison to stay in Shichifan. Three days later, Guo Ziyi led the army to leave. When he arrived in Shangzhou, Guo Ziyi received the remaining soldiers, a total of four thousand people combined with the Wuguan defenders. At this time, the strength of the army was slightly invigorated.

古文：子仪乃泣谕将士以共雪国耻，取长安，皆感激受约束。
现代文：于是，郭子仪哭着晓喻将士，勉励他们要共雪国耻，攻取长安，将士们颇受感动，都表示愿意受郭子仪的统帅。
English: As a result, Guo Ziyi wept as he addressed the generals, exhorting them to work together to end the national disgrace and conquer Chang'an. The generals were quite moved and all expressed their willingness to be commanded by Guo Ziyi.

古文：子仪请太子宾客第五琦为粮料使，给军食。
现代文：郭子仪请太子宾客第五琦担任粮料使，供给军粮。
English: Guo Ziyi invited the Crown Prince's guest, the Fifth Prince, to serve as the Grain Envoy and supply the army with grain.

古文：上赐子仪诏，恐吐蕃东出潼关，征子仪诣行在。
现代文：代宗赐郭子仪诏书，因为担心吐蕃军队东出潼关，召他前往陕州。
English: The daimyō issued an imperial edict to Guo Ziyi, summoning him to travel to Shaanxi for fear that the Tubo army would march east out of Shaoguan.

古文：子仪表称： 臣不收京城无以见陛下，若出兵蓝田，虏必不敢东向。 
现代文：郭子仪上表说： 我不收复京城，无法来见陛下。如果我出兵兰田，吐蕃军队一定不敢向东出击。 
English: Guo Ziyi said, "If I do not take back the capital, I will not be able to come to see Your Majesty. If I send troops to Lantian, the Tubo army will not dare to attack to the east."

古文：上许之。
现代文：代宗表示同意。
English: Emperor Jing agreed with this opinion.

古文：鄜坊节度判官段秀实说节度使白孝德引兵赴难，孝德即日大举，南趣京畿，与蒲、陕、商、华合势进击。
现代文：延节度判官段秀实劝说节度使白孝德率军前来急救国难，白孝德即日大举南下，奔赴京畿，与蒲州、陕州、商州、华州的军队同心协力，共击吐蕃军队。
English: Yan Jiedu adjudicator Duan Xiushi persuaded Jiedu to let Bai Xiaode lead the army to come to the rescue of the national disaster. On the same day, Bai Xiaode went south in a big way, rushed to Gyeonggi, and made concerted efforts with the armies of Puzhou, Shaanxi, Shangzhou and Huazhou to jointly defeat the Tubo army.

古文：吐蕃既立广武王承宏，欲掠城中士、女、百工，整众归国。
现代文：吐蕃已经立广武王李承宏为皇帝，想掳掠长安城中的士人、妇女和工匠，然后整队回国。
English: The king of Guangwu, Li Chenghong, had been made emperor by Tubo, who wanted to capture the soldiers, women, and craftsmen in Chang'an, and then return to China with the whole army.

古文：子仪使左羽林大将军长孙全绪将二百骑出蓝田观虏势，令第五琦摄京兆尹，与之偕行，又令宝应军使张知节将兵继之。
现代文：郭子仪派左羽林大将军长孙全绪率领二百骑兵出兰田，前去观察吐蕃军队的形势，命令第五琦代理京兆尹，让他与全绪一起行动，又命令宝应军使张知节率军跟随其后。
English: Guo Ziyi sent General Zuo Yulin, Sun Quanxu, and 200 cavalry out of Lantian to observe the situation of the Tuyun army, ordered the Fifth Empress's deputy, Jing Zhaoyun, to act together with Quanxu, and also ordered the Baoying envoy, Zhang Zhisie, to follow with his army.

古文：全绪至韩公堆，昼则击鼓张旗帜，夜则多燃火，以疑吐蕃。
现代文：长孙全绪到达韩公堆，白天就击鼓摇旗，夜里就燃起许多火堆，用来迷惑吐蕃军队。
English: The eldest grandson, Quanxu, arrived at Han Gongdui, beating drums and waving flags during the day, and lit many fires at night to confuse the Tuobao army.

古文：前光禄卿殷仲卿聚众近千人，保蓝田，与全绪相表里，帅二百馀骑直度浐水。
现代文：前光禄卿殷仲卿则聚集近一千人的军队保卫兰田，与长孙全绪内外呼应，又率领二百多骑兵直接渡过水。
English: On the other hand, Qian Guangluqing and Yin Zhongqing gathered an army of nearly a thousand people to defend Lantian, echoing the eldest grandson Quanxu inside and out, and led more than two hundred cavalry directly across the water.

古文：吐蕃惧，百姓又绐之曰： 郭令公自商州将大军不知其数至矣！ 
现代文：吐蕃军队害怕，而老百姓又哄骗他们说： 郭令公已经从商州率领大军来了！军队多得数不清！ 
English: The army of Tubo was afraid, but the people cheated them and said: Guo Lingong has come from Shangzhou with a large army! The army is too numerous to count!

古文：虏以为然，稍稍引军去。
现代文：吐蕃军队信以为真，逐渐率军撤退。
English: The Tubo army believed this to be true and gradually led the army to retreat.

古文：全绪又使射生将王甫入城阴结少年数百，夜击鼓大呼于硃雀街，吐蕃惶骇，庚寅，悉众遁去。
现代文：长孙全绪又派射生将王甫入城秘密纠集数百名少年，夜里在朱雀街击鼓呐喊，吐蕃军队更加惶恐不安，庚寅，他们便都逃跑了。
English: The eldest grandson, Quanxu, also sent an archer to secretly gather hundreds of boys to escort Wang Fu into the city. At night, they played drums and shouted in Suzaku Street, which made the Tubo army even more panicked and anxious. In the end, they all ran away.

古文：高晖闻之，帅麾下三百馀骑东走，至潼关，守将李日越擒而杀之。
现代文：高晖听到吐蕃军队已逃跑，也率领部下三百多名骑兵向东出逃，到达潼关时，被潼关守将李日越抓获并杀死。
English: When Gao Kun heard that the Tubo army had fled, he also led more than three hundred cavalrymen to flee to the east. When he arrived at Shaoguan, he was captured and killed by the guards of Shaoguan.

古文：壬辰，诏以元载判元帅行军司马，以第五琦为京兆尹。
现代文：壬辰，代宗下诏任命元载兼任元帅行军司马，第五琦为京兆尹。
English: In Imjin, the daimyō issued an edict appointing Yuan Zai to the additional post of marshal marching Sima, and the fifth shogun to be Jing Zhaoyun.

古文：癸巳，以郭子仪为西京留守。
现代文：癸巳，任命郭子仪为西京留守。
English: Soon after, Guo Ziyi was appointed to stay in West Beijing.

古文：甲午，子仪发商州。
现代文：甲午，郭子仪从商州出发。
English: In the afternoon of the first day, Guo Ziyi set off from Shangzhou.

古文：巳亥，以鱼朝恩部将皇甫温为陕州刺史，周智光为华州刺史。
现代文：己亥，代宗任命鱼朝恩部将皇甫温为陕州刺史，周智光为华州刺史。
English: Ji Hai, the daimyō appointed Yu Chaon Enbu to appoint Emperor Fuwen as the governor of Shaanxi, and Zhou Zhiguang as the governor of Huazhou.

古文：骠骑大将军、判元帅行军司马程元振专权自恣，人畏之甚于李辅国。
现代文：骠骑大将军、判元帅行军司马程元振大权独揽，为所欲为。人们害怕他超过李辅国。
English: The general of cavalry and the marshal of marching troops, Sima Chengyuan Zhen, monopolized power and did whatever he wanted. People were afraid that he would surpass Li Yu's state.

古文：诸将有大功者，元振皆忌疾欲害之。
现代文：对军功卓著的将领，程元振都忌恨，总想加害于他们。
English: Cheng Yuan Zhen hated the generals who had distinguished themselves in the military, and always wanted to harm them.

古文：吐蕃入寇，元振不以时奏，致上狼狈出幸。
现代文：吐蕃进犯唐朝时，程元振不及时上奏，致使代宗狼狈出走。
English: When Tubo invaded the Tang Dynasty, Cheng Yuan Zhen did not play in time, resulting in the departure of Daizong Wolverine.

古文：上发诏征诸道兵，李光弼等皆忌元振居中，莫有至者，中外咸切齿而莫敢发言。
现代文：代宗颁发诏书征调诸道军队，李光弼等人都忌恨程元振位居要职，没有一人前来赴难。朝廷内外也都咬牙切齿，敢怒而不敢言。
English: The daimyō issued an imperial edict to conscript troops from various provinces. Li Guangyao and others were jealous of Cheng Yuan Zhen's important position, and no one came to help. Both inside and outside the imperial court gritted their teeth and dared not speak.

古文：太常博士柳伉上疏，以为： 犬戎犯关度陇，不血刃而入京师，劫宫闱，焚陵寝，武士无一人力战者，此将帅叛陛下也。
现代文：太常博士柳伉上疏认为， 犬戎侵犯关陇地区，兵不血刃，就从容地进入京师，抢劫皇宫，焚烧陵寝，而士兵没有一人在拼死作战，这是将帅背叛陛下。
English: Too often, Dr. Liu Xuan Shangsu believed that the Injunjun invaded the Guanzhong area, and the soldiers entered the Beijing Division without bloodshed, robbed the imperial palace, and burned the tomb, while none of the soldiers were fighting to the death. This was a betrayal of His Majesty.

古文：陛下疏元功，委近习，日引月长，以成大祸，群臣在廷，无一人犯颜回虑者，此公卿叛陛下也。
现代文：陛下亲小人而远君子，天长日久，酿成大祸，而大臣们身居朝廷，却没有一人敢触犯龙颜，使陛下回心转意。这是公卿大臣背叛陛下。
English: His majesty's affinity for the lowly and his estrangement from the gentry has been going on for a long time and has led to a great calamity, while his ministers live in the imperial court, but no one dares to offend the dragon and change his majesty's mind. This is a betrayal of his majesty by a noble minister.

古文：陛下始出都，百姓填然，夺府库，相杀戮，此三辅叛陛下也。
现代文：陛下才出都城，老百姓便大声鼓噪，争夺府库，互相残杀，这是三辅地区背叛陛下。
English: His Majesty had just left the capital, when the common people began to make loud noises, fight over the government treasury, and kill each other. This was the betrayal of His Majesty in the Sanfu area.

古文：自十月朔召诸道兵，尽四十日，无只轮入关，此四方叛陛下也。
现代文：从十月初一日颁下诏书征调诸道军队以来，已有四十天，但是没有一兵一卒入关赴难，这是地方背叛陛下。
English: It has been forty days since the imperial edict was issued on the first day of October to recruit and transfer troops from various provinces, but not a single soldier has been sent to Guan to face the hardships. This is a local betrayal of His Majesty.

古文：内外离叛，陛下以今日之势为安邪，危邪？
现代文：内外叛离，陛下认为今天的形势是安全呢，还是危险呢？
English: With internal and external defections, does Your Majesty think that today's situation is safe or dangerous?

古文：若以为危，岂得高枕，不为天下讨罪人乎！
现代文：如果陛下认为形势危险，难道能高枕无忧，不为天下讨伐罪人吗！
English: If Your Majesty thinks that the situation is dangerous, how can you sleep peacefully and not fight against the criminals for the sake of the world!

古文：臣闻良医疗疾，当病饮药，药不当病，犹无益也。
现代文：我听说良医治病要对症下药，不对症下药是没有好处的。
English: I have heard it said that good medicine cures the disease by treating the symptoms, and that there is no benefit in treating the symptoms.

古文：陛下视令日之病，何繇至此乎？
现代文：陛下看看今天的病根，是什么原因使陛下落到这种地步呢？
English: Your Majesty, look at the root of today's illness. What caused Your Majesty to fall to this level?

古文：必欲存宗庙社稷，独斩元振首，驰告天下，悉出内使隶诸州，持神策兵付大臣，然后削尊号，下诏引咎，曰： 天下其许朕自新改过，宜即募士西赴朝廷；若以朕恶未悛，则帝王大器，敢妨圣贤，其听天下所往。 
现代文：假如一定要想让宗庙社稷存在下去，陛下只有将程元振斩首，通告天下，并且让担任内诸司使的宦官全部隶属各州，将神策军交付大臣统领。然后自削尊号，颁发诏书，引咎自责，说： 如果天下允许朕改过自新，那么，应当立即招募士兵西来救援朝廷；如果天下认为朕有恶不改，那么，朕愿意听从天下人心向归，请访求圣贤登上帝王宝座。 
English: If you must want the Imperial Family Temple to continue to exist, your majesty has only to behead Cheng Yuan Zhen and announce it to the world, and let all the eunuchs who serve as internal emissaries be subordinated to the states, and hand over the Divine Policy Army to the minister in charge. Then he cut off his honorary title, issued an edict, and blamed himself, saying: If the world allows me to reform myself, then soldiers should be immediately recruited to the west to rescue the imperial court; if the world thinks I am evil and will not change, then I am willing to listen to the hearts of the world, and visit the saints to ascend to the throne of God.

古文：如此，而兵不至，人不感，天下不服，臣请阖门寸斩以谢陛下。 
现代文：如果陛下那样做了，而军队仍然不来救驾，人们仍不感动，天下仍然不服，那么，我就请求将我满门抄斩以向陛下谢罪。 
English: If Your Majesty does that, and the army still does not come to the rescue, the people are still not moved, and the world is still not convinced, then I would ask that I be beheaded to thank Your Majesty.

古文：上以元振尝有保护功，十一月，辛丑，削元振官爵，放归田里。
现代文：代宗因为程元振曾经有保驾之功，十一月辛丑，仅削去程元振的官爵，放归田里。
English: Daizong because Cheng Yuan Zhen once had the merit of keeping the car, in November, only the official title of Cheng Yuan Zhen was removed, and he was released back to the field.

古文：王甫自称京兆尹，聚众二千馀人，署置官属，暴横长安中。
现代文：王甫自称京兆尹，聚集二千多人，设置属吏，并在长安城中横行霸道。
English: Wang Fu called himself Jing Zhaoyun, gathered more than two thousand people, set up subordinate officials, and ran amok in Chang'an City.

古文：壬寅，郭子仪至浐水西，甫按兵不出。
现代文：壬寅，郭子仪来到水西岸，王甫按兵不动。
English: Ren Yin and Guo Zi Yi came to the west bank of the river, but Wang Fu remained motionless.

古文：或谓子仪，城不可入。
现代文：有人跟郭子仪说，不能到城里去。
English: Someone told Guo Ziyi that she couldn't go to the city.

古文：子仪不听，引三十骑徐进，使人传呼召甫；甫失据，出迎拜伏，子仪斩之，其兵尽散。
现代文：郭子仪不听，带领三十名骑兵慢慢向城里走去，同时派人去传呼王甫；王甫进退两难，只得出来伏拜迎接，于是，郭子仪杀掉了他，其部下也一哄而散。
English: Guo Ziyi did not listen, and led thirty horsemen slowly towards the city. At the same time, he sent someone to summon Wang Fu. Wang Fu was in a dilemma, and had to come out to meet him, so Guo Ziyi killed him, and his men scattered.

古文：白孝德与邠宁节度使张蕴琦将兵屯畿县，子仪召之入城，京畿遂安。
现代文：白孝德和宁节度使张蕴琦率兵驻扎在京畿各县，郭子仪将他们召入京城。于是京畿地区得到安宁。
English: Bai Xiaodong and Ning Jiedu stationed soldiers led by Zhang Yunyang in various counties of Gyeonggi, and Guo Ziyi called them to the capital. As a result, the Gyeonggi region was pacified.

古文：宦官广州市舶使吕太一发兵作乱，节度使张休弃城奔端州。
现代文：宦官广州市舶使吕太一发兵叛乱，节度使张休放弃州城逃往端州。
English: The eunuch of Guangzhou, Haku, caused Lvtai to launch a mutiny, and Zhengdu caused Zhang Xiu to abandon the state capital and flee to Danzhou.

古文：太一纵兵焚掠，官军讨平之。
现代文：吕太一纵兵焚烧掠夺，最后被官军镇压下去。
English: Lv Tai led a column of soldiers to burn and plunder, and was finally suppressed by the government army.

古文：吐蕃还至凤翔，节度使孙志直闭城拒守，吐蕃围之数日。
现代文：镇西节度使马听说代宗逃往陕州，便率领一千多名精锐骑兵从河西前来救援。马一路转战来到凤翔，正好遇上吐蕃军队围城。
English: The festival in the west of the town caused Ma He to hear that Daizong had fled to Shaanxi, so he led more than a thousand elite cavalrymen from Hexi to come to the rescue. Ma went all the way to Fengxiang, and just happened to meet the Tujuan army besieging the city.

古文：镇西节度使马璘闻车驾幸陕，将精骑千馀自河西入赴难；转斗至凤翔，值吐蕃围城，璘帅众持满外向，突入城中，不解甲，背城出战，单骑先士卒奋击，俘斩千计而归。明日，虏复逼城请战，璘开悬门以待之。
现代文：马便率军队，手持满弓，直指吐蕃军队，突入城内，不等脱下盔甲，又出城作战，匹马单枪，身先士卒，奋击敌人，俘杀敌军数以千计，这才回城。第二天，吐蕃军队再次向凤翔城进逼挑战，马打开悬门，严阵以待。
English: The horse then led the army, holding a full bow and pointing directly at the Tubo army, rushed into the city, took off his armor, and went out of the city to fight again. The horse fought the enemy with a single gun, leading the way, and captured thousands of enemy troops before returning to the city. The next day, the Tubo army once again advanced to Fengxiang City to challenge, the horse opened the hanging door, and waited in a tight line.

古文：虏引退，曰： 此将军不惜死，宜避之。 
现代文：吐蕃军队一见马出现便退却了，说道： 这位将军不怕死，还是避开他吧！ 
English: The Tubo army retreated at the sight of the horse, saying, "This general is not afraid of death, so avoid him!"

古文：遂去，居于原、会、成、渭之地。
现代文：于是，他们撤走了，并在原州、会州、成州、渭州地区留居下来。
English: As a result, they moved away and stayed in the regions of Wonju, Hoeju, Chungju and Yeoju.

古文：十二月，丁亥，车驾发陕州。
现代文：十二月，丁亥，代宗从陕州启程返京。
English: In December, Dinghai and Daizong returned to Beijing from Shaanxi.

古文：左丞颜真卿请上先谒陵庙，然后还宫，元载不从，真卿怒曰： 朝廷岂堪相公再坏邪！ 
现代文：左丞颜真卿请求代宗先拜谒祖宗陵庙，然后回宫，元载不听从他的建议，颜真卿愤怒地说： 难道朝廷还能经受住你再去败坏吗！ 
English: Zuo Zheng Yan Zhenqing asked the daimyō to visit the ancestral mausoleum first, and then return to the palace. Yuan Zhao did not listen to his advice, and Yan Zhenqing angrily said: Can the imperial court withstand your corruption?

古文：载由是衔之。
现代文：元载由此对他怀恨在心。
English: He held a grudge against him because of this.

古文：甲午，上至长安，郭子仪帅城中百官及诸军迎于沪水东，伏地待罪。
现代文：甲午，代宗到达长安，郭子仪率领城中群臣和军队，在水东岸迎接代宗，并且伏地等待代宗惩处。
English: In the afternoon of the first day of the second month, Daizong arrived in Chang'an. Guo Ziyi led a group of ministers and troops in the city to meet Daizong on the east bank of the water, and waited for Daizong to be punished.

古文：上劳之曰： 用卿不早，故及于此。 
现代文：代宗慰问郭子仪说： 朕没能及早任用你，所以落到这种地步。 
English: The daimyō expressed his condolences to Guo Ziyi, saying, "I didn't appoint you early enough, so I ended up in this situation.

古文：以鱼朝恩为天下观军容宣慰处置使，总禁兵，权宠无比，筑城于鄠县及中渭桥，屯兵以备吐蕃，以骆奉仙为鄠县筑城使，遂将其兵。
现代文：代宗任命鱼朝恩为天下观军容宣慰处置使，总管禁军，权势和宠幸无人能比。代宗又下令在县以及中渭桥修筑城池，屯兵防备吐蕃进攻。代宗任命骆奉仙为县筑城使。
English: The daimyosong appointed Yu Chaon as the commander-in-chief of the imperial army, and his power and favor were unrivaled. The daimyosong also ordered the construction of a castle moat in the county and Zhongye Bridge, and the garrisoning of troops to prevent the attack of Tubo. The daimyosong appointed Luo Fengxian as the county's castle-building envoy.

古文：乙未，以苗晋卿为太保，裴遵庆为太子少傅，并罢政事；以宗正卿李岘为黄门侍郎、同平章事。
现代文：于是，骆奉仙掌握了那里的军队。乙未，代宗任命苗晋卿为太保，裴遵庆为太子少傅，停止让他们参知政事，又任命宗正卿李岘为黄门侍郎、同平章事。
English: As a result, Luo Fengxian took control of the army there. At the same time, the daimyō appointed Miao Jinqing as Taiho and Pei Zunqing as Taishi shofu, stopping them from participating in political affairs, and appointed Zong Zhengqing Li Jie as Huangmen jiro and Tongping zhangji.

古文：遵庆既去，元载权益盛，以货结内侍董秀，使主书卓英倩潜与往来，上意所属，载必先知之，承意探微，言无不合；上以是愈爱之。
现代文：裴遵庆被免职后，元载的权势更盛。元载用财物交结内侍董秀，派遣主书卓英倩与董秀私下往来。这样，代宗有什么意图，元载必然首先知道，他根据圣意作深入细致的考虑，言无不合，因此代宗更加宠爱他。
English: After Pei Zunqing was removed from his post, the power of Yuan Zeng became even stronger. Yuan Zeng used his wealth to entangle his personal attendant, Dong Xiu, and sent his chief secretary, Zhuo Yingqi, to have private dealings with Dong Xiu. In this way, if Yuan Zeng had any intentions, he must first know that he made in-depth and detailed considerations according to the holy will, and his words were all right, so Yuan Zeng loved him even more.

古文：英倩，金州人也。
现代文：卓英倩是金州人。
English: Zhuo Yingyao is a native of Jinzhou.

古文：吐蕃既去，广武王承宏逃匿草野；上赦下诛，丙申，放之于华州。
现代文：吐蕃军队撤走后，广武王李承宏便逃避到荒郊野外中。代宗赦令不杀，丙申，将他流放到华州。
English: After the withdrawal of the Tubo army, the king of Guangwu, Li Chenghong, fled to the wilderness. He was exiled to Huazhou after the daizong pardoned him for not killing.

古文：程元振既得罪，归三原，闻上还宫，衣妇人服，私入长安，复规任用，京兆府擒之以闻。
现代文：程元振已被惩处，回到三原，听说皇上回到皇宫，便身着女装，私下潜入长安，谋求再次重用，但被京兆府抓获，并上报代宗。
English: Cheng Yuan Zhen had been punished and returned to Mihara. When he heard that the emperor had returned to the imperial palace, he dressed in women's clothing and secretly sneaked into Chang'an, seeking to reuse it again. However, he was caught by the Beijing Zhao Prefecture and reported to the Daizong.

古文：吐蕃陷松、维、保三州及云山新筑二城，西川节度使高适不能救，于是剑南西山诸州亦入于吐蕃矣。
现代文：吐蕃军队攻陷松州、维州、保州和云山县新修筑的二个城池，西川节度使高适不能前去救援，至此，剑南西山各州都被吐蕃攻陷。
English: The Tubo army captured Songzhou, Wizhou, Baozhou and the two newly built cities in Yunsan County, and the West River Festival made Gaozu unable to go to the rescue. At this point, all the states in the West Mountain of Jian'an were captured by Tubo.

古文：广德二年甲辰，公元七六四年春，正月，壬寅，敕称程元振变服潜行，将图不轨，长流溱州。
现代文：广德二年春季正月，壬寅，代宗颁发敕书宣称程元振改装潜行，将要图谋不轨，将他远远地流放到溱州。
English: In the first month of the spring of the second year of Guangde, Ren Yin, the daizong, issued an imperial edict declaring that Cheng Yuan Zhen would sneak into the country and that he would plot to exile him far away to Zhangzhou.

古文：上念元振之功。寻复令于江陵安置。
现代文：不久，代宗又想到程元振有保驾之功，又下令在江陵安置。
English: Not long after, the daizong also thought that Cheng Yuan Zhen had the merit of driving safely, and ordered him to be resettled in Gangneung.

古文：癸卯，合剑南东、西川为一道，以黄门侍郎严武为节度使。
现代文：癸卯，代宗将剑南东川和剑南西川合为一道，任命黄门侍郎严武为剑南节度使。
English: At that time, Emperor Taizong combined the Eastern and Western Jiannan Rivers into one, and appointed Yan Wu, the attendant of Huangmen, as the Jiannan Festival envoy.

古文：丙午，遣检校刑部尚书颜真卿宣慰朔方行营。
现代文：丙午，代宗派遣检校刑部尚书颜真卿前去安抚慰问朔方行营。
English: In the afternoon of the third day, the daimyō sent the head of the inspection and punishment department, Shang Shuxuan Zhenqing, to the camp to comfort and console Shuo Fang.

古文：上之在陕也，真卿请奉诏召仆固怀恩，上不许。
现代文：代宗在陕州时，颜真卿请求奉诏召回仆固怀恩，代宗不同意。
English: When the daimyō was in Shaanxi, Yan Zhenqing requested that his servant Gu Wai'en be recalled. The daimyō did not agree.

古文：至是，上命真卿说谕怀恩入朝。
现代文：这时，代宗命令颜真卿劝说仆固怀恩入朝。
English: At this time, the daimyō ordered Yan Zhenqing to persuade his servant Gu Wai into the imperial court.

古文：对曰： 陛下在陕，臣往，以忠义责之，使之赴难，彼犹有可来之理；今陛下还宫，彼进不成勤王，退不能释众，召之，庸肯至乎！
现代文：颜真卿回答说： 陛下在陕州时，我去用忠义的道理质问他，让他前来奔赴国难，他还有可来的道理。如今陛下已经回宫，他进不是勤王赴难，退则无法向大家解释，这时去召见他，他怎么肯前来呢！
English: Yan Zhenqing replied: "When Your Majesty was in Shaanxi, I went to question him with the principle of loyalty, asking him to come to the country to go to the country, he still has a reason to come. Now that Your Majesty has returned to the palace, he is not a diligent king to go to the country, and he cannot explain to everyone if he withdraws. At this time, I went to summon him, how could he come?

古文：且言怀恩反者，独辛云京、骆奉仙、李抱玉、鱼朝恩四人耳，自外群臣皆言其枉。
现代文：再说，告仆固怀恩谋反的人，仅辛云京、骆奉仙、李抱玉、鱼朝恩四人而已，其余大臣都说他冤枉。
English: Moreover, only four people, Xin Yunjing, Luo Fengxian, Li Baoyu, and Yu Chaon, accused Gu Huai's servant of plotting a rebellion. The other ministers all said that he was wrong.

古文：陛下不若以郭子仪代怀恩，可不战而服也。 
现代文：陛下不如用郭子仪取代仆固怀恩，这样可以不战而使其臣服。 
English: Your Majesty might as well replace the servant Gu Guaiyin with Guo Ziyi, so that he can be subdued without a fight.

古文：时汾州别驾李抱真，抱玉之从父弟也，知怀恩有异志，脱身归京师。
现代文：当时，李抱玉的堂弟汾州别驾李抱真知道仆固怀恩胸怀异志，便脱身回到京师。
English: At that time, Li Bozhong, the cousin of Li Bozhong, knew that his servant was full of ambition, so he escaped and returned to Beijing.

古文：上方以怀恩为忧，召见抱真问计，对曰： 此不足忧也。
现代文：代宗正为仆固怀恩的事忧虑，于是，召见李抱真询问对策。李抱真回答说： 陛下不必忧虑这件事。
English: The daimyō was worried about his servant, Gu Wai Yu, so he summoned Li Bozhen to ask for advice. Li Bozhen replied, "Your Majesty need not worry about this matter.

古文：朔方将士思郭子仪，如子弟之思父兄。
现代文：朔方将士思念郭子仪，如同子弟思念父兄一样。
English: Shuo Fang misses Guo Zi Yi, just as his children miss their father and brother.

古文：怀恩欺其众云 郭子仪已为鱼朝恩所杀 ，众信之，故为其用耳。
现代文：仆固怀恩欺骗部下说，郭子仪已为鱼朝恩所杀，部下信以为真，所以被仆固怀恩利用。
English: Servant Gu Wai deceived his subordinates and said that Guo Zi Yi had been killed by Fish Chao En, his subordinates believed it to be true, so they were used by Servant Gu Wai.

古文：陛下诚以子仪领朔方，彼皆不召而来耳。 
现代文：陛下如果让郭子仪统领朔方军队，他们都会不召而至的。 
English: Your Majesty, if you let Guo Ziyi lead the army of the Shuo side, they will all come without being summoned.

古文：上然之。
现代文：代宗认为这个办法可行。
English: She wrote a very elegant and beautiful piece of music, and the emperor gladly accepted her suggestion.

古文：甲寅，礼仪使杜鸿渐奏： 自今祀圜丘、方丘请以太祖配，祈谷以高祖配，大雩以大宗配，明堂以肃宗配。 
现代文：甲寅，礼仪使杜鸿渐上奏说： 从今以后，祭圜丘、方丘时附祭太祖，祈祷五谷丰登时附祭高祖，求雨祭祀时附祭太宗，在明堂祭祀时附祭肃宗。 
English: In the first year of the Jiajing Emperor's reign, the etiquette caused Du Hongxuan to recite: "From now on, when you make a sacrifice at the Fongqiu and Fangqiu, you should make a sacrifice to the Great Ancestor; when you pray for the abundance of grain, you should make a sacrifice to the Great Ancestor; when you make a sacrifice to pray for rain, you should make a sacrifice to the Great Ancestor; and when you make a sacrifice at the Ming Hall, you should make a sacrifice to Su Zong.

古文：从之。
现代文：代宗同意。
English: I followed his advice.

古文：乙卯，立雍王适为太子。
现代文：乙卯，代宗立雍王李适为皇太子。
English: On the second day of the month, the Yong Wang Li Si was enthroned as crown prince.

古文：吐蕃之入长安也，诸军亡卒及乡曲无赖子弟相聚为盗；吐蕃既去，犹窜伏南山子午等五谷，所在为患。
现代文：吐蕃军队攻入长安时，唐军逃亡士兵和乡里无赖子弟相聚为盗。吐蕃撤军后，他们仍然在南山的子午等五个山谷中流窜隐伏，成为当地一大祸害。
English: When the Tubo army invaded Chang'an, the fugitive soldiers of the Tang army and the villains of the countryside gathered together to steal. After the withdrawal of the Tubo army, they still lurked in the middle of the five valleys in the meridian of Nanshan, becoming a major local scourge.

古文：丁巳，以太子宾客薛景仙为南山五谷防御使，以讨之。
现代文：丁巳，代宗任命太子宾客薛景仙为南山五谷防御使，前去讨伐他们。
English: Soon after, the daimyō appointed the prince's guest, Xue Jingxian, as the defense envoy of the Nanshan Five Valleys, and he went to fight them.

古文：魏博节度使田承嗣奏名所管曰天雄军，从之。
现代文：魏博节度使田承嗣上奏，要将其所辖更名为天雄军，代宗表示同意。
English: The Wei Bo Festival made Tian Cheng Ci play a song, and he wanted to change the name of his jurisdiction to Tian Xiong Jun, and the daizong agreed.

古文：仆固怀恩既不为朝廷所用，遂与河东都将李竭诚潜谋取太原；辛云京觉之，杀竭诚，乘城设备。
现代文：仆固怀恩既然不为朝廷所重用，但与河东都将李竭城密谋夺取太原。此事被辛云京察觉，他杀掉李竭诚，登城设防。
English: Since Gu Hui's servant was not of much use to the imperial court, he and Hedong plotted to seize Li Zecheng from Taiyuan. This was noticed by Xin Yunjing, who killed Li Zecheng and fortified the city.

古文：怀恩使其子瑒将兵攻之，云京出与战，瑒大败而还，遂引兵围榆次。
现代文：仆固怀恩派儿子仆固率军攻打太原，辛云京出城应战，仆固大败而归，于是率军围攻榆次。
English: Dugu Wai'en sent his son Dugu to lead the army to attack Taiyuan, Xin Yunjing went out of the city to fight, Dugu was defeated and returned, so he led the army to besiege Shiji.

古文：上谓郭子仪曰： 怀恩父子负朕实深。
现代文：代宗对郭子仪说： 仆固怀恩父子太辜负朕了。
English: The daimyō said to Guo Ziyi: My servant Gu Wai Yan and his father have failed me.

古文：闻朔方将士思公如枯旱之望雨，公为朕镇抚河东，汾上之师必不为变。 
现代文：朕听说朔方将士思念你如同久旱盼望甘雨一样，你为朕坐镇和安抚河东，汾阳的朔方军队一定不会叛变。 
English: I have heard that the generals of the Shuo side miss you like a long drought and hope for a sweet rain. You have sat down and pacified Hedong for me. The Shuo army in Fenyang will certainly not mutiny.

古文：戊午，以子仪为关内、河东副元帅、河中节度等使。
现代文：戊午，代宗任命郭子仪为关内、河东副元帅、河中节度等使。
English: In the afternoon, the Daizong appointed Guo Ziyi as the envoy to Guennai, the vice-marshal of Hedong, and the governor of Hedong.

古文：怀恩将士闻之，皆曰： 吾辈从怀恩为不义，何面目见汾阳王！ 
现代文：仆固怀恩的部将听说此事后，都说： 我们跟随仆固怀恩，做不义的事，有何面目再见汾阳王郭子仪呢！ 
English: After hearing about this, the ministers of Guo Huai'en said: "We followed Guo Huai'en and did unjust things. What is the face of Guo Ziyi, the king of Shenyang?"

古文：癸亥，以刘晏为太子宾客，李岘为詹事，并罢政事。
现代文：癸亥，代宗任命刘晏为太子宾客，李岘为詹事，一并停止他们参知政事。
English: At that time, the daimyō appointed Liu Ye as the prince's guest and Li Ye as his secretary, and both of them ceased to participate in government affairs.

古文：晏坐与程元振交通；元振获罪，岘有力焉，由是为宦官所疾，故与晏皆罢。
现代文：刘晏的罢免是因为与程元振交往密切而受株连。而李岘则是因为程元振获罪是他的功劳，所以为宦官所忌恨。因此，他与刘晏同时被罢免。
English: Liu Hui's dismissal was due to his close association with Cheng Yuan Zhen. Li Hui, on the other hand, was hated by the eunuchs because he was responsible for Cheng Yuan Zhen's conviction. Therefore, he was dismissed at the same time as Liu Hui.

古文：以右散骑常侍王缙为黄门侍郎，太常卿杜鸿为兵部侍郎，并同平章事。
现代文：代宗任命右散骑常侍王缙为黄门侍郎，任命太常卿杜鸿渐为兵部侍郎，二人同平章事。
English: The daimyō appointed the right sanshō rider and regular attendant Wang Xi as the attendant of the Yellow Gate, and appointed the grand secretary Du Hongqian as the attendant of the military department, and the two were appointed to the same post.

古文：丁卯，以郭子仪为朔方节度大使。
现代文：丁卯，代宗任命郭子仪为朔方节度大使。
English: Dingwu, the acting emperor appointed Guo Ziyi as the ambassador of the Spring Festival.

古文：二月，子仪至河中。
现代文：二月，郭子仪到达河中。
English: In February, Guo Zi Yi arrived in the middle of the river.

古文：云南子弟万人戍河中，将贪卒暴，为一府患，子仪斩十四人，杖三十人，府中遂安。
现代文：当时，有一万名云南籍士兵在河中戍守，将官贪婪，士兵残暴，成为当地一大祸害。郭子仪杀掉十四人，杖挞三十人，于是河中安定。
English: At that time, ten thousand Yunnan soldiers were stationed in the middle of the river. The greed of generals and the brutality of soldiers became a great local scourge. Guo Ziyi killed fourteen people and stabbed thirty people, so the middle of the river was stable.

古文：癸酉，上朝献太清宫；甲戌，享太庙；乙亥，祀昊天上帝于圜丘。
现代文：癸酉，代宗在太清宫举行朝献礼。甲戌，代宗去太庙供祭祖先；乙亥，又在圜丘祭祀昊天大帝。
English: First, Daizong held a morning offering ceremony at the Taiqing Palace. Second, Daizong went to the Imperial Temple to offer sacrifices to the ancestors; and third, Daizong offered sacrifices to Emperor Haotian in the Mound.

古文：仆固瑒围榆次，旬馀不拔；遣使急发祁县兵，李光逸尽与之。
现代文：仆固围攻榆次已有十余天，但未能攻克。仆固派使者急速征调祈县的军队，李光逸将他的军队全部交付使者。
English: It has been more than ten days since the siege of Shiji, but it has not been able to conquer it. Shiji sent an envoy to quickly mobilize the army of Qi County, and Li Guangyi handed over all of his army to the envoy.

古文：士卒未食，行不能前，十将白玉、焦晖紧鸣镝射其后者，军士曰： 将军何乃射人？ 
现代文：因为士兵尚未吃饭，行军速度很缓慢，十将白玉、焦晖用响箭射击掉队者，士兵说道： 将军为什么用箭射人？ 
English: Because the soldiers had not yet eaten, the marching speed was very slow. Ten generals, Baidai and Jiao Tong, shot stragglers with loud arrows. The soldiers said: Why does the general shoot people with arrows?

古文：玉曰： 今从人反，终不免死；死一也，射之何伤！ 
现代文：白玉回答道： 今天跟随他人造反，终究不免一死。反正都是一死，用箭射人又有什么关系呢！ 
English: Bai Yu replied, "If you follow others to rebel today, you will eventually die. You are going to die anyway, so what does it matter if you shoot someone with an arrow!

古文：至榆次，瑒责期迟，胡人曰： 我乘马，乃汉卒不行耳。 
现代文：军队到达榆次时，仆固训斥他们来迟了，胡人士兵说道： 我们骑马，迟到的原因是因为汉人士兵不愿行动。 
English: When the troops arrived at Shiji, Min Gu reprimanded them for being late, and the Hu soldiers said: We rode horses, and the reason we were late was because the Han soldiers were unwilling to act.

古文：瑒捶汉卒，卒皆怨怒，曰： 节度使党胡人。 
现代文：仆固就敲打汉人士兵。汉人士兵都愤怒不满，说道： 节度使偏袒胡人士兵。 
English: The Han soldiers were all angry and dissatisfied, saying, "Modesty favors the Hu soldiers."

古文：其夕，焦晖、白玉帅众攻瑒，杀之。
现代文：当日傍晚，焦晖、白玉率兵攻击仆固，并将他杀死。
English: In the evening of the same day, Jiao Tong and Bai Yu led an army to attack Mugu and killed him.

古文：仆固怀恩闻之，入告其母。母曰： 吾语汝勿反，国家待汝不薄，今众心既变，祸必及我，将如之何！ 
现代文：仆固怀恩闻听此事，立即前来告诉他母亲，他母亲说道： 我曾经跟你说过，朝廷待你不薄，不要谋反。如今众心已变，大祸必然殃及于我，那将如何是好！ 
English: Hearing of this, Gu Wai's servant immediately came to tell his mother. His mother said, "I once told you that the court would not treat you badly, so don't rebel. Now that everyone's hearts have changed, a great calamity will inevitably befall me, and what a wonderful thing that will be!

古文：怀恩不对，再拜而出。
现代文：仆固怀恩无言以答，拜了两拜，便走了出来。
English: The servant, Gu Wai En, was speechless. He bowed twice and then walked out.

古文：母提刀逐之曰： 吾为国家杀此贼，取其心以射三军。 
现代文：他母亲提刀出来追逐他，说道： 我要为朝廷杀掉你这个叛贼，剖取你的心以向三军谢罪。 
English: His mother took out her sword and chased after him, saying, "I will kill you, the traitor, for the sake of the court, and cut out your heart to atone for the sins of the three armies."

古文：怀恩疾走，得免，遂与麾下三百渡河北走。
现代文：仆固怀恩快步逃走，才得幸免。于是，仆固怀恩与部下三百人渡过黄河，向北而去。
English: Servant Gu Huai'en was spared because he fled at a fast pace. Therefore, Servant Gu Huai'en and his three hundred men crossed the Yellow River and headed north.

古文：时朔方将浑释之守灵州，怀恩檄至，云全军归镇，释之曰： 不然，此必众溃矣。 
现代文：当时，朔方将领浑释之镇守灵州。仆固怀恩送来檄文，说全军返回镇所。浑释之说： 不对，这一定是军队溃逃了。 
English: At that time, Shuo's general, Hunjizhi, was in charge of the town of Lingzhou. His servant, Gu Hui'en, sent him a letter saying that the entire army had returned to the town. Hunjizhi said, "No, this must be the army fleeing."

古文：将拒之，其甥张韶曰： 彼或翻然改图，以众归镇，何可不纳也！ 
现代文：他想要拒绝仆固怀恩入灵州，他的外甥张韶劝说： 仆固怀恩或许幡然改悔，率领部众回归镇所，我们怎能不接纳他们呢！ 
English: He wanted to refuse to allow the servant Gu Wai Yan to enter Lingzhou. His nephew Zhang Ye persuaded him: "The servant Gu Wai Yan may suddenly repent and lead his followers back to the town, how can we not accept them!"

古文：释之疑未决。
现代文：浑释之迟疑不决。
English: Uncertainty and indecision.

古文：怀恩行速，先候者而至，释之不得已纳之。
现代文：仆固怀恩行动迅速，不等接纳，便来到灵州。浑释之迫不得已只好接纳他们。
English: The servants of Gu Wai Yan acted quickly and came to Lingzhou without waiting for acceptance. Hun Hsi had no choice but to accept them.

古文：张韶以其谋告怀恩，怀恩以韶为间，杀释之而收其军，使韶主之；既而曰： 释之，舅也，彼尚负之，安有忠于我哉！ 
现代文：张韶将他的阴谋告诉仆固怀恩，仆固怀恩即以张韶为内应，杀掉浑释之，收编其部下，并派张韶来统领。不久，仆固怀恩又说： 浑释之是张韶的舅舅，张韶尚且背叛他，哪里会对我忠诚啊！ 
English: Zhang Xuan told his plot to his servant Gu Wai Yan. Gu Wai Yan took Zhang Xuan as his inside man, killed Hun Xiang, gathered his subordinates, and sent Zhang Xuan to take over. Soon, Gu Wai Yan said, "Hun Xiang is Zhang Xuan's uncle, yet Zhang Xuan betrayed him. How can he be loyal to me?"

古文：他日，以事杖之，折其胫，置于弥峨城而死。
现代文：有一天，仆固怀恩借故杖挞张韶，打断他的小腿，将他抛置在弥峨城死去。
English: One day, his servant Gu Wai En used his old cane to break his leg and left him to die in the city of Miaga.

古文：都虞候张维岳在沁州，闻怀恩去，乘传至汾州，抚定其众，杀焦晖、白玉而窃其功，以告郭子仪。
现代文：都虞侯张维岳在沁州，听说仆固怀恩已经离去，便乘驿马到达汾州，按抚其部众，又杀掉焦晖、白玉，将其功劳窃为己有，以此禀告郭子仪。
English: When Zhang Weiyue, the prince of the provincial capital, heard that his servant Gu Wai Yan had left Zhangzhou, he rode a donkey to Zhangzhou to appease his subordinates. He also killed Jiaoju and Baiyu, and stole their merits as his own. He used this to sue Guo Ziyi.

古文：子仪使牙官卢谅至汾州，维岳赂谅，使实其言。
现代文：郭子仪派牙官卢谅到汾州，张维岳贿赂卢谅，让他证实自己所说的都是事实。
English: Guo Ziyi sent Lu Peng, a dentist, to Zhangzhou, and Zhang Weiyue bribed Lu Peng to let him confirm that what he said was true.

古文：子仪奏维岳杀瑒，传首诣阙。
现代文：郭子仪奏称张维岳杀掉了仆固，并传送仆固的首级到朝廷。
English: Guo Ziyi claimed that Zhang Weiyue killed the servant and sent the servant's head to the imperial court.

古文：群臣入贺，上惨然不悦，曰： 朕信不及人，致勋臣颠越，深用为愧，又何贺焉！ 
现代文：大臣们前来祝贺，代宗心情很不愉快，说道： 朕未能信任好人，使得功臣遭受冷落，朕深感惭愧，有什么可庆贺的呢！ 
English: The ministers came to congratulate him. Daizong was very unhappy and said, "I am deeply ashamed that I failed to trust a good man and let a meritorious person be snubbed. What is there to celebrate?

古文：命辇怀恩母至长安，给待优厚，月馀，以寿终；以礼葬之，功臣皆感叹。
现代文：代宗下令用车接仆固怀恩的母亲到长安，待遇丰厚。一个多月后，其母寿终正寝，代宗又按照礼节将她埋葬，功臣们对此都很感叹。
English: The daimyō ordered a car to be used to take the mother of the servant, Gu Hui'en, to Chang'an, and the treatment was rich. More than a month later, her mother passed away, and the daimyō buried her in accordance with etiquette, which the heroes all lamented.

古文：戊寅，郭子仪如汾州，怀恩之众数万悉归之，咸鼓舞涕泣，喜其来而悲其晚也。
现代文：戊寅，郭子仪到达汾州，仆固怀恩旧部都来归顺，他们既欢欣鼓舞，又凄然泪下。高兴的是郭子仪来了，悲叹的是他来得晚了。
English: When Wu Yin and Guo Ziyi arrived in Zhangzhou, all of Guo Wai En's former followers came to submit. They were both joyful and tearful. They were happy that Guo Ziyi had come, but sad that he had come too late.

古文：子仪知卢谅之诈，杖杀之。
现代文：当郭子仪得知卢谅所言有诈，将他用乱棍打死。
English: When Guo Ziyi learned that Lu Yuanzhong's words were fraudulent, she beat him to death with a bludgeon.

古文：上以李抱真言有验，迁殿中少监。
现代文：代宗因为李抱真的话被证实了，便提升他为殿中少监。
English: The daimyō promoted him to the position of palace junior superintendent because Li's words were proven to be true.

古文：上之幸陕也，李光弼竟迁延不至；上恐遂成嫌隙，其母在河中，数遣中使存问之。
现代文：代宗逃奔陕州时，李光弼竟然拖延时间，不去救援。代宗担心因此产生嫌隙，恰好其母在河中，代宗就多次派遣中使前去慰问。
English: When Daizong fled to Shaanxi, Li Guangyao actually delayed the time and did not go to the rescue. Daizong was worried that this would create a rift. Just as his mother was in the river, Daizong repeatedly sent envoys to offer condolences.

古文：吐蕃退，除光弼东都留守以察其去就；光弼辞以就江、淮粮运，引兵归徐州。
现代文：吐蕃退兵后，唐代宗又任命李光弼为东都留守，以观察他的去留动向。李光弼借口江、淮粮运事，率军返回徐州。
English: After Tubo retired, the Tang Dynasty Emperor also appointed Li Guangyao to stay in Dongdu to observe his movements. Li Guangyao led the army back to Xuzhou under the pretext of transporting rice and grain.

古文：上迎其母至长安，厚加供给，使其弟光进掌禁兵，遇之加厚。
现代文：代宗将他母亲接到长安，供给丰厚。又让他弟弟李光进执掌禁兵，提高待遇。
English: Daizong brought his mother to Chang'an and provided her with plentiful supplies. He also put his brother Li Guangjin in charge of the forbidden soldiers and improved their treatment.

古文：戊子，赦天下。
现代文：戊子，大赦天下。
English: Peace, peace to all the world.

古文：自丧乱以来，汴水堙废，漕运者自江、汉抵梁、洋，迂险劳费。
现代文：自从安史之乱以来，汴水荒废不治，漕运都从长江、汉水运抵梁州、洋州，绕道险阻，劳费财力。
English: Since the Anshi Rebellion, Surabaya's waterways have been neglected and abandoned, and rowing transport has been carried from the Yangtze River and Han River to Liangzhou and Yangzhou, with dangerous detours, labor costs, and financial resources.

古文：三月，己酉，以太子宾客刘晏为河南、江、淮以来转运使，议开汴水。
现代文：三月己酉，代宗任命太子宾客刘晏为河南、江、淮以来转运使，商议开通汴水。
English: In March, the daimyō appointed the prince's guest, Liu Ye, as the envoy to Henan, Jiangsu and Huai since then, to discuss the opening of Surabaya.

古文：庚戌，又命晏与诸道节度使均节赋役，听从便宜行毕以闻。
现代文：庚戌，代宗又命令刘晏和诸道节度使节用赋役，见机行事，事后再行上报。
English: Geng Zong, the daimyō, also ordered Liu Zong and the emissaries of the various sects to perform their duties, act at their own discretion, and report back afterwards.

古文：时兵火之后，中外艰食，关中米斗千钱，百姓挼穗以给禁军，宫厨无兼时之积。
现代文：当时，战乱之后全国粮食匮乏，关中一斗米价值一千钱，老百姓摘取麦穗来供给禁军，宫廷厨师也没有可供二个季节用的存粮。
English: At that time, after the war, there was a shortage of grain in the whole country. A barrel of rice in Guanzhong was worth a thousand yuan. The common people picked the ears of wheat to supply the imperial army. The court chefs did not have enough stored grain to last for two seasons.

古文：晏乃疏浚汴水，遗元载书，具陈漕运利病，令中外相应。
现代文：于是，刘晏就疏浚汴水，又给宰相元载上书，陈述漕运的利弊，要求全国各地响应。
English: As a result, Liu Wei dredged the dredged water and sent a letter to the Prime Minister, stating the advantages and disadvantages of rowing transport and requesting a response from all over the country.

古文：自是每岁运米数十万石以给关中，唐世称漕运之能者，推晏为首，后来者皆遵其法度云。
现代文：从此以后，每年运米数十万石供给关中地区。终唐一代，掌管漕运之事最有才能的首推刘晏，后来者都遵循他的法令制度。
English: Since then, hundreds of thousands of koku of rice have been transported every year to supply the Guanzhong area. In the last Tang generation, the most talented person in charge of transportation was Liu Bei, and later generations followed his legal system.

古文：甲子，盛王琦薨。
现代文：甲子，盛王李琦去世。
English: On the 27th, the king of Sheng, Li Yong, passed away.

古文：党项寇同州，郭子仪使开府仪同三司李国臣击之，曰： 虏得间则出掠，官军至则逃入山，宜使羸师居前以诱之，劲骑居后以覆之。 
现代文：党项进犯同州，郭子仪派开府仪同三司李国臣前去迎击，说： 党项往往乘隙来虏掠，官军到时则逃亡入山。因此，我们应当先派赢弱之师居前引诱他们出来，再以精锐骑兵殿后伏击他们。 
English: Guo Ziyi sent Kaifu Yi and the third secretary Li Guoqin to meet the attack of the party cadres attacking Tongzhou, saying: The party cadres often take advantage of the gap to loot, and the government army flees into the mountains. Therefore, we should first send the winning and weak divisions to lure them out, and then ambush them with the elite cavalry.

古文：国臣与战于澄城北，大破之，斩首捕虏千馀人。
现代文：在澄城以北，李国臣率军与党项交战，结果大获全胜，斩首和俘虏达一千多人。
English: In the north of Chengcheng, Li Guoshen led the army to fight with the party, and the result was a complete victory, with more than a thousand people beheaded and captured.

古文：夏，五月，癸丑，初行《五纪历》。
现代文：夏季，五月癸丑，朝廷首次颁行《五纪历》。
English: In the summer, at the end of May, the Imperial Court issued the "Five-Year Calendar" for the first time.

古文：庚申，礼部侍郎杨绾奏岁贡教弟力田无实状，及童子科皆侥幸；悉罢之。
现代文：庚申，礼部侍郎杨绾上奏说，每年上贡的孝弟力田科与实际情况不符；考中童子科的人都纯属侥幸，朝廷将两科全都取消。
English: Goshun, the attendant of the Ceremonial Department, Yang Xuan, said that the filial piety of the annual tribute does not match the actual situation; those who took the junior high school exam were pure luck, and the imperial court canceled both subjects.

古文：郭子仪以安、史昔据洛阳，故诸道置节度使以制其要冲；今大盗已平，而所在聚兵，耗蠹百姓，表请罢之，仍自河中为始。
现代文：郭子仪认为，过去安史叛军盘据洛阳，所以诸道都设置节度使控制军事要冲，如今叛乱已经平息，而各节度使仍在当地聚集军队，加重百姓的负担。上表请求取消节度使，仍由河中节度使开始。
English: Guo Ziyi believed that in the past, the Anshi rebels had a foothold in Luoyang, so all the provinces set up festivals to control military conflicts. Now the rebellion has subsided, but the festivals are still gathering troops in the local area, increasing the burden on the people. The above table requested the cancellation of the festival, but it was still started by the festival in the middle of the river.

古文：六月，庚辰，敕罢河中节度及耀德军。
现代文：六月，代宗敕令取消河中节度使和耀德军。
English: In June, Emperor Daizong issued an edict to cancel the rendezvous of the German troops with the Chinese envoys.

古文：子仪复请罢关内副元帅；不许。
现代文：郭子仪又请求免去他的关内副元帅职务，代宗没有同意。
English: Guo Ziyi also requested to be relieved of his duties as deputy marshal of Guanai, but the daimyō did not agree.

古文：仆固怀恩至灵武，收合散亡，其众复振。
现代文：仆固怀恩到达灵武，收罗逃散的士兵，部队再次壮大起来。
English: The servant Gu Wai Yan arrived at Lingwu to collect the soldiers who had fled, and the army grew again.

古文：上厚抚其家，癸未，下诏，称其 勋劳著于帝室，及于天下。
现代文：代宗对他的家属厚加抚慰。癸未，代宗颁发诏书说，仆固怀恩 对皇室和天下都功绩卓著。
English: The daimyosong consoled his family members. Recently, the daimyosong issued an edict saying, "Servant Gu Wai has made outstanding contributions to the imperial family and the world."

古文：疑隙之端，起自群小，察其深衷，本无他志；君臣之义，情实如初。
现代文：他所以产生怨愤，是来自众小人的挑唆，考察他的内心，本无异志，君臣之间的情义，实际上宛如当初。
English: It was the instigation of the little people that caused his resentment. Look into his heart, there is nothing different, and the relationship between the prince and the vassal is actually the same as it was in the beginning.

古文：但以河北既平，朔方已有所属，宜解河北副元帅、朔方节度等使，其太保兼中书令、大宁郡王如故。
现代文：然而，河北已经平定，朔方已经另有归属，因此，应当解除他河北副元帅、朔方节度使等职务，仍为太保兼中书令、大宁郡王。
English: However, Hebei has been pacified, and the Shuo side has been assigned elsewhere. Therefore, he should be relieved of his duties as Hebei Vice-Marshal and Shuo party's delegate to the Qing Dynasty, and he is still the Taibo and the middle secretary, and the king of the County of Daning.

古文：但当诣阙，更勿有疑。 
现代文：仆固怀恩应当入朝，切勿迟疑。 
English: Servant Gu Wei En should enter the imperial court, do not hesitate.

古文：怀恩竟不从。
现代文：仆固怀恩竟然不从圣旨。
English: Servant Guo Wai actually did not follow the sacred will.

古文：秋，七月，庚子，税天下青苗钱以给百官俸。
现代文：秋季，七月庚子，朝廷征收天下青苗钱税，以供给百官俸禄。
English: In the autumn, in July Geng Zi, the imperial court levied a money tax on the world's young seedlings in order to provide a hundred officials with a salary.

古文：大尉兼侍中、河南副元帅、临淮武穆王李光弼，治军严整，指顾号令，诸将莫敢仰视，谋定而后战，能以少制众，与郭子仪齐名。
现代文：太尉兼侍中、河南副元帅、临淮武穆王李光弼治军严整，手指目视，发号施令，诸将不敢仰视。李光弼先决策而后战，能够以少胜多，与郭子仪齐名。
English: Li Guangyao, captain and aide-de-camp, deputy marshal of Henan Province, the king of Huaiwumu, ruled the army strictly. He looked at his fingers and gave orders, which the generals did not dare to look up to. Li Guangyao made decisions first and fought later. He could win more with less, and was on a par with Guo Ziyi.

古文：及在徐州，拥兵不朝，诸将田神功等不复禀畏，光弼愧恨成疾，己酉，薨。
现代文：及至李光弼回到徐州，把持重兵而不回朝，诸将如田神功等人便不再惧怕李光弼了。李光弼愧恨交加，积郁成疾，于己酉去世。
English: By the time Li Guangyao returned to Xuzhou and took control of the heavy troops instead of returning to the North, generals such as Tian Shengong and others were no longer afraid of Li Guangyao. Li Guangyao was ashamed of his hatred and became ill, and died in his hometown.

古文：八月，丙寅，以王缙代光弼都统河南、淮西、山南东道诸行营。
现代文：八月丙寅，代宗以王缙代替李光弼统帅河南、淮西、山南东道各行营。
English: In August, Emperor Xizong replaced Li Guangyao as commander-in-chief of Henan, Huaixi, and Shannan provinces with Wang Qi.

古文：郭子仪自河中入朝，会泾原奏仆固怀恩引回纥、吐蕃十万众将入寇，京师震骇，诏子仪帅诸将出镇奉天。
现代文：郭子仪从河中入朝，这时，泾原节度使上奏说，仆固怀恩招引回纥、吐蕃军队共十万人即将来犯，京师震惊。代宗诏令郭子仪率领诸将出镇奉天。
English: Guo Ziyi entered the imperial court from the middle of the river. At that time, the Shihara Emperor sent a report to the emperor, saying that a total of one hundred thousand troops from Guo Wai'en's army were about to attack the imperial court. The emperor was shocked. The emperor ordered Guo Ziyi to lead the generals out of the town to serve the emperor.

古文：上召问方略，对曰： 怀恩无能为也。 
现代文：同时，召见郭子仪询问对策，郭子仪答道： 仆固怀恩将无所作为。 代宗问道： 为什么？ 
English: At the same time, Guo Ziyi was summoned to inquire about the countermeasures, and Guo Ziyi replied, "Servant Guo Wei'en will do nothing."

古文：上曰： 何故？ 对曰： 怀恩勇而少恩，士心不附，所以能入寇者，因思归之士耳。
现代文：郭子仪答道： 仆固怀恩虽然勇敢，但对部下缺少恩义，士兵并不归心于他，他们之所以能够前来进犯，这是因为思归故里的缘故。
English: Guo Ziyi replied: Although Dugu Wai Yan was brave, he lacked gratitude to his subordinates. The soldiers did not confide in him. The reason why they were able to attack was because they wanted to return to their hometown.

古文：怀恩本臣偏裨，其麾下皆臣部曲，必不忍以锋刃相向，以此知其无能为也。 
现代文：仆固怀恩本是我的部将，他的部下都是我的部曲，他们一定不忍兵刃相见，由此可知，仆固怀恩不可能有所作为。 
English: He was my captain, and his men were my subordinates, and they would not have put up with each other. From this we can see that he could not have made a difference.

古文：辛巳，子仪发，赴奉天。
现代文：辛巳，郭子仪发兵，奔赴奉天。
English: Soon after, Guo Ziyi sent an army and rushed to Fengtian.

古文：甲午，加王缙东都留守。
现代文：甲午，加王缙担任东都留守。
English: In the afternoon of the first day of the second month, Wang Qian was absent from Dongdu.

古文：河中尹兼节度副使崔发镇兵西御吐蕃，为法不一。
现代文：河中尹兼节度副使崔征发镇兵西御吐蕃，执法不一。
English: In the middle of the river, Yin and Jie Du, the deputy envoy of Cui Zhengfa, sent soldiers to West Utuo, and the enforcement of the law was inconsistent.

古文：九月，丙申，镇兵作乱，掠官府及居民，终夕乃定。
现代文：九月丙申，镇兵叛乱，虏掠官府和居民财物，持续到傍晚才被平息。
English: In September, the town's soldiers rebelled and plundered government offices and residents' property, which lasted until the evening before being quelled.

古文：丙午，加河东节度使辛云京同平章事。
现代文：丙午，代宗任命河东节度使辛云京为同平章事。
English: In the afternoon of the 3rd day of the 4th month, the daizong appointed the Hedong Festival to make Xinyunjing a dongping event.

古文：辛亥，以郭子仪充北道邠宁、泾原、河西以来通和吐蕃使，以陈郑?舐航趰度使李抱玉充南道通和吐蕃使。
现代文：辛亥，代宗任命郭子仪担任北道宁、泾原、河西以来通和吐蕃使，陈郑、泽潞节度使李抱玉担任南道通和吐蕃使。
English: In Xinhai, the daimyō appointed Guo Ziyi as the envoy to the Northern Provinces of Ning, Yuyuan, and Hexi, and to the Southern Provinces of the Southern Provinces of the Southern Provinces of the Southern Provinces of the Southern Provinces of the Southern Provinces of the Southern Provinces of the Southern Provinces of the Southern Provinces.

古文：子仪闻吐蕃逼邠州，甲寅，遣其子朔方兵马使晞将兵万人救之。
现代文：郭子仪听说吐蕃军队进逼州，甲寅，即派长子朔方兵马使郭率军一万人前去救援。
English: When Guo Ziyi heard that the Tubo army had entered Kuzhou, he sent his eldest son, Shuo Fang Terracotta Warriors and Horses, to send Guo and his army of ten thousand men to the rescue.

古文：己未，剑南节度使严武破吐蕃七万众，拔当狗城。
现代文：己未，剑南节度使严武击败吐蕃七万人的军队，攻克当狗城。
English: Before long, the Jian'nan Festival caused Yan Wu to defeat the 70,000-man army of Tubo and conquer Dangucheng.

古文：关中虫蝗、霖雨，米斗千馀钱。
现代文：关中地区遭蝗灾，又连绵大雨，米价一斗值一千多钱。
English: The Guanzhong area suffered locust plagues and continuous heavy rain. The price of a barrel of rice rose to more than 1,000 yuan.

古文：仆固怀恩前军至宜禄，郭子仪使右兵马使本国臣将兵为郭晞后继。
现代文：仆固怀恩的前军抵达宜禄，郭子仪派右兵马使李国臣率军作为郭的后援。
English: Guo Ziyi sent his right-hand man Li Guoshen to lead the army as Guo's backup.

古文：邠宁节度使白孝德败吐蕃于宜禄。
现代文：宁节度使白孝德在宜禄击败吐蕃军队。
English: Ning Jiedu led Bai Xiaodong to defeat the Tubo army in Yilu.

古文：冬，十月，怀恩引回纥、吐蕃至晞州，白教德、郭晞闭城拒守。
现代文：冬季，十月，仆固怀恩又引回纥、吐蕃军队到州，白孝德、郭闭城坚守。
English: In the winter, in October, Gu Wai's servant Gu Wai brought back the Yunnan and Tubo armies to the state, and Bai Xiaode and Guo Jiuyong held on to the city.

古文：庚午，严武拔吐蕃盐川城。
现代文：庚午，严武攻克吐蕃盐川城。
English: In the afternoon of the 7th day of the 7th month, the Yanchuan Castle of Tubo was conquered.

古文：仆固怀恩与回纥、吐蕃进逼奉天，京师戒严。
现代文：仆固怀恩与回纥、吐蕃军队进逼奉天，京师戒严。
English: Minion Gu Wai'en and the Uighur and Tibetan armies advanced to force Bongtian, and the capital was placed under martial law.

古文：诸将请战，郭子仪不许，曰： 虏深入吾地，利于速战，吾坚壁以待之，彼以吾为怯，必不戒，乃可破也。
现代文：诸将请求出战，郭子仪不同意，他说： 敌军深入我内地，速战速决对他们有利，我军坚守壁垒等待他们，他们以为我军胆怯，必然戒备松懈。
English: The generals requested to go to war, but Guo Ziyi did not agree. He said, "The enemy army has penetrated deep into our inland. A quick battle and quick decision are beneficial to them. Our army will stand firm on the ramparts and wait for them. They think that our army is timid and will inevitably be lax in its vigilance."

古文：若遽战而不利，则众心离矣。敢言战者斩！ 
现代文：我们就可以击败他们。假如仓促应战不利，军心势必涣散。谁再敢言战，当斩不赦！ 
English: We can defeat them. If the hasty response is unfavorable, the military spirit is bound to be dissipated. Who dares to speak of war, should not be forgiven!

古文：辛未夜，子仪出陈于乾陵之南，壬申未明，虏众大至。
现代文：辛未，夜里，郭子仪在乾陵之南布列军阵。壬申，天还不亮，敌军便蜂涌而来。
English: On the eve of Xin, in the night, Guo Zi Yi was in the south of Qianling in the Bule army. In Jinshin, the sky was not yet bright, and the enemy army swarmed in.

古文：虏始以子仪为无备，欲袭之，忽见大军，惊愕，遂不战而退。
现代文：起初，敌军以为郭子仪没有防备，想要突袭，忽然看到唐朝大军，大为惊愕，于是不战而退。
English: At first, the enemy thought that Guo Ziyi was unprepared and wanted to make a surprise attack. Suddenly, they saw a large Tang Dynasty army and were very surprised, so they retreated without a fight.

古文：子仪使裨将李怀光等将五千骑追虏，至麻亭而还。
现代文：郭子仪派副将李怀光等率五千骑兵追击敌军，到麻亭才回师。
English: Guo Ziyi sent 5,000 cavalry led by Vice Admiral Li Huaiguang to chase the enemy, and only returned to Mating.

古文：虏至邠州，丁丑，攻之，不克；乙酉，虏涉泾而遁。
现代文：敌军到达州，丁丑，进攻州，没有成功。乙酉，敌军渡过泾水逃跑了。
English: The enemy army reached the state, Ding Chou, attacked the state, did not succeed. Acetylene, the enemy army fled across the flood.

古文：怀恩之南寇也，河西节度使杨志烈发卒万千，谓监军柏文达曰： 河西锐卒，尽于此矣。君将之以攻灵武，则怀恩有返顾之虑，此亦救京师之一奇也！ 
现代文：仆固怀恩南侵时，河西节度使杨志烈发动五千士兵，并对监军柏文达说： 河西的精锐部队都在这里，你率领他们进攻灵武，仆固怀恩就会有后顾之忧，这也是救援京师的一大奇计！ 
English: When Minion Gu Wai'en invaded the south, the Hexi Festival made Yang Zhili launch five thousand soldiers, and said to the supervisor of the army, Bo Wenda: The elite troops of Hexi are all here. If you lead them to attack Lingwu, Minion Gu Wai'en will have worries about the future. This is also a great plan to rescue the Beijing division!

古文：文达遂将其众击摧砂堡、灵武县，皆下之，进攻灵州。
现代文：于是柏文达率军攻克了摧砂堡、灵武县，又进攻灵州。
English: As a result, Bo Wenda led the army to conquer Sandcastle, Lingwu County, and attack Lingzhou.

古文：怀恩闻之，自永寿遽归，使蕃、浑二千骑夜袭文达，大破之，士卒死者殆半。
现代文：仆固怀恩闻讯，匆忙从永寿赶回，并派二千名吐蕃、吐谷浑骑兵夜袭柏文达，唐军大败，死者近半数。
English: After hearing the news, Gu Hui'en hurried back from Yongshou, and sent two thousand cavalrymen from Tubo and Tubo to attack Baowenda at night. The Tang army was defeated, with nearly half of the dead.

古文：文达将馀众归凉州，哭而入。
现代文：柏文达率领残余部队返回凉州，痛哭而入。
English: Baowenda led the remaining troops back to Liangzhou, weeping bitterly.

古文：士卒怨其言。未几，吐蕃围凉州，士卒不为用；志烈奔甘州，为沙陀所杀，凉州遂陷。沙陀姓硃耶，世居沙陀碛，因以为名。
现代文：杨志烈前去迎接他说： 这次行动有安定京室的功劳，死了一些士兵又有什么关系呢！ 士兵听后，颇为怨愤。不久，吐蕃围攻凉州，士兵都不愿为他卖命。杨志烈逃奔甘州，为沙陀所杀。沙陀姓朱耶，世代居住在沙陀碛，因而得名。
English: Yang Zhirong went to meet him and said, "This operation has the merit of stabilizing the capital, so what does it matter if some soldiers die?" The soldiers were quite indignant after hearing this. Soon, Tuyong besieged Liangzhou, and the soldiers were not willing to fight for him. Yang Zhirong fled to Ganzhou and was killed by Shado. Shado's surname was Zhuye, and he had lived in Shado for generations, which is how he got his name.

古文：十一月，丁未，郭子仪自行营入朝。
现代文：十一月丁未，郭子仪从行营入朝。
English: In November, Guo Ziyi left the camp and entered the North.

古文：郭晞在邠州，纵士卒为暴，节度使白孝德患之，以子仪故，不敢言；泾州剌史段秀实自请补都虞侯，孝德从之。
现代文：郭在州，放纵士兵残暴横行。节度使白孝德十分厌恨，因为郭子仪的缘故，不敢说出。泾州刺史段秀实自己请求担任都虞候，得到白孝德的许可。
English: Guo was in Zhoushou, indulging soldiers in rampant brutality. Bai Xiaode hated Guo's moderation, because of Guo Ziyi, he did not dare to speak out. Guo Zhoushou asked Shiduan Husi to serve as the governor of Zhoushou, and obtained Bai Xiaode's permission.

古文：既署一月，晞军士十七人入市取酒，以刃刺酒翁，坏酿器，秀实列卒取十七人首注槊上，植市门。
现代文：段秀实到任一个月后，郭部下十七人闯入市场，随意取酒作乐，又用兵刃刺酿酒老翁，砸坏酿酒器具。段秀实派兵围捕，砍下这十七人的头，用长矛串起来，树立在市门旁。
English: One month after Duan Hsiu-sze took office, seventeen of Guo's subordinates broke into the market, drinking and making merry at will. They also stabbed a brewing master with a sword and smashed the brewing equipment. Duan Hsiu-sze sent soldiers to round them up, cut off the heads of these seventeen people, strung them up with spears, and set them up next to the city gate.

古文：晞一营大噪，尽甲。
现代文：于是郭营中一片嘈杂，士兵们都披上了战甲。
English: As a result, there was a lot of noise in the blockhouse, and the soldiers all put on their battle armor.

古文：孝德震恐，召秀实曰： 奈何？ 
现代文：白孝德对此十分惊恐，召见段秀实说道： 怎么办呢？ 
English: Bai Xiaode was very alarmed by this, summoned Duan Xiushi and said: What should we do?

古文：秀实曰： 无伤也，请往解之。 
现代文：段秀实回答道： 没有什么了不起的，请让我前去解决。 
English: Duan Xiushi replied: There is nothing remarkable, please let me go and solve it.

古文：孝德使数十人从行，秀实尽辞去，选老躄者一人持马至晞门下。甲者出，秀实笑且入，曰： 杀一老卒，何甲也！
现代文：白孝德派数十人随同前往，段秀实将他们全部辞去，只选了一名破脚老翁，为他牵马，一起来到郭营门前，这时，披甲的士兵从里面涌出，段秀实边笑边往里走着说： 杀一个老兵，何必披甲呢！
English: Bai Xiaode sent dozens of people to accompany him, but Duan Xiuxi dismissed them all. He chose only an old man with a broken foot and led a horse for him. They came to the gate of Guo Ying together. At this time, soldiers wearing armor poured out from inside. Duan Xiuxi smiled and walked inside and said: "Kill a veteran, why wear armor?"

古文：吾戴吾头来矣。 
现代文：我是戴着我的脑袋来的。 
English: I came with my head.

古文：甲者愕。
现代文：士兵颇为惊愕。
English: The soldier was quite surprised.

古文：因谕曰： 尚书负若属邪，副元帅负若属邪？
现代文：段秀实又晓谕他们说： 郭常侍辜负你们了吗？副元帅辜负你们了吗？
English: Duan Xiushi also told them: "Has Guo Changzhi failed you? Has the vice-marshal failed you?

古文：奈何欲以乱败郭氏！ 
现代文：为什么你们想要作乱去败坏郭氏呢！ 
English: How could they want to create havoc and corrupt the Guo family?

古文：晞出，秀实让之曰： 副元帅勋塞天地，当念始终。
现代文：郭出来，段秀实责问他说： 副元帅功盖天地，应当考虑善始善终。
English: Guo came out, Duan Xiushi scolded him and said: the vice-marshal has made great achievements, we should consider a good beginning and a good end.

古文：今尚书恣卒为暴，行且致乱，乱则罪及副元帅；乱由尚书出，然则郭氏功名，其存者几何！ 
现代文：如今郭常侍放纵士兵为非作歹，他们的行动将会导致变乱，变乱则会株连副元帅。既然乱由郭常侍一手制造，那么，郭氏的功绩声望还能存下多少呢！ 
English: Now Guo Changzhi is indulging soldiers to do wrong, their actions will lead to chaos, and the chaos will be caused by Vice-Marshal Zhu. Since the chaos is created by Guo Changzhi, then how much of Guo's reputation can be saved!

古文：言未毕，晞再拜曰： 公幸教晞以道，恩甚大，敢不从命！ 
现代文：段秀实言犹未尽，郭拜了两拜说： 多亏您用大道理来教导我，你的恩情太大了，我哪敢不从命呢！ 
English: Duan Xiu's true words were not yet exhausted, Guo Bai said to Dua Bai: Thanks to you teaching me with great principles, your kindness is too great, how dare I not follow my destiny!

古文：顾叱左右： 皆解甲，散还火伍中，敢哗者死！ 
现代文：又回头训斥随从说： 都给我脱掉战甲，回到队伍中去，谁敢吵嚷就斩首！ 
English: He turned around and reprimanded his followers, saying, "Take off your battle armor and return to the ranks. Anyone who dares to make noise will be beheaded!"

古文：秀实因留宿军中。
现代文：段秀实因此就在郭军中留宿。
English: As a result, Duan Hsiu-sheng stayed in the Guo army.

古文：晞通夕不解衣，戒候卒击柝卫秀实。
现代文：郭整夜未脱衣服，告诫哨兵敲着木梆守卫段秀实。
English: Guo did not undress all night, and warned the sentry to knock on the raft to guard Duan Xiusheng.

古文：旦，俱至孝德所，谢不能，请改。
现代文：早晨，段秀实和郭一同来到白孝德的官署，郭承认自己无能，请求让他改过。
English: In the morning, Duan Xiushi and Guo came to Bai Xiaode's government office together. Guo admitted that he was incompetent and asked him to make amends.

古文：邠州由是无患。
现代文：州由从此平安无事。
English: The state has been safe ever since.

古文：五谷防御使薛景仙讨南山群盗，连月不克，上命李抱玉讨之。
现代文：五谷防御使薛景仙讨伐南山强盗，连续数月都未攻克，代宗便命令李抱玉前去讨伐。
English: The defense of Otani made Xue Jingxian fight against the bandits of Nanshan Mountain, and he could not defeat them for several months in a row, so he ordered Li Baoyu to fight on his behalf.

古文：贼帅高玉最强，抱玉遣兵马使李崇客将四百骑自洋州入，袭之于桃虢川，大破之；玉走成固。
现代文：贼军统帅高玉实力最强，李抱玉就派遣兵马使李崇客率领四百骑兵从洋州进入南山，在桃虢川袭击高玉，结果大获全胜。高玉逃往成固。
English: The commander of the invaders, Gao Yuping, was the strongest, so Li Baoyuping sent soldiers and horses to send Li Chongka to lead four hundred cavalrymen from Yangzhou into Nanshan to attack Gao Yuping at the Taobao River, and the result was a complete victory. Gao Yuping fled to Chenggu.

古文：庚申，山南西道节度使张献诚擒玉，献之，馀盗皆平。
现代文：庚申，山南西道节度使张献诚抓获高玉，并将他献给朝廷。
English: Goshun, the festival of Shannan West Road made Zhang Xiancheng capture Gao Yu, and presented him to the imperial court.

古文：十二月，乙丑，加郭子仪尚书令。
现代文：其余强盗均被平定。十二月乙丑，代宗加封郭子仪为尚书令。
English: The rest of the robbers were subdued. In December of the second year, the daizong and Guo Ziyi were promoted.

古文：子仪以为： 自太宗为此官，累圣不复置，近皇太子亦尝为之，非微臣所宜当。 
现代文：郭子仪认为： 自从太宗担任过尚书令以来，历朝皇帝都不再设置此职。近来皇太子也曾经担任尚书令，因此，尚书令的职位不是我所应该担任的。 
English: Guo Ziyi believes: Since Emperor Taizong served as Shang Shuling, the emperors of all dynasties have no longer set up this post. Recently, the crown prince has also served as Shang Shuling, so the position of Shang Shuling is not what I should hold.

古文：固辞不受，还镇河中。
现代文：郭子仪坚决推托不受，并回去镇守河中。
English: Guo Ziyi resolutely refused to be pushed around, and went back to guard the town of Hezhong.

古文：是岁，户部奏：户二百九十馀万，口一千六百九十馀万。
现代文：这一年，户部上奏说：全国共有二百九十多万户，一千六百九十多万人。
English: In that year, the head of the Household Ministry reported that there were more than 2.9 million households and more than 16.9 million people in the country.

古文：上遣于阗王胜还国，胜固请留宿卫，以国授其弟曜；上许之，加胜开府仪同三司，赐爵武都王。
现代文：代宗遣送于阗王尉迟胜回国，他坚持恳求留下值宿警卫，并将国家传给他的弟弟尉迟曜。代宗表示同意，并加封尉迟胜为开府仪同三司，赐给他武都王爵位。
English: On behalf of the emperor, the deputy emperor sent Yu Wangfei Chi Sheng back to the country. He insisted on pleading with Meng Meng to stay on duty as a guard and pass the country to his younger brother, Meng Shiyou. The deputy emperor agreed, and appointed Meng Fei Chi Sheng as the third secretary of the Kaifu ceremony, and gave him the title of King of Wudu.

古文：永泰元年乙巳，公元七六五年
现代文：永泰元年春季，正月癸卯朔，改年号为永泰，大赦天下。
English: In the spring of the first year of Yongtai, the first month of the new year, the year was changed to Yongtai, and the world was amnestied.

古文：春，正月，癸卯朔，改元，赦天下。戊申，加陈郑、泽潞节度使李抱玉凤翔、陇右节度使，以其从弟殿中少监抱真为泽潞节度副使。
现代文：戊申，代宗加封陈郑、泽潞节度使李抱玉为凤翔、陇右节度使，任命其堂弟殿中少监李抱真为泽潞节度副使。李抱真认为山东节镇如有变故，上党便是军事要冲。
English: Wushin, the vicar-general, appointed Chen Zheng as the envoy to the Shandong Festival, the Shandong Festival appointed Li Baoyu as the envoy to the Fengxiang Festival and the Shandong Festival appointed his cousin Li Baozhen as the deputy envoy to the Shandong Festival. Li Baozhen believed that if there was any change in the Shandong Festival, the military would rush to the party.

古文：抱真以山东有变，上党为兵冲，而荒乱之馀，土瘠民困，无以赡军，乃籍民，每三丁选一壮者，免其租徭，给弓矢，使农隙习射，岁暮都试，行其赏罚。
现代文：然而，兵荒马乱之后，上党土地贫瘠、百姓困苦，没有力量供给军队。于是，李抱真将当地居民登记入册，每三个男丁选择一名强壮者，免除他的租税和徭役，发给弓箭，让这些人在农闲时练习武艺，年终进行考核，实行赏罚。
English: However, after the Chinese Civil War, the land of Shangdang was barren, the people were poor, and there was no strength to supply the army. Therefore, Li Baozhen registered the local residents, selected one strong man for every three men, exempted him from taxes and corvée, and sent him to the bow and arrow, so that these people could practice martial arts during the farmer's idle time, conduct year-end assessment, and implement rewards and punishments.

古文：比三年，得精兵二万，既不费廪给，府库充实，遂雄视山东。
现代文：到第三年，练得精兵二万人，既不费官府粮食，官府仓库便充实了，于是，泽潞威震山东。
English: By the third year, 20,000 elite soldiers had been trained, and since they did not cost the government grain, the government warehouse was enriched. As a result, Shandong was shaken.

古文：由是天下称泽潞步兵为诸道最。
现代文：由此，天下都称泽潞节度使的步兵是各道中最强大的。
English: As a result, all over the world, the infantrymen led by Zedong Jietuo are said to be the most powerful in each province.

古文：二月，戊寅，党项寇富平，焚定陵殿。
现代文：二月戊寅，党项进犯富平，焚烧中宗定陵的殿堂。
English: In February of Wu Yin, the party attacked Fuping and burned the hall of the mausoleum of Zhong Zongding.

古文：庚辰，仪王璲薨。
现代文：庚辰，仪王李去世。
English: On the 18th, the king of ceremonies, King Li, passed away.

古文：三月，壬辰朔，命左仆射裴冕、右仆射郭英乂等文武之臣十三人于集贤殿待制。
现代文：三月壬辰朔，代宗命令左仆射裴冕、右仆射郭英义等文武大臣十三人在集贤殿待命。
English: At the beginning of March, the daimyō ordered thirteen ministers of literature and military affairs to be on standby at Jixian Palace, including his left-hand man, Sho Pei Guan, and his right-hand man, Sho Guo Ying Yi.

古文：左拾遗洛阳独孤及上疏曰： 陛下召冕等待制以备询问，此五帝盛德也。
现代文：左拾遗洛阳人独孤及上疏说： 陛下召集裴冕等人待命以备随时询问，这是五帝般的大德。
English: Luoyang residents, both lonely and lonely, said: Your Majesty has summoned Fei Guan and others to be on standby to be ready to inquire at any time. This is the great virtue of the Five Emperors.

古文：顷者陛下虽容其直，而不录其言，有容下之名，无听谏之实，遂使谏者稍稍钳口饱食，相招为禄仕，此忠鲠之人所以窃叹，而臣亦耻之。
现代文：近来陛下虽然能够容忍臣下忠直之言，但并没有记录下来。因此，陛下虽有容忍臣下之名，但无听从劝告之实，于是使得进谏者逐渐闭口不言，饱食终日，为俸禄官位而互相应酬。这正是忠诚耿直之士私下感叹的原因，而我也感到羞耻。
English: Recently, although His Majesty can tolerate the words of his loyal subjects, he has not recorded them. Therefore, although His Majesty tolerates the name of his subjects, he does not listen to the truth of the advice, so that those who enter the palace gradually shut up, eat all day long, and meet each other for the salary position. This is the reason why the loyal and honest people privately sigh, and I feel ashamed.

古文：拥兵者第馆亘街陌，奴婢厌酒肉，而贫人羸饿就役，剥肤及髓。长安城中白昼椎剽，吏不敢诘，官乱职废，将惰卒暴，百揆隳剌，如沸粥纷麻，民不敢诉于有司，有司不敢闻于陛下，茹毒饮痛，穷而无告。
现代文：如今劳师出征、战火不息已有十年了，百姓失去谋生之业，难以耕织，拥有军队的将官宅第连接街道，其奴婢连酒肉都感到厌腻，而穷苦百姓拖着羸弱的身体去服劳役，遭受着敲骨吸髓的盘剥，长安城中光天化日之下竟有杀人越货者，而官吏不敢过问。官吏混乱，职事荒废，将官堕落，士兵暴虐。朝廷各种规章制度遭到破坏，如同煮沸的粥与纷乱的麻那样一塌糊涂。百姓不敢向有关部门申诉，有关部门也不敢让陛下知道。百姓茹毒饮痛，穷困却无处可告。
English: Now it has been ten years since the laborers went to the front and the war raged on and on. The people have lost their livelihoods and find it difficult to farm. The generals who own the army have their residences at the end of the streets, and their slaves are fed up with meat and wine. Meanwhile, the poor people drag their weak bodies to work and are subjected to brutal exploitation. In Chang'an City, there are murderers and smugglers in broad daylight, but the officials dare not question them. The officials are in disarray, the work is wasteful, the generals are corrupt, and the soldiers are tyrannical. The various rules and regulations of the imperial court have

古文：陛下不以此时思所以救之之术，臣实惧焉。
现代文：陛下不在此时思考拯救危难的办法，我实在感到害怕。
English: I am really afraid that His Majesty is not thinking about how to save us at this time.

古文：今天下惟朔方、陇西有吐蕃、仆固之虞，邠泾、凤翔之兵足以当之矣。
现代文：如今天下只有朔方、陇西有吐蕃、仆固怀恩之患，而州、泾州、凤翔的军队足以抵挡。
English: For example, today, only the Shuo side and the Shaanxi side are plagued by the problem of spitting, and the Zhou, Zhangzhou and Fengxiang armies are enough to resist.

古文：自此而往，东洎海，南至番禺，西尽巴、蜀，无鼠窃之盗而兵不为解。倾天下之货，竭天下之谷，以给不用之军，臣不知其故。
现代文：自今以后，东到大海，南至番禺，西达巴蜀，已无鼠窃之盗，然而军队仍不解散，朝廷倾尽天下的财物和粮食，用来供给闲置的军队，我不知道这是什么缘故。
English: From now on, from the east to the sea, from the south to Panyu, and from the west to Bashu, there will be no more theft by rats and mice. However, the army is still not disbanded, and the imperial court has poured out all the wealth and grain in the world to supply the idle army. I don't know why.

古文：假令居安思危，自可厄要害之地，俾置屯御，悉休其馀，以粮储屝屦之资充疲人贡赋，岁可减国租之半。
现代文：假如陛下居安思危，自然可以扼守要害地区，派兵驻守防御，但其余军队都可以取消，用这些军用物资，来充当穷苦百姓的贡赋，这样每年可以减少国家租赋的一半。
English: If His Majesty is calm and prudent, he can naturally hold the key areas and send troops to guard the defense, but the rest of the army can be canceled, and these military materials can be used as tribute for the poor people, so that the national rent can be reduced by half every year.

古文：陛下岂可持疑于改作，使率土之患日甚一日乎！ 
现代文：陛下难道在改作面前可以持怀疑态度，使国家的忧患日益加重吗！ 
English: Is it possible for His Majesty to be sceptical in the face of change and make the country's sorrow worse and worse!

古文：上不能用。
现代文：代宗没有采用他的建议。
English: The daimyō did not follow his advice.

古文：丙午，以李抱玉同平章事，镇凤翔如故。
现代文：丙午，代宗任命李抱玉为同平章事，如过去一样镇守凤翔。
English: In the afternoon of the 3rd day of the 3rd month, the daimyosong appointed Li Baoyu as the dongping zheng, as in the past, the town guard Fengxiang.

古文：庚戌，吐蕃遣使请和，诏元载、杜鸿渐与盟于兴唐寺。
现代文：庚戌，吐蕃派遣使者前来请和，代宗便下诏让元载、杜鸿渐在兴唐寺与吐蕃结盟。
English: Geng Zang and Tu Zang sent envoys to invite peace, and the daimyos issued an edict to Yuan Zhao and Du Hongqian to ally with Tu Zang at Xingtang Temple.

古文：上问郭子仪： 吐蕃请盟，何如？ 
现代文：代宗问郭子仪： 吐蕃请求结盟，怎么办？ 
English: The daimyō asked Guo Ziyi, "What should we do if the Tuyn request an alliance?"

古文：对曰： 吐蕃利我不虞，若不虞而来，国不可守矣。 
现代文：郭子仪回答道： 吐蕃利用我们没有准备，假如我们无备而他们前来的话，国家就保不住了。 
English: Guo Ziyi replied: We are not prepared for the spade, if we are unprepared and they come, the country cannot be saved.

古文：乃相继遣河中兵戍奉天，又遣兵巡泾原以觇之。
现代文：于是，相继派遣河中的军队戍守奉天，又派遣军队在泾原一带巡逻以观察吐蕃的动向。
English: As a result, troops from the middle of the river were successively dispatched to guard Mukden, and troops were also sent to patrol around Yingyuan to observe the movement of the Tuyu.

古文：是春不雨，米斗千钱。
现代文：这年春季没有下雨，一斗米值一千钱。
English: It didn't rain this spring, and a bucket of rice costs a thousand yuan.

古文：夏，四月，丁丑，命御史大夫王翊充诸道税钱使。
现代文：夏季，四月丁丑，代宗任命御史大夫王翊充当诸道税钱使。
English: In the summer, in April of Dingwuxi, the daimyō appointed the goshi taifu, Wang Qi, to act as the tax collector for all the provinces.

古文：河东道租庸、盐铁使裴谞入奏事，上问： 榷酤之利，岁入几何？ 
现代文：河东道租庸、盐铁使裴入朝奏报情况，代宗问道： 卖酒专利，每年能够收入多少？ 
English: The Daizong asked: How much revenue can be made from selling liquor patents each year?

古文：谞久之不对。上复问之，对曰： 臣自河东来，所过见菽粟未种，农夫愁怨，臣以为陛下见臣，必先问人之疾苦，乃责臣以营利，臣是以未敢对也。 
现代文：裴沉默很久没有回答，代宗再次问他，裴才回答说： 我自河东前来，沿途看到地里没有种庄稼，农民愁叹怨愤，我以为陛下见到我，一定首先询问百姓的疾苦，陛下却责问我营利之事，我所以没有敢回答。 
English: Pei was silent for a long time and did not answer. The daizong asked him again, and Pei finally answered: I came from the east of the river, and along the way I saw that there were no crops in the land, and the peasants were sad and angry. I thought that when His Majesty saw me, he would first ask about the sufferings of the people, but His Majesty accused me of profiteering, so I did not dare to answer.

古文：上谢之，拜左司郎中。
现代文：代宗对他表示谢意，授予他左司郎中的官职。
English: The daimyō expressed his gratitude to him and granted him the official position of Sasiro no chujo.

古文：谞，宽之子也。
现代文：裴是裴宽的儿子。
English: Pei is the son of Pei Kuan.

古文：辛卯，剑南节度使严武薨。
现代文：辛卯，剑南节度使严武去世。
English: Xinwu, Jiannan Festival caused Yanwu's death.

古文：武三镇剑南，厚赋敛以穷奢侈，梓州剌史章彝小不副意，召而杖杀之；然吐蕃畏之，不敢犯其境。
现代文：严武前后三次出镇剑南，横征暴敛，穷极奢侈。梓州刺史章彝稍不如其意，严武便将他召来用乱棍打死。然而，吐蕃却十分害怕他，不敢侵犯他的辖区。
English: Yan Wu went out of the town of Jiannan three times before and after. He was violent in collecting taxes and extravagant to the extreme. Zizhou stabber Zhang Xi was a little less than he wanted, so Yan Wu summoned him and beat him to death with a club. However, Tubo was very afraid of him and dared not encroach on his jurisdiction.

古文：母数戒其骄暴，武不从；及死，母曰： 吾今始免为官婢矣！ 
现代文：严武的母亲屡次告诫他不要骄横暴虐，严武不听。等到严武去世，他母亲说道： 从今以后，我可以免掉做官婢的命运了！ 
English: Yan Wu's mother repeatedly warned him not to be arrogant and tyrannical, but Yan Wu did not listen. When Yan Wu died, his mother said: From now on, I can avoid the fate of being an official servant!

古文：五月，癸丑，以右仆射郭英又为剑南节度使。
现代文：五月癸丑，代宗任命右仆射郭英义为剑南节度使。
English: At the end of May, the daimyō appointed his right-hand man, Shakuo Yingyi, as the Jianan Festival envoy.

古文：畿内麦稔，京兆尹第五琦请税百姓田，十亩收其一，曰： 此古什一之法也。 
现代文：京畿地区麦子成熟，京兆尹第五琦请求代宗征收百姓田税，十亩田收取一亩田的租税，说： 这是古代征收十分之一的法制。 
English: When the wheat ripened in Gyeonggi Province, the fifth son of Emperor Taejo, Emperor Taejo, requested the dajong to collect the peasants' field tax, and the ten mu field to collect the tax of one mu field, saying, "This is the legal system of collecting one-tenth in ancient times.

古文：上从之。
现代文：代宗表示许可。
English: Emperor Dezong accepted his suggestion.

古文：平卢节度使侯希逸镇淄青，好游畋，营塔寺，军州苦之。
现代文：平卢节度使侯希逸坐镇淄青，喜欢游猎，营建佛塔寺院，所在军州颇受其苦。
English: The Pinglu Festival made Hou Xiyi sit in the town of Jiaqing, like to go hunting, build a stupa temple, and suffer a lot in the military region.

古文：兵马使怀玉得众心，希逸忌之，因事解其军职。
现代文：兵马使李怀玉颇得人心，侯希逸十分忌恨他，借故解除了他的军职。
English: The soldiers and horses made Li Huaiyu quite popular. Hou Xiyi detested him very much and relieved him of his military post.

古文：希逸与巫宿于城外，军士闭门不纳，奉怀玉为帅。
现代文：后来，侯希逸与巫师在城外住宿，士兵们就关闭城门不让他回城，拥立李怀玉为主帅。
English: Later, Hou Xiyi and the sorcerer stayed outside the city, and the soldiers closed the city gate to prevent him from returning to the city and made Li Huaiyu the head coach.

古文：希逸奔滑州上表待罪，诏赦之，召还京师。
现代文：侯希逸逃奔滑州，上表等待惩处。代宗下诏赦免其罪，将他召回京师。
English: Hou Xiyi fled to Luzhou and awaited punishment from the emperor. The emperor pardoned him and recalled him to Beijing.

古文：秋，七月，壬辰，以郑王邈为平卢、淄青节度大使，以怀玉知留后，赐名正己。
现代文：秋季，七月壬辰，代宗任命郑王李邈为平卢、淄青节度大使，李怀玉担任留后，并赐名为李正己。
English: In the autumn, in July, Emperor Taizong appointed Zheng Wang Lijun as the ambassador to Pinglu and Jiaqing, and Li Huaiyu as the empress dowager, and gave him the name Li Zhenggi.

古文：时成德节度使李宝臣，魏博节度使田承嗣，相卫节度使薛嵩，卢龙节度使李怀仙，收安、史馀党，各拥劲卒数万，治兵完城，自署文武将吏，不供贡赋，与山南东道节度使梁崇义及正己皆结为婚姻，互相表里。
现代文：这时，承德节度使李宝臣、魏博节度使田承嗣、相卫节度使薛蒿、卢龙节度使李怀仙收罗安史叛军的余党，各自拥有精兵数万人，操练军队，修筑城池，自行任命文武官员，不向朝廷上贡赋税，与山南东道节度使梁崇义以及平卢、淄青留后李正己联姻，遥相呼应，内外勾结。
English: At this time, the Chengde Festival made Li Baochen, the Weibo Festival made Tian Chengzi, the Mutual Defense Festival made Xue Qi, and the Lulong Festival made Li Huai Xian recruit the remaining party of the Luo rebels. Each had tens of thousands of elite soldiers, trained troops, built castles, appointed civil and military officials on their own, did not pay tribute to the imperial court, and colluded with the Shannan host festival to marry Liang Chongyi and Li Zhengyi after staying in Pinglu and Jiaqing, echoing each other and colluding with each other.

古文：朝廷专事姑息，不能复制，虽名籓臣，羁縻而已。
现代文：朝廷对此一味姑息，不能再控制他们，因而这些节度使虽然称为藩臣，但实际上仅仅是维系朝廷与地方名义上的关系而已。
English: The imperial court simply tolerated this and could no longer control them, so these restrictions, although they were called vassals, actually only maintained the nominal relationship between the imperial court and the localities.

古文：甲午，以上女升平公主嫁郭子仪之子暖。
现代文：甲午，代宗将女儿升平公主嫁给郭子仪的儿子郭暧。
English: In the afternoon of the first day of the second month, the daizong married his daughter, Princess Shengping, to Guo Ziyi's son, Guo Yao.

古文：太子母沈氏，吴兴人也；安禄山之陷长安也，掠送洛阳宫。
现代文：太子的母亲沈氏是吴兴人。当初安禄山攻陷长安，将沈氏掳送到东京洛阳的皇宫中。
English: The prince's mother, Shen, was a Wu Xing person. At that time, An Lushan conquered Chang'an and sent Shen to the imperial palace in Luoyang, Tokyo.

古文：上克洛阳，见之，未及迎归长安；会史思明再陷洛阳，遂失所在。
现代文：代宗攻克洛阳时，曾经见到沈氏，但来不及送回长安，又碰上史思明再度攻陷洛阳，于是沈氏下落不明。
English: When Daizong conquered Luoyang, he once saw Shen, but he was too late to send him back to Chang'an, and he met Shi Siming again to conquer Luoyang, so Shen's whereabouts are unknown.

古文：上即位，遣使散求之，不获。
现代文：代宗登基即位后，派遣使者到处寻访沈氏，没有找到。
English: After Emperor Daizong ascended to the throne, he sent an envoy to look for the Shen family everywhere, but they were not found.

古文：己亥，寿州崇善寺尼广澄诈称太子母，按验，乃故少阳院乳母也，鞭杀之。
现代文：己亥，寿州崇善寺尼姑广澄诈称是太子的母亲，经查验，广澄是原少阳院的奶妈，于是，将她用乱鞭打死。
English: According to Ji Hai, the nun of Shoushu Chongzenji, Guangcheng, falsely claimed to be the prince's mother. After investigation, Guangcheng was the wet nurse of the former Shao Yang Academy, so he whipped her to death.

古文：九月，庚寅朔，置百高座于资圣、西明两寺，讲仁王经，内出经二宝舆，以人为菩萨、鬼神之状，导以音乐卤簿，百官迎于光顺门外，从至寺。
现代文：九月庚寅朔，代宗在资圣寺、西明寺设置百尺高的坛座，请高僧宣讲《护国仁王经》，从皇宫内运出二车佛经，并让人装扮成菩萨和鬼神的模样，前面音乐仪杖队开道，百官在光顺门外迎接，并且跟随着到寺院。
English: In September, the Daizong set up a hundred-foot-high altar in Zu Sheng Temple and Ximing Temple, invited high monks to preach the "Defense of the Nation and the King's Sutra," transported two carloads of Buddhist scriptures from the imperial palace, and had people dress up as bodhisattvas and ghosts. A procession of musical instruments led the way, and hundreds of officials greeted them outside the Guangshun Gate and followed them to the temple.

古文：仆固怀恩诱回纥、吐蕃、吐谷浑、党项、奴剌数十万众俱入寇，令吐蕃大将尚结悉赞磨、马重英等自北道趣奉天，党项帅任敷、郑庭、郝德等自东道趣同州，吐谷浑、奴剌之众自西道趣盩厔，回纥继吐蕃之后，怀恩又以朔方兵继之。
现代文：仆固怀恩诱使回纥、吐蕃、吐谷浑、党项、奴剌数十万人众共同进犯唐朝，仆固怀恩命令吐蕃大将尚结悉赞摩、马重英等人从北道奔赴奉天，党项帅任敷、郑庭、郝德等人从东道奔赴同州，吐谷浑、奴剌的部队从西道奔赴，回纥部队则跟随吐蕃后面，仆固怀恩又让朔方军队紧随其后。
English: Dugu Wai-en enticed hundreds of thousands of Uighurs, Tutsis, Tujuguns, Danzhangs, and Nungs to jointly invade the Tang Dynasty. Dugu Wai-en ordered the Tutsis generals Shang Ketsu, Zammo, Ma Chung-ying, and others to rush from the North Road to Bong Tian, the Danzhang commanders Ren Zhi, Zheng Ting, Xing De, and others to rush from the East Road to Tongzhou, the troops of Tutsis and Nungs to rush from the West Road, and the Uighur troops to follow the Tutsis. Dugu Wai-en also

古文：郭子仪使行军司马赵复入奏曰： 虏皆骑兵，其来如飞，不可易也。
现代文：郭子仪派行军司马赵复入朝奏报： 敌军都是骑兵，进军如飞，不可轻敌。
English: Guo Ziyi sent marching army Sima Zhao Fuxin to the morning report: The enemy troops are all cavalry, the advance is flying, and the enemy should not be taken lightly.

古文：请使诸道节度使凤翔李抱玉、滑濮李光庭、邠宁白孝德、镇西马璘、河南郝庭玉、淮西李忠臣各出兵以扼其冲要。 
现代文：请求陛下派遣凤翔节度使李抱玉、滑濮节度使李光庭、宁节度使白孝德、镇西节度使马、河南节度使郝庭玉、淮西节度使李忠臣分别出兵扼守各军事要冲。 
English: I request Your Majesty to send troops from Fengxiang to Li Baoyu, from Nanning to Li Guangting, from Ning to Bai Xiaode, from Zhenxi to Ma, from Henan to Fengting, and from Huaxi to Li Zhongchen to guard the military key points.

古文：上从之。
现代文：代宗采纳了他的建议。
English: Emperor Dezong accepted his suggestion.

古文：诸道多不时出兵；李忠臣方与诸将击球，得诏，亟命治行。
现代文：当时，诸道节度使大多不按时出兵。然而李忠臣正与诸将领打马，得到诏书后，马上下令整队出发。
English: At that time, most of the provinces did not send their troops on time due to the festivals. However, Li Zhongcheng was leading the horses with the generals, and after receiving the edict, he immediately ordered the whole team to set out.

古文：诸将及监军皆曰： 师行必择日。 
现代文：诸将领及监军都说： 军队出发必须选择良辰吉日。 
English: All the generals and supervisors of the army said: the army must choose a good time and day to start.

古文：忠臣怒曰： 父母有急，岂可择日而后救邪！ 
现代文：李忠臣气愤地对他们说： 父母有急难，难道也要选择良辰吉日然后再去援救吗！ 
English: Li Zhongchen angrily said to them, "My parents are in dire straits. Should I choose a good time and day and then go to rescue them?"

古文：即日勒兵就道。
现代文：李忠臣当日就统率军队出发了。
English: On the same day, Li Zhongcheng led the army and set out.

古文：怀恩中途遇暴疾而归；丁酉，死于鸣沙。
现代文：仆固怀恩在进军途中突然得急病，只好返回灵武。丁酉，在鸣沙县去世。
English: The servant Gu Wai Yan suddenly fell ill on his way to the army and had to return to Lingwu. Ding Yao passed away in Mingsha County.

古文：大将张韶代领其众，别将徐璜玉杀之，范志诚又杀璜玉而领其众。
现代文：大将张韶代理仆固怀恩统率军队，别将徐璜玉将他杀掉，范志诚又杀掉徐璜玉而统率军队。
English: General Zhang Ye's acting servant Gu Wai En led the army, don't kill Xu Bingyu, Fan Zhicheng killed Xu Bingyu and led the army.

古文：怀恩拒命三年，再引胡寇，为国大患，上犹为之隐，前后制敕未尝言其反；及闻其死，悯然曰： 怀恩不反，为左右所误耳！ 
现代文：仆固怀恩抗拒圣命三年，两次勾引胡人军队进犯唐朝，成为国家一大祸害。但是代宗仍然隐晦此事，前后敕制都没有提及仆固怀恩谋反。及至代宗听到仆固怀恩死讯时，怜悯地说： 仆固怀恩没有谋反，只是为部下所误罢了！ 
English: Minion Gu Huai'en resisted his holy mission for three years, twice luring the Hu army to invade the Tang Dynasty, becoming a great national calamity. However, the Daizong remained silent on the matter, and did not mention Minion Gu Huai'en's rebellion. And when the Daizong heard of Minion Guai'en's death, he said with pity: Minion Guai'en did not rebel, but was mistaken by his subordinates!

古文：吐蕃至邠州，白孝德婴城自守。
现代文：吐蕃军队到达州，白孝德环城固守。
English: When the army of Tubo arrived in the state, Bai Xiaodong and De Huancheng held fast.

古文：甲辰，上命宰相及诸司长官于西明寺行香设素馔，奏乐。
现代文：甲辰，代宗命令宰相和各部门长官在西明寺烧香拜佛，摆设素斋，演奏音乐。
English: At that time, the Daizong ordered the Prime Minister and the heads of various departments to burn incense and worship the Buddha at Ximing Temple, set up a vegetarian meal, and play music.

古文：是日，吐蕃十万众至奉天，京城震恐。
现代文：当天，吐蕃十万大军到达奉天，京城一片惶恐。
English: On the same day, the 100,000-strong army of Tubo arrived in Mukden, and the capital was in a panic.

古文：朔方兵马使浑瑊、讨击使白元光先戍奉天，虏始列营，瑊帅骁骑二百直冲之，身先士卒，虏众披靡。
现代文：朔方兵马使浑、讨击使白元光率先戍守奉天，敌军刚开始布列阵营，浑便率领二百名勇猛的骑兵冲击敌阵，浑身先士卒，敌军惊慌溃败。
English: Shuo Fang's soldiers and horses made Hun and counterattack made Bai Yuanguang take the lead in defending Fengtian. The enemy army had just begun to lay out the camp, and Hun led two hundred brave cavalrymen to attack the enemy line. They were all pawns, and the enemy army was panicked and defeated.

古文：瑊挟虏将一人跃马而还，从骑无中锋镝者。
现代文：浑生擒敌军将领一人，跃马而回，随从骑兵没有一人为敌军兵器所击中。
English: Hanzo tackled one enemy general and jumped back, but none of his cavalry were hit by the enemy's weapons.

古文：城上士卒望之，勇气始振。
现代文：城头上的士兵望到这一情景后，勇气顿时倍增。
English: When the soldiers at the top of the castle saw this scene, their courage suddenly multiplied.

古文：乙巳，吐蕃进攻之，虏死伤甚众，数日，敛众还营；瑊夜引兵袭之，杀千馀人，前后与虏战二百馀合，斩首五千级。
现代文：乙巳，吐蕃军队又进攻奉天，但伤亡更加惨重。几天后，吐蕃只好收兵回营。浑夜里率领士兵袭击吐蕃军营，杀死敌军一千多人。浑与敌军交战前后达二百多次，共杀死敌军五千人。
English: Suddenly, the Tubo army attacked Mukden again, but the casualties were even more severe. A few days later, Tubo had no choice but to withdraw the troops back to the camp. He led the soldiers to attack the Tubo camp at night, killing more than a thousand enemy troops. He fought with the enemy more than two hundred times before and after the battle, killing a total of five thousand enemy troops.

古文：丙午，罢百高座讲；召郭子仪于河中，使屯泾阳。
现代文：丙午，代宗取消在百尺高坛座宣讲佛经，又召见坐镇河中的郭子仪，让他驻兵泾阳。
English: In the afternoon of the third day, the daizong cancelled the preaching of Buddhist scriptures at the hundred-foot high altar, and summoned Guo Zi Yi, who was sitting in the middle of the town, and had him stationed in Shenyang.

古文：己酉，命李忠臣屯东渭桥，李光进屯云阳，马璘、郝庭玉屯便桥，李抱玉屯凤翔，内侍骆奉仙、将军李日越屯盩厔，同华节度使周智光屯同州，鄜坊节度使杜冕屯坊州，上自将六军屯苑中。
现代文：己酉，代宗命令李忠臣驻兵东渭桥，李光进驻兵云阳，马、郝庭玉驻兵便桥，李抱玉驻兵凤翔，内侍骆奉仙、将军李日越驻兵，同华节度使周智光驻兵同州，坊节度使杜冕驻兵坊州。代宗亲自率领六军驻守禁苑之中。
English: On behalf of Emperor Jizong, Emperor Daizong ordered Li Zhongchen to be stationed in Dongluqiao, Li Guangjin to be stationed in Yunyang, Ma and Xingting Yu to be stationed in Bingqiao, Li Baoyu to be stationed in Fengxiang, Naishi Luo to be stationed in Fengxian, General Li Nichiyue to be stationed in Dongzhou, and Donghua Jiedu to be stationed in Tongzhou, and Fang Jiedu to be stationed in Jingfangzhou. Emperor Daizong personally led the six armies to be stationed in the Forbidden Garden.

古文：庚戌，下制亲征。
现代文：庚戌，代宗发布制令亲自出征。
English: Geng Zong, the daizong issued an order and personally went to the front.

古文：辛亥，鱼朝恩请索城中，括士民私马，令城中男子皆衣皁，团结为兵，城门皆塞二开一。
现代文：辛亥，鱼朝恩请求代宗在京城中搜括士人平民的私人马匹，命令城中男子都穿黑衣服，并加以编组教练，使他们成为地方武装力量。
English: In Xinhai, Yu Chaon requested the vicar general to search the private horses of the scholars and civilians in the capital, ordered the men in the city to wear black clothes, and organized coaches to make them become local armed forces.

古文：朝恩欲奉上幸河中以避吐蕃，恐群臣论议不一；一旦百官入朝，立班久之，阁门不开，朝恩忽从禁军十馀人操白刃而出，宣言： 吐蕃数犯郊畿，车驾欲幸河中，何如？ 
现代文：又将各城门的两个门洞关闭，只启用一个门洞。士人平民闻讯后大为惊恐，翻城墙和凿地洞逃跑的人很多，官吏都无法禁止。鱼朝恩想要让代宗到河中去躲避吐蕃的进攻，但又害怕大臣们议论不一。一天早晨，大臣们入朝，按班次站立，很长时间不见东西门打开。这时，鱼朝恩突然同禁军十多人手操兵器从门里出来，宣称： 吐蕃多次侵犯京畿郊县，皇上想要到河中去避难，你们看怎么样？ 
English: In addition, two doorways of each gate were closed, and only one doorway was opened. Upon hearing the news, the nobles and commoners were greatly alarmed. There were many people who climbed over the city wall and dug holes to escape, and the officials could not forbid it. Yu Chaon wanted to let Daizong go to the river to escape the attack of the Tuobao, but he was afraid that the ministers would not agree. One morning, the ministers entered the palace, stood in shifts, and did not see the east and west doors open for a long time. At this time, Yu Chaon suddenly came out of the door with more than ten forbidden soldiers to handle weapons and declared: Tu

古文：公卿皆错愕不知所对。
现代文：公卿大臣们都十分惊愕，不知如何答复。
English: The Lords were so astonished that they did not know how to reply.

古文：有刘给事者，独出班抗声曰： 敕使反邪！
现代文：有一位刘给事从朝班中独自站出来大声说： 宦官谋反吗！
English: For some reason, one Liu stood up alone from the morning shift and said loudly: Is the eunuch plotting a rebellion?

古文：今屯军如云，不戮力扞寇，而遽欲胁天子弃宗庙社稷而去，非反而何！ 
现代文：如今守军云集，你不同心戮力抵御敌寇，而是想匆忙胁迫天子放弃宗庙社稷而逃亡，不是谋反又是什么呢！ 
English: Now that the defenders have gathered, you are not so anxious to resist the enemy, but want to hastily coerce the son of heaven to abandon the patriarchal temple and flee, not to rebel, but what is it!

古文：朝恩惊沮而退，事遂寝。
现代文：鱼朝恩即惊恐又沮丧，便惶惶而退。
English: Fish morning grace that frightened and frustrated, they panicked and retreated.

古文：自丙午至甲寅，大雨不止，故虏不能进。
现代文：出走河中一事便搁置下来。从丙午到甲寅，一直下着大雨，所以吐蕃无法进军。
English: From the afternoon of the 3rd to the morning of the 4th, it rained heavily all the time, so they couldn't march.

古文：吐蕃移兵攻醴泉，党项西掠白水，东侵蒲津。
现代文：吐蕃移师转攻醴泉，党项向西攻掠白水，向东侵犯蒲津。
English: The spade-moving division turned to attack Jiuquan, the party attacked and plundered Baishui in the west, and invaded Pudong in the east.

古文：丁巳，吐蕃大掠男女数万而去，所过焚庐舍，蹂禾嫁殆尽。
现代文：丁巳，吐蕃大肆掳掠男子妇女数万人后便撤军而去，所经之处焚烧屋舍，践踏庄稼，毁之殆尽。
English: At that time, after the Tujia army had plundered tens of thousands of men and women, they withdrew, burning houses, trampling crops, and destroying everything in their path.

古文：周智光引兵邀击，破之于澄城北，因逐北至邠州。
现代文：周智光率军拦截阻击，在澄城以北击败吐蕃军队，并追逐敌军直到州。
English: Zhou Zhiguang's army intercepted and blocked the attack, defeated the Tubo army north of Chengcheng, and chased the enemy army all the way to Zhuangzhou.

古文：智光素与杜冕不协，遂杀鄜州剌史张麟，坑冕家属八十一人，焚坊州庐舍三千馀家。
现代文：周智光平素与杜冕不和，于是，他杀掉州刺史张麟，坑杀杜冕家属八十一人，焚烧坊州民宅三千多家。
English: Zhou Zhiguang was always at odds with Du Guan, so he killed Zhang Lin, the state's chief historian, murdered 81 members of Du Guan's family, and burned more than 3,000 homes in Fangzhou.

古文：冬，十月，己未，复讲经于资圣寺。
现代文：冬季，十月己未，又在资圣寺开讲佛经。
English: In the winter, before October, Buddhist sutras were once again being taught at Zu Sheng Temple.

古文：吐蕃退至邠州，遇回纥，复相与入寇，辛酉，至奉天。
现代文：吐蕃军队撤退到州时，遇到回纥军队，他们相互联合再次前来进犯，辛酉，到达奉天。
English: When the Tubo army retreated to the prefecture, they encountered the Uighur army, and they jointly attacked again, and arrived at Mukden.

古文：癸亥，党项焚同州官廨、民居而去。
现代文：癸亥，党项军队焚毁同州官署、民宅后便撤军而去。
English: In Yanhai, the party troops burned the same state government office and private houses, and then withdrew.

古文：丙寅，回纥、吐蕃合兵围泾阳，子仪命诸将严设守备而不战。
现代文：丙寅，回纥、吐蕃联军包围泾阳，郭子仪命令诸将加强守备而不与敌军作战。
English: Hsin-Yin, Hui-Yin, and Tu-Yin allied forces encircled Fenyang, and Guo Ziyi ordered his generals to strengthen their defenses rather than fight the enemy.

古文：及幕，二虏退屯北原，丁卯，复至城下。
现代文：等到傍晚时，回纥、吐蕃联军退驻北原。丁卯，回纥、吐蕃联军再次来到城下。
English: In the late afternoon, the Uighur and Tibetan allied forces withdrew to Bukhara. However, the Uighur and Tibetan allied forces came to the city again.

古文：是时，回纥与吐蕃闻仆固怀恩死，已争长，不相睦，分营而居，子仪知之。
现代文：正当此时，回纥和吐蕃听说仆固怀恩已经去世，便开始互争尊长，不相和睦，分别设置营帐居住，郭子仪知道了这件事。
English: Just at this time, when Huizhou and Tubo heard that the servant Gu Huai had passed away, they began to fight with each other and set up camp to live separately. Guo Ziyi knew about this.

古文：回纥在城西，子仪使牙将李光瓚等往说之，欲与之共击吐蕃。
现代文：回纥军队住在城西，郭子仪便派牙将李光瓒等人前去游说回纥，打算联合回纥共同攻击吐蕃。
English: The Uighur army lived in the west of the city, and Guo Ziyi sent Li Guangyao and others to lobby the Uighurs, intending to jointly attack Tibet.

古文：回纥不信，曰： 郭公固在此乎？
现代文：回纥人不相信李光瓒，说道： 郭子仪真在这里吗？
English: Uighurs do not believe Li Guangyao, saying: Is Guo Ziyi really here?

古文：汝绐我耳。
现代文：你不过是在欺骗我罢了。
English: You're just trying to trick me.

古文：若果在此，可得见乎？ 
现代文：假如真在这里的话，我可以见见他吗？ 
English: If he's really here, can I see him?

古文：光瓚还报，子仪曰： 今众寡不敌，难以力胜。
现代文：李光瓒便回去向郭子仪报告，郭子仪说： 如今我们寡不敌众，难于凭借军事力量取胜。
English: Li Guangyao then went back to report to Guo Ziyi. Guo Ziyi said, "Nowadays, we are outnumbered, and it is difficult to win by military force.

古文：昔与回纥契约甚厚，不若挺身往说之，可不战而下也。 
现代文：过去我们曾与回纥缔结协约，交情甚厚。所以不如我挺身前往，去劝说他们，可以不战而胜。 
English: In the past, we had concluded an agreement with the Uighurs, and our friendship was very strong, so it was better for me to go there and persuade them that we could win without a fight.

古文：诸将请选铁骑五百为卫从，子仪曰： 此适足为害也。 
现代文：诸将请求选派铁骑兵五百人作为郭子仪的警卫随从，郭子仪说： 此举恰恰会害了我。 
English: They will request the selection of 500 cavalrymen to be Guo Ziyi's bodyguards. Guo Ziyi said, "This move will harm me."

古文：郭晞扣马谏曰： 彼，虎狼也；大人，国之元帅，奈何以身为虏饵！ 
现代文：郭拉住郭子仪的马劝说道： 他们是虎狼，父亲大人你是一国元帅，怎么可以让自己成为敌人口中之食呢！ 
English: Guo Lala took hold of Guo Ziyi's horse and said, "They are tigers and wolves. Father, you are a national marshal. How can you allow yourself to become food for the enemy population?"

古文：子仪曰： 今战，则父子俱死而国家危；往以至诚与之言，或幸而见从，则四海之福也！
现代文：郭子仪回答道： 如今要是交战的话，那么我们父子俩都会牺牲，国家就危险了。我前去以真诚劝说他们，或许能侥幸使他们听从我的劝说，那就是国家的福分了！
English: Guo Ziyi replied: If there is a war now, then both of our fathers and sons will be sacrificed, and the country will be in danger. I will go to persuade them sincerely, and maybe I can persuade them to listen to my persuasion. That is the blessing of the country!

古文：不然，则身没而家全。 
现代文：假如他们不听我的劝说，我虽身死而我家可以保全。 
English: If they don't listen to my persuasion, I can save my family even if I die.

古文：以鞭击其手曰： 去！ 
现代文：郭子仪扬鞭抽打郭拉马的手，说道： 走开！ 
English: Guo Ziyi lashed Guolama's hand with a whip and said: "Go away!

古文：遂与数骑开门而出，使人传呼曰： 令公来！ 
现代文：郭子仪与几位骑兵打开城门而去，郭子仪又派人传呼说： 郭令公来了！ 
English: Guo Ziyi and several cavalrymen opened the city gate and left. Guo Ziyi also sent someone to announce: Guo Ling Gong has arrived!

古文：回纥大惊。
现代文：回纥军队大吃一惊。
English: The Hui army was taken by surprise.

古文：其大帅合胡禄都督药葛罗，可汗之弟也，执弓注矢立于阵前。
现代文：回纥统帅合胡禄都督药葛罗是回纥可汗的弟弟，他执弓上箭，立在军阵前列。
English: The commander-in-chief of the Uighur Khanate, the governor of the Uighur capital, H Hu Lc, was the younger brother of the Uighur Khan. He stood at the front of the army, holding a bow and arrows.

古文：子仪免胄释甲投枪而进，回纥诸酋长相顾曰： 是也！ 
现代文：郭子仪脱掉盔甲，放下长枪，向前走去，回纥各位酋长相互看了看，说道： 是郭子仪来了！ 
English: Guo Ziyi took off his armor, put down his gun and walked forward. The chiefs looked at each other and said: Guo Ziyi is coming!

古文：皆下马罗拜。
现代文：他们都下马一起围着郭子仪跪拜。
English: They all dismounted and knelt around Guo Ziyi.

古文：子仪亦下马，前执药葛罗手，让之曰： 汝回纥有大功于唐，唐之报汝亦不薄，奈何负约，深入吾地，侵逼畿县，弃前功，结怨仇，背恩德而助叛臣，何其愚也！
现代文：郭子仪也下了马，上前拉着药葛罗的手，责备他说： 你们回纥对我们唐朝是有大功劳的，唐朝报答你们也不薄，为何背信弃义，深入我内地，侵犯进逼京畿郊县，放弃前功，新结怨仇，违背恩德而帮助叛臣，这是多么愚蠢啊！
English: Guo Ziyi also dismounted from his horse and came forward, holding the hand of Yingge Luo, and scolded him, saying, "You have done great service to us, the Tang Dynasty, and the Tang Dynasty has rewarded you handsomely. Why did you betray our trust, go deep into our inland, invade the suburbs of Gyeonggi Province, abandon your previous achievements, create new grudges, and help traitors in violation of your benevolence? How stupid is this!

古文：且怀恩叛君弃母，于汝国何有！
现代文：况且仆固怀恩背叛国君，抛弃母亲，对你们国家有什么好处！
English: Besides, what benefit is it to your country for a servant to betray the sovereign and abandon his mother?

古文：今吾挺身而来，听汝执我杀之，我之将士必致死与汝战矣。 
现代文：今天我挺身前来，任凭你们把我抓起来杀掉，我的部下必定与你们作殊死搏战。 
English: Today, I come forward. If you arrest me and kill me, my men will surely fight to the death with you.

古文：药葛罗曰： 怀恩欺我，言天可汗已晏驾，令公亦捐馆，中国无主，我是以敢与之来。
现代文：药葛罗回答道： 仆固怀恩欺骗我，说大唐天子已经驾崩，郭子仪也已经去世，中国没有主人了，所以我才敢同他前来。
English: He replied, "My servant Gu Wai lied to me and said that Datang Tianzi had passed away, Guo Ziyi had also passed away, and China had no master, so I dared to come with him.

古文：今知天可汗在上都，令公复总兵于此，怀恩又为天所杀，我曹岂肯与令公战乎！ 
现代文：如今我已经知道天子在上都长安，您又在这里统帅军队，仆固怀恩又为苍天所杀，我们难道愿意和您交战吗！ 
English: Now that I know that God's capital is Chang'an, and that you are the commander of the army here, and that your servant Gu Wei'en was killed by God, do we really want to fight with you?

古文：子仪因说之曰： 吐蕃无道，乘我国有乱，不顾舅甥之亲，吞噬我边鄙，焚荡我畿甸，其所掠之财不可胜载，马牛杂畜，长数百里，弥温在野，此天以赐汝也。
现代文：郭子仪因此劝说道： 吐蕃暴虐，乘我国有乱，不顾舅甥之国的关系，吞噬我边疆，焚毁扫荡我京畿地区，他们所掠夺的财物用车装都装不完，马、牛和其它牲畜前后长达数百里，散布在荒野上，这是苍天赏赐给你们的。
English: Guo Ziyi therefore advised: "Tibetan tyrants, taking advantage of the turmoil in our country, and disregarding the relations of the uncle's and nephew's country, have devoured our borderlands, burned and swept through our Gyeonggi region. The goods and vehicles they have plundered cannot be fully loaded. Horses, cattle and other livestock stretch for hundreds of miles back and forth and are scattered in the wilderness. This is the reward given to you by heaven.

古文：全师而继好，破敌以取富，为汝计，孰便于此！不可失也。 
现代文：使自己的军队完整而能与唐朝重归于好，击败敌军又能取得财富。从你那方面考虑，还有比这更有利的吗！机不可失啊！ 
English: To make his army complete and be able to return to peace with the Tang Dynasty, to defeat the enemy army and gain wealth. From your point of view, is there anything more advantageous than this? Don't miss the opportunity!

古文：药葛罗曰： 吾为怀恩所误，负公诚深，今请为公尽力，击吐蕃以谢过。
现代文：药葛罗说道： 我上了仆固怀恩的当，辜负您实在太深，如今请让我为您尽力，攻击吐蕃以谢罪。
English: He said, "I fell into the trap of my servant, Gu Wai Yan. I have failed you so badly. Now, please let me do my best for you and attack Tu Yao to atone for my sins."

古文：然怀恩之子，可敦兄弟也，愿舍之勿杀。 
现代文：然而，仆固怀恩之子是回纥可敦的兄弟，愿您放过他而不要杀他。 
English: However, the son of the servant of Ghuwayn is the brother of Uthman, so let him go and do not kill him.

古文：子仪许之。
现代文：郭子仪表示允许。
English: Guo Ziyi allowed it.

古文：回纥观者左右为两翼，稍前，子仪麾下亦进，子仪挥手却之，因取酒与其酋长共饮。
现代文：在两侧旁观的回纥人，逐渐向前靠近，郭子仪的部下也迎上去，郭子仪挥手让他们退后，于是取酒来与回纥酋长共饮。
English: The Uighur people, who were watching from both sides, gradually moved forward, and Guo Ziyi's subordinates also greeted them. Guo Ziyi waved for them to move back, so he took some wine to drink with the Uighur chief.

古文：药葛罗使子仪先执酒为誓，子仪酹地曰： 大唐天子万岁！
现代文：药葛罗让郭子仪先拿酒杯对天发誓，郭子仪将酒洒在地上，发誓说： 大唐天子万岁！
English: Zhuge Luo asked Guo Ziyi to first take a glass of wine and swear to the heavens. Guo Ziyi spilled the wine on the ground and swore: Long live the Great Tang Emperor!

古文：回纥可汗亦万岁！
现代文：回纥可汗也万岁！
English: Long live the Great Khan!

古文：两国将相亦万岁！
现代文：两国的将相也万岁！
English: Long live the leaders of the two countries!

古文：有负约者，身殒陈前，家族灭绝。 
现代文：谁要负约，就在阵前陨命，家族灭绝。 
English: Anyone who wants to break the contract will die before the battle, and the family will be exterminated.

古文：杯至药葛罗，亦酹地曰： 如令公誓！ 
现代文：酒杯传到药葛罗手中，他也将酒洒在地上说： 我的誓言同郭令公一样！ 
English: The glass of wine passed into the hands of the druggist, who also spilled the wine on the ground and said: "My oath is the same as Guo Linggong's!"

古文：于是诸酋长皆大喜曰： 向以二巫师从军，巫言此行甚安稳，不与唐战，见一大人而还，今果然矣。 
现代文：于是回纥诸位酋长都非常高兴地说： 出发时，我们让两位巫师从军，巫师说这次行动非常安稳，不用与唐军交战，见到一位大人物就回师，如今果然如此。 
English: Therefore, the chiefs of the Hui were very happy to say: When we set out, we let two wizards serve in the army. The wizards said that this operation was very stable, there was no need to fight with the Tang army, and when they saw a big man, they returned to the division, and now it is true.

古文：子仪遗之彩三千匹，酋长分以赏巫。
现代文：郭子仪送给他们彩帛三千匹，回纥酋长分出部分彩帛，奖赏巫师。
English: Guo Ziyi gave them three thousand colored horses, and the Hui chiefs allocated part of the colored horses to reward the wizards.

古文：子仪竟与定约而还。
现代文：郭子仪最后与回纥订好盟约才回来。
English: Guo Ziyi finally made a pact with Hui Yao before returning.

古文：吐蕃闻之，夜，引兵遁去。
现代文：吐蕃闻讯后，夜里便率领军队逃跑了。
English: After hearing the news, he led an army to escape in the night.

古文：回纥遣其酋长石野那等六人入见天子。
现代文：回纥派酋长石野那等六人入朝觐见代宗。
English: Six people, including the chief of the Uighur faction, Ishino Na, entered the imperial court to see the daimyō.

古文：药葛罗帅众追吐蕃，子仪使白元光帅精骑与之俱；癸酉，战于灵台西原，大破之，杀吐蕃万计，得所掠士女四千人。
现代文：药葛罗率领军队追击吐蕃军队，郭子仪派遣白元光率领精锐骑兵与回纥军队共同追击。癸酉，在灵台西原与吐蕃军队交战，大破吐蕃军队，杀死数以万计的吐蕃士兵，截获被吐蕃掠走的士人、妇女四千人。
English: Zhuge Luo led the army to pursue the Tubo army, and Guo Ziyi dispatched Bai Yuanguang to lead the elite cavalry and the Uighur army to jointly pursue. In Lingdai West Plains, they fought with the Tubo army, defeated the Tubo army, killed tens of thousands of Tubo soldiers, and intercepted four thousand men and women who were robbed by Tubo.

古文：丙子，又破之于泾州东。
现代文：丙子，在泾州东面又将吐蕃军队打败。
English: Bongzi, in the east of Zhangzhou, defeated the Tugun army.

古文：丁丑，仆固怀恩将张休藏等降。
现代文：丁丑，仆固怀恩部将张休藏等人向朝廷投降。
English: Ding Jiu, his servant Gu Huai's subordinate Zhang Xuzang and others surrendered to the imperial court.

古文：辛巳，诏罢亲征，京城解严。
现代文：辛巳，代宗下诏停止亲征，京城解除戒严。
English: Soon after, Emperor Taizong issued an edict to stop personal enlistment, and martial law was lifted in the capital.

古文：初，肃宗以陕西节度使郭英乂领神策军，使内侍鱼朝恩监其军；英乂入为仆射，朝恩专将之。
现代文：当初，肃宗任命陕西节度使郭英义统领神策军，派遣内侍鱼朝恩为神策军监军。郭英义入朝担任仆射，鱼朝恩便专门统领神策军。
English: At first, Su Zong appointed Guo Yingyi to the Shaanxi Festival to lead the Divine Providence Army, and dispatched his personal attendant, Yu Chaon, to supervise the Divine Providence Army. Guo Yingyi entered the court as a foot soldier, and Yu Chaon specifically led the Divine Providence Army.

古文：及上幸陕，朝恩举在陕兵与神策军迎扈，悉号神策军，天子幸其营。
现代文：等到代宗出走陕州，鱼朝恩便率领在陕州的部队和神策军前去接驾扈从，这些部队都号称为神策军，代宗便到了神策军的营中。
English: When Daizong left Shaanxi Province, Yu Chaon led the troops in Shaanxi Province and the Shenzhao Army to meet him. These troops were called the Shenzhao Army, and Daizong went to the camp of the Shenzhao Army.

古文：及京师平，朝恩遂以军归禁中，自将之，然尚未得与北军齿。
现代文：等到京城平定，鱼朝恩便将神策军归入禁军中，并由自己统领，然而神策军尚未取得与北门六军平起平坐的地位。
English: By the time the capital was pacified, Yucho En had included Shinsaka's army in the forbidden army and placed it under his own command. However, Shinsaka's army had not yet achieved a status equal to that of the six armies of the Northern Gate.

古文：至是，朝恩以神策军从上屯苑中，其势浸盛，分为左、右厢，居北军之右矣。
现代文：到这个时候，鱼朝恩率领神策军跟随代宗驻守禁苑中，神策军的势力逐渐增强，分为左厢、右厢二部分，其地位居北门六军之上。
English: At this time, Yu Chaon led the Shinsakae army to follow the daizong and stationed in the Forbidden Garden. The Shinsakae army's power gradually increased and was divided into two parts, the left compartment and the right compartment, and its position was above the six armies at the north gate.

古文：郭子仪以仆固名臣、李建忠等皆怀恩骁将，恐逃入外夷，请招之。
现代文：因为仆固名臣、李建忠等人都是仆固怀恩手下的勇将，郭子仪担心他们逃到外夷，便请求代宗招抚他们。
English: Guo Ziyi was afraid that they would flee to the provinces, so he asked Zhuang Zong to appease them on behalf of Guo Ziyi, because Guo Nianchen and Li Jianzhong were brave generals under Guo Wai En.

古文：名臣，怀恩之侄也，时在回纥营。
现代文：仆固名臣是仆固怀恩的侄子，当时在回纥军营中。
English: Minion Minion is the nephew of Minion Wynn, who was in the camp of Uluwatu.

古文：上敕并旧将有功者皆赦其罪，令回纥送之。
现代文：代宗下敕书赦免仆固名臣、李建忠和有军功的旧将的罪行，命令回纥将他们送归朝廷。
English: The daimyō issued an imperial edict pardoning the crimes of his trusted servants, Li Jianzhong, and former generals who had distinguished themselves in the military, and ordered that they be returned to the imperial court.

古文：壬午，名臣以千馀骑来降。
现代文：壬午，仆固名臣率领一千多名骑兵前来投降。
English: In the morning of the following day, Minko's distinguished vassals led more than a thousand cavalrymen to surrender.

古文：子仪使开府仪同三司慕容休贞以书谕党项帅郑庭、郝德等，皆诣凤翔降。
现代文：郭子仪又派遣开府仪同三司慕容休贞携带书信晓示党项统帅郑庭、郝德等人，郑庭、郝德等人都到凤翔投降。
English: Guo Ziyi also sent Kaifu Yi and Murong Xuzhen of the Third Division to carry a letter stating that the party commander Zheng Ting, Xing De and others, Zheng Ting, Xing De and others had surrendered to Fengxiang.

古文：甲申，周智光诣阙献捷，再宿归镇。
现代文：甲申，周智光到皇宫报捷，过了两夜便回到镇所。
English: Jiashen, Zhou Zhiguang went to the imperial palace to report the victory, and returned to the town hall after two nights.

古文：智光负专杀之罪未治，上既遣而悔之。
现代文：周智光擅杀无辜之罪没有得到惩治，代宗让他回去之后颇为后悔。
English: Zhou Zhiguang's crime of killing innocent people was not punished, and Daizong regretted letting him go back.

古文：乙酉，回纥胡禄都督等二百馀人入见，前后赠赉缯帛十万匹；府藏空竭，税百官俸以给之。
现代文：乙酉，回纥胡禄都督药葛罗等二百多人入朝觐见，朝廷前后赠送他们丝帛十万匹，库藏为之空竭，只好收纳百官俸禄税来供给回纥人。
English: More than 200 people, including the Empress Dowager Cixi, the Empress Dowager Hu Lu, and the Empress Dowager Yao Gaoluo, came to see the imperial court. The imperial court presented them with 100,000 silk cocoons before and after. Their treasury was exhausted, so they had to collect the hundred officials' salary tax to supply the Empress Dowager.

