古文：冯熙，字晋国，长乐信都人，文明太后之兄也。
现代文：冯熙字晋国，长乐信都人，文明太后的兄长。
English: Feng Xi is from Jin Province, Changle is from Xindu, and he is the elder brother of the Empress Dowager of Civilization.

古文：祖弘，北燕王。
现代文：祖父冯弘，位至北燕王。
English: His grandfather, Feng Hong, rose to the rank of Northern Yan King.

古文：太武平辽海，熙父朗内徙，官至秦雍二州刺史、辽西郡公，坐事诛。
现代文：太武平定辽海，冯熙的父亲冯郎迁到内地，官至秦州、雍州二州刺史，爵辽西郡公，因罪被杀。
English: Taiwu conquered Liaohai, Feng Xi's father, Feng Lang, moved to the mainland, was sent to Qin and Yongzhou, and became the governor of Liaoxi County. He was killed for his crime.

古文：文明太后临朝，追赠假黄钺、太宰、燕宣王，立庙长安。
现代文：文明太后临朝执政，追赠假黄钺，享祭太宰，赠爵燕宣王，在长安建立庙宇。
English: The Empress Dowager Civility ruled the Lin Dynasty, posthumously bestowed the fake Huang Di, enjoyed the Dazai Festival, bestowed a peerage on Yan Xuan Wang, and built a temple in Chang'an.

古文：熙生于长安，为姚氏魏母所养。
现代文：冯熙生在长安，由姚氏魏母养育。
English: Feng Xisheng was born in Chang'an and raised by Yao's Wei mother.

古文：以叔父乐陵公邈因战入蠕蠕，魏母携熙逃避至氐羌中抚育。年十二，好弓马，有勇干，氐羌皆归附之。
现代文：因为叔父乐陵公冯邈在战争中归附蠕蠕，魏母就携带冯熙逃避到氐、羌两部落中抚养，十二岁时，冯熙就喜欢骑马射箭，勇敢有才干，氐、羌两部落的人都归附他。
English: Because his uncle, Le Ling Gong Feng Xi, had joined the Cm Cm in the war, Wei's mother took Feng Xi with her to escape and raised him in the C and C tribes. At the age of twelve, Feng Xi liked to ride horses and shoot arrows. He was brave and talented, and people from both C and C tribes joined him.

古文：魏母恶其如此，将还长安，始就博士学问。
现代文：魏母讨厌冯熙这样，就带他回长安，开始到博士那里学习求问。
English: Wei's mother hated Feng Xi, so she took him back to Chang'an and began to study and ask questions from the doctor.

古文：从师受《孝经》、《论语》，好阴阳兵法事。
现代文：跟着老师学习《孝经》、《论语》，喜好阴阳和兵法之事。
English: Follow the teacher to study the "Filial Piety Sutra" and "Analects," and enjoy yin and yang and the art of war.

古文：及长，游华阴、河东二郡间。
现代文：长大后，游历华阴和河东二郡之间。
English: After growing up, he traveled between Huayin and the two counties of Hedong.

古文：性泛爱，不拘小节，人无士庶，来则纳之。
现代文：生性爱好广泛，不拘泥小的礼节，不论官员百姓，来就结交。
English: They have a wide range of hobbies, and regardless of the small etiquette, whether they are officials or ordinary people, they come to make friends.

古文：熙姑先入掖庭，为太武左昭仪。
现代文：冯熙的姑姑先进入宫廷，任太武左昭仪。
English: Feng Xi's aunt was the first to enter the court, and she was named Taibu Zuo Zhaoyi.

古文：妹为文成帝后，即文明太后也。
现代文：妹妹是文成皇帝之后，就是文明太后。
English: After Emperor Wencheng, her younger sister was Empress Dowager Wencheng.

古文：使人外访，知熙所在，征赴京师，拜冠军将军，赐爵肥如侯，尚景穆女博陵长公主，拜驸马都尉。
现代文：她们派人外出访求，知道了冯熙在哪里，就征召入京，授冠军将军之职，赐爵肥如侯，娶景穆皇帝之女博陵长公主，任驸马都尉。
English: They sent people out to visit, and when they found out where Feng Xi was, they conscripted him into Beijing, awarded him the title of champion general, gave him the title of Duke of Huizhou, married Princess Boling Chang, the daughter of Emperor Jingmu, and made him the captain of horses.

古文：出为定州刺史，进爵昌黎王。
现代文：出京任定州刺史，晋封爵位为昌黎王。
English: He was appointed as the governor of Dingzhou when he went to Beijing, and was given the title of the King of Changli.

古文：献文即位，为太傅，累拜内都大官。
现代文：献文皇帝即位，冯熙为太傅，多次任内都大官。
English: Emperor Xianwen ascended to the throne, and Feng Xi was appointed as Taifu, and became a high-ranking official several times during his tenure.

古文：孝文即位，文明太后临朝，帝乃承旨以熙为侍中、太师、中书监，领秘书事。
现代文：孝文皇帝即位，文明太后临朝执政，孝文皇帝顺应太后的旨意，任冯熙为侍中、太师、中书监，兼领秘书事。
English: Emperor Xiaowen ascended to the throne, and Empress Dowager Lin took the throne. Emperor Xiaowen complied with the Empress Dowager's wishes, and appointed Feng Xi as attendant, teacher, and librarian, as well as secretary.

古文：熙以频履师傅，又中宫之宠，为群情所骇，心不自安，乞转外任。
现代文：冯熙因频繁地任太师、太傅之职，又因中宫所得的宠幸，令众人感到惊骇，自己心中不安，请求改任外职。
English: Because Feng Xi frequently held the posts of Grand Master and Grand Master, and because he was favored by the Chinese Imperial Court, he shocked everyone and was uneasy in his heart, and asked to be reassigned to a position outside the palace.

古文：文明太后亦以为然，除都督、洛州刺史，侍中、太师如故。
现代文：文明太后也认为这样做较好，就任命为都督、洛州刺史，侍中、太师之职仍如原来。
English: Empress Dowager Civili also thought it was better to do so, and appointed him as the governor of the capital and the governor of Lozhou, while the posts of chamberlain and grand master remained as before.

古文：洛阳虽经破乱，而旧《三字石经》宛然犹在。至熙与常伯夫相继为州，废毁分用，大至颓落。
现代文：洛阳虽然经历了战乱，而原有的《三字石经》依然还在，到冯熙和常伯夫相继任洛州刺史时，毁坏用于不同的地方，《三字石经》毁坏得很厉害。
English: Although Luoyang went through the war, the original "Three-character Stone Sutra" was still in existence. By the time Feng Xi and Chang Bof successively served as the history of Luozhou, the destruction was used in different places, and the "Three-character Stone Sutra" was badly damaged.

古文：熙为政不能仁厚，而信佛法。
现代文：冯熙治理政事不能仁德宽厚，而是相信佛理。
English: Feng Xi's governance cannot be benevolent and generous, but believes in Buddhism.

古文：自出家财在诸州镇建佛图精舍，合七十二处。
现代文：自己拿出家中的钱财，在各州镇建立佛塔和僧徒居住之所，共计七十二处。
English: He took out his family's money and wealth to build pagodas and residences for monks in all prefectures and towns, a total of seventy-two locations.

古文：写十六部一切经，延致名德沙门，日与讲论，精勤不倦，所费亦不赀。
现代文：抄写二十六部佛经，请来有名德的僧人，每天给他讲说，精诚辛勤，不知疲倦，所费的资财也是无法计算。
English: To copy twenty-six Buddhist scriptures, to invite a monk of great virtue to teach him every day, to be diligent and tireless, and to spend an incalculable amount of money.

古文：而营塔寺多在高山秀阜，伤杀人牛。
现代文：修造的佛塔佛寺大都在高山秀阜之上，伤害了百姓和耕牛。
English: Most of the Buddhist pagodas and temples that have been built are on top of the high mountains of Shufu, injuring the people and cattle.

古文：有沙门劝止之，熙曰： 成就后，人唯见佛图，焉知杀人牛也。 
现代文：有的僧人劝阻冯熙，冯熙说： 建成之后，人们看见的只是佛塔佛寺，怎么知道伤害了百姓和耕牛呢！ 
English: Some monks tried to dissuade Feng Xi. Feng Xi said, "After it was built, people only saw the stupa and the temple. How could they know that they had harmed the people and the oxen?

古文：其北芒寺碑文，中书侍郎贾元寿词。
现代文：其中北芒寺的碑文，是中书侍郎贾元寿撰写的。
English: Among them, the inscription of Beimang Temple was written by Jia Yuanshou, the secretary of the Chinese Academy of Letters.

古文：孝文频登北芒寺，亲读碑文，称为佳作。
现代文：孝文皇帝多次登上北芒寺，亲自阅读碑文，称赞是好文章。
English: Emperor Xiaowen ascended the Beimang Temple many times and personally read the inscriptions, praising it as a good article.

古文：熙为州，因取人子女为奴婢，有容色者幸之为妾，有子女数十人，号为贪纵。
现代文：冯熙任洛州刺史，顺便取人家的子女做奴婢，有容貌姿色的女子，就纳为小妾，生有几十个子女，人称其贪婪纵欲。
English: Feng Xi was a connoisseur of the history of Luozhou. He also took other people's children as slaves and concubines. He had dozens of children and was said to be greedy and debauched.

古文：后授内都大官，太师如故。
现代文：后来，授职内都大官，太师之职依旧。
English: Later, the title of daikan was changed to taishi, but the position of taishi remained the same.

古文：熙事魏母孝谨，如事所生。
现代文：冯熙侍奉魏母孝顺恭谨，像侍奉亲生母亲一样。
English: Feng Xi served the Wei mother with filial piety and respect, just like he served his own mother.

古文：魏母卒，乃散发徒跣，水浆不入口三日。
现代文：魏母死，冯熙披头散发，光着脚，三天滴水不沾。
English: After Wei Mu's death, Feng Xi wore a head scarf, went barefoot and did not touch a drop of water for three days.

古文：诏不听服，熙表求依赵氏之孤。帝以熙情难夺，听服齐衰期。
现代文：诏令冯熙不用穿孝服，冯熙上表请求按赵氏孤儿之例，孝文皇帝因冯熙之情难以强求，听任他服重丧，至期而止。
English: According to the example of the orphans of the Zhao clan, the Emperor Xiaowen allowed Feng Xi not to wear the filial piety dress because it was difficult to force Feng Xi to wear it.

古文：后以例降，改封京兆郡公。
现代文：后来因惯例降低爵位，改封京兆郡公。
English: Later, due to custom, his title was lowered, and he was renamed Keicho County Governor.

古文：帝纳其女为后，曰： 《白武通》云：王所不臣，数有三焉。
现代文：孝文皇帝娶冯熙之女为皇后，说： 《白武通》云：帝王不用为臣子的，有三种情况。
English: Emperor Xiaowen married the daughter of Feng Xi as empress, saying: "Baiwu Tong" cloud: The emperor does not have to be a vassal, there are three situations.

古文：妻之父母，抑言其一。
现代文：妻之父母，就是所说的一种情况。
English: The wife's parents is one such case.

古文：此所谓供承宗庙，不欲夺私心。
现代文：这说的是供奉承继宗庙，不想强迫个人之情。
English: This is to flatter the successor of the ancestral temple, not to force personal feelings.

古文：然吾季著于《春秋》，无臣证于往牒，既许通体之一，用开至尊之敬。
现代文：然而，我们载入《春秋》，却没有臣子能够从以往的文册中加以证实。既已允许整个体例中的一种，因而开启至尊的敬仰。
English: However, we included it in "Spring and Autumn," but no vassal was able to confirm it from the previous anthology. Having allowed one of the entire styles, it opened up supreme admiration.

古文：比长秋配极，阴政既敷，未闻有司，陈奏斯式。
现代文：等到皇后匹配皇帝，后宫之政既已设置，没有报知有司，陈述这种仪式。
English: When the empress was matched with the emperor, the government of the harem had already been set up, and there was no official announcement of this ceremony.

古文：可诏太师，辍臣从礼。 
现代文：可诏令太师停止称臣，而顺从礼仪。 
English: However, the emperor could order the daishi to stop praising the vassal and follow the etiquette.

古文：又勒集书造仪付外。
现代文：又刻写书中礼仪交付宫外。
English: Also inscribed in the book is the etiquette for delivery outside the palace.

古文：孝文前后纳熙三女，二为后，一为左昭仪。
现代文：孝文皇帝前后娶冯熙的三个女儿，两个立为皇后，一个为左昭仪。
English: Emperor Xiaowen married three of Feng Xi's daughters, two of whom became empresses, and one, Zuo Zhaoyi.

古文：由是冯氏宠贵益隆，赏赐累巨万。
现代文：因此，冯姓的宠贵更加丰隆，赏赐的财物累计起来有很多万。
English: Therefore, the favors of the Feng surname are more plentiful, and the accumulated rewards are many tens of thousands.

古文：帝每诏熙上书不臣，入朝不拜，熙上书如旧。
现代文：孝文皇帝每每诏令冯熙上书不称臣，入朝不参拜，冯熙上书仍如原来。
English: Emperor Xiaowen ordered Feng Xi not to praise his subordinates and not to visit the imperial court, and Feng Xi's letter is still the same as before.

古文：熙于后遇疾，绵寝四载。诏遣监问，道路相望，车驾亦数幸焉。
现代文：冯熙后来患有疾病，卧床长达四年，诏令派人监候问视，使者不绝于途，皇帝车驾也多次临幸。
English: Feng Xi later suffered from illness and was bedridden for up to four years. The imperial edict sent someone to wait and greet him. Envoys were constantly on their way, and the emperor's chauffeur was also lucky on several occasions.

古文：将迁洛，帝亲与熙别，见其困笃，歔欷流涕。密敕宕昌公主遇曰： 太师万一，即可监护丧事。 
现代文：准备迁往洛阳时，孝文皇帝与冯熙告别，见冯熙病得很厉害，痛哭流涕，秘密命令宕昌公王遇说： 太师万一病故，即可监护丧事。 
English: When preparing to move to Luoyang, Emperor Xiaowen bid farewell to Feng Xi. Seeing that Feng Xi was very ill and weeping profusely, he secretly ordered Prince Tang Chang to meet him and said: "In the event that the Grandmaster dies of illness, you can be the guardian of the funeral."

古文：十九年，薨于代。
现代文：北魏孝文帝太和十九年，冯熙死于代。
English: In the 19th year of the Northern Wei Emperor Xiaowen's reign, Feng Xi died.

古文：车驾在淮南，留台表闻，还至徐州，乃举哀，为制缌服。
现代文：孝文帝在淮南，留台上表奏知，回到徐州，就举行丧礼，为冯熙服孝。
English: Emperor Xiaowen was in Huainan, and he stayed on the stage to make a speech, and when he returned to Xuzhou, he held a funeral to pay his respects to Feng Xi.

古文：诏有司预辨凶仪，并开魏京之墓，令公主之柩，俱向伊洛。
现代文：诏令有司预先举办丧事礼仪，并打开魏京的坟墓，令和公主的灵枢，一同送往伊洛。
English: The emperor ordered a funeral ceremony to be held in advance, and the tomb of Wei Jing was opened, and the spirit of the princess was sent to Ilo.

古文：凡所营送，皆公家为备。
现代文：凡是营造运送所需财物，都是由国家置办。
English: All the construction of the property needed for transportation is carried out by the state.

古文：又敕代给彩帛，前后六千匹，以供凶用。
现代文：又敕令代地供给纟采帛，前后计有六千匹，供丧事用。
English: In addition, the emperor ordered the supply of yakitori mushrooms instead, a total of six thousand, for use in funerals.

古文：皇后诣代都赴哭，太子恂亦赴代哭吊。
现代文：皇后到代都去哭灵，太子元恂也到代都哭祭。
English: The empress has been going to Weeping Spirit for generations, and Prince Mototsune has also been going to Weeping Festival for generations.

古文：将葬，赠假黄钺、侍中、都督十州诸军事、大司马、太尉、冀州刺史，加黄屋、左纛，备九锡、前后部羽葆鼓吹，皆依晋太宰、安平献王故事。
现代文：将要安葬时，追赠假黄钺、侍中，都督十州诸军事、大司马、太尉、冀州刺史，加赠黄屋、左纛，备九锡、前后部羽葆鼓吹，都按晋太宰、安平献王的先例。
English: When he was to be buried, he was posthumously presented with a fake yellow scepter, a courtier, the military governors of ten states, a grand steward, a captain, and the history of Jizhou, and he was also presented with a yellow house, a left scepter, nine scepters, and feathered trumpets at the front and back, all of which followed the precedent of Jin Dazai and Anping's royal offering.

古文：帝之图尔硃荣，侃晞与鲁安等持刃于禁内杀荣。
现代文：有司奏请谥号，诏令说： 可以威风强盛恢宏远大称为武，就把武奉送给公作谥号。 
English: The imperial edict said: "If you have the power, strength, and grandeur to be called a warrior, then give the warrior title to your official title."

古文：及庄帝蒙尘，侃晞奔梁。
现代文：灵柩到了洛阳七里涧，孝文帝服丧前往迎接灵柩，拦住灵柩，悲恸而祭拜。
English: The coffin arrived in Luoyang seven miles away, and Emperor Xiaowen went to the funeral to meet the coffin, stop the coffin, mourn and worship.

古文：高肇，字首文，文昭皇太后之兄也。
现代文：安葬那天，孝文帝送葬到安葬之处，亲自撰写墓志铭。高肇字首文，文昭皇太后的兄长。
English: On the day of her burial, Emperor Xiaowen accompanied her to the place of her burial and personally wrote her epitaph. Gaozhao, the first letter, was the elder brother of Empress Dowager Wenzhao.

古文：自云本勃海蓚人。
现代文：自称祖先渤海人。
English: They call themselves the ancestors of the Bohai people.

古文：五世祖顾，晋永嘉中，避乱入高丽。
现代文：五世祖高顾，晋永嘉中，躲避战乱进入高丽。
English: The fifth generation ancestor Gaogu, Jin Yongjia Middle School, escaped the war and entered Korea.

古文：父飏，字法脩。
现代文：父亲高，字法。
English: My father is tall, and his handwriting is poor.

古文：孝文初，与弟乘信及其乡人韩内、冀富等入魏，拜厉威将军、河间子；乘信明威将军，俱待以客礼。
现代文：北魏孝文帝初年，和弟弟乘信及其同乡韩内、冀福等人进入北魏，任厉威将军，封爵河间子。乘信任明威将军。
English: In the first year of Emperor Xiaowen of the Northern Wei Dynasty, he and his younger brother Jingsin and his fellow countrymen Hannai and Jifu and others entered the Northern Wei Dynasty, serving as General Li Wei, knighted Kawazo, and trusted by General Ming Wei.

古文：遂纳飏女，是为文昭皇后，生宣武。
现代文：孝文帝都用对待客人的礼节对待他们，于是就娶高的女儿，这就是文昭皇后，生宣武帝元恪。高死。
English: Emperor Xiaowen treated his guests with great courtesy, so he married Gao's daughter, Empress Wenzhao, who was born as Emperor Xuanwu and died as Gao.

古文：飏卒，景明初，宣武追思舅氏，征肇兄弟等。
现代文：景明初年，宣武帝追思舅氏，征召高肇兄弟等人。
English: In the first year of the reign of Emperor Jingming, Emperor Xuanwu pined for his brother-in-law and conscripted Gao Zhao's brothers and others.

古文：录尚书事、北海王详等奏，飏宜赠左光禄大夫，赐爵勃海公，谥曰敬。
现代文：录尚书事、北海王元详等人上奏称，高应追赠左光禄大夫，赐爵渤海公，谥号曰敬。
English: Records of Shang Shujing, Beihai Wang Yuanjie and others reported that Gao should be posthumously awarded the title of Doctor of the Left Guanglu, given the title of Duke of Bohai, and his posthumous name was Jing.

古文：其妻盖氏，宜追封清河郡君。
现代文：其妻盖氏，应追封为清河郡君。
English: His wife, Ms. Gai, was posthumously awarded the title of Countess of Qinghe County.

古文：诏可。
现代文：诏令准许。
English: The royal decree was approved.

古文：又诏飏嫡孙猛袭勃海公爵，封肇平原郡公，肇弟显澄城郡公，三人同日受封。
现代文：又诏令高的长孙高孟袭封渤海公爵位，封高肇为平原郡公，高肇的弟弟高显为澄城郡公。三人同一天接受封赠。
English: In addition, Gao Meng, the eldest grandson of Gao Linggao, succeeded to the title of Duke of Bohai, Gao Zhao became the governor of Pingyuan County, and Gao Zhao's younger brother Gao Xian became the governor of Chengcheng County. The three received the award on the same day.

古文：始宣武未与舅氏相接，将拜爵，乃赐衣帻，引见肇、显于华林都亭。
现代文：开始的时候，宣武帝没有和舅家人相互通气，就赐给他们衣服巾帻，在华林都亭接见高肇、高显兄弟。
English: At the beginning, Emperor Xuanwu did not communicate with his uncle and uncle's family, he gave them clothes and handkerchiefs, and met Gao Zhao and Gao Xian brothers in Huarintu Pavilion.

古文：皆甚惶惧，举动失仪，数日之间，富贵赫奕。
现代文：兄弟二人都非常惊慌恐惧，举动有失礼仪。几天之间，就富贵显赫起来。
English: Both brothers were very frightened and behaved in a manner unbecoming. Within a few days, they became rich and famous.

古文：是年，咸阳王禧诛，财物珍宝、奴婢、田宅多入高氏。
现代文：这一年，咸阳王元禧被诛杀，其所拥有的财物珍宝、奴婢、田宅等大都归入高氏。
English: In the same year, King Yuanxi of Xianyang was killed in a battle, and most of his possessions, such as treasures, slaves, and farmhouses, were taken over by the Gaos.

古文：未几，肇为尚书右仆射、冀州大中正，尚宣武姑高平公主，迁尚书令。
现代文：不久，高肇任尚书右仆射、冀州大中正，娶宣武帝的姑姑高平公主，升任尚书令。
English: Soon after, Gao Zhao was appointed as Shang Shu's right-hand man, Jizhou Da Zhong Zheng married Emperor Xuanwu's aunt, Princess Gao Ping, and was promoted to Shang Shu Ling.

古文：肇出自夷土，时望轻之。及在位居要，留心百揆，孜孜无倦，世咸谓之为能。
现代文：高肇生在异国土地，当时的舆论都轻视他，等他官居要职，留心朝中各种政务，孜孜不倦，世人才都称他有才干。
English: Gao Zhaozhou was born in a foreign land. At that time, the public opinion despised him. When he held important positions, paid attention to various government affairs of the DPRK and China, and worked tirelessly, people all over the world said that he was talented.

古文：宣武初，六辅专政，后以咸阳王禧无事构逆，由是委肇。
现代文：宣武帝初年，六辅独揽政权，后来因咸阳王元禧无缘无故地造反作乱，因此把政权交给高肇。
English: In the first year of Emperor Xuanwu's reign, Liufu took sole control of the government. Later, because King Yuanxi of Xianyang rebelled without any reason, the government was handed over to Gao Zhao.

古文：肇既无亲族，颇结朋党，附之者旬月超升，背之者陷以大罪。
现代文：高肇既然没有亲族，就大结党羽，依附高肇的人，很快就被越级提升，违背他的人就用大罪陷害。
English: Since Gao Zhao had no relatives, he gathered a large number of followers. Those who adhered to Gao Zhao were quickly promoted to higher ranks, and those who disobeyed him were framed for serious crimes.

古文：以北海王详位居其上，构杀之。
现代文：因为北海王元详官位在他上面，就罗织罪名将其杀害。
English: Because Beihai Wangyuan's official rank was higher than his, Luo was accused of killing him.

古文：又说宣武防卫诸王，殆同囚禁。
现代文：又劝说宣武帝防备诸王，宣武帝几乎等同于被囚禁。
English: He also persuaded Emperor Xuanwu to guard the kings, which was almost equivalent to being imprisoned.

古文：时顺皇后暴崩，世议言肇为之。
现代文：当时，顺皇后突然死亡，世人的议论说是高肇干的。
English: At that time, when Empress Shun died suddenly, people said that Gao Zhaozhong did it.

古文：皇子昌薨，佥谓王显失于医疗，承肇意旨。
现代文：皇子元昌死，都说是王显医疗失误，是秉承高肇的旨意。
English: The death of Prince Yuanchang was said to be a medical error on the part of Wang Xian, and was the result of Gao Zhao's will.

古文：及京兆王愉出为冀州刺史，畏肇恣擅，遂至不轨。
现代文：京兆王元愉出外任冀州刺史，畏惧高肇恣意擅权，以至于图谋不轨。
English: Jing Zhao Wangyuan was pleased to be appointed to the post of Jizhou chief historian, and was afraid of Gaozhao's arbitrary abuse of power, so much so that he plotted to derail the process.

古文：肇又谮杀彭城王勰。
现代文：高肇又上谗言杀害彭城王元勰。
English: Gao Zhaozhou once again criticized the killing of Pengcheng Wang Yuanxuan.

古文：由是朝野侧目，咸畏恶之。
现代文：因此，朝廷内外都对高肇侧目而视，都畏惧和憎恨他。
English: Therefore, both inside and outside the imperial court looked sideways at Gaozhao, fearing and hating him.

古文：因此专权，与夺任己。
现代文：高肇因此而独揽大权，生杀予夺全由自己。
English: As a result, Gao Zhao monopolized great power, and it was entirely up to him to take life and death.

古文：又尝与清河王怿于云门外庑下，忽忿诤，大至纷纭。
现代文：又曾经和清河王元怿，在云龙门外堂下突然间争执起来，闹得乱哄哄的。
English: In addition, he once had a sudden dispute with King Yuan of Qinghe outside the hall of Yunlongmen, which caused a lot of commotion.

古文：太尉、高阳王雍和止之。
现代文：太尉、高阳王元雍调和劝止了他们。
English: The captain, Gaoyang Wangyuan Yong, reconciled and dissuaded them.

古文：高后既立，逾见宠信。
现代文：高后既被立为皇后，高肇更加受到宠信。
English: After Gao Zhao was appointed as empress, Gao Zhao was even more favored.

古文：肇既当衡轴，每事任己，本无学识，动违礼度。
现代文：高肇既已主持朝政，每一件事都由自己裁决，本来就没有什么学问见识，动不动就违背礼仪法度。
English: Since Gao Zhao has presided over the government, he has decided everything by himself. Originally, he had little knowledge and insight, and he violated the rules of etiquette at every turn.

古文：好改先朝旧制，减削封秩，抑黜勋人，由是怨声盈路矣。
现代文：喜欢改前朝原有的制度，削减封赠的俸禄，压抑罢免有功之人，因此而怨声载道。
English: They like to change the system that was originally in place in the previous government, cut the salaries given out by the emperor, and suppress and dismiss those who have made contributions. As a result, there is a lot of grumbling.

古文：延昌初，迁司徒。
现代文：宣武帝延昌初年，改任司徒。
English: In the first year of Emperor Xuanwu's reign in Yanchang, he was reassigned to the position of tutor.

古文：虽贵登台鼎，犹以去要怏怏，众咸嗤笑之。
现代文：高肇虽然身居三公，还因为没能居于要职而不满意，众人都嗤笑他。
English: Although Gao Zhao is a member of the Three Princes, he is still dissatisfied because he has not been able to hold an important position, and everyone laughs at him.

古文：父兄封赠虽久，竟不改瘗。
现代文：父兄受到封赠虽然很久，竟然不予改葬。
English: Although my father and brother had been given the title for a long time, they were not allowed to be reburied.

古文：三年，乃诏令还葬。肇不自临赴，唯遣其兄子猛改服诣代，迁葬于乡。
现代文：延昌三年，才诏令还葬，高肇自己不亲临前往，只是派遣哥哥的儿子高猛改换服装到代都，迁葬于家乡。
English: It was not until three years after Yanchang that the imperial edict was issued for the funeral. Gao Zhao did not go to the funeral himself, but sent his brother's son Gao Meng to the capital to change his clothes and be buried in his hometown.

古文：时人以肇无识，哂而不责也。
现代文：当时的人认为高肇没有见识，哂笑他而不加责备。
English: At the time, people thought Gao Zhao lacked insight and ridiculed him without reproach.

古文：及大举征蜀，以肇为大将军、都督诸军，为之节度。
现代文：大举征讨蜀时，任命高肇为大将军、都督诸军，诸军由高肇指挥。
English: When a large-scale campaign was launched against Shu, Gao Zhao was appointed as the general and governor of the army, and the army was commanded by Gao Zhao.

古文：与都督甄琛等二十余人，俱面辞宣武于东堂，亲奉规略。
现代文：高肇和都督甄琛等二十多人，都一起在东堂向宣武帝辞行，亲自陈说经营谋略。
English: More than twenty people, including Gao Zhao and the governor Zhen Qi, all resigned to Emperor Xuanwu in the East Hall and personally presented their business strategies.

古文：是日，肇所乘骏马，停于神兽门外，无故惊倒，转卧渠中，鞍具瓦解，众咸怪异。
现代文：这一天，高肇乘坐的骏马，停在神兽门外，无缘无故地受惊卧倒，翻滚到水渠中，马鞍散了架，众人都感到奇怪。
English: On this day, Gao Zhao's steed stopped outside the Gate of Divine Beasts. For no reason, he was startled and fell down, tumbling into the canal. The saddle broke, and everyone was surprised.

古文：肇出，恶焉。
现代文：高肇出宫后，对此亦感厌恶。
English: After Gao Zhao left the palace, he was also disgusted by this.

古文：四年，宣武崩，赦，罢征军。
现代文：延昌四年，宣武帝驾崩，大赦天下，解散远征军。
English: In the fourth year of Yanchang, Emperor Xuanwu passed away, pardoned the world, and disbanded the expeditionary force.

古文：明帝与肇及征南将军元遥等书，称讳言以告凶问。
现代文：北魏孝明帝元诩致书高肇和征南将军元遥等人，称宣武驾崩而报告凶信。
English: The Northern Wei Xiaoming Emperor Yuan Shao wrote to Gao Zhao and the Southern Expeditionary General Yuan Yao and others, saying that the proclamation of martial law had died and the report was a bad faith.

古文：肇承变，非唯仰慕，亦忧身祸，朝夕悲泣，至于羸悴。
现代文：高肇遇此变故，不仅仰望思慕，也担心身遭祸患，每天从早到晚悲痛哭泣，以至于身体羸弱憔悴。
English: Gao Zhao encountered this change, not only looked up to and admired, but also worried about being in trouble, crying with grief every day from morning to night, so that his body was weak.

古文：将至，宿瀍涧驿亭，家人夜迎省之，皆不相视。直至阙下，缞服号哭，升太极殿，尽哀。
现代文：快到洛阳时，停宿鏶涧驿亭，家里的人夜里去迎接看视，高肇对家人都不看一眼，一直到宫门楼下，身着丧服，大声痛哭，登上太极殿，哀痛至极。
English: When he was about to reach Luoyang, he stopped at Jingting. His family members went to meet him at night, but Gaozhao did not look at his family. He went all the way down to the palace gate, dressed in mourning clothes, crying loudly, and boarded the Taiji Hall, grief-stricken.

古文：太尉高阳王先居西柏堂，专决庶事，与领军于忠，密欲除之。
现代文：太尉高阳王元雍先居于西柏堂，独揽各种事务，和领军于忠密谋，想除掉高肇。
English: First Lieutenant Gao Yang Wang Yuan Yong lived in Xibaidang, taking care of all kinds of affairs, and conspired with the leader Yuzhong to get rid of Gao Zhao.

古文：潜备壮士直寝邢豹、伊盆生等十余人于舍人省下。肇哭梓宫讫，于百官前引入西廓，清河王怿、任城王澄及诸王等皆窃言目之。
现代文：偷偷地在舍人省下埋伏精壮武士直寝邢豹、伊盆生等十多人，高肇在宣武帝的棺材前哭祭过后，高阳王在文武百官面前将高肇的领进西廊，清河王元怿、任城王元澄和诸王等都看着高肇窃窃私语。
English: He secretly spared no one and ambushed more than a dozen strong samurai, including Shigetada and Ibonsen. After Gaozhao held a wailing ceremony in front of Emperor Xuanwu's coffin, King Gaoyang led Gaozhao into the west corridor in front of hundreds of civil and military officials. King Yuancheng of Qinghe, King Yuancheng of Rencheng, and other kings all watched Gaozhao whispering.

古文：肇入省，壮士扼而拉杀之，下诏暴其罪恶，称为自尽。
现代文：高肇进入舍人省，埋伏的壮士就又掐又拉把高肇杀死，传下诏书，宣布高肇的罪恶，说高肇是自尽。
English: Gao Zhao entered the Shannan Province, and the ambushed strongmen dragged and dragged Gao Zhao to kill him, and issued an edict to announce Gao Zhao's crime, saying that Gao Zhao committed suicide.

古文：自余亲党，悉无追问。削除职爵，葬以士礼。
现代文：高肇的亲信余党都不加追究，削除高肇的官职爵位，用士的礼仪安葬。
English: Gao Zhao's cronies and the rest of the party were not investigated, Gao Zhao's official title and rank were removed, and he was buried with the etiquette of a soldier.

古文：逮昏，乃于厕门出其尸归家。
现代文：到了黄昏，才从厕所门将高肇的尸体运出送回家中。
English: It was not until dusk that Gao Zhao's body was carried out of the toilet door and sent home.

古文：二年，八坐奏封后母王氏为武邑郡君。
现代文：当初，高肇西征，行至函谷关，车轴从中折断，跟随的人都认为高肇不能平安而回。
English: At first, Gao Zhaozhou went on a western expedition to Han Valley Pass, and the axle broke off from it. The people who followed Gao Zhaozhou thought that he could not return safely.

古文：偃弟寿，早卒。寿弟即肇也。
现代文：灵太后临朝执政，特意命令追赠高肇为营州刺史。
English: After Lingdai came to power, he specifically ordered that Gao Zhao be posthumously awarded the title of Yingzhou.

古文：肇弟显，侍中、高丽国大中正，早卒。
现代文：永熙二年，孝武帝追赠高肇使持节、侍中、中外诸军事、太师、大丞相、太尉公、录尚书事、冀州刺史。
English: In the second year of Yongxi, Emperor Xiaowu posthumously awarded Gao Zhaozhi Jizhi Jie, Samurai Junior, Foreign Military, Grand Master, Grand Secretary, Second Lieutenant, Record of Records, and History of Jizhou.

古文：胡国珍，字世玉，安定临泾人也。
现代文：胡国珍字世玉，安定临泾人。
English: Hu Guozhun, the world's gem, is a stable Linyi person.

古文：祖略，姚兴勃海公姚逵平北府谘议参军。
现代文：祖父胡略，任姚兴渤海公姚逵平北府咨议参军。
English: His grandfather, Hu Liao, was appointed by Yao Xing, the governor of Binhai, Yao Bingping North Prefecture, to join the army.

古文：父深，赫连屈丐给事黄门侍郎。
现代文：父胡深，任赫连屈丐给事黄门侍郎。
English: His father, Hu Shen, was a waiter of the Yellow Gate.

古文：太武克统万，深以降款之功，赐爵武始侯。
现代文：太武帝攻克统万城，胡深因对投降条款的签订有功，赐爵武始侯。
English: Emperor Taibu conquered the whole world, and Hu Sheng was awarded the title of Prince Wuchihou for his contribution to the signing of the terms of surrender.

古文：后拜河州刺史。
现代文：后来任河州刺史。
English: Later, he was appointed as the chief historian of Hezhou.

古文：国珍少好学，雅尚清俭。
现代文：胡国珍自幼好学，喜好清淡俭朴。
English: Hu Guozhen has been eager to learn since she was a child, and likes to be simple and frugal.

古文：太和十五年袭爵，例降为伯。
现代文：太和十五年，胡国珍袭封父爵，依例降为伯。
English: In the 15th year of the Taihe era, Hu Guozhen followed his father's example and made him a peer.

古文：女以选入掖庭，生明帝，即灵太后也。
现代文：其女入选宫廷，生明帝，即是灵太后。
English: His daughter was elected to the court, and was born Emperor Ming, that is, the spiritual empress dowager.

古文：孝明帝践祚，以国珍为光禄大夫。
现代文：孝明帝继位，任命胡国珍为光禄大夫。
English: Emperor Xiaoming succeeded to the throne and appointed Hu Guozhen as the doctor of Guanglu.

古文：灵太后临朝，加侍中，封安定郡公。
现代文：灵太后临朝执政，加授胡国珍为侍中，封爵安定郡公。
English: After Lingdai's enthronement, Hu Guozhen was given the title of Chamberlain, and he was knighted as the Prince of Ding'an County.

古文：追崇国珍妻皇甫氏为京兆郡君，置守冢十户。
现代文：追赠胡国珍妻皇甫氏为京兆郡君，设置十户人家看守墓冢。
English: Hu Guozhen's wife, Empress Fu, was posthumously awarded the title of King of Jingzha County, and ten families were set up to guard the tomb.

古文：尚书令、任城王澄奏，安定公宜出入禁中，参谘大务。
现代文：尚书令、任城王元澄奏称，安定公应出入宫禁，参与商议大政。
English: Shang Shuling, appointed by Wang Yuancheng, said that the Prince of Stability should be banned from entering the palace and participate in the deliberation of major policies.

古文：诏屈公入决万机。
现代文：诏令胡国珍入宫参与裁决各种事务。
English: The imperial edict ordered Hu Guozhen to enter the palace to participate in the adjudication of various affairs.

古文：寻进位中书监、仪同三司，侍中如故。
现代文：不久，胡国珍晋位中书监，仪同三司，侍中之职依旧。
English: Soon after, Hu Guozhen was promoted to the position of the middle school librarian, the ceremony was the same as the three divisions, and the position of the attendant was still the same.

古文：赐绢，岁八百疋，妻梁四百匹，男女姊妹各有差。
现代文：每年赠给绢八百疋，妻子梁氏四百匹，男女姊妹所得赏赐各有不同。
English: Every year, 800 yakitori are given, and 400 yakitori are given to Liang's wife. There are different rewards for male and female sisters.

古文：国珍与太师高阳王雍、太傅清河王怿、太保广平王怀入居门下，同厘庶政。
现代文：胡国珍和太师高阳王元雍、太傅清河王元怿、太保广平王元怀入居门下，同理各种政务。
English: Hu Guozhen lived under the tutelage of Grand Master Gaoyang Wang Yuan Yong, Grand Master Qinghe Wang Yuan Rong, and Grand Protector Guangping Wang Yuan Huai, and they were in charge of various government affairs.

古文：诏依汉车千秋、晋安平王故事，给步挽一乘，自掖门至于宣光殿，得以出入，并备几杖。
现代文：诏令依照汉朝车千秋、晋朝安平王的先例，赐给胡国珍人力车一辆，自宫门到宣光殿，可以进出，并且备有几案和手杖。
English: In accordance with the precedent of the Han Dynasty Chariot and the Jin Dynasty Anping King, the imperial decree gave Hu Guozhen a rickshaw, which can enter and exit from the palace gate to the Xuanguang Palace, and has several cases and canes.

古文：后与侍中崔光，俱授帝经，侍直禁中。
现代文：后来，和侍中崔光一同向明帝传授经籍，在宫中侍奉当值。
English: Later, together with the chambermaid Cui Guang, he taught scriptures to the Ming Emperor and served as an attendant in the palace.

古文：国珍上表陈刑政之宜，诏皆施行。
现代文：胡国珍上表陈述刑法政务所应做的，诏令全部施行。
English: Hu Guozhen made a statement on the table of what the Criminal Law Administration should do, and the edict was fully implemented.

古文：延和初，加国珍使持节、都督、雍州刺史，骠骑大将军开府。
现代文：熙平初年，加授胡国珍使持节、都督、雍州刺史，骠骑大将军开府。
English: In the first year of Heiping, Hu Guozhen was additionally awarded the title of "envoy of the festival," "governor-general," "governor-general of Yongzhou," and "general of cavalry."

古文：灵太后以国珍年老，不欲令其在外，且欲示以方面之荣，竟不行。
现代文：灵太后因胡国珍年纪老迈，不想让他在外任职，并且想在某一方面显示出荣耀，竟然不去赴任。
English: Due to Hu Guozhen's advanced age, the Empress Dowager did not want him to hold a position outside the palace, and she wanted to show her honor in some way by not going to the post.

古文：迁司徒公，侍中如故。
现代文：升任司徒公，侍中之职依旧。
English: He was promoted to the post of Stuchukong, but his position as an attendant remained the same.

古文：就宅拜之。灵太后、明帝率百僚幸其第，宴会极欢。
现代文：到胡国珍的宅第授职，灵太后、明帝率领文武百官驾幸其宅第，大摆宴席，极尽欢乐。
English: To Hu Guozhen's residence for the investiture, Empress Dowager Ling and Emperor Ming led hundreds of military and civilian officials to visit his residence, held a grand banquet, and were overjoyed.

古文：又追京兆郡君为秦太上君。
现代文：又追赠京兆郡君为秦太上君。
English: He also posthumously bestowed the title of Prince of Jingzha County to the Qin Empress Dowager.

古文：太上君景明三年薨于洛阳，于此十六年矣。
现代文：太上君景明三年死于洛阳，至此已十六年了。
English: It's been 16 years since Grandmother Jingming died in Luoyang three years ago.

古文：太后以太上君坟瘗卑局，更增广，为起茔域门阙碑表。
现代文：太后认为太上君的坟墓低下狭窄，再增高扩大，为之起造坟茔门楼碑表。
English: The empress dowager thought that the tomb of the great-grandmother was narrow and narrow, and then increased and expanded, for which the tombstone of the gate tower was built.

古文：侍中崔光等奏： 按汉高祖母始谥曰昭灵夫人，后为昭灵后；薄太后母曰灵文夫人，皆置园邑三百家，长丞奉守。
现代文：侍中崔光等人奏道： 按：汉高祖的母亲开始谥号为昭灵夫人，后来改谥号为昭灵后；薄太后的母亲谥号曰灵文夫人。都设置守护陵园区三百家，长丞守卫。
English: Attendant Cui Guang and others sang: According to: the mother of Han Gaozu's mother began to be called Mrs. Zhaoling, later changed to Mrs. Zhaoling; the mother of the Empress Dowager's mother was called Mrs. Lingwen. All were set up to guard the cemetery's 300 tombs, with the eldest son standing guard.

古文：今秦太上君未有尊谥，陵寝孤立，即秦君名，宜上终称，兼设扫卫，以慰情典。
现代文：如今秦太上君没有尊加谥号，陵墓孤单而立，即使是秦太上君这个名号，也应加上一个永久性的称号，并设置打扫卫护陵园的人，以安慰情感。
English: Nowadays, the Qin Empress Dowager has no honorary title, and the mausoleum stands alone. Even if it is the name of the Qin Empress Dowager, a permanent title should be added, and the people who clean and guard the cemetery should be set up to comfort the feelings.

古文：请上尊谥曰孝穆，权置园邑三十户，立长丞奉守。 
现代文：请求上尊谥号曰孝穆，姑且设置守护陵区三十家，立一长丞恭奉守卫。 
English: Requesting that the name of the deceased be "Xiao Mu," he also set up a garrison of thirty tombs in the tomb area, and appointed a chancellor to serve as a guard.

古文：太后从之。封国珍继室梁氏为赵平郡君。元叉妻拜为女侍中，封新平郡君，又徙封冯翊君。
现代文：灵太后准许崔光等人所奏，封胡国珍的继室梁氏为赵平郡君，元义的妻子任为女侍中，封新平郡君，又改封冯翊君。
English: The Empress Dowager allowed Cui Guang and others to play the role, naming Hu Guozhen's stepmother Liang as Zhao Ping Gu Jun, Yuan Yi's wife as the maid of honor, naming Xinping Gu Jun, and changing the name to Feng Yu Jun.

古文：国珍子祥妻长安县公主，即清河王怿女也。
现代文：胡国珍之子胡祥的妻子长安县公主，即是清河王元怿的女儿。
English: The wife of Hu Guozhen's son Hu Xiang, the Princess of Chang'an County, was the daughter of the Qing River King Yuan Zang.

古文：国珍年虽笃老，而雅敬佛法，时事洁齐，自礼拜。
现代文：胡国珍虽然年纪老迈，却很是敬信佛法，经常洁身斋戒，自做礼拜。
English: Although Hu Guozhen is very old, she is a great believer in Buddhism. She often fasts and prays by herself.

古文：至于出入侍从，犹能跨马据鞍。
现代文：以至于侍候他进出的随从，尚且能够骑马而行。
English: So much so that his entourage, who wait on him as he enters and leaves, are able to travel on horseback.

古文：神龟元年四月七日，步从所建佛像，发第至阊阖门四五里。
现代文：神龟元年四月七日，步行跟从自己建造的佛像，从宅第出发至阊阖门，行了四五里。
English: On April 7th, the year of the turtle, he set out on foot from his house to the gate, following the Buddha statue he had built. He walked for four or five miles.

古文：八日，又立观像，晚乃肯坐。
现代文：八日，又站立观看佛像，到天晚时才肯坐下。
English: On the eighth day, he stood up again to look at the Buddha statue, and he would not sit down until late in the day.

古文：劳热增甚，因遂寝疾。
现代文：劳累烦热过度，因而就卧病在床。
English: Exhausted and overheated, he was sick in bed.

古文：灵太后亲侍药膳，十二日薨，年八十。
现代文：灵太后亲自侍奉药汤膳食，十二日病死，卒年八十。
English: The Empress Dowager Ling personally served the medicinal soup meal, and died of illness on the 12th, at the age of 80.

古文：给东园温明秘器，五时朝服各一具，衣一袭，赠布五千匹，钱一百万，蜡千斤。
现代文：给予东园葬具温明秘器，五时朝服各一具，衣服一套，赠给布帛五千匹，钱一百万，蜡一千斤。
English: Dongyuan was given warm and secret funerary utensils, a five o'clock morning suit each, a set of clothes, five thousand pieces of cloth, one million money, and one thousand pounds of wax.

古文：大鸿胪持节监护丧事。
现代文：大鸿胪持节监督察看丧事。
English: Dahongjie Festival Supervisor to observe the funeral.

古文：太后还宫，成服于九龙殿，遂居九龙寝室。
现代文：太后回宫，在九龙殿穿着丧服，于是就在九龙殿睡卧。
English: The empress dowager returned to the palace, wore mourning clothes in the Kowloon Palace, and then slept in the Kowloon Palace.

古文：明帝服小功服，举哀于太极东堂。
现代文：明帝身穿小功服丧服，在太极东堂举行祭吊。
English: Emperor Ming, wearing a small ceremonial costume, held a wreath-laying ceremony in the Taiji East Hall.

古文：又诏，自始薨至七七，皆为设千僧斋，斋令七人出家，百日设万人斋，二七人出家。
现代文：又诏令自胡国珍死时起至七七，每天都设置一千名僧人的斋饭，每一次斋饭后令七人出家；百日大祭准备一万人的斋饭，十四岁的男童出家为僧。
English: He also decreed that from the time of Hu Guozhen's death to the year 77, a thousand monks should have a meal every day, and seven monks should be ordained after each meal; a hundred-day festival should prepare a meal for ten thousand people, and a fourteen-year-old boy should be ordained as a monk.

古文：先是巫觋言将有凶，劝令为厌胜法，国珍拒而不从，云吉凶有定分，唯修德以禳之。
现代文：在这之前，巫师说将有灾凶，劝说让行驱邪之法，胡国珍拒绝而不听从，说吉凶是命中注定，惟有完善德行来禳除。
English: Prior to this, the sorcerer said that there would be disasters and evils, and persuaded Hu Guozhen to practice the law of exorcism. Hu Guozhen refused and did not listen, saying that good and evil were predestined by fate, and could only be eliminated by perfecting virtue.

古文：临死，与太后诀，云 母子善临天下 ，殷勤至于再三。
现代文：临死的时候，和太后诀别，说 ：你们母子要好好地治理天下。 
English: When he was about to die, he bade farewell to the empress dowager, saying, "Your mother and son will rule the world well."

古文：又及其子祥云， 我唯有一子，死后勿如比来威抑之 。
现代文：再三嘱咐，又说到儿子胡祥 ：我只有一个儿子，我死后不要这样用威势来压抑他。 
English: He repeatedly ordered and said about his son Hu Xiang: I only have one son, after my death, don't use such power to suppress him.

古文：灵太后以其好戏，时加威训，国珍故以为言。
现代文：灵太后因胡祥好嬉戏，经常加以恐吓训斥，胡国珍所以才这样说。
English: Because Hu Xiang liked to play, the Empress Dowager often threatened and reprimanded him, which is why Hu Guozhen said this.

古文：始国珍欲就祖、父，西葬旧乡。
现代文：开始的时候，胡国珍想跟着祖父和父亲，往西安葬在故乡。
English: At the beginning, Hu Guozhen wanted to follow his grandfather and father to Xi'an to be buried in his hometown.

古文：后缘前世诸胡多在洛葬，有终洛之心。
现代文：后来，因为前代诸多姓胡的大都在洛阳安葬，就有了死在洛阳的想法。
English: Later, because most of the previous generations with surnames of Hu were buried in Luoyang, they had the idea of dying in Luoyang.

古文：崔光尝对太后前问国珍： 国公万年后，为在此安厝？为归长安？ 
现代文：崔光曾当着太后的面问胡国珍 ：国公万年之后，是在洛阳安葬，还是归葬长安？ 
English: In the presence of the empress dowager, Cui Guang once asked Hu Guozhen: "After ten thousand years of the Emperor, will you be buried in Luoyang, or will you be buried in Chang'an?"

古文：国珍言： 当陪葬天子山陵。 
现代文：胡国珍说 ：应当陪葬天子的陵墓。 
English: Hu Guozhen said: The tomb of the heavenly son should be buried with him.

古文：及病危，太后请以后事，竟言还安定。
现代文：等到病危时候，太后请问后事，竟然说还葬安定。
English: When she was critically ill, the empress dowager asked for advice and was told that her health was stable.

古文：语遂惛忽。
现代文：说话已经昏迷。
English: He has lost the ability to speak.

古文：太后问清河王怿与崔光等，议去留。
现代文：太后问清河王元怿和崔光等人，商议葬于安定还是葬于洛阳。
English: The Empress Dowager asked Wang Yuanjun and Cui Guang of Qinghe to discuss whether to be buried in Ding'an or Luoyang.

古文：怿等皆以病乱，请从先言。
现代文：元怿等人都认为后来的话是病中乱语，请求按照胡国珍先前说的做。
English: Yuan Qi and others all thought that the later words were gibberish during the illness, and asked to do as Hu Guozhen had said earlier.

古文：太后犹记崔光昔与国珍言，遂营墓于洛阳。
现代文：太后还记得崔光昔日和胡国珍说的话，就在洛阳建造坟墓。
English: The empress dowager remembered what Cui Guang said to Hu Guozhen in the past, and built a tomb in Luoyang.

古文：太后虽外从众议，而深追临终之语，云： 我公之远慕二亲，亦吾之思父母也。 
现代文：太后虽然表面听从众人的建议，而心中深思父亲临终时说的话，说： 我的父亲思念远方的双亲，我也思念父母。 
English: The Empress Dowager, while ostensibly heeding the advice of many people, thought deeply about the words her father said on his deathbed, saying: My father misses his distant parents, and I miss my parents.

古文：追崇假黄钺、使持节、侍中、相国、都督中外诸军事、太师，领太尉公、司州牧，号太上秦公，加九锡，葬以殊礼。给九旒銮辂，武贲班剑百人，前后部羽葆鼓吹，巉辌车，谥曰文宣公。
现代文：追赠假黄钺、使持节、侍中、相国、都督中外诸军事、太师，兼领太尉公、司州牧，号为太上秦公，加九锡，以特殊的礼仪安葬，给予九旒銮辂，武贲仪仗一百人，前后部羽葆鼓吹，鍂车京车；谥号文宣公。
English: He was posthumously presented with a fake yellow scepter, an envoy's scepter, an attendant's scepter, a brother-in-law's scepter, a governor's scepter, a lieutenant's scepter, a governor's scepter, and a governor's scepter. He was given a special burial ceremony, nine scepters were given to him, a military scepter was given to one hundred people, a feather scepter was blown in front of and behind him, and a carriage was given to him; his scepter was given to

古文：赐物三千段，粟一千五百石。
现代文：赐予财物三千段，谷物一千五百石。
English: He was given 3,000 dan in property and 1,500 koku in grain.

古文：又诏赠国珍祖父、父，兄下逮从子，皆有封职。
现代文：又诏令追赠胡国珍的祖父、父亲、兄长下及侄子，都有封爵职位。
English: In addition, Hu Guozhen's grandfather, father, brother and nephew were posthumously knighted.

古文：持节就安定监护丧事。
现代文：持节到安定监督察看丧事。
English: He went to the stability supervision center to observe the funeral.

古文：灵太后迎太上君神柩还第，与国珍俱葬，赠襚一与国珍同。
现代文：灵太后迎接太上君的灵柩回到宅第，和胡国珍一同安葬，赠与衣被和胡国珍相同。
English: The Empress Dowager returned to the residence to receive the coffin of the Empress Dowager, and was buried together with Hu Guozhen. The gift quilt was the same as that of Hu Guozhen.

古文：及国珍神主入庙，诏太常权给以轩县之乐，六佾之舞。
现代文：等到胡国珍神位送入庙宇，诏领太常按诸侯的礼节奏乐献舞。
English: When Hu Guozhen's throne was brought into the temple, the empress danced according to the ritual rhythm of the princes.

古文：初，国珍无男，养兄真子僧洗为后。
现代文：当初，胡国珍没有儿子，收养兄长胡真的儿子僧洗作为后代。
English: At first, Hu Guozhen did not have a son, so she adopted her elder brother Hu Zhen's son, Sengcha, as a descendant.

古文：后纳赵平君，生子祥，字元吉，袭封。
现代文：后来娶赵平君，生下儿子胡祥，字元吉，承袭封爵。
English: Later, she married Zhao Pingjun and gave birth to a son, Hu Xiang, also known as Yuanji, who inherited the title of knight.

古文：故事，世袭例皆减邑，唯祥独得全封。
现代文：按照先例，世袭依例削减封地，惟独胡祥封地不减。
English: In accordance with precedent, hereditary fiefs were reduced as usual, except for the Hu Xiang fief.

古文：赵平君薨，给东园秘器，明帝服小功服，举哀于东堂，灵太后服齐衰期。
现代文：赵平君死，给与东园葬用秘器，明帝服小功服丧服，在东堂举行祭吊，灵太后服齐衰丧服，至期满为止。
English: After Zhao Pingjun's death, the East Garden was given the secret burial utensils, the Ming Emperor was given a small funeral dress, a hanging ceremony was held in the East Hall, and the Empress Dowager was given a funeral dress, until the expiration date.

古文：葬于太上君墓左，不得祔合。
现代文：赵平君安葬在太上君的墓左边，不能与胡国珍合葬。
English: Zhao Pingjun was buried on the left side of the tomb of his mother-in-law, and could not be buried with Hu Guozhen.

古文：祥历位殿中尚书、中书监、侍中，改封平凉郡公。
现代文：胡祥历任殿中尚书、侍中，改封为平凉郡公。
English: Hu Xiang successively held the posts of courtier and chamberlain in the palace, and was appointed as the governor of Pingliang County.

古文：薨，赠开府仪同三司、雍州刺史，谥曰孝景。
现代文：死后追赠开府仪同三司、雍州刺史，谥号孝景。
English: After his death, he bequeathed Kaifu Yi, Tong San Shi, Yongzhou Zhishi, and his posthumous name, Xiao Jing.

