古文：夫有人民而后有夫妇，有夫妇而后有父子，有父子而后有兄弟：一家之亲，此三而已矣。
现代文：有了人群然后才有夫妻，有了夫妻然后才有父子，有了父子然后才有兄弟，一个家庭中的亲人，无外乎这三种关系。
English: If there is a crowd, then there will be a husband and wife, if there is a husband and wife, then there will be a father and son, if there is a father and son, then there will be a brother, a relative in a family, nothing but these three relationships.

古文：自兹以往，至于九族，皆本于三亲焉，故于人伦为重者也，不可不笃。
现代文：由此类推，直推到九族，都是在这三种关系的基础上产生的，所以这三种关系在人伦中极为重要，不能不重视。
English: From this kind of reasoning, straight to the nine ethnic groups, all arise on the basis of these three relationships, so these three relationships are extremely important in interpersonal relationships and must be valued.

古文：兄弟者，分形连气之人也，方其幼也，父母左提右挈，前襟后裾，食则同案，衣则传服，学则连业，游则共方，虽有悖乱之人，不能不相爱也。
现代文：兄弟，是形体不同但是气息相通的人。在他们年幼的时候，父母左手牵右手携，这个扯着父母的前襟，那个抓住父母的后摆，同桌吃饭，衣服共穿，学习用同一册课本，游玩去同一处地方，即使有荒谬胡乱来的，兄弟之间也是友爱的。
English: Brothers are people who are different in shape but share the same breath. When they were young, their parents held their left hands and right hands together. This one pulled the parents' front collar, that one grabbed the parents' back swing. They ate at the same table, wore the same clothes, studied with the same textbook, played and went to the same place. Even if there were absurdities, the brothers were friendly.

古文：及其壮也，各妻其妻，各子其子，虽有笃厚之人，不能不少衰也。
现代文：等到成年以后，各自娶妻生子，即使是诚实厚道的，感情上也会淡薄几分。
English: When they reach adulthood, they will each marry a wife and have children. Even if they are honest and kind, they will be somewhat emotionally weak.

古文：娣姒之比兄弟，则疏薄矣；今使疏薄之人，而节量亲厚之恩，犹方底而圆盖，必不合矣。
现代文：至于妯娌比起兄弟来，就关系就更加疏远了。如今让这种关系疏远的人，来掌握亲厚不亲厚的节制度量，就好比给方形的底座加上一个圆形的盖子，必然是不合适的。
English: As for the cormorants, they are more estranged from each other than they are from their brothers, and it is certainly not appropriate for those who are estranged from this relationship today to grasp the relationship between the cormorants and the cormorants, which is like adding a round lid to a square base.

古文：惟友悌深至，不为旁人之所移者，免夫！
现代文：这种情况只有十分敬爱兄长和仁爱兄弟，不被妻子所动摇才能避免出现啊！
English: This kind of situation can only be avoided if the elder brother and the younger brother are respected and loved, and not shaken by the wife!

古文：二亲既殁，兄弟相顾，当如形之与影，声之与响；爱先人之遗体，惜己身之分气，非兄弟何念哉？
现代文：双亲去世后，兄弟之间，应当像身体与它的影子，音响与它的回声一样密切。爱护父母给予的身体，珍爱父母分予的血气，除了兄弟还有谁能像这样互相挂念呢？
English: After the death of their parents, brothers and sisters should be as close as the body and its shadow, the sound and its echo. Love the body given by parents, cherish the blood given by parents. Who else but brothers and sisters can care about each other like this?

古文：兄弟之际，异于他人，望深则易怨，地亲则易弭。
现代文：兄弟之间的关系于别人不一样，期望太高就容易产生埋怨，但又因为地近情亲，也容易消除隔阂。
English: The relationship between brothers is different from others. If expectations are too high, it is easy to complain, but because of the closeness of relatives, it is also easy to eliminate estrangement.

古文：譬犹居室，一穴则塞之，一隙则涂之，则无颓毁之虑；如雀鼠之不恤，风雨之不防，壁陷楹沦，无可救矣。
现代文：譬如住的房屋，出现了一个漏洞就立刻堵上，出现了一条细缝就马上填补，那就不会有倒塌的危险；假如有了乌鹊、老鼠也不忧虑，不提防风雨的侵蚀，就会墙倒柱摧，无从挽回。
English: For example, in a residential building, if there is a hole, it will be plugged immediately, and if there is a small crack, it will be filled immediately, so there will be no danger of collapse; if there are worms and mice, they will not worry, and if there is no protection against wind and rain erosion, the wall will be destroyed, and there will be no way back.

古文：仆妾之为雀鼠，妻子之为风雨，甚哉！
现代文：仆妾比那雀鼠，妻子和风雨相比，所产生的危害更为严重！
English: The harm caused by the concubine is more serious than that of the squirrel, the wife and the wind and rain!

古文：兄弟不睦，则子侄不爱；子侄不爱，则群从疏薄；群从疏薄，则僮仆为仇敌矣。
现代文：兄弟要是不和睦，子侄之间就不能互相友爱；子侄不能互相友爱，族里的子侄辈就会关系疏远；族里的子侄辈关系疏远，那僮仆就成仇敌了。
English: If the brothers do not get along, the sons and nephews cannot love each other; if the sons and nephews do not love each other, the sons and nephews in the clan will be estranged; if the sons and nephews in the clan are estranged, the servants will become enemies.

古文：如此，则行路皆踖其面而蹈其心，谁救之哉！
现代文：如果这样，即使走在路上的陌生人都踏他的脸踩他的心，那还有谁来救他呢？
English: If so, even if strangers walking on the road trample his face and trample his heart, who will save him?

古文：人或交天下之士，皆有欢爱，而失敬于兄者，何其能多而不能少也！人或将数万之师，得其死力，而失恩于弟者，何其能疏而不能亲也！
现代文：世人中有能结交天下之士并做到欢爱、却对兄长不尊敬的人存在，怎么能做到待多和睦而不能待少啊；世人中又有能统率几万大军并得其死力、却对弟弟不恩爱的，这又怎么能疏而不能做到对弟亲呢！
English: Among the world's people, there are those who can make friends with the world's people and achieve love, but do not respect their brothers and sisters. How can they be more harmonious and not less? Among the world's people, there are those who can command tens of thousands of armies and gain their death, but are not grateful to their brothers and sisters. How can they be estranged and not do this to their brothers and sisters?

古文：娣姒者，多争之地也，使骨肉居之，亦不若各归四海，感霜露而相思，伫日月之相望也。
现代文：妯娌之间特别容易产生纠纷。即使是亲姐妹成为妯娌，也不如她们住的距离远一点，这样她们长久分离，反而会因感叹霜露降临而互相思念，等待相会的日子。
English: It is especially easy for disputes to arise between cormorants. Even if sisters become cormorants, it is not as if they live a little further away, so that they are separated for a long time, but they will miss each other by lamenting the arrival of frost and waiting for the day of meeting.

古文：况以行路之人，处多争之地，能无间者，鲜矣。
现代文：何况妯娌本来就是走在路上的陌生人，处在多事的环境中，能做到不生嫌隙的实在太少了。
English: What's more, mules are basically strangers walking on the road, and in an eventful environment, there are very few mules that can avoid causing trouble.

古文：所以然者，以其当公务而执私情，处重责而怀薄义也；若能恕己而行，换子而抚，则此患不生矣。
现代文：之所以会这样，是因为大家在面对家庭中的集体事务时，难免各怀私心；肩负重大的家庭责任时，心底却挂念着个人的恩怨。如果能使自己宽恕原谅对方，把对方的孩子看作自己的孩子一般爱护，那这类灾祸就不会发生了。
English: The reason for this is that when facing the collective affairs of the family, everyone is inevitably selfish; when shouldering important family responsibilities, they are deeply concerned about personal grudges. If you can forgive each other and treat each other's children as your own, this kind of disaster will not happen.

古文：人之事兄，不可同于事父，何怨爱弟不及爱子乎？
现代文：人在侍奉兄长的时候，不能像侍奉父亲一样孝敬，那又为何埋怨兄长爱护弟弟不像爱护自己的孩子一样呢？
English: When serving one's elder brother, one cannot be as filial as when serving one's father, so why complain that an elder brother does not love his younger brother as he loves his own child?

古文：是反照而不明也。沛国刘琎，尝与兄连栋隔壁，呼之数声不应，良久方答；怪问之，乃曰： 向来未着衣帽故也。 
现代文：一次，刘瓛呼叫刘琎，连叫几声都没有答音，过了好一会儿才听见刘琎答应。哥哥感到诧异，问他为什么，于是他说： 是因为刚才还没有穿戴好衣帽的缘故啊！ 
English: Once, Liu Ye called Liu Ye, but there was no answer even after several calls. It took a while before Liu Ye said yes. His brother was surprised and asked him why, so he said: It's because he hadn't put on his hat and coat just now!

古文：以此事兄，可以免矣。
现代文：以这样的态度敬事兄长，兄弟之间的任何隔阂都可以免除了。
English: With such an attitude of respect for the elder brother, any estrangement between the brothers can be avoided.

古文：江陵王玄绍，弟孝英、子敏兄弟三人，特相友爱，所得甘旨新异，非共聚食，必不先尝，孜孜色貌，相见如不足者。
现代文：江陵王玄绍与他的弟弟孝英、子敏兄弟三人特别友爱，谁要得到美味新奇的食物，除非是三人在一起共享，否则决不会有谁先去品尝。
English: Wang Xuanshao, his younger brother Xiaoying, and Zimin, three brothers from Gangneung, are especially friendly. Whoever wants to get delicious and novel food, unless the three of them share it together, there will never be anyone to taste it first.

古文：及西台陷没，玄绍以形体魁梧，为兵所围，二弟争共抱持，各求代死，终不得解，遂并命尔。
现代文：兄弟之间互相勤勉相待，态度热诚，每次见面总觉得在一起的时间不够。赶上江陵陷落，玄绍因体形魁梧，被敌兵包围，两个弟弟争着去抱他，请求替哥哥去死，但未能消解厄运，最终三人被一同杀害。
English: The brothers treated each other diligently and had a warm-hearted attitude. Every time they met, they always felt that they didn't have enough time together. After the fall of Jiangling, Xuan Shao, because of his heavy build, was surrounded by enemy soldiers. The two brothers fought to hold him and asked him to die for their brother, but they couldn't resolve the bad luck, and eventually the three were killed together.

