古文：和跋，代人也，世领部落，为国附臣。
现代文：和跋，是代郡人，世代统领部落，为国家附属的臣子。
English: Watanabe is the representative of the county, the leader of the tribe for generations, and a state-affiliated vassal.

古文：跋以才辩知名，太祖擢为外朝大人，参军国大谋，雅有智算。
现代文：和跋以才华和善辩闻名，太祖擢升他为外朝大人，参与军国大事的谋划，很有智慧算度。
English: He was famous for his talent and ability to argue. He was promoted by his great-grandfather to be the adult of the foreign court, and participated in the planning of military and national events. He was very wise and calculating.

古文：频使称旨，拜龙骧将军。
现代文：多次出使符合旨意，被任命为龙骧将军。
English: He was dispatched many times in accordance with the will, and was appointed as the general of Longjing.

古文：未几，赐爵日南公。
现代文：不久，赐爵位为日南公。
English: Soon after, Nichinan was given a title of nobility.

古文：从平中原，以功进为尚书，镇鄴。
现代文：跟随平定中原，因功劳升为尚书，镇守邺城。
English: He followed the emperor to pacify the Central Plains, and was promoted to Shangshu for his achievements, and became the town guard of Jixian County.

古文：慕容德使兄子和守滑台，和长史李辨杀和，求援于跋。
现代文：慕容德派哥哥的儿子慕容和守卫滑台，慕容和的长史李辨杀死慕容和，向和跋求援。
English: Murongde sent his brother's son, Muronghe, to guard the slide. Muronghe's eldest son, Li Bian, killed Muronghe and begged for help.

古文：跋率轻骑赴之。
现代文：和跋率领轻装的骑兵赶去。
English: and rode off at full gallop with his light cavalry.

古文：既至，辨悔，闭门拒守。
现代文：到达后，李辨后悔，关上城门抵御。
English: After arriving, Li Bin regretted and closed the gate to resist.

古文：跋使尚书郎邓晖说之，辨乃开门。
现代文：和跋派尚书郎邓晖劝说他，李辨才开门。
English: He was persuaded by Deng Wei, a disciple of Shang Shulang, that Li Bian should open the door first.

古文：跋入，收其府藏。
现代文：和跋进城，收缴府中库藏。
English: and stormed into the city to seize the central government's treasury.

古文：德闻之，遣将率三千骑，击跋。
现代文：慕容德听说后，派遣将领率领三千骑兵，攻打和跋。
English: When Murong De heard of this, he dispatched a general with three thousand cavalry to attack and repel them.

古文：跋逆击，大破之，擒其将士千余人而还。
现代文：和跋迎击，大败他们，擒获慕容德的将士一千多人后返回。
English: and defeated them, capturing more than a thousand of Murongde's soldiers before returning.

古文：于是陈颍之民，多来向化。
现代文：这时陈颖地区的民众，大多前来归附。
English: At this time, most of the people in the Chen Ying area came to join.

古文：改封定陵公。
现代文：改封为定陵公。
English: His title was changed to Dingling Gong.

古文：与常山王遵率众五万，讨贺兰部别帅木易干，破之。
现代文：和常山王元遵率领军队五万人，讨伐贺兰部的别部头领木易于，打败了他。
English: And Wang Yuan Zun of Changshan led an army of fifty thousand people, and it was easy to defeat the other leader of He Lan, and defeated him.

古文：出为平原太守。
现代文：外出任平愿太守。
English: He also served as the Taiju of the Heian period.

古文：太祖宠遇跋，冠于诸将。
现代文：太祖宠信优待和跋，高于各将领。
English: The great-grandfather favored preferential treatment and favors, higher than the generals.

古文：时群臣皆敦尚恭俭，而跋好修虚誉，眩曜于时，性尤奢淫。太祖戒之，弗革。
现代文：当时群臣都崇尚恭敬节俭，而和跋爱图虚名，向世人炫耀，性格尤为骄奢淫逸，太祖告诫他，不改正。
English: At that time, the courtiers all advocated respect, respect and thrift, but he loved to make a false name, show off to the world, and his character was particularly extravagant and lascivious. The great-grandfather warned him not to correct it.

古文：后车驾北狩豺山，收跋，刑之路侧。
现代文：后来太祖向北巡枧豺山，逮捕和跋，在路旁施刑。
English: Later, Taizu patrolled Shaoshan to the north, arresting and punishing criminals on the roadside.

古文：妻刘氏自杀以从。
现代文：妻子刘氏亦随之自杀。
English: Mr. Liu's wife also committed suicide.

古文：初，将刑跋，太祖命其诸弟毗等视诀，跋谓毗曰： 氵垒北地瘠，可居水南，就耕良田，广为产业，各相勉励，务自纂修。 
现代文：起初，将要杀和跋，太祖命令他的几个弟弟和毗等人去看望诀别，和跋对和毗说： 漫水北面土地贫瘠，可以住在河的南面，耕种良田，大量增加产业，互相勉励，各自努力。 
English: At first, when it was time to kill Wotan, the great-grandfather ordered several of his younger brothers and Wotan's attendants to pay a farewell visit. Wotan said to Wotan, "The land to the north of the flood is barren. You can live on the south side of the river, cultivate good fields, greatly increase your property, encourage each other, and work hard.

古文：令之背己曰： 汝曹何忍视吾之死也！ 
现代文：让他们背对着自己说： 你们怎么忍心看到我死呢! 
English: Let them turn their backs on themselves and say, "How could you bear to see me die?

古文：毗等解其微意，诈称使者，亡奔长安，追之不及。
现代文：和毗等人理解他的含义，假称使者，逃奔长安，追赶他们没赶上。
English: He and the others understood his meaning, pretended to be messengers, fled to Chang'an, and did not catch up with them.

古文：太祖怒，遂诛其家。
现代文：太祖发怒，就诛杀和跋的全家。
English: The great-grandfather was so angry that he killed the whole family.

古文：后世祖西巡五原，回幸豺山校猎，忽遇暴风，云雾四塞。
现代文：后来世祖向西巡视五原，返回到豺山狩猎，忽然遇到暴风，云雾四起。
English: Later, the ancestor went to the west to inspect the Five Plains, returned to Lushan to hunt, and suddenly encountered a storm, with clouds and fog everywhere.

古文：世祖怪而问之，群下佥言跋世居此土，祠冢犹存，其或者能致斯变。
现代文：世祖奇怪而询问原因，群臣都说和跋世代住在遣片土地，祠堂坟墓还存在，或许是这能导致这种变故。
English: The patriarch was puzzled and asked why. The courtiers all said that they had lived on the same piece of land for generations and that the ancestral hall and tomb still existed. Perhaps this was the reason for the change.

古文：帝遣建兴公古弼祭以三牲，雾即除散。
现代文：皇帝派遣建兴公古弼用三种牲畜祭祀，大雾就消散了。
English: The emperor dispatched Jianxing Gongguan to perform three kinds of animal sacrifices, and the fog dissipated.

古文：后世祖搜狩之日，每先祭之。
现代文：后来世祖狩猎的日子，每每先祭祀和跋。
English: Later, in the days when the ancestors were hunting, every ancestor would make a sacrifice and trek.

古文：少子归，从征赫连昌有功，拜统万将军，赐爵成皋男。
现代文：小儿子和归，跟随征伐赫连昌有功劳，被任命为统万将军，赐爵位为成皋男。
English: The youngest son, Kazuchika, followed the conquest of Kherenchang with great merit, was appointed as the general of Tongwan, and was given a peerage as the eldest son.

古文：与西平公安颉攻虎牢，拔之。
现代文：和西平公安颉攻打虎牢，攻下来了。
English: The Xiping Public Security Bureau attacked the tiger's stronghold and took it down.

古文：进爵高阳侯。
现代文：升爵位为高阳侯。
English: He was raised to the peerage as Goyang marquis.

古文：后以罪徙配凉州为民。
现代文：后来因有罪发配凉州为平民。
English: Later, Liangzhou was found guilty and sentenced to be a commoner.

古文：盖吴作乱于关中，复拜归龙骧将军往讨之。
现代文：盖吴在关中作乱，又任命和归为龙骧将军前往讨伐他。
English: Gai Wu caused a disturbance in Guanzhong, and was appointed and relegated to the position of Longjing general to go and fight him.

古文：还，拜使持节、冠军将军、雍城镇都大将、高阳侯。
现代文：返回后，被任命为使持节、冠军将军、雍城镇都大将、高阳侯。
English: After returning, he was appointed as the Envoy of the Festival, the Champion General, the General of the Yongzheng Capital, and the Mayor of Gaoyang.

古文：卒。
现代文：去世。
English: To die.

古文：子度，袭爵。
现代文：儿子和度，继承爵位。
English: His son, Kazuchika, succeeded to the peerage.

古文：尚书都官郎、昌平太守。
现代文：担任尚书都官郎、昌平太守。
English: He served as Shoshu-tokansoro and Shohei Dazhu.

古文：卒。
现代文：去世。
English: To die.

古文：度子延穆，司州部郡从事，早卒。
现代文：和度的儿子延穆，担任司州部郡从事，去世早。
English: Ando's son, Yanmu, who worked as a county magistrate, died early.

古文：子安，武定末，给事黄门侍郎。
现代文：儿子和安，武定末年，担任给事黄门侍郎。
English: His son, Kazuchika, in the last years of Wuding's life, served as an attendant at the Yellow Gate.

古文：奚牧，代人也，重厚有智谋。
现代文：奚牧，是代郡人，忠厚有智谋。
English: Yanmu is a representative of the county, loyal and resourceful.

古文：太祖宠遇之，称之曰仲兄。
现代文：太祖宠信优待他，称他为仲兄。
English: The great-grandfather treated him favorably and called him a middle brother.

古文：初，刘显谋害太祖，梁眷知其谋，潜使牧与穆崇至七介山以告，语在《崇传》。
现代文：起初，刘显圆谋杀害太祖，銮鲞知道这个谋划，暗中派奚牧和穆崇到七介山报告，记载在《穆崇传》。
English: At first, Liu Xianyuan murdered and killed his great-grandfather. Yu knew about this plan and secretly sent Yu Mu and Mu Chong to Qixiaoshan to make a report, which was recorded in "The Biography of Mu Chong."

古文：太祖录先帝旧臣，又以牧告显之功，拜为治民长，敷奏政事，参与计谋。
现代文：太祖任用先帝时旧臣，又因奚牧告发刘显的功劳，任命他为治民长，上奏政事，参与国事谋划。
English: The great-grandfather appointed the former emperor's old minister, and appointed Liu Xian as the governor of the people, to report on political affairs, and to participate in the planning of state affairs.

古文：太祖征慕容宝，加辅国将军，略地晋川，获宝丹阳王买得及离石护军高秀和于平陶。
现代文：太祖征伐慕容宝，加授奚牧为辅国将军，攻取土地到晋川，在平陶擒获慕容实的丹阳王买馒和整石护军高秀和平陶。
English: The great-great-grandfather conquered Murongbao, and was awarded the title of assistant general of Jinchuan Province, and conquered the land to Jinchuan. In Pingtao, he won the support of the powerful King of Danyang and the whole stone protection force of Gaoxiu and Pingtao.

古文：以军功拜并州刺史，赐爵任城公。
现代文：因军功被任命为并州刺史，赐爵位为任城公。
English: Due to his military service, he was appointed to be a member of the State Council of the People's Republic of China, and was given the title of Rencheng.

古文：州与姚兴接界，兴颇寇边，牧乃与兴书，称顿首，钧礼抗之，责兴侵边不直之意。
现代文：州与姚兴边界相连，姚玺时常侵犯边境，奚牧就写信给姚兴，称顿首，用对等的礼节相待，责备姚兴侵犯边境为不正当的想法。
English: The state is connected to Yao Xing's border, and Yao Xing often violates the border. Yan Mu wrote a letter to Yao Xing, saying that he would shake his head, treat each other with reciprocal courtesy, and reproach Yao Xing for violating the border as an illegitimate idea.

古文：兴以与国通和，恨之。
现代文：塑哩认为他以对等国家相通好，怨恨他。
English: Shuli thought that he would get along better with a peer country and resented him.

古文：有言于太祖，太祖戮之。
现代文：把这件事告诉了太祖，太祖诛杀了奚牧。
English: He told his great-grandfather about this, and his great-grandfather killed Gong Mu.

古文：莫题，代人也，多智有才用。
现代文：莫题，是伐郡人。智谋多有才干。
English: Never mind, he's from Fuxian County. He's very clever and talented.

古文：初为幢将，领禁兵。
现代文：起初做幢将，统领宫中军队。
English: At first he was a general, commanding the troops in the palace.

古文：太祖之征慕容宝也，宝夜来犯营，军人惊骇。
现代文：左担征伐蔓容宣，摹容宣夜晚前来偷袭军营，军人惊慌害怕。
English: The left-hand side of the army was led by General Yong Xuan, and the right-hand side was led by General Yong Xuan, who came to raid the army camp at night. The soldiers panicked and were afraid.

古文：遂有亡还京师者，言官军败于柏肆，京师不安。
现代文：于是有人逃回京城，说官军在柏肆失败，京城不安定。
English: As a result, some people fled back to the capital, saying that the government army had failed in Bashi, and that the capital was unstable.

古文：南安公元顺因之欲摄国事。
现代文：南安公元顺因此想代行国事。
English: Nan'an Shun therefore wanted to act on behalf of the state.

古文：题谓顺曰： 此大事，不可轻尔，宜审待后要，不然祸将及矣。 
现代文：莫题对元顺说： 这是大事，不可以轻率，应该审慎等待以后的消息，不然祸患就要到了。 
English: Moji said to Yuan Shun, "This is an important matter, we must not be rash, and we should carefully wait for the news later, otherwise the disaster will come."

古文：顺乃止。
现代文：元顺于是作罢。
English: It was only then that Tuoba Shun gave up the idea.

古文：以功拜平远将军，赐爵扶柳公，进号左将军，改为高邑公。
现代文：莫题因军功被任命为乎远将军，赐爵位为扶柳公，升军号为左将军，改为高邑公。
English: Because of his military exploits, Mo Qi was appointed as General Huyuan, given the title of Lord Fuyu, promoted to General Zuo, and changed to Lord Gaoyu.

古文：出除中山太守，督司州之山东七郡事。
现代文：外出任中山太守、督司州之山东七郡事。
English: He also served as the governor of Zhongshan and the superintendent of seven counties in Shandong Province.

古文：车驾征姚兴，次于晋阳。而上党群盗秦颇、丁零翟都等聚众于壶关，诏题帅众三千以讨之。
现代文：太祖征讨姚兴，停驻在晋阳，而上党盗贼秦颇、丁零翟都等人在壶关聚集部众，韶令莫题率领兵士三千人去讨伐他们。
English: Emperor Taizu's expedition against Yao Xing stopped in Jinyang, while the upper-class thieves Qin Po, Ding Ziyi and others gathered their followers in Kuguan and led 3,000 soldiers to fight them.

古文：上党太守捕颇，斩之。
现代文：上党太守捕住秦颇，杀了他。
English: Shang Dang Taishu captured Qin Po and killed him.

古文：都走林虑。
现代文：翟都逃到林虑。
English: The baboons all fled to the forest.

古文：诏题搜山穷讨，尽平之。
现代文：诏令莫题搜索山林全力讨伐，全部平定他们。
English: It is imperative to search the mountains and forests and make all-out efforts to subdue them.

古文：初，昭成末，太祖季父窟咄徙于长安。
现代文：当初，昭成帝末年，太祖的叔父窟咄迁徙到长安。
English: At first, in the last years of Emperor Zhao Zheng, the great-grandfather's uncle Gu Gu migrated to Chang'an.

古文：苻坚败，从慕容永东迁。
现代文：苻坚失败，窟咄随从慕容永向东迁徙。
English: After the failure of Jianjian, the caves followed the migration from Murongyong to the east.

古文：及永自立，以窟咄为新兴太守。
现代文：等到慕容永自己登位，任命窟咄为新兴太守。
English: Wait until Murong Yong himself ascends to the throne and appoints Gu as the new crown prince.

古文：登国初，刘显遣弟亢泥等迎窟咄，寇南鄙。
现代文：登国初年，刘显派遣弟弟亢坚等人迎接窟咄，侵犯南部边境。
English: In the first year after he came to China, Liu Xian sent his younger brother, Yu Jian, and others to meet Deng Xiaoping and violate the southern border.

古文：题时贰于太祖，遗箭于窟咄，谓之曰： 三岁犊岂胜重载 ？言窟咄长而太祖少也。
现代文：莫题这时对太祖有二心，送箭给窟咄，对他说 三岁小牛哪能负重 ，意思是窟咄年长而太祖年少。
English: At this time, he was ambivalent about the great-grandfather and sent an arrow to the cave, telling him that a three-year-old calf could not bear weight, meaning that the cave was older and the great-grandfather was younger.

古文：太祖既衔之。
现代文：太祖忌恨莫题。
English: The great-great-grandfather would have hated it.

古文：天赐五年，有告题居处倨傲，拟则人主。
现代文：天赐五年，有人告发莫题傲慢自大，仿照君主。
English: For five years, some people accused him of being arrogant and arrogant, like the monarch.

古文：太祖乃使人示之箭，告之曰： 三岁犊，能胜重载不？ 
现代文：太祖就派人拿箭给他看，问他说： 三岁的小牛，能不能承受重负? 
English: The grandfather sent someone to show him the arrows and asked him, "Can a three-year-old calf bear a heavy load?

古文：题奉诏，父子对泣，诘朝乃刑之。
现代文：莫题接到韶书，父子相对而哭，第二天早上就被杀。
English: After receiving the letter, the father and son cried and were killed the next morning.

古文：庾业延，代人也，后赐名岳。
现代文：庾业延，是代郡人，后来赐名为岳。
English: Gong Ye Yan, deputy county man, was later given the name Yue by the emperor.

古文：其父及兄和辰，世典畜牧。
现代文：他的父亲和哥哥和辰，世代掌管放牧。
English: His father and his brother, Kazuchika, have been in charge of cattle grazing for generations.

古文：稍转中部大人。
现代文：逐渐升为中部大人。
English: Gradually rising to middle-aged adults.

古文：昭成崩，氐寇内侮。
现代文：昭成帝逝世，氐寇侵入境内。
English: After the death of Emperor Zhaocheng, raiders invaded the territory.

古文：事难之间，收敛畜产，富拟国君。
现代文：患难的时候，集中牲畜财产，富足近似国君。
English: In times of trouble, they concentrate their livestock assets and become as rich as a sovereign.

古文：刘显谋逆，太祖外幸，和辰奉献明太后归太祖，又得其资用。
现代文：刘显谋划作乱，太祖逃到外地，和辰保护献明太后回到太祖那裹，太祖又得到他的物资帮助。
English: Liu Xian plotted to create turmoil, the great-grandfather fled to a foreign country, and returned to the great-grandfather with the protection of the Empress Dowager Xianming, and the great-grandfather received his material help.

古文：以和辰为内侍长。
现代文：任命和辰为内侍长。
English: Appointed Kazuchika as Chief Chamberlain.

古文：和辰分别公私旧畜，颇不会旨，太祖由是恨之。
现代文：和辰区分公私旧日的牲畜，很不合旨意，太祖因此怨恨他。
English: The old-fashioned distinction between private and public life did not suit Tatsu, and he was resented by his great-grandfather.

古文：岳独恭慎修谨，善处危难之间，太祖喜之。
现代文：庾岳独自恭敬慎重修饬严谨，善于处在危难之中，太祖喜爱他。
English: Gongyue alone is respectful, prudent, and rigorous, and is good at being in danger. Grandfather loves him.

古文：与王建等俱为外朝大人，参预军国。
现代文：和王建等人都为外朝大人，参预军国大事的谋划。
English: He and Wang Jian and others all served as foreign dignitaries and participated in the pre-military national events.

古文：太祖既绝慕容垂，以岳为大人，使诣慕容永。
现代文：太祖和慕容垂断绝关系，任命庾岳为大人，派他出使慕容永。
English: The great-grandfather severed ties with Murong, appointed Gongyue as the adult, and sent him as an envoy to Murongyong.

古文：永服其辞义。
现代文：慕容永佩服庾岳的言辞义理。
English: Murong has always admired the sincerity of Yu Yue's words.

古文：垂围永于长子，永告急求援。岳与陈留王虔以五万骑东渡河救之，次于秀容，破山胡部高车门等，徙其部落。
现代文：慕容垂在长子包围慕容永，慕容永告急求援，庾昼和陈留王：左卢率五万骑兵向东渡过董回去救助他，停驻在秀容，打败山胡部高车门等人，迁徙他的部落。
English: Murongdang surrounded Murongyong with his eldest son. Murongyong called for urgent help. At noon, Zalo led fifty thousand cavalry eastward across the Dong River to rescue him. He stopped in Xiurong, defeated Gaochimen and others in Shanhu, and moved his tribe.

古文：会永灭，乃班师。
现代文：遇慕容永灭亡，就撤军了。
English: When Murong Yong was killed, they withdrew.

古文：从平中原，拜安远将军。
现代文：跟随平定中原，被任命为安远将军。
English: Following the pacification of the Central Plains, he was named General Anyuan.

古文：官军之惊于柏肆也，贺兰部帅附力眷、纥突邻部帅匿物尼、纥奚部帅叱奴根等闻之，聚党反于阴馆。
现代文：官军在柏肆受惊，贺兰部头领附力眷、纥突邻部头领匿物尼、纥奚部头领叱奴根等人听说后，在阴馆聚集党与反叛。
English: The government army was alarmed in Paju. After hearing about this, the head of the Horan Department, Zeng Lijian, the head of the neighboring Department, Xuan Tu, and the head of the Hanzhong Department, Zhen Nugen, gathered the party and the rebels in Yinyuan.

古文：南安公元顺讨之，不克，死者数千人。
现代文：南安公元顺讨伐他们，不能攻克，死亡的有几千人。
English: Nan'an and Shun fought against them, but could not defeat them, and several thousand people died.

古文：太祖闻之，诏岳率万骑，还讨叱奴根等，殄之，百姓乃安。
现代文：太祖听说后，韶令庾岳率领一万骑兵，返回讨伐叱奴根等人，消灭他们，百姓才安定下来。
English: After the great-grandfather heard about it, he ordered Gong Yue, leading ten thousand cavalry, to return to fight against and exterminate Yanugen and others, and the people settled down.

古文：离石胡帅呼延铁、西河胡帅张崇等不乐内徙，聚党反叛。
现代文：离石胡头领呼延铁、西河胡头领张崇等人不乐意向内地迁徙，聚集党与反叛。
English: Some leaders, such as Huyan Tie, the leader of the Shi Hu, and Zhang Chong, the leader of the Xihe Hu, were unwilling to move inland and gathered the party and rebels.

古文：岳率骑三千，讨破之，斩铁擒崇，搜山穷讨，散其余党。
现代文：庾岳率领骑兵三千人，讨伐打败他们，斩杀呼延铁擒获张崇，搜索山林全力讨伐，打散他们残余的党与。
English: Gongyue led three thousand cavalry, defeated them in a crusade, killed Wuyan Tiejun and captured Zhang Chong, searched the mountains and forests for a full-scale crusade, and dispersed their remnants.

古文：以功赐爵西昌公，进号征虏将军。
现代文：因功劳获赐爵位为西昌公，升军号为征虏将军。
English: He was awarded the title of Xichang due to his meritorious service, and his promotion title was Conscript General.

古文：又讨反人张超、清河太守傅世，并破平。
现代文：又讨伐反叛的人张超、清河太守傅世，都打败他们。
English: Zhang Chao, who fought against the rebels, and Fu Shih, the governor of Qinghe, both defeated them.

古文：以岳为鄴行台。
现代文：任命庾岳为邺城行台。
English: Appointed Shigatake as the capital of Shicheng.

古文：岳为将有谋略，治军清整，常以少击多，士众服其智勇，名冠诸将。
现代文：庾岳做将领有谋略，治理军队清明严整，经常以少打多，士兵佩服他的智慧勇敢，名声在将领中最高。
English: As a general, Gongyue had a strategy, governed the army in a clear and strict manner, often played more with less, the soldiers admired his wisdom and bravery, and his reputation was the highest among generals.

古文：及罢鄴行台，以所统六郡置相州，即拜岳为刺史。
现代文：等到罢除邺城行台，以他所统的六郡设置相州，就任命庾岳为刺史。
English: When Minhangdai was abolished, the six counties that were originally under its jurisdiction were set up as Sangshu, and Gongyue was immediately appointed as Sangshi.

古文：公廉平当，百姓称之。
现代文：公道清廉平正允当，百姓称赞他。
English: The people praised him for being fair, honest, just and tolerant.

古文：旧有园池，时果初熟，丞吏送之，岳不受，曰： 果未进御，吾何得先食？ 
现代文：州中旧时有园池，当时果子刚成熟，属吏送给他，庾岳不接受，说： 果子还没送给皇上，我怎么能先吃? 
English: Once upon a time, there was a garden pond in the middle of the state. At that time, the fruit was just ripe and was given to him by a subordinate official. Yu Yue did not accept it and said, "The fruit has not yet been given to the emperor. How can I eat it first?"

古文：其谨如此。后迁司空。
现代文：他就是这样地严谨。后来迁为司空。
English: That's how strict he was. Later he moved to Skytree.

古文：岳兄子路有罪，诸父兄弟悉诛，特赦岳父子。
现代文：庾岳哥哥的儿子庾路有罪，父辈兄弟都被诛杀，特地赦免庾岳父子。
English: Gong Yue's elder brother's son, Gong Lu, was found guilty, and his father and brothers were all killed. Gong Yue's father and son were specifically pardoned.

古文：天赐四年，诏赐岳舍地于南宫，岳将家僮治之。
现代文：天赐四年，韶令在南宫赐给庾岳房地，庾岳带领家僮整治这片地。
English: For four years, by the grace of God, the imperial edict bestowed the premises of Yu Yue to the Southern Palace, and Yu Yue led the family to rectify this land.

古文：候官告岳衣服鲜丽，行止风采，拟仪人君。
现代文：候官报告庾岳衣服鲜艳美丽，行为举止仿照君主。
English: The officer-in-waiting reported that Zou Yue's clothes were bright and beautiful, and his behavior was similar to that of a monarch.

古文：太祖时既不豫，多所猜恶，遂诛之。
现代文：太祖当时已患病，多有猜疑厌恶，就杀了庾岳。
English: At that time, the great-grandfather was already ill, and many people were suspicious and disgusted, so they killed Gong Yue.

古文：时人咸冤惜焉。
现代文：当时人都为他感到冤屈惋惜。
English: At the time, everyone felt sorry for him.

古文：岳葬在代西善无之界。
现代文：庾岳被安葬在代郡西善无的疆界内。
English: Gongyue was buried within the boundaries of the county seat Xishanmou.

古文：后世祖讨赫连氏，经其墓宅，怆然动容，遂下诏为立庙，令一州之民，四时致祭。
现代文：后来世祖讨伐赫连氏，经过庾岳的墓地，悲伤动容，就下韶为庾岳立庙，命令一州的民众，四季祭祀他。
English: Later, the ancestor fought against the Khelian clan, and after passing the cemetery of Shanyue, he was saddened and moved, and ordered the people of Yizhou to worship him for four seasons.

古文：求其子孙任为将帅者，得其子陵。
现代文：寻求他任将帅的子孙，找到他的儿子庾陵。
English: Seek out the descendants of his commander-in-chief, and find his son, Huling.

古文：从征有功，听袭爵。
现代文：尘陵随从征伐有功劳，准许他继承爵位。
English: Fuling followed the emperor to go to war and made meritorious service, so he inherited his father's knighthood.

古文：路，皇始初，从征慕容宝，为城门校尉。
现代文：路，皇始初年，随从征伐慕容实，担任城门校尉。
English: Lu, in the first year of the imperial era, accompanied the conquest of Mu Rongshi and served as the captain of the city gate.

古文：迁司隶校尉。
现代文：升司隶校尉。
English: This is Captain Shouji.

古文：爵高平公而诛。
现代文：赐爵位为高平公后被诛杀
English: Princess Takahira, who was given a title of nobility, was beaten to death

古文：贺狄干，代人也。
现代文：贺狄干，是代郡人。
English: Hodeikan is a representative of the county.

古文：家本小族，世忠厚，为将以平当称。
现代文：出身于小族，世代忠诚宽厚，担任将领以公平允当闻名。
English: He came from a small clan, was loyal and generous for generations, and was known as a fair and honest general.

古文：稍迁北部大人。
现代文：逐渐升迁到北部大人。
English: Gradually moved to the north to grow up.

古文：登国初，与长孙嵩为对，明于听察，为人爱敬。
现代文：登国初年，和长孙嵩配合，善于了解下情，受人尊敬。
English: In the first year of landing in China, he cooperated with his eldest son Song, was good at understanding the situation, and was respected.

古文：太祖遣狄干致马千匹，结婚于姚长。
现代文：太祖派遣狄干送马一千匹，和姚苌结亲。
English: The great-grandfather sent Dikang to send a thousand horses, and Yao Yao became a relative.

古文：会苌死兴立，因止狄干而绝婚。
现代文：遇姚苌死而姚兴登位，于是扣留狄干而互相断绝婚姻之好。
English: When Yao Xing died and Yao Xing ascended to the throne, it was best to detain Dickan and break off the marriage.

古文：兴弟平率众寇平阳，太祖讨平之，擒其将狄伯支、唐小方等三十余人。
现代文：姚兴的弟弟姚平率领部众侵犯平阳，太祖讨伐平定他，擒获他的将领狄伯支、唐小方等四十多人。
English: Yao Xing's younger brother, Yao Ping, led the troops to invade Pingyang. Emperor Taizu fought to pacify him and captured his generals, Di Bo Zhi, Tang Xiaofang, and more than forty others.

古文：天赐中，诏北新侯安同送唐小方于长安。
现代文：天赐年间，诏令北新侯安同护送唐小方到长安。
English: During the providential year, he ordered Bei Xin Hou An to escort Tang Xiaofang to Chang'an.

古文：后蠕蠕社仑与兴和亲，送马八千匹。
现代文：后来蠕蠕社蝓同姚兴和好结亲，送给马八千匹。
English: Later, the Crome Crome Society made peace with Yao Xing and gave him eight thousand horses.

古文：始济河，赫连屈子忿兴与国交好，乃叛兴，邀留社仑马。
现代文：刚渡黄河，赫连屈孑气愤姚兴同代国结交和好，就背叛姚兴，拦截下社蝓的马匹。
English: Just after crossing the Yellow River, He Lianqian became angry with Yao Xing for making peace with his contemporary country. He betrayed Yao Xing and intercepted Yao Xing's horses.

古文：兴乃遣使，请以骏马千匹赎伯支而遣狄干还。
现代文：姚兴于是派遣使者，请求用骏马一千匹赎回伯支而送狄干返回。
English: Yao Xing then sent an envoy to request that a thousand horses be used to ransom Bo Zhi and send Dickan back.

古文：太祖意在离间二寇，于是许之。
现代文：太祖意图在离间两个敌寇，于是答应了姚兴。
English: The great-grandfather intended to drive a wedge between the two enemy raiders, so he agreed to Yao Xing.

古文：狄干在长安幽闭，因习读书史，通《论语》、《尚书》诸经，举止风流，有似儒者。
现代文：狄干在长安被囚禁，因而阅读图书史籍，贯通《论语》、《尚书》各经，举止言谈，如同儒生。
English: Dikang was imprisoned in Chang'an, so he read books and history books, read through the Analects of Confucius and the Classic of Confucianism, and spoke and behaved like a Confucian.

古文：初，太祖普封功臣，狄干虽为姚兴所留，遥赐爵襄武侯，加秦兵将军。
现代文：起初，太祖普遍封授功臣，狄干虽被姚兴扣留，遥赐爵位为襄武侯，加授秦兵将军。
English: At first, great-grandfathers generally conferred honorary titles on meritorious vassals. Although Dickan was detained by Yao Xing, Yao conferred the title of Prince of Xiangwu, as well as the title of General of Qin.

古文：及狄干至，太祖见其言语衣服，有类羌俗，以为慕而习之，故忿焉，既而杀之。
现代文：等狄于归来，太祖见到他的言谈服饰，同羌人风俗相似，以为他羡慕而学习羌人，所以心中气愤，不久杀了他。
English: Upon Di's return, the great-grandfather saw that Di's speech, dress, and customs were similar to those of the Xiongnu, and thought that he was learning from the Xiongnu out of envy, so he was enraged and soon killed him.

古文：弟归，亦刚直方雅。
现代文：弟弟贺归，也刚烈正直端方儒雅。
English: His younger brother, He Gui, is also a tough and honest man with a gentle demeanor.

古文：与狄干俱死。
现代文：和狄干一起死去。
English: To die with Dickon.

古文：李栗，雁门人也。
现代文：李栗，是雁门人。
English: Li Kuri is a native of the Wild Goose Gate.

古文：昭成时，父祖入国。
现代文：昭成帝时，父亲祖父进入代国。
English: At the time of Emperor Akechi, my father's grandfather entered the country as a regent.

古文：少辩捷，有才能，兼有将略。
现代文：年轻时善辩敏捷，有才能，兼有军事谋略。
English: When he was young, he was a quick debater, talented, and a military strategist.

古文：初随太祖幸贺兰部，在元从二十一人中。
现代文：起初跟随太祖前往贺兰部，在最先随从的二十一人之中。
English: At first, he followed his great-grandfather to Horanbe, and was among the first twenty-one to follow him.

古文：太祖爱其艺能。
现代文：太祖喜爱他的技艺才能。
English: His great-grandfather loved his talent.

古文：时王业草创，爪牙心腹，多任亲近，唯栗一介远寄，兼非戚旧，当世荣之。
现代文：当时君王大业初创，武臣心腹，多任用亲近的人，惟独李垩一人远来归附，加上不是亲戚旧臣，当时人认为他很荣耀。
English: At that time, the king's great undertaking was in its infancy, the vassal was a confidant, and many people close to him were appointed, but Li Xi was the only one who came from afar to attach, plus he was not a relative of the old minister. At that time, people thought he was very honorable.

古文：数有战功，拜左军将军。
现代文：多次立有战功。被任命为左军将军。
English: He distinguished himself in battle many times. He was appointed General of the Left Army.

古文：太祖征慕容宝，栗督五万骑为前驱，军之所至，莫不降下。
现代文：太祖征伐慕容宝，李栗统领五万骑兵充当前锋，军队所到之处，无不投降。
English: The great-grandfather conquered Murongbao, and Li Rong led fifty thousand cavalry as the vanguard. Wherever the army went, they surrendered.

古文：迁左将军。
现代文：升为左将军。
English: He was transferred to the position of General of the Left.

古文：慕容宝弃中山东走也，栗以轻骑追之，不及而还。
现代文：慕容宣放弃土山向东逃跑，奎垩率领轻装骑兵追赶他，没有赶上而返回。
English: Murong Xuan abandoned the hills and fled to the east. Qui Xuan led the light cavalry to chase him, but did not catch up and returned.

古文：栗性简慢，矜宠，不率礼度，每在太祖前舒放倨傲，不自祗肃，咳唾任情。
现代文：李栗性格怠慢，仗恃宠信，不遵循礼法，时常在左担面前放肆无礼，不恭敬严肃，随意谈论。
English: Li Li's character is negligent, favors favoritism, does not follow etiquette, is often impudent and rude in front of the left shoulder, is not respectful and serious, and talks freely.

古文：太祖积其宿过，天兴三年遂诛之。
现代文：左担累积他往日的过失，天兴三年就诛杀了他。
English: The left-hander accumulated his past mistakes, and Tianxing killed him three years later.

古文：于是威严始厉，制勒群下尽卑谦之礼，自栗始也。
现代文：于是开始讲威严，制定臣下完备行用谦卑的礼节，是从李栗开的头。
English: So he began to speak of majesty and to establish the etiquette of complete reserve and humility among his subjects, starting with Li Li.

古文：刘洁，长乐信都人也。
现代文：刘洁，是长乐信都人。
English: As a result, there were many complaints and dissatisfied remarks, and his family appealed that Gu Yao used witch hazel at home to curse the imperial court.

古文：祖父生，颇解卜筮。
现代文：祖父刘生，很懂得卜筮。
English: His grandfather, Liu Sheng, was very knowledgeable about divination.

古文：昭成时，慕容氏来献女，为公主家臣，仍随入朝。
现代文：昭成帝时，慕容氏前来奉献女儿，刘生是公主家臣，跟随公主入朝。
English: At the time of Emperor Akechi, the Murong clan came to dedicate their daughter, and Liu Sheng, a vassal of the princess, followed the princess into the imperial court.

古文：赐以妻，生子。
现代文：昭成帝赐给他妻子，生下儿子。
English: Emperor Akechi gave him a wife, who gave birth to a son.

古文：父提，太祖时，官至乐陵太守，赐爵信都男。
现代文：刘洁的父亲刘提，太祖时，职位到乐陵太守，赐爵位为信都男。
English: Liu Jie's father, Liu Ti, when he was the great-grandfather, was appointed to the position of Le Ling Dazhu, and was given a peerage for being a man of letters.

古文：卒。
现代文：去世。
English: To die.

古文：洁性强力多智，数从征讨有功，进爵会稽公。
现代文：刘洁天性力量强智谋多，多次随从征伐有功劳，升爵位为会稽公。
English: Liu Jie had a strong intelligence and a lot of natural strength. He had the merit of following the conquest for many times, and was promoted to the peerage as the auditor of the association.

古文：河西胡张外、建兴王绍等聚党为逆，洁与永安侯魏勤率众三千人，屯于西河以镇抚之。
现代文：河西胡张外、建兴人王绍等聚集党羽作乱，刘洁和永安侯魏勤率领部众三干人，驻守在西河来镇守安抚他们。
English: Hu Zhangwei of Hexi and Wang Shao of Jianxing gathered their followers to make trouble. Liu Jie and Yongan Hou Weiqin led the three leading cadres and stationed themselves in Xihe to guard and pacify them.

古文：又与勤及功劳将军元屈等击吐京叛胡。
现代文：又和魏勤以及功劳将军元屈等人攻打吐京叛变的胡人。
English: In addition, he and Wei Qin and the meritorious general Yuan Qu and others attacked the Hu people who rebelled against Beijing.

古文：时离石胡出以眷引屈丐骑，断截山岭邀洁。洁失马，登山力战，矢刃俱尽，为胡所执，送诣屈丐。
现代文：这时离石胡出以眷勾引屈丐的骑兵，截断山岭拦击刘洁，刘洁失去马匹，登山拼力作战，弓箭刀刃用尽，被胡人抓住，送到屈丐那裹。
English: At this time, Shi Hu went out to seduce Qu Gao's cavalry as soon as possible, cut off the mountains to stop Liu Jie, Liu Jie lost his horses, fought hard on the mountain, exhausted his bow and arrow blades, and was caught by Hu people and sent to Qu Gao.

古文：洁声气不挠，呼其字而与之言，神色自若。
现代文：刘洁声音不屈不挠，屈丐呼唤他的字同他说话，他神色自若。
English: Liu Jie was unyielding, calling out the name of Kherian Kugai and talking to him, looking confident.

古文：屈丐壮而释之。
现代文：屈丐认为他壮烈而释放了他。
English: The beggars released him for his bravery.

古文：后得还国，典东部事。
现代文：后来得以回国，掌管东部事务。
English: Later, he was able to return to China and was put in charge of various affairs in the East.

古文：太宗寝疾，世祖监国，洁与古弼等选侍东宫，对综机要，敷奏百揆。
现代文：太宗患病，世祖代行国事，刘洁和古弼等人被挑选在束宫侍奉，一起处理机要事务，上奏百官情形。
English: The Emperor Taizong fell ill, the founder of the dynasty carried out state affairs on his behalf, and Liu Jie and Gu Xi and others were selected to serve at the Palace of the Grand Cordon, working together to deal with important matters and report on the situation of hundreds of officials.

古文：世祖即位，以告反者，又献直言，所在合旨，奇其有柱石之用，委以大任。
现代文：世祖即位，因告发谋反者，又进献正直言论，均合旨意，世祖惊异他有柱石般的作用，交给他重大责任。
English: When the patriarch ascended to the throne, he was surprised by the fact that he had a pillar-like role and was given a great responsibility because he reported the plotters to the emperor and offered honest speech that was in accordance with the emperor's will.

古文：及议军国，朝臣咸推其能。
现代文：等到议论军队国家大事，朝臣都推重他的才能。
English: When it came to discussing military and national affairs, courtiers all emphasized his talent.

古文：于是超迁尚书令，改为钜鹿公。
现代文：于是越级升任尚书令，改封为钜鹿公。
English: As a result, he was promoted to the rank of Shang Shuling, and his title was changed to Elk King.

古文：世祖破蠕蠕大檀于云中。洁言于世祖曰： 大檀恃众，虽破胆奔北，恐不惧往败，将复送死。
现代文：世祖在昼空打败蠕蠕大檀于，刘洁对世担说： 太檀仗恃人多，虽然逃跑，恐怕不畏惧往日的失败，还要前来送死。
English: Liu Jie said to the world leader: There are many people who are too afraid to fight, and although they run away, I am afraid that they will not be afraid of past failures, but will come to die.

古文：请收田讫，复一大举，东西并进，为二道讨之。 
现代文：请求在收割以后，再次大举出兵，东西一并进发，以两路讨伐他。 
English: He requested that after the harvest, the troops should be sent out again in a big way, and the east and west should advance together to fight him in two ways.

古文：世祖然其言。
现代文：世祖认为他的话对。
English: The patriarch thought he was right.

古文：后大议征讨，洁言宜先平冯跋，世祖不从。
现代文：后来大议征讨，刘洁说应先平定冯跋，世祖不听从。
English: Later, there was a big discussion about the requisition. Liu Jie said that Feng Biao should be pacified first, but Shizuo did not listen.

古文：敕勒新民以将吏侵夺，咸出怨言，期牛马饱草，当赴漠北。
现代文：敦勤新归附的民众因将领官吏侵夺，都发出怨言，期待牛马在水草丰足后，将赶往沙漠北面。
English: The newly annexed people of Dunqin have all complained about the encroachment of generals and officials, expecting that the cattle and horses will rush to the north of the desert after the water and grass are plentiful.

古文：洁与左仆射安原奏，欲及河冰未解，徙之河西，冰解之后，不得北遁。
现代文：刘洁和左仆射安原上奏，想趁萤回冰块没消融，把这些人迁到黄河西面，冰块消融以后，就不能向北逃跑。
English: Liu Jie and his second-in-command shot up the Andes, hoping to take advantage of the fact that the ice had not melted and move these people to the west side of the Yellow River. After the ice had melted, they could not escape to the north.

古文：世祖曰： 不然。
现代文：世祖说： 不对。
English: The patriarch said, "That's not right."

古文：此等习俗，放散日久，有似园中之鹿，急则冲突，缓之则定。
现代文：这些人的习俗，放散的时间长久，如同园中的鹿，情况紧急就冲撞奔跑，舒缓就安定。
English: The custom of these people is to take a long time to disperse, just like the deer in the park. When the situation is urgent, they will run, and when it is calm, they will be stable.

古文：吾自处之有道，不烦徙也。 
现代文：我自有处理的办法，不需要迁徙。 
English: I have my own way of dealing with it, I don't need to move.

古文：洁等固执，乃听分徙三万余落于河西，西至白盐池。
现代文：刘洁等人坚持己见，于是准许迁徙三万多家到黄河以西，西到白盐池。
English: Liu Jie and others persisted in their views, and allowed more than 30,000 people to migrate to the west of the Yellow River, west to Baiyanchi.

古文：新民惊骇，皆曰 圈我于河西之中，是将杀我也 ，欲西走凉州。
现代文：新归附的民众震惊诧异，都说 把我围在黄河以西，是将要杀我 ，想向西逃到凉州。
English: The newly annexed people were shocked and surprised. They all said that they had surrounded me west of the Yellow River, that they were going to kill me, and that they wanted to flee west to Liangzhou.

古文：洁与侍中古弼屯五原河北，左仆射安原屯悦拔城北，备之。
现代文：刘洁和侍中古弼驻守在五原黄河北岸，左仆射安原驻守在悦拔城北面，防备他们。
English: Liu Jie and his second-in-command Gu Yao were stationed on the north bank of the Yellow River in Wuhuan, and his left-hand man, Sha'an Yuan, was stationed on the north side of Yuepajiang to guard against them.

古文：既而新民数千骑北走，洁追讨之。
现代文：不久新归附的民众几千人马向北逃跑，刘洁追击讨伐他们。
English: Soon, thousands of newly-annexed people fled to the north, and Liu Jie pursued and fought them.

古文：走者粮绝，相枕而死。
现代文：逃跑的人粮食吃光，互相枕靠而死去。
English: Those who fled ran out of food and died on each other's necks.

古文：时南州大水，百姓阻饥。
现代文：当时南方州郡发生大水灾，百姓挨饿。
English: At that time, a major flood occurred in Nanfangzhou County, and the people were starving.

古文：洁奏曰： 臣闻天地至公，故万物咸育；帝王无私，而黎民戴赖。
现代文：刘洁上奏说： 臣下听说天地最公正，所以万物都生长；帝王没有私心，而民众拥戴仰赖。
English: Liu Jie said in his report: His subjects heard that heaven and earth are the most just, so everything grows; the emperor has no selfishness, and the people support and rely on him.

古文：伏惟陛下以神武之姿，绍重光之绪，恢隆大业，育济群生。
现代文：陛下以神明英武的资质，继承世代的统绪，恢宏大业，养育救助百姓。
English: His Majesty, with the qualifications of a divine warrior, inherits the unity of generations, carries out a grand cause, and nurtures and rescues the people.

古文：威之所振，无思不服，泽之所洽，无远不怀，太平之治，于是而在。
现代文：声威所震撼，没有谁人不信服，恩泽所沾润，没有哪裹不怀念，太平的治理，就在这时。
English: Shaken by the voice of authority, no one is unconvinced, touched by grace, there is nothing not to miss, the governance of peace, just at this time.

古文：自顷边寇内侵，戎车屡驾，天资圣明，所在克殄。
现代文：近来边境贼寇向内侵犯，战车接连出动，陛下天赋英明，各处攻克取胜。
English: Lately, the border bandits have been encroaching inwards, chariots have been dispatched one after another, and His Majesty has been gifted with wisdom, conquering and winning everywhere.

古文：方难既平，皆蒙酬锡，勋高者受爵，功卑者获赏，宠赐优崇，有过古义。
现代文：患难平定后，都受到报答，功勋高的受爵位，劳绩低的获赏赐，宠信赐予优厚，超过古代制度。
English: After the hardships were settled, they were all rewarded. Those with high meritorious deeds were given knighthoods, those with low meritorious deeds were rewarded, and those with favored letters were given preferential treatment, surpassing the ancient system.

古文：而郡国之民，虽不征讨，服勤农桑，以供军国，实经世之大本，府库之所资。
现代文：然而郡国的民众，虽然不征讨，但是勤恳从事农业，来供给军队国家，实在是治理社会的根本，府库的依赖。
English: Nowadays, the war has calmed down, and the meritorious generals have also been rewarded. Although the people of various states and counties and the country have not personally gone out to fight, they have been diligently farming and raising silkworms to supply the needs of the country and the army. It is really the foundation of governing the country, and it is also an important source of the national treasury salary.

古文：自山以东，偏遇水害，频年不收，就食他所。
现代文：从太行山以束，独受水灾，接连几年不丰收，到其他地方谋食。
English: From Taihang Mountain to Izuka, they suffered from floods and poor harvests for several years in a row, and went to other places to find food.

古文：臣闻率土之滨，莫非王臣，应加哀矜，以鸿覆育。
现代文：臣下听说疆域之内，无人不是君王的臣属，应该加以哀怜，来扩大他们的生路。
English: The vassals heard that there was no one in the realm who was not a vassal of the king, and that they should be pitied in order to enlarge their livelihood.

古文：今南摧强寇，西败丑虏，四海晏如，人神协暢，若与兆民共飨其福，则惠感和气，苍生悦乐矣。 
现代文：现在向南打败强大的敌寇，向西打败罪恶的贼虏，四海平安，入神协和，陛下如和百姓同享这个福佑，就能恩惠感应和顺之气，百姓喜悦安乐了。 
English: Now to the south defeat the powerful enemy, to the west defeat the evil thief, to the four seas peace, to God's harmony, if His Majesty and the people share this blessing, they will be able to feel the grace and harmony, and the people will be happy and at ease.

古文：世祖从之，于是复天下一岁租赋。
现代文：世祖听从他的建议，于是免除天下一年的租赋。
English: The patriarch followed his advice and waived a year's rent.

古文：洁与乐平王丕督诸军取上邽。
现代文：刘洁和乐平王元丕统领各军攻取上邦。
English: Liu Jie and Leping Wang Yuanjun led the armies to conquer Shangguo.

古文：军至启阳，百姓争致牛洒。
现代文：军队到达启阳，百姓争相送上牛和酒。
English: When the troops arrived in Qiyang, the people rushed to send them cattle and wine.

古文：洁至上邽，诸将咸欲斩其豪帅以示王威，洁不听。
现代文：刘洁到达上邽，各将领都想杀死他们的魁首来显示国家的威风，型迁不听从。
English: When Liu Jie arrived in Shangguan, all the generals wanted to kill their leader to show the power of the country, but the emperor would not listen.

古文：抚慰秦陇，秋毫无犯，人皆安业。
现代文：安抚慰问秦岭陇山一带民众，秋毫无犯，人们都安居乐业。
English: Reassure and comfort the people in the Lushan area of Qinling, there will be no crime in the autumn, and people will live and work in peace.

古文：世祖将发陇右骑卒东伐高丽。
现代文：世祖将要调发陇以西的骑兵向东征伐高丽。
English: The ancestor will send the cavalry from the west to the east to invade Korea.

古文：洁进曰： 陇土新民，始染大化，宜赐优复以饶之。
现代文：刘洁进言说： 陇山地区新归附的民众，刚受教化的引导，应该给予优待免税来使他们富饶充足。
English: Liu Jie further said: The newly annexed people in Lushan District, who have just been guided by indoctrination, should be given preferential treatment and tax exemption to make them rich and sufficient.

古文：兵马足食，然后可用。 
现代文：兵马食物充足，然后可以使用。 
English: There is enough food for the soldiers and horses, and then they can be used.

古文：世祖深纳之。
现代文：世担深深地听取了他的意见。
English: The Council listened carefully to his views.

古文：车驾西伐，洁为前锋。
现代文：世祖向西征伐，玺膣担任前锋。
English: Soon, a large army was conquering the herdsmen in the western part of the country, with Liu Jie leading the way.

古文：沮渠牧犍弟董来率万余人拒战于城南。
现代文：担缓牧犍的弟弟董来率领一万多人在城南抗拒。
English: More than ten thousand people in the south of the city resisted, led by Dong Lai, the younger brother of the herdsman.

古文：洁信卜者之言，日辰不协，击鼓却陈，故后军不进，董来得入城。
现代文：刘洁相信占卜者的话，认为时间不合，击鼓退兵，所以后面的军队不前进，董来得以进城。
English: Liu Jie believed the words of the fortuneteller, thought that the time was not right, beat the drum and withdrew, so the army behind did not advance, and Dong Lai was able to enter the city.

古文：世祖微嫌之。
现代文：世祖对他略有嫌隙。
English: The patriarch had a slight grudge against him.

古文：后洁与建宁王崇督诸军，于三城胡部中简兵六千，将以戍姑臧。
现代文：后来刘洁和建宁王元崇统领各军，在三城胡部落中挑选兵士六千人，将用他们戍守姑臧。
English: Later, Liu Jie and Jianning Wangyuan Chong led the armies and selected six thousand soldiers from the Sancheng Hu tribe, who would be used to defend Guzheng.

古文：胡不从命，千余人叛走。
现代文：胡人不听从命令，一千多人背叛逃跑。
English: The Huts did not obey the order, and more than a thousand people defected and fled.

古文：洁与崇击诛之，虏男女数千人。
现代文：刘洁和元崇攻打诛杀他们，俘获男女老少几千人。
English: Liu Jie and Yuan Chong attacked and killed them, capturing thousands of men, women and children.

古文：洁朝夕在枢密，深见委任，性既刚直，恃宠自专。
现代文：刘洁早晚在枢密机构，很受信任，性格刚烈正直，仗恃宠信专权。
English: Liu Jie is always in a confidential organization, is very trusted, has a strong and honest personality, and is favored with exclusive power.

古文：世祖心稍不平。
现代文：世祖心中逐渐不满。
English: The patriarch gradually became dissatisfied.

古文：时议伐蠕蠕，洁意不欲，言于世祖曰： 虏非有邑居，迁徙无常，前来出军，无所擒获，不如广农积谷，以待其来。 
现代文：当时议论讨伐蠕蠕，刘洁心中不想出兵，对世祖说： 贼寇没有固定住处，迁徙没有常规，近来出兵，没有擒获，不如大力从事农业积蓄谷粟，来等待将来的时机。 
English: At that time, there was talk of a crusade against the Cormorants. Liu Jie did not want to send troops in his heart, and said to Shizu: Thieves and robbers do not have a fixed place to live, there is no regular migration, recently sent troops, there is no capture, it is better to vigorously engage in agricultural accumulation of millet, to wait for the future opportunity.

古文：群臣皆从其议。
现代文：群臣都顺从他的议论。
English: The courtiers obeyed his words.

古文：世祖决行，乃问于崔浩，浩固言可伐。
现代文：世祖决意出兵，就询问崔浩，崔浩坚决地说可以征伐。
English: When the ancestor decided to send troops, he asked Cui Hao. Cui Hao resolutely said that they could go to war.

古文：世祖从浩议。
现代文：世祖听从崔浩的议论。
English: The patriarch accepted Choi Ho's suggestion.

古文：既出，与诸将期会鹿浑谷。
现代文：出兵后，世祖和各将领约定在鹿浑谷会合。
English: When leaving for the campaign, the emperor and the generals agreed on a date to meet in Shuhun Valley.

古文：而洁恨其计不用，欲沮诸将，乃矫诏更期，故诸将不至。
现代文：而刘洁遣憾自己的计策不被采用，想阻止各将领，就假称韶令更改日期，所以各将领没赶到。
English: However, Liu Jie regretted that his strategy was not adopted. In order to prevent the generals, he pretended to change the date of the imperial order, so the generals did not arrive in time.

古文：时虏众大乱，恭宗欲击之，洁执不可，语在《帝纪》。
现代文：当时贼寇部众大乱，恭宗想攻打他们，刘洁坚持认为不可以，记载在《世祖纪》。
English: At that time, there was a great disturbance among the thieves and robbers, and Gongzong wanted to attack them, but Liu Jie insisted that it was not possible, as recorded in the "Ancestral Chronicle."

古文：停鹿浑谷六日，诸将犹不进。
现代文：在鹿浑谷停留六天，各将领还未会集。
English: After a six-day stay in Deer Valley, the generals have yet to meet.

古文：贼已远遁，追至石水，不及而还。
现代文：贼寇已经逃远，追赶到石水，没有赶上而返回。
English: The bandits had already fled far away, chased them to Shisui, but did not catch them and returned.

古文：师次漠中，粮尽，士卒多死。
现代文：军队停驻在沙漠中，粮食吃光，兵士多有死亡的。
English: The troops arrived in the middle of the desert, food had run out, and many soldiers had died.

古文：洁阴使人惊军，劝世祖弃军轻还，世祖不从。
现代文：刘洁暗中派人惊扰军队，劝说世祖放弃大军轻装返回，世祖不听从。
English: Liu Jie secretly sent someone to disturb the army and persuade Shizu to abandon the large army and return lightly, but Shizu did not listen.

古文：洁以军行无功，奏归罪于崔浩。
现代文：刘洁因军队出动没有功绩，上奏把罪过归到崔浩身上。
English: Liu Jie reported to the emperor the reason for the failure of this military expedition, and attributed the crime to Cui Hao.

古文：世祖曰： 诸将后期，及贼不击，罪在诸将，岂在于浩？ 
现代文：世祖说： 各将领延误期限，赶上贼寇不攻打，罪过在各将领，哪在于崔浩身上? 
English: The ancestor said: The generals delayed the deadline, caught up with the bandits and did not attack. The crime lies with the generals. What lies with Cui Hao?

古文：浩又言洁矫诏，事遂发。
现代文：崔浩又说刘洁假称韶令，事情于是泄露。
English: Cui Hao also said that Liu Jie falsely claimed to be a royal order, and the matter was leaked.

古文：舆驾至五原，收洁幽之。
现代文：世祖到达五原，逮捕刘洁囚禁他。
English: The patriarch arrived at Wuhuan, arrested Liu Jie and imprisoned him.

古文：世祖之征也，洁私谓亲人曰： 若军出无功，车驾不返者，吾当立乐平王。 
现代文：世祖出征时，刘洁私下对亲近的人说： 如果军队出动没有功劳，皇上不能返回，我将拥立乐平王。 
English: When the founder of the dynasty went to war, Liu Jie privately said to those close to him: "If there is no merit in the army's departure and the emperor cannot return, I will support King Leping.

古文：洁又使右丞张嵩求图谶，问： 刘氏应王，继国家后，我审有名姓否？ 
现代文：刘洁又派右丞张嵩求取图录谶纬，询问说： 刘氏应该统治天下，继这个国家以后，确有我的姓名吗? 
English: Liu Jie also sent his right-hand man, Zhang Song, to ask for a copy of the map, asking: "Should the Liu clan rule the world, after this country, does my name really exist?

古文：嵩对曰： 有姓而无名。 
现代文：张嵩回答说： 有姓而没有名。 
English: Zhang Song replied, "He has a surname but no name."

古文：穷治款引，搜嵩家，果得谶书。
现代文：竭力审查得到招认，搜查张嵩的家，果然找到谶书。
English: After strenuous efforts, the examination was admitted, and Zhang Song's home was searched, and the forged document was found.

古文：洁与南康公狄邻及嵩等，皆夷三族，死者百余人。
现代文：刘洁和南康公狄邻以及张嵩等人，都被夷灭三族，死亡的有一百人。
English: Liu Jie and Nankang Gong Di's neighbors, as well as Zhang Song and others, were all exterminated from the three ethnic groups, and one hundred people died.

古文：洁既居势要，擅作威福，诸阿附者登进，忤恨者黜免，内外惮之，侧目而视。
现代文：刘洁处于权势显要位置，擅自作威作福，所有阿谀顺从的升官，逮背他意愿的免职，内外的人畏惧他，斜着眼睛看他。
English: Liu Jie is in a prominent position of power and influence. He is arrogant and self-serving. He is promoted by all the flatterers and dismissed against his will. People at home and abroad are afraid of him and look at him askance.

古文：拔城破国者，聚敛财货，与洁分之。
现代文：攻下城池打败敌国的，聚敛财货，和刘洁瓜分。
English: Capture the city, defeat the enemy country, accumulate wealth and goods, and divide it with Liu Jie.

古文：籍其家产，财盈巨万。
现代文：没收他的家产，财富巨万。
English: Confiscate his family's property, they have a huge amount of wealth.

古文：世祖追忿，言则切齿。
现代文：世祖回想起来就怨恨，谈论起来就咬牙切齿。
English: The ancestors of the world are resentful when they recall, and gnash their teeth when they talk about it.

古文：古弼，代人也。
现代文：古弼，是代郡人。
English: Gushan is the county seat.

古文：少忠谨，好读书，又善骑射。
现代文：年轻时忠诚谨慎，喜爱读书，又善于骑马射箭。
English: When he was young, he was loyal and cautious, loved to read, and was good at horseback riding and archery.

古文：初为猎郎，使长安，称旨，转门下奏事，以敏正著称。
现代文：起初为猎郎，出使长安，符合旨意，改任门下奏事，以敏捷正直闻名。
English: At first he was a huntsman, sent to Chang'an, and in accordance with the will, he was reassigned to a subordinate post, known for his agility and honesty.

古文：太宗嘉之，赐名曰笔，取其直而有用；后改名弼，言其辅佐材也。
现代文：太宗赞许他，赐名为笔，采用正直而有作用的意思，后来改名为弼，说他有辅佐的才能。
English: Emperor Taizong praised him and gave him the name Pen, meaning honest and effective, and later changed his name to Gong, saying that he had the ability to assist.

古文：令弼典西部，与刘洁等分绾机要，敷奏百揆。
现代文：命令古弼掌管西部，和刘洁等人共同处理机要事务，上奏百官情形。
English: He ordered Gu Zheng to take charge of the western region, and to work with Liu Jie and others to deal with important matters, and to report the situation of hundreds of officials.

古文：世祖即位，以功拜立节将军，赐爵灵寿侯。
现代文：世祖即位，因功劳被任命为立节将军，赐爵位为灵寿侯。
English: The founder ascended to the throne, was appointed as the general of the festival for his merits, and was given the title of prince of Lingshou.

古文：征并州叛胡。
现代文：征伐并州反叛的胡人。
English: The Hu people, who rebelled against annexation, were subjugated.

古文：还，进为侍中、吏部尚书，典南部奏事。
现代文：返回，升为侍中、吏部尚书，掌管南部奏事。
English: He returned and was promoted to the position of chamberlain and secretary of the personnel department, and was in charge of the southern affairs.

古文：与安原降东部高车于已尼陂。
现代文：和安原在巳尼陂降伏东部高车。
English: And Yasuhara surrenders the Eastern Highlands at the time of Niimi.

古文：又与刘洁屯五原河北，以备叛民。
现代文：又和刘洁驻守五原黄河北岸，来防备叛变的人。
English: He and Liu Jie also stationed themselves on the north bank of the Yellow River in Wuhuan to guard against mutineers.

古文：拜安西将军，从征赫连定。
现代文：被任命为安西将军，随从征伐赫连定。
English: He was appointed as the general of Anxi and accompanied the conquest of He Lianding.

古文：驾至平凉，次于泾南。
现代文：世祖到达平凉，停驻在泾水南。
English: The ancestor arrived in Pingliang and stayed in the south of Surabaya.

古文：遣弼与侍中张黎击平凉。
现代文：派遣古弼和侍中张黎攻打平凉。
English: He dispatched Gu Xi and Zhang Li to attack Pingliang.

古文：赫连定自安定率步骑二万来救，与弼等相遇。弼伪退以诱之。
现代文：赫连定从安定率领步兵骑兵二万人前来救援，和古弼等人相遇，古弼假装后退来引诱他。
English: He Lianding led 20,000 infantry and cavalry from Ding'an to come to the rescue, and met Gu Yao and others. Gu Yao lured him by pretending to retreat.

古文：世祖使高车敕勒驰击定，斩首数千级。
现代文：世祖派高车敕勒飞奔攻打赫连定，斩首几千级。
English: The ancestor sent Gao Che Xule to rush to attack He Lianding, beheading several thousand.

古文：弼乘胜取安定。
现代文：古弼乘胜攻取安定。
English: Gushan takes advantage of victory to gain stability.

古文：又与永昌王健等讨冯文通。
现代文：又和永昌王元健等人讨伐冯文通。
English: He also fought with Yongchang Wang Yuanjian and others against Feng Wentong.

古文：文通婴城固守，弼芟其禾而还。
现代文：文通环城固守，古弼砍除他的禾稼后返回。
English: Wentsong Huancheng held fast, and Gu Yao returned after cutting off his crops.

古文：后又征文通，文通求救于高丽。
现代文：后来又征伐文通，文通向高丽求救。
English: Later, he conscripted Wentsong, and Wentsong appealed to Goryeo for help.

古文：高丽救至，文通将东奔，民多难之。
现代文：高丽救兵到来，文通将投奔东方，民众大多感到为难。
English: With the arrival of Goryeo's rescuers and the defection of the literati to the East, the majority of the people felt perplexed.

古文：其大臣古泥，因民心之不欲，遂率众攻文通，开城门以引官军。
现代文：他的大臣古垩，利用民心的不想外逃，就率领部众攻打文通，打开城门来招引官军。
English: His minister, Gu Xi, taking advantage of the people's unwillingness to flee, led his subordinates to attack Wentsong and opened the city gates to attract government troops.

古文：弼疑古泥谲诈，不入城。
现代文：古弼怀疑古坚诈伪，不进城。
English: Gu Yao suspected Gu Jian of fraud and did not enter the city.

古文：高丽军至，文通乃随之。
现代文：高丽军队到来，文通于是跟随他们。
English: When the Koryo army arrived, Wentsong followed them.

古文：文通之奔也，令妇人被甲居中，其精卒及高丽陈兵于外。
现代文：文通逃奔时，命妇女穿上钟甲处在中央，精锐的兵士和高丽排列军队在外部。
English: When the courtiers fled, the maid of honor wearing a bell armor was in the center, and the elite soldiers and the gory arrayed army were on the outside.

古文：弼部将高苟子率骑冲击贼军，弼酒醉，拔刀止之，故文通得东奔。
现代文：古弼的部将高苟子率领骑兵冲击贼寇军队，古弼喝醉酒，拔出刀来制止他，所以塞通得以向东逃奔。
English: Gutong's subordinate Gao Guo Zi led the cavalry to attack the bandit army. Gutong was drunk and pulled out a knife to stop him, so Setong was able to escape to the east.

古文：将士皆怨弼不击。
现代文：将领士兵都抱怨古周不出击。
English: The generals and soldiers all complained that Gu Zhou did not attack.

古文：世祖大怒，徵还，黜为广夏门卒。
现代文：世回大怒，征召他返回，贬为卢夏盟卫兵。
English: The world was outraged and called him back, relegating him to the guards of the Lusha League.

古文：寻复为侍中，与尚书李顺使于凉州。
现代文：不久又担任侍中，和尚书李顺出使凉州。
English: Soon he served as an attendant, and the monk Li Shun sent an envoy to Liangzhou.

古文：拜安西将军，赐爵建兴公，镇长安，甚著威名。
现代文：被任命为安西将军，赐爵位为建兴公，镇守长安，十分有威名。
English: He was appointed as the Anxi General, given a knighthood for Jian Xing Gong, the town guard of Chang'an, and was very prestigious.

古文：及议征凉州，弼与顺咸言凉州乏水草，不宜行师。
现代文：等到商议征伐凉州，古弼和李顺都说速蛆缺乏水草，不适宜出兵。
English: When it came time to discuss the requisitioning of Liangzhou, Gu Yao and Li Shun both said that Hayan lacked aquatic plants and was not suitable for dispatching troops.

古文：世祖不从。
现代文：坐旦不听从。
English: Sitting ducks don't listen.

古文：既克姑臧，微嫌之，以其有将略，故弗之责也。
现代文：攻克驻邀后，世坦对他略有嫌隙，因他有军事谋略，所以不责备他。
English: After winning the invitation to stay, the world was a little annoyed with him, because he had a military strategy, so he did not blame him.

古文：刘义隆遣将裴方明等击南秦王杨难当，难当遣使请救兵。
现代文：刘义隆派遣将领裴方明等人攻打卢台王扰难赏，凿赏派遣使者请求救援军队。
English: Liu Yilong dispatched general Pei Fangming and others to attack the King of Lutetia, and was rewarded with the reward of sending an envoy to request a rescue army.

古文：未至，难当奔上邽，方明克仇池，立杨玄庶子保炽。
现代文：没有到达，难当奔向上邦，方明攻克仇池，立杨玄庶出的儿子保炽。
English: Without arriving, it is difficult to rush to Shangpang, Fangming to conquer the enemy pool, and establish Yang Xuan's illegitimate son Baojing.

古文：于是假弼节，督陇右诸军。
现代文：于是赐给古弼符节，统领陇山以西各军。
English: Therefore, he gave Gu Xi Fu Jie the command of all the armies west of Shaoshan.

古文：义隆遣其秦州刺史胡崇之屯仇池，弼与平西将军元齐邀崇之于浊水，临阵擒之，其众走还汉中。
现代文：义隆派遣他的秦州刺史胡崇之驻守在仇池，古弼和平西将军元齐在浊水拦击崇之，在战阵中擒获了他，他的部众逃回汉中。
English: Yilong sent his Qin Zhou general Hu Chongzhi to be stationed in Qiuqi, while Gu Zheng and Western Heping general Yuan Qi intercepted Chongzhi in Surabaya and captured him in the battle. His subordinates fled back to Hanzhong.

古文：弼等从祥郊山南入，与东道将皮豹子等讨仇池，遣永安侯贺纯攻义隆，塞狭道。
现代文：古弼等人从祥郊山南面进入，和东路将领皮豹子等人讨伐仇池，派遣永安侯贺纯攻打义隆，堵塞狭窄的通道。
English: Gu Yao and others entered from the south side of the Xiangjiao Mountain, and the east road led the leather leopard and others to fight against the enemy, sending Yongan Hou Hejun to attack Yilong, blocking the narrow passage.

古文：守将姜道祖退守狭亭，诸将以山道险峻，时又雪深，用马不便，皆迟留不进。
现代文：守将姜道祖退守狭亭。各将领因山路险峻，遣时又有很深的雪，用马不方便，都停留不前进。
English: The commander, Jiang Daozu, retreated to Satei. Due to the steep mountain road and deep snow at the time of sending, it was not convenient to use horses, so the generals did not advance.

古文：弼独进军，使元主、贺纯等击狭亭，道祖南走，仇池平。
现代文：古弼独自进军，派元齐、贺纯等人攻打狭亭，道祖向南逃跑，仇池平定。
English: Gu Yao marched alone, sent Yuan Qi, He Chun and others to attack Santei, Dousu fled to the south, and Qiu Chi was pacified.

古文：未几，诸氐复推杨文德为主，围仇池。
现代文：不久，氐人又推举杨文德为头领，包围仇池。
English: Soon after, Zhu Xi selected Yang Wende as the head coach and surrounded Qiu Chi.

古文：弼发上邽、高平、汧城诸军讨之，仇池围解，文德走汉川。
现代文：古弼调发上邦、高平、讶城各军讨伐他，仇池的包围解除，文德逃到汉!
English: Gu Xi dispatched Shang Bang, Gaoping, and surprised the city's armies to fight him, the encirclement of Qiu Chi was lifted, and Wen De fled to Han!

古文：时豹子督关中诸军次于下辨，闻仇池围解，议欲还军。
现代文：。这时豹子统领关中各军停驻在下辨，听说仇池的包围解除，商议要退兵。
English: At this time, the leopards led the troops stationed in Guanzhong to argue, heard that the encirclement of Qiuchi was lifted, and discussed the withdrawal of troops.

古文：弼使谓豹子曰： 比连破贼军，恐彼君臣未体大分，耻其负败，或来报复。
现代文：古弼派人对豹子说： 近来接连打败贼军，恐怕他们君臣没有体会天命，耻于他们的失败，或许前来报复。
English: The ancient magistrate sent someone to say to the leopard, "Recently, you have been defeating the bandit army one after another. I am afraid that your lords and ministers have not experienced the fate of heaven, are ashamed of their failure, and may come to take revenge."

古文：若其班师，寇众复至，后举为难。
现代文：如果退兵，贼寇部众再到来，今后出动就困难了。
English: If the soldiers are withdrawn and the bandits come again, it will be difficult to dispatch them in the future.

古文：不如缮兵练甲，蓄力待之。
现代文：不如修治兵器练习兵法，积蓄力量等待他们。
English: It is better to repair weapons, practice the art of war, and accumulate strength to wait for them.

古文：不出秋冬，南寇必来，以逸待劳，百胜之策。 
现代文：不超出秋冬，南面敌寇必定前来，我们以逸待劳，是百战百胜的策略。 
English: Not beyond the autumn and winter, the southern invaders will certainly come, and we will work hard to wait for them, which is a winning strategy.

古文：豹子乃止。
现代文：豹子于是停止撤退。
English: The leopard skin is out of action.

古文：世祖闻之，曰： 弼之言，长策也。
现代文：世祖听说后，说： 古弼的话，是长远的策略。
English: After hearing this, the patriarch said, "The words of the ancients are a long-term strategy.

古文：制南秦，弼谋多矣。 
现代文：制服南秦，古弼的谋略足够了。 
English: To subdue the Southern Qin, Gu Yao's strategy is enough.

古文：恭宗总摄万几，徵为东宫四辅，与宜都王穆寿等并参政事。
现代文：恭宗总摄朝政，征召古弼为束宫四辅，和宜昼晅垂跶等人共同参与政事。
English: He made Gu Zong the chief regent of the dynasty, enlisted Gu Yao as the fourth assistant of the imperial court, and invited Gu Liang Zi and Gu Liang Zi to jointly participate in political affairs.

古文：诏以弼保傅东宫，有老成之勤，赐帛千匹、绵千斤。
现代文：诏书以直迩为束宫师傅，有老练成熟的辛勤，赐帛一千匹、绵一千斤。
English: According to the imperial edict, Naosuke was designated as the tutor of Sokugyo, and was awarded a thousand horses and a thousand cattles for his hard work.

古文：迁尚书令。
现代文：升为尚书令。
English: He was promoted to Shang Shuling.

古文：弼虽事务殷凑，而读书不辍，端谨慎密，口不言禁中之事，功名等于张黎而廉不及也。
现代文：古弼虽然事务繁多紧凑，而读书不停止，端方严谨慎重保密，口中不说宫中的事，功名和张黎相等而廉洁赶不上。
English: Although Gu Yao's affairs are numerous and compact, he does not stop reading, he is very careful to keep secrets, he does not talk about things in the palace, and he is not as honest as Zhang Lixiang.

古文：上谷民上书，言苑囿过度，民无田业，乞减太半，以赐贫人。
现代文：上谷民众上书，说苑囿过大，民众没有田地，乞求减少一大半，来赐给贫困的人。
English: The people of Kamitani wrote a letter saying that the garden was too large and that the people had no fields. They begged for a reduction of more than half of the land to be given to the poor.

古文：弼览见之，入欲陈奏，遇世祖与给事中刘树棋，志不听事。
现代文：古弼阅览见到遣件事，入宫要上奏，遇上世祖和给事中刘塑下棋，一心不听报告。
English: Reading the ancient book, Gu Yao saw that it was a matter of sending, and that it was necessary to play at the entrance to the palace. When he met the ancestor of the previous generation, Liu Shuo played chess and did not listen to the report.

古文：弼侍坐良久，不获申闻。
现代文：古弼侍奉坐了很久，不能得到机会报告。
English: The ancient magistrate sat for a long time, unable to get a chance to report.

古文：乃起，于世祖前捽树头，掣下床，以手搏其耳，以拳殴其背曰： 朝廷不治，实尔之罪！ 
现代文：于是起身，在世祖面前揪住室蝈的头，拉下床来，用手打他的耳朵，用拳头打他的背说： 朝廷不理事，实在是你的罪过! 
English: So he got up, put his arms around the head of Muroto in front of the patriarch, pulled him off the bed, hit his ears with his hands, and his back with his fists, saying, "It's really your fault that the court doesn't have any say!"

古文：世祖失容放棋曰： 不听奏事，实在朕躬，树何罪？
现代文：世担变脸放下棋说： 不听取奏事，实在于我本人，里塑有什么罪?
English: Shetan changed his face, put down the chess and said: I did not listen to the case, it was actually me. What is Li Shou guilty of?

古文：置之！ 
现代文：放下他! 
English: Let him go!

古文：弼具状以闻。
现代文：直弼将事情详细报告。
English: Gu Yao told the emperor about the letter written by Shangguan.

古文：世祖奇弼公直，皆可其所奏，以丐百姓。
现代文：世担惊异直迩的公正耿直，全部同意了他的上奏，将土地赐给百姓。
English: The world was astonished at the justice of Geng Zhi, and all agreed to his request to give the land to the people.

古文：弼曰： 为臣而逞其志于君前者，非无罪也。 
现代文：古弼说： 做臣下的在君主面前逞其心志，不是没有罪的。 
English: Gu Yao said: It is not without sin to be a subject of the emperor and show off one's ambition in front of him.

古文：乃诣公车，免冠徒跣，自劾请罪。
现代文：于是前往公车门，取下帽子打起赤脚，弹劾自己请求治罪。
English: So he went to the bus station, took off his hat and bare feet, and blamed himself.

古文：世祖遣使者召之。
现代文：世祖派遣使者召见他。
English: The patriarch sent a messenger to summon him.

古文：及至，世祖曰： 卿其冠履。
现代文：等他到达后，世祖说： 你戴上帽子穿起鞋子。
English: When he arrived, the patriarch said, "Put on your hat and shoes.

古文：吾闻筑社之役，蹇蹶而筑之，端冕而事之，神与之福。
现代文：我听说建筑祭祀处所的时候，跛着脚而修筑，端正帽子而敬神，神赐给他福禄。
English: I heard that when building a place of worship, he stomped his feet while building, straightened his hat while worshiping God, and God gave him a blessing.

古文：然则卿有何罪？
现代文：如此说来你有什么罪过?
English: So what's your crime?

古文：自今以后，苟利社稷，益国便民者，虽复颠沛造次，卿则为之，无所顾也。 
现代文：从今以后，如果利于社稷，有益国家便于民众，即使困顿仓促，你就尽管行事，不要有所顾虑。 
English: From now on, if it is beneficial to the society, beneficial to the country and convenient for the people, even if you are in a hurry, you can act without hesitation.

古文：世祖大阅，将校猎于河西。
现代文：世祖大阅兵，将要在黄河以西狩猎。
English: The Great Military Parade of the Ancestors of the World will be held in the west of the Yellow River.

古文：弼留守，诏以肥马给骑人，弼命给弱者。
现代文：古弼留守，韶令把肥壮的马匹给予骑乘的人，古弼命令给予瘦弱的马匹。
English: Gudrun stayed behind, and ordered the fat horses to be given to the riders, and Gudrun ordered the thin horses to be given to the horses.

古文：世祖大怒曰： 尖头奴，敢裁量朕也！
现代文：世祖大发脾气说： 尖头奴，竟敢限制我!
English: The ancestor lost his temper and said, "How dare you limit me, smartass!

古文：朕还台，先斩此奴。 
现代文：我回朝廷，首先斩杀这个奴才。 
English: When I returned to the imperial court, the first thing I did was to kill this slave.

古文：弼头尖，世祖常名之曰笔头，是以时人呼为笔公。
现代文：古弼的头尖，世祖时常称他为笔头，所以当时人叫他为笔公。
English: At the tip of the ancient skull, the ancestors often called him the pen, so at that time people called him the pen master.

古文：弼属官惶怖惧诛。
现代文：古弼的属官恐惧担心被杀。
English: Gu Xi's subordinates are afraid of being killed.

古文：弼告之曰： 吾以为事君使畋猎不适盘游，其罪小也。
现代文：古弼告诉他们说： 我以为侍奉君主使狩猎不至于娱乐游逸，罪过是小的。
English: Gudrun said to them: "I thought it was a small sin to serve the sovereign and keep the hunt from being a pleasure.

古文：不备不虞，使戎寇恣逸，其罪大也。
现代文：不防备意外，使敌寇放肆，罪过是大的。
English: It is a great sin not to be prepared for the unexpected and to allow the enemy bandits to act recklessly.

古文：今北狄孔炽，南虏未灭，狡焉之志，窥伺边境，是吾忧也。
现代文：现在北方部族很强盛，南方敌寇没消灭，狡猾的心愿，窥伺边境，是我所忧虑的。
English: Now that the North is strong and the enemies in the South are not eliminated, they are very cunning and are spying on our border, that's what worries me.

古文：故选肥马备军实，为不虞之远虑。
现代文：所以挑选肥壮马匹预备军事需要，做不测事件的长远考虑。
English: Therefore, the selection of fat horses to prepare for the military is to prevent unforeseen forethought.

古文：苟使国家有利，吾何避死乎！
现代文：如果使国家有利，我为什么逃避死亡呢!
English: Why should I run away from death if it is for the good of the country!

古文：明主可以理干，此自吾罪，非卿等之咎。 
现代文：英明的君主可以用道理劝说，这是我的罪恶，不是你们的过失。 
English: A wise prince can reason that this is my sin, not your fault.

古文：世祖闻而叹曰： 有臣如此，国之宝也！ 
现代文：世祖听说后赞叹说： 有如此的臣子，是国家的宝贝! 
English: Upon hearing this, the patriarch said with admiration, "Such a courtier is a national treasure!

古文：赐衣一袭、马二匹、鹿十头。
现代文：赐给古弼衣服一套、马二匹、鹿十头。
English: He gave him a set of clothes, two horses and ten deer.

古文：后车驾畋于山北，大获麋鹿数千头，诏尚书发车牛五百乘以运之。
现代文：后来世祖在山北狩猎，大量捕获麋鹿几千头，诏令尚书调发牛车五百辆去运输。
English: Later, Shizu hunted in the northern part of the mountain, catching thousands of elk in large numbers, and ordered Shang Shuxu to dispatch 500 ox carts to transport them.

古文：世祖寻谓从者曰： 笔公必不与我，汝辈不如马运之速。 
现代文：世祖不久对随从的人说： 笔公必定不会给我车，你们不如用马运得迅速。 
English: The patriarch soon said to his followers: "Peng Gong will certainly not give me a car, you might as well use a horse to move quickly.

古文：遂还。
现代文：于是返回。
English: I just came back.

古文：行百余里而弼表至，曰： 今秋谷悬黄，麻菽布野，猪鹿窃食，鸟雁侵费，风波所耗，朝夕参倍。乞赐矜缓，使得收载。 
现代文：行走一百多里后而古弼的奏疏送到，说： 今年秋季谷粟成熟，麻菽遍布田野，猪鹿偷吃，鸟雁侵扰，风暴所消耗，早晚相差三倍，乞求怜惜从缓，使农民能够收割运载。 
English: After walking more than a hundred miles, and the sound of the ancient gongs was brought to him, he said: This autumn, the corn is ripe, the poppies are all over the fields, the pigs and deer are stealing, the birds and geese are intruding, the storms are consuming, and the difference between morning and evening is three times, begging for mercy and delay, so that farmers can harvest and transport.

古文：世祖谓左右曰： 笔公果如朕所卜，可谓社稷之臣。 
现代文：世祖对左右的人说： 笔公果然如我所预测，可以说是国家重臣。 
English: The patriarch said to the people around him, "Pen Gongru is indeed as I predicted, and can be said to be the chief minister of the state.

古文：初，杨难当之来也，诏弼悉送其子弟于京师。
现代文：当初，杨难当前来，诏令古弼送其所有子弟到京城。
English: At first, when Yang Nandong came to accede, the emperor issued an edict to let Gu Xuan send all the children of the Yang family to Beijing.

古文：杨玄小子文德，以黄金四十斤赂弼，弼受金，留文德而遇之无礼，文德亡入刘义隆。
现代文：杨玄的小儿子文德，用四十斤黄金贿赂直回，直周接受黄金，留下塞德而对待他没有礼节，塞擅逃亡到刘盏隆那裹。
English: Yang Xuan's youngest son, Wen De, bribed Zhiguo with forty pounds of gold, accepted gold from Zhiguo, left Said and treated him without etiquette, and then fled to Liu Linlong.

古文：世祖以其正直有战功，弗加罪责也。
现代文：世担因直翅正直有战功，不加以治罪责罚。
English: The world does not punish or punish them for their bravery in battle.

古文：世祖崩，吴王立，以弼为司徒。
现代文：世祖逝世，吴王继位，任命弼为司徒。
English: After the death of his ancestor, King Wu succeeded to the throne and appointed Zou as his disciple.

古文：高宗即位，与张黎并坐议不合旨，俱免，有怨谤之言。
现代文：高宗即位，与张黎议论不合旨意而获罪，都被免职，有埋怨诽谤的言论。
English: Gao Zong ascended to the throne, and he and Zhang Li were found guilty of discussing matters not in accordance with the will of the people. They were both removed from office, and there were complaints of slanderous speech.

古文：其家人告巫蛊，俱伏法。时人冤之。
现代文：他们的家人上告他们使用巫蛊手法，都受死刑，当时人认为他们很冤枉。
English: Their families sued them for witchcraft, and they were both sentenced to death, although they were considered innocent at the time.

古文：张黎，雁门平原人也。
现代文：张黎，是雁门原平人。
English: Zhang Li is a native of the Wild Goose Gate Plain.

古文：善书计，太祖知待之。
现代文：善于书写计算，太祖了解厚待他。
English: He was good at writing and calculating, and his great-grandfather knew how to treat him well.

古文：太宗器其忠亮，赐爵广平公，管综机要。
现代文：太宗器重他的忠诚正直，赐爵位为广平公，掌管机要事务。
English: Emperor Taizong valued his loyalty and honesty, gave him the title of Guangping Gong, and put him in charge of important affairs.

古文：世祖以其功旧，任以辅弼，除大司农卿。军国大议，黎常与焉。
现代文：世祖因他是有功旧臣，委以辅佐重任，授任大司农卿，军队国家大事的商议，张黎时常参与。
English: Because he was a meritorious old minister, the founder of the dynasty appointed Zhang Li as an important assistant and assistant, and appointed him as the chief secretary of the Ministry of Agriculture. Zhang Li often participated in the deliberation of national affairs of the army.

古文：加镇北将军。
现代文：加授镇北将军。
English: He was also awarded the title of Zhenbei General.

古文：以征赫连定功，进号征北大将军。
现代文：以征伐赫连定的功劳，升军号为征北大将军。
English: He was awarded the title of General of the Northern Expeditionary Army for his contribution to the conquest and defeat of He Lian Ding.

古文：与乐安王范、济南公崔徽镇长安，清约公平，甚著声称。
现代文：和乐安王元范、济南公崔徽镇守长安，清廉简约公正平实，很有名声。
English: He Le'an Wang Yuan Fan, Jinan Gong Cui Hui Town Guard Chang'an, clean, simple, fair and flat, very famous.

古文：代下之日，家无余财。
现代文：被接替的时候，家中没有多余的财产。
English: When he was replaced, the family had no extra assets.

古文：世祖诏黎领兵一万二千人，通莎泉道。
现代文：世祖诏令张黎率领兵士一万二千人，打通莎泉道。
English: The emperor ordered Zhang Li to lead 12,000 soldiers to open the Xaquan Road.

古文：车驾征凉州，蠕蠕吴提乘虚入寇，黎与司空道生拒击之。
现代文：世祖征伐凉州，蠕蠕吴提乘虚入侵，张黎和司空道生抵御出击他。
English: The ancestor conquered and besieged Liangzhou, Wu Ti took advantage of the virtual invasion, and Zhang Li and Sikuo Dousheng resisted his attack.

古文：恭宗初总百揆，黎与东郡公崔浩等辅政，忠于奉上，非公事不言。
现代文：恭宗初掌朝政，张黎和束郡公崔浩等人辅佐政事，忠心侍奉主上，不是公事不谈论。
English: At the beginning of the reign of Emperor Gongzong, Zhang Li and Cui Hao, the governor of Sok County, assisted in the government affairs. They served the Lord loyally and did not talk about business.

古文：诏曰： 侍中广平公黎、东郡公浩等，保傅东宫，有老成之勤，朕甚嘉焉。
现代文：诏书说： 侍中广平公张黎、柬郡公崔浩等人，在束宫为师傅，有老练成熟的辛勤，我很赞许。
English: The edict said: I highly commend Guangping Gong Zhang Lirong, Cam County Gong Cui Hao and other attendants, who are masters at Sokong Palace, for their experienced and mature hard work.

古文：其赐布帛各千匹，以褒旧勋。 
现代文：现赐布帛各自一千匹，来表彰旧的功勋。 
English: In recognition of their past achievements, they have now each been given one thousand cloth ponies.

古文：恭宗薨于东宫，黎兼太尉，持节奉策谥焉。
现代文：恭宗在束宫逝世，张黎兼任太尉，秉持符节册封上谧号。
English: Gongzong died in Sokgong, Zhang Li concurrently served as a captain, adhering to the seal of the seal of the seal.

古文：吴王余立，以黎为太尉。
现代文：吴王余立继位，任命张黎为太尉。
English: Wu Wang Yu Li succeeded to the throne and appointed Zhang Li as the second lieutenant.

古文：后以议不合旨，免。
现代文：后来因议论不合乎旨意，被免职。
English: He was later removed from his post for speaking against the will of the emperor.

古文：仍与古弼并诛。
现代文：不久和古弼一同被杀。
English: He was soon killed along with Gu Yao.

古文：史臣曰：和跋、奚牧、莫题、贺狄干、李栗、刘洁等，并有忠勤征伐之效，任遇仍优，俱至诛灭。
现代文：史臣曰：和跋、奚牧、莫题、贺狄干、李栗、刘洁等人，都有忠诚勤恳征战攻伐之功，职任待遇又优厚，都被诛杀。
English: The historian said, "Wataba, Zengmu, Moqi, He Dikang, Li Li, Liu Jie and others, all of whom were loyal and diligent in their military service, and were well treated in their positions, were all killed in the battle.

古文：岳身犯危难之中，受事草创之际，智勇既申，功名尤举，乃良将之材。
现代文：庾岳受任于危难之中。在初创的阶段接受重任，表现出机智勇敢，功名格外突出，是良将之材。
English: Gongyue was appointed in the midst of a crisis. Accepting a heavy task in the initial stage, he showed wit and courage, and his achievements were particularly outstanding. He is a good general.

古文：弼谋军辅国，远略正情，有柱石之量。
现代文：古弼谋划军事辅助国家，计策长远情怀正大，有国家柱石的器量。
English: Gu Yao planned a military auxiliary state, his long-term strategy was upright, and he had the stature of a national pillar.

古文：张黎诚谨兼方，功旧见重。
现代文：张黎诚实谨慎兼备，以功劳旧臣受到重用。
English: Zhang Li was both honest and prudent, and was highly regarded for his services as a former minister.

古文：纤介之间，一朝殒覆，宥及十世，乃徒言尔，惜乎！
现代文：以细微的过失，一时之间命丧黄泉，宽恕延及十代，是句空话。可惜啊!
English: It is an empty phrase to say that with a slight mistake, a person's life will be destroyed in an instant, and forgiveness will be extended to ten generations. What a pity!

