古文：《易》曰： 观乎天文，以察时变；观乎人文，以化成天下。 
现代文：《易》说： 观察天体的分布运行现象，是为了观察时令的变化；观察礼教文化，是为了教化天下。 
English: "Yi" said: Observing the distribution and movement of celestial bodies is to observe the change of seasons; observing the culture of etiquette is to enlighten the world.

古文：然则文之为用其大矣哉！
现代文：这么说，文化的作用就是很大的了。
English: So, the role of culture is huge.

古文：逖听三古，弥纶百代，若乃《坟》、《素》所纪，靡得而云；《典》、《谟》已降，遗风可述。
现代文：远听上古三代，包罗统括百世，至于《坟》、《素》所记载的，就不知道说些什么了；《典》、《谟》以来，遗留下来的风尚可以述说。
English: Listening to the three generations of the ancients, including the past 100 years, I don't know what to say about what is recorded in "Grave" and "Basic"; since "Diary" and "Mou," the traditions left behind can be described.

古文：至于制礼作乐，腾实飞声，善乎。言之不文，行之岂能远也。
现代文：至于制作礼乐，物实升腾，音声飞扬，都是好事情，但表达没有文采，岂能达到远方！
English: As for the production of liturgical music, the rising of the material and the soaring of the voice are all good things, but without literary expression, how can it reach far away!

古文：是以曲阜之多才多艺，监二代以正其源；阙里之性与天道，修《六经》以维其末。
现代文：所以，孔子多才多艺，借鉴于二代而使其源归于正道；孔夫子本性与天道相合，修撰《六经》以维系人世。
English: Therefore, Confucius was multi-talented, and attributed his origin to the righteous path by virtue of his second generation; Confucius' nature was in line with the heavenly path, and he compiled the "Six Classics" to maintain the human world.

古文：用能穷神知化，称首于千古；经邦纬俗，藏用于百代。
现代文：因而能够尽晓神理，明白教化，千古以来称为第一；治理国家，端正风俗，蕴藏功用于百代。
English: As a result, it is able to fully understand the divine principles, understand and educate, and has been called the first since ancient times; govern the country, rectify customs, and possess merits for hundreds of generations.

古文：至哉，斯固圣人之述作也。
现代文：圣人的这些著作，真正完美啊！
English: These writings of the saint are truly perfect!

古文：逮乎两周道丧，七十义乖。
现代文：下至春秋战国，道德沦丧，七十子释义乖戾。
English: Down to the Spring and Autumn Period and the Warring States Period, morals were in decline, and seventy-year-olds were grumpy.

古文：淹中、稷下，八儒、三墨之异，漆园、黍谷，名、法、兵、农之别，虽雅诰奥义，或未尽善，考其遗迹，亦贤达之流乎。
现代文：淹中、稷下和八儒、三墨这些学派各异，漆园、黍谷和名、法、兵、农各家不同，虽然雅致之文含义深奥，或许不够完善，但考察其遗迹，也都是贤明通达之流。
English: Although the elegant texts have profound meanings and may not be perfect, the study of their remains is also a stream of wisdom.

古文：其离谗放逐之臣，涂穷后门之士，道感轲而未遇，志郁抑而不申。愤激委约之中，飞文魏阙之下，奋迅泥滓，自致青云，振沈溺于一朝，流风声于千载者往往而有矣。
现代文：那些遭到谗陷而被流放的臣子，途穷末路中的文士，道路坎坷而不投合，志向抑郁而不得申张，愤慨激励于山野之中，飞文呈送于朝廷门下，迅速从泥沼中奋起，自己登上青云之路，一朝从沉溺之处振作，千载流传遗风声名，这样的事情经常是有的。
English: Those courtiers who were overthrown and exiled, scribes who were at the end of the road, bumpy roads that did not converge, depressed aspirations that could not be claimed, indignation inspired in the mountains and fields, flying letters presented to the imperial court, quickly rising from the quagmire, climbing their way to the Qingyun Road, one morning from the place of indulgence, thousands of years of tradition and fame, such things often exist.

古文：汉自孝武之后，雅尚斯文，扬葩振藻者如林，而二马、王、杨为之杰。
现代文：汉朝自孝武帝之后，特别崇尚诗文，从事文章写作的人很多，司马相如、司马迁、王褒、扬雄是这些人中的俊杰。
English: Since Emperor Xiaowu of the Han Dynasty, poetry has been particularly revered, and there are many people engaged in writing articles. Sima Xiangru, Sima Qian, Wang Bao, and Yang Xiong are among these people.

古文：东京之朝，兹道逾扇，咀徵含商者成市，而班、傅、张、蔡为之雄。
现代文：东汉文章之道更加兴盛，玩味辞章音声的人更多，班固、傅毅、张衡、蔡邕是东汉文人中的英雄。
English: In the Eastern Han Dynasty, the way of writing was more prosperous, and there were more people who played with the sound of words and phrases. Banggu, Fu Yi, Zhang Heng and Cai Xuan were the heroes among the Eastern Han Dynasty writers.

古文：当涂受命，尤好虫篆；金行勃兴，无替前烈。
现代文：曹魏受命，特别喜爱文学辞赋。晋朝勃然兴起，没有改变前朝的功业。
English: Cao Wei was ordered to do so, and he was particularly fond of literature. The Jin Dynasty rose to prominence, but it did not change the achievements of the previous dynasty.

古文：曹、王、陈、阮负宏衍之思，挺栋干于邓林；潘、陆、张、左擅侈丽之才，饰羽仪于凤穴。
现代文：曹植、王粲、陈琳、阮王禹自负宏大的精思，卓然挺立于文学之林；潘岳、陆机、张协、左思擅长华丽的词章，耀眼灼目于文学之家。
English: Cao Zhi, Wang Hui, Chen Lin, and Ruan Wang Yu are proud of their ambitious thoughts and stand tall in the literature forest; Pan Yue, Lu Ji, Zhang Xie, and Zuo Si are good at gorgeous verses, and are dazzling in the literature house.

古文：斯并高视当世，连衡孔门。
现代文：这些人都是高视当世，旁通儒学。
English: These people have a high opinion of the contemporary world, bypassing Confucianism.

古文：虽时运推移，质文屡变，譬犹六代并奏，易俗之用无爽；九源竞逐，一致之理同归。
现代文：虽然时代更替，内容形式屡屡变化，就好像六代一起弹奏，移风易俗的作用没有违背；各种学术流派竞相争逐，共同归于相同的道理。
English: Although the times change and the forms of content change frequently, it is as if six generations are playing together, and the role of changing customs has not been violated; various academic schools compete and compete, and they all belong to the same principle.

古文：历选前英，于斯为盛。
现代文：选遍前代英贤，这个时候最为兴盛。
English: The selection of the previous generation of great sages, this time is the most prosperous.

古文：既而中州板荡，戎狄交侵，僭伪相属，生灵涂炭，故文章黜焉。
现代文：接下就是中原动乱，外夷交相入侵，僭越伪立者，一个接一个，百姓陷于水深火热之中，所以，文章就被废止了。
English: Next came the Central Plains upheaval, the invasion of foreign invaders, and the rise of pseudo-rulers, one after another, and the people were caught up in the turmoil. Therefore, the article was abolished.

古文：其能潜思于战争之间，挥翰于锋镝之下，亦有时而间出矣。若乃鲁徵、杜广、徐光、尹弼之俦，知名于二赵；宋该、封弈、硃彤、梁谠之属，见重于燕、秦。
现代文：能够在战争之中深思默想，刀箭之下挥笔为文的，也不时地出现，像鲁征、杜广、徐光、尹弼之辈，扬名于赵地；宋该、封弈、朱彤、梁谠之类，在燕、秦受到推重。
English: Those who were able to meditate in the midst of the war and write under the sword and arrow appeared from time to time, such as Lu Zheng, Du Guang, Xu Guang, and Yin Qi, who were famous in Zhao; Song Gao, Feng Yi, Zhu Xi, and Liang Qi, who were promoted in Yan and Qin.

古文：然皆迫于仓卒，牵于战阵，章奏符檄，则粲然可观；体物缘情，则寂寥于世。
现代文：然而都受时间逼迫，战阵牵累，章奏符檄，文采粲然，可以一观；体察物理，抒写性情之作，则传之甚。
English: However, they are all time-pressured, war-torn, chapter-and-verse-inspired, and can be viewed at a glance; works that observe physics and describe temperament are even more passed down.

古文：非其才有优劣，时运然也。
现代文：不是他们的才能有优劣之分，而是时势造成的。
English: It's not their talent that makes the difference, it's the times.

古文：至于朔方之地，蕞尔夷俗，胡义周之颂国都，足称宏丽。
现代文：至于朔方那个地方，小小的夷地，胡义周颂扬国都之作，足可以称得上宏伟富丽。
English: As for the place of Shuo Fang, a small Yidi, Hu Yi Zhou's glorification of the capital's work can be called magnificent and rich.

古文：区区河右，而学者埒于中原，刘延明之铭酒泉，可谓清典。
现代文：小小的河右之地，学者与中原一样多，刘延明撰写的酒泉的铭记，可以说是清新典范之文。
English: In the small land on the right side of the river, there are as many scholars as in the Central Plains. Liu Yanming's "Remembering the Liquor Spring" can be said to be a fresh and exemplary text.

古文：子曰： 十室之邑，必有忠信。 
现代文：孔子说： 十户人口的私邑，必定有忠信之人。 
English: Confucius said, "In a village of ten families, there must be one person who is loyal."

古文：岂徒言哉。
现代文：这岂是空话？
English: Is this just empty talk?

古文：洎乎有魏，定鼎沙朔。
现代文：到了北魏，在北方沙漠建立王朝。
English: In the Northern Wei Dynasty, a dynasty was established in the northern desert.

古文：南包河、淮，西吞关、陇。
现代文：南面包容了河、淮之地，西方吞并了关、陇。
English: In the south, it included He and Huai, and in the west, it included Guan and Tong.

古文：当时之士，有许谦、崔宏、宏子浩、高允、高闾、游雅等，先后之间，声实俱茂，词义典正，有永嘉之遗烈焉。
现代文：当时的文士，有许谦、崔宏、崔宏之子崔浩、高允、高闾、游雅等人，前后相继，名声和创作都很繁茂，词章义理典雅方正，有晋朝之遗风。
English: The scribes at that time, such as Xu Qian, Cui Hong, Cui Hong's son Cui Hao, Gao Yun, Gao Wei, You Ya and others, successively, had a great reputation and creativity. The lyrics were elegant and formal, with the legacy of the Jin Dynasty.

古文：及太和在运，锐情文学，固以颉颃汉彻，跨蹑曹丕，气韵高远，艳藻独构。
现代文：到了魏孝帝太和年间，一心爱好文学，和汉武帝决然不相上下，超越曹丕，气质风韵高雅深远，独自创作艳丽词章。
English: During the reign of Empress Dowager Wei Xiao Di, he devoted himself to literature. He was on a par with Emperor Hanwu and surpassed Cao Pi. His temperament was elegant and far-reaching, and he independently created beautiful poems.

古文：衣冠仰止，咸慕新风，律调颇殊，曲度遂改。
现代文：文士十分仰慕，都羡慕新的文风，声律音调很是不同，曲调尺度因而改变。
English: The scribes greatly admired and envied the new style of writing, the vocal tone was very different, and the scale of the tune changed as a result.

古文：辞罕泉源，言多胸臆，润古雕今，有所未遇。
现代文：辞章少有源头，语言多出胸臆，滋润古风，雕制新章，有所不中。
English: Slogans rarely have a source, language is more of a chest, moisturizing the old style, carving a new chapter, something is out of place.

古文：是故雅言丽则之奇，绮合绣联之美，眇历岁年，未闻独得。
现代文：因此，雅正艳丽合乎规范的奇文，文采华丽合乎对仗的妙章，经历了很多年，没有听说有独到之处。
English: As a result, the elegant and bright quaintness conforms to the norms, and the literary splendor conforms to the war. After many years, I have not heard that there is anything unique.

古文：既而陈郡袁翻、河内常景，晚拔畴类，稍革其风。
现代文：接着，陈郡人袁翻、河内人常景，晚年出类拔萃，稍稍改变这种文风。
English: Then, Chen County's Yuan Tuo and Hanoi's Chang Jie, outstanding in their later years, slightly changed this literary style.

古文：及明皇御历，文雅大盛，学者如牛毛，成者如麟角。
现代文：魏孝明帝继位，文学之风最为兴盛，学的人多如牛毛，成功的人却如凤毛麟角。
English: When Emperor Wei Xiaoming succeeded to the throne, the literary style flourished the most. The number of scholars was enormous, but the number of successful people was extremely small.

古文：孔子曰： 才难。 
现代文：孔子说： 才难。 
English: Confucius said, "It is not easy to become great."

古文：不其然也？
现代文：不就是这样吗？
English: Isn't that how it goes?

古文：于时陈郡袁翻、翻弟跃、河东裴敬宪、弟庄伯、庄伯族弟伯茂、范阳卢观、弟仲宣、顿丘李谐、勃海高肃、河间邢臧、赵国李骞，雕琢琼瑶，刻削杞梓，并为龙光，俱称鸿翼。
现代文：这个时候，陈郡袁翻、袁翻的弟弟袁跃、河东裴敬宪、其弟裴庄伯、庄伯的同族兄弟裴伯茂、范阳卢观、其弟卢仲宣、顿丘李谐、渤海高肃、河间邢臧、赵国李骞，雕琢辞章，刻削妙文，都很有文采，皆称为大作。
English: At this time, Chen County Yuan Ren, Yuan Ren's younger brother Yuan Yue, Hedong Pei Jing Xian, his younger brother Pei Zhuang Bo, Zhuang Bo's brother Pei Biao, Fan Yang Lu Guan, his younger brother Lu Zhong Xuan, Dongqiu Lijun, Bohai Gao Su, Hao Zi, Zhao Guo Lijun, carved words and carved wonderful texts, all of which are very literary, all of which are called great works.

古文：乐安孙彦举、济阴温子升，并自孤寒，郁然特起。
现代文：乐安孙彦举、济阴温子癉，都出身孤苦贫寒，迅速崛起。
English: Both Le'an Sun Yanyu and Jiyin Wanzi were born in poverty and hardship, and rose rapidly.

古文：咸能综采繁缛，兴属清华。
现代文：他们都能撰著繁茂华丽的词章，兴寄清新华美。
English: All of them can compose lush and gorgeous lyrics, and are full of fresh and new beauty.

古文：比于建安之徐、陈、应、刘，元元之潘、张、左、束，各一时也。
现代文：和建安时期的徐干、陈琳、应蠩、刘桢，元康时期的潘岳、张协、左思、束皙相比，各擅一时。
English: Compared with Xu Gan, Chen Lin, Ying Qi, Liu Qi in the Jian'an period, and Pan Yue, Zhang Xie, Zuo Si, and Sok Ya in the Yuan Kang period, each is good at one time.

古文：有齐自霸业云启，广延髦俊，开四门以宾之，顿八纮以掩之。鄴都之下，烟霏雾集。
现代文：北齐自建立霸业开始，广泛延请俊才，开放四门像迎宾一样迎接他们，八方收拢以把俊才都收拢过来，邺都城里，俊才云集。
English: Since the establishment of hegemony, Beiqi has extensively invited talents, opened four doors to welcome them like guests, and gathered talents from all over the world. In the city of Shudu, talents are gathered.

古文：河间邢子才、钜鹿魏伯起、范阳卢元明、钜鹿魏季景、清河崔长儒、河间邢子明、范阳祖孝徵、中山杜辅玄、北平阳子烈并其流也。
现代文：河间人邢子才、钜鹿人魏伯起、范阳人卢元明、钜鹿人魏季景、清河人崔长儒、河间人邢子明、范阳人祖孝征、中山人杜辅玄、北平人阳子烈，都是文人之流。
English: Kawama's Shanzicai, Elk's Wei Boqi, Fanyang's Lu Yuanming, Elk's Wei Ji Jing, Qinghe's Cui Changru, Kawama's Shanzi Ming, Fanyang's Zu Xiao Zheng, Zhongshan's Du Fu Xuan, and Peiping's Yang Zile are all literati.

古文：复有范阳祖鸿勋，亦参文士之列。
现代文：又有范阳人祖鸿勋，也参与文士之列。
English: Fan Yang's ancestor, Zu Hongxun, was also among the scribes.

古文：及天保中，李愔、陆仰、崔瞻、陆元规并在中书，参掌纶诰。
现代文：北齐文宣帝天保年间，李忄音、陆、崔瞻、陆元规，都在中书省，参与掌管文诰。
English: During the Northern Qi Emperor Xuanwen's reign of Tianbao, Li Yuyin, Lu, Cui Zhan, and Lu Yuanbei were all in the Central Literature Department, participating in the management of the Literature Department.

古文：其李广、樊逊、李德林、卢询祖、卢思道始以文章著名。
现代文：其余李广、樊通、李德林、卢询祖、卢思道，开始因文章而显名。
English: The others, Li Guang, Zhaotong, Li Delin, Lu Xunzu and Lu Siduo, began to become famous for their articles.

古文：皇建之朝，常侍王晞独擅其美。
现代文：齐孝昭帝皇建朝，常侍王独擅文学之美。
English: Emperor Qixiao Zhaozhong established the dynasty, and his attendant emperors excelled in the beauty of literature.

古文：河清、天统之辰，杜台卿、刘逖、魏骞亦参诏敕。
现代文：河清、天统的时候，杜台卿、刘逖、魏骞也参与诏书敕令。
English: At the time of Heqing and Tiantong, Du Taiqing, Liu Bei and Wei Wei also participated in the imperial edict.

古文：自李愔已下，在省唯撰述除官诏旨，其关涉军国文翰，多是魏收作之。
现代文：自从李忄音以下诸人，在中书省只是撰写任命官员的委任状和诏令，那些涉及到军事国政的文章，大多是魏收撰写的。
English: Since Li Yuyin and his successors only wrote letters of appointment and edicts appointing officials in the People's Republic of China, most of the articles related to military and state affairs were written by Wei Hui.

古文：及在武平，李若、荀士逊、李德林、薛道衡并为中书侍郎，典司纶綍。
现代文：到了齐后主武平年间，李若、荀士逊、李德林、薛道衡，都任中书侍郎，掌管制令。
English: After the arrival of Qi, during the reign of Wu Ping, Li Ruo, Wu Shisong, Li Delin, and Xue Daoheng were all appointed as middle secretaries, in charge of the control order.

古文：后主虽溺于群小，然颇好咏诗，幼时尝读诗赋，语人云： 终有解作此理不？ 
现代文：齐后主虽然沉溺于众多的小人之中，但是却很喜欢吟咏诗篇，幼小时曾读诗赋，告诉人说： 最终有没有人明白作诗的道理呢？ 
English: Although Qi Hou's master indulged in a large number of villains, he was very fond of chanting poems. When he was young, he read poetry and told people: In the end, does anyone understand the truth of poetry?

古文：初因画屏风，敕通直郎萧放及晋陵王孝式录古贤烈士及近代轻艳诸诗以充图画，帝弥重之。
现代文：当初因为绘制屏风，敕令通直郎萧放和晋陵人王孝武，抄录古代贤人烈士和近代的轻糜艳丽的诗章，用来题写图画，皇上更加看重他。
English: At first, the emperor valued him more because he painted screens, copied ancient sages and martyrs and modern light and bright poems, and was used to inscribe pictures.

古文：后复追齐州录事参军萧悫、赵州功曹参军颜之推同入撰录，犹依霸朝，谓之馆客。
现代文：后来又追请齐州录事参军萧悫、赵州功曹参军颜之推一同入京任撰录，还依照齐朝旧例，称他们为馆客。
English: Later, he also asked Xiao Wei, a member of the army from Qi Prefecture, and Yan Zhaozhou, a member of the army from Zhaozhou, to go to Beijing together to write a record, and also called them guests in accordance with the old rules of the Qi Dynasty.

古文：放及之推意欲更广其事，又因祖珽辅政，爱重之推，又托邓长颙渐说后主，属意斯文。
现代文：萧放和颜之推想要扩大文学之事，又因为祖王廷辅助朝政，爱护重视颜之推，又托邓长慢慢地劝说后主，对文学加以注意。
English: Xiao Fang and Yan Zhipu wanted to expand literature, and because the ancestral royal court assisted the imperial government and valued Yan Zhipu, they asked Deng Chang to slowly persuade his successor to pay attention to literature.

古文：三年，祖珽奏立文林馆，于是更召引文学士，谓之待诏文林馆焉。
现代文：武平三年，祖王廷奏请设立文林馆，于是又召集引荐文学之士，把这些人称之为待诏文学馆。
English: In the third year of Wuping, the founder Wang Tingso asked for the establishment of the Wenlin Museum, so he also convened the introduction of literary men and women, and called these people the Taizhao Literature Museum.

古文：珽又奏撰《御览》，诏珽及特进魏收、太子太师徐之才、中书令崔劼、散骑常侍张凋、中书监阳休之监撰。
现代文：祖王廷又奏请撰著《御览》，诏令祖王廷和特进魏收、太子太师徐之才，中书令崔吉力、散骑常侍张彤、中书监阳休之监督编撰。
English: Zowangting also requested to write the "Overview," and ordered Zowangting and Wei Jie, the special envoy, and Xu Zhicai, the prince and grandmaster, to supervise and compile it, as well as the editor of the Chinese book, Cui Jili, the errand boy Zhang Qi, and the editor of the Chinese book, Yang Hui.

古文：珽等奏追通直散骑侍郎韦道逊、陆乂、太子舍人王劭、卫尉丞李孝基、殿中侍御史魏澹、中散大夫刘仲威、袁奭、国子博士硃才、奉车都尉眭道闲、考功郎中崔子枢、左外兵郎薛道衡、并省主客郎中卢思道、司空东阁祭酒崔德立、太傅行参军崔儦、太学博士诸葛汉、奉朝请郑公超、殿中侍御史郑子信等入馆撰书，并敕放、悫、之推等同入撰例。
现代文：祖王廷等人奏请追令通直散骑侍郎韦道逊、陆义，太子舍人王劭、卫尉丞李孝基、殿中侍御史魏澹、中散大夫刘仲威、袁、国子博士朱才，奉车都尉睦道闲，考功郎中崔子枢、在外兵部郎薛道衡、并省主客郎中卢思道、司空东阁祭酒崔德立、太傅行参军崔、太学博士诸葛汉、奉朝请郑公超、殿中侍御史郑子信等人进入文林馆撰著，并敕令萧放、萧、颜之推等人一同参与编撰体例。
English: The ancestor Wang Ting and others requested the following orders: the courier Wei Daosong, Lu Yi, the prince's concubine Wang Xi, the guard lieutenant general Li Xiaoqi, the palace attendant Shi Weiqi, the palace doctor Liu Zhongwei, Yuan, the doctor Zhu Cai, the car captain Mutu Doju, the honor student Choi Zizhu, the soldier in exile Xue Doheng, and the provincial guest master Choi Lu Si Dao, the governor of the East Pagoda Festival Choi De Li, Taifu marching to the army Choi, the scholar Zhu Ge Han, the court invited Zheng Gongchao, the palace attendant

古文：复命散骑常侍封孝琰、前乐陵太守郑元礼、卫尉少卿杜台卿、通直散骑常侍杨训、前南兗州长史羊肃、通直散骑侍郎马元熙、并省三公郎中刘珉、开府行参军李师上、温君悠入馆，亦令撰书。
现代文：又命散骑常侍封孝琰、前乐陵太守郑元礼、卫尉少卿杜台卿、通直散骑常侍杨训、前南兖州长史羊肃、通直散骑侍郎马元熙、并省三公郎中刘珉、开府行参军李师上、温君悠进入文林馆，也让他们编撰书籍。
English: He also ordered the sanshaku of the regular attendants Fong Xiaojun, the former governor of Le Mausoleum Zheng Yuanli, the guard lieutenant Shaoqing Du Taiqing, the direct sanshaku of the regular attendants Yang Xun, the former governor of Nanxun Shi Yangsu, the direct sanshaku of the attendants Ma Yuanxi, and the provincial three princes Liu Xuan, Li Shijian and Wen Junyu, who participated in the march to Kaifu, to enter the Wenlin Museum and also let them compile books.

古文：后复命特进崔季舒、前仁州刺史刘逖、散骑常侍李孝贞、中书侍郎李德林续入待诏。
现代文：后来，又命特进崔季舒、前任仁州刺史刘逖、散骑常侍李教贞、中书侍郎李德林接着进入文林馆待诏。
English: Later, Cui Jishu, the special envoy, Liu Ye, the former governor of Renzhou, Li Jiazhen, the equestrian attendant, and Li Delin, the chancellery attendant, were also ordered to enter the Wenlin Pavilion to wait for the imperial edict.

古文：寻又诏诸人各举所知。又有前济州长史李翥、前广武太守魏謇、前西兗州司马萧溉、前幽州长史陆仁惠、郑州司马江旰、前通直散骑侍郎辛德源、陆开明、通直郎封孝骞、太尉掾张德冲、并省右户郎元行恭、司徒户曹参军古道子、前司空功曹参军刘顗、获嘉令崔德儒、给事中李元楷、晋州中从事阳师孝、太尉中兵参军刘儒行、司空祭酒阳辟疆、司公士曹参军卢公顺、司空中兵参军周子深、开府行参军王友伯、崔君洽、魏师謇并入馆待诏。
现代文：不久，又诏令诸人各自举荐自己所认识的人，于是又有前济州长史李翥、前广武太守魏骞、前西兖州司马萧溉、前幽州长史陆仁惠、郑州司马江旰、前通直散骑侍郎辛德源、陆开明、通直郎封孝骞、太尉张德冲、并省右户郎元行恭、司徒户曹参军古道子、前司空功曹参军齐岂页、获嘉令崔德儒、给事中李元楷、晋州中从事阳师孝、太尉中兵参军刘儒行、司空祭酒阳辟疆、司空士曹参军卢公顺、司空中兵参军周子深、开府行参军王友伯、崔君洽、魏师謇等人，一并入文林馆待诏。
English: Soon, he ordered everyone to nominate people they knew, so there was the former governor of Ji Province, Shi Li Rong, the former governor of Guangwu Province, Wei Rong, the former governor of West Gansu Province, Sima Xiao Rui, the former governor of Yu Province, Shi Lu Renhui, the governor of Zhengzhou Province, Sima Jiang Rong, the former governor of Jilin Province, Xin De Yuan, Lu Kaiming, the former governor of Jilin Province, Tong Naorong, the former governor of Guangwu Province, Fang Fang, the former governor of Guangwu Province, Wei Rong, the former governor of Guangwu Province, Wei R

古文：又敕仆射段孝言亦入焉。
现代文：又敕令仆射段孝言也进入文林馆。
English: In addition, he also ordered the servant of the shooting section, Takanori, to enter the Wenlin Pavilion.

古文：《御览》成后，所撰录人亦有不得待诏，付所司处分者。
现代文：《御览》编撰完成之后，所有参与编撰的人也有不能待诏文林馆的，就交给所司安置。
English: After the compilation of the "Overview" is completed, all the people involved in the compilation will be transferred to the directorate for resettlement.

古文：凡此诸人，亦有文学肤浅，附会亲识，妄相推荐者十三四焉。
现代文：所以，这些交给所司安置的人，也有文学功底肤浅，依附亲戚朋友，胡乱相互荐举的人有十分之三四。
English: Therefore, three-fourths of the people who were placed by their superiors also have a shallow literary foundation, are dependent on relatives and friends, and randomly recommend each other for promotion.

古文：虽然，当时操笔之徒，搜求略尽。
现代文：虽然这样，当时从事文学的人，搜求个差不多了。
English: In spite of this, people who were engaged in literature at that time had almost nothing to search for.

古文：其外如广平宋孝王、信都刘善经辈三数人，论其才性，入馆诸贤亦十三四不逮之。
现代文：另外，像广平宋孝王、信都刘善经之类的有三几人，若是论其才能，进入文林馆的诸位贤士也有十分之三四不如他们。
English: In addition, there are three or four people like Guangping Song Xiao Wang and Xindu Liu Shan Jing, and if it is about their talents, the sages who enter the Wenlin Museum are also three to four tenths inferior to them.

古文：周氏创业，运属陵夷，纂遗文于既丧，聘奇士如弗及。
现代文：周朝建立，适逢文运衰落，搜求散佚的文章于将要亡佚之时，征聘奇俊的文士好像惟恐不及。
English: The establishment of the Zhou Dynasty coincided with the decline of the literary movement, and the search for lost and stolen articles was about to die. It seemed to be too late to recruit brilliant scribes.

古文：是以苏亮、苏绰、卢柔、唐瑾、元伟、李昶之徒，咸奋鳞翼，自致青紫。
现代文：因此，苏亮、苏绰、卢柔、唐瑾、元伟、李昶一类人物，都奋起拼搏，自己挣得高官厚禄。
English: Therefore, Su Liang, Su Cao, Lu Rong, Tang Jun, Yuan Wei, Li Jun and other figures have all worked hard and earned high-ranking officials.

古文：然绰之建言，务存质朴，遂糠秕魏、晋，宪章虞、夏，虽属辞有师古之美，矫枉非适时之用，故莫能常行焉。
现代文：然而苏绰的文章，努力追求质朴，于是就视魏、晋的文章为糠米比，视虞、夏之时的文章为典范，虽然其为文师法古文之美，但矫正过失不合时宜，因而没有能够通行于世。
English: However, Su Qiao's essay tried hard to pursue simplicity, so he regarded Wei and Jin's essay as sticky rice, and regarded Yu and Xia's essay as a model. Although it is the beauty of ancient literature, it is not timely to correct mistakes, so it has not been able to pass to the world.

古文：既而革车电迈，渚宫云撤，梁、荆之风，扇于关右，狂简之徒，斐然成俗，流宕忘反，无所取裁。
现代文：接着战车奔驰，平定荆楚，梁、荆之地的风俗，盛行于关中，轻狂疏简的人，斐然形成习俗，流连忘返。没有什么取法和舍弃。
English: Next, the chariot gallops, and the customs of Jingchu, Liang, and Jinghu prevail in Guanzhong. People who are frivolous and simplistic have formed customs, and have been forgotten. There is nothing to do and abandon.

古文：夫人有六情，禀五常之秀；情感六气，顺四时之序。
现代文：人有六情，秉承五常的精华；情感与六气相应，顺应四季的顺序。
English: People have six emotions, adhering to the essence of the five elements; emotions correspond to the six qi, and conform to the order of the four seasons.

古文：盖文之所起，情发于中。
现代文：因为，文章的产生，是情感发自心中而产生的。
English: Because the creation of an article is the result of an emotion coming from the heart.

古文：而自汉、魏以来，迄乎晋、宋，其体屡变，前哲论之详矣。
现代文：而自汉、魏以来，下迄于晋、宋，文章体式屡屡变化，前代贤哲论述得很详细了。
English: However, since the Han and Wei dynasties, up to the Jin and Song dynasties, the style of the article has repeatedly changed, and the previous generation of sages have been described in great detail.

古文：暨永明、天监之际，太和、天保之间，洛阳、江左，文雅尤盛，彼此好尚，互有异同。
现代文：到了齐、梁之际，魏、齐之时，洛阳和江左，文章特别兴盛，彼此间的喜好崇尚，互有差异。
English: At the time of Qi and Liang, at the time of Wei and Qi, Luoyang and Jiangzao, the articles were particularly prosperous, the preferences between each other were admired, and there were differences between each other.

古文：江左宫商发越，贵于清绮；河朔词义贞刚，重乎气质。
现代文：江左声律激越，贵在清新绮丽；河朔词义耿直刚正，重在气韵质实。
English: Jiang Zuo's vocal rhythms are agitated, and Gui is fresh and beautiful; the meaning of the words is straightforward and upright, and the emphasis is on the quality of the rhyme.

古文：气质则理胜其词，清绮则文过其意。
现代文：气韵质实就理义胜过文词，清新绮丽就文词胜过意旨。
English: The rhyme quality and reality are more important than the meaning of the words, and the fresh and beautiful words are more important than the meaning.

古文：理深者便于时用，文华者宜于咏歌。
现代文：理义深奥便于为时所用，文采华丽适宜吟咏歌唱。
English: The profound logic is convenient to use at the time, and the gorgeous literature is suitable for singing and chanting.

古文：此其南北词人得失之大较也。
现代文：这就是南北文章得失的主要方面。
English: This is the main aspect of the gain and loss of the North-South article.

古文：若能掇彼清音，简兹累句，各去所短，合其两长，则文质彬彬，尽美尽善矣。
现代文：北朝的文章如果能够取南朝文章的清新，简化多余的字句，各自去除缺点，汇合南北朝文章的优点，就文采和内容俱为丰茂，尽善尽美了。
English: If the articles of the Northern Dynasty can take the freshness of the articles of the Southern Dynasty, simplify the superfluous words, remove the shortcomings of each other, and combine the advantages of the articles of the Northern and Southern Dynasties, the literature and content will be rich and perfect.

古文：梁自大同之后，雅道沦缺，渐乖典则，争驰新巧。
现代文：梁朝自从大同年间以后，文章的雅正之道沦丧，逐渐和典雅规范相背离，争相显示新奇精巧。
English: After the Liang Dynasty in the same year, the elegance of the article was lost, gradually deviating from the elegant norms and competing to show novelty and sophistication.

古文：简文、湘东启其淫放，徐陵、庾信分路扬镳。
现代文：简文帝和湘东王开启淫荡放纵之途，徐陵和庾信分道扬镳。
English: Emperor Jianwen and the King of Eastern Hunan embarked on a path of lascivious indulgence, and Xu Ling and Yuxin parted ways.

古文：其意浅而繁，其文匿而彩，词尚轻险，情多哀思，格以延陵之听，盖亦亡国之音也。
现代文：其意浅陋而音繁，其文隐晦而华丽，文词崇尚轻灵奇险，情意颇多哀怨愁思，用春秋吴季札评论音乐的标准来要规范，大概也算是亡国之音。
English: Its meaning is shallow and complex, its text is obscure and gorgeous, the words of the text advocate light-hearted adventure, the meaning is quite sad and melancholy, using the standard of the Spring and Autumn Wu Ji Fad Commentary on Music to standardize, it is probably the sound of a ruined country.

古文：隋文初统万机，每念斫凋为朴，发号施令，咸去浮华。
现代文：隋文帝即位之初，常常认为文章要质朴，颁发号令，都除去轻浮华丽。
English: At the beginning of the Sui Emperor's reign, it was often thought that the articles should be simple, and the decrees issued should be stripped of frivolity and pomp.

古文：然时俗词藻、犹多淫丽；故宪台执法，屡飞霜简。
现代文：然而，当时习俗崇尚词藻，多有淫荡艳丽。所以，宪台执行法令，屡屡词采飞扬。
English: However, at that time, the custom advocated words and phrases, most of which were lascivious and glamorous. Therefore, the Constitutional Court implemented the decree, and the words were often flying.

古文：炀帝初习艺文，有非轻侧，暨乎即位，一变其体。
现代文：隋炀帝刚刚学习文学艺术时，对轻佻失于雅正有所非议，即位之后，一下子改变了当时的文体。
English: When Emperor Sui Xuan was just learning literature and art, he criticized the frivolity and loss of elegance. After he ascended the throne, he suddenly changed the style of the time.

古文：《与越公书》、《建东都诏》、《冬至受朝诗》及《拟饮马长城窟》，并存雅体，归于典制，虽意在骄淫，而词无浮荡。
现代文：《与越公书》、《建东都诏》、《冬至受朝诗》及《拟饮马长城窟》，都存有雅正之体，归之于典雅规范，虽然他所想的是骄纵淫侈，但文词并不轻佻淫荡。
English: "Yue Gongshu," "Jian Dongdu Zhao," "Winter Solstice by the Imperial Poem" and "Want to Drink Horse Great Wall Grotto" all have the body of elegance and are attributed to the elegant standard. Although he thought of arrogance and lasciviousness, the words are not flippant and lascivious.

古文：故当时缀文之士，遂得依而取正焉。
现代文：所以，当时的文学之士，就得到了依凭而取法其雅正。
English: Therefore, the literary men of that time were able to rely on and take advantage of their elegance.

古文：所谓能言者未必能行，盖亦君子不以人废言也。
现代文：所谓能说的人未必能够去做，大概也是君子，不因为这个人而废止他的言论。
English: The so-called person who can speak may not be able to do it, probably also a gentleman, do not cancel his speech because of this person.

古文：爰自东帝归秦，逮乎青盖入洛，四隩咸暨，九州攸同。江、汉英灵，燕、赵奇俊，并该天纲之中，俱为大国之宝。
现代文：自北周灭齐开始，到炀帝进入洛阳，四方安定，九州统一，江汉之地的杰出人才，燕赵之地的奇才俊士，都收罗在天网之中，成为大国的宝物。 言刈其楚 ，一片好的也没有遗漏。
English: From the beginning of the Northern Zhou Dynasty, to the time Emperor Qian entered Luoyang, the four directions were stable, Kyushu was unified, and the outstanding talents of Jianghan and the wizards of Yanzhao were all gathered in the sky net, becoming the treasure of a great country.

古文：言刈其楚，片善无遗，润水圆流，不能十数，才之难也，不其然乎。时之文人，见称当世者，则齐人范阳卢思道、安平李德林、河东薛道衡、赵郡李元操、钜鹿魏澹，陈人会稽虞世基、河东柳、高阳许善心等，或鹰扬河朔，或独步汉南，俱骋龙光，并驱云路矣。
现代文：雨水朝周围流，不能流出很远，人才难得，不也是这样的吗？当时的文人，受到当世称道的，则有齐人范阳卢思道、安平李德林、河东薛道衡、赵郡李元操、钜鹿魏澹，陈人会稽虞世基、河东柳、高阳许善心等人。他们或是在河朔享有高名，或是在汉南独占鳌头，都驰骋文采，位居高官。
English: At that time, the literati who were praised by the world at that time were Qi people Fan Yang Lu Si Dao, Anping Li Delin, Hedong Xue Daoheng, Zhao County Li Yuanchao, Elk Wei Wei, Chen Renhui Ji Yu Shiji, Hedong Liu, Gaoyang Xu Sanshin and others. They either enjoyed a high reputation in Hexuo, or monopolized Shantou in Hannan. They all excelled in literature and ranked high officials.

古文：《魏书》序袁跃、裴敬宪、卢观、封肃、邢臧、裴伯茂、邢昕、温子升为《文苑传》，今唯取子升，其余并各附其家传。
现代文：《魏书》叙述袁跃、裴敬宪、卢观、封肃、邢臧、裴伯茂、刑昕、温子癉等人的事迹为《文苑传》，如今只取温子癉一人，其他都分别附录于其家传。
English: The "Weishu" described the deeds of Yuan Yue, Pei Jingyan, Lu Guan, Fuxu, Yao, Pei Bomao, Jingyao, Wen Zixuan and others as "Wen Yuan Biography." Nowadays, only Wen Zixuan is taken, and the others are separately appended to his family biography.

古文：《齐书》叙祖鸿勋、李广、樊逊、刘逖、荀士逊、颜之推为《文苑传》，今唯取祖、李、樊、荀，其余亦各附其家传。
现代文：《齐书》叙述祖鸿勋、李广、樊逊、刘逖、荀士逊、颜之推等人的事迹为《文苑传》，如今只取祖鸿勋、李广、樊逊、荀士逊，其余也各自附录于其家传。
English: The "Qi Shu" described the deeds of Zu Hongxun, Li Guang, Yu Song, Liu Wei, Yu Shisong, Yan Zhitui and others as "Wen Yuan Biography," now only Zu Hongxun, Li Guang, Yu Song and Yu Shisong are taken, and the rest are also appended to their family histories.

古文：《周书》不立此传，今取王褒、庾信列于此篇。
现代文：《周书》没有设立《文苑传》，如今取王褒、庾信置于此篇。
English: "Zhou Shu" did not set up "Wen Yuan Chuan," and now the king's praise and letter are placed in this article.

古文：颜之推竟从齐入周，故列在王、庾之下。
现代文：颜之推最终从齐朝进入周朝，所以放在王褒、庾信的后面。
English: Yan Zhi Tuo eventually entered the Zhou Dynasty from the Qi Dynasty, so it was placed behind Wang Bao and Yan Xin.

古文：颜之仪既之推之弟，故列在之推之末。
现代文：颜之仪是颜之推的弟弟，所以放在颜之推传的后面。
English: Yan Zhi Yi is the younger brother of Yan Zhi Pu, so he is placed behind Yan Zhi Pu.

古文：《隋书》序刘臻、崔儦、王頍、诸葛颍、王贞、孙万寿、虞绰、王胄、庾自直、潘徽为《文学传》，今检崔儦、王頍、孙万寿各从其家传，其余编之此篇，并取虞世基、许善心、柳、明克让冠之于此，以备《文苑传》云。
现代文：《隋书》叙述刘臻、崔、王支页、诸葛颍、王贞、孙万寿、虞绰、王胄、庾自直、潘徽等人的事迹为《文学传》，如今将崔、王支页、孙万寿捡出各自随其家传，其余的人编入这篇《文苑传》中，并且取虞世基、许善心、柳、明克讠襄置于这些人前面，以备《文苑传》云云。
English: The "Sui Shu" described the deeds of Liu Zhen, Cui, Wang Zhizhi, Zhuge Zheng, Wang Zhen, Sun Wanshou, Yu Cao, Wang Hui, Zou Zizhi, Pan Hui and others as "Literary Biography." Now, Cui, Wang Zhizhi, Sun Wanshou have been picked up and passed down in their families, and the rest of the people have been compiled into this "Wen Yuan Biography," and Yu Shiji, Xu Zenshin, Liu and Ming Kexiang have been placed in front of these people to prepare for "Wen Yuan Biography."

古文：温子升，字鹏举，自云太原人，晋大将军峤之后也。
现代文：温子癉字鹏举，自称是太原人，晋大将军温峤的后代。
English: Wen Zi, surnamed Peng Jiu, claimed to be from Taiyuan and a descendant of the great general Wen Jiu.

古文：世居江左。
现代文：世代居住在江东。
English: They have lived in the east of the Yangtze River for generations.

古文：祖恭之，宋彭城王义康户曹，避难归魏，家于济阴冤句，因为其郡县人焉。
现代文：祖父温恭之，任宋彭城王刘义康的户曹，逃难来到北魏，在济阴冤句安下家，因而就成为济阴冤句县人。
English: Grandfather Wen Gongzhi, who was the household servant of Song Pengcheng King Liu Yikang, fled to the Northern Wei Dynasty and settled down in Jiyin Wugu, thus becoming a resident of Jiyin Wugu County.

古文：父晖，兗州左将军长史，行济阴郡事。
现代文：父亲温晖，任兖州左将军长史，兼行济阴郡事。
English: His father, Wen Wei, served as the chief historian of the Left General of Bozhou and was also in charge of the affairs of Jiyin County.

古文：子升初受学于崔灵恩、刘兰。精勤，以夜继昼，昼夜不倦。
现代文：温子癉开始时拜崔灵恩、刘兰为师，精诚辛勤，夜以继日，昼夜学习不知疲倦。
English: At the beginning of Wen Ziqi, she studied with Bai Cui Ling En and Liu Lan. She was diligent and hardworking, studying tirelessly day and night.

古文：长乃博览百家，文章清婉。
现代文：长大后就博览百家，文章清丽婉转。
English: When I grew up, I read hundreds of books, and the articles were clear and elegant.

古文：为广阳王深贱客，在马坊教诸奴子书。
现代文：成为广阳王元深门下的一个卑贱的门客，在马厩中教诸位奴仆的儿子读书。
English: He became a lowly concubine under the tutelage of King Yuan of Guangyang and taught the sons of servants to read in the stables.

古文：作《侯山祠堂碑文》，常景见而善之，故诣深谢之。
现代文：撰写《侯山祠堂碑文》，常景见到后，认为写得很好，因而到元深那里感谢温子癉。
English: After writing the "Houshan Ancestral Hall Inscription" and seeing the scenery, he thought it was well written, so he went to Yuan Sheng to thank Wen Ziqin.

古文：景曰： 顷见温生。 
现代文：常景说 ：立刻见温子癉。 
English: Changjing said, "See Unzi immediately."

古文：深怪问之。
现代文：元深奇怪地问他。
English: Yuan Sheng asked him strangely.

古文：景曰： 温生是大才士。 
现代文：常景说： 温子癉是位了不起的才子。 
English: Changjing said, "Wanzihong is a great talent.

古文：深由是稍知之。
现代文：元深因此对温子癉稍稍有所了解。
English: As a result, Yuan Sheng had a slight understanding of the Onzi cormorant.

古文：熙平初，中尉、东平王匡博召辞人以充御史。
现代文：孝明帝熙平初年，中尉、东平王元匡广召文学之士充任御史。
English: In the first year of Emperor Xiaoming Heiping, the lieutenant, Dongping Wangyuan Kuang, called on literary figures to serve as imperial historians.

古文：同时射策者八百余人，子升与卢仲宣、孙搴等二十四人为高第。
现代文：同时射策的有八百多人，温子癉和卢仲宣、孙搴等二十四人成绩优等。
English: At the same time, there were more than 800 shooters, and 24 of them, including Wen Zixuan, Lu Zhongxuan and Sun Qian, achieved excellent results.

古文：于是预选者争相引决，匡使子升当之，皆受屈而去。
现代文：于是预选来的人争相前来要求裁决，元匡让温子癉去阻挡他们，都很委屈地离去。
English: As a result, the pre-selected people rushed to come and demand a ruling. Yuan Kuang let Wen Zixuan block them, and they all left with grievances.

古文：搴谓人曰： 朝来靡旗乱辙者，皆子升逐北。 
现代文：孙搴对人说 ：那些人早晨来的时候乱哄哄闹嚷嚷的，都被温子癉打败了。 
English: Sun Yat-sen said to the man, "When those people came in the morning, they made a lot of noise, but they were all defeated by Wenzi Yao.

古文：遂补御史，时年二十二。
现代文：于是就补为御史。当时，温子癉二十二岁。
English: At that time, Atsuko was twenty-two years old.

古文：台中弹文皆委焉。
现代文：御史台中的弹劾奏章，都交给了温子癉。
English: The impeachment record in history has all been handed over to Wen Zixuan.

古文：以忧去任。
现代文：因居父母之丧而离职。
English: He left the position due to the death of his parents.

古文：服阕，还为朝请。
现代文：服丧期满，回京任朝请。
English: At the end of the mourning period, please return to Beijing to serve as the next emperor.

古文：后李神俊行荆州事，引兼录事参军。
现代文：后来，李神俊兼理荆州事，用温子癉兼任录事参军。
English: Later, Li Shenzhun also led the Jingzhou affairs, and he also served as a record officer in the army with Wen Ziqi.

古文：被徽赴省，神俊表留不遣。
现代文：被征召赴省台，神俊上表将温子癉留下不让他去。
English: When he was called up to go to Taiwan Province, Shen Jun refused to let him go, leaving Atsuko on the table.

古文：吏部郎中李奖退表不许，曰： 昔伯瑜之不应留，王朗所以发叹。
现代文：吏部郎中李奖将其上表退回，不准其请，说 ：当初伯瑜不应当留下来，王朗因此而发出感叹。
English: Li Shou, a member of the Ministry of Civil Affairs, sent back his invitation and did not allow him to stay, saying: At the beginning, Bo Yu should not have stayed, and Wang Lang sighed because of this.

古文：宜速遣赴，无踵彦云前失。 
现代文：应迅速送温子癉赴京，不要蹈袭彦云以前的过失。 
English: We should quickly send Atsuko Atsuko to Beijing, and not repeat the mistakes of the past.

古文：于是还省。
现代文：于是，回到省台。
English: As a result, I returned to Taiwan.

古文：及广阳王深为东北道行台，召为郎中。
现代文：广阳王元深任东北道行台，召温子癉任郎中。
English: Guangyang Wang Yuan Sheng was appointed as the governor of the Northeastern Province, and called on Wenzihong to serve as his junior.

古文：黄门郎徐纥受四方表启，答之敏速，于深独沈思，曰： 彼有温郎中，才藻可畏。 
现代文：黄门郎徐纥接受四面八方的章表奏启，答复他们很是迅速，只有对元深却要沉思，说： 他那里有一个温郎中，才华词藻很可畏惧。 
English: Huangmen Lang Xuqi accepted the opening of chapters from all directions, and answered them very quickly, but only for Yuan Sheng, he had to meditate, saying: He has a warm-hearted person there, and his talent is very formidable.

古文：高车破走，珍宝盈满，子升取绢四十疋。
现代文：高车被打败逃走，留下很多珍宝，温子癉只是拿了四十疋绢。
English: Gao Che was defeated and fled, leaving a lot of treasures behind. Wen Zixuan only took forty baht.

古文：深军败，子升为葛荣所得。
现代文：元深军被打败，温子癉被葛荣俘获。
English: Yuan Sheng's army was defeated, and Wen Ziqi was captured by Ge Rong.

古文：荣下都督和洛兴与子升旧识，以数十骑潜送子升，得达冀州。
现代文：葛荣的部下都督和洛兴和温子癉是老朋友，用几十名骑兵偷偷地送温子癉逃出，得以到达冀州。
English: Ge Rong's subordinates, the governor and Luo Xing and Wen Zixuan, were old friends. They used dozens of cavalry to secretly send Wen Zixuan to escape and reach Jizhou.

古文：还京，李楷执其手曰： 卿今得免，足使夷甫惭德。 
现代文：回到京城后，李楷拉着他的手说： 你如今得以幸免，足以让夷甫心中感到惭愧。 
English: After returning to Beijing, Li Kai took his hand and said: You have been spared now, which is enough to make Yi Fu feel ashamed.

古文：自是无复宦情，闭门读书，厉精不已。
现代文：从此以后，温子癉再也没有做官的意思，闭门读书，精神振奋不已。
English: From then on, Wen Zixuan no longer had any intention of becoming an official. He read books behind closed doors, and his spirits were uplifted.

古文：及孝庄即位，以子升为南主客郎中，修起居注。
现代文：孝庄帝即位后，任命温子癉为南主客郎中，修撰起居注。
English: After Emperor Xiaozhuang ascended to the throne, he appointed Wen Ziqi as a guest of the Southern Lord, and began to write and live there.

古文：曾一日不直，上党王天穆时录尚书事，将加捶挞，子升遂逃遁。
现代文：曾经有一天没有当值，上党王元天穆当时录尚书事，准备揍温子癉一顿鞭子，温子癉就逃跑了。
English: Once upon a time, when he was not on duty, the upper party king, Yuan Tianmu, was writing a book and preparing to whip Wen Zixuan with a whip, and Wen Zixuan ran away.

古文：天穆甚怒，奏人代之。
现代文：元天穆非常愤怒，奏请用人代替温子癉修撰起居注。
English: Yuan Tianmu was so angry that he asked someone to write the commentary in place of Wen Zixiu.

古文：庄帝曰： 当世才子不过数人，岂容为此便相放黜？ 
现代文：孝庄帝说 ：当世才子只有几个人，岂能允许因为这点事情就放逐罢免？ 
English: Xiaozhuangdi said: When there are only a few talented people in the world, can it be allowed to expel and dismiss because of this little thing?

古文：乃寝其奏。
现代文：就把元天穆的奏章压下了。
English: He put down the score of Yuan Tianmu.

古文：及天穆将讨邢杲，召子升同行，子升未敢应。
现代文：到了天穆将要讨伐邢杲时，召子癉同行，温子癉不敢答应。
English: When it came to the time when Tianmu was going to fight against Yao, he invited Zi Yao to accompany him. Wen Zi Yao did not dare to agree.

古文：天穆谓人曰： 吾欲收其才用，岂怀前忿也？
现代文：元天穆对人说 ：我想使用他的才能，岂能记念前仇呢？
English: Yuan Tianmu said to the man, "If I want to use his talent, can I not remember the past?"

古文：今复不来，便须南走越，北走胡耳！ 
现代文：如今他不来，就一定要南逃越国，北逃胡地！ 
English: If he doesn't come now, he'll have to flee south to Yueguo and north to Hudi!

古文：子升不得已而见之。加伏波将军。为行台郎中。
现代文：温子癉不得已而见元天穆，加授伏波将军，任行台郎中。
English: As a last resort, Wen Zixuan met with Yuan Tianmu, conferred the title of General of Fubao, and was appointed as a middle-ranking official of Xingtai.

古文：天穆深知赏之。
现代文：元天穆十分了解和欣赏他。
English: Yuan Tianmu knows and appreciates him very well.

古文：元颢入洛，天穆召子升问曰： 即欲向京师？为随我北度？ 
现代文：元颢进入洛阳，元天穆召见了温子癉，问他说 ：你想到京城去，还是跟随我往北去？ 
English: When Yuan Shao entered Luoyang, Yuan Tianmu summoned Wen Zihao and asked him: "Do you want to go to Beijing, or should you follow me to the north?"

古文：对曰： 主上以武牢失守，致此狼狈。
现代文：温子癉回答说 ：主上因为武牢关失守，以至如此为难窘迫。
English: Atsuko replied, "The lord is in such a difficult predicament because he lost control of the castle."

古文：元颢新入，人情未安，今往讨之，必有征无战。
现代文：元颢刚刚进入洛阳，人心没有安定，如今前往征讨，必定旗开得胜，马到成功。
English: The Yuan Dynasty had just entered Luoyang, and the hearts of the people were not stable. Now they are going to fight, they will surely win, and they will succeed.

古文：王若克复京师，奉迎大驾，桓、文之举也。
现代文：您如果能收复京城，迎接皇上回京，这就是齐桓、晋文的壮举啊。
English: If you can recover the capital city and welcome the emperor back to Beijing, this is the feat of Qi Huan and Jinwen.

古文：舍此北度，窃为大王惜之。 
现代文：舍弃这种选择而往北去，我私下为大王感到可惜。 
English: Privately, I feel sorry for the king for giving up this choice and going north.

古文：天穆善之而不能用，遣子升还洛，颢以为中书舍人。
现代文：元天穆认为温子癉说得很好，却不能采纳，派遣温子癉回洛阳，元颢用为中书舍人。
English: Yuan Tianmu thought that Wen Zixuan spoke very well, but could not accept it. He sent Wen Zixuan back to Luoyang, and Yuan Zixuan was used as a middle school teacher.

古文：庄帝还宫，为颢任使者多被废黜，而子升复为舍人。
现代文：孝庄帝回宫复位，受到元颢任用的人大都被罢免，而温子癉又任舍人。
English: Emperor Xiaozhuang returned to the imperial court and was reinstated, and most of the people appointed by Yuan Shao were dismissed, while Wen Zixuan was appointed as a subordinate.

古文：天穆每谓子升曰： 恨不用卿前计。 
现代文：元天穆常常对温子癉说 ：遗憾的是没有采纳你之前的计谋。 
English: Yuan Tianmu often said to Wen Zixuan: Unfortunately, I did not adopt your previous strategy.

古文：除正员郎，仍舍人。
现代文：任正员郎，仍兼舍人。
English: He was appointed to the post of vice-chairman, but he remained a layman.

古文：及帝杀尔硃荣也，子升预谋，当时赦诏，子升词也。
现代文：孝庄帝杀朱荣时，温子癉参与谋划，当时的赦令诏书，是温子癉撰写的。
English: When Emperor Xiaozhuang killed Zhu Rong, Wen Zixuan participated in the planning. The pardon edict at that time was written by Wen Zixuan.

古文：荣入内，遇子升把诏书，问： 是何文字？ 
现代文：朱荣进入宫内，遇见温子癉手持诏书，问 ：这是些什么内容？ 
English: Zhu Rong entered the palace, met Atsuko Atsuko holding the imperial edict, and asked: What is the content of this?

古文：子升颜色不变，曰： 敕。 
现代文：温子癉面色不变，说： 敕令。 
English: Wen Ziqi, his face unchanged, said: "This is an order.

古文：荣不视之。
现代文：朱荣看也不看。
English: Zhu Rong didn't even look at it.

古文：尔硃兆入洛，子升惧祸逃匿。
现代文：朱兆进入洛阳，温子癉惧怕灾祸，逃跑隐藏了起来。
English: Zhu Zhao entered Luoyang, and Wen Zixuan, fearing disaster, ran away and hid.

古文：永熙中为侍读，兼舍人、镇南将军、金紫光禄大夫。
现代文：孝武帝永熙年间，温子癉任侍读，兼任舍人，镇南将军、金紫光禄大夫。
English: During the reign of Emperor Xiaowu Yongxi, Wen Zixuan served as an attendant, concurrently served as an attendant, Zhenan general, and Jin Zi Guanglu doctor.

古文：迁散骑常侍、中军大将军，后领本州大中正。
现代文：升任散骑常侍、中军大将军，后来兼领本州大中正。
English: He rose to the rank of straggler, general of the Chinese army, and later also led the Honshu University Junior High School.

古文：梁使张皋写子升文笔，传于江外，梁武称之曰： 曹植、陆机复生于北土，恨我辞人，数穷百六。 
现代文：梁朝使者张皋抄写温子癉的文章在江东流传，梁武帝称赞他说： 曹植、陆机再生于北方，遗憾的是我朝辞人，气数尽于厄运。 
English: The Liang Dynasty's emissary Zhang Ye copied Wen Zi Yao's article and it was circulated in the east of the Yangtze River. Emperor Liang Wudi praised him and said: Cao Zhi and Lu Ji were reborn in the north. Unfortunately, I resigned from the imperial court. I am full of bad luck.

古文：阳夏守傅摽使吐谷浑，见其国主床头有书数卷，乃是子升文也。
现代文：阳夏太守傅标出使吐谷浑，见到吐谷浑国主的床头有几卷书，竟是温子癉的文章。
English: Yang Xia Taizhou Fu pointed out the envoy of Tuyugun, and saw that there were several volumes of books on the bedside of the ruler of Tuyugun, which turned out to be the articles of Wen Zixuan.

古文：济阴王晖业尝云： 江左文人，宋有颜延之、谢灵运，梁有沈约、任昉，我子升足以陵颜轹谢，含任吐沈。 
现代文：济阴王元晖业曾经说： 江东的文人，宋朝有颜延之、谢灵运，梁朝有沈约、任日方，我朝温子癉，足以凌超颜、谢，吞吐任、沈。 
English: Wang Yuanjunye of Jilin Province once said: The literati of the East Jiangsu Province, the Song Dynasty has Yan Yan, Xie Lingyun, the Liang Dynasty has Shen Ying, Ren Nipo, and our Dynasty has Wen Zi Ya, which is enough to surpass Yan, Xie, and swallow Ren, Shen.

古文：杨遵彦作《文德论》，以为古今辞人皆负才遗行，浇薄险忌，唯邢子才、王元景、温子升彬彬有德素。
现代文：杨遵彦作《文德论》，认为古往今来的文人都自负才能，行为失检，轻浮鄙薄，险诈忌刻，只有邢子才、王元景、温子癉彬彬有礼，有德有行。
English: Yang Zunyan wrote "On Literary Virtue" and believed that all literati from ancient times to the present were conceited, misbehaved, frivolous and despicable, and treacherous. Only Zizi, Wang Yuanjing, and Wen Ziqi were courteous and virtuous.

古文：齐文襄引子升为大将军谘议。
现代文：齐文襄皇帝用温子癉为大将军咨议。
English: Emperor Qibun Xiang used Wanzi Yao to consult with the generals.

古文：子升前为中书郎，尝诣梁客馆受国书，自以不修容止，谓人曰： 诗章易作，逋峭难为。 
现代文：温子癉之前任中书郎时，曾经到梁朝客馆接受国书，自认为行为举止不够整齐，对人说： 诗篇容易写，委婉曲折却难以做。 
English: When Wen Zixuan was previously appointed as a middle school teacher, he once went to the Liang Dynasty Guest House to receive the national book. He thought that his behavior was not neat enough, and said to people: Poems are easy to write, but euphemism is difficult to do.

古文：文襄馆客元仅曰： 诸人当贺，推子升合陈辞。 
现代文：文襄皇帝的门客元瑾说 ：众人应当祝贺，推举温子癉代表大家祝辞。 
English: The disciple of Emperor Wenxiang, Yuan Shao, said, "Everyone should congratulate, and select Wen Zihao to deliver a congratulatory speech on behalf of everyone."

古文：子升久忸怩，乃推陆操焉。
现代文：温子癉扭怩很久，众人就推荐陆操。
English: It's been a hot topic for a long time, and many people recommend the floor exercise.

古文：及元仅、刘思逸、荀济等作乱，文襄疑子升知其谋。
现代文：到了元瑾、刘思逸、荀济等人发动叛乱，文襄皇帝怀疑温子癉参与其阴谋。
English: When Yuan Shao, Liu Siyi, Qian Ji and others launched a rebellion, Emperor Wenxiang suspected that Wen Zixuan was involved in the conspiracy.

古文：方使之作《神武碑》。文既成，乃饿诸晋阳狱，食弊襦而死。
现代文：当时正让温子癉撰写《神武碑》，文章写好之后，就把温子癉投入晋阳监狱挨饿，温子癉吃破旧棉絮而死。
English: At that time, he was asking Wen Zixuan to write "The Divine Military Monument." After the article was written, he put Wen Zixuan into Jinyang Prison to starve, and Wen Zixuan ate old cotton wool and died.

古文：弃尸路隅，没其家口。
现代文：将其尸首弃置于路边，将其家人籍没入官。
English: He dumped her body on the side of the road and deprived her family of official status.

古文：太尉长史宋游道收葬之，又为集其文笔为三十五卷。
现代文：太尉长史宋游道收其尸而安葬，又收集其文章编为三五十卷。
English: Song Youdao, the captain of Shih, collected his body and buried it. He also collected his articles and compiled them into thirty-five volumes.

古文：子升外恬静，与物无竞，言有准的，不妄毁誉。而内深险，事故之际，好豫其间，所以终致祸败。
现代文：温子癉外表恬淡宁静，和人没有争执，说话有原则，不轻易诋毁和称赞别人；而内心幽深危险，生逢多事之秋，喜欢参与其中，所以终于招致灾祸。
English: On the outside, Wen Zixuan is calm and serene. He does not quarrel with others, speaks with principles, and does not easily denigrate and praise others. But deep inside, he is dangerous. He is born in the autumn of many things, and likes to participate in them, so he finally causes a disaster.

古文：齐亡年卒。
现代文：另撰有《永安记》三卷。
English: He also wrote the three-volume "Record of Yongan."

古文：王褒，字子深，琅邪临沂人也。
现代文：无子。王褒字子深，琅笽临沂人。
English: He had no children. Wang Baozhizhong was a man of deep character.

古文：曾祖俭、祖骞、父规，并《南史》有传。
现代文：曾祖父王俭、祖父王骞、父亲王规，《南史》都有传。
English: His great-grandfather Wang Jian, his grandfather Wang Xi, and his father Wang Gui are all said to have read "Southern History."

古文：褒识量淹通，志怀沈静，美威仪，善谈笑，博览史传，七岁能属文。
现代文：王褒见识广博，器量通达。心怀沉静之志，威仪俊美，善于谈笑，博览史籍，七岁就能作文章。
English: Wang Bao has a wide range of knowledge and is well-versed. He has a quiet spirit, is dignified and handsome, is good at talking and laughing, is well-versed in history, and can write articles at the age of seven.

古文：外祖梁司空袁昂爱之，谓宾客曰： 此兒当成吾宅相。 
现代文：外祖父梁朝司空袁昂喜爱他，对客人说： 这个孩子会成为很有出息的人。 
English: Grandfather Liang Chao Si Ku Yuan Ang loved him and said to the guests: "This child will become a very promising person."

古文：弱冠举秀才，除秘书郎、太子舍人。
现代文：没到成人的年龄就举荐为秀才，任秘书郎、太子舍人之职。
English: Before reaching the age of adulthood, he was recommended as a talented person, appointed as a secretary and a prince's concubine.

古文：梁国子祭酒萧子云，褒之姑夫也，特善草隶。
现代文：梁朝国子祭酒萧子云，是王褒的姑父，特别擅长草书和隶书。
English: Xiao Ziyun, Liang's uncle, was particularly good at cursive and cursive writing.

古文：褒少以姻戚，去来其家，遂相模范，而名亚子云，并见重于时。
现代文：王褒小的时候因为亲戚的关系，来往于萧子云家，就向他学习书法，而名声在萧子云之下，一同受到当时的重视。
English: When Wang Bo was a child, because of the relationship between relatives, he went to Xiao Ziyun's home to learn calligraphy from him, and the reputation was under Xiao Ziyun's cloud, and both were valued at the time.

古文：武帝嘉其才艺，遂以弟鄱阳王恢女妻之。袭爵南昌县侯，历位秘书丞、宣城王文学、安城内史。
现代文：梁武帝嘉奖他的才华技艺，就把弟弟鄱阳王萧恢的女儿嫁给王褒，世袭爵位南昌县侯，历任秘书丞、宣城王文学、安城内史。
English: Emperor Liangwu commended his talent and skill, so he married the daughter of his younger brother, Wang Xiaowei of Shenyang, to Wang Bao, hereditary title of Nanchang County, successive secretaries, literature of Xuancheng Wang, and history of Ancheng.

古文：及侯景陷建鄴，褒辑宁所部，见称于时。
现代文：到了侯景攻陷建业，王褒收集安定其部下，受到当时人的称道。
English: When Houjing invaded Jianye, Wang Bo collected and stabilized his subordinates, which was praised by people at the time.

古文：转南平内史。
现代文：改任南平内史。
English: He was reassigned to the post of Nampyeong Naishi.

古文：梁元帝嗣位，褒有旧，召拜吏部尚书、右仆射，仍迁左丞，兼参掌。
现代文：梁元帝继位，王褒和梁元帝有旧交，召至京师，任吏部尚书、右仆射，仍改任左丞，兼任参掌。
English: When Emperor Liang Yuan succeeded to the throne, Wang Bao, who had an old friendship with Emperor Liang Yuan, was summoned to Beijing to serve as the imperial secretary, and was appointed as the secretary and the right-hand man of the imperial secretary. However, he was still appointed as the left-hand man of the imperial secretary, and also served as a staff officer.

古文：褒既名家，文学优赡，当时咸共推挹，故位望隆重，宠遇日甚。而愈自谦损，不以位地矜物，时论称之。
现代文：王褒既是名家，文学成就尤为优异丰赡，当时都很推崇他。所以，王褒职位名望并重，宠遇日甚一日，却越发自谦自逊，不因地位高居人上而自骄于人，当时的舆论都称赞他。
English: As Wang Bao was from a famous family, and his literary achievements were particularly outstanding and abundant, he was highly respected at the time. Therefore, Wang Bao's position was equally prestigious, and he was favored day by day, but he became more and more self-effacing, and he was not proud of himself because of his high status. The public opinion at the time praised him.

古文：初，元帝平侯景及禽武陵王纪后，以建鄴凋残，时江陵殷盛，便欲安之。又其政府臣僚皆楚人也，并愿即都鄢郢。
现代文：当初，元帝平定侯景之乱和擒获武陵王萧纪之后，因建邺凋零残破，而当时江陵殷实强盛，就想迁都江陵，另外，元帝朝中的官员僚属都是楚人，都希望立即建都鄢郢。
English: At first, after the Yuan Emperor had quelled the Houjing Rebellion and captured the Wuling King Xiao Ji, he wanted to move the capital to Jiangling because of the dilapidated ruins of Jiangling. At that time, Jiangling was prosperous and powerful. In addition, the officials and subordinates of the Yuan Dynasty were all Chu people, and they all hoped to build the capital immediately.

古文：尝召群臣议之。
现代文：元帝曾经召集群臣商议建都鄢郢之事。
English: Emperor Yuan once convened a group of courtiers to discuss the construction of the capital.

古文：镇军将军胡僧祐、吏部尚书宗懔、太府卿黄罗汉、御史中丞刘珏等曰： 建鄴王气已尽，又荆南地又有天子气，迁徙非宜。 
现代文：镇军将军胡僧、吏部尚书宗懔、太府卿黄罗汉、御史丞刘等人说 ：建邺帝王气数已尽，而荆南之地有天子气象，迁都建邺不合适。 
English: The general of the town army, Hu Zeng, the head of the personnel department, Shang Shuzong, the grand prefect Huang Luohan, the imperial secretary Liu and others said: Jianye Emperor's energy is exhausted, and Jingnan has the weather of heaven, and it is not suitable to move the capital to Jianye.

古文：元帝深以为然。
现代文：元帝认为他们说的很对。
English: Yuan Di thought that what they said was right.

古文：褒性谨慎，知元帝多猜忌，弗敢公言其非。
现代文：王褒生性谨慎，知道元帝猜疑忌讳很多，不敢公开说元帝的不是。
English: Wang Baosheng was cautious, knowing that the Yuan Emperor had a lot of suspicions and taboos, and did not dare to publicly say that the Yuan Emperor was wrong.

古文：后因清闲，密谏，言辞甚切。
现代文：后来借助清静闲暇之机，秘密劝谏，言词非常恳切。
English: Later, with the help of the opportunity of quiet leisure, they secretly persuaded him, and the words were very earnest.

古文：元帝意好荆楚，已从僧祐等策，竟不用。
现代文：元帝心中喜好荆楚之地，已听从胡僧等人的谋略，终于没能采用王褒的建议。
English: Emperor Yuan liked the land of Jingchu in his heart, and he had already listened to the strategy of Hu Monk and others, and finally failed to adopt Wang Bo's suggestion.

古文：及魏征江陵，元帝授褒都督城西诸军事。
现代文：到了北魏征讨江陵时，元帝授命王褒都督城西诸军事。
English: When the Northern Wei conquered Jiangling, the Yuan Emperor ordered Wang Bao, the governor of the western part of the city, to lead the military.

古文：栅破，从元帝入金城。
现代文：栅栏被攻破，跟从元帝进入金城。
English: The fence was breached, and he followed the former emperor into the Golden City.

古文：俄而元帝出降，褒遂与众俱出，见柱国于谨，甚礼之。
现代文：很快，元帝出城投降，王褒就与众人一同出城。见到柱国于谨，于谨待他很有礼貌。
English: Soon, Emperor Yuan left the city to surrender, and Wang Bo left the city with everyone else. Seeing Zhu Guo was very respectful, and treated him very politely.

古文：褒曾作《燕歌》，妙尽塞北寒苦之状，元帝及诸文士并和之，而竞为凄切之辞，至此方验焉。
现代文：王褒曾经写有《燕歌》，描绘塞北寒冷贫苦的状况维妙维肖，元帝和诸位文士一同唱和，竞相选用凄凉悲切的言词，到现在才得到验证。
English: Wang Bo once wrote "The Swallow's Song," describing the cold and poverty-stricken conditions in northern Tibet in vivid detail. Emperor Yuan and all the scribes sang together and competed to choose the bleak and sad words, which have only now been verified.

古文：褒与王克、刘珏、宗懔、殷不害等数十人俱至长安，周文喜曰： 昔平吴之利，二陆而已；今定楚之功，群贤毕至，可谓过之矣。 
现代文：王褒与王克、刘、宗懔、殷不害等几十人一起来到长安，周文帝高兴地说： 当年平定吴地的好处，只是得到了陆机、陆云兄弟而已，如今平定楚地的功绩，是众多的贤才都来到了，可以说超过平吴之利了。 
English: Wang Bao came to Chang'an together with dozens of people including Wang Ke, Liu, Zong Xi, and Yin Nihong. Zhou Wendi said happily: The benefits of pacifying Wudi that year were only obtained by Lu Ji and Lu Yun brothers, but the achievements of pacifying Chu today are that many sages have come, which can be said to exceed the benefits of pacifying Wudi.

古文：又谓褒及王克曰： 吾即王氏甥也，卿等并吾之舅氏，当以亲戚为情，勿以去乡介意。 
现代文：又对王褒和王克说 ：我就是姓王的外甥，你们都是我的舅家人，应当看重亲戚的情意，不要因离开故乡而放心不下。 
English: He also said to Wang Bao and Wang Ke: I am the nephew of Wang, you are all my uncles, you should value the feelings of relatives, don't worry about leaving your hometown.

古文：于是授褒及殷不害等车骑大将军、仪同三司。
现代文：于是授予王褒和殷不害等人车骑大将军、仪同三司。
English: As a result, Wang Bao and Yin Nuxing were awarded the title of General of Chariot and Cavalry, and the title of Third Division.

古文：常从容上席，资饩甚厚。
现代文：常常从容地居于上席，赏赐非常丰厚。
English: They often sit comfortably in the upper seats, and the rewards are very rich.

古文：褒等亦并荷恩眄，忘羁旅焉。
现代文：王褒等人也都受到恩遇，忘记了是在周朝寄居做客。
English: Wang Bao and others were also favored, forgetting that they were guests in the Zhou Dynasty.

古文：周孝闵帝践阼，封石泉县子。
现代文：周孝闵帝即皇帝位，封王褒石泉县子爵。
English: Emperor Zhou Xiaohui was enthroned as emperor, and Wang Bo was made Viscount of Shiquan County.

古文：明帝即位，笃好文学，时褒与庾信才名最高，特加亲待。
现代文：周明帝即位，特别喜爱文学，当时王褒与庾信才华声名最高，特意加以亲宠优待。
English: When Emperor Zhou Ming ascended the throne, he was particularly fond of literature. At that time, Wang Bo and Zou Xin were the most famous for their talents, and they were specially favored.

古文：帝每游宴，命褒赋诗谈论，恆在左右。
现代文：周明帝每有欢宴，就命王褒写诗为文，一直在身边。
English: Whenever Emperor Zhou Ming had a banquet, he ordered the king to write a poem praising him, and he was always by his side.

古文：寻加开府仪同三司。
现代文：很快加授开府仪同三司。
English: He was soon given the additional award of Kaifu Yi and the three divisions.

古文：保定中，除内史中大夫。
现代文：周武帝保定年间，授内史中大夫之职。
English: During the reign of Emperor Zhouwu in Baoding, he was awarded the post of doctor of internal history.

古文：武帝作《象经》，令褒注之，引据该洽，甚见称赏。
现代文：周武帝作《象经》，命王褒为之作注。王褒注引证详备广博，很受武帝的赞赏。
English: Emperor Zhou Wu wrote "The Elephant Sutra" and ordered Wang Rong to annotate it. Wang Rong annotated it extensively, which was greatly appreciated by Emperor Wu.

古文：褒有器局，雅识政体，既累世在江东为宰辅，帝亦以此重之。
现代文：王褒有器量，特别明了政事，既然多年在江东做辅政大臣，周武帝也就因此而看重他。
English: Wang Bao was resourceful and particularly knowledgeable about politics. Since he had been an assistant minister of state in Jiangdong for many years, Emperor Zhou valued him for this reason.

古文：建德以后，颇参朝议，凡大诏册，皆令褒具草。
现代文：建德年间以后，王褒多参与朝政，所有大的诏令文册，都让王褒执笔撰写。
English: After the Jiande era, Wang Baoduo took part in the imperial court politics, and all the major imperial edicts were written by Wang Baoduo.

古文：东宫既建，授太子少保，迁少司空，仍掌纶诰。
现代文：东宫设立之后，授太子少保之职，改任少司空，仍旧掌管诏令。
English: After the establishment of the East Palace, he was given the post of Junior Bodyguard to the Crown Prince, and changed his post to Junior Secretary, but he was still in charge of the imperial edict.

古文：乘舆行幸，褒常侍从。
现代文：武帝乘车出行巡幸，王褒常常跟从侍奉。
English: Emperor Wu would travel around the country by car, and Wang Bo would often accompany him.

古文：初，褒与梁处士汝南周弘让相善，及让兄弘正自陈来聘，帝许褒等通亲知音问，褒赠弘让诗并书焉。
现代文：当初，王褒和梁朝居士汝南人周弘让相友善，到了弘让的兄长弘正自陈国来通好，武帝允许王褒等人和亲戚朋友通音信，王褒赠给周弘让诗和书信。
English: At first, Wang Bao and Zhou Hongzhang, a resident of the Liang Dynasty in the south of China, were friendly with each other. When Hongzhang's elder brother, Hong Zheng, came from Chen Province, they communicated well. Emperor Wu allowed Wang Bao and others to send letters to relatives and friends. Wang Bao presented Zhou Hongzhang with poems and letters.

古文：寻出为宜州刺史，卒于位。
现代文：不久，出任宜州刺史，死于官任。
English: Soon after, he was appointed as the governor of Yizhou and died in office.

古文：子鼒。庾信，字子山，南阳新野人。
现代文：庾信字子山，南阳新野人。
English: Yuxin Zizishan, Nanyang Xinyang.

古文：祖易、父肩吾，并《南史》有传。
现代文：祖父庾易、父亲庾肩吾，《南史》中都有传。
English: His grandfather, Jie Yi, and his father, Jie Shangguo, are both mentioned in "Southern History."

古文：信幼而俊迈，聪敏绝伦，博览群书，尤善《春秋左氏传》。
现代文：庾信自幼俊逸超俗，非常聪明机敏，博览群书，尤其擅长《春秋左氏传》。
English: From a young age, Yu Xin was handsome and eccentric. He was very clever and quick-witted. He was an avid reader, and was particularly good at "The Biography of Zuo Shunqiu."

古文：身长八尺，腰带十围，容止颓然，有过人者。
现代文：身高八尺，腰带长达十围，仪容举止恭顺，有过人之处。
English: He is eight feet tall, his belt is ten times as long, his appearance and demeanour are deferential, and he is exceptional.

古文：父肩吾，为梁太子中庶子，掌管记。
现代文：父亲庾肩吾，任梁朝太子中庶子，掌管记。
English: My father took me under his wing, and I became the illegitimate son of the crown prince of the Liang Dynasty, in charge of the record.

古文：东海徐摛为右卫率。
现代文：东海人徐扌离任右卫率。
English: East China Sea native Xu Wei is the most senior right guard to leave his post.

古文：摛子陵及信并为抄撰学士。
现代文：徐扌离之子徐陵和庾信都任抄撰学士。
English: Xu Ling and Xuxin, the sons of Xu Bingli, were both graduates in copywriting.

古文：父子东宫，出入禁闼，恩礼莫与比隆。
现代文：徐、庾父子在东宫，出入宫禁之中，恩崇礼遇没有人能和他们比高低。
English: Xu and Zou, father and son, were in the East Palace, and were forbidden to enter or leave the palace. No one could match their courtesy and courtesy.

古文：既文并绮艳，故世号为徐、庾体焉。
现代文：既然诗文都绮丽糜艳，因而世人称为 徐庾体 。
English: Since the poems are all beautiful and vivid, the world is called "Xu Xun body."

古文：当时后进，竞相模范，每有一文，都下莫不传诵。
现代文：当时的后辈，争相模仿。他们每有一篇新的诗文，京城都争相传诵。
English: The younger generation at the time competed to imitate. Every time they had a new poem, the capital city competed to recite it.

古文：累迁通直散骑常侍，聘于东魏。文章辞令，盛为鄴下所称。
现代文：庾信多次升迁至通直散骑常侍，出使到东魏，其文章辞采，在邺都受到很高的称誉。
English: Yuxin was promoted many times to the position of a regular attendant of the imperial cavalry, and was sent to the Eastern Wei Dynasty. He was highly praised in Shandong for his writings.

古文：还为东宫学士，领建康令。
现代文：回国后任东宫学士，领建康令。
English: After returning to China, he held the post of Donggong Baccalaureate and led the Jiankang Order.

古文：侯景作乱，梁简文帝命信率宫中文武千余人营于硃雀航。
现代文：侯景发动叛乱，梁简文帝命令庾信率领宫中文武官员士卒一千多人，在朱雀航安营。
English: Hou Jing launched a rebellion, and Emperor Liang Jianwen ordered Xunxin to lead more than a thousand Chinese military officers from the imperial court to set up camp in Suzakehang.

古文：及景至，信以众先退。
现代文：侯景来到的时候，庾信率领众人先退。
English: When Hou Jing arrived, Yan Xin led the crowd to retreat first.

古文：台城陷后，信奔于江陵。
现代文：台城被攻陷之后，庾信逃奔到江陵。
English: After the fall of Taichung, Yan Xin fled to Gangneung.

古文：梁元帝承制，除御史中丞。
现代文：梁元帝受命，庾信任御史中丞。
English: Emperor Liang Yuan was ordered to place his trust in Goshi Zhongzheng.

古文：及即位，转右卫将军，封武康县侯，加散骑侍郎，聘于西魏。
现代文：梁元帝继位后，改任右卫将军，封爵武康县侯，加授散骑侍郎，出使于西魏。
English: After Emperor Liang Yuan succeeded to the throne, he was reappointed as the General of the Right Division, knighted as the Marquis of Bukang County, awarded the Distinguished Cavalryman, and dispatched to the Western Wei Dynasty.

古文：属大军南讨，遂留长安。
现代文：适逢大军南征江陵，于是就留在长安。
English: The time was right for a large army to march south to conquer Jiangling, so he stayed in Chang'an.

古文：江陵平，累迁仪同三司。
现代文：江陵平定后，多次升迁至仪同三司。
English: After the subjugation of Gangneung, he was promoted to the Third Division of Yidong several times.

古文：周孝闵帝践阼，封临清县子，除司水下大夫。
现代文：周孝闵帝即位，封爵临清县子，授司水下大夫之职。
English: Emperor Zhou Xiaohui ascended to the throne, knighted Lin Qingxianzi, and assigned him the post of underwater doctor.

古文：出为弘农郡守。
现代文：出京任弘农郡太守。
English: He went to Kyoto to become the governor of Kono County.

古文：迁骠骑大将军、开府仪同三司、司宪中大夫。进爵义城县侯。
现代文：升任骠骑大将军、开府仪同三司、司宪中大夫，晋爵为义城县侯。
English: He was promoted to General of Horse Cavalry, Kaifu Rites and Ceremonies Third Division, Sisian Middle Doctor, and was given the title of Marquis of Yicheng County.

古文：俄拜洛州刺史。
现代文：很快授洛州刺史之职。
English: He was soon given the post of Los Angeles County historian.

古文：信为政简静，吏人安之。
现代文：庾信治理政务简要安静，官吏百姓都感到安全。
English: The administration of government affairs is simple and quiet, and officials and ordinary people feel safe.

古文：时陈氏与周通好，南北流寓之士，各许还其旧国。
现代文：当时，陈朝和北周互通友好，南北流浪寓居的文士，允许他们各自回到其原来国家。
English: At that time, the Chen Dynasty and the Northern Zhou Dynasty were on friendly terms with each other, and the wandering scribes living in the North and South were allowed to return to their original countries.

古文：陈氏乃请王褒及信等十数人。
现代文：陈朝就请求让王褒和庾信等十几人回到故国。
English: The Chen dynasty requested that more than a dozen people, including Wang Bao and Xuan Xin, be allowed to return to their homeland.

古文：武帝唯放王克、殷不害等，信及褒并惜而不遣。
现代文：周武帝只放还了王克、殷不害等人，庾信和王褒，都因爱惜他们而没有放还。
English: Emperor Zhou only released Wang Ke, Yin Nihong and others, but did not release Xuan Xin and Wang Bao, because he cared about them.

古文：寻徵为司宗中大夫。
现代文：不久，授予司宗中大夫之职。
English: Soon after, he was given the post of junior doctor.

古文：明帝、武帝并雅好文学，信特蒙恩礼。
现代文：周明帝和周武帝都特别喜爱文学，庾信受到特殊的恩宠礼遇。
English: Both Zhou Mingdi and Zhou Wudi were particularly fond of literature, and Zangxin received special grace and courtesy.

古文：至于赵、滕诸王，周旋款至，有若布衣之交。
现代文：至于赵王、滕王和其他诸王，交往非常融洽，就像和平民交往一样。
English: As for King Zhao, King Teng and other kings, they interacted very harmoniously, just like they interacted with the common people.

古文：群公碑志，多相托焉。
现代文：众位公卿的碑文墓志，大都托请庾信撰写。
English: Most of the epitaphs and epitaphs of the nobles were written by Zou Xin.

古文：唯王褒颇与信埒，自余文人，莫有逮者。
现代文：只有王褒与庾信很相当，其他的文人，没有人赶得上他。
English: Only Wang Bao is on a par with Xuan Xin, and no other literati can catch up with him.

古文：信虽位望通显，常作乡关之思，乃作《哀江南赋》以致其意。
现代文：庾信虽然职位声望通达显赫，却经常有故乡之思，就创作《哀江南赋》来表达这种乡思。
English: Although his position was prestigious, Yuxin often thought of his hometown. He created "Southern Lament" to express this feeling.

古文：大象初，以疾去职。
现代文：周静帝大象年初，因病离职。
English: Zhou Jingdi left his post at the beginning of the year due to illness.

古文：隋开皇元年卒。
现代文：隋文帝开皇元年去世。
English: The Sui Emperor died in the first year of his reign.

古文：有文集二十卷。
现代文：有文集二十卷。
English: Liu Xuanqiu has a collection of twenty volumes.

古文：文帝悼之，赠本官，加荆、雍二州刺史。
现代文：隋文帝悼念庾信，追赠原有官职，加授荆、雍二州刺史。
English: Sui Emperor Wenxuan paid tribute to the memory of the letter, posthumously awarded the original official position, and awarded Jing and Yong with the history of two states.

古文：子立嗣。颜之推，字介，琅邪临沂人也。祖见远、父协，并以义烈称。
现代文：颜之推字介，琅笽临沂人，祖父颜见远，父亲颜协，都因忠义刚烈受到称赞。
English: Yan Zhizhi, Yan Lin, Yan Jianyuan, Yan Jianyuan's grandfather, and Yan Xie, Yan's father, were all praised for their loyalty and courage.

古文：世善《周官》、《左氏》学，俱《南史》有传。
现代文：世代擅长《周官》和《左传》，《南史》都有传。
English: The generation is good at "Zhou Guan" and "Zo Zhuan," and "Nan Shi" has been passed down.

古文：之推年十二，遇梁湘东王自讲《庄》、《老》，之推便预门徒。
现代文：颜之推十二岁那年，遇见梁朝湘东王亲自讲解《庄子》、《老子》，颜之推就置身其学生之中。
English: When Yan Zhitui was 12 years old, he met Liang Chao, the King of Eastern Hunan, who personally explained "Zhuang Zi" and "Lao Zi." Yan Zhitui was among his students.

古文：虚谈非其所好，还习《礼》、《传》。
现代文：虚无的言谈不是他所喜爱的，就回去研习《礼》、《传》。
English: He didn't like empty talk, so he went back to studying "Rite" and "Biography."

古文：博览书史，无不该洽，辞情典丽，甚为西府所称。
现代文：广为阅览书籍史册，无不详备广博，文词情致典雅明丽，很受西府的称道。
English: He is widely read in the history of books, all of which are detailed and extensive, and his writings are elegant and beautiful. He is highly praised by the West Prefecture.

古文：湘东王以为其国右常侍，加镇西墨曹参军。
现代文：湘东王任命颜之推为国右常侍，加授镇西墨曹参军。
English: The king of eastern Hunan appointed Yan Zhixu as the country's right-hand attendant, and gave him the additional award of Zhen Xi Miao to join the army.

古文：好饮酒，多任纵，不修边幅，时论以此少之。
现代文：喜欢饮酒，常任性放纵，不注意衣着仪容的整洁，当时的议论因此而对他有所指责。
English: He was criticized for his fondness for alcohol, his constant self-indulgence, and his disregard for cleanliness of dress and appearance.

古文：湘东遣世子方诸镇郢州，以之推为中抚军府外兵参军，掌管记。
现代文：湘东王派遣太子萧方诸镇守郢州，任命颜之推为中抚军府外兵参军，掌管记。
English: The king of eastern Hunan dispatched the prince Xiao Fang to guard the towns of Bozhou, and appointed Yan Zhixu as the commander of the foreign soldiers to join the army, in charge of the record.

古文：遇侯景陷郢州，频欲杀之，赖其行台郎中王则以免。
现代文：遇上侯景攻陷郢州，多次想杀掉他，托赖其行台郎中王则而幸免。
English: When Hou Jing invaded and conquered Zhangzhou, he tried to kill him many times, but Wang Zhongwang, who relied on him, was spared.

古文：景平，还江陵。
现代文：侯景叛乱平定后，颜之推回到江陵。
English: After the suppression of the rebellion of Houjing, Yan Zhipu returned to Gangneung.

古文：时湘东即位，以之推为散骑侍郎，奏舍人事。
现代文：这时，湘东王即皇帝位，任命颜之推为散骑侍郎，奏舍人事。
English: At this time, the king of eastern Hunan, i.e. the emperor, appointed Yan Zhixu as a horseback riding attendant and sent him to the palace.

古文：后为周军所破，大将军李穆重之，送往弘农，令掌其兄阳平公远书翰。
现代文：后来，江陵被周朝的军队攻破，大将军李穆看重颜之推，送到弘农，令颜之推掌管其兄长阳平公李远的文书。
English: Later, when Jiangling was conquered by the Zhou Dynasty's army, the general Li Mu Rong valued Yan Zhi and sent him to Hongnong. Yan Zhi Rong was in charge of the documents of his brother Yang Ping Gong Li Yuan.

古文：遇河水暴长，具船将妻子奔齐，经砥柱之险，时人称其勇决。
现代文：遇河水猛涨，颜之推准备船只带着妻子儿女逃奔齐国，经过砥柱那样的险要，当时的人称赞他勇敢果决。
English: When the river surged, Yan Zhi Tuo prepared a boat to take his wife and children to flee Qi. He passed through the perilous situation like a pillar, and the people at the time praised him for his courage and determination.

古文：文宣见，悦之，即除奉朝请，引于内馆中，侍从左右，颇被顾眄。
现代文：齐文宣帝见到颜之推，很是高兴，当即授予奉朝请之职，引入内馆中。颜之推在文宣帝身旁侍奉，很受重视。
English: Emperor Qianwen Xuan was very pleased to see Yan Zhituo, and immediately gave him the position of being invited by the emperor and introduced him to the inner hall. Yan Zhituo served next to Emperor Wenxuan and was highly valued.

古文：后从至天泉池，以为中书舍人，令中书郎段孝信将敕示之推。
现代文：后来跟从文宣帝至天泉池，任命颜之推为中书舍人，命令中书郎段孝信带着敕令向颜之推宣示。
English: Later, he followed Emperor Wenxuan to Tianquan Lake, appointed Yan Zhi Niu as the person to hand over the book, and ordered the book dealer Duan Xiaoxin to carry the edict to Yan Zhi Niu.

古文：之推营外饮酒，孝信还以状言，文宣乃曰： 且停。 
现代文：颜之推在营外饮酒，段孝信回去把这种情况告诉文宣帝，文帝帝就说： 暂且停下。 
English: Yan Zhi Niu was drinking outside the camp. Duan Xiaoxin went back and told Emperor Wenzong about the situation. Emperor Wenzong said, "Stop for the time being."

古文：由是遂寝。
现代文：因此任命中书舍人之事就作罢了。
English: Therefore, the matter of appointing a middle school librarian is done.

古文：后待诏文林馆，除司徒录事参军。
现代文：后来待诏文林馆，任司徒录事参军。
English: Later, he was posted to Wenlin Hall, and was allowed to join the army.

古文：之推聪颖机悟，博识有才辩，工尺牍，应对闲明，大为祖珽所重，令掌知馆事，判署文书。
现代文：颜之推聪明机敏有悟性，见识广博，有论辩之才，擅长书信，应答熟练明达，很受祖王廷的重视，受命掌管文林馆，判署文书。
English: Yan Zhipu was intelligent, quick-witted, insightful, well-informed, able to argue, good at writing letters, and good at answering questions. He was highly valued by the ancestral court, and was appointed to be in charge of the Wenlin Museum and to sign documents.

古文：迁通直散骑常侍，俄领中书舍人。
现代文：升任通直散骑常侍，很快领中书舍人。
English: He was promoted to the post of Tsuchida Sanzhishi no Tsuneishi, and was soon promoted to the post of Chuseok Shosei.

古文：帝时有取索，恆令中使传旨，之推禀承宣告，馆中皆受进止。
现代文：皇上时常有所索取，经常令中使传达旨意，颜之推秉承旨意，文林馆中的事务都由他决定。
English: The emperor often asked for something, often ordered the middle envoy to convey his will, Yan Zhi pushed to uphold his will, and the affairs in the Wenlin Museum were decided by him.

古文：所进文书，皆是其封署，于进贤门奏之，待报方出。
现代文：进献的文书，都是由他密封署名，在进贤门上奏，等到禀报才将文书取出。
English: The documents presented to him were all signed by him, sealed, and played on the Jinxian Gate. The documents were not taken out until they were reported.

古文：兼善于文字，监校缮写，处事勤敏，号为称职，帝甚加恩接。
现代文：又兼擅长文字，监督校订缮写，处理事情辛勤机敏，人称其称职。皇上给颜之推特别的恩遇。
English: He is also good at writing, oversees the editing, proofreading and writing, and is diligent and astute in handling things. People say that he is competent. The emperor gave Yan a special favor.

古文：为勋要者所嫉，常欲害之。
现代文：勋臣权要妒嫉颜之推，常常加以陷害。
English: The right to be awarded the title of nobility and the right to be a vassal of the emperor were often framed as a result of jealousy.

古文：崔季舒等将谏也，之推取急还宅，故不连署。
现代文：崔季舒等人准备进谏，颜之推急忙回到宅第，故意不连同署名。
English: As Cui Jishu and others prepared to enter the palace, Yan Zhixu hurriedly returned to the residence, deliberately not signing the document.

古文：及召集谏人，之推亦被唤入，勘无名，得免。
现代文：召集进谏者的时候，颜之推也被传唤进去，检查没有发现颜之推的名字，颜之推得以幸免。
English: When the police were called, Yan Zhitui was also summoned, but when they checked, Yan Zhitui's name was not found, and Yan Zhitui was spared.

古文：寻除黄门侍郎。
现代文：不久，授黄门侍郎之职。
English: Soon after, he was given the position of Huangmen waiter.

古文：及周兵陷晋阳，帝轻骑还鄴，窘急，计无所从。
现代文：到了周朝军队攻陷晋阳，皇上率轻装的骑兵回到邺都，困窘急迫，不知该怎么办才好。
English: When the Zhou army invaded Jinyang, the emperor and his lightly armed cavalry returned to the capital, embarrassed and in a hurry, not knowing what to do.

古文：之推因宦者侍中邓长颙进奔陈策，仍劝募吴士千余人以为左右，取青、徐路共投陈国。
现代文：颜之推借助宦官侍中邓长进献逃奔陈朝的计谋，劝说招募吴籍士卒一千多人，作为皇帝身边的卫队，夺取青州、徐州的道路，一同投奔陈国。
English: With the help of the eunuch's aide-de-camp, Deng Changjin, Yan pushed forward the strategy of fleeing to the Chen dynasty, persuading more than a thousand Wu-born soldiers to be recruited as guards around the emperor, to seize the roads of Qingzhou and Xuzhou, and to flee to Chen together.

古文：帝纳之，以告丞相高阿那肱等。
现代文：皇帝采纳颜之推的计谋，告诉丞相高阿那肱等人。
English: The emperor adopted Yan's plan and told the chancellor Gao Anaxun and others.

古文：阿那肱不愿入陈。乃云吴士难信，劝帝送珍宝累重向青州，且守三齐地。
现代文：阿那肱不愿意到陈国去，就说吴籍士卒难以相信，劝说皇帝送珍宝和各种贵重之物到青州，暂且守卫三齐之地。
English: Anaxun did not want to go to Chen Province, so he said that it was hard to believe the Wu scholars, and persuaded the emperor to send treasures and all kinds of valuables to Qingzhou to temporarily guard the land of Sanqi.

古文：若不可保，徐浮海南度。
现代文：如果三齐之地守不住，就慢慢地渡海南去。
English: If you can't keep the place of Sanqi, you should slowly go to the south of Hainan.

古文：虽不从之推策，然犹以为平原太守，令守河津。
现代文：虽然没有采用颜之推的计谋，但还是任命颜之推为平原郡太守。令他守卫黄河渡口。
English: Although he did not use Yan Zhitui's trick, he still appointed Yan Zhitui as the governor of Pingyuan County and ordered him to guard the Yellow River ferry.

古文：齐亡入周。
现代文：齐国灭亡后，颜之推进入周朝。
English: After the fall of the State of Qi, Yan Zhipu entered the Zhou Dynasty.

古文：大象末，为御史上士。
现代文：周静帝大象年末，任御史上士。
English: At the end of the year of the Zhou Jing Emperor's Elephant, he was appointed as the Imperial Historian.

古文：隋开皇中，太子召为文学，深见礼重，寻以疾终。
现代文：隋文帝开皇年间，太子召颜之推为文学，深受礼遇重视。不久因病而死。
English: During the reign of the Sui Emperor Wen, Prince Zhao Yan pushed for literature, which was highly valued by the court. He soon died of illness.

古文：有文集三十卷，撰《家训》二十篇，并行于世。
现代文：有文集三十卷，撰有《家训》二十篇，一起流传于世。
English: There are thirty volumes of anthologies, and twenty "family teachings" have been compiled and passed down to the world.

古文：有《文集》十卷，行于世。
现代文：颜之推在齐国时有两个儿子，长子名思鲁，次子名敏楚，大概是不忘本籍。
English: Yan Zhitui had two sons when he was in Qi Province. The eldest son was named Silu, and the second son was named Minchu. He probably never forgot his hometown.

古文：虞世基，字懋世，会稽余姚人也。
现代文：《之推集》，是思鲁自己作的序。虞世基字懋世，会稽余姚人。
English: "The Selection" is a preface written by Silu himself. Yu Shiji is a character from the story of Yu Yao.

古文：父荔，《南史》有传。
现代文：父亲虞荔，《南史》中有传。
English: His father, Yu Li, is mentioned in "Southern History."

古文：世基幼恬静，喜愠不形于色，博学有高才，兼善草隶。
现代文：虞世基自幼恬淡安静，喜怒都不在脸上表现出来。学识广博，才能超人，兼长草书、隶书。
English: Yu Shiji has been light and quiet since he was a child, and his happiness and anger are not shown on his face. He has a wide range of knowledge, superhuman talent, and is also good at cursive and cursive writing.

古文：陈中书令孔奂见而叹曰： 南金之贵，属在斯人。 
现代文：陈朝中书令孔奂见到虞世基，赞叹说： 南方杰出优秀人才中崇贵的人，就属于这个人了。 
English: In the middle of the Chen dynasty, the emperor's secretary, Confucius, saw Yu Shiji and said with admiration: "Among the outstanding and excellent talents in the south, the noble person belongs to this person."

古文：少傅徐陵闻其名，召之，世基不往。
现代文：少傅徐陵听说他的名字，召见虞世基，虞世基不去。
English: When Fu Xuling heard his name, he summoned Yu Shiji, but Yu Shiji did not come.

古文：后因公会，陵一见而奇之，顾朝士曰： 当今潘、陆也。 
现代文：后来因公聚会，徐陵一见到虞世基就认为他很奇异，对朝中官员说： 这个人就是当今的潘岳、陆机。 
English: Later, at a business meeting, Xu Ling thought that Yu Shiji was very strange as soon as he saw him, and said to the officials of the DPRK and China: This person is today's Pan Yue, the land plane.

古文：因以弟女妻焉。
现代文：因此就把弟弟的女儿嫁给虞世基为妻。
English: Therefore, he married his brother's daughter to Yu Shiji.

古文：仕陈，累迁尚书左丞。
现代文：出仕陈朝，多次升迁至尚书左丞。
English: He served in the Chen dynasty, and was promoted to Shangshuzojo several times.

古文：陈主尝于莫府山校猎，令世基为《讲武赋》，于坐奏之。
现代文：陈主曾经在莫府山打猎，命令虞世基撰写《讲武赋》，就在座前上奏。
English: Chen Shuzhen once went hunting in Mofu Mountain, ordered Yu Shiji to write "Talking about Martial Arts," and played it in front of the audience.

古文：陈主嘉之，赐马一匹。
现代文：陈主嘉奖虞世基，赐给他一匹马。
English: Master Chen commended Yu Shiji and gave him a horse.

古文：及陈灭，入隋为通直郎，直内史省。
现代文：到了陈朝灭亡，进入隋朝任通直郎，直内史省。
English: After the fall of the Chen Dynasty, he entered the Sui Dynasty and was assigned to the Ministry of Internal Affairs.

古文：贫无产业，每佣书养亲，怏怏不平。尝为五言诗以见情，文理忄妻切，世以为工，作者无不吟咏。
现代文：贫穷没有家产基业，经常给人家抄书赡养父母，愤愤不平，曾经作五言诗抒写这种心情，文采词理凄凉悲切，世人认为诗写得很好，写诗的人没有不吟咏的。
English: Poverty has no family heritage, often copying books to support parents, resentful, once wrote a five-sentence poem to express this mood, the sentence is bleak and sad, the world thinks that the poem is well written, and there is no one who does not sing.

古文：未几拜内史舍人。
现代文：不久，授内史舍人之职。
English: Soon after, he was given the post of Naishi.

古文：炀帝即位，顾遇弥隆。
现代文：隋炀帝即位，恩遇更为丰隆。
English: The Sui and Qin emperors ascended the throne, and the favors were more plentiful.

古文：秘书监河东柳顾言，博学有才，罕所推谢，至是与世基相见，叹曰： 海内当共推此一人，非吾侪所及也。 
现代文：秘书监河东人柳顾言，学识广博，很有才干，很少有他推重的人，到了这个时候和虞世基相见，赞叹道： 天下应当共同推重这样一个人，他不是我们这些人能够比得上的。 
English: Liu Guyan, a secretary and supervisor from the east of the river, is very knowledgeable and talented, and there are very few people he respects. At this time, he met with Yu Shiji and said with admiration: The world should jointly respect such a person, he is not comparable to us.

古文：俄迁内史侍郎。
现代文：很快虞世基升任内史侍郎。
English: Soon, Yu Shiji was promoted to Naishi no Samurai.

古文：以母忧去职，哀毁骨立。
现代文：因守母丧而离职，悲伤过度以至于损伤了身体。
English: He left his job to attend his mother's funeral, and was so overcome with grief that he injured his body.

古文：有诏起令视事。拜见之日，殆不能起，令左右扶之。哀其羸瘠，诏令进肉。
现代文：诏令命他起身任职，拜见那一天，虞世基几乎不能站立起来。炀帝令身边的人搀扶着他，可怜他瘦弱，命他食肉。
English: The imperial edict ordered him to get up and take office. On the day of the visit, Yu Shiji could hardly stand up. The people around him supported him, pitied his weakness, and ordered him to eat meat.

古文：世基食，辄悲哽不能下筋。
现代文：虞世基一吃就悲伤哽咽，下不了筷子。
English: As soon as Yu Shiji eats, he chokes with sadness and can't put down his chopsticks.

古文：帝使谓曰： 方相委任，宜为国惜身。 
现代文：炀帝派人对他说： 刚刚把职任委付给你，应该为国家爱惜自身。 
English: Emperor Qian sent a person to say to him, "You have just been given the post of commission, you should cherish yourself for the sake of the country.

古文：前后敦劝者数矣。
现代文：前后多次真诚地劝慰他。
English: She consoled him sincerely many times.

古文：帝重其才，亲礼逾厚，专典机密，与纳言苏威、左翊卫大将军宇文述、黄门侍郎裴矩、御史大夫裴蕴等参掌朝政。
现代文：炀帝重视他的才能，亲宠礼遇更为丰厚，独自掌管机密，和纳言苏威、左翊卫大将军宇文述、黄门侍郎裴矩、御史大夫裴蕴等人参与掌管朝政。
English: Emperor Xuan valued his talent, and treated him more generously. He was in sole charge of secrets, and participated in the management of imperial politics with Nagan Su Wei, General Zuo Wei Yu Wenshu, Yellow Gate chamberlain Pei Keng, and Grand Historian Pei Yun.

古文：时天下多事，四方表奏，日有百数。
现代文：当时天下事故很多，四面八方的章表奏书，每天都有上百件。
English: At that time, there were a lot of accidents in the world, and there were hundreds of accidents every day.

古文：帝方凝重，事不廷决。入阁之后，始召世基口授节度。
现代文：炀帝端庄持重，不当廷裁决事情，进入内房之后，才召见虞世基口授处理旨意。
English: Emperor Qian was dignified and dignified. He did not want the court to adjudicate the matter. After entering the inner room, he summoned Yu Shiji to dictate the disposition of the matter.

古文：世基至省，方为敕书，日旦百纸，无所遗缪。
现代文：虞世基回到台省，才草撰敕令，每天将近有一百份敕令，没有一点遗漏差错。
English: When Yu Shiji returned to Taiwan Province, he began to draft the imperial edicts. There are nearly one hundred imperial edicts every day, without a single omission or mistake.

古文：辽东之役，进位金紫光禄大夫。
现代文：辽东之战，虞世基晋位金紫光禄大夫。
English: In the Battle of Liaodong, Yu Shiji was promoted to Jin Zi Guanglu Doctor.

古文：后从幸雁门，为突厥所围。战士多败。
现代文：后来跟随炀帝至雁门，被突厥军围困，士卒多被打败。
English: Later, he followed Emperor Gao to the Wild Goose Gate and was besieged by the Turkish army. Many of his soldiers were defeated.

古文：世基劝帝为赏格，亲自抚循，乃下诏停辽东事。
现代文：虞世基劝炀帝设立悬赏的等差标准，亲自安抚，就颁布诏令停止平定辽东之战。
English: Yu Shiji advised Emperor Gao to set up a standard for the reward, personally appeased him, and then issued a decree to stop the war in Liaodong.

古文：帝从之，师乃复振。
现代文：炀帝听从虞世基的建议，士气才又振作起来。
English: Emperor Xuan listened to Yu Shiji's advice, and morale began to pick up again.

古文：及围解，勋格不行，又下伐辽之诏，由是言其诈众，朝野离心。
现代文：到了围兵散去之后，悬赏的等级标准没有实行，又颁布讨伐辽东的诏令，因此都说炀帝欺骗众人，朝廷内外心都散了。
English: After the encircling troops had dispersed, the reward level standard was not implemented, and a decree to attack Liaodong was issued. As a result, it was said that Emperor Qian deceived everyone, and the hearts of both inside and outside the imperial court were scattered.

古文：帝幸江都，次巩县，世基以盗贼日盛，请发兵屯洛口仓，以备不虞。
现代文：炀帝巡幸江都，行至巩县，虞世基认为盗贼一天比一天炽盛，请求发兵屯居洛口仓，以防备不测。
English: Emperor Qian toured the capital of the Yangtze River and went to Gong County. Yu Shiji thought that the thieves were becoming more and more ardent every day, and requested that troops be sent to live in the Lokuchang warehouse in case of an emergency.

古文：帝不从，但答云： 卿是书生，定犹恇怯。 
现代文：炀帝没有听从，只是回答说： 你是读书人，肯定还存有胆怯。 
English: Hao Di did not listen, but replied: "You are a reader, you must still have some fear.

古文：于时天下大乱，世基知帝不可谏正，又以高颎、张衡等相继诛戮，惧祸及己，虽居近侍，唯谄取容，不敢忤意。
现代文：这个时候，天下大乱，虞世基知道不能劝谏炀帝归于正道，又因为高赹、张衡等人相继被诛杀，害怕自己遭受灾祸，虽然在炀帝身边侍奉，只是惟惟诺诺取得炀帝的欢心，不敢违背旨意。
English: At this time, there was great turmoil in the world. Yu Shiji knew that he could not persuade Emperor Gao to return to the right path, and because Gao Yao, Zhang Heng and others were killed one after another, he was afraid of suffering a disaster. Although he served around Emperor Gao, he only managed to win Emperor Gao's favor, and did not dare to go against his will.

古文：盗贼日甚，郡县多没，世基知帝恶数闻之，后有告败者，乃抑损表状，不以实闻。
现代文：盗贼一天比一天猖獗，许多郡县都已陷没，虞世基知道炀帝讨厌屡屡听到郡县陷没的消息，后来有报告失败的奏章，就把它压下来，不把实情报告给炀帝。
English: Thieves were becoming more and more rampant day by day, and many counties had fallen into ruin. Yu Shiji knew that Emperor Xian hated to hear the news of counties falling into ruin again and again. Later, when there was a report of failure, he suppressed it and did not report the truth to Emperor Xian.

古文：是后外间有变，帝弗之知也。
现代文：自此以后，外面有什么变化，炀帝就不知道了。
English: From then on, Emperor Xuan didn't know what had changed on the outside.

古文：尝遣太仆卿杨义臣捕盗河北，降贼数十万，列状上闻。
现代文：曾经派遣太仆卿杨义臣去河北搜捕盗贼，降服贼众几十万，列表上报炀帝。
English: He once sent Yang Yichen to Hebei to search for and arrest thieves, subdued hundreds of thousands of thieves, and reported the list to the emperor.

古文：帝叹曰： 我初不闻贼顿如此，义臣列降贼何多也？ 
现代文：炀帝感叹说 ：我当初没有听说盗贼受这么大的挫败，杨义臣开列的投降的盗贼名单为何这么多？ 
English: Emperor Xuan lamented, "I had not heard that the thieves had suffered such a great defeat. Why is there such a long list of thieves who have surrendered, as listed by Yang Yichen?"

古文：世基曰： 鼠窃虽多，未足为虑。
现代文：虞世基说 ：鼠窃狗盗之徒虽然多，但不足以成为忧虑。
English: Yu Shiji said: Although there are many rat thieves and dog thieves, it is not enough to be worried about.

古文：义臣克之，拥兵不少，久在阃外，此最非宜。 
现代文：杨义臣战胜盗贼，拥有许多兵马，长久居住在京城之外，这样做很不合适。 
English: It is very inappropriate for Yang Yichen to defeat thieves, have many soldiers and horses, and live outside the capital for a long time.

古文：帝曰： 卿言是也。 
现代文：炀帝说： 你说的对。 
English: Emperor Gao said: Just as you said.

古文：遽追义臣，放其兵散。
现代文：立即追令杨义臣，听任其军队四散。
English: He immediately ordered Yang Yichen and let his army scatter.

古文：又越王侗遣太常丞元善达间行贼中，诣江都奏事，称： 李密有众数万，围逼京都。
现代文：又，越王杨侗派遣太常丞元善达秘密从盗贼中通过，到江都禀报事情，说 ：李密有几万人，围困攻逼京都洛阳。
English: In addition, the king of Yue, Yang Hui, sent the Grand Vizier, Yuan Shanda, secretly through the thieves, to Jiangdu to report the situation, saying: Li Mi has tens of thousands of people, besieging Kyoto and forcing Luoyang.

古文：贼据洛口仓，城内无食。
现代文：贼兵占据洛口仓，城中没有吃的。
English: Rogue soldiers occupy Lokuchikura, and there is no food in the city.

古文：若陛下速还，乌合必散。
现代文：如果陛下迅速回京，乌合之众必定散逃。
English: If His Majesty returns to Beijing quickly, the mob will surely disperse.

古文：不然者，东都决没。 
现代文：不然的话，东都洛阳必定陷没。 
English: Otherwise, Luoyang, the eastern capital, will definitely be trapped.

古文：因歔欷呜咽，帝为改容。
现代文：于是痛哭流涕，呜咽不止，炀帝因此脸色大变。
English: As a result, he wept bitterly and sobbed more and more, and his face changed dramatically.

古文：世基见帝色忧，进曰： 越王年小，此辈诳之。
现代文：虞世基见炀帝面色忧惧，进前说： 赵王年纪小，这些人欺骗他。
English: Seeing Emperor Zhao's worried face, Yu Shiji stepped forward and said: Zhao Wang is young, these people are deceiving him.

古文：若如所言，善达何缘得至？ 
现代文：如果按他说的，元善达为什么能够到达江都？ 
English: If what he said is true, why was Yuan Shanda able to reach Jiangdu?

古文：帝勃然怒曰： 善达小人，敢廷辱我！ 
现代文：炀帝勃然大怒，说： 元善达这个小人，敢于当廷侮辱我！ 
English: Emperor Gao flew into a rage and said, "This villain, Yuan Shanda, dares to insult me in court!

古文：因使经贼中，向东阳催运。
现代文：因而派元善达经过贼兵所占之地，去东阳催运粮草。
English: Therefore, he sent Yuan Shengda to Dongyang to transport grain and grass, passing through the land occupied by the thief soldiers.

古文：善达遂为群盗所杀。
现代文：元善达于是被众盗贼杀害。
English: Yuan Shengda was then killed by the thieves.

古文：此后外人杜口，莫敢以贼闻奏。
现代文：自此以后，外边的人闭口不言，没有人敢将盗贼的事奏知。
English: Since then, the outside world has been silent, and no one dares to report the theft.

古文：世基气貌沈审，言多合意，是以特见亲爱，朝臣无与为比。
现代文：虞世基气度相貌沉静精明，说话大都合乎皇上意旨，因此特别受到宠爱，朝中大臣没有人能和他相比。
English: Yu Shiji's appearance was calm and shrewd, and his speech was largely in line with the emperor's wishes. As a result, he was especially loved, and no other minister in the middle of the dynasty could compare to him.

古文：其继室孙氏，性骄淫，世基惑之，恣意奢靡，雕饰器服，无复素士之风。
现代文：他的继室孙氏，生性骄奢淫荡，虞世基受其诱惑，恣意奢侈淫靡，器物服饰雕采镂饰，不再有寒素之士的风度。
English: His step-sister-in-law, the Sun clan, was born with a proud, extravagant and lascivious nature, and Yu Shiji was seduced by it. He was extravagant and lascivious at will, and his utensils and clothing were decorated with ornaments. He no longer had the demeanor of a cold person.

古文：孙复携前夫子夏侯俨入世基舍，而顽鄙无赖，为其聚敛，鬻官卖狱，贿赂公行，其门如市，金宝盈积。
现代文：孙氏又携带前夫之子夏侯俨进入虞世基家，夏侯俨顽劣粗鄙无赖，为了聚财敛物，出卖官爵刑狱，贿赂公然盛行，他的家门口像集市一样热闹，金银财宝堆积得满满的。
English: Sun also brought her ex-husband's son, Xia Houyao, into Yu Shiji's home. Xia Houyao was a vile and vulgar scoundrel. In order to accumulate wealth, he sold the prison sentences of officials and nobles. Bribery was rampant. His front door was as bustling as a market, with gold, silver, and treasures piled high.

古文：其弟世南素国士，而清贫不立，未曾有所赡。
现代文：虞世基的弟弟虞世南原是国中有才能的人，清贫不能自立，不曾给与一点补给。
English: Yu Shiji's younger brother, Yu Shiminanhara, was a talented person in the country. He was too poor to be self-reliant, so he never gave him any supplies.

古文：由是为论者所讥。
现代文：因此，虞世基受到论者的讥讽。
English: For this reason, Yu Shiji has been ridiculed by commentators.

古文：朝野咸共疾怨。
现代文：朝廷内外都疾恶怨恨。
English: Resentment was rife both inside and outside the court.

古文：宇文化及之弑逆也，世基乃见害。
现代文：宇文化及杀害炀帝而叛逆，虞世基于是被杀害。
English: Yu culture and the killing of Emperor Shun rebelled, and Yu Shiji was killed.

古文：长子肃，好学才艺，时人称有家风。
现代文：虞世基长子虞肃，喜爱学习，多才多艺，当时人称赞他有家父之风。
English: Yu Shiji's eldest son, Yu Su, loved to study and was multi-talented. At that time, people praised him for having his father's style.

古文：弱冠早没。
现代文：没到成年就死了。
English: He died before reaching adulthood.

古文：肃弟熙，大业末为符玺郎。
现代文：虞肃的弟弟虞熙，大业末年任符玺郎。
English: Yu Su's younger brother, Yu Xi, was appointed to the post of Fu Ying Lang at the end of his life.

古文：次子柔、晦，并宣义郎。
现代文：次子虞柔、虞晦，都任宣义郎。
English: His second sons, Gu Rong and Gu Gu, were both named Xuan Yiro.

古文：化及将乱之夕，宗人虞伋知而告熙曰： 事势已然，吾将济卿南度，且得免祸，同死何益。 
现代文：宇文化及将要叛乱的那天晚上，同族人虞亻及得知这个消息，告诉虞熙说： 事情的形势已经这样，我准备把你送到江南，暂且得以免除灾祸。一起死掉有什么益处？ 
English: On the night of the rebellion, Yu Xun and his compatriot Yu Yao learned the news and told Yu Xi: "The situation is such that I am ready to send you to the south of the Yangtze River to temporarily avoid the disaster. What is the benefit of dying together?

古文：赠大将军，谥曰康。
现代文：虞熙说 ：丢弃父亲，背弃君主，何处能够求生？
English: Yu Xi said, "If you abandon your father and turn your back on the monarch, how can you survive?"

古文：撰《晋王北伐记》十五卷，有集十卷行于世。
现代文：感谢您的关怀，就此诀别了。 到了国难发生，兄弟争相请求先死，行刑的人在杀害虞世基之前先把他们杀了。
English: Thank you for your concern, this is how we say goodbye.When the national tragedy occurred, the brothers clamored to die first, and the executioner killed them before killing Yu Shiji.

古文：许善心，字务本，高阳北新城人也。
现代文：许善心字务本，高阳北新城人。
English: Xu Zenshin, the author, is from Gaoyang Beixincheng.

古文：祖茂、父亨，并《南史》有传。
现代文：祖父许茂、父亲许亨，《南史》中都有传。
English: His grandfather Xu Mao and father Xu Heng are both mentioned in "Southern History."

古文：善心九岁而孤，为母范氏所鞠养。
现代文：许善心九岁时死了父亲，由母亲范氏抚养。
English: When Xu Zenshin was nine years old, his father died, and he was raised by his mother, Ms. Fan.

古文：幼聪明，有思理，所闻辄能记，多闻默识，为当世所称。
现代文：自幼聪明，思路清晰，听到的就能记住，见闻广博，默默记忆，受到当世人的称赞。
English: Smart since childhood, clear thinking, can remember what you hear, well-informed, silent memory, praised by contemporary people.

古文：家有旧书万余卷，皆遍通涉。
现代文：家中有旧书一万多卷，全部都通览了一遍。
English: There are more than 10,000 volumes of old books at home, all of which have been thoroughly reviewed.

古文：十五解属文，为笺上父友徐陵，陵大奇之，谓人曰： 此神童也。 
现代文：十五岁时就会写文章，写信给父亲的朋友徐陵，徐陵非常惊奇，对人说 ：这人是个神童。 
English: At the age of fifteen, he would write articles and letters to his father's friend, Xu Ling. Xu Ling was very surprised and said, "This person is a child prodigy."

古文：太子詹事江总举秀才，对策高第，授度支郎中，补撰史学士。
现代文：太子詹事江总举荐许善心为秀才，对策成绩优异，授度支郎中之职，补任撰史学士。
English: Prince Zhan Shijiang always recommended Xu Zenshin as an outstanding talent, with outstanding achievements in countermeasures. He was awarded the post of junior secretary and the post of writing history bachelor.

古文：祯明二年，加通直散骑常侍聘隋。
现代文：陈后主祯明二年，加授通直散骑常侍，出使隋朝。
English: In the second year of the reign of Empress Chen, Zhaozhong Zhizhong sent an envoy to the Sui Dynasty.

古文：遇文帝伐陈，礼成而不获反命。
现代文：遇到隋文帝讨伐陈朝。完成使命之后不能回国复命。
English: Encountered the Sui and Wen Dynasties' crusade against the Chen Dynasty. Unable to return to China after completing his mission.

古文：累表请辞，上不许。留絷宾馆。
现代文：多次上表请求告辞，文帝不允许，软禁在宾馆中。
English: After repeated requests to leave the table, Emperor Wen did not allow it, and he was placed under house arrest in a hotel.

古文：及陈亡，上遣使告之。
现代文：到了陈朝灭亡，文帝派遣使者告诉许善心。
English: After the fall of the Chen dynasty, Emperor Wen sent an envoy to tell Xu Zenshin.

古文：善心素服号哭于西阶下，藉草东向，经三日，敕书唁焉。
现代文：许善心身着丧服在西阶下痛哭，坐在草上面向东方。经过了三天，敕令吊唁。
English: Dressed in mourning clothes, Xu Zenshin cried bitterly under the west steps and sat on the grass facing the east. After three days, the imperial edict of condolence was issued.

古文：明日，有诏就馆拜通直散骑常侍，赐衣一袭。
现代文：第二天，有诏令到宾馆，授许善心通直散骑常侍之职，赏赐衣服一套。
English: The next day, there was a royal decree to the hotel, awarding the good-hearted Tsuchina the position of equerry, and rewarding him with a set of clothes.

古文：善心哭尽哀，入房改服，复出北面立，垂涕再拜受诏。
现代文：许善心痛哭尽哀，入房改换服装，重新出来后朝北面站立，流着泪再次拜谢，接受诏书。
English: Xu Zhen cried his heart out, went into the room to change his clothes, came out again and stood facing north. With tears streaming down his face, he bowed again and accepted the edict.

古文：明日，乃朝服泣于殿下，悲不能兴。
现代文：次日，许善心就身着朝服，在殿堂下哭泣，非常悲痛。
English: The next day, Xu Zenshin was dressed in a morning suit, crying under the hall of fame, very sad.

古文：上顾左右曰： 我平陈国，唯获此人。
现代文：文帝对身边的人说： 我平定陈国，只获得这一个人。
English: Emperor Wen said to the people around him, "I pacified Chen Guo, and only gained this one person.

古文：既能怀其旧君，即我诚臣也。 
现代文：既能怀恋其原来的君主，就是我的忠臣。 
English: A loyal vassal of mine is one who is able to cherish his former sovereign.

古文：敕以本官直门下省，赐物千段、草马二十匹。
现代文：敕令以原有的官职直门下省，赏赐物品一千段、雌马二十匹。
English: The imperial edict placed the province under the direct supervision of the original official position, and rewarded a thousand pieces of goods and twenty female horses.

古文：从幸太山，还，授虞部侍郎。
现代文：跟从隋文帝巡幸太山，回京后，授予虞部侍郎之职。
English: He accompanied Emperor Sui Wen on a tour of Mount Tai, and after returning to Beijing, he was awarded the position of attendant to Emperor Yube.

古文：十六年，有神雀降于含章闼，上召百官赐宴，告以此瑞。
现代文：开皇十六年，有神雀落在含章闼上。隋文帝召集文武百官，赐予宴席，把这件祥瑞告诉众人。
English: In the 16th year of the reign of Emperor Gaozong, a divine bird landed on a dragonfly. Emperor Wen of the Sui Dynasty called together hundreds of civil and military officials, gave them a banquet, and told everyone about this auspicious event.

古文：善心于坐请纸笔，制《神雀颂》奏之。
现代文：许善心在座位上请赐纸笔，创作《神雀赋》上奏。
English: Xu Zenshin on the seat, please give me a pen and paper to create "Divine Sparrow" and play it.

古文：上甚悦曰： 我见神雀，共皇后观之。
现代文：文帝非常高兴地说： 我见到神雀，和皇后一起观看。
English: Emperor Wen was very pleased and said, "I saw the divine sparrow and watched it with the empress."

古文：今且召公等入，适述此事。
现代文：今早召见诸位公卿进来，才讲述这件事情。
English: I've called the Lords in this morning to tell them about it.

古文：善心于坐始知，即能成颂。
现代文：许善心在座位上刚刚知道，就能撰成颂章。
English: Xu Zenshin just knew from his seat that he would be able to compose a hymn.

古文：文不加点，笔不停毫，常闻此言，今见其事。 
现代文：行文不加点抹，运笔不停止，我常听说这种话，今天见到了这样的事情。 
English: I have often heard such words, and today I saw such a thing.

古文：因赐物二百段。
现代文：因而赏赐许善心物品二百段。
English: As a result, Mr. Xu was awarded 200 dan of goods for his kindness.

古文：十七年，除秘书丞。
现代文：十七年，任秘书丞。
English: For seventeen years, he served as secretary.

古文：时秘藏图籍，尚多淆乱。
现代文：当时秘书省收藏的图书典籍，尚有许多很混乱。
English: At that time, many of the books and classics in the collection of the Ministry of Secretaries were still in disarray.

古文：善心效阮孝绪《七录》，更制《七林》，各总叙冠于篇首。又于部录之下明作者之意，区分类例焉。
现代文：许善心模仿阮孝绪《七录》，另撰写《七林》，各自撰写总叙，放在篇章的开篇，又在分部著录下面，说明作者的用意，以从中区分不同的类别。
English: Xu Zenshin imitated Nguyen Xiaoxu's "Seven Records" and wrote "Seven Forests" separately. Each of them wrote a general narrative, which was placed at the beginning of the chapter and under the section of the book, explaining the author's intention to distinguish different categories.

古文：又奏追李文博、陆从典等学者十许人，正定经史错谬。
现代文：又奏请追令李文博、陆从典等十来名学者，纠正校定经史中的错误。
English: He also requested that more than ten scholars, including Li Wenbo and Lu Congdian, be ordered to correct the errors in the history of calibration.

古文：仁寿元年，摄黄门侍郎。
现代文：仁寿元年兼任黄门侍郎。
English: In the first year of Jinshou, he also served as the Yellow Gate's chamberlain.

古文：二年，加摄太常少卿，与牛弘等议定礼乐，秘书丞、黄门并如故。
现代文：二年，加授太常少卿，和牛弘等人商议编定礼乐，秘书丞、黄门侍郎之职依旧。
English: In the second year, he was awarded the title of Taizhang Shaoqing, and he and Ushihiro and others discussed the composition of the ceremonial music. The duties of the secretary and Huangmen waiter remained the same.

古文：四年，留守京师。
现代文：仁寿四年，留守京城。
English: After four years of benevolence, he stayed in Kyoto.

古文：帝崩于仁寿宫，炀帝秘不发丧，先易留宫人，出除岩州刺史。
现代文：隋文帝死于仁寿宫，炀帝隐藏事实，不向众人发布文帝驾崩的消息，先更换留守京城的官员。许善心出京任岩州刺史。
English: Emperor Sui and Emperor Wen died in the Palace of Renshou. Emperor Zhou concealed the fact and did not release the news of Emperor Wen's death to the public. The officials who remained in Beijing were replaced first. Xu Zenshin went to Beijing to serve as Iwazhou's historian.

古文：逢汉王谅反，不之任。
现代文：适逢汉王杨谅造反，许善心没有赴任。
English: At the time of the Han King Yang Peng's rebellion, Xu Zenshin did not take up his post.

古文：大业元年，转礼部侍郎，奏荐儒者徐文远为国子博士，包恺、陆德明、褚徽、鲁世达之辈，并加品秩，授为学官。
现代文：大业元年，改任礼部侍郎，上奏举荐儒者徐文远为国子博士，包恺、陆德明、褚徵、鲁世达等人，都加授官品俸禄，任命为学官。
English: In the first year of the Taiei era, Xu Wenyuan, a Confucianist, was appointed as the attendant of the ceremonial department. He was recommended as the Kuniko doctor, and Baojun, Lu Deming, Xizhe, Lu Shida and others were awarded the official salary and appointed as academicians.

古文：其年，副纳言杨达为冀州道大使，以称旨，赐物五百段。
现代文：这一年，副纳言杨达任冀州道大使，许善心因举荐合皇上的旨意，赐物品五百段。
English: In the same year, Yang Da, Vice-Counselor of the State Council, was appointed as the ambassador of Jizhou Province, and Xu Zenshin was given 500 pieces of goods for his recommendation and the emperor's will.

古文：左卫大将军宇文述每日借本部兵数十人以供私役，常半日而罢。
现代文：左卫大将军宇文述每天借用几十名本部士卒，以供个人役使，常常是役使半天就结束了。
English: General Zuo Wei Uwen said that he borrowed dozens of headquarters soldiers every day for personal service, and often the service ended after half a day.

古文：御史大夫梁毗奏劾之。
现代文：御史大夫梁毗上奏弹劾宇文述。
English: Liang Pi, Vice-Minister of History, made a report on the impeachment of Yu Wen.

古文：上方以腹心委述，初付法官推，千余人皆称被役。
现代文：炀帝刚刚把宇文述视为心腹，当初交付法官追究时，有一千多人都说被役使过。
English: Emperor Qian had just regarded Yu Wenshu as a confidant. When the case was initially submitted to the judge for investigation, more than a thousand people said that they had been forced to serve.

古文：经二十余日，法官候伺上旨，乃言役不满日，其数虽多，不合通计，纵令有实，亦无罪。
现代文：经过二十多天，法官窥伺炀帝的旨意，竟然说使役不满一天，人数虽然很多，但不应该连续计算，即使有役使士卒的实情，也没有罪。
English: After more than twenty days, the judge spied on the emperor's will and said that the number of envoys was less than one day. Although there were many envoys, they should not be counted consecutively. Even if there was the truth about the envoys, there was no crime.

古文：诸兵士闻之，更云初不被役。
现代文：众士卒得知此事，改口说当初没有被役使过。
English: When the soldiers learned of this, they changed their minds and said that they had not been used at the beginning.

古文：上欲释之，付议虚实，百僚咸议为虚。
现代文：炀帝想释放宇文述，交付百官议论此事真假，文武百官都认为是假的。
English: Emperor Qianlong wanted to release Wu Wenshu, and delivered it to hundreds of officials to discuss whether it was true or false. All the officials thought it was false.

古文：善心以为述于仗卫之所，抽兵私役，虽不满日，阙于宿卫，与常役所部，情状乃殊。
现代文：许善心认为宇文述从仪仗卫戍之处抽调士兵供个人役使，虽然不满一天，但禁卫缺位，和平常那种役使其所部士卒的情况不一样。
English: Xu Zenshin believed that Yu Wenshu selected soldiers from the place of honor guard for personal service, although less than a day, but the guards were absent, and the situation was different from that of ordinary soldiers.

古文：又兵多下番，散还本府，分道追至，不谋同辞。
现代文：另外，士兵下岗之后，分散回到原来的住所，分别被追回，没有商议而供词相同。
English: In addition, after the soldiers were relieved of duty, they dispersed back to their original residences and were recovered separately, and their confessions were the same without consultation.

古文：今殆一月，方始翻覆，奸状分明，此何可舍？
现代文：如今差不多过了一个月，才开始翻供，奸情很明显，这种情况下怎么可以释放呢？
English: Now, it's been almost a month since he started to retract his confession, the infidelity is obvious, how can he be released under these circumstances?

古文：苏威、杨汪等二十余人同善心议，其余皆议免罪。
现代文：苏威、杨汪等二十多人赞同许善心的建议，其他人都认为应该免除罪行。
English: Su Wei, Yang Wang and more than 20 other people agreed with Xu Sanshin's suggestion, and everyone else believed that they should be exonerated.

古文：炀帝可免者之奏。
现代文：隋炀帝准许主张免除罪行的人的奏请。
English: Emperor Sui Xuan allowed the appeal of those who claimed to have been absolved of their crimes.

古文：后数月，述谮善心曰： 陈叔宝卒，善心共周罗、虞世基、袁充、蔡徵等同往送葬。
现代文：事情过后几个月，宇文述谮害许善心说： 陈叔宝死时，许善心和周罗侯、虞世基、袁充、蔡征等人一同为陈叔宝送葬。
English: A few months after the incident, Yu Wenshu said: When Chen Shubao died, Xu Zenshin and Zhou Luohu, Yu Shiji, Yuan Chong, Cai Zheng and others attended Chen Shubao's funeral.

古文：善心为祭文，谓为 陛下 。
现代文：许善心撰写祭文，称为 陛下 。
English: Xu Zhenxin wrote the dedicatory poem and was called "Your Majesty."

古文：敢于今日加叔宝尊号。 
现代文：竟敢在今天给陈叔宝尊号。 
English: How dare they give Chen Shubao the honorific title today.

古文：召问有实，自援古例，事得释，而甚恶之。
现代文：召见许善心询问，许善心承认有这样的事情，自己援引古时候的先例。事情得以开解，但炀帝非常讨厌许善心。
English: Xu Shanshin was summoned for questioning. Xu Shanshin admitted that there was such a thing, and he cited ancient precedents. The matter was resolved, but Emperor Qian hated Xu Shanshin very much.

古文：又太史奏帝即位年与尧时符合，善心议以国哀甫尔，不宜称贺。
现代文：又，太史奏称炀帝即位的年份与尧时相符合，许善心认为国哀才开始，不应祝贺。
English: In addition, the Taishi report said that the year of the enthronement of Emperor Zou was the same as that of Zou, and Xu Zenshin thought that the national mourning had just begun and should not be congratulated.

古文：述讽御史劾之，左迁给事郎，降品二等。
现代文：宇文述让御史弹劾许善心，贬为给事郎，官降二级。
English: According to Yuwen's report, Xu Zenshin was impeached by the imperial court, demoted to the position of an assistant, and demoted to the second grade.

古文：四年，撰《方物志》，奏之。
现代文：大业四年，撰著《方物志》，上奏炀帝。
English: Da Ye was four years old when he wrote "Fang Wenshi" (The Biography of Fang Wenshi).

古文：七年，从至涿郡。
现代文：大业七年，跟从炀帝至涿郡。
English: It took Daye seven years to follow Emperor Gong to Gong County.

古文：帝方自御戎以东讨，善心上封事，忤旨免官。
现代文：炀帝刚刚亲自率军东征辽东，许善心上秘密奏章，违忤旨意而被免官。
English: Emperor Qian had just personally led the Eastern Expedition to Liaodong, and Xu Zhen had secretly made a record in his heart, and was dismissed in violation of Emperor Qian's will.

古文：凡称史臣者皆先君所言，下称名案者皆善心补阙。
现代文：这一年，又授予守给事郎之职。炀帝曾说起文帝受命的符应，因而问鬼神的事情，敕令许善心和崔祖撰写《灵异记》十卷。
English: In the same year, Shou was also given the post of secretary. Emperor Wu once said that Emperor Wen had been ordered to ask about ghosts and gods, and ordered Xu Zenshin and Cui Zu to write ten volumes of "The Tale of the Spirits."

古文：别为《叙论》一篇，托于《叙传》之末。
现代文：当初，许善心的父亲许亨撰写《梁史》，没有完成人就死了，许善心继承父亲的遗志，续修史书。
English: At the beginning, Xu Zenshin's father Xu Heng wrote "History of Liang," but died before completing it. Xu Zenshin inherited his father's will and continued to study the history book.

古文：十年，又从至怀远镇，加授朝散大夫。
现代文：大业十年，又跟从炀帝至怀远镇，加授朝散大夫。
English: After ten years of hard work, he followed Emperor Qian to Huaiyuan Town and was awarded the title of Choshan Doctor.

古文：突厥围雁门，摄左亲侍武贲郎将，领江南兵宿卫殿省。
现代文：突厥军围困雁门，许善心兼左亲侍武贲郎将，率领江南士兵守卫殿省。
English: The Turkish army besieged the Wild Goose Gate, and Xu Zenshin, who was also the left-hand man of General Takehiro, led the soldiers from the south of the Yangtze River to guard the Imperial Palace.

古文：驾幸江都，追叙前勋，授通议大夫，诏还本品，行给事郎。
现代文：炀帝驾幸江都，追叙之前的功勋，授许善心通议大夫之职，诏令还复原来的官品，行给事郎。
English: Emperor Xuan drove to the capital of the Yangtze River, recounted the merits before the award, conferred the post of good-hearted doctor, restored the original official title, and gave it to Zhi Lang.

古文：十四年，化及弑逆之日，隋官尽诣朝堂谒贺，善心独不至。
现代文：大业十四年，宇文化及杀害炀帝那天，隋朝官员都到殿堂拜谒祝贺，只有许善心没有到。
English: In the 14th year of the Taiei era, on the day of the unification of China and the murder of Emperor Zhou, the officials of the Sui Dynasty all went to the hall of fame to offer their congratulations. Only Xu Zenshin did not come.

古文：许弘仁驰告曰： 天子已崩，宇文将军摄政，合朝文武，莫不咸集。
现代文：许弘仁驰马告诉他说 ：天子已经驾崩，宇文将军代理朝政，满朝文武全部集聚朝堂。
English: Xu Hongren told him on horseback: "The heavenly son has passed away, General Uwen is acting as the regent, and all the princes and generals have gathered in the imperial palace.

古文：天道人事，自有代终，何预叔而低徊若此？ 
现代文：天道人事，自然有其代谢始终。没有想到叔叔还像这样低首徘徊？ 
English: In the world of human affairs, there is always a natural turnover. Didn't you think that your uncle was still hanging around with his head down like this?

古文：善心怒之，不肯随去。
现代文：许善心恼怒，不愿随他前去。
English: Xu Zhenxin was angry and did not want to follow him.

古文：弘仁返走上马，泣而言曰： 将军于叔全无恶意，忽自求死，岂不痛哉！ 
现代文：许弘仁往回走，上马后哭着说： 宇文将军对叔叔没有半点恶意，突然间自己求死，岂不痛心啊！ 
English: Xu Hongren walked back, got on his horse and cried: "General Yuwen did not have the slightest malice towards my uncle, and all of a sudden he asked for his own death. Isn't that heartbreaking?"

古文：还告唐奉议，以状白化及，遣人就宅执至朝堂。
现代文：回去后告诉唐奉义，唐奉义把这种情况告诉宇文化及，派人到许善心家把他抓起来带回朝堂。
English: After returning, he told Tang Bongyi. Tang Bongyi reported the situation to Yu Wenjun and sent someone to Xu Zenshin's home to arrest him and take him back to the imperial court.

古文：化及令释之，善心不舞蹈而出。
现代文：宇文化及命令放了他，许善心不向宇文化及祝贺就出去了。
English: U Culture and the order released him, and Xu Zenshin went out without congratulating U Culture and the order.

古文：化及目送之，曰： 此大负气。 
现代文：宇文化及目送许善心说 ：这人太傲气。 
English: U-bunka and witness Xu Zenshin said, "This man is too arrogant."

古文：命捉来，骂云： 我好欲放你，敢如此不逊！ 
现代文：命人把他抓回来，骂道： 我好心想要放了你，你竟敢如此不恭敬！ 
English: The man ordered him to be brought back and scolded him: "I wanted to let you go, how dare you be so disrespectful!"

古文：其党辄牵曳，遂害之。
现代文：宇文化及的党羽就牵扯拉曳，把许善心杀害了。
English: U Culture and other party members were involved in the plot to kill Xu Zenshin.

古文：及越王称制，赠左光禄大夫，封高阳县公，谥曰文节。
现代文：到了越王杨侗自立为帝，追赠许善心左光禄大夫，封爵高阳县公，谥号为文节。
English: When King of Yue, Yang Jie, established himself as emperor, he posthumously bestowed the title of Dr. Xu Zenshin Zuoguanglu, the title of Duke of Goyang County, and the posthumous name of Wen Jie.

古文：善心母范氏，梁太子中舍人孝才之女也。
现代文：许善心的母亲范氏，是梁朝太子中舍人范孝才的女儿。
English: Xu Zenshin's mother, Fan, was the daughter of Fan Xiaocai, one of the princes of the Liang Dynasty.

古文：少寡，养孤，博学有高节。
现代文：年轻守寡，抚养孤儿，学识广博，有高尚的节操。
English: Young widowhood, raising orphans, broad knowledge, noble self-restraint.

古文：隋文帝知之，敕尚食每献时新，常遣分赐。
现代文：隋文帝知道后，敕令掌管御膳的人经常把时新果菜进献范氏，常常派人分赐物品。
English: After the Sui Emperor learned about it, the person in charge of the imperial banquet often brought fresh fruits and vegetables to present to the Fan family, and often sent people to distribute the items.

古文：尝诏范入内，侍皇后讲读。
现代文：曾经召范氏入内宫，陪伴皇后讲读经籍。
English: He once invited Fan into the inner palace to accompany the empress in reading scriptures.

古文：封永乐郡君。
现代文：封为永乐郡君。
English: He was given the title of Yongle County.

古文：及善心遇祸，范氏九十有二，临丧不哭，抚柩曰： 能死国难，我有兒矣。 
现代文：到了许善心遇害，范氏已经九十二岁，临送丧时不哭，手抚灵柩说 ：能够死于国难，我没有白养这个儿子。 
English: By the time of Xu Shanshin's murder, Fan was ninety-two years old. He did not cry at the time of the funeral. He patted the coffin and said, "I was able to die in the national tragedy. I did not raise this son in vain."

古文：因卧不食，后十余日亦终。
现代文：因而卧床不吃东西，此后十多天也死了。
English: As a result, he stayed in bed and did not eat, and died more than ten days later.

