古文：《诗》文宏奥，包韫六义；毛公述《传》，独标 兴体 ，岂不以 风 通而 赋 同， 比 显而 兴 隐哉？
现代文：《诗经》里边的作品，体大思精；其中包含着风、赋、比、兴、雅、颂六项。在毛亨作《诗训诂传》时，特别提出 兴 来；难道不是因为通贯全书按照 风  雅  颂 来分类，而 赋 则和直陈手法一样， 比 明显而 兴 隐晦吗？
English: The works in the "Book of Songs" are large and thoughtful; they contain six items of style, fu, bi, xing, elegance, and ode. When Mao Heng wrote "Poetic Precepts and Traditions," he especially proposed xing; isn't it because the entire book is classified according to style and ode, while fu is the same as the straight stencil method, with obvious and obscure contrasts?

古文：故比者，附也；兴者，起也。
现代文：所以， 比 是比附的意思，而 兴 则是起兴的意思。
English: Therefore, "比" means "comparison" and "興" means "rise."

古文：附理者切类以指事，起情者依微以拟议。
现代文：比附事理的，要使用贴切类比的方法来说明事物；起兴时要依据事物微妙处来寄托意义。
English: When comparing incidental things, it is necessary to use the method of appropriate analogy to explain things; when starting, it is necessary to place meaning according to the subtleties of things.

古文：起情故兴体以立，附理故比例以生。
现代文：由于引起情感，所以 兴 的文体才能成立；由于比附事理，所以 比 的文体才能产生。
English: Because it arouses emotion, the style of Xing (兴) can be established; because of the principle of comparison, the style of comparison can be produced.

古文：比则畜愤以斥言，兴则环譬以托讽。
现代文：用比的方法，是作者因内心的积愤而有所指斥；用 兴 的方法，是作者以委婉譬喻来寄托讽刺之情。
English: By using the comparative method, the author is rebuked due to the accumulation of anger in his heart; by using the entertaining method, the author uses euphemistic metaphors to express his irony.

古文：盖随时之义不一，故诗人之志有二也。
现代文：为了适应不同场合的不同意义，所以诗人言志的方法也就有 比 和 兴 这两种表现方法。
English: In order to adapt to the different meanings of different occasions, the poet's way of speech also has two ways of expression: comparison and entertainment.

古文：观夫兴之托谕，婉而成章，称名也小，取类也大。
现代文：试看用 兴 来寄托讽喻，常常是婉转而善于表达；表面上说的是小事，但譬喻的意义却很广泛。
English: Try to use humour to support the metaphor, it is often subtle and expressive; on the surface it is a small thing, but the meaning of the metaphor is very broad.

古文：关雎有别，故后妃方德；尸鸠贞一，故夫人象义。义取其贞，无疑于夷禽；德贵其别，不嫌于鸷鸟；明而未融，故发注而后见也。且何谓为比？
现代文：例如《诗经》中的《周南·关雎》所说的雎鸠是雌雄有别的鸟，所以用作引起周王后妃的 兴 ；《召南·鹊巢》所说的鸤鸠有贞静专一的品德，所以用作引起诸侯的夫人的 兴 。既然有取于贞静，那就不在乎是否平凡的飞禽；同样，既然取其雌雄有别，自然不管是否健猛的鸟。这些诗句虽然明了但意义没有融通，所以只有看了注才能够明白。至于什么是 比 ？
English: For example, the cormorant called "Zhou Nan Guanzhang" in the "Song of Songs" is a bird with a different male and female, so it is used to arouse the interest of the Queen of Zhou; the cormorant called "Zhou Nan Guanzhang" has the virtue of chastity and singleness, so it is used to arouse the interest of the lords' wives. Since it is taken from chastity, it does not matter whether it is an ordinary bird; similarly, since it is taken from a male and female, it does not matter whether it is a robust bird. Although these verses are clear, the meaning is not comprehensive, so

古文：盖写物以附意，飏言以切事者也。
现代文：那是描写事物来比附某种意义，用鲜明的形貌来说明事理。
English: It is to describe things to attach a certain meaning, to illustrate things with vivid shapes.

古文：故金锡以喻明德，珪璋以譬秀民，螟蛉以类教诲，蜩螗以写号呼，浣衣以拟心忧，席卷以方志固：凡斯切象，皆比义也。
现代文：例如《诗经》中的《卫风·淇奥》以金和锡来比喻美德，《大雅·卷阿》以名贵的玉器来比喻贤人，《小雅·小宛》以蜂育螟蛉来比喻教养后辈，《大雅·荡》以蝉叫比喻酒后喧哗，《邶风·柏舟》以衣服未洗来比喻心情忧郁，又以心非床席可卷来比喻立志不变：这些相切合的形象，就是 比 的方法。
English: For example, "Weifeng Qiao" in the "Book of Songs" uses gold and tin as a metaphor for virtue, "Daya Zuo" uses precious jade as a metaphor for wise men, "Xiao Ya Xiaowan" uses bee breeding as a metaphor for educating the younger generation, "Daya Zang" uses cicada calls as a metaphor for noise after drinking, "Feng Feng Bai Zhou" uses unwashed clothes as a metaphor for a gloomy mood, and uses the heart as a metaphor for unwavering determination: these matching images are the methods of comparison.

古文：至如 麻衣如雪 ， 两骖如舞 ，若斯之类，皆比类者也。
现代文：还有《曹风·蜉蝣》说， 麻衣洁白如雪 ；《郑风·大叔于田》说， 驾在车两旁的马，走起来像舞蹈一般 ：这些也都是 比 一类的。
English: There is also "Cao Feng Zhai" saying that Ma Yi is as white as snow; "Zheng Feng Uncle Yu Tian" saying that the horses driving on both sides of the car walk like a dance: these are also of the same kind.

古文：楚襄信谗，而三闾忠烈，依《诗》制《骚》，讽兼 比 、 兴 。
现代文：后来楚顷襄王听信坏人的挑拨，屈原却忠君爱国，他继承《诗经》的优良传统而写作《离骚》，其中讽刺是兼用 比 、 兴 两种方法的。
English: Later, Chu He Xiang Wang listened to the provocations of the bad guys, but Qu Yuan was loyal and patriotic. He inherited the fine tradition of "The Book of Songs" and wrote "Leaving So," in which satire is a combination of the two methods of comparison and promotion.

古文：炎汉虽盛，而辞人夸毗，诗刺道丧，故兴义销亡。
现代文：汉代文风虽盛，但作家们却卑躬屈节，所以《诗经》讽刺的传统中断，而 兴 的表现方法也就不存在了。
English: Although the literary style of the Han Dynasty was prosperous, the writers were subservient, so the tradition of satire in the "Book of Songs" was interrupted, and the expression method of "Xing" did not exist.

古文：于是赋颂先鸣，故比体云构，纷纭杂遝，倍旧章矣。
现代文：这时赋和颂很兴盛， 比 的运用风起云涌，越来越多，和过去的法则不一样了。
English: At this time, fuheosong was very prosperous, and the use of the ratio was surging, more and more, and the rules were different from the past.

古文：夫比之为义，取类不常∶或喻于声，或方于貌，或拟于心，或譬于事。
现代文： 比 的手法，从比喻上来说并没有固定的规律：有时比声音，有时比形貌，有时比心情，有时比事物。
English: The method of comparison, metaphorically speaking, has no fixed rules: sometimes compared to sound, sometimes compared to shape, sometimes compared to mood, sometimes compared to things.

古文：宋玉《高唐》云∶ 纤条悲鸣，声似竽籁 ，此比声之类也；枚乘《菟园》云∶ 焱焱纷纷，若尘埃之间白云 ，此则比貌之类也；贾生《鵩赋》云∶ 祸之与福，何异纠纆 ，此以物比理者也；王褒《洞箫》云∶ 优柔温润，如慈父之畜子也 ，此以声比心者也；马融《长笛》云∶ 繁缛络绎，范蔡之说也 ，此以响比辩者也；张衡《南都》云∶ 起郑舞，茧曳绪 ，此以容比物者也。
现代文：宋玉《高唐赋》说： 风吹细枝，发出悲声，好像吹竽似的。 这是比声音的例子。枚乘《菟园赋》说： 众鸟飞得极快，好像白云间的点点尘埃。 
English: Song Yu's "Gao Tang Fu" said: The wind blows the thin branches and makes a sad sound, as if blowing a gong. This is an example of sound comparison. Meituan's "Gao Yuan Fu" said: The birds fly extremely fast, like specks of dust between the white clouds.

古文：若斯之类，辞赋所先，日用乎比，月忘乎兴，习小而弃大，所以文谢于周人也。
现代文：诸如此类，辞赋里很多。作者天天用 比 的方法，久而久之就忘记了 兴 ；他们习惯于次要的，而抛弃了主要的，所以作品便不及周代。
English: There are a lot of words like this. Authors use the comparison method every day, and over time they forget the interest; they are used to the secondary, but abandoned the main, so the work is not as good as Zhou Dynasty.

古文：至于扬班之伦，曹刘以下，图状山川，影写云物，莫不织综比义，以敷其华，惊听回视，资此效绩。
现代文：至于扬雄、班固诸人，以及曹植、刘桢以后的作家们，描写山水云霞，无不运用 比 的方法来施展文采；其所以能写得动人，主要依靠这种方法取得成功。
English: As for Yang Xiong, Bangu and others, as well as writers after Cao Zhi and Liu Xuan, they all use the method of comparison to describe the landscape and clouds; therefore, they can write movingly, and mainly rely on this method to achieve success.

古文：又安仁《萤赋》云 流金在沙 ，季鹰《杂诗》云 青条若总翠 ，皆其义者也。
现代文：又如潘岳《萤火赋》说： 萤光好像沙中金粒似地闪烁。 张翰《杂诗》说： 青枝好像聚集着翠鸟的羽毛。 这也是 比 的方法。
English: For example, Pan Yue's "Firefly" says, "The fluorescence shines like gold in the sand." Zhang Han's "Miscellaneous Poems" says, "The green branches seem to gather the feathers of the kingfisher." This is also a method of comparison.

古文：故比类虽繁，以切至为贵，若刻鹄类鹜，则无所取焉。
现代文：这类例子虽多，总以十分切合为佳。如果把天鹅刻划成家鸭，那就没有什么可取的了。总结：
English: Although there are many such examples, it is always best to be very precise. If the swan is depicted as a domestic duck, then there is nothing to be desired. Summary:

古文：赞曰∶诗人比兴，触物圆览。
现代文：《诗经》的作者运用 比 、 兴 方法，是对事物进行了全面观察。
English: The author of the "Book of Songs" used the comparison, comparison method to make a comprehensive observation of things.

古文：物虽胡越，合则肝胆。拟容取心，断辞必敢。
现代文：作者的思想和比拟的事物，虽像胡越两地相距极远，但应使它们像肝胆一样紧密结合。比拟事物的外貌，要摄取其精神实质，这是写作中必须努力争取的。
English: Although the author's thoughts and the things to be compared are as far apart as the two places of Hu Yue, they should be as closely connected as the liver and the gallbladder. To compare the appearance of things, it is necessary to absorb their spiritual essence, which must be strived for in writing.

古文：攒杂咏歌，如川之澹。
现代文：把形形色色的事物写进诗篇，就汇合成滔滔奔流的春水。
English: When all kinds of things are written into a poem, they merge into a torrent of spring water.

