古文：凡致敌来战，则彼势常虚；不能赴战，则我势常实。
现代文：凡是调动敌人前来与我交战，就要使敌人处于兵势常虚、被动不利的地位，我军不为敌人调动去战，就使我军处于兵势常实、主动有利的地位。
English: Whenever the enemy is mobilized to fight against us, it is necessary to put the enemy in a position of permanent weakness and passive disadvantage. If our army is not mobilized to fight for the enemy, it is necessary to put our army in a position of permanent strength and active advantage.

古文：多方以致敌之来，我据便地而待之，无有不胜。
现代文：作战中，应当采用多种方法调动敌人来战，我军凭据有利地形条件而等待敌人，这样就一定会胜利。
English: In combat, multiple methods should be used to mobilize the enemy to fight, and our army should wait for the enemy based on favorable terrain conditions, so that it will surely win.

古文：法曰： 致人而不致于人。 
现代文：诚如兵法所说： 作战中要能够调动敌人而不被敌人所调动。 
English: As stated in the Art of War: In battle, it is necessary to be able to mobilize the enemy without being mobilized by the enemy.

古文：后汉建武五年，光武诏耿弇，悉收集降附，结部曲，置将吏，弇帅骑都尉刘歆、泰山太守陈俊将兵而东。
现代文：东汉建武五年，光武帝刘秀命令建威大将军耿弇全部收编投降的士卒，组成建制，置设将吏。然后，耿弇奉命亲率骑都尉刘歆、泰山太守陈俊等部队，东进讨伐割据济南称雄的张步。
English: In the fifth year of Jianwu of the Eastern Han Dynasty, Emperor Guangwu Liu Xiu ordered General Geng Bi of Jianwei to collect all the surrendered soldiers, form an organization, and set up officers. Then, Geng Bi, under the orders of his father, led the troops such as Captain Liu Bi and Tai Shan Daju Chen Jun to march eastward to fight and divide Zhang Pu, who was famous in Jinan.

古文：张步闻之，使其将费邑军历下，又令兵屯祝阿，别于泰山、钟城列营数十以待之。
现代文：张步得知后，便派部将费邑屯兵历下，又令兵驻守祝阿，此外还在泰山、钟城等处布列营阵几十个以等待耿弇。
English: After Zhang Bu learned of this, he dispatched troops to garrison Feiyi, and also stationed soldiers in Zhu'a. In addition, dozens of camps were set up in Taishan, Zhongcheng and other places to wait for Geng Yao.

古文：渡河先击祝阿，拔之，故开围一角，令其众得奔归钟城。
现代文：耿弇率军渡过黄河后，首先攻克了祝阿城。打下城池后，却故意放开一个缺口，让守敌部众逃走。
English: After crossing the Yellow River with his army, Geng Yao first conquered Zhu A City. After the city was defeated, he deliberately left a gap so that the enemy defenders could escape.

古文：人闻祝阿已溃，大恐，遂空壁亡去。
现代文：钟城守军听说祝阿已被攻破，都十分恐慌，于是弃城而逃亡。
English: When the defenders of Zhongcheng heard that Zhu'a had been breached, they panicked and abandoned the city and fled.

古文：费邑分兵，遣其弟费敢守巨里，弇进兵先胁巨里，严令军中趣修攻具：后三日悉力攻巨里城。阴缓生口，亡归，以弇期告邑。
现代文：费邑又分兵派他的弟弟费敢防守巨里。耿弇率兵大举进攻，威胁巨里，并且严令部队尽快修造攻城器械，准备三天后全力攻打巨里城，同时暗中放出一些被俘人员，故意让他们逃归后将耿弇预定攻城的日期报告费邑。
English: Feiyu sent his younger brother Fei Dang to defend Jiu Li. Geng Yao led the troops in a large-scale attack, threatening Jiu Li, and ordered the troops to build siege equipment as soon as possible, prepare to attack Jiu Li three days later, and secretly release some captured personnel, deliberately letting them escape and report the date of Geng Yao's planned siege to Feiyu.

古文：邑至日果自将精兵来救。
现代文：费邑果然到这一天亲率精兵三万余人前去援救巨里。
English: On this day, Fei Yu led more than 30,000 elite soldiers to rescue Jiu Li.

古文：弇谓诸将曰： 吾所以修攻具者，欲诱致之耳。
现代文：耿弇见此情形，便高兴地对部将们说： 我之所以修造攻城器械，为的是诱使费邑前来就范。
English: Seeing this, Geng Yao happily said to his subordinates, "I built the siege equipment in order to entice Fei Yu to come to heel.

古文：野兵不击，何以城为？ 
现代文：现在放着这些驻营野外而无防御设施的敌军不打，为什么硬要强攻设防坚固的城池呢？ 
English: Now that these enemy troops, who are camped out in the open and have no defensive facilities, are not fighting, why do they want to forcefully attack a fortified city?

古文：则分兵守巨里，自帅精锐上冈阪，乘高合战，大破之，斩邑。
现代文：于是，耿弇分兵一部继续围攻和牵制巨里的敌人守军，自己亲率精锐部队抢占制高点，以居高临下之势与敌交战，大败敌军，击斩了费邑。
English: As a result, a part of Geng Yao's detachment continued to besiege and hold off the enemy defenders in Joli. He led his own elite troops to seize the commanding heights, and fought with the enemy in a high-handed manner. He defeated the enemy army and defeated Feiyu.

古文：既而取首级以示巨里，城中惧，费敢亡归张步。
现代文：然后砍下费邑首级展示给巨里的守敌，敌人望见后异常恐惧，费敢慌忙逃往据守剧地的张步处。
English: Then he chopped off the head of Fei Yiu, which was shown to the defenders of the giant. The enemies were extremely frightened when they saw it, and they did not dare to flee in a hurry to the Zhangpu area where the theater was located.

古文：弇悉收其积聚，纵兵攻诸未下者，平四十余营，遂定济南。
现代文：耿弇缴获了巨里城里的全部物资积蓄，又指挥军队攻打各个还未攻下的地方，扫平敌营余座，终于平定了济南。
English: Geng Biao captured all the material resources in Jili City, and commanded the army to attack all the places that had not yet been conquered, and finally leveled Jinan.

