古文：黄帝曰：气为上膈者，食饮入而还出，余已知之矣。
现代文：黄帝问：因为气机郁结在上，形成食后即吐的上膈症，我已经知道了。
English: Huang Di asked: I already know that because of the stagnation of qi in the upper body, it forms the epiglottis that vomits immediately after eating.

古文：虫为下膈，下膈者，食晬时乃出，余未得其意，愿卒闻之。
现代文：至于因虫积在下所形成的下膈症，下膈症的表现是食后经过一天左右才吐出，我还不甚了解其中的道理，我想尽快地知道其中的道理。
English: As for the lameness caused by the accumulation of insects underneath, the manifestation of lameness is that it takes a day or so after eating to vomit. I still don't quite understand the reason for this, and I want to know the reason as soon as possible.

古文：岐伯曰：喜怒不适，食饮不节，寒温不时，则寒汁流于肠中，流于肠中则虫寒，虫寒则积聚，守于下管，则肠胃充郭，卫气不营，邪气居之。
现代文：岐伯答道：喜怒不能适度，饮食不加节制，衣着不能随气候变化增减，时而衣少身寒，时而衣多过暖，以致损伤了胃气；胃如受寒，则寒汁流于肠内；寒汁流肠内，则肠内寄生虫感觉寒冷；虫觉寒冷，就会拥挤在一起，聚守于下脘部，因而使肠胃充满、张大，以致卫气不能营运护养，而邪气留止其中。
English: Qi Bo replied, "Happiness and anger cannot be in moderation, eating and drinking are unrestrained, clothing cannot increase and decrease with climate change, sometimes the clothes are too cold, sometimes the clothes are too warm, resulting in damage to the stomach gas; if the stomach is cold, the cold juice flows in the intestine; if the cold juice flows in the intestine, the intestinal parasites feel cold; if the insects feel cold, they will crowd together and gather in the lower jaw, thus making the stomach full and distended, so that the hygienic gas cannot operate and maintain, and the evil gas remains in it.

古文：人食则虫上食，虫上食则下管虚，下管虚则邪气胜之，积聚以留，留则痈成，痈成则下管约。
现代文：人吃进东西，虫即上而取食；虫上而取食，则下脘虚空；下脘虚空，则邪气占了上风，积聚而滞留不去；邪气滞留，就形成为痈；痈成，则下脘收束。
English: When a person eats something, the worms go up and take food; when the worms go up and take food, the lower jaw is empty; when the lower jaw is empty, the evil spirit prevails, accumulates and does not linger; when the evil spirit lingers, it forms a cocoon; when the cocoon forms, the lower jaw closes.

古文：其痈在管内者，即而痛深；其痈在外者，则痈外而痛浮，痈上皮热。
现代文：其痈在下脘之内的，一经碰触，则疼痛剧烈；其痈在下脘之外的，则痈外显而痛轻，痈上的皮肤发热。
English: If the mole is inside the lower eyelid, the pain is severe when touched; if the mole is outside the lower eyelid, the mole is external and painless, and the skin on the mole is hot.

古文：黄帝曰：刺之奈何？
现代文：黄帝问：下膈症怎样用针刺治疗呢？
English: Huang Di asked: How can acupuncture be used to treat aphasia?

古文：岐伯曰：微按其痈，视气所行，先浅刺其傍，稍内益深，逐而刺之，毋过三行，察其沉浮，以为深浅。
现代文：岐伯答道：针刺的方法是，应当用手轻轻地按摩痈肿的部位，以观察痈肿部位的大小和病气发展的动向，先浅刺痈肿周边，再逐渐深刺，如此反复行针但不要超过三次，进针的深浅，要根据病位的深度来决定。
English: Qibo replied: The method of acupuncture is to gently massage the abscessed area with your hand to observe the size of the abscessed area and the development of the disease. First, lightly prick the area around the abscess, then gradually deepen the prick. Repeat the procedure but not more than three times. The depth of the needle should be determined according to the depth of the disease.

古文：已刺必熨，令热入中，日使热内，邪气益衰，大痈乃溃。
现代文：针刺后必须使用温熨法，使热气直达体内，只要使阳气日渐温通，邪气日趋衰退，内痈就会溃散。
English: After acupuncture, it is necessary to use the warm ironing method, so that the hot air can reach the body directly. As long as the yang is gradually warmed up, and the evil gas is increasingly declining, the internal hernia will collapse.

古文：伍以参禁，以除其内；恬憺无为，乃能行气。后以咸苦化谷，乃下矣。
现代文：上述治疗要综合参依日月四时等气候情况及患者身体内部的状况，注意不要违犯针刺的禁忌，用泻法排除体内郁结的邪气；同时患者本人也须保持心境的安恬澹泊，这样才能使正气畅行。
English: The above-mentioned treatment should comprehensively take into account the weather conditions such as the four o'clock of the sun and the moon and the internal conditions of the patient's body, be careful not to violate the taboo of acupuncture, and use the laxative method to eliminate the stagnant evil qi in the body; at the same time, the patient himself must maintain the peace of mind, so that the righteous qi can flow smoothly.

