古文：十有七年春，卫北宫括帅师侵郑。
现代文：十七年春季，卫国的北宫括率领军队攻打郑国。
English: In the spring of the seventeenth year, the Northern Palace Guards led the army to attack Zheng.

古文：夏，公会尹子、单子、晋侯、齐侯、宋公、卫侯、曹伯、邾人伐郑。
现代文：夏季，成公与尹子、单子、晋侯、齐侯、宋公、卫侯、曹伯、邾人一起出兵攻打郑国。
English: In the summer, Cheng Gong, together with Yin Zi, Shan Zi, Jin Hou, Qi Hou, Song Gong, Wei Hou, Cao Bo, and Yan Ren, sent troops to attack Zheng Guo.

古文：六月乙酉，同盟于柯陵。
现代文：六曰乙酉日，在柯陵结盟。
English: On the 6th day of the month, they made an alliance in Koling.

古文：秋，公至自会。
现代文：秋季，成公从柯陵回到鲁国。
English: In autumn, Aigong returns from Huangchi.

古文：齐高无咎出奔莒。
现代文：齐国的高无咎逃到莒国。
English: Gao Muxin of Qi fled to Shandong.

古文：九月辛丑，用郊。
现代文：九月辛丑日，鲁国用了祭祀天地的礼仪。
English: In September, on the day of the Ugly Duckling, Lu used the ritual of sacrificing heaven and earth.

古文：晋侯使荀罃来乞师。
现代文：晋侯派遣荀罃来请求出兵救援。
English: Jin sent a messenger to request troops to come to the rescue.

古文：冬，公会单子、晋侯、宋公、卫侯、曹伯、齐人、邾人伐郑。
现代文：冬季，成公与单子、晋侯、宋公、卫侯、曹伯、齐人、邾人一起出兵攻打郑国。
English: In the winter, Chenggong, together with Shan Zi, Jin Hou, Song Gong, Wei Hou, Cao Bo, Qi Ren and Yan Ren, sent troops to attack Zheng Guo.

古文：十有一月，公至自伐郑。
现代文：十一月，成公从攻打郑国的地方回来。
English: In November, Chengong returned from the attack on Zheng.

古文：壬申，公孙婴齐卒于貍脤。
现代文：壬申日，公孙婴齐在貍脤去世。
English: On Jinshin Day, grandchild Qi passed away at home.

古文：十有二月丁巳朔，日有食之。
现代文：十二月丁巳这天是初一，有日食。
English: It was the first day of the new year in December, and there was a solar eclipse.

古文：邾子貜且卒。
现代文：邾娄国国君貜且去世。
English: "Kokoku Kokujin" passed away.

古文：晋杀其大夫郤锜、郤犫、郤至。
现代文：晋国杀掉自己的大夫郤锜、郤犫、郤至。
English: Jin killed his own doctor,,.

古文：楚人灭舒庸。
现代文：楚国军队灭掉了舒庸国。
English: The Chu army destroyed Shuyang.

古文：十七年春，王正月，郑子驷侵晋虚、滑。
现代文：十七年春季，周王朝历法的正月，郑国子驷进攻晋国的虚、滑两地。
English: In the spring of the seventeenth year, the first month of the Zhou Dynasty calendar, Zheng Guozihong attacked Jin Province and attacked the two places.

古文：卫北宫括救晋侵郑，至于高氏。
现代文：卫国的北宫括救援晋国，侵袭郑国，到达高氏。
English: The Northern Palace Guard, including the rescue of Jin, invaded Zheng, and reached Gao.

古文：夏五月，郑大子髠顽、侯獳为质于楚，楚公子成、公子寅戍郑。
现代文：夏季，五月，郑国太子髡顽和侯卻獳到楚国作为人质，楚国公子成、公子寅戍守在郑国。
English: In the summer, in May, the prince of Zheng and his concubine came to Chu as hostages. The princes of Chu, Zheng Zicheng and Yin Zicheng, stayed in Zheng.

古文：公会尹武公、单襄公及诸侯伐郑，自戏童至于曲洧。
现代文：鲁成公会合尹武公、单襄公以及诸侯进攻郑国，从戏童到达曲洧。
English: Lu Chenggong gathered Yin Wukong, Shan Xianggong and the princes to attack Zheng, from the Playboy to the Opera House.

古文：晋范文子反自鄢陵，使其祝宗祈死，曰： 君骄侈而克敌，是天益其疾也。难将作矣！
现代文：晋国的范文子从鄢陵回国，让他的祝宗祈求早点死去，说： 国君骄横奢侈而又战胜敌人，这是上天增加他的毛病，祸难将要起来了。
English: Fan Wenzi of Jin returned from Fuling and asked his Zhuzong to pray for an early death, saying, "The sovereign is arrogant and extravagant, yet he has defeated the enemy. This is God's way of adding to his problems. Disaster is imminent."

古文：爱我者惟祝我，使我速死，无及于难，范氏之福也。 
现代文：爱我的人只有诅咒我，让我快点死去，不要及于祸难，这就是范氏的福气。 
English: Those who love me only have to curse me, let me die quickly, and not fall into the calamity. This is Mr. Fan's blessing.

古文：六月戊辰，士燮卒。
现代文：六月初九日， 范文子死。
English: On June 9, Fan Wenzi passed away.

古文：乙酉，同盟于柯陵，寻戚之盟也。楚子重救郑，师于首止。
现代文：六月二十六日，鲁成公和尹子、单子、晋厉公、齐灵公、宋平公、卫献公、曹成公、邾国人在柯陵结盟，这是为了重温戚地的盟会。楚国的子重援救郑国，军队驻扎在首止。
English: On June 26th, Lu Chenggong, Yin Zi, Shan Zi, Jin Li, Qi Ling, Song Ping, Wei Xian, Cao Chenggong, and Yan Guo allied themselves in Ke Ling, in order to revisit the alliance in their ancestral lands. The son of Chu Guo came to the rescue of Zheng Guo, and the army was stationed at the beginning.

古文：诸侯还。
现代文：诸侯就退兵回国。
English: The lords withdrew and returned to their country.

古文：齐庆克通于声孟子，与妇人蒙衣乘辇而入于闳。
现代文：齐国的庆克和声孟子私通，穿着女人衣服和女人一起坐辇进入宫中的夹道门。
English: Qingke of Qi and Mencius of Mencius fornicated, wearing women's clothes and sitting with women to enter the palace through the side door.

古文：鲍牵见之，以告国武子，武子召庆克而谓之。
现代文：鲍牵见到了，报告国武子。武子把庆克召来告诉他。
English: Bao Rui saw this and reported it to Guo Wu Zi. Wu Zi summoned Qing Ke to tell him.

古文：庆克久不出，而告夫人曰： 国子谪我！ 
现代文：庆克躲在家里很久不出门，报告声孟子说： 国子责备我。 
English: Qingke hid at home for a long time and did not leave the house. Mencius said, "The son of the country reproaches me."

古文：夫人怒。
现代文：声孟子发怒。
English: Mencius was furious.

古文：国子相灵公以会，高、鲍处守。
现代文：国武子作为齐灵公的相礼参加会见，高无咎、鲍牵留守。
English: Kunitake Takeshi attended the meeting as Qi Linggong's consort, and Gao Muxin and Bao Dangling stayed behind.

古文：及还，将至，闭门而索客。
现代文：等到回国，将要到达的时候，关闭城门，检查旅客。
English: When they return home, when they are about to arrive, close the gates and check the passengers.

古文：孟子诉之曰： 高、鲍将不纳君，而立公子角。国子知之。 
现代文：声孟子诬陷说： 高、鲍两人打算不接纳国君而立公子角，国子参与这件事。 
English: Voice Mengzi framed said: Gao, Bao two people plan not to accept the prince and set up a prince corner, the prince involved in this matter.

古文：秋七月壬寅，刖鲍牵而逐高无咎。
现代文：秋季，七月十三日，砍去了鲍牵的双脚而驱逐了高无咎。
English: In the autumn, on July 13th, Bao Tong's feet were chopped off and Gao Muxin was expelled.

古文：无咎奔莒，高弱以卢叛。
现代文：高无咎逃亡到莒国。高弱据有卢地而发动叛乱。
English: Gao Muxin fled to Shan State. Gao Weak started a rebellion according to Lu Di.

古文：齐人来召鲍国而立之。
现代文：齐国人来鲁国召回鲍国而立了他。
English: The people of Qi came to Lu to call back Bao and set him up.

古文：初，鲍国去鲍氏而来，为施孝叔臣。
现代文：当初，鲍国离开鲍氏来鲁国做施孝叔的家臣。
English: At first, Bao Guo left the Bao clan and came to Lu to be a vassal of Shi Xiaoshu.

古文：施氏卜宰，匡句须吉。
现代文：施氏占卜总管的人选，匡句须吉利。
English: Shi's candidate for chief diviner, Kuang Quan Sugili.

古文：施氏之宰，有百室之邑。
现代文：施氏的总管拥有一百家的采邑。
English: Mr. Shi's head office has a hundred factories.

古文：与匡句须邑，使为宰。以让鲍国，而致邑焉。
现代文：施氏给了匡句须采邑，让他做总管，他却让给鲍国而且把采邑也给了鲍国。
English: Mr. Shi gave Kuang Quan Su the county seat and asked him to be the general manager, but he gave it to Bao Guo and also gave the county seat to Bao Guo.

古文：施孝叔曰： 子实吉。 
现代文：施孝叔说： 你是占卜认为吉利的。 
English: Uncle Shi Xiao said, "You are a soothsayer who believes in good luck.

古文：对曰： 能与忠良，吉孰大焉！ 
现代文：匡句须回答说： 能够给忠良，还有比这再大的吉利吗？ 
English: Kuang Quan replied, "Could there be a greater blessing than this to give to Zhong Liang?

古文：鲍国相施氏忠，故齐人取以为鲍氏后。
现代文：鲍国辅助施氏很忠诚，所以齐国人把他召回去作为鲍氏的后嗣。
English: Bao Guo Auxiliary Shi was very loyal, so the people of Qi called him back as Bao's heir.

古文：仲尼曰： 鲍庄子之知不如葵，葵犹能卫其足。 
现代文：孔子说： 鲍牵的聪明不如葵菜，葵菜还能保护自己的脚。 
English: Confucius said, "Bao Tuo is not as clever as Sunflower. Sunflower can also protect its own feet.

古文：冬，诸侯伐郑。
现代文：冬季，诸侯进攻郑国。
English: In winter, the princes attacked Zheng.

古文：十月庚午，围郑。
现代文：十月十二日，包围郑国。
English: On October 12, they encircled Zheng.

古文：楚公子申救郑，师于汝上。
现代文：楚国公子申救援郑国，军队驻扎在汝水边上。
English: The prince of Chu State, Shen, came to the rescue of Zheng State, and the army was stationed on the edge of the river.

古文：十一月，诸侯还。
现代文：十一月，诸侯退兵回国。
English: In November, the feudal lords returned home.

古文：初，声伯梦涉洹，或与己琼瑰，食之，泣而为琼瑰，盈其怀。从而歌之曰： 济洹之水，赠我以琼瑰。
现代文：当初，声伯梦见步行渡过洹水，有人将琼瑰给他吃了，哭出来的眼泪都成了琼瑰装满怀抱，跟着唱歌说： 渡过洹水，赠给我琼瑰。
English: At first, Song Bo had a dream of crossing Surabaya on foot. Someone gave him Qiongwu to eat. The tears he cried turned into Qiongwu, who filled his arms and sang: "Crossing Surabaya, give me Qiongwu."

古文：归乎！归乎！琼瑰盈吾怀乎！ 
现代文：回去吧回去吧，琼瑰装满我的怀内！ 
English: Go back, go back, Joan of Arc, fill my arms!

古文：惧不敢占也。
现代文：醒来由于害怕而不敢占卜。
English: Waking up and not being able to tell fortunes because of fear.

古文：还自郑，壬申，至于貍脤而占之，曰： 余恐死，故不敢占也。
现代文：从郑国回来，十一月某一天，到达狸脤，而占卜这件事，说： 我害怕死，所以不敢占卜。
English: Returning from Zhengzhou, on a certain day in November, he arrived at Cucutao, and divined the matter, saying: I am afraid of death, so I dare not divine.

古文：今众繁而从余，三年矣，无伤也， 言之之莫而卒。
现代文：现在大家跟随我已经三年了，没有妨碍了。 说了这件事，到晚上就死了。
English: Now you have been with me for three years, and there is nothing to hinder you; and when you have said this, in the evening you will die.

古文：齐侯使崔杼为大夫，使庆克佐之。帅师围卢。
现代文：齐灵公派崔杼做大夫，派庆克辅佐他，率领军队包围卢地。
English: Qiling Gong sent Cui Wei to be a doctor, sent Qing Ke to assist him, and led the army to encircle Ludi.

古文：国佐从诸侯围郑，以难请而归。
现代文：国佐跟从诸侯包围郑国，由于齐国发生祸难请求回国。
English: Guo Zuo and his vassals besieged Zheng and requested to return home due to the disaster in Qi.

古文：遂如卢师，杀庆克，以穀叛。
现代文：国佐于是就到了包围卢地的军队里，杀了庆克，据有穀地而发动叛乱。
English: Guo Zuo then went to the army encircling Ludi, killed Qing Ke, and launched a rebellion based on the grain fields.

古文：齐侯与之盟于徐关而复之。
现代文：齐灵公和国佐在徐关结盟以后，恢复了他的官位。
English: After the alliance between Lord Qi Ling and Guo Zuo in Xu Guan, he resumed his official position.

古文：十二月，卢降，使国胜告难于晋，待命于清。
现代文：十二月，卢地人投降。齐灵公派遣国胜向晋国报告祸难，并且让他在清地等候命令。
English: In December, the Ludi surrendered. Qilinggong's dispatching country reported the disaster to Jin, and told him to wait for orders in Qingdao.

古文：晋厉公侈，多外嬖。
现代文：晋厉公奢侈，有很多宠信的大夫。
English: Jin Liguo is extravagant and has many favorite doctors.

古文：反自鄢陵，欲尽去群大夫，而立其左右。
现代文：从鄢陵回来，想要全部去掉其他的大夫，而立左右宠信的人。
English: After returning from Fuling, he wanted to get rid of all the other doctors and put in place people he trusted.

古文：胥童以胥克之废也，怨郤氏，而嬖于厉公。
现代文：胥童因为胥克的被废，怨恨郤氏而成为厉公宠臣。
English: Xing Tong became Liguo's favorite because Xing Ke was abolished and he resented the Xing clan.

古文：郤锜夺夷阳五田，五亦嬖于厉公。
现代文：郤犫夺走了夷阳五的土田，夷阳五也为厉公所宠信。
English: The dragonfly took away the earthen field of Yi Yang Wu, and Yi Yang Wu was also a favorite of Li Gong.

古文：郤犫与长鱼矫争田，执而梏之，与其父母妻子同一辕。
现代文：郤犫和长鱼矫争夺土田，把长鱼矫逮捕囚禁，和他的父母妻子同系在一个车辕上。
English: Zhai and Changyu Jiao competed for the land. Changyu Jiao was arrested and imprisoned, and he was chained to a cart with his parents and wife.

古文：既，矫亦嬖于厉公。
现代文：不久以后，长鱼矫也受到厉公的宠信。
English: Soon after, Changyu Jiao was also favored by Liguo.

古文：栾书怨郤至，以其不从己而败楚师也，欲废之。
现代文：栾书怨恨郤至，因为他不听自己的主意而又打败了楚军，想要废掉他。
English: Because he did not listen to his own advice and defeated the Chu army, Zenshu became resentful and wanted to depose him.

古文：使楚公子茷告公曰： 此战也，郤至实召寡君。以东师之未至也，与军帅之不具也，曰： 此必败！吾因奉孙周以事君。  
现代文：栾书让楚国的公子茷告诉厉公说： 这次战役，郤至实在是召来我寡君的，因为东方的军队没有到达和晋军统帅没有完全出动，他说： 这一战晋国必然失败，我就乘机拥立孙周来事奉君王。  
English: In the letter, Li Gong, the prince of the state of Chu, was told by Li Gong that: "This battle is really the one that has brought me the most kings, because the eastern army has not arrived and the commander of the Jin army has not fully set out. He said: This battle is bound to fail, and I will take the opportunity to serve Sun Zhou.

古文：公告栾书，书曰： 其有焉！
现代文：厉公告诉栾书。栾书说： 恐怕有这回事。
English: "I'm afraid that's what's going on," he said.

古文：不然，岂其死之不恤，而受敌使乎？
现代文：否则，难道他会不顾虑死，而接受敌人的使者吗？
English: Otherwise, would he accept the enemy's messenger without fear of death?

古文：君盍尝使诸周而察之！ 
现代文：君王何不试着派他到成周而考察他一下呢？ 
English: Why don't you try to send him to Cheng Zhou and have a look at him?

古文：郤至聘于周，栾书使孙周见之。公使觇之，信。
现代文：郤至到成周聘问，栾书让孙周接见他，晋厉公派人窥探，证实了。
English: When he came to Cheng Zhou for an interview, Zenshu let Sun Zhou meet him, and Jin Li sent someone to spy on him, which confirmed it.

古文：遂怨郤至。
现代文：于是厉公就怨恨郤至。
English: As a result, Liguo became bitter.

古文：厉公田，与妇人先杀而饮酒，后使大夫杀。
现代文：晋厉公打猎，和女人一起首先射猎，并且喝酒，然后让大夫射猎。
English: Jin Li Gong hunts, shoots with the woman first, and drinks, and then lets the doctor shoot.

古文：郤至奉豕，寺人孟张夺之，郤至射而杀之。
现代文：郤至奉献野猪，寺人孟张夺走野猪，郤至射死了孟张。
English: When it was time to dedicate the wild boar, the temple man Meng Zhang took the wild boar, and when it was time to shoot it, he shot Meng Zhang.

古文：公曰： 季子欺余。 
现代文：厉公说： 郤至欺负我！ 
English: Liguang said, "Don't bully me!

古文：厉公将作难，胥童曰： 必先三郤，族大多怨。
现代文：厉公准备发动群臣讨伐郤至，胥童说： 一定要先从三郤开刀。他们族大，怨恨多。
English: When Liguo was about to mobilize his retainers to fight against the Xiongnu, the Xiongnu said, "We must start with the Sanxiongnu first. They are a large tribe and have a lot of grudges."

古文：去大族不偪，敌多怨有庸。 公曰： 然。 
现代文：去掉大族，公室就不受逼迫；讨伐怨恨多的，容易有功。 厉公说： 对。 
English: If you get rid of the big clans, the officials will not be persecuted; if you fight against those who have a lot of grudges, it is easy to be effective.

古文：郤氏闻之，郤锜欲攻公，曰： 虽死，君必危。 
现代文：郤氏听到这件事，郤锜想要攻打厉公，说： 虽然我们一族就要死了，国君也必定危险了。 
English: Hearing this, Mr. Zou wanted to attack Li Gong, saying, "Although our family is about to die, the sovereign must also be in danger."

古文：郤至曰： 人所以立，信、知、勇也。
现代文：郤至说： 人能站得住，是由于有信用、明智、勇敢。
English: He said, "A person can stand firm because he is trustworthy, wise, and brave."

古文：信不叛君，知不害民，勇不作乱。
现代文：有信用不能背叛国君，明智不能残害百姓，勇敢不能发动祸难。
English: If you have trust, you cannot betray the sovereign; if you are wise, you cannot destroy the people; if you are brave, you cannot unleash disaster.

古文：失兹三者，其谁与我？
现代文：没有这三样，还有谁亲近我们？
English: Without these three, who else is close to us?

古文：死而多怨，将安用之？
现代文：死了又增多怨恨，还有什么用？
English: What's the use of being dead and hating more?

古文：君实有臣而杀之，其谓君何？
现代文：国君有了臣下而杀了他们，能把国君怎么办？
English: If the sovereign has vassals and kills them, what can the sovereign do?

古文：我之有罪，吾死后矣！
现代文：我若有罪，死得已经晚了。
English: If I'm guilty, it's too late to die.

古文：若杀不辜，将失其民，欲安得乎？
现代文：如果国君杀害的是无罪的人，他将要失掉百姓，想要安定，行吗？
English: If the king is killing innocent people, he's going to lose the people, he wants stability, okay?

古文：待命而已！
现代文：还是听候命令吧。
English: Better to follow orders.

古文：受君之禄，是以聚党。
现代文：受了国君的禄位，因此才能聚集亲族。
English: He received the position of the sovereign, so he was able to gather relatives.

古文：有党而争命，罪孰大焉！ 
现代文：有了亲族而和国君相争，还有比这更大的罪过吗？ 
English: Is there a greater sin than to have relatives and to fight against the sovereign?

古文：壬午，胥童、夷羊五帅甲八百，将攻郤氏。长鱼矫请无用众，公使清沸魋助之，抽戈结衽，而伪讼者。
现代文：十二月二十六日，胥童、夷羊五率领甲士八百人准备进攻郤氏，长鱼矫请求不要兴师动众，晋厉公派清沸魋去帮助他们。长鱼矫和清沸魋抽出戈来，衣襟相结，装成打架争讼的样子。
English: On the 26th day of December, eight hundred warriors were preparing to attack the Xiong clan, led by Xiong Tong and Yiyang Wu. Changyu Jiao requested not to stir up the crowd, and Jin Liguo sent Qing Bo Xiong to help them. Changyu Jiao and Qing Bo Xiong drew their swords, tied their clothes together, and pretended to fight.

古文：矫及诸其车，以戈杀之，皆尸诸朝。
现代文：三郤准备在台榭里和他们计议，长鱼矫乘机用戈在座位上刺死了郤锜和郤犫。郤至说： 无罪被杀，不如逃走。 于是赶快逃走。
English: The three cormorants prepared to discuss the matter with them in the pond. Changyu Jiao took the opportunity to stab the cormorant and the cormorant on the seat. The cormorant said: If you are killed without guilt, it is better to run away. So run away quickly.

古文：胥童以甲劫栾书、中行偃于朝。
现代文：长鱼矫追上郤至的车子，用戈刺死了他。都陈尸在朝廷上。胥童带领甲士在朝廷上劫持了栾书、中行偃。
English: Changyu chased and caught up with Zou's car and stabbed him to death with a crossbow. Both bodies were found in the imperial court. Zou Tong led the knights to kidnap Zou Shu and Zhong Xing Zou in the imperial court.

古文：矫曰： 不杀二子，忧必及君。 
现代文：长鱼矫说： 不杀这两个人，忧患必然会到国君身上。 
English: Changyu Jiao said: If you don't kill these two people, sorrow will inevitably come to the sovereign.

古文：公曰： 一朝而尸三卿，余不忍益也。 
现代文：晋厉公说： 一天之中而把三个卿的尸摆在朝上，我不忍心增加了。 
English: Jin Liguo said, "I can't bear to have the bodies of three nobles brought to the emperor in one day.

古文：对曰： 人将忍君。
现代文：长鱼矫回答说： 别人对君王会忍心的。
English: The boy replied, "But others will have the heart to kill you."

古文：臣闻乱在外为奸，在内为轨。
现代文：下臣听说祸乱在外就是奸，在内就是轨。
English: The vassal heard that outside, the calamity was treachery, but inside, it was a rut.

古文：御奸以德，御轨以刑。
现代文：用德行来对待奸，用刑罚来对待轨。
English: Treat adultery with virtue and vice with punishment.

古文：不施而杀，不可谓德。臣偪而不讨，不可谓刑。
现代文：不施教化就加以杀戮，不能叫做德行；臣下逼迫国君而不加讨伐，不能叫做刑罚。
English: To kill without instruction cannot be called virtue; for a vassal to persecute his sovereign without a crusade cannot be called punishment.

古文：德刑不立，奸轨并至。臣请行。 
现代文：德行和刑罚不加树立，奸、轨就一起来了，下臣请求离去。 
English: Virtue and punishment are not enforced. Treachery and betrayal go hand in hand. Subordinates are asked to leave.

古文：遂出奔狄。
现代文：于是就逃亡到狄人那里。
English: So he fled to the Di people.

古文：公使辞于二子，曰： 寡人有讨于郤氏，郤氏既伏其辜矣。大夫无辱，其复职位。 
现代文：厉公派人向栾书和中行偃辞谢说： 寡人讨伐郤氏，郤氏已经伏罪，大夫不要把劫持的事作为耻辱，还是各复其位吧！ 
English: Liguo sent a person to express his gratitude to Zou Shu and Zhong Xing, saying: Many people fought against the Zou clan, the Zou clan has already committed a crime, the doctor should not regard the kidnapping as a disgrace, but each should return to his place!

古文：皆再拜稽首曰： 君讨有罪，而免臣于死，君之惠也。
现代文：他们都再拜叩头说： 君王讨伐有罪的人，而赦免下臣一死，这是君王的恩惠。
English: They all prostrated themselves again and said, "It is the king's bounty that he fights the guilty and forgives the death of his vassal."

古文：二臣虽死，敢忘君德。 
现代文：我们两个人即使死了，哪里敢忘记君王的恩德？ 
English: Even if the two of us die, how dare we forget the king's kindness?

古文：乃皆归。
现代文：于是都回去了。
English: So they all went back.

古文：公使胥童为卿。
现代文：晋厉公派胥童做卿。
English: Rigong let Xing Tong assume the post of chancellor.

古文：公游于匠丽氏，栾书、中行偃遂执公焉。
现代文：晋厉公在匠丽氏那里游玩，栾书、中行偃就乘机抓住了他。
English: Jin Liguo was playing at the residence of the artist Li Shi, and Zou Shu and Zhong Xing Yao seized the opportunity to catch him.

古文：召士匄，士匄辞。
现代文：召唤士匄，士匄辞谢。
English: Summon a warrior, and the warrior will thank you.

古文：召韩厥，韩厥辞，曰： 昔吾畜于赵氏，孟姬之谗，吾能违兵。
现代文：召唤韩厥，韩厥辞谢说： 从前我在赵氏家里养大，孟姬诬陷赵氏，我能顶住不出兵。
English: Summoning Han Jue, Han Jue thanked him and said: I was once raised in the Zhao family, Meng Ji framed Zhao, I can resist not joining the army.

古文：古人有言曰， 杀老牛莫之敢尸 ，而况君乎？
现代文：古人有话说， 杀老牛没有人敢作主 ，何况是国君呢？
English: The ancients said that no one would dare to kill an old cow, let alone the sovereign.

古文：二三子不能事君，焉用厥也！ 
现代文：您几位不能事奉国君，又哪里用得到厥呢？ 
English: Some of you can't serve the sovereign, so where are you going to get the money from?

古文：舒庸人以楚师之败也，道吴人围巢，伐驾，围厘、虺，遂恃吴而不设备。
现代文：舒庸人由于楚军的战败，引导吴国人包围巢地，进攻驾地，包围厘地和虺地，因此就依仗着吴国而不设防。
English: As a result of the defeat of the Chu army, Shu Yong led the people of Wu to encircle the nest, attack the driving ground, encircle the Liji and Yunnan, and therefore rely on the state of Wu without setting up defenses.

古文：楚公子橐师袭舒庸，灭之。
现代文：楚国公子槖师入侵舒庸，灭亡了舒庸。
English: The Duke of Chu and his army invaded Shuyang and destroyed it.

古文：闰月乙卯晦，栾书、中行偃杀胥童。
现代文：闰月二十九日，栾书、中行偃杀了胥童。
English: On the 29th day of the leap month, Gongshu and Zhongxing killed Gongdong.

古文：民不与郤氏，胥童道君为乱，故皆书曰： 晋杀其大夫。 
现代文：百姓不亲附郤氏，胥童引导国君作乱，所以《春秋》都记载说 晋杀其大夫 。
English: The people were not close to the Zou clan, and the Zou children led the sovereign to make trouble, so "Spring and Autumn" all recorded that Jin killed his doctor.

