古文：元岩，字君山，河南洛阳人也。
现代文：元岩字君山，河南洛阳人。
English: Former Iwaza Junshan, from Luoyang, Henan Province.

古文：父祯，魏敷州刺史。
现代文：父元祯，魏时任敷州刺史。
English: His father, Yuan Jie, was appointed as the governor of Shikizhou in the Wei Dynasty.

古文：岩好读书，不守章名，刚鲠有器局，以名节自许，少与勃海高颎、太原王韶同志友善。
现代文：元岩喜爱读书，不拘守文章字句，刚硬耿直，有气量，以名节高雅不俗自许。少年时和渤海高赹、太原王韶成为朋友，相互友好。
English: Yuan Yan loved to read, did not stick to the words of the article, was tough and upright, had energy, and prided himself on being elegant. When he was a boy, he became friends with Bohai Gaoqi and Taiyuan Wang Qi, and they were friendly with each other.

古文：仕周，为武贲给事。
现代文：出仕周朝，任武贲给事。
English: He served in the Zhou Dynasty and was assigned to Wuyi.

古文：大冢宰宇文护见而器之，以为中外记室。
现代文：大冢宰宇文护见到他而加以器重，任命为中外记室。
English: He was highly regarded by the grand secretary of the imperial eunuchs, and was appointed to the foreign secretary's office.

古文：累迁内史中大夫，封昌国县伯。
现代文：多次升迁至内史中大夫，封爵昌国县伯。
English: He was promoted many times to the position of doctor of internal history, and was given the title of peer of Changguo County.

古文：周宣帝嗣位，为政昏暴，京兆郡丞乐运舆榇诣朝堂，陈帝八失，言甚切至。
现代文：周宣帝继位，政治昏愦暴虐，京兆郡丞乐运抬着棺材到朝堂之上，陈说宣帝的八种过失，言辞非常激动切恳至。
English: Zhou Xuandi's succession to the throne, political dizziness and tyranny, Jing Zhaogun Zhao Le Yun carrying the coffin to the top of the imperial hall, Chen said Xuandi's eight kinds of faults, the rhetoric was very emotional and earnest.

古文：帝大怒，将戮之，朝臣莫有救者。
现代文：周宣帝大怒，准备将乐运杀掉，朝中大臣没有人救助。
English: Emperor Zhou Xuan was furious and prepared to kill Le Yun. No one came to the Middle Kingdom minister's rescue.

古文：岩谓人曰： 臧洪同日，尚可俱死，其况比干乎？
现代文：元岩对人说 ：臧洪若和乐运同日，尚且可以一同去死，何况比干呢？
English: Yuanyan said to the man, "If Gong Hong and Le Yun can die together on the same day, how much more so?"

古文：若乐运不免，吾将与之俱毙。 
现代文：如果乐运不能免死，我就将和他一起死。 
English: If Le Ying cannot avoid death, I will die with him.

古文：诣閤请见，言于帝曰： 乐运知书奏必死，所以不顾身命者，欲取后世名。
现代文：到朝堂求见，对宣帝说： 乐运知道上书奏闻难免一死，因此就不顾自己的性命，想借此博取后世的名声。
English: He went to the imperial court to seek an audience with Emperor Xuan and said to him, "Since Le Yun knew that he would die if he submitted his report, he did not care about his own life and wanted to use this opportunity to gain fame in the future.

古文：陛下若杀之，乃成其名，落其术内。
现代文：陛下如果杀掉他，就成就了他的名声，落在了他圈套里。
English: Your Majesty, if you kill him, will have made his reputation and fallen into his trap.

古文：不如劳而遣之，以广圣度。 
现代文：不如使他劳累而将他发遣出去，以扩大圣明帝王的气度。 
English: It would be better to overwork him and send him out to expand the stature of Emperor Shengming.

古文：运因获免。
现代文：乐运因此而得幸免。
English: As a result, Le Ying was spared.

古文：后帝将诛乌丸轨，岩不肯署诏。
现代文：后来，宣帝将要诛杀乌丸轨，元岩不肯签署诏书。
English: Later, Emperor Xuanxuan was going to assassinate Emperor Wu, and Yuan Yan refused to sign the edict.

古文：御正颜之仪切谏不入，岩进继之，脱巾顿颡，三拜三进。
现代文：御正颜之仪直言切谏，宣帝不采纳，元岩上殿继续劝谏，摘去头巾，磕着头，三拜三进。
English: The Emperor did not accept the suggestion, and the former Iwakami-dono continued to persuade him. He took off his turban, bowed his head, and made three prostrations.

古文：帝曰： 汝欲党乌丸轨耶？ 
现代文：宣帝说 ：你想和乌丸轨为同党吗？ 
English: Emperor Xuan said: Do you want to be a member of the same party as Emperor Wu?

古文：岩曰： 臣非党轨，正恐滥诛，失天下望。 
现代文：元岩说 ：臣不是乌丸轨的同党，正是恐怕滥杀无辜，失去天下人之心。 
English: Motoiwa said, "I'm not a member of the same party as Uzumaru, but I'm afraid that indiscriminate killing of the innocent will lead to the loss of the people's hearts.

古文：帝怒，使阉竖搏其面，遂废于家。
现代文：宣帝大怒，令宦官抽打元岩的脸，就将元岩废置于家。
English: Emperor Xuan was so angry that he ordered the eunuch to slap Yuan Yan in the face, and Yuan Yan was sent home.

古文：隋文帝为丞相，加开府、户部中大夫。
现代文：隋文帝为丞相，加授元岩开府、户部中大夫。
English: Emperor Sui Wendi was chancellor, and Yuan Iwakifu was awarded the title of vice-premier, and became a junior doctor of the household department.

古文：及受禅，拜兵部尚书，进爵平昌郡公。
现代文：隋文帝禅位，任元岩为兵部尚书，晋封爵位为平昌郡公。
English: Sui Emperor Wen was enthroned, Ren Yuanyan was appointed as the military commander, and he was promoted to the peerage as the governor of Pyeongchang County.

古文：岩性严重，明达世务，每有奏议，侃然正色，廷争面折，无所回避，上及公卿皆敬惮之。
现代文：元岩生性威严持重，明白通达世务，每有奏议，神色端庄，当廷面争，没有什么可回避的，皇上和公卿大臣都敬重而畏惧他。
English: Yuan Yan's nature is dignified and dignified. He is well-versed in world affairs. Whenever there is a report, he looks dignified. When there is a dispute at court, there is nothing to avoid. The emperor and the noble ministers respect and fear him.

古文：时帝惩周代诸侯微弱，以致灭亡，由是分王诸子，权侔王室，以为盘石之固。
现代文：当时，隋文帝以周朝诸侯势力微弱以至于灭亡为鉴戒，因此分封诸子为王，权力和王室相等。
English: At that time, Emperor Sui Wen took the weak power of the Zhou Dynasty as a warning, so he made his sons the kings, with equal power to the royal family.

古文：遣晋王广镇并州，蜀王秀镇益州。
现代文：文帝认为这样做国家就会像磐石一样坚固。派遣晋王杨广镇守并州，蜀王杨秀镇守益州。
English: Emperor Wen believed that by doing so, the country would be as solid as a rock. He dispatched the Jin king Yang Guangzhen to guard the annexed province, and the Shu king Yang Xiuzhen to guard the Yizhou province.

古文：二王年并幼，选贞良有重望者为之僚佐。
现代文：二王子年龄都幼小，选择忠贞善良有崇高声望的人作为僚属辅助。
English: The two princes, both of whom are very young, choose loyal, good-hearted people with high reputations as their subordinates.

古文：时严与王韶为河北道行台右仆射，帝谓曰： 公宰相大器，今屈辅我兒，亦如曹参相齐之意。 
现代文：当时，元岩和王韶都因耿直有骨气而知名，时议称赞二人的才能和高赹相等，因此任命元岩为益州总管长史，任命王韶为河北道行台右仆射。文帝对元岩说： 公有宰相的大才能，如今委屈你辅助我的儿子，也就像曹参做齐国丞相一样的意思吧！ 
English: At that time, both Yuan Yan and Wang Qian were well-known for their uprightness and backbone, and the discussion praised the talents of the two as equal to Gao Qian. Therefore, Yuan Yan was appointed as the governor-general of Yizhou, and Wang Qian was appointed as the governor-general of Hebei Province. Emperor Wen said to Yuan Yan: You have the great talent of the prime minister, and now you are helping my son, just like Cao San as the prime minister of Qi.

古文：及岩到官，法令明肃，吏人称焉。
现代文：元岩到官任后，法令严明整肃，官员百姓都称赞他。
English: After Yuan Yan took office, the laws and regulations were strictly rectified, and the officials and the people praised him.

古文：蜀王好奢，尝欲取獠口为阉人，又欲生剖死囚，取胆为乐。
现代文：蜀王喜爱奢侈，曾经想用山獠做宦官，又曾想活剥死囚犯人，取死囚之胆做药。
English: King Shu loved luxury. He once wanted to use hawksbill turtles as eunuchs. He also wanted to flay prisoners alive and take the gallbladder of a death row inmate to make medicine.

古文：岩皆不奉教，排阁切谏，王辄谢而止。
现代文：元岩皆不听从教令，推门进去直言劝谏，蜀王拜谢而止。
English: Yuan Yan did not listen to the edict, but pushed the door to go in and advised him bluntly. Shu Wang bowed and stopped.

古文：惮岩为人，每循法度。
现代文：蜀王畏惧元岩为人耿直，常常遵循法度。
English: Shu Wang feared that Yuan Yan was a straightforward person and often followed the law.

古文：蜀中狱讼，岩所裁断，莫不悦服。
现代文：蜀中的诉讼案件，元岩裁断的，没有人不心悦诚服的。
English: The lawsuits in Shuzhong, which were adjudicated by Yuanyan, no one is dissatisfied.

古文：有得罪者，谓曰： 平昌公与罪，吾何怨焉？ 
现代文：有一被判定有罪的人对人说 ：平昌公给定的罪，我有什么怨言呢？ 
English: One person who was found guilty said, "What do I have to complain about, given the crime given by PyeongChang?"

古文：上甚嘉之，赏赐优洽。
现代文：文帝非常喜爱元岩，赏赐很是优厚。
English: Emperor Wen loved Yuanyan very much, and the reward was very generous.

古文：卒于官，上悼惜久之。
现代文：元岩死在官任上。文帝悲悼痛惜很久。
English: Yuan Yan died in office. Emperor Wen mourned and lamented for a long time.

古文：益州父老莫不陨涕，于今思之。
现代文：益州的父老乡亲没有不痛哭流涕的，至今依然思念他。
English: There is no father or countryman in Yizhou who does not weep bitterly, and they still miss him.

古文：岩卒后，蜀王为非法，造浑天仪，又共妃出猎，以弹弹人，多捕山獠充宦者，僚佐无能谏止。
现代文：元岩死后，蜀王所作所为没有法度，制造浑天仪，又和妃子一起外出打猎，用弹子射人，捕获许多山獠充当宦官，僚属辅佐没有人能够劝谏阻止。
English: After Yuan Yan's death, there was no legal limit to what Shu Wang could do. He made armadillos, went hunting with his concubine, shot people with marbles, and captured many hawks to serve as eunuchs. No one could persuade or stop him.

古文：及秀得罪，上曰： 元岩若在，吾兒岂有是乎！ 
现代文：等到蜀王秀获罪，文帝说： 元岩如果还活着，我的儿子岂能会这样！ 
English: After Shu Wangxiu was found guilty, Emperor Wen said: "If Yuan Yan were still alive, my son would not be like this!

古文：子弘嗣。
现代文：儿子元弘继承爵位。
English: His son Motohiro succeeded to the peerage.

古文：历给事郎、司朝谒者、北平通守。
现代文：历任给事郎、司朝谒者、北平通守等职。
English: He was successively assigned the posts of secretary, secretary of the Imperial Household Agency, and governor of Beiping Province.

古文：宇文弼，字公辅，河南洛阳人也，其先与周同出。
现代文：宇文弼字公辅，河南洛阳人。其祖与周朝宗室同出一支。
English: A native of Luoyang, Henan Province, his ancestors came from the same family as the Zhou dynasty.

古文：祖直力勤，魏钜鹿太守。
现代文：祖父直力勤，魏时任钜鹿太守。
English: His grandfather, Dazhi Liqin, was the governor of Yangtze River at the time of Wei Dynasty.

古文：父珍，周宕州刺史。
现代文：父宇文珍，曾任周朝宕州刺史。
English: Her father, Yu Wenzhen, was once the Zhou dynasty's secretary of state.

古文：弼慷慨有大节，博学多通。
现代文：宇文弼情感激昂，有非凡的节操，学问广博，多所精通。
English: Yu Wenzhen is passionate, has extraordinary self-restraint, has a wide range of knowledge, and is proficient in many things.

古文：仕周，尝奉使邓至国及黑水、龙涸诸羌，前后降附三十余部。
现代文：出仕周朝，曾奉命出使邓至国和黑水、龙涸等羌族部落，前后投降归附的部落有三十多个。
English: He served the Zhou Dynasty and was once ordered to send envoys to Deng Zhi Guo, Heishui, Long Qian and other Yi tribes. More than 30 tribes surrendered to him.

古文：及还，奉诏修定五礼，书成奏之，赐田二顷、粟百石。
现代文：回朝之后，奉诏令修订五礼，书成之后上奏，得到赏赐的田地二顷、谷物一百石。
English: After returning to China, he was ordered by the emperor to revise the Five Rites and recite them after completing the book. He was rewarded with two hectares of fields and a hundred kilos of grain.

古文：累迁小吏部，擢八人为县令，皆有异绩，世以为知人。
现代文：多次升迁至小吏部，提拔八个人做县令，都有不寻常的政绩，当世人认为他善于识人。
English: He was promoted many times to the petty officials department, and promoted eight people to be county magistrates, all of which had unusual political achievements. At the time, the world thought he was good at recognizing people.

古文：转内史都上士。
现代文：转任内史都上士。
English: He was transferred to the post of staff sergeant in charge of internal history.

古文：武帝将谋出兵河阳以伐齐，弼进策曰： 齐氏建国，于今累世，虽曰无道，尚有其人。
现代文：周武帝计划准备出兵河阳讨伐齐国，宇文弼进献策略说： 齐氏建国，迄今已经许多代了，虽然说没有道义，但尚有能人。
English: Emperor Zhou Wudi planned to prepare to send troops to Heyang to fight against the State of Qi, and Uwen Zang presented a strategy saying: The founding of the State of Qi has lasted for many generations so far. Although it is said that there is no morality, there are still capable people.

古文：今若用兵，须择其地。
现代文：如今如果对齐国用兵，必须要选择地方。
English: Today, if you want to align national troops, you have to choose a place.

古文：河阳要冲，精兵所聚，尽力攻围，恐难得志。
现代文：河阳是关键要冲，精兵聚集之处，尽全力围攻，恐怕也难以如愿。
English: Hayang is the key to rushing, the place where the elite soldiers gather, do their best to besiege, I am afraid it is difficult to wish.

古文：彼汾之曲，戍小山平，攻之易拔，用武之地也。 
现代文：齐国汾水弯曲处，守兵少，山势平，进攻容易攻下，正是用兵之地。 
English: At the bend of the Qishui River in Qi Province, there are few guards, the mountain is flat, and the attack is easy to attack. It is the best place to use troops.

古文：帝不纳，师竟无功。
现代文：周武帝不采纳，大军终于没有功劳。
English: Emperor Zhou Wu did not adopt it, and the great army finally had no merit.

古文：建德五年，大举伐齐，卒用弼策。
现代文：建德五年，大举攻伐齐国，终于采用了宇文弼的策略。
English: Jiande five years, a large-scale attack on Qi, and finally adopted the strategy of Uwenqi.

古文：于是募三辅豪侠少年数百人为别阳，从帝攻拔晋州，身被三疮，苦战不息，帝奇而壮之。
现代文：于是招募三辅豪勇侠义少年几百人，另外组成一支队伍，跟从武帝进攻晋州，身受三处创伤，仍然苦战不止，武帝感到惊奇，认为他是壮士。
English: As a result, he recruited a few hundred auxiliary heroic and chivalrous youths and formed another team to attack Jinzhou with Emperor Wu. Although he suffered three wounds, he still fought hard. Emperor Wu was surprised and thought he was a strong man.

古文：因从平齐，以功拜上仪同，封武威县公。
现代文：因而跟从武帝平定齐国，因功授上仪同之职，封爵武威县公。
English: As a result, he followed Emperor Wu to subdue Qi, and was awarded the honor of the same post, and was knighted as the governor of Wuwei County.

古文：宣帝嗣位，为守庙大夫。
现代文：周宣帝继位，宇文弼任守庙大夫。
English: Emperor Zhou Xuan ascended to the throne, and Uwen Zang was appointed as the guardian of the temple.

古文：时突厥寇甘州，帝令侯莫陈昶击之。
现代文：这时，突厥进犯甘州，宣帝令侯莫陈昶率兵退敌。
English: At this time, the Turks invaded Gansu, and Emperor Xuanzong ordered Hou Mo Chen to lead the troops to retreat.

古文：弼为监军，谓昶曰： 宜选精骑，直趋祈连之西。
现代文：宇文弼任监军，对侯莫陈昶说： 应该选择精锐的骑兵，直接赶赴祁连山西边。
English: Yu Wenjun, who was in charge of supervising the troops, said to Hou Mo Chenjun: You should choose elite cavalry and go directly to the west side of Qilian Mountain.

古文：贼若收军，必自蓼泉之北，此地险隘，兼下湿，度其人马，三日方度。
现代文：贼兵若收兵，必定从蓼泉往北，那里地势险要狭窄，又低洼潮湿，人马从那里经过，三天才能过去。
English: If the robber soldiers were to gather their forces, they would have to go north from Longquan, where the terrain is narrow, low-lying and wet, and it would take three days for people and horses to pass.

古文：彼劳我逸，破之必矣。
现代文：敌兵疲劳，我军闲逸，一定可以大破敌军。
English: The enemy soldiers are fatigued, our army is idle, we can surely defeat the enemy troops.

古文：若邀此路，真上策也。 
现代文：如果阻挡住这条路，真是上策。 
English: If you block this road, it's really the best strategy.

古文：昶不能用，西取合黎，大军行迟，虏已出塞。
现代文：侯莫陈昶不能采纳，向西攻取合黎，大军行动迟缓，敌兵已经出了边塞。
English: Hou Mocheng could not accept it, and attacked Haili to the west. The large army was slow to act, and the enemy soldiers had already left the border fortress.

古文：其年，弼又从梁士彦攻拔寿阳，改封安乐县公，除浍州刺史，转南司州刺史。
现代文：这一年，宇文弼又跟随梁士彦进攻寿阳。改封为安乐县公，任浍州刺史，转任南司州刺史。
English: In the same year, he followed Liang Shiyan to attack Shouyang. He was given the title of Anle County official, and served as the governor of Zhangzhou and the governor of Nanshi.

古文：司马消难之奔陈，弼追之不及。
现代文：司马消难逃奔陈国，宇文弼追赶不及。
English: Sima fled to Chen Guo after the disaster, and Uwen Yao couldn't catch up.

古文：遇陈将樊毅，战于漳口，自旦及午，三战三捷。
现代文：与陈国将领樊毅遭遇，在漳口交战，从早上战到中午，三战三捷。
English: He encountered Chen Guozhong's general, Lian Yi, and fought with him at the entrance to the pass. From morning to noon, they fought three battles and achieved three victories.

古文：除黄州刺史，转南定州刺史。
现代文：授任黄州刺史之职，转任南定州刺史。
English: He was appointed to the post of Huangzhou chief historian and transferred to the post of South Dingzhou chief historian.

古文：开皇初，以前功封平昌县公。入为尚书右丞。
现代文：开皇初年，因以前的功劳封爵平昌县公，入京任尚书右丞。
English: In the first year of the Emperor's reign, he was given the title of Pyeongchang County Governor for his previous achievements, and was appointed to the position of Shojo Ujo in Beijing.

古文：时西羌内附，诏弼持节安集，置盐泽、蒲昌二郡而还。
现代文：这时，西部羌族归附隋朝，诏令宇文弼持节前往安定集结，设置盐泽、蒲昌二郡而回京。
English: At this time, the western Yi people were annexed to the Sui Dynasty, and the Emperor ordered Uwen to go to the stable assembly, set up two counties of Yanchezawa and Buchang, and return to Beijing.

古文：迁左丞，当官正色，为百僚所惮。
现代文：升任尚书左丞，为官神色端正，为许多僚属所畏惧。
English: He was promoted to the post of Senior Secretary of the Left, and was a dignified and upright official, feared by many of his colleagues.

古文：三年，突厥寇甘州，以行军司马元帅窦荣定击破之。
现代文：开皇三年，突厥兵进犯甘州，宇文弼以行军司马之职跟随元帅窦荣定打败突厥军。
English: In the third year of the emperor's reign, the Turkic soldiers invaded Ganzhou, and Uwen Zang followed Marshal Dou Rongding to defeat the Turkic army.

古文：还除太仆少卿，转吏部侍郎。
现代文：回京后任太仆少卿，转任吏部侍郎。
English: After returning to Kyoto, he was appointed to the position of Taichu Shokei, and later he was transferred to the position of Riibu Jiro.

古文：平陈之役。杨素出信州道，令弼持节为诸军节度，仍领行军总管。
现代文：平定陈国的战役中，杨素出兵信州道，令宇文弼持节为诸军节度，兼任行军总管。
English: During the campaign to pacify Chen Guo, Yang Su sent troops to Shinshu Road, and made the Uwen Xizhi Festival the military festival, and also served as the commander-in-chief.

古文：刘仁恩之破陈将吕仲肃也，弼有谋焉。
现代文：刘仁恩打败陈国将领吕仲肃，宇文弼参与了谋划。
English: Liu Rien defeated Chen's general Lü Zhongsu, and Uwen Zang took part in the planning.

古文：加开府，擢拜刑部尚书，领太子虞候率。
现代文：加授开府，擢升为刑部尚书，兼任太子虞候率。
English: In addition, he was awarded the title of Kaifu, promoted to the position of Shosho of the Penal Department, and concurrently served as the Prince Regent.

古文：上尝亲临释奠。弼与博士论议，词致清远。
现代文：文帝曾亲临置爵神前而祭祀，宇文弼和博士一同论说，词旨清新高远。
English: Emperor Wen once made a sacrifice in front of the deity himself, and Uwen Zang and the doctor discussed it together, and the words were fresh and far-reaching.

古文：上大悦，谓群臣曰： 朕今睹周公之制礼，见宣尼之论孝，实慰朕心。 
现代文：文帝非常高兴，对群臣说： 朕今日看到了周公制定礼，见到了仲尼议论孝，实在大慰朕心。 
English: Emperor Wen was very happy and said to his courtiers: "Today, I saw Zhou Gong make a ritual, and I saw Zhongni discuss filial piety, which really comforted my heart.

古文：时朝廷以晋阳为重镇，并州总管必属亲王，其长史、司马亦一时高选。
现代文：当时，朝廷认为晋阳是军事地位重要的城镇，并州总管一定要由亲王担任，其长史、司马也是当时高尚的人选。
English: At that time, the imperial court believed that Jinyang was a town with an important military status, and the provincial governor must be held by a prince. With his long history, Sima was also a noble candidate at that time.

古文：前长史王韶卒，以弼有文武干用，出为并州长史。
现代文：前任长史王韶死后，因为宇文弼有文武干材，出京任并州长史。
English: After the death of the previous governor Wang Shih, because Uwen Shih had literary and military talent, he was appointed to Beijing and became governor of Shih.

古文：十八年，辽东之役，授元帅汉王府司马，仍领行军总管。
现代文：开皇十八年，在征伐辽东的战役中，任元帅汉王府司马，仍兼任行军总管。
English: In the 18th year of the Emperor, during the campaign to conquer Liaodong, he was appointed Marshal Han Wangfu Sima, and still concurrently served as the general manager of the march.

古文：军还，历朔、代、吴三州总管，皆有能名。
现代文：回师后，历任朔、代、吴三州总管，都有好名声。
English: After returning to China, successive governors of the three states, such as Shuo, Dai and Wu, have a good reputation.

古文：炀帝即位，拜刑部尚书，仍持节，巡省河北。
现代文：隋炀帝即位，宇文弼任刑部尚书，依旧持节巡省河北。
English: When the Sui and Qian Dynasties ascended to the throne, Uwen Qian was appointed as the head of the Penal Department, and he continued to patrol the province of Hebei.

古文：还除泉州刺史。
现代文：回京后任泉州刺史。
English: After returning to Kyoto, he was appointed as the governor of Quanzhou.

古文：复徵拜刑部尚书，转礼部尚书。
现代文：又征召入京任刑部尚书，转任礼部尚书。
English: He was also conscripted to Beijing as a member of the Ministry of Justice and transferred to the Ministry of Ceremonies.

古文：弼既以才能著称，历职显要，声望甚重，物议多见推许。
现代文：宇文弼既因才能著称于世，又历任显要职位，声望很高，很受时议的推重。
English: Not only is he famous in the world for his talent, but he has also held important positions. He has a high reputation and is highly regarded.

古文：帝颇忌之。
现代文：隋炀帝很是忌讳他。
English: Sui and Qin emperors shunned him.

古文：时帝渐好声色，尤勤远略，弼谓高颎曰： 昔周天元好声色亡国，以今方之，不亦甚乎！ 
现代文：这时，隋炀帝越来越喜好声色，尤其是经常攻略远方，宇文弼对高赹说 ：当初周天元因喜好声色而亡国，拿如今的事情和其相比，不也是更过分吗？ 
English: At this time, the Sui and Qian Dynasties were becoming more and more fond of color, especially in attacking far away places. Uwen Hui said to Gao Qi: At the beginning, Zhou Tianyuan lost his country because of his preference for color. Compared to what is happening now, isn't it more excessive?

古文：又言 长城之役，幸非急务 。
现代文：又说： 长城之战，不是当务之急。 
English: He also said: The battle of the Great Wall is not an urgent matter.

古文：有人奏之，坐诛，天下冤之。
现代文：有人上奏给炀帝，坐罪被杀，天下之人都认为他冤枉。
English: Someone reported to Emperor Xizong and was killed for his crime. People all over the world believed that he was innocent.

古文：以疾去职，吏人攀恋，行数百里不绝。卒于家。
现代文：著有辞赋二十多万言，作《尚书注》、《孝经注》行于世。
English: He is the author of more than two hundred thousand words, and his works "Shang Shu Annotation" and "Chiao Jing Annotation" are well known in the world.

古文：子杰嗣。
现代文：有子名俭瑗。
English: He has a son named Jian Chen.

古文：李圆通，京兆泾阳人也。
现代文：李圆通，京兆泾阳人。
English: Li Yantong, Beijing-Shanghai Yangren.

古文：少孤贱，给使隋文帝家。
现代文：自幼孤苦贫贱，在隋文帝家做差役。
English: From a young age, he was poor and alone. He worked as a messenger in the household of the Sui Emperor Wen.

古文：及帝为隋公，擢授参军事。
现代文：文帝为隋公，擢升李圆通为参军事。
English: Emperor Wen was crowned Emperor of the Sui Dynasty, and Li Yantong was promoted to be a military officer.

古文：初，帝少时，每宴客，恆令圆通监厨。
现代文：当初，文帝年少时，每次宴请宾客，总是李圆通负责监厨。
English: At first, when Emperor Wen was young, Li Yuntong was always in charge of supervising the chef for every banquet.

古文：圆通性严整，左右婢仆，咸所敬惮。
现代文：李圆通生性威严整肃，身边的婢女奴仆，都敬重畏惧他。
English: Li Yuntong was dignified and austere, and all the maidservants around him respected and feared him.

古文：唯世子乳母恃宠轻之，宾客未供，每有干请。
现代文：只有太子的乳母自恃受宠，看不起李圆通，食物还没有供给客人，就常常有所请求。
English: Only the prince's nanny, who fancied herself a favourite, looked down on Li Yuantong. When food had not yet been served to the guests, she would often make requests.

古文：圆通不许，或辄持去。
现代文：李圆通不答应，乳母有时就自顾拿去。
English: Li Yuntong did not agree, and the nanny sometimes took it on herself.

古文：圆通大怒，叱厨人挝之数十，叫声彻于阁内，僚吏左右，代其失色。
现代文：李圆通十分愤怒，怒叱掌厨的人，扌扇了他几十个耳光，叫喊声响彻房内，僚属和身边的人替他担心，大惊失色。
English: Li Yuntong was very angry. He angrily scolded the person in charge of the kitchen, slapped him dozens of times, and shouted loudly throughout the room. His colleagues and people around him were worried about him and were shocked.

古文：宾去后，帝知之，召圆通命坐赐食，从此独善之，以为堪当大任。
现代文：客人离开后，文帝知道了这件事，召见李圆通，命他就座，赐给他食物，自此独自善待李圆通，认为他足堪担当大任。
English: After the guests left, Emperor Wen found out about the matter, summoned Li Yuantong, ordered him to take a seat, and gave him food. Since then, he has been treating Li Yuantong well, and believes that he is capable of taking on a big task.

古文：帝作相，赐爵怀昌男。
现代文：文帝为丞相，赐李圆通怀昌男爵。
English: Emperor Wen became chancellor and gave Li Yuntong the title of Baron Huaichang.

古文：授帅都督，进爵新安子，委以心膂。
现代文：授任帅都督之职，晋封爵位新安子，视为心腹。
English: Shin Anshi, who was appointed to the post of governor-general and promoted to the peerage, is regarded as a confidant.

古文：圆通多力劲捷，长于武用。
现代文：李圆通力大快捷，擅长武功。
English: Li Yuan is very quick and good at martial arts.

古文：周代诸王素惮帝，伺便图为不利，赖圆通保护，获免者数矣。
现代文：周朝诸王素来畏惧文帝，伺机对文帝下手，托赖李圆通的保护，多次得以幸免。
English: The kings of the Zhou Dynasty had always been afraid of Emperor Wen, waiting for an opportunity to attack Emperor Wen, and relying on the protection of Li Yuantong, they were spared many times.

古文：帝深感之，由是参预政事，授相国外兵曹，仍领左亲信。
现代文：文帝非常感谢李圆通，因此让他参与政事，授予相国外兵曹之职，依旧兼领左亲信。
English: Emperor Wen was very grateful to Li Yuntong, so he allowed him to participate in political affairs, awarded him the post of foreign petty officer, and still concurrently led the left cronies.

古文：寻授上仪同。
现代文：很快授上仪同之职。
English: He was soon promoted to the same position.

古文：帝受禅，拜内史侍郎，领左卫长史，进爵为伯。
现代文：文帝受禅即位，任李圆通为内史侍郎，兼任左卫长史，晋爵位为伯。
English: Emperor Wen accepted Zen's accession to the throne, and appointed Li Yuntong as the chamberlain of the inner history, concurrently as the left guard of the long history, and promoted to the peerage.

古文：历左右庶子、给事黄门侍郎、尚书左丞，摄刑部尚书，深被任信。
现代文：历任左右庶子，给事黄门侍郎、尚书左丞，兼任刑部尚书，深得文帝的信任。
English: Successive left and right illegitimate sons, including Huangmen Zhi Rong, Shangshu Zu Rong, and Shangshu of the Department of Criminal Law, won the deep trust of Emperor Wen.

古文：伐陈之役，以行军总管从杨素出信州道，以功进位大将军。改封万安县公，扬州总管长史。
现代文：讨伐陈国之战，以行军总管之职跟从杨素出兵信州道，平陈后因功晋位大将军，改封万安县公，任扬州总管长史。
English: He fought in the Battle of Chen Guo, followed Yang Su's dispatch of troops to Shinshu Road with the post of chief marshal, and was promoted to the rank of general for his service after the Battle of Chen Guo. He was appointed as the governor of Wan'an County and served as the chief marshal of Yangzhou.

古文：秦孝王仁柔自喜，少断决，府中事多决于圆通。
现代文：秦孝王杨俊仁厚宽柔，沾沾自喜，缺少决断，府中之事大都由李圆通裁决。
English: Qin Xiao Wang and Yang Junren were indulgent, complacent, and indecisive. Most of the affairs in the palace were decided by Li Yuntong.

古文：入为司农卿，迁刑部尚书，后复为并州长史。
现代文：入京任司农卿，改任刑部尚书，此后又任并州长史。
English: He entered Beijing as the Secretary of the Ministry of Agriculture, was transferred to the Criminal Investigation Department of the Ministry of Justice, and then became the governor of the history.

古文：孝王以奢得罪，圆通亦坐免。
现代文：秦孝王因奢侈获罪，李圆通也连坐免官。
English: Qin Xiaowang was found guilty of extravagance, and Li Yuntong was removed from office.

古文：寻检校刑部尚书事。
现代文：很快又任检校刑部尚书事。
English: Soon after, he was appointed as the secretary of the school inspection and punishment department.

古文：仁寿中，以勋旧进爵郡公。
现代文：仁寿年间，因功勋依旧晋爵为郡公。
English: During his benevolent life, he was promoted to the rank of Count for his meritorious service.

古文：炀帝嗣位，拜兵部尚书。
现代文：隋炀帝继位，李圆通任兵部尚书。
English: Emperor Sui and Qian succeeded to the throne, and Li Yuntong was appointed as the military secretary.

古文：帝幸扬州，以圆通留守京师。
现代文：炀帝巡幸扬州，以李圆通留守京师。
English: Emperor Qian made a tour of Yangzhou, with Li Yuntong remaining in Beijing.

古文：判宇文述田还百姓，述诉其受赂。
现代文：判处宇文述将田地还给百姓，宇文述向炀帝告李圆通接受贿赂。
English: Uwenshu was sentenced to return the fields to the people, and Uwenshu accused Li Yantong of accepting bribes from the emperor.

古文：帝怒，坐是免官。
现代文：炀帝恼怒，因此而将李圆通免官。
English: Emperor Yao was so angry that he dismissed Li Yuntong.

古文：圆通忧惧发病，卒。
现代文：李圆通忧愁恐惧，疾病发作而死。
English: Li Yuntong was sad and afraid, and died from the onset of illness.

古文：子长寿，颇知名，位骠骑将军。
现代文：追赠柱国，封爵等一切如旧。儿子李孝常，大业末年，任华阴令。
English: His son, Li Xiaochang, who was at the end of his career, was appointed to the position of Huayin.

古文：李安，字玄德，陇西狄道人也。
现代文：唐高祖武德初年，因响应高祖举义旗之功，封为义安王。李安字玄德，陇西狄道人。
English: In the first year of Emperor Gaozong of the Tang Dynasty, he was named the King of righteousness for his response to Gaozong's performance of raising the banner of righteousness.

古文：父蔚，仕周，为相燕恆三州刺史、襄武县公。
现代文：父李蔚，仕于周朝，任相、燕、恒三州刺史，封爵襄武县公。
English: His father, Li Wei, served in the Zhou Dynasty, and was appointed minister, Yan, and Heng of the three states, and was knighted as the governor of Xiangwu County.

古文：安美姿容，善骑射。
现代文：李安容貌俊美，擅长骑马射箭。
English: Li An is handsome and good at horseback riding and archery.

古文：天和中，袭爵襄武公，授仪同、小司右上士。
现代文：北周武帝天和年间，袭父爵为襄武公，授仪同、小司右上士之职。
English: During the reign of the Northern Zhou Emperor Tian He, he succeeded his father as Prince Xiangwu, and was awarded the title and the post of Junior Sergeant of the Right Division.

古文：隋文帝作相，引之左右，迁职方中大夫。
现代文：隋文帝为丞相，引之为左右，升任方中大夫。
English: Emperor Sui Wendi was the prime minister of the Joseon Dynasty, referred to as the left and right, and was promoted to the position of Fangzhongdafu.

古文：复拜安弟哲为仪同。
现代文：又任李安的弟弟李哲为仪同。
English: Li An's younger brother, Li Zhe, is also in the cast.

古文：安叔父梁州刺史璋时在京师，与周赵王谋害帝，诱哲为内应。
现代文：李安的叔父梁州刺史李璋当时在京师，与周朝赵王密谋杀害文帝，引诱李哲为内应。
English: At that time, Li An's uncle Liang Zhou's assassin Li Yan was teaching in Beijing. He plotted with Zhou Dynasty's Zhao Wang to assassinate Emperor Wen and lure Li Zhe into a conspiracy.

古文：哲谓安曰： 寝之则不忠，言之则不义，失忠与义，何以立身？ 
现代文：李哲对李安说： 此事按下不说是不忠，说出来就是不义，失去了忠和义，凭什么立身于世？ 
English: Li Zhe said to Li An, "If you don't mention this matter, it's disloyalty. If you mention it, it's injustice. You've lost your loyalty and righteousness. How can you stand up in the world?"

古文：安曰： 丞相，父也，其可背乎！ 
现代文：李安说 ：丞相，就像父亲一样，怎么可以背叛呢！ 
English: Lee An said, "Minister Jung, just like your father, how could you betray me!

古文：遂阴白之。
现代文：就私下告诉了文帝。
English: He told Emperor Wen in private.

古文：及赵王等伏诛，将加官赏，安顿首曰： 岂可将叔父之命以求官赏？ 
现代文：等到赵王等人被杀之后，文帝将要给李安加官封赏，李安叩首道 ：岂能够用叔父的性命来求官位赏赐？ 
English: After Zhao Wang and others had been killed, Emperor Wen was about to reward Li Ang with an additional official post. Li An bowed his head and said, "Can I use my uncle's life to seek an official post?"

古文：於是俯伏流涕，悲不自胜。
现代文：因此就伏地痛哭流涕，悲痛得似乎难以承受。
English: So she burst into tears, her grief seemingly too much to bear.

古文：帝为之改容曰： 我为汝特存璋子。 
现代文：文帝为此而改变面容，说： 我为了你特意让李璋的儿子存活下来。 
English: For this reason, Emperor Wen changed his countenance and said, "For your sake, I deliberately let Li Yao's son survive.

古文：乃命有司罪止璋身，帝亦为安隐其事而不言。
现代文：就命加罪只及李璋一人，文帝亦替李安隐瞒这件事情而不说出来。
English: Li Yao was the only one who was ordered to be punished, and Wen Di also concealed this matter for Li An and did not speak out.

古文：寻授安开府，进封赵郡公，哲上仪同、黄台县男。
现代文：不久，授李安开府之职，晋封爵位赵郡公，李哲为上仪同、黄台县男。
English: Soon, Li An was awarded the post of Kaifu, promoted to the title of Zhao County, and Li Zhe became the man of Huangdai County.

古文：文帝即位，历内史侍郎、尚书左丞、黄门侍郎。
现代文：隋文帝即位，李安历任内史侍郎、尚书左丞、黄门侍郎。
English: Emperor Sui Wen ascended to the throne, and Li An successively served as Naishi no jiro, Shoshuzojo, and Huangmen no jiro.

古文：平陈之役为杨素司马，仍领行军总管，率蜀兵顺流东下。
现代文：平定陈国之战，李安任杨素的司马，兼任行军总管，率领蜀兵顺流而下。
English: To settle the Battle of Chen Guo, Li An served as Yang Su's steed, and also served as the commander-in-chief of the march, leading the Shu soldiers down the river.

古文：时陈人屯白沙，安谓诸将曰： 水战非北人所长。
现代文：当时，陈国屯兵白沙。李安对诸位将官说： 水战不是北方人的特长。
English: At that time, Chen Guotun was garrisoning Baisha. Li An said to the generals: Naval warfare is not a specialty of northerners.

古文：今陈人依险泊船，必轻我无备。
现代文：如今陈国的军队依据险要停泊船只，必定轻视我们而无防备。
English: Now that Chen's army is on the verge of stopping the ships, they must despise us and be defenseless.

古文：夜袭之，贼可破也。 
现代文：夜里袭击他们，可以击败贼兵。 
English: If you attack them at night, you can defeat the bandits.

古文：安率众先锋，大破陈师。
现代文：李安率领众兵为先锋，大破陈国军队。
English: Li An led the troops as the vanguard and defeated Chen's army.

古文：诏书劳勉，进位上大将军、郢州刺史。
现代文：诏书慰劳勉励，晋升为上大将军、郢州刺史。
English: He was commended by imperial edict for his hard work and encouragement, and was promoted to the rank of senior general.

古文：转邓州刺史。
现代文：转任邓州刺史。
English: He was transferred to the post of Dengzhou chief historian.

古文：求为内职，帝重违其意，除左领左右将军。
现代文：李安请求在朝廷内担任职务，文帝两次违背他的意思，任命他为左领左右将军。
English: Li An requested to hold a post in the imperial court, but Emperor Wen twice went against his wishes and appointed him as the left-collar general.

古文：迁右领军大将军。
现代文：升任右领军大将军。
English: He was promoted to General of the Right Leading Army.

古文：拜哲开府仪同三司、备身将军。
现代文：任命李哲为开府仪同三司、备身将军。
English: Li Zhe was appointed as the General of the Kaifu Ceremony, the Third Division and the General of Preparedness.

古文：兄弟俱典禁卫，恩信甚重。
现代文：兄弟二人都掌管宫禁护卫，深得恩宠信任。
English: Both brothers are in charge of the palace guards and are deeply trusted.

古文：十八年，突厥犯塞，以安为行军总管，从杨素击之。
现代文：开皇十八年，突厥兵进犯边塞，朝廷任命李安为行军总管，跟从杨素打击突厥军队。
English: In the 18th year of the emperor's reign, the Turkic soldiers invaded the border fortress, and the imperial court appointed Li An as the general manager of the march, following Yang Su in the fight against the Turkic army.

古文：安别出长川，会虏渡河，与战破之。
现代文：李安另道出兵长川，正逢上突厥兵渡河，与之交战，击败突厥兵。
English: On another occasion, Li An sent his troops to the Changchuan River, just as the Turkish soldiers were crossing the river, and fought with them, defeating the Turkish soldiers.

古文：仁寿元年，出安为宁州刺史，哲为卫州刺史。
现代文：仁寿元年，李安出京任宁州刺史，李哲任卫州刺史。
English: In the first year of Ren Shou's reign, Li An went to Beijing to serve as the prefect of Ningzhou, and Li Zhe served as the prefect of Weizhou.

古文：安子琼，哲子玮，始自襁褓，乳养宫中，至是年八九岁，始命归家。
现代文：李安之子李琼，李哲之子李玮，自在襁褓之中，就由乳母在宫中养育，至仁寿元年已八九岁，才让他们回到家中。
English: Li Qiong, the son of Li An, and Li Jie, the son of Li Zhe, were raised by nannies in the palace when they were young. They were eight or nine years old when they were allowed to return home.

古文：其亲顾如是。
现代文：文帝对李氏兄弟亲宠如此。
English: Emperor Wen was very fond of the Li brothers.

古文：帝尝言及作相时事，因愍安兄弟灭亲奉国，乃下诏曰： 先王立教，以义断恩，割亲爱之情，尽事君之道，用能弘奖大节，体此至公。
现代文：文帝曾经言及做丞相的事情，因而怜悯李安兄弟不顾亲情而敬奉国家，于是就下诏书说： 先王设立教化，因大义而断绝恩情，割舍亲戚友爱之情，恪尽侍奉君主之道，因而能够弘扬褒奖临难不苟的节操，实践这些特别公正。
English: Emperor Wen had once mentioned the matter of serving as prime minister, and thus pitied the Li An brothers for serving the country in spite of their family feelings, so he issued an edict saying: The previous king established enlightenment, cut off kindness for the sake of righteousness, abandoned the feelings of relatives and friends, and served the monarch to the best of his ability, and thus was able to promote and reward hard-working and rigorous discipline, and practice these special justice.

古文：往者朕登庸惟始，王业初基，宁州刺史赵郡公李安，其叔璋潜结籓枝，包藏不逞。
现代文：当初朕刚开始做丞相时，王业刚刚奠基，宁州刺史赵郡公李安，其叔父李璋暗地里与藩王勾结，包藏祸心。
English: At the beginning of my term as chancellor, Wang Ye had just laid the foundation, and Li An, the governor of Zhao County in Ningzhou Province, and his uncle Li Xi were secretly colluding with the king of the domain, harboring evil intentions.

古文：安与弟哲深知逆顺，披露丹心，凶谋既彰，罪人斯得。
现代文：李安与弟弟李哲深明逆顺之理，表露赤胆忠心，李璋的凶恶阴谋既然暴露，罪人因而拿获。
English: Li An and his brother Li Zhe Sheng clearly went against the common sense and showed their loyalty. Since Li Yao's evil plot was exposed, the culprit was caught.

古文：朕每念诚节，嘉之无已。
现代文：朕常常念及他们忠诚的节操，一直不停地嘉奖。
English: I have often thought about their loyalty and have been constantly praising them.

古文：但以事涉其亲，犹有疑惑，欲使安等名教之方，自处有地。
现代文：只是因为事情涉及到他的亲人，还有疑惑，想使李安与名教之方相等齐，自己有地立身。
English: Just because the matter involves his relatives, and there are doubts, he wants to make Li An equal to the famous religious figure, and stand up for himself.

古文：朕常为思审，遂致淹年。
现代文：朕经常仔细思考，以至于掩没数年。
English: I used to think about it so much that I hid it for years.

古文：今更详案圣典，求诸往事，父子天性，忠孝犹不并立，况复叔侄恩轻，情礼本有差降。
现代文：如今详尽地考察圣人典实，求之于以往的事情，父与子出于天性，忠孝尚且不能并立，还何况叔侄恩义轻薄，情与礼本来就有所减少呢？
English: Now that we have thoroughly examined the truth of the sages, we must look to the past. Father and son by nature cannot be both loyal and filial, not to mention that the gratitude of uncle and nephew is frivolous, and affection and courtesy have already been reduced.

古文：忘私奉国，深得正理。
现代文：忘记私情，敬奉国家，很合乎正当的道理。
English: It is quite reasonable to forget one's personal feelings and serve the country.

古文：宜录旧勋，重弘赏命。 
现代文：应该记录其旧有的功勋，重新弘扬赏赐。 
English: It is necessary to record his former merits and reward him again.

古文：于是拜安、哲俱为柱国，赐缣各五十匹、马百匹、羊千口。
现代文：于是将李安、李哲兄弟都任命为柱国，各赏赐细绢五十匹、马一百匹、羊一千只。
English: So he named both brothers Li An and Li Zhe as pillar countries, and each was rewarded with fifty fine horses, one hundred horses, and one thousand sheep.

古文：以哲为备身将军。进封顺阳郡公。
现代文：任命李哲为备身将军，晋封爵位为顺阳郡公。
English: Li Zhe was appointed as a general to prepare for battle, and was promoted to the rank of Shunyang County official.

古文：安谓亲族曰： 虽家获全，而叔父遭祸，今奉此诏，悲愧交怀。 
现代文：李安对他的亲戚族人说 ：虽然家族得以保全，但叔父遭受大祸。如今奉接此诏，心中是悲痛羞愧交加。 
English: Li An said to his relatives: Although the family was saved, my uncle suffered a great disaster. Now, I am heartbroken and ashamed to receive this notice.

古文：因歔欷悲感，不能自胜。
现代文：因而痛哭流涕，悲痛感怀，似乎不能自我承受。
English: As a result, I cried bitterly, felt sad, and seemed to be unable to bear it.

古文：先患水病，于是疾甚而卒。
现代文：早先患有水肿病，因此病情加重而死。
English: He had previously suffered from hydrops, and as a result his condition worsened and he died.

古文：谥曰怀。
现代文：谥号为怀。
English: The nickname stuck.

古文：子琼嗣。
现代文：儿子李琼袭封爵位。
English: His son, Li Qiong, received a knighthood.

古文：少子孝恭，最知名。
现代文：小儿子李孝恭，当时最为知名。
English: His youngest son, Li Xiaogong, was the most famous star at the time.

古文：哲，炀帝时工部尚书，后坐事除名，配防岭南，道卒。
现代文：炀帝时李哲任工部尚书，后来因事受连累而被除去名籍，发配到岭南为戍卒，死于途中。
English: At the time of Emperor Qian, Li Zhe was the secretary of the Ministry of Works. Later, he was removed from the register of names due to being implicated, and was sent to Lingnan as a messenger. He died on the way.

