古文：江淮士人李鹄僧智圆南孝廉谢翱僧法长河北村正僧弘济金友章于凝
现代文：江淮士人李鹄僧智圆南孝廉谢翱僧法长河北村正僧弘济金友章于凝
English: Jianghuai people, Li Zhe, Zhi Yuan, Nan Xiao Lian, Xie Zhe, Hechang, Hebei village, Hongji, Jinyu, Zhang Yuge

古文：江淮士人
现代文：江淮士人
English: Jianghuai Shi Ren

古文：江淮有士人庄居，其子年二十余，尝病厌。
现代文：江淮有一个士人住在村庄里。他的儿子二十多岁，曾经患病很重。
English: In Jianghuai, there was a scholar who lived in a village. His son, who was in his twenties, had been very ill.

古文：其父一日饮茗，瓯中忽靤起如瓯，高出瓯外，莹净若琉璃。
现代文：有一天，他的父亲喝茶，茶碗里忽然鼓起一个气泡象茶碗，高出茶碗之外，晶莹匀净象琉璃。
English: One day, when his father was drinking tea, a bubble suddenly appeared in the teacup, like a teacup, higher than the teacup, crystal clear and uniform, like glass.

古文：有人长一寸，立于沤上，高出瓯中。
现代文：有一个一寸高的小人站在水泡上，高出茶碗来。
English: There was a one-inch-tall little man standing on the blister, higher than the teacup.

古文：细视之，衣服状貌，乃其子也。
现代文：细看那个人，衣服模样，竟是他的儿子。
English: Look closely at the man, the clothes look like they belong to his son.

古文：食顷爆破，一无所见，茶碗如旧，但有微璺耳。
现代文：一顿饭的工夫，气泡爆破，什么都看不到了，茶碗和原来一样，只有轻微的裂纹。
English: The time of a meal, bubbles burst, nothing can be seen, the teacup is the same as the original, only slight cracks.

古文：数日，其子遂著神，译神言，断人休咎不差。
现代文：几天之后，他的儿子有神灵附着在身上，能翻译神的语言，判断人的祸福丝毫不差。
English: A few days later, his son had a spirit attached to his body and was able to translate God's language and judge people's blessings and misfortunes.

古文：李鹄
现代文：李鹄
English: Lee Min Ho

古文：前秀才李鹄，觐于颍川，夜至一驿。
现代文：前秀才李鹄，到颍川去朝拜，夜间走到一家驿站。
English: The former talent, Li Yao, went to prostrate himself in front of a train station at night.

古文：才卧，见物如猪者，突上厅阶。
现代文：他刚躺下，看见一个猪一样的东西，突然走上厅堂的台阶。
English: He had just lain down when he saw something that looked like a pig suddenly walk up the hall steps.

古文：鹄惊走，透后门，投驿厩，潜身草积中，屏息伺之。
现代文：李鹄吓得跑开，通过后门，来到驿站的马棚里，藏在草堆里，屏住呼吸窥伺着。
English: Frightened, Li Yao ran away, went through the back door, came to the stable of the post station, hid in the grass, and held his breath as he spied.

古文：怪亦随至，声绕草积数匝，瞪目视鹄所潜处，忽变为巨星，腾起，数道烛天。
现代文：那怪物也随着来到，声音绕着草堆转了几圈，瞪着眼睛看李鹄藏身的地方，忽然变成一颗大星，升腾起来，几道亮光直上天空。
English: The monster also came with him. The voice circled around the heap of grass several times, staring at the place where Li Yao was hiding, suddenly turning into a big star, rising up, and several bright lights went straight up into the sky.

古文：鹄左右取炬，索鹄于草积中，鹄已卒矣。
现代文：李鹄左右的人取来火把，在草堆里找到了李鹄。
English: The people around Li Yao fetched torches and found Li Yao in the grass.

古文：半日方苏，因说所见。
现代文：李鹄已经吓死了，半天才醒过来。于是他就述说他见到了什么。
English: Li Yao was scared to death and only woke up half a day later. So he described what he saw.

古文：未旬，无疾而卒。
现代文：未到十天，李鹄没有病就死了。
English: Less than ten days later, Li Yao died without any illness.

古文：僧智圆
现代文：僧智圆
English: The monk Zhiyuan

古文：郑余庆在梁州，有龙兴寺僧智圆，善总持敕勤之术，制邪理病，多著效。
现代文：郑余庆在梁州的时候，龙兴寺里有一个叫智圆的和尚。他善长持善不失、敕令勤工的法术，制服邪理之病，多有显著效果。
English: When Zheng Yuqing was in Liangzhou, there was a monk named Zhiyuan in Longxing Temple. He was good at keeping the good without losing the good, and his magic of commanding hard work and subduing the disease of evil reason had significant effects.

古文：日有数十人候门，智圆老，稍倦。
现代文：每天都有几十人等候在门口。智圆老了，渐渐地倦怠了。
English: Dozens of people wait at the gate every day. Zhiyuan is old and getting tired.

古文：郑颇敬之，因求住城东隙地，起草屋而居，有沙弥行者各一人。
现代文：郑余庆很敬重他，就请他到城东的空地上，盖一所草房居住。有刚出家的小和尚和行者各一人。
English: Zheng Yuqing respected him very much, so he invited him to the open space in the east of the city to build a grass hut to live in. There was a young monk who had just become a monk and a practitioner each.

古文：数年，暇日，智圆向阳科脚甲，有布衣妇人，甚端丽，至阶作礼，泣曰：妾不幸，夫亡子幼，老母危病，知师神咒助力，乞加救护。
现代文：几年之后，一个闲暇之日，智圆晒着太阳剪脚趾甲，有一个很端庄的穿布衣的妇人，来到阶下行礼，哭着说：我很不幸，丈夫死了，儿子还小，老母亲病得很危险。知道大师您的神咒能助我一臂之力，特来求您救护。
English: A few years later, on a day of leisure, when Zhiyuan was sunbathing and cutting his toenails, a very dignified woman in a cloth robe came to the steps, bowed and cried: "I am very unfortunate, my husband is dead, my son is still young, and my old mother is very sick. Knowing that your god's curse can help me, I came to ask you for help.

古文：智圆曰：贫道本厌城隍喧湫，兼烦于招谢。
现代文：智圆说：贫道本来厌恶城隍的喧闹，又厌烦招待答谢。
English: Zhiyuan said: "Poor people originally dislike the noise of the city, and they are tired of inviting and thanking.

古文：弟子母病，可就此为加持也。
现代文：你的母亲病了，可到这来，我给她疗理一下。
English: Your mother is ill, but come here, I'll treat her.

古文：妇人复再三泣请，且言母病亟，不可举扶，智圆亦哀而许之。
现代文：妇人又再三哭着求情，而且说母亲病得危急，不能搀扶。智圆也就可怜她而答应了。
English: The woman repeatedly cried and pleaded for mercy, saying that her mother was critically ill and could not be helped. Zhiyuan took pity on her and agreed.

古文：乃言从此向北二十余里，至一村，村侧近有鲁家庄，但访韦十娘所居也。
现代文：妇人就说，从此向北二十多里，到一个小村，村附近有个鲁家庄，只打听韦十娘住的地方就行了。
English: The woman then said, "From here, it's more than twenty miles north to a small village. There's a Lu village near the village. All you have to do is find out where Wei Shizhen's daughter lives."

古文：智圆诘朝。如言行二十余里，历访不得，乃还。
现代文：智圆在第二天早晨，就象妇人说的那样，走了二十多里，到处打听也没找到，就返回来了。
English: In the morning of the next day, just as the woman said, Zhiyuan walked more than twenty miles, inquired everywhere and did not find it, and returned.

古文：明日，妇人复至，僧责曰：贫道昨日远赴约，何差谬如此？
现代文：第二天，妇人又来了。智圆责备她说：我昨天远道去赴约，为什么有这样的差错？
English: The next day, the woman came again. Zhiyuan scolded her: "I went all the way to the appointment yesterday, why did I make such a mistake?

古文：妇人言：只去师所止处二三里耳。
现代文：妇人说，我住的地方，只离大师去的地方二三里了。
English: The woman said, "I live only two or three miles from where the master went.

古文：师慈悲，必为再往。
现代文：大师慈悲，一定要再走一趟。
English: Master, have mercy. We must go back one more time.

古文：僧怒曰：老僧衰暮，今誓不出。
现代文：智圆生气地说：老僧我身老力衰，如今坚决不出去了！
English: Zhiyuan said angrily: "I'm too old and feeble to go out now!

古文：妇人乃大声言：慈悲何在耶？
现代文：妇人就大声说：你的慈悲在哪里？
English: Then the woman cried out, "Where is your mercy?"

古文：今事须去。
现代文：今天你非去不可！
English: You have to go today!

古文：因上阶牵僧臂，僧惊迫，亦疑其非人，恍惚以小刀刺之，妇人遂倒，乃沙弥误中刀，流血死矣。
现代文：于是上台阶去拽智圆的胳膊。老和尚惊慌窘迫，也怀疑她不是人，恍惚间用小刀刺她。妇人于是便倒下了。原来竟是小和尚误中一刀，流血死了。
English: So he went up the steps to pull Zhiyuan's arm. The old monk panicked and distressed, and also suspected that she was not human, stabbing her with a knife in a trance. The woman then fell down. It turned out that the little monk hit the knife by mistake and bled to death.

古文：僧遽与行者瘗于饭瓮下。
现代文：智圆和尚急忙和行者把小和尚埋到了水缸底下。
English: Zhiyuan Monk hurriedly buried the little monk under the water tank with the practitioner.

古文：沙弥本村人，家去兰若十余里。
现代文：小和尚是本村人，家离寺院十几里。
English: The little monk is from our village, and his home is more than ten miles away from the temple.

古文：其日，家人悉在田，有人皂衣褐袱，乞浆于田中，且说其事。
现代文：那一天，小和尚的家人都在田间劳作，有一个穿黑衣背褐色包袱的人一大早到田间来讨水喝，就说了那件事。
English: On that day, the little monk's family were all working in the fields. A man in black with a brown backpack came to the fields early in the morning to ask for water and told them about the incident.

古文：沙弥父母，举家号哭，诣僧，僧犹绐焉。
现代文：小和尚的父母和全家哭叫，来见老和尚。
English: The little monk's parents and the whole family cried and came to see the old monk.

古文：其父及锹索而获，即诉于官。
现代文：老和尚还想骗他们。小和尚的父亲用铁锹找到了小和尚的尸体，就告到了官府。
English: The old monk also tried to deceive them. The father of the little monk found the body of the little monk with a spade and reported it to the government.

古文：郑公大骇，俾求盗吏细按，意其必冤也。
现代文：郑余庆非常吃惊，派捉拿盗贼的官吏细察此案，认为他一定冤枉。
English: Zheng Yuqing was very surprised. The officials sent to catch the thief carefully examined the case and thought that he must have been wronged.

古文：僧具陈状，复白：贫道宿债，有死而已。
现代文：老和尚洒沐浴设坛，急印符契，捆绑木桩，察访那个鬼魅。
English: The old monk sprinkled the bath and set up the altar, stamped the deed, tied the stake, and visited the ghost.

古文：按者亦以死论。僧求假七日命，持念，为将来资粮，余庆哀而许之，僧沐浴设坛，急印契缚檋，考其魅，凡三夕，妇人见于坛上，言：我类不少，所求食处，辄为师破除。
现代文：共念了三个晚上，那妇人就出现在坛上，说：我的同类有不少，求食的地方，动不动就被大师破除了。
English: After three nights of chanting together, the woman appeared on the altar and said, "There are many like me. The place where I asked for food was destroyed by the master.

古文：沙弥且在，能为誓不持念，必相还也。
现代文：小和尚还在，如果你能发誓不念咒了，我一定把他还给你。
English: The little monk is still there. If you can swear off spells, I'll definitely give him back to you.

古文：智圆恳为设誓，妇人喜曰：沙弥在城南某村古丘中。
现代文：智圆恳切地发誓，妇人高兴地说：小和尚在城南某村的古墓里。
English: Zhiyuan earnestly swore, and the woman said happily, "The little monk is in an ancient tomb in a village south of the city."

古文：僧言于官吏，如其言寻之，沙弥果在，神已痴矣。
现代文：老和尚对官吏讲了。官吏按照他讲的去找，小和尚果然在那，神情已经痴呆了。
English: The old monk told the officials. The officials went to look for him as he had told them, and sure enough, the little monk was there, already looking demented.

古文：发沙弥棺中，乃一苕帚也。
现代文：打开小和尚的棺材，里边装的是一把笤帚。
English: Open the little monk's coffin. Inside is a pickaxe.

古文：僧自是绝其术。
现代文：老和尚智圆从此绝了他的法术。
English: The old monk Zhiyuan has since renounced his magic.

古文：南孝廉
现代文：南孝廉
English: Nan Xiaolian

古文：唐南孝廉，失其名，莫知何许人，能作鲙，彀薄缕细，轻可吹起。
现代文：唐朝有位姓南的孝廉，不知道他的名字，不知道他是哪里人氏。他善于作鲙鱼。他作的鲙鱼纹缕又薄又细，轻得可以吹起来。
English: In the Tang Dynasty, there was a scholar named Xiaolian, surnamed Nan. I don't know his name, I don't know where he was from. He was good at making eels. The eels he made had thin and fine lines, so light that they could be blown up.

古文：操刀响捷，若合节奏。
现代文：他拿着刀作鲙鱼的时候，有响声，动作敏捷，好象合乎节奏。
English: When he reels in a swordfish, it makes a noise and moves quickly, as if in rhythm.

古文：因会客炫伎，先起架以陈之，忽暴风雨。
现代文：于是就会集宾客，炫耀他的技艺。先搭起架子把鲙鱼摆上。
English: So he would gather guests and show off his skills, first setting up a stand to display the eels.

古文：震一声，鲙悉化为胡蝶飞去。
现代文：忽然一阵暴风雨，一声大震，鲙鱼全都变成蝴蝶飞走了。
English: Suddenly there was a storm, a great earthquake, and the eels all turned into butterflies and flew away.

古文：南惊惧，遂折刀，誓不复作。
现代文：南孝廉又惊又怕，于是折断了刀，发誓不再作鲙鱼。
English: Nan Xiaolian was shocked and afraid, so he broke his sword and vowed not to be a carp anymore.

古文：谢翱
现代文：谢翱
English: Xie Yao

古文：陈郡谢翱者，尝举进士，好为七字诗。
现代文：陈郡的谢翱，曾经考过进士，喜欢作七言诗。
English: Chen County's Xie Yao, who once passed the entrance examination, likes to write seven-character poems.

古文：其先寓居长安升道里，所居庭中，多牡丹。
现代文：他以前寓居在长安升道里。他住的院子里，有许多牡丹花。
English: He used to live in Chang'an Shengdao. In the courtyard where he lived, there were many peony flowers.

古文：一日晚霁，出其居，南行百步，眺终南峰。
现代文：一天晚上雨后天晴，他从家里出来，向南走出百步远，眺望终南山，伫立了很久。
English: One evening, after the rain, the sky was clear. He came out of his house, walked a hundred paces to the south, and stood for a long time looking out over Mount Nan.

古文：伫立久之，见骑自西驰来，绣缋仿佛，近乃双鬟，高髻靓妆，色甚姝丽。
现代文：他望见一人骑马从西奔来。那人穿戴华贵，行迹绰约，近看才知是双鬟女子，高高的发髻，漂亮的化妆，姿色非常美丽。
English: He saw a person riding a horse coming from the west. The person was dressed in luxurious clothes and walked around casually. Up close, he knew that she was a double-breasted woman with a high bun, beautiful makeup, and a very beautiful appearance.

古文：至翱所，因驻谓翱：郎非见侍耶？翱曰：步此，徙望山耳。
现代文：那人来到谢翱跟前，就停下对他说：你不是在等我吧？谢翱说：我走到这儿，只望望山罢了！
English: When the man came up to Xie Yao, he stopped and said to him, "Aren't you waiting for me?" Xie Yao said, "When I came here, I was just looking at the mountains!"

古文：双鬟笑，降拜曰：愿郎归所居。
现代文：那人就笑，下马行礼说：请您回家吧！
English: The man laughed, dismounted, saluted and said: "Please go home!

古文：翱不测，即回望其居，见一青衣三四人，偕立其门外。
现代文：谢翱不明白什么意思就回来了。远望自己的住处，望见三四个婢女站在门外。
English: Xie Yao didn't understand what it meant, so she came back. Looking far and wide at her home, she saw three or four maids standing outside the door.

古文：翱益骇异。
现代文：谢翱更加惊骇。
English: Xie Yao was even more shocked.

古文：入门，青衣俱前拜。
现代文：进了门，几位婢女一齐上前来拜。
English: When she entered the door, several maids came forward to bow to her.

古文：既入，见堂中设茵毯，张帷帘，锦绣辉映，异香遍室。
现代文：进了屋，见堂中铺着地毯，挂着幔帐，锦绣辉映，异香满室。
English: Entering the house, I saw the carpet in the hall, hanging curtains, gorgeous embroidery, and a room full of exotic fragrances.

古文：翱愕然且惧，不敢问。
现代文：谢翱又惊又怕，不敢多问。
English: Shocked and afraid, Xie Qi did not dare to ask more.

古文：一人前曰：郎何惧？固不为损耳？
现代文：一人上前说：您不要怕，保证不会害您。
English: One of them stepped forward and said, "Don't be afraid, I promise I won't hurt you."

古文：顷之，有金车至门，见一美人，年十六七，风貌闲丽，代所未识。降车入门，与翱相见，坐于西轩。谓翱曰：闻此地有名花，故来与君一醉耳。
现代文：过了一会儿，有一辆金色车子来到门前。有一位十六七岁，风貌秀丽的绝代美人下车走进来，与谢翱相见，坐到西窗下，对谢翱说：听说这地方有名花，所以来和您饮酒赏花。
English: After a while, a golden car came to the door. A sixteen-seven-year-old, beautiful beauty got out of the car and walked in, met Xie Qi, sat down under the west window, and said to Xie Qi: I heard that this place has famous flowers, so I came to drink and enjoy flowers with you.

古文：翱惧稍解。
现代文：谢翱的恐惧稍微解除了。
English: Xie Yao's fear was slightly relieved.

古文：美人即命设馔同食，其器用物，莫不珍丰。
现代文：美人就命人摆酒与谢翱同饮。那些器物用品，没有不珍贵丰盛的。
English: Beauty ordered someone to serve wine to drink with Xie Yao. Those utensils and supplies were nothing short of precious and plentiful.

古文：出玉杯，命酒递酌。翱因问曰：女郎何为者？
现代文：美人举起玉杯，递过来让谢翱喝酒，谢翱便问道：您是干什么的？
English: The beauty held up a jade cup and handed it over for Xie Jun to drink from. Xie Jun then asked: What do you do?

古文：得不为他怪乎？
现代文：不能是别的仙怪吧？
English: It can't be another fairy, can it?

古文：美人笑不答，固请之，乃曰：君但知非人则已，安用问耶？
现代文：美人笑而不答。谢翱坚决请求，美人就说：你只要知道我不是人就行了，何必一个劲问呢！
English: Beauty laughed and did not answer. Xie Yao made a firm request, and Beauty said, "You only need to know that I am not a human being. Why do you have to ask so many questions?"

古文：夜阑，谓翱曰：某家甚远，今将归，不可久留此矣。
现代文：夜深了，美人对谢翱说：我家很远，现在就要回去，不能久留在这儿。
English: Late at night, the beauty said to Xie Yao: My home is far away, I have to go back now, I can't stay here for long.

古文：闻君善为七言诗，愿有所赠。
现代文：听说您善作七言诗，希望能有赠给我的。
English: I heard that you are good at composing seven-character poems, and I hope to receive one as a gift.

古文：翱怅然，因命笔赋诗曰：阳台后会杳无期，碧树烟深玉漏迟。
现代文：谢翱很失意的样子，就命笔赋诗说：阳台后会杳无期，碧树烟深玉漏迟。
English: Xie Yao looked very disappointed, and wrote a poem about his life: After the balcony, the meeting will last forever, and the blue tree will be late.

古文：半夜香风满庭月，花前竟发楚王时。
现代文：半夜香风满庭月，花前竟发楚王时。
English: In the middle of the night, the fragrant wind fills the courtyard and the moon, and the king of Chu is actually crowned in front of the flowers.

古文：美人览之，泣下数行曰：某亦尝学为诗，欲答来赠，幸不见诮。
现代文：美人读诗，潸然泪下，说：我也曾学过作诗，想要作诗答您所赠，希望不要见笑。
English: Beauty read the poem, burst into tears, and said, "I also once learned to write poetry. I want to write a poem in response to your gift. I hope you don't laugh."

古文：翱喜而请，美人求绛笺，翱视笥中，唯碧笺一幅，因与之。
现代文：谢翱很高兴，请她快作。
English: Xie Yao was very happy and asked her to hurry up.

古文：美人题曰：相思无路莫相思，风里花开只片时。
现代文：美人要绛色纸笺。谢翱看那书箱里，只有一幅碧色的，就给了她。美人题诗道：相思无路莫相思，风里花开只片时。
English: Beauty asked for an indigo-colored notebook. Xie Yao looked at the bookcase and saw that there was only one blue-colored one, so he gave it to her. Beauty recited a poem: "There is no way to fall in love, it only takes a moment for the wind to blow."

古文：惆怅金闺却归处，晓莺啼断绿杨枝。
现代文：惆怅金闺却归处，晓莺啼断绿杨枝。
English: But the golden girl has returned to her place, and the green poplar branch has been cut off.

古文：其笔札甚工，翱嗟赏良久。
现代文：她的文笔很有功夫。谢翱叹赏了好久。
English: Her writing is very skillful. Xie Yu admired her for a long time.

古文：美人遂顾左右，撒帐帘，命烛登车。
现代文：美人于是看了看左右，拨开帐幔，命人带上灯烛上车。
English: The beauty then looked left and right, pulled back the curtain, and ordered the man to take a candle and get on the bus.

古文：翱送至门，挥泪而别。
现代文：谢翱送到门口，挥泪而别。
English: Xie Qi sent to the door, tears and farewell.

古文：未数十步，车与人马，俱亡见矣。
现代文：没走上十步，车和人马全不见了。
English: Within ten steps, all the cars and people were gone.

古文：翱异其事，因贮美人诗笥中。
现代文：谢翱感到这事奇怪，就把美人的诗藏在书箱里。
English: Xie Yao felt strange about this and hid the beautiful woman's poem in a bookcase.

古文：明年春，下第东归，至新丰，夕舍逆旅。因步月长望，感前事，又为诗曰：一纸华笺丽碧云，余香犹在墨犹新。
现代文：第二年春天，他落第东归，走到新丰，晚上住在客店里，于是在月下散步长望，有感于以前的事，又作诗道：一纸华笺丽碧云，余香犹在墨犹新。
English: In the spring of the following year, he returned to the east and went to Xinfeng. In the evening, he stayed at an inn. He then went for a long walk under the moon, had a sense of the past, and wrote a poem: A paper of gorgeous clouds, the aftertaste is still fresh.

古文：空添满目凄凉事，不见三山缥缈人。
现代文：空添满目凄凉事，不见三山缥缈人。
English: The sky is filled with gloomy things, and there are no people in the mountains.

古文：斜月照衣今夜梦，落花啼雨去年春。
现代文：斜月照衣今夜梦，落花啼雨去年春。
English: The slanting moon shines on tonight's dream, the falling flowers and rain last spring.

古文：红闺更有堪愁处，窗上虫丝镜上尘。
现代文：红闺更有堪愁处，窗上虫丝镜上尘。
English: The scarlet-robed maiden is more sad, and the magnifying glass on the window is covered with dust.

古文：既而朗吟之。
现代文：然后就朗诵这首诗。
English: He then recited the poem.

古文：忽闻数百步外，有车音西来甚急。
现代文：忽然听到几百步外，有车马的声音从西来得很急。
English: Suddenly, several hundred paces away, I heard the sound of horses and carts coming very quickly from the west.

古文：俄见金闺从数骑，视其从者，乃前时双鬟也。
现代文：不一会儿见一位高贵女郎前后有骑马的随从几人。看那随从便认出来，原来正是以前那个梳双鬟的。
English: After a while, I saw a noblewoman with several attendants on horseback in front and behind her. Looking at the attendant, I recognized that it was the one who used to comb her hair.

古文：惊问之，双鬟遽前告，即驻车，使谓翱曰：通衢中恨不得一见。翱请其舍逆旅，固不可。
现代文：于是就驻了车。美人让人对谢翱说：大道上恨不得相见。谢翱请她到客店住下，她坚决不肯。
English: So they parked the car. The beauty had someone say to Xie Yao: "I can't wait to meet you on the boulevard." Xie Yao invited her to stay at an inn, but she firmly refused.

古文：又问所适，答曰：将之弘农。
现代文：他又问她要到哪儿去。她说要到弘农去。
English: He also asked her where she was going. She said she was going to Hongnong.

古文：翱因曰：某今亦归洛阳，愿偕东可乎？
现代文：谢翱就说：我现在也回洛阳，愿意和您一块走可以吗？
English: Xie Yao said, "I'm going back to Luoyang now, would you like to go with me?"

古文：曰：吾行甚迫，不可。
现代文：说完，放声悲泣，不能自禁。
English: Having said that, I burst into tears, unable to restrain myself.

古文：翱亦为之悲泣，因诵以所制之诗，美人曰：不意君之不忘如是也，幸何厚焉？
现代文：谢翱也为她悲泣。于是就念了她所作的诗。美人说：没想到您这样忘不了我！我是多么荣幸啊！
English: Xie Yao also cried for her. So he read her poem. The beauty said, "I didn't expect you to forget me like this! What an honor it is for me!"

古文：又曰：愿更酬此一篇。
现代文：又说：我想再酬答一首。
English: And he said, I will answer with one more song.

古文：翱即以纸笔与之，俄顷而成曰：惆怅佳期一梦中，五陵春色尽成空。
现代文：谢翱就把纸笔交给她。不一会儿诗就写成了。说：惆怅佳期一梦中，五陵春色尽成空。
English: Xie Yao handed the paper and pen to her. Soon the poem was written. He said: "In my dream, the five mausoleums were completely empty.

古文：欲知离别偏堪恨，只为音尘两不通。
现代文：欲知离别偏堪恨，只为音尘两不通。
English: Wanting to know the parting is hateful, just because of the sound and dust.

古文：愁态上眉凝浅绿，泪痕侵脸落轻红。
现代文：愁态上眉凝浅绿，泪痕侵脸落轻红。
English: The sad upper eyebrows are light green, and the tear stains on the face are light red.

古文：双轮暂与王孙驻，明日西驰又向东。
现代文：双轮暂与王孙驻，明日西驰又向东。
English: The two-wheelers will stay with Wang Sun for the time being, and tomorrow they will head west and then east.

古文：翱谢之，良久别去。
现代文：谢翱向她致谢，很久才别去。
English: Xie Yao thanked her and didn't leave for a long time.

古文：才百余步，又无所见。
现代文：才走了百余步，又不见了。
English: He only walked about a hundred paces before disappearing again.

古文：翱虽知为怪，眷然不能忘。
现代文：谢翱虽然知道她是怪物，却牵挂她忘不了。
English: Although Xie Yao knew she was a monster, he couldn't forget her.

古文：及到陕西，遂下道至弘农，留数日，冀一再遇。
现代文：等到了陕西，就改道到了弘农，逗留了几天，希望再见到那美人，竟然不见踪影。
English: After arriving in Shaanxi, he changed his route to Hongnong. He stayed there for a few days, hoping to see the beautiful woman again, but there was no sign of her.

古文：竟绝影响，乃还洛阳。出二诗，话于友人。
现代文：于是就回到洛阳，拿出两首诗，说给友人。
English: So he went back to Luoyang, took out two poems and told his friends.

古文：不数月，以怨结遂卒。
现代文：不几个月，因为悲怨郁结，就死了。
English: Within a few months, he died of grief and depression.

古文：僧法长
现代文：僧法长
English: The head monk

古文：河南龙门寺僧法长者，郑州原武人。
现代文：河南龙门寺的僧人法长，郑州原武人。
English: The head monk of Longmen Temple in Henan Province, Zhengzhou Yuanwu Ren.

古文：宝历中，尝自龙门归原武。家有田数顷，稔则未刈。
现代文：宝历年间，他从龙门回到原武老家，家里有几顷地的庄稼，成熟了还没有收割。
English: During the year of the lunar calendar, he returned from Longmen to his former hometown of Wu. At home, there were several hectares of crops that had matured but had not yet been harvested.

古文：一夕，因乘马行田间。
现代文：一天晚上，他就骑着马走到田间。
English: One evening he rode out to the fields.

古文：马忽屹不前，虽鞭抶，辄不动，唯瞪目东望，若有所见。
现代文：马忽然停止不前，即使用鞭打它，它也一动不动，只瞪着眼向东望，好象看到什么东西。
English: The horse suddenly stopped moving. Even when he was whipped, he remained motionless, only staring to the east as if he saw something.

古文：时月明，随其望数百步外，有一物，如古木色，兀然而来。
现代文：当时月光很亮，随着它望的方向几百步之外，有一个东西。那东西颜色象古树，突然而来。
English: The moonlight was very bright, and as it looked in the direction of a few hundred steps away, there was something. That thing was the color of an ancient tree, and it came suddenly.

古文：长惧，即回马走道左数十步，伺之。
现代文：法长害怕，就回马跑到道旁十几步远的地方，等候在那里。
English: Fearing for his life, he ran back to his horse and rode to a place a dozen paces away by the roadside, where he waited.

古文：其物来渐近，乃白气，高六七尺，腥秽甚，愈于鲍肆。
现代文：那东西渐渐向近处来，一看，原来是一团白气，六七尺高，又腥又脏，超过鱼店。
English: The thing gradually came closer, and at a glance, it turned out to be a cloud of white gas, six or seven feet high, smelly and dirty, larger than a fish store.

古文：有声绵绵，如呻吟，西望而去。
现代文：那东西发出绵绵的声音，好象呻吟，向西望了望就离去了。
English: The thing emitted a muffled sound, like a groan, looked west and left.

古文：长策马随其后，常远数十步。
现代文：法长策马跟在它后面，总保持十几步的距离。
English: Farang Zema followed behind it, always maintaining a distance of a dozen steps.

古文：行一里余，至里民王氏家，遂突入焉，长驻马伺之。
现代文：走了一里多，来到乡民老王家门前，那东西就突然进去了。法长驻马等在外边。
English: After walking for more than a mile, they arrived in front of the door of the Laowang family, and the thing suddenly entered the house.

古文：顷之，忽闻其家呼曰：车宇下牛将死，可偕来视之！
现代文：等了一会儿，忽然听到这家有人喊：车棚里的牛要死啦！大家快来看哪！
English: After waiting for a while, the family suddenly heard someone shout: "The cow in the shed is going to die! Come and see!"

古文：又顷，闻呼：后舍驴蹶仆地，不可救！
现代文：又过了一会儿，听有人喊后屋的驴倒在地上，不能救了。
English: After a while, someone shouted that the donkey in the back room had fallen to the ground and could not be saved.

古文：又顷。闻惊哭。
现代文：又过了一会儿，听到有人惊哭。
English: A little while later, I heard someone start crying.

古文：有出者，长佯过讯之，曰：主人有子十余岁，忽卒。
现代文：有人走出来，法长装作路过这里一打听，那人说，这家主人有个十多岁的儿子，忽然死了。
English: Someone came out, and the head of law pretended to be passing by to inquire. The man said that the owner of the house had a ten-year-old son who had died suddenly.

古文：语未竟。又闻哭音，或惊叫，联联不已。
现代文：话没说完，又听到哭声，有的惊叫，连连不断。
English: Before he had finished speaking, he heard more crying, some screams, one after the other.

古文：夜分后，声渐少，迨明而绝。
现代文：入夜以后，声音渐少，等到天明就彻底没声了。
English: After nightfall, the sound gradually diminishes, and by dawn there is no sound at all.

古文：长骇异，即具告其邻，偕来王氏居侦之。其中悄然无闻，因开户，而其家十余人皆死，鸡犬无存焉。
现代文：法长惊异，就详细告诉了邻居，一块到这家来看，院中悄然无声，破门而入，见这家十多口人都死了，鸡犬没有活着的。
English: Surprised, the head of the legal department told the neighbors in detail. A group of them came to look at the house. They quietly broke into the house and saw that more than ten people in the house were dead, and the chickens and dogs were not alive.

古文：河北村正
现代文：河北村正
English: Zheng, Hebei Village

古文：处士郑宾于言，尝客河北，有村正妻新死，未敛。
现代文：处士郑宾于说，他曾经客游河北，有一个村正刚死了妻子，没有入殓。
English: Officer Zheng Bin Yu said that he once traveled to Hebei Province, and there was a village where a man's wife had just died, but he had not been arrested.

古文：日暮，其儿女忽觉有乐声渐进，至庭宇，尸已动矣。
现代文：日暮时分，儿女们忽然觉得有乐声渐渐接近，来到庭院时，那尸体就动弹了。
English: At dusk, the children suddenly felt the music getting closer, and when they came to the courtyard, the corpse moved.

古文：及入房，如在梁栋间，尸遂起舞。
现代文：等到乐声进了屋，就象萦绕在梁栋之间，尸体便起来跳舞。
English: When the music entered the house, it was as if the corpses were suspended between the beams, and they got up and danced.

古文：乐声复出，尸倒。
现代文：乐声又出去了，尸体就倒下了。
English: The music came out again and the body fell down.

古文：旋出门，随乐声而去。
现代文：不一会儿尸体出了门，随乐声而去。
English: A moment later, the corpse was out the door, following the music.

古文：其家惊惧，时月黑，亦不敢寻逐。
现代文：这一家又惊又怕。当时天黑，也不敢出去寻找追赶。
English: The family was shocked and afraid. It was dark, and they didn't dare to go out to look for him.

古文：一更，村正方归，知之，乃折一桑枝如臂，被酒大骂寻之，入墓林，约五六里，复觉乐声在一柏林上。
现代文：一更时分，村正刚回来，知道了此事，就折了胳膊粗的一根桑树枝，带着酒劲大骂着到处寻找。他走进墓林，大约走了五六里，又觉得乐声在一棵柏树上。
English: A moment later, just after returning from the village, when he found out about the incident, he broke a mulberry branch as thick as his arm and searched everywhere, swearing with the strength of wine. He went into the cemetery, walked about five or six miles, and felt the music on a cypress tree.

古文：乃近树，树下有火荧荧然，尸方舞矣。
现代文：等到走到树前，树下有荧荧的火光，尸体正舞呢。
English: When I got to the tree, there was a fluorescent glow under the tree, and the bodies were dancing.

古文：村正举杖击之，尸倒，乐声亦止，遂负而还。
现代文：村正抡棒就打，尸体倒下去，乐声也停止了。于是他背着尸体回来。
English: The villagers beat him with cudgels, the corpse fell down, and the music stopped. So he came back with the corpse on his back.

古文：僧弘济
现代文：僧弘济
English: The monk Koji

古文：医僧行儒说，福州有僧弘济，斋戒精苦。
现代文：行医和尚行儒说，福州有一个叫弘济的和尚，认真斋戒，精心刻苦。
English: A practitioner of medicine and a practitioner of Confucianism said that there was a monk in Fuzhou named Hongji who fasted seriously and worked hard.

古文：尝于沙岸得一颅骨，遂贮衣篮中。
现代文：他曾经在沙岸上拾到一个颅骨，就把它收藏在衣篮中。
English: He once found a skull on the beach and put it in his basket.

古文：归寺数日，忽眠中有物啮其耳，以手拨之落，声如数升物，疑其颅骨所为也。
现代文：回到寺里几天，忽然在睡觉的时候有东西咬他的耳朵。他用手把那东西打落，声音象几升东西落地那样重。他怀疑是那颅骨干的。
English: A few days after returning to the temple, something bit his ear while he was sleeping. He knocked it down with his hand, and the sound was as heavy as several liters of something falling to the ground. He suspected that it was the skull.

古文：及明，果坠在床下，遂破为六片，零置瓦沟中。
现代文：等到了天亮一看，颅骨果然掉到床下。于是他把颅骨打碎成六片，散放在瓦沟中。
English: When he woke up in the morning, he saw that the skull had indeed fallen under the bed. So he broke the skull into six pieces and scattered them in the gutter.

古文：夜半，有火如鸡卵，次第入瓦下，烛之，弘济责曰：尔不能求生人天，凭朽骨何也？
现代文：夜半时分，有鸡蛋大的火球，依次进入瓦下，用蜡烛照着它，弘济责怪道：你不能在人间求生，凭着一块烂骨头能怎样！
English: At midnight, a fireball the size of an egg flew into the roof tiles and lit it with a candle. Hongji scolded: "You can't survive on earth, what can you do with a rotten bone!"

古文：于是怪绝。
现代文：于是怪物就绝迹了。
English: So the monster died out.

古文：金友章
现代文：金友章
English: Jin Youzhang

古文：金友章者，河内人，隐于蒲州中条山，凡五载。
现代文：金友章，河内人，隐居在蒲州中条山，共五年。
English: Jin Youzhang, a native of Hanoi, lived in seclusion in the Zhongjia Mountain of Puzhou for a total of five years.

古文：山有女子，日常挈瓶而汲溪水，容貌殊丽。
现代文：山中有一位女子，容貌非常美丽，常带着罐子到溪边打水。
English: In the mountains there was a woman, very beautiful, who often went to the stream with a jar to draw water.

古文：友章于斋中遥见，心甚悦之。
现代文：金友章在屋里远远望见那女子，心里很喜欢她。
English: Jin Youzhang saw the woman from far away in the room and liked her very much.

古文：一日，女子复汲，友章蹑屣企户而调之曰：谁家丽人，频此汲耶？
现代文：一日，女子又到溪边打水，金友章轻步开门调情说：谁家的美人打水这么勤！
English: One day, the woman went to the creek to fetch water. Jin Youzhang opened the door and flirted, saying, "Who's beautiful woman is so diligent in fetching water?"

古文：女子笑曰：涧下流泉，本无常主，须则取之，岂有定限？
现代文：女子笑着：涧下的流水，本没有主人，需要就来取，哪有什么一定之限！
English: The woman laughed and said, "The running water under my armpits doesn't have an owner. I just come to get it when I need it. There's no limit!"

古文：先不相知，一何造次！
现代文：你以前也不认识我，多么冒失！
English: You didn't know me before, how presumptuous!

古文：然儿止居近里，少小孤遗。今且托身于姨舍，艰危受尽，无以自适。
现代文：我就住在附近，从小失去父母，现在暂且托身住在姨母家里，受尽了艰难，自己没有嫁人。
English: I live nearby. I lost my parents when I was a child, and now I'm temporarily staying at my aunt's house. I've been through a lot, and I'm not married.

古文：女曰：君子既不以貌陋见鄙，委焉敢拒违？
现代文：金友章说：娘子既然没有嫁人，我正在谋求婚姻，和你婚配是我的夙愿，你不应该远嫁，不远嫁可以吗？女子说：您既然不嫌我长得丑，我哪敢拒绝？
English: Jin Youzhang said, "Since my daughter has not married, I am seeking marriage. It is my long-cherished wish to marry you. You should not marry far away. Can you marry not far away?" The woman said, "Since you don't mind that I am ugly, how can I refuse?"

古文：然候夜而赴佳命。言讫，女子汲水而去，是夕果至。
现代文：但是要等到了夜晚我才能来成全好事。说完，女子汲水离去。这天晚上，她果然来了。
English: But I have to wait until the evening before I can complete the good deed. After that, the woman drew water and left. This evening, she did come.

古文：友章迎之入室，夫妇之道，久而益敬。
现代文：金友章把她迎到屋里。夫妻之道，时间越久越互相尊敬。
English: Jin Youzhang welcomed her into the house. As husband and wife, the more time passes, the more they respect each other.

古文：友章每夜读书，常至宵分，妻常坐伴之，如此半年矣。
现代文：金友章每夜读书，常读到半夜，妻总是伴着他。如此半年了。
English: Jin Youzhang reads every night, often until midnight, and his wife always accompanies him. This has been the case for half a year.

古文：一夕，友章如常执卷，而妻不坐，但伫立侍坐。
现代文：一天晚上，金友章照常捧卷阅读，而妻不坐下，只伫立在那里侍候她。
English: One evening, Jin Youzhang was reading a book as usual, while his wife did not sit down, but only stood there to wait for her.

古文：友章诘之，以他事告。
现代文：金友章问她怎么了，她说的是别的事。
English: When Jin Youzhang asked her what was wrong, she said something else.

古文：友章乃令妻就寝，妻曰：君今夜归房，慎勿执烛，妾之幸矣。
现代文：金友章就让她睡觉。妻说：你今晚回房的时候，千万不要拿蜡烛，这就是我的万幸啦。
English: Jin Youzhang let her sleep. His wife said: "When you go back to your room tonight, don't take a candle. That's how lucky I am."

古文：既而友章秉烛就榻，即于被下，见其妻乃一枯骨耳。
现代文：后来金友章拿着蜡烛回屋上床，见他的妻子原来是一具枯骨。
English: Later, Jin Youzhang took the candle back to the roof and went to bed. He saw that his wife was a dead body.

古文：友章惋叹良久，复以被覆之。
现代文：金友章惋惜嗟叹了好长时间。又用被盖上了。
English: Jin Youzhang sighed with regret for a long time. He covered it with a quilt.

古文：须臾，乃复本形，因大悸怖，而谓友章曰：妾非人也，乃山南枯骨之精，居此山北。
现代文：不一会儿，就恢复了本形，于是她特别害怕，对金友章说：我不是人，是山南的一个枯骨精，住在这山北面。
English: In a short time, she regained her original form, so she was particularly afraid and said to Jin Youzhang: "I am not a person, I am a dead spirit of Shannan, living on the north side of this mountain.

古文：妾受此楚毒，不胜其苦，向以化身未得，岂意金郎视之也。
现代文：有个叫恒明王的，是鬼的首领，平常每月要朝见一次。我自从嫁给你，半年都没到他那去了，刚才被鬼捉去打我一百铁棍。我受这样的毒打，非常痛苦。刚才没有变成人形，哪想到让你看到了！
English: There is a man named Hengming Wang, who is the leader of the ghosts, and I usually have to see him once a month in the morning. Since I married you, I haven't been to him for half a year. Just now, a ghost caught me and beat me with a hundred iron rods. I suffered such a severe beating, it was very painful. I didn't turn into a doll just now, how could I let you see it!

古文：事以彰矣，君宜速出，更不留恋。
现代文：事情已经明白了，你应该马上出去，更不要留恋。
English: The matter has been understood, you should go out immediately, and do not linger.

古文：盖此山中，凡物总有精魅附之，恐损金郎。
现代文：这山里边，大凡所有东西，总有精魅附其身，恐怕对你有害。
English: In this mountain, there is always a spirit attached to everything, and I'm afraid it will be harmful to you.

古文：言讫，涕泣呜咽，因尔不见，友章亦凄恨而去。
现代文：说完，她哭泣呜咽，于是就不见了。金友章也凄楚地含恨离开那里。
English: After saying this, she wept and sobbed, and then disappeared. Jin Youzhang also left there with bitter hatred.

古文：于凝
现代文：于凝
English: Condensation

古文：岐人于凝者，性嗜酒，常往来邠泾间。
现代文：岐州人于凝，生性嗜酒，常常往来于邠州泾州之间。
English: The people of Qizhou are tight-knit and have a natural affinity for alcohol. They often travel back and forth between Bozhou and Ganzhou.

古文：故人宰宜禄，因访饮酒，涉旬乃返。
现代文：他有个老朋友叫宰宜禄，一次去喝酒，过了十来天才回来。
English: He has an old friend named Zaiyilu, who once went out drinking and only came back after more than ten years.

古文：既而宿醒未愈，令童仆先路，以备休憩。
现代文：不久，他饮酒隔夜未醒，让童仆提前上路，以预备休息事项。
English: Not long after, he stayed up all night drinking and sent his servant on his way ahead of schedule to prepare for the rest.

古文：时孟夏，麦野韶润，缓辔而行，遥见道左嘉木美荫，因就焉。
现代文：当时正是孟夏，小麦的田野韶光湿润。他骑马徐徐而行，远远望见道旁有一处很美的树林，就走过去。
English: At that time, it was the summer of Mengxia, and the wheat fields were bright and wet. He rode slowly and slowly, and saw a beautiful forest next to the road in the distance, and walked over.

古文：上有乌鸢纷飞，嘲噪甚众。
现代文：上边有乌鸦纷飞，杂然吵闹。
English: There are crows flying above, making a lot of noise.

古文：凝良久稍逼，枯骨乃竦然挺立，骨节绝伟。
现代文：于凝好久才渐渐走近。枯骨就竦然挺立起来，骨节非常高大。
English: After staring at it for a long time, he gradually approached it. The dead bone suddenly stood upright, and the osseous tubercle was very tall.

古文：凝心悸，马亦惊走，遂驰赴旅舍。
现代文：于凝心里惊悸，马也吓跑了。于是就跑到客店。
English: Yu Chengxin was startled, and the horse also ran away. So he ran to the inn.

古文：而先路童仆出迎，相顾骇曰：郎君神思，一何惨悴！
现代文：提前上路的童仆出来迎接，见了他吃惊地说：郎君的神情多么凄惨憔悴！
English: The servant boy, who had set out ahead of time, came out to meet him, and when he saw him, he said in surprise: "What a miserable look your husband has!

古文：凝即说之。
现代文：于凝就说了路上的事情。
English: Yu Geng said something on the way.

古文：适有泾倅十余。各执长短兵援蕃。觇以东。皆曰：岂有是哉？
现代文：碰巧有十几个泾州的兵卒，各拿着长短兵器援助蕃兵，向东方窥视，都说：哪有这样的事呢？
English: As it happened, there were more than a dozen soldiers from Zhangzhou, each holding a long and short weapon to assist the soldiers, peering to the east, all saying: "How could such a thing happen?"

古文：洎逆旅少年辈，集聚极众。
现代文：再加上客店里的年轻人，聚集了很多人。
English: Coupled with the young people in the inn, a lot of people gathered.

古文：凝即为之导前，仍与众约曰：倘或尚在，当共碎之。
现代文：于凝就为他们在前边引路，还和大伙约定说：如果还在，应该一起上去打碎它。
English: He led the way ahead of them, and they agreed that if it was still there, they should go up and smash it together.

古文：虽然，恐不得见矣。
现代文：这样虽好，恐怕看不见了。
English: This is good, but I'm afraid I can't see it.

古文：俄到其处，而端坐如故。
现代文：不多时来到那地方，那枯骨照旧端坐在那里。
English: I don't go there very often, but the bones are still there.

古文：或则叫噪，曾不动摇；或则弯弓发矢，又无中者；或欲环之前进，则亦相顾莫能先焉。久之，枯骸欻然自起，徐徐南去。
现代文：有人就大叫，它居然不动不摇。
English: Someone yelled out that it would not budge.

古文：日势已晚，众各恐詟，稍稍遂散。
现代文：天色已晚，众人恐惧，慢慢就散了。
English: It was late in the day and people were scared and slowly dispersed.

古文：凝亦鞭马而回。
现代文：于凝骑马回来了。
English: Yu Ge came back on horseback.

古文：远望，尚见乌鹊翔集，逐去不散。
现代文：远远望去，还有乌鸦鸟雀在空中翔集，赶也赶不散。
English: Looking far away, there are also crows, birds and sparrows flying in the air, and they cannot be dispersed.

古文：自后凝屡经其地，及询左近居人，乃无复见者。
现代文：此后于凝多次经过这里，等到打听左右的邻居，竟没有再见到的。
English: After that, Yu Ning passed by here many times. When he asked his neighbors, he didn't see it again.

