古文：骈拇枝指出乎性哉，而侈于德；附赘县疣出乎形哉，而侈于性；多方乎仁义而用之者，列于五藏哉，而非道德之正也。
现代文：脚的大趾拇跟二趾拇连在了一起，手大拇指旁多长出一指，对于人体来说都是多余的东西。肉瘤、毒疮虽是后天所生，但对自然的本性来说，也是多余的，想方设法要施行仁义的念头，虽然比列于身体本身的五脏，却不是纯正的道德。
English: The big toe of the foot is connected to the second toe of the foot, and an extra finger grows next to the thumb of the hand, all of which are superfluous for the human body. Although sarcomas and canker sores are acquired, they are also superfluous for the natural nature. Trying to implement the idea of benevolence and righteousness, although it is listed in the five viscera of the body itself, is not pure morality.

古文：是故骈于足者，连无用之肉也；枝于手者，树无用之指也；多方骈枝于五藏之情者，淫僻于仁义之行，而多方于聪明之用也。
现代文：因此，脚趾骈生，不过多连结了一块无用的肉；手上长六指，不过多长了一个无用的指头；超出了五脏之情，走上仁义的歪门邪道，只不过是小聪明而已。
English: Therefore, to have two toes but only one useless piece of flesh attached to them; to have six fingers but only one useless finger on the hand; to go beyond the five viscera and enter the crooked path of benevolence and righteousness, is nothing more than petty cleverness.

古文：是故骈于明者，乱五色，淫文章，青黄黼黻之煌煌非乎？而离朱是已！
现代文：超出本体的 多余 对于一个视觉明晰的人来说，难道不是搅乱五色、迷滥文彩、绣制出青黄相间的华丽服饰而炫人眼目吗？而离朱就是这样。
English: Superfluous beyond the body For a person with clear vision, isn't it a distraction of the five colors, obsessive colors, and embroidery to make gorgeous clothes of blue and yellow that dazzle the eyes? And this is the case with Zhu.

古文：多于聪者，乱五声，淫六律，金石丝竹黄钟大吕之声非乎？
现代文：超出本体的 多余 对于听觉灵敏的人来说，难道不是搅乱五音、混淆六律，岂不是搅浑了金、石、丝、竹、黄钟、大吕的各种音调吗？
English: For people with sensitive hearing, doesn't the tambourine disturb the five tones and confuse the six laws, and doesn't it muddle the various tones of gold, stone, silk, bamboo, yellow bell and big bamboo?

古文：而师旷是已！
现代文：而师旷就是这样。
English: But that's how Shige is.

古文：枝于仁者，擢德塞性以收名声，使天下簧鼓以奉不及之法非乎？
现代文：超出本体的 多余 对于倡导仁义的人来说，难道不是矫擢道德、闭塞真性来捞取名声、而使天下的人们争相鼓噪信守不可能做到的礼法吗？
English: For those who advocate benevolence and righteousness, isn't it promoting morality and occluding truth to gain fame, and making people around the world compete to adhere to impossible etiquette?

古文：而曾、史是已！骈于辩者，累瓦结绳窜句，游心于坚白同异之间，而敝跬誉无用之言非乎？
现代文：而曾参和史鱼就是这样，超出本体的 多余 对于善于言辞的人来说，难道不是堆砌辞藻，穿凿文句、将心思驰骋于 坚白 诡辩的是非之中，而艰难疲惫地罗列无数废话去追求短暂的声誉吗？
English: But Zeng Sanzhong and Shi Yu are just like that, superfluous beyond the body. For people who are good at rhetoric, isn't it a matter of piling up rhetoric, wearing chiseled phrases, riding the mind in the midst of "solid" and "sophisticated" and "wrong," and laboriously and wearily listing countless nonsense to pursue a short-lived reputation?

古文：而杨、墨是已！故此皆多骈旁枝之道，非天下之至正也。
现代文：而杨朱和墨翟就是这样，所以说这些都是多余的、矫造而成的不正之法，绝不是天下的至道正理。
English: But Yang Zhu and Mochu are just like that, so it is said that these are superfluous, fabricated and unjust laws, and are by no means the most righteous path in the world.

古文：彼正正者，不失其性命之情。
现代文：那纯正的道，不失去它的本性。
English: That pure path does not lose its nature.

古文：故合者不为骈，而枝者不为跂；长者不为有余，短者不为不足。
现代文：所以合在一起不能算是 骈趾 ，分歧也不能算是 枝指 。长的不能看作多余，短的不能看作不足。
English: Therefore, together can not be regarded as a toe, and differences can not be regarded as a branch. Long can not be regarded as superfluous, short can not be regarded as insufficient.

古文：是故凫胫虽短，续之则忧；鹤胫虽长，断之则悲。
现代文：野鸭的腿虽短，给它接上一节就带来痛苦；鹤的脚虽长，截下一节就会带来悲哀。
English: Though the legs of the wild duck are short, it is painful to attach a stump to it; though the legs of the crane are long, it is sad to cut off a stump.

古文：故性长非所断，性短非所续，无所去忧也。
现代文：所以，本来长的不能截短，本来短的不能接长，没有什么可以忧虑的。
English: Therefore, what is long cannot be shortened, what is short cannot be lengthened, and there is nothing to worry about.

古文：意仁义其非人情乎！彼仁人何其多忧也。
现代文：我想那仁义大概不是人的本性吧，那些仁者为何不施仁义的行为如此。
English: I think that benevolence is probably not human nature. Why do those who are benevolent not practice benevolence?

古文：且夫骈于拇者，决之则泣；枝于手者，齕之则啼。
现代文：况且对于脚趾并生的人来说，分裂两脚趾他就会哭泣；对于手指旁出的人来说，咬断歧指他也会哀啼。
English: Moreover, for a person with conjoined toes, he will cry when he splits his toes; for a person with protruding fingers, he will also cry when he bites his fingers.

古文：二者或有余于数，或不足于数，其于忧一也。
现代文：以上两种情况，有的是多于正常的手指数，有的是少于正常的脚趾数，而它们所导致的忧患却是一样的。
English: In both cases, some people have more than the normal number of fingers, and some people have fewer than the normal number of toes, but the problems they cause are the same.

古文：今世之仁人，蒿目而忧世之患；不仁之人，决性命之情而饕贵富。
现代文：如今世上的仁人，放目远视而忧虑人间的祸患；那些不仁的人，摒弃人的本真和自然而贪求富贵。唉！
English: Nowadays, the benevolent people in the world look far and wide and worry about the evils of the world; those who are not benevolent, abandon human nature and nature and seek wealth. Alas!

古文：故意仁义其非人情乎！
现代文：仁义难道不合人情吗？
English: Isn't it human nature to be benevolent?

古文：自三代以下者，天下何其嚣嚣也。
现代文：而从夏、商、周三代以来，天下又怎么会那么喧嚣竞逐呢？
English: But since the Xia, Shang and San dynasties, how could the world compete so noisily?

古文：且夫待钩绳规矩而正者，是削其性者也；待绳约胶漆而固者，是侵其德者也；屈折礼乐，呴俞仁义，以慰天下之心者，此失其常然也。
现代文：用规矩准绳来矫正形体，就是伤害了事物的本性；用绳索、粘胶来加固，就是侵蚀了事物的原貌；规定礼节和音调，和气地旅行仁义，用以安慰天下，就是违背了原始的常态。
English: To use rules and standards to correct the shape is to harm the nature of things; to use ropes and glue to reinforce is to erode the original appearance of things; to prescribe etiquette and tone, and to use kindness and compassion to comfort the world is to violate the original normal state.

古文：天下有常然。常然者，曲者不以钩，直者不以绳，圆者不以规，方者不以矩，附离不以胶漆，约束不以纆索。
现代文：天下事物都有它的本原常态，这种本原常态就是指：曲的不用钩，直的不用绳，圆的不用规，方的不用矩，黏合的不用胶漆，捆绑的不用绳索。
English: All things in the world have their original normal state. This original normal state refers to: no hooks for curves, no ropes for straight lines, no rules for circles, no moments for squares, no glue for gluing, and no ropes for tying.

古文：故天下诱然皆生，而不知其所以生；同焉皆得，而不知其所以得。
现代文：所以，天下事物任其自然而然地生长却不必知道生的缘故，万物存在而不知道存在的缘故。
English: Therefore, things in the world are allowed to grow naturally without having to know the reason for their birth, and all things exist without knowing the reason for their existence.

古文：故古今不二，不可亏也。
现代文：因而古今的道理并无两样，都是无法损害。
English: Therefore, the principles of ancient and modern times are no different and cannot be harmed.

古文：则仁义又奚连连如胶漆纆索而游乎道德之间为哉！使天下惑也！
现代文：那么，仁义为什么不断的如同胶漆黏合，绳索捆绑那样往复于人性道德之间，使天下人感到困惑呢？
English: So, why do benevolence and righteousness constantly go back and forth between human morality like glue and glue, like ropes and ropes, so that people around the world are confused?

古文：夫小惑易方，大惑易性。
现代文：小糊涂会迷失方向，大糊涂会丧失本性。
English: Small muddle will lose direction, big muddle will lose its nature.

古文：何以知其然邪？
现代文：凭什么知道是如此呢？
English: How do we know this is the case?

古文：自虞氏招仁义以挠天下也，天下莫不奔命于仁义。
现代文：自从虞舜标榜仁义而扰乱天下以来，天下之人没有不为仁义而疲于奔命的。
English: Ever since Gu Ying disrupted the world by flaunting benevolence and righteousness, people all over the world have been running for their lives for the sake of benevolence.

古文：是非以仁义易其性与？
现代文：这不就是以仁义错乱了本性吗？
English: Isn't this just using benevolence and righteousness to derange one's nature?

古文：故尝试论之：自三代以下者，天下莫不以物易其性矣！小人则以身殉利；士则以身殉名；大夫则以身殉家；圣人则以身殉天下。故此数子者，事业不同，名声异号，其于伤性以身为殉，一也。
现代文：所以我且来试论这个问题：自夏、商、周三代以来，天下没有不因外物而错乱本性的，小人为了追求利益而牺牲自己，士人为了追求名声而牺牲自己，大夫为了维护家室而牺牲自己，圣人为了治理天下而牺牲自己，这四种人，事业虽不相同，名声虽不一样，但从损伤本性、自己这一点上看，却是相同的。
English: Therefore, I will try to discuss this issue: Since the Xia, Shang and San dynasties, there has been nothing in the world that does not have a disordered nature due to external things. The villain sacrifices himself in pursuit of profit, the scholar sacrifices himself in pursuit of fame, the doctor sacrifices himself in order to maintain the family, and the saint sacrifices himself in order to govern the world. These four kinds of people, although the cause is different and the reputation is different, are the same from the point of view of damaging nature and themselves.

古文：臧与谷，二人相与牧羊而俱亡其羊。
现代文：臧与谷二人同去放羊，都把羊丢失了，问臧当时在干什么。
English: Gong and Gu both went to herd sheep together, and both lost their sheep. Gong asked Gong what he was doing at the time.

古文：问臧奚事，则挟策读书；问谷奚事，则博塞以游。
现代文：他说正在那里捧着简册读书；问谷当时在干什么，他说正在那里下棋。
English: He said he was reading a brochure there; when asked what he was doing at the time, he said he was playing chess.

古文：二人者，事业不同，其于亡羊均也。
现代文：他们二人所做的事情虽不相同，但都丢失了羊。
English: They did not do the same thing, but they both lost sheep.

古文：伯夷死名于首阳之下，盗跖死利于东陵之上。二人者，所死不同，其于残生伤性均也。奚必伯夷之是而盗跖之非乎？
现代文：伯夷死于首阳山下是为名，盗跖死于东陵之上是为利，他们二人所死的原因虽不同，但在丧生害性上却是相同的，既然如此，又何必去肯定伯夷而否定盗跖呢！
English: Bo Yi's death at the foot of Shouyang Mountain was for fame, and the death of the robber on the top of Dongling Mountain was for profit. Although the causes of death of the two were different, they were the same in terms of loss of life and damage. In that case, why should we affirm Bo Yi and deny the robber?

古文：天下尽殉也：彼其所殉仁义也，则俗谓之君子；其所殉货财也，则俗谓之小人。
现代文：天下人都在为了某种目的而牺牲了自己，有的为仁义而死，世人称为君子；有的为财富而死，世人称之为小人。
English: People all over the world have sacrificed themselves for some purpose. Some have died for the sake of righteousness, and the world calls them gentlemen; others have died for the sake of wealth, and the world calls them villains.

古文：其殉一也，则有君子焉，有小人焉。若其残生损性，则盗跖亦伯夷已，又恶取君子小人于其间哉！
现代文：同样都是死，却有君子与小人的区别；如果以丧生害性来说，盗跖与伯夷本无两样，又何必去分什么君子、小人呢！
English: Death is the same, but there is a difference between a gentleman and a villain; if, in terms of lethality, the robber and the thief are the same, why should there be a distinction between a gentleman and a villain!

古文：且夫属其性乎仁义者，虽通如曾、史，非吾所谓臧也；属其性于五味，虽通如俞儿，非吾所谓臧也；属其性乎五声，虽通如师旷，非吾所谓聪也；属其性乎五色，虽通如离朱，非吾所谓明也。
现代文：况且，把自己的本性缀连于仁义，即使像曾参和史鰌那样精通，也不是我所认为的完美；把自己的本性缀连于甜、酸、苦、辣、咸五味，即使如同俞儿那样精通，也不是我所认为的完善；把自己的本性缀连于五声，即使如同师旷那样通晓音律，也不是我所认为的聪敏；把自己的本性缀连于五色，即使如同离朱那样通晓色彩，也不是我所认为的视觉敏锐。
English: Moreover, attaching one's nature to benevolence and righteousness, even if one is as proficient as Zeng Zang and Shi Xuan, is not what I consider to be perfection; attaching one's nature to sweet, sour, bitter, spicy and salty, even if one is as proficient as Xuan Er, is not what I consider to be perfection; attaching one's nature to the five tones, even if one is as knowledgeable as Shi Kuang, is not what I consider to be cleverness; attaching one's nature to the five colors, even if one is as knowledgeable as Zhu Li, is not what I consider to be visual acuity.

古文：吾所谓臧者，非所谓仁义之谓也，臧于其德而已矣；吾所谓臧者，非所谓仁义之谓也，任其性命之情而已矣；吾所谓聪者，非谓其闻彼也，自闻而已矣；吾所谓明者，非谓其见彼也，自见而已矣。
现代文：我所说的完美，绝不是仁义之类的东西，而是比各有所得更美好罢了；我所说的完善，绝不是所谓的仁义，而是放任天性、保持真情罢了。我所说的聪敏，不是说能听到别人什么，而是指能够审视自己罢了。我所说的视觉敏锐，不是说能看见别人什么，而是指能够看清自己罢了。
English: When I speak of perfection, I do not mean something like goodness, but something better than anything else; when I speak of perfection, I do not mean goodness, but rather letting nature take its course and maintaining true feelings; when I speak of intelligence, I do not mean the ability to hear others, but the ability to examine oneself; when I speak of visual acuity, I do not mean the ability to see others, but the ability to see oneself clearly.

古文：夫不自见而见彼，不自得而得彼者，是得人之得而不自得其得者也，适人之适而不自适其适者也。
现代文：不能看清自己而只能看清别人，不能安于自得而向别人索求的人，这就是索求别人之所得而不能安于自己所应得的人，也就是贪图达到别人所达到而不能安于自己所应达到的境界的人。
English: A person who cannot see himself clearly but can only see others clearly, who cannot be satisfied with himself but demands from others, that is, a person who demands the income of others but cannot be satisfied with what he deserves, that is, a person who longs to reach the level reached by others but cannot be satisfied with what he should achieve.

古文：夫适人之适而不自适其适，虽盗跖与伯夷，是同为淫僻也。
现代文：贪图达到别人所达到而不安于自己所应达到的境界，无论盗跖与伯夷，都同样是滞乱邪恶的。
English: Coveting to achieve what others have achieved and being insecure about what you should achieve, no matter whether you are a thief or a monk, is equally disorderly and evil.

古文：余愧乎道德，是以上不敢为仁义之操，而下不敢为淫僻之行也。
现代文：我有愧于宇宙万物本体的认识和事物变化规律的理解，所以就上一层说我不能奉行仁义的节操，就下一层说我不愿从事滞乱邪恶的行径。
English: I am unworthy of the knowledge of the essence of all things in the universe and the understanding of the law of change of things. Therefore, on the upper layer I say that I cannot pursue the discipline of benevolence and righteousness, and on the next layer I say that I do not want to engage in disorderly evil practices.

