古文：道宗一道宗孝文皇帝，讳洪基，字涅邻，小字查剌。
现代文：道宗孝文皇帝，名洪基，字涅邻，乳名查剌。
English: Emperor Daozong Xiaowen, his name was Hongji, his nickname was Nien Niang, and his mother's maiden name was Cha Jun.

古文：兴宗皇帝长子，母曰仁懿皇后萧氏。
现代文：兴宗皇帝长子，母为仁懿皇后萧氏。
English: He was the eldest son of Emperor Xingzong, and his mother was Empress Xiao of Nian.

古文：六岁封梁王。重熙十一年，进封燕国，总领中丞司事。
现代文：六岁封为梁王，重熙十一年进封为燕国王，总领中丞司事务。
English: At the age of six, he was given the title of King Liang, and in the eleventh year of the reign of King Chongxi, he was given the title of King Yan.

古文：明年，总北南院枢密使事，加尚书令，进封燕赵国王。
现代文：次年，总理北南院枢密使事，加封尚书令，进封燕赵国王。
English: The following year, the prime minister of the North-South Privy Council sent a diplomatic envoy, and added a letter of appointment to King Yan Zhao.

古文：二十一年，为天下兵马大元帅，知惕隐事，预朝政。
现代文：二十一年为天下兵马大元帅，知惕隐事，参预朝政。
English: In 1921, he became the grand marshal of the world's soldiers and horses. He was discreet and secretive, and participated in pre-imperial politics.

古文：帝性沉静、严毅，每朝，兴宗为之敛容。
现代文：皇上生性沉稳闲静、严厉刚毅，每当朝见时，兴宗为之正容。
English: The Emperor was by nature calm and quiet, stern and resolute, and whenever he was seen in the morning, Xingzong made a show of it.

古文：二十四年秋八月己丑，兴宗崩，即皇帝位于柩前，哀恸不听政。
现代文：二十四年秋八月初四，兴宗驾崩，道宗即皇帝位于灵柩前，哀伤悲恸不听朝政。
English: On the 4th day of the 8th month of the 24th year of autumn, Emperor Xingzong passed away, and Emperor Daozong was placed in front of the coffin. He was sad and did not listen to the government.

古文：辛卯，百僚上表固请，许之。
现代文：初六，百官上表恳请皇上临朝听政，答许之。
English: On the sixth day of the first month of the year, a hundred officials petitioned the emperor to come to the imperial court to listen to the government, and he agreed.

古文：诏曰： 朕以菲德，托居士民之上，第恐智识有不及，群下有未信；赋敛妄兴，赏罚不中；上恩不能及下，下情不能达上。
现代文：下诏说： 朕以薄德之身，托居于万民之上，诚恐智识有所不及，臣下不尽归心；赋税妄兴，聚敛无已，赏罚不合法度；上面的恩泽不能施及下属，下情不能上达。
English: The next edict said: I, with my weak virtue, live above all the people. I am afraid that my sincerity is not as good as my wisdom, and that my subjects are not as devoted as I am. My taxation is excessive, my accumulation is boundless, and my rewards and punishments are illegal. The above-mentioned benefits cannot be extended to my subordinates, and my subordinate feelings cannot be reached.

古文：凡尔士庶，直言无讳。
现代文：尔等士庶臣民，应该直言无讳。
English: He and other commoners should not be outspoken.

古文：可则择用，否则不以为愆。
现代文：所上奏章有可用之处朕将择而用之，有不是之处朕也不会因此而加罪。
English: I will choose to use the above-mentioned movement where it is available, and I will not add to the crime where it is not.

古文：卿等其体朕意。 
现代文：希望卿等能体察朕的心意。 
English: I hope you can feel my heart.

古文：壬辰，以皇太弟重元为皇太叔，免汉拜，不名。
现代文：初七，尊皇太弟重元为皇太叔，免其见君依汉礼而拜，奏事时参赞官不直呼其名。
English: On the seventh day of the new year, Chongyuan, the prince's younger brother, became the prince's uncle. To avoid embarrassment, he bowed in accordance with Chinese etiquette, and the counsellor did not call him by his first name when reporting the matter.

古文：癸巳，遣使报哀于宋及夏、高丽。
现代文：初八，派使者前往宋、夏及高丽报哀。
English: On the first day of the eighth month, envoys were sent to Song, Xia and Goryeo to mourn.

古文：甲午，遣重元安抚南京军民。
现代文：初九，派重元前去抚谕南京军民。
English: On the 9th day of the first lunar month, he sent Chongyuan to consult with the military and people of Nanjing.

古文：戊戌，以遗诏，命西北路招讨使西平郡王萧阿剌为北府宰相，仍权知南院枢密使事，北府宰相萧虚烈为武定军节度使。
现代文：十三日，奉遗诏，任命西北路招讨使西平郡王萧阿剌为北府宰相，仍领权知南院枢密使事之职，北府宰相萧虚烈出为武定军节度使。
English: On the 13th, according to his will, he appointed Wang Xiao Aqi of Xiping County to be the prime minister of the northern prefecture, still holding the post of privy envoy to the Southern Yuan, and the prime minister of the northern prefecture, Xiao Huirei, was appointed as the festival envoy of the Wuding Army.

古文：辛丑，改元清宁，大赦。
现代文：十六日，改元清宁，大赦天下。
English: On the 16th, the Yuan Dynasty was changed to the Qing Dynasty, and the country was amnestied.

古文：九月戊午，诏常所幸围场外毋禁。
现代文：九月初三，诏令不要禁止百姓在皇帝经常巡幸的围场外打猎。
English: On the third day of the ninth month, the emperor issued a decree not to prohibit the people from hunting outside the paddock where the emperor often visited.

古文：庚申，诏除护卫士，余不得佩刃入宫；非勋戚后及夷离堇、副使、承应诸职事人，不得冠巾。
现代文：初五，下诏规定除护卫之士外，其余的人不得佩剑入宫；非皇族后族及夷离堇、副使、承应诸职事人，不得戴巾帻。
English: On the fifth day of the first month, the following edict stipulated that, with the exception of the guards, the rest of the people were not allowed to enter the palace with swords; non-royal family members, emissaries, deputy envoys, and officials were not allowed to wear scarves.

古文：壬戌，诏夷离堇及副使之族并民奴贱，不得服驼尼、水獭裘，刀柄、兔鹘、鞍勒、珮子不许用犀玉、骨突犀；惟大将军不禁。
现代文：初七，诏令夷离堇及副使的族属也如贱民一般，不得服用驼尼、水獭裘，刀柄、腰带、鞍勒，佩子不许用犀玉、骨突犀；惟有大将军不在禁止之列。
English: On the seventh day of the first month, the imperial edict ordered that the families of the exiles and the deputy envoys should also be treated like the common people. They were not allowed to use camel's milk, water chestnuts, sword handles, belts, saddles, nor were they allowed to use rhinestones or bone needles; only the general was not prohibited.

古文：乙丑，赐内外臣僚爵赏有差。
现代文：初十，赐内外臣僚财物官爵各有等差。
English: In the 10th year of the Heian period, there was a disparity in the amount of money and property given to ministers both at home and abroad.

古文：庚午，尊皇太后为太皇太后。
现代文：十五日，尊皇太后为太皇太后。
English: On the 15th, Her Imperial Highness the Empress Dowager became the Grand Empress Dowager.

古文：辛未，遣左夷离毕萧谟鲁、翰林学士韩运以先帝遗物遗宋。
现代文：十六日，派左夷离毕萧谟鲁、翰林学士韩运送先帝遗物给宋国。
English: On the 16th, he sent Zuoying away from Bi Xiao Moru and Han Lin, a scholar, to transport the relics of the former emperor to Song.

古文：癸酉，遣使以即位报宋。
现代文：十八日，派使者向宋告知新皇即位之事。
English: On the 18th, an envoy was sent to inform Song of the new emperor's accession.

古文：丙子，尊皇后为皇太后，宴菆涂殿。
现代文：二十一日，尊皇后为皇太后，在涂殿宴饮。
English: On the twenty-first day, His Majesty the Empress became the Empress Dowager and held a banquet in the Tuiden Hall.

古文：以上京留守宿国王陈留为南京留守。
现代文：任命上京留守宿国王陈留为南京留守。
English: Appointed Shangjing Lingering Inn King Chen Liu as Nanjing Lingering King.

古文：壬午，遣使赐高丽、夏国先帝遗物。
现代文：二十七日，派使者赐给高丽、夏国先帝遗物。
English: On the 27th, an emissary was sent to present the relics of the former Emperor Xia to Goryeo.

古文：冬十月丁亥，有司请以帝生日为天安节，从之。
现代文：冬十月初三，有司奏请以皇上生日为天安节，皇上从之。
English: On the third day of the first month of October in the winter, the Emperor requested that the Emperor's birthday be celebrated as Tiananmen Day, and the Emperor agreed.

古文：以吴王仁先同知南京留守事，陈王涂孛特为南府宰相，进封吴王。
现代文：任命吴王仁先为同知南京留守事，陈王涂孛特为南府宰相，进封吴王。
English: Wu Wang Rensen was appointed as a retainer of his friend in Nanjing, Chen Wang Duyun as the prime minister of Nanfu, and Wu Wang was enthroned.

古文：壬寅，以顺义军节度使十神奴为南院大王。
现代文：十八日，任命顺义军节度使十神奴为南院大王。
English: On the 18th, the Shunyi Army Festival was appointed to make the Ten Divine Servants the Great King of the Southern Court.

古文：有事于太宗、穆宗庙。
现代文：十一月初十，安葬兴宗皇帝于庆陵。
English: On the 10th day of the 11th month, Emperor Xingzong was buried in Qingling Mausoleum.

古文：甲戌，谒祖陵。
现代文：宋及高丽派使者前来会葬。
English: Song and Goryeo sent emissaries to attend the funeral.

古文：戊寅，冬至，有事于太祖、景宗、兴宗庙，不受群臣贺。
现代文：将兴宗皇帝陵寝命名为永兴。十二日，任命南院大王侯古为中京留守，北府宰相西平郡王萧阿剌进封韩王。拜谒祖陵。二十四日，冬至，祭祀太祖、景宗、兴宗庙，不接受群臣朝贺。
English: The Emperor Xingzong's mausoleum was named Yongxing. On the 12th, the Southern Court Grand Prince Hou Gu was appointed to stay in Beijing, and the North Prefecture Prime Minister of Xiping County, Wang Xiao Aqin, went to visit the Han King. On the 24th, the winter solstice, the temple of Taizu, Jingzong, and Xingzong was dedicated, and did not accept the morning greetings of the vassals.

古文：十二月丙戌，诏左夷离毕曰： 朕以眇冲，获嗣大位，夙夜忧惧，恐弗克任。
现代文：十二月初三，下诏给左夷离毕说： 朕在幼冲之年，得以嗣继皇位，夙夜忧惧，恐不能当此大任。
English: On the third day of the first month of December, he issued the following edict to Zuo Yi, saying, "In my childhood, I was able to succeed to the throne, but I am worried day and night, and I am afraid that I will not be able to assume such a great responsibility.

古文：欲闻直言，以匡其失。
现代文：故希望听到直言以匡正过失。
English: Therefore, I hope to hear straight talk to rectify mistakes.

古文：今已数月，未见所以副朕委任股肱耳目之意。
现代文：今登基已历数月，尚未见诸臣有助朕委任军国股肱栋梁能臣之意。
English: It has been several months since I ascended to the throne, but I have yet to see the intention of the ministers to help me appoint the military and state councillor Dongliang Nengchen.

古文：其令内外百官，比秩满，各言一事。
现代文：宜令内外百官，任满之期，要上书言一事。
English: It is appropriate to order all officials, both at home and abroad, to submit a written statement upon the expiration of their term of office.

古文：仍转谕所部，无贵贱老幼，皆得直言无讳。 
现代文：仍请百官转谕其部属，无论贵贱老幼，均可以上书言事，直言无讳。 
English: Officials are still asked to tell their subordinates, no matter how old or young, that they can write and speak openly.

古文：戊子，应圣节，上太皇太后寿，宴群臣、命妇，册妃萧氏为皇后。
现代文：初五，为应圣节，给太皇太后祝寿，宴饮群臣及命妇，册立妃萧氏为皇后。
English: On the fifth day of the first month of the year, to celebrate the birthday of the great empress dowager, a banquet was held for a group of ministers and their wives, and Princess Xiao was crowned empress.

古文：进封皇弟越王和鲁斡为鲁国王，许王阿琏为陈国王，楚王涅鲁古徙封吴王。
现代文：进封皇弟越王和鲁斡为鲁国王，许王阿琏为陈国王，楚王涅鲁古改封吴王。
English: The crown prince's younger brothers, King Yue and King Lu, were given the titles of King of Lu, King Xu and King Yan were given the titles of King of Chen, and King Chu and King Nehru were given the titles of King of Wu.

古文：辛卯，诏部署院，事有机密即奏，其投谤讪书，辄受及读者并弃市。
现代文：初八，诏令部署院，有机密大事应立即上奏，如有人投递诽谤和攻讪他人的书函，贸然接受谤书及传阅谤书者均处以弃市之刑。
English: On the 8th day of the first month of the year, the imperial edict was issued that if there was a confidential matter, it should be reported immediately. If someone delivered a letter that slandered and attacked others, those who rashly accepted the slanderous letter and those who read the slanderous letter would be punished by being expelled from the city.

古文：癸巳，皇族十公悖母，伏诛。
现代文：初十，皇族十公对母亲不孝，伏诛。
English: The first ten princes of the imperial family were disloyal to their mothers and fled.

古文：甲午，以枢密副使姚景行为参知政事，翰林学士吴湛为枢密副使，参知政事、同知枢密院事韩绍文为上京留守。
现代文：十一日，任命枢密副使姚景行为参知政事，翰林学士吴湛为枢密副使，参知政事、同知枢密院事韩绍文为上京留守。
English: On the 11th day of the month, Yao Jing was appointed as the Vice-Minister of the Privy Council, and Han Shaowen as the Vice-Minister of the Privy Council. Han Shaowen, the Vice-Minister of the Privy Council, and Han Shaowen, the Vice-Minister of the Privy Council, stayed in Beijing.

古文：丙申，宋遣欧阳修等来贺即位。戊戌，诏设学养士，颁《五经》传疏，置博士、助教各一员。癸卯，以知涿州杨绩参知政事兼同知枢密院事。庚戌，以圣宗在时生辰，赦上京囚。
现代文：十三日，诏令设置学官养士，颁行《五经》传疏，设置博士、助教各一名。二十日，任命知涿州杨绩为参知政事兼同知枢密院事。二十七日，因是圣宗诞辰日，赦免上京囚犯。
English: On the 13th, the imperial edict set up academic officials to foster scholars, promulgated the "Five Classics" to pass down, and set up a doctor and an assistant teacher each. On the 20th, Yang Jie of Zhishu was appointed as a co-chairman of the government and co-chairman of the Privy Council. On the 27th, because it was the birthday of the Holy Father, the prisoners in Beijing were pardoned.

古文：是年，御清凉殿放进士张孝杰等四十四人。
现代文：这一年，御临清凉殿进行殿试，录取进士张孝杰等四十四人及第。
English: In the same year, the Imperial Palace held an entrance examination, and 44 students, including Zhang Xiaojie, were admitted.

古文：二年春正月丙辰，诏州郡官及僚属决囚，如诸部族例。
现代文：清宁二年春正月初三，诏令州郡官员及其僚属在审理案件时，按照诸部族之例讯问定罪。
English: On the third day of the first month of the second year of the Qing Dynasty, the emperor ordered the county officials and their subordinates to follow the example of the tribes in the trial of the case.

古文：己巳，诏二女古部与世预宰相、节度使之选者免皮室军。
现代文：十六日，诏令二女真部与世代任宰相、节度使之选者免予到皮室军中服兵役。
English: On the 16th, the Emperor issued an edict exempting the two women, Manabe and Tsuneda, who had been appointed prime minister and selected by the Diet, from military service in the Shimuro army.

古文：是月，幸鱼儿泺。
现代文：同月，皇上临幸鱼儿泊。
English: In the same month, the emperor went to stay at the Imperial Palace.

古文：二月乙酉，以左夷离毕萧谟鲁知西南面招讨都监事。
现代文：二月初三，任命左夷离毕萧谟鲁为知西南面招讨都监事。
English: On the third day of February, Zuoyili Bi Xiao Moru was appointed as the supervisor of the southwestern part of Zhizhong.

古文：乙巳，以兴宗在时生辰，宴群臣，命各赋诗。
现代文：二十三日，因是兴宗诞辰日，宴饮群臣，命分别赋诗。
English: On the 23rd, because it was the birthday of Xingzong, the banqueting group of ministers ordered to separately compose poems.

古文：三月丁巳，应圣节，曲赦百里内囚。
现代文：三月初五，是应圣节，特赦京城方圆百里内囚犯。
English: On the fifth day of the third month, on the occasion of the Holy Day, prisoners within a hundred-mile radius of Beijing were granted amnesty.

古文：己卯，御制《放鹰赋》赐群臣，谕任臣之意。
现代文：二十七日，皇上亲撰放鹰诗赐给群臣，以示信任委用臣下之意。
English: On the 27th, the emperor himself composed and gave the eagle poem to his retainers to show his confidence in them.

古文：闰月己亥，始行东京所铸钱。
现代文：闰三月十七日，开始通行东京所铸钱币。
English: On leap March 17th, coins minted in Tokyo began to circulate.

古文：乙巳，南京狱空，进留守以下官。
现代文：二十三日，因南京监狱里没有犯人，晋升留守以下官员官职。
English: On the 23rd, because there were no prisoners in Nanjing Prison, the following officials were promoted.

古文：夏四月甲子，诏曰： 方夏，长养鸟兽孳育之时，不得纵火于郊。 
现代文：夏四月十三日，下诏说： 时当夏天，正属鸟兽生长、繁衍养育后代之时，不得在郊外纵火。 
English: On the thirteenth day of the fourth month of summer, the following edict was issued: When it is summer, when birds and beasts grow, reproduce and raise offspring, it is not allowed to set fire in the suburbs.

古文：五月戊戌，谒庆陵。
现代文：五月十七日，皇上拜谒庆陵。
English: On May 17th, the emperor paid a visit to the Yongqing Mausoleum.

古文：甲辰，有事于兴宗庙。
现代文：二十三日，祭祀兴宗庙。
English: On the 23rd, a ceremony was held to celebrate the founding of the new temple.

古文：六月丁巳，诏宰相举才能之士，戊午，命有司籍军补边戍。
现代文：六月初七，诏令宰相贡举有才干之士。初八，命有司检点士兵名籍以补充边防戍卒。
English: On the 7th day of the 6th month of the year, the chancellor was ordered to pay tribute to talented people, and on the 8th day of the year, it was ordered to check the names of soldiers to supplement the border guards.

古文：辛酉，阻卜酋长来朝，贡方物。
现代文：十一日，阻卜酋长前来朝见，贡献土产。
English: On the 11th day of the month, the head of the Dzhab came to see the morning, and contributed to the local production.

古文：丁卯，高丽遣使来贡。
现代文：十七日，高丽派使者前来进贡。
English: On the 17th, Goryeo sent an envoy to pay tribute.

古文：辛未，罢史官预闻朝议，俾问宰相而后书。
现代文：二十一日，停止史官参预朝廷议事，使之询问宰相政事后再行记载。
English: On the twenty-first day, the historian stopped participating in the imperial court's deliberations and asked the prime minister to make a record afterwards.

古文：乙亥，中京蝗蝻为灾。
现代文：二十五日，中京蝗蝻成灾。
English: On the 25th, a plague of locusts hit central Beijing.

古文：丙子，诏强盗得实者，听诸路决之。
现代文：二十六日，诏令捕获的强盗只要有作案的真凭实据，听任诸路自己处置。
English: On the 26th, as long as the robbers captured by the imperial edict had real evidence of the crime, they were left to their own devices.

古文：丁丑，南院枢密使赵国王查葛为上京留守，同知南京留守事吴王仁先为南院枢密使。
现代文：二十七日，任命南院枢密使赵国王查葛为上京留守，同知南京留守事吴王仁先为南院枢密使。
English: On the 27th, the Privy Envoy of the Southern Yuan, King Zhao Cha Ge, was appointed to stay in Beijing, and Wu Wang Rensi, who also stayed in Nanjing, was appointed the Privy Envoy of the Southern Yuan.

古文：乙酉，遣使分道平赋税，缮戎器，劝农桑，禁盗贼。
现代文：乙酉日，派使者分头往诸道均平赋税，修缮兵器，劝课农桑，禁止盗贼。
English: On the Day of the Rooster, he sent emissaries to all provinces to equalize taxes, repair weapons, exhort farmers, and ban thieves.

古文：八月辛未，如秋山。
现代文：八月二十二日，皇上到秋山。
English: On August 22nd, the Emperor went to Akiyama.

古文：九月庚子，幸中京，祭圣宗、兴宗于会安殿。
现代文：九月二十一日，临幸中京，祭祀圣宗、兴宗于会安殿。
English: On September 21st, Linxing Zhongjing held a religious service for the Holy Sect and the Revived Sect at Heian-den.

古文：冬十月丙子，如中会川。
现代文：冬十月二十八日，到中会川。
English: Winter, October 28th, to Nakakai River.

古文：十一月戊戌，知左夷离毕事耶律划里为夷离毕，北院大王耶律仙童知黄龙府事。
现代文：十一月二十日，任命知左夷离毕事耶律划里为夷离毕，北院大王耶律仙童为知黄龙府事。
English: On November 20th, Chizao Yi was appointed to be the governor of Zhifang Longfu, and Beiyin Daowang was appointed to be the governor of Zhifang Longfu.

古文：甲辰，文武百僚上尊号曰天佑皇帝，后曰懿德皇后。
现代文：二十六日，文武百官给皇上上尊号为天佑皇帝，皇后为懿德皇后。
English: On the 26th, hundreds of civil and military officials gave the emperor the title of "God Save the Emperor" and the empress the title of "Empress of Shunde."

古文：大赦。
现代文：大赦天下。
English: Amnesty for criminals.

古文：乙巳，以皇太叔重元为天下兵马大元帅，徙封赵国王查葛为魏国王、鲁国王和鲁斡为宋国王、陈国王阿琏为秦国王，吴王涅鲁古进封楚国王，百官进迁有差。
现代文：二十七日，以皇太叔重元为天下兵马大元帅，改封赵国王查葛为魏国王，鲁国王和鲁斡为宋国王，陈国王阿琏为秦国王，吴王涅鲁古进封楚国王，百官也各有升迁。
English: On the 27th, Emperor Taishu's uncle Chongyuan was appointed as the grand marshal of the world's soldiers and horses, King Zhao was renamed as the King of Wei, King Lu and King Luyu were renamed as the King of Song, King Chen was renamed as the King of Qin, King Wu was renamed as the King of Chu, and hundreds of officials were promoted.

古文：十二月戊申朔，以韩王萧阿剌为北院枢密使，东京留守宿国王陈留北府宰相，宋国王和鲁斡上京留守，秦国王阿琏知中丞司事。
现代文：十二月初一，以韩王萧阿剌为北院枢密使，东京留守宿国王陈留为北府宰相，宋国王和鲁斡为上京留守，秦国王阿琏为知中丞司事。
English: On the first day of December, King Han Xiao Aqian was appointed as the Privy Envoy of the Northern Yuan, King Chen Liu, who was staying in Tokyo, was appointed as the Prime Minister of the Northern Yuan, King Song and King Lu stayed in Beijing, and King Aqian of Qin was appointed as the Secretary of the Chizhongzheng.

古文：甲寅，上皇太后尊号曰慈懿仁和文惠孝广敬爱宗天皇太后。
现代文：初七，给皇太后上尊号为慈懿仁和文惠孝敬广爱宗天皇太后。
English: On the seventh day of the first month, the empress dowager was given the honorific titles of Cixin Ren and Wen Hui Xiao Ke Guang Ai Zong, the empress dowager.

古文：三年春正月庚辰，如鸭子河。
现代文：三年春正月初三，皇上到鸭子河。
English: On the third day of the first month of the third year of spring, the emperor went to the Duck River.

古文：丙戌，置倒塌岭节度使。
现代文：初九，设置倒塌岭节度使之职。
English: At the beginning of the 9th month, a festival was set up to celebrate the collapse of the ridge.

古文：乙未，五国部长来贡方物。
现代文：十八日，五国部酋长前来进贡土产。
English: On the 18th, the chiefs of the five provinces came to collect the tribute.

古文：二月己未，如大鱼泺。
现代文：二月十三日，皇上到大鱼泊。
English: On the 13th of February, the Emperor went to Otori-paku.

古文：三月辛巳，以楚国王涅鲁古为武定军节度使。
现代文：三月初五，任命楚国王涅鲁古为武定军节度使。
English: On the fifth day of March, King Nehru of Chu was appointed as the military envoy of the Wuding Army.

古文：夏四月丙辰，清暑永安山。
现代文：夏四月初十，避暑于永安山。
English: Summer, the tenth day of the fourth month, summering in Yongan Mountain.

古文：五月己亥，如庆陵，献酎于金殿、同天殿。
现代文：五月二十四日，到庆陵，向金殿、同天殿进献美酒。
English: On May 24th, they went to Qingling to offer fine wine to the Golden Hall and the Heavenly Hall.

古文：六月辛未，以魏国王查葛为惕隐，同知枢密院事萧唐古南府宰相，魏国王贴不东京留守。
现代文：六月二十六日，任命魏国王查葛为惕隐，同知枢密院事萧唐古为南府宰相，魏国王贴不为东京留守。
English: On June 26th, Wei King Chagat was appointed as Tihiyin, and Tongzhi Privy Councillor Xiao Tanggu was appointed as the Prime Minister of Nanfu, and Wei King Tipu stayed in Tokyo.

古文：秋七月甲申，南京地震，赦其境内。
现代文：秋七月初十，南京发生地震，赦免其境内犯人。
English: On the 10th day of the 7th month of the autumn, an earthquake occurred in Nanjing, and prisoners in the city were pardoned.

古文：乙酉，如秋山。
现代文：十一日，皇上到秋山。
English: On the eleventh day, the Emperor went to Akiyama.

古文：八月辛亥，帝以《君臣同志华夷同风诗集》进皇太后。九月庚子，幸中会川。
现代文：八月初七，皇上向皇太后进献《君臣同志华夷同风》诗。九月二十七日，临幸中会川。
English: On the 7th day of the 8th month, the emperor presented the poem "Comrade Emperor and Comrade Empress" to the empress dowager. On the 27th day of the 9th month, the emperor visited Nakanokai River.

古文：冬十月己酉，谒祖陵。
现代文：冬十月初六，拜谒祖陵。
English: On the 6th day of the 10th month of winter, pay homage to the ancestral mausoleum.

古文：庚申，谒让国皇帝及世宗庙。
现代文：十七日，拜谒让国皇帝及世宗庙。
English: On the seventeenth day, the Emperor and the Sejong Temple were visited.

古文：辛酉，奠酎于玉殿。
现代文：十八日，在玉殿陈设美酒祭奠。
English: On the 18th, a wine festival was held in the Jade Hall.

古文：十一月丙子，以左夷离毕萧谟鲁为契丹行宫都部署。
现代文：十一月初四，任命左夷离毕萧谟鲁为契丹行宫都部署。
English: On the fourth day of the first month of November, the appointment of Zuo Yili Bi Xiao Mulu as the crown prince of the Khitan imperial court was deployed.

古文：庚子，高丽遣使来贡。
现代文：二十八日，高丽派使者前来进贡。
English: On the 28th, Goryeo sent an envoy to pay tribute.

古文：十二月庚戌，禁职官于部内假贷贸易。
现代文：十二月初八，禁止在职官员在辖部内借钱经商。
English: On the eighth day of the first month of December, serving officials were prohibited from borrowing money to do business within the jurisdiction.

古文：戊辰，太皇太后不豫，曲赦行在五百里内囚。
现代文：二十六日，太皇太后病重，特赦行宫所在五百里内囚犯。
English: On the 26th, the empress dowager was gravely ill, and prisoners within 500 miles of the Imperial Palace were pardoned.

古文：己巳，太皇太后崩。
现代文：二十七日，太皇太后崩逝。
English: On the 27th, the great empress dowager passed away.

古文：四年春正月壬申朔，遣使报哀于宋、夏。
现代文：四年春正月初一，皇上派使者向宋、夏告哀。
English: On the first day of the first month of the fourth year of spring, the emperor sent an envoy to mourn Song and Xia.

古文：如鸭子河钓鱼。
现代文：到鸭子河钓鱼。
English: Go fishing in the Duck River.

古文：癸酉，宋遣使奉宋主绘像来。
现代文：初二，宋派使者奉宋主画像前来送上。
English: On the second day of the first month of the year, Song sent an emissary to bring Song's portrait.

古文：丁亥，知易州事耶律颇得秩满，部民乞留，许之。
现代文：十六日，知易州事耶律颇得任期已满，部民乞请留下他，得到允许。
English: On the 16th, his term of office expired, and his subordinates begged him to stay, which was granted.

古文：二月丙午，诏夷离毕：诸路鞫死罪，狱虽具，仍令别州县覆按，无冤，然后决之；称冤者，即具奏。
现代文：二月初五，下诏给夷离毕：诸路审理判人死罪，即使罪案已经确定，仍需要让别的州县再行审察，如无冤情，便可定罪结案；如有诉说冤屈者，应立即备文上奏。
English: On the fifth day of the second month of the year, the following edict was issued: Even if the criminal case has been determined, it is still necessary to let other states and counties re-examine the case. If there is no grievance, the case can be convicted and closed; if there is a complaint of grievance, it should be recorded immediately.

古文：庚戌，如鱼儿泺。
现代文：初九，皇上到鱼儿泊。
English: On the ninth day of the first month, the emperor went to stay with the fishes.

古文：三月戊寅，募天德、镇武、东胜等处勇捷者，籍为军。
现代文：三月初八，召募天德、镇武、东胜等处勇猛矫捷者，编为一军。
English: On the eighth day of the third month, Tiande, Zhenwu, Dongsheng and other brave warriors were recruited and organized into an army.

古文：甲午，肆赦。
现代文：二十四日，赦免囚犯。
English: On the 24th, prisoners were pardoned.

古文：夏四月甲辰，谒庆陵。
现代文：夏四月初四，拜谒庆陵。
English: On the 4th day of the 4th month of the 4th month of the 4th month of the 4th month of the 4th month of the 4th month of the 4th month of the 4th month of the 4th month of the 4th month of the 4th month of the 4th month of the 4th month.

古文：丁卯，宋遣使吊祭。
现代文：二十七日，宋派遣使者吊唁祭祀。
English: On the 27th, Song dispatched an envoy to offer condolences.

古文：五月庚午朔，上大行太皇太后尊谥曰钦哀皇后。
现代文：五月初一，给大行太皇太后上尊谥为钦哀皇后。
English: On the first day of May, Da Xing was given the title of "Queen of Tribute" by the Grand Empress Dowager.

古文：癸酉，葬庆陵。
现代文：初四，下葬于庆陵。
English: On the fourth day of his junior year, he was buried in Qingling.

古文：夏国、高丽遣使来会。
现代文：夏国、高丽派遣使者前来会葬。
English: Xia Guo and Goryeo sent envoys to attend the funeral.

古文：乙酉，如永安山清暑。
现代文：十六日，皇上到永安山消夏。
English: On the 16th, the emperor went to Mount Yongan to spend the summer.

古文：六月乙丑，以北院枢密使郑王萧革为南院枢密使，徙封楚王，南院枢密使吴王仁先为北院枢密使。
现代文：六月二十六日，任命北院枢密使萧革为南院枢密使，改封为楚王，任命南院枢密使吴王耶律仁先为北院枢密使。
English: On June 26, Xiao Ge, the Northern Privy Councilor, was appointed as the Southern Privy Councilor, and his title was changed to King of Chu, and the Southern Privy Councilor, King Wu, was appointed as the Northern Privy Councilor.

古文：秋七月辛巳，制诸掌内藏库官盗两贯以上者，许奴婢告。
现代文：秋七月十三日，下制令：所有掌管内府藏品的官员有监守自盗两贯以上者，准许奴婢出首告状。
English: On the 13th day of the 7th month of the autumn, an order was issued: All officials in charge of the collections of the prefectural government who have more than two consecutive terms of imprisonment for theft are allowed to issue the first complaint.

古文：壬午，猎于黑岭。
现代文：十四日，出猎于黑岭。
English: On the 14th, they went hunting in Heiling.

古文：冬十月戊戌朔，以同知东京留守事侯古为南院大王，保安军节度使奚底为奚六部大王。
现代文：冬十月初一，任命同知东京留守事侯古为南院大王，保安军节度使奚底为奚六部大王。
English: On the first day of October in winter, he appointed his friend Hou Gu, who was stationed in Tokyo, as the Great King of the Southern Court, and the festival of the Security Army made Xie Di the Great King of the Six Provinces.

古文：十一月癸酉，行再生及柴册礼，宴群臣于八方陂。
现代文：十一月初六，皇上举行再生及柴册礼，在八方陂宴饮群臣。
English: On the 6th day of the 11th month of the year, the Emperor held the ceremony of rebirth and chajaku, and gave a banquet for his retainers in Happo.

古文：庚辰，御清风殿受大册礼。
现代文：十三日，御临清风殿接受大册礼。
English: On the 13th, the Imperial Throne Hall of the Qing Dynasty received a grand ceremony.

古文：大赦。以吴王仁先为南京兵马副元帅，徙封隋王。
现代文：大赦天下，任命吴王耶律仁先为南京兵马副元帅，改封隋王。
English: The king of Wu, Ye Luren, was amnestied and appointed vice-marshal of the Nanjing Terracotta Warriors and Horses, and his title was changed to King of Sui.

古文：壬午，谒太祖及诸帝宫。
现代文：十五日，拜谒太祖及诸帝庙宇。
English: On the fifteenth day, they visited the temple of the great ancestor and the emperors.

古文：丙戌，祠木叶山。
现代文：十九日，祭祀木叶山。
English: On the 19th, the worship of Mt. Koba ended.

古文：禁造玉器。
现代文：禁止自造玉器。
English: It is forbidden to make your own jade objects.

古文：十二月辛丑，弛驼尼、水獭裘之禁。
现代文：十二月初五，解除对于驼尼、水獭裘的禁令。
English: On the fifth day of the first month of December, the ban on camel riding and water skiing will be lifted.

古文：乙巳，许士庶畜鹰。
现代文：初九，准许普通百姓养鹰。
English: On the first day of the ninth month, ordinary people are allowed to raise eagles.

古文：辛亥，南院枢密使楚王萧革复为北院枢密使。
现代文：十五日，南院枢密使楚王萧革再次担任北院枢密使。
English: On the 15th, the Southern Privy Council envoy Chu Wang Xiao Ge once again served as the Northern Privy Council envoy.

古文：闰月己巳，赐皇太叔重元金券。
现代文：闰十二月初三，赐给皇太叔重元金券。
English: On the third day of the twelfth lunar month, a heavy gold certificate was given to the uncle of the emperor.

古文：是岁，皇子浚生。
现代文：这一年，皇子耶律浚出生。
English: In the same year, Prince Yerujun was born.

古文：五年春，如春州。
现代文：五年春，皇上到春州。
English: In the spring of the fifth year, the emperor went to Chunzhou.

古文：夏六月甲子朔，驻跸纳葛泺。
现代文：夏六月初一，歇驾于纳葛泊。
English: On the first day of June, summer comes to Nagpur.

古文：己丑，以南院枢密使萧阿速为北府宰相，枢密副使耶律乙辛南院枢密使，惕隐查葛辽兴军节度使，鲁王谢家奴武定军节度使，东京留守吴王贴不西京留守。
现代文：二十六日，任命南院枢密使萧阿速为北府宰相，枢密副使耶律乙辛为南院枢密使，惕隐查葛为辽兴军节度使，鲁王谢家奴为武定军节度使，东京留守吴王贴不为西京留守。
English: On the 26th, Xiao Asao, the envoy of the privy council of the Southern Yuan Dynasty, was appointed as the prime minister of Beifu, the deputy envoy of the privy council of the Southern Yuan Dynasty, Yelu Yixin, was appointed as the envoy of the privy council of the Southern Yuan Dynasty, Ti Yingcha Ge was appointed as the envoy of the Liao Xing Army, Lu Wang Xie Jia Nu was appointed as the envoy of the Wuding Army, and Wu Wang Tipi, who stayed in Tokyo, was appointed as the envoy of the West Beijing.

古文：秋七月丁酉，以乌古敌烈详稳萧谟鲁为左夷离毕。
现代文：秋七月初五，任命乌古敌烈详稳萧谟鲁为左夷离毕。
English: On the 5th day of the 7th month of the autumn, the appointment of the Ughu's enemy, Jiao Jian Shao Moru, as the Zuoying was completed.

古文：冬十月壬子朔，幸南京，祭兴宗于嘉宁殿。
现代文：冬十月初一，临幸南京，祭祀兴宗于嘉宁殿。
English: In winter, on the first day of October, in Nanjing, there is a religious service for the enthronement of the emperor at the Jianing Palace.

古文：十一月，禁猎。
现代文：十一月，禁止打猎。
English: In November, hunting is prohibited.

古文：十二月壬戌，以北院林牙奚马六为右夷离毕，参知政事吴湛以弟洵冒入仕籍，削爵为民。
现代文：十二月初一，任命北院林牙奚马六为右夷离毕，参知政事吴湛因为其弟吴洵冒名顶替进入现任官花名册，被削职为民。
English: On the first day of December, after the appointment of the Northern Court Lin Jiaxuan Ma Lu as the right-wing eunuch, Wu Zhan, a political advisor to the governor, was removed from his post because his brother Wu Yao had entered the roster of current officials as an impostor.

古文：是年，上御百福殿，放进士梁援等百一十五人。
现代文：这一年，皇上御临百福殿，录取进士梁援等一百一十五人。
English: In the same year, the Emperor visited the Baifu Palace and admitted one hundred and fifteen new recruits, including Liang Yuan.

古文：六年春，如鸳鸯泺。
现代文：六年春，到鸳鸯泊。
English: In the spring of the sixth year, to Oshidomari.

古文：夏五月戊子朔，监修国史耶律白请编次御制诗赋，仍命白为序。
现代文：夏五月初一，监修国史耶律白请求编集御制诗赋，便命耶律白做序。
English: On the first day of May in the summer, the supervisor of the country, Shi Ye Rubei, requested to compile the imperial poems, and then ordered Ye Rubei to do the preface.

古文：己酉，驻跸纳葛泺。
现代文：二十二日，皇上歇驾于纳葛泊。
English: On the 22nd, the emperor retired to Nagpur.

古文：六月戊午朔，以东北路女直详稳高家奴为惕隐。
现代文：六月初一，任命东北路女真详稳高家奴为惕隐。
English: On the first day of June, the Northeast Women's True Detailed Stable High School Slave was appointed as a guard.

古文：壬戌，遣使录囚。
现代文：初五，派使者察看犯人口供。
English: On the fifth day of the first month, an envoy was sent to inspect the scene of the crime.

古文：丙寅，中京置国子监，命以时祭先圣先师，癸未，以隋王仁先为北院大王，赐御制诰。
现代文：初九，中京设置国子监，命令按时祭祀先圣先师。二十六日，任命隋王耶律仁先为北院大王，赐给御制诰文。
English: On the 9th day of the first lunar month, the Central Capital set up the Imperial Procuratorate and ordered that the first priest be sacrificed on time. On the 26th day, the King of the Sui Dynasty, Jerujin, was appointed as the first king of the Northern Court and was given the imperial edict.

古文：冬十月甲子，驻跸藕丝淀。
现代文：冬十月初九，歇驾于藕丝淀。
English: On the 9th day of the 10th month of winter, the sun sets over Gansu.

古文：七年春三月庚戌，如春州。
现代文：七年春三月二十七日，皇上到春州。
English: In the spring of the seventh year, on the 27th day of March, the emperor went to Chunzhou.

古文：以耶律乙辛知北院枢密使事。
现代文：任命耶律乙辛为知北院枢密使事。
English: Yerut Yetsin was appointed to the Privy Council of Chihoku-in.

古文：夏四月辛未，禁吏民畜海东青鹘。
现代文：夏四月十八日，禁止平民畜养海东青鹘。
English: On the 18th day of the 4th month of the summer, it was forbidden for civilians to raise animals.

古文：五月丙戌，清暑永安山。
现代文：五月初四，在永安山消夏。
English: On the fourth day of the fifth month, the summer is over in Yongan Mountain.

古文：丙午，谒庆陵。
现代文：二十四日，拜谒庆陵。
English: On the 24th, they paid their respects at the Qing Tomb.

古文：辛亥，杀东京留守陈王萧阿剌。
现代文：二十九日，诛杀东京留守陈王萧阿剌。
English: On the 29th, Chen Wang Xiao Aya, who stayed in Tokyo, was killed.

古文：六月壬子朔，日有食之。
现代文：六月初一，日食。
English: On the first day of June, a solar eclipse.

古文：甲子，以萧谟鲁为顺义军节度使。
现代文：十三日，任命萧谟鲁为顺义军节度使。
English: On the 13th, Xiao Moru was appointed as the Shunyi Army's ceremonial envoy.

古文：丁卯，幸弘义、永兴、崇德三宫致祭。
现代文：十六日，临幸弘义、永兴、崇德三宫献祭品祭祀。
English: On the 16th, the sacrificial offerings of the Three Palaces of Linxing, Hongyi, Yongxing and Chongde were held.

古文：射柳，赐宴，赏赉有差。
现代文：射柳，赐臣下宴饮，赏赐各有等差。
English: Shooting willow, giving a banquet to a vassal, and giving a reward are all unequal.

古文：戊辰，行再生礼，复命群臣分朋射柳。
现代文：十七日，举行再生礼，又命群臣分组射柳。
English: On the seventeenth day, a rebirth ceremony was held, and the ministers were ordered to shoot willows in groups.

古文：丁丑，以楚国王涅鲁古知南院枢密使事。
现代文：二十六日，任命楚国王涅鲁古为知南院枢密使事。
English: On the 26th, King Nehru of Chu was appointed as the privy envoy of the Southern Yuan.

古文：秋九月丁丑，驻跸藕丝淀。
现代文：秋九月二十八日，歇驾于藕丝淀。
English: On the 28th day of the 9th month of autumn, he stopped in Goseidian.

古文：冬十二月壬午，以知黄龙府事耶律阿里只为南院大王。
现代文：冬十二月初三，任命黄龙府知州耶律阿里只为南院大王。
English: On the 3rd day of the 12th month of winter, Huanglong Prefecture Chizhou Yelu Ali was appointed only as the Southern Yuan Emperor.

