古文：起重光大渊献，尽玄黓困敦八月，凡一年有奇。
现代文：上章阉茂，一年。
English: The last chapter is called Shigeru, one year old.

古文：太祖圣神恭肃文孝皇帝上广顺元年春，正月，丁卯，汉太后下诰，授监国符宝，即皇帝位。
现代文：后周太祖广顺元年春季正月，丁卯，后汉太后颁下诰令，授予监国郭威传国玺印，正式即皇帝位。
English: In the spring of the first month of the first year of the Zhou Dynasty, Emperor Guangshun's great-grandfather, Emperor Dingwu, issued a royal edict to the empress dowager of the Han Dynasty, awarding the imperial seal to Guo Wei Chuan, officially the emperor.

古文：监国自皋门入宫，即位于崇元殿，制曰： 朕周室之裔，虢叔之后，国号宜曰周。 
现代文：郭威从皋门进入皇宫，在崇元殿即位，下制书说： 朕是周代宗室的子孙，虢叔的后裔，国号应该叫周。 
English: Guo Wei entered the imperial palace from the main gate, ascended the throne in the Chongyuan Hall, and wrote a book saying: I am the descendant of the Zhou dynasty family, the descendant of Uncle Zhou, and the country should be called Zhou.

古文：改元，大赦。
现代文：改年号，实行大赦。
English: The era was changed. There was a general amnesty.

古文：杨邠、史弘肇、王章等皆赠官，官为敛葬，仍访其子孙叙用之。
现代文：杨、史弘肇、王章等人都追赠官爵，官府为他们收敛安葬，并且寻访他们的子孙依次任用。
English: Yang, Shi Hongzhao, Wang Zhang and others were posthumously awarded official ranks, and the government restrained and buried them, and their descendants were successively appointed.

古文：凡仓场、库务掌纳官吏，无得收斗馀、称耗。
现代文：所有粮食仓库、场院掌管交纳的官吏，不得收取额外的 斗余 、 称耗 。
English: All officials in charge of the payment of grain in grain warehouses and yards shall not collect additional surplus and wastage.

古文：旧所羡馀物，悉罢之。
现代文：从前以赋税盈余名义进贡物品，全部取消。
English: All the tributary items that were previously collected in the name of tax surplus have been cancelled.

古文：犯窃盗及奸者，并依晋天福元年以前刑名，罪人非反逆，无得诛及亲族，籍没家赀。
现代文：犯有盗窃、抢劫和强奸罪的，一律按照后晋天福元年以前的刑法条文处理；罪人不犯谋反罪的，不得株连亲戚家族和登记没收家产。
English: Those who have committed the crimes of theft, robbery and rape shall be dealt with in accordance with the provisions of the criminal law before the first year of Emperor Tianfu; if the criminal does not commit the crime of conspiracy, he shall not be allowed to join his relatives and family, and his family property shall be confiscated.

古文：唐庄宗、明宗、晋高祖各置守陵十房，汉高祖陵职员、宫人，时月荐享及守陵户并如故。
现代文：后唐庄宗、后唐明宗、后晋高祖安葬处分别设置守陵的人家十户，后汉高祖陵园的官吏、宫人，一年四季供奉祭祀以及守陵户数一律照旧。
English: The tombs of Emperor Gaozong of the Later Tang Dynasty, Emperor Ming of the Later Tang Dynasty and Emperor Gaozong of the Later Jin Dynasty will be guarded by ten families each, and the officials and courtiers of the Mausoleum of the Emperor Gaozong of the Later Han Dynasty will offer sacrifices all year round, and the number of families guarding the tombs will remain the same.

古文：初，唐衰，多盗，不用律文，更定峻法，窃盗赃三匹者死。
现代文：当初，唐朝衰败，抢劫的很多，便不用原来的刑律条文，另外制订严刑酷法，规定盗窃抢劫脏物够三匹绢帛的处死。
English: At the beginning, the Tang Dynasty was in decline, and there were many robberies, so the original criminal law provisions were not used. In addition, a severe punishment law was formulated, stipulating that theft and robbery of dirty things were enough to be executed.

古文：晋天福中，加至五匹。
现代文：后晋天福年间将处死标准加到五匹绢帛。
English: Later, during the reign of Emperor Tianfu, the execution standard was increased to five horses.

古文：奸有夫妇人，无问强、和，男女并死。
现代文：奸淫有夫之妇，不论强奸、通奸，男女一律处死。
English: Any man or woman who commits adultery with a married woman, regardless of whether it is rape or adultery, shall be put to death.

古文：汉法，窃盗一钱以上皆死。又罪非反逆，往往族诛、籍没，故帝即位，首革其弊。
现代文：后汉刑法规定，盗窃抢劫钱一文以上的都处死，此外罪行还不属于谋反的，往往满族抄斩、没收家产。所以后周太祖郭威一即位，首先革除这些弊端。
English: According to the post-Han criminal law, anyone who stole or robbed more than a penny was to be put to death. In addition, if the crime did not involve plotting a rebellion, the Manchus were often beheaded and their property confiscated. Therefore, when Guo Wei, the great-great-grandfather of Zhou Dynasty, ascended the throne, he first eliminated these drawbacks.

古文：初，杨邠以功臣、国戚为方镇者多不闲吏事，乃以三司军将补都押牙、孔目官、内知客，其人自恃敕补，多专横，节度使不能制，至是悉罢之。
现代文：当初，杨因为功臣元勋、皇亲国戚担任镇守一方长官大多不熟悉行政事务，于是用朝廷三司军将补任都押牙、孔目官、内知客，那些人自仗是皇命敕补，大多专横跋扈，节度使不能控制；到这时全部罢免。
English: At first, Yang, because most of the officials who served as town guards were not familiar with administrative affairs due to the fact that they were meritorious soldiers, heroes, and relatives of the emperor, so he used the three imperial divisions to fill the posts of the imperial guards, the imperial guards, the imperial guards, and the imperial guards. Those people were self-appointed by the emperor, most of them were domineering, and the degree of control could not be controlled; at this time, they were all dismissed.

古文：帝命史弘肇亲吏上党李崇矩访弘肇亲族，崇矩言： 弘肇弟弘福今存。 
现代文：后周太祖命令史弘肇亲吏上党人李崇矩寻访史弘肇的亲族，李崇矩说： 史弘肇的弟弟史弘福如今还在。 
English: Later, Zhou Taizu ordered Shi Hongzhao's family official and top Party member Li Chong Rui to visit Shi Hongzhao's relatives. Li Chong Rui said: Shi Hongzhao's younger brother Shi Hongfu is still alive.

古文：初，弘肇使崇矩掌其家赀之籍，由是尽得其产，皆以授弘福。
现代文：当初，史弘肇让李崇矩掌管他家财产的帐簿，因此得到全部史家财产，李崇矩都交付给了史弘福。
English: At first, Shi Hongzhao let Li Chongzhen manage the account book of his family's property, so he got all the historian's property, and Li Chongzhen was handed over to Shi Hongfu.

古文：帝贤之，使隶皇子荣帐下。
现代文：太祖认为李崇矩贤能，让他在皇子郭荣手下供职。
English: The great-grandfather thought that Li Chong Rong was capable and let him serve under the prince Guo Rong.

古文：戊辰，以前复州防御使王彦超权武宁节度使。
现代文：戊辰，任命前复州防御使王彦超代理武宁节度使。
English: Boshen, appointed the former Fuzhou defense envoy Wang Yanchao as the deputy of the Wu Ning Festival envoy.

古文：汉李太后迁居西宫，己巳，上尊号曰昭圣皇太后。
现代文：后汉李太后迁居西宫，己巳，后周太祖进上尊号称昭圣皇太后。
English: Later in the Han Dynasty, Empress Dowager Li moved to the West Palace. Later, Empress Dowager Zhou was known as Shosheng Empress Dowager.

古文：开封尹兼中书令刘勋卒。
现代文：开封尹兼中书令刘勋去世。
English: Liu Xun passed away at the behest of Yin Jianzhong.

古文：癸酉，加王峻同平章事。
现代文：癸酉，王峻加官同平章事。
English: , Wang Jun was promoted to the same rank.

古文：以卫尉卿刘皞主汉隐帝之丧。
现代文：命令卫尉卿刘主办后汉隐帝的丧事。
English: He ordered Liu, the captain of the imperial guard, to preside over Emperor Han's funeral.

古文：初，河东节度使兼中书令刘崇闻隐帝遇害，欲举兵南向，闻迎立湘阴公，乃止，曰： 吾儿为帝，吾又何求！ 
现代文：当初，河东节度使兼中书令刘崇听说后汉隐帝遇害，准备起兵向南进发，听说迎立湘阴公刘继位，于是作罢，说： 我儿子当皇帝，我又有什么可求！ 
English: At first, Liu Chong, the envoy of the Hedong Festival and the commander of the Chinese army, heard about the murder of the Han Emperor and prepared to march south with his army. He also heard about the succession of Hunan Emperor Liu, so he stopped and said: My son is the emperor, what else can I ask for!

古文：太原少尹李骧阴说崇曰： 观郭公之心，终欲自取，公不如疾引兵逾太行，据孟津，俟徐州相公即位，然后还镇，则郭公不敢动矣。
现代文：太原少尹李骧私下劝说刘崇道： 观察郭威的心思，终究是要自取帝位，您不如火速领兵翻过太行山，占据孟津，等待徐州相公刘即帝位，然后返回镇所，那郭威就不敢动手了。
English: Taiyuan Shao Yin Lijun privately persuaded Liu Chongdao: "Observe Guo Wei's thoughts. After all, he wants to take the throne for himself. You'd better lead the troops over Taihang Mountain at high speed, occupy Mengjin, wait for Xuzhou Emperor Liu to take the throne, and then return to the town hall. Then Guo Wei would not dare to do it.

古文：不然，且为所卖。 
现代文：不然，将要被人出卖。 
English: Otherwise, they will be betrayed.

古文：崇怒曰： 腐儒，欲离间吾父子！ 
现代文：刘崇发怒道： 你这个腐儒，想要离间我父子关系！ 
English: Liu Chong angrily said, "You rotten person, you want to separate my father-son relationship!

古文：命左右曳出斩之。
现代文：命令手下人将李骧拉出去斩首。
English: He ordered his subordinates to drag Li Yao outside and behead him.

古文：骧呼曰： 吾负经济之才而为愚人谋事，死固甘心！
现代文：李骧大喊道： 我怀经世济民的才能却在为愚人谋划事情，死了本当甘心！
English: Li Yao shouted: I have the ability to help the world, but I am planning things for fools. I am truly willing to die!

古文：家有老妻，愿与之同死。 
现代文：但家中还有年老的妻子，希望和她同死。 
English: But he also has an elderly wife at home, and hopes to die with her.

古文：崇并其妻杀之，且奏于朝廷，示无二心。
现代文：刘崇便连他的妻子一齐杀了，并且向朝廷奏报，表示没有二心。
English: Liu Chong then killed his wife as well, and reported this to the imperial court, saying that he had no second thoughts.

古文：及赟废，崇乃遣使请赟归晋阳。
现代文：到了刘被废黜，刘崇才派遣使者请求让刘返归晋阳。
English: It was not until Liu was deposed that Liu Chong sent an envoy to request Liu to return to Jinyang.

古文：诏报以 湘阴公比在宋州，今方取归京师，必令得所，公勿以为忧。
现代文：诏书回答说： 湘阴公刘近在宋州，如今正取道返归京城，必定让他得其所宜，您不要为此忧虑。
English: The imperial edict replied: Hunan Yin Gong Liu recently left Songzhou and is now taking the road to return to Beijing. He will certainly get what he deserves. Don't worry about it.

古文：公能同力相辅，当加王爵，永镇河东。 
现代文：您如能一同出力辅佐朝廷，理当加封王爵，永远镇守河东。 
English: If you can work together to assist the imperial court, you should be awarded the title of prince and forever guard the east of the river.

古文：巩廷美、杨温闻湘阴公赟失位，奉赟妃董氏据徐州拒守，以俟河东援兵，帝使赟以书谕之。
现代文：巩廷美、杨温听说湘阴公刘失去帝位，便侍奉刘妃子董氏占据徐州坚守，以此等待河东援军，后周太祖让刘用书信陈说利害。
English: Gong Tingmei and Yang Wen heard that Hunan Yin Gong Liu lost the imperial throne, so they served Liu Fei Zi Dong to occupy Xuzhou and wait for reinforcements from the East. Later, Zhou Taizu asked Liu to express his interest in a letter.

古文：廷美、温欲降而惧死，帝复遗赟书曰： 爰念斯人尽心于主，足以赏其忠义，何由责以悔尤，俟新节度使入城，当各除刺史，公可更以委曲示之。 
现代文：巩廷美、杨温想投降而怕死，后周太祖又给刘书信说： 念及这两人对主人竭尽忠心，就值得奖赏他们的忠义，哪有什么理由责备他们有过错，等待新节度使入城，应当分别委任刺史，您可再用亲笔信宣示此意。 
English: Gong Tingmei and Yang Wen wanted to surrender and were afraid of death. Later, Zhou Taizu also wrote to Liu, saying, "Considering that these two people have been loyal to their master, it is worth rewarding their loyalty. There is no reason to blame them for their mistakes. While waiting for the new festival to enter the city, they should be separately appointed to write history. You can use your own letter to declare this.

古文：契丹之攻内丘也，死伤颇多，又值月食，军中多妖异，契丹主惧，不敢深入，引兵还，遣使请和于汉。
现代文：契丹军队进攻内丘，死伤很多，又碰到月食，军中出现许多奇异怪事，契丹主恐惧，不敢继续深入，便领兵返回，派遣使者向后汉请求和好。
English: The Khitan army attacked the Inner Hill, there were many deaths and injuries, they also encountered a lunar eclipse, and many strange and bizarre things occurred in the army. The Khitan lord was afraid and did not dare to go further, so he led the soldiers back and sent an envoy to Houhan to ask for reconciliation.

古文：会汉亡，安国节度使刘词送其使者诣大梁，帝遣左千牛卫将军硃宪报聘，且叙革命之由，以金器、玉带赠之。
现代文：适逢后汉灭亡，安国节度使刘词送契丹使者到大梁，后周太祖派遣左千牛卫将军朱宪回报使者来访，并且陈述改朝换代的缘由，把金器、玉带赠送给契丹主。
English: At the time of the fall of the Western Han Dynasty, the An Guo Festival caused Liu Zhi to send an envoy of the Khitan Empire to Daliang. Later, Zhou Taizu sent General Zhu Xian of the Left Qianyu Guards to return the envoy's visit, and stated the reason for the change of dynasty, and presented the goldware and jade belt to the Khitan ruler.

古文：帝以鄴都镇抚河北，控制契丹，欲以腹心处之。
现代文：后周太祖利用邺都镇抚黄河以北地区，控制契丹，打算安排心腹亲信居守。
English: Later, Zhou Taizu used the area north of the Yellow River to control the Khitan, and planned to arrange for his closest relatives to stay there.

古文：乙亥，以宁江节度使、侍卫亲军都指挥使王殷为鄴都留守、天雄节度使、同平章事，领军如故，仍以侍卫司从赴镇。
现代文：乙亥，任命宁江节度使、侍卫亲军都指挥使王殷为邺都留守、天雄节度使、同平章事，兼领侍卫军照旧，并仍带侍卫司随从同赴镇所。
English: Yihai appointed Wang Yin as Ningjiang's festival envoy and commander of the bodyguards, leaving Wang Yin to stay in the capital, Tianxiong as the festival envoy and Tongping as the commander of the bodyguards, and still accompanied by the bodyguards to the town hall.

古文：丙子，帝帅百官诣西宫，为汉隐帝举哀成服，皆如天子礼。
现代文：丙子，后周太祖率领文武百官到西宫，为后汉隐帝发丧，穿上丧服，全都按照天子的葬礼。
English: Cun Zi, the late Zhou Taizu, led hundreds of officials to the Western Palace to mourn the late Han Emperor and put on mourning clothes, all in accordance with the funeral of the heavenly son.

古文：慕容彦超遣使入贡，帝虑其疑惧，赐诏慰安之，曰： 今兄事已至此，言不欲繁，望弟扶持，同安亿兆。 
现代文：慕容彦超派遣使者入朝进贡，后周太祖顾虑他有疑惑恐惧，特赐诏书安慰他，说： 如今我的事情已到这个地步，不想多说，只望你能鼎力扶助，共同安定黎民。 
English: Murong Yanchao sent an envoy to the North to pay tribute. Later, Zhou Taizu, worried that he had doubts and fears, gave him a special edict to comfort him, saying: "Now that my affairs have reached this stage, I do not want to say more, I only hope that you can help me as much as possible and work together to stabilize the Li people."

古文：戊寅，杀湘阳公于宋州。
现代文：戊寅，在宋州杀死湘阴公刘。
English: Wu Yin, killed Xiang Yin Gong Liu in Songzhou.

古文：是日，刘崇即皇帝位于晋阳，仍用乾祐年号，所有者并、汾、忻、代、岚、宪、隆、蔚、沁、辽、麟、石十二州之地。
现代文：当天，刘崇在晋阳即皇帝位，仍旧沿用乾年号，所统辖的有并州、汾州、忻州、代州、岚州、宪州、隆州、蔚州、沁州、辽州、麟州、石州，共十二州之地。
English: On the same day, Liu Chong was enthroned as emperor in Jinyang, still using the name Qian Nian. He was in charge of the provinces of Anhui, Ganzhou, Ganzhou, Dayu, Ganzhou, Ganzhou, Ganzhou, Longzhou, Wuzhou, Ganzhou, Liaozhou, Linzhou and Shizhou, a total of 12 provinces.

古文：以节度判官郑珙为中书侍郎，观察判官荥阳赵华为户部侍郎，并同平章事。
现代文：任命节度判官郑珙为中书侍郎，观察判官荥阳人赵华为户部侍郎，均为同平章事。
English: The appointment of the judge of the festival, Zheng Qi, as the attendant of the Chinese calligraphy, and the observation of the judge, Zhao Huai, the attendant of the household, are both equal matters.

古文：以次子承钧为侍卫亲军都指挥使、太原尹，以节度副使李存瑰为代州防御使，裨将武安张元徽为马步军都指挥使，陈光裕为宣徽使。
现代文：任命次子刘承钧为侍卫亲军都指挥使、太原尹，任命节度副使李存为代州防御使，副将武安人张元徽为马步军都指挥使，陈光裕为宣徽使。
English: He appointed his second son Liu Chengyao as the commander of the palace guards and Taiyuan Yin as the commander of the palace guards, appointed the deputy commander of the festival Li Cun as the commander of the defense of Daizhou, the vice-commander of Wu'an Zhang Yuanhui as the commander of the horse guards, and Chen Guangyu as the commander of the imperial emblems.

古文：北汉主谓李存瑰、张元徽曰： 朕以高祖之业，一朝坠地，今日位号，不得已而称之。
现代文：北汉主刘崇对李存、张元徽说： 朕只因为高祖的大业一朝断送，所以今日的帝位年号，是不得已才称的。
English: Liu Chong, the ruler of Northern Han, said to Li Cun and Zhang Yuanhui: "I only used today's imperial era name because Gao Zu's great career was cut short.

古文：顾我是何天子，汝曹是何节度使邪！ 
现代文：但我算是什么天子，你们又算是什么节度使啊！ 
English: But what a son of heaven I am, and what moderation you show!

古文：由是不建宗庙，祭祀如家人，宰相俸钱月止百缗，节度使止三十缗，自馀薄有资给而已，故其国中少廉吏。
现代文：因此不建立宗庙，祭祀祖宗如同普通百姓，宰相每月俸禄只有一百缗钱，节度使只有三十缗钱，其余官员也都只有微薄的供养而已，所以北汉国中很少有廉洁的官吏。
English: Therefore, they did not build ancestral temples, but worshipped their ancestors like ordinary people. The prime minister's monthly salary was only one hundred pennies, the ceremonial leader's was only thirty pennies, and the rest of the officials had only meager support. Therefore, there were very few corrupt officials in Northern Han.

古文：客省使河南李光美尝为直省官，颇谙故事，北汉朝廷制度，皆出于光美。
现代文：客省使河南人李光美曾经做过直省官，很熟悉宫廷旧事，北汉朝廷的各项制度，都出自李光美之手。
English: Li Guangmei, a guest provincial envoy from Henan Province, once served as a direct provincial official and was very familiar with the old palace affairs. All the systems of the Northern Han Dynasty were created by Li Guangmei.

古文：北汉主闻湘阴公死，哭曰： 吾不用忠臣之言，以至于此！ 
现代文：北汉君主听说湘阴公刘死讯，哭着说： 我不听忠臣的话，才至于此！ 
English: When the Emperor of Northern Han heard of the death of Prince Liu of Hunan, he wept and said, "I did not listen to my loyal vassal, that's why!"

古文：为李骧立祠，岁时祭之。
现代文：为李骧建立祠堂，逢年过节祭祀他。
English: An ancestral hall was built for Li Xi, and sacrifices were made to him every year.

古文：己卯，以太师冯道为中书令，加窦贞固侍中，苏禹珪司空。
现代文：己卯，后周太祖任命太师冯道为中书令，窦贞固加官侍中，苏禹加官司空。
English: Later, Zhou Taizu appointed Grand Master Feng Dao as the second secretary, Dou Zhenggu as the second secretary, and Su Yu as the third secretary.

古文：王彦超奏遣使赍敕诣徐州，巩廷美等犹豫不肯启关，诏进兵攻之。
现代文：王彦超奏报派遣使者携带敕书到徐州，巩廷美等犹豫未决不肯打开城门，后周太祖下诏令进兵攻城。
English: Wang Yanchao sent an envoy to Xuzhou with the imperial edict, Gong Tingmei and others hesitantly refused to open the city gate, and later Zhou Taizu issued an imperial edict to attack the city.

古文：帝谓王峻曰： 朕起于寒微，备尝艰苦，遭时丧乱，一旦为帝王，岂敢厚自奉养以病下民乎！ 
现代文：后周太祖对王峻说： 朕出身在贫赛之家，饱尝艰辛困苦，遭遇时世沉沦动乱，如今一朝成为帝王，岂敢优厚自己的供养而让下面百姓吃苦呢！ 
English: Later, Zhou Taizu said to Wang Jun, "I was born in a poor family, experienced hardships and sufferings, suffered the ups and downs of the times, and now I have become an emperor, how dare I make my own generous contributions and let the people below suffer!

古文：命峻疏四方贡献珍美食物，庚辰，下诏悉罢之。
现代文：命令王峻清理四方贡献的珍美食物，庚辰，下诏令全部停止进贡。
English: He ordered Wang Jun to clean up the precious food contributed by the four parties, Geng Chen, and issued a decree to stop all tribute.

古文：其诏略曰： 所奉止于朕躬，所损被于庶。 
现代文：诏书大致说： 所供养的只给朕一人，而受损害的却普及黎民百姓。 
English: The edict said, in essence, "I am the only one who has been provided for, while the people of Lebanon are the only ones who have been harmed."

古文：又曰： 积于有司之中，甚为无用之物。 
现代文：又说： 贡品贮存在官府之中，大多成为无用之物。 
English: He also said: Tributes are stored in government offices, and most of them become useless.

古文：又诏曰： 朕生长军旅，不亲学问，未知治天下之道，文武官有益国利民之术，各具封事以闻，咸宜直书，勿事辞藻。 
现代文：又下诏书说： 朕生长在军队，没有亲自从师学习，不懂治理天下的道理，文武官员有利国利民的办法，各自上书奏报让我知道，都应直陈其事，不要讲究辞藻。 
English: The next imperial edict also said: I grew up in the army, I did not personally study under a teacher, I do not understand the principles of governing the world, civil and military officials should be forthright and not pay attention to rhetoric.

古文：帝以苏逢吉之第赐王峻，峻曰： 是逢吉所以族李崧也！ 
现代文：后周太祖将苏逢吉的宅第赏赐给王峻，王峻说： 这是苏逢吉诛灭李崧家族的起因啊！ 
English: Later, Zhou Taizu gave Su Fengji's mansion to Wang Jun. Wang Jun said, "This is the reason why Su Fengji killed Li Yan's family!"

古文：辞而不处。
现代文：推辞而不住。
English: You can't live with rejection.

古文：初，契丹主北归，横海节度使潘聿撚弃镇随之，契丹主以聿撚为西南路招讨使。
现代文：当初，契丹主返归北方，横海节度使潘聿离弃镇所跟随北上，契丹主任命潘聿为西南路招讨使。
English: At first, the Khitan lord returned to the north, and the cross-sea festival made Pan Ye leave the abandoned town and follow the north. The Khitan lord appointed Pan Ye as the southwestern road recruiting envoy.

古文：及北汉主立，契丹主使聿撚遗刘承钧书。北汉主使承钧复书，称： 本朝沦亡，绍袭帝位，欲循晋室故事，求援北朝。 契丹主大喜。
现代文：及至北汉主即位，契丹主让潘聿给刘承钧去信；北汉主让刘承钧复信，说： 原来的汉朝已沦陷灭亡，我继承帝位，想遵循晋朝的先例，向北朝契丹求援。 
English: When the Northern Han Emperor ascended to the throne, the Khitan Emperor asked Pan Zhen to write to Liu Chengyi; the Northern Han Emperor asked Liu Chengyi to reply to the letter, saying: The original Han Dynasty has fallen and perished, I inherited the throne, I want to follow the precedent of the Jin Dynasty and ask the Northern Dynasty for help.

古文：北汉主发兵屯阴地、黄泽、团柏。
现代文：契丹主非常高兴。北汉主发兵屯住阴地、黄泽、团柏。
English: The Khitan lord was very pleased. The Northern Han lord sent troops to settle in Yinchi, Huangze, and Tuanbo.

古文：丁亥，以承钧为招讨使，与副招讨使白从晖、都监李存瑰将步骑万人寇晋州。
现代文：丁亥，任命刘承钧为招讨使，与副招讨使白从晖、都监李存率领步兵、骑兵万人侵犯晋州。
English: Dinghai, appointed Liu Chengyao as the recruiting envoy, and the deputy recruiting envoy Bai Congyao and the governor Li Cun led the infantry and cavalry to invade Jinzhou.

古文：从晖，吐谷浑人也。
现代文：白从晖是吐谷浑人。
English: Bai Conglu is a native of Tugu.

古文：郭崇威更名崇，曹威更名英。
现代文：郭崇威改名为崇，曹威改名为英。
English: Guo Chongwei changed his name to Chong and Cao Wei changed his name to Ying.

古文：二月，丁酉，以皇子天雄牙内都指挥使荣为镇宁节度使，选朝士为之僚佐，以侍御史王敏为节度判官，右补阙崔颂为观察判官，校书郎王朴为掌书记。
现代文：二月，丁酉，后周太祖任命皇子天雄牙内都指挥使郭荣为镇宁节度使，挑选朝廷文士当他的属官，任命侍御史王敏为节度使判官，右补阙崔颂为观察判官，校书郎王朴为掌书记。
English: In February, after Ding Xi, Zhou Taizu appointed the prince Tian Xiong Ya Nadu commander Guo Rong as the Zhanning festival envoy, selected the imperial scribes as his subordinate officers, appointed the attendant Shi Wang Min as the festival envoy judge, the right assistant Wei Cui Song as the observation judge, and the school scribe Wang Pu as the chief secretary.

古文：颂，协之子；朴，东平人也。
现代文：崔颂是崔协的儿子，王朴是东平人。
English: Cui Song is the son of Cui Xie, and Wang Pak is from Dongping.

古文：戊戌，北汉兵五道攻晋州，节度使王晏闭城不出。
现代文：戊戌，北汉军队分五路进攻晋州，节度使王晏紧闭城门不出。
English: In Wuyi, the Northern Han army attacked Jinzhou in five directions, and Wang Yi closed the city gate tightly.

古文：刘承钧以为怯，蚁附登城。
现代文：刘承钧认为王晏胆怯，下令士兵像蚂蚁那样密集攀墙登城。
English: Liu Chengyao thought that Wang Hui was timid and ordered soldiers to climb the walls of the city as densely as ants.

古文：晏伏兵奋击，北汉兵死伤者千馀人。
现代文：王晏埋伏的士兵奋起反击，北汉军队死伤一千余人。
English: Wang Yao's ambushed soldiers rose up to fight back, and more than a thousand North Han soldiers were killed and wounded.

古文：承钧遣副兵马使安元宝焚晋州西城，元宝来降。
现代文：刘承钧派副兵马使安元宝焚烧晋州西城，安元宝却前来投降。
English: Liu Chengyao sent his second-in-command, An Yuanbao, to burn the western city of Jinzhou, but An Yuanbao surrendered.

古文：承钧乃移军攻隰州。癸卯，隰州刺史许迁遣步军都指挥使耿继业迎击北汉兵于长寿村，执其将程筠等，杀之。
现代文：刘承钧于是转移军队攻打隰州，癸卯，隰州刺史许迁派步军都指挥使孙继业在长寿村迎击北汉军队，捉住北汉将军程筠等人，杀死他们。
English: Liu Chengyao then transferred his army to attack Bozhou. Zou Yu, the governor of Bozhou, dispatched an infantry force under the command of Sun Jieye to attack the Northern Han army in Changshou Village, capture the Northern Han general Cheng Yao and others, and kill them.

古文：未几，北汉兵攻州城，数日不克，死伤甚众，乃引去。
现代文：不久，北汉军队进攻隰州州城，多日不能攻克，死伤惨重，于是退兵离去。
English: Soon after, the Northern Han army attacked the city of Ganzhou, which they were unable to conquer for several days, and suffered heavy casualties, so they withdrew.

古文：迁，郓州人也。
现代文：许迁是郓州人。
English: Xu Qian is from Zhangzhou.

古文：甲辰，楚王希萼遣掌书记刘光辅入贡于唐。
现代文：甲辰，楚王马希萼派遣掌书记刘光辅到南唐进贡。
English: Jia Chen and Chu King Ma Xicai dispatched Liu Guangyu, the chief secretary, to Nantang to pay tribute.

古文：帝悉出汉宫中宝玉器数十，碎之于庭，曰： 凡为帝王，安用此物！
现代文：后周太祖将后汉宫中数十件珠宝玉器全部清出，在厅堂上砸碎，说： 所有当帝王的，哪里用得着这些东西！
English: Later, Zhou Taizu cleared out all the dozens of pieces of jewelry and jade in the Later Han Palace, smashed them in the hall, and said: All those who are emperors, where do you need these things!

古文：闻汉隐帝日与嬖宠于禁中嬉戏，珍玩不离侧，兹事不远，宜以为鉴！ 
现代文：听说汉隐帝整日与亲信宠臣在宫禁中游戏玩耍，珍宝古玩不离身边，此事不远，应该引为鉴戒。 
English: I heard that Emperor Han Ying played games all day long with his favorite cronies in the palace, and precious antiques were never far from his side. This is not far away, and should serve as a warning.

古文：仍戒左右，自今珍华悦目之物，无得入宫。
现代文：并告诫左右的人，从今以后珍贵华丽、赏心悦目的物品，不得进入宫廷。
English: He also warned those around him that from now on, precious, gorgeous, and pleasing objects would not be allowed into the court.

古文：丁未，契丹主遣其臣袅骨支与硃宪偕来，贺即位。
现代文：丁未，契丹主派遣他的臣子袅骨支与朱宪一同来朝，祝贺后周太祖即皇帝位。
English: Ding Wei, the lord of Khitan sent his vassal Shibonshi to the North together with Zhu Xian to congratulate Emperor Hou Zhou on his accession to the throne.

古文：戊申，敕前资官各听自便居外州。
现代文：戊申，后周太祖下敕令前朝官员居住京外州、县各听自便。
English: According to Wu Shen, after Zhou Taizu issued the edict, the officials of the former dynasty were allowed to live in any prefecture or county outside Beijing.

古文：陈思让未至湖南，马希萼已克长沙。思让留屯郢州，敕召令还。
现代文：陈思让没有到达湖南镇府，马希萼便已攻克长沙，陈思让只得滞留屯住郢州，后周太祖下敕书召回。
English: Chen Sijang did not arrive at the Hunan town government, Ma Xicai had already conquered Changsha. Chen Sijang had to stay in Bozhou, and Zhou Taizhu recalled him.

古文：丁巳，遣尚书左丞田敏使契丹。
现代文：丁巳，后周太祖派遣尚书左丞田敏出使契丹。
English: Soon after, Zhou Taizu sent Shangshu Zuoying and Tian Min to dispatch Qidan.

古文：北汉主遣通事舍人李巩言使于契丹；乞兵为援。
现代文：北汉主派遣通事舍人李出使到契丹，请求出兵作为援军。
English: The ruler of Northern Han dispatched an envoy to Khitan, requesting the dispatch of troops as reinforcements.

古文：诏加泰宁节度使慕容彦超中书令，遣翰林学士鱼崇谅诣兗州谕指。
现代文：后周太祖下诏泰宁节度使慕容彦超加官中书令，派遣翰林学士鱼崇谅到兖州宣旨。
English: Later in the week, Emperor Taizong of Tainin issued an imperial edict to promote Murong Yan to the highest-ranking official, and sent Hanlin Baishi to Bozhou to issue the edict.

古文：崇谅，即崇远也。
现代文：鱼崇谅就是鱼崇远。
English: Fish admiration is fish admiration.

古文：彦超上表谢。
现代文：慕容彦超进表书道谢。
English: Murong Yanchao presented his certificate and expressed his thanks.

古文：三月，壬戌朔，诏报之曰： 向以前朝失德，少主用谗，仓猝之间，召卿赴阙。卿即奔驰应命，信宿至京，救国难而不顾身，闻君召而不俟驾。
现代文：三月，壬戌朔，诏书回复说： 昔日因为前代汉朝丧失德政，年少君主听用谗言，危急关头，征召爱卿奔赴宫阙，爱卿立即飞奔疾驰接受命令，只过了两夜便赶到京城，这真是拯救国家危难而不顾自身，听到君主召唤而不等驾车。
English: In March, the imperial rescript replied: "In the past, because the previous Han Dynasty lost the German government, the young monarch listened to the advice and, at a critical moment, summoned Ai Xing to rush to the palace. Ai Xing immediately rushed to accept the order and arrived in Beijing after only two nights. This is truly saving the country from danger without regard to oneself, hearing the monarch's summons without waiting to drive.

古文：以至天亡汉祚，兵散梁郊，降将败军，相继而至，卿即便回马首，径返龟阴。
现代文：及至上天结束汉朝国运，军队在大梁郊外溃散，投降的将领、溃败的军队接踵而至，爱卿却立刻就掉转马头，直接返回龟阴。
English: At the end of the Han Dynasty and the National Movement, the army broke up on the outskirts of Dalian. The surrendering generals and the defeated army followed one after another. However, Ai Qing immediately turned around and returned directly to Kameyin.

古文：为主为时，有终有始。所谓危乱见忠臣之节，疾风知劲草之心。
现代文：对于国君，对于时势，做到有始有终，真所谓危乱关头才看见忠臣的节操，狂风时节才知道劲草的骨气。
English: For the sovereign, for the current situation, it is necessary to have a beginning and an end. It is only in the so-called critical moment that you can see the discipline of the loyal subjects, and only in the windy season that you can know the backbone of the grass.

古文：若使为臣者皆能如兹，则有国者谁不欲用！
现代文：倘若做臣子的都能如此，那么有国家的君主谁不想任用！
English: If this is the case for all courtiers, then who wouldn't want to be appointed by the monarch of a country!

古文：所言朕潜龙河朔之际，平难浚郊之时，缘不奉示喻之言，亦不得差人至行阙。
现代文：表中所说朕到黄河北岸回避退让的关头，在浚水郊外平定乱难的时候，因为没有接到告示，所以也没能派人到朕的行在。
English: In the table, it says that I went to the north bank of the Yellow River to avoid the moment of concession, and when it was difficult to quell the chaos outside the dredging area, because I did not receive a notice, I could not send someone to my place.

古文：且事主之道，何必如斯！
现代文：但臣子事奉君主的道理，何必如此！
English: But why should a courtier serve the monarch?

古文：若或二三于汉朝，又安肯忠信于周室！
现代文：如若对汉朝有三心二意，又怎么肯对周室忠信不二呢！
English: If you are ambivalent about the Han Dynasty, how can you be loyal to the Zhou Dynasty?

古文：以此为惧，不亦过乎！
现代文：由此产生恐惧，不也过分了吗！
English: Isn't the resulting fear excessive?

古文：卿但悉力推心，安民体国，事朕之事，如事故君，不惟黎庶获安，抑亦社稷是赖。
现代文：爱卿只管尽心竭力，安民利国。事奉朕的节操，如同事奉从前君主一样，不但黎民获得平安，而且国家也依赖于此。
English: Sir, just do your best to keep the people and the country safe. By serving me, as my colleagues served the former monarch, not only will the people be safe, but the country will also depend on it.

古文：但坚表率，未议替移。
现代文：朕只想坚定爱卿的表率作用，从未议论过撤换。
English: I only want to strengthen the leading role of Ai Qing, and I have never discussed replacing him.

古文：由衷之诚，言尽于此。 
现代文：一片肺腑之言，话全说到这里。 
English: It's a heartfelt speech, and I'll end it here.

古文：唐以楚王希萼为天策上将军、武安、武平、静江、宁远节度使兼中书令、楚王，以右仆射孙忌、客省使姚凤为册礼使。
现代文：南唐主任命楚王马希萼为天策上将军，武安、武平、静江、宁远节度使兼中书令、楚王；任命右仆射孙忌、客省使姚凤为册礼使。
English: The Lord of Southern Tang appointed Ma Xicai, the King of Chu, as the general of the heavenly policy, and Wu An, Wuping, Jingjiang, and Ningyuan as the envoys of the festival and the scribes of the Middle Kingdom, and the King of Chu; appointed his right-hand man, Jia Sunqi, and the guest provincial envoy, Yao Feng, as the envoys of the book.

古文：丙寅，遣前淄州刺史陈思让将兵戍磁州，扼黄泽路。
现代文：丙寅，后周太祖派遣前淄州刺史陈思让领兵驻防磁州，把守黄泽关路口。
English: Cui Yin, after Zhou Taizu dispatched the former Zhangzhou leader Chen Si to lead the troops stationed in the anti-magnetic state to guard the Huangze pass junction.

古文：楚王希萼既得志，多思旧怨，杀戮无度，昼夜纵酒荒淫，悉以军府事委马希崇。
现代文：楚王马希萼既已得志称王，便时常回忆旧日怨仇，诛杀屠戮没有节制，日夜纵酒，荒淫无度，把军政事务全部委托给马希崇。
English: Since King Ma Xicai of Chu had already made up his mind to become king, he often recalled the old days of grudges, killing and slaughtering without restraint, day and night drinking, and excessive debauchery, and entrusted all military and political affairs to Ma Xitong.

古文：希崇复多私曲，政刑紊乱。
现代文：马希崇又多私人好恶，政治刑律混乱不堪。
English: Ma Xizong has many personal likes and dislikes, and the political penal code is in chaos.

古文：府库既尽于乱兵，籍民财以赏赍士卒，或封其门而取之，士卒犹以不均怨望。
现代文：官府仓库已经在战乱中荡然无存，便搜刮没收百姓财产来赏赐士兵，有的封百姓的门而夺取家中财物，士兵仍然因为分配不均而怨恨。
English: The government warehouse had been completely destroyed in the turmoil of the war, so they searched and confiscated the property of the people to reward the soldiers, and some sealed the doors of the people and seized the family's property. The soldiers still resented the unequal distribution.

古文：虽朗州旧将佐从希萼来者，亦皆不悦，有离心。
现代文：即使朗州旧日将佐跟从马希萼一同来的，也都不高兴，渐渐产生背离之心。
English: Even if Lanzhou's former general Zsa came with Ma Xicai, they were not happy, and gradually they had a heart of departure.

古文：刘光辅之入贡于唐也，唐主待之厚，光辅密言： 湖南民疲主骄，可取也。 
现代文：刘光辅到南唐进贡，南唐主待他很优厚，刘光辅秘密进言道： 湖南百姓疲惫，君主骄横，可以攻取啊。 
English: Liu Guangyu went to Nantang to pay tribute. The Lord of Nantang treated him very generously. Liu Guangyu secretly said: The people of Hunan are tired, the monarch is arrogant, they can be conquered.

古文：唐主乃以营屯都虞候边镐为信州刺史，将兵屯袁州，潜图进取。
现代文：南唐君主于是任命营屯都虞候边镐为信州刺史，领兵屯驻袁州，暗中谋划进攻夺取湖南。
English: The monarch of Southern Tang then appointed the commander of the camp to be the governor of Shinshu and the commander of the camp to be stationed in Yuanzhou, secretly plotting to attack and seize Hunan.

古文：小门使谢彦颙，本希萼家奴，以首面有宠于希萼，至与妻妾杂坐，恃恩专横。
现代文：小门使谢彦，原本是马希萼的家奴，因为面目姣美得到马希萼宠幸，甚至与马希萼的妻妾同坐，依仗恩宠专横跋扈。
English: The gatekeeper, Xie Yan, was originally Ma Xicai's house slave. Because of his handsome appearance, he was favored by Ma Xicai, and even sat with Ma Xicai's wife and concubine, relying on his favor to be bossy.

古文：常肩随希崇，或拊其背，希崇衔之。
现代文：谢彦经常与马希崇并肩相随，有时拍马希的背；马希崇怀恨在心。
English: Xie Yan often walked side by side with Ma Xizong, sometimes patting him on the back; Ma Xizong held a grudge.

古文：故事，府宴，小门使执兵在门外。希萼使彦颙预坐，或居诸将之上，诸将皆耻之。
现代文：旧例，府中设宴，小门使手持兵器站在门外，马希萼让谢彦入席同坐，有时坐在众将的上方，众将都为此感到耻辱。
English: In the old days, when a banquet was held in the palace, the gatekeeper would have his weapon standing outside the door, and Ma would have Xie Yan sit at the table with him, and sometimes he would sit on top of the generals. The generals felt humiliated by this.

古文：希萼以府舍焚荡，命朗州静江指挥使王逵、副使周行逢帅所部兵千馀人治之，执役甚劳，又无犒赐，士卒皆怨，窃言曰： 囚免死则役作之。
现代文：马希萼因为府第房舍焚烧毁坏，命令朗州静江指挥使王逵、副使周行逢率领所管辖的士兵千余人修建，承担的徭役十分辛苦，又没有犒劳赏赐，士兵都怨恨，私下说道： 囚犯免死便罚作苦役。
English: Because the prefectural government building was burned and destroyed, Ma Xicai ordered the commander of the Lanzhou-Jingjiang Railway, Wang Qian, and the deputy envoy, Zhou Xingfeng, to lead more than a thousand soldiers under their jurisdiction to build it. The forced labor they undertook was very hard, and there was no reward for the hard work. The soldiers were resentful and said privately: If the prisoners were spared death, they would be punished with hard labor.

古文：我辈从大王出万死取湖南，何罪而囚役之！
现代文：我们跟从大王出生入死攻取湖南，有什么罪过要像囚犯那样服苦役呀！
English: We followed the great king from birth to death to conquer Hunan, what is the sin to serve hard labor like a prisoner!

古文：且大王终日酣歌，岂知我辈之劳苦乎！ 
现代文：况且大王终日醉酒当歌，哪里知道我们的辛劳苦处啊！ 
English: Besides, the great king is drunk all day and sings songs. Who knows about our hardships?

古文：逵、行逢闻多，相谓曰： 众怨深矣，不早为计，祸及吾曹。 
现代文：王逵、周行逢听到这些，相互说： 大家的积怨深了，不早作打算，灾祸会轮到我们头上。 
English: Whenever Wang Qian and Zhou Xingfeng heard these things, they said to each other: Everyone's grievances are deep-rooted. If we don't make plans early, disaster will befall us.

古文：壬申旦，帅其众各执长柯斧、白梃，逃归朗州。
现代文：壬申早晨，他俩便率领部众各人手拿长柄斧子、白木棍棒，逃回朗州。
English: In the morning of Jinshin, the two of them fled back to Lanzhou, leading the rest of the group, each with a long-handled axe and a white wooden club.

古文：时希萼醉未醒，左右不敢白。
现代文：当时马希萼酒醉没醒，周围的人不敢报告。
English: At the time, Mahicale was drunk and unconscious, and the people around him did not dare to report it.

古文：癸酉，始白之。
现代文：癸酉，才报告此事。
English: The matter was only reported to the police.

古文：希萼遣湖南指挥使唐师翥将千馀人追之，不及，直抵朗州。
现代文：马希萼派遣湖南指挥使唐师翥带领千余人追赶，没追上，一直追到朗州。
English: Ma Xicai dispatched the Hunan commander to make Tang Shijun lead more than a thousand people to catch up, but did not catch up, and chased them all the way to Lanzhou.

古文：逵等乘其疲乏，伏兵纵击，士卒死伤殆尽，师翥脱归。
现代文：王逵等乘他们疲惫困乏，埋伏的士兵全力出击，追兵死伤几乎全军覆没，唐师翥脱身逃归。
English: Wang Qian and others took advantage of their exhaustion and exhaustion, and the ambushed soldiers launched an all-out attack. The pursuing soldiers were killed and wounded, and almost the entire army was wiped out. Tang's division escaped and fled.

古文：逵等黜留后马光赞，更以希萼兄子光惠知州事。
现代文：王逵等废黜留后马光赞，改用马希萼哥哥的儿子马光惠主持朗州政事。
English: After the dethronement of Wang Hui and other emperors, Ma Guangzan stayed, and changed to Ma Xicai's brother's son, Ma Guanghui, to preside over the political affairs of Langzhou.

古文：光惠，希振之子也。
现代文：马光惠是马希振的儿子。
English: Ma Guanghui is the son of Ma Xizhen.

古文：寻奉光惠为节度使，逵等与何敬真及诸军指挥使张亻放参决军府事。
现代文：不久奉立马光惠为节度使，王逵等与何敬真以及诸军指挥使张参预决策军政大事。
English: Soon, Ma Guanghui was appointed as the festival envoy, and Wang Xi and He Jingzhen, as well as the military commander Zhang, participated in the decision-making of military and political events.

古文：希萼具以状言于唐，唐主遣使以厚赏招谕之。
现代文：马希萼详细将情况通报给南唐，南唐主派遣使者用丰厚的赏赐来招降安抚。
English: Ma Xicai reported the situation in detail to Nantang, and the Lord of Nantang sent an envoy with a rich reward to appease and pacify.

古文：逵等纳其赏，纵其使，不答其诏，唐亦不敢诘也。
现代文：王逵等收下南唐的赏赐，放走使者，不回答诏谕，南唐也不敢追问。
English: Wang Xi and others accepted the reward from Nantang, released the envoy, did not answer the edict, and Nantang did not dare to ask.

古文：王彦超奏克徐州，杀巩廷美等。
现代文：王彦超奏报攻克徐州，杀死巩廷美等人。
English: Wang Yanchao reported that he had conquered Xuzhou and killed Gong Tingmei and others.

古文：北汉李巩言至契丹，契丹主使拽剌梅里报之。
现代文：北汉使者李到契丹，契丹主派拽剌梅里回报北汉。
English: The Northern Han emissary Li went to the Khitan, and the Khitan main faction dragged Xing Meili back to the Northern Han.

古文：丙子，敕： 朝廷与唐本无仇怨，缘淮军镇，各守疆域，无得纵兵民擅入唐境。商旅往来，无得禁止。 
现代文：丙子，后周太祖下敕令： 本朝廷与唐朝廷本来没有怨仇，沿淮河的军镇，各守自己疆域，不得放纵士兵百姓擅自进入唐人地界；商人旅客往来，不得阻止。 
English: Cun Zi, later Zhou Taizu, issued an imperial edict: This imperial court and the Tang imperial court originally had no grudge against each other. The military towns along the Huai River should each guard their own territory, and soldiers and commoners should not be allowed to enter the Chinese territory without permission; merchants and travelers should not be prevented from traveling.

古文：己卯，潞州送涉县所获北汉将卒二百六十馀人，各赐衫袴巾履遣还。
现代文：己卯，潞州送来涉县所俘获的北汉将领士兵二百六十多人，后周朝廷赐给每人衣衫、裤子、头巾、鞋子，遣送回家。
English: At the same time, Bozhou sent more than two hundred and sixty soldiers of the Northern Han generals captured by Wanzhou County. The following week, the court gave each of them shirts, trousers, headscarves and shoes and sent them home.

古文：加吴越王弘亻叔诸道兵马都元帅。
现代文：后周太祖给吴越王钱弘加官诸道兵马都元帅。
English: Later, Zhou Taizu promoted Wu Yue Wang Qian Hong to marshal of all the martial arts.

古文：夏，四月，壬辰朔，滨淮州镇上言： 淮南饥民过淮籴谷，未敢禁止。 
现代文：夏季，四月，壬辰朔，滨临淮河的州镇上奏说： 淮南饥民渡过淮河来买粮，没敢禁止。 
English: In the summer, in April, Ren Chenshuo, a prefectural town on the banks of the Huai River, said: The hungry people of Huainan crossed the Huai River to buy grain, and did not dare to ban it.

古文：诏曰： 彼之生民，与此何异，宜令州县津铺无得禁止。 
现代文：后周太祖下诏说： 那边的百姓，与这边的百姓有什么不同，应下令各州、县渡口、粮铺不得禁止。 
English: Later, Zhou Taizu issued an edict saying, "What is the difference between the people on the other side and the people on this side? It should be ordered that all prefectures and counties should not prohibit ferries and grain stores.

古文：蜀通奏使高延昭固辞知枢密院，丁未，以前云安榷盐使太原伊审征为通奏使，知枢密院事。
现代文：后蜀通奏使高延昭坚决推辞主持枢密院事务。丁未，后蜀君主任命前云安榷盐使太原人伊审征为通奏使，主持枢密院事务。
English: After the Shu Consulship, Gao Yan Zhao resolutely refused to preside over the Privy Council affairs. Ding Wei, after the Shu monarch, appointed the former Yun Anqishan to the Taiyuan people as the Consulship, presiding over the Privy Council affairs.

古文：审征，蜀高祖妹褒国公主之子也，少与蜀主相亲狎，及知枢密，政之大小悉以咨之。
现代文：伊审征是后蜀高祖妹妹褒国公主的儿子，从小同后蜀君主亲昵随便，及至他主持枢密院，后蜀君主无论政事大小都向他咨询。
English: Yixin Zheng was the son of Princess Baoguo, the younger sister of Emperor Gao of Later Shu, and from the time he was a child, he was friendly with the Emperor of Later Shu, and when he presided over the Privy Council, the Emperor of Later Shu consulted him on all matters of state, large and small.

古文：审征亦以经济为己任，而贪侈回邪，与王昭远相表里，蜀政由是浸衰。
现代文：伊审征也以经国济世为己任，但贪婪奢侈、奸诈邪恶，与王昭远内外勾结，后蜀政权因此逐渐衰败。
English: Yi Xuan Zheng also took it as his duty to manage the country and benefit the world, but he was greedy, extravagant, treacherous and evil, and colluded with Wang Zhaoyuan inside and outside the country. As a result, the post-Shu regime gradually declined.

古文：吴越王弘亻叔徙废王弘倧居东府，为筑宫室，治园圃，娱悦之，岁时供馈甚厚。
现代文：吴越王钱弘将废黜的前王钱弘迁居东府，为他建筑宫室，修造园林，让他游玩快活，一年四季供养馈赠非常丰厚。
English: Wuyue King Qianhong moved the deposed former King Qianhong to Dongfu, built a palace for him, built a garden, let him play happily, and provided very rich gifts throughout the year.

古文：契丹主遣使如北汉，告以周使田敏来，约岁输钱十万缗。
现代文：契丹主派遣使者前往北汉，告知后周使者田敏来的情况，约定每年送钱十万缗。
English: The Khitan lord sent an envoy to Northern Han to inform him of the circumstances surrounding the arrival of the envoy Tian Min the following week, and agreed to send him 100,000 baht of money each year.

古文：北汉主使郑珙以厚赂谢契丹，自称 侄皇帝致书于叔天授皇帝 ，请行册礼。
现代文：北汉主派郑珙为使者用丰厚的钱财向契丹主致谢，自称 侄皇帝向叔父天授皇帝致送书信 ，请求举行册命典礼。
English: The ruler of the Northern Han Dynasty sent Zheng Qi as an emissary to express his gratitude to the Khitan ruler with a large sum of money. He claimed to be the nephew of the emperor and sent a letter to his uncle, the Emperor Taizu, requesting that the investiture ceremony be held.

古文：五月，己巳，遣左金吾将军姚汉英等使于契丹，契丹留之。
现代文：五月，己巳，后周太祖派遣左金吾将军姚汉英等出使到契丹，契丹留住他们。
English: In May, Zhou Taizu sent Yao Han Ying, the general of Zuo Kingu, to Khitan, and Khitan kept them.

古文：辛未，北汉礼部侍郎、同平章事郑珙卒于契丹。
现代文：辛未，北汉礼部侍郎、同平章事郑珙在契丹去世。
English: Xin Wei, the attendant of the North Han Ceremonial Department, and Tongping Zhangji Zheng Qi passed away in Qidan.

古文：甲戌，义武节度使孙方简避皇考讳，更名方谏。
现代文：甲戌，义武节度使孙方简为避后周皇帝父亲郭简的名讳，改名为方谏。
English: The Armor Festival and Yiwu Festival made Sun Fang Jian change his name to Fang Jian to avoid the name of Emperor Zhou's father, Guo Jian.

古文：定难节度使李彝殷遣使奉表于北汉。
现代文：定难节度李彝殷派遣使者持奉表书到北汉。
English: Li Yuyan sent an envoy to North Han with a letter of invitation to the difficult festival.

古文：六月，辛亥，以枢密使、同平章事王峻为左仆射兼门下侍郎，枢密副使、兵部侍郎范质、户部侍郎、判三司李谷为中书侍郎，并同平章事，谷仍判三司。
现代文：六月，辛亥，后周太祖任命枢密使、同平章事王峻为左仆射兼门下侍郎，枢密副使及兵部侍郎范质、兼领三司李为中书侍郎，都为同平章事，李仍然兼领三司。
English: In June, Xinhai, the late Zhou Taizu appointed the Privy Envoy, Tongping Zhangji Wangjun as his left-hand man and attendant, the Vice-Envoy of the Privy Council and the standard of the attendant of the military department, and the attendant of the third secretary Li as the attendant of the middle secretary, all of which were Tongping Zhangji, and Li was still the attendant of the third secretary.

古文：司徒兼侍中窦贞固、司空兼中书侍郎、同平章事苏禹珪并罢守本官。癸丑，范质参知枢密院事。
现代文：司徒兼侍中窦贞固，司空兼中书侍郎、同平章事苏禹都被免去同平章事而保留原来的职务。癸丑，范质参预主持枢密院事务。
English: Dou Zhenggu, the secretary and chamberlain, Su Yu, the secretary and chamberlain, and Tongping Zhangji were all removed from their posts but retained their original positions.

古文：丁巳，以宣徽北院使翟光鄴兼枢密副使。
现代文：丁巳，任命宣徽北院使翟光邺兼枢密副使。
English: Ding Si, appointed the envoy of the Northern Yuan of the State Council of the State Council of the State Council of the State Council of the State Council of the People's Republic of China, and the vice-envoy of the Privy Council.

古文：初，帝讨河中，已为人望所属。
现代文：当初，后周太祖征讨河中，已为众望所归。
English: At first, Zhou Taizhu's conquest of the middle of the river was highly anticipated.

古文：李谷时为转运使，帝数以微言讽之，谷但以人臣尽节为对，帝以是贤之。即位，首用为相。
现代文：李当时任转运使，后周太祖多次用委婉言语打动他，李只用为人臣子应该尽守臣节作为回答，后周太祖因此认为他有贤德，即皇帝位后，便首先任用他为宰相。
English: At that time, Li was a transfer envoy. Later, Zhou Taizu repeatedly impressed him with euphemistic words. Li only replied that as a vassal, he should observe the Vassal Day. Therefore, Zhou Taizu thought that he had virtue, that is, after the emperor's throne, he first appointed him as the prime minister.

古文：时国家新造，四方多故，王峻夙夜尽心，知无不为，军旅之谋，多所裨益。
现代文：当时国家新建，四方多事，王峻日夜绞尽脑汁，知道的事没有不去做的，军事谋划，常出良策补益。
English: At that time, the country was newly built, there were many things happening in all directions, Wang Jun racked his brains day and night, there was nothing he didn't know to do, military planning, and there were often good policies and benefits.

古文：范质明敏强记，谨守法度。
现代文：范质精明敏锐，博闻强记，严守法律制度。
English: They are shrewd and perceptive, have a strong knowledge of history, and strictly abide by the legal system.

古文：李谷沉毅有器略，在帝前议论，辞气慷慨，善譬谕以开主意。
现代文：李沉静坚毅，有才器胆略，在后周太祖面前议论朝政，言辞慷慨激昂，善于运用譬喻来启发皇帝的意向。
English: Li Shenjing was strong-willed and courageous. He had the ability to make bold moves. In front of Emperor Zhou, he discussed the politics of the dynasty. His words were impassioned and he was good at using metaphors to enlighten the emperor's intentions.

古文：武平节度使马光惠，愚懦嗜酒，不能服诸将，王逵、周行逢、何敬真谋以辰州刺史庐陵刘言骁勇得蛮夷心，欲迎以为副使。
现代文：武平节度使马光惠，愚蠢胆小，专好饮酒，不能折服众将。王逵、周行逢、何敬真商量，认为辰州刺史庐陵人刘言打仗勇猛很得蛮夷士众之心，准备迎立他为武平节度副使。
English: The Wu-Ping Festival made Ma Guanghui, stupid and timid, a specialist in drinking, unable to compromise with the generals. Wang Xi, Zhou Xingfan, and He Jingzhen discussed, and thought that Liu Yan, a man from Fuling, Chenzhou, who fought bravely and won the hearts of barbarians, was ready to welcome him as the deputy envoy of the Wu-Ping Festival.

古文：言知逵等难制，曰： 不往，将攻我。 
现代文：刘言知道王逵等人难以驾驭，说： 不去的话，将会向我进攻。 
English: Liu Yan knew that Wang Yao and the others were difficult to control, and said, "If you don't go, they will attack me."

古文：乃单骑赴之。
现代文：于是单枪匹马赶赴朗州。
English: So he rushed to Lanzhou single-handedly.

古文：既至，众废光惠，送于唐，推言权武平留后，表求旄节于唐，唐人未许。亦称籓于周。
现代文：刘言已到，众将便废黜马光惠，送他到南唐，推举刘言代理武平留后，上表书向南唐朝廷请求赐予旌旗符节，南唐人没有答应，便同时也向后周称臣。
English: When Liu Yan arrived, the generals dethroned Ma Guanghui and sent him to Southern Tang. After Liu Yan's deputy Wu Ping was elected to stay, he sent a petition to the Southern Tang court to request the granting of the Festival of Flags and Banners. The Southern Tang people did not agree, but at the same time praised the minister to Hou Zhou.

古文：吴越王弘亻叔以前内外马步都统军使仁俊无罪，复其官爵。
现代文：吴越王钱弘因为前内外马步都统军使钱仁俊无罪，恢复他的官职爵位。
English: Qian Hong, the king of Wuyue, exonerated Qian Renzhun and restored his official title and knighthood because he united the troops in front and behind.

古文：契丹遣燕王述轧等册命北汉王为大汉神武皇帝，妃为皇后。
现代文：契丹主派遣燕王耶律述轧等人来主持典礼，册命北汉主为大汉神武皇帝，妃子为皇后。
English: The Khitan lord sent Yan King Yerut Shulam and others to preside over the ceremony, and named the North Han lord as the Great Han Emperor Shenwu, and the concubine as the empress.

古文：北汉主更名旻。
现代文：北汉主改名为。
English: The Northern Han Dynasty changed its name to the Eastern Han Dynasty.

古文：秋，七月，北汉主遣翰林学士博兴卫融等诣契丹谢册礼，且请兵。
现代文：秋季，七月，北汉主派遣翰林学士博兴人卫融等到契丹道谢所赐册命典礼，并且请求出兵。
English: In the autumn, in July, the ruler of Northern Han dispatched Hanlin Scholar Bo Xingren Wei Rong to Qidan to thank him for the appointment ceremony and to request the dispatch of troops.

古文：八月，壬戌，葬汉隐帝于颍陵。
现代文：八月，壬戌，北汉隐帝安葬在颖陵。
English: In August, the Northern Han Emperor Jingu was buried in Yingling Mausoleum.

古文：义武节度使孙方谏入朝，壬子，徙镇国节度使，以其弟易州刺史行友为义武留后。
现代文：义武节度使孙方谏进京入朝，壬子，调任镇国节度使，任命孙方谏弟弟易州刺史孙行友为义武留后。
English: After the Yiwu Festival, Sun Fangyao went to Beijing and entered the imperial court. Ren Zi was transferred to the post of town and country festival envoy, and Sun Fangyao's younger brother, Yizhou Jishi Sun Yingyou, was appointed as Yiwu resident.

古文：又徙建雄节度使于晏镇徐州，以武宁节度使王彦超代之。
现代文：又调建雄节度使王晏改任武宁节度使镇守徐州，任命武宁节度使王彦超接替王晏原职。
English: In addition, he transferred the construction of Xiong Jiedu to Wang Hui to be appointed as the town guard of Xuzhou by Wu Ning Jiedu, and appointed Wang Yanchao to succeed Wang Hui's original post by Wu Ning Jiedu.

古文：戊午，追立故夫人柴氏为皇后。
现代文：戊午，后周太祖追立已故夫人柴氏为皇后。
English: In the afternoon, the late Zhou Taizu crowned his late wife Chai as empress.

古文：九月，北汉主遣招讨使李存瑰将兵自团柏入寇。
现代文：九月，北汉主派遣招讨使李存领兵从团柏入侵。
English: In September, the ruler of Northern Han dispatched an envoy to persuade Li Cun to lead the troops to invade from Tuanpai.

古文：契丹欲引兵会之，与酋长议于九十九泉。
现代文：契丹主准备领兵会合北汉军队，与酋长们在九十九泉商议。
English: The Khitan lord was preparing to lead an army meeting of the Northern Han army and discuss with the chiefs in Jiuquanquan.

古文：诸部皆不欲南寇，契丹主强之。
现代文：各部落都不愿南侵，契丹主强行出兵。
English: All the tribes did not want to invade the south, so the Khitan lord sent troops by force.

古文：癸亥，行至新州之西火神淀，燕王述轧及伟王之子太宁王沤僧作乱，弑契丹主而立述轧。
现代文：癸亥，契丹军队行进到新州的火神淀，燕王耶律述轧以及伟王的儿子太宁王耶律沤僧发动叛乱，杀死契丹主耶律阮而拥立耶律述轧。
English: In the Year of the Rooster, the Khitan army marched to the new state of Vulcan, and the king of the Terns, Yerut Thurawal, and the great king's son, the king of the Tanin, Yerut Thurawal, launched a rebellion, killing the Khitan lord, Yerut Nguyen, and establishing Yerut Thurawal.

古文：契丹主德光之子齐王述律逃入南山，诸部奉述律以攻述轧、沤僧，杀之，并其族党。立述律为帝，改元应历。
现代文：前契丹主耶律德光的儿子耶律述律逃入南山，各部落拥戴耶律述律而进攻耶律述轧、耶律沤僧，杀死他们，吞并他们的部族党羽，拥立耶律述律为皇帝，改年号为应历。
English: The son of the former Khitan lord Yerud-de-Kwang, Yerud-sul-lu, fled into the Nanshan Mountains. The tribes supported Yerud-sul-lu and attacked Yerud-sul-wal and Yerud-zang monks, killing them, annexing their tribal party wings, establishing Yerud-sul-lu as emperor, and changing the year name to the lunar calendar.

古文：自火神淀入幽州，遣使告于北汉，北汉主遣枢密直学士上党王得中如契丹，贺即位，复以叔父事之，请兵以击晋州。
现代文：耶律述律从火神淀进入幽州，派遣使者向北汉报告，北汉主派遣枢密直学士上党人王得中前往契丹，祝贺耶律述律即皇帝位，又用对待叔父的规格事奉他，请求出兵来攻击晋州。
English: Yeludushrutus entered Yuzhou from Vulcan Lake and sent an envoy to report to the Northern Han Dynasty. The Northern Han Emperor sent Wang Dezhong, a Privy Councilor and member of the Inner Party, to Khitan to congratulate Yeludushrutus on his accession to the throne and to serve him as an uncle and to request the dispatch of troops to attack Jinzhou.

古文：契丹主年少，好游戏，不亲国事，每夜酣饮，达旦乃寐，日中方起，国人谓之睡王。
现代文：契丹主耶律述律年轻，喜好玩耍，不亲理国家大事。每天夜里摆酒畅饮，直到天亮才睡觉，中午才起床，国中之人称他为睡王。
English: The lord of the Khitans, Yerut, is young, likes to play, and does not care about national events. He drinks wine every night, does not go to bed until dawn, and does not get up until noon. People in the country call him the sleeping king.

古文：后更名明。
现代文：后来改名为明。
English: The name was later changed to Ming.

古文：壬申，蜀以吏部尚书、御史中丞范仁恕为中书侍郎兼吏部尚书、同平章事。
现代文：壬申，后蜀任命吏部尚书、御史中丞范仁恕为中书侍郎兼吏部尚书、同平章事。
English: According to Jinshin, after Shu appointed the secretary of the General Staff and the Vice-Minister of History, Fan Renshu, as the secretary of the General Staff and the secretary of the General Staff, and the same rank.

古文：楚王希萼既克长沙，不赏许可琼，疑可琼怨望，出为蒙州刺史。
现代文：楚王马希萼既已攻克长沙，没有奖赏许可琼，怀疑许可琼有怨恨，便让他出任蒙州刺史。
English: Since King Ma Xicai of Chu had already conquered Changsha, there was no reward for allowing Qiong, and he suspected that Qiong had a grudge, so he appointed him as the governor of Mengzhou.

古文：遣马步都指挥使徐威、左右军马步使陈敬迁、水军都指挥使鲁公馆、牙内侍卫指挥使陆孟俊帅部兵立寨于城西北隅，以备朗兵。不存抚役者，将卒皆怨怒，谋作乱。
现代文：派遣马步都指挥使徐威、左右军马步使陈敬迁、水军都指挥使鲁公绾、牙内侍卫指挥使陆孟俊率领所部军队在城西北角安营扎寨，用以防备朗州军队，不慰问安抚从事劳役的军队，服役的将士都怨恨忿怒，谋划发动叛乱。
English: Xu Wei, commander of the Horse Guards, Chen Jingqian, commander of the Left and Right Armies, Lu Gongya, commander of the Naval Forces, and Lu Mengjun, commander of the Inner Palace Guards, led the troops of the headquarters to camp in the northwest corner of the city, to prevent the Lanzhou army, not to comfort and pacify the army engaged in labor service, and the serving soldiers were resentful and angry, and planned to launch a rebellion.

古文：希崇知其谋，戊寅，希萼宴将吏，徐威等不预，希崇亦辞疾不至。
现代文：马希崇知道将士的阴谋，戊寅，马希萼宴请将领官吏，徐威等人不参加，马希崇也推辞有病而不到。
English: Ma Xizong knew about the plot of the generals. Wu Yin, Ma Xizhe invited generals and officials to the banquet, but Xu Wei and others did not attend. Ma Xizong also refused to attend because of illness.

古文：威等使人先驱踶啮马十馀入府，自帅其徒执斧斤、白梃，声言絷马，奄至座上，纵横击人，颠踣满地。
现代文：徐威等派人先驱赶十几匹尥蹶子咬人的劣马进入府中，自己带领部下手持斧子、白木棍棒，声称来绊缚劣马，突然闯到坐席上面，任意砍杀赴宴的人，倒下的人躺满一地。
English: Xu Wei and others sent a forerunner to drive more than a dozen bad horses that bite people into the government building. He himself led his subordinates armed with axes and white wooden sticks, claiming to tie up bad horses, suddenly broke into the table, arbitrarily slashed and killed people going to the banquet, and the fallen people lay all over the ground.

古文：希萼逾垣走，威等执囚之。执谢彦颙，自顶及踵剉之。
现代文：马希萼翻墙逃跑，徐威等抓住囚禁了他，抓住谢彦，从头到脚剁成碎块。
English: Ma Xizhe climbed over the wall to escape, Xu Wei and others caught and imprisoned him, caught Xie Yan, and chopped him into pieces from head to toe.

古文：立希崇为武安留后，纵兵大掠。
现代文：拥立马希崇为武安留后，放纵士兵大肆抢掠。
English: After supporting Ma Xizong to stay in Wu'an, he allowed the soldiers to plunder and pillage.

古文：幽希萼于衡山县。
现代文：将马希萼幽禁在衡山县。
English: Ma Xicheng was confined in Hengshan County.

古文：刘言闻希崇立，遣兵趣潭州，声言讨其篡夺之罪。壬午，军于益阳之西。
现代文：刘言听说马希崇立为武安留后，便调遣军队奔赴潭州，声称要讨伐他篡位夺权的罪行，壬午，军队驻扎在益阳西面。
English: When Liu Yan heard that Ma Xi Chongli was staying in Wu'an, he dispatched an army to Tanzhou, claiming to fight against his crime of usurping power. By noon, the army was stationed in the west of Yiyang.

古文：希崇惧，癸未，发兵二千拒之，又遣使如朗州求和，请为邻籓。
现代文：马希崇恐惧，癸未，发兵二千抵抗，又派遣使者前往朗州求和，请结为睦邻藩镇。
English: Ma Xizong was afraid and hesitant, sent two thousand soldiers to resist, and sent an envoy to Lanzhou to sue for peace, asking for a good-neighborly town.

古文：掌书记桂林李观象说言曰： 希萼旧将佐犹在长沙，此必不欲与公为邻；不若先檄希崇取其首，然后图湖南，可兼有也。 
现代文：掌书记桂林人李观象劝说刘言道： 马希萼的旧部将佐还在长沙，那些人必定不愿与您结为友邻；不如先驰传檄文命马希崇取来他们的首级，然后筹划夺取湖南，便可最后兼并占有整个湖南了。 
English: Guilin native Li Guanxiang, the secretary-in-charge, persuaded Liu to say, "Ma Xizhe's old vice-minister is still in Changsha, and those people will certainly not want to be your friends and neighbors; it is better to first preach the mission of Ma Xizhe to get their heads, and then plan to seize Hunan, and then finally annex and occupy the whole of Hunan.

古文：言从之。
现代文：刘言听从此计。
English: Liu Yan listened to this plan.

古文：希崇畏言，即断都军判官杨仲敏、掌书记刘光辅、牙内指挥使魏师进、都押牙黄勍等十馀人首，遣前辰阳县令李翊赍送朗州。
现代文：马希崇畏惧刘言，立即斩下都军判官杨仲敏、掌书记刘光辅、牙内指挥使魏师进、都押牙黄等十几人的首级，派遣前辰阳县令李翊带着送往朗州。
English: Mashi Chong was afraid of Liu Yan, and immediately cut off the heads of more than a dozen people, including Yang Zhongmin, the judge of the Capital Military, Liu Guangyu, the chief secretary, Wei Shijin, the commander of the Inner Court, and Du Azu Huang, and sent the former Chenyang County commander Li Xi to Lanzhou.

古文：至则腐败，言与王逵等皆以为非仲敏等首，怒责翊，翊惶恐自杀。
现代文：等到朗州，首级已经腐烂，刘言与王逵等都认为不是杨仲敏等人的头，发怒斥责李翊，李翊惶恐不安而自杀。
English: By the time they arrived in Langzhou, the head had already rotted. Liu Yan and Wang Qianlong both believed that it was not the head of Yang Zhongmin and others, and angrily rebuked Li Qian. Li Qian panicked and committed suicide.

古文：希崇既袭位，亦纵酒荒淫，为政不公，语多矫妄，国人不附。
现代文：马希崇继位之后，也纵酒狂饮，荒淫无度，办事不公，言语多虚妄，国中之人都不亲附他。
English: After Ma Xizong succeeded to the throne, he also indulged in heavy drinking, immoral excesses, unfair dealings, many false words, and no one in the country was close to him.

古文：初，马希萼入长沙，彭师暠虽免死，犹杖背黜为民。
现代文：当初，马希萼进入长沙，彭师虽然免于死刑，但仍背受杖刑废黜为民。
English: At first, Ma Xicai entered Changsha, and although Peng Shi was exempted from the death penalty, he was still punished with the cane and deposed as a citizen.

古文：希崇以为师暠必怨之，使送希萼于衡山，实欲师暠杀之。师暠曰： 欲使我为弑君之人乎！ 
现代文：马希崇认为彭师必定仇恨马希萼，便派他送马希萼到衡山，实际要彭师杀死马希萼，彭师说： 难道要让我做弑君犯上的人吗！ 
English: Ma Xizong thought that Peng Shih must hate Ma Xicai, so he sent him to send Ma Xicai to Hengshan. In fact, he wanted Peng Shih to kill Ma Xicai. Peng Shih said, "Do you want me to be the one who commits the crime of being a traitor?"

古文：奉事逾谨。
现代文：反而侍候马希萼愈加小心谨慎。
English: On the contrary, the waiters became more and more cautious.

古文：丙戌，至衡山。
现代文：丙戌，到达衡山县。
English: and arrived at Hengshan County.

古文：衡山指挥使廖偃，匡图之子也，与其季父节度巡官匡凝谋曰： 吾家世受马氏恩，今希萼长而被黜，必不免祸，盍相与辅之！ 
现代文：衡山指挥使廖偃是廖匡图的儿子，与他叔父节度巡官寥匡凝商量说： 我家世代承受马氏恩德，如今马希萼年长而被废黜，必定不能避免杀身大祸，何不一起辅助他！ 
English: Hengshan commander Liao Wei is the son of Liao Kuangtu, and discussed with his uncle, festival inspector Liao Kuangtu, saying: My family's generation inherited Ma's end, and now Ma Xicai is older and has been deposed, we must not avoid a fatal disaster, why not assist him together!

古文：于是帅庄户及乡人悉为兵，与帅暠共立希萼为衡山王，以县为行府，断江为栅，编竹为战舰，以师暠为武清节度使，召募徒众，数日，至万馀人，州县多应之。
现代文：于是率领庄中佃户和乡里百姓全部组成军队，与彭师共立马希萼为衡山王，将县府作为临时王府，横截湘江设置栅栏，编排竹子作为战舰，任命彭师为武清节度使，招募部众，数天之后，达到一万多人，邻近州县也大多响应。
English: Therefore, he led all the villagers in the village and the villagers in the village to form an army, and together with Peng Shih, he established Ma Xicai as the king of Hengshan, set up the county government as a temporary royal government, set up a fence across the Hunan River, arranged bamboo as a warship, appointed Peng Shih as the Wuqing festival envoy, and recruited members. A few days later, there were more than 10,000 people, and most of the neighboring counties also responded.

古文：遣判官刘虚己求援于唐。
现代文：派遣判官刘虚己向南唐求援。
English: Liu Hui, the dispatched magistrate, went to South Tang for help.

古文：徐威等见希崇所为，知必无成，又畏朗州、衡山之逼，恐一朝丧败，俱及祸，欲杀希崇以自解。
现代文：徐威等人见马希崇的所作所为，知道必定不能成功，又畏惧朗州、衡山的压力，恐怕有朝一日马希崇覆亡，同遭祸殃，打算杀死马希崇来解脱自己。
English: Xu Wei and others saw what Ma Xizong was doing and knew that it would not succeed. They were also afraid of the pressure from Lanzhou and Hengshan. They were afraid that one day Ma Xizong would be overthrown and they would suffer the same fate. They planned to kill Ma Xizong to free themselves.

古文：希崇微觉之，大惧，密遣客将范守牧奉表请兵于唐，唐主命边镐自袁州将兵万人西趣长沙。
现代文：马希崇暗中察觉此事，大为惊恐，秘密派遣客将范守牧携带表书到南唐请求出兵，南唐主命令边镐从袁州领兵一万人向西赶赴长沙。
English: Ma Xizong secretly noticed this and was greatly alarmed. He secretly sent a guest, Fan Shoumu, to Nantang with a form to request the dispatch of troops. The Lord of Nantang ordered Bentham to lead ten thousand soldiers from Yuanzhou westward to Changsha.

古文：冬，十月，辛卯，潞州巡检陈思让败北汉兵于虒亭。
现代文：冬季十月，辛卯，后周潞州巡检陈思让在亭击败北汉军队。
English: In the winter of October, shortly after Zhou Bozhou's inspection tour, Chen Sizhang defeated the Northern Han army in the pavilion.

古文：唐边镐引兵入醴陵。
现代文：南唐边镐领兵进入醴陵。
English: The Southern Tang Dynasty's border eunuch led the troops into Gongling.

古文：癸巳，楚王希崇遣使犒军。
现代文：癸巳，楚王马希崇派遣使者犒劳军队。
English: At this time, King Ma Xitong of Chu dispatched an envoy to reward the laboring troops.

古文：壬寅，遣天策府学士拓跋恒奉笺诣镐请降。
现代文：壬寅，派遣天策府学士拓跋恒奉持笺书到边镐住处请求投降。
English: Ren Yin, dispatched Tian Zhefu scholar Tuoba Heng to hold the letter to Bian Yao's residence to request surrender.

古文：恒叹曰： 吾久不死，乃为小儿送降状！ 
现代文：拓跋恒叹息说： 我这么长时间没有死，竟是为了给这小子递送投降书！ 
English: Tuoba Heng sighed and said: I have not died for such a long time, in order to deliver a letter of surrender to this boy!

古文：癸卯，希崇帅弟侄迎镐，望尘而拜，镐下马称诏劳之。
现代文：癸卯，马希崇率领兄弟侄子迎接边镐，刚望见远处的行尘便叩拜，边镐下马宣读诏书慰劳马希崇。
English: Suddenly, Ma Xitong led his brother and nephew to meet Bentham. As soon as he saw the distant marching dust, he bowed, and Bentham dismounted and read out an edict to comfort Ma Xitong.

古文：甲辰，希崇等从镐入城，镐舍于浏阳门楼，湖南将吏毕贺，镐皆厚赐之。
现代文：甲辰，马希崇等人跟从边镐进入长沙城，边镐住宿在浏阳门楼，湖南将领官吏全来祝贺，边镐都重赏他们。
English: Ji Chen, Ma Xizong and others followed Bentham into Changsha City. Bentham stayed at Liuyang Gate. Hunan generals and officials all came to congratulate them, and Bentham rewarded them.

古文：时湖南饥馑，镐大发马氏仓粟赈之，楚人大悦。
现代文：当时湖南闹饥荒，边镐大量散发马氏仓库粮食救济百姓，楚地人民非常喜悦。
English: At that time, Hunan was suffering from famine, and Bentham distributed a large amount of grain from Ma's warehouse to help the people. The people of Chu were very pleased.

古文：契丹遣彰国节度使萧禹厥将奚、契丹五万会北汉兵入寇。
现代文：契丹派遣彰国节度使萧禹厥统率奚、契丹五万人马会合北汉军队入侵，北汉主亲自统领二万军队从阴地关侵犯晋州。
English: The Khitans dispatched the Northern Han Army to invade Jinzhou from the west at the time of the Chang Guo Festival, which was led by Xiao Yu Jue, the leader of the Northern Han Army, who personally led 20,000 troops to invade Jinzhou from the west.

古文：北汉主自将兵二万自阴地关寇晋州，丁未，军于城北，三面置寨，昼夜攻之，游兵至绛州。时王晏已离镇，王彦超未至，巡检使王万敢权知晋州，与龙捷都指挥使史彦超、虎捷指挥使何徽共拒之。
现代文：丁未，军队驻扎在晋州城北，三面安置营寨，日夜攻城，流动部队到了绛州。当时王晏已经离开镇所，王彦超还没有到达，巡检使王万敢临时主持晋州军政，与龙捷都指挥使史彦超、虎捷指挥使何徽共同抵抗敌军。
English: At that time, Wang Yao had already left the town hall, Wang Yanchao had not yet arrived, and Wang Wanxiang, the inspector, temporarily presided over the military and political affairs of Jinzhou, and he resisted the enemy forces together with Shi Yanchao, the commander of Long Jie Du, and He Hui, the commander of Tiger Jie.

古文：史彦超，云州人也。
现代文：史彦超是云州人。
English: Shi Yanchao, a native of Yunnan.

古文：癸丑，唐武昌节度使刘仁赡帅战舰二百取岳州，抚纳降附，人忘其亡。
现代文：癸丑，南唐武昌节度使刘仁赡率领战船二百艘攻取岳州，安抚招纳投降归附的军民，楚人都好像忘记了国家灭亡。
English: At the time of the Southern Tang Dynasty's Wuchang Festival, Liu Renyi led 200 warships to conquer Yuezhou and pacify the soldiers and civilians who had been recruited, surrendered and annexed. The Chu people seemed to have forgotten the country's demise.

古文：仁赡，金之子也。
现代文：刘仁赡是刘金的儿子。
English: Liu Renyi is the son of Liu Jin.

古文：唐百官共贺湖南平，起居郎高远曰： 我乘楚乱，取之甚易。
现代文：南唐文武百官共同庆贺平定湖南，起居郎高远说： 我们乘着楚国内乱，所以夺取它很容易。
English: A hundred officials of the Southern Tang Dynasty jointly celebrated the pacification of Hunan, and Gaoyuan, who was a resident of Hunan, said: We took advantage of the civil war in Chu, so it was easy to seize it.

古文：观诸将之才，但恐守之难耳！ 
现代文：观察众将的才能，只怕守住它就难了！ 
English: It is difficult to observe the talent of the generals, let alone hold on to it!

古文：远，幽州人也。
现代文：高远是幽州人。
English: Gao Yuan is from Yuzhou.

古文：司徒致仕李建勋曰： 祸其始此乎！ 
现代文：司徒致仕李建勋说： 祸患恐怕就从这里开始吧！ 
English: Szeto said to Li Jianxun: I'm afraid the disaster will start here!

古文：唐主自即位以来，未尝亲祠郊庙，礼官以为请。唐主曰： 俟天下一家，然后告谢。 
现代文：南唐主从即位以来，未曾亲自祭祀天地宗庙，礼官请求举行祭祀，南唐主说： 等到天下成为一家，然后告谢天地祖宗。 
English: Since his enthronement, the Lord of the Southern Tang Dynasty had not personally offered sacrifices to the ancestral temple of Heaven and Earth. When the etiquette official requested that the sacrifice be held, the Lord of the Southern Tang Dynasty said, "Wait until the whole world becomes one family, and then give thanks to the ancestors of Heaven and Earth."

古文：及一举取楚，谓诸国指麾可定。
现代文：及至一举夺取楚地，认为其余各国也能随手平定。
English: As far as seizing Chudi in one fell swoop, they believe that the rest of the countries can also be easily pacified.

古文：魏岑侍宴言： 臣少游元城，乐其风土，俟陛下定中原，乞魏博节度使。 
现代文：魏岑陪从南唐主消磨闲暇，说： 我年轻时游过元城，喜欢那里的风土人情，等到陛下平定中原，请求让我当魏博节度使。 
English: Wei Wei, who spent his leisure time accompanying the lord of Southern Tang, said, "When I was young, I swam through Yuancheng and liked the customs and people there. When His Majesty conquered the Central Plains, he asked me to be the envoy of the Wei Bo Festival.

古文：唐主许之，岑趋下拜谢。
现代文：南唐主答应了他，魏岑赶忙快步走下台阶拜谢。
English: The Lord of Southern Tang promised him, and Wei Wei hurriedly walked down the steps to thank him.

古文：其主骄臣佞如此。
现代文：南唐主的骄傲、臣子们的谗媚大都如此。
English: The pride of the Lord of Southern Tang and the flattery of his courtiers were mostly of this kind.

古文：马希萼望唐人立己为潭帅，而潭人恶希萼，共请边镐为帅，唐主乃以镐为武安节度使。
现代文：马希萼希望南唐人扶立自己为潭州主帅，但潭州人憎恨马希萼，一齐请求边镐为主帅，南唐主于是任命边镐为武安节度使。
English: Ma Xicai hoped that the Southern Tang people would support him to become the coach of Tanzhou, but the people of Tanzhou hated Ma Xicai, and they all asked Bentham to be the coach. The Lord of Southern Tang then appointed Bentham as the envoy to the Wu'an Festival.

古文：王峻有故人曰申师厚，尝为兗州牙将，失职饥寒，望峻马拜谒于道。
现代文：王峻有个老熟人叫申师厚，曾任兖州牙将，因失失去职务而饥寒交迫，在路上望见王峻坐骑而叩拜谒见。
English: Wang Jun has an old acquaintance named Shen Shih Hou. He was once a Zhangzhou dental officer. He lost his position and suffered from hunger and cold. When he saw Wang Jun's horse on the road, he bowed to see him.

古文：会凉州留后折逋嘉施上表请帅于朝廷，帝以绝域非人所欲，募率府供奉官愿行者，月馀，无人应募，峻荐师厚于帝。
现代文：恰好凉州留后折逋嘉施向朝廷上奏表书请求委派主帅，后周太祖因为偏远地区无人愿去，便在东宫率府供奉官中招募愿意前往的人，但过了一个多月，还是没人应募，王峻向后周太祖推荐申师厚。
English: It just so happened that Liangzhou stayed behind, and Duan Jia Shi submitted a petition to the imperial court to request the appointment of a coach. Later, Zhou Taizu, because no one wanted to go to the remote area, recruited people who were willing to go from the Eastern Palace and the government officials, but after more than a month, there was still no one to apply. Wang Jun recommended the application to Zhou Taizu.

古文：丁巳，以师厚为河西节度使。
现代文：丁巳，任命申师厚为河西节度使。
English: Ding Si, appointed Shen Shih Hou as the Hexi Festival envoy.

古文：唐边镐趣马希崇帅其族入朝，马氏聚族相泣，欲重赂镐，奏乞留居长沙。镐微晒曰： 国家与公家世为仇敌，殆六十年，然未尝敢有意窥公之国。
现代文：南唐边镐催促马希崇带领家族进京入朝，马氏聚集族人相对哭泣，打算用重礼贿赂边镐，上奏乞求留住长沙，边镐微微一笑说： 国家与您马家世代互为仇敌，将近六十年，然而未曾敢有窥窬您马氏楚国的意思。
English: In Southern Tang Dynasty, Bentham urged Ma Xizong to lead his family to Beijing and enter the imperial court. The Ma clan gathered the tribesmen to cry, intending to bribe Bentham with a heavy gift, and begged him to keep Changsha. Bentham smiled and said, "The country and your Ma family generation have been enemies for nearly sixty years, but I have never dared to spy on your Ma clan's Chu Kingdom.

古文：今公兄弟斗阋，困穷自归，若复二三，恐有不测之忧。 
现代文：如今您兄弟争斗，自己落得穷困下场，倘若再有三长两短，恐怕又会产生无法预测的忧患。 
English: Now that your brothers are fighting and you have ended up poor, if there are three more ups and downs, I'm afraid there will be unpredictable worries.

古文：希崇无以应，十一月，辛酉，与宗族及将佐千馀人号恸登舟，送者皆哭，响振川谷。
现代文：马希崇无言以答，十一月，辛酉，和同宗族人以及将佐一千余人呼喊痛哭登上船只，送行的人也都哭着，哭声震动江河山谷。
English: Ma Xizong was speechless. In November, Xin Zhuang, his fellow clansmen, and more than a thousand soldiers boarded the ship crying bitterly. The people who saw them off were also crying, and their cries shook the river valley.

古文：帝以北汉、契丹之兵犹在晋州，甲子，以王峻为行营都部署，将兵救之。诏诸军皆受峻节度，听以便宜从事，得自选择将吏。
现代文：后周太祖因为北汉、契丹的军队仍在晋州，甲子，任命王峻为行营都部署，领兵援救晋州，颁诏令各路军队都接受王峻的调度指挥，授权王峻根据情况需要机断从事，可以自己选择任命将领官吏。
English: Later, Zhou Taizu, because the armies of the Northern Han and Khitan were still in Jinzhou, appointed Wang Jun as the commander of the camp and led the troops to rescue Jinzhou. He issued a decree that all armies would accept Wang Jun's dispatching command and authorized Wang Jun to act according to the needs of the situation. He could choose to appoint generals and officials.

古文：乙丑，峻行，帝自至城西饯之。
现代文：乙丑，王峻出征，后周太祖亲自到城西为他饯行。
English: Second Ugly, Wang Jun went to war, and later Zhou Taizu himself went to the west of the city to accompany him.

古文：楚静江节度副使、知桂州马希隐，武穆王殷之少子也。
现代文：楚静江节度副使、知桂州马希隐是楚武穆王马殷的小儿子。
English: Chu Jingjiang's deputy envoy to the Qing Dynasty, Zhi Guizhou Ma Xiyin, was the youngest son of King Ma Yin of the Chu Kingdom.

古文：楚王希广、希萼兄弟争国，南汉主以内侍使吴怀恩为西北招讨使，将兵屯境上，伺间密谋进取。希广遣指挥使彭彦晖将兵屯龙峒以备之。
现代文：楚王马希广、马希萼兄弟争夺国家，南汉主任命内侍吴怀恩为西北招讨使，领兵屯驻国境线上，等待时机，秘密图谋进攻夺取楚地，马希广派遣指挥使彭彦晖领兵屯驻龙峒来防备南汉军队。
English: The King of Chu, Ma Xiguang, and the Ma Xucal brothers fought for the country. The Lord of Southern Han appointed the servant Wu Huai'en as the envoy to the northwest, stationed the leading soldiers on the border line, waited for the opportunity, and secretly plotted to attack and seize Chu. Ma Xiguang sent the commander to have Peng Yanyan lead the soldiers stationed in Longyan to protect the Southern Han army.

古文：希萼自衡山遣使以彦晖为桂州都监、在城外内巡检使、判军府事，希隐恶之，潜遣人告蒙州刺史许可琼。
现代文：马希萼从衡山县派遣使者任命彭彦晖为桂州都监、在城外内巡检使、判军府事，马希隐厌恶彭彦晖，暗中派人告知蒙州刺史许可琼。
English: Ma Xicai dispatched an envoy from Hengshan County to appoint Peng Yanjun as the Guizhou Metropolitan Supervisor, inspect outside the city, and decide on military affairs. Ma Xicai detested Peng Yanjun and secretly sent someone to inform Mengzhou of his permission to assassinate Qiong.

古文：可琼方畏南汉之逼，即弃蒙州，引兵趣桂州，与彦晖战于城中。彦晖败，奔衡山，可琼留屯桂州。
现代文：许可琼正畏惧南汉的威逼，立即放弃蒙州，领兵直奔桂州，同彭彦晖军队在城中开战，彭彦晖被打败，逃奔衡山县，许可琼留下来屯驻桂州。
English: It is said that Qiong Zheng was afraid of the threat of Southern Han, immediately abandoned Mengzhou and led his army straight to Guizhou, and fought with Peng Yanyan's army in the city. Peng Yanyan was defeated and fled to Hengshan County. Qiong was allowed to stay in Guizhou.

古文：吴怀恩据蒙州，进兵侵掠，桂管大扰，希隐、可琼不知所为，但相与饮酒对泣。
现代文：吴怀恩占据蒙州，进军侵犯抢掠，桂管一带大受骚扰，马希隐、许可琼不知该怎么办，只是一起饮酒相对哭泣。
English: Wu Huai'en occupied Mengzhou, invaded and plundered, Guizhou was greatly harassed, and Ma Xiyin and Zheng Qiong did not know what to do, but they drank and cried together.

古文：南汉主遗希隐书，言： 武穆王奄有全楚，富强安靖五十馀年。
现代文：南汉主给马希隐书信，说： 楚武穆王拥有整个楚国，富强安宁五十多年。
English: The lord of the Southern Han Dynasty wrote a letter to Ma Xiyin, saying: King Chu Wumu owns the entire state of Chu, which has been prosperous, strong and peaceful for more than fifty years.

古文：正由三十五舅、三十舅兄弟寻戈，自相鱼肉，举先人基业，北面仇雠。
现代文：正是由于三十五舅马希广、三十舅马希萼兄弟同室操戈，自相残杀，拿先人打下的江山，向昔日仇敌南唐称臣降服。
English: It was precisely because the thirty-fifth uncle Ma Xiguang and the thirty-third uncle Ma Xicai brothers, who were roommates, fought against each other, killed each other, took the country that their predecessors had defeated, and surrendered to the former enemy South Tang.

古文：今闻唐兵已据长沙，窃计桂林继为所取。
现代文：如今听说南唐军队已经占据长沙，我估计桂林将相继为南唐所夺取。
English: Now that I have heard that the South Tang army has occupied Changsha, I estimate that Guilin will be successively captured by the South Tang.

古文：当朝世为与国，重以婚姻，睹兹倾危，忍不赴救！
现代文：本朝世代与楚为邻国，加以通婚联姻，见此倾覆危亡，岂能忍心不前往救援！
English: This dynasty's generation was neighbors with the Chu dynasty and intermarried with them. Seeing that they were in danger of collapse, how could they not go to the rescue!

古文：已发大军水陆俱进，当令相公舅永拥节旄，常居方面。 
现代文：已经调发大军水陆并进，必当让您相公舅永远握有实权，长久镇居一方。 
English: A large army has been dispatched to advance on land and sea, so you must let your father-in-law always hold real power and stay on one side for a long time.

古文：希隐得书，与僚佐议降之，支使潘玄珪以为不可。
现代文：马希隐得到书信，与部下商议投降南汉，支使潘玄认为不可。
English: When Ma Xiyin received the letter, he and his subordinates discussed surrendering to the Southern Han, but the envoy Pan Xuan thought it was impossible.

古文：丙寅，吴怀恩引兵奄至城下，希隐、可琼帅其众，夜斩关奔全州，桂州遂溃。
现代文：丙寅，吴怀恩领兵突然进到城下，马希隐、许可琼率领部众，夜晚破关夺路逃奔全州，桂州于是溃败。
English: Hsin Yin, Wu Huai'en led the troops suddenly into the city, Ma Xiyin and Zheng Qiong led the troops, broke through the night to escape to Quanzhou, and Guizhou was defeated.

古文：怀恩因以兵略定宜、连、梧、严、富、昭、柳、象、龚等州，南汉始尽有岭南之地。
现代文：吴怀恩乘机用兵基本平定宜州、连州、梧州、严州、富州、昭州、柳州、龚州、象州等，南汉从此完全占有大庾岭以南之地。
English: Wu Huai'en basically pacified Yizhou, Lianzhou, Wuzhou, Yanzhou, Fuzhou, Zhaozhou, Liuzhou, Zhangzhou, Xiangzhou, etc. by using aircraft and soldiers. Nanhan has since completely occupied the land south of Dalatangling.

古文：辛未，唐边镐遣先锋指挥使李承戬将兵如衡山，趣马希萼入朝。
现代文：辛未，南唐边镐派遣先锋指挥使李承戬领兵前往衡山县，催促马希萼进京入朝。
English: Soon after, the Southern Tang Dynasty sent Li Chengyu to lead the troops to Hengshan County, urging Ma Xicai to enter Beijing and the imperial court.

古文：庚辰，希萼与将佐士卒万馀人自潭州东下。
现代文：庚辰，马希萼与将佐士兵一万多人从潭州向东沿江而下。
English: Geng Chen, Ma Xicai and more than ten thousand soldiers from Tanzhou marched east along the river.

古文：王峻留陕州旬日，帝以北汉攻晋州急，忧其不守，议自将由泽州路与峻会兵救之，且遣使谕峻。
现代文：王峻在陕州停留十日，后周太祖因北汉军队攻打晋州紧急，担心晋州不能坚守，商议亲自统军从泽州路与王峻会师救援晋州，并且派遣使者告知王峻。
English: Wang Jun stayed in Shaanxi for ten days. Later, Zhou Taizu was worried that Jinzhou could not hold out due to the emergency caused by the Northern Han Army attacking Jinzhou. He personally negotiated with Wang Jun to unite the army from Zezhou Road to rescue Jinzhou, and sent an envoy to inform Wang Jun.

古文：十二月，戊子朔，下诏以三日西征。
现代文：十二月，戊子朔，后周太祖下诏令于三日出发西征。
English: In December, at the dawn of the new year, Zhou Taizu issued an imperial edict to set out for the West on the 3rd.

古文：使者至陕，峻因使者言于帝曰： 晋州城坚，未易可拔，刘崇兵锋方锐，不可力争。
现代文：使者到达陕州，王峻通过使者转告后周太祖说： 晋州城池坚固，不易攻破，刘崇军队前锋正锐气十足，不可力争。
English: After the envoys arrived in Shaanxi and Wang Jun relayed the message through the envoys, Zhou Taizu said: The city of Jinzhou is solid and not easy to break through. Liu Chong's army's forwards are full of vigor and cannot fight.

古文：所以驻兵，待其气衰耳，非臣怯也。
现代文：我之所以屯兵不进，只为等待他们士气低落罢了不是臣下心虚胆怯。
English: The reason why I did not enter the garrison was only to wait for their low morale, not because my vassals were cowardly.

古文：陛下新即位，不宜轻动。
现代文：陛下新近即位，不宜轻举妄动。
English: His Majesty has just ascended the throne, and it is not appropriate to act rashly.

古文：若年驾出汜水，则慕容彦超引兵入汴，大事去矣！ 
现代文：倘若陛下大驾从汜水出来，那末慕容彦超领兵进入汴京的话，大事就完了。 
English: If His Majesty comes out of Surabaya in a big way, then Murong Yanchao will lead the troops into Beijing, and the big event will be over.

古文：帝闻之，自以手提耳曰： 几败吾事！ 
现代文：后周太祖听到这话，不觉自己用手拉耳朵说： 差点坏了我的大事！ 
English: Later, when Zhou Taizu heard this, he involuntarily covered his ears with his hands and said, "I almost ruined my big event!"

古文：庚寅，敕罢亲征。
现代文：庚寅，敕命取消原定的亲征计划。
English: Goyang, desperately canceled the original plan of self-enlistment.

古文：初，泰宁节度使兼中书令慕容彦超闻徐州平，疑惧愈甚，乃招纳亡命，畜聚薪粮，潜以书结北汉，吏获其书以闻。
现代文：当初，泰宁节度使兼中书令慕容彦超听说徐州平定，疑虑恐惧愈发加重，于是招纳亡命之徒，积聚粮草，暗中写书信勾结北汉，官吏截获书信而奏报。
English: At the beginning, Taining's festival envoy and Chinese scribe Murong Yanchao heard about the pacification of Xuzhou, and his doubts and fears became more and more serious. Therefore, he recruited outlaws, accumulated grain and grass, secretly wrote letters to collude with the Northern Han Dynasty, and officials intercepted the letters and reported them.

古文：又遣人诈为商人求援于唐。
现代文：慕容彦超又派人装作商人向南唐寻求援助。
English: Murong also sent someone posing as a merchant to South Tang to seek assistance.

古文：帝遣通事舍人郑好谦就申慰谕，与之为誓。
现代文：后周太祖派遣通事舍人郑好谦前去申明劝慰之意，与他立下誓约。
English: Later, Zhou Taizu sent Zheng Haoqian to express his condolences and made an oath with him.

古文：彦超益不自安，屡遣都押牙郑麟诣阙，伪输诚款，实觇机事。又献天平节度使高行周书，其言皆谤毁朝廷与彦超相结之意。
现代文：慕容彦超更加自感不安，屡次派遣都押牙郑麟到朝廷，表面上假表忠心，实际上刺探机密，又献上天平节度使高行周的书信，信中讲的都是诽谤朝廷与慕容彦超私相勾结的话。
English: Murong Yanchao felt even more uneasy. He repeatedly sent Zheng Lin to the imperial court, pretending to be loyal on the surface, but actually spying on secrets. He also presented Gao Xingzhou's letters with the balance of power. The letters were all about slandering the imperial court and Murong Yanchao's private collusion.

古文：帝笑曰： 此彦超之诈也！ 
现代文：后周太祖笑道： 这是慕容彦超的鬼计啊！ 
English: Later, Zhou Taizu laughed and said, "This is Murong Yanchao's evil plan!"

古文：以书示行周，行周上表谢恩。
现代文：将书信拿给高行周看，高行周上陈表书感谢皇恩。
English: He showed the letter to Gao Xing Zhou, and Gao Xing Zhou thanked the emperor for his kindness.

古文：既而彦超反迹益露，丙申，遣阁门使张凝将兵赴郓州巡检以备之。
现代文：不久慕容彦超谋反的迹象日益显露，丙申，后周太祖派遣阁门使张凝领兵赶赴郓州巡行检查来防备他。
English: Soon, more and more signs of Murongyan's rebellion were revealed, and later, Zhou Taizu sent a messenger to Zhang Jian to lead soldiers to rush to Luzhou for a patrol inspection to prevent him.

古文：庚子，王峻至绛州。乙已，引兵趣晋州。
现代文：庚子，王峻到达绛州；乙巳，领兵奔赴晋州。
English: Geng Zi, Wang Jun arrived in Ganzhou; Yixi, the leader of the troops rushed to Jinzhou.

古文：晋州南有蒙坑，最为险要，峻忧北汉兵据之。
现代文：晋州南面有个蒙，地形最为险要，王峻担心北汉军队占据它。
English: In the south of Jinzhou, there is a mountain range, the most dangerous terrain, and Wang Jun is worried that the North Han army will occupy it.

古文：是日，闻前锋已度蒙坑，喜曰： 吾事济矣！ 
现代文：当天，听说前锋部队已过蒙，欣喜地说： 我的大事成功了！ 
English: On the same day, when he heard that the vanguard troops had been defeated, he said with joy: My great deed has been successful!

古文：慕容彦超奏请入朝，帝知其诈，即许之。既而复称境内多盗，未敢离镇。
现代文：慕容彦超上表奏请进京入朝，后周太祖明知他有诈，立即应许他，不久他又说境内强盗多，不敢离开镇所。
English: Murong Yanchao made a request to enter Beijing and the imperial court. Later, Zhou Taizu, knowing that he was deceitful, immediately promised him, and soon he said that there were many robbers in the territory, and he did not dare to leave the town.

古文：北汉主攻晋州，久不克。
现代文：北汉主攻打晋州，久攻不下。
English: The Northern Han Dynasty mainly attacked Jinzhou, but could not conquer it for a long time.

古文：会大雪，民相聚保山寨，野无所掠，军乏食。
现代文：碰上天下大雪，百姓互相聚集保守山寨，野外没有可抢掠的，军队缺乏食物。
English: When there is heavy snowfall, the people gather together to protect their cottages. There is nothing to loot in the field, and the army is short of food.

古文：契丹思归，闻王峻至蒙坑，烧营夜遁。
现代文：契丹军队想返回，听说王峻到达蒙，便焚烧营帐连夜逃跑。
English: When the Khitan army wanted to return and heard that Wang Jun had arrived in Mongolia, they burned their camp and fled overnight.

古文：峻入晋州，诸将请亟追之，峻犹豫未决。明日，乃遣行营马军都指挥使仇弘超、都排陈使药元福、左厢排除使陈思让、康延沼将骑兵追之，及于霍邑，纵兵奋击，北汉兵坠崖谷死者甚众。
现代文：王峻进入晋州，众将请命立即追赶，王峻犹豫没作决定；第二天，才派遣行营马军都指挥使仇弘超、都排陈使药元福、左厢排陈使陈思让、康延沼率领骑兵追击，赶到霍邑放任士兵奋勇击杀，北汉士兵坠落山崖深谷摔死的非常多。
English: Wang Jun entered Jinzhou, the crowd will ask for orders to chase immediately, Wang Jun hesitated and did not make a decision; the next day, he sent the cavalry to chase the cavalry, led by the commander of the cavalry, Quchu Hongchao, the commander of the cavalry, the commander of the cavalry Chen, the commander of the cavalry, the commander of the cavalry, the commander of the cavalry, the commander of the cavalry, the commander of the cavalry, the commander of the cavalry, the commander of the cavalry, the commander of the cavalry, the commander of the cavalry, the commander of the cavalry, the commander of the cav

古文：霍邑道隘，延沼畏懦不急追，由是北汉兵得度。
现代文：霍邑道路狭窄，康延沼畏缩害怕不敢紧追，因此北汉军队得以渡河。
English: The road in Huoyu is narrow, and the Kangyan swamp is afraid to follow closely, so the Northern Han army was able to cross the river.

古文：药元福曰： 刘崇悉发其众，挟明骑而来，志吞晋、绛。今气衰力惫，狼狈而遁。不乘此翦扑，必为后患。 
现代文：药元福说： 刘崇调动他的全部军队，挟持胡人骑兵一起来，志在吞并晋州、绛州，如今士气衰落疲惫不堪，狼狈逃窜，不乘此时歼灭，必定留为后患。 
English: Yu Yuanfu said, "Liu Chong mobilized his entire army and brought Hu Ren cavalry together, with the aim of annexing Jinzhou and Zhangzhou. Now, his morale is exhausted, and he is on the run. If he does not take advantage of this opportunity to annihilate, he will certainly be left behind.

古文：诸将不欲进，王峻复遣使止之，遂还。
现代文：众将不想继续挺进，王峻又派人制止，于是返回。
English: The crowd did not want to advance any further, so Wang Jun sent someone to stop them, and then returned.

古文：契丹比至晋阳，士马什丧三四。
现代文：等到契丹军队到达晋阳，士卒马匹损失十分之三四。
English: By the time the Khitan army reached Jinyang, the loss of soldiers and horses was three-fourths.

古文：萧禹厥耻于无功，钉大酋长一人于市，旬馀而斩之。
现代文：萧禹厥因无功败归感到耻辱，将一名大酋长钉在街市上，十几天以后才斩杀。
English: Embarrassed by his failure, Xiao Yu Jue nailed a great chieftain to the street, only to be beheaded ten days later.

古文：北汉主始息意于进取。
现代文：北汉主开始打消南下进取的念头。
English: Northern Han rulers began to dismiss the idea of advancing southward.

古文：北汉土瘠民贫，内供军国，外奉契丹，赋繁役重，民不聊生，逃入周境者甚众。
现代文：北汉土地贫瘠、人民穷困，内要供给军队、官府的费用，外要向契丹贡献钱财，赋税繁多，徭役沉重，民不聊生，逃入后周地界的人很多。
English: The land of Northern Han is barren and the people are impoverished. It is necessary to supply the expenses of the army and the government from the inside, and to contribute money to the Khitan from the outside. There are many taxes, heavy labor, people do not enjoy life, and there are many people who have fled to the hinterland.

古文：唐主以镇南节度使兼中书令宋齐丘为太傅，以马希萼为江南西道观察使、守中书令，镇洪州，仍赐爵楚王。以马希崇为永泰节度使、兼侍中，镇舒州。
现代文：南唐主任命镇南节度使兼中书令宋齐丘为太傅；任命马希萼为江南西道观察使，镇守洪州，仍旧赐爵为楚王；任命马希崇为永泰节度使，镇守舒州。
English: The Lord of the Southern Tang Dynasty appointed Song Qiqiu, the Zhennan Festival Envoy and the Central Writing Envoy, as the Taifu; appointed Ma Xichal as the observation envoy of the West Jiangnan Road, the town guard of Hongzhou, and still knighted as the King of Chu; appointed Ma Xichong as the Yongtai Festival Envoy, and the town guard of Shuzhou.

古文：湖南将吏，位高者拜刺史、将军、卿监，卑者以次拜官。
现代文：湖南的将领官吏，职位高的授于刺史、将军、卿监，职位低的也依次授官。
English: For generals and officials in Hunan, the highest positions were awarded to the chief historian, generals, and court supervisors, and the lowest positions were also awarded in turn.

古文：唐主嘉廖偃、彭师暠之忠，以偃为左殿直军使、莱州刺史，师暠为殿直都虞候，赐予甚厚。
现代文：南唐主嘉奖廖偃、彭师的忠诚，任命廖偃为左殿直军使、莱州刺史，彭师为殿直都虞候，赏赐非常丰厚。
English: The Lord of the Southern Tang Dynasty commended the loyalty of Liao Zhen and Peng Shih, appointing Liao Zhen as the left palace direct military envoy and the governor of Laizhou, and Peng Shih as the palace direct governor, and the rewards were very rich.

古文：湖南刺史皆入朝于唐，永州刺史王赟独后至，唐王毒杀之。
现代文：湖南刺史都到南唐京城入朝称臣，只有永州刺史王最后到达，南唐主用毒药杀死他。
English: Hunan's King Sisi went to the capital of Southern Tang to enter the court and claim to be a vassal. Only Yongzhou's King Sisi finally arrived, and the lord of Southern Tang killed him with poison.

古文：南汉主遣内侍省丞潘崇彻、将军谢贯将兵攻郴州，唐边镐发兵救之。
现代文：南汉主派遣内侍省丞潘崇彻、将军谢贯领兵进攻郴州，南唐边镐发兵救援。
English: The lord of Southern Han dispatched his personal attendant, the provincial governor Pan Chongche, and the general Xie Ran to lead the troops to attack Zhangzhou, while the governor of Southern Tang sent troops to the rescue.

古文：崇彻败唐兵于义章，遂取郴州。
现代文：潘崇彻在义章击败南唐军队，于是攻取郴州。
English: Pan Chongche defeated the Southern Tang army in Yizhang, and then conquered Zhangzhou.

古文：边镐请除全、道二州刺史以备南汉。
现代文：边镐请求任命全、道二州的刺史来防备南汉。
English: Bentham requested the appointment of governors-general for all and two provinces to guard against the rise of the Southern Han.

古文：丙辰，唐主以廖偃为道州刺史，以黑云指挥使张峦知全州。
现代文：丙辰，南唐主任命廖偃为道州刺史，任命黑云指挥使张峦主持全州军政。
English: Cixin, the ruler of Southern Tang Dynasty, appointed Liao Wei as the governor of Daozhou, and appointed Black Cloud commander Zhang Wei to preside over the military and political affairs of the whole state.

古文：是岁，唐主以安化节度使鄱阳王王延政为山南西道节度使，更赐爵光山王。
现代文：这一年，南唐主任命安化节度使鄱阳王王延政为山南西道节度使，又赐爵为光山王。
English: In this year, the Lord of Southern Tang appointed Anhua as the festival envoy to make King Yan Zheng of Poyang the festival envoy of Shannan West Road, and gave him the title of King of Guangshan.

古文：初，蒙城镇将咸师朗将部兵降唐，唐主以其兵为奉节都，从边镐平湖南。
现代文：当初，蒙城镇守将领咸师朗率领所辖军队投降南唐，南唐主将他的部队改编为奉节都，跟随边镐平定湖南。
English: At first, the Mongolian town guard general, Xian Shilang, led the army under his jurisdiction to surrender to Southern Tang. The Lord of Southern Tang converted his troops into Fengjitu and followed the borderlands to settle Hunan.

古文：唐悉收湖南金帛、珍玩、仓粟乃至舟舰、亭馆、花果之美者，皆徙于金陵，遣都官郎中杨继勋等收湖南租赋以赡戍兵。
现代文：南唐全部没收湖南的金银绢帛、珍宝古玩、仓库粮食乃至舟船战舰、亭台馆阁、鲜花水果中的佳品，都转移到金陵，派遣都官郎中杨继勋等收取湖南租税来供养守卫的军队。
English: The Southern Tang Dynasty confiscated all of Hunan's gold and silver ingots, precious antiques, warehouse grain, and even the finest war ships, pavilions, and flowers and fruits. They were all transferred to Jinling, and Yang Jixun, the son of the capital official, was sent to collect Hunan taxes to feed the guarding army.

古文：继勋等务为苛刻，湖南人失望。
现代文：杨继勋等专门加重收敛盘剥，湖南百姓大失所望。
English: Yang Jixun and others have specially intensified the austerity drive, and the people of Hunan are greatly disappointed.

古文：行营粮料使王绍颜减士卒粮赐，奉节指挥使孙朗、曹进怒曰： 昔吾从咸公降唐，唐待我岂如今日湖南将士之厚哉！
现代文：行营粮料使王绍颜削减士兵的粮食、赏赐，奉节指挥使孙朗、曹进发怒说： 从前我们跟着咸公投降唐朝，唐朝待我们哪里比得上今日待湖南将士那样优厚呀！
English: Wang Shaoyan reduced the soldiers' food and rewards due to the lack of food for the campaign. Sun Lang and Cao Jin were angered by the command of the festival and said: Once upon a time, we followed Xian Gong to surrender to the Tang Dynasty. How can the Tang Dynasty treat us better than it treats the Hunan soldiers today!

古文：今有功不增禄赐，又减之，不如杀绍颜及镐，据湖南，归中原，富贵可图也！ 
现代文：如今有功劳不增加俸禄赏赐，反而减少，不如杀掉王绍颜和边镐，占据湖南，投归中原，荣华富贵指日可待。
English: Nowadays, the reward for meritorious service is not increased, but decreased. It is better to kill Wang Shaoyan and Bentham, occupy Hunan, return to the Central Plains, and glory and wealth are just around the corner.

古文：太祖圣神恭肃文孝皇帝上广顺二年春，正月，庚申，夜，孙朗、曹进帅其徒作乱，束藁潜烧府门，火不然。
现代文：广顺二年春季，正月，庚申，夜晚，孙朗、曹进率领他们的徒众举行叛乱，将藁草打成捆暗中焚烧镇府大门，火没点着。
English: In the spring of the second year of Guangshun, in the first month of the year, in the evening of the second month of the year, Sun Lang and Cao Jin led their followers to hold a rebellion, and secretly burned the gate of the town hall by tying reeds into bundles. The fire was not lit.

古文：边镐觉之，出兵格斗，且命鸣鼓角，朗、进等以为将晓，斩关奔朗州。
现代文：边镐发觉，派出士兵进行格斗，并且命令击鼓吹号，孙朗、曹进等以为天将破晓，便夺关破门逃奔朗州。
English: When Bentham found out, he sent soldiers to fight, and ordered them to beat drums and blow trumpets. Sun Lang, Cao Jin, and others thought it was dawn, so they broke through the gate and fled to Lanzhou.

古文：王逵问朗曰： 吾昔从武穆王，与淮南战屡捷，淮南兵易与耳。
现代文：王逵问孙朗道： 我昔日跟随楚武穆王，与淮南作战屡次取胜，淮南军队容易对付。
English: Wang Zhe asked Sun Lang: I once followed King Chu Wumu and fought against Huainan and won many times. The Huainan army is easy to deal with.

古文：今欲以朗州之众复取湖南，可乎？ 
现代文：如今打算用朗州的部众再次夺取湖南，可以吗？ 
English: Now he intends to use the people of Lanzhou to seize Hunan again, is that okay?

古文：朗曰： 朗在金陵数年，备见其政事，朝无贤臣，军无良将，忠佞无别，赏罚不当，如此，得国存幸矣，何暇兼人！
现代文：孙朗说： 我在金陵多年，详察南唐的政事，朝廷没的贤臣，军队没有良将，忠诚奸佞不分，赏罚失当，像这样，能保存国家已是万幸了，还有什么闲暇去兼并别人！
English: Sun Lang said, "I have been in Jinling for many years, closely observing the political affairs of Southern Tang. The court has no wise men, the army has no good generals, there is no distinction between the loyal and the treacherous, and the rewards and punishments are inappropriate. In this way, it is a great fortune to be able to preserve the country. What leisure is left to annex others!

古文：朗请为公前驱，取湖南如拾芥耳！ 
现代文：我请求做您的前锋，夺取湖南就如同捡拾小草！ 
English: I ask to be your striker, to capture Hunan is like picking up grass!

古文：逵悦，厚遇之。
现代文：王逵很高兴，厚礼待他。
English: Wang Yao was very happy and treated him with great courtesy.

古文：壬戌，发开封府民夫五万修大梁城，旬日而罢。
现代文：壬戌，后周征发开封府五万民夫修筑大梁城墙，十天完成。
English: Later, Zhou enlisted and dispatched fifty thousand people from Kaifeng to build a large-beam city wall, which was completed in ten days.

古文：慕容彦超发乡兵入城，引泗水注壕中，为战守之备。又多以旗帜授诸镇将，令募群盗，剽掠邻境，所在奏其反状。
现代文：慕容彦超调发乡兵入城，挖沟引泗水灌注壕沟中，作战斗防守的准备；同时把许多旗帜授予各镇将领，让他们招募成群结伙的强盗，抢掠邻近州县，骚扰所及之处纷纷奏报慕容彦超反叛的情况。
English: Murong Yancao dispatched the townspeople to enter the city, dig trenches, divert water and pour water into the trenches to prepare for battle defense; at the same time, he awarded many flags to the town generals, let them recruit gangs of robbers, loot the neighboring counties, and report the situation of Murong Yancao's rebellion everywhere the harassment reached.

古文：甲子，敕沂、密二州不复隶泰宁军。
现代文：甲子，后周太祖敕令沂、密二州不再隶属泰宁军。
English: After the death of Emperor Gaozong, Zhou Taizong and Emperor Lingzhu, Mizhou no longer belonged to the Taining Army.

古文：以侍卫步军都指挥使、昭武节度使曹英为都部署，讨彦超，齐州防御使史延超为副部署，皇城使河内向训为都监，陈州防御使乐元福为行营马步都虞候。
现代文：任命侍卫步军都指挥使、昭武节度使曹英为都部署，讨伐慕容彦超，齐州防御使史延超为副部署，皇城使河内人向训为都监，陈州防御使药元福为行营马步都虞候。
English: He appointed Zhaowu Jiedu to be the commander of the marching guards, Zhaowu Jiedu to be the commander of Cao Ying's marching troops, Mu Rongyanchao to be the commander of the marching troops, Shi Yanchao to be the deputy commander of the marching troops for the defense of Qi Province, Xiangxun of Hanoi to be the commander of the marching troops for the defense of the imperial capital, and Yue Yuanfu to be the commander of the marching troops for the defense of Chen Province.

古文：帝以元福宿将，命英、训无得以军礼见之，二人皆父事之。
现代文：后周太祖因为药元福是经验丰富的老将，命令曹英、向训不得按照军礼见药元福，二人都像对父亲那样待他。
English: Later, Zhou Taizu ordered Cao Ying and Xiang Xun not to meet Yue Yuanfu according to military etiquette, because Yue Yuanfu was an experienced veteran. Both of them treated him as they had treated their father.

古文：唐主发兵五千，军于下邳，以援彦超。闻周兵将至，退屯沐阳。
现代文：南唐君主发兵五千，驻扎在下邳，以便援助慕容彦超；听说后周军队将到，后退屯驻沭阳。
English: The Southern Tang Monarch sent five thousand soldiers, stationed in the Lower Yangtze, in order to aid Murong Yanchao; when he heard that Zhou's army would arrive later, he retreated and settled in Fenyang.

古文：徐州巡检使张令彬击之，大破唐兵，杀、溺死者千馀人，获其将燕敬权。初，彦超以周室新造，谓其易摇，故北召北汉及契丹，南诱唐人，使侵边鄙，冀朝廷奔命不暇，然后乘间而动。
现代文：徐州巡检使张令彬出击，大败南唐军队，杀死、淹死的有一千当初，慕容彦超因周朝新建，认为容易动摇，所以北面召呼北汉和契丹，南面引诱南唐人，让他们侵犯边疆，希望朝廷疲于奔命无暇它顾，然后自己乘机而动。
English: The Xuzhou patrol sent Zhang Lingbin to attack and defeated the Southern Tang army, killing and drowning a thousand. At first, Murong Yanchao thought that it was easy to shake because of the new construction of the Zhou Dynasty, so he called the Northern Han and Khitan in the north, and lured the Southern Tang people in the south to invade the border, hoping that the court would be too busy to take care of it, and then take the opportunity to move.

古文：及北汉、契丹自晋州北走，唐兵败于沐阳，彦超之势遂沮。
现代文：及至北汉、契丹军队从晋州败走，南唐军队在沭阳溃败，慕容彦超的势力于是受挫。
English: As far as the Northern Han Dynasty, the Khitan army was defeated in Jinzhou, the Southern Tang army was defeated in Shenyang, and the power of Murong Yanchao was frustrated.

古文：永兴节度使李洪信，自以汉室近亲，心不自安。城中兵不满千人，王峻在陕，以救晋州为名，发其数百。
现代文：永兴节度使李洪信，因为自己是后汉皇室的近亲，内心不能自安，城中军队不满千人，王峻在陕州时，以援救晋州的名义，调发其中数百人。
English: The Yongxing Festival made Li Hongxin, because he was a close relative of the post-Han royal family, feel insecure. There were less than a thousand troops in the city. When Wang Jun was in Shaanxi, he sent hundreds of them in the name of rescuing Jinzhou.

古文：及北汉兵遁去，遣禁兵千馀人戍长安。洪信惧，遂入朝。
现代文：及至北汉军队逃跑离去，朝廷又派遣禁兵一千多人戍守长安；李洪信深感恐惧，于是只得进京入朝。
English: When the Northern Han army fled, the imperial court sent more than a thousand soldiers to guard Chang'an. Li Hongxin was deeply afraid, so he had to go to Beijing to enter the imperial court.

古文：壬申，王峻自晋州还，入见。
现代文：壬申，王峻从晋州回来，入朝拜见后周太祖。
English: In Jinshin, Wang Jun returned from Jinzhou and went to the imperial court to pay homage to Emperor Hou Zhou.

古文：曹英等至兗州，设长围。
现代文：曹英等到达兖州，布设包围圈。
English: Cao Ying and others arrived in Zhangzhou and set up an encirclement.

古文：慕容彦超屡出战，药元福皆击败之，彦超不敢出。
现代文：慕容彦超屡次出城交战，药元福都击败他，慕容彦超便不敢出来。
English: Murong Yanchao repeatedly went out of the city to fight, and Yueyuan Fu beat him. Murong Yanchao did not dare to come out.

古文：十馀日，长围合，遂进攻之。
现代文：十几天后，包围圈合围，就发起进攻。
English: A dozen days later, when the encirclement was complete, they launched an attack.

古文：初，彦超将反，判官崔周度谏曰： 鲁，诗书之国，自伯禽以来不能霸诸侯，然以礼义守之，可以长世。
现代文：当初，慕容彦超将要反叛，判官崔周度劝谏说： 鲁这个地方，是诗书的国家，自从伯禽以来虽不能称霸诸侯，然而用礼义守护，可以长存于世。
English: At first, Murong Yanchao was going to rebel, and the judge, Cui Zhoudu, persuaded him: "This place, Lu, is a country of poetry. Although it has not been able to dominate the princes since the time of the peasant, it can be protected with courtesy and can survive in the world.

古文：公于国家非有私憾，胡为自疑！况主上开谕勤至，苟撤备归诚，则坐享泰山之安矣。
现代文：您对国家并无私恨，为什么自己疑神疑鬼，况且主上开导诫谕关怀备至，假如撤去防备归降投诚，就可以坐享太山那样的平安了。
English: You have no selfish hatred for the country. Why do you doubt God and the spirits? Moreover, the Lord has given the commandment to be concerned and prepared. If you remove the precautionary measures and surrender to sincerity, you will be able to enjoy the peace of Mount Tai.

古文：独不见杜中令、安襄阳、李河中竟何所成乎！ 
现代文：难道没看见杜重威、安从进、李守贞结果干成什么了吗！ 
English: Didn't they see what Du Chongwei, An Congjin, and Li Shouzhen accomplished as a result?

古文：彦超怒。
现代文：慕容彦超大怒。
English: Murayohiko was furious.

古文：及官军围城，彦超括士民之财以赡军，坐匿财死者甚众。
现代文：及至官军围城，慕容彦超搜刮士人百姓的财产来供应军需，因隐匿财产罪被处死的人很多。
English: When the government army besieged the city, Murong Yanchao began to seize the property of the common people to supply military supplies. Many people were executed for the crime of concealing property.

古文：前陕州司马阎弘鲁，宝之子也，畏彦超之暴，倾家为献。
现代文：前陕州司马阎弘鲁是阎宝的儿子，畏惧慕容彦超的残暴，把全部家产献出，但慕容彦超仍然认为他有所隐瞒，命令崔周度搜索阎家。
English: Former Shaanxi Sima Yan Honglu was the son of Yan Bao. He was afraid of Murong Yanchao's brutality and gave away all his family property. However, Murong Yanchao still thought that he had something to hide and ordered Cui Zhoudu to search Yan's house.

古文：彦超犹以为有所匿，命周度索其家，周度谓弘鲁曰： 君之死生，系财之丰约，宜无所爱。 弘鲁泣拜其妻妾曰： 悉出所有以救吾死。 
现代文：崔周度对阎弘鲁说： 您的死生之命，就系连在献出财产的多少上，应该无所吝惜。 阎弘鲁流泪叩拜他的妻子侍妾说： 拿出全部所有的财物来救我免死。 都说： 一点儿也没有了。 
English: Cui Zhoudu said to Yan Honglu, "Your life and death are linked to the amount of property you give away, and you should not begrudge anything." Yan Honglu tearfully bowed to his wife and concubine and said, "Take out all your belongings to save me from death." They all said, "There is nothing left."

古文：皆曰： 竭矣！ 周度以白彦超，彦超不信，收弘鲁夫妻系狱。
现代文：崔周度将情况告诉慕容彦超，慕容彦超不相信，拘捕阎弘鲁夫妻押在监狱。
English: Cui Zhoudu told Murong Yanchao about the situation, but Murong Yanchao did not believe him and arrested Yan Honglu and his wife and detained them in prison.

古文：有乳母于泥中掊得金缠臂，献之，冀以赎其主。
现代文：有个奶妈从泥土中扒到金镯子，献给官府，希望赎出主人。
English: A wet nurse scraped a gold ingot out of the dirt and presented it to the government, hoping to redeem her master.

古文：彦超曰： 果然，所匿必犹多。 
现代文：慕容彦超说： 所隐藏的必定还有很多。 
English: Murong said: "There must be a lot more that is hidden.

古文：榜掠弘鲁夫妻，肉溃而死。
现代文：拷打阎弘鲁夫妻，皮开肉绽而死。
English: He tortured Yan Honglu and his wife until they died.

古文：以周度为阿庇，斩于市。
现代文：又认为崔周度袒护包庇阎弘鲁，将他在闹市斩首。
English: It is also believed that Cui Zhoudu protected and protected Yan Honglu and beheaded him in downtown.

古文：北汉遣兵寇府州，防御使折德扆败之，杀二千馀人。
现代文：北汉派遣军队侵犯府州，防御使折德击败入侵军队，杀死二千多人。
English: North Han dispatched troops to invade Fuzhou, and the defense made Oride defeat the invading army, killing more than two thousand people.

古文：二月，庚子，德扆奏攻拔北汉岢岚军，以兵戍之。
现代文：二月，庚子，折德奏报攻下北汉岢岚军，用军队守卫。
English: In February, Geng Zi and Oride Sonpo captured the Northern Han Dynasty's Han army and guarded it with troops.

古文：甲辰，帝释燕敬权等使归唐，谓唐主曰： 叛臣，天下所共疾也，不意唐主助之，得无非计乎！ 
现代文：甲辰，后周太祖释放燕敬权等人让他们回归南唐，对南唐主说： 叛逆之臣，是天下所共同痛恨的，不料唐主扶助他们，恐怕是失策了吧！ 
English: Jia Chen, after Zhou Taizu released Yan Jingquan and others to let them return to Southern Tang, said to the Lord of Southern Tang: The rebellious vassals are hated by the whole world, but the Lord of Tang supported them, I'm afraid it was a misstep!

古文：唐主大惭，先所得中国人，皆礼而归之。
现代文：南唐主大感惭愧，将先前所得的中原降附人士，都以礼相待遣返回国。
English: The lord of the Southern Tang Dynasty felt very ashamed, and sent all the previously acquired Central Plains descendants back to China with due respect.

古文：唐之言事者犹献取中原之策，中书舍人韩熙载曰： 郭氏有国虽浅，为治已固，我兵轻动，必有害无益。 
现代文：南唐谈论政事的人仍然进献夺取中原的计策，中书舍人韩熙载说： 郭氏撑握国家虽然时间不长，但统治已经牢固，我国军队轻易出动，必然有害无益。 
English: People in Nantang who talk about politics still offer strategies for seizing the Central Plains. Han Xizhe, a Chinese scholar, said: Although Guo's hold on the country is not long, his rule is already solid. Our army can easily be dispatched, which is bound to be harmful and useless.

古文：唐自烈祖以来，常遣使泛海与契丹相结，欲与之共制中国，更相馈遗，约为兄弟。
现代文：南唐自从烈祖以来，经常派遣使者飘洋过海与契丹相勾结，打算和契丹共同钳制中原，并厚礼馈赠，相约结为兄弟。
English: Since the time of the Southern Tang Dynasty's emperors, the Southern Tang Dynasty has often sent emissaries across the ocean to collude with the Khitan Empire, intending to jointly control the Central Plains with the Khitan Empire. They also presented gifts to the Khitan Empire and agreed to become brothers.

古文：然契丹利其货，徒以虚语往来，实不为唐用也。
现代文：然而契丹贪图送来的财货，只是用空话作为回报，实际上不被南唐所利用。
English: However, the money and goods sent by Khitan covetousness were just empty words in return, and were not actually used by Nantang.

古文：唐主好文学，故熙载与冯延己、延鲁、江文蔚、潘佐、徐铉之徒皆至美官。
现代文：南唐主喜好文学，所以韩熙载与冯延己、冯延鲁、江文蔚、藩佑、徐铉等人都得到高官。
English: The lord of the Southern Tang Dynasty liked literature, so Han Xizai, Feng Yanji, Feng Yanlu, Jiang Wenwei, Han You and Xu Jun were all promoted to high-ranking officials.

古文：佑，幽州人也。
现代文：潘佑是幽州人。
English: Pan You is from Yuzhou.

古文：当时唐之文雅于诸国为盛，然未尝设科举，多因上书言事拜官，至是，始命韩林学士江文蔚知贡举，进士庐陵王克贞等三人及第。
现代文：当时南唐的艺文礼乐比其它各国兴盛，然而未曾设立科举制度，大多根据上书言事来授于官职。到这时，开始任命翰林学士江文蔚主持贡举，进士有庐陵人王克贞等三人考中。
English: At that time, Southern Tang's arts, literature, and music were more prosperous than those of other countries. However, there was no imperial examination system, and most people were awarded official posts according to their letters and speeches. At this time, the Hanlin scholar Jiang Wenwei was appointed to preside over the tribute, and three people, including Wang Kezhen from Fuling, were appointed to the examination.

古文：唐主问文蔚： 聊取士何如前朝？ 
现代文：南唐主问江文蔚： 爱卿取士比前朝怎么样？ 
English: The Lord of the Southern Tang Dynasty asked Jiang Wenwei: How was the morning before Aiqing's victory?

古文：对曰： 前朝公举、私谒相半，臣专任至公耳。 
现代文：回答说： 前朝公家荐举、私人说情各占一半，臣下专用一种绝对公正！ 
English: He replied, "In the previous government, public recommendation and private intercession each accounted for half, and it was a kind of absolute justice reserved for vassals.

古文：唐主悦。
现代文：南唐主很高兴。
English: The Lord of Southern Tang is very pleased.

古文：中书舍人张纬，前朝登第，闻而衔之。
现代文：中书舍人张纬，前朝取中进士，听说此话而怀恨在心。
English: Zhang Wei, who had abandoned Chinese calligraphy and taken up Chinese calligraphy in the previous morning, held a grudge when he heard this.

古文：时执政皆不由科第，相与沮毁，竟罢贡举。
现代文：当时朝廷执政官员都不是经科举任职，便一齐阻挠诋毁，结果停止了科举选仕。
English: At that time, the ruling officials of the imperial court were not appointed by the imperial examination, so they all obstructed the defamation, and as a result, the imperial examination was suspended.

古文：三月，戊辰，以内客省使、恩州团练使晋阳郑仁诲为枢密副使。
现代文：三月，戊辰，任命内客省使、恩州团练使晋阳人郑仁诲为枢密副使。
English: In March, Wu Chen appointed Zheng Renya, the envoy of Neigak Province and the envoy of Enzhou Reunification, as the vice-envoy of Jinyang.

古文：甲戌，改威胜军曰武胜军。
现代文：甲戌，后周威胜军改名为武胜军。
English: Later, the Zhou Weisheng Army was renamed the Wu Sheng Army.

古文：唐主以太弟太保、昭义节度使冯延己为左仆射，前镇海节度使徐景运为中书侍郎，及右仆射孙晟皆同平章事。
现代文：南唐主任命太弟太保、昭义节度使冯延己为左仆射，前镇海节度使徐景运为中书侍朗，和右仆射孙晟都为同平章事。
English: The Lord of Southern Tang appointed his younger brother, Taibo, and his second-in-command, Zhaoyi, to be Feng Yanji's left-hand servants, and his former second-in-command, Zhenhai, to be Xu Jingyun's right-hand servant, and his right-hand servant, Zhaosun, to be his equal.

古文：既宣制，户部尚书常梦锡众中大言曰： 白麻甚佳，但不及江文蔚疏耳！ 
现代文：宣读制书后，户部尚书常梦锡在大庭广众中大声说道： 白麻诏书虽然很好，只是不及江文蔚的弹劾疏文啊！ 
English: After the reading of the document, the head of the household, Shang Shou Chang Mengxi, said loudly in the audience: Although Bai Ma Zhaoxu is very good, it is not as good as Jiang Wenwei's impeachment letter!

古文：晟素轻延己，谓人曰： 金杯玉碗，乃贮狗矢乎！ 
现代文：孙晟素来轻视冯延己，对人说： 金杯玉碗，竟然盛了狗屎！ 
English: Sun Yat-sen used to despise Feng Yan-chi, saying to people, "The golden cup and jade bowl are actually filled with dog feces!

古文：延己言于唐主曰： 陛下躬亲庶务，故宰相不得尽其才，此治道所以未成也。 
现代文：冯延己对南唐主说： 陛下亲自处理各种政务，所以宰相不能全部施展他的才能，这就是安邦治国之道未能实现的原因啊！ 
English: Feng Yanji said to the Lord of Southern Tang: His Majesty personally handles all kinds of government affairs, so the Prime Minister cannot fully exert his talents. This is the reason why Anbang's way of governing the country has not been realized!

古文：唐主乃悉以政事委之，奏可而已。
现代文：南唐主于是便把政事全部委托给他，只等奏报点头而己。
English: The Lord of Southern Tang then entrusted all political affairs to him, only waiting for the report and nodding his head.

古文：既而延己不能勤事，文书皆仰成胥史，军旅则委之边将。顷之，事益不治，唐主乃复自览之。
现代文：不久，冯延己不能勤理事务，文书仰仗刀笔小吏写成，军务就交给守边将领，过了一段时间，事务愈发不能处理，南唐主才再次亲理朝政。
English: Soon, Feng Yan himself was unable to attend to his duties, and the documents were written by petty officials with the help of a knife and pen, and the military affairs were handed over to the border guard generals. After a period of time, the affairs became increasingly difficult to handle, and the ruler of Southern Tang was once again in charge of the government.

古文：大理卿萧俨恶延己为人，数上疏攻之，会俨坐失入人死罪，钟谟、李德明辈必欲杀之，延己曰： 俨误杀一妇人，诸君以为当死，俨九卿也，可误杀乎？ 
现代文：大理卿萧俨憎恶冯己的为人，多次上疏攻击冯延己。正好遇上萧俨犯了错判人死罪的过失，钟谟、李德明等一帮人一定要杀萧俨，冯延己说： 萧俨误杀一个妇人，诸位认为应当处死。萧俨是九卿之一，难道可以误杀吗？ 
English: As a person who detested Feng Zi, Dai Liqing Xiao Yan repeatedly attacked Feng Yan Zi. Just when Xiao Yan made the mistake of sentencing someone to death, Zhong Mo, Li Deming and other people must kill Xiao Yan, Feng Yan Zi said: Xiao Yan killed a woman by mistake, you all think he should be put to death. Xiao Yan is one of the Nine Lords, is it possible to kill by mistake?

古文：独上言： 俨素有直声，今所坐已会赦，宜从宽宥。 
现代文：单独上言说： 萧俨一向有耿直的名声，如今所判犯人已遇赦免，应当从宽饶恕他的过失。 
English: A separate commentary said: Xiao Wei has always had a reputation for honesty. Now that the convicted person has been pardoned, he should be forgiven for his mistakes.

古文：俨由是得免。人亦以此多之。
现代文：萧俨因此得以免死；人们也为此称道冯延己。
English: As a result, Xiao Yao was spared from death; people also praised Feng Yanji for this.

古文：景运寻罢为太子少傅。
现代文：徐景运不久被罢免中书侍郎、同平章事之职而任太子少傅。
English: Soon after, Xu Jingyun was removed from the post of the secretary of the Central Committee of the Communist Party of China and appointed to the post of the prince's younger brother.

古文：夏，四月，丙戌朔，日有食之。
现代文：夏季，四月，丙戌朔，出现日食。
English: In summer, in April, there is a solar eclipse.

古文：帝以曹英等攻克兗州久未克，乙卯，下诏亲征，以李谷权东京留守兼判开封府，郑仁诲权大内都点检，又以侍卫马军都指挥使郭崇充在京都巡检。
现代文：后周太祖因为曹英等攻打兖州长时间不下，乙卯，下诏书亲自出征，任命李代理东京留守兼领开封府，郑仁诲代理大内都巡检，又任命侍卫马军都指挥使郭崇担任在京都巡检。
English: Later, Zhou Taizu, because Cao Ying and others had not been able to attack Bozhou for a long time, issued an edict to personally go to the front, appointing Li to act as the representative of Tokyo to stay and lead the Kaifeng government, Zheng Renyi to act as the representative of the inspection of the Inner Capital, and appointing Guo Chong as the commander of the guards and the cavalry to serve as the inspection in Kyoto.

古文：唐主既克湖南，遣其将李建期屯益阳以图朗州，以知全州张峦兼桂州招讨使以图桂州，久之，未有功。
现代文：南唐主已经攻克湖南，派遣其将领李建期屯兵益阳来谋取朗州，任命知全州事务张峦兼任桂州招讨使来谋取桂州，旷日持久，没有成功。
English: The lord of the Southern Tang Dynasty had already conquered Hunan. He sent his general Li Jianzhong to garrison Yiyang in an attempt to capture Lanzhou. He also appointed Zhi Quanzhou Affairs Zhang Qian to serve as Guizhou's recruiting envoy in an attempt to capture Guizhou. It took a long time and was not successful.

古文：唐主谓冯延己、孙晟曰： 楚人求息肩于我，我未有以抚其疮痍而虐用其力，非所以副来苏之望。吾欲罢桂林之役，敛益阳之戍，以旌节授刘言，何如？ 
现代文：南唐主对冯延己、孙晟说： 楚人求我能让他们休养生息，但我没有抚恤治疗战乱的创伤反而滥用民力，这不是用以实现楚人复苏愿望的办法；我打算停止桂林的战役，收回益阳的屯兵，将指挥权授于刘言，怎么样？ 
English: The Lord of the Southern Tang Dynasty said to Feng Yanji and Sun Qian: The Chu people begged me to let them rest and recuperate, but instead of treating the wounds of the war, I abused the people's power. This is not the way to realize the desire of the Chu people to recover. I plan to stop the campaign in Guilin, withdraw the troops from Yiyang, and give the command to Liu Yan. How about it?

古文：晟以为宜然。
现代文：孙晟认为应该这样。
English: This is how Sun Yat-sen thought it should be.

古文：延己曰： 吾出偏将举湖南，远近震惊。一旦三分丧二，人将轻我。
现代文：冯延己说： 我们派出偏将攻取湖南，远近四方为之震惊；若一旦丧失三分之二，人家将会轻视我们。
English: Feng Yanji said: We sent a partial commander to conquer Hunan, which shocked the four quarters; if we lose two-thirds, people will despise us.

古文：请委边将察其形势。 
现代文：请求委派守边将领试探朗州、桂州的形势。 
English: Request the commission to send a border guard general to probe the situation in Lanzhou and Guizhou.

古文：唐主乃遣统军使侯训将兵五千自吉州路趣全州，与张峦合兵攻桂州。
现代文：南唐主于是派遣统军使侯训领兵五千从吉州一路赶赴全州，与张峦合兵进攻桂州。
English: The Lord of the Southern Tang Dynasty then dispatched the unified army to send five thousand soldiers led by Hou Xun from Jizhou all the way to Quanzhou to attack Guizhou together with Zhang Ye.

古文：南汉伏兵于山谷，峦等始至城下，罢乏，伏兵四起，城中出兵夹击之，唐兵大败，训死，峦收散卒数百奔归全州。
现代文：南汉在山谷埋伏军队，张峦等刚到城下，十分疲乏，突然南汉伏兵四起，桂州城中出动军队前后夹击，南唐军队大败，侯训战死，张峦收拾残兵数百逃归全州。
English: The Southern Han ambushed the army in the valley. Zhang Ye, who had just arrived at the city, was very tired. Suddenly, the Southern Han ambushed four times. The army in the city of Guizhou was dispatched to attack back and forth. The Southern Tang army was defeated. Hou Xun died in battle. Zhang Ye collected hundreds of remnants and fled to Quanzhou.

古文：五月，庚申，帝发大梁。戊辰，至兗州。
现代文：五月，庚申，后周太祖从大梁出发；戊辰，到达兖州。
English: In May, in Goshun, the late Zhou Taizu set out from Daliang; in Boshen, he arrived in Zhangzhou.

古文：己巳，帝使人招谕慕容彦超，城上人语不逊。庚午，命诸军进攻。
现代文：己巳，后周太祖派人招安慕容彦超，但城上的人出言不逊；庚午，后周太祖命令各军发起进攻。
English: Once upon a time, Emperor Zhou Taizu sent someone to recruit Anmu Yonghongchao, but the people on the castle spoke harshly; in the afternoon, Emperor Zhou Taizu ordered the army to launch an attack.

古文：先是，术者绐彦超云： 镇星行至角、亢，角、亢兗州之分，其下有福。 
现代文：在此之前，方士欺骗慕容彦超说： 土星已运行到角、亢二宿，角、亢是兖州的分野，土星下面有福运。 
English: Prior to this, the magi deceived Murong Yanchao, saying: Saturn has moved to the cusp, 二宿, the cusp and  are the fields of the cusp, and there is good luck under Saturn.

古文：彦超乃立祠而祷之，令民家皆立黄幡。
现代文：慕容彦超于是建立祠堂祈祷求福，并命令民间都要树立黄色旗幡。
English: Murong Yanchao then set up an ancestral hall to pray and seek blessings, and ordered the people to erect yellow banners.

古文：彦超性贪吝，官军攻城急，犹瘗藏珍宝，由是人无斗志，将卒相继有出降者。
现代文：慕容彦超生性贪婪吝啬，官军攻城紧急，仍然埋藏珍宝，因此人无斗志，将领士卒相继有出城投降的。
English: Murongyan was greedy and miserly by nature, the government army was in a hurry to attack the city, and treasures were still buried. As a result, there was no fighting spirit, and the generals and officers left the city one after another to surrender.

古文：乙亥，官军克城，彦超方祷镇星祠，帅众力战，不胜，乃焚镇星祠，与妻赴井死。
现代文：乙亥，官军攻克兖州城，慕容彦超正在土星祠祈祷，急忙率领部众拼力战斗，没有获胜，于是焚烧土星祠，与妻子投井而死。
English: In the second year of the Heian period, when the government army conquered the city of Ganzhou, Murong Yancha was praying at the Saturn Shrine. He hurriedly led the troops to fight hard, but did not win. He then burned the Saturn Shrine and threw himself and his wife into a well to their deaths.

古文：子继勋出走，追获，杀之。
现代文：儿子慕容继勋出城逃跑，被追兵抓获，杀死。
English: His son, Murong Jixun, fled the city and was caught by pursuing soldiers and killed.

古文：官军大掠，城中死者近万人。
现代文：官军大肆抢掠，城中死的接近万人。
English: The government army plundered and killed nearly 10,000 people in the city.

古文：初，彦超将反，募群盗置帐下，至者二千馀人，皆山林犷悍，竟不为用。
现代文：当初，慕容彦超将要反叛，招募群盗安置在自己手下，来的盗贼有二千多人，都是山林粗犷强悍之徒，结果却没有被他派上用场。
English: At first, Murong Yanchao was going to rebel, recruit a group of thieves and place them under his command. There were more than two thousand thieves who came, all of whom were rough and tough people from the mountains and forests, but as a result, they were not used by him.

古文：帝欲悉诛兗州将吏，翰林学士窦仪见冯道、范质，与之共白帝曰： 彼皆胁从耳。 
现代文：后周太祖想诛杀兖州所有的将领官吏，翰林学士窦仪谒见冯道、范质，和二人共同对后周太祖说： 他们都只是胁从罢了。 
English: Later, Zhou Taizu wanted to kill all the generals and officials in Zhangzhou. Hanlin Scholar Dou Yi met Feng Dao and An Quan, and the two of them said to Zhou Taizu: They are just obeying.

古文：乃赦之。
现代文：太祖于是赦免了兖州将吏。
English: So he pardoned him.

古文：丁丑，以端明殿学士颜衎权知兗州事。
现代文：丁丑，任命端明殿学士颜临时主持兖州事务。
English: Ding Yuxi, appointed Duan Ming Dian Bao Yan to temporarily preside over the affairs of Zhangzhou.

古文：壬午，赦兗州管内，彦超党与逃匿者期一月听自首，前已伏诛者赦其亲戚。
现代文：在兖州管区内实行大赦，规定慕容彦超同党逃跑隐匿者一月之内随时可以自首，以前已经伏罪诛杀者赦免他们的亲戚。
English: An amnesty was implemented in Zhangzhou administrative region, stipulating that those who fled and hid with Murong Yanchao could surrender at any time within one month, and those who had previously committed the crime of ambush and murder were pardoned by their relatives.

古文：癸未，降泰宁军为防御州。
现代文：癸未，将泰宁军降为防御州。
English: Soon after, the Taining Army was reduced to a defensive state.

古文：唐司徒致仕李建勋卒，且死，戒家人曰： 时事如此，吾得良死幸矣！
现代文：南唐司徒退休李建勋去世，临死时，告诫他的家里人说： 世道到了如此地步，我能得好死已经很幸运了！
English: Southern Tang Dynasty monk Li Jianxun passed away. When he was about to die, he warned his family and said, "The world has come to such a pass, I am very lucky to die well!"

古文：勿封土立碑，听人耕种于其上，免为他日开发之标。 
现代文：不要在这坟头封土立碑，任凭别人在坟上耕种，免得成为日后开挖盗发的标志。 
English: Do not seal the soil at the head of the grave and erect a monument, let others cultivate the grave, lest it become a sign of future excavation and theft.

古文：及江南之亡也，诸贵人高大之冢无不发者，惟建勋冢莫知其处。
现代文：及至江南沦亡，各权贵人家高大的墓冢没有不被发掘的，只有李建勋的坟无人知道地方。
English: As far as the fall of the Southern Yangtze River, there are no tall tombs of dignitaries that have not been unearthed. Only the grave of Li Jianxun is unknown.

古文：六月，乙酉朔，帝如曲阜，谒孔子祠。
现代文：六月，乙酉朔，后周太祖前往曲阜，拜谒孔子祠。
English: In June, at the turn of the year, Zhou Taizu went to Qufu to visit the Confucius Shrine.

古文：既尊，将拜。左右曰： 孔子，陪臣也，不当以天子拜之。 
现代文：已献上供品，将行拜礼，左右侍臣说： 孔子是诸侯的大夫，不应当以天子的身分拜他。 
English: After the offerings had been made and the worship service was about to begin, the attendants said, "Confucius is the doctor of princes, and we should not worship him as the son of heaven.

古文：帝曰： 孔子百世帝王之师，敢不敬乎！ 
现代文：太祖说： 孔子是百代帝王的老师，岂敢不恭敬啊！ 
English: The great-grandfather said: Confucius is the teacher of hundreds of emperors, how dare you disrespect him!

古文：遂拜之。
现代文：子是行拜。
English: The child is bowing.

古文：又拜孔子墓，命葺孔子祠，禁孔林樵采。
现代文：又拜孔子墓，命令修缮孔子祠，禁止在孔林打柴采草。
English: He also paid homage to the tomb of Confucius, ordered the renovation of the Confucius Shrine, and prohibited firewood and grass gathering in the Confucian forest.

古文：访孔子、颜渊之后，以为曲阜令及主簿。
现代文：访求孔子、颜渊的后代，任命做曲阜县令以及主簿。
English: Visit the descendants of Confucius and Yan Yuan, appoint them as Qufu County magistrates and the main book.

古文：丙戌，帝发兗州。
现代文：丙戌，后周太祖从兖州出发。
English: Later, Zhou Taizu set off from Zhangzhou.

古文：乙未，吴越顺德太夫人吴氏卒。
现代文：乙未，吴越顺德太夫人吴氏去世。
English: Wu Yue Shun De's great-grandmother, Lady Wu, passed away.

古文：丁酉，蜀大水入成都，漂没千馀家，溺死五千馀人，坏太庙四室。
现代文：丁酉，后蜀发大水冲入成都，漂没一千多家，淹死五千多人，冲坏太庙四室。
English: Dingyao, after Shu issued a large amount of water rushed into Chengdu, drifting more than a thousand, drowning more than five thousand people, and destroying four rooms of the Great Temple.

古文：戊戌，蜀大赦，赈水灾之家。
现代文：戊戌，后蜀发布大赦，救济遭受水灾的人家。
English: Wuzhen and later Shuxu issued an amnesty to provide relief to people affected by the floods.

古文：己亥，帝至大梁。
现代文：己亥，后周太祖回到大梁。
English: After Ji Hai, Zhou Taizu returned to Daliang.

古文：朔方节度使兼中书令陈留王冯晖卒，其子牙内都虞候继业杀其兄继勋，自知军府事。
现代文：朔方节度使兼中书令陈留王冯晖去世，他的儿子牙内都虞候冯继业杀死其兄冯继勋，自己主持方镇军政事务。
English: Emperor Shuo's envoy and second-in-command, Chen Liu Wang, died, and his son, the eunuch Feng Jiye, killed his brother Feng Jixun and presided over the military and political affairs of Fangzhen.

古文：太子宾客李涛之弟澣，在契丹为勤政殿学士，与幽州节度使萧海真善。
现代文：后周太祖太子宾客李涛的弟弟李浣，在契丹当勤政殿学士，与幽州节度使萧海真关系很好。
English: Li Tao, the younger brother of the late Zhou Taizong's prince guest Li Tao, was a diligent scholar in Khitan, and Xiao Haizhen had a good relationship with the Yuzhou Festival.

古文：海真，契丹主兀欲之妻弟也。
现代文：萧海真是契丹主耶律兀欲的妻弟。
English: Xiao Hai is really the younger brother-in-law of the Khitan lord, Yerut, who is in love with her.

古文：浣说海南内附，海真欣然许之。
现代文：李瀚劝说萧海真归附后周，萧海真欣然答应。
English: A week after Li Han persuaded Xiao Haizhen to join, Xiao Haizhen gladly agreed.

古文：澣因定州谍者田重霸赍绢表以闻，且与涛书，言： 契丹主童騃，专事宴游，无远志，非前人之比，朝廷若能用兵，必克；不然，与和，必得。
现代文：李浣利用定州间谍田重霸携带绢表来传报，并且给李涛信，说： 契丹主幼稚愚昧，专门从事闲逛游戏，毫无远大志向，没法同他的前人相比，朝廷倘若能够用兵，必定取胜；不然的话，与他讲和，也必定可以。
English: Li Yu used the Dingzhou spy Tian Shouba, who was carrying an enamel watch, to transmit the news, and sent a letter to Li Tao, saying: The Khitan lord is childish and stupid, specializes in idle games, has no lofty ambitions, and cannot be compared to his predecessors. If the court can use soldiers, it will certainly win; otherwise, it will certainly be possible to make peace with him.

古文：二者皆利于速，度其情势，他日终不能力助河东者也。 
现代文：这两者都宜于快速进行，估计契丹的情况形势，将来终究不能出力帮助河东的北汉。 
English: Both of these are suitable for rapid progress, and it is estimated that the situation in Khitan will not be able to help the North Han Dynasty in Hedong in the future.

古文：壬寅，重霸至大梁，会中国多事，不果从。
现代文：壬寅，田重霸到达大梁，遇上国内事情繁多，结果没有采取李浣之计。
English: In Renin, Tian Chongba arrived in Daliang and encountered a lot of domestic affairs. As a result, he did not adopt Li Xuan's plan.

古文：辛亥，以冯继业为朔方留后。
现代文：辛亥，任命冯继业为朔方留后。
English: Xinhai, after appointing Feng Jiye as the leader of the Shuo faction.

古文：枢密使王峻，性轻躁，多计数，好权利，喜人附己，自以天下为己任。
现代文：枢密使王峻性情轻浮急躁，善于算计，贪图权利，喜欢人家奉承自己。
English: The privy council made Wang Jun's temperament frivolous and impetuous, good at calculation, greedy for power, and fond of being flattered.

古文：每言事，帝从之则喜，或时未允，辄愠怼，往往发不逊语。
现代文：自负得认为治理天下的重任只有自己才能承担。
English: They are so conceited that they think they are the only ones who can shoulder the heavy responsibility of governing the world.

古文：帝以其故旧，且有佐命功，又素知其为人，每优容之。
现代文：他经常谈论政事，后周太祖听从他就高兴，有时不同意，就怨恨，往往出言不逊；太祖念其元老旧臣，并且有辅佐创立帝业的功劳，又一向深知他的为人，常常宽容原谅他。
English: He often talked about political affairs. Later, Zhou Taizu was pleased to listen to him, sometimes disagreed, resented him, and often spoke harshly; Taizu remembered his veteran and old minister, and had the merit of helping to establish the empire, and always knew him well and often forgave him.

古文：峻年长于帝，帝即位，犹以兄呼之，或称其字，峻以是益骄。
现代文：王峻年纪比太祖大，太祖即位，仍然对王峻以兄相称，或者称他的字，王峻因此愈加骄横。
English: Wang Jun is older than his great-grandfather, his great-grandfather ascended to the throne, but he still calls Wang Jun his elder brother, or calls him by his nickname, which makes Wang Jun even more arrogant.

古文：副使郑仁诲、皇城使向训、恩州团练使李重进，皆帝在籓镇时腹心将佐也，帝即位，稍稍进用。
现代文：枢密副使郑仁诲、皇城使向训、恩州团练使李重进，都是太祖在藩镇时的心腹将佐，太祖即位，逐渐提拔起用他们。
English: Privy Vice-Envoy Zheng Renyi, Imperial Envoy Xiang Xun, and Enzhou Reunification Envoy Li Shujin were all close confidants of the great-grandfather when he was a vassal of the Han Dynasty. When the great-grandfather ascended to the throne, they were gradually promoted and put to use.

古文：峻心嫉之，累表称疾，求解机务，以诇帝意。
现代文：王峻心中妒嫉，便多次上表称说有病，请求解除政务，以此试探太祖的意思。
English: Envious in his heart, Wang Jun repeatedly declared that he was ill and asked to be relieved of his government duties, in order to probe the meaning of the great-grandfather.

古文：帝屡遣左右敦谕，峻对使者辞气亢厉。又遗诸道节度使书求保证，诸道各献其书，帝惊骇久之，复遣左右慰勉，令视事，且曰： 卿倘不来，朕且自往。 
现代文：太祖屡次派遣左右侍者敦促劝慰，王峻回答使者的言词意气非常激烈厉害，同时给各道节度使去信寻求保举证书；各道分别进献保举王峻的书信，后周太祖阅后惊骇很久，又派左右侍者慰问劝勉，让他治理政事，并且说： 爱卿倘若不来，朕将亲自前往。 
English: The great-grandfather repeatedly sent attendants to the right and left to urge consolation. Wang Jun replied to the envoy's words with a very fierce and powerful spirit. At the same time, he sent a letter to each provincial governor to seek a certificate of guarantee. Each province separately presented a letter of guarantee to Wang Jun. Later, after Zhou Taizu read it, he was shocked for a long time. He also sent attendants to the right and left to offer condolences and encouragement, let him govern affairs of state, and said: If Aiqing does not come, I will go in person.

古文：犹不至。
现代文：王峻仍然不到朝廷。
English: Wang Jun still did not come to the imperial court.

古文：帝知枢密直学士陈观与峻亲善，令往谕指，观曰： 陛下但声言临幸其第，严驾以待之，峻必不敢不来。 
现代文：太祖知道枢密直学士陈观与王峻亲密友善，便令他前去宣谕旨意，陈观说： 陛下只须扬言要亲自驾临他的家，王峻必定不敢不来。 
English: The great-grandfather knew that the Privy Councilor Chen Guan and Wang Jun were close and friendly, so he ordered him to go and proclaim his will. Chen Guan said: His Majesty only has to threaten to come to his house in person, and Wang Jun will certainly not dare not to come.

古文：从之。秋，七月，戊子，峻入朝，帝慰劳令视事。
现代文：秋季，七月戊子，王峻上朝，太祖慰劳他并让他处理政事。
English: In the autumn, in July, Wuzi, Wang Jun ascended to the throne, the great-grandfather consoled him and let him deal with political affairs.

古文：重进，沧州人，其母即帝妹福庆长公主也。
现代文：李重进是沧州人，他母亲就是太祖的妹妹福庆长公主。
English: Li Shougin is from Cangzhou, and his mother is his great-grandfather's sister, Princess Wu of Fuqing.

古文：李谷足跌，伤右臂，在告月馀。
现代文：李失足摔跤，伤了右臂，休假一个多月。
English: Li lost his footing in a wrestling match, injuring his right arm, and was off work for more than a month.

古文：帝以谷职业繁剧，趣令入朝，辞以未任趋拜。
现代文：太祖因为李主管的业务繁多紧急，便催促他入朝，李以不能行朝拜大礼为理由推辞。
English: The great-grandfather urged Li to enter the imperial court because of the many urgent tasks he was in charge of, but Li declined on the grounds that he could not perform the grand ritual of the imperial court.

古文：癸巳，诏免朝参，但令视事。
现代文：癸巳，太祖下诏免除他的入朝参拜礼节，只让他处理事务。
English: However, Emperor Taizu issued an edict exempting him from entering the Imperial Palace to attend the festival, only allowing him to handle affairs.

古文：蜀工部尚书、判武德军邵延钧不礼于监押王承丕，承丕谋作乱。
现代文：后蜀工部尚书、判武德军郭延钧对监押王承丕无礼，王承丕阴谋发动叛乱。
English: Later, the Shu Ministry of Industry and Trade issued a document condemning the German military commander, Guo Yanxuan, for being rude to the prisoner, Wang Chengyi, and accusing him of plotting to launch a rebellion.

古文：辛丑，左奉圣都指挥使安次孙钦当以部兵戍边，往辞承丕，承丕邀与俱见府公。
现代文：辛丑，左奉圣都指挥使安次人孙钦应当率所部士兵戍守边关，前往王承丕处告辞，王承丕邀请他一同去参见府公郭延钧。
English: Xin Xiu, left to command the holy city, ordered Sun Qin, the second son of An Zi, to lead the soldiers of the headquarters to guard the border and go to Wang Chengjun's place to say goodbye. Wang Chengjun invited him to go to see the prefectural governor Guo Yanjun.

古文：钦不知其谋，从之。
现代文：孙钦不知他的阴谋，跟从他去。
English: Sun Qin, unaware of his plot, followed him.

古文：承丕至，则令左右击杀延钧，屠其家，称奉诏处置军府，即开府库赏士卒，出系囚，发屯戍。
现代文：王承丕到后，就命手下击杀郭延钧，并屠杀他全家，号称奉诏命处理军府事务，立即打开仓库赏赐士卒，放出关押的囚犯，征发他们屯戍边疆。
English: After Wang Chengyao arrived, he ordered his men to kill Guo Yanyao and slaughtered his entire family, claiming that he had been ordered by the emperor to handle the affairs of the military government, immediately open the warehouse to reward the soldiers, release the prisoners, and send them to the frontier.

古文：将吏毕集，钦谓承丕曰： 今延钧已伏辜，公宜出诏书以示众。 
现代文：将领官吏全部集合，孙钦对王承丕说： 如今郭延钧已经伏罪，您该拿出诏书来给大家看。 
English: When all the generals and officials had gathered, Sun Qin said to Wang Chengyao, "Now that Guo Yengyao has committed a crime, you should take out the edict and show it to everyone."

古文：承丕曰： 我能致公富贵，勿问诏书。 
现代文：王承丕说： 我能让您得到富贵，不必再问诏书。 
English: Wang Chengyao said: I can make you rich, you don't have to ask for the imperial decree.

古文：钦始知承丕反，因绐曰： 今内外未安，我请以部兵为公巡察。 
现代文：孙钦这才知道王承丕是在造反，就骗他说： 如今内外没有安定，我请求用所部士兵为您巡逻检查。 
English: Only then did Sun Qin know that Wang Chengtao was rebelling, so he lied to him and said, "There is no stability at home and abroad now. I request you to use soldiers from the headquarters to patrol and inspect for you."

古文：即跃马而出，承丕连呼之，不止。
现代文：随即跳上马奔驰而出，王承丕连声叫他，没有止步。
English: He immediately jumped on a horse-drawn carriage and rode out. Wang Chengyao called him repeatedly, without stopping.

古文：钦至营，晓谕其众，帅以入府，攻承丕，承丕左右欲拒战，钦叱之，皆弃兵走，遂执承丕，斩之，并其亲党，传首成都。
现代文：孙钦回到军宫，向部众说明情况，率领队伍进入军府，攻击王承丕，王承丕左右侍卫想抵抗战斗，孙钦大声呼喝，侍卫全都丢弃武器逃跑，于是抓住王承丕，斩杀了他，连及他的亲属同党，将王承丕首级传送成都。
English: Sun Qin returned to the military palace, explained the situation to his subordinates, led the team into the military government, and attacked Wang Chengyao. Wang Chengyao's bodyguards wanted to resist the battle, Sun Qin shouted loudly. The bodyguards all threw away their weapons and fled. So he grabbed Wang Chengyao, beheaded him, together with his relatives and party members, and sent Wang Chengyao's head to Chengdu.

古文：天平节度使、守中书令高行周卒。
现代文：天平节度使、守中书令高行周去世。
English: Emperor Tenpyo's regent Gao Xing Zhou passed away.

古文：行周有勇而知义，功高而不矜，策马临敌，叱咤风生，平居与宾僚宴集，侃侃和易，人以是重之。
现代文：高行周勇敢而深明大义，功高而不骄傲自夸，战场上扬鞭策马亲临敌阵，叱咤风云，但平时居家与宾客僚属闲暇聚会，和颜悦色，平易近人，人们因此尊重他。
English: Gao Xing Zhou is brave and profound in righteousness. He is proud of his high achievements, but not proud. On the battlefield, he would go to the enemy's frontline with a whip and scold the enemy. However, at home, he and his guests and colleagues usually have leisure gatherings. He is amiable and approachable, so people respect him.

古文：癸卯，蜀主遣客省使赵季札如梓州，慰抚吏民。
现代文：癸卯，后蜀主派遣客省使赵季札前往梓州，慰问安抚官吏百姓。
English: However, after the Lord of Shu dispatched the guest province to send Zhao Jizha to Zizhou to comfort and pacify the officials and the people.

古文：汉法，犯私盐、麹，无问多少抵死。
现代文：后汉刑法规定，凡犯有走私食盐、酒曲罪的，不问数量多少一律处死。
English: The post-Han criminal law stipulates that anyone who commits the crime of smuggling salt and liquor is to be put to death, regardless of the quantity.

古文：郑州民有以屋税受盐于官，过州城，吏以为私盐，执而杀之，其妻讼冤。
现代文：郑州百姓有人交纳屋税而从官府接受配给的盐，经过州城时，官吏以为是私盐，抓住杀了他；他的妻子申诉冤枉。
English: When a citizen of Zhengzhou was passing through the city of Zhouzhuang, the officials thought that he was smuggling salt, so they caught and killed him. His wife filed a wrongful complaint.

古文：癸丑，始诏犯盐、麹者以斤两定刑有差。
现代文：癸丑，后周太祖开始发布诏令：犯走私食盐、酒曲罪者，根据数量多少，定刑时应有差别。
English: After the scandal, Zhou Taizu began to issue a royal edict: those who commit the crime of smuggling salt and liquor should be sentenced differently according to the quantity.

