古文：完颜赛不，始祖弟保活里之后也。
现代文：完颜赛不是金始祖弟弟保活里的后代。
English: Gansei is not a descendant of Kim Il-sung's younger brother Bao Huo-ri.

古文：状貌魁伟，沉厚有大略。
现代文：他的相貌伟岸，为人深沉忠厚而很有谋略。
English: He was a great-looking man, deep and loyal, and very cunning.

古文：初补亲卫军，章宗时，选充护卫。
现代文：起初，完颜赛不当了亲卫军，到章宗时，被选为护卫。
English: At first, it was the bodyguards who did not finish the beauty contest, but when it came to Zhang Zong, he was chosen as a bodyguard.

古文：明昌元年八月，由宿直将军为宁化州刺史。
现代文：明昌元年八月，由宿直将军任宁化州刺史。
English: In August of the first year of the Ming Dynasty, General Sukuzuna was appointed as the governor of Ningwazhou.

古文：未几，迁武卫军副都指挥使。
现代文：不久，他又升迁为武卫军副都指挥使。
English: Soon after, he was promoted to Deputy Commander-in-Chief of the Armed Forces.

古文：泰和二年，转胡里改路节度使。
现代文：泰和二年，转为胡里改路节度使。
English: In the 2nd year of the Taihe era, it was changed to the Hurri-Chang Road Festival.

古文：四年，升武卫军都指挥使，寻为殿前左副都点检。
现代文：四年，升为武卫军都指挥使，不久又为殿前左副都点检。
English: Four years later, he was promoted to Commander-in-Chief of the Imperial Guards, and shortly after that, he was promoted to Deputy Commander-in-Chief of the Imperial Guards.

古文：及平章仆散揆伐宋，为右翼都统。
现代文：到平章仆散揆伐宋，完颜赛不任右翼都统。
English: As far as Pingzhang's servant Sanzhong's campaign against the Song Dynasty, the right wing was not allowed to unite after the face-off.

古文：六年六月，宋将皇甫斌遣率步骑数万由确山、褒信分路侵蔡，闻郭倬、李爽之败，阻溱水不敢进。
现代文：泰和六年六月，宋将皇甫斌率领步兵、骑兵数万人从确山、褒信分几路侵蔡，当听说郭倬、李爽战败了，就停留在溱水那边不敢前进。
English: In June of the sixth year of the Taihe era, Emperor Song sent Emperor Fubin to invade Cai with tens of thousands of infantry and cavalry from Jishan and Baoxin. When he heard that Guo Gan and Li Shuang were defeated, he stayed on the other side of Surabaya and did not dare to advance.

古文：于是，揆遣赛不及副统尚厩局使蒲鲜万奴、深州刺史完颜达吉不等以骑七千往击之。
现代文：于是仆散揆派完颜赛不与副统尚厩局使蒲鲜万奴、深州刺史完颜达吉不等率七千骑兵前往攻打宋军。
English: As a result, seven thousand cavalrymen were dispatched to attack the Song army by the subordinate general Shang Mews Bureau, with the subordinate general Shang Mews Bureau sending seven thousand cavalrymen to attack the Song army, including seven thousand cavalrymen sent to attack the Song army by the subordinate general Shang Mews Bureau and seven thousand cavalrymen sent by the subordinate general Shang Mews Bureau.

古文：会溱水涨，宋兵扼桥以拒，赛不等谋潜师夜出，达吉不以骑涉水出其右，万奴等出其左。赛不度其军毕渡，乃率副统阿鲁带以精兵直趋桥，宋兵不能遏，比明大溃。
现代文：当时溱水大涨，宋兵守住桥进行抵抗，完颜赛不等人商议在夜间悄悄出兵，完颜达吉不带领骑兵涉水从敌军的右面进攻，蒲鲜万奴等从左面进攻，完颜赛不估计宋军一定会渡河，就率领副都统阿鲁带领精兵直奔桥去。
English: At that time, the water level rose sharply. The Song soldiers held the bridge and resisted. After the battle, they did not wait for others to discuss and quietly sent troops at night. After the battle, Daji did not lead the cavalry to attack from the right side of the enemy army, and Pu Xiangwu attacked from the left side. After the battle, he did not expect the Song army to cross the river, so he led the deputy general Aru to lead the elite soldiers straight to the bridge.

古文：万奴以兵断真阳路，诸军追击至陈泽，斩首二万级，获战马杂畜千余。
现代文：宋兵无法阻止金兵的进攻，到天亮便大败，蒲鲜万奴带兵切断了真阳路，其他各路军队追击到陈泽，斩首二万，缴获战马及各种牲畜一千多头。
English: The Song soldiers were unable to stop the attack of the Jin soldiers, and by dawn they were defeated. Pu Xianwu led the troops to cut off the Zhenyang Road, and the other armies chased them to Chenze, beheaded twenty thousand, and captured more than a thousand horses and various livestock.

古文：兵还，进爵一级，赐金币甚厚。
现代文：回兵之后，完颜赛不等都进爵一级，赏赐的金银帛币十分丰厚。
English: After returning to the army, all of them were promoted to the first rank after finishing the beauty contest, and the gold and silver coins they were awarded were very rich.

古文：贞祐初，拜同签枢密院事。
现代文：贞祐初年，完颜赛不任同签枢密院事。
English: In the first year of Zhenyu, he was not allowed to sign the Privy Council.

古文：三年，迁知临洮府事，兼陕西路副统军。
现代文：贞祐三年，升迁为知临洮府事，兼陕西路副统军。
English: In the third year of Zhenyu's reign, he was promoted to the position of the provincial governor of Zhilin and the deputy commander of the Shaanxi Road.

古文：上召见谕曰： 卿向在西京，尽心为国，及治华州，亦尝宣力，今始及三品。
现代文：皇上召见时对他说 ：卿原在西京尽心为国，到治理华州时也曾尽力，现在刚到三品官职。
English: When the Emperor summoned him, he said to him: "Your Excellency, you devoted yourself to serving the country in West Beijing, and you also did your best when you governed Huazhou. Now you have just arrived at Sanpin government post.

古文：特升授汝此职者，以陕西安抚副使乌古论兖州不遵安抚使达吉不节制，多致败事。
现代文：这次特升你为此职，是因为陕西安抚副使乌古论兖州不听从安抚使达吉不的制约，多次导致失败。
English: This time, you were specially promoted to this position because the Shaanxi deputy pacification minister, Ugu, did not listen to the constraints of the pacification minister, Dagi, and repeatedly led to failure.

古文：今已责罚兖州，命卿副之。
现代文：现在已处罚了他，命你当副统军。
English: Now that he has been punished, he has ordered you to be the vice-unification army.

古文：宜益务尽心，其或不然，复当别议行之。 
现代文：你应更加尽心，如不能做到，就另行商议派别人去。 
English: You should be more conscientious, if you can't do it, you should have another discussion and send someone else.

古文：八月，知凤翔府事，兼本路兵马都总管，俄为元帅右都监。
现代文：八月，完颜赛不任知凤翔府事，兼本路兵马都总管，不久又任元帅右都监。
English: In August, after the beauty contest, he was appointed as the prefect of Zhifengxiang, as well as the general manager of this road, and soon he was appointed as the marshal of the right.

古文：四年四月，调兵拔宋木陡关。
现代文：贞祐四年四月，他攻占了宋的木陡关。
English: In April of Zhengyu's fourth year, he conquered Song's Muxian Pass.

古文：五月，夏人于来羌城界河修折桥，以兵守护，赛不遣兵焚之。
现代文：五月，西夏人在来羌城界河上修复断桥，并用兵守护，完颜赛不派兵烧了桥。
English: In May, the Xixia people repaired the broken bridge on the Laiwu city boundary river and guarded it with soldiers. After the competition, they did not send soldiers to burn the bridge.

古文：八月，夏人寇结耶觜川，遣兵击走之，寻又破其众于车儿堡。
现代文：八月，西夏人侵占结耶觜川，完颜赛不派兵打跑了他们，不久又在车儿堡打败了前来的西夏军。
English: In August, the Xixia people invaded and occupied Jieyuan River, and after the competition, they did not send soldiers to fight them, and soon defeated the advancing Xixia army in Cherbourg.

古文：兴定元年二月，转签枢密院事。
现代文：兴定元年二月，完颜赛不转任签枢密院事。
English: In February of the first year of the Xingding era, Yan Xie did not transfer to sign the Privy Council.

古文：时上以宋岁币不至，且复侵盗，诏赛不讨之。
现代文：当时因宋每年应交的岁币不送来，而且又来入侵，皇帝下诏让完颜赛不征讨宋。
English: At that time, due to the fact that Song did not send the annual New Year's money, and also invaded again, the emperor issued an edict to let Yan Xie not to collect Song.

古文：四月，与宋人战于信阳，斩首八千，生擒统制周光，获马数千、牛羊五百。
现代文：四月，他与宋人战于信阳，斩首八千，活捉了宋统制周光，缴获数千匹马，五百多头牛羊。
English: In April, he fought with the Song people in Xinyang, beheaded eight thousand, captured the Song dictator Zhou Guang alive, captured thousands of horses, and more than five hundred cattle and sheep.

古文：又遇宋人于陇山、七里山等处，前后六战，斩获甚众。
现代文：后来又在陇山、七里山等处遇宋兵，前后共作战六次，杀敌和缴获都很多。
English: Later, he encountered Song soldiers in Shaoshan, Qili Mountain and other places. He fought a total of six times, killing and capturing a lot of enemies.

古文：寻遣兵渡淮，略中渡店，拔光山、罗山、定城等县，破光州两关，斩首万余，获马牛及布，分给将士。
现代文：不久，又派兵渡过淮河，攻打中渡店，攻下了光山、罗山、定城等县，攻破了光州两座关，斩首一万多，将作战获得的马、牛及布分给将士。
English: Soon, he sent troops to cross the Huai River, attack Zhongduantian, capture the counties of Guangshan, Luoshan and Dingcheng, break through the two gates of Gwangju, behead more than 10,000 people, and distribute the horses, cattle and cloth obtained in the war to the soldiers.

古文：诏赐玉兔鹘一、内府重币十端。
现代文：皇上下诏赐给他一只玉兔鹘、内府上等绸缎十端。
English: The Emperor issued an imperial edict awarding him a jade rabbit brooch, the 10th highest silk brooch in the Imperial Court.

古文：七月，上章言： 京都天下之根本，其城池宜极高深，今外城虽坚，然周六十余里，仓猝有警难于拒守。窃见城中有子城故基，宜于农隙筑而新之，为国家久长之利。
现代文：七月，完颜赛不上奏疏说： 京都为天下的根本，它的城墙应极高，护城河应极深。现在外城虽然很坚固，但城周长六十余里，如有紧急情况很难防守，我见城中有子城故基，最好在农闲时将子城重新筑起来，这样，对国家长治有利。
English: In July, after the beauty contest, he said: "Kyoto is the foundation of the world, its walls should be extremely high, and its moat should be extremely deep. Now, although the outer city is very strong, the perimeter of the city is more than sixty miles long. If there is an emergency, it is difficult to defend. I see that there is a sub-city foundation in the city. It is best to rebuild the sub-city during the idle time of farmers. In this way, it is beneficial to the country's long-term governance.

古文：及凡河南、陕西州府，皆乞量修。 
现代文：至于河南、陕西的州府，都应当适当地修城。 
English: As for the state capitals of Henan and Shaanxi, they should properly rebuild their cities.

古文：从之。
现代文：皇帝准了他的奏章。
English: I followed his advice.

古文：二年正月，破宋人于铁山及上石店、唐县。
现代文：兴定二年正月，完颜赛不在铁山以及上石店、唐县攻破宋军。
English: In the first month of the second year of Xingding, the Song Army was not defeated in Iron Mountain, Shangshidian and Tang County.

古文：四月，进兼西南等路招讨使、西安军节度使、陕州管内观察使。
现代文：四月，他又兼任西南等路招讨使、西安军节度使、陕州管内观察使。
English: In April, he also concurrently served as the envoy for the southwest and other routes, the envoy for the Xi'an Military Festival, and the envoy for observation within the Shaanxi Province.

古文：奉诏攻枣阳，宋出兵三万拒战，稍诱击之，宋兵败走城，薄诸濠，杀及溺死者三千余人，遂进兵围之。
现代文：他奉诏攻打枣阳，宋出兵三万抵抗，完颜赛不稍稍诱敌入侵，然后再攻打。宋兵败逃进城，他们一直追逼到城边，杀死及淹死宋军三千多人，接着又进兵包围。
English: According to the edict, he attacked Zaoyang, and Song dispatched 30,000 soldiers to resist. After the game, he tried to lure the enemy into invading, and then attacked again. The defeated Song soldiers fled into the city. They chased them all the way to the edge of the city, killed and drowned more than 3,000 Song soldiers, and then surrounded the advancing soldiers.

古文：宋骑兵千、步卒万来援，逆战复大败之。
现代文：宋一千骑兵、上万步兵前来救援，金兵迎战，又使宋军大败。
English: A thousand Song cavalrymen and tens of thousands of foot soldiers came to the rescue, and the gold soldiers fought back, causing the Song army to suffer a major defeat.

古文：七月，迁行山东西路兵马都总管，兼武宁军节度使。
现代文：七月，完颜赛不升为山东西路兵马都总管，兼武宁军节度使。
English: In July, he was promoted to the head of the Shanxi-Tibet-Myanmar Military Command, and also the military commander of the Wu Ning Army.

古文：三年二月，夺宋白石关，杀其守者千余人，获铠仗千计。
现代文：兴定三年二月，他夺取了宋的白石关，杀了守关者千余人，缴获甲仗数以千计。
English: In February of the third year of Xingding, he captured the Song's Baishi Pass, killed more than a thousand people guarding the pass, and captured thousands of horses.

古文：三月，破宋兵于七口仓，又夺宋小鹘仓，获粮九千石、兵仗三十余万。
现代文：三月，在七口仓击败宋军，又夺取宋的小鹘仓，缴获九千石粮食，兵器三十多万件。
English: In March, they defeated the Song army in Qigoucang and captured Song's Xiaobangcang, seizing nine thousand kilos of grain and more than three hundred thousand weapons.

古文：是月，复败宋兵三千于石鹘崖。
现代文：这月又在石鹘崖击败宋兵三千人。
English: This month, he defeated another 3,000 Song soldiers at Shijiazhuang Cliff.

古文：四年三月，奉诏出兵河北招降，晋安权府事皇甫珪、正平县令席永坚率五千余人来归，得粮万石。
现代文：兴定四年三月，完颜赛不奉诏出兵去河北招降，晋安代理府事皇甫皀、正平县令席永坚率领五千多人前来归降，得到了万石粮食。
English: In March of the 4th year of Xingding, after Yan Xie sent troops to Hebei to recruit and surrender, the Jin'an deputy prefect, Emperor Fuxi, and the Zhengping County governor, Yong Jian, led more than 5,000 people to come and surrender, and obtained 10,000 kilos of grain.

古文：时河北所在义军官民坚守堡寨，力战破敌者众。赛不上章言： 此类忠赤可嘉，若不旌酬无以激人心。乞朝廷量加官赏，万一敌兵复来，将争先效用矣。 
现代文：当时河北各地的义军官兵坚守堡寨，很多人奋力作战攻打敌兵，完颜赛不上奏说 ：这类人忠诚赤心值得嘉奖，如果不表彰和奖赏就不能激励人心，请朝廷量情加官加赏，万一敌兵再来，将士们将会争着为朝廷效力。 
English: At that time, the righteous officers and soldiers from all over Hebei held fast to the fortress, and many people fought hard to fight and attack the enemy soldiers. After the competition, they did not say: This kind of person is loyal and worthy of praise. If there is no commendation and reward, it cannot inspire people's hearts. Please ask the imperial court to be considerate and increase the reward. In case the enemy soldiers come again, the soldiers will compete to serve the imperial court.

古文：上览奏，召枢密官曰： 朕与卿等亦尝有此议，以不见彼中事势，故一听帅臣规画。
现代文：皇帝看了奏章，召枢密官说： 我和你们也曾议过此事，因为没见他们的具体情况，所以一切听任帅臣等处置，现在看了这份奏章，很合我的心意。
English: The emperor read the report and summoned the privy councillors and said, "I have also discussed this matter with you, and since I have not seen their specific conditions, I will leave everything to the discretion of the generals and other officials. Now that I have read this report, it is very much to my liking.

古文：今观此奏，甚称朕意，其令有司迁赏之。 
现代文：我命令有关部门升迁和奖赏他们。 这年四月，升任枢密副使。
English: I ordered the relevant departments to promote and reward them. In April this year, I was promoted to Deputy Privy Counsellor.

古文：是年四月，迁枢密副使。五年五月，奉诏引兵救河东，战屡捷，复晋安、平阳二城。监察御史言其不能检束士众，纵之虏略，请正其罪。
现代文：兴定五年五月，赛不奉诏带兵解救河东，屡战屡胜，收复了晋安、平阳两城，监察御史上奏说他无法约束士兵，放纵他们去掳掠，请求加以治罪。
English: In May of the fifth year of Xingding, Saifu led the troops to rescue Hedong, repeatedly won battles, and recovered the two cities of Jin'an and Pingyang. The inspector general of history reported that he could not restrain the soldiers, indulged them to kidnap and plunder, and requested to be punished.

古文：上以有功，诏勿问。
现代文：皇帝因他有功，下诏说不再追查。
English: Because of his merits, the emperor issued an edict saying that there would be no further investigation.

古文：元光二年五月，复河中。
现代文：元光二年五月，完颜赛不又收复了河中。
English: In May of the second year of the Yuanguang era, after the completion of the beauty contest, it regained the middle of the river.

古文：六月，诏谕宰臣曰： 枢密副使赛不本皇族，先世偶然脱遗。朕重其旧人，且久劳王家，已命睦亲府附于属籍矣。卿等宜知之。 
现代文：六月，皇帝告诉宰臣说： 枢密副使赛不本是皇族，他的先世偶然脱籍，我看重他是旧人，而且久为皇家效劳，现已命睦亲府将他附在皇族本籍上，你们也应该知道这件事。 
English: In June, the Emperor told the Vice-Minister of the Imperial Household: The Vice-Minister of the Imperial Household is not originally a member of the Imperial Family. He left the Imperial Family by accident in his previous life. I value him as an old man, and he has served the Imperial Family for a long time. Now, Mutsu Kin-fu has ordered him to be attached to the Imperial Family. You should also know about this.

古文：正大元年五月，拜平章政事。未几，转尚书右丞相。
现代文：正大元年五月，完颜赛不任平章政事，不久转任尚书右丞相。
English: In May of the first year of Zhengda, after Yan Xie was dismissed from the government of Pingzhang, he was soon transferred to the post of Minister of the Right of Shangshu.

古文：雅与参知政事李蹊相得，及蹊以公罪出尹京洛，赛不数荐蹊，比唐魏徵，以故蹊得复相。
现代文：他与参知政事李蹊情趣相投，后来李蹊因罪出任京洛尹，完颜赛不多次推荐李蹊，说他比得上唐朝魏征，因此李蹊恢复了丞相的职位。
English: He was a kindred spirit with the prefectural governor and statesman Li Lan. Later, Li Lan served as the governor of Luoyang due to his crime. After the beauty contest, he recommended Li Lan several times, saying that he was comparable to Wei Zheng of the Tang Dynasty. Therefore, Li Lan resumed his position as the prime minister.

古文：三年，宣宗庙成，将禘祭，议配享功臣，论者纷纭。
现代文：正大三年，宣宗的庙宇落成，将要举行祭，便商议配祭的功臣，朝中议论纷纷。
English: In the third year of Zhengda, the temple of Xuan Zong was completed, a festival was to be held, and the heroes and heroines who were to participate in the festival were discussed.

古文：赛不为大礼使，因言： 丞相福兴死王事，七斤谨守河南以迎大驾，功宜配享。 
现代文：完颜赛不当时负责这次大祭礼，他说： 丞相福兴死于王事，七斤谨守河南以迎大驾，按功适合配享。 
English: He was in charge of this grand festival at the time of the completion of the beauty contest, he said: the prime minister Fu Xing died in a royal matter, seven catties were carefully kept in Henan to welcome the great driver, and it was suitable to share according to merit.

古文：议遂定。
现代文：这事便定了下来。
English: The matter was settled.

古文：四年，吏部郎中杨居仁上封事，言宰相宜择人，上语大臣曰： 相府非其人，御史谏官当言，彼吏曹，何与于此。 
现代文：正大四年，吏部郎中杨居仁上封书奏事，说宰相应当选择合适的人，皇上对大臣们说： 宰相人选不合适，御史谏官应当进言，他是个吏部官员怎么干预这件事？ 
English: In the fourth year of the reign of the emperor, Yang Jiu Ren, the vice-minister of the General Staff, sent a letter to the emperor, saying that the prime minister should choose a suitable person. The emperor said to the ministers: The prime minister is not a suitable candidate, the imperial secretary should advise, he is an official of the General Staff, how can he intervene in this matter?

古文：尚书左丞颜盏世鲁素嫉居仁，亦以为僣，赛不徐进曰： 天下有道，庶人犹得献言，况在郎官。
现代文：尚书左丞相颜盏世鲁一向恼恨杨居仁，也说他越职。完颜赛不慢慢地说 ：天下有道，庶民还能说话，况且是个郎官呢。
English: Yang Jiu-Jin had always been resented by Shangshu's left-wing vice-premier Kanjan Shilu, who also said that he had exceeded his duties. After the face-to-face meeting, he said: "There is virtue in the world, ordinary people can still speak, and what's more, he is a vassal."

古文：陛下有宽弘之德，故不应言者犹言。使其言可用则行之，不可用不必示臣下也。 
现代文：陛下有宽弘之德，所以不应进言的人也进言，如果他说的可采用就采用，不可采用就不必告诉臣下。 
English: His Majesty has the virtue of broadmindedness, so those who should not speak also speak. If he says it can be adopted, it will be adopted, and if it cannot be adopted, it does not have to be told to his subjects.

古文：上是之。
现代文：皇帝同意他的话。
English: The emperor agreed with him.

古文：居仁字行之，大兴人。泰和三年进士。
现代文：杨居仁，字行之，大兴人，泰和三年进士。
English: Yang Jueren, Zi Xingzhi, Daxing Ren, Taihe Sanren Jinji.

古文：天兴末时北渡，举家投黄河死。
现代文：天兴末年北渡，全家投黄河而死。
English: At the end of Tianxing's life, he went to the north, and his whole family drowned in the Yellow River.

古文：五年，行尚书省于京兆，谓都事商衡曰： 古来宰相必用文人，以其知为相之道。
现代文：正大五年，完颜赛不在京兆行尚书省，对都事商衡说： 自古宰相必定用文人，因为他们知道为相之道，我知道什么呢？
English: In the fifth year of senior high school, when the beauty contest was over, she did not go to the Beijing Zhaoxing Shang Shuxuan, but said to the provincial government: Since ancient times, the prime minister must use literati, because they know how to be a scholar. What do I know?

古文：赛不何所知，使居此位，吾恐他日史官书之，某时以某为相而国乃亡。 
现代文：让我在此职位上，恐怕以后史官会记载说：某时因为某人为相而国家灭亡。 
English: If I remain in this position, I am afraid that later historians will record that: at some point, because of someone, the country perished.

古文：即促衡草表乞致仕。
现代文：他当即督促商衡写奏表请求辞职。
English: He immediately urged Sangheng to write a letter of resignation.

古文：平章政事侯挚朴直无蕴藉，朝廷鄙之，天兴元年兵事急，自致仕起为大司农，未几复致仕，徐州行尚书省无敢行者，复拜挚平章政事。
现代文：平章政事侯挚朴直但没有涵养，朝廷里的人都鄙视他。天兴元年，军情紧急，便让本已退休的他出任大司农，不久又辞职，徐州行尚书省没人敢去，于是又拜侯挚为平章政事。
English: In the first year of the Tianxing Dynasty, the military situation was urgent, so he, who had already retired, was appointed as the Chief Secretary of Agriculture, and soon resigned. No one dared to go to Xuzhou and Shangshu Province, so he was appointed as the Governor of Pingzhang Province.

古文：都堂会议，挚以国势不支，因论数事，曰： 只是更无擘划。 
现代文：在都堂议事时，侯挚认为国事难以支撑，他列举几件事，说： 像这样更无从筹划了。 
English: During the deliberation in the capital hall, Hou Zhiying thought that it was difficult to support the national affairs. He listed several things and said: It is even more impossible to plan like this.

古文：白撒怒曰： 平章出此言，国家何望耶！ 
现代文：白撒愤怒地说： 平章说出这样的话来，国家还有什么希望呢？ 
English: Bai Sha said angrily, "What hope is there for the country if such a thing can be said so casually?"

古文：意在置之不测。
现代文：想要让侯挚遭受大祸。
English: He wanted to bring great disaster to Houxin.

古文：赛不顾谓白撒曰： 侯相言甚当。 
现代文：完颜赛不却回头对白撒说 ：侯相的话很对呀！ 
English: After the beauty contest, he turned to Baisa and said, "Hosang's words are right!

古文：白撒遂含愤而罢。
现代文：白撒只好气愤地算了。
English: Baisa had no choice but to angrily give up.

古文：时大元兵薄汴，白撒策后日讲和或出质，必首相当行，力请赛不领省事，拜为左丞相，寻复致仕。
现代文：当时元兵逼近汴梁，白撒估计以后讲和或者出人质必定首相前去，竭力请求让完颜赛不负责尚书省事，拜为左丞相，不久，赛不又辞职。
English: At that time, the former soldiers were approaching Jiaolang. Baisa estimated that the prime minister would certainly go to the prime minister after peace was declared or a hostage was taken. He tried his best to request that Jian Cai not be responsible for handling affairs, and that he be appointed as the minister of the left. Soon after, Jian Cai resigned again.

古文：是年冬，哀宗迁归德，起复为右丞相，枢密使，兼左副元帅，封寿国公，扈从以行。
现代文：这年冬天，哀宗迁往归德，再次起用完颜赛不为右丞相、枢密使，兼左副元帅，封寿国公，随驾前往。
English: In the winter of that year, Aizong moved back to Germany, and was appointed as the right minister, the privy councilor, the left deputy marshal, and the governor of Fuzhou Province.

古文：河北兵溃，从至归德，又请致仕。
现代文：河北兵败，他跟从皇上到归德，又请求辞职。
English: When Hebei was defeated, he followed the emperor back to Germany and asked to resign.

古文：二年七月，复诏行尚书省事于徐州。
现代文：天兴二年七月，皇帝又诏令他在徐州行尚书省事。
English: In July of the second year of Tianxing, the emperor also ordered him to go to Xuzhou to study and save trouble.

古文：既至，以州乏粮，遣郎中王万庆会徐、宿、灵璧兵取源州，令元帅郭恩统之。
现代文：他到徐州后，因为缺粮，派郎中王万庆会合徐、宿、灵璧的军队夺取源州，命令元帅郭恩总领军队。
English: After he arrived in Xuzhou, because of the shortage of grain, he sent his son-in-law Wang Wanqing to gather the armies of Xu, Shuku and Lingbi to seize Yuanzhou, and ordered Marshal Guo En to lead the army.

古文：九月，恩至源州城下，败绩而还。再命卓翼攻丰县，破之。
现代文：九月，郭恩到了源州城下，失败而回，完颜赛不又命卓翼攻丰县，攻取了它。
English: In September, Guo En arrived at the outskirts of the city of Yuanzhou, failed and returned. After the beauty contest, he attacked Feng County and captured it.

古文：初，郭恩以败为耻，托疾不行，乃密与河北诸叛将郭野驴辈谋归国用安，执元帅商瑀父子、元帅左都监纥石烈善住，并杀之。又逐都尉斡转留奴、泥庞古桓端、蒲察世谋、元帅右都监李居仁、员外郎常忠。自是，防城与守门者皆河北义军，出入自恣。
现代文：起初，郭恩因失败而耻辱，称病不肯去，并和河北叛将郭野驴等人密谋投奔国用安，他们抓住了元帅商王禹父子、元帅左都监纥石烈善住，将他们都杀了，又赶走了都尉斡转留奴、泥古桓端、蒲察世谋、元帅右都监李居仁、员外郎常忠，从此防城与守门的都是河北义军，他们进出自由自在。
English: At first, Guo En, humiliated by his failure, said that he was ill and refused to go, and conspired with the Hebei rebel general Guo Yunesi and others to flee to Guoyuan. They captured the marshal Shang Wang Yu and his son, the marshal Zuo Duan, and the marshal Zou Shi Rong Sheng, and killed them all. They also drove away the captain Zhuo Zeng Rongnu, Mu Guan Duan, Pucha Shimo, the marshal Zuo Duan, Li Juerin, and the member Wei Lang Changzhong. From then on, the defenders of the city and the gatekeepers were the H

古文：赛不先病疽，久不视事，重为贼党所制，束手听命而已。
现代文：完颜赛不得了疽病，好久不能亲自处理事务，又受贼党的控制，只是束手听命而已。
English: After the beauty contest, he got gangrene, and for a long time he couldn't personally handle affairs. He was also under the control of the Kuomintang, but he just did as he was told.

古文：初，源、徐交攻，郭野驴者每辞疾不行，赛不遂授野驴徐州节度副使，兼防城都总领，实羁之也。
现代文：起初，源州和徐州互相攻打，郭野驴每次都推说有病而不出战，完颜赛不授予郭野驴徐州节度副使兼防城都统领，其实是牵制他。
English: At the beginning, Yuanzhou and Xuzhou fought against each other. Guo Wanzhe always pretended to be ill and did not go to war. After the competition, Guo Wanzhe was not awarded the title of vice-envoy of the Xuzhou Festival and commander of the defense of the city. In fact, he was restrained.

古文：野驴既见徐州空虚，乃约源州叛将麻琮内外相应。
现代文：后来，郭野驴见徐州空虚，就与源州叛将麻琮里应外合。
English: Later, when Guo Ye saw the emptiness of Xuzhou, he made a deal with the rebel commander of Yuanzhou.

古文：十月甲申，诘旦，袭破徐州。
现代文：十月甲申，天亮时，攻破了徐州。
English: In October, Jiashen broke through Xuzhou at dawn.

古文：时蔡已被围，徐州将士以朝命阻绝，且逼大兵，议出降。
现代文：当时蔡州已被包围，徐州的将士因为朝廷的命令被隔绝了，又逼于兵势，商议后投降。
English: At that time, Caizhou had been besieged, and the soldiers of Xuzhou were isolated because of the order of the imperial court, and they were forced to surrender after discussion.

古文：赛不弗从，恐被执，至是投河求死，流三十余步不没，军士援出之。
现代文：完颜赛不不同意，他怕被抓住，于是投河自尽。他随河水漂流了三十多步都没被淹没，军士们将他救出。
English: He was afraid of being caught, so he threw himself into the river. He drifted along the river for more than thirty steps without being submerged, and the sergeants rescued him.

古文：又五日，自缢于州第。麻琮乃遣人以州降大元。
现代文：过了五日，他在州中府第内自缢，麻琮便派人以徐州投降了元军。
English: Five days later, he committed suicide in the central prefecture of Xuzhou, and Miao sent people to Xuzhou to surrender to the Yuan army.

古文：子按春，正大中充护卫，坐与宗室女奸，杖一百收系。
现代文：完颜赛不的儿子按春，正大年间当护卫，因与宗室之女通奸而获罪，被杖打一百而收监。
English: As a result of committing adultery with his father-in-law's daughter, his son, Asaharu, who was an escort during his junior and senior years, was punished by being beaten with a cane and sent to prison.

古文：赞曰：赛不临阵对垒既有将略，洎秉钧衡，观其救解杨居仁、侯挚等言，殊有相度，按春之事尤有古人之风焉。
现代文：他居住在许州。元兵到许州，按春开南门降元，并跟从元军攻打京城，曹王去当人质，朝臣和近卫中有人跟从他去，按春破口大骂，指责他们。
English: He lived in Huzhou. The Yuan soldiers went to Huzhou, opened the south gate to the Yuan, and followed the Yuan army to attack the capital. Cao Wang went to be a hostage, and some courtiers and guards followed him, and swore loudly and accused them.

古文：晚以老病，受制叛臣，致修匹夫匹妇之节，此犹大厦将倾，非一木之所能支也，悲夫！
现代文：这年冬天，按春又从北兵中逃回，皇帝下诏令将他押入省，审问他，按春随着近侍上堂时装出流泪的模样。皇帝问完颜赛不： 按春从北边来，丞相可以问问他那里的消息。 完颜赛不上奏说 ：我不幸生了这样一个贼子，事到如今，恨不得亲手杀了他，怎么忍心与他对话呢？ 
English: In the winter of that year, Asaharu again escaped from the Northern soldiers, and the emperor issued a decree to bring him into the province and interrogate him. As Asaharu was about to be brought into the court, he pretended to shed tears. The emperor asked Yanase not to come: Asaharu came from the north, the prime minister could ask him about the news there. After Yanase not to come, he said: I had the misfortune to give birth to such a thief, and to this day, I can't wait to kill him with my own hands. How can I bear to talk to him?

古文：内族白撒，名承裔，末帝承麟之兄也，系出世祖诸孙。
现代文：十二月，皇上车驾东巡，担任留后的两位丞相到开封，抓了按春将他在狱中斩首。皇族白撒名承裔，是末帝承麟的哥哥，是世祖的孙子辈。
English: In December, the emperor went on an eastward tour in the imperial car, and the two prime ministers who stayed behind to serve him came to Kaifeng, arrested Anshun and beheaded him in prison. The royal family is descended from Baisa, the brother of the last emperor Chenglin, and the grandchildren of the founder.

古文：自幼为奉御。贞祐间，累官知临洮府事、兼本路兵马都总管。
现代文：自幼充当奉御，贞祐年间，累官知临洮府事、兼本路兵马都总管。
English: He served as a vassal since he was a child, and during the reign of Emperor Zhenyu, he was appointed to the post of Linyi prefectural governor, and also served as the general manager of the troops and horses on this road.

古文：兴定元年，为元帅左都监，行帅府事于凤翔。
现代文：兴定元年，任元帅左都监，行帅府事于凤翔。
English: In the first year of Xingding, he was appointed marshal of the Left Capital Supervision, and the post of marshal was held by Fengxiang.

古文：是年，诏陕西行省伐宋，白撒出巩州盐川，遇宋兵于皂郊堡，败之。
现代文：当年，诏令陕西行省讨伐宋国，白撒从巩州盐川出兵，在皂郊堡和宋军相遇，击败了他们。
English: In that year, the emperor ordered Shaanxi Province to fight against the Song Dynasty, and Baisa dispatched troops from Gongzhou and Yanchuan. They met the Song Dynasty troops at Sojiao Fort and defeated them.

古文：又遇宋兵于天水军，掩击，宋兵大溃。
现代文：又在天水军遇上宋兵，他偷袭宋军，宋军大败。
English: He also encountered Song soldiers in the Tianshui Army. He secretly attacked the Song Army, and the Song Army was defeated.

古文：二年四月，复败宋兵，至鸡公山，遂拔西和州，毁其诸隘营屯。
现代文：二年四月，又打败宋兵，追至鸡公山，便夺取了西和州，摧毁了各关隘营垒。
English: In April of the second year, they defeated the Song soldiers and chased them as far as Jigong Mountain. They then captured West Hwasho and destroyed the barracks in Guanxiao.

古文：遣合紥都统完颜习涅阿不率军趋成州，宋帅罗参政、统制李大亨焚庐舍弃城遁，留千余人城守，督兵赴之，逐克焉，获粮七万斛，钱数千万。
现代文：他又派合扎都统完颜习涅阿不率领军队直趋成州，宋军主帅罗参政、统制李大亨烧掉房屋弃城逃跑，只留一千多人守城。白散指挥金兵进攻之后，夺取这座城，缴获粮食七万斛、钱几千万。
English: He also sent Zhangzadu to lead the army straight to Chengzhou after the unification of Yanxi and Nea. Luo, the commander of the Song army, participated in politics, and Li Taigang, the commander-in-chief, burned the houses and abandoned the city and fled, leaving only more than a thousand people to defend the city. After Baisan commanded the attack of the gold soldiers, he captured the city and seized 70,000 mu of grain and tens of millions of money.

古文：河池县守将杨九鼎亦焚县舍走保清野原。
现代文：河池县守将杨九鼎也烧掉县城房舍逃往清野原防守。
English: Yang Jiu Ding, the governor of Hechi County, also burned down the county seat and fled to the defense of Qingyuan Plain.

古文：统制高千据黑谷关甚固，遣兵袭之，千遁去，获粮二万斛，器械称是，因夷其险而还。
现代文：统制高千占据着黑谷关，关城坚固，白撒派兵偷袭，高千逃跑，又缴获粮食二万斛，器械若干，于是摧毁了这个险关后退兵。
English: Gao Qian, the governor, occupied Hegu Pass, the pass was strong, Baisa sent soldiers to make a sneak attack, Gao Qian fled, and captured twenty thousand catties of grain and some equipment, so he destroyed this dangerous pass and retreated.

古文：三年，破虎头关，败宋兵于七盘子、鸡冠关。
现代文：三年，攻破虎头关，在七盘子、鸡冠关击败宋军。
English: In three years, he broke through the Tiger's Head Pass and defeated the Song Army in the Seven Plates Pass and the Chicken's Head Pass.

古文：褒城县官民自焚城宇遁，因取其城。
现代文：褒城县官民自己烧毁城内房屋逃遁，于是夺取该城。
English: The officials and citizens of Baocheng County burned down their own houses in the city to escape, and then seized the city.

古文：兴元府提刑兼知府事赵希昔闻兵将至，率官民遁，于是白撒遂取兴元，以驻兵焉。
现代文：兴元府提刑兼知府事赵希昔听说金朝兵将到，率领官民逃跑，于是，白撒又取下兴元，用以驻扎军队。
English: Zhao Xixi, the procurator of Xingyuan and governor of the prefecture, heard that the Kim dynasty soldiers would arrive and led the officials and citizens to escape. Therefore, Baisa also took Xingyuan and used it to station troops.

古文：命提控张秀华驰视洋州，官民亦遁，又取其城。
现代文：他命令提控张秀华驰马前去察看洋州，洋州的官民也逃跑，又取下该城。
English: He ordered Zhang Xiuhua, the prosecutor, to ride ahead to inspect Yangzhou. The officials and citizens of Yangzhou also fled and took down the city.

古文：寻闻汉江之南三十里，宋兵二千据山而阵，遣提控唐括移失不击走之。
现代文：不久，又听说汉江南面三十里处，宋兵二千人占据山头摆下阵容，他便派提控唐括移失不把他们打跑了。
English: Soon after, he heard that there were two thousand Song soldiers occupying the top of a hill thirty miles south of the Han River. He sent his troops to attack the Tang forces and drove them away.

古文：行省以捷闻，宣宗大悦，进白撒官一阶。
现代文：行省向朝廷告捷，宣宗大喜，给白撒提升了一级官阶。
English: The imperial court was overjoyed at the province's success, and Baisa was promoted to the first rank.

古文：时朝议以兰州当西夏之冲，久为敌据，将遣白撒复之，白撒奏曰： 臣近入宋境，略河池，下凤州，破兴元，抵洋州而还。
现代文：当时朝廷商议说，兰州是阻挡西夏的门户，久为敌人所占据，准备派白撒前去收复。白撒上奏说 ：臣近时深入宋国境内，取河池，下凤州，破兴元，直至洋州而回。
English: At that time, the imperial court deliberated that Lanzhou was the gateway to block the Western Xia and had long been occupied by the enemy, and was preparing to send Bai Sha to recover it. Bai Sha said: The vassal recently went deep into the Song territory, took Hechi, went down to Fengzhou, broke through Xingyuan, and returned to Yangzhou.

古文：经涉险阻数千里，士马疲弊，未得少休，而欲重为是举，甚非计也，不若息兵养士以备。 
现代文：经历艰难险阻几千里，兵士马匹疲弊不堪，还未稍得休息，便要重新执行这个任务，很不合适，不如休兵养士加以防备。 
English: After experiencing thousands of miles of hardships and obstacles, soldiers and horses are exhausted, and they have not had a moment's rest, so they have to re-execute this task. It is very inappropriate, and it is better to be prepared by retired soldiers.

古文：从之。
现代文：皇帝听从了。
English: I followed his advice.

古文：未几，权参知政事，行省事于平凉。
现代文：不久，代理参知政事，设行省于平凉。
English: Soon, he became an acting governor and set up the province in Pingliang.

古文：四年，上言： 宋境山州宕昌东上拶一带蕃族，昔尝归附，分处德顺、镇戎之间。
现代文：四年，上奏说： 宋朝境内的山州、宕昌、东上拶一带的蕃族，过去曾经归附我国，分居在德顺、镇戎之间。
English: In the fourth year, Shangso said: The Yi people in the Song Dynasty in the areas of Shanzhou, Gaochang and Dongjiaoxing, who had been annexed to China in the past, lived separately between Deshun and Zhenrong.

古文：其后有司不能存抚，相继亡去。
现代文：后来，因有关方面不能安抚，所以相继逃跑。
English: Later, because the parties concerned could not be appeased, they fled one after another.

古文：近闻复有归心，然不招之亦无由自至。
现代文：近来听说又有归降的愿望，不过如不去招抚，他们也不会自动前来。
English: I have recently heard that there is a desire to return, but they will not come voluntarily if they are not petted.

古文：诚得其众，可以助兵，宁谧一方。
现代文：如得到这些部众，可以有助于军队，并使一方安宁。
English: If you get these people, you can help the army and bring peace to one side.

古文：臣以同知通远军节度使事乌古论长寿及通远军节度副使温敦永昌皆本蕃属，且久镇边鄙，深得彼心，已命遣人招之。
现代文：因为同知通远军节度使事乌古论长寿以及通远军节度副使温敦永昌原是蕃族人，而且长期镇守边境，深得蕃人之心，臣已让他们派人去招降。
English: Because of the longevity of the Tongyuan Army's festival envoy Wu Gu and the fact that Tongyuan Army's festival deputy envoy Wyndon Yongchang was originally a Yi, and had been guarding the border for a long time, deeply won the hearts of the Yi people, the minister had them send someone to recruit.

古文：其所遣及诸来归者，皆当甄奖，请预定赏格以待之。 
现代文：这些派去的以及前来归降的人都应当分别给予奖赏，请预先商定好赏赐的规格等候实行。 
English: Those who are sent and those who come to surrender should be rewarded separately. Please agree on the award specifications in advance and wait for them to be implemented.

古文：上是其言。
现代文：皇帝认为他说得对。
English: The emperor thought he was right.

古文：是年，夏兵三万由高峰岭入寇定西州，环城为栅，白撒遣刺史爱申阿失剌与行军提控乌古论长寿、温敦永昌出战，大败之，斩首千余，获马仗甚众。
现代文：当年，夏国派兵三万由高峰岭入侵定西州，他们在城外设置了栅栏，白撒派刺史爱申阿失剌和行军提控乌古论长寿、温敦永昌出战，大败该军，斩首一千多，缴获马匹兵器很多。
English: In that year, Xia Guo sent thirty thousand soldiers from Gaofengling to invade Dingxi Province. They set up a fence outside the city. Bai Zi Shi Aishen A, a member of the Baizha faction, lost his temper and marched to take control of Wugu on the theory of longevity. Winton Yongchang went to war and defeated the army, beheaded more than a thousand people, and seized a lot of horse weapons.

古文：五年五月，白撒言： 近诏臣遣官谕诸蕃族以讨西夏，臣即令临洮路总管女奚烈古里间计约乔家丙令族首领以谕余族。
现代文：五年五月，白撒上奏说 ：近来朝廷诏令臣派官员告知各藩族攻打西夏，臣即令临洮路总管女奚烈古里间约集乔家丙令族首领告诉其余各族。
English: In May of the fifth year, Bai Zasa reported: Recently, the imperial court issued an imperial edict to send officials to inform the various clans to attack Western Xia, and the minister immediately ordered the head of the Linyi Road to tell the leaders of the Qiao family to tell the other clans.

古文：又别遣权左右司都事赵梅委差官遥授合河县尉刘贞同往抚谕。
现代文：又另派代理左右司都事赵梅委派差官遥授合河县尉刘贞一起去告诉他们。
English: In addition, the Zhao Mei Commission, the acting left and right director of the capital affairs department, sent an officer, Yaoju He County Lieutenant Liu Zhen, to go and tell them.

古文：未几，梅、贞报溪哥城等处诸族，与先降族共愿助兵七万八千余人，本国蕃族愿助兵九千，若更以官军继为声援，胜夏必矣。
现代文：不久，赵梅、刘贞报告说，溪哥城等地的各族，以及先前投降的各族一共打算助兵七万八千多人，本国蕃族愿意助兵九千人，如果再有官军作为后继声援部队，必定战胜西夏。
English: Soon after, Zhao Mei and Liu Zhen reported that all the ethnic groups in Xigaocheng and other places, as well as the ethnic groups that had previously surrendered, planned to help a total of more than 78,000 soldiers, and the local Yi people were willing to help 9,000 soldiers. If there were another government army as a follow-up support force, it would surely defeat Xixia.

古文：臣已令古里间将巩州兵三万，宜更择勇略之臣副之。
现代文：臣已命令古里间带领巩州军三万人，还应再选派有勇有谋的人充当副将。
English: The minister has ordered Gulima to lead the 30,000-strong Gongzhou Army, and he should also select a brave and resourceful person to serve as vice-general.

古文：梅、贞等既悉事势，当假以军前之职。
现代文：赵梅、刘贞既已熟悉有关情况，应当授予军队的官职。
English: Since Zhao Mei and Liu Zhen are already familiar with the relevant situation, they should be awarded military posts.

古文：蕃僧纳林心波亦招诱有功，乞迁官授职以奖励之。 
现代文：蕃族僧人纳林心波也招降有功，请授予官职以示奖励。 
English: Nalin Xinbo, a monk of the Yi ethnic group, has also contributed to the promotion and demotion. Please award him an official post as a reward.

古文：上皆从其请。
现代文：皇帝都听从了他的请求。
English: The emperors all complied with his request.

古文：元光元年二月，行省上言： 近与延安元帅完颜合达、纳合买住议：河北郡县俱已残毁，陕西、河南亦经抄掠。
现代文：元光元年二月，行省上奏说： 近来和延安元帅完颜合达、纳合买住商议：河北的郡县都已残破，陕西、河南也都经过掳掠。
English: In February of the first year of the Yuan Guang Dynasty, he made a report to the provincial government, saying, "Recently, we have been in discussion with the Yan'an marshal to complete the settlement of Yan'an and Naha. The counties and counties in Hebei have all been destroyed, and Shaanxi and Henan have also been plundered.

古文：比者西北二敌并攻鄜延，城邑随陷，惟延安孤墉仅得保全。
现代文：近来西北两处敌军合力攻打延，城邑随之沦陷，只有延安孤城得以保全。
English: Recently, two enemy forces in the northwest joined forces to attack Yan, and the city fell as a result. Only the isolated city of Yan'an was preserved.

古文：若今秋复至，必长驱而深入，虽京兆、凤翔、庆阳、平凉已各益军，而率皆步卒，且相去阔远，卒难应援，倘关中诸镇不支，则河南亦不安矣。
现代文：如果今秋敌军又来，必定长驱而深入内地，虽然京兆、凤翔、庆阳、平凉都已增兵，但大都是步兵，况且相距遥远，终究难以相互援救，如果关中各镇难以支撑，那么河南也就不得安宁了。
English: If the enemy army comes again this autumn, it will certainly drive long and go deep into the inland. Although Jingzhao, Fengxiang, Qingyang and Pingliang have all increased their troops, most of them are infantry, moreover, they are far apart, so it is difficult to rescue each other. If the towns in Guanzhong are difficult to support, then Henan will not be peaceful.

古文：今二敌远去，西北少休，宜乘此隙径取蜀、汉、实国家基业万全之计。 
现代文：如今二敌远去，西北稍得休息，应当乘此机会直取蜀汉，这是充实国家基业的万全之计。 
English: Now that the two enemies are far away, Northwest China can rest a little. It should take this opportunity to directly take over Shuhan, which is a perfect way to enrich the national heritage.

古文：诏枢密议之。
现代文：诏令枢密院商议。
English: The Privy Council deliberated on the edict.

古文：先是，夏兵数十万分寇龛谷、鄜延、大通诸城，上召白撒等授以方略，命发兵袭其浮桥，遂趋西凉。
现代文：起先，西夏兵几十万人分头入侵龛谷、延、大通各城，皇帝召见白撒等人教给作战方略，命令他们出兵攻击敌人浮桥，进往西凉。
English: At first, hundreds of thousands of Western Xia soldiers split up to invade the cities of Shugu, Yan and Datong. The emperor summoned Baisa and others to teach them battle strategies and ordered them to send troops to attack the enemy pontoon and enter Xiliang.

古文：别遣将取大通城，出溪哥路，略夏地。
现代文：另派将领夺取大通城，从溪哥路出兵，占领西夏土地。
English: In addition, generals were dispatched to seize Datong City, and troops were dispatched from Xi'er Road to occupy the land of Western Xia.

古文：白撒徐出镇戎，合达出环州，以报三道之役。
现代文：白撒从镇戎出兵，合达从环州出兵，分兵三路迎击。
English: Baisa dispatched troops from Zhenrong, and Heda dispatched troops from Huanzhou, and divided the troops into three groups to counterattack.

古文：白撒驰至临洮，遣总管女奚烈古里间、积石州刺史徒单牙武各摄帅职，率兵西入，遇夏兵千余于踏南寺，击走之。
现代文：白撒奔往临洮，派总管女奚烈古里间、积石州刺史徒单牙武各领统帅职务，领兵西征，在踏南寺遇到一千多名夏兵，便打跑了他们。
English: Baisa rushed to Linyi, and sent the chief stewardess, Lady Jiali, to take the position of commander-in-chief and lead the troops to the west. When she met more than a thousand summer soldiers at the Southern Temple, she beat them and ran away.

古文：夏人据大通城，因围之，分兵夺其桥，与守兵七千人战，大败之，几杀其半，入河死者不可计，余兵焚其桥西遁。
现代文：夏人占领大通城，他们将城包围住，并分兵夺取桥梁，和守兵七千人交战，大败他们，杀掉了将近一半人，掉进河里淹死的不计其数，剩余兵士烧掉桥梁西逃。
English: The Xia people occupied Datong City, they surrounded the city, and a detachment of soldiers captured the bridge, and fought with seven thousand guards, defeated them, killed nearly half of the people, and drowned countless people who fell into the river. The remaining soldiers burned the bridge and fled west.

古文：乃还军攻大通，克之，斩首三千，因招来诸寺族被胁僧俗人，皆按堵如故。
现代文：于是他们回军进攻大通，攻克后，斩首三千人，并招降了各寺各族中被胁迫的僧人和平民，让他们安居如常。
English: So they returned to attack Datong, and after conquering it, they beheaded three thousand people, and recruited monks and civilians from all temples and ethnic groups who had been coerced, and let them live in peace as usual.

古文：以河梁既焚，塞外地寒少草，师遂还。
现代文：由于黄河桥被烧毁，塞外天气寒冷少草，大军回师。
English: Due to the burning of the Yellow River Bridge and the cold weather and lack of grass outside the city, the large army returned to the division.

古文：十二月，行省言： 近有人自北来者，称国王木华里悉兵沿渭而西，谋攻凤翔，凤翔既下乃图京兆，京兆卒不可得，留兵守之，至春蹂践二麦以困我。
现代文：十二月，行省上奏说： 近日有人从北面来，说国王木华里带领全部军队沿渭水向西，准备攻打凤翔，凤翔攻下以后再取京兆，京兆一时不能攻下，便留兵看守，到春天时践踏麦地让我方受困。
English: In December, an envoy from the provincial government said: Recently, someone came from the north and said that King Mu Huali led the entire army westward along the Surabaya River, preparing to attack Fengxiang. After attacking Fengxiang, he would take Jingzhao. If he could not capture Jingzhao, he would leave soldiers to guard it. In the spring, he would trample the wheat fields, leaving our side trapped.

古文：未几，大兵果围凤翔，帅府遣人告急。
现代文：不久，大兵果然包围了凤翔，帅府派人告急。
English: Soon, the soldiers surrounded Fengxiang, and the governor's office sent someone to complain.

古文：臣以为二镇唇齿也，凤翔蹉跌，则京兆必危，而陕右大震矣。
现代文：臣认为这二镇是唇齿相依，凤翔失陷则京兆必危，而陕右就会大受震动了。
English: The minister thought that these two towns were closely related, and the fall of Fengxiang would endanger Beijing, while Shaanxi would be greatly shaken.

古文：然平川广野实骑兵驰骋之地，未可与之争锋。
现代文：然而平川旷野之地实在是骑兵驰骋的好地方，难以和敌人作战。
English: However, the wilderness of Hirakawa was actually a good place for cavalry to gallop, and it was difficult to fight the enemy.

古文：已遣提控罗桓将兵二千，循南山而进，伺隙攻其栅垒，以纾城围。
现代文：我已派提控罗桓领兵二千，沿南山进发，等候机会攻打敌军营垒，以缓解城中之围。
English: I have dispatched two thousand troops led by Luo Huan to advance along the Nanshan Mountain, waiting for the opportunity to attack the enemy camp to ease the siege in the city.

古文：更乞发河南步骑以备潼关。 
现代文：更请派河南的步骑军以防备潼关。 
English: In addition, please send the Henan cavalry to guard the pass.

古文：诏付尚书省枢密院议之。
现代文：皇帝诏令交尚书省、枢密院商议。
English: The Emperor's edict was sent to the Ministry of Literature and the Privy Council for deliberation.

古文：二年冬，哀宗即位，边事益急。
现代文：二年冬，哀宗即位，边境战事更为紧急。
English: In the winter of the second year, Emperor Aizong ascended to the throne, and the border war became more urgent.

古文：正大五年八月，召白撒还朝，拜尚书右丞，未几，拜平章政事。
现代文：正大五年八月，朝廷召白撒回朝，拜为尚书右丞，不久，又拜任平章政事。
English: In August of the fifth year of Jodai, the imperial court summoned Baisa back to the imperial court, and he was given the title of Shangshu Rojo (尚書右丞). Soon after, he was given the title of Pingzhang Zhengji (平章政事).

古文：白撒居西垂几十年，当宋、夏之交，虽颇立微效，皆出诸将之力。
现代文：白撒居留西部边境几十年，在和宋、夏交接的地区，虽然颇立有小功劳，也都出于众将之力。
English: Baisa stayed on the western border for several decades. In the areas bordering Song and Xia Dynasties, although there were some small achievements, they were also due to the power of the generals.

古文：然本恇怯无能，徒以仪体为事，性愎贪鄙，及入为相，专愎尤甚。
现代文：他本人却怯懦无能，只是讲求形式，性情又贪婪，当他入朝任相以后，尤其专横独断。
English: He himself, however, was cowardly and incompetent, concerned only with form, greedy by nature, and especially domineering after he assumed the throne.

古文：尝恶堂食不适口，每以家膳自随，国家颠覆，初不恤也。
现代文：他曾经嫌朝堂伙食不合口味，总是从家里带来食物，国家的危亡，他并不放在心上。
English: He used to complain that the food in the dining hall was not to his taste. He always brought food from home. He did not care about the country's peril.

古文：九年正月，诸军败绩于三峰山。大兵与白坡兵合，长驱趋汴。
现代文：九年正月，各军在三峰山战败，元兵和在白坡的军队会合，长趋直奔汴京。
English: In the first month of the ninth year, the armies were defeated in Sanfeng Mountain, and the Yuan soldiers and the army in Baipo met and headed straight for Beijing.

古文：令史杨居仁请乘其远至击之，白撒不从，且阴怒之。
现代文：令史杨居仁请求乘敌军远来而出击，白撒不肯听从，而且在心中暗暗恼怒。
English: Shi Yang Jiu Ren asked Shi Yang Jiu Ren to use the enemy army to attack far away. Shi Yang Jiu Ren refused to listen, and was secretly angry in his heart.

古文：遂遣完颜麻斤出、邵公茂等部民万人，开短堤，决河水，以固京城。
现代文：他便派完颜麻斤出、邵公茂等带领民众一万多人，开挖短堤，掘开黄河，用以加固京城防守。
English: He then sent more than ten thousand people led by Yan Makjin, Shao Gongmao and others to dig a short dike and excavate the Yellow River to strengthen the defense of Beijing.

古文：功未毕而骑兵奄至，麻斤出等皆被害，丁壮无二三百人得反者。
现代文：可是工程未完而敌骑兵突然到达，麻斤出等人都被杀害，民工只有二三百人能够逃回。
English: However, before the project was completed, the enemy cavalry suddenly arrived, and everyone was killed. Only two or three hundred migrant workers were able to escape.

古文：壬辰，弃卫州，运守具入京。
现代文：十一日，放弃了卫州，将防守器械运回京都。
English: On the 11th, they abandoned Weshu and transported the defensive equipment back to Kyoto.

古文：初，大兵破卫州，宣宗南迁，移州治于宜村渡，筑新城于河北岸，去河不数步，惟北面受敌，而以石包之，岁屯重兵于此，大兵屡至不能近。
现代文：当初，元兵攻破卫州，宣宗南迁，将州治移到宜村渡，在黄河北岸修建新城，离河只有几步远，只有北面对敌，采用石块包在城墙上，每年在这里屯守重兵，元军屡次不能靠近。
English: At the beginning, the Yuan soldiers broke through the Weizhou, the Xuan Zong moved south, moved the state government to Yimundu, and built a new city on the north bank of the Yellow River. It was only a few steps away from the river, and only the north faced the enemy. The city walls were covered with stones, and heavy troops were stationed here every year. The Yuan army could not get close many times.

古文：至是，弃之，随为大兵所据。
现代文：这一次放弃之后，新城随之被元兵所占领。
English: After giving up this time, Xincheng was subsequently occupied by the former soldiers.

古文：甲午，修京城楼橹。
现代文：二十三日，修建京城的城楼。
English: On the 23rd, the castle tower of the capital was built.

古文：初，宣宗以京城阔远难守，诏高琪筑里城，公私力尽仅乃得成。
现代文：当初，宣宗认为京城过于开阔，路远难以防守，诏令术虎高琪修筑里城，将公家和民力用尽了才勉强建成。
English: At first, Emperor Xuanzong thought that the capital city was too open and difficult to defend, so he ordered Shuguo Gaoqi to build the city of Chulli, but only after exhausting public and private resources.

古文：至是，议所守。朝臣有言里城决不可守，外城决不可弃。
现代文：在商议如何防守时，朝臣中有的人说里城决不能守，外城决不能放弃。
English: When discussing how to defend the castle, some courtiers said that the inner castle must not be defended and the outer castle must not be abandoned.

古文：大兵先得外城，粮尽救绝，走一人不出。
现代文：元兵如先占领外城，粮食吃尽而救援绝断，连一个人也跑不出去。
English: If the former soldiers occupy the outer city first, the grain will be exhausted and the rescue will be cut off, and not even one person can run out.

古文：里城或不测可用，于是决计守外城。
现代文：里城也说不上有没有用处，于是决定防守外城。
English: The city of Licheng could not be said to be useful, so it was decided to defend the outer city.

古文：时在城诸军不满四万，京城周百二十里，人守一乳口尚不能遍，故议避迁之民充军。
现代文：当时在城中的各军合计不满四万，京城周长一百二十里，一人守一个口子也不够用，因此商议让避难南迁来的民众充任兵士。
English: At that time, the total number of troops in the city was less than forty thousand. The capital was one hundred and twenty miles in circumference, and it was not enough for one person to guard one entrance. Therefore, it was discussed to let the people who had fled to the south serve as soldiers.

古文：又召在京军官于上清宫，平日防城得功者如内族按出虎、大和儿、刘伯纲等皆随召而出，截长补短假借而用，得百余人。又集京东西沿河旧屯两都尉及卫州已起义军，通建威得四万人，益以丁壮六万，分置四城。
现代文：又在上清宫召集在京的军官们，平时守城而有功的像皇族的按出虎、大和儿、刘伯纲等人都随同召出，取长补短挑选出暂用的一百多人，又召集京东和京西沿河旧屯守的两都尉以及卫州已组织起来的义军，总共编成四万人，又增加了一些民间的青壮年共六万人，分别布置在四面城墙上。
English: In addition, the officers in Beijing were summoned to the Shangqing Palace, and those who had served in the defense of the city in peacetime, such as the imperial family's Hanzhida Tiger, Yamato, and Liu Bo Gang, were also summoned, and more than one hundred people were selected for temporary use, taking into account their strengths and weaknesses. The two captains of the former garrison along the river in East Beijing and West Beijing were also summoned, as well as the rebel army that had been organized in Weizhou. A total of forty thousand people were assembled, and a total of sixty thousand young people were added. They were arranged on the four city walls.

古文：每面别选一千，名 飞虎军 ，以专救应，然亦不能军矣。
现代文：每一面另外挑选出一千人，称为 飞虎军 ，专门作为救应之用，但是也已难制约了。
English: Each side selected another thousand people, known as the "Flying Tiger Army," specifically for the purpose of rescue, but it has also become difficult to control.

古文：三月，京城被攻，大臣分守四面。
现代文：三月，京城被围攻，大臣们分别守四面。
English: In March, Kyoto was besieged again, and the ministers separately guarded four sides.

古文：白撒主西南，受攻最急，楼橹垂就辄摧，传令取竹为护帘，所司驰入城大索，竟无所得，白撒怒欲斩之。
现代文：白撒主管西南方向，受到攻击最为猛烈，城上的高台眼看就要被摧毁，他便传令取竹子作为护帘用，有关人员飞奔入城到处寻找，竟然一无所得，白撒大怒要将他斩首。
English: Baisa, who was in charge of the southwest direction, was attacked the most violently, and the high platform on the city was about to be destroyed. He then sent an order to use bamboo as a curtain. The relevant personnel rushed into the city to search everywhere, but they found nothing. Baisa was furious and wanted to behead him.

古文：员外郎张衮附所司耳语曰： 金多则济矣，胡不即平章府求之。 
现代文：员外郎张衮附在有关官员耳朵旁耳语说： 钱多就能办成，何不到平章府中求取？ 
English: Zhang Yuxu, the official's son-in-law, whispered in the ear of the relevant official: More money can be made, why not seek it from the Pingzhang government?

古文：所司怀金三百两径往，赂其家僮，果得之。
现代文：这个官员带着三百两银子直到平章家里，贿赂了平章的家僮，果然找到了。
English: The official took the three hundred and two silver coins to Pingzhang's home, bribed the family members of Pingzhang, and found it.

古文：已而兵退，朝廷议罢白撒，白撒不自安，乃谓令令史元好问曰： 我妨贤路久矣，得退是幸，为我撰乞致仕表。 
现代文：不久兵退，朝廷议论应当罢免白撒，白撒心里也惶惶不安，便对令史元好问说 ：我妨碍了贤能的进路为时已久了，能够退职也是幸事，你替我写请求辞职的奏章。 
English: Soon after the soldiers left, the imperial court began to discuss whether Baisa should be dismissed. Baisa was also worried and anxious, so he asked Ling Shiyuan: "It's been a long time since I stood in the way of a virtuous person, and it's a blessing to be able to retire. Please write a letter of resignation for me."

古文：顷之，上已遣使持招至其第，令致仕。
现代文：很快，皇帝已派人带着诏书来到他家，让他辞职。
English: Soon, the emperor had sent someone to his house with an imperial edict to force him to resign.

古文：既废，军士恨其不战误国，扬言欲杀之。
现代文：被废黜之后，军士们恼恨他不肯作战而误国，扬言要杀死他。
English: After he was deposed, enraged that he had deserted the country by refusing to fight, the officers threatened to kill him.

古文：白撒惧，一夕数迁，上以亲军二百阴为之卫。
现代文：白撒非常害怕，一夜迁移几个地方，皇帝派亲兵二百多人在暗地里保护他。
English: Baisa was very scared and moved several places in one night. The emperor sent more than two hundred soldiers to secretly protect him.

古文：军士无以泄其愤，遂相率毁其别墅而去。
现代文：士兵们难以发泄内心的愤怒，便一起动手拆毁了他家的别墅后才离开。
English: Unable to vent their anger, the soldiers proceeded to demolish his family's villa before leaving.

古文：其党元帅完颜斜捻阿不领本部军戍汴，闻之径诣其所，斩经其垣下者一人以镇之。
现代文：白撒的同党元帅完颜斜捻阿不带领本部人马镇守汴京，听说后直往白撒住所，斩了经过他家墙下的一个人以镇压。
English: Baisa's comrade-in-arms, the marshal of the same party, led the headquarters to guard Beijing, and after hearing the news, he went straight to Baisa's residence and beheaded a person who passed under the wall of his house to suppress him.

古文：是时，速不泬等兵散屯河南，汴城粮且尽，累召援兵复无至者。
现代文：当时，速不礙等军队分散驻扎在河南，汴京的粮食将吃尽，屡次召集援兵却没有前来的。
English: At that time, the troops stationed in Henan were dispersed without delay, and the grain in Beijing would be exhausted. Repeatedly, reinforcements were summoned, but they did not come.

古文：冬十月，乃复起白撒为平章政事、权枢密使、兼右副元帅。
现代文：冬十月，重新起用白撒任平章政事、代理枢密使、兼右副元帅。
English: In the winter of October, Baisa was reappointed as the Minister of State, Acting Privy Counsellor, and Deputy Marshal of the Right.

古文：于是，群臣为上画出京计，以赛不为右丞相、枢密使、兼左副元帅，内族讹出右副元帅、兼枢密副使、权参知政事，李蹊兵部尚书、权尚书左丞，徒单百家元帅左监军、行总帅府事。
现代文：于是，群臣替皇帝策划离京的计策。他命赛不为右丞相、枢密使、兼左副元帅，皇族讹出为右副元帅、兼枢密副使、代理参知政事，李蹊为兵部尚书、代理尚书左丞，徒单百家为元帅左监军、行总帅府事。
English: As a result, a group of courtiers plotted a strategy for the emperor to leave Beijing. His destiny was not to be the minister of the right, the privy councilor, and the deputy marshal of the left, the royal family was the deputy marshal of the right, the deputy minister of the privy councilor, and the acting senator of the government, Li Wei was the military secretary of the military department, and the deputy secretary of the military department of the military department, and the deputy secretary of the military department of the military department was the marshal of the military department, and the marshal of the military department was the marshal of the military department, and the marshal of the general

古文：东面元帅高显，副以果毅都尉粘合咬住兵五千。南面元帅完颜猪儿，副以建威都尉完颜斡论出兵五千。西面元帅刘益、上党公张开，副以安平都尉纪纲军五千。北面元帅内族娄室，副以振威都尉张闰军五千。中翼都尉贺都善军四千，隶总帅百家。
现代文：东面元帅高显，由果毅都尉粘合咬住为副，领兵五千；南面元帅为完颜猪儿，以建威都尉完颜斡论出为副，领兵五千；西面元帅为刘益和上党公张开，安平都尉纪纲为副，领兵五千；北面元帅为皇族的娄室，振威都尉张闰为副，领兵五千；中翼都尉贺都喜领兵四千，隶属总帅府的徒单百家管辖。
English: The east-facing marshal Gao Xian was led by the vice marshal Guo Yi and led 5,000 soldiers; the south-facing marshal was the vice marshal Guan Yan, led by the vice marshal Jian Wei and led 5,000 soldiers; the west-facing marshal was led by Liu Yi and Shang Dang Gong, led by the vice marshal Anping and led 5,000 soldiers; the north-facing marshal was the imperial family's concubine, led by the vice marshal Zhen Wei and led 5,000 soldiers; the middle-wing marshal Haduqi led 4,000 soldiers and was under the jurisdiction of the general marshal's office.

古文：都尉内族久住，副都尉王简、总领王福胤神臂军三千五百，左翼元帅内族小娄室亲卫军一千，右翼元帅完颜按出虎亲卫军一千，总领完颜长乐、副帅温敦昌孙马军三百，郡王王义深马军一百五十，郡王范成进、总领苏元孙圭军三千，隶总帅百家。
现代文：都尉皇族的久住、副都尉王简、总领军王福胤带领神臂军三千五百人，左翼元帅皇族小娄室带领亲卫军一千人，右翼元帅完颜按出虎带领亲卫军一千人，总领军完颜长乐、副统帅温敦昌孙带领马军三百，郡王王义深带领马军一百五十人，郡王范成进、总领军苏元孙圭带领军队三千，都隶属总帅府徒单百家。
English: The commander of the imperial family, the vice-captain Wang Jian, and the general leader Wang Fuyin led the sacred arm army of 3,500 people, the left-wing marshal of the imperial family, Xiao Yanshim, led the bodyguard army of 1,000 people, the right-wing marshal, Guan Yan, led the bodyguard army of 1,000 people, the general leader of the army, Guan Yan Changle, the deputy commander, Wyndong Changsun, led the horse army of 300 people, the county king, Wang Yishen, led the horse army of 150 people, the county king, Fan Chengjin, and the general leader of the army, Su Yuan Sun

古文：飞骑都尉兼合里合总领术虎只鲁欢、总领夹谷得伯、飐军田众家奴等百人及诸臣下，发京师。
现代文：飞骑都尉兼合里合总领军术虎只鲁欢、总领军夹谷得伯、礣军田众家奴等百人以及诸臣等，从京师出发。
English: Hundreds of people, including the captain of the flying cavalry, the general leader of the army, the general leader of the army, the general leader of the army, the general leader of the army, the general leader of the army, the general leader of the army, the general leader of the army, the general leader of the army, the general leader of the army, the general leader of the army, the general leader of the army, the general leader of the army, the general leader of the army, the general leader of the army, the general leader of the army, the general leader of the army, the general leader of the army, the general leader of the army, the general leader of the army, the general

古文：十二月甲辰，车驾至黄陵冈，白撒先降大兵两寨，得河朔降将，上赦之，授以印及金虎符。
现代文：十二月二十九日，车驾到达黄陵冈，白撒先招降了元兵的两寨人马，得到原河朔投降过去的将领，皇帝宽赦了他们，授给印授和金虎符。
English: On December 29th, the car arrived at Huangling Mountain. Bai Zhaopeng first recruited two soldiers from the Yuan soldiers, and received the former generals who had surrendered. The emperor pardoned them and awarded them the seal and the golden tiger emblem.

古文：群臣议以河朔诸将前导，鼓行入开州，取大名、东平，豪杰当有响应者，破竹之势成矣。
现代文：群臣商议由河朔的诸将作为先导，大张旗鼓地进入开州，夺取大名、东平，自然有豪杰之士加以响应，就势如破竹了。
English: A group of vassals, led by the vassals from Heshaku, entered Keshu with great fanfare and conquered Daimyo and Dongping. Naturally, there were heroes who responded, and the situation was hopeless.

古文：温敦昌孙曰： 太后、中宫皆在南京，北行万一不如意，圣主孤身欲何所为？
现代文：温敦昌孙说： 太后、中宫都在南京，北行万一不顺利，圣上孤身一人有什么作为？
English: Wyndon Changsun said: The empress dowager and the second consort are both in Nanjing. If the northbound trip does not go well, what will the saint do all alone?

古文：若往归德，更五六月不能还京。
现代文：如果去归德，又得五六个月不回京。
English: If I were to return to Germany, I would have to wait another five or six months before returning to Beijing.

古文：不如先取卫州，还京为便。 
现代文：不如先取下卫州，回京为便。 
English: It would be better to take the province of Heshou first and then return to Beijing.

古文：白撒奏曰： 圣体不便鞍马，且不可令大兵知上所在，今可驻归德。
现代文：白撒说： 圣体不便乘坐鞍马，况且也不能让元军知道皇上所在的地方，如今可驻留在归德。
English: Baisa said, "It is inconvenient for the holy body to ride on a pommel horse, and moreover, it is impossible for the Yuan army to know where the emperor is, but now he can stay in Quingde."

古文：臣等率降将往东平，俟诸军至，可一鼓而下，因而经略河朔，且空河南之军。 
现代文：臣等带领降将们前往东平，等众军一到，可一鼓作气取下，并进而夺取河朔之地，这样还可以让河南的敌人扑空。 
English: The vassals and others led the surrendering generals to Dongping. As soon as the troops arrived, they could take them down in one fell swoop, and then seize the land of Hexuo. In this way, the enemies of Henan could also be defeated.

古文：上以为然。
现代文：皇帝很赞同。
English: Tenshi thinks it makes sense.

古文：时上已遣官奴将三百骑探沤麻冈未还，上将御船，赐白撒剑，得便宜从事，决东平之策。
现代文：这时，皇帝已派出官奴带领三百骑兵去探查沤麻冈的情况，但还未回来。皇帝准备上船，就赐给白撒宝剑，让他得以根据方便处置东平有关问题。
English: At this time, the emperor had sent an official slave to lead three hundred cavalrymen to investigate the situation of Nimaoka, but had not yet returned. When the emperor was ready to board the ship, he gave Baisa the sword, so that he could deal with relevant issues in Dongping according to convenience.

古文：官奴还奏卫州，有粮可取？
现代文：官奴回来后报告说，卫州存有粮食可取，皇帝召白撒询问怎么办。
English: After returning, the official slave reported that it was desirable to have grain stored in Weizhou, and the emperor summoned Baisa to inquire what to do.

古文：上召白撒问之，白撒曰： 京师且不能守，就得卫州，欲何为耶？以臣观之，东平之策为便。 
现代文：白撒说： 京都尚且不能防守，就是得到卫州又有什么作用？以臣看呢，取东平的计策最方便。 
English: Baisa said, "Kyoto can't be defended yet, so what's the use of taking Weizhou? As far as I'm concerned, it's most convenient to take the Dongping strategy."

古文：上主官奴之议。
现代文：但皇帝主张按照官奴的建议去办。
English: However, the emperor insisted on acting in accordance with the suggestion of the officials.

古文：明年正月朔，次黄陵冈。
现代文：第二年正月初一，皇帝在黄陵冈。
English: On the first day of the first month of the second year, the emperor stayed in Huanglinggang.

古文：是日，归德守臣以粮糗三百余船来饷，遂就其舟以济南岸，未济者万人，大元将回古乃率四千骑追击之，贺都喜挥一黄旗督战，身中十六七箭，军殊死斗，得卒十余人，大兵少却。
现代文：当天，归德府守臣用三百多艘船运送军粮，于是便乘坐这些粮船从南岸渡过，未能渡过的有万人。大元将军回古乃带领四千骑兵追击，贺都喜挥舞一面黄旗督战，身上被射中十六、七支箭，军队殊死决斗，抓获士卒十多人，元军才稍有退却。
English: On the same day, the returnees and retainers of the Tokugawa shogunate used more than three hundred ships to transport military rations, so they took these grain ships to cross from the south coast, and there were thousands of people who could not cross. General Daigen led four thousand cavalrymen to pursue, He Du Xi waved a yellow flag to fight, and was shot with sixteen or seven arrows. The army fought a deadly duel, and more than ten soldiers were captured. The Yuan army only retreated slightly.

古文：上遣送酒百壶劳之。
现代文：皇帝派人送去百壶酒犒劳他们。
English: The emperor sent a hundred jugs of wine to reward them.

古文：须臾，北风大作，舟皆吹著南岸，诸兵复击之，溺死者近千人，元帅猪儿、都尉纥石烈讹论等死之。
现代文：一小会儿，北风大作，船都被吹靠南岸，元军又前来攻击，溺死的近千人，元帅猪儿、都尉纥石烈讹论等死去。
English: A short while later, the north wind blew violently, the ships were all blown to the south shore, the Yuan army attacked again, nearly a thousand people drowned, Marshal Pig, Lieutenant Zou Shi and others died.

古文：建威都尉完颜讹论出降于大元。上于北岸望之震惧，率从官为猪儿等设祭，哭之，皆赠官，录用其子侄，斩讹论出二弟以徇。
现代文：建威都尉完颜讹论出投降了大元，皇帝在北岸望见后心中十分震惊，便率领从官为猪儿等人祭奠，他痛哭着，都追赠给他们官职，任用了他们的子侄，同时斩了讹论出的二弟来祭祀。
English: Captain Jian Wei surrendered to the Taiyuan Emperor after the battle of Yancheng. The emperor was very shocked after seeing the battle on the north bank. He led the officials to pay tribute to the pigs and others. He cried bitterly, gave them all official positions, appointed their sons and nephews, and at the same time beheaded the second brother of the battle of Yancheng to sacrifice.

古文：遂命白撒攻卫州。
现代文：于是，皇帝命令白撒攻打卫州。
English: As a result, the emperor ordered Baisa to attack Weizhou.

古文：上驻兵河上，留亲卫军三千护从，都尉高显步军一万，元帅官奴忠孝军一千，郡王范成进、王义深、上党公张开、元帅刘益等军总帅百家总之，各赍十日粮，听承裔节制。
现代文：皇帝驻扎在河上，留有亲卫军三千人作为护从，都尉高显带领步军一万，元帅官奴带领忠孝军一千，郡王范成进、王义深、上党公张开、元帅刘益等军由总帅百家统领，各带十天粮食，听由承裔指挥，从蒲城出发。
English: The emperor was stationed on the river, with 3,000 of his bodyguards as escorts. Captain Gao Xian led an infantry force of 10,000, Marshal Guanzhong led a loyal and filial army of 1,000, and Count Wang Fan Chengjin, Wang Yishen, Shang Danggu and Marshal Liu Yi led an army of 100 generals, each with ten days' supply of grain, under the command of Zheng Rong, and set out from Putian.

古文：发自蒲城，上时已遣赛不将马军北向矣，白撒以三十骑追及，谓赛不曰： 有旨，命我将马军。 
现代文：当时皇帝原已派赛不领兵北去了，白撒带领三十骑人马追上了他们，对赛不说： 有旨，让我统率马军。 
English: At that time, the emperor had already sent Sai to lead the troops to the north. Baisa led thirty horsemen to catch up with them and said to Sai, "That's right, let me lead the horse army."

古文：赛不谓上曰： 北行议已决，不可中变。 
现代文：赛不对皇帝说： 北行是已经商议决定了的，不可中途改变。 
English: Sai did not say to the emperor: The northern route has already been discussed and decided, and must not be changed midway.

古文：上曰： 丞相当与平章和同。 
现代文：皇帝说 ：丞相应当和平章意见相同。 
English: The emperor said, "The prime ministers should have the same opinion as the emperor."

古文：完颜仲德持御马衔苦谏曰： 存亡在此一举，卫州决不可攻。 
现代文：完颜仲德抓住御马的衔头苦谏说： 存亡在此一举，卫州决不能攻。 
English: Yan Zhongde grasped the title of Mima and said bitterly: Survival is in this one stroke, Weizhou must not be attacked.

古文：上麾之曰： 参政不知。 
现代文：皇帝把手一挥，说： 参政不知情况。 
English: The emperor waved his hand and said, "I don't know about politics.

古文：白撒遂攻卫州，兵至城下，御旗黄伞招之不下。
现代文：于是，白撒便进攻卫州。当军队到达城下时，用黄伞御旗招降城里人，他们却不肯投降。
English: As a result, Baisa attacked Weizhou. When the army arrived at the foot of the city, they used the yellow umbrella flag to call down the people in the city, but they refused to surrender.

古文：其夜，北骑三千奄至，官奴、和速嘉兀地不、按出虎与之战，北兵却六十里。
现代文：当夜，北骑三千人突然前来，官奴、和速嘉兀地不、按出虎和他们交战，北兵后退了六十里。
English: That night, three thousand horsemen suddenly came from the north, and the officials and slaves, together with Sojia, rode out and fought with them, and the northern soldiers retreated sixty miles.

古文：然自发蒲城，迁延八日始至卫，而猝无攻具，缚枪为云梯。州人知不能攻，守益严。
现代文：可是，从蒲城出发一直拖延至八日才到达卫州，仓促之间又无攻城的器具，便将枪绑接起来作为云梯，州里人知道这是没法攻得进去的，便防守得更加严实。
English: However, the departure from Putuo was delayed until the eighth day before reaching Weizhou. In a hurry and without the equipment to attack the city, they tied up the gun as a ladder. The people in the state knew that it was impossible to attack, so they defended more strictly.

古文：凡攻三日不克。
现代文：前后进攻了三天未能攻下。
English: After attacking back and forth for three days, they failed to capture Mt.

古文：及闻河南大兵济自张家渡，至卫西南，遂班师。
现代文：当听说在河南的元兵已从张家渡渡河到达卫州西南时，军队便回师了。
English: When they heard that the Yuan soldiers in Henan had crossed the river from Zhangjiadu to the southwest of Weizhou, the army returned to the division.

古文：大兵踵其后，战于白公庙，败绩，白撒等弃军遁，刘益、张开皆为民家所杀。
现代文：元兵紧跟在他们的后面，两军在白公庙交战，金兵战败，白撒等人弃军逃跑，刘益、张开都被民众杀死。
English: The Yuan soldiers followed closely behind them. The two armies clashed at the Bai Gong Temple. The Jin soldiers were defeated. Bai Sa and others abandoned the army and fled. Liu Yi and Zhang Kai were both killed by the people.

古文：车驾还次蒲城东三十里，白撒使人密奏刘益一军叛去。
现代文：皇帝车驾到蒲城东三十里处时，白撒派人来密奏说，刘益的一支军队叛变了。
English: When the emperor's carriage was thirty miles east of Pucheng, Baisa sent someone to whisper that one of Liu Yi's troops had mutinied.

古文：点检抹捻兀典、总领温敦昌孙时侍行帐中，请上登舟，上曰： 正当决战，何遽退乎？ 
现代文：点检抹睰兀典、总领温敦昌孙当时正在行帐中侍奉皇帝，他们请皇帝上船。皇帝说 ：正是决战的时候，怎么能这么快后退？ 
English: The commander-in-chief, Wyndon Changsun, was serving the emperor in the accounting department at the time, and they invited the emperor on board. The emperor said, "It is the time of the decisive battle, how can you retreat so quickly?"

古文：少顷，白撒至，仓皇言于上曰： 今军已溃，大兵近在堤外，请圣主幸归德。 
现代文：过了一小会儿，白撒跑来，慌慌忙忙对皇帝说： 如今军队已散败了，元兵近在河堤外，请皇上前往归德。 
English: After a short while, Baisa came running and hurriedly said to the emperor, "Nowadays, the army has been defeated, the former soldiers are close to the river embankment, please ask the emperor to return to Germany."

古文：上遂登舟，侍卫皆不知，巡警如故。
现代文：皇帝便立即上了船，连侍卫们都不知道这一情况，依然在那里巡逻警卫。
English: The emperor immediately boarded the ship. Even the guards did not know the situation, and the guards were still patrolling there.

古文：时夜已四更矣，遂狼狈入归德。
现代文：当时已是四更时分，他们便狼狈不堪地进入归德。
English: At that time, it was already four o'clock in the morning, and they returned to Germany in dismay.

古文：白撒收溃兵大桥，得二万余人，惧不敢入。
现代文：白撒在大桥收集败退下来的兵士，共得二万多人，他心里害怕不敢进城。
English: Bai Sasa went to the bridge to collect the defeated and retreating soldiers, a total of more than twenty thousand people. He was afraid and did not dare to enter the city.

古文：上闻，遣近侍局提点移剌粘古、纥石烈阿里合、护卫二人以舟往迎之。
现代文：皇帝听知之后，派了近侍局提点移剌粘古、纥石烈阿里合护卫，两人用船前去把他接来。
English: After the emperor heard about it, he sent his close attendants to escort him, and the two of them went by boat to fetch him.

古文：既至，不听入见，并其子下狱。
现代文：到达时，皇帝不让他入见，把他和他的儿子一并抓送入狱。
English: When he arrived, the emperor did not allow him to see him, and he and his son were arrested and sent to prison.

古文：诸都尉司军以白撒不战而退，发愤出怨言。
现代文：各都尉、司军都对白撒不战而退十分愤慨，发出怨言。
English: All the captains and sub-commanders were very indignant about Baisa's retreat without a fight, and they complained.

古文：上乃暴其罪曰： 惟汝将士，明听朕言：我初提大军次黄陵冈得捷，白撒即奏宜渡河取卫州，可得粮十万石，乘胜恢复河北。
现代文：皇帝便公开发布他的罪状 ：各位将士，详听我言。我初领大军在黄陵冈获胜，白撒便上奏说应当渡河攻取卫州，可得粮十万石，乘胜收复河北。
English: The emperor then publicly announced his charges: "Fellow soldiers, listen to me carefully. I first led a large army to victory at Huangling Mountain. Baisa then reported that he should cross the river to capture Weizhou, where he could obtain 100,000 koku of grain and use the victory to recover Hebei.

古文：我从其计，令率诸军攻卫。
现代文：我听从他的计议，命令众军攻打卫州。
English: I listened to his advice and ordered the troops to attack Weizhou.

古文：去蒲城二百余里，白撒迁延八日方至，又不预备攻具，以致败衄。
现代文：卫州离蒲城只有二百多里远，白撒拖延了八天才到达，又不事先预备好攻城器具，以致失败。
English: Weizhou is only more than two hundred miles away from Pucheng. Baisa delayed for eight days to arrive, and did not prepare the siege equipment in advance, resulting in failure.

古文：白撒弃军窜还蒲城，便言诸军已溃，北兵势大不可当，信从登舟，几死于水。
现代文：白撒抛弃军队逃窜回蒲城，便说诸军已经溃散，北兵势大难以阻挡，我听信他的话上了船，差点死在水中。
English: Bai Sa abandoned the army and fled back to Putuo. He said that all the armies had been dispersed and that the northern army was very difficult to stop. I believed his words and got on the boat. I almost died in the water.

古文：若当时知诸军未尝溃，只河北战死，亦可垂名于后。
现代文：如果当时知道诸军并未溃散，便在河北战死也可以垂名于后世。
English: If it had been known at the time that the armies had not been dispersed, those who died in battle in Hebei could have passed their names down to future generations.

古文：今白撒已下狱，不复录用，籍其家产以赐汝众，其尽力国家，无效此人。 
现代文：如今白撒已经下狱，不再录用，籍没他家产业以赐给你们众人，你们应当尽力报效国家，不要效法这个人。 
English: Now that Baisa has been released from prison and is no longer employed, you should do your best to serve the country and not follow the example of this man.

古文：囚白撒七日而饿死，发其弟承麟、子狗儿徐州安置。
现代文：白撒被关了七天后，便饿死了。他的弟弟承麟、儿子狗儿被发配到徐州安置。
English: Baisa starved to death after seven days in detention, while his brother Chenglin and son Xuer were sent to Xuzhou for resettlement.

古文：当时议者，卫州之举本自官奴，归之白撒则亦过矣。
现代文：当时人们议论认为，攻打卫州的提议原出自官奴，归罪于白撒也是过份了。
English: At that time, people argued that the proposal to attack Weizhou originally came from officials, and it was too much to blame Baisa.

古文：初，濒河居民闻官军北渡，筑坦塞户，潜伏洞穴，及见官奴一军号令明肃，抚劳周悉，所过无丝发之犯，老幼妇子坦然相视，无复畏避。
现代文：起初，黄河边上的居民听说官军北渡后，都筑墙堵门，藏入洞穴中，当见到官奴这一支军队号令严明，安抚慰问民众十分周到，所经过的地方秋毫无犯后，老幼妇女等便安心出来相望，不再害怕和躲避。
English: At first, residents on the edge of the Yellow River heard that after the government army crossed the north, they all built walls, blocked doors, and hid in caves. When they saw the official slave army, the orders were clear, the pacification and consolation of the people were very thoughtful, and after the places they passed through had no crime, the old and young women would come out to look at each other, no longer afraid and avoid.

古文：俄白撒辈纵军四出，剽掠俘虏，挑掘焚炙，靡所不至。哭声相接，尸骸盈野。
现代文：不久白撒之流放纵军队四处游荡，劫掠俘虏，挑挖焚烧，无所不至，哭声相接，尸横遍野。
English: Before long, the army was roaming freely, looting prisoners, digging up and burning everything in sight, weeping in unison, and corpses were strewn everywhere.

古文：都尉高禄谦、苗用秀辈仍掠人食之，而白撒诛斩在口，所过官吏残虐不胜，一饭之费有数十金不能给者，公私皇皇，日皆徯大兵至矣。
现代文：都尉高禄谦、苗用秀之类还抓人来吃，而白撒信口开河，说杀就杀，凡经过的官吏都残暴不堪，一顿饭没有几十两银子都备办不成，官府百姓人心惶惶，天天都希望元军赶快前来。
English: The likes of the governors Gao Luqian and Miao Yixiu also arrested people to eat, while Bai Zaxin opened his mouth and said kill or be killed. All the officials who passed by were cruel and unbearable. A meal could not be prepared without dozens of silver coins. The people in the government offices were panicked and hoped every day that the Yuan army would come soon.

古文：白撒目不知书，奸黠有余，簿书政事，闻之即解，善谈议，多知，接人则煦煦然，好货殖，能捭阖中人主心，遂浸渍以取将相。
现代文：白撒一个字也不认识，却很有奸计，账簿书籍政事，他一听就懂，又善于言谈，多智谋，和人交接和蔼可亲。喜欢聚财经商，能够纵横捭阖说中皇帝的心事，因而渐渐地取得将相地位。
English: Bai Sasa did not know a single word, but he was very cunning, he could understand accounting books, books and politics at a glance, and he was good at talking, witty and amiable. He liked to collect money and do business, and he was able to talk about the emperor's heart, so he gradually gained the position of the commander.

古文：既富贵，起第于汴之西城，规模拟宫掖，婢妾百数，皆衣金缕，奴隶月廪与列将等，犹以为未足也。
现代文：他地位显贵以后，便在汴城西边建造房屋，规模可和皇宫相比，其中婢妾数以百计，都穿着金线织绣的衣服，奴婢们每月的工钱和将领相当，他仍觉不满足。
English: After his position of prominence, he built a house on the west side of Lucheng, the scale of which could be compared to the imperial palace. Among them were hundreds of maidservants and concubines, all wearing clothes embroidered with gold thread. The monthly wages of the maidservants and servants were equivalent to those of the generals. He still felt dissatisfied.

古文：上尝遣中使责之曰： 卿汲汲于此，将无北归意耶？ 
现代文：皇帝曾经派宫使去责备他说： 你成天注意于这些东西，莫非不想北归吗？ 
English: The emperor once sent an envoy to rebuke him, saying: "You have been paying attention to these things all day, don't you want to return to the north?

古文：白撒终不悛，以及于祸。
现代文：但白撒始终不改，一直到他遭祸为止。
English: But Bai Sa never changed, right up until his misfortune.

