古文：秦始皇时，有王道平，长安人也，少时与同村人唐叔偕女，小名父喻，容色俱美，誓为夫妇。
现代文：秦始皇的时候，有个叫王道平的，是长安人。少年时代，他和本村人唐叔偕的女儿立誓结为夫妇。
English: At the time of the First Emperor of Qin, there was a man named Wang Daoping, who was from Chang'an. When he was a boy, he and the daughter of a local villager, Tang Shuxuan, took an oath to become husband and wife.

古文：寻王道平被差征伐，落堕南国，九年不归，父母见女长成。
现代文：唐叔偕的女儿小名叫父喻，容貌和肤色都很美丽。不久，王道平应征去打仗，流落在南方，九年不能回家。
English: Tang Shuxuan's daughter was named Zhu Yu, and her appearance and complexion were very beautiful. Soon, Wang Daoping was conscripted to fight in the war, and he was exiled to the south, unable to return home for nine years.

古文：即聘与刘祥为妻，女与道平，言誓甚重，不肯改事。
现代文：父喻的父母看到女儿已长大成人，就把她许配给刘祥做妻子，女儿因为与王道平订婚时誓言很庄重，所以不肯改嫁。
English: When her parents saw that their daughter had grown up and become an adult, they betrothed her to Liu Xiang as his wife. Since their daughter had made a solemn vow when she was engaged to Wang Daoping, she refused to remarry.

古文：父母逼迫，不免出嫁刘祥。
现代文：父母强迫她，她设法逃避，就嫁给了刘祥。
English: Her parents forced her, but she managed to escape and married Liu Xiang.

古文：经三年，忽忽不乐，常思道平，忿怨之深，悒悒而死。
现代文：这样一直过了三年，她整天精神恍惚，闷闷不乐，常常思念王道于，悲忿愁怨极深，忧郁地死了。
English: This went on for three years, and all day long she was in a daze, depressed, often thinking about Wang Daoyu, and deeply saddened and resentful. She died gloomily.

古文：死经三年，平还家，乃诘邻人： 此女安在？ 
现代文：父喻死后三年，王道平回到家中，就问邻居： 这位姑娘在哪里？ 
English: Three years after his father's death, Wang Daoping returned home and asked his neighbor: Where is this girl?

古文：邻人云： 此女意在于君，被父母凌逼，嫁与刘祥，今已死矣。 
现代文：邻居说： 这姑娘的心全在您身上，但遭到她父母亲的的欺凌威逼，只好嫁给了刘祥。现在早已死了。 
English: A neighbour said: "This girl had her heart set on you, but her parents bullied her into marrying Liu Xiang, who is now dead.

古文：平问： 墓在何处？ 
现代文：王道平问： 她的坟墓在什么地方？ 
English: Wang Daoping asked: Where is her grave?

古文：邻人引往墓所，平悲号哽咽，三呼女名，绕墓悲苦，不能自止。
现代文：邻居便把王道平带到了基地。王道平痛哭失声，连连呼唤着姑娘的名字，绕着坟墓哀痛万分，设法控制自己。
English: Neighbors then brought Wang Daoping to the base. Wang Daoping broke down in tears, repeatedly called the girl's name, walked around the grave with great sorrow, and tried to control himself.

古文：平乃祝曰： 我与汝立誓天地，保其终身，岂料官有牵缠，致令乖隔，使汝父母与刘祥，既不契于初心，生死永诀。
现代文：王道平祝愿说： 我和你早向天地发誓，要厮守一辈子。哪里料到被公家的事拖累，以致于使我们分离两地，使你父母把你嫁给了刘祥。这样做，既不合我们当初的心意，又使我们生死永别了。
English: Wang Daoping made a wish and said, "I and you swore to the heavens and the earth that we would stay together for the rest of our lives. We never expected to be dragged down by public affairs, so that we would separate the two places, and your parents would marry you to Liu Xiang. Doing so was not in line with our original intention, and it also meant that we would be separated forever.

古文：然汝有灵圣，使我见汝生平之面。
现代文：但是你如果有神灵的话，就让我再看一下你生前的容貌。
English: But if you have a spirit, let me see what you looked like when you were alive.

古文：若无神灵，从兹而别。 
现代文：如果你没有神灵，只好从此永别了。 
English: If you don't have a god, it's goodbye forever.

古文：言讫，又复哀泣逡巡。
现代文：说完，便又悲哀地抽泣着。
English: When she had finished, she sobbed again sadly.

古文：其女魂自墓出，问平： 何处而来？
现代文：不一会儿，那姑娘的魂从坟墓中出来，问道平： 你从什么地方来？
English: After a while, the girl's spirit came out of the grave and asked Ping: Where did you come from?

古文：良久契阔。
现代文：我们分别得很久了。
English: We've been separated for a long time.

古文：与君誓为夫妇，以结终身，父母强逼，乃出聘刘祥，已经三年，日夕忆君，结恨致死，乖隔幽途。
现代文：我曾和您立誓结成夫妻，来度过这一辈子。后来我父母强迫我，我才嫁给了刘样，已经过了三年。我日夜想您，以致于怨愤郁结而死，让冥间把我们隔开了。
English: I made a vow with you to be a husband and wife for the rest of my life. Later, my parents forced me to marry Liu Zang. It's been three years since then. I miss you day and night, so much so that I died of resentment and let the darkness separate us.

古文：然念君宿念不忘，再求相慰，妾身未损，可以再生，还为夫妇。
现代文：但是我想到您不忘旧情，再来求我安慰您，因此我想告诉您，我的身体并没有损坏，可以重新活过来，再和您做夫妻。
English: But I thought that you would not forget the past and would ask me to comfort you again, so I wanted to tell you that my body was not damaged and I could come back to life and be your husband and wife again.

古文：且速开冢，破棺，出我，即活。 
现代文：请您赶快挖开坟墓，撬开棺材，让我出来就活了。 
English: Please quickly dig up the grave, open the coffin, and let me come out alive.

古文：平审言，乃启墓门，扪看。其女果活。乃结束随平还家。
现代文：王道平仔细审察了她的话后，就打开坟墓棺盖，抚摸察看那姑娘，她果然活了，于是就装束打扮后跟着王道平回家了。
English: After Wang Daoping carefully examined her words, he opened the tomb coffin lid, stroked and examined the girl. She was indeed alive, so he dressed up and followed Wang Daoping home.

古文：其夫刘祥闻之，惊怪，申诉于州县。
现代文：她的丈夫刘祥，听见了这件事十分惊奇，使向州县衙门申诉，要求领回父喻。
English: Her husband, Liu Xiang, was very surprised to hear about this, so he appealed to the prefectural government to demand the return of his father.

古文：检律断之，无条，乃录状奏王。
现代文：州县官员查看法律来断案，却没有相应的条文，便把这情况写下来上奏皇上。
English: State and county officials looked at the law to decide the case, but there was no corresponding provision, so they wrote down the situation and reported it to the emperor.

古文：王断归道平为妻。
现代文：皇上把父喻断给王道平做妻子。
English: The emperor asked Wang Daoping to be his wife.

古文：寿一百三十岁。
现代文：王道平活到一百三十岁。
English: Wang Daoping lived to be 130 years old.

古文：实谓精诚贯于天地，而获感应如此。
现代文：这实在是他的真心诚意贯通了天地，才得到这样的报答。
English: This is really his sincerity penetrating heaven and earth, only to get such a reward.

古文：晋武帝世，河间郡有男女私悦，许相配适；寻而男从军，积年不归，女家更欲适之，女不愿行，父母逼之，不得已而去，寻病死。
现代文：普惠帝的时候，河间郡有一对男女青年私下相爱，互相约好以后结婚。不久男的去服兵役了，好几年没回家，女家想把女儿改嫁。女儿不肯改嫁，父母亲强迫她，她没有办法只好嫁走了，不久就病死了。
English: During the time of Emperor Pu Hui, there was a young man and woman in Kawama County who secretly fell in love and arranged to marry each other. Soon after, the man went to serve in the military and did not return home for several years, and the woman wanted to remarry her daughter. The daughter did not want to remarry, but her parents forced her to. She had no choice but to marry and soon died of illness.

古文：其男戍还，问女所在，其家具说之；乃至冢，欲哭之叙哀，而不胜其情，遂发冢，开棺，女即苏活，因负还家，将养数日，平复如初。后夫闻，乃往求之；其人不还，曰： 卿妇已死，天下岂闻死人可复活耶？此天赐我，非卿妇也。 
现代文：于是两人去打官司。
English: So the two men went to court.

古文：于是相讼，郡县不能决，以谳廷尉，秘书郎王导奏以； 精诚之至，感于天地，故死而更生，此非常事，不得以常礼断之。
现代文：郡、县的官吏部没有办法判决，就把这柱官司上交给朝廷的最高法官廷尉审理。秘书郎王导上奏说， 因为这男子精诚到了极点，感动了天地，所以这姑娘才死而复主。这是非同寻常的事情，不能用普通的礼法来断案。
English: The officials of the county and the county had no way to make a decision, so they referred the case to the highest judge of the imperial court, the imperial lieutenant, for trial. The secretary, Lang Wang, reported that because this man was extremely sincere and moved heaven and earth, the girl died and was restored to the Lord. This is an extraordinary thing, and it is not possible to use ordinary etiquette to decide the case.

古文：请还开冢者。 
现代文：我请求把这姑娘还给掘开坟墓的男子。 
English: I'm asking for this girl to be returned to the man who dug her grave.

古文：朝廷从其议。
现代文：朝廷听从了王导的处理意见。
English: The Imperial Court agreed with three opinions.

古文：汉献帝建安中，南阳贾偶，字文合，得病而亡。
现代文：汉献帝建安年间，南阳郡有个贾偊，字文合，生病死了。
English: During the reign of Emperor Jianan of the Han Dynasty, there was a Jia Yu in Nanyang County who was ill and died.

古文：时有吏，将诣太山司命，阅簿，谓吏曰： 当召某郡文合，何以召此人？
现代文：当时有一个阴间小吏就把他的魂带到泰山，判官查阅了生死簿，对这小吏说： 应该召来某某郡的文合，为什么召来这个人？
English: At that time, there was a minor official of the underworld who brought his soul to Mount Tai. The judge examined the book of life and death and said to this minor official: It is necessary to summon Weng He of such-and-such county. Why did you summon this person?

古文：可速遣之。 
现代文：赶快把他送回去！ 
English: Let's send him back to the sun.

古文：时日暮，遂至郭外树下宿，见一年少女独行，文合问曰： 子类衣冠，何乃徒步？
现代文：这时候太阳已下山了，于是贾文合的魂就到城外的树下过夜。这时他看见一个年轻的女子独自一人走来，贾文合问道： 您好象是大户人家的姑娘，为什么还得步行？
English: At this time, the sun had already set, so Jia Wenga's soul went out to spend the night under a tree outside the city. At this time, he saw a young woman walking alone. Jia Wenga asked: You seem to be a girl from a large family, why do you still have to walk?

古文：姓字为谁？ 
现代文：您姓什么？名字又叫什么？ 
English: What's your name?

古文：女曰： 某，三河人，父见为弋阳令，昨被召来，今却得还，遇日暮，惧获瓜田李下之讥，望君之容，必是贤者，是以停留，依凭左右。 
现代文：姑娘说： 我是三河人氏，父亲现任弋阳县令。昨天我被阴府召来，今天却可以重返阳间。现在碰上天黑，怕遭到行为不轨的指责。看您的容貌举止，一定是个贤人，因此停留下来，想依靠您。 
English: The girl said, "I am Mr. Mikawahito, and my father is the current governor of Suiyang County. Yesterday I was summoned to the underworld, but today I can return to the sun. Now that it is getting dark, I am afraid of being accused of improper behavior. Looking at your appearance and behavior, you must be a wise man, so I want to stay and rely on you."

古文：文合曰： 悦子之心，愿交欢于今夕。 
现代文：贾文合说： 我很欣赏您的想法，非常愿意和您在今晚共享云雨之乐。 
English: Jia Wenhe said: I appreciate your thoughts, I am very willing to share the joy of clouds and rain with you tonight.

古文：女曰： 闻之诸姑：女子以贞专为德，洁白为称。 
现代文：姑娘说： 我曾听母辈们说过，女子应该把有贞操不事二夫当作美德，把洁身清白当作名誉。 
English: The girl said, "I once heard my parents say that a woman should regard chastity as a virtue and chastity as an honor.

古文：文合反复与言，终无动志。
现代文：贾文合反复和她说情，她始终没有动摇自己的心意。
English: Jia Wenhe repeatedly pleaded with her, but she never wavered in her determination.

古文：天明，各去。
现代文：天亮以后，两人便各奔前程了。
English: After dawn, the two of them went their separate ways.

古文：文合卒巳再宿，停丧将殓，视其面，有色，扪心下，稍温，少顷，却苏。
现代文：贾文合死了已经两夜，开丧完毕就要入棺了，家里的人却看见他的脸上有了血色，摸摸他的心口，也稍微有点温暖，一会儿他却苏醒过来了。
English: It had been two nights since Jia Wenhe died. After the funeral, he was about to be put into the coffin. However, the people at home saw that his face was blood-colored, felt his heart, and felt a little warm, but after a while, he woke up.

古文：后文合欲验其实，遂至弋阳，修刺谒令，因问曰： 君女宁卒而却苏耶？ 
现代文：后来贾文合想要验证一下他昨晚碰到的事情是否真实，就来到弋阳县。他置备了名片，报上姓名拜见了县令，便问县令说： 您的女儿是否是死了却又复活了？ 
English: Later, Jia Wenhe wanted to verify whether what happened to him last night was true, so he came to Fenyang County. He prepared a business card, visited the county magistrate with the name on the newspaper, and asked the county magistrate: Is your daughter dead but resurrected?

古文：具说女子姿质，服色，言语，相反覆本末。
现代文：他还详细地叙述了那姑娘的天资品德与服饰打扮、以及他们谈话的反复和始末。
English: He also gave a detailed account of the girl's character and dress, as well as the sequence of their conversations.

古文：令入问女，所言皆同。
现代文：县令进闺房问女儿，女儿说的话与贾文合说的全都相同。
English: The county magistrate went into the house and asked the daughter, and what the daughter said was completely consistent with the words of Wenhe.

古文：乃大惊叹。竟以此女配文合焉。
现代文：县令大为震惊，赞叹不绝，最后便把这女儿许配给了贾文合。
English: The county magistrate was shocked and amazed, and finally gave the daughter to Jia Wenhe.

古文：汉建安四年二月，武陵充县妇人李娥，年六十岁，病卒，埋于城外，已十四日。
现代文：汉献帝建安四年二月，武陵郡充县的妇女李娥，年龄六十岁，生病死了，埋在城外已经十四天。
English: In February of the 4th year of the Han Dynasty, Li E, a 60-year-old woman from Chong County, Wuling County, fell ill and died. She had been buried outside the city for 14 days.

古文：娥比舍有蔡仲，闻娥富，谓殡当有金宝，乃盗发冢求金，以斧剖棺。
现代文：李娥的隔壁邻居有个叫蔡仲的，听说李娥很富裕，以为棺材中一定有金银珠宝作陪葬，于是就偷偷地挖开坟墓去盗取金银珠宝。
English: Ms. Li's next-door neighbor, a man named Cai Zhong, heard that Ms. Li was very wealthy and thought that there must be gold and silver jewelry in the coffin for burial, so he secretly dug up the grave to steal gold and silver jewelry.

古文：斧数下，娥于棺中言曰： 蔡仲！汝护我头。 
现代文：他用斧子去劈那棺材，才劈了几下，便听见李娥在棺材中说道： 蔡仲，你可要保住我的头！ 
English: He used an axe to split the coffin, and only after a few cuts did he hear Li E say in the coffin: Cai Zhong, you have to save my head!

古文：仲惊，遽便出走，会为县吏所见，遂收治。
现代文：蔡仲惊慌失措，便连忙逃跑。但正好被县衙的官吏看见，于是就被逮捕审讯。
English: Caizhong panicked and quickly ran away. However, he happened to be seen by officials from the county government and was arrested for interrogation.

古文：依法，当弃市。
现代文：按照法律，蔡仲应该被处死示众。
English: According to the law, Cai Zhong should be publicly executed.

古文：娥儿闻母活，来迎出，将娥回去。
现代文：李娥的儿子听说母亲活了，就来把母亲接出棺材，搀着李娥回家去了。
English: When Li E's son heard that his mother was alive, he came to take his mother out of the coffin and carried Li E home.

古文：武陵太守闻娥死复生，召见，问事状。
现代文：武陵太守听说李娥死而复生，便召见了李娥，向她询问事情的经过情形。
English: When the Wuling Empress Dowager heard that Li E had been revived from the dead, she summoned Li E and asked her how things had gone.

古文：娥对曰： 闻谬为司命所召，到时，得遣出，过西门外，适见外兄刘伯文，惊相劳问，涕泣悲哀。
现代文：李娥回答说： 听说我是误被那掌管生死的判官召去的，所以一到那儿就被放出来了。经过西门外，正巧碰见表兄刘伯文，我们惊讶地互相慰问，痛哭流涕，十分悲哀。
English: Li E replied: "I heard that I was mistakenly summoned by the judge in charge of life and death, so I was released as soon as I arrived there. Passing outside the West Gate, I happened to meet my cousin Liu Bowen. We were surprised to commiserate with each other, weeping bitterly, very sad.

古文：娥语曰： 伯文！
现代文：我对他说： 伯文，我那天被误召到这里，今天才得放回。
English: I said to him: Berwen, I was called here by mistake the other day and had to be sent back today.

古文：我一日误为所召，今得遣归，既不知道，不能独行，为我得一伴否？
现代文：但我既不认路，又没有能力只身一人赶路，你能为我找个伴来么？
English: But I don't know the way, and I don't have the ability to travel alone. Can you find a companion for me?

古文：又我见召在此，已十余日，形体又为家人所葬埋，归，当那得自出？ 
现代文：还有，我被召来，在这里已经十多天了，身体又被家里的人埋葬了，回家时应该从哪里走才能让自己走出坟墓？ 
English: Also, I have been summoned here for more than ten days, and my body has been buried by my family. When I go home, where should I go to get myself out of the grave?

古文：伯文曰： 当为问之。 
现代文：伯文说： 我得为你问一下。 
English: Berwen said: I have to ask about you.

古文：即遣门卒与尸曹相问： 司命一日误召武陵女子李娥，今得遣还，娥在此积日，尸丧，又当殡殓，当作何等得出；又女弱，独行，岂当有伴耶？
现代文：他就马上派了个守门的士兵去问户曹： 判官那一天误召了武陵郡的妇女李娥，今天她被放回。李娥在这里已有好几天了，尸体又肯定入棺埋葬了，应该怎么办才能出得棺材？还有，这妇女体质虚弱，难以一个人独自行走，是否应该有个伴呢？
English: He immediately sent a soldier guarding the gate to ask Hou Cao: The judge mistakenly summoned Li E, a woman from Wuling County, that day, and today she was released. Li E has been here for several days, and the body must have been buried in a coffin. What should be done to get the coffin out? Also, this woman is frail, and it is difficult for her to walk alone. Should she have a companion?

古文：是吾外妹，幸为便安之。 
现代文：她是我的表妹，希望您行个方便让她能平安回去。 
English: She's my cousin. I hope you can arrange for her to get home safely.

古文：答曰： 今武陵西界，有男子李黑，亦得遣还，便可为伴。
现代文：户曹回答说： 现在武陵郡西面边境上有个男子叫李黑，也被放回，可以让他作伴。
English: Hucao replied, "Right now, there is a man named Li Hei on the western border of Wuling County. He has also been released, and you can have him as a companion.

古文：兼敕黑过娥比舍蔡仲，发出娥也。 
现代文：同时再叫李黑去拜访李娥的隔壁邻居蔡仲，叫他来挖开坟墓让李娥出棺。 
English: At the same time, Li Hei was told to visit Li E's next-door neighbor, Cai Zhong, and ask him to dig up the grave and let Li E's coffin out.

古文：于是娥遂得出。
现代文：这样我就可以出来了，于是使与伯文告别。
English: That way I could get out, so I said goodbye to Bowen.

古文：与伯文别，伯文曰： 书一封，以与儿佗。 
现代文：伯文说： 我有封信，请你把它捎给我的儿子刘佗。 
English: Bo Wen said, "I have a letter, please take it to my son Liu Ye.

古文：娥遂与黑俱归。
现代文：接着我就和李黑一起回来了。
English: Then I came back with Li Hei.

古文：事状如此。 
现代文：事情的经过情形就是这样。 
English: Here's how it went down.

古文：太守闻之，慨然叹曰： 天下事真不可知也。 
现代文：太守听了这一席话，感慨地叹息说： 天下的事情真不可理解啊！ 
English: When the daimyō heard this, he sighed with emotion and said, "The things of this world are truly incomprehensible!

古文：乃表，以为： 蔡仲虽发冢为鬼神所使；虽欲无发，势不得已，宜加宽宥。 
现代文：他就向朝廷上表陈情，认为： 蔡仲虽然挖了坟，却是鬼神让他干的。他即使想不挖，那情势也使他不得不这样。所以，对他的盗墓，应该加以宽容饶恕。 
English: He presented his case to the imperial court, arguing that although Cai Zhong had dug the grave, the spirits had made him do it. Even if he did not want to dig, the situation forced him to do so. Therefore, his grave robbery should be tolerated and forgiven.

古文：诏书报可。
现代文：皇帝诏书答复说可以。
English: The imperial rescript replied that it was possible.

古文：太守欲验语虚实，即遣马吏于西界，推问李黑，得之，与黑语协。
现代文：太守想验证一下李娥的话是否真实，就派遣骑兵到武陵郡西面边境上去打听查询李黑，果然找到了他，与李娥所说的情况完全相合。
English: In order to verify whether Li E's words were true, the governor sent cavalry to the western border of Wuling County to inquire about Li Hei and found him, which was completely consistent with what Li E said.

古文：乃致伯文书与佗，佗识其纸，乃是父亡时送箱中文书也。
现代文：李娥便把刘伯文的信送给了刘佗。
English: Li E then sent Liu Bowen's letter to Liu Yao.

古文：表文字犹在也，而书不可晓。
现代文：刘伦认得那信纸。这是父亲死亡时陪葬箱中的公文纸。纸上写着的文字还在，但信却不可理解。
English: Liu Lun recognized the letter paper. It was the official document paper in her father's coffin at the time of his death. The writing on the paper was still there, but the letter was incomprehensible.

古文：乃请费长房读之，曰： 告佗：我当从府君出案行部，当以八月八日日中时，武陵城南沟水畔顿。汝是时必往。 
现代文：于是就请费长房来读信。原来信中写的是： 告诉佗儿我要跟着泰山府君出外巡视，该在八月八日中午时分，在武凌城南护城河边稍作停留，你这时候一定得去。 
English: So he asked Fei Changfang to read the letter. The original letter said: Tell my daughter that I want to go on a tour with Taishan prefectural governor. It is time to make a brief stop at the southern moat of Wuling City at noon on August 8. You must go at this time.

古文：到期，悉将大小于城南待之。
现代文：到了那约定的日期，刘佗带了全家老小在城南等父亲。
English: When the agreed date arrived, Liu Ye took the whole family to wait for his father in the south of the city.

古文：须臾果至，但闻人马隐隐之声，诣沟水，便闻有呼声曰： 佗来！
现代文：一会儿刘伯文果然来了。只听见人马喧闹的声音来到护城河，接着便听见有人喊道： 刘佗，你来！
English: After a while, Liu Bowen did indeed come. I only heard the noisy voices of people and horses coming to the moat, and then I heard someone shout: Liu Wei, you come!

古文：汝得我所寄李娥书不耶？ 
现代文：你收到我让李娥捎给你的信了吗？ 
English: Did you get the letter I sent to you from Li Eui-yong?

古文：曰： 即得之，故来至此。 
现代文：刘佗说： 已经收到了，所以我才来这里。 
English: Liu Wei said, "I have already received it, that's why I came here."

古文：伯文以次呼家中大小，久之，悲伤断绝，曰： 死生异路，不能数得汝消息，吾亡后，儿孙乃尔许大！ 
现代文：伯文依次呼唤着全家老小，一一询问他们的情况，真是悲痛欲绝，他说： 死和生是两个世界，不能经常得到你们的消息。我死后，儿孙们竟长得这么大了。 
English: He said: "Death and life are two different worlds. I don't get to hear from you very often. After my death, my children and grandchildren have grown so much.

古文：良久，谓佗曰： 来春大病，与此一丸药，以涂门户，则辟来年妖疠矣。 
现代文：过了很久，他又对刘佗说： 明年春天会有大病流行，给你这一丸药，用来涂在家门上，就可以避开明年的怪病了。 
English: After a long time, he said to Liu Yao, "There will be an epidemic of serious diseases next spring. If you take this pill and apply it to your door, you will be able to avoid the strange diseases next year."

古文：言讫，忽去，竟不得见其形。
现代文：说罢他忽然走了，刘佗始终没能看见他的形体。
English: As soon as he said that, he suddenly left, and Liu Ye never saw him again.

古文：至来春，武陵果大病，白日皆见鬼，唯伯文之家，鬼不敢向。
现代文：到明年春天，武陵郡果然大病流行，白天都可以见到鬼，只有刘伯文的家，鬼不敢去打扰。
English: By the next spring, Wuling County was indeed plagued by an epidemic of serious illness. Ghosts could be seen during the day, but only in Liu Bowen's home. The ghosts dared not disturb him.

古文：费长房视药丸，曰： 此 方相 脑也。 
现代文：费长房仔细察看了那药丸后说： 这是驱疫避邪之神方相的脑子啊。 
English: Fei Changfang took a closer look at the pill and said: This is the brain of the god of pestilence and evil.

古文：汉，陈留考城，史姁，字威明，年少时，尝病，临死，谓母曰： 我死，当复生。
现代文：汉代陈留郡考城县人氏史殉，字威明。他年轻的时候，曾患重病，临死时，他对母亲说： 我死了会再活过来。
English: When he was young, he suffered from a serious illness. As he was about to die, he said to his mother, "I will come back to life after I die."

古文：埋我，以竹杖柱于瘗上，若杖折，掘出我。 
现代文：你埋我的时候，请拿一根竹竿竖在我的坟上，如果竹竿折断了，就把我挖出来。 
English: When you bury me, please take a bamboo pole and stand it on my grave. If the bamboo pole breaks, dig me up.

古文：及死，埋之柱，如其言。
现代文：等他死了，母亲就埋葬了他，按用他的吩咐栽了竹竿。
English: When he died, his mother buried him and planted a bamboo pole at his behest.

古文：七日，往视，杖果折。
现代文：七天后去察看，竹竿果然折断了。
English: Seven days later, he went to check and found that the bamboo pole had indeed broken.

古文：即掘出之，已活。走至井上，浴，平复如故。
现代文：母亲就把他挖了出来，他已经活了，跑到井边洗了个澡，便恢复得象过去一样。
English: His mother dug him out, he was alive, ran to the well, took a bath and recovered as before.

古文：后与邻船至下邳卖锄，不时售，云： 欲归。 
现代文：后来他搭邻居的船到下邳县去卖锄。没有按时卖完，却说要回家。
English: Later, he took a neighbor's boat to Zhangye County to sell anchovies. He did not complete the sale on time, but said he wanted to go home.

古文：人不信之，曰： 何有千里暂得归耶？ 
现代文：人们不相信他，说： 哪有千里迢迢一下子就回家的呢？ 
English: People didn't believe him and said, "What kind of person travels thousands of miles just to come back home?"

古文：答曰： 一宿便还。 
现代文：他却回答说： 我住一夜便回来。 
English: He replied, "I'll be back in one night."

古文：即书，取报以为验。
现代文：大家就给家里写信要他带来回信，以此作为验证。
English: Everyone wrote home asking him to bring a reply as proof.

古文：实一宿便还，果得报。
现代文：他过了一夜便回来了，果然带来了回信。
English: He returned after one night and brought a reply.

古文：考城令江夏贾和姊病，在邻里，欲急知消息，请往省之。路遥三千，再宿还报。
现代文：考城县的县令江夏郡县人贾和的姐姐病在家乡，他急着想知道姐姐的情况，便请史姁前去看望她，考城县到县的路程远达三千里，他过了两夜就回来汇报了情况。
English: The county of Kaocheng County was home to the sister of Jia He, a resident of Jiangxia County, who was ill. He was anxious to know the situation of his sister, so he invited Shi Yan to visit her. The distance from Kaocheng County to the county was as far as three thousand miles. He returned after two nights to report the situation.

古文：会稽贺瑀、字彦琚，曾得疾，不知人，惟心下温，死三日，复苏。
现代文：会稽郡的贺瑀，字彦琚，曾经染上疾病，神志昏迷不认识人了，只有心口还有点馀温，死了三天，他却又苏醒了。
English: He Xuan, Zi Yan Xuan, of Huiqi County, was once infected with a disease. He was unconscious and did not know anyone. Only his heart and mouth still had some residual heat. He died for three days, but he woke up again.

古文：云： 吏人将上天，见官府，入曲房，房中有层架，其上层有印，中层有剑，使瑀惟意所取；而短不及上层，取剑以出门，吏问： 何得？ 
现代文：说： 阴间的差役把我带上了天，我看见那儿有一座官暑。进了那深邃幽隐的密室，房中摆着多层架子，那架子的上层有印，中层有剑，他让我想拿什么就拿什么。但是我个儿矮，手够不着上层，就拿了把剑出了门。
English: He said: The messenger from the underworld took me up to heaven, and there I saw a palace. I entered the deep and secret chamber, in which there were many shelves, and on the upper shelf there was a seal, and on the middle shelf there was a sword, and he let me take whatever I wanted. But I am short, and my hand cannot reach the upper floor, so I took the sword and went out the door.

古文：云： 得剑， 曰： 恨不得印，可策百神，剑惟得使社公耳。  
现代文：看门的人问我拿到了什么，我说拿到了剑。看门人说， 真遗憾你没拿到印，印可以指挥百神。剑只能指使土地神罢了。  
English: The gatekeeper asked me what I got, and I said I got a sword. The gatekeeper said, "It's a shame you didn't get a seal. A seal can command a hundred gods. A sword can only command the gods of the land."

古文：疾愈，果有鬼来，称社公。
现代文：贺瑀的疾病痊愈后，果然有鬼来见，自称是土地神。
English: After He Yao recovered from his illness, a ghost came to see him, claiming to be a land god.

古文：戴洋，字国流，吴兴长城人，年十二，病死。
现代文：戴洋，字国流，矣兴郡长城县人氏。
English: Dai Yang, Zi Guolong, from Yixing County, Changcheng County.

古文：五日而苏。说： 死时，天使其酒藏吏授符箓，给吏从幡麾，将上蓬莱、昆仑、积石、太室、庐、衡等山，既而遣归、 妙解占候。
现代文：年纪十二岁的时候，他病死了，过了五天又活了，他说： 我死的时候，天帝让我当酒藏吏，授给我符篆，随从都跟在我的大旗后面，将要登上蓬莱山、昆仑山、积石山、太室山、庐山、衡山等等。过了不久却打发我回来了。 
English: At the age of twelve, he fell ill and died. Five days later, he was still alive. He said, "When I died, the Heavenly Emperor asked me to be a wine collector and gave me a badge. My followers all followed behind my banner. They were going to climb Penglai Mountain, Kunlun Mountain, Jishan Mountain, Taimuro Mountain, Shaoshan Mountain, Hengshan Mountain, and so on. However, they sent me back soon after.

古文：知吴将亡，托病不仕，还乡里，行至濑乡，经老子祠，皆是洋昔死时所见使处，但不复见昔物耳。
现代文：戴洋善于根据天象变化来预测吉凶，他知道吴国即将灭亡了，使推托自己有病而不去做官，回故乡去了。走到濑乡，经过老子的祠庙，原来这里都是戴洋过去死时被他使唤过的地方，只是现在已不能再见到过去的东西罢了。
English: Dai Yang was good at predicting fortunes and misfortunes according to the changes of the celestial bodies. He knew that the state of Wu was about to perish, so he pretended that he was ill and did not become an official, and returned to his hometown. When he went to Xiangxiang, he passed Laozi's ancestral temple. Originally, this was the place where Dai Yang had been summoned by him when he died in the past, but now he could no longer see the past.

古文：因问守藏应凤曰： 去二十余年，尝有人乘马东行，经老君祠而不下马，未达桥，坠马死者否？ 
现代文：因而他就问守藏史应凤说： 二十多年前，曾经有个人骑了马向东走，经过老子的祠庙而不下马，还没有到达桥上，就从马背上掉下来摔死了。
English: So he asked the keeper of Tibetan history, Ying Feng, and said: More than 20 years ago, there was a man who rode a horse to the east, passed Laozi's ancestral temple without dismounting, and before reaching the bridge, fell off his horse and fell to his death.

古文：凤言有之。
现代文：是否有这件事呢？ 
English: Is there any truth to this?

古文：所问之事，多与洋同。
现代文：应凤说有这件事。而应凤询问的事情，也多与戴洋所经历的相同。
English: Ying Feng said there was such a thing, and the things Ying Feng asked about were mostly the same as what Dai Yang had experienced.

古文：吴，临海松阳人，柳荣，从吴相张悌至扬州，荣病，死船中，二日，军士已上岸。
现代文：吴国临海郡松阳县人氏柳荣，跟着吴国相张悌来到扬州。柳荣病死在船中已两天了，但士兵都已经上岸，没有人去埋葬他。
English: Liu Rong, a native of Songyang County, Linhai County, Wuxi Province, followed Zhang Ye, the governor of Wuxi Province, to Yangzhou. It had been two days since Liu Rong died of illness on the ship, but the soldiers had already gone ashore, and no one went to bury him.

古文：无有埋之者，忽然大叫，言： 人缚军师！
现代文：他忽然大叫道： 有人绑缚军师！有人绑缚军师！ 
English: He suddenly shouted: "Someone is tying up a military instructor! Someone is tying up a military instructor!"

古文：人缚军师！ 
现代文：这喊声十分激越响亮，于是他就活了过来。
English: The scream was so loud and so agitated that he came to life.

古文：声甚激扬。
现代文：别人间他到底是怎么回事。
English: What the hell is going on with him?

古文：遂活。人问之。荣曰： 上天北斗门下卒，见人缚张悌，意中大愕，不觉大叫言。何以缚军师？ 
现代文：柳荣说： 我登上天界来到北斗门边，突然看见有人绑缚张悌，心中大吃一惊，不觉大叫道： 为什么绑缚军师！ 
English: Liu Rong said, "I ascended to the Heaven Realm and came to the edge of the Big Dipper Gate. Suddenly, I saw someone tying up Zhang Ye. My heart was taken aback. Unconsciously, I shouted, "Why are you tying up a military strategist?"

古文：门下人怒荣，叱逐使去。
现代文：那门边的人对我很生气，大声斥责我，赶我走。
English: The man on the other side of the door got angry with me, shouted at me and sent me away.

古文：荣便怖惧，口余声发扬耳。
现代文：我就十分恐惧，而嘴巴里那残余的喊声便不觉扩散出来了。 
English: I was terrified, and the remnants of my screams seeped from my mouth.

古文：其日，悌即死战。
现代文：那一天张悌就阵亡了。
English: That day, Zhang Ye was killed in action.

古文：荣至晋元帝时犹存。
现代文：柳荣到晋元帝的时候还活着。
English: Liu Rong was still alive at the time of Emperor Jin Yuan.

古文：吴国富阳人马势妇，姓蒋，村人应病死者，蒋辄恍惚熟眠经日，见病人死，然后省觉。
现代文：吴国富阳县人氏马势的妻子，姓蒋。村里人该病死的时候，蒋氏总是迷迷糊糊地要熟睡好几天，看到那病人死了，然后才醒来。
English: Ms. Jiang, the wife of Mr. Ma Xiang of Fuyang County, Wu Province. When a villager was about to die of illness, Ms. Jiang would sleep for several days in a daze, and only wake up when she saw that the patient had died.

古文：觉，则具说。家中人不信之。
现代文：醒后她就把详细情况告诉大家，家里的人都不相信她。
English: When she woke up, she told everyone the details, but no one in the family believed her.

古文：语人云： 某中病我欲杀之，怒强，魂难杀，未即死。
现代文：她告诉别人说： 某某病了，我想杀了他，可恨的是这强壮的灵魂很难杀死，所以他没有马上死去。
English: She told someone: So-and-so is ill, I wanted to kill him, but unfortunately this strong soul is hard to kill, so he didn't die immediately.

古文：我入其家内，架上有白米，几种鲑，我暂过灶下，戏，婢无故犯我，我打其脊，使婢当时闷绝，久之乃苏。 
现代文：我到他的家中，他家中的架子上有白米饭，还有几种鱼做的菜。我暂时到灶边玩，他家的婢女竟无缘无故地来冒犯我，我就打了她的脊梁，使那婢女当场就昏死过去，过了好长时间才醒过来 。
English: I went to his house, and on the shelves in his house there was white rice and several kinds of fish dishes. I temporarily went to the kitchen to play, but his maid came to offend me for no reason. I hit her spine, causing the maid to pass out on the spot, and it took her a long time to wake up.

古文：其兄病，在乌衣人令杀之，向其请乞，终不下手。
现代文：蒋氏的哥哥病了，有一个穿黑衣服的人叫她去杀哥哥，她向那人请求，终于没有下毒手。
English: Jiang's brother was ill. A man dressed in black told her to kill him. She pleaded with the man and finally refrained from killing him.

古文：醒，乃语兄云， 当活。 
现代文：她醒来后就告诉哥哥说： 你会活着的。 
English: She woke up and told her brother, "You're going to live."

古文：晋咸宁二年十二月，琅琊颜畿，字世都，得病，就医，张瑳自治，死于张家。
现代文：晋咸宁二年十二月，琅邪郡的颜畿，字世都，得了疾病，到医生张瑳那里让他治疗，结果却死在张家。
English: In December of the second year of Jin Xianning, Yanqi, the capital of the world, in Yuya County, fell ill and went to the doctor Zhang Xuan to be treated. However, he died at Zhang's home.

古文：棺敛已久。家人迎丧，旐每绕树木而不可解。
现代文：颜畿的尸体入棺已有一段时间了，家里人就来接丧，引路的魂旗总是缠住树木解不开。
English: It has been some time since Yanqi's body was placed in the coffin, and family members have come to pay their respects. The soul flag that guides the way is always entangled in trees and cannot be untied.

古文：人咸为之感伤。
现代文：人们都为此而感伤万分。
English: People are very sentimental about it.

古文：引丧者忽颠仆，称畿言曰： 我寿命未应死，但服药太多，伤我五脏耳。
现代文：为棺材引路的人忽然跌倒在地，称道颜畿的话说： 我的寿命还不应该死，只是因为服药太多，损伤了我的五脏罢了。
English: The person leading the way for the coffin suddenly fell to the ground, saying the words of Dao Yanqi: My life expectancy should not die, but because I take too much medicine, I have damaged my internal organs.

古文：今当复活，慎无葬也。 
现代文：今天我会重新活过来，你们千万别埋葬我啊。 
English: Today I will come back to life, don't bury me.

古文：其父拊而祝之，曰： 若尔有命，当复更生，岂非骨肉所愿；今但欲还家，不尔葬也。 
现代文：他的父亲拍着棺材向他祝告说： 如果你的命大，应当再重新活过来，难道不是你父母亲十分愿意的事？今天只是想让你回家，不是去埋葬你啊。 
English: His father patted the coffin and wished him well, saying: "If your life is so important that you should come back to life, isn't that what your parents would have wanted? Today they just want you to go home, not to bury you."

古文：旐乃解。
现代文：那魂旗这才松开了。
English: It was only then that the spirit flag was released.

古文：及还家，其妇梦之曰： 吾当复生，可急开棺。 
现代文：等到回到家中，他妻子便梦见他说： 我该复活了，你可赶快去打开棺材。 
English: When he got home, his wife had a dream in which she heard him say, "I'm going to come back to life, so hurry up and open the coffin."

古文：妇便说之。
现代文：他妻子就把这话说了。
English: That's what his wife said.

古文：其夕，母及家人又梦之。即欲开棺，而父不听；其弟含，时尚少，乃慨然曰： 非常之事，自古有之；今灵异至此，开棺之痛，孰与不开相负？ 
现代文：那天晚上，他母亲以及家里的人又梦见他讲这种话，于是大家就想撬开棺材，但父亲不肯依从。他的弟弟颜含，当时年纪还轻，使感慨地说： 非同寻常的事情，从古就有了。现在神灵奇异到了这种地步，撬开棺材的悲伤，与不撬开棺材相比哪个更能违背他呢？ 
English: That night, his mother and the rest of the family had another dream of him saying the same thing, and everyone wanted to open the coffin, but his father refused to comply. His younger brother Yanhan, who was still young at the time, said with emotion: "Extraordinary things have existed since ancient times. Now the gods are so strange, and the sadness of opening the coffin, which is more contrary to him than not opening the coffin?

古文：父母从之。乃共发棺，果有生验，以手刮棺，指爪尽伤，然气息甚微，存亡不分矣，于是急以绵饮沥口，能咽，遂与出之。
现代文：父母亲听从了颜含的话，就一起把棺材撬开了，果然有颜畿还活着的痕迹，他用手抓过棺材，所以指甲全都抓伤了，但呼吸很微弱，是死是活已经分辨不出来了。于是急忙用棉花吸了水滴到他口中，他能咽下去，大家就马上把他从棺材里抬了出来。
English: After listening to Yan Han's words, his parents pried open the coffin together, and sure enough, there were signs that Yan Qi was still alive. He had scratched the coffin with his hands, so his nails were all scratched, but his breathing was very weak, and it was impossible to tell whether he was dead or alive. So they quickly used cotton to suck water drops into his mouth so that he could swallow them, and everyone immediately carried him out of the coffin.

古文：将护累月，饮食稍多，能开目视瞻，屈伸手足，不与人相当，不能言语，饮食所须，托之以梦。
现代文：调养护理了几个月，他的食量渐渐增加了，还能睁开眼睛张望，手脚也能弯曲伸展，只是不尽如人意罢了。不过，他还不能说话，需要吃什么，只好托梦给家里人。
English: After a few months of nursing, his food intake gradually increased, he could open his eyes and gaze, and his hands and feet could bend and stretch, but it was not satisfactory. However, he could not speak yet, and he had to rely on his family for what he needed to eat.

古文：如此者十余年。家人疲于供护，不复得操事；含乃弃绝人事，躬亲侍养，以知名州党。
现代文：象这样过了十多年，家里的人因为供养护理他都忙不过来，所以不再能干其他的事情了。于是颜含就完全不干人世间的各种事情，一个人专门来服侍供养他，颜含也因此而在州县出了名。
English: After more than ten years like this, the people at home were too busy to provide for and care for him, so they were no longer able to do other things. So Yanhan completely stopped doing all kinds of things in the world, and one person came specifically to serve and provide for him. Yanhan also became famous in the state and county because of this.

古文：后更衰劣，卒复还死焉。
现代文：后来颜畿又变得衰弱了，病情更加恶化，最后还是死了。
English: Later, Yanqi became weak again, her condition worsened, and she eventually died.

古文：羊祜，年五岁时，令乳母取所弄金镮，乳母曰： 汝先无此物。 
现代文：羊祜五岁的时候，叫奶妈去取他玩过的金环。奶妈惊奇地说： 你过去并没有这东西啊。 
English: When Sheepy was five years old, he asked his wet nurse to fetch the gold ring he had been playing with. Surprised, his wet nurse said: "You didn't have this in the past."

古文：祜即诣邻人李氏东垣桑树中，探得之。
现代文：羊祜就到邻居李家东墙边的桑树中，掏到了他要的金环。
English: The shepherd went to the mulberry tree on the east side of the wall of the neighboring Li family and pulled out the gold ring he wanted.

古文：主人惊曰： 此吾亡儿所失物也，云何持去？ 
现代文：那李家的主人惊奇地说： 这是我死了的儿子所丢失的东西啊。你凭什么拿走呢？ 
English: Surprised, the owner of the Li family said, "This is what my dead son lost. Why would you take it?"

古文：乳母具言之。李氏悲惋。时人异之。
现代文：奶妈就详细地说了这件事情的前后经过，李家的主人非常悲痛惋惜，当时的人都觉得羊祜不同寻常。
English: The wet nurse described in detail the events leading up to and following the incident, and the owner of the Li family was very sad and regretful. At the time, people thought the mutilation was unusual.

古文：汉末，关中大乱，有发前汉宫人冢者，宫人犹活，既出，平复如旧。
现代文：汉朝末年，关中大乱，有人掘开西汉宫女的坟墓，宫女竟还活着。她出来后，就恢复得象过去一样了。
English: At the end of the Han Dynasty, there was a big riot in Guanzhong. Someone dug up the grave of a Western Han princess, but the princess was still alive. After she came out, she recovered as before.

古文：魏郭后爱念之，录置宫内，常在左右，问汉时宫中事，说之了了，皆有次绪。
现代文：魏文帝的郭皇后爱怜她，就把她收到宫内，她常在郭皇后身边侍候，皇后问她汉朝时皇宫内的事情，她说得清清楚楚，都很有头绪。
English: Emperor Weiwen's Empress Guo loved and pitied her, so she received her into the imperial court. She often waited at Empress Guo's side. When the empress asked her about things in the imperial palace during the Han Dynasty, she spoke clearly and had a good grasp of everything.

古文：郭后崩，哭泣过哀，遂死。
现代文：郭皇后逝世的时候，她哭得太悲伤了，因此便死了。
English: When Empress Guo passed away, she cried so hard that she died.

古文：魏时太原发冢，破棺，棺中有一生妇人，将出，与语，生人也。
现代文：曹魏的时候，太原有个人掘开坟墓撬开棺材，发现棺材中有一个活着的妇女。把她扶出来和她说话，的确是活人。
English: In the time of Cao Wei, a man in Taiyuan dug up a grave and opened the coffin, and found a living woman in the coffin. He brought her out and spoke to her, and she was indeed alive.

古文：送之京师，问其本事，不知也。
现代文：于是就把她送到京城。问她原来的事情，她却什么也不知道。
English: So they sent her to Kyoto. They asked her about the original incident, but she didn't know anything.

古文：视其冢上树木，可三十岁，不知此妇人三十岁，常生于地中耶？
现代文：看看他坟上的树木，大约有三十年了。不知道这个妇女是三十年一直活在地下呢？
English: Look at the trees on his grave, about thirty years old. Don't you know that this woman has been living underground for thirty years?

古文：将一朝欻生，偶与发冢者会也？
现代文：还是这一天忽然活过来，碰巧和掘坟的人相遇？
English: Or did he suddenly come to life that day, by chance meeting the grave digger?

古文：晋世，杜锡，字世嘏，家葬而婢误不得出。
现代文：晋代的杜锡，字世嘏，家里的人把他埋葬时，他的婢女耽误了没能跑出坟墓。
English: When the family buried Du Xi, also known as Shixi, in the Jin Dynasty, his maid was delayed and could not get out of the grave.

古文：后十余年，开冢祔葬，而婢尚生。
现代文：过了十多年，杜锡的妻子死了，家里的人掘开坟墓合葬，而婢女还活着。
English: More than ten years later, when the grave was opened and a joint funeral was held, the maid was still alive.

古文：云： 其始如瞑目。有顷，渐觉。 
现代文：他说： 那开始的时候好象是闭住了眼睛，过了一会儿就渐渐地醒了。 
English: He said: 'At first it was like my eyes were closed, but after a while I gradually woke up.

古文：问之，自谓。 当一再宿耳。 
现代文：问她，她自己说不过才过了一二夜罢了。
English: Ask her, she said herself, it's only been a night or two.

古文：初婢埋时，年十五六，及开冢后，姿质如故。
现代文：当初这婢女被埋葬时，有十五六岁。等到掘开坟墓时，她的姿质还象过去那样。
English: The servant was 15 or 16 years old when she was buried, and when the grave was opened, she still looked the same.

古文：更生十五六年，嫁之，有子。
现代文：又活了十五六年，嫁人后还生了儿子。
English: She lived for another 156 years, married and had a son.

古文：汉桓帝冯贵人，病亡；灵帝时有盗贼发冢，七十余年，颜色如故，但肉小冷；群贼共奸通之，至斗争相杀，然后事觉。
现代文：汉桓帝的冯贵妃病死了。汉灵帝时，有几个贼掘她的坟，她已埋葬七十多年，但面色还是象过去那样，只是肌肤稍微冷一些。这几个贼便一起轮奸她，直到他们互相争夺残杀，然后这事才被发觉。
English: Feng Guifei of Emperor Han died of illness. When Emperor Han Ling died, several thieves dug up her grave. She had been buried for more than seventy years, but her face was still the same as before, only her skin was slightly colder. These thieves gang-raped her together until they fought to kill each other, and then the matter was discovered.

古文：后窦太后家被诛，欲以冯贵人配食下邳陈公达；议以贵人虽是先帝所幸，尸体秽污，不宜配至尊，乃以窦太后配食。
现代文：后来窦太后一家被诛灭，想用冯贵妃作为祔祭。下邳县陈球建议说： 我以为冯贵妃虽然是桓帝宠爱的妻子，但她的尸体被玷污了，不宜再与皇帝一起享受祭祀。 
English: Later, Empress Dowager Dou's family was annihilated, and she wanted to use Feng Guifei as a sacrificial offering. Chen Qiu of Heshan County suggested: I thought that although Feng Guifei was the favorite wife of Emperor Huan, her body was defiled, and it was no longer appropriate to enjoy the sacrifice with the emperor.

古文：吴孙休时，戍将于广陵掘诸冢，取版，以治城，所坏甚多。
现代文：于是就用窦太后来作祔祭。吴国孙休在位的时候，守将们在广陵发掘了很多坟墓，取那棺材板来修筑城廓，被搞坏的坟墓很多。
English: When Sun Quan of the State of Wu was on the throne, the guards unearthed many tombs in Guangling and used the coffin plates to build the city walls. Many tombs were damaged.

古文：复发一大冢，内有重阁，户扇皆枢转可开闭，四周为徼道，通车，其高可以乘马，又铸铜人数十，长五尺，皆大冠，朱衣，执剑，侍列。
现代文：后来又发掘一座大坟，内有楼阁，门扇都靠门枢来转动，可以打开，可以关闭，四周是供巡察用的道路，可以通马车，它的高度可以供人骑马。又铸有铜人几十个，身长五尺，都戴着大帽子，穿着红袍，拿着宝剑，守卫排列在棺材的边上。
English: Later, a large tomb was unearthed, containing a mansion, the doors of which were turned by a pivot, and could be opened and closed, surrounded by a road for inspection, through which a carriage could pass, and high enough for a man to ride a horse. There were also dozens of bronze men, five feet tall, all wearing large hats, wearing red robes, and holding swords. Guards lined up at the edges of the coffin.

古文：灵坐皆刻铜人。背后石壁，言：殿中将军，或言：侍郎，常侍。似公侯之冢。
现代文：每个铜人背后的石壁上都刻着他们的官爵，有的刻着殿中将军，有的刻着侍郎、常侍，好象是王侯的坟墓一样。
English: On the stone wall behind each bronze figure are engraved the names of their officials, some are generals of the court, others are attendants, as if they were the tombs of princes.

古文：破其棺，棺中有人，发已班白，衣冠鲜明，面体如生人。
现代文：打开那棺材，棺中有一个人，头发已经花白了，衣帽华美，面色躯体象活人一样。
English: Open the coffin, there is a man in the coffin, his hair has turned white, his hat is gorgeous, and his body looks like a living person.

古文：棺中云母，厚尺许，以白玉璧三十枚借尸。
现代文：棺材中的云母石有一尺左右厚，还用白玉壁三十枚衬垫在尸体底下。
English: The mica stone in the coffin is about a foot thick, and there are also thirty pieces of white jade wall padding under the body.

古文：兵人辇共举出死人，以倚冢壁；有一玉，长尺许，形似冬瓜，从死人怀中透出，堕地；两耳及孔鼻中。皆有黄金，如枣许大。
现代文：士兵们一起抬出死人，把他靠在墓壁上。有一块玉，长一尺左右，形状象冬爪，从死人的怀里掉出来落到地上。死人的双耳及鼻孔中，都有黄金，象枣子那么大。
English: The soldiers carried the dead man out together and propped him up against the tomb wall. A piece of jade, about a foot long, shaped like a claw, fell out of the dead man's arms and landed on the ground. The dead man's ears and nostrils were full of gold, the size of a jujube.

古文：汉广川王好发冢。
现代文：汉代广川王喜欢发掘坟墓。
English: King Hirokawa of the Han Dynasty liked to dig up graves.

古文：发栾书冢，其棺柩盟器，悉毁烂无余；唯有一白狐，见人惊走；左右逐之，不得，戟伤其左足。
现代文：在发掘栾书的坟时，他的棺材明器，全都毁坏腐烂了，只有一只白色的狐狸，看见人就惊慌地逃跑了。广川王手下的人去追赶它，没追上，只是用戟刺伤了它的左脚。
English: During the excavation of the grave of King Hezekiah, his coffin's coffin lids were all destroyed and rotted. There was only one white fox, which ran away in panic when it saw people. King Hezekiah's men went after it, but did not catch it, but only stabbed its left foot with a pickaxe.

古文：是夕，王梦一丈夫，须眉尽白，来谓王曰： 何故伤吾左足？ 
现代文：这天晚上，广川王梦见一个男人，胡须眉毛全白了，来对广川王说： 为什么要刺伤我的左脚？ 
English: That night, King Hirokawa dreamed of a man with a white beard and white eyebrows, who came to King Hirokawa and said, "Why did you stab my left foot?

古文：乃以杖叩王左足。
现代文：说完便用手杖敲击广川王的左脚。
English: After saying this, he tapped Hirokawa-o's left foot with his cane.

古文：王觉，肿痛，即生疮，至死不差。
现代文：广川王感到肿胀疼痛，当即生了疮，一直到死都没有痊愈。
English: King Hirokawa felt swelling and pain, immediately developed sores, and did not recover until his death.

