古文：德宗既立，改年为隆安。
现代文：司马德宗即位为晋安帝，改年号为隆安。
English: Sima Dezong ascended to the throne as Emperor Jinan, and changed his era name to Longan.

古文：以道子为太傅、扬州牧、中书监，加殊礼，黄钺、羽葆、鼓吹，又增甲仗百人入殿。
现代文：司马德宗授予司马道子以太傅、扬州牧、中书监等职，加赐特殊的礼仪，其仪仗有黄钺、羽葆、鼓吹等，又增赐卫士一百人入殿。
English: Sima De Zong awarded Sima Daozi the positions of etheric teacher, Yangzhou pastor, and Chinese librarian, and gave him special etiquette. His honors included the yellow gong, feathered gong, and trumpet, and he also granted an additional hundred guards to enter the temple.

古文：既而内外众事必先关于道子。
现代文：不久，朝廷内外各种事务都必须首先经过司马道子之手。
English: Soon, all kinds of affairs both inside and outside the imperial court had to first pass through the hands of Sima Daozi.

古文：尚书仆射王国宝轻薄无行，为道子所亲，权震建业，擅取东宫兵以配己府。
现代文：尚书仆射王国宝轻薄无德行，被道子当作亲信，他的权势显赫，震慑京城建业，竟然擅自把禁卫东宫的士卒用来配备自己的私府。
English: Shang Shuxu's flunky, Shih Guo Bao, was light and without virtue. He was treated as a close confidant by Tao Zi. His power was so prominent that he shocked the construction of the capital, and he even used the guards of the East Palace to equip his private palace without authorization.

古文：道子以王绪为辅国将军、琅邪内史，又辄并石头之兵，屯于建业。
现代文：司马道子任用王绪为辅国将军、琅邪内史，又擅自兼并守卫石头城的军队，把他们屯驻在建业城。
English: Sima Daozi appointed Wang Xu as an auxiliary general of the country, suppressed the evil internal history, and annexed the troops guarding Stone Town without authorization, and stationed them in Jianye Town.

古文：绪犹领其从事中郎，居中用事，宠幸当政。
现代文：王绪还兼任他的从事中郎，在中枢部门主事，倍受宠幸而主持朝政。
English: Wang Xu also served as his middle-man, in charge of the central department, and was favored to preside over the imperial government.

古文：德宗兗州刺史王恭恶国宝、王绪之乱政也，乃要荆州刺史殷仲堪克期同举。
现代文：司马德宗属下的兖州刺史王恭向来憎恶王国宝、王绪这一帮人扰乱朝政，就约荆州刺史殷仲堪到期同时举事。
English: Wang Qiong, a member of the Sima De Zong, has always detested Wang Guobao and Wang Xu, who have been disrupting the imperial government, and raised an issue at the same time about the appointment of Jing Zhou, a member of the Sima De Zong.

古文：王恭表德宗曰： 国宝身负莫大之罪，谨陈其状。
现代文：王恭上奏表给司马德宗说： 王国宝犯有滔天大罪，我恭敬地向陛下陈述他的罪状。
English: Wang Qiong sent a report to Sima Dezong saying, "Kingdom treasure has committed a heinous crime, I respectfully report his crime to Your Majesty.

古文：前荆州刺史王悦，国宝同产弟也。
现代文：前任荆州刺史王悦，是王国宝的同胞兄弟。
English: Wang Yue, the former Jingzhou assassin, is a compatriot and brother of Wang Guobao.

古文：受任西籓，不幸致丧。
现代文：王悦在西藩任上，不幸丧亡。
English: Wang Yue was in charge of the West Domain, but he died tragically.

古文：国宝求假奔彼，遂不即路，虑台纠察，惧于黜免，乃毁冠改服，变为妇人，与婢同载，入请相王。
现代文：国宝向陛下告假奔丧，却迟迟不愿上路，御史台对此事进行纠察，他害怕获罪黜免，就改换衣服冠帽，伪装成妇人，与婢女同坐一车，到相王司马道子那里求情。
English: The national treasure told his majesty that he was taking time off to grieve, but he was reluctant to go on the road. Goshidai picketed the matter. He was afraid of being exonerated, so he changed his clothes, crown and hat, disguised himself as a woman, sat in a car with his maid, and went to King Sima Daozi to ask for forgiveness.

古文：又先帝暴崩，莫不惊号，而国宝靦然，了无哀容，方犯阖叩扉，求行奸计，欲诈为遗诏，矫弄神器。
现代文：再则先帝暴崩之时，朝廷上下莫不惊哭，但国宝若无其事，丝毫不见悲哀之貌，并且潜入宫中，谋求施行奸计，想要诈称圣上遗诏，伪造皇帝玺印。
English: On the other hand, when the former emperor suddenly passed away, the imperial court was in tears, but the national treasure did not see any sadness, and sneaked into the palace, seeking to carry out treachery, wanting to fraudulently claim the imperial edict, and forge the emperor's seal.

古文：彰暴于外，莫不闻知。
现代文：事实昭著在外，上下莫不知晓。
English: The facts are well-known, but we don't know the ins and outs.

古文：谗疾二昆，过于仇敌；树立私党，遍于府朝。
现代文：先前谗言离间王繤、王珉兄弟，使二者不和胜过仇敌；后又树立私党，遍及朝廷官府。
English: In the past, his words had driven a wedge between Wang Xi and Wang Xi's brothers, causing discord between the two to prevail over the enemy. Later, he established his own party, which spread throughout the imperial court and government offices.

古文：兵食资储，敛为私积；贩官鬻爵，威恣百城。
现代文：侵吞军队物资储备，据为私人财产；公然卖官鬻爵，威势恣肆于天下。
English: misappropriating the army's material reserves and claiming them as private property; openly selling government posts and titles, and arrogating power to the world.

古文：收聚不逞，招集亡命。
现代文：网罗不得志者，招集亡命之徒。
English: To snare the unwilling, to gather the fugitives.

古文：补国将军王绪，顽凶狂狡，人理不齿，同恶相成，共窃名器。
现代文：辅国将军王绪凶狂狡诈，为人所不齿，二人狼狈为奸，共同窃居要位。
English: Wang Xiu, the general of the Auxiliary State, was vicious and cunning. He was not a man to be trifled with, and the two of them worked together to steal important positions.

古文：自知祸恶已盈，怨集人鬼，规为大逆，荡复天下。
现代文：彼等自知恶贯满盈，人鬼都为之怨愤，就图谋背叛朝廷，废毁天下。
English: They knew that evil was rampant, and they were so angry that they plotted to betray the imperial court and destroy the world.

古文：昔赵鞅兴晋阳之甲，夷君侧之恶，臣虽驽劣，敢忘斯义。 
现代文：昔日赵鞅兴晋阳之甲，铲除君侧之恶，我虽拙笨愚劣，岂敢忘却这个道理。 
English: In the past, Zhao Bingxing was the champion of Jinyang and eradicated the evil of the imperial side. Although I am clumsy and stupid, I dare not forget this truth.

古文：恭表至，道子密欲讨恭，以元显为征虏将军，内外诸军潜加严备。
现代文：王恭的表章送到朝廷，司马道子得知以后就密谋要讨伐王恭，任司马元显为征虏将军，令内外各路军队暗中严加防备。
English: Wang Gong's epaulettes were sent to the imperial court. After learning of this, Sima Daozi plotted to fight Wang Gong. He appointed Sima Yuanxian as a conscript general, and ordered all domestic and foreign armies to secretly be on high alert.

古文：而国宝惶惧，不知所为，乃遣数百人戍竹里，夜遇风雨，各散而归。
现代文：但王国宝惶恐畏惧，不知道怎么行事，就派出数百人守卫竹里，夜晚遇到大风大雨，将士各自奔散而回。
English: But the kingdom was afraid and did not know what to do, so it sent out hundreds of people to guard the bamboo grove. In the night, when there was a strong wind and heavy rain, the soldiers scattered and returned.

古文：绪劝国宝杀王珣，然后南征北伐，弗听，反问计于珣。 
现代文：王绪劝说王国宝杀死王繤，然后出兵南征北伐，王国宝不听，反而向王繤征求对策。
English: Wang Xu persuaded Wang Guobao to kill Wang Qian, and then sent troops to the Southern Expedition and the Northern Expedition. Wang Guobao did not listen, but instead asked Wang Qian for countermeasures.

古文：既而惧慑，遂上表解职。
现代文：不久王国宝恐惧过度，就向朝廷上表请求免去自己的官职。
English: Before long, Wang Guobao's fear became too great, and he petitioned the imperial court to remove him from his post.

古文：寻复悔惧，诈称德宗复其本官。
现代文：没过多久他又畏惧而反悔，就诈称司马德宗有诏令其官复原职。
English: It did not take long for him to recant out of fear, and he falsely claimed that Sima Dezong had issued an edict to reinstate him.

古文：道子既不能拒恭等之兵，亦欲因以委罪，乃收国宝付廷尉杀之，斩王绪于市，以悦恭等。
现代文：司马道子既不能抵抗王恭等人的军队，又想要借此而推卸自己的罪责，就把王国宝逮捕起来交付廷尉处死，又斩王绪于市，以取悦于王恭等人。
English: Sima Daozi was not able to resist the army of Wang Qiong and others, and wanted to use this to shirk his guilt, so he arrested the treasure of the kingdom and gave it to the courtier to be executed, and also beheaded Wang Xiu in the city to please Wang Qiong and others.

古文：司徒左长史王廞遭母丧居吴，恭板行吴国内史。
现代文：司徒左长史王广钦因为母亲亡故而在吴郡服丧，王恭就授予他吴国内史之职。
English: Wang Guangqin, the head of the History Division of the Provincial Party Committee, was in mourning in Wuxi County due to the death of his mother, and Wang Qiong awarded him the post of Wuxi Domestic History.

古文：廞乃征发吴兴诸郡兵。
现代文：王广钦就征集动用吴兴等各郡的兵卒。
English: Wang Guangchin conscripted and mobilized soldiers from Wu Xing and other counties.

古文：国宝既死，王恭使廞反于丧。
现代文：王国宝被处死之后，王恭要王广钦仍回家服丧。
English: After Wang Guobao was put to death, Wang Gong still asked Wang Guangqin to go home to pay his respects.

古文：廞谓因缘事际，可大得志，乃据吴郡，遣子弟率众击恭。
现代文：王广钦认为这是一次极好的机遇，可以实现自己的意愿，于是就占据吴郡，派遣自己的子弟率兵攻击王恭。
English: Wang Guangqin thought that this was an excellent opportunity to realize his wishes, so he occupied Wu County and sent his son and son-in-law to attack Wang Qiong.

古文：以女为真烈将军，京置官属，领兵自卫。
现代文：王广钦以女儿为真烈将军，也设置各种文武官员，领兵自卫。
English: Wang Guangqin regarded his daughter as a truly heroic general, and also set up various civil and military officials to lead soldiers to self-defense.

古文：恭遣司马刘牢之讨平之。
现代文：王恭派司马刘牢之前往征讨，平定了王广钦。
English: Wang Qiong sent Sima Liu to the prison to settle the dispute, and Wang Guangqin was pacified.

古文：德宗谯王尚之兄弟复说道子，以为籓伯强盛，宰相权弱，宜密树置，以自籓卫。
现代文：司马德宗属下谯王司马尚之兄弟又去游说司马道子，认为当前各地藩镇势力强盛，而朝廷宰相权势薄弱，应当暗地里树置朋党，作为保卫自己的屏障。
English: The brother of Sima De Zong's subordinate Shao Wang, Sima Shang Luo, also went to lobby Sima Daozi, believing that at present, the power of various provinces and towns is strong, while the power of the imperial prime minister is weak. He should secretly set up a friend party as a barrier to protect himself.

古文：道子然之，分遣腹心，跨据形要，由是内外骚动。
现代文：司马道子同意他们的看法，就分派自己的心腹之人，占据许多位置重要的州郡，从此内外骚动不得安宁。
English: Sima Daozi agreed with them and sent his henchmen to occupy many important positions in the prefectures and counties. From then on, there was no peace and quiet.

古文：王恭深虑祸难，复密要殷仲堪、西中郎将庾楷、广州刺史桓玄同会建业。
现代文：王恭深恐发生祸害，再次秘密相约殷仲堪、西中郎将庾楷、广州刺史桓玄按期举兵同会于京都建业。
English: Wang Qiong was deeply afraid of a calamity, and once again made a secret agreement with Yin Zhongkang, Nishi Chungro, Zhao Xingkai, and Guangzhou Zishi Kuan Xuan to raise an army on schedule and build a business in Kyoto.

古文：玄等响应。
现代文：桓玄等人立即响应。
English: Kangen and others immediately responded.

古文：恭抗表传檄，以江州刺史王愉、司马尚之为事端。
现代文：王恭向朝廷上表，向各地传檄，以讨伐江州刺史王愉、司马尚之作为起兵的事由。
English: Wang Qiong presented a petition to the imperial court and sent it to various regions, with the purpose of raising an army to fight against Wang Yu and Sima Shang, the assassins of Jiangzhou.

古文：仲堪遣龙骧将军、南郡相杨佺期舟师五千发江陵，桓玄借兵于仲堪，亦给五千人。
现代文：殷仲堪派龙骧将军、南郡相杨亻全期率水师五千人从江陵进发，桓玄向殷仲堪借兵，殷仲堪也借给他五千兵马。
English: Yin Zhongkang sent five thousand sailors from Gangneung, led by General Longyu and Nan County Minister Yang Jie. Huan Xuan borrowed soldiers from Yin Zhongkang, and Yin Zhongkang also lent him five thousand soldiers and horses.

古文：于是德宗戒严，加道子黄钺遣右将军谢琰拒恭等元显为征讨都督，众军继进，前军王珣领中军府众次于北郊；以尚之为豫州刺史，率弟恢之、允之西讨楷等。
现代文：于是，司马德宗采取了严密的防卫措施：给司马道子加赐黄钺；派右将军谢琰领兵抵抗王恭等人；任司马元显为征讨都督，率领众军作后续相继进发；令前军王王旬率领中军府的部队驻扎在京都北郊；任司马尚之为豫州刺史，率领其弟司马恢之、司马允之向西讨伐庾楷等人。
English: As a result, Sima Dezong took strict defensive measures: he gave Huang Qi to Sima Daozi; he sent the right-wing general Xie Jun to lead the troops to resist Wang Qiang and others; he appointed Sima Yuanxian to recruit the governor and led the troops to advance one after another; he ordered the troops of the Central Military Government to be stationed in the northern suburbs of Kyoto under the command of the former military king Wang Jun; he appointed Sima Shang Yi to write the history of Yuzhou and led his brother Sima Huai Zhi and Sima Yun Zhi to the west to fight against Xingkai and others.

古文：皆执白虎幡居前。
现代文：所有各部都令人举着白虎幡走在前列。
English: All departments are leading the way with their white tiger banners.

古文：王恭遣刘牢之为前锋，次于竹里。
现代文：王恭派刘牢之为前锋，驻扎在竹里。
English: Wang Gong sent Liu Diao as a forward and stationed him in Bamboo Village.

古文：初，道子之谋恭也，啖牢之以重赏，牢之斩恭别帅颜延、延弟强，送二级于谢琰。
现代文：当初，司马道子图谋除掉王恭，曾许以重赏收买了刘牢之，刘牢之就杀了王恭的别帅颜延和他的弟弟颜强，把两个人的首级送给谢琰。
English: At the beginning, Sima Daozi plotted to get rid of Wang Gong, and had bribed Liu Dechi with a large reward. Liu Dechi then killed Wang Gong's second-in-command Yan Yan and his brother Yan Qiang, and gave the heads of the two men to Xie Jun.

古文：琰与牢之俱进袭恭，恭奔于曲阿，为湖浦尉所执，送建业。
现代文：谢琰与刘牢之同时袭击王恭，王恭被打败逃往曲阿，被湖浦军尉拿获，解送到建业。
English: Xie Qi and Liu Du attacked Wang Gong at the same time. Wang Gong was defeated and fled to Qu'ao. He was captured by Lieutenant Hupo and sent to Jianye.

古文：尚之与庾楷子鸿战于牛渚，斩鸿前锋将殷万，鸿遁还历阳。
现代文：司马尚之与庾楷之子庾鸿在牛渚交战，斩杀了庾鸿的前锋将领殷万，庾鸿只得逃回到历阳。
English: Sima Shangzhi fought with Zou Kai's son, Zou Hong, at Niu Zizhu, and killed Zou Hong's vanguard general, Yin Wan. Zou Hong had to flee back to Liyang.

古文：尚之犹不敢济。
现代文：司马尚之还是不敢渡水作战。
English: Sima Shangzhi still did not dare to fight across the water.

古文：桓玄、佺期奄至横江，尚之等退，恢之所领外军皆没。
现代文：桓玄、杨亻全期等突然到达横江，司马尚之引兵退走，司马恢之所率领的军队全部覆没。
English: Kuan Xuan, Yang Xuan Quan and others suddenly arrived at the Yokoe River, Sima Shang's lead troops retreated, and the army led by Sima Wei Ruo was completely wiped out.

古文：玄等径造石头，仲堪继在芜湖，建业震骇。
现代文：桓玄等人径直到达石头城，殷仲堪所部继而进到芜湖，建业受到威胁，京城震骇。
English: Huan Xuan and others followed the path until they reached Stone City, while Yin Zhongkan and his followers entered Wuhu. The construction industry was threatened, and the capital was shaken.

古文：道子杀恭于倪塘。
现代文：司马道子在倪塘把王恭处斩。
English: Sima Daozi beheaded Wang Qiong in Niitan.

古文：桓玄等于是走还寻阳。
现代文：桓玄等人无心恋战，于是退兵回到寻阳。
English: Kuan Xuan and the others had no intention of fighting, so they left the army and returned to Xuanyang.

古文：是年冬，德宗遣使朝贡，并乞师请讨姚兴。
现代文：这一年冬天，司马德宗派遣使者来大魏朝贡，并请求派军队前去讨伐姚兴。
English: In the winter of that year, Sima Dezong sent an envoy to pay tribute to the Great Wei Dynasty, and requested that an army be sent to fight Yaoxing.

古文：二年夏，德宗又遣使朝贡。
现代文：第二年夏天，司马德宗又派使者前来朝贡。
English: In the summer of the following year, the Sima De sect sent an envoy to pay tribute.

古文：以元显为扬州刺史，道子有疾，元显惧已弗得袭位，故矫以自授，而道子弗知。
现代文：司马德宗授任司马元显为扬州刺史。司马道子有病，元显生怕自己不能承袭他的职位，就伪造旨意擅自就任，而道子却毫无所知。
English: Sima De Zong appointed Sima Yuanxian as Yangzhou's chief historian. Sima Daozi was ill, and fearing that he would not be able to succeed him, Yuanxian forged a will to take office without authorization, but Daozi knew nothing about it.

古文：既瘳，乃大怒，以元显已拜，故弗复改，于是内外政事一决元显。
现代文：等到他病愈之后，得知此事大怒，由于司马元显已受任，也就不再改正过来，从此朝廷内外一切政事都由司马元显裁断。
English: After he recovered from his illness, he was furious to learn of the incident. Since Sima Yuanxian had already been appointed, he would not correct himself. From then on, all political affairs inside and outside the imperial court were decided by Sima Yuanxian.

古文：道子少而耽酒，治日甚希，至是无是，俾昼作夜，时谓道子为东录，元显为西录，西府千两辐凑，东第门设雀罗矣。
现代文：司马道子一向嗜酒，治理政务的时间非常少，到这时更是无事可做，就以白昼当作夜晚，只顾饮酒。当时人们都说道子是东尚书，元显是西尚书，西府门第车马繁杂，东边府第则门可罗雀。
English: Sima Daozi had always been a heavy drinker and had very little time to manage government affairs. At this time, there was nothing else to do, so he treated the day as a night and only drank alcohol. At that time, people said that the son was the East Shangshu, the Yuan Xian was the West Shangshu, the West Ward was full of cars and horses, and the East Ward was full of sparrows.

古文：元显年少，顿居权重，骄奢淫暴，于是远近讥之。
现代文：司马元显年轻气盛，一时间位尊权重，更加骄奢淫暴，于是远近的人都背地里讥讽、指责他。
English: Sima Yuanxian was young and full of vigor, at one time he was held in high esteem, and he became even more arrogant and violent. As a result, people near and far secretly ridiculed and blamed him.

古文：初，德宗新安太守孙泰以左道惑众被戮，其兄子恩窜于海屿，妖党从之，至是转众，攻上虞，希县令，众百许人径向山阴。
现代文：当初，司马德宗所属新安太守孙泰因以旁门左道惑众而被诛戮，他的侄子孙恩逃窜到东海岛上，许多妖党都追随他，到这时孙恩就纠集妖众，进攻上虞，杀死县令，率其部下一百人左右径直奔向山阴。
English: At first, Sun Tai, the governor of Xin'an, who belonged to Sima Dezong, was killed for leading the people astray. His nephew Sun En fled to the East Sea Island, and many evil spirits followed him. At this time, Sun En gathered evil spirits, attacked Shangyu, killed the county magistrate, and led about a hundred of his subordinates straight to the mountains.

古文：会稽内史王凝之事五斗米道，恩之来也，弗先遣军，乃稽颡于道室，跪而咒说，指麾空中，若有处分者。
现代文：会稽内史王凝之信奉五斗米道，孙恩将要到来，他没有事先派军队抵抗，而是在道人所居之室跪拜祷告，口里不断念着咒语，向空中指指划划，好像是在嘱托什么事情。
English: He did not send an army to resist in advance, but knelt and prayed in the room where the Taoists lived, reciting mantras and pointing to the sky, as if he were telling them what to do.

古文：官属劝其讨恩，凝之曰： 我已请大道出兵，凡诸津要各有数万人矣。 
现代文：王凝之的下属都劝他讨伐孙恩，王凝之却说： 我已经祈请大师发兵，凡是各处渡口要道都各有数万人马。 
English: Wang Xunzhi's subordinates all advised him to fight Sun En, but Wang Xunzhi said, "I've already asked Master to send troops. There are tens of thousands of horses everywhere along the important ferry routes.

古文：恩渐近，乃听遣军。
现代文：直到孙恩逼近，他才听从部属意见派兵抵御。
English: It was not until Sun En approached that he listened to his subordinates and sent troops to resist.

古文：比兵出，恩已至矣。
现代文：及至军队刚刚出动，孙恩率人已经到了跟前。
English: When the army had just been dispatched, Sun En and his men had already arrived.

古文：战败，凝之奔走，再宿执之。
现代文：王凝之战败，狼狈逃跑，过了一夜就被孙恩捕获。
English: Wang Geng was defeated and fled in disarray. He was captured by Sun En after one night.

古文：旬日，恩众数万，自号平东将军，逼人士为官属。
现代文：十天之内，孙恩聚集部众数万人，自号平东将军，强迫当地名士接受伪职。
English: Within ten days, Sun En gathered tens of thousands of people, called himself General Pingdong, and forced local celebrities to accept fake positions.

古文：于是诸郡妖惑，并杀守令而应之，众皆云集。
现代文：于是，各郡的人被妖术蛊惑，一齐杀死太守县令而响应孙恩，一时间妖众云集。
English: As a result, the people of each county were bewitched by magic and killed the governor of the county together in response to Sun En. For a while, the monsters gathered.

古文：吴国内史桓谦出奔，吴兴太守谢邈被害。
现代文：吴国内史桓谦逃走，吴兴太守谢邈被害。
English: Wuzhong Guozhong Shi Huanqian fled, and Wu Xingtao governor Xie Yao was killed.

古文：自德宗以来，内外乖贰，石头以外，皆专之于荆、江，自江以西则受命于豫州，京口暨于江北皆兗州刺史刘牢之等所制，德宗政令所行，唯三吴而已。
现代文：自从司马德宗即位以来，其朝廷内外乖迕叛逆，石头城以外都被荆州、江州刺史把持，长江以西的地方则受命于豫州刺史，京口以至长江北部都被兖州刺史刘牢之等人所挟制，司马德宗的政令，只有三吴之地可以推行而已。
English: Since Sima Dezong ascended the throne, his imperial court has been rebellious and rebellious inside and outside the court. Except for Stone Town, all were controlled by Jingzhou and Jiangzhou scribes. The places west of the Yangtze River were ordered by the scribes of Yuzhou. Beijing and the northern part of the Yangtze River were held hostage by the scribes of Zhangzhou, Liu Diao and others. Sima Dezong's decrees could only be implemented in Sanwu.

古文：恩既作乱，八郡尽为贼场，及丹阳诸县处处蜂起，建业转成蹙弱。
现代文：孙恩既然作乱，江南八郡全都沦为贼寇的地盘，直到丹阳各县，处处都是贼寇蜂起，建业城变得衰弱不堪。
English: Since Sun En made the disturbance, all the eight counties in the south of the Yangtze River fell into the territory of the bandits. Until the counties of Danyang, the bandits rose up everywhere, and Jianye City became weak.

古文：且妖惑之徒，多潜都邑，人情危惧，恆虑大兵窃发。
现代文：而且被妖术蛊惑之徒，大多潜伏在各个都邑，百姓人人危惧，常常担心被妖众窃据。
English: Moreover, those who are bewitched by magic are mostly lurking in various cities and towns, and the people are afraid of them, often fearing that they will be stolen by demons.

古文：于是众军戒严，刘牢之共卫将军谢琰讨之。
现代文：于是各部军队严加防卫，刘牢之联合卫将军谢琰共同讨伐贼寇。
English: As a result, the armies of all departments strictly defended, and Liu Dang's joint guard general Xie Jun jointly fought against the bandits.

古文：贼等禁令不行，肆意杀戮，士庶死者不可胜计，或醢诸县令以食其妻子，不肯者辄支解之，其虐如此。
现代文：贼众根本不执行禁令，肆意抢劫杀戮，士民百姓被杀害的不计其数，有的县令被贼人剁成肉酱强逼他的妻儿吃，不肯吃的人就被拿去肢解，贼寇的暴虐竟至如此。
English: The bandits did not enforce the ban at all, robbing and killing at will. There are countless numbers of scholars and common people who were killed. Some county magistrates were made into meat sauce by the bandits and forced his wife and children to eat it. Those who did not want to eat it were taken and dismembered. This is how tyrannical the bandits were.

古文：骠骑长史王平之死未葬，恩剖棺焚尸，以其头为秽器。
现代文：骠骑长史王平之死后尚未埋葬，孙恩就打开棺材把尸体烧掉，用他的头骨当作大小便的器具。
English: After the death of the chief of the imperial cavalry Shi Wangping and before he was buried, Sun En opened the coffin and burned the body, using his skull as a urinal.

古文：牢之率军讨破之。
现代文：刘牢之率军征讨把他们打败。
English: Liu Diao led an army to conquer and defeat them.

古文：琰将至吴兴，贼徒遁走，驱逼士庶，奔于山阴。
现代文：谢琰率军将要到达吴兴，贼徒闻风逃走，驱赶强逼士民百姓，逃到山阴。
English: Xie Rong and his army were about to reach Wu Xing. Hearing the wind, the bandits fled, drove away the forced laborers and people, and fled to the mountains.

古文：诸妖乱之家，妇女尤甚，未得去者，皆盛饰婴兒投之于水而告之曰： 贺汝先登仙堂，我寻复就汝也。 
现代文：被诸妖众践踏的家中，妇女受害尤甚，凡是没有跟他们走的，就把她的婴儿盛妆打扮投进水中，并且说： 祝贺你先登上仙堂，我不久就会来找你的。 
English: In the homes that were trampled on by the demons, the women suffered the most. Anyone who didn't go with them threw her baby costume into the water and said, "Congratulations, you're the first to reach the Hall of Immortals. I'll be looking for you soon."

古文：贼既走散，邑屋焚毁，郛郭之中，时见人迹，经月乃渐有归者。
现代文：贼寇被驱赶走散之后，各地城邑房屋都被焚毁，只是在城外偶尔能见到人迹，过了一个多月才渐渐有人回来。
English: After the thieves and robbers were driven away, houses in towns and cities all over the country were burned down. Only occasionally could traces of people be seen outside the city, and it took more than a month for people to gradually return.

古文：谢琰留屯乌程，遣其将高素助牢之。
现代文：谢琰屯兵留守乌程，派他的部将高素协助刘牢之。
English: Xie Yu's garrison stayed behind in Wucheng and sent his subordinate Gao Su to assist Liu Dangzhi.

古文：牢之率众军济江。
现代文：刘牢之率领众军渡过长江。
English: Liu Dolezhi led the troops across the Yangtze River.

古文：初，孙恩闻八郡响应也，告诸官属曰： 天下无复事矣，当与诸君朝服而至建业。 
现代文：起初，孙恩听说八郡的人都响应他，就对他属下的官员说道： 天下从此不会再有什么事了，我当与各位穿上朝服而进入建业城。 
English: At first, when Sun En heard that the people of the eight counties responded to him, he said to the officials under him: There will be no more trouble in the world from now on. I should put on the imperial robes and enter Jianye City with you.

古文：既闻牢之临江，复曰： 我割据浙江，不失作勾践也。 
现代文：后来听说刘牢之的军队到达长江，又对他们说： 我割据浙江，也不失为做又一个勾践。 
English: Later, when he heard that Liu's army had reached the Yangtze River, he said to them, "I've made it to Zhejiang, which is another good practice.

古文：寻知牢之已济，乃曰： 孤不耻走。 于是乃走。
现代文：不久得知刘牢之已经渡江，他就说： 我并不以逃跑为耻。 于是就逃走了。
English: Soon after learning that Liu Dolezhi had crossed the river, he said, "I'm not ashamed of running away," and ran away.

古文：缘道多遗珍宝，牢之将士争取之，不得穷追。
现代文：孙恩逃跑时令人沿路丢弃许多珍宝财物，刘牢之的将士见了就争着拾取，不能穷追贼军。
English: When Sun En was running away, he caused many precious treasures and goods to be discarded along the road. When Liu Doji's soldiers saw them, they scrambled to pick them up, unable to pursue the bandits.

古文：恩复入于海。
现代文：孙恩再次逃到了海上。
English: Sun En again fled to the sea.

古文：初，三吴困于虐乱，皆企望牢之、高素等。
现代文：起初，三吴之地困于贼寇肆虐作乱，都翘首盼望刘牢之、高素等人的军队到来。
English: At the beginning, the land of Sanwu was trapped in the chaos caused by bandits, and everyone was looking forward to the arrival of Liu Diao Zhi, Gao Su and other troops.

古文：既至，放肆抄暴，百姓咸怨毒失望焉。
现代文：他们的军队来到之后，同样放肆地抢掠施暴，百姓都大失所望，无不怨恨其荼毒。
English: When their army came, they also plundered and committed violence with the same audacity. The people were greatly disappointed and all resented their venom.

古文：孙恩在海，妖众转复从之。
现代文：孙恩逃到海上，其部下又辗转跟从于他。
English: Sun En fled to the sea, and his subordinates followed him.

古文：既破永嘉、临海，复入山阴。
现代文：于是他率众攻破永嘉、临海，再次进入山阴。
English: So he led the crowd to break through Yongjia and Linhai, and once again entered the mountain shade.

古文：谢琰战殁。
现代文：谢琰迎战身亡。
English: Xie Yao was killed in the battle.

古文：于是建业大震。遣冠军将军、东海太守桓不才，辅国将军孙无终，广陵相高雅之等东讨恩。
现代文：于是建业大为震惊，派冠军将军、东海太守桓不才，辅国将军孙无终，广陵相高雅之等人向东征讨孙恩。
English: As a result, Jianye was greatly shocked and sent the champion general, the East Sea Taizhu Huan Baizai, the auxiliary country general Sun Muzhuang, and the Guangling phase Gaoya and others to the east to fight for Sun En.

古文：吴兴太守庾恆虑妖党复发，大行诛戮，杀男女数千人。
现代文：吴兴太守庾恒惧怕妖党再次兴起，就大行诛戮，杀死男女数千人。
English: Fearing the rise of the Demon Party again, Wu Xingtao, the governor of Yancheng, went on a killing spree, killing thousands of men and women.

古文：孙恩复破高雅之于余姚，雅之走还山阴。
现代文：孙恩又在余姚打败了高雅之，高雅之败逃回到山阴。
English: Sun En defeated Gao Yaozhi in Yuyao, and Gao Yaozhi fled back to the mountains.

古文：元显自为后将军、开府仪同三司、都督十六州，本官悉如故；封子彦章为东海王，食吴兴四万余户，清选文学臣僚，吏兵一同宗国。
现代文：司马元显在建业自封为后将军、开府仪同三司、都督十六州，原任的官职全都照旧；授予他的儿子司马彦章为东海王，食邑吴兴四万余户，精心挑选文章博学之士作为臣僚，文武官员的设置如同一个小朝廷。
English: In Jianye, Sima Yuanxian self-appointed himself as the next general, Kaifu Yi with three divisions, and the governor of 16 states. The original official positions were all the same; Sima Yanzhang, who was awarded to his son, was the king of the East China Sea, more than 40,000 households in Wuxing, carefully selected scholars as ministers, and the civil and military officials were set up like a small imperial court.

古文：孙恩浮海奄至京口，战士十万刘牢之隔在山阴，众军惧不敢旋，恩遂径向建业。
现代文：孙恩渡海而来很快就到达京口，拥有战士十万人，刘牢之在山阴阻截，众军畏惧不敢同他周旋，孙恩于是径直向建业前进。
English: After crossing the sea, Sun En soon arrived in Beijing, with 100,000 soldiers. Liu Diao Zhi was intercepted in the shade of the mountain, and the troops were afraid to negotiate with him. Sun En then headed straight for Jianye.

古文：德宗惶骇，遽召豫州刺史司马尚之。
现代文：司马德宗惶恐惊骇，立即征召豫州刺史司马尚之。
English: Sima Dezong was so frightened that he immediately conscripted Sima Shangzhi, the governor of Yuzhou.

古文：于时中外惊扰，而元显置酒高会，道子唯日祈于钟山。
现代文：当时建业内外一片惊惧混乱，但司马元显却设置盛大酒宴，司马道子则只是每天在钟山祈祷神明。
English: At that time, there was a panic and confusion inside and outside the construction industry, but Sima Yuanhan set up a grand wine banquet, while Sima Daozi only prayed to the gods in Zhongshan every day.

古文：恩来渐近，百姓忷惧。
现代文：孙恩之众渐渐逼近，城中百姓惊恐万分。
English: Sun En's army gradually approached, and the people in the city were terrified.

古文：尚之率精锐驰至，径屯积弩堂。
现代文：司马尚之率领精锐骑兵迅速赶到，直接屯兵在积弩堂。
English: The elite cavalry led by Sima Shangzhu arrived quickly, and the troops were directly stationed in Jiexuan Hall.

古文：恩时沂风，不得疾行，数日乃至白石。
现代文：孙恩当时碰到逆风，不能快速行进，走了几天才到达白石。
English: At that time, Sun En encountered a headwind and could not travel fast. He walked for a few days before reaching Shiroishi.

古文：恩本以诸军分散，欲掩不备，知尚之尚在建业，复闻牢之不还，不敢上，乃走向郁洲。
现代文：孙恩原以为司马氏诸军分散，想要乘其不备进行偷袭，但他听说司马尚之还在建业，又听说刘牢之的军队没有退走，不敢上前攻击，就向郁州方向前进。
English: Sun En originally thought that Sima's army was scattered and wanted to take advantage of the situation to make a surprise attack, but he heard that Sima Shangzhi was still building, and that Liu Diaozhi's army had not retreated and dared not attack, so he advanced towards Yuzhou.

古文：恩别帅卢循攻没广陵，虏掠而去。
现代文：孙恩的别帅卢循攻陷广陵，大肆掳掠而去。
English: Lu Xun, Sun En's second-in-command, invaded Guangling and plundered it.

古文：桓玄闻孙恩之逼也，乃建牙戒严，表求征讨。
现代文：桓玄听说孙恩部众逼近建业，就在军前树起大旗，采取措施严密防备，一面给朝廷上表请求发兵征讨。
English: When Huan Xuan heard that Sun Enbu's army was approaching Jianye, he set up a large flag in front of the army, took measures to closely guard against it, and at the same time sent a request to the imperial court to send troops to collect taxes.

古文：时恩去未还，玄表复至，元显等大惧，急遣止玄。
现代文：当时孙恩离建业并不远，桓玄请战的表章又送到了，司马元显等人大为惊惧，急忙派人去制止桓玄。
English: At that time, Sun En was not far from Jianye, and the badge of Kuan Xuan's invitation to battle was also sent. Sima Yuanxian and others were greatly alarmed and hurriedly sent someone to stop Kuan Xuan.

古文：庾楷密使自结于元显，说玄大失人情，众不为用，若朝廷遣军。已当内应。
现代文：庾楷暗地里差遣使者私自与元显勾结，说桓玄已经大失人心，部下都不愿替他卖力，如果朝廷派兵征伐桓玄，自己愿意充当内应。
English: He secretly sent an emissary to secretly collude with Yuan Xian, saying that Kuan Xuan had lost a lot of people's hearts, and his subordinates were not willing to work hard for him. If the imperial court sent troops to conquer Kuan Xuan, he would be willing to act as a middleman.

古文：元显得书大喜，遣张法顺谋于刘牢之，牢之同许焉。
现代文：司马元显见到庾楷的书信大喜，就派张法顺前往与刘牢之谋划，刘牢之答应这样做。
English: Sima Yuanxian was overjoyed to see Gong Kai's letter and sent Zhang Faxun to plan with Liu Diao, who agreed to do so.

古文：于是征兵装舰，将谋西讨。
现代文：于是司马元显就征集兵马，装配舰船，准备向西征讨桓玄。
English: As a result, Sima Yuanxian conscripted soldiers and horses, assembled ships, and prepared to march west to fight Kuan Xuan.

古文：德宗改年曰地兴，以元显为大都督讨玄。
现代文：司马德宗改年号为元兴，任命司马元显为大都督，率兵征讨桓玄。
English: Sima Dezong changed the name of the year to Genxing, appointed Sima Yuanxian as the grand governor, and led the army to fight against Kuan Xuan.

古文：玄军至，元显不战而败，父子并为玄所杀。
现代文：及至桓玄军到，司马元显不战而败，父子二人都被桓玄所杀。
English: When Huan Xuan's army arrived, Sima Yuanxian was defeated without a fight, and both father and son were killed by Huan Xuan.

古文：后改年为大亨。
现代文：司马德宗旋即又改年号为大亨。
English: Sima De Zongxuan immediately changed his name to Tycoon.

古文：天兴六年十月，德宗遣使朝京师。
现代文：魏天兴六年，司马德宗派遣使者来朝朝贡。
English: In the sixth year of Wei Tianxing, Sima Dezong sent an envoy to pay tribute to the imperial court.

古文：德宗封桓玄为楚王，玄寻逼德宗手诏禅位。
现代文：司马德宗封桓玄为楚王，桓玄不久就胁迫司马德宗亲自写下诏书禅位。
English: Sima Dezong crowned Huan Xuan as the King of Chu, and Huan Xuan soon forced Sima Dezong to personally write down the imperial edict.

古文：德宗出居永安宫。
现代文：司马德宗出居永安宫。
English: Sima Dezong moved out of Yongan Palace.

古文：既受禅，封德宗为南康平固县王，居之寻阳。
现代文：桓玄受禅即位之后，封司马德宗为南康平固县王，令他居住在寻阳。
English: After Kuan Xuan was enthroned by Zen, he made Ma Dezong the king of Nankang Pinggu County, and made him live in Xiangyang.

古文：天赐元年，德宗在姑熟，二月，至寻阳。
现代文：天赐元年，司马德宗在姑熟，二月，他到达寻阳。
English: In the auspicious first year of the year, Sima Dezong became acquainted with his aunt, and in February, he arrived at Xuanyang.

古文：其彭城内史刘裕杀玄除州刺史桓脩，与刘毅等举兵讨玄。
现代文：司马德宗的彭城内史刘裕杀了桓玄的徐州刺史桓，与刘毅等人发兵讨伐桓玄。
English: Liu Yu, the Pengcheng insider of the Sima De sect, killed the Xuzhou assassin of Huan Xuan, and sent troops with Liu Yi and others to fight Huan Xuan.

古文：玄败走寻阳，携德宗兄弟至于江陵，又走荆州。
现代文：桓玄失败逃往寻阳，又裹挟司马德宗兄弟奔往江陵，接着又到了荆州。
English: Huan Xuan unsuccessfully fled to Xuanyang, and he also ran to Jiangling with the Sima Dezong brothers, and then to Jingzhou.

古文：荆州别驾王康产、南郡相王腾之迎德宗入南郡府。
现代文：荆州别驾王康产、南郡相王腾之迎接司马德宗进入南郡府舍。
English: Jingzhou Beidou Wang Kangsang and South County Minister Wang Teng welcome Sima Dezong into the South County Government House.

古文：桓玄死。
现代文：桓玄不久被杀。
English: Kangen was killed soon after.

古文：玄将桓振复袭江陵，斩王康产及腾之。
现代文：桓玄部将桓振又来袭击江陵，杀了王康产和王腾之。
English: Kuan Zhen, the commander of Kuan Xuan Bu, attacked Gangneung again and killed Wang Kangsang and Wang Tengzhi.

古文：将杀德宗，玄扬州刺史、新安王桓谦苦禁之，乃止。
现代文：他还准备杀死司马德宗，桓玄的扬州刺史、新安王桓谦苦苦劝阻，才没有下手。
English: He also planned to kill Sima Dezong, but was dissuaded by the Yangzhou assassin of Huan Xuan and the King of Xin'an, Huan Qian.

古文：时卢循执德宗广州刺史吴隐之，自号平南将军、广州刺史，令其党徐道覆据始兴，余郡皆以亲党居之。
现代文：当时孙恩的旧部卢循捉拿了司马德宗的广州刺史吴隐之，自号平南将军、广州刺史，令他的同党徐道覆占据始兴，其余各郡都安排他的亲信党羽把持。
English: At that time, Lu Xun of Sun En's old faction captured Wu Yingzhi, the Guangzhou secretary of Sima Dezong, who called himself Pingnan General and Guangzhou secretary, and made his party comrade Xu Daohui occupy Shixing. The remaining counties were all arranged to be controlled by his cronies.

古文：德宗复僭立于江陵，改章义熙。
现代文：司马德宗在江陵再次即位，改年号为义熙。
English: Sima Dezong ascended the throne again in Gangneung and changed his era name to Yixi.

古文：尚书陶夔迎德宗达于板桥，大风暴起，龙舟沉浚，死者十余人。
现代文：尚书陶夔前往迎接司马德宗，到达板桥的时候，突然刮起大风，龙舟沉没在水里，死亡十余人。
English: Shangshu Tao Jun went to meet Sima Dezong. When he arrived at Banqiao, a strong wind suddenly blew, the dragon boat sank in the water, and more than ten people died.

古文：德宗发江陵至寻阳，其益州刺史毛璩、参军谯纵反，攻涪城，克之，遂以益州叛德宗。
现代文：司马德宗从江陵出发到了寻阳，他的益州刺史毛璩、参军谯纵反叛，进攻涪城，并占领了它，于是就凭借益州反叛司马德宗。
English: Sima Dezong set out from Gangneung to seek the sun. He went to Yizhou, stabbed Shifang, joined the army to instigate a rebellion, attacked Shicheng, and occupied it. Therefore, he relied on the Yizhou rebellion of Sima Dezong.

古文：德宗发姑孰，还建业。
现代文：司马德宗又从姑熟出发，回到了建业。
English: Sima Dezong went back to Jianye from Shuguang.

古文：六月，太祖遣军攻德宗钜鹿太守贺申，申举城降。
现代文：这一年六月，太祖派军攻击司马德宗所属巨鹿太守贺申，贺申举城投降。
English: In June of the same year, Taizu sent an army to attack Koshu Taishu Hoshimune, who belonged to the Sima De sect, and Hoshimune surrendered the city.

古文：永兴二年，卢循复起于岭南，杀德宗江州刺史何无忌于石城。
现代文：永兴二年，卢循又在岭南东山再起，在石城杀了司马德宗所属江州刺史何无忌。
English: In the second year of Yongxing, Lu Xun made a comeback in the south of Lingnan and killed Sima Dezong's Jiangzhou assassin in Shicheng.

古文：咸欲以德宗北走，知循未下乃止。
现代文：众人都想让司马德宗向北出走，后来得知卢循并没有到来，才安定下来。
English: Everyone wanted Sima Dezong to flee to the north, but he only settled down when he learned that Lu Xun had not arrived.

古文：裕令抚军刘毅讨循，败于桑落洲，步走而还。
现代文：刘裕令抚军刘毅率兵讨伐卢循，被卢循在桑落洲打败，弃马步行而还。
English: Liu Yu ordered Liu Yi to lead his troops to fight Lu Xun. He was defeated by Lu Xun in Sanluo Zhou, abandoned his horse and fled on foot.

古文：裕党孟昶、诸葛长民等劝裕拥德宗过江，裕不从。
现代文：刘裕的亲信孟昶、诸葛长民等人劝刘裕拥司马德宗过长江，刘裕不听。
English: Liu Yu's close confidants Meng Xuan, Zhuge Changmin and others advised Liu Yu to have Sima De live across the Yangtze River, but Liu Yu did not listen.

古文：神瑞二年，德宗遣广武将军玄文、石齐朝贡。
现代文：神瑞二年，司马德宗派广武将军玄文、石齐前来朝贡。
English: In the second year of Jin Rui, the generals of the Sima De sect, Guangwu Genwen and Shi Qi, came to pay tribute.

古文：太宗初，刘裕征姚泓。
现代文：泰常初年，刘裕发兵征讨姚泓。
English: In the first year of the reign of Emperor Taizang, Liu Yu sent soldiers to recruit Yao Tong.

古文：二年，太宗遣长孙道生、娥清破其将朱超石于石河，擒骑将杨丰，斩首千七百余级。
现代文：二年，太宗派长孙道生、娥清在石河打败刘裕的部将朱超石，生擒骑将杨丰，斩首一千七百余级。
English: In the second year, Sun Daosheng and E Qing, the leaders of the Tai Sect, defeated Zhu Chaoishi, Liu Yu's subordinate, and Yang Feng, Liu Yu's cavalryman, in Shihe, beheading more than 1,700 echelons.

古文：三年，德宗死，弟德文僭立。
现代文：泰常三年，司马德宗去世，其弟司马德文继位。
English: In the third year of Taizang, Sima Dezong died, and his brother Sima Dewen succeeded to the throne.

古文：四年，改年曰元熙五年，德文禅位于裕，裕封德文为零陵王。
现代文：泰常四年，将其年号改称元熙五年，司马德文禅位给刘裕，刘裕封司马德文为零陵王。
English: In the fourth year of the reign of Emperor Taizang, the name of the year was changed to the fifth year of the reign of Emperor Yuanxi. Sima Dewen was given the title of zen by Liu Yu, and Liu Yu designated Sima Dewen as the King of the Zero Mausoleum.

古文：德文后河南褚氏，兄季之、弟淡之虽德文姻戚，而尽心于裕。
现代文：司马德文的皇后河南褚氏，她的哥哥褚季之、弟弟褚淡之虽说是司马德文的姻亲，但他们都只为刘裕尽心尽力。
English: The Queen of Sima Devin, the Henan Luo clan, her brother, Luo Jizhu, and her brother, Luo Tan, are Sima Devin's in-laws, but they are all doing their best for Liu Yu.

古文：德文每生男，辄令方便杀焉。
现代文：司马德文只要生了男孩，他们就令人找机会杀掉。
English: As soon as Sima Devin gives birth to a boy, they will find an opportunity to kill him.

古文：惑诱内人，密加毒害，前后非一。
现代文：或者诱使宫内的人，暗地里加以毒害，前后害死的孩子不止一个。
English: Or seduce the people in the palace, secretly poison them, and kill more than one child back and forth.

古文：及德文被废，囚于秣陵宫，常惧见祸，与褚氏共止一室，虑有鸩毒，自煮食于前。
现代文：及至司马德文被刘裕废除皇帝之位，囚禁在秣陵宫内，他经常害怕遭到他们杀害，虽然和褚氏共居在一间房屋内，但他因害怕他们在食物里放了毒药，就自己在前面煮食。
English: Until Sima Dewen was dethroned as emperor by Liu Yu and imprisoned in the Fuling Palace, he was often afraid of being killed by them. Although he lived in the same house with the Yi clan, he was afraid that they had put poison in the food, so he cooked his own food in front.

古文：六年，刘裕将杀之，不欲遣人入内，令淡之兄弟视褚氏，褚氏出别宫，于是兵乃逾垣而入，进药于德文。
现代文：泰常六年，刘裕打算杀掉司马德文，又不想派人去到宫内，就叫褚谈之兄弟去探视褚氏，等她出来去到别宫，派去的兵士就越墙而入，进上毒药给司马德文。
English: For six years, Liu Yu planned to kill Sima Dewen, but did not want to send someone to the palace, so he asked his brother to visit Sima Dewen. When she came out to go to another palace, the soldiers sent by him broke through the wall and poisoned Sima Dewen.

古文：德文不肯饮，曰： 佛教，自杀者不复人身。 
现代文：德文不肯饮服毒药，说： 佛教教规有言，自杀的人来生不再转为人身。 
English: Devin refused to drink poison and said, "According to Buddhist doctrine, those who commit suicide will not be reincarnated in the next life.

古文：乃以被掩杀之。
现代文：于是就用被子把他闷死。
English: So she smothered him with a quilt.

古文：自叡之僭江南，至于德文之死，君弱臣强，不相羁制，赏罚号令，皆出权宠，危亡废夺，衅故相寻，所谓夷狄之有君，不若诸夏之亡也。
现代文：自从司马睿在江南即位以来，直到司马德文被杀死，国君势弱而权臣势强，不能牵制约束，一切赏罚号令，都出于权贵宠臣，国家的危亡，君主的废夺，各种动乱事故相继发生，这就是人们所说的夷狄之有君主，不如诸侯之亡国的道理。
English: Since Sima Rui ascended the throne in the south of the Yangtze River, until Sima Dewen was killed, the king was weak and the powerful vassals were strong, and could not be restrained. All orders to reward and punish were made by the powerful and powerful vassals, the country was in danger, the monarch was dethroned, and all kinds of turmoil and accidents occurred one after another. This is what people call the reason why it is better to have a monarch than a ruined country.

