古文：汉高祖怒萧何，谓王卫尉曰： 李斯相秦皇帝，有善归主，有恶自予，今相国请吾苑以自媚于民，故系治之。 
现代文：汉高祖对相国萧何感到很恼火，于是对王卫尉说： 李斯辅佐秦朝皇帝，有了好事归国君，有了坏事自己承担，现在相国萧何竟然请求开垦我的上林苑荒地以便自己讨好老百姓，所以我将他收身治罪。 
English: Han Gao Zu felt very annoyed with his brother-in-law Xiao He, so he said to Wang Weifang: Li Sisuo, the emperor of the Qin Dynasty, with good things returned to the sovereign, with bad things borne by himself, now his brother-in-law Xiao He has actually requested to reclaim my Shanglinyuan wasteland in order to please the people, so I will take him in and punish him.

古文：卫尉曰： 秦以不闻其过亡天下，李斯之分过，又何足法哉！ 
现代文：王卫尉说： 秦朝皇帝因为听不到自己的过失而丢了天下，李斯分担失误责任又有什么用处呢？
English: Wang Wei said: The emperor of the Qin Dynasty lost the world because he could not hear his own mistakes. What is the use of Li Si sharing the responsibility for mistakes?

古文：唐太宗疑三品以上轻魏王，责之曰： 我见隋家诸王，一品以下皆不免其踬顿，我自不许儿子纵横耳。 
现代文：这种做法哪值得后人学习呢？ 唐太宗李世民怀疑三品以上官员轻视自己的儿子魏王李泰，便责备他们说： 在隋朝，我看见一品以下官员见到诸王时无不毕恭毕敬地行礼，我当然是不会允许皇子们随心所欲，胡作非为的。 
English: Li Shimin, Emperor Taizong of Tang Dynasty, suspected that officials with three or more court ranks despised his son, Wei King Li Tai, and reproached them: "In the Sui Dynasty, I saw officials with one or less court rank bow respectfully when they saw the kings. Of course, I will not allow the princes to do whatever they want.

古文：魏郑公曰： 隋高祖不知礼义，宠纵诸子，使行非礼，寻皆罪黜，不可以为法，亦何足道！ 
现代文：魏征听后说： 隋高祖不知礼义，过分地宠爱放纵自己的儿子，使他们多行非礼，不久诸王就都因罪被罢免，这种做法是不值得学习的，也不值得一提！ 
English: After listening, Wei Zheng said: Sui Gao Zu did not know the etiquette and excessively pampered and indulged his sons, causing them to commit many offenses. Soon all the kings were dismissed for crimes. This practice is not worth learning, nor is it worth mentioning!

古文：观高祖、太宗一时失言，二臣能用其所言随即规正，语意既直，于激切中有婉顺体，可谓得谏争之大义。
现代文：汉高祖和唐太宗一时失言，王卫尉和魏征二臣听到后随即规正，直截了当，但激切又不失婉转恭敬，可谓深得谏争之大义。
English: Emperor Gaozong of Han and Emperor Taizong of Tang made a momentary slip of the tongue. After hearing this, Wang Weifang and Wei Zheng, the two ministers, immediately corrected themselves. They were straightforward, but at the same time impassioned, gentle and respectful. It can be said that they were deeply motivated by the great cause of the struggle.

古文：虽微二帝，其孰不降心以听乎！
现代文：即使不是汉高祖和唐太宗这两位具有雄才大略的明君，其他人谁能不虚心听取、诚恳接受呢？
English: Even if it is not Han Gaozu and Tang Taizong, the two brilliant Ming princes, who else can listen with an open mind and sincerely accept?

