古文：◎乐三
现代文：乐三
English: Le San

古文：○乐章二
现代文：○乐章二
English: ○ movement two

古文：洪武三年定朝贺乐章。
现代文：洪武三年，制定朝贺乐章：
English: In the third year of Hongwu, the morning greeting movement was formulated:

古文：升殿，奏《飞龙引之曲》。
现代文：升殿，演奏《飞龙引之曲》。
English: He ascended the throne and performed "The Song of the Flying Dragon."

古文：百官行礼，奏《风云会之曲》。
现代文：百官行礼，演奏《风云会之曲》。
English: The centurion saluted and played "The Song of the Wind and Cloud."

古文：丞相致词，奏《庆皇都之曲》。
现代文：丞相致词，演奏《庆皇都之曲》。
English: The prime minister delivered a speech and the "Song of the Imperial Capital" was played.

古文：复位，百官行礼，奏《喜升平之曲》。
现代文：返回座位，百官行礼，演奏《喜升平之曲》。
English: Returning to their seats, the centurions saluted and the "Song of the Rising Plain" was played.

古文：还宫，奏《贺圣朝之曲》。
现代文：返回内宫，演奏《贺圣朝之曲》。
English: Returned to the inner palace and performed "Song of the Sacred Pilgrimage."

古文：俱见后宴飨九奏中。
现代文：都详见后文宴飨九奏中。
English: All details can be found in the after-dinner recital.

古文：二十六年更定。
现代文：二十六年重新制定：
English: Revised in 2006:

古文：升殿，韶乐，奏《圣安之曲》：乾坤日月明，八方四海庆太平。
现代文：升殿，韶乐，演奏《圣安之曲》：乾坤曰月明，八方四海庆太平。
English: Ascension, music, performance of the "Song of St. Ann": The moon is bright, and the four directions of the world are celebrating peace.

古文：龙楼凤阁中，扇开帘卷帝王兴。
现代文：龙楼凤阁中，扇开帘卷帝王兴。
English: In the Longlou Fengge, the fan opens the curtain to roll the Emperor Xing.

古文：圣感天地灵，保万寿，洪福增。
现代文：神圣感通天地灵，保佑万岁大福增。
English: A sense of sacredness permeates heaven and earth. May God bless you with eternal happiness.

古文：祥光王气生，升宝位，永康宁。
现代文：祥瑞光辉照，帝王气象生，升上实位，永保康乐和安宁。
English: Xiang Rui shines brightly, the emperor weathers, ascends to the real position, and preserves well-being and tranquility forever.

古文：还宫，韶乐，奏《定安之曲》：九五飞圣龙，千邦万国敬依从。
现代文：返回内宫，韶乐，演奏《定安之曲》：天子至尊飞腾圣龙，天下四方敬仰依从。
English: Return to the inner palace, play music, play "Jingan's Song": the Son of Heaven is the supreme flying dragon, and the four quarters of the world respect and obey him.

古文：鸣鞭三下同，公卿环珮响玎〈王东〉，掌扇护御容。
现代文：挥响殿鞭三下同，公卿移步环佩叮咚，执掌羽扇护帝容。
English: The palace whip is swung three times at the same time, and the nobles walk around with bells and whistles, holding a feather fan to protect the emperor.

古文：中和乐，音吕浓，翡翠锦绣，拥还华盖赴龙宫。
现代文：中和乐曲，音乐盛浓，翡翠锦锈，簇拥皇帝到内宫。
English: Zhonghe music, rich music, jade and rust, gathered around the emperor to the inner palace.

古文：公卿入门，奏《治安之曲》：忠良为股肱，昊天之德承主恩，森罗拱北辰。
现代文：公卿入门，演奏《治安之曲》：忠心贤良是股肱，苍天美德承主恩，森然罗列拱卫帝圣。
English: An introduction to the court nobles, a performance of the "Songs of Security": Loyalty and virtue are the pillars, heavenly virtues inherit the grace of the Lord, and the saints of the Arch Emperor are listed.

古文：御炉烟绕奉天门，江山社稷兴。
现代文：御炉香烟缭绕奉天门，江山社稷兴。
English: Cigarette smoke from the kiln wreathed around the Fengtian Gate, and the Jiangshan community was jubilant.

古文：安天下，军与民，龙虎会风云。
现代文：安定天下，军队与人民，龙虎蕾萃起风云。
English: The world is stable, the army and the people, and the dragon and tiger buds are emerging.

古文：洪武二十六年定中宫正旦、冬至、千秋节朝贺乐章。
现代文：后来不用。洪武二十六年，制定中宫正旦日、冬至日、皇后生日朝拜庆贺乐章：
English: In the twenty-sixth year of Hongwu's reign, the music for the Mid-Autumn Festival, the Winter Solstice, and the Empress's birthday were formulated:

古文：中宫《天香凤韶之曲》：宝殿光辉晴天映，悬玉钩珍珠帘栊，瑶觞举时箫韶动。
现代文：中宫《天香凤韶之曲》：宝殿光辉晴天照映，悬挂玉钧珍珠帘拢，琼瑶酒杯举起音乐响动。
English: "Song of Heavenly Incense and Phoenix" in the Middle Palace: The treasure hall is illuminated by the bright and sunny sky, the jade and pearl curtains are hung, and the Qiong Yao wine cup is raised to the music.

古文：庆大筵，来仪凤，昭阳玉帛齐朝贡。
现代文：庆贺大筵，招来仪凤，昭阳玉帛齐来朝贡。
English: The celebration of the Great Kite, the invitation to the ceremony of the phoenix, and the Shoyang Jade Kite all came to pay tribute.

古文：赞孝慈贤助仁风，歌谣正在升平中，谨献上齐天颂。
现代文：祝孝慈贤德助仁风，歌声谣曲正在升平中，敬仰献上齐天颂。
English: Wishing filial piety, benevolence and virtue to help the benevolent wind, the songs and ballads are in the process of leveling out, and the worship and offering are in line with the heavenly chant.

古文：宣德以后增定慈宫朝贺乐章。
现代文：宣德以后增加制定太后朝拜庆贺乐章：
English: After the promulgation of the Constitution of the People's Republic of China, the following music was added to celebrate the visit of the Empress Dowager:

古文：《天香凤韶之曲》：龙楼凤阁彤云晓，开绣帘天香芬馥，瑶阶春暖千花簇。
现代文：《天香凤韶之曲》：龙楼凤阁彤云散，打开绣帘香气馥郁，瑶台春暖繁花簇拥。
English: "Song of Heavenly Incense and Phoenix": Longlou Fengge is scattered with clouds, the opening of the embroidered curtain has a rich aroma, and the spring warmth of Xingtai is surrounded by flowers.

古文：寿圣母，齐颂祝，御筵奏献长生曲。
现代文：庆贺圣母，齐声颂祝，御筵演奏进献长生曲。
English: In celebration of the Virgin Mary, they chanted in unison, and the choir performed the Prelude to the Elixir of Life.

古文：坤道宁品类咸育，和气四时调玉烛，享万万年太平福。
现代文：妇德安宁万类都长育，四季和畅温润光明，安享万年太平福。
English: Women and children are nurtured in all kinds of peace and tranquility, the four seasons are warm and bright, and they can enjoy peace and happiness for thousands of years.

古文：洪武三年定宴飨乐章。
现代文：洪武三年，制定宴飨乐章：
English: In the third year of Hongwu, the banquet music was formulated:

古文：一奏《起临濠之曲》，名《飞龙引》：千载中华生圣主，王气成龙虎。
现代文：第一次演奏《起临濠之曲》，名为《飞龙引》：千年中华生圣主，王者之气成龙虎。
English: The first performance of "Song of the Rising Dragon," titled "Flying Dragon": the millennium of the Chinese birth of the Lord, the king's breath into the dragon and tiger.

古文：提剑起淮西，将勇师雄，百战收强虏。
现代文：提起宝剑起事淮西，战将勇猛军队英雄，身经百战收伏强虏。
English: When the sword was raised in Huaxi, the warlord was a brave army hero, and he went through hundreds of battles to subdue the invaders.

古文：驱驰鞍马经寒暑，将士同甘苦。
现代文：驰骋鞍马历经寒暑，将士同甘共辛苦。
English: After experiencing the cold and heat, the galloping horses worked hard together.

古文：次第静风尘，除暴安民，功业如汤武。
现代文：依次扫平战乱敌，剪除强暴安人民，丰功伟业如汤、武。
English: successively wiped out the war and the enemy, eliminated the violence and the people, and made great achievements such as soup and martial arts.

古文：二奏《开太平之曲》，名《风云会》：玉垒瞰江城，风云绕帝营。
现代文：第二次演奏《开太平之曲》，题名《风云会》：玉垒俯视江城，风云环绕帝营。
English: The second performance of "Kai Taihei no Kyoku," entitled "Fengyunkai": Jade fortress overlooking the river city, wind and clouds surround the imperial camp.

古文：驾楼船龙虎纵横，飞炮发机驱六甲，降虏将，胜胡兵。
现代文：驾驭楼船龙虎纵横，飞炮发机驱遣六甲，降服虏将，战胜胡兵。
English: He steered the buildings, ships, dragons and tigers vertically and horizontally, drove the flying cannon launchers to drive the Rokko, subjugated the captors, and defeated the Hu soldiers.

古文：谈笑掣长鲸，三军勇气增。
现代文：谈笑之间制服强敌，三军勇气增。
English: The three armies gained more courage as they talked and laughed with each other.

古文：一戎衣，宇宙清宁。
现代文：消灭元寇，全国太平安宁。
English: The elimination of the Mongolian invaders brought peace and tranquility to the whole country.

古文：从此华夷归一统，开帝业，庆升平。
现代文：从此华夏夷狄大统一，开创帝业，庆祝升平。
English: Since then, Huaxia Yidi University has been unified, the empire has been created, and the leveling has been celebrated.

古文：三奏《安建业之曲》。名《庆皇都》：虎踞龙蟠佳丽地，真主开基，千载风云会。
现代文：第三次演奏《安建业之曲》，题名《庆皇都》：虎踞龙蟠形胜地，贤明君王开创基业，千年风云际会。
English: The third performance of "An Jianye's Song," titled "Celebrating the Imperial Capital": Tigress Dragon-shaped resort, wise king creating a foundation, millennium wind and clouds meeting.

古文：十万雄兵屯铁骑，台臣守将皆奔溃。
现代文：十万雄兵屯聚铁骑，大臣守将都奔溃。
English: One hundred thousand strong soldiers gathered on horseback, and the ministers and generals were all routed.

古文：一洗烦苛施德惠，里巷讴歌，田野腾和气。
现代文：尽洗苛捐杂税布施恩惠，街巷平民同诬歌，田野农夫升腾和气。
English: Harsh taxes and other taxes are used to give out favors, the common people in the streets sing the same songs, and the farmers in the fields have a rising spirit of harmony.

古文：王业弘开千万世，黎民咸仰雍熙治。
现代文：帝王伟业广开千秋莴代，百姓全都景仰和乐升平天下大洽。
English: The emperor's great achievements have spread far and wide over the generations, and the people all admire and enjoy the world.

古文：四奏《削群雄之曲》，名《喜升平》：持黄钺，削平荆楚清吴越。
现代文：第四次演奏《削群雄之曲》，题名《喜升平》：手持黄铁，削平剂、楚，扫清昊、越。
English: The fourth performance of "The Song of the Scraping Crowd," entitled "Heisei Ping": hand-held yellow iron, leveling agent, Chu, sweep Qinghao, Yue.

古文：清吴越，暮秦朝晋，几多豪杰。
现代文：扫清昊、越，暮秦朝晋，多少豪杰。
English: How many heroes have swept away Qing Hao, Yue, and the late Qin Dynasty.

古文：幽燕齐鲁风尘洁，伊凉蜀陇人心悦。
现代文：幽、燕、齐、鲁战乱平息，伊、凉、蜀、陇人心喜悦。
English: Yu, Yan, Qi, and Lu have calmed down, and Yi, Liang, Shu, and Xuan are happy.

古文：人心悦，车书一统，万方同辙。
现代文：人心喜悦，国家统一，天下同辙。
English: People's hearts are happy, the country is unified, and the world is the same.

古文：五奏《平幽都之曲》，名《贺圣朝》：天运推迁虏运移，王师北讨定燕畿。
现代文：第五次演奏《平幽都之曲》，题名《贺圣朝》：天命推移敌虏气运转，王期军队北伐平定燕。
English: The fifth performance of "Pingyutsu no Kyoku," entitled "Hosho-cho": the fate of the heavens passes, the enemy's spirit moves, and the royal army's northern campaign is pacified.

古文：百年礼乐重兴日，四海风云庆会时。
现代文：百年礼乐重兴之日，天下君臣遇合之时。
English: The day of the revival of the centuries-old ritual music, the time when the world's princes and ministers meet.

古文：除暴虐，抚疮痍，漠南争睹旧威仪。
现代文：铲除暴虐，安抚战争创伤，大漠以南争着观看旧有威仪。
English: Eradicate tyranny, soothe the wounds of war, and watch the old dignities compete in the south of the desert.

古文：君王圣德容降虏，三恪衣冠拜玉墀。
现代文：君王圣明之德容纳投降敌人，封赐前代三王朝的子孙朝拜于王朝。
English: Emperor Shengming accommodated the surrender of the enemy and granted the descendants of the previous three dynasties the right to worship the dynasty.

古文：六奏《抚四夷之曲》，名《龙池宴》：海波不动风尘静，中国有真人。
现代文：第六次演奏《抚四夷之曲》，题名《龙池宴》：安定四方保太平，中国有圣君。
English: The sixth performance of "Song of the Four Emperors," entitled "Dragon Pool Banquet": Stability in all directions to maintain peace, China has saints.

古文：文身交阯，毡裘金齿，重译来宾。
现代文：纹身的交趾，毡裘的金齿，荒速之地有来宾。
English: The tattooed toes, the grinning gold teeth, and the guests in the rough and tumble.

古文：奇珍异产，梯山航海，奉表称臣。
现代文：奇妙珍品特异出产，登山渡海长途跋涉，捧表来称臣。
English: Strange and rare goods are produced in a special way, mountaineers travel long distances to cross the sea, and hold up a watch to commend themselves.

古文：白狼玄豹，九苞丹凤，五色麒麟。
现代文：白色的狼黑色的豹，九种特征有丹凤，五色麒麟祥瑞呈。
English: The white wolf, the black leopard, the nine characteristics of the red phoenix, and the five colors of the unicorn are all present.

古文：七奏《定封赏之曲》，名《九重欢》：乾坤清廓，论功定赏，策勋封爵。
现代文：第七次演奏《定封赏之曲》，题名《九重欢》：天下太平正空廓，论功行赏赐，记勋策书定封爵。
English: The seventh performance of the "Song of the Decoration of the Decoration," entitled "Nine-fold Celebration": The world is peaceful, the sky is clear, the reward for meritorious deeds is discussed, and the knighthood is written.

古文：玉带金符，貂蝉簪珥，形图麟阁。
现代文：系玉带佩金符，貂尾附蝉发簪耳饰，画像麒麟阁。
English: It is made of jade and gold, with a cicada's ear attached to its tail, and features a picture of the Kirin Pavilion.

古文：奉天洪武功臣，佐兴运，文经武略。
现代文：承奉苍天洪武功臣，辅佐君主时运昌盛，文治武功谋划经营。
English: He is the successor of Cang Tian Hong, a military hero, and assists the monarch in the planning and management of military exploits.

古文：子子孙孙，尊荣富贵，久长安乐。
现代文：子子孙孙，富贵尊荣，长久安乐。
English: Your children and grandchildren will be rich, honorable, and happy for a long time.

古文：八奏《大一统之曲》，名《凤凰吟》：大明天子驾飞龙，开疆宇，定王封。
现代文：第八次演奏《大一统之曲》，题名《凤凰吟》：大明皇帝驾驭飞龙，开拓疆宇，确定王封。
English: The eighth performance of the "Song of Great Unity," entitled "Phoenix Chanting": Emperor Daming drove the flying dragon, opened up the empire, and confirmed Wangfeng.

古文：江汉远朝宗，庆四海，车书会同。
现代文：江、汉远地来朝拜，庆贺四海，归于一统。
English: Jiang and Han came from afar to worship, celebrate the four seas, and unite as one.

古文：东夷西旅，北戎南越，都入地图中。
现代文：东方之夷西方旅，北方戎狄南越蛮，都入大明版图中。
English: The eastern part of the country, the western part of the country, and the northern part of the country, the southern part of the country, are all included in the Daming map.

古文：遐迩畅皇风，亿万载，时和岁丰。
现代文：远近通畅布皇风，千秋万年安定和平五谷丰。
English: Far and near the smooth flow of the imperial wind, everlasting stability, peace and prosperity.

古文：九奏《守承平之曲》，名《万年春》：风调雨顺遍乾坤，齐庆承平时节。
现代文：第九次演奏《守承平之曲》，题名《万年春》：风调雨顺遍天下，共庆太平时节。
English: The ninth performance of the "Song of Shou Chengping," entitled "Spring of All Ages": The wind and rain are in harmony throughout the world, celebrating the Taiping season.

古文：玉烛调和甘露降，远近桑麻相接。
现代文：四季和畅甘露降，远近桑麻相衔接。
English: The four seasons and the sweet nectar fall, far and near the mulberry are connected.

古文：偃武修文，报功崇德，率土皆臣妾。
现代文：停息武备修明文教，报答功德，天下人民都是臣妾。
English: Cease martial arts, study literature and education, and reward merit. All the people in the world are subjects and concubines.

古文：山河磐固，万方黎庶欢悦。
现代文：山河坚固若盘石，全国百姓欢喜愉悦。
English: Mountains and rivers are as solid as a rock, and people across the country are rejoicing.

古文：长想创业艰难，君臣曾共扫四方豪杰。
现代文：追思创业艰难，君臣携手扫陈四方豪杰。
English: It is difficult to pursue entrepreneurship. Monarchs and ministers work together to sweep away the heroes of the four directions.

古文：露宿宵征鞍马上，历尽风霜冰雪。
现代文：露宿宵征鞍马劳顿，历尽风霜冰雪。
English: Rough sleepers in the evening to fight for the saddle horse Laughton, after all the frost and snow.

古文：朝野如今，清宁无事，任用须贤哲。
现代文：天下如今清静安宁，任用官吏须贤明圣哲。
English: The world is now calm and tranquil, and officials must be appointed by wise sages.

古文：躬勤节俭，万年同守王业。十二月按律乐歌。正月太簇，本宫黄钟商，俗名大石，曲名《万年春》：奏天承运秉黄麾，志在安民除慝。曾睹中天腾王气，五色虹霓千尺。
现代文：十二月按律所奏乐歌：正月是太蔟，本宫黄钟商，俗间名为大石，乐曲名《万年春》：承奉天运秉持黄麾，志在安民除邪僻。曾见天空王气升，五色彩虹跨千尺。
English: According to the law, the first month of the year is the lunar new year, and the yellow bell merchant of the palace, popularly known as Daishi, will play a piece of music in December. The title of the piece is "All-Year Spring": "Following the heavenly fortune, upholding the yellow bell, and aiming at the safety of the people and eliminating the evil." I have seen the king of the sky ascend, and the five-color rainbow spans a thousand feet.

古文：龙绕兜鍪，神迎艘舰，嘉应非人力。
现代文：飞龙绕头上，神灵迎船舰，祥瑞在天非人力。
English: The dragon flies around the head, the gods welcome the ship, and Xiang Rui is not human in heaven.

古文：凤凰山上，废云长绕峰石。
现代文：凤凰山上，吉庆祥云长绕山峰石。
English: On the Phoenix Mountain, auspicious clouds circled the mountain peak.

古文：天助神武成功，人心效顺，所至皆无敌。
现代文：上天佑助太祖，英明威武获成功，人心顺服，所到之处全无敌。
English: Heaven bless the great-grandfather, the wise and mighty have achieved success, the hearts of the people are obedient, and they are invincible everywhere they go.

古文：手握乾符开宝祚，略定山河南北。
现代文：手握天命创帝业，平定山河共南北。
English: He holds in his hand the destiny to create an empire and to level the mountains and rivers in the north and the south.

古文：饮马江淮，列营河汉，四海风波息。
现代文：江、淮饮战马，河、汉列军营，天下纷扰全平息。
English: Jiang, Huai drinking war horses, river, Han Li military camp, the world's disturbance completely subsided.

古文：师雄将猛，万方齐仰威德。
现代文：军队雄武将勇猛，各地共仰帝威德。
English: The army's heroic generals are so brave that they are admired all over the country.

古文：二月夹钟，本宫夹钟宫，俗名中吕，曲名《玉街行》：山林豺虎，中原狐兔，四海英雄无数。
现代文：二月为夹钟，本宫夹钟宫，俗问名为中吕，乐曲名为《玉街行》：山林藏豺虎，中原奔狐兔，天下英雄无计数。
English: The month of February is a pendulum, this palace is a pendulum palace, popularly known as Zhonglu, and the music is called "Jade Street": mountains and forests hide tigers, the Central Plains run fox rabbits, and there are countless heroes in the world.

古文：大明真主起临濠，震于赫戎衣一怒。
现代文：大明天子起临濠，奋起神威逞勇武。
English: Daming Zi stood up and fought bravely.

古文：星罗玉垒，云屯铁骑，一扫乾坤烟雾。
现代文：众星罗列成玉垒，铁骑屯集如云聚，尽扫天下战乱烟雾。
English: The stars are lined up like a jade fortress, and the iron cavalry is gathered like a cloud, sweeping away all the smoke of war.

古文：黎民重睹太平年，庆万里山河磐固。
现代文：黎民重见太平年，庆贺万里山河长稳固。
English: The people of Lai see the Taiping Year again and celebrate the stability of the Wanli Mountains and Rivers.

古文：三月姑洗，本宫太簇商，俗名大石，曲名《贺圣朝》：云气朝生芒砀间，虹光夜起凤凰山。江淮一日真主出，华夏千年正统还。
现代文：三月为姑洗，本宫太蔟商，俗间名为大石，乐曲名为《贺圣朝》：早晨云起芒、殇问，夜里虹照凤凰山，江、淮一朝天子出，中华千年正统还。
English: March is the month of purification, and this palace is a great merchant, popularly known as the Great Stone, and the music is called "Holy Morning": in the morning, the clouds rise, the clouds ask questions, in the evening, the rainbow shines on the Phoenix Mountain, the river and the Huai River are the sons of heaven, and the Chinese millennium is still orthodox.

古文：瞻日角，睹天颜，云龙风虎竞追攀。
现代文：瞻仰帝王，目睹帝颜，云从神龙风从虎，竞争向前猛追攀。
English: Looking up to the emperor, witnessing the emperor's face, the cloud from the dragon, the wind from the tiger, the competition rushes forward.

古文：君臣勤苦成王业，王业汪洋被百蛮。
现代文：君臣辛苦成就帝业，帝业广远恩布百蛮。
English: Princes and courtiers have worked hard to achieve imperial achievements, and imperial achievements are far and wide.

古文：四月仲吕，本宫无射徵，俗名黄钟正徵，曲名《喜升平》：风云密，濠梁千载真龙出。
现代文：四月为仲吕，本宫无射征，俗间名为黄钟正征，乐曲名为《軎升平》：风云密布，濠梁千年真龙天子出。
English: The month of April is Zhonglu, there is no meteor shower in this palace, the secular name is Huangzhongzheng, and the music is called "Fengshengping": the wind and clouds are dense, and the millennium dragon is born.

古文：真龙出，鲸鲵豺虎，扫除无迹。
现代文：真龙天子出，强大凶恶众豪右，全部扫平无痕迹。
English: The true dragon was born, and the powerful, vicious, and numerous heroes emerged, all of which were swept away without a trace.

古文：江河从此波涛息，乾坤同庆承平日。
现代文：江河从此波涛息，天下同庆太平日。
English: Since then, the rivers and streams have calmed down, and the whole world is celebrating the Day of Peace.

古文：承平日，华夷万里，地图归一。
现代文：太平日，华夏夷狄程万里，国家版图归统一。
English: On Taiping Day, Huaxia Yidecheng Wanli, the national territory was unified.

古文：五月蕤宾，本宫姑洗商，俗名中管双调，曲名《乐清朝》：中原鹿走英雄起，回首四郊多垒。
现代文：五月为蕤宾，本宫姑洗商，俗间名为中管双调，乐曲名为《乐清朝》：中原失鹿，英雄群起，回顾天卜多营垒。
English: May is the guest of honor, the palace washer, the secular name is the double-tuned pipe, the music is called "Le Qing Dynasty": the Central Plains lost deer, the heroes flocked, and the fortunes of Tianbu were reviewed.

古文：英主倡兵淮水，将士皆雄伟。
现代文：英明君主首倡起兵在淮水，将士都雄伟。
English: The wise monarch took the initiative to raise an army in Huai Shui, and the soldiers were all magnificent.

古文：百灵护助人心喜，一呼万人风靡。
现代文：百神保护佑助人心喜，振臂一呼万众响应一时风靡。
English: Hundreds of gods protect and help people's hearts, and everyone responds with a wave of their arms.

古文：谈笑扫除蝼蚁，王业从兹始。
现代文：谈笑之间扫除群敌，帝王事业从此始。
English: The emperor's career began with the sweeping away of the enemies in the midst of conversation and laughter.

古文：六月林钟，本宫夹钟角，俗名中吕角，曲名《庆皇都》：王气呈祥飞紫凤，虎啸龙兴，千里旌旗动。
现代文：六月为林钟，本宫夹钟角，俗问名为中吕角，乐曲名为《庆皇都》：帝王气象呈吉祥，飞起紫凤，猛虎呼啸神龙兴起，千里旌旗动。
English: June is Lin Zhong, this palace is located in Zhonglu, commonly known as Zhonglu Cape, and the music is called "Celebrating the Imperial Capital": the emperor's weather is auspicious, the purple phoenix flies, the fierce tiger howls and the dragon rises, and the flags of thousands of miles fly.

古文：四海欢呼师旅众，天戈一指风云从。
现代文：天下欢呼军队多，帝师所指风云从。
English: There are many cheering armies in the world, and the wind and clouds pointed out by the emperor are moving forward.

古文：将士争先民乐用，驾御英雄，圣德皆天纵。
现代文：将士争先民乐效力，统率英雄，圣德都是天纵容。
English: The effectiveness of folk music, the leadership of heroes, and the sanctity of saints are all condoned by heaven.

古文：率土华夷归职贡，词臣拜献河清颂。
现代文：封境之内华夏夷狄都顺服，文学之臣献上黄河水清颂。
English: Within the fenced territory, the Huaxia Yididi all obeyed, and the literary vassal presented the Yellow River Water Ching Soong.

古文：七月夷则，本宫南吕商，俗名中管商角，曲名《永太平》：凤凰佳气好，王师起义，乾坤初晓。
现代文：七月为夷则，本宫南吕商，俗问名为中管商角，乐曲名为《永太平》：凤凰祥瑞气象好，帝王军队举义旗，天下见光明大地正清晓。
English: July is the month of fire, the palace is South Lushang, popularly known as Zhongguancun, and the music is called "Eternal Peace": the phoenix is bright, the weather is good, the emperor's army raises the banner of righteousness, and the whole world sees the bright land at dawn.

古文：淮水西边，五色庆云缭绕。
现代文：淮水西边，五彩祥云层层缭绕。
English: To the west of Huai Shui, multicolored clouds swirled around.

古文：三尺龙泉似水，更百万貔貅熊豹。
现代文：三尺龙泉剑似水，更有百万大军猛如虎豹。
English: The three-foot dragon spring sword is like water, and the million-strong army is as fierce as a tiger leopard.

古文：军令悄，鱼丽鹅鹳，风云蛇鸟。
现代文：军令严明，鱼丽鹅鹳，风云蛇乌，各种阵法熟又巧。
English: The military order is strict, the fish is beautiful, the goose is beautiful, the wind is stormy, the various formations are skillful and skillful.

古文：赳赳电掣鹰扬，在伐罪安民，去残除暴。
现代文：雄壮军队奔走迅速逞威武，讨伐罪人安定人民，消灭残贼铲除强暴。
English: The strong army is running fast and powerful, fighting against criminals and stabilizing the people, eliminating the remnants of thieves and eradicating violence.

古文：天与人归，豪杰削平多少。
现代文：天意民心尽归往，豪杰削平有多少。
English: When the will of heaven and the hearts of the people are fully returned to, how many heroes will be leveled?

古文：万里烟尘净洗，正红日一轮高照。
现代文：平息战乱出太平，红日一轮正高照。
English: The war ended peacefully, and the red sun was shining brightly.

古文：膺大宝，王业万年相保。
现代文：建成帝业，大明江山万年保。
English: After the completion of the imperial industry, the Daming River and Mountain will be guaranteed for a thousand years.

古文：八月南吕，本宫南吕宫，俗名中管仙吕，曲名《凤凰吟》：紫微翠盖拥蓬莱，圣天子，帝图开。
现代文：八月为南吕，本宫南吕宫，俗名中管仙吕，乐曲名为《凤凰吟》：紫微翠盖簇拥蓬莱，圣明天子，帝王事业开。
English: August is Nanlu, the main palace is Nanlu Palace, popularly known as Zhongguan Xianlu, and the music is called "Phoenix": purple and light green covers Penglai, St. Nicholas, and the emperor's career begins.

古文：历数应江淮，看五色云生上台。
现代文：君主代天理民顺序在江、淮，五彩祥云生上台。
English: The monarchs of the era of Tian Li Min came to power in the order of Jiang, Huai, and Wucai Xiangyun.

古文：栉风沐雨，攻坚击锐，将士总英才。
现代文：劳苦奔波，攻打坚城击锐兵，将士都是英雄才。
English: Toiling, rushing around, attacking a strong city and striking a sharp soldier, the soldiers are all heroes.

古文：跃马定尘埃，创万古山河壮哉。
现代文：跃马横戈平战乱，创建万古基业，山河伟壮哉！
English: Jumping on the horse to end the war and create a foundation for all time, the mountains and rivers are magnificent!

古文：九月无射，本宫无射宫，俗名黄钟，曲名《飞龙引》，词同前《起临濠》之曲。
现代文：九月为无射，本宫无射宫。俗问名为黄钟，乐曲名《飞龙引》，歌词与前面所载《起临濠》之曲相同。
English: There is no shooting in September, and there is no shooting in this palace. It is popularly known as the Yellow Bell, and the song is called "Flying Dragon," and the lyrics are the same as the song of "Coming Down" listed above.

古文：十月应钟，本宫姑洗徵，俗名中吕正徵，曲名《龙池宴》：大明英主承天运，倡义拥天戈。
现代文：十月为应钟，本宫姑洗征，俗问名为中吕正征，乐曲名《龙池宴》：大明英明君主承奉上天气运，倡导道义掌握大军。
English: October is the time of the bell, the palace is the time of the conscription, the popular name is the middle of the Ruzheng conscription, the name of the music is "Dragon Pool Banquet": Daming and wise monarchs follow the weather fortune, advocate morality and master the army.

古文：星辰旋绕，风云围护，龙虎麾诃。
现代文：星辰围绕转，风云共回护，指挥猛将率强兵。
English: The stars revolve around it, the winds and clouds protect it, and the commander is a fierce general leading a strong army.

古文：旌旗所指，羌夷纳款，江海停波。
现代文：旌旗指向，羌夷投顺，天下安宁。
English: The banner of the Kuomintang points to the east, the banner of the Kuomintang points to the west, the banner of the Kuomintang points to the east.

古文：从今平定，万年疆宇，百二山河。
现代文：从今以后巩固疆宇，永保万年平，山河百二一片新。
English: From now on, we will consolidate our territory, maintain peace for all time, and create a hundred and two new mountains and rivers.

古文：十一月黄钟，本宫夷则角，俗名仙吕角，曲名《金门乐》：庆皇明圣主开宝祚，起临濠。
现代文：十一月为黄钟，本宫夷则角，俗间名为仙吕角，乐曲名为《金门乐》：庆贺大明皇帝创帝业，起兵临濠。
English: The month of November is the Yellow Bell, the palace is Yizi Angle, popularly known as Xianlu Angle, and the music is called "Golden Gate Music": celebrating the Emperor Daming's creation of the empire, starting the army Linyi.

古文：正汝颍尘飞，江淮浪卷，赤子呼号。
现代文：正逢汝、颖战乱，江、淮纷争，百姓哀苦呼号。
English: It was the time of the war between Ru and Ying, and the disputes between Jiang and Huai, when the people cried out in grief.

古文：天戈奋然倡义，拥神兵百万总英豪。
现代文：奋然倡大义，皇帝军队起，掌握军队百万都是英豪。
English: From the emperor's army to the millions of soldiers who fought for justice, they are all heroes.

古文：貔虎朝屯壁垒，虹霓夜绕弓刀。
现代文：战将早晨屯军垒，虹霓晚上绕弓。
English: In the morning, the warlord will set up a military base, and in the evening, the dragonfly will fly around the bow.

古文：凤凰同势耸层霄，佳气五云高。
现代文：凤凰山形势直冲九重霄，佳和之气五彩云层高。
English: The situation in Fenghuang Mountain is very serious, and the atmosphere of harmony and harmony is high.

古文：爱士伍同心，君臣协力，不惮勤劳。
现代文：爱惜人才军伍同心，君臣同心协力，不怕辛劳。
English: Cherish talent, the army is united, the monarchs and ministers are united in their efforts, and they are not afraid of hard work.

古文：风云一时相会，看鱼龙飞舞出波涛。
现代文：贤才纷纷来相会，建功立业真英豪。
English: Talented people come to the meeting one after another, and those who have made great achievements are truly heroes.

古文：静扫八方氛祲，咸听九奏箫韶。
现代文：扫平天下无战乱，大家共听九奏箫韶。
English: There is no war in the world, and everyone listens to the nine stringed instruments.

古文：十二月大吕，本宫大吕宫，俗名高宫，曲名《风云会》：天眷顾淮西，真人起布衣，正乾刚九五龙飞。
现代文：十二月为大吕，本宫大吕宫，俗闻名焉高宫，乐曲名焉《风云会》：上天垂爱于淮西，帝王起家于百姓，正刚健决断帝位确立神龙飞。
English: December is the Great Lu, the main palace is the Great Lu, the palace is commonly known as the High Palace, and the name of the music is "Wind and Cloud": God loves Huaxi, the emperor started from the people, and Zheng Gangjian decided to establish the imperial throne.

古文：驾驭英雄收俊杰，承永命，布皇威。
现代文：控制英雄收罗豪杰，承受永久天命，广布皇帝恩威。
English: Control the hero, win the hero, bear the eternal destiny, and spread the emperor's favor.

古文：一剑立鸿基，三军拥义旗，望云霓四海人归。
现代文：一把宝剑建立大基业，三军簇拥大义旗，想望云霓天下人心归。
English: To establish a great foundation with a sword, the three armies gathered around the great banner of righteousness, hoping to win the hearts of the people around the world.

古文：整顿乾坤除暴虐，歌圣德，庆雍熙。
现代文：整顿天下铲除暴虐，歌唱圣君德，庆贺国家和乐升平更光辉。
English: Rectify the world, eradicate tyranny, sing saintly virtues, celebrate the country and make it more glorious.

古文：武舞曲，名《清海宇》：拔剑起淮土，策马定寰区。
现代文：武舞的乐曲，名为《清海宇》：拔剑起兵在淮地，鞭马驰骋平寰宇。
English: The music of the martial dance is called "Qinghai Yu" (Qinghai Yu): The sword is drawn and troops are raised in Huai Di, and the horse is whipped and gallops across the plain.

古文：王气开天统，宝历应乾符。
现代文：王者之气创帝业，国祚应合吉祥符。
English: The king's spirit creates the empire, and the imperial seal should match the auspicious symbols.

古文：武略文谟，龙虎风云创业初。
现代文：文臣武将施谋略，云从飞龙风从虎，共建帝业拓疆土。
English: The scholar-vassal general strategized, the cloud from the flying dragon, the wind from the tiger, and worked together to build the empire and expand the territory.

古文：将军星绕弁，勇士月弯弧。
现代文：将军如星统士卒，勇士似月开弓弩。
English: A general is like a star-struck soldier, while a warrior is like the moon opening his bow.

古文：选骑平南楚，结阵下东吴，跨蜀驱胡，万里山河壮帝居。
现代文：挑选精锐平南蕉，布开阵势破束昊，跨过蜀中驱胡虏，万里江山帝王土。
English: Selecting the elite of Pingnanban, we will break the shackles, cross the Shuzhong and drive away the hooligans, and conquer the land of the emperor.

古文：文舞曲，名《泰阶平》：乾坤清宁，治功告成，武定祸乱，文致太平。
现代文：文舞的乐曲，题名《泰阶平》：天下清静又安宁，治国大功已告成，武功定祸乱，文治达太平。
English: A piece of music for the literary dance, entitled "Thai Jia Ping": The world is calm and tranquil, the great work of governing the country has been completed, martial arts have settled the calamity, and literature has achieved peace.

古文：郊则致其礼，庙则尽其诚。
现代文：郊祀献其礼，庙祭尽诚心。
English: Suburban shrines offer their prayers, temple festivals are sincere.

古文：卿云在天甘露零，风雨时若百谷登。
现代文：卿云在天甘露降，风调雨顺百壳丰登。
English: Qingyun in the sky, the dew falling, the wind and rain along the hundred shell Fengdeng.

古文：礼乐雍和，政刑肃清。
现代文：礼乐雍容又和睦，政治稳定法严明。
English: The ceremonial music is graceful and harmonious, and the political stability law is strict.

古文：储嗣既立，封建乃行。
现代文：太子已确立，分封又实行。
English: The crown prince has been established, and the division of territories has been implemented.

古文：谗佞屏四海，贤俊立朝廷。
现代文：奸佞遭摒弃，贤良立朝廷。
English: The traitors were discarded, and the virtuous established the imperial court.

古文：玉帛钟鼓陈两楹，君臣赓歌扬颁声。
现代文：玉帛钟鼓陈列在两楹君臣酬唱歌颂太平。
English: The jade gongs, bells and drums are displayed in the two pavilions.

古文：四夷舞曲，其一，《小将军》：大明君，定宇寰，圣恩宽，掌江山，东虏西戎，北狄南蛮，手高擎，宝贝盘。
现代文：四方民族舞乐曲，第一曲名《小将军》：大明国君，平定宇寰，圣恩宽广，执掌江山，束边胡虏西边戎，北方称狄南方蛮。举手高擎，宝贝承盘。
English: Shifang folk dance music, the first song is called "Little General": Daming the king, pacifying the world, holy grace is broad and wide, holding the country, the edge of the cord, the west side of the cord, the north is called the south side of the cord. Raise your hand high, baby bearer.

古文：其二，《殿前欢》：五云宫阙连霄汉，金光明照眼。
现代文：第二曲名《殿前欢》：五云宫阙高连天，金光明亮照耀眼。
English: The title of the second piece is "Hall of Fame": Wuyun Palace is soaring high in the sky, shining brightly.

古文：玉沟金水声潺潺，頫囟观，趋跄看，仪銮严肃百千般，威人心胆寒。
现代文：玉沟金水河流声潺，俯首观看，奔趋向前，仪銮肃穆又庄严，威仪令人心胆寒。
English: The rivers of the Jinshui River in the Yuguo Valley resounded with the sound of music, and people bowed their heads to watch, rushing forward. The ceremony was solemn and dignified, and it was awe-inspiring.

古文：其三，《庆新年》：虎豹关，文武班，五彩间庆云朝霞灿。
现代文：第三曲名《庆新年》：虎豹之关，文武两班，五彩祥云朝霞灿烂。
English: The title of the third piece, "New Year's Eve": Tiger and leopard pass, two classes of literature and martial arts, colorful clouds, brilliant morning glow.

古文：黄金殿，喜气增，丹墀内，仰圣颜。
现代文：黄金实殿，喜气增添，丹墀之内，瞻仰帝颜。
English: In the Golden Realm Hall, the mood of joy is increasing. In the Danluo Hall, the emperor's face is admired.

古文：翠绕红围锦绣班，高楼十二栏。
现代文：翠绿环绕朱红圈，锦绣朝班，高楼十二栏。
English: The emerald green surrounds the vermilion circle, the brocade morning shift, and the tall building has twelve columns.

古文：笙箫趁紫坛，仙音韵，瑶闉按，拜舞齐，歌谣缵，吾皇万寿安。
现代文：笙箫吹奏在紫坛，神仙音韵，瑶池纂按，拜舞整齐，歌谲颂赞，祝愿皇上万岁平安。
English: The gong is played on the purple altar, the celestial melody, the gong pond is arranged, the worship and dance are neat, the songs are sung, and the wishes for the emperor's long life and peace are rhymed.

古文：其四，《过门子》：定宇寰，定宇寰，掌江山，抚百蛮。
现代文：第四曲名《过门子》：平定天下，平定宇寰，执掌江山，安抚百蛮。
English: The title of the fourth piece is "Passing the Gate": to pacify the world, to pacify the world, to control the country, and to pacify the barbarians.

古文：讴歌拜舞仰祝缵，万万年，帝业安。
现代文：高歌拜舞瞻仰礼赞，帝业平安，万万年。
English: High praise, imperial peace, for a thousand years.

古文：洪武十五年重定宴飨九奏乐章。
现代文：洪武十五年，重新制定宴飨九奏乐章：
English: In the 15th year of Hongwu's reign, he reformulated the nine-movement banquet march:

古文：一奏《炎精开运之曲》：炎精开运，笃生圣皇。
现代文：第一次演奏《炎精开运之曲》：应火运而兴的大明朝，得天独厚降生圣明帝王。
English: The first performance of "The Song of the Fire Sprite's Fortune": The Ming Dynasty, which flourished in response to the fire, was blessed with the birth of Emperor Shengming.

古文：大明御极，远绍虞唐。
现代文：大明王朝，远继古帝虞舆唐。
English: The Daming Dynasty, a distant descendant of the ancient Emperor Yu of the Tang Dynasty.

古文：河清海宴，物阜民康。
现代文：黄河水清天下安，物产丰厚民富康。
English: The clear water of the Yellow River is safe for the world, and the rich products are good for the people.

古文：威加夷僚，德被戎羌。
现代文：威武施加夷僚族，恩德广被及戎羌。
English: He imposed martial law on the Yi people, and was defeated by the Ende Guangbei and his troops.

古文：八珍有荐，九鼎馨香。
现代文：各样珍品都进献，九鼎飘馨香。
English: All kinds of treasures are presented, and Jiuding is fragrant.

古文：鼓钟鐄鐄，宫徵洋洋。
现代文：钟鼓响亮声鐄鐄，宫征乐盛浩洋洋。
English: The bell and drum resounded loudly, and the palace was filled with music.

古文：怡神养寿，理阴顺阳。
现代文：怏乐心神养寿顺适阴与阳。
English: The god of pleasure is good for longevity and is compatible with yin and yang.

古文：保兹遐福，地久天长。
现代文：保佑此长福，地久天长。
English: Bless this Changfu, and may it last forever.

古文：二奏《皇风之曲》：皇风被八表，熙熙声教宣。
现代文：第二次演奏《皇风之曲》：皇家风化延天下，和乐声教遍宣传。
English: The second performance of the "Song of the Imperial Wind": the royal weathering spread throughout the world, and the harmony of the music was widely publicized.

古文：时和景象明，紫宸开绣筵。
现代文：时节和畅景象分明，宫廷开华筵。
English: The season and the scene are clear, and the palace is in full bloom.

古文：龙衮曜朝日，金炉袅祥烟。
现代文：衮龙服饰朝日曜，金炉袅袅吉祥烟。
English: Dragon costume in the morning and on Sunday, the gold stove emits auspicious smoke.

古文：济济公与侯，被服丽且鲜。
现代文：公侯盛多纷纷到，服色美丽又鲜艳。
English: Princes and princesses arrived in droves, their clothes beautiful and bright.

古文：列坐侍丹扆，磬折在周旋。
现代文：列坐大臣陪君王，恭敬应对勤周旋。
English: The king was accompanied by his ministers, who dutifully attended to his every need.

古文：羔豚升华俎，玉馔充方圆。
现代文：羔羊猪豚放华俎，美食充满方圆盘。
English: Lamb, pork and pork are glistening, and the food is full of square discs.

古文：初筵奏《南风》，继歌赓载篇。
现代文：初次设筵演奏《南风》，继后歌唱篇连篇。
English: The first performance of "South Wind" was held, followed by a series of songs.

古文：瑶觞欣再举，拜俯礼无愆。
现代文：欣然再次举美酒，跪拜俯伏礼节无违犯。
English: He gladly raised the wine again, and there was no violation of the kneeling and prostrating etiquette.

古文：同乐及斯辰，于皇千万年。
现代文：同乐在此时，大明千万年。
English: Having fun together at this time has been around for thousands of years.

古文：奏《平定天下之舞》，曲名《清海宇》。
现代文：演奏《平定天下之舞》，乐曲题名《清海宇》。
English: They performed "The Dance to Pacify the World," the title of the piece being "Clearing the Sea."

古文：三奏《眷皇明之曲》：赫赫上帝，眷我皇明。
现代文：歌词与前面相同。第三次演奏《眷皇明之曲》：伟大的上天，眷顾我大明。
English: The lyrics are the same as before. The third performance of "Song of the Beneficent Emperor": Great God, have mercy on me, great emperor.

古文：大命既集，本固支荣。
现代文：天命既已成，根本牢固支庶颢荣。
English: Now that the Mandate of Heaven has been fulfilled, the foundation has been firmly supported.

古文：厥本伊何？
现代文：根本是什么？
English: What is it all about?

古文：育德春宫。
现代文：培育太子美德盛。
English: Nurturing Prince Virtue.

古文：厥支伊何？
现代文：支庶是什么？
English: What is a branch?

古文：藩邦以宁。
现代文：封藩邦国得安宁。
English: The feudal domain and the country were pacified.

古文：庆延百世，泽被群生。
现代文：福禄延百代，德泽殿众生。
English: Fortune extends for a hundred generations, and all the living beings of the Tokuzawa clan are happy.

古文：及时为乐，天禄是膺。
现代文：及时享快乐，天赐福禄长受承。
English: Timely enjoyment of happiness is a blessing from heaven.

古文：千秋万岁，永观厥成。
现代文：千秋万年，永观功成。
English: In the long run, Yongguan is a success.

古文：奏《抚安四夷之舞》，曲名《小将军》、《殿前欢》、《庆新年》、《过门子》。
现代文：演奏《抚安四夷之舞》，乐曲题名《小将军》、《殿前欢》、《庆新年》、《过门子》。
English: Performed "Dance of the Four Emperors of Fu'an," with the titles of "Little General," "Celebrating the New Year," and "Passing the Gate."

古文：四奏《天道传之曲》：马负图兮天道传，龟载书兮人文宣。羲画卦兮禹畴叙，皇极建兮合自然。
现代文：都与前面相同。第四次演奏《天道传之曲》：马负图啊天道传，龟载书啊人文传，伏羲画卦啊大禹田畴分等级，帝位建立啊适合自然。
English: The fourth performance of the "Song of Heaven's Way": the horse-drawn figure ah heaven's way, the tortoise-drawn book ah humanistic biography, the Fushun painting ah great Yutian domain division grade, the imperial throne establishment ah suitable for nature.

古文：绵绵历数归明主，祥麟在郊威凤舞。
现代文：绵长历数归属明主，吉祥麒麟在郊野，威仪凤凰翩腥舞。
English: The long calendar number belongs to the bright lord, the auspicious unicorn is in the countryside, and the majestic phoenix dances.

古文：九夷入贡康衢谣，圣子神孙继祖武，垂拱无为迈前古。
现代文：九夷各族来进贡，康庄大道唱歌谣，神圣子孙继远祖，垂拱行政，无为而治，超越前古。
English: Tribute was brought in from all ethnic groups in Jiujiang, songs and ballads were sung on Kangzhuang Road, the divine descendants followed the ancestors, the government was not active, and the ancient times were surpassed.

古文：奏《车书会同之舞》，曲名《泰阶平》。
现代文：演奏《车书会同之舞》，乐曲名为《泰阶平》。
English: A performance of "Dance of the Car Book Club," the piece is called "Tai Jia Ping."

古文：五奏《振皇纲之曲》：《周南》咏麟趾，《卷阿》歌凤凰。
现代文：与前相同。第五次演奏《振皇纲之曲》：《周南》歌咏麟趾，《卷阿》歌唱凤凰。
English: The same as before. The fifth performance of the "Song of the Zhenwang Program": "Zhou Nan" sung by Lin Zi, "Volume A" sung by Feng Huo.

古文：蔼蔼称多士，为桢振皇纲。
现代文：众盛称多士，辅佐大臣振皇纲。
English: The crowd cheered, calling him a great man, and the assistant minister, Zhen Wanggang, came out.

古文：赫赫我大明，德尊逾汉唐。
现代文：光明伟大的大明朝，仁德尊显超漠、唐。
English: The bright and great Ming Dynasty, the benevolent and dignified Tang Dynasty.

古文：百揆修庶绩，公辅理阴阳。
现代文：百官修明众政绩，三公四辅治理阴阳。
English: A hundred officials clarify the political achievements of the people, and three officials and four assistants govern yin and yang.

古文：峨冠正襟佩，都俞在高堂，坐令八纮内，熙熙民乐康。
现代文：高高礼冠端正襟佩，都命在高堂，坐令极远八方内，人民欢悦快乐安康。
English: Gao Gao Li Guan Duan Zhengyi Pei, all lives are in high places, orders are far away in the eight directions, people are happy, happy and healthy.

古文：气和风雨时，田畴岁丰穰。
现代文：气象和畅风雨按时，田地庄稼得丰穰。
English: The weather was good and the wind and rain came at the right time, and the crops in the fields were bountiful.

古文：献礼过三爵，欢娱良未央。
现代文：进献之礼遇三爵，欢喜娱悦确实无尽无疆。
English: The courtesy of the presentation of the three knights, the joy and pleasure is truly endless.

古文：六奏《金陵之曲》：钟山蟠苍龙，石城踞金虎。千年王气都，于今归圣主。
现代文：第六次演奏《金陵之曲》：钟山蟠苍龙，石城踞金虎，有千年王气之都，如今归属圣君主。
English: The sixth performance of "Song of the Golden Mausoleum": Zhongshan is the dragon, Shicheng is the golden tiger, the capital with a thousand years of royal spirit, now belongs to the holy monarch.

古文：六代繁华经几秋，江流东去无时休。
现代文：六朝繁华经历多久，长江之水向东流，奔腾永不休。
English: How long did the prosperity of the Six Dynasties last? The water of the Yangtze River flows eastward and never stops flowing.

古文：谁言天堑分南北，英雄岂但嗤曹刘。
现代文：谁说天然壕堑分南北，英雄岂只嗤笑曹、刘。
English: Who said that the natural ditch divides the north and the south, and the heroes only laugh at Cao and Liu?

古文：我皇昔住濠梁屋，神游天锡真人服，提兵乘势渡江来，语臣早献《金陵曲》。
现代文：太祖昔日住濠梁，神游仙境天赐帝王服，率兵乘势渡江来，文学之臣早已献上《金陵曲》。
English: The great-grandfather used to live in Qilian in the old days. He wandered in a fairyland wearing the emperor's clothes, and led his soldiers to cross the river. The literary minister had already presented "The Golden Lying Song."

古文：歌金陵，进珍馔，皆八音，继三叹。请观汉祖用兵时，为尝冯异滹沱饭。
现代文：歌唱金陵，进献美食，和谐八音，继后三叹，请看汉祖用兵晴，为尝冯异滹沱饭。
English: Singing Jinling, offering gourmet food, harmonious eight tones, followed by three sighs, please see the Han ancestors with soldiers, to taste Fengyi rice.

古文：七奏《长杨之曲》：长杨曳绿，黄鸟和鸣。
现代文：第七次演奏《长杨之曲》：长杨垂枝绿，黄乌和谐呜。
English: The seventh performance of "Song of the Evergreens": Evergreens droop, branches turn green, yellow and black harmonize.

古文：菡萏呈鲜，紫燕轻盈。
现代文：荷花呈鲜色，紫燕更轻盈。
English: The lotus flowers are brightly colored, and the purple swallowtails are lighter.

古文：千花浥露，日丽风清。
现代文：千花沾湿露，太阳明丽微风清。
English: The thousand flowers are wet with dew, the sun is bright and the breeze is clear.

古文：及时为乐，芳尊在庭。
现代文：及时享快乐，芬芳酒在庭。
English: In time to enjoy happiness, fragrant wine in the garden.

古文：管音嘒嘒，丝韵泠泠，玉振金声，各奏尔能。
现代文：管乐声嗜嚿，弦乐清泠泠，玉振与金声，各自献其能。
English: The pipe music, the strings, the tambourine and the golden voice, all contribute their talents to the chorus.

古文：皤皤国老，载劝载惩。明德惟馨，垂之圣经。
现代文：年高德厚国家重臣，又劝勉又惩戒，贤明德行只有香馨，垂示在圣经。
English: High-ranking dignitaries of the country, both exhortation and discipline, wisdom and virtue are only fragrant, revealed in the Bible.

古文：《唐风》示戒，永保嘉名。无已太康，哲人是听。
现代文：《唐风》示警戒，永远保美名，无穷太康，听从哲人。
English: "Tang style" shows caution, always keep a good reputation, be infinitely well-off, and listen to philosophers.

古文：八奏《芳醴之曲》：夏王厌芳醴，商汤远色声。圣人示深戒，千春垂令名。
现代文：第八次演奏《芳醴之曲》：夏王厌恶芳香的甜酒，商汤远离美色与歌声，圣人昭示严警戒，千古留美名。
English: The eighth performance of "Aroma's Song": Xia Wangwu detests aromatic sweet wine, Shang Tang is far away from beauty and song, the sage shows strict vigilance, and beauty remains for thousands of years.

古文：惟皇登九五，玉食保尊荣。
现代文：皇上登帝位，美食保尊荣。
English: The emperor ascends to the throne, and the cuisine preserves the honor.

古文：日昃不遑餐，布德延群生。
现代文：太阳偏西无暇餐，布施恩德延及人民。
English: When the sun is in the west, there is no time for meals.

古文：天庖具丰膳，鼎鼐事调烹，岂但资肥甘，亦足养遐龄。
现代文：皇家庖厨备办丰盛食，鼎鼐之中精调烹。岂止供食肥美甘甜，也足以此怡养长寿高龄。
English: The Royal Cuisine prepares sumptuous food, with exquisite cooking in the middle of the meal. Not only is the food rich and sweet, but it is also enough to nourish longevity and old age.

古文：达人悟兹理，恒令五气平。
现代文：通达之人明白此理，常令五气保和平。
English: Wise people understand this principle and often order the five elements to keep the peace.

古文：随时知有节，昭哉天道行。
现代文：随顺时节知控制，昭显天煞之道行。
English: Know and control the auspicious seasons, and act in a way that reveals the evil of heaven.

古文：九奏《驾六龙之曲》：日丽中天漏下迟，公卿侍宴多令仪。
现代文：第九次演奏《驾六龙之曲》：太阳明丽悬中天，刻漏滴下迟，公卿陪宴多有好礼仪。
English: The ninth performance of "The Song of the Six Dragons": The sun hangs brightly in the middle of the sky, the drip drip drip is late, and the nobles have good etiquette.

古文：箫韶九奏觞九献，炉烟细逐祥风吹。
现代文：箫韶乐九奏，美酒九次献，玉炉香姻细细燃，祥瑞轻风吹。
English: Nine pieces of music are played, nine cups of wine are offered, incense is burned on the jade stove, and the wind blows gently.

古文：群臣舞蹈天颜喜，岁熟民康常若此。
现代文：群臣礼拜皇帝喜，丰收之年人民安康常如此。
English: The group of courtiers worshipped the emperor's happiness, and the people's well-being in the year of the harvest was often so.

古文：六龙回驾凤楼深，宝扇齐开扶玉几。
现代文：皇帝车驾回官凤楼幽深，宝扇一起打开手扶玉几。
English: The emperor's car drove back to the depths of the Guanfeng Building, and the fans opened the handrail together.

古文：景星呈瑞庆云多，两曜增晖四序和。
现代文：德星现有道，祥云涌起多，日月增光辉，四时节序和。
English: De Xing existing road, auspicious clouds surging more, the sun and the moon increasing brilliance, the four seasons and.

古文：圣人道大如天地，岁岁年年奈乐何。
现代文：圣人道大如天地，年年歌舞伴音乐。
English: The saint is as big as heaven and earth, singing and dancing with music year after year.

古文：进膳曲，《水龙吟》：宝殿祥云紫气濛，圣明君，龙德宫。
现代文：进献膳食的乐曲，《水龙吟》：官殿祥云紫气蒙蒙，圣明君主，帝王美德在皇官。
English: The music for the meal offering, "Water Dragon Chanting": The official hall is clouded with purple, the monarch is holy, and the emperor's virtue is in the imperial officials.

古文：氤氲雾霭，桧柏间青松。
现代文：氤氲雾弥漫，桧柏杂青松。
English: The mist is thick and the cypress trees are mixed with the pine trees.

古文：龙楼凤阁，雕梁画栋，此是蓬莱洞。
现代文：龙楼凤阁，雕梁画栋，犹如仙境蓬莱洞。
English: Dragon Tower Fengge, carved beams and painted buildings, just like the fairyland Penglai Cave.

古文：太平清乐曲，《太清歌》：万国来朝进贡，仰贺圣明主，一统华夷。
现代文：太平清乐曲，《太清歌》：各国朝拜进贡物，瞻仰拜贺圣明君，一统华与夷。
English: Taiping Ching Music, "Taiching Song": All countries pay homage to the tributes, pay homage to the holy Ming Jun, and unite the Chinese and the barbarians.

古文：普天下八方四海，南北东西。
现代文：普天之下、八方四海、南北与东西。
English: All over the world, in all directions, from north to south and from east to west.

古文：托圣德，胜尧王，保护家国太平，天下都归一，将兵器销为农器。
现代文：托福圣主德，胜过尧王，保护家国都太平，天下归统一，兵器销熔铸农器。
English: The Lord God is better than the king of the flies. He protects his homeland and makes it peaceful. The whole world is unified. Weapons are sold as cast agricultural implements.

古文：旌旗不动酒旗招，仰荷天地。
现代文：旌旗不动酒旗招，敬承恩德天与地。
English: Don't move the flag, raise the flag, and honor the benevolence of heaven and earth.

古文：《上清歌》：一愿四时风调雨顺民心喜。
现代文：《上清歌》：惟愿一年四季风调雨顺，人民心欢喜。
English: "Song of the Upper Qing Dynasty": I wish that the four seasons of the year will be prosperous and the people will be happy.

古文：摄外国，将宝贝；摄外国，将宝贝；见君王，来朝宝殿里，珊瑚、玛瑙、玻璃，进在丹墀。
现代文：统摄外国，献上宝贝；统摄外国，献上宝贝；拜见君王，来朝宫殿里，珊瑚、玛瑙、玻璃，进呈在丹墀。
English: Take a group photo of a foreign country, present a treasure; take a group photo of a foreign country, present a treasure; meet the king, come to the palace, coral, agate, glass, presented in Danluo.

古文：《开天门》：托长生，日月光天德，万万岁永固皇基。
现代文：《开天门》：寄托长生，日月光照显天德，万万年永远巩固帝王基。
English: "Opening Heaven's Gate": sustaining eternal life, the sun and moon illuminating heavenly virtue, and forever consolidating the foundation of the emperor for thousands of years.

古文：公卿文武来朝会，开玳筵，捧金杯。
现代文：公卿文武大臣来朝会，摆开华筵，捧献金杯。
English: The Kugyo (high court noble) and Minister of Education, Culture, Sports, Science and Technology came to the Imperial Court for the meeting.

古文：迎膳，奏《水龙吟曲》，与进膳同。
现代文：迎候膳食，演奏《水龙吟曲》，与进膳的乐曲相同。
English: In anticipation of the meal, "Water Dragon Chant" is played, which is the same as the music for the meal.

古文：升座、还宫、百官行礼，奏《万岁乐》、《朝天子》二曲，与朝贺同。
现代文：升登座位、返回内宫、百官行拜礼，演奏《万岁乐》、《朝天子》二支乐曲，与朝拜庆贺相同。
English: They ascended to their seats, returned to the inner palace, and performed the two pieces of music, "Wansei Raku" and "Asatenshi," which are the same as the morning worship and celebration.

古文：大祀庆成大宴，用《万国来朝队舞》、《缨鞭得胜队舞》。
现代文：大犁祭祀庆成大宴，施用《万国来朝队舞》、《缨鞭得胜队舞》。
English: A grand banquet was held to celebrate the completion of the Great Dragonfly Festival, and "Dance of the Nations" and "Dance of the Beating Team" were performed.

古文：万寿圣节大宴，用《九夷进宝队舞》、《寿星队舞》。
现代文：皇帝生日大宴会，用《九夷进宝队舞》、《寿星队舞》。
English: Emperor's birthday banquet, with "Jiu Yi into the treasure team dance," "Birthday star team dance."

古文：冬至大宴，用《赞圣喜队舞》、《百花圣朝队舞》。
现代文：冬至日大宴，用《赞圣喜队舞》、《百花圣朝队舞》。
English: Winter Solstice Day banquet, with the "Praise the Holy Joy Dance," "Hundred Flowers Pilgrimage Dance."

古文：正旦大宴，用《百戏莲花盆队舞》、《胜鼓采莲队舞》。
现代文：正月旦日大宴，用《百戏莲花盆队舞》、《胜鼓采莲队舞》。
English: The grand banquet on the first day of the New Year, with the "Dance of the Lotus Flower Bowl Team" and the "Dance of the Lotus Drum Team."

古文：永乐十八年定宴飨乐舞。
现代文：永乐十八年，制定宴飨乐舞：
English: In the 18th year of the Yongle Emperor, the following rules for banquet music and dance were established:

古文：一奏《上万寿之曲》：龙飞定万方，受天命，振纪纲。
现代文：第一次演奏《上万寿之曲》：帝王兴起平天下，承受天命，振起纪纲。
English: The first performance of "Song of Ten Thousand Years": The emperor rises to the world, bears the fate of heaven, and revives the discipline.

古文：彝伦攸叙四海康，普天率土尽来王。
现代文：常道次叙四海安康，普天之下各地都来朝圣王。
English: He always brought peace to the four seas, and pilgrims from all over the world came to see him.

古文：臣民舞蹈，嵩呼载扬，称觞奉吾皇，圣寿天长。
现代文：臣民行礼拜，高呼声上扬，举起酒杯敬皇上，圣寿与天长。
English: Subjects worship, chant, raise a glass to the emperor, celebrate the saint's birthday and the emperor.

古文：《平定天下舞曲》，其一，《四边静》：威伏千邦，四夷来宾纳表章。
现代文：《平定天下舞曲》，第一曲，《四边静》：威武伏千邦，四夷宾服呈表章。
English: "Punishing the World Dance," the first song, "Four Sides of Tranquility": the four emperors, the four barbarians, and the four barbarians wear the badge.

古文：显祯祥，承乾象，皇基永昌，万载山河壮。
现代文：显现吉祥，承接天象，帝王基业永盛昌，万年山河壮。
English: Appearing auspicious, inheriting the celestial elephant, Emperor Jiye will be forever prosperous, and the mountains and rivers will be strong forever.

古文：其二，《刮地风》：圣主过尧、舜、禹、汤，立五常三纲。
现代文：第二曲，《刮地风》：圣明君主超过尧、舜、禹、汤，建立五常与三纲。
English: The second piece, "Breathing the Wind": the Holy Emperor surpasses Zou, Zou, Yu and Tang, establishing the five constants and the three principles.

古文：八蛮进贡朝今上，顿首诚惶。
现代文：八方蛮夷进贡、朝拜当今帝王，叩头诚恐又诚惶。
English: The barbarians from all sides paid tribute, worshipped the current emperor, and bowed down in fear and trepidation.

古文：朝中宰相，变理阴阳。
现代文：朝中宰相协合调理阴阳。
English: The prime ministers of North Korea and China jointly regulate yin and yang.

古文：五谷收成，万民欢畅。
现代文：五谷丰收，万民欢畅。
English: A bumper grain harvest has made everyone happy.

古文：贺吾皇，齐赞扬，万国来降。
现代文：庆贺我皇，齐声赞扬，各国来归降。
English: Congratulations to my emperor, praise in unison, all countries come to surrender.

古文：二奏《仰天恩之曲》：皇天眷圣明，五辰顺，四海宁，风调雨顺百谷登，臣民鼓舞乐太平。
现代文：第二次演奏《仰天恩之曲》：皇天眷顾圣明君，四季和顺，天下安宁，风调雨顺百谷丰登，臣民歌舞乐太平。
English: The second performance of "Song of Divine Grace": the emperor is patronized by the saint Mingjun, the four seasons are harmonious, the world is peaceful, the wind and rain are harmonious, the valleys are rich, and the subjects' song and dance are peaceful.

古文：贤良在位，邦家永祯。
现代文：贤良在上位，国家永祥顺。
English: The virtuous are at the top, and the country is eternally prosperous.

古文：吾皇仰洪恩，夙夜存诚。
现代文：景仰皇上洪大恩，时时存真诚。
English: Admire Emperor Hongdaeun, and always be sincere.

古文：黄童白叟鼓腹讴歌承应曲，曰《豆叶黄》：雨顺风调，五谷收成，仓廪丰盈，大利民生。
现代文：黄发儿童白发老人拍击肚子应节高歌承应曲，题名《豆叶黄》：风调雨顺，五谷丰登，仓库满盈，大利人民。
English: Yellow-haired children and white-haired old men beat their stomachs to the tune of a high-pitched song, entitled "Toy Leaf Yellow": The weather is fine, the grain is plentiful, the warehouse is full, the Italian people.

古文：托赖著皇恩四海清，鼓腹讴歌，白叟黄童，共乐咸宁。
现代文：托福颢皇恩，天下得清平，拍擎肚子应节歌，白发老人黄发幼童，共同欢乐天下安宁。
English: TOEFL is a royal favor, the world is peaceful, the stomach is happy, the white-haired old people and the yellow-haired children are happy, and the world is peaceful.

古文：四夷舞曲，其一，《小将军》：顺天心，圣德诚，化番邦，尽朝京。
现代文：四夷舞曲，第一曲，《小将军》：顺应天心，圣德真诚，化育番邦，尽来朝京城。
English: Si Yi Dance, first piece, "Little General": Conform to the will of Heaven, be sincere in holiness, cultivate a loyal nation, and come to the capital.

古文：四夷归伏，舞于龙廷。
现代文：四方蛮夷来归伏，拜舞在朝廷。
English: The barbarians of the four quarters have come to surrender, and they are dancing at the imperial court.

古文：贡皇明，宝贝擎。
现代文：进贡皇明，宝贝高擎。
English: Tribute to Emperor Ming, baby Gao Qing.

古文：其二，《殿前欢》：四夷率土归王命，都来仰大明。
现代文：第二曲，《殿前欢》：四方蛮夷、疆域之内归顺王命，都来敬拜大明。
English: The second song, "Hall of Fame": barbarians from all over the country, and those within the borders who have surrendered to the king's command, have come to worship Daming.

古文：万邦千国皆归正，现帝庭，朝仁圣。
现代文：各国都来归正统，幽现在朝廷，朝拜仁圣君。
English: All countries are returning to orthodoxy, and now it is the imperial court that is turning to the patron saint of Bavaria.

古文：天阶班列众公卿，齐声歌太平。
现代文：宫殿台阶班列众公卿，齐声高歌颂太平。
English: The courtiers lined up on the steps of the palace to sing the praises of Taiping.

古文：其三，《庆丰年》：和气增，鸾凤鸣，紫雾生，祥云朝霞映。
现代文：第三曲，《庆丰年》：和畅祥气增，鸾乌凤凰呜，紫色薄雾生，祥云朝霞映。
English: The third song, "Celebration of the Year of Abundance": Harmony and prosperity are on the rise, clouds are gathering, violet mist is rising, and auspicious clouds are reflected in the morning sky.

古文：爇金炉，香味馨，列丹墀，御驾盈。
现代文：点燃金炉，香味芳馨，排列丹墀，御驾盈盈。
English: Light the gold stove, the fragrance is fragrant, arrange the bamboo shoots, and the parade is in full swing.

古文：弦管箫韶五音应，龙笛间凤笙。
现代文：管弦乐器奏箫韶，五音齐和应，龙笛杂凤笙。
English: Orchestral instruments play the gong, five-tone chord, dragon flute and phoenix gong.

古文：其四，《渤海令》：金杯中，酒满盛。
现代文：第四曲，《渤海令》：金杯中，酒满盛。
English: The fourth piece, "The Order of the Bohai Sea": In the golden cup, the wine is overflowing.

古文：御案前，列群英。
现代文：皇帝座案前，陈列有群英。
English: In front of the Emperor's Seat, there are a number of statues on display.

古文：君德成，皇图庆，嵩呼万岁声。
现代文：君王仁德成，皇朝共欢庆，高呼万岁声。
English: The king, Rinchen Dorjee Rinpoche, and the entire imperial court celebrated with shouts of "long live the king."

古文：其五，《过门子》：圣主兴，圣主兴，显威灵，蛮夷静。
现代文：第五曲，《遇门子》：圣主振兴，圣主振兴，显耀威灵，蛮夷安静。
English: The fifth song, "Meet the Door": The Lord is invigorating, the Lord is invigorating, the Lord is radiant and majestic, the barbarians are quiet.

古文：至仁至德至圣明，万万年，帝业成。
现代文：最仁最德最圣明，万万年，帝业成。
English: The most benevolent, the most virtuous, the most holy, for ten thousand years, the Emperor shall reign.

古文：三奏《感地德之曲》：皇心感地灵，顺天时，德厚生。
现代文：第三次演奏《感地德之曲》：皇帝之心感地灵，顺应天时，道德厚生。
English: The third performance of the "Song of Empathy": the emperor's heart is empathetic, conforms to the times, and promotes morality.

古文：含弘光大品物亨，钟奇毓秀产俊英。
现代文：包容博厚、光明盛大、万物都亨通，聚集奇异化育灵秀生豪俊。
English: Inclusive and rich, bright and grand, all things are prosperous, gathering strangeness to nurture the spirit of excellence and valor.

古文：河清海宴，麟来凤鸣，阴阳永和平，相我文明。
现代文：黄河水清海水平，麒麟出现凤凰鸣，阴阳永和平，辅我得文明。
English: The Yellow River is at sea level, the unicorn appears, the phoenix sings, the yin and yang are forever peaceful, and we must be civilized.

古文：《车书会同舞曲》，其一，《新水令》：锦衣花帽设丹墀，具公服百司同会。
现代文：《车书会同舞曲》，第一曲，《新水令》：锦衣花帽布设阶庭，准备公服百官同会。
English: "Car book meeting with dance music," the first song, "New Water Order": brocade and flowered hats are laid out in the courtyard, preparing for the meeting of hundreds of officials in public service.

古文：麟至舞，凤来仪，文武班齐，朝贺圣明帝。
现代文：麟来起舞，凤凰来仪，文官武将两班齐，朝拜庆贺圣明帝。
English: The unicorn dances, the phoenix comes to the ceremony, and the civil officers and generals come in two groups to worship and celebrate Saint Ming.

古文：其二，《水仙子》：八方四面锦华夷，天下苍生仰圣德。
现代文：第二曲，《水仙子》：四面八方锦绣华与夷，天下人民敬仰圣德。
English: The second piece, "Narcissus": In all directions, the brocade is embroidered with the Chinese and the barbarians, and the people all over the world admire the sanctity.

古文：风调雨顺升平世，遍乾坤，皆赞礼，托君恩民乐雍熙。
现代文：风调雨顺社会升平，遍天下，都赞礼，托福君恩，百姓欢乐国家升平。
English: When the wind and rain are in harmony, the society is leveled. All over the world, people praise, honor, and rejoice. The country is leveled.

古文：万万年皇基坚固，万万载江山定体，万万岁洪福天齐。
现代文：帝王基业已坚固，相传万万年。万万年，江山稳定，万万年，洪福齐天。
English: The foundation of the emperor has been solid and has been passed down for tens of thousands of years. For tens of thousands of years, the country has been stable. For tens of thousands of years, Hong Fu Qi Tian.

古文：四奏《民乐生之曲》：世间的万民，荷天地，感圣恩。
现代文：第四次演奏《民乐生之曲》：世间万民，承蒙天地，感谢圣恩。
English: The fourth performance of "Folk Music Song": All the people in the world, thanks to heaven and earth, thank the grace.

古文：乾坤定位四海春，君臣父子正大伦。
现代文：江山定位四海如春，君臣父子端正大伦。
English: The country and the mountains are positioned so that the four seas are like spring, and the monarchs and ministers, father and son, are in the ascendant.

古文：皇风浩荡，人心载醇，熙熙乐天真，永戴明君。
现代文：皇家风化恩浩荡，人心厚淳，和睦欢乐纯天真，永远拥戴圣明君。
English: The royal demeanor is gracious and generous, the people are kind and honest, the harmony and joy are pure and innocent, and they will always embrace Shengmingjun.

古文：《表正万邦舞曲》，其一，《庆太平》：奸邪浊乱朝纲，构祸难，煽动戈斨。
现代文：《表正万邦舞曲》，第一曲，《庆太平》：奸邪溷浊扰乱朝纲，制造祸难，煽动战争，国家凶荒。
English: "Formalization of the Dance of All Nations," the first song, "Celebration of Peace": treachery and mischief-making to disrupt the system of government, create calamity, incite war, and make the country savage.

古文：赫怒吾皇，亲征灞上，指天戈，敌皆降。
现代文：我皇盛怒，亲自率军征灞上，王师直指，敌人都投降。
English: My emperor was furious, and personally led the army to march to the battlements. Wang Shi pointed directly, and the enemy all surrendered.

古文：其二，《武士欢》：白沟战场，旌旗云合迷日光。
现代文：第二曲，《武士欢》：白沟摆战场，旌旗如云遮日光。
English: The second piece, "Samurai Rejoicing": The battlefield is laid out in a white ditch, and the battle flag hides the sun like a cloud.

古文：令严气张，三军踊跃齐奋扬，扫除残甲如风荡，凯歌传四方。
现代文：军令严明士气涨三军奋勇斗志昂，扫除残敌如风荡，胜利歌声传四方。
English: The morale of the three armies rose sharply, and they fought bravely and enthusiastically, swept away the remnants of the enemy like the wind, and the victory song spread in all directions.

古文：仁圣不杀降，望河南，失欃枪。
现代文：仁厚圣德不杀来降，遥望河南，有失凶星是榄枪。
English: Benevolence, benevolence and holiness do not kill, look at Henan from a distance, and the missing and deadly star is the gun.

古文：其三，《滚绣球》：肆旅拒，恃力强，一心构殃，筑沧洲百尺城隍。
现代文：笫三曲，《滚绣毯》：陈兵抗拒，倚恃力强，一心造祸殃，修筑沧洲百尺城墙。
English: The Three Melodies and the Rolling Embroidered Blanket: The old soldier resists, relies on strength, is bent on creating disasters, and builds a hundred-foot city wall in Cangzhou.

古文：骋虿毒，恣虎狼，孰能御当。
现代文：放纵任趸毒，恣意如虎狼，谁能抵挡。
English: Indulgence of any poison, arbitrary as tigers and wolves, who can resist.

古文：顺天心有德隆昌，倒戈敛甲齐归降，抚将生还达故乡，自此仁闻愈彰。
现代文：顺应天意有德之君能盛昌，放下武器、收起甲兵、齐来归降，抚将生还回到故乡，从此仁德美名更昭彰。
English: In accordance with the will of heaven, the virtuous prince can prosper, lay down weapons, gather armored soldiers, surrender together, and return to his hometown alive. Since then, the reputation of benevolence and virtue has become more prominent.

古文：其四，《阵阵赢》：不数孙吴兵法良，神谋睿算合阴阳，八阵堂堂行天上，虎略龙韬孰敢当。
现代文：第四曲，《阵阵嬴》：不计孙、昊兵法优良，神谋智算应合阴阳，堂堂八阵行天上，龙虎谋略谁敢挡。
English: The fourth piece, "Battles, Battles, Battles": Regardless of Sun and Hao's excellent methods of warfare, God's wit and calculation should be in accordance with yin and yang, and the magnificent eight battles should go to heaven. Who would dare to block the dragon and tiger strategy?

古文：俘囚十万皆疏放，感荷仁恩戴上苍。
现代文：俘虏十万都释放，感蒙仁恩拥戴上苍。
English: A hundred thousand captives were released, and the emperor was overwhelmed with gratitude.

古文：其五，《得胜回》：两傍四方，展鸟翼风云雁行。
现代文：第五曲，《得胜回》：两旁及四方，展开两翼阵法风云如雁行。
English: The fifth piece, "Return to Victory": On both sides and in all directions, the two-wing formation of the Fa unfolds like a geese flying.

古文：出奇兵，敌难量，士强马强。
现代文：发出奇兵，敌难料量，将士劲健战马强。
English: Send out extraordinary soldiers, the enemy is difficult to supply, the general will be strong and the horse will be strong.

古文：遍百里，眠旌卧枪。胜兵回，乐洋洋。
现代文：遍及百里，收起旌旗放下枪，得胜兵回，喜气洋洋。
English: Throughout the hundred miles, put away the flag and put down the gun, the victorious soldiers returned, full of joy.

古文：其六，《小梁州》：敌兵战败神魂丧，拥貔貅，直渡长江。
现代文：第六曲，《小梁州》：敌兵战败神魂丧，率领军队，直渡长江。
English: The sixth piece, "Xiaolangzhou": the enemy soldiers were defeated and lost their souls, led the army, and went straight to the Yangtze River.

古文：开市门，肆不移，宣圣恩，如天旷。
现代文：打开市门，集市不动，宣布圣恩，如天宽广。
English: Open the city gates, the bazaar does not move, proclaiming grace, as broad as the sky.

古文：纶音颁降，普天下，仰吾皇。
现代文：圣旨颁降，普天之下，敬仰我皇上。
English: The imperial edict to abdicate is issued, and my emperor is revered throughout the world.

古文：五奏《感皇恩之曲》：当今四海宁，颂声作，礼乐兴。
现代文：第五次演奏《感皇恩之曲》：如今天下安宁，颂扬声起，礼乐振兴。
English: The fifth performance of the "Song of Royal Grace": If today is calm, praise will rise, and the music will be revitalized.

古文：君臣庆会跻太平，衣冠济济宴彤庭。
现代文：君臣庆贺国家出太平，众官盛多、宴飨在宫廷。
English: Sovereigns and courtiers celebrate the country's return to peace, officials are in attendance, and a banquet is held at the court.

古文：文臣武将，共荷恩荣，忠心尽微诚，仰答皇明。
现代文：文臣武将，共受恩德与颢荣，忠心尽真诚，景仰报答我皇明。
English: A scholar and military commander, I have received both grace and glory, I have been loyal and sincere, and I have been rewarded with admiration.

古文：《天命有德舞曲》，其一，《庆宣和》：雨顺风调万物熙，一统华夷。
现代文：《天命有德舞曲》，第一曲，《庆宣和》：风调雨顺万物兴，一统华与夷。
English: "Manifest Destiny and Virtue Dance," the first song, "Celebration of Peace": the wind and rain are conducive to the prosperity of all things, uniting the Chinese and the barbarians.

古文：四野嘉禾感和气，一干百穗，一干百穗。
现代文：遍地嘉禾感通和气，一棵主干长百穗，一棵主干长百穗。
English: All over the land, Jiahe can feel the harmony. One trunk can grow a hundred ears, and one trunk can grow a hundred ears.

古文：其二，《窄砖儿》：梯航万国来丹陛，太平年，永固洪基。
现代文：第二曲，《窄砖儿》：登山航海各国来朝拜，太平之年，永远巩固帝基业。
English: The second song, "Narrow Brick": Mountaineering and sailing countries come to worship, the year of peace, forever consolidate the imperial foundation.

古文：正东西南北来朝会，洽寰宇，布春晖，四夷咸宾声教美。
现代文：正值东西南北来朝会，天下融洽，广布春辉，四夷尽服声教美。
English: It is the time when the east, west, south and north come to the imperial court, the world is harmonious, the spring is bright, and the four ethnic groups are in full obedience to the voice and beauty of the emperor.

古文：自古明王在慎德，不须威武服戎狄。
现代文：自古圣明君王谨慎仁德不必用威武制服戎狄。
English: Since ancient times, emperors have been prudent and benevolent, so there is no need to use martial arts to subdue them.

古文：祥瑞集，凤来仪。
现代文：祥瑞汇集，凤凰来仪。
English: Xiang Rui gathers, phoenix comes to play.

古文：佳期万万岁，圣明君，主华夷。
现代文：美好时期万万岁，圣明君王，主宰华夏与四夷。
English: Long live the good times, King Shengming, ruler of Huaxia and Shiyi.

古文：六奏《庆丰年之曲》：万方仰圣君，大一统，抚万民。
现代文：第六次演奏《庆丰年之曲》：天下敬仰圣明君，统一国家，安抚万民。
English: The sixth performance of "Song of the Year of Abundance": the whole world admires Sheng Mingjun, unifies the country, and pacifies the people.

古文：丰年时序雨露均，穰穰五谷货财殷。
现代文：丰收之年时节有序雨露均匀，五谷丰登货财殷盛。
English: In the year of the harvest, the rain and dew fall in an orderly and even manner, and the grain harvest is bountiful.

古文：酣歌击壤，风清俗淳，四夷悉来宾，正统皇仁。
现代文：酣声歌唱击壤谣，风俗清又淳，四方蛮夷都来顺服，正统显皇仁。
English: The cymbals sing the folk songs, the customs are pure and honest, the barbarians from all over the country have come to obey, and the orthodoxy shows the emperor's benevolence.

古文：七奏《集祯应之曲》：皇天眷大明，五星聚，兆太平；驺虞出现甘露零，野蚕成茧嘉禾生，醴泉涌地河水清。
现代文：第七次演奏《集祯应之曲》：皇天眷顾大明朝，五星聚集，兆应太平；义兽骋虞出现甘露降，野蚕成茧嘉禾生，甘甜泉水从地涌，黄河水流清。
English: The seventh performance of the "Song of the Gathering": the emperor's patronage of the Ming Dynasty, the five stars gathered, and the signs should be peaceful; the virtuous animals and states appeared, the nectar fell, the wild silkworms became good plants, the sweet spring water flowed from the ground, and the Yellow River water flowed clear.

古文：乾坤万万年，四海永宁。
现代文：江山万万年，天下永安宁。
English: The country will enjoy lasting peace and tranquility for thousands of years.

古文：八奏《永皇图之曲》：天心眷圣皇，正天位，抚万邦。
现代文：第八次演奏《永皇图之曲》：天意眷顾我圣皇，端正帝位，安抚万邦。
English: The eighth performance of "Song of the Eternal Emperor": Providence favors my holy emperor, rectifies the imperial throne, and pacifies all nations.

古文：仁风宣布礼乐张，戎夷稽首朝明堂。
现代文：仁德风教传宣施布礼乐教化张，戎狄叩头朝拜明堂。
English: The benevolence style preaching, the charity music teaching, and the eunuch kowtowing to the Myeongdong.

古文：皇图巩固，贤臣赞襄。
现代文：王朝已巩固，贤臣共扶帮。
English: The royal dynasty has been consolidated, supported by all the wise men.

古文：太平日月光，地久天长。
现代文：太平犹如日月光，地久又天长。
English: Taiping is like the sun and moon, lasting forever and ever.

古文：九奏《乐太平之曲》：皇恩被八纮，三光明，四海清。
现代文：第九次演奏《乐太平之曲》：皇朝恩德布八方，日月星三光明亮，天下清静。
English: The ninth performance of "Song of Peace": The imperial dynasty is expanding in all directions, the sun, moon and stars are shining brightly, and the world is calm.

古文：人康物阜岁屡登，含哺鼓腹皆欢声。
现代文：人民安康物富厚，五谷屡丰登，人民安乐到处是欢声。
English: The people's well-being is rich, the grain is abundant, and the people's happiness is everywhere joyful.

古文：民歌帝力，唐尧至仁。
现代文：人民歌颂帝王功，唐尧最宽仁。
English: The people sing the praises of Emperor Gong, and Tang Xi is the most generous.

古文：乾坤永清，共乐太平。
现代文：江山永安宁，共同乐太平。
English: The country will enjoy lasting peace and tranquility.

古文：导膳、迎膳、进膳及升座、还宫、百官行礼诸曲，俱与洪武间同。
现代文：导膳、迎膳、进膳以及升上座位、返回内宫、百官行礼等曲，都与洪武年间相同。
English: The melodies for leading the meal, welcoming the meal, entering the meal, as well as rising to the seat, returning to the inner palace, and the etiquette of the eunuchs, are all the same as in the Hongwu era.

古文：大祀庆成，用《缨鞭得胜蛮夷队舞》；万寿圣节，《九夷进宝队舞》；冬至节，《赞圣喜队舞》；正旦节，《百戏莲盆队舞》。
现代文：大祀庆成典礼，用《缨鞭得胜蛮夷队舞》；皇帝生日，用《九夷进宝队舞》；冬至节日，用《赞圣喜队舞》；正月旦日节，用《百戏莲盆队舞》。
English: The grand religious celebration ceremony uses the "Dance of the Barbarians and Barbarians Defeated by the Whip"; the emperor's birthday uses the "Dance of the Nine Barbarians and Barbarians Defeated by the Whip"; the winter solstice festival uses the "Dance of the Praise and Rejoicing Team"; the New Year's Day festival uses the "Dance of the Lotus Bowl Team."

古文：嘉靖间续定庆成宴乐章
现代文：嘉靖年间继续制定庆成宴会乐章：
English: During the Jiajing period, he continued to work out the music for the celebration banquet:

古文：升座，乐曲《万岁乐》：五百昌期嘉庆会，启圣皇，龙飞天位。
现代文：升座，乐曲《万岁乐》：五百兴隆昌盛期，吉祥喜庆会，开启圣皇，龙飞登帝位。
English: Ascension to the throne, music "Vanzhei Le": Five hundred years of prosperity, auspicious celebration, opening of the Holy Emperor, Longfei ascended to the throne.

古文：九州四海重华日，大明朝，万万世。
现代文：九州岛四海累世升平日，大明王朝，万万世。
English: The four seas of Kyushu Island have been rising and leveling day after day for thousands of years, since the Ming Dynasty.

古文：百官行礼，乐曲《朝天子》：满前瑞烟，香绕蓬莱殿，风回韶律鼓渊渊，列陛上，旌旗绚，日至朱躔。
现代文：百官行礼，乐曲《朝天子》：充满前庭祥瑞姻，馨香缭绕蓬莱殿。风回韶律击豉渊渊，排立台阶上，旌旗绚烂，日至轨迹在朱躔。
English: The eulogies of the dignitaries and the music of "Morning Star" fill the vestibule with the auspiciousness of marriage, and the fragrance of incense wafts around the Penglai Palace. The wind echoes the rhythm of the syllables, hitting the gongyuan, lining up on the steps, the flags are brilliant, and the sun's trajectory is in vermilion.

古文：阳生赤甸气和融，彻上元。
现代文：冬至赤甸气息和融，通彻上元。
English: The atmosphere of the winter solstice equinox is harmonious and harmonious.

古文：历年万千，长庆天宫宴。
现代文：国运千万年，长久庆贺皇宫宴。
English: The country has been prosperous for tens of thousands of years, and the palace banquet has been celebrated for a long time.

古文：上护衣、上花，乐曲《水龙吟》：宝殿金炉瑞霭浮，陈玉案，列珍羞。
现代文：呈上护衣，呈上花，乐曲《水龙吟》：宫殿金炉轻姻浮，陈设玉案，排列美味珍馑。
English: Presented with protective clothing, presented with flowers, the music "Water Dragon": the palace gold stove is light and airy, decorated with jade cases, arranged with delicious and rare candies.

古文：天花炫彩，照曜翠云裘。
现代文：天花炫光彩，照曜翠云裘。
English: The daffodils are dazzling, the sun is shining and the clouds are dancing.

古文：鸾歌凤舞，虞庭乐奏，万岁君王寿。
现代文：鸾凤美妙歌且舞，宫廷乐演奏，君王万岁寿。
English: The beautiful song and dance of the phoenix, the performance of court music, and the long life of the king.

古文：一奏《上万岁之曲》：圣主垂衣裳，兴礼乐，迈虞唐。
现代文：第一次演奏《上万岁之曲》：圣王治国垂衣裳，振兴礼乐，超过虞、唐。
English: The first performance of the "Song of Long Life": the holy king governing the country with his clothes hanging down, revitalizing the liturgy, surpassing the state and the Tang Dynasty.

古文：箫韶九成仪凤凰，日月中天照八荒。
现代文：箫韶九成凤凰来仪，日月高空照八方。
English: Ninety percent of the phoenix came to the ceremony, the sun and the moon high in the sky shone in all directions.

古文：民安物阜，时和岁康。
现代文：人民安宁物丰厚，四时祥和粮食富康。
English: The people are peaceful and prosperous, and the country is peaceful and prosperous at all times.

古文：上奉万年觞，胤祚无疆。
现代文：奉上万年大酒觞，继承国祚永无疆。
English: The great sake cup will last for a thousand years, and the successor state cup will be boundless.

古文：奏《平定天下舞曲》，其一，《四边静》：天启嘉祥，圣主中兴振纪纲。
现代文：演奏《平定天下舞曲》，第一曲，《四边静》：天开吉祥，圣主中兴振起纪纲。
English: The performance of the "Dance to Calm the World" and the first piece, "Quietness on All Sides": the auspicious start of the day, and the Lord's revival of the discipline.

古文：颂洋洋，功荡荡，国运隆昌，万岁皇图壮。
现代文：颂歌浩洋洋，功劳坦荡荡，国家气运隆盛昌，万年王朝强。
English: The ode is vast, the merit is unpretentious, the national fortune is prosperous, and the dynasty is strong.

古文：其二，《凤鸾吟》：维皇上天佑圣明，景命宣，五云辉，三台润，七纬光悬。
现代文：第二曲，《凤鸾吟》：上天保佑圣君明王，大命传宣，五云光辉，三台星沾润，七纬光昭悬。
English: The second song, "Phoenix Chanting": Heaven bless the holy king Ming Wang, the great life is proclaimed, the five clouds are bright, the three stars are moist, and the seven latitudes are bright.

古文：协气生，嘉祥见。
现代文：协和之气生，美好祥瑞现。
English: The spirit of harmony is alive and well.

古文：正万民，用群贤。
现代文：端正万民，使用群贤。
English: All the people are upright, and all the people are virtuous.

古文：垂衮御经筵，宵衣勤政殿。
现代文：垂下衮衣亲赴讲经筵，早起驾幸勤政殿。
English: He went to give a lecture on the classics in his underwear and got up early to go to the palace.

古文：礼圜丘大祀精虔，明水洁，苍璧圆。
现代文：大祀圜丘礼精虔，明水清洁，苍璧玉圆。
English: Greatly worshiping, the Shunqiu ceremony is refined and pious, the clear water is clean, and the sky is brilliant and round.

古文：秉周文，承殷荐，眷皇家亿万斯年。
现代文：秉持周之文，承继殷之献，眷颅皇家亿万年。
English: Adhering to Zhou's text, inheriting Yin's dedication, and being royal for hundreds of millions of years.

古文：二奏《仰天恩之曲》：皇穹启圣神，钦乾运，祗郊禋。
现代文：第二次演奏《仰天恩之曲》：皇天开圣神，敬仰天运，恭敬升烟祭上天。
English: The second performance of the "Song of Praise to Heaven": the emperor opens the Holy Spirit, respects the heavenly fortune, and respects the smoke festival to heaven.

古文：一阳初动霭先春，万福来同仰至仁。
现代文：冬至阳气初动，姻霭先于春，万福到来，同仰至仁。
English: The winter solstice yang qi begins to move, the marriage vows precede the spring, all blessings come, and all praise goes to the benevolence.

古文：祥开日月，瑞见星辰。
现代文：吉祥开日月，瑞应现星辰。
English: The sun and moon rise auspiciously, and the stars appear auspiciously.

古文：礼乐协神人，宇宙咸新。
现代文：礼乐协和神与人，宇宙全新。
English: The liturgy harmonizes God and man, and the universe is brand new.

古文：迎膳曲，《水龙吟》：春满雕盘献玉桃，葭管动，日轮高。熹微霁色，遥映衮龙袍。
现代文：迎膳曲，《水龙吟》：春满天地，雕花托盘献玉桃，侧律葭管已飞动，太阳高照，微光晴天色，远远映照衮龙袍。
English: Welcome song, "Water Dragon": Spring is in full bloom, carved trays offer jade peaches, lateral rhythm gongs are already flying, the sun is shining high, the sky is clear, and the dragon robe is reflected far away.

古文：千官舞蹈，钧韶迭奏，曲度升平调。
现代文：众官拜舞蹈，钧天韶乐重复奏，乐曲谱写升平调。
English: All officials worship the dance, the music of the heavenly harp is played repeatedly, and the music score is written in a rising flat tone.

古文：进膳曲，《水龙吟》：紫禁琼筵暖应冬，骖八螭，乘六龙，玉卮琼斝，黼座献重瞳。
现代文：进膳曲，《水龙吟》：紫禁城中设盛筵，温暖应寒冬，八螭黪乘，六龙驾车，琼玉酒杯，帝座献圣君。
English: Song for the meal, "Water Dragon Chanting": In the Forbidden City, there is a grand gong, warmth for the cold winter, eight gongs ride, six dragons drive, Qiong Yu wine cup, imperial throne dedicated to the saint.

古文：尧天广运，舜云飞动，喜听赓歌颂。
现代文：帝尧天运广无边，帝受云气动纷纷，喜听继续颂歌声。
English: The emperor's good fortune is boundless, the emperor is moved by the clouds, and he likes to hear the continuous chanting.

古文：进汤曲，其一，《太清歌》：长至日，开黄道，喜乾坤佳气，阳长阴消。
现代文：进汤曲，第一曲，《太清歌》：冬歪节日，开启黄道，喜天地佳气，阳气渐长阴气消。
English: Into the soup song, the first song, "Taiqing Song": Winter festival, open the zodiac, rejoice in the heavens and the earth, yang gradually increase and yin gradually disappear.

古文：奏钧韶，音调凤轸，律协鸾箫。
现代文：奏起钧天韶乐，声音调琴柱，律吕协鸾箫。
English: The music of the heavenly harp is played, the sound is tuned, and the strings are tuned.

古文：仰龙颜，天日表，如舜如尧。
现代文：瞻仰圣帝颜，仪容非凡，如舜如尧。
English: Admire the Holy Emperor's face, her appearance is extraordinary, she is radiant.

古文：金炉烟暖御香飘，玉墀晴霁祥光绕。宫梅苑柳迎春好，燕乐蓬莱岛。
现代文：金炉畑暖御香飘，宫阶晴朗吉祥光环绕，官苑梅柳喜迎春，燕乐蓬莱岛。
English: The warm fragrance wafts from the gold furnace field, the palace steps are surrounded by a clear and auspicious light, the government garden Meiliu welcomes spring, and Penglai Island is full of birdsong.

古文：其二，《上清歌》：云捧宸居，五星光映三台丽。
现代文：第二曲，《上清歌》：云霞捧护帝王宫，五星光照日月星明丽。
English: The second song, "Upper Qing Song": Clouds and haze protect the imperial palace, and the five stars shine brightly.

古文：仰日月，层霄霁；仰日月，层霄霁。
现代文：仰望日月，层层霄汉天晴色；仰望日月，层层霄汉天晴色。
English: Looking up at the sun and the moon, the sky is clear; looking up at the sun and the moon, the sky is clear.

古文：中兴重见唐虞际，太和元气自阳回，兆姓欢愉。
现代文：重新振兴又见唐与虞。太和元气自阳回，天下酉姓尽欢愉。
English: Revitalization has also seen Tang and Yu. Taihe Genki has returned from the sun, and the world is full of joy.

古文：其三，《开天门》：九重霄，日转皇州晓。
现代文：第三曲，《开天门》：九重霄汉，太阳回转皇州天晓。
English: The third piece, "Opening Heaven's Gate": Nine heavy heroes, the sun revolves around the kingdom of heaven.

古文：宴天家，共歌《鱼藻》。
现代文：宴饮帝王家，共同歌《鱼藻》。
English: The imperial family is feasting and singing "Fish Algae" together.

古文：龙鳞雉尾高，祝圣寿，庆清朝。
现代文：龙鳞雉尾高，祝贺皇上人长寿，喜庆太平大明朝。
English: The dragon scale is high in Shanwei, congratulating the emperor on his long life, and celebrating the great peace of the Ming Dynasty.

古文：奏黄童白叟鼓腹讴歌承应曲，《御銮歌》：雅奏乐升平，瞻绛阙，集瑶京。
现代文：演奏黄发幼童白发老人击腹为节讽歌承应曲，《御銮歌》：典雅乐曲喜升平，瞻望帝宫，会集京城。
English: Yellow-haired toddlers, white-haired old men, and a stomach-churning, sarcastic song to accompany the music, "Onyeongga": an elegant piece of music, looking out over the Imperial Palace and gathering in the capital.

古文：黄童白叟喜气盈，讴歌鼓舞四海宁。
现代文：黄发幼童、白发老人喜气盈盈，谌歌鼓舞天下安宁。
English: Yellow-haired toddlers and white-haired old people are full of joy, and folk songs encourage peace in the world.

古文：金枝结秀，玉树含英。
现代文：金枝结花，玉树含英。
English: The golden branch bears flowers, the jade tree contains wax.

古文：听康衢击壤声，帝力难名。
现代文：倾听大道击壤歌，帝王功劳难尽陈。
English: Listen to the song of the roadside, the emperor's work is hard to do.

古文：三奏《感昊德之曲》：帝德运光明，一阳动，万物生。
现代文：第三次演奏《感昊德之曲》：圣帝德性运光明，冬至阳气动，万物始萌生。
English: The third performance of the "Song of Sentimental Virtue": The saint's virtue is bright, the winter solstice is sunny, and everything begins to sprout.

古文：升中大报苍璧陈，礼崇乐畅歆太清。
现代文：祭天告功成，遍祭天神青璧陈，礼隆乐畅歆享太清。
English: The performance of the festival is a great success, the festival is held all over the country, the celestial god is young and beautiful, and the revelry and enjoyment are very clear.

古文：星悬紫极，日丽璇庭，乾坤瑞气盈，海宇安宁。
现代文：星辰悬紫极，太阳明丽照璇庭，天地瑞气盈，国家得安宁。
English: The stars overhang the purple pole, the sun shines brightly on the garden, the heaven and earth are radiant, and the country is tranquil.

古文：奏《抚安四夷舞曲》，其一，《贺圣朝》：华夷一统，万国来同。
现代文：演奏《抚安四夷舞曲》，第一曲，《贺圣朝》：华夏夷狄成一统，各国来会同。
English: The performance of "Fu'an Four Barbarians Dance," the first song, "Hail Holy Emperor": the Huaxia barbarians are united, and all countries come together.

古文：献方物，修庭贡，远慕皇风，自南自北，自西自东。
现代文：进献土特产，实行入朝贡，遥远慕皇风，从南从北，从西从束。
English: From the north to the south, from the west to the north, from the north to the west, from the north to the south, from the north to the west.

古文：望天宫，佳气郁重重，四灵毕至，麟凤龟龙。
现代文：遥望天宫，佳气浓郁重复重，四灵都到来，麟凤和龟龙。
English: Looking at the Heavenly Palace from afar, the auspicious atmosphere is rich and repetitive, the four spirits have all arrived, the unicorn, the phoenix and the turtle dragon.

古文：其二，《殿前欢》：瑞云晴霭浮宫殿，一脉阳和转。
现代文：第二曲，《殿前欢》：瑞云晴雾浮宫殿，一脉阳气转。
English: The second piece, "Hall of Fame": the clouds and fog floating in the palace, a yang turn.

古文：礼成交泰开周宴，凤笙调，龙幄展，天心感格人欢忭，四海讴歌遍。
现代文：典礼既成，天地气和祥，万物通泰，开设周宴，凤笙调和，绣龙帐幄展，天心感通人心欢，天下诬歌遍。
English: The ceremony has been completed, the atmosphere of heaven and earth is harmonious, all things are harmonious, the weekly banquet has been opened, the phoenix and dragon have been reconciled, the embroidered dragon curtain has been exhibited, the heavenly heart has been felt by the people, and the world has been singing.

古文：其三，《庆丰年》：赖皇天，锡丰年，勤禹稼，力舜田，喜慰三农愿。
现代文：第三曲，《庆丰年》：仰赖皇天，赐予丰年，勤种禹稼，力耕舜田，欣喜告慰三农愿。
English: The third piece, "Celebrating the Year of Abundance": Relying on the emperor, bestowing the year of abundance, diligently sowing and reaping, working hard in the fields, rejoicing and comforting the three farmers.

古文：嘉禾秀，瑞麦鲜，赋九州，贡八埏。神仓御廪咸充满，养民以养贤。
现代文：嘉谷秀，瑞麦鲜，纳赋九州，进贡八方，神仓御凛全充满，滋养人民滋养贤。
English: Jiayu Xiu, Ruimai Fresh, Nafu Kyushu, Tribute Happo, Kamakura Goryo are all full, nourishing the people and nourishing the virtuous.

古文：其四，《新水令》：圣德精禋格昊穹，大一统。
现代文：第四曲，《新水令》：圣德精祀达天穹，国家大一统。
English: The fourth song, "New Water Order": Sanctity will reach the heavens, and the country will be unified.

古文：四夷来贡，玉帛捧。
现代文：四夷来进贡玉帛手高捧。
English: The Four Emperors came to pay tribute to the Jade Emperor and were highly praised.

古文：文轨同，世际昌隆，共听舆人颂。
现代文：书同文车同轨，世代永昌隆，共听人民颂。
English: Books and literature are on the same track, the generation is forever prosperous, and the people's ode is heard.

古文：其五，《太平令》：诞明禋，天鉴元后，光四表，惠泽周流。
现代文：第五曲，《太平令》：明洁诚敬行献享，上天察帝君，光耀被天下，德惠润人民。
English: The fifth piece, "The Order of the Taiping": clear, sincere, reverent and dedicated to the enjoyment of the heavenly emperor, the glory of the world, the prosperity of the people.

古文：来四裔，趋前拥后，献万宝，充庭满囿。
现代文：招徕速地人，前趋后拥，进献万宝，充满苑囿与殿庭。
English: Attracting people from all over the world, moving forward and embracing them, donating a lot of treasure, full of gardens and courtyards.

古文：稽首顿首，天高地厚，祝圣人，多男福寿。
现代文：稽首顿首行恭跪拜，天高地厚，祝愿圣人，多男多福多寿命。
English: He bowed his head in reverence and worship at the beginning of the first line. The sky was high and the earth was thick. He wished the saint many sons, many blessings and a long life.

古文：四奏《民乐生之曲》：大报礼初成，象乾德，运皇诚。
现代文：第四次演奏《民乐生之曲》：遍祭天神礼初成，象征帝王德，运转皇心诚。
English: The fourth performance of the "Folk Music Song": the first performance of the Hen Festival Tenjin Rite, symbolizing the emperor's virtue and the operation of the imperial heart.

古文：神州赤县永清宁，灵雨和风乐太平。
现代文：中华大地永安宁，神雨和风乐太平。
English: The land of China is eternally peaceful, and the rain and weather are peaceful.

古文：阴阳交畅，品物咸亨，元化自流行，允殖群生。
现代文：阴阳交通畅，万物都通亨，天地自流行，任意繁衍众苍生。
English: Yin and yang have smooth traffic, all things are fluent, heaven and earth are self-popular, and all beings can reproduce at will.

古文：迎膳曲，《水龙吟》：五色祥云捧玉皇，开阊阖，坐明光。钧天乐奏，冬日御筵张。
现代文：迎膳曲，《水龙吟》：五彩祥云捧玉皇，打开宫门，坐在宫殿上美妙仙乐奏，冬日皇家筵席张。
English: The welcome song, "Water Dragon Chanting": the colorful auspicious clouds hold the Jade Emperor, open the palace gate, sit on the palace and play beautiful fairy music, and the royal banquet in winter.

古文：文恬武熙，太平气象，人在唐虞上。
现代文：文臣安恬武臣乐，太平新气象，超过唐、虞谱新章。
English: Wencheng, Anhui, Wushenle, Taiping, new weather, surpassing Tang and Yue, a new chapter.

古文：进膳曲，《水龙吟》：玉律阳回景运新，燕镐京，蔼皇仁。
现代文：进膳曲，《水龙吟》：玉制律管阳气回，美好时运新，燕安镐京，皇帝仁德盛。
English: Jinzenqu, "Water Dragon Chanting": the jade system of law controls the return of yang qi, good times and new fortune, Yan'an and Beijing, the emperor Ren Desheng.

古文：光昭云汉，一气沸韶韺。锦瑟和声，瑶琴清韵，瞻仰天颜近。
现代文：光明显云汉，一气沸扬古乐音，锦瑟奏和声，瑶琴发清韵，瞻仰皇帝容颜近。
English: The light is obviously cloudy, the ancient music is booming, the brocade plays harmonies, the harp has a clear rhyme, and the emperor's face is close.

古文：进汤曲，《太清歌》：万方民，乐时雍，鼓舞荷天工，雷行风动。
现代文：进汤曲，《太清歌》：天卞人民，欢乐和熙笑颜容，欣喜承天然，雷行风飞动。
English: Jin Tang Qu, "Taiching Song": The people of Tianyao, happy and smiling, rejoicing in nature, the thunderstorm wind flying.

古文：喜今逢，南蛮北貊，东夷西戎，来朝贡。
现代文：可喜今遭逢，南蛮北狄，束夷西戎，纷纷来朝贡。
English: However, it is a happy coincidence that Nanban, Beidi, and Sakuishi came to pay tribute to the emperor.

古文：大明宫，星罗斗拱。
现代文：大明宫殿，众星罗列斗卫拱。
English: Daming Palace, the stars line up to guard the arch.

古文：九重天上六飞龙，五色云间双彩凤，普天率土效华封，允协河清颂。
现代文：九重天上六飞龙，五色云间双彩凤，普天境域效华封，和谐河清太平颂。
English: There are six flying dragons in the nine-layered sky, two colorful phoenixes among the five-colored clouds, the whole heaven is sealed with the effect of Huafeng, and the harmonious river is a clear and peaceful ode.

古文：奏《车书会同舞曲》，其一，《新水令》：五云深护九重城，感洪恩。
现代文：演奏《车书会同舞曲》，第一曲，《新水令》：层层保护帝王所居宫禁城，感谢大恩情。
English: The first piece, "New Water Decree," was performed. The palace and the Forbidden City, where the emperor resided, were protected layer by layer. I am grateful for this great favor.

古文：一人有庆，阳初长，礼方行。
现代文：皇帝有吉庆，阳气初长，礼仪正施行。
English: The emperor is auspicious, the yang qi is beginning to grow, and the etiquette is being implemented.

古文：帝德文明，表率邦家正。
现代文：帝王德性显文明，表率邦家都端正。
English: The emperor's moral character is civilized, and the leading statesmen are upright.

古文：其二，《水仙子》：万方安堵乐康宁，九域同仁荷圣明。
现代文：第二曲，《水仙子》：天下安居快乐康宁，国家同仁蒙圣明。
English: The second song, "Narcissus": The world is safe, happy and prosperous, and the country's colleagues are blessed with enlightenment.

古文：千年抚运承天命，露垂甘，河献清，见双岐秀麦连茎，喜灵雪随冬应，睹祥云拂曙生，神与化并运同行。
现代文：千年顺应时运承受天命，甘露降，黄河清，出现双歧秀麦共连茎，喜庆瑞雪随冬则应，观看祥云拂晓而生，神灵与造化一同运行。
English: The millennium conforms to the time and fortune to bear the fate of heaven, the nectar falls, the Yellow River clears, the ambiguity appears, the wheat and the stalks are connected, the joyous celebration and the snow are in accordance with the winter, watch the auspicious clouds born at dawn, and the gods and creation run together.

古文：五奏《感皇恩之曲》：双阙五星光，霓旌树，紫盖张。
现代文：第五次演奏《感皇恩之曲》：京城五星放光芒，霓旌树立，紫盖伸张。
English: The fifth performance of the "Song of Touching Grace": the five stars of Beijing shine, the cocoon is erected, and the purple cover is stretched.

古文：璇台玉历转新阳，钧天广乐谐宫商。
现代文：璇台日历转动到新阳，天上仙乐和谐宫商。
English: The Xingtai calendar turns to the new sun, the celestial paradise and the harmonious palace merchant.

古文：恩深露湛，喜溢霞觞，日月焕龙章，地久天长。
现代文：恩深露浓，喜悦洋溢美酒中，日月焕然映龙章，地久天长。
English: Benevolence is deep and rich, joy abounds in fine wine, the sun and the moon shine brightly, and the earth is eternal.

古文：奏《表正万邦舞曲》，其一，《庆太平》：维天眷我圣明，礼圜丘，至德精诚。
现代文：演奏《表正万邦舞曲》，第一曲，《庆太平》：上天誊顾圣明君，礼祀圜丘，至德精诚。
English: The performance of "Celebration of the Great Peace," the first piece, "Celebration of the Great Peace": Heaven looks down on Saint Mingjun, he is revered, and he is virtuous and sincere.

古文：乾元永清，洪膺景命，休徵应，泰阶平。
现代文：天子大德永清纯，宏大心胸承大命，吉祥征兆来相应，天下得太平。
English: The great virtue of the Son of Heaven is eternally pure, the great heart bears a great destiny, the auspicious signs come accordingly, and the world is peaceful.

古文：其二，《千秋岁》：圣主乘龙御万邦，庆云翔化日重光。
现代文：第二曲，《千秋岁》：圣主乘龙统治天下，祥云翔化日抱重光。
English: The second piece, "A Thousand Years of Autumn": The Holy Lord reigns over the world with a dragon, and the auspicious clouds fly and the sun embraces the heavy light.

古文：群臣拜舞称寿觞，载歌《天保》章。
现代文：群臣礼拜祝寿举杯颂扬，高唱《天保》章。
English: The courtiers raised their glasses to celebrate the anniversary and sang "Tenpo" chapter.

古文：其三，《滚绣球》：五云车，度九重，利见飞龙。
现代文：第三曲，《滚绣球》：五云彩车，度过天九重，利见有飞龙。
English: The third piece, "Rolling Ball": Five clouds, nine days, nine days, and a flying dragon.

古文：耀衮章，火藻华虫。
现代文：映耀衮衣纹，火藻与华虫。
English: The patterns of dragonflies, fire algae and Chinese caterpillars shine.

古文：击虎敔，考凫钟，鼍鼓逢逢。
现代文：击打虎形敔，敲奏鬼形钟，鼌鼓声嘭嘭。
English: Beat the tiger-shaped gong, strike the ghost-shaped bell, and beat the drum.

古文：八珍列，九鼎丰隆。
现代文：八珍肴镤列，九鼎盛丰隆。
English: Eight rare dishes are lined up, and nine dinners are plentiful.

古文：尧眉扬彩舜重瞳，万国咸熙四海雍，齐歌颂圣德神功。
现代文：尧眉扬光彩，舜目为重瞳，万国都兴天下和，齐声歌颂圣德与神功。
English: The eyebrows are radiant, the eyelids are heavy, all nations are promoting world peace, and all voices are singing the praises of holiness and divine power.

古文：其四，《殿前欢》：万年礼乐中兴日，大化睹重熙。
现代文：第四曲，《殿前欢》：万年传礼乐，中兴之日，眼见深广教化又重兴。
English: The fourth piece, "Tennozenhwa" (Celebration in front of the main hall): A sacred music that has been passed down for thousands of years, the day it was revived, it has been deeply and widely taught and revived.

古文：河清海宴臻祥瑞，五行顺，七政齐，超三迈五贞元会，既醉颂凫鹥。
现代文：黄河水清大海平，祥瑞不断临，五行顺畅，七政整齐，超三过五新旧更替，既醉颂壳鹭。
English: The Yellow River's water is clear and the sea is flat, the auspicious and auspicious are constantly coming, the five elements are smooth, the seven policies are neat, the super three and super five are new and old, and it is drunk.

古文：其五，《天下乐》：万灵朝拱接清都，享南郊，钦天法祖。
现代文：第五曲，《天下乐》：万灵环绕接帝都，南郊祭享，顺天效法祖。
English: The fifth song, "Heavenly Music": All souls encircle and connect the imperial capital, the southern suburbs celebrate, and the sky follows the Buddha.

古文：愿圣人，承乾纳祜，中和位育，龟献范，马陈图。
现代文：祝愿圣人，承天纳福，致中和、天地位、万物育，灵龟献范，神马陈图。
English: I wish the saint, inheriting the blessings of heaven, to achieve peace, heavenly status, the education of all things, the gift of the spirit turtle, and the divine horse Chen Tu.

古文：其六，《醉太平》：礼乐万年规，讴歌四海熙。衣冠蹈舞九龙墀，丽正仰南离。
现代文：第六曲，《醉太平》：礼乐成为万年规，谵歌天下乐，百官礼拜九龙墀，附着正道仰望南离。
English: The sixth piece, "Drunken Taiping": the ritual music becomes the eternal standard, the anthem is the world's music, the dignitaries worship the dragon and the dragonfly, adhere to the righteous path and look up to the south.

古文：紫云高捧唐虞帝，垂衣天下文明治。
现代文：紫云高捧唐、虞帝，无为施政天下文明治。
English: Ziyun Gao admired Tang Dynasty and Yu Dynasty. He did nothing to govern the world.

古文：镐鸟岐凤呈嘉瑞，真个是人在成周世。
现代文：镐京乌歧山凤呈现祥瑞，好像真的生在成周世。
English: The Wuqi Mountain phoenix in Beijing appears to be auspicious, as if it was really born in Cheng Zhou's time.

古文：六奏《庆丰年之曲》：圣人懋承乾，绥万邦，屡丰年。
现代文：第六次演奏《庆丰年之曲》：圣人勤勉承天命，安定天下，屡获丰年。
English: The sixth performance of "Song for the Celebration of the Year of Abundance": The sage diligently follows the fate of heaven, stabilizes the world, and repeatedly wins the year of abundance.

古文：神仓御廪登天田，明粢郁鬯祀孔虔。
现代文：神仓御糜登天田，谷物香酒祭祀甚诚虔。
English: Kamakura mikado ascends to Amada, grain and incense offering ceremony is held with great devotion.

古文：舆情咸豫，协气用宣，万古帝图传，璧合珠联。
现代文：民众内心都欢悦，协和气传宣，万古帝王图流传，璧合而珠联。
English: The hearts of the people are joyous, the spirit of harmony is propagated, the ancient emperor's map is passed down, and the two are united.

古文：七奏《集祯应之曲》：天保泰阶平，宝露降，浑河清，喜禾秀麦集休祯，遐陬绝域喜气盈。
现代文：第七次演奏《集祯应之曲》：上天保佑世太乎，甘露降落，浑河水清，嘉瑞禾稼秀美麦，聚集美候征，极远之地喜气盈。
English: The seventh performance of "Song of the Gathering": Heaven blesses the world, the nectar descends, the Hun River is clear, Jiarai produces beautiful wheat, gathers beautiful weather, and the distant land is joyful.

古文：一人有庆，百度惟贞，万国颂咸宁，丽正重明。
现代文：皇帝一人有善德，百事都端正。各地颂安宁，附着正道重光明。
English: The emperor alone is virtuous, and all things are upright. All parts of the country extol tranquility, and attach importance to the path of righteousness.

古文：八奏《永皇图之曲》：镐燕集天京，颂《鱼藻》，歌《鹿鸣》。
现代文：第八次演奏《永皇图之曲》：镐京宴享聚集在天京，颂赞《鱼藻》，歌唱《鹿呜》。
English: The eighth performance of "Song of Yonghuangtu": the banquet guests gathered in Tianjing to celebrate "fish algae" and sing "deer."

古文：边陲安堵万国宁，重译来庭四海清。
现代文：边防安定天下宁，外族翻译来朝廷四海清宁。
English: The border was stable and the world was stable, and foreign translators came to the imperial court to clarify the four seas.

古文：咸池日曙，昧谷云征，帝座仰前星，豫大丰亨。
现代文：咸池日刚亮，昧谷云气征。帝座望前星，快乐富厚又通亨。
English: The sun is just beginning to shine in Hamchi, with the air signs of clouds in the valley. The emperor is gazing at the foreground stars, happy, rich and prosperous.

古文：九奏《乐太平之曲》：皇极永登祥，乾符启，泰运昌。
现代文：第九次演奏《乐太平之曲》：皇位永远趋吉祥，承受天命祥瑞征兆开，大运长盛昌。
English: The ninth performance of "Song of Peace": the imperial throne will always be auspicious, bear the destiny of auspiciousness and auspiciousness, and the great fortune will be prosperous.

古文：玉管回春动一阳，金銮锡燕歌九章，虞庭兽舞，岐山凤翊，日丽衮龙裳，主圣臣良。
现代文：律管回春阳气动，宫殿赐宴歌九章，虞舜之庭兽起舞，岐山凤翱翔，日光明丽映照衮龙裳，君主圣明臣贤良。
English: Lixuan returns to the spring sun, the palace gives a nine-chapter banquet song, the court animals of the yakitori dance, the mountain phoenix soars, the sun shines brightly on the dragon, and the monarch is a saint.

古文：迎膳曲，《水龙吟》：香雾氤氲紫阁重，仰天德，瞻帝容。
现代文：迎膳曲，《水龙吟》：香雾弥漫紫阁重重，仰承天德，瞻望帝容。
English: The welcome song, "Water Dragon Chanting": the fragrance of mist pervades the purple pavilion, upholding the principles of heaven and looking up to the emperor.

古文：星辉海润，甘雨间和风。
现代文：星辰辉映海沾润，甘雨闲杂和畅风。
English: The stars shine, the sea is damp, the rain is gentle and the wind is light.

古文：乐比鸢鱼，瑞呈麟凤，永献《卷阿》颂。
现代文：鸢飞鱼跃各得乐，祥瑞呈现麟与凤，永远献上《卷阿》颂。
English: Zou Fei's "Fish Leap" is a joy to watch, while Xiang Rui's "Lion and Phoenix" is a must-see.

古文：进膳曲，其一，《水龙吟》：万户千门启建章，台阶峻，帝座张。
现代文：进膳曲，第一曲，《水龙吟》：万户千门开建章，台阶高峻，帝座设张。
English: The entrance song, the first song, "Water Dragon Chanting": thousands of doors open, the steps are high, and the imperial throne is set up.

古文：三垣九道，北斗玉衡光。
现代文：三垣九道，北斗玉衡映辉光。
English: In the nine streets of Mikaki, the North Star, Tamahira, shines brightly.

古文：元气调和，雅韵铿锵，昭代庆明良。
现代文：混元体气协调顺和，雅乐韵铿锵，时代清明君贤臣良。
English: The mixed elements harmonize and harmonize, the elegant music rhymes, and the times are bright and the wise men are good.

古文：其二，《太清歌》：万方国，尽来庭。稽首歌帝仁，仰荷生成。
现代文：第二曲，《太清歌》：各地邦国，尽来朝廷，叩头歌唱皇帝仁，仰承养育得生存。
English: The second song, "Taiqing Song": All over the country, all the states come to the court, kowtow to the emperor, sing the emperor's benevolence, and live up to their upbringing.

古文：振乾纲，阴阳顺序，民物乐生。
现代文：振兴皇纲，阴阳合顺序，人民乐其生。
English: Revitalize the imperial system, yin and yang in order, and the people will enjoy their lives.

古文：逢明圣，万年春，永膺休命。
现代文：遭逢明圣君，万年如春，永远承受好命运。
English: If you meet a saint, you will have a good fortune for a long time.

古文：华夷蛮僚咸归正，苍生至老不知兵，鼓腹含哺囿太平，九有享清宁。
现代文：华夏蛮夷都服顺，百姓到老不懂战争，生活安乐保太平，九州岛享受清静舆安宁。
English: The barbarians in China are obedient, the people do not understand war for a long time, life is safe and peaceful, and Kyushu Island enjoys peace and tranquility.

古文：奏《天命有德舞曲》，其一，《万岁乐》：太平天子兴隆日，履初长，阳回元吉。
现代文：演奏《天命有德舞曲》，第一曲，《万岁乐》：太平天子兴隆时，日初长，阳气返回福大吉。
English: The performance of "The Dance of Destiny and Virtue," the first piece, "Viva La": When the Taiping Heavenly Child was flourishing, the days were getting longer, and the yang qi returned to Fudakichi.

古文：醴泉芝草休徵集，曾闻道五星聚室。
现代文：甘泉灵芝祥瑞集，曾经听说五星聚于室。
English: Ganquan Lingzhi Xiangrui Collection, once heard that the five stars gathered in the room.

古文：其二，《贺圣朝》：一人元良，百度维新。
现代文：第二曲，《贺圣朝》：天子一人有大善，世间百事都是新。
English: The second piece, "Congratulations on the Holy Morning": The Son of Heaven alone has great goodness, and everything in the world is new.

古文：握赤符，凝玄应，享太清。
现代文：手握赤符，凝聚玄妙神感应，安享无为而治最太平。
English: Holding a red amulet in one's hand, one can feel the influence of the Mysterious God, and enjoy the peacefulness of doing nothing.

古文：大礼方行，祀事孔明感天心，亿载恒承庆。
现代文：大礼刚举行，祭祀很洁净，感通上天心，千秋万年常承吉庆。
English: The grand ceremony has just been held, the ritual is very clean, it is inspired by the heavenly heart, and it will continue to celebrate good luck for thousands of years.

古文：明王慎德，四裔咸宾。
现代文：圣明君王慎在德，四方远境都服顺。
English: The holy Emperor Ming is prudent and virtuous, and is obeyed far and wide.

古文：奏《缨鞭得胜蛮夷队舞承应曲》，其一，《醉太平》：星华紫殿高，云气彤楼绕。
现代文：演奏缨鞭得胜蛮夷队舞承应曲，第一曲，《醉太平》：星光照耀紫殿高，云气飘逸红楼绕。
English: The first piece, "Drunken Taiping": Starlight shines high in the Purple Hall, clouds float around the Red Tower.

古文：九夷重译梯航到，皇图光八表。
现代文：各族翻译跋山涉水到，皇朝大恩光被八表。
English: Translators from all ethnic groups trekked mountains and waded through water to arrive, and the imperial dynasty was greatly blessed with eight tables.

古文：玉宇无尘明月皎，银河自转扶桑晓，平平荡荡归王道。
现代文：宇宙无尘明月皎皎，银河自转东方天晓，坦坦荡荡归王道。
English: The universe is dustless, the moon is bright, the Milky Way revolves around the east, and it is getting back to the royal road.

古文：百兽舞，凤鸣箫韶。
现代文：百兽起舞，凤凰呜箫韶。
English: The beasts dance, the phoenixes sing.

古文：其二，《看花会》：普天下，都赖吾皇至圣。
现代文：第二曲，《看花会》：普天之下，全赖我皇最圣明。
English: The second song, "Watching the Flower Show": Under the whole world, it all depends on my emperor, the most sacred.

古文：看玉关频款，天山已定。四夷效顺归王命。
现代文：看玉关频频归顺，天山已安定，四夷效命顺从归王命。
English: It is seen that Yugang frequently surrenders, Tianshan has been stabilized, and Shiyi effectively obeys the king's command.

古文：《天保》歌，群黎百姓。
现代文：同唱《天保》歌，平民百姓。
English: Common people sing along to the "Tenpo" song.

古文：其三，《天下乐》：九重乐奏万花开，望龙楼，云蒸雾霭。
现代文：第三曲，《天下乐》：宫禁乐奏万花开，远望龙楼，云气蒸腾雾霭霭。
English: The third piece, "Heavenly Music": Forbidden music from the palace plays, flowers bloom, dragon towers can be seen in the distance, clouds evaporate, and fog rolls in.

古文：仰天工，雍熙帝载，臣民欢戴。
现代文：仰承天工，和乐太平帝王业，臣民欢欣齐拥戴。
English: Obeying the work of heaven, and enjoying the peaceful reign of the emperor, the subjects enthusiastically embraced it.

古文：溥仁恩，遍九垓。
现代文：广施仁恩，遍及九州岛与四海。
English: He spread benevolence far and wide, throughout Kyushu Island and the four seas.

古文：其四，《清江引》：黄钟既奏阳和长，德盛天心贶。
现代文：第四曲，《清江引》：黄钟已奏阳气长，仁德隆盛天心赏。
English: The fourth piece, "Clearing the River": The yellow bell has played the yang qi long, and benevolence and prosperity are appreciated by heaven.

古文：人文日月明，国势山河壮，衢室民谣频击壤。
现代文：礼乐教化日月明，国家形势山河壮，大道室内民间歌谣频传幸福乐康。
English: The education of ceremonial music is getting better day by day, the national situation is strong, and the indoor folk songs on the avenue are frequently spreading happiness and well-being.

古文：奏致语曲，其一，《清江引》：钧天毕奏日方中，既醉欢声动。
现代文：演奏致语曲，第一曲，《清江引》：仙乐尽奏日正中，酣醉欢声动。
English: The performance of the Song of Songs, the first song, "Clearing the River": The celestial music was played in the middle of the day, and the drunken and joyful voices were moving.

古文：云章傍衮龙，飙势翔威凤，万方安乐兴嘉颂。
现代文：帝王文章傍衮龙，乘风翱翔有威凤，天下安乐共称颂。
English: The emperor's article is next to the dragon, soars with the wind and has great power, and is praised for the world's well-being.

古文：其二，《千秋岁》：上下交欢燕礼成，一阳奋，万汇咸亨。
现代文：第二曲，《千秋岁》：上下共欢宴礼完成，阳气振奋，万物都通亨。
English: The second song, "A Thousand Years of Autumn": The banquet is complete, the yang qi is uplifted, and everything is prosperous.

古文：风云会合开明运，紫极转璇衡。
现代文：风云汇合开明运，观测天象皇家运筹施国政。
English: The wind and clouds converge to open up the country, and the observation of celestial objects and royal operations are carried out to implement national policies.

古文：宴毕，百官行礼曲，《朝天子》：文班武班，欢动承明殿，礼成乐备颂声喧。
现代文：宴飨结束，百官行礼乐曲，《朝天子》：文臣武将立两班，欢声震动承明殿，典礼完成音乐齐备歌颂声喧天。
English: At the end of the banquet, the eulogies were performed by hundreds of officials, and two groups of ministers and generals were formed to sing the "Asatenshi" (Song of the Morning Star). The joyous voices shook the Shomyo-den, and when the ceremony was over, the music was complete and the chanting voices filled the air.

古文：真咫尺，仰天颜，日照龙筵。
现代文：咫尺之内，瞻仰帝颜，日光照龙筵。
English: Within a stone's throw, the emperor's face can be seen, and the sun shines on the dragon.

古文：风回雉扇翠蕤旋，奉仙銮，云间斗间，五色金章灿。
现代文：风回雉扇羽饰旌旗仪仗送帝还，簇拥銮驾，云雾星斗间，五彩金章光灿灿。
English: The wind is blowing, the fans are decorated with feathers, the flags are ceremoniously waving to send the emperor back, the clouds are gathering, the stars are twinkling, and the multi-colored gold seals are shining.

古文：还宫曲，《万岁乐》：天回北极云成瑞，望层霄，重华日丽。
现代文：还宫曲，《万岁乐》：天回北极彩云成祥瑞，仰望九霄，岁星闪烁日明丽。
English: Hoanggongqu, "Wan Lai Le": At the end of the day, the Arctic colored clouds become auspicious, look up to the nine heavens, and the stars twinkle brightly.

古文：九垓八极乐雍熙，祝圣寿，万万岁。
现代文：天下四方乐升平，祝贺圣皇长寿，万万岁。
English: The four quarters of the world rejoice, and congratulate the holy emperor on his long life. Long live the emperor.

古文：永乐间小宴乐章。
现代文：永乐年间小宴乐章：
English: Yongle years of small banquet movement:

古文：一奏《本太初之曲》，《朝天子》：混兮沌兮，水土成元气，不分南北与东西，未辨天和地。
现代文：第一次演奏《本太初之曲》，《朝天子》：混混沌沌啊，水土结合成元气，不分南北与东西，不辨上天和大地。
English: The first performance of "Song of the First Emperor of China" and "Son of the Morning Star": "Chaos and chaos, water and earth combined into vitality, no distinction between north and south, east and west, no distinction between heaven and earth."

古文：万象包涵，其中秘密，难穷造化机，是阴阳本体。乃为之太极，两仪因而立。
现代文：万物包涵，其中秘密，难以穷究自然变化的奥理，造就是阴阳的本体宇宙本原是太极，天地由此立。
English: All things are encompassed, including secrets, and it is difficult to exhaustively investigate the nature of natural changes. The universe, which is the body of yin and yang, was originally the Taiji, from which heaven and earth were established.

古文：二奏《仰大明之曲》，《归朝欢》：太极分，混然方始见仪形，清浮浊偃乾坤定。
现代文：第二次演奏《仰大明之曲》，《归朝欢》：宇宙本原分，混沌纔得见容仪成体形，清轻上浮重浊沉，从此天地定。
English: The second performance of "Song of Yang Daming" and "Return to Morning Revelry": The universe is the original point, chaos and confusion can be seen in the shape of the instrument, light and heavy and heavy, and from this day on, the world is determined.

古文：日月齐兴，照青霄，万象明。
现代文：太阳月亮一齐出现，照耀青霄，万种物象明。
English: The sun and the moon appear at the same time, illuminating the sky, and all kinds of objects are bright.

古文：阳须动，阴须静，阴与阳，皆相应。流行二气，万物俱生。
现代文：阳要动，阴要静，阴与阳，彼此都相应，流行此二气，万物都生成。
English: The yang wants to move, the yin wants to be still, the yin and the yang, each corresponding to the other. When these two energies are in vogue, everything comes into being.

古文：三奏《民初生之曲》，其一，《沽美酒》：乾坤清，宇宙宁，六合净，四维正，万象原来一气生。
现代文：第三次演奏《民初生之曲》，第一曲，《沽美酒》：天地清静，宇宙安宁，天地四方净，东西南北正，万物原来一气生。
English: The third performance, "Song of the Firstborn of the People," and the first song, "Let the Good Wine Flow": Heaven and earth are calm, the universe is peaceful, the four directions of heaven and earth are clear, the east and west are north and south, and all things are originally one breath.

古文：定三才五行，民与物，共成群。
现代文：确定三才与五行，人民与万物，共同集成群。
English: Determine the three talents and five elements, the people and all things, and jointly integrate the group.

古文：其二，《太平令》：为一类不分人品，竟生食岂晓庖烹，避寒暑巢居穴遁，披树叶相寻趁，如何是爱亲。
现代文：第二曲，《太平令》：成一类不分人品，都吃生食不懂庖厨与煮烹，躲避严寒与酷暑，或巢居或穴遁，拨开树叶相寻觅，如何知道是爱亲。
English: The second song, "Taiping Ruling": into one category, regardless of personal taste, all eat raw food, do not know how to cook and cook, avoid cold and heat, or nest or burrow, open the leaves to find each other, how to know is love.

古文：世情治生。虽混然各安其性。
现代文：世间情势为生存，虽然混蒙却各安其性情。
English: The situation in the world is one of survival, and although there is confusion, everyone has their own disposition.

古文：四奏《品物亨之曲》，《醉太平》：黎民生世间，万物长尘寰，阴阳交运转循环，久远时庶繁。
现代文：第四次演奏《品物亨之曲》，《醉太平》：百姓生活在世间，万物长大地，阴阳交互运转永远循环，时间久远万物众多而纷繁。
English: The fourth performance of "The Song of the Goodsman" and "Drunken Taiping": People live in the world, all things grow on the earth, the interplay of yin and yang circulates forever, and all things are numerous and varied for a long time.

古文：相传气候应无间，品物交错凭谁鉴。
现代文：相传气候应验无差错，万物交错靠谁来识鉴。
English: According to legend, the weather is accurate, but who is to judge the intertwining of all things?

古文：望圣人出世整江山，主万民得安。
现代文：盼望圣人出世整顿江山，主管万民得平安。
English: It is hoped that a saint will be born to rectify the country and lead the people to peace.

古文：五奏《御六龙之曲》，其一，《清江引》：人心久仰生圣君，天使人生圣。
现代文：第五次演奏《御六龙之曲》，第一曲，《清江引》：人心久望产生圣君，上天使人生圣人。
English: The fifth performance of "Song of the Six Dragons," the first song, "Clearing the River": It has long been hoped that the people will produce a saint, a saint of life.

古文：圣人受天机，体天居中正，御六龙，驿明登九重。
现代文：圣人承受上天意，依照天命居中正，驾御六龙，圣明登九重。
English: The saint has received the will of heaven, and according to the destiny of heaven, he is in the middle, driving six dragons, and Saint Ming has ascended nine levels.

古文：其二，《碧玉箫》：君坐神京，海岳共从新。
现代文：第二曲，《碧玉箫》：圣君坐神京，天下共从新。
English: The second piece, "Begijuro": The saint sits in the heavenly capital, and the whole world starts anew.

古文：民仰君恩，圣治有人伦。
现代文：人民敬仰君王恩，圣明治国有人伦。
English: The people venerate the benevolence of the monarchs, and the people of the Holy Meiji State have a strong sense of loyalty.

古文：人品分，万物增，圣承乾，百福臻。
现代文：人分品级，万物加增，圣人承天，百福来纷纷。
English: People are graded according to their quality, all things increase in value, saints inherit the heavens, and a hundred blessings come one after another.

古文：垂法明，尊天命，兴后朝，皆从正。
现代文：垂示法律甚分明，尊奉天命，兴起后代，都从端正。
English: The revealed laws are very clear, and it is correct to respect the Mandate of Heaven and raise up future generations.

古文：六奏《泰阶平之曲》，《十二月》：圣乃有言天，天是无言圣。
现代文：第六次演奏《泰阶平之曲》，《十二月》：圣人有言天，上天无言圣。
English: The sixth performance of "Thai Jia Ping's Song," "December": The sage has words, but the heaven has no words.

古文：圣人临正，万物亨通，恩威盛，社稷安，仁德感，江山定。
现代文：圣人临事行端正，万物通达，恩威并盛，社稷安宁，感戴仁德，江山稳定。
English: The saint's actions are correct, all things are accessible, benevolence is prosperous, the society is peaceful, benevolence is appreciated, and the country is stable.

古文：选用英贤兴王政，分善恶赏罚均平。
现代文：选拔任用英俊豪贤，振兴王政，分清善恶，赏罚分明。
English: The selection and appointment of handsome heroes and sages, the revitalization of the royal government, the distinction between good and evil, and the distinction between rewards and punishments.

古文：三公九卿，左右股肱，庶事康宁。
现代文：三公九卿，左右辅佐大臣，万事得康宁。
English: Three princes and nine nobles, right and left assistant ministers, everything must be done well.

古文：七奏《君德成之曲》，其一，《十二月》：皇基以兴，圣帝修身，奉天体道，圣德愈明。
现代文：第七次演奏《君德成之曲》，第一曲，《十二月》：皇帝基业兴，圣帝修养身，承奉上天体大道，圣德更贤明。
English: The seventh performance of "Song of the Accomplishment of Virtue and Virtue," the first song, "December": Emperor Ji Yingxing, the Holy Emperor cultivates himself, follows the celestial highway, and sanctity is more wise.

古文：敬天地，勤劳万民；立法度，上下咸宁。
现代文：敬顺天地，勤劳万民；建立法度，上下都安宁。
English: Respect heaven and earth, work diligently for all people; establish laws, and there will be peace above and below.

古文：其二《尧民歌》：风俗礼乐厚彝伦，爰兴学校进儒经，贤臣良将保朝廷，四野人民颂欢声。
现代文：第二曲，《尧民歌》：风俗礼乐厚常伦，兴修学校提倡儒经，贤臣良将保朝廷，遍地人民颂扬声。
English: The second piece, "民歌": customs, rites and music are deeply rooted, the construction of schools promotes Confucianism, wise men and good generals protect the imperial court, and people everywhere praise it.

古文：用的是贤英，贤英定太平，寰海皆归正。
现代文：任用英豪贤人，英豪贤人定太平，天下都归正。
English: Appoint great sages, and great sages will establish peace, and the whole world will be reformed.

古文：八奏《圣道行之曲》，其一，《金殿万年欢》：三纲既定，九畴复兴。
现代文：第八次演奏《圣道行之曲》，第一曲，《金殿万年欢》：三纲已确定，天下又复兴。
English: The eighth performance of "Song of the Pilgrimage," the first song, "Golden Hall of Eternal Joy": the three programs have been determined, and the world has been revived.

古文：圣道如天，嘉禾齐秀，寒暑和平。
现代文：圣道大如天，嘉禾齐秀发，寒暑和谐又安定。
English: The Holy Road is as big as the sky, the Jiahe River has beautiful hair, and the cold and hot weather are harmonious and stable.

古文：圣威无边皇基稳，胜磐石，庆云生。
现代文：圣人威武无边，帝王基业稳，胜过盘石，祥云涌生。
English: The sage's power is boundless, the emperor's foundation is stable, surpassing the stone, and the auspicious clouds are born.

古文：景星长现，三光辉耀，百谷收成，万姓安宁。
现代文：大星长现，三光辉耀，百谷收成，万姓得安宁。
English: The great star appears, the three lights shine, the hundred grains are harvested, and all families enjoy peace.

古文：其二，《得胜令》：圣德感皇乾，甘露降山川。
现代文：第二曲，《得胜令》：圣德感皇天，甘露降山川。
English: The second piece, "Order of Victory": The sense of sanctity is divine, the nectar descends from the mountains and rivers.

古文：万邦来朝贡，奇珍摆布全，玉阶下鸣鞭。
现代文：万国来朝贡，奇异珍宝摆设全，殿阶下示警呜鞭。
English: All nations come to pay tribute, strange treasures are displayed, and a warning whip is displayed at the foot of the throne.

古文：仰圣主，升金殿，丹墀列英贤，赞吾皇，丰稔年。
现代文：敬仰圣主，升登金殿，宫阶列英贤，赞颂我皇，喜获丰收年。
English: Admire the Holy Lord, ascend the Golden Hall, the palace steps are lined with sages, praise my emperor, and rejoice in the year of harvest.

古文：九奏《乐清宁之曲》，其一，《普天乐》：万邦宁，皇图正。
现代文：第九次演奏《乐清宁之曲》，第一曲，《普天乐》：万邦安宁，皇朝端正。
English: The ninth performance of "Music of Peace and Tranquility," the first piece, "Universal Music": peace and tranquility in all countries, the imperial dynasty is coming to an end.

古文：父君母后，天下咸钦。
现代文：父君母后，天下都钦敬。
English: After my father and mother, the whole world admired me.

古文：君治外，永圣明；后治内，长安静。
现代文：君治外朝，永远圣明；后治宫内，长久安静。
English: If you reign outside the court, you will always be holy; if you reign inside the court, you will be quiet for a long time.

古文：后圣承乾皆从正，德相传，圣子神孙。
现代文：后圣承天都从正，仁德相传，神圣子孙。
English: After the Holy Succession of Heaven, the righteous, benevolent and virtuous are passed down from generation to generation, and the holy children and grandchildren are born.

古文：天威浩荡，江山永固，洪福无穷。
现代文：天威浩荡，江山永牢固，大福无穷。
English: Heaven is vast and mighty, the country is eternally strong, and the blessings are endless.

古文：其二，《沽美酒》：和气生，满玉京；祥烟起，映皇宫。
现代文：第二曲，《沽美酒》：中和气生，满布京城，祥瑞姻起，辉映皇宫。
English: The second piece, "Fine Wine": Chinese harmony and vitality, full of Beijing, Xiang Rui marriage, Hui Ying palace.

古文：明圣开基整万民，风云会帝庭。奏箫韶，九韵成。
现代文：圣明君主开基业，整顿万民，风云交汇帝王庭，演奏箫韶，九韵完成。
English: The Emperor Shengming laid the foundation, rectified the people, and brought the imperial court together. The gongs were played and the nine rhymes were completed.

古文：其三，《太平令》：紫雾隐金鸾彩凤，祥光罩良将贤臣。
现代文：第三曲，《太平令》：紫雾隐隐金鸾彩凤，祥光笼罩，良将贤臣。
English: The third piece, "Taiping Ruling": purple mist looms, golden chrysanthemums and colorful phoenixes, auspicious light envelops, and good generals and wise men appear.

古文：玉案列珍羞美酝，宝鼎爇龙涎香喷。
现代文：玉案摆列，嘉肴美酒，宝鼎蒸腾，龙涎香喷喷。
English: Jade cases are lined up, exquisite dishes, fine wine, Baoding steaming, ambergris spraying.

古文：至尊永宁，储嗣守成，贺万万岁一人有庆。
现代文：皇帝永安宁，太子保守帝业成，祝贺万万岁，吉祥帝一人。
English: Emperor Yong Anning, Prince Conservative Emperor Ye Cheng, congratulations, long live, auspicious emperor is one.

古文：右二奏至八奏，俱奏百戏承应；第九奏，《鱼跃于渊》承应。
现代文：以上第二次演奏到第八次演奏，都进献百戏表演侍奉；第九次演奏，进献《鱼跃于渊》表演侍奉。
English: From the above-mentioned second performance to the eighth performance, all of them will present performances of one hundred plays; the ninth performance will present a performance of "Fish Leaping in the Deep."

古文：奉天门宴百官，止用《本太初》、《仰大明》、《民初生》三奏曲，其进酒、进膳乐同。惟百官叩头礼，用《朝天子》曲。
现代文：奉天门宴请百官，只用《本太初》、《仰大明》、《民初生》三奏曲，它的进酒、进膳乐相同只有百官叩头礼，用《朝天子》乐曲。
English: At the banquet held at the Gate of Heaven for the hundred officials, only the trios of "The Beginning of the Beginning," "Mount Tai Ming" and "The Firstborn of the People" were used. Its music for drinking and dining was the same, except for the bowing ceremony for the hundred officials, which used the music of "The Son of Heaven."

古文：宴毕，导驾还宫，用《御銮歌》。
现代文：宴会结束，引导车驾回宫，用《御銮歌》。
English: At the end of the banquet, guide the car back to the palace and sing "Song of Solomon."

古文：嘉靖间仁寿宫落成宴飨乐章。
现代文：嘉靖年间仁寿宫建成宴飨乐章：
English: During the Jiajing Dynasty, the Renju Palace was built.

古文：一奏《本太初之曲》，《朝天子》：帝诚帝明，宝位基昌命。
现代文：第一次演奏《本太初之曲》，《朝天子》：皇帝真诚皇帝圣明，初受天命即帝位国运昌盛。
English: The first performance of "Song of the First Emperor" and "Son of the Morning Star": Emperor Sincerity, Emperor Shengming, the first to receive the Mandate of Heaven, that is, the Imperial Throne and the prosperity of the country.

古文：仙苑开筵歌《鹿鸣》，亭殿天章映。我有嘉宾，鼓瑟吹笙。示周行，昭德音。
现代文：宫苑设筵歌《鹿鸣》，亭台殿阁与天文相映。 我有嘉宾，弹瑟吹笙 ，显示周行，昭告德音。
English: The palace garden features the elegiac "Deer Song," and the pavilion and pavilion are reflected in astronomy. I have guests, play the bagpipes, show the weekly schedule, and announce the dean.

古文：日升月恒，万载皇图正。
现代文：太阳升月永恒，万年皇位正。
English: The sun will rise and the moon will set forever, and the imperial throne will remain in place for all eternity.

古文：二奏《仰大明之曲》，《殿前欢》：天保定圣人，多寿多男庆。
现代文：第二次演奏《仰大明之曲》，《殿前欢》：上天保佑定圣人，多寿多男有吉庆。
English: The second performance of "Song of Yang Daming" and "Celebration in front of the hall": Heaven blesses the saint, and many men have a long life.

古文：修和礼乐协中兴，丽正重明，如山阜，如冈陵，如川方至莫不增。
现代文：修养和平、礼乐协和、帝业中兴，附着正道光明相继，高如山阜，又如冈陵，如水刚到无不加增。
English: Cultivating peace, harmonizing ritual and music, and promoting the imperial cause, adhering to the righteous path of light one after another, are as high as the mountains, as high as the hills, and as high as the water.

古文：协气生，祯祥应，百神受命，万国来庭。
现代文：协和之气生，吉祥征兆应，百神都受命，万国来朝廷。
English: The spirit of harmony is born, auspicious signs respond, hundreds of gods are ordered, and all nations come to the imperial court.

古文：三奏《民初生之曲》，其一，《沽美酒》：黄河清，宝露凝，瑞麦呈，灵鹊鸣，诸福来同仰圣明。
现代文：第三次演奏《民初生之曲》，第一曲，《沽美酒》：黄河水清，甘露凝聚，瑞麦呈祥，灵鹊呜叫，众福来到同仰圣明君。
English: The third performance of "Song of the Firstborn of the People," the first song, "Circle of Wine": The Yellow River water is clear, the nectar is condensed, the Ruimai is auspicious, the coffin is crying, and the blessed come to worship the holy Ming Jun.

古文：喜万宝告成，占景纬，泰阶平。
现代文：喜悦万宝报告功业成，占卜日与星，泰阶显和平。
English: Joyfully, Wanbao reported the accomplishment of his work, divined the day and the star, and found peace.

古文：其二，《太平令》：念农桑，衣食之本；仰君德，独厚民生。
现代文：第二曲，《太平令》：顾念农桑，衣食的根本；敬仰君德，独厚人民生。
English: The second piece, "The Taiping Decree": Consider the farmers and mulberry trees, the basis of food and clothing; respect the gentleman, the unique people's life.

古文：事耕凿，群黎百姓。
现代文：从事耕作，黎民百姓。
English: The people of Lai are engaged in farming.

古文：歌《鹿鸣》，神人胥庆。
现代文：歌唱《鹿鸣》，神人共庆。
English: Singing "Deer Song," the gods and mortals celebrate together.

古文：明主宴嘉宾，承筐鼓瑟吹笙，继自今福增天定。
现代文：明主宴飨嘉宾，欢迎宾客弹瑟吹笙，从今后福禄增由天定。
English: In the Ming Dynasty, the host of the banquet would welcome the guests with music. From now on, the increase of the fortune would be decided by heaven.

古文：四奏《品物亨之曲》，《醉太平》：瑶宫怡圣颜，阆苑隔人寰。
现代文：第四次演奏《品物亨之曲》，《醉太平》：皇宫圣容乐，宫苑隔人间。
English: The fourth performance of "The Tale of the Heir" and "Drunken Taiping": the music of the imperial court, the music of the imperial court.

古文：吹笙鼓瑟宾，旨酒天开宴，《鹿鸣》歌舞黄金殿，赖吾皇锡福万民安，醉歌《天保》欢。
现代文：吹笙弹瑟飨嘉宾，美酒天开宴。演奏《鹿呜》歌舞黄金殿，仰赖我皇上赐福万民安，酣醉高歌《天保》人心欢。
English: Guests playing the bagpipes, fine wine and a heavenly banquet. The performance of "Deer" song and dance golden hall, relying on my emperor to give blessings to all the people, drunk high song "Tenpo" people's hearts.

古文：五奏《御六龙之曲》，其一，《清江引》：圣主有道乐升平，宴会延休庆。
现代文：第五次演奏《御六龙之曲》，第一曲，《清江引》：圣主有道快乐升平，宴会延吉庆。
English: The fifth performance of "Song of the Six Dragons," the first song, "Clearing the River": the Lord has a way of happiness, and the banquet is extended.

古文：务本轸民生，弘化凝天命。
现代文：务求根本顾念民生，弘扬德化凝集天命。
English: In order to fundamentally consider the people's livelihood and carry forward the mission of moralization and agglomeration.

古文：欣落成，万载开鸿运。
现代文：欣喜宫建成，万年开大运。
English: With the completion of the Palace of Delight, the great fortune will continue forever.

古文：其二，《碧玉箫》：帝重农桑，法驾起明光。
现代文：第二曲，《碧玉箫》：皇帝重农桑，天子车驾起明光。
English: The second piece, "Jade Jade": the emperor emphasizes agriculture and mulberry, and the celestial chariot drives the bright light.

古文：麟游凤翔，宴陈《天保》章。
现代文：麒麟出游凤凰翱翔，宴席陈设《天保》章。
English: Kirin outing phoenix soaring, banquet display "Tianbao" chapter.

古文：开玳筵，荐瑶觞，既醉颂洋洋。
现代文：开设宫筵进献美酒，酣醉歌颂喜洋洋。
English: The palace was opened for the presentation of fine wine, and the guests sang and danced joyfully.

古文：圣德巍，皇恩荡，世际唐虞上。
现代文：圣德巍巍，皇恩浩荡，盛世遇虞、唐。
English: Sanctity and virtue, royal grace, prosperity and crisis, the Tang Dynasty.

古文：进膳曲，其一，《水龙吟》：宝瑟瑶笙鼓吹喧，圣天子，御华筵。
现代文：进膳曲，第一曲，《水龙吟》：宝瑟瑶笙鼓吹喧天，圣明天子，亲临华筵。
English: The entrance song, the first song, "Water Dragon Chanting": Baosheng preached the noisy sky, Shengmeizi, and personally went to Huaqi.

古文：南山万寿，瑞日正中天。
现代文：高如南山万万岁，祥瑞之日正中天。
English: As high as Nanshan Wanlong, the auspicious day is in the middle of the sky.

古文：百谷丰年，八方珍膳，人乐升平宴。
现代文：百谷得丰年，八方献美膳，人乐升平宴。
English: In the year of the hundred grain harvest, Happo will present a beautiful meal, and people's enjoyment will rise to a banquet.

古文：其二，《太清歌》：祥麦嘉瓜臻瑞，仰荷尧舜主，爱育群黎，感天意五风十雨。
现代文：第二曲，《太清歌》：祥麦嘉瓜至吉瑞，仰蒙尧、舜圣明主，爱抚养育众黎民，感通天意五日清风十日雨。
English: The second song, "Taiqing Song": Xiang Meijiagua to Jirui, looking up to and admiring the holy Ming Lord, loving and nurturing the Li people, and inspiring the divine will of five days of clear wind and ten days of rain.

古文：秋报春祈遍尔德，劝农桑，日用衣食。
现代文：秋季报祭春季祈谷遍赐恩德，鼓励农桑，日用衣食。
English: Autumn heralds the festival of spring, praying for the valley to be filled with blessings, encouraging farmers to plant mulberry trees, and providing clothing and food for daily use.

古文：嘉宾和乐开筵地，红云捧雕盘珍味。
现代文：嘉宾和乐设筵地，红云捧持雕盘美味。
English: The guests and musicians set up a table, and Hongyun holds a carved plate of delicacies.

古文：山呼万岁福无疆，日升川至。
现代文：山呼万岁幸福无疆，红日升百川至。
English: Long live happiness without borders, the red sun rises to the end of the world.

古文：其三，《上清歌》：仰赖吾皇，参天两地凝和气。
现代文：第三曲，《上清歌》：仰赖我皇上，参天两地凝集和畅气。
English: The third song, "Upper Qing Song": Relying on my emperor, the two places are agglomerated and cheerful.

古文：四三王，六五帝，四三王，六五帝，国家兴，贤才为上瑞。
现代文：四三王，六五帝，四三王，六五帝，国家兴盛，贤才最祥瑞。
English: Forty-three emperors, sixty-five emperors, forty-three emperors, sixty-five emperors, the country is prosperous, and the talents are most auspicious.

古文：养万民，九域熙，百禄咸宜。
现代文：抚养莴民，天下兴盛，百禄都相宜。
English: To raise up a virtuous people is to make the whole country prosperous, and it is worth a hundred times one's income.

古文：其四，《开天门》：宝殿辉，龙虎风云会。
现代文：第四曲，《开天门》：宝殿闪光辉，龙虎风云汇。
English: The fourth piece, "Opening Heaven's Gate": The treasure hall shines brightly, dragons and tigers mingle.

古文：瞻丹陛，觐紫微，周诗歌《既醉》，《螽斯》《麟趾》开祥瑞，仰飞龙，在天位。
现代文：瞻望宫阶，朝觐紫微，周诗歌《既醉》。《螽斯》《麟趾》开祥瑞，敬仰飞龙，处在天位。
English: Looking forward to the palace steps, the morning mist is purple and faint, the Zhou poetry "He is drunk." "Moses" "Uncle Toe" opens Xiangrui, admires the flying dragon, and is in the heavenly position.

古文：豳风亭宴讲官乐章。
现代文：豳风亭宴飨讲官乐章：
English: 風亭宴講官 Music:

古文：一奏《本太初之曲》，《朝天子》：九重诏传，殿阁开秋宴。
现代文：第一次演奏《本太初之曲》，《朝天子》：内宫诏命传，官殿亭阁设秋宴。
English: The first performance of "Song of the First Emperor" and "Son of the Morning Star": the imperial edict was passed down in the Inner Palace, and an autumn banquet was held in the Kanden Pavilion.

古文：授衣时节肃霜天，禾稼登场遍。
现代文：授衣时节深秋天，遍地禾稼场上展。
English: The dress-giving season is in late autumn, and the fields of crops are on display everywhere.

古文：鼓瑟吹笙，升平重见，工歌《七月》篇。
现代文：鼓瑟吹笙，升平社会重展现，乐工歌唱《七月》篇。
English: Drummers are blowing gongs, the rise and fall of society is once again on display, and musicians are singing "July."

古文：春酒当筵献，愿吾皇万年，岁岁临西苑。
现代文：春酒当筵敬呈献，祝愿我皇万万岁，年年临西苑。
English: Spring wine should be presented respectfully, I wish my emperor a long life, and I will visit the West Garden every year.

古文：二奏《仰大明之曲》，《殿前欢》：凤苑御筵开，黄花映玉阶。
现代文：第二次演奏《仰大明之曲》，《殿前欢》：凤苑皇家酒筵开，黄花映玉阶。
English: The second performance of "Song of Yang Daming" and "Celebration in front of the palace": Fengyuan royal wine is opened, yellow flowers reflect the steps of the throne.

古文：《鹿鸣》《天保》歌三代，古调新裁，奉君王寿杯。
现代文：《鹿呜》、《天保》歌颂三代，古调新体裁，奉献君王万寿杯。
English: "Luwu" and "Tianbao" sing the praises of three generations, old-fashioned and new genres, and dedicate the King Longevity Cup to the emperor.

古文：日月明，乾坤大，看年年秋报赛。
现代文：日月光明，乾坤广大，笑看年年秋报赛。
English: The sun and the moon are bright, the universe is vast, and it is fun to watch the annual autumn report competition.

古文：太平有象，元首明哉。
现代文：太平有征象，君王圣明哉！
English: There is a sign of peace, the king is a saint!

古文：三奏《民初生之曲》，其一，《沽美酒》：熙春阳，化日长。
现代文：第三次演奏《民初生之曲》，第一曲，《沽美酒》：和暖春阳，白昼天长。
English: The third performance of "Song of the Firstborn of the People," the first song, "Drinking Wine": Warm spring sun, long day.

古文：执懿筐，采柔桑。
现代文：手执深筐，采摘柔桑。
English: Hand holding a deep basket, picking mulberry.

古文：拾茧缲丝有万箱。
现代文：取茧缫丝有万箱。
English: There are tens of thousands of boxes of silk.

古文：染红黄孔阳，为公子制衣裳。
现代文：柒成红、黄色，色彩甚鲜明，为公子制成衣裳。
English: The cocoons are red and yellow, the colors are very bright, and they are made into clothes for boys.

古文：其二，《太平令》：勤树艺，岁年丰穰，九十月禾黍登场。
现代文：第二曲，《太平令》：勤劳种植，庄稼丰收，九月十月禾稼登场。
English: The second piece, "The Taiping Decree": diligent planting, bumper crops, September-October grain harvest.

古文：为春酒瓮浮新酿，村田乐齐歌齐唱。
现代文：制成春酒飘浓香，乡村快乐齐歌唱。
English: Made of spring wine, it has a strong fragrance, and the villagers sing happily.

古文：飨公堂，杀羊举觞，继进著兕觥，祝圣寿，万灵扶相。
现代文：宴飨公堂，杀羊举酒觞，继续进献着大杯，祝贺君王寿，万神共相帮。
English: The banquet was held in the court, the sheep were slaughtered, the wine was raised, the big cup was presented, the king's birthday was congratulated, and all the gods helped each other.

古文：四奏《品物亨之曲》，《醉太平》：纳嘉禾满场，酿御酒盈缸，公桑蚕绩制玄黄，服龙衣衮裳。
现代文：第四次演奏《品物亨之曲》，《醉太平》：收纳嘉禾满晒场，酿成御酒满瓮缸，公桑蚕绩制成黑与黄，穿上龙衣和衮裳。
English: The fourth performance of "The Song of the Product Hun" and "Drunken Taiping": the storage of Jiahe was full of drying fields, brewed into wine full of gourds, and the male mulberry was made into black and yellow, and put on dragon clothes and gowns.

古文：螽斯蟋蟀谐清唱，水光山色明仙仗，幽风亭殿进霞觞，祝圣寿无疆。
现代文：螽斯蟋蟀和谐清唱，水光山色明仙依仗，豳风亭殿献美酒：祝愿圣上寿无疆。
English: 斯 harmonic a cappella, water-bright mountain-colored celestial being, 风亭殿 offering fine wine: wishing the saint longevity without borders.

古文：五奏《御六龙之曲》，其一，《清江引》：九月风光何处有？
现代文：第五次演奏《御六龙之曲》，第一曲，《清江引》：九月风光何处有？
English: The fifth performance of "Song of the Six Dragons," the first song, "Clearing the River": Where is the scenery in September?

古文：凤苑在龙池右。
现代文：凤苑地处龙池右。
English: Fengyuan is located to the right of Longchi.

古文：农夫稼已登，公子衣方授，万岁君王频进酒。
现代文：农夫禾稼已收成，公子衣裳正相授，万岁君王频进酒。
English: The farmer's crops have been harvested, the prince's clothes are being awarded to each other, and the long-lived monarch frequently drinks wine.

古文：其二，《碧玉箫》：凡我生民，农桑最苦辛，终岁经营。
现代文：第二曲，《碧玉箫》：凡是我人民，农桑最苦辛，终年勤经营。
English: The second song, "Bright Jade": For all of our people, farmers are the most hard-working, and they work hard all year round.

古文：气候变冬春，田畯欣，妇子勤。
现代文：气候变冬春，田官欣喜，妇子辛勤。
English: The weather changes from winter to spring, the farmers rejoice, and the women and children work hard.

古文：詠豳诗，仰化钧，场圃新，风雨顺。
现代文：歌咏豳诗，景仰造化工，场圃一新，风调雨顺。
English: Singing poems, admiring the chemical industry, the field is a new one, the wind is good.

古文：宴御墀，龙颜近。
现代文：设宴御阶，皇帝龙颜近。
English: A banquet is being held on the royal steps, and the Emperor Longyan is nearby.

古文：进膳曲，其一，《水龙吟》：养老休农敞御筵，泻春酒，介耆年，刲羊剪韭，社鼓正阗阗。
现代文：进膳曲，第一曲，《水龙吟》：养老休农开御筵，倾注春酒，祈求长寿，杀羊割韭菜，社鼓敲得欢。
English: The pre-dinner song, the first song, "Water Dragon Chanting": retired farmers open the imperial gong, pour spring wine, pray for longevity, kill sheep, cut leeks, and the social drum beats happily.

古文：香粳米颗，升堂拜献，此乐真堪羡。
现代文：香粳米粒，升堂拜献，此乐真可羡。
English: Fragrant glutinous rice grains, ascending to worship, this fun is really enviable.

古文：其二，《太清歌》：九月天，开西苑，宸居无逸殿，讲幄张筵。
现代文：第二曲，《太清歌》：九月天，打开西苑，帝王居处无逸殿，讲幄设御筵。
English: The second song, "Taiqing Song": On the day of September, the West Garden was opened, and the imperial residence, Muxiyi Hall, was built.

古文：集儒流，云蒸星炫，璧纬珠躔。
现代文：聚集儒流，云气蒸腾星光炫，璧玉纬珍珠躔。
English: Confucianism is gathering, clouds are steaming, stars are dazzling, and gems and pearls abound.

古文：睹御制，焕天章，昭回云汉。
现代文：目睹帝制作，文章焕然，星辰光耀转云汉。
English: Witness the production of the emperor, the article is radiant, the stars shine and turn into clouds.

古文：尧天舜日民安宴，御廪神仓百谷登，金辉玉灿休征见，大有丰年。
现代文：尧舜天日民平安，御麇神仓百谷丰登，金辉玉灿美好征兆现，获得巨大丰收年。
English: The heavens and the earth are safe, the storehouses of the gods are full of bountiful grain, the golden radiance of the moon is a beautiful omen, and a year of great harvest has been obtained.

古文：其三，《上清歌》：凤苑宸居，公桑帝耤今方举。
现代文：第三曲，《上清歌》：凤苑皇帝居，公桑帝耕藉礼仪今正举。
English: The third song, "Upper Qing Song": Fengyuan is the emperor's residence, Gongsangdi is cultivating the etiquette now.

古文：躬耕蚕，劝士女，躬耕蚕，劝士女。
现代文：亲耕种亲养蚕，勉励男女，亲耕种亲养蚕，勉励男女。
English: Cultivate and raise silkworms, encourage men and women. Cultivate and raise silkworms, encourage men and women.

古文：献羊羔，升堂奏乐舞，葵菽枣壶上珍厨，万寿山呼。
现代文：进献羊羔，登堂奏乐舞，葵菽枣壶献珍肴，万寿齐山呼。
English: The sacrificial lamb was brought in, music and dance were performed in the hall, a jujube jug with sunflower seeds was offered as a precious dish, and the call for longevity rang out.

古文：其四，《开天门》：豳风亭，共仰吾皇圣。
现代文：第四曲，《开天门》：豳风亭，共同敬仰我皇圣明。
English: The fourth piece, "Opening Heaven's Gate": Gongfeng Pavilion, together they worshiped Emperor Shengming.

古文：百谷登，万国咸宁。
现代文：百谷丰登，万国都安宁。
English: Abundant grain and peace to all nations.

古文：民康物阜祯祥应，仰乾运，俯坤灵。
现代文：人民安康、物资富厚、吉祥征兆应，仰望天运，俯视坤灵。
English: People's well-being, material wealth, auspicious signs, looking up to heaven, looking down on Kunling.

古文：隆庆三年大阅礼成回銮乐章。
现代文：隆庆三年大阅礼完成车驾回京乐章：
English: The Longqing three-year grand ceremony concludes with the car driving back to Beijing movement:

古文：《武成之曲》：吾皇阅武成，简戎旅，壮帝京。
现代文：《武成之曲》：我皇检阅武备成，简选军队，威壮京城。
English: "Wu Cheng's Song": My emperor inspected Wu Bei Cheng, selected troops, and the majestic capital city.

古文：龙旗照耀虎豹营，六师云拥甲胄明。
现代文：龙旗照耀雄武营，六军云拥甲胄鲜明。
English: The dragon banner shines on the camp of Xiongwu, and the cloud of the six armies embraces the brightly colored armor.

古文：威灵广播，蛮夷震惊，稽首颂升平，四海澄清。
现代文：威禧广散播，蛮夷被震惊，叩头歌颂世升平，天下得澄清。
English: Wei Xiyi was widely disseminated, barbarians were shocked, and the world had to be clarified.

古文：嘉靖间皇后亲蚕宴内外命妇乐章。
现代文：嘉靖年间皇后行亲蚕礼宴飨内外受封号妇女乐章：
English: During the reign of Empress Jiajing, there was a banquet for the empress and her attendants, and the following music was played for the women inside and outside the palace:

古文：升座，奏《天香凤韶之曲》：春云缭绕芳郊曙，喜乾坤万象感舒，兰皋蕙圃迎仙驭。
现代文：升座，演奏《天香凤韶之曲》：春云缭绕芳郊天刚亮，喜天地万物全张舒，兰皋蕙圃迎候仙驭。
English: He ascended to the podium and performed "Song of Heavenly Incense and Phoenix": Spring clouds swirl around the beautiful countryside, the sky is just bright, everything in heaven and earth is joyful, and the orchid garden welcomes the fairies.

古文：采桑条，攀茂树。蚕宫茧馆亲临御。
现代文：采摘桑条，攀缘茂树，养蚕宫馆亲自临御。
English: He personally visited the palace to pick mulberry, climb trees, and raise silkworms.

古文：璧月珠星照太虚，开筵还驻翠旓旟，万载垂贞誉。
现代文：璧玉般月光珍珠般星照耀太空明，开筵回驻旌旗舞，万年垂留美名誉。
English: Jade-like moonlight, pearl-like stars shine brightly in the universe, reopen the flag dance, and retain the honor of the United States for thousands of years.

古文：进膳曲，《沽美酒》：蚕礼成，凤辇停，荐霞觞，列云屏。
现代文：进膳曲，《沽美酒》：亲蚕礼告成，后乘凤辇停，进献美酒，摆列云屏。
English: The prelude to the meal, "The Feast of Fine Wine": The ceremony is concluded with a feast of silkworms, followed by a feast of phoenixes, the presentation of fine wine, and the display of cloud screens.

古文：宫妃世妇仰坤宁。
现代文：宫妃世妇瞻仰皇后仪容。
English: Court ladies admire the queen's appearance.

古文：祥云映紫冥，同祝颂，耀前星。
现代文：祥云映天空，同声祝颂，照耀前星同。
English: The auspicious clouds reflect the sky, and the praises are sung in unison. The shining stars are the same.

古文：回宫，《御銮歌》：惟天启圣皇，君耕耤，后躬桑，身先田织率万邦。
现代文：回宫，《御銮歌》：惟天开圣皇，君行耕藉礼，皇后亲蚕桑，身先耕织表率万邦。
English: Returning to the palace, "Song of Solomon": However, the emperor opened the heavens, the king performed the cultivating ceremony, the queen was a silkworm, and the first to cultivate and weave was a model for all nations.

古文：天清地宁民阜康，百谷用成，四夷来王。
现代文：天清地宁人民富裕又安康，百谷好收成，四夷来朝王。
English: During the Qing Dynasty, the people of Dining were prosperous and healthy, with good harvests in hundreds of provinces, and four emperors came to power.

古文：治化登虞唐，世发祯祥。
现代文：治理教化超过虞、唐，世世发吉祥。
English: The governance and enlightenment surpasses the Yu and Tang dynasties, and is auspicious in all ages.

古文：永乐间定东宫宴飨乐章。
现代文：永乐年间制定束宫宴飨乐章：
English: During Yongle's reign, a set of palace banquet rhyme movements were formulated:

古文：一奏《喜千春之曲》，《贺圣朝》：开国承天，圣感极多，总一统，封疆阔。
现代文：第一次演奏《喜干春之曲》，《贺圣朝》：开国承上天，圣感极多，总管一统，封疆广阔。
English: The first performance of "Song of Joyful Spring" and "Salute to the Sacred Spring": the founding of the country was inherited from heaven, there are many sacred feelings, the general management is unified, and the territory is vast.

古文：百姓快活，万物荣光，共沐恩波。
现代文：百姓得快活，万物显荣光，共沐帝恩泽。
English: The people were happy, all things were glorious, and all were blessed by the emperor.

古文：仙音韵，合赞升平咏歌。
现代文：神仙音韵，合唱升平咏叹歌。
English: Immortal melody, chorus soaring aria.

古文：齐朝拜，千千岁东宫，满国春和。
现代文：齐朝拜，千千岁太子，满国春畅和。
English: Qi Zhaobai, the thousand-year-old prince, and the spring of Manchukuo.

古文：二奏《永南山之曲》，《水仙子》：洪基永固海波清，盛世明时礼乐兴，华夷一统江山静。
现代文：第二次演奏《永南山之曲》，《水仙子》：洪大基业永固海波清，盛明之世礼乐兴，华夏夷狄统一，江山清静。
English: The second performance of "Song of Yongnan Mountain" and "Water Nymphs": Hongda Ji'e's "Song of Yongnan Mountain" and "Water Nymphs": Hongda Ji'e's "Song of Yongnan Mountain" and "Water Nymphs": Hongda Ji'e's "Song of Yongnan Mountain" and "Water Nymphs":

古文：民通和，乐太平。
现代文：人民和睦，乐享太平。
English: The people live in harmony and enjoy peace.

古文：赞东宫仁孝贤明，秉钧衡端正，顺乾坤泰亨，坐中华万世昌宁。
现代文：赞颂太子仁孝又贤明，秉持钧衡要端正，顺应干坤安泰通亨，坐镇中华，万代昌盛又安宁。
English: Praise the prince for his benevolence, filial piety and wisdom, for upholding the principle of balance and rectitude, for adhering to the principle of stability and harmony, for leading the Chinese nation, and for the prosperity and tranquility of all generations.

古文：三奏《桂枝香之曲》，《蟾宫曲》：晓光融，宴飨春宫，日朗风和，喜气葱葱。
现代文：第三次演奏《桂枝香之曲》，《蟾宫曲》：清晓光融融，宴飨在东宫，太阳晴朗风顺和，古祥之气正葱葱。
English: The third performance of "Song of the Guizhi Fragrance" and "Song of the Summer Palace": The sky is clear and the light is melting, the banquet is in the East Palace, the sun is clear and the wind is smooth, and the ancient atmosphere is in full swing.

古文：镇领台枢，规宏纲宪，礼节至公。
现代文：镇领宰辅，规范发扬纲常法纪，礼节达到最允公。
English: The town will lead the auxiliary, standardize and develop the normal law and discipline, and the etiquette will reach the most fair.

古文：事圣上柔声婉容，问安宁勤孝虔恭。
现代文：事奉圣上，柔和声音婉仪容，问候安宁、勤奋孝顺诚静与谦恭。
English: He serves as a priest, his voice is soft and his appearance is gentle, and his greetings are of peace, diligence, filial piety, sincerity, tranquility and modesty.

古文：果断宽洪，刚健文明，圣德合同。
现代文：果断又宽宏，刚健带文明，圣君德合同。
English: Resolute and magnanimous, robust and civilized, the saintly and virtuous contract.

古文：四奏《初春晓之曲》，《小梁州》：端拱严宸事紫微，秉运璇玑，四时百物总相宜。
现代文：第四次演奏《初春晓之曲》，《小梁州》：恭敬有礼严肃宫禁奉事紫微，执掌运璇玑，四季万物都相宜。
English: The fourth performance of "Song of Early Spring" and "Little Liangzhou": Respectful, courteous, serious, forbidden to serve the purple and white, in charge of transportation, all things in the four seasons are appropriate.

古文：仰赖明君德，大业胜磐石。
现代文：仰赖圣明君主德，帝王大业胜遇盘石。
English: Relying on the sacred virtue of the monarchy, the emperor's great cause will be successful.

古文：皇储仁孝明忠义，美遐方顺化朝仪。
现代文：太子仁孝明忠义，褒美远方归顺教化谨守朝廷礼仪。
English: Prince Jinxiao is known for his loyalty, and rewards those who follow the teachings from afar and strictly observe the imperial court etiquette.

古文：孝能欢慈爱心，敬笃上尊卑意，礼上和下睦民，鼓舞乐雍熙。
现代文：孝能让父母欢心，诚敬遵守尊卑意。礼敬上位和睦下民，欢歌曼舞和乐庆升平。
English: Filial piety can make parents happy, and sincerity and respect can keep the spirit of superiority and inferiority. Reverence and respect for superiors and harmony among subordinates, and joyful singing and dancing and music and celebration can level the playing field.

古文：五奏《乾坤泰之曲》，《满庭芳》：春和玳筵，安邦兴国，钦圣尊贤，文英武烈于民便。
现代文：第五次演奏《乾坤泰之曲》，《满庭芳》：春日和畅设华筵，安邦兴国，敬仰圣君尊明贤，文臣多谋武将猛，于民有利便。
English: The fifth performance of "Song of Qian Kun Tai" and "Man Ting Fang": the Spring Festival and the opening of the Spring Festival are auspicious, the country is prosperous, the saint is revered, the scholar is more resourceful, and the warrior is fierce, which is convenient for the people.

古文：礼乐成全，享大业中庸不偏，顺天常节俭为先，达文献严仪训典，孝敬亿千年。
现代文：礼乐完成甚周全，享大业持中庸不倚不偏，顺应天道节俭为先，通达文献严肃礼仪遵守训典，孝敬永保亿万年。
English: The ceremonial music is very complete, enjoy the great cause, hold the middle way, be impartial, conform to the heavenly way and be frugal first, have access to literature, serious etiquette, abide by the code, and cherish for hundreds of millions of years.

古文：六奏《昌运颂之曲》，《喜秋风》：文武安，军民乐。
现代文：第六次演奏《昌运颂之曲》，《喜秋风》：文武安恬，军民欢乐。
English: The sixth performance of "Chang Yun Song" and "Xi Qiu Feng": the military and civilians are happy.

古文：宴文华，会班僚，五云齐动钧天乐。
现代文：设宴文华殿，会集同班僚佐，帝宫齐奏上天乐。
English: Set up a banquet at the Wenhua Hall, gather with classmates and assistants, and the imperial palace will play heavenly music.

古文：贺春宫，赞皇朝。
现代文：祝贺束宫，赞颂皇朝福。
English: Congratulate Sokgong and praise the imperial family.

古文：右二奏至六奏，俱奏百戏承应。
现代文：以上第二次演奏至第六次演奏，都进献百戏表演侍奉。
English: The above-mentioned second performance to the sixth performance, are all dedicated to the performance of the opera.

古文：七奏《泰道开之曲》，《沽美酒》：布春风，满画楼，对嘉景，凤凰洲。
现代文：第七次演奏《泰道开之曲》，第一曲，《沽美酒》：遍布春风，充满画楼，面对美景，凤凰洲。
English: The seventh performance of the "Song of Tai Dao Kai" and the first song, "Wang Mei Wine": spring breeze everywhere, full of art galleries, facing beautiful scenery, phoenix.

古文：高捧金波碧玉瓯，设威仪左右，分品从，列公侯。
现代文：高捧金波碧玉瓯，设立威仪在左右，分别品级相随从，班列公候。
English: The golden wave and the jasper and jade are held in high esteem, and dignity is established on the left and right, respectively.

古文：其二，《太平令》：效圣上诚心勤厚，主宗器严备《春秋》，谐律吕仙音齐奏，钦王政皇天保佑。
现代文：第二曲，《太平令》：仿效圣上，诚心勤劳又笃厚，主掌宗庙，严备《春秋》，和谐音律美妙乐齐奏，敬顺王政皇天保佑。
English: The second piece, "Taiping Ruling": Imitate the saint, sincere, hard-working and virtuous, head of the ancestral temple, strict "Spring and Autumn," harmonious melody and wonderful music, respect and obey the king, the emperor and heaven bless.

古文：拜舞顿首，赞祝进酒，千千岁康宁福寿。
现代文：跪拜行礼虔叩头，礼赞祝福献美酒，千岁康宁幸福长寿。
English: Kneel in worship, bow down reverently, praise and bless, offer fine wine, and live a long and happy life.

古文：迎膳乐曲，《水龙吟》：方响笙闉鼓乐喧，排宝器，开玳筵。
现代文：迎膳乐曲，《水龙吟》：正奏笙篥鼓乐喧天，排列宝器，开设盛筵。
English: The welcome music, "Water Dragon": the gong and drum music are played, the treasures are arranged, and the feast is opened.

古文：鸾仪旌工，锦绣景相连。
现代文：仪仗旌节，锦绣景相连。
English: The ceremonial war and the Lantern Festival are connected by the beautiful scenery.

古文：簪缨趋进，皆来朝见，春满文华殿。
现代文：众官趋步进，都来朝见，春意充满文华殿。
English: All the officials are moving forward. They are all coming to the morning meeting. Spring is in full bloom at the Wenhua Hall.

古文：升座、还宫、百官行礼，奏《千秋岁曲》：尧年舜日胜禹周，庆云生缭绕凤楼。
现代文：升座、回宫、百官行礼，演奏《千秋岁曲》：尧年舜日胜遇禹、周，祥云生缭绕凤楼。
English: He ascended the throne, returned to the palace, bowed to the dignitaries, and played the "Song of the Thousand Autumns": "In the year of the dragon, in the year of the rooster, in the year of the rooster, in the year of the rooster, in the year of the rooster, in the year of the rooster, in the year of the rooster, in the year of the rooster, in the year of the rooster, in the year of the rooster."

古文：风调雨顺五谷收，万民畅歌讴。
现代文：风调雨顺五谷丰收，万民欢乐齐歌诬。
English: The weather is fine, the harvest is good, and all the people are singing happily.

