古文：狄郝硃狄仁杰，字怀英，并州太原人。
现代文：狄仁杰，字怀英，并州太原人氏。
English: Di Renjie, Zi Huaiying, and Shuzhou Taiyuan people.

古文：为儿时，门人有被害者，吏就诘，众争辨对，仁杰诵书不置，吏让之，答曰： 黄卷中方与圣贤对，何暇偶俗吏语耶？ 
现代文：小时候，门人中有被杀害的，吏就此事前来盘问，众门人争辩、讨论。仁杰仍诵读书文不放下，吏责备他，他回答说 ：正在书卷中与圣贤对话，哪有空闲同时与俗吏说话呢？ 
English: When he was a child, one of his disciples was killed. The officials came to interrogate him about this in advance, and all the disciples argued and discussed. Rinjay still did not give up reading. The officials scolded him, and he replied, "When you are talking to saints and sages in books, how can you have time to talk to ordinary people?"

古文：举明经，调汴州参军。
现代文：后被推举为通晓经术的人才，升调做汴州参军。
English: Later, he was selected as a talented person who knew the scriptures, and was promoted to join the army in Zhangzhou.

古文：为吏诬诉，黜陟使阎立本召讯，异其才，谢曰： 仲尼称观过知仁，君可谓沧海遗珠矣。 
现代文：受到吏的诬告，黜陟使阎立本召见并讯问他，觉得狄仁杰的才能不同一般，带有歉意说： 圣人仲尼称观过知仁，你可以说是沧海遗珠啊！ 
English: Having been falsely accused by officials, he summoned Yan Liben and interrogated him. He felt that Di Renjie's talent was different from the average, and said with apologies: The saint Zhongni said that he had seen Zhiren, you can say that it is the pearl of the sea!

古文：荐授并州法曹参军。
现代文：极力推荐他，使他得授并州法曹参军。
English: Strongly recommended him, so that he was awarded and joined the army as a state legal officer.

古文：亲在河阳，仁杰登太行山，反顾，见白云孤飞，谓左右曰： 吾亲舍其下。 
现代文：狄仁杰的父母亲住在河阳，他登上太行山，回头远望，见白云孤飞，对左右说： 我的父母亲就住在它的下面。 
English: Di Renjie's parents lived in Kheyang. He climbed Mount Taihang, looked back into the distance, saw the white clouds flying alone, and said to the right and left: My parents live under it.

古文：瞻怅久之，云移乃得去。
现代文：望了很久、很久，直到白云移了位置，他才离去。
English: He looked for a long, long time, until the white clouds moved and he left.

古文：同府参军郑崇质母老且疾，当使绝域。
现代文：同一知府的参军郑崇质的母亲年老多病，又碰上郑崇质被派出使边远之地。
English: The mother of Zheng Chongqing, who joined the army in the same prefecture, was old and sick, and Zheng Chongqing was sent to a remote place.

古文：仁杰谓曰： 君可贻亲万里忧乎？ 
现代文：仁杰对他说 ：你能够让母亲因您远在万里而忧愁吗？ 
English: Renjie said to him: Can you make your mother sad because you are thousands of miles away?

古文：诣长史兰仁基请代行。仁基咨美其谊，时方与司马李孝廉不平，相敕曰： 吾等可少愧矣！ 
现代文：于是，向长史蔺仁基建议代替郑前去，仁基嗟叹赞美狄、郑的情谊，这时，仁基正与司马李孝廉不和，有感而对李说： 咱们不觉得惭愧了。 
English: As a result, he suggested to the Chief of the General Staff, Renji, to go in place of Zheng, and Renji praised the friendship between Di and Zheng. At this time, Renji was at odds with Sima Li Xiaolian, and said to Li with feeling: We do not feel ashamed.

古文：则相待如初，每曰： 狄公之贤，北斗以南，一人而已。 
现代文：蔺、李二人相处得如当初那样好了。每一提及，就说： 狄公贤德，北斗以南，仅此一人而已。 
English: The two of them get along as well as they did in the beginning. Every time they are mentioned, they say: Di Gongxiande, south of the Big Dipper, is just one person.

古文：稍迁大理丞，岁中断久狱万七千人，时称平恕。
现代文：过了不久，狄仁杰升迁为大理丞，一年之中，判完了积压的案件达一万七千人之多，被当时的人称颂为 平恕 。
English: Not long after, Di Renjie was promoted to the post of Dalizheng, and in one year, he completed the backlog of 17,000 cases, which was praised by the people at the time as a pardon.

古文：左威卫大将军权善才、右监门中郎将范怀义坐误斧昭陵柏，罪当免，高宗诏诛之。
现代文：左威卫大将军权善才、右监门中郎将范怀义由于用斧误砍昭陵的柏树，按律定罪应当免死，唐高宗却下诏书要杀他们。
English: Zuo Wei Wei general Quan Shencai and Guanmen chengro commander Fan Huaiyi were sentenced to death for cutting down the cypress tree of Zhaoling with an axe, but Tang Gaozong issued an edict to kill them.

古文：仁杰奏不应死，帝怒曰： 是使我为不孝子，必杀之。 
现代文：仁杰上奏章申述他们不应当论死，高宗发脾气说： 这是使我背不孝子孙的罪名，一定要杀。 
English: When Renjie wrote a petition saying that they should not be sentenced to death, Gao Zong lost his temper and said, "This is a crime of betraying my filial children. I must be killed."

古文：仁杰曰： 汉有盗高庙玉环，文帝欲当之族，张释之廷诤曰： 假令取长陵一抔土，何以加其法？ 
现代文：仁杰说： 西汉有偷盗高庙玉环之事，汉文帝想要灭其族，张释之在朝廷直言规劝说 ：假如盗取了长陵一把土，将如何按律加其罪？ 
English: Renjie said: In Western Han, there was a case of stealing the high temple's jade ring. Emperor Hanwen wanted to exterminate his people. Zhang Xizhi directly persuaded the imperial court: If you steal a handful of soil from Changling, how will you punish it according to the law?

古文：於是罪止弃市。
现代文：于是罪只杀一人。
English: As a result, only one person was convicted of murder.

古文：陛下之法在象魏，固有差等。犯不至死而致之死，何哉？
现代文：陛下的法律悬挂在宫外阙门上，法律规定本来就有差别等次的，罪不至于死而让他们去死，这是什么缘故呢？
English: Your majesty's law hangs on the palace gate, the law stipulates that there are differences and so on, the crime does not die and let them die, what is the reason for this?

古文：今误伐一柏，杀二臣，后世谓陛下为何如主？ 
现代文：现在误砍一株柏树，就杀掉二位大臣，后世之人将说陛下是什么样的君主呢？ 
English: Now, if you cut down a cypress tree by mistake, you will kill two ministers, and future generations will say, "What kind of monarch is Your Majesty?"

古文：帝意解，遂免死。
现代文：高宗的心里疙瘩解开了，于是免去了二人的死罪。
English: Gao Zong's heart was loosened, and the two men were spared the death penalty.

古文：数日，授侍御史。
现代文：过了几天，任命狄仁杰为侍御史。
English: A few days later, Di Renjie was appointed as an attendant historian.

古文：左司郎中王本立怙宠自肆，仁杰劾奏其恶，有诏原之。
现代文：左司郎中王本立以为得宠而放纵自己，肆无忌惮，仁杰上奏弹劾，列其罪恶。
English: Zuo Si Lang Zhong Wang originally thought that he would be favored and indulged himself, unscrupulously. Ren Jie impeached him and listed his sins.

古文：仁杰曰： 朝廷借乏贤，如本立者不鲜。
现代文：诏书下，意在宽宥。仁杰说： 朝廷如果借缺乏贤才而宽恕他们，那像本立这样的人倒不少。
English: Under the imperial edict, forgiveness is intended. Ren Jie said: If the court forgives them for lack of talent, there are many people like Hong Li.

古文：陛下惜有罪，亏成法，奈何？
现代文：陛下怜惜有罪，而让成文的法律有亏损，怎么办呢？
English: What will your majesty do for the guilty, and for the loss of the written law?

古文：臣愿先斥，为群臣戒。 
现代文：我愿率先被斥，让满朝文武大臣有所警戒。 
English: I would like to be the first to be expelled, so that the Manchurian Minister of Culture and Martial Arts would be alerted.

古文：本立抵罪。
现代文：于是，本立抵罪。
English: As a result, Hondori pleaded guilty.

古文：繇是朝廷肃然。
现代文：由于这，朝廷纪纲肃然。
English: As a result of this, the Imperial Court's disciplinary system was in disarray.

古文：使岐州，亡卒数百剽行人，道不通。
现代文：仁杰出使岐州时，有数百逃亡的士兵，抢劫过往行人财物，致路不畅通。
English: When Renxing led his army to Qizhou, there were hundreds of soldiers who fled, robbed the property of passers-by, and the road was not smooth.

古文：官捕系盗党穷讯，而余曹纷纷不能制。
现代文：官府捕捉盗党并严加审讯，余党则四处作乱而又制止不住。
English: The government caught the thieves and severely interrogated them, while the rest of the party caused chaos everywhere and could not be stopped.

古文：仁杰曰： 是其计穷，且为患。 
现代文：仁杰说 ：这是他们走投无路而成了祸患。 
English: Renjie said, "It's because they have no choice but to become a scourge."

古文：乃明开首原格，出系者，禀而纵之，使相晓，皆自缚归。
现代文：于是公开说明自首的待遇。凡捕捉到的告诉他们后就放了，使他们相互知晓。结果，这些盗徒都来归案自首。
English: So they publicly explained the treatment of those who turned themselves in. Anyone who was caught was released after telling them, so that they could get to know each other. As a result, these thieves all turned themselves in.

古文：帝叹其达权宜。
现代文：高宗赞叹仁杰权宜达变得当。
English: Gao Zong praised Ren Jie's ability to become a leader.

古文：迁度支郎中。
现代文：仁杰升迁为度支郎中。
English: Ninjie was promoted to Dojiro Junior High School.

古文：帝幸汾阳宫，为知顿使。
现代文：高宗驾幸汾阳宫，仁杰为知顿使。
English: Gao Zong drove to the Poyang Palace, and Renjie was the messenger.

古文：并州长史李冲玄以道出石女祠，俗言盛服过者，致风雷之变，更发卒数万改驰道。
现代文：并州长史李氵中玄以路必经妒女祠，民间传言盛服经过，会招致风雷交加为由，征发数万士卒改修皇帝经过的驰道。
English: And Governor Shi Li Yuzhongxuan, on the grounds that the road must pass through the envy of the female shrine, and the folk rumor that the grand dress would cause wind and thunder, conscripted tens of thousands of men to renovate the road passed by the emperor.

古文：仁杰曰： 天子之行，风伯清尘，雨师洒道，何石女避邪？ 
现代文：仁杰说： 天子出行，风伯为之清尘，雨师前来洒道，为什么要回避妒女呢？ 
English: Renjie said: The heavenly son travels, the wind brother clears the dust for him, the rain master comes to sprinkle the road, why should he avoid the jealous woman?

古文：止其役。
现代文：于是，制止了这次徭役。
English: As a result, the hazing was stopped.

古文：帝壮之，曰： 真丈夫哉！ 
现代文：高宗嘉奖仁杰说 ：真正的大丈夫啊！ 
English: Gao Zong Citation Renjie said: It's really okay!

古文：出为宁州刺史，抚和戎落，得其欢心，郡人勒碑以颂。
现代文：仁杰出任宁州刺史，安抚各戎部落，深得他们的欢心，宁州郡人立碑颂扬这件事。
English: Ren outstanding appointment of Ningzhou stabbing history, appease the various Rong tribes, deeply won their favor, Ningzhou County people erected a monument to celebrate this event.

古文：入拜冬官侍郎、持节江南巡抚使。
现代文：仁杰调入朝廷，拜为冬官侍郎，任江南巡抚使出使。
English: Nijie was transferred to the imperial court, and served as the attendant of the winter official and the envoy of the governor of Jiangnan Province.

古文：吴、楚俗多淫祠，仁杰一禁止，凡毁千七百房，止留夏禹、吴太伯、季札、伍员四祠而已。
现代文：吴、楚一带民间习俗，滥设祠堂。仁杰下令禁止，毁掉祠堂一千七百余座，只留下夏禹、吴太伯、季札、伍员的祠堂四座。
English: It was a folk custom in the regions of Wu and Chu to set up ancestral halls indiscriminately. Ren Jie issued an order to ban it, destroying more than 1,700 ancestral halls, leaving only four ancestral halls for Xia Yu, Wu Tai Bo, Ji Zha, and the soldiers.

古文：转文昌右丞，出豫州刺史。
现代文：仁杰转调文昌右丞，出任豫州刺史。
English: Renjie was transferred to Wenchang Rongzheng, and served as the governor of Yuzhou.

古文：时越王兵败，支党余二千人论死。
现代文：当时越王的兵被打败，剩下党羽二千多人论罪当死。
English: At that time, the soldiers of King Yue were defeated, and more than two thousand of the remaining party members were sentenced to death.

古文：仁杰释其械，密疏曰： 臣欲有所陈，似为逆人申理；不言，且累陛下钦恤意。表成复毁，自不能定。
现代文：仁杰收缴了他们的兵器，上密奏说： 臣想有所陈奏，又似乎在替叛逆之人说理；不说，将连累陛下没有体恤之意，奏章写好了又毁掉了，我拿不定主意。
English: Rinchen Dorjee Rinpoche collected their weapons, and said to the secret recorder: "The minister wants to make a point, and seems to be making a point for the traitor; besides, he has no compassion for His Majesty, he has written and destroyed the record, I can't make up my mind."

古文：然此皆非本恶，诖误至此。 
现代文：这些人都不是本意要作乱，而是被胁迫、连累成这样的。 
English: These people did not intend to create a disturbance, but were coerced into it.

古文：有诏悉谪戍边。
现代文：不久，诏令下，全都被贬到边疆戍卫。
English: Soon, under the imperial edict, they were all relegated to guarding the frontier.

古文：囚出宁州，父老迎劳曰： 狄使君活汝耶！ 
现代文：他们被押解出宁州时，父老乡亲迎着并安慰他们说： 狄使君使你们活着啊！ 
English: When they were escorted out of Ningzhou, their parents and fellow villagers greeted them and consoled them, saying: "Di Zhi Jun kept you alive!

古文：因相与哭碑下。
现代文：因而，他们都相聚在碑下哭泣。
English: So they all gathered under the monument and wept.

古文：囚斋三日乃去。至流所，亦为立碑。
现代文：这些囚徒斋戒三日后才离开宁州，到了被流放的处所，又为狄仁杰立碑。
English: These prisoners fasted for three days before leaving Ningzhou. They went to the place where they were exiled and erected a monument to Di Renjie.

古文：初，宰相张光辅讨越王。军中恃功，多暴索，仁杰拒之。
现代文：当初，宰相张光辅讨伐越王，仗军功自傲，多有过分的索取，被仁杰拒绝。
English: At the beginning, the prime minister Zhang Guangfu fought against the king of Yue, was proud of his military achievements, and often made excessive demands, which were rejected by Renjie.

古文：光辅怒曰： 州将轻元帅邪？ 
现代文：光辅发怒说 ：州府难道轻视元帅不成？ 
English: Guangfu said angrily, "Isn't it true that the prefectural government despised the marshal?

古文：仁杰曰： 乱河南者一越王，公董士三十万以平乱，纵使暴横，使无辜之人咸坠涂炭，是一越王死，百越王生也。
现代文：狄仁杰说： 乱河南的只是越王一人，您率领三十万之众来平息叛乱却放纵他们残暴横行，使无辜的百姓都坠入涂炭之中，这是死了一个越王，却生出了一百个越王。
English: Di Renjie said, "Yue Wang was the only one who caused chaos in Henan Province. You led 300,000 people to quell the rebellion, but allowed them to run amok, leaving innocent people in the lurch. This was the death of one Yue Wang, but the birth of a hundred Yue Kings.

古文：且王师之至，民归顺以万计，自缒而下，四面成蹊。
现代文：况且，王师一到，百姓的归顺数以万计，从城上缒下的人，把城外的四面都走成了小路。
English: Moreover, as soon as Wang Shi arrived, tens of thousands of people surrendered, and the people who came down from the top of the city made the four sides outside the city into paths.

古文：奈何纵邀赏之人杀降以为功，冤痛彻天？
现代文：您为什么放纵邀功请赏的人以杀害投降之人来作为功劳，使得喊冤的痛哭之声响彻上天？
English: Why do you allow those who seek honor and reward to take credit for killing those who surrender, causing the cries of injustice to resound to the heavens?

古文：如得上方斩马剑加君颈，虽死不恨！ 
现代文：假如我能得到上方斩马之剑加到您的脖子上，即使死了也没有什么遗憾了。 
English: If I could get the sword from the top of the horse to add to your neck, even if you die, there would be nothing to regret.

古文：光辅还，奏仁杰不逊，左授复州刺史。徙洛州司马。
现代文：张光辅还朝，上奏报狄仁杰不谦虚谨慎，狄仁杰被贬谪为复州刺史，后又被谪迁为洛州司马。
English: When Zhang Guangfu was still in power, he reported that Di Renjie was not modest and prudent. Di Renjie was relegated to Fuzhou, and later he was transferred to Lozhou.

古文：天授二年，以地官侍郎同凤阁鸾台平章事。
现代文：天授二年，狄仁杰以地官侍郎的身份，同时领风阁鸾台平章事。
English: In the second year of Tianju, Di Renjie, as a local official's attendant, also led the way to the pavilion and the platform.

古文：武后谓曰： 卿在汝南有善政，然有谮卿者，欲知之乎？ 
现代文：武后对他说 ：你在汝南有政绩，但也有诋毁你的人，要想知道他吗？ 
English: Empress Wu said to him, "You have political achievements in the south of China, but there are also people who slander you. Do you want to know who they are?"

古文：谢曰： 陛下以为过，臣当改之；以为无过，臣之幸也。
现代文：仁杰辞谢说： 陛下您认为是错的，臣一定改正错；认为我没有错，那就是臣的幸运。
English: Renjie thanked him and said, "Your Majesty, if you think I am wrong, I will definitely correct my mistake. If you think I am not wrong, that is your good fortune.

古文：谮者乃不愿知。 
现代文：诋毁之人是谁，我不愿意知道。 
English: I don't want to know who the detractors are.

古文：后叹其长者。
现代文：武后赞叹他为忠厚长者。
English: Empress Wu praised him as a loyal elder.

古文：时太学生谒急，后亦报可。
现代文：当时太学生紧急求见，武后闻报认为可以。
English: At that time, the student urgently asked to see him, and Wu Hou Wen Bao thought it was OK.

古文：仁杰曰： 人君惟生杀柄不以假人，至簿书期会，宜责有司。
现代文：仁杰说 ：人君只有生杀权柄不能借给他人，至于签署文书、上奏请见应当责成有关部门去办理。
English: Renjie said: Only the power of life and death can not be lent to others. As for signing documents and reporting, please see that the relevant departments should be instructed to handle it.

古文：尚书省决事，左、右丞不句杖，左、右丞相不判徒，况天子乎？
现代文：尚书省决断事务，左、右丞不管拘捕；左、右丞相不判决囚犯，何况天子呢？
English: The Ministry of Education and Culture decides on affairs, the left and right ministers do not care about arrest; the left and right ministers do not sentence prisoners, and what about the emperor?

古文：学徒取告，丞、簿职耳，若为报可，则胄子数千，凡几诏耶？
现代文：太学生们告见，这是丞、簿的职责，如果报告允许谒见，那些贵胄弟子多达数千人，得下多少诏令呢？
English: It is the duty of the secretary and the bookkeeper to inform the students. If the report allows the audience, those noble disciples are as many as thousands. How many imperial decrees will be issued?

古文：为定令示之而已。 
现代文：只要将明文规定告诉他们就行了。 
English: Just tell them what the rules are.

古文：后纳其言。
现代文：武后采纳了仁杰的意见。
English: Wu Hou adopted Ren Jie's opinion.

古文：会为来俊臣所构，捕送制狱。
现代文：狄仁杰被酷吏来俊臣诬陷犯了谋反罪，被捕入狱。
English: Di Renjie was falsely accused of treason by the cruel officials and was arrested and imprisoned.

古文：于时，讯反者一问即臣，听减死。
现代文：这时，其他受牵连的人犯害怕来俊臣的严刑拷打，都含屈招认，只求听到减免死罪的消息。
English: At this time, the other implicated criminals were afraid of being severely tortured by the young minister, and all of them confessed, only asking to hear the news of commutation of the death penalty.

古文：俊臣引仁杰置对，答曰： 有周革命，我乃唐臣，反固实。 
现代文：来俊臣提审仁杰，仁杰说： 周朝革命，我是唐臣，谋反历来就是事实。 
English: When the young minister came to arraign Renjie, Renjie said: Zhou Dynasty revolution, I am a Tang minister, plotting rebellion has always been a fact.

古文：俊臣乃挺系。
现代文：来俊臣用木棒毒打，抓入牢狱。
English: Lai Junchen was severely beaten with a wooden stick and taken to prison.

古文：其属王德寿以情谓曰： 我意求少迁，公为我引杨执柔为党，公且免死。 
现代文：来手下的一个亲信王德寿利用感情到狱中对仁杰说 ：我的意思是让你的处境求得稍微好些，只要你肯供说杨执柔是你的同党，我就设法开脱你的死罪。 
English: Wang Deshou, a close confidant of Yang's, took advantage of his emotions to go to prison and say to Renjie: "I mean to make your situation a little better. As long as you are willing to confess that Yang Jiru is your comrade, I will try to absolve you of the death penalty."

古文：仁杰叹曰； 皇天后土，使仁杰为此乎！ 
现代文：仁杰叹气说： 老天在上，我狄仁杰能干这种伤天害理的事吗？ 
English: Renjie sighed and said: Good heavens, can I, Di Renjie, do such a wicked thing?

古文：即以首触柱，血流沫面。
现代文：说完就用头碰柱，血流满面。
English: After saying this, he hit the pillar with his head, and blood streamed down his face.

古文：德寿惧而谢。
现代文：王德寿害怕了，赶紧溜掉。
English: Wang Deshou was scared and ran away.

古文：守者浸弛，即丐笔书帛，置褚衣中，好谓吏曰； 方暑，请付家彻絮。 
现代文：时间久了，看守渐渐松怠，于是，狄仁杰便借了笔，在布上写了奏章，放在褚色的破衣内，对牢中看守说： 天热了，请把这衣送到我家，让他们把里面的棉花去掉。 
English: After a long time, the guards gradually slacked off, so Di Renjie borrowed a pen, wrote a piece of music on the cloth, put it in a dark-colored rag, and said to the prison guards: It's hot, please send this coat to my house and let them remove the cotton inside.

古文：仁杰子光远得书上变，后遣使案视。
现代文：仁杰的儿子狄光远见到衣内的奏章，就送呈武后，武后派使者去视察。
English: When Renjie's son, Di Guangyuan, saw the scroll inside the robe, he presented it to Empress Wu, who sent an emissary to inspect it.

古文：俊臣命仁杰冠带见使者，私令德寿作谢死表，附使以闻。
现代文：来俊臣让狄仁杰穿着官服出见使者，并秘密下令要王德寿以狄仁杰的名义写了一道谢死表，交给使者带回。
English: He secretly ordered Wang Deshou to write a death certificate in the name of Di Renjie and give it to the envoy to bring back.

古文：后乃召见仁杰，谓曰： 承反何耶？ 
现代文：后来，武后召见狄仁杰问道： 你为什么要谋反？ 
English: Later, the Empress Dowager summoned Di Renjie and asked: Why are you plotting a rebellion?

古文：对曰： 不承反，死笞掠矣。 
现代文：狄说 ：我并没有谋反，而是差一点被无辜打死。 
English: Di said: "I didn't rebel, I was almost beaten to death innocently.

古文：示其表，曰： 无之。 
现代文：武后拿出谢死表给他看，狄说： 这不是我写的。 
English: Wu Hou took out the death certificate and showed it to him. Di said, "I didn't write this."

古文：后知代署，因免死。
现代文：武后知道了这是别人代笔捉刀搞的花招，便免去了狄仁杰的死罪。
English: Wu Hou knew that this was a trick of someone else's ghostwriting to catch the knife, and he was exempted from Di Renjie's capital crime.

古文：武承嗣屡请诛之，后曰： 命已行，不可返。 
现代文：武承嗣多次请求诛杀狄仁杰，武后说 ：免死令已下，不可追回了。 
English: Wu Chengzhi repeatedly requested that Di Renjie be killed, and Wu Hou said, "The order to spare his life has been issued and cannot be revoked."

古文：时同被诬者凤阁侍郎任知古等七族悉得贷。
现代文：这时，被诬陷的凤阁侍郎任知古等人七族全都得到宽宥。
English: At this time, all seven clans, including the falsely accused Fengge waiter Ren Zhigu, were pardoned.

古文：御史霍献可以首叩殿陛苦争，欲必杀仁杰等，乃贬仁杰彭泽令，邑人为置生祠。
现代文：御史霍献可用头叩金殿玉阶苦苦力争，要一定杀掉狄仁杰等，于是贬谪狄仁杰为彭泽令，彭泽邑人为仁杰立长生祠。
English: Gishi Hokken can be used to knock on the head of the gold hall, and the jade steps are struggling hard to kill Di Renjie, so they belittle Di Renjie as Pengze Ling, and the people of Pengze Town build the Eternity Shrine for Di Renjie.

古文：万岁通天中，契丹陷冀州，河北震动，擢仁杰为魏州刺史。
现代文：万岁通天年间，契丹攻陷冀州，河北军民为之震惊恐慌。这时，狄仁杰被提升做魏州刺史。
English: When the Khitan invaded Jizhou and the soldiers and people of Hebei were shocked and panicked, Di Renjie was promoted to be the leader of the history of Weizhou.

古文：前刺史惧贼至，驱民保城，修守具。
现代文：前任刺史害怕贼兵到，驱赶老百姓去保卫城池，修整守城器械。
English: The predecessor, Sashi, was afraid of the arrival of the robber soldiers, and drove the common people to defend the castle and repair the castle's equipment.

古文：仁杰至，曰： 贼在远，何自疲民？
现代文：仁杰到任后，说： 贼兵还在远处，何必自己使老百姓疲惫？
English: After taking office, Renjie said, "The bandits are still far away, why should I make the people tired?

古文：万一虏来，吾自办之，何预若辈？ 
现代文：万一敌虏来了，我自有办法对付，何必预先劳累他们？ 
English: In the unlikely event that enemy prisoners arrive, I have my own means of dealing with them, so why bother them in advance?

古文：悉纵就田。
现代文：于是，把全部守戍的老百姓放回去耕田。
English: As a result, all the people of Shouyu were sent back to their fields.

古文：虏闻，亦引去，民爱仰之，复为立祠。
现代文：敌虏听到这个消息也引兵退去。老百姓爱护拥戴狄仁杰，又为他立祠。
English: When the enemy heard this news, they also withdrew their troops. The common people loved and supported Dai Di Renjie and built a small shrine for him.

古文：俄转幽州都督，赐紫袍、龟带，后自制金字十二於袍，以旌其忠。
现代文：过了不久，仁杰又转任幽州都督，武后赐给他紫袍、龟带，还亲自制十二个金字在袍上，以表彰他的忠诚。
English: Soon after, Renjie was transferred to the post of Yuzhou governor. The empress dowager gave him a purple robe and a tortoise belt, and personally made twelve gold letters on the robe to commend his loyalty.

古文：召拜鸾台侍郎，复同凤阁鸾台平章事。
现代文：仁杰奉诏回京拜为鸾台侍郎，又同时领凤阁鸾台平章事。
English: Upon receiving the imperial edict, Nijie returned to Beijing to serve as the attendant of Xingtai, and at the same time led the Fengge Xingtai Pingzhang.

古文：时发兵戍疏勒四镇，百姓怨苦。
现代文：这时，正发兵戍守疏勒四镇，老百姓不堪其苦，怨声载道。
English: At this time, soldiers were being sent to guard the four towns of Sule. The people were in great distress and complained loudly.

古文：仁杰谏曰：天生四夷，皆在先王封域之外。
现代文：仁杰规谏说： 上天生下四夷，都在先王的疆域之外。
English: "God gave birth to four emperors, all of whom were born outside the former king's territory," said Renjie Guijuan.

古文：东距沧海，西隔流沙，北横大漠，南阻五岭，天所以限中外也。
现代文：东与沧海相距，西有流沙阻隔，北被大漠横断，南有五岭隔绝，这是上天用来界别中外的。
English: The east is separated from the sea of vicissitudes, the west is blocked by quicksand, the north is crossed by the desert, and the south is isolated by the Wuling Mountains, which is used by heaven to delimit the middle and outside.

古文：自典籍所纪，声教所暨，三代不能至者，国家既已兼之。
现代文：这是有上古典籍所记载、声威教化所及的，凡三代不能达到的，国家兼吞了它。
English: This is what has been recorded in the classical books, and what has been achieved by propaganda and indoctrination. If it cannot be achieved in three generations, the state will swallow it up.

古文：诗人矜薄伐於太原，化行於江、汉，前代之遐裔，而我之域中，过夏、商远矣。
现代文：诗人崇尚在太原少有攻伐，在江、汉施行教化，这样追溯久远的前代后裔，就在我国的版图之内，远远超过了夏、商时期啊！
English: The poet advocated a rare offensive in Taiyuan and the implementation of enlightenment in Jiangsu and Han, thus tracing the descendants of previous generations, within the territory of our country, far beyond the summer and business period!

古文：今乃用武荒外，邀功绝域，竭府库之实，以争硗确不毛之地，得其人不足以增赋，获其土不可以耕织。苟求冠带远夷，不务固本安人，此秦皇、汉武之所行也。
现代文：现在却到域外荒凉之地去实施武力，求得功劳，耗尽府库的财物，去争那贫瘠的不毛之地，就是得到了这些地方的人也增加不了多少赋税，得到了这些土地又不能耕田养桑，只求夺冠统率远夷，却不从事巩固本土，安定民心，这是秦始皇、汉武帝的所作所为啊！
English: Now, however, they go to a desolate land outside the region to use force, seek credit, deplete the treasury's wealth, and fight for the barren barren land. Even if they get these places, they can't increase taxes much. If they get these lands, they can't cultivate fields and raise mulberries. They only seek to win the title of supreme leader, but they don't engage in consolidating the mainland and stabilizing the people's hearts. This is the behavior of Qin Shihuang and Emperor Hanwu!

古文：传曰： 与覆车同轨者未尝安。 
现代文：传云： 再走翻了车的轨迹，未必就安全。 
English: Chuan Yun: It is not necessarily safe to walk over the track of the car again.

古文：此言虽小，可以喻大。
现代文：这话说的虽是小事，也可用来比喻国家大事。
English: Although this sentence is about a small thing, it can be used to illustrate a big thing.

古文：臣伏见国家师旅岁出，调度之费狃以浸广，右戍四镇，左屯安东，杼轴空匮，转输不绝，行役既久，怨旷者多。
现代文： 臣以为国家的军旅每年出动，调度的费用习以为常地逐年增多，右边戍守四镇，左边驻防安东，国库空虚，辗转运输的车辆在路上往来不绝，服役在外的人时间长了，怨妇旷夫必然会多。
English: The minister thought that the national military brigade would be dispatched every year, and the cost of dispatching would increase year by year as usual. On the right was the garrison of Shizhen, on the left was the garrison of Andong, the treasury was empty, the vehicles of transportation were constantly on the road, the time of those who were out of service was long, and there would inevitably be more absentee wives.

古文：上不是恤，则政不行；政不行，则害气作；害气作，则虫螟生，水旱起矣。
现代文：上对此如不体贴抚恤，那政令就不会行得通；政令行不通，就必然会使有害之气发生；有害之气发生，那毒虫螟蛉就会生长，水灾旱灾就会泛滥了啊！
English: If the government is not considerate of this, then the decree will not work; if the decree does not work, it will inevitably cause harmful gases to occur; if harmful gases occur, then poisonous worms will grow, and floods and droughts will spread!

古文：方今关东荐饥，蜀汉流亡，江、淮而南，赋敛不息。
现代文：正值现在关东发生饥荒，蜀、汉之地有人流亡，江、淮及其以南地区苛捐杂税从未停止过。
English: Right now, famine is occurring in Kanto, people are fleeing to Shu and Han lands, and the harsh taxes and surcharges in Jiangsu, Huai and the areas south of them have never stopped.

古文：人不复本，则相率为盗，本根一摇，忧患非浅。
现代文：百姓不能再生存下去了，那就只好相继为盗，国家的本与根一动摇，忧思就不会少啊！
English: If the people can no longer survive, then they will have no choice but to steal one after another. If the foundation and roots of the country are shaken, there will be no shortage of worries!

古文：所以然者，皆贪功方外，耗竭中国也。
现代文：之所以这样，都是因为贪功而伐域外，耗尽中原了啊！
English: The reason for this is that they are greedy for power and are cutting out of the region, exhausting the Central Plains!

古文：昔汉元帝纳贾捐之之谋而罢珠崖，宣帝用魏相之策而弃车师田。
现代文：以往汉元帝采纳贾捐之的计谋，停止了对珠崖用武，宣帝用魏相的策略，放弃了车师的土地。
English: In the past, Emperor Han Yuan adopted Jia Dongzhi's strategy and stopped using military force against Zhuya, while Emperor Xuan used Wei's strategy and gave up the land of Chaishi.

古文：贞观中，克平九姓，册拜李思摩为可汗，使统诸部，夷狄叛则伐，降则抚，得推亡固存之义，无远戍劳人之役。
现代文：贞观年间，攻克平息域外九姓部落，册封李思摩为可汗，让他统率各个部落，夷狄有叛乱的就讨伐，有投降的就安抚，这就有避免消耗、保存实力的意义而没有远戍劳苦百姓的徭役。
English: During Zhenguan's reign, he conquered and pacified nine tribes outside the region, crowned Li Sima as khan, and put him in charge of various tribes. If there was a rebellion, he would fight against it, and if there was a surrender, he would pacify it. This had the significance of avoiding consumption and preserving strength, but did not have the role of a faraway guardian of the hard-working people.

古文：今阿史那斛瑟罗，皆阴山贵种，代雄沙漠，若委之四镇，以统诸蕃，建为可汗，遣御寇患，则国家有继绝之美，无转输之苦。
现代文：现在阿史那斛瑟罗是阴山贵胄之后，历代雄驻沙漠，如果委任他驻守四镇，以统率域外各部落，封其为可汗，派遣他抵御寇患，那国家既有扶植部落的好处，又没有辗转运输的劳苦。
English: Now, after Ashina-Nasir, who was a great warrior in the desert, if he is appointed to garrison the four towns, to lead the tribes outside the region, to appoint him as a khan, and to send him to resist the invasion, then the country will have the benefit of supporting the tribes without the labor of transportation.

古文：损四镇，肥中国，罢安东，实辽西，省军费於远方，并甲兵於要塞，恒、代之镇重，而边州之备丰矣。
现代文：放弃四镇，使中原得到好处；罢守安东，辽西获得实惠，节省远戍的军费集中兵甲器械镇守要塞，恒、代的镇守牢固，边关州郡也就丰足了啊！
English: Give up the four towns, so that the Central Plains will benefit; guard Anton, Liaoxi will gain real benefits, save far-reaching military expenses, concentrate the military and armored equipment to guard the fortress, and firmly guard the town of Heng and Dai, and Guanzhou County will also be plentiful!

古文：且王者外宁，容有内危。
现代文： 况且，行仁政的外域安宁，可以缓解域内危机。
English: Moreover, the external tranquility of benevolent governance can alleviate the internal crisis.

古文：陛下姑敕边兵谨守备，以逸待劳，则战士力倍；以主御客，则我得其便；坚壁清野，寇无所得。
现代文：陛下应下诏让边关军队谨慎守备，以逸待劳，那么将士们会力量倍增；以主抵御客侵，那我方就会得到方便；坚壁清野，敌寇就什么也得不到。
English: His Majesty should issue an edict to let the frontier troops guard cautiously, and to wait for labor with pleasure, then the soldiers will double their strength; to resist the invasion of guests with the Lord, then our side will be convenient; the wall is clear, and the enemy will not get anything.

古文：自然深入有颠踬之虑，浅入无虏获之益。
现代文：如果他们主动出击，深入就有寸步难行的忧虑，浅入又没有缴获俘虏的好处。
English: If they attack on their own initiative, there will be worries that it will be difficult to go deep, and there will be no benefit of capturing prisoners if they go shallow.

古文：不数年，二虏不讨而服矣。
现代文：这样，不到几年，四镇与安东二处的敌寇可以不用讨伐就臣服了。 
English: Thus, in less than a few years, the enemy corsairs in Shizhen and two places in Andong could be subdued without a fight.

古文：又请废安东，复高姓为君长，省江南转饷以息民，不见纳。
现代文：又请求废安东，恢复高姓的做君长，免去江南辗转运输粮草，让百姓得到安宁。
English: He also asked for the abolition of Andong, the reinstatement of Gao as the ruler, and the removal of the transportation of grain and grass from the south of the Yangtze River, so that the people could have peace.

古文：张易之尝从容问自安计，仁杰曰： 惟劝迎庐陵王可以免祸。 
现代文：这些意见未被采纳。张易之曾经不在意地请教自身安全的计谋，仁杰说： 只有劝武后迎回庐陵王可以免除祸患。 
English: These opinions were not adopted. Zhang Yizhi once carelessly asked for advice on his own safety, and Renjie said: Only after persuading Wu to welcome back the King of Fuling can the disaster be avoided.

古文：会后欲以武三思为太子，以问宰相，众莫敢对。
现代文：这时，武后想立武三思为皇太子，为此询问宰相，众大臣都不敢回答。
English: At this time, Empress Wu wanted to make Wu Sanshi the crown prince, so she asked the prime minister, but the ministers did not dare to answer.

古文：仁杰曰： 臣观天人未厌唐德。
现代文：仁杰说： 依臣看，上天和百姓都没有厌弃唐的仁德。
English: Renjie said: According to my opinion, heaven and the people have not abandoned Tang's benevolence.

古文：比匈奴犯边，陛下使梁王三思募勇士於市，逾月不及千人。
现代文：此刻，匈奴侵犯边境，陛下让梁王三思在市上招募勇士，过了一个月还不到一千人。
English: At this time, the Xiongnu invaded the border, and His Majesty asked Liang Wang to think twice about recruiting warriors in the city. After a month, there were less than a thousand.

古文：庐陵王代之，不浃日，辄五万。
现代文：庐陵王代替梁王做这件事，不到十天，就募兵五万。
English: Gongling Wang did this in place of Liang Wang, and in less than ten days, he recruited fifty thousand soldiers.

古文：今欲继统，非庐陵王莫可。 
现代文：现在要承继大统，非庐陵王不可。 
English: Now, if you want to succeed to the throne, you must become the King of Fuling.

古文：后怒，罢议。
现代文：武后大怒，罢议。
English: Empress Wu was furious and called off the discussion.

古文：久之，召谓曰： 朕数梦双陆不胜，何也？ 
现代文：过后好长一段时间，武后召见仁杰说： 朕多次梦见博双陆而不胜，这是什么原因？ 
English: After a long period of time, Wu Hou was summoned to see Ren Jie and said, "I have dreamed many times that Bo Shuanglu would not win. What is the reason for this?

古文：於是，仁杰与王方庆俱在，二人同辞对曰： 双陆不胜，无子也。
现代文：这时，狄仁杰与王方庆都在，二人同时回答： 博双陆不胜，无子啊！
English: At this time, Di Renjie and Wang Fangqing were both present, and they both answered at the same time: Bo Shuanglu is invincible, there is no child!

古文：天其意者以儆陛下乎！
现代文：上天有意用这警戒陛下呀！
English: Heaven has purposely used this warning, Your Majesty!

古文：且太子，天下本，本一摇，天下危矣。
现代文：况且太子是天下的根本，根本一动摇，那天下就危险了。
English: Moreover, the crown prince is the foundation of the world. If the foundation is shaken, the world will be in danger.

古文：文皇帝身蹈锋镝，勤劳而有天下，传之子孙。
现代文：文皇帝冒刀刃箭林，冲锋陷阵，勤奋用力夺得天下并传之后代子子孙孙。
English: Emperor Wen took up the sword and spear, stormed the battlefield, and diligently won the world and passed it down to future generations.

古文：先帝寝疾，诏陛下监国。
现代文：先帝病危，诏令陛下监国。
English: The late emperor was gravely ill, and the emperor ordered his majesty to oversee the country.

古文：陛下掩神器而取之，十有余年，又欲以三思为后。且姑侄与母子孰亲？
现代文：陛下获取帝位十几年，又要传位给三思。况且，姑侄与母子哪个亲？
English: His Majesty has been on the throne for more than ten years, and he has to think twice about passing on the throne. Moreover, which parent is the uncle and which is the mother?

古文：陛下立庐陵王，则千秋万岁后常享宗庙；三思立，庙不祔姑。 
现代文：陛下立庐陵王为皇太子，您驾崩后能常享宗庙，若立三思为皇太子，宗庙里就不会有您这姑姑的神主牌位了。 
English: His Majesty has appointed the King of the Mausoleum as the Crown Prince, and you will be able to enjoy the ancestral temple after your death. If you were to become the Crown Prince, there would be no place in the ancestral temple for your aunt.

古文：后感悟，即日遣徐彦伯迎庐陵王於房州。王至，后匿王帐中，召见仁杰语庐陵事。
现代文：武后感悟，当天就派徐彦伯到房州迎接庐陵王，庐陵王到后，武后把庐陵王藏在王帐中，召见仁杰说庐陵王的事。
English: Emboldened, Empress Wu sent Xu Yanbo to Fangzhou on the same day to meet the King of Huling. After the King of Huling arrived, Empress Wu hid the King of Huling in the royal treasury and summoned Renjie to talk about the King of Huling.

古文：仁杰敷请切至，涕下不能止。
现代文：仁杰恳请意切，以致哭泣不能停止。
English: Renjie pleaded so hard that she couldn't stop crying.

古文：后乃使王出，曰： 还尔太子！ 
现代文：武后让庐陵王出来，说： 还你皇太子。 
English: The Empress Wu asked the King of Fuling to come out and said, "Return your crown prince."

古文：仁杰降拜顿首，曰： 太子归，未有知者，人言纷纷，何所信？ 
现代文：仁杰跪拜叩头，说： 太子回来了，还没人知道，人言纷纷，怎么才能让人相信呢？ 
English: Renjie knelt down and bowed, saying: The prince has returned, no one knows yet, people are talking about it, how can we make people believe it?

古文：后然之。更令太子舍龙门。
现代文：武后认为对，就下诏令，使皇太子住在龙门，然后按礼数迎接回宫。
English: Empress Wu thought it was the right thing to do, so she issued an imperial decree to have the crown prince live in Longmen, and then welcomed him back to the palace according to the number of courtesies.

古文：具礼迎还，中外大悦。
现代文：满朝文武及老百姓都十分高兴。
English: The whole court and the common people were very happy.

古文：初，吉顼、李昭德数请还太子，而后意不回，唯仁杰每以母子天性为言，后虽忮忍，不能无感，故卒复唐嗣。
现代文：当初，吉顼、李昭德多次请求太子回宫，武后就是不答应，只有仁杰每每以母子天性为说词，武后即使忌恨不做声，却不能不感悟，因此终于恢复了唐的嗣统。
English: At the beginning, Ji Yeon and Li Zhaode repeatedly requested the prince to return to the palace, but Empress Wu did not agree. Only Rinjie always spoke of mother-son nature. Empress Wu could not help but be impressed, even if she did not say anything, so she finally restored Tang's lineage.

古文：寻拜纳言，兼右肃政御史大夫。
现代文：不久，任官纳言并兼任右肃政御史大夫。
English: Soon after, he was appointed as Nagan and concurrently served as the Right Suisei Imperial Historian.

古文：突厥入赵、定，杀掠甚众，诏仁杰为河北道行军元帅，假以便宜。
现代文：突厥入侵赵、定等地，大肆杀人抢掠。诏下，任命狄仁杰做河北道行军元帅，并授权他见机行事。
English: The Turks invaded Zhao, Ding and other places, killing and looting on a large scale. Under the edict, Di Renjie was appointed marshal of Hebei Province and authorized to act at his own discretion.

古文：突厥尽杀所得男女万计，由五回道去，仁杰追不能逮。
现代文：突厥杀尽所掠掳的男女达万余人，由五回的路离开，仁杰猛追没有赶上。
English: The Turks killed and captured more than ten thousand men and women. They left by the fifth road, and Renjie couldn't catch up.

古文：更拜河北安抚大使。
现代文：改任为河北安抚大使。
English: He was reappointed as Hebei's ambassador of pacification.

古文：时民多胁从於贼，贼已去，惧诛，逃匿。
现代文：当时，百姓大都被突厥胁从，当突厥兵已离开，又怕被杀就纷纷逃跑或隐藏。
English: At that time, most of the people were intimidated by the Turks, and when the Turkish soldiers had left, they fled or hid in fear of being killed.

古文：仁杰上疏曰： 议者以为虏入寇，始明人之逆顺，或迫胁，或愿从，或受伪官，或为招慰。
现代文：仁杰上疏说： 议论者以为敌虏入侵，才开始明了百姓的反抗或服从，有的被迫胁从，有的愿意服从，有的接受了伪官伪职，有的被招抚。
English: Renjie Shangsuo said: It was only when the commentators thought that the enemy had invaded that they began to understand the people's resistance or obedience. Some were forced to obey, some were willing to obey, some accepted fake officials and fake positions, and some were coaxed.

古文：诚以山东之人重气，一往死不为悔。
现代文：诚然，山东之人重义气，做事死也不会后悔。
English: It is true that people in Shandong value loyalty above all else, and they will not regret doing things.

古文：比缘军兴，调发烦重，伤破家产，剔屋卖田，人不为售。
现代文：由于兴起军旅，调拨征发繁重，使得百姓家产受损失、被破坏，拆屋卖田，老百姓也无法达到所需数额。
English: As a result of the rise of the military, the allocation of requisition and distribution is heavy, causing the loss and destruction of the people's household goods, the demolition of houses and the sale of fields, and the people can not reach the required amount.

古文：又官吏侵渔，州县科役，督趣鞭笞，情危事迫，不循礼义，投迹犬羊，以图赊死，此君子所愧，而小人之常。
现代文：又有官吏侵占渔利，州县的苛捐徭役，督促催促，严刑拷打，情况危急，催逼紧迫，只好不遵循礼仪，投敌如投犬羊，为的是苟延性命。这是君子所愧做的事，但小人却习以为常了。
English: There are also officials who encroach on the fishing profits, the state and county's harsh contributions, urging, urging, severe torture, the situation is critical, urging is urgent, we have no choice but to follow the etiquette, and throw enemies like dogs and sheep, in order to prolong life. This is what a gentleman is ashamed to do, but the villain has become accustomed to it.

古文：民犹水也，壅则为渊，疏则为川，通塞随流，岂有常性。
现代文：百姓好比是水，堵塞了就成了渊，疏通了就成了河，畅通、阻塞哪有一定之规。
English: The people are like water. If it is blocked, it will become a swamp. If it is unclogged, it will become a river. There are certain rules for unblocking and unblocking.

古文：昔董卓之乱，神器播越，卓已诛禽，部曲无赦，故事穷变生，流毒京室。此由恩不溥洽，失在机先。
现代文：以往，董卓之乱，帝乃流亡，卓已被捉被杀，对其部属没有赦免，因此，事变接二连三地发生，流毒京师宗室，这是因为施的恩惠不普遍、不恰当，失去机会在先的缘故。
English: In the past, Dong Zhuo's rebellion, the emperor's exile, Zhuo has been captured and killed, and his subordinates have not been pardoned. As a result, incidents have occurred one after another, poisoning the Beijing master's family. This is because Shi's favor is not common and inappropriate, and the lost opportunity is the first reason.

古文：今负罪之伍，潜窜山泽，赦之则出，不赦则狂。山东群盗，缘兹聚结。故臣以为边鄙暂警不足忧，中土不宁可为虑也。
现代文：现在，担着罪恶的军伍，隐匿逃窜到深山大泽，如果赦免就出来，不赦免就疯狂，山东的众多盗贼，由于这个原因而集聚，所以臣以为边关暂时告警不足为忧患，中原大地不安宁诚可为忧虑啊！
English: Now, carrying an army of criminals, he has secretly fled to Shenshan Lake. If he is pardoned, he will come out, but if he is not pardoned, he will go mad. Many thieves in Shandong have gathered for this reason, so the vassal thinks that the lack of warning at the border is a worry, and the unrest in the Central Plains would rather be a worry!

古文：夫持大国者不可以小治，事广者不可以细分。
现代文：主持大国之政的不可用管理小地方的办法去治理，事情牵扯的面宽了不可以过细去分。
English: Those who preside over the politics of a large country cannot be governed by the methods of managing a small place. The issues involved are wide-ranging and cannot be subdivided too much.

古文：人主所务，弗检常法。愿曲赦河北，一不问罪。 
现代文：人主所从事的是不必按常规处置，愿大赦河北，一个也不要问罪。 
English: What the human owner is engaged in does not need to be dealt with according to the usual procedures. He is willing to grant amnesty to Hebei, and not to charge anyone with a crime.

古文：诏可。
现代文：下诏认可。
English: The royal decree was approved.

古文：还，除内史。
现代文：仁杰还朝，拜为内史。
English: Renjie is still in the morning, worship for the inner history.

古文：后幸三阳宫，王公皆从，独赐仁杰第一区，眷礼卓异，时无辈者。
现代文：武后驾幸三阳宫，王公大臣全都跟随，武后独赐仁杰在最显要的位置，礼眷甚隆，超出寻常，没有等辈的。
English: The empress dowager drove to Sanyang Palace, accompanied by all the princes and ministers. The empress dowager alone gave Renjie the most prominent position. The courtesy was very high, beyond the ordinary, and without peer.

古文：是时李楷固、骆务整讨契丹，克之，献俘含枢殿，后大悦。
现代文：这个时候，李楷固、骆务整讨伐契丹，并攻克了它，在含枢殿献俘获，武后十分高兴。
English: At this time, Li Kai Gu and Luo Wu Jie led a crusade against the Khitan, and conquered it, and were captured in the Han Palace. Empress Wu was very happy.

古文：二人者，本契丹李尽忠部将，尽忠入寇，楷固等数挫王师，后降，有司请论如法。
现代文：这两个人本来是契丹李尽忠的部将，尽忠入侵，楷固等多次挫败王师，后来投降，有司请求按律论罪处死。
English: These two men were originally the generals of Khitan Li Jianzhong. Jianzhong led the invasion and defeated Wang Shi several times, such as Kaigu. Later, they surrendered, and a judge requested that they be sentenced to death according to the law.

古文：仁杰称其骁勇可任，若贷死，必感恩纳节，可以责功。
现代文：仁杰称他们骁勇，可留任，如果免去死罪，一定会对武后感恩戴德，还可建立功勋。
English: Renjie said that they are brave and can stay in office. If they are exempted from the death penalty, they will surely be grateful to Wu Hou and can also establish merits.

古文：至是凯旋，后举酒属仁杰，赏其知人。
现代文：到这时候，凯旋来朝，武后向仁杰举酒，赞赏他知人。
English: At this time, after his triumphant return to the DPRK, Wu Hou raised a glass of wine to Ren Jie and praised his acquaintance.

古文：授楷固左玉钤卫大将军、燕国公，赐姓武；务整右武威卫将军。
现代文：授楷固为左玉钤卫大将军、燕国公，赐姓武；授务整右武威将军。
English: He was awarded the rank of General of the Left Jade Guards and the title of Prince of Yan Province, and given the surname of Wu; he was also awarded the title of General of the Right Jade Guards and the title of General of the Right Jade Guards.

古文：后将造浮屠大像，度费数百万，官不能足，更诏天下僧日施一钱助之。
现代文：武后将要营造佛像大菩萨，计算花费要数百万，官府库存不够，就诏令天下的和尚每天施舍一钱相助。
English: Empress Wu is going to build a large Buddha statue. It will cost millions to calculate the cost, and the government's inventory is not enough. Therefore, she ordered all the monks in the world to donate one money a day to help.

古文：仁杰谏曰： 工不役鬼，必在役人；物不天降，终由地出。
现代文：仁杰规劝说： 做工不能役使鬼，必定要役使人；庄稼不会从天上掉下来，终究是由地里长出来的。
English: Ren Jieqi advised: "Working cannot be to serve ghosts, it must be to serve people. Crops will not fall from the sky, after all, they grow from the ground.

古文：不损百姓，且将何求？
现代文：不损害百姓，还有什么可求的？
English: Without harming the people, what else can we ask for?

古文：今边垂未宁，宜宽征镇之傜，省不急之务。就令顾作，以济穷人，既失农时，是为弃本。
现代文：现在边境未得安宁，适宜于放宽征发镇守的徭役，省免不急需办的事务，即使雇请工匠劳作，是以此接济穷人，但误了农时，这是放弃根本。
English: Now that the border has not been pacified, it is appropriate to relax the duty of recruiting and dispatching town guards, and to avoid unnecessary matters. Even if hiring artisans to work is to help the poor, but it is a waste of time, it is a fundamental abandonment.

古文：且无官助，理不得成。
现代文：况且，没有官助，按理难以办成。
English: Moreover, without official assistance, it is difficult to accomplish this.

古文：既费官财，又竭人力，一方有难，何以救之？ 
现代文：既费官府财物，又耗尽人力，如一方有灾难，那用什么去救济呢？ 
English: If there is a disaster on one side, what will be used for relief?

古文：后由是罢役。
现代文：武后由于这个缘故，就中止了这次工役。
English: Because of this, Wu Hou suspended the labor service.

古文：圣历三年卒，年七十一。赠文昌右相，谥曰文惠。
现代文：狄仁杰圣历三年逝世，享年七十一岁，追赠文昌右相，谥号为 文惠 。
English: Di Renjie died three years later, at the age of seventy-one, and was posthumously awarded the title of Wenchang Yuzo, and his nickname was Wen Hui.

古文：仁杰所荐进，若张柬之、桓彦范、敬晖、姚崇等，皆为中兴名臣。
现代文：仁杰所荐进的如张柬之、桓彦范、敬晖、姚崇等都是唐的中兴名臣。
English: Those recommended by Renjie, such as Zhang Kammzhi, Kuan Yan Fan, Jing Yi, and Yao Chong, were all prominent ministers of the Tang Dynasty.

古文：始居母丧，有白鹊驯扰之祥。
现代文：当初，居母丧期间，有白鹊顺服的祥瑞。
English: At first, during the mother's funeral, there was a white egret obediently following Xiang Rui.

古文：俄领天平节度使，辞疾，以秘书监归洛阳，迁东都留守，卒。
现代文：唐中宗登帝位后，追赠狄仁杰司空。睿宗又封他为梁国公。
English: After Emperor Taizong of Tang ascended the throne, he posthumously bestowed Di Renjie Sku. Emperor Ruizong also made him the Prince of Liang.

古文：郝处俊，安州安陆人。
现代文：郝处俊，安州安陆人。
English: Gong Chengjun, a native of Anzhou and Lu.

古文：父相贵，因隋乱，与妇翁许绍据峡州，归国，拜滁州刺史，封甑山县公。
现代文：父亲名郝相贵，隋末乱起时，与亲家翁许绍占据陕州。唐兴，即归顺，被任为滁州刺史，封爵甑山县公。
English: His father was well-known and respected, and when the late Sui Dynasty War broke out, he and his relatives occupied Shaanxi Province. Tang Xing, who surrendered, was appointed as the governor of Zhangzhou Province and given the title of Duke of Lushan County.

古文：处俊甫十岁而孤，故吏归千缣赗之，已能让不受。
现代文：郝处俊十岁时就失去了父亲，父亲的原属吏送奠仪缣一千段，处俊辞谢不受。
English: He lost his father when he was ten years old. His father's former subordinate officials sent a thousand-dan memorial, but he did not accept their thanks.

古文：及长，好学，嗜《汉书》，崖略暗诵。
现代文：他长大后，爱好学习，特别喜欢《汉书》，大致都能背下来。
English: When he grew up, he was fond of learning, especially liked "Chinese Classics," and was able to memorize most of it.

古文：贞观中，第进士，解褐著作佐郎，袭父爵。
现代文：贞观年间，考中进士，任著作佐郎，承袭父亲的封爵。
English: During the Zhenguan years, he passed the junior high school entrance examination, and was appointed as a scholar, inheriting his father's knighthood.

古文：兄弟友睦，事诸舅谨甚。
现代文：兄弟间和睦友爱，侍奉舅舅们甚为恭敬。
English: There is harmony and brotherly love between the brothers, and serving the uncles is very respectful.

古文：再转滕王友，耻为王府属，弃官去。
现代文：后来任滕王友，但他耻于当王府的属下，弃官而去。
English: Later, he was appointed as Teng Wangyou, but he was ashamed to be a subordinate of the royal court and resigned.

古文：久之，召拜太子司议郎，累迁吏部侍郎。
现代文：后来，招他去任太子司议郎，逐步升官至吏部侍郎。
English: Later, he was appointed to the post of the Prince's Councilor, and was gradually promoted to the position of the Chamberlain of the Cadastre.

古文：高丽叛，诏李勣为浿江道大总管，处俊副之。
现代文：高丽背叛时，皇帝诏令李责力任氵贝江道大总管，郝处俊任副总管。
English: At the time of Goryeo's treachery, the emperor ordered Li Rongli to be appointed as the general manager of the Mubei-jiang Highway, and Gongdianjun to be appointed as the deputy general manager.

古文：师入虏境，未阵，贼遽至，举军危骇。
现代文：军队到了贼人境内，还未列阵，贼人突然袭来，全军都张惶失措。
English: When the army arrived in the territory of the bandits, they had not yet formed a line of battle. The bandits suddenly attacked, and the entire army was at a loss.

古文：处俊方据胡床，体胖，安餐乾Я不顾，密畀料精锐击之，虏却，众壮其谋。
现代文：那时，郝处俊正靠在胡床上，他又是个胖子，安然坐着吃他的干粮，同时秘密派精锐轻兵迎击。贼人退，大家都认为他了不起。
English: At that time, Gongdejun was reclining on the goose bed, he was a fat man, sitting peacefully eating his dry food, at the same time secretly sent elite light soldiers to meet the attack. The thieves retreated, everyone thought he was great.

古文：入拜东台侍郎。
现代文：郝处俊入朝被任为东台侍郎。
English: Shishidokoro Shunri was appointed as a chamberlain of the Eastern Court.

古文：时浮屠卢伽逸多治丹，曰： 可以续年。 
现代文：那时僧人卢伽逸多会炼丹，说是可以延年益寿。
English: At that time, Lu Jiayu, a monk, used to make a lot of incense, saying that it could prolong life.

古文：高宗欲遂饵之，处俊谏曰： 脩短固有命，异方之剂，安得轻服哉？
现代文：高宗打算服用，郝处俊谏阻道： 人寿长短，是天所定，异域的药剂，不能贸然服用。
English: Gao Zong intended to take it, but Juntao at the scene objected: The length of one's life is determined by the heavens. It is a foreign medicine and should not be taken recklessly.

古文：昔先帝诏浮屠那罗迩娑寐案其方书为秘剂，取灵■怪石，历岁乃能就。
现代文：以前先帝诏令僧人那罗迩娑寐根据其配方炼置秘剂，取灵花怪石，炼了一年才炼好。
English: In the past, the emperor had ordered the monk Narokushimaru to refine the secret agent according to its formula, take the mysterious stone, and refine it for one year before refining it.

古文：先帝饵之，俄而大渐，上医不知所为。
现代文：先帝服用了，不久即告病危，医生都不知怎么办才好。
English: The former emperor took it and soon fell critically ill, and the doctors didn't know what to do.

古文：群臣请显戮其人，议者以为取笑夷狄，故法不得行。
现代文：群众要求杀了僧人示众，有人认为这样做会让夷狄取笑，所以没有执行。
English: The crowd demanded that the monk be killed in a public demonstration. Some people thought that doing so would make the Yidi laugh, so it was not carried out.

古文：前鉴不远，惟陛下深察。 
现代文：前车之鉴不远，请陛下深思。 
English: The precedent is not far away, please think about it, Your Majesty.

古文：帝纳其言，第拜卢伽逸多为怀化大将军，进处俊同东西台三品。
现代文：皇帝采纳了他的建议，只任卢伽逸多为怀化大将军，升郝处俊为东西台三品。
English: The emperor accepted his suggestion, and appointed Lu Jiayu to be the general of Huaihua Province, and promoted Zhu Shun to be the third-ranked official of the Eastern and Western Regions.

古文：咸亨初，幸东都，皇太子监国，诸宰相皆留，而处俊独从。
现代文：咸亨初年，皇帝前往东都洛阳，由皇太子监国，各宰相均留在京都，只有郝处俊随皇帝前往。
English: In the first year of Xianheng, the emperor went to the eastern capital Luoyang. The crown prince supervised the country, and all the prime ministers stayed in Kyoto. Only Shishidokotoshun went with the emperor.

古文：帝尝曰： 王者无外，何为守御？
现代文：皇帝曾说 ：帝王的权威无所不在，为什么还要有守御的？
English: The emperor once said: The authority of the emperor is omnipresent, why should there be a guardian?

古文：而重门击柝，庸待不虞邪？
现代文：再加上道道重门，守更击柝，难道是准备有不测之事发生吗？
English: Coupled with the heavy gate of the road, the guard is more striking, is it to prepare for unforeseen things to happen?

古文：我尝疑秦法为宽，荆轲匹夫耳，匕首窃发，群臣皆荷戟侍，莫敢拒，岂非习慢使然？ 
现代文：我曾经怀疑秦国的法规太宽，荆轲只不过是个匹夫，能突然拿出匕首来，群臣都带有武器，却没有一个来抵御荆轲的，岂不是平日法制太松慢造成的吗？ 
English: I once suspected that Qin's laws and regulations were too broad, that Jing Xi was just a rogue who could suddenly take out a dagger, and that the courtiers were all armed, but there was no one to defend against Jing Xi. Wasn't it the result of the law and order system being too lax?

古文：处俊对曰： 此乃法急耳。
现代文：郝处俊回答说 ：这是法规过于严峻造成的。
English: Gong Chengjun replied: This is caused by the regulations being too strict.

古文：秦法，辄升殿者，夷三族。
现代文：秦国的法规：不待召令而登殿的，要杀尽三族。
English: The law of the State of Qin: If you enter the palace without being summoned, you must kill all three tribes.

古文：人皆惧族，安有敢拒邪？
现代文：人人都害怕灭族，哪个还敢未得命令上殿与荆轲搏斗呢？
English: Everyone is afraid of the extermination of the Chinese people. Who would dare to order the emperor to fight the dragon?

古文：魏曹操著令曰； 京城有变，九卿各守其府。 
现代文：魏国曹操曾制定法令 ：京城中若发生变故，九卿要各自严守其公府。 
English: Cao Cao of Wei once issued a decree: In the event of a change in the capital, the nine lords should each strictly guard their public office.

古文：后严才乱，与徒数十人攻左掖门，操登铜爵台望之，无敢救者。
现代文：后来严才作乱，与他的党徒几十个人攻入左掖门。曹操登上铜爵台眺望，没有一个臣下敢来救的。
English: Later, Yan Cai caused a riot and broke into the Zuoying Gate with dozens of his followers. Cao Cao climbed onto the dais to look around, but none of his subjects dared to come to his rescue.

古文：时王脩为奉常，闻变，召车骑未至，领官属步至宫门。
现代文：那时王修任奉常职，听说发生了变乱，招集车马还未到，就先率领属官徒步到宫门。
English: At that time, Wang Xiu was on permanent duty. When he heard that there had been a disturbance, he led his subordinate officers on foot to the palace gate before the convoy arrived.

古文：操曰； 彼来者，必王脩乎！ 
现代文：曹操远望有人来了，说： 那来的人，一定是王修。 
English: Cao Cao looked far and wide for someone to come and said, "That person must be Wang Xiu."

古文：此由脩察变识几，故冒法赴难。
现代文：这是因为王修能观察偶发事件，因形势突变而临时机动，所以他能违反法令而来救难。
English: This is because Wang Xiu can observe occasional incidents and temporarily maneuver due to sudden changes in the situation, so he can come to the rescue in violation of the law.

古文：向若拘常，则遂成祸矣。
现代文：倘若他拘泥于常法，那大祸也就酿成了。
English: If he had stuck to the common law, the calamity would have been complete.

古文：故王者设法不可急，亦不可慢。
现代文：所以，为帝王的制定法令不可太严峻，也不可太宽缓。
English: Therefore, the decrees made for the emperor should not be too severe, nor too lenient.

古文：《诗》曰 不懈于位，人之攸塈 ，仁也； 式遏寇虐，无俾作慝 ，刑也。
现代文：上劳则下逸。 这是 仁 之所在；《诗》中还说： 要制止窃权为非作歹的人，不要让他们存有作乱之心。 这是 刑 之所用。
English: This is the essence of benevolence; the "Poem" also says: To stop those who steal power and do evil, do not let them have the spirit of disorder, this is the use of punishment.

古文：《书》曰 高明柔克，沈潜刚克 ，中道也。 帝曰： 善。 
现代文：《书》中说 ：秉性高亢明爽之人，当以柔来调和自己的本性；秉性沉稳凝滞的人，就要注意刚的培养。 这就是中庸之道。 皇帝听后说 ：说得好。 
English: "The book" said: "Those with high and bright qualities should reconcile their natures with gentleness; those with stable and stagnant qualities should pay attention to the cultivation of hardness. This is the way of moderation." After listening, the emperor said: Well said.

古文：转中书侍郎，监脩国史。
现代文：后来，郝处俊转任中书侍郎，监修国史。
English: Later, Shishidokoro Shun was transferred to the post of Chushojiro, supervising the study of national history.

古文：初，显庆中，令狐德棻、刘胤之撰国史，其后许敬宗复加绪次。
现代文：当初，显庆年间，令狐德芬、刘胤之修撰国史，后来，许敬宗继续。
English: At first, during the reign of Emperor Xianqing, the national history was compiled by Ling Fudefen and Liu Yin, and later continued by Xu Jingzong.

古文：帝恨敬宗所纪失实，更命宰相刊正，且曰： 朕昔从幸未央宫，辟仗既过，有横刀伏草中者，先帝敛辔却，谓朕曰； 事发，当死者数十人，汝可命出之。 
现代文：皇帝极不满许敬宗所记失实，命宰相纠正。还说： 我以前随从先皇上到未央宫去，前导及仪仗队过去后，发现有横刀伏在草丛中的人，先皇上勒住马后退几步，对我说： 这事情如果公开了，会要死几十个人，你去叫那人出去。 
English: The emperor was extremely dissatisfied with the inaccuracy recorded by Xu Jingzong and ordered the prime minister to correct it. He also said: I used to follow the first emperor to the Weiyang Palace. After the guide and the honor guard passed, I found a man with a sword lying in the grass. The first emperor held back his horse and retreated a few steps and said to me: If this matter is made public, dozens of people will die. You go and call that man out.

古文：史臣惟叙此为实。 
现代文：史臣只记叙了这件事实。 
English: This is the only fact recorded by the historian.

古文：处俊曰： 先帝仁恩溥博，类非一。
现代文：郝处俊说： 先帝胸怀仁广，普施恩泽，这样的事不止一二件。
English: Gong Chengjun said: The former emperor had a broad mind and was generous. There were more than one or two things like this.

古文：臣之弟处杰被择供奉，时有三卫误拂御衣者，惧甚。
现代文：臣之弟处杰被择任供奉，那时有个三卫中人不小心碰了先帝的御衣，他吓得要死。
English: When the minister's younger brother, Shuan Jie, was selected to be enshrined, one of the three guards accidentally touched the emperor's robe, and he was scared to death.

古文：先帝曰： 左右无御史，我不汝罪。  
现代文：先帝说： 旁边没有御史，我不怪罪你。  
English: The former emperor said, "I don't blame you for not having a prince next to you.

古文：帝曰： 此史臣应载。 
现代文：皇帝说： 这件事史臣应该记载。 
English: The emperor said: This matter should be recorded by the historian.

古文：处俊乃表左史李仁实欲删整伪辞，会仁实死而止。
现代文：郝处俊上表请让左史李仁实删改不符史实的言辞，恰遇李仁实死了，删史之事也就作罢。
English: On the table above, please let the left historian Li Renshi delete the words that do not conform to the historical facts. If Li Renshi dies, the deletion of history will also be stopped.

古文：上元初，帝观酺翔鸾阁，时赤县与太常音技分东西朋，帝诏雍王贤主东，周王显主西，因以角胜，处俊曰： 礼所以示童子无诳者，恐其欺诈之心生也。
现代文：上元初年，高宗皇帝在翔鸾阁大宴群臣。那时赤县与太常的音乐演出班子分东西朋，皇帝诏令雍王贤掌握东朋，令周王显掌握西朋，要他们比赛角胜。郝处俊劝说： 礼中要教育孩子不说谎，是担心孩子们会生出欺诈之心。
English: In the first year of Shangyuan, Emperor Gaozong held a grand banquet for his ministers at Xiangyuan Pavilion. At that time, Akagata and Taizang's musical performance team were divided into East and West pals. The emperor ordered Yong Wangxian to master the East pals, and Zhou Wangxian to master the West pals, and wanted them to win the competition. Gong Chengjun persuaded: To teach children not to lie during the ceremony is to worry that children will have a fraudulent heart.

古文：二王春秋少，意操未定，乃公朋造党使相夸，彼俳儿优子，言辞无度，争负胜，相讥诮，非所以导仁义，示雍和也。 
现代文：现在两位王还很年轻，意志品德尚未定型，就让他们聚朋结党，相互夸示。那些戏子们，说话没有分寸，为争胜负可以互相讥诮，这不是教导仁义、表现雍容和祥的办法。 
English: Now that the two kings are still very young, and their wills and morals have not yet been formed, let them get together and boast to each other. Those actors, their words are not measured, and they can ridicule each other in order to win. This is not the way to teach benevolence and righteousness, and to show grace and peace.

古文：帝遽止，叹曰： 处俊远识，非众臣所逮。 
现代文：皇帝于是即刻制止两王参加比赛的事，并感叹 ：处俊有远见卓识，非一般臣子所能比得上。 
English: The emperor then immediately stopped the two kings from participating in the competition, and lamented: Shunjun has foresight and insight, which is not comparable to that of ordinary courtiers.

古文：迁中书令，兼太子宾客，检校兵部尚书。
现代文：升他为中书令，兼太子宾客、检校兵部尚书。
English: He was promoted to the rank of middle secretary, and was also a guest of the crown prince and inspector of the school's military department.

古文：帝多疾，欲逊位武后，处俊谏曰： 天子治阳道，后治阴德，然则帝与后犹日之与月，阳之与阴，各有所主，不相夺也。
现代文：皇帝体弱多病，想退位给武后执政，郝处俊劝谏说： 天子治理阳道，皇后掌管阴德。皇帝与皇后就好像太阳和月亮。阳和阴，各统宇宙的一部分，不能相互排斥。
English: The emperor was frail and sickly, and wanted to abdicate the throne for Empress Wu to take over the government. Gongdejun advised him saying, "The heavenly son governs the yang way, and the empress governs the yin way. The emperor and the empress are like the sun and the moon. The yang and the yin, both part of the universe, cannot be mutually exclusive.

古文：若失其序，上谪见于天，下降灾诸人。昔魏文帝著令，帝崩，不许皇后临朝。
现代文：倘若违背了自然规律，上，会遭到天帝的谴责；下，将会降灾给人民，过去魏文帝曾制定法令： 皇帝驾崩，不允许皇后临朝管国政。 
English: If it violates the laws of nature, on the one hand, it will be condemned by the heavenly emperor; on the other hand, it will bring disaster to the people. In the past, Emperor Weiwen had made a decree: The emperor is dying, and the empress is not allowed to take charge of state affairs.

古文：今陛下奈何欲身传位天后乎？
现代文：如今陛下为什么身还健在就要传位给天后呢？
English: Now, why should His Majesty pass the throne to the Empress Dowager while he is still alive?

古文：天下者，高祖、太宗之天下，非陛下之天下，正应谨守宗庙，传之子孙，不宜持国与人，以丧厥家。 
现代文：天下，是高祖、太宗创立的天下，不是陛下的天下。陛下应该谨守李家宗庙，传给子孙，不应该将国家送给他人，使自己宗室沦丧。 
English: The world is the world created by Gao Zu and Taizong, not the world of His Majesty. His Majesty should keep the Li family ancestral temple and pass it on to his children and grandchildren. He should not give the country to others, so that his family would be ruined.

古文：中书侍郎李义琰曰： 处俊言可从，惟陛下不疑。 
现代文：中书侍郎李义琰说： 处俊的话有道理，希望陛下不怀疑他有异心。 
English: Li Yijun, the chief secretary's servant, said, "Shenjun's words are reasonable, and I hope that Your Majesty does not suspect that he has other intentions.

古文：事遂沮。
现代文：传位事就此作罢。
English: The matter of passing on the position is hereby closed.

古文：又兼太子左庶子，拜侍中，罢为太子少保。
现代文：又要郝处俊兼任太子左庶子，任他为侍中，免除太子少保之职。
English: In addition, it was decided that Shishidokoro Shun would also serve as the Prince's left illegitimate son, appointing him as a chamberlain and exempting him from the position of the Prince's junior bodyguard.

古文：开耀元年卒，年七十五。
现代文：开耀元年死，终年七十五岁。
English: He died at the age of seventy-five.

古文：赠开府仪同三司、荆州大都督。
现代文：追赠开府仪同三司、荆州大都督。
English: He was posthumously awarded the title of Kaifu, the title of Sanji, and the title of Jingzhou Grand Governor.

古文：帝哀叹其忠，举哀光顺门，祭以少牢，赙绢布八百段、米粟八百石，诏百官赴哭，官庀葬事。
现代文：皇帝哀叹他的忠心赤诚，为他在光顺门举哀，用少牢祭奠，奠仪绢布八百段、米粟八百石，诏令百官都去哭祭，官家安排其入葬事宜。
English: The emperor lamented his loyalty and sincerity, held a memorial service for him at the Guangshun Gate, held a memorial service for him in a small prison, laid a wreath of eight hundred pieces of cloth and eight hundred kilos of rice, ordered all officials to go to the wailing ceremony, and the officials arranged his funeral.

古文：子北叟固辞，未听。
现代文：其子郝北叟再三辞谢，皇帝不从。
English: His son Yan Beibei repeatedly declined to thank the emperor, but the emperor did not comply.

古文：裴炎为白帝曰： 处俊阽死，诿臣曰； 生无益于国，死无烦费，凡诏赐，愿一罢之。  
现代文：裴炎代郝处俊向皇帝说： 处俊病危时，委托臣代为禀告 ：活着时未能有益于国家，死时切不要麻烦浪费。凡有诏赐，希望一概辞谢。  
English: Pei Yan said to the emperor on behalf of the Emperor: When the Emperor was critically ill, he entrusted a vassal to serve as an obituary: If you fail to benefit the country when you are alive, don't waste your time when you die. If you have any imperial edict, I hope you will thank me.

古文：帝闻恻然，答其意，止赙物而已。
现代文：皇帝听了后凄然动容，为酬答他的愿望，只送了奠仪。
English: Hearing this, the emperor was deeply moved. As a reward for granting his wish, he only sent a votive offering.

古文：处俊资约素，土木形骸，然临事敢言，自秉政，在帝前议论谆谆，必傅经义，凡所规献，得大臣体。
现代文：郝处俊天性诚朴不多话，其貌不扬，然而有事时敢于直言。自从当政以来，在皇帝面前谆谆议论，定要引经据典，凡有所规劝献策，都不越大臣之礼。
English: Since he came to power, he has never been afraid to speak his mind in front of the emperor. He always quotes scriptures when he gives advice, and he is always grateful to the minister for any advice or suggestion.

古文：武后虽忌之，以其操履无玷，不能害。
现代文：武后虽然忌恨他，但因他的品德行为绝无污点或错误，所以无法加害于他。
English: Although Empress Wu detested him, she could not harm him because there was no blemish or mistake in his moral conduct.

古文：与舅许圉师同里，俱宦达；乡人田氏、彭氏以高赀显。故江、淮间为语曰： 贵如郝、许，富如田、彭。 
现代文：郝处俊与舅舅许圉师同乡里，都是官宦名人，乡里人田氏、彭氏因钱多而闻名，所以江、淮间有俗语 ：贵如郝、许，富如田、彭。 
English: In the same village, Gong Chengjun and his uncle Xu Yanshi were both officials and celebrities. The villagers, the Tian and Peng clans, were famous for their wealth, so there was a saying among the Jiang and Huai clans: "You are as valuable as Gong and Xu, and as rich as Tian and Peng."

古文：孙象贤，垂拱中，为太子通事舍人，后素衔处俊，故因事诛之。
现代文：处俊的孙子郝象贤，垂拱年间任太子通事舍人。武后一向恨郝处俊，就迁怒于郝象贤，借故要杀他。
English: Zheng Jun's grandson, Zang Xiangxian, was appointed as the crown prince in the years of the Hanging Arch. The Empress Dowager had always hated Zang Xiangxian, so she was angry with Zang Xiangxian and wanted to kill him.

古文：临刑，极骂乃死，后怒，令离磔其尸，斫夷祖、父棺冢。
现代文：临刑时，痛骂武后。武后生气，下令将他碎尸万段，斫开他祖父、父亲的棺木，夷平他们的坟墓。
English: When he was about to be executed, he cursed Empress Wu. Empress Wu became angry and ordered that his body be chopped into thousands of pieces, that the coffins of his grandfather and father be broken open, and that their graves be razed.

古文：自是讫后世，将刑人，必先以木丸窒口云。
现代文：从这以后直到后世，在将要处决犯人之前，定要先用个木球塞住犯人的嘴，怕他们受刑前将有不利当局的语言。
English: From then on, and until the end of time, before a prisoner was to be executed, a wooden ball had to be placed in the prisoner's mouth to prevent them from speaking against the authorities before they were executed.

