古文：黄帝问曰：肺之令人咳，何也？
现代文：黄帝问道：肺脏有病，能使人咳嗽，这是什么道理呢？
English: Huang Di asked: The lungs are diseased and can make people cough. What is the reason for this?

古文：岐伯对曰：五脏六腑，皆令人咳，非独肺也。
现代文：岐伯回答说：五脏六腑有病，都能使人咳嗽，不单是肺脏有病如此。
English: Qi Bo replied, "If one's internal organs are diseased, it can make one cough, not just if one's lungs are diseased.

古文：帝曰：愿闻其状。
现代文：黄帝说：请告诉我各种咳嗽的症状。
English: Huang Di said: I want to know the symptoms of typhoid fever.

古文：岐伯曰：皮毛者，肺之合也。皮毛先受邪气，邪气以从其合也。
现代文：岐伯说：皮毛与肺是相配合的，皮毛先感受了寒邪，邪气就会影响到肺脏。
English: Qi Bo said: The fur and the lungs are compatible. The fur feels the cold first, and the evil spirit will affect the lungs.

古文：其寒饮食入胃，从肺脉上至于肺则肺寒，肺寒则外内合邪，因而客之，则为肺咳。
现代文：寒冷的饮食进入到胃里，寒气就循着肺经上于肺脏，引起肺寒，肺寒就使内外寒邪相合，停留于肺脏，发病为肺咳。
English: Cold food enters the stomach, and the cold air follows the lungs up to the lungs, causing lung cold. The lung cold causes the internal and external colds to combine and stay in the lungs, causing lung cough.

古文：五脏各以其时受病，非其时各传以与之。
现代文：五脏各在其所主的时令受病，非主时受病是因为各脏所传变。
English: Each of the five viscera is affected by disease at the time of its owner, and when it is not the owner, the disease is caused by the transformation of each viscera.

古文：人与天地相参，故五脏各以治时，感于寒则受病，微则为咳，甚则为泄、为痛。
现代文：人和自然界是相应相合，故五脏各有其所主的时令，各脏在所主之时令受了寒邪就会得病，症状轻微的则为咳嗽，严重的，寒邪入里就成为腹泻、腹痛。
English: People and the natural world are correspondingly compatible. Therefore, each of the five internal organs has its own season. If each organ is affected by the cold at the time of the owner, it will get sick. The symptoms are mild for coughing, and severe for diarrhea and abdominal pain.

古文：乘秋则肺先受邪，乘春则肝先受之，乘夏则心先受之，乘至阴则脾先受之，乘冬则肾先受之。
现代文：所以，当秋天的时候，肺先受邪；当春天的时候，肝先受邪；当夏天的时候，心先受邪；当长夏太阴主时，脾先受邪；当冬天的时候，肾先受邪。
English: Therefore, when it is autumn, the lungs are affected first; when it is spring, the liver is affected first; when it is summer, the heart is affected first; when it is summer, the spleen is affected first; when it is winter, the kidneys are affected first.

古文：帝曰：何以异之？
现代文：黄帝道：五脏咳嗽有什么差异呢？
English: Huang Di Dao: What is the difference between him and Siten Zaquan?

古文：岐伯曰：肺咳之状，咳而喘息有音，甚则唾血。
现代文：岐伯说：肺咳的症状，咳而气喘，呼吸有声，甚至吐血。
English: Qi Bo said: the symptoms of lung cough, coughing and wheezing, breathing noisily, and even vomiting blood.

古文：心咳之状，咳则心痛，喉中介介如梗状，甚则咽肿喉痹。
现代文：心咳的症状，咳则心痛，咽喉中好像有东西堵塞一样，甚至咽喉肿痛闭塞。
English: Symptoms of heart cough, cough is heartache, throat seems to have something clogged, even the throat is swollen and closed.

古文：肝咳之状，咳则两胁下痛，甚则不可以转，转则两胠下满。
现代文：肝咳的症状，咳则两侧胁肋下疼痛，甚至痛得不能转侧，转侧则两胁下胀满。
English: Symptoms of hepatic cough, cough is pain under the ribs on both sides, even pain can not turn the side, the turning side is swollen under the two stress.

古文：脾咳之状，咳则右胁下痛，阴阴引肩背，甚则不可以动，动则咳剧。
现代文：脾咳的症状，咳则右胁下疼痛，并隐隐然疼痛牵引肩背，甚至不可以行动，一动就会使咳嗽加剧。
English: Symptoms of splenic cough, the cough is accompanied by pain under the right hypochondrium, and a vague pain pulls the shoulder back, and it is even impossible to move, a movement will make the cough worse.

古文：肾咳之状，咳则腰背相引而痛，甚则咳涎。
现代文：肾咳的症状，咳则腰背互相牵引作痛，甚至咳吐痰涎。
English: Symptoms of renal cough, coughing is a pain in the lower back and back, and even coughing spit up phlegm.

古文：帝曰：六腑之咳奈何？
现代文：黄帝道：六腑咳嗽的症状如何？
English: Huang Di said: What are the symptoms of six-beak cough?

古文：安所受病？
现代文：是怎样受病的呢？
English: How did he get the disease?

古文：岐伯曰：五脏之久咳，乃移于六腑。
现代文：岐伯说：五脏咳嗽日久不愈，就要传移于六腑。
English: Qi Bo said, "If the five viscera cough persists for a long time, it will spread to the six viscera.

古文：脾咳不已，则胃受之。胃咳之状，咳而呕，呕甚则长虫出。
现代文：脾咳不愈，则胃就受病；胃咳的症状，咳而呕吐，甚至能呕出蛔虫。
English: If the spleen cough does not heal, the stomach will be affected; the symptoms of stomach cough, cough and vomit, and can even vomit maggots.

古文：肝咳不已，则胆受之。胆咳之状，咳呕胆汁。
现代文：肝咳不愈，则胆就受病；胆咳的症状，能咳吐出胆汁。
English: If the liver cough does not heal, then the gallbladder will be affected; the symptoms of cholecystitis, can cough out bile.

古文：肺咳不已，则大肠受之。大肠咳状，咳而遗失。
现代文：肺咳不愈，则大肠受病；大肠咳的症状，咳而大便失禁。
English: If the lung cough does not go away, then the large intestine is affected; the symptoms of the large intestine cough are cough and fecal incontinence.

古文：心咳不已，则小肠受之。小肠咳状，咳而失气，气与咳俱失。
现代文：心咳不愈，则小肠受病；小肠咳的症状，咳而放屁，而且往往是咳嗽与放屁同时出现。
English: If the heart cough does not heal, then the small intestine is affected; the symptoms of small intestine cough, cough and fart, and often the cough and fart appear at the same time.

古文：肾咳不已，则膀胱受之。
现代文：肾咳不愈，则膀胱受病；膀胱咳的症状，咳而遗尿。
English: Kidney cough does not heal, then the bladder is affected; symptoms of bladder cough, cough and urination.

古文：膀胱咳状，咳而遗溺，久咳不已，则三焦受之。三焦咳状，咳而腹满，不欲食饮。
现代文：以上各种咳嗽，如经久不愈，则使三焦受病；三焦咳的症状，咳而腹满，不想饮食。
English: The above-mentioned coughs, if they persist for a long time, will make the three jiaos suffer from illness; the symptoms of the three jiaos cough, coughing and full, do not want to eat.

古文：此皆聚于胃，关于肺，使人多涕唾，而面浮肿气逆也。
现代文：上、中、下焦引起的咳嗽，其邪必聚于胃，并循着肺经而影响及肺脏，能使人多痰涕，面部浮肿，咳嗽气逆。
English: Upper, middle and lower coke-induced cough, its evil must gather in the stomach, and follow the pulmonary meridian and affect the lungs, can make people have more phlegm, face edema, cough gas inverse.

古文：帝曰：治之奈何？
现代文：黄帝道：治疗的方法怎样呢？
English: Huang Di asked: How to treat it?

古文：岐伯曰：治脏者治其俞，治腑者治其合，浮肿者治其经。
现代文：岐伯说：治五脏的咳，针刺五输穴的输穴；治六腑的咳，针刺五输穴的合穴；治咳伴浮肿者，针刺五输穴的经穴。
English: Qi Bo said: to cure the cough of the five viscera, needling the five outflow holes; to cure the cough of the six pharynx, needling the five outflow holes; to cure the cough with edema, needling the five outflow holes.

古文：帝曰：善。
现代文：黄帝道：讲得好！
English: Emperor Jinwu said, "Very good."

