古文：孝宣皇帝，武帝曾孙，戾太子孙也。
现代文：汉宣皇帝，武帝曾孙，戾太子的孙子。
English: Emperor Han Xuan, the great-grandson of Emperor Wu, the grandson of the crown prince.

古文：太子纳史良娣，生史皇孙。皇孙纳王夫人，生宣帝，号曰皇曾孙。
现代文：戾太子纳史良娣，生史皇孙，史皇孙纳王夫人，生宣帝，号为曾皇孙。
English: Prince Naxilang, the grandson of King Naxilang, the wife of King Naxilang, the great-great-grandson of Emperor Xuan.

古文：生数月，遭巫蛊事，太子、良娣、皇孙、王夫人皆遇害。
现代文：生下数月，就遭遇 巫蛊事件 ，太子、良娣、皇孙、王夫人都被杀害。
English: A few months after he was born, he was caught up in the Wushan Incident, in which the crown prince, the empress dowager, the grandson of the emperor, and the wife of the emperor were all killed.

古文：语在《太子传》。
现代文：事实都记在《太子传》中。
English: The event is recorded in "Prince biographies."

古文：曾孙虽在襁褓，犹坐收系郡邸狱。
现代文：曾孙虽在襁褓之中，也被收监入狱。
English: Although the great-grandson was in shackles, he was also taken to prison.

古文：而邴吉为廷尉监，治巫蛊于郡邸，怜曾孙之亡辜，使女徒复作淮阳赵征卿、渭城胡组更乳养，私给衣食，视遇甚有恩。
现代文：当时丙吉为廷尉属官，负责处理巫蛊事件。对曾孙的无辜遭受不幸极为同情，就令女犯淮阳赵征卿、渭城胡组交换喂乳，并私给衣食，看待甚有恩德。
English: At that time, Bingji was a court official in charge of dealing with the Wuxia Incident. He was extremely sympathetic to the misfortune of his great-grandson's innocence, and made the female prisoners Huaiyang Zhao Zhengqing and Shicheng Hu group exchange breast feeding, and gave them food and clothing, which was considered very kind.

古文：巫蛊事连岁不决。
现代文：巫蛊事件几年不能结案。
English: The Wuxi Incident could not be closed for several years.

古文：至后元二年，武帝疾，往来长杨、五柞宫，望气者言长安狱中有天子气，上遣使者分条中都官狱系者，轻、重皆杀之。
现代文：到后元二年，武帝有病，来回于长杨、五柞宫，观望云气的星相客说长安狱中有天子气，武帝派使者分别通知京师诸官府对因巫蛊事件入狱的罪犯，不论轻重均处死。
English: In the second year of the Yuan Dynasty, Emperor Wu was ill and went back and forth between Changyang and Wuzhong Palace. Astrologers who observed the clouds said that there was a heavenly son in Chang'an Prison. Emperor Wu sent emissaries to inform the Beijing Division of the various government offices that all criminals who were imprisoned because of the witchcraft incident would be executed regardless of their severity.

古文：内谒者令郭穰夜至郡邸狱，吉拒闭，使者不得入，曾孙赖吉得全。
现代文：内谒者令郭穰夜到郡邸狱检查，丙吉将狱门关闭，使者不能入内，曾孙赖丙吉得以保全。
English: The insider ordered Guo Bing to go to the county seat prison at night to inspect it. Bongji closed the prison door, the messenger could not enter, and the great-grandson, Lai Bongji, was saved.

古文：因遭大赦，吉乃载曾孙送祖母史良娣家。
现代文：后逢大赦，丙吉就车载曾孙送到祖母史良娣家。
English: After the amnesty, He Jie drove his great-grandson to his grandmother Shi Liangyao's house.

古文：语在吉及外戚《传》。
现代文：此事记在《丙吉传》及《外戚传》中。
English: This event is recorded in "The Tale of Bingji" and "The Tale of the Maternal Relatives."

古文：后有诏掖庭养视，上属籍宗正。
现代文：后有诏书，派掖庭官去史家看望曾孙，并令宗正将其录入皇家宗谱。
English: Later, there was an imperial edict, sending a court official to visit the historian's great-grandson, and ordering Zongzheng to enter him into the royal genealogy.

古文：时掖庭令张贺尝事戾太子，思顾旧恩，哀曾孙，奉养甚谨，以私钱供给教书。
现代文：此时掖庭令张贺是戾太子往日的侍者，怀念戾太子的旧恩，同情曾孙，就对曾孙体贴入微，用私人的钱供给曾孙读书。
English: At this time, the court ordered Zhang He, a former waiter of the crown prince, to miss the old favor of the crown prince and sympathize with the great-grandson. He was considerate to the great-grandson and used his private money to provide the great-grandson with books.

古文：既壮，为取暴室啬夫许广汉女。曾孙因依倚广汉兄弟及祖母家史氏。
现代文：年长，为曾孙娶宫廷染工许广汉之女为妻，曾孙因而依靠广汉兄弟及祖母家史氏。
English: The eldest, for his great-grandson, married the daughter of the court dyer Xu Guanghan as his wife, so his great-grandson relied on the Guanghan brothers and his grandmother, Jia Shi.

古文：受《诗》于东海澓中翁，高材好学，然亦喜游侠，斗鸡走马，具知闾里奸邪，吏治得失。
现代文：他从东海氵彳复中翁学《诗》，秉赋过人又学而不厌，且具有路见不平、拔刀相助的性格，他斗鸡走马，广为交结，熟知闾巷里奸邪与吏治得失。
English: He learned "Poetry" from Zhong Weng of the East China Sea Fu Fu, and he was endowed with the ability to learn and not get tired of learning, and he had the character of seeing things from different perspectives and helping others. He fought against evil and evil, and was well-acquainted with the evil and evil in the streets of Fu Fu.

古文：数上下诸陵，周遍三辅，常困于莲勺卤中。
现代文：他多次到祖宗陵墓之地去登临凭吊，到京都三辅之区去了解民情，在莲勺县盐池中，曾被人困辱，特别爱在杜县？
English: He repeatedly went to the place of his ancestor's mausoleum to climb the lintel, to the district of Kyoto Sansho to understand the people's feelings, and in the salt pond of Lianchao County, he was humiliated by people, especially in Du County?

古文：尤乐杜、鄠之间，率常在下杜。
现代文：县之间流连，大多时在下杜。
English: Lingering between counties, mostly in the Lower Dou.

古文：时会朝请，舍长安尚冠里，身足下有毛，卧居数有光耀。每买饼，所从买家辄大雠，亦以是自怪。
现代文：到朝廷参加朝请，住在长安尚冠里，全身及脚下长毛，睡觉时常放出光彩，每到一家饼店买饼，这家饼店就会生意兴隆，人们对此都感到奇怪。
English: People are surprised when they go to the imperial court to attend the morning reception, live in Chang'an Shangguan, have long hair all over their body and under their feet, and often glow when they sleep. Every time they go to a cake shop to buy cakes, this cake shop will have a booming business.

古文：元平元年四月，昭帝崩，毋嗣。
现代文：元平元年四月，昭帝去世，没有子嗣。
English: In April of the first year of the Genpei era, Emperor Zhao died without an heir.

古文：大将军霍光请皇后征昌邑王。
现代文：大将军霍光请皇后召昌邑王为帝。
English: General Huo Guang asked the queen to make Chang'e the emperor.

古文：六月丙寅，王受皇帝玺、绶，尊皇后曰皇太后。
现代文：六月一日，昌邑王受皇帝的玉玺及皇服，尊皇后为皇太后。
English: On June 1, Changyi Wang received the emperor's jade bracelet and imperial robe, and his queen became the empress dowager.

古文：癸已，光奏王贺淫乱，请废。
现代文：六月二十八日，霍光奏皇后说昌邑王行为淫乱，请予废除。
English: On June 28th, Queen Huo Guangxiao said that King Changyi had committed adultery, and asked for it to be abolished.

古文：语在贺及光《传》。
现代文：此事记在《昌邑王贺传》及《霍光传》。
English: This event is recorded in the "Changyi Wang He Biography" and "Huo Guang Biography."

古文：秋七月，光奏议曰： 礼，人道亲亲故尊祖，尊祖故敬宗。
现代文：秋七月，霍光奏议说： 礼制，人重视血统关系所以就尊重自己的祖先，尊重祖先就会敬奉祖宗的事业。
English: In the autumn of July, Huo Guang made a speech and said: In the ritual system, people respect their ancestors because they attach importance to the relationship of blood, and respect the ancestors will respect the cause of the ancestors.

古文：大宗毋嗣，择支子孙贤者为嗣。
现代文：昭帝无嗣，应选择支子孙贤德的为继承人。
English: If Emperor Zhao has no heir, he should choose Zhi Zi's grandson Xian De as his successor.

古文：孝武皇帝曾孙病已，有诏掖庭养视，至今年十八，师受《诗》、《论语》、《孝经》，操行节俭，慈仁爱人，可以嗣孝昭皇帝后，奉承祖宗，子万姓。 
现代文：武帝曾孙名病已，有诏令由掖庭进行照管。至今已十八岁。从师学习《诗》、《论语》、《孝经》，操行节俭、慈仁而爱人，可以作昭帝的继承人。
English: Emperor Wu's great-grandson has fallen ill and has been placed under the care of the imperial court. He is now 18 years old. He has been learning "Poetry," "Analects" and "Filial Piety" from his teacher. He is frugal, kind and loving, and can be Emperor Zhao's heir.

古文：奏可。
现代文：奉承祖宗大业，统驭天下臣民。 
English: The Emperor assents.

古文：遣宗正德至曾孙尚冠里舍，洗沐，赐御府衣。太仆以軨猎车奉迎曾孙，就齐宗正府。庚申，入未央宫，见皇太后，封为阳武侯。
现代文：皇太后表示同意。派宗正刘德到曾孙尚冠里住处，浣洗、赐御府衣冠，太仆用兰舆轻车奉迎曾孙，先到宗正府斋戒行礼，七月二十五日，进入未央宫，朝见皇太后，先封为阳武侯。
English: The empress dowager agreed. She sent Zongzheng Liu De to the residence of her great-grandson Shang Guanli to baptize him and give him the imperial crown. The eunuch greeted his great-grandson with a lantern light car, and first went to Zongzheng palace to fast and perform a ritual. On July 25, he entered the Weiyang Palace to see the empress dowager in the morning, and was first sealed as Yang Wuhou.

古文：已而群臣奉上玺、绶，即皇帝位，谒高庙。
现代文：随后郡臣奉上传国宝玺，继皇帝位。晋谒高庙。
English: Subsequently, the county vassal was awarded the title of National Treasure, succeeding the emperor.

古文：八月已巳，丞相敞薨。
现代文：八月初五日，丞相杨敞去世。
English: On the 5th day of the 8th month, the prime minister, Yang Jiao, passed away.

古文：九月，大赦天下。
现代文：九月，大赦天下。
English: In September, there was a general amnesty.

古文：十一月壬子，立皇后许氏。
现代文：十一月十九日，立皇后许氏。
English: On November 19, Empress Xu was enthroned.

古文：赐诸侯王以下金钱，至吏、民鳏、寡、孤、独各有差。
现代文：赏赐各侯王以下的金钱，从吏民至鳏寡孤独都有一定的赏赐。
English: Each lord was rewarded with money below his rank, and everyone from officials and commoners to widows and orphans received a certain reward.

古文：皇太后归长乐宫。长乐宫初置屯卫。
现代文：皇太后进入长乐宫，开始设置屯卫。
English: The Empress Dowager entered the Changle Palace and began setting up the guards.

古文：本始元年春正月，募郡国吏、民訾百万以上徙平陵。
现代文：本始元年春季正月，招募郡国吏民资产在一百万以上的迁移到昭帝墓地平陵。
English: In the first month of the spring of this year, more than one million assets of county officials and citizens were recruited and moved to Pingling, the cemetery of Emperor Zhao.

古文：遣使者持节诏郡国二千石谨牧养民而风德化。
现代文：派出使者持朝廷符节晓谕郡国二千石要谨慎理政，以德化被于百姓。
English: He sent an envoy bearing the imperial seal to instruct the county of 2,000 koku to be prudent in its governance and to be respected by the people for its virtue.

古文：大将军光稽首归政，上谦让委任焉。
现代文：大将军霍光向宣帝叩请还政于君，宣帝谦让再三，仍委霍光以大任。
English: General Huo Guang appealed to Emperor Xuan for the return of power to him. Emperor Xuan humbly conceded again and again, but still entrusted Huo Guang with the important task.

古文：论定策功，益封大将军光万七千户，车骑将军光禄勋富平侯安世万户。
现代文：论功行赏，增封大将军霍光一万七千户，为车骑将军、光禄勋、富平侯、安世万户。
English: On the basis of merit and reward, 17,000 households were awarded the title of General Ho Kwang, and 10,000 households were awarded the titles of General of Cavalry, General of Honor, Fuping Hou, and An Shih.

古文：诏曰： 故丞相安平侯敞等居位守职，与大将军光、车骑将军安世建议定策，以安宗庙，功赏未加而甍。
现代文：下诏书说： 已故丞相安平侯杨敞等忠于职守，与大将军霍光、车骑将军安世建议定策，以安定宗庙，功赏未及而去世。
English: The next imperial edict said: The late chancellor Anping Hou Yang Zhan and others were loyal to their duties, and proposed and decided on strategies with the general Huo Guang and the cavalry general An Shih to stabilize the ancestral temple, but died before the reward.

古文：其益封敞嗣子忠及丞相阳平侯义、度辽将军平陵侯明友、前将军龙雒侯增、太仆建平侯延年、太常蒲伺昌、谏大夫宜春侯谭、当涂侯平、杜侯屠耆堂、长信少府关内侯胜邑户各有差。
现代文：现增封其子杨忠及丞相阳平侯蔡义、度辽将军平陵侯范明友、前将军龙雒侯韩增、太仆建平侯杜延年、太常蒲侯苏昌、谏大夫宜春侯王谭、当涂侯平、杜侯屠耆堂、长信少府关内侯夏侯胜等增封邑户各有等差。
English: Yang Zhong, his son, and Yang Pinghou Cai Yi, the chancellor of the Joseon Dynasty; Fan Mingyou, the Pingling Hou, the general of Du Liao; Han Zeng, the former general of Longjing; Du Yannian, the servant of Jianping Hou; Su Chang, the governor of Taizhong; Wang Tan, the governor of Yichun; Dang Du Pinghou; Tu Xuedang, the governor of Du Hou; Xia Hosheng, the governor of Guanzhong of Changxin County and Guanzhong of Guanzhong County, and so on, have been granted additional fiefs.

古文：封御史大夫广明为昌水侯，后将军充国为营平侯，大司农延年为阳城侯，少府乐成为爰氏侯，光禄大夫迁为平丘侯。
现代文：封御史大夫田广明为昌水侯，后将军赵充国为营平侯，大司农田延年为阳城侯，少府史乐成为爰氏侯，光禄大夫王迁为平丘侯。
English: The Grand Historian Tian Guangming became the Prince of Changshui, the future General Zhao Chongguo became the Prince of Yingping, the Grand Secretary of Farmland Yan Nian became the Prince of Yangcheng, the Minor Prefect Shile became the Prince of Zou, and the Grand Historian Wang Qian became the Prince of Pingqiu.

古文：赐右扶风德、典属国武、廷尉光、宗正德、大鸿胪贤、詹事畸、光禄大夫吉、京辅都尉广汉爵皆关内侯。德、武食邑。 
现代文：赏赐右扶风周德，典属国苏武、廷尉李光、宗正刘、大鸿胪章贤、詹事宋畸、光禄大夫丙吉、京辅都尉赵广汉的爵级为关内侯，周德、苏武赐以食邑。 
English: Zhou De, the right-hand man of Fu Feng, was awarded the title of Guan Nei Hou, and the titles of Su Wu, the imperial lieutenant Li Guang, Zong Zheng Liu, the great general Zhang Xian, Zhan Zhi Song Qi, the doctor Guang Lu, and the Beijing auxiliary lieutenant Zhao Guang Han were awarded the title of Guan Nei Hou, and Zhou De and Su Wu were given the title of Shuxi Yu.

古文：夏四月庚午，地震。诏内郡国举文学高第各一人。
现代文：夏季四月十日，发生地震，诏令中原郡国举文学高第各一人。
English: On the 10th day of the 4th month of summer, an earthquake occurred, and Nakahara County Kunitachi Literature High School was ordered to evacuate.

古文：五月，凤皇集胶东、千乘。
现代文：五月，凤凰聚集于胶东、千乘。
English: In May, the phoenixes gathered in Jiaodong and Senjiao.

古文：赦天下。
现代文：赦天下。
English: Pardons all around.

古文：赐吏二千石、诸侯相、下至中都官、宦吏、六百石爵，各有差，自左更至五大夫。
现代文：赏赐吏二千石、诸侯相、下至中都官、宦吏、六百石爵级，各有差等。从左更到五大夫。
English: Officials were rewarded with 2,000 koku, vassals of vassals, officials from vassals down to middle-level officials, and officials with 600 koku, each with a different rank. From left to right, there were up to five vassals.

古文：赐天下人爵各一级，孝者二级，女子百户牛、酒。租税勿收。
现代文：赐天下人民爵位各一级，孝子二级，女子每百户赐牛肉及酒，租税免收。
English: Give all the people in the world first-class titles, second-class filial sons, and give beef and wine to every hundred female households, and exempt them from taxes.

古文：六月，诏曰： 故皇太子在湖，未有号谥、岁时祠。
现代文：六月，下诏说： 已故皇太子在湖县去世，未有号谥。
English: In June, the next imperial edict said: "The late crown prince died in Huxian County without a posthumous name."

古文：其议谥，置园邑。 
现代文：应按时祠祭，并议谥号，设置墓地园邑。 
English: It is necessary to set up a cemetery garden village according to the time of the ancestral hall festival and discuss the name.

古文：语在《太子传》。
现代文：其事记在《太子传》。
English: The event is recorded in "Prince biographies."

古文：秋七月，诏立燕剌王太子建为广阳王，立广陵王胥少子弘为高密王。
现代文：秋季七月，下诏书燕剌王太子刘建为广阳王，立广陵王刘胥的小儿子刘弘为高密王。
English: In the autumn of July, Liu Jian, the prince of Yanqi Wang, was named Guangyang King in the next edict, and Liu Hong, the youngest son of Guangling King Liu Xi, was named Gaomi King.

古文：二年春，以水衡钱为平陵，徙民起第宅。
现代文：二年春，用天子私钱修建平陵，迁移百姓到此起住宅。
English: In the spring of the second year, Pingling was built with private money from Tianzi, and the people moved their residences here.

古文：大司农阳城侯田延年有罪，自杀。
现代文：大司农阳城侯田延年因有贪污罪，自杀。
English: The superintendent of Nongyang Town, Hou Tian Yan Nian, committed suicide after being convicted of corruption.

古文：夏五月，诏曰： 朕以眇身奉承祖宗，夙夜惟念孝武皇帝躬履仁义，选明将，讨不服，匈奴远遁，平氐、羌、昆明、南越，百蛮乡风，款塞来享；建太学，修郊祀，定正朔，协音律；封泰山，塞宣房，符瑞应，宝鼎出，白麟获。
现代文：夏五月，下诏说： 朕德行浅薄而继承祖宗大业，早晚都怀念武帝履仁行义，挑选名将，征讨不服，因而匈奴远逃，戡平氐、羌、昆明、南越，边远地区望风归顺，叩塞臣服；兴建太学，按礼郊祀，确定正朔，协调音律，泰山封禅，宣房筑堤。
English: In the summer of May, the next imperial edict said: I am shallow in virtue and inherit the great cause of my ancestors. Sooner or later, I miss Emperor Wu, perform benevolence and righteousness, select famous generals, and solicit disapproval. As a result, the Xiongnu fled far away, and went to Pingyao, Shandong, Kunming, South Vietnam, and remote areas to look for the wind to surrender, and beat down the subjugation; to build Taigaku, to worship according to etiquette, to determine Zhengshuo, to coordinate musical rhythms, to seal Mount Tai, and to build a dike.

古文：功德茂盛，不能尽宣，而庙乐未称，其议奏。 
现代文：符瑞迭应，宝鼎生辉，白麟呈祥、丰功盛德，不能尽宣，而庙乐与其功德不相适应，请有司议奏。 
English: Fu Rui Dui should be, Baoding is brilliant, Bai Lin is auspicious, rich in merit, can not be fully declared, and temple music is not compatible with its merits, please have a discussion.

古文：有司奏请宜加尊号。
现代文：有关机构请应加尊号。
English: Relevant institutions, please add your honorifics.

古文：六月庚午，尊孝武庙为世宗庙，奏《盛德》、《文始》、《五行》之舞，天子世世献。
现代文：六月，尊武帝庙为世祖庙，奏《盛德》、《文始》、《五行》之舞，天子代代献礼。
English: In June, the Temple of the Revered Emperor Wu was designated as the ancestral temple of the world. The dances of "Shengde," "Wen Shi," and "Wu Xing" were performed, and gifts were presented from generation to generation.

古文：武帝巡狩所幸之郡国，皆立庙。
现代文：凡武帝巡狩所到的郡国，都建庙祭祀。
English: Wherever Emperor Wu went on a hunting tour, temples were built to hold religious services.

古文：赐民爵一级，女子百户牛、酒。
现代文：赏赐民爵位一级，赏女子百户牛酒若干。
English: Awarded a first-class title of people's peerage, awarded a number of women's hundred households of beef wine.

古文：匈奴数侵边，又西伐乌孙。乌孙昆弥及公主因国使者上书，言昆弥愿发国精兵击匈奴，唯天子哀怜，出兵以救公主。
现代文：匈奴多次侵犯边界，又西侵乌孙，乌孙昆弥王及嫁乌孙王的汉公主通过出使乌孙的汉朝使者向朝廷上书，说乌孙王希望朝廷派遣精兵攻打匈奴，希望天子哀怜，乌孙饱受侵略的处境，出兵以救公主。
English: The Huns repeatedly violated the border, and invaded the west of the Ussun, Ussun King Kunmyo and the Han princess, who was the wife of Ussun King, sent a letter to the imperial court through the Han dynasty emissary sent by Ussun, saying that King Ussun hoped that the imperial court would send elite soldiers to attack the Huns, and hoped that heaven would take pity on the situation of Ussun suffering from aggression and send troops to save the princess.

古文：秋，大发兴调关东轻车锐卒，选郡国吏三百石伉健习骑射者，皆从军。
现代文：秋季，朝廷动员与选派关东轻车锐卒，还挑选各郡国位在三百石的强健而善于骑射的吏员，都从军西征。
English: In the autumn, the imperial court mobilized and selected soldiers from the Guandong Light Cavalry, and also selected officials from each county who were strong and good at riding and shooting, all of whom were from the Western Expeditionary Force.

古文：御史大夫田广明为祁连将军，后将军赵充国为蒲类将军，云中太守田顺为虎牙将军，及度辽将军范明友、前将军韩增，凡五将军，兵十五万骑，校尉常惠持节护乌孙兵，咸击匈奴。
现代文：御史大夫田广明为祁连将军，后将军赵充国为蒲类将军，云中太守田顺为虎牙将军，与度辽将军范明友，前将军韩增共为五将军，兵十五万骑，校尉常惠持符节指挥乌孙兵，共击匈奴。
English: The chief historian Tian Guangming was the general of Qilian, the later general Zhao Chongguo was the general of Putuo, the governor of Yunzhong, Tian Shun, was the general of Huya, and the general of Du Liao, Fan Mingyou, and the former general Han Zeng were a total of five generals, with a total of 150,000 soldiers, and the lieutenant, Chang Hui Zhi, commanded the Wusun soldiers and fought against the Xiongnu.

古文：三年春正月癸亥，皇后许氏崩。
现代文：本始三年春季正月十三日，皇后许氏去世。
English: On the 13th day of the first month of spring in the first three years, Empress Xu passed away.

古文：戊辰，五将军师发长安。
现代文：十八日，五将军兵发长安。
English: On the 18th, the five generals and soldiers left Chang'an.

古文：夏五月，军罢。
现代文：夏五月，收兵。
English: In the summer of May, the troops were withdrawn.

古文：祁连将军广明、虎牙将军顺有罪，下有司，皆自杀。
现代文：祁连将军田广明因逗留不进、虎牙将军田顺因虚报战果有罪，交军法机构处置，都自杀了。
English: General Tian Guangming, commander of the Qilian Company, committed suicide because he could not advance due to his stay, and General Tian Shun, commander of the Huya Company, committed suicide because he was found guilty of falsely reporting the results of the battle and submitted to the disposition of the military legal institution.

古文：校尉常惠将乌孙兵入匈奴右地，大克获，封列侯。
现代文：校尉常惠率领乌孙兵攻入匈奴右地，大获全胜，封为列侯。
English: The school captain Chang Hui led the Wusun soldiers to invade the Hun's right, won a complete victory, and was made a vassal.

古文：大旱，郡国伤旱甚者，民毋出租赋。
现代文：发生大的旱情，凡是郡国旱情严重的，全部免除百姓租税。
English: In the event of a major drought, all the people will be exempted from tax if the county and country are in a severe drought.

古文：三辅民就贱者，且毋收事，尽四年。
现代文：三辅区内的贫困户，皆免其租税徭役，到第二年为止。
English: All poor households in Sanshu District will be exempted from their tax and service charges until the following year.

古文：六月已丑，丞相义薨。
现代文：六月十一日，丞相蔡义去世。
English: On June 11, General Secretary Cai Yi passed away.

古文：四年春正月，诏曰： 盖闻农者兴德之本也，今岁不登，已遣使者振贷困乏。
现代文：四年春正月，下诏说： 曾闻农业发达是国家兴旺的根本，今年农业收成减少，已派遣使者赈贷困乏。
English: In the first month of the fourth year of the Spring, the following edict was issued: It was once heard that a well-developed agriculture is fundamental to the country's prosperity. This year's agricultural harvest has decreased, and an envoy has been dispatched to relieve the credit shortage.

古文：其令太官损膳省宰，乐府减乐人，使归就农业。
现代文：现特令御厨节省馔膳和裁减屠工，乐府减少乐工，让他们去参加农业。
English: He has now ordered the Imperial Cuisine to reduce the number of chefs and butchers, and the Music House to reduce the number of musicians, so that they can participate in agriculture.

古文：丞相以下至都官令、丞上书入谷，输长安仓，助贷贫民。
现代文：丞相以下至中央各署官员都要上报捐助谷物数字，输入长安仓，以帮助朝廷赈贷贫民。
English: All officials from the prime minister down to the officials of the central government departments were required to report the number of donated grain and enter it into the Chang'an warehouse to help the imperial court to lend money to the poor.

古文：民以车船载谷入关者，得毋用传。 
现代文：民间用车船载谷物入关的，勿须进行盘查。 
English: If the grain is imported by a private vehicle or ship, there is no need to conduct an inventory.

古文：三月乙卯，立皇后霍氏。赐丞相以下至郎吏从官金、钱、帛各有差。赦天下。
现代文：三月十一日，立皇后霍氏，赏赐丞相以下到郎吏从官金钱绢帛各有不等，大赦天下。
English: On March 11th, the Empress Ho was established, and rewarded officials from the prime minister down to the vassals with varying amounts of money, and granted amnesty to the whole country.

古文：夏四月壬寅，郡国四十九地震，或山崩水出。
现代文：夏四月二十九日，郡国有四十九处地震，有的地方山崩水出。
English: On the 29th day of the 4th month of summer, there were 49 earthquakes in the county, and landslides occurred in some places.

古文：诏曰： 盖灾异者，天地之戒也。
现代文：下诏说： 大凡灾异的出现，是天地示以警戒。
English: The following edict said: The appearance of extraordinary calamities is a warning from heaven and earth.

古文：朕承洪业，奉宗庙，托于士民之上，未能和群生。乃者地震北海、琅邪，坏祖宗庙，朕甚惧焉。
现代文：朕继承大业，奉祀宗庙，君临于臣民之上，未能德被群生，因而地震北海、琅王牙，毁坏祖宗宗庙，朕深为惶恐。
English: I am inheriting a great cause, worshiping the ancestral temple, reigning over my subjects, and I have not been able to be virtuous. Therefore, I am deeply frightened that the earthquake will destroy the ancestral temple in the North Sea and the King's Tooth.

古文：丞相、御史其与列侯、中二千石博问经学之士，有以应变，辅朕之不逮，毋有所讳。
现代文：丞相、御史其与列侯、中二千石及知识渊博之士，提出御塞灭异的建议，以匡正朕的不德，望言无不尽。
English: The chancellor, the minister of history, the vassals, the vassals of the middle and upper classes, and the men of two thousand koku, as well as the men of profound knowledge, put forward the proposal to put an end to the differences and rectify our immoralities.

古文：令三辅、太常、内郡国举贤良方正各一人。
现代文：令三辅、太常、中原郡国各荐举贤良方正一人。
English: Sanju, Taichung, and Nakahara counties each recommended one virtuous person, Fang Zheng.

古文：律令有可蠲除以安百姓，条奏。被地震坏败甚者，勿收租赋。 
现代文：有些律令给百姓造成困难与不便的可以蠲除，望分别提出。因地震破坏严重的，免收租赋。 
English: Some laws and regulations that cause difficulties and inconvenience to the people can be eliminated, and the hope was separately raised. Due to the serious earthquake damage, the rent is exempted.

古文：大赦天下。
现代文：宣布大赦天下。
English: Amnesty for the whole world.

古文：上以宗庙堕，素服，避正殿五日。
现代文：皇上因为宗庙被地震所毁，就穿素服，避正殿五天以表示心情沉重。
English: Because the ancestral temple was destroyed by the earthquake, the emperor wore plain clothes and avoided the main hall for five days to express his heavy heart.

古文：五月，凤皇集北海安丘、淳于。
现代文：五月，凤凰聚集于北海安丘、淳于。
English: In May, phoenixes gathered in Anqiu and Junyu in the North Sea.

古文：秋，广川王吉有罪，废迁上庸，自杀。
现代文：秋，广川王吉有罪，废位迁于上庸，自杀。
English: In the autumn, Guangchuan Wangji was found guilty, and was demoted to Shangyong and committed suicide.

古文：地节元年春正月，有星孛于西方。
现代文：地节元年春正月，西空出现彗星。
English: On the first day of spring in the year 1000, a comet appeared in the western sky.

古文：三月，假郡国贫民田。
现代文：三月，暂借郡国田地与贫民耕种。
English: In March, the county's land was temporarily leased to the poor for farming.

古文：夏六月，诏曰： 盖闻尧亲九族，以和万国。朕蒙遗德，奉承圣业，惟念宗室属未尽而以罪绝，若有贤材，改行劝善，其复属，使得自新。 
现代文：夏季六月，下诏说： 曾闻尧先让九族亲睦，再发展到协和万国，朕蒙祖宗德泽，继承帝业，每念宗室成员血统仍亲而因罪被宗室除去属籍，若有贤德之人，能劝其改恶从善，就可以恢复属籍，使其自新。 
English: In the summer of June, the following imperial edict was issued: "Having heard that the first step was to bring the nine ethnic groups into harmony, and then to develop into the harmony of all nations, I, the founder of the Zongdeze, inherited the imperial inheritance. Every member of the imperial family who was considered to be a blood relative was removed from the imperial family for the crime of belonging to the imperial family. If there is a virtuous person who can persuade him to change evil and do good, he can restore his belonging to the imperial family and reform himself.

古文：冬十一月，楚王延寿谋反，自杀。
现代文：冬季十一月，楚王延寿谋反，自杀。
English: In the winter of November, King Yanshou of Chu plotted a rebellion and committed suicide.

古文：十二月癸亥晦，日有蚀之。
现代文：十二月三十日，出现日偏食。
English: On December 30, a partial solar eclipse occurred.

古文：二年春三月庚午，大司马大将军光薨。
现代文：二年春三月初八日，大司马大将军霍光去世。
English: In the spring of the second year, on the 8th day of the 3rd month, Major General Ma Huo Guang passed away.

古文：诏曰： 大司马大将军博陆侯宿卫孝武皇帝三十余年，辅孝昭皇帝十有余年，遭大难，躬秉义，率三公、诸侯、九卿、大夫定万世策，以安宗庙。
现代文：下诏说： 大司马大将军博陆侯宿卫孝武皇帝三十余年，辅佐孝昭皇帝十有余年，屡逢国难，躬秉忠义，率领三公、九卿、大夫等群臣定长治久安之策，以安定宗庙，让天下黎民，都得安宁。
English: The following imperial edict said: For more than 30 years, the Grand Master Ma Da, the general of Baoluhou, lodged with Emperor Xiaowu, and assisted Emperor Xiao Zhao for more than 10 years. He repeatedly encountered national difficulties, upheld loyalty, and led the three princes, nine nobles, doctors and other vassals to establish a long-term peace policy to stabilize the ancestral temple and let the people of the world have peace.

古文：天下蒸庶，咸以康宁，功德茂盛，朕甚嘉之。
现代文：功高德劭，朕深为钦佩。现让其子孙享受其荣光。
English: I deeply admire his great merits and virtues. Now, let his children and grandchildren enjoy his glory.

古文：复其后世，畴其爵邑，世世毋有所与。功如萧相国。 
现代文：不减少其爵邑，世世不负担徭役赋税，其功如萧何丞相。 
English: If he does not reduce his peerage, and does not bear the tax burden of government service, his achievement will be as great as that of Xiao Hezheng.

古文：夏四月，凤皇集鲁，群鸟从之。
现代文：夏四月，凤凰聚集于鲁郡，群鸟追随其后。
English: In the summer of April, phoenixes gathered in Lu County, followed by flocks of birds.

古文：大赦天下。
现代文：大赦天下。
English: Amnesty for the whole world.

古文：五月，光禄大夫平丘侯王迁有罪，下狱死。
现代文：五月，光禄大夫平丘侯王迁有罪，下狱死。
English: In May, Guanglu doctor Pingqiu Hou Wangqian was found guilty and died in prison.

古文：上始亲政事，又思报大将军功德，乃复使乐平侯山领尚书事，而令群臣得奏封事，以知下情。五日一听事，自丞相以下各奉职奏事，以傅奏其言，考试功能。
现代文：皇上开始亲政，又思念大将军霍光的功德，就委任霍光侄孙乐平侯霍山领尚书事，总揽朝政，而令群臣还要常向皇帝报告工作，以便皇帝掌握下情，五天听取一次工作汇报，从丞相以下各署奉职奏事。以敷陈其情况与措施，考试其政绩与能力。
English: When the emperor began to govern personally, he also thought about the merits of the great general Huo Guang, so he appointed Huo Guang's nephew, Sun Leping, lord of Huoshan, to be in charge of the records and general administration of the court. He also ordered the courtiers to report their work to the emperor frequently, so that the emperor could grasp the situation, listen to a work report every five days, and report on their duties from the offices of the prime minister and below. In order to explain their situation and measures, and to test their political performance and ability.

古文：侍中尚书功劳当迁及有异善，厚加赏赐，至于子孙，终不改易。
现代文：侍中尚书应当迁升及有特殊贡献者，要厚加赏赐，其职事可以传至子孙，不易其位。
English: An attendant should be promoted, and those who have made special contributions should be rewarded more generously. Their duties can be passed down to their children and grandchildren, and it is not easy to rise to their position.

古文：枢机周密，品式备具，上下相安，莫有苟且之意也。
现代文：由此就形成朝廷机构设施效能完备，人员配置得当。上下同心同德，没有苟且偷安之意。
English: As a result, the institutional facilities of the imperial court were formed with complete efficiency and proper staffing. The upper and lower echelons were of the same mind, and there was no intention of stealing the peace.

古文：三年春三月，诏曰： 盖闻有功不赏，有罪不诛，虽唐、虞犹不能以化天下。
现代文：三年春三月，下诏说： 曾闻有功不赏，有罪不诛，虽唐尧虞舜也不能以德化天下。
English: In the spring and March of the third year, the next imperial edict said: Once heard, there is no reward for merit, no punishment for guilt, although the Tang Dynasty and the Yuan Dynasty could not make the world virtuous.

古文：今胶东相成劳来不怠，流民自占八万余口，治有异等，其秩成中二千石，赐爵关内侯。 
现代文：今胶东相王成热情接待与妥善安置流民，使流民在胶东注户口名籍的达八万余人。其政绩异于常等，现将王成俸禄升至二千石，赐爵为关内侯。 
English: Wang Cheng, the current Minister of Jiaodong, has warmly received and properly resettled the displaced people, so that more than 80,000 displaced people have registered their names in the Jiaodong registration. His political achievements are different from usual, and Wang Cheng's salary is now raised to two thousand koku, and he is given a peerage as Guanai Hou.

古文：又曰： 鳏、寡、孤、独、高年、贫困之民，朕所怜也。
现代文：诏书又说： 鳏寡孤独与年老贫困的百姓，是朕最为同情与关怀的。
English: The edict also said: "The widowed, the lonely, the old and the poor are the people I most sympathize with and care about.

古文：前下诏假公田，贷种、食。
现代文：以前曾下诏借给公田，贷给种子、口粮。
English: In the past, imperial edicts were issued to lend public land, seeds, and rations.

古文：其加赐鳏、寡、孤、独、高年帛。
现代文：现再加赐鳏寡孤独老人帛。
English: Now add widowed lonely old men.

古文：二千石严教吏谨视遇，毋令失职。 
现代文：二千石官员应严格要求吏员认真关切他们，莫让其失其常业。 
English: Officials of 2,000 koku should strictly require officials to seriously concern them and prevent them from losing their regular jobs.

古文：令国郡国举贤良方正可亲民者。
现代文：令中原郡国举贤良方正能够深入到百姓中去了解民情的人员。
English: People who can go deep into the people to understand the people's conditions are the ones who have made Zhongyuan County a virtuous county.

古文：夏四月戊申，立皇太子，大赦天下。
现代文：夏四月二十二日，立皇太子，大赦天下。
English: On the 22nd day of the 4th month of the summer, the crown prince was established, and the country was amnestied.

古文：赐御史大夫爵关内侯，中二千石爵右庶长。天下当为父后者爵一级。
现代文：赐御史大夫爵关内侯，中二千石爵右庶长，天下的作为父亲的继承人的晋爵一级。
English: He was given the title of Lord of Guanai, the second-highest peerage in the world, and the second-highest peerage in the world as his father's successor.

古文：赐广陵王黄金千斤，诸侯王十五人黄金各百斤，列侯在国者八十七人黄金各二十斤。
现代文：赏赐广陵王黄金千斤，各侯王十五人黄金各百斤，列侯在封国的八十七人每人黄金各二十斤。
English: The Guangling King was awarded one thousand catties of gold, each of the fifteen feudal lords was awarded one hundred catties of gold, and each of the eighty-seven feudal lords in the fief was awarded twenty catties of gold.

古文：冬十月，诏曰： 乃者九月壬申地震，朕甚惧焉。有能箴朕过失，及贤良方正直言极谏之士以匡朕之不逮，毋讳有司。
现代文：冬十月，下诏说： 前者九月二十六日地震，朕深感惶恐，希望群臣能箴戒朕的过失，并举荐贤良方正直言极谏的人以匡正朕的不足，要无所讳忌，不避权贵。
English: In the winter of October, the next imperial edict said: I am deeply alarmed by the earthquake of September 26th. I hope that the ministers can admonish me for my mistakes, and recommend the virtuous and honest people to rectify my shortcomings, to be shameless, and not to avoid the powerful.

古文：朕既不德，不能附远，是以边境屯戍未息。
现代文：由于朕德行不足，不能使边远地区归附，以致边境屯戍不息。
English: Due to our lack of virtue, we cannot annex the remote areas, so that the border remains unsettled.

古文：今复饬兵重屯，久劳百姓，非所以绥天下也。
现代文：接着又命令重兵屯守，增加百姓的负担与将士的劳苦，这不是一种安靖天下的长策。
English: Then he ordered the troops to stay put, increasing the burden on the people and the toil of the soldiers. This was not a long-term strategy for world peace.

古文：其罢车骑将军、右将军屯兵。 
现代文：现决定撤除车骑将军、右将军屯兵。 
English: It is now decided to remove the cavalry general and the right general from the garrison.

古文：又诏： 池崇未御幸者，假与贫民。
现代文：又下诏： 池陂禁苑皇家未曾使用的，皆借给贫民使用。
English: He also issued the following edict: All the gardens in the Chihshang Forbidden City that had not been used by the imperial family were to be lent to the poor for use.

古文：郡国宫、馆，勿复修治。
现代文：郡的楼台馆舍，不再修建。
English: The county's main hall will no longer be built.

古文：流民还归者，假公田，贷种、食，且勿算事。 
现代文：外流人员返回的，借以公田，贷给种子口粮，免其役赋。 
English: Those who returned from the exodus were given public land, loaned seed rations, and exempted from labor service.

古文：十一月，诏曰： 朕既不逮，导民不明，反侧晨兴，念虑万方，不忘元元。唯恐羞先帝圣德，故并举贤良方正以亲万姓，历载臻兹，然而俗化阙焉。
现代文：十一月，下诏说： 由于朕思虑不周，就导民不明，勤以宵旰，思考全国大事，怀念天下百姓，深恐玷污先帝的圣德，还大力树立贤良方正典型以在百姓中形成孝悌之风，至今已历数载，但未能完全移风易俗。
English: In November, the next imperial edict said: "Because I was not thoughtful, I did not know how to lead the people, I often used the curfew to think about national affairs, I missed the people around the world, I was deeply afraid of tarnishing the sacredness of the former emperor, and I also vigorously established the virtuous Fangzheng model to form a filial piety among the people. It has been several years since then, but I have not been able to completely change the custom.

古文：传曰： 孝、弟也者，其为仁之本与！ 
现代文：古语说： 孝与悌，是为人的根本啊！ 
English: An ancient saying says: filial piety and modesty are the foundation of being a good person!

古文：其令郡国举孝、弟有行义闻于乡里者各一人。 
现代文：现令郡国推举孝悌，有行义著称于乡里的各一人。 
English: The county is now ordering the state to nominate a filial son who is known for his good deeds in the village.

古文：十二月，初置廷尉平四人，秩六百石。
现代文：十二月，开始设置廷尉平四人，俸禄六百石。
English: In December, four court lieutenants were appointed, with a salary of 600 koku.

古文：省文山郡，并蜀。
现代文：撤销文山郡，其县并入蜀郡。
English: Wenshan County was revoked, and its county was merged into Shu County.

古文：四年春二月，封外祖母为博平君，故酂侯萧何曾孙建世为侯。
现代文：四年春二月，封外祖母为博平君，前赞阝侯萧何曾孙萧建世为侯。
English: In February of the spring of the fourth year, the grandmother of the fief was Bo Pingjun, and the great-grandson of the former great-grandson of the great-grandson of the great-grandson of the great-grandson of the great-grandson of the great-grandson of the great-grandson of the great-grandson of the great-grandson of the great-grandson of the great-grandson of the great-grandson of the great-grandson of the great-grandson of the great-grandson of the great-grandfather.

古文：诏曰： 导民以孝，是天下顺。
现代文：下诏说： 引导人民以孝为先，则天下就会和顺。
English: The next edict said, "If you lead the people to be filial, the world will be harmonious."

古文：今百姓或遭衰绖凶灾，而吏徭事使不得葬，伤孝子之心，朕甚怜之。
现代文：今百姓有时遭受父母之丧，还要负担徭役，使父母遗体不得按时入土，有伤孝子之心，朕对此深表同情。
English: Nowadays, people sometimes suffer the loss of their parents, and also have to bear the burden of burial service, so that the remains of their parents cannot be buried on time, which hurts the hearts of filial children. I express my deep sympathy for this.

古文：自今，诸有大父母、父母丧者勿徭事，使得收敛送终，尽其子道。 
现代文：从现在起，凡有祖父母、父母丧事的可以免去徭役，使能收殓送终，尽人子之道。 
English: From now on, anyone who has a grandparent or parent who has passed away can be exempted from the funeral service, so that they can receive the funeral and send it to the end, fulfilling the way of the son of man.

古文：夏五月，诏曰： 父子之亲，夫妇之道，天性也。
现代文：夏五月，下诏说： 父子之亲，夫妇之道，是出于天性。
English: In the summer of May, the following edict was issued: It is natural for a father and son to be close, and for a husband and wife to be a couple.

古文：虽有患祸，犹蒙死而存之。
现代文：虽有祸患，仍愿舍身与冒险相救。
English: Although there are disasters, they are still willing to sacrifice themselves and take risks to save themselves.

古文：诚爱结于心，仁厚之至也，岂能违之哉！
现代文：真诚的爱结于心，仁厚出于自然，这是不可能违背的啊！
English: Genuine love is in the heart, kindness is natural, it is impossible to go against it!

古文：自今，子首匿父母、妻匿夫、孙匿大父母，皆勿坐。
现代文：从现在起，凡儿子为首藏匿犯罪的父母，妻子藏匿犯罪的丈夫，孙子藏匿犯罪的祖父母，都可以不问罪。
English: From now on, any parent whose son hides a crime, any wife who hides a husband who has committed a crime, any grandparent whose grandchild hides a crime will not be held accountable.

古文：其父母匿子、夫匿妻、大父母匿孙，罪殊死，皆上请廷尉以闻。 
现代文：另如父母匿犯罪的儿子，丈夫匿犯罪的妻子，祖父母匿犯罪的孙子，罪不致于死的，都要上报廷尉与奏明皇上后再行决断。 
English: In addition, if the parents hide the criminal son, the husband hides the criminal wife, the grandparents hide the criminal grandson, and the crime does not lead to death, they must be reported to the court lieutenant and the Emperor Soniming for adjudication.

古文：立广川惠王孙文为广川王。
现代文：封广川惠王孙文为广川王。
English: Guangchuan Hui Wang Sunwen was named King of Guangchuan.

古文：秋七月，大司马霍禹谋反。
现代文：秋七月，大司马霍禹谋反。
English: In the autumn and July, the chief magistrate, Maho Yu, plotted a rebellion.

古文：诏曰： 乃者，东织室令史张赦使魏郡豪李竟报冠阳侯霍云谋为大逆，朕以大将军故，抑而不扬，冀其自新。
现代文：下诏说： 前者，东织室令张赦派魏郡豪家李竟举报冠阳侯霍云谋为大逆，朕念在霍光大将军的功绩，想把大事化小，促令霍禹洗心革面。
English: The next edict said: The former, the East Loom ordered Zhang Meng to send the Wei County strongman Li Qian to report Guanyang marquis Huo Yun's plot as a great treason. I thought of the exploits of General Huo Guang and wanted to minimize the big things and urge Huo Yu to wash his heart and face.

古文：今大司马博陆侯禹与母宣成侯夫人显及从昆弟冠阳侯云、乐平侯山、诸姊妹婿度辽将军范明友、长信少府邓广汉、中郎将任胜、骑都尉赵平、长安男子冯殷等谋为大逆。
现代文：现在大司马博陆侯霍禹与其母宣成侯夫人显及从昆弟子冠阳侯霍云、乐平侯霍山、诸姊妹婿度辽将军范明友，长信少府邓广汉、中郎将任胜、骑都尉赵平、长安男子冯殷等共谋为大逆不道之事。
English: At present, the grand secretary Ma Bo, Lu Hou, Ho Yu, his mother, Xuan Cheng Hou, Lady Xian, and the disciples from Kun, Guanyang Hou, Huo Yun, Leping Hou, Huoshan, the sisters' sons-in-law, General Du Liao, Fan Mingyou, Changxin Shaofu, Deng Guanghan, Zhong Lang, General Ren Sheng, Cavalry Captain Zhao Ping, Chang'an man Feng Yin, etc. conspired to commit the crime of high treason.

古文：显前又使女侍医淳于衍进药杀共哀后，谋毒太子，欲危宗庙。
现代文：霍禹之母又指使女侍医淳于衍进药毒杀恭哀后，还准备毒杀太子，想篡夺汉家政权。
English: Hoyu's mother also instructed her lady-in-waiting to poison the crown prince, hoping to usurp power from the Han family.

古文：逆乱不道，咸伏其辜。
现代文：该等逆乱不道，俱已按律伏法。
English: Such rebellions are not the way to go, and all have been resolved in accordance with the law.

古文：诸为霍氏所诖误未发觉在吏者，皆赦除之。 
现代文：凡为霍氏所蒙蔽裹胁而没有具体犯罪事实的一般参与者，一律赦免。 
English: All ordinary participants who did not have specific criminal facts but were deceived and threatened by Huo will be pardoned.

古文：八月已酉，皇后霍氏废。
现代文：八月初一日，皇后霍氏被废。
English: On the first day of August, Empress Huo was abolished.

古文：九月，诏曰： 朕惟百姓失职不赡，遣使者循行郡国问民所疾苦。
现代文：九月，下诏说： 朕恐百姓失去常业而生活困苦，特派使者循行郡国访问民间疾苦。
English: In September, the next imperial edict said: I am afraid that the people will lose their regular jobs and live in hardship. A special envoy will travel around the county to visit the people's sufferings.

古文：吏或营私烦扰，不顾厥咎，朕甚闵之。
现代文：有些官吏营私烦扰百姓，不顾百姓的水深火热，朕极表同情。
English: I have the utmost sympathy for some officials who disturb the people for personal gain, regardless of the people's deep-seated feelings.

古文：今年郡国颇被水灾，已振贷。
现代文：今年各郡国部分遭受水灾，已经赈贷。
English: This year, some counties and provinces have suffered from floods and have been flooded.

古文：盐，民之食，而贾咸贵，众庶重困。其减天下盐贾。 
现代文：盐，是千家万户所必需的，而价格甚高，更增加百姓的困难，现令降低天下盐价。 
English: Salt is essential for thousands of households, but the price is very high, which increases the difficulties of the people. It is now ordered to reduce the world's salt price.

古文：又曰： 令甲，死者不可生，刑者不可息。
现代文：又下诏说： 第一号令曾指出：处死刑者不可复生，受劓、刖、膑、割之刑的不可再行生长。
English: The edict also said: Order No. 1 had pointed out that those who were sentenced to death could not be revived, and those who were sentenced to be beaten, shackled, castrated, or mutilated could not grow again.

古文：朕甚痛之。其令郡国岁上系囚以掠笞若瘐死者所坐名、县、爵、里，丞相、御史课殿最以闻。 
现代文：这就是先帝之所以特别重视刑罚的原因，而有些法吏却未能深体其意。今日被捕入狱的有的因遭受严刑拷打，有的因饥寒折磨而瘐死狱中。为何这般的惨无人道啊！朕对此十分痛心。现特令郡国每年应上报因拷打与饥寒而瘐死狱中的死者的姓名、籍贯、爵级、居住地址，丞相御史要在年终作为一项重要的情况奏明朝廷。 
English: This is the reason why the former emperor paid special attention to punishment, but some legal officials failed to understand it. Some of those arrested and imprisoned today were severely tortured, and some died of starvation and cold in prison. Why is this so inhumane? I am very sorry about this. The county and state are now required to report the name, hometown, peerage, and residential address of those who died of torture and starvation in prison every year, and the prime minister must report to the imperial court at the end of the year as an important situation.

古文：十二月，清河王年有罪，废迁房陵。
现代文：十二月，清河王刘年有罪被废，迁徙于房陵。
English: In December, the Qing King Liu Nian's conviction was overturned and he was moved to Fangling.

古文：元康元年春，以杜东原上为初陵，更名杜县为杜陵。
现代文：元康元年，以杜东原上为初陵，更名杜县为杜陵。
English: In the first year of the Yuan and Kang dynasties, Du Dongyuan Shang was used as the first mausoleum, and Du County was renamed as Du Ling.

古文：徙丞相、将军、列侯、吏二千石、訾百万者杜陵。
现代文：迁移丞相、将军、列、吏二千石、资产在百万者到杜陵。
English: The chancellor, generals, enlisted men, and officials of 2,000 koku, with assets of one million, were moved to Tuling.

古文：三月，诏曰： 乃者凤皇集泰山、陈留，甘露降未央宫。
现代文：三月，下诏说： 近日凤凰聚集于泰山、陈留，甘露降于未央宫。
English: In March, the following edict was issued: "Recently, the phoenixes have gathered in Mount Tai and Chenliu, and the nectar has descended on Weiyang Palace.

古文：朕未能章先帝休烈，协宁百姓，承天顺地，调序四时，获蒙嘉瑞，赐兹祉福，夙夜兢兢，靡有骄色，内省匪解，永惟罔极。
现代文：朕未能弘扬先帝的丰功伟绩，保证百姓的安居乐业，顺承天地之德，调序四时之节，竟蒙天地献瑞呈祥，赐以凤凰甘露之福，自是昼夜兢兢，毫无骄矜之色，自我反省不敢稍懈，长思正道没有终极。
English: I have not been able to carry forward the great achievements of the former emperor, ensure the people's peaceful living and happy career, obey the virtue of heaven and earth, and adjust the order of the four-hour festival, but I have been given the blessing of heaven and earth, and given the blessing of the phoenix nectar. I am trembling day and night, without the color of pride, I dare not relax my self-reflection, and there is no end to thinking about the right way.

古文：《书》不云乎？ 凤皇来仪，庶尹允谐。 
现代文：《书》不是指出过吗？ 凤凰降临，人神交畅。 
English: Wasn't it pointed out in "The Book"? The phoenix descends, and people and gods mingle freely.

古文：其赦天下徒，赐勤事吏中二千石以下至六百石爵，自中郎吏至五大夫，佐史以上二级，民一级，女子百户牛、酒。
现代文：可以赦免天下囚徒，赏赐勤于职守的官吏中二千石以下到六百石的爵级，从中郎到五大夫，佐史以上二级，百姓一级，女子每百户牛酒若干。
English: It can pardon the world's prisoners, reward the officials who are diligent in their duties with a peerage of less than two thousand koku to six hundred koku, from middlemen to five husbands, two levels above Sashi, one level for commoners, and a number of cattle wine for women per hundred households.

古文：加赐鳏、寡、孤、独、三老、孝弟、力田帛。所振贷勿收。 
现代文：加赐鳏寡孤独、三老、孝悌力田帛。对其原有赈贷免还。 
English: In addition, it is granted to the widows and widowers who are lonely, the three old people, and the filial children who have the power to work. The original loan is exempted.

古文：夏五月，立皇考庙。
现代文：夏五月，建立皇考庙。
English: In the summer of May, the imperial examination temple was built.

古文：益奉明园户为奉明县。
现代文：增加奉明园户口设置奉明县。
English: Increasing the number of households with a Fengmingyuan hukou to Fengming County.

古文：复高皇帝功臣绛侯周勃等百三十六人家子孙，令奉祭祀，世世勿绝。
现代文：免除高祖皇帝功臣绛侯周勃等一百三十六家的嫡长子孙的赋役，让他们以此来供奉家庙祭祀，世世都不得间断。
English: He exempted the eldest sons and grandsons of 136 families, including Emperor Gaozhu's meritorious vassals and princes such as Zhou Bo, from paying tribute, so that they could offer sacrifices to their families and temples without interruption throughout the ages.

古文：其毋嗣者，复其次。
现代文：要是没有嫡长子孙的，就免除其以下的。
English: And if he have no firstborn, then he that is younger than he shall go free.

古文：秋八月，诏曰： 朕不明六艺，郁于大道，是以阴阳风雨未时。
现代文：秋季八月，下诏说： 朕不明于礼、乐、书、射、数、御，不能融会贯通治国之道，所以不能达到阴阳合谐风调雨顺。
English: In the autumn of August, the following edict was issued: "I do not know how to perform rituals, music, calligraphy, shooting, numbers, and government, and I cannot integrate the way of governing the country, so I cannot achieve the harmony of yin and yang, the harmony of wind and rain.

古文：其博举吏民，厥身修正，通文学，明于先王之术，宣究其意者，各二人，中二千石各一人。 
现代文：现下令广举吏民，其品行优良，精通文学，明于先王治国之术，并能深明其中义理的，各郡国举二人，中二千石各举一人。 
English: Now, it is ordered to widely select officials and people who are of good moral character, proficient in literature, familiar with the previous king's way of governing the country, and able to understand the meaning of it. Two people will be selected from each county, and one person will be selected from every 2,000 koku.

古文：冬，置建章卫尉。
现代文：冬季，设置建章卫尉。
English: In winter, there is a guard of honour.

古文：二年春正月，诏曰： 《书》云 文王作罚，刑兹无赦 ，今吏修身奉法，未有能称朕意，朕甚愍焉。
现代文：二年春正月，下诏说： 《书》说： 文王作刑法，对于乱常违教者不得赦免。 当今有些法吏虽然修身奉法，仍不称其任，还不能使朕感到满意，朕也为这些法吏感到难过。
English: In the first month of the second year of the Spring, the following edict was issued: "The Book says: King Wen made the criminal law, and there shall be no amnesty for those who violate the law in a disorderly manner. Today, there are some legal officials who, although they have cultivated themselves and practiced the law, still do not fulfill their duties, which does not make me feel satisfied, and I also feel sad for these legal officials.

古文：其赦天下，与士大夫厉精更始。 
现代文：现决定不追究他们的责任，望他们与各级官员聚精会神，重新开始。 
English: Now it has been decided not to hold them accountable, and they are expected to regroup with officials at all levels and make a fresh start.

古文：二月乙丑，立皇后王氏。赐丞相以下至郎从官钱、帛各有差。
现代文：二月二十六日，立皇后王氏，赏赐丞相以下至郎从官钱帛各有差等。
English: On February 26, the Empress Wang clan was established, and rewards were given to officials from the prime minister on down.

古文：三月，以凤皇、甘露降集，赐天下吏爵二级，民一级，女子百户牛、酒，鳏、寡、孤、独、高年帛。
现代文：三月，因为凤凰、甘露屡呈祥瑞，特赐天下吏爵级二级，庶民爵一级，女子每百户赐牛肉及酒若干，鳏寡孤独高年赐帛若干。
English: In March, because the phoenix and the nectar of nectar were often auspicious, they were specially awarded the second level of the world's officials and the first level of the common people, a certain amount of beef and wine was given to every hundred households, and a certain amount of money was given to the widows and the lonely elderly.

古文：夏五月，诏曰： 狱者，万民之命，所以禁暴止邪，养育群生也。
现代文：夏季五月，下诏说： 刑狱关系到千万人的命运，是用以禁暴止邪，养育群生的。
English: In the summer of May, the following edict was issued: Imprisonment is related to the fate of tens of thousands of people. It is used to prohibit violence, stop evil, and nurture the masses.

古文：能使生者不怨，死者不恨，则可谓文吏矣。
现代文：要能使生者不怨、死者不恨，这才可以担任文吏。
English: If you can make the living not resent and the dead not hate, then you can serve as a clerk.

古文：今则不然，用法或持巧心，析律贰端，深浅不平，增辞饰非，以成其罪。
现代文：现在却不然。有的执法量刑持机巧之心，分析律条，妄生端绪，以出入人罪，无限上纲或有意开脱，以定罪名。
English: However, this is no longer the case. Some law enforcement agencies are clever in their sentencing, analyzing the rules, creating false leads, using the crime of trespassing, or intentionally excusing, in order to get a conviction.

古文：奏不如实，上亦亡由知。此朕之不明，吏之不称，四方黎民将何仰哉！
现代文：将案情不如实上报，朝廷也无法了解真情，朕不能明察，吏不能称职，这样下去，四方黎民就无所仰仗了！
English: Reporting the facts of the case is not as good as the truth, the court can not understand the truth, I can not see clearly, the officials can not be competent, if this continues, the four parties and the people will have nothing to rely on!

古文：二千石各察官属，勿用此人。
现代文：二千石各自检察其下属，不得用这种徇私枉法的人主管刑狱。
English: Two thousand koku each inspect their subordinates, and they must not use such a self-serving person to be in charge of prison.

古文：吏务平法。或擅兴徭役，饰厨、传，称过使客，越职逾法，以取名誉，譬犹践薄冰以待白日，岂不殆哉！
现代文：官吏首务是依法办事，而有的为了让来往客使称心如意，就任意派遣听差役夫，提高客使食饮标准，僭越职权和无视法规，以博取客使对他的好评，这好比踏着薄冰而等待烈日，难道还不危险吗？
English: The first duty of officials is to act in accordance with the law, but some, in order to please the guests, arbitrarily send attendants, raise the food and beverage standards of the guests, exceed their powers and ignore laws and regulations, and win the praise of the guests. This is like treading on thin ice and waiting for the hot sun. Isn't it dangerous?

古文：今天下颇被疾疫之灾，朕甚愍之。
现代文：当今天下部分地区疾疫流行，朕深为同情。
English: I deeply sympathize with the current epidemic in some regions.

古文：其令郡国被灾甚者，毋出今年租赋。 
现代文：现令郡国受灾疫严重的地方，免出今年租税。 
English: Places in the prefecture that have been severely affected by the disaster and epidemic are now exempt from this year's tax.

古文：又曰： 闻古天子之名，难知而易讳也。
现代文：诏又说：听说古代的天子之名，难知而易讳。
English: Zhao also said: "I have heard that the name of the ancient son of heaven is difficult to know and difficult to conceal.

古文：今百姓多上书触讳以犯罪者，朕甚怜之。
现代文：现在百姓中有不少因上书触讳而犯罪的，朕十分同情。
English: Now there are quite a few among the people who commit crimes because of the taboo of writing, and I sympathize with them very much.

古文：其更讳询。
现代文：朕将原名 病已 改为 询 。
English: I have changed the original name of the disease from "cancer" to "inquiry."

古文：诸触讳在令前者，赦之。 
现代文：凡是在此诏之前触讳而蒙罪的，一律赦免。
English: All those who have offended before this edict will be pardoned.

古文：冬，京兆尹赵广汉有罪，要斩。
现代文：冬季，京兆尹赵广汉有罪，腰斩。
English: In winter, Jing Zhaoyun Zhao Guanghan was found guilty and beheaded.

古文：三年春，以神爵数集泰山，赐诸侯王、丞相、将军、列侯二千石金，郎从官帛，各有差。
现代文：三年春季，因为凤凰多次栖集于泰山，赏赐各侯王、丞相、将军、列侯、二千石以金，赏郎从官以帛，各有差别。
English: In the spring of the third year, because the phoenixes had gathered on Mount Tai for many times, they rewarded the princes, prime ministers, generals, and vassals with two thousand koku of gold, and rewarded the officials with money, each with a difference.

古文：赐天下吏爵二级，民一级，女子百户牛、酒、鳏、寡、孤、独、高年帛。
现代文：赏赐天下官吏爵二级，百姓一级，女子每百户赏牛酒若干，鳏寡孤独高年帛若干。
English: Awarded the world's second-class officials, first-class people, women per hundred households awarded a number of cattle and wine, widows and lonely old people awarded a number.

古文：三月，诏曰： 盖闻象有罪，舜封之，骨肉之亲粲而不殊。其封故昌邑王贺为海昏侯。 
现代文：三月，下诏说： 曾闻舜弟象有罪，舜为帝后封他于有鼻之国。骨肉之亲明而不绝，现封已故昌邑王为海昏侯。 
English: In March, the following edict was issued: "I once heard that my brother the elephant was guilty, and I crowned him emperor and sent him to the country of the nose. The flesh and blood are inseparable, and now I am crowning the late King Changyi as the prince of the sea."

古文：又曰： 朕微眇时，御史大夫丙吉，中郎将史曾、史玄、长乐卫尉许舜、侍中光禄大夫许延寿皆与朕有旧恩。
现代文：又下诏说： 朕身处卑微时，御史大夫丙吉、中郎将史曾、史玄、长乐卫尉许舜、侍中光禄大夫许延寿都对朕有旧恩。
English: He also said, "When I was a lowly person, Goshi-taifu Byakichi, Churo-chosho Shizen, Shigen, Chokei-weijun Xu Xi, and waiter-chuko Koroku-taifu Xu Yanju all had a long-standing favor for me.

古文：及故掖庭令张贺辅导朕躬，修文学经术，恩惠卓异，厥功茂焉。
现代文：还有已故掖庭令张贺辅导朕躬，学习文学经术，恩惠卓异，其功甚伟。
English: There is also the late Gongting ordered Zhang He to tutor me, to study literature and scripture, the benefits are extraordinary, and his achievements are great.

古文：《诗》不云乎？ 无德不报。 
现代文：《诗》不是说过吗？ 无德不报。 
English: Isn't it said in "Poetry"? No virtue, no reward.

古文：封贺所子弟子侍中中郎将彭祖为阳都侯，追赐贺谥曰阳都哀侯。
现代文：现封张贺所养的弟弟的儿子侍中中郎将彭祖为阳都侯，追赠张贺的谥号为阳都哀侯。
English: Now, the son of Zhang He's younger brother, the middle son of a chamberlain, will be named Peng Zu as Yang Du Hou, and Zhang He's posthumous nickname will be Yang Du Mourning.

古文：吉、曾、玄、舜、延寿皆为列侯。
现代文：丙吉、史曾、史玄、许舜、许延寿都为列侯。
English: Bingji, Shi Zeng, Shi Xuan, Xu Xi, Xu Yan Shou were all vassals.

古文：故人下至郡邸狱复作尝有阿保之功，皆受官禄、田宅、财物，各以恩深浅报之。 
现代文：故人中的郡狱女囚胡组、赵征卿对朕也有哺乳保育之功，都赏以官禄田宅财物，各按恩的深浅进行报答。 
English: Among the deceased, female county prison inmates Hu Jiu and Zhao Zecheng also had the merit of nursing and caring for me. They were all rewarded with the official residence and property, each according to the depth of their kindness.

古文：夏六月，诏曰： 前年夏，神爵集雍。
现代文：夏六月，下诏说： 前年夏，凤凰集于雍地。
English: In the summer of June, the following edict was issued: The previous summer, the phoenixes gathered in Yongdi.

古文：今春，五色鸟以万数飞过属县，翱翔而舞，欲集未下。
现代文：今年春，五色鸟以万数飞过三辅各县，翱翔飞舞，想栖集而未下。
English: This spring, thousands of the five-colored birds flew over all the counties of Sanshu, soaring and flying, trying to gather and not go down.

古文：其令三辅毋得以春夏擿巢探卵，弹射飞鸟。
现代文：现令三辅不得在春夏时捣鸟巢取鸟卵，不得弹射飞鸟。
English: It is now decreed that the three aides must not pick up bird eggs in the spring and summer, and must not catapult flying birds.

古文：具为令。 
现代文：切切此令。 
English: The above is a regulation.

古文：立皇子钦为淮阳王。
现代文：立皇子钦为淮阳王。
English: Prince Qin was established as the king of Huaiyang.

古文：四年春正月，诏曰： 朕惟耆老之人，发齿堕落，血气衰微，亦亡暴虐之心，今或罹文法，拘执囹圄，不终天命，朕甚怜之。
现代文：四年春季正月，下诏说： 朕感到年事已高的人，发齿堕落，血气衰微，也没有暴虐之心，今日有的受到法律惩处，关进监狱，不能终其天年，朕甚为哀怜。
English: In the first month of the spring of the fourth year, the following edict said: I feel very sorry for the people who are old, have fallen teeth, weak blood, and have no tyrannical heart. Today, some are punished by the law, put in prison, and cannot live out their days.

古文：自今以来，诸年八十以上，非诬告、杀伤人，佗皆勿坐。 
现代文：从现在起，凡年在八十以上，凡因犯诬告与杀伤人罪外，其余都不问罪。 
English: From now on, no one over the age of 80 will be charged with a crime, except for the crime of false accusation and homicide.

古文：遣太中大夫强等十二人循行天下，存问鳏、寡，览观风俗，察吏治得失，举茂材异伦之士。
现代文：派遣大中大夫强等人巡行于天下，慰问鳏寡，览观风俗民情，察看吏治得失，发现与举荐品学兼优的人。
English: He sent Dr. Qiang and others to travel around the world, to console the widows and widowers, to observe the customs and folk customs, to observe the merits and demerits of officials, and to find and recommend people with excellent academic performance.

古文：二月，河东霍徵史等谋反，诛。
现代文：二月，河东霍征史等谋反，被诛杀。
English: In February, Hedong Huo Zhengshi and others plotted a rebellion and were killed.

古文：三月，诏曰： 乃者，神爵五采以万数集长乐、未央、北宫、高寝、甘泉泰畤殿中及上林苑。
现代文：三月，下诏说： 前一段，凤凰、五彩鸟以万数集于长乐、未央、北宫、高寝、甘泉泰畤殿中及上林苑。
English: In March, the next edict said: In the previous paragraph, phoenixes and colorful birds gathered by the tens of thousands in Changle, Weiyang, Beigu, Gaoshe, Ganquan, Taizhong and Shanglinyuan.

古文：朕之不逮，寡于德厚，屡获嘉祥，非朕之任。
现代文：朕义行不周，德薄功浅，却屡获嘉祥，实在不敢攘人功以为己功。
English: My righteous deeds are not thorough, my virtue is shallow, but I have won many awards. I really do not dare to take others' merits as my own.

古文：其赐天下吏爵二级，民一级，女子百户牛、酒。
现代文：现赏赐天下官吏爵二级，百姓爵一级，女子每百户牛酒若干。
English: Officials are now awarded the second level of peerage, the people are awarded the first level of peerage, and women are awarded a certain amount of cattle wine per hundred households.

古文：加赐三老、孝弟、力田帛，人二匹，鳏、寡、孤、独各一匹。 
现代文：加赐三老、孝悌力田帛，每人二匹，鳏寡孤独人各一匹。 
English: In addition, the three elders, the filial piety, and the strength of the field are given two horses each, and the widows and the lonely are each given one horse.

古文：秋八月，赐故右扶风尹翁归子黄金百斤。以奉其祭祀。
现代文：秋八月，赐已故右扶风郡尹翁归之子黄金百斤，以奉其父祭祀。
English: In autumn and August, he gave 100 jin of gold to the son of the late Yin Wengui of Fufeng County to worship his father.

古文：又赐功臣適后黄金，人二十斤。
现代文：又赐功臣的嫡后黄金，每人二十斤。
English: He also bestowed gold on the legitimate heirs of meritorious vassals, 20 jin per person.

古文：丙寅，大司马卫将军安世薨。
现代文：八月十一日，大司马卫将军安世去世。
English: On August 11th, General Ma Wei passed away.

古文：比年丰，谷石五钱。
现代文：频年丰收，每石谷五钱。
English: Frequent years of good harvests, five coins per stone valley.

古文：神爵元年春正月，行幸甘泉，郊泰畤。
现代文：神爵元年春正月，皇帝驾临甘泉、郊祭泰畤。
English: In the first month of the spring of the first year of Jinshaku, the emperor came to Ganquan, and the suburb festival took place.

古文：三月，行幸河东，祠后土。
现代文：三月，驾临河东，祭祀后土。
English: In March, they came to the eastern part of the river to hold a memorial service.

古文：诏曰： 朕承宗庙，战战栗栗，惟万事统，未烛厥理。
现代文：下诏说： 朕继承祖宗大业，战战兢兢，只想万事就绪，仍未能完全理顺。
English: The following edict said: I have inherited the great cause of my ancestors, I am trembling, I just want everything to be ready, but I have not been able to completely straighten it out.

古文：乃元康四年嘉谷、玄稷降于郡国，神爵仍集，金芝九茎产于函德殿铜池中，九真献奇兽，南郡获白虎、威凤为宝。
现代文：而乃元康四年，嘉谷瑞粟生长于郡国，神雀凤凰屡集于京畿，金芝九茎产于函德殿铜池中，九真献麒麟，南郡获白虎威凤为宝。
English: However, in the 4th year of the reign of Yuan Kang, Jia Gu Rui Mao was grown in Gu Guo, Shen Fei Fenghuang was repeatedly collected in Gyeonggi, Jin Zhi Ji Stem was produced in the copper pond of Hande Hall, Ji Zhen was dedicated to Qilin, and Nan Guo was awarded the treasure of Bai Hui Feng.

古文：朕之不明，震于珍物，饬躬斋精，祈为百姓。
现代文：朕的德行浅薄，见祥瑞的不断呈现而深感震动，就恭敬虔诚，为百姓祈祷。
English: My virtue is shallow, and I am deeply shocked by the continuous appearance of Xiang Rui, so I am respectful and pious, and pray for the people.

古文：东济大河，天气清静，神鱼舞河。
现代文：东渡大河，天气清静，神鱼舞于河中。
English: Dongdu River, the weather is calm, the divine fish dances in the river.

古文：幸万岁宫，神爵翔集。
现代文：临万岁宫，凤凰凌空而下集。
English: In front of the Long Live Palace, the phoenix soars into the sky.

古文：朕之不德，惧不能任。
现代文：朕无厚德，恐不能副上天之望。
English: I have no virtue, I'm afraid I can't hope for heaven.

古文：其以五年为神爵元年。
现代文：现以五年为神爵元年。
English: It is now five years since the first year of the peerage.

古文：赐天下勤事吏爵二级，民一级，女子百户牛、酒，鳏、寡、孤、独、高年帛。
现代文：赐天下勤于吏事的爵级二级，百姓一级，女子百户牛酒若干，鳏寡孤独高年帛若干。
English: Give the world a second-class peer who is diligent in official duties, a first-class commoner, several hundred cattle and wine for women, and several widows and lonely old women.

古文：所振贷物勿收。
现代文：所赈借的钱物免收。
English: The borrowed money and goods are exempt from collection.

古文：行所过，毋出田租。 
现代文：朕所经过之地不出田租。 
English: I don't rent the land I pass through.

古文：西羌反，发三辅、中都官徒弛刑，及应募佽飞射士、羽林孤兒，胡、越骑，三河、颍川、沛郡、淮阳、汝南材官，金城、陇西、天水、安定、北地、上郡骑士、羌骑，诣金城。
现代文：西羌造反，征集三辅、中都官狱的轻刑犯人以及敏捷迅速的射士、羽林孤儿，胡、越马匹，三河、颍川、沛郡、淮阳、汝南的材官，金城、陇西、天水、安定、北地、上郡的骑士，羌地的马匹，都到金城集中。
English: Xi'an revolted, recruiting prisoners with light sentences from Sanfu and Zhongdu prisons, as well as swift archers, orphans from Hulin, horses from Hu and Yue, cadres from Sanhe, Luochuan, Pei County, Huaiyang and Runan, knights from Jincheng, Shaanxi, Tianshui, Ding'an, Hokkien and Shangguan, and horses from Handan, all of which were concentrated in Jincheng.

古文：夏四月，遣后将军赵充国、强弩将军许延寿击西羌。
现代文：夏四月，派遣后将军赵充国、强弩将军许延寿出击西羌。
English: In the summer of April, after being dispatched, General Zhao Chongguo and General Xu Yanshou of the Qiangbei Army went out to attack Xicheng.

古文：六月，有星孛于东方。
现代文：六月，有彗星在东方出现。
English: In June, a comet appeared in the east.

古文：即拜酒泉太守辛武贤为破羌将军，与两将军并进。
现代文：就地封酒泉太守辛武贤为破羌将军，与后将军、强弩将军并进。
English: Jiuquan Daju Xinwu Xian was made the general who broke the shackles of the shackles of the shackles of the shackles of the shackles of the shackles.

古文：诏曰： 军旅暴露，转输烦劳，其令诸侯王、列侯、蛮夷王、侯、君、长当朝二年者，皆毋朝。 
现代文：下诏说： 军旅征途辛苦，军需转运烦劳，现令各侯王、列侯、蛮夷王侯君应在明年正月来朝的，一律免朝。 
English: The following edict said: The military journey is arduous, and the transportation of military supplies is tedious. It is now ordered that all princes, vassals, and barbarian princes should come to the DPRK in the first month of the next year, and they will all be exempted from the DPRK.

古文：秋，赐故大司农朱邑子黄金百斤，以奉祭祀。
现代文：秋，赏赐已故大司农朱邑之子黄金百斤，以奉其父祭祀。
English: In the autumn, the son of the late farmer Zhuyi was awarded 100 jin of gold to worship his father.

古文：后将军充国言屯田之计，语在《充国传》。
现代文：后将军赵充国上书提出在边塞进行屯田之策，其事记在《赵充国传》中。
English: Later, General Zhao Chongguo proposed in a letter to carry out the policy of setting up garrisons in the frontier fortress, which was recorded in "Zhao Chongguo Biography."

古文：二年春二月，诏曰： 乃者正月乙丑，凤皇、甘露降集京师，群鸟从以万数。
现代文：二年春二月，下诏说： 前日正月十九日，凤凰与甘露降集于京师，群鸟从者以万计。
English: In the spring and February of the second year, the following edict said: On the 19th day of the first month of the previous day, the phoenix and the nectar gathered in the Beijing division, and the birds followed by tens of thousands.

古文：朕之不德，屡获天福，祗事不怠，其赦天下。 
现代文：朕无大德，屡获天福，深感天恩，其赦天下。 
English: I have no great virtue, I have been repeatedly blessed by heaven, I deeply feel the grace of heaven, and it forgives the world.

古文：夏五月，羌虏降服，斩其首恶大豪杨玉、酋非首。
现代文：夏季五月，西羌降服，斩其首恶大豪杨玉、酋非首级。
English: In the summer of May, Xidi capitulated and decapitated the evil giants Yangyu and Chefei.

古文：置金城属国以处降羌。
现代文：设置金城属国以安置降羌。
English: Set up the Jincheng vassal state to settle down.

古文：秋，匈奴日逐王先贤掸将人众万余来降。
现代文：秋，匈奴日逐王先贤掸领人众万余来降。
English: In the autumn, the Xiongnu kings and sages led more than ten thousand people to descend.

古文：使都护西域骑都尉郑吉迎日逐，破车师，皆封列侯。
现代文：派都护西域骑都尉郑吉迎日逐王，攻破车师，都封为列侯。
English: Zheng Jie, the cavalry captain of the western region who was assigned to protect the capital, defeated the chariot division and was made a vassal.

古文：九月，司隶校尉盖宽饶有罪，下有司，自杀。
现代文：九月，司隶校尉宽饶有罪，打入监狱，自杀。
English: In September, Captain Sili was convicted of leniency, went to prison, and committed suicide.

古文：匈奴单于遣名王奉献，贺正月，始和亲。
现代文：匈奴单于派遣名王来汉朝献，祝贺正月，开始和亲。
English: The Xiongnu single-handedly sent eminent kings to the Han Dynasty to offer congratulations on the first month of the year, and began to make peace.

古文：三年春，起乐游苑。
现代文：三年春，修建乐游苑。
English: In the spring of the third year, Le Youyuan was built.

古文：三月丙午，丞相相薨。
现代文：三月初六，丞相魏相去世。
English: On the 6th day of the 3rd month, the chancellor Wei Xiang passed away.

古文：秋八月，诏曰： 吏不廉平则治道衰。
现代文：秋季八月，下诏说： 官吏贪赃枉法则治道衰。
English: In the autumn of August, the following edict was issued: "Officials who are corrupt will be punished according to the law."

古文：今小吏皆勤事，而奉禄薄，欲其毋侵渔百姓，难矣。
现代文：今小吏都勤于民事，而俸禄甚薄，想叫他们不侵渔百姓，那是难以做到的。
English: At present, the minor officials are diligent in civil affairs, but the salary is very low. It is difficult to ask them not to encroach on the fishing people.

古文：其益吏百石以下奉十五。 
现代文：现在增加百石以下俸禄十五。 
English: Now increase the salary of those with less than 100 koku to 15 koku.

古文：四年春二月，诏曰： 乃者凤皇、甘露降集京师，嘉瑞并见。
现代文：四年春季二月，下诏说： 前者，凤凰、甘露降集于京师，嘉瑞同时出现。
English: In the spring of the fourth year, in February, the following edict was issued: The former, phoenix and nectar were gathered in Beijing Division, and Kerry appeared at the same time.

古文：修兴泰一、五帝、后士之祠，祈为百姓蒙祉福。
现代文：修建泰一、五帝、后土之祠，为百姓祈求福祉。
English: Built the shrines of Tai I, Five Emperors, and Hou Tuo, and prayed for the welfare of the people.

古文：鸾凤万举，蜚览翱翔，集止于旁。
现代文：鸾凤集聚以万数，有的在高空盘旋，俯瞰都邑，有的在地下栖息献祥。
English: There are tens of thousands of chrysanthemum and phoenixes, some hovering high in the sky, overlooking the capital, and some roosting underground.

古文：斋戒之暮，神光显著。
现代文：朕斋戒的当晚，神光显著。
English: On the night of my fast, the divine light was conspicuous.

古文：荐鬯之夕，神光交错。
现代文：祭神的黄昏，神光交错。
English: At dusk, when the deities are enshrined, the divine light is interlaced.

古文：或降于天，或登于地，或从四方来集于坛。
现代文：有的祥降于天，有的瑞应于地，有的从四方汇集到坛前现彩。
English: Some are auspicious and descend to heaven, some are auspicious and descend to earth, and some are gathered from the four directions to appear in front of the altar.

古文：上帝嘉飨，海内承福。
现代文：上天给朕以崇高的奖赐，四海都沐受其恩泽，现赦天下。
English: Heaven has bestowed upon me a lofty reward, and all the four seas have been showered with its grace. I now forgive the whole world.

古文：其赦天下，赐民爵一级，女子百户牛、酒，鳏、寡、孤、独、高年帛。 
现代文：赏赐民爵一级，女子每百户牛酒若干，鳏寡孤独高年帛若干。 
English: Awarded a first-class burgess, a number of cows and wine for every hundred households for women, and a number of widows and lonely senior citizens.

古文：夏四月，颍川太守黄霸以治行尤异秩中二千石，赐爵关内侯，黄金百斤。
现代文：夏季四月，颍川太守黄霸以政绩显著升至二千石，赐爵为关内侯，赏黄金百斤。
English: In the summer of April, Huang Ba, the governor of Luochuan, significantly increased his political achievements to 2,000 koku, was awarded a peerage as the governor of Guanai, and was awarded 100 kg of gold.

古文：及颍川吏、民有行义者爵，人二级，力田一级，贞妇、顺女帛。
现代文：还赏赐颍川吏民中品德高尚的以爵级，每人二级，力田的赏一级，贞妇孝女赏以帛。
English: He also awarded peerage to the most virtuous among the cadres and commoners of the Hechuan, second class to each of them, first class to the powerful peasants, and a gong to the virtuous women and children.

古文：令内郡国举贤良可亲民者各一人。
现代文：下令郡国举荐能关心人民的贤良各一人。
English: The county was ordered to nominate one person from each county who could care for the people.

古文：五月，匈奴单于遣弟呼留若王胜之来朝。
现代文：五月，匈奴单于派其弟呼留若王胜之来朝。
English: In May, the Xiongnu Emperor sent his younger brother, Huruwaka Wangsheng, to the imperial court.

古文：冬十月，凤皇十一集杜陵。
现代文：冬十月，十一只凤凰集于杜陵。
English: In the winter of October, eleven phoenixes gathered in the Tu Ling.

古文：十一月，河南太守严延年有罪，弃市。
现代文：十一月，河南太守严延年有罪，处斩。
English: In November, Henan's grand marshal Yan Yan was found guilty and beheaded.

古文：十二月，凤皇集上林。
现代文：十二月，凤鸟栖集于上林。
English: In December, phoenixes gather in the upper forest.

古文：五凤元年春正月，行幸甘泉，郊泰畤。
现代文：五凤元年春正月，驾临于甘泉，郊祭泰畤。
English: In the first month of spring in the first year of Wu Feng, he arrived in Ganquan, and the suburb festival began.

古文：皇太子冠。
现代文：皇太子行加冠礼。
English: After the imperial edict and the court edict, the crown prince performed the coronation.

古文：皇太后赐丞相、将军、列侯、中二千石帛，人百匹，大夫人八十匹，夫人六十匹。又赐列侯嗣子爵五大夫，男子为父后者爵一级。
现代文：皇太后赐丞相、将军、列侯、中二千石帛，每人一百匹，大夫每人八十匹。又赏赐列侯嗣子的爵以五大夫，男子为父的继承人的赏爵一级。
English: The empress dowager gave the prime minister, generals, vassals, and junior vassals 2,000 koku of rice, with 100 koku per person and 80 koku per doctor. She also awarded the vassal sons of vassals with the rank of grand vassal, and the male heirs of the father with the rank of first grade.

古文：夏，赦徒作杜陵者。
现代文：夏季，赦免一批参加兴建杜陵宫的罪人。
English: In the summer, he pardoned a group of criminals who took part in the construction of the Tu Lin Palace.

古文：冬十二月乙酉朔，日有蚀之。
现代文：冬十二月初一，出现日偏食。
English: In winter, a partial solar eclipse occurs on the first day of December.

古文：左冯翊韩延寿有罪，弃市。
现代文：左冯翊韩延寿有罪，处决。
English: Zuo Feng Han Yan Shou was found guilty and executed.

古文：二年春三月，行幸雍，祠五畤。
现代文：二年春三月，驾临于雍祭祀五畤。
English: In the spring and March of the second year, he came to Yong to perform the Five Rites of Spring Festival.

古文：夏四月已丑，大司马车骑将军增薨。
现代文：夏四月初七日，大司马车骑将军韩增去世。
English: On the 7th day of the 4th month of the summer, General Han Zeng, a great charioteer, died.

古文：秋八月，诏曰： 夫婚姻之礼，人伦之大者也；酒食之会，所以行礼乐也。
现代文：秋八月，下诏说： 婚姻举行仪礼，这是人伦之中的大事；酒食宴会，是举行礼乐的形式之一。
English: In the autumn and August, the following edict was issued: The marriage ceremony is the most important event in human relations; the wine and food banquet is one of the forms of holding the ceremony.

古文：今郡国二千石或擅为苛禁，禁民嫁娶不得具酒食相贺召。
现代文：当今有的郡国及二千石擅为苛禁，禁止民间嫁娶不得设筵席以招待贺客。
English: At present, some counties, provinces and counties with more than 2,000 koku are strictly prohibited, prohibiting people from marrying and setting up banquets to invite well-wishers.

古文：由是废乡党之礼，令民亡所乐，非所以导民也。
现代文：由此就弛废乡党应酬之礼，使百姓享受不到婚嫁的欢乐气氛，这不是一种好的导民方法。
English: Therefore, it is not a good way to guide the people to waste the courtesy of the village party banquet, so that the people can not enjoy the happy atmosphere of the wedding.

古文：《诗》不云乎？ 民之失德，乾餱以愆。 
现代文：《诗》不是说过吗？ 民间如失去了互相饮食应酬的情义，而粗薄的食品将会加深人们的怨尤。 
English: Isn't it said in "Poetry" that if people lose the sentiment of eating and socializing with each other, and coarse and thin food will deepen people's resentment.

古文：勿行苛政。 
现代文：对禁止婚姻礼宴的政令应予取消。 
English: The ban on wedding receptions should be lifted.

古文：冬十一月，匈奴呼遬累单于帅众来降，封为列侯。
现代文：冬季十一月，匈奴呼速单于率众来降于汉，朝廷封之为列侯。
English: In the winter of November, the Xiongnu hurriedly came to Han with a large number of people, and the imperial court made him a vassal.

古文：十二月，平通侯杨恽坐前为光禄勋有罪，免为庶人。
现代文：十二月，平通侯杨恽因以前任光禄勋时有罪事发，削职为民。
English: In December, Pingtong Hou Yang Hui was removed from his post due to a criminal incident that occurred when he was a member of the Guanglu Honor Society.

古文：不悔过，怨望，大逆不道，要斩。
现代文：不思悔过，怨恨朝廷，大逆不道，腰斩。
English: No remorse, resentment of the imperial court, high treason, beheading.

古文：三年春正月癸卯，丞相吉薨。
现代文：三年春正月二十六日，丞相丙吉去世。
English: On the 26th day of the first month of the third year of the Spring, the chancellor Heji passed away.

古文：三月，行幸河东，祠后土。诏曰： 往者匈奴数为边寇，百姓被其害。
现代文：三月，驾临河东，祭祀后土之神，下诏说： 前一段匈奴多次侵扰边疆，百姓遭受祸害。
English: In March, when he arrived in Hedong, he offered a sacrifice to the god of the hinterland, and said: In the previous paragraph, the Huns repeatedly invaded the frontier, and the people suffered calamity.

古文：朕承至尊，未能绥安匈奴。
现代文：朕位为天子，未能抚定匈奴。
English: I am the son of heaven, but I have not been able to pacify the Xiongnu.

古文：虚闾权渠单于请求和亲，病死。
现代文：虚闾权渠单于请求与本朝结为婚姻，不久病死。
English: At the request of the emperor, the false regent married into the imperial family, but died of illness soon after.

古文：右贤王屠耆堂代立。
现代文：右贤王屠耆堂代立。
English: The Right Sage King Tu Youyou stood in for him.

古文：骨肉大臣立虚闾权渠单于子为呼韩邪单于，击杀屠耆堂。
现代文：骨肉大臣立虚闾权渠单于之子为呼韩邪单于，击杀屠耆堂。
English: The Minister of Meat and Offal appointed the son of the son of the son of the son of the son of the son of the son of the son of the son of the son of the son of the son of the son of the son of the son of the son.

古文：诸王并自立，分为五单于，更相攻击，死者以万数，畜产大耗什八九，人民饥饿，相燔烧以求食，因大乖乱。
现代文：诸王各行自立，分为五单于，互相攻击，死者以万数，畜产损失十之八九，人民饥饿，互相挟掠以求食，因而局势十分动乱。
English: The kings, each in his own line, divided into five factions, attacked each other, the dead numbered in the thousands, livestock losses were in the tens of thousands, the people were starving, and they plundered each other for food, so the situation was very turbulent.

古文：单于阏氏子孙、昆弟及呼遬累单于、名王、右伊秩訾、且渠、当户以下将众五万余人来降归义。单于称臣，使弟奉珍朝驾正月，北边晏然，靡有兵革之事。
现代文：单于阏氏子孙兄弟及呼速累单于、名王、右伊秩訾、且渠，当户诸官以下率众五万余人来归顺汉朝，单于称臣，派王弟奉珍宝朝贺新春，北边安靖，无有刀兵之事。
English: Alone with the brothers and descendants of the Min clan and the speed of the call, more than fifty thousand people came to the Han Dynasty with the leaders of the family and the officials, including the king, the right-hand man, the right-hand man, and the right-hand man. Alone with the courtiers, the king sent his younger brother to celebrate the New Year with precious treasures. The north side was peaceful, and there were no sword soldiers.

古文：朕饬躬斋戒，郊上帝，祠后土，神光并见，或兴于谷，烛耀齐宫，十有余刻。
现代文：朕恭敬虔诚，郊祭上天、祠祀后土，神光并见，有在地平面上出现，其光辉照耀宫顶，历时十余刻。
English: I am respectful and pious, the suburb festival ascends to heaven, the ancestral shrine ascends to the earth, and the divine light appears on the ground plane, and its brilliance shines on the top of the palace, which lasted for more than ten minutes.

古文：甘露降，神爵集。
现代文：甘露下降，神雀云集。
English: The nectar drops and the starlings gather.

古文：已诏有司告祠上帝、宗庙。
现代文：已诏令有关机构禀告上天、宗庙。
English: The relevant institutions have been ordered to report to heaven and the ancestral temple.

古文：三月辛丑，鸾凤又集长乐宫东阙中树上，飞下止地，文章五色，留十余刻，吏民并观。
现代文：三月二十五日，鸾凤又栖集于长乐宫东阙中树上，飞下止于地，羽翼色彩斑斓，停留十余刻，吏民一齐观看。
English: On March 25th, the dragonflies and phoenixes gathered again in the middle of the trees in the east wing of the Changle Palace. They flew down to the ground, their wings were colorful, and they stayed for more than ten minutes. The officials and the people watched together.

古文：朕之不敏，惧不能任，娄蒙嘉瑞，获兹祉福。
现代文：朕性愚钝，深恐不能副上天屡赐嘉祥之望，而获得如此福祉。
English: I'm stupid, and I'm afraid that I can't receive such a blessing without God's repeatedly bestowing auspicious hope.

古文：《书》不云乎？ 虽休勿休，祗事不怠。 
现代文：《尚书》不是说过吗？ 受到褒奖之后不要自我陶醉，应谦虚谨慎，勿怠勿荒。 
English: Didn't "Shang Shu" say? Don't be intoxicated after receiving praise, be modest and cautious, and don't be lazy.

古文：公卿大夫其焉。
现代文：公卿大夫都应自勉啊。
English: All noble doctors should be self-disciplined.

古文：减天下口钱。
现代文：现减少天下人口钱税。
English: Now reduce the world's population money tax.

古文：赦殊死以下。
现代文：赦免死罪以下犯人。
English: Pardons for death row inmates.

古文：赐民爵一级，女子百户牛、酒。大酺五日。
现代文：赏赐民爵一级，赏女子每百户牛酒若干，全国欢宴五天。
English: Awarded a first-class title of people's peer, awarded a number of cattle wine per hundred households for women, and a five-day national banquet.

古文：加赐鳏、寡、孤、独、高年帛。 
现代文：加赐鳏寡孤独与高年帛若干。 
English: In addition, widowhood and loneliness and old age were associated with a number of symptoms.

古文：置西河、北地属国以处匈奴降者。
现代文：置西河、北地属国以处匈奴降者。
English: Those who surrendered to the Xiongnu in the Western and Northern Provinces.

古文：四年春正月，广陵王胥有罪，自杀。
现代文：四年春正月，广陵王胥有罪，自杀。
English: In the first month of the fourth year of the Spring, Guangling Wang Yao was found guilty and committed suicide.

古文：匈奴单于称臣，遣弟谷蠡王入侍。
现代文：匈奴单于称臣，遣弟谷蠡王入侍朝廷。
English: The Huns singled him out as a respected vassal, and sent his younger brother, King Gu Xi, to serve in the imperial court.

古文：以边塞亡寇，减戍卒什二。
现代文：由于边塞不受侵扰，减少戍卒百分之二十。
English: Due to the fact that the border posts are not subject to intrusion, the number of incidents has been reduced by twenty percent.

古文：大司农中丞耿寿昌奏设常平仓，以给北边，省转漕。
现代文：大司农中丞耿寿昌奏请设常平仓，以供应北方边塞军需，减少漕转。
English: Geng Shuchang, Senior Vice-Minister of Agriculture, requested the establishment of permanent warehouses to supply military supplies to the northern border of Serbia and reduce the number of transports.

古文：赐爵关内侯。
现代文：赐爵为关内侯。
English: He was given the title of Lord of Kwanai.

古文：夏四月辛丑晦，日有蚀之。
现代文：夏四月三十日，出现日偏食。
English: In the summer, a partial solar eclipse occurred on April 30.

古文：昭曰： 皇天见异，以戒朕躬，是朕之不逮，吏之不称也。
现代文：下诏说： 皇天显示异兆，以亻敬戒朕躬，是朕的德行不足，是官吏不称其职所致。
English: The following edict said: The emperor showed a sign from heaven, and bowed down to me in reverence. This was due to my lack of virtue and the officials' incompetence.

古文：以前使使者问民所疾苦，复遣丞相、御史掾二十四人循行天下，举冤狱，察擅为苛禁深刻不改者。 
现代文：以前曾派使者访问民间疾苦，再派丞相、御史掾二十四人循行于天下，平反冤狱，查处擅自制定苛刻政令不改的官吏。 
English: In the past, emissaries were sent to visit the suffering of the people, and 24 people, including the prime minister and the minister of education, were sent to travel around the country to rectify unjust imprisonment and investigate and deal with officials who did not change harsh decrees without authorization.

古文：甘露元年春正月，行幸甘泉，郊泰畤。
现代文：甘露元年春正月，驾临甘泉，郊祭泰畤。
English: On the first day of spring in the first year of Kamloops, driving to Ganquan, the suburb festival begins.

古文：匈奴呼韩邪单于遣子右贤王铢娄渠堂入侍。
现代文：匈奴呼韩邪单于派遣其子右贤王铢娄渠堂入侍朝廷。
English: The Xiongnu summoned Han Yadsan to send his son, King Uxian, to attend the imperial court.

古文：二月丁已，大司马车骑将军延寿薨。
现代文：二月二十一日，大司马车骑将军许延寿去世。
English: On February 21st, General Xu Yanshou, a great charioteer, passed away.

古文：夏四月，黄龙见新丰。
现代文：夏四月，黄龙出现于新丰。
English: In the summer of April, the yellow dragon appeared in Xinfeng.

古文：丙申，太上皇庙火。
现代文：四月初一日，太上皇庙发生火灾。
English: On the first day of April, a fire broke out at the Imperial Palace.

古文：甲辰，孝文庙火。上素服五日。
现代文：初九日孝文帝庙火灾，皇上着素服五天。
English: Emperor Xiaowen's temple caught fire on the 9th day of the first month of the year, and the emperor had to wear plain clothes for five days.

古文：冬，匈奴单于遣弟左贤王来朝贺。
现代文：冬，匈奴单于派遣其弟左贤王来朝贺。
English: In winter, Xiongnu sent his younger brother Zuoxian Wang to the Imperial Palace to congratulate the emperor.

古文：二年春正月，立皇子嚣为定陶王。
现代文：二年春正月，立皇子嚣为定陶王。
English: In the first month of the second year of the Spring, the crown prince was enthroned as the king of Dento.

古文：诏曰： 乃者凤皇、甘露降集，黄龙登兴，醴泉滂流，枯槁荣茂，神光并见，咸受祯祥。其赦天下。减民算三十。
现代文：下诏说： 前者，凤凰甘露降集，甘泉涌流，枯木逢春，神光并见，俱受祯祥，宜赦天下，减民赋算三十钱。
English: The next edict said: The former, the phoenix, the nectar, the gushing spring, the dead tree in spring, and the divine light, are all auspicious, and should be forgiven by the world, and the people are reduced by thirty money.

古文：赐诸侯王、丞相、将军、列侯、中二千石金、钱各有差。
现代文：赏赐各侯王、丞相、将军、列侯、中二千石金钱各有差等。
English: The reward of 2,000 koku of money was given to each of the princes, ministers, generals, vassals, and middle-ranking officials.

古文：赐民爵一级，女子百户牛、酒，鳏、寡、孤、独、高年帛。 
现代文：赐百姓爵一级，赐女子每百户牛酒若干，赐鳏寡孤独高年布帛若干。 
English: Give the people a first-class peerage, give women a number of cattle and wine for every hundred households, and give widows and widowers a number of lonely senior citizens.

古文：夏四月，遣护军都尉禄将兵击珠崖。
现代文：夏四月，遣护军都尉禄领兵平定珠崖。
English: In the summer of April, Lieutenant Luo, the leader of the escorting army, conquered Zhuyao.

古文：秋九月，立皇子宇为东平王。
现代文：秋季九月，立皇子宇为东平王。
English: In September of the autumn, Prince Utsuko was crowned as the King of Dongping.

古文：冬十二月，行幸萯阳宫属玉观。
现代文：冬十二月，驾临负阳宫属玉观。
English: In the winter of December, the negative yang palace belongs to the jade view.

古文：匈奴呼韩邪单于款五原塞，愿奉国珍朝三年正月。
现代文：匈奴呼韩邪单于叩求于五原塞，愿奉国宝朝贺三年春节。
English: The Xiongnu called for Han Yanshan to pray at the Wuhuan Pass, wishing to be honored as a national treasure to celebrate the Spring Festival for the third year.

古文：诏有司议。
现代文：下诏令有关机构议论。
English: The relevant agencies were ordered to discuss the matter.

古文：咸曰： 圣王之制，施德行礼，先京师而后诸夏，先诸夏而后夷狄。
现代文：都说： 圣王的制度，施德行礼，先京都而后中原，先中原而后夷狄。
English: They all say: the system of the holy king, the act of virtue, first Kyoto and then the Central Plains, first the Central Plains and then the Yidi.

古文：《诗》云： 率礼不越，遂视既发。
现代文：《诗》说： 率民遵礼守法，到处教令顺行。
English: "Poetry" said: Lead the people to follow the etiquette and abide by the law, and follow orders everywhere.

古文：相土烈烈，海外有截。 
现代文：相土威令烈烈，海外截然归服。 
English: Domination at home, subjugation abroad.

古文：陛下圣德。充塞天地，光被四表。
现代文：陛下的圣德，充塞于天地，光被于方外。
English: His majesty's holiness fills the heavens and the earth, and the light is radiated outward.

古文：匈奴单于乡风慕义，举国同心，奉珍朝贺，自古未之有也。
现代文：匈奴单于向风慕义，举国同心，奉国宝而来朝贺，这是亘古未有的事。
English: The Xiongnu alone came to pay homage to the wind, and the whole country came to pay homage to the national treasure. This is an unprecedented event.

古文：单于非正朔所加，王者所客也，礼仪宜如诸侯王，称臣昧死再拜，位次诸侯王下。 
现代文：单于不奉汉朝正朔，是王者之客，朝拜时应和各侯王一样，称 臣昧死再拜 ，位在各侯王之下。 
English: The Han Dynasty is just beginning, it is the king's guest, when worshiping, it should be the same as the princes, saying that the vassal must die and then worship, and it is under the princes.

古文：诏曰： 盖闻五帝三王，礼所不施，不及以政。
现代文：诏说： 常闻五帝三王，对于荒外不是按礼施行统治，其政刑亦不及。
English: The edict said, "It is common knowledge that the Five Emperors and Three Kings did not rule according to the etiquette, and their political punishment was not enough.

古文：今匈奴单于称北籓臣，朝正月，朕之不逮，德不能弘覆。其以客礼待之，位在诸侯王上。 
现代文：今日单于自称北藩之臣，来朝贺春节，朕德行不足，不能把它置于本朝的统治之内，应以客礼相待，其位在各侯王之前。 
English: Today, just because a self-proclaimed vassal of the Northern Domain came to celebrate the Spring Festival, I am not virtuous enough to place it under the rule of this dynasty. It should be treated with courtesy, and its throne should be in front of the princes.

古文：三年春正月，行幸甘泉，郊泰畤。
现代文：三年春正月，驾临甘泉，郊祭泰畤。
English: In the first month of spring in the third year, arriving at Ganquan, the suburb festival was held.

古文：匈奴呼韩邪单于稽侯犭册来朝，赞谒称籓臣而不名。
现代文：匈奴呼韩邪单于稽侯犭册来朝，朝拜时称藩臣而不报名。
English: The Xiongnu called Han Yansan to come to the DPRK in the register of vassals, and called him a vassal of the domain without registering when paying homage.

古文：赐以玺绶、冠带、衣裳、安车、驷马、黄金、锦绣、缯絮。
现代文：宣帝赏赐他以玺绶、冠带、衣裳、安车、驷马、黄金、锦绣、缯絮。
English: Emperor Xuan rewarded him with a scepter, a sash, robes, a chariot, a horse, gold, embroidered brocade and embroidered lace.

古文：使有司道单于先行就邸长安，宿长平。
现代文：派专员去作单于的向导，先到长安馆舍，宿于长平。
English: A commissioner was sent to act as a guide for the monks, who first went to the Chang'an Museum and stayed in Changping.

古文：上自甘泉宿池阳宫。
现代文：宣帝从甘泉到池阳宫安歇。
English: Emperor Xuan rested from Ganquan to Chiyang Palace.

古文：上登长平阪，诏单于毋谒。
现代文：再登长平阪，传诏单于免予拜见。
English: After that, he went to Nagahira-zaka, and the leaflet said that he was free to see him.

古文：共左右当户之群皆列观，蛮夷君、长、王、侯迎者数万人，夹道陈。
现代文：其所经之道两旁的人群均在户前列观，蛮夷君长及王侯与欢迎人群有数万人，夹道欢迎。
English: The crowds on both sides of the path he took were watching in front of the house. Tens of thousands of barbarian kings and princes and the welcoming crowd welcomed him.

古文：上登渭桥，咸称万岁。
现代文：皇帝登上渭桥，欢迎人群齐呼 万岁 ！
English: The emperor boarded the Long Bridge, welcoming the crowd with a chorus of "Long live!

古文：单于就邸。
现代文：单于进入馆舍。
English: Just enter the building.

古文：置酒建章宫，飨赐单于，观以珍宝。
现代文：皇帝在建章宫举行欢迎宴会，为单于接风洗尘。
English: The emperor held a welcome banquet at the Jianzhang Palace, in order to sweep away the dust.

古文：二月，单于罢归。
现代文：并让单于参观汉廷珍宝。
English: And let Shan Yu visit the treasures of Hanting.

古文：遣长乐卫尉高昌侯忠、车骑都尉昌、骑都尉虎将万六千骑送单于。
现代文：二月，单于完成朝贺任务西返。朝廷派长乐卫尉高昌侯董忠、车骑都尉韩昌、骑都尉虎带领一万六千人的卫队护送单于。
English: In February, after completing his morning greeting mission, he returned to the west. The imperial court sent Changle Guard Lieutenant Gao Chang Hou Dongzhong, Chariot and Cavalry Captain Han Chang, and Cavalry Captain Hu to escort him with a 16,000-strong guard.

古文：单于居幕南，保光禄城。
现代文：单于居于幕南，驻光禄城。
English: He lives alone in the south of Makun, in the city of Kōroku.

古文：诏北边振谷食。
现代文：诏北边支援其谷食。
English: The northern part of the prefecture supported its grain harvest.

古文：郅支单于远遁，匈奴遂定。
现代文：郅支单于孤立而远遁，匈奴从此安定。
English: Isolated and far away, the Xiongnu became stable.

古文：诏曰： 乃者凤皇集新蔡，群鸟四面行列，皆乡凤皇立，以万数。
现代文：宣帝下诏说： 前者凤凰集于新蔡，群鸟四面环列，都向凤凰肃立，数以万计。
English: Emperor Xuan decreed: The former phoenix gathered in Xin Cai, the birds lined up on all sides, all facing the phoenix, tens of thousands of them.

古文：其赐汝南太守帛百匹，新蔡长吏、三老、孝弟、力田、鳏、寡、孤、独各有差。
现代文：为此，赏赐汝南太守帛一万匹，对新蔡的长吏、三老、孝悌力田、鳏寡孤独都进行不同赏赐。
English: To this end, ten thousand horses were given to the Yongan Empress Dowager, and different rewards were given to the elders, the three elders, the filial piety, and the lonely widows and widowers of the new Cai.

古文：赐民爵二级。毋出今年租。 
现代文：赐百姓爵二级，并免出今年田租。 
English: He gave the people second-class peerage and exempted them from this year's field rent.

古文：三月已丑，丞相霸薨。
现代文：三月初六日，丞相黄霸去世。
English: On the 6th day of March, the Prime Minister Huang Ba passed away.

古文：诏诸儒讲《五经》同异，太子太傅萧望之等平奏其议，上亲称制临决焉。
现代文：诏令各儒出讲《五经》的同异，太子太傅萧望之等进行归纳综合，然后由宣帝亲自进行审定。
English: The emperor ordered all Confucians to recite the same and different parts of the Five Classics, and the prince Taifu Xiaowang and others to summarize and synthesize them, and then Emperor Xuan personally verified them.

古文：乃立梁丘《易》、大小夏侯《尚书》、穀梁《春秋》博士。
现代文：于是设立梁丘《易》、大小夏侯《尚书》、谷梁《春秋》博士。
English: As a result, Dr. Liangqiu "Yi," Dr. Xiaohu "Shangshu" and Dr. Gu Liang "Chunqiu" were established.

古文：冬，乌孙公主来归。
现代文：冬季，乌孙公主刘解忧回国探亲。
English: In winter, U Sun Princess Liu Gezheng returned to China to visit relatives.

古文：四年夏，广川王海阳有罪，废迁房陵。
现代文：四年夏季，广川王海阳有罪，废为平民迁于房陵。
English: In the summer of the fourth year, King Haiyang of Guangchuan was found guilty and moved to Fangling as a commoner.

古文：冬十月丁卯，未央宫宣室阁火。
现代文：冬十月二十三日，未央宫宣室阁发生火灾。
English: On October 23rd, a fire broke out in the Great Hall of the Imperial Palace.

古文：黄龙元年春正月，行幸甘泉，郊泰畤。
现代文：黄龙元年春正月，驾临甘泉，郊祭泰畤。
English: In the first month of spring in the year of the dragon, driving to Ganquan, the suburb festival was held.

古文：匈奴呼韩邪单于来朝，礼赐如初。
现代文：匈奴呼韩邪单于来朝，礼遇与赏赐和上次一样。
English: The Xiongnu summoned Han Yidan to come to the DPRK, and the courtesy and reward were the same as last time.

古文：二月，单于归国。
现代文：二月，单于回国。
English: In February, I went back to China alone.

古文：诏曰： 盖闻上古之治，君臣同心，举措曲直，各得其所。
现代文：下诏说： 曾闻上古治理天下，君臣同心，判断是非，俱合矩度。
English: The following edict said: It has been said that in ancient times, the world was governed by a single mind of ruler and subject, who judged right from wrong and acted in unison.

古文：是以上下和洽，海内康平，其德弗可及已。
现代文：是以上下和洽，海内康平。其和衷共济是令人钦佩的。
English: It is above and below that is harmonious, and the sea is peaceful. Its harmony is admirable.

古文：朕既不明，数申诏公卿、大夫务行宽大，顺民所疾苦，将欲配三王之隆，明先帝之德也。
现代文：朕不是明君，多次申诏公卿要以宽大为怀，关心与解决百姓疾苦，是将追踪三王的太平盛世，发扬列祖列宗的德泽。
English: I am not a wise ruler. I have repeatedly said that court nobles should be generous, care about and solve the people's sufferings. I am a virtuous man who will follow the peaceful and prosperous times of the three kings and carry forward the ancestors.

古文：今吏或以不禁奸邪为宽大，纵释有罪为不苛，或以酷恶为贤，皆失其中。
现代文：今日官吏中有的以不禁奸邪为宽大，以纵释有罪为不苛；有的则以酷吏为贤能，这都是片面而不正确的。
English: Among today's officials, some are lenient with the crime of treason, lenient with the crime of perjury, while others are virtuous with the crime of cruelty. All of these are one-sided and incorrect.

古文：奉诏宣化如此，岂不谬哉！
现代文：如此的奉诏宣化，是十分荒谬的！
English: This kind of propaganda is quite absurd!

古文：方今天下少事，徭役省减，兵革不动，而民多贫，盗贼不止，其咎安在？
现代文：当今天下少事，徭役减省，兵革不动，而百姓多贫，盗贼多起，其过失何在？
English: When today there are few things, the number of conscripts is reduced, the military reform does not move, but the people are poor, and thieves are more frequent, what is their fault?

古文：上计簿，具文而已，务为欺谩，以避其课。
现代文：向朝廷上报的人事、户口、赋税的情况，文实不符，谎言骗上，以避免追究。
English: The personnel, household registration, and tax situation reported to the imperial court did not match the facts, and they were deceived by lies in order to avoid investigation.

古文：三公不以为意，朕将何任？
现代文：三公对此不以为意，朕将怎样了解真实可信的情况？
English: The Three Wise Men do not care about this. How will I know the true and trustworthy situation?

古文：诸请诏省卒徒自给者皆止。
现代文：凡请求减少随从与差役取其费用以自给的都不再执行。
English: All requests to reduce entourages and servants to cover their expenses and to be self-sufficient are no longer implemented.

古文：御史察计簿，疑非实者，按之，使真伪毋相乱。 
现代文：御史在审查各地上报的材料时，发现有可疑之处的，要进行查证，不能让其以假乱真。 
English: When inspecting the materials reported by various regions, if there is anything suspicious, it must be verified and cannot be allowed to be falsified.

古文：三月，有星孛于王良、阁道，入紫宫。
现代文：三月，有彗星出现在王良星、阁道星区之间，后进入紫宫星区。
English: In March, a comet appeared between the Wang Liang star and the Guodou star region, and then entered the Purple Palace star region.

古文：夏四月，诏曰： 举廉吏，诚欲得其真也。
现代文：夏四月，下诏说： 举荐廉吏，是为了提倡廉洁奉公。
English: In the summer of April, the next imperial edict said: To recommend incorruptible officials is to advocate incorruptible public service.

古文：吏六百石位大夫，有罪先请，秩禄上通，足以效其贤材，自今以来毋得举。 
现代文：官吏六百石位为大夫，他在处理案情时，得先向朝廷请示，而他的秩禄又是朝廷确定的，从现在起，对于吏六百石不得复举为廉吏。 
English: An official of 600 koku is a doctor. When he is promoted, he must first ask the Imperial Court for instructions, and his rank is determined by the Imperial Court. From now on, an official of 600 koku may not be promoted again as a corrupt official.

古文：冬十二月甲戌，帝崩于未央宫。
现代文：冬十二月初七日，宣帝驾崩于未央宫。
English: On the 7th day of the 12th month of winter, Emperor Xuan died at the Weiyang Palace.

古文：癸巳，尊皇太后曰太皇太后。
现代文：二十六日，尊皇太后为太皇太后。
English: On the 26th, Her Imperial Highness the Empress Dowager became the Grand Empress Dowager.

古文：赞曰：孝宣之治，信赏必罚，综核名实，政事、文学、法理之士咸精其能，至于技巧、工匠、器械，自元、成间鲜能及之，亦足以知吏称其职，民安其业也。
现代文：班固评论：汉宣帝治理国家，有功必赏，有罪必罚。综核名实，政事、文学、法理之士都能精通专业，发挥专长，至于技巧工匠器械，从元帝、成帝年间是极少能及的。从此可知宣帝时代是吏称其职，民安其业的。
English: Ban Gu commented: Emperor Xuan of Han governed the country, meritorious deeds must be rewarded, and criminal acts must be punished. A comprehensive check of facts and figures, political affairs, literature, and jurisprudence, people can be proficient in their specialties and exert their expertise. As for the skills of craftsmen and instruments, from the Yuan Dynasty and the Zheng Dynasty, very few can match them. From now on, it can be known that in the era of Emperor Xuan, officials praised their duties, and the people were safe in their work.

古文：遭值匈奴乖乱，推亡固存，信威北夷，单于慕义，稽首称籓。
现代文：遭受匈奴侵扰，却能让呼韩邪单于来朝，郅支单于远遁，申天威于北夷，单于慕义，俯首称藩。
English: Although they were harassed by the Xiongnu, they were able to call Han Zidan to come to the DPRK, Sui Zidan to Yuancheng, Shin Tianwei to Beiyi, and Shan Zidan to Muyi, bowing their heads and calling it a domain.

古文：功光祖宗，业垂后嗣，可谓中兴，侔德殷宗、周宣矣！
现代文：功光宗祖，业垂后嗣，可谓中兴之主，德行可与殷高宗和周宣王媲美。
English: Gongguang Zongzong, the inheritor, can be said to be the master of ZTE. His virtue is comparable to that of Yin Gaozong and Zhou Xuan Wang.

