古文：宋子曰：兵非圣人之得已也。
现代文：宋先生说：兵器是圣人在不得已时才会使用的。
English: Mr. Song said, "Weapons are only used by sages when they have no other choice."

古文：虞舜在位五十载，而有苗犹弗率。
现代文：舜帝在位长达五十余年，只有苗部族仍然没有归附。
English: Emperor Qian has been on the throne for more than 50 years, and only the Miao tribe has not yet been annexed.

古文：明王圣帝，谁能去兵哉？弧矢之利，以威天下，其来尚矣。
现代文：即使是贤明的帝王，谁能够放弃战争和取消兵器呢？ 武器的功用，就在于威慑天下 ，这句话由来已久了。
English: Even if you are a wise emperor, who can give up war and abolish weapons? The function of weapons is to deter the world, this saying has been around for a long time.

古文：为老氏者，有葛天之思焉。其词有曰： 佳兵者，不详之器。 
现代文：写作《老子》一书的人，怀有葛天氏 无为而治 的理想，书中有句话说： 兵器这玩意儿，是不吉祥的东西。 
English: The person who wrote the book "Lao Zi" harbored Ge Tianhu's ideal of doing nothing, and there is a saying in the book: "This weapon is an inauspicious thing.

古文：盖言慎也。
现代文：那只是警戒人们用兵要慎重罢了。
English: It's just a warning to people to be careful with their weapons.

古文：火药机械之窍，其先凿自西番与南裔，而后乃及于中国。变幻百出，日盛月新。
现代文：制造新式枪炮的技巧，是西洋人较早使用后来经由西域和南方的边远地区传到中国来的，紧接着它很快就变化百出，日新月异。
English: The technology of manufacturing new guns was first used by Westerners and later transmitted to China through the remote areas of the western and southern regions, and then it quickly changed and changed.

古文：中国至今日，则即戎者以为第一义，岂其然哉？
现代文：时至今日，中国有些带兵的人已把发展兵器放到了第一位，难道这种想法对头吗？
English: To this day, some Chinese military leaders have put the development of weapons in the first place. Is this idea right?

古文：虽然，生人纵有巧思，乌能至此极也？
现代文：不过话说回来，人类即便有着巧妙的构思，武器的发展怎能到此为止呢？
English: But then again, even if humans have ingenious ideas, how can the development of weapons stop here?

古文：○弧矢
现代文：弧矢
English: Arc arrows

古文：凡造弓，以竹与牛角为正中干质，桑枝木为两梢。
现代文：造弓，要用竹片和牛角做正中的骨干，两头接上桑木。
English: To make a bow, use a piece of bamboo and a cow horn to make the backbone in the middle, and connect the two ends with mulberry wood.

古文：弛则竹为内体，角护其外；张则角向内而竹居外。
现代文：未安紧弓弦时，竹在弓弧的内侧，角在弓弧的外侧起保护作用；安紧弓弦以后，角在弓弧的内侧，竹在弓弧的外侧。
English: When the bowstring is not tightened, the bamboo protects the inside of the bow, and the horn protects the outside of the bow. After the bowstring is tightened, the horn protects the inside of the bow, and the bamboo protects the outside of the bow.

古文：竹一条而角两接，桑肖则其末刻锲，以受弦区，其本则贯插接笋于竹丫，而光削一面以贴角。
现代文：弓的本体是用一整条竹片，牛角则两段相接。弓两头的桑木末端都刻有缺口，使弓弦能够套紧。桑木本身与竹片互相穿插接榫，并削光一面贴上牛角。
English: The body of the bow is made of a single piece of bamboo, while the horns are connected in two sections. The ends of the mulberry wood at both ends of the bow are carved with notches so that the strings of the bow can be tightened. The mulberry wood itself and the bamboo pieces are interspersed with rivets, and the shaved side is attached to the horn.

古文：凡造弓，先削竹一片，中腰微亚小，两头差大，约长二尺许。
现代文：动手造弓时，先削竹片一根，中腰略小，两头稍大一些，长约两尺左右。
English: When starting to make a bow, first cut a piece of bamboo, the middle is slightly smaller, the two ends are slightly larger, and the length is about two feet.

古文：一面粘胶靠角，一面铺置牛筋与胶而固之。
现代文：一面用胶粘贴上牛角，一面用胶粘铺上牛筋，加固弓身。
English: Glue the horn on one side and glue the string on the other side to strengthen the bow.

古文：牛角当中牙接，固以筋胶。胶外固以桦皮，名曰暖靶。
现代文：两段牛角之间互相咬合，用牛筋和胶液固定，外面再粘上桦树皮加固，这就叫做 暖靶 。
English: The horns of the two horns are interlocked with each other, fixed with beef sinew and glue, and then reinforced with eucalyptus bark. This is called a warm target.

古文：凡桦木关外产辽阳，北土繁生遵化，西陲繁生临洮郡，闽、广、浙亦皆有之。
现代文：桦树，东北地区产在辽阳，华北地区以河北遵化为最多，西北地区以甘肃临洮为最多，福建、广东和浙江等地也有出产。
English: Eucalyptus, the northeast region is produced in Liaoyang, the north China region with Hebei Zunhua as the most, the northwest region with Gansu Linyi as the most, Fujian, Guangdong and Zhejiang and other places are also produced.

古文：其皮护物，手握如软绵，故弓靶所必用。
现代文：用桦树皮作为保护层，手握起来感到柔软，所以造弓把一定要用它。
English: Use eucalyptus bark as a protective layer. It feels soft to hold in your hand, so you must use it to make a bow.

古文：即刀柄与枪干亦需用之。
现代文：即使是刀柄和枪身也要用到它。
English: Even the handle of a knife and the barrel of a gun use it.

古文：其最薄者，则为刀剑鞘室也。
现代文：最薄的就可用来作为刀剑的套子。
English: The thinnest can be used as a cover for a sword.

古文：凡牛脊梁每只生筋一方条，约重三十两。
现代文：牛脊骨里都有一条长方形的筋，重约三十两。
English: There is a rectangular muscle in the backbone of a cow, weighing about thirty-two kilograms.

古文：杀取晒干，复浸水中，析破如苎麻丝。
现代文：宰杀牛以后取出来晒干，再用水浸泡，然后将它撕成苎麻丝那样的纤维。
English: After slaughtering the cow, it is taken out to dry in the sun, then soaked in water, and then it is torn into fibers like nettle.

古文：北边无蚕丝，弓弦处皆纠合此物为之。
现代文：北方少数民族没有蚕丝，弓弦都是用这种牛筋缠合的。
English: The northern ethnic minorities do not have silk, and the bow strings are all wound with this kind of sinew.

古文：中华则以之铺护弓干，与为棉花弹弓弦也。
现代文：中原地区则用它铺护弓的主干，或者用它来作为弹棉花的弓弦。
English: In the Central Plains, it is used to cover the main trunk of the bow, or it is used as a bow string for playing cotton.

古文：凡胶乃鱼脬杂肠所为，煎治多属宁国郡，其东海石首鱼，浙中以造白鲞者，取其脬为胶，坚固过于金铁。
现代文：胶是从鱼鳔、杂肠中熬取的，多数在安徽宇国县熬炼。东海有一种石首鱼，浙江人常用它晒成美味的鱼干，用它的鳔熬成的胶比铜铁还要牢固。
English: The glue is made from fish gills and sausages, and most of it is refined in Anhui Uguo County. There is a kind of stone fish in the East China Sea, which is commonly used by Zhejiang people to make delicious dried fish. The glue made from its gills is stronger than copper and iron.

古文：北边取海鱼脬煎成，坚固与中华无异，种性则别也。
现代文：北方少数民族用其他海鱼的鳔熬成的胶，同中原的一样牢固，只是种类不同而已。
English: The glue made by ethnic minorities in the north from the gills of other marine fish is just as strong as that from the Central Plains, but the types are different.

古文：天生数物，缺一而良弓不成，非偶然也。
现代文：天然的这几种东西，缺少一种就造不成良弓，看来这并不是偶然的。
English: It does not seem to be a coincidence that without one of these natural elements, a good bow cannot be made.

古文：凡造弓初成坯后，安置室中梁阁上，地面勿离火意。
现代文：弓坯子刚刚做成之后，要放在屋梁高处，地面不断地生火烘焙。
English: After the loin has just been made, it should be placed at the height of the roof beam, and the ground should be continuously baked with fire.

古文：促者旬日，多者两月，透干其津液，然后取下磨光，重加筋胶与漆，则其弓良甚。
现代文：短则放置十来天，长则两个月，等到胶液干透后，就拿下来磨光，再一次添加牛筋、涂胶和上漆，这样做出来的弓质量就很好了。
English: The short ones are left for about ten days, the long ones for two months. When the glue is dry, it is taken off and polished. Again, beef tendon, glue and paint are added. The quality of the bow is very good.

古文：货弓之家，不能俟日足者，则他日解释之患因之。
现代文：有的卖弓人不到足够的烘焙时间就把弓卖出，这样，日后就可能出现脱胶的毛病。
English: Some bow sellers sell their bows before they have had enough time to bake them, which can lead to problems with degumming in the future.

古文：凡弓弦取食柘叶蚕茧，其丝更坚韧。
现代文：用柘蚕丝为弓弦的弓就会更加坚韧。
English: A bow with cocoon silk as strings will be tougher.

古文：每条用丝线二十余根作骨，然后用线横缠紧约。
现代文：每条弦用二十多根丝线为骨，然后用丝线横向缠紧。
English: For each string, more than twenty silk threads are used to make the bone, and then the silk threads are wound horizontally.

古文：缠丝分三停，隔七寸许则空一二分不缠，故弦不张弓时，可折叠三曲而收之。
现代文：缠丝的时候分成三段，每缠七寸左右就留空一两分不缠。这样，在弦不上弓时就可以折成三节收起。
English: When wrapping the string, divide it into three sections, leaving one or two empty sections for every seven centimetres or so. This way, when the string does not fit the bow, it can be folded into three sections and put away.

古文：往者北边弓弦，尽以牛筋为质，故夏月雨雾，妨其解脱，不相侵犯。
现代文：过去北方少数民族都用牛筋为弓弦，每逢夏天雨季就怕它吸潮解脱而不敢贸然出兵进犯。
English: In the past, the northern ethnic minorities all used cow sinew as a bow string. Every summer rainy season, they were afraid that it would absorb moisture and become loose, so they did not dare to attack.

古文：今则丝弦亦广有之。涂弦或用黄蜡，或不用亦无害也。
现代文：现在到处都有丝弦了，有的人用黄蜡涂弦防潮，不用也不要紧。
English: Now there are silk strings everywhere, some people use yellow wax to coat the strings with moisture, it doesn't matter if they don't need it.

古文：凡弓两肖系区处，或以最厚牛皮，或削柔木如小棋子，钉粘角端，名曰垫弦，义同琴轸。
现代文：弓两端系弦的部位，要用最厚的牛皮或软木做成像小棋子那样的垫子，用胶粘紧钉在牛角末端，这叫做垫弦，作用跟琴弦的码子差不多。
English: At the ends of the bow strings, the thickest cowhide or cork should be used to make a cushion that looks like a small chess piece, and glued tightly to the end of the horn. This is called a cushion string, and its function is similar to that of the strings.

古文：放弦归返时，雄力向内，得此而抗止，不然则受损也。
现代文：放箭时弓弦的回弹力很大，有了垫弦就可以抵消它，否则会损伤弓弦。
English: The spring-back force of the bowstring is very large when the arrow is released. With the cushion string, it can be offset, otherwise the bowstring will be damaged.

古文：凡造弓，视人力强弱为轻重，上力挽一百二十斤，过此则为虎力，亦不数出。
现代文：造弓还要按人的挽力大小来分轻重。上等力气的人能挽一百二十斤，超过这个数目的叫做虎力，但这样的人很少见。
English: The weight of a bow is also determined by the size of a person's draw weight. A person of superior strength can draw one hundred and twenty kilos, exceeding this number is called tiger strength, but such a person is rare.

古文：中力减十之二三，下力及其半。
现代文：中等力气的人能挽八九十斤，下等力气的人只能挽六十斤左右。
English: A person of average strength can pull eighty or ninety pounds, while a person of inferior strength can only pull about sixty pounds.

古文：彀满之时皆能中的。
现代文：这些弓箭在拉满弦时都可以射中目标。
English: These bows and arrows can hit the target when the strings are full.

古文：但战阵之上洞胸彻札，功必归于挽强者。而下力倘能穿杨贯虱，则以巧胜也。
现代文：但在战场上能射穿敌人的胸膛或铠甲的，当然是力气大的射手；力气小的人如果有能射穿杨树叶或射中虱子的，那是以巧取胜。
English: But on the battlefield, the one who can shoot through the enemy's chest or armor is, of course, a strong archer; if a weak person can shoot through poplar leaves or hit a hazelnut, it is a skillful victory.

古文：凡试弓力，以足踏弦就地，称钩搭挂弓腰，弦满之时，推移称锤所压，则知多少。
现代文：测定弓力的方法是：可以用脚踩弓弦，将秤钩钩住弓的中点往上拉，弦满之时，推移秤锤称平，就可知道弓力大小。
English: The method of measuring the force of the bow is: you can step on the bowstring with your foot, pull the scale hook up to the middle point of the bow, and when the string is full, the balance hammer is balanced, so you can know the size of the bow force.

古文：其初造料分两，则上力挽强者，角与竹片削就时，约重七两。筋与胶、漆与缠约丝绳，约重八钱。此其大略。
现代文：做弓料的分量是，上等力气所用的弓，角和竹片削好后约重七两，筋、胶、漆和缠丝约重八钱，这是大概的数字。
English: The weight of the materials used to make a bow is roughly the same: the weight of the bow, the angle and the piece of bamboo after sharpening is about seventy-two, and the weight of the string, glue, lacquer and twine is about eight quid.

古文：中力减十之一二，下力减十之二三也。
现代文：中等力气的相应减少十分之一或五分之一，下等力气的减少五分之一或十分之三。
English: The corresponding reduction is one-tenth or one-fifth for medium strength and one-fifth or three-tenths for low strength.

古文：凡成弓，藏时最嫌霉湿。
现代文：弓的保管：藏弓最怕潮湿。
English: How to store a bow: The best way to store a bow is to keep it away from moisture.

古文：将士家或置烘厨、烘箱，日以炭火置其下。
现代文：军官家里常设置有烘厨或烘箱，每天都用炭火放在下面烘。
English: Officers' homes are often equipped with ovens or ovens, and every day they use charcoal to bake below.

古文：小卒无烘厨，则安顿灶突之上。
现代文：士兵没有烘厨或烘箱，就把弓放在灶头烟道的凸起上。
English: Without a stove or oven, the soldier placed his bow on the bulge of the stove flue.

古文：稍怠不勤，立受朽解之患也。
现代文：稍微照管不周到，弓就会朽坏解脱。
English: A little careless care and the bow will rot and fall apart.

古文：凡箭，中国南方竹质，北方萑柳质，北边桦质，随方不一。
现代文：箭杆的用料各地不尽相同，我国南方用竹，北方使用薄柳木，北方少数民族则用桦木。
English: The materials used for arrow shafts vary from place to place. In the south of China, bamboo is used, in the north, thin willow wood is used, and in the north, the ethnic minorities use birch.

古文：竿长二尺，簇长一寸，其大端也。
现代文：箭杆长二尺，箭头长一寸，这是一般的规格。
English: The shaft of the arrow is two feet long, and the arrowhead is one inch long, which is a general specification.

古文：凡竹箭削竹四条或三条，以胶粘合，过刀光削而圆成之。
现代文：做竹箭时，削竹三四条并用胶黏合，再用刀削圆刮光。
English: When making bamboo arrows, cut three or four strips of bamboo and glue them together, then use a knife to cut the circle and scrape it.

古文：漆丝缠约两头，名曰 三不齐 箭杆。
现代文：然后再用漆丝缠紧两头，这叫做 三不齐 箭杆。
English: Then, the two ends are tightly wrapped with lacquered silk, which is called "Sanwuqi" (三不齐) arrow shaft.

古文：浙与广南有生成箭竹，不破合者。
现代文：浙江和广东南部有天然的箭竹，不用破开黏合。
English: Zhejiang and southern Guangdong have natural arrow bamboo, which can be glued together without breaking.

古文：柳与桦杆，则取彼圆直枝条而为之，微费刮削而成也。
现代文：柳木或桦木做的箭杆，只要选取圆直的枝条稍加削刮就可以了。
English: For arrow shafts made of willow or birch, it is enough to select a round, straight branch and scrape it a little.

古文：凡竹箭其体自直，不用矫揉。
现代文：竹箭本身很直，不必矫正。
English: The bamboo arrow itself is very straight and does not need to be straightened.

古文：木杆则燥时必曲，削造成时以数寸之木，刻槽一条，名曰箭端。
现代文：木箭杆干燥后势必变弯，矫正的办法是用一块几寸长的木头，上面刻一条槽，名叫箭端。
English: After drying, the wooden arrow shaft is bound to become bent. The method of correction is to use a piece of wood a few inches long, with a groove carved on it, called the arrow end.

古文：将木杆逐寸戛拖而过，其身乃直。
现代文：将木杆嵌在槽里逐寸刮拉而过，杆身就会变直。
English: The wooden rod inserted in the groove is scraped and pulled over inch by inch, and the rod body straightens.

古文：即首尾轻重，亦由过端而均停也。
现代文：即使原来杆身头尾重量不均匀的也能得到矫正。
English: Even if the original bar body, head and tail weight is uneven, it can be corrected.

古文：凡箭，其本刻衔口以驾弦，其末受镞。
现代文：箭杆的末端刻有一个小凹口，叫做 衔口 ，以便扣在弦上，另一端安装箭头。
English: At the end of the shaft there is a small notch, called a notch, so that it can be fastened to the string and the arrowhead mounted on the other end.

古文：凡镞冶铁为之。北边制如桃叶枪尖，广南黎人矢镞如平面铁铲，中国则三棱锥象也。
现代文：箭头是用铁铸成的，至于箭头的形状，北方少数民族做的像桃叶枪尖，广东南部黎族人做的像平头铁铲，中原地区做的则是三棱锥形。
English: The arrowheads are made of cast iron. As for the shape of the arrowheads, the northern ethnic minorities made them look like the tips of peach-leaf guns, the Li people in southern Guangdong made them look like flat-headed shovels, and the Central Plains region made them look like triangular cones.

古文：响箭则以寸木空中锥眼为窍，矢过招风而飞鸣，即《庄子》所谓嚆矢也。
现代文：响箭之所以能迎风飞鸣，巧妙就在于小小的箭杆上锥有孔眼，这就是《庄子》说的 嚆矢 。
English: The reason why the ringing arrows can fly against the wind is that the small arrows have holes on the shafts, which is what "Zhuang Zi" said about the arrows.

古文：凡箭行端斜与疾慢，窍妙皆系本端翎羽之上。
现代文：箭飞行得是正还是偏，快还是慢，关键都在箭羽上。
English: Whether the arrow flies straight or sideways, fast or slow, the key is in the quill.

古文：箭本近衔处剪翎直贴三条，其长三寸，鼎足安顿，粘以胶，名曰箭羽。
现代文：在箭杆末端近衔口的地方，用脬胶粘上三条三寸长的三足鼎立形的翎羽，名叫箭羽。
English: At the end of the shaft, near the mouth of the quiver, three three-inch-long three-legged vertical quill feathers, called arrow feathers, are glued on with glue.

古文：羽以雕膀为上，角鹰次之，鸱鹞又次之。
现代文：所用的羽毛，以雕的翅毛为最好，角鹰的翎羽居其次，鹞鹰的翎羽更次。
English: For the feathers used, the wing feathers of the eagle are the best, followed by the beak feathers of the horned eagle, and the beak feathers of the vulture.

古文：南方造箭者，雕无望焉，即鹰、鹞亦难得之货，急用塞数，即以雁翎，甚至鹅翎亦为之矣。
现代文：南方造箭的人，固然没希望得到雕翎，就是鹰翎也很难得到，急用时就只好用雁翎、甚至用鹅翎来充数。
English: People who make arrows in the south, of course, have no hope of getting carved crossbows, even eagle crossbows are hard to get, and in an emergency, they have to use goose quills, or even goose quills to make up the number.

古文：凡雕翎箭行疾过鹰、鹞翎，十余步而端正，能抗风吹。
现代文：雕翎箭飞得比鹰、鹞翎箭快十多步而且端正，还能抗风吹。
English: The carved crossbow arrow flies more than ten steps faster than the eagle and the crossbow arrow and is neat, and can also resist the wind.

古文：北边羽箭多出此料。
现代文：北方少数民族的箭羽多数都用雕翎。
English: Most of the arrow feathers of the northern ethnic minorities are made of carved arrowheads.

古文：鹰、鹞翎作法精工，亦恍惚焉。
现代文：角鹰或鹞鹰翎箭如果精工制作，效用也跟雕翎箭差不多。
English: If the horned eagle or vulture eagle crossbow arrow is made with precision, the effect is similar to that of a carved crossbow arrow.

古文：若鹅、雁之质，则释放之时，手不应心，而遇风斜窜者多矣。
现代文：可是，鹅翎箭和雁翎箭射出时却手不应心，往往一遇到风就歪到一边去了。
English: However, when the goose quail arrow and the goose quail arrow are shot, they do not fit the hand, and often they are skewed to one side when they encounter the wind.

古文：面箭不及北，由此分也。
现代文：南方的箭比不上北方的箭，原因就在这里。
English: The arrows of the south are not equal to the arrows of the north, and for this reason.

古文：○弩
现代文：弩
English: 

古文：凡弩为守营兵器，不利行阵。
现代文：弩是镇守营地的重要兵器，不适用于冲锋陷阵。
English: The crossbow is an important weapon of the garrison camp, and it is not suitable for charging into an ambush.

古文：直者名身，衡者名翼，弩牙发弦者名机。
现代文：其中直的部分叫身，横的部分叫翼，扣弦发箭的开关叫机。
English: Among them, the straight part is called the body, the horizontal part is called the wing, and the switch that fastens the string and shoots the arrow is called the ring.

古文：斫木为身，约长二尺许，身之首横拴度翼。其空缺度翼处，去面刻定一分，去背则不论分数。
现代文：砍木做弩身，长约二尺。弩身的前端横拴弩翼，拴翼的孔离弩面划定一分厚，与弩底的距离则不必计较。
English: Chop wood to make a ploughshare, about two feet long. The front end of the ploughshare is the transverse ploughshare, the hole of the ploughshare is one point thick from the plough face, and the distance from the plough base does not have to be considered.

古文：面上微刻直槽一条以盛箭。
现代文：弩面上还要刻上一条直槽用以盛放箭。
English: A straight groove was also carved into the table top to hold arrows.

古文：其翼以柔木一条为者名扁担弩，力最雄。
现代文：有的弩翼只用一根柔木做成，叫做扁担弩，这种弩的射杀力最强。
English: Some crossbows are made with only one piece of flexible wood, called the flat crossbow. This crossbow has the strongest shooting power.

古文：或一木之下加以竹片叠承，名三撑弩，或五撑、七撑而止。
现代文：如果弩翼是在一根柔木下面再用竹片叠撑的就相应叫做三撑弩、五撑弩或七撑弩。
English: If the hoop is supported under a piece of flexible wood and then supported by a stack of bamboo sheets, it is called a three-post hoop, a five-post hoop or a seven-post hoop.

古文：身下截刻锲衔弦，其衔傍活钉牙机，上剔发弦。
现代文：弩身后端刻一个缺口扣弦，旁边钉上活动扳机，将活动扳机上推即可发箭。
English: A notch is carved behind the crossbow to fasten the string, and an active trigger is nailed next to it. Push the active trigger upwards to fire the arrow.

古文：上弦之时唯力是视。
现代文：上弦时全靠人的体力。
English: When the strings are wound, it all depends on the physical strength of the person.

古文：一人以脚踏强弩而弦者，《汉书》名曰 蹶张材官 。
现代文：由一个人脚踏强弩上弦的，《汉书》称为 蹶张 材官。
English: The "Hanshu" (Chinese Classics) calls a piece of string played by a person with his or her foot on a strong gong a "Zhangzhang Zhaojuan."

古文：弦送矢行，其疾无与比数。
现代文：弩弦把箭射出，快速无比。
English: The koto string shoots out the arrow, it's incredibly fast.

古文：凡弩弦以苎麻为质，缠绕以鹅翎，涂以黄蜡。
现代文：弩弦用苎麻绳为骨，还要缠上鹅翎，涂上黄蜡。
English: The strings of the harp are made of the bones of a nettle rope, and are also wrapped in goose down and coated with yellow wax.

古文：其弦上翼则谨，放下仍松，故鹅翎可扌及首尾于绳内。
现代文：弩弦装上弩翼时虽然拉得很紧，但放下来时仍然是松的，所以鹅翎的头尾都可以夹入麻绳内。
English: Although the strings are pulled tight when the wings are attached, they are still loose when they are let down, so the head and tail of the gosling can be clipped into the twine.

古文：弩箭羽以箬叶为之。
现代文：弩箭的箭羽是用箬竹叶制成的。
English: The quiver of the crossbow arrow is made from the leaves of the cucumber.

古文：析破箭本，衔于其中而缠约之。
现代文：把箭尾破开一点，然后把箬竹叶夹进去并将它缠紧。
English: Break the arrowhead end a little, then clamp a bamboo leaf into it and wrap it tightly.

古文：其射猛兽药箭，则用草乌一味，熬成浓胶，蘸染矢刃。见血一缕则命即绝，人畜同之。
现代文：射杀猛兽用的药箭，则是用草乌熬成浓胶蘸涂在箭头上，这种箭一见血就能使人畜丧命。
English: The medicinal arrows used to shoot wild beasts are made of blackstrap grass and coated on the arrowhead with thick glue. This kind of arrow can kill people and animals at the first sight of blood.

古文：凡弓箭强者行二百余步，弩箭最强者五十步而止，即过咫尺，不能穿鲁缟矣。
现代文：强弓可以射出二百多步远，而强弩只能射五十步远，再远一点就连薄绢也射不穿了。
English: A strong bow can shoot more than two hundred paces, while a strong crossbow can only shoot fifty paces, and even a thin crossbow can't shoot any further.

古文：然其行疾则十倍于弓，而入物之深亦倍之。
现代文：然而，弩比弓要快十倍，而穿透物体的深度也要大一倍。
English: However, the crossbow is ten times faster than the bow and penetrates objects twice as deep.

古文：国朝军器造神臂弩、克敌弩，皆并发二矢、三矢者。
现代文：本朝作为军器的弩有神臂弩和克敌弩，都是能同时发出两三支箭的。
English: As military weapons of this dynasty, the javelin, dagger and crossbow were able to shoot two or three arrows at the same time.

古文：又有诸葛弩，其上刻直槽，相承函十矢，其翼取最柔木为之。
现代文：还有一种诸葛弩，弩上刻有直槽可装箭十支，弩翼用最柔韧的木制成。
English: There is also a kind of Zhuge arrowhead. The arrowhead is carved with a straight groove that can hold ten arrows. The wing of the arrowhead is made of the most flexible wood.

古文：另安机木随手扳弦而上，发去一矢，槽中又落一矢，则又扳木上弦而发。
现代文：另外还安有木制弩机，随手扳机就可以上弦，发出一箭，槽中又落下一箭，又可以再拉扳机上弦发一箭。
English: In addition, there is also a wooden hammering machine. The trigger can be wound by hand, and an arrow can be fired. An arrow will fall in the groove, and the trigger can be pulled again to fire an arrow.

古文：机巧虽工，然其力绵甚，所及二十余步而已。
现代文：这种弩机结构精巧，但射杀力弱，射程只有二十来步远。
English: This machine has a delicate structure, but the shooting power is weak, and the shooting range is only twenty steps away.

古文：此民家妨窃具，非军国器。
现代文：这是民间用来防盗用的，而不是军队所用的兵器。
English: This is a weapon used by civilians to prevent theft, not by the military.

古文：其山人射猛兽者名曰窝弩，安顿交迹之衢，机傍引线，俟兽过，带发而射之。
现代文：山区的居民用来射杀猛兽的弩叫做 窝弩 ，装在野兽出没的地方，拉上引线，野兽走过时一触动引线，箭就会自动射出。
English: The crossbows used by residents of mountainous areas to shoot wild beasts are called "wo-tsu," which are installed in places where wild beasts are found, and a lead is pulled on. When a wild beast passes by, the arrow will automatically shoot out when the lead is touched.

古文：一发所获，一兽而已。
现代文：每发一箭，所得的收获只是一只野兽罢了。
English: For every arrow shot, only a beast is reaped.

古文：○干
现代文：干
English: dry

古文：凡干戈名最古，干与戈相连得名者，后世战卒，短兵驰骑者更用之。
现代文： 干戈 这个名字在兵器中是最为古老的，干和戈相连成为一个词，是因为后代的步兵和手握短兵器的骑兵经常配合使用干和戈。
English: The name kango is the oldest in weaponry, and kango and go became one word because later generations of infantrymen and cavalrymen with short weapons often used kango and go together.

古文：盖右手执短刀，左手执干以蔽敌矢。
现代文：右手执短刀，左手执盾牌以抵挡敌人的箭。
English: The right hand holds a knife, the left hand holds a shield to fend off the enemy's arrows.

古文：古者车战之上，则有专司执干，并抵同人之受矢者。
现代文：古时候的战车上，有人专门负责拿着盾牌，用来保护同车的人免中敌方的来箭。
English: In the chariots of ancient times, someone was specifically responsible for holding the shield, which was used to protect the passengers from the enemy's arrows.

古文：若双手执长戈与持戟、槊，则无所用之也。
现代文：要是双手拿着长矛或者戟，那就腾不出手来拿盾牌了。
English: If you hold a spear or a halberd in both hands, you won't be able to reach your shield.

古文：凡干长不过三尺，杞柳织成尺径圈置于项下，上出五寸，亦锐其端，下则轻竿可执。
现代文：盾牌长度一般不会超过三尺，用杞柳枝条编织成的直径约一尺的圆块，盾牌上方的尖部突出五寸，它的下端接有一根轻竿可供手握，放在脖子下面进行防护。
English: The length of the shield generally does not exceed three feet. It is a round piece with a diameter of about one foot, woven with willow twigs. The top of the shield protrudes five inches. At its lower end, there is a light pole that can be held by hand and placed under the neck for protection.

古文：若盾名中干，则步卒所持以蔽矢并拒槊者，俗所谓傍牌是也。
现代文：另有一种盾叫 中干 ，那是步兵拿来挡箭或长矛用的，俗称傍牌。火药料
English: There is another kind of shield called Zhonggan, which is used by infantrymen to fend off arrows or spears, commonly known as parapets.

古文：○火药料火药、火器，今时妄想进身博官者，人人张目而道，著书以献，未必尽由试验。
现代文：关于火药和火器，现在那些妄图博取高官厚禄的人，个个都是高谈阔论，著书呈献朝廷，他们说的不一定都是经过试验的。
English: With regard to gunpowder and firearms, those who are now vainly trying to win the favor of high-ranking officials are all high-brow, writing books to present to the imperial court. What they say is not necessarily tested.

古文：然亦粗载数叶，附于卷内。
现代文：在这里还是要粗略写上几页，附在卷内。
English: Here it is still necessary to write a few rough pages and attach them to the volume.

古文：凡火药以硝石、硫黄为主，草木灰为铺。
现代文：火药的成分以硝石和硫黄为主、草木灰为辅。
English: The composition of gunpowder is mainly saltpeter and sulfur, supplemented by grass and wood ash.

古文：硝性至阴，硫性至阳，阴阳两神物相遇于无隙可容之中。其出也，人物膺之，魂散惊而魄齑粉。
现代文：其中硝石的阴性最强，硫黄的阳性最强，这两种神奇的阴阳物质在没有一点空隙的地方相遇，就会爆炸起来，不论人还是物都要魂飞魄散、粉身碎骨。
English: Among them, saltpeter is the strongest negative and sulfur is the strongest positive. When these two magical yin and yang substances meet in a place without a single gap, they will explode, and both people and things will be scattered and crushed.

古文：凡硝性主直，直击者硝九而硫一。
现代文：硝石纵向的爆发力大，所以用于射击的火药成分是硝九硫一。
English: The longitudinal explosive force of saltpeter is large, so the gunpowder component used for shooting is saltpeter.

古文：硫性主横，爆击者硝七而硫三。
现代文：硫黄横向的爆发威力大，所以用于爆破的火药成分是硝七硫三。
English: The lateral explosion of sulfur is very powerful, so the gunpowder component used for blasting is saltpeter.

古文：其佐使之灰，则青杨、枯杉、桦根、箬叶、蜀葵、毛竹根、茄秸之类，烧使存性，而其中箬叶为最燥也。
现代文：作为辅助剂的炭粉，可以用青杨、枯杉、桦树根、箬竹叶、蜀葵、毛竹根、茄秆之类，烧制成炭，其中以箬竹叶炭末最为燥烈。
English: As an auxiliary agent, charcoal powder can be used to make charcoal from poplar, dead cedar, eucalyptus root, eucalyptus leaf, coneflower, hairy bamboo root, and eggplant, among which eucalyptus leaf charcoal powder is the most pungent.

古文：凡火攻有毒火、神火、法火、烂火、喷火。
现代文：战争中采用火攻的有毒火、神火、法火、烂火、喷火等名目。
English: In war, fire attacks are called poisonous fire, divine fire, legal fire, rotten fire, spitting fire, and other names.

古文：毒火以白砒、砂为君，金汁、银锈、人粪和制。神火以朱砂、雄黄、雌黄为君。烂火以硼砂、磁末、牙皂、秦椒配合。飞火以朱砂、石黄、轻粉、草乌、巴豆配合。劫营火则用桐油、松香。
现代文：毒火主要以白砒、硇砂为主，再加上金汁、银锈、人粪混和配制；神火主要以朱砂、雄黄、雌黄为主；烂火要加上硼砂、瓷屑、猪牙皂荚、花椒等物；飞火要加上朱砂、雄黄、轻粉、草乌、巴豆；劫营火则要用桐油、松香。
English: Poisonous fire is mainly composed of chalk and borax, and mixed with gold juice, silver rust, and human excrement; divine fire is mainly composed of cinnabar, male yellow, and female yellow; rotten fire should be added with borax, porcelain chips, pig's teeth soap, pepper, etc.; flying fire should be added with cinnabar, male yellow, light powder, grass black, and cowpea; campfire should be used with tung oil and rosin.

古文：此其大略。
现代文：这些配方只是个大概。
English: These recipes are just a guide.

古文：其狼粪烟昼黑夜红，迎风直上，与江豚灰能逆风而炽，皆须试见而后详之。
现代文：至于焚烧狼粪的烟白天黑、晚上红，迎风直上，以及江豚的灰还能逆风燃烧，这些都只是传闻，必须先得经过试验，亲眼看一看，才能详加说明。
English: As for the fact that the smoke from burning wolf dung is black in the daytime and red in the evening, and rises straight up against the wind, and that the ash of the finless porpoise can also burn against the wind, these are just rumors, which must first be tested and seen with one's own eyes before they can be explained in detail.

古文：○硝石
现代文：硝石
English: saltpeter

古文：凡硝，华夷皆生，中国则专产西北。
现代文：硝石这种东西，中国和外国都有，而中国只有西北部才出产。
English: Saltpeter is something that both China and other countries have, but China only produces it in the northwest.

古文：若东南贩者不给官引，则以为私货而罪之。
现代文：东南地区卖硝石的人如果没有官府下发的运销凭证，就会以走私的名义而被治罪。
English: People who sell saltpeter in the southeastern region will be prosecuted in the name of smuggling if they do not have a shipping certificate issued by the government.

古文：硝质与盐同母，大地之下潮气蒸成，现于地面。
现代文：硝石和盐都是在地底下面生成的，随着水气蒸发，出现在地面。
English: Both saltpeter and salt are formed underground and appear on the ground as water vapor evaporates.

古文：近水而土薄者成盐，近山而土厚者成硝。
现代文：近水而土层薄的地方形成盐，靠山而土层厚的地方形成硝。
English: Salt forms near water where the soil layer is thin, and salt crystals form near mountains where the soil layer is thick.

古文：以其入水即硝熔，故名曰 硝 。
现代文：因为它入水即消溶，所以就叫硝。
English: Because it dissolves in water, it is called soda ash.

古文：长淮以北，节过中秋，即居室之中，隔日扫地，可取少许以供煎炼。
现代文：长江、淮河以北地区，过了中秋节以后，即使是在室内，隔天扫地也可扫出少量的粗硝，以供进一步煎炼提纯。
English: In the areas north of the Yangtze River and Huaihe River, after the Mid-Autumn Festival, even if it is indoors, a small amount of coarse salt can be swept out the next day to be further refined.

古文：凡硝三所最多：出蜀中者曰川硝，生山西者俗呼盐硝，生山东者俗呼土硝。
现代文：我国有三个地方出产硝石为最多：其中，四川产的叫做川硝，山西产的叫做盐硝，山东产的叫做土硝。
English: There are three places in China that produce the most saltpeter: among them, the one produced in Sichuan is called river saltpeter, the one produced in Shanxi is called salt saltpeter, and the one produced in Shandong is called soil saltpeter.

古文：凡硝刮扫取时，入缸内水浸一宿，秽杂之物浮于面上，掠取去时，然后入釜，注水煎炼。硝化水干，倾于器内，经过一宿，即结成硝。
现代文：把刮扫来的粗硝放进缸里，用水浸一夜，捞去浮渣，然后放进锅中，加水煎煮直到硝完全溶解并又充分浓缩时，倒入容器，经过一晚便析出硝石的结晶。
English: Put the scraped coarse salt into a jar, soak it in water for one night, remove the scum, then put it in a pot, add water and boil until the salt is completely dissolved and fully concentrated, pour it into a container, and after one night, the saltpeter crystals will precipitate.

古文：其上浮者曰芒硝，芒长者曰马牙硝，其下猥杂者曰朴硝。
现代文：其中浮在上面的叫芒硝，芒长的叫马牙硝，而沉在下面含杂质较多的叫朴硝。
English: Among them, the one that floats on the top is called meng gong, the one with the longest meng is called ma fang gong, and the one that sinks below contains more impurities is called park gong.

古文：欲去杂还纯，再入水煎炼。
现代文：要除去杂质把它提纯，还需要加水再煮。
English: To remove impurities and purify it, it is necessary to add water and then boil it.

古文：入莱菔数枚同煮熟，倾入盆中，经宿结成白雪，则呼盆硝。
现代文：扔进去几只萝卜一起煮熟后，再倒入盆中，经过一晚便能析出雪白的结晶，这叫做盆硝。
English: Throw in a few radishes cooked together, then pour into the basin, and after one night, snow-white crystals can be precipitated, which is called pot glass.

古文：凡制火药，牙硝、盆硝功用皆同。
现代文：牙硝和盆硝制造火药的功用相同。
English: Tooth glass and basin glass have the same function of making gunpowder.

古文：凡取硝制药，少者用新瓦焙，多者用土釜焙，潮气一干，即成研末。
现代文：用硝制造火药，少量的可以放在新瓦片上焙干，多的就要放在土锅中焙。焙干后，立即取出研成粉末。
English: Gunpowder is made from glass. A small amount can be roasted and dried on new tiles, while a larger amount must be roasted in an earthenware pot. After roasting, the ground powder is taken out immediately.

古文：凡研硝不以铁碾入石臼，相激火生，则祸不可测，凡硝配定何药分两，入黄同研，木灰则从后增入。
现代文：不能用铁碾在石臼里研磨硝，因为铁石摩擦一旦产生火花，造成的灾祸就不堪设想了。硝和硫按照某种火药所要求的配方比例拌匀研磨以后，木炭末随后才加入。
English: Glass cannot be ground with iron in a millstone, for the calamity of sparks caused by the friction of iron and stone is inconceivable. After mixing and grinding the glass and sulphur according to the proportions required by a certain gunpowder, the charcoal powder is then added.

古文：凡硝既焙之后，经久潮性复生。使用巨泡，多从临期装载也。
现代文：硝焙干后，时间久了又会返潮，因此大炮所用的硝药，多数是临时才装上去的。
English: After the nitro roast dries, it takes a long time for the moisture to return, so most of the gunpowder used by the cannon is only temporarily installed.

古文：○硫黄
现代文：硫黄
English: Sulphur

古文：凡硫黄配硝，而后火药成声。
现代文：硫黄和硝配合好之后，才能使火药能够爆炸。
English: Only after sulphur and glass have been combined can the gunpowder explode.

古文：北狄无黄之国，空繁硝产，故中国有严禁，凡燃炮拈硝与木灰为引线，黄不入内，入黄即不透关。
现代文：北方少数民族地区不产硫黄，硝石产量虽然多也用不上。因此中原地区对于硫黄是严禁贩运的。大炮点火，要用硝和木炭末混合搓成导火线，不要加入硫黄，不然引线导火就会失灵。
English: Ethnic minority areas in the north do not produce sulfur, and although the production of saltpeter is high, it is not used. Therefore, it is strictly forbidden to traffic sulfur in the Central Plains. To ignite a cannon, use a mixture of glass and charcoal powder to make a fuse. Do not add sulfur, otherwise the fuse will fail.

古文：凡碾黄难碎，每黄一两，和硝一钱同碾，则立成微尘细末也。
现代文：硫黄很难单独碾碎，但是如果每两硫黄加入一钱硝一起碾磨，很快就可以碾成像尘一样的粉末了。
English: Sulfur is difficult to grind alone, but if you grind every two sulfur together with a penny of glass, it can soon be ground into a dust-like powder.

古文：○火器
现代文：火器
English: Firearms

古文：西洋炮熟铜铸就，圆形若铜鼓。
现代文：西洋炮是用熟铜铸成的，圆得像一个铜鼓。
English: Western cannons are made of cast copper, round like a brass drum.

古文：引放时，半里之内，人马受惊死。
现代文：放炮时，半里之内，人和马都会吓死。
English: When the cannon is fired, within half a mile, both man and horse will be scared to death.

古文：红夷炮铸铁为之，身长丈许，用以守城。
现代文：红夷炮是用铸铁造的，身长一丈多，用来守城。
English: The Hongyi cannon was made of cast iron and stood more than a meter tall. It was used to defend the city.

古文：中藏铁弹并火药数斗，飞激二里，膺其锋者为齑粉。
现代文：炮膛里装有几斗铁丸和火药，射程二里，被击中的目标会变得碎粉。
English: There are several barrels of iron pellets and gunpowder in the gun chamber, with a range of two miles, and the target will be crushed when hit.

古文：凡炮引内灼时，先往后坐千钧力，其位须墙抵住，墙崩者其常。
现代文：大炮引发时，首先会产生很大的后坐力，炮位必须用墙顶住，墙因此而崩塌也是常见的事。
English: When a cannon is fired, it first generates a large recoil force. The gun position must be supported by a wall, and it is common for the wall to collapse as a result.

古文：大将军二将军佛郎机
现代文：大将军、二将军、佛郎机。
English: The great general, the second general, and the flouro machine.

古文：三眼铳百子连珠炮
现代文：三眼铳、百子连珠炮
English: Three-eyed dragonfly, hundreds of thousands of beads cannon

古文：地雷埋伏土中，竹管通引，冲土起击，其身从其炸裂。
现代文：地雷：埋藏在泥土中，用竹管套上保护引线，引爆时冲开泥土起到杀伤作用，地雷本身也同时炸裂了。
English: Mine: Buried in the dirt, with a bamboo tube to cover the protective lead. When detonated, it breaks the dirt and kills. The mine itself also explodes.

古文：所谓横击，用黄多者。
现代文：这便是所谓的 横击 ，是因为ǒ药配方中硫黄用得较多的缘故。
English: This is a so-called "side effect" because of the high amount of sulfur used in the tincture formula.

古文：混江龙，漆固皮囊炮沉于水底，岸上带索引机。
现代文：混江龙：用皮囊包裹，再用漆密封，然后沉入水底，岸上用一条引索控制。
English: Mixed river dragon: wrapped in a leather bag, sealed with paint, and then sunk to the bottom of the water, controlled by a lead rope on the shore.

古文：囊中悬吊火石、火镰，索机一动，其中自发。
现代文：皮囊里挂有火石和火镰，一旦牵动引索，皮囊里自然就会点火引爆。
English: There are flints and firecrackers in the skin bag. Once the lead rope is pulled, the skin bag will naturally ignite and detonate.

古文：凡鸟铳长约三尺，铁管载药，嵌盛木棍之中，以便手握。
现代文：敌船如果碰到它就会被炸坏，但它毕竟是个笨重的家伙。鸟铳：约有三尺长，装火药的铁枪管嵌在木托上，以便于手握。
English: An enemy ship would be blown up if it hit it, but it was a heavy thing after all. Bird's beak: about three feet long, with a gun barrel containing gunpowder embedded in the wooden base for easy grip.

古文：凡锤鸟铳，先以铁梃一条大如箸为冷骨，裹红铁锤成。
现代文：锤制鸟铳时，先用一根像筷子一样粗的铁条当锻模，然后将烧红的铁块包在它上面打成铁管。
English: When hammering a bird's beak, an iron bar as thick as chopsticks is first used as a forging die, and then a red-hot piece of iron is wrapped around it to make an iron tube.

古文：先为三接，接口炽红，竭力撞合。
现代文：枪管分三段，再把接口烧红，尽力锤打接合。
English: The barrel is divided into three sections, then the interface is red-hot, and the joints are hammered as hard as possible.

古文：合后以四棱钢锥如箸大者，透转其中，使极光净，则发药无阻滞。
现代文：接合之后，又用如同筷子一样粗的四棱钢锥插进枪管里来回转动，使枪管内壁极其圆滑，发射时才不会有阻滞。
English: After joining, a square steel cone, as thick as chopsticks, is inserted into the barrel and rotated back and forth, making the inner wall of the barrel extremely smooth, so that there is no blockage when firing.

古文：其本近身处，管亦大于末，所以容受火药。每铳约载配消一钱二分，铅铁弹子二钱。
现代文：枪管近人身的一端较粗，用来装载火药。每支铳一次大约装火药一钱二分，铅铁弹子二钱。
English: The end of the barrel closest to the body is thicker and is used to load gunpowder. One charge of gunpowder is about two cents, and two charges of lead and iron pellets are about two cents.

古文：发药不用信引，孔口通内处露消分厘，捶熟苎麻点火。
现代文：点火时不用引信，在枪管近人身一端通到枪膛的小孔上露出一点硝，用锤烂了的苎麻点火。
English: No fuse is needed for ignition. A bit of grit is exposed in a small hole near the end of the barrel, which leads to the chamber, and it is ignited with a hammered nettle.

古文：左手握铳对敌，右手发铁机逼苎火于消上，则一发而去。
现代文：左手握铳对准目标，右手扣动扳机将苎麻火逼到硝药上，一刹那就发射出去了。
English: With the left hand, hold the hammer and aim at the target. With the right hand, pull the trigger to force the nettle fire onto the gunpowder, and it will be fired out in an instant.

古文：鸟雀遇于三十步内者，羽肉皆粉碎，五十步外方有完形，若百步则铳力竭矣。
现代文：鸟雀在三十步之内中弹，会被打得稀巴烂，五十步以外中弹才能保存原形，到了一百步，火力就不及了。
English: If a bird finch is shot within thirty paces, it will be beaten to a pulp. If it is shot beyond fifty paces, it can only preserve its original shape. If it is shot at a hundred paces, it will not have enough firepower.

古文：鸟枪行远过二百步，制方仿佛鸟铳，而身长药多，亦皆倍此也。
现代文：鸟枪的射程超过二百步，制法跟鸟铳相似，但枪管的长度和装火药的量都增加了一倍。
English: The bird gun has a range of more than two hundred paces and is made in a similar way to the birdcage, but the length of the barrel and the amount of gunpowder have been doubled.

古文：万人敌。凡外郡小邑乘城却敌，有炮力不具者，即有空悬火炮而痴重难使者，则万人敌近制随宜可用，不必拘执一方也。
现代文：万人敌：用于边远小县城里守城御敌，有的没有炮，有的即使配有火炮也笨重难使，万人敌便是适合近距离作战的机动武器。
English: Million Man Enemy: It is used to defend against enemies in small towns in remote counties. Some do not have cannons, and some are cumbersome and difficult to use even if they are equipped with artillery. Million Man Enemy is a mobile weapon suitable for close-range combat.

古文：贯药安信而后，外以木架匡围，或有即用木桶而塑泥实其内郭者，其义亦同。
现代文：硝石和硫黄配合产生的火力，能使千军万马炸得血肉横飞。它的制法是：把中空的泥团晾干后，通过上边留出的小孔装满由硝和硫黄配成的火药，并由人灵活地增减和掺入毒火、神火等药料，压实并安上引信后，再用木框框住。
English: The firepower produced by the combination of saltpeter and sulfur can make thousands of soldiers fly. It is made by: after drying the hollow mud, filling the gunpowder made of saltpeter and sulfur through the small holes left on the top, and flexibly adding and subtracting and mixing poison fire, divine fire and other materials, compacting and attaching the fuse, and then framing it with a wooden frame.

古文：若泥团必用木匡，所以妨掷投先碎也。
现代文：也有在木桶里面糊泥并填实火药而造成的，道理是一样的。
English: There are also those caused by filling a wooden barrel with clay and filling it with gunpowder. The reason is the same.

古文：敌攻城时，燃灼引信，抛掷城下。
现代文：如果用泥团就一定要在泥团外加上木框以防止抛出去还没爆炸就破裂了。敌人攻城时，点燃引信，把万人敌抛掷到城下。
English: If you use a mud ball, be sure to add a wooden frame to the outside of the mud ball to prevent it from exploding. When the enemy attacks the city, light the fuse and throw the mortal enemy under the city.

古文：火力出腾，八面旋转。
现代文：这时，万人敌不断射出火力，而且四方八面地旋转起来。
English: At this time, the arch-enemy continued to fire, and rotated in all directions.

古文：旋向内时，则城墙抵信，不伤我兵。旋向外时，则敌人马皆无幸。
现代文：当它向内旋时，由于有城墙挡着，不会伤害自己人；当它向外旋时，敌军人马会大量伤亡。
English: When it turns inward, it will not hurt its own people because it is blocked by the city wall; when it turns outward, the enemy soldiers will suffer a large number of casualties.

古文：此为守城第一器。
现代文：这是守城的首要武器。
English: This is the primary weapon for defending the city.

古文：而能通火药之性、火器之方者，聪明由人。
现代文：凡能通晓火药性能和火器制法的人，都可以发挥自己的聪明才智。
English: Anyone who is familiar with the properties of gunpowder and the manufacturing methods of firearms can give full play to their ingenuity.

古文：作者不上十年，守土者留心可也。
现代文：这种武器发明还不到十年，负责守卫疆土的将士们都应密切关注其中的技巧原理呀！
English: This weapon was invented less than a decade ago, and soldiers responsible for defending the territory should pay close attention to the technical principles involved!

