古文：韩人攻宋，秦王大怒曰： 吾爱宋，与新城、阳晋同也。
现代文：韩珉为齐国攻打宋国，秦王大怒说： 我爱宋国，与爱新城、阳晋是一样的。
English: Han Xuan attacked Song for Qi, and the Qin king said angrily: I love Song, just as I love Xincheng and Yangjin.

古文：韩珉与我交，而攻我甚所爱，何也? 
现代文：韩珉同我交往，却攻打我非常喜欢的地方，为什么呢？ 
English: Han Zheng is in contact with me, but attacks a place I like very much. Why?

古文：苏秦为韩说秦王曰： 韩珉之攻宋，所以为王也。
现代文：苏秦为齐国游说秦王说： 韩珉攻打宋国，正是为了大王着想。
English: Su Qin lobbied for the State of Qi, and the King of Qin said: Han Yu attacked the State of Song, precisely for the sake of the Great King.

古文：以韩之强，辅之以宋，楚、魏必恐。恐，必西面事秦。
现代文：凭齐国的强大，再加上宋国的辅助，楚、魏两国一定惊慌，只要他们一害怕，就一定会到西面来侍奉秦国。
English: With the strength of Qi and the support of Song, Chu and Wei must have panicked. As long as they were afraid, they would have come to the west to serve Qin.

古文：王不折一兵，不杀一人，无事而割安邑，此韩珉之所以祷于秦也。 
现代文：大王不损一兵一卒，不杀一人，不经过战争就可以割取安邑，这是韩珉为秦国祈求的事。 
English: The great king does not harm a single soldier, does not kill a single person, and can take Amoy without a war. This is what Han Yu prayed for Qin.

古文：秦王曰： 吾固患韩之难知，一从一横，此其说何也? 
现代文：秦王说： 我本来就担心齐国的行动难以意料，一会儿合纵一会儿联横，你又这样说，为什么？ 
English: Qin Wang said: I was worried that Qi Guo's actions were hard to predict. One moment they are united, the next moment they are divided. You say this again, why?

古文：对曰： 天下固令韩可知也。
现代文：苏秦回答说： 天下诸侯本来使齐国可以理解了。
English: Su Qin replied: All the princes in the world have made Qi understandable.

古文：韩故已攻宋矣，其西面事秦，以万乘自辅；不西事秦，则宋地不安矣。
现代文：齐国原来已经攻占了宋国，假如他们到西面来服事秦国，就可以借助拥有万辆兵车的秦国辅助自己；不到西面服事秦国，那么宋地也不会安宁无事。
English: Qi had already conquered Song. If they went to the west to serve Qin, they could help themselves with the help of Qin, which had 10,000 chariots. If they did not go to the west to serve Qin, there would be no peace in Song.

古文：中国白头游敖之士，皆积智欲离秦、韩之交。伏轼结靷西驰者，未有一人言善韩者也；伏轼结靷东驰者，未有一人言善秦者也。
现代文：中原一带的白头说客，都处心积虑想离间秦、齐两国的邦交，那些伏在车前横木上，系好拉车皮带向西而来的说客，没有一个说应该亲近齐国的；另一些伏在车轼上，系好拉车皮带向东而去的说客，没有一个说应该亲近秦国的。
English: The white-haired lobbyists around the Central Plains are all engaged in deliberate efforts to sever the diplomatic relations between Qin and Qi. None of the lobbyists who prostrated themselves on the crossbeams of the car and pulled the car belt to the west said that they should be close to Qi; and none of the lobbyists who prostrated themselves on the axles of the car and pulled the car belt to the east said that they should be close to Qin.

古文：皆不欲韩、秦之合者何也?
现代文：他们都不想齐、秦两国联合，为什么？
English: They don't want the unification of Qi and Qin, why?

古文：则晋、楚智而韩、秦愚也。
现代文：这就是魏、楚两国聪明，而齐、秦两国太傻了。
English: This is because Wei and Chu were clever, while Qi and Qin were too stupid.

古文：晋、楚合，必伺韩、秦；韩、秦合，必图晋、楚。请以决事。 秦王曰： 善 。
现代文：魏、楚两国联合一定会窥采齐、秦两国的动静，齐、秦两国联合必然要图谋魏国、楚国，请您决断韩珉攻打宋国之事吧。 秦王说： 太好了。 
English: The union of Wei and Chu is bound to spy on the movements of Qi and Qin, and the union of Qi and Qin is bound to plot against Wei and Chu, so please resolve the issue of Han and Qi attacking Song. The king of Qin said, "That's great."

