古文：见善，修然必以自存也；见不善，愀然必以自省也。善在身，介然必以自好也；不善在身，菑然必以自恶也。
现代文：见到善良的行为，一定认真地检查自己是否有这种行为；见到不善的行为，一定要严肃地检讨自己；自己身上有了好的德行，就要坚定不移地珍视它；自己身上有不良的品行，就如会因此而被害似的痛恨自己。
English: If you see a good deed, you must seriously check whether you have such a deed; if you see a bad deed, you must seriously examine yourself; if you have a good virtue, you must unswervingly cherish it; if you have a bad character, you hate yourself as if you would be harmed by it.

古文：故非我而当者，吾师也；是我而当者，吾友也；谄谀我者，吾贼也。
现代文：所以，指出我的缺点而批评又中肯的人，就是我的老师；肯定我，而赞赏又恰当的人，就是我的朋友；谄媚我的人，就是害我的寇贼。
English: Therefore, the person who points out my shortcomings and criticizes and is pertinent is my teacher; the person who affirms me and appreciates and is appropriate is my friend; the person who flatters me is the thief who harms me.

古文：故君子隆师而亲友，以致恶其贼。
现代文：所以君子要尊重老师，亲近朋友，而极端痛恨那些谄媚自己的贼人。
English: Therefore, a gentleman should respect his teacher, be close to his friends, and extremely hate those thieves who flatter themselves.

古文：好善无厌，受谏而能诫，虽欲无进，得乎哉？
现代文：追求好的德行永远不满足，受到劝告能够警惕，这样即使不想进步，可能吗？
English: Is it possible to never be satisfied with the pursuit of good moral conduct, and to be alert when advised, even if you don't want to make progress?

古文：小人反是，致乱而恶人之非己也，致不肖而欲人之贤己也，心如虎狼、行如禽兽而又恶人之贼己也。
现代文：小人则与此相反，自己胡作非为，却痛恨别人批评自己；自己极其无能，却期望别人说自己贤能；自己心肠狠毒，行为如同禽兽，却又憎恨别人说妨害自己。
English: The villain, on the other hand, acts like a monster, but hates to be criticized by others; he is extremely incompetent, but expects others to say that he is virtuous; he is cruel at heart, acts like an animal, but hates others to say that he disturbs himself.

古文：谄谀者亲，谏争者疏，修正为笑，至忠为贼，虽欲无灭亡，得乎哉？《诗》曰： 噏噏呰呰，亦孔之哀。
现代文：他们亲近阿谀奉承自己的人，疏远直言规劝自己改正错误的人，把纠正自己错误的话当作讥笑自己，把极端忠诚的行为当作损害自己，这样的人即使不想灭亡，可能吗？《诗经》说： 胡乱吸取，乱加诋毁，实在是非常可悲啊。
English: Are such people possible, even if they do not want to perish? "The Book of Songs" says: "It is very sad to absorb and slander indiscriminately."

古文：谋之其臧，则具是违；谋之不臧，则具是依。 
现代文：本来计划做好事，结果却违反，本来计划不好，反而一一依从。 
English: The original plan was to do good things, but the result was a violation. The original plan was not good, but it was followed one by one.

古文：此之谓也。
现代文：就是说的这样的小人。
English: This is exactly what is happening.

古文：扁善之度，以治气养生则后彭祖，以修身自名则配尧、禹。
现代文：使人无往而不善的法则是：用调理血气来保养身体，那么自己的寿命会仅次于彭祖；用善行来洁身自好，那么自己的名声可与尧、禹媲美。
English: The rules that make people have nowhere to go but good are: use the regulation of blood and gas to maintain the body, then your life expectancy will be second only to Peng Zu; use good deeds to cleanse yourself, then your reputation can be comparable to Yu and Yu.

古文：宜于时通，利以处穷，礼信是也。
现代文：既适宜于用来处守显达的顺境，也有利于处守困窘的境遇，这全在于礼法和信义。
English: It is not only suitable for dealing with a prosperous situation, but also for dealing with a difficult situation. It all depends on etiquette and good faith.

古文：凡用血气、志意、知虑，由礼则治通，不由礼则勃乱提僈；食饮、衣服、居处、动静，由礼则和节，不由礼则触陷生疾；容貌、态度、进退、趋行，由礼则雅，不由礼则夷固僻违，庸众而野。
现代文：凡是使用血气、意志，智慧和思虑的时候，遵循礼法就通达顺利，不遵循礼义就产生谬误错乱，行为就会迟缓怠惰；在吃饭、穿衣、居处及活动的时候，遵循礼义的行为就会和谐适当，不遵循礼义就会触犯禁忌而生病；人的容貌、态度、进退、行走，遵循礼义就温雅可亲，不遵循礼义就显得傲慢、固执、邪僻，粗野。
English: Whenever one uses one's blood, will, wisdom, and thoughts, following etiquette will lead to success; not following etiquette will lead to fallacies and confusion, and behavior will be sluggish and lazy; when eating, dressing, living, and activities, following etiquette will be harmonious and appropriate, and not following etiquette will violate taboos and cause illness; people's appearance, attitude, advance and retreat, and walking, following etiquette will be gentle and amiable, and not following etiquette will be arrogant, stubborn, perverse, and uncouth.

古文：故人无礼则不生，事无礼则不成，国家无礼则不宁。
现代文：所以，人没有礼义就不能生存，做事情不讲礼义，事情就办不成，国家没有礼义就不能安宁。
English: Therefore, people cannot survive without propriety, things cannot be done without propriety, and the country cannot be peaceful without propriety.

古文：《诗》曰： 礼仪卒度，笑语卒获。 
现代文：《诗经》说： 礼仪完全符合法度，一言一笑完全得当。 
English: "The Book of Songs" says: The etiquette is completely in accordance with the law, and every word and smile is completely appropriate.

古文：此之谓也。
现代文：说的就是这种情况。
English: This is exactly what is happening.

古文：以善先人者谓之教，以善和人者谓之顺；以不善先人者谓之谄，以不善和人者谓之谀。
现代文：用善良的言行来引导别人的叫做教导，用善行去附和别人叫做顺应，用不良的言行引导别人叫做谄媚，用不好的言行去附和别人叫做阿谀。
English: To guide others with good words and deeds is called teaching, to follow others with good deeds is called compliance, to lead others with bad words and deeds is called flattery, and to follow others with bad words and deeds is called flattery.

古文：是是、非非谓之知，非是、是非谓之愚。
现代文：以是当是，以非当非，就叫做明智，以是为非，以非为是，就叫做愚蠢。
English: To be right or wrong is to be wise; to be wrong or right is to be foolish.

古文：伤良曰谗，害良曰贼。
现代文：用言论中伤善良，就叫做谗言，用言论陷害良士，就叫做虐害。
English: Using speech to defame the virtuous is called slander, and using speech to frame the virtuous is called abuse.

古文：是谓是，非谓非曰直。
现代文：以是为是，以非为非，就是正直。
English: To be right or wrong is to be honest.

古文：窃货曰盗，匿行曰诈，易言曰诞。趣舍无定谓之无常。保利弃义谓之至贼。
现代文：窃取财物，就叫做偷窃，隐瞒自己的行为，就叫做欺骗，信口开河，就叫做虚妄，对追求是进取还是放弃犹豫不决，就叫做无常，为了保住利益而背信弃义，就叫做大贼。
English: Stealing property is called theft, concealing one's actions is called deception, telling lies is called falsehood, being indecisive about whether to pursue or give up is called impermanence, and betraying one's interests in order to keep them is called a big thief.

古文：多闻曰博，少闻曰浅。多见曰闲，少见曰陋。
现代文：听到的事情多叫做广博，听到的事情少叫做浅薄，见多识广叫做僴，见识少叫做孤陋寡闻。
English: Hearing more things is called broad, hearing less things is called shallow, seeing more and knowing more is called deaf, seeing less is called deaf and dumb.

古文：难进曰偍，易忘曰漏。
现代文：难于进取叫做废弛，学过的经常遗忘叫做遗漏。
English: Difficult to advance is called waste, and frequent forgetting of what has been learned is called omission.

古文：少而理曰治，多而乱曰秏。
现代文：事情少但井井有条叫做治理、管理，事情多但繁多而杂乱无章叫做昏乱不明。
English: Few things but orderly is called governance, management, many things but complex and chaotic is called confusion.

古文：治气养心之术：血气刚强，则柔之以调和；知虑渐深，则一之以易良；勇胆猛戾，则辅之以道顺；齐给便利，则节之以动止；狭隘褊小，则廓之以广大；卑湿重迟贪利，则抗之以高志；庸众驽散，则刦之以师友；怠慢僄弃，则炤之以祸灾；愚款端悫，则合之以礼乐，通之以思索。
现代文：调理血气，修养思想的方法是：对于血气刚强的人，就用心平气和来调和他；对于思想深沉而不明朗的人，就用坦率善良来同化他；对于勇猛乖张的人，就用疏导的方式辅助他；对于性急嘴快的人，就用动静相辅相成的方式来节制他；对于心胸狭窄的人，就用宽宏大量来开导他；对于卑下迟钝、贪图小利的人，就用高尚的志向来提点他；对于庸俗散漫的人，就用良师益友来管教他；对于怠慢轻薄、自暴自弃的人，就用将会招致灾祸来警醒他；对于愚钝朴实、端庄拘谨的人，就用礼仪音乐来协调他，用深思熟虑来开导他。
English: The methods for tempering one's temperament and cultivating one's thoughts are as follows: for a person with a strong temperament, temper him with equanimity of mind; for a person with a deep and unclear mind, assimilate him with frankness and kindness; for a courageous and perverse person, assist him with the method of distraction; for a person with a quick tongue, restrain him with the method of movement and stillness complementing each other; for a narrow-minded person, enlighten him with magnanimity; for a lowly, dull and greedy person, point him with lofty aspirations; for a vulgar and rambling person, discipline him with a good teacher and friend;

古文：凡治气养心之术，莫径由礼，莫要得师，莫神一好。
现代文：凡是调理血气、修养思想的方法，没有比遵循礼义更直接的了，没有比得到好的老师的指导更重要的了，没有什么比专心一致更神妙的了。
English: Of all the methods for tempering one's temperament and cultivating one's thoughts, none is more direct than following etiquette, none is more important than receiving guidance from a good teacher, and none is more miraculous than concentration and unity.

古文：夫是之谓治气养心之术也。
现代文：这就是所说的调理血气、修养思想的方法。
English: This is the so-called method of regulating blood and qi and cultivating thoughts.

古文：志意修则骄富贵，道义重则轻王公，内省而外物轻矣。
现代文：志向远大就能傲视富贵之人，把道义看得重就能藐视王公贵子；内心反省注重了，那么身外之物就微不足道了。
English: If one's aspiration is lofty, one can look down on the rich and noble; if one attaches importance to morality, one can despise princes and noblemen; if one's inner reflection is focused, then the things outside one's body become insignificant.

古文：传曰： 君子役物，小人役于物。 
现代文：古书上说： 君子役使外物，小人被外物所役使。 
English: An ancient book says: A gentleman is served by a foreign object; a small man is served by a foreign object.

古文：此之谓矣。
现代文：就是说的这个道理啊。
English: That's a good point.

古文：身劳而心安，为之；利少而义多，为之。事乱君而通，不如事穷君而顺焉。
现代文：身体劳累而心安理得的事，就做它；利益少而道义多的事，就做它；侍奉昏乱的君主而显贵，不如侍奉陷于困境的君主而顺行道义。
English: It is better to do what is physically tiring, but mentally satisfying; it is better to do what is less profitable, but more moral; it is better to serve a confused monarch, but honorable, than to serve a troubled monarch, but moral.

古文：故良农不为水旱不耕，良贾不为折阅不市，士君子不为贫穷怠乎道。
现代文：所以优秀的农夫不因为遭到水灾旱灾就不耕种，优秀的商人不因为亏损而不做买卖，有志操和学问的人不因为贫穷困厄而怠慢道义。
English: Therefore, good farmers do not stop farming because of floods and droughts, good businessmen do not stop trading because of losses, and people with ambition and learning do not neglect morality because of poverty and hardship.

古文：体恭敬而心忠信，术礼义而情爱人，横行天下，虽困四夷，人莫不贵。劳苦之事则争先，饶乐之事则能让，端悫诚信，拘守而详，横行天下，虽困四夷，人莫不任。
现代文：外貌恭敬，内心忠诚，遵循礼义并且性情仁爱，这样的人走遍天下，即使困顿在边远偏僻的地区，也没有人不敬重他的；劳累辛苦的事抢先去做，有利可图、享乐的事却能让给别人，诚实守信，谨守法度而又明察事理，这样的人走遍天下，即使困顿在边远地区，也没有人不信任他的。
English: Respectful in appearance, loyal in heart, observant of etiquette and humane in disposition, such a person travels all over the world, even if he is stranded in a remote and isolated area, no one does not respect him; hard work is done ahead of time, profitable and enjoyable things can be given to others, honest and trustworthy, law-abiding and prudent, such a person travels all over the world, even if he is stranded in a remote area, no one does not trust him.

古文：体倨固而心执诈，术顺墨而精杂污，横行天下，虽达四方，人莫不贱。劳苦之事则偷儒转脱，饶乐之事则佞兑而不曲，辟违而不悫，程役而不录，横行天下，虽达四方，人莫不弃。
现代文：外表傲慢固执，内心阴险狡诈，滥用慎到和墨翟的学说，并且性情肮脏，这样的人走遍天下，即使显贵四方，没有人不轻视他的；遇到劳累辛苦的事就逃避，遇到有利可图、得以享乐的事就用花言巧语地谄媚，毫不谦让地迅速抢夺，邪僻恶劣又不忠厚，轻贱而不善良，这样的人走遍天下，即使显贵四方，没有人是不摒弃他的。
English: Outwardly arrogant and obstinate, inwardly insidious and cunning, abusing the teachings of prudence and prudence, and having a filthy disposition, such a person travels all over the world, even if he is in high places, no one does not despise him; if he encounters hard work, he will escape; if he encounters profitable and enjoyable things, he will use rhetoric to flatter; if he encounters immodest things, he will quickly snatch them; if he is wicked and unfaithful, and if he is lowly and not kind, no one does not abandon him.

古文：行而供冀，非渍淖也；行而俯项，非击戾也；偶视而先俯，非恐惧也。
现代文：走路的时候小心谨慎，不是因为怕陷于泥沼；走路的时候低头俯视，不是因为怕碰撞着什么；与别人对视而先低下头，不是因为惧怕对方。
English: When walking, be cautious, not because you are afraid of getting stuck in the mud; when walking, look down, not because you are afraid of bumping into something; when looking at others, look down first, not because you are afraid of the other person.

古文：然夫士欲独修其身，不以得罪于比俗之人也。
现代文：读书人这样做，只是想独自修养身心，不是怕得罪世俗中人。
English: Readers do this because they want to cultivate their mind and body on their own, not because they are afraid of offending worldly people.

古文：夫骥一日而千里，驽马十驾则亦及之矣。
现代文：千里马一天能奔跑千里，劣马跑十天也能够达到。
English: A good horse can run a thousand miles in a day, but a bad horse can run ten days.

古文：将以穷无穷，逐无极与？其折骨绝筋，终身不可以相及也。
现代文：但是，如果用有限的气力要去穷尽无尽的路途，追赶起来没完没了，那么即使劣马跑断了骨头，走断了脚筋，一辈子也不能赶上千里马啊！
English: However, if you use your limited strength to go on an endless journey, and the pursuit is endless, then even if a bad horse breaks a bone and a hamstring, you can't catch up with a thousand horses for the rest of your life!

古文：将有所止之，则千里虽远，亦或迟或速、或先或后，胡为乎其不可以相及也？
现代文：如果有个终点，那么千里的路程虽然很遥远，也不过是快点、慢点，早点、晚点而已，怎么不能到达目的地呢？
English: If there is an end point, then although the journey of a thousand miles is very far, it is just a matter of faster, slower, earlier, later, so how can we not reach the destination?

古文：不识步道者，将以穷无穷、逐无极与？
现代文：不知道走小路的人，是用有限的力量去追逐那无限的目标呢？
English: Don't you know that those who walk on the narrow path use their limited strength to pursue the infinite goal?

古文：意亦有所止之与？
现代文：还是也有个一定的范围和止境呢？
English: Or does it also have a certain scope and limit?

古文：夫坚白、同异、有厚无厚之察，非不察也，然而君子不辩，止之也；倚魁之行，非不难也，然而君子不行，止之也。
现代文：对那些 坚白 、 同异 、 有厚无厚 等命题的考察、辨析，不是不明察，然而君子不去辩论它们，是因为有所节制啊。那些怪异的行为，并不是不难做到，但是君子并不去做，也是因为有所节制啊。
English: It is not unobservable to examine and analyze the propositions of firmness, sameness, thickness, etc. However, gentlemen do not debate them because they are restrained. Those strange behaviors are not easy to do, but gentlemen do not do it, also because they are restrained.

古文：故学曰： 迟，彼止而待我，我行而就之，则亦或迟或速、或先或后，胡为乎其不可以同至也？ 
现代文：所以学者说： 当别人停下来等待我的时候，我就努力赶上去，这样或慢或快，或早或晚，怎么不能一同到达目的地呢？ 
English: So the scholar said: When others stop and wait for me, I try to catch up, so slowly or quickly, sooner or later, how can we not reach the destination together?

古文：故跬步而不休，跛鳖千里；累土而不辍，丘山崇成。厌其源，开其渎，江河可竭；一进一退，一左一右，六骥不致。
现代文：所以只要一步一步地走个不停，那么即使瘸了腿的甲鱼也能走千里；土堆积起来没完，山丘也能够堆成；堵塞水源，开通沟渠，即使是长江、黄河也会枯竭；一会儿前进，一会儿后退，一会儿向左，一会儿向右，就是六匹千里马拉车也不能到达目的地。
English: Therefore, as long as you keep walking step by step, even a lame turtle can walk thousands of miles; the soil piles up endlessly, hills can also be piled up; block water sources, open ditches, even the Yangtze River and the Yellow River will dry up; advance for a while, retreat for a while, turn left for a while, turn right for a while, even six-horse chariots cannot reach their destination.

古文：彼人之才性之相县也，岂若跛鳖之与六骥足哉？
现代文：至于人的资质，即使相距悬殊，难道会像瘸了腿的甲鱼和六匹千里马那样悬殊吗？
English: As for people's qualifications, even if they are very different, will they be as different as a lame turtle and six horses?

古文：然而跛鳖致之，六骥不致，是无它故焉，或为之，或不为尔。
现代文：然而瘸了腿的甲鱼能够到达目的地，六匹千里马拉的车却不能到达，这并没有其他的原因，只不过是有的去做，有的不去做罢了！
English: However, a lame turtle can reach its destination, but a six-horse chariot can't. There's no other reason for this, it's just that some do and some don't!

古文：道虽迩，不行不至；事虽小，不为不成。
现代文：路程即使很近，但如果不走就不能到达；事情虽然很小，但不做就不能完成。
English: Even if the distance is very close, if you don't walk, you can't get there; things are small, but if you don't do them, you can't complete them.

古文：其为人也多暇日者，其出人不远矣。
现代文：那些无所事事的人，他们是不可能超过别人的。
English: Those who don't do anything, they can't be better than others.

古文：好法而行，士也；笃志而体，君子也；齐明而不竭，圣人也。
现代文：遵守法度且尽力遵行的，是学士；意志坚定又身体力行的，是君子；思虑敏捷而智慧又永不枯竭的，是圣人。
English: He is a scholar who obeys the law and does his best; he is a gentleman who is strong-willed and hard-working; he is a saint who is quick-witted and wise and never exhausted.

古文：人无法，则伥伥然；有法而无志其义，则渠渠然；依乎法而又深其类，然后温温然。
现代文：人没有礼法，就会感到迷惘、无所适从；有了礼法，却不知其意义，就会局促不安；遵循礼法而又深明事类，精确把握它的具体规则，然后才能不慌不忙、得心应手。
English: Without etiquette, people will feel confused and bewildered; with etiquette, but do not know its meaning, will be cramped and uneasy; follow etiquette and have a deep understanding of things, accurately grasp its specific rules, and then be able to be unhurried and handy.

古文：礼者，所以正身也；师者所以正礼也。
现代文：礼法，是用来端正自身的行为的；老师，是用来正确阐明礼法的。
English: The etiquette is used to correct one's own behavior; the teacher is used to correctly explain the etiquette.

古文：无礼何以正身？
现代文：没有礼法，怎么能够端正身心呢？
English: Without etiquette, how can the mind and body be right?

古文：无师，吾安知礼之为是也？
现代文：没有老师，又怎么能知道礼义那种事正确的呢？
English: Without a teacher, how can you know what is right and what is not?

古文：礼然而然，则是情安礼也；师云而云，则是知若师也。
现代文：礼法怎样规定就怎样去做，这就是性情习惯于按照礼的要求去做；老师怎么说就怎么说，这就是理智顺从老师。
English: To do as the etiquette prescribes is the disposition to do as the etiquette requires; to say what the teacher says is the reason to obey the teacher.

古文：情安礼，知若师，则是圣人也。
现代文：性情习惯于遵礼而行，理智顺从老师，那就是圣人了。
English: The disposition is accustomed to obeying, and the reason obeys the teacher, that is the saint.

古文：故非礼，是无法也；非师，是无师也。
现代文：所以，违背了礼法，就是无视法度；违背了老师，就是无视老师。
English: Therefore, to violate the etiquette is to ignore the law; to violate the teacher is to ignore the teacher.

古文：不是师法而好自用，譬之是犹以盲辨色，以聋辨声也，舍乱妄无为也。
现代文：不遵照老师的教导，违背礼法，喜欢自以为是，这就好像让盲人去分辨颜色，让聋子去分辨声音，除了胡说妄为是不会干出什么好事来的。
English: Disobeying the teacher's instruction, violating the etiquette, and enjoying self-righteousness is like letting a blind person distinguish colors and a deaf person distinguish sounds. It will not do any good except for nonsense.

古文：故学也者，礼法也。夫师，以身为正仪而贵自安者也。
现代文：所以，学习就是学礼法，老师也要以身作则，而且又要安心于这样做。
English: Therefore, learning is learning etiquette, teachers should also lead by example, and they should be comfortable doing so.

古文：《诗》云： 不识不知，顺帝之则。 
现代文：《诗经》说： 不知不觉，顺应天帝的法则。 
English: "The Book of Songs" says: Unconsciously, we conform to the laws of the heavenly emperor.

古文：此之谓也。
现代文：就是说的这种情况。
English: This is exactly what is happening.

古文：端悫顺弟，则可谓善少者矣；加好学逊敏焉，则有钧无上，可以为君子者矣。
现代文：端正谨慎而顺从兄长，就可以称为好少年了；如果还好学上进，谦虚敏捷，那就只有和他相等的人而没有超过他的人了，这样的人可以称为君子了。
English: If he is well-behaved, prudent, and obedient to his elder brother, he can be called a good boy; if he is a good student, modest, and quick-witted, he can be called a gentleman.

古文：偷儒惮事，无廉耻而嗜乎饮食，则可谓恶少者矣；加惕悍而不顺，险贼而不弟焉，则可谓不详少者矣，虽陷刑戮可也。
现代文：苟且偷安，懒惰怕事，没有廉耻而又贪图吃喝，就可以称为坏少年了；如果还放荡凶暴，不顺从长者，险恶害人，这就叫做凶险的少年了，这样的人即使遭受刑杀，也毫不可惜。
English: If he is a peace-stealer, lazy, afraid of things, shameless, and greedy for food and drink, he can be called a bad boy; if he is also violent, disobedient to elders, and dangerous, he is called a dangerous boy, and such a person is not to be pitied even if he is tortured and killed.

古文：老老而壮者归焉，不穷穷而通者积焉，行乎冥冥而施乎无报，而贤不肖一焉。
现代文：尊敬老年人，那么壮年人也就来归附了；不使固陋无知的人困窘，那么通达事理的人也就汇聚来了；在暗中做好事而施舍给无力报答的人，那么贤能的人和无能的人都会聚拢来了。
English: Honour the aged, and the aged will be won over; do not confound the brutish and the ignorant, and the wise will be won over; do good in secret, and give to those who cannot repay you, and both the wise and the foolish will be won over.

古文：人有此三行，虽有大过，天其不遂乎？
现代文：人有了这三种德行，即使有大的过失，老天恐怕也不会毁灭他的吧！
English: If a person has these three virtues, even if he makes a big mistake, I'm afraid God won't destroy him!

古文：君子之求利也略，其远害也早，其避辱也惧，其行道理也勇。
现代文：君子对于求取利益是漫不经心的，他对于避开祸害是早作准备的，他对于避免耻辱是诚惶诚恐的，他对于奉行道义是勇往直前的。
English: A gentleman is careless in seeking profit, he is prepared in advance to avoid disaster, he is sincere in avoiding disgrace, and he is courageous in pursuing morality.

古文：君子贫穷而志广，富贵而体恭，安燕而血气不惰，劳勌而容貌不枯，怒不过夺，喜不过予。
现代文：即使身处贫困，君子的志向也是远大的；即使身处富贵，体态容貌却非常恭敬；即使生活安逸，但精神并不松懈懒惰；即使劳累疲乏，但容貌依然端庄；发怒的时候也不过份地处罚人，高兴时也不过份地奖赏人。
English: Even in poverty, a gentleman's aspirations are lofty; even in wealth, his physique and appearance are very respectful; even if his life is comfortable, his spirit is not lax and lazy; even if he is tired and exhausted, his appearance is still dignified; when he is angry, he does not punish people excessively, and when he is happy, he does not reward people excessively.

古文：君子贫穷而志广，隆仁也；富贵而体恭，杀势也；安燕而血气不惰，柬理也；劳勌而容貌不枯，好交也；怒不过夺，喜不过予，是法胜私也。
现代文：君子虽然受到贫穷，但志向是远大，这是因为他要尊重仁德；虽然得到富贵，可是容貌是谦恭的，这是因为他不依势作威；虽然安逸，但精神并不松懈懒惰，这是因为他明通道理；虽然身体劳累，但容貌依然端庄，这是因为他爱好礼仪，注重礼节；发怒时、高兴时的赏罚不过度，这是因为礼法战胜了私情。
English: Although the gentleman is poor, his aspiration is lofty, because he wants to respect benevolence; although he is rich, his appearance is humble, because he does not rely on authority; although he is comfortable, his spirit is not slack and lazy, because he understands the truth; although he is physically tired, his appearance is still dignified, because he likes etiquette and pays attention to etiquette; when he is angry or happy, he does not reward or punish excessively, because etiquette overcomes personal feelings.

古文：《书》曰： 无有作好，遵王之道。无有作恶，遵王之路。 
现代文：《尚书》说： 不要有所偏好，要循古代圣王的正道；不要有所偏恶，遵循古代圣王的正路。 
English: "Shangshu" said: Do not have any preference, but follow the right path of the ancient holy kings; do not have any deviation, but follow the right path of the ancient holy kings.

古文：此言君子之能以公义胜私欲也。
现代文：就说的是君子能用公理正义战胜个人的欲望。
English: It means that a gentleman can use justice and fairness to overcome personal desires.

