古文：十有二年春，王三月庚午，日有食之。
现代文：十二年春季，周历三月庚午日，有日食。
English: In the spring of the twelfth year, in the third month of the lunar calendar, there was a solar eclipse.

古文：夏，楚人灭黄。
现代文：夏季，楚国灭掉黄国。
English: In the summer, Chu wiped out Huang.

古文：秋七月。
现代文：秋季七月，无事。
English: Autumn in July.

古文：冬十有二月丁丑，陈侯杵臼卒。
现代文：冬季十二月丁丑日，陈侯杵臼去世。
English: In the winter of December, on the day of Dingwu, Chen Houyu passed away.

古文：十二年春，诸侯城卫楚丘之郛，惧狄难也。
现代文：十二年春季，诸侯在卫国的楚丘建筑外城，这是因为担心狄人来犯。
English: In the spring of the twelfth year, the lords built the outer city of Chuqiu in the defense of the country, because they were afraid of the Di people.

古文：黄人恃诸侯之睦于齐也，不共楚职，曰： 自郢及我九百里，焉能害我？ 
现代文：黄人依靠诸侯和齐国和睦，不向楚国进贡，说： 从郢都到我国有九百里，楚国哪能危害我国？ 
English: The people of Huang relied on the princes to make peace with the state of Qi and not to pay tribute to the state of Chu. They said, "There are nine hundred miles from the capital of Shandong to our country. How can the state of Chu harm our country?

古文：夏，楚灭黄。
现代文：夏季，楚国就灭亡了黄国。
English: In the summer, the State of Chu was defeated by the State of Huang.

古文：王以戎难故，讨王子带。
现代文：周襄王由于戎人骚扰的缘故，讨伐王子带。
English: King Zhou Xiang, because of the harassment of the soldiers, attacked the prince's belt.

古文：秋，王子带奔齐。
现代文：秋季，王子带逃亡到齐国。
English: In autumn, the prince and his retinue fled to Qi.

古文：冬，齐侯使管夷吾平戎于王，使隰朋平戎于晋。
现代文：冬季，齐桓公派遣管仲让戎人和周襄王讲和，派隰朋让戎人和晋国讲和。
English: In the winter, Lord Qi Huan dispatched Guanzhong to make peace between the soldiers and King Zhou Xiang, and sent Yu Peng to make peace between the soldiers and Jin.

古文：王以上卿之礼飨管仲，管仲辞曰： 臣，贱有司也，有天子之二守国、高在。若节春秋，来承王命，何以礼焉？
现代文：周襄王以上卿的礼节设宴招待管仲。管仲辞谢说： 陪臣是低贱的官员。现在有天子所任命的国氏、高氏在那里，如果他们按春秋两季接受天子的命令，又用什么礼节来待他们呢？
English: King Zhou Xiang hosted a banquet for Guanzhong with the etiquette of a nobleman. Guanzhong said, "A vassal is a low-ranking official. Now there are Guozhi and Gaozhi appointed by the Son of Heaven. If they accept the order of the Son of God in the spring and autumn, what kind of etiquette should be used to treat them?

古文：陪臣敢辞。 
现代文：陪臣谨请辞谢。 
English: I'd like to thank you for your resignation.

古文：王曰： 舅氏，余嘉乃勋，应乃懿德，谓督不忘。
现代文：天子说： 舅父，我赞美你的功勋，接受你的美德，这可以说是深厚而不能忘记的。
English: Heavenly Son said: Uncle, I praise your merits and accept your virtues, which can be said to be profound and unforgettable.

古文：往践乃职，无逆朕命。 
现代文：去执行你的职务吧，不要违抗我的命令！ 
English: Go do your duty, don't disobey my orders!

古文：管仲受下卿之礼而还。
现代文：管仲最终还是接受了下卿的礼节而回国。
English: In the end, Guanzhong accepted the courtesy of the Lord and returned to China.

古文：君子曰： 管氏之世祀也宜哉！
现代文：君子说： 管氏世世代代受到祭祀是多么恰当啊！
English: The nobleman said, "How appropriate that the Guan family has been worshipped for generations!"

古文：让不忘其上。
现代文：谦让而不忘记爵位比他高的上卿。
English: He humbly concedes without forgetting that his superior is a high-ranking nobleman.

古文：《诗》曰： 恺悌君子，神所劳矣。  
现代文：《诗》说： 和蔼平易的君子，就是神明所保佑的了。  
English: "Poetry" says: A gentle and easy-going gentleman is blessed by the gods.

