古文：◎礼九
现代文：礼九
English: Li Jiu

古文：天子纳后仪皇太子纳妃仪亲王婚礼公主婚礼品官婚礼庶人婚礼皇帝视学仪经筵日讲东宫出阁讲学仪诸王读书仪
现代文：天子纳后仪皇太子纳妃仪亲王婚礼公主婚礼品官婚礼庶人婚礼皇帝视学仪经筵日讲东宫出阁讲学仪诸王读书仪
English: The Heavenly Son, the Empress Dowager, the Crown Prince, the Crown Princess, the Prince's wedding, the Princess' wedding, the Courtier's wedding, the Commoner's wedding, the Emperor's wedding, the Viewing Ceremony, the Sermon on the Mount, the Eastern Palace, the Lecture, the Kings' reading ceremony

古文：天子纳后仪
现代文：天子纳后仪
English: The divine child, Na Hou Yi

古文：婚礼有六，天子惟无亲迎礼。
现代文：婚礼有六道程序，天子只是没有亲迎礼。
English: There are six procedures for a wedding, but there is no personal greeting.

古文：汉、晋以来，皆遣使持节奉迎，其礼物仪文，各以时损益。
现代文：汉、普以来，都派遣使者持节恭迎，它的礼物礼仪形式，各按时代增减。
English: Since the Han Dynasty and the Pu Dynasty, emissaries have been dispatched to extend greetings on the festival, and the form of gift etiquette has increased and decreased according to the times.

古文：明兴，诸帝皆即位后行册立礼。
现代文：明代建立，众皇帝都在即位后行册立礼。
English: It was established in the Ming Dynasty, and all emperors performed the rite after their enthronement.

古文：正统七年，英宗大婚，始定仪注。
现代文：正统七年，英宗举行大婚，纔固定仪节制度。
English: In the seventh year of orthodoxy, Emperor Yingzong held a grand wedding and established a fixed ceremony system.

古文：凡纳采问名，前期择日，遣官告天地宗庙。
现代文：共有纳采问名、前期择日，派遣官员祭告天地宗庙等仪节。
English: In total, officials were dispatched to inquire about the name, select the date in the early stage, and announce the heaven and earth ancestral temple and other ceremonial festivals.

古文：至期，设御座、制案、节案、卤簿、彩舆、中和大乐如仪。
现代文：到了礼期，按照礼仪设御座、制案、节案、卤簿、彩舆、中和大乐。
English: When it comes to the ceremonial period, according to the etiquette, the throne, the system, the section, the book, the color, the middle and the big music are set up.

古文：礼部陈礼物于丹陛上及文楼下。
现代文：礼部在台阶上以及文楼下陈放礼物。
English: The Ministry of Ceremonies displayed gifts on the steps and under the library.

古文：质明，皇帝冕服升座，百官朝服行礼讫，各就位。
现代文：天刚亮，皇帝穿冕服登帝座，百官穿朝服行完礼，各自到自己的位置。
English: At first light, the emperor, dressed in his coronation robes, ascended the throne, and the hundreds of officials, dressed in their imperial robes, bowed their heads and went to their respective places.

古文：正副使朝服四拜，执事举制案、节案，由中门出，礼物随之，俱置丹陛中道。
现代文：正副使穿朝服行四拜礼，主事人举制案、节案，由中门出去，礼物也相随，都放在丹陛中道。
English: The emperor and empress, wearing imperial robes, performed four prostrations, and the host went out from the middle gate with the formal and ceremonial motions, followed by the gifts, all of which were placed in the middle aisle of the hall.

古文：传制官宣制曰： 兹选某官某女为皇后，命卿等持节行纳采问名礼。 
现代文：传制官宣读制命说： 现在选某官某女为皇后，命令你等持节举行纳采问名礼。 
English: The production officer read out the production order and said: Now choose a certain official and a certain woman to be the queen, and order you to hold the festival and hold the ceremony.

古文：正副使四拜，驾兴。
现代文：正副使者拜四拜，皇帝起身。
English: The emissaries bowed four times, and the emperor stood up.

古文：举制、节案由奉天门中门出。
现代文：举着制案、节案由奉天门中门出去。
English: Holding up the motion, the motion went out from the middle gate of the Mingtian Gate.

古文：正副使取节及制书置彩舆中，仪仗大乐前导，出大明门。
现代文：正副使者取节以及制书放置在彩舆中，仪仗大乐在前引导，出大明门。
English: The emissaries and deputy emissaries took the festival and the book-making and placed them in the color circle, and the ceremony was conducted in front of them, leading to a big bright gate.

古文：释朝服，乘马行，诣皇后第。
现代文：脱下朝服，乘马出行，到皇后家宅第。
English: Take off the morning dress, travel by horse, go to the queen's house.

古文：第中设使者幕次于大门外左，南向，设香案于正堂，设制、节案于南，别设案于北。
现代文：在宅第大门外左边搭起使者帐幕，面向南，在正堂设香案，在南面设制案、节案，另在北面设案。
English: An envoy tent was set up on the left side outside the first gate of the house, facing south. Incense was set up in the main hall, while in the south there was a production tent and a festival tent, and in the north there was another tent.

古文：使者至，引礼导入幕次，执事官陈礼物于正堂。
现代文：使者到来，引礼人引导进入帏帐，主事官在正堂陈列礼物。
English: The messenger arrives, the usher leads the way to the register, and the officiant displays the gifts in the main hall.

古文：使者出次，奉制书于案。
现代文：使者出帏帐，捧着制书放于案上。
English: The envoy took out his cheque book and put it on the table, holding the book.

古文：礼官先入，立于东；主婚朝服出，立于西。
现代文：礼官先进入，站在东面；主婚人穿朝服出来，站在西面。
English: The etiquette officer enters first and stands on the east side; the bride and groom come out in their court attire and stand on the west side.

古文：礼官曰： 奉制建后，遣使行纳采问名礼。 
现代文：礼官说： 奉制命立皇后，派遣使者行纳采问名的礼仪。 
English: The etiquette officer said, "I hereby order you to appoint a queen and send an emissary to perform the etiquette of accepting the name."

古文：引主婚者出迎。
现代文：引导主婚的人出来迎接。
English: Guide the bride and groom out to greet them.

古文：使者捧制书及节，主婚者随至堂，置制书及节于案。
现代文：使者捧着制书以及符节，主婚人随着到堂上，在案上放置制书以及符节。
English: The messenger holds the book and the rune, and the bride and groom follow him into the hall and place the book and the rune on the case.

古文：正副使分立案左右。
现代文：正副使分别站立在案左右。
English: The principal and deputy commissioners stand separately to the right and left of the case.

古文：主婚者四拜，诣案前跪。
现代文：主婚人拜四拜，到案前跪下。
English: The bride and groom bow four times and kneel before the hearse.

古文：正使取纳采制，宣曰： 朕承天序，钦绍鸿图。
现代文：正使取出纳采制命，宣读说： 朕继承帝位，恭敬地承继宏伟的基业。
English: The imperial edict was read out, saying: "I am the heir to the throne, and I will respectfully carry on the great legacy."

古文：经国之道，正家为本。
现代文：治国的方法，使家庭关系正常有序是根本。
English: The method of governing the country, making family relations normal and orderly, is fundamental.

古文：夫妇之伦，乾坤之义，实以相宗祀之敬，协奉养之诚，所资惟重。
现代文：夫妇的伦理，帝后义理，实在是增加对祖宗祭祀的敬意，协和奉养的真诚，所依恃的作用十分重大。
English: The couple's ethics, the empress's ethics, are really to increase the respect for the ancestor's sacrifice, the sincerity of the harmony and upbringing, and the role of the attachment is very important.

古文：祗遵圣母皇太后命，遣使持节，以礼采择。 
现代文：恭敬地遵奉圣母皇太后的命令，派遣使者手持符节，按礼仪选取皇后。 
English: Respectfully obeying the order of the Holy Mother Empress Dowager, they sent an emissary, holding a rune, to select the empress according to the etiquette.

古文：宣讫，授主婚者。
现代文：宣读完毕，交给主婚人。
English: Once it has been read out, it is handed to the bride and groom.

古文：主婚者授执事者，置于北案上稍左。
现代文：主婚人交给执事者，放在北案上稍左的地方。
English: The bride and groom give it to the officiant and place it on the north case, slightly to the left.

古文：副使取问名制，宣曰： 朕惟夫妇之道，大伦之本。
现代文：副使取出问名的制命，宣读说： 朕认为夫妇的道义，是大伦的根本。
English: The deputy envoy took out the order to ask for names and read it out, saying: "I believe that the morality of the couple is the foundation of Dalian.

古文：正位乎内，必资名家。
现代文：在内端正其位；必须依恃有名望的家庭。
English: To fit in at home; must be related to a prestigious family.

古文：特遣使持节以礼问名，尚伫来闻。 
现代文：特此派遣使者持节按礼问名，选期盼来报。 
English: Envoys are hereby dispatched to report to you on the occasion of the festival according to the etiquette of asking for names and selecting expectations.

古文：宣讫，授如前，置案上稍右。
现代文：宣读完毕，如前面所述的礼仪放在案上稍靠右的地方。
English: When the reading is over, the rite, as described above, is placed slightly to the right of the document.

古文：主婚者俯伏，兴。
现代文：主婚人俯伏，起身。
English: The bride and groom prostrate themselves and stand up.

古文：执事举表案，以表授主婚者。
现代文：孰事者举着表案，把表交给主婚人。
English: The officiant holds up the form and hands it to the bride and groom.

古文：主婚者跪授正使，表曰： 臣某，伏承嘉命。
现代文：主婚人跪着交给正使，表上说： 臣某，恭敬地承接美好的命令。
English: Kneeling, the husband-to-be handed it to the chief envoy, saying, "Dear vassal, respectfully accept this fine order.

古文：正使某官某等，重宣制诏，问臣名族。
现代文：正使某官某等，重宣皇帝命令，询问臣名姓家族。
English: A certain official, etc., is re-announcing the emperor's order to inquire about the vassal's name and family.

古文：臣女，臣夫妇所生，先臣某官某之曾孙，先臣某官某之孙，先臣某官某之外孙。
现代文：臣的女儿，是臣夫妇所生，先臣某官某的曾孙，先臣某官某的孙女，先臣某官某的外孙。
English: A vassal's daughter is born to a vassal couple, a great-grandchild of a vassal, a granddaughter of a vassal, and a grandson of a vassal.

古文：臣女今年若干，谨具奏闻。 
现代文：臣的女儿现在年龄若干，恭敬地具文奏报。 
English: The minister's daughter, now a few years older, respectfully holds up a copy of the newspaper.

古文：主婚者俯伏，兴，退四拜。
现代文：主婚人俯伏，起身，退后行四拜礼。
English: The bride and groom prostrate themselves, stand up, step back and bow four times.

古文：使者出，置表彩舆中。
现代文：使者出来，将表放在彩舆中。
English: The messenger came out and put the table in the center of the room.

古文：主婚者前曰： 请礼从者。 
现代文：主婚人上前说： 请礼待从者。 
English: The husband-to-be stepped forward and said, "Please wait for me."

古文：酒馔毕，主婚者捧币以劳使者。
现代文：饮完酒吃完饭，主婚人捧着缯帛慰劳使者。
English: After drinking the wine and eating the meal, the bride and groom held a gong to comfort the messenger.

古文：使者出，主婚者送至大门外。
现代文：使者出来，主婚人送到大门外。
English: The messenger came out and the bride and groom were sent outside the gate.

古文：使者随彩舆入大明门左门，至奉天门外，以表节授司礼监，复命。
现代文：使者跟随彩舆进入大明门左门，到奉天门外，将表、节交给司礼监，回复命令。
English: The messenger followed Saimyo into the left door of the Daimyo gate and went outside the Bongten gate, handed the table and the tablecloth to the chief etiquette officer, and replied to the order.

古文：次纳吉、纳徵、告期，传制遣使，并如前仪。
现代文：其次是卜得吉兆，备礼与女方缔结婚姻的纳吉礼、送礼物到女家定婚的纳征礼、报告婚期的告期礼，传制命派遣使者，也都如同先前的礼仪。
English: Next is the blessing of good luck, the preparation of gifts and the marriage ceremony with the woman, the gift of gifts to the woman's family, the announcement of the wedding ceremony, the transmission of orders to send messengers, are also the same as the previous etiquette.

古文：但纳徵用玄纁、束帛、六马、谷圭等物，制词曰： 兹聘某官某女为皇后，命卿等持节行纳吉、纳徵、告期礼。 
现代文：只是送礼物到女家定婚用黑色和浅红色的布帛、东帛、六匹马、谷圭等物品，制命的言词说： 现在聘某官某女为皇后，命你等持节行纳吉、纳征、告期礼。 
English: Just send a gift to the woman's house for the marriage, with black and light red cloth, Dongyu, six horses, Gu Gui and other items, and the words of the command say: Now hire a certain official and a certain woman as the queen, and you should hold the festival of Naji, collection, and announcement ceremony.

古文：皇后第，陈设如前，惟更设玉帛案。
现代文：皇后的住所，陈设如同前面所述礼仪，只是更改设置了玉帛案。
English: The Queen's residence was furnished as per the aforementioned etiquette, with the only change being the placement of the emerald urn.

古文：使者至，以制书、玉帛置案上，六马陈堂下。
现代文：使者到，将制书、玉帛放置在案上，六匹马陈列在堂下。
English: When the messenger arrived, he placed the book and the jade scepter on the case, and the six horses were displayed under the hall.

古文：执事先设皇后冠服诸物于正堂。
现代文：执事先在正堂设皇后冠服等物品。
English: Items such as the Queen's coronation robe were placed in the main hall beforehand.

古文：礼官入，主婚者出迎，执事举玉帛案，正使捧纳吉、纳徵制书，副使捧告期制书，执节者捧节，以次入，各置于案。
现代文：礼官进入，主婚者出来迎接，执事举着玉帛案，正使捧着纳吉、纳征的制书，副使捧着告期的制书，执节者捧节，依次进入，各自放在案上。
English: The etiquette officer enters, the bride and groom come out to greet them, the deacon holds up the yakitori case, the chief clerk holds the books for nagi and tax collection, the deputy clerk holds the books for the period of notice, the celebrant holds the festival, they enter in turn, and each of them places it on the case.

古文：主婚者四拜，诣案前跪。
现代文：主婚人行四拜礼，到案前跪下。
English: The bride and groom bow four times and kneel before the hearse.

古文：正使取制书，宣曰： 大婚之卜，龟筮师士协从。
现代文：正使取制书，宣读说： 大婚占卜，龟筮师士协助。
English: An attendant was taking out a book and reading out: "Great marriage divination, with the help of goblin masters."

古文：敬循礼典，遣使持节告吉。 
现代文：恭敬地遵循典礼，派遣使者持节报告吉祥。 
English: Respectfully follow the ceremony, send messengers to report the auspiciousness of the festival.

古文：又宣曰： 卿女有贞静之德，称母仪之选，宜共承天地宗庙。
现代文：又宣读说： 你的女儿有端庄娴静的美德，称合母仪的选择，适宜共同承继天地宗庙。
English: It also read: Your daughter has the virtue of being dignified and quiet, and is suitable for the selection of the mother rite, and is suitable for jointly inheriting the world and the ancestral temple.

古文：特遣使持节，以礼纳徵。 
现代文：特派遣使者持节，按礼仪行纳征礼。 
English: Special emissaries are dispatched to celebrate the festival and collect gifts according to etiquette.

古文：宣讫，授主婚者。
现代文：宣读完毕，交给主婚人。
English: Once it has been read out, it is handed to the bride and groom.

古文：正副使又捧圭及玄纁以授主婚者，俱如前仪。
现代文：正副使又捧圭以及黑色和浅红色布帛交给主婚人，都按以上礼仪行事。
English: The officiating minister and the officiating maidservant handed the black and light red cloth to the bride and groom, and they all followed the above etiquette.

古文：副使取制书，宣曰： 岁令月良，吉日某甲子，大婚维宜。
现代文：副使取出制书，宣读说： 岁月美好，吉利日子是某甲子日，大婚适宜。
English: The deputy envoy took out the book and read out: The years are beautiful, the auspicious day is a certain day, and the big wedding is appropriate.

古文：特遣使持节，以礼告期。 
现代文：特派使持节，按礼仪行告期礼。 
English: The special envoys held a farewell ceremony according to the etiquette.

古文：宣讫，授如前仪。
现代文：宣读完毕，按以上礼仪进行。
English: Once the reading is over, the rite is performed according to the above etiquette.

古文：主婚者四拜，使者持节出，主婚者礼使者，使者还，复命如初。
现代文：主婚人行四拜礼，使者持节出来，主婚人礼待使者，使者返回，如开初那样复命。
English: The bridegroom makes four prostrations, the messenger comes out holding the festival, the bridegroom treats the messenger with respect, the messenger returns, and the mission is resumed as it was at the beginning.

古文：次发册奉迎，所司陈设如前仪。
现代文：其次是发册奉迎，有关部门按先前的礼仪陈设。
English: Next is the issuing of certificates of welcome, and the relevant departments display them according to the previous etiquette.

古文：礼部陈雁及礼物于丹陛上，内官监陈皇后卤簿车辂于奉天门外。
现代文：礼部在丹陛上陈放雁以及礼物，内官监在奉天宫外陈列皇后卤簿以及车辆。
English: The Ministry of Ceremonies presented the geese and gifts to His Majesty the Emperor Dan, while the Commissioner of Internal Affairs displayed the Empress's gift book and car outside the Imperial Palace.

古文：制词曰： 兹册某官某女为皇后，命卿等持节奉册宝，行奉迎礼。 
现代文：制命说： 现在册封某官某女为皇后，命令你等持节捧着册书和宝玺，举行奉迎礼。 
English: The system of orders said: Now an official and a woman are crowned as empresses, and you are ordered to hold the festival, hold the book and the treasure, and hold a welcoming ceremony.

古文：正副使以册宝置彩舆中，随诣皇后第。
现代文：正副使拿着册书和宝玺放置在彩舆中，随着到皇后住所。
English: The chief and deputy envoys took the record book and the treasure map and placed them in the painting room, and followed to the empress's residence.

古文：至门，取制书册宝置案上。
现代文：到了门口，取出制书、册书、宝玺放置在案上。
English: When you get to the door, take out the paperback, hardcover, and treasure map and place them on the case.

古文：礼官先入，主婚者朝服出见。
现代文：礼官先进入，主婚人穿朝服出来相见。
English: The etiquette officer enters first, and the bride and groom come out to meet him in their court dress.

古文：礼官曰： 奉制册后，遣使持节奉册宝，行奉迎礼。 
现代文：礼官说： 奉制命册封皇后，派遣使者持节奉册书和宝玺，举行奉迎礼。 
English: The etiquette official said, "I will issue an order to seal the empress, send an emissary to hold the festival, and hold a welcoming ceremony.

古文：主婚者出迎。
现代文：主婚人出来迎接。
English: The bride and groom came out to greet them.

古文：执事者举案前行，使者捧制书及节，执事者以雁及礼物从之。
现代文：执事者举着案走在前面，使者捧制书以及符节，执事者拿雁以及礼物跟从。
English: The deacon walks in front holding the case, the messenger holds the book and the rune, and the deacon follows with the goose and the gift.

古文：至堂中，各置于案。
现代文：到了堂中，各自在案上放置。
English: When they got to the hall, they each placed a ring on the case.

古文：使者左右立，主婚者四拜，退立于西南。
现代文：使者在左右站立，主婚人行四拜礼，退后站立在西南。
English: The messenger stands to the right and left, the bride and groom bow four times, and stand back to the southwest.

古文：女官以九龙四凤冠祎衣进皇后。
现代文：女官拿着九龙四凤冠、有野鸡图纹的祭服进献给皇后。
English: The lady-in-waiting presented the queen with a ceremonial robe decorated with the four phoenix crowns of Kowloon and the pattern of a pheasant.

古文：内官陈仪仗于中堂前，设女乐于堂下，作止如常仪。
现代文：内官在中堂前陈列仪仗，在堂下陈设女乐，奏乐止乐如同常仪。
English: In front of the nave, the steward displays the ceremonial battle, and under the nave, the women's music is displayed, and the music is played as usual.

古文：使者以节册宝授司礼监官，内赞导入中堂。
现代文：使者把符节、册书、宝玺交给司礼监官，内赞官引导进入中堂。
English: The messenger handed over the symbols, books, and treasures to the superintendent of ceremonies, and led the vice-chancellor into the nave.

古文：皇后具服出阁，诣香案前，向阙立，四拜。
现代文：皇后穿好衣服出阁，到香案前，向着宫阙站立，行四拜礼。
English: The empress put on her clothes and went out of the pavilion. When she arrived at the incense altar, she stood facing the palace gate and bowed four times.

古文：赞宣册，皇后跪。
现代文：礼赞官宣读册书，皇后跪下。
English: The eulogist reads from the book, and the queen kneels.

古文：宣册官宣讫，以授皇后。
现代文：宣册官宣读完毕，交给皇后。
English: Once the registrar has finished reading out the proclamation, it is handed to the Queen.

古文：皇后搢圭，受册，以授女官。
现代文：皇后插上圭，接受册书，把它交给女官。
English: The queen stepped forward, accepted the register, and handed it to the lady-in-waiting.

古文：女官跪受，立于西。
现代文：女官跪着接受，站在西面。
English: The lady officer kneeled and accepted, standing on the west side.

古文：赞宣宝，如宣册仪。
现代文：赞宣读宝玺，如同宣读册书的礼仪。
English: It is the etiquette to read out the praise of Baojun, just as it is to read out a book.

古文：赞出圭，赞兴，四拜讫，皇后入阁。
现代文：赞唱抽出圭，赞唱起身，行四拜礼完毕，皇后进入阁。
English: The hymn is sung, the bridegroom is drawn out, the anthem is sung, the procession is over, and the queen enters the pavilion.

古文：司礼监官持节出，授使者，报受册宝礼毕。
现代文：司礼监官持节出来，交给使者，报告接受册书宝玺的礼仪结东。
English: The proctor of ceremonies came out with the festival, handed it to the emissary, and reported the acceptance of the book of the etiquette.

古文：主婚者诣案前跪。
现代文：主婚人到案前跪下。
English: Kneel down before your husband-to-be.

古文：正使取奉迎制宣讫，授主婚者。
现代文：正使拿出奉迎制命宣读完毕，交给主婚人。
English: He was just finishing reading out the hongying system order and handing it over to the host.

古文：副使进雁及礼物。
现代文：副使进献雁以及礼物。
English: The vice-envoy presented geese and gifts.

古文：主婚者皆跪受，如前仪。
现代文：主婚人都跪着接受，如同先前的礼仪。
English: Both the bride and groom knelt to receive it, as was the previous custom.

古文：主婚者兴，使者四拜出。
现代文：主婚人起身，使者行四拜礼出来。
English: The bride and groom got up, and the messenger came out to perform the four prostrations.

古文：主婚者礼使者如初。
现代文：主婚人如最初一样礼待使者。
English: The bride and groom treat the messenger with the same courtesy as before.

古文：女官奏请皇后出阁。
现代文：女官奏请皇后出阁。
English: The lady-in-waiting called for the queen to come out.

古文：自东阶下，立香案前，四拜。
现代文：自东阶下来，站在香案前，行四拜礼。
English: Come down from the east steps, stand in front of the incense case, and perform four prostrations.

古文：升堂，南向立。
现代文：登堂，向南站立。
English: Enter the church and stand facing south.

古文：主婚者进立于东，西向，曰： 戒之敬之，夙夜无违。 
现代文：主婚人上前站在东面，面向西，说： 警戒恭敬，早晚不要违背。 
English: The bride and groom came forward and stood in the east, facing west, and said, "Be alert and respectful, and don't disobey sooner or later."

古文：退立于东阶。
现代文：退后站在柬阶下。
English: Stand back and stand under the rungs.

古文：母进，立于西，东向，施衿结帨，曰： 勉之敬之，夙夜无违。 
现代文：母亲上前，站在西面，面向东，结衿结悦，说： 勤勉恭敬，早晚不要违背。 
English: My mother came forward, standing on the west side, facing the east, and said, "Be diligent and respectful, and don't disobey sooner or later.

古文：退立于西阶。
现代文：退后站立在西阶。
English: Step back and stand on the West Steps.

古文：内执事请乘舆，皇后降阶升舆。
现代文：内执事请求乘舆车，皇后下台阶登上车舆。
English: The deacon requests a carriage ride, and the empress steps down to board.

古文：导从出，仪仗大乐前行，次彩舆，正副使随，次司礼监官拥导，从大明门中门入。百官朝服于承天门外班迎，候舆入，乃退。
现代文：引导跟从出来，仪仗大乐在前行走，其次是彩舆，正副使者随从，再次是司礼监官簇拥引导，从大明门的中门进入百官穿着朝服在承天门外列班迎接，等候舆车进入，然后纔退下。
English: The guide came out with his retinue, and the ceremonial parade marched in front, followed by the ceremonial procession, followed by the emissaries, followed by the ceremonial inspectors, followed by the guides. From the middle gate of the Daming Gate, hundreds of officials wearing imperial robes entered and lined up outside the Chengtian Gate to greet the procession. They waited for the procession to enter, and then retreated.

古文：皇后至午门外，鸣钟鼓，卤簿止。
现代文：皇后到了午门外，呜钟鼓，扈从仪仗队停止。
English: When the empress arrived outside the noon gate, the bells, drums and gongs stopped from the guard of honor.

古文：正副使以节授司礼监，复命。
现代文：正副使者把符节交给司礼监，回稷命令。
English: The principal and deputy emissaries handed over the symbols to the chief etiquette inspector and returned the order.

古文：捧册宝官捧册宝，仪仗女乐前导，进奉天门。
现代文：捧册书宝玺的官员捧着册书和宝玺，仪仗、女乐在前引导，进入奉天门。
English: The official holding the scroll and the treasure basket, leading the ceremonial battle and the women's music in front, entered the Fengtian Gate.

古文：至内庭幕次，司礼监以册宝授女官。
现代文：到了内庭幕帐，司礼监拿册书和宝玺交给女官。
English: When they arrived at the inner court curtain, the chief etiquette inspector took the book and the treasure map and handed them to the maidservant.

古文：皇后出舆，由西阶进。
现代文：皇后出舆车，由西阶进入。
English: The empress got out of the carriage and entered from the west steps.

古文：皇帝由东阶降迎于庭，揖皇后入内殿。
现代文：皇帝由东阶下来在庭中迎接，向皇后拱手进入内殿。
English: The emperor came down from the east steps to greet her in the courtyard, and he gave the empress a hand to enter the inner hall.

古文：帝诣更服处，具衮冕。
现代文：皇帝到更换衣服处，穿上衮冕服。
English: The emperor went to the changing room and put on his crown.

古文：后诣更服处，更礼服。
现代文：皇后到更换衣服处，更换礼服。
English: The Queen went to the wardrobe department to change her dress.

古文：同诣奉先殿，行谒庙礼。
现代文：一同到奉先殿，举行拜谒太庙礼。
English: Together, they went to the Bonshinden Hall to hold a memorial service for the late Empress Dowager.

古文：祭毕，还宫。
现代文：祭祀完毕，回宫。
English: After the ritual, it was time to return to the palace.

古文：合卺，帝更皮弁，升内殿。
现代文：举行合卺礼，皇帝更换皮弁，登内殿。
English: The enthronement ceremony was held, the emperor replaced the skin valve, and ascended to the inner hall.

古文：后更衣，从升。
现代文：皇后更换衣服，跟从升登。
English: The queen changes clothes and follows the procession.

古文：各升座，东西相向。
现代文：各自升登座位，东西相向。
English: Everyone climbed into their seats, facing east and west.

古文：执事者举馔案于前，女官取四金爵，酌酒以进。
现代文：执事者举着食案到前面，女官拿出四个金杯，斟酒进献。
English: The steward comes to the front holding up the meal plan, and the maidservant takes out four gold goblets and pours wine into them.

古文：既饮，进馔。
现代文：饮完后，进献饭食。
English: After drinking, the meal is served.

古文：复进酒、进饭讫，女官以两卺酌酒，合和以进。
现代文：又进酒、进饭完毕，女官拿两瓢斟酒，合好瓢献上。
English: After the wine-drinking and meal-eating were over, the maidservant took two jars of wine, filled them, and presented them to the bridegroom.

古文：既饮，又进馔毕，兴，易常服。
现代文：饮完，又进献饭食完毕，起身，改换常服。
English: After drinking, and after finishing the meal, get up and change your clothes.

古文：帝从者馂后之馔，后从者馂帝之馔。
现代文：皇帝的侍从吃皇后剩下的饭菜，皇后的侍从吃皇帝剩下的饭菜。
English: The emperor's attendants eat the queen's leftover food, and the queen's attendants eat the emperor's leftover food.

古文：次日早，帝后皆礼服，候太后升座。
现代文：次日早上，皇帝、皇后都穿礼服，等候太后登座。
English: The next morning, the Emperor and Empress were both dressed in ceremonial robes, waiting for the Empress Dowager to take the throne.

古文：帝后进座前。
现代文：皇帝、皇后上座前。
English: Before the Emperor and Empress take their seats.

古文：宫人以腶修盘立于后左，帝后皆四拜。
现代文：宫人拿盛服修的盘站立在皇后左边，皇帝、皇后都行四拜礼。
English: The palace attendants stand to the left of the empress, holding their ceremonial trays. Both the emperor and the empress bow four times.

古文：执事举案至，宫人以腶修盘授后，后捧置于案。
现代文：执事者举着案到来，宫人将盛服修的盘交给皇后，皇后捧着放在案上。
English: When the steward arrived with the case, the palace attendant handed the plate of ceremonial service to the empress, who held it in her hand and placed it on the case.

古文：女官举案，后随至太后前，进讫，复位。
现代文：女官举着案，皇后随着到了太后面前，进献完毕，回到原位。
English: The lady-in-waiting held up the case, and the empress followed in front of the empress dowager. After the presentation, she returned to her original position.

古文：帝后皆四拜。
现代文：皇帝、皇后都行四拜礼。
English: The emperor and empress both perform the four prostrations.

古文：三日早，帝冕服，后礼服，同诣太后宫，行八拜礼。还宫，帝服皮弁，升座。
现代文：第三日早上，皇帝穿着冕服，皇后穿着礼服，同到太后宫，行八拜礼，回宫，皇帝穿皮弁，升登座位。
English: On the morning of the third day, the emperor, wearing a crown, and the empress, wearing a ceremonial dress, went to the Imperial Palace together, performed eight prostrations, and returned to the palace. The emperor wore a leather valance and ascended to his seat.

古文：女宫导后，礼服诣帝前，行八拜礼。
现代文：女官引导皇后，穿礼服到皇帝面前，行八拜礼。
English: The lady-in-waiting led the empress, dressed in ceremonial robes, to the emperor and performed eight prostrations.

古文：后还宫，升座。
现代文：皇后回宫，升登座位。
English: The empress returned to the palace and ascended to the throne.

古文：引礼导在内亲属及六尚等女官，行八拜礼；次各监局内官内使，行八拜礼。
现代文：引礼官引导在内的亲属以及六尚等女官，行八拜礼；其次各监局内官、内使，行八拜礼。
English: The relatives, including the usher, and the six maids of honor, performed eight prostrations, followed by the officials and envoys of the supervisory bureaus.

古文：是日，皇帝御奉天殿。颁诏如常仪。
现代文：这天，皇帝驾临奉天殿，按平常礼仪颁布韶书。
English: On this day, the emperor arrived at the Temple of Heaven and promulgated the imperial edict according to the usual etiquette.

古文：四日早，皇帝服衮冕御华盖殿，亲王八拜，次执事官五拜，遂升奉天殿，百官进表，行庆贺礼。
现代文：第四日早上，皇帝穿衮冕服到华盖殿，亲王行八拜礼，其次是执事官行五拜礼，于是升登奉天殿，百官上表，举行庆贺礼。
English: On the morning of the fourth day, the emperor put on his coronation robes and went to the Huagai Hall. The prince performed eight prostrations, followed by the deacon performing five prostrations, and then ascended to the Heaven Hall, where he was received by hundreds of officials, and held a celebration.

古文：是日，太后及皇后各礼服升座。
现代文：这一天，太后以及皇后各自穿礼服升座。
English: On this day, the empress dowager and the queen ascended the throne in their respective gowns.

古文：亲王入，八拜出，次内外命妇庆贺及外命妇进表笺，皆如常仪。
现代文：亲王进入，行八拜礼而出，其次是内外命妇庆贺以及外命妇进献表文，都按平常礼仪进行。
English: The prince entered, performed the eight prostrations and left, followed by the celebration of the inner and outer life and the presentation of the written document by the outer life, all of which were carried out according to the usual etiquette.

古文：五日行盥馈礼，尚膳监具膳修。
现代文：第五日行盥债礼，尚膳监制作美味膳食。
English: On the fifth day of the ceremony, the chief cook prepared a delicious meal.

古文：皇后礼服诣太后前，四拜。
现代文：皇后穿礼服到太后面前，行四拜礼。
English: The empress put on her ceremonial dress and came before the empress dowager. She bowed four times.

古文：尚食以膳授皇后，皇后捧膳进于案，复位，四拜，退立于西南。
现代文：尚食将膳食交给皇后，皇后捧膳食上前放在案上，回到原位，行四拜礼，退后站立在西南。
English: After the meal, the meal is handed over to the queen. The queen holds the meal in front of her and places it on the table. She returns to her original position, performs four prostrations, and stands back in the southwest.

古文：俟膳毕，引出。
现代文：等用完膳，导引而出。
English: When the meal is finished, the guide will come out.

古文：皇太子纳妃仪
现代文：皇太子纳妃
English: Crown Prince and Princess Naomi

古文：历代之制与纳后同。
现代文：历代制度皇太子纳妃与纳皇后礼仪相同。
English: The protocol for Crown Prince Na and Empress Na has been the same throughout the ages.

古文：隋、唐以后，始亲迎，天子临轩醮戒。
现代文：隋、唐以后，开始亲自迎接，天子在前殿行醮酒告诫礼。
English: After the Sui and Tang dynasties, they began to greet each other in person, and the heavenly son made a toast in front of the hall.

古文：宋始行盥馈礼，明因之，洪武元年定制，凡行礼，皆遣使持节，如皇帝大婚仪。
现代文：宋代开始举行盥馒。明优因循唐、宋礼仪。洪武元年规定制度，凡是行礼，都派遣使者持节，如同皇帝大婚的仪礼。
English: The Song Dynasty began to hold the imperial banquet. The Ming Dynasty followed the Tang Dynasty and Song Dynasty etiquette. In the first year of Hongwu, the system stipulated that whenever there was a ceremony, an emissary would be sent to hold the ceremony, just like the ceremony of the emperor's big wedding.

古文：纳采、问名。
现代文：纳采、问名。
English: Nace, what's your name?

古文：制曰： 奉制纳某氏女为皇太子妃，命卿等行纳采问名礼。 
现代文：制命说： 奉制命娶某氏女为皇太子妃，命你等行纳采、问名之礼。 
English: The emperor said, "I have ordered you to marry a certain lady to become the crown princess. Please wait until I give you the order to receive her and ask her name."

古文：至妃第，傧者出，诣使者前曰： 敢请事。 
现代文：到了妃的住所，接引宾客的人出来，到使者面前说： 请吩咐事情。 
English: When they arrived at the princess's residence, the ushers came out and said to the messenger, "Please give the order."

古文：使者曰： 储宫纳配，属于令德。
现代文：使者说： 太子娶妃，连属美德。
English: The messenger said, "It is virtuous for a prince to marry a princess.

古文：邦有常典，使某行纳采之礼。 
现代文：国家有恒常典章制度，使某行纳采之礼。 
English: The country has a permanent award system, so that a certain line is awarded.

古文：傧者入告，主婚者曰： 臣某之子，昧于壸仪，不足以备采择。
现代文：接引宾客的人进入报告，主婚者说： 臣某的女儿，蒙昧于内官的礼仪，不足以充选取。
English: The host of the wedding said, "A vassal's daughter, ignorant of the etiquette of a courtier, is not good enough to be chosen.

古文：恭承制命，臣某不敢辞。 
现代文：恭敬地承接制命，臣某不敢推辞。 
English: Respectfully accepting the command, the vassal did not dare to refuse.

古文：傧者出告，使者入，陈礼物于庭，宣制曰： 某奉诏采择。 
现代文：接引宾客的人出来报告，使者进入，陈列礼物于庭中，宣读制命说： 某奉诏选取。 
English: The person who picked up the guests came out to report, the messenger entered, displayed the gifts in the courtyard, read out the order and said: "A certain person has been selected."

古文：奠雁礼毕，使者出。
现代文：献雁礼结东，使者出来。
English: The geese salute the east, and the messenger comes out.

古文：傧者复诣使者前曰： 敢请事。 
现代文：接引宾客的人又到使者面前说： 请吩咐事情。 
English: Then the one who was bringing the guests came to the messenger and said, "Tell us what to do."

古文：使者曰： 储宫之配，采择既谐。
现代文：使者说： 太子的配偶，选取已好。
English: The messenger said, "The prince's wife has been well chosen.

古文：将加卜筮，奉制问名。 
现代文：将加以卜筮，奉制命行问名礼。 
English: They will be blessed with the name of Buddha, and will be ordered to perform namaz.

古文：傧者入告，主婚者曰： 制以臣某之女，可以奉侍储宫，臣某不敢辞。
现代文：接引宾客的人进入报告，主婚者说： 制命以为臣的女儿可以侍奉东宫太子，臣某不敢推辞。 
English: The person who brought the guests entered the report, and the host of the wedding said: The order was given that the vassal's daughter could serve the Crown Prince, and the vassal did not dare to refuse.

古文：傧者出告。
现代文：接引宾客的人出来报告。
English: The ushers come out to report.

古文：使者复入，陈礼奠雁如仪，宣制曰： 臣某奉诏问名，将谋诸卜筮。 
现代文：使者又进入，按仪礼陈列礼物进献雁，宣读制命说： 臣奉诏行问名礼，将以卜筮来决定。 
English: The messenger entered again, displayed the gifts according to the ceremony, presented the geese, and read out the order saying: "If the minister obeys the edict and performs the name-calling ceremony, it will be decided by the divination.

古文：主婚者曰： 臣某第几女，某氏出。 
现代文：主婚者说： 臣某第几女，是某氏生。 
English: The bridegroom said, "The daughter of a certain vassal is a member of a certain clan.

古文：次纳吉。
现代文：其次是行纳吉礼。
English: This was followed by the performance of the Najib salute.

古文：傧者请事如前，使者曰： 谋诸卜筮，其占协从，制使某告吉。 
现代文：接引宾客的人如先前请求吩咐，使者说： 用卜筮来决定，占卜也协和。制命使某报告吉兆。 
English: As the usher had requested, the messenger said: Use divination to decide, divination is also harmonious. Order a certain report to be auspicious.

古文：傧者入告，主婚者曰： 臣某之子蠢愚，惧弗克堪。
现代文：接引宾客的人进入报告，主婚者说： 臣某的女儿愚蠢，恐怕不能胜任。
English: The person who picked up the guests entered the report, and the officiant said: "The daughter of a certain vassal is stupid, and I'm afraid she's not competent.

古文：卜筮云吉，惟臣之幸，臣谨奉典制。 
现代文：占卜说吉祥，是臣的幸运，臣恭敬地遵守典章制度。 
English: Fortune-telling is said to be auspicious, it is the fortune of the vassal, and the vassal respectfully abides by the award system.

古文：傧者出告。
现代文：接引宾客的人出来报告。
English: The ushers come out to report.

古文：使者入，陈礼奠雁如仪，宣制曰： 奉制告吉。 
现代文：使者进入，按仪礼陈列礼物献上雁，宣读制命说： 奉制命报告占卜吉祥。 
English: The messenger entered, presented the geese according to the ritual display of gifts, and read out the order: "Following the order, report divination is auspicious."

古文：又次纳徵。
现代文：又其次是行纳征礼。
English: The second is the collection of gifts.

古文：傧者出告，使者入陈玉帛礼物，不奠雁，宣制曰： 某奉制告成。 
现代文：接引宾客的人出来报告，使者进入陈列玉帛礼物，不进献雁，宣读制命说： 某奉制命报告成婚。 
English: The person who brought the guests came out to report, the messenger went into the display of jade gifts, did not go into the offering of geese, and read out the order saying: A certain person was ordered to report the marriage.

古文：又次请期。
现代文：又其次是行请期礼。
English: The second most important thing is to perform the rite of expiation.

古文：辞曰： 询于龟筮。某月某日吉，制使某告期。 
现代文：其辞说： 询问卜筮，某月某日吉利，制命派某告诉婚期。 
English: His words said: "Ask Bu Yao, a certain month, a certain day is auspicious, the system orders a certain person to tell the marriage period.

古文：主婚者曰： 敢不承命。 
现代文：主婚人说： 岂敢不遵命。 
English: The husband said: "How dare you disobey my orders.

古文：陈礼奠雁如仪。
现代文：按礼仪陈列礼物献上雁。
English: According to the etiquette, the gifts are displayed and the geese are presented.

古文：又次告庙。
现代文：又其次是祭告太庙的告庙礼。
English: The second is the temple-announcing ceremony.

古文：遣使持节授册宝仪注，悉见前。
现代文：派遣使者持节授册书、宝玺、礼仪程序，全见于前面的记载。
English: The dispatch of envoys bearing the festival registration book, the treasure map, and the etiquette procedures can all be found in the previous record.

古文：又次醮戒。
现代文：又其次是醮戒。
English: The second most important is the precept of abstinence.

古文：皇帝服通天冠、绛纱袍，御奉天殿，百官侍立。
现代文：皇帝戴通天冠、穿绛纱袍，驾临奉天殿，百官侍立。
English: The emperor wore a crown and a gauze robe, drove to the Temple of Heaven, and was attended by hundreds of officials.

古文：引进导皇太子至丹陛，四拜。
现代文：引进官引导皇太子到台阶上，拜四拜。
English: The usher leads the crown prince up the steps, bowing four times.

古文：入殿东门就席位，东向立。
现代文：进入殿东门走上席位，向东站立。
English: Enter the east gate of the hall, take a seat, and stand facing east.

古文：司爵以醆进，皇太子跪，搢圭，受醆祭酒。
现代文：司爵官拿酒盏进献，皇太子跪下，插上圭，接受酒盏祭酒。
English: The magistrate presented the chalice, and the crown prince knelt down, inserted the clavicle and accepted the sacrificial chalice.

古文：司馔以馔进，跪受亦如之。
现代文：司锲官拿食物进献，皇太子也像前面那样跪着接受。
English: The eunuchs brought food offerings, which the crown prince accepted on his knees, as he had done before.

古文：兴，就席坐，饮食讫，导诣御座前跪。
现代文：起身，到席位坐下，饮食完毕，引导到皇帝座前跪下。
English: Get up, go to the seat, sit down, finish eating, and kneel in front of the emperor's throne.

古文：皇帝命之曰： 往迎尔相，承我宗事，勖帅以敬。 
现代文：皇帝命令说： 前往迎娶你的妻子，继承我宗族大事，恭敬地勉励遵循。 
English: The emperor ordered: "Go and marry your wife, inherit my family's cause, and respectfully urge others to follow suit.

古文：皇太子曰： 臣某谨奉制旨。 
现代文：皇太子说： 臣某谨遵奉圣旨。 
English: The crown prince said, "The vassal is honoring the sacred will.

古文：俯伏，兴。
现代文：俯伏，起身。
English: Bend over, get up.

古文：出至丹陛，四拜毕，皇帝还宫，皇太子出。
现代文：出来到台阶上，拜四拜结东，皇帝回宫，皇太子退出。
English: Come out to the steps, bow four times, the emperor returns to the palace, the crown prince withdraws.

古文：又次亲迎。
现代文：又其次是行亲迎礼。
English: The next most common greeting is a family greeting.

古文：前一日，有司设皇太子次于妃氏大门外，南向，东宫官次于南，东西相向。
现代文：前一天，有关部门在妃家的大门外设皇太子帐幕，面向南，东宫太子属官的帐幕在南面，东西相向。
English: The day before, the relevant departments set up the crown prince's tent outside the gate of the princess's house, facing south, and the tent of the crown prince's subordinate officials in the East Palace was in the south, facing east and west.

古文：至日质明，东宫官具朝服陈卤簿鼓吹于东宫门外。
现代文：这天天刚亮，东宫太子属官在东宫门外穿朝服陈设扈从仪仗队和鼓吹。
English: At first light this morning, officials of the Crown Prince of the East Palace, wearing imperial robes, marched in the honor guard and preached outside the East Palace gate.

古文：皇太子冕服乘舆出，侍卫导从如仪。
现代文：皇太子穿冕服乘车出来，侍卫按礼仪引导跟从。
English: The crown prince, dressed in his coronation robes, got out of the car, and the guards followed his lead according to protocol.

古文：至宫门降舆升辂，东宫官皆从至妃第，回辕南向，降辂升舆。
现代文：到宫门，从舆上下来登上辖车，东宫太子属官都跟从到妃的住所，回辕向南，从辖车上下来登上舆。
English: When they reached the palace gate, they climbed down from the carriage and boarded the carriage. The princes and officials of the Eastern Court followed them to the residence of the Empress Dowager, and then walked back to the south, climbed down from the carriage and boarded the carriage.

古文：至次，降舆入就次，东宫官皆就次。
现代文：到了帐幕，从舆上下来进入帐幕，东宫太子属官也都进入帐幕。
English: When they arrived at the tabernacle, they came down from the pulpit and entered the tabernacle, and the princes and officials of the Eastern Court also entered the tabernacle.

古文：先是，皇太子将至，主婚者设会宴女。
现代文：在此之前，皇太子将要到达，主婚者设宴招待女。
English: Before that, the crown prince will arrive, and the bridegroom will host a banquet for his bride.

古文：至期，妃服褕翟花钗，出就阁南面立，傅姆立于左右。
现代文：到了婚期，妃穿着褕翟戴花钗，出来到阁南面站立，妃的傅和姆站在左右。
English: When it was time for the wedding, the princess, dressed in a saree, came out and stood on the south side of the pavilion, while her brother-in-law stood to the right and left.

古文：主婚者具朝服立于西阶之下。
现代文：主婚者穿朝服站在西阶下面。
English: The bride and groom, dressed in formal attire, stood at the foot of the west steps.

古文：引进导皇太子出次，立于大门之东，西向。
现代文：引进官引导皇太子出帐幕，站在大门的东面，面向西。
English: The usher led the crown prince out of the tent and stood on the east side of the gate, facing west.

古文：傧者朝服出，立于门东曰： 敢请事。 
现代文：接引宾客的人穿着朝服出来，站在门的东面，说： 请吩咐。 
English: The person bringing the guests out, dressed in formal attire, stood on the east side of the door and said, "If you please."

古文：引进跪启讫，皇太子曰： 某奉制亲迎。 
现代文：引进官跪下禀告完毕，皇太子说： 某奉制命行亲迎礼。 
English: After the introduction officer kneeled down and finished the obituary, the crown prince said: "A certain person obeys the order to salute.

古文：引进受命兴，承传于傧者。
现代文：引进官接受命令，起身，传达给接引宾客的人。
English: The usher takes the order, stands up, and hands it to the usher.

古文：傧者入告，导主婚者出迎于大门外之西，东向再拜。
现代文：接引宾客的人进入报告，引导主婚者出来在大门外西面迎接，向东行再拜礼。
English: The person who brings the guests enters the hall, leads the bride and groom out of the gate to the west to greet them, and then heads east to pray.

古文：皇太子答拜。
现代文：皇太子回拜。
English: The crown prince returns the bow.

古文：引进导皇太子入门而左，执雁者从。
现代文：引进官引导皇太子入门到左面，拿雁的人跟从。
English: The introduction officer guides the crown prince to the entrance on the left, and the person taking the goose follows.

古文：傧者导主婚者入门而右。
现代文：接引宾客的人引导主婚者进入门到右面。
English: The usher leads the bride and groom through the door to the right.

古文：皇太子升东阶进，立于阁门户前，北向立。
现代文：皇太子登上东阶进入，站在阁门的户前，向北站立。
English: The crown prince climbed the eastern steps to enter and stood in front of the house at the gate, facing north.

古文：主婚者升西阶，立于西，东向。
现代文：主婚者从西阶升登，站在西面，面向东。
English: The bride and groom ascended from the west steps and stood on the west side, facing east.

古文：引进启奠雁，执雁者以雁进。
现代文：引进官启奏献雁，拿雁的人拿着雁上前。
English: After the introduction of the official opening ceremony, a goose was presented, and the person who took the goose went forward with the goose.

古文：皇太子受雁，以授主婚者。
现代文：皇太子接受雁。交给主婚者。
English: The crown prince accepts the goose and gives it to the bride and groom.

古文：主婚者跪受，兴，以授左右，退立于西。
现代文：主婚者跪着接受，起身，交给左右之人，退着站在西面。
English: The bride and groom kneel to receive, stand up, give the ring to the person to their right and left, and stand back to the west.

古文：皇太子再拜，降自东阶，出至次以伺。
现代文：皇太子行再拜礼，从东阶下来，出来到帐幕等待。
English: The crown prince bowed again, came down from the eastern steps, and went out to the tabernacle to wait.

古文：主婚者不降送。
现代文：主婚者不下台阶相送。
English: The bride and groom walk down the aisle.

古文：初，皇太子入门，妃母出，立于阁门外，奠雁位之西，南向。
现代文：开初，皇太子进入门内，妃的母亲出来，站在阁门外面，献雁位置的西面，面向南。
English: At the beginning of the ceremony, the crown prince entered the door, and the mother of the princess came out and stood outside the attic door, on the west side of the geese offering position, facing south.

古文：皇太子拜讫，宫人傅姆导妃出，立于母左。
现代文：皇太子行拜礼完毕，宫人傅姆引导妃出来，站在母亲的左面。
English: After the crown prince had performed the ritual, the palace attendant Fumu led the princess out and stood on her mother's left.

古文：主婚者命之曰： 戒之戒之，夙夜恪勤，毋或违命。 
现代文：主婚者命令说： 一定要警戒，早晚恭敬勤恳，不要违背命令。 
English: The bride and groom ordered: "Be vigilant, be respectful and diligent in the morning and evening, and do not disobey orders.

古文：母命之曰： 勉之勉之，尔父有训，往承惟钦。 
现代文：母亲命令说： 一定要勉励自己，你的父亲有训令，前往承命一定要恭敬。 
English: Mother's orders said: You must encourage yourself, your father has orders, and you must be respectful when you go to take orders.

古文：庶母申之曰： 恭听父母之言。 
现代文：庶母申说告诫： 恭敬地听从父母的话。 
English: The stepmother admonished: "Respectfully obey your parents."

古文：宫人傅姆擎执导从，妃乘舆出门，降舆，乘凤轿。
现代文：宫人傅姆牵着她引导跟从，妃乘舆出门，下舆，乘凤轿。
English: The palace attendant Fumu led her and guided her. The princess went out in a meadow, came down in a meadow, and rode in a phoenix carriage.

古文：皇太子揭帘讫，遂升辂，侍从如来仪。
现代文：皇太子揭起帘子结东，就整上辖车，侍从也如同来时的礼仪。
English: The crown prince raised the curtain to the east, straightened the carriage, and the attendants followed the same etiquette as when he arrived.

古文：至东宫门外，降辂乘舆。
现代文：到东官门外，下辖车乘舆。
English: When you get to the gate of Dongguan, take the shuttle bus.

古文：至阁，降舆入，俟于内殿门外之东，西面。
现代文：到阁后，下舆进入，在内殿门外东面等候，面向西。
English: After arriving at the pavilion, go down and enter, wait outside the inner hall door on the east side, facing west.

古文：司闺导妃诣内殿门外之西，东面。
现代文：司闰官引导妃到殿门外的西面，面朝东。
English: The chief usher led the empress to the west side outside the palace gate, facing east.

古文：皇太子揖妃入，行合卺礼，如中宫仪。
现代文：皇太子向妃拱手请进，举行合卺礼，如同中宫皇后的礼仪。
English: The Crown Prince gave his hand to the Empress and invited her to enter, and they held a marriage ceremony, just like the etiquette of the Empress Dowager.

古文：又次朝见。
现代文：又其次是朝见。
English: The second most popular is the morning meeting.

古文：其日，妃诣内殿陛下，候皇帝升座。
现代文：这一天，太子妃到内殿台阶下，等候皇帝升登宝座。
English: On this day, the crown princess went to the steps of the inner hall to wait for the emperor to ascend to the throne.

古文：司闺导妃入，北面立，再拜，自西阶升。
现代文：司闰官引导太子妃进入，向北站立，行再拜礼，从西阶上。
English: The chief usher led the Crown Princess to enter, stand facing north, and perform the second prostration, from the west steps.

古文：宫人奉枣栗盘，进至御座前授妃。
现代文：官人捧着枣栗盘，进献到御座前交给太子妃。
English: The official, holding a jujube chestnut plate, presented it to the Crown Princess in front of the throne.

古文：妃奠于御前，退复位，再拜。
现代文：太子妃进献于皇帝面前，退回原位，行再拜礼。
English: The crown princess presented herself to the emperor, then returned to her seat and bowed again.

古文：礼毕，诣皇后前，奉腶修盘，如上仪。
现代文：礼仪完毕，到皇后面前，捧着装有服修的盘，如以上礼仪进献。
English: After the etiquette is completed, go to the queen, holding a plate with a service, such as the above etiquette.

古文：又次醴妃，次盥馈，次谒庙，次群臣命妇朝贺，皆如仪。
现代文：又其次是醴妃，其次是盥髋，其次是拜庙，其次是群臣、受封妇女朝贺，都按礼仪进行。
English: Next is the imperial concubine, followed by the empress dowager, followed by the worship of the temple, followed by the courtiers and the women who have received the title of nobility, all of which are carried out according to the etiquette.

古文：四年，册开平王常遇春女为皇太子妃。
现代文：四年，册封开平王常遇春的女儿为皇太子妃。
English: In the fourth year, the daughter of Heian King Jochiharu was enthroned as crown princess.

古文：礼部上仪注，太祖览之曰： 贽礼不用笄，但用金盘，翟车用凤轿，雁以玉为之。
现代文：礼部呈上礼仪程序，太祖看后说： 赞礼不用笄，只用金盘，翟车用凤轿，雁用玉制造。
English: The etiquette department presented the etiquette procedure, and after reading it, the great-grandfather said, "You don't need a gong to praise, just use a gold plate, a chariot with a phoenix, and a goose made of jade.

古文：古礼有亲迎执绥御轮，今用轿，则揭帘是矣。
现代文：古礼有亲迎执绥御轮的规定，现在用轿，揭帘子就是了。
English: Ancient etiquette dictated that the bride and groom should greet each other in person, but now the bride and groom are greeted in a carriage.

古文：其合卺，依古制用匏。
现代文：合卺礼，依照古代礼制用瓢。
English: In accordance with the ancient etiquette, bowls are used.

古文：妃朝见，入宫中，乘小车，以帷幕蔽之。
现代文：妃子朝见，进入宫中，乘小车，用帷幕遮蔽。
English: The concubine sees the dawn, enters the palace, rides in a carriage, and is shielded by a curtain.

古文：谒庙，则皇太子俱往。
现代文：拜祭太庙，则皇太子都前往。
English: The crown prince went to pay his respects at the grand temple.

古文：礼成后三日，乃宴群臣命妇。 
现代文：礼成后三天，便设宴招待群臣命妇。 
English: Three days after the ceremony, a banquet was held to invite the wives of the ministers.

古文：著为令。
现代文：写成书面法令。
English: This article shall be construed as a ritsuryo.

古文：成化二十二年，更定婚礼。
现代文：成化二十二年，更改修订婚礼。
English: In the 22nd year of Chenghua, the wedding ceremony was revised.

古文：凡节册等案，俱由奉天左门出。
现代文：凡是节案、册案等，都从奉天左门出宫。
English: All the ceremonial cases, record cases, etc. leave the palace from the left gate of the Bongtian Palace.

古文：皇太子亲迎，由东长安门出。
现代文：皇太子亲迎，从东长安门出官。
English: Crown Prince Chinyong was appointed to the post from Dongchang'anmen.

古文：亲迎日，妃服燕居服，随父母家庙行礼。
现代文：亲迎那天，太子妃穿闲居时的衣服，随父母到家庙行礼。
English: On the day of the welcome, the princess put on the clothes she wore when she was idle and went to the family temple with her parents.

古文：执事者具酒馔，妃饮食讫。
现代文：执事者准备酒食，妃饮食完。
English: The steward prepares the food and drink, and the princess finishes eating and drinking.

古文：父母坐堂上，妃诣前各四拜。
现代文：父母坐在堂上，妃上前各自拜四拜。
English: The parents were sitting in the hall, and they bowed four times each before the empress.

古文：父命之曰： 尔往大内，夙夜勤慎，孝敬无违。 
现代文：父亲命令说： 你到皇宫，早晚要勤劳谨慎，孝敬，不要违背礼仪。 
English: My father ordered, "When you go to the Imperial Palace, you must be diligent and careful in the morning and evening, be respectful, and do not violate etiquette.

古文：母命之曰： 尔父有训，尔当敬承。 
现代文：母亲命令说： 你的父亲有训谕，你应当恭敬地遵守。 
English: Your father has a command, and you should respectfully obey it, my mother ordered.

古文：合卺前，于皇太子内殿各设拜位。
现代文：举行合卺礼之前，在皇太子的内殿各自设行礼的位置。
English: Prior to the wreath-laying ceremony, each of them will set up a place to perform the ceremony in the inner hall of the crown prince's palace.

古文：皇太子揖妃入就位，再拜，妃四拜，然后各升座。
现代文：皇太子向妃拱手相请，就位，行再拜礼，妃拜四拜，然后各白登座位。
English: The crown prince offered his hand to the princess, took his seat, bowed again, the princess bowed four times, and then they all took their seats.

古文：庙见后，百官朝贺，致词曰： 某官臣某等，恭惟皇太子嘉礼既成，益绵宗社隆长之福。
现代文：拜庙后，百官朝贺，致词说： 某官臣某等，恭敬地希望皇太子的嘉礼已经完成，增益延长宗庙社稷又大又长的福柞。
English: After paying homage to the temple, hundreds of officials congratulated the morning, and made a speech saying: A certain official and minister, etc., respectfully hope that the crown prince's tribute has been completed, and the increase extends the great and long blessing of the ancestral temple.

古文：臣某等不胜欣忭之至，谨当庆贺。 
现代文：臣某等高兴到极点，恭敬地表示庆贺。 
English: The vassal was overjoyed and respectfully expressed his congratulations.

古文：帝赐宴如正旦仪。
现代文：皇帝如同正月初一的礼仪赐宴。
English: The emperor gave a ceremonial banquet as if it were the first day of the new year.

古文：命妇诣太后皇后前贺，亦赐宴，致词曰： 皇太子嘉聘礼成，益绵景福。 
现代文：命妇到太后、皇后面前祝贺，也赐给宴会，致词说： 皇太子嘉聘礼完成，增加延长大福。 
English: The lady-in-waiting congratulated the empress dowager and the empress in front of everyone, and also gave a speech at the banquet, saying, "The crown prince's investiture ceremony has been completed.

古文：余大率如洪武仪。
现代文：其余的大略如同洪武时期的礼仪。
English: The rest is roughly the same as the etiquette of the Hongwu period.

古文：亲王婚礼
现代文：亲王婚礼
English: The wedding of a prince

古文：唐制，皇子纳妃，命亲王主婚。
现代文：唐朝制度，皇子娶妃，命令亲王主婚。
English: The Tang Dynasty system, the prince marries the princess, and orders the prince to marry.

古文：宋皆皇帝临轩醮戒，略与皇太子同。
现代文：宋代都是皇帝在前殿行醮酒告诫礼，略与皇太子同。
English: In the Song Dynasty, emperors performed the wine-drinking ceremony in the front hall, somewhat in the same way as the crown prince.

古文：明因之。
现代文：明代沿用宋礼仪。
English: The Ming Dynasty inherited the etiquette of the Song Dynasty.

古文：其宣制曰： 册某氏为某王妃。 
现代文：宣读制命说： 册封某氏为某王妃。 
English: The establishment order was read out, saying: "A certain person shall be enthroned as a certain princess."

古文：纳采，致词曰： 某王之俪，属于懿淑，使某行纳采礼。 
现代文：行纳采礼，致词说： 某王的配偶，属于美好温和，使某行纳吉的礼仪。 
English: In his acceptance speech, he said: "The consort of a king is a beautiful and gentle person, and it is the etiquette of a Najib to do so.

古文：问名词曰： 某既受命，将加诸卜筮协从，使某告吉。 
现代文：行间名的礼仪，致词说： 某已受命，将付之于卜筮，奉制命问名。 
English: The etiquette of the interlinear name, the speech said: A certain person has been ordered, will be sent to Bu Wei, and will be ordered to ask for the name.

古文：主婚者曰： 制以臣某之子，可以奉侍某王，臣某不敢辞。 
现代文：主婚者说： 制命以臣某之女儿，可以侍奉某王，臣某不敢推辞。 
English: The bridegroom said, "The daughter of a certain vassal may serve a certain king, and the vassal dare not refuse.

古文：纳吉词曰： 卜筮协从，使某告吉。 
现代文：占卜得吉行纳吉礼，言辞是： 卜筮协和顺从，使某报告吉祥。 
English: The divination of the auspiciousness of the auspiciousness of the auspiciousness of the auspiciousness of the auspiciousness of the auspiciousness.

古文：主婚者曰： 臣某之子，愚弗克堪。
现代文：主婚者说： 臣某的女儿，愚钝不能胜任。
English: The husband-to-be said, "The daughter of a certain vassal is too stupid to be in charge.

古文：卜贶之吉，臣与有幸，谨奉典制。 
现代文：占卜吉利，臣有幸运，谨遵从典章制度。 
English: In divination, if you are lucky, you should follow the system of regulations.

古文：纳徵词曰： 某王之俪，卜既协吉，制使某以仪物告成。 
现代文：行纳征礼的言词是： 某王的配偶，占卜协和吉利，制命使某以礼仪物品报告成功。 
English: The words of the performance of the collection of gifts are: the spouse of a certain king, the divination association and the auspicious, and the order to make a certain ceremonial item report successful.

古文：主婚者曰： 奉制赐臣以重礼，臣某谨奉典制。 
现代文：主婚者说： 奉制命赏赐给臣重礼，臣某谨遵守典章制度。 
English: The bridegroom said, "It is my duty to reward the vassal with a heavy gift, so the vassal must abide by the award system."

古文：请期词曰： 某月日涓吉，制使某告期。 
现代文：请期的言词是： 某月日选择吉祥日子，制命使某告诉婚期。 
English: The words of the request are: Select an auspicious day on a certain day of the month, and order someone to tell the marriage period.

古文：主婚者曰： 谨奉命。 
现代文：主婚者说： 谨遵奉命令。 
English: The bridegroom said, "I will do as you say.

古文：醮戒命曰： 往迎尔相，用承厥家，勖帅以敬。 
现代文：醮戒的命令说： 前往迎接你的配偶，来继承家族，勉励遵循敬慎其事。 
English: The injunction of the precepts says: Go to meet your spouse, come to inherit the family, and exhort one another to follow what is right.

古文：其亲迎、合卺、朝见、盥馈，并如皇太子。
现代文：迎亲、合卺、朝见、盥馊的礼仪，一并如皇太子之礼。
English: The etiquette of welcoming relatives, joining the coffin, seeing the emperor, and bowing is the same as that of the crown prince.

古文：盥馈毕，王皮弁服，妃翟衣，诣东宫前，行四拜礼。
现代文：盥洗髋食完毕，王穿皮弁，妃穿翟衣，到东宫太子前面，行四拜礼。
English: After washing and eating, the king put on a leather valance and the princess put on a silk gown, and went to the East Palace in front of the prince and performed four prostrations.

古文：东宫坐受，东宫妃立受二拜，答二拜。
现代文：东宫太子坐着接受礼拜，东官妃站着受两拜，回两拜。
English: The Crown Prince of the Eastern Court sat to receive the prayer, while the Empress Dowager of the Eastern Court stood to receive two prayers and return two prayers.

古文：王与妃至妃家，妃父出迎。
现代文：王与妃到了王妃家，王妃的父亲出来迎接。
English: When the king and queen arrived at the queen's house, the queen's father came out to meet them.

古文：王先入，妃父从之。
现代文：王先进入，妃的父亲跟从。
English: The king entered first, followed by the princess's father.

古文：至堂，王立于东，妃父母立于西。
现代文：到了堂上，王站在柬面，妃的父母站在西面。
English: When they arrived at the hall, the king stood on the Cambodian side, and the parents of the princess stood on the western side.

古文：王四拜，妃父母立受二拜，答二拜。
现代文：王行四拜礼，妃的父母站着接受二拜，回二拜。
English: The king performed four prostrations, and the parents of the princess stood to receive two prostrations and return two prostrations.

古文：王中坐，其余亲属见王，四拜，王皆坐受。
现代文：王在中间坐下，其余的亲属见王，行四拜礼，王都坐着接受。
English: The king sat down in the middle, and the rest of his relatives came to see him. They bowed four times, and the king accepted them all sitting down.

古文：妃入中堂，妃父母坐，妃四拜。
现代文：妃进入中堂，妃的父母坐下，妃行四拜礼。
English: The princess entered the nave, the parents of the princess sat down, and the princess prayed four times.

古文：其余序家人礼。
现代文：其余，依次行家人礼。
English: The rest, in turn, perform the family salute.

古文：太祖之世，皇太子、皇子有二妃。
现代文：太祖时期，皇太子、皇子有两个妃子。
English: During the time of the great-grandfather, the crown prince and the prince had two concubines.

古文：洪武八年十一月，徵卫国公邓愈女为秦王次妃，不传制，不发册，不亲迎。
现代文：洪武八年十一月，征召卫国公邓愈的女儿为秦王次妃，不传制命，不发册书，不迎亲。
English: In November of the eighth year of Hongwu, the daughter of Emperor Deng Yu was conscripted to be the second wife of King Qin. She was not required to pass on the imperial edict, nor was she issued a registration book, nor did she receive relatives.

古文：正副使行纳徵礼，冠服拟唐、宋二品之制，仪仗视正妃稍减。
现代文：正副使举行纳征礼，冠服仿照唐、宋二品官的规制，仪仗按正妃的礼制稍稍减少。
English: The emperor and empress will be required to pay a ceremonial tax, the crowned robe will be modeled on the regulation of the Tang and Song dynasties, and the ceremonial war will be slightly reduced according to the ceremonial system of the imperial concubine.

古文：婚之日，王皮弁服，导妃谒奉先殿。
现代文：结婚那天，王穿皮弁，引导妃拜谒奉先殿。
English: On the day of the wedding, the king wore a leather valance and led the princess to bow to the emperor.

古文：王在东稍前，妃西稍后。
现代文：王在东稍稍向前，妃在西稍稍往后。
English: The king is slightly ahead in the east, the queen slightly behind in the west.

古文：礼毕入宫，王与正妃正坐，次妃诣王前四拜，复诣正妃前四拜。
现代文：行礼结东入官，王与正妃在正面坐，次妃到王前行四拜礼，又到正妃面前行四拜礼。
English: The king and the empress dowager were seated at the front, the second empress bowed four times to the king, and the second empress bowed four times to the empress dowager.

古文：次妃东坐，宴饮成礼。
现代文：次妃在东面坐，宴饮成礼。
English: The second wife sits in the east, feasting.

古文：次日朝见，拜位如谒殿。
现代文：次日朝见，行礼位置如同拜殿。
English: See you in the morning of the next day, the position of the salutation is the same as the place of worship.

古文：谒中宫，不用枣栗腶修，余并同。
现代文：拜见中宫皇后，不用枣栗以及服修，其余的都相同。
English: To visit the Empress of the Middle Palace, you don't need dates and chestnuts, and you don't need to do any formalities. Everything else is the same.

古文：公主婚礼
现代文：公主婚礼
English: A Princess Wedding

古文：古者天子嫁女，不自主婚，以同姓诸侯主之，故曰公主。
现代文：古代天子嫁女，不自己主婚，用同姓诸侯主婚，所以叫公主。
English: In ancient times, the sons and daughters of heaven did not marry themselves, but married princes with the same surname, so they were called princesses.

古文：唐犹以亲王主婚。
现代文：唐代仍用亲王主婚。
English: In the Tang Dynasty, it was still common for princes to marry.

古文：宋始不用，惟令掌婚者于内东门纳表，则天子自为主矣。
现代文：宋代开始不用，只是命令主掌婚礼的人在内东门接表，则是皇帝自己主婚。
English: At the beginning of the Song Dynasty, it was not used, but the person in charge of the wedding was ordered to receive the watch at the Inner East Gate, while the emperor himself presided over the wedding.

古文：明因之。
现代文：明代因袭宋代礼仪。
English: The Ming Dynasty inherited the etiquette of the Song Dynasty.

古文：凡公主出降，行纳采问名礼，婿家备礼物表文于家庭，望阙再拜。
现代文：凡是公主出嫁时候，行纳采问名礼，女婿家在家中庭堂上准备礼物表文，望宫阙行再拜礼。
English: Whenever a princess marries, she performs a great ceremony, the son-in-law family prepares a gift form in the courtyard of the house, and then visits the palace.

古文：掌婚者奉至内东门，诣内使前曰： 朝恩贶室于某官某之子，某习先人之礼，使臣某请纳采。 
现代文：主掌婚礼的人捧着到内东门，来到太监面前说： 朝廷恩赐于某官某的儿子，某学习先人的礼仪，使臣某请纳采。 
English: The person in charge of the wedding went to the Inner East Gate holding a yakitori and came to the eunuch and said, "The Imperial Court has bestowed a favor on the son of a certain official, a certain person is learning the etiquette of the ancestors, and an envoy has invited a certain person.

古文：以表跪授内使。
现代文：跪着将表交给太监。
English: Kneeling, he handed the watch to the eunuch.

古文：内使跪受，奉进内殿，执雁及礼物者从入。
现代文：太监跪着接受，捧着进入内殿，拿着雁以及礼物的人跟从进入。
English: The eunuch kneels to receive it, and enters the inner hall with it in his hand. The person holding the goose and the gift follows him in.

古文：内使出，掌婚者曰： 将加卜筮，使臣某问名。 
现代文：太监出来，主掌婚礼的人说： 将用卜筮，使臣某问名。 
English: When the eunuch came out, the person in charge of the wedding ceremony said, "We will use divination to ask the name of a certain envoy."

古文：进表如初，内使出曰： 有制。 
现代文：上表如初。太监出来说： 有制命。 
English: The table is the same as before. The eunuch comes out and says, "There is a restraining order."

古文：掌婚者跪，内使宣曰； 皇帝第几女，封某公主。 
现代文：主掌婚礼的人跪下，太监宣读说： 皇帝第几女，封为某公主。 
English: The person in charge of the wedding knelt down, and the eunuch read out the following: The emperor's first daughter was given the title of princess.

古文：掌婚者俯伏，兴。
现代文：主掌婚礼的人俯身伏地，起身。
English: The man in charge of the wedding bows to the ground and stands up.

古文：入就次，赐宴出。
现代文：进入内殿就位，赐宴后退出来。
English: Enter the inner hall, take your seats, give the banquet and then leave.

古文：纳吉仪与纳采同。
现代文：纳吉的礼仪与纳采相同。
English: Najib's etiquette is the same as Natshe's.

古文：掌婚者致词曰： 加诸卜筮，占曰从吉，谨使臣某敢告纳徵。 
现代文：主掌婚礼的人致词说： 付之于卜筮，占词为吉利，使臣某冒昧报告行纳征礼。 
English: The person in charge of the wedding gave a speech, saying: "It was paid to Bu Rong, the fortune-telling was auspicious, and a certain envoy had the temerity to report the collection of gifts.

古文：婿家具玄纁、玉帛、乘马、表文如仪。
现代文：女婿家按礼仪准备玄鳄、玉帛、四匹马、表文。
English: According to the etiquette, the son-in-law's family prepared a black crocodile, a jade beak, four horses, and an epitaph.

古文：掌婚者致词曰： 朝恩贶室于某官某之子某，有先人之礼，使臣某以束帛、乘马纳徵。 
现代文：主掌婚礼的人致词说： 朝廷恩赐家室给某官某的儿子某，有先人的礼仪，使臣某用东帛、四匹马纳征。 
English: The person in charge of the wedding gave a speech, saying: The imperial court granted the family to the son of a certain official, with the etiquette of the ancestors, and the envoy used the Donglu and four horses.

古文：请期词曰： 某命臣某谨请吉日。 
现代文：请期礼的言词是： 某命臣某请求完婚的吉利日子。 
English: The words of the ceremony are: 某命臣某 insisting on the auspicious day to get married.

古文：亲迎日，婿公服告庙曰： 国恩贶室于某，以某日亲迎，敢告。 
现代文：迎亲这天，女婿穿公服祭告宗庙说： 国家恩赐家室给某，在某日亲迎，冒昧相告。 
English: On the day of the wedding, the son-in-law, dressed in his official attire, told the ancestral temple: The state bestowed a family to a certain person. On a certain day, he had the temerity to tell his parents.

古文：将行，父醮于厅，随意致戒。
现代文：将要出行，父亲在厅里行醮礼，按礼训戒。
English: Will travel, his father in the hall to perform the bow, according to the etiquette of discipline.

古文：婿再拜出，至内东门内。
现代文：女婿行再拜礼出去，到内东门内。
English: The son-in-law then went out to worship and went inside the inner east gate.

古文：内使延入次，执雁及奉礼物者各陈于庭。
现代文：太监邀请进入帐幕，拿雁以及捧持礼物的人各自陈放在庭中。
English: The eunuch invited them into the tent, and they took the geese and the people holding the gifts and placed them in the courtyard.

古文：其日，公主礼服辞奉先殿，诣帝后前四拜，受爵。
现代文：这一天，公主穿着礼服在奉先殿辞行，到皇帝、垒后面前行四拜礼，接受爵。
English: On this day, the princess, wearing a ceremonial dress, resigned from the imperial court and bowed four times before the emperor and empress dowager to receive a knighthood.

古文：帝后随意训戒。
现代文：皇帝、皇后按礼训戒。
English: Emperors and empresses are disciplined according to etiquette.

古文：受命讫，又四拜。
现代文：接受完教命，又行四拜礼。
English: After receiving the teaching, he performed four prostrations.

古文：降阶，内命妇送至内殿门外，公主升辇。
现代文：下阶，内命妇送到内殿门外，公主登辇。
English: At the lower level, the lady-in-waiting is sent outside the inner hall door, and the princess ascends the throne.

古文：至内东门，降辇。
现代文：到了内东门，下辇。
English: When you get to the Inner East Gate, turn left.

古文：婿揭帘，公主升轿。
现代文：女婿揭帘子，公主登轿。
English: The son-in-law opens the curtains and the princess climbs into the limousine.

古文：婿出次立。
现代文：女婿出帐幕站立。
English: The son-in-law came out of the tent and stood up.

古文：执雁者以雁跪授婿，婿受雁，跪进于内使。
现代文：拿雁的人拿雁跪着交给女婿，女婿接雁，跪着交给太监。
English: The person who takes the goose kneels and hands it to the son-in-law, the son-in-law takes the goose and kneels and hands it to the eunuch.

古文：内使跪受以授左右。
现代文：太监跪着接受交给左右的人。
English: The eunuch kneeled to receive those who were given to him.

古文：婿再拜，先出，乘马还。
现代文：女婿行再拜礼，先出来，乘马返回。
English: The son-in-law went back to worship, came out first, and rode back.

古文：公主卤簿车辂后发，公侯百官命妇送至府。
现代文：公主的扈从仪仗队以及车辖随后出发，公侯百官命妇送到府上。
English: The princess's carriage set off from the guard of honour and the chariot afterwards, and the prince sent hundreds of officials and their wives to the palace.

古文：婿先候于门。
现代文：女婿先在门口等候。
English: The son-in-law waits at the door.

古文：公主至，婿揭帘。
现代文：公主到，女婿揭开帘子。
English: The princess arrives and the son-in-law opens the curtains.

古文：公主降，同诣祠堂。
现代文：公主下来，同到祠堂。
English: The princess came down and went with them to the ancestral hall.

古文：婿东，公主西，皆再拜。
现代文：女婿在柬，公主在西，都行再拜礼。
English: The son-in-law in Cambodia and the princess in the West can both return to worship.

古文：进爵，读祝，又再拜。
现代文：进献爵，读祝文，又行再拜礼。
English: The investiture ceremony, the reading of the congratulatory message, the procession and then the worship.

古文：出，诣寝室。
现代文：出来，到寝室。
English: Come out to the bedroom.

古文：婿公主相向再拜，各就坐，婿东，公主西。
现代文：女婿公主相对行再拜礼，各自就位坐下，女婿在柬，公主在西。
English: The son-in-law and the princess bowed to each other and sat down in their respective places. The son-in-law was in Cambodia and the princess was in the West.

古文：进馔合卺如仪，复相向再拜。
现代文：按礼仪进献饭食、合卺，又相对行再拜礼。
English: According to the etiquette, the meal is offered, the meal is eaten, and then the opposite line is worshipped.

古文：明日，见舅姑。
现代文：第二天，见公婆。
English: The next day, I met my in-laws.

古文：舅姑坐于东，西向。
现代文：公婆坐在东，面向西。
English: The in-laws sat in the east, facing west.

古文：公主立于西，东向，行四拜礼。
现代文：公主站在西，面向东，行四拜礼。
English: The princess stood in the west, facing east, and made four prostrations.

古文：舅姑答二拜。
现代文：公婆回两拜礼。
English: The parents-in-law prayed twice.

古文：第十日，驸马朝见谢恩，行五拜礼。
现代文：第十天，驸马上朝拜见谢恩，行五拜礼。
English: On the tenth day, Zou immediately paid homage to Shane in the morning and performed five prostrations.

古文：初，洪武九年，太祖以太师李善长子祺为驸马都尉，尚临安公主。
现代文：开初，洪武九年，太祖以太师李善长的儿子李祺为驸马都尉，娶临安公主。
English: At the beginning of the 9th year of Hongwu, Li Yan, the son of the great-grandfather etheric teacher Li Shanchang, became the captain of the horse and married Princess Lin'an.

古文：先期告奉先殿。
现代文：婚期之前在奉先殿祭告。
English: Before the wedding, it is announced in the hosendo hall.

古文：下嫁前二日，命使册公主。
现代文：下嫁前两天，命令使者册封公主。
English: Two days before the wedding, he ordered an envoy to crown the princess.

古文：册后次日，谒奉先殿。
现代文：册封后的次日，拜谒奉先殿。
English: On the next day after the canonization, I went to pay my respects to my predecessor.

古文：又定驸马受诰仪，吏部官捧诰命置龙亭，至太师府，驸马朝服拜受。
现代文：又制定驸马接受诰命的礼仪，吏部官员捧着诰命放在龙亭中，到太师府，驸马穿朝服行拜礼接受。
English: In addition, the etiquette for the horse to receive the horse's life was formulated. The officials of the cadre department placed the horse with the horse's life in the Longting, and went to the Grand Master's residence, where the horse was dressed in a court dress to receive the horse.

古文：次日，善长及驸马谢恩。
现代文：次日，李善长以及驸马谢恩。
English: The next day, Li Shanchang and his horse Shane.

古文：后十日，始请婚期。
现代文：后十天，开始请问婚期。
English: After ten days, the wedding period begins.

古文：二十六年，稍更仪注。
现代文：二十六年，稍稍更改礼仪制度。
English: In 1926, the etiquette system was slightly changed.

古文：然仪注虽存，其拜姑舅及公主驸马相向拜之礼，终明之世实未尝行也。
现代文：然而礼仪程序虽然存在，而拜公婆以及公主、驸马相对拜的礼仪，到明末实际上也不曾实行。
English: However, although the ceremonial procedures existed, the rituals of bowing to one's parents-in-law as well as bowing to princesses and horses were not actually practiced until the end of the Ming Dynasty.

古文：明年，又更定公主、郡主封号、婚礼，及驸马、仪宾品秩。
现代文：第二年又更改制定公主、郡主封号、婚礼，以及驸马、亲王、郡王女婿的官品与俸秩。
English: In the following year, the official ranks and salaries of princesses, princesses, princesses, princesses, princesses, princesses, princesses, princesses, princesses, princesses, princesses, princesses, princesses, princesses, princesses, princesses, princesses, princesses, princesses, princesses, princesses, princesses, princesses, princesses, princesses, princesses, princesses, princesses, princesses, princesses, princesses, princesses, princesses, princesses, princesses, princesses, princesses, princesses, princesses, princesses, princesses, princesses, princesses, princesses, princesses, princesses

古文：弘治二年，册封仁和长公主，重定婚仪。
现代文：弘治二年，册封仁和长公主，重新制定婚姻仪礼。
English: In the second year of Hongzhi, the crown prince and the first princess were crowned, and the marriage ceremony was reformulated.

古文：入府，公主驸马同拜天地，行八拜礼。
现代文：入府，公主、驸马同拜天地，行八拜礼。
English: Entering the palace, the princess and her horse bowed to heaven and earth together, performing eight prostrations.

古文：堂内设公主座于东，西向，驸马东向座，余如前仪。
现代文：堂内在东面设公主座位，面向西，驸马座位面向东，其余的如同前面所记礼仪。
English: Inside the hall, the princess's seat is located in the east, facing west, and the groom's seat faces east. The rest is as described in the previous etiquette.

古文：嘉靖二年，工科给事中安磐等言： 驸马见公主，行四拜礼，公主坐受二拜。
现代文：嘉靖二年，工科给事中安盘等人说： 驸马见公主，行四拜礼，公主坐着接受二拜。
English: In the second year of Jiajing, Anpan and others in the engineering department said: "If you see a princess, bow four times, and the princess sits and receives two bows.

古文：虽贵贱本殊，而夫妇分定，于礼不安。 
现代文：虽然贵贱本来悬殊，而夫妇名分确定，于礼不安。 
English: Although there is a great disparity between the nobility and the commoners, and the title of husband and wife is determined, they are uneasy about the ceremony.

古文：不听。
现代文：皇帝不听。
English: The emperor does not allow it.

古文：崇祯元年，教习驸马主事陈钟盛言： 臣都习驸马巩永固，驸马黎明于府门外月台四拜，云至三月后，则上堂、上门、上影壁，行礼如前。
现代文：崇祯元年，教习驸马主事陈锺盛说： 臣教习驸马巩永固，驸马黎明时在府门外站台行四拜礼，说到三月后，上堂、上门、上影壁，行礼如先前。
English: In the first year of the reign of Emperor Chongzhen, Chen Yongsheng, the head of the horse-riding school, said: "The horse-riding school of Emperor Chongzhen is firmly established. At dawn, the horse-riding school performs four prostrations on the platform outside the government gate. After March, the horse-riding school goes to the hall, the gate and the shadow wall and performs the prostrations as before.

古文：始视膳于公主前，公主饮食于上，驸马侍立于旁，过此，方议成婚。
现代文：开始在公主面前照顾膳食，公主在上饮食，驸马在一穷侍立，经过此仪，纔议论成婚。
English: He began to take care of the meal in front of the princess, the princess was eating and drinking, the horse was waiting for the poor, and after this ceremony, they discussed marriage.

古文：驸马馈果肴书臣，公主答礼书赐，皆大失礼。
现代文：驸马赠送果肴称臣，公主答礼称赐，都很失礼仪。
English: It is bad etiquette for a horse to present fruit and vegetables to a dignitary, and for a princess to reciprocate.

古文：夫既合卺，则俨然夫妇，安有跪拜数月，称臣侍膳，然后成婚者？
现代文：丈夫既然已经合卺完婚，那么明明是夫妇，哪有跪拜数月，称臣侍奉用膳，然后成婚的道理呢？
English: Since the husband has already consummated the marriage, then obviously they are a couple, where is the reason for kneeling for several months, praising and serving the meal, and then getting married?

古文：《会典》行四拜于合卺之前，明合卺后无拜礼也。
现代文：《会典》上说在合卺前行四拜礼，表明在合卺后无拜礼。
English: The "Canon" says that there are four prostrations before the closing, indicating that there is no prostration after the closing.

古文：以天子馆甥，下同隶役，岂所以尊朝廷？ 
现代文：以天子的女婿，而卑下如同奴隶，这哪里是尊重朝廷呢？ 
English: To be the son-in-law of the Son of Heaven, and to be humbled like a slave, where is the respect for the imperial court?

古文：帝是其言，令永固即择日成婚。
现代文：皇帝同意他的话，命令巩永固立即选择吉日成婚。
English: The emperor agreed with his words and ordered Gong Yonggu to choose a good day to get married immediately.

古文：凡选驸马，礼部榜谕在京官员军民子弟年十四至十六，容貌齐整、行止端庄、有家教者报名，司礼内臣于诸王馆会选。
现代文：凡是选驸马，礼部张榜下谕在京官员军民的子弟年纪在十四至十六岁的，容貌整齐、行为端庄、有家教的人报名，司礼内臣在众王馆内会同选取。
English: For the selection of the best horses, the Ministry of Ceremonies will issue a list of names and invite the sons and daughters of officials, soldiers and civilians in Beijing who are between the ages of fourteen and sixteen, have a neat appearance, behave modestly, and have tutors to sign up. The priests and courtiers will be selected together in the Hall of the Kings.

古文：不中，则博访于畿内、山东、河南。
现代文：没有选中，就广泛地在京郊地区、山东、河南寻访。
English: If they are not selected, they will search extensively in the suburbs of Beijing, Shandong and Henan.

古文：选中三人，钦定一人，余二人送本处儒学，充廪生。
现代文：选中三人，皇帝确定下一人，其余两人送本处儒学，充任公家供膳食的生员。
English: Three people were selected, the emperor determined the next one, and the remaining two were sent to the Confucianism Department to serve as students of the public dining room.

古文：自宣德时，驸马始有教习，用学官为之。
现代文：从宣德年间，驸马开始有教习，由学官担任。
English: From the Xuande era, Xiama began to have a teaching department, which was headed by an academic officer.

古文：正统以后，令驸马赴监读书习礼。
现代文：正统以后，命令驸马到园子监读书学习礼仪。
English: After the orthodoxy, he ordered his horse to go to the garden to supervise the reading and study the etiquette.

古文：嘉请六年，始定礼部主事一人，专在驸马府教习。
现代文：嘉靖六年，开始规定礼部主事一人，专门在驸马府教授讲习。
English: In the sixth year of Jiajing, it began to stipulate that there should be one person in charge of the ceremonial department, who would specifically teach seminars in Xiama Prefecture.

古文：品官婚礼
现代文：品官婚礼
English: An Officer's Wedding

古文：周制，凡公侯大夫士之婚娶者，用六礼。
现代文：周朝制度，凡是公侯大夫士人结婚娶亲，用六礼。
English: According to the Zhou Dynasty system, when princes and princesses get married, they should use the Six Rites.

古文：唐以后，仪物多以官品为降杀。
现代文：唐代以后，礼仪器物多根据官位品级来增减。
English: After the Tang Dynasty, ceremonial instruments were mostly increased or decreased according to the official rank grade.

古文：明洪武五年诏曰： 古之婚礼，结两姓之欢，以重人伦。
现代文：明代洪武五年下诏说： 古代婚礼，结两姓的欢好，以推重人伦。
English: The imperial edict issued in the fifth year of the Hongwu Dynasty of the Ming Dynasty said: "Ancient wedding, the marriage of two surnames, with the emphasis on human relations."

古文：近世以来，专论聘财，习染奢侈。
现代文：近代以来，专论聘娶财物，风俗染上奢侈。
English: Since modern times, the focus has been on hiring and marrying wealth, and customs have been tainted with luxury.

古文：其仪制颁行。务从节俭，以厚风俗。 
现代文：礼仪制度的颁布施行，务必依从节俭，以此醇厚风俗。 
English: In the promulgation and implementation of the etiquette system, it is imperative to follow frugality as a mellow custom.

古文：故其时品节详明，皆有限制，后克遵者鲜矣。
现代文：所以当时等级详细严明，都有所限制，后来能够遵守的人少了。
English: Therefore, at that time, the levels were detailed and strict, and there were some restrictions. Later, fewer people were able to comply.

古文：其制，凡品官婚娶，或为子聘妇，皆使媒氏通书。
现代文：它的制度规定，凡是有品级的官员婚娶，或为儿子聘妻，都派遣媒人通信。
English: Its system stipulates that any official with a rank can marry, or hire a wife for his son, and send a matchmaker correspondence.

古文：女氏许之，择吉纳采。主婚者设宾席。
现代文：女方同意后，选择吉利日子纳采，主婚者设宾席。
English: After the woman agreed, she chose the auspicious day of Natse, and the host of the wedding set up a guest seat.

古文：至日，具祝版告庙讫，宾至女氏第。
现代文：到了这天，准备祝文祭告宗庙完毕，宾到女方住所。
English: On this day, the preparations for the congratulatory message festival were completed, and the guests arrived at the woman's residence.

古文：主婚者公服出迎，揖宾及媒氏人。
现代文：主婚者穿着公服出来迎接，向宾以及媒人拱手请进。
English: The bride and groom come out in their official attire to greet the guests and the matchmaker.

古文：雁及礼物陈于厅。
现代文：雁以及礼物陈放在厅上。
English: Geese and gifts are displayed in the hall.

古文：宾左主右，媒氏立于宾南，皆再拜。
现代文：实在左主在右，媒人站在宾的南面，都行再拜礼。
English: The real host on the left is on the right, and the matchmaker stands on the south side of the guests.

古文：宾诣主人曰： 某官以伉俪之重施于某，某率循典礼，谨使某纳采。 
现代文：宾见主人说： 某官将结为夫妻重任交于某，某遵循典礼，使某纳采。 
English: The guest said to the host, "A certain official entrusted the important task of marrying a husband and wife to a certain person, a certain person followed the ceremony, and made a certain person marry.

古文：主婚者曰： 某之子弗娴姆训，既辱采择，敢不拜嘉。 
现代文：主婚者说： 某的女儿不熟习女师的训诫，既然使你屈尊选取，岂敢不拜谢你的美意。 
English: The bridegroom said, "A certain daughter is not familiar with the precepts of her teacher. Since you have condescended to choose her, how dare she not thank you for your kindness?"

古文：宾主西东相向坐，彻雁受礼讫，复陈雁及问名礼物。
现代文：宾主东西相对坐下，撤掉雁接受礼物后，又陈设雁以及问名的礼物。
English: The guests sit down opposite each other, remove the geese to accept the gift, and then display the geese and the gift.

古文：宾兴，诣主婚者曰： 某官慎重婚礼，将加卜筮，请问名。 
现代文：宾起身，拜见主婚者说： 某官愤重婚礼，将付之于卜筮，请问名。 
English: The guest stood up and said to the bride and groom: "A certain official is upset about the wedding, and it will be held in Buyeo. Please state your name."

古文：主婚者进曰： 某第几女，妻某氏出。 
现代文：主婚人上前说： 某第几女，妻某氏所生。 
English: The husband-to-be stepped forward and said, "A certain first daughter, born to the wife of a certain lord.

古文：或以红罗，或以销金纸，书女之第行年岁。
现代文：或用红罗，或用销金纸，写上女子的排行年龄。
English: Or with red ink, or with gold paper, write the ranking age of the woman.

古文：宾辞，主婚者请礼从者。
现代文：宾告辞，主婚者请礼待随从人员。
English: The guests leave, and the bride and groom ask the attendants to be polite.

古文：礼毕，送宾至门外。
现代文：礼仪结东，送宾到门外。
English: After the etiquette, the guests are escorted out of the door.

古文：纳吉如纳采仪。
现代文：纳吉的礼仪如同纳采的礼仪。
English: The etiquette of Najib is like the etiquette of Natshe.

古文：宾致词曰： 某官承嘉命，稽诸卜筮，龟筮协从，使某告吉。 
现代文：宾致词说： 某官承接美好的命令，考察于卜筮，龟筮协和依从，使某报告吉祥。 
English: The guest said in his speech: A certain official undertook a good order, investigated in Buyeo, and the tortoise and the hare cooperated and obeyed, making a certain report auspicious.

古文：主婚者曰： 某未教之女，既以吉告，其何敢辞。 
现代文：主婚者说： 某没有教育的女儿，既以吉兆来告，怎敢推辞？ 
English: The bridegroom said, "How dare an uneducated daughter refuse a good omen?"

古文：纳徵如纳吉仪，加玄纁束帛、函书，不用雁。
现代文：纳征如同纳吉的礼仪，加上玄缥、东帛、函书，不用雁。
English: The tax collection is like Najib's etiquette, with the addition of Xuan Zang, Dong Zang, and Hanzhong, but without the goose.

古文：宾致词曰： 某官以伉俪之重，加惠某官，率循典礼。
现代文：宾致词说： 某官以夫妻事关重大，施恩惠给某官，遵循典礼。
English: In his speech, the guest said: It is of great importance for a certain official to be married, to grant favors to a certain official, and to follow the ceremony.

古文：有不腆之币，敢请纳徵。 
现代文：有不丰厚的缯帛，请求纳征。 
English: If there is not enough money, they will ask for a levy.

古文：主婚者曰： 某官贶某以重礼，某敢不拜受。 
现代文：主婚者说： 某官赐给我重礼，某岂敢不行礼接受。 
English: The bridegroom said, "A certain official has given me a great gift, but I dare not accept it.

古文：宾以函书授主婚者，主婚者亦答以函书。
现代文：宾将函书交给主婚者，主婚者也用函书回覆。
English: The guest hands the letter to the officiant, who also replies with a letter.

古文：请期，亦如纳吉仪。
现代文：请期礼也如同纳吉的礼仪。
English: The request for a grace period is also part of Najib's etiquette.

古文：亲迎日，婿父告于祢庙。
现代文：亲迎那天，新婿的父亲在父庙告祭。
English: On the day of the wedding, the father of the new son-in-law made an offering in the father's temple.

古文：婿北面再拜立，父命之曰： 躬迎嘉偶，釐尔内治。 
现代文：新婿面向北行再拜礼，然后站立，父亲命令他说： 亲自迎娶好的配偶，厘正自我，修身约束。 
English: The new son-in-law faced north and bowed again, then stood up. His father ordered him to say: "Marry a good spouse in person, rectify yourself, and discipline yourself."

古文：婿进曰： 敢不承命。 
现代文：新婿上前说： 不敢不从命！ 
English: The new son-in-law stepped forward and said: I dare not disobey my orders!

古文：再拜，媒氏导婿之女家。
现代文：行再拜礼，媒人引导新婿到了女方家里。
English: After the ceremony, the matchmaker led the new husband to the woman's house.

古文：其日，女氏主婚者告庙讫，醴女如家人礼。
现代文：这天，女方的主婚者祭告完宗庙，按家人礼仪给女饮甜酒。
English: On this day, the woman's husband-to-be finished the sermon at the ancestral temple and gave the woman sweet wine according to family etiquette.

古文：婿至门，下马，就大门外之次。
现代文：新婿到家门，下马，到大门外的帐幕里。
English: The bridegroom came to the door of the house, dismounted, and went into the tent outside the gate.

古文：女从者请女盛服，就寝门内，南向坐。
现代文：女方侍从请女穿盛服，到寝门内，向南坐下。
English: The female attendant asked the woman to put on a dress, go to the bedroom door, and sit down to the south.

古文：婿出次，主婚者出迎于门外，揖而入。
现代文：新婿出帐幕，主婚者出来在门外迎接，拱手请进。
English: The bridegroom went out of the tent, and the bridegroom came out to meet him outside the door. Please come in.

古文：主婚者入门而右。
现代文：主婚者进门走右边。
English: The bride and groom enter the door and walk to the right.

古文：婿入门而左，执雁者从，至寝户前，北面立。
现代文：新婿进门走左边，拿雁的人跟从，到了寝室门前，向北站立。
English: The new son-in-law entered the door and walked to the left, followed by the person who took the geese. When he reached the bedroom door, he stood facing north.

古文：主婚者立于户东，西向。
现代文：主婚者站在门户东面，面向西。
English: The bride and groom stand on the east side of the portal, facing west.

古文：婿再拜，奠雁，出就次。
现代文：新婿行再拜礼，献雁，出来到帐幕中。
English: And the bridegroom went in again to worship, and to sacrifice, and to go forth into the tabernacle.

古文：主婚者不降送。
现代文：主婚者降阶相送。
English: The bride and groom walk down the aisle.

古文：婿既出，女父母南向坐，保母导女四拜。
现代文：新婿出来以后，女方的父母向南坐下，保姆引导女行四拜礼。
English: After the new son-in-law came out, the woman's parents sat down to the south, and the nanny led the bridal procession.

古文：父命之曰： 往之女家，以顺为正，无忘肃恭。 
现代文：父亲命令说： 前往你家，以顺为正，不要忘了端庄恭敬。 
English: The father ordered: "Go to your home, be obedient, and don't forget to be dignified and respectful.

古文：母命之曰： 必恭必戒，毋违舅姑之命。 
现代文：母亲命令她说： 一定要恭敬，一定要戒慎，不要违背公婆的命令。 
English: Her mother ordered her: "You must be respectful, you must be cautious, and you must not disobey your in-laws' orders."

古文：庶母申之曰： 尔忱听于训言，毋作父母羞。 
现代文：庶母申说道： 你要真诚地听父母的训诫，不要做使父母羞辱的事。 
English: Mother-in-law Shin said, "You should sincerely listen to your parents' admonition and not do anything that would humiliate your parents.

古文：保姆及侍女翼女出门，升车。
现代文：保姆以及侍女纔扶女子出门，登上车。
English: The nanny and the maid help the woman out of the house and into the car.

古文：仪卫导前，送者乘车后。
现代文：仪仗侍卫在前面引导，陪送的人乘车在后。
English: The guard of honor leads the procession in front, while the escort rides behind.

古文：婿先还以俟。
现代文：新婿先返回等侯。
English: The new husband returns first and waits.

古文：妇车至门，出迎于门内，揖妇入。
现代文：新妇的车到了门口，新婿出来在门内迎接，向新妇拱手请进入。
English: When the bride's car arrived at the door, the groom came out to meet her inside the door. He extended his hand to the bride and asked her to enter.

古文：及寝门，婿先升阶，妇从升。
现代文：到了寝门，新婿先登上台阶，新妇跟着登台阶。
English: When they reached the bedroom door, the groom climbed the steps first, followed by the bride.

古文：入室，婿盥于室之东南，妇从者执巾进水以沃之；妇盥于室之西北，婿从者执巾进水以沃之。
现代文：进入室内，新婿在室的东南洗手，跟随新妇的人拿巾送造水为他洗盥；新妇在室的西北洗手，新婿的侍从拿手巾送进水焉她洗盥。
English: Entering the room, the groom washes his hands in the southeast of the room, and the bride's attendant takes a towel and brings water to wash his hands; the bride washes her hands in the northwest of the room, and the groom's attendant takes a towel and brings water to wash her hands.

古文：盥毕，各就坐，婿东，妇西。
现代文：洗完后，各自就座，新婿在东，新妇在西。
English: After washing, they each take their seats, the new husband in the east and the new wife in the west.

古文：举食案，进酒，进馔。
现代文：举食案，进献酒，进献饭菜。
English: Make a meal plan, serve wine, serve food.

古文：酒食讫，复进如初。
现代文：饮酒吃饭完毕，又进献如初。
English: After drinking and eating, it was back to business as usual.

古文：侍女以卺注酒，进于婿妇前。
现代文：侍女拿瓢倒酒，进献到新婿、新妇面前。
English: The maid takes a ladle and pours the wine, then presents it to the bride and groom.

古文：各饮毕，皆兴，立于座南，东西相向，皆再拜。
现代文：各自饮完，都起身，站在座位南，东西相对，都行再拜礼。
English: After each of them finished drinking, they all got up and stood on the south side of the seat, facing each other. They all went back to worship.

古文：婿妇入室，易服。
现代文：新婿、新妇进入内室，换上衣服。
English: The new husband and wife enter the inner room and change into their clothes.

古文：婿从者馂妇之余，妇从者馂婿之余。
现代文：新婿的侍从吃新妇剩下的食物，新妇侍从吃新婿剩下的食物。
English: The groom's valet eats the bride's leftover food, and the bride's valet eats the groom's leftover food.

古文：明日见宗庙，设婿父拜位于东阶下，婿于其后；主妇拜位于西阶下，妇于其后。
现代文：第二天拜见宗庙，在东阶下陈设新婿父亲的行礼位置，新婿位在他的后面；主妇的行礼位置在西阶下，新妇位于她的后面。
English: The next day, they visited the ancestral temple and set up the bridegroom's father's bowing position under the east steps, with the bridegroom behind him; the housewife's bowing position was under the west steps, with the bride behind her.

古文：诸亲各以序分立。
现代文：众亲人各自按次序分别站立。
English: All the relatives stood separately in order.

古文：其日夙兴，婿父以下各就位，再拜。
现代文：这天早起，新婿的父亲以下各自就位，行再拜礼。
English: After getting up early that day, the father of the new son-in-law and the rest of the family took their places and performed the second prayer.

古文：赞礼引妇至庭中，北面立。
现代文：赞礼人引导新妇到庭中，向北站立。
English: The celebrant leads the bride into the courtyard and stands facing north.

古文：婿父升自东阶，诣神位前，跪。
现代文：新婿的父亲从东阶升登，到神位前，跪下。
English: The father of the new son-in-law ascended from the eastern step to the throne of God, kneel down.

古文：三上香，三祭酒，读祝，兴，立于西。
现代文：上香三次，祭酒三次，读祝文，起身，站在西面。
English: Incense three times, sacrificial wine three times, read a congratulatory message, get up and stand on the west side.

古文：妇四拜，退，复位。
现代文：新妇行四拜礼，退下，回原位。
English: The bride performs four prostrations, steps back and returns to her original position.

古文：婿父降自西阶就拜位，婿父以下皆再拜，礼毕。
现代文：新婿的父亲下西阶来到行礼的位置，新婿的父亲以下都行再拜礼，礼仪结东。
English: The father of the new son-in-law comes down the west steps to the place of the salute. The father of the new son-in-law and all those below him bow again, and the etiquette is completed.

古文：次见舅姑。
现代文：其次拜见公婆。
English: Next, I visited my in-laws.

古文：其日，妇立堂下，伺舅姑即座，就位四拜。
现代文：这天，新妇站在堂下，等公婆就座，到拜位行四拜礼。
English: On this day, the bride stood under the hall and waited for her in-laws to take their seats.

古文：保姆引妇升自西阶，至舅前，侍女奉枣栗授妇。
现代文：保姆引导新妇从西阶升登，到公公面前，侍女捧枣栗交给新妇。
English: The nanny led the bride up the west steps to the presence of her father-in-law, while the maid-of-honour handed the date-chestnuts to the bride.

古文：妇进讫，降阶四拜。
现代文：新妇进献完毕，下阶行四拜礼。
English: After the bride has made her entrance, the lower tiers perform four prostrations.

古文：诣姑前，进腶修，如前仪。
现代文：到婆婆面前，进献服修，如同前面的礼仪。
English: Go to your mother-in-law and make a ritual offering, as in the previous etiquette.

古文：次舅姑醴妇，如家人礼。
现代文：其次是公婆按家人的礼仪给新妇饮甜酒。
English: Next, the in-laws give the bride sweet wine according to the family's etiquette.

古文：次盥馈。
现代文：其次是举行洗手镘食礼。
English: This was followed by the washing of hands and breaking of bread ceremony.

古文：其日，妇家备馔至婿家。
现代文：这天，新妇家准备饭食到新婿家。
English: On this day, the bride and groom prepare a meal and go to their new husband's house.

古文：舅姑即座，妇四拜。
现代文：公婆就座，新妇行四拜礼。
English: The parents-in-law take their seats, and the bride makes four bows.

古文：升自西阶，至舅前。
现代文：从西阶升登，到公公的面前。
English: From the west rung of the ladder, to the presence of the father-in-law.

古文：从者举食案以馔授妇，妇进馔，执事者加匕箸。
现代文：侍从举着食案将饭食交给新妇，新妇进献饭食，执事者加羹匙和筷子。
English: The attendant hands the meal to the bride, holding up the meal plan. The bride offers the meal, and the officiant adds a spoon and chopsticks.

古文：进馔于姑，亦如之。
现代文：给婆婆进献饭食，也如此。
English: It's the same with giving food to your mother-in-law.

古文：食讫，彻馔，妇降阶就位，四拜，礼毕。
现代文：吃完，撤掉饭菜，新妇下阶就位，行四拜礼，礼仪结东。
English: After eating, remove the food, the bride and groom take their places, perform four prostrations, and conclude the etiquette.

古文：舅姑再醴妇，如初仪。
现代文：公婆再次给新妇饮甜酒，如同初次的礼仪。
English: The mother-in-law again gave the bride sweet wine to drink, just like the first time.

古文：庶人婚礼
现代文：庶人婚礼
English: The commoner wedding

古文：《礼》云： 婚礼下达。 则六礼之行，无贵贱一也。
现代文：《礼》说 婚礼下达百姓 ，那么六礼的施行，没有贵贱都是一致的。
English: "Ri" says that the wedding ceremony starts with the people, so the implementation of the six rites is consistent regardless of rank.

古文：朱子《家礼》无问名、纳吉，止纳采、纳币、请期。
现代文：朱子《家礼》没有问名、纳吉礼，祇有纳采、纳币、请期礼。
English: Zhu Zi's "Family Rite" does not have the name-calling and nagging, but only nagging, nagging, and begging.

古文：洪武元年定制用之，下令禁指腹、割衫襟为亲者。
现代文：洪武元年，规定制度施行，下令禁止指腹为亲、割衫襟为亲的做法。
English: In the first year of Hongwu, the regulation system was implemented, and it was ordered to prohibit the practice of fingering the belly for a relative, and cutting the shirt collar for a relative.

古文：凡庶人娶妇，男年十六，女年十四以上，并听婚娶。
现代文：凡是平民娶妻，男子年龄十六岁，女子十四岁以上，都任凭婚嫁。
English: Any commoner who marries a woman is allowed to do so, provided the man is at least 16 and the woman at least 14.

古文：婿常服，或假九品服，妇服花钗大袖。
现代文：新婿穿常服，或借九品服，新妇穿花钗大袖服。
English: The groom wears regular clothes, or borrows nine-piece suits, and the bride wears a flower embroidered long-sleeved dress.

古文：其纳采、纳币、请期，略仿品官之仪。
现代文：纳采、纳币、请期的礼仪，大略仿照有品级官员的礼仪。
English: The etiquette of receiving gifts, receiving money, and requesting time off is roughly modeled on the etiquette of officials with ranks.

古文：有媒无宾，词亦稍异。
现代文：有媒没有宾，言词也稍有差别。
English: If there is a mediator but no guests, the words will be slightly different.

古文：亲迎前一日，女氏使人陈设于婿之寝室，俗谓之铺房。
现代文：亲迎的前一天，女方派人在新婿的寝室陈设，俗语叫铺房。
English: The day before the wedding, the woman sent someone to decorate the new son-in-law's bedroom.

古文：至若告词、醮戒、奠雁、合卺，并如品官仪。
现代文：至于告词、醮戒、献雁，合卺的礼仪，全如品级官的礼仪。
English: As for the etiquette of proclamations, imposition of vows, offering of geese, and the tying of knots, they are all the same as the etiquette of the court officials.

古文：见祖祢舅姑，舅姑醴妇，亦略相准。
现代文：拜见祖庙父庙公公婆婆，公公婆婆给新妇饮甜酒，也大致相同。
English: It is roughly the same to visit the ancestor's temple, the father's temple, the father-in-law and mother-in-law, and the father-in-law and mother-in-law drink sweet wine to the bride.

古文：皇帝视学仪
现代文：皇帝视学仪
English: The emperor looks at the instrument

古文：《礼》曰： 凡始立学者，必释奠于先圣先师。 
现代文：《礼》说： 凡是开始设立学校，必定先设酒食祭奠先圣先师。 
English: "Li" said: Whenever a school is established, there must first be a wine and food festival to lay the foundation stone.

古文：周末沦丧，礼废不行。
现代文：周末沦役丧亡，礼仪废弃不施行。
English: If a soldier is killed in the line of duty on the weekend, the etiquette is abandoned and is not enforced.

古文：汉明帝始幸辟雍。
现代文：汉明帝开始驾临学校。
English: Emperor Han Ming started to come to the school.

古文：唐以后，天子视学，始设讲榻。
现代文：唐代以后，天子视察学校，开始设立讲榻。
English: After the Tang Dynasty, Tianzi inspected the school and began to set up lecture couches.

古文：洪武十五年，太祖将幸国子监。
现代文：洪武十五年，太祖将驾临国子监。
English: In the 15th year of Hongwu's reign, the great-grandfather will come to visit the state inspector.

古文：议者言，孔子虽圣，乃人臣，礼宜一奠而再拜。
现代文：议论的人说，孔子虽然是圣人，仍然是人臣，礼仪应为祭献一次而行再拜礼。
English: Commentators said that although Confucius was a saint, he was still a vassal, and that the ritual should be to offer the sacrifice once and then perform the ritual.

古文：太祖不从，命礼部尚书刘仲质定其制。
现代文：太祖役听从，命令礼部尚书刘仲质制定制度。
English: The great ancestor obeyed and ordered the Ministry of Ceremonies to draw up a system.

古文：前期设御幄于大成门东，南向，设御座于彝伦堂。
现代文：到期前在大成门东面设皇帝的帷帐，面向南，在彝伦堂设皇帝宝座。
English: Before the deadline, the emperor's curtain will be set up on the east side of the Dacheng Gate, facing south, and the emperor's throne will be set up in the Yulun Hall.

古文：至日，学官率诸生迎驾于成贤街左。
现代文：到了这天，学官率领诸生在成贤街左面迎接皇帝。
English: On this day, the scholar-officials led all the students to meet the emperor on the left side of Chengxian Street.

古文：皇帝入御幄，具皮弁服，诣先师神位，再拜。
现代文：皇帝进入帷帐，穿皮弁服，到孔子神位前，行再拜礼。
English: The emperor entered the tabernacle, put on the leather vestments, and went before the throne of Confucius to worship again.

古文：献爵，复再拜。
现代文：祭献爵，又行再拜礼。
English: Sacrifices are offered, and then there is another round of worship.

古文：四配、十哲、两庑分献，如常仪。
现代文：孔子的四个配祀弟子颜渊、子思、曾参、孟轲，十位贤哲弟子在两庶分别祭祀，如同平常礼仪。
English: The four disciples of Confucius, Yan Yuan, Zisi, Zeng San, and Meng Yao, and the ten disciples of the sages and sages held the sacrifice separately in two rows, as is the usual etiquette.

古文：皇帝入御幄，易常服。
现代文：皇帝进入帷帐，换上常服。
English: The emperor entered the curtain and changed into his regular clothes.

古文：升舆，至彝伦堂升座。
现代文：升舆，到彝伦堂登上座位。
English: Shengwu, go to Qilian Hall and take your seat.

古文：三品以上及侍从官，以次入堂，东西序立。
现代文：三品以上及侍从官，依次进入堂中，在东西厢房站立。
English: Those with three or more court ranks and attendants entered the hall in turn and stood in the east and west chambers.

古文：赞进讲，祭酒、司业、博士、助教四人由西门入，至堂中。
现代文：赞唱为皇帝讲书，祭酒、司业、博士、助教四人从西门进入，到堂中。
English: Singing praises for the emperor's lecture, four people, including the officiant, the dean, the doctor, and the assistant professor, entered the hall from the west gate.

古文：赞举经案于御前，礼部官奏，请授经于讲官。祭酒跪受。
现代文：赞举经案到皇帝面前，礼部官员奏报，请求授经给讲官祭酒，跪下接受。
English: After praising the sutra and presenting it to the emperor, the officials of the etiquette department made a report, requested that the sutra be given to the lecturer, and kneeled down to accept it.

古文：赐讲官坐。
现代文：赏赐讲官坐下。
English: Will the awards presenter please be seated.

古文：及以经置讲案，叩头，就西南隅几榻坐讲。
现代文：等到把经放置到讲案上，叩头，到西南角几榻上坐着讲。
English: Wait until the sutra is placed on the lectern, bow your head, and sit on a few couches in the southwest corner to speak.

古文：赐大臣翰林儒臣坐，皆叩头，序坐于东西，诸生圜立以听。
现代文：赐大臣、翰林、儒臣坐下，都叩头，依次坐在东西两旁，诸生围着站立听讲。
English: The minister, Hanlin, and Confucius sat down, bowed their heads, and sat on the east and west sides in turn. All the people stood around to listen to the lecture.

古文：讲毕，叩头，退就本位。
现代文：讲完，叩头，退到原来的位置。
English: When finished, bow your heads and return to your original position.

古文：司业、博士、助教，各以次进讲。
现代文：司业、博士、助教，各自依次焉皇帝讲书。
English: The dean of the school, the doctor, and the assistant teacher, each in turn, delivered the emperor's lecture.

古文：出堂门，复位。
现代文：出堂门，回到原位。
English: Out the door, back to square one.

古文：赞宣制，学官诸生列班俱北面跪，听宣谕，五拜叩头。
现代文：赞唱宣读制命，学官、诸生都列队面向北跪下，听宣读训谕，行五拜叩头礼。
English: When the imperial edict was read aloud, the scholars and all sentient beings lined up facing north, knelt down, listened to the reading of the edict, and performed the five-bow kowtow.

古文：礼毕，学官诸生出成贤街送驾。
现代文：行完礼，学官、诸生出成贤街送皇帝。
English: After the ceremony, the scholar-officials and all the students went to Chengxian Street to see the emperor off.

古文：明日，祭酒率学官上表谢恩。
现代文：第二天，祭酒率领学官上表谢恩。
English: The next day, the sacrificial wine led the school officials to express their gratitude.

古文：永乐四年，礼部尚书郑赐引宋制，请服靴袍，再拜。
现代文：永乐四年，礼部尚书郑赐引用宋代礼制，请穷靴袍，行再拜礼。
English: In the fourth year of Yongle, the etiquette department Shangshu Zheng cites the Song Dynasty etiquette, invites poor boots and robes, and goes to worship again.

古文：帝不从，仍行四拜礼。
现代文：皇帝不听从，仍然行四拜礼。
English: The emperor did not listen and continued to perform the four prostrations.

古文：进讲毕，赐百官茶。
现代文：给皇帝讲书完毕，赐给百官茶。
English: After he finished reading to the emperor, he gave him a cup of tea.

古文：礼部请立视学之碑，帝亲制文勒石。
现代文：礼部请求竖立视察学校的碑，皇帝亲自写文章刻在石上。
English: The Ministry of Ceremonies requested that a monument to the inspection of the school be erected, and the emperor himself wrote an article and engraved it on the stone.

古文：祭酒等表谢。
现代文：祭酒等人上表谢恩。
English: Those who drank the sacrificial wine expressed their gratitude.

古文：帝御奉天门，赐百官宴，仍赐祭酒、司业纻丝罗衣各二袭，学官三十五人各纻丝衣一袭，监生三千余人各钞五锭。
现代文：皇帝驾临奉天门，赐百官宴席，接着赏赐祭酒、司业各两套纡麻罗衣，学官三十五人各赐一套贮麻衣，监生三干余人各赐五锭钞。
English: The emperor arrived at the Gate of Heaven and gave a banquet to a hundred officials, followed by the awarding of two sets of nettle robes to each of the sacrificial wine and the steward, a set of linen robes to each of the thirty-five scholars, and a five-baht banknote to each of the more than three hundred prisoners.

古文：正统九年，帝幸国子监，如仪。
现代文：正统九年，皇帝驾临国子监，按照礼仪行礼。
English: In the ninth year of his reign, the emperor arrived at the Imperial Household Agency and bowed in accordance with the etiquette.

古文：礼毕，赐公、侯、伯、驸马、武官都督以上、文官三品以上及翰林学士至检讨、国子监祭酒至学录宴。
现代文：礼仪完毕，赏赐公、侯、伯、驸马、武官都督以上、文官三品以上以及翰林学士至检讨、国子监祭酒至学录宴席。
English: After the etiquette is completed, the prince, lord, vassal, equestrian, military officer governor and above, civil servant three prizes and above, as well as the scholar of Hanlin to review, the son of the state to supervise the festival, and the wine to study the banquet.

古文：先是，视学祭先师，不设牲，不奏乐。
现代文：此前，视学祭祀先师，不设祭牲，不奏乐。
English: Previously, there was no sacrificial offering and no musical performance.

古文：至成化元年，始用牲乐。
现代文：到成化元年，开始用祭牲及音乐。
English: By the first year of Chenghua, they began to use sacrificial animals and music.

古文：视学之日，乐设而不作。
现代文：视察学校那天，设音乐而不演奏。
English: On the day of the inspection, there was no music.

古文：礼毕，百官庆贺，赐衣服，赐宴，皆及孔、颜、孟三氏子孙。
现代文：礼仪完毕，百官庆贺，赏赐衣服，赐宴，都施及孔、颜、孟三氏的子孙。
English: After the ceremony was over, officials from all walks of life congratulated the descendants of Kong, Yan, and Meng San, and gave them clothes and a banquet.

古文：弘治元年，定先期致斋一日，奠加币，牲用太牢，改分献官为分奠官。
现代文：弘治元年，规定至期之前斋戒一天，祭献加用缯帛，祭牲用太牢，改分献官为分奠官。
English: In the first year of the Hongzhi era, it was stipulated that one day of fasting should be observed before the deadline, offerings were to be accompanied by a gong, and sacrificial animals were to be accompanied by a bow, and the office of offering was to be changed to the office of laying wreaths.

古文：嘉靖元年，定衍圣公率三氏子孙，祭酒率学官诸生，上表谢恩，皆赐宴于礼部。
现代文：嘉靖元年，规定衍圣公率三氏的子孙，祭酒率学官、诸生，上表谢恩，都在礼部赏赐宴席。
English: In the first year of the Jiajing era, it was stipulated that the descendants of the three clans led by Yan Sheng Gong, the scholars and all the living beings who offered wine, and the thanks on the table were all awarded banquets in the ceremonial department.

古文：十三年，以先师祀典既正，再视学，命大臣致奠启圣公祠。
现代文：十二年，因孔子的祭祀典礼已确定，再次视察学校，命令大臣到启圣公祠祭奠。
English: In the twelfth year, because the Confucius ritual ceremony had been determined, he inspected the school again and ordered the minister to go to the Qixing Public Shrine to pay his respects.

古文：万历四年，定次日行庆贺礼，颁赏如旧，免赐宴。
现代文：万历四年，规定次日行庆贺礼，按以前的礼仪颁布赏赐，免除赐宴。
English: In the fourth year of Wanli, it is stipulated that the celebration ceremony will be held the next day, and the awards will be issued according to the previous etiquette, and the awards banquet will be exempted.

古文：初，宪宗取三氏子孙赴京观礼，又命衍圣公分献。
现代文：当初，宪宗选取孔、颜、孟三氏子孙到京城观礼，又命衍圣公分别祭献。
English: At first, the descendants of the Kong, Yan, and Meng San clans were selected by the Jianzong to come to the capital to watch the ceremony, and they were also ordered to make separate offerings to the saint.

古文：至世宗，命衍圣公及颜、孟二博士，孔氏老成者五人，颜、孟各二人，赴京陪祀。
现代文：到世宗，命令衍圣公以及颜、孟二博士，孔氏老成的五人，颜、孟各两人，到京城陪同祭祀。
English: To Shizong, he ordered Yan Sheng Gong, Yan and Dr. Meng Er, five members of the Kong family, two each from Yan and Meng, to accompany the sacrificial rites to the capital.

古文：经筵
现代文：经筵
English: Economic and Social Council

古文：明初无定日，亦无定所。
现代文：明代初年经筵没有固定日子，也没有固定场所开设。
English: In the first year of the Ming Dynasty, there was no fixed date or place for the opening of the Great Wall.

古文：正统初，始著为常仪，以月之二日御文华殿进讲，月三次，寒暑暂免。
现代文：正统初年，开始制订成恒常礼仪，在每月的逢二之日到文华殿为皇帝讲经史等书，每月三次，寒暑天暂且免除。
English: In the first year of the orthodoxy, the establishment of a regular etiquette began. On the second day of every month, books such as the history of the scriptures were read to the emperor at the Palace of Literature. This was done three times a month, with the exception of hot and cold days.

古文：其制，勋臣一人知经筵事，内阁学士或知或同知。
现代文：其制度是功臣一人掌管御前讲席事务，内阁学士或主持或协助主持。
English: Its system is that a meritorious person is in charge of the front desk affairs, and the cabinet bachelor either presides or assists in presiding.

古文：尚书、都御史、通政使、大理卿及学士等侍班，翰林院、春坊官及国子监祭酒二员进讲，春坊官二员展书，给事中御史各二员侍仪，鸿胪寺、锦衣卫堂上官各一员供事，鸣赞一赞礼，序班四举案，勋臣或驸马一人领将军侍卫。
现代文：尚书、都御史、通政使、大理卿以及学士等随从陪侍，翰林院、春坊官以及国子监祭酒两名为帝王讲经史书，春坊官两名展书，给事中、御史各两名侍奉礼仪，鸿胪寺、锦衣卫堂上官各一名供事，鸣赞一名赞礼，四名序班举案具，功臣或驸马一人兼将军侍卫。
English: Accompanied by attendants such as Shangshu, the Metropolitan Historian, Tong Zhengzong, Dali Ching, and the academician, Hanlin Academy, Chunfang Official, and Guo Zi Supervisor of Sacrificial Wine are two books of the emperor's sermon history, two books of the Chunfang Official, two attendants of the ceremony and two attendants of the ceremony, one superior of Hongyu Temple and Jin Yi Weidong, one praising, one praising, four order of precedence to raise the case, one meritorious person or horse and the general's bodyguard.

古文：礼部择吉请，先期设御座于文华殿，设御案于座东稍南，设讲案于案南稍东。
现代文：礼部选择吉日请求，事前在文华殿设御座，在座东稍南的地方设御案，在案南稍往东的地方设讲案。
English: The Ministry of Ceremonies selects the auspicious day and requests that a throne be set up in front of the Bunka-den, a throne be set up slightly south-east of the throne, and a lectern be set up slightly south-east of the throne.

古文：是日，司礼监先陈所讲《四书》、经、史各一册置御案，一册置讲案，皆《四书》东，经、史西。
现代文：这一天，司礼监先将所要讲的《四书》、经、史各一册放置在御案，一册放置在讲案，都是《四书》在东，经、史在西。
English: On this day, the master of ceremonies first placed one volume of the Four Books, the Classics, and the Histories to be delivered in the oracle, and one volume in the lectern, with the Four Books in the east and the Classics and Histories in the west.

古文：讲官各择撰讲章置册内。
现代文：讲官各白撰写讲读的章节放在册内。
English: The lecturers each wrote a chapter to be included in the book.

古文：帝升座，知经筵及侍班等官于丹陛上，五拜三叩头。
现代文：皇帝登座，主持御前讲席以及侍班等官在丹陛上，五拜三叩头。
English: The emperor ascended the throne, presided over the throne lecture, and the attendants and other officials bowed to His Majesty five times.

古文：以次上殿，东西序立。
现代文：后来每次进讲祇行叩头礼。依次上殿，东西依次站立。
English: Afterward, they had to perform a kowtow every time they entered the lecture hall. They had to go up to the hall in order, and stand up from the east to the west.

古文：序班二员，举御案于座前，二员举讲案置御案南正中。
现代文：序班二名，举着御案到座前，两名举着讲案放在御案南的正中。
English: Two members of the preliminaries class come to the front of the room holding the proposal, and two people come to the middle of the room holding the presentation.

古文：鸿胪官赞进讲。
现代文：鸿胪官赞唱为帝王讲读。
English: Hung Yan Guan sang praises and read for the emperor.

古文：讲官二员从东西班出，诣讲案前，北向并立。
现代文：两名讲官从东西班列中出来，到讲案前，向北并立。
English: Two lecturers came out of the east-west train and stood side by side facing north before the lecture.

古文：东西展书官各至御案南铜鹤下，相向立。
现代文：东西展书官各自到御案南的铜鹤下，相对站立。
English: The librarians of the East-West Exhibition each went to the bronze crane on the south side of the stage and stood opposite each other.

古文：鸿胪官赞讲拜，兴。
现代文：鸿胪官赞唱讲官行拜礼，起身。
English: Hung Yan Guan sang praises to the speaker, performed a prayer, and stood up.

古文：东班展书官诣御案前，跪展《四书》，退立于东鹤下。
现代文：东班展书官到御案前，跪下展开《四书》，退着站立在东边铜鹤下。
English: Before the exhibition librarian of the eastern class arrived, he knelt down to open the "Four Books" and stood back under the bronze crane on the east side.

古文：讲官至讲案前立，奏讲某书，讲毕退。
现代文：讲官到讲案前站立，奏报讲某书，讲完退下。
English: Lecturers stand up before delivering a lecture, give a report on a certain book, and then leave.

古文：展书官跪掩书，仍退立鹤下。
现代文：展书官跪下合上书，仍然退着站立在铜鹤下。
English: The librarian knelt down and closed the book, still standing back to back under the bronze crane.

古文：西班展书官展经或史，讲官进讲，退，如初。
现代文：西班展书官展开经或者史，讲官讲读，退下，如前。
English: The west team will have the librarian present the sutra or history, the lecturer will read, and then retire, as before.

古文：鸿胪官赞讲官拜，兴。
现代文：鸿胪官赞唱讲官行拜礼，起身。
English: Hung Yan Guan sang praises to the speaker, performed a prayer, and stood up.

古文：各退就东西班，展书官随之，序班彻御案讲案。
现代文：各自退到东西班列，展书官跟随，序班撤掉御案、讲案。
English: Everyone withdraws to the east-west line, the exhibition librarian follows, and the order of the class is removed.

古文：礼毕，命赐酒饭。
现代文：礼仪完毕，命令赐给酒饭。
English: When the ceremony is over, the order is given to serve wine and rice.

古文：各官出至丹陛，行叩头礼。
现代文：各官员出来到丹陛，行叩头礼。
English: All officials came out to pay obeisance to His Majesty the Emperor.

古文：至左顺门，酒饭毕，入行叩头礼。
现代文：到左顺门，吃完酒饭，进入行叩头礼。
English: Go to Zuo Shunmen, finish eating and drinking, and enter the line of kowtowing.

古文：隆庆元年，定先一日告奉先殿，告几筵。
现代文：隆庆元年，规定早一天祭告奉先殿，祭告灵座。
English: In the first year of the Longqing Festival, it was stipulated that the temple should be announced one day earlier, and the shrine should be announced one day earlier.

古文：是日，帝诣文华殿左室，展礼先圣先师。
现代文：这天，皇帝到文华殿左边室内，向先圣先师施礼。
English: On this day, the emperor went to the room on the left side of the Hall of Literature to bow to the former saint.

古文：讲章于前两日先进呈览。
现代文：在前两天先进呈讲读章节请皇帝阅览。
English: In the first two days, the emperor was invited to read the advanced reading section.

古文：万历二年，定春讲以二月十二日起，至五月初二日止，秋讲以八月十二日起，至十月初二日止，不必题请。
现代文：万历二年，规定春季讲书从二月十二日起，到五月初二结东，秋季讲书从八月十二日起，到十月初二日结东，不必题奏请示。
English: In the second year of the Wanli calendar, it is stipulated that the spring lecture will start from February 12 and end on the second day of May, and the autumn lecture will start from August 12 and end on the second day of October. There is no need to ask for instructions.

古文：日讲
现代文：日讲
English: Japanese language

古文：日讲，御文华穿殿，止用讲读官内阁学士侍班，不用侍仪等官。
现代文：日讲，皇帝驾临文华穿殿，只用讲读官内阁学士随从陪侍，不用侍仪等官员。
English: According to the Japanese, when the emperor came to Wenhua to enter the palace, he only used a lector and a cabinet bachelor to accompany him, and did not need an attendant or other officials.

古文：讲官或四或六。
现代文：讲官或四名或六名。
English: There are either four or six lecturers.

古文：开读初，吉服，五拜三叩首，后常服，一拜三叩首。
现代文：开始讲读，穿吉服，行五拜三叩头礼，后来穿常服，行一拜三叩头礼。
English: He began to read, put on the auspicious robe, and performed the five bowing and three prostrating. Later, he put on the regular robe and performed the one bowing and three prostrating.

古文：阁臣同侍于殿内，候帝口宣 先生来 ，同进，叩首，东西立。
现代文：内阁大臣同在殿内侍奉，等候皇帝口头传宣 先生来 ，同时进前，叩头，在东西两边站立。
English: The cabinet ministers also served in the hall, waiting for the emperor's oral proclamation, "Sir, come," while marching forward, kowtowing, and standing on both sides of the east and west.

古文：读者先至御前一揖，至案展书，压金尺，执牙签。
现代文：读者先到皇帝面前一拱手，到案前展开书，压上金尺，拿着牙签。
English: The reader first goes to the emperor to open the book, open the book before the case, press the gold ruler, and hold the toothpick.

古文：读五过，掩书一揖退。
现代文：读五遍，合上书一拱手退下。
English: Read it five times, close the book and step back.

古文：先书，次经，次史，进讲如读仪。
现代文：先读《四书》，再读经书，再读史书，为帝王讲解诗书文史如同读书的礼仪。
English: First read the "Four Books," then read the scriptures, then read the history books, and explain the poetry, literature and history to the emperor as a reading etiquette.

古文：侍书官侍习书毕，各叩头退。
现代文：侍书官侍奉学习结东，各自叩头退下。
English: The attendants bowed their heads and retreated.

古文：于文华殿赐茶，文华门赐酒饭。
现代文：在文华殿赐茶，文华门赐酒饭。
English: At the Wenhua Hall, tea is served, and at the Wenhua Gate, wine and rice are served.

古文：午讲，隆庆六年定。
现代文：午讲，隆庆六年规定。
English: In the afternoon, the Longqing six-year celebration was held.

古文：每日早讲毕，帝进暖阁少憩，阅章奏。
现代文：每天早讲完毕，皇帝进入暖阁稍稍休息，阅读奏章。
English: After finishing his speech each morning, the emperor went into the warming pavilion to take a short break and read the transcript.

古文：阁臣等退西厢房，久之，率讲官再进午讲，讲《通鉴节要》及《贞观政要》。
现代文：内阁大臣等人退到西厢房。很久，率领讲官再进献午讲，讲《通鉴节要》及《贞观政要》。
English: The cabinet ministers and others retreated to the west wing. After a long time, the lecturers led the lecturers to give the afternoon lectures, speaking about "The Essentials of Confucianism" and "The Essentials of Chastity."

古文：讲毕，帝还宫。
现代文：讲完，皇帝回宫。
English: After the speech, the emperor returned to the palace.

古文：凡三、六、九视朝日，暂免讲读。
现代文：凡是三、六、九上朝日，暂时免丢讲读。
English: Whenever the sun rises on the 3rd, 6th, or 9th, do not forget to read for the time being.

古文：又嘉靖六年定制，月三、八日，经筵日讲官二员，讲《大学衍义》。
现代文：又在嘉靖六年规定制度，每月三、八日，两名御前讲席日讲官，讲《大学衍义》。
English: In addition, in the six years of Jiajing, the system stipulated that on the 3rd and 8th of each month, two lecturers in front of the throne would give lectures on "the meaning of university."

古文：十年，定无逸殿讲仪。
现代文：十年，制定无逸殿讲席的礼仪。
English: Ten years later, the etiquette of the lecture room in Mu Yat Hall was established.

古文：质明，帝常服乘辇至殿门，众官于门外迎候。
现代文：天刚亮，皇帝穿常服乘辇车到殿门，众官员在门外等候迎接。
English: At first light, the emperor arrived at the gate of the palace in a carriage wearing his regular clothes. Officials were waiting outside the gate to greet him.

古文：帝降辇，乘板舆，至殿升座。
现代文：皇帝下辇，乘坐板舆，到殿上升座。
English: The emperor bowed his head, rode on a palanquin, and ascended to the throne.

古文：各官于殿门外一拜三叩首，入内，东西序立。
现代文：各位官员在殿门外行一拜三叩头礼，进殿内，在东西依次站立。
English: All officials performed a bowing and three prostrations outside the gate of the hall, and entered the hall, standing in the east and west in turn.

古文：赞进讲，讲官大学士一员出班叩首。
现代文：赞唱为皇帝讲书，讲官大学士一人走出班列叩头。
English: Singing praises for the emperor's lecture, one of the lecturers came out of the line to bow.

古文：命赐坐，一叩首，乃坐。
现代文：命令赐坐，一叩头，纔坐下。
English: Give the order to sit, bow down, and sit down.

古文：讲毕，展书官跪掩讲章，讲官叩头复班。
现代文：讲书完毕，展书官跪下合上讲章，讲官叩头回到班列。
English: After the lecture, the librarian knelt down to close the lecture, and the lecturer bowed his head to return to the queue.

古文：又学士一员承旨坐讲，如初礼毕。
现代文：又有一名学士奉旨坐着讲书，如同初次的礼仪结东。
English: Another bachelor was ordered to sit and read a book, just like the first-time etiquette.

古文：各官至豳风亭候驾至，亭内赐宴。
现代文：各位官员到豳风亭等候皇帝驾到，在亭内赐宴。
English: All officials went to the Pavilion of the Winds to await the arrival of the emperor, who gave a banquet in the pavilion.

古文：东宫出阁讲学仪
现代文：东宫出阁讲学仪
English: The Eastern Court of the Imperial Court of Japan

古文：太祖命学士宋濂授皇太子、诸王经于大本堂，后于文华后殿。
现代文：太祖命令学士宋濂在大本堂传授皇太子、诸王经书，后来改在文华后殿。
English: The great-grandfather ordered the scholar Song Xi to teach the scriptures of the crown prince and the kings in the main hall, and later changed it to the Bunhua Houden.

古文：世宗改为便殿，遂移殿东厢。
现代文：世宗改在便殿，就移到殿的东厢房。
English: When the Sejong was moved to the hall, it was moved to the east wing of the hall.

古文：天顺二年，定出阁仪。
现代文：天顺二年，制定出阁礼仪。
English: In the second year of Tianshun, the etiquette of the pavilion was formulated.

古文：是日早，侍卫侍仪如常。
现代文：这天早上，侍卫如同平常的侍奉礼仪。
English: On this morning, the guards began to serve as usual.

古文：执事官于文华后殿四拜，鸿胪官请皇太子升殿，师保等于丹陛上四拜。
现代文：主事官在文华后殿行四拜礼，鸿胪官请皇太子升殿，师保等官员在台阶上行四拜礼。
English: The chief officer performed four prostrations in the hall behind the Great Hall, the grand steward asked the crown prince to go up to the hall, and the officials such as the teacher and the guard performed four prostrations on the steps.

古文：各官退出，内侍导皇太子至后殿升座，以书案进。
现代文：各位官员退出，内侍引导皇太子到后殿升上座位，将书案进献。
English: The various officials withdrew, and the chambermaid guided the Crown Prince to a seat in the rear of the hall, where he presented the book.

古文：侍班侍读讲官入，分班东西立。
现代文：侍班、侍读、讲官进入，分班列在东西站立。
English: Attendants, readers, and lecturers enter, and stand in a line from east to west.

古文：内侍展书，侍读讲官以次进读讲，叩头而退。
现代文：内侍展开书，侍读、讲官依次进读进讲，叩头退下。
English: The chambermaid opens the book, the attendant reads, and the lecturer reads and speaks in turn, bowing his head.

古文：其每日讲读仪，早朝退后，皇太子出阁升座，不用侍卫等官，惟侍班侍读讲官入，行叩头礼。
现代文：每天讲读的礼仪，在早朝退后，皇太子出阁登座，不用侍卫等官，只有侍班、侍读、讲官进入，行叩头礼。
English: After retiring in the early morning, the crown prince comes out of the pavilion and takes his seat. There is no need for attendants and other officials, only the attendants, readers, and lecturers enter and perform a kowtow.

古文：内侍展书，先读《四书》，则东班侍读官向前，伴读十数遍，退复班。
现代文：内侍展开书，先读《四书》，则是东班侍读官上前，陪伴读十多遍，退后回到班列。
English: The chambermaid opens the book and reads "The Four Books" first, while the east-class chambermaid comes forward, reads it more than ten times with the attendant, and then returns to the queue.

古文：次读经或史，则西班伴读，亦如之。
现代文：其次是读经或读史，则是西班陪伴读书，也如前。
English: Next is reading the Bible or reading history, while Seipan accompanies the reading, as before.

古文：读毕，各官退。
现代文：读完，各位官员退下。
English: After reading, the officials withdrew.

古文：至巳时，各官入，内侍展书，侍讲官讲早所读《四书》毕，退班。
现代文：到巳时，各位官员进入，内侍展开书，侍讲官讲解早上所读的《四书》，讲完后退回班列。
English: When it was time for lunch, the officials entered, the chambermaid unfolded the books, the assistant lecturer explained the "Four Books" read in the morning, and returned to the queue after the lecture.

古文：次讲经史亦然。
现代文：其次讲经史也如此。
English: Secondly, the same applies to the history of the scriptures.

古文：讲毕，侍书官侍习写字。
现代文：讲完，侍书官侍奉练习写字。
English: At the end of the lecture, the clerk began to practice writing.

古文：写毕，各官叩头退。
现代文：写完，各位官员叩头退下。
English: After writing, the officials bowed and retreated.

古文：凡读书，三日后一温，背诵成熟。
现代文：凡是读书，三天后温习一遍，背熟成诵。
English: Whenever you read a book, review it after three days and memorize it until you can recite it.

古文：温书之日，不授新书。
现代文：温习书的那天，不教新书。
English: Don't teach a new book on the day of a book review.

古文：凡写字，春夏秋日百字，冬日五十字。
现代文：凡是写字，春夏秋三季每天一百字，冬天每日五十字。
English: When it comes to writing, a hundred words a day in spring, summer and autumn, and five crosswords a day in winter.

古文：凡朔望节假及大风雨雪、隆寒盛暑，则暂停。
现代文：凡是朔日和望日、节假日及大风雨雪天、严冬酷暑天，就暂时停止。
English: It will be temporarily suspended on the New Year's Day, the Day of Hope, holidays, heavy rain and snow, severe winter and hot weather.

古文：弘治十一年更定，三师三少并宫僚于丹陛四拜毕，从殿左右门入，东西立。候讲读毕，叩头退。
现代文：弘治十一年更改修订，太师、太傅、太保，少师、少傅、少保以及宫中僚属在台阶上行四拜礼结东，从殿左右门进入，在东西两旁站立，等候讲读完毕，叩头退下。
English: Amended and revised in the eleventh year of Hongzhi, the Grand Master, Grand Master, Grand Steward, Junior Master, Junior Master, Junior Steward, and members of the Imperial Household go up the steps, bow four times to the east, enter from the left and right doors of the hall, stand on both sides of the east and west, wait for the lecture to be over, and bow their heads.

古文：隆庆六年，改设皇太子座于文华殿之东厢，正中西向。
现代文：隆庆六年，改在文华殿的柬厢房设皇太子座，正中向西。
English: In the sixth year of the Longqing, the Crown Prince's Seat was set up in the Camellia Room of the Wenhua Hall, facing west.

古文：每日讲读各官，先诣文华门外东西向，序立。
现代文：每天讲读的各位官员，先到文华门外东西相向，依次站立。
English: The officials who read every day first go to the east-west direction outside the Wenhua Gate and stand in turn.

古文：候帝御日讲经筵毕，皇太子出阁升座。
现代文：等候皇帝日讲的御前讲席完毕，皇太子出阁升座。
English: After waiting for the Emperor's speech on the following day, the Crown Prince rose to the throne.

古文：凡东宫初讲时，阁臣连侍五日，后每月三、八日一至，先拜出，然后各官入。
现代文：凡是东官初讲时，内阁大臣接连陪侍五天，后来每月的三日、八日到一次，先行拜礼后出来，然后各官进入。
English: Whenever a Dongguan official gave the first speech, the cabinet minister accompanied him for five days in a row. Later, he came once a month on the third and eighth days. He came out after the worship, and then the officials entered.

古文：崇祯十一年，署礼部事学士顾锡畴言： 东宫嘉礼告成，累朝锡赉有据。
现代文：崇祯十一年，署礼部事学士顾锡畴说： 东宫嘉礼已告成，各朝赏赐有依据。
English: In the 11th year of the Chongzhen era, Gu Xizhen, a graduate of the Department of Ceremonial Affairs, said: The East Palace's celebration has been completed, and each dynasty has a basis for the reward.

古文：《实录》载成化十五年，皇太子出阁讲学，六卿皆加保、傅。
现代文：《实录》记载成化十五年，皇太子出阁讲学，六卿都加封保、傅。
English: "Real Record" records that in the fifteenth year of Chenghua, the crown prince gave a lecture, and the six nobles all added a seal of protection and Fu.

古文：弘治十年，皇太子出阁讲学，内阁徐溥等四人、尚书马文升等七人，俱加宫保。 
现代文：弘治十年，皇太子出阁讲学，内阁徐溥等四人、尚书马文升等七人，都加赠太子太保、少保等号。 
English: In the tenth year of the Hongzhi era, the crown prince delivered a lecture to the cabinet, and four members of the cabinet, including Xu Xi, and seven members, including Shang Shuma and Wensheng, were given the titles of the crown prince Taibo and Shobo.

古文：帝命酌议行之。
现代文：皇帝命令酌情议论实行。
English: The Emperor's order shall be implemented at his discretion.

古文：诸王读书仪
现代文：诸王读书仪
English: The Reading of Kings

古文：书堂在皇极门右厢。
现代文：书堂在皇极门的右厢房。
English: The library is in the right wing of the Emperor's Gate.

古文：讲官选部曹或进士改授翰林官充之。
现代文：讲官选部曹或进士改授翰林官充任。
English: Lecturer Selection Division Cao or Jin Shi was awarded the post of Hanlin official.

古文：天顺二年定，初入书堂，其日早，王至右顺门之北书堂，面东，中坐。
现代文：天顺二年规定，初入害堂，这天早上，王到右顺门的北书堂，面向东，在中间坐下。
English: According to the regulations of the second year of Tianshun, the first time to enter the evil hall, in the morning of this day, Wang went to the north hall of the right door, facing east, and sat down in the middle.

古文：提督讲读并讲读官行四拜礼。
现代文：提督讲读官和讲读官行四拜礼。
English: The Admiral and the Reader bowed four times.

古文：内官捧书展于案上，就案左坐。
现代文：内官捧书在案上展开，到案左边坐下。
English: The clerk took the book and unfolded it on the case, then sat down to the left of the case.

古文：讲读官进立于案右。伴读十遍，叩头退。
现代文：讲读官上前站在案右边，陪伴读十遍，叩头退下。
English: The reading officer comes forward and stands on the right side of the case, accompanies the reading ten times, and bows his head.

古文：每日讲读，清晨，王至书堂，讲读官行叩头礼，伴读十遍，出。
现代文：每天讲读，清晨，王到书堂，讲读官行叩头礼，陪伴读书十遍，出来。
English: Reading every day, in the morning, Wang went to the study hall, read the official line kowtow, accompanied by reading ten times, and came out.

古文：饭后，复诣堂伴看写字。
现代文：吃饭后，又到书堂陪伴看写字。
English: After dinner, I went to the study hall to watch and write with Mao.

古文：讲书毕，仍叩头退。
现代文：讲完书，仍然叩头退下。
English: After reading the book, bow your heads and step back.

古文：万历六年定，书堂设中座，书案在左，写字案在右。
现代文：万历六年规定，在书堂设中座，书案在左，写字案在右。
English: According to the regulations of the sixth year of the Wanli era, the middle seat is set up in the study hall, the book case is on the left, and the writing case is on the right.

古文：辅臣率讲读侍书官候于门外。
现代文：辅政大臣率领讲读、侍书官在门外等候。
English: The Vice-Minister of State led the reading, and the registrar waited outside the door.

古文：王入书堂，传令旨 先生进 。
现代文：王进入书堂，传令旨 先生进来 。
English: The king entered the study and gave the order for the teacher to come in.

古文：辅臣率各官入，四拜，分班侍立。
现代文：辅政大臣率领各位官员进入，行四拜礼，分班侍立。
English: The Vice-Minister of State led the officials into the hall, where they bowed four times and stood in shifts.

古文：讲读官以次授书各十遍讫，令旨 先生吃酒饭 ，各官出，王暂入堂南间少憩。
现代文：讲读官依次各传授书十遍后，下令 先生吃酒饭 。各位官员出来，王暂时进入书堂南问稍稍休息。
English: After lecturing ten times in succession, the officials ordered Mr. Wang to eat and drink. The officials came out, and Mr. Wang temporarily entered the south of the study hall to ask for a short break.

古文：辅臣各率官入。
现代文：辅政大臣各自率领官员进入。
English: The Vice-Ministers of State each led an official to enter.

古文：令旨 先生进 ，遂入分班侍立。
现代文：传令 先生进 ，于是进入分班侍立。
English: The messenger ordered the teacher to come in, so he went to the duty officer's desk.

古文：侍书官看写字，讲读以次进讲毕，各官一拜出。
现代文：侍书官看着王写字，讲读官依次为诸王讲解诗文经史完毕，各位官员行一拜礼退出。
English: The librarian watched Wang write, the reader explained the history of poetry and literature to the kings in turn, and the officials bowed and left.

