古文：山者，物之高者也。
现代文：山，是万物中以崇高为其特征的。
English: Among all things, mountains are characterized by their loftiness.

古文：惠者，主之高行也。
现代文：施惠于民，是君主的崇高行为。
English: It is the noblest act of a monarch to do good to his people.

古文：慈者，父母之高行也。
现代文：慈爱，是父母的崇高行为。
English: Loving kindness is a noble act of parents.

古文：忠者，臣之高行也。
现代文：忠君，是人臣的崇高行为。
English: Loyalty is the noblest act of a vassal.

古文：孝者，子妇之高行也。
现代文：孝亲，是子、妇的崇高行为。
English: Filial piety is a noble act of sons and wives.

古文：故山高而不崩则祈羊至，主惠而不解则民奉养，父母慈而不解则子妇顺，臣下忠而不解则爵禄至，子妇孝而不解则美名附。
现代文：所以，山高而不崩则人们烹羊设祭，君主施惠不懈则人民拥戴，父母慈爱不懈则子、妇孝顺，臣下忠君不懈则得爵禄，子、妇孝亲不懈则有美名。
English: Therefore, if the mountain is high and does not collapse, people will cook sheep and hold a festival; if the monarch is unremittingly generous, the people will support it; if the parents are unremittingly loving, the children and women will be filial; if the vassals are unremittingly loyal, they will receive a knighthood; if the children and women are unremittingly filial, they will have a good name.

古文：故节高而不解，则所欲得矣；解，则不得。
现代文：所以操行高尚而不懈，就能达到所要求的目的。懈，就达不到。
English: Therefore, if you act nobly and tirelessly, you will be able to achieve the required goal.

古文：故曰： 山高而不崩则祈羊至矣。 
现代文：所以说： 山高而不崩，则祈羊至矣。 
English: Therefore, it is said: If the mountain is high and does not collapse, then it is too late to pray for sheep.

古文：渊者，众物之所生也，能深而不涸，则沈玉至。
现代文：渊，是众物生长的地方。渊深而水不枯，人们就会来投玉求神。
English: The abyss is a place where many things grow. If the abyss is deep and the water is not dry, people will come to pray to the gods.

古文：主者，人之所仰而生也，能宽裕纯厚而不苛忮，则民人附。
现代文：君主，是人们所仰望而赖以生活的，能宽大纯厚而不苛刻刚愎，人民就会归附。
English: Monarchs are what people look up to and live by. If they can be generous, pure and not harsh, the people will follow them.

古文：父母者，子妇之所受教也，能慈仁教训而不失理，则子妇孝。
现代文：父母，是子、妇都要接受其教育的，能慈爱教训而不离开正理，子、妇就会孝顺。
English: Parents, sons, and wives should all receive their education. If they can love and teach without abandoning righteousness, their sons and wives will be filial.

古文：臣下者，主之所用也，能尽力事上，则当于主。
现代文：臣下，是为君主服务的，能尽力事奉君上，就合君主的心意。
English: A vassal is one who serves the sovereign. If he can do his best to serve the sovereign, he is in line with the sovereign's will.

古文：子妇者，亲之所以安也，能孝弟顺亲，则当于亲。
现代文：儿子儿妇，是安养父母的，能孝悌顺亲，就合父母的心意。
English: A son's daughter-in-law is one who supports her parents. If she is able to be filial and obedient, she will conform to her parents' will.

古文：故渊涸而无水则沈玉不至，主苛而无厚则万民不附，父母暴而无恩则子妇不亲，臣下随而不忠则卑辱困穷，子妇不安亲则祸忧至。
现代文：所以，渊枯竭而无水，投玉求神的就不肯来；君主苛刻而不宽厚，百姓就不肯归附；父母残暴而无恩，子妇就不亲；臣下怠惰而不忠，就遭到屈辱困难；子妇不安养双亲，祸患就要来临。
English: Therefore, if the well is dry and there is no water, and if you pray to the gods, they will not come; if the monarch is harsh and not generous, the people will not join; if the parents are cruel and ungrateful, the children will not be relatives; if the vassals are lazy and unfaithful, they will be humiliated and difficult; if the children are uneasy to raise their parents, the disaster will come.

古文：故渊不涸，则所欲者至；涸，则不至。
现代文：所以，渊水不枯竭。所要求的就可以来到，枯竭，就不会来。
English: Therefore the deep waters shall not be dried up: for the thing that shall be done shall be done, and there shall be no end.

古文：故曰： 渊深而不涸则沈玉极。 
现代文：所以说： 渊深而不涸，则沈玉极。 
English: Therefore, it is said: If the abyss is deep but not dry, then the jade will sink to the bottom.

古文：天，覆万物，制寒暑，行日月，次星辰，天之常也。
现代文：天，覆育着万物，控制着寒暑，运行着日月，安排着星辰。这是天的常规。
English: Heaven nurtures all things, controls cold and heat, moves the sun and moon, and arranges the stars. This is the routine of heaven.

古文：治之以理，终而复始。
现代文：天总是依理行事。终而复始。
English: The heavens always act according to reason. The end follows the beginning.

古文：主，牧万民，治天下，莅百官，主之常也。
现代文：君主，统治万民，治理天下，统率百官，这是君主的常规。
English: Monarch, rule all the people, govern the world, lead all the officials, this is the monarch's routine.

古文：治之以法，终而复始。
现代文：君主总依法治事，终而复始。
English: The monarch always acts in accordance with the law, from beginning to end.

古文：和子孙，属亲戚，父母之常也。
现代文：和睦子孙，团结亲戚，这是父母的常规。
English: Reconciling children and grandchildren, uniting relatives, this is the routine of parents.

古文：治之以义，终而复治。
现代文：父母总是依义行事，终而复始。
English: Parents always act in accordance with righteousness, beginning with the end.

古文：敦敬忠信，臣下之常也。
现代文：敦敬忠信，这是臣下的常规。
English: This is the usual practice of the vassals.

古文：以事其主，终而复始。
现代文：臣下应当以此事奉君主，终而复始。
English: Subjects should serve the monarch in this way, beginning with the end.

古文：爱亲善养，思敬奉教，子妇之常也。
现代文：亲爱且善养父母，尊敬并接受教导，这是子妇的常规。
English: It is customary for a daughter-in-law to love and nurture her parents, to respect and be taught by them.

古文：以事其亲，终而复始。
现代文：子妇应当以此事奉双亲，终而复始。
English: Daughters should serve their parents in this way, from beginning to end.

古文：故天不失其常，则寒暑得其时，日月星辰得其序。
现代文：所以，天不失其常规，寒来暑往就恰当其时，日月星辰就正常有序。
English: Therefore, the sky does not lose its regularity, the cold and heat come and go at the right time, and the sun, moon and stars are in normal order.

古文：主不失其常，则群臣得其义，百官守其事。
现代文：君主不失其常规，群臣就行其正义，百官尽其职守。
English: The monarch does not lose his routine, the courtiers do their justice, and the officials do their duty.

古文：父母不失其常，则子孙和顺，亲戚相欢。
现代文：父母不失其常规，子孙就顺从，亲戚就和睦。
English: Parents keep to their routines, children and grandchildren obey, and relatives live in harmony.

古文：臣下不失其常，则事无过失，而官职政治。
现代文：臣下不失其常规，办事就没有过失，而且官吏称职政务得治。
English: Subordinates do not lose their routine, there is no fault in doing things, and officials are responsible for government affairs.

古文：子妇不失其常，则长幼理而亲疏和。
现代文：子妇不失其常规，就长幼有序，而亲疏和睦。
English: Without losing her routine, the daughter-in-law raised her children in an orderly manner, but in a friendly and amicable manner.

古文：故用常者治，失常者乱。天未尝变，其所以治也。故曰： 天不变其常。 
现代文：所以按常规办事就治，不按常规办事就乱，天从来不曾改变它的常规，因而总是处于 治 的状态。所以说： 天不变其常。 
English: Therefore, to act according to convention is to govern, and not to act according to convention is to be disorderly. Heaven has never changed its convention, and thus it is always in a state of governing. Therefore, it is said: Heaven does not change its normal.

古文：地生养万物，地之则也。
现代文：地，生养万物，这是地的法则。
English: The earth produces and nurtures all things. This is the law of the earth.

古文：治安百姓，主之则也。
现代文：治理和安定百姓，这是作君主的法则。
English: To govern and stabilize the people, this is the law of being a monarch.

古文：教护家事，父母之则也。
现代文：指导和监护家事，这是作父母的法则。
English: It is the law of parenthood to guide and supervise the affairs of the home.

古文：正谏死节，臣下之则也。
现代文：对君主正谏死节，这是作臣子的法则。
English: It is the law of the vassal that the sovereign is on his deathbed.

古文：尽力共养，子妇之则也。
现代文：对父母尽力供养，这是作子妇的法则。
English: It is the law of the housewife to do her best to provide for her parents.

古文：地不易其则，故万物生焉。
现代文：地不改变它的法则，所以万物生长。
English: The earth does not change its laws, so everything grows.

古文：主不易其则，故百姓安焉。
现代文：君主不改变他的法则，所以百姓安宁。
English: The lord does not change his laws, so the people are at peace.

古文：父母不易其则，故家事辨焉。
现代文：父母不改变他的法则。所以家事得治。
English: His parents don't change his rules, so housework is out of the question.

古文：臣下不易其则，故主无过失。
现代文：臣下不改变他的法则，君主就可以没有过失。
English: If his subjects do not change his laws, the sovereign can do no wrong.

古文：子妇不易其则，故亲养备具。
现代文：子妇不改变他的法则，双亲就被奉养得周到。
English: If a woman does not change her ways, her parents will be well taken care of.

古文：故用则者安，不用则者危。地未尝易，其所以安也。故曰： 地不易其则。 
现代文：因此，遵照法则办事就平安，不遵照法则办事就危险，地从来不曾改变它的法则，因而总是处于安定的状态。所以说： 地不易其则。 
English: Therefore, it is safe to act according to the law, and it is dangerous to act without following the law. The earth has never changed its laws, so it is always in a stable state. Therefore, it is said: The earth is not easy to rule.

古文：春者，阳气始上，故万物生。
现代文：春天，阳气开始上升，所以万物发生。
English: In spring, the yang begins to rise, so everything happens.

古文：夏者，阳气毕上，故万物长。
现代文：夏天，阳气完全上升，所以万物成长。
English: In summer, the yang qi rises completely, so everything grows.

古文：秋者，阴气始下，故万物收。
现代文：秋天，阴气开始降临，所以万物收敛。
English: In autumn, the gloomy weather begins to descend, so everything converges.

古文：冬者，阴气毕下，故万物藏。
现代文：冬天，阴气完全降临，所以万物藏闭。
English: In winter, the gloomy weather fully descends, so everything is closed.

古文：故春夏生长，秋冬收藏，四时之节也。
现代文：故春夏生长，秋冬收闭，这是四时的节令。
English: After all, spring and summer are growing, and autumn and winter are closing. This is the four o'clock season.

古文：赏赐刑罚，主之节也。
现代文：赏赐刑罚，这是君主的节度。
English: It is the sovereign's prerogative to mete out punishment.

古文：四时未尝不生杀也，主未尝不赏罚也。
现代文：四时从没有不实现生杀的。君主从没有不进行赏罚的。
English: At four o'clock, there is never anyone who does not carry out life and death. The monarch never fails to reward and punish.

古文：故曰： 春秋冬夏不更其节也。 
现代文：所以说： 春秋冬夏，不更其节也。 
English: Therefore, it is said: Spring, autumn, winter, and summer are all the same.

古文：天，覆万物而制之；地，载万物而养之；四时，生长万物而收藏之。
现代文：天，覆育而控制着万物；地，承载而生养着万物；四时，生长而藏闭着万物。
English: Heaven, nurturing and controlling all things; earth, bearing and nurturing all things; four o'clock, growing and hiding all things.

古文：古以至今，不更其道。
现代文：从古至今，从来不改变这个常规。
English: From ancient times to the present, never change this routine.

古文：故曰： 古今一也。 
现代文：所以说： 古今一也。 
English: Therefore, he said, "The past and the present are one and the same."

古文：蛟龙，水虫之神者也。
现代文：蚊龙，是水虫当中的神灵。
English: Mosquito dragons are deities among aquatic insects.

古文：乘于水则神立，失于水则神废。
现代文：有水，神就立；失水，神就灭。
English: Where there is water, God is present; where there is no water, God is absent.

古文：人主，天下之有威者也。
现代文：君主，是天下有权威的人。
English: The monarch is the most powerful person in the world.

古文：得民则威立，失民则威废。
现代文：得人民拥护就有权威，失去人民，权威就消失。
English: If you win the support of the people, you will have authority; if you lose the support of the people, your authority will disappear.

古文：蛟龙待得水而后立其神，人主待得民而后成其威。
现代文：蚊龙得水而后才有神灵，君主得人民拥护而后才有权威。
English: Mosquitoes and dragons need water before they become gods. Monarchs need the support of the people before they have authority.

古文：故曰： 蛟龙得水而神可立也。 
现代文：所以说： 蛟龙得水，而神可立也。 
English: Therefore, it is said, "A dragon can obtain water, but a god cannot."

古文：虎豹，兽之猛者也，居深林广泽之中则人畏其威而载之。
现代文：虎豹，是兽类中最凶猛的。它们居住在深林大泽之中，人们就畏其威力而看重它们。
English: Tigers and leopards are the most ferocious of all animals. They live in the deep forests of Japan, and people fear their power and value them.

古文：人主，天下之有势者也，深居则人畏其势。
现代文：君主，是天下最有势力的人。深居简出，人们就害怕他的势力。
English: The monarch is the most powerful person in the world. People are afraid of his power because he lives in seclusion.

古文：故虎豹去其幽而近于人，则人得之而易其威。
现代文：虎豹若离开深山幽谷而与人接近，人们就会把它捕起来而无视它的威力。
English: If a tiger leopard leaves the deep mountains and valleys and approaches people, people will catch it and ignore its power.

古文：人主去其门而迫于民，则民轻之而傲其势。
现代文：君主若离开朝廷而与人民靠近，人民就轻慢他而不怕他的势力。
English: If the monarch leaves the court and approaches the people, the people despise him and are not afraid of his power.

古文：故曰： 虎豹托幽而威可载也。 
现代文：所以说； 虎豹托幽，而威可载也。 
English: Therefore, it is said that; the tiger and the leopard are hidden, but they can be carried.

古文：风，漂物者也。
现代文：风，是吹拂万物的。
English: The wind is what blows everything.

古文：风之所漂，不避贵贱美恶。雨，濡物者也。
现代文：风吹起来不避贵贱美恶。雨，是淋湿万物的。
English: When the wind blows, there is no avoiding the good, the bad and the ugly. Rain is the drenching of all things.

古文：雨之所堕，不避小大强弱。
现代文：雨，下起来，不管大小强弱。
English: Rain, come down, no matter big or small, strong or weak.

古文：风雨至公而无私，所行无常乡，人虽遇漂濡而莫之怨也。
现代文：风雨是至公而无私心的，风吹雨下，没有既定方向，人们虽然遇到风吹雨打也不会发出怨言。
English: The wind and rain are public and selfless. When the wind blows and the rain falls, there is no set direction. Although people encounter wind and rain, they will not complain.

古文：故曰： 风雨无乡而怨怒不及也。 
现代文：所以说： 风雨无向而怨怒不及也。 
English: Therefore, he said: The wind and rain have no direction, but the anger is not enough.

古文：人主之所以令则行禁则止者，必令于民之所好而禁于民之所恶也。
现代文：人君之所以做到令行禁止，一定是因为 令 发在人民所好的方面， 禁  行在人民所恶的地方。
English: The reason why people have been able to ban the order is because the order is issued in the people's good aspects, and the ban is imposed in the people's evil areas.

古文：民之情莫不欲生而恶死，莫不欲利而恶害。
现代文：人之常情没有不爱生而恶死的，也没有不爱利而恶害的。
English: There is no such thing as a person who does not love life and dies an evil death, and there is no such thing as a person who does not love profit and does evil.

古文：故上令于生、利人，则令行；禁于杀、害人，则禁止。
现代文：所以君主发令是使人生存和对人有利，命令就能推行；君主行禁是禁止杀人和禁止害人，施禁就能制止。
English: Therefore, when the monarch issues an order, it is to ensure the survival and benefit of the people, and the order can be implemented; when the monarch issues a ban, it is to prohibit the killing and harming of the people, and the ban can be stopped.

古文：令之所以行者，必民乐其政也，而令乃行。
现代文：命令之所以能够推行，必须是民乐其政，才能够推行下去。
English: The reason why the order can be implemented is that the people must be happy with their government before it can be implemented.

古文：故曰： 贵有以行令也。 
现代文：所以说： 贵有以行令。 
English: Therefore, he said: You have to give orders.

古文：人主之所以使下尽力而亲上者，必为天下致利除害也。
现代文：人君之所以能使百姓尽力而亲近自己，必须为天下致利除害。
English: The reason why the ruler can make the people as close as possible to himself must be to benefit the world and eliminate harm.

古文：故德泽加于天下，惠施厚于万物，父子得以安，群生得以育，故万民欢尽其力而乐为上用。
现代文：所以要把德泽加于天下，恩惠施于万物，使家庭得以安居，群生得以养育，这样，万民便愿意尽力而为君主效劳。
English: Therefore, it is necessary to add virtue to the world, bestow favor on all things, so that families can live safely, and groups of people can be raised, so that all people are willing to do their best to serve the monarch.

古文：入则务本疾作以实仓廪，出则尽节死敌以安社稷，虽劳苦卑辱而不敢告也。
现代文：他们在家里努力耕作以充实国家仓廪，在战场尽节杀敌以保卫国家疆土，即使劳苦卑辱也是不敢叫苦的。
English: They work hard at home to enrich the country's storehouses, and fight hard on the battlefield to defend the country's territory. Even if they are humiliated and humiliated, they do not dare to complain.

古文：此贱人之所以亡其卑也。故曰 贱有以亡卑。 
现代文：这就是地位低的人可以忘其卑贱的原因。所以说： 贱有以亡卑。 
English: This is the reason why people of low status can forget their lowliness. Therefore, it is said, "Lowliness breeds lowliness."

古文：起居时，饮食节，寒暑适，则身利而寿命益，起居不时，饮食不节，寒暑不适，则形体累而寿命损。
现代文：起居有定时，饮食有定量，寒热得当，则身体好而寿命长。起居无定时，饮食无定量，寒热调配不当，则身体弱而寿命短。
English: If you have regular wake-up time, proper diet and proper cold and heat, you will have good health and long life. If you have irregular wake-up time, improper diet and proper cold and heat, you will have weak body and short life.

古文：人惰而侈则贫，力而俭则富。
现代文：人要懒惰而奢侈则贫，勤劳而节俭则富。
English: Lazy and extravagant people are poor, while hard-working and frugal people are rich.

古文：夫物莫虚至，必有以也。故曰： 寿夭贫富无徒归也。 
现代文：事情是不会凭空而至的，一定有它的原因。所以说： 寿夭贫富无徒归也。 
English: Things don't happen out of thin air, there must be a reason for it. Therefore, it is said: "To live a long, poor, and rich life is not in vain."

古文：法立而民乐之，令出而民衔之，法令之合于民心如符节之相得也，则主尊显。
现代文：法立而人民乐从，令出而人民接受，法令合于民心，就象符节那样的一致，君主就尊显。
English: If laws are enacted and the people are happy to follow them, if orders are issued and the people accept them, if laws and decrees are in line with the people's will, they will be as consistent as the symbols, and the monarch will be respected.

古文：故曰： 衔令者君之尊也。 
现代文：所以说： 衔令者君之尊也。 
English: Therefore, he said, "The honor of the person who gives the order is also important."

古文：人主出言，顺于理，合于民情，则民受其辞。
现代文：君主出言合理，合于民情，臣民就接受他的指示。
English: If the monarch's words are reasonable and in line with the people's sentiments, the subjects will accept his instructions.

古文：民受其辞则名声章。
现代文：臣民接受指示则君主的名声显赫。
English: When subjects take orders, the monarch's reputation is enhanced.

古文：故曰： 受辞者名之运也。 
现代文：所以说： 受辞者名之远也。 
English: Therefore, he said, the recipient of the award is far from being famous.

古文：明主之治天下也，静其民而不扰，佚其民而不劳。
现代文：英明君主的治理天下，使人们安定而无所干扰，使人们安闲而无所劳累。
English: Wise monarchs rule the world, making people stable and free from interference, making people relaxed and free from fatigue.

古文：不扰则民自循；不劳则民自试。
现代文：不干扰，人民会自动守法；不劳累，人民会自动工作。
English: Without interference, the people will automatically abide by the law; without fatigue, the people will automatically work.

古文：故曰： 上无事而民自试。 
现代文：所以说： 上无事而民自试。 
English: So he said: let the people try for themselves.

古文：人主立其度量，陈其分职，明其法式，以莅其民，而不以言先之，则民循正。
现代文：人君建立法度，公布职责，明确规范来统治他的臣民，而不是无用说话指挥，臣民就按正道行事了。
English: The ruler establishes laws, promulgates duties, and clarifies norms to rule his subjects. Instead of uselessly speaking and commanding, the subjects act in the right way.

古文：所谓抱蜀者，祠器也。
现代文：所谓抱 蜀 ，指的是祭器。
English: The so-called "hug shu" refers to the sacrificial vessels.

古文：故曰： 抱蜀不言而庙堂既修。 
现代文：所以说： 抱蜀不言而庙堂既修。 
English: Therefore, it is said, "Holding shu is not enough, the temple must be built."

古文：将将鸿鹄，貌之美者也。
现代文：锵锵而鸣的鸿鹄，是长得很美的飞鸟。
English: The great cormorant is a beautiful flying bird.

古文：貌美，故民歌之。
现代文：因为美，所以人们歌颂它。
English: It is celebrated for its beauty.

古文：德义者，行之美者也。
现代文：德义，是一种行为上的美。
English: Virtue is a kind of beauty in behavior.

古文：德义美，故民乐之。
现代文：因为德义美，所以人们喜悦它。
English: People enjoy it because it is virtuous and beautiful.

古文：民之所歌乐者，美行德义也，而明主鸿鹄有之。
现代文：人民所歌颂喜悦的，乃是美貌和德义，而明君和鸿鸽恰好具有这些。
English: It is beauty and virtue that the people sing and rejoice in, and Mingjun and Hongyao have just these.

古文：故曰： 鸿鹄将将，维民歌之。 
现代文：所以说： 鸿鹄将将，维民歌之。 
English: Therefore, it is said: "Hongye will be victorious, Wei folk song will be victorious."

古文：济济者，诚庄事断也；多士者，多长者也。
现代文： 济济 ，指的是诚实庄重而果断； 多士 ，指的是许多有才德的人。
English: 济济, means honest, dignified and resolute; 多士, means many talented people.

古文：周文王诚庄事断，故国治。
现代文：周文王诚庄事断，故国家安定。
English: Zhou Wenwang Chengzhuang made the decision, so the country is stable.

古文：其群臣明理以佐主，故主明。
现代文：他的群臣明理佐助君主，故君主英明。
English: His vassals clearly supported Sasuke the monarch, so the monarch was wise.

古文：主明而国治，竟内被其利泽，殷民举首而望文王，愿为文王臣。
现代文：君主英明而国家安定，国内都得到他的好处和恩泽，殷民也举首而拥护文王，愿意作他的臣民。
English: The monarch is wise and the country is stable. All the people in the country have received his benefits and favors. The people also support King Wen and are willing to be his subjects.

古文：故曰： 济济多士，殷民化之。 
现代文：所以说： 济济多士，殷民化之。 
English: Therefore, it is said: Let's make more people, and make the people more prosperous.

古文：纣之为主也，劳民力，夺民财，危民死，冤暴之令，加于百姓；憯毒之使，施于天下。
现代文：殷纣王为君，劳民力，夺民财，危害人民性命，把残暴的法令强加于百姓，又把惨毒的使臣派往天下各地。
English: The king of Yin and Yang is the king. He exploits the people's labor, steals the people's wealth, endangers the people's lives, imposes cruel laws on the people, and sends poisonous envoys to all parts of the world.

古文：故大臣不亲，小民疾怨，天下叛之而愿为文王臣者，纣自取之也。
现代文：所以大臣不亲，小民怨恨，天下背叛而愿为文王的臣民，这是纣王的自作自受。
English: Therefore, the ministers were not close to him, the common people resented him, and the whole country betrayed him and wanted to be the subjects of King Wen. This was self-inflicted by King Xuan.

古文：故曰： 纣之失也。 
现代文：所以说： 纣之失也。 
English: That's why he said: "It's also the loss of the kite."

古文：无仪法程式，蜚摇而无所定，谓之蜚蓬之间。
现代文：不合乎法度规范，摇摆而没有定见，叫作飞蓬一样没有根据的言论。
English: Statements that do not conform to legal norms, vacillate without a fixed view, and are as unfounded as flying kites.

古文：蜚蓬之间，明主不听也。
现代文：这种言论，英明君主是不听的。
English: Wise monarchs do not listen to this kind of talk.

古文：无度之言，明主不许也。
现代文：就象对于没有法度的言论一样，英明君主是不赞成的。
English: As with unlicensed speech, wise monarchs disapprove.

古文：故曰： 蜚蓬之间，不在所宾。 
现代文：所以说： 蜚蓬之问，不在所宾。 
English: So he said, "If you ask me, I'm not a guest here.

古文：道行则君臣亲，父子安，诸生育。
现代文：行 道 ，君臣就亲近，父子就和睦，生命就繁育。
English: The lineage, the monarchs and ministers are close, the father and son are in harmony, and life is breeding.

古文：故明主之务，务在行道，不顾小物。
现代文：所以明主的职责，在于行 道 ，而不在小的事物上。
English: Therefore the Lord's business is not in small matters, but in great ones.

古文：燕爵，物之小者也。
现代文：燕雀，是事物中的小东西。
English: The chaffinch is the smallest of all things.

古文：故曰： 燕爵之集，道行不顾。 
现代文：所以说： 燕雀之集，道行不顾。 
English: Therefore, it is said: "A collection of birds and sparrows, disregarding the Tao."

古文：明主之动静得理义，号令顺民心，诛杀当其罪，赏赐当其功，故虽不用牺牲珪璧祷于鬼神，鬼神助之，天地与之，举事而有福。
现代文：明主的行动合乎理义，号令顺乎民心，诛杀与罪行相合，赏赐与功绩相称，所以他虽不用牛羊玉器祈祷于神鬼，鬼神也会帮助，天地也会支援，办什么事都得福。
English: The Emperor's actions are reasonable, his orders are in line with the people's hearts, his battles and killings are in line with his crimes, and his rewards are commensurate with his merits. Therefore, although he does not need to pray to the gods and spirits, the ghosts and spirits will also help, heaven and earth will also support, and everything he does will be blessed.

古文：乱主之动作失义理，号令逆民心，诛杀不当其罪，赏赐不当其功，故虽用牺牲珪璧祷于鬼神，鬼神不助，天地不与，举事而有祸。
现代文：昏君的行动不合理义，号令逆乎民心，诛杀与罪行不相当，赏赐与功绩不相称，所以，虽用牛羊玉器祈祷于鬼神，鬼神也不帮助，天地也不支援，办什么事都得祸。
English: The actions of the dim prince are unreasonable, his orders are contrary to the people's hearts, his fighting and killing are not commensurate with his crimes, and his rewards are not commensurate with his merits. Therefore, although he prays to ghosts and gods with cattle and sheep jade utensils, ghosts and gods do not help, heaven and earth do not support, and doing anything will bring misfortune.

古文：故曰： 牺牲珪璧不足以享鬼神。 
现代文：所以说： 牺牲珪壁不足以享鬼神。 
English: So he said, "Sacrificing the wall is not enough to enjoy ghosts and gods."

古文：主之所以为功者，富强也。
现代文：君主的功绩，就是使国家富强。
English: The merit of the monarch is to make the country rich and strong.

古文：故国富兵强，则诸侯服其政，邻敌畏其威，虽不用宝币事诸侯，诸侯不敢犯也。
现代文：所以，国富兵强，诸侯就服从他的政令，邻邦也惧怕他的威力，虽然不用珍贵的宝币交结诸侯，诸侯也不敢侵犯他。
English: Therefore, the country is rich and the army is strong, the lords obey his decrees, and the neighbors are afraid of his power. Although they do not have to hand over precious coins to the lords, the lords do not dare to infringe on him.

古文：主之所以为罪者，贫弱也。
现代文：君主的罪过，就是使国家贫弱。
English: The monarch's sin is to make the country poor and weak.

古文：故国贫兵弱，战则不胜，守则不固，虽出名器重宝以事邻敌，不免于死亡之患。
现代文：所以，国贫兵弱，战则不胜，守则不固，虽然用名器重宝来交结邻国，也不免于灭亡的祸患。
English: Therefore, the poor soldiers of the country are weak, the war is not victorious, and the code is not firm. Although they use famous tools and treasures to make contact with neighboring countries, they are not exempt from the scourge of destruction.

古文：故曰： 主功有素，宝币奚为？ 
现代文：所以说： 主功有素，宝币莫为？ 
English: Therefore, it is said: The main work is good, but the treasure is worthless?

古文：羿，古之善射者也。
现代文：后羿，是古代的善射者。
English: Hou Yi was a good archer in ancient times.

古文：调和其弓矢而坚守之。
现代文：他调和好弓箭而坚持掌握着。
English: He adjusted his bow and arrow and held on to it.

古文：其操弓也，审其高下，有必中之道，故能多发而多中。
现代文：他操弓时，审明其高下，掌握必能射中目标的规律，故能百发百中。
English: When he was practicing archery, he knew his strengths and weaknesses, and mastered the rule that he must be able to hit the target, so he was able to hit a hundred shots.

古文：明主，犹羿也，平和其法，审其废置而坚守之，有必治之道，故能多举而多当。
现代文：明主就象后羿一样，调和其治国的法度，审明其当废当立而坚持实行，掌握必治的规律，所以能做到多办事而事多办好。
English: Just like Emperor Ming and Empress Dowager Cixi, Emperor Ming and Empress Dowager Cixi reconciled the laws of governing the country, determined what should be done and what should not be done, and persisted in implementing them, and mastered the laws of governing, so they were able to do more things and do more things well.

古文：道者，羿之所以必中也，主之所以必治也。
现代文：规律，使后羿必能命中，使君主必能治国。
English: According to the law, so that the queen will be able to hit, so that the monarch will be able to govern the country.

古文：射者，弓弦发矢也。故曰： 羿之道非射也。 
现代文：射箭的表面动作，不过是弓弦发出箭枝而已。所以说： 羿之道，非射也。 
English: The surface action of archery is nothing more than the string of the bow releasing the arrow. Therefore, it is said: The way of the crossbow is not archery.

古文：造父，善驭马者也。
现代文：造父，是善于驭马的。
English: My father-in-law is good at riding horses.

古文：善视其马，节其饮食，度量马力，审其足走，故能取远道而马不罢，明主，犹造父也。
现代文：他爱护自己的马，调节它的饮食，度量马力了解它的速度，所以能驶行远路而马不疲累。
English: He cares for his horse, regulates its diet, measures its power and knows its speed, so he can travel long distances without the horse getting tired.

古文：善治其民，度量其力，审其技能，故立功而民不困伤。
现代文：明君也同造父一样，善于治理他的民众，度量民力，了解他们的技能，所以建立了事功而人民不感到疲困。
English: Like his father, the Ming Emperor was good at governing his people, gauging their strength, and understanding their skills, so he built up his achievements without the people feeling exhausted.

古文：故术者，造父之所以取远道也，主之所以立功名也。
现代文：所以，技艺方术，使造父驶行远路，使君主建立功名。
English: Therefore, the skill of the craftsmanship enables the founder to travel a long way and enables the monarch to build a reputation.

古文：驭者，操辔也。
现代文：至于驭马的表面动作，不过是掌握马的缰绳而已。
English: As for the surface action of riding a horse, it is nothing more than grasping the reins of a horse.

古文：故曰， 造父之术非驭也。 
现代文：所以说： 造父之术，非驭也。 
English: Therefore, it is said, "The art of fathering is not without its difficulties."

古文：奚仲之为车器也，方圜曲直皆中规矩钩绳，故机旋相得，用之牢利，成器坚固。
现代文：奚仲的制造车器，方圆曲直都合乎规矩钩绳，所以机轴都很合适，用起来牢固快速，成器坚固持久。
English: Hanzhong's manufacturing vehicle, the square circular curve is straight according to the rules of the hook rope, so the shaft is very suitable, it is fast and fast to use, and the finished product is durable and durable.

古文：明主，犹奚仲也，言辞动作，皆中术数，故众理相当，上下相亲。巧者，奚仲之所以为器也，主之所以为治也。
现代文：明君同奚仲一样，言词动作，都合乎方法策略，所以，各项治理都很适当，上下互相亲近。 巧 ，使奚仲能制成车器，使君主能治好国家。
English: Just as the words and actions of the Ming monarchs were in line with the methods and strategies of their predecessors, the words and actions of the Ming monarchs were in line with the methods and strategies of their predecessors. Therefore, the various governance methods were appropriate, and the upper and lower levels were close to each other.

古文：斫削者，斤刀也。
现代文：至于木材的砍削，不过是刀斧的动作而已。
English: As for chopping wood, it's just a knife and axe action.

古文：故曰： 奚仲之巧非斫削也。 
现代文：所以说： 奚仲之巧非削也。 
English: Therefore, it is said that the skill of the middlemen is not enough.

古文：民，利之则来，害之则去。
现代文：人民，有利则来，有害则去。
English: People, good things come and bad things go.

古文：民之从利也，如水之走下，于四方无择也。
现代文：人民趋利，就象水往下流一样，不管东西南北。
English: People are moving towards profit, just as water flows downhill, regardless of east, west, north or south.

古文：故欲来民者，先起其利，虽不召而民自至。
现代文：所以，要招来民众，先创造对他们有利的条件，虽不招而民自至。
English: Therefore, it is necessary to invite the people, first create favorable conditions for them, and then invite the people.

古文：设其所恶，虽召之而民不来也。故曰： 召远者使无为焉。 
现代文：如对他们有害，虽招而不来。所以说； 召远者使无为焉。 
English: If it be hurtful to them, they call, but come not: therefore they that are far off, and they that are near, both come not.

古文：莅民如父母，则民亲爱之。
现代文：统治人民要象父母一样，人民自然会亲近和爱戴。
English: If you govern the people like a parent, the people will naturally be close to you and love you.

古文：道之纯厚，遇之实，虽不言曰吾亲民，而民亲矣。
现代文：以纯厚来治理他们，用实惠来对待他们，虽然口里不说我亲近人民，人民也是会来亲近的。
English: To govern them with sincerity, to treat them with practical benefits, although I do not say that I am close to the people, the people will also come close.

古文：莅民如仇雠，则民疏之。
现代文：如把人民当作仇敌一般统治，人民自然就会疏远。
English: If you rule the people as enemies, the people will naturally be alienated.

古文：道之不厚，遇之无实，诈伪并起，虽言曰吾亲民，民不亲也。
现代文：治理他们不以厚道，对待他们没有实惠，欺诈和虚伪都用上了，虽然口头上说我要亲近人民，人民也是不会亲近的。
English: I do not govern them with kindness, I do not treat them with real benefits, I use deceit and hypocrisy, although I say I want to be close to the people, the people will not be close.

古文：故曰： 亲近者言无事焉。 
现代文：所以说： 亲近者言无事焉。 
English: Therefore, it is said: Let those who are close to you say nothing.

古文：明主之使远者来而近者亲也，为之在心。
现代文：明君能使远者来而近者亲，作用在于内心。
English: Ming Jun can make the distant come and the near come. The effect lies in the heart.

古文：所谓夜行者，心行也。
现代文：所谓 夜行 意思就是 心行 。
English: The so-called "night walk" means "mind walk."

古文：能心行德，则天下莫能与之争矣。
现代文：能做到内心行德，天下就没有人能够与之抗争了。
English: If you can achieve inner morality, no one in the world will be able to resist it.

古文：故曰： 唯夜行者独有之乎。 
现代文：所以说； 唯夜行者独有之乎。 
English: Therefore, it is unique to night walkers.

古文：为主而贼，为父母而暴，为臣下而不忠，为子妇而不孝，四者人之大失也。
现代文：作君主的，害人；作父母的，残暴；作臣下的，不忠；作子、妇的，不孝。这四项是人的大过失。
English: To be a ruler is harmful; to be a parent, cruel; to be a vassal, disloyal; to be a son or a wife, unfilial. These four are the great faults of man.

古文：大失在身，虽有小善，不得力贤。
现代文：有大过失在身，虽有小的优点，不得称之为贤。
English: He who has great faults in his body, although he has small merits, cannot be called virtuous.

古文：所谓平原者，下泽也，虽有小封，不得为高。
现代文：所谓平原，是指低洼的地面。虽有小的土堆，不能算作高。
English: The so-called plain refers to low-lying ground. Although there are small mounds, they cannot be counted as high.

古文：故曰： 平原之隰，奚有于高？ 
现代文：所以说： 平原之径，奚有于高。 
English: Therefore, it is said: the path of the plain is higher than that of the mountain.

古文：为主而惠，为父母而慈，为臣下而忠，为子妇而孝，四者人之高行也。
现代文：作君主的，惠民；作父母的，慈爱；作臣子的，忠君；作子、妇的，孝亲。这四项是人们的大德。
English: To be a ruler, benefit the people; to be a parent, be kind; to be a vassal, be loyal; to be a son, a wife, be a filial son. These four are the great virtues of people.

古文：高行在身，虽有小过，不为不肖。
现代文：有大德在身，虽有小过，不算不肖。
English: If there is great virtue in one's body, even if there is a small defect, it is not unsightly.

古文：所谓大山者，山之高者也，虽有小隈，不以为深。
现代文：所谓大山，是山中最高的。虽有小沟，不算作深。
English: The so-called big mountain is the highest in the mountain. Although there is a small ditch, it is not considered to be deep.

古文：故曰： 大山之隈，奚有于深？ 
现代文：所以说： 大山之限，奚有于深。 
English: Therefore, it is said: "The limit of a large mountain lies in its depth."

古文：毁訾贤者之谓訾，推誉不肖之谓讆。訾讆之人得用，则人主之明蔽，而毁誉之言起。
现代文：毁谤诽议贤者叫作 訾讆 ，吹捧不肖之徒叫作 誓讆 。 訾讆 之人得用，君主的聪明就被蒙蔽，而毁谤或者吹捧的谗言就起来了。
English: Those who slander and defame the wise are called liars, and those who praise the worthless are called oath-breakers. If one has to use liars, the wisdom of the monarch is blinded, and slanderous or laudatory criticism arises.

古文：任之大事，则事不成而祸患至。
现代文：若是任用这种人管理大事，那就把事情办坏而祸患临头。
English: If this kind of person is appointed to manage a big event, it will be a disaster if things go wrong.

古文：故曰： 訾讆之人，勿与任大。 
现代文：所以说： 訾讆之人，勿与任大。 
English: Therefore, he said, "If you are a lazy person, don't join Renda."

古文：明主之虑事也，为天下计者，谓之譕臣。
现代文：明君考虑事物，为天下全局打算，这叫作谋虑远大。
English: Ming Jun considers things and plans for the overall situation of the world, which is called far-sighted.

古文：譕臣则海内被其泽，泽布于天下，后世享其功久远而利愈多。
现代文：谋虑远大则海内都受到他的恩泽，恩泽施布于天下，后世享受他的功业，愈久远而利益愈多。
English: The more far-sighted one is, the more the sea will receive his grace, the more grace will be given to the world, and the future generations will enjoy his work. The longer the time, the greater the benefit.

古文：故曰： 譕臣者可与远举。 
现代文：所以说： 譕巨者可与远举。 
English: Therefore, it is said that: "He who conquers a giant can go far."

古文：圣人择可言而后言，择可行而后行。
现代文：圣人总是选择好可以说的话而后才说，选择好可以做的事而后才做。
English: A sage always chooses what to say before he says it, and what to do before he does it.

古文：偷得利而后有害，偷得乐而后有忧者，圣人不为也。
现代文：苟得其利而有后来之患，苟得其乐而有后顾之忧，圣人是不做这种事情的。
English: A saint does not do things like this, taking advantage only to suffer later, taking pleasure only to worry about the future.

古文：故圣人择言必顾其累，择行必顾其忧。
现代文：所以圣人 择言 一定考虑其后顾之累， 择行 一定要考虑其后顾之忧。
English: Therefore, when choosing words, a sage must consider the burden of looking after others, and when choosing actions, he must consider the worries of looking after others.

古文：故曰： 顾忧者可与致道。 
现代文：所以说： 顾忧者可与致道。 
English: Therefore, it is said: Those who are worried can join the path.

古文：小人者，枉道而取容，适主意而偷说，备利而偷得。
现代文：小人，不用正道来讨人欢喜，他总是迎合君意而苟且取悦于君，追求财利而苟且得其财利。
English: A villain does not need to be righteous to make people happy. He always panders to your wishes and tries to please you. He pursues financial gain and tries to get it.

古文：如此者，其得之虽速，祸患之至亦急。
现代文：这样的人，得利虽然很快，祸患的来临也很急。
English: Such a person, although the gain is quick, the arrival of the disaster is also very urgent.

古文：故圣人去而不用也。
现代文：所以圣人总是远离他而不使用的。
English: That's why sages always stay away from it and don't use it.

古文：故曰： 其计也速而忧在近者，往而勿召也。 
现代文：所以说： 其计也速而忧在近者，往而勿召也。 
English: Therefore it is said, "He who makes haste with his feet misses his neighbor and does not invite him."

古文：举一而为天下长利者，谓之举长。
现代文：办一件大事而为天下取得长远利益的，叫做 举长 。
English: To do a big thing and gain long-term benefits for the world is called "promotion."

古文：举长则被其利者众，而德义之所见远。
现代文：举长则受益的人众多，而德义的影响深远。
English: There are many people who benefit from the promotion of virtue, and the influence of virtue is far-reaching.

古文：故曰： 举长者可远见也。 
现代文：所以说： 举长者可远见也。 
English: Therefore, it is said: "Elderly people can also have foresight."

古文：天之裁大，故能兼覆万物；地之裁大，故能兼载万物；人主之裁大，故容物多而众人得比焉。
现代文：天的材器大，所以能兼覆万物；地的材器大，所以能兼载万物；人君的材器大，所以能容纳各种事物而使众人信赖。
English: Heaven's lumber is large, so it can cover all things; earth's lumber is large, so it can carry all things; man's lumber is large, so it can accommodate all kinds of things and make people trust.

古文：故曰： 裁大者众之所比也。 
现代文：所以说： 裁大者众之所比也。 
English: Therefore, it is said, "A great leader is better than all others."

古文：贵富尊显，民归乐之，人主莫不欲也。
现代文：贵富尊显，使人民拥戴感激，君主没有不愿意的。
English: There is nothing the monarch would not like to do in order to make the people appreciate his wealth and dignity.

古文：故欲民之怀乐己者，必服道德而勿厌也，而民怀乐之。故曰： 美人之怀，定服而勿厌也。 
现代文：问题是要求人民感怀自己，一定要行德而不厌倦，人民才可以感怀。所以说： 欲人之怀，定服而勿厌也。 
English: The problem is that the people are required to be impressed with themselves, and they must practice virtue without getting tired, so that the people can be impressed. Therefore, it is said: If you want people's hearts, you must be satisfied and not tired.

古文：圣人之求事也，先论其理义，计其可否。
现代文：圣人要干一件工作，首先问它是否合于理义，并估计其可能性。
English: A sage does a piece of work, first asks whether it makes sense, and then estimates its likelihood.

古文：故义则求之，不义则止。
现代文：合于 义 则做，不合于 义 的则不做。
English: What is right is done, and what is not right is not done.

古文：可则求之，不可则止。
现代文：有可能则做，没有可能则不做。
English: If it is possible, do it; if it is not possible, do not do it.

古文：故其所得事者，常为身宝。
现代文：所以他所做到的事情，常常是宝贵的。
English: So what he has achieved is often precious.

古文：小人之求事也，不论其理义，不计其可否，不义亦求之，不可亦求之。
现代文：小人做一件事，不问它是否合乎理义，不估计可能与不可能。不义的做，不可能的也做。
English: A villain does a thing without asking whether it is reasonable, without estimating the possible and the impossible. If it is unjust, it is also impossible.

古文：故其所得事者，未尝为赖也。故曰： 必得之事，不足赖也。 
现代文：所以他所做的事情，是靠不住的。所以说： 必得之事，不足赖也。 
English: Therefore what he does cannot be trusted; therefore he says, "What is impossible is possible."

古文：圣人之诺已也，先论其理义，计其可否。
现代文：圣人对一件事情的承诺与否，首先问它是否合于理义，并估计其可能性。
English: Whether or not a sage commits to something, he first asks whether it makes sense and assesses its likelihood.

古文：义则诺，不义则已；可则诺，不可则已。
现代文：合于 义 则承诺，不合于 义 则不承诺；有可能则承诺，没有可能则作罢。
English: If it is consistent, it is a commitment; if it is inconsistent, it is not a commitment; if it is possible, it is a commitment; if it is not possible, it is not a commitment.

古文：故其诺未尝不信也。
现代文：所以他的诺言没有不兑现的。
English: So there was no way he was going to renege on his promise.

古文：小人不义亦诺，不可亦诺，言而必诺。
现代文：小人则是不义也承诺，没有可能也承诺，一张口就一定承诺。
English: A villain, on the other hand, promises what is not right, promises what is not possible, and promises with one's mouth.

古文：故其诺未必信也。故曰： 必诺之言，不足信也。 
现代文：所以他的诺言是未必兑现的。所以说： 必诺之言，不足信也。 
English: Wherefore he saith, A promise is not of force: wherefore he saith, A promise is not of force.

古文：谨于一家，则立于一家；谨于一乡，则立于一乡；谨于一国，则立于一国；谨于天下，则立于天下。
现代文：谨慎对待一家的事情，则可在一个家庭里有所建树；谨慎对待一乡的事情，则可在一个乡里有所建树；谨慎对待一国的事情，则可在一国里面有建树；谨慎对待天下的事情，则可在天下的范围有建树。
English: If you treat the affairs of a family with caution, you can build something in a family; if you treat the affairs of a township with caution, you can build something in a township; if you treat the affairs of a country with caution, you can build something in a country; if you treat the affairs of the world with caution, you can build something in the world.

古文：是故其所谨者小，则其所立亦小；其所谨者大，则其所立亦大。
现代文：因此，谨慎处事的范围小，则其所建树的范围也小；谨慎处事的范围大，则其所建树的范围也大。
English: Therefore, if the scope of prudence is small, the scope of its construction is also small; if the scope of prudence is large, the scope of its construction is also large.

古文：故曰： 小谨者不大立。 
现代文：所以说： 小谨者不大立。 
English: Therefore it is said, "He who is a little prudent will not be exalted."

古文：海不辞水，故能成其大；山不辞土石，故能成其高；明主不厌人，故能成其众；士不厌学，故能成其圣。
现代文：海不排斥水，所以能够成为大海；山不排斥土石，所以能成为高山；明君不厌恶人民，所以能实现人口众多；士不厌学，所以能成为圣人。
English: The sea does not repel water, so it can become the sea; the mountain does not repel earth and stone, so it can become a mountain; the wise ruler does not hate the people, so he can achieve a large population; the scholar is not tired of learning, so he can become a saint.

古文：飺者，多所恶也。
现代文：飺，就是挑拣食品太严重。
English: , that is, the selection of food is too serious.

古文：谏者，所以安主也；食者，所以肥体也。
现代文：纳谏，是为了安定君位的；吃东西，是为了强壮身体的。
English: To eat, is to be strong; to eat, is to be healthy.

古文：主恶谏则不安，人飺食则不肥。
现代文：君主怕人进谏，君位就不安定；人们挑拣食品，身体就不肥壮。
English: Monarchs are afraid of people entering the palace, and the monarch's position is not stable; people pick food, and the body is not strong.

古文：故曰： 飺食者不肥体也。 
现代文：所以说： 飺食者不肥体。 
English: Therefore it is said, "He who feeds on carrion does not grow fat."

古文：言而语道德忠信孝弟者，此言无弃者。
现代文：一讲话就讲道德忠信孝梯的，这是不能废弃的话。
English: A speech on morality, loyalty and filial piety, this is a word that cannot be discarded.

古文：天公平而无私，故美恶莫不覆；地公平而无私，故小大莫不载。
现代文：天公平而无私，所以美与恶无所不覆；地公平而无私，所以小与大无所不载。
English: Heaven is fair and selfless, so beauty and evil are omnipresent; earth is fair and selfless, so small and large are omnipresent.

古文：无弃之言，公平而无私，故贤不肖莫不用。
现代文：不能废弃的话，也是公平无私的，所以贤与不肖都可以应用。
English: If it cannot be scrapped, it is also fair and selfless, so it can be applied to both virtuous and unscrupulous people.

古文：故无弃之言者，参伍于天地之无私也。故曰： 有无弃之言者，必参之于天地矣。 
现代文：所以，不能废弃的语言，是同天地一样无私的。所以说： 有无弃之言者，必参之于天地也。 
English: Therefore, a language that cannot be discarded is as selfless as heaven and earth. Therefore, it is said: Those who have words that cannot be discarded must also be in heaven and earth.

古文：明主之官物也，任其所长，不任其所短，故事无不成而功无不立。
现代文：明君授官任事，用其所长，不用其所短，所以事无不成而功无不立。
English: The Ming emperors assigned officials to duties, using their strengths and not their weaknesses, so they achieved a lot.

古文：乱主不知物之各有所长所短也，而责必备。
现代文：昏君不懂得事物都各有所长又各有所短，而求全责备。
English: Dim Jun does not understand that all things have their own strengths and weaknesses, and seeks to blame everyone.

古文：夫虑事定物，辩明礼义，人之所长而蝚蝯之所短也；缘高出险，蝚蝯之所长而人之所短也。
现代文：比如考虑事情定计划，辩明礼义，是人之所长而却是猿猴之所短；爬高走险，是猿猴之所长而却是人之所短。
English: For example, considering things, making plans, and defining propriety are the strengths of humans, but the weaknesses of apes; climbing high and taking risks are the strengths of apes, but the weaknesses of humans.

古文：以蝚蝯之所长责人，故其令废而责不塞。
现代文：用猿猴的所长要求人类，其政令就会失效而任务不能完成。
English: If the leader of the apes asks the humans, their decree will be invalidated and the task will not be completed.

古文：故曰： 坠岸三仞，人之所大难也，而蝚蝯饮焉。 
现代文：所以说： 坠岸三仍，人之所大难也，而蝚蝯饮焉。 
English: Therefore, it is said, "Falling ashore three times is still a great hardship for a person, but drowning is nothing."

古文：明主之举事也，任圣人之虑，用众人之力，而不自与焉。
现代文：明君做事，采用圣人的策划，使用众人的力量，而不用亲自去办。
English: Ming Jun does things, using the sage's planning, using the power of the people, without having to do it himself.

古文：故事成而福生。
现代文：所以事成而得福。
English: That's why success is a blessing.

古文：乱主自智也，而不因圣人之虑；矜奋自功，而不因众人之力；专用己，而不听正谏，故事败而祸生。
现代文：昏君自侍聪明，而不能运用圣人的策划；自己逞能，而不依靠众人的力量；一意孤行，而不听正谏。所以事败而生祸。
English: Faint-hearted princes are wise in their own eyes, but cannot employ the planning of sages; they are self-assertive, but do not rely on the strength of the masses; they are determined to go their own way, but do not listen to right advice. Therefore, disaster results from failure.

古文：故曰： 伐矜好专，举事之祸也。 
现代文：所以说： 伐矜好专，举事之祸也。 
English: Therefore, it is said: If you are good at felling, you will be good at managing.

古文：马者，所乘以行野也。
现代文：马，是用来骑乘到野外跑路的。
English: Horses are used for riding on the open road.

古文：故虽不行于野，其养食马也，未尝解惰也。
现代文：所以，虽不在野外跑路，在养马喂马上，也不能懈怠其事。
English: Therefore, although they do not run in the field, they should not slack off when raising and feeding horses.

古文：民者，所以守战也。
现代文：人民，是用来守国杀敌的。
English: The people are used to defend the country and kill the enemy.

古文：故虽不守战，其治养民也，未尝解惰也。
现代文：所以，虽不适守土战争，在治民养民上，也不能懈怠其事。
English: Therefore, although it is not appropriate to wage a war to defend the motherland, we should not slacken our efforts in governing and feeding the people.

古文：故曰： 不行其野，不违其马。 
现代文：所以说： 不行其野，不违其马。 
English: Therefore, he said, "If you can't go with the flow, you can't go against the flow."

古文：天生四时，地生万财，以养万物而无取焉。
现代文：天生有四时，地生有万财，它们以此养育万物而不取任何报酬。
English: There are four seasons in nature, and the earth produces all kinds of wealth, which they use to nurture all things without receiving any reward.

古文：明主配天地者也，教民以时，劝之以耕织，以厚民养，而不伐其功，不私其利。
现代文：明君是与天地相比配的。他教育人民按时生产，鼓励人民耕织，以此提高人民生活，而不肯自矜其功，独占其利。
English: He educated the people to start production on time, encouraged the people to cultivate and weave, thereby improving the people's lives, but refused to take credit for his work and monopolize his profits.

古文：故曰： 能予而无取者，天地之配也。 
现代文：所以说： 能予而无取者，天地之配也。 
English: Therefore, it is said: "He who can give but cannot take away is a match made in heaven and earth."

古文：解惰简慢，以之事主则不忠，以之事父母则不孝，以之起事则不成。
现代文：懒惰简慢，以此事君就是不忠，以此事父母就是不孝，用此来办事就不成功。
English: To be lazy and slow is to be disloyal to one's parents and unfilial to one's parents. It is not a good way to run a business.

古文：故曰： 怠倦者不及也。 
现代文：所以说： 怠倦者不及也。 
English: Therefore it is said, "He who is slow to anger is better than the mighty."

古文：以规矩为方圜则成，以尺寸量长短则得，以法数治民则安。
现代文：用规矩划方圆就能划成，用尺寸量长短就能量好，用法度、政策来治理民众就能安定。
English: It is possible to draw a square circle by using rules, and it is possible to draw a circle by using dimensions, and it is possible to use laws and policies to govern the people.

古文：故事不广于理者，其成若神。
现代文：所以，事情不背于规范，其成效如神。
English: Therefore, things are not contrary to the norm, and its effectiveness is like God.

古文：故曰： 无广者疑神。 
现代文：所以说： 无广者疑神。 
English: Therefore, it is said: No one doubts God.

古文：事主而不尽力则有刑，事父母而不尽力则不亲，受业问学而不加务则不成。
现代文：事奉君主而不尽力就要受刑，事奉父母而不尽力就无人亲近，受业问学而不加倍努力就没有成就。
English: If you do not do your best to serve the monarch, you will be punished; if you do not do your best to serve your parents, no one will be close to you; if you do not do your best to study, you will not be successful.

古文：故朝不勉力务进，夕无见功。故曰： 朝忘其事，夕失其功。 
现代文：所以，早上不努力求进，晚上就没有成果。所以说： 朝忘其事，夕失其功。 
English: Therefore, if you do not work hard in the morning, there will be no results in the evening. Therefore, it is said: Forget it in the morning, lose it in the evening.

古文：中情信诚则名誉美矣，修行谨敬则尊显附矣。
现代文：内心信诚，名誉就美了；修身严肃认真，尊显就来了。
English: Faithfulness in heart, honor is beautiful; self-cultivation is serious and earnest, and dignity comes.

古文：中无情实则名声恶矣，修行慢易则污辱生矣。
现代文：内心不诚实，名声就坏了；修身简馒松懈，污辱就来了。
English: Dishonesty in the heart brings a bad reputation; lack of self-discipline brings disgrace.

古文：故曰： 邪气袭内。正色乃衰也。 
现代文：所以说： 邪气袭内，正色乃衰也。 
English: Therefore, it is said: When evil spirits invade, the positive color is also bad.

古文：为人君而不明君臣之义以正其臣，则臣不知于为臣之理以事其主矣。
现代文：为人君主而不懂君臣之间的道理来规正臣下，臣下就不会懂得作臣下的道理来事奉君主了。
English: If you are a monarch and do not understand the principle between monarch and subject, you will not know the principle of being a subject to serve the monarch.

古文：故曰： 君不君则臣不臣。 
现代文：所以说： 君不君则臣不臣。 
English: So he said, "If you don't obey me, I won't obey you."

古文：为人父而不明父子之义以教其子而整齐之，则子不知为人子之道以事其父矣。
现代文：为人父亲而不懂父子之间的道理来管教子女，子女也就不会懂得作子女的道理来事奉父亲了。
English: For if the father does not know how to judge his children, the children will not know how to serve their father.

古文：故曰： 父不父则子不子。 
现代文：所以说： 父不父则子不子。 
English: Therefore, it is said: If the father is not the father, then the son is not the son.

古文：君臣亲，上下和，万民辑，故主有令则民行之，上有禁则民不犯。
现代文：君臣相亲，上下协调，万民和睦，所以国君有命令，人民就会实行；上面有禁律，人民就不去违犯。
English: Princes and ministers are close to each other, coordination between the upper and lower levels, and harmony among all the people. Therefore, if the ruler has an order, the people will implement it; if there is a prohibition above, the people will not violate it.

古文：君臣不亲，上下不和，万民不辑，故令则不行，禁则不止。故曰： 上下不和，令乃不行。 
现代文：君臣不亲，上下不协调，万民不和睦，所以令不能行，禁不能止，所以说： 上下不和，令乃不行。 
English: Kings and ministers are not close, the upper and lower levels are not coordinated, and all the people are not in harmony, so the order cannot be carried out, and the ban cannot be stopped. Therefore, it is said: If the upper and lower levels are not in harmony, the order cannot be carried out.

古文：言辞信，动作庄，衣冠正，则臣下肃。
现代文：说话有信用，动作庄重，衣冠端正，臣下就严肃了。
English: If you speak with credibility, act with dignity, and dress well, your subjects will take you seriously.

古文：言辞慢，动作亏，衣冠惰，则臣下轻之。
现代文：说话轻率，动作无礼，衣冠不整，臣下就轻慢了。
English: If you speak carelessly, behave rudely, and dress inappropriately, your subordinates will think less of you.

古文：故曰： 衣冠不正则宾者不肃。 
现代文：所以说： 衣冠不正则宾者不肃。 
English: Therefore, it is said: If the clothes are not proper, the guests will not be respectable.

古文：仪者，万物之程式也。
现代文：仪法，是万物的准则法式。
English: Etiquette is the standard of all things.

古文：法度者，万民之仪表也。
现代文：法度，是万民的仪表；礼仪，是尊卑的仪表。
English: Rule of law is the standard of all people; etiquette is the standard of superiority and inferiority.

古文：礼义者，尊卑之仪表也。故动有仪则令行，无仪则令不行。故曰： 进退无仪则政令不行。 
现代文：君主的举动合乎仪法，政令就能推行；不合乎仪法程式政令就不能推行，所以说： 连退无仪则政令不行。 
English: If the monarch's actions are in accordance with the etiquette, the decree can be implemented; if they are not in accordance with the etiquette procedure, the decree cannot be implemented, so it is said: If there is no etiquette, the decree cannot be implemented.

古文：人主者，温良宽厚则民爱之，整齐严庄则民畏之。
现代文：作君主的，温良宽厚则人民爱戴他；整齐庄严则人民敬畏他。
English: As a monarch, the people love him for his gentleness and generosity; the people revere him for his neatness and solemnity.

古文：故民爱之则亲，畏之则用。
现代文：人民爱戴就同他亲近，人民敬畏就可以为他所用。
English: If the people love him, they will be close to him. If the people fear him, they can be of use to him.

古文：夫民亲而为用，王之所急也。
现代文：人民亲近君主而又为君主所用，这是君主所最需要的。
English: The people are close to the monarch and are used by the monarch, which is what the monarch needs the most.

古文：故曰： 且怀且威则君道备矣。 
现代文：所以说： 且怀且威则君道备矣。 
English: Therefore, it is said, "If you are courageous, you will be prepared."

古文：人主能安其民，则事其主如事其父母。
现代文：君主能使人民生活安定，人民事奉君主就会象事奉父母一样。
English: If the monarch can make the people's life stable, the people will serve the monarch as if they were serving their parents.

古文：故主有忧则忧之，有难则死之。
现代文：这样，君主有忧人民可以为他分忧，国家有难人民可以为国死难。
English: In this way, if the monarch is worried, the people can share his worries, and if the country is in trouble, the people can help the country.

古文：主视民如土，则民不为用，主有忧则不忧，有难则不死。
现代文：若君主视民如粪土，人民就不会为他所用。君主有忧就不肯分忧，有难也不会死难。
English: If the monarch regards the people as dung, the people will not be of any use to him. If the monarch is worried, he will not share his worries, and if he is in trouble, he will not die.

古文：故曰： 莫乐之则莫哀之，莫生之则莫死之。 
现代文：所以说： 莫乐之则莫哀之，莫生之则莫死之。 
English: Therefore, it is said: If there is no joy, there is no sorrow; if there is no life, there is no death.

古文：民之所以守战至死而不衰者，上之所以加施于民者厚也。
现代文：人民之所以肯于守国杀敌至死而不后退，是因为君主对人民施加了厚惠。
English: The reason why the people were willing to defend the country and kill the enemy to death without retreating was because the monarch imposed generous benefits on the people.

古文：故上施厚，则民之报上亦厚；上施薄，则民之报上亦薄。
现代文：所以，君主施惠优厚，人民报答他也优厚；上面施惠微薄，人民报答他也微薄。
English: Therefore, if the monarch gives generous benefits, the people will reward him generously; if he gives meager benefits, the people will reward him meagerly.

古文：故薄施而厚责，君不能得之于臣，父不能得之于子。故曰： 往者不至，来者不极。 
现代文：如果施惠少而求索甚多，君主就不能从臣下手里得到，甚至父亲也不能从儿子手里得到。所以说： 往者不至，来者不极。 
English: If favors are few and much sought after, the sovereign cannot obtain them from his subjects, nor even a father from his son. Therefore, it is said, "Those who came before cannot come, and those who come after cannot come."

古文：道者，扶持众物，使得生育，而各终其性命者也。
现代文：道，是扶持万物，使它们生长发展，而全部完成它们生命的。
English: The Tao is to support all things, to make them grow and develop, and to complete their lives.

古文：故或以治乡，或以治国，或以治天下。
现代文：所以它或者可以用来治乡，或者可以用来治国，或者可以用来治理天下。
English: So it can either be used to govern the countryside, or it can be used to govern the country, or it can be used to govern the world.

古文：故曰： 道之所言者一也，而用之者异。 
现代文：所以说： 道之所言者一也，而用之者异。 
English: Therefore, it is said, "Those who speak the Tao are one, but those who use it are different."

古文：闻道而以治一乡，亲其父子，顺其兄弟，正其习俗，使民乐其上，安其土，为一乡主干者，乡之人也。
现代文：了解 道 而用它来治理一个乡，使一乡父子相亲，兄弟和睦，习俗归正，使人民怀乐君上，安居乐业，成为一乡之主干的，这就是治乡的人材。
English: Understanding the Tao and using it to govern a township, to make a township parent-child friendly, brotherly and harmonious, to rectify customs, to make the people cherish happiness, live and work in peace, and become the mainstay of a township, this is the talent for governing a township.

古文：故曰： 有闻道而好为乡者，一乡之人也。 
现代文：所以说： 有闻道而好为乡者，一乡之人也。 
English: Therefore, he said: There are people who have heard about Tao and are happy to be villagers, as well as people from the same village.

古文：民之从有道也，如饥之先食也，如寒之先衣也，如暑之先阴也。
现代文：人民归附有道的君主，如同饥饿时重视食品，寒冷时重视衣服，暑热时重视荫凉一样。
English: The people are as attached to a virtuous prince as they are to food when they are hungry, to clothing when they are cold, and to shade when they are hot.

古文：故有道则民归之，无道则民去之。
现代文：所以，有道则民众归附，无道则民众离散。
English: Therefore, if there is a way, the people will adhere to it, but if there is no way, the people will disperse.

古文：故曰： 道往者其人莫来，道来者其人莫往。 
现代文：所以说： 道往者其人莫来，道来者其人莫往。 
English: Therefore, it is said, "Those who have been to the Way cannot come here, and those who have come from the Way cannot go here."

古文：道者，所以变化身而之正理者也，故道在身则言自顺，行自正，事君自忠，事父自孝，遇人自理。
现代文：道，是用来改造人的自身而使人走向正理的。所以，一个有道在身的人，言语自能通达，行为自能端正，事君自能忠诚，事父自能孝顺，对人自能顺理。
English: The Tao is used to transform a person's self and lead him or her to righteousness. Therefore, a person with the Tao in his or her body can speak fluently, behave correctly, be loyal to the emperor, filial to the father, and be reasonable to others.

古文：故曰： 道之所设，身之化也。 
现代文：所以说： 道之所设，身之化也。 
English: Therefore, it is said, "What the Tao sets up, it also embodies."

古文：天之道，满而不溢，盛而不衰。
现代文：天的道，满而不外溢，盛而不衰竭。
English: The way of heaven is full but not overflowing, abundant but not exhausted.

古文：明主法象天道，故贵而不骄，富而不奢，行理而不惰。
现代文：明君效法天道行事，所以贵而不骄，富而不奢，行理而不懈。
English: Ming Jun acted according to the heavenly way, so he was expensive but not arrogant, rich but not extravagant, and he acted rationally but not unremittingly.

古文：故能长守贵富，久有天下而不失也。
现代文：所以能长守富贵，久有天下而不失。
English: That's why they can keep their wealth for a long time and not lose it.

古文：故曰： 持满者与天。 
现代文：所以说： 持满者与天。 
English: Therefore, it is said: "He who is full is full of heaven."

古文：明主救天下之祸，安天下之危者也。
现代文：明君就是要解救天下灾祸，使天下危局趋于安定的。
English: Ming Jun is to save the world disaster, so that the world crisis tends to stability.

古文：夫救祸安危者，必待万民之为用也，而后能为之。
现代文：但救祸患与安危局，一定要依靠广大人民为其所用，然后才能办得到。
English: But the disaster relief and safety bureau must rely on the broad masses of the people to use it, and then it can be done.

古文：故曰： 安危者与人。 
现代文：所以说： 安危者与人。 
English: Therefore, it is said: Those who are safe and those who are not.

古文：地大国富，民众兵强，此盛满之国也。
现代文：地大国富，民众兵强，这是繁荣的国家。
English: The country is rich and the people are strong. This is a prosperous country.

古文：虽已盛满，无德厚以安之，无度数以治之，则国非其国，而民无其民也。故曰， 失天之度，虽满必涸。 
现代文：虽然已经繁荣，如果没有深德厚惠来安定它，没有法度策略来治理它，国家还不是他的国家，而人民也还不是他的人民。所以说： 失天之度，虽满必涸。 
English: Although it has been prosperous, if there is no profound virtue and benefit to stabilize it, and there is no legal strategy to govern it, the country is not yet his country, and the people are not yet his people. Therefore, it is said: The degree of losing heaven, although full, must dry up.

古文：臣不亲其主，百姓不信其吏，上下离而不和，故虽自安，必且危之。
现代文：臣下不亲近他们的君主，百姓不信任他们的官吏，上下离而不和，虽然表面安定，必将走向危亡。
English: The subjects are not close to their monarchs, the people do not trust their officials, and they do not get along with each other. Although the surface is stable, it will surely go to peril.

古文：故曰： 上下不和，虽安必危。 
现代文：所以说： 上下不和，虽安必危。 
English: Therefore, it is said: Although there is discord between the upper and lower classes, it is safe and secure.

古文：主有天道，以御其民，则民一心而奉其上，故能贵富而久王天下。
现代文：君主掌握天道，用来统治他的百姓，百姓就一心事奉君主，所以能够富贵而长久统治天下。
English: The monarch possesses the heavenly way, which he uses to rule his people, and the people serve the monarch wholeheartedly, so they can be rich and rule the world for a long time.

古文：失天之道，则民离叛而不听从，故主危而不得久王天下。
现代文：如果违背天道，百姓就背叛而不服从，君主就危险而不得长久统治天下。
English: If the heavenly way is violated, the people will betray and disobey, and the monarch will be in danger and will not be able to rule the world for a long time.

古文：故曰： 欲王天下而失天之道，天下不可得而王也。 
现代文：所以说： 欲王天下而失天之道，天下不可得而王也。 
English: Therefore, it is said: If you want to be the king of the world and lose the way to heaven, you cannot be the king of the world and win.

古文：人主务学术数，务行正理，则化变日进，至于大功，而愚人不知也。
现代文：人君努力积累学识韬略，遵行正理，则每日都有发展进步，以至于成就大的事业，而愚人是不理解的。
English: A person who diligently accumulates knowledge and follows the truth will make progress every day and achieve great things, but a fool does not understand this.

古文：乱主淫佚邪枉，日为无道，至于灭亡，而不自知也。
现代文：昏君淫逸邪枉，每天干无道的事情以至于灭亡，而自己还不知道原因。
English: The faint-hearted, debauched and wicked, do senseless things every day until they perish, and they still don't know why.

古文：故曰： 莫知其为之，其功既成；莫知其舍之也，藏之而无形。 
现代文：所以说： 莫知其为之，其功既成；莫知其舍之也，藏之而无形。 
English: Therefore, it is said: "If you don't know what you are doing, your work is already done; if you don't know what you don't want to do, it is hidden and invisible."

古文：古者三王五伯皆人主之利天下者也，故身贵显而子孙被其泽。
现代文：古代三王五霸都是利天下的君主，故自身贵显而子孙蒙其德泽。
English: In ancient times, the three kings and five emperors were all emperors who benefited the world. Therefore, they were highly respected and their descendants were highly esteemed.

古文：桀，纣、幽、厉皆人主之害天下者也，故身困伤而子孙蒙其祸。
现代文：夏桀、殷纣、周幽王、周厉王都是害天下的君主，故自身因伤而子孙蒙其祸害。
English: Xia Yao, Yin Yao, Zhou Yu Wang and Zhou Li Wang were all monarchs who harmed the world, so because of their own injuries, their children and grandchildren suffered from their misfortune.

古文：故曰： 疑今者察之古，不知来者视之往。 
现代文：所以说： 疑今者察之古，不知来者视之往。 
English: Therefore, it is said: Those who doubt the present should look at the past, and those who do not know the past should look at the future.

古文：神农教耕生谷，以致民利。
现代文：神农氏教民耕作生产粮食，以利人民。
English: The Shennong taught the people to cultivate and produce grain for the benefit of the people.

古文：禹身决渎，斩高桥下，以致民利。
现代文：大禹亲身疏浚河道，铲高治低，以利人民。
English: Dayu personally dredged the river, shoveled high and ruled low, to benefit the people.

古文：汤武征伐无道，诛杀暴乱，以致民利。
现代文：商场王和周武王征伐无道，诛杀暴君，以利人民。
English: The king of the market and the king of Zhou Wu had no choice but to fight and kill the tyrant in order to benefit the people.

古文：故明王之动作虽异，其利民同也。故曰： 万事之任也，异起而同归，古今一也。 
现代文：他们的行动虽有所不同，其有利于人民则一。所以说： 万事之任也，异起而同归，古今一也。 
English: Although their actions are different, their benefit to the people is the same. Therefore, it is said: "All things are permitted, all things are permitted, all things are permitted, all things are permitted, all things are permitted."

古文：栋生桡不胜任则屋覆，而人不怨者，其理然也。
现代文：屋柱是新伐而又弯曲的木材，它不堪负荷而倒塌，人们并不埋怨，这是理该如此的。
English: The post is newly cut and bent wood, it is overloaded and collapses, people do not complain, it is natural.

古文：弱子，慈母之所爱也，不以其理动者，下瓦则慈母笞之。
现代文：小孩子，是慈母所钟爱的，但他无缘无故地拆下屋瓦，慈母也要拿棍子打他。
English: A child is loved by his mother, but if he pulls down the roof tiles for no reason, his mother will beat him with a stick.

古文：故以其理动者，虽覆屋不为怨；不以其理动者，下瓦必笞。
现代文：故理该如此的，虽房屋倒坍也埋怨不到它；而理不该如此的，拆屋瓦就一定要打棍子。
English: Logically, if a house falls down, there is nothing to complain about; logically, if it doesn't, you have to beat the tiles with a stick.

古文：故曰： 生栋覆屋，怨怒不及；弱子下瓦，慈母操箠。 
现代文：所以说： 生栋覆屋，怨怒不及；弱子下瓦，慈母操垂。 
English: Therefore, it is said: "If you build a house of bricks, you will not be able to withstand the anger of others; if you are a weakling, you will be a weakling; if you are a loving mother, you will be a weakling."

古文：行天道，出公理，则远者自亲；废天道，行私为，则子母相怨。
现代文：行事合于天道，出自公理，则远者都来亲近；废天道，按私心行事，则母子互相怨恨。
English: If one's actions are in accordance with the heavenly way and come from justice, then those who are far away will come closer; if one abandons the heavenly way and acts according to selfishness, then mother and son will resent each other.

古文：故曰： 天道之极，远者自亲；人事之起，近亲造怨。 
现代文：所以说： 天道之极，远者自亲；人事之起，近亲造怨。 
English: Therefore, it is said that: in the realm of heaven, the farthest is the closest; in the realm of human affairs, the closest is the most resentful.

古文：古者，武王地方不过百里，战卒之众不过万人，然能战胜攻取，立为天子，而世谓之圣王者，知为之之术也。
现代文：古时候，周武王地方不过百里，战卒不过万人，但是能战胜攻取，立为天子，而后世称之为圣王，是因为他懂得治国为君的方法。
English: In ancient times, the land of King Zhou Wu was only a hundred miles away, and his soldiers were no more than ten thousand, but he was able to defeat the attack and become the son of heaven, and later generations called him the holy king, because he knew how to govern the country.

古文：桀、纣贵为天子，富有海内，地方甚大，战卒甚众，而身死国亡，为天下僇者，不知为之之术也。
现代文：桀、纣贵为天子，富有海内，地方甚大，战卒甚多，而身死国亡，被天下所杀戮，是不懂得治国为君的方法。
English: He who regards himself as the son of heaven, who is rich at home and abroad, who has a vast territory and many soldiers, but who dies for his country and is killed by the whole world, does not know how to rule his country.

古文：故能为之，则小可为大，贱可为贵。
现代文：故善于为国的，小就可以变大，贱就可以变贵。
English: Therefore, if you are good at being a country, small can become big, and cheap can become expensive.

古文：不能为之，则虽为天子，人犹夺之也。
现代文：不善于为国的，即使当了天子，人们也会夺取的。
English: If you are not good at serving the country, even if you become the son of heaven, people will take it from you.

古文：故曰： 巧者有余而拙者不足也。 
现代文：所以说： 巧者有余而拙者不足也。 
English: Therefore, he said, "The skillful have more than enough, but I am not enough."

古文：明主上不逆天，下不圹地，故天予之时，地生之财。
现代文：明君上不背天，下不废地，所以天给他有利的天时，地为他生产财富。
English: The Ming emperor did not betray heaven when ascending, nor did he abandon the earth when descending. Therefore, heaven gave him favorable weather, and the earth produced wealth for him.

古文：乱主上逆天道，下绝地理，故天不予时，地不生财。
现代文：昏君上违天道，下背地理，所以天不给他有利的天时，地也不给他生产财富。
English: Emperor Wuxuan went up against the heavenly way and came down against geography. Therefore, heaven did not give him a favorable time of day, nor did the earth give him the opportunity to produce wealth.

古文：故曰： 其功顺天者，天助之；其功逆天者，天违之。 
现代文：所以说： 其功顺天者，天助之；其功逆天者，天违之。 
English: Therefore, it is said: "He whose work is in accordance with Heaven is aided by Heaven; he whose work is against Heaven is opposed by Heaven."

古文：古者，武王，天之所助也。故虽地小而民少，犹之为天子也。
现代文：古时候，周武王是天所帮助的君主，故虽土地小而人口少，仍然可以当天子。
English: In ancient times, King Zhou Wu was a monarch helped by heaven, so although the land was small and the population was small, it was still possible to have children.

古文：桀纣，天之所违也，故虽地大民众，犹之困辱而死亡也。
现代文：桀与纣，是天所抵制的君主。故虽土地大而人口多，仍然困辱而死亡。
English: Toad and Toad are monarchs who are resisted by heaven. Therefore, although the land is large and the population is large, they still suffer humiliation and die.

古文：故曰： 天之所助，虽小必大；天之所违，虽大必削。 
现代文：所以说： 天之所助，虽小必大；天之所违，虽大必削。 
English: Therefore it is said, "A little that Heaven helps is great; but great that Heaven opposes is small."

古文：与人交，多诈伪无情实，偷取一切，谓之乌集之交。
现代文：与人交友，多行诈伪，不讲真实，苟且谋取一切，叫作乌鸦般的友谊。
English: Making friends with people, committing many frauds, not telling the truth, and seeking everything, is called crow-like friendship.

古文：乌集之交，初虽相欢，后必相咄。
现代文：乌鸦般的友谊，最初虽然亲密，后来一定反目。
English: The friendship of crows, though intimate at first, is sure to degenerate.

古文：故曰： 乌集之交，虽善不亲。 
现代文：所以说： 乌集之交，虽善不亲。 
English: Therefore, it is said: Even though they are good friends, they are not close.

古文：圣人之与人约结也，上观其事君也，内观其事亲也，必有可知之理，然后约结。
现代文：圣人同人家结交，在朝上要看他如何事君的，在家里要看他如何事亲的，一定要根据可靠的条件，然后才与他结交。
English: If you want to make friends with a saint, you should see how he treats you in the imperial court, and how he treats his relatives at home. You must first make friends with him based on reliable conditions.

古文：约结而不袭于理，后必相倍。
现代文：结交而不根据可靠的条件，以后一定背叛。
English: If you establish a friendship without a reliable basis, you are sure to be betrayed later.

古文：故曰： 不重之结，虽固必解。
现代文：所以说： 不重之结，虽固必解。
English: Therefore it is said: A knot of no weight, although it is solid, must be solved.

古文：道之用也，贵其重也。 
现代文：道之用也，贵其重也。 
English: The use of the road is also very important.

古文：明主与圣人谋，故其谋得；与之举事，故其事成。
现代文：明君总是与圣人共同谋事，所以他的谋划得宜；与圣人共同举事，所以他的事业有成。
English: Ming Jun always worked together with the sage, so his plans were appropriate; he worked together with the sage, so his career was successful.

古文：乱主与不肖者谋，故其计失；与之举事，故其事败。
现代文：昏君总是与不肖者共同谋事，所以他的计谋失误；与不肖者共同举事，所以他的事业失败。
English: The dim prince always conspires with the unscrupulous, so his schemes fail; he conspires with the unscrupulous, so his undertakings fail.

古文：夫计失而事败，此与不可之罪。故曰： 毋与不可。 
现代文：计谋失误与事业失败，这都是用人不可靠的过错。所以说： 毋与不可。 
English: Mistakes in planning and business failures are all the fault of unreliable employers. Therefore, it is said: it is necessary.

古文：主度量人力之所能为，而后使焉。
现代文：明君用人总是衡量着每个人的力所能及，然后才加以使用。
English: Mingjun's employees always measure each person's ability to the best of their ability before using them.

古文：故令于人之所能为，则令行；使于人之所能为，则事成。
现代文：所以，命令人们做力所能及的事情，命令就能推行；使役人们做力所能及的事情，事情就能成功。
English: Therefore, command people to do what they can, and the command will be implemented; make people do what they can, and things will be successful.

古文：乱主不量人力，令于人之所不能为，故其令废；使于人之所不能为，故其事败。
现代文：昏君不衡量人的能力，命令人们做力所不及的事情，所以命令不能推行；使役人们做力所不及的事情，所以事业失败。
English: The dim prince does not measure people's ability, and orders people to do things that are beyond their ability, so the order cannot be implemented; and causes people to do things that are beyond their ability, so the cause fails.

古文：夫令出而废，举事而败，此强不能之罪也。
现代文：令出而不行，举事而失败，这都是强加于 力所不及 的过错。
English: To issue an order but fail to carry it out, to hold a meeting but fail, these are all faults that are beyond one's ability to impose.

古文：故曰： 毋强不能。 
现代文：所以说： 毋强不能。 
English: Therefore, he said, "I can't do it without strength."

古文：狂惑之人，告之以君臣之义、父子之理、贵贱之分，不信圣人之言也，而反害伤之。
现代文：对于狂惑的人，若告诉他君臣之义、父子之理、贵贱之分，他非但不相信圣人的话，反而加以伤害。
English: For a deluded person, if you tell him about the righteousness of kings and ministers, the righteousness of fathers and sons, and the distinction of high and low, he will not only not believe the words of the saints, but will actually harm them.

古文：故圣人不告也。
现代文：所以圣人是不肯告诉他的。
English: So the sage did not want to tell him.

古文：故曰： 毋告不知。 
现代文：所以说： 毋告不知。 
English: So he said: I don't know.

古文：与不肖者举事，则事败；使于人之所不能为，则令废；告狂惑之人，则身害。
现代文：同不肖者共同举事，则事败；使人做力所不能及的事情，则命令失效；把事理告知狂惑之人，则身受其害。
English: Those who try to do things together will fail; those who try to make others do things beyond their ability will fail; and those who tell the truth to those who are deluded will be harmed.

古文：故曰： 与不可，强不能，告不知，谓之劳而无功。 
现代文：所以说： 与不可，强不能，告不知，谓之劳而无功。 
English: Therefore, it is said: "If you can't compete, you can't be strong, and if you can't tell, you don't know, it's a waste of effort."

古文：常以言翘明，其与人也，其爱人也，其有德于人也，以此为友则不亲，以此为交则不结，以此有德于人则不报。
现代文：常常用言语宣传他对人友好，对人亲爱和对人有德，以此与人交友就不会亲密，以此与人交往就不会结好，以此施德于人就不会赢得报答。
English: He often uses words to advertise that he is friendly to people, dear to people, and virtuous to people. If you make friends with people in this way, you will not be intimate with them, if you make friends with people in this way, you will not get along with them, and if you are kind to people in this way, you will not be rewarded.

古文：故曰： 见与之友，几于不亲；见爱之交，几于不结；见施之德，几于不报。
现代文：所以说： 见与之友，几于不亲；见爱之交，几于不结，见施之德，几于不报。
English: Therefore, it is said: If you see a friend, you are more likely to be friends than not; if you see a loving friend, you are more likely to be friends than not; if you see a generous person, you are more likely to be generous than not.

古文：四方之所归，心行者也。 
现代文：四方之所归，心行者也。 
English: The home of the four directions is also the home of the mind walker.

古文：明主不用其智，而任圣人之智；不用其力，而任众人之力。
现代文：明君不用他自己的智慧，而依靠圣人的智慧；不用他自己的力量，而依靠众人的力量。
English: Mingun did not use his own wisdom, but relied on the wisdom of the sages; did not use his own strength, but relied on the strength of the people.

古文：故以圣人之智思虑者，无不知也；以众人之力起事者，无不成也。
现代文：所以，用圣人的智慧思考问题，没有不了解的问题；用众人的力量举办事业，没有不成功的事业。
English: Therefore, if you think about a problem with the wisdom of a sage, there is no problem that you do not understand; if you use the power of many people to do business, there is no unsuccessful business.

古文：能自去而因天下之智力起，则身逸而福多。
现代文：能做到个人放手而依靠天下人的智慧与力量推动国事，那就自身安逸而多得其福了。
English: If an individual can let go and rely on the wisdom and strength of the people of the world to promote national affairs, then he will be comfortable and blessed.

古文：乱主独用其智，而不任圣人之智；独用其力，而不任众人之力，故其身劳而祸多。
现代文：昏君独用他个人的智慧，而不依靠圣人的智慧；独用他个人的力量，而不依靠众人的力量，所以他自身劳累而多遭祸患。
English: The king of darkness uses his personal wisdom alone, and does not rely on the wisdom of the saints; uses his personal strength alone, and does not rely on the strength of the people, so he is exhausted and suffers more disasters.

古文：故曰： 独任之国，劳而多祸。 
现代文：所以说： 独任之国，劳而多祸。 
English: Therefore, it is said: "The country that is left to its own devices will suffer from too much work."

古文：明主内行其法度，外行其理义，故邻国亲之，与国信之，有患则邻国忧之，有难则邻国救之。
现代文：明君对内实行法度，对外实行理义。所以邻国亲近他，盟国信任他。有祸患邻国替他分忧，有危难邻国对他援救。
English: Therefore, the neighboring countries are close to him, the allied countries trust him. If there is a disaster, the neighboring countries will share his worries, and if there is a crisis, the neighboring countries will rescue him.

古文：乱主内失其百姓，外不信于邻国，故有患则莫之忧也，有难则莫之救也，外内皆失，孤特而无党，故国弱而主辱。
现代文：昏君对内脱离人民，对外不取信于邻国。国有祸患没有人替他分优，国有危难没有人对他援救。内外都脱离了，孤立而无援，所以国弱而君辱。
English: The dim prince is detached from the people internally, and does not gain the trust of the neighboring countries externally. There is no one to give him an advantage in the national calamity, and there is no one to rescue him in the national crisis. Both inside and outside are detached, isolated and helpless, so the country is weak and humiliated.

古文：故曰， 独国之君，卑而不威。 
现代文：所以说： 独国之君，卑而不威。 
English: Therefore he said, "Humble thyself before the Lord, and he will exalt thee."

古文：明主之治天下也，必用圣人，而后天下治；妇人之求夫家也，必用媒，而后家事成。
现代文：明君的治理天下，一定任用圣人，而后天下治；女人求嫁夫家，必须通过媒人，而后家事成。
English: When the Ming Dynasty ruled the world, they would appoint a sage to rule the country; when a woman wanted to marry her husband, she had to go through a matchmaker, and then the marriage would be consummated.

古文：故治天下而不用圣人，则天下乖乱而民不亲也；求夫家而不用媒，则丑耻而人不信也。
现代文：因此，治理天下而不任用圣人，则天下乖乱而人民不会亲近；求嫁夫家而不通过媒人，则名声丑恶而没有信誉。
English: Therefore, governing the world without appointing a saint, the world will be disorderly and the people will not be close; asking for a husband's family without a matchmaker, the reputation is ugly and has no credibility.

古文：故曰， 自媒之女，丑而不信。 
现代文：所以说： 自媒之女，丑而不信。 
English: Therefore, they say: A self-taught woman is ugly and untrustworthy.

古文：明主者，人未之见而有亲心焉者，有使民亲之之道也。
现代文：明君，人们还没有见面就有了亲近之心，是因为他有使人亲近的治世之道。
English: Ming Jun, people have a heart of closeness even before they meet, because he has a way of governing the world that brings people closer.

古文：故其位安而民往之。
现代文：所以他总是地位安定而人民都来归附。
English: That's why he's always been stable and people have come around.

古文：故曰： 未之见而亲焉，可以往矣。 
现代文：所以说： 未之见而亲焉，可以往矣。 
English: Therefore, he said, "If you don't see it, but are familiar with it, you can go ahead."

古文：尧舜，古之明主也。
现代文：尧舜，是古代的明主。
English: , is the ancient Ming Dynasty.

古文：天下推之而不倦，誉之而不厌，久远而不忘者，有使民不忘之道也。故其位安而民来之。
现代文：天下人不厌倦地推祟他，不厌倦地赞誉他，历时久远而不忘记他，是因为他有使人民怀念不忘的治世之道，所以，他地位安定而人民都来归附。
English: The people of the world do not tire of cursing him, do not tire of praising him, and do not forget him for a long time, because he has a way of governing the world that makes the people remember and do not forget. Therefore, his position is stable and the people all adhere to him.

古文：故曰： 久而不忘焉，可以来矣。 
现代文：所以说： 久而不忘焉，可以来矣。 
English: Therefore, he said, "If you don't forget for a long time, you can still come."

古文：日月，昭察万物者也，天多云气，蔽盖者众，则日月不明。
现代文：日月，是照亮万物的。天空多有云气，掩盖的云层一多，日月就不那么明亮了。
English: The sun and the moon illuminate everything. If there are more clouds in the sky and more clouds cover the sky, the sun and the moon will not be as bright.

古文：人主，犹日月也，群臣多奸立私，以拥蔽主，则主不得昭察其臣下，臣下之情不得上通。
现代文：人君，就如同日月一样；群臣之中如果多奸邪之徒，树立私党，以蒙蔽君主，君主便不得明察其臣下，下情也不得上达。
English: Princes are like the sun and the moon. If there are many traitors and evil-doers among the courtiers, and if they set up a private party in order to deceive the monarch, then the monarch will not be able to see his or her subjects clearly, nor will he or she be able to obtain their favor.

古文：故奸邪日多而人主愈蔽。
现代文：所以奸邪之臣愈多，君主愈受其蒙蔽。
English: Therefore, the more treacherous vassals there are, the more the monarch is deceived by them.

古文：故曰： 日月不明，天不易也。 
现代文：所以说： 日月不明，天不易也。 
English: Therefore, it is said: The sun and the moon are unknown, and the weather is not easy.

古文：山，物之高者也。
现代文：山，是物中最高的。
English: The mountain is the highest of all things.

古文：地险秽不平易，则山不得见。
现代文：但地面险恶不平，山也就看不见了。
English: But the ground is treacherously uneven, and the mountain is out of sight.

古文：人主，犹山也，左右多党比周以壅其主，则主不得见。
现代文：人君，就象山一样。左右近臣结党营私，以蒙蔽君主，君主也就看不清了。
English: A ruler is like a mountain. His close vassals on both sides form a party to blind the ruler, and the ruler cannot see clearly.

古文：故曰： 山高而不见，地不易也。 
现代文：所以说： 山高而不见，地不易也。 
English: Therefore, he said, "It is not easy to climb a high mountain.

古文：人主出言不逆于民心，不悖于理义，其所言足以安天下者也，人唯恐其不复言也。
现代文：人君讲话不违背民心，不违弃礼义，他的话便足以安定天下，人们是唯恐他不多讲的。
English: If a person's speech does not violate the people's heart and does not violate etiquette, his words will be enough to stabilize the world. People are afraid that he will not speak much.

古文：出言而离父子之亲，疏君臣之道，害天下之众，此言之不可复者也，故明主不言也。
现代文：如果讲出话来使父子不亲，使君臣疏远，伤害天下的大众，这便是不应再说的错话，明君是不讲的。
English: If one utters words that alienate father and son, estrange princes and ministers, and harm the people of the world, it is a wrong word that should not be uttered again.

古文：故曰： 言而不可复者，君不言也。 
现代文：所以说： 言而不可复者，君不言也。 
English: So he said, "If you can't be redeemed for what you say, don't say it."

古文：人主身行方正，使人有礼，遇人有理，行发于身而为天下法式者，人唯恐其不复行也。
现代文：人君自身行事端正，对待臣下有礼，与人相处有信，做出事来可为天下的表率，人们是唯恐他不多做一些事情的。
English: A person who conducts himself well, treats his subordinates with courtesy, gets along with people with trust, and can set an example for the world by doing things, people are afraid that he will not do many things.

古文：身行不正，使人暴虐，遇人不信，行发于身而为天下笑者，此不可复之行，故明主不行也。
现代文：如果自身行事不正，使用臣下暴虐，与人相处没有信用，所行之事为天下人耻笑，这是不可再做的错事，明君是不做的。
English: If you behave improperly, use your vassals to be tyrannical, have no trust in getting along with others, and the things you do are a disgrace to the world, this is a mistake that can no longer be done, and you should not do it.

古文：故曰： 行而不可再者，君不行也。 
现代文：所以说： 行而不可再者，君不行也。 
English: So he said, "If you can't go on, you can't go on."

古文：言之不可复者，其言不信也；行之不可再者，其行贼暴也。
现代文：不应该再说的错话，这种话没有信用；不应该再做的错事，这种事害人至深。
English: Wrong words that should not be said again have no credibility; wrong things that should not be done again are extremely harmful.

古文：故言而不信则民不附，行而贼暴则天下怨。
现代文：出言而无道，人民就不肯归附；行事而害人至深，天下就怨声载道。
English: If you say something and do nothing, the people will not adhere to it; if you do something and cause great harm, the world will be filled with complaints.

古文：民不附，天下怨，此灭亡之所从生也，故明主禁之。
现代文：人民不归附，天下怨声载道，这是导致灭亡的根源，所以是明君所禁忌的。
English: If the people do not adhere to it, the whole world will complain loudly. This is the root cause of destruction, so it is taboo for Mingjun.

古文：故曰， 凡言之不可复，行之不可再者，有国者之大禁也。 
现代文：所以说： 凡言之不可复，行之不可再者，有国者之大禁也。 
English: Therefore it is said, "Whosoever shall say, It shall not be done, and shall do it no more, he also shall be cut off from among his people."

