古文：秦王谓公子他曰： 昔岁殽下之事，韩为中军，以与诸侯攻秦。
现代文：秦昭王对公子他说： 去年壳下的战争，韩国作为中军主力，而与诸侯联合起来进攻秦国。
English: Qin Zhao Wang said to his son: Last year's war under the shell, South Korea, as the main force of the Chinese army, united with the princes to attack Qin.

古文：韩与秦接境壤界，其地不能千里，展转不可约。
现代文：韩国与秦国边境接壤，他们的土地方圆不到千里，反复无常不遵守盟约。
English: South Korea shares a border with Qin. Their territory is less than a thousand miles in circumference, and they are capricious and do not abide by the treaty.

古文：日者秦、楚战于蓝田，韩出锐师以佐秦，秦战不利，因转与楚，不固信盟，唯便是从。
现代文：从前秦国，楚国在蓝田交战，韩国派出精锐部队帮助秦军，可是秦军战斗不剩，韩国因此反与楚国联合，不坚守盟约，只追求利益。
English: Formerly, Qin and Chu fought in Lantian. South Korea sent elite troops to help the Qin army, but the Qin army did not have enough fighting left. Therefore, South Korea opposed the alliance with Chu, did not adhere to the treaty, and only pursued interests.

古文：韩之在我，心腹之疾。
现代文：韩国对于我国来说，是心腹之患。
English: For our country, South Korea is a problem close to our hearts.

古文：吾将伐之，何如? 
现代文：我准备进攻他们，怎么样？ 
English: I'm going to attack them, how about that?

古文：公子他曰： 王出兵韩，韩必惧，惧则可以不战而深取割。 
现代文：公子他说： 君王出兵韩国，韩国一定恐惧，恐惧就可以不用战争而多割取土地。 
English: He said: The king sent troops to South Korea, South Korea must be afraid, fear can take more land without war.

古文：王曰： 善。 
现代文：昭王说。 好。 
English: Japan is preparing to send an envoy to South Korea.

古文：乃起兵，一军临荧阳，一军临太行。
现代文：于是就出动军队，一支军队逼近荥阳，一支军队逼近太行。
English: As a result, an army was dispatched. One army approached Shenyang, and one army approached Taihang.

古文：韩恐，使阳成君入谢于秦，请效上党之地以为和。
现代文：韩国十分恐惧，派阳城君到秦国谢罪，请求献出上党的土地阼为讲和的条件。
English: South Korea was very afraid and sent Yangcheng Jun to Qin to apologize and ask for the land to be given to the party as a condition for peace.

古文：命韩阳告上党之守靳曰： 秦起二军以临韩，韩不能有。
现代文：韩桓惠王又派阳城君告诉上党太守靳悬说： 秦国出动两支军队来进攻韩国，韩国就会灭亡。
English: King Han Huan Hui also sent Yangcheng Jun to tell the supreme commander of the upper party, Yu Xing, that: If Qin dispatched two armies to attack Korea, Korea would perish.

古文：今王令韩兴兵以上党入和与秦，使阳言之太守，太守其效之。 
现代文：现在君王一面命令韩国出兵，一面又把上党献给秦国求和，派我把情况告诉太守，太守还是献给他。 
English: Now the king ordered South Korea to send troops, and on the other hand, he offered the upper party to Qin to sue for peace. He sent me to tell the situation to the governor, and the governor still offered it to him.

古文：靳曰： 人有言：挈瓶之知，不失守器。
现代文：靳簸说： 人们有这样的话： 即使是小智小慧，守着的器物就不能出借。 
English: Zou said: People have this saying: Even if you are a little clever, you can't lend out the things you keep.

古文：王则有令，而臣太守，虽王与子，亦其猜焉。
现代文：君王有兴兵的命令，而臣下又是太守，即使是君王和您也大概会对我猜疑的。
English: The king has orders to raise an army, and his vassal is the governor. Even the king and you would probably be suspicious of me.

古文：臣请悉发守以应秦，若不能卒，则死之。 
现代文：臣下请求发动全部守军对付秦兵，如果最后不能守住，那么我就为国战死。 
English: My vassal requested that I launch all the defending troops to deal with the Qin soldiers. If I couldn't hold out in the end, then I would die fighting for my country.

古文：韩阳趋以报王，王曰： 吾始已诺于应侯矣，今不与，是欺之也。 
现代文：韩阳迅速把情况报告给韩王、韩王说： 我开始对应侯就答应了这件事，现在不给，这是欺骗他。 
English: Han Yang quickly reported the situation to Han Wang. Han Wang said, "I agreed to this when I started corresponding with Hou, but now I won't give it to him. This is deceiving him."

古文：乃使冯亭代靳。
现代文：予是就派冯亭取代靳簸。
English: Feng Ting was sent to replace Zou.

古文：冯亭守三十日，阴使人请赵王曰： 韩不能守上党，且以与秦，其民皆不欲为秦，而愿为赵。
现代文：冯亭坚守三十天，暗中派人请求赵孝成王说： 韩国不能守住上党，将要把它献给秦国，可是上党的民众都不想做秦国的臣民而愿意做赵国的臣民。
English: Feng Ting held out for thirty days and secretly sent a request to Zhao Xiaocheng Wang, saying: South Korea cannot hold onto Shangdang and will give it to Qin, but the people of Shangdang do not want to be subjects of Qin but are willing to be subjects of Zhao.

古文：今有城市之邑七十，愿拜内之与王，唯王才之。 
现代文：现在上党作为大邑拥有十七个县，愿意拜献给大王，希望君主决定这件事情。 
English: Now the upper party has seventeen counties as a large county, and is willing to pay tribute to the great king, hoping that the monarch will decide this matter.

古文：赵王喜，召平原君而告之曰： 韩不能守上党，且以与秦，其吏民不欲为秦，而皆愿为赵。
现代文：赵王大喜过望，召来平阳君并告诉他说： 韩国不能坚守上党，将要把它献给秦国，上党的百姓不想做秦国的臣民而都愿意做赵国的臣民。
English: Zhao Wang was overjoyed and summoned Pingyang Jun and told him: South Korea cannot hold on to Shangdang and will dedicate it to Qin. The people of Shangdang do not want to be subjects of Qin, but are willing to be subjects of Zhao.

古文：今冯亭令使者以与寡人，何如? 
现代文：如今冯亭派使者把上党献给寡人，你看怎么样？ 
English: Now Feng Ting has sent an envoy to dedicate the party to you, what do you think?

古文：赵豹对曰： 臣闻圣人甚祸无故之利。 
现代文：赵豹回答说： 臣下听说圣人认为无缘无故获得利益是最大的祸患。 
English: Zhao Pang replied: My subjects have heard that sages believe that it is the greatest evil to make profit without any reason.

古文：王曰： 人怀吾义，何谓无故乎? 
现代文：赵王说： 人们感念我的恩义，怎么说是无缘无故呢？ 
English: Zhao Wang said: People think of my gratitude, how can they say it is without reason?

古文：对曰： 秦蚕食韩氏之地，中绝不令相通，故自以为坐受上党也。
现代文：赵豹说： 秦国逐渐侵占韩国的土地，中间断绝了上党通韩凰的道路，使他们不能互相援救，所以自认为可以坐得上党。
English: Zhao Leopard said: Qin gradually occupied the land of South Korea, and cut off the road to the party through Han Ying in the middle, so that they could not help each other, so they thought they could sit on the party.

古文：且夫韩之所以内赵者，欲嫁其祸也。
现代文：再说韩国之所以把上党献给赵国的原因，是想要把祸患转嫁给赵国。
English: Furthermore, the reason why South Korea dedicated the party to Zhao Guo is to pass on the disaster to Zhao Guo.

古文：秦被其劳，而赵受其利，虽强大不能得之于小弱，而小弱顾能得之强大乎?
现代文：秦国遭受了攻打上党的辛劳，而赵国却享受了它的利益，即使是强大的国家也不能从弱小的国家得到这种好处，弱小的国家能从强大的国家手中得到吗？
English: Qin suffered the hardships of the attack on the Party, while Zhao enjoyed its benefits. Even a strong country cannot get this benefit from a weak country. Can a weak country get it from a strong country?

古文：今王取之，可谓有故乎?
现代文：如今君王得到上党，可以说是有缘故吗？
English: Now that the king has gained the upper hand, can it be said that there is a reason?

古文：且秦以牛田，水通粮，其死士皆列之于上地，令严政行，不可与战。
现代文：况且秦国用牛耕种，从水道运送军粮，那些勇敢不怕死的将士列阵在上党，法令严格政务推行顺利，不能与他们交战。
English: Moreover, Qin used cattle to cultivate the land and transported military supplies from the waterways. Those brave soldiers who were not afraid of death were lined up in the upper ranks of the party. Strict government regulations were implemented smoothly, and it was impossible to fight with them.

古文：王自图之。 
现代文：君王还是自己认真考虑一下！ 
English: The king should seriously think about it himself!

古文：王大怒曰： 夫用百万之众，攻战逾年历岁，未见一城也。
现代文：赵王大怒说： 动用上百万军队，攻战经年累岁，没有得到一座城池。
English: Zhao Wang said angrily, "Using millions of troops and fighting for years and years, we didn't get a single city.

古文：今不用兵而得城七十，何故不为? 
现代文：如今不用兵反而会得到十七座城，为什么不干？ 
English: Now, instead of using soldiers, they will get seventeen cities. Why not?

古文：赵豹出。
现代文：赵豹退出去。
English: Zhao Pang retired.

古文：王召赵胜、赵禹而告之曰： 韩不能守上党，今其守以与寡人，有城市之邑七十。 
现代文：赵王召赵胜、赵禹告诉他们说： 韩国不能守卫上党，上党太守准备把它献给寡人：有十七城池。 
English: Zhao Wang called Zhao Sheng and Zhao Yu and told them: South Korea can't guard Shangtang, and Shangtang's governor is ready to give it to someone: there are seventeen castles.

古文：二人对曰： 用兵逾年，未见一城，今坐而得城，此大利也。 
现代文：二人回答说： 用兵多年，没看见得到一座城市，观在安坐而得到城邑，这是大吉大利的事。 
English: And they said, It is an excellent thing if a man go a long time in the army, and have not seen a city; and if he see a city, and dwell in it;

古文：乃使赵胜往受地。
现代文：于是就派遣赵胜前去接受土地。
English: So he sent Zhao Sheng forward to accept the land.

古文：赵胜至曰： 敝邑之王，使使者臣胜，太守有诏，使臣胜谓曰： 请以三万户之都封太守，千户封县令，诸吏皆益爵三级，民能相集者，赐家六金。  
现代文：赵胜到上党说： 敞国的君王，委派使者匿下赵胜，听到了太守的转告，派臣下赵胜对您说： 请把三万户的缄邑封赏给太守，千户的封赏给县令，各官吏的爵位都连升三级，民众能把人聚集到一起的，每家赏赐金子一百二十两。
English: Zhao Sheng went to the upper party and said: "King of the open country, appoint an emissary to hide Zhao Sheng. When he heard the message from the governor, he sent his vassal Zhao Sheng to say to you: Please reward the governor with the fief of thirty thousand households, the governor with the fief of one thousand households, the county magistrate with the fief of one thousand households, and the officials with the fief of three levels. If the people can gather people together, each family will be rewarded with one hundred and twenty-two gold.

古文：冯亭垂涕而勉曰： 是吾处三不义也：为主守地面不能死，而以与人，不义一也；主内之秦，不顺主命，不义二也；卖主之地而食之，不义三也。 
现代文：冯亭流泪并低头说： 这是我使自己处在三不义的境地了：为君主守卫土地丽不能战死，并且把它送给别人，这是第一不义；君王把土地献给秦国，我没有听从君主的命令，这是第二不义；出卖君主的地反而食封户，这是第三不义。 
English: Feng Ting shed tears and bowed his head and said, "I have put myself in three unjust situations: I cannot die in battle to protect the land for the monarch, and I give it to others, which is the first injustice; the monarch gave the land to Qin, I did not obey the monarch's order, which is the second injustice; I sold the monarch's land, but I had to close my home, which is the third injustice.

古文：辞封而入韩，谓韩王曰： 赵闻韩不能守上党，今发兵已取之矣。 
现代文：辞谢了赵国的封赏而回到韩国，肘韩王说： 赵国听说韩国不能坚守上党，观在已发兵占领上党了。 
English: After returning to Korea without thanking Zhao Guo for the reward, Han Wang said: Zhao Guo heard that Korea could not hold on to Shangdi, but now he has sent troops to occupy Shangdi.

古文：韩告秦曰： 赵起兵取上党。 
现代文：韩国报告秦国说： 赵国发兵占领丁上党。 
English: Korean report Qin Guo said: Zhao Guo sent troops to occupy Ding Shang Party.

古文：秦王怒，令公孙起、王以兵遇赵于长平。
现代文：秦王大怒，命令孙起、王龅率领军队与赵国的军队在长平交战。
English: The Qin king was furious and ordered Sun Qi and Wang Qi to lead the army to fight the army of Zhao in Changping.

