古文：孙子见威王，曰： 夫兵者，非士恒势也。
现代文：孙膑拜见齐威王，说道： 所谓用兵之道，并没有可以依赖的永恒不变的有利形势。
English: Sun Yat-sen paid a visit to King Qi Wei and said: The so-called way of using troops does not have an eternal and unchanging favorable situation that can be relied on.

古文：此先王之傅道也。
现代文：这是先王所陈述的道理。
English: This is the reason stated by the former king.

古文：战胜，则所以在亡国而继绝世也。战不胜，则所以削地而危社稷也。
现代文：战争的胜负，关系到国家存亡。一个国家取得战争的胜利，就可以避免亡国，从而使社稷能够世代延续下去。
English: The victory or defeat of a war is related to the survival of a country. If a country achieves victory in a war, it can avoid the destruction of the country, thus enabling the society to continue for generations.

古文：是故兵者不可不察。
现代文：如果不能取得战争的胜利，就会被迫割让土地，以至危及国家生存了。
English: If they cannot win the war, they will be forced to cede land, which will endanger the survival of the country.

古文：然夫乐兵者亡，而利胜者辱。
现代文：所以，如何用兵不能不认真明察。
English: Therefore, how to use soldiers must be carefully examined.

古文：兵非所乐也，而胜非所利也。
现代文：那些轻率用兵的人常常会遭遇失败，贪图胜利者也会常常遭受屈辱。
English: Those who recklessly use force often fail, and those who are greedy for victory are often humiliated.

古文：事备而后动，故城小而守固者，有委也；卒寡而兵强者，有义也。
现代文：所以说，用兵作战绝对不能轻率，战争的胜利也不是靠贪求就能得到，用兵作战必须做好充分准备，才能付诸行动。这样，哪怕城池很小，也能够坚持，这是因为有充足的储备；兵力不足，而战斗力强，是因为正义在自己一方。
English: Therefore, it is absolutely necessary not to be reckless in the use of troops to fight, and the victory of the war cannot be obtained by greed, and the use of troops to fight must be fully prepared before it can be put into action. In this way, even if the city is small, it can be insisted on, because there are sufficient reserves; insufficient troops, but strong combat effectiveness, because justice is on its own side.

古文：夫守而无委，战而无义，天下无能以固且强者。
现代文：如果储备不足而守卫，没有正义而进行战争，那样，世上没有任何人能够固守不败，没有任何人能取得战争胜利。
English: No one in the world can be invincible, and no one can win the war, if the reserves are not enough to guard, and the war is not just.

古文：尧有天下之时，黜王命而弗行者七，夷有二，中国四，素佚而致利也。战胜而强立；故天下服矣。
现代文：唐尧治理国家时，拒不执行王命的部落共有七个，其中蛮夷地区两个，中原地区四个只因唐尧注重休养生息，积蓄力量，才创造了有利条件，战胜了各部落，而居于强者地位，全国都归服于他。
English: When Tang Xuan governed the country, there were a total of seven tribes that refused to carry out the king's order, including two in the barbarian regions and four in the Central Plains. It was only because Tang Xuan paid attention to rest and recuperation and accumulated strength that he created favorable conditions, defeated the tribes, and lived in a strong position, and the whole country was subject to him.

古文：昔者，神戌战斧遂；黄帝战蜀禄；尧伐共工；舜代劂□□而并三苗，□□管；汤放桀；武王伐纣；帝奄反，故周公浅之。
现代文：从前，神农氏和斧遂作战，黄帝和蜀禄交锋，唐尧讨伐共工，虞舜征讨劂及平定三苗，商汤驱逐夏桀，周武王讨伐商纣王，商奄反叛，周公很快就将其平定了。
English: Once upon a time, the Shennong clan fought against the Axe, the Yellow Emperor fought against the Shu Lu, the Tang Dynasty fought against the Co-operators, the Yunnan Dynasty fought against the Jurchens and defeated the Three Young Men, the Shang Dynasty drove out the Xia Dynasty, the Zhou Dynasty fought against the Shang Dynasty, and the Shang Dynasty rebelled, but the Zhou Dynasty quickly defeated them.

古文：故曰，德不若五帝，而能不及三王，智不若周公，曰我将欲责仁义，式礼乐，垂衣裳，以禁争夺。
现代文：现在，有些人，功德不如五帝，才能不如三王，智慧不如周公，却说 我要以积蓄仁义，实行礼乐，不用武力，来制止争夺 。
English: Now, some people, whose merits are not as good as the Five Emperors, whose talents are not as good as the Three Kings, and whose wisdom is not as good as that of Zhou Gong, are saying that I want to stop the competition by accumulating benevolence and righteousness, practicing ritual music, and not using force.

古文：此尧舜非弗欲也，不可得，故举兵绳之。
现代文：其实，这种办法，并不是尧、舜不想实行，而是这种办法根本无法得以解决，所以，只好利用战争去制止战争。
English: As a matter of fact, it is not that we do not want to implement this method, but that this method cannot be resolved at all, so we have no choice but to use war to stop war.

