古文：心之在体，君之位也；九窍之有职，官之分也。
现代文：心在人体，处于君的地位；九窍各有功能，有如百官各有职务。
English: The heart is in the human body, in the position of the king; the nine acupoints each have their own functions, just like the duties of a centurion.

古文：心处其道。九窍循理；嗜欲充益，目不见色，耳不闻声。
现代文：心的活动合于正道，九窍就能按常规工作；心充满了嗜欲，眼就看不见颜色，耳就听不到声音。
English: When the activities of the mind are on the right track, the nine sense organs can work normally; when the mind is full of craving, the eyes cannot see color and the ears cannot hear sound.

古文：故曰上离其道，下失其事。
现代文：所以说：在上位的脱离了正道，居下位的就荒怠职事。
English: Therefore it is said: He who is in a superior position has departed from the right path, and he who is in an inferior position is derelict in his duty.

古文：毋代马走，使尽其力；毋代鸟飞，使弊其羽翼；毋先物动，以观其则。
现代文：不要代替马去跑，让它自尽其力；不要代替鸟去飞，让它充分使用其羽翼。不要先物而动，以观察事物的运动规律。
English: Don't run in place of the horse, let it do its best; don't fly in place of the bird, let it make full use of its wings; don't move ahead of things, observe the movement of things.

古文：动则失位，静乃自得。
现代文：动则失掉为君的地位，静就可以自然地掌握事物运动规律了。
English: If you lose your status as a ruler, you can naturally grasp the movement of things.

古文：道，不远而难极也，与人并处而难得也。
现代文：道，离人不远而难以探其穷尽，与人共处而难以掌握。
English: The Tao is not far away from people, but it is difficult to explore its exhaustion, and it is difficult to master when it coexists with people.

古文：虚其欲，神将入舍；扫除不洁，神乃留处。
现代文：使欲念空虚，神道就将来到心里；欲念扫除不净，神道就不肯留处。
English: Empty your mind of desires, and Shinto will come to your heart. If you do not purify your mind of desires, Shinto will not remain.

古文：人皆欲智而莫索其所以智乎。
现代文：人人都想得到智慧，但不知道怎样才能获得智慧。
English: Everyone wants wisdom, but no one knows how to get it.

古文：智乎，智乎，投之海外无自夺，求之者不得处之者。
现代文：智慧呵，智慧呵，应把它投之海外而不可空自强求。追求智慧不如保持心的空虚。
English: Wisdom, wisdom, should be cast abroad and not vainly sought after. It is better to seek wisdom than to keep one's heart empty.

古文：夫正人无求之也，故能虚无。
现代文：圣人就是无所追求的，所以能够做到 虚 。
English: A saint is someone who has nothing to strive for, so they can achieve "virtuousness."

古文：虚无无形谓之道，化育万物谓之德，君臣父子人间之事谓之义，登降揖让、贵贱有等、亲疏之体谓之礼，简物、小未一道。杀僇禁诛谓之法。
现代文：虚无无形叫作道，化育万物叫作德，摆正君臣父子这类人间的关系叫作义，尊卑揖让、贵贱有别以及亲疏之间的体统叫作礼，繁简、大小的事务都使之遵守统一规范，并规定杀戮禁诛等事叫作法。
English: Nothingness and formlessness are called the Tao, the cultivation of all things is called the Virtue, the relationship between human beings such as the ruler, the father and the son is called the righteousness, the superiority and inferiority, the distinction between the high and the low, and the relationship between the relatives are called the etiquette, the complex, the simple, and the large and small affairs are all made to comply with the unified standard, and the things such as killing and imprisonment are called the etiquette.

古文：大道可安而不可说。
现代文：大道，可以适应它而不能说得明白。
English: avenue, can adapt to it without being able to speak it clearly.

古文：直人之言不义不颇，不出于口，不见于色，四海之人，又孰知其则？
现代文：真人的理论，不偏不颇，不从口里说出。不在表情上流露，四海的人，又谁能知道他的法则呢？
English: The true man's theory is unbiased, does not come out of his mouth, does not show on his face, and who can know the laws of a man of the four seas?

古文：天曰虚，地曰静，乃不伐。
现代文：天是虚的，地是静的， 所以没有差错。
English: The sky is empty, the earth is quiet, so there is no mistake.

古文：洁其宫，开其门，去私毋言，神明若存。
现代文：清扫房屋。开放门户，排除私欲，不要主观成见。
English: Clean the house. Open the door, eliminate selfishness, and do not have subjective prejudices.

古文：纷乎其若乱，静之而自治。
现代文：神明就似乎出现了；事物总是纷杂地好象很乱，静下来就自然有条不紊。
English: Gods seem to appear; things always seem to be chaotic and chaotic, and when they calm down, they are naturally orderly.

古文：强不能遍立，智不能尽谋。
现代文：能力再强也不能把一切事情都包揽起来，智慧再高也不能把所有事情都谋划周到。
English: No matter how strong one's ability is, one cannot cover everything, and no matter how high one's wisdom is, one cannot plan everything thoroughly.

古文：物固有形，形固有名，名当，谓之圣人。
现代文：物的自身本来有它一定的形体，形体自身本来有它一定的名称，立名正合于实际，就叫作圣人。所以。
English: The thing itself already has its definite form, the form itself already has its definite name, and if the name fits the reality, it is called a saint. Therefore.

古文：故必知不言，无为之事，然后知道之纪。
现代文：必须懂得什么是不由自己去说的理论，不用亲自去做的事业，然后才懂得道的要领。
English: You must understand what is the theory that you do not have to say by yourself, and what is the cause that you do not have to do by yourself, and then you will understand the essentials of the Tao.

古文：殊形异埶，不与万物异理，故可以为天下始。
现代文：尽管万物的形态千差万别，但从不违背万物自身的规律，所以能成为天下万物的始祖。
English: Although the forms of all things are very different, they never violate the laws of all things themselves, so they can become the ancestors of all things in the world.

古文：人之可杀，以其恶死也；其可不利，以其好利也。
现代文：人可以用杀戮来镇压，这是因为他们怕死；可以用不利之事来阻止，这是因为他们贪利。
English: Men can be subdued by killing because they are afraid of death; they can be deterred by injury because they are greedy for gain.

古文：是以君子不休乎好，不迫乎恶，恬愉无为，去智与故。
现代文：所以君子不被爱好之事所诱惑，不被厌恶之事所胁迫，安愉无为，消除了智谋和故巧。
English: Therefore, a gentleman is not seduced by the things he likes, is not coerced by the things he dislikes, is at ease and does nothing, and has eliminated cleverness and cunning.

古文：其应也，非所设也；其动也，非所取也。
现代文：他的处事，不是出于他自己的主观筹划；他的行动，不是出于他自己的主观择取。
English: His actions are not the result of his own subjective planning; his actions are not the result of his own subjective choice.

古文：过在自用，罪在变化。
现代文：有过错在于自以为是，发生罪过在于妄加变化。
English: To err is to be self-righteous, to sin is to change.

古文：是故有道之君，其处也若无知，其应物也若偶之。静因之道也。
现代文：因此。有道的君子，他在自处的时候，象是没有知识；他在治理事物时，象是只起配合的作用，这就是静因之道。
English: Therefore, a virtuous gentleman, when he is at home, seems to have no knowledge; when he governs, he seems to act only as a facilitator. This is the way of the silent cause.

古文： 心之在体，君之位也；九窍之有职，官之分也。 
现代文： 心在人体，处于君的地位；九窍各有的功能，有如百官的职务一样。 
English: The heart is in the human body, in the position of the king; the nine acupoints each have their own functions, just like the duties of a centurion.

古文：耳目者。视听之官也，心而无与于视听之事，则官得守其分矣。
现代文：这是说耳目是管视听的器官，心不去干预视听的职守，器官就得以尽到它们的本分。
English: This means that the eyes and ears are the organs that control vision and hearing. If the mind does not interfere with the duties of vision and hearing, the organs will be able to perform their duties.

古文：夫心有欲者，物过而目不见，声至而耳不闻也。
现代文：心里有了嗜欲杂念，那就有东西也看不见，有声音也听不到。
English: If there are desires and thoughts in the mind, then there will be things that cannot be seen, and there will be things that cannot be heard.

古文：故曰： 上离其道，下失其事。 
现代文：所以说：上离其道，下失其事。
English: Therefore, it is said that: the top deviates from its path, and the bottom loses its way.

古文：故曰：心术者，无为而制窍者也。
现代文：所以说：心的功能，就是用虚静无为来管辖九窍的。
English: Therefore, it is said that the function of the mind is to govern the nine acupoints with nothingness.

古文：故曰 君 。 毋代马走 ， 毋代鸟飞 ，此言不夺能能，不与下诚也。 毋先物动 者，摇者不走，趮者不静，言动之不可以观也。 位 者 ，谓其所立也。
现代文：所以叫作 君 。 不要代替马去跑 ， 不要代替鸟去飞 ，这是说不要取代各个能者的功用，不要干预下面的操作。所谓 不要先物而动 ，是因为摇摆就不能镇定，躁动就不能平静，就是说 动 就不可能好好观察事物了。 位 ，指所处的地位。
English: Don't replace the horse to run, don't replace the bird to fly, which means don't replace the function of each capable person, don't interfere with the following operation. The so-called don't move ahead of things, because swinging can't be calm, agitation can't be calm, that is, it's impossible to observe things properly. Position, refers to the position.

古文：人主者立于阴，阴者静，故曰 动则失位 。
现代文：人君处在阴的地位。阴的性质是静，所以说 动则失位 。
English: Man is in the position of yin. The nature of yin is stillness, so movement is out of place.

古文：阴则能制阳矣，静则能制动矣，攸曰， 静乃自得。 
现代文：处在阴的地位可以控制阳，处在静的地位可以掌握动，所以说 静乃自得 。
English: Being in the position of yin can control yang, and being in the position of stillness can control movement, so it is said that stillness is self-control.

古文：道在天地之间也，其大无外，其小无内，故曰 不远而难极也 。
现代文：道在天地之间，无限大又无限小，所以说 不远而难极也 。
English: The Tao is between heaven and earth, infinitely large and infinitely small, so it can be said that it is not far away but extremely difficult.

古文：虚之与人也无间，唯圣人得虚道，故曰 并处而难得 。
现代文：虚与人之间没有什么距离，但只有圣人能做到虚，所以说 并处而难得 。
English: There is no distance between the virtual and the human, but only a sage can achieve the virtual, so it is rare to find them side by side.

古文：世人之所职者精也。
现代文：人们所要记住的是心意专一。
English: What people need to remember is to be single-minded.

古文：去欲则宣，宣则静矣，静则精。
现代文：清除欲念则心意疏通，疏通则虚静。虚静就可以专一。
English: To purify the desire is to purify the mind, and to purify the mind is to purify the mind.

古文：精则独立矣，独则明，明则神矣。
现代文：心意专一则独立于万物之上，独立则明察一切，明察一切就到达神的境界了。
English: The single mind is independent of all things, and independence sees all things, and seeing all things reaches the realm of God.

古文：神者至贵也，故馆不辟除，则贵人不舍焉。
现代文：神是最高贵的，馆舍不加扫除，贵人就不来居住了。
English: God is the most precious. If the house is not cleaned, the nobles will not come to live.

古文：故曰 不洁则神不处 。 人皆欲知而莫索之 ，其所知，彼也；其所以知，此也。
现代文：所以说 不洁则神不处 。所谓 人皆欲知而莫索之 ，就是说，人们所认识的对象是外界事物，而人们认识的主体是心。
English: The so-called "everyone wants to know but no one can find it," that is to say, the object of people's knowledge is external things, while the subject of people's knowledge is the heart.

古文：不修之此，焉能知彼？
现代文：不把心修养好，怎么能认识外界事物？
English: Without cultivating one's mind well, how can one know external things?

古文：修之此，莫能虚矣。
现代文：修养心的最好办法，莫如使它处于虚的状态。
English: The best way to cultivate the mind is to keep it in a state of emptiness.

古文：虚者，无藏也。故曰去知则奚率求矣，无藏则奚设矣。
现代文：虚，就是无所保留，所以说能做到连智慧都抛掉，就没有什么可追求的了；能做到无所保留。
English: To be empty is to hold nothing back, so if you can throw away even your wisdom, there is nothing left to pursue; if you can do that, you can hold nothing back.

古文：无求无设则无虑，无虑则反复虚矣。
现代文：就没有什么可筹划的了。不追求又不筹划就可以做到无虑，无虑就回到虚的境界了。
English: There is nothing to plan. If you don't pursue and don't plan, you can do it without worries, and you will return to the realm of the unreal without worries.

古文：天之道，虚其无形。
现代文：天道，是虚而无形的。
English: The heavenly way is empty and formless.

古文：虚则不屈，无形则无所位迕，无所位迕，故遍流万物而不变，德者，道之舍，物得以生生，知得以职道之精。
现代文：由于虚，就不受挫折；由于无形，就无所抵触。无所抵触，所以能普遍流通于万物之中而不变。德，是道的体现，万物依赖它得以生长，心智依赖它得以认识道的精髓。
English: Because it is virtual, it cannot be frustrated; because it is intangible, it cannot be resisted; and because it cannot be resisted, it can circulate universally among all things without change. Virtue is the embodiment of the Tao. All things depend on it to grow, and the mind depends on it to know the essence of the Tao.

古文：故德者得也。得也者，其谓所得以然也。
现代文：所以， 德 就是 得 ，所谓得，那就等于说是所要得到的东西已经实现了。
English: Therefore, virtue is attainment, and the so-called attainment is tantamount to saying that what is to be attained has already been realized.

古文：以无为之谓道，舍之之谓德。故道之与德无间，故言之者不别也。
现代文：无为叫作道，体现它就叫作德，所以道与德没有什么距离，谈论它们往往不加区别。
English: To do nothing is called Tao, and to embody it is called virtue. Therefore, there is little distance between Tao and virtue, and they are often discussed without distinction.

古文：间之理者，谓其所以舍也。义者，谓各处其宜也。
现代文：硬是要问它们有所距离的道理，还是说德是用来体现道的。所谓义，说的是各，行其宜。
English: It is hard to ask whether they are the reason for the distance, or whether virtue is used to embody the Tao. The so-called meaning is to say that everyone should do what is appropriate.

古文：礼者，因人之情，缘义之理，而为之节文者也，故礼者谓有理也。理也者，明分以谕义之意也。故礼出乎义，义出乎理，理因乎宜者也。
现代文：所谓礼，则是根据人的感情，按照义的道理，而规定的制度和标志。所以，礼就是有理，理是通过明确本分来表达义的，因此，礼从理产生，理从义产生，义是根据行事所宜来定的。
English: So-called etiquette, on the other hand, is a system and sign that is determined based on human feelings and in accordance with the principle of righteousness. Therefore, etiquette is to have reason, and reason is to express the meaning by clarifying the duty. Therefore, etiquette comes from reason, reason comes from righteousness, and righteousness is determined according to what is appropriate.

古文：法者所以同出，不得不然者也，故杀僇禁诛以一之也。
现代文：法，是用来划一不齐的社会行动而不得不实行的，所以要运用杀戮禁诛来划一。
English: Law is used to standardize social actions that are not uniform and have to be carried out, so we must use killing and imprisonment to standardize.

古文：故事督乎法，法出乎权，权出于道。
现代文：事事都要用法来督察，法要根据权衡得失来制定，而权衡得失则是以道为根据的。
English: Everything should be supervised by using the law, and the law should be formulated according to the balance of gains and losses, and the balance of gains and losses is based on the Tao.

古文：道也者、动不见其形，施不见其德，万物皆以得，然莫知其极。故曰 可以安而不可说 也。莫人，言至也。不宜，言应也。
现代文：所谓道，动作时看不见它的形体，布施时看不到它的德惠，万物都已经得到它的好处，但不知它的究竟。所以说 可以安而不可说 。 真人 ，言其水平最高。 不偏 ，说的是 应 。
English: The so-called Tao, its form cannot be seen when moving, its virtue cannot be seen when giving, and all things have already received its benefits, but do not know its ultimate. Therefore, it can be said to be safe, but it cannot be said to be true. A true person speaks at the highest level. However, it is said to be due.

古文：应也者，非吾所设，故能无宜也。不顾，言因也。
现代文：所谓应，即不是由自己主观筹划，所以能做到不偏。 不颇 ，说的是 因 。
English: The so-called response means that it is not subjectively planned by oneself, so it can be unbiased.

古文：因也者，非吾所顾，故无顾也。 不出于口，不见于色 ，言无形也； 四海之人，孰知其则 ，言深囿也。
现代文：所谓因，即不是由自己主观择取，所以能做到不颇。 不出于口，不见于色 ，说的是道的无形； 四海之人，孰知其则 ，讲的是蕴藏极深。
English: The so-called cause, that is, it is not subjectively selected by oneself, so it can be done imperfectly; it is not out of the mouth, it is not visible in the color, it is said that the Tao is invisible; people of the four seas, if they do not know it, it is said that it is extremely deep.

古文：天之道虚，地之道静。
现代文：天的道是 虚 ，地的道是 静 。
English: The way of heaven is deceptive, but the way of earth is quiet.

古文：虚则不屈，静则不变，不变则无过，故曰 不伐 。 洁其宫，阙其门 ：宫者，谓心也。
现代文：虚就没有曲折，静就没有变动，没有变动就没有失误。所以叫作 不成。 ， 清扫室屋，开放门户 ：室屋，指的是心。
English: There are no twists and turns in the imaginary, no changes in the static, and no mistakes without changes. That is why it is called failure., Cleaning the room, opening the portal: The room refers to the heart.

古文：心也者，智之舍也，故曰 宫 。
现代文：心是智慧的居处，所以称作 室屋 。
English: The heart is the dwelling place of wisdom, so it is called "Muroya."

古文：洁之者，去好过也。
现代文：清扫它，即清除好恶的意思。
English: To sweep it clean means to clear it of likes and dislikes.

古文：门者，谓耳目也。
现代文：门，指的是耳目。
English: The door refers to the eyes and ears.

古文：耳目者，所以闻见也。 物固有形，形固有各 ，此言不得过实、实不得延名。
现代文：因为耳目是听、看外部事物的。 物的自身本来有它一定的形体，形体自身本来有它一定的名称， 这是说名称不得超出事物的实际，实际也不得超过事物的名称。
English: Because the ears and eyes are for hearing and seeing external things, the thing itself originally has its certain shape, and the shape itself originally has its certain name, which means that the name must not exceed the reality of the thing, and the reality must not exceed the name of the thing.

古文：姑形以形，以形务名，督言正名，故曰 圣人 。 不言之言 ，应也。
现代文：从形体的实际出发说明形体，从形体的实际出发确定名称。据此来考察理论又规正名称，所以叫作 圣人 。 不由自己亲自去说的理论 ，意思就是 应 。
English: From the actuality of the form, the form is explained, and the name is determined from the actuality of the form. According to this, the theory is examined and the name is regularized, so it is called a sage. The theory that is not said by oneself means should.

古文：应也者，以其为之人者也。执其名，务其应，所以成，之应之道也。 无为之道，因也。
现代文：所谓应，是因为它的创造者是别的人，抓住每一种名称的事物，研究它自身形成的规律，这就是 应 的做法。 不用自己亲自去做的事业 ，意思就是 因 。所谓因，就是不增加也不减少。
English: It is called "due" because its creator is someone else, and it is the practice of "due" to grasp the things of each name and study the laws of its own formation. The cause that does not need to be done by oneself is the cause. The so-called cause is not to increase or decrease.

古文：因也者，无益无损也。以其形因为之名，此因之术也。
现代文：是个什么样，就给它起个什么名，这就是 因 是做法。
English: Call it what it is, because that's what it is.

古文：名者，圣人之所以纪万物也。
现代文：名称不过是圣人用来标记万物的。
English: A name is nothing more than a sage's way of labeling things.

古文：人者立于强，务于善，未于能，动于故者也。
现代文：一般人行事总是立意强求，专务修饰，欣味逞能，而运用故巧。
English: Ordinary people always act with the intention of demanding, specializing in decoration, appreciating courage, and using skill.

古文：圣人无之，无之则与物异矣。
现代文：圣人则没有这些毛病。没有这些就可以承认万物的不同规律。
English: The saints do not have these problems, and without them they can recognize the different laws of all things.

古文：异则虚，虚者万物之始也，故曰 可以为天下始 。
现代文：承认万物的不同就能做到虚，虚是万物的原始，所以说： 可以为天下始。 
English: Acknowledging the differences in all things can achieve the virtual, the virtual is the original of all things, so it is said: It can be the beginning of the world.

古文：人迫于恶，则失其所好；怵于好，则忘其所恶。
现代文：一般的人往往被迫于所厌恶的事物，而失掉他应喜好的东西；或者被诱惑于所喜好的东西，因而连可恶的事物都忘记了。
English: The average man is often forced by what he hates to lose what he ought to like, or seduced by what he likes to forget what is hateful.

古文：非道也。
现代文：这都是不合于道的。
English: None of this makes sense.

古文：故曰： 不怵乎好，不迫乎恶。 
现代文：所以说； 不休乎好，不迫乎恶。 
English: Therefore it is said, "It is good not to have rest, but it is evil not to have leisure."

古文：恶不失其理，欲不过其情，故曰： 君子 。 恬愉无为，去智与故 ，言虚素也。 其应非所设也，其动非所取也 ，此言因也。
现代文：厌恶要不丧失常理，喜好要不超越常情，所以叫作 君子 。 安愉无为，消除了智谋和故巧 ，说的是保持空虚纯洁。 他的应事不是出于他自己的主观筹划。
English: Disgust should not lose common sense, liking should not exceed common sense, so he is called a gentleman. Peace and pleasure do nothing, eliminate cleverness and cleverness, it is to maintain emptiness and purity. His response is not out of his own subjective planning.

古文：因也者，舍己而以物为法者也。
现代文：他的行动不是出于他自己的主观择取 。这是说 因 的道理。所谓因，就是撇开自己而以客观事物为依据。
English: His actions are not the result of his own subjective choice. This is the principle of cause. The so-called cause is based on objective things apart from himself.

古文：感而后应，非所设也；缘理而动，非所取也， 过在自用，罪在变化 ：自用则不虚，不虚则仵于物矣；变化则为生，为生则乱矣。故道贵因。
现代文：感知事物而后去适应。就不是由自己所筹划的了；按照事物的道理采取行动，就不是自己所择取的了。 有过错在于自以为是，发生罪过在于安加变化 ：自以为是就不能够做到虚，不能虚，主观认识就与客观事物发生抵触了；妄加变化就会产生虚伪，产生虚伪就陷于混乱了。所以，道以 因 为贵。因。
English: Perceiving things and then adapting to them is not planned by oneself; acting in accordance with the principles of things is not chosen by oneself; the fault lies in self-righteousness, and the crime occurs in the change of attitude: self-righteousness cannot achieve falsity, and without falsity, subjective knowledge will conflict with objective things; arbitrary changes will produce hypocrisy, and hypocrisy will be confused. Therefore, the way is precious.

古文：因者，因其能者，言所用也。 君子之处也若无知 ，言至虚也； 其应物也若偶之 ，言时适也、若影之象形，响之应声也。
现代文：就是根据事物自身所能来发挥它应有的作用。 君子自处时象是没有知识 ；说的是最虚境界。 他在治理事物时象是只起配合的作用 ，说的是经常适应事物，好比影子与形体相似，回响与发声相随一样。
English: A gentleman behaves as if he has no knowledge; he speaks of the most unreal realm; when he governs things, it seems that he only plays the role of cooperation, that is, he always adapts to things, as if the shadow is similar to the body, and the reverberation follows the vocalization.

古文：故物至则应，过则舍矣。
现代文：所以，事物一到就去适应，事物一过去就舍开了。
English: Therefore, as soon as things arrive, we adapt to them, and as soon as things pass, we let them go.

古文：舍矣者，言复所于虚也。
现代文：所谓舍开，说的是又回到虚的境界。
English: The so-called renunciation means returning to the realm of nothingness.

