古文：大宰之职，掌建邦之六典，以佐王治邦国：一曰治典，以经邦国，以治官府，以纪万民。
现代文：大宰的主要职责，掌管建立和颁行国家的六种法典，以辅助君王统治天下各国。第一是治典，用来治理天下各国，治理官府，治理百姓。
English: The main duties of the grand vizier are to supervise the establishment and promulgation of the country's six codes to assist the monarch in ruling all countries in the world. The first is the rule of law, which is used to govern all countries in the world, govern the government, and govern the people.

古文：二曰教典，以安邦国，以教官府，以扰万民。
现代文：第二是教典，用来安定天下各国，教育官府的官吏，使百姓顺服。
English: The second is the canon, which is used to stabilize countries around the world, educate government officials, and make the people obedient.

古文：三曰礼典，以和邦国，以统百官，以谐万民。
现代文：第三是礼典，用来谐调天下各国，统御百官，使百姓和谐。
English: The third is the ceremony, which is used to harmonize all the countries in the world, to govern hundreds of officials, and to make the people harmonious.

古文：四曰政典，以平邦国，以正百官，以均万民。
现代文：第四是政典，是用来使天下各国政治公平，百官政风端正，百姓赋役平均。
English: The fourth is the political code, which is used to make the politics of all countries in the world fair, the political style of all officials correct, and the people's performance average.

古文：五曰刑典，以诘邦国，以刑百官，以纠万民。
现代文：第五是刑典，用来禁止天下各国的叛逆，惩罚百官的违法者，纠察百姓。
English: The fifth is the Penal Code, which is used to prohibit the rebellion of all countries in the world, punish the violators of hundreds of officials, and picket the people.

古文：六曰事典，以富邦国，以任百官，以生万民。
现代文：第六是事典，用来使天下各个国家繁荣富强，百官胜任职事，百姓能得生养。
English: The sixth is the encyclopedia, which is used to make every country in the world prosperous and strong, so that officials can perform their duties better than anyone else, and so that people can earn a living.

古文：以八法治官府：一曰官属，以举邦治。
现代文：依据八种法则来治理官府。第一是官属，用来开展国家的政事。
English: According to eight rules to govern the government, the first is the government, which is used to carry out the country's political affairs.

古文：二曰官职，以辨邦治。
现代文：第二是官职，用来区别国家不同官吏的职责。
English: The second is the official post, which is used to distinguish the duties of different state officials.

古文：三曰官联，以会官治。
现代文：第三是官联，用来会合各官共同办事。
English: The third is the Federation of Government Officials, which is used to bring together all government officials to work together.

古文：四曰官常，以听官治。
现代文：第四是官常，用来考察官吏的工作。
English: The fourth is the government office, used to inspect the work of government officials.

古文：五曰官成，以经邦治。
现代文：第五是官成，用来治理国家的政事。
English: The fifth is the government, which is used to govern the country's politics.

古文：六曰官法，以正邦治。
现代文：第六是官法，用来端正王国的政风。
English: The sixth is the official law, which is used to correct the political style of the kingdom.

古文：七曰官刑，以纠邦治。
现代文：第七是官刑，用来纠察国家的政事。
English: The seventh is official punishment, used to picket the country's political affairs.

古文：八曰官计，以弊邦治。
现代文：第八是官计，用来评断国家的吏治。
English: The eighth is the official plan, which is used to judge the success of the country's leadership.

古文：以八则治都鄙：一曰祭祀，以驭其神。
现代文：依据八种制度治理王畿内的采邑。第一是祭祀制度，用来节制对神的祭祀。
English: Eight systems were used to govern the townships in Wanggai. The first was the sacrificial system, which was used to control the worship of gods.

古文：二曰法则，以驭其官。
现代文：第二是有关宫室、车服等级的制度，用来统御属官。
English: The second is the system concerning the rank of the palace chamber and chariot dress, which is used to govern subordinate officials.

古文：三曰废置，以驭其吏。
现代文：第三是废置制度，用来治理官吏。
English: The third is the abolition system, which is used to control officials.

古文：四曰禄位，以驭其士。
现代文：第四是禄位制度，用来督励学士。
English: The fourth is the position system, which is used to encourage graduates.

古文：五曰赋贡，以驭其用。
现代文：第五是赋贡制度，用来调节财用。
English: The fifth is the tribute system, which is used to regulate the use of funds.

古文：六曰礼俗，以驭其民。
现代文：第六是礼仪风俗，用来约束百姓。
English: The sixth is etiquette and custom, which is used to restrain the common people.

古文：七曰刑赏，以驭其威。
现代文：第七是刑赏制度，主要用来树立威信。
English: The seventh is the punishment and reward system, which is mainly used to establish prestige.

古文：八曰田役，以驭其众。
现代文：第八是田役制度，用来役使百姓。
English: The eighth is the field service system, which is used to serve the people.

古文：以八柄诏王驭群臣：一曰爵，以驭其贵。
现代文：用八种权柄辅助君王统御群臣。第一是授予爵位的权柄，以使臣下尊贵。
English: Eight kinds of powers are used to assist the monarch in ruling his subjects. The first is the power to bestow titles of nobility, so that his subjects become noble.

古文：二曰禄，以驭其富。
现代文：第二是授予俸禄的权柄，以使臣下富有。
English: The second was the power to grant a stipend to enrich the vassal.

古文：三曰予，以驭其幸。
现代文：第三是赐予的权柄，以使臣下得宠幸。
English: The third is the power to grant favors to one's subjects.

古文：四曰置，以驭其行。
现代文：第四是安置官吏的权柄，以劝励臣下的贤行。
English: The fourth is to place the authority of officials to encourage the virtuous behavior of their subordinates.

古文：五曰生，以驭其福。
现代文：第五是赦免死罪的权柄，以使臣下得免死之福。
English: The fifth was the power to pardon capital crimes, so that his subjects would receive the blessing of avoiding death.

古文：六曰夺，以驭其贫。
现代文：第六是剥夺的权柄，以使臣下贫穷。
English: The sixth is the power to deprive, in order to impoverish one's subjects.

古文：七曰废，以驭其罪。
现代文：第七是废黜的权柄，以惩罚犯了错误的罪臣。
English: The seventh is the power of dethronement to punish erring ministers.

古文：八曰诛，以驭其过。
现代文：第八是诛杀的权柄，以使罪臣遭祸。
English: The eighth is the power to kill in order to bring misfortune to the guilty.

古文：以八统诏王驭万民：一曰亲亲，二曰敬故，三曰进贤，四曰使能，五曰保庸，六曰尊贵，七曰达吏，八曰礼宾。
现代文：用八项原则辅助王统御百姓。第一是亲近亲族，第二是尊敬故旧，第三是举荐贤人，第四是任用有能力的人，第五是抚慰有功的人，第六是尊重尊贵的人，第七是提拔勤劳的小吏，第八是礼敬宾客。
English: Wang Tong assisted his people with eight principles. The first is to be close to relatives, the second is to respect the past, the third is to recommend wise men, the fourth is to appoint capable people, the fifth is to comfort meritorious people, the sixth is to respect honorable people, the seventh is to promote hard-working petty officials, and the eighth is to respect guests.

古文：以九职任万民：一曰三农，生九谷。
现代文：以九类职业任用百姓。第一是在三种不同地形从事农业，生产各种谷物。
English: The first is to engage in agriculture in three different terrains and produce various grains.

古文：二曰园圃，毓草木。
现代文：第二是园圃之业，培育瓜果。
English: The second is the business of the garden, cultivating cucumbers.

古文：三曰虞衡，作山泽之材。
现代文：第三是虞衡之业，开发利用山林川泽的材物。
English: The third is Yuheng's business, the development and use of materials from the mountains, forests and rivers.

古文：四曰薮牧，养蕃鸟兽。
现代文：第四是薮牧之业，蕃养鸟兽。
English: The fourth is the herding industry, raising birds and animals.

古文：五曰百工，饬化八材。
现代文：第五是百工之业，利用各种原材料制造器物。
English: The fifth is the industry of a hundred craftsmen, using a variety of raw materials to manufacture utensils.

古文：六曰商贾，阜通货贿。
现代文：第六是商贾之业，使财物得到大的流通。
English: The sixth is the business of the merchant, so that the goods get a large circulation.

古文：七曰嫔妇，化治丝枲。
现代文：第七是嫔妇之业，治理丝麻。
English: The seventh is the business of women, the management of silk and flax.

古文：八曰臣妾，聚敛疏材。
现代文：第八是臣妾之业，采集草木果实。
English: The eighth is the business of vassals and concubines, collecting plants and fruits.

古文：九曰闲民，无常职，转移执事。
现代文：第九是闲民，没有固定的职业，经常转换雇主为人做工。
English: The ninth is the idler, who has no fixed occupation and often changes employers to work as a laborer.

古文：以九赋敛财贿：一曰邦中之赋，二曰四郊之赋，三曰邦甸之赋，四曰家削之赋，五曰邦县之赋，六曰邦都之赋，七曰关市之赋，八曰山泽之赋，九曰币余之赋。
现代文：用九种赋税法征收财物。第一是王都中的赋税法，第二是距离王都百里的四郊的赋税法，第三是距离王都百里至二百里的邦甸的赋税法，第四是距离王都二百里至三百里的家削的赋税法，第五是距离王都三百里至四百里的邦县的赋税法，第六是距离王都四百里至五百里的邦都的赋税法，第七是关市的赋税法，第八是山泽的赋税法，第九是给公用的剩余财物的回收法。
English: Nine kinds of tax laws are used to collect property. The first is the tax law in the royal capital, the second is the tax law in the four suburbs one hundred miles away from the royal capital, the third is the tax law in the Bundian from one hundred miles to two hundred miles away from the royal capital, the fourth is the tax law of the house cutting from two hundred miles to three hundred miles away from the royal capital, the fifth is the tax law of the state county from three hundred miles to four hundred miles away from the royal capital, the sixth is the tax law of the state capital from four hundred miles to five hundred miles away from the royal capital, the seventh is the tax law of the customs city,

古文：以九式均节财用：一曰祭祀之式，二曰宾客之式，三曰丧荒之式，四曰羞服之式，五曰工事之式，六曰币帛之式，七曰刍秣之式，八日匪颁之式，九曰好用之式。
现代文：用九种法则调节财物的用度。第一是祭祀所用财物的法则，第二是接待宾客所用财物的法则，第三是遇死丧或灾荒所用财物的法则，第四是饮食和车服所用财物的法则，第五是工匠制作所用财物的法则，第六是行聘问礼所用财物的法则，第七是饲养牛马草料支出的法则，第八是分颁群臣俸禄所用财物的法则，第九是君王闲暇时为与诸侯和臣下结恩好而赐予财物的法则。
English: Nine rules are used to regulate the use of wealth. The first is the rule of wealth used for sacrifice, the second is the rule of wealth used for receiving guests, the third is the rule of wealth used in the event of death or disaster, the fourth is the rule of wealth used for food and clothing, the fifth is the rule of wealth used by craftsmen, the sixth is the rule of wealth used for the performance of the ceremony of offering gifts, the seventh is the rule of the expenditure of grass for raising cattle and horses, the eighth is the rule of wealth used to distribute the salary of the vassals, and the ninth is the rule of wealth given by the king in his spare time to make goodwill with

古文：以九贡致邦国之用：一曰祀贡，二曰嫔贡，三曰器贡，四曰币贡，五曰材贡，六曰货贡，七曰服贡，八曰斿贡，九曰物贡。
现代文：按九种贡法收取诸侯国的财物。第一是贡献祭祀用物，第二是贡献接待宾客所需之物，第三是贡献各种器物，第四是贡献丝织物，第五是贡献竹、木材，第六是贡献珠贝金玉等自然之物，第七是贡献缝制祭服用的材料，第八是贡献玩赏之物，第九是贡献各地的特产。
English: The wealth of the vassal states was collected according to nine kinds of tribute methods. The first was the contribution of sacrificial objects, the second was the contribution of objects needed for the reception of guests, the third was the contribution of various utensils, the fourth was the contribution of silk fabrics, the fifth was the contribution of bamboo and wood, the sixth was the contribution of natural objects such as jewels and gold, the seventh was the contribution of materials for sewing and ceremonial use, the eighth was the contribution of playful objects, and the ninth was the contribution of local specialties.

古文：以九两系邦国之民：一曰牧，以地得民。
现代文：用九种和协的办法联系天下各国的百姓。第一是诸侯国君，以土地取得百姓。
English: Use the nine methods of conciliation to contact the people of all countries in the world. The first is the princes of the states, using land to acquire the people.

古文：二曰长，以贵得民。
现代文：第二是官长，以尊贵的爵位取得百姓。
English: The second is the government official, who gains the respect of the people with a noble title.

古文：三曰师，以贤得民。
现代文：第三是老师，以贤德取得百姓。
English: The third is the teacher, who gains the people's favor by virtue.

古文：四曰儒，以道得民。
现代文：第四是儒士，以道艺取得百姓。
English: The fourth is the Confucianist, who uses Taoism to win over the common people.

古文：五曰宗，以族得民。
现代文：第五是大宗，以亲睦族人取得百姓。
English: The fifth is the large-scale acquisition of the people by the people of kinship.

古文：六曰主，以利得民。
现代文：第六是主人，以有利可依取得百姓。
English: The sixth is the master, who can gain the people by advantage.

古文：七曰吏，以治得民。
现代文：第七是官吏，以治理民事取得百姓。
English: The seventh is the official, who gains the people by administering civil affairs.

古文：八曰友，以任得民。
现代文：第八是朋友，以可托付信任取得百姓。
English: The eighth is a friend who gains the confidence of the people.

古文：九曰薮，以富得民。
现代文：第九是掌管山林川泽的官吏，以山林川泽的材物取得百姓。
English: The ninth is the government official who is in charge of the mountains and forests, and uses the materials from the mountains and forests to gain the support of the people.

古文：正月之吉，始和，布治于邦国都鄙，乃县治象之法于象魏，使万民观治象，挟日而敛之。
现代文：周历的正月初一，开始向各国诸侯和王畿内的采邑宣布治典，把形成文字的治典悬挂在象魏上，让百姓观看治典，十天后再收藏起来。
English: On the first day of the first month of the lunar calendar, they began to announce the code to the princes of various countries and the villages in the kingdoms. The code that formed the text was hung on the elephant Wei, so that the people could watch the code, and then collect it ten days later.

古文：乃施典于邦国，而建其牧，立其监，设其参，傅其伍，陈其殷，置其辅。
现代文：在各诸侯国和王畿内的采邑施行治典，为各州设州牧，为各国设国君，为国君设三卿，为卿设五大夫，为大夫设众士，为士置府史。
English: In each of the vassal states and the imperial cities within the realm of the king, there was to be a governor, a state shepherd for each state, a sovereign for each country, three nobles for the sovereign, five great nobles for the nobles, a number of nobles for the doctors, and a prefectural historian for the nobles.

古文：乃施则于都鄙，而建其长，立其两，设其伍，陈其殷。
现代文：在王畿施行八则，为各采邑设君长，为君长设两卿，为卿设五大夫，为大夫设众士，为士置府史。
English: Eight regulations were implemented in Wangji, and each county was assigned a royal governor, a royal governor was assigned two nobles, a nobleman was assigned five nobles, a doctor was assigned many nobles, and a scholar was assigned a prefectural historian.

古文：乃施法于官府，而建其正，立其贰，设其考，陈其殷，置其辅。
现代文：在官府施行八法，为各官府设长官，为长官设副手，副手下设考核官，属官下设众士，士下置府史。
English: Eight laws will be implemented in government offices. Each government office will have a chief, a deputy chief, an evaluation officer under the deputy chief, subordinate officers under subordinate officers, and subordinate officers under subordinate officers.

古文：凡治，以典待邦巩之治，以则待都鄙之治，以法待官府之治，以官成待万民之治，以礼待宾客之治。
现代文：凡是治理天下，用六典以待治理天下各国，用八则以待治理王畿，用八法以待治理官府，用官成以待治理百姓，用宾礼以待接待宾客。
English: When it comes to governing the world, the best way is to use the Six Classics to govern the countries of the world, the Eight Principles to govern the provinces, the Eight Precepts to govern the government, the Officials to govern the people, and the Guests to receive the guests.

古文：祀五帝，则掌百官之誓戒，与其具修。
现代文：祭祀五帝，掌管告诫百官不要失礼，以及将祭祀用品准备齐备并把祭祀场所打扫干净。
English: Five emperors were sacrificed, and the person in charge warned the officials not to be impolite, as well as to prepare the sacrificial items and clean the sacrificial site.

古文：前期十日，帅执事而卜日，遂戒。
现代文：祭祀前的第十天，率领众官占卜祭祀的日期，接着就开始斋戒。
English: On the tenth day before the sacrifice, he led the officials in divination about the date of the sacrifice, and then began fasting.

古文：及执事视涤濯，及纳亨，赞王牲事。
现代文：等到了祭祀的前夕就携同众官员视察祭器是否洗涤干净。等到祭祀那天黎明王牵牲行纳亨礼的时候，帮助王牵牲。
English: On the eve of the sacrifice, he and all the officials inspected whether the sacrificial vessels were clean. On the day of the sacrifice, when the king was leading the sacrificial animals at dawn, he helped the king to lead the sacrificial animals.

古文：及祀之日，赞玉币爵之事。
现代文：到祭祀那天天大亮的时候，帮助王拿玉器、币帛和爵。
English: When it was broad daylight on the day of the sacrifice, Wang was helped to take the jade vessels, coins and coins.

古文：祀大神示，亦如之。
现代文：祭祀天上的大神和地神的礼仪也是这样。
English: This is also true of the rituals for the worship of the great gods of heaven and the gods of the earth.

古文：享先王亦如之。
现代文：祭祀先王也是这样的。
English: The previous sacrificial king did the same.

古文：赞玉几玉爵。
现代文：还要帮助王拿玉几和玉爵。
English: We also need to help Wang Nayu and Yu Jue.

古文：大朝觐会同，赞玉币、玉献、玉几、玉爵。
现代文：诸侯朝觐王大会同而来，大宰协助王接受诸侯奉献的玉币，协助王接受诸侯进献的珍异之物，协助王设置玉几，协助王接受诸侯向王进酢酒的玉爵。
English: The assembly of princes and kings came together, and Dazai assisted the king in receiving the jade coins donated by the princes, assisted the king in receiving the rare items donated by the princes, assisted the king in setting up the jade table, and assisted the king in receiving the jade earrings donated by the princes.

古文：大丧，赞赠玉、含玉。
现代文：有王丧，协助行赠玉、含玉之礼。
English: There is a king mourning, helping to make gifts of jade and gifts of jade.

古文：作大事，则戒于百官，赞王命。
现代文：采取大的军事行动的时候，负责告诫百官，协助王发布命令。
English: When large-scale military actions are taken, he is responsible for admonishing hundreds of officials and assisting the king in issuing orders.

古文：王视治朝，则赞听治。
现代文：王在治朝处理政事，就协助王评断政事。
English: Wang dealt with political affairs when he ruled the country, so he assisted Wang in judging political affairs.

古文：视四方之听朝，亦如之。
现代文：王巡守四方时听断政事，大宰的职责也是这样。
English: When the king patrols the four directions, he listens to and decides on political affairs. This is also the duty of the grand vizier.

古文：凡邦之小治，则冢宰听之。
现代文：凡王国政务的小事，就由大宰处理。
English: All minor matters of government in the kingdom are handled by the dazai.

古文：待四方之宾客之小治。
现代文：四方来朝宾客有小事也有待大宰处理。
English: Guests from all over come to the morning, and there are small things that need to be dealt with.

古文：岁终，则令百官府各正其治，受其会，听其致事，而诏王废置。
现代文：夏历年末，命令各官府实事求是地整理文书资料，接受他们的会计总账，评断他们汇报的政绩，而帮助王决定对官吏的罢黜和提升。
English: At the end of the lunar year, he ordered all government departments to truthfully sort out the written materials, accept their accounting ledgers, judge their reported political achievements, and help Wang decide on the dismissal and promotion of officials.

古文：三岁则大计群吏之治而诛赏之。
现代文：三年大考核众官吏的政绩，从而帮助王决定对他们的惩罚和奖励。
English: The three-yearly grand appraisal of the performance of all officials, thus helping Wang to decide on their punishment and reward.

