古文：唐滕王极淫。
现代文：原文
English: Original text from

古文：诸官美妻，无得白者，诈言妃唤，即行无礼。
现代文：唐朝的滕王李元婴贪淫好色，见到哪位官员的妻眷稍有姿色，就假传王妃召唤，等到官员的妻眷入府之后，就对其加以染指。
English: The Tang Dynasty's King of Teng, Li Yuanbo, was a lecherous womanizer. When he saw that an official's wife or a relative had a slightly lecherous appearance, he would summon a fake princess, and after the official's wife or relative entered the palace, he would finger her.

古文：时典签崔简妻郑氏初到，王遣唤。
现代文：当时典签崔简的妻子郑氏初来乍到，滕王派人召唤郑氏前往王府。
English: At that time, Zheng's wife, Cui Jian, who was a signer, arrived for the first time. King Teng sent someone to summon Zheng to the royal palace.

古文：欲不去，则惧王之威；去则被王之辱。郑曰： 无害。 
现代文：崔简不愿意让自己的妻子前去，但又畏惧王爷的权威，去又害怕妻子遭到王爷的侮辱。郑氏说： 不必担心。 
English: Cui Jian did not want his wife to go, but he was afraid of the prince's authority, and he was afraid that his wife would be insulted by the prince. Zheng said, "Don't worry.

古文：遂入王中门外小阁。王在其中，郑入，欲逼之，郑大叫左右曰： 大王岂作如是，必家奴耳。 
现代文：郑氏来到王府之后，就被带到王府中门外的阁楼，这时王爷已经在阁楼等候她了，郑氏进来，王爷就想要强行逼郑氏就范。郑氏大叫来人，一面说： 这哪里是王爷会做的事呢，你肯定是王爷府中的奴仆! 
English: After Ms. Zheng came to the palace, she was taken to the attic outside the middle gate of the palace. At that time, the prince was already waiting for her in the attic. When Ms. Zheng came in, the prince wanted to force Ms. Zheng to submit. Ms. Zheng shouted at the man and said, "What kind of thing would the prince do? You must be a servant in the palace!"

古文：取只履击王头破，抓面流血，妃闻而出。郑乃得还。
现代文：说完脱下鞋，照着王爷的头猛打，并用手将王爷的脸抓得到处都是血。
English: Having said this, he took off his shoes, hit the prince on the head, and scratched his face with his hands until there was blood everywhere.

古文：王惭，旬日不视事。
现代文：王爷觉得非常羞惭，十多天都不敢到官府处理公事。
English: Wang Ye felt very ashamed and did not dare to go to the government office for more than ten days to deal with official business.

古文：简每日参候，不敢离门。
现代文：崔简每天都站在王府门外面守候，不敢离开半步。
English: Every day, Cui Jian stands outside the gate of the royal palace and waits, not daring to leave even half a step.

古文：后王坐，简向前谢，王惭，乃出。
现代文：后来王爷坐着，崔简上前谢罪，王爷惭愧，这才出来。
English: Later, when Wang Ye was sitting down, Cui Jian came forward to apologize. Wang Ye was ashamed, and only then did he come out.

古文：诸官之妻曾被唤入者，莫不羞之。
现代文：那些曾经被王爷召入王府的妻眷，都羞惭得不敢见人了。
English: Those wives and relatives who had been summoned to the royal palace by the prince were too ashamed to see anyone.

古文：不唯自全，又能全人，此妇有胆有识。
现代文：崔简的妻子不仅仅保全了自己的名节，也使别的妇女不再遭受王爷的逼迫，郑氏不但有胆量，更有见识。
English: Cui Jian's wife not only saved her own name day, but also made other women no longer suffer from the prince's persecution. Zheng not only has courage, but also more insight.

