古文：汉昭帝年十四，能察霍光之忠，知燕王上书之许，诛桑弘羊、上官桀，后世称其明。
现代文：汉昭帝十四岁，能够察知霍光的忠诚，知道燕王上书的虚假，杀桑弘羊、上官杰，后代说他英明。
English: At the age of fourteen, Han Zhaoyi was able to detect Huo Guang's loyalty, know the falsity of Yan Wang's letter, kill Sang Hongyang and Shang Guan Jie, and his descendants said that he was wise.

古文：然和帝时，窦宪兄弟专权，太后临朝，共图杀害。
现代文：然而汉和帝时，窦宪兄弟专权，太后垂帘听政，共谋杀害皇帝。
English: However, at the time of Han and Emperor, Dou Xian and his brothers had absolute power, and the empress dowager listened to the government and conspired to kill the emperor.

古文：帝阴知其谋，而与内外臣僚莫由亲接，独知中常侍郑众不事豪党，遂与定议诛宪，时亦年十四，其刚决不下昭帝，但《范史》发明不出，故后世无称焉。
现代文：和帝暗中了解到他们的计划，但和内外大臣不能接近，他知道中常侍郑众不巴结豪们奸党，遂和郑众定计，杀掉窦宪，当时也是十四岁。刚烈决断不比昭帝差。但范哗《后汉书》没指出这点，所以后代没有人称赞和帝。
English: Emperor Zhao secretly learned of their plan, but he couldn't get close to the Minister of the Interior and the Minister of the Interior. He knew that Zheng Zongzhu, the general secretary of the CPC Central Committee, wouldn't let the heroes betray the party, so he made a plan with Zheng Zongzhu to kill Dou Xian, who was also fourteen years old at the time. His resolute determination was no worse than Emperor Zhao. However, Fan Guo's "Hou Han Shu" didn't point this out, so future generations didn't praise Emperor Zongzhu.

古文：顺帝时，梁商为大将军辅政，商以小黄门曹节用事于中，遣于冀与交友，而宦官忌其宠，反欲害之。
现代文：汉顺帝时，梁商任大将军辅佐政事，梁商因为小黄门曹节侍候皇帝，就派儿子梁冀和他交朋友，但太监们息妒他们得到皇帝恩宠，反而想害他们。
English: At the time of Emperor Han Shun, Liang Shang was appointed as a general to assist the government. Liang Shang sent his son Liang Ji to make friends with the emperor because Xiao Huangmen Cao Jie was waiting for the emperor. However, the eunuchs were jealous that they had received the emperor's favor and wanted to harm them instead.

古文：中常侍张逵、蘧政、杨定等，与左右连谋，共谮商及中常侍曹腾、孟贲，云欲议废立，请收商等按罪。
现代文：中常侍张逵、蘧政、杨定等，与皇帝左右的人共同策划还蔑梁商及中常侍曹腾、孟贲，说他们想另立皇帝，要求逮捕梁商等治罪。
English: The middle-ranking attendants Zhang Qian, Yan Zheng, Yang Ding, and others plotted with the people around the emperor to defame Liang Shang and the middle-ranking attendants Cao Teng and Meng Qi, saying that they wanted to set up a separate emperor and demanded the arrest of Liang Shang and others.

古文：帝曰： 大将军父子我所亲，腾、贲我所爱，必无是，但汝曹共妒之耳。 
现代文：顺帝说： 大将军父子是我所亲近的，曹腾、孟贲是我喜欢的，决没有这种事，只不过是你们忌妒他们罢了。 
English: Shun Di said, "The general father and son are close to me, Cao Teng and Meng Qi are my favorites, there is no such thing, it is just that you are jealous of them."

古文：逵等知言不用，遂出矫诏收缚腾、贲。
现代文：张逵等知道顺帝不听他们的话，遂假托皇帝诏命逮捕曹腾、孟贲。
English: Zhang Ye and others knew that Emperor Shun did not listen to them, so they arrested Cao Teng and Meng Ye on the pretext of the emperor's edict.

古文：帝震怒，收逵等杀之，此事尤与昭帝相类。
现代文：顺帝大怒，把张逵等抓起来杀了。此事尤其与昭帝相似。
English: Emperor Shun was furious and arrested and killed Zhang Xuan and others. This incident is particularly similar to Emperor Zhao.

古文：霍光忠于国，而为子禹覆其宗，梁商忠于国，而为子冀覆其宗，又相似。
现代文：霍光忠于国家，却因为儿子霍禹的罪恶灭了族，梁商忠于国家，却因为儿子梁冀的罪恶灭了族，这事又相似。
English: Huo Guang was loyal to the country, but because of the sins of his son Huo Yu, he destroyed the tribe; Liang Shang was loyal to the country, but because of the sins of his son Liang Ji, he destroyed the tribe. This is also similar.

古文：但顺帝复以政付冀，其明非昭帝比，故不为人所称。
现代文：但顺帝又把政圈交托给梁冀，他的英明不能和昭帝相比，所以不被后人称道。
English: However, Emperor Shun entrusted the political circle to Liang Jie. His wisdom could not be compared to Emperor Zhao, so he was not praised by posterity.

