古文：文王问太公曰： 愿闻为国之大务，欲使主尊人安，为之奈何？ 
现代文：文王询问太公道： 我想知道治国的根本道理。如果想让君主受百姓爱戴，百姓安居乐业，应该怎么做呢？ 
English: King Wen asked King Taigong: I want to know the fundamental principle of governing the country. If you want the monarch to be loved by the people and the people to live and work in peace, what should you do?

古文：太公曰： 爱民而已。 
现代文：太答道： 只需要爱护百姓就行了。 
English: The Empress Dowager replied, "All you need to do is to love and care for the people."

古文：文王曰： 爱民奈何？ 
现代文：文王问道： 应该怎么去爱护百姓呢？ 
English: King Wen asked: How should we care for the people?

古文：太公曰： 利而勿害，成而不败，生而勿杀，与而勿夺，乐而勿苦，喜而勿怒。 
现代文：太公回答说： 要对百姓有利，不要对他们施加伤害；安抚成全百姓的家业，不要加以毁败。使百姓能够生存下来而不被无缘无故的杀害，给予百姓实惠而不掠夺侵占他们的利益，使百姓安乐而不要让他们蒙受痛苦，让百姓高高兴兴而不要激起他们愤怒。 
English: The great-grandfather replied: to benefit the people, not to harm them; to pacify and complete the people's family inheritance, not to destroy it; to enable the people to survive without being killed for no reason; to give the people real benefits, not to plunder and occupy their interests; to make the people happy, not to make them suffer; to make the people happy, not to arouse their anger.

古文：文王曰： 敢请释其故。 
现代文：文王说： 想请您再解释一下其中的道理。 
English: Wen Wang said: I would like to ask you to explain the reason again.

古文：太公曰： 民不失务，则利之；农不失时，则成之；省刑罚，则生之；薄赋敛，则与之；俭宫室台榭，则乐之；吏清不苛扰，则喜之。
现代文：太公说： 百姓不失去工作，对他们就是有利的；不耽误耕种收获，就是促成了百姓的事情；减省刑罚，就是保护了百姓的生存；减轻赋税，就是给老百姓实惠；少修建宫室台榭，百姓就高兴；官吏清廉不苛捐杂税，就是让百姓喜悦。
English: Taigong said: If the people do not lose their jobs, it is beneficial to them; if they do not delay cultivation and harvest, it is conducive to the people; if they reduce penalties, it is to protect the people's survival; if they reduce taxes, it is to give real benefits to the people; if they reduce the construction of palaces and pavilions, the people will be happy; if the officials are clean and do not impose taxes, it is to make the people happy.

古文：民失其务，则害之；农失其时，则败之；无罪而罚，则杀之；重赋敛，则夺之；多营宫室台榭以疲民力，则苦之；吏浊苛扰，则怒之。
现代文：相反，使百姓失去工作，就是损害了他们的利益；耽误农时，就是损坏百姓的事情；百姓无罪而妄加惩罚，就是杀害他们；横征暴敛，就是对百姓的掠夺；大兴土木修建宫室台榭而疲劳民力，就会增加百姓的痛苦；官吏贪污苛扰，就会激起百姓的愤怒。
English: On the contrary, to deprive the people of work is to damage their interests; to delay the agricultural time is to damage the people's affairs; to punish the people without guilt is to kill them; to levy exorbitant taxes is to plunder the people; to exhaust the people's strength by building large-scale civil engineering projects and palaces is to increase the people's suffering; and the officials' corruption and harassment will arouse the people's anger.

古文：故善为国者，驭民如父母之爱子，如兄之爱弟。见其饥寒则为之忧，见其劳苦则为之悲；赏罚如加于身，赋敛如取己物。
现代文：所以，善于治国的君主，统驭百姓像父母爱护子女，兄长爱护弟妹那样，看到他们饥寒就为他们忧虑，看到他们劳苦就为他们悲痛，对他们施行赏罚就像自己身受赏罚，向他们征收赋税如同夺取自己的财物。
English: Therefore, a monarch who is good at governing the country, controls the people like parents love their children, brothers and sisters love their brothers and sisters. When he sees them hungry and cold, he worries for them. When he sees them laboring, he grieves for them. When he rewards and punishes them, it is as if he is being rewarded and punished. When he taxes them, it is as if he is seizing his own property.

古文：此爱民之道也。 
现代文：这些就是爱护百姓的道理。 
English: These are the ways to love the people.

