古文：李抱玉，武德功臣安兴贵之裔。
现代文：李抱玉是武德年间的功臣安兴贵的后代。
English: Li Baoyu is a descendant of An Xinggui, a hero during the Wu De era.

古文：代居河西，善养名马，为时所称。
现代文：世代住在河西，因善于喂养好马，受当时人称赞。
English: He lived in Hexi for generations and was praised by the people of the time for being good at feeding good horses.

古文：群从兄弟，或徙居京华，习文儒，与士人通婚者，稍染士风。
现代文：他的侄儿们，有的迁居京城，成了儒生，和儒士结成了亲家，逐渐受到了儒士的影响。
English: His nephews, some of whom moved to the capital, became Confucianists, and formed a family with the Confucianists, and gradually came under the influence of the Confucianists.

古文：抱玉少长西州，好骑射，常从军幕，沉毅有谋，小心忠谨。
现代文：李抱玉从小在西州长大，喜欢骑马射箭，经常在军营任随从，沉着、坚毅、有计谋、忠诚并细心谨慎。
English: Li Baoyu grew up in Xizhou as a child. He liked riding horses and archery. He often served as an attendant in the military camp. He was calm, resolute, resourceful, loyal and careful.

古文：乾元初，太尉李光弼引为偏裨，屡建勋绩，由是知名。
现代文：乾元初年，太尉李光弼命他任偏将，多次立有功绩，因此出了名。
English: In the first year of Qianyuan, Lieutenant Li Guangyao was appointed as a partial general by his life, and he was famous for his many meritorious deeds.

古文：二年，自特进、右羽林军大将军、知军事，迁鸿胪卿员外置同正员，持节郑州诸军事兼郑州刺史、摄御史中丞、郑陈颍亳四州节度。
现代文：乾元二年，从特进官、右羽林大将军、知军事，升任鸿胪卿员外置同正员；持节郑州诸军事兼郑州刺史，代理御史中丞，郑、陈、颍、亳四州节度。
English: In the second year of Qianyuan, he was promoted from the special promotion officer, the right feather Lin general, the intellectual military, to the Hongyuqing member and the external same official member; he held the festival of the Zhengzhou military and the Zhengzhou stabbing history, the acting chief historian, and the Zheng, Chen, Zou and Zou four-state festival.

古文：时史思明陷洛阳，光弼守河阳，贼兵锋方盛，光弼谓抱玉曰： 将军能为我守南城二日乎？ 
现代文：当时史思明攻陷了洛阳，李光弼据守河阳，叛军兵力正强，李光弼对李抱玉说： 您能替我守两天南城吗？ 
English: At that time, Shi Siming captured Luoyang, Li Guangyao was in charge of the defense of Heyang, and the rebel forces were strong. Li Guangyao said to Li Baoyu: Can you guard Nancheng for me for two days?

古文：抱玉曰： 过期若何？ 
现代文：李抱玉说： 过了两天怎么办？ 
English: Li Baoyu said: "What should we do after two days?

古文：光弼曰： 过期而救不至，任弃城也。 
现代文：李光弼说： 过了两天没有救兵来，可以放弃城池。 
English: Li Guangyao said: After two days, if there is no rescue, we can give up the city.

古文：贼帅周挚领安太清、徐黄玉等先次南城，将陷之，抱玉乃绐之曰： 吾粮尽，明日当降。 
现代文：叛军元帅周挚率安太清、徐黄玉等先抵达南城，要攻城，李抱玉就骗他们说： 我军粮食吃完了，明天就投降。 
English: The rebel marshal Zhou Zhizhong led by An Taiching, Xu Huangyu and others arrived in Nancheng first. To attack the city, Li Baoyu lied to them and said: Our army has finished eating grain and will surrender tomorrow.

古文：贼众大喜，敛军以俟之。
现代文：叛军很高兴，收兵等他们投降。
English: The rebels are happy, they are waiting for them to surrender.

古文：抱玉因得缮完设备，明日，坚壁请战。
现代文：李抱玉因此能修好守卫设施，第二天，他坚守城墙求战。
English: As a result, Li Baoyu was able to repair the guard facilities. The next day, he insisted on defending the city wall and sued for war.

古文：贼怒欺绐，急攻之。
现代文：叛军因被骗发怒而猛烈攻城。
English: Enraged at being deceived, the rebels stormed the city.

古文：抱玉出奇兵，表里夹攻，杀伤甚众，挚军退。
现代文：李抱玉乘敌兵没防备进攻，内外夹攻，杀死了很多敌军，周挚军退却了。
English: Li Baoyu took advantage of the enemy's unprepared attack, attacked both inside and outside, killed many enemy troops, and the Zhou army retreated.

古文：光弼自将于中氵单城，挚舍南城攻中氵单，不胜，乃整军将攻北城。
现代文：李光弼亲自率军守中贖城，周挚放弃南城进攻中贖城，没获胜，就整顿军队要攻北城。
English: Li Guangyao personally led the army to defend the middle of the city of redemption, and conscientiously abandoned the south city to attack the middle of the city of redemption. If he did not win, he would reorganize the army to attack the north city.

古文：光弼以兵出战，大败之。
现代文：李光弼率军出城进攻，大败叛军。
English: Li Guangyao led the army out of the city to attack and defeated the rebels.

古文：固河阳，复怀州，皆功居第一，迁泽州刺史、兼御史中丞。
现代文：固守河阳，收复怀州，他的功劳都最大，因此升任泽州刺史、兼任御史中丞。
English: He made the greatest contribution to the defense of Kawayo and the recovery of Waizhou, so he was promoted to the post of Zeshu Sashishi and concurrently served as the Vice-President of the Imperial Historian.

古文：代宗即位，擢为泽潞节度使、潞州大都督府长史、兼御史大夫，加领陈、郑二州，迁兵部尚书。
现代文：唐代宗登基，提升他为泽潞节度使、潞州大都督府长史、兼任御史大夫，兼管陈、郑两州，升任兵部尚书。
English: Emperor Zong of the Tang Dynasty ascended to the throne, and he was promoted to the position of Zedong's envoy to the Qing Dynasty, the governor of Zhangzhou, the chief historian, concurrently the chief historian, concurrently in charge of Chen and Zheng two states, and was promoted to the position of military secretary.

古文：抱玉上言： 臣贯属凉州，本姓安氏，以禄山构祸，耻与同姓，去至德二年五月，蒙恩赐姓李氏，今请割贯属京兆府长安县。 
现代文：李抱玉上书说： 我的籍贯是凉州，本来姓安，因为安禄山反叛，我不愿与他同姓，至德二年五月，承蒙皇帝赐我姓李，现请求改籍贯为京兆府长安县。 
English: Li Baoyu wrote: My hometown is Liangzhou. Originally, my surname was An. Because of the rebellion of Anlu Mountain, I didn't want to have the same surname as him. In May of the year of our Lord, the emperor graciously gave me the surname of Li. I am now requesting to change my hometown to Chang'an County, Beijing.

古文：许之，因是举宗并赐国姓。
现代文：皇帝同意了，从此全族都姓李了。
English: The emperor agreed, and since then the whole family has been surnamed Li.

古文：广德元年冬，吐蕃寇京师，乘舆幸陕，诸军溃卒及村闾亡命相聚为盗，京城南面子午等五谷群盗颇害居人，朝廷遣薛景仙领兵为五谷使招讨，连月不捷，乃诏抱玉兼凤翔节度使讨之。
现代文：广德元年冬天，吐蕃进犯京城，皇帝逃到陕州，各军散兵和各地亡命之徒聚集成为草寇，京城南边子午等五条山谷的草寇对人民危害较大，皇帝派薛景仙率军任五谷使征讨，几个月都没有获胜，于是下诏命李抱玉为凤翔节度使讨伐草寇。
English: In the winter of the first year of the Guangde era, the Tuoba invaded the capital, the emperor fled to Shaanxi, the scattered soldiers of the various armies and the desperadoes from all over the country gathered to become grasshoppers. The grasshoppers in the five valleys south of the capital, such as the meridian, were more harmful to the people. The emperor sent Xue Jingxian to lead the army to fight the grasshoppers. They did not win for several months, so he ordered Li Baoyu to fight the grasshoppers for Fengxiang.

古文：抱玉探知贼帅行止之处，先分屯诸谷，乃设奇潜使轻锐数百南自洋州入攻之。
现代文：李抱玉探听到匪首住处，先派兵分别驻守各条山谷，又出奇兵暗暗派几百名精兵从洋州进攻草寇。
English: When Detective Li Baoyu heard the gang leader's residence, he first sent soldiers to guard each valley separately, and then, surprisingly, secretly sent several hundred elite soldiers from Yangzhou to attack the grasshopper.

古文：贼帅高玉方与诸偷会，遽为锐卒数十人掩擒之，因大搜获偷党，悉斩之，余党不讨自溃，旬日内五谷平。
现代文：匪首高玉正和众匪首聚会，突然被几十名精兵抓获，于是又大举搜捕匪首，把他们都杀了，其余匪徒不攻自散，十天以内五谷都平定了。
English: The leader of the gang, Gao Yuzheng, was holding a meeting with other gang leaders when he was suddenly captured by dozens of elite soldiers. As a result, a large-scale search was conducted for the leaders of the gang, and they were all killed. The rest of the gang members did not attack, but dispersed, and the whole valley was leveled within ten days.

古文：以功迁司空，余并如故。
现代文：因此升任司空，其他职务和过去一样。
English: As a result, he was promoted to the position of S.K.U., and his other duties remained the same as before.

古文：时吐蕃每岁犯境，上以岐阳国之西门，寄在抱玉，恩宠无比，迁同中书门下平章事，又兼山南西道节度使、河西陇右山南西道副元帅、判梁州事，连统三道节制，兼领凤翔、潞、梁三大府，秩处三公。
现代文：当时吐蕃每年进犯边境，皇帝认为岐阳是国家西边的大门，靠李抱玉镇守，对他无比宠信，提升他为同中书门下平章事，又兼任山南西道节度使，河西、陇右、山南西道副元帅、判梁州事，同时兼任三道节度，又掌管凤翔、潞、梁三大府，官任三公。
English: At that time, Tubo invaded the border every year. The emperor believed that Qiyang was the gateway to the west of the country. He relied on Li Baoyu to guard the town, and he was very fond of him. He promoted him to be a member of the Standing Committee of the Central Committee of the Communist Party of China. He also served as the delegate of the Shannan West Road Festival, the deputy marshal of the West Coast of Shannan, the deputy marshal of the West Coast of Shannan, and the judge of the Liang Prefecture. At the same time, he also served as the three-way festival, and he also controlled the three major prefectures of Fengxiang,

古文：抱玉以任位崇重，抗疏恳让司空及山南西道节度、判梁州事，乞退授兵部尚书。
现代文：李抱玉认为职务太高，坚持上奏恳切辞让司空官职和山南西道节度、判梁州事，又请求辞去兵部尚书。
English: Li Baoyu believed that the post was too high, insisting that he should earnestly resign from the post of civil air marshal and the post of Shannan West Road governor, judge Liangzhou affairs, and request to resign from the military department.

古文：上嘉其谦让，许之。
现代文：皇帝赞赏他的谦逊礼让，同意了。
English: The emperor appreciated his humble courtesy and agreed.

古文：抱云凡镇凤翔十余年，虽无破虏之功，而禁暴安人，颇为当时所称。
现代文：李抱玉镇守凤翔十多年，虽然没有打破敌军的战功，但禁绝强暴安抚百姓，很受当时人赞扬。
English: Li held Yuzhen and guarded Fengxiang for more than ten years. Although he did not break the enemy's war exploits, he forbade violence to pacify the people, which was highly praised by the people at the time.

古文：大历十二年卒，上甚悼之，辍朝三日，赠太保。
现代文：大历十二年，他去世了，皇帝非常悲痛，为此停止上朝三天，赠官为太保。
English: In the twelfth year of the lunar calendar, he passed away, and the emperor was very sad. For this reason, he stopped visiting the emperor for three days and bestowed the title of Taibo.

古文：李抱真，抱玉从父弟也。
现代文：李抱真是李抱玉的堂弟。
English: Li Bao is really Li Bao Yu's cousin.

古文：抱玉为泽潞节度使，甚器抱真，任以军事，累授汾州别驾。
现代文：李抱玉任泽潞节度使时，很器重李抱真，任命他掌管军中事务，他多次升官后任汾州别驾。
English: When Li Baoyu was appointed as the military governor of Zhejiang Province, he attached great importance to Li Baozhen and appointed him to be in charge of military affairs. He was promoted several times and later served as the governor of Zhangzhou.

古文：当是时，仆固怀恩反于汾州，抱真陷焉，乃脱身归京师。
现代文：这时候，仆固怀恩在汾州反叛，李抱真陷身在叛军中，后逃回了京城。
English: At this time, the servant Gu Wai Yan rebelled in Zhangzhou, and Li Bozhen was trapped in the rebel army, and then fled back to Beijing.

古文：代宗以怀恩倚回纥，所将朔方兵又劲，忧甚，召见抱真问状，因奏曰： 郭子仪领朔方之众，人多思之。
现代文：唐代宗因仆固怀恩倚仗回纥，所率朔方军又强大，非常担心，召见李抱真问他们的情况，李抱真上奏说： 郭子仪长期统率朔方军队，兵将多怀念他。
English: The Tang Dynasty Emperor was worried because his servant Gu Wai En had returned from the war, and the Shuo army led by him was strong. He summoned Li Bozhen to inquire about their situation. Li Bozhen reported: Guo Ziyi led the Shuo army for a long time, and the generals miss him very much.

古文：怀恩欺其众，曰 子仪为朝恩所杀 ，诈而用之。
现代文：仆固怀恩欺骗他的军队，说 郭子仪被鱼朝恩杀死了 ，靠欺骗指挥他们。
English: Gu Wai'en deceived his troops, saying that Guo Ziyi had been killed by Yu Chaon, and led them by deception.

古文：今复子仪之位，可不战而克。 
现代文：现如恢复郭子仪的官职，能不作战就战胜他。 
English: Now that Guo Ziyi has been reinstated as an official, we can defeat him without fighting.

古文：其后怀恩子瑒为其下所杀，怀恩奔遁，多如抱真策，因是迁殿中少监。
现代文：后来仆固怀恩的儿子仆固被部下杀死，仆固怀恩逃走，多应验了李抱真的计谋，因此升任殿中少监。
English: Later, Dugu Wai Yan's son, Dugu, was killed by his subordinates, and Dugu Wai Yan fled, which more or less fulfilled Li Bozhen's plan, so he was promoted to junior superintendent of the palace.

古文：居顷之，为陈郑、泽潞节度留后，抱真因中谢言曰： 臣虽无可取，当今百姓劳逸，系在牧守，愿得一郡以自试。 
现代文：过了一段时间，又任陈郑、泽潞节度留后，李抱真乘到朝中谢恩的机会上奏说： 我虽然没有才能，但现在老百姓是劳累还是安逸，和刺史很有关系，希望能任命我掌管一州试试。 
English: After a period of time, after Chen Zheng and Zehui Xiadu were appointed, Li Baozhen took advantage of the opportunity to thank the North Korean government and said: Although I have no talent, whether the people are tired or comfortable now has a lot to do with history. I hope to be appointed to take charge of a state to try.

古文：上许之，改授泽州刺史，兼为泽潞节度副使。
现代文：皇帝答应了，改任他为泽州刺史，兼任泽潞节度副使。
English: The emperor agreed, and he was appointed as the governor of Zezhou and the vice-envoy of the Zezhou Festival.

古文：居二年，转怀州刺史，复为怀泽潞观察使留后，凡八年。
现代文：过了两年，调任怀州刺史，又任怀、泽、潞观察使留后，共任职八年。
English: After two years, he was transferred to the post of Waizhou chief historian, and also served as the observation envoy of Waizhou, Ze and Handan, and served for a total of eight years.

古文：抱玉卒，抱真仍领留后。抱真密揣山东当有变，上党且当兵冲，是时乘战余之地，土瘠赋重，人益困，无以养军士。
现代文：李抱玉去世后，李抱真仍任留后，李抱真私下判断东边将有变乱，上党地区将遭进攻，这地区当时刚经战乱，地贫瘠赋税重，人民更加贫困，不能供应军队。
English: After the death of Li Baoyu, and after Li Baozhen still remained in office, Li Baozhen privately judged that there would be turmoil in the east, and the Shangdang region would be attacked. This region had just experienced war, the land was barren, the taxes were heavy, the people were more impoverished, and they could not supply the army.

古文：籍户丁男，三选其一，有材力者免其租徭，给弓矢，令之曰： 农之隙，则分曹角射；岁终，吾当会试。 
现代文：他就登记每户的男丁，三名中选一名，选有才能力气的，免除租税徭役，发给弓箭，对他们下令说： 农闲时，分班比赛射箭，年底，我将召集比赛。 
English: He registered the men of each household, selected one out of three, selected the most talented, exempted from taxes and duties, issued bows and arrows, and ordered them to say: During the farmer's idle time, archery competitions will be held in shifts, and at the end of the year, I will convene a competition.

古文：及期，按簿而征之，都试以示赏罚，复命之如初。
现代文：到年底，按记载征调他们，会合比赛并给以奖赏和惩罚，后又命他们像从前那样练习。
English: At the end of the year, they were recruited according to the record, met the competition and given rewards and punishments, and then ordered them to practice as before.

古文：比三年，则皆善射，抱真曰： 军可用矣。 
现代文：过了三年，他们都善于射箭了，李抱真说： 军队可以作战了。 
English: After three years, they are all good at archery, Li Bozhen said: the army can fight.

古文：于是举部内乡兵，得成卒二万，前既不廪费，府库益实，乃缮甲兵，为战具，遂雄视山东。
现代文：于是召集辖区内各乡的士兵，共有两万军队，此前因没花军费，仓库更充实了，于是修整铠甲及兵器，制造作战用具，成了制约东方的重要力量。
English: As a result, soldiers from all the townships in the jurisdiction were called up, a total of twenty thousand troops. Previously, due to the lack of military spending, the warehouse was more abundant, so the armor and weapons were repaired and the combat equipment was manufactured, becoming an important force to restrict the East.

古文：是时，天下称昭义军步兵冠诸军。
现代文：这时，全国都认为昭义军的步兵是各军中最好的。
English: At this time, the whole country believed that the foot soldiers of the Shouyi Army were the best in the army.

古文：无几，复代李承昭为昭义军及磁邢节度观察留后，加散骑常侍。
现代文：不久，他又接替李成昭任昭义军和磁邢节度观察留后，被加封为散骑常侍。
English: Soon after, he took over from Li Chengzhao as an observer of the Shao Yi Army and the Magnetic Kite Festival, and was awarded the title of a knight errant.

古文：德宗即位，拜检校工部尚书，兼潞州长史、昭义军节度支度营田、泽潞磁邢观察使。
现代文：唐德宗登基后，任命他为检校工部尚书，兼任潞州长史、昭义军节度使、支度、营田和泽潞、磁邢观察使。
English: After Tang Dezong ascended to the throne, he appointed him as the inspector of the school inspection department, and also served as the governor of Shandong Province, the governor of Shandong Province, the governor of Shandong Province, the governor of Shandong Province, the governor of Shandong Province, and the governor of Shandong Province.

古文：建中二年，田悦以魏博反，乃悉兵围邢州及临洺益急，诏河东节度使马燧及神策兵救之。
现代文：建中二年，田悦率魏博反叛，用全部军队猛烈进攻邢州和临氵名，皇帝下诏命河东节度使马燧和神策军援救他。
English: In the second year of Jianzhong, Tian Yue led by Wei Bo rebelled and used all the troops to fiercely attack Zhangzhou and Linyi. The emperor ordered Hedong Jiedu to let Ma Wei and Shencao army rescue him.

古文：抱真与燧败悦兵于双冈，斩悦将杨朝光，又击破悦于临洺，遂解临洺及邢州之围，以功加检校兵部尚书。
现代文：李抱真和马燧在双冈打败了田悦的军队，杀死了田悦的将领杨朝光，后又在临氵名打败了田悦，于是解除了对临氵名和邢州的包围，他因功升任检校兵部尚书。
English: Li Bozhen and Ma Jun defeated Tian Yue's army in Shuanggang, killed Tian Yue's general Yang Chaoguang, and then defeated Tian Yue in Linyi, thus lifting the siege on Linyi and Zhangzhou. For his service, he was promoted to Shangshu, the military inspection department.

古文：复与燧大破悦于洹水，悦以数百骑走归魏州。
现代文：后又和马燧在洹水大败田悦，田悦率几百名骑兵逃回魏州。
English: After that, he and Ma Jun were defeated by Tian Yue in Surabaya. Tian Yue led several hundred cavalrymen to flee back to Weizhou.

古文：复与燧围魏州，又败悦于城下，以功加检校右仆射。
现代文：李抱真和马燧包围了魏州，又在城外打败了田悦，他因功又升任检校右仆射。
English: Li Bozhen and Ma Jun encircled Weizhou, and defeated Tian Yue outside the city. He was promoted to the position of inspector and right-hand man.

古文：时悦窘蹙，硃滔、王武俊皆反，联兵救悦，抱真与燧等退次魏县。
现代文：当时田悦危在旦夕，朱滔、王武俊都反叛了，联合军队援救田悦，李抱真和马燧等退驻魏县。
English: At that time, Tian Yue was in danger of falling, Zhu Tao and Wang Wujun rebelled, and the joint army rescued Tian Yue. Li Bozhen and Ma Jun withdrew to Wei County.

古文：上幸奉天，中使告问至，诸将皆仰天恸哭。
现代文：皇帝因变乱逃到奉天，皇帝慰问和报告消息的使者来到军营，众将都对天痛哭。
English: Due to the turmoil, the emperor fled to Mukden. The emissary of the emperor to offer condolences and report the news came to the military camp. The generals all cried bitterly to heaven.

古文：李怀光席卷奔命，马燧、李芃各引兵归镇。
现代文：李怀光率全军赶去勤王，马燧、李秡各自率军回到辖区。
English: Li Huaiguang led the whole army to rush to Qinwang, while Ma Jun and Li Jun led their respective armies back to the jurisdiction.

古文：硃泚既汙宫阙，时李希烈陷大梁，李纳亦反郓州。
现代文：朱氵此占领了京城，同时李希烈攻占了大梁，李纳也在郓州反叛。
English: Zhu Xi thus occupied the capital, while Li Xilai captured the girders, and Li Na also rebelled in Zhangzhou.

古文：无何，上幸梁州，李怀光又窃据河中。
现代文：不久，皇帝逃到梁州，李怀光又占据了河中。
English: Soon after, the emperor fled to Liangzhou, and Li Huaiguang occupied Hezhong again.

古文：抱真独于扰攘倾溃之中，以山东三州外抗群贼，内辑军士，群贼深惮之。
现代文：李抱真独自在纷忧动乱之中，率河北三州对外抵抗众多叛将，对内整顿军队，叛贼们都很害怕他。
English: Li Bozhen alone in the midst of turmoil, led the three provinces of Hebei to resist many traitors and reorganize the army, and the traitors were very afraid of him.

古文：兴元初，迁检校左仆射、平章事。时硃滔悉幽蓟军，借兵回纥，拥众五万，南向以应泚，攻围贝州。
现代文：兴元初年，他升任检校左仆射、同中书门下平章事，当时朱滔率幽、蓟州全部军队，又向回纥借了兵，共纠集五万军队，向南进攻来和朱氵此呼应。包围进攻贝州。
English: In the first year of the Heian period, he was promoted to the position of inspecting school left-hand shooters, and the school gate of the same school was leveled. At that time, Zhu Tao led the entire army of Bozhou, and borrowed soldiers from Huizhou, and gathered a total of 50,000 troops to attack southward to echo Zhu Xi. Surrounded and attacked Bozhou.

古文：初，群贼附于希烈，希烈僭伪，有臣属群贼意，群心稍离。
现代文：当初，叛将们依附李希烈，李希烈称帝后，有要叛将们称臣的意图，叛将们逐渐分裂了。
English: At first, the rebel generals clung to Li Xilai. Li Xilai claimed to be the empress, with the intention of making the rebel generals his vassals. The rebel generals gradually split.

古文：上自奉天下罪己之诏，悉赦群贼，抱真乃遣门客贾林以大义说武俊，合从击硃滔，武俊许之。
现代文：皇帝在奉天颁布归罪自己的诏书，赦免了众叛将，李抱真就派门客贾林用礼义劝说王武俊，联合对付朱滔，王武俊答应了。
English: After the emperor issued the imperial edict condemning himself and pardoned all the traitors, Li Bozhen sent his protégé Jialin to persuade Wang Wujun with courtesy and jointly deal with Zhu Tao. Wang Wujun agreed.

古文：时两军尚相疑，抱真乃以数骑径入武俊营。
现代文：当时双方军队还互不信任，李抱真就带几名骑兵到王武俊军营里去。
English: At that time, the two armies still distrusted each other, so Li Po Zhen took several cavalrymen to Wang Wujun's camp.

古文：其将去也，宾客皆止之，抱真遣军司马卢玄卿勒军部分曰： 仆今日此举，系天下安危。
现代文：他去之前，门客都劝阻他，李抱真派军司马卢玄卿掌管军队并吩咐说： 我今天的举动，关系到国家的安危。
English: Before he left, his advisers tried to dissuade him. Li Po Zhen sent the military chief, Malu Xuanqing, to take charge of the army and ordered: "My actions today are related to the country's safety and security.

古文：仆死不还，领军事以听朝命，亦唯子；奋励士马，东向雪仆之耻，亦唯子。 
现代文：我如果死了不能回来，管理军队听从皇帝的命令，也靠你；指挥军队，到东边为我报仇，也靠你。 
English: If I die and cannot return, it is also up to you to command the army and obey the emperor's orders; it is also up to you to command the army and go to the east to avenge me.

古文：言讫而去。
现代文：说完就走了。
English: After Bao Jiu's daughter finished speaking, Saburo left.

古文：武俊设备甚严，抱真曰： 硃泚、希烈僭窃大位，硃滔攻围贝州，此辈皆欲陵驾吾属。
现代文：王武俊戒备森严，李抱真对他说： 朱氵此、李希烈僭越称帝，朱滔围攻贝州，他们都想骑在我们头上。
English: Wang Wujun was on high alert, and Li Bozhen said to him, "Ju Xuan, Li Xilai and Zhu Dao have proclaimed themselves emperors, and Zhu Tao has besieged Bozhou. They all want to ride on our heads.

古文：足下既不能自振数贼之上，舍九叶天子而北面臣反虏乎？
现代文：您既然不能和他们争雄，难道愿抛弃真命天子去臣属叛贼吗？
English: Since you cannot compete with them, are you willing to abandon your true destiny and become a vassal of the traitors?

古文：乃者圣上奉天下罪己之诏，可谓禹、汤之主也。 
现代文：何况皇帝在奉天下诏归罪自己，真是夏禹、商汤式的好天子啊。 
English: What's more, the emperor is condemning himself in accordance with the edict of the world. He is truly a good son of heaven like Xia Yu and Shang Tang.

古文：因言及播越，持武俊哭，涕泗交下，武俊亦哭，感动左右。
现代文：说到皇帝外出避难，他抱着王武俊哭了起来，泪水直流，王武俊也哭了，周围的人也被感动了。
English: When it came to the emperor going out to take refuge, he hugged Wang Wujun and burst into tears. Wang Wujun also cried, and the people around him were also moved.

古文：因退卧武俊帐中，酣寝久之。
现代文：晚上他就睡在王武俊营帐里，睡了很长时间。
English: In the evening, he slept in Wang Wujun's tent and slept for a long time.

古文：武俊感其不疑，待之益恭，指心仰天曰： 此身已许公死敌矣。 
现代文：王武俊因他不疑心自己很受感动；对他更恭敬了，指着心对天说： 我这条命已答应您誓死杀敌了。 
English: Wang Wujun was very moved because he did not doubt his heart; he was even more respectful to him, pointing to his heart and saying to the sky: I have promised you this life to swear to kill the enemy.

古文：遂与结为兄弟而别，约明日合战，遂击破硃滔于经城，以功加检校司空，实封五百户。
现代文：两人结为兄弟后才分手，约定明天会战，于是在经城打败了朱滔，他因功加封为检校司空、食实封五百户。
English: After the two became brothers, they broke up and agreed to fight tomorrow, so they defeated Zhu Tao in Jingcheng. He was awarded the title of school inspector due to his performance, and 500 households were actually sealed.

古文：贞元初，朝于京师，居顷之，还镇。
现代文：贞元初年，他到京城来朝拜，住了不久，又回到了辖区。
English: In the first year of Sadamoto, he came to worship in Kyoto, stayed for a short time, and then returned to his jurisdiction.

古文：抱真沉断多智计，尝欲招致天下贤俊，闻人之善，必令持货币数千里邀致之；至与语无可采者，渐退之。
现代文：李抱真沉着果断多计谋，曾想招纳全国贤才，听说谁有长处，一定命人带着礼品哪怕千里之外也要把他请来；请来后和他谈话，如没有可取之处，才逐渐疏远他。
English: Li Bozhen was calm and resolute and had many stratagems. He once wanted to recruit the nation's sages. He had heard that if someone had strengths, he must order someone to invite him with a gift, even if he was thousands of miles away. After inviting him, he would talk to him, and if there was nothing to recommend him, he would gradually alienate him.

古文：时天下无事，乃大起台榭，穿池沼以自娱。
现代文：当时国内没有战事，他就大规模建楼台，挖池塘来消遣。
English: At that time, there was no war in the country, so he built a large-scale building platform and dug a pond for recreation.

古文：晚节又好方士，以冀长生。
现代文：晚年又相信道士，想长生不死。
English: In his later years, he believed in Taoism and wanted to live forever.

古文：有孙季长者，为抱真练金丹，绐抱真曰： 服之当升仙 遂署为宾僚。
现代文：有位叫孙季长的道士，给李抱真炼金丹，欺骗李抱真说： 服了可以成仙。 李抱真就任命他为幕僚。
English: There was a Taoist named Sun Qichang, who gave Li Bozhen alchemy, deceived Li Bozhen and said: "If you serve, you can become immortal." Li Bozhen appointed him as a staff member.

古文：数谓参佐曰： 此丹秦皇、汉武皆不能得，唯我遇之，他年朝上清，不复偶公辈矣。 
现代文：李抱真多次对部将说： 这金丹秦始皇、汉武帝都没得到，只有我碰到了，今后我要去朝拜上清，不能再和诸位在一起了。 
English: Li Baozhen repeatedly said to his subordinate: This gold coin was not given to the First Emperor of Qin or the Emperor of Han, only I have come across it. In the future, I will go to the Qing Dynasty to worship, and I can no longer be with you.

古文：复梦驾鹤冲天，寤而刻木鹤、衣道士衣以习乘之。
现代文：他又梦见自己骑鹤升天，醒来后就命人雕刻一只木鹤，自己穿上道士衣裳练习骑坐木鹤。
English: He also dreamed that he ascended to heaven riding a crane. After waking up, he ordered someone to carve a wooden crane and put on his Taoist robes to practice riding a wooden crane.

古文：凡服丹二万丸，腹坚不食，将死，不知人者数日矣。
现代文：他共服了两万粒金丹，肚子发硬吃不下东西，快死了，不省人事有好几天。
English: He took a total of twenty thousand pieces of jujube, his stomach was so hard that he couldn't eat anything, he was dying, and he was unconscious for several days.

古文：道士牛洞玄以猪肪谷漆下之，殆尽。
现代文：道士牛洞玄用猪油谷漆泻肚子，几乎把金丹都泻光了。
English: Taoist priest Niu Dongxuan licked his stomach with lard valley paint, and almost licked all the gold.

古文：病少间，季长复曰： 垂上仙，何自弃也！ 
现代文：病略好了一点，孙季长又说： 差点成仙了，为什么放弃呢！ 
English: The illness got a little better, and Sun Ji Chang said again: I almost became immortal, why give it up!

古文：益服三千丸，顷之卒。
现代文：他又加服了三千粒金丹，一会儿就去世了。
English: He took another three thousand snapper and died a short time later.

古文：初，抱真久疾，好礻几祥，或令厌胜，为巫祝所惑，请降官爵以禳除之。
现代文：此前，李抱真长期生病，相信吉凶征兆，有人叫他冲冲邪气，又被巫婆神汉们迷惑，叫他请求降低官职爵位来驱除邪祟。
English: Previously, Li Bozhen had been ill for a long time and believed in the signs of good and evil. Some people told him to expel evil spirits, and he was confused by witches and gods, and asked him to request a lower official title to drive away evil.

古文：是年，凡七上章让司空，复为检校左仆射。
现代文：这年间，他共七次上奏章辞去了司空，又任检校左仆射。
English: During this year, he resigned from the position of secretary for a total of seven times, and was also appointed as a left-handed shooting guard.

古文：贞元十年卒，时年六十二，废朝三日，赠太保，赙以布帛米粟有差。
现代文：他贞元十年去世，当时六十二岁，皇帝停止上朝三天致哀，赠官为太保，赠给的绸布粮食等助丧礼物数量不等。
English: He died in the tenth year of the Zhengyuan era, when he was sixty-two years old. The emperor paused for three days to offer condolences, bestowing officials as eunuchs, and the number of mourning gifts such as silk cloth and grain varied.

古文：抱真薨之日，其子殿中侍御史缄匿丧不发。
现代文：李抱真去世那天，他的儿子殿中侍御史李缄隐瞒不发丧。
English: On the day of Li Po Zhen's death, his son, the palace attendant Li Yao, concealed his grief.

古文：营田副使卢会昌令抱真从甥元仲经潜与缄谋，其明日，将吏会集，仲经诈为抱真令曰： 吾疾甚，不能莅职，今令缄掌军事，诸军善佐之。 
现代文：营田副使卢会昌命李抱真的外甥元仲经暗中和李缄谋划，第二天召集将领，元仲经伪造李抱真的命令说： 我病重了，不能管事，现命李缄掌管军务，各位要好好辅佐他。 
English: The next day, Yuan Zhongjing, the nephew of Li Bangzhen, who was secretly plotting with him, summoned the generals. Yuan Zhongjing forged Li Bangzhen's order and said, "I am seriously ill and cannot manage affairs. Li Bangzhen is now in charge of military affairs. Everyone should support him well."

古文：节度副使李说及诸将吏俯首，皆曰： 诺 。
现代文：节度副使李说和众将校都俯首听令，说： 好。 
English: Li, the deputy chief of the General Staff, said that he and all the officers bowed their heads to listen to the order and said, "Good.

古文：须臾，缄盛服而出，众皆拜之，缄乃悉府藏颁赏军士。
现代文：一会儿，李缄穿官服走了出来，众人都对他跪拜行礼，李缄拿出所有库存奖赏兵将。
English: After a while, Li Wei came out wearing his official uniform. Everyone bowed to him and saluted. Li Wei took out all of his inventory to reward the soldiers.

古文：卢会昌仍诈为抱真表，请以职事付缄。
现代文：卢会昌又伪托李抱真上奏章，请求将官职交给李缄继任。
English: Lu Huichang also falsely asked Li Baozhen to recite the imperial rescript, requesting that the official post be handed over to Li Xi as his successor.

古文：翌日，又令诸将连奏请缄领军。
现代文：第二天，又命众将联名上奏请求任命李缄掌管军队。
English: The next day, he also ordered the people to jointly appeal for the appointment of Li Lan to take charge of the army.

古文：上已闻真疾病，请见明日。如此者凡三日，缄乃出造中使，左右皆陈兵，甚严备。
现代文：皇帝已听说李抱真去世了，就派第五守进任使者坐传车去观察情况，并命将军中事务交给大将王延贵掌管。
English: When the emperor heard that Li Po Zhen had passed away, he sent an envoy to observe the situation, and ordered the general affairs to be handed over to the general Wang Yan Gui.

古文：中使谓缄曰： 朝廷已知相公薨殁，令以兵务属延贵，侍御宜归发丧行服也。 
现代文：第五守进到了潞州，李缄欺骗他说李抱真病重，请求明天会见。像这样过了三天，李缄才出来会见使者，他身边带着军队，戒备森严。使者对李缄说： 皇帝已经知道李宰相去世了，命将军务交给王延贵，你应该回家发丧服丧。 
English: When the fifth governor entered Zhangzhou, Li Yan deceived him by saying that Li Bozhen was seriously ill and asked to meet him tomorrow. After three days like this, Li Yan finally came out to meet the envoy. He was accompanied by an army and was heavily guarded. The envoy said to Li Yan: The emperor has already known that Prime Minister Li has passed away. He ordered the general affairs to be handed over to Wang Yangui. You should go home and wear mourning clothes.

古文：缄愕然，出谓诸将曰： 有诏不许缄掌事，诸公意若何？ 
现代文：李缄惊呆了，出去对众将说： 皇帝下诏不让我掌管军务，你们认为怎样？ 
English: Li Qiye was stunned and went out to say to the generals: The emperor issued an edict not to let me take charge of military affairs. What do you think?

古文：将吏莫有对者。
现代文：将领们没人敢答腔。
English: No one dared answer the generals.

古文：缄惧而退，遽以使印及管钥归监军。
现代文：李缄害怕了，退了出去，赶快将节度使大印和钥匙交给了监军。
English: Li Yao was scared and retreated, quickly handing over the seal and key to the guards.

古文：是日，乃发丧，毕一哭。
现代文：当天，就发丧了，哭一场就完事了。
English: On the same day, I went into mourning. One cry and it was all over.

古文：中使召延贵，以口诏令视事，趣遣缄赴东都。
现代文：使者召来王延贵，宣布皇帝口头诏令命他管理军务，又赶快把李缄打发去了洛阳。
English: The envoy summoned Wang Yangui, announced that the emperor had ordered him to manage military affairs, and quickly sent Li Xi to Luoyang.

古文：元仲经逃于外，延贵捕得杀之。既归罪仲经，卢会昌得不坐。
现代文：元仲经逃到外地，王延贵把他抓住杀死了，既然认为罪名都在元仲经身上，卢会昌没受牵连。
English: Yuan Zhongjing fled abroad, Wang Yangui caught him and killed him. Since Yuan Zhongjing was considered guilty, Lu Huichang was not implicated.

古文：缄初谋乱，遣裨将陈荣诈以文书告成德节度使王武俊，求假财帛，武俊大怒曰： 吾与汝府公善者，冀恭王命，非同恶也。今闻已亡，孰诈令其子而不俟朝旨耶？
现代文：李缄当初想作乱，派偏将陈荣伪造公文告诉成德节度使王武俊，求借钱财，王武俊很生气地说： 我和他父亲交好，是为了辅佐皇上，不是合伙做坏事，现听说他父亲已去世了，怎能靠欺骗立他的儿子却不等待皇上的任命呢？
English: At first, Li Yan wanted to make trouble. He sent Chen Rong to forge official documents to tell the Chengde Festival to make Wang Wujun to borrow money. Wang Wujun said angrily, "I befriended his father to assist the emperor, not to do bad things together. Now I hear that his father has passed away. How can he appoint his son by deception without waiting for the emperor's appointment?

古文：何敢告我，况有求也！ 
现代文：你们怎么敢把这消息告诉我，竟然还想找我借钱财！ 
English: How dare you tell me this and then try to borrow money from me!

古文：乃囚陈荣而遣使让缄焉。
现代文：于是将陈荣关押起来并派使者去责备李缄。
English: Therefore, Chen Rong was arrested and an envoy was sent to reprimand Li Gan.

