古文：李孝伯李冲
现代文：李孝伯，赵郡人，高平公李顺堂父的弟弟。
English: Li Xiao Bo, from Zhao County, is the younger brother of Gao Ping Gong's cousin, Li Shun.

古文：李孝伯，赵郡人也，高平公顺从父弟。父曾，少治《郑氏礼》、《左氏春秋》，以教授为业。
现代文：父亲名叫李曾，从小专攻《郑氏礼》、《左氏春秋》，以教书为业。
English: His father's name was Li Zeng, and from an early age he specialized in "The Rite of Zheng" and "The Spring and Autumn of Zuo," teaching as his profession.

古文：郡三辟功曹不就，门人劝之，曾曰： 功曹之职，虽曰乡选高第，犹是郡吏耳。
现代文：郡府三次征召他为功曹，他都不去就任，门徒们劝他，他说： 功曹的职位，虽然说是地方政府所任的高职，但毕竟是郡吏。
English: Three times the county government called him to be a gong cao, but he refused to take up the post. His disciples persuaded him, saying: "The position of gong cao, although it is said to be a high-ranking position held by the local government, is after all a county official.

古文：北面事人，亦何容易。 
现代文：北面侍奉他人，谈何容易。 
English: It's easy to talk about serving others in the north.

古文：州辟主簿，到官月余，乃叹曰： 梁叔敬有云：州郡之职，徒劳人耳。
现代文：州中征召他为主簿，上任一个多月后，叹着气说： 梁叔敬有句话说：州郡之职，只是劳扰人们而已。
English: After more than a month in office, he sighed and said, "Uncle Liang Jing once said, 'The position of county magistrate is just to bother people.

古文：道之不行，身之忧也。 
现代文：无法行道，是身之忧患。 
English: Not being able to walk is a great sorrow.

古文：遂还家讲授。
现代文：于是又回到家里，教书授徒。
English: So he went back home to teach.

古文：太祖时，征拜博士，出为赵郡太守，令行禁止，劫盗奔窜。
现代文：魏太祖时，朝廷征拜他为博士，出任赵郡太守，令行禁止，盗窃强贼之流闻声逃奔。
English: During the reign of Emperor Taizu of the Wei Dynasty, the imperial court enlisted him as a doctor, and he served as the governor of Zhao County. He issued an order prohibiting the practice, and the thieves and robbers fled.

古文：太宗嘉之。
现代文：太宗称赞他的治绩。
English: Emperor Taizong praised his performance.

古文：并州丁零，数为山东之害，知曾能得百姓死力，惮不入境。
现代文：并州丁零郡，屡屡为太行山以东的盗贼所害，敌人得知李曾受到老百姓的衷心拥戴之后，害怕了，再也不敢入境骚扰。
English: He was repeatedly victimized by thieves from the east of Taihang Mountain. After the enemy learned that Li had been sincerely supported by the people, they were afraid and no longer dared to harass him.

古文：贼于常山界得一死鹿，谓赵郡地也，贼长责之，还令送鹿故处。
现代文：贼寇在常山地界获得一匹死了的鹿，拿回来说是在赵郡地界得到的，贼首把他责备了一顿，让他把鹿还回原处。
English: The bandit obtained a dead deer in the Changshan territory, and got it back in the Zhao County territory. The bandit leader scolded him and asked him to return the deer to its original place.

古文：邻郡为之谣曰： 诈作赵郡鹿，犹胜常山粟。 
现代文：邻郡的人为之编了一首歌谣说： 诈作赵郡鹿，犹胜常山粟。 
English: The people of the neighboring county made up a song and ballad for it, saying: "It is better to be a deer in Zhao County than to be a mountain poppy."

古文：其见惮如此。
现代文：可见盗贼害怕李曾的程度。
English: Emperor-in-waiting Wang Feng has come to such a pass.

古文：卒，赠平南将军、荆州刺史、柏仁子，谥曰懿。
现代文：死后，朝廷赠他为平南将军、荆州刺史、柏仁子，谥称懿。
English: After his death, the imperial court gave him the titles of Pingnan Shogun, Jingzhou Shishi, and Bai Rongzi.

古文：孝伯少传父业，博综群言。
现代文：李孝伯少年传承父业，博览群书。
English: As a boy, Li Xiao Bo inherited his father's business and read a lot of books.

古文：美风仪，动有法度。
现代文：风度翩翩，行为符合礼节法度。
English: She is personable and behaves in accordance with the rules of etiquette.

古文：从兄顺言之于世祖，征为中散。世祖见而异之，谓顺曰： 真卿家千里驹也。 
现代文：堂兄李顺在魏世祖面前推荐他，朝廷便征拜他为中散官职，魏世祖一见到他大为惊异，对李顺说： 这真是你家门之中的千里马呀。 
English: His cousin, Li Shun, recommended him to Emperor Wei, and the imperial court recruited him for the position of Zhongshan official. When Emperor Wei saw him, he was very surprised and said to Li Shun, "This is really the best of your family."

古文：迁秘书奏事中散，转侍郎、光禄大夫，赐爵南昌子，加建威将军，委以军国机密，甚见亲宠。
现代文：迁任秘书奏事中散，转任侍郎、光禄大夫，赐爵位南昌子，加授建威将军，皇上把军国机密大事交付给他，可见其受朝廷宠爱的程度。
English: He was transferred to the position of secretary in the middle of the report, transferred to the position of chamberlain, doctor of Guanglu, given the title of Nanchangzi, awarded General Jianwei, and the emperor entrusted him with military secrets, which shows the extent to which he was favored by the imperial court.

古文：谋谟切秘，时人莫能知也。
现代文：李孝伯所参预的机密谋划事宜，当时的一般人无法知道。
English: Ordinary people at the time had no way of knowing about the confidential planning that Li Xiaobo was involved in.

古文：迁北部尚书。
现代文：后又迁任比部尚书。
English: Later, he was transferred to Hibe Shosho.

古文：以频从征伐规略之功，进爵寿光侯，加建义将军。
现代文：因为他频繁跟随征战，立下诸多谋划功勋，朝廷又晋爵为寿光侯，加授建义将军。
English: Because he frequently followed the war, set up many planning achievements, the court also promoted to the peerage for Shuguang Hou, and awarded to General Jianyi.

古文：真君末，车驾南伐，将出彭城。
现代文：真君末年，皇帝南伐，大军准备向彭城出发。
English: In the last years of the reign of Emperor Zhengjun, the emperor went to the south, and the army was preparing to set out for Pengcheng.

古文：刘义隆子安北将军、徐州刺史、武陵王骏，遣将马文恭率步骑万余至萧城。
现代文：刘义隆的儿子安北将军、徐州刺史、武陵王刘骏，派将马文恭率领骑步兵一万多人到萧城。
English: Liu Yilong's son, General Anbei, the governor of Xuzhou, and the king of Wuling, Liu Yao, sent Ma Wenyong to lead more than ten thousand cavalry and infantry to Xiaocheng.

古文：前军击破之，文恭走免，执其队主蒯应。
现代文：被魏国前驱兵马迎击消灭了，马文恭逃走，免于一死，魏军抓住了他的队主蒯应。
English: They were wiped out by Wei's front-line troops, and Ma Wenqong escaped without a single death. The Wei army captured his team leader, Zou Ying.

古文：义隆闻大驾南巡，又遣其弟太尉、江夏王义恭率众赴彭城。
现代文：刘义隆听说魏国大军南下而来，又派自己的弟弟太尉、江夏王刘义恭率领军马赶赴彭城。
English: Liu Yilong heard that the Wei army was coming south, and sent his younger brother, Lieutenant Liu Yigong, the King of Jiangxia, to lead the army to Pengcheng.

古文：世祖至彭城，登亚父冢以望城内，遣送蒯应至小市门宣世祖诏，劳问义恭，并遣自陈萧城之败。
现代文：魏世祖到了彭城，登上当年亚父范曾的墓冢望城内，派蒯应到小市门，宣读魏世祖诏书，慰问刘义恭等人，并让蒯应讲述他自己已在萧城败北的情况。
English: Wei Shizhu arrived in Pengcheng, boarded the tomb of his father Fan Zeng that year and looked around the city. He sent Zou Ying to the small city gate, read out Wei Shizhu's imperial edict, gave condolences to Liu Yigong and others, and asked Zou Ying to tell the story of his own defeat in Xiaocheng.

古文：义恭等问应： 魏帝自来以不？ 
现代文：刘义恭等问蒯应： 魏朝皇帝自己来了没有？ 
English: Liu Yigong and others asked Zou Ying: Did the Emperor of the Wei Dynasty come himself?

古文：应曰： 自来。 
现代文：蒯应说： 本人来了。 
English: Zou Ying said: I have come.

古文：又问： 今在何处？ 
现代文：又问： 今在何处？ 
English: He also asked: Where are you now?

古文：应曰： 在城西南。 
现代文：蒯应说： 在城的西南面。 
English: You should say: In the southwestern part of the city.

古文：又问： 士马多少？ 
现代文：又问： 军马多少？ 
English: He also asked: How many horses are in the army?

古文：应曰： 中军四十余万。 
现代文：蒯应说： 中军四十余万。 
English: You should say: The Chinese army is more than 400,000 strong.

古文：骏遣人献酒二器、甘蔗百梃，并请骆驼。
现代文：刘骏派人向魏世祖献上两壶酒，一百根甘蔗，并请求魏朝送给他一些骆驼。
English: Liu Bei sent people to present two jars of wine and a hundred sugar cane to Wei Shizuo, and asked Wei Dynasty to send him some camels.

古文：世祖明旦复登亚父冢，遣孝伯至小市，骏亦遣其长史张暢对孝伯。
现代文：魏世祖第二天早上又登上亚父墓冢，派李孝伯到小市，刘骏也派他的长史张畅与孝伯相对。
English: The next morning, Emperor Wei ascended to the tomb of his father and sent Li Xiao Bo to the small town. Liu Bei also sent his long-time official Zhang Chang to confront Li Xiao Bo.

古文：孝伯遥问暢姓，暢曰： 姓张。 
现代文：李孝伯在远处问张畅姓什么，张畅说： 姓张。 
English: In the distance, Li Xiaobing asked Zhang Chang what his surname was. Zhang Chang said: My surname is Zhang.

古文：孝伯曰： 是张长史也。 
现代文：李孝伯说： 原来是张长史啊。 
English: Li Xiaobo said: It was Zhang Changshi after all.

古文：暢曰： 君何得见识？ 
现代文：张畅说： 您怎么这么清楚？ 
English: Zhang Chang said: How did you know?

古文：孝伯曰： 既涉此境，何容不悉。 
现代文：孝伯说； 既然来到这里，怎能够不熟悉这里的情况。 
English: Since I came here, how can I not be familiar with the situation here?

古文：暢问孝伯曰： 君复何姓？居何官也？ 
现代文：张畅问李孝伯说： 您姓什么？任何官职？ 
English: Zhang Chang asked Li Xiaobo: What is your surname? Any official position?

古文：孝伯曰： 我戎行一夫，何足致问。
现代文：李孝伯说： 我是戎装行伍中的一名卒子，哪能劳君如此相问。
English: Li Xiao Bo said: I am a pawn in the military parade, how can Lao Jun ask such a question.

古文：然足与君相敌。 
现代文：但我足以与君相匹敌。 
English: But I'm more than a match for you.

古文：孝伯曰： 主上有诏： 太尉、安北可暂出门，欲与相见，朕亦不攻彭城，何为劳苦将士，城上严备？ 
现代文：孝伯说： 魏主有诏： 太尉刘骏、安北将军刘义隆可暂时走出城门，魏皇我想跟他们见面，朕也不攻打彭城，为什么要辛苦三军将士，城上如此戒备森严？ 
English: Xiao Bo said, "The Emperor of Wei has decreed that Lieutenant Liu Tong and General Liu Yilong of Anbei may temporarily leave the city gate. The Emperor of Wei wants to meet with them, and I will not attack Pengcheng. Why should the three soldiers work so hard, and the city is so heavily guarded?"

古文：今遣赐骆驼及貂裘杂物。 
现代文：今天特地派我送来赐给你们的骆驼以及貂裘与其他杂物。 
English: Today I am sending you a camel and a donkey and some other things.

古文：暢曰： 有诏之言，政可施于彼国，何得称之于此？ 
现代文：张畅说： 依你皇诏书的说法，政治可以施行于其他国家，为什么就找上了我朝宣诏？ 
English: Zhang Chang said: According to your imperial edict, politics can be carried out in other countries. Why did you come to my imperial edict?

古文：孝伯曰： 卿家太尉、安北，是人臣不？ 
现代文：李孝伯说： 你家太尉、安北，是人臣不是？ 
English: Li Xiaobo said, "Your family's First Lieutenant, An Bei, is a courtier, is he not?

古文：暢曰： 是也。 
现代文：张畅说： 是啊。 
English: Zhang Chang said: Yes.

古文：孝伯曰： 我朝廷奄有万国，率土之滨，莫敢不臣。
现代文：李孝伯说： 我大魏拥有万国，率土之滨，无人敢不臣服。
English: Li Xiaobo said, "I, the Great Wei, own all the countries and command the shores of the earth. No one dares to disobey me."

古文：纵为邻国之君，何为不称诏于邻国之臣？ 
现代文：我皇既是你宋国邻国之君，为什么不能称诏于你宋国的臣子们呢？ 
English: Since my emperor is the sovereign of your Song neighbors, why can't you issue an imperial edict to your Song subjects?

古文：孝伯又问暢曰： 何至忽遽杜门绝桥？ 
现代文：李孝伯又问张畅说： 你们何以至于突然就紧闭城门，收起吊桥？ 
English: Li Xiao'er asked Zhang Chang again, "Why did you suddenly close the gate and close the suspension bridge?

古文：暢曰： 二王以魏帝壁垒未立，将士疲劳，此精甲十万，人思致命，恐轻相凌践，故且闭城耳。
现代文：张畅说： 二位王公认为魏帝远道而来，壁垒未立，将士疲劳，而彭城之中十万精锐，人思战斗，二王公怕他们会冲出城来，冲踏魏军，所以姑且关起城门而已。
English: Zhang Chang said: The two princes thought that the Wei emperor had come from far away, the barriers had not been erected, the soldiers were tired, and there were a hundred thousand elites in Pengcheng who were thinking about fighting. The two princes were afraid that they would rush out of the city and trample on the Wei army, so they just closed the city gate.

古文：待休息士马，然后共治战场，克日交戏。 
现代文：等到你们军马休整过来，二王决定再在沙场相见，约日交战。 
English: When your horses have rested, the two kings decide to meet again on the battlefield. They agree to fight on the same day.

古文：孝伯曰： 令行禁止，主将常事，宜当以法裁物，何用废桥杜门？
现代文：李孝伯说： 令行禁止，主将常事，所应采取的应当以法办事，哪里用得着闭桥关门这种不得已的做法呢？
English: Li Xiaobo said: "It is forbidden by order, the master will always do things, and what should be taken should be done by law. Where is the need to close the bridge and close the door as a last resort?

古文：穷城之中，复何以十万夸大？
现代文：穷迫的城中，哪里有十万精锐的海口呢？
English: In a poor city, where are a hundred thousand elite seagulls?

古文：我亦有良马百万，复可以此相矜。 
现代文：我大魏也有良马百万，我们难道也以此自夸不成。 
English: My Great Wei also had millions of good horses, can we not boast of this?

古文：暢曰： 王侯设险，何但法令而已也。
现代文：张畅说： 王侯设险而凭，但求合乎法令要求就行了。
English: Zhang Chang said: Princes set risks and get away with it, but it is enough to meet the requirements of the law.

古文：我若夸君，当言百万，所以言十万者，正是二王左右素所畜养者耳。
现代文：我如果夸君势力，就当说兵马百万了，之所以说兵马十万，这正是二位王公身边一向拥有的兵力之数罢了。
English: If I were to praise the prince's power, I would have to say that he has a million soldiers and horses. The reason why I say 100,000 soldiers and horses is that this is exactly the number of soldiers that the two princes have always had around them.

古文：此城内有数州士庶，工徒营伍犹所未论。
现代文：这座城里，有几个州的士庶百姓，那些工徒营伍之人还没有算进去。
English: In this city, there are common people from several states, and those who are in the labor battalions have not been included.

古文：我本斗人，不斗马足。
现代文：我说的是人数，而没列举马匹数量。
English: I'm talking about the number of people, not the number of horses.

古文：且冀之北土，马之所生，君复何以逸足见夸也？ 
现代文：况且冀州地处北方，出产马匹，你凭什么又把那些不是军中战马的野马算在内而借以自夸呢？ 
English: Moreover, Jizhou is located in the north and produces horses, so why do you include those wild horses that are not war horses in the army and boast about it?

古文：孝伯曰： 王侯设险，诚如来言，开闭有常，何为杜塞？
现代文：李孝伯说： 王侯设置险障，的确如你刚才所说的，但有关闭之时，也有开门之日，你们为什么又干脆紧紧闭上呢？
English: Li Xiao Bo said: It is true that the prince has set up a dangerous obstacle, as you just said, but when it comes to closing, there is also a day of opening the door, why do you simply close it tightly?

古文：绝桥之意，义在何也？
现代文：拉起吊桥，道理又在什么地方？
English: Pull up the drawbridge, where's the logic in that?

古文：此城守君之所习，野战我之所长；我之恃马，犹如君之恃城耳。 
现代文：这座城池是你们守城的将帅所熟悉的，野外打战是我们的长处，我们凭借马匹，就如你们凭依城池一样。 
English: This citadel is familiar to your generals who defend the city. Fighting in the field is our strength. We rely on horses, just as you rely on the citadel.

古文：城内有具思者，尝至京师，义恭遣视之，思识是孝伯。
现代文：城里有个叫贝思的人，曾经到过魏国京城，刘义恭派他前去看究竟是谁，贝思认出是李孝伯。
English: There was a man named Beth in the city, who had been to the capital of Wei. Liu Yigong sent him to see who it was, and Beth recognized Li Xiaobo.

古文：思前问孝伯曰： 李尚书行途有劳。 
现代文：贝思上前慰问李孝伯说： 李尚书一路辛苦了。 
English: Beth came forward to offer condolences to Li Xiaobo, saying: Li Shangshu has worked hard all the way.

古文：孝伯曰： 此事应相与共知。 
现代文：李孝伯说： 这个事你我行路之人心中都清楚。 
English: Li Xiaobo said: This should be something that you and I both know.

古文：思答曰： 缘共知，所以仰劳。 
现代文：贝思回答说： 正因为都知道，所以才问候你。 
English: Beth replied, "It's because they all know that's why I'm saying hello."

古文：孝伯曰： 感君至意。 
现代文：孝伯说： 感谢你的一片心意。 
English: Xiao Bo said, "Thank you for your hospitality."

古文：既开门，暢屏人却仗，出受赐物。
现代文：既开城门，张畅摈退随从，撤去仪仗，出城接受魏朝赐给的东西。
English: As soon as the city gate was opened, Zhang Changyu retreated with his followers, withdrew from the ceremonial battle, and went out of the city to accept what was given by the Wei Dynasty.

古文：孝伯曰： 诏以貂裘赐太尉，骆驼、骡、马赐安北，蒲萄酒及诸食味当相与同进。 
现代文：李孝伯说： 魏皇有诏，貂裘赐给太尉，骆驼、骡子、马匹赐给安北将军，葡萄酒以及各种吃食让你们大家一起共同享受。 
English: Li Xiaobo said, "The Emperor of the Wei Dynasty had an edict, Qigong was given to the first lieutenant, camels, mules and horses were given to General Anbei, and wine and all kinds of food were given to you all to enjoy together.

古文：暢曰： 二王敬白魏帝，知欲垂见，常愿面接，但受命本朝，忝居籓任，人臣无境外之交，故无容私觌。 
现代文：张畅说： 二位王公敬回魏帝，知道魏帝垂见，常愿亲自接驾，但是受命宋朝，居守一方，作为人臣应无境外之交，所以不能私自面见魏皇。 
English: Zhang Chang said: The two princes respectfully returned to the Wei Emperor, and knowing the Wei Emperor's foresight, they would like to pick up the car in person. However, they were ordered to stay in the Song Dynasty, and as courtiers, they should not have foreign friends, so they could not see the Wei Emperor in private.

古文：义恭献皮裤褶一具，骏奉酒二器、甘蔗百梃。
现代文：刘义恭献上皮制衣服一套，刘骏献上两杯酒，百捆甘蔗。
English: Liu Yigong presented a set of leather clothing, Liu Wei presented two glasses of wine, and a hundred bundles of sugar cane.

古文：孝伯曰： 又有诏： 太尉、安北，久绝南信，殊当忧悒。
现代文：李孝伯说： 魏皇又有诏书说： 太尉、安北，长久没有与宋国通消息，应该是十分忧郁不快。
English: Li Xiao Bo said: The Emperor of Wei also issued an edict saying: Lieutenant, Anbei, you have not communicated with Song Guo for a long time. You must be very depressed and unhappy.

古文：若欲遣信者，当为护送，脱须骑者，亦当以马送之。  
现代文：你们如若派遣使者去朝，我们为你们护送，如需要坐骑，我们送给马匹。  
English: If you send envoys to the North, we will escort them, and if you need horses, we will provide them.

古文：暢曰： 此方间路甚多，使命日夕往复，不复以此劳魏帝也。 
现代文：张畅说： 这里小路很多，使命官员往返频繁，不用为此事劳扰魏帝了。 
English: Zhang Chang said: There are many small roads here, and mission officials frequently travel back and forth, so there is no need to bother Emperor Wei with this matter.

古文：孝伯曰： 亦知有水路，似为白贼所断。 
现代文：李孝伯说： 我们也知道有水路，好像是被造反的黎庶百姓隔断了。 
English: Xiao Bo said, "We know that there is a waterway here, but it seems to be occupied by white thieves.

古文：暢曰： 君著白衣，称白贼也。 
现代文：张畅说： 君你穿着白衣，便是白贼了。 
English: Zhang Chang said: If you wear a white coat, you are a white thief.

古文：孝伯大笑曰： 今之白贼，似异黄巾、赤眉。 
现代文：李孝伯大笑说： 今天所说的白贼，好像指的是像黄巾、赤眉那种身份的人。 
English: Li Xiao Bo laughed loudly and said, "The white thief mentioned today seems to refer to a person with the status of a yellow scarf or red eyebrows.

古文：暢曰： 黄巾、赤眉，不在江南。 
现代文：张畅说： 黄巾、赤眉，不在江南。 
English: Zhang Chang said: The yellow scarf and red eyebrows are not from the south of the Yangtze River.

古文：孝伯曰： 虽不在江南，亦不离徐方也。 
现代文：李孝伯说： 虽然不在江南，但也不离徐州地界。 
English: Li Xiaobo said: Although it is not in the south of the Yangtze River, it is not far from the border of Xuzhou.

古文：孝伯曰： 向与安北相闻，何以久而不报？ 
现代文：李孝伯说： 向与安北相闻，为什么你久不通报。 
English: Li Xiaobo said, "You have heard of Anbei, why didn't you inform him for a long time?"

古文：暢曰： 二王贵远，启闻为难。 
现代文：张畅说： 二王高贵遥远，告诉他们颇不方便。 
English: Zhang Chang said: The two kings are far away, and it is quite inconvenient to tell them.

古文：孝伯曰： 周公握发吐饣甫，二王何独贵远？ 
现代文：李孝伯说： 当年周公握发吐饭，接待宾客，二王怎么格外高贵？ 
English: Li Xiaobo said: In those days, Zhou Gong held a banquet and received guests. How were the two kings so noble?

古文：暢曰： 握发吐餐，不谓邻国之人也。 
现代文：张畅说： 握发吐饭，不是对邻国的人而言的。 
English: Zhang Chang said: Shaking hands and spitting rice is not for people in neighboring countries.

古文：孝伯曰： 本邦尚尔，邻国弥应尽恭。
现代文：李孝伯说： 本国尚且如此，邻国更应礼节周全了。
English: Li Xiaobo said: This is still the case in our own country, but our neighbours should be more courteous.

古文：且宾至有礼，主人宜以礼接。 
现代文：宾客应该做到彬彬有礼，主人应该以礼相接。 
English: Guests should be courteous and the host should reciprocate with courtesy.

古文：暢曰： 昨见众宾至门，未为有礼。 
现代文：张畅说： 昨天你们军马临城，未为有礼。 
English: Zhang Chang said, "Yesterday, I saw that you guests did not have any etiquette when you came here!

古文：孝伯曰： 非是宾至无礼，直是主人怱怱，无待宾调度耳。 
现代文：李孝伯说： 不是宾客没有礼节，只是主人手脚忙乱，无法等到宾客调度罢了。 
English: Li Xiaobo said: It's not that the guests lack etiquette, it's just that the host is so busy that he can't wait for the guests to arrive.

古文：孝伯又言： 有诏： 程天祚一介常人，诚知非江南之选，近于汝阳，身被九枪，落在溵水，我使牵而出之。
现代文：孝伯又说： 魏皇有诏： 程天祚一介常人，你们诚然知道他非江南之选，而接近汝阳，身遭九枪，落入氵殷水，我派人把他打捞上来。
English: Xiao Bo also said, "The Emperor of Wei issued an edict: Cheng Tianyao is an ordinary person. You all know that he was not chosen from the south of the Yangtze River, but was close to Yuyang. He was shot nine times and fell into the swampy water. I sent someone to rescue him.

古文：凡人骨肉分张，并思集聚，闻其弟在此，如何不遣暂出？
现代文：凡是人骨肉分离，都常思团聚，我们听说其弟在此，如何不让其把他领回去？
English: People who are separated often think about reuniting. We have heard that his younger brother is here. How can we prevent him from bringing him back?

古文：寻自令反，岂复苟留一人。  
现代文：而把他留在我魏军中。  
English: But I kept him in my Wei army.

古文：暢曰： 知欲程天祚兄弟集聚，已勒遣之，但其固辞不往。 
现代文：张畅说： 已经知道并也想让程天祚兄弟团聚，而且也要他前来领人，但他弟坚决不去。 
English: Zhang Chang said: He already knew and also wanted to let Cheng Tianyao brothers reunite, and also wanted him to come to lead people, but his brother resolutely did not go.

古文：孝伯曰： 岂有子弟闻其父兄而反不肯相见，此便禽兽之不若。
现代文：李孝伯说： 哪有子弟听说其父辈兄长回来却反而不肯相见的道理，这真是连禽兽都不如。
English: Li Xiaobo said: "If any child hears that his parents or older brothers have returned, but refuses to see them, this is really not even as good as animals.

古文：贵土风俗，何至如此？ 
现代文：贵土风俗人情，怎么到了这种地步。 
English: How did the customs and manners of a noble land come to this?

古文：世祖又遣赐义恭、骏等氈各一领，盐各九种，并胡豉。
现代文：魏世祖派人送去赐予刘义恭、刘骏等人毡子各一件，盐各九种，加上胡豉。
English: Emperor Wei sent someone to give Liu Yigong, Liu Yao and others a piece of hazelnut each, nine kinds of salt each, and cucumbers.

古文：孝伯曰： 有后诏： 凡此诸盐，各有所宜。
现代文：李孝伯说： 魏皇有后诏： 这些盐，各有用处。
English: Li Xiaobo said: The Emperor of the Wei Dynasty had the following edict: Each of these salts has its usefulness.

古文：白盐食盐，主上自食；黑盐治腹胀气满，末之六铢，以酒而服；胡盐治目痛；戎盐治诸疮；赤盐、驳盐、臭盐、马齿盐四种，并非食盐。
现代文：白盐是食盐，主上自食；黑盐治疗腹部气胀，研成碎末，一次六铢，用酒服下；胡盐治疗眼睛疼；戎盐治各种疮疤；赤盐、驳盐、臭盐、马齿盐等四种盐，都不是食盐。
English: White salt is table salt, which is mainly eaten by oneself; black salt is used to treat abdominal bloating, and is ground into powder, crushed into six pieces at a time, and drunk with wine; goose salt is used to treat eye pain; eucalyptus salt is used to treat various scars; red salt, barley salt, rancid salt, horse tooth salt and other four kinds of salt are not table salt.

古文：太尉、安北何不遣人来至朕间？
现代文：太尉、安北何不派人到朕这里来？
English: Captain, why doesn't Anbei send someone to me?

古文：彼此之情，虽不可尽，要复见朕小大，知朕老少，观朕为人。  
现代文：彼此之情，虽不可尽，但是总要看看朕身材大小，年龄老少，观察一下朕的为人吧。  
English: Although our love for each other is inexhaustible, you should always look at my size, my age and my personality.

古文：暢曰： 魏帝久为往来所具，李尚书亲自衔命，不患彼此不尽，故不复遣信。 
现代文：张畅说： 魏帝总是为我们之间往来准备东西，李尚书你亲自赴问，我们之间尽可互相了解，所以二位王公不再写信。 
English: Zhang Chang said: Emperor Wei always prepared things for our correspondence, Li Shangshu, you should go and ask in person, we can understand each other, so the two princes no longer write letters.

古文：义恭献蜡烛十梃，骏献锦一匹。
现代文：刘义恭又献上蜡烛十根，刘骏献上锦缎一匹。
English: Liu Yigong also presented ten candles, and Liu Ye presented a koi carp.

古文：孝伯曰： 君南土士人，何为著屩？
现代文：李孝伯说： 君你是南方的人，为什么脚穿木鞋？
English: Li Xiaobo said: You are from the south, why do you wear wooden shoes?

古文：君而著此，将士云何？ 
现代文：你脚穿此鞋，将士如何说法？ 
English: What would you say if you were in his shoes?

古文：暢曰： 士人之言，诚为多愧。
现代文：张畅说： 士人之言，诚为多愧。
English: Zhang Chang said, "I am deeply ashamed of what the scholar said.

古文：但以不武受命，统军戎陈之间，不容缓服。 
现代文：我虽不是武将，但受命统军，戎中阵前，不容我随便着装。 
English: Although I am not a military commander, I was ordered to lead the army, and I am not allowed to dress casually.

古文：孝伯曰： 永昌王自顷恆镇长安，今领精骑八万直造淮南，寿春亦闭门自固，不敢相御。
现代文：李孝伯说： 永昌王一向总是镇守长安，今天率领精锐骑兵八万直进淮河以南，寿春守军也闭门防守，不敢对阵。
English: Li Xiaobo said: Yongchang Wang has always been a staunch defender of Chang'an. Today, he led 80,000 elite cavalry straight to the south of the Huaihe River. Shouchun's defenders also closed their doors and did not dare to fight.

古文：向送刘康祖首，彼之所见王玄谟，甚是所悉，亦是常才耳。
现代文：过去割下刘康祖首级送来，你们也见到了。王玄谟也被我们熟悉了解，他不过也是平常之才而已。
English: In the past, he cut off Liu Kangzu's head and sent it to us, as you have seen. Wang Xuanmu is also familiar to us, he is just an ordinary talent.

古文：何意作如此任使，以致奔败。
现代文：怎么派他充当抵挡大军之职，以致奔逃败北。
English: How could he be sent to defend against a large army, only to flee to the north?

古文：自入境七百余里，主人竟不能一相拒抗。
现代文：魏大军自从进入宋境长驱七百余里，你们竟然不能稍加抵抗。
English: Since the Wei army entered the Song territory, it has driven more than seven hundred miles, and you can't even put up a little resistance.

古文：邹山之险，彼之所凭，前锋始得接手，崔邪利便尔入穴，将士倒曳出之。
现代文：邹山之险，是你们所凭借的，我前锋部队刚与其交手，崔邪利便如鼠入穴，将士倒戈投降。
English: The danger of Lushan is what you are relying on. As soon as our frontline troops engaged with them, Cui Yaxili fell into a hole like a rat and surrendered.

古文：主上丐其生命，今从在此。
现代文：我魏主怜惜他们，让他们从军南下，今在军中。
English: Our Lord took pity on them and let them go south from the army, and now they are in the army.

古文：复何以轻脱，遣马文恭至萧县，使望风退挠也。
现代文：你们怎么又轻率大意，派马文恭到萧县拒守，以致使他望风退却呢。
English: How thoughtless of you to send Ma Wenyong to Xiao County to resist, causing him to retreat.

古文：彼之民人，甚相忿怨，言清平之时，赋我租帛，至有急难，不能相拯。 
现代文：那里的百姓，怨声载道，说国境平安的时候，你们找他们催租逼帛，一到危难时，便不能相救。 
English: The people there complain that when they say the border is safe, you go to them to extort money, and when they are in danger, you can't help them.

古文：暢曰： 知永昌已过淮南。
现代文：张畅说： 我们知道永昌已越过淮河向南而来。
English: Zhang Chang said: We know that Yongchang has crossed the Huai River to the south.

古文：康祖为其所破，比有信使，无此消息。
现代文：至于康祖为你们所破，那里有信使传递消息，未见此报。
English: As for Kang Zu being broken by you, there was a messenger there to deliver the news, but no such report was seen.

古文：王玄谟南土偏将，不谓为才，但以其北人，故为前驱引导耳。
现代文：而王玄谟本是南方一名偏将，不能称做是才，但因他是一名北方人，所以让他为前部先锋。
English: However, Wang Xuan Mew was originally a southern half-forward, and cannot be called a talent, but because he was a northerner, he was made the front-line spearhead.

古文：大军未至，而河冰向合，玄谟量宜反旆，未为失算，但因夜回归，致戎马惊乱耳。
现代文：魏朝大军未到，而黄河结冰合拢，王玄谟根据实际撤军南岸，不是失算，但只因夜晚撤还，才导致戎马相互惊乱而已。
English: The great army of the Wei Dynasty did not arrive, and the Yellow River froze and closed. Wang Xuanmu withdrew the troops to the south bank according to the actual situation, which was not a miscalculation, but only because of the withdrawal at night, it only led to the military horses scaring each other.

古文：我家悬瓠小城，陈宪小将，魏帝倾国攻围，累旬不克。
现代文：我宋悬瓠小城，守军是小将陈宪，而魏帝倾国中所有兵力攻打围困，几十天都没攻下来。
English: In the Song Dynasty, a small city was besieged, and the defending army was led by the young general Chen Xian, while in the Wei Dynasty, all the troops attacked and besieged, and did not attack for dozens of days.

古文：胡盛之偏裨小帅，众无三旅，始济翮水，魏国君臣奔散，仅得免脱。
现代文：胡盛之本是偏裨小将，人马不足三旅，他刚渡翮水，魏国便君臣奔散，仅免一死。
English: Originally, Hu Sheng was a minor general, with less than three brigades of men and horses. He had just crossed the Danshui River, and the Wei Kingdom was dispersed, with only one death spared.

古文：滑台之师，无所多愧。
现代文：滑台之师，没什么可多惭愧的。
English: There's nothing to be ashamed of in being a ski instructor.

古文：邹山小戍，虽有微险，河畔之民，多是新附，始慕政化，奸盗未息，示使崔邪利抚之而已。
现代文：邹山小关，虽有微险，但黄河边上的老百姓，大多是刚归附的，刚开始受我宋教化熏陶，奸盗还未停息，朝廷让崔邪利率领一些军马安抚他们而已。
English: Although Lushan Xiaoguan has micro-insurance, most of the people on the edge of the Yellow River are newly annexed, just beginning to be influenced by our Song Dynasty. The thieves have not yet stopped, and the court has let Cui Yuxin take some war horses to appease them.

古文：今虽陷没，何损于国。
现代文：今天虽然被攻陷，于国家有什么损害。
English: Even if the country is invaded today, what will be the damage to the country?

古文：魏帝自以十万之师而制一崔邪利，乃复足言也？
现代文：魏帝自己亲统十万军马而制服一个小小的崔邪利，还有什么好值得夸口的？
English: Emperor Wei personally led a hundred thousand soldiers and horses to subdue a small Cui Zari, what else is worth boasting about?

古文：近闻萧县百姓并依山险，聊遣马文恭以十队迎之耳。
现代文：近来听说萧县百姓都凭依山险，不归魏军，朝廷只派马文恭率十队人马迎之。
English: Recently, it was heard that the people of Xiao County did not return to the Wei army because of the danger of the mountains. The imperial court only sent Ma Wenyong and ten teams to welcome them.

古文：文恭前以三队出，还走彼大营。
现代文：马文恭仅以三队人马出击，还能奔走在魏大营之中。
English: Ma Wenyong only attacked with three teams, but he was still able to run in the midst of the Wei camp.

古文：嵇玄敬以百舸至留城，魏军奔败。
现代文：嵇玄敬率百来条船到留城，魏军奔散溃败。
English: Xing Xuanjing led more than a hundred ships to stay in the city, and the Wei army was routed.

古文：轻敌致此，亦非所恤。
现代文：你们轻敌致此，也不是应该原谅的。
English: You should not be forgiven for treating your enemies so lightly.

古文：王境人民，列居河畔，二国交兵，当互加抚养。
现代文：王境人民，列居黄河两岸、两国交兵，宜当互加抚养。
English: The people on the border of the kingdom, who live on both sides of the Yellow River, and who fought in the war between the two countries, should be mutually supported.

古文：而魏师入境，事生意外，官不负民，民亦何怨。
现代文：而今天魏师入境，事出意外，我宋官不负民，百姓又有什么可埋怨的。
English: But today, Wei Shi has entered the country, an accident has occurred, I, Song Guan, have not failed the people, and the people have nothing to complain about.

古文：知入境七百里，无相捍拒，此自上由太尉神算，次在武陵圣略。军国之要，虽不预闻，然用兵有机间，亦不容相语。 
现代文：我们知道魏军入境七百余里，却不加抵抗。如此做法上出自太尉的神机妙算，驻军武陵的大计划，这类军国机要，我虽然未曾参与，但用兵双方都各有机密，也不容我在阵前明说。 
English: We know that the Wei army entered more than seven hundred miles, but did not put up any resistance. Such an approach came from the great tactic of the captain, the great plan to station troops in Wuling. Although I have not participated in this kind of military and national strategy, both sides have secrets, and I am not allowed to say it before the battle.

古文：孝伯曰： 君藉此虚谈，支离相对，可谓遁辞知其所穷。
现代文：李孝伯说： 君你借此不着边际的话，支离对答，真可以说是遁辞，知你已无计可施了。
English: Li Xiaobo said, "You can really say that if you take advantage of this to get ahead of yourself and deviate from the answer, it's just empty talk. You know you have nothing else to do.

古文：且主上当不围此城，自率众军直造瓜步。
现代文：况且我魏皇当不围此城，自统军马直逼瓜步。
English: Moreover, I, the Wei emperor, should not encircle this city, since the unified army would be forced to make a hasty retreat.

古文：南事若办，城故不待攻围；南行不捷，彭城亦非所欲也。
现代文：建业若被拿下，此城便不攻自破；南行不能成功，彭城也不是我们想要获取的。
English: If Jianye is taken, this city will not be broken; the southbound cannot succeed, and Pengcheng is not what we want to obtain.

古文：我今当南，欲饮马江湖耳。 
现代文：我大军今日南进，意在饮马长江大湖呢。 
English: Our army is marching south today, intending to drink the Yangtze River and the Great Lake.

古文：暢曰： 去留之事，自适彼怀。
现代文：张畅说： 去留这类事，你们自己决定。
English: Zhang Chang said, "Whether to go or stay, naturally, it's up to you.

古文：若魏帝遂得饮马长江，便为无复天道。 
现代文：假如魏帝终得饮马长江，便是没有天道。 
English: If Emperor Wei eventually had to drink from the Yangtze River, there would be no heaven.

古文：孝伯曰： 自北而南，实惟人化。饮马长江，岂独天道？ 
现代文：李孝伯说： 自北而南，实是人化之迹，饮马长江，岂独不是天道？ 
English: Li Xiaobo said: From the north to the south, it is really a trace of humanization, drinking the Yangtze River, isn't it just the way of heaven?

古文：暢将还城，谓孝伯曰： 冀荡定有期，相见无远。
现代文：张畅准备回到城里，对李孝伯说： 希望动荡有个定期，我们相见之日不远。
English: As Zhang Chang prepared to return to the city, he said to Li Xiaobo, "I hope the turmoil has a regular schedule. The day we meet is not far away."

古文：君若得还宋朝，今为相识之始。 
现代文：君你如若还归我宋朝，今天我们便算是认识了。 
English: If you can return to the Song Dynasty, then now is the beginning of your acquaintance with me.

古文：孝伯曰： 今当先至建业以待君耳。
现代文：李孝伯说： 你今天应当先到建业城以等待魏君。
English: Li Xiaobo said: You should go to Jianye City first today to wait for Wei Jun.

古文：恐尔日君与二王面缚请罪，不暇为容。 
现代文：不然我担心你他日与二位王公一起被捆绑着面见魏君，便没有脸面了。 
English: Otherwise, I'm afraid you'll be tied up with the two princes to face Wei Jun one day, and then you won't have a face.

古文：孝伯风容闲雅，应答如流，暢及左右甚相嗟叹。
现代文：李孝伯风度潇洒，应答如流，张畅以及身边随从很是嗟叹。
English: Li Xiao Bo's demeanor is dashing, his answers are fluent, and Zhang Chang and his entourage are very impressive.

古文：世祖大喜，进爵宣城公。
现代文：魏世祖大为高兴，进他爵位为宣城公。
English: Wei Shizuo was very pleased, and he was given the title of Xuancheng.

古文：兴安二年，出为使持节、散骑常侍、平西将军、秦州刺史。
现代文：兴安二年，出任使持节、散骑常侍、平西将军、秦州刺史。
English: In the second year of Xing'an, he served as the envoy of the Jizhi Festival, the horseback riding attendant, the Pingxi general, and the Qinzhou sashimi.

古文：太安三年卒，高宗甚悼惜之。
现代文：太安五年去世，高宗十分伤心痛惜。
English: When Taian died five years later, Gao Zong was heartbroken.

古文：赠镇南大将军、定州刺史，谥曰文昭公。
现代文：赠他为镇南大将军、定州刺史，谥称文昭公。
English: He gave him the titles of Zhenan Grand General, Dingzhou Sashimi, and the nickname of Wen Zhaogong.

古文：孝伯体度恢雅，明达政事，朝野贵贱，咸推重之。
现代文：李孝伯风度翩翩，体度闲雅，通晓明达政事，朝中上下，不论贵贱，都十分推举尊重他。
English: Li Xiao Bo had a graceful demeanor, a laid-back and elegant demeanor, and was well-versed in political affairs. He was highly respected by people of all ranks, both high and low.

古文：恭宗曾启世祖广征俊秀，世祖曰： 朕有一孝伯，足治天下，何用多为？
现代文：恭宗曾经启奏世祖广泛征选俊秀之才，魏世祖说： 朕有了一个李孝伯，便足以治理天下，还征召那么多干嘛？
English: King Gyeongjong used to instruct his forefathers to extensively recruit outstanding talents. Emperor Wei said, "If I had a Li Xiao Bo, it would be enough to rule the world. Why do I have to recruit so many?

古文：假复求访，此人辈亦何可得。 
现代文：即使四下求访，像这样的人才哪里还能得到。 
English: Even if you make four visits, where can you get talent like this?

古文：其见赏如此。
现代文：世祖赏识他的程度由此可见。
English: This shows the appreciation for him.

古文：性方慎忠厚，每朝廷大事有不足，必手自书表，切言陈谏；或不从者，至于再三。
现代文：李孝伯性格方正谨慎，忠实厚道，每遇朝廷大事有什么不周到的地方，他必定要亲手书写上表，直言陈奏，碰上不被接纳的，他陈奏再三。
English: Li Xiao Bo's character is upright, prudent, loyal and kind. Whenever there is anything inconsiderate in the imperial court's major events, he must write it down with his own hand and play it straight. If he is not accepted, he will play it again and again.

古文：削灭稿草，家人不见。
现代文：他修改草稿，即使家人也不给看见。
English: He edits drafts, even if his family can't see them.

古文：公庭论议，常引纲纪，或有言事者，孝伯恣其所陈，假有是非，终不抑折。
现代文：在官府论议时，李孝伯常常引据纲纪，如有人陈说事情，孝伯总是让他们充分地发表意见，假使遇到是非大事，李孝伯是始终不会马虎的。
English: During discussions at government offices, Li Xiaobo often cited the rules of etiquette. If someone brought up an issue, Li Xiaobo always let them fully express their opinions. If there was a major issue, Li Xiaobo would never be careless.

古文：及见世祖，言其所长，初不隐人姓名以为己善。故衣冠之士，服其雅正。
现代文：等到他见到魏世祖，便言说别人的长处，从不埋没别人的姓名以称自己的好处，所以每位官员，都佩服他的为人正派。
English: When he met Wei Shizu, he talked about the strengths of others, never buried the names of others to claim his own benefits, so every official admired his decency.

古文：自崔浩诛后，军国之谋，咸出孝伯。
现代文：自从崔浩被杀之后，军国谋略大事，都出自李孝伯之手了。
English: Since Cui Hao was killed, all major military strategies have come from the hands of Li Xiaobo.

古文：寻病卒，赠散骑常侍、都督定冀相沧殷五州军事、骠骑大将军、尚书左仆射、仪同三司、定州刺史。
现代文：世祖宠爱他虽比不上对崔浩，但也是以宰辅的礼节待他。献替补缺，形迹不见，当时人都不知道这些。他死的那天，远近之人都十分哀痛悲伤。李孝伯美名，远近传播，李彪出使江南，萧赜对他说： 孝伯与你哪位更为人称道？ 
English: Although the world's forefathers did not favor him as much as they did Cui Hao, they also treated him with the etiquette of a vassal. There was no sign of a replacement, and no one knew about it at the time. On the day of his death, people near and far were very sad. Li Xiaobo's beautiful name spread far and wide, and Li Biao was sent to the south of the Yangtze River. Xiao Yao said to him: Which of you is more respected?

古文：子士谦，仪同开府参军事。李冲，字思顺，陇西人，敦煌公宝少子也。
现代文：他被很远的人所称道，由此可见一斑。李冲，字思顺，陇西人，敦煌公李宝的小儿子。
English: He was praised by people far and wide, as can be seen from the fact that Li Chong, also known as Sishun, was from Shaanxi and was the youngest son of Li Bao, the Duke of Dunhuang.

古文：少孤，为长兄荥阳太守承所携训。
现代文：少小便成孤儿，被长兄荥阳太守李承所抚养教育。
English: He became an orphan at a young age and was raised and educated by his eldest brother, the Yang di-Pertuan Agong Li Cheng.

古文：承常言： 此兒器量非恆，方为门户所寄。 
现代文：李承常说： 这孩子器量非同常人，正是我李门的希望之星。 
English: Li Chengchang said, "This child has an extraordinary talent. He is the star of hope for my Li Men.

古文：冲沉雅有大量，随兄至官。
现代文：李冲深沉儒雅，心胸宽广，跟随长兄到其任所。
English: Deep-rooted, refined and broad-minded, Li Chong followed his eldest brother to his post.

古文：是时牧守子弟多侵乱民庶，轻有乞夺，冲与承长子韶独清简皎然，无所求取，时人美焉。
现代文：当时牧守的子弟大多侵犯百姓，动不动就向他们索要夺取财物，李冲与李承的长子李韶独独清简皎然，无所求取，当时人很是赞美他们。
English: At that time, most of the children of the herdsmen encroached on the people and demanded money and goods from them at every turn. Li Chong and Li Cheng's eldest son, Li Yingdu, was simple and straightforward, and had nothing to ask for. At that time, people praised them very much.

古文：显祖末，为中书学生。
现代文：魏显祖末年，李冲为中书学生。
English: At the end of Wei Xianzu's life, Li Chong was a middle school student.

古文：冲善交游，不妄戏杂，流辈重之。
现代文：他善于交游，不随便乱来，同辈人们都很推重他。
English: He's good at socializing, doesn't make random mistakes, and his peers are very impressed with him.

古文：高祖初，以例迁秘书中散，典禁中文事，以修整敏惠，渐见宠待。
现代文：魏高祖初年，按惯例迁任秘书中散，掌管禁中文事，因其修整敏惠，渐渐被皇帝宠幸。
English: In the first year of Wei Gaozu, according to the usual practice, he was transferred to the secretary of Zhongshan, in charge of the forbidden Chinese affairs. Because of his refinement and sensitivity, he was gradually favored by the emperor.

古文：迁内秘书令、南部给事中。
现代文：迁任内秘书令、南部给事中。
English: Nanbu is in the process of being removed from his post by order of the internal secretary.

古文：旧无三长，惟立宗主督护，所以民多隐冒，五十、三十家方为一户。
现代文：过去没有三长设置，只是设立宗主督护负责户籍事务，所以老百姓大多隐瞒户籍真实情况，五十、三十家才为一户。
English: In the past, there was no such thing as the three heads of households, but only the head of the family who was in charge of the household registration affairs. Therefore, most of the people concealed the true situation of the household registration, and there were only fifty or thirty families per household.

古文：冲以三正治民，所由来远，于是创三长之制而上之。
现代文：李冲觉得用三正治理百姓，历史已很久远，于是创立三长制度呈奉皇上。
English: Li Chong felt that the history of using the Three Corporations to govern the people was a long time ago, so he presented the creation of the Three Seniority System to the emperor.

古文：文明太后览而称善，引见公卿议之。
现代文：文明太后看后觉得很好，召集公卿大臣讨论这件事。
English: Seeing this, the Empress Dowager Civilius thought it was a good idea to convene the nobles and ministers to discuss the matter.

古文：中书令郑羲、秘书令高祐等曰： 冲求立三长者，乃欲混天下一法。
现代文：中书令郑羲、秘书令高等人说： 李冲请求设立三长，本意是求混同天下为一法。
English: Zheng Qi, secretary to the high-ranking person, said: Li Chong's request for the establishment of the three heads was intended to confuse the world into one law.

古文：言似可用，事实难行。 
现代文：他这个建议理论上可以实行，实际上很难做到。 
English: In theory, his suggestion can be implemented, but in practice it is difficult to achieve.

古文：羲又曰： 不信臣言，但试行之。事败之后，当知愚言之不谬。 
现代文：郑羲又说： 不相信为臣的说法，但试行之，事败之后，当知愚言的真实。 
English: Zheng Yao also said: I do not believe in the argument of being a vassal, but if you try it, after the defeat, you should know the truth of the nonsense.

古文：太尉元丕曰： 臣谓此法若行，于公私有益。 
现代文：太尉元丕说： 我认为这个办法如果施行，对于公私都有益处。 
English: "I think this measure, if implemented, will be beneficial to both the public and private sectors," Captain Motohiro said.

古文：咸称方今有事之月，校比民户，新旧未分，民必劳怨。请过今秋，至冬闲月，徐乃遣使，于事为宜。
现代文：大家都说当今有事之月，核查户籍，新旧未分，老百姓必定劳怨，请求过了今年秋天，到冬天闲暇的时候，慢慢派人办此事，更合适些。
English: Everyone said that today is an eventful month, the verification of household registration, the new and the old are not divided, the common people must work hard, and it is more appropriate to request that after this autumn, in the winter leisure time, slowly send people to do this.

古文：冲曰： 民者，冥也，可使由之，不可使知之。
现代文：李冲说： 民者，冥昏也，可让他们做什么事，但不可让他们知道为什么做这样的事。
English: Li Chong said: Citizens, even if they are in the dark, can let them do anything, but they must not let them know why they are doing such things.

古文：若不因调时，百姓徒知立长校户之勤，未见均徭省赋之益，心必生怨。
现代文：如不适时而行此事，老百姓徒然知道立长校户的勤密，没有见到平均徭役、省却赋税的好处，心中必定会生出怨愤。
English: If this is not done in a timely manner, the people will know the diligence of the school head in vain, and they will not see the benefits of the average bailiff and tax savings, and resentment will certainly arise in their hearts.

古文：宜及课调之月，令知赋税之均。
现代文：我们正应该在课调之月，让百姓知道赋税平均的好处。
English: We should be letting people know the benefits of tax averaging in the month of the new school year.

古文：既识其事，又得其利，因民之欲，为之易行。 
现代文：老百姓既已认识此事，又得到了好处，也就想要立三长了，我们做起来也容易多了。 
English: Now that the common people are aware of this and have benefited from it, they want to set up a third party, and it is much easier for us to do so.

古文：著作郎傅思益进曰： 民俗既异，险易不同，九品差调，为日已久，一旦改法，恐成扰乱。 
现代文：著作郎傅思益进言说： 民间习俗不同，难易也不一致，设立九品差调百姓，施行已久，一旦改法，臣担心会造成恐慌混乱。 
English: Author Langfu Siyi Jinyan said: Folk customs are different, difficult and easy are not consistent, the establishment of nine grades of people has been implemented for a long time, once the law is changed, the minister is worried that it will cause panic and confusion.

古文：太后曰： 立三长，则课有常准，赋有恆分；苞廕之户可出，侥幸之人可止。何为而不可？ 
现代文：太后说： 设立三长，则课税便有经常的标准，赋税有经常分别，隐藏的户籍就会出来，心存侥幸的人也就不存在了，怎么说不行呢？ 
English: The Empress Dowager said, "If the Three Elders are established, then taxation will have a regular standard, taxation will be regularly separated, the hidden household registration will come out, and people who are lucky will no longer exist. How can it be said that it is impossible?

古文：群议虽有乖异，然惟以变法为难，更无异义。
现代文：大家讨论的意见虽有不同，但都认为变法是很艰难的，便更无异议了。
English: Although the opinions discussed by everyone are different, they all think that changing the law is very difficult, so there is no objection.

古文：遂立三长，公私便之。
现代文：于是设立三长，公私都觉得很便利。
English: As a result, the three departments were established, which both the public and private sectors found very convenient.

古文：迁中书令，加散骑常侍，给事中如故。
现代文：迁任中书令，加授散骑常侍，给事中官职仍旧。
English: He was transferred to the post of middle secretary, and given the additional post of horseback riding attendant. He still holds the post of middle secretary.

古文：寻转南部尚书，赐爵顺阳侯。
现代文：不久又转任南部尚书，赐给爵位顺阳侯。
English: Soon he was transferred to Nanbu Shoshu and given the title of Shunyang Marquis.

古文：冲为文明太后所幸，恩宠日盛，赏赐月至数十万，进爵陇西公，密致珍宝御物以充其第，外人莫得而知焉。
现代文：李冲被文明太后所宠幸，恩遇日隆一日，赏赐的东西每月达数千万，晋爵陇西公，李冲秘密弄来珍宝御用物品以充实其府第，外面没有一人知道。
English: Li Chong was favored by the Empress Dowager of Civilization. He was favored by the Emperor for a day, and the rewards amounted to tens of millions per month. As the Prince of Jin Dynasty, Li Chong secretly brought precious and royal items to enrich his palace, and no one outside knew about it.

古文：冲家素清贫，于是始为富室。
现代文：李冲家一向清贫，从此以后便成为富室。
English: Li Chong's family has always been poor, but since then they have become rich.

古文：而谦以自牧，积而能散，近自姻族，逮于乡闾，莫不分及。
现代文：然而以谦逊为怀，积聚之后也能施散，近至姻亲新故，远到乡亲里友，没有人不受过他的赠予。
English: However, with modesty in mind, he was able to distribute gifts even after he had accumulated them. He was close to his in-laws and far away from his friends and relatives. No one ever received a gift from him.

古文：虚己接物，垂念羁寒，衰旧沦屈，由之跻叙者，亦以多矣。
现代文：李冲虚己接物，常念贫寒，衰老之人、旧敝之友、沉沦屈枉之人都可在他那受到良好的待遇，人们纷至沓来。
English: Li Chonghu himself was a beggar, always thinking about the poor and the cold. Old people, old friends, and those who had been wronged could all receive good treatment at his place. People flocked to him.

古文：时以此称之。
现代文：舆论也以此称赞他。
English: Public opinion also praised him for this.

古文：初，冲兄佐与河南太守来崇同自凉州入国，素有微嫌。
现代文：当初，李冲的哥哥李佐与河南太守来崇同从凉州进入魏国，二人一向就有间隙隔阂。
English: At the beginning, Li Chong's brother Li Zuo and Henan Taishou came to Chongdong from Liangzhou to enter Wei. The two always had a gap between them.

古文：佐因缘成崇罪，饿死狱中。
现代文：李佐因此构陷来崇犯罪，致使他饿死狱中。
English: As a result, Li Zuo framed Lai Chong for the crime, causing him to starve to death in prison.

古文：后崇子护又纠佐赃罪，佐及冲等悉坐幽系，会赦乃免，佐甚衔之。
现代文：后来来崇的儿子又纠奏李佐受收贿赂的罪过，李佐及李冲等人都因此被投入监狱，碰到朝廷大赦，才得免罪出狱，李佐深深怀恨在心。
English: Later, Chong's son went after Li Zuo for the crime of accepting bribes. Li Zuo and Li Chong and others were thrown into prison for this. They were pardoned by the imperial court and released from prison. Li Zuo held a deep grudge.

古文：至冲宠贵，综摄内外，护为南部郎，深虑为冲所陷，常求退避，而冲每慰抚之。
现代文：到了李冲宠贵时，综摄内外，来护任南部郎，深深担心被李冲陷害，常常请求退避，而李冲则每每安慰他。
English: When Li Chong fell in love with Gui, he came to protect Nanbu Lang both inside and outside the photo shoot. Deeply worried about being framed by Li Chong, he often asked to retreat, while Li Chong always comforted him.

古文：护后坐赃罪，惧必不济。
现代文：来护后来犯了贿赂罪，心想这下肯定完了。
English: Lai Guo later committed the crime of bribery, thinking that this was definitely over.

古文：冲乃具奏与护本末嫌隙，乞原恕之，遂得不坐。
现代文：李冲于是上表诉说与他的交往及不和，乞求皇上原谅他的过失，于是来护免于刑罚。
English: Li Chong then went public to complain about his dealings and discord with him, begged the emperor to forgive his mistake, and then came to protect him from punishment.

古文：冲从甥阴始孙孤贫，往来冲家，至如子侄。
现代文：李冲的外甥阴始孙孤独贫困，出入李冲家中，宛如他的儿侄们。
English: Li Chong's nephews and nieces are lonely and poor. They come and go from Li Chong's home, just like his nephews and nieces.

古文：有人求官，因其纳马于冲，始孙辄受而不为言。
现代文：有人想求官，因此送了些马给李冲，始孙便接受下来而且不向李冲说。
English: Someone wanted to run for office, so they sent some horses to Li Chong. The first grandson accepted and did not tell Li Chong.

古文：后假方便，借冲此马，马主见冲乘马而不得官，后乃自陈始末。
现代文：后来始孙声称有事，借李冲此马，骑出之后，马的主人见到始孙乘坐此马而自己却没得到官职，大为愤怒，后来始孙才说出事情真相。
English: Later, the great-grandson claimed that there was something wrong, borrowed Li Chong this horse, after riding out, the owner of the horse saw the great-grandson riding this horse but did not get an official post, was very angry, and later the great-grandson told the truth of the matter.

古文：冲闻之，大惊，执始孙以状款奏，始孙坐死。
现代文：李冲听说，大为惊讶，抓起始孙，备表上奏，始孙因此被处死。
English: Li Chong heard about this and was very surprised. He grabbed his great-grandson and prepared to play the music. As a result, his great-grandson was executed.

古文：其处要自厉，不念爱恶，皆此类也。
现代文：李冲身处要地，严守节挥，不念爱恶，就如上面所述。
English: Li rushes to important places, strictly observes the festival, and does not think about love and evil, as mentioned above.

古文：是时循旧，王公重臣皆呼其名，高祖常谓冲为中书而不名之。
现代文：当时遵照旧俗，王公重臣都叫他的名字，魏高祖常叫李冲为中书，始终不直呼其名。
English: At that time, according to the old custom, Wang Gong's senior ministers all called him by his name. Wei Gao Zu often called Li Chong as Zhongshu, but never called him by his first name.

古文：文明太后崩后，高祖居丧引见，待接有加。
现代文：文明太后逝世后，高祖服丧，引见接待李冲，礼遇有加。
English: After the death of Empress Dowager Wenming, Gao Zu was in mourning, and Li Chong was invited to receive him, and he was treated with great courtesy.

古文：及议礼仪律令，润饰辞旨，刊定轻重，高祖虽自下笔，无不访决焉。
现代文：等到朝廷商议礼仪律令，润饰辞意，改定字句，高祖虽然亲自下笔，但是总是与李冲一起商量。
English: When the imperial court discussed the rules of etiquette, embellished expressions, and revised words, Gaozu, although he personally wrote down, always discussed with Li Chong.

古文：冲竭忠奉上，知无不尽，出入忧勤，形于颜色；虽旧臣戚辅，莫能逮之，无不服其明断慎密而归心焉。
现代文：李冲竭尽忠诚侍奉圣上，知无不尽，出入勤勉，形于颜色，虽是旧臣戚辅，没人能赶得上他，大家无人不佩服他的决断慎密，全都归心于他。
English: Li Chong devoted all his efforts to loyally serve the saint, his knowledge was inexhaustible, he was diligent in his comings and goings, and he was the epitome of color. Although he was an old vassal, no one could catch up with him. No one could fail to admire his determination and prudence, and they all confided in him.

古文：于是天下翕然，及殊方听望，咸宗奇之。
现代文：从此以后，天下太平，异域之人，听说他的情况，也都很佩服惊奇。
English: Since then, the world has been at peace, and people in foreign countries are surprised and amazed when they hear about his situation.

古文：高祖亦深相仗信，亲敬弥甚，君臣之间，情义莫二。
现代文：魏高祖也更加深深地相信依靠他，更加亲近尊重他，君臣之间，情义无间。
English: Emperor Wei Gaozu also believed more deeply in relying on him, respected him more closely, and there was no rift between princes and ministers.

古文：及改置百司，开建五等，以冲参定典式，封荥阳郡开国侯，食邑八百户，拜廷尉卿。
现代文：等到改置百司，开建五等爵制，高祖请李冲参与制定典制法式，封他为荥阳郡开国侯，食邑达八百户，拜授廷尉卿。
English: When the Hundred Divisions were replaced and the five-class peerage system was established, Gao Zu invited Li Chong to participate in the formulation of the French-style peerage system. He was awarded the title of Founding Marquis of Poyang County, with 800 households, and was awarded the title of Lord Lieutenant.

古文：寻迁侍中、吏部尚书、咸阳王师。
现代文：不久又迁任侍中、吏部尚书、咸阳王老师。
English: Not long after, he was transferred to the position of a chamberlain, a clerk, and a teacher of Xianyang Wang.

古文：东宫既建，拜太子少傅。
现代文：东宫建成之后，朝廷拜授他为太子少傅。
English: After the East Palace was completed, the Imperial Court gave him the title of Crown Prince Junior Master.

古文：高祖初依《周礼》，置夫、嫔之列，以冲女为夫人。
现代文：魏高祖初依《周礼》，置立夫、嫔，让李冲的女儿为夫人。
English: According to "Wei Gao Zu" (Wei Gao Zu), Li Chong's daughter became his wife.

古文：诏曰： 昔轩皇诞御，垂栋宇之构；爰历三代，兴宫观之式。
现代文：皇帝下诏说： 过去轩皇统领天下，始立建造宫室之制；经历三代，兴起宫观法式。
English: The emperor issued an edict saying: In the past, Emperor Xuan ruled the world and established the system of building palaces; after three generations, the French style of palace architecture emerged.

古文：然茅茨土阶，昭德于上代；层台广厦，崇威于中业。
现代文：但茅门土阶，昭德于上代；层台广厦，崇威于中世。
English: However, the lattice door steps, Zhaode in the previous generation; multi-storey buildings, revered in the Middle Ages.

古文：良由文质异宜，华朴殊礼故也。
现代文：这实际是由于文饰质朴的制度风俗因时不同，华美朴素不同礼制的缘故。
English: This is actually due to the fact that the system and customs of plain decoration vary from time to time, and the beauty and simplicity vary from one ceremony to another.

古文：是以周成继业，营明堂于东都；汉祖聿兴，建未央于咸镐。
现代文：所以周代立国，在东都营造明堂；汉祖始兴，在咸阳、镐京建造未央宫。
English: Therefore, Zhou Dynasty founded the country and built Myeongdong in Dongdu; Han Dynasty founder Shuxing built Yuyang Palace in Xianyang and Handan.

古文：盖所以尊严皇威，崇重帝德，岂好奢恶俭，苟敝民力者哉？
现代文：这都是为了使皇威尊崇，帝德隆盛，哪里说得上是好奢恶俭，以使民力凋弊呢？
English: All of this is to make the imperial authority revered, the emperor prosperous, and what can be said of extravagance and frugality, so that the people's power withers?

古文：我皇运统天，协纂乾历，锐意四方，未遑建制，宫室之度，颇为未允。
现代文：我皇运承天，以协天地，锐意安定四方，没来得及建造宫室，因此皇室建制，颇与国威不符。
English: Our emperor inherits the luck of the heavens and the earth, and strives to stabilize the four directions. He did not have time to build a palace, so the establishment of the royal family is quite inconsistent with the national prestige.

古文：太祖初基，虽粗有经式，自兹厥后，复多营改。
现代文：魏太祖刚刚登基，虽然宫室有了大致模样，从那以后，又多有营建改造。
English: Wei Taizu had just ascended to the throne, and although the imperial palace had a general appearance, since then, there have been more construction and transformation.

古文：至于三元庆飨，万国充庭，观光之使，具瞻有阙。
现代文：但到了三元庆典，万国使者都来我庭，观瞻的人，都有缺憾。
English: However, when it came to the ternary celebration, envoys from all over the world came to our garden, and those who watched were all disappointed.

古文：朕以寡德，猥承洪绪，运属休期，事钟昌运，宜遵远度，式兹宫宇。
现代文：朕虽不才，也承皇绪，适逢休明之期，事逢昌盛之运，应该按照远古法度，营造皇室宫宇。
English: Although I am not an expert, I am also following the imperial trend. It is a time of peace and prosperity, and it is necessary to build an imperial palace in accordance with ancient laws.

古文：指训规模，事昭于平日；明堂、太庙，已成于昔年。
现代文：指训规模，事昭于平日；明堂、太庙，已在昔年建成。
English: The scale of instruction and training is evident in everyday life; Myeongdong and Taemyo have been built in the past.

古文：又因往岁之丰资，藉民情之安逸，将以今春营改正殿。
现代文：又凭借往年的好年成，依仗民情的安逸，准备在今年春天营造改修正殿。
English: In addition, by virtue of the good results of previous years, and relying on the comfort of the people's feelings, we are preparing to build the hall of correction this spring.

古文：违犯时令，行之惕然。
现代文：朕这一举措违犯时令，实行起来心惊胆颤。
English: This measure violates the law of the season, and my heart trembles with fear when it is implemented.

古文：但朔土多寒，事殊南夏，自非裁度当春，兴役徂暑，则广制崇基，莫由克就。
现代文：但是北方天气寒冷，做事不同南方，如果不是在春天动工，营造经夏，那么宫殿建造，便无法完工。
English: However, the weather in the north is cold, and the way of doing things is different from the south. If the construction is not started in the spring and built in the summer, then the palace cannot be completed.

古文：成功立事，非委贤莫可；改制规模，非任能莫济。
现代文：成功地办成一件事，非得委任贤才不可；改制规模，不任用能人无法做到。
English: To successfully accomplish a task, it is necessary to appoint a talented person; to restructure the scale, it is impossible without appointing a capable person.

古文：尚书冲器怀渊博，经度明远，可领将作大匠；司空、长乐公亮，可与大匠共监兴缮。
现代文：尚书李冲器识胸怀渊大广博，经治营度明达高远，可为将作大臣；司空、长乐公元亮，可与他共治此事。
English: Shangshu Li Chong's knowledge is vast and profound, and his management ability is far-sighted, and he can be the next minister; Siku and Changle can work with him on this matter.

古文：其去故崇新之宜，修复太极之制，朕当别加指授。 
现代文：至于去故崇新之事，修复太极之制，朕当另行委派。 
English: As for the matter of reviving the old and reviving the new, and the restoration of the Taiji system, I should be appointed separately.

古文：车驾南伐，加冲辅国大将军，统众翼从。
现代文：皇帝车驾南征，加授李冲为辅国大将军，统领军马随从皇帝。
English: The emperor went on a southern expedition in a chariot. Li Chong was promoted to the rank of vice-general of the state, and he led the army and followed the emperor.

古文：自发都至于洛阳，霖雨不霁，仍诏六军发轸。
现代文：自京城出发至于洛阳，阴雨连绵，天不开晴，皇帝仍诏六军出发。
English: As far as Luoyang was concerned, it rained incessantly and the weather was cloudy, but the emperor still ordered the six armies to set out.

古文：高祖戎服执鞭御马而出，群臣启颡于马首之前。
现代文：魏高祖一身戎装，手执马鞭，乘马而出，群臣在马上行君臣之礼。
English: Wei Gaozu dressed in military attire, holding a whip in his hand, rode out on a horse, and the courtiers immediately performed the royal salute.

古文：高祖曰： 长驱之谋，庙算已定，今大将军进，公等更欲何云？ 
现代文：高祖说： 长驱南境的计划，在京时就已商议好，而今大军即将进发，你们都有什么话要说？ 
English: Gao Zu said, "The plan to drive south has already been discussed in Beijing, and now a large army is about to advance. What do you all have to say?

古文：冲进曰： 臣等不能折冲帷幄，坐制四海，而令南有窃号之渠，实臣等之咎。
现代文：李冲上前说： 为臣等不能运筹帷幄，坐制四海，而使南方有窃取帝号的一帮人，这实在是作为臣子的过失。
English: Li Chong stepped forward and said, "It is indeed a fault of a vassal that he cannot plan and control the four seas, and that there is a group of people in the south who have stolen the imperial title.

古文：陛下以文轨未一，亲劳圣驾，臣等诚思亡躯尽命，效死戎行。
现代文：陛下您因四海之内未统一，亲劳圣驾，臣等确实想舍生忘死，冲锋陷阵。
English: Your majesty, because of the lack of unification within the four seas, you personally, your ministers, and others really want to sacrifice life and limb and charge into battle.

古文：然自离都淫雨，士马困弊，前路尚遥，水潦方甚。
现代文：然而自从离都以来，阴雨不断，士兵马匹困顿不堪，前面路途还很遥远，积水更多。
English: However, since leaving the capital, it has been raining incessantly, the soldiers and horses are exhausted, the road ahead is still far away, and there is more water.

古文：且伊洛境内，小水犹尚致难，况长江浩汗，越在南境。
现代文：伊、洛境内，这样的小水尚且导致如此困难，何况长江浩瀚，远在南境。
English: In Iraq and Laos, such small water still leads to such difficulties, not to mention the vast Yangtze River, far away in the south.

古文：若营舟楫，必须停滞，师老粮乏，进退为难，矜丧反旆，于义为允。 
现代文：如打造舟船，必须停顿，军队疲乏，粮食缺少，进退就很困难，正视困难回撤军马，这在目前是最合礼义的做法。 
English: For example, to build a boat, it is necessary to stop, the army is tired, there is a shortage of food, it is difficult to advance and retreat, and it is the most appropriate practice to face the difficulties and withdraw the horses.

古文：高祖曰： 一同之意，前已具论。
现代文：高祖说： 进伐南方，这是我们一致的意见，前面已经说过。
English: Gaozu said, "It is our unanimous opinion to march into the south, as I have already said.

古文：卿等正以水雨为难，然天时颇亦可知。
现代文：而眼下你们因天雨而犯难，然而天时也是可以了解的。
English: And now you are in trouble because of the rain, but the weather is understandable.

古文：何者？
现代文：为什么呢？
English: Why is that?

古文：夏既炎旱，秋故雨多，玄冬之初，必当开爽。
现代文：夏天既然烈日炎炎，北方干旱，秋天必定雨水很多，而初冬时节，天必晴爽。
English: Since the summer is hot and the sun is hot, and the north is dry, there must be a lot of rain in the fall, and in the early winter, the weather must be fine.

古文：比后月十间，若雨犹不已，此乃天也，脱于此而晴，行则无害。
现代文：等到下个月初十左右，如果淫雨仍然不止，这就是天意不许，假如在此间天晴，行军则无多大妨碍。
English: Wait until around ten o'clock at the beginning of the next month, if the rain continues, this is the will of heaven, if it is sunny here, the march will not be much of an obstacle.

古文：古不伐丧，谓诸侯同轨之国，非王者统一之文。
现代文：古时的君王不讨伐不幸的国家，那指的是诸侯同辈的国家，而不是指作为王者统一天下而言的。
English: In ancient times, kings did not fight against unfortunate countries. That referred to the countries of their peers, not to those that were unified as kings.

古文：已至于此，何容停驾？ 
现代文：今天已到这步，怎么能随便就不走了呢？ 
English: It's come to this stage today, how can I just not go?

古文：冲又进曰： 今者之举，天下所不愿，唯陛下欲之。
现代文：李冲又说： 今天这个行动，天下之人都不情愿，只有陛下您一个人要这样做。
English: Li Chong also said: Today's action, people all over the world are reluctant, only your majesty alone wants to do this.

古文：汉文言：吾独乘千里马，竟何至也？
现代文：汉文帝说，我独乘千里马，这是要到哪里去？
English: Han Wendi said, "I'm traveling alone. Where am I going?"

古文：臣有意而无其辞，敢以死请。 
现代文：为臣有请您回驾之意但一时无辞可说，惟以一死请陛下改变初衷。 
English: As a vassal, I have the intention of asking you to return, but for the time being, I have no choice but to ask His Majesty to change his original intention.

古文：高祖大怒曰： 方欲经营宇宙，一同区域，而卿等儒生，屡疑大计，斧钺有常，卿勿复言！ 
现代文：魏高祖大怒说： 朕正要经营宇宙，统一海内，而你们这些儒生，却屡屡疑惑我的大计划，战事有它的常规，你们不要再多嘴！ 
English: Wei Gaozhu said angrily: I am about to manage the universe and unify the sea, but you Confucians have repeatedly doubted my great plan. War has its own rules. You should not talk too much!

古文：策马将出。
现代文：打马准备出发。
English: The horses are ready to go.

古文：于是大司马、安定王休，兼左仆射、任城王澄等并殷勤泣谏。
现代文：于是，大司马、安定王元休，兼左仆射、任城王元澄等人一起殷殷泣谏。
English: As a result, the chief steward Ma, the stable king Yuan Xiu, the concurrent left-handed servant Sha, the appointed city king Yuan Cheng and others wept together.

古文：高祖乃谕群臣曰： 今者兴动不小，动而无成，何以示后？
现代文：魏高祖于是宣明群臣说： 现在兴动不小，动而无所成就，何以昭示后人？
English: Wei Gao Zu then said to Xuanming's group of vassals, "Nowadays, there is a lot of excitement, but nothing has been accomplished. How can we show this to future generations?

古文：苟欲班师，无以垂之千载。
现代文：假如班师回朝，又无以垂名千载。
English: If the class teacher returns to the North, he will not be famous for a thousand years.

古文：朕仰惟远祖，世居幽漠，违众南迁，以享无穷之美，岂其无心，轻遗陵壤？
现代文：朕仰思我魏远祖，世代居住幽僻的荒漠，当年不顾众人异议举都南迁，为的是享受无穷之美，岂是没有心计，轻率离祖宗陵壤的行为。
English: I think of my ancestors in the Wei Dynasty, who lived in the remote desert for generations, and moved the capital to the south in order to enjoy the infinite beauty, despite the objections of many people. Is it not a reckless act to leave the ancestral burial ground?

古文：今之君子，宁独有怀？
现代文：今天的君子，宁是独有胸怀？
English: Today's gentleman, rather unique mind?

古文：当由天工人代、王业须成故也。
现代文：当是由于人代天工，王业须成的缘故。
English: It must be due to the fact that the king's business must be done.

古文：若不南銮，即当移都于此，光宅土中，机亦时矣，王公等以为何如？
现代文：如果不向南征伐，就当移都于此，光被中原，机会也是时运，王公大人们你们以为如何？
English: If you don't go to the south, you should move the capital here. The light is the Central Plains, and the opportunity is also the time. What do you think, princes and great men?

古文：议之所决，不得旋踵。欲迁者左，不欲者右。 
现代文：讨论的结果，再不得出尔反尔，同意迁都的靠左边站，不同意的往右站。 
English: As a result of the discussion, there is no turning back. Those who agree to move the capital should stand on the left, and those who disagree should stand on the right.

古文：安定王休等相率如右。
现代文：安定王元休等人纷纷站到右边去了。
English: Wang Yuanhui and others stood on the right side.

古文：南安王桢进曰： 夫愚者暗于成事，智者见于未萌。
现代文：前南安王元桢说： 大凡愚陋的人鼠目寸光，不明事体，机智的人有先见之明，察事于未萌之中。
English: The former King of Nan'an, Yuan Shao, said: The great and the stupid are short-sighted and do not understand things. The witty are far-sighted and see things before they happen.

古文：行至德者不议于俗，成大功者不谋于众，非常之人乃能非常之事。
现代文：施行大德的不听普通人的议论，成就大功的不让老百姓参与谋划，非常之人才能建就非常之事。
English: Great virtue is not to listen to ordinary people's arguments, great achievements are not to let ordinary people participate in the planning, and extraordinary people can build extraordinary things.

古文：廓神都以延王业，度土中以制帝京，周公启之于前，陛下行之于后，固其宜也。
现代文：开阔神都以延续帝王之业，在中土建造帝王之都，当年周公行之在前，如今陛下行之于后，所以这是很合适的事情。
English: It is fitting that the gods of expansion should have continued the emperor's work and built the imperial capital in the Middle-earth. In the past, Zhou Gong walked in front, but now, His Majesty walks behind.

古文：且天下至重，莫若皇居，人之所贵，宁如遗体？
现代文：况且天下至为重要的，莫如皇帝居室了，大凡体贵之人，岂能裸体而立？
English: Besides, the most important thing in the world is the emperor's bedroom. How can a great and noble man stand naked?

古文：请上安圣躬，下慰民望，光宅中原，辍彼南伐。
现代文：臣等请求皇上安顿好玉身贵体，下以慰百姓所望，光被中原，停止征南。
English: The courtiers requested the emperor to settle down well, to comfort the people's hopes, and to stop the conquest of the south.

古文：此臣等愿言，苍生幸甚。 
现代文：这是为臣想要说的，苍生百姓所希望的好事。 
English: This is what the minister wants to say, the good things that ordinary people hope for.

古文：群臣咸唱 万岁 。
现代文：群臣都口唱 万岁 。
English: The courtiers were all singing "Hooray."

古文：高祖初谋南迁，恐众心恋旧，乃示为大举，因以协定群情，外名南伐，其实迁也。
现代文：魏高祖刚开始谋划南迁都城的时候，担心群臣心恋旧地，于是采取了南征的大行动，以此来压定群臣之情，外面叫南伐，其实是迁都。
English: When Emperor Gaozhu of the Wei Dynasty began to plan to move the capital to the south, he was worried that the courtiers would fall in love with the old country, so he took the big action of the Southern Expedition to suppress the feelings of the courtiers. It was called the Southern Expedition, but it was actually the relocation of the capital.

古文：旧人怀土，多所不愿，内惮南征，无敢言者，于是定都洛阳。
现代文：旧都之人怀恋故土，大多不愿南迁，但是担心帝王南征，没人敢发牢骚，于是魏高祖定都洛阳。
English: The people of the old capital are nostalgic for their homeland, most of them do not want to move to the south, but they are worried about the emperor's Southern Expedition, and no one dares to complain, so Wei Gao Zu set Luoyang as the capital.

古文：冲言于高祖曰： 陛下方修周公之制，定鼎成周。
现代文：李冲对魏高祖说： 陛下正仿照周公当年典制，定都洛阳。
English: Li Chong said to Wei Gaozu, "Your majesty is following Zhou Gong's system of the year and making Luoyang the capital.

古文：然营建六寝，不可游驾待就；兴筑城郛，难以马上营讫。
现代文：然而营建六宫，不能即刻而就；兴筑城墙，难以马上营讫。
English: However, the construction of the Sixth Palace cannot be done immediately; the construction of the city wall is difficult to start immediately.

古文：愿暂还北都，令臣下经造，功成事讫，然后备文物之章，和玉銮之响，巡时南徙，轨仪土中。 
现代文：臣请陛下暂还北都，让臣下经造，功成事讫，然后备文物之章，和玉銮之响，择时南迁，定都此中。 
English: The minister asked His Majesty to temporarily return to the northern capital, let his subordinates work and achieve success, then prepare the chapter of cultural relics, and the sound of the gongs, choose the time to move south, and set the capital here.

古文：高祖曰： 朕将巡省方岳，至鄴小停，春始便还未宜。 遂不归北。
现代文：高祖说： 朕准备巡察各地，到邺城小停，到了春天就回来，那时再不回去了。 
English: Gao Zu said: I am ready to inspect all over the country, go to Shicheng small stop, come back in the spring, and then I will not go back.

古文：寻以冲为镇南将军，侍中、少傅如故，委以营构之任。
现代文：不久任命李冲为镇南将军，侍中、少傅等职照旧，委他以营造新都的重任。
English: Soon, he appointed Li Chong as the general of Zhenan, and appointed him to the important task of building the new capital.

古文：改封阳平郡开国侯，邑户如先。
现代文：改封阳平郡开国侯，所封邑户如故。
English: Yangpyeong County was renamed Yangpyeong County to open the country, and the fiefs of the villages remained the same.

古文：车驾南伐，以冲兼左仆射，留守洛阳。
现代文：皇帝车驾南伐，让李冲兼任左仆射，留守洛阳。
English: The emperor drove the car to the south, so that Li Chong also served as a left-handed archer, and stayed in Luoyang.

古文：车驾渡淮，别诏安南大将军元英、平南将军刘藻讨汉中，召雍泾岐三州兵六千人拟戍南郑，克城则遣。
现代文：车驾渡淮河，另诏安南大将军元英、平南将军刘藻讨伐汉中，命令雍、泾、岐三州兵马六千人准备戍守南郑，一旦城池被攻下，立即派遣。
English: The car drove across the Huaihe River, and in addition, Annan ordered six thousand soldiers and horses from the three states of Yong, Min and Qi to prepare to guard Nan Zheng, once the city was captured, immediately dispatched.

古文：冲表谏曰： 秦州险厄，地接羌夷，自西师出后，饷援连续，加氐胡叛逆，所在奔命，运粮擐甲，迄兹未已。
现代文：李冲上表谏说： 秦州地理险厄，位置接近羌夷，自从征西部队出发之后，粮饷支援连续不断，加上氐、胡人叛逆朝廷，所在奔命，运粮拥甲，以防不测，至今仍然如此。
English: Li Chong said on the podium: Qinzhou's geography is precarious, its location is close to Zhaiyi. Since the departure of the Western Expeditionary Force, grain and grain support has been continuous. Coupled with the rebellion of the Qin and Hu people against the imperial court, the region is running for its life, transporting grain and grain to prevent accidents, and this is still the case.

古文：今复豫差戍卒，悬拟山外，虽加优复，恐犹惊骇，脱终攻不克，徒动民情，连胡结夷，事或难测。
现代文：今又预遣守城士兵，孤单单派到山外，虽然给他们优厚的待遇，臣仍担心他们会害怕。假如最终攻不下南郑，那就会扰动民众，假如他们连结胡夷，事情结果就难以预测了。
English: Now they have sent soldiers to defend the city in advance, and they have sent them alone outside the mountains. Although they have given them generous treatment, the minister is still worried that they will be afraid. If they can't finally conquer Nan Zheng, it will disturb the people. If they link up with the Hui, the outcome of the matter will be unpredictable.

古文：辄依旨密下刺史，待军克郑城，然后差遣，如臣愚见，犹谓未足。
现代文：为臣今又要依旨密令刺史，待军队攻克郑城，然后差遣守军，依为臣愚见，这个办法欠妥。
English: The vassal now wants to make history according to the secret order, wait for the army to conquer Zhengcheng, and then send the defending army, according to the foolishness of the vassal, this method is not appropriate.

古文：何者？
现代文：为什么呢？
English: Why is that?

古文：西道险厄，单径千里。今欲深戍绝界之外，孤据群贼之口，敌攻不可卒援，食尽不可运粮。
现代文：西方道路险恶，往往羊肠小道，绵延千里，而今想深戍绝界之外，孤据群贼之中，敌人进攻不能马上援救，粮食完了不可立即接济。
English: The western road is treacherous, often a sheep's gut path, stretching for thousands of miles, but now I want to go deep beyond the absolute boundary, alone among the thieves, the enemy attack can not be immediately rescued, the grain is finished can not immediately help.

古文：古人有言： 虽鞭之长，不及马腹 ，南郑于国，实为马腹也。
现代文：古人有言： 虽鞭之长，不及马腹 ，南郑对于我魏，就是马腹。
English: The ancients said: Although the whip is long, it is not as long as the horse's belly, Nan Zheng for me Wei, is the horse's belly.

古文：且昔人攻伐，或城降而不取；仁君用师，或抚民而遗地。
现代文：况且过去的人攻伐，或有城降而不获取；仁君用兵，或有抚慰其民而遗其地。
English: Moreover, people in the past attacked, or the city fell without gaining it; benevolent ruler used soldiers, or comforted his people and left his land.

古文：且王者之举，情在拯民；夷寇所守，意在惜地。
现代文：而且王者的举措，情在拯救百姓；夷寇所守，意在爱惜土地。
English: Moreover, the king's measures are aimed at saving the people; the protection of the barbarians is intended to cherish the land.

古文：校之二义，德有浅深。
现代文：比较二者意旨，德行有其深浅。
English: Comparing the intention of the two, virtue has its depth.

古文：惠声已远，何遽于一城哉？
现代文：如果君主声誉远播，何止是一城一地的得失？
English: If the reputation of the monarch spreads far and wide, what is the gain or loss of more than one city and one place?

古文：且魏境所掩，九州过八，民人所臣，十分而九。
现代文：而且魏境所领，九州过八，所统臣民，十分有九。
English: Moreover, there are nine states ruled by the Wei dynasty, including Kyushu, which is more than eight.

古文：所未民者，惟漠北之与江外耳。
现代文：所未为我民者，只是漠北与江外而已。
English: Those who are not our people are only from the north of the desert and outside the river.

古文：羁之在近，岂急急于今日也？
现代文：南郑近在咫尺，何需急急忙忙今天就要解决问题呢？
English: Nan Zheng is so close, why do you need to hurry up and solve the problem today?

古文：宜待大开疆宇，广拔城聚，多积资粮，食足支敌，然后置邦树将，为吞并之举。
现代文：臣认为应待我魏大开疆宇、广拔城池，多积资粮，足以对付敌人，然后再行置邦树将，开始并吞之举。
English: The minister thought that it was necessary to wait for the Wei Dynasty to open up the world, expand the city, and accumulate more resources and grain, enough to deal with the enemy, and then set up the national tree, and begin the annexation.

古文：今钟离、寿阳，密迩未拔；诸城、新野，跬步弗降。
现代文：而今钟离、寿阳，近在眼前却未拔除；赭城、新野，一步之遥却未降归。
English: But Imajuku and Shouyang are close at hand, but have not been uprooted; Shicheng and Niiro are a step away, but have not returned.

古文：所克者舍之而不取，所降者抚之而旋戮。
现代文：攻克的城池舍弃而不取，投降的士卒抚慰之后旋即被杀戮。
English: The conquered city was given up and not taken, the surrendering soldiers were immediately killed after being comforted.

古文：东道既未可以近力守，西蕃宁可以远兵固？
现代文：东道既不能因近而力守，西蕃怎能因遥远而使兵固？
English: If the host country cannot defend itself because it is close by, how can Xidi fortify itself because it is far away?

古文：若果欲置者，臣恐终以资敌也。
现代文：如真要设置，为臣担心这最终是帮助了敌人。
English: If it is necessary to set up troops to guard Nan Zheng, I think that it will eventually be broken by the enemy, and the soldiers will be captured. Will this not become the financing of the enemy?

古文：又今建都土中，地接寇壤，方须大收死士，平荡江会。
现代文：又加上现在在中原建都，地接敌寇疆城，正需大收勇士，平荡长江以南。
English: In addition, the capital is now being built in the Central Plains, and the city, which is adjacent to the enemy's enclave, is in need of a large number of warriors, and is floating south of the Yangtze River.

古文：轻遣单寡，弃令陷没，恐后举之日，众以留守致惧，求其死效，未易可获。
现代文：而轻率派遣单寡兵力，攻守西方孤城，使其陷没敌手，臣担心以后采取行动之日，大家以留守为难，不愿前往，陛下您要求其将士效死朝廷，也就不易做到了。
English: On the other hand, he rashly dispatched a single troop to attack and defend a lone city in the west, causing it to fall into the enemy's hands. The vassal was worried about the day of action in the future, and everyone was worried about staying behind and did not want to go. Your Majesty, you asked them to die for the imperial court, which was not easy to do.

古文：推此而论，不戍为上。 
现代文：由此而论，不戍为上策。 
English: According to the above-mentioned circumstances, I believe that the best policy is not to send soldiers to guard South Zheng.

古文：高祖从之。
现代文：高祖接纳了他的意见。
English: Gaozu listened to him.

古文：车驾还都，引见冲等，谓之曰： 本所以多置官者，虑有令仆暗弱，百事稽壅。
现代文：皇帝车驾还都，引见李冲等人，对他们说： 朕本想多设官员，考虑到如有人暗弱不明，则政事壅滞。
English: The emperor drove back to the capital, introduced Li Chong and others, and said to them: I originally wanted to set up more officials, considering that if someone is weak and unclear, then political affairs will be stagnant.

古文：若明独聪专，则权势大并。
现代文：如果那些人聪明独出，则权势又会很集中。
English: If those people are clever and unique, then power will be concentrated.

古文：今朕虽不得为聪明，又不为劣暗，卿等不为大贤，亦不为大恶。
现代文：而今朕虽然说不上是大聪明，也不是愚蠢之人，卿等不叫做大贤之人，但也不是大恶之辈。
English: And now, although I cannot be said to be a very clever person, nor a stupid person, nor can I be called a great man, but I am not a great evil.

古文：且可一两年许，少置官司。 
现代文：所以一两年内，朕想少置些官衙。 
English: Therefore, within a year or two, I would like to reduce the number of officials.

古文：高祖自鄴还京，泛舟洪池，乃从容谓冲曰： 朕欲从此通渠于洛，南伐之日，何容不从此入洛，从洛入河，从河入汴，从汴入清，以至于淮？
现代文：魏高祖自邺城还京，泛舟洪池，于是从容对李冲说： 朕想从这里把渠道修到洛阳，南伐的时候，何不从这里到洛阳，从洛阳进入黄河，从黄河进入汴河，从汴河入清河，而到达淮河？
English: When Wei Gao Zu returned to Beijing from Lushan, he rafted across the Hongchi River, so he calmly said to Li Chong: I want to build a channel from here to Luoyang. During the Southern Expedition, why not from here to Luoyang, from Luoyang into the Yellow River, from the Yellow River into the Fen River, from the Fen River into the Qing River, and reach the Huai River?

古文：下船而战，犹开户而斗，此乃军国之大计。
现代文：下船而战，就如出门而斗一样方便，这是军国大计。
English: It is just as convenient to get off the ship and fight as it is to go out and fight. This is the grand strategy of the military state.

古文：今沟渠若须二万人以下、六十日有成者，宜以渐修之。 
现代文：而今沟渠挖建如须二万人以下，六十天就可挖成的话，应该逐渐修渠以备将来之用。 
English: However, if a ditch requires less than 20,000 people to dig and can be dug in 60 days, the ditch should be gradually repaired for future use.

古文：冲对曰： 若尔，便是士无远涉之劳，战有兼人之力。 
现代文：李冲回答说： 如像这样，便是士兵没有远涉的劳苦，战斗起来就有过人的力量了。 
English: Li Chong replied, "If it is like this, it means that soldiers do not have to go far to work hard, and when they fight, they have superhuman strength.

古文：迁尚书仆射，仍领少傅。
现代文：迁任尚书仆射，仍领少傅。
English: He was transferred to the post of Shangshu's manservant, but still kept the title of Shao Fu.

古文：改封清渊县开国侯，邑户如前。
现代文：改封清渊县开国侯，邑户不变。
English: Qingyuan County will be renamed Qingyuan County, and the county seat will remain unchanged.

古文：及太子恂废，冲罢少傅。
现代文：等到太子元恂被废，李冲也被罢免少傅官职。
English: When the crown prince, Yuan Shao, was deposed, Li Chong was also removed from his position as a minor official.

古文：高祖引见公卿于清徽堂，高祖曰： 圣人之大宝，惟位与功，是以功成作乐，治定制礼。
现代文：魏高祖在清徽堂引见公卿大臣，高祖说： 圣人的大宝物，只是官位与功劳，所以功成作乐，国安制礼。
English: In Qinghui Hall, Wei Gao Zu introduced the noblemen and ministers. Gao Zu said: The great treasure of a saint is only the official rank and merit, so the achievement is to make music and the country is safe.

古文：今徙极中天，创居嵩洛，虽大构未成，要自条纪略举。
现代文：而今移宫中土，创居嵩、洛，虽然是大构未成，但大体建制略略具体了。
English: However, now that the center of the palace has been moved, Chuang Ju Song and Luo have been created, although the overall structure has not been completed, the overall structure is slightly more specific.

古文：但南有未宾之竖，兼凶蛮密迩，朕夙夜怅惋，良在于兹。
现代文：但是南方有被未征服的逆竖，加上凶蛮近在眼前，朕日夜思虑叹惜，只是为此。
English: However, there is an unconquered antipodes in the south, and the ferocity is right in front of my eyes. I think and lament day and night, just for this reason.

古文：取南之计决矣，朕行之谋必矣。
现代文：攻取南方的计策已经决定，朕行动的计划确定了。
English: The strategy for capturing the south has been decided, and our plan of action has been determined.

古文：若依近代也，则天子下帷深宫之内；准上古也，则有亲行，祚延七百。
现代文：如依近代惯例，则天子下帷处深宫之内；准之上古，则有为帝亲行，福延七百年的事实。
English: According to the modern practice, the curtain of the heavenly son is deep inside the palace; according to the ancients, there is the fact that it is the emperor's family line, extending for seven hundred years.

古文：魏晋不征，旋踵而殒，祚之修短，在德不在征。
现代文：魏、晋当年不征，所以旋即灭亡，福的长短，在德行而不在征伐。
English: Wei and Jin did not invade that year, so they immediately perished. The length of the blessing is in the virtue and not in the conquest.

古文：今但以行期未知早晚。
现代文：今天朕只是不知南征行期的早晚。
English: Today, I just don't know when the Southern Expedition will begin.

古文：知几其神乎，朕既非神，焉能知也。
现代文：知道此的难道是神灵吗，朕既不是神灵，哪里知道呢。
English: Is it a god that knows this? Since I am not a god, how can I know?

古文：而顷来阴阳卜术之士，咸劝朕今征必克。
现代文：而一向以来，阴阳卜算的人，都劝朕现在出征必定克敌。
English: But ever since, people who believe in yin and yang have been urging me to go to war now to defeat the enemy.

古文：此既家国大事，宜共君臣各尽所见，不得以朕先言，便致依违，退有同异。 
现代文：这既是国家大事，应该是君臣各抒所见，不能因为朕先有说法，你们便只是依从，不发表不同看法了。 
English: This is a matter of national importance, and it should be seen by every ruler and subject. It cannot be that because I say something first, you just follow and do not express different opinions.

古文：冲对曰： 夫征战之法，先之人事，然后卜筮。今卜筮虽吉，犹恐人事未备。
现代文：李冲回答说： 大夫征战的常规，先察人事，然后看于卜筮的征兆，而今卜筮结果虽然吉利，但人事仍未完备。
English: Li Chong replied, "It is the general rule for doctors to go to war. First, they check the personnel, and then they look at the signs of Bo Xun. Now, although the results of Bo Xun are auspicious, the personnel is still incomplete.

古文：今年秋稔，有损常实，又京师始迁，众业未定，加之征战，以为未可。
现代文：今年秋谷收成不如常年，又加上京师始迁，众业未定，再加上征战，臣以为不可。
English: This year's harvest in Akitani was not as good as in previous years, and with the relocation of the capital's teachers beginning and many industries undecided, as well as conscription, the vassal thought it was impossible.

古文：宜至来秋。 
现代文：应该等到来年。 
English: It should wait until next year.

古文：高祖曰： 仆射之言，非为不合。
现代文：高祖说： 仆射之言，不是没有道理。
English: Gao Zu said, "It's not without reason that you say that you're a servant.

古文：朕意之所虑，乃有社稷之忧。
现代文：朕的想法，是为国家社稷担忧。
English: My thoughts are of concern to the national community.

古文：然咫尺寇戎，无宜自安，理须如此。
现代文：像南方这样敌人近在咫尺，我们便无法自安，而今行动，理应如此。
English: With a foe like the South so close at hand, we cannot be complacent, and we must act now.

古文：仆射言人事未从，亦不必如此。
现代文：仆射说人事未备，也不见得是这样。
English: It doesn't have to be like this.

古文：朕去十七年，拥二十万众，行不出畿甸，此人事之盛，而非天时。
现代文：朕去十七年，拥兵二十万，行不出京畿，这人事极盛，却与天时相违。
English: In the seventeenth year, with two hundred thousand soldiers, I could not march to Gyeonggi, which was very popular, but it was contrary to the times.

古文：往年乘机，天时乃可，而阙人事，又致不捷。
现代文：往年行动，天时合适，而缺人事，又致不捷。
English: In previous years, when the time was right, action was taken, but when there was a shortage of personnel, action was not swift.

古文：若待人事备，复非天时，若之何？
现代文：如等待人事齐备，又非天时，那怎么办？
English: What if it is not the right time to wait until all personnel are ready?

古文：如仆射之言，便终无征理。
现代文：像仆射这种说法，就会总也没有征讨的道理了。
English: With such an argument, there will always be no reason to collect.

古文：朕若秋行无克捷，三君子并付司寇。
现代文：朕此番秋行，如不能克敌制胜，你们三君子一起把朕交给司寇处理。
English: This autumn trip, if I can't defeat the enemy and win, you three gentlemen will hand me over to Scor together.

古文：不可不人尽其心。 
现代文：不可不人尽其心。 
English: One must do one's best.

古文：罢议而出。
现代文：罢议而去。
English: He dismissed the discussion and left.

古文：后世宗为太子，高祖宴于清徽堂。
现代文：后来魏世宗立为太子，高祖在清徽堂设宴。
English: Later, Wei Shizong became the crown prince, and Gao Zu held a banquet in Qinghui Hall.

古文：高祖曰： 皇储所以纂历三才，光昭七祖，斯乃亿兆咸悦，天人同泰，故延卿就此一宴，以暢忻情。 
现代文：高祖说： 皇储身兼三才，光昭七祖，深得众望，天人同安，所以招延大家在此就宴，以畅胸怀。 
English: Gao Zu said: The crown prince is only three years old, and he is a brilliant seventh ancestor. He has won great popularity, and everyone is at peace. Therefore, we invite everyone to have a banquet here to refresh their minds.

古文：高祖又曰： 天地之道，一盈一虚，岂有常泰。
现代文：高祖又说： 天地之道，一盈一虚，哪有经常安泰的。
English: Gao Zu also said: The way of heaven and earth, one gain and one loss, which is always safe.

古文：天道犹尔，况人事乎？
现代文：天道犹且如此，何况人事呢？
English: This is the way of heaven, how much more the way of man?

古文：故有升有黜，自古而然。
现代文：所以凡事都有升有降，自古而来都是如此。
English: Therefore, everything has its ups and downs, and this has been the case since ancient times.

古文：悼往欣今，良用深叹。 
现代文：追昔思今，的确颇值感慨。 
English: Tracing the past and thinking about the present is indeed a worthwhile emotion.

古文：冲对曰： 东晖承储，苍生咸幸。
现代文：李冲回答说： 太子承储，苍生咸幸。
English: Li Chong replied: "It is fortunate to be born a prince.

古文：但臣前忝师傅，弗能弼谐，仰惭天日，慈造宽含，得预此宴，庆愧交深。 
现代文：但是为臣以前忝居师傅，不能辅弼谐合，有愧苍天白日，蒙君宽含，能够参加此次宴会，幸福与惭愧交相迭至。 
English: However, as a vassal of a former concubine, I can't help but be ashamed, and I am humbled to be able to participate in this banquet. Happiness and shame overlap.

古文：高祖曰： 朕尚不能革其昏，师傅何劳愧谢也。 
现代文：高祖说： 朕尚且不能及时革除昏弊，师傅又何必如此不安呢？ 
English: Gao Zu said: I still can't get rid of the dizziness in time, why should the master be so anxious?

古文：后尚书疑元拔、穆泰罪事，冲奏曰： 前彭城镇将元拔与穆泰同逆，养子降寿宜从拔罪。
现代文：后来尚书怀疑元拔、穆泰等犯有罪行，李冲启奏说： 前彭城镇将与穆泰同时叛逆，养子降寿应该随拔定罪。
English: Later, Shangshu suspected that Yuanbai and Mutai were guilty of crimes, and Li Chongqi said: The former Peng Town will rebel at the same time as Mutai, and the adopted son should be convicted along with Yuanbai.

古文：而太尉、咸阳王禧等，以为律文养子而为罪，父及兄弟不知情者不坐。
现代文：而太尉、咸阳王元禧等人，认为法律条文养子而为罪，父及兄弟不知情的不被连坐。
English: However, Taifu, Xianyang Wang Yuanxi and others believe that it is a crime to adopt a child according to the provisions of the law, and the father and brothers will not be incarcerated without their knowledge.

古文：谨审律意，以养子于父非天性，于兄弟非同气，敦薄既差，故刑典有降；是以养子虽为罪，而父兄不预。
现代文：谨慎审察律书意旨，因养子对于其父来说没有血缘关系，于兄弟也不是一气相通，亲缘厚薄既有差别，所以刑典量罪也有区分，所以养子虽然有罪，而父兄不在牵连之列。
English: Carefully examine the intention of the law, because the adopted son is not related by blood to his father, and he is not the same as his brother. There is a difference in the thickness of the relationship, so there is a distinction in the sentencing of the criminal code. Therefore, although the adopted son is guilty, the father and brother are not involved.

古文：然父兄为罪，养子不知谋，易地均情，岂独从戮乎？
现代文：这样父兄犯罪，养子不知其谋，易地均情，也和前面所说的一样，哪能草草就要被株连呢？
English: In this way, the father and brother commit crimes, the adopted son does not know what to do, the exchange of land is even, and it is the same as what was said earlier. How can it be hastily connected?

古文：理固不然。
现代文：道理固然不是这样。
English: Of course, this is not the case.

古文：臣以为：依据律文，不追戮于所生，则从坐于所养，明矣。
现代文：臣以为：依据律文，不追戮于所生，也不从坐于所养，道理很明确了。
English: The vassal thought: According to the text of the law, it is not necessary to pursue what one was born with, nor to depend on what one was raised with. The reason is very clear.

古文：又律惟言父不从子，不称子不从父，当是优尊厉卑之义。
现代文：又律文只说父亲不被儿子所牵连，而不说子不被其父牵连，这应当是优尊厉卑的意思。
English: Moreover, the text of the law only says that the father is not implicated by the son, but does not say that the son is not implicated by his father, which should be the meaning of superiority and inferiority.

古文：臣禧等以为： 律虽不正见，互文起制，于乞也举父之罪，于养也见子坐，是为互起。
现代文：臣元禧等认为： 律文中虽然没有正面见到此类条文，但互起见制，于给也举父之罪，于养也见子牵连，这就叫做互起。
English: Subjects such as Yuan Xi believed that: Although there are no positive provisions of this kind in the law, it is called reciprocity. In giving, the father's sin is also mentioned, and in raising, the son is also implicated.

古文：互起两明，无罪必矣。
现代文：互起两明，无罪是必定的。
English: Where there is doubt, innocence is certain.

古文：若以嫡继，养与生同，则父子宜均，只明不坐。
现代文：如果以继养与亲生的相同，则父子受牵连都应相同，只明不坐。
English: If the succession is the same as that of the biological child, then the father and son should be involved in the same way, but they should not sit together.

古文：且继养之注云：若有别制，不同此律。
现代文：而且继养的条文注说： 如有别制，不同此律。 
English: Moreover, the note to the provisions on succession says: If there is a different system, this law is different.

古文：又令文云：诸有封爵，若无亲子，及其身卒，虽有养继，国除不袭。
现代文：又令文说： 诸官有封爵，如没有亲生儿子，虽然有抱养过继的儿子，也不袭爵。
English: The document also said: All officials are entitled to knighthood. If there is no natural son, although there is an adopted son, he will not inherit a knighthood.

古文：是为有福不及己，有罪便预坐。
现代文：这叫做有福不及己，有罪便连坐。
English: It's called having the bad luck to be unlucky and the bad luck to be unlucky.

古文：均事等情，律令之意，便相矛盾。
现代文：均事等情，律令的意思，就互相矛盾。
English: On the other hand, the meaning of the ritsuryo, which means "law and order," contradicts each other.

古文：伏度律旨，必不然也。 
现代文：揣度法律意旨，必然不是这样。 
English: According to the intention of the law, this is not necessarily the case.

古文：臣冲以为：指例条寻，罪在无疑，准令语情，颇亦同式。 
现代文：臣李冲以为：按例寻条，有罪无疑，体味语情，颇亦同式。 
English: Minister Li Chong thought: according to the case, there is no doubt of guilt, and the taste and sentiment are quite the same.

古文：诏曰： 仆射之议，据律明矣；太尉等论，于典矫也。
现代文：诏书说： 仆射议论，据律明矣；太尉等论，于典矫枉。
English: The edict said: "If you argue with your subordinates, the rules are clear; if you argue with your lieutenants, the rules are unfair."

古文：养所以从戮者，缘其已免所生，故不得复甄于所养。
现代文：养子随父从戮的，按律已经免其生子，所以也不得独加罪于养子。
English: An adopted son who has been with his father since birth is exempt from the law, so he cannot be held solely responsible for his adopted son.

古文：此独何福，长处吞舟？
现代文：此独何福，长处吞舟？
English: What's the benefit of being alone, and what's the advantage of being alone?

古文：于国所以不袭者，重列爵，特立制，因天之所绝，推而除之耳，岂复报对刑赏？
现代文：对于国家来说有不许继承爵位的做法，是因为看重列爵的缘故，特为此立制，因天之所绝，推而除之罢了，哪能够再反过来报以刑赏？
English: As far as the state is concerned, the practice of not allowing succession to a knighthood is due to the importance attached to knighthoods. A special system was set up for this purpose. Since it is forbidden by heaven, it can only be removed. How can it be punished in turn?

古文：于斯则应死，可特原之。 
现代文：就此而论应该连坐而死的，可以特别原谅其不死。 
English: For this reason, it can be said that it should die together, and it can be particularly forgiven for not dying.

古文：冲机敏有巧思。北京明堂、圆丘、太庙，及洛都初基，安处郊兆，新起堂寝，皆资于冲。
现代文：李冲生性机敏，常有巧思，北边京都的明堂、园丘、太庙，以及洛阳初基，安处郊兆，新起的宫室，都仗力于他。
English: Li Chongsheng is quick-witted and often has ingenious ideas. The Myeongdong, garden hills, and ancient temples in northern Kyoto, as well as the beginning of Luoyang, the suburbs of Anjuan, and the newly built palace, all rely on him.

古文：勤志强力，孜孜无怠，旦理文簿，兼营匠制，几案盈积，剞劂在手，终不劳厌也。
现代文：他勤勉志刚，孜孜无怠，旦理公务，兼营建造，文案上堆满文牍，手中常拿刻刀，始终不觉劳累。
English: He is a diligent and tireless worker. He is in charge of public affairs and construction at the same time. He has piles of papers on his desk and often has a carving knife in his hand. He never feels tired.

古文：然显贵门族，务益六姻，兄弟子侄，皆有爵官，一家岁禄，万匹有余；是其亲者，虽复痴聋，无不超越官次。
现代文：这样的位置使他一门尽贵，他务求照顾六姻亲戚，兄弟子侄，都有官爵，一家人每年的俸禄，都在万匹以上，只要是他的亲戚，即使是痴聋的残疾人，也无不做了大官。
English: Such a position made him the most valuable of all. He tried to take care of his six relatives by marriage, brothers, sons and nephews, all of whom were court nobles. The family's annual salary was more than 10,000 horses. As long as they were his relatives, even if they were deaf-mutes or handicapped, they all became high-ranking officials.

古文：时论亦以此少之。
现代文：当时舆论也因此而对他颇有微词。
English: At the time, public opinion was also critical of him for this reason.

古文：年才四十，而鬓须班白，姿貌丰美，未有衰状。
现代文：李冲刚到四十，但他鬓发便已斑白，容姿相貌丰岸伟美，看不到一点衰老的迹象。
English: Li Chong has just turned forty, but his hair has already turned white, his appearance is magnificent, and there is no sign of aging.

古文：李彪之入京也，孤微寡援，而自立不群，以冲好士，倾心宗附。
现代文：李彪入京之后，孤身一人，没有可凭仗的人，而他又自立不群，觉得李冲喜欢交结人，便倾心攀附。
English: After Li Biao entered Beijing, he was all alone, without anyone to rely on, and he was not self-reliant. He felt that Li Chong liked to make friends, so he clung to him with all his heart.

古文：冲亦重其器学，礼而纳焉，每言之于高祖，公私共相援益。
现代文：李冲也十分重视他的才器学识，礼貌地收容了他，经常在高祖面前提起他，公私场合都忘不了出力相助。
English: Li Chong also attached great importance to his talent and knowledge, politely received him, often mentioned him in front of Gao Zu, and could not forget to provide assistance in public and private occasions.

古文：及彪为中尉兼尚书，为高祖知待，便谓非复藉冲，而更相轻背，惟公坐敛袂而已，无复宗敬之意也。
现代文：等到李彪任中尉，兼任尚书，为高祖所厚待，便声称他并不是凭借李冲才上来的，而且对他很不礼貌，只是在公共场合敛袖作个揖而已，不再对他表示尊敬了。
English: When Li Biao was appointed lieutenant, concurrently serving as Shangshu, and was treated well by Gao Zu, he claimed that he did not come up with the help of Li Chong, and that he was very impolite to him, but only made a fuss in public, and no longer showed respect to him.

古文：冲颇衔之。
现代文：李冲心中很不痛快。
English: Li Chong was very unhappy.

古文：后高祖南征，冲与吏部尚书、任城王澄并以彪倨傲无礼，遂禁止之。
现代文：后来魏高祖南征，李冲与吏部尚书、任城王元澄二人以李彪傲慢无礼的罪名，把他囚禁起来。
English: Later, Wei Gao, the founder of the Southern Expedition, Li Chong, and two officials, Shang Shu and Rencheng Wang Yuancheng, imprisoned Li Biao on charges of arrogance and rudeness.

古文：奏其罪状，冲手自作，家人不知，辞甚激切，因以自劾。
现代文：上表列举李彪的罪状，李冲亲自制作，家人一点也不知道，表奏措词激切，引咎自责。
English: The above list of Li Biao's crimes was made by Li Chong himself, without his family's knowledge. The wording of the list is fierce and self-incriminating.

古文：高祖览其表，叹怅者久之，既而曰： 道固可谓溢也，仆射亦为满矣。 
现代文：高祖看了他的表奏，叹惜怅惘良久，接着说： 道固可以说骄纵横溢，仆射也称得上意气自满。 
English: Gaozhu looked at his performance, sighed for a long time, and then said, "Dogu can be said to be arrogant, and Pusha can be said to be self-satisfied.

古文：冲时震怒，数数责彪前后愆悖，瞋目大呼，投折几案。
现代文：李冲听说，当时便勃然大怒，不断数落李彪前后的过失罪行，怒目圆睁，放声大叫，砸折书案。
English: Li Chong heard that at that time, he flew into a rage, constantly counted the negligent crimes before and after Li Biao, was furious, shouted loudly, and smashed the book case.

古文：尽收御史，皆泥首面缚，詈辱肆口。
现代文：尽数关起御史，把他们全都以泥涂首，绑赴到皇帝面前，口出污言，泼口大骂。
English: He arrested as many of them as he could, smeared their heads with mud, tied them all up and brought them before the emperor, where they spoke foul language and hurled abuse.

古文：冲素性温柔，而一旦暴恚，遂发病荒悸，言语乱错，犹扼腕叫詈，称李彪小人。
现代文：李冲一向性情温和柔顺，而一旦暴怒，便爆发疾病，神情惊悸，言语错乱，而且捋袖拍案，大骂李彪是小人。
English: Li Chong had always been gentle and docile, but once he was enraged, he broke out in illness, looked panicked, spoke incoherently, and lashed out, shouting that Li Biao was a villain.

古文：医药所不能疗，或谓肝藏伤裂。
现代文：服汤吃药，也不能救治他的病，有人说他的肝脏受到伤害，已损坏破裂。
English: Taking medicine and soup can't cure his illness. Some people say that his liver has been damaged and ruptured.

古文：旬有余日而卒，时年四十九。
现代文：十多天后便死了，当时才四十九岁。
English: He died more than ten days later, at the age of forty-nine.

古文：高祖为举哀于悬瓠，发声悲泣，不能自胜。
现代文：魏高祖为他在悬瓠举哀，失声痛哭，悲不自胜。
English: Wei Gaozu mourned for him on the gallows, wept bitterly, and was inconsolable.

古文：诏曰： 冲贞和资性，德义树身，训业自家，道素形国。
现代文：下诏曰： 李冲贞和资性，德义树身，训导自家，尽忠于国。
English: The following edict said: Li Chongzhen is a person of noble character, virtuous, self-disciplined, and loyal to the country.

古文：太和之始，朕在弱龄，早委机密，实康时务。鸿渐瀍洛，朝选开清，升冠端右，惟允出纳。
现代文：太和初年，朕未成年，早委军国机密，实在有功于国，后来，他官位渐高，参与选拔官员，进退升黜，全凭他一手操办。
English: In the first year of the Taihe era, I was a minor, I was a member of the Military and State Secrets Committee, and I really contributed to the country. Later, he was promoted to higher positions, participated in the selection of officials, and promoted and promoted, all of which were handled by him.

古文：忠肃柔明，足敷睿范，仁恭信惠，有结民心。
现代文：他忠诚自律，柔顺明达，足以称得上是睿智的典范，仁慈恭敬诚爱惠明的品质，经常受到民众的拥戴。
English: He is loyal and self-disciplined, gentle and wise, enough to be a model of wisdom, kind and respectful, sincere and loving, and is often loved by the people.

古文：可谓国之贤也，朝之望也。
现代文：他真可以称得上是国家的贤才，深受朝野看重。
English: He can truly be called a national genius and is held in high regard by the Emperor and Empress.

古文：方升宠秩，以旌功旧，奄致丧逝，悲痛于怀。
现代文：为此，朕刚刚把他提拔到较高的位置，以表彰他以前立下的功勋，没想到他竟早早就丧逝，朕岂能不悲痛于怀。
English: For this reason, I have just promoted him to a higher position in recognition of his previous achievements. I couldn't help but feel sad when I found out that he had passed away so early.

古文：既留勤应陟，兼良宿宜褒，可赠司空公，给东园秘器、朝服一具、衣一袭，赠钱三十万、布五百匹、蜡三百斤。 
现代文：既留勤应升，加过去宜奖，可赠他为司空公，赐予东园秘器、朝服一套、衣一套，赠钱三十万、布五百匹、蜡二百斤。 
English: Since he has remained diligent, he should be promoted, and in addition to the past award, he can be presented with a dragon, given the East Garden secret utensil, a set of morning dress, a set of clothes, and given 300,000 yuan, 500 pieces of cloth, and 200 pounds of wax.

古文：有司奏谥曰文穆。
现代文：有关部门奏请谥号为文穆。
English: The relevant departments requested that the nickname be changed to Wenmu.

古文：诏曰： 司空文穆公，德为时宗，勋简朕心，不幸徂逝，托坟邙岭，旋銮覆舟，躬睇茔域，悲仁恻旧，有恸朕衷。
现代文：在覆舟山下葬，坟墓邻近杜预坟冢，这是高祖本意。后来，皇帝车驾从邺城还归洛阳，路过李冲坟墓，身边的人告诉高祖，高祖卧病望坟，掩泣良久，下诏曰： 司空文穆公，德行为一时所宗，功劳深慰朕心。不幸去世，托坟邙岭，朕经过这里，凝望坟茔，悲其仁、思其旧，痛不自胜。
English: It was Gao Zu's intention to be buried at the foot of Fuzhou Mountain, with his grave near Du Yu Cemetery. Later, the emperor drove from Shicheng back to Luoyang and passed Li Chong's grave. The people around him told Gao Zu that Gao Zu had been lying ill and looking at the grave, hiding his tears for a long time, and issued the following edict: "Mr. Siku Wenmu, you have been virtuous for a while, and your achievements have deeply consoled my heart. Unfortunately, you passed away, and I passed by here, gazing at the grave, feeling sorry for you and thinking about your old age. I can't help

古文：可遣太牢之祭，以申吾怀。 
现代文：可备太牢祭奠，以宽释朕思念之情。 
English: We can prepare a memorial service to forgive and release our feelings of longing.

古文：及与留京百官相见，皆叙冲亡没之故，言及流涕。
现代文：等到高祖与留京的官员见面，大家都说起李冲去世的原因，纷纷流着眼泪。
English: When Gaozu met with the officials who stayed in Beijing, everyone shed tears as they talked about the reason for Li Chong's death.

古文：高祖得留台启，知冲患状，谓右卫宋弁曰： 仆射执我枢衡，总釐朝务，清俭居躬，知宠已久。
现代文：高祖得到官员们的启奏，知道李冲患病的原因，对左卫宋行说： 仆射掌我国家大机，总揽朝中事务，清俭尽职，恩宠已久。
English: Gaozu was inspired by the officials, knew the reason for Li Chong's illness, and said to Song Xing, the left guard: "You have been a great asset to our country. You have been in charge of the affairs of the DPRK and China, you have been frugal and dutiful, and you have been favored for a long time.

古文：朕以仁明忠雅，委以台司之寄，使我出境无后顾之忧，一朝忽有此患，朕甚怀怆慨。 
现代文：朕以其仁爱明达、忠诚儒雅，托付给他代管朝政，使我出境无后顾之忧，李冲忽然有这个病患，朕很是悲凉怆慨。 
English: I entrusted him to be in charge of the imperial government with my benevolence, wisdom, loyalty and sophistication, so that I could leave the country without any worries. Li Chong suddenly had this disease, and I was very sad.

古文：其相痛惜如此。
现代文：高祖是如此地痛惜李冲。
English: Gaozu felt so sorry for Li Chong.

古文：冲兄弟六人，四母所出，颇相忿阋。
现代文：李冲兄弟六人，分别为四母所生，兄弟之间，很有些矛盾隔阂。
English: There are six Li Chong brothers, born to four mothers, and there are some contradictions between the brothers.

古文：及冲之贵，封禄恩赐皆以共之，内外辑睦。
现代文：等到李冲显贵起来，封禄恩赐都与他们共享，大家变得和睦起来。
English: When Li Chongxian rose to prominence, the bounty was shared with them, and everyone became harmonious.

古文：父亡后同居二十余年，至洛乃别第宅，更相友爱，久无间然。
现代文：李冲父亲去世后兄弟们一起居住达二十年之久，到了洛阳才各建宅第，兄弟之间相互友爱，很久都没有矛盾发生。
English: After the death of Li Chong's father, the brothers lived together for twenty years. It was not until they arrived in Luoyang that they each built a house. The brothers loved each other, and there were no conflicts for a long time.

古文：皆冲之德也。
现代文：这都是因为李冲的德行所致。
English: This is all due to Li Chong's virtuous conduct.

古文：始冲之见私宠也，兄子韶恆有忧色，虑致倾败。
现代文：一开始李冲受到长兄偏爱，兄子李韶常有忧郁之情，担心会导致倾败。
English: At the beginning, Li Chong was favored by his eldest brother, and his elder brother Li Yao often felt depressed, fearing that it would lead to defeat.

古文：后荣名日显，稍乃自安。
现代文：后来他荣名日显一日，渐渐便安心下来。
English: Later, as his fame grew, he gradually felt more at ease.

古文：而冲明目当官，图为己任，自始迄终，无所避屈。
现代文：而李冲为官时起，图谋任用自己的人，自始至终，毫不隐讳。
English: But from the time Li Chong became an official, he made no secret of his intention to appoint his own people from start to finish.

古文：其体时推运，皆此类也。
现代文：他察时推运，都是跟这类事情一样。
English: He checks the time, it's the same with this kind of thing.

古文：子延寔等，语在《外戚传》。
现代文：儿子延实等人传，记在《外戚传》。
English: The biography of his son, Yenshi, and others is recorded in "The Biography of a Maternal Relative."

