古文：郭世通，会稽永兴人也。
现代文：郭世通是会稽永兴人。
English: Guo Shitong is the auditor Yongxing.

古文：年十四丧父，居丧殆不胜哀。
现代文：十四岁时丧父，服丧期间悲痛欲绝。
English: He lost his father at the age of fourteen and was overwhelmed with grief during the period of mourning.

古文：家贫，佣力以养继母。
现代文：家里穷，给人家帮工来养活继母。
English: The family was poor, and they had helpers to feed the stepmother.

古文：妇生一男，夫妻恐废侍养，乃垂泣瘗之。
现代文：他妻子生下一个男孩，夫妻俩怕因此无力供养继母，就流着泪把孩子活埋了。
English: His wife gave birth to a boy, and the couple, fearing that they would not be able to support their stepmother, buried the child alive in tears.

古文：母亡，负土成坟。
现代文：继母死后，他背土堆成坟墓。
English: After his stepmother's death, he was buried in a heap of earth.

古文：亲戚或共赙助，微有所受，葬毕，佣赁还先直。
现代文：有亲戚给他一些资助，他也多少收下一点儿，葬完母亲以后，便去替人作亻庸工先把债还了。
English: A relative gave him some financial support, and he accepted some of it. After burying his mother, he went to work as a labourer to pay off the debt.

古文：服除后，思慕终身如丧者，未尝释衣幍。
现代文：丧服期满后，思念母亲终身都像刚办丧事时一样，未脱过孝衣孝帽。
English: After the expiration of the mourning period, I miss my mother all my life as if I had just held a funeral, without taking off my filial piety.

古文：仁孝之风，行于乡党。邻村小大莫有呼其名者。
现代文：仁孝之风，影响了乡邻，邻村无论老少没有直呼其名的，都对他表示尊敬。
English: His benevolence and filial piety have influenced his neighbors in his hometown. All the people in the neighboring villages, regardless of whether they call him by his first name or not, respect him.

古文：尝与人共于山阴市货物，误得一千钱，当时不觉，分背方悟，追还本主。钱主惊叹，以半直与之，世通委之而去。
现代文：他曾和别人在山阴集市上做买卖，算错账多得了一千钱，当时没有察觉，分手以后才知道，于是赶紧追上那人还给他，那人惊叹不已，把一半送给他，世通把钱扔在地上就走。
English: He had been doing business with someone else at the Shanyin Bazaar, miscalculated and got an extra thousand dollars. He didn't realize it at the time, and only found out after they broke up. So he quickly caught up with the man and gave it back to him. The man was amazed and gave him half of it. Shitong threw the money on the ground and left.

古文：元嘉四年，大使巡行天下，散骑常侍袁愉表其淳行，文帝嘉之，敕榜表门闾，蠲其租调，改所居独枫里爲孝行焉。
现代文：元嘉四年，皇帝的使臣巡行天下，散骑常侍袁愉上报了他的美德，宋文帝表示嘉许，下诏在他家乡张贴文告表彰他，免除他的租调。把他住的地方独枫里改名为孝行。
English: In the fourth year of Yuan Jia, when the emperor's envoys toured the world, Yuan Yu, the imperial equerry, reported on his virtues. Emperor Song expressed his appreciation and issued an edict to post a message in his hometown to commend him and exempt him from the lease. He changed the name of the place where he lived to Dukfengli to Filial Piety.

古文：太守孟顗察孝廉，不就。
现代文：太守孟靑举荐他为孝廉，他没去应召。
English: The daimyō, Meng Xi, recommended him as a filial son, but he did not accept the call.

古文：子原平字长恭，又禀至行，养亲必以己力，佣赁以给供养。
现代文：郭世通的儿子郭原平，字长恭，也具有仁孝的品行，全靠自己的力量来赡养父母，给人家做工挣取饣善食。
English: Guo Yuanping, the son of Guo Shitong, also has a benevolent and filial character, relying entirely on his own strength to support his parents and earn good food for his family.

古文：性甚巧，每爲人作正，取散夫价。
现代文：性情谦虚，每为人做活儿，只收取打短工的工钱。
English: Modest by nature, he does odd jobs for people and only charges them for short-time work.

古文：主人设食，原平自以家贫，父母不办有肴味，唯飧盐饭而已。
现代文：主人供应饭食，原平因为自己家贫，父母都没有吃过好饭的缘故，就只吃些咸饭。
English: The host provided the meal, but because of his family's poverty and the fact that neither of his parents had ever eaten a good meal, Yuan Ping only ate some salty rice.

古文：若家或无食，则虚中竟日，义不独饱。
现代文：如果有时候家里断了顿儿，便自己在外边也空肚子一天，义不独饱。
English: If you sometimes have a bad day at home, you will also have an empty stomach outside for a day, and you will not be satisfied.

古文：须日暮作毕，受直归家，于里籴买，然后举爨。
现代文：必定等到傍晚收了工，领了工钱回去，在附近买了粮食以后，才生火做饭。
English: They had to wait until the evening, after they had finished work, collected their pay, and bought grain nearby, before they could start a fire to cook.

古文：父笃疾弥年，原平衣不解带，口不尝盐菜者，跨积寒暑，又未尝睡卧。
现代文：父亲病重一年，从冬到夏，原平衣不解带，不吃蔬菜，也从来没有躺下睡过觉。
English: My father was seriously ill for a year. From winter to summer, he did not take off his clothes, did not eat vegetables, and never lay down to sleep.

古文：父亡，哭踊恸绝，数日方苏。
现代文：父亲死后，蹦着脚哭昏过去，几天后才醒过来。
English: After her father died, she jumped to her feet and cried herself into a coma, only to wake up a few days later.

古文：以爲奉终之义，情礼自毕，茔圹凶功，不欲假人。
现代文：他认为给父母办丧事，从道理上讲，不管是情义还是礼节都应该由孝子自己来干，丧葬之事，不宜交别人代理。
English: He believes that to arrange a funeral for parents, from a logical point of view, whether it is the situation or the etiquette, it should be done by the filial son himself. It is not appropriate to delegate the funeral to others.

古文：本虽巧而不解作墓，乃访邑中有营墓者，助人运力，经时展勤，久乃闲练。
现代文：他虽然灵巧却不懂怎么做坟墓，就打听到本地有造墓的，去给人家帮忙，这样经常出力干活，时间长了便精通此道。
English: Although he is dexterous, he does not know how to make a grave, so he inquired about a local gravedigger and went to help others. In this way, he often worked hard, and after a long time, he became proficient in this way.

古文：又自卖十夫以供衆费，窀穸之事，俭而当礼。
现代文：又十次顶替别人服役来挣取费用。造墓的事，办得节俭又合乎礼节。
English: He also earned money by serving as a substitute for others ten times. The construction of the tomb was done sparingly and in accordance with etiquette.

古文：性无术学，因心自然。
现代文：他并没有经过什么专门的学习，全是凭内心一股自然灵气。
English: He didn't go through any special learning, he just went with a natural aura in his heart.

古文：葬毕，诣所买主执役无懈，与诸奴分务，让逸取劳。
现代文：葬完父亲以后，就到雇主家里去干活儿而毫无懈怠，和其他奴仆分担劳务，把轻松的事让别人，自己拣重活儿干。
English: After burying his father, he went to work at his employer's house without slacking off, sharing the labor with other slaves, letting others do the easy work, and doing the heavy work himself.

古文：主人不忍使，每遣之。
现代文：主人不忍心使唤他，几次让他回去，而原平辛勤劳作不曾停歇。
English: The owner couldn't bear to call him and asked him to go back several times, but Yuan Ping never stopped working hard.

古文：原平服勤未尝暂替，佣赁养母，有馀聚以自赎。
现代文：得到的工钱用来养母，有余剩就攒着自己赎身。
English: He used the money he earned to support his mother, and saved the rest to buy his freedom.

古文：既学构冢，尤善其事，每至吉岁，求者盈门。
现代文：他学了造墓手艺之后，对这活儿很精通，每到宜于丧葬的吉日，来求他的人络绎不绝。
English: Having learned the craft of building tombs, he was well-versed in this work, and every time there was a good day for a funeral, he was inundated with requests.

古文：原平所起必自贫始，既取贱价，又以夫日助之。
现代文：原平一定先捡最穷的人家去干，不但收的费用低，还整天当劳力去帮着干活儿。
English: The original level must first pick up the poorest people to do it, not only charge low fees, but also work all day to help do the work.

古文：及父丧终，自起两间小屋以爲祠堂，每至节岁，常于此数日中哀思，绝饮粥。父服除后，不复食肉。
现代文：等他父亲丧事办完后，自己盖了两间小屋作为祠堂，逢年过节，常在这里悲哀悼念，只啃几口干粮，不喝汤水。
English: After his father's funeral was over, he built two huts as ancestral halls. Every year, he often mourned here, eating only a few mouthfuls of dry food and drinking no soup.

古文：高阳许瑶之罢建安郡丞还家，以绵一斤遗之，不受。
现代文：父亲丧服期满后，再也不吃肉。高阳许瑶之免去建安郡丞后回乡，派人送他一斤丝绵，原平不要。
English: After his father's mourning period expired, he no longer ate meat. Gaoyang Xu Rong was excused from going to Jianan County to return to his hometown, and sent someone to send him a kilo of silk. Yuanping did not want it.

古文：瑶之乃自往，曰： 今岁过寒，而建安绵好，以此奉尊上下耳。 
现代文：瑶之就亲自登门，对他说： 今年冬天太冷，建安的丝绵又好，所以我拿来奉送令堂大人。 
English: Yan Zhi himself came to the door and said to him: This winter is too cold, Jian An's silk is very good, so I brought it to present to you.

古文：原平乃拜而受之。
现代文：原平才拜谢收下。
English: Genpei only accepted it with thanks.

古文：及母终，毁瘠弥甚，仅乃免丧。
现代文：他母亲死时，悲痛伤身更甚，勉强支撑到丧服期满。
English: When his mother died, the grief hit him even harder, and he barely made it to the end of the mourning period.

古文：墓前有数十亩田，不属原平，每至农月，耕者恒裸袒。
现代文：母墓前有几十亩田，不属他所有，每到耕种收获季节，种田人经常赤身露体地干活儿。
English: There are dozens of mu of fields in front of his mother's grave, which do not belong to him. Every harvest season, farmers often work naked.

古文：原平不欲使人慢其坟墓，乃贸家资，贵买此田，三农之月，辄束带垂泣，躬自耕垦。
现代文：原平不想让人亵渎了父母坟墓，就变卖家产，出高价买下这块地，农忙时节，就穿戴整齐，流着眼泪亲自去耕种。
English: Not wanting anyone to desecrate his parents' grave, Genpei sold his family's property and bought the land at a high price. During the busy farming season, he dressed neatly and went to work in tears.

古文：每出卖物，裁求半价，邑人皆共识悉，辄加本价与之，彼此相让，要使微贱，然后取直。
现代文：每次出门卖东西，只要半价，本地人都知道这情况，总是加上原价付钱，彼此相让，原平一定要让价钱稍便宜些，才肯收钱。
English: Every time they go out to sell something, as long as it's half price, the locals all know this situation. They always add the original price to pay, and make concessions to each other. The original level must make the price a little cheaper before they are willing to collect the money.

古文：宅上种竹，夜有盗其笋者，原平遇见之，盗者奔走坠沟。
现代文：他家房子附近种着竹子，夜里有人来偷笋，被原平碰上了，贼逃跑时掉进了沟里。
English: There was a bamboo grove near his house. At night, someone came to steal bamboo shoots. He was run into by Yuan Ping. When the thief ran away, he fell into a ditch.

古文：原平乃于所植竹处沟上立小桥令通，又采笋置篱外，邻里惭愧，无复取者。
现代文：原平就在种竹处的沟上修了座小桥供人来往，又采下笋放在篱笆外边，邻里感到惭愧，再无人来偷取。
English: Harahei built a small bridge over the ditch at the bamboo plantation for people to come and go, and collected the bamboo shoots and placed them outside the fence. The neighbors felt ashamed, and no one came to steal them.

古文：宋文帝崩，原平号恸，日食麦鉡一枚，如此五日。
现代文：宋文帝驾崩，原平嚎啕大哭，一天只吃了一个面饼，这样一连五天。
English: When Emperor Songwen passed away, Yuan Pingyao burst into tears and ate only one noodle cake a day for five days in a row.

古文：人曰： 谁非王臣，何独如此？ 
现代文：有人说他： 谁不是皇帝的臣民呢，你何必这样？ 
English: Someone said to him: "Who is not a subject of the emperor? Why do you do this?

古文：原平泣而答曰： 吾家见异先朝，蒙褒赞之赏，不能报恩，私心感动耳。 
现代文：原平哭着回答说： 我家被先帝看重，受褒奖之赏，不能报恩，所以心里特别难受。 
English: Genpei cried and replied: My family was valued by the former emperor and received rewards, but I can't repay the favor, so I feel particularly bad.

古文：又以种瓜爲业，大明七年大旱，瓜渎不复通船。
现代文：他又以种瓜为业，大明七年大旱，运瓜的河沟不能通船。
English: He also grew melons for a living, but there was a seven-year drought in Daming, and the river ditch where the melons were transported could not be navigated.

古文：县令刘僧秀湣其穷老，下渎水与之。
现代文：县令刘僧秀可怜他穷困老迈，给他往河沟里放水。
English: The county magistrate Liu Sangxiu took pity on his poverty-stricken old age and released water into the ditch for him.

古文：原平曰： 普天大旱，百姓俱困，岂可减溉田之水，以通运瓜之船。 
现代文：原平说： 普天大旱，百姓们都受苦害，怎能再减少浇地的水，用来通运瓜的船呢。 
English: Harahira said, "There is a drought all over the country, and the people are suffering. How can we reduce the amount of water used to irrigate the land and use it to transport the melons by boat?

古文：乃步从他道往钱唐货卖。
现代文：于是就步行从别的旱路去钱塘卖瓜。
English: So he walked from another dry road to Qiantang to sell melons.

古文：每行来见人牵埭未过，辄迅烜助之。
现代文：每次在来往途中，碰到拉船过水坝，总是赶紧划过去帮忙。
English: Every time, on the way to and from work, I come across a tugboat crossing the dam, I always quickly row over to help.

古文：己自引船，不假旁人。
现代文：而他却总是自己拉船，不求助人家。
English: But he always pulled the boat himself, without asking for help.

古文：若自船已度，后人未及，常停住须待，以此爲常。
现代文：如果是自家的船先过水坝，后边的人还没到，常常停下船等待，这样做已成了习惯。
English: If it is their own boat that crosses the dam first, the people behind have not yet arrived, and they often stop the boat and wait. It has become a habit to do so.

古文：尝于县南郭凤埭助人引船，遇有斗者爲吏所录，斗者逃散，唯原平独住，吏执以送县。
现代文：曾有一次在县南郭凤埭帮人拉船，碰到有人打架，被差吏抓捕，打架的人都跑了，只有原平一人留了下来，差役把他拿住送到县里。
English: There was a time when he was helping to pull a boat in the south of Guofeng County. When he encountered someone fighting, he was arrested by the police. The people who were fighting ran away. Only Yuanping stayed behind. The police arrested him and sent him to the county.

古文：县令新到，未相谙悉，将加严罚，原平解衣就罪，义无一言。
现代文：县令是新来的，不认识他，就要对他严加责罚，原平脱衣领受责打，一句也不争辩。
English: The county magistrate is a newcomer. If you don't know him, you must severely punish him. Yuanping will strip and be beaten, and there will be no argument.

古文：左右大小咸稽颡请救，然后得免。
现代文：左右上下的人都磕头求情，才得以幸免。
English: People on all sides begged for mercy before they were spared.

古文：由来不谒官长，自此乃始修敬。
现代文：原平从来不去拜谒官长，从出了这事以后，才开始学着去孝敬当官的。
English: Harahei never went to pay respects to eunuch officials. It was only after this incident that he began to learn to respect officials.

古文：太守蔡兴宗临郡，深加贵异，以私米馈原平及山阴朱百年妻各百斛。
现代文：太守蔡兴宗到本郡上任，十分看重他，把他私人的米馈赠原平和山阴朱百年的妻子。
English: When Tai Shou Cai Xingzong took office in this county, he valued him very much and gave his personal rice gift to the wife of the original Heping Shanyin Zhu Centenary.

古文：原平誓死不受，百年妻亦固辞。
现代文：原平誓死不受，百年妻也坚决不要。
English: Genpin swore not to accept death, and the hundred-year-old wife also resolutely refused.

古文：会稽郡贵重望计及望孝，盛族出身，不减秘、着。
现代文：会稽郡特别看重望计与望孝，如若被荐举者出身士族高门，那么授官不会下于秘书、著作郎。
English: The Audit County attaches great importance to Wang Jie and Wang Xiao. If the recommended candidate is from a high-ranking family, then the award will not be lower than the secretary and the writer.

古文：明帝泰始七年，兴宗欲举山阴孔仲智子爲望计，原平次息爲望孝。
现代文：宋明帝泰始七年，兴宗打算荐举山阴孔仲智儿子为望计，原平次子为望孝。
English: In the first seven years of the reign of Emperor Taizong of the Song Dynasty, Emperor Xingzong planned to recommend that the son of Emperor Taizong of the Song Dynasty, Shanying Kong Zhongzhi, be raised as Emperor Taizong of the Song Dynasty, and that the second son of Emperor Taizong of the Song Dynasty, Yuanping, be raised as Emperor Taizong of the Song Dynasty.

古文：仲智会土高门，原平一邦至行，欲以相敌。
现代文：仲智是会稽高门大族，原平是一方人伦楷模，想找两个旗鼓相当的人。
English: Zhongzhi is a member of a large family of high-ranking officials, while Genpei is a model of personal ethics. He wants to find two people who are on the same level.

古文：会明帝别敕用人，故二选并寝。
现代文：碰上明帝下诏用了别人，所以这两个人选都被搁置一边。
English: When Emperor Ming issued an edict, he used someone else, so these two candidates were put aside.

古文：兴宗征还都，表其殊行，举爲太学博士。
现代文：兴宗被征召回京，向朝廷报告原平不寻常的德行，荐举他为太学博士。
English: Xingzong was called back to Beijing to report to the imperial court on Yuanping's unusual virtue and recommend him for the title of Doctor of Science.

古文：会兴宗薨，事不行。
现代文：赶上兴宗去世，此事未能办成。
English: The matter could not be resolved in time for the death of Emperor Xingzong.

古文：卒于家。
现代文：原平死在家里。
English: He died at home.

古文：三子一弟，并有门行。
现代文：三子一弟，都秉承家风具有孝行。
English: The three sons and one younger brother are all adhering to the family style and have filial piety.

