古文：人主之所以身危国亡者，大臣太贵，左右太威也。
现代文：君主之所以会遇到身危国死的情况，是因为大臣过分显贵，近侍过分逞威。
English: The reason why the monarch would be in danger of death is because the ministers are too prominent and the aides-de-camp are too arrogant.

古文：所谓贵者，无法而擅行，操国柄而便私者也。
现代文：所谓显贵，就是无视法令而独断专行，掌握国家大权来谋取私利。
English: The so-called dignitaries are those who ignore laws and regulations and act arbitrarily, seizing state power to seek personal gain.

古文：所谓威者，擅权势而轻重者也。
现代文：所谓逞威，就是独揽权势而为所欲为。
English: The so-called arrogance is to monopolize power and do whatever you want.

古文：此二者，不可不察也。
现代文：对这两种人，不能不加以明察。
English: These two types of people cannot be ignored.

古文：夫马之所以能任重引车致远道者，以筋力也。
现代文：马之所以能负重拉车达到远方，凭的是肌肉力量。
English: The reason why a horse can carry a heavy load and pull a cart to a distance is muscle power.

古文：万乘之主、千乘之君所以制天下而征诸侯者，以其威势也。威势者，人主之筋力也。
现代文：大、中国家的君主之所以能统治天下讨伐诸侯，凭的是威势；威势也就是君主的筋骨。
English: The reason why the monarchs of large and medium-sized countries can rule the world and fight against vassals is due to their power; power is also the backbone of the monarch.

古文：今大臣得威，左右擅势，是人主失力；人主失力而能有国者，千无一人。
现代文：如今大臣得势，亲信擅权，即是君主失去了威力；君主失去威力而仍能保有国家的，一千个人中也没有一个。
English: Now a minister gains power, and cronies usurp power, that is, the monarch has lost power; the monarch has lost power and can still keep the country, not one out of a thousand people.

古文：虎豹之所以能胜人执百兽者，以其爪牙也，当使虎豹失其爪牙，则人必制之矣。
现代文：虎豹之所以能胜人以及擒拿其他各种野兽，靠的是它的尖爪利牙，假使去掉尖爪利牙，人就一定能制服它了。
English: The reason why the tiger leopard is able to defeat people and capture other kinds of beasts is due to its sharp claws and teeth. If the sharp claws and teeth are removed, people will definitely be able to subdue it.

古文：今势重者，人主之爪牙也，君人而失其爪牙，虎豹之类也。
现代文：现在，权势就是君主的尖爪利牙，要是统治别人而丢失权势，便同虎豹去掉尖爪利牙一样。
English: Now, power is the sharp-clawed tooth of the monarch, and if you rule others and lose power, it is like a tiger and leopard removing their sharp-clawed teeth.

古文：宋君失其爪牙于子罕，简公失其爪牙于田常，而不蚤夺之，故身死国亡。
现代文：宋桓公把他的 爪牙 丢给了子罕，齐简公把他的 爪牙 丢给了田常，又没有早早夺回来，最终导致身死国亡。
English: Song Huan lost his minions to Zi Han, Qi Jian lost his minions to Tian Chang, and did not win them back early, eventually leading to his death and the death of the country.

古文：今无术之主皆明知宋、简之过也，而不悟其失，不察其事类者也。
现代文：现在不懂得法术的君主都明知宋桓公、齐简公有过错，却不能觉察他们失误的根源，是不懂得君主失去权势跟虎豹失去爪牙两事相类。
English: Now the monarchs who do not understand magic know that Song Huan Gong and Qi Jian Gong are at fault, but they cannot perceive the root of their mistakes. They do not understand that the loss of power of the monarch is similar to the loss of the minions of the tiger and the leopard.

古文：且法术之士与当涂之臣，不相容也。
现代文：况且，法术之士与当权大臣是互不相容的。
English: Moreover, a sorcerer and a minister in power are incompatible.

古文：何以明之？
现代文：何以证明？
English: How do you prove it?

古文：主有术士，则大臣不得制断，近习不敢卖重；大臣、左右权势息，则人主之道明矣。
现代文：君主如能任用法术之士，大臣就不能专制独断，近侍也不敢卖弄威势；大臣和近侍的权势消除后，君主的治国原则就得以体现。
English: If the monarch can appoint magicians, the ministers cannot be arbitrary, and the aides-de-camp do not dare to flaunt their power; after the power of the ministers and aides-de-camp is eliminated, the monarch's principle of governing the country can be reflected.

古文：今则不然，其当涂之臣得势擅事以环其私，左右近习朋党比周以制疏远，则法述之士奚时得进用，人主奚时得论裁？
现代文：现在却不这样。那些当权大臣掌握权柄、把持政务来营求私利，左右亲信结成朋党、紧密勾结来挟制关系疏远的人，那么法术之士何时能得到选拔任用，君主何时能加以论断裁决？
English: But it is not like that now. For those ministers in power who hold power, who use government affairs to pursue their own interests, and who form friendships and parties with their right and left relatives, and closely cooperate to control the alienation of relations, when will the magicians be selected and appointed, and when will the monarch be able to judge and adjudicate?

古文：故有术不必用，而势不两立。法述之士焉得无危？
现代文：所以，法术主张不一定被采用，又与权臣势不两立，主张法术的人怎能没有危险？
English: Therefore, the spell advocate is not necessarily adopted, and it is not compatible with the power of the powerful. How can the person who advocates the spell be without danger?

古文：故君人者非能退大臣之议，而背左右之讼，独合乎道言也，则法术之士安能蒙死亡之危而进说乎？
现代文：所以，做君主的如果不能排除大臣的议论，摒弃左右的诬告，独自作出符合原则的判断，那么法术之士哪能冒死亡的危险而向君主进说呢？
English: Therefore, if the monarch cannot exclude the discussion of ministers, discard the false accusations of the left and right, and make a principled judgment on his own, then how can the magician risk death and speak to the monarch?

古文：此世之所以不治也。
现代文：这是国家得不到治理的症结所在。
English: This is the crux of the country's lack of governance.

古文：明主者，推功而爵禄，称能而官事，所举者必有贤，所用者必有能，贤能之士进，则私门之请止矣。
现代文：英明的君主，按照功劳封爵赏禄，衡量才能进官任事。选拔的人必定有好的品德；任用的人必定有优秀才干，贤能的人得以进用，私门的请托就行不通了。
English: A wise monarch will award knighthoods according to merit, and promote officials according to ability. Those who are selected must have good moral character; those who are appointed must have excellent ability, and those who are capable can be promoted. Private requests will not work.

古文：夫有功者受重禄，有能者处大官，则私剑之士安得无离于私勇而疾距敌，游宦之士焉得无挠于私门而务于清洁矣？
现代文：有功劳的人得到优厚的俸禄，有能力的人处在重要职位上，那么寄养在私门的侠士怎么能不抛掉私勇而去奋力抵抗敌人，靠游说谋官的人又怎么能不离开私门而务求保持高风亮节呢？
English: People of merit receive generous salaries, capable people are in important positions, so how can the knights who are fostered in the private sector not throw away their courage and fight to resist the enemy, and how can people who rely on lobbying and advising officials not leave the private sector and strive to keep the high winds bright?

古文：此所以聚贤能之士，而散私门之属也。
现代文：这就是聚集贤能人才而离散私门党徒的途径。
English: This is the way to gather talented people and disperse the partisans.

古文：今近习者不必智，人主之于人也或有所知而听之，入因与近习论其言，听近习而不计其智，是与愚论智也。
现代文：现在的情形是：君主近侍不一定有智慧；而君主对于某人，有时欣赏他的智慧而听取了他的意见，回头又同近侍谈论来者的言论。听信近侍的话，却不先衡量一下他的智力水平，这就成了同愚蠢的人论定有智慧的人。
English: Now the situation is this: the prince's attendant does not necessarily have wisdom; and the prince, for someone, sometimes appreciates his wisdom and listens to his opinion, and then returns to talk with the attendant about the visitor's remarks. Listen to the words of the attendant, but do not first measure his intellectual level, which has become a stupid person's wisdom.

古文：其当涂者不必贤，人主之于人或有所贤而礼之，入因与当途者论其行，听其言而不用贤，是与不肖论贤也。
现代文：当权的人不一定贤良；而君主对于某人，有时欣赏他的贤良而加以礼遇，回头又同当权的人论定来者的品行。听信当权者的话，而不用贤良的人，这就成了同无德无才的人论定有德有才的人。
English: Those in power are not necessarily virtuous; and a prince, on occasion, admiring the virtue of someone, treats him with courtesy, and in turn judges the conduct of the newcomer by the people in power. To listen to the people in power, and not to the people of virtue, is to judge the people of virtue and merit by the people without virtue and merit.

古文：故智者决策于愚人，贤士程行于不肖，则贤智之士奚时得用，而人主之明塞矣。
现代文：所以有智慧的人，其主张倒要由愚蠢的人来决断；有德有才的人，其品行倒要由无德无才的人来衡量。这样一来，品德好、有智慧的人便没有机会得到任用，而君主的眼睛就被蒙住了。
English: So the wise man's opinion is judged by the foolish, and the virtuous man's conduct is measured by the virtuous man, and the virtuous man's conduct is measured by the virtuous man, and the virtuous man's conduct is measured by the virtuous man, and the virtuous man's conduct is measured by the virtuous man, and the virtuous man's conduct is measured by the virtuous man.

古文：昔关龙逄说桀而伤其四肢，王子比干谏纣而剖其心，子胥忠直夫差而诛于属镂。
现代文：过去关龙逢劝说夏桀，结果四肢都被肢解了；王子比干劝谏商封，结果心脏都被剖开了；伍子胥忠诚吴王夫差，结果死于属楼剑下。
English: In the past, Guan Longfeng persuaded Xia Yao, and as a result, all of his limbs were dismembered; Prince Bi Gan persuaded Yao Shangfeng, and as a result, both of their hearts were cut open; Wu Zi Yao was not as loyal as Wu Wangfu, and as a result, he died under the sword.

古文：此三子者，为人臣非不忠，而说非不当也，然不免于死亡之患者，主不察贤智之言，而蔽于愚不肖之患也。
现代文：这三个人，做臣子不是不忠，建议不是不恰当，但是最终不免于死亡的祸患，原因就在君主不明察贤士和智者的主张，而受蠢才和恶人的蒙蔽。
English: These three men, as courtiers, are not disloyal, and their advice is not improper, but ultimately they are not immune to the scourge of death, because the monarch does not see the opinions of the wise and the wise, but is blinded by the stupid and the wicked.

古文：今人主非肯用法术之士，听愚不肖之臣，则贤智之士孰敢当三子之危而进其智能者乎？
现代文：现在，君主如果不肯任用法术之士，而要听从没有智慧、没有德才的臣子的话，那么品德好、智慧高的法术之士，谁还敢冒着关龙逄、比干、伍子胥三个人那样的危险，去进献自己的智慧和才能呢？
English: Now, if the sovereign does not want to appoint magicians, but wants to listen to the words of a vassal without wisdom and virtue, then who would dare to risk the danger of the three magicians with good moral character and high wisdom to offer their wisdom and talent?

古文：此世之所以乱也。
现代文：这就是社会动乱的根源。
English: This is the root cause of social unrest.

