古文：齐威王问用兵孙子曰： 两军相当，两将相望，皆坚而固，莫敢先举，为之奈何？ 
现代文：齐威王向孙膑询问佣兵作战的方法时说，问孙膑： 如果两军旗鼓相当，双方的将领对阵，阵势都十分坚固，致使谁也不敢先发动攻击，应该怎么办呢？ 
English: When King Qi Wei asked Sun Yat-sen about the methods of mercenary warfare, he said, "Ask Sun Yat-sen: If the two armies are of equal strength, the generals of both sides are facing each other, and the positions are very solid, so that no one dares to attack first, what should be done?

古文：孙子答曰： 以轻卒尝之，贱而勇者将之，期于北，毋期于得。为之微阵以触其侧。
现代文：孙膑回答道： 可以先派出少量兵力，由勇敢的低级将领带领去试探敌军，要做好试探失败的准备，不要期望取胜，试探的军队要行动要隐蔽，一定要攻击敌阵侧翼。
English: Sun Yat-sen replied, "We can first send a small number of troops, led by a brave low-ranking general, to test the enemy army. We must be prepared to fail in the test, and not expect to win. The test army must operate covertly, and must attack the flank of the enemy.

古文：是谓大得。 
现代文：这就是取得大胜的方法。 
English: That's how you win big.

古文：威王曰： 用众用寡有道乎？ 孙子曰： 有。 
现代文：威王问： 作战时，用兵多少有一定的规律吗？ 孙膑说： 有。 
English: Wei Wang asked: When fighting, is there a certain rule for how many soldiers should be used? Sun Yat-sen said: Yes.

古文：威王曰： 我强敌弱，我众敌寡，用之奈何？ 
现代文：威王问： 在我强敌弱，我方兵多敌方兵少时，应该怎么办？ 
English: Wei Wang asked: What should I do when I am strong and the enemy is weak, and our soldiers are more and the enemy's soldiers are less?

古文：孙子再拜曰： 明王之问！
现代文：孙膑再次向齐威王行礼后回答道： 这真是英明君王提的问题。
English: After Sun Yat-sen bowed again to King Qi Wei, he replied, "This is indeed a question raised by a wise king.

古文：夫众且强，犹问用之，则安国之道也。
现代文：在我方兵多势强的形势下，还能问如何用兵，这种谨慎的态度，确实是定国安邦的根本。
English: In a situation where we have a large number of powerful soldiers, we can still ask how to use the soldiers. This cautious attitude is indeed fundamental to the stability of the country.

古文：命之曰赞师。毁卒乱行，以顺其志，则必战矣。 
现代文：在这种形势下，可以采用诱敌之计，叫做 赞师 ，即是故意让我方军队队形散乱，迎合敌方贪胜的心理，引诱敌方和我方交战。 
English: In this situation, we can use the trick of luring the enemy, called "Zan Shi," that is, deliberately scattering the formation of our army, pandering to the enemy's desire to win, and luring the enemy to engage us.

古文：威王曰： 敌众我寡，敌强我弱，用之奈何？ 
现代文：威王又问： 如果敌方兵多，敌强我弱，又该怎么办呢？ 
English: King Wei also asked: What should I do if there are many enemy soldiers and the enemy is strong and I am weak?

古文：孙子曰： 命曰让威。
现代文：孙膑说： 要采取退避战术，叫做 退威 ，避过敌军的锋锐。
English: Sun Yat-sen said: It is necessary to adopt evasive tactics, called retreat, to avoid the enemy's sharpness.

古文：必臧其尾，令之能归。
现代文：但要做好后卫的掩护工作，让自己的军队能安全后退。
English: However, it is necessary to do a good job of covering the rear guard, so that their own troops can safely retreat.

古文：长兵在前，短兵在□，为之流弩，以助其急者。
现代文：后退军队持长兵器的军兵在前，持短兵器的军兵在后，并配备弓箭，作为应急之用。
English: Retreating army soldiers with long weapons in front, soldiers with short weapons behind, and equipped with bows and arrows, as a contingency.

古文：□□毋动，以待敌能。 
现代文：我方军队要按兵不动，等待敌军疲惫时再伺机出击。 
English: Our troops should remain motionless, wait for the enemy to tire, and then attack when the opportunity arises.

古文：威王曰： 我出敌出，未知众少，用之奈何？ 
现代文：威王问： 我军和敌军同时出动，而又不知放军兵力多少时，该怎么办呢？ 
English: Wei Wang asked: What should we do when our army and the enemy's army go out at the same time, but we don't know how many troops to send?

古文：孙子曰： 命曰险成。
现代文：孙膑说： 叫 威王问： 如何追击穷寇？ 
English: Sun Yat-sen said, "Tell King Wei to ask: How should we pursue the poor robbers?

古文：险成，敌将为正，出为三阵，一□能相助，可以止而止，可以行而行，毋求 威王曰： 击穷寇奈何？ 孙子曰： 可以待生计矣。 
现代文：孙膑说：  威王问， 对势均力敌的敌军该怎么办？ 孙膑回答道： 要迷惑敌军，使其兵力分散，我军抓住战机，在敌军尚未察觉我军意图之前，给以突然袭击。
English: Sun Yat-sen said, "Wei Wang asked, 'What should we do against an enemy with equal strength?' Sun Yat-sen replied, 'To confuse the enemy and disperse its forces, our army should seize the fighter plane and make a surprise attack before the enemy has noticed our army's intention.

古文：威王曰： 击钧奈何？ 
现代文：但是，在敌军兵力没有分散时，要按兵不动，耐心等待战机。
English: However, when the enemy forces are not dispersed, it is necessary to stand still and patiently wait for the fighters.

古文：威王曰： 以一击十，有道乎？ 
现代文：千万不要中敌军疑兵之计，盲目出击。 威王问， 如果我军和敌军兵力为一比十时，有攻击敌军的办法吗？ 
English: Wei Wang asked, "If our army and the enemy's army are ten to one, is there any way to attack the enemy army?"

古文：孙子曰： 有。
现代文：孙膑回答道： 有！
English: Sun Yat-sen replied, "Yes!

古文：攻其无备，出其不意。 
现代文：可以采用 攻其无备，出其不意 的战术，对敌军发动突然袭击。 
English: It is possible to launch a surprise attack on the enemy with the tactic of attacking the unprepared and taking them by surprise.

古文：威王曰： 地平卒齐，合而北者，何也？ 
现代文：威王问： 在地利和兵力都相当的情况下，却吃了败仗，又是什么原因呢？ 
English: King Wei asked: What was the reason for losing the battle when the territory and troops were equal?

古文：孙子曰： 其阵无锋也。 
现代文：孙膑回答， 这是由于自己的军阵没有锋锐。 
English: Sun Yat-sen replied that this was due to the fact that his army was not sharp.

古文：威王曰： 令民素听，奈何？ 
现代文：威王问： 怎样才能使得军兵听命？ 
English: Wei Wang asked: How can soldiers be made to obey orders?

古文：孙子曰： 素信。 
现代文：孙膑答道： 靠平时的威信。 
English: Sun Yat-sen replied: Rely on the usual prestige.

古文：威王曰： 善哉！
现代文：威王说： 你说得太好了！
English: Wei Wang said: You said it so well!

古文：言兵势不穷。 
现代文：你讲的用兵的奥妙真让人受用无穷啊啊！ 
English: The secret of using soldiers that you talk about is really very useful!

古文：田忌问孙子曰： 患兵者何也？
现代文：田忌问孙膑说： 用兵的忧虑是什么？
English: Tianqi asked Sun Yat-sen, "What are the concerns of using soldiers?

古文：困敌者何也？
现代文：使敌军陷入困境的办法是什么？
English: What's the best way to trap the enemy?

古文：壁延不得者何也？
现代文：不能攻占壁垒壕沟的原因是什么？
English: What is the reason for not being able to capture the barrier trench?

古文：失天者何也？
现代文：失去天时的原因是什么？
English: What is the reason for the loss of time?

古文：失地者何也？
现代文：失去地利的原因是什么？
English: What is the reason for losing ground?

古文：失人者何也？
现代文：失去人心的原因是什么？
English: What is the reason for the loss of heart?

古文：请问此六者有道乎？ 孙子曰： 有。
现代文：请问，改变这六项作战要素有没有规律可循呢？ 孙膑回答道： 有。
English: Excuse me, are there any rules to follow when changing these six combat factors? Sun Yat-sen replied: Yes.

古文：患兵者地也，困敌者险也。
现代文：用兵最大的忧虑是不得地利。
English: The biggest concern about the use of troops is the lack of space.

古文：故曰，三里沮洳将患军涉将留大甲。故曰，患兵者地也，困敌者险也，壁延不得者渠寒也， 田忌曰： 奈何？ 
现代文：让敌军落入困境的办法是据险。所以说，几里沼泽地带就能妨碍军队行动由此可见，用兵的忧虑是不得地利，困敌的办法是据险。不能攻克壁垒壕沟的原因则在于没有障碍物。 
English: The way to make the enemy army fall into a predicament is to take advantage of danger. Therefore, it can be said that a few miles of marshland can hinder the army's actions. It can be seen that the concern of using soldiers is out of place, and the way to trap the enemy is to take advantage of danger. The reason for not being able to overcome the barrier trench is that there are no obstacles.

古文：孙子曰： 鼓而坐之，十而揄之。 
现代文：孙膑说： 击鼓作出进军的样子而实际上不动，坐待敌军来攻，千方百计引诱敌军。 
English: Sun Yat-sen said: to beat the drum to make the appearance of marching, but not actually move, to wait for the enemy to attack, and to do everything possible to lure the enemy.

古文：田忌曰： 行阵已定，动而令士必听，奈何？ 
现代文：田忌问： 进军部署已经确定，在行动中怎样让军兵完全听从命令呢？ 
English: Tianqi asked: Since the deployment has been determined, how can soldiers fully obey orders during the operation?

古文：孙子曰： 严而示之利。 
现代文：孙膑回答说： 严明军纪，同时又明令悬赏。 
English: Sun Yat-sen replied: Strictly enforce military discipline, and at the same time, explicitly offer a reward.

古文：田忌曰： 赏罚者，兵之急者耶？ 
现代文：田忌问： 赏罚是用兵中最要紧的事项吗？ 
English: Tianqi asked: Is reward and punishment the most important thing for soldiers?

古文：孙子曰： 非。
现代文：孙膑说： 不是。
English: Sun Yat-sen said, "No."

古文：夫赏者，所以喜众，令士忘死也。罚者，所以正乱，令民畏上也。
现代文：赏赐是提高士气，使得军兵会死忘生作战的办法；处罚是严明军纪，让军兵对上畏服的手段。
English: Reward is a way to raise morale, so that soldiers will fight to the death; punishment is a means of strict military discipline, so that soldiers are intimidated.

古文：可以益胜，非其急者也。 
现代文：赏赐有助于取得胜利，但不是用兵最要紧的事项。 
English: All of this helps to achieve victory, but it is not the most important thing in the use of troops.

古文：田忌曰： 权、势、谋、诈，兵之急者耶？ 
现代文：田忌又问： 那么，权力、威势、智谋、诡诈是用兵最紧要的事项吗？ 
English: Tabi also asked: So, are power, authority, cunning, and deceit the most important things for soldiers?

古文：孙子曰： 非也。
现代文：孙膑回答： 也不是。
English: Sun Yat-sen replied: Neither.

古文：夫权者，所以聚众也；势者，所以令士必斗也；谋者，所以令敌无备也；诈者，所以困敌也。
现代文：权力是保证军队整体指挥的必需，威势是保证军兵用命的条件，智谋可以使敌军无从防备，诡诈能让敌军落入困境。
English: Power is a necessity to ensure the overall command of the army, authority is a condition to ensure the lives of the soldiers, strategy can make the enemy army unable to defend itself, and cunning can make the enemy army fall into a predicament.

古文：可以益胜，非其急者也。 
现代文：这些都有助于取得胜利，但又都不是用兵最要紧的事项。 
English: All of this helps to achieve victory, but it is not the most important thing in the use of troops.

古文：田忌忿然作色： 此六者，皆善者所用，而子大夫曰非其急者也。
现代文：田忌气得变了脸色地说： 这六项都是善于用兵的人常用的，而您却说这些都不是最要紧的事项，那什么才是最要紧的呢？ 
English: Tian Qi frowned and said: These six items are commonly used by people who are good at using soldiers, but you said that these are not the most important matters, so what is the most important?

古文：然则其急者何也？ 孙子曰： 料敌计险，必察远近，将之道也。必攻不守，兵之急者也。
现代文：孙膑说： 充分了解敌情，根据当时形势和战局将会出现的变化，利用好地形这就是领兵打仗的规律。善于进攻而不消极防守，这才是用兵最要紧的。 
English: Sun Yat-sen said: to fully understand the enemy's situation, according to the situation at that time and the changes that will occur in the war situation, to make good use of the terrain, this is the law of leading soldiers to fight. To be good at attacking without passive defense, this is the most important thing in using soldiers.

古文：骨也。 田忌问孙子曰： 张军毋战，有道？ 孙子曰： 有。
现代文：田忌再问孙膑： 敌军摆开阵势却不进攻，有办法对付吗？ 孙膑说： 有办法。
English: Tabi asked Sun Yat-sen again, "The enemy troops have set up their positions but are not attacking. Is there any way to deal with them?" Sun Yat-sen said, "There is a way."

古文：倅险增垒，诤戒毋动，毋可□□，毋可怒。 
现代文：利用险要地形增加堡垒，约束士兵，不许轻举妄动，不要被敌军的挑衅所激怒。 
English: Take advantage of the dangerous terrain to add fortresses, restrain soldiers, do not act rashly, and do not be provoked by the enemy's provocation.

古文：田忌曰： 敌众且武，必战有道乎？ 孙子曰： 有。
现代文：田忌问： 敌军兵多将广而且勇武凶猛，这种情况下有战胜敌军的办法吗？ 孙膑说： 有。
English: Tian Qi asked, "The enemy troops are large and numerous, and they are brave and fierce. Under such circumstances, is there any way to defeat the enemy troops?" Sun Yao said, "Yes."

古文：埤垒广志，严正辑众，避而骄之，引而劳之，攻其无备，出其不意，必以为久。 
现代文：要在城池内修筑低垒，表示无所畏惧，以此来激励士气，广设旗帜，用以迷惑敌军，并且严明军令，以团结士卒，有意避开敌人的锐气，使敌军骄傲自大，并设法牵引敌军，使敌军疲劳倦怠，然后出其不意，攻其无备，使敌人防不胜防，同时还要做好打持久战的准备。 
English: It is necessary to build low fortifications in the city and show fearlessness to encourage morale, set up flags to confuse the enemy, and issue strict military orders to unite the soldiers, deliberately avoid the enemy's sharpness, make the enemy proud, and try to lead the enemy, make the enemy tired and tired, and then surprise them, attack them, and make the enemy unable to defend, and at the same time be prepared to fight a protracted war.

古文：田忌问孙子曰： 锥行者何也？
现代文：孙膑说： 采用锥形队形，是为了冲破敌军坚固的阵地，摧毁敌军的精锐部队。
English: Sun Yat-sen said: The cone formation was adopted in order to break through the enemy's strong positions and destroy the enemy's elite troops.

古文：雁行者何也？
现代文：运用雁形队形是对敌时便于本方相互策应。
English: The use of the goose-shaped formation makes it easier for the two sides to respond to each other when facing the enemy.

古文：篡卒力士者何也？
现代文：选拔强壮士兵是为了决战时拿敌军将领。
English: Strong soldiers were selected in order to defeat the enemy generals in a decisive battle.

古文：劲弩趋发者何也？
现代文：使用发射强弓硬弩的士兵是为了在双方相持不下时能够持久作战。
English: The use of soldiers who fired strong bows and hardened crossbows was to be able to fight for a long time when the two sides could not stand each other.

古文：孙子曰： 明主、知道之将，不以众卒几功。 
现代文：使用飘风式机动快速队形。普通士兵则是配合作战，保障战斗胜利。 孙膑又说： 明智的君王和精通兵法的将领，都不会用普通士兵去完成关键任务。 
English: Using the drifting wind type of mobile rapid formation. Ordinary soldiers are matched to ensure the success of the battle. Sun Yat-sen also said: A wise king and a general versed in the art of war will not use ordinary soldiers to complete key tasks.

古文：孙子出，而弟子问曰： 威王、田忌臣主之问何如？ 
现代文：问答完毕，孙膑走出来。他的弟子问他： 威王和田忌问策的情况怎么样？ 
English: After the Q&A, Sun Yat-sen came out. His disciple asked him, "What is the situation of King Wei and Emperor Tianyi?"

古文：孙子曰： 威王问九，田忌问七，几知兵矣，而未达于道也。
现代文：孙膑说： 威王问了九个问题，田忌问了七个问题，可以算懂得用兵之道，但还没有完全掌握战争规律。
English: Sun Yat-sen said, "Wei Wang asked nine questions, and Tian Ji asked seven questions. It can be said that they know how to use soldiers, but they have not fully grasped the laws of war.

古文：吾闻素信者昌，立义用兵无备者伤，穷兵者亡。
现代文：我听说，一贯讲信用的君王，其国家必然昌盛没有做好准备而用兵的人必定失败，穷兵黩武的人必定灭亡。
English: I have heard it said that the country of a prince who is always creditworthy will prosper without preparation, while those who make war will fail and those who make war will perish.

古文：齐三世其忧矣。 
现代文：齐国已传了三代，应该有忧患意识啊！ 
English: Qi Guo has been passed down for three generations, there should be a sense of sorrow!

