古文：武皇帝贞简皇后曹氏，庄宗之母也，太原人，以良家子嫔于武皇。
现代文：武皇帝贞简皇后曹氏，是庄宗的母亲。太原人，以良家妇女身份做武皇妃子。
English: Empress Cao of Emperor Wu, the mother of Emperor Zhuangzong, was a native of Taiyuan who acted as Empress Wu's concubine as a woman from a good family.

古文：姿质闲丽，性谦退而明辨，雅为秦国夫人所重。
现代文：身姿美丽气质娴淑，性格谦让明辨是非，深为秦国夫人看重。
English: Lady Qin attaches great importance to the beauty of her body, the beauty of her temperament, the modesty of her personality, and the ability to distinguish right from wrong.

古文：常从容谓武皇曰： 妾观曹姬非常妇人，王其厚待之。 
现代文：常从容对武皇说 ：我看曹姬不是一般妇人，请王厚待她。 
English: Chang Zongrong said to Emperor Wu: I think Cao Ji is not an ordinary woman, please treat her well.

古文：武皇多内宠，乾宁初，平燕蓟，得李匡俦妻张氏，姿色绝代，嬖幸无双。
现代文：武皇有很多内宠女子，乾宁初年，平定燕北蓟州，得到李匡俦妻子张氏，姿色为当代第一，武皇宠爱无比。
English: Emperor Wu had many favorite women. In Qianning's first year, he subdued Yanbei's Bozhou and obtained Li Kuangyao's wife, Zhang. She was the most beautiful woman of her time, and was the favorite of Emperor Wu.

古文：时姬侍盈室，罕得进御，唯太后恩顾不衰。
现代文：当时姬妾侍女满屋都是，很少受武皇光顾，只有太后得到的恩遇不曾减少。
English: At that time, concubines and concubines were all over the house, and they were rarely patronized by Emperor Wu. Only the grace received by the empress dowager never decreased.

古文：武皇性严急，左右有过，必峻于谴罚，无敢言者，唯太后从容救谏，即为解颜。
现代文：武皇性格严峻急躁，身边人有过错，必严加惩罚，没有敢劝说的，只有太后从容解救，立即会使武皇息怒。
English: Emperor Wu's character is severe and impetuous. If anyone around him makes a mistake, he will be severely punished. If he does not dare to persuade, only the Empress Dowager can calmly rescue him, which will immediately calm Emperor Wu's anger.

古文：及庄宗载诞，体貌奇杰，武皇异而怜之，太后益宠贵，诸夫人咸出其下，后亦恭勤内助，左右称之。
现代文：到庄宗降生，体貌奇特，武皇惊异而又爱怜，太后更加受宠尊贵，各位夫人都排在她下面，她也恭敬勤恳治理内室，身边的人都称赞她。
English: When Zhuangzong was born, she had a strange appearance. Emperor Wu was surprised and pitied her. The empress dowager was more favored and respected. All the ladies were ranked below her. She also governed the inner chamber respectfully and diligently. People around her praised her.

古文：武皇薨，庄宗嗣晋王位，时李克宁、李存颢谋变，人情危惧。
现代文：武皇去世，庄宗接任晋王，当时李克宁、李存颢阴谋变乱，人心畏惧。
English: Emperor Wu died, and Zhuangzong took over as the King of Jin. At that time, Li Kening and Li Cunxu plotted a coup, and the people were afraid.

古文：太后召监军张承业，指庄宗谓之曰； 先人把臂授公此兒，如闻外谋，欲孤付托，公等但置予母子有地，毋令乞食于沛，幸矣。 
现代文：太后叫来监军张承业，指着庄宗对他说： 先君拉着您的手把这孩子交给您，如有人谋反，请不要忘记付托，您们只要让我们母子有生存的地方，不至于到汴州讨饭，就大幸了。 
English: The empress dowager called Zhang Chengye, the military overseer, and pointed to Zhuangzong and said to him, "The forefather took you by the hand and gave you this child. If anyone plots against us, please don't forget to entrust him to us. As long as you let our mother and son have a place to live and don't have to go to Zhangzhou to beg for food, we will be very lucky."

古文：承业因诛存颢、克宁，以清内难。
现代文：张承业于是杀死李存颢、李克宁，以清除内患。
English: Zhang Chengye then killed Li Cunxu and Li Kening in order to eliminate internal problems.

古文：庄宗善音律，喜伶人谑浪，太后常提耳诲之。
现代文：庄宗精通音律，喜欢与伶人戏谑调笑，太后曾提着他耳朵教训他。
English: Zhuangzong was well-versed in musical notation and liked to joke with the deaf. The empress dowager once held his ear to teach him how to play the flute.

古文：天祐七年，镇、定求援，庄宗促命治兵，太后曰： 予齿渐衰，兒但不坠先人之业为幸矣，何事栉风沐雨，离我晨昏！ 
现代文：天七年镇州、定州求援，庄宗急忙下令带兵，太后说： 我年岁已大，孩儿只要不败落先人基业就不错了，何必顶风冒雨，离我远行！ 
English: On the seventh day of the seventh month, Zhenzhou and Dingzhou asked for help. Zhuang Zong hurriedly ordered to lead an army. The empress dowager said, "I am already old. As long as I don't lose the inheritance of my ancestors, it's not a bad thing. Why do you have to brave the wind and rain and travel far away from me?"

古文：庄宗曰： 禀先王遗旨，须灭仇雠。
现代文：庄宗说： 接受先王遗旨，必须消灭仇敌。
English: Zhuangzong said: To accept the last will of the former king, we must eliminate the enemy.

古文：山东之事，机不可失。 
现代文：山东之事，机不可失。 
English: When it comes to Shandong, there is no time to lose.

古文：及发，太后饯于汾桥，悲不自胜。
现代文：军队出发时，太后在汾桥饯行，十分悲伤。
English: When the troops set out, the empress dowager was walking along the bridge, very sad.

古文：庄宗平定赵、魏，驻于鄴城，每一岁之内，驰驾归宁者数四，民士服其仁孝。
现代文：庄宗平定赵、魏，驻扎在邺城，一年里，多次骑马看望太后，百姓官员都佩服他的仁义孝顺。
English: Zhuangzong subdued Zhao and Wei, stationed in Lucheng. In one year, he visited the empress dowager on horseback many times, and the people and officials all admired his benevolence, righteousness and filial piety.

古文：太后初封晋国夫人，庄宗即位，命宰臣卢损奉册书上皇太后尊号。
现代文：太后起初封为晋国夫人，庄宗即位后，命令宰臣卢损奉册书上皇太后尊号。
English: At first, the empress dowager was given the title of the wife of Jin, but after Emperor Zhuangzong ascended to the throne, he ordered the aide-de-camp Luzia to record the empress dowager's honorific title.

古文：其年平定河南，西幸洛阳，令皇弟存渥、皇子继岌就太原迎奉。
现代文：这一年平定河南，往西到洛阳，令皇弟李存渥、皇子李继岌到太原迎接太后。
English: In this year, Henan was pacified and moved west to Luoyang, and the emperor's younger brother Li Cunwu and his son Li Jizhe went to Taiyuan to meet the empress dowager.

古文：庄宗亲至怀州，迎归长寿宫，太后素与刘太妃善，分诀之后，悒然不乐。
现代文：庄宗亲自到怀州，迎归到长寿宫。太后一直和刘太妃很友好，分别之后，郁郁不乐。
English: Zhuang Zong himself went to Waizhou to welcome her back to the Longevity Palace. The empress dowager had always been very friendly with Liu Taifei, but after their separation, she was depressed.

古文：俄闻太妃寝疾，尚医中使，问讯结辙。
现代文：不久听说太妃病倒，派去很多太医中使治病问讯，往来不断。
English: Soon after, he heard that Toffee had fallen ill, and sent many doctors to inquire about her treatment.

古文：既而谓庄宗曰： 吾与太妃恩如伯仲，彼经年抱疾，但见吾面，差足慰心，吾暂至晋阳，旬朔与之俱来。 
现代文：不久又对庄宗说 ：我和太妃情同姐妹，她常年有病，只要见了我，心里会有安慰，我暂时去晋阳，十天半月后和她一起回来。 
English: Soon he said to Zhuangzong, "I and Toifei are like sisters. She has been ill for many years. Whenever she sees me, her heart will be comforted. I will go to Jinyang for a while, and come back with her in ten days and a half months."

古文：庄宗曰： 时方暑毒，山路崎岖，无烦往复，可令存渥辈迎侍太妃。 
现代文：庄宗说： 这时正是暑热天气，山路崎岖，不必麻烦您往返，可以叫李存渥等人迎接太妃。 
English: Zhuangzong said: At this time, it is the hot weather, the mountain road is rugged, do not bother you to go back and forth, you can ask Li Cunwoo and others to meet Toffee.

古文：乃止。
现代文：太后才作罢。
English: He dismissed the idea.

古文：及凶问至，太后恸哭累旬，由是不豫，寻崩于长寿宫。
现代文：当太妃死讯传来后，太后痛哭了几十天，从此生病，不久在长寿宫去世。
English: When the news of the death of Toi came, the empress dowager cried bitterly for dozens of days, fell ill, and died soon after in the Longevity Palace.

古文：同光三年冬十月，上谥曰贞简皇太后，葬于寿安陵。
现代文：同光三年十月，上谥号为贞简皇太后，葬于寿安陵。
English: In October of the same year, her posthumous name was Empress Dowager Zhenjan, and she was buried in Shouan Mausoleum.

