古文：情性者，人治之本，礼乐所由生也。
现代文：情性，是治理人的根本，礼乐制度就是由此制定出来的。
English: Sentiment is the basis for governing people, and the etiquette system was developed from this.

古文：故原情性之极，礼为之防，乐为之节。
现代文：特意分析了情性发展到极端的后果，然后用礼来作为防范，用乐来作为节制。
English: He deliberately analyzed the consequences of extreme emotional development, and then used etiquette as a precaution and music as a restraint.

古文：性有卑谦辞让，故制礼以适其宜；情有好恶喜怒哀乐，故作乐以通其敬。
现代文：性有卑谦辞让，所以制礼以便适合其亲善；情有好恶喜怒哀乐，所以作乐以便得到严肃的表达。
English: Humility is a virtue, so the etiquette should be suitable for its affinity; feelings are likes and dislikes, anger and sadness, so make music to get a serious expression.

古文：礼所以制，乐所为作者，情与性也。昔儒旧生，著作篇章，莫不论说，莫能实定。
现代文：制礼作乐的根据，是人的情和性。过去的儒生，写文章，没有不论说的，却没有一个能作出正确的结论。
English: The basis of the system of etiquette and music is human affection and disposition. In the past, Confucian scholars wrote articles, but no matter what they said, none of them could make a correct conclusion.

古文：周人世硕，以为 人性有善恶，举人之善性，养而致之则善长；性恶，养而致之则恶长 。
现代文：周朝人世硕认为人的本性中有善的有恶的两方面，取人的善良本性，通过培养、引导，好的品行就会滋长起来；取人的恶劣本性，加以培养、引导，那坏的品行就会发展下去。
English: The Zhou Dynasty believed that there are both good and evil aspects in human nature. If you take a person's good nature and nurture and guide it, good behavior will grow; if you take a person's evil nature and nurture and guide it, bad behavior will develop.

古文：如此，则性各有阴阳，善恶在所养焉。
现代文：像这样，原来情性就会各有善恶，而是善是恶，在于培养的方向。
English: In this way, the original emotion will have good and evil, but good is evil, depends on the direction of training.

古文：故世子作《养书》一篇。
现代文：所以世硕作《养性书》一篇。
English: That's why Shiso wrote a "Nutrition Book."

古文：密子贱、漆雕开、公孙尼子之徒，亦论情性，与世子相出入，皆言性有善有恶。
现代文：虙子贱、漆雕开、公孙尼子这些人，也论述过情性，与世硕相互有出入，但都说人的情性中有善恶两个方面。
English: Zou Zi Tian, Urushi Zhao Kai, Gong Sun Nizi, these people also discussed emotionality, and there are differences between them and the world, but they all said that there are two aspects of good and evil in human emotionality.

古文：孟子作《性善》之篇，以为 人性皆善，及其不善，物乱之也 。
现代文：孟子作《性善》篇，认为人的本性都是善良的，至于他们不好的东西，是受了外界事物的不良影响。
English: Mencius wrote "Sexual Virtue" and believed that all human beings are good by nature, and that what is bad for them is due to the bad influence of external things.

古文：谓人生於天地，皆禀善性，长大与物交接者，放纵悖乱，不善日以生矣。
现代文：说人由天地所生，都禀受了善良的本性，长大以后与外界事物接触，放纵自己，胡作非为，恶劣品质日渐滋长。
English: It is said that people are born from heaven and earth, and all of them are born with a good nature. When they grow up, they come into contact with external things, indulge themselves, do bad things, and their bad qualities gradually grow.

古文：若孟子之言，人幼小之时，无有不善也。
现代文：像孟子说的，人幼小的时候，没有不善良的。
English: As Mencius said, when a person is young, there is nothing that is not good.

古文：微子曰 我旧云孩子，王子不出。 
现代文：但微子说： 我过去评论孩子时说过，纣王没有一般孩子好。 
English: But the microbe said: When I used to comment on children, I said that Hao Wang was no better than an ordinary child.

古文：纣为孩子时，微子睹其不善之性。
现代文：因为纣王做孩子的时候，微子就看出了他不良的本性。
English: Because when Hao Wang was a child, the microbe saw his bad nature.

古文：性恶不出众庶，长大为乱不变，故云也。
现代文：其禀性恶劣，不如一般人，长大之后为非作歹，并没有改变原来的禀性，所以他这样说。
English: His toughness is bad, not as good as the average person. When he grew up, he did bad things and did not change his original toughness, so he said this.

古文：羊舌食我初生之时，叔姬视之，及堂，闻其啼声而还，曰： 其声，豺狼之声也。
现代文：羊舌食我刚生的时候，祖母叔姬去看他，刚走到堂屋，听见他啼哭的声音就往回走，说： 他啼哭的声音，像豺狼号叫。
English: When I was just born, my grandmother, Auntie, went to see him. As soon as she got to the hall, she heard the sound of his crying and went back, saying: "The sound of his crying is like the howling of a wolf."

古文：野心无亲，非是莫灭羊舌氏。
现代文：狼子野心，不认六亲，只有这个孩子，才会灭我羊舌氏族。 
English: A wolf with ambition, who doesn't recognize his six relatives. Only this child will be able to destroy my sheep-tongued clan.

古文：隧不肯见。
现代文：始终不肯去看他。
English: She has always refused to see him.

古文：及长，祁胜为乱，食我与焉。
现代文：等他长大以后，祁胜作乱，羊舌食我参与其中。
English: When he grows up, he'll start a riot, and I'll get involved.

古文：国人杀食我。羊舌氏由是灭矣。
现代文：国人杀了羊舌食我，羊舌氏因此灭亡。
English: My compatriots killed the Sheep Tongue and ate me, and so the Sheep Tongue clan was destroyed.

古文：纣之恶在孩子之时；食我之乱见始生之声。
现代文：纣王的恶劣品质，表现在孩子的时候；羊舌食我参与作乱，显现在刚生时啼哭的声音。
English: The bad qualities of the king of the baboons are manifested in children; the sheep's tongue-eating and my participation in the disturbance are manifested in the sound of wailing at the time of birth.

古文：孩子始生，未与物接，谁令悖者？
现代文：孩子刚生下来，还没有与外界事物接触，谁会叫他胡来？
English: When a child is just born and has not yet come into contact with the outside world, who would call him crazy?

古文：丹硃生於唐宫，商均生於虞室。
现代文：丹朱在尧的宫里出生，商均在舜屋里出生。
English: Danzhu was born in the palace of Zou, and Shangdu was born in the house of Zou.

古文：唐、虞之时，可比屋而封，所与接者，必多善矣。
现代文：尧、舜的时候，挨家挨户都有品德高尚可以受封的人，所被接触到的人，肯定大多是善良的百姓。
English: When I visit, I go from house to house and there are people of high moral character who can be sealed, and most of the people I come into contact with are certainly good people.

古文：二帝之旁，必多贤矣。
现代文：尧舜二帝的身旁，肯定大多是贤能的大臣。
English: Alongside the two emperors, most of them must have been capable ministers.

古文：然而丹硃傲，商均虐，并失帝统，历世为戒。
现代文：然而丹朱傲慢，商均暴虐，都失去了帝位，历代成为人们的教训。
English: However, Danzhu's arrogance and Shangyun's tyranny both lost the imperial throne, and became a lesson for people throughout the ages.

古文：且孟子相人以眸子焉，心清而眸子，心浊而眸子眊。
现代文：再说孟子是根据对方的瞳人来观察人的好坏，心地清明眼珠就明亮，心地混浊眼珠就昏乱。
English: In addition, Mencius observed the good and bad of people according to the other person's pupil. If the mind is clear, the eyes will be bright, and if the mind is muddled, the eyes will be confused.

古文：人生目辄眊了，眊禀之於天，不同气也；非幼小之时，长大与人接乃更眊也。
现代文：人生下来眼睛总有昏乱与明亮，这种昏乱与明亮是从上天禀受来的，是承受了不同的气形成的，并不是幼小的时候明亮，长大之后与人接触，才变得昏乱的。
English: People's eyes are always dizzy and bright when they are born. This dizziness and brightness are received from God, and are formed by different qi. They are not bright when they are young, and only become dizzy after contact with people when they grow up.

古文：性本自然，善恶有质。
现代文：生性原本自然就如此，它的善恶是由承受的气的性质决定的。
English: Nature is like this by nature, and its good and evil are determined by the nature of the qi it receives.

古文：孟子之言情性，未为实也。
现代文：孟子说的人情天性，并不符合实际情况。
English: What Mencius said about human nature does not correspond to the actual situation.

古文：然而性善之论，亦有所缘。
现代文：然而人天性善良的说法，也有一定依据。
English: However, there is also some basis for saying that human nature is kind.

古文：一岁婴兒无争夺之心，长大之後，或渐利色，狂心悖行，由此生也。
现代文：一岁的婴儿，没有你争我夺的心，长大之后，有的逐渐浸染了自私与情欲，于是放纵胡为，由此而产生。
English: One-year-old babies do not have the heart to compete with others. After growing up, some are gradually impregnated with selfishness and lust, so they indulge in immoral behavior, resulting in this.

古文：告子与孟生同时，其论性无善恶之分，譬之湍水，决之东则东，决之西则西，夫水无分於东西，犹人无分於善恶也。
现代文：告子跟孟子同一个时代，他评论人性没有善恶的区分，就像湍流着的水，挖个缺口使它向东就向东流，挖个缺口使它向西就向西流。水本来没有向东流向西流的区分，就像人性没有善恶区分一样。
English: Guo Zi was in the same era as Mencius. He commented that human nature has no distinction between good and evil, just like flowing water. Dig a hole to make it flow east to east, dig a hole to make it flow west to west. Water originally had no distinction between flowing east to west, just as human nature had no distinction between good and evil.

古文：夫告子之言，谓人之性与水同也。
现代文：告子的话，是说人性与水相同。
English: To say so is to say that human nature is the same as water.

古文：使性若水，可以水喻性，犹金之为金，木之为木也。
现代文：假使人性像水，可以用水来比喻人性，那就像金成为金是因为它本性是金，木成为木是由于它本性是木一样，人善是由于禀性是善的，人恶也是由于禀性是恶的。
English: If human nature is like water, and water can be used as a metaphor for human nature, then just as gold becomes gold because its nature is gold, and wood becomes wood because its nature is wood, so human good is good because its nature is good, and human evil is evil because its nature is evil.

古文：人善因善，恶亦因恶，初禀天然之姿，受纯壹之质，故生而兆见，善恶可察。
现代文：开始在娘胎中禀受天然之气形成的本性，接受的是单纯的资质，所以生下来就有征兆呈现，是善是恶可以明察。
English: Nature, which is formed in the womb by natural gas, accepts only pure qualities, so there are signs when you are born, and you can clearly see whether you are good or evil.

古文：无分於善恶，可推移者，谓中人也，不善不恶，须教成者也。
现代文：对于善恶无法区分，而可以改变的，称为平常人。他们不善不恶，要等待教育才能成为性善的人。
English: Those who cannot distinguish between good and evil, but can change, are called ordinary people. They are neither good nor evil, and they have to wait for education to become good-natured people.

古文：故孔子曰： 中人以上可以语上也；中人以下，不可以语上也。 
现代文：所以孔子说： 具有中等以上智力的人，可以告诉他们高深的道理；中等以下智力的人，不能够告诉他们高深的道理。 
English: Therefore, Confucius said: People with above-average intelligence can tell them profound truths; people with below-average intelligence cannot tell them profound truths.

古文：告子之以决水喻者，徒谓中人，不指极善极恶也。
现代文：告子用决水来比喻人性，仅仅说的是平常人，并不指最善与最恶的。
English: Guo Zi's analogy of human nature with water breaking is just an ordinary person, and does not refer to the best and the worst.

古文：孔子曰： 性相近也，习相远也。 
现代文：孔子说： 人性本来是相近的，只因受不同习气的影响，才彼此相差很远。 
English: In the preface to the Analects of Confucius, he said, "Sex is similar, but learning is different."

古文：夫中人之性，在所习焉。
现代文：这样看来，平常人的人性，在于习气了。
English: In this way, the humanity of ordinary people lies in their habits.

古文：习善而为善，习恶而为恶也。
现代文：习气好就成为好人，习气坏就成为坏人。
English: Good habits make you a good person, bad habits make you a bad person.

古文：至於极善极恶，非复在习。
现代文：至于最善最恶的，那就不再决定于习气。
English: As for the best and the worst, that is no longer determined by habit.

古文：故孔子曰： 惟上智与下愚不移。 
现代文：所以孔子说： 只有上等聪明的人与下等愚蠢的人才不可能改变。 
English: That is why Confucius said, "Only the wisest of men and the stupidest of men cannot change."

古文：性有善不善，圣化贤教，不能复移易也。
现代文：人性有善与不善，即使圣贤教化，它也不会再改变。
English: Human nature has good and bad, even if it is educated by sages, it will not change again.

古文：孔子，道德之祖，诸子之中最卓者也，而曰 上智下愚不移 ，故知告子之言，未得实也。夫告子之言，亦有缘也。
现代文：孔子是道德的鼻祖，在所有人中是最卓越的，都说 只有上等聪明的人与下等愚蠢的人才不会改变 ，所以知道告子的话，不够真实。不过，告子的话，也有缘由。
English: Confucius is the originator of morality, the most outstanding of all, saying that only the highest intelligent people and the lowest stupid people will not change, so it is not true enough to know the words of Guozi. However, there is a reason for the words of Guozi.

古文：《诗》曰： 彼姝之子，何以与之。 
现代文：《诗经·鄘风·干旄》上说： 那个美好的人啊，用什么帮助他？ 
English: "The Book of Poetry, the Wind, and the Dry Grass" said: That beautiful person, how can I help him?

古文：其传曰： 譬犹练丝，染之蓝则青，染之硃则赤。 
现代文：其注释说： 比喻像白色的丝，用青色的染料去染它就成为青色，用红色的染料去染它就成为红色。 
English: Its commentary says: The metaphor is like white silk, dye it with blue dye and it becomes blue, dye it with red dye and it becomes red.

古文：夫决水使之东西，犹染丝令之青赤也。
现代文：挖个决口让水向东流或向西流，就像染丝使它成为青色或红色。
English: Digging a breach to let the water flow east or west is like dyeing silk to make it blue or red.

古文：丹硃、商均已染於唐、虞之化矣，然而丹硃傲而商均虐者，至恶之质，不受蓝硃变也。
现代文：丹朱，商均应该已被尧、舜浸染改变了，然而丹朱却很傲慢、商均却很暴虐，可见最恶劣的本性，是不会接受像白丝被染成青色或红色那样改变的。
English: Dan Zhu and Shang Quan should have been changed by dyeing and dyeing, but Dan Zhu was very arrogant and Shang Quan was very tyrannical, showing the worst nature, which would not accept changes like white silk being dyed blue or red.

古文：孙卿有反孟子，作《性恶》之篇，以为 人性恶，其善者伪也 。
现代文：荀子又责难孟子，作《性恶》篇，认为 人性本来是恶的，其好的品行是人为的结果。 
English: Xun Zi also rebuked Mencius, writing "Sexual Evil," arguing that human nature is inherently evil, and its good behavior is an artificial result.

古文：性恶者，以为人生皆得恶性也；伪者，长大之後，勉使为善也。
现代文：性恶，是认为人刚生下来都具备有恶劣的本性；人为，是指长大之后，努力使自己行为善良。
English: "Sexual evil" means that people are born with an evil nature; "artificial" means that after growing up, they strive to make their behavior good.

古文：若孙卿之言，人幼小无有善也。
现代文：像荀子说的，那人幼小的时候就不会有善良行为。
English: As the cripple said, when that person is young, there will be no good deeds.

古文：稷为兒，以种树为戏；孔子能行，以俎豆为弄。
现代文：后稷做孩子的时候，以种植当作戏耍；孔子刚会走路的时候，以陈设俎豆当做游戏。
English: When Hou Yi was a child, he used planting as a game; when Confucius was just able to walk, he used setting up peas as a game.

古文：石生而坚，兰生而香。
现代文：石头一产生就坚硬，兰草刚发芽就清香。
English: The stone is hard as soon as it is born, and the orchid is fragrant as soon as it sprouts.

古文：禀善气，长大就成，故种树之戏为唐司马；俎豆之弄，为周圣师。
现代文：人刚生下来已禀承善良之气，长大以后就成为善人。所以种植的戏耍，使稷成了尧时掌管农业的司马；陈设俎豆的游戏，使孔子成了东周时的圣贤之师。
English: When a person is just born, he has already inherited the spirit of kindness, and when he grows up, he will become a good person. Therefore, the play of planting has made the earthworm the steward of agriculture when he was a toad; the game of setting up peas has made Confucius the sage teacher of Eastern Zhou Dynasty.

古文：禀兰石之性，故有坚香之验。
现代文：由于禀承了石头兰草的本性，所以有坚硬清香的应验。
English: Because it inherits the nature of the stone orchid, it has a hard and fragrant fulfillment.

古文：夫孙卿之言，未为得实。
现代文：这样看来，荀子的话，不能成为事实。
English: In this way, the words of the cripple cannot become a reality.

古文：然而性恶之言，有缘也。
现代文：然而性恶的说法，也有一定的缘由。
English: However, there is also a certain reason for the term "sexual evil."

古文：一岁婴兒，无推让之心，见食，号欲食之；睹好，啼欲玩之。
现代文：一岁的小孩，没有推让的心。看见食物，哭叫着想吃它；看见好玩的，哭叫着想玩它。
English: A one-year-old is not a pushover. When he sees food, he cries to eat it. When he sees fun, he cries to play with it.

古文：长大之後，禁情割欲，勉励为善矣。
现代文：长大以后，就会克制感情，去掉私欲，努力磨炼成为善良的人。
English: When they grow up, they will restrain their emotions, get rid of their selfish desires, and strive to become good people.

古文：刘子政非之曰： 如此，则天无气也。阴阳善恶不相当，则人之为善安从生？ 
现代文：刘子政指责说： 像这样，那天就没有正常的气，而是有阴无阳，有恶无善，根本不相应，照这样，人表现出来的善良，又是从哪里来的呢？ 
English: Liu Zizheng accused: "In this way, there was no normal qi on that day, but there was a yin and yang, there was evil and good, and there was no corresponding at all. According to this, where did the goodness that people showed come from?

古文：陆贾曰： 天地生人也，以礼义之性。
现代文：陆贾说： 天地给人生命，就赋予了礼义的本性。
English: Lu Jia said: When heaven and earth give life to people, they endow them with the nature of courtesy.

古文：人能察己所以受命则顺，顺之谓道。 
现代文：人能够明察到自己是从天地那里接受到的礼义之性，就能顺应它。能顺应它，就叫做道。 
English: If a person can clearly see the nature of the etiquette that he has received from heaven and earth, he can conform to it. If he can conform to it, it is called the Way.

古文：夫陆贾知人礼义为性，人亦能察己所以受命。
现代文：陆贾的话是说人生下来就有礼义之性，人也能明察到自己是从天地那里接受的礼义之性。
English: Lu Jia's words mean that people are born with courtesy and politeness, and people can also clearly see the courtesy and politeness they receive from heaven and earth.

古文：性善者，不待察而自善；性恶者，虽能察之，犹背礼畔义，义挹於善不能为也。
现代文：性善的人，不等待明察就能自然从善；性恶的人，虽然也能明察到它，但仍然违背了礼义。礼义来自于人的善性，不是靠人为得到的。
English: A good-natured person can naturally do good without waiting to be noticed; a bad-natured person, although he can also notice it, still violates etiquette. Etiquette comes from a person's good nature, not from people.

古文：故贪者能言廉，乱者能言治。
现代文：所以贪婪的人会夸夸其谈地讲廉洁，作乱的人能头头是道地说治理。
English: Therefore, greedy people will boastfully talk about integrity, and troublemakers can boastfully talk about governance.

古文：盗跖非人之窃也，庄蹻刺人之滥也，明能察己，口能论贤，性恶不为，何益於善？
现代文：盗跖会指责别人偷窃，庄跷会斥责别人贪得无厌，他们都清楚地能明察到自己从天地得到的礼义之性，嘴里会谈论圣贤的道理，却因本性不好，自己不能实行，这对于从善有什么好处呢？
English: A thief will accuse others of stealing, a dignified person will reproach others of being greedy, they can clearly see the nature of courtesy they have received from heaven and earth, they will talk about the truth of saints and sages, but because of their bad nature, they cannot practice, what is the benefit of doing good?

古文：陆贾之言未能得实。
现代文：可见，陆贾的话，并不那么真实。
English: It can be seen that Lu Jia's words are not so true.

古文：董仲舒览孙、孟之书，作《情性》之说曰： 天之大经，一阴一阳。人之大经，一情一性。
现代文：董仲舒看了荀子和孟子的书，兴起情性的说法，说： 天的常道，是有阴有阳；人的常道，是有情有性。
English: Dong Zhongshu read the book of Zou Zi and Mencius, and the saying of emotion arose, saying: The normal way of heaven is to have yin and yang; the normal way of man is to have emotion and nature.

古文：性生於阳，情生於阴。
现代文：人性生于阳，人情生于阴。
English: Human nature is born in the yang, human feelings are born in the yin.

古文：阴气鄙，阳气仁。
现代文：阴气卑劣，阳气仁义。
English: Yin qi is despicable, yang qi is benevolent.

古文：曰性善者，是见其阳也；谓恶者，是见其阴者也。 
现代文：说人性善的，只看见它阳的一面；说人性恶的，又只看见它阴的一面。 
English: Those who say that human nature is good only see its bright side; those who say that human nature is evil only see its dark side.

古文：若仲舒之言，谓孟子见其阳，孙卿见其阴也。
现代文：照董仲舒的说法，认为孟子只见到它阳的一面，荀子只见到它阴的一面。
English: According to Dong Zhongshu, Mencius only saw its positive side, while Diao Zi only saw its negative side.

古文：处二家各有见，可也。不处人情性，情性有善有恶，未也。
现代文：分析他们二家各有所见，是对的；而不分析人的情性有善有恶，是不对的。
English: It is right to analyze the two of them as having their own views, but it is wrong not to analyze human nature as having good and evil.

古文：夫人情性，同生於阴阳，其生於阴阳，有渥有泊。
现代文：人的情性同时生于阴阳，虽生于阴阳，但有厚有薄。
English: Human affection is born in both yin and yang, and although it is born in yin and yang, it is both thick and thin.

古文：玉生於石，有纯有驳，性情生於阴阳，安能纯善？
现代文：玉产生于石，有纯的有不纯的，人情性生于阴阳，哪能都是纯的善的？
English: Jade is born from stone, there are pure and impure, human nature is born from yin and yang, how can they all be pure and good?

古文：仲舒之言，未能得实。
现代文：董仲舒的话，并不那么真实。
English: Dong Zhongshu's words are not so true.

古文：刘子政曰： 性，生而然者也，在於身而不发；情，接於物而然者也，出形於外。
现代文：刘子政说： 人性，生下来就是这个样子，在身体里面存在，而不表露出来。人情，是与外界事物接触而形成的，在身体外面表现出来。
English: Liu Zimeng said: Human nature is born this way, it exists inside the body without being exposed. Human feelings are formed by contact with external things and are manifested outside the body.

古文：形外则谓之阳；不发者则谓之阴。 
现代文：在外表露的则称之为阳，不表露的则称之为阴。 
English: Those that are exposed on the outside are called yang, and those that are not exposed are called yin.

古文：夫子政之言，谓性在身而不发。
现代文：刘子政的话，认为人性是在身体里却不显露出来。
English: According to Liu Zizheng, human nature is in the body but does not reveal itself.

古文：情接於物，形出於外，故谓之阳；性不发，不与物接，故谓之阴。
现代文：人情与外界事物接触，在身体外表现出来，所以称之为阳；人性不表露，不与外界事物接触，所以称之为阴。
English: Human nature is in contact with external things and is manifested outside the body, so it is called yang; human nature is not exposed and is not in contact with external things, so it is called yin.

古文：夫如子政之言，乃谓情为阳、性为阴也。
现代文：照刘子政的说法，就称人情为阳，称人性为阴。
English: According to Liu Zizheng, human feelings are called yang, and human nature is called yin.

古文：不据本所生起，苟以形出与不发见定阴阳也。
现代文：这是没有依据情性产生的根源来谈论产生的起源，而只是用外露或不外露把情性说成是阴的阳的。
English: This is not based on the root cause of the emotion to talk about the origin of the emotion, but only to say that the emotion is the yin of the yang with or without exposure.

古文：必以形出为阳，性亦与物接，造此必於是，颠沛必於是。
现代文：一定要把外露叫做阳，人性也与外界事物接触，在急迫情况下离不开它，在颠沛情况下也离不开它。
English: We must call exposure the yang, and human nature is also in contact with external things. In urgent situations, it cannot be separated from it, and in extreme situations, it cannot be separated from it.

古文：恻隐不忍，仁之气也；卑歉辞让，性之发也，有与接会，故恻隐卑谦，形出於外。
现代文：怜悯而不残忍，是人禀承 仁气 的表现。
English: Compassion, not cruelty, is the expression of man's innate benevolence.

古文：谓性在内，不与物接，恐非其实。
现代文：卑谦辞让，是人性的表露。由于有外界事物与它接触，所以怜悯、卑谦，在身体外部表现出来。
English: Humility is an expression of human nature. Since there are external things in contact with it, compassion and humility are expressed outside the body.

古文：不论性之善恶，徒议外内阴阳，理难以知。
现代文：说人性在身体里存在不与外界事物接触，恐怕不是事实。
English: It is probably not true to say that human nature exists in the body without contact with external things.

古文：且从子政之言，以性为阴，情为阳，夫人禀情，竟有善恶不也？
现代文：不论说人性的善与恶，而仅仅议论它存在于体外还是体内，叫做阳还是叫做阴，从道理上难以弄清楚。而且顺从刘子政的说法，把人性叫做阴，人情叫做阳，那么人禀承自然之气所形成的本性，究竟还有没有善恶呢？
English: Whether we talk about the good and evil of human nature, but only talk about whether it exists outside the body or inside the body, whether it is called yang or yin, it is difficult to figure out from the reason. And according to Liu Zizheng's argument, human nature is called yin, and human feelings are called yang. Then, is there any good or evil in the nature formed by people inheriting the natural gas?

古文：自孟子以下至刘子政，鸿儒博生，闻见多矣。然而论情性竟无定是。
现代文：从孟子以下到刘子政，都是学识渊博的大儒，听见的看见的多得很，然而论说人的情性，竟然没有判断对。
English: From Mencius down to Liu Zicheng, they were all learned great scholars, hearing and seeing a lot, but when it came to human emotions, they didn't have the right judgment.

古文：唯世硕、公孙尼子之徒，颇得其正。
现代文：只有世硕、公孙尼子这些人，讲得稍微接近于正确。
English: Only Sheshuo, Gongsun Nizi and these people spoke a little closer to the truth.

古文：由此言之，事易知，道难论也。
现代文：由此说来，事情容易知道，但是道理却难得说清。
English: In this way, things are easy to know, but the truth is hard to explain.

古文：酆文茂记，繁如荣华，恢谐剧谈，甘如饴蜜，未必得实。
现代文：内容丰富的文章和书籍，像盛开的花朵那样茂盛；有趣流畅的言谈，如饴糖蜂蜜那样甘甜，但不见得符合事实。
English: Informative articles and books are as abundant as blooming flowers; interesting and fluent speech is as sweet as maple syrup honey, but it may not be true.

古文：实者，人性有善有恶，犹人才有高有下也。
现代文：事实上人性有善有恶，就像人的才能有高有低一样。
English: In fact, human nature has good and evil, just as human talent has high and low.

古文：高不可下，下不可高。
现代文：高超的不能说它低下，低下的也不能说它高超。
English: The superior cannot be said to be inferior, and the inferior cannot be said to be superior.

古文：谓性无善恶，是谓人才无高下也。
现代文：认为人性没有善恶，就是认为人的才能没有高低一样。
English: To say that there is no good or evil in human nature is to say that there is no high or low in human talent.

古文：禀性受命，同一实也。
现代文：禀受自然之气形成的命与性，实际上是一样的。
English: Life and nature, both of which are formed by the breath of nature, are actually the same.

古文：命有贵贱，性有善恶。
现代文：命有贵与贱之分，性有善与恶之别。
English: Life is divided into precious and worthless, and sex is divided into good and evil.

古文：谓性无善恶，是谓人命无贵贱也。
现代文：认为人性没有善与恶，就是认为人命没有贵与贱。
English: To hold that there is no good or evil in human nature is to hold that human life is neither precious nor cheap.

古文：九州田土之性，善恶不均。
现代文：中国田土的性质，好坏不均匀，所以土色有黄、红、黑的区别，土质有上、中、下的差别。
English: The quality of China's soil is uneven, so the soil color varies from yellow, red and black, and the soil quality varies from top, middle and bottom.

古文：故有黄赤黑之别，上中下之差；水潦不同，故有清浊之流，东西南北之趋。
现代文：水源不同，所以有清的水流，有浊的水流，有流往东西南北的不同趋向。
English: The water source is different, so there are clear water currents, turbulent water currents, and different directions flowing from east to west and north to south.

古文：人禀天地之性，怀五常之气，或仁或义，性术乖也；动作趋翔，或重或轻，性识诡也。面色或白或黑，身形或长或短，至老极死不可变易，天性然也。
现代文：人禀受天地之性，心存仁、义、礼、智、信 五常 之气，有人仁有人义，是天生的道义不同；遇事动作机灵与呆板，有人严重有人轻微，是天生判断力不同；人脸上的颜色有人白有人黑，人的身体有人高有人矮，到人老最后死去都不会改变，这是因为天性如此。
English: People are influenced by the nature of heaven and earth, and keep in mind the five elements of benevolence, righteousness, courtesy, wisdom, and faith. Some people are benevolent and righteous, and they are born with different moralities. In case of action, they are clever and dull. Some people are serious and some are light, and they are born with different judgment. The color of people's face is white and some is black, the body is tall and some is short, and they will not change until they die. This is because nature is like this.

古文：余固以孟轲言人性善者，中人以上者也；孙卿言人性恶者，中人以下者也；扬雄言人性善恶混者，中人也。
现代文：人们都只知道水、土、物、器的形状与性质不同，却不懂得人性的善恶是由于禀受的气有所不同。我因此认为孟子说人性是善的，是指中等才智以上的人；荀子说人性是恶的，是指中等才智以下的人；扬雄说人性是善恶兼有的，是指具有中等才智的平常人。
English: People only know that the shape and nature of water, soil, objects and utensils are different, but they do not understand that the good and evil of human nature are different due to the influence of qi. Therefore, I think that when Mencius said that human nature is good, it refers to people with above-average intelligence; when Xunzi said that human nature is evil, it refers to people with below-average intelligence; when Yang Xiong said that human nature is both good and evil, it refers to ordinary people with above-average intelligence.

古文：若反经合道，则可以为教；尽性之理，则未也。
现代文：如果为了让人们的行为与经书、道义相符合，那么以上关于人性的说法都可以用作施行教化的依据。但从充分阐明人性的道理来评论，那是不够的。
English: In order to make people's behavior consistent with the scriptures and morality, the above statements about human nature can be used as a basis for the implementation of indoctrination, but it is not enough to comment from the perspective of fully clarifying the truth of human nature.

