古文：初二日早起，阴云如故。
现代文：初二日早晨起床，天空阴云密布如故。
English: I woke up on the morning of the first two days, and the sky was still overcast.

古文：饭久之，夫至乃行。
现代文：饭后很久，脚夫到了便动身。
English: Long after dinner, the porter arrives and sets off.

古文：东向三里，即前往观鱼道也。
现代文：向东三里，就是前两天去观看捕鱼的路。
English: Three miles to the east, that's the road where I went to watch the cormorants fishing two days ago.

古文：既乃渡溪而北，随溪北岸东行，又二里，有石峰东峙峡中。
现代文：随即渡到溪水北岸，沿溪流北岸往东行，又走二里，东面有石峰屹立在峡中。
English: Then I immediately crossed to the north bank of the stream and walked along the north bank of the stream to the east for another two miles. To the east, there was a rocky peak standing in the gorge.

古文：盖南北两界山，自州西八里即排闼而来，中开一坞，水经其间，至此则东石峰中峙而坞始尽，溪水由石峰之南而东趋岭中，即昨所随而入者。
现代文：大体上南北两列山，自州城西面八里就像门扇样排列而来，中间分开一个山坞，溪水流经坞中，到了这里东面就有石峰屹立在中央而山坞才到了头，溪水由石峰的南麓往东奔入峡中，就是昨天跟随农君进去的地方。
English: In general, there are two rows of mountains from north to south, eight miles from the west of the city of Zhouzhou, arranged like doors. In the middle, there is a dock. The stream flows through the dock. To the east of here, there is a stone peak standing in the center and the dock has just reached the end. The stream flows from the southern foot of the stone peak to the east into the gorge, which is where the farmer went in yesterday.

古文：今路由石峰之北而东趋北坞，又三里，得一村在坞中，曰那贤。
现代文：今天路由石峰的北麓往东通向北面的山坞，又走三里，有一个村庄在坞中，叫那贤。
English: Today, the route from the northern foot of the stone peak to the east leads to the dock on the north side. After another three miles, there is a village in the dock, called Naxian.

古文：又东二里，坞乃大开，田畴层络，有路通南坞，即那伦今作那隆道也。
现代文：又向东二里，山坞就变宽阔了，田地层层环绕，有路通向南面的山坞，就是去那伦的路了。
English: Another two miles to the east, the dock becomes wider and wider, surrounded by layers of fields, and there is a road leading to the dock to the south, which is the road to Narun.

古文：又东五里，山坞复穷。乃北折而东逾山坳。
现代文：又向东五里，山坞又一次完了，于是折向北后往东越过山坳。
English: After another five miles to the east, the dock was once again finished, so I turned north and went east over the mountains.

古文：一里，越坳之东，行坞间又一里，复东穿山峡。
现代文：一里，越到山坳的东面，在坞中又行一里，再向东穿过山峡。
English: One mile to the east of the mountains, another mile in the docks, and then east across the gorge.

古文：其峡甚逼而中平，但石骨棱棱，如万刀攒侧，不堪着足。
现代文：山峡十分狭窄可中央平缓，但石骨嶙峋，如万把尖刀攒聚侧立，不能落脚。
English: The gorge is very narrow and can be flat in the middle, but the stone skeletons, like thousands of sharp knives, stand side by side, unable to land.

古文：出峡，路忽降而下，已复南转石壑中，乱石高下共三里，山渐开。
现代文：出峡后，路忽然下降，不久又向南转进石山壑谷中，在乱石中高高低低地共走三里，山势渐开阔起来。
English: After going out of the gorge, the road suddenly dropped, and soon turned south into the middle of the Shishan ravine, walking a total of three miles in the high, low and lowlands among the rocks, and the mountain gradually opened up.

古文：忽见路左石穴曲折，坠成两潭，清流潴其中，映人心目。
现代文：忽然见路左的石穴曲曲折折，坠成两个深潭，清澈的流水积在其中，照人心目。
English: Suddenly, I saw that the stone pit on the left of the road had twists and turns, and had fallen into two deep pools, with clear running water accumulating in them, dazzling my eyes.

古文：潭之南坞有茅舍二架，潭之东坞有茅舍一架，皆寂无一人。
现代文：深潭南面的坞中有两间高架的茅舍，深，潭东面的坞中有一间高架的茅舍，都寂静无一人。
English: There are two high-rise cottages in the dock on the south side of the deep pool, and one high-rise cottage in the dock on the east side of the deep pool. All are silent.

古文：询之舆夫，曰： 此湘村也。
现代文：向轿夫打听情况，说： 这是湘村。
English: He asked the driver about the situation and said, "This is Xiangcun.

古文：向为万承今作龙门所破，故居民弃庐而去。 
现代文：从前被万承州攻占，所以居民弃房而去了。 
English: Once occupied by Mancheng, the residents abandoned their homes.

古文：由湘村而东，复有溪在路北，即从两潭中溢出者。
现代文：由湘村往东走，又有溪流在路北，就是从两个深潭中溢出的水。
English: Walking east from Xiangcun, there is a stream to the north of the road, which is water overflowing from two deep pools.

古文：东行平坞二里，过昨打鱼塘之南，又东三里，遂北渡西来之溪，溪水穿石壑中，路复随之，水石交乱。
现代文：往东在平坦的山坞中行二里，路过昨天打鱼塘的南边，又向东三里，就向北渡过西来的溪水，溪水穿流在岩石壑谷中，路再次顺着它走，水石交积乱流。
English: I walked two miles east in the middle of the flat dock, passing the south side of the fish pond where I had fished yesterday, and three miles east, I crossed the west stream to the north. The stream flowed through the rocky valley, and the road followed it again. The water and rocks were jumbled and turbulent.

古文：一里，从溪北行，转入北壑。
现代文：一里，从溪边往北行，转入北面的壑谷中。
English: Go one mile north from the stream and turn into the valley on the north side.

古文：一里，水复自南来，又渡之而东。
现代文：一里，溪水又从南边流来，又渡溪往东行。
English: For a mile, the stream water flows from the south, and then crosses the stream to the east.

古文：又一里，水复自北而南，又渡之，乃东向出峡。
现代文：又一里，溪水又自北流向南，又渡溪，于是向东出峡。
English: For another mile, the stream flowed from north to south, crossed the stream again, and then flowed out of the gorge to the east.

古文：忽坠峡直下者一里，始见峡东平畴，自北而南，开洋甚大，乃知都结之地，直在西山之顶也。
现代文：峡谷忽然下坠一直下走一里，这才见到峡东平旷的原野，自北延向南，宽广开阔非常大，于是了解到都结州的辖地，一直到西山的山顶。
English: The canyon suddenly fell down and I walked down for a mile, only then did I see the flat wilderness in the east of the canyon, stretching from north to south, wide and open and very large, so I learned about the jurisdiction of the prefecture, all the way to the top of the West Mountain.

古文：下山是为隆安界，亦遂为太平、南宁之分，其高下顿殊矣。
现代文：下山就是隆安县的地界，也就是太平府、南宁府的分界处，它们的地势高低顿时悬殊了。
English: Going down the mountain is the geographical boundary of Long'an County, that is, the demarcation of Taiping Prefecture and Nanning Prefecture. Their topography is very different from each other.

古文：随西峰东麓北一里，溪流淙淙，溯之得一村，是为岩村，居民始有瓦房、高凳，复见汉官仪矣。
现代文：顺西峰的东麓往北行一里，溪流涂涂发声，溯流遇上一个村庄，这是岩村，居民这才有瓦房、高凳，重新见到汉族官吏的威仪了。
English: I followed the east foot of the west peak northward for one mile. The stream murmured and made a sound. The backwash encountered a village. It was Iwamura. The residents had only tile houses and high stools. They saw the dignity of the Han officials again.

古文：至是天色亦开霁。
现代文：来到这里天色也渐晴开。
English: When I got here, the weather was gradually clearing up.

古文：时已过午，换夫至，遂行。
现代文：此时已过中午，替换的脚夫到了，马上动身。
English: By this time it was past midday, the replacement porter had arrived and they set off immediately.

古文：于是俱南向行平畴间，二里，饭于前村之邓姓者家。
现代文：从这里起全是向南行走在平坦的田野间，二里，在前村一个姓邓的人家中吃饭。
English: From here, it's all southbound walking between flat fields, two miles, to eat at the home of a man surnamed Deng in the former village.

古文：既饭，又渡溪西岸，南行一里半，其西山峡中开，峰层坞叠，有村在西坞甚大，曰杨村今作杨湾。
现代文：饭后，又渡到溪水西岸，往南行一里半，那西面的山峡从中豁开，峰峦山坞层层叠叠，在西面山坞中有个非常大的村庄，叫杨村。
English: After the meal, I went to the west bank of the stream and walked southward for a mile and a half. The mountain gorge on the west side opened out from it, and the peaks and docks lay on top of each other. In the west dock, there was a very large village called Yangcun.

古文：又南一里半，杨村有溪亦自西坞而南，与北溪合，其溪乃大。
现代文：又向南走一里半，杨村有溪水也是从西边的山坞往南流，与北溪合流，这条溪水才变大。
English: Another mile and a half to the south, Yangcun Creek also flows south from the dock on the west, merging with the North Stream, and this stream only becomes larger.

古文：并渡其西，又南一里，水东注东界土山腋中；路西南一里，抵西界石山下，得一村曰黑区村。
现代文：一起渡过两条溪流到西岸，又向南一里，溪水向东流注到东面一列土山侧畔；路向西南走一里，抵达西面一列石山下，走到一个村子叫黑区村。
English: Together, they crossed two streams to the west coast, and then went one mile south. The stream water flowed eastward to the eastern side of a line of earthen hills. The road went one mile southwest, reached the western side of a line of stone hills, and went to a village called Heihe District Village.

古文：换夫，循西界石山南行，其峰有尖若卓锥，其岩有劈若飞翅而中空者。
现代文：换夫后，沿着西面一列石山往南行，其中山峰有尖如卓立的锥子一样的，其中岩石有劈开如鸟翅飞翔在空中的。
English: After changing husbands, I drove south along a line of stone mountains in the west, among which the peaks are as sharp as standing cones, and the rocks are split like bird wings flying in the air.

古文：行其下嵌石中，又南四里，得巨村在西峰丛夹处，曰龙村今作龙正。
现代文：行走在那下嵌的岩石中，又向南四里，见到在西边山峰成丛相夹之处有个大村庄，叫龙村。
English: Walking in the embedded rock, and four miles to the south, I saw a large village, called Longcun, in the west where the mountain peaks are sandwiched.

古文：又换夫而南，乃随东界土山行矣。
现代文：又换夫后往南行，就沿东面一列土山走了。
English: After changing her husband again, she headed south and walked along a line of hills in the east.

古文：始知自黑区至此，皆山夹中平坞而无涧，以杨村所合之流，先已东入土山也。
现代文：这才知道自黑区村到此，都是山间夹谷中的平坦山坞但没有涧水，因为在杨村会合的溪流，已先向东流入土山了。
English: It was only then that I knew that from the village of Heihe District to here, it was all a flat dock in the mountain valley, but there was no running water, because the stream at the meeting of Yang Village had first flowed east into the dirt mountain.

古文：至是复有水西自龙村西坞来，又南成小涧。
现代文：到了这里又有水流从西面龙村西边的山坞中流来，又向南流成小涧。
English: At this point, the water flowed from the dock on the west side of Longcun on the west side, and flowed southward into a small creek.

古文：行其东三里，盘土山东南垂而转，得一村曰伐雷今作发雷，换夫。
现代文：在山涧东岸行三里，绕着土山的东南垂转弯，走到一个村子叫伐雷，换夫。
English: Walk three miles along the eastern shore of the mountains, turn around the southeastern slope of the hill, walk to a village called Farei, and change husbands.

古文：又暮向东南行三里，宿于巴潭黄姓者家。
现代文：又在暮色中向东南行三里，住宿在巴潭姓黄的人家中。
English: In the twilight, they traveled three miles southeast and stayed at the home of a Batan surnamed Huang.

古文：初三日巴潭黄老五鼓起，割鸡取池鱼为饷。
现代文：初三日巴潭黄老五更起床，杀鸡捕来池中的鱼做饭。
English: On the third day of the first lunar month, Huang Laowu of Batan got up and killed a chicken to catch the fish in the pond to cook.

古文：晨餐后，东南二里，换夫于伐连村。
现代文：早餐后，向东南二里，在伐连村换夫。
English: After breakfast, I walked two miles southeast and changed husbands in the village of Varian.

古文：待夫久之，乃东南逾土山峡，一里，则溪流自西北石山下折而东来，始虢成声。
现代文：等派夫等了很久，于是向东南穿越土山山峡，一里，就见溪流从西北的石山下折向东流来，开始涂涂有声。
English: After waiting for a long time, Paifu drove southeast through the Tsuchiyama mountain gorge. After one mile, he saw a stream flowing eastward from the foot of the northwest stone mountain, and it began to make noise.

古文：随之南行，盖西界石山至此南尽，转而西去，复东突一石峰峙于南峡之中，若当户之枢，故其流东曲而抵土山之麓，又南绕出中峙石峰，始南流平畦，由龙场入右江焉。
现代文：顺溪流往南行，大体上西面一列石山在此地到了南边的尽头，转向西延去，又在东面突起一座石峰屹立在南边峡谷之中，好像门上的门枢，所以溪流向东弯曲后流抵土山的山麓，又往南绕出在中央屹立的石峰，这才向南流经平旷的田野，经由龙场流入右江。
English: Following the stream to the south, a row of stone mountains in the upper west reaches the end of the south here, turns westward, and a stone peak protrudes in the east and stands in the south canyon, like a doorway on the door, so the stream bends to the east and flows to the foothills of Dushan Mountain, and then goes south around the stone peak standing in the center. It then flows south through the flat fields and flows into the Yu River through the dragon field.

古文：随溪一里，南山既转，西南平壑大开，而石峰之南，山尽而石不尽。
现代文：顺溪流走一里，南山转向之后，西南平坦的壑谷十分开阔，而石峰的南面，山到了头而岩石不断。
English: After walking along the stream for a mile and turning south of the mountain, the flat valley in the southwest is very open, while south of the stone peak, the mountain comes to a head and the rocks continue.

古文：于是平畴曲塍间，怪石森森，佹ｇｕǐ诡异离佹合，行石间一里，水正南去，路东上山麓，得一村，聚落甚大，曰把定村。
现代文：在这里平旷的田野弯曲的田埂之间，怪石森森罗列，诡异之状忽分忽合，高低不一，清泉流淌时时冲刷着石根，田膛环绕，假使在其中建起一间房，石林中的读书场所，没有能胜过此处的了。在石丛间行一里，水向正南流去，路向东上登山麓，走到一村，村落很大，叫把定村。
English: Here, between the flat fields and the crooked rice paddies, there is a row of strange rocks. The strange shapes are intermittent, high and low. The clear spring flows constantly, scouring the stone roots. The paddy field is surrounded. If you build a room in it, there is no better place to read in the stone forest. Walk a mile between the stone piles, the water flows to the south, the road goes east to the foot of the mountain, and you come to a village. The village is very large and is called Ding village.

古文：村人刁甚，候夫至日昃，始以一骑二担夫来。
现代文：村里人十分刁猾，等换夫直到日头偏西，才派一匹马两个挑夫来。
English: The villagers are very cunning. They wait until the sun sets before they send a horse with two drivers.

古文：遂东北逾土岭，一里半，北渡一小水，乃北上岭。
现代文：于是往东北翻越土岭，一里半，向北渡过一条小河，便向北上岭。
English: So he climbed over the ridge to the northeast, a mile and a half, crossed a small river to the north, and then headed north up the ridge.

古文：又一里逾其巅，又北行岭上者一里，则下见隆安城郭在东麓矣。
现代文：又走一里越到岭头，又在岭上向北行一里，就见下面隆安县的城郭在东麓了。
English: Walk another mile to the top of the ridge, walk another mile north on the ridge, and you will see the castle of Long'an County below at the eastern foot.

古文：乃随岭东北下者数里，又东行者一里，入西门，抵北门，由门内转而南，税驾于县前肆中。
现代文：于是顺山势向东北下走几里，又向东行一里，走入西门，来到北门，由城门内转向南，住宿在县衙前的旅店中。
English: So I walked down the mountain a few miles to the northeast, then another mile to the east, walked into the west gate, came to the north gate, turned south from inside the city gate, and stayed in a hotel in front of the county gate.

古文：是日云气浓郁，不见日光。
现代文：这一天云气浓郁，不见阳光。
English: On this day, the clouds were thick and there was no sunshine.

古文：时已下午，索饭，令顾仆往驿中索骑，期以明旦，而挑夫则须索之县中。
现代文：此时已是下午，要饭来吃了，命令顾仆去骤站要马，约在明天早晨走，可挑夫却必须到县里去要。
English: At this time, it was already afternoon. To ask for food, Gu ordered his servant to go to the station to ask for a horse, which would be about tomorrow morning. However, the porter had to go to the county to ask for it.

古文：时云君何为库役所讼往府，摄尉代理县的长官事者为巡检李姓，将觅刺往索天，而先从北关外抵巩阁，则右江从西北来，经其下而东去，以江崖深削，故遥视不见耳。
现代文：此时县官何君被管仓库的差役控告前往府城，代理县官政事的是一个姓李的巡检，将要找名帖去要夫，但先从北关外走到巩阁，就见右江从西北流来，经过城下往东流去，由于江岸上的石崖又深又陡，所以从远处望不见罢了。
English: At this time, the county official, He Jun, was accused by the police officer in charge of the warehouse and went to Fucheng. The agent of the county official and political affairs was a patrol inspector surnamed Li. He was going to find a famous person to ask for a husband. However, when he walked from Beiguan to Gongge, he saw the Yangtze River flowing from the northwest, passing under the city and flowing to the east. Because the stone cliff on the riverbank was deep and steep, he could not see it from a distance.

古文：从崖下得一舟，期以明日发。
现代文：在石崖下找到一条去南宁的船，约定在明天出发。
English: They found a boat to Nanning under the cliff and agreed to set off tomorrow.

古文：余时疮大发，乐于舟行，且可以不烦县夫，遂定之。
现代文：我此时疮大发作，乐意乘船走，而且可以不必麻烦县里派夫，便讲定了此船。
English: At this time, I had a large sore, I was happy to go by boat, and I didn't have to bother with the county courier, so I booked this boat.

古文：令顾仆折骑银于驿，以为舟资。
现代文：命令顾仆去释站把马折成银子，作为船费。
English: He ordered his servant to go and break the horse into silver to pay for the boat.

古文：乃还宿于肆。
现代文：于是返回到旅店中住下。
English: So he went back to the hotel to stay.

古文：初四日晨起，饭而下舟；则其舟忽改期，初八始行。
现代文：初四日早晨起床，吃饭后下船；但那条船忽然改期，初八才动身。
English: On the morning of the fourth day of the first lunar month, I got up and disembarked after eating. However, the ship was suddenly rescheduled and did not leave until the eighth day of the first lunar month.

古文：盖是时巡方使者抵南宁，先晚出囚于狱，同六房之听考察者，以此舟往。
现代文：原来是此时巡察地方的使者到达南宁，先一天晚上从狱中放出囚犯，会同县属六个机构听候考察的官吏，要乘此船去南宁。
English: It turned out that it was at this time that the emissary of the inspection of localities arrived in Nanning. The prisoners were released from prison the night before, and together with the officials of six institutions belonging to the county who were waiting for the inspection, they wanted to take this ship to Nanning.

古文：中夜忽逸一囚，吏役遂更期云。
现代文：半夜忽然逃走一个囚犯，官吏差役便改期了。
English: A prisoner suddenly escaped in the middle of the night, and the official guard was rescheduled.

古文：余时已折骑价，遂淹留舟中。
现代文：我此时已折了马价，便滞留在船中。
English: By this time I had lost my bet and was stranded in the boat.

古文：疮病呻吟，阴云黯淡，岁寒荒邑外，日暮瘴江边，情绪可知也。
现代文：疮病发作，呻吟不已，阴云黯淡，岁寒仍在荒凉的县城外，日暮瘴气弥漫在江边，情绪可想而知了。
English: Sores attack, moaning continues, gloomy clouds are gloomy, the cold of the year is still outside the desolate county town, the twilight haze pervades the riverside, emotions can be imagined.

古文：初五日坐卧舟中。
现代文：初五日坐卧在船中。
English: He spent the first five days lying in the boat.

古文：下午，顾仆曰： 岁云暮矣，奈何久坐此！
现代文：下午，顾仆说： 年终了，怎么长久坐等此地！
English: In the afternoon, Gu's servant said: "It's the end of the year, how long can I sit here and wait!"

古文：请索担夫于县，为明日步行计。 
现代文：请到县里去要挑夫，为明天步行做准备。 
English: Please go to the county to ask for a porter and prepare for tomorrow's walk.

古文：余然之。
现代文：我同意了。
English: I agreed.

古文：左、右江之分，以杨村、把定以西石山为界。
现代文：左江、右江的划分，以杨村、把定村以西的石山为界。
English: The division of the left and right rivers is bounded by Yangcun and Shishan to the west of Putdingcun.

古文：故石山之内，其地忽高，是为土州，都结、万承。属太平；石山之下，其坞忽坠，是为隆安，乃嘉靖间王新建所开设者，属南宁。
现代文：所以石山以内，地势忽然高起来，这是土司所属的州，属于太平府；石山之下，山坞忽然下坠，这是隆安县，是嘉靖年间王新建建立的县，属南宁府。
English: Therefore, within Shishan, the terrain suddenly rises, which is the prefecture belonging to Tusi, belonging to Taiping Prefecture; under Shishan, the dock suddenly falls, which is Longan County, which is the county newly established by Wang in the Jiajing years, belonging to Nanning Prefecture.

古文：此治界所分也。
现代文：这是政区界线的划分。
English: This is the delineation of political district boundaries.

古文：若西来之龙脊，则自归顺、镇安、都康、龙英北界之天灯墟，又东经全茗、万承，而石山渐尽，又东抵合江镇，则宣化属矣。
现代文：至于由西面延伸而来的主脉山脊，却是从归顺州、镇安府、都康州、龙英州北境的天灯墟，又往东经过全茗州、万承州，而后石山渐渐到头，又向东延抵合江镇，便是宣化县的属地了。
English: As for the main mountain ridge extending from the west, it is from Guishun, Zhen'an, Dukang and Longying to the northern sky lantern market, and then eastward through Quanzhou and Wancheng, and then gradually to the end of Shishan, and then eastward to Hejiang Town, which is the territory of Xuanhua County.

古文：其在脊之北者，曰镇远、佶伦、结安、都结，万承之东北鄙。
现代文：那在山脊北面的，是镇远州、结伦州、结安州、都结州，万承州的东北边鄙。
English: On the north side of the ridge is the northeastern edge of Zhenyuanzhou, Zulunzhou, Jieanzhou, Duyezhou and Wanchengzhou.

古文：其水或潜坠地穴，或曲折山峡，或由土上林，或由隆安入右江。
现代文：这一片的水流，或潜坠入地下的洞穴中，或曲折流经山峡，或经由上林土县，或经由隆安县流入右江。
English: This stretch of water either sinks into underground caves, or meanders through mountain gorges, or flows through Shanglin County, or through Long'an County into the Yu River.

古文：然则，此四土州水入右江而地辖于左江，则以山脊迂深莫辨也。
现代文：然而，这四个土州的水流流入右江可地域归左江道管辖，那是由于山脊曲折深远没有辨清的原因。
English: However, the flow of water from these four prefectures into the Yangtze River can not be governed by the Yangtze River, which is due to the ridge twists and turns are far from clear reasons.

古文：隆安东北临右江，其地北去武缘界一百四十里，南去万承土州界四十里，东去宣化界一百二十里，有大滩驿。西去归德土州界八十里。
现代文：隆安县城东北方面临右江，此地北边距武缘县境一百四十里，南边距万承土州边界四十里，东边距宣化县边界一百二十里，西边距归德土州边界八十里。
English: The northeast side of Long'an County is adjacent to the Yangtze River. The north side of this place is 140 miles from the border of Wujian County, the south side is 40 miles from the border of Manzheng County, the east side is 120 miles from the border of Xuanhua County, and the west side is 80 miles from the border of Dezhou.

古文：其村民始有瓦屋，有台凳，邑中始为平居，始以灶爂，与土州截然若分也。
现代文：这里的村民开始有瓦房，有桌凳，人们开始在平地上居住，开始用灶烧火做饭，与土州截然不同了。
English: The villagers here began to have tile houses, tables and benches, people began to live on flat land, and began to cook with stoves, which was completely different from Tuzhou.

古文：土人俱架竹为栏，下畜牛豕，上爂与卧处之所托焉。
现代文：土人全是用竹子架成干栏式竹楼，下边养牛养猪，楼上用来烧火做饭与睡觉。
English: The local people all use bamboo to build dry-column-style bamboo buildings. At the bottom, they raise cattle and pigs, and the upper floors are used for cooking and sleeping.

古文：架高五六尺，以巨竹槌开，径尺余，架与壁落俱用之。
现代文：架子高五六尺，用大竹子褪裂开来，竹片宽一尺多，屋架与墙壁屋檐滴水全用竹子。
English: The shelf is five or six feet high, and is made of large bamboo, which is split open, and the bamboo piece is more than a foot wide. The roof rack and the wall gutter are all made of bamboo.

古文：爂以方板三四尺铺竹架之中，置灰爂火，以块石支锅而炊。
现代文：烧火做饭是用三四尺长的方木板铺在竹楼架子的中央，放上木炭灰点燃火，用石块架起锅煮饭。
English: For cooking, a three- or four-foot-long square wooden board is laid in the middle of the bamboo shelf, charcoal ashes are put on it to light the fire, and a stone is used to set up the pot for cooking.

古文：纺亦然。男子着木屐，木片为底，端绊皮二条，交于巨趾间。
现代文：锅的上方三四尺的地方悬挂着一个竹筐，天天烤稻子去春米。妇女担四个竹筒，在溪中汲水。
English: A bamboo basket hangs three or four feet above the pot, where rice is roasted daily to make spring rice. Women carry four bamboo canes to draw water from the stream.

古文：岂交趾之称以此耶？
现代文：也有纺纱与织布的人。
English: There were also spinners and weavers.

古文：妇人则无不跣者。
现代文：男子穿木板鞋，妇女则无人不赤脚的。
English: The men wear wooden shoes, while the women are barefoot.

古文：首用白布五、六尺盘之，以巨结缀额端为美观。亦间有用青布、花布者。
现代文：头上用五六尺白布盘绕在上，以巨大的头结缀在额头上以为美观，也间或有用青布、花布的人。
English: People who wear five or six feet of white cloth coiled around their heads and a huge headdress on their foreheads, which they think is beautiful, and sometimes use blue cloth or flower cloth.

古文：妇人亦间戴竹丝笠；胸前垂红丝带二条者，则酋目之妇也。
现代文：妇女也间或有戴竹丝斗笠的；胸前垂挂两条红丝带的，是酋长头目的妻子。
English: Women sometimes wear bamboo silk hats; the one with two red ribbons hanging from her chest is the wife of the chief.

古文：裙用百骈细裥迭，间有紧束以便行走，则为大结以负于臀后。
现代文：裙子用成百并列的细直褶子做成，偶尔有束紧裙子以便行走的，便结为一个大结背在臀部后方。
English: The skirts were made of hundreds of parallel thin straight braids, occasionally bunched up so that the skirts could be walked in, then tied back behind the hips in a large knot.

古文：土酋、土官多戴毡帽，惟外州人寓彼者，束发以网，而酋与官俱无焉。
现代文：土人酋长、土司大多戴毡帽，只有外州人寓居在那里的，用发网束拢头发，可酋长与土司全都没有。
English: The local chiefs and stewards mostly wear straw hats. Only the out-of-towners who live there wear hairnets around their hair, but there are no chiefs or stewards.

古文：惟向武王振吾戴巾。交人则披发垂后，并无布束。
现代文：交人则散披着头发垂在身后，并且不用布条束发。
English: Kojin, on the other hand, wears his hair loose, hanging down behind his back, and does not wear a headband.

古文：间有笼毡帽于发外者，发仍下垂，反多穿长褶，而足则俱跣。
现代文：偶尔有在头发外面罩上毡帽的，头发仍下垂着，反而大多穿长褶裙，但脚却全都赤着。
English: Occasionally, there are people who wear a cap over their hair, but their hair is still hanging down. Instead, most of them wear long pleated skirts, but their feet are all bare.

古文：交绢轻细如吾地兼通 缣 ，交丝的细绢丝，而色黄如睦州今之梅城之黄生绢，但比之密而且匀，每二丈五尺一端，价银四钱，可制为帐。
现代文：交趾的绢又轻又细好像我们地方的丝嫌，颜色黄得像睦州的黄生绢，但比它细密而且均匀，每匹长二丈五尺，价值四钱白银，可制成蚊帐。
English: The cross-toed grasshoppers are light and thin, like the silky grasshoppers of our region. Their color is yellow like the yellow grasshoppers of Muzhou, but they are finer and more uniform than it. Each horse is two and a half feet long, worth four silver coins, and can be used to make mosquito nets.

古文：向武多何首乌，出石山穴中，大有至四、五斤者。
现代文：向武州何首乌很多，出产在石山洞穴中，有大到四五斤的。
English: There are many Xiangwuzhou He Shouwu, produced in Shishan Cave, which weigh up to four or five pounds.

古文：余按《一统土物志》，粤西有马棕榔，不知为何物，至是见州人俱切为片，和蒌叶以敬客，代摈榔焉，呼为马槟榔，不知为何首乌也。
现代文：我在州城的集市上用十二文钱买到三个，重约十五斤。我考察《一统土物志》，粤西有种马槟榔，不知是什么东西，来到这里见州里的人全都切成片，与篓叶拌和后拿来敬客，代替槟榔，称为马槟榔，却不知是何首乌。
English: I bought three yakitori at the market in Suzhou with 12 yuan, weighing about 15 catties. I examined the "History of the Yi Dynasty," there is a stallion yakitori in Guangdong and Western China, I don't know what it is. I came here to see that the people in Suzhou are all cut into slices, mixed with yakitori leaves and then served to guests. Instead of yakitori, it is called yakitori, but I don't know what it is.

古文：隆安县城在右江西南岸。
现代文：隆安县城在右江的西南岸。
English: The county seat of Long'an is on the southwest bank of the Yu River.

古文：余前至南宁，入郡堂观屏间所绘郡图，则此县绘于右江之北。
现代文：我从前到南宁，进入府衙大堂观看屏风上所绘的南宁府地图，就见此县绘在右江的北岸。
English: When I went to Nanning and entered the prefectural government hall to look at the map of Nanning on the screen, I saw that the county was drawn on the north bank of the Yangtze River.

古文：故余自都结来，过把定，以为必渡江而后抵邑。
现代文：所以我从都结州来时，过了把定村，以为必定要渡过江后才能到县城。
English: So when I came from Duyezhou, I passed the village of Putding, thinking that I would have to cross the river to get to the county seat.

古文：及至，乃先邑而后江焉。
现代文：及走到时，是先到县城而后到江边。
English: When we arrived, we went to the county seat first and then to the river.

古文：非躬至，则郡图犹不足凭也。
现代文：不亲自来到，就不知道南宁府地图是不值得凭信的。
English: If you do not come in person, you will not know that the map of Nanning is not worth trusting.

古文：初六日早雾四寒。
现代文：初六日早晨雾气四面充塞。
English: On the morning of the sixth day of the first lunar month, the fog was thick on all sides.

古文：饭后，适县中所命村夫至，遂行。
现代文：饭后，恰好县里命令村中的脚夫来到，于是上路。
English: After the meal, the county ordered the village porter to come, so he went on his way.

古文：初自南门新街之南南向行，三里，复入山。
现代文：起初从南门新街的南面向南行，三里，又走入山中。
English: At first, I walked south from the south of Nanmen New Street for three miles, and then walked into the mountains.

古文：逾冈而下半里，两过细流之东注者，抵第三流，其水较大，有桥跨其上，曰广嗣度桥。
现代文：越过山冈下走半里，两次涉过向东流注的细小溪流，到达第三条溪流，溪水较大，有桥跨在溪上，叫广嗣度桥。
English: After walking half a mile under the mountain, he twice waded through a small stream flowing eastward, and reached the third stream. The stream was large and there was a bridge across the stream. It was called the Guang Shidu Bridge.

古文：又南上山一里半，出一夹脊，始望见山南大坞自西北开洋南去。
现代文：又往南上山一里半，走出一条相夹的山脊，这才望见山南面的大山坞从西北向南广褒地伸展而去。
English: Another mile and a half south up the mountain, out of a clamped ridge, only to see the large dock on the south side of the mountain stretching from the northwest to the south of Guangbo.

古文：遂南下土山，一里，土山南尽、复有石山如锥当央。
现代文：于是向南下土山，一里，土山在南边到了头，又有石山如锥子一样挡在中央。
English: As a result, the earthen mound descends to the south for one mile, the earthen mound reaches the top in the south, and the stone mound is blocked in the center like a cone.

古文：由其西南向行六里，又抵一石山下，其山自北遥望若屏斯列，近循其西麓，愈平展如屏。
现代文：由石山西面向南行六里，又抵达一座石山下，此山从北面远望好似屏风劈开排列，走近顺着它的西麓看去，愈加呈平面展开好像屏风。
English: From the west of Shishan facing south for six miles, we arrived at the foot of a stone mountain. From the north, this mountain looks like a split screen. As we approached and looked along its western foot, it became more and more flat and spread out like a screen.

古文：已绕其南，转东向行三里，其山忽东西两壁环列而前，中央则后逊而北，皆削崖轰空，三面围合而缺其南；其前后有土冈横接东西两峰尽处，若当门之阈；其后石壁高张，则环霄之玦也。
现代文：不久绕到山南，转向东行三里，此山东西两面崖壁忽然环列在前方，中央则往后退向北方，都是陡削的山崖在高空崩裂，三面合围而缺着南面；它前后有土冈横接到东西两座山峰的尽头处，好像挡在门口的门槛；它后方的石壁高高扩展开，如环绕在云霄中的玉块。
English: Soon after, I went around to the south of the mountain and turned east for three miles. Suddenly, the cliff walls on the east and west sides of the mountain were lined up in front, while the center receded to the north. They were all steep cliffs that collapsed at high altitudes. The three sides were enclosed, but the south side was missing. In front and behind, there were earthen mounds horizontally connected to the ends of the two peaks in the east and west, as if they were blocking the threshold of the door. The stone walls behind it expanded high and wide, like jade blocks surrounded by clouds.

古文：先是，按《百粤志》记隆安有金榜山，合沓如城。
现代文：这之前，据《百粤志》记载，隆安县有座金榜山，重合起来如像城墙。
English: Prior to this, according to the "Hundreds of Cantonese" records, there was a golden hill in Long'an County, which looked like a city wall.

古文：余至邑问之，无有知者。
现代文：我到县城打听此山，无人知道。
English: I went to the county seat to inquire about this mountain, but no one knew.

古文：又环观近邑皆土山，而余方患疮，无暇远索。
现代文：又环视县城附近都是土山，而且我正患病生疮，无暇到远处去寻找。
English: I also looked around and saw that everything around the county seat was dirt and mountains, and I was suffering from an illness and sores, so I didn't have time to search far away.

古文：至是心异其山，问之村夫，皆曰： 不知所谓金榜者。 
现代文：来到这里心里感到此山很奇异，向村夫打听，都说： 不认识所谓的金榜山。 
English: When I came here, I felt that this mountain was very strange. When I asked the villagers about it, they all said, "I don't know the so-called Jinbang Mountain."

古文：问： 此山何名？ 
现代文：问： 此山叫什么名字？ 
English: Question: What is the name of this mountain?

古文：曰： 第称为石岩，以山有岩可避寇也。 
现代文：答： 只是称作石岩山，因为山中有岩洞可以躲避强盗。 
English: A: It's just called Shiyan Mountain because there are caves in the mountain where you can hide from robbers.

古文：余闻之，遂令顾仆同夫候于前村，余乃北向入山。
现代文：我听说这话，就命令顾仆同脚夫在前边的村子等候，我于是向北进山。
English: Hearing this, I ordered my attendants and porters to wait in the village ahead, and I headed north into the mountains.

古文：半里，逾土冈而下，其内土反洼坠，其东西两崖俱劈空前抱，土冈横亘而接其两端。
现代文：半里，越过土冈下山，土冈内地势反而洼陷下去，土冈东西两侧的石崖全都劈向空中向前环抱，土冈横亘着接到两端的石崖。
English: Half a mile later, after crossing the hill, the terrain inside the hill dips and sinks. The cliffs on the east and west sides of the hill are all split into the air and hugged forward. The hill stretches across the cliffs at both ends.

古文：既直抵北崖下，望东崖之上，两裂透壁之光，若明月之高悬镜台也；又望西崖之上，有裂罅如门，层悬叠缀，基天云之嵌空天半也。
现代文：径直抵达北面的石崖下后，望见东面石崖之上，两处石壁上的裂隙透过亮光，好像明月高悬在明镜台上了；又望见西面石崖之上，有像门一样的裂缝，层层叠叠悬缀着，好似入云的门扉镶嵌在半天空。
English: After arriving directly under the stone cliff in the north, I could see two cracks in the stone wall above the cliff in the east through the light, as if the bright moon was hanging high on the mirror stand; I could also see cracks like doors above the cliff in the west, hanging layer upon layer, like doors into the clouds embedded in the half sky.

古文：余俱不暇穷，先从北崖之麓入一窍。
现代文：我都来不及穷究，先从北面石崖的山麓进人一个石窍。
English: I didn't have time to investigate everything, so I first went into a rock cave at the foot of the cliff on the north side.

古文：窍门南向，嵌壁为室，裂隙为门，层累而上，内不甚宽，而外皆叠透。
现代文：石窍口向南，嵌入石壁成为石室，裂开缝隙成为门洞，层层叠累上去，里面不怎么宽，但外边全都层层叠叠相通。
English: The mouth of the stone nook faces south, embedded in the stone wall to become a stone room, cracking the gap to become a doorway, piled up layer by layer. It is not very wide inside, but the outside is all connected layer by layer.

古文：连跻二重，若楼阁高倚，飞轩下临，爽朗可憩。
现代文：一连上登两层，好像楼阁背靠高空，飞空的轩廊凭临下方，明朗可以歇息。
English: Climbing up two floors in a row, it's as if the mansion's back is against the sky, with the soaring gallery below, you can rest with clarity.

古文：其左忽转劈一隙，西裂甚深，直自崖巅，下极麓底，攀夹缝而上，止可胁肩，不堪寄傲。
现代文：它左边忽然转过去劈开一道缝隙，向西裂去非常深，一直从石崖顶端，下裂到山麓极底处，攀着夹缝上登，只可以收缩肩头，不能寄托豪迈的情怀。
English: It suddenly turned to the left and split a gap. It split very deep to the west, all the way from the top of the cliff, down to the bottom of the mountain, climbing up through the cracks. You can only shrink your shoulders, you can't rely on heroic feelings.

古文：乃复层累下，出悬隙两重，遂望西崖悬扉而趋。
现代文：只好重又层层叠累而下，钻出两层高悬的裂隙，于是望着西面石崖上高悬的门扉赶过去。
English: He just had to go down again and again, drill out two high-hanging cracks, and then look at the high-hanging doors on the west cliff.

古文：其门东向，仰眺皆崇崖莫跻，惟北崖有线痕可攀，乃反攀倒跻，两盘断峡，下而复上，始凌洞门。
现代文：这个门洞向东，仰望过去都是高崖无法上登，只有北面石崖上有线一样的石痕可以攀登，于是反攀倒登，两次绕过断开的峡谷，下了又上，这才登到洞口。
English: This doorway to the east, looking up, used to be a high cliff that could not be climbed, only the north face of the cliff had a line-like stone trace that could be climbed, so he climbed backwards, twice around the broken canyon, down and up again, and only then did he reach the mouth of the cave.

古文：门以内，隙向西北穹起；门以外，隙从崖麓坠下。
现代文：洞口以内，裂隙向西北弯隆而起；洞口以外，裂隙从石崖向山麓下坠。
English: Inside the mouth of the cave, the fissure rises steeply to the northwest; outside the mouth of the cave, the fissure drops down from the cliff to the foot of the mountain.

古文：下峡深数丈，前有巨石立而掩之，故自下望，只知为崖石之悬，而不知其内之有峡也。
现代文：下方的峡谷深数丈，前边立有巨石遮住了峡谷，所以从下边望去，只知是石崖高悬，却不知巨石之内有峡谷了。
English: The canyon below is several meters deep, and there are huge boulders in front of it that cover the canyon, so when you look from below, you only know that the cliff is high, but you don't know that there is a canyon inside the boulder.

古文：然峡壁峻削，从上望之，亦不能下，欲攀门内之隙，内隙亦倾侧难攀。
现代文：不过峡壁陡削，从上边望得见，却不能下去，想攀住洞口内的裂隙，里面的裂隙也是倾斜难攀。
English: However, the canyon wall is steeply cut. You can see it from the top, but you can't go down. You want to climb the crack inside the cave, but the crack inside is also inclined and difficult to climb.

古文：窥其内渐暗，于是复从旧法攀悬下。
现代文：窥视峡内渐渐暗下来，于是又用原来的方法攀住悬崖下来。
English: Peering into the canyon, it gradually darkened, so I used the original method to climb down the cliff.

古文：乃南出大道，则所送夫亦自前村回，候余出而后去。
现代文：急忙问： 大洞怎么讲？  答： 这座山三面环形排列，唯有西面好像屏风。
English: Quick question: How do you describe a large cave? Answer: This mountain is arranged in a circle on three sides, with only the west side looking like a screen.

古文：乃东行五里，有村在路左，曰鱼奥今作儒浩。
现代文：大洞在前崖后面高峰的半中腰，洞中开有四个洞口，宏伟明朗，透着灵气。 
English: The big hole is halfway up the peak behind the front cliff. There are four openings in the hole, magnificent and clear, permeated with aura.

古文：将入而觅夫，则村人遥呼曰： 已同押担者向前村矣。 
现代文：我于是醒悟过来，我游的是前崖的小洞，还不是大洞。
English: I then realized that I was swimming through a small hole in the cliff, not a big hole.

古文：又东五里，追及之于百浪村，乃饭于村氓家。
现代文：又向东五里，在百浪村追上了顾仆他们，便在村民家中吃了饭。
English: Another five miles to the east, they caught up with their clients in the village of Ba Lang, and then had a meal in the villagers' home.

古文：于是换夫，东南行二里，复见右江自北来，随之南，遂下抵江畔，则有水西自石峡中来注。
现代文：于是换夫，往东南行二里，又见到右江从北面流来，顺江流往南走，于是下到江畔，就见有条水流自西面的石山峡中前来注入右江。
English: So I changed my route and went southeast for two miles. I saw the Right River flowing from the north and the Shun River flowing to the south. Then I went down to the riverbank and saw a stream of water coming from the middle of the Shishan Gorge in the west and pouring into the Right River.

古文：其水亦甚深广，似可胜舟，但峡中多石，不能入耳。
现代文：这条水流也十分深广，似乎可以承载船只，只是峡中岩石很多，船不能进入罢了。
English: This current is also very deep and wide, it seems to be able to carry ships, but there are a lot of rocks in the canyon, so the ship cannot enter.

古文：其下有渡舟，名龙场渡，盖即把定、龙村之水，其源自都结南境，与万承为界者也。
现代文：岸下有渡船，名叫龙场渡，大概就是把定村、龙村溪水的源头出自都结州南境，与万承州交界的地方。
English: There is a ferryboat under the shore, called Longchangdu, which is probably the place where the source of the Dingcun and Longcun streams comes from the southern border of Duzhou and the border with Wancheng.

古文：渡溪口，复南上陇，江流折而北去，路乃东南行。
现代文：渡过溪流的水口，再向南上登土陇，江流折向北流去，路于是向东南行。
English: Crossing the mouth of the stream, and then heading south to the mound, the river turns north, and the road then heads southeast.

古文：又六里，换夫于邓炎村。
现代文：又走六里，在邓炎村换夫。
English: She walked another six miles and changed her husband in Dengyan Village.

古文：又东南八里，逾一小山之脊，又南二里，抵那纵村。
现代文：又向东南行八里，越过一座小山的山脊，又往南二里，抵达那纵村。
English: Another eight miles to the southeast, over the ridge of a hill, and another two miles to the south, to the village of Nagatsucho.

古文：从村中行，又二里，换夫于甲长家，日已暮矣。
现代文：从村子中走，又行二里，在甲长家中换夫，天色已晚了。
English: After walking two miles from the village, they changed husbands at the home of A-Chang. It was too late.

古文：复得肩舆，行月夜者二里，见路右有巨塘汪洋，一望其盘汇甚长。
现代文：又得到轿子，在月夜中行二里，见路右边有个巨大的水塘，一片汪洋，一眼望去水塘弯弯曲曲积水非常长。
English: He also got a palanquin. He walked two miles in the middle of the moonlit night and saw a huge pond on the right side of the road. It was a vast ocean. Looking at the pond, the water was very long.

古文：又四里，渡一石桥，有大溪自西南来，透桥东北去。
现代文：又是四里，走过一座石桥，有条大溪自西南流来，穿过桥下往东北流去。
English: After another four miles, we crossed a stone bridge. A large stream came from the southwest and flowed under the bridge to the northeast.

古文：越桥又东二里，宿于那同村今作好桐。夜二鼓，风雨大作。
现代文：过了桥又向东走二里，住宿在那同村。夜里二更时，风雨大作。
English: After crossing the bridge, we walked two miles to the east and stayed in the same village. At two o'clock in the evening, there was a storm.

古文：初七日早起颇寒，雨止而云甚浓郁。
现代文：初七日早晨起床相当寒冷，雨停了但云层非常浓郁。
English: It was quite cold when I woke up on the morning of the seventh day of the first lunar month. The rain had stopped but the clouds were very thick.

古文：饭后夫至，始以竹椅缚舆，遂东行。
现代文：饭后脚夫来到，开始用竹椅捆成轿子，于是向东行。
English: After the meal, the porter came and began to bundle the bamboo chairs into a palanquin, and then headed east.

古文：一里，路左大江自北来，前所过桥下大溪西南入之，遂曲而东，路亦随之。
现代文：一里，路左大江自北面流来，前一天所过桥下的大溪从西南流入大江，于是弯向东，路也顺着江走。
English: For one mile, the big river on the left of the road flows from the north, and the stream under the bridge that was crossed the day before flows from the southwest into the big river, so it bends to the east, and the road also follows the river.

古文：半里，江曲东北去，路向东南。
现代文：半里，江流弯向东北流去，路走向东南。
English: After half a mile, the bend of the river flowed to the northeast, and the road went to the southeast.

古文：又半里，换夫于那炎村今作那元。又待夫缚舆，乃东南行。
现代文：又走半里，在那炎村换夫。又等着脚夫绑轿子，这才往东南行。
English: I walked another half-mile to change husbands in that burning village, and waited for the porter to tie the palanquin before heading southeast.

古文：二里，路左复与江遇，既而江复东北去。
现代文：二里，路左边再次与江流相遇，不久江水又向东北流去。
English: After two miles, the left side of the road meets the river again, and soon the river is flowing to the northeast.

古文：又东南四里，渐陟土山，共一里，逾而下，得深峡焉，有水自西南透峡底，东北入大江。
现代文：又向东南走四里，渐渐上登土山，共有一里路，翻越而下，下到一处深峡中，有水流从西南通过峡底，往东北流入大江。
English: He also walked four miles to the southeast, gradually climbing up a dirt hill, a total of one mile, climbing over and down, down to a deep gorge, with water flowing from the southwest through the bottom of the gorge and flowing into the river to the northeast.

古文：绝流而渡，复上山冈，半里逾岭侧，复见大江自北来，折而东去，路亦随之。
现代文：横渡水流，又上登山冈，半里越到岭侧，再次见大江自北面流来，折向东流去，路也顺江而下。
English: Crossing the stream, I went up the mountain again, and walked half a mile to the side of the ridge. Once again, I saw the big river flowing from the north, turning to the east, and the road also went down the river.

古文：循南山之半东行一里，南山东尽，盘壑成塘，外筑堤临江，内潴水浸麓。
现代文：沿南山的山腰东行一里，南山在东面到了尽头，环绕壑谷建成水塘，外面临江处筑了堤，堤内蓄水浸到山麓。
English: One mile east along the mountainside of Nanshan, Nanshan came to an end in the east, a reservoir was built around Shugu, a dike was built outside facing the river, and water was stored inside the dike to the foot of the mountain.

古文：越堤而东，江乃东北去，路仍南转，共一里，有公馆北向大江，有聚落南倚回阜，是曰梅圭今作玫瑰。
现代文：越过堤坝往东走，江水于是向东北流去，路仍向南转，共一里，有客馆面向北边的大江，有村落在南面背靠回绕的土阜，这里叫梅圭。
English: After crossing the dike to the east, the river water then flowed to the northeast, and the road still turned to the south, a total of one mile. There was a guest house facing the big river in the north, and a village in the south with its back to the surrounding soil, here called Meigui.

古文：又东从岐行三里，饭于振楼村今作镇流。
现代文：又向东从岔道行三里，在振楼村吃饭。仍等脚夫捆轿子等了很久。
English: I also walked three miles eastward from Myeongdong to have dinner at Zhenlou Village. I still waited a long time for the porter to bundle the palanquin.

古文：仍候夫缚舆久之。南行十里，始与梅圭西北来大道合。又东南十二里，抵平陆村。
现代文：往南行十里，这才与梅圭从西北来的大道会合。又向东南走十二里，抵达平陆村。
English: After traveling ten miles to the south, he met Meigui on the highway coming from the northwest. He then traveled twelve miles to the southeast and arrived at Pinglu Village.

古文：已为宣化属矣。村人不肯缚舆，欲以牛车代，相持久之，雨丝丝下；既而草草缚木于梯架，乃行，已昏黑矣。
现代文：村里人不肯绑轿子，想用牛车代替，相持了很久，细雨丝丝地下着；随后在梯子架上草草捆了些木头，这才上路，天已经昏黑了。
English: The villagers didn't want to tie up the palanquin, and wanted to use the ox cart instead. They held each other for a long time, and a light rain began to fall. Then they hastily bundled some wood on the ladder frame, and then they were on their way. It was already getting dark.

古文：共四里，宿于那吉，
现代文：共四里，住宿在那吉，当地人称为屯吉。
English: A total of four miles, accommodation in Nagi, known locally as Tunji.

古文：初八日晨起，雨不止。
现代文：初八日早晨起床，雨未停。
English: I got up in the morning of the 8th day of the first month, and it continued to rain.

古文：饭而缚舆，久之雨反甚，遂持伞登舆。
现代文：吃饭后捆轿子，等了很久雨反而更大了，终于打着伞登上轿子。
English: After dinner, we bundled up the palanquin. After waiting for a long time, the rain became heavier, and we finally boarded the palanquin with umbrellas.

古文：东南五里，雨止，换夫于麟村，缚舆就乃行。
现代文：向东南五里，雨停了，在麟村换夫，捆好轿子就上路。
English: Five miles to the southeast, the rain stopped, we changed husbands in Lincun, bundled up the sedan chair and hit the road.

古文：东南三里，路分二岐，转从东南者行，渐复逾土山。
现代文：向东南三里，路分为两条岔道，转弯从通向东南的路走，渐渐又翻越土山。
English: Three miles to the southeast, the road splits into two side roads. Turn off the road leading to the southeast, and gradually climb over the dirt hill.

古文：三里，越山而东，则右江自北折而来，至此转东南向去，行随之。
现代文：三里，越过山往东走，就见右江从北面曲折流来，流到此地转向东南流去，顺江行。
English: After walking for three miles over the mountains to the east, we saw the Right River meandering from the north, turning here to the southeast and flowing along the river.

古文：又二里而至大滩，有数家之聚在江西岸，始降栏宅土，有平居矣。
现代文：又走二里后来到大滩，有个几家人的村落在江西岸，就是从前的大滩骚，万历初年已迁到宋村。
English: After walking another two miles, they came to Datan. There was a village of several families on the west bank of the river, the former Datan So. They had moved to Song village in the first year of Wanli.

古文：即旧之大滩驿也，万历初已移于宋村。江中有石横截下流，滩声轰轰，闻二三里，大滩之名以此。
现代文：江中有石滩横截下游，河滩水声轰轰响，二三里外都听得见，大滩的地名源于此，右江到这里才听见水声。
English: There is a rocky beach across the lower reaches of the river, and the sound of the water crashing on the beach can be heard two or three miles away. The name of the beach comes from this, and the sound of the water can only be heard here on the Right River.

古文：右江至此始闻声也。换夫缚舆，遂从村东东南逾岭，三里，逾岭南，则左江自杨美下流东北曲而下，至此折而东南去。
现代文：换夫捆轿子，于是从村东向东南越岭，三里，越到岭南，就见左江自杨美往下流向东北弯曲而下，流到此地折向东南流去。
English: He changed husbands and tied up his palanquin, so he crossed the ridge from the east of the village to the southeast, and three miles further to the south of the ridge, he saw the Zuo River flowing down from Yangmei, curving down to the northeast, flowing to this place and turning to the southeast.

古文：遂从江北岸随流东行，二里，复入山脊，雨复纷纷。
现代文：于是从左江北岸顺流往东行，二里，再走入山脊，雨又纷纷而下。
English: So I followed the north bank of the Zuo River eastward for two miles, then walked into the ridge, and the rain continued to fall.

古文：上下冈陀间又二里，换夫于平凤村。
现代文：上下在起伏的山冈间又走二里，在平凤村换夫。
English: They walked another two miles up and down between the undulating mountains and changed husbands in Pingfeng Village.

古文：又东行二里半，至宋村，即来时左、右二江夹而合处，其南面临江，即所谓大果湾也。
现代文：又向东行二里半，到了宋村，就是来时左江、右江两条江流相夹会合之处，它的南面临江，就是所谓的大果湾了。
English: Another two and a half miles to the east, to Song Village, which is the place where the two rivers, the Left and the Right, meet. It faces the river to the south, which is the so-called Da Guo Bay.

古文：其村在两江夹中，实即古之合江镇，而土人莫知其名矣。
现代文：这个村子在两江相夹的中心地带，实际就是古代的合江镇，可本地人无人知道这个名字的。
English: This village in the middle of the two rivers is actually the ancient town of Hejiang, but no local people know the name.

古文：万历初移大滩驿于此，然无邮亭、驿铺，第民间供马而已。
现代文：万历初年把大滩释迁到此地，然而没有邮亭释站只是民间供给马匹而已。
English: In the first year of Wanli, Datan was relocated to this place, but there was no post office to release the horses.

古文：故余前过此，求大滩驿而不知何在，至是始知之也。
现代文：所以我前次路过此地，找大滩骚却不知在哪里，到此时才知道。
English: So the last time I passed by here, I was looking for the giant tansha, but I didn't know where it was, until now.

古文：候饭，候夫，久之乃行，雨不止。
现代文：等着吃饭，等候派夫，很长时间才上路，雨不停。
English: Waiting for dinner, waiting for a pie, it took a long time to get on the road, and it kept raining.

古文：其地南即大果湾，渡左江为杨美通太平府道，正东一里即左、右二江交会之嘴。
现代文：此地南面就是大果湾，渡过左江是杨美通向太平府的路，正东一里处就是左、右二江交汇的尖嘴。
English: To the south of this place is Daguo Bay, across the Zuo River is the Yangmei Road leading to Taiping Prefecture, and one mile due east is the cusp where the two rivers meet.

古文：今路从东北行一里余，渡右江，南望二江之会在半里外，亦犹前日从舟过其口而内望其地也。
现代文：现在路从东北方行一里多，渡过右江，向南望去两条江水相会之处在半里外，也像前些日子从船中经过江口向江内望那个地方一样。
English: Now the road runs for more than a mile from the northeast, crossing the Right River, and looking south, the place where the two rivers meet is half a mile away, just like the other day when I looked at that place from the boat passing through the river mouth.

古文：渡右江东岸，反溯江东北行。
现代文：渡到右江东岸，溯江流往东北行。
English: Crossed to the east bank of the Yu River, the river flowed to the northeast.

古文：王宫在大江北岸里余矣。
现代文：不久便向东翻山，三里后下走，雨居然哗哗地大下起来。
English: Soon I was climbing the mountain to the east, and three miles later, it started raining heavily.

古文：初九日中夜数闻雨声甚厉，天明，云油然四翳。
现代文：又走一里来到王宫村，便停下来休息。雨声哗哗，到天黑都不能再上路。初九日半夜几次听见雨声十分猛烈，天明后，阴云浓郁四面笼罩。
English: I walked another mile to Wang Gong Village, and then stopped to rest. The rain was so loud that I couldn't get back on the road until it was dark. I heard the rain several times in the middle of the night on the 9th day of the first month, and it was very heavy. After dawn, thick clouds covered all sides.

古文：迟迟而起，饭而后行，近上午矣。
现代文：很迟才起床，吃饭后上路，将近上午了。
English: I got up very late, went on the road after dinner, and it was almost morning.

古文：王宫村之左，有路北入山夹，乃旧大滩间道。
现代文：王宫村的左边，有路向北通进山间峡谷中，是从前去大滩骚的近路。
English: On the left side of Wanggong village, there is a road leading north into the mountain canyon, which is a shortcut to Datangsao.

古文：由村前东南行二里，逾一岭而下，有小水自北夹来，西南入大江。
现代文：由村前往东南行二里，越过一座岭后下走，有小溪从北面的峡谷中流来，向西南流入大江。
English: Two miles southeast from the village, after crossing a ridge and going down, there is a stream flowing from the canyon in the north and flowing southwest into the big river.

古文：越之而东又一里，稍北转循北山行，有大道自东而西，始随上东去。
现代文：越过小溪又向东一里，稍转向北沿北山行，有条大道自东通向西，开始沿大道向东去。
English: Cross the creek and go one mile east, turn slightly north along Kitayama, there is a road from east to west, and begin to go east along the road.

古文：其直西逾小坳者，亦旧大滩道，盖南宁抵隆安，此其正道，以驿在宋村两江夹间，故迁而就之也。
现代文：那一直往西越过小山坳的路，也是从前去大滩骚的路，原来南宁到隆安，这是正道，因为骚站在两江相夹间的宋村，所以绕路去将就它。
English: The road that has been going west over the small mountains is also the road that used to go to Datan So. Originally, Nanning to Long'an was the right way, because So stood in Song village between the two rivers, so it would be a detour to go there.

古文：又东行三里，转上北冈，换夫于颜村今作言屋；又东南逾一岭而下，转而西，共五里，换夫于登科村。
现代文：又向东行三里，转上北面的山冈，在颜村换夫。又往东南越过一座岭下行，转向西，共走五里，在登科村换夫。
English: Another three miles to the east, turning up the hill to the north, changing husbands in Yan village. Another five miles to the southeast, crossing a ridge and turning west, changing husbands in Dengke village.

古文：又东南二里，换夫于狼科村。
现代文：又向东南二里，在狼科村换夫。
English: Two miles to the south-east, in the village of Wolko, she changed her husband.

古文：山雨大至，候夫不来，趋避竹间，顶踵淋漓，乃趋避一山庄庑下。
现代文：山雨暴降，脚夫等不来，奔到竹丛间避雨，头顶脚跟雨水淋漓，只得赶到一处山庄的厢房下躲雨。
English: Torrential downpour, the porter could not wait, he ran to the bamboo thicket to shelter from the rain, his head and feet were drenched with rain, and he had to rush to a mountain villa to shelter from the rain.

古文：久之夫至，雨亦渐止，又东南逾一平坳，共四里，饭于石步村。
现代文：很久之后脚夫到来，雨也渐渐停了，又向东南越过一个平坦的山坳，共四里，在石步村吃饭。
English: After a long time, the porter arrived, the rain gradually stopped, and they crossed a flat ridge to the southeast, a total of four miles, to eat in the village of Ishibuku.

古文：既饭，已下午矣，雨犹不全止，夫至乃行。
现代文：饭后，已是下午了，雨还没有全停，脚夫到了便动身。
English: After the meal, it was already afternoon, the rain had not completely stopped, the porter arrived and set off.

古文：东南有墟在冈头，逾冈而下共半里，越小石梁，下有涧深而甚细，盖南宁北面之山，至石步而西截江流者也。
现代文：东南方有个集市在冈头，翻过冈头后共下走半里，越过小石桥，桥下有条深涧但水流非常细，大概是南宁北面的山，到石步村后向西横截江流。
English: In the southeast, there is a bazaar in Gangtou. After turning over Gangtou, walk down a total of half a mile, cross the small stone bridge. Under the bridge, there is a deep but very thin stream, probably the mountain in the north of Nanning. After reaching Shibucun, cross the river to the west.

古文：又东南行，雨势大作，遍体沾透。
现代文：又往东南行，雨势大作，遍体湿透。
English: Heading south-east again, it's raining hard and I'm drenched.

古文：二里，复下一深涧，越木桥而上冈，又东南行雨中二里，止于罗岷村。
现代文：二里，又走下一条深涧，越过木桥后上山冈，又在雨中向东南行二里，停在罗崛村。
English: After two miles, they walked down a deep ravine, crossed a wooden bridge and went up the mountain, and then drove two miles southeast in the rain, stopping at Luo Hori Village.

古文：候夫不至，雨不止，煨湿木以爇衣，未几乃卧。
现代文：等候派夫不见到来，雨不停，点燃湿柴烘烤衣服，不多久便躺下了。
English: Waited for the baker not to come, the rain continued, lit wet firewood to bake clothes, and soon lay down.

古文：初十日云势油然连连，乃饭。
现代文：初十日乌云浓郁连绵，于是吃饭。
English: On the tenth day of the first month, the dark clouds were thick and continuous, so we went to eat.

古文：村人以马代舆，而另一人持舆随行。
现代文：村里人用马来代替轿子，而另有一人扛着轿子跟着走。
English: The villagers use a horse to replace the palanquin, while another person carries the palanquin and follows behind.

古文：雨复霏霏，于是多东南随江岸行矣。
现代文：雨又霏霏而下，从这里起多半是向东南沿着江岸走了。
English: The rain began to fall again, and from here on, most of the cormorants headed southeast along the riverbank.

古文：五里，稍北折，内坞有溪自东北来入江，乃南逾之。
现代文：五里，稍折向北，山内坞中有溪水从东北前来流入江中，于是向南越过溪水。
English: Five miles, a slight turn to the north, there is a stream in the mountain dock that flows into the river from the northeast, and then crosses the stream to the south.

古文：复上冈，二里，抵秦村今作陈村，其村甚长。
现代文：又上冈，二里，抵达秦村，这个村子非常长。
English: Another uphill, two miles, arrived in Qin village, this village is very long.

古文：先两三家互推委，既乃下一村人家，骑与送夫去。
现代文：开头两三家人互相推楼，随后去到村中一户人家，坐骑与送行的脚夫离开了。
English: At the beginning, two or three families pushed each other, then went to a house in the village, and the horse and the porter left.

古文：候夫久之，有奸民三四人索马牌看，以牌有马，不肯应夫。
现代文：等候派夫等了很久，有三四个奸民要了马牌去看，因为牌上只派马，不肯派夫应差。
English: After waiting for a long time, three or four of the ruffians asked to see the horse cards, because the cards showed only horses, and they would not let Paiw go.

古文：盖近郭之民，刁悍无比，真不如来境之恭也。
现代文：原来城郭附近的百姓，刁悍无比，真不如来时的那些地方恭敬了。
English: Originally, the people near the castle were incredibly tough, so it's better to be respectful of the places you visit.

古文：久之，止以二夫肩行李，舆与马俱一无，余以步而行。
现代文：很久后，只派两个脚夫肩扛行李，轿子与马全无一样，我用脚步行。
English: After a long time, only two porters were sent to carry the luggage on their shoulders. The palanquin was nothing like a horse, and I walked with my feet.

古文：一舆来，已数村，反为其人有矣。
现代文：一经乘轿以来，已走过数村，现反而被这里的人占有了。
English: Since I took the sedan, I have walked through several villages, but now they are occupied by people from here.

古文：幸雨止，冈渐燥。
现代文：幸好雨停了，山冈渐渐变干。
English: Fortunately, the rain stopped and the mountain gradually dried out.

古文：一里，平逾冈东北，有溪自东北来入江，较前三溪颇大，横竹凳数十渡涧底，盖即申墟之下流，发于罗秀山者也。
现代文：一里，平缓越到山冈东北面，有溪水自东北前来流入江中，与前三条溪流相比相当大，用几十个竹凳横在涧底渡过去，大概就是申墟的下游，是发源于罗秀山的溪流了。
English: For one kilometer, it flows smoothly to the northeast side of the mountain range. There is a stream coming from the northeast and flowing into the river. Compared to the previous three streams, it is quite large. It is crossed with dozens of bamboo benches at the bottom of the river. It is probably the downstream of Shenhu, and it is a stream originating from Mount Luo.

古文：复东南上冈一里余，过窑头村之北，顾奴同二担入村换夫，余即从村北大道东行。
现代文：再向东南上冈一里多，经过窑头村的北边，顾奴同两副担子进村去换夫，我立即从村北的大道往东行。
English: Further to the southeast, up the hill for more than a mile, past the northern edge of Yaotou village, Gu Nong and two porters entered the village to change husbands, and I immediately went east from the main road north of the village.

古文：二里，北渡一石梁，其梁颇长，架两冈间，而下流亦细，向从舟登陆，自窑头村东渡小桥，即其下流也。
现代文：二里，向北走过一座石桥，此桥很长，架在两面山冈之间，但桥下的水流也很细小，从前从船上登陆，从窑头村向东走过的小桥，就是它的下游。
English: Two miles to the north, I walked over a stone bridge. This bridge is very long and is built between two hills, but the water flow under the bridge is also very small. I used to land from a boat, and the small bridge that I walked eastward from Yaotou Village is its downstream.

古文：又东四里，有长木梁驾两冈上，渡而东即白衣庵，再东即崇善寺，乃入寺询静闻永诀事。
现代文：又向东走四里，有座长木桥架在两座山冈上，过桥往东走就是白衣庵，再往东就是崇善寺。于是进寺询问静闻永诀的事。
English: Four miles to the east, there is a long wooden bridge over two hills. Passing the bridge to the east is Shiroi-an, and to the east is Sozen-ji Temple. So I went to the temple to inquire about Jinghun Yongrui.

古文：其殁ｍò死在九月二十四酉时，止隔余行一日也。
现代文：他死在九月二十四日下午五至七时，我上路后的一天。
English: He died between five and seven o'clock in the afternoon of the 24th of September, the day after I set out.

古文：僧引至窆骨之所，乃在木梁东岸溪之半。
现代文：僧人引路来到下葬的场所，就在木桥溪流东岸的半中腰。
English: The monk led the way to the burial site, halfway up the eastern bank of the Muxiao Stream.

古文：余拜而哭之。
现代文：我哭着拜祭了他。
English: I cried and worshipped him.

古文：南顾桥上，则顾奴与二担适从梁上过矣。
现代文：回顾南面的桥上，就见顾奴与两个挑夫刚好从桥上走过。
English: Looking back at the bridge to the south, I saw Gu Nong and two porters just walking across the bridge.

古文：乃与僧期，而趋梁店税驾焉。
现代文：于是与僧人约定日期，便赶到梁家客店住下了。
English: So he agreed on a date with the monk and rushed to the Liangjia Inn to stay.

古文：时才午，雨纷纷不止。
现代文：此时才是中午，雨纷纷下个不停。
English: By this time it was midday and it was raining incessantly.

古文：饭后蹑履问云、贵客于熊石湖家，云、贵经纪。
现代文：饭后散步到熊石湖家去打听云南、贵州的客商，有贵州客商才离开，现在还没有人来。
English: After dinner, I walked to Xiong Shih Hu's home to inquire about merchants from Yunnan and Guizhou. Some merchants from Guizhou had just left, but no one has come yet.

古文：余以疮痛市药于肆，并履袜而还。
现代文：我因为疮痛到药店中买了药，并买了鞋袜便返回来。
English: I went to the drugstore to buy medicine for my sore, and came back with shoes and socks.

