古文：十有七年春，王正月庚子，许男锡我卒。
现代文：十七年春季，周历正月庚子日，许昭公去世。
English: In the spring of the seventeenth year, on the first day of the first month of the lunar calendar, Xu Zhaogong passed away.

古文：丁未，蔡侯申卒。
现代文：丁未日，蔡文公去世。
English: On the day before yesterday, Cai Wengong passed away.

古文：夏，葬许昭公。
现代文：下架，安葬许昭公。
English: Off the shelves, the burial of Xu Zhaogong.

古文：葬蔡文公。
现代文：安葬蔡文公。
English: Tsai Wen-gong is buried peacefully.

古文：六月癸卯，日有食之。
现代文：六月癸卯日，有日食。
English: On the last day of June, there was a solar eclipse.

古文：己未，公会晋侯、卫侯、曹伯、邾子同盟于断道。
现代文：己未日，宣公在断道与晋侯、卫侯、曹伯、邾子一起结盟。
English: The day before yesterday, Xuan Guo made an alliance with Jin Hou, Wei Hou, Cao Bo, and Zou Zi.

古文：秋，公至自会。
现代文：秋季，宣公从断道回来。
English: In autumn, Aigong returns from Huangchi.

古文：冬十有一月壬午，公弟叔肸卒。
现代文：冬季十一月壬午日，鲁宣公的弟弟叔肸去世。
English: On the morning of November 30, Lu Xuan's younger brother, Zhu Xi, passed away.

古文：十七年春，晋侯使郤克征会于齐。
现代文：十七年春季，晋景公派遣郤克到齐国征召齐顷公参加盟会。
English: In the spring of the 17th year of the Jin Dynasty, Emperor Jinjing sent Zengke to Qi Province to recruit Qi He Gong to participate in the League.

古文：齐顷公帷妇人，使观之。
现代文：齐顷公用帷幕遮住妇人让她观看。
English: Suddenly, a curtain was used to cover the woman and allow her to watch.

古文：郤子登，妇人笑于房。
现代文：郤克登上台阶，那妇人在房里笑起来。
English: As he climbed the steps, the woman in the room burst out laughing.

古文：献子怒，出而誓曰： 所不此报，无能涉河。 
现代文：郤克生气，出来发誓说： 不报复这次耻辱，就不能渡过黄河！ 
English: Enraged, he came out and swore: "I will not cross the Yellow River without avenging this humiliation!"

古文：献子先归，使栾京庐待命于齐，曰： 不得齐事，无复命矣。 
现代文：郤克先回国，让栾京庐在齐国等候命令，说： 不能完成在齐国的使命，就不要回国复命。 
English: Yan Ke returned home first, and let Yan Jingjun wait for orders in Qi, saying: If you can't complete your mission in Qi, don't return home.

古文：郤子至，请伐齐，晋侯弗许；请以其私属，又弗许。
现代文：郤克到达晋国，请求进攻齐国，晋景公不答应，请求带领家族去进攻齐国，晋景公也不答应。
English: When Yan Ke arrived in Jin, he asked to attack Qi, but Jin Jing did not agree. He also asked to lead his family to attack Qi, but Jin Jing did not agree.

古文：齐侯使高固、晏弱、蔡朝、南郭偃会。
现代文：齐顷公派遣高固、晏弱、蔡朝、南郭偃参加会盟。
English: Qi Hegong sent Gao Guo, Zou Weak, Cai Zhao, and Nanguo Yao to join the alliance.

古文：及敛盂，高固逃归。
现代文：到达敛盂，高固逃回来。
English: Gao Gu escaped back to his home.

古文：夏，会于断道，讨贰也。
现代文：夏季，在断道会盟，这是为了讨伐有二心的国家。
English: In the summer, at the Taoist Association, it's to fight against double-minded countries.

古文：盟于卷楚，辞齐人。
现代文：又在卷楚结盟，拒绝齐国人参加。
English: It also allied itself with Wuchu and refused to allow the people of Qi to participate.

古文：晋人执晏弱于野王，执蔡朝于原，执南郭偃于温。
现代文：晋国人在野王逮捕了晏弱，在原地逮捕了蔡朝，在温地逮捕了南郭偃。
English: The people of Jin arrested He Weak in Yanwang, arrested Cai Dynasty in situ, and arrested Nan Guo Jun in Warmi.

古文：苗贲皇使，见晏桓子，归言于晋侯曰： 夫晏子何罪？
现代文：苗贲皇出使路过，见到晏弱。回去，对晋景公说： 晏子有什么罪？
English: An emissary of the Miao Emperor passed by and saw the feeble cripple. He went back and said to Jin Jing Gong, "What is the crime of the cripple?"

古文：昔者诸侯事吾先君，皆如不逮，举言群臣不信，诸侯皆有贰志。
现代文：从前诸侯奉事我们的先君，都急得像赶不上的样子，都说是因为晋国君臣不讲信用，所以诸侯都有二心。
English: In the past, the princes who served our forefathers were in such a hurry that they couldn't keep up. They all said that because the princes and ministers of Jin didn't trust each other, the princes were double-minded.

古文：齐君恐不得礼，故不出而使四子来。
现代文：齐国的国君恐怕不能得到礼遇，所以不出国而派这四个人来。
English: The sovereign of Qi was afraid that he would not be treated with courtesy, so he sent these four people without leaving the country.

古文：左右或沮之曰： 君不出，必执吾使。 
现代文：齐顷公左右的随从有人阻止，说： 您不出国，一定会抓住我国的使者。 
English: Someone stopped the entourage of Lord Qi and said, "If you don't go abroad, you will surely catch our country's envoy."

古文：故高子及敛盂而逃。
现代文：所以高子到达敛盂就逃走了。
English: So when Takako got to Atsugi, she ran away.

古文：夫三子者曰： 若绝君好，宁归死焉。 
现代文：这三个人说： 如果因为我们断绝了国君的友好，宁可回国被处死。 
English: The three men said, "If it is because we have broken off our friendship with the sovereign, we would rather return to our country and be executed."

古文：为是犯难而来，吾若善逆彼，以怀来者，吾又执之以信齐沮，吾不既过矣乎？
现代文：为此他们甘冒危险而来。我们应该好好迎接他们，以使前来的人对我们怀念，但是我们偏偏逮捕了他们，以证明齐国人的劝阻是对的，我们不是已经做错了吗？
English: That's why they risked their lives to come here. We should have given them a good welcome so that those who came would remember us, but instead we arrested them to prove that the people of Qi were right to dissuade them. Didn't we already do the wrong thing?

古文：过而不改，而又久之，以成其悔，何利之有焉？
现代文：做错了而不加以改正，而又久久不肯释放，以造成他们的后悔，这有什么好处？
English: What good is it to make a mistake and not correct it, and then not release them for a long time to make them regret it?

古文：使反者得辞，而害来者，以惧诸侯，将焉用之？ 
现代文：让回去的人有了逃走的理由，而伤害前来的人，以使诸侯害怕，这有什么用？ 
English: What is the use of giving the returnees a reason to flee, and of injuring the newcomers, in order to frighten the princes?

古文：晋人缓之，逸。
现代文：于是晋国人放松了看管，齐国的三名使者就逃走了。
English: As a result, the people of Jin loosened their guard, and the three emissaries of Qi fled.

古文：秋八月，晋师还。
现代文：秋季，八月，晋军回国。
English: In the autumn, in August, the Jin army returned to China.

古文：范武子将老，召文子曰： 燮乎，吾闻之，喜怒以类者鲜，易者实多。
现代文：范武子打算告老还乡，把儿子范文子喊过来，说： 燮儿啊！我听说，喜怒合于礼法的是很少的，和它相反的倒是很多。
English: Fan Muxi was planning to return to his hometown, so he called his son Fan Wenzi over and said, "Son, I've heard that there are very few emotions that are compatible with etiquette, but there are many that are the opposite.

古文：《诗》曰： 君子如怒，乱庶遄沮；君子如祉，乱庶遄已。 
现代文：《诗》说： 君子如果发怒，祸乱或许可以很快阻住。君子如果喜悦，祸乱或许可以很快停歇。 
English: "Poetry" says: If a gentleman is angry, the calamity may be quickly stopped. If a gentleman is happy, the calamity may be quickly stopped.

古文：君子之喜怒，以已乱也。
现代文：君子的喜怒是用来阻止祸乱的。
English: A gentleman's joy and anger are used to stop evil.

古文：弗已者必益之。
现代文：如果不是阻止，就一定会增加祸乱。
English: If it is not prevented, it will certainly increase the calamity.

古文：郤子其或者欲已乱于齐乎，不然，余惧其益之也。
现代文：郤子或者是想要在齐国阻止祸乱吧。如果不是这样，我怕他会增加祸乱呢！
English: The mule is probably trying to stop the calamity in Qi. If not, I'm afraid he will increase the calamity!

古文：余将老，使郤子逞其志，庶有豸乎？尔从二三子唯敬。 
现代文：我打算告老还乡了，让郤子能够心满意足，祸乱或许可以解除。你跟随几位大夫，唯有恭敬从事。 
English: I plan to return to my hometown, so that the cripple can be satisfied, and the calamity can perhaps be lifted. You follow several doctors, only respectfully engaged.

古文：乃请老，郤献子为政。
现代文：于是就请求告老。郤克执政。
English: So he asked to retire. Zeng Ke came to power.

古文：冬，公弟叔肸卒。公母弟也。
现代文：冬季，鲁宣公的弟弟叔肸死，他是宣公的同母兄弟。
English: In the winter, Lu Xuanguo's younger brother, Xiong Yao, died. He was Xuanguo's half-brother.

古文：凡大子之母弟，公在曰公子，不在曰弟，凡称弟，皆母弟也。
现代文：凡是太子的同母兄弟，国君在世叫做公子，不在世叫做弟。凡称为弟的，都是同母兄弟。
English: All brothers of the same mother who are princes are called princes when they are alive, and brothers when they are dead. Everyone who is called a brother is a brother of the same mother.

