古文：陈仲微，字致广，瑞州高安人。其先居江州，旌表义门。嘉泰二年，举进士。
现代文：陈仲微，字致广，瑞州高安人。他的祖先居住在江州，嘉奖为义门。嘉泰二年，考中进士。
English: Chen Zhongwei, known as Zhiguang, is from Gao'an, Ruizhou. His ancestors lived in Jiangzhou and were commended for their virtuous deeds. In the second year of Jia Tai, he passed the middle school entrance examination.

古文：调莆田尉，会守令阙，通判又罢软不任，台阃委以县事。
现代文：调任为莆田县尉，恰逢没有县令，通判又罢免柔弱与不任职的人，有关部门把县令的事委任给他。
English: He was transferred to Putian County Lieutenant when there was no county magistrate. The magistrate dismissed the weak and incompetent person, and the relevant departments delegated the county magistrate to him.

古文：时岁凶，部卒并饥民作乱，仲微立召首乱者戮之。
现代文：那年歉收，部卒与饥民一起造反，陈仲微立刻把作乱的首领抓来杀了。
English: When the harvest failed that year, his subordinates rebelled together with the starving people. Chen Zhongwei immediately arrested and killed the leader of the rebellion.

古文：籍闭粜，抑强籴一境以肃。
现代文：缉拿不卖粮食的人，抑制强迫买粮食的人，莆田县境内秩序肃然。
English: Arresting those who do not sell grain and restraining those who forcibly buy grain, there is order in Putian County.

古文：囊山浮屠与郡学争水利，久不决，仲微按法曰： 曲在浮屠。 它日沿檄过寺，其徒久揭其事钟上以为冤，旦暮祝诅，然莫省为仲微也。
现代文：囊山的佛教徒与郡学的师生争夺水利，长久不能解决，陈仲微按照法律公断说： 错误是在佛教徒这一方。 有一天，沿檄经过寺庙，这个寺庙的和尚一直说这事并撞钟以为冤枉，一天到晚诅咒，然而，没有谁省悟是陈仲微依法公断。
English: The dispute between the Buddhists of Jinshan and the teachers and students of Guanxue for water conservancy could not be resolved for a long time. Chen Zhongwei judged according to the law and said, "The error is on the side of the Buddhists." One day, along the river, he passed a temple. The monk of this temple kept saying this and rang the bell, thinking it was unjust, and cursed all day long. However, no one realized that Chen Zhongwei judged according to the law.

古文：仲微见之曰： 吾何心哉？
现代文：陈仲微看到后说 ：我是什么心呢？
English: Chen Zhongwei saw it and said, "What kind of heart do I have?"

古文：吾何心哉？ 质明，首僧无疾而死。
现代文：我是什么心呢？ 质对明白，为首的那个寺僧没有患病就死了。
English: What kind of heart do I have? To be clear, the head monk of the temple died without getting sick.

古文：寓公有诵仲微于当路而密授以荐牍者，仲微受而藏之。
现代文：寓公有称赞陈仲微的，并在他经过的路上暗中授给他推荐的书信，陈仲微接受以后就藏起来了。
English: The landlord praised Chen Zhongwei and secretly gave him a letter of recommendation as he passed by. Chen Zhongwei accepted the letter and then hid.

古文：逾年，其家负县租，竟逮其奴。
现代文：过了一年多，寓公的家里欠县府的租，陈仲微竟令人逮捕了他家的佣奴。
English: After more than a year, the landlord's family owed rent to the county government, and Chen Zhongwei had his family's servant arrested.

古文：寓公有怨言，仲微还其牍，缄封如故，其人惭谢，终其任不敢挠以私。
现代文：寓公为此有怨言，陈仲微还给他年前给他的简牍书信，书信的封口还是原来的样子，并未拆封，这个人惭愧地称谢而去，在陈仲微的这一任期内再也不敢徇私。
English: Fuhong complained about this, and Chen Zhongwei gave him back the handwritten letter he had given him years ago. The letter was still sealed as it was, and had not been opened. The man was ashamed to say thank you and left. During Chen Zhongwei's term of office, he would no longer dare to be selfish.

古文：迁海盐丞。
现代文：陈仲微改任海盐县丞。
English: Chen Zhongwei was reappointed as the county magistrate of Haiyan County.

古文：邻邑有疑狱十年，郡命仲微按之，一问立决。
现代文：邻邑有疑问的狱事诉讼已经十年，州郡守令命陈仲微去调查审理，一问就决断此案。
English: It has been ten years since the prison lawsuit in question in the neighborhood. The state and county warden ordered Chen Zhongwei to investigate and adjudicate the case.

古文：改知崇阳县，寝食公署旁，日与父老樵竖相尔汝，下情毕达，吏无所措手。
现代文：改为崇阳县知县，一直在县署旁边吃住，白天多与县邑父老乡亲、打柴的等人相互你我相称，故对民情了如指掌，小吏们自然不敢有任何违法行为。
English: He changed his name to Zhixian of Chongyang County, and has been eating and living next to the county office. During the day, he is more compatible with the people of the county, townspeople, and firewood collectors. Therefore, he knows the people's feelings like the back of his hand. Naturally, the petty officials dare not commit any illegal acts.

古文：通判黄州，职兼饷馈，以身律下，随事检柅，军兴赖以不乏。
现代文：担任黄州通判时，还兼任搜集军饷之职，自己以身作则，随事检查，军队粮饷靠此毫无匮乏。
English: When he served as the Huangzhou magistrate, he also served as the duty of collecting military pay. He set an example by inspecting everything, and the army had no shortage of food.

古文：制置使上其最，辞曰： 职分也，何最之有？ 复通判江州，迁干办诸司审计事，知赣州、江西提点刑狱，迕丞相贾似道，监察御史舒有开言罢。
现代文：制置使上书称道他为这方面最好的表率。
English: The petitioners hailed him as the best example in this regard.

古文：久之，起知惠州，迁太府寺丞兼权侍右郎官。
现代文：他推辞说： 这是自己的职责，哪里谈得上是最好的表率呢？ 
English: He declined, saying: "This is my duty. Where can I be the best example?

古文：轮对，言： 禄饵可以钓天下之中才，而不可啖尝天下之豪杰；名航可以载天下之猥士，而不可以陆沉天下之英雄。 似道怒，又讽言者罢夺其官。
现代文：又担任江州通判，迁转兼任干办诸司审计事，任赣州知州，江西提点刑狱，因违逆丞相贾似道，监察御史舒有开上书罢免他。好久以后，又起用他担任惠州知州，迁升太府寺臣，暂时兼理侍右郎官。上朝论对，说： 俸禄作为诱饵可以钓天下才能属于中等的人，但不可能以此来收罗天下的豪杰；有名的船只可以运载天下的卑鄙之人，而不可以使天下的英雄沉沦下去。 贾似道大怒，又令监察官弹劾，罢夺他的官职。
English: He also served as the chief judge of Jiangzhou, was transferred and concurrently served as the person in charge of auditing the various departments, was appointed as the governor of Zhangzhou, the governor of Zhizhou, and the governor of Jiangxi Province, and was sentenced to prison. For his disobedience to the prime minister, Jia Li Dao, the inspector general Shu You wrote a letter to dismiss him. After a long time, he was appointed to serve as the governor of Huizhou, was promoted to the minister of the temple of Taifu, and temporarily served as the assistant to the right-hand man. The Shang Dynasty argued against, saying: Salary can be used as a bait to

古文：久之，叙复。
现代文：好久以后，才恢复职务。
English: It was a long time before he resumed his duties.

古文：时国势危甚，仲微上封事，其略曰： 误襄者，老将也。
现代文：当时，国家大势很危急，陈仲微上封事论说，其中大致说： 因错误而导致襄阳失守的，是老将。
English: At that time, the national situation was very critical. Chen Zhongwei made a speech on the matter, which roughly said: It was the veteran who lost control of Xiangyang due to a mistake.

古文：夫襄之罪不专在于庸阃、疲将、孩兵也，君相当分受其责，以谢先皇帝在天之灵。
现代文：襄阳失守的罪过不单纯是在关隘不牢、疲劳的将帅、幼小的兵卒，度宗皇上、丞相应当为此分担责任，以谢先皇帝理宗的在天之灵。
English: The sin of losing the defense of Xiangyang is not simply in the narrow pass, tired generals and young soldiers. Emperor Du and prime ministers should share the responsibility for this, with thanks to the spirit of the former emperor Rizong in heaven.

古文：天子若曰罪在朕躬，大臣宜言咎在臣等，宣布十年养安之往缪，深惩六年玩寇之昨非，救过未形，固已无极，追悔既往，尚愈于迷。
现代文：度宗皇上假若说罪过在自己，大臣们表示其错误在我们，宣布十年积蓄力量，改正过错，严惩六年中忽视敌人的罪行，纠正尚未昭彰的过失，本来没有什么极限，追悔过去的失误，还可以在迷途中清醒。
English: If Emperor Du were to say that the fault was in himself, and the ministers were to say that the fault was in us, and announce the accumulation of strength for ten years, correct the mistakes, severely punish the crimes of ignoring the enemy for six years, correct the mistakes that have not yet been revealed, there would be no limit, repent the mistakes of the past, and still be able to be sober in the middle of the road.

古文：或谓覆护之意多，克责之辞少；或谓陛下乏哭师之誓，师相饰分过之言，甚非所以慰恤死义，祈天悔祸之道也。
现代文：有的说袒护的意思多，责备的言词少；陛下缺乏那种悲壮哭师的誓言，师相润饰承担过错的言论，这尤其不是抚慰忧恤死者的道义，祈求上天悔悟致祸的道理。
English: Some say that the words of protection mean more, and the words of reproach are few; His Majesty lacks the oath of the mourners, and the words of the mourners to bear the fault. This is especially not the morality of comforting the mourners and praying to heaven for repentance.

古文：往往代言乏知体之士，翘馆鲜有识之人，吮旨茹柔，积习成痼，君道相业，两有所亏。
现代文：往往代言的人缺乏知书识体的儒士，高等学馆很少有有识之士，吃香喝辣，积恶习成痼疾，君道相业，各有不足的地方。
English: People who endorse often lack the knowledge of Confucius, who is literate and sensible, and there are few people with insight in colleges and universities. Eating spicy food, drinking spicy drinks, accumulating bad habits into maladies, and pursuing a career as a monarch have their own shortcomings.

古文：方今何时，而在廷无谋国之臣，在边无折冲之帅。
现代文：而现在这个时候，在朝廷没有能为国家筹谋的人才，在边境没有能够指挥破敌的将帅。
English: But now, at this time, there is no talent in the imperial court that can plan for the country, and there is no general at the border who can command the enemy.

古文：监之先朝宣和未乱之前、靖康既败之后，凡前日之日近冕旒，朱轮华毂，俯首吐心，奴颜婢膝，即今日奉贼称臣之人也；强力敏事，捷疾快意，即今日畔君卖国之人也。
现代文：审察前朝北宋宣和年末变化之前，靖康已败之后，凡是前日接近皇帝的大臣们，坐着漂亮的车子，俯首称臣，奴颜婢膝，就像今天认贼做父、向贼称臣的人。力量强、敏于事，办事痛快合意的人，就是今天背叛皇上、出卖国家的人。
English: Examining the Northern Song Dynasty's proclamation of the former dynasty and the changes before the end of the year, after the defeat of Jing Kang, all the ministers who approached the emperor the day before, sitting in a beautiful car, bowed their heads and bowed their knees, just like today's thieves. Those who are strong, sensitive, and agreeable are those who betray the emperor and sell the country today.

古文：为国者亦何便于若人哉！
现代文：为国家考虑的人哪能与这样的人去相比呢？
English: How can anyone who thinks about the country be compared to such a person?

古文：迷国者进慆忧之欺以逢其君，托国者护耻败之局而莫敢议，当国者昧安危之机而莫之悔。
现代文：使国家大乱的人上奏骗人的话以逢迎皇上，依赖国家的人掩盖着耻败的局面而且不敢议论，主持国家事务的人不清楚安危的预兆而不知道悔过。
English: Those who make the country chaotic play up deceitful words to meet the emperor, those who rely on the state cover up the shameful situation and dare not discuss it, and those who preside over national affairs do not know the signs of danger and do not know repentance.

古文：臣尝思之，今之所少不止于兵。
现代文：我曾经考虑过，现在所缺乏的不只是兵。
English: I have considered that what is lacking now is not only soldiers.

古文：阃外之事，将军制之，而一级半阶，率从中出，斗粟尺布，退有后忧，平素无权，缓急有责，或请建督，或请行边，或请京城，创闻骇听。
现代文：宫廷外面的事务，都由将军管理，而一官半职，都出于其中，斗粟尺布，退有后忧，平素没有权力，危急时却有责任，有的请求建督，有的请求行边，有的请求到京城，骇人听闻。
English: The affairs outside the palace were managed by the generals, and all officials and officials were appointed from among them. However, there were worries about the poppy cloth. They usually had no power, but they had responsibilities in times of crisis. Some asked to be appointed governor, some asked to travel, and some asked to go to the capital, which was appalling.

古文：因诸阃有辞于缓急之时，故庙堂不得不掩恶于败阙之后，有谋莫展，有败无诛，上下包羞，噤无敢议。
现代文：因诸将在危急之时推辞，故朝廷不得不在失败后帮助遮掩缺点，有智谋的不能施展，打败仗没有被惩罚诛杀，上下包藏羞耻，闭口不敢议论。
English: Because the generals resigned in a time of crisis, the imperial court had to help cover up the shortcomings after the defeat, those with wisdom could not exert themselves, those who lost the battle were not punished and killed, and they hid their shame, and they did not dare to talk about it.

古文：是以下至器仗甲马，衰飒厖氵京，不足以肃军容；壁垒堡栅，折樊驾漏，不足以当冲突之骑。
现代文：这是因为下至器仗甲马，衰飒杂乱，不足以整肃军容；壁垒寨堡栅栏，折樊驾漏，不足以抵挡冲撞的骑兵。
English: This is because it is not enough to tidy up the military appearance when it is in disarray and disorder; it is not enough to resist the charging cavalry by building ramparts and fences.

古文：号为帅阃，名存实亡也。
现代文：号为将帅，名存实亡。
English: He was given the title of Generalissimo, but his reputation was short-lived.

古文：城而无兵，以城与敌；兵不知战，以将与敌；将不知兵，以国与敌。
现代文：建城无兵，以城给敌；士兵不知怎样作战，以致使将帅断送给敌方；将帅不了解士卒，就会把国家葬送给敌方。
English: If you build a city without soldiers, you give the city to the enemy; if soldiers do not know how to fight, they will give the commander to the enemy; if the commander does not know the soldiers, he will give the country to the enemy.

古文：光景蹙近目睫矣！
现代文：这个时间是越来越临近了。
English: That time is fast approaching.

古文：惟君相幡然改悟，天下事尚可为也。
现代文：只有皇上、丞相翻然醒悟、改进，天下国家的事还有挽回的余地。
English: Only the emperor and the prime minister have suddenly woken up and improved, and there is still room for improvement in the affairs of the country.

古文：转败为成，在君相一念间耳。 乃出仲微江东提点刑狱。
现代文：转败为胜，在皇上、丞相的一念之间。 于是，授命陈仲微出任江东提点刑狱。
English: Turning defeat into victory, the emperor and the prime minister were at a loss for words, so they ordered Chen Zhongwei to serve as the leader of the East River.

古文：德祐元年，迁秘书监，寻拜右正言、左司谏、殿中侍御史。
现代文：德元年，陈仲微迁任秘书监，不久，拜任右正言、左司谏、殿中侍御史。
English: In the first year of the German era, Chen Zhongwei was transferred to the post of secretary supervisor, and soon after, he was appointed to the post of right chief councillor, left secretary, and palace attendant.

古文：益王即位海上，拜吏部尚书、给事中。
现代文：益王在海上即位，拜任吏部尚书、给事中。
English: Prince Masu ascended to the throne at sea. He was in the middle of writing and attending to his duties as a court official.

古文：厓山兵败，走安南。
现代文：山兵败以后，逃走安南。
English: After the defeat of the mountain soldiers, Annan fled.

古文：越四年卒，年七十有二。
现代文：过了四年死了，时年七十二岁。
English: He died four years later, aged 72.

古文：其子文孙与安南王族人益稷出降，乡导我师南征。
现代文：陈仲微的儿子陈文孙与安南王族人益稷出降元朝，为元朝军队南征充当向导。
English: Chen Zhongwei's son, Chen Wensun, and members of the Annan royal family went to the Yuan Dynasty to serve as guides for the southern expedition of the Yuan Dynasty army.

古文：安南王愤，伐仲微墓，斧其棺。
现代文：安南王愤怒，掘开陈仲微的墓坟，砍了他的棺材。
English: Enraged, King Annan dug up Chen Zhongwei's grave and chopped up his coffin.

古文：仲微天禀笃实，虽生长富贵，而恶衣菲食，自同窭人。
现代文：陈仲微天性诚实，虽生长富贵之家，然而却粗衣淡饭，就像贫穷的人。
English: Chen Zhongwei was honest by nature. Although he grew up in a wealthy family, he was a pauper, just like the poor.

古文：故能涵饫《六经》，精研理致，于诸子百家、天文、地理、医药、卜筮、释老之学，靡不搜猎云。
现代文：所以能够熟诵《六经》，精通理义致知之学，对于诸子百家、天文、地理、医药、卜筮、释老佛教的学问，没有不搜猎、学习的。
English: Therefore, they are able to recite the "Six Classics" and are proficient in the study of reason and knowledge, and there is no way for them not to search and study the knowledge of the hundreds of schools, astronomy, geography, medicine, divination, and Shilao Buddhism.

古文：梁成大，字谦之，福州人。
现代文：梁成大，字谦之，福州人。
English: Liang Chengda, alias Qian Zhi, from Fuzhou.

古文：开禧元年进士。
现代文：开禧元年的进士。
English: Congratulations to the winners of the first year of the jubilee.

古文：素苟贱亡耻，作县满秩，谄事史弥远家干万昕，昕言真德秀当击，成大曰： 某若入台，必能辨此事。 昕为达其语。
现代文：一贯不顾廉耻，县官满任后，谄媚史弥远家的干亲万昕，万昕说真德秀当受惩罚，梁成大说： 我假若能任官台谏，一定能明辨此事。 万昕为他转告这个话。
English: Liang Chengda said, "If I could serve as the county magistrate, I would definitely be able to discern this matter. If only I could convey this message to him."

古文：通判扬州，寻迁宗正寺簿。
现代文：出任扬州通判，不久迁宗正寺簿。
English: He served as Yangzhou magistrate, and soon moved to Sozhengji.

古文：宝庆元年冬，转对，首言： 大佞似忠，大辨若讷，或好名以自鬻，或立异以自诡，或假高尚之节以要君，或饰矫伪之学以欺世。
现代文：宝庆元年冬天，入朝转对，首先说 ：大佞的人似忠臣，大智的人似愚夫，有的喜好名声以自卖自夸，有的喜好标新立异以诡辩，有的假借高尚之节以要挟君王，有的掩饰虚伪的学问以欺世盗名。
English: In the winter of the first year of Baoqing, when he entered the imperial court, he turned to the right and first said: "Those who are arrogant are like loyal subjects, and those who are wise are like fools. Some people like to make a name for themselves by boasting, some people like to make a name for themselves by sophistry, some people pretend to be noble to blackmail the king, and some people hide their knowledge by deceiving the world.

古文：言若忠鲠，心实回邪，一不察焉，薰莸同器，泾、渭杂流矣。
现代文：说的话似忠诚鲠直，心里实际上满腹邪恶，一不觉察，薰莸同器，泾渭混流。
English: His words seem to be loyal and upright, but his heart is actually full of evil, and he is unaware of it.

古文：言不达变，谋不中机，或巧辨以为能，或诡讦以市直，或设奇险之说以駴众听，或肆妄诞之论以惑士心。
现代文：言论不达时变，计谋不中要害，或巧辩以为能干，或诡辩以此获得名声，或设置奇险的言论以告诫众人，或讲些欺骗妄诞的语言以蛊惑士心。
English: Speech that does not keep up with the times, strategy that does not hit the mark, or sophistry that is thought to be skillful, or sophistry that gains fame, or setting up risky speech to warn the people, or speaking deceptive and delusional language to deceive the hearts of the people.

古文：所行非所言，所守非所学，一不辨焉，枘凿不侔，矛盾相激矣。 
现代文：所做的不是所说的，所坚持的不是所学的，一不辨别，凿枘两不相合，矛盾不相容。 
English: What is done is not what is said, what is insisted on is not what is learned, one does not distinguish, the two do not coincide, and the contradiction is incompatible.

古文：越六日，拜监察御史。
现代文：过了六天，梁成大拜任为监察御史。
English: Six days later, Liang Chengda was appointed as the inspector general of history.

古文：寻奏： 魏了翁已从追窜，人犹以为罪大罚轻。
现代文：不久上奏： 魏了翁已服从处罚被驱逐，人们还以为他罪行重而惩罚轻。
English: It was soon reported that Wei Liaowong had already been expelled for obeying the punishment, and people thought that his crime was serious but his punishment was light.

古文：真德秀狂僣悖缪，不减了翁，相羊家食，宜削秩贬窜，一等施行。 章既上，不下者两月，或传德秀有衡阳之命，时宰于帝前及之。
现代文：真德秀狂妄违逆误谬，不比魏了翁少，相羊家食，应该削职放逐，同样施行。 奏章呈上后，不到两个月时间，有的传说真德秀被任命到衡阳任职，当时宰相已到皇帝跟前说过这话。
English: Zhendexiu's arrogance and violation of the law were no less than Wei's, and he should be stripped of his post and banished, and the same should be done. Less than two months after the report was submitted, there was a legend that Zhendexiu was appointed to Hengyang. At that time, the prime minister had already said this to the emperor.

古文：帝曰： 仲尼不为已甚。 遂止镌三秩。
现代文：皇上说 ：孔仲尼不做太过份的事。 于是，只降了他三级。
English: The emperor said, "Kongzhongni will not do anything too excessive," so he only lowered his rank by three levels.

古文：明年三月，又奏杨长孺寝新命，徐瑄追三秩移象州居住，胡梦昱移钦州编管。
现代文：第二年三月，又上奏杨长孺停止授予新的官职，徐王宣削夺三级迁移象州居住，胡梦昱迁移钦州编管。
English: In March of the following year, Yang Changtao was ordered to stop awarding new official positions, Xu Wang Xuanquan was ordered to relocate to Xiangzhou, and Hu Mengtao was ordered to relocate to Qinzhou.

古文：是冬，拜右正言。
现代文：这一年冬天，梁成大拜任为右正言。
English: In the winter of that year, Liang Cheng Daibai was appointed as the Right Zheng.

古文：绍定元年，进左司谏。
现代文：绍定元年，进升左司谏。
English: In the first year of Shaoding, Jin Sheng left the priesthood.

古文：四年正月，迁宗正少卿。
现代文：四年正月，迁升宗正少卿。
English: In the first month of the fourth year, he was promoted to Shosho Shokei.

古文：五年二月，权刑部侍郎，明年十月，帝夜降旨黜之，提举千秋鸿禧观。
现代文：五年二月，暂任刑部侍郎。第二年十月，理宗皇帝晚上下诏令贬黜了他，提举千秋鸿禧观。
English: In February of the fifth year, he was temporarily appointed as a constable of the Criminal Investigation Department. In October of the second year, Emperor Ritsuzo issued a decree in the evening to demote him and promote Qian Qiu Hongxi.

古文：莫泽时兼给事中，急于别异，上疏驳之，遂寝祠命。
现代文：莫泽当时兼任给事中，急于表现出与其不同，上疏反对，于是，停止给他祠官的任命。
English: At that time, Moser was also in charge of the matter, anxious to show that he was different and opposed to the upper echelon, so he stopped giving him the appointment of the priest.

古文：端平初，洪咨夔、吴泳交章论驳，镌两秩。
现代文：端平初年，洪咨夔、吴泳相互上奏章议论驳斥，削夺两级。
English: In the first year of Duanping, Hong Zhaojun and Wu Yong disputed and refuted each other's composition, and won two levels.

古文：泳复上疏，送泉州居住。
现代文：吴泳又上奏疏，送移泉州居住。
English: Wu Yong was sent to Quanzhou to live.

古文：会王遂论亦上，再镌秩，徙潮州。
现代文：恰逢王遂的奏论也呈上，再次削职，迁徙潮州。
English: Coincidentally, Wang Sui's report was also submitted, and he was dismissed again and moved to Chaozhou.

古文：成大天资暴狠，心术崄巇，凡可贼忠害良者，率多攘臂为之。
现代文：梁成大天性强暴残狠，心术凶险，凡是可以为贼臣残害忠良的事，大概都不顾一切的拼命地去做。
English: Liang Chengda's nature is violent and cruel, and his mind is dangerous. Anything that can be done for the vassal to harm the loyal, he will probably do it desperately against all odds.

古文：四方赂遗，列置堂庑，宾至则导之使观，欲其效尤也。
现代文：接受的各方贿赂，排列于堂庑之中，来了客人就引导他们去看，好让他们效法去做。
English: Bribes from all sides were lined up in the hall, and when guests arrived, they were shown around so that they could do the same.

古文：尤嗜豪夺，冒占宇文氏赐第。
现代文：尤其是巧取豪夺，冒领抢占宇文氏的房产。
English: In particular, he skillfully took advantage of others and pretended to occupy Mr. Uwen's property.

古文：既摈归，讼之者不下百数。
现代文：到去职以后，告他的人不下百余个。
English: After he left office, more than a hundred people came forward to accuse him.

古文：窜之日，朝命毁其庐，虽小人如李知孝亦曰： 所不堪者，他日与成大同传耳。 
现代文：被贬驱逐的那一天，朝廷命令拆毁他家的房子，即使是小人李知孝也说： 最难堪的事，就是将来有一天同梁成大同传。 
English: On the day he was ousted, the court ordered the demolition of his family's house. Even the villain Li Zhixiao said: The most embarrassing thing is that one day he and Liang Chengda will have the same biography.

古文：李知孝，字孝章，参知政事光之孙。
现代文：李知孝，字孝章，参知政事李光的孙子。
English: Li Zhitiao, also known as Xiaozhang, is the grandson of Li Guang, a member of the Politburo.

古文：嘉定四年进士。
现代文：嘉定四年考中进士。
English: Jiading four-year examination for junior high school students.

古文：尝为右丞相府主管文字，不以为耻。
现代文：曾经为右丞相府主管文字，不以为耻。
English: He used to be the chief clerk of the Office of the Minister of the Right. He is not ashamed.

古文：差充干办诸司审计司，拜监察御史。
现代文：差充干办诸司审计司，拜任为监察御史。
English: He was assigned to the Audit Division of the Audit Division of the Audit Division of the Audit Division of the Audit Division of the Audit Division.

古文：宝庆元年八月，上疏： 士大夫汲汲好名，正救之力少而附和沽激之意多，扶持之意微而诋訾扇摇之意胜。
现代文：宝庆元年八月，上疏说： 士大夫努力追求好的名声，为国效劳有作为的少，而附和偏激的意思多，扶持国家的意念微弱，而诋毁挑拨的意念却很强。
English: In August of the first year of Baoqing, Shang Zuo said: "Scholars and scholars strive to pursue a good reputation, serve the country and have little effect, but the meaning of attachment and extremism is more, the idea of supporting the country is weak, but the idea of defaming and provoking is very strong.

古文：既虑君上之或不能用，又恐朝廷之或不能容，姑为激怒之辞，退俟斥逐之命。
现代文：既担心皇上不能选用他，又忧虑朝廷不能容纳他，故居朝廷多为激怒之辞，退下则等待斥逐的命令。
English: Both worried that the emperor could not choose him, and worried that the court could not accommodate him, the former residence of the court was mostly an angry speech, and the retreat was waiting for the expulsion order.

古文：始则慷慨而激烈，终则恳切而求去，将以树奇节而求令名，此臣之所未解。 盖阴诋真德秀等。
现代文：开始的时候慷慨而激烈，最终的结果则恳切地请求离职而去，打算以此建树奇节而求令名，这就是我所不能理解的。 暗地里诋毁真德秀等人。
English: To begin with, it was generous and fierce, but the end result was a sincere request to leave the company, intending to make a name for himself by creating a miracle, which is what I can't understand.

古文：又奏洪咨夔镌三秩、放罢，胡梦昱追毁、除名、勒停，羁管象州。
现代文：又奏请降洪咨夔三级，罢免放逐，胡梦昱追毁、除名、勒令停职，羁押管制于象州。
English: He also requested the third-level reduction of Hongzhi, dismissal and banishment, Hu Mengyao's pursuit, expulsion, suspension, and detention control in Xiangzhou.

古文：知孝犹语魏了翁曰： 此所论咨夔等，乃府第付出全文。 其情状变诈如此。
现代文：李知孝还告诉魏了翁说 ：这些话是论奏洪咨夔等人是相府交的全文。 这种欺诈的状况就像这样。
English: Li Zhihong also told Wei Lioweng: "These words are the full text of the diplomatic relations between Song Hongzhi and others.

古文：越月，复言： 近年以来，诸老凋零，后学晚出，不见前辈，不闻义理，不讲纲常，识见卑陋，议论偏诐，更唱迭和，蛊惑人心，此风披扇，为害实深。
现代文：过了一个多月，又说： 近年以来，许多老臣已经衰老，后学诸生晚出，不见教前辈，没有听说义理，不讲习纲常，识见卑下浅陋，议论偏颇，一个个相互唱和，蛊惑人心，这种风气泛滥，为害的确很深。
English: After more than a month, he also said, "In recent years, many old ministers have become senile. After studying, they go out late, do not see their predecessors, do not listen to the truth, do not study the syllabus, see the lowly and shallow, talk biasedly, sing to each other, and demagogue. This kind of culture is rampant, and it is indeed very harmful.

古文：乞下臣章，风厉内外，各务靖共，以杜乱萌。 拜右正言。
现代文：请求诏下我的奏章，整肃朝廷内外，各方一定平息，以杜绝混乱萌生。 拜为右正言。
English: I request you to promulgate my edict to clean up both inside and outside the imperial court, and all parties must calm down to prevent chaos from arising.

古文：又言： 德秀节改圣语，缪誊牒示，导信邪说，簧鼓同流，其或再有妄言，当追削流窜，以正典刑。 疏既上，遂镂榜播告天下。
现代文：又说 ：真德秀对皇上的话断章取义，错误地抄，屡次地给人看，导信邪说，如簧鼓舌，同流合污，如或再有类似狂妄的言论，应当追查、处罚，予以放逐，以正典刑。 疏文上奏后，于是发榜文布告天下。
English: He also said: Zhendexiu took the emperor's words out of context, copied them incorrectly, repeatedly showed them to people, and spread heretical theories, such as propaganda and collusion, and if there are any similar arrogant statements, they should be investigated, punished, banished, and punished with a canonical sentence. After the epistle was played, he then issued a proclamation to the world.

古文：又言： 趣召之人，率皆迟回，久而不至，以要君为高致，以共命为常流，可行而固不行，不疾而称有疾，比比皆是，相扇成风，欲求难进易退之名，殊失尊君亲上之义。
现代文：又说： 急速地召录的人，大多迟到晚回，很久不来，以要挟君王表现自己高风亮节，以忽视君帝为通常做法，可行动的而坚持不行动，没有病的称有病，比比皆是，相互煽动，蔚成风气，想求难进易退之名，特别失掉了尊君亲上的道义。
English: He also said: Those who are hastily called up are mostly late and do not come back for a long time. They show their high spirits by threatening the king. They ignore the emperor as a common practice. They can act but insist on inaction. They say that they are not sick but they are sick. They are everywhere. They instigate each other. They have become popular. They want to be difficult to enter and easy to leave. They have especially lost the moral right to respect the emperor.

古文：愿将趣召之人计其程途，限以时日，使之造朝；其有衰病者，早与改命。 时召傅伯成、杨简、刘宰等皆不至，故知孝诋之。
现代文：希望将急速召用的人才按他们的路途远近计算时间，规定到来的时间，使他们到朝；其中衰老有病的人，尽早改变任命。 当时，朝廷召用傅伯成、杨简、刘宰等都没有到，故李知孝上疏诋毁他们。
English: It is hoped that the talents to be rapidly called will calculate the time according to the distance of their journey, determine the time of arrival, and make them arrive in the morning; among them, those who are aging and sick will change their appointment as soon as possible.At that time, the imperial court called Fu BoCheng, Yang Jian, Liu Zai, etc. did not arrive, so Li Zhixiao slandered them.

古文：又奏张忠恕落职、镌秩、罢郡。
现代文：又奏张忠恕之过，革除职务，削减俸禄，免除郡事。
English: In addition, Zhang Zhongzheng was dismissed from his post, his salary was reduced, and he was exempted from county affairs.

古文：知孝拜殿中侍御史，升侍御史。
现代文：李知孝拜殿中侍御史，升迁为侍御史。
English: Li Zhixiao was promoted to the position of attendant of the history in the worship hall.

古文：绍定元年，迁右司谏，进右谏议大夫。
现代文：绍定元年，迁右司谏，进升右谏议大夫。
English: In the first year of Shao Ding, he was transferred to the right secretary, and promoted to the right doctor.

古文：五年，迁工部尚书兼侍读。
现代文：绍定五年，迁升工部尚书兼侍读。
English: In the fifth year of Shao Ding, he was promoted to the Ministry of Industry and Commerce.

古文：越月，进兵部。
现代文：过了一个多月，进升兵部任职。
English: After more than a month, he was appointed to the promotion department.

古文：明年，理宗亲政，以宝谟阁直学士出知宁国，后省驳之，令提举嵩山崇福宫。
现代文：第二年，理宗皇帝亲自治政，李知孝以宝谟阁直学士出知宁国，后省驳斥议免这个任命，诏令提举嵩山崇福宫。
English: In the second year, Emperor Rizong was in favor of self-governance, and Li Zhixiao was appointed as the direct master of Baomu Pavilion and sent to Zhiling Province. Later, the provincial government rejected the proposal to exempt this appointment, and issued a decree to elevate Songshan Chongfu Palace.

古文：端平初，监察御史洪咨夔、权直舍人院吴泳交章论驳，镌秩罢祠。
现代文：端平初年，监察御史洪咨夔、权直舍人院吴泳相互交替上奏章论驳，削夺俸禄，罢去祠官。
English: In the first year of the Duanping era, the inspector of the imperial court, Hong Zhiqi, and the right-hand man of the imperial court, Wu Yong, alternately wrote and refuted each other, cut the salary, and dismissed the ancestral hall official.

古文：泳复封驳，继送婺州居住。
现代文：吴泳又上封事驳议，既而诏命移送婺州居住。
English: Wu Yong also appealed against the verdict and was ordered to be transferred to live in Zhangzhou.

古文：殿中侍御史王遂且论之，再镌秩，徙瑞州。
现代文：殿中侍御史王遂又上奏议论他，再次削夺官职品级，迁徙瑞州。
English: The palace attendant, Shi Wang, then made a report about him, and he was once again stripped of his official rank and moved to Suzhou.

古文：知孝起自名家，苟于仕进，领袖庶顽，怀谖迷国，排斥诸贤殆尽。
现代文：李知孝起自名家，投机钻营于仕途，对于皇上、大小臣僚心怀欺诈，迷惑祸害国家，排斥各种贤能的人才。
English: Li Zhixiao started from a famous family, speculated in his career, cheated the emperor and ministers, confused and harmed the country, and excluded all kinds of talented people.

古文：时乘小舆，谒醉从官之家，侵欲敛积，不知纪极。
现代文：时常乘坐小轿，醉酒于一些小官之家，侵夺聚敛，不知守纪。
English: They often ride in a sedan, get drunk at the homes of minor officials, steal from others, and do not know how to abide by the rules.

古文：绍定末，犹自乞为中丞，世指知孝及梁成大、莫泽为三凶。
现代文：至绍定末年，还自己请求为中丞。当时人们指斥李知孝与梁成大、莫泽为 三凶 。
English: Towards the end of Shao Ding's life, he even asked to be promoted to the rank of middle-ranked general. At that time, people accused Li Zhitiao, Liang Chengda and Mozer of being the three villains.

古文：卒以贬死，天下快之。
现代文：最后因为贬逐而死，天下人都为此感到高兴。
English: In the end, he died of humiliation, and the whole world rejoiced.

