古文：凡与敌战，若敌人行阵整齐，士卒安静，未可轻战，伺其变动击之，则利。
现代文：凡是对敌作战，如果敌军行列严整有序，士兵情绪安稳平静，就不能轻率进攻，等到敌人内部发生变化时再进攻，就有利于我军取胜。
English: Whenever fighting against the enemy, if the enemy ranks are neat and orderly, and the soldiers' emotions are stable and calm, it is impossible to attack rashly. It is beneficial for our army to win if we wait until there is a change within the enemy before attacking.

古文：法曰： 无邀正正之旗。 
现代文：诚如兵法所说： 不要进攻旗帜整齐、戒备严密的敌人。 
English: As it is said in the Art of War: Do not attack an enemy whose flag is in good order and whose defences are well fortified.

古文：三国，魏司马懿征公孙渊，懿泛舟潜济辽水，作围，弃城而向襄平。
现代文：三国时期，魏国大将司马懿奉命率军征讨公孙渊，而进至辽水。公逊渊果然派遣数万步骑兵凭据辽隧，企图固守坚城壁垒以抵御司马懿进攻。
English: During the Three Kingdoms period, the Wei general Sima Qian was ordered to lead an army to conquer Gongsunyuan and entered Liaoshui. Gongsunyuan successfully dispatched tens of thousands of infantry and cavalry according to Liaocheng, attempting to hold the Jiancheng barrier to resist Sima Qian's attack.

古文：诸将曰：懿曰： 贼坚营高垒，欲以老吾军也。
现代文：司马懿率军乘船偷偷渡过辽水后，依傍辽水构筑一道长围，然后又命令部队放弃该城不攻，而向其老巢襄平进发。
English: After sneaking across the Liao Shui River by boat, Sima Yu led the army to build a long encirclement along the Liao Shui River, and then ordered the troops to abandon the city without attacking, and go to their old nest, Xiangping.

古文：攻之，正堕其计。贼大众在此，其巢穴虚失，我直指襄平，必人怀内惧，惧而求战，破之必矣。 
现代文：众将对此决策十分不解地说： 我们不攻打辽隧城，却又构筑长围，这不是显示我们兵多军威的办法。 司马懿解释说： 敌人现在凭据辽隧坚固而高大的城防设施，企图把我军拖垮在这里。
English: The generals were very puzzled by this decision and said: We are not attacking Liaotong, but we are building a long perimeter, which is not a way to show our military might.Sima Yi explained: The enemy is now trying to drag our army down here with the strong and tall city defense facilities of Liaotong.

古文：遂整阵而过。贼见兵出其后，果邀之，乃纵兵逆击，大破之。
现代文：敌人发现魏军所向直指其后方老巢，果然脱离坚城辽隧而去拦截魏军。司马懿乘机挥军迎头痛击，大破敌人，三战三捷。
English: The enemy found that the Wei army was pointing directly at its rear nest, and it actually broke away from the Jiancheng Liao Tunnel to intercept the Wei army. Sima Wei took the opportunity to wave the army head-on, smashed the enemy, and achieved three victories in three battles.

