古文：傅宗龙，字仲纶，昆明人。
现代文：傅宗龙，字仲纶，昆明人。
English: Fu Zonglong, alias Zhongyao, from Kunming.

古文：万历三十八年进士。
现代文：万历三十八年进士。
English: In the thirty-eighth year of Wanli, he became a priest.

古文：除铜梁知县，调巴县，行取，入为户部主事。
现代文：初任铜梁知县，又调往巴县，被推荐后调进京城，入朝当了户部主事。
English: He was initially assigned to Tong Liangzhi County, and then transferred to Ba County. After being recommended, he was transferred to Beijing, and became the head of the household department when he entered the imperial court.

古文：久之，授御史。
现代文：很久以后，又升任御史。
English: Much later, he was promoted to the post of Imperial Historian.

古文：天启元年，辽阳破，帝下募兵之令，宗龙请行。一月余，得精卒五千。
现代文：天启元年，辽阳失守，熹宗皇帝下了召兵的命令，宗龙自告奋勇要过去，仅一个多月，就募到五千精兵。
English: In the year of the first revelation of heaven, Liaoyang lost its defense, and Emperor Jianzong issued an order to call up troops. Zonglong volunteered to go over, and in just over a month, he recruited five thousand elite soldiers.

古文：明年，安邦彦反，围贵阳，土寇蜂起。
现代文：第二年，安邦彦起来造反，包围了贵阳，一时土匪蜂拥而起。
English: The following year, An Bangyan rebelled and besieged Guiyang. At one point, bandits swarmed in.

古文：请发帑金济滇将士，开建昌，通由蜀入滇之路，别设偏沅巡抚，罢湖广退怯总兵薛来允。
现代文：宗龙上书请朝廷拨出国库银帮助云南将士；开通建昌的交通，打通由四川进入云南的道路；另外设置一名偏沅巡抚；罢免胆怯退避的总兵薛来胤。
English: Zonglong petitioned the imperial court to allocate treasury funds to help Yunnan soldiers; to open the traffic of Jianchang, to open the road from Sichuan to Yunnan; to set up a partisan governor; to dismiss the cowardly retreating general soldier Xue Laiyin.

古文：帝多采纳之。
现代文：熹宗大都采纳了他的意见。
English: His views were largely adopted by the Sect.

古文：又上疏自请讨贼，言： 为武定、寻甸患者，东川土酋禄千钟。
现代文：宗龙又上书自请出去讨伐贼兵，说： 在武定、寻甸作乱的是东川土酋禄千钟。
English: Zonglong also wrote a letter inviting himself to go out and fight against the thief soldiers, saying: In Wuding and Xiangdian, it was the Dongchuan local chief Lu Qianbong who caused the turmoil.

古文：为沾益、罗平患者，贼妇设科及其党李贤辈。
现代文：在沾益、罗平作乱的是一个女贼设科和她的同伙李贤等人。
English: It was a female thief, Shikei, and her accomplice, Li Xian, and others who caused the disturbance in Zhanyi and Luoping.

古文：攻围普安，为滇、黔门户患者，龙文治妻及其党尹二。
现代文：围攻普安，在云南、贵州边口上作乱的是龙文治的妻子及其同伙尹二。
English: It was Long Wenji's wife and his accomplice, Yin II, who besieged Pu'an and wreaked havoc on the border of Yunnan and Guizhou.

古文：困安南，据关索岭者，沙国珍及罗应魁辈。
现代文：围困安南，占领关索岭的是沙国珍及罗应魁等人。
English: It was Sha Guozhen and Luo Yingkui and others who besieged Annan and occupied Guansoling.

古文：困乌撒者，安效良。
现代文：围困乌撒的是安效良。
English: The siege of Usa was a success.

古文：臣皆悉其生平，非臣敌。
现代文：对这些人，我都熟知他们的生平，他们不是我的对手。
English: For these people, I know their lives very well, they are not my rivals.

古文：臣愿以四川巡按兼贵州监军，灭此群丑。 
现代文：我愿意以四川巡按兼贵州监军的身份过去消灭这帮小丑。 
English: I am willing to go and eliminate these clowns in my capacity as the Sichuan patrol and Guizhou supervisory army.

古文：帝大喜，下所司议。
现代文：熹宗非常高兴，就交给有关部门讨论。
English: Enzong was very pleased and handed it over to the relevant department for discussion.

古文：会宗龙以疾归，不果行。
现代文：恰好这时宗龙因为生病回乡，没能最后实行。
English: Just at that time, Zonglong returned to his hometown due to illness and was unable to perform the last rites.

古文：四年正月，贵州巡抚王三善为降贼陈其愚所绐，败殁。
现代文：四年正月，贵州巡抚王三善被降贼陈其愚欺骗，战败而死。
English: In the first month of the fourth year, Wang Sanshan, the governor of Guizhou, was deceived by the surrendering thief Chen Qigu and died in defeat.

古文：其夏即家起宗龙巡按其地，兼监军。
现代文：这年夏天，朝廷就从家里起用宗龙为那里的巡按兼监军。
English: In the summer of that year, the imperial court began to use Zonglong from home to serve as a patrol and supervise the troops there.

古文：初，部檄滇抚闵洪学援黔，以不能过盘江而止。
现代文：早先，兵部曾传令云南巡抚闵洪学增援贵州，因为过不了盘江就停了下来。
English: Earlier, the Ministry of Military Affairs had sent a message to Yunnan Governor Hao Hongxue to reinforce Guizhou, but it stopped because it could not cross the Pan River.

古文：宗龙既被命，洪学令参政谢存仁、参将袁善及土官普名声、沙如玉等以兵五千送之。
现代文：宗龙接到任命后，洪学让参政谢存仁、参将袁善及土官普名声、沙如玉等带兵五千护送他过去。
English: After receiving Zonglong's appointment, Hong Xue asked the politician Xie Cunren, the general Yuan Shan, and the local official Pu Ren Ren, Sha Ruyu, to escort him with five thousand soldiers.

古文：宗龙直渡盘江，战且行，寇悉破。
现代文：宗龙直渡盘江，边战边行，一路上的土匪都给他打败了。
English: Zonglong went straight to Panjiang, fighting side by side. The bandits along the way were all defeated by him.

古文：乃谢遣存仁、善，以名声等土兵七百人入贵阳，擒斩其愚，军民大快。
现代文：然后谢过谢存仁、袁善，把他们遣送回来，带着名声等士兵七百人进入贵阳，捕杀了其愚，贵阳军民大快人心。
English: Then, after thanking Xie Cunren and Yuan Shan, he sent them back. Seven hundred soldiers entered Guiyang with their reputation and killed their fools. Guiyang's soldiers and people were very happy.

古文：宗龙尽知黔中要害及土酋逆顺，将士勇怯。巡抚蔡复一倚信之，请敕宗龙专理军务，设中军旗鼓，裨将以下听赏罚，可之。
现代文：宗龙知晓贵州的要害及各地土酋的顺逆、将士的勇怯，巡抚蔡复一十分信赖他，向朝廷奏请敕令宗龙专职办理军事，给他设置中军、旗鼓，裨将以下任他赏罚。
English: Zonglong knew the key to Guizhou, as well as the successes and failures of the local chieftains, and the courage of the soldiers. Governor Cai Fuyi trusted him very much, and asked the imperial court to order Zonglong to handle military affairs full-time, to set up the Chinese army and fan drums for him, and to reward and punish him.

古文：宗龙乃条上方略，又备陈黔中艰苦，请大发饷金，亦报可。
现代文：朝廷同意了。宗龙于是上书讲论方略，又详细谈到了贵州一带的艰苦，请多拨一些饷银。朝廷也同意了。
English: The court agreed. Zonglong then published a book on strategies, and spoke in detail about the hardships in the Guizhou area. Please allocate more money. The court also agreed.

古文：初，三善令监军道臣节制诸将，文武不和，进退牵制。
现代文：早先，三善让监军的道臣管制将领，致使文武不和，进退都相互牵制着。
English: Earlier, the Three Virtues had allowed the military overseers, the Daoists, to control the generals, which led to discord between the literati and the military, and the advance and retreat of both sides were held back by each other.

古文：宗龙反其所为，令监军给刍粮，核功罪，不得专进止。
现代文：宗龙一反他的做法，让监军负责供应粮草，评定功罪，不得掌握军队的进退。
English: Zonglong, contrary to his practice, let the supervising army be responsible for the supply of grain and grass, assess the merits and demerits, and must not grasp the advance and retreat of the army.

古文：由是诸将用命，连破贼汪家冲、蒋义寨，直抵织金。
现代文：因此将领们都听从命令，在汪家冲、蒋义寨接连战胜贼兵，直抵织金。
English: Therefore, the generals all obeyed the order and defeated the bandits in succession in Wangjiachong and Jiang Yizhai, right up to Weaving Gold.

古文：五年正月，总理鲁钦败绩于陆广河。
现代文：五年正月，总理鲁钦在陆广河战败。
English: In the first month of the fifth year, Prime Minister Lu Qin was defeated in Lu Guanghe.

古文：宗龙上言： 不合滇、蜀，则黔不能平贼；不专总督任，则不能合滇、蜀兵。
现代文：宗龙上书说： 不联合云南、四川，贵州就没法平定贼寇；不集中总督的事权，就不能联合云南、四川的兵力。
English: Zonglong said in his letter: Without uniting Yunnan and Sichuan, Guizhou would not be able to suppress the bandits; without centralizing the powers of the governor, it would not be possible to unite the forces of Yunnan and Sichuan.

古文：请召还朱燮元，以复一兼督四川，开府遵义，而移蜀抚驻永宁，滇抚驻沾益，黔抚驻陆广，沅抚驻偏桥，四面并进，发饷二百万金给之。
现代文：请召回朱燮元，让复一兼带总督四川，在遵义开设总督府。同时把四川巡抚移驻永宁，云南巡抚移驻沾益，贵州巡抚移驻陆广，沅州巡抚移驻偏桥，从四面一起进兵，发二百万饷银给他们。
English: Please recall Zhu Rongyuan, let Fu Yi take the governor of Sichuan and open the governor's office in Zunyi. At the same time, move the Sichuan governor to Yongning, the Yunnan governor to Jianyi, the Guizhou governor to Luguang, and the Zhangzhou governor to Yangtze River Bridge. March in troops from all sides and give them 2 million baht.

古文：更设黔、蜀巡抚。 
现代文：此外请更换贵州、四川巡抚！ 
English: In addition, please replace the Guizhou and Sichuan governors!

古文：帝以复一新败，令解官，即以燮元代，而命尹同皋抚蜀，王瑊抚黔，沅抚闵梦得移镇，一如宗龙议。
现代文：熹宗因为复一刚打了败仗，命令解除他的职务，让燮元接替了他。同时任命尹同皋巡抚四川，王蠨巡抚贵州，沅州巡抚闵梦得迁移了驻所，和宗龙的主张完全相同。
English: Because Zongzong had just lost the second battle, he ordered Zonglong to be relieved of his duties and let Zengyuan succeed him. At the same time, he appointed Yin Tongyuan as the governor of Sichuan, Wang Ying as the governor of Guizhou, and Zangzhou governor Zou Mengde moved his residence, which was exactly the same as Zonglong's idea.

古文：陆广败后，诸苗复蠢动。
现代文：陆广之战失败后，各地苗贼又蠢蠢欲动。
English: After the failure of the battle of Luguang, seedlings thieves around the country are eager to move again.

古文：复一、宗龙谋，讨破乌粟、螺蛳、长田诸叛苗，大破平越贼，毁其砦百七十，贼党渐孤。
现代文：复一、宗龙一起商议，打败了乌粟、螺蛳、长田等地的叛乱苗人，把平越的贼兵给打了个大败，捣毁了他们的一百七十个营寨，贼寇的同伙渐渐少了。
English: Fuxi and Zonglong discussed together, defeated the rebellious Miao people in Wucao, Nulong, Nagata and other places, defeated the Pingyue bandits, destroyed their one hundred and seventy camps, and the bandits' allies gradually decreased.

古文：宗龙乃条上屯守策，言：
现代文：宗龙于是上书讲述屯守的办法，他说：
English: Zonglong then wrote a letter describing the methods of the garrison, saying:

古文：蜀以屯为守，黔则当以守为屯。
现代文： 四川用屯田来防守，贵州却应当用防守来屯田。
English: Sichuan defends itself with military garrisons, but Guizhou should defend itself with military garrisons.

古文：盖安酋土地半在水外，仡佬、龙仲、蔡苗诸杂种，缓急与相助。
现代文：因为安邦彦的土地有一半是在水外，仡佬、龙仲、蔡苗等杂色人种，和他在危急时相互帮助。
English: Because half of An Bangyan's land is out of the water, the mixed-race people such as Zangnang, Longzhong, Cai Miao, and he help each other in times of crisis.

古文：贼有外藩，我无边蔽，黔兵所以分力愈诎。
现代文：贼寇外边有封藩，我边界上却没有屏障，这就是贵州兵力分散就越发无能为力的原因。
English: Thieves and robbers have fiefdoms on the outside, but there is no barrier on our border. This is why the dispersion of Guizhou's military forces is increasingly powerless.

古文：臣谓以守为屯者，先发兵据河，夺贼所恃。然后抚剿诸种，随渡口大小，置大小寨，深沟高垒，置烽墩炮台。
现代文：我所谓的用防守来屯田，就是说先要派兵占领河流，夺取贼兵所凭仗的地势，然后安抚或剿灭各杂色人种，根据渡口的大小，分别设置大小水寨，挖深沟，筑高台，设立烽火台、炮台。
English: What I call using defense to occupy land means first sending troops to occupy the rivers and seize the terrain that the robber soldiers rely on, and then appeasing or exterminating all mixed-race people. According to the size of the ferry, set up small and large water forts, dig deep ditches, build high platforms, set up campfires, and set up forts.

古文：小渡则塞以木石，使一粟不入水内，一贼不出水外，贼无如我何。
现代文：小渡口就用木石堵塞起来。务求一粒米都运不到水内来，一个贼都逃不到水外去，这样贼寇就不能把我们怎么样了。
English: The small ferry was blocked with rocks and stones, so that not a single grain of rice could be carried into the water, and not a single thief could escape out of the water, so that the thieves could not do anything to us.

古文：又令沿河兵习水战，当贼耕耨时，频出奇兵，渡河扰之。
现代文：再命令沿河部队都操练水战，当贼寇在对岸耕种时，频出奇兵，渡过河去干扰他们。
English: He then ordered the troops along the river to practice water warfare. When the bandits were farming on the opposite bank, they frequently sent out soldiers to cross the river to interfere with them.

古文：贼不敢附河而居，而后我可以议屯也。
现代文：贼寇不敢再靠近河道居住时，我们就可以讨论屯田了。
English: When the bandits no longer dare to live close to the river, then we can talk about the settlement.

古文：屯之策有二：一曰清卫所原田，一曰割逆贼故壤，而以卫所之法行之。
现代文： 屯田的办法有两条：一是清理各卫所原有的田地，二是割取反贼原有的土地，用我们卫所的办法推行屯田。
English: There are two methods of establishing military garrisons: the first is to clean up the original fields of each garrison, and the second is to cut off the original land of the anti-thieves and use the method of our garrison to implement military garrisons.

古文：盖黔不患无田，患无人。
现代文：贵州不担心没田，只担心没人。
English: Guizhou is not worried about the lack of fields, only about the lack of people.

古文：客兵聚散无常，不能久驻，莫若仿祖制，尽举屯田以授有功，因功大小，为官高下，自指挥至总、小旗，畀以应得田为世业，而禁其私卖买。
现代文：临时来的客兵聚散无常，不能久驻，不如仿照祖宗定下的制度，把全部屯田都分给有功人员，视功劳大小，做官大小，从指挥、把总到小旗，给他们应得的屯田作为世袭产业，但禁止他们买卖。
English: It is better to follow the example of the system established by the ancestors and distribute all the military camps to meritorious personnel, according to the size of the merit, the size of the official, from the commander, the general to the small flag, and give them the military camps they deserve as a hereditary property, but prohibit them from buying and selling.

古文：不待招徕，户口自实。
现代文：这样不消朝廷招徕移民，贵州的户口自然会多起来。
English: In this way, without the need for the imperial court to invite immigrants, the number of hukou in Guizhou will naturally increase.

古文：臣所谓以守为屯者如此。
现代文：我所谓的用防守来屯田就是如此。
English: This is what I call using defense to occupy territory.

古文：然兵当用四万八千人，饷当岁八十余万，时当阅三年，如此而后贼可尽灭也。
现代文：不过这样办成，兵力应当使用四万八千人，饷银应当每年花费八十多万两，时间应当等待三年。这样子以后贼寇就可以全部消灭干净了。 
English: However, if it is done in this way, 48,000 soldiers should be used, more than 800,000 taels of silver should be spent each year, and the time should wait for three years. In this way, the bandits can be completely eliminated.

古文：部议从之。
现代文：兵部讨论后同意了他的意见。
English: The Ministry of Industry and Trade agreed to their request.

古文：复一卒，王瑊代，事悉倚办。
现代文：复一死后，王蠨来接任，凡事都靠着宗龙来办理。
English: After the death of Fuyi, Wang Qian took over the post and relied on Zonglong to handle everything.

古文：宗龙乃渐剪水外逆党，将大兴屯田。
现代文：宗龙于是逐步剪除了水外的叛逆队伍，打算大力兴办屯田。
English: Zonglong then gradually cut off the rebellious troops outside the water, intending to vigorously build up the military garrison.

古文：邦彦惧，谋沮之，六年三月，大举渡河入寇。
现代文：邦彦怕了，妄图过来破坏，六年三月大举渡河过来入侵。
English: Kunihiko was afraid and tried in vain to come and destroy it. In March of the sixth year, he crossed the river in a big way to invade.

古文：宗龙击破邦彦赵官屯，斩老虫添，威名大著。
现代文：宗龙在赵官屯打败了邦彦，斩除了老虫添，威名大振。
English: Zonglong defeated Kunihiko in Zhaoguantun, eliminating the old insect, and his reputation was greatly enhanced.

古文：当是时，大帅新亡，全黔震动，燮元远在蜀，瑊拥虚位，非宗龙，黔几殆。
现代文：那个时候，大帅刚刚死去，整个贵州受到震动，燮元远在四川，王蠨虚领其职，不是宗龙，贵州差点完了。
English: At that time, the grand marshal had just died, the whole of Guizhou was shaken, Zouyuan was far away in Sichuan, Wang Jianhu led his post, not Zonglong, Guizhou was almost finished.

古文：诏加太仆少卿。
现代文：朝廷下诏升宗龙的官为太仆少卿。
English: Under the imperial court, the official position of Zonglong Zhaosheng was Taibo Shaoqing (太僕少卿).

古文：忧归。
现代文：后来宗龙因为守丧回家去了。
English: Later, Soryu went home to mourn.

古文：崇祯三年起故官。
现代文：崇祯三年，宗龙起任原职。
English: Three years after the enthronement, Soryu took up his original post.

古文：用孙承宗荐，擢右佥都御史，巡抚顺天。
现代文：朝廷采纳孙承宗的推荐，提拔宗龙为右佥都御史，巡抚顺天。
English: The imperial court accepted the recommendation of Sun Chengzong and promoted Zonglong to the position of the right-hand man of the capital, the governor Shuntian.

古文：未几，拜兵部右侍郎兼佥都御史，总督蓟、辽、保定军务。
现代文：不久，封任兵部右侍郎兼佥都御史，总督蓟门、辽东、保定军务。
English: Soon after, he was appointed as the right-hand man of the military department and the governor of Shimen, Liaodong, and Baoding.

古文：用小故夺官矣。
现代文：此后宗龙因为一点小原因被剥夺了官职。
English: After that, Zonglong was deprived of his official position for a small reason.

古文：居久之，十年十月流寇大入蜀，陷蜀三十余州县，帝拊髀而思宗龙曰： 使宗龙抚蜀，贼安至是哉！ 
现代文：过了很多年，十年十月流寇大举进入四川，攻下四川的三十多个州县，庄烈帝才拍着大腿想念宗龙说： 假使宗龙巡抚四川，贼兵怎么能达到这种地步！ 
English: After many years, in October of the tenth year, the bandits entered Sichuan in a big way and captured more than thirty counties and prefectures in Sichuan. Zhuang Rong only patted his thigh and thought of Zong Long and said: If Zong Long is the governor of Sichuan, how can the thief soldiers reach this level!

古文：趣即家起宗龙。
现代文：于是催促兵部把宗龙从家里起复。
English: So he urged the military to recover Zonglong from his home.

古文：宗龙至蜀，代王维章与总兵罗尚文御却贼。
现代文：宗龙到四川接替王维章后，与总兵罗尚文打退了贼兵。
English: After Zonglong went to Sichuan to succeed Wang Weizhang, he and the general Luo Shangwen beat back the bandits.

古文：十二年五月，以杨嗣昌荐，召为兵部尚书，去蜀。
现代文：十二年五月，因为杨嗣昌的推荐，宗龙被召入朝中担任兵部尚书，离开了四川。
English: In May of the 12th year, because of the recommendation of Yang Shichang, Zonglong was called into the Middle Court to serve as a military official, and left Sichuan.

古文：宗龙自定黔乱后，凡十有四年，辄起用，用不久辄迁去。
现代文：宗龙自从平定贵州的乱贼以后，共十四年当中总是一会儿得到起用，用不久就又免除了官职。
English: In the fourteen years since Zonglong quelled the bandits in Guizhou, he was always appointed for a short period of time, and was soon relieved of his post.

古文：八月至京，入见帝。
现代文：八月，宗龙到京师后进去朝见庄烈帝。
English: In August, after arriving in Beijing, Zonglong went to see Emperor Zhuang.

古文：宗龙为人伉直任气，不能从谀承意。
现代文：他为人刚直不屈，不会顺着人的脾气讨好人。
English: He is a straightforward and unyielding person, and will not follow people's temper to please good people.

古文：帝愤中枢失职，嗣昌以权诡得主知。
现代文：庄烈帝愤恨兵部长官不称职，嗣昌因为狡诈得到了庄烈帝的欣赏。
English: Emperor Zhuang was angry with the incompetence of the minister of war, and Tsuchimasa was appreciated by Emperor Zhuang for his cunning.

古文：宗龙朴忠，初入见，即言民穷财尽。
现代文：宗龙为人朴直、忠厚，刚进见，就讲百姓困穷，国家财力虚竭。
English: Zonglong is a straightforward and loyal person. As soon as he came to power, he said that the people were poor and the country's financial resources were exhausted.

古文：帝颇然之，顾豤言不已，遂怫然曰： 卿当整理兵事尔。 
现代文：庄烈帝相当肯定这一点，只是宗龙不停地款诚讲论，庄烈帝于是不高兴地说： 你是来整顿军事的！ 
English: Emperor Zhuang was quite sure of this, but Zonglong kept making sincere speeches, and Emperor Zhuang was displeased and said: You are here to rectify the military!

古文：既退，语嗣昌曰： 何哉？
现代文：宗龙退出以后，庄烈帝对嗣昌说： 怎么回事？
English: After Zonglong withdrew, Zhuang Rongdi said to Zichang: What's going on?

古文：宗龙善策黔，而所言卑卑，皆他人唾余，何也？ 
现代文：宗龙过去很会决策贵州，现在却只讲这些琐屑的事务，都是他人唾余的事，什么原因？ 
English: In the past, Zonglong was very good at making decisions about Guizhou, but now he only talks about these trivial matters, all of which are the business of others. What is the reason?

古文：自是所奏请，多中格。
现代文：从此宗龙有所奏请，大都被驳回了。
English: Since then, Zonglong has made a number of appeals, most of which have been rejected.

古文：熊文粲既罢，宗龙乃言： 向者贼流突东西，嗣昌故建分剿之策。
现代文：熊文灿罢官以后，宗龙就上书讲： 过去贼兵东窜西逃，所以嗣昌提出划地剿灭的办法。
English: After the dismissal of Xiong Wencang, Zonglong wrote a letter saying: In the past, the thief soldiers fled from east to west, so Zichang proposed a method of exterminating them.

古文：今则流突者各止其所，臣请收势险节短之效。
现代文：现在流窜不停的贼兵都停在了各自的地盘上，请让我过去在短期内办成解救危急的功效吧！
English: Now the roving bandits have stopped on their respective turf, please let me accomplish the effect of rescuing the critical situation in the short term!

古文：总理止辖楚、豫，秦督兼辖四川，凤督兼辖安庆，各率所辖抚镇，期十二月成功。 
现代文：让总理只管辖湖北、河南，陕西总督兼管四川，凤阳总督兼管安庆，各自统率所属部队稳住本镇，我预期十二个月内取得成功。 
English: Let the prime minister only govern Hubei and Henan, the governor of Shaanxi also govern Sichuan, and the governor of Fengyang also govern Anqing. Let each of them lead their respective troops to stabilize this town. I expect success within twelve months.

古文：因荐湖广巡抚方孔召堪代文灿。
现代文：进而推荐说湖广巡抚方孔昭可以接替文灿。
English: Furthermore, it was recommended that the governor of Hunan and Guangxi, Fang Kongzhao, could succeed Wencan.

古文：帝不用，用嗣昌督师。
现代文：庄烈帝不予采用，用嗣昌过去担任督师。
English: Zhuang Rongdi was not adopted, and Yizhichang was used as an inspector.

古文：嗣昌既督师，上章请兵食，不悉应，劾中枢不任。
现代文：嗣昌外出担任督师以后，递上奏章请拨军粮，兵部不能完全供给他，嗣昌就弹劾尚书不称职。
English: After Shichang went out to serve as an inspector, he submitted a petition to request the allocation of military rations. The military department could not fully supply him, so Shichang impeached him for incompetence.

古文：宗龙亦劾嗣昌徒耗敝国家，不能报效，以气凌廷臣。
现代文：宗龙也弹劾嗣昌，说他白白耗费国家的财力，不能报效国家，还要盛气凌人，欺负朝臣。
English: Zonglong also impeached Tsuchimasa, saying that he spent the country's financial resources in vain, could not serve the country, and bullied courtiers.

古文：会蓟辽总督洪承畴请用刘肇基为团练总兵官，中官高起潜又揭肇基恇怯，宗龙不即覆。
现代文：正好这时蓟辽总督洪承畴请任命刘肇基为团练总兵官，宦官高起潜又揭发肇基为人懦弱、胆小，宗龙没有立即答复他们。
English: It was at this time that Gongliao Governor Hong Chengzong requested the appointment of Liu Zhaoji as the general officer of the regimental drill. The eunuch Gao Qianqian also exposed Zhaoji as a cowardly and timid person. Zonglong did not immediately reply to them.

古文：帝遂发怒，责以抗旨，令对状。
现代文：庄烈帝就发火了，批评他抵抗圣旨，要他回禀真相。
English: Zhuge Liang became enraged, criticizing him for resisting the sacred edict and demanding that he tell the truth.

古文：奏上，复以戏视封疆下吏。
现代文：宗龙的奏章交上后，又被看作是把封疆大事视同儿戏，就因此被关进了监狱。
English: After Zonglong's report was handed over, it was also seen as a child's play to treat the events of the blockade of the motherland as child's play, and he was thrown into prison for this reason.

古文：法司拟戍边，不许，欲置之死。
现代文：法司判为充军边疆，庄烈帝不同意，想把他处死。
English: The law court ruled that it was a border area for the military, but Emperor Zhuang disagreed and wanted to put him to death.

古文：在狱二年矣，十四年春，嗣昌死，尚书陈新甲荐其才，帝未有以应也，良久曰： 朴忠，吾以夙负用之，宜尽死力。 
现代文：宗龙在监狱中呆了两年，十四年春季，嗣昌死了，尚书陈新甲推荐宗龙的才干，庄烈帝一时没有答话，过了很长时间才说： 他倒是朴实、忠厚。
English: Zonglong stayed in prison for two years. In the spring of 14th year, Tsuchang died. Shangshu Chen Xinjia recommended Zonglong's talent. Zhuangde did not answer for a while, but after a long time he said: He is simple and loyal.

古文：遂释之出狱，以兵部右侍郎兼右佥都御史代丁启睿，总督陕西三边军务。
现代文：我用早先的心思任用他，他应该不计前嫌，为我尽死力才是。 于是把宗龙释放出来，让他以兵部右侍郎兼右佥都御史的官职去接替丁启睿，总督三边军务。
English: I used my earlier thoughts to appoint him, he should not think about the future, but do his best for me. So I released Zonglong and let him succeed Ding Qirui as the governor of the military affairs of the three sides with the official post of the right attendant of the military department and the right attendant of the capital.

古文：当是之时，李自成有众五十万，自陷河、洛，犯开封，罗汝才复自南阳趋邓、淅，与合兵。
现代文：那个时候，李自成有兵马五十万，刚刚打下了河南、洛阳，又进犯开封。罗汝才又从南阳开赴邓州、淅州，与他会师。
English: At that time, Li Zicheng had half a million soldiers and horses. He had just conquered Henan and Luoyang and invaded Kaifeng. Luo Ru only went from Nanyang to Dangzhou and Zhangzhou to join his division.

古文：帝命宗龙专办自成。
现代文：庄烈帝命令宗龙专门惩办自成。
English: Emperor Zhuang ordered that Zonglong be specially punished.

古文：议尽括关中兵饷以出，然属郡旱蝗，已不能应。
现代文：宗龙打算集结关中的全部军队、粮饷出关开战，但是所属的府县发生旱、蝗灾害，已经无法应征了。
English: Zonglong planned to gather all of Guanzhong's troops and grain harvesters to go to war, but due to droughts and locust plagues in his prefecture, he was no longer able to enlist.

古文：九月四日，以川、陕兵二万出关，次新蔡，与保督杨文岳兵会。
现代文：九月四日，宗龙带领四川、陕西的两万部队开出潼关，驻扎在新蔡，与保定总督杨文岳的部队会合。
English: On September 4, Zonglong led 20,000 troops from Sichuan and Shaanxi out of Shaoguan, stationed in Xin Cai, and met with the troops of Yang Wengyue, the governor of Baoding.

古文：贺人龙、李国奇将秦兵，虎大威将保兵，共结浮桥，东渡汝，合兵趋项城。
现代文：然后由贺人龙、李国奇率领陕西部队，虎大威带领保定部队，一起架起浮桥，东渡汝宁，联合起来开赴项城。
English: Then, the Shaanxi troops led by He Renlong and Li Guoqi, and the Baoding troops led by Hu Dawei, set up a floating bridge together, sailed eastward to Runing, and united to go to Xiangcheng.

古文：五日，两军毕渡，走龙口。
现代文：五日，两支部队都渡了过去，奔向龙口。
English: On the fifth day, both troops crossed the river and rushed to Longkou.

古文：自成、汝才亦结浮桥于上流，将趋汝宁。觇两督兵至，尽伏精锐于林中，阳驱诸贼自浮桥西渡。
现代文：自成、汝才也在上游架起浮桥，打算奔赴汝宁，侦察到两个总督的部队开来，就把精锐兵力都埋伏到树林中，佯装统领各路贼兵从浮桥上过河西去。
English: Zicheng and Rucai also set up a pontoon upstream, intending to rush to Runing. When they detected the troops of the two governors coming, they ambushed the elite troops into the woods, pretending to lead the bandits from the pontoon to the west of the river.

古文：人龙使后骑觇贼，还报曰： 贼向汝矣，结浮桥将渡矣。 
现代文：人龙让后边的骑兵侦探敌情，骑兵回来禀报说： 贼兵要向汝宁去了，架起浮桥就要渡过河走了。 
English: The man-dragon let the cavalry detective at the back be hostile, and the cavalry came back and reported: The thief soldiers want to go to Yuning, set up a pontoon bridge and cross the river.

古文：宗龙、文岳夜会诸将于龙口，诘朝将战。
现代文：宗龙、文岳夜间召集诸将，决定明早开战。
English: Zonglong and Wenyu summoned their generals at night and decided to go to war the next morning.

古文：六日，两军并进，中道一骑驰而告曰： 贼毕渡矣。 
现代文：六日，两支官军一起进兵，半路上一个骑兵跑回来说： 贼兵全渡过河了。 
English: On the sixth day, the two official armies marched into the army together. Halfway through, a cavalryman ran back and said, "The robber soldiers have all crossed the river."

古文：复进，一骑驰而告曰： 贼半渡矣，三分渡其二矣。 
现代文：又往前走，一个骑兵跑回来报告： 贼兵渡过一大半，三分渡过两分了。 
English: He went on again, and a cavalryman ran back to report: "The bandits have crossed more than half of the country, and two-thirds of it.

古文：宗龙、文岳曰： 驱之。 
现代文：宗龙、文岳说： 往前追。 
English: Zonglong and Wenyu said, "Go ahead."

古文：走三十里，至于孟家庄，日卓午。
现代文：又走了三十里，来到孟家庄，时间已是正午。
English: I walked another thirty miles and arrived at Mengjiazhuang. It was already noon.

古文：人龙、大威曰： 马力乏矣，诘朝而战，止兵为营。 
现代文：人龙、大威说： 马累了，明天再战，停止前进扎营休息吧。 
English: "I'm tired, I'll fight again tomorrow, let's stop marching and camp and rest," said the dragon and Dawei.

古文：诸军弛马甲，植戈錞，散行墟落求刍牧。
现代文：各个部分都下马解甲，把武器靠到一边去了，大家四出到村子里寻找马草。
English: All the units dismounted, took off their armor, and put their weapons aside. Everyone went out to the village to look for horse grass.

古文：贼觇之，尘起于林中，伏甲并出搏我兵。
现代文：贼兵暗中发觉后，猛然间从林子里杀了出来，伏兵都冲上来跟官兵搏斗。
English: After the robbers and soldiers found out secretly, they suddenly came out of the forest and killed them, and the ambush soldiers rushed up to fight with the officers and soldiers.

古文：人龙有马千骑不战，国奇以麾下兵迎击之，不胜。秦兵、保兵俱溃，人龙、大威奔沈丘，国奇从之，三帅师溃。
现代文：人龙有一千骑兵却不参战，国奇以自己的部下迎击贼兵，没能得胜，结果陕西部队、保定部队都败下阵来，人龙、大威逃往沈丘，国奇也跟着跑，三总兵的部队全败逃了。
English: Renlong had a thousand cavalrymen but did not participate in the war. Guoqi used his subordinates to fight against the bandits, but failed to win. As a result, the Shaanxi troops and Baoding troops were defeated. Renlong and Dawei fled to Shenqiu, and Guoqi also followed. The troops of the three generals were completely defeated and fled.

古文：宗龙、文岳合兵屯火烧店，贼以步兵攻其营。
现代文：宗龙、文岳联合起来驻扎在火烧店，贼兵用步兵过来攻打他们的营寨。
English: Zonglong and Wen Yue jointly stationed themselves at the incinerator, and the bandits attacked their camp with infantry.

古文：诸军鸣大炮，震死贼百余。
现代文：官军点燃大炮，炸死了一百多贼兵。
English: The government army ignited a cannon, which exploded and killed more than a hundred bandits.

古文：日暮，贼引去。
现代文：天黑下来，贼兵引退了。
English: As darkness fell, the bandits retreated.

古文：宗龙军西北，文岳军东南，画堑而守。
现代文：宗龙的部队在西北向，文岳的部队在东南向，凭借战壕死守。
English: Zonglong's troops were in the northwest, and Wenyu's troops were in the southeast, defending themselves with trenches.

古文：保兵宵溃，保督副将挟文岳骑而驰，夜奔于项城。
现代文：保定部队当晚逃走了，保定总督的副将挟持着文岳的坐骑飞驰而去，当夜跑到了项城。
English: The troops of Baoding fled that night. The vice-admiral of the governor of Baoding, holding the horse of Wenyu, sped away and ran to Xiangcheng that night.

古文：宗龙复分秦兵立营于东南，诸将分壁当贼垒。
现代文：宗龙又派出士兵到东南向扎下营，各将领分守壁堡，跟贼兵的战垒相持。
English: Zonglong also sent soldiers to the southeast to set up a camp, and each general was assigned to defend the walled fortress, holding out against the robber soldiers' battlements.

古文：九日，檄人龙、国奇还兵救，二帅不应。
现代文：九日，宗龙传令人龙、国奇回兵来援救，这两个总兵不加响应。
English: On the 9th, Zong Longchuan sent Long and Guo Qi back to rescue the soldiers, but the two soldiers did not respond.

古文：宗龙曰： 彼避死，宜不来，吾岂避死哉！ 
现代文：宗龙说： 他们避死，想必不来了，我难道也避死吗！ 
English: Zonglong said, "They avoid death, so they must not come. Should I also avoid death?"

古文：语其麾下曰： 宗龙老矣，今日陷贼中，当与诸军决一死战，不能效他人卷甲走也。 
现代文：对他的部下讲： 宗龙老了，今天陷在贼兵包围中，我要和大家一道决一死战，不能像他人一样卷甲逃走。 
English: He said to his men: "Zong Long Lao, today we are surrounded by bandits. I want to fight to the death with all of you. I can't run away like everyone else.

古文：召裨校李本实，即文岳壁穿堑筑垒以拒贼。
现代文：又召裨校李本实过去挨着文岳守过的壁堡开挖战壕，堆起战垒用来拒击贼兵。
English: He also summoned Li Benshi to dig trenches next to the fortified wall that had been guarded by Wen Yue in the past, and to build battlements to repel the invaders.

古文：贼亦穿壕二重以围之。
现代文：贼兵也挖了两重战壕来包围他们。
English: The bandits also dug double trenches to surround them.

古文：十一日，秦师食尽，宗龙杀马骡以享军。
现代文：十一日，陕西部队的粮食吃完了，宗龙杀了骡、马给他们吃。
English: On the 11th day, the Shaanxi troops ran out of food, and Zonglong killed a donkey and a horse to give them food.

古文：明日，营中马骡尽，杀贼取其尸分啖之。
现代文：第二天，营中的骡马也没了，就杀贼后把尸体拿来分了吃。
English: The next day, when there were no more horses left in the camp, they took the bodies and divided them up to eat.

古文：十八日，营中火药、铅子、矢并尽。
现代文：十八日，营中的火药、铅子、箭都放完了。
English: On the 18th, all the gunpowder, lead and arrows in the camp had been let off.

古文：宗龙简士卒，夷伤死丧之余，有众六千。
现代文：宗龙清点士卒，除受伤、死亡的士兵以外，还有六千兵。
English: In addition to the wounded and dead soldiers, there are also six thousand soldiers.

古文：夜半，潜勒诸军突贼营，杀千余人，溃围出。
现代文：半夜时分，宗龙率领这些部队偷袭贼营，杀死贼兵一千多人，突围而出。
English: At midnight, Zonglong led these troops to raid the bandit camp, killed more than a thousand bandits, and broke out.

古文：诸军星散，宗龙徒步率诸军且战且走。
现代文：官军出来后散乱了，宗龙步行率领他们边战边走。
English: After the government troops came out, they scattered. Zonglong led them on foot, marching side by side.

古文：十九日，日卓午，未至项城八里，贼追及之，执宗龙，呼于门曰： 秦督围随官丁也，请启门纳秦督。 
现代文：十九日正午，他们走到离项城只有八里的地方，贼兵追上来，活捉了宗龙。然后到城门前喊道： 我们是陕西总督的护卫官兵，请打开城门让总督进去！ 
English: At noon on the 19th, they walked to a place only eight miles away from Xiangcheng. The robber soldiers caught up and captured Zonglong alive. Then they went to the city gate and shouted: We are the guards of the governor of Shaanxi, please open the city gate and let the governor in!

古文：宗龙大呼曰： 我秦督也，不幸堕贼手，左右皆贼耳。 
现代文：宗龙大声喊道： 我是陕西总督，不幸落在贼兵手里，左右都是贼呀。 
English: Zonglong shouted loudly: I am the governor of Shaanxi Province. Unfortunately, I have fallen into the hands of thieves. There are thieves on both sides.

古文：贼唾宗龙。宗龙骂贼曰： 我大臣也，杀则杀耳，岂能为贼赚城以缓死哉！ 
现代文：贼兵向宗龙唾口水，宗龙骂他们说： 我是朝廷大臣，要杀就杀，怎肯替贼赚城门，苟延残喘！ 
English: The robber soldiers spat at Zonglong, and Zonglong scolded them, saying, "I am a minister of the imperial court. If you want to kill, then kill. How can you earn the city gate for the robbers and still live?

古文：贼抽刀击宗龙，中其脑而仆，檆其耳鼻死城下。
现代文：贼兵抽出刀向宗龙砍来，宗龙被砍中头颅，倒下了，贼兵又割下他的耳朵、鼻子，宗龙就这样死在了城门之下。
English: The bandits pulled out a knife and slashed at Zonglong. Zonglong was decapitated and fell down. The bandits also cut off his ears and nose. Zonglong died under the city gate.

古文：事闻，帝曰： 若此，可谓朴忠矣。 
现代文：事情报送朝廷后，庄烈帝说： 宗龙这样，真可谓朴实、忠诚啊！ 
English: After the information was sent to the imperial court, Emperor Zhuang said: "Zonglong is so down-to-earth and loyal!

古文：复官兵部尚书，加太子少保，谥忠壮，荫子锦衣世百户，予祭葬。
现代文：于是给他恢复官职为兵部尚书，加官太子少保，谥忠壮，荫封子孙为世袭锦衣百户，并对他予以公祭、公葬。
English: As a result, he was reinstated in his official position as Hyobusho, given the title of Kakan Taishi Shobo, given the title of Shobo Taishi, given the title of Shobo Taishi, given the title of Shobo Taishi, given the title of Shobo Taishi, given the title of Shobo Taishi, given the title of Shobo Taishi, given the title of Shobo Taishi, given the title of Shobo Taishi, given the title of Shobo Taishi, given the title of Shobo Taishi, given the title of Shobo Taishi, and given the title of Shobo Taishi.

古文：人龙、国奇兵溃归陕，贼遂屠项城。
现代文：人龙、国奇兵溃归陕，贼遂屠项城。
English: The human dragon and the national miracle soldier were routed and returned to Shaanxi, and the thief was slaughtered in the city.

古文：分兵屠商水、扶沟，遂攻叶县。
现代文：分兵屠商水、扶沟，于是攻打叶县。
English: He divided his army into two groups, Tuo Shangshui and Bu Gou, and then attacked Ye County.

古文：汪乔年，字岁星，遂安人。
现代文：汪乔年，字岁星，遂安人。
English: Wang Qiao's year, the word year star, Su'an people.

古文：天启二年进士。
现代文：天启二年进士。
English: Entered the priesthood in the second year of the Apocalypse.

古文：授刑部主事，历郎中。母忧归。
现代文：初任刑部主事，历官郎中，为母亲守丧回家去了。
English: The first head of the criminal justice department, a junior official, went home to mourn for his mother.

古文：崇祯二年起工部，迁青州知府。
现代文：崇祯二年，乔年以工部郎中起复，升任青州知府。
English: In the second year of Chongzhen, Qiaonian was reinstated as vice-minister of the Ministry of Industry and promoted to the post of governor of Qingzhou.

古文：以治行卓异，迁登莱兵备副使，乞终养归。
现代文：因为治绩、品行突出，升为登菜兵备副使。
English: Because of his outstanding performance and conduct, he was promoted to the vice-envoy of the enlisted soldiers.

古文：父丧除，起官平阳，迁陕西右参政，提督学校。
现代文：他请求回家赡养父亲，父亲的丧守完，才出任平阳知府，然后调任陕西右参政，管理学校。
English: He asked to go home to support his father. After his father's funeral, he served as the governor of Pingyang, and then was transferred to the right to participate in politics in Shaanxi and manage schools.

古文：再以卓异，就迁按察使。
现代文：又一次因为政绩、品行突出，原地升任按察使。
English: Once again, because of outstanding political performance and conduct, he was promoted to inspector in place.

古文：乔年清若自励，恶衣菲食，之官，携二仆，不以家自随。
现代文：乔年清苦自勉，衣食都很简单，到做官的地方去时只带两个仆人，不把家属带在身边。
English: In his youth, he worked hard, and his food and clothing were very simple. When he went to work as an official, he only took two servants with him, and did not bring his family members with him.

古文：为青州，行廊置土锉十余，讼者自炊候鞫，吏无敢索一钱。
现代文：他当青州知府时在官署的廊檐下砌了十多个锅灶，让来打官司的人自己烧饭等候审理，小吏们不敢向他们要一个钱。
English: When he was the governor of Qingzhou, he built more than ten pots and pans under the corridor of the government office, so that the people who came to sue would cook their own meals while waiting for the trial, and the petty officials would not dare to ask them for a penny.

古文：自负才武，休沐辄驰骑，习弓刀击刺，寝处风露中。
现代文：乔年自以为是个用兵人才，休息时总是骑马奔跑，练习射箭、冲刺，在野外的风露中睡觉。
English: Qiao Nian thought of himself as a military talent, and always ran on horseback at rest, practiced archery and sprinting, and slept in the wind and dew in the open air.

古文：十四年，擢右佥都御史，巡抚陕西。
现代文：十四年，朝廷提拔他为右佥都御史，巡抚陕西。
English: Fourteen years later, the imperial court promoted him to the post of the right-hand man of the capital, the governor of Shaanxi.

古文：时李自成已破河南，声言入关。
现代文：当时李自成已经打下河南，扬言要进入潼关。
English: At that time, Li Zicheng had already defeated Henan and threatened to enter Shiguan.

古文：乔年疾驱至商、洛，不见贼。
现代文：乔年立即驱马来到商州、雒南，没有见到贼兵的人影，贼兵包围了开封。
English: Qiao Nian immediately drove his horse to Shangzhou and southern Anhui, and did not see the shadow of the bandits. The bandits surrounded Kaifeng.

古文：贼围开封，而三边总督傅宗龙亦至陕，议抽兵括饷，则关中兵食已尽，无以应。
现代文：三边总督傅宗龙这时也来到陕西，两个人讨论抽拉丁兵，凑集粮饷，但这时关中的丁兵、粮食早已派用完了，无法加以响应。
English: The governor of the three sides, Fu Zonglong, also came to Shaanxi at this time, and the two discussed drawing Latin soldiers and collecting grain, but at this time the Ding soldiers and grain in Guanzhong had already been used up and could not be responded to.

古文：宗龙、乔年握手欷歔而别。
现代文：宗龙、乔年两个人握着手，叹着气分手了。
English: Zong Long and Qiao Nian held hands and sighed as they parted.

古文：未几，宗龙败殁于项城，乔年流涕叹曰： 傅公死，讨贼无人矣。 
现代文：不多天，宗龙在项城败亡，乔年流着泪感叹说： 傅先生死掉，没有人能平定贼寇了。 
English: Not many days later, Zonglong was defeated and killed in Xiangcheng. Qian Nian shed tears and lamented, "Mr. Fu is dead, no one can defeat the bandits."

古文：已，又闻诏擢乔年兵部右侍郎，总督三边军务，代宗龙。
现代文：过后又听说庄烈帝颁发诏书提升他为兵部右侍郎，总督三边军务，接替宗龙。
English: Later, he also heard that Emperor Zhuang Liang had issued an imperial edict to promote him to the position of the right-hand man of the military department, the governor of the three-sided military affairs, and the successor of Zonglong.

古文：部檄踵至，趣出关。
现代文：兵部的檄文一个接一个发来，催促他出关作战。
English: Letters from the military were sent one after another, urging him to go out and fight.

古文：是时，关中精锐尽没于项城。
现代文：当时关中的精锐部队都在项城灭亡了。
English: At that time, all of Guanzhong's elite troops perished in Xiangcheng.

古文：乔年曰： 兵疲饷乏，当方张之寇。我出，如以肉喂虎耳。
现代文：乔年说： 部队疲惫了，粮饷又缺乏，让我去抵挡正强大无比的敌人，我一旦出去，便如同拿肉去喂老虎。
English: Qian Nian said: "The troops are exhausted, food is scarce, let me resist the extremely powerful enemy, once I go out, it will be like taking meat to feed the tiger.

古文：然不可不一出，以持中原心。 
现代文：但是我不能不出去一回，以便巩固中原地区的民心。 
English: But I can't help but go out once in order to consolidate the people's hearts in the Central Plains.

古文：乃收散亡，调边卒，得马步三万人。
现代文：于是收召散亡的士兵，调集边防部队，凑起骑、步兵三万人。
English: As a result, scattered soldiers were called up, border guards were mobilized, and 30,000 cavalry and infantry were mustered.

古文：十五年正月，率总兵贺人龙、郑嘉栋、牛成虎出潼关。
现代文：十五年正月，乔年率领总兵贺人龙、郑嘉栋、牛成虎开出潼关。
English: In the first month of the 15th year, Qiao Nian led the general soldiers He Renlong, Zheng Jiadong and Ushi Chenghu out of Shaoguan.

古文：先是，临颍为贼守，左良玉破而屠之，尽获贼所掳。
现代文：早先，临颍被贼兵守着，左良玉打下后进行屠城，把贼寇抢劫的东西全部缴获了。
English: Earlier, Linyi was guarded by robber soldiers, and after Zuo Liangyu was defeated, they slaughtered the city and seized all the things robbed by the bandits.

古文：自成闻之怒，舍开封而攻良玉，良玉退保郾城，贼围之急。
现代文：自成听说后大为恼怒，放弃开封过来攻打良玉，良玉退守郾城，贼兵把他紧紧给包围了。
English: After hearing this, Zicheng was very angry. He gave up opening the seal and came to attack Liangyu. Liangyu retreated to the defense of Handan City, and the bandits surrounded him tightly.

古文：乔年诸将议曰： 郾城危在旦夕。
现代文：乔年召集手下的将领们讨论说： 郾城危在旦夕。
English: Qiao Nian gathered his generals to discuss and said: "Fengcheng is in imminent danger.

古文：吾趋郾，贼方锐，难与争锋。
现代文：如果我们到郾城去赴援，贼兵正气势威猛，很难跟他争锋。
English: If we go to Lushan to help, the bandits are in full swing, and it's hard to compete with them.

古文：吾闻襄城距郾四舍，贼老砦咸在。
现代文：我听说襄城离郾城只一百二十里，贼兵的老营都在那里。
English: I heard that Xiangcheng is only a hundred and twenty miles away from Handan, and the old battalions of robber soldiers are all there.

古文：吾舍郾而以精锐攻其必应，贼必还兵救，则郾城解矣。
现代文：我们舍郾城不打，以精锐兵力去攻打他必然要接应的襄城，贼兵一定回师来救，那么郾城之围也就解除了。
English: We did not fight the city of Handan, but attacked the city of Xiang with elite troops, which he was bound to respond to. The thief soldiers must return to the division to rescue, and then the siege of Handan was lifted.

古文：郾城解，我击其前，良玉乘其背，贼可大破也。 
现代文：解围之后，我们打击贼兵的前军，良玉攻击它的背后，贼兵是可以打得大败的。 
English: After the lifting of the siege, we will strike at the front of the bandits, and the good guys will attack behind it. The bandits can be defeated.

古文：诸将皆曰： 善。 
现代文：将领们都说： 好。 
English: The generals all said: OK.

古文：乃留步兵火器于洛阳，简精骑万人兼程进。
现代文：乔年于是把步兵、火器留在洛阳，挑选了一万精锐骑兵昼夜兼程地前进。
English: Qiao Nian then left the infantry and firearms in Luoyang and selected ten thousand elite cavalry to advance day and night.

古文：次郏县，襄城人张永祺等迎乔年。
现代文：当他们在郏县住宿时，襄城人张永祺等过来迎接乔年。
English: When they were staying in Jixian, Zhang Yongyao, a resident of Xiangcheng, came to welcome Qiao Nian.

古文：二月二日，乔年入襄城，分人龙、嘉栋、成虎军三路，驻城东四十里，逼郾城而军，而自勒兵驻城外。
现代文：二月二日，乔年进入了襄阳，把人龙、嘉栋、成虎分作三路，驻扎在城东四十里，靠向郾城，乔年自己则统兵驻在襄阳城外。
English: On February 2nd, Qiao Nian entered Xiangyang, and divided Renlong, Jiadong, and Chenghu into three routes, stationed forty miles east of the city, leaning towards Lucheng. Qiao Nian himself was stationed outside the city of Xiangyang.

古文：贼果解郾城而救襄城。
现代文：贼兵果然解除对郾城的包围，过来救襄城。
English: The bandits successfully lifted the siege on Lucheng and came to the rescue of Xiangcheng.

古文：贼至，三帅奔，良玉救不至，军大溃。
现代文：贼兵赶到，三个大将都逃了，良玉的救兵又没来，官兵大败。
English: The bandits arrived, the three generals fled, the good soldiers did not come, and the officers and soldiers were defeated.

古文：乔年叹曰： 此吾死所也。 
现代文：乔年叹气说： 这儿是我的坟墓了。 
English: Qian Nian sighed and said, "This is my grave."

古文：率步卒千余入城守。
现代文：接着就率领步兵一千多人把守城墙。
English: Then he led more than a thousand infantrymen to defend the city wall.

古文：贼穴地实火药攻城，乔年亦穿阱，视所凿，长矛刺之。
现代文：贼兵挖地道填火药攻城，乔年也打地洞看贼兵所挖的地道，用长矛刺杀贼兵。
English: The bandits dug a tunnel to fill with gunpowder to attack the city. Qian Nian also dug a hole to see the tunnel dug by the bandits and killed the bandits with a spear.

古文：贼炮击乔年坐纛，雉堞尽碎，左右环泣请避之，乔年怒，以足蹴其首曰： 汝畏死，我不畏死也。 
现代文：贼兵用大炮轰击乔年的坐旗，城墙上的掩体都给打坏了，手下的将吏围在旁边哀求他出去避开贼兵，乔年恼了，用脚踹他们的头说： 你们怕死，我不怕死。 
English: The bandits bombarded Qiao Nian's banner with cannons. The bunkers on the city wall were all destroyed. His subordinates surrounded the officials and implored him to go out and avoid the bandits. Qiao Nian became angry and stomped on their heads, saying: "You are afraid of death, I am not afraid of death."

古文：时张国钦、张一贯、党威、李万庆及监纪西安同知孙兆禄、材官李可从、襄城知县曹思正从乔年，皆死之。
现代文：十七日，城被打下，乔年杀死了三个贼兵，然后自杀未遂，给贼兵俘获了，大骂不止。贼兵割下了他的舌头，把他给分尸了。襄阳人后来给乔年修祠祭祀。时张国钦、张一贯、党威、李万庆及监纪西安同知孙兆禄、材官李可从、襄城知县曹思正从乔年，皆死之。
English: On the seventeenth day, the city was defeated, Qiao Nian killed three bandits, and then attempted suicide. He was captured by the bandits and cursed endlessly. The bandits cut off his tongue and dismembered him. The people of Xiangyang later gave Qiao Nian a memorial service. At that time, Zhang Guoqin, Zhang Xincun, Dang Wei, Li Wanqing, and the warden Ji Xian Tongzhi Sun Zhaolu, the talent officer Li Kezhang, and Xiangcheng Zhixian Cao Sizheng Zhao Nian, all died.

古文：万庆者，降将射塌天也。
现代文：万庆者，降将射塌天也。
English: If you celebrate, the sky will fall down.

古文：又有马帅某者，逸其名。
现代文：又有马帅某者，逸其名。
English: There is also a certain Ma Shuai, whose name escapes me.

古文：兆禄，盐山人。
现代文：兆禄，盐山人。
English: Zhao Lu, a native of Yanshan.

古文：可从，盩厔人。
现代文：可从，盩厔人。
English: You can start from here.

古文：党威，神木人。
现代文：党威，神木人。
English: The Party's will, the divine wooden man.

古文：余莫考。
现代文：余莫考。
English: There's nothing else to do.

古文：党威则尝击贼于西雒峪，擒贼首窦阿婆者也。
现代文：党威则尝击贼于西雒峪，擒贼首窦阿婆者也。
English: The Party's will tried to fight the thieves in Xidi, and the thieves were led by grandma.

古文：自成购永祺不得，屠其族，劓刖诸生刘汉臣等百九十人。
现代文：自成购永祺不得，屠其族，劓刖诸生刘汉臣等百九十人。
English: He ordered the massacre of his own people, including all of Liu Hancheng's descendants, a total of 190 people.

古文：自成数月之间再败秦师，获马二万，降秦兵又数万，威震河雒。
现代文：自成数月之间再败秦师，获马二万，降秦兵又数万，威震河雒。
English: Within a few months of its formation, it defeated the Qin army again, gaining 20,000 horses, and losing tens of thousands of Qin soldiers.

古文：初，乔年之抚陕西也，奉诏发自成先冢。
现代文：当初乔年出任陕西巡抚的时候，奉诏开挖自成的祖坟。
English: At the beginning, when Qiaonian was the governor of Shaanxi Province, he ordered the excavation of the ancestral tomb.

古文：米脂令边大受，河间静海举人，健令也，诇得其族人为县吏者，掠之。
现代文：米脂县令边大受，河间静海的举人出身，是一个精明能干的县令，他在打听到自成的一个在县里做小吏的本家后，就抓来拷问。
English: The governor of Mizhi County was a shrewd and capable man. He was born in Jinghai County, Hebei Province. When he found out that one of his relatives was a minor official in the county, he came to interrogate him.

古文：言： 去县二百里曰李氏村，乱山中，十六冢环而葬，中其始祖也。
现代文：这人招供说： 离县城二百里有个村叫李氏村，在乱山之中有十六个坟埋成圆形，中间的那个就是自成始祖的坟墓。
English: This person confessed: There is a village called Li's village, 200 miles from the county seat. There are 16 graves buried in a circle in the mountains. The one in the middle is the grave of the founder.

古文：相传，穴，仙人所定，圹中铁灯檠，铁灯不灭，李氏兴。 
现代文：据传说墓穴是经仙人指定的，里边有一座铁灯台。铁灯不熄灭，李氏就兴盛。 
English: According to legend, the tomb was designated by the immortals, and there is an iron lighthouse inside. If the iron lamp does not go out, the Li clan will prosper.

古文：如其言发之蝼蚁数石，火光荧荧然。
现代文：按照他的话挖开自成先祖坟墓后，发现里边有几石蝼蛄和蚂蚁，火光闪闪发亮。
English: According to his words, after digging up the tomb of his ancestors, he found several stone worms and ants inside, and the fire was shining brightly.

古文：檆棺，骨青黑，被体黄毛，脑后穴大如钱，赤蛇盘，三四寸，角而飞，高丈许，咋咋吞日光者六七，反而伏。
现代文：砸开棺材，里边的尸骨呈青黑色，浑身上下都是黄毛，脑后有一个像铜钱大小的洞，盘着一只红蛇，长三四寸，长着角，还会飞，张开嘴巴吐出六七道日光，又飞回来落在脑后。
English: He broke open the coffin, and the bones inside were blue-black, with yellow hair all over the body and underneath. There was a hole behind the head the size of a copper coin. A red snake was coiled around it, three or four inches long, with horns, and it could fly. When it opened its mouth, it spat out six or seven rays of sunlight, which then flew back and landed behind the head.

古文：世琮尝为汝宁推官，讨土寇，流矢贯耳不为动，时号王铁耳者也。
现代文：乔年把那颅骨和红蛇用匣子收了，报送给朝廷。其余一把火烧了，掺杂进脏东西，扔掉了。自成听说后恼得咬牙切齿，说： 我非把乔年搞死不可！ 
English: Qiao Nian collected the skull and the red snake in a box and reported it to the imperial court. The rest was burned, mixed with filth and thrown away. After hearing this, Zicheng gritted his teeth and said, "I have to kill Qiao Nian!"

古文：师颐莅任甫三日。
现代文：在杀死乔年以后，李自成又经西华去攻打陈州。
English: After killing Qiao Nian, Li Zicheng went to attack Chenzhou via Xihua.

古文：孙传庭，字百雅，代州振武卫人。
现代文：孙传庭，字百雅，代州振武卫人。
English: Sun Chuanting, the character Baiya, is played by Daizhou Zhenwu Weiren.

古文：自父以上，四世举于乡。
现代文：在他父亲任上，他家里四代人都乡试中举。
English: During his father's tenure, four generations of his family have passed the junior high school entrance examination.

古文：传庭仪表颀硕，沈毅多筹略。
现代文：传庭长得身材高大，沉着坚定而且多智多谋。
English: Choninaga is tall, calm, determined and resourceful.

古文：万历四十七年成进士，授永城知县，以才调商丘。
现代文：万历四十七年他考中进士。初任永城知县，因为有才干又被调往商丘。
English: He passed the junior high school entrance examination in the 47th year of Wanli, and was assigned to Yongcheng County for the first time. Because of his talent, he was transferred to Shangqiu.

古文：天启初，擢吏部验封主事，屡迁稽勋郎中，请告归。家居久不出。
现代文：天启初年，他升任吏部验封主事，经几次迁升又做了稽勋郎中，然后告假还乡，在家里闲住多年不出。
English: In the first year of the Apocalypse, he was promoted to the post of the head of the cadre inspection and sealing, and after several promotions, he became an inspector, and then returned to his hometown on leave, staying at home for many years.

古文：崇祯八年秋，始迁验封郎中，超迁顺天府丞。
现代文：崇祯八年秋天，传庭才升职为验封郎中，然后越级升任顺天府丞。
English: In the autumn of the eighth year of the reign of Emperor Chongzhen, Chonin was promoted to the rank of Jianfeng Rongzhong, and then promoted to the rank of Shuntianfu Rongzhong.

古文：陕西巡抚甘学阔不能讨贼，秦之士大夫哗于朝，乃推边才用传庭，以九年三月受代。
现代文：陕西巡抚甘学阔不能讨平贼寇，陕西的士大夫向朝廷争吵，朝廷于是推选边才，用了传庭，在九年三月里受命接任。
English: Gan Xueguo, the governor of Shaanxi, was unable to defeat the bandits, and the sheriffs of Shaanxi quarreled with the imperial court. The imperial court then selected Biancai, and he was appointed to take over the post in March of the ninth year.

古文：传庭莅秦，严征发期会，一从军兴法。
现代文：传庭到陕西后，对民间人力、物力征集的时限掌握得很严格，完全按照军需供应的法规来执行。
English: After the transfer of the court to Shaanxi, the time limit for the collection of civilian manpower and material resources was very strict, and it was carried out in full accordance with the military supply regulations.

古文：秦人爱之不如总督洪承畴，然其才自足办贼。
现代文：陕西人对他的爱戴不如洪承畴，不过他的才干足能平定贼寇。
English: Shaanxi people's love for him is not as great as that of Hongcheng, but his talent is enough to quell the bandits.

古文：贼首整齐王据商、雒，诸将不敢攻，檄副将罗尚文击斩之。
现代文：贼首整齐王占领着商州、雒南，诸将不敢前去攻打，传庭传令副将罗尚文攻打并斩除了他。
English: The king of thieves, Neiji Wang, occupied Shangzhou and southern Anhui. The generals did not dare to attack him. The court ordered Vice Admiral Luo Shangwen to attack and kill him.

古文：当是时，贼乱关中，有名字者以十数，高迎祥最强，拓养坤党最众，所谓闯王、蝎子块者也。
现代文：当时，贼寇搞乱了关中，有名字的贼首有十多个，高迎祥势力最强，拓养坤人数最多，他们两个人也就是所谓的闯王、蝎子块。
English: At that time, there were more than ten thieves with names. Gao Yingxiang had the strongest influence, and Tuo Yangkun had the largest number of people. The two of them were the so-called king and scorpion.

古文：传庭设方略，亲击迎祥于盩厔之黑水峪，擒之，及其伪领哨黄龙、总管刘哲，献俘阙下。
现代文：传庭制定了战略规划，亲自到銩稨的黑水峪进攻迎祥，活捉了他以及他的伪领哨黄龙、总管刘哲，把俘虏送到了京师。
English: The court-martial drew up a strategic plan, personally went to the Black Water Dragon's attack on Yangxiang, captured him alive, as well as his pseudo-captain Huanglong and the chief Liu Zhe, and sent the captives to the Beijing Division.

古文：录功，增秩一等。
现代文：朝廷论定战功，给他加官一级。
English: The Imperial Court determined his war merit and gave him a higher rank.

古文：而贼党自是乃共推李自成为闯王矣。
现代文：从此贼群就共同推举李自成做了闯王。
English: Since then, the group of thieves have jointly elected Li Zicheng as the champion.

古文：明年，养坤及其党张耀文来降。
现代文：第二年，养坤及其同伙张耀文过来投降了。
English: The following year, Yang Kun and his accomplice Zhang Yaowen came over and surrendered.

古文：已而养坤叛去，谕其下追斩之。
现代文：后来养坤又反叛而去，传庭指示他的部下追上去斩除了养坤。
English: Later, Ya Kun rebelled and left, and the court ordered his subordinates to hunt down and eliminate Ya Kun.

古文：击贼惠登相于泾阳、三原，登相西走。
现代文：传庭在泾阳源向贼首惠登相发动攻击，登相西逃了。
English: The court of inquiry launched an attack on the thief leader Hui Deng Xiang in Fenyangyuan, and Deng Xiang escaped to the west.

古文：河南贼马进忠、刘国能等十七部入渭南，追之出关，复合河南兵夹击之，先后斩首千余级。
现代文：河南的贼将马进忠、刘国能等十七部进入渭南，传庭把他们打出了关门，又联合河南部队夹击他们，先后斩敌一千多人。
English: Thieves from Henan brought 17 units, including Ma Jinzhong and Liu Guoneng, into southern Hunan. According to legend, the court ordered them to be shut down, and the joint Henan troops clamped down on them, killing more than a thousand enemies in succession.

古文：进忠等复扰商、雒、蓝田，叛卒与之合，将犯西安。
现代文：进忠等又侵扰商州、雒南、蓝田，官军的叛兵跟他们会合，打算进犯西安。
English: Jinzhong and others also invaded Shangzhou, Hunan, and Lantian. The rebels of the government army joined them and planned to invade Xi'an.

古文：遣左光先、曹变蛟追走之渭南，降其渠一条龙，招还胁从。
现代文：传庭派左光先、曹变蛟把他们追赶到渭南，收降了他们的首领一条龙，招回了胁从人员。
English: Cao Zhengyi was the first to send troops to the imperial court, and Cao Zhengyi chased them to the south of Anhui Province, captured their leader, and called back his subordinates.

古文：募健儿击余贼，斩圣世王、瓦背、一翅飞，降镇天王、上山虎，又歼白捍贼渠魁数人。
现代文：又召募健壮的年轻人攻打残余的贼寇，斩除了圣世王、瓦背王、一翅飞，收降了镇天王、上山虎，又歼灭了几个白杆的贼寇大首领。
English: He also called for the recruitment of strong young people to attack the remaining bandits, eliminated the king of the holy world, the king of the tile backs, and a wing fly, captured the king of the town, the mountain tiger, and destroyed several white-stick bandit leaders.

古文：关南稍靖。
现代文：潼关以南的地区稍稍平定了一些。
English: The area south of Shaoguan has calmed down a bit.

古文：遣副将盛略等败贼大天王于宝鸡，贼走入山谷，传庭追之凤翔。
现代文：传庭又派副将盛略等人在宝鸡打败了贼首大天王。贼兵逃进山谷中，传庭一直追赶到凤翔。
English: He also sent Vice Admiral Sheng Yao and others to defeat the thief king in Baoji. The thief soldiers fled into the valley, and he chased them all the way to Fengxiang.

古文：他贼出栈道，谋越关犯河南，还军击，贼走伏斜谷，复大败之，降其余众。
现代文：别的贼军开出栈道，打算越过潼关进犯河南，传庭回师打击他们，贼军逃到斜谷设下埋伏，传庭又把他们打得大败，收降了残余的贼兵。
English: Other bandits opened the causeway, intending to cross the pass and invade Henan. The court ordered the division to fight them. The bandits fled to the valley and set up an ambush. The court also defeated them and captured the remaining bandits.

古文：西安四卫，旧有屯军二万四千，田二万余顷，其后田归豪右，军尽虚籍。
现代文：西安所属的四卫过去有屯军两万四千人，田地二万余顷，后来田地被豪强占有，部队的编制都是虚的。
English: In the past, Siwei, which belonged to Xi'an, had a garrison of twenty-four thousand people and more than twenty thousand hectares of fields. Later, the fields were occupied by the powerful, and the composition of the troops was all imaginary.

古文：传庭厘得军万一千有奇，岁收屯课银十四万五千余两，米麦万三千五百余石。
现代文：传庭对此加以改正，召集了一万一千多士兵，每年收入屯田的课银十四万五千多两，米、麦一万三千五百多石。
English: This was corrected by the court-martial, and more than 11,000 soldiers were called up, and the annual income of the garrison was more than 145,000 taels of silver, and more than 13,500 koku of rice and wheat.

古文：帝大喜，增秩，赉银币。
现代文：庄烈帝非常高兴，给他加了官，赏了银币。
English: Emperor Zhuang was very pleased and gave him a promotion and a silver coin.

古文：会杨嗣昌入为本兵，条上方略。洪承畴以秦督兼剿务，而用广抚熊文灿为总理。分四正六隅，马三步七，计兵十二万，加派至二百八十万，期百日平贼。
现代文：正当这时杨嗣昌进入朝中做了兵部尚书，向庄烈帝陈述了用兵方略，让洪承畴以陕西总督的身份兼办剿贼事务，任命广东巡抚熊文灿为总理，全国划分为四正六隅，骑兵占三成，步兵占七成，共召集十二万官兵，加派军饷征收额达二百八十万石，限定时限为一百天，消灭贼寇。
English: It was at this time that Yang Shichang entered the imperial court and made a report on the military, and presented to Zhuo Li Rong the strategy for the use of soldiers. He asked Hong Chengzong, as the governor of Shaanxi, to concurrently handle the affairs of the bandits, and appointed the Guangdong governor Xiong Wencang as the prime minister. The whole country was divided into four equal parts and six corners, the cavalry accounted for 30%, and the infantry accounted for 70%, and a total of 120,000 officers and soldiers were summoned. The amount of money collected by the army was 2.8 million koku, and the time limit was 100 days. To eliminate the bandits.

古文：传庭移书争之，曰： 无益，且非特此也。部卒屡经溃蹶，民力竭矣，恐不堪命。
现代文：传庭写信过去和他争论说： 这样做没用，现在部队屡经败折，百姓的物力也抽干了，我担心军民都不能承受。
English: The coroner wrote a letter to argue with him, saying, "It's useless to do this. Now the army has suffered repeated defeats, and the people's material resources have been drained. I'm worried that the military and the people can't bear it.

古文：必欲行之，贼不必尽，而害中于国家。 
现代文：如果一定这样推行，那么贼寇不见得能消灭掉，反而会使国家受害。 
English: If this is definitely implemented, then the bandits may not be able to be eliminated, but the country will suffer.

古文：累数千言，嗣昌大忤。
现代文：长达几千字。嗣昌收到他的信大不高兴。
English: It was several thousand words long. Tsuchimasa was very unhappy to receive his letter.

古文：部议，秦抚当一正面，募土著万人，给饷银二十三万，以商、雒等处为汛守。
现代文：兵部决定，陕西巡抚抵挡一个正面，应招募当地兵一万人，发给饷银二十三万两，把商州、雒南等处作为防区。
English: The Ministry of Military Affairs decided that the governor of Shaanxi should recruit 10,000 local soldiers to resist a front, issue 230,000 taels of silver and silver, and use Shangzhou, southern Anhui and other places as defense zones.

古文：传庭知其不可用也，乃核帑藏，蠲赎鍰，得银四万八千，市马募兵，自办灭贼具，不用部议。
现代文：传庭知道这种办法行不通，于是清理库藏，积存赎款，凑集了四万八千两银子，收兵买马，自行添置灭贼器械，不采用兵部的意见。
English: The court knew that this method would not work, so they cleaned out the storeroom, accumulated the ransom money, collected 48,000 taels of silver, recruited soldiers and horses, and added their own anti-thief equipment, and did not use the opinion of the military department.

古文：会诸抚报募兵及额，传庭疏独不至。
现代文：当各地巡抚都上报募兵兵额时，单单传庭的奏疏没送上来。
English: When the governors of various regions reported the number of soldiers to be recruited, they did not send up a single report.

古文：嗣昌言军法不行于秦，自请白衣领职，以激帝怒。
现代文：嗣昌说军法不能在陕西推行了，自请不担官职过去领兵，用这来激发庄烈帝的怒火。
English: Tsuchimasa said that martial law could not be implemented in Shaanxi, so he volunteered to lead the troops without holding any official position, and used this to arouse the wrath of Emperor Zhuang.

古文：传庭奏曰： 使臣如他抚，籍郡县民兵上之，遂谓及额，则臣先所报屯兵已及额矣。
现代文：传庭于是上书说： 假如我像其他巡抚那样收编府县的民兵报上去，就说是及额了，那么我先前所报上的屯兵就已经及额了。
English: The court then sent a letter saying: "If I were to collect and compile the prefectural and county militia reports as other governors have done, I would say that the quota has been reached, so the troops I reported earlier have already reached the quota.

古文：况更有募练马步军，数且逾万，何尝不遵部议。
现代文：此外我这里还有召集起来正在操练的骑、步兵将近一万多人，何尝不遵守兵部的决定呢？
English: In addition, I have more than ten thousand cavalry and infantry soldiers who are training here. Why not abide by the decision of the military department?

古文：至百日之期，商、雒之汛守，臣皆不敢委。
现代文：至于所规定的一百天的期限，商州、雒南的防区，我都不敢推托。
English: As for the stipulated period of one hundred days, I dare not postpone the defense zones in Shangzhou and southern Anhui.

古文：然使贼入商、雒，而臣不能御，则治臣罪。若臣扼商、雒，而逾期不能灭贼，误剿事者必非臣。 
现代文：不过假如是贼兵进入商州、雒南而我不能防卫，就请治我的罪；如果我守住了商州、雒南而超越期限不能灭贼，那么耽误剿贼的一定不是我了。 
English: However, if the bandit soldiers enter Shangzhou and South Hunan and I am unable to defend myself, I will be punished for my crime; if I defend Shangzhou and South Hunan and cannot destroy the bandits beyond the time limit, then it must not be me who delays the bandits.

古文：嗣昌无以难，然衔之弥甚。
现代文：嗣昌对他的话无法加以指责，但对他恨之入骨。
English: Tsuchimasa couldn't blame him for what he said, but he hated him to his bones.

古文：传庭两奉诏进秩，当加部衔，嗣昌抑弗奏。
现代文：传庭两次接到诏书加升官级，应当加部衔了，嗣昌压下来不替他奏请。
English: After the court twice received the imperial edict to raise the official level, it should be raised to the ministry level, but Tsuchimasa was pressured not to make a request for him.

古文：十一年春，贼破汉阴、石泉，则坐传庭失援，削其所加秩。
现代文：十一年春天，贼兵打下汉阴、石泉，嗣昌就怪罪传庭没有增援，削了他所提升上来的官级。
English: In the spring of the eleventh year, the bandits beat down Hanyin and Shiquan, and Tsuchimasa blamed the court for not providing reinforcements and cut the official rank he had been promoted to.

古文：传庭出扼商、雒。
现代文：传庭出兵扼守商州和雒南。
English: According to legend, the court sent troops to defend Shangzhou and southern Anhui.

古文：大天王等犯庆阳、宝鸡，还军战合水，破走之，获其二子，追击之延安。
现代文：大天王等进犯庆阳、宝鸡，传庭回师到合水交战，打跑了他，抓住了他两个儿子，又到延安追击他。
English: The Great Heavenly King and others attacked Qingyang and Baoji, and the court sent back the division to fight in Heshui, beat him away, caught his two sons, and pursued him to Yan'an.

古文：过天星、混天星等从徽、秦趋凤翔，逼澄城。传庭分兵五道击之杨家岭、黄龙山，大破之，斩首二千余级。
现代文：过天星、混天星等从徽州、秦州直奔凤翔，进逼澄城，传庭分兵五路在杨家岭、黄龙山进攻他们，把他们打得大败，斩获了两千多首级。
English: From Huizhou and Qinzhou, the Over-Heavenly Star and the Mixed-Heavenly Star went straight to Fengxiang and entered Fuxingcheng. They were attacked by five armies in Yangjialing and Huanglongshan. They were soundly defeated and captured more than two thousand heads.

古文：大天王知二子不杀，遂降。
现代文：大天王听说传庭没杀他的两个儿子，就投降了。
English: When the king heard that the court had not killed his two sons, he surrendered.

古文：贼引而北，犯延安。传庭策鄜州西、合水东三四百里，荒山邃谷，贼入当自毙，乃率标兵中部遏其东，檄变蛟、庆阳拒其西，伏兵三水、淳化间。
现代文：其他贼兵开向北面去进犯延安，传庭知道州以西、合水以东的三四百里都是荒山深谷，贼兵进去就会自取灭亡，于是亲率标兵从中部阻止贼兵向东跑，传令变蛟在庆阳阻止贼兵向西逃，在三水、淳化之间设下了埋伏。
English: Other bandits headed north to attack Yan'an. The court heard that the three or four hundred miles to the west of the prefecture and east of Heshui were barren mountains and deep valleys, and the bandits would perish if they went in. Therefore, he led the pacesetters from the central part to stop the bandits from running eastward. He sent messengers to Qingyang to stop the bandits from fleeing westward, and set up an ambush between Sanshui and Chunhua.

古文：贼饥，出掠食，则大张旗帜，鸣鼓角以邀之，一日夜驰二百五十里。
现代文：贼兵饿了，出来抢粮食，传庭就高高举起旗帜，打起鼓吹响号角阻击他们，一天一夜马行了二百五十里。
English: The robber soldiers were hungry and came out to snatch grain. The courtiers held their banners high and raised their trumpets to stop them. The horse traveled 250 miles in one day and one night.

古文：贼大惊，西奔，至职田庄，遇伏而败；复走宝鸡，取栈道，再中伏大败；折而走陇州关山道，又为伏兵所挫。三败，贼死者无算，过天星、混天星并降。
现代文：贼兵大惊，赶快往西边逃，到职田庄遇上伏兵，战败了，又逃向宝鸡，取道栈道，又中了埋伏，大败，转而进入陇州关山的山路，又被伏兵打击了一回，三次失败，贼兵死掉的不计其数，过天星、混天星都投降了。
English: The robber soldiers were shocked and fled to the west as soon as possible. They encountered an ambush when they arrived at the grange. They were defeated and fled to Baoji. They took the path of the trestle. They were ambushed again and defeated. They turned to the mountain road of Zhangzhou Guanshan. They were ambushed once again and failed three times. The number of robber soldiers who died was uncountable. The passing stars and the mixed stars all surrendered.

古文：又逐贼邠、宁间，陷阵，获其渠。
现代文：传庭又在州、宁羌一带追赶贼兵，官军冲入敌阵，擒拿了贼首。
English: The court also chased the bandits in the areas of Suzhou and Ningbo. The government army rushed into the enemy lines and captured the heads of the bandits.

古文：河南贼马进忠、马光玉驱宛、洛之众，箕张而西。传庭击之，贼还走。
现代文：河南的贼首马进忠、马光玉统率宛、洛一带的贼兵向西部扩散，传庭向他们进攻，贼兵回头逃跑。
English: The bandits in Henan led by Ma Jinzhong and Ma Guang Yutong and the bandits around Luo spread to the west and attacked them. The bandits turned back and fled.

古文：又设伏于潼关原，变蛟逐贼入伏。
现代文：传庭又在潼关的平原地带埋下伏兵，变蛟把贼兵赶进了埋伏。
English: The court also planted an ambush in the plain area of Shaoguan, and then drove the thief soldiers into the ambush.

古文：而闯王李自成者，为洪承畴所逐，尽亡其卒，以十八骑溃围遁。
现代文：闯王李自成受到洪承畴追击，丢掉了他的所有人马，只带十八个骑兵突围出去，逃跑了。
English: Wang Li Zicheng was chased by Hong Chengzhuang, lost all his horses, broke out of the encirclement with only eighteen cavalrymen, and fled.

古文：关中群盗悉平，是为崇祯之十一年春也。
现代文：一时间关中地区的各路盗贼都平定了，这时是崇祯十一年的春天。
English: At one time, all the thieves in the Guanzhong area were pacified. It was the spring of the eleventh year of the reign of Chongzhen.

古文：捷闻，大喜，先叙澄城之捷，命加传庭部衔。
现代文：捷报送上后，庄烈帝非常高兴，首先评定澄城的胜利，命令给传庭加官部衔。
English: After the victory report was sent, Zhuang Rongdi was very happy. First, he evaluated the victory of Chengcheng and ordered to add an official rank to the court.

古文：嗣昌仍格不奏。
现代文：嗣昌仍旧阻挠，未予申报。
English: Tsuchimasa still obstructed and did not declare.

古文：当是时，总理熊文灿主抚。湖广贼张献忠已降，惟河南贼如故。
现代文：那个时候，总理熊文灿主张招安，湖广地方的贼首张献忠已经投降，只有河南的贼兵依然如故。
English: At that time, Premier Xiong Wencang advocated recruiting soldiers. The first bandits in the Huguang region had already surrendered, and only the bandits in Henan remained the same.

古文：罗汝才、马进忠、贺一龙、左金王等十三部西窥潼关，联营数十里。
现代文：罗汝才、马进忠、贺一龙、左金王等十三部西窥潼关，联营几十里。
English: Luo Rucai, Ma Jinzhong, He Yilong, Zuo Jinwang and other 13 departments of Xizhuyuan Pass are dozens of miles away from the joint camp.

古文：传庭计曰： 天下大寇尽在此矣。
现代文：传庭想到： 天下的大盗现在都在这了。
English: It occurred to the court: the world's biggest thieves are all here now.

古文：我出击其西，总理击其东，贼不降则灭。
现代文：我在西面出击，总理在东面出击，贼兵不是投降就是灭亡。
English: I attack in the west, the prime minister attacks in the east, and the bandits either surrender or perish.

古文：此贼平，天下无贼矣。
现代文：这一带的贼兵平定后，天下也就没有贼寇了。
English: After the bandits in this area were subdued, there were no more bandits in the world.

古文：献忠即狙伏，无能为也。 
现代文：献忠即便是伪装投降，心存不轨，也不能怎么样了。 
English: Loyalty, even if it is disguised as surrender, is no longer acceptable.

古文：乃遂引兵东，大败贼阌乡、灵宝山间，贯其营而东，复自东以西。
现代文：于是就率军东征，在阌乡、灵宝一带的山中把贼兵打得大败，从他们的营地中间从西向东锳了一回，又从东往西锳。
English: Therefore, he led the army to the east and defeated the bandits in the mountains around the towns of Xingxiang and Lingbao. From the middle of their camp, he marched from west to east once, and then from east to west.

古文：贼窘甚，以文灿招降手谕上，言旦夕且降。
现代文：贼兵困窘得很，拿文灿招降他们的亲笔指示上交给传庭看，说短时间内将归降。
English: Embarrassed, the bandits handed over their handwritten instructions to surrender to the court-martial, saying that they would surrender in a short time.

古文：传庭曰： 尔曹日就熊公言抚，而日攻堡屠寨不已，是伪也。
现代文：传庭说： 你们天天到熊先生那里说接受招安，可是又天天不停地攻打城堡，屠杀村寨，这是假投降。
English: The court heard: "You go to Mr. Xiong every day to say that you accept the offer, but every day you keep attacking the castle and slaughtering villages. This is a false surrender.

古文：降即解甲来，有说即非真降，吾明日进兵矣。 
现代文：如果真想投降，就放下武器过来投降，再说空话就不是真心投降了，我明天就要进兵了！ 
English: If you really want to surrender, then put down your weapons and come here to surrender. If you say empty words, then you are not really surrendering. I am going to join the army tomorrow!

古文：明日擐甲而出，得文灿檄于途中曰： 毋妒吾抚功。 
现代文：第二天传庭统兵而出，在进军途中接到文灿的檄文说： 不要忌妒我招安贼兵的功劳！ 
English: The next day, Chuan Ting, the commander-in-chief, went out, and on the way into the army, he received a message from Wen Can saying, "Don't be jealous of my achievements in recruiting peace-keeping soldiers!

古文：又进，得本兵嗣昌手书，亦云。
现代文：又往前走，收到了兵部尚书嗣昌的手信，也是这么说。
English: I went further and received a handwritten letter from the head of the military department, Shang Shuxi Chang, saying the same thing.

古文：传庭怏怏撤兵还。
现代文：传庭闷闷不乐地撤兵回来了。
English: The court-martialed soldiers returned sullenly.

古文：然贼迄不就抚，移瞰商、雒。
现代文：但是贼兵最终还是不接受招安，反而转移过去窥视商州、雒南。
English: However, in the end, the bandits still did not accept the invitation, but instead diverted to look at Shangzhou and southern Anhui.

古文：文灿悔，期传庭夹击。
现代文：文灿后悔了，约传庭出兵夹击。
English: Wen Can regretted it and ordered the court martial.

古文：属吏王文清等三战三败之，贼奔内乡、淅川而去。
现代文：传庭手下的官员王文清三战三胜，打败了贼兵，贼兵逃往内乡、淅川去了。
English: Wang Wenqing, an official under the court, won three victories in three battles, defeating the bandits. The bandits fled to inland villages and the Beichuan River.

古文：传庭既屡建大功，其将校数奉旨优叙，嗣昌务抑之不为奏。
现代文：传庭在屡建大功之后，他手下的将校几次得到诏令进行了封赏，嗣昌却坚决压制他，不为他奏请。
English: After Chuan Ni repeatedly performed great feats, his officers were rewarded several times by imperial edict, but Tsuchimasa resolutely suppressed him and did not petition for him.

古文：传庭恳请上其籍于部，嗣昌曰： 需之。 
现代文：传庭恳请他把自己提上部籍，嗣昌说： 等等吧！ 
English: When the judge implored him to make himself a member of the team, Tsuchimasa said, "Wait!

古文：十月，京师戒严，召传庭及承畴入卫，擢兵部右侍郎兼右佥都御史，代总督卢象升督诸镇援军，赐剑。
现代文：十月，京师戒严，朝廷召传庭及承畴入卫京师，提升传庭为兵部右侍郎兼右佥都御史，接替总督卢象升统率从各地来的援军，赐给他尚方宝剑。
English: In October, when the capital was placed under martial law, the imperial court summoned Chonba and promoted him to enter the imperial guard. Chonba was promoted to the position of the right-hand man of the military department and the right-hand man of the capital's governor, succeeding the governor Lu Xiang, who led the reinforcements from all over the country. He was given the Shangfang Sword.

古文：当是时，传庭提兵抵近郊，与嗣昌不协，又与中官高起潜忤，降旨切责，不得朝京师。
现代文：这时传庭统兵来到京城近郊，与嗣昌不和，又跟宦官高起潜发生冲撞，庄烈帝传下圣旨严厉批评了他，不让他进城朝见。
English: At this time, the court marshal came to the outskirts of the capital, quarreled with Tsuchimasa, and clashed with the eunuch Gao Zhixuan. Emperor Zhuangliu severely criticized him and did not allow him to enter the city for the imperial court.

古文：承畴至，郊劳，且命陛见，传庭不能无觖望。
现代文：承畴来了以后，嗣昌到郊外慰劳，又命令他觐见皇上，传庭对此不能不感到失望。
English: After the arrival of the heir, Tsuchimasa went to the suburbs to console, and ordered him to see the emperor. The court could not help but feel disappointed.

古文：无何，嗣昌用承畴以为蓟督，欲尽留秦兵之入援者守蓟、辽。
现代文：不久，嗣昌任用承畴为蓟门总督，想把来增援京师的陕西部队都留下来守护蓟门、辽东。
English: Soon after, Tsuchimasa appointed Jocho as the governor of Shimen, and wanted to keep the Shaanxi troops that had come to reinforce the Beijing division to guard Shimen and Liaodong.

古文：传庭曰： 秦军不可留也。留则贼势张，无益于边，是代贼撤兵也。
现代文：传庭说： 陕西部队不能留，留在这边，那边贼寇的势焰便会扩张，无益于边防，这简直是为贼寇撤走敌人。
English: The court said: "The Shaanxi troops cannot stay. If they stay on this side, the influence of the bandits on the other side will expand, which is not beneficial to border defense. This is simply evacuating the enemy for the bandits."

古文：秦军妻子俱在秦，兵日杀贼以为利，久留于边，非哗则逃，不复为吾用，必为贼用，是驱民使从贼也。
现代文：陕西士兵的妻子、子女都在陕西，他们天天把杀贼当作自己的利益，长期留在边疆，不是起哄就是逃跑，不能再为我们所用，就一定为贼寇所用，这简直是逼迫良民去当贼兵。
English: The wives and children of the Shaanxi soldiers are all in Shaanxi. Every day, they regard the murderers as their own interests. They stay on the frontier for a long time, either cheering or fleeing. If they can no longer be used by us, they must be used by the bandits. This is simply forcing good people to be bandits.

古文：安危之机，不可不察也。 
现代文：这是有关国家安危的重要一环，不能不加考虑。 
English: This is an important part of the security of the countries concerned, and cannot be ignored.

古文：嗣昌不听。传庭争之不能得，不胜郁郁，耳遂聋。
现代文：嗣昌不听，传庭争执不下，心中不胜郁郁，耳朵就聋了。
English: Tsuchimasa doesn't listen, the dispute can't be settled, his heart is depressed, and his ears are deaf.

古文：传庭初受命，疏言： 年来疆事决裂，由计画差谬。
现代文：传庭刚接受任命时上书讲过： 近年来封疆的事务乱成一团，原因在于谋划差错。
English: When he was first appointed, Chonin said in a letter: In recent years, the affairs of the blockaded areas have been chaotic, due to planning errors.

古文：事竣，当面请决大计。 
现代文：事情结束后，我想给陛下当面把国家大事商定一下。 
English: After this is over, I'd like to discuss matters of state with His Majesty in person.

古文：明年，帝移传庭总督保定、山东、河南军务。
现代文：第二年，庄烈帝改派传庭去总督保定、山东、河南军务。
English: In the following year, Emperor Zhuang was reassigned to be the military governor of Baoding, Shandong, and Henan.

古文：既解严，疏请陛见。嗣昌大惊，谓传庭将倾之，斥来役赍疏还之传庭。
现代文：京师解严以后，传庭上书请求朝见，嗣昌大为吃惊，以为传庭要扳倒自己，就喝令过来的仆人把奏疏带回去还给传庭。
English: After the imperial edict was lifted, Chonin sent a letter to the court requesting to see the emperor. Tsuchimasa was very surprised. He thought that Chonin was trying to bring him down, so he shouted at the servant who came to him to take back Sonosho and return it to Chonin.

古文：传庭愠，引疾乞休。
现代文：传庭恼火了，就上书称病，请求离任，嗣昌又弹劾他假称生病，并不是真聋。
English: Exasperated, the court sent a letter to Zhuang saying that he was ill and asked him to resign. Tsuchang also impeached him for pretending to be ill and not being really deaf.

古文：嗣昌又劾其托疾，非真聋，帝遂发怒，斥为民，下巡抚杨一俊核真伪，一俊奏言： 真聋，非托疾。 
现代文：庄烈帝恼了，把传庭罢官为民，又交巡抚杨一亻隽核实真伪。一亻隽奏称 传庭真的聋了，不是说假。 
English: Dignified Emperor Zhuang was annoyed, dismissed the court as a people, and asked the inspector Yang Yijie to verify the authenticity. Yijie said that the court was really deaf, not false.

古文：并下一俊狱。
现代文：庄烈帝连一亻隽一起关进监狱。
English: Zhuang Rongdi was put in prison together with a gang.

古文：传庭长系待决，举朝知其冤，莫为言。
现代文：传庭被长期关押，等候处理。满朝大臣都知道他的冤枉，但没人说话。
English: He was held in custody for a long time, waiting to be dealt with. All the imperial ministers knew of his wrongdoing, but no one spoke out.

古文：在狱三年，文灿、嗣昌相继败。
现代文：传庭在狱中关了三年，文灿、嗣昌相继败灭。
English: Zongting was jailed for three years, and Wencan and Tsuchang were defeated one after another.

古文：而是时，闯王李自成者，已攻破河南矣，犯开封，执宗龙，杀唐王，兵散而贼益横。
现代文：可是这时闯王李自成已经打下河南，进犯开封，活捉了宗龙，杀掉了唐王，官军分崩离析，贼寇更加凶猛了。
English: However, at this time, Li Zicheng, the invading king, had already laid siege to Henan, attacked Kaifeng, captured Zonglong alive, and killed Tang Wang. The official army was falling apart, and the thieves and robbers were becoming more ferocious.

古文：帝思传庭言，朝士荐者益众。
现代文：庄烈帝想到了传庭讲过的话，朝臣中推荐传庭的人也越来越多了。
English: Zhuang Rong thought of what Zhuang Rong had said, and there were more and more courtiers who recommended Zhuang Rong.

古文：十五年正月，起传庭兵部右侍郎，亲御文华殿问剿贼安民之策，传庭侃侃言。帝嗟叹久之，燕劳赏赉甚渥，命将禁旅援开封。
现代文：十五年正月，庄烈帝起用传庭为兵部右侍郎，亲自到文华殿向他询问剿贼安民的办法，传庭侃侃而言，庄烈帝深为感叹，设宴对他加以慰劳，赏赐了很多东西，然后命令他带领禁军去增援开封。
English: In the first month of the fifteenth year, Emperor Zhuang was appointed by Emperor Zhuang to be the right-hand man of the military department, and he personally went to the Palace of Literature to ask him about the way to deal with thieves and pacify the people. According to Emperor Zhuang, Emperor Zhuang was deeply impressed, gave him a banquet to console him, rewarded him with many things, and then ordered him to lead the Imperial Army to reinforce Kaifeng.

古文：开封围已解，贼杀陕督汪乔年，帝即命传庭往代。
现代文：开封的包围圈已经解除，贼兵杀死了陕西总督汪乔年，庄烈帝就让传庭过去接任。
English: The encirclement of Kaifeng had been lifted, the bandits had killed the governor of Shaanxi, Wang Qiaoren, and Emperor Zhuang allowed Chuanting to take over.

古文：大集诸将于关中，缚援剿总兵贺人龙，坐之麾下，数而斩之。
现代文：传庭上任后，在关中召集诸将，绑了援剿总兵贺人龙，列举了他的罪状，在军帐中把他斩了。
English: After he took office, he summoned all the generals in Guanzhong, tied up the general of the relief army, Humenlong, listed his crimes, and beheaded him in the military account.

古文：谓其开县噪归，猛帅以孤军失利而献、曹出柙也；又谓其遇敌先溃，新蔡、襄城连丧二督也。
现代文：宣布他的罪状是在开县起哄逃回，致使猛如虎总兵孤军作战失利，让献忠、曹操跳出了圈套。又说他遇上贼兵抢先逃跑，致使新蔡、襄城接连丧失了两位总督。
English: It was announced that his crime was to flee back from Kaishan County, which caused the defeat of the fierce tiger army and the defeat of the lone army, so that the loyalty and Cao Cao jumped out of the trap. He also said that he met the thief soldiers to escape ahead of time, causing Xin Cai and Xiangcheng to lose two governors in succession.

古文：诸将莫不洒然动色者。
现代文：诸将为此无不肃然起敬。
English: Everyone will be awestruck by this.

古文：传庭既已诛杀人龙，威詟三边，日夜治军为平贼计，而贼遂已再围开封。诏御史苏京监延、宁、甘、固军，趣传庭出关。
现代文：传庭斩掉人龙以后，威震三边，从此后天天整治军队做平贼的打算，可是这时贼兵又围困开封，朝廷传令御史苏京过来监督延安、宁夏、甘肃、固原的部队，催促传庭出关。
English: After the imperial court cut off the dragon, the three sides trembled, and from then on, the army was rectified every day with the intention of leveling the thief. However, at this time, the thief soldiers besieged Kaifeng again, and the imperial court ordered Goshi Sujing to come and supervise the troops in Yan'an, Ningxia, Gansu, and Guyuan, and urge the imperial court to leave the customs.

古文：传庭上言： 兵新募，不堪用。 
现代文：传庭上书说： 部队刚招募起来，还不能使用呢。 
English: "The troops have just been recruited, and they can't be used yet," the court document said.

古文：帝不听。
现代文：庄烈帝不听。
English: Emperor Xuan did not listen.

古文：传庭不得已出师，以九月抵潼关。
现代文：传庭不得已出兵，在九月里抵达潼关。
English: The court was forced to send troops, which arrived in Shaoguan in September.

古文：大雨连旬，自成决马家口河灌开封。
现代文：当时下了几十天雨，自成挖开马家口一带的黄河淹没了开封。
English: At that time, it rained for dozens of days, and the Yellow River in the vicinity of Majiakou flooded Kaifeng.

古文：开封已陷，传庭趋南阳，自成西行逆秦师。
现代文：开封失陷后传庭进兵南阳，自成向西来迎击陕西部队。
English: After the fall of Kaifeng, Chuanting marched into Nanyang and went west to meet the Shaanxi troops.

古文：传庭设三覆以待贼：牛成虎将前军，左勷将左，郑嘉栋将右，高杰将中军。
现代文：传庭设下三重伏兵等待贼兵；牛成虎率领前军，左襄力领左边，郑嘉栋领右边，高杰指挥中军。
English: According to legend, the court set up a triple ambush to wait for the thief soldiers to come; Niu Chenghu led the front army, Zuo Xiangli led the left, Zheng Jiadong led the right, Gao Jie commanded the middle army.

古文：成虎阳北以诱贼，贼奔入伏中，成虎还兵而斗，高杰、董学礼突起翼之，左勷、郑嘉栋左右横击之。贼溃东走，斩首千余。
现代文：成虎假装北上引诱贼兵，贼兵跑进埋伏后，成虎回头来厮杀，高杰、董学礼突然从两侧出来相帮，左襄力、郑嘉栋又左右横冲，贼兵战败向东逃走，被杀死一千多人。
English: Chenghu pretended to go north to lure the bandits. After the bandits ran into an ambush, Chenghu turned back to fight and kill. Gao Jie and Dong Xueli suddenly came out from both sides to help each other. Zuo Xiangli and Zheng Jiadong also rampaged left and right. The bandits were defeated and fled to the east, killing more than a thousand people.

古文：追三十里，及之郏县之冢头，贼弃甲仗军资于道，秦兵趋利。
现代文：官兵追了三十里，到了郏县的冢头，贼兵把兵器、军需品扔在道路上，陕西兵就忙着抢战利品。
English: The officers and soldiers chased for thirty miles and arrived at Shantou in Handan County. The robbers threw weapons and military supplies on the road, and the Shaanxi soldiers were busy grabbing the loot.

古文：贼觇我军嚣，反兵乘之，左勷、萧慎鼎之师溃，诸军皆溃。
现代文：贼兵侦察到官兵乱了阵，就回过头来袭击，左襄力、萧慎鼎的部队败退下来，各路部队也都败了阵。
English: The thief-soldiers detected that the officers and soldiers were in disarray, so they turned back to attack. The troops of Zuo Xiangli and Xiao Shending were defeated and retreated, and all the troops were defeated.

古文：副将孙枝秀跃马以追贼，击杀数十骑，贼兵围之，驰突不得出，马蹶被执，植立不挠。以刃临之，瞠目不答。
现代文：副将孙枝秀跃马追杀贼兵，打死了几十个骑兵。后来贼兵包围了他，他左右飞奔无法冲出来，战马跌倒后被俘虏了，他直立不挠，贼兵用刀对着他，他直瞪着贼兵，不说一句话。
English: Vice-commander Sun Zhi Xiuyue chased the bandits on horseback and killed dozens of horsemen. Later, the bandits surrounded him. He couldn't get out of the way as he was galloping from side to side. He was captured after his horse fell down. He remained upright as the bandits held a knife to him. He stared at the bandits without saying a word.

古文：一人曰： 此孙副将也。 
现代文：有一个贼兵说： 这是孙副将。 
English: One of the soldiers said, "This is Vice Admiral Sun."

古文：遂杀之。
现代文：贼寇就把他杀了。
English: The man then killed Yasuko.

古文：参将黑尚仁亦被执不屈而见杀，覆军数千，材官小将之殁者，张渼奎、李栖凤、任光裕、戴友仁以下七十有八人。
现代文：参将黑尚仁也被抓住，不屈而被杀。这次战斗官兵死了几千人，材官小将牺牲的有张日英奎、李日英凤、任光裕、戴友仁以下七十八个人。
English: Several thousand officers and soldiers died in this battle, and among the young officers who died were 78 people, including Zhang Rihingkui, Li Rihingfeng, Ren Guangyu, and Dai Youren.

古文：贼倍获其所丧马。
现代文：贼兵得到了他们所丢掉的很多战马。
English: The raiders got back many of the horses they had lost.

古文：传庭走巩，由孟入关，执斩慎鼎；罚勷马以二千，以勷父光先故，贷勷。
现代文：传庭败走巩县，取路孟县进入潼关，捕杀了慎鼎，罚了左襄力两千匹战马，因为他父亲左光先的原因，饶他一死。
English: After losing the court case, he went to Gongxian County and took the road of Mengxian County to enter Shaoguan. He caught and killed Shending and punished Zuo Xiangli with two thousand horses. Because his father Zuo Guangxian was the first, he was spared death.

古文：是役也，天大雨，粮不至，士卒采青柿以食，冻且馁，故大败。
现代文：这次战役，天下着大雨，军粮没送来，士卒们只能采青柿子吃。既冷且饿，所以大败而回。
English: In this battle, it was raining heavily, no rations were sent, and the soldiers could only pick green persimmons to eat. They were cold and hungry, so they were defeated.

古文：豫人所谓 柿园之役 也。
现代文：河南人把它称为 柿园之役 。
English: Henan people call it the Persimmon Garden War.

古文：传庭既已败归陕西，计守潼关，扼京师上游。
现代文：传庭在战败返回陕西后，打算防守潼关，扼住京师上游。
English: After returning to Shaanxi in defeat, Chuan Court planned to defend Shaoguan and hold the upper reaches of the Beijing Division.

古文：且我军新集，不利速战，乃益募勇士，开屯田，缮器，积粟，三家出壮丁一。
现代文：况且官军刚刚集结起来，不利速战，于是就召募更多的勇士，开垦屯田，修造器械，储蓄军粮，让每三家出一名壮丁。
English: Moreover, the government army had just assembled and was not in a position to fight a quick war, so they recruited more warriors, reclaimed farmlands, repaired equipment, and saved grain for the army, so that every third family would have a young man.

古文：火车载火炮甲仗者三万辆，战则驱之拒马，止则环以自卫。
现代文：又造了三万辆载着火炮的战车，作战时推着它抵挡敌人的战马，驻地休息时围在四周用以自卫。
English: He also built thirty thousand chariots with cannons, which he pushed against the enemy's horses during battle, and which he surrounded for self-defence during rest periods.

古文：督工苛急，夜以继日，秦民不能堪。
现代文：修造工程催办得很急，昼夜不停，陕西百姓不能承受。
English: The construction project is being carried out very quickly, around the clock, which is unbearable for the people of Shaanxi.

古文：而关中频岁饥，驻大军饷乏，士大夫厌苦传庭所为，用法严，不乐其在秦。
现代文：而且关中连年饥荒，驻扎着大批军队粮饷缺乏，所以士大夫厌恶传庭所办的工程，又因他执法过于严格，士大夫就一起向朝廷起哄说： 陕西总督不那么热心平贼了。 
English: Moreover, Guanzhong suffered from famine for years on end, and a large number of troops stationed there were short of food and fodder. Therefore, the shidafu detested the work carried out by the court, and because he was too strict in enforcing the law, the shidafu began to whisper to the court: The governor of Shaanxi is not so keen on punishing thieves.

古文：相与哗于朝曰： 秦督玩寇矣。 
现代文：又一起用吓人的话威胁他说： 陕西总督再不出关，来缉捕你的人就要到了。 
English: At the same time, he threatened him with frightening words, saying, "If the governor of Shaanxi does not close the border again, the people who are coming to arrest you will be arriving soon."

古文：又相与危语恫胁之曰： 秦督不出关，收者至矣。 明年五月，命兼督河南、四川军务，寻进兵部尚书，改称督师，加督山西、湖广、贵州及江南、北军务，赐剑。趣战益急。
现代文：第二年五月，朝廷命令传庭兼督河南、四川军务，不久又提升他为兵部尚书，改称督师，加管山西、湖广、贵州及江南、江北的军务，庄烈帝赐给他尚方宝剑，更加紧急地催他开战。
English: In May of the following year, the imperial court ordered him to be appointed as the military governor of Henan and Sichuan. Soon after, he was promoted to be the commander of the military department, renamed as the superintendent, and put in charge of the military affairs of Shanxi, Hukang, Guizhou, and the south and north of the Yangtze River. Emperor Zhuang gave him the sword of Shangfang and urged him to go to war more urgently.

古文：传庭顿足叹曰： 奈何乎！
现代文：传庭跺着脚感叹说： 这是干什么呢！
English: Chuan Court stomped his feet and lamented, "What is this for!

古文：吾固知往而不返也。然大丈夫岂能再对狱吏乎！ 
现代文：我固然知道这次去一定回不来，但是大丈夫怎么能再一次掉到监狱看守的手里！ 
English: Of course, I knew that I would not be able to return this time, but how could I fall into the hands of the prison guards again?

古文：顷之，不得已遂再议出师。
现代文：不久，就迫不得已地再一次决定出兵。
English: Soon, he was forced to make another decision to send in the troops.

古文：总兵牛成虎将前锋，高杰将中军，王定、官抚民将延、宁兵为后劲，白广恩统火车营，檄左良玉赴汝宁夹击。
现代文：他让总兵牛成虎领前锋，高杰领中军，王定、官抚民领着延安、宁夏部队作为后援，白广恩率领战车营，又传令左良玉开到汝宁，两边夹击。
English: He let the general soldier Niu Chenghu lead the vanguard, Gao Jie lead the middle army, Wang Ding and the government officials and people led Yan'an, Ningxia troops as backup, Bai Guang'en led the chariot battalion, and ordered Zuo Liangyu to drive to Runing and fight on both sides.

古文：当是时，自成已据有河南、湖北十余郡，自号新顺王，设官置戍，营襄阳而居之。
现代文：这个时候，自成已经占领了河南、湖北的十多个府，自号新顺王，设置官吏，分兵驻守，营建了襄阳城，驻在那里。
English: At this time, Zicheng had already occupied more than ten prefectures in Henan and Hubei, called himself the King of Xin Shun, set up officials, stationed troops, built Xiangyang City, and stationed there.

古文：二十一日，师次陕州，檄河南诸军渡河进剿。
现代文：打算经过内乡、淅川窥视商州、雒南。发动了荆州、襄阳的全部兵力在汜水、荥泽会师，砍下竹子修造筏船，每个人佩带三个葫芦，计划渡过黄河。传庭分兵防御。
English: They planned to pass through the inland villages and the Li River to look at Shangzhou and southern Anhui. They mobilized the entire forces of Jingzhou and Yangyang to join the division in Surabaya and Heze, cut down bamboo and built a raft, each person wearing three gourds, and planned to cross the Yellow River.

古文：九月八日，师次汝州，伪都尉四天王李养纯降。
现代文：九月八日，官军驻到汝州，伪都督四天王李养纯归降了。
English: On September 8th, the government army was stationed in Ruzhou, and the pseudo-governor, the Four Heavenly Kings, Li Yaochun, surrendered.

古文：养纯言贼虚实：诸贼老营在唐县，伪将吏屯宝丰，自成精锐尽聚于襄城。
现代文：养纯讲了贼兵的虚实：诸贼老营在唐县，伪将吏屯集在宝丰，自成的精锐部队全都聚集在襄城。
English: Yaochun talked about the truth and falsehood of the bandits: the bandits were based in Tang County, the fake generals were gathered in Baofeng, and the self-made elite troops were all gathered in Xiangcheng.

古文：遂破贼宝丰，斩伪州牧陈可新等。遂捣唐县，破之，杀家口殆尽，贼满营哭。
现代文：传庭于是在宝丰打败贼兵，斩除了伪州牧陈可新等人，接着直捣唐县，打下以后把贼兵的家口杀戮殆尽，使贼兵整个军营中都是哭声。
English: According to legend, he then defeated the bandits in Baofeng, eliminated the pseudo-state herdsman Chen Kexin and others, and then directly attacked Tang County. After the defeat, he killed the bandits' families, so that the bandits were crying throughout the military camp.

古文：转战至郏县，遂擒伪果毅将军谢君友，斫贼坐纛，尾自成几获。
现代文：传庭又转战到郏县，活捉了伪果毅将军谢君友，砍了贼军的坐旗，尾随而追自成，差点抓住了他。
English: Afterward, the court transferred the battle to Lixian County, captured the pseudo-Chu Yi General Xie Junyou alive, cut off the banner of the thief army, followed and chased Zicheng, and almost caught him.

古文：贼奔襄城，大军遂进逼襄城。
现代文：贼兵逃往襄城，大批官军就进逼襄城。
English: The robber soldiers fled to Xiangcheng, and a large number of government troops entered and forced Xiangcheng.

古文：贼惧谋降，自成曰： 无畏！
现代文：贼寇怕了，打算投降，自成说： 不要怕！
English: The robber was afraid, and was about to surrender, when he said to himself, "Don't be afraid!

古文：我杀王焚陵，罪大矣，姑决一死战。
现代文：我杀害藩王，焚烧王陵，罪已经很大了，姑且决一死战吧。
English: I killed the lord of the domain and burned the royal tomb. My crime is already great. Let me fight to the death.

古文：不胜，则杀我而降未晚也。 
现代文：不能取胜的话，杀掉我去投降也不晚。 
English: If we can't win, it's not too late to kill me and surrender.

古文：而大军时皆露宿与贼持，久雨道泞，粮车不能前。
现代文：官军当时都是露天宿营跟贼军相持，下了长时间的雨，道路泥泞，粮车不能过来。
English: At that time, the government troops were camped out in the open, holding out against the bandits. It rained for a long time, the roads were muddy, and the grain trucks couldn't get through.

古文：士饥，攻郏破之，获马骡啖之立尽。
现代文：士卒饥饿不过，打下郏县时，抓到的骡马立即都被吃完了。
English: The soldiers were starving, however, and when they entered the county, the captured horses were immediately eaten.

古文：雨七日夜不止，后军哗于汝州。
现代文：大雨下了七个昼夜也不停，后军在汝州开始起哄。
English: After seven days and nights of heavy rain, the rearguard began to stir in Ruzhou.

古文：贼大至，流言四起。不得已还军迎粮，留陈永福为后拒。
现代文：贼兵大举而来，一时间流言四起，传庭迫不得已让部队回过头去迎接军粮，留下陈永福断后。
English: Thieves and soldiers came en masse, and rumors spread quickly. According to legend, the court was forced to let the troops turn back to meet the military rations, leaving Chen Yongfu behind.

古文：前军既移，后军乱，永福斩之不能止。
现代文：前边的部队开始移动以后，后边的军队也乱了，永福斩杀也不能制止。
English: After the troops at the front began to move, the troops at the rear were also in disarray, and Yongfu could not stop them.

古文：贼追及之南阳，官军还战。贼阵五重，饥民处外，次步卒，次马军，又次骁骑，老营家口处内。
现代文：贼兵在南阳追上官军，官军回头来战，贼兵的战阵分为五层，饥民在外，其次是步兵，再其次是骑兵，再其次是勇猛的骑兵。
English: The bandits caught up with the government army in Nanyang, and the government army turned back to fight. The bandits' battle line was divided into five layers: the starving soldiers, the infantry, the cavalry, and the brave cavalry.

古文：战破其三重。贼骁骑殊死斗，我师阵稍动，广恩军将火车者呼曰： 师败矣！ 
现代文：老营的家口在最里边，开战以后，官兵打败了三层，贼寇的骁骑殊死拼斗，官军的战阵稍一移动，广恩部下推战车的士兵就喊叫说： 我军败了！ 
English: The entrance to the old camp is in the innermost part. After the war began, the officers and soldiers defeated the three layers, the horse-riding bandits fought to the death, the battle line of the official army moved slightly, and the soldiers of Guangen's subordinates pushing the chariot shouted: Our army has been defeated!

古文：脱挽辂而奔，车倾塞道，马挂于衡不得前，贼之铁骑凌而腾之，步贼手白棓遮击，中者首兜鍪俱碎。
现代文：解下搭肩钻出车辕就跑，战车翻了，堵住了路，马拴在横木上不能向前走，贼兵的铁骑从上面凌空跳过去，步兵手提白棍劈头盖脑地打，被打上的人连头带盔都给打碎了。
English: He dismounted, climbed out of the carriage, and ran. The chariot overturned, blocking the road. The horse could not go forward on the crossbar. The cavalry of the robbers jumped from the top in a volley. The infantrymen, armed with white sticks, beat him on the head and neck. The beaten man even had his headband and helmet broken.

古文：自成空壁蹑我，一日夜，官兵狂奔四百里，至于孟津，死者四万余，失亡兵器辎重数十万。
现代文：自成倾兵而出追在官军后边，一天一夜的时间里，官军狂奔了四百里，到达孟津，死掉了四万多人，丢掉兵器、辎重几十万件。
English: They went out of their way to chase after the government army, and in the space of one day and one night, the government army ran four hundred miles to reach Mengjin. More than forty thousand people died, and hundreds of thousands of weapons and baggage were lost.

古文：传庭单骑渡垣曲，由阌乡济。
现代文：传庭单骑穿过垣曲，从阌乡渡河过去。
English: Chuan Ting rode single-handedly through the fence and crossed the river from the town of Xing.

古文：贼获督师坐纛，乘胜破潼关，大败官军。
现代文：贼兵捡到了督师的坐旗，乘胜打下潼关，把官军打得大败。
English: The robber soldiers picked up the inspector's banner, took advantage of the victory, and defeated the government army.

古文：传庭与监军副使乔迁高跃马大呼而殁于阵，广恩降贼。
现代文：传庭与监军副使乔迁高跨着马，大声喊叫着冲入敌阵，死在了战场上，广恩投降了贼寇。
English: Zengting and the deputy commander Qiao Qian straddled their horses, shouted loudly and rushed into the enemy lines. They died on the battlefield, and Guang'en surrendered to the bandits.

古文：传庭尸竟不可得。
现代文：传庭的尸体后来竟然没有找到。
English: The coroner's body was never found.

古文：传庭死，关以内无坚城矣。
现代文：传庭死后，潼关以内再也没有有效的防御力量了。
English: After the death of the court, there was no longer any effective defense force in Shaoguan.

古文：初，传庭之出师也，自分必死，顾语继妻张夫人曰： 尔若何？ 
现代文：早先传庭在出兵前自己料定要死了，回头对他的继妻张夫人说： 你怎么办呢？ 
English: Earlier, the court heard that before he went to war, he expected to die, and turned to his step-wife, Mrs. Zhang, and said, "What are you going to do?

古文：夫人曰： 丈夫报国耳，毋忧我。 
现代文：夫人说： 大丈夫只管报效国家好了，不要忧念我！ 
English: My wife said, "It's okay, just do your duty to the country. Don't worry about me!"

古文：及西安破，张率二女三妾沉于井，挥其八岁儿世宁亟避贼去之。
现代文：等到西安被打下来时，张氏领着传庭的两个女儿、三个妾跳井死了，让他们八岁的小儿子世宁赶紧躲避贼兵逃走了。
English: When Xi'an was defeated, the Zhangs led their two daughters and three concubines to jump into a well to their deaths, leaving their eight-year-old youngest son, Shining, to escape the invaders.

古文：儿逾墙堕民舍中，一老翁收养之。
现代文：世宁翻过墙头掉在一个百姓家里，一个老头子收养了他。
English: Shining fell over the wall into a peasant's house, and an old man took him in.

古文：长子世瑞闻之，重趼入秦，得夫人尸井中，面如生。
现代文：传庭的大儿子世瑞听说后，异常艰苦地步行进入陕西，在井里找出了母亲的尸体，面色如生。
English: After hearing the news, the eldest son of the family court, Sherei, entered Shaanxi on foot with great difficulty and found his mother's body in the well, looking very much alive.

古文：翁归其弟世宁，相扶携还。道路见者，知与不知皆泣下。
现代文：那个老头还回了他的弟弟世宁，兄弟两个相互掺扶着返回，路上遇见他们的人，不管平时认识不认识都为他们流下了眼泪。
English: The old man brought back his brother Shining, and the two brothers helped each other to return. People who met them on the road, whether they knew them or not, shed tears for them.

古文：传庭死时，年五十有一矣。
现代文：传庭死的时候已经五十一岁了。
English: He was fifty-one years old when he died.

古文：传庭再出师皆以雨败也。
现代文：他两次出兵都是因为天下大雨失败了。
English: Both of his expeditions failed because of heavy rain.

古文：或言传庭未死者，帝疑之，故不予赠荫。
现代文：有人说传庭没死，庄烈帝怀疑他，所以没有给他追赠、封荫。
English: Some people said that Chuenting did not die, Zhuo Ledei doubted him, so he did not give him a posthumous gift and seal.

古文：传庭死而明亡矣。
现代文：传庭死后，明朝也就灭亡了。
English: After the death of Zongting, the Ming Dynasty also perished.

