古文：大将军青兵出定襄。
现代文：原文汉武帝时，大将军卫青出兵定襄攻击匈奴。
English: In the time of Emperor Hanwu, General Wei Qing sent troops to attack the Xiongnu.

古文：苏建、赵信并军三千余骑，独逢单于兵。
现代文：苏建、赵信两位将领同率三千多骑兵行军，在途中遭遇单于军队。
English: The two generals, Su Jian and Zhao Xin, led more than three thousand cavalry marching at the same rate, encountering only the army on the way.

古文：与战一日，兵且尽，信降单于，建独身归青。
现代文：汉军和匈奴军苦战一天，士兵伤亡殆尽，赵信投降单于，苏建独身一人逃回大营。
English: The Han army and the Hun army fought hard for a day, the soldiers were exhausted, Zhao Xin surrendered alone, and a single Soviet soldier fled back to the camp.

古文：议郎周霸曰： 自大将军出，未尝斩裨将。
现代文：议郎周霸说： 自从大将军出兵以来，从来没有处死过副将。
English: Advocate Zhou Ba said: Since the general dispatched troops, there has never been a vice-general executed.

古文：今建弃军，可斩以明将军之威。 
现代文：现在苏建抛弃军队，独自逃回，可以杀他以显示大将军的威严。 
English: Now that Soviet Jian abandoned the army and returned, he can kill Soviet Jian to show the majesty of the great general.

古文：长史安曰： 不然，建以数千卒当虏数万，力战一日，士皆不敢有二心。
现代文：长史任安说： 这样不可以。苏建以数千骑兵去抵挡数万之敌，奋力作战一天，而士兵没有二心。
English: Chief Historian Ren'an said: "This is unacceptable. The Soviet Union sent thousands of cavalry to resist tens of thousands of enemies, fighting hard for a day, and the soldiers did not have a second thought.

古文：自归而斩之，是示后无反意也，不当斩。 
现代文：如今他侥幸脱险，将军反而要杀他，岂非要告诉后人，以后遇到这种情况回来还不如向敌人投降吗？我认为不该杀苏建。 
English: Now that he has narrowly escaped danger, the general wants to kill him instead. Shouldn't he tell future generations that if they encounter such a situation in the future, it's better to surrender to the enemy? I don't think it's right to kill So Jian.

古文：青曰： 青以肺腑待罪行间，不患无威，而霸说我以明威，甚失臣意；且使臣职虽当斩将，以臣之尊宠而不敢专诛于境外，其归天子，天子自裁之，于以风为人臣者不敢专权，不亦可乎？ 
现代文：虽然论职权，我有权处死手下将官，但以我所受到天子的宠信，也不敢在塞外专擅生杀大权，而应该押回京师，请天子裁决，并可借此训示为人臣的不应擅自专权，这样做不是更好吗？ 
English: Although, in terms of authority, I have the right to execute the generals under my command, but since I am favored by the Son of Heaven, I dare not arrogate to myself the power to kill in foreign countries. Instead, I should be sent back to the capital, ask the Son of Heaven to adjudicate, and use this to instruct my subjects that they should not arrogate to themselves the power to kill. Wouldn't it be better to do this?

古文：遂囚建诣行在，天子果赦不诛。
现代文：于是卫青命人把苏建押解到天子行在，后来汉武帝果然赦免了他。
English: As a result, Wei Qing ordered people to escort Su Jian to the heavenly son, and later Emperor Hanwu pardoned him.

古文：卫青握兵数载，宠任无比，而上不疑，下不忌，唯能避权远嫌故。
现代文：卫青掌兵权多年，深受宠信，天子对他没有疑心，属下对他也没有嫉妒之意。
English: Wei Qing has been in charge of the military for many years, and is deeply trusted. Tianzi has no suspicion of him, and his subordinates have no jealousy of him.

古文：不然，虽以狄枢使之功名，犹不克令终，可不戒欤？
现代文：这正是因为他能避开过度的权威，远离各种嫌疑的缘故啊。若非如此，即使有北宋狄青般的显赫功勋，还是不能得到善终，这实在不能不引以为戒啊。
English: This is precisely because he can avoid excessive authority and stay away from all kinds of suspicions. Otherwise, even if he has outstanding merits like the Northern Song Dynasty, he still can't get a good death, which is really a warning.

古文：狄青为枢密使，自恃有功，颇骄蹇，怙惜士卒，每得衣粮，皆曰： 此狄家爷爷所赐。 
现代文：狄青担任枢密院枢密使时，自恃功勋卓著，十分桀骜不驯，袒护士卒。士卒每次得到衣物粮食，都说： 这是狄家爷爷赏赐的。 
English: When Di Qing served as a privy council envoy, he prided himself on his outstanding achievements, was very rebellious, and bullied nurses. Every time a nurse received clothing and food, they would say, "This was given to me by Grandpa Di."

古文：朝廷患之。
现代文：朝廷上下都以此为心头大患。
English: All levels of the imperial court regarded this as a serious problem.

古文：时文潞公当国，建言以两镇节使出之，青自陈无功而受镇节，无罪而出外藩。
现代文：当时文潞公在朝执政，建议仁宗让狄青出任两镇节度使以便让他离开朝廷。狄青上书说自己无功却受封节度使，无罪却又外放，心中很是委屈。
English: At that time, Prince Wenzhong was in power in the imperial court, and he suggested that Emperor Nanzong let Dizhong serve as the two-town festival envoy in order to let him leave the imperial court. Dizhong wrote a letter saying that he had no merit but had been appointed as a festival envoy, that he was not guilty but had been released, and that he was very aggrieved.

古文：仁宗亦以为然，向潞公述此语，且言狄青忠臣。
现代文：仁宗也觉得他说得有道理，就向潞公述说了狄青的话，并说狄青是忠臣。
English: Renzong also felt that he had a point, so he told Zou Gong about Di Qing's words and said that Di Qing was a loyal subject.

古文：潞公曰： 太祖岂非周世宗忠臣？
现代文：潞公说： 本朝太祖难道不是后周世宗的忠臣吗？
English: Gong Li said: Isn't this morning's great-grandfather a loyal retainer of Zhou Shizong?

古文：但得军心，所以有陈桥之变。 
现代文：但因为得到军心，所以才会发生黄袍加身、陈桥兵变的事。 
English: However, it was because of the military spirit that the yellow robes were added and the Chenqiao mutiny occurred.

古文：上默然。
现代文：仁宗听了，默然无语。
English: The Emperor was speechless.

古文：青犹未知，到中书自辨，潞公直视之，曰： 无他，朝廷疑尔。 
现代文：狄青尚不知道这事，到中书门下去为自己辩白。潞公盯着他，直截了当地说： 没有其他原因，只是朝廷有些怀疑你罢了。 
English: Di Qing didn't know about this yet, so he went down to the Zhongshu Gate to defend himself. Zou Gong stared at him and said bluntly: There is no other reason, it's just that the court has some doubts about you.

古文：青惊怖，却行数步。
现代文：狄青吓得禁不住后退好几步。
English: Terrified, Di Qing couldn't help but retreat several steps.

古文：青在镇，每月两遣中使抚问，青闻中使来，辄惊疑终日，不半年，病作而卒。
现代文：狄青到藩镇以后，仁宗每个月都派使者去慰问看望他两次。每次听说皇上的使者要来，狄青都会整日惊吓疑虑。结果不到半年，就得病去世了。
English: After Di Qing arrived in Hanzhong, Rinzong sent an emissary to visit him twice a month. Every time he heard that the emperor's emissary was coming, Di Qing would be frightened and doubtful all day long. As a result, he died of illness in less than half a year.

古文：皆潞公之谋也。
现代文：这些都是文潞公的计谋啊。
English: These are all the stratagems of Prince Wenzhong.

