古文：◎世纪金之先，出靺鞨氏。
现代文：金朝的祖先，出自靺鞨氏。
English: Ancestors of the Kim dynasty, from the Min clan.

古文：靺鞨本号勿吉。
现代文：靺鞨本号勿吉。
English: This is the beginning of the good luck.

古文：勿吉，古肃慎地也。
现代文：勿吉，是上古肃慎地名。
English: Bekichi is the name of a sacred place in ancient times.

古文：元魏时，勿吉有七部：曰粟末部、曰伯咄部、曰安车骨部、曰拂涅部、曰号室部、曰黑水部、曰白山部。
现代文：元魏时，勿吉有七部：粟末部、伯咄部、安车骨部、拂涅部、号室部、黑水部、白山部。
English: At the time of the Yuan and Wei Dynasties, there were seven parts to Beiji: Maozhou, Baoji, Anche, Huine, Guochu, Heishui and Baishan.

古文：隋称靺鞨，而七部并同。
现代文：隋朝时改称勿吉为靺鞨，而保留了七部的名称。
English: During the Sui Dynasty, the name of Beji was changed to Shao, but the name of the seven parts was retained.

古文：唐初，有黑水靺鞨、栗末靺鞨，其五部无闻。
现代文：唐代初年，有黑水靺鞨、粟末靺鞨，其余五部不再闻名。
English: In the first year of the Tang Dynasty, there were the Black Water Cucumber and the Cornflower Cucumber, and the remaining five were no longer famous.

古文：粟末靺鞨始附高丽，姓大氏。
现代文：起初粟末靺鞨依附高丽，姓大氏。
English: At first, he was attached to Goryeo with the surname of Daishi.

古文：李绩破高丽，粟末靺鞨保东牟山。后为渤海，称王，传十余世。
现代文：李眅攻占高丽后，粟末靺鞨保住东牟山，后据渤海称王，传十余世。
English: After Li Gan conquered Goryeo, Maw Maw secured Dongmushan, and was later crowned king by Baekhae, a title that has been passed down for more than ten generations.

古文：有文字、礼乐、官府、制度。有五京、十五府、六十二州。
现代文：粟末靺鞨有文字、礼乐、官府、制度，设五京、十五府、六十二州。
English: There are characters, ceremonial music, government offices, and systems, with five capitals, fifteen prefectures, and sixty-two states.

古文：黑水靺鞨居肃慎地，东濒海，南接高丽，亦附于高丽。
现代文：黑水靺鞨聚居肃慎地方，东面临海，南接高丽，也依附于高丽。
English: The Black Water Egrets live in the Shushan region, facing the sea to the east and adjoining Korea to the south. They are also attached to Korea.

古文：尝以兵十五万众助高丽拒唐太宗，败于安市。
现代文：黑水靺鞨曾经出兵十五万帮助高丽抗拒唐太宗的军队，结果兵败安市。
English: Heishuiwei once sent 150,000 soldiers to help Goryeo resist Tang Taizong's army. As a result, the soldiers defeated Anshi.

古文：开元中，来朝，置黑水府，以部长为都督、刺史，置长史监之。
现代文：唐开元年间，黑水靺鞨向唐朝纳贡，唐朝因之设置了黑水府，任命黑水部长为都督、刺史，设置长史监督。
English: During the first year of the Tang Dynasty, the Black Water Mines paid tribute to the Tang Dynasty. As a result, the Tang Dynasty set up the Black Water Office, appointed the Minister of Black Water as the governor and chief historian, and set up a long-term historical supervision.

古文：赐都督姓李氏，名献诚，领黑水经略使。
现代文：赐黑水都督姓李氏，取名献诚，任黑水经略使之职。
English: He gave the surname of Li to the governor of Heishui, named him Xiancheng, and appointed him to the position of Heishui Jing.

古文：其后渤海盛强，黑水役属之，朝贡遂绝。
现代文：到后来渤海日渐强盛起来，黑水靺鞨又隶属于渤海，于是就断绝了向唐朝进贡。
English: Later, the Bohai Sea became more and more powerful, and Heishui Diao belonged to the Bohai Sea, so it cut off tribute to the Tang Dynasty.

古文：五代时，契丹尽取渤海地，而黑水靺鞨附属于契丹。
现代文：唐五代时，契丹攻占了全部渤海之地，黑水靺鞨又归附于契丹。
English: In the fifth generation of the Tang Dynasty, Khitan conquered all the land of the Bohai Sea, and Heishui again became part of Khitan.

古文：其在南者籍契丹，号熟女直；其在北者不在契丹籍，号生女直。
现代文：在契丹南部的黑水靺鞨人入了契丹籍，号称熟女真；而在北部的却没有入契丹籍，号称生女真。
English: In the southern part of Khitan, the people of Kuroshio entered the Khitan nationality and were known as "mature women," while in the northern part, they did not enter the Khitan nationality and were known as "born women."

古文：生女直地有混同江、长白山，混同江亦号黑龙江，所谓 白山黑水 是也。
现代文：生女真所在地有混同江、长白山，混同江也叫黑龙江，所谓 白山、黑水 ，说的就是这种情况。
English: The real location of the birth of the daughter is the confluence of the Yangtze River and the Changbai Mountain, the confluence of the Yangtze River is also called the Heilongjiang River, the so-called Baishan and Heishui, and this is the case.

古文：金之始祖讳函普，初从高丽来，年已六十余矣。
现代文：金朝的始祖名讳函普，从高丽刚来的时候，年纪已经六十多岁了。
English: The progenitor of the Kim dynasty, Namecheap Hanpu, was already more than sixty years old when he first came from Korea.

古文：兄阿古乃好佛，留高丽不肯从，曰： 后世子孙必有能相聚者，吾不能去也。 
现代文：他的兄长阿古乃信佛，留在高丽不肯随从他来，说 ：我的后世子孙一定有能与你们相聚的，我是不能去啦。 
English: His elder brother, Agune, a believer in Buddhism, stayed behind in Goryeo and refused to follow him, saying, "Some of my descendants will be able to join you in the future, but I can't go."

古文：独与弟保活里俱。
现代文：函普单独与他的弟弟保活里一起同来。
English: Kanpu came alone with his younger brother, Bao Hokuryo.

古文：始祖居完颜部仆干水之涯，保活里居耶懒。
现代文：金始祖函普居住在完颜部仆干水之涯，保活里居住在耶懒。
English: The ancestor of the Jin Dynasty, Han Pu, lived in the land of dry water after he finished his service in the Ministry of the People's Commissariat of Foreign Affairs, and he lived in Ye Lai in Bao Huo.

古文：其后胡十门以曷苏馆归太祖，自言其祖兄弟三人相别而去，盖自谓阿古乃之后。
现代文：后来，有一个叫胡十门的带曷苏馆归顺太祖阿骨打，自言他的先祖兄弟三人分别的情景，自称是阿古乃的后代。
English: Later, there was a man named Hu Shimen, who claimed to be a descendant of Aguneh, who had brought his family to the Su Pavilion to pay homage to the great ancestor, Akechi. He said that his ancestors were three separate brothers.

古文：石土门、迪古乃，保活里之裔也。
现代文：石土门、迪古乃是保活里的后裔。
English: Shidumen, Digu is a descendant of Hokuryo.

古文：及太祖败辽兵于境上，获耶律谢十，乃使梁福、斡荅刺招谕渤海人曰： 女直、渤海本同一家。 
现代文：及至太祖阿骨打败辽兵于境上，擒获耶律谢十，就差遣梁福、斡答剌招谕渤海人，说： 女真、渤海本是一家。 
English: When the great-great-grandfather Akhen defeated the Liao soldiers on the territory and captured Jeru Xie, he sent Liang Fu, mediated and invited the Bohai people, saying: "Feminine, Bohai is originally a family."

古文：盖其初皆勿吉之七部也。
现代文：原来他们当初都属于勿吉的七部。
English: Originally, all of them belonged to the seven branches of Bekichi.

古文：始祖至完颜部，居久之，其部人尝杀它族之人，由是两族交恶，哄斗不能解。
现代文：金始祖函普到了完颜部，住了很久，完颜部人曾经杀害其他部族的人，因此两族关系恶化，武斗经常发生，不可调和。
English: The ancestor of the Jin Dynasty, Hanzhong, lived for a long time in the Guanyin Department. The people of the Guanyin Department once killed people from other tribes. As a result, the relationship between the two tribes deteriorated, armed battles often occurred, and they could not be reconciled.

古文：完颜部人谓始祖曰： 若能为部人解此怨，使两族不相杀，部有贤女，年六十而未嫁，当以相配，仍为同部。 
现代文：完颜部有人对始祖说 ：如果你能为完颜部的人化解这个仇怨，使两族不再互相残杀，我们部族中有位贤女，年满六十而尚未出嫁，就把她许配给你为妻，仍为同一部族。 
English: Someone from the clan said to the ancestor: "If you can resolve this feud for the people of the clan, so that the two tribes will no longer kill each other, there is a virtuous woman in our tribe who is sixty years old and has not yet married, I will give her to you as a wife, still in the same tribe."

古文：始祖曰： 诺。 
现代文：始祖说： 可以。 
English: The founder said: Yes.

古文：乃自往谕之曰： 杀一人而斗不解，损伤益多。
现代文：于是，亲自到怨家劝解说 ：为杀死一个人而长斗不解，损伤的会更多。
English: As a result, I personally went to the offender's home to persuade him: it would be a long struggle to kill a person, and there would be more damage.

古文：曷若止诛首乱者一人，部内以物纳偿汝，可以无斗，而且获利焉。 
现代文：假若只诛杀带头闹事者一人，让他们部族拿些东西赔偿你们，不仅可以解除恶斗而且可以获得财富。 
English: If you kill just one of the ringleaders and let their tribe compensate you with something, you can not only break up the fight but also gain wealth.

古文：怨家从之。乃为约曰： 凡有杀伤人者，征其家人口一、马十偶、牸牛十、黄金六两，与所杀伤之家，即两解，不得私斗。 
现代文：怨家听从了他的劝告，于是订立条约 ：凡有杀伤人者，征收其家一口人、二十匹马、十头母牛、黄金六两，赔偿被杀伤之家，两家即告和解，不得私斗。 
English: The offending family heeded his advice, and so they concluded a treaty: anyone who had killed someone would have one person, twenty horses, ten cows, and sixty taels of gold taken from his family, and the family that had been killed would be compensated. The two families would then declare a reconciliation, and would not be allowed to fight among themselves.

古文：曰： 谨如约。 
现代文：众人响应 ：谨按约定办。 
English: The crowd responded: "We would like to do it as agreed."

古文：女直之俗，杀人偿马牛三十，自此始。
现代文：女真人的风俗，杀了人赔偿马牛三十，就是从此时开始的。
English: It was at this time that the custom of the Jurchen, who killed a man to compensate for thirty cows, began.

古文：既备偿如约，部众信服之，谢以青牛一，并许归六十之妇。
现代文：和约既已实行，部内群众信服始祖，送一头青牛感谢他，并将那六十岁贤女嫁给他。
English: Once the peace treaty had been implemented, the people in the ministry believed in the founder, sent a young bull to thank him, and married the sixty-year-old virtuous woman to him.

古文：始祖乃以青牛为聘礼而纳之，并得其赀产。
现代文：始祖就拿青牛作为聘礼而纳贤女为妻，并得到了她的财产。
English: The founder took the young bull as a bride price and married the virtuous woman, and received her property.

古文：后生二男，长曰乌鲁，次曰斡鲁，一女曰注思板，遂为完颜部人。
现代文：后来生下两个儿子，长子叫乌鲁，次子叫斡鲁，还有一个女儿叫注思板，都成了完颜部人。
English: Later, she gave birth to two sons, the eldest son called Ulu, the second son called Ulu, and a daughter called Chusipan, all of whom became accomplished artists.

古文：天会十四年，追谥景元皇帝，庙号始祖。
现代文：天会十四年，函普被追谥为景元皇帝，庙号始祖。
English: In the 14th year of Tianhui, Hanpu was crowned as Emperor Jingyuan, the founder of the temple name.

古文：皇统四年，号其藏曰光陵。
现代文：皇统四年，尊其陵寝为光陵。
English: In the fourth year of imperial rule, his mausoleum became a light mausoleum.

古文：五年，增谥始祖懿宪景元皇帝。
现代文：皇统五年，又增谥号为始祖懿宪景元皇帝。
English: In the fifth year of imperial unification, Emperor Jingyuan, the founder of the Qin Dynasty, was also given the title.

古文：子德帝，讳乌鲁。
现代文：始祖之子德帝，名讳乌鲁。
English: The founder's son, Emperor De, was called Ulu.

古文：天会十四年，追谥德皇帝。
现代文：天会十四年被追谥为德皇帝。
English: He would be crowned German Emperor fourteen years later.

古文：皇统四年，号其藏曰熙陵。
现代文：皇统四年，谥号其陵寝为熙陵。
English: In the fourth year of imperial rule, his tomb became known as the Mausoleum of Xi.

古文：五年，增谥渊穆玄德皇帝。
现代文：皇统五年，又增谥号为渊穆玄德皇帝。
English: In the fifth year of imperial unification, the imperial title of Emperor Yuanmu Xuande was added.

古文：子安帝，讳跋海。
现代文：始祖之子安帝，名讳跋海。
English: Andi, the son of the founder, is known as Babakai.

古文：天会十四年，追谥安皇帝。
现代文：天会十四年被追封为安皇帝。
English: He was enthroned as Emperor An fourteen years later.

古文：皇统四年，号其藏建陵。
现代文：皇统四年，谥号其陵寝为建陵。
English: In the fourth year of imperial rule, his tomb was designated as a mausoleum.

古文：五年，增谥和靖庆安皇帝。
现代文：五年，又增谥他为和靖庆安皇帝。
English: Five years later, he was crowned as Emperor He Jing Qing An.

古文：子献祖，讳绥可。
现代文：始祖之子献祖，名讳绥可。
English: The son of the founder dedicated to the founder, his name is well known.

古文：黑水旧俗无室庐，负山水坎地，梁木其上，覆以土，夏则出随水草以居，冬则入处其中，迁徙不常。
现代文：黑水部旧的习俗没有房屋，背靠着山水边的坎地，把梁木架在上面，再用土覆盖一下，夏天出去找水草丰盛的地方居住，冬天就住进坎地窝篷，四季迁徙居住没有一定的地方。
English: The old custom of the Ministry of Black Water did not have a house. They used to build houses on the banks of the river with their backs against the mountains and rivers. They would put wooden beams on top and then cover them with soil. In the summer, they would go out to find a place with abundant water plants to live, and in the winter, they would live in the canals. There was no specific place to live during the four seasons of migration.

古文：献祖乃徙居海古水，耕垦树艺，始筑室，有栋宇之制，人呼其地为纳葛里。纳葛里者，汉语居室也。
现代文：献祖迁徙到一个叫海古水的地方居住，在那里垦荒种树，开始建造房屋，有栋梁穹宇的构造，人们称他居住的地方叫纳葛里。 纳葛里 ，就是汉语中 居室 的意思。
English: Xianzu migrated to a place called Haigushui to live, where he ploughed the wasteland and planted trees, and began to build houses with a structure of beams and domes. People called the place where he lived Nagri. Nagri means "room" in Chinese.

古文：自此遂定居于安出虎水之侧矣。
现代文：从此献祖就定居在安出虎水之侧了。
English: Since then, the ancestors have settled on the side of Ande Tiger Water.

古文：天会十四年，追谥定昭皇帝，庙号献祖。
现代文：天会十四年，他被追封为定昭皇帝，庙号定为献祖。
English: In the 14th year of the Heaven's Fair, he was enthroned as the Emperor Jingshao, and the temple name was set as "Kenzhu."

古文：皇统四年，号其藏曰辉陵。
现代文：皇统四年，谥其陵寝号为辉陵。
English: In the fourth year of imperial rule, the name of the mausoleum was changed to Huiling.

古文：五年，增谥献祖纯烈定昭皇帝。
现代文：五年，增谥为献祖纯烈定昭皇帝。
English: In the fifth year, Emperor Zeng Rong became the ancestor of Emperor Jingshao.

古文：子昭祖，讳石鲁，刚毅质直。
现代文：始祖之子昭祖，名讳石鲁，刚毅正直。
English: The son of the founder, Zhaozhu, his name is Shilu, and he is tough and honest.

古文：生女直无书契，无约束，不可检制。
现代文：生女真部族没有文书契约，对部族人没有什么约束，对任何事情不能检查制约。
English: Genuine tribes do not have a written contract, there are no restrictions on tribesmen, and they cannot check or restrict anything.

古文：昭祖欲稍立条教，诸父、部人皆不悦，欲坑杀之。
现代文：昭祖开始建立条文典制的时候，诸位父辈、部人都不喜欢，他们甚至要活埋他。
English: When Zhaozhu began to establish the canon system, his parents and subordinates did not like it. They even wanted to bury him alive.

古文：已被执，叔父谢里忽知部众将杀昭祖，曰： 吾兄子，贤人也，必能承家，安辑部众，此辈奈何辄欲坑杀之！ 
现代文：就在他已被抓起来的时候，他的叔父谢里忽知道了部内众人要杀昭祖的事，说： 我兄长的儿子，是个贤人，一定能继承家业，安抚部族众人，此辈怎么要坑杀他？ 
English: Just when he had been arrested, his uncle Sheri suddenly learned that everyone in the ministry wanted to kill Zhaozhu, saying: My brother's son is a wise man, he will certainly be able to inherit the family business and pacify the tribe. How can this generation kill him?

古文：亟往，弯弓注矢射于众中，劫执者皆散走，昭祖乃得免。
现代文：立刻赶到现场，揽弓向众人中射了一箭，劫绑昭祖的人都逃走了，昭祖才免于一死。
English: He immediately rushed to the scene and shot an arrow at the crowd with his bow. The kidnappers fled, and Shouzu was spared from death.

古文：昭祖稍以条教为治，部落浸强。
现代文：昭祖制订一些条令来治理部落，部落逐渐强盛。
English: Zhaozhu formulated some regulations to govern the tribe, and the tribe gradually became strong.

古文：辽以惕隐官之。
现代文：于是辽国封他以惕隐之职。
English: As a result, Liao Guo gave him the duty of being discreet.

古文：诸部犹以旧俗，不肯用条教。
现代文：各部落还是沿袭旧俗，不肯采用条令治天下。
English: The tribes still follow the old customs and refuse to rule the world according to rules.

古文：昭祖耀武至于青岭、白山，顺者抚之，不从者讨伐之，入于苏滨、耶懒之地，所至克捷，还经仆燕水。
现代文：昭祖炫耀武力兴兵于青岭、白山，对顺服的人安抚他们，对不顺从的人讨伐他们，进入苏滨、耶懒这些地方，所到之处皆攻占告捷。
English: Zhaozhu made a show of force and raised an army in Qingling and Baishan. He pacified those who obeyed him and fought those who disobeyed him. He entered places such as Su'bin and Yala, and achieved success everywhere he went.

古文：仆燕，汉语恶疮也。
现代文：昭祖得胜还朝途经仆燕水 ，仆燕 ，在汉语里是 恶疮 的意思。
English: Zhaozhu's victory was also achieved in the morning through the water of Zhuoyanshui, Zhuoyanshui, which in Chinese means "bad sores."

古文：昭祖恶其地名，虽已困惫，不肯止。
现代文：昭祖厌恶这个地名，虽然已经困顿疲惫，却不肯停下来休息。
English: Zhao Zu detested this place name. Although he was exhausted, he refused to stop and rest.

古文：行至姑里甸，得疾。
现代文：继续行进至姑里甸，昭祖生了病。
English: Continuing to Gurdian, Zhaozou fell ill.

古文：迨夜，寝于村舍。
现代文：到了夜晚，住在一个村舍里。
English: At night, they live in a village house.

古文：有盗至，遂中夜启行，至逼剌纪村止焉。
现代文：不想又遇上有强盗来，就又半夜启程，到逼剌纪村停下，当天黄昏，昭祖竟与世长辞。
English: Not wanting to encounter robbers again, they set off again in the middle of the night, stopping at the village of Xuzhuangji. At dusk on the same day, Shao Zu actually passed away.

古文：是夕，卒。载柩而行，遇贼于路，夺柩去。
现代文：部人运载昭祖灵柩往回走，路上又遇盗贼，夺去了灵柩。
English: The members of the group carried the coffin of Zhaozhu back home, but on the way they were attacked by thieves, who took the coffin.

古文：部众追贼与战，复得柩。
现代文：部人追上盗贼与他们作战，夺回了灵柩。
English: Deputies caught up with the thieves, fought them and recovered the casket.

古文：加古部人蒲虎复来袭之，垂及，蒲虎问诸路人曰： 石鲁柩去此几何？ 
现代文：之后，加古部人蒲虎又来袭击护灵队，几乎追上了。蒲虎问一些过路人说 ：石鲁灵柩离开这里多远了？ 
English: After that, Kakubu's Puhu attacked the cortege again and almost caught up with it. Puhu asked some passers-by, "How far is Shiloh's coffin from here?"

古文：其人曰： 远矣，追之不及也。 
现代文：过路人答道 ：太远了，追不上了！ 
English: The passer-by replied: "It's too far, I can't catch up!"

古文：蒲虎遂止。
现代文：蒲虎才停止了追击。
English: It was only then that Puhu stopped the pursuit.

古文：于是乃得归葬焉。
现代文：于是，昭祖部人才得以将他的灵柩运回安葬。
English: As a result, Zhao Zubei was able to transport his coffin back home for burial.

古文：生女直之俗，至昭祖时稍用条教，民颇听从，尚未有文字，无官府，不知岁月晦朔，是以年寿修短莫得而考焉。
现代文：按照生女真的习俗，到昭祖时开始用条令治理部民，部民很是听从，但是那时还没有文字，也没设官府，不知道年代历法，所以昭祖年寿长短无从考证了。
English: According to the customs of Shoshenzhen, when he came to Shouzu, he began to govern his subordinates with rules and regulations. The subordinates were very obedient, but at that time there was no written language, no government office, and no calendar, so there was no way to verify the length of Shouzu's life.

古文：天会十五年，追谥成襄皇帝，庙号昭祖。
现代文：天会十五年，追封石鲁为成襄皇帝，庙号为昭祖。
English: In the 15th year of the Heaven's Fair, Shilu was enthroned as the Chengxiang Emperor, and his temple name was Zhaozu.

古文：皇统四年，藏号安陵。
现代文：皇统四年，定陵寝为安陵。
English: In the fourth year of imperial rule, the Ding Mausoleum became the An Mausoleum.

古文：五年，增谥昭祖武惠成襄皇帝。
现代文：皇统五年，又加封为昭祖武惠成襄皇帝。
English: In the fifth year of imperial unification, he was also awarded the title of Shao Zu Wu Huicheng Xuan Emperor.

古文：子景祖，讳乌古乃。辽太平元年辛酉岁生。
现代文：昭祖之子景祖，名讳乌古乃，辽太平元年辛酉岁生。
English: Jing Zu, the son of Zhaozhu, surnamed Ugunai, was born in Xincheng in the first year of the Liao dynasty.

古文：自始祖至此，已六世矣。景祖稍役属诸部，自白山、耶悔、统门、耶懒、土骨论之属，以至五国之长，皆听命。
现代文：从始祖到景祖诞生，金朝皇帝已经是第六代了，景祖统治所属诸部，自白山、耶悔、统门、耶懒、土骨论各部下属以及五国的部落长，都听从他的命令。
English: From the founding fathers to the birth of Jingsu, the emperor of the Jin Dynasty is already the sixth generation. Jingsu ruled the ministries he belonged to, and his subordinates from the White Mountain, Yechi, Tongmen, Yelao, Soil and Bone Theory, as well as the tribal leaders of the five countries, all obeyed his orders.

古文：是时，辽之边民有逃而归者。
现代文：那时，辽国的边民有逃来归附景祖部落的。
English: At that time, the border people of Liaoning fled to join the Jingzu tribe.

古文：及辽以兵徙铁勒、乌惹之民，铁勒、乌惹多不肯徙，亦逃而来归。
现代文：等到辽动用军队强令铁勒、乌惹的民众迁徙，他们大多不肯服从，也逃到景祖所属部落。
English: When Liao mobilized the army to force the people of Tiele and Wujia to migrate, most of them refused to obey and fled to the tribe to which Jing Zu belonged.

古文：辽使曷鲁林牙将兵来索逋逃之民。景祖恐辽兵深入，尽得山川道路险易，或将图之，乃以计止之曰： 兵若深入，诸部必惊扰，变生不测，逋户亦不可得，非计也。 
现代文：辽国派曷鲁林牙率领军队来索要抓捕逃跑的民众，景祖恐怕辽兵深入境内，详尽了解境内山川道路险易情况，或者把这些情况绘成图，就用计谋阻止曷鲁进军，说 ：军队如果继续深入，所属诸部必然受到惊扰，恐怕发生不测，要捕的逃亡户捉不到，如此不是上策啊。 
English: Liao Guo sent Yilu Lingya to lead the army to demand the arrest of the fleeing people. Jing Zu feared that the Liao soldiers would go deep into the territory, thoroughly understand the dangerous conditions of the mountain and river roads in the territory, or draw a map of these conditions, and use the strategy to prevent Yilu from marching, saying: If the army continues to go deep, the departments it belongs to will inevitably be disturbed. I am afraid that something will happen, and the fugitives to be arrested will not be caught. This is not the best strategy.

古文：曷鲁以为然，遂止其军，与曷鲁自行索之。
现代文：曷鲁觉得他说得有道理，就命令停止进军，让曷鲁自己去寻捕。
English: Jairus thought he had a point, so he ordered the army to stop marching and let Jairus search for them himself.

古文：是时，邻部虽稍从，孩懒水乌林答部石显尚拒阻不服。
现代文：当时，景祖辖区的邻近部落虽然有少数臣服于他，但孩懒水乌林答部的石显还拒绝并阻碍别人服从他。
English: At that time, although a few of the neighboring tribes in Jingzu Bailiwick submitted to him, Shi Xian, who was a child in Ulin, also refused and hindered others from obeying him.

古文：攻之，不克。
现代文：景祖兴兵进攻该部，不能战胜。
English: Jingzu Xing's soldiers attacked the group and could not defeat them.

古文：景祖以计告于辽主，辽主遣使责让石显。
现代文：景祖便施计谋告诉辽主，辽主派遣使者责备石显。
English: Jing Zu then told the Liao Lord of his plan, and the Liao Lord sent an envoy to rebuke Shi Xian.

古文：石显乃遣其子婆诸刊入朝，辽主厚赐遣还。
现代文：石显就差遣他的儿子婆诸刊入朝见辽主。辽主给了婆诸刊丰厚的赏赐并派他回去。
English: Shi Xian sent his son, Ba Zhukan, to the court of Liao Lord. Liao Lord gave Ba Zhukan a rich reward and sent him back.

古文：其后石显与婆诸刊入见辽主于春蒐。辽主乃留石显于边地，而遣婆诸刊还所部。
现代文：后来，石显与婆诸刊在春搜晋见辽主，辽主就将石显留在边地，而派遣婆诸刊回去管辖所属乌林答部。
English: Later, Shi Xian and his wife Zhukan went to see the Liao Lord in the spring, and the Liao Lord left Shi Xian on the outskirts and sent his wife Zhukan back to the jurisdiction of the subordinate Urim and Thummim.

古文：景祖之谋也。
现代文：这是景祖用的计谋。
English: This was the stratagem that Jing Zu used.

古文：既而五国蒲聂部节度使拔乙门叛辽，鹰路不通。
现代文：不久之后五国蒲聂部节度使拔乙门叛变辽国，设置路障连老鹰也飞不过。
English: Soon after that, the Five Kingdoms and the Five Kingdoms of Liao rebelled against Ba Yimen and set up a roadblock. Even an eagle couldn't fly through it.

古文：辽人将讨之，先遣同干来谕旨。景祖曰： 可以计取。
现代文：辽主要派人讨伐叛贼，先派同干来向景祖传谕辽主旨意，景祖说： 可以用计谋攻取他。
English: Lord Liao sent people to fight against the traitors. First, he sent his followers to preach the Lord Liao's will to King Jingzhu. King Jingzhu said, "We can use stratagems to capture him."

古文：若用兵，彼将走保险阻，非岁月可平也。 
现代文：如果用兵，拔乙门势必逃跑，凭借险阻顽抗，不是短时间就可以平定的。 
English: If soldiers are used, the second gate is bound to escape, and with the help of dangerous resistance, it can be pacified in a short time.

古文：辽人从之。
现代文：辽人听从了他的劝告。
English: The Liao people heeded his advice.

古文：盖景祖终畏辽兵之入其境也，故自以为功。
现代文：景祖最终还是畏惧辽兵进入他的境地，所以自己去立这个功。
English: In the end, Jing Zu was still afraid of the Liao soldiers entering his territory, so he went to establish this gong himself.

古文：于是景祖阳与拔乙门为好，而以妻子为质，袭而擒之，献於辽主。
现代文：于是景祖表面上与拔乙门交好，而实际上却以自己的妻子为人质，袭击拔乙门并擒获了他，献给了辽主。
English: As a result, Jingzhu ostensibly befriended Bajie Yimen, but actually took his wife as a hostage, attacked Bajie Yimen and captured him, dedicating him to the Lord of Liao.

古文：辽主召见于寝殿，燕赐加等，以为生女直部族节度使。
现代文：辽主在自己的寝殿召见景祖，设宴款待，任命他为生女真部族节度使。
English: Liao Shi summoned Jing Zu to his bedchamber, set up a banquet for him, and appointed him as the festival envoy of the Zengzhen tribe.

古文：辽人呼节度使为太师，金人称都太师者自此始。
现代文：辽人称节度使为太师，金人称 都太师 ，就是从这时开始的。
English: It was at this time that the Liao people began to refer to the Jie as the Taishi, and the Jin people called the Du as the Taishi.

古文：辽主将刻印与之，景祖不肯系辽籍，辞曰： 请俟他日。 
现代文：辽主把刻印授给景祖，景祖不肯入辽籍，推辞说： 请改他日再授。 
English: Liao Lord conferred the engraved seal to Jing Zu. Jing Zu refused to be registered as a citizen of Liao and said, "Please change the date for the next conferment."

古文：辽主终欲与之，遣使来。
现代文：辽主最终还是要授予他，特派人前来。
English: In the end, the Liao Lord still wanted to bestow the award on him, so he sent someone to come.

古文：景祖诡使部人扬言曰： 主公若受印系籍，部人必杀之！ 
现代文：景祖又施诡计，让部人扬言说： 主公如果接受刻印入辽国籍，部族的人一定杀死他。 
English: Jingzu also played a trick, making his subordinates threaten: If the lord accepts to be engraved into the Liao nationality, the tribesmen will surely kill him.

古文：用是以拒之，辽使乃还。
现代文：景祖即用此言拒绝受印，辽使无奈而还朝交差。
English: Jing Zu refused to accept the seal with these words, and Liao Zi reluctantly crossed back to the North.

古文：既为节度使，有官属，纪纲渐立矣。
现代文：景祖既已做了节度使，有了官属，纪律纲常也逐渐建立起来了。
English: Since Jing Zu had already made the commander of the festival, he had subordinates, and the disciplinary system was gradually established.

古文：生女直旧无铁，邻国有以甲胄来鬻者，倾赀厚贾以与贸易，亦令昆弟族人皆售之。
现代文：生女真原本没有铁，邻国有拿甲胄来卖的，部族便拿出丰厚的待遇和他们进行贸易，也叫兄弟族人都来买卖。
English: The native women did not have iron originally, but the neighboring countries used armor to sell it, and the tribe offered rich treatment to trade with them, and also invited brothers and relatives to come and trade.

古文：得铁既多，因之以修弓矢，备器械，兵势稍振，前后愿附者众。
现代文：得到了大量铁物后，便拿来修造弓和箭头，制备兵器，从而使兵势有所振兴，周围愿意来归附的人很多。
English: After obtaining a large amount of iron, he used it to repair and make bows and arrows and prepare weapons, thus revitalizing the army, and there are many people around who are willing to join.

古文：斡泯水蒲察部、泰神忒保水完颜部、统门水温迪痕部、神隐水完颜部，皆相继来附。
现代文：斡泯水的蒲察部、泰神忒保水的完颜部、统门水的温迪痕部、神隐水的完颜部，都相继归附了景祖。
English: The water purification department, the water preservation department, the wendy trace department, and the water purification department were all successively attached to Jing Zu.

古文：景祖为人宽恕，能容物，平生不见喜愠。
现代文：景祖为人宽宏大量，能包容事物，平生从来喜怒不形于色。
English: Jing Zu was a magnanimous person, able to tolerate things, and never lost his temper in his life.

古文：推财与人，分食解衣，无所吝惜。
现代文：分财与人，分食解衣，毫不吝惜。
English: They share their wealth with others, their food with others, their clothes with others, and they are not stingy.

古文：人或忤之，亦不念。
现代文：有人做了冒犯他的事，他也不记仇。
English: Someone has done something to offend him, and he does not take revenge.

古文：先时，有叛去者，遣人谕诱之。
现代文：早先，有一个背叛他的人离去了，他派人去劝诱那人。
English: Earlier, one of his defectors had left, and he sent someone to talk the man down.

古文：叛者曰： 汝主，活罗也。
现代文：叛徒说： 你的主子，是个活罗。
English: The traitor said, "Your master is dead.

古文：活罗，吾能获之，吾岂能为活罗屈哉！ 
现代文：活罗，我能得到他，我难道能为一个活罗而去屈就吗？ 
English: Can I get him, can I get him, can I get him?

古文：活罗，汉语慈乌也。北方有之，状如大鸡，善啄物，见马牛橐驼脊间有疮，啄其脊间食之，马牛辄死，若饥不得食，虽砂石亦食之。
现代文： 活罗 ，汉语里是 慈乌 的意思，北方有这种鸟，形状像大鸡，善于啄食物，看见马、牛、骆驼脊背上有疮，就去啄其间的烂物吃，被它啄过的马牛则死去。如果它饥饿难忍而不得食，即使是砂砾石子它也吃。
English: There is a bird in the north, shaped like a large chicken, which is good at gnawing food. If it sees a horse, cow or camel with sores on its back, it will go and gnaw on the rotting flesh, while the horse or cow it has gnawed on will die. If it is too hungry to eat, it will even eat gravel.

古文：景祖嗜酒好色，饮啖过人，时人呼曰活罗，故彼以此讪之，亦不以介意。
现代文：景祖嗜酒好色，饮食过人，当时人们叫他活罗，所以那个叛徒拿活罗这一绰号来讥笑景祖，景祖对此也不介意。
English: At that time, people called Jingzu a drunkard, a womanizer, and a glutton. Therefore, the traitor mocked Jingzu with the nickname "Goro," and Jingzu didn't mind.

古文：其后讪者力屈来降，厚赐遣还。
现代文：后来讥笑他的人来屈膝投降，景祖赐他厚重的礼物遣他回去。
English: Later, his mockers came to bend the knee and surrender, and Jing Zu gave him a heavy gift and sent him back.

古文：曷懒水有率众降者，录其岁月姓名，即遣去，俾复其故。人以此益信服之。
现代文：曷懒水地方有人率众投降，景祖登记下他们的年龄姓名后，就遣送回去，让他们像往常那样生活，民众因此更加信服景祖。
English: Some people in the Lazy Water area led the crowd to surrender. After Jing Zu registered their ages and names, he sent them back to live as usual, which made the people more convinced of Jing Zu.

古文：辽咸雍八年，五国没拈部谢野勃堇叛辽，鹰路不通。
现代文：辽国咸雍八年，五国没睰部的谢野勃堇叛变辽国，鹰路不通。
English: In the eighth year of the reign of Emperor Xianyong of the Liao Dynasty, Xieye Burguang of the Five Kingdoms rebelled against the Liao Dynasty, and the Eagle Road was impassable.

古文：景祖伐之，谢野来御。
现代文：景祖带兵讨伐他，谢野抵御。
English: Jing Zu led an army to fight him, and Xie Ye resisted.

古文：景祖被重铠，率众力战。谢野兵败，走拔里迈泺。
现代文：景祖披挂重铠，率众力战，致使谢野兵败，逃到拔里迈泊。
English: Jingzu wore a heavy yoke and led the troops in battle, causing Xie Ye to be defeated and flee to Baili Maipo.

古文：时方十月，冰忽解，谢野不能军，众皆溃去，乃旋师。
现代文：当时刚刚十月，结冰的河忽然解冻，谢野指挥不了散军，众兵士都溃逃而去。
English: At that time, it was just October, and the frozen river suddenly thawed. Xie Ye could not command the scattered troops, and all the soldiers fled.

古文：道中遇逋亡，要遮险阻，昼夜拒战，比至部已惫。
现代文：景祖于是挥师凯旋。中途遇到逃亡的要对付，又要越过险要地势的阻碍，昼夜拒阻作战，等回到部落已疲乏不堪。
English: Jingzu then waved his division back in triumph. Midway, he encountered a fugitive who needed to be dealt with, and he had to overcome the obstacles of the dangerous terrain, refusing to fight day and night, and he returned to the tribe exhausted.

古文：即往见辽边将达鲁骨，自陈败谢野功。
现代文：又立即前去会见辽国边将达鲁骨，想向达鲁骨陈述自己打败谢野的功劳。
English: He also immediately went to meet with Liao's border general Darukone, and wanted to tell Darukone about his achievement in defeating Xie Ye.

古文：行次来流水，未见达鲁骨，疾作而复，卒于家，年五十四。
现代文：不料行到来流水，未见到达鲁骨，疾病发作而返回，在家中逝世，时年五十四岁。
English: Unexpectedly, the flow of water came, but did not reach the stern, the disease returned, and he died at home, at the age of fifty-four.

古文：天会十四年，追谥惠桓皇帝，庙号景祖。
现代文：天会十四年，金朝追封他为惠桓皇帝，庙号是景祖。
English: In the 14th year of Tian Hei, the Kim dynasty crowned him as Emperor Hui Huan, and his temple name was Jing Zu.

古文：皇统四年，藏号定陵。
现代文：皇统四年，封陵寝号为定陵。
English: In the fourth year of imperial rule, the name of the mausoleum was changed to Dingling.

古文：五年，增谥景祖英烈惠桓皇帝。
现代文：五年，又增谥他为景祖英烈惠桓皇帝。
English: Five years later, he was awarded the title of Jingzu hongrui Huihuan emperor.

古文：第二子袭节度使，是为世祖，讳劾里钵。
现代文：景祖的第二个儿子承袭了节度使官职，即是金世祖，名讳劾里钵。
English: The second son of King Sejong inherited the post of the festival delegate, that is, Kim Sejong, whose name was later changed to Kim Jong Il.

古文：生女直之俗，生子年长即异居。
现代文：按照生女真的习俗，儿子长大后即与父母分居。
English: According to the true custom of giving birth, the son is separated from his parents when he grows up.

古文：景祖九子，元配唐括氏生劾者，次世祖，次劾孙，次肃宗，次穆宗。
现代文：景祖共有九个儿子，他的元配夫人唐括氏生劾者，接下来依次生下世祖、劾孙、肃宗、穆宗。
English: Jing Zu had a total of nine sons. His first wife, Tang Kuo, was the first to be born, followed by the next generation, the second son, Su Zong, and Mu Zong.

古文：及当异居，景祖曰： 劾者柔和，可治家务。
现代文：到了应当分居的时候，景祖说 ：劾者性情柔和，可以料理家务。
English: When the time came for them to separate, Jing Zu said, "The accuser has a gentle disposition and can do housework.

古文：劾里钵有器量智识，何事不成。
现代文：劾里钵有器量，聪明有见解，没有什么事做不成的。
English: There is ability, wisdom and insight in the impeachment, and nothing can be done.

古文：劾孙亦柔善人耳。 
现代文：劾孙也是温柔慈善人。 
English: Impeached Sun is also a gentle and charitable person.

古文：乃命劾者与世祖同居，劾孙与肃宗同居。
现代文：于是命令劾者与世祖同居，劾孙与肃宗同居。
English: So he ordered the accuser to live with the patriarch, and the accused son to live with the emperor.

古文：景祖卒，世祖继之。
现代文：景祖去世后，世祖继承节度使的职位。
English: After the death of Jingzu, Shizu inherited the post of the Festival Commissioner.

古文：世祖卒，肃宗继之。
现代文：世祖去世后，由肃宗继承。
English: After the death of the founder, it was succeeded by Su Zong.

古文：肃宗卒，穆宗继之。
现代文：肃宗去世以后，由穆宗继承。
English: After Su Zong's death, Mu Zong succeeded him.

古文：穆宗复传世祖之子，至于太祖，竟登大位焉。
现代文：穆宗又将这一职位传给世祖的儿子，到太祖的时候，竟然登上皇帝大位了。
English: Mu Zong also passed this position to the son of the ancestor, and by the time of the great-grandfather, he had ascended to the throne of the emperor.

古文：世祖，辽重熙八年己卯岁生。辽咸雍十年，袭节度使。
现代文：金世祖，生于辽重熙八年。辽咸雍十年，承袭节度使之职。
English: Jin Shizu, born in the eighth year of the reign of Liao Chongxi and the tenth year of the reign of Liao Xianyong, inherited the office of the festival.

古文：景祖异母弟跋黑有异志，世祖虑其为变，加意事之，不使将兵，但为部长。
现代文：景祖的同父异母弟弟跋黑有贰心，世祖恐怕他生出事端，留心对待他，不让他掌握兵权，但让他当部落长。
English: Emperor Jingzhu's half-brother, Bao He, had a bad heart, and Emperor Jingzhu feared that he might have an accident. He treated him carefully and did not allow him to hold military power, but allowed him to be the head of the tribe.

古文：跋黑遂诱桓赧、散达、乌春、窝谋罕为乱，及间诸部使贰于世祖。
现代文：跋黑于是拉拢桓赧、散达、乌春、窝谋罕作乱，并离间诸部落使他们与世祖离心离德。
English: As a result, Toba drew in Huanqian, Sanda, Wuchun, and Wo Mochan to make trouble, and divided the tribes, causing them to break away from their ancestors.

古文：世祖犹欲抚慰之，语在跋黑、桓赧等传中。
现代文：世祖还是想安抚他，这些话都记载在跋黑、桓赧等人的传略中。
English: The ancestor still wanted to appease him, and these words are recorded in the biographies of Toba, Kanen, and others.

古文：世祖尝买加古部锻工乌不屯被甲九十，乌春欲托此以为兵端，世祖还其甲，语在《乌春传》。
现代文：世祖曾经向加古部锻工乌不屯购买过九十件披甲，乌春就想以此事作为兵变事端，世祖把披甲还给了乌不屯，这件事在《乌春传》中有记载。
English: The ancestor once bought ninety pieces of caparison from the forger Wu Bittun of the Qaju Department, and Wu Chun wanted to use this as the cause of the mutiny. The ancestor returned the caparison to Wu Bittun, and this event is recorded in "The Legend of Wu Chun."

古文：部中有流言曰： 欲生则附于跋黑，欲死则附于劾里钵、颇剌淑。 
现代文：部落中有流言说： 要想生存得投靠跋黑，要想死就去依靠劾里钵、颇剌淑。 
English: There is a rumor in the tribe that says: If you want to survive, you have to rely on the dark, and if you want to die, you have to rely on Impeachment, Impeachment, Impeachment, Impeachment.

古文：世祖闻之，疑焉。无以察之，乃佯为具装，欲有所往者，阴遣人扬言曰： 寇至！ 
现代文：世祖听了这些话，虽然有疑惑，但无从调查落实，就假装什么也不知道，但有想去投靠跋黑的人，就暗中派人扬言道： 强盗来了。 
English: When the patriarch heard these words, although he had doubts, he was unable to investigate and implement them, so he pretended not to know anything. However, if there were people who wanted to go to the dark side, he secretly sent someone to threaten them, saying, "The robbers are coming."

古文：部众闻者莫知虚实，有保于跋黑之室者，有保于世祖之室者，世祖乃尽得兄弟部属向背彼此之情矣。
现代文：部落里众人听到这话不知虚实，于是有保卫跋黑家的，有保护世祖家的，世祖因此完全掌握了兄弟部属之间彼此向背的情况。
English: When the people in the tribe heard this, they didn't know if it was true or not. Therefore, they had to protect the black family and protect the ancestral family. As a result, the ancestral family fully grasped the situation between brothers and subordinates.

古文：间数年，乌春来攻，世祖拒之。
现代文：过了几年，乌春来进攻，世祖抵御他。
English: A few years later, Wu Chun came to attack, and Shizu resisted him.

古文：时十月已半，大雨累昼夜，冰澌覆地，乌春不能进。
现代文：当时已是十月中旬，大雨昼夜不停，流冰覆地，乌春的队伍不能行进。
English: At that time, it was already the middle of October. It rained heavily day and night, and the ground was covered with ice. Wu Chun's team couldn't march.

古文：既而悔曰： 此天也！ 
现代文：他此时后悔地说 ：这是天意啊！ 
English: At this time, he regretted saying: This is God's will!

古文：乃引兵去。
现代文：于是带领队伍回去。
English: So he led his soldiers away.

古文：乌春舍于阿里矮村滓不乃家，而以兵围其弟胜昆于胡不村。
现代文：乌春借住在阿里矮村滓不乃家，而让他的队伍包围他弟弟胜昆所在的胡不村。
English: Wu Chun rented a house in the Ali dwarf village of Shufu, and let his team surround the Huwu village where his brother Sheng Kun was located.

古文：兵退，胜昆执其兄滓不乃，而请莅杀于世祖，且请免其孥戮。
现代文：兵退的时候，胜昆抓住他的哥哥滓不乃，请求世祖当面杀了他，但是请求世祖不要殃及他的妻儿。
English: When the soldiers retreated, Sheng Kun grabbed his brother Zou Bunye and begged the patriarch to kill him in person, but begged the patriarch not to harm his wife and children.

古文：从之。
现代文：世祖答应了他的请求。
English: I followed his advice.

古文：桓赧、散达亦举兵，遣肃宗拒之。
现代文：桓赧、散达也起兵闹事，世祖派肃宗抗拒他们。
English: Kuanpi and Sanda also raised an army to cause trouble, and Shiso, the founder of the sect, opposed them.

古文：当是时，乌春兵在北，桓赧兵在南，其势甚盛。
现代文：当时，乌春在北面兴兵，桓赧在南面起事，他们的势头很盛。
English: At that time, Wu Chun raised an army in the north, and Huan Yu rose up in the south, and their momentum was very strong.

古文：戒之曰： 可和则与之和，否则决战！ 
现代文：世祖告诫肃宗说： 能与他们讲和就讲和，否则就进行决战。 
English: The ancestor admonished Su Zong, "If you can make peace with them, then make peace, otherwise you will have a decisive battle."

古文：肃宗兵败。
现代文：肃宗打了败仗。
English: Su Zong fought a losing battle.

古文：会乌春以久雨解去，世祖乃以偏师涉舍很水，经贴割水，覆桓赧、散达之家。
现代文：正巧乌春那里大雨停止，世祖于是率领偏师涉过舍很水，经过贴割水，捣毁桓赧、散达的老家。
English: It just so happened that the heavy rain stopped there in Wuchun, so the ancestor led the deviators to wade through the water, and after cutting the water, they destroyed the old homes of Huancheng and Sanda.

古文：明日，大雾晦冥，失道，至婆多吐水乃觉。
现代文：第二天，大雾漫天，阴晦冥暗，世祖的队伍迷失了方向，到婆多吐水才察觉。
English: The next day, the sky was foggy and gloomy. The ancestor's team lost their way and had to spit out water to find their way.

古文：即还至舍很、贴割之间，升高阜望之，见六骑来，大呼，驰击之。
现代文：立刻退到舍很及贴割之间，世祖等人站到高阜望，忽然看见有六人骑马驰来。世祖一边大声喊叫，一边驰马攻击他们。
English: They immediately retreated to the area between the shed and the warehouse, and Shizu and the others stood looking out at the hillside. Suddenly, they saw six men on horseback galloping toward them. Shizu shouted loudly as he galloped toward them.

古文：世祖射一人毙，生获五人，问之，乃知卜灰、撒骨出使助恒赧、散达者也。
现代文：世祖射死一人，生擒五人，审问他们，才知道是卜灰、撒骨出派去援助桓赧、散达的人。
English: The ancestor shot one person dead and five people alive, and interrogated them, only to find out that they were the ones who had been sent to assist the people of Huancheng and Sanda.

古文：世祖至桓赧、散达所居，焚荡其室家。杀百许人，旧将主保亦死之。
现代文：世祖带人到了桓赧、散达居住的地方，放火烧了他们的住室，屠杀了一百人左右，世祖旧将主保也死在这场祸事中。
English: The ancestor took people to the places where Huancheng and Xanda lived, set fire to their living quarters, and killed about a hundred people. The old guardian of the ancestor also died in this disaster.

古文：比世祖还，与肃宗会，肃宗兵又败矣。
现代文：等到世祖凯旋，与肃宗会合，肃宗的军队又打了败仗。
English: Wait until the ancestor's triumphant return, meet with Su Zong, Su Zong's army was defeated again.

古文：世祖让肃宗失利之状。
现代文：世祖体察肃宗失利的情况，派人去与桓赧、散达议和。
English: The patriarch took stock of Su Zong's defeat and sent someone to negotiate a peace treaty with Huan Zong and Sanda.

古文：遣人议和，桓赧、散达曰： 以尔盈歌之大赤马、辞不失之紫骝马与我，我则和。 二马皆女直名马，不许。
现代文：桓赧、散达说： 拿你盈歌的大赤马、辞不失的紫骝马给我，我就同意讲和。 这两种马都是女真的名马，世祖没答应。
English: Huanqin and Sanda said, "Give me your great red horse, which is full of songs, and your tawny horse, which never loses its temper, and I will agree to make peace. These two horses are both famous female horses, but the patriarch did not agree.

古文：桓赧、散达大会诸部来攻，过裴满部，以其附于世祖也，纵火焚之。
现代文：桓赧、散达联合各部落，发起对世祖的进攻。因为裴满部归附了世祖，所以大军经过这个部落时就放火焚烧了它。
English: Huancheng and Sanda united all the tribes and launched an attack on Shizu. Because Pei Manbu had joined Shizu, the large army set fire to the tribe as it passed by.

古文：蒲察部沙祇勃堇、胡补答勃堇使阿喜来告难，世祖使之诡从以自全，曰： 战则以旗鼓自别。 
现代文：蒲察部沙禾氐勃堇、胡补答勃堇派一个叫阿喜的来向世祖报告这场灾难，世祖让他们假装屈从桓赧等以保全自己，说： 打起仗来拿旗和鼓做记号，以便识别敌我。 
English: Pu Zha Bu sent a man named Ah Xi to report the disaster to the ancestor. The ancestor told them to pretend to be subordinate to Huan Yu to protect themselves, saying: "Let's fight a battle and take flags and drums to make a mark in order to identify the enemy."

古文：世祖往御桓赧之众，将行，有报者曰： 跋黑食于爱妾之父家，肉胀咽死矣！ 
现代文：世祖率兵前往抵御桓赧人马，就要出发的时候，有人报告说： 跋黑在他爱妾的父亲家里吃饭，吃肉过多咽胀死了。 
English: When the founder of the world was about to set out with his army to resist the invaders, someone reported: "Baburo ate at his father's house, who loved his concubine, and swallowed too much meat and died.

古文：乃遣肃宗求援于辽，遂率众出。
现代文：世祖于是派肃宗向辽国求援，才率众出发。
English: The founder then sent Su Zong to Liao to ask for help, and he led the crowd to set out.

古文：使辞不失取海姑兄弟兵，已而乃知海姑兄弟贰於桓赧矣。欲并取其众，径至海姑。
现代文：世祖派辞不失去攻取海姑兄弟的军队，之后才知道海姑兄弟对桓赧存有戒心，想与桓赧火并并夺取其众，于是世祖径直率军队来到海姑。
English: The ancestor did not hesitate to attack the brother's army, and only later did he know that the brother was wary of Huan Yu and wanted to unite with Huan Yu and capture his people, so the ancestor led the army straight to Huan Yu.

古文：侦者报曰： 敌已至。 
现代文：侦探的人报告说： 敌军已到。 
English: The detective's men reported: The enemy has arrived.

古文：将战，世祖戒辞不失曰： 汝先阵于脱豁改原，待吾三扬旗，三鸣鼓，即弃旗决战。
现代文：即将开战，世祖告诫辞不失说： 你先在脱豁改原摆开阵势，待我扬三下旗，击三次鼓，即放下旗子开始决战。
English: On the verge of going to war, the founder of the Chinese nation said in his exhortation, "First, you should set up a position in the land of liberation. Wait for me to raise the flag three times and beat the drum three times, then put down the flag and begin the decisive battle."

古文：死生惟在今日，命不足惜！ 
现代文：是死是活就看今天这一战，生死在所不惜。 
English: Whether you live or die depends on today's battle.

古文：使裴满胡喜牵大紫骝马以为贰马，驰至阵。
现代文：又派裴满胡喜牵来大紫骝马备用，驰进阵中。
English: He also sent Pei Man Hu Xi to bring a large purple horse to stand by and gallop into the battle.

古文：时桓赧、散达盛强，世祖军吏未战而惧，皆植立无人色。
现代文：当时桓赧、散达势力强盛，世祖的官兵未战而惧，都像木头人似的站在那里，面无人色。
English: At that time, Kuanpi and Sanda were powerful, and the officers and soldiers of the ancestors were afraid of war, and they stood there like wooden men, without any color.

古文：世祖阳阳如平常，亦无责让之言，但令士卒解甲少憩，以水沃面，调蒨水饮之。
现代文：世祖表面上镇静像平常一样，对他的官兵并不责骂，但是命令士卒解下铠甲稍事休息，用水洗脸，调麦水喝。
English: On the surface, the patriarch was as calm as usual. He did not scold his officers and soldiers, but ordered the soldiers to take off their armor, take a break, wash their faces with water, and drink barley water.

古文：有顷，训励之，军势复振。
现代文：过一会儿，世祖在阵前训话鼓动，军中士气又振作起来。
English: After a while, Shizu gave a pre-battle exhortation, and the morale of the soldiers perked up again.

古文：乃避众独引穆宗，执其手密与之言曰： 今日之事，若胜则已，万一有不胜，吾必无生。
现代文：世祖避开众人叫来穆宗单独相见，握着穆宗的手悄悄对他说： 今天的战事，如果打胜了也就罢了，万一失败了，我一定不会生还。
English: Shunning the crowd, the patriarch called Mu Zong to meet him alone. Holding Mu Zong's hand, he quietly said to him, "Today's battle, if I win, that's it. If I fail, I won't survive."

古文：汝今介马遥观，勿预战事。
现代文：你现在骑马在远处观阵，不要参与战事。
English: You are now riding a horse to watch the battle in the distance, do not participate in the battle.

古文：乘胜逐之，自阿不弯至于北隘甸，死者如仆麻，破多吐水水为之赤，弃车甲马牛军实尽获之。
现代文：如果我死了，你不要收我的尸骨，不要顾恋亲戚，要立即驰马奔告你的兄长颇剌淑，到辽国入籍受印，乞求辽国出兵以报此仇。 说完，卷起袖子，也不披铠甲，撩起袍襟护住前胸后心，把弓放进弓袋，提着剑，扬三次旗，击三遍鼓，发号施令后，扔下旗子开始搏战，身先士卒，做军前先锋，突入敌阵，众人随着他冲杀。
English: If I die, don't collect my bones, don't care about my relatives, you should immediately run on horseback to tell your brother, Prayuth, to become a naturalized citizen of Liao, beg Liao to send troops to avenge this. Having said that, roll up your sleeves, don't wear armor, cover your chest and heart with the lapels of your robe, put the bow into the bow bag, carry the sword, raise the flag three times, beat the drum three times, give the order, throw down the flag and start fighting, take the lead, be the vanguard of the army, rush into the enemy lines, and everyone rushes to kill with him.

古文：世祖曰： 今日之捷，非天不能及此，亦可以知足矣。
现代文：辞不失从对方背后奋勇出击，把桓赧、散达杀得大败。世祖又率众乘胜追击，从阿不弯到北隘甸，死者遍野，像仆倒的麻杆，破多吐水的水都因死者的血流进太多而变成红色。
English: He bravely attacked from behind the other side, and defeated Huanqiu and Xanda. The ancestor led the crowd to pursue the victory, from Abucheng to the North Fork, the dead were everywhere, like fallen hemp poles, and the water that spit out water turned red because the blood of the dead flowed in too much.

古文：虽纵之去，败军之气，没世不振。 
现代文：桓赧、散达军队的弃车甲马牛军用物资，全部被世祖的人缴获。
English: The abandoned wagons, horses and oxen of the Huancheng and Sanda armies were all captured by the ancestors.

古文：乃引军还。世祖视其战地，驰突成大路，阔且三十陇。
现代文：世祖视察这片战地，看到这里由于战马奔驰而变成大路，足有三十陇地那么宽。
English: The patriarch inspected this battlefield and saw that it had been turned into a highway by the galloping of war horses. It was as wide as thirty fathoms.

古文：手杀九人，自相重积，人皆异之。
现代文：世祖亲手杀敌九人，竟自己累积在一起，众人对此都很惊异。
English: The ancestor killed nine of his enemies with his own hands, and the fact that he managed to do it all by himself surprised everyone.

古文：桓赧、散达自此不能复聚，未几，各以其属来降，辽大安七年也。
现代文：桓赧、散达从此不能再集合人马，没过多久，他们各自带着部下来向世祖投降，这一年正是辽国大安七年。
English: Since then, Huancheng and Sanda were no longer able to gather men and horses, and it was not long before they each came down with their subordinates to surrender to the ancestor. This year was the seventh year of the Great Peace of Liao.

古文：初，桓赧兄弟之变，朮鲁部卜灰、蒲察部撒骨出助之。
现代文：当初，桓赧兄弟叛变，不术鲁部的卜灰、蒲察部的撒骨出帮助他们。
English: At first, the Kuanpi brothers mutinied, and Bugei from the Shulun and Shibone from the Puchas helped them.

古文：至是，招之，不肯和。
现代文：到了现在，世祖向他们招安，他们却不肯来和。
English: To this day, their ancestors have called out to them for peace, but they refuse to make peace.

古文：卜灰之党石鲁遂杀卜灰来降。
现代文：卜灰的同党石鲁就杀了卜灰然后来投降。
English: Bu Ash's fellow party member Shi Lu killed Bu Ash and then came to surrender.

古文：撒骨出追蹑亡者，道傍人潜射之，中口而死。
现代文：撒骨出追踪逃跑的人，被潜伏在道旁的人射了一箭，正中嘴巴而死。
English: He went out in pursuit of the fugitive and was shot in the mouth with an arrow by a man lurking by the roadside.

古文：自是旧部悉归。
现代文：他的旧部自然都归顺了世祖。
English: Naturally, all of his former subordinates obeyed their ancestor.

古文：景祖时，斡勒部人杯乃来属，及是，有他志。
现代文：景祖的时候，斡勒部人杯乃来归附，来后，却心怀他志。
English: In the time of King Jingzhu, the cup was given to the person in charge of the Ministry of Public Security, but after he came, he harbored his ambition.

古文：会其家失火，因以纵火诬欢部，世祖征偿如约。
现代文：正赶上他家失火，便拿纵火罪诬陷欢都，世祖按规约向欢都索取了赔偿。
English: Just as his house caught fire, he framed Huandu for arson, and the patriarch claimed compensation from Huandu in accordance with the regulations.

古文：杯乃不自安，遂结乌春、窝谋罕举兵。
现代文：杯乃并不安于现状，勾结乌春、窝谋罕举兵起事。
English: The cup is not satisfied with the status quo, colluding with Wuchun and conspiring to raise an army.

古文：使肃宗与战，败之，获杯乃，世祖献之于辽。
现代文：世祖派肃宗去镇压，打败了杯乃、乌春之流，擒获了杯乃，世祖把他献给了辽国。
English: The ancestor sent Su Zong to suppress, defeated Cup Na, Wuchun's current, captured Cup Na, and the ancestor dedicated him to Liao.

古文：腊醅、麻产侵掠野居女直，略来流水牧马。
现代文：腊醅、麻产侵犯掠夺野居女真，在来流水稍停牧马。
English: Lashan and Asafo encroach on and plunder the field maiden Zhen, and the herd horse stops for a moment at the flowing water.

古文：世祖击之，中四创，久之疾愈。
现代文：世祖攻击他们，四处受伤，过了很久伤才痊愈。
English: The patriarch attacked them and was wounded everywhere. It took a long time for the wound to heal.

古文：腊醅等复略穆宗牧马，交结诸部。
现代文：腊醅等又游动到穆宗所在地牧马，并勾结各个部落。
English: Lashun and others also swam to the location of Mu Zong, Wrangler, and colluded with various tribes.

古文：世祖复伐之，腊醅等绐降，乃旋。
现代文：世祖又讨伐他，腊醅等谎称投降，世祖乃凯旋。
English: The ancestor fought against him again, Lashio and others falsely claimed to surrender, and the ancestor returned in triumph.

古文：腊醅得姑里甸兵百十有七人，据暮棱水守险，石显子婆诸刊亦在其中。
现代文：其实，腊醅已得到姑里甸兵士一百一十七人，占据暮棱水险要处把守，石显的儿子婆诸刊也在其中。
English: In fact, Lashio has received one hundred and seventeen Gurdian soldiers, occupying and guarding the water hazard key points, and Shi Xian's son Zhuan is also among them.

古文：世祖围而克之，尽获姑里甸兵。
现代文：世祖出兵包围并攻克了这一险处，姑里甸守兵全部被擒获。
English: Emperor Zedong sent troops to encircle and conquer this dangerous place, and the Guridian guards were all captured.

古文：麻产遁去。
现代文：麻产逃得不见了踪影。
English: No trace of the hemp crop was ever found.

古文：遂擒腊醅及婆诸刊，皆献之辽。
现代文：于是世祖擒获了腊醅和婆诸刊，并把他们都献给了辽国。
English: As a result, King Sejong obtained all the publications of Lashan and Bao, and dedicated them to Liao.

古文：既已，复请之，辽人与之，并以前后所献罪人归之。
现代文：做完了这些，世祖又请辽国让他把守这地方，辽人给了他，并把前后所献的罪人归还给他。
English: Having done all this, the patriarch asked the Liao nation to let him guard this place, and the Liao people gave it to him, and returned to him the sinners they had sacrificed before and after.

古文：欢都在破乌春等于斜堆，故石、拔石皆就擒。
现代文：欢都在斜堆把乌春等杀得大败，故石、拔石都束手就擒。
English: Huan killed Wu Chun and others in the sloping heap, so the stone and stone-pulling were tied up.

古文：世祖自将与欢都合兵岭东，诸军皆至。
现代文：世祖将与欢都在岭东合兵，各方面军队也都到齐。
English: The ancestor of the world will join forces with Huanku in the east of Lingding, and the armies from all directions will also come together.

古文：是时，乌春已前死，窝谋罕请于辽，愿和解。
现代文：当时，乌春在此之前已经死了，窝谋罕向辽国请求，说是愿意和解。
English: At that time, Wu Chun had already died before this, and Wo Mu Han made a request to Liao Guo, saying that he was willing to reconcile.

古文：既与和，复来袭，乃进军围之。窝谋罕弃城遁去。
现代文：可是和解后，又来袭击世祖，世祖于是出兵包围了窝谋罕驻地。窝谋罕弃城逃跑不知去向。
English: However, after the reconciliation, they attacked Shizu again. Shizu then sent troops to encircle Wo Mochan's encampment. Wo Mochan abandoned the city and fled to an unknown destination.

古文：破其城，尽俘获之，以功差次分赐诸军。
现代文：世祖的军队攻破了窝谋罕的城池，将他的人马全部俘获，于是按功劳大小奖赏各路军队。
English: The ancestor's army broke through the enemy's castle, captured all of his men and horses, and then rewarded each army according to their merits.

古文：城始破，议渠长生杀，众皆长跪，辽使者在坐。
现代文：破城之后，世祖与众人商议对渠长生杀之事，那些渠长都跪在那里，当时辽国使者也在座。
English: After breaking through the city, the ancestor and the people discussed the matter of killing the canal chief. Those canal chiefs were kneeling there, and the Liao envoy was also present at the time.

古文：忽一人佩长刀突前咫尺，谓世祖曰： 勿杀我！ 
现代文：忽然，有一个人佩带长刀冲上前，离世祖近在咫尺，对世祖说 ：不要杀我。 
English: Suddenly, a man with a long sword rushed forward, very close to the patriarch, and said to him: "Don't kill me.

古文：辽使及左右皆走匿。
现代文：辽国使者及世祖左右的人见状吓得全走开躲起来了。
English: The envoys of the Liao Dynasty and the people around the ancestor were so scared that they all walked away and hid.

古文：世祖色不少动，执其人之手，语之曰： 吾不杀汝也。 
现代文：世祖面色一点不改，抓住那人的手，对他说 ：我不杀你。 
English: The patriarch did not change his face at all, grabbed the man's hand and said to him: "I won't kill you."

古文：于是罚左右匿者，曰： 汝等何敢失次耶？ 
现代文：于是斥责左右躲开的人，说： 你们这些人怎么敢丢失身份啊！ 
English: So he scolded those who were dodging left and right, saying: How dare you people lose your identity!

古文：罚既已，乃徐使执突前者杀之。
现代文：斥责完了，才慢慢让人把抓住的冲上前的人杀掉。
English: After the reprimand is over, the person who has been caught rushes forward and is slowly killed.

古文：其胆勇镇物如此。
现代文：世祖胆勇果敢镇事的本领就如此之大。
English: This is how great the ability of the ancestors of the world to be courageous and courageous is.

古文：师还，寝疾，遂笃。
现代文：班师归来，世祖卧病在床，并日渐沉重。
English: When the class teacher returned, Shizu was sick in bed and getting heavier and heavier.

古文：元娶拏懒氏哭不止，世祖曰： 汝勿哭，汝惟后我一岁耳。 
现代文：他的元配夫人孥懒氏哭泣不止，世祖说 ：你不要哭，你只比我晚死一年罢了。 
English: His former wife, Mrs. Zou Lazy, cried endlessly. Shizuo said, "Don't cry, you only died a year after me."

古文：肃宗请后事，曰： 汝惟后我三年。 
现代文：肃宗请世祖交待后事，世祖说： 你只比我晚死三年。 
English: Su Zong asked his ancestor to tell him what had happened. The ancestor said, "You only died three years after me.

古文：肃宗出，谓人曰： 吾兄至此，亦不与我好言。 
现代文：肃宗出来对人说 ：我哥哥已到了这地步了，也不给我好话。 
English: Su Zong came out and said to the people, "My brother has come to this stage, and he does not give me a kind word.

古文：乃叩地而哭。
现代文：于是叩地而哭。
English: So I fell to the ground and cried.

古文：俄呼穆宗谓曰： 乌雅束柔善，若办集契丹事，阿骨打能之。 
现代文：过了一会儿，世祖又叫去穆宗并对他说： 乌雅束柔善，如果办吞并契丹的事，阿骨打能胜任。 
English: After a while, the patriarch called Mu Zong again and said to him, "Wu Ya Sok is gentle. If you want to annex Khitan, Ah Ked can do it.

古文：辽大安八年五月十五日卒。
现代文：辽国大安八年五月十五日，世祖逝世。
English: On the 15th day of the 5th month of the 8th year of the Great Peace of the State of Liao, the ancestor passed away.

古文：袭位十九年，年五十四。
现代文：世祖在位十九年，享年五十四岁。
English: King Sejong reigned for 19 years and died at the age of 54.

古文：明年，拏懒氏卒。
现代文：第二年，孥懒氏逝世。
English: The following year, Gong Lazy passed away.

古文：又明年，肃宗卒。
现代文：又过了一年，肃宗逝世。
English: A year later, Su Zong passed away.

古文：肃宗病笃，叹曰： 我兄真多智哉！ 
现代文：肃宗病重的时候叹息道 ：我哥哥真是太聪明了！ 
English: When Sozong was seriously ill, he sighed, "My brother is really so smart!"

古文：世祖天性严重，有智识，一见必识，暂闻不忘。凝寒不缩栗，动止不回顾。
现代文：世祖天性严谨持重，有智慧有知识，遇事一看就明白，一听就不忘，冰天雪地不畏缩不颤栗，行动或停止一旦决定不再犹豫。
English: World Ancestors are by nature strict and serious, wise and knowledgeable. They understand things at a glance and do not forget them when they hear them. They do not flinch or tremble, and they do not hesitate once they decide to act or stop.

古文：每战未尝被甲，先以梦兆候其胜负。
现代文：每次作战没有披过铠甲，事先用梦兆来预测其胜负。
English: He did not wear armor in every battle, and used omens to predict his victory or defeat in advance.

古文：尝乘醉骑驴入室中，明日见驴足迹，问而知之，自是不复饮酒。
现代文：他曾经有一回乘着酒醉骑上驴进入室中，第二天看见驴的足迹，询问别人后知道是自己干的事，从此不再饮酒。
English: He once rode a donkey into a room while drunk. The next day, he saw the donkey's footprints and, after questioning others, he knew it was his own doing. He has never drunk alcohol since.

古文：袭位之初，内外溃叛，缔交为寇。世祖乃因败为功，变弱为强。既破桓赧、散达、乌春、窝谋罕，基业自此大矣。
现代文：他刚承袭节度使职位的时候，内部溃军外部叛匪，勾结为寇，世祖转败为胜，变弱为强，平定了桓赧、散达、乌春、窝谋罕之乱，基业自此牢固起来。
English: When he had just inherited the post of the Festival Administrator, the internal routed the external rebels, the collusion was a robbery, the ancestor turned defeat into victory, the weak into the strong, and the turmoil of Huanqian, Sanda, Wuchun, and Wo Mu Han was quelled. The foundation has been firmly established since then.

古文：天会十五年，追谥圣肃皇帝，庙号世祖。
现代文：天会十五年，追谥圣肃皇帝，庙号世祖。
English: In the 15th year of the Heaven's Fair, the Emperor of Shenshu, the founder of the temple, was chased away.

古文：皇统四年，号其藏曰永陵。
现代文：皇统四年，封其陵寝号为永陵。
English: In the fourth year of imperial rule, his tomb was sealed and given the name Yongling.

古文：五年，增谥世祖神武圣肃皇帝。
现代文：五年，增谥为世祖神武圣肃皇帝。
English: Five years later, Zeng Rong became the ancestor of Emperor Shenwu.

古文：母弟颇剌淑袭节度使，景祖第四子也，是为肃宗。辽重熙十一年壬午岁生。
现代文：世祖一母同胞弟弟颇剌淑承袭了节度使之职，他是景祖的第四个儿子，就是肃宗，辽国重熙十一年出生。
English: He was the fourth son of Jing Zu, that is, Su Zong, born in the eleventh year of Chongxi in Liao Province.

古文：在父兄时号国相。
现代文：他的父、兄在位时，他号称国相。
English: When his father and brother were in power, he claimed to be the minister of state.

古文：国相之称不知始何时。
现代文：国相之称不知始于何时。
English: I don't know when the title of minister of state began.

古文：初，雅达为国相。
现代文：当初，雅达是国相。
English: At the beginning, Yada was the Minister of State.

古文：雅达者，桓赧、散达之父也。
现代文：雅达，是桓赧、散达的父亲。
English: Yada is the father of Kanen and Sanda.

古文：景祖以币马求之于雅达，而命肃宗为之。
现代文：景祖拿财物和马匹送给雅达，请求他让位，而命肃宗做了国相。
English: Jing Zu took all his property and horses and gave them to Yada, asking him to give up his position, while Minsuzong became the minister of state.

古文：肃宗自幼机敏善辩。
现代文：肃宗自幼机敏善辩。
English: Su Zong has been quick-witted and good at arguing since he was a child.

古文：当其兄时，身居国相，尽心匡辅。
现代文：当他兄长在位时，他身居国相，尽心帮助辅佐世祖。
English: When his brother was on the throne, he served as the Minister of State and did his best to assist Shizuo.

古文：是时，叔父跋黑有异志，及桓赧、散达、乌春、窝谋罕、石显父子、腊醅、麻产作难，用兵之际，肃宗屡当一面。
现代文：当时，他的叔父跋黑与世祖不一心，以及后来桓赧、散达、乌春、窝谋罕、石显父子、腊醅、麻产作乱，在世祖用兵讨伐之际，肃宗屡次为他独挡一面。
English: At that time, his uncle, Tawaguro, was not of one mind with the patriarch, and later, Huan Zhao, Xanda, Wuchun, Wo Mu Han, Shi Xian and his son, Lashun, and Asan made trouble. When the patriarch used soldiers to fight, Su Zong repeatedly stood aside for him.

古文：尤能知辽人国政人情。凡有辽事，一切委之肃宗专心焉。
现代文：尤其是肃宗熟悉辽国的国政人情，凡有关辽国的事，一切委托给肃宗去办就放心了。
English: In particular, Su Zong is familiar with the national politics and human conditions of Liaoning Province. Any matters related to Liaoning Province can be entrusted to Su Zong.

古文：凡白事于辽官，皆令远跪陈辞，译者传致之，往往为译者错乱。
现代文：凡是向辽国官吏陈述事情，都被命令远远地跪着陈述，再由翻译的人将话传过去，事情往往被传译者说错搞乱。
English: Whenever they had to make a statement to Liao officials, they were ordered to do so from a distance, on their knees. An interpreter then relayed the words to them, and things were often confused by the interpreter's mistakes.

古文：肃宗欲得自前委曲言之，故先不以实告译者。
现代文：肃宗想得到机会自己进前说明事情的底细和原委，所以先不告诉传译者实话。
English: Su Zong did not tell the interpreter the truth at first because he wanted to have the opportunity to explain the details of the matter and the original committee.

古文：译者惑之，不得已，引之前，使自言。
现代文：传译者对他的话有疑惑，迫不得已，把他引荐到辽官面前，让他自己说。
English: The interpreter had doubts about his words and, as a last resort, introduced him to the Liao officials and asked him to speak for himself.

古文：乃以草木瓦石为筹，枚数其事而陈之。
现代文：肃宗就拿草木瓦石作为记数和计算的用具，一件一件数他的事而陈述。
English: Su Zong took the grass, wood and stone as the tools for counting and calculating, and listed the things one by one.

古文：官吏听者皆愕然，问其故，则为卑辞以对曰： 鄙陋无文，故如此。 
现代文：辽国官吏和旁听者都很惊讶，问他为什么这样做，他就用谦卑的词句对答说： 我粗俗寡闻不识字，所以才像这样。 
English: Liao officials and onlookers were astonished. When asked why he did it, he replied humbly, "I am vulgar and illiterate, that's why I am like this."

古文：官吏以为实然，不复疑之，是以所诉无不如意。
现代文：官吏以为他说的是实话，不再怀疑他，所以对他所诉说的没有不满意的。
English: The officials thought he was telling the truth and no longer doubted him, so they were not dissatisfied with what he told them.

古文：桓赧、散达之战，部人赛罕死之，其弟活罗阴怀忿怨。
现代文：在对桓赧、散达的战斗中，部落里一个叫赛罕的人死了，赛罕的弟弟活罗暗地里怀着忿怨。
English: During the battle against Huancheng and Sanda, a man in the tribe named Saihan died, and Saihan's younger brother, Liu Luo, secretly harbored a grudge.

古文：一日，忽以剑脊置肃宗项上曰： 吾兄为汝辈死矣！刭汝以偿，则如之何？ 
现代文：有一天，他忽然拿剑脊放在肃宗脖子上说 ：我哥哥是为你们死的，杀你为他偿命，你看怎么样？ 
English: One day, he suddenly put the sword on Sozong's neck and said, "My brother died for you, kill you for his life, what do you think?"

古文：久之，因其兄柩至，遂怒而攻习不出，习不出走避之。
现代文：僵持良久，因为他兄长的灵柩运回来了，于是他又愤怒地去攻击习不出，习不出跑开躲过了他。
English: After a long standoff, because his brother's coffin had been returned, he angrily attacked and ran away from him.

古文：攻肃宗于家，矢注次室之裙，著于门扉。
现代文：活罗又到肃宗家里攻击肃宗，箭头射穿了肃宗第二位夫人的裙子，又进入门扉里。
English: Kuro also went to Sojong's home to attack him. The arrow pierced the skirt of Sojong's second wife and entered the door.

古文：复攻欢都，欢都衷甲拒于室中，既不能入，持其门旃而去，往附杯乃。
现代文：活罗转而去攻击欢都，欢都把甲胄贴身穿在衣服里面，关上门在室内抵御，活罗进不去，扯下欢都门上赤色旗子就走，去投奔杯乃。
English: Lively Luo turned to attack Huandu. Huandu put the armor close to his body and wore it inside his clothes. He closed the door and resisted indoors. Lively Luo could not get in. He pulled down the red flag on the door of Huandu and left. He went to join the cup.

古文：杯乃诱乌春兵度岭，世祖与遇于苏素海甸。
现代文：杯乃诱骗乌春的兵翻过山岭，世祖与他们在苏素海甸相遇。
English: The cup was used to trick Wu Chun's soldiers into crossing the mountains, and the founder met them in the Susu Sea.

古文：世祖曰： 予昔有异梦，今不可亲战。
现代文：世祖说 ：我过去曾做过一个奇怪的梦，说今天不可亲自迎战。
English: The patriarch said: "I had a strange dream in the past, saying that I must not go into battle today.

古文：若左军中有力战者，则大功成矣！ 
现代文：如果左军中有奋力作战的人，那么就大功告成了。 
English: If there are people in the left army who fight hard, then it's a great achievement.

古文：命肃宗及斜列、辞不失与之战。
现代文：于是他命令肃宗以及斜列、辞不失去迎战乌春的军队。
English: So he ordered Su Zong and his army to march in formation and not to lose the battle against Wuchun.

古文：肃宗下马，名呼世祖，复自呼其名而言曰： 若天助我当为众部长，则今日之事神祇监之。 
现代文：肃宗翻身下马，呼喊世祖的名字，又呼唤自己的名字，说道 ：如果老天爷帮助我当众部长，那么今天的战事请神明来监督它。 
English: Sozong rolled over and dismounted, called out the name of his ancestor and his own name, and said, "If God helps me to become a minister, then I ask the gods to oversee today's battle."

古文：语毕再拜。遂炷火束缊。
现代文：说完向苍天拜了两拜，点燃一束棉麻。
English: After saying this, he bowed to the heavens and lit a bundle of cotton.

古文：顷之，大风自后起，火益炽。
现代文：顷刻之间，大风从人们身后刮起，火越烧越炽烈。
English: In an instant, a strong wind blew up from behind the people, and the fire became more and more fierce.

古文：是时八月，并青草皆焚之，烟焰涨天。
现代文：当时是八月，连青草也一起焚烧起来，烟焰弥漫天空。
English: At that time, it was August, and even the grass was burned together, and the sky was filled with smoke.

古文：我军随烟冲击，大败之。
现代文：世祖军队随着浓烟冲击，把杯乃军打得大败。
English: The ancestral army, with the impact of thick smoke, defeated the cup army.

古文：遂获杯乃，囚而献诸辽。
现代文：结果杯乃被擒获，把他囚起来献给了辽国。
English: As a result, the cup was captured, and he was imprisoned and given to Liao.

古文：并获活罗，肃宗释其罪，左右任使之，后竟得其力焉。
现代文：同时抓获了活罗。肃宗开脱了活罗的罪责，任由肃宗左右驱使，后来竟然借了他的力。
English: At the same time, Goro was captured. Sozong absolved Goro's guilt and allowed Sozong to drive him around, and later even borrowed his strength.

古文：大安八年，自国相袭位。
现代文：大安八年，肃宗以国相的身份承袭节度使之位。
English: In the 8th year of the Taian era, Su Zong, as the minister of state, inherited the festival and put it in place.

古文：是时，麻产尚据直屋铠水，缮完营堡，诱纳亡命。
现代文：当时，麻产还据守在直屋铠水，修缮兵营堡垒，诱纳亡命之徒。
English: At that time, Asanobu was still stationed in Tadaya, Surabaya, repairing the barracks fortress and luring fugitives.

古文：招之，不听，遣康宗伐之。
现代文：肃宗对他招安，他不听从，肃宗就派遣康宗讨伐他。
English: Su Zong appealed to him for peace, but he did not listen, so Su Zong sent Kang Zong to fight him.

古文：太祖别军取麻产家属，锜釜无遗。
现代文：太祖阿骨打分出部分军队去捕获麻产的家属，钅奇釜无遗，洗劫一空。
English: The great-grandfather, Akone, sent out a part of the army to capture the relatives of Asanobu, and the whole place was ransacked.

古文：既获麻产，杀之，献馘于辽。
现代文：等到抓获了麻产，把他杀了，割下他的左耳献给了辽国。
English: When he caught Asao, he killed him, cut off his left ear and gave it to Liao.

古文：陶温水民来附。
现代文：陶温水民众都来归附肃宗。
English: The people of Tawangshui have all come to adhere to Sui Sect.

古文：二年癸酉，遣太祖以偏师伐泥厖古部帅水抹离海村跋黑、播立开，平之，自是寇贼皆息。
现代文：第二年，派遣太祖阿骨打带领偏师讨伐泥庞古部帅水抹离海村的跋黑、播立开，平定了他们的叛乱，从此寇贼之乱全部平息。
English: In the second year, Emperor Akechi dispatched the patriarch Akechi to lead the division to fight against the muddy muddy muddy muddy muddy muddy muddy muddy muddy muddy muddy muddy muddy muddy muddy muddy muddy muddy muddy muddy muddy muddy mud.

古文：三年八月，肃宗卒。
现代文：第三年八月，肃宗去世。
English: In August of the third year, Su Zong passed away.

古文：天会十五年，追谥穆宪皇帝。
现代文：天会十五年，追谥肃宗为穆宪皇帝。
English: In the 15th year of the Heian period, Emperor Suizong became Emperor Mu Xian.

古文：皇统四年，藏号泰陵。
现代文：皇统四年，其寝陵定名为泰陵。
English: In the fourth year of imperial rule, his mausoleum was given the name Tai Ling.

古文：五年，增谥肃宗明睿穆宪皇帝。
现代文：五年，又增谥他为肃宗明睿穆宪皇帝。
English: Five years later, he was elevated to the throne as Emperor Su Zong Ming Rui Mu Xian.

古文：母弟穆宗，讳盈歌，字乌鲁完，景祖第五子也。
现代文：肃宗的胞弟穆宗，名叫盈歌，字为乌鲁完，是景祖的第五个儿子。
English: Su Zong's brother Mu Zong, named Yingge, is the fifth son of Jing Zu.

古文：南人称扬割太师，又曰扬割追谥孝平皇帝，号穆宗，又曰扬割号仁祖。
现代文：南方人称他为 扬割太师 ，有说扬割被追封为孝平皇帝，号穆宗，还有一说扬割号仁祖。
English: The Nanfang people called him Yang Wai Daishi, and there is a story that Yang Wai was posthumously crowned as Emperor Xiaoping, with the name Mu Zong, and there is also a story that Yang Wai was called Ren Zu.

古文：金代无号仁祖者，穆宗讳盈歌，谥孝平， 盈 近 扬 ， 歌 近 割 ，南北音讹。
现代文：可是金代没有号仁祖的皇帝。穆宗名讳盈歌，谥号孝平， 盈 的读音与 扬 相近 ，歌 的读音与 割 相近，可能是南北方口音的讹传。
English: However, the Jin Dynasty did not have an emperor with the name Renzu. Mu Zong's name was Yingge, and his posthumous name was Xiaoping. The pronunciation of Ying was similar to Yang, and the pronunciation of Song was similar to Ku, which may be the transmission of the north-south accent.

古文：辽人呼节度使为太师，自景祖至太祖皆有是称。
现代文：辽人称呼节度使为 太师 ，从景祖到太祖都有这么称呼的。
English: The Liao people called the ruler of the Liao dynasty "Taishi" (太師), and people from Jingzu (景祖) to Taizu (太祖) were called by this title.

古文：凡《丛言》、《松漠记》、张棣《金志》等书皆无足取。
现代文：凡是《丛言》、《松漠记》、张棣的《金志》等书都是不足取的。
English: Books such as "The Analects of Confucius," "Song of the Desert" and Zhang Ye's "The Golden Legend" are not good enough.

古文：穆宗，辽重熙二十二年癸巳岁生。
现代文：穆宗，辽重熙二十二年生。
English: Mu Zong, Liao Shigehiro, 22 years old.

古文：肃宗时擒麻产，辽命穆宗为详稳。
现代文：肃宗在位时擒拿麻产，辽朝命令穆宗为镇抚边民的官。
English: When Su Zong was on the throne, he seized the hemp production, and the Liao Dynasty ordered Mu Zong to be the official of the border residents.

古文：大安十年甲戌，袭节度使，年四十二。
现代文：大安十年，穆宗承袭节度使之职，当时他四十二岁。
English: In the 10th year of the Taian era, Mu Zong was 42 years old when he inherited the post of the festival.

古文：以兄劾者子撒改为国相。
现代文：他任命兄长劾者的儿子撒改做国相。
English: He appointed the son of his brother's accuser, Sako, as minister of state.

古文：三年丙子，唐括部跋葛勃堇与温都部人跋忒有旧，跋葛以事往，跋忒杀跋葛。
现代文：第三年，唐括部跋葛勃堇与温都部人跋忒有旧怨，跋葛因旧事前往温都部，跋忒杀死了跋葛。
English: In the third year of the Tang Dynasty, the Tang bracket Boga Burgu had an old grudge with the people of Wendao. Boga went to Wendao because of the old matter, and Boga killed Boga.

古文：使太祖率师伐跋忒，跋忒亡去，追及，杀之星显水，纥石烈部阿疏、毛睹禄阻兵为难，穆宗自将伐阿疏，撒改以偏师攻钝恩城，拔之。
现代文：为此，穆宗差遣太祖率领军队攻伐跋忒，跋忒逃跑了，太祖追上他，在星显水把他杀了。纥石烈部阿礡、毛睹禄阻挡太祖军队有意为难，穆宗打算亲自讨伐阿礡，命撒改带领偏师攻打钝恩城，拔下了这个钉子。
English: For this reason, Mu Zong sent his great-grandfather to lead the army to attack Bafang, Bafang fled, the great-grandfather caught up with him and killed him in Xingxianshui. Zhi Shi Rongbu Ayun, Mao Jilu blocked the great-grandfather's army intentionally, Mu Zong planned to personally fight against Ayun, and changed his life to lead the division to attack Blunt En City, and pulled out this nail.

古文：阿疏初闻来伐，乃自诉于辽。遂留劾者守阿疏城，穆宗乃还。
现代文：开始，阿礡听说穆宗来攻伐，就亲自到辽国告状，于是辽国便留劾者守卫阿礡城，穆宗就回去了。
English: At first, upon hearing that Mu Zong was coming to attack, Aman personally went to Liao to lodge a complaint. As a result, Liao left the accusers to guard the city of Aman, and Mu Zong went back.

古文：会陶温水、徒笼古水纥石烈部阿阁版及石鲁阻五国鹰路，执杀辽捕鹰使者。
现代文：恰逢陶温水、徒笼古水纥石烈部阿版及石鲁串通在五国鹰路设障碍，捕杀辽国的捕鹰使者。
English: It coincided with the collusion of the Tao Warm Water, the Ancient Water Dragon Cage, the Stone Strongman Aban and the Stone Lu to set up obstacles in the Five Countries Eagle Road to catch and kill the eagle-hunting envoys of Liao.

古文：辽诏穆宗讨之，阿阁版等据险立栅。
现代文：辽国诏令穆宗讨伐他们，阿版等占据险要地段设立栅栏。
English: Liao Guo Zhao ordered Mu Zong to fight them, and Aban and others occupied the critical area and set up a fence.

古文：方大寒，乃募善射者操劲弓利矢攻之。
现代文：当时正值天气大寒，穆宗就招募善于射箭的人操劲弓利箭向栅内攻击。
English: At that time, when the weather was very cold, Mu Zong recruited people who were good at archery to use their bows and arrows to attack the gate.

古文：数日，入其城，出辽使存者数人，俾之归。
现代文：过了几天，才进入阿版守城，救出幸存的辽国使者仅数人，让他们回辽去了。
English: It took a few days before they entered the Aban fortress and rescued the few surviving emissaries from Liao, allowing them to return to Liao.

古文：统门、浑蠢水之交乌古论部留可、诈都与苏滨水乌古论敌库德，起兵于米里迷石罕城，纳根涅之子钝恩亦亡去，于是两党作难。
现代文：统门、浑蠢水相交处的乌古论部的留可、诈都与苏滨水的乌古论敌库德在米里迷石罕城起兵，纳根涅的儿子钝恩也逃去了。于是两人作乱。
English: At the junction of the Unimun Gate and the Muddy Water, Ruko and Shuku of the Department of the Ughu Theory and the enemy of the Ughu Theory of Su Bin Shui, Kud, raised an army in the city of Mirimazhikhan, and Nagane's son, Tupun, also fled. So the two made a disturbance.

古文：八月，撒改为都统，辞不失、阿里合懑、斡带副之，以伐留可、诈都、坞塔等。
现代文：八月，撒改出任都统，辞不失、阿里合懑、斡带为副都统，率兵攻伐留可、诈都、坞塔等。
English: In August, Sakai was appointed as a member of the Central Committee of the Communist Party of China (CPC) and became the vice-chairman of the Central Committee of the Communist Party of China (CPC).

古文：谩都诃、石土门伐敌库德。
现代文：谩都诃、石土门攻伐敌库德。
English: Tudou, Shitumen attacked the enemy Kude.

古文：撒改欲先平边地城堡，或欲先取留可，莫能决，乃命太祖往。
现代文：撒改打算先扫平边地城堡，或者先攻取留可，没能决断。于是命令太祖前往。
English: Sakai was undecided whether to level the castle first or to capture Ruko first, so he ordered Taizu to go.

古文：钝恩将援留可，乘谩都诃兵未集而攻之。
现代文：钝恩想援助留可，乘谩都诃兵尚未集结而向他们进攻。
English: Blunt En wanted to help but stayed, taking advantage of the fact that the Tudor soldiers had not yet assembled to attack them.

古文：石土门军既与谩都诃会，迎击钝恩，大败之，降米里迷石罕城，获钝恩、敌库德，释弗杀。
现代文：石土门军已经与谩都诃会合，迎击钝恩，把钝恩打得大败，降服了米里迷石罕城，擒获了钝恩、敌库德，没有杀他们把他们释放了。
English: The Shidumen army has already met with the Shu and the Tudors, confronted the Gog and Magog, defeated the Gog and Magog, conquered the city of Mirimuzhikhan, captured the Gog and Magog, and released them without killing them.

古文：太祖度盆搦岭，与撒改会，攻破留可城，留可已先往辽矣，尽杀其城中渠长。
现代文：太祖的军队翻越盆搦岭，与撒改会合，攻破了留可守城，留可已经先逃往辽国了，于是把城中渠长全杀光了。
English: Taizu's army crossed the Bonpi Mountains, met with Sakai, and broke through the Ruko fortress. Ruko had already fled to Liao, so he killed all the canals in the city.

古文：还围坞塔城，坞塔先已亡在外，城降于军。诈都亦降于蒲家奴，于是抚宁诸路如旧时。
现代文：部队返回又包围了坞塔守城。坞塔先已经逃亡在外，城中留守人员投降了太祖的军队，诈都也投降了蒲家奴，于是安抚各路得以宁静，像往常一样。
English: The troops returned and encircled the dockyard tower. The dockyard tower had already fled, the remaining personnel in the city surrendered to the ancestor's army, and the fraud also surrendered to Pujian, so the pacification of all roads was peaceful, as usual.

古文：太师因致穆宗，教统门、浑蠢、耶悔、星显四路及岭东诸部自今勿复称都部长。
现代文：太祖因此建议穆宗，从此以后统门、浑蠢、耶悔、星显四路以及岭东各部不再称他们的首领为部长。
English: The great-grandfather therefore suggested to Mu Zong that henceforth, the leaders of Tongmen, Hunbu, Yechi, Xingxian and the ministries in the eastern part of Lingdong should no longer be called ministers.

古文：命胜官、丑阿等抚定乙离骨岭注阿门水之西诸部居民，又命斡带及偏裨悉平二涅囊虎、二蠢出等路寇盗而还。
现代文：穆宗又命令胜管、丑阿等安抚平定乙离骨岭注阿门水之西的诸部居民，又命令斡带及副将平定二涅囊虎、二蠢出等路强盗贼寇。
English: Mu Zong also ordered the commander-in-chief, Ushi Ah, and others to pacify the residents of various parts of the west of the Jiaoling-Amenshui River, and also ordered the mediator and vice-commander to pacify the bandits and thieves such as the two nixies and the two fools.

古文：七年庚辰，劾者尚守阿疏城，毛睹禄来降。
现代文：第七年，劾者仍然驻守阿礡城，毛睹禄来投降。
English: In the seventh year, the accusers were still stationed in the city of Ao, and Mao Jilu came to surrender.

古文：阿疏犹在辽，辽使使来罢兵。
现代文：阿礡还在辽国，辽国派使者来停止兵乱。
English: The Grand Empress Dowager Cixi was still in Liao, and Liao sent an envoy to stop the mutiny.

古文：未到，穆宗使乌林答石鲁往佐劾者，戒之曰： 辽使来罢兵，但换我军衣服旗帜与阿疏城中无辨，勿令辽使知之。 
现代文：人还未到，穆宗派乌林答石鲁前往阿礡城辅佐劾者，告诫他说 ：辽国使者来罢兵，但他们换穿我军衣服，打着我军旗帜，与阿礡城中我军无法分辨，你们此行不要让辽使知道。 
English: Before they arrived, Mu Sect sent Ulin Taishi Lu to Ayutthaya to assist the prosecutor, and warned him: The Liao envoys came to strike, but they changed into our army's clothes and carried our army's flag, and they were indistinguishable from our army in Ayutthaya. Don't let the Liao envoys know about your trip.

古文：因戒劾者曰： 辽使可以计却，勿听其言遽罢兵也。 
现代文：并告诫劾者说： 辽使可能用计谋退兵，不要听他们的话马上收战。 
English: And he admonished his accusers, saying, "The Liao envoys may use stratagems to withdraw their troops. Don't listen to their words and immediately end the war.

古文：辽使果来罢兵，穆宗使蒲察部胡鲁勃堇、邈逊孛堇与俱至阿疏城。
现代文：辽国使者果然来罢兵。穆宗派蒲察部胡鲁勃堇、邈逊孛堇和他一起到阿礡城。
English: The emissary from Liao really did come to call up the troops. Mu Sect sent the Puja Department, Hulubong and Xunxun, to join him in Ao.

古文：劾者见辽使，诡谓胡鲁、邈逊曰： 我部族自相攻击，干汝等何事？
现代文：劾者看见辽使在侧，施诡计对胡鲁、邈逊说 ：我部族的人自相攻击，干你们什么事？
English: The accuser saw the Liao envoy at his side and, using trickery, said to Huru and Jison, "My tribe is attacking each other, what are you doing?"

古文：谁识汝之太师？ 
现代文：谁认识你们太师？ 
English: Who knows your grand masters?

古文：乃援创刺杀胡鲁、邈逊所乘马。
现代文：说着，又拿剑刺杀胡鲁、邈逊所乘的马。
English: Saying this, he also took a sword and stabbed the horses that Hulú and Xunxun were riding.

古文：辽使惊骇遽走，不敢回顾，径归。
现代文：辽使很吃惊，吓得急忙就跑，不敢回头，径直逃回去了。
English: The Liao envoy was very surprised. He was so scared that he ran away in a hurry. He did not dare to turn back and ran straight back.

古文：居数日，破其城。
现代文：过了几天，穆宗攻破阿礡城。
English: A few days later, Mu Zong broke through the city.

古文：狄故保还自辽。在城中，执而杀之。
现代文：狄故保从辽国回来，在城中被抓住杀了。
English: Di Guobao returned from Liao and was caught and killed in the city.

古文：阿疏复诉于辽。
现代文：阿礡报告了辽国。
English: Ah Yan reported on the situation in Liao Province.

古文：辽遣奚节度使乙烈来。
现代文：辽国差遣奚节度使乙烈来到阿礡城。
English: Liao's dispatch of Xie Jiedu brought Yitre to Aqian City.

古文：穆宗至来流水兴和村，见乙烈。
现代文：穆宗到来流水兴和村会见了乙烈。
English: When Mu Zong arrived at Lushui Xinghe Village, he met with Aitre.

古文：问阿疏城事，命穆宗曰： 凡攻城所获，存者复与之，不存者备偿。 
现代文：乙烈询问了阿礡城的事，命令穆宗说： 凡攻城所缴获的，还存在的要还给他们，不存在的要加倍赔偿。 
English: Yi Rong inquired about the city of Aran, and ordered Muzong to say: "Anything captured during the siege that still exists should be returned to them, and anything that does not exist should be compensated twice as much.

古文：且征马数百匹。
现代文：并且要征收马数百匹。
English: In addition, hundreds of horses are to be confiscated.

古文：穆宗与僚佐谋曰： 若偿阿疏，则诸部不复可号令任使也。 
现代文：穆宗与左右同僚商量说： 假如赔偿阿礡，那么不再可以对各部落发号施令任意驱使了。 
English: Mu Zong discussed with his colleagues from the left and right and said, "If we compensate the imams, then it will no longer be possible to issue orders to the tribes and drive them arbitrarily.

古文：乃令主隈、秃答两水之民阳为阻绝鹰路，复使鳖故德部节度使言于辽曰： 欲开鹰路，非生女直节度使不可。 
现代文：于是让主隈、秃答两水的居民佯装阻绝鹰路，暗中派鳖故德部节度使给辽传话 ：要开鹰路，非生女真节度使出面不可。 
English: So let the residents of the main neighborhood, Balda and the two waters pretend to block the eagle road, and secretly send the old virtue to Liao: to open the eagle road, it is necessary to make the birth of a woman true.

古文：辽不知其为穆宗谋也，信之，命穆宗讨阻绝鹰路者，而阿疏城事遂止。
现代文：辽国不知这是穆宗的计谋，相信了这话，命令穆宗讨伐阻绝鹰路的人，而阿礡城的事就放下不问了。
English: Liao did not know that this was Mu Zong's scheme. He believed this and ordered Mu Zong to fight against the people who blocked Yinglu Road, and he did not ask about the matter of Ayao City.

古文：穆宗声言平鹰路，畋于土温水而归。
现代文：穆宗声言扫平鹰路，打猎到土温水后就归去了。
English: Mu Zong said that he would sweep the eagle road and return after hunting to the warm water.

古文：是岁，留可来降。
现代文：当年，留可前来投降。
English: That year, Ruko came to surrender.

古文：八年辛巳，辽使使持赐物来赏平鹰路之有功者。
现代文：第八年，辽国派使臣带着赐物来奖赏平鹰路有功者。
English: In the eighth year, Liao sent envoys with gifts to reward the meritorious people of Pingyao Road.

古文：九年壬午，使蒲家奴以辽赐，给主隈、秃答之民，且修鹰路而归。
现代文：第九年，辽国使臣蒲家奴向主隈、秃答居民分发了辽国的赐物，并且修复鹰路，然后归去了。
English: In the ninth year, the envoy of Liao State, Pu Jianu, distributed gifts from Liao State to residents of Zhukuma and Zhaotou, and repaired Eagle Road, and then returned.

古文：冬，萧海里叛，入于系案女直阿典部，遣其族人斡达剌来给结和，曰： 愿与太师为友，同往伐辽。 
现代文：这年冬天，萧海里叛乱，进入系案女真阿典部，派他的族人斡达剌来讲和，说： 我们愿意和太师做朋友，一同前往攻伐辽国。 
English: This winter, when Xiao Hai rebelled, he entered the department of Zhen A Dun, and sent his clansmen to mediate peace, saying, "We are willing to be friends with the Grandmaster and go to attack Liao Province together."

古文：穆宗执斡达剌。
现代文：穆宗逮捕了斡达剌。
English: Mu Zong arrested Yang Da Quan.

古文：会辽命穆宗捕讨海里，穆宗送斡达剌于辽，募军得甲千余。
现代文：正好辽国命令穆宗讨伐缉捕海里，穆宗将斡达剌押送到辽国，募集军队得铠甲一千多件。
English: It was just at that time that Liao ordered Mu Zong to crack down on illegal fishing in the sea. Mu Zong sent his envoys to Liao and recruited more than a thousand soldiers.

古文：女直甲兵之数，始见于此，盖未尝满千也。
现代文：女真军队铠甲和兵器的数目，始见于此，还不满一千人。
English: The number of armor and weapons of the Jurchen army, first seen here, is still less than a thousand.

古文：军次混同水，萧海里再使人来，复执之。
现代文：军队到混同水，萧海里再派人来议和，又被抓捕。
English: The army arrived at the confluence of the two rivers, and Xiao Hai again sent someone to negotiate peace, but he was arrested again.

古文：既而与海里遇。海里遥问曰： 我使者安在？ 
现代文：不久穆宗军队与海里相遇，海里在远处问道 ：我派的人在什么地方？ 
English: Soon the army of Muzong met the sea, and the sea in the distance asked: Where are the people I sent?

古文：对曰： 与后人偕来。 
现代文：回答道： 和后面的人一同来。 
English: He answered, Come with the crowd that is behind you.

古文：海里不信。
现代文：海里不相信。
English: Hai Li didn't believe it.

古文：是时，辽追海里兵数千人，攻之不能克。
现代文：这时候，辽国追海里的兵士几千人，攻击海里却不能战胜他。
English: At this time, Liao Guo chased several thousand soldiers in the sea, attacked the sea but could not defeat him.

古文：穆宗谓辽将曰： 退尔军，我当独取海里。 
现代文：穆宗对辽将说 ：你的军队退下去，我当单独擒拿海里。 
English: Mu Zong said to Liao Zheng: "Withdraw your army, and let me take the sea by myself."

古文：辽将许之。
现代文：辽将答应了他。
English: Liao Zheng agreed.

古文：太祖策马突战，流矢中海里首，海里堕马下，执而杀之，大破其军。
现代文：太祖策马冲锋，流矢击中海里的头部，海里堕落在马下，太祖抓住杀了他，并把他的军队杀得大败。
English: The great-grandfather charged the horse, the arrow hit the head of the sea, the sea fell under the horse, the great-grandfather caught and killed him, and his army was defeated.

古文：使阿离合懑献馘于辽。
现代文：派阿离合懑将海里尸首献给辽国。
English: Paia Yiaohui dedicated the body in the sea to Liao Guo.

古文：金人自此知辽兵之易与也。
现代文：金人从此了解了辽国军队容易掌握。
English: From then on, the Jin learned that the Liao forces were easy to control.

古文：是役也，康宗最先登，于是以先登并有功者为前行，次以诸军护俘获归所部。
现代文：这场战役中，康宗最先登城，于是让先登城并且有功的人走在前面，随后走的是诸军押着所擒俘虏，分别归回自己的部落。
English: In this battle, Kangzong was the first to enter the city, so he let those who entered the city first and had meritorious deeds go ahead, followed by the troops holding the captured prisoners and returning to their own tribe.

古文：穆宗朝辽主于渔所，大被嘉赏，授以使相，锡予加等。
现代文：穆宗在打鱼的地方朝拜辽主，大受嘉赏，辽主授给他使相之职，并加倍封赏。
English: Mu Zong paid homage to the Liao Lord in the place where he was fishing, and was greatly rewarded. The Liao Lord awarded him the post of envoy, and doubled the reward.

古文：十年癸未二月，穆宗还。
现代文：十年二月，穆宗得胜归来。
English: In February of the tenth year, Mu Zong returned victorious.

古文：辽使使授从破海里者官赏。
现代文：辽国派使臣给随着穆宗破海里的人封官加赏。
English: Liao sent envoys to reward the people who broke through the sea with Mu Zong.

古文：高丽始来通好。
现代文：这时高丽国开始来建立友好往来。
English: At this time, Korea began to establish friendly relations.

古文：十月二十九日，穆宗卒，年五十有一。
现代文：十月二十九日，穆宗逝世，享年五十一岁。
English: On October 29, Muzong passed away at the age of 51.

古文：初，诸部各有信牌，穆宗用太祖议，擅置牌号者置于法，自是号令乃一，民听不疑矣。
现代文：当初，各部落都有信牌，穆宗采用太祖的建议，规定擅自设置牌号的人要按法令处置，从此才有了统一的号令，民众听命于统一的号令不容置疑。
English: At the beginning, each tribe had a sign, and Mu Zong adopted the suggestion of the great-grandfather, stipulating that those who set up a sign without authorization should be dealt with according to the law. From then on, there was a unified call, and the people obeyed the unified call without question.

古文：自景祖以来，两世四主，志业相因，卒定离析，一切治以本部法令，东南至于乙离骨、曷懒、耶懒、土骨论，东北至于五国、主隈、秃答，金盖盛于此。
现代文：自景祖以来，两世四主，志向事业相承袭，终老论定相分离，一切治理依据本部法令，东南到乙离骨、曷懒、耶懒、土骨论，东北到五国、主隈、秃答，金朝因此兴盛起来。
English: Since the time of King Jingsu, two generations and four lords have inherited the cause of aspiration, but separated the cause of determination from the cause of life and death, and all governance is based on the headquarters decree, from the southeast to the west, from the bone, lazy, lazy, and soil to the bone, and from the northeast to the five countries, the main neighborhood, and the bald answer, so the Jin Dynasty flourished.

古文：天会十五年，追谥孝平皇帝，庙号穆宗。
现代文：天会十五年，追谥穆宗为孝平皇帝，庙号是穆宗。
English: In the fifteenth year of the Heaven's Fair, Emperor Jiaozong Mu Zong was enthroned as Emperor Xiaoping, and the temple's name was changed to Mu Zong.

古文：皇统四年，号其藏曰献陵。
现代文：皇统四年，尊其寝宫为献陵。
English: In the fourth year of imperial rule, his sleeping palace was dedicated as a mausoleum.

古文：五年，增谥章顺孝平皇帝。
现代文：五年，又加封其为章顺孝平皇帝。
English: Five years later, he was given the additional title of Emperor Zhang Shun Xiaoping.

古文：兄子康宗，讳乌雅束，字毛路完，世祖长子也。辽清宁七年辛丑岁生。
现代文：穆宗兄长的儿子康宗，名讳乌雅束，字毛路完，是世祖的长子，生于辽清宁七年。
English: The eldest son of Mu Zong's elder brother, Kang Zong, known as Wu Ya Zuke, is the eldest son of Shizu, born in the seventh year of Liao Qing Ning.

古文：乾统三年癸未，袭节度使，年四十三。
现代文：乾统三年癸未，承袭节度使之职，时年四十三岁。
English: At the age of forty-three, Emperor Qian was still in his third year of reign.

古文：穆宗末年，阿疏使达纪诱扇边民，曷懒甸人执送之。
现代文：穆宗末年，阿礡派达纪诱骗煽动边民，曷懒甸人抓住这个煽动者驱逐出去。
English: In the last years of the Mu Zong, the imam sent Daji to entice and incite the border people, and the lazy people caught the instigator and expelled him.

古文：穆宗使石适欢抚纳曷懒甸，未行，穆宗卒，至是遣焉。
现代文：穆宗派石适欢安抚收拢曷懒甸，石适欢未走，穆宗去世，到这个时候还是派遣了。
English: Mu Zong faction Shi Shiguang pacified and curbed the idleness, but before Shi Shiguang left, Mu Zong passed away. At this time, he was still dispatched.

古文：先是，高丽通好，既而颇有隙，高丽使来请议事，使者至高丽，拒而不纳。
现代文：先是高丽来通好，后来互相之间很有些猜忌，高丽派人来请议事，及至派了人到了高丽，却又拒绝接见。
English: At first, Goryeo tried to make amends, but later there was a lot of suspicion between the two sides. Goryeo sent someone to request a meeting, and when that person arrived in Goryeo, they refused to meet.

古文：五水之民附于高丽，执团练使十四人。语在《高丽传》中。
现代文：五水的人民都归附了高丽，拘捕的团练使有十四人，这些事记载在《高丽传》中。
English: The people of Wushui all joined Goryeo, and there were fourteen members of the group who were arrested. These events are recorded in "The Biography of Goryeo."

古文：二年甲申，高丽再来伐，石适欢再破之。
现代文：康宗二年，高丽又来攻伐，石适欢又击败了高丽军队。
English: In the second year of Kangzong, Goryeo attacked again, and Shishihong defeated the Goryeo army.

古文：高丽复请和，前所执团练十四人皆遣归，石适欢抚定边民而还。
现代文：高丽于是又请求讲和，以前拘捕的团练使十四人全部释放归来，石适欢安抚罢边民而还。
English: Goryeo then requested to make peace, and the previous arrest of the group resulted in the release and return of all fourteen people. Shi Shiguang appeased the people on the other side and returned.

古文：苏滨水民不听命，使斡带至活罗海川，召诸官僚告谕之。
现代文：苏滨水的民众不听从命令，差遣斡带等到活罗海川，召集各官僚告诉他们这件事。
English: The people of Su's waterfront did not obey the order, and sent a messenger to wait until the Zhuro River, and gathered the bureaucrats to tell them about the matter.

古文：含国部苏滨水居斡豁勃堇不至。斡准部、职德部既至，复亡去。
现代文：含国部居于苏滨水的斡豁部落酋长勃堇不到场，斡准部、职德部的人已经到了场，又溜回去了。
English: Burgundy, the tribal chief of Su Bin Shui, including the Ministry of State, was not present at the scene. People from the Ministry of Good Offices and the Ministry of Ethics had already arrived at the scene and slipped back.

古文：坞塔遇二部于马纪岭，执之而来，遂伐斡豁，克之。
现代文：坞塔在马纪岭与斡准、职德二部相遇，把他们抓了来，于是攻伐斡豁，攻克了。
English: The dock tower met with the two departments of the Ministry of Justice and the Ministry of Public Security in Maji Ridge and caught them, so they attacked the Ministry of Justice and the Ministry of Public Security and defeated them.

古文：斡带进至北琴海，攻拔泓忒城，乃还。
现代文：斡带挺进到北琴海，攻克了泓忒城，才回来。
English: They advanced to the North Qin Sea and conquered the city of Lushan before returning.

古文：四年丙戌，高丽遣黑欢方石来贺袭位，遣杯鲁报之。
现代文：康宗四年，高丽派遣黑欢方石来祝贺康宗袭位，派杯鲁通报。
English: In the fourth year of Kangzong's reign, Goryeo sent a black square stone to congratulate Kangzong on his accession to the throne, and sent a cup to inform Lu.

古文：高丽约还诸亡在彼者，乃使阿聒、胜昆往受之。
现代文：高丽使臣约定放还逃亡在高丽的金人，康宗乃派阿聒、胜昆前去高丽接收这些人。
English: The Koryo envoys agreed to release the fugitives who were still in Koryo, and Kangjongnae sent Aye and Seokun to Koryo to receive these people.

古文：高丽背约，杀二使，筑九城于曷懒甸，以兵数万来攻。
现代文：高丽却违背条约，杀了阿聒、胜昆两位使者，并在曷懒甸建筑九座城堡，集兵数万前来进攻。
English: Goryeo, however, violated the treaty, killed the two envoys, Ay and Sheng Kun, and built nine castles in Loudian, gathering tens of thousands of soldiers to attack.

古文：斡赛败之。
现代文：斡赛打败了他们。
English: Good offices defeated them.

古文：斡鲁亦筑九城，与高丽九城相对。
现代文：斡鲁也构筑九座城堡，与高丽的九座城堡相对抗。
English: Goryeo also built nine castles to rival Goryeo's nine castles.

古文：高丽复来攻，斡赛复败之。
现代文：高丽又发动进攻，斡赛再次打败了他们。
English: Goryeo launched another attack, and Gosei defeated them again.

古文：高丽约以还逋逃之人，退九城之军。复所侵故地。
现代文：高丽签约归还逮捕的和逃到他们那里去的金人，撤退驻在九座城堡的军队，恢复所侵占的旧地。
English: Goryeo signed an agreement to return the arrested and gold miners who had fled to them, to withdraw the troops stationed in the nine castles, and to restore the former occupied territories.

古文：九月，乃罢兵。
现代文：九月，双方才罢兵。
English: In September, both sides went on strike.

古文：七年己丑，岁不登，减盗贼征偿，振贫乏者。
现代文：康宗七年，年景不丰，减少做盗贼的人应出的赔偿额，赈助贫乏的穷人。
English: During the seven years of Kangzong's rule, he reduced the amount of compensation payable to thieves and helped the poor.

古文：十一年癸巳，康宗卒，年五十三。
现代文：十一年，康宗逝世，享年五十三岁。
English: In the eleventh year, Kangzong died at the age of fifty-three.

古文：天会十五年，追谥恭简皇帝。
现代文：天会十五年，追谥他为恭简皇帝。
English: In the 15th year of the Heaven's Fair, he was crowned as the Emperor of Jingjian.

古文：皇统四年，号其藏曰乔陵。
现代文：皇统四年，封号其寝陵为乔陵。
English: In the fourth year of imperial rule, the name of his tomb was changed to Qiao Ling.

古文：五年，增谥康宗献敏恭简皇帝。
现代文：五年，增谥他为康宗献敏恭简皇帝。
English: Five years later, he was promoted to Kangzong Xianmin Jingjian Emperor.

古文：赞曰：金之厥初，兄弟三人，亦微矣。
现代文：史家赞叹说：金朝开初，兄弟三人，也是出身贫贱的人。
English: Historians said with admiration: At the beginning of the Kim dynasty, there were three brothers, who were also from a poor background.

古文：熙宗追帝祖宗，定著始祖、景祖、世祖庙，世世不祧。
现代文：熙宗追念先帝祖宗，定名为始祖、景祖、世祖宗庙，世世不辱先君的祖庙。
English: In memory of his ancestor, Emperor Hezong, the temple was named the ancestral temple of Emperor Hezong, Emperor Hezong, Emperor Hezong, Emperor Hezong, Emperor Hezong, Emperor Hezong and Emperor Hezong.

古文：始祖娶六十之妇而生二男一女，岂非天耶？
现代文：始祖娶六十岁的老妇而能生下二男一女，难道不是天意吗？
English: Wasn't it God's will that our forefathers should marry sixty-year-old women and have two sons and one daughter?

古文：景祖不受辽籍辽印，取雅达国相以与其子。
现代文：景祖不接受辽籍辽印，却取雅达 国相 之职给他的儿子。
English: Jing Zu did not accept the Liao nationality of Liao Yin, but took the post of Yada Minister of State to his son.

古文：世祖既破桓赧、散达，辽政日衰，而以太祖属之穆宗，其思虑岂不深远矣夫！
现代文：世祖攻破了桓赧、散达之后，辽国政事日益衰败，而让太祖归属于穆宗。这些事难道不正说明金之祖先深谋远虑吗？
English: After King Jin's ancestors conquered Huancheng and Sanda, the political affairs of Liaoning Province became increasingly decadent, and King Jin's great-grandfather was made to belong to Mu Zong. Don't these things show that King Jin's ancestors were far-sighted?

