古文：玄宗乔琳张去逸李泌刘邈之张仁袆裴谞李揆道昭
现代文：玄宗乔琳张去逸李泌刘邈之张仁袆裴谞李揆道昭
English: Zhenzong Qiaolin Zhang Deyi Li Jing Liu Ye's Zhang Renyi Pei Wei Li Yan Dojo

古文：玄宗
现代文：玄宗
English: Hyunjong

古文：唐德宗降诞三日，玄宗视之。
现代文：唐德宗生下来三天，玄宗去看他。
English: Three days after Tang Dezong was born, Xuanzong went to see him.

古文：肃宗、代宗以次立。
现代文：肃宗和代宗依次站在旁边。
English: Su Zong and Daizong stood next to each other.

古文：保母襁褓德宗来呈，德宗色不白皙，龙身仆前，肃宗、代宗皆不悦。
现代文：保姆用儿衣裹着德宗抱给他们看。
English: The nanny wrapped Dezong in baby clothes and cradled him for them to see.

古文：二帝以手自下递传，呈上玄宗。
现代文：德宗肤色不白，身体向前倾。肃宗和代宗看了都不喜欢。
English: Dezong's skin color is not white, his body is leaning forward. Su Zong and Daizong do not like it.

古文：玄宗一顾之曰： 真我儿也。 
现代文：他俩依次捧着德宗给玄宗看。玄宗一看说道： 真是我的儿子呀！ 
English: They both took turns holding Dezong to show it to Xuanzong. Xuanzong said, "He really is my son!"

古文：谓肃宗曰： 汝不及他。 
现代文：然后对肃宗说： 你不如他。 
English: Then he said to Sozong, "You are not as good as him."

古文：又谓代宗曰： 汝亦不及他。
现代文：以后德宗果然到过陕西韩城。
English: Later, Dezong did indeed go to Hancheng in Shaanxi.

古文：仿佛似我。 
现代文：就是验证。
English: It's called verification.

古文：德宗
现代文：因此可以知道，玄宗是应了上苍的旨意，来统治国家时间很长，难道是没有根据的吗？
English: Therefore, we can know that Xuanzong was in accordance with God's will and ruled the country for a long time. Is there no basis for this?

古文：乔琳
现代文：乔琳
English: By Jolene

古文：乔琳以天宝元年冬，自太原赴举。
现代文：乔琳在天宝元年冬天，从太原出发赴京城应试。
English: In the winter of the first year of Tianbao, Jolene set out from Taiyuan to take the exam in Beijing.

古文：至大梁，舍于逆旅。
现代文：走到大梁，住在旅店里。
English: I went to Dalian and stayed in a hotel.

古文：时天寒雪甚，琳马死，佣仆皆去。
现代文：当时天寒雪大，他的马死了，奴仆也都离他而去。
English: It was a cold and snowy day, his horse had died and his servants had left him.

古文：闻浚仪尉刘彦庄喜宾客，遂往告之。
现代文：乔琳听说浚仪尉刘彦庄喜欢结交朋友，便前往求助。
English: Jolene heard that Liu Yanzhuang, a lieutenant of the Jianyi Corps, liked to make friends, so she went to ask for help.

古文：彦庄客申屠生者，善鉴人，自云八十已上，颇箕踞傲物，来客虽知名之士，未尝与之揖让。
现代文：彦庄的朋友中有个名叫申屠生的人。
English: One of Hikosho's friends is a man named Shen Tuo Sheng.

古文：及琳至，则言款甚狎，彦庄异之。
现代文：精通相术。他自称自己已经八十多岁了，待人轻慢踞傲。
English: He is proficient in the art of physiognomy. He claims to be in his eighties and treats everyone with disdain and arrogance.

古文：琳既出，彦庄谓生曰： 他宾客贤与不肖，未尝见先生之一言。
现代文：彦庄的朋友宾客中虽然有许多达官名流，但他从不与人礼貌谦虚。乔琳来了，他态度却非常亲热，彦庄感到奇怪。乔琳出去时，彦庄对申屠生说： 我的宾客中，无论是有无才能的人呢，都未曾见过你同他们说一句话。
English: Although there were many dignitaries and celebrities among his friends and guests, he was never polite and modest with people. When Jolene came, his attitude was very intimate, which surprised Hianzhuang. When Jolene went out, Hianzhuang said to Shen Tuo: Among my guests, whether they are talented or not, I have never seen you say a word to them.

古文：向者乔生一布衣耳，何词之密欤？ 
现代文：乔琳只是个布衣平民，你为何对他异常客气？ 
English: Jolene is just a civilian in civilian clothes. Why are you being so polite to him?

古文：生笑曰： 此固非常人也。
现代文：申屠生笑着回答： 此人哪里是个平常的人呀！
English: Shen Tuo replied with a smile: "This man is an ordinary person!

古文：且当为君之长吏，宜善视之，必获其报。
现代文：日后会成为你的上司。你应该好好地对待他，日后必能得到他的报答。
English: He will be your boss in the future. You should treat him well and you will be rewarded by him in the future.

古文：向与之言，盖为君结欢耳。
现代文：我同他结交，也完全是为了你。
English: I'm only friends with him because of you.

古文：然惜其情反于气，心不称质，若处极位，不至百日。年过七十，当主非命。
现代文：可惜观察他的面相，有反叛的征兆。如果做高官，不会超过百日，并且过了七十岁，必然死于非命。
English: Unfortunately, looking at his face, there are signs of rebellion. If he is a high-ranking official, he will not last more than a hundred days, and after the age of seventy, he will inevitably die a violent death.

古文：子其志之。 
现代文：你记住我今天说过的话。 
English: You remember what I said today.

古文：彦庄遂馆之数日，厚与车马，遂至长安。
现代文：彦庄于是款待乔琳数日，并赠送车马，使其安全到达长安。
English: Yan Zhuang then entertained Jolene for a few days and gave her a horse and carriage so that she could reach Chang'an safely.

古文：而申屠生亦告去，且曰： 吾辱君之惠，今有以报矣，请从此辞。 
现代文：而申屠生也准备告辞，临行前对彦庄说： 我得到你的恩惠，今天已经有了报答，让我们从此分手吧。 
English: But Shen Tuo Sheng was also ready to say goodbye. Before leaving, he said to Yan Zhuang: I have received your favor, and today I have been rewarded. Let's part ways.

古文：竟不知所在。
现代文：申屠生走后，便再也不知其去向。
English: After Shen Tuo Sheng left, he no longer knew where he was going.

古文：琳后擢进士第，累佐大府。
现代文：乔琳后来果然考中进士，累次做了高级官府的幕僚。
English: Jolene later successfully passed the junior high school entrance examination and successively became a senior government staff member.

古文：大历中，除怀州刺史。时彦庄任修武令，误断狱有死者，为其家讼冤，诏下御史劾其事。
现代文：大历中期，被任命为怀州刺史，彦庄正在怀州所辖的修武任县令，因其断案中有误判致人屈死的情况，家属上诉要求申冤，皇上下诏命御史调查弹劾。
English: In the middle of the calendar, he was appointed as the county magistrate of Huizhou, and the county magistrate of Xiuwu, which was under the jurisdiction of Huizhou. Because there was a misjudgment in his case that caused the death of a person, his family members appealed for redress of grievances, and the emperor ordered his investigation and impeachment.

古文：及琳至，竟获免。
现代文：等乔琳到了怀州，竟使彦庄获免。
English: When Jolene arrived in Waizhou, she was actually able to get Yanzhuang off the hook.

古文：建中初，微拜中书侍郎平章事，在位八十七日，以疾罢。
现代文：建中初年，乔琳升迁为中书侍郎平章，上任后只有八十七天，就因病辞官。
English: In the first year of junior high school, Jolene was promoted to the position of junior high school secretary, but resigned due to illness only eighty-seven days after taking office.

古文：后朱泚构逆，琳方削发为僧。
现代文：后来朱泚谋反时，乔琳已削发为僧。
English: Later, when Zhu Xi plotted a rebellion, Jolene was already ordained as a monk.

古文：泚知之，竟逼受逆命。及收复，亦陈其状。
现代文：朱泚知道了，竟逼迫他接受其任命，参与了反叛，待叛乱被平息后，乔琳陈述了被逼参与叛乱的经过。
English: When Zhu Xi found out, he forced him to accept his appointment and participated in the rebellion. After the rebellion was quelled, Jolene recounted the process of being forced to participate in the rebellion.

古文：太尉李晟，欲免其死，上不可，遂诛之。
现代文：太尉李晟欲免其死罪，皇上不准，于是乔琳被诛杀。
English: Captain Li Yan wanted to spare her the death penalty, but the emperor would not allow it, so Jolene was beaten to death.

古文：时年七十一。
现代文：死时七十一岁。
English: He was 71 years old at the time of his death.

古文：张去逸
现代文：张去逸
English: Zhang Deyi

古文：肃宗张皇后祖母窦氏，玄宗之姨母也。
现代文：唐肃宗张皇后的祖母窦氏是玄宗的姨母。
English: The Dou clan, the grandmother of Empress Dowager Jang of Tang Su Zong, was the aunt of Xuanzong.

古文：玄宗先后早薨，窦有鞠养之恩。景云中，封邓国夫人，帝甚重之。
现代文：玄宗的母后死的比较早，窦氏对玄宗有养育之恩，景云年间被封为邓国夫人，皇帝对她很敬重。
English: Xuanzong's mother died relatively early, and the Dou clan had the privilege of raising Xuanzong. During the Jingyun era, she was named the wife of Deng Guo, and the emperor held her in high esteem.

古文：其子去惑、去盈、去奢、去逸，依倚恩宠，颇极豪华。
现代文：她的儿子去惑、去盈、去奢、去逸，依靠皇帝的恩宠，享尽荣华富贵。
English: Her son went astray, went to prosperity, went to luxury, went to escape, relied on the emperor's grace, and enjoyed all the glory and wealth.

古文：一日，弟兄同猎渭曲。
现代文：一天弟兄们一同打猎在渭河河曲。
English: One day, the brothers were hunting together in the Li River.

古文：忽有巨蛇长二丈，腾赶草上，迅捷如飞。去逸因踪辔弯弧，一发而中，则命从骑挂之而行。
现代文：忽然有一条两丈长的大蛇在草上穿行如飞，去逸策马弯弓，一箭射中巨蛇，便叫随从将蛇挂在马上继续行猎。
English: Suddenly, there was a two-meter-long snake flying through the grass. He went to his horse to bend the bow, shot the snake with an arrow, and told his followers to hang the snake on the horse and continue hunting.

古文：俄顷雾起于渭上，咫尺昏晦，骤雨惊电，无所遁逃。
现代文：顷刻大雾弥漫，咫尺间看不清景物，随后天降雷雨，荒野上无处遮蔽。
English: In an instant, the fog was thick and the scenery was indistinct, followed by a thunderstorm, and there was nowhere to shelter on the moor.

古文：偶得野寺，去逸既弃马，径依佛庙。
现代文：偶然间遇到一座寺庙，去逸弃马躲了进去。
English: By chance, he came across a temple and abandoned his horse to hide inside.

古文：烈火震霆，随而大集。方霆火交下之际，则闻空中曰： 勿惊仆射， 霆火遽散，俄而复臻。
现代文：谁知霹雳闪电也云集到庙上，正当雷电交加之时，忽然听到天空中说： 不要惊吓了仆射。 雷电随即散去，顷刻又至。
English: Who knew that lightning also gathered over the temple, and just as the thunder and lightning were intensifying, suddenly a voice was heard in the sky saying, "Don't be alarmed by the thunder and lightning.

古文：又闻空中曰： 勿惊司空！ 
现代文：又听到空中说： 不要惊吓司空。 
English: I also heard a voice in the air saying, "Don't scare Sifu.

古文：霆火登止。俄复聚集，又闻空中曰： 勿惊太尉！ 
现代文：雷电立刻停止，随后又重新聚集，又听到空中说： 不要惊吓太尉。 
English: The thunder and lightning immediately stopped, then gathered again, and the air was heard to say: "Don't frighten the captain."

古文：既而阴翳廓然，终无所损。然死蛇从马，则已失矣。
现代文：阴云雷电全部散去，去逸丝毫也没有损伤，但是射死的巨蛇以及随从和马匹却不见了。
English: The thunder and lightning had all dispersed, and there was no damage at all, but the giant snake that had been shot, as well as the attendants and horses, were gone.

古文：去逸自负坐须富贵。不数年，染疾而卒，官至太仆卿。
现代文：去逸对坐享富贵非常自负，过不了几年，去逸患病而死，死时所做的官是太仆卿。
English: He was very proud to sit and enjoy his wealth. A few years later, he fell ill and died. When he died, he was made an official servant of the emperor.

古文：天宝中，其女选东宫，充良媛。
现代文：天宝中期，他的女儿被选送到东宫做良媛。
English: In the middle of the Tenpo era, his daughter was selected to be sent to the East Palace to be a virtuous woman.

古文：及肃宗收复两京，良媛颇有辅佐之力，至德二载，册为淑妃。
现代文：后来肃宗收复两京时，良媛有辅佐的功劳。至德二年，被册封为淑妃。
English: Later, when Emperor Suzong recaptured the two capitals, Yoshihime was credited with assisting him. Two years later, she was given the title of Princess.

古文：乾元元年，诏中书令崔圆持节册为皇后。
现代文：乾元元年，皇帝下诏中书令崔圆持符节册封淑妃为皇后。
English: In the first year of Qianyuan, the emperor issued an imperial edict ordering Cui Yuan to hold the festival book to crown Shuxi as the empress.

古文：而去逸以后父，前后三赠官，皆如空中之告耳。
现代文：而去逸则以皇后父亲的身份，前后三次被追封官职，其职衔全都同当日天空中所说的一致。
English: On the other hand, Go Yat, as the queen's father, was awarded the official title three times, and all of his titles were the same as what was said in the sky that day.

古文：李泌
现代文：李泌
English: Li Jie

古文：天宝十四载，李泌三月三日，自洛乘驴归别墅。
现代文：天宝十四年三月三日，李泌自洛阳乘驴回别墅，随行的仆人落在后面。
English: On March 3rd, the 14th year of Tianbao, Li Xiu took a donkey back to his villa from Luoyang. The attendant servants left behind.

古文：从者未至，路旁有车门，而驴径入，不可制。
现代文：路旁有一个大门，毛驴竟自行走了进去，李泌无法制止。
English: There was a gate by the side of the road, and the donkey walked into it on its own. Li Xiu couldn't stop it.

古文：遇其家人，各将乘驴马群出之次。
现代文：这时遇到了这家的人，各自把乘坐的驴和马牵出来。
English: At this time, people from the family came across, and each of them brought out the donkey and horse they were riding.

古文：泌因相问，遂并入宅。
现代文：李泌因这家的主人相问，便和仆人走进屋去。
English: When the master of the house questioned Li Xiu, he went into the house with his servant.

古文：邀泌入。既坐，又见妻子出罗拜。泌莫测之，疑是妖魅。
现代文：主人请李泌进屋里坐下，李泌坐下后，主人的妻子出来同李泌见礼，李泌不知道这是为什么，怀疑自己遇见了妖怪鬼魅。
English: The master invited Li Xuan into the house to sit down. After Li Xuan sat down, the master's wife came out to meet Li Xuan. Li Xuan did not know why, and suspected that he had met a monster.

古文：问姓窦，潜令仆者问邻人，知实姓窦。
现代文：李泌问其姓氏，主人回答姓窦。李泌暗中派仆人去附近的人家证实，知道主人确实姓窦。
English: Li Xiu asked his surname, and his master replied with the surname Dou. Li Xiu secretly sent a servant to a nearby person's house to confirm that he knew that his master's surname was indeed Dou.

古文：泌问其由，答曰： 窦廷芬。且请宿。 
现代文：李泌又详细询问，主人回答叫窦廷芬，并请李泌留下住宿，以便继续交谈。
English: Li Xiu inquired in detail again. The host replied that he was calling Dou Tingfen, and asked Li Xiu to stay at the accommodation in order to continue the conversation.

古文：续言之，势不可免，泌遂宿，然甚惧。
现代文：其态度诚恳得叫人无法推辞。于是李泌便住了下来，但是心中非常害怕。
English: His attitude was so sincere that it was impossible to refuse. So Li Xuan stayed down, but he was very scared.

古文：廷芬乃言曰： 中桥有筮者胡芦生，神之久矣。
现代文：窦廷芬对李泌说： 中桥有个算命的人叫胡芦生，因为算得极准，所以非常出名。
English: Dou Tingfen said to Li Jue: There is a fortune-teller in Zhongqiao called Hu Lucheng. He is very famous for being extremely accurate.

古文：昨因筮告某曰，不出三年，当有赤族之祸，须觅黄中君方免。
现代文：昨天他为我算命后告诉我，不出三年，我们家有灭门之祸，必须找到黄中君才能幸免。
English: Yesterday, he told me, after calculating my fortune, that in less than three years, our family would be wiped out, and I had to find Huang Zhongjun to be spared.

古文：问如何觅黄中君？曰，问鬼谷子。又问安得鬼谷子？言公姓名是也。
现代文：我问他如何才能找到黄中君，他回答说，去问鬼谷子，我又问怎样才能找到鬼谷子，他说的就是您的姓名呀！
English: I asked him how I could find Huang Zhongjun, and he replied, "Go and ask the demon, and I asked how I could find the demon, and he said your name!"

古文：宜三月三日，全家出城觅之。
现代文：他又告诉我，应该在三月三日，全家出城寻找。
English: He also told me that the whole family should go out of town on March 3rd to look for him.

古文：不见，必籍死无疑；若见，但举家悉出衷祈，则必免矣。
现代文：如果找不到您，我们全家到时候必死无疑。如果找到了您，一定要全家人出来哀求祈祷，则一定能免除灾祸。
English: If we don't find you, our whole family will surely die. If we do find you, our whole family must come out to beg for prayers, and we will surely be spared the disaster.

古文：适全家方出访觅，而卒遇公，乃天济其举族命也。 
现代文：刚才我们全家人出访寻找，而终于遇见了您，真是苍天解救我们全家的性命啊！ 
English: Just now, our whole family went abroad to look for you, and finally we met you. It's really a miracle that you saved our whole family's lives!

古文：供待备至。
现代文：窦廷芬对李泌招待得十分周到。
English: Dou Tingfen treated Li Xiu to a very thoughtful invitation.

古文：明日请去，且言归颍阳庄。
现代文：第二天，李泌告辞，并说要回颍阳庄。
English: The next day, Li Xiu said goodbye and said that he wanted to return to Fenyangzhuang.

古文：廷芬坚留之，使人往颍阳，为致所切，取季父报而还。如此住十余日，方得归。
现代文：窦廷芬坚持挽留，并派人去颍阳为李泌送信。并代其拿取他关心的东西，李泌接到叔父的回信后，又住了十多天才告辞回家。
English: Dou Tingfen insisted on retaining him, and sent someone to Shenyang to send a letter for Li Xiu, and to pick up the things he was concerned about on his behalf. After Li Xiu received his uncle's reply, he stayed for more than ten days before returning home.

古文：自此献遗不绝。
现代文：自从这以后，廷芬不断地给李泌赠送礼物。
English: Since then, Tingfen has continued to give gifts to Li Xuan.

古文：及禄山乱，肃宗收西京，将还秦，收陕府，获刺史窦廷芬。
现代文：后来安禄山叛乱，肃宗收复西京后回师长安，收复陕府，抓获了刺史窦廷芬。
English: Later, An Lushan rebellion, Su Zong recovered West Beijing, then returned to Shijiazhuang and Chang'an, recovered Shaanxi Province, and captured the assassin Dou Tingfen.

古文：肃宗令诛之而籍其家。
现代文：肃宗下令诛杀其全家，并将家产没收入宫。
English: Su Zong ordered his entire family to be killed and confiscated their property.

古文：又以玄宗外家而事贼，固囚诛戮。
现代文：又气愤地说： 玄宗的外家亲戚反而替反贼做事，真是该杀。 
English: He also said angrily, "It's really a crime for Hyunjong's foreign relative to work for the anti-thieves.

古文：泌因具其事，且请使人问之，令其手疏验之。肃宗乃遣使。
现代文：李泌因为知道窦廷芬命运的前因后果，所以派人拿着自己所写的奏章去朝见肃宗说明情况。
English: Because Li Xiu knew the antecedents and consequences of Dou Tingfen's fate, he sent someone to go to the imperial court to explain the situation to Su Zong with the music he had written.

古文：使回，具如泌说。
现代文：肃宗派人去调查，回奏同李泌说的一样。
English: Su Seong sent someone to investigate, echoing what Ri Seok said.

古文：肃宗大惊，遽命赦之。因问黄中君鬼谷子何也？
现代文：肃宗非常惊奇，随即下令赦免窦廷芬的死罪，并问黄中君和鬼谷子是什么？
English: Su Zong was very surprised, and immediately ordered the pardon of Dou Tingfen's capital crime, and asked Huang Zhongjun and Qiguzi what?

古文：廷芬亦云不知，而胡芦生已卒。
现代文：窦廷芬也说不知道，而此时胡芦生已死。
English: Dou Tingfen also said that he did not know, and at this time Hu Lousheng was dead.

古文：肃宗深感其事。因曰： 天下之事，皆前定矣。
现代文：肃宗感叹说： 天下的事，都是以前就定下来的呀！ 
English: Su Zong sighed and said: Everything under heaven has been decided before!

古文：刘邈之
现代文：刘邈之
English: Liu Xizhi

古文：刘邈之，天宝中，调授岐州陈仓尉。邈之从母弟吴郡陆康，自江南同官来。
现代文：刘邈之在天宝年间调任岐州陈仓尉，他姨母家的表弟吴郡的陆康从江南来到官府看他。
English: Liu Yanzhi was transferred to Qizhou Chen Cangfei during the Tianbao period, and his aunt's cousin, Lu Kang from Wu County, came from the south of the Yangtze River to see him at the government office.

古文：有主簿杨豫、尉张颖者，闻康至，皆来贺邈之。
现代文：主簿杨豫、县尉张颖听说陆康来了，都来向刘邈之祝贺。
English: Yang Yu, the chief clerk, and Zhang Ying, the county lieutenant, heard that Lu Kang was coming, and they all came to congratulate Liu Yanzhong.

古文：时冬寒，因饮酒。方酣适，有魏山人琮来。
现代文：当时正是寒冬季节，他们喝酒正热闹畅快的时候，有个叫琮的魏山人求见。
English: At that time, it was the cold winter season, when they were drinking and having a good time, a crier from Mount Wei asked to see him.

古文：邈之命下帘帷，迎于庭，且问其所欲。
现代文：刘邈之叫人放下门帘，起身迎到院子里，并问琮有什么事。
English: Liu Yizhi asked the person to put down the door curtain, get up and welcome him to the courtyard, and asked him what was the matter.

古文：琮曰： 某将入关。请一食而去。 
现代文：琮说： 我要入关，请安排一顿饭，我吃完就走。 
English: Zou said: I want to enter the customs, please arrange a meal for me, I will leave after eating.

古文：邈之顾左右，命具刍米于馆。
现代文：刘邈之叫左右的人安排饭菜于客房。
English: Liu Yanzhi called the right and left people to arrange meals in the guest room.

古文：琮曰： 馆则虑不及，请于此食而过。 
现代文：琮说： 安排到客房我等不及了，请让我就在这里吃吧。 
English: Zou said, "I can't wait until we get to the guest room, so please let me eat here."

古文：邈之以方饮，有难色。
现代文：刘邈之因为正在饮酒，觉得很为难。
English: Liu Yanzhi felt embarrassed because he was drinking.

古文：琮曰： 某能知人。若果从容，亦有所献。 
现代文：琮说： 我会给人看相，如果你们以礼待我，我也会有所贡献。 
English: Zou said: I will show my face to people, if you treat me with courtesy, I will also contribute.

古文：邈之闻之而喜，遂命褰帷，而坐客亦乐闻其说，咸与揖让而做。
现代文：刘邈之听了很高兴，便叫人撩起帷帘。而座上的几位客人也都想听他能说些什么，全都请其入座。
English: Liu Xizhi was very happy to hear this, so he asked for the curtains to be raised. Several guests also wanted to hear what he had to say, and they all invited him to take a seat.

古文：时康以醉卧于东榻，邈之乃具馔。既食之，有所请。
现代文：这时陆康因为喝醉了躺在东边的床上。刘邈之添置杯筷菜肴招待琮吃完饭，然后请琮为自己看相。
English: At this time, Lu Kang was lying on the east side of the bed because he was drunk. Liu Xizhi added a cup of chopsticks to the dishes to invite him to finish the meal, and then asked him to see for himself.

古文：琮曰： 自此当再名闻，官止二邑宰而不主务，二十五年而终。 
现代文：琮说： 你以后还有功名，能做两任邑宰，但不主持政务，还可以做官二十五年。 说完要走。
English: Zou said, "You still have merits in the future, you can serve as the mayor of two towns, but not preside over government affairs, you can also serve as an official for twenty-five years.

古文：言讫将去，豫、颖固止之，皆有所问。谓豫曰： 君后八月，勿食驴肉，食之遇疾，当不可救。 
现代文：杨豫和张颖请他留下，向他问各自的前程。琮对杨豫说： 你从现在起八个月内，不能吃驴肉，如果吃了必然得病，并且无法医治。 
English: Yang Yu and Zhang Ying invited him to stay and asked him about their respective futures. Zou said to Yang Yu: "You can't eat donkey meat for eight months from now. If you eat it, you will definitely get sick and can't be cured."

古文：次谓颖曰： 君后政官，宜与同僚善。如或不叶，必为所害。 
现代文：又对张颖说： 你以后做官，应当与同僚搞好关系，否则必受其害。 
English: He also said to Zhang Ying: When you become an official in the future, you should have a good relationship with your colleagues, otherwise you will be harmed.

古文：豫、颖不悦。
现代文：杨豫和张颖听了都不高兴。
English: Yang Yu and Zhang Ying were not happy to hear this.

古文：琮知其意，乃曰： 某先知者，非能为君祸福也。 
现代文：琮知道他们的心意，便说： 我虽然能够事先知道以后的事，但却不能决定你们的祸福。 
English: Knowing their thoughts, he said, "Although I can foretell what will happen in the future, I cannot decide your fate.

古文：因指康曰： 如醉卧者，不知为谁，明年当成名，历官十余政，寿考禄位，诸君子不及也。 
现代文：又指着陆康说： 比如醉酒躺着的这个人，不知道是谁。但我却知道，他明年可成功名，当官十多任，官大寿高，诸位都赶不上他。 
English: He also pointed to Lu Kang and said, "For example, this man lying drunk, I don't know who he is. But I do know that next year he can be a success, with more than ten posts in government and a high official birthday. You all can't catch up with him."

古文：言讫遂去，亦不知所往。明年，逆胡陷两京，玄宗幸蜀，陈仓当路。
现代文：说完便走得不知去向。第二年，安禄山叛乱，两京陷落，玄宗去蜀郡，陈仓是必经之路。
English: The next year, the Anlu Mountain Rebellion, the fall of the two capitals, Xuanzong went to Shu County, and Chencang was the only way to go.

古文：及驿骑交至，或有与豫旧者，因召与食，误啖驴肠数脔。
现代文：这时杨豫管理驿站，他常常想起琮说过的话，并将其记在自己的手心上。
English: At this time, Yang Yu was in charge of the station. He often remembered what Zou had said and wrote it down on his palm.

古文：至暮，胀腹而卒。
现代文：一次，一个骑马传送公文的人与杨豫有旧交，请杨豫一同吃饭。
English: Once, a person riding a horse to deliver official documents had an old friend with Yang Yu, and invited Yang Yu to have a meal together.

古文：颖后为临濮丞，时有寇至，郡守不能制，为贼所陷。
现代文：杨豫误吃了几小片驴肠，当晚胀肚而死。张颖后来做了临濮丞，一次贼兵攻城，郡守无力抵抗，被围困。
English: Yang Yu mistakenly ate a few small slices of donkey intestine, and died that night with a bloated stomach. Zhang Ying later became the governor of Linyi. Once the bandits attacked the city, the county governor was powerless to resist and was besieged.

古文：临濮令薛景元率吏及武士持兵与贼战，贼退郡平。节度使以闻，既拜景为长史，领郡务。
现代文：临濮县令薛景元率领兵丁将贼兵打退。节度使接到报告后，任命薛景元为长史，主持郡务。
English: Linfen County ordered Xue Jingyuan to lead the soldiers to repel the bandits. After receiving the report, the governor appointed Xue Jingyuan as the governor to preside over county affairs.

古文：而颖果常与不叶，及此因事陷之，遂阴污而卒。
现代文：而张颖果然常常与其不和，因此受到陷害，不久蒙冤而死。
English: However, Zhang Ying was often at odds with her, so she was framed and died shortly after.

古文：邈之后某下登科，拜汝州临汝县令，转润州上元县令。
现代文：刘邈之后来考中进士，官拜汝州临汝县令，后又转任润州上元县令。
English: After that, Liu Wei came to take the junior high school entrance examination, and was appointed as the county magistrate of Linwu County, Ruzhou. Later, he was transferred to the county magistrate of Shangyuan County, Ruzhou.

古文：在任无政，皆假掾以终考。
现代文：在任职期间没有主持重要政务，均以太平官结束任职。
English: During their term of office, they did not preside over important government affairs, and all of them ended their term of office as peace officers.

古文：明年，康明经及第，授秘书省正字，充陇右巡官。府罢，调授咸阳尉，迁监察御史周至令比部员外郎。
现代文：第二年，陆康考明经入榜，先后做秘书省正字，又任陇右巡官，任期满后调任咸阳尉，后又改任监察御史、周至令，比部员外郎。
English: In the second year, Lu Kang Cao Ming entered the list, successively became the secretary of the provincial official, and also served as the right-hand inspector, after the expiration of his term of office, he was transferred to the Xianyang lieutenant, and later he was transferred to the supervision of the history, Zhou Zhi Ling, and the member of the department.

古文：连典大郡，历官二十二考。
现代文：接连担任重要官职，历任二十二年。
English: He has successively held important official positions for 22 years.

古文：张仁袆
现代文：张仁袆
English: Zhang Rincun

古文：唐沈君亮，见冥道事。
现代文：唐朝的沈君亮，能推算人的未来过去。
English: Shen Junliang of the Tang Dynasty was able to predict a person's future and past.

古文：上元年中，吏部员外张仁袆延坐问曰： 明公看袆何当迁？ 
现代文：上元年中的一天，吏部员外张仁袆将他请到上座后问道： 明公看我什么时候能够升迁？ 
English: One day in the middle of the first year of the year, Zhang Renyu, a member of the administrative department, invited him to the upper seat and asked: My lord, when can I be promoted?

古文：亮曰： 台郎坐不暖席，何虑不迁？ 
现代文：沈君亮回答说： 您不会等到把席位坐热，何愁不升官呢！ 
English: Shen Junliang replied: "You won't wait until the seat is hot, why not get promoted!"

古文：俄而袆如厕，亮谓诸人曰： 张员外总十余日活，何暇忧官职乎？ 
现代文：过一会张仁袆上厕所去了，沈君亮对大家说： 张员外最多还能活十几天了，怎么还有时间考虑升不升官呢？ 
English: After a while, Zhang Renyu went to the toilet, and Shen Junliang said to everyone: Zhang can only live for a maximum of ten days, how can there be time to consider whether to promote or not to promote?

古文：后七日而袆卒。
现代文：果然七天后张仁袆死了。
English: Sure enough, Zhang Renya died seven days later.

古文：裴谞
现代文：裴谞
English: Baekhyun

古文：宝应二年，户部郎中裴谞出为卢州刺史。
现代文：宝应二年，户部郎中裴谞出任卢州刺史。
English: In the second year of Baoying, Pei Yao, the head of the household, became the governor of Luzhou.

古文：郡有二迁客，其一曰武彻，自殿中侍御史贬为长史；其一曰于仲卿，自刑部员外郎贬为别驾。
现代文：卢州有两个被贬谪来的官员。一个叫武彻，从殿中侍郎史降为长史。一个叫于仲卿，从刑部员外郎降为别驾。
English: In Luzhou, there are two officials who have been demoted. One is named Wu Che Re, who was demoted from a palace attendant to a senior official, and another is named Yu Zhongqing, who was demoted from a member of the criminal investigation department to a subordinate official.

古文：谞至郡三日，二人来候谒。
现代文：裴谞到卢州府三天，两人前来拜见。
English: Pei Jun came to Luzhou for three days, and the two came to see each other.

古文：谞方与坐，俄而吏持一刺云：寄客前巢县主簿房观请谒。
现代文：裴谞刚同二人坐下，忽然衙役呈上一张名帖禀报： 寄居在这里的前巢县主簿房观拜见。
English: As soon as Pei Yao sat down with the two of them, he suddenly presented a famous poster: "See you in the main book room of Qianchao County."

古文：谞方与二客话旧，不欲见观，语吏云： 谢房主簿相访，方对二客，请俟他日。 
现代文：裴谞正与二人谈论以前的交往，不愿意接见房观，便对衙役说： 你去对房观说感谢房主簿来访，我正在接待两位客人，请他改日再来。 
English: Pei Yao was talking with the two of them about their previous dealings. He didn't want to meet Fang Guan, so he said to the bailiff: You go and say to Fang Guan, "Thank you for visiting my house. I am receiving two guests. Please come back another day."

古文：吏以告观，观曰： 某以使君有旧，宜以今日谒，固不受命。 
现代文：衙役回复房观后，房观对衙役说： 我与刺史有老关系，应当今日拜见，所以不能从命。 
English: After the eunuch replied to Fangguan, Fangguan said to the eunuch: I have a long-standing relationship with Zhang Shi, and I should visit him today, so I can't obey his order.

古文：吏又入白谞，谞曰： 吾中外无有房氏为旧者。 
现代文：衙役进去禀告，裴谞说： 我家族内外没有与姓房的人有交往的。 
English: In his obituary, Pei Yao said, "No one in or out of my family had any dealings with a person with the last name of Fang.

古文：乃令疏其父祖官讳，观具以对。又于怀中探一纸旧书，以受吏。
现代文：传话叫房观写出他父亲和祖父的名字。房观全都写上来了，并从怀中拿出一封旧信，请衙役转交裴谞。
English: The messenger told Fangguan to write down the names of his father and grandfather. Fangguan wrote them all down and took out an old letter from his pocket and asked the bailiff to give it to Pei Yao.

古文：谞览之愀然，遽命素服，引于东庑而吊之，甚哀。
现代文：裴谞看了信后脸色大变，立即命令仆人取来丧服换上，请房观一同去堂下东边的屋子里凭吊亡灵，神情非常悲哀。
English: After reading the letter, Pei Xuan's face changed dramatically. He immediately ordered his servants to fetch mourning clothes and put them on. He asked Fang Guan to go with him to the room on the east side of the hall to bury the dead. He looked very sad.

古文：既出，未及易服。顾左右问曰： 此有府职月请七八千者乎？ 
现代文：出来后没来得及换下丧服，便对左右的人说： 还有没有空缺的职位，每月的俸禄为七八千的？ 
English: After he came out, he didn't have time to change out of his mourning clothes, so he said to the people around him: Are there any vacant positions with a monthly salary of seven or eight thousand?

古文：左右曰： 有名逐要者是也。 
现代文：左右的人说： 拿出花名册一查就知道了。 
English: People on both sides said, "Take out the roster and you'll find out."

古文：遽命吏出牒以署观。
现代文：裴谞立即叫人取来花名册查阅，并注上房观的名字。
English: Pei Yan immediately asked someone to get the roster and check it, and noted Fang Guan's name.

古文：时二客相顾，甚异之，而莫发问。
现代文：这时两位客人在旁边观看，心中非常惊奇，但没发问。
English: Meanwhile, the two guests looked on in amazement, but did not ask any questions.

古文：谞既就榻叹息，因谓二客曰： 君无为复患迁谪？
现代文：裴谞就势坐在床上叹息，并对两位客人说： 两位不必再为遭贬的事烦恼，什么事都是命中注定的。
English: Pei Yao sat on the bed, sighed, and said to the two guests: You two don't have to worry about being demoted, everything is predestined.

古文：事固已前定，某开元七年，罢河南府文学。时至大梁，有陆仕佳为浚仪尉。
现代文：我在开元七年，被免除河南府文学的职务，走到大梁，因为陆仕佳正在那里任浚仪尉，我顺路前往探望。
English: In the seventh year of the year of the founding of the People's Republic of China, I was relieved of the post of Henan Literature and went to Daliang, because Lu Shijia was working there as a dredging officer, and I went to visit along the way.

古文：某往候之，仕佳座客有陈留尉李揆、开封主簿崔器方食，有前襄州功曹参军房安禹继来。
现代文：当在陆仕佳那里做客吃饭的有陈留尉李揆、开封主簿崔器，随后襄州功曹参军房安禹也来了。
English: Among the guests who dined at Lu Shijia's place were Chen Liufei Li Rong, Kaifeng Master Book Choi Ji, and later, Xiangzhou Gong Cao Yu and An Yu.

古文：时坐客闻其善相人，皆请。
现代文：在座的客人听说他很会相面，都请他入座，房安禹毫不谦让。
English: The guests present heard that he was very good at meeting people face to face, and they all invited him to take a seat. Fang Anyu did not make any concessions.

古文：安禹无所让，先谓仕佳曰： 官当再易，后十三年而终。 
现代文：他对陆仕佳说： 您的官职还会变动，还可做十三年官。 
English: He said to Lu Shijia: Your official position will change, and you can still be an official for 13 years.

古文：次谓器曰： 君此去二十年，当为府寺官长，有权位而不见曹局，亦有寿考。 
现代文：又对崔器说： 您二十年后，可做郡国的长官，有权位而不见曹局，并且高寿。 
English: He also said to Cui Wei: After twenty years, you can be the governor of the county and state, have the power without seeing the Cao situation, and have a long life.

古文：次谓揆曰： 君今岁名闻至尊，十三年间，位极人臣。
现代文：再对李揆说： 您今年能得到皇帝的重视，十三年里，可做到最大的官。
English: Then he said to Li Qiye, "This year you can get the emperor's attention, and in thirteen years, you can become the greatest official.

古文：后十二年，废弃失志，不知其所以然也。 
现代文：以后的十二年，会失意丢官，不知道是为了什么。 
English: In the next twelve years, he will be disappointed and lose his position, I don't know why.

古文：次谓某曰： 此后历践清要，然无将相。年至八十。 
现代文：然后又对我说： 您以后能历任重要官职，但达不到将相那样的高位，可以活到八十岁。 
English: Then he said to me, "You will be able to hold important posts in the future, but you will not be able to reach as high a position as Masako. You can live to be 80 years old."

古文：言讫将去，私谓某曰： 少间有以奉托，幸一至逆旅。 
现代文：说完要走，并私下对我说： 一会儿我有事相托。请你到我住的旅馆去一下。 
English: After saying that he was leaving, he said to me privately, "I have something to tell you in a moment. Please come to my hotel."

古文：安禹既归，某即继往。
现代文：房安禹回去后，我立即跟着去了，到了那里，我二人言谈非常亲密。
English: After Fang Anyu returned, I immediately followed him, and when we got there, the two of us had a very intimate conversation.

古文：至则言款甚密，曰： 君后二十八年，当从正郎为江南郡守。
现代文：房安禹对我说： 您以后二十八年，能从正郎调任江南郡守。
English: Fang Anyu said to me: In the next 28 years, you can be transferred from Zhengrong to Jiangnan County Governor.

古文：某明年当有一子，后合为所守郡一官。
现代文：我明年能有一个儿子，长大后注定会成为您所管辖的郡里的一名官员。
English: I'm going to have a son next year, destined to grow up to be an officer in your county.

古文：君至三日，当令奉谒。
现代文：您到任后三天，我会叫他去拜访。
English: Three days after your arrival, I will ask him to visit.

古文：然此子命薄，不可厚禄，顾假俸十千已下， 此即安禹子也。
现代文：但是我这个儿子命薄，不能给他太高的待遇，能够给他十千以下的俸禄。 方才我去会见的就是安禹的儿子。 
English: But my son is very poor, I can't give him too high a salary, I can give him a salary of less than ten thousand.

古文：彻等咸异其事，仕佳后再受监察御史卒，器后为司农丞。肃宗在灵武，以策称旨，骤拜大司农。
现代文：武彻等人都觉得这些事很奇怪。陆仕佳后来调任监察御史，就死了。崔器后来当了司农丞，肃宗在灵武时，他的策对很合皇帝的旨意，破格任命为大司农。
English: Lu Shijia and others thought these things were very strange. Lu Shijia was later transferred to the position of Supervisor of History, and died. Cui Jie later became the Secretary of Agriculture, and Su Zong, when he was in Lingwu, his strategy was very much in line with the emperor's will, and he was appointed the Chief Secretary of Agriculture in an unprecedented manner.

古文：及归长安，累奉使。后十余年，竟不至本曹局。
现代文：等到肃宗回到长安，崔器多次奉命出使，后来十多年，竟不至本曹局。
English: By the time Su Zong returned to Chang'an, Cui Jie had been sent on several missions, and more than ten years later, he did not even make it to the emperor's office.

古文：揆其年授右拾遗，累至宰相。
现代文：李揆当年被授予右拾遗，逐渐升到宰相。
English: That year, Li Jie was awarded the Right Reverend Sun Yat-sen, and gradually rose to the post of prime minister.

古文：后与时不叶，放逐南中二十年。
现代文：后来他与皇帝当时的意见不一致，被贬流放到南中二十年。
English: Later, he disagreed with the emperor's opinion at that time and was exiled to the Southern Middle School for twenty years.

古文：除国子祭酒，充吐蕃会盟使。既将行而终。
现代文：又起用为国子监祭酒，任出使吐蕃的使臣，即将出发时死了。
English: He was also appointed as the son-in-law of the governor of the province, and appointed as the envoy of the governor of Tubo. He died when he was about to leave.

古文：皆如其言。
现代文：这些人的命运全都如房安禹所说的一样。
English: The fate of all these people is the same as what Fang Anyu said.

古文：安禹开元二十一年进士及第，官止南阳令。
现代文：房安禹开元二十一年考中进士，最后做的官是南阳令。
English: Fang'an Yu entered the 21st year of the 21st year of the 21st year of the 21st year of the 21st year of the 21st year of the 21st year of the 21st year of the 21st year.

古文：李揆
现代文：李揆
English: Lee Min Ho

古文：李相国揆以进士调集在京师，闻宣平坊王生善易筮，往问之。
现代文：相国李揆当年考中进士，被调集在京城，听说宣平坊有个叫王生的善于抽签算命，便前去询问自己的前程。
English: His partner, Li Wei, was the top student in the middle school entrance examination that year and was mobilized in Beijing. When he heard that there was a man in Xuanpingfang named Wang Sheng who was good at lottery and fortune-telling, he went to inquire about his future.

古文：王生每以五百文决一局，而来者云集，自辰及酉，不次而有空反者。
现代文：王生每算一卦，就要收取五百文钱，但前去算卦的人仍然很多，每天都从辰时算到酉时，仍然有挨不上号而白跑一趟的。
English: Wang Sheng has to charge 500 yuan for every calculation, but there are still a lot of people who go to calculate. Every day, from the hour to the hour, there are still people who do not get the signal and run for nothing.

古文：揆时持一缣晨往，生为之开卦曰： 君非文章之选乎？
现代文：李揆带着一匹细纱作为礼物，很早就赶去了。王生为他算卦后说： 您是问您的文章，能选授什么官职吧？
English: Li Yao took a horse with a fine yarn as a gift and left very early. After Wang Sheng did the math for him, he said: You are asking about your article, what official position can you choose?

古文：当得河南道一尉。 
现代文：我算您能得河南道的一个县尉。 
English: I reckon you can get a county lieutenant from Henan Province.

古文：揆负才华，不宜为此，色悒忿而去。
现代文：李揆自负才华出众，不应当做这样一个小官，神色气愤要走。
English: Li Wei is conceited and talented. He should not be such a petty official. He looks angry and wants to leave.

古文：王生曰： 君无怏怏，自此数月，当为左拾遗，前事固不可涯也。 
现代文：王生又说： 您不要不高兴，几个月以后，还能当左拾遗，前途正是不可限量的。 
English: Wang Sheng also said, "Don't be unhappy. In a few months, you will still be able to collect relics. Your future is limitless."

古文：揆怒未解。
现代文：李揆仍余怒未消。
English: Li Yao is still angry.

古文：生曰： 若果然，幸一枉驾。 
现代文：王生又说： 若同我说的一样，希望您能来一趟。 
English: Wang Sheng also said: If it's the same as I said, I hope you can come.

古文：揆以书判不中第，补汴州陈留尉。
现代文：果然李揆考书判未中，补缺被派到汴州做陈留县尉。
English: As expected, Li Yao's examination paper was not approved, and he was sent to Zhangzhou to fill the vacancy as Chen Liu County Lieutenant.

古文：始以王生之言有征。
现代文：这时才知道王生的话有了验证，又赶到王生那里求教。
English: It was only then that he knew that Wang Sheng's words had been verified, and he rushed to Wang Sheng to ask for advice.

古文：后诣之，生于几下取一缄书，可十数纸，以授之曰： 君除拾遗，可发此缄，不尔当大咎。
现代文：王生从书案下取出封好的信，大约有十几张纸那么厚，交给李揆说： 您官拜左拾遗时，可拆开此信，不然会有灾祸。 
English: Wangsheng took out a sealed letter from under the bookcase, about a dozen sheets of paper thick, and handed it to Li Yao, saying: When you come to pick up the remains, you can open this letter, otherwise there will be a disaster.

古文：揆藏之，既至陈留。
现代文：李揆收起信后赶往陈留。
English: After collecting the letter, Li Yan rushed to Chen Liu.

古文：时采访使倪若冰以揆才华族望，留假府职。
现代文：采访使倪若冰因为李揆有才华，又出身名门望族，留他在府中帮忙。
English: The interview caused Ni Ruobing to leave him in the house to help because Li Yao was talented and came from a prestigious family.

古文：会郡有事须上请，择与中朝通者，无如揆，乃请行。
现代文：正赶上郡府有事需要向朝廷请示，想找一个和朝中有交往的人，没有比李揆更合适的，于是就派他去了。
English: When he arrived at the county seat, he needed to ask the imperial court for instructions. If he wanted to find someone who had contacts with the imperial court, there was no one more suitable than Li Qian, so he sent him there.

古文：开元中，郡府上书姓李者，皆先谒宗正。
现代文：唐玄宗开元中期，各郡府姓李的官员向上呈报文书，都先拜见宗正。
English: In the middle of the first century of Tang Xuan Zong, officials with surnames of Li from all counties and prefectures submitted their reports to the emperor. They all visited Zong Zheng first.

古文：时李璆为宗长，适遇上尊号。
现代文：当时李璆是宗长。正逢朝廷百官为皇帝上尊号，李揆拜见李璆。
English: At that time, Li Qiye was the head of the sect. At a time when hundreds of officials in the imperial court were given the title of emperor, Li Qiye paid a visit to Li Qiye.

古文：揆既谒璆，璆素闻其才，请为表三通，以次上之。
现代文：李璆早就听说李揆有才华，就请他代为起草三篇上报给皇帝的文书，一篇一篇地向上呈报。
English: He had long heard that Li Xuan was talented, so he asked him to draft three reports to the emperor on his behalf, one report at a time.

古文：上召璆曰： 百官上表，无如卿者，朕甚嘉之。 
现代文：皇帝召见李璆说： 百官上报的文章，没有能赶上你的，我非常欣赏。 
English: The emperor summoned Li Qiye and said: The articles submitted by hundreds of officials have not been able to catch up with yours, I really appreciate it.

古文：璆顿首谢曰： 此非臣所为，是臣从子陈留尉揆所为。 
现代文：李璆磕头谢恩说： 这三篇文章不是我写的，而是我的侄子陈留尉李揆所写的。 
English: Li Shantou Shane said: These three articles were not written by me, but by my nephew, Chen Liufei Li Xuanwu.

古文：乃下诏召揆，时揆寓宿于怀远坊卢氏姑之舍，子弟闻召，且未敢出。及知上意欲以推择，遂出。
现代文：皇帝下令召见李揆。当时李揆正寄居在怀远坊姓卢的姑姑家，听说皇帝召见，不敢出来，直到知道皇帝是要选拔重用他，便去见皇帝。
English: The emperor ordered to summon Li Yao. At that time, Li Yao was staying at the home of his aunt Lu in Huaiyuanfang. When he heard that the emperor had summoned him, he did not dare to come out until he knew that the emperor was going to select and reuse him, and then he went to see the emperor.

古文：既见，乃宣命宰臣试文词。
现代文：皇帝命令大臣考其文章诗词。
English: The emperor ordered the minister to check his article's poetry.

古文：时陈黄门为题目三篇，其一曰《紫丝盛露囊赋》，二曰《答吐蕃书》，三曰《代南越献白孔雀表》。
现代文：当时陈黄门出了三个题目，一个是《紫丝盛露囊赋》，一个是《答吐蕃书》，另一个是《代南越献白孔雀表》。
English: At that time, Chen Huangmen came up with three topics, one was "Purple silk dewdrops," one was "Answering the book," and the other was "South Vietnam's white peacock watch."

古文：揆自午及酉而成，既封，请曰：前二道无所遗限，后一首或有所疑，愿得详之。
现代文：李揆自午时做到酉时完成。封好后又请示说： 前两篇没有什么遗漏，后一篇或者还有遗漏和疑问之处，我想写得再详细明白一点。
English: After it was sealed, he asked for further instructions, saying, "There are no omissions in the first two articles, but there may be omissions and questions in the last article. I would like to write about this in more detail."

古文：及许拆其缄，涂八字，旁注两句。
现代文：遂允许其拆封，李揆又涂改了八个字，在旁边加了两句注释，然后呈报给皇帝。
English: He then allowed it to be unsealed, and Li Lan altered another eight characters and added two comments on the side before presenting it to the emperor.

古文：既进，翌日授左拾遗。
现代文：第二天被授予左拾遗。
English: The next day, he was awarded the left relic.

古文：旬余，乃发王生之缄视之，三篇皆在其中，而涂注者亦如之。
现代文：十天后，他拆开王生给他的信一看，自己写的三篇应试文章都在里面，并且连涂改加注的地方也完全一致。
English: Ten days later, he opened Wang Sheng's letter to him and saw that the three essays he had written were all in it, and even the places where he had altered and added notes were exactly the same.

古文：遽命驾往宣平坊访王生，则竟不复见矣。
现代文：立即驱车赶往宣平坊去见王生，然而王生已不知去向。
English: He immediately drove to Xuanpingfang to see Wang Sheng, but Wang Sheng did not know where to go.

古文：道昭
现代文：道昭
English: Dosho

古文：永泰中，有沙门道昭，自云兰州人，俗姓康氏。
现代文：唐代宗永泰年间，有个和尚叫道昭。他自称是兰州人，俗家姓康，少年时得病无法医治。
English: During the reign of Emperor Zong Yongtai in the Tang Dynasty, there was a monk named Tao Zhao. He claimed to be a native of Lanzhou with the secular family name Kang. When he was a boy, he fell ill and could not be cured.

古文：少时因得疾不救，忽寤云： 冥司见善恶报应之事， 遂出家。
现代文：一天睡醒后说： 我看见了阴间的善恶报应之事 ，遂出家做了和尚。
English: One day he woke up and said, "I have seen the reward of good and evil in the underworld," and he became a monk.

古文：住太行山四十年，戒行精苦，往往言人将来之事。初若隐晦，后皆明验。
现代文：他在太行山修行四十年，苦守佛家戒律，经常讲述别人未来的事情，说得比较隐晦，但过后都一一得到了证实。
English: He has been practicing in Mount Taihang for forty years, adhering to the Buddhist precepts, often telling others about the future, speaking more obscurely, but later confirmed one by one.

古文：尝有二客来，一曰姚邈，举明经，其二曰张氏，以资荫，不记名。
现代文：曾经有两位客人来访，一个叫姚邈，有明经的功名。一个叫张氏，有世袭官职的资格不知叫什么名字。
English: There were once two guests who came to visit, one was called Yao Zheng, who had the merit of the Ming Dynasty, and the other was called Mr. Zhang, who had the qualification of a hereditary official, I don't know what his name was.

古文：僧谓张曰： 君授官四政，慎不可食禄范阳。
现代文：道昭和尚对张氏说： 您能做四任官，但千万不要去范阳做官。
English: Dao Showa still said to Mr. Zhang: You can be a four-term official, but don't go to Fanyang to be an official.

古文：四月八日得疾，当不可救。 
现代文：如果在范阳，四月八日得病将无法医治。 
English: If you are in Fanyang, you will not be able to be cured if you get sick on April 8.

古文：次谓邈曰： 君不利簪笏，如能从戎，亦当三十年无乏。
现代文：又对姚邈说： 您不适合做文官，如果能够投军，也有三十年事情做。
English: He also said to Yao Wei: You are not suitable to be a civilian official. If you can join the army, you will have thirty years to do something.

古文：有疾勿令胡人疗之。 
现代文：有病不要找胡人医治。 
English: If you are sick, don't look for a doctor.

古文：其年。张授官于襄邓间。
现代文：这一年张氏当了官在襄邓一带，并多次调任新的职务。
English: This year, Mr. Zhang became an official in the Xiangdong area, and was transferred to new positions several times.

古文：后累选，常求南州，亦皆得之。后又赴选，果授虢州卢氏县令。到任两日而卒。
现代文：要求到江南一带做官，也都如愿了。后来又被选中，做了虢州卢氏县令，到任两天就死了。
English: He was asked to be an official in the area south of the Yangtze River, and his wish came true. Later, he was selected to be the governor of Luzhou Lushi County, but he died two days after taking office.

古文：卒之日，果四月八日也。
现代文：死的日子果然是四月八日。
English: The day of death was indeed April 8th.

古文：后方悟范阳即卢氏望也。
现代文：以后才明白范阳就是卢氏的郡望。
English: Only later did it become clear that Fan Yang was the Lu clan's county magistrate.

古文：邈后举不第，从所知于容州。假军守之名，三十年累转右职。后因别娶妇求为傧者，因得疾，服妪黄氏之药而终。
现代文：姚邈后来考举人不中，到容州去跟随他的一个熟人，从了军，三十年间不断升任重要官职，后来因为另外娶了媳妇，并要抛弃原来的媳妇而得病，吃了一个黄氏老太太的药而死。
English: Yao Yao later failed the exam and went to Rongzhou to follow an acquaintance of his. He joined the army and was promoted to important official positions for thirty years. Later, because he married another daughter-in-law and wanted to abandon his original daughter-in-law, he became ill and took a medicine from an old lady of the Huang clan and died.

古文：后访黄氏本末，乃洞主所放出婢，是胡女也。
现代文：以后有人查访黄氏的来历，原来是个外族洞主所放逐的婢女，正是个胡女。
English: Later, someone investigated the origin of the Huang clan, and it turned out to be a maid who had been banished by the foreign cave owner. It was a Hu woman.

