古文：武帝中天监元年夏四月丙寅，高祖即皇帝位于南郊。
现代文：天监元年夏季四月丙寅，高祖在南郊登皇帝位。
English: In the summer of April of the first year of Tianjing, Gaozu ascended to the throne in the southern suburbs.

古文：设坛柴燎，告类于天曰： 皇帝臣衍，敢用玄牡，昭告于皇天后帝：齐氏以历运斯既，否终则亨，钦若天应，以命于衍。
现代文：设祭坛烧柴，行祭告上天之礼道： 皇帝臣子萧衍，冒昧地祭用黑色公牛，明白地告知皇天上帝：天象运行显示齐氏的气数已尽，厄运已尽，亨通即来，敬顺上天的感应，授命予我萧衍。
English: An altar was set up to burn wood, and a ritual was performed to announce the heavenly salute: Emperor's vassal Xiao Yan, who had the temerity to sacrifice a black bull, clearly told the Emperor God: The movement of the celestial bodies showed that Qi's energy was exhausted, his bad luck was over, and he was about to succeed, so he obeyed Heaven's inspiration and gave the order to Xiao Yan.

古文：夫任是司牧，惟能是授；天命不于常，帝王非一族。
现代文：树立君主，衹授立贤能者；天命不会一成不变，帝王不属一姓一族。
English: The establishment of the monarch, the appointment of the virtuous; the fate of heaven will not remain unchanged, the emperor does not belong to one family or one family.

古文：唐谢虞受，汉替魏升，爰及晋、宋，宪章在昔。
现代文：唐尧逊让虞舜受命，汉朝衰落魏朝兴起，直至束晋、刘宋，效法往昔。
English: The Tang Dynasty and the Song Dynasty allowed the Yugong to receive orders, the Han Dynasty declined and the Wei Dynasty arose, until the Shu Jin and the Liu Song Dynasty followed the example of the past.

古文：咸以君德驭四海，元功子万姓，故能大庇氓黎，光宅区宇。
现代文：都是用人主的恩德统治全国，以抚育百姓为最高的功业，因此能大大庇护黎民，广有天下。
English: All of them used the grace of the Lord to rule the whole country, with the upbringing of the people as the highest achievement, so they could greatly protect the people, and the world at large.

古文：齐代云季，世主昏凶，狡焉群慝，是崇是长，肆厥奸回暴乱，以播虐于我有邦，俾溥天惴惴，将坠于深壑。
现代文：齐代末世，国君昏乱凶残，贪诈的群奸，受到推崇得以掌权，放纵其奸邪暴乱，在我国家施虐，使天下惶恐不安，将坠入深渊。
English: In the last days of the Qi Dynasty, the ruler of the country was a confused, cruel, greedy gangster, who was respected to take power, indulged in his treachery and violence, abused our country, and made the world fearful and uneasy, and will fall into the abyss.

古文：九服八荒之内，连率岳牧之君，蹶角顿颡，匡救无术，卧薪待然，援天靡诉。
现代文：全国各地，地方长官封疆大吏，额角叩地屈膝下拜，匡正补救无术，卧薪柴之上束手待焚，怨天尤人不予申诉。
English: In all parts of the country, local governors and high-ranking officials in fiefdoms bow their heads and kneel down, there is no way to rectify the situation, there is no way to correct the situation, there is no way to rectify the situation, there is no way to rectify the situation, there is no way to rectify the situation, there is no way to rectify the situation.

古文：衍投袂星言，摧锋万里，厉其挂冠之情，用拯兆民之切。
现代文：我激动奋起急速救援，进军万里，奋扬我辞官弃职的激情，来拯救百姓的危急。
English: I excitedly rallied for rapid rescue, marched thousands of miles, and rallied my passion of resigning from my post to save the people's critical situation.

古文：衔胆誓众，覆锐屠坚，建立人主，克剪昏乱。
现代文：刻苦白励聚众誓师，消灭劲敌屠杀强暴，拥立新的君主，铲除昏乱旧君。
English: He assiduously rallied his votaries, eliminated his ardent enemies, slaughtered and raped them, established a new monarch, and eradicated the befuddled old one.

古文：遂因时来，宰司邦国，济民康世，实有厥劳。
现代文：于是依托运转时来，主管掌理邦国。救助人民使时世太乎，委实有一份功劳。
English: Therefore, relying on the operation of the time, the director is in charge of the state. The rescue of the people has made the time too long, and the committee actually has a merit.

古文：而晷纬呈祥，川岳效祉，朝夕坰牧，日月郊畿。
现代文：并且日舆星呈现祥瑞，山与川呈现福祉，常常在荒野，时时在郊外呈现。
English: Moreover, the sun and stars are auspicious, the mountains and rivers are beneficial, often in the wilderness, and sometimes in the suburbs.

古文：代终之符既显，革运之期已萃，殊俗百蛮，重译献款，人神远迩，罔不和会。
现代文：取代旧皇朝的征兆已显，国运变更之期已至，不同习俗的少数民族，通过辗转翻译前来归顺，入神远近，无不欢会。
English: The signs of replacing the old imperial dynasty have become apparent, the period for changing the national movement has arrived, and ethnic minorities with different customs have come to submit through translation and translation, and they are far away from the gods, and they are all unhappy.

古文：于是群公卿士，咸致厥诚，并以皇乾降命，难以谦拒。
现代文：于是群公卿士，都表白其诚，都认为皇天降命，难以谦让拒绝。
English: As a result, a group of nobles all expressed their sincerity, and all believed that the Emperor had surrendered his life, and it was difficult to refuse.

古文：齐帝脱屣万邦，授以神器。
现代文：变壹不再顾恋邦国，授予帝位。
English: He no longer cared about the state and granted the imperial throne.

古文：衍自惟匪德，辞不获许。仰迫上玄之眷，俯惟亿兆之心，宸极不可久旷，民神不可乏主，遂藉乐推，膺此嘉祚。
现代文：我自思无德，辞让不获准许，上迫于皇天之恩遇，下顾虑百姓之心愿，帝位不可以久空，民神不可缺主，于是依院托天下乐意拥戴之心，承受造帝业之福。
English: I thought to myself, "I am not virtuous, I am not allowed to make concessions, I am compelled by the grace of the emperor, I am concerned about the wishes of the people, the throne cannot be empty for a long time, and the people's gods must not lack the Lord," so I relied on the institute to support the world's willingness to embrace the heart and bear the blessing of creating an empire.

古文：以兹寡薄，临御万方，顾求夙志，永言祗惕。
现代文：用我遣微薄的才德，统御万邦，追求平素的志愿，心中永远充满谨慎戒惧。
English: I will use my meager talent to rule all nations, pursue the plain will, and my heart will always be full of caution and fear.

古文：敬简元辰，恭兹大礼，升坛受禅，告类上帝，克播休祉，以弘盛烈，式传厥后，用永保于我有梁。
现代文：敬选良辰，恭行大礼，登坛受禅，祭告上帝，播洒福利，光大伟业，传位子孙，从而永保我有梁。
English: Respectfully choose a good time, respectfully perform a grand ceremony, ascend the altar to receive Zen, worship God, spread welfare, glorious great career, and pass on to descendants, thus ensuring that I have a beam.

古文：惟明灵是飨。 
现代文：衹有圣明神灵才享其祭祀。 
English: Only those who have the Holy Spirit can enjoy its worship.

古文：礼毕，备法驾即建康宫，临太极前殿。
现代文：祭礼完毕，备具法驾到建康宫，至太极前殿。
English: After the ceremony, we drove to Jiankang Palace to prepare for the Taiji front hall.

古文：诏曰： 五精递袭，皇王所以受命；四海乐推，殷、周所以改物。
现代文：诏令道： 五精递相承袭，古圣王因此受命；四海乐意拥戴，殷朝、周朝因此改朝换代。
English: The imperial edict said: The Five Immortals will inherit the succession, and the ancient holy kings were ordered to do so; the four seas will gladly support it, and the Yin Dynasty and the Zhou Dynasty will therefore change the dynasty.

古文：虽禅代相舛，遭会异时，而微明迭用，其流远矣。
现代文：尽管禅代不同，际遇异时，但都知幽眇之理而收显著之效，其仁政流播很远了。
English: Although the Zen dynasties are different, in different circumstances, they all know the subtle reason and obtain significant effects, and their benevolent politics have spread far and wide.

古文：莫不振民育德，光被黎元。
现代文：无不救济百姓培养德性，德泽遍及黎民。
English: There is no shortage of relief for the people to cultivate virtue. Virtue is widespread among the people.

古文：朕以寡暗，命不先后，宁济之功，属当期运，乘此时来，因心万物，遂振厥弛维，大造区夏，永言前踪，义均惭德。
现代文：我知识浅陋不明事理，然而命运不分先后，安定匡济之功，适逢机运，趁此运转时来，顺应众人心愿，于是拯救废弛的纲纪，立大功于华夏，缅怀前人的遗迹，理应较之愧疚。
English: My knowledge is shallow and I do not know the reason. However, fate does not distinguish successively. The work of stabilizing and improving the economy is opportune. I took advantage of this operation, complied with the wishes of the people, and thus saved the dilapidated discipline, made a great contribution to China, and remembered the remains of the predecessors. I should be more guilty.

古文：齐氏以代终有征，历数云改，钦若前载，集大命于朕躬。
现代文：齐氏出现皇朝被取代的征兆，表明帝王继承的秩序要予以更改，敬顺前代的典故，天命聚集于我身。
English: The signs of the imperial dynasty being replaced by the Qi dynasty indicate that the order of imperial succession should be changed, the allusions of the previous generation should be respected, and the destiny of heaven should be gathered in me.

古文：顾惟菲德，辞不获命，寅畏上灵，用膺景业。
现代文：反省自己德薄，推辞而不获准，敬畏上帝，因而承受大业。
English: Consider thyself unworthy, refuse and thou shalt not receive, fear God, and thou shalt have a great reward.

古文：执禋柴之礼，当与能之祚，继迹百王，君临四海，若涉大川，罔知攸济。
现代文：举行燔柴升烟祭天之礼，充当举荐能人之君，继承历代君王之踪迹，统治天下，如涉大河，不知如何渡过。
English: To hold the Bonfire of the Gods ceremony, to serve as the king of the able men, to inherit the traces of the kings of all ages, to rule the world, like wading into a large river, I do not know how to cross.

古文：洪基初兆，万品权舆，思俾庆泽，覃被率土。
现代文：大业初始，万物新生，想使皇恩，遍及四海。
English: At the beginning of the great undertaking, everything is new, and I want to spread the royal grace throughout the four seas.

古文：可大赦天下。
现代文：可以大赦天下。
English: Convicted criminals across the country can have their sentences commuted or pardoned.

古文：改齐中兴二年为天监元年。
现代文：改南齐中兴二年为天监元年。
English: Change the second year of Nanzhi Zhongxing to the first year of Tianjing.

古文：赐民爵二级；文武加位二等；鳏寡孤独不能自存者，人谷五斛。
现代文：赐给民间有功者爵位二级；文武官员加品位二等；鳏寡孤独不能自立的，每人赐谷五斛。
English: Awarded to the people's meritorious people with the second-level title; civil and military officials with the second-class grade; widows and widowers who are unable to stand on their own, each person is given a grain of five yuan.

古文：逋布、口钱、宿债勿复收。
现代文：欠交的租布、人口赋、旧债不再征收。
English: Arrears of rent, subsistence allowance and old debts will no longer be levied.

古文：其犯乡论清议，赃污淫盗，一皆荡涤，洗除前注，与之更始。 
现代文：那些不合乡里评议，贪脏纳贿奸淫偷盗的罪名，全都清除，抹除以前的档案，让他们重新开始。 
English: Those who do not fit into the village deliberation, the charges of corruption, bribery, adultery and theft are all cleared, the previous files are erased, and they are allowed to start anew.

古文：封齐帝为巴陵王，全食一郡。
现代文：分封齐帝为巴陵王，享用一郡的租赋。
English: Emperor Qi was appointed as the king of Baling and enjoyed the rent of one county.

古文：载天子旌旗，乘五时副车。
现代文：树天子旌旗，乘五时副车。
English: Tree of heaven, son of heaven, hoist the flag, take the five o'clock train.

古文：行齐正朔。
现代文：沿用南齐所颁的历法。
English: It follows the calendar issued by the Southern Qi Dynasty.

古文：郊祀天地，礼乐制度，皆用齐典。
现代文：郊外祭祀天地，礼乐制度，全部用南齐的典章。
English: The suburban sacrificial heaven and earth, the ritual music system, all use the rules of Nanqi.

古文：齐宣德皇后为齐文帝妃，齐后王氏为巴陵王妃。
现代文：南齐宣德皇后改为齐文帝妃，齐帝后王氏改为巴陵王妃。
English: Queen Nanqi Xuande was changed to Empress Qiwen, and Empress Dowager Qi was changed to Princess Baling.

古文：诏曰： 兴运升降，前代旧章。
现代文：韶令道： 时运兴隆官爵有升有降，是前代旧有的典章。
English: Zou Lingdao: The rise and fall of officials' titles in times of prosperity and prosperity is the same as that of the previous generation.

古文：齐世王侯封爵，悉皆降省。
现代文：南齐时的王侯封爵，全都要降低其爵位除去其封国。
English: When the princes of Nanqi were ennobled, they all had to reduce their titles and remove their fiefs.

古文：其有效著艰难者，别有后命。
现代文：那些在国难时有显赫功效的。后面另有诏令。
English: Those that had a notable effect during the national tragedy. The following is another edict.

古文：惟宋汝阴王不在除例。 
现代文：祇有宋汝阴王不在降免之例。 
English: There is only the example of King Song Ryu Yin not being demoted.

古文：又诏曰： 大运肇升，嘉庆惟始，劫贼余口没在台府者，悉可蠲放。
现代文：又诏令道： 国运初升，吉祥喜庆之事刚开始，劫贼残余人口没收入官府的，都可蠲免释放。
English: He also ordered: The National Movement is on the rise, the auspicious and festive events have just begun, and the remaining robbers who have no income from the government can be released.

古文：诸流徙之家，并听还本。 
现代文：众流放之家，全部听任返归本土。 
English: Home of the exiles, all have been allowed to return to the mainland.

古文：追尊皇考为文皇帝，庙曰太祖；皇妣为献皇后。
现代文：追加亡父尊号为文皇帝，庙号为太祖；亡母为献皇后。
English: His late father's posthumous honorific title was Emperor Wen, his temple name was Taizu, and his late mother's posthumous title was Konoe.

古文：追谥妃郗氏为德皇后。
现代文：追加亡妃郗氏为德皇后。
English: An additional deceased consort of the House of Hohenzollern was the German Empress.

古文：追封兄太傅懿为长沙郡王，谥曰宣武；齐后军谘议敷为永阳郡王，谥曰昭；弟齐太常畅为衡阳郡王，谥曰宣；齐给事黄门侍郎融为桂阳郡王，谥曰简。
现代文：追封哥哥太傅萧懿为长沙郡王，谧号为宣武；追封南齐后军谘议萧敷为永阳郡王，谧号为昭；追封弟弟南齐太常萧畅为衡阳郡王，谧号为宣；追封南齐给事黄门侍郎萧融为桂阳郡王，谧号为简。
English: Succession of the elder brother of the Tai Fu, Xiao Jun, as the king of Changsha County, with the posthumous name of Xuan Wu; Succession of the Southern Qi Rear Army Advisory Council, Xia Shiki, as the king of Yongyang County, with the posthumous name of Zhao; Succession of the younger brother of the Southern Qi Tai Chang, Xiao Chang, as the king of Hengyang County, with the posthumous name of Xuan; Succession of the Southern Qi Yellow Gate Attendant, Xiao Rong, as the king of Guiyang County, with the posthumous name of Jian.

古文：是日，诏封文武功臣新除车骑将军夏侯详等十五人为公侯，食邑各有差。
现代文：当天，韶令赐封文武功臣新任车骑将军夏侯详等十五人为公侯，世禄的封地各有差别。
English: On the same day, the imperial edict granted fiefs to fifteen princes, including the newly appointed cavalry and cavalry general Xia Houzhao, who was a military hero. The fiefs of Shilu were all different.

古文：以弟中护军宏为扬州刺史，封为临川郡王；南徐州刺史秀安成郡王；雍州刺史伟建安郡王；左卫将军恢鄱阳郡王；荆州刺史憺始兴郡王。
现代文：任命弟弟中护军萧宏为扬州刺史，封为临川郡王；南徐州刺史萧秀封为安成郡王；雍州刺史萧伟封为建安郡王；左卫将军萧恢封为鄱阳郡王；荆州刺史萧儋封为始兴郡王。
English: He appointed Xiao Hong, the younger brother of the middle guard, to be the Yangzhou prefectural governor and the king of Linchuan County; Xiao Xiufeng, the prefectural governor of South Xuzhou, to be the king of Ancheng County; Xiao Weifeng, the prefectural governor of Yongzhou, to be the king of Jian'an County; Xiao Weifeng, the prefectural governor of Zuoying, to be the king of Shenyang County; Xiao Yufeng, the prefectural governor of Jingzhou, to be the king of Shixing County.

古文：丁卯，加领军将军王茂镇军将军。
现代文：丁卯，加授领军将军王茂为镇军将军。
English: Dingwu awarded the leader of the army, General Wang Mao, as the general of the town army.

古文：以中书监王亮为尚书令、中军将军，相国左长史王莹为中书监、抚军将军，吏部尚书沈约为尚书仆射，长兼侍中范云为散骑常侍、吏部尚书。
现代文：任命中书监王亮为尚书令、中军将军，相国左长史王莹为中书监、抚军将军，吏部尚书沈约为尚书仆射，长兼侍中范云为散骑常侍、吏部尚书。
English: Wang Liang, the chief librarian, was appointed as the chief librarian and the general of the Chinese army; Shi Wang Ying, the left-hand chief of the same country, was appointed as the chief librarian and the general of the army; Shen Ying, the chief librarian, was appointed as the chief librarian and the second-in-command; Fan Yun, the chief librarian and the second-in-command, was appointed as the riding attendant and the chief librarian.

古文：诏曰： 宋氏以来，并恣淫侈，倾宫之富，遂盈数千。
现代文：诏令道： 宋氏以来，都是纵恣淫乱奢侈，居住在巍巍宫殿的富有者，竟满数千。
English: Zhao Ling said: Since the Song Dynasty, it has been all about debauchery and extravagance. There are thousands of rich people living in this palace.

古文：推算五都，愁穷四海，并婴罹冤横，拘逼不一。
现代文：推算五大城市，忧虑极达四海，一起蒙冤遭受横祸的，受到的逼迫不一。
English: Calculating the five major cities, the anxiety reaches the four seas, and those who have suffered injustice and misfortune together are subject to different persecution.

古文：抚弦命管，良家不被蠲；织室绣房，幽厄犹见役。
现代文：拨弄琴弦挥毫执笔，良家不被蠲免；织女闺秀，困厄仍被役使。
English: Twiddling the strings and waving the pen, the good family is not spared; the weaver girl, the trouble is still being used.

古文：弊国伤和，莫斯为甚。
现代文：败坏国家政治，伤害天地中和之气，没有比这更严重的了。
English: There is nothing more serious than corrupting national politics and harming the atmosphere of harmony between heaven and earth.

古文：凡后宫乐府，西解暴室，诸如此例，一皆放遣。
现代文：凡是后宫乐府中，有押送西至暴室的，诸如此例，全部释放。
English: All the harem musicians who had been sent west to the torture chamber, and so on, were released.

古文：若衰老不能自存，官给廪食。 
现代文：如果是衰老不能自立的，公家供给粮。 
English: If they are too old to be self-sufficient, the public sector will provide grain.

古文：戊辰，车骑将军高句骊王高云进号车骑大将军。
现代文：戊辰，车骑将军高句骊王高云进升官爵名号为车骑大将军。
English: At that time, the chariot and cavalry general Gao Guozhen Wang Gaoyun was promoted to the title of chariot and cavalry general.

古文：镇东大将军百济王馀大进号征东大将军。
现代文：镇束大将军百济王余大进升官爵名号为征束大将军。
English: Baekje King Yu Da, the general of Zhenzhuang, was promoted to the title of General of Conscription.

古文：安西将军宕昌王梁弥进号镇西将军。
现代文：安西将军宕昌王梁弥颌进升官爵名号为镇西将军。
English: Anxi General Tang Chang Wang Liang Yijun was promoted to the title of Zhenxi General.

古文：镇东大将军倭王武进号征东大将军。
现代文：镇东大将军倭王武进升官爵名号为征东大将军。
English: Zhen Dongda's general, Wa Wang Wujin, was promoted to the rank and title of General of the Eastern Expedition.

古文：镇西将军河南王吐谷浑休留代进号征西将军。
现代文：镇西将军河南王吐谷浑休留代进升官爵名号为征西将军。
English: The name of Zhenxi General, Henan King Tuya Hunkyu, who was promoted to the title of General of the Western Expedition.

古文：巴陵王薨于姑孰，追谥为齐和帝，终礼一依故事。
现代文：巴陵王在姑孰去世，追加谧号为齐和帝，送终之礼全部遵循先例。
English: The Balinese king died in Guzheng, with the additional posthumous name of Qi He Di, and the last rites all followed the precedent.

古文：己巳，以光禄大夫张瑰为右光禄大夫。
现代文：己巳，任命光禄大夫张瓖为右光禄大夫。
English: At the same time, he appointed the doctor of Guanglu, Zhang Qi, as the doctor of Uguanglu.

古文：庚午，镇南将军、江州刺史陈伯之进号征南将军。
现代文：庚午，镇南将军、江史陈伯之进升官爵名号为征南将军。
English: In the afternoon of the same day, Zhenan General and Jiangshi Chen Bozhi were promoted to the title of General Zhenan.

古文：诏曰： 观风省俗，哲后弘规；狩岳巡方，明王盛轨。
现代文：诏令道： 观察风俗，是贤明君主的宏大谋划；巡狩四方，是圣明帝王的美好典范。
English: "Observing customs is a grand plan of a wise monarch; patrolling the four directions is a beautiful example of Emperor Shengming.

古文：所以重华在上，五品聿修；文命肇基，四载斯履。
现代文：因此虞舜在上，继承发扬先人仁、义、礼、智、信五常之德；夏禹始创基业，乘舟、车、韬、摞四种交通工具巡行。
English: Therefore, Yu Yu inherited and promoted the five virtues of benevolence, righteousness, propriety, wisdom and faith from his ancestors; Xia Yu started the foundation, and paraded by boat, car, raft and palanquin.

古文：故能物色幽微，耳目屠钓，致王业于缉熙，被淳风于遐迩。
现代文：所以能辨识幽微，审察和了解操贱业者，使王业辉煌，淳朴之风遍及远近。
English: Therefore, it is able to identify the subtle, examine and understand the low-level operators, make the king's career brilliant, and the wind of simplicity pervades far and near.

古文：朕以寡薄，昧于治方，藉代终之运，当符命之重，取监前古，懔若驭朽。
现代文：我才德微薄，不明治国方略，凭藉取代旧皇朝的机运，担当帝王受命的重任，取法前古，畏惧如朽索驭马。
English: I am a man of meager talent, who does not know how to govern the country. By virtue of the opportunity to replace the old imperial dynasty, I take on the heavy task of the emperor's appointment, take the ancient law, and fear like a dead rope to steer the horse.

古文：思所以振民育德，去杀胜残，解网更张，置之仁寿；而明惭照远，智不周物，兼以岁之不易，未遑卜征，兴言夕惕，无忘鉴寐。
现代文：思考怎样救济民众培养德性，实行使残暴者化而为善从而废除刑杀的仁政，解放罗网改弦更张，将人民置入有仁德而长寿的境地。然而鉴察不能见远，智慧不能博物，加上岁事艰难，无暇占卜巡狩之吉凶，直到夜晚仍怀忧惧而工作不懈，不敢脱衣冠入睡。
English: Thinking about how to relieve the people, cultivate virtue, implement a benevolent government that makes the brutal become good and thus abolishes torture and killing, liberate Luo and change the strings, and put the people in a situation of benevolence and longevity. However, observation can not see far, wisdom can not be natural, coupled with the hardships of the year, there is no time to divine the fortunes of the patrol, until the night is still anxious and work tirelessly, do not dare to undress and fall asleep.

古文：可分遣内侍，周省四方，观政听谣，访贤举滞。
现代文：可分头派遣内侍，遍视四方，观察政情了解民俗，访求贤者举荐遗留未选之才。
English: You can send a chambermaid separately, look in all directions, observe the political situation and understand the folk customs, and visit the sages to recommend the remaining unselected talents.

古文：其有田野不辟，狱讼无章，忘公殉私，侵渔是务者，悉随事以闻。
现代文：那些有田野不开垦，断理讼案不分明，忘公徇私，衹知侵吞牟利的，都要随时随地上报。
English: Those who have fields but do not plow, who do not know how to adjudicate lawsuits, who forget the public and pursue private interests, and who abuse their knowledge to make a profit, should report to the government at any time and place.

古文：若怀宝迷邦，蕴奇待价，蓄响藏真，不求闻达，并依名腾奏，罔或遗隐。
现代文：如有才德而不为国用，身怀奇能待时而行，蓄藏声誉和真才实干，不求显达的，全部依名上奏，不要有什么遗漏隐匿。
English: If you have talent but do not use it for the country, cherish yourself and be able to wait for the right time, accumulate reputation and true talent, do not seek to show up, all according to the name, do not leave anything out.

古文：使輶轩所届，如朕亲览焉。 
现代文：让使臣所到之地操办的，犹如我亲自操办的一样。 
English: Let the envoys do as much for the places they visit as I do for myself.

古文：又诏曰： 金作赎刑，有闻自昔，入缣以免，施于中世，民悦法行，莫尚乎此。
现代文：又韶令道： 用钱财赎罪，听说源自古代，纳缣以免罪，实施于中古，人民欢欣法令推行，莫高于此。
English: He also said: using money and wealth to atone for one's sins is said to have originated in ancient times, and using money and wealth to atone for one's sins was practiced in the Middle Ages, and the people rejoiced when the law was implemented.

古文：永言叔世，偷薄成风，婴愆入罪，厥涂匪一。
现代文：长叹末世，不敦厚成为一种风气，犯禁入罪，其途不一。
English: Lamenting the end of the world, it has become a kind of custom not to be thick-skinned. If you commit a crime, you will be banned, and your path will not be the same.

古文：断弊之书，日缠于听览；钳钅犬之刑，岁积于牢犴。
现代文：判决定罪之文书，日缠于听事览文；动用钳钦刑具的案件，岁积于牢狱。
English: The sentencing document is tangled with the transcript of the hearing; the case of the use of the Qinqin torture device has accumulated in prison.

古文：死者不可复生，刑者无因自返，由此而望滋实，庸可致乎？
现代文：死人不能复生，受刑的人无由自返，因此而期望昌盛富裕，难道能达到吗?
English: For there is no resurrection of the dead, neither shall there be any resurrection of the dead that are in the tombs; and they that are wise shall shine as the brightness of the firmament.

古文：朕夕惕思治，念崇政术，斟酌前王，择其令典，有可以宪章邦国，罔不由之。
现代文：我直到夜晚仍怀忧惧工作不懈想望治世，考虑推崇政治方略，思忖前代君王，选择其法令宪章，有可以作为邦国典章制度的，无不遵循。
English: I to-night, with anxious care, labour tirelessly to reign, to consider and recommend policies, to meditate on former monarchs, to select their statutes and charters, and to devise a system of laws and ordinances which may serve as a constitution for the state.

古文：释愧心于四海，昭情素于万物。
现代文：闸释羞惭之心于四海，昭明真情本心于众人。
English: Shedding one's self-consciousness is good for the whole world, and revealing one's true feelings is good for everyone.

古文：俗伪日久，禁网弥繁。
现代文：诈伪之俗曰久，张布如网的禁令法律更加繁密。
English: The custom of fraud has been around for a long time, and the prohibition laws have become more complex.

古文：汉文四百，邈焉已远。
现代文：汉文帝时四百条律令，已很遥远。
English: It is a long way from the 400 ritsuryo edicts of the Han Dynasty.

古文：虽省事清心，无忘日用，而委衔废策，事未获从。
现代文：虽然减少事务心地清静，不忘日常应用，但确实含有废策，置立未得遵从。
English: Although the reduction of affairs is clear and calm, and does not forget the daily application, it does contain wasteful measures, and the establishment is not complied with.

古文：可依周、汉旧典，有罪入赎，外详为条格，以时奏闻。 
现代文：可以依照周朝、莲翘旧有的法典，有罪纳财赎罪，外廷臣僚可详细订立条例，及时奏报。 
English: According to the old codes of the Zhou Dynasty and Lianyou Dynasty, the guilty could pay money to atone for their sins, and the ministers of the Outer Court could make detailed regulations and report them in a timely manner.

古文：辛未，以中领军蔡道恭为司州刺史。
现代文：辛未，任命中领军蔡道恭为司州刺史。
English: Xin Wei appointed the middle leader Cai Daogong as the secretary of state.

古文：以新除谢沐县公萧宝义为巴陵王，以奉齐祀。
现代文：封新授予的谢沐县公萧寅义为旦盐工，以供奉壹鱼祭祀。
English: The newly conferred title of Xie Mu County Gong Xiao Yin Yi is a salt worker, to offer a fish sacrifice.

古文：复南兰陵武进县，依前代之科。
现代文：恢复南兰陵武进县，依照前代的规制。
English: Nanlanying Wujin County was restored in accordance with the previous regulation.

古文：征谢朏为左光禄大夫、开府仪同三司，何胤为右光禄大夫。
现代文：征召邀匙为左光禄大夫、开府仪同三司，何胤为右光禄大夫。
English: The call-up invitation key is for the doctor of the left light, the opening ceremony and the three departments, and Ho Yin is the doctor of the right light.

古文：改南东海为兰陵郡。
现代文：改蜜塞痉为堕陆虽。
English: Although it has been changed from "mise-sé" to "fallen land."

古文：土断南徐州诸侨郡县。
现代文：废除尘魁出各侨置郡县使侨寓户口编入所在郡县。
English: Abolish the practice of assigning each overseas Chinese resident to a county and assign the overseas Chinese resident's household registration to the county where the overseas Chinese resident resides.

古文：癸酉，诏曰： 商俗甫移，遗风尚炽，下不上达，由来远矣。
现代文：癸酉，调令道： 商代腐败的风俗刚刚转变，遣留的风俗尚且强盛，下情不达于君上，由来已久啊。
English: ,调令道: The corrupt customs of the Shang Dynasty have just changed, the customs of repatriation are still strong, the situation is not up to you, it has been a long time.

古文：升中驭索，增其懔然。
现代文：祭天禀告成功治民如朽索驭马，加深其危惧之感。
English: Sacrificing the divine edict to succeed in governing the people is like riding a horse on a rotten rope, deepening their sense of danger.

古文：可于公车府谤木肺石傍各置一函。
现代文：可在公车府的谤木和肺石旁各设置一函。
English: It is possible to set up a post box next to the chopping block and the lung stone at the bus station.

古文：若肉食莫言，山阿欲有横议，投谤木函。
现代文：如果官吏不进言，山野之民想要非难的。可投谏言于木函。
English: If the government officials do not speak up, the people of the mountains and the countryside will find it difficult to blame them. The criticism can be directed at Mukan.

古文：若从我江、汉，功在可策，犀兕徒弊，龙蛇方县；次身才高妙，摈压莫通，怀傅、吕之术，抱屈、贾之叹，其理有皦然，受困包匦；夫大政侵小，豪门陵贱，四民已穷，九重莫达。
现代文：如随我征战长江、汉水，功劳可以给予奖赏，却是犀兕皮制的甲和盾徒然破损，矛戟等武器一起悬挂的；才能达到美善之至，却被排斥压抑不能通达，怀藏傅说、吕尚的谋术，却抱有屈原、贾谊的悲叹，其道理清楚明白，受困于包裹缠结之中的；大官侵夺小官，豪族欺凌贫贱之民，士、农、工、商已困厄，不能使帝王闻知的。
English: If I go to fight in the Yangtze River and the Han River, the merit can be rewarded, but the armor and shield made of rhinoceros hide are broken in vain, and the spear and other weapons are hung together; the ability to achieve beauty and goodness, but it is rejected and suppressed and cannot be reached, said Huizang Fu, Lushang's strategy, but it has the lament of Qu Yuan and Jia Yi, and its reason is clear and clear, trapped in the entanglement of parcels; big officials encroach on small officials, powerful clans bully poor people, and priests, farmers, workers, and merchants are trapped, and cannot make the emperor

古文：若欲自申，并可投肺石函。 
现代文：如要自我申述，都可投书于肺石函。 
English: If you want to self-petition, you can write to lung stone letter.

古文：甲戍，诏断远近上庆礼。
现代文：甲戌，韶令定夺远近呈上的吉庆之礼。
English: Armor and armor, imperial edicts are sure to win the auspicious thanks from far and near.

古文：又诏曰： 礼闱文阁，宜率旧章，贵贱既位，各有差等，俯仰拜伏，以明王度，济济洋洋，具瞻斯在。
现代文：又韶令道： 尚书省文阁，应遵循昔日典章，贵贱已就其位，各有等第，前俯后仰跪拜俯伏，以明王法，盛大美好，此为众人所瞻望。
English: He also ordered, "For the study of books and the study of literature, you should follow the rules of the past. The noble and the lowly have already taken their places, each has a place, bowing and kneeling, bowing and kneeling, to show the king's law, grand and beautiful, this is what everyone is looking forward to.

古文：顷因多难，治纲弛落，官非积及，荣由幸至。
现代文：近来由于多难，治国的纲纪废弛凋零，官位不是积累政绩所取，富贵衹是由于宠幸而至。
English: Recently, due to the many difficulties, the discipline of governing the country has withered away, the official position is not taken by the accumulation of political achievements, and the rich and noble are favored by favor.

古文：六军尸四品之职，青紫治白簿之劳。
现代文：领军将军、护军将军、左右二卫将军、骁骑将军、游击将军尸位四品之职，高官显爵求无功之赏。
English: Leading generals, escort generals, left and right guards generals, cavalry generals, and guerrilla generals are the four highest-ranking positions, and high-ranking officials are seeking a reward for no merit.

古文：振衣朝伍，长揖卿相，趋步广闼，并驱丞郎。
现代文：整衣朝官之列，作揖卿相之间，趋步豪门大户，与丞郎官员并驾齐驱。
English: Among the ranks of court officials in full dress, they are among the highest-ranking officials, and they are on the same level as the highest-ranking officials.

古文：遂冠履倒错，珪甑莫辨。
现代文：于是上下颠倒，贵贱难分。
English: As a result, it's upside down, and it's hard to tell the rich from the poor.

古文：静言疚怀，思返流弊。
现代文：悄然伤心，思虑使相沿而成的弊病更正。
English: Quietly sad, thoughts make the side-by-side ills corrected.

古文：且玩法惰官，动成逋弛，罚以常科，终未惩革。
现代文：并且玩忽法令轻慢官吏，往往养成懈怠松弛的习惯，用通常的刑罚惩治，始终不能鉴于前失而有所改变。
English: Moreover, officials who flout negligence laws and ordinances often develop the habit of slackness and slackness, punish with the usual penalties, and always cannot be changed in view of the previous loss.

古文：夫槚楚申威，盖代断趾，笞捶有令，如或可从。
现代文：用椟木荆条制成的刑具笞打以申明严威，来代替斩断脚趾的刑罚，抽打有令，如有的话可以遵从。
English: The punishment of chopping off a toe is replaced by the punishment of beating with a tool made of birch and rattan, which is said to be severe. There is an order for beating, and if there is one, it can be obeyed.

古文：外详共平议，务尽厥理。 
现代文：外廷臣僚共同详细议论，一定要合情合理。 
English: It is necessary for the ministers of the Foreign Court to have a detailed discussion together, and it must be reasonable.

古文：癸未，诏 相国府职吏，可依资劳度台；若职限已盈，所度之余，及骠骑府并可赐满。 
现代文：癸未，诏令： 相国府官吏，可根据资格和功劳迁转中央机构的官署；如果职位限额已满，所迁剩余，至骠骑府，都可据资格和功劳满授职位。 
English: On the other hand, the imperial edict stated that the officials of the relevant prefectures could be transferred to the central government agencies according to their qualifications and merits; if the quota of the post was full, the remaining officials could be transferred to the Shandong Province, and they could be assigned to the post according to their qualifications and merits.

古文：闰月丁酉，以行宕昌王梁弥邕为安西将军、河凉二州刺史，正封宕昌王。
现代文：闰月丁酉，任命行宕昌王梁弥邕为安西将军、河凉二州刺史，正式封为宕昌王。
English: In the intercalary month of Ding Xi, he appointed Liang Yijun, the king of the Tang and Chang dynasties, as the general of Anxi, and He Liang as the governor of Erzhou, and officially crowned him as the king of the Tang and Chang dynasties.

古文：壬寅，以车骑将军夏侯详为右光禄大夫。
现代文：壬寅，任命车骑将军夏侯详为右光禄大夫。
English: Ren Yin, appointed the cavalry general Xia Hou Zeng as the doctor of Uguanglu.

古文：诏曰： 成务弘风，肃厉内外，实由设官分职，互相惩纠。
现代文：诏令道： 成就事业弘扬德风，整饬内外，实由设官分职，相互告诫督察。
English: The imperial edict said: to carry forward the cause of achievement and the spirit of virtue, to rectify the internal and external affairs, to divide the duties of officials, and to admonish the inspectors.

古文：而顷壹拘常式，见失方奏，多容违惰，莫肯执咎，宪纲日弛，渐以为俗，今端右可以风闻奏事，依元熙旧制。 
现代文：而近来一拘常规，看到阙失才弹奏，多容忍违逆轻慢，不敢建言担当过失，法度日益松弛，渐成习俗。如今宰辅重臣可以根据传闻进谏或弹劾官吏，遵循元熙时旧有的制度。 
English: Recently, however, it has become customary to stick to the routine, only play when you see mistakes, be more tolerant of disobedience and imprudence, and not dare to make suggestions and take responsibility for mistakes. The laws are becoming more and more relaxed, and gradually become a custom. Nowadays, the senior vice-minister can imprison or impeach officials according to rumors, following the old system in the Yuan Dynasty.

古文：五月乙亥夜，盗人南、北掖，烧神虎门、总章观，害卫尉卿张弘策。
现代文：五月乙亥晚上，盗贼进入南、北掖，火烧神虎门、总章观，杀害卫尉卿张弘策。
English: On the evening of May in the Year of the Fire Rooster, thieves entered Nan and Beilun, set fire to the Gate of the Divine Tiger, the General Chapter, and killed the Lieutenant of the Guards, Zhang Hongzhe.

古文：戊子，江州刺史陈伯之举兵反，以领军将军王茂为征南将军、江州刺史，率众讨之。
现代文：戊子，江州刺史陈伯之起兵反叛，任命领军将军王茂为征南将军、江州刺史，率军征讨叛军。
English: Wuzi, the governor of Jiangzhou, Chen Bo, raised an army to rebel and appointed the leading general, Wang Mao, as the general to conquer the south, the governor of Jiangzhou, and led the army to conquer the rebels.

古文：六月庚戌，以行北秦州刺史杨绍先为北秦州刺史、武都王。
现代文：六月庚戌，任命行北秦州刺史杨绍先为韭台州刺史、武都王。
English: In June, Emperor Gaozong appointed Yang Shao, the governor of North Qin Province, as the governor of Xingtai Province and the King of Wudang.

古文：是月，陈伯之奔魏，江州平。
现代文：造一月，陈伯之逃奔北魏，江州平定。
English: In January, Chen Bozhi fled to the Northern Wei Dynasty, and Jiangzhou was pacified.

古文：前益州刺史刘季连据成都反。
现代文：前益州刺史刘季连拥据成都反叛。
English: Liu Jilian, the former governor of Yizhou, supported the rebellion in Chengdu.

古文：八月戊戌，置建康三官。
现代文：八月戊戌，设置建康三官。
English: In August, the Three Departments of Jiankang were established.

古文：乙巳，平北将军、西凉州刺史象舒彭进号安西将军，封邓至王。
现代文：乙巳，平北将军、西凉州刺史象舒彭进升官号安西将军，封为邓至王。
English: At this time, the general of North Pyongan Province and the general of West Liangzhou Province, Shupeng, were promoted to the rank of the general of Anxi Province, and were given the title of Deng Zi Wang.

古文：丁未，诏中书监王莹等八人参定律令。
现代文：丁未，韶令中书监王莹等八人参酌商定法令。
English: Ding Wei, Wang Ying, the book supervisor of the imperial edict, and other eight people discussed and agreed on the decree.

古文：是月，诏尚书曹郎依昔奏事。
现代文：这一月，诏令尚书曹郎照旧向皇帝奏陈事情。
English: This month, the emperor ordered Shang Shulang to report to the emperor as usual.

古文：林邑、干利国各遣使献方物。
现代文：林邑、干陁利国各自派遣使者进献本地物产。
English: Lin-eup and Kangri-eup each sent envoys to present local products.

古文：冬十一月己未，立小庙。
现代文：冬季十一月己未，为其庶母立庙。
English: In November of the winter, a temple was built for his stepmother.

古文：甲子，立皇子统为皇太子。
现代文：甲子，立皇子萧统为皇太子。
English: Emperor Gao made Prince Xiao Tong the crown prince.

古文：十二月丙申，以国子祭酒张稷为护军将军。
现代文：十二月丙申，任命国子祭酒张稷为护军将军。
English: In December of the same year, he appointed the son of the country, Zhang Jun, as the general of the escort.

古文：辛亥，护军将军张稷免。
现代文：辛亥，护军将军张稷被罢免。
English: In Xinhai, Zhang Ye, the military escort general, was removed from his post.

古文：是岁大旱，米斗五千，人多饿死。
现代文：这一年发生大旱灾，每斗米钱五千，人多饿死。
English: In that year, there was a severe drought, and the price of a barrel of rice rose to five thousand. Many people died of starvation.

古文：二年春正月甲寅朔，诏曰： 三讯五听，著自圣典，哀矜折狱，义重前诰，盖所以明慎用刑，深戒疑枉，成功致治，罔不由兹。
现代文：二年春季正月甲寅初一，韶令道： 审理案件要多方查询和运用五种方法，这些记载出于圣明的法典，要怀着怜悯之心判决诉讼案件，其意义被强调于从前的诰令，这些都是为了明察审慎地施用刑法，深戒疑忌枉屈，成就功业达到治世，无不由此。
English: On the first day of the first month of the second year of spring, the imperial edict said: It is necessary to make multiple inquiries and use five methods to try cases. These records are based on the sacred code, and it is necessary to judge litigation cases with compassion. Its significance was emphasized in the previous imperial edict. These are all for the purpose of applying criminal law prudently and cautiously, refraining from suspicion and ingratitude, and achieving achievements to achieve success.

古文：朕自籓部，常躬讯录，求理得情，洪细必尽。
现代文：我在藩部时，常亲自省察、审讯囚徒罪状，求得情理，大小必尽。
English: When I was in the domain ministry, I often personally examined and interrogated the prisoners' criminal records to find out the truth.

古文：末运弛网，斯政又阙，牢犴沉壅，申诉靡从。
现代文：末世国运衰微纲纪废弛，这种政治又缺乏，牢狱罪囚积压充斥，无从申诉。
English: With the decline of national prosperity in the last century and the decline of micro-level disciplines, this kind of politics is also lacking, and the backlog of prisoners in prison is overflowing, and there is no way to appeal.

古文：朕属当期运，君临兆亿，虽复斋居宣室，留心听断；而九牧遐荒，无因临览。
现代文：我适逢机运，统治万民，纵令斋戒别居宣室，仍留心听讼断狱；然而九州荒远，无从亲临省察。
English: I had the opportunity to rule over all the people, and even though I ordered them to fast and stay away from the preaching room, I still paid attention to the hearing of the lawsuit and the prison break; however, Kyushu is far away, and there is no way to personally investigate.

古文：深惧怀冤就鞫，匪惟一方。
现代文：深深担心含冤受审的，不衹一方。
English: Those who are deeply concerned about being wrongfully tried are not on the wrong side.

古文：可申敕诸州，月一临讯，博询择善，务在确实。 
现代文：可以申令各州，每月一次亲临审讯，广泛查询择善而从，一定要确切信实。 
English: We can order the states to conduct in-person trials once a month, conduct extensive inquiries to select the best, and be absolutely faithful.

古文：乙卯，以尚书仆射沈约为尚书左仆射；吏部尚书范云为尚书右仆射；前将军鄱阳王恢为南徐州刺史；尚书令王亮为左光禄大夫；右卫将军柳庆远为中领军。
现代文：乙卯，任命尚书仆射沈够为尚书左仆射；吏部尚书范云为尚书右仆射；前将军鄱阳王萧恢为南徐州刺史；尚书令玉台为左光禄大夫；右卫将军柳庆远为中领军。
English: Second, he appointed Shang Shuxu's servant, Sha Shen Jen, as Shang Shuxu's left-hand servant, Sha; Shang Shuxu's official Fan Yun as Shang Shuxu's right-hand servant, Sha; the former general, Shenyang Wang Xiaoguai, as the historian of South Xuzhou; Shang Shuxu appointed Yutai as the doctor of the left Guanglu; and the right-guard general, Liu Qingyuan, as the leader of the middle army.

古文：丙辰，尚书令、新除左光禄大夫王亮免。
现代文：丙辰，尚书令、新任左光禄大夫王亮被罢免。
English: Hsin-Chen, Shang Shuling, and Wang Liang, the newly appointed doctor of the Left Guanglu, were dismissed.

古文：夏四月癸卯，尚书删定郎蔡法度上《梁律》二十卷、《令》三十卷、《科》四十卷。
现代文：夏季四月癸卯，尚书删定郎蔡法度呈上《梁律》二十卷、《令》三十卷、《科》四十卷。
English: At the end of the summer in April, Cai Fadu, the editor-in-chief of Shangshu, submitted 20 volumes of Liang Lu, 30 volumes of Ling, and 40 volumes of Ke.

古文：五月丁巳，尚书右仆射范云卒。
现代文：五月丁巳，尚书右仆射范云去世。
English: In May, Shoshu's right-hand man Sho Fanyun passed away.

古文：乙丑，益州刺史邓元起克成都，曲赦益州。
现代文：乙丑，益塑刺史邓元起攻克盛翅，特赦董蛆。
English: The second ugliness, the plastic thorn history, Deng Yuanqi conquered Shengying, and pardoned Dong Qi.

古文：壬申，断诸郡县献奉二宫。
现代文：壬申，禁绝各郡县进贡物品给天子和太子。
English: Jinshin, forbade all counties and counties to bring tribute items to the emperor and the prince.

古文：惟诸州及会稽，职惟岳牧，许荐任土，若非地产，亦不得贡。
现代文：衹有各州和会擅，职位为封疆大吏，允许进献根据土地情况而制定的贡赋品种和数量，如果不是本地所产。也不得进贡。
English: Some prefectures and guilds, with the post of "Fengjiang Daoli," allow the donation of the variety and quantity of tribute according to the land conditions, and if it is not locally produced, it is not allowed to pay tribute.

古文：六月丁亥，诏以东阳、信安、豊安三县水潦，漂损居民资业，遣使周履，量蠲课调。
现代文：六月丁亥，诏令由于东阳、信安、丰安三县水灾，冲毁了居民的财产，派遣使者周巡，量定免征的赋税。
English: In June of Dinghai, because of the floods in Dongyang, Xin'an, and Feng'an counties, which destroyed the property of residents, the imperial edict was issued to dispatch envoys to make rounds and quantify the tax exemptions.

古文：是夏多疬疫。
现代文：这一年夏季发生瘟疫。
English: A plague broke out in the summer of that year.

古文：以新除左光禄大夫谢朏为司徒、尚书令。
现代文：任命新任的左光禄大夫邀壁为司徒、尚书令。
English: The newly appointed Dr. Sakoroku invited the wall to become a disciple and a disciple.

古文：甲午，以中书监王莹为尚书右仆射。
现代文：甲午，任命中书监王莹为尚书右仆射。
English: In the afternoon of the first day of the month, Wang Ying, the book supervisor of the CPC Central Committee, was appointed as Shang Shuxu's right-hand man.

古文：秋七月，扶南、龟兹、中天竺国各遣使献方物。
现代文：秋季七月，迭尘、鱼垄、中天竺国各自派遣使者进献本地物产。
English: In the autumn, in July, the provinces of Yidibao, Yulong and Zhongtianyuan each sent envoys to present local products.

古文：冬十月，魏寇司州。
现代文：冬季十月，北魏侵犯司州。
English: In the winter of October, the Northern Wei invaded Shizhou.

古文：十一月乙卯，雷电大雨，晦。
现代文：十一月乙卯，有雷电大雨，天昏地暗。
English: In November, there was lightning and heavy rain, and the sky was dark.

古文：是夜又雷。
现代文：当夜又有雷电。
English: That night there were thunder and lightning.

古文：乙亥，尚书左仆射沈约以母忧去职。
现代文：乙亥，尚书左仆射沈约因居母丧离职。
English: Yi Hai, Shangshu's left-hand man, Sho Shen, has left the company due to his mother's death.

古文：三年春正月戊申，后将军、扬州刺史临川王宏进号中军将军。
现代文：三年春季正月戊申，后将军、扬州刺史临川王芦塞进升官号中军将军。
English: In the first month of the spring of the third year, Wushin, the general, Yangzhou assassin Linchuan Wang Lusei, was promoted to the rank of general of the Chinese army.

古文：癸丑，以尚书右仆射王莹为尚书左仆射，太子詹事柳惔为尚书右仆射，前尚书左仆射沈约为镇军将军。
现代文：癸丑，任命尚书右仆射王莹为尚书左仆射，太子詹事柳恢为尚书右仆射，前尚书左仆射沈约为镇军将军。
English: At the same time, he appointed Shangshu's right-hand man, Sha Wang Ying, as Shangshu's left-hand man, Prince Zhan Shiliu Gao as Shangshu's right-hand man, and the former Shangshu's left-hand man, Sha Shen, as the general of the town army.

古文：二月，魏陷梁州。
现代文：二月，北魏攻陷梁州。
English: In February, the Northern Wei captured Liangzhou.

古文：三月，陨霜杀草。
现代文：三月，降霜草木枯萎。
English: In March, the frost-reduced plants and trees wither.

古文：五月丁巳，以扶南国王憍陈如阇耶跋摩为安南将军。
现代文：五月丁巳，任命扶南国王侨陈如合耶跋摩为安南将军。
English: In May, the king of Funan Province, Chen Ruhe Yabema, was appointed as General Annan.

古文：六月丙子，诏曰： 昔哲王之宰世也，每岁卜征，躬事巡省，民俗政刑，罔不必逮。
现代文：六月丙子，韶令道： 从前贤明的君王掌管治理天下时，每年占卜出征吉凶，亲自巡行视察，民情风俗政令刑罚，无不一一顾及。
English: In June, Cixi, the son of a king, issued an edict: In the past, when wise kings ruled the world, every year they divined the fortunes, personally inspected the processions, and took into account the folk customs, decrees, and punishments.

古文：末代风凋，久旷兹典。
现代文：末世风气衰落，久废此种法式。
English: With the decline of the style of the last century, this French style has long been abandoned.

古文：虽欲肆远忘劳，究临幽仄，而居今行古，事未易从，所以日晏踟蹰，情同再抚。
现代文：虽想纵迹远方不知疲倦，遍察微贱，然而处在今天遵行古道，不易从事，所以天色已晚徘徊踟蹰，情同再抚。
English: Although I want to travel far and wide tirelessly, I am not easy to follow the ancient path today, so it is too late for me to wander, and I will not be able to meet again.

古文：总总九州，远近民庶，或川路幽遐，或贫羸老疾，怀冤抱理，莫由自申，所以东海匹妇，致灾邦国，西土孤魂，登楼请诉。
现代文：总括九州，远近百姓，或者水路幽远，或者贫弱老病，含冤有理，无从申诉，所以柬海的平民妇女，使邦国遭灾，西土孤魂，登楼求诉。
English: Including Kyushu, the people far and near, or the waterway is far away, or the poor and weak are old and sick, there is a grievance and reason, and there is no way to appeal, so the civilian women of Cambodia and the sea, the country suffered a disaster, and the West was lonely, went to the building to appeal.

古文：念此于怀，中夜太息。
现代文：胸中挂念此事，常半夜深深地叹息。
English: I think about it in my heart and often sigh deeply in the middle of the night.

古文：可分将命巡行州部。其有深冤钜害，抑郁无归，听诣使者，依源自列。
现代文：可以分别奉命巡行州部，那些有着深冤大害，忧愤烦闷无所归宿的，听任他们到使者那裹，依据原本情况自陈。
English: They can be ordered to patrol the prefectures separately. Those who have deep grievances and great harms, and are sad and bored with nowhere to go, let them go to the envoy and explain themselves according to the original situation.

古文：庶以矜隐之念，昭被四方，棨听远闻，事均亲览。 
现代文：希望将同情恻隐的爱怜，如曰月的光辉一样播洒四方，使视听范围更远更广，事情如我亲自操持一样。 
English: I hope to spread the compassion, love and mercy of Gu Yin to the four corners of the world like the glory of the moon, so that the audio-visual range will be further and wider, just as I personally do.

古文：癸未，大赦天下。
现代文：癸未，大赦天下。
English: There will be a general amnesty.

古文：秋七月丁未，以光禄大夫夏侯详为车骑将军、湘州刺史，湘州刺史杨公则为中护军。
现代文：秋季七月丁未，任命光禄大夫夏侯详为车骑将军、湘史，湘州刺史杨公则为中护军。
English: In the autumn of July, Guanglu Doctor Xia Houchao was appointed as the cavalry general and Hunan historian, and Hunan scholar Yang Gong was appointed as the middle guard.

古文：甲子，立皇子综为豫章郡王。
现代文：甲子，立皇子萧综为豫章郡王。
English: His eldest son, Prince Xiao Zhan, became the king of Yuzhang County.

古文：八月，魏陷司州，诏以南义阳置司州。
现代文：八月，噬攻陷划，诏令在壶盏垒置立划蛆。
English: In August, the imperial edict was issued to set up paddling rafts at the jars.

古文：九月壬子，以河南王世子伏连筹为镇西将军、西秦河二州刺史、河南王。
现代文：九月王子，任命河南王嫡长子伏连筹为镇西将军、西秦河二州刺史、河南王。
English: In September, the prince appointed the eldest legitimate son of the king of Henan, Fulian, as the general of Zhenxi, the governor of the two states of the West Qin River, and the king of Henan.

古文：北天竺国遣使献方物。
现代文：北天竺国派遣使者进献本土物产。
English: The North of China sent an envoy to present local products.

古文：冬十一月甲子，诏曰： 设教因时，淳薄异政，刑以世革，轻重殊风。
现代文：冬季十一月甲子，诏令道： 实施教化根据不同时间的具体情况而制定适宜的措施，政治的淳厚与浇薄相异，刑罚随着世事的变化而变革，风俗的轻浮与厚朴不同。
English: In the winter of November, the Emperor issued the following edict: The implementation of edification is to formulate appropriate measures according to the specific circumstances of different times, the thickness of politics is different from the thickness, the punishment changes with the changes of the world, and the frivolity and simplicity of customs are different.

古文：昔商俗未移，民散久矣，婴网陷辟，日夜相寻。
现代文：从前商代风俗未变，人民离散很久了，触陷罗网坠入刑罚，日夜相继。
English: In the past, the customs of the merchant era remained unchanged, the people were separated for a long time, and they were caught in the net and fell into criminal punishment, day and night.

古文：若悉加正法，则赭衣塞路；并申弘宥，则难用为国，故使有罪入赎，以全元元之命。
现代文：如果全部加以正法，那么罪囚满路皆是；如果全部予以宽赦，那么难以用他们来为国效力，因此让有罪的纳财赎罪，用来保全百姓的性命。
English: If all of them are rectified, then all the prisoners will be released; if all of them are pardoned, then it will be difficult to use them to serve the country, so let the guilty pay money to atone for their sins and use it to save the lives of the people.

古文：今遐迩知禁，圄犴稍虚，率斯以往，庶几刑措。
现代文：如今远近知道法禁，牢狱渐空，从此以后，或许可以置刑法而不用。
English: Now that the ban is known far and wide, and prisons are emptying out, from now on, it may be possible to dispense with criminal law.

古文：金作权典，宜在蠲息。可除赎罪之科。 
现代文：用钱财除去法律的惩罚，应当废止。可以除去赎罪的法规。 
English: The use of money to remove the punishment of the law should be abolished. The law of atonement can be removed.

古文：是岁多疾疫。
现代文：这一年多流行传染病。
English: The year was marked by epidemics of infectious diseases.

古文：四年春正月癸卯朔，诏曰： 今九流常选，年未三十，不通一经，不得解褐。
现代文：四年春季正月癸卯初一，韶令道： 现在九品常选，年纪不满三十，不能精通一经的，不得出仕。
English: On the first day of the first month of the spring of the fourth year, he ordered: Now nine grades are regularly selected, under the age of thirty, and those who cannot master one grade are not allowed to serve.

古文：若有才同甘、颜，勿限年次。 
现代文：如果有才能和甘罗、颜回相同的，不限年龄的大小。 
English: If you have the same talent as Gan Luo and Yan Hui, there is no age limit.

古文：置《五经》博士各一人。
现代文：置立《五经》博士各一人。
English: Set up "Five Classics" doctorates, one each.

古文：以镇北将军、雍州刺史、建安王伟为南徐州刺史，南徐州刺史鄱阳王恢为郢州刺史，中领军柳庆远为雍州刺史。
现代文：任命镇北将军、壅刺史建安王芦售为亩剑刺史，南徐州刺史鄱阳王萧恢为郢州刺史，中领军柳庆远为雍州刺史。
English: He appointed Zhenbei General, Jian'an Wang Ruxuan as Mu Jian's Jian's Jian's Jian's Jian's Jian's Jian's Jian's Jian's Jian's Jian's Jian's Jian's Jian's Jian's Jian's Jian's Jian's Jian's.

古文：丙午，省《凤皇衔书伎》。
现代文：丙午，阅览《凤皇衔书伎》。
English: In the afternoon of the third day, read "Phoenix Emperor's Calligraphy."

古文：戊申，诏曰： 夫禋郊飨帝，至敬攸在，致诚尽悫，犹惧有违；而往代多令宫人纵观兹礼，帷宫广设，辎軿耀路，非所以仰虔苍昊，昭感上灵。
现代文：戊申，韶令道： 郊祀时祭天帝，极其崇敬，表达诚心竭尽恭谨，仍惧怕有违逆的；然而前代多使妃嫔宫女恣意观看此礼，以帷幕布置成的行宫大设，有屏蔽的车子辉耀于大路，这不是用来仰敬苍天，诚感上帝的行为。
English: Wushin, Zhao Lingdao: When the suburb worships the heavenly emperor, it is extremely reverent, expresses sincerity, is respectful, and still fears treason; however, in previous generations, many concubines were arbitrarily allowed to watch this ceremony, and the marching palace was set up with a curtain, and the shielded chariot shone on the road. This is not an act of worshipping the heavens and sincerely feeling God.

古文：属车之间，见讥前世，便可自今停止。 
现代文：在帝王之间，受讥斥于前世，即可从今以后停止。 
English: Among emperors, if you were scorned in a previous life, you can stop it from now on.

古文：辛亥，舆驾亲祠南郊，赦天下。
现代文：辛亥，皇上亲自在南郊祭天，大赦天下。
English: At the turn of the year, the emperor himself held a festival in the southern suburb of Tian, and granted amnesty to the whole country.

古文：二月壬午，遣卫尉卿杨公则率宿卫兵塞洛口。
现代文：二月壬午，派遣卫尉卿杨公则率领禁军在洛口构筑要塞。
English: At noon of February, Yang Gongze, the captain of the Imperial Guards, was dispatched to lead the Imperial Army to build a fortress in Lokou.

古文：壬辰，交州刺史李凯据州反，长史李畟讨平之。
现代文：壬辰，交州刺史李凯拥据本州反叛，长史李异征讨平定了他。
English: In Imjin, Jiaozhou stabbed Li Kai, who supported the rebellion in his home state, and the long history of Li's dissident activities brought him down.

古文：曲赦交州。
现代文：特赦交州。
English: Amnesty for Jangju.

古文：戊戌，以前郢州刺史曹景宗为中护军。
现代文：戊戌，任命前郢州刺史曹景宗为中护军。
English: Wuzhen, appointed the former Zhangzhou statesman Cao Jingzong as the middle guard.

古文：是月，立建兴苑于秣陵建兴里。
现代文：逭一月，在秣陵建兴里建立建兴苑。
English: In January, Jianxing Garden was established in Jianxing Village, Fuling.

古文：夏四月丁巳，以行宕昌王梁弥博为安西将军、河凉二州刺史、宕昌王。
现代文：夏季四月丁巳，任命行宕昌王梁弥博为安西将军、河凉二州刺史、宕昌王。
English: In the summer of April, Liang Yibo, the king of Gongchang, was appointed as the general of Anxi, and He Liang Erzhou, the king of Gongchang, was appointed as the king of Anxi.

古文：是月，自甲寅至壬戌，甘露连降华林园。
现代文：这一月，从甲寅到壬戌，甘露接连降落华林园。
English: This month, from Jiaying to Renmin, the nectar of nectar successively landed in the Hualin Garden.

古文：五月辛卯，建康县朔阴里生嘉禾，一茎十二穗。
现代文：五月辛卯，建康县朔阴里生长出奇异的禾稻，一茎有十二穗。
English: In the middle of May, strange rice plants sprouted in Shuoyin, Jiankang County. One stem had twelve ears.

古文：六月庚戌，立孔子庙。
现代文：六月庚戌，建立孔子庙。
English: In June, Geng Zi established the Confucius Temple.

古文：壬戌，岁星昼见。
现代文：壬戌，岁星在白天出现。
English: After all, the New Year's Star only appears during the day.

古文：秋七月辛卯，右光禄大夫张瑰卒。
现代文：秋季七月辛卯，右光禄大夫张瓖去世。
English: In the autumn of July, the doctor of Uguanglu Hospital, Zhang Qi, passed away.

古文：八月庚子，老人星见。
现代文：八月庚子，老人星出现。
English: August Geng Zi, the old man star appears.

古文：冬十月丙午，北伐，以中军将军、扬州刺史临川王宏都督北讨诸军事，尚书右仆射柳惔为副。
现代文：冬季十月丙午，北伐，任命中军将军、握丛刺史临川王芦塞都督北讨诸军事，尚书右仆射堑噬为副职。
English: On the afternoon of the third day of October in winter, during the Northern Expedition, the general of the Chinese army and the governor of Linchuan Province, Lusei, were appointed to the military, and Shangshu's right-hand man, Shajiao, was appointed to the deputy post.

古文：是岁，以兴师费用，王公以下各上国租及田谷，以助军资。
现代文：这一年，因为兴师开支，王公以下各自缴上职田所收租税和田谷，以助军资。
English: This year, because of the expense of reviving the division, Wang Gong and his subordinates each paid the taxes and fees collected by the Vocational Field Office and Tianya to help raise military funds.

古文：十一月辛未，以都官尚书张稷为领军将军。
现代文：十一月辛未，任命都官尚书张稷为领军将军。
English: In November Xinwei appointed the official of the capital, Shangshu Zhang Jun, as the leading general.

古文：甲午，天晴朗，西南有电光，闻如雷声三。
现代文：甲午，天气晴朗，西南方有闪电，听到似有三声雷鸣。
English: In the afternoon of the 1st, the weather was fine, there was lightning in the southwest, and I heard what seemed to be three claps of thunder.

古文：十二月，司徒、尚书令谢朏以所生母忧，去职。
现代文：十二月，司徒、尚书令谢肋因居生母之丧，离职。
English: In December, Szeto and Shang Shuling resigned due to the death of their mother.

古文：是岁大穰，米斛三十。
现代文：这一年大丰收，每斛米钱三十。
English: It was a bumper harvest this year, with 30 cents paid for each stalk of rice.

古文：五年春正月丁卯朔，诏曰： 在昔周、汉，取士方国。
现代文：五年春季正月丁卯初一，韶令道： 在从前雕目、莲翘时，从四方诸侯之国取士。
English: On the first day of the first month of the spring of the fifth year, Dingwu, Zou Lingdao said: In the past, when the carvings were carved and the lotuses were in bloom, he took soldiers from the provinces of the four provinces.

古文：顷代凋讹，幽仄罕被，人孤地绝，用隔听览，士操沦胥，因兹靡劝。
现代文：近代衰替讹乱，隐居者很少顾及，人孤地远，因而隔绝了视听，士人操守沦丧，因此无法劝勉。
English: The decline of modern times has led to turmoil. Those who live in seclusion are rarely taken into account. People are isolated and far away, so they are cut off from audio-visual, and the ethics of scholars have been lost, so they cannot be persuaded.

古文：岂其岳渎纵灵，偏有厚薄，实由知与不知，用与不用耳。
现代文：难道是五岳四渎纵恣威灵，单单有亲疏，实是由于知舆不知、用与不用而已。
English: Is it because the five mountains and four rivers are all powerful and powerful, or is it just a matter of affinity and estrangement, or is it really just a matter of knowing and not knowing, of using and not using?

古文：朕以菲德，君此兆民，而兼明广照，屈于堂户，飞耳长目，不及四方，永言愧怀，无忘旦夕。
现代文：我以微薄之德，统治着这些老百姓，况且点燃所有的灯火来照明，也限于门庭之内，无论怎样扩大自己的视听范围，也不能遍及四方，常怀愧疚，旦夕不忘。
English: I rule these people with a meager virtue, and moreover, I light all the lights to illuminate, also limited to the courtyard. No matter how I expand my audio-visual range, I cannot reach all four directions. I always feel guilty and never forget.

古文：凡诸郡国旧族，邦内无在朝位者，选官搜括，使郡有一人。 
现代文：各郡国内曾有一定社会政治地位的家族和悠久历史的故国中没有在朝任职的，吏部要广加搜求，使每郡有一人选入。 
English: In each county, if there is a family with a certain socio-political status and a long history in the home country that has not served in the DPRK, the cadre department should search widely so that one person from each county is selected.

古文：乙亥，以前司徒谢朏为中书监、司徒、卫将军，镇军将军沈约为右光禄大夫，豫章王综为南徐州刺史。
现代文：乙亥，任命前司徒谢础为中书监、司徒、卫将军，镇军将军沈约为右光禄大夫，豫章王萧综为南徐州刺史。
English: Yi Hai, appointed the former Sittu Xie Zong as the book supervisor, Sittu, and Wei general, the town army general Shen Yu as the doctor of Uguanglu, and Yu Zhang Wang Xiao Zong as the history of South Xuzhou.

古文：丁丑，以尚书左仆射王莹为护军将军，仆射如故。
现代文：丁丑，任命尚书左仆射王莹为护军将军，任仆射照旧。
English: Ding Yuxiu appointed Shang Shuxu's left-hand man, Sha Wang Ying, as the general to protect the army, and appointed his servant, Sha Zhe, as before.

古文：甲申，立皇子纲为晋安郡王。
现代文：甲申，立皇子萧纲为晋安郡王。
English: In Jiaxing, Prince Xiao Gang was appointed as the King of Jinan County.

古文：丁亥，太白昼见。
现代文：丁亥，太白星白天出现。
English: Dinghai, Taibai Star appeared during the day.

古文：二月庚戌，以太常张充为吏部尚书。
现代文：二月庚戌，任命太常张充为吏部尚书。
English: In February, Geng Yao appointed Zhang Zong as the first secretary of the Ministry of Civil Affairs.

古文：三月丙寅朔，日有蚀之。
现代文：三月丙寅初一，发生日食。
English: On the first day of the third lunar month, a solar eclipse occurred.

古文：癸未，魏宣武帝从弟翼率其诸弟来降。
现代文：癸未，北魏宣武童堂弟五娄率领他的同宗的弟弟们来降。
English: Soon after, the Northern Wei Emperor Xuanwudong's cousin Wu Xi led his brothers of the same clan to descend.

古文：辅国将军刘思效破魏青州刺史元系于胶水。
现代文：辅国将军刘思效在胶水打败魏青州刺史元系。丁亥。
English: Auxiliary General Liu Sihui defeats Wei Qingzhou Zhishu Yuan in the glue. Dinghai.

古文：丁亥，陈伯之自寿阳率众归降。
现代文：陈伯之从寿阳率部投降。
English: Chen Bozhi surrenders from Shouyang's army.

古文：夏四月丙申，庐陵高昌之仁山获铜剑二，始豊县获八目龟一。
现代文：夏季四月丙申，庐陵高昌的仁山获得二把铜剑，筮丰县获得一只有八只眼的龟。
English: In the summer of April, Yinshan of Gaochang, Fuling, won two bronze swords, and Fenfeng County won a turtle with only eight eyes.

古文：甲寅，诏曰： 朕昧旦斋居，惟刑是恤，三辟五听，寝兴载怀。
现代文：甲寅，诏令道： 我破晓便斋戒别居，衹是顾念刑法的实施，夏、商、周三代之刑法审察案情的五种方式，日夜思念。
English: A Yin, Zhao Ling said: I will break my fast and leave home at dawn. I am thinking about the implementation of the criminal law, the five methods of criminal law examination of the case of Xia, Shang and Zhong, and I am thinking about it day and night.

古文：故陈肺石于都街，增官司于诏狱，殷勤亲览，小大以情。
现代文：因此在闹市陈设征集言论的肺石，在关押奉旨缉捕的犯人牢狱增设官吏，勤奋努力亲自操持，按照实情处理大小案件。
English: Therefore, it is necessary to set up an office in the downtown to solicit opinions, and to add officials to the prison to detain the prisoners wanted for arrest, and diligently work hard to personally manage and deal with large and small cases according to the facts.

古文：而明慎未洽，囹圄尚壅，永言纳隍，在予兴愧。
现代文：然而明察审慎未能普及，牢狱还充满了犯人，常怀出民于水火的急切心情，在我心裹充满愧疚。
English: However, due diligence was not widespread, the prison was still full of prisoners, often with the eagerness to get out of the fire, and my heart was full of guilt.

古文：凡犴狱之所，可遣法官近侍，递录囚徒，如有枉滞，以时奏闻。 
现代文：凡是牢狱之处，可派遣司法官吏和我左右的侍从，依次登录囚徒，如有未能申雪的冤案，及时奏报。 
English: Wherever there is a prison, judicial officials and my attendants can be dispatched to register the prisoners in turn. If there is a wrongful case that cannot be reported, report it in time.

古文：五月辛未，太子左卫率张惠绍克魏宿预城。
现代文：五月辛未，太子左卫率张惠绍攻克北魏的宿预城。
English: In late May, Zhang Huishao, led by Prince Zuo, conquered the Northern Wei capital of Yuecheng.

古文：乙亥，临川王宏前军克梁城。
现代文：乙亥，临川王萧宏的先头部队攻克梁城。
English: In the Year of the Boar, the vanguard of Linchuan King Xiaohong's troops conquered Liangcheng.

古文：辛巳，豫州刺史韦睿克合肥城。
现代文：辛巳，速业刺史韦壑攻克合胆撼。
English: It's hard to believe, but it's time for the fast-paced industry to take on the fast-paced world.

古文：丁亥，庐江太守裴邃克羊石城；庚寅，又克霍丘城。
现代文：丁亥，庐辽太守羞邃攻克羊石城；庚寅，又攻克霍丘城。
English: Dinghai, Zhao Liao Taizhong conquered Shek Shi City; Goyang, also conquered Huoqiu City.

古文：辛卯，太白昼见。
现代文：辛卯，太白星白天出现。
English: It's hard to believe, but Taibai Star appears during the day.

古文：六月庚子，青、冀二州刺史桓和前军克朐山城。
现代文：六月庚子，壹、冀二州刺史但和的先头部队攻克朐山城。
English: In June, the first and second prefectures of Henan and Hebei conquered Lushan.

古文：秋七月乙丑，邓至国遣使献方物。
现代文：秋季七月乙丑，邓至国派遣使者进献本土物产。
English: In the autumn, in July, Deng Zhi Guo sent an envoy to present local products.

古文：八月戊戌，老人星见。
现代文：八月戊戌，老人星出现。
English: In August, the old man star appeared.

古文：辛酉，作太子宫。
现代文：辛酉，建太子宫。
English: It's time to build a crown prince's womb.

古文：冬十一月甲子，京师地震。
现代文：冬季十一月甲子，京都地震。
English: Winter, November, Kobe, Kyoto earthquake.

古文：乙丑，以师出淹时，大赦天下。
现代文：乙丑，因军队出征经历了一段时间，大赦天下。
English: Second Ugly, due to the army's departure for a period of time, was pardoned by the world.

古文：魏寇钟离，遣右卫将军曹景宗率众赴援。
现代文：北魏侵犯钟墼，派遣右卫将军萱垦塞率军前往救援。
English: The Northern Wei invaded Zhongye and sent the Right Guard General Xie Xie and his army to the rescue.

古文：十二月癸卯，司徒谢朏薨。
现代文：十二月癸卯，司徒谢肶去世。
English: At the end of December, Szu Chieh passed away.

古文：六年春正月辛酉朔，诏曰： 径寸之宝，或隐沙泥；以人废言，君子斯戒。
现代文：六年春季正月辛酉初一，诏令道： 直径一寸的玉实，有的隐埋沙泥；因为一个人有阙失就废弃他说过的好话，这是君子要戒备的。
English: On the first day of Hsinchu in the first month of the spring of the sixth year, the emperor ordered: Jade solid with a diameter of one inch, some buried sand and mud; because a person has a slip and discards the good words he has said, this is what a gentleman should beware of.

古文：朕听朝晏罢，思阐政术，虽百辟卿士，有怀必闻，而蓄响边遐，未臻魏阙。
现代文：我临朝听政很晚才罢退，想着开辟政治方略，虽然百官卿士，有什么感想必然向我奏报，但边远蓄积的声息，不达朝廷。
English: I listened to politics in the imperial court and retired very late, thinking of opening up a political strategy. Although hundreds of officials and nobles would inevitably report to me on their impressions, the accumulated opinions from the periphery would not reach the imperial court.

古文：或屈以贫陋，或间以山川，顿足延首，无因奏达。
现代文：或者因贫陋屈抑，或者因山间隔，虽急切盼望，却无从奏上。
English: Either because of poverty, or because of the mountain gap, although eagerly looking forward to, but unable to play.

古文：岂所以沉浮靡漏，远迩兼得者乎？
现代文：难道是用来使上下不遗漏，远近都得到的办法吗?
English: Is it just a way to make sure that no one misses out on the top and bottom, and that everything is available near and far?

古文：四方士民，若有欲陈言刑政，益国利民，沦碍幽远，不能自通者，可各诠条布怀于刺史二千石。
现代文：四方的人民，如有想陈言刑法政令，可以利国利民，因深远而沉没阻隔，不能自己通报的，可各自诠释条理向刺史二干石布陈心意。
English: If the people of the four provinces want to make a statement on the criminal law decree, they can benefit the country and the people. If they cannot announce it themselves because it is too far-reaching and has sunk into obstruction, they can each interpret the structure to their own interests.

古文：有可申采，大小以闻。 
现代文：有可以采用的，无论大小都奏报上来。 
English: If there is anything that can be used, no matter how big or small, it will be reported.

古文：己卯，诏曰： 夫有天下者，义非为己。
现代文：己卯，诏令道： 统有天下的人，理应不是为了自己。
English: He said, "People who rule the world should not do so for their own sake.

古文：凶荒疾疬，兵革水火，有一于此，责归元首。
现代文：荒年瘟疫，战争艰险。有一样在此，责任归于君主。
English: Plague in a year of famine, perils of war. In all these cases, the responsibility belongs to the sovereign.

古文：今祝史请祷，继诸不善，以朕身当之。永使灾害不及万姓，俾兹下民稍蒙宁息。
现代文：今司祭祀之官祈祷，系众多不善，将我身承受它们，永远让灾害不祸及百姓，使百姓稍蒙安宁。
English: The prayers of the sacrificial officials of today's priests are full of many evils, and I will bear them myself, and forever keep the people free from disasters, and give the people a little peace.

古文：不得为朕祈福，以增其过。
现代文：不得为我求福，以增加我的过失。
English: You shall not seek my good to add to my sins.

古文：特班远迩，咸令遵奉。 
现代文：特颁布远近，都要遵从。 
English: The special decree is far and near, and must be complied with.

古文：二月甲辰，老人星见。
现代文：二月甲辰，老人星出现。
English: In the first hour of February, the old man star appeared.

古文：三月庚申朔，陨霜杀草。
现代文：三月庚申初一，霜降草木枯萎。
English: In March, the first day of the Year of the Goat, frost falls and plants and trees wither.

古文：是月，有三象入京师。
现代文：这一月，有三头大象进入京都。
English: This month, three elephants entered Kyoto.

古文：夏四月壬辰，置左右骁骑、左右游击将军官。
现代文：夏季四月壬辰，设置左右骁骑、左右游击将军官职。
English: In the summer of April, the official positions of the left and right cavalry and the left and right guerrilla forces were set up.

古文：癸巳，曹景宗、韦睿等破魏军于邵阳洲，斩获万计。
现代文：癸巳，曹景宗、童壑等在迎阳巡打败韭魏军队，斩杀擒获敌人数以万计。
English: At that time, Cao Jingzong, Tonglu and others defeated the Wei and Wei armies in the Yangyang patrol, killing and capturing tens of thousands of enemies.

古文：癸卯，以右卫将军曹景宗为领军将军、徐州刺史。
现代文：癸卯，任命右卫将军董量塞为领军将军、徐州刺史。
English: Yu Yu appointed the right guard general, Dong Yuanzi, as the leading general, and Xuzhou, Zhishi.

古文：己酉，以江州刺史王茂为尚书右仆射，中书令安成王秀为平南将军、江州刺史。
现代文：己酉，任命辽塑刺史王茎为尚书右仆射，中书令安成王萧昼为平南将军、江州刺史。
English: Ji Yu, appointed Liao Shi Wang Zhuo as Shang Shu's right-hand man, and An Cheng Wang Xiao Rong as the general of Pingnan and the governor of Jiangzhou.

古文：分湘广二州置衡州。
现代文：分出湘、广二州的一部分置立堑州。
English: Parts of Hunan and Guanzhou were separated to form Ganzhou.

古文：丁巳，以中军将军、扬州刺史临川王宏为骠骑将军、开府仪同三司，抚军将军建安王伟为扬州刺史，右光禄大夫沈约为尚书左仆射，尚书左仆射王莹为中军将军。
现代文：丁巳，任命中军将军、扬州刺史临川王芦塞为骠骑将军、开府仪同三司，抚军将军建安王芦伟为握业刺史，右光禄大夫沈饱为尚书左仆射，尚书左仆射王莹为中军将军。
English: Ding Si appointed the general of the Chinese army, the Yangzhou military historian Linchuan Wang Lusei as the cavalry general, Kaifu Yi Tong as the third secretary, the army general Jian An Wang Lue Wei as the military historian, the doctor of the Right Guang Lu Shen Tan as the left-handed military historian Shang Shu, and the left-handed military historian Shang Shu Wang Ying as the general of the Chinese army.

古文：五月己未，以新除左骁骑将军长沙王深业为中护军。
现代文：五月己未，任命新任的左骁骑将军长沙王逦墓为中护军。
English: In May, the newly-appointed left-hand cavalry general Changsha Wangye Tomb was appointed as the middle guard.

古文：癸亥，以侍中袁昂为吏部尚书。
现代文：癸亥，任命侍中塞显为吏部尚书。
English: Yan Hai, appointed the chamberlain Sa Xian as the secretary of the cadre department.

古文：己巳，置中卫、中权将军，改骁骑为云骑，游击为游骑。
现代文：己巳，设置中卫、中权将军，改骁骑名为云骑，游击名为游骑。
English: As a result, the middle guard and middle power generals were set up, the cavalry was renamed as the cloud cavalry, and the guerrillas were called the cavalry.

古文：辛未，右将军、扬州刺史建安王伟进号中权将军。
现代文：辛未，右将军、扰州刺史建塞兰芦伟进升官号为中权将军。
English: Xin Wei, Right General, Zhouzhou Zhishi, Jian Selan, Lu Wei were promoted to the position of General of the Central Powers.

古文：六月庚戌，以车骑将军、湘州刺史夏侯详为右光禄大夫，新除金紫光禄大夫柳惔为安南将军、湘州刺史。
现代文：六月庚戌，任命车骑将军、湘州刺史夏侯详为右光禄大夫，新任的金紫光禄大夫柳恢为安南将军、湘州刺史。
English: In June, Genghis Khan appointed General of Cavalry and Cavalry, Xiangzhou Zhishihai as the doctor of Uguanglu, and the newly-appointed Doctor of Gold and Purple Zhishihai as the general of Annan and the doctor of Xiangzhou.

古文：新吴县获四目龟一。
现代文：新吴县获得一只有四只眼的龟。
English: Xinwu County obtained a four-eyed turtle.

古文：秋七月甲子，太白昼见。
现代文：秋季七月甲子，太白星白天出现。
English: In autumn, July and July, too white stars appear during the day.

古文：丙寅，分广州置桂州。
现代文：丙寅，分出广州一部分置立桂州。
English: Cui Yin split off a part of Guangzhou and established Guizhou.

古文：丁亥，以新除尚书右仆射王茂为中卫将军。
现代文：丁亥，任命新任的尚书右仆射王茂为中卫将军。
English: Ding Hai, appointed the newly appointed Shang Shuxu's right-hand man, Sha Wangmao, as the general of the middle guard.

古文：八月戊子，赦天下。
现代文：八月戊子，大赦天下。
English: August Boshi, amnesty to the world.

古文：戊戌，大风折木。
现代文：戊戌，大风吹断树木。
English: Gale force winds tearing down trees.

古文：京师大水，因涛入，加御道七尺。
现代文：京都发生大水灾，由于大浪进入，加高供帝王车驾通行的道路七尺。
English: A great flood occurred in Kyoto. Due to the large waves, the road for the emperor's car was raised by seven feet.

古文：九月，嘉禾一茎九穗，生江陵县。
现代文：九月，有茁壮的禾稻一茎九穗，生长在江陵鳄。
English: In September, there is a strong crop of rice, one stem and nine ears, growing in Gangneung.

古文：乙亥，改阅武堂为德阳堂，听讼堂为仪贤堂。
现代文：乙亥，改阅武堂名为德阳堂，听讼堂名为仪竖堂。
English: In the second year of the Heian period, the martial arts hall was renamed the Deyang hall, and the court of justice hall was renamed the hall of ceremony.

古文：丙戌，以左卫将军吕僧珍为平北将军、南兗州刺史，豫章内史萧昌为广州刺史。
现代文：丙戌，任命左卫将军旦遭趁为平北将军、南兖州刺史，豫章内史萧昌为广州刺史。
English: In addition, the appointment of General Zuo Wei as the general of North Pyongan Province, the general of South Pyongan Province as the general of South Pyongan Province, and the general of Guangzhou Province as the general of Guangzhou Province.

古文：冬十月壬寅，以五兵尚书徐勉为吏部尚书。
现代文：冬季十月壬寅，任命五兵尚书徐勉为吏部尚书。
English: In the winter of October, Jinyin appointed the five-soldier Shangshu Xu Yan as the Shangshu of the cadre department.

古文：闰月乙丑，以骠骑将军、开府仪同三司临川王宏为司徒、行太子太傅，尚书左仆射沈约为尚书令、行太子少傅，吏部尚书袁昂为右仆射。
现代文：闰十月乙丑，任命骠骑将军、开府仪同三司堕丛王芦塞为司徒、行太子太傅，尚书左仆射选鲍为尚书令、行太子少傅，吏部尚书袁昂为右仆射。
English: In leap October of the second year of the eleventh month, he appointed the general of the imperial cavalry, Kaifu Yi, and the three officers of the fallen Cong Wang Lusei as officers, the prince of the prince of the prince of the prince of the prince of the prince of the prince of the prince of the prince of the prince of the prince of the prince of the prince of the prince of the prince of the prince of the prince of the prince of the prince of the prince.

古文：戊寅，平西将军、荆州刺史始兴王忄詹进号安西将军。
现代文：戊寅，平西将军、荆州刺史始兴王萧儋进升官号安西将军。
English: Wu Yin, Pingxi General, Jingzhou Zishi Shi Xing Wang Xiao Yujin promoted to the rank of Anxi General.

古文：甲申，以右光禄大夫夏侯详为尚书左仆射。
现代文：甲申，任命右光禄大夫夏侯详为尚书左仆射。
English: Gao Shin, appointed Uguanglu doctor Xia Hou as Shangshu's right-hand man.

古文：十二月丙辰，尚书左仆射夏侯详卒。
现代文：十二月丙辰，尚书左仆射夏侯详去世。
English: In December, Shangshu's second-in-command, Xia Houzhao, passed away.

古文：乙丑，魏淮阳镇都军主常邕和以城内属。
现代文：乙丑，北魏淮阳镇都军主常邕和率城归附。
English: Second, the Northern Wei Huaiyang Town was attached to the capital city by the commander of the army, Chang Kui, and the city.

古文：分豫州置霍州。
现代文：分出豫州一部分置立霍州。
English: A part of Yuzhou was split off and Huzhou was established.

古文：七年春正月乙酉朔，诏曰： 建国君民，立教为首。
现代文：七年春季正月乙酉初一，韶令道： 建立国家统治人民，树立教化是第一位的。
English: On the first day of the Chinese New Year in the spring of the seventh year, he issued the following order: "Establish a state to rule the people, and establish enlightenment as the first priority."

古文：不学将落，嘉植靡由。
现代文：不学习将衰败，俊才无从萌生。
English: If you don't study, you will fail. If you don't study, you will fail.

古文：朕肇基明命，光宅区宇，虽耕耘雅业，傍阐艺文，而成器未广，志本犹阙，非所以熔范贵游，纳诸轨度。
现代文：我始创基业成其教命，广有天下，虽然钻研学问，旁及辞章，但不能在多方面成器，志向本身犹有阙失，不能作为显贵者的模范，使之纳入规范法度。
English: I started the foundation to become its mission, and it is widely known around the world. Although I have studied the culture, including the motto, I cannot become a multi-faceted instrument. The aspiration itself is still lacking, and it cannot be used as a model for dignitaries and incorporated into normative laws.

古文：思欲式敦让齿，自家刑国。
现代文：想要劝勉对长者谦让，自己以法治国。
English: If you want to encourage people to be more considerate to the elderly, you should rule the country according to the law.

古文：今声训所渐，戎夏同风，宜大启庠斅，博延胄子，务彼十伦，弘此三德，使陶钧远被，微言载表。 
现代文：如今受声威教化感染，戎狄和华夏同受天子之教化，应大设学校，广为招收国子学生员，致力那十种伦理，弘扬这三种品德，使天下陶冶造就，圣人精微的语言裹深奥的意义得以显扬。 
English: Now, infected by the influence of the teachings of the voice of wisdom, both Yong Di and Huaxia have received the teachings of the Son of Heaven. It is necessary to set up a large school, widely recruit students from the country, work hard on the ten ethics, promote these three virtues, so that the world can be edified, and the subtle language of the sage can be revealed.

古文：中卫将军、领太子詹事王茂进号车骑将军。
现代文：中卫将军、领太子詹事王茂进升官号车骑将军。
English: Zhongwei general and crown prince Zhan Zhi Wang Maojin was promoted to general of cavalry.

古文：戊戌，作神龙、仁虎阙于端门、大司马门外。
现代文：戊戌，在端门、大司马门外建神龙、仁虎阙。
English: Wuzhen, in the end of the gate, the big horse gate outside the construction of the dragon, the tiger.

古文：壬子，以领军将军曹景宗为中卫将军，卫尉萧景兼领军将军。
现代文：壬子，任命领军将军曹景宗为中卫将军，卫尉萧景兼领军将军。
English: Ren Zi appointed the leading general Cao Jingzong as the middle guard general, and the guard lieutenant Xiao Jing as the leading general.

古文：二月乙卯，庐江灊县获铜钟二。
现代文：二月乙卯，庐江洒县获得二座铜钟。
English: In February, two bronze bells were awarded to Lijiang County.

古文：新作国门于越城南。乙丑，增置镇卫将军以下各有差。
现代文：在越城南面新建国门。乙丑，增设镇卫将军以下的官员人数各有差别。
English: A new national gate was built in the south of Yuecheng. Second, the number of officials below the additional Zhenwei general varied.

古文：庚午，诏于州郡县置州望、郡宗、乡豪各一人，专掌搜荐。
现代文：庚午，韶令在州郡县设州望、郡宗、乡豪各一人，专门掌管访求荐举。
English: In the afternoon of the 7th day of the 7th month, the imperial edict set up one person in each of Zhouzhouwang, Guzong and Xianggao in Zhoushu County to be in charge of the visit and recommendation.

古文：乙亥，以车骑大将军高丽王高云为抚东大将军、开府仪同三司，平北将军、南兗州刺史吕僧珍为领军将军。
现代文：乙亥，任命车骑大将军高丽王高云为抚束大将军、开府仪同三司，平北将军、南兖州刺史吕僧珍为领军将军。
English: Yi Hai appointed the general of cavalry and cavalry, Goryeo Wang Gaoyun, as the general of Fuzhou, Kaifu Yi Tong as the third secretary, Pingbei general, Nanluozhou Shishi Lv Sozhen as the leading general.

古文：丙子，以中护军长沙王深业为南兗州刺史，兼领军将军萧景为雍州刺史，雍州刺史柳庆远为护军将军。
现代文：丙子，任命中护军长沙王渊业为南兖州刺史，兼领军将军萧景为雍州刺史，雍州刺史柳庆远为护军将军。
English: Cui Zi appointed Wang Yuanye of Changsha, the middle guard, as the guard general of Nanluozhou, Xiao Jing, the leading general, as the guard general of Yongzhou, and Liu Qingyuan, the guard general of Yongzhou.

古文：夏四月乙卯，皇太子纳妃，赦大辟以下，颁赐朝臣及近侍各有差。
现代文：夏季四月乙卯，皇太子纳娶妃子，赦免死刑以下的罪犯，分赏朝臣和近侍各有差别。
English: In the summer of April, the crown prince married his concubine, pardoned criminals below the death penalty, and rewarded courtiers and attendants differently.

古文：辛未，秣陵县获灵龟一。
现代文：辛未，秣陵县获得一只灵龟。
English: Xin Wei, Fuling County obtained a spirit turtle.

古文：戊寅，余姚县获古铜剑二。
现代文：戊寅，余姚县获得二把古铜剑。
English: Wu Yin, Yuyao County won two bronze swords.

古文：五月己亥，诏复置宗正、太仆、大匠、鸿胪，又增太府、太舟，仍先为十二卿。
现代文：五月己亥，调令复设宗正、太仆、大匠、鸿胪，又增设太府、太舟，依照原先的制度为十二卿。
English: In May of the same year, the order was revised and the positions of patriarch, eunuch, master craftsman, and great eunuch were restored, and the positions of daifu and taizhou were added, making twelve nobles in accordance with the original system.

古文：癸卯，以平南将军、江州刺史安成王秀为平西将军、荆州刺史，安西将军、荆州刺史始兴王憺为护军将军，中卫将军曹景宗为安南将军、江州刺史。
现代文：癸卯，任命平南将军、江州刺史安成王萧秀为平西将军、荆州刺史，安西将军、荆州刺史始兴王萧儋为护军将军，中卫将军曹景宗为安南将军、江州刺史。
English: At the same time, he appointed Pingnan General and Jiangzhou Military Historian Ancheng Wang Xiao Xiu as Pingxi General, Jingzhou Military Historian, Anxi General and Jingzhou Military Historian Shi Xing Wang Xiao Jie as Military Historian, and Zhongwei General Cao Jingzong as Annan General and Jiangzhou Military Historian.

古文：六月辛酉，复建、修二陵周回五里内居民，改陵监为令。
现代文：六月辛酉，免除建、修二陵周围五里内居民的徭役，改陵监为令。
English: In June of Xinwu, the residents within five miles around the construction and repair of the two mausoleums were exempted from the corvee, and the mausoleum supervisor was changed.

古文：秋七月丁亥，月犯氐。
现代文：秋季七月丁亥，月亮犯氐宿。
English: In the autumn of July, Dinghai, the moon is late.

古文：八月癸丑，安南将军、江州刺史曹景宗卒。
现代文：八月癸丑，安南将军、江州刺史曹景宗去世。
English: In August, General Annan and Jiangzhou statesman Cao Jingzong passed away.

古文：丁巳，赦大辟以下未结正者。
现代文：丁巳，赦免死刑以下没有定案判决的犯人。
English: Ding Si, pardoned prisoners who have not been sentenced to death or less.

古文：甲戌，平西将军、荆州刺史安成王秀进号安西将军，云麾将军、郢州刺史鄱阳王恢进号平西将军。
现代文：甲戌，平西将军、荆州刺史安成王萧秀进升官号安西将军，云麾将军、郢州刺史鄱阳王萧恢进升官号子西将军。
English: Kuching, Pingxi, Jingzhou, Shishi, Ancheng, Wang, Xiao Xiu, promoted to Anxi, Yunnan, Zhangzhou, Shishiyang, Wang, Xiao Hui, promoted to Zixi.

古文：老人星见。
现代文：老人星出现。
English: The old man star appears.

古文：九月丁亥，诏曰： 刍牧必往，姬文垂则，雉兔有刑，姜宣致贬。
现代文：九月丁亥，韶令道： 割草放牧必前往，周文王垂示法则；野鸡和兔子遭杀，姜宣受到贬斥。
English: In September of the Dinghai Dynasty, Zhenling Road: it is necessary to go there for cutting grass and grazing, Zhou Wenwang dictated the rules; pheasants and rabbits were killed, and Jiang Xuan was rebuked.

古文：薮泽山林，毓材是出，斧斤之用，比屋所资。
现代文：沼泽湖泊和山林，由此出产木材，用斧子去砍伐它们，为家家户户赖以资用。
English: Swamps, lakes and mountain forests, from which timber is produced, are chopped down with an axe and are used as a source of income for families.

古文：而顷世相承，并加封固，岂所谓与民同利，惠兹黔首？
现代文：然而近代递相沿袭，都加以封闭禁锢，逭难道是所谓与民同利，施惠百姓吗?
English: However, modern times have followed suit, and all of them have been closed and banned. Is it the so-called benefit the people and benefit the people?

古文：凡公家诸屯戍见封熂者，可悉开常禁。 
现代文：凡是公家各驻防被渔猎垦植的，可全部解除通常的禁令。 
English: The usual ban can be completely lifted for all public-owned garrisons that have been planted by fishing and hunting.

古文：壬辰，置童子奉车郎。
现代文：壬辰，设童子奉车郎。
English: In Imjin, there is a boy called Bongchuro.

古文：癸巳，立皇子绩为南康郡王。
现代文：癸巳，立皇子萧绩为南康郡王。
English: Soon after, Prince Xiao Rong became the king of Nankang County.

古文：己亥，月犯东井。
现代文：己亥，月亮犯东井星宿。
English: Ji Hai, the moon offends Dongjing star inn.

古文：冬十月丙寅，以吴兴太守张稷为尚书左仆射。
现代文：冬季十月丙寅，任命吴兴太守张稷为尚书左仆射。
English: In the winter of October, Emperor Qin appointed Wu Xing's eunuch Zhang Xuan as Shang Shushi's second-in-command.

古文：丙子，魏阳关主许敬珍以城内附。
现代文：丙子，北魏阳关主许敬珍率城归附。
English: Cun Zi, Northern Wei Yang Guan Lord Xu Jing Zhen led the city to annexation.

古文：诏大举北伐。
现代文：诏令大举北伐。
English: The emperor ordered a large-scale Northern Expedition.

古文：以护军将军始兴王憺为平北将军，率众入清；车骑将军王茂率众向宿预。
现代文：任命护军将军始兴王萧儋为平北将军，率军进入清地；车骑将军王茂率军挺进宿预。
English: He appointed the escort general Shi Xing Wang Xiaojuan as the general of Pingbei and led the army into Qingdi; the cavalry general Wang Maozhu led the army into Shibuya.

古文：丁丑，魏悬瓠镇军主白皁生、豫州刺史胡逊以城内属。以皁生为镇北将军、司州刺史，逊为平北将军、豫州刺史。
现代文：丁丑，北魏悬瓠镇军主白早生、豫州刺史胡逊率城归附，任命阜生为镇北将军、司州刺史，胡逊为乎北将军、豫州刺史。
English: Ding Yuxi, the Northern Wei Hanging Town army commander Bai Zaosheng, and Hu Xun, the governor of Yuzhou, led the city to annexation, and appointed Fusheng as the governor of Zhenbei, Sizhou as the governor of Sizhou, and Hu Xun as the governor of Hubei and Yuzhou.

古文：十一月辛巳，鄞县言甘露降。
现代文：十一月辛巳，鄞县告知甘露降临。
English: In November, when the weather was bad, Jixian County announced the arrival of nectar.

古文：八年春正月辛巳，舆驾亲祠南郊，赦天下，内外文武各赐劳一年。
现代文：八年春季正月辛巳，皇上亲自到南郊祭祀，大赦天下，朝廷内外的文武官员各赏赐慰劳一年。
English: In the first month of the spring of the eighth year, the emperor himself went to the southern suburbs to offer sacrifices and grant amnesty to the world. Civil and military officials inside and outside the imperial court were each awarded one year of consolation.

古文：壬辰，魏镇东参军成景俊斩宿预城主严仲宝，以城内属。
现代文：壬辰，北魏镇束参军成景俊斩杀宿预城主严仲宝，率城归附。
English: In Imjin, the Northern Wei town of Sokzheng, the army of Cheng Jingjun killed Yan Zhongbao, the lord of the pre-town, and the city was annexed.

古文：二月壬戌，老人星见。
现代文：二月壬戌，老人星出现。
English: At the end of February, the elderly star appeared.

古文：夏四月，以北巴西郡置南梁州。
现代文：夏季四月，在北巴西郡设南梁州。
English: In the summer of April, Nan Liang Prefecture was established in North Brazil County.

古文：戊申，以护军将军始兴王憺为中卫将军，司徒、行太子太傅临川王宏为司空、扬州刺史，车骑将军、领太子詹事王茂即本号开府仪同三司。
现代文：戊申，任命护军将军始兴王萧怆为中卫将军，司徒、行太子太傅临川王萧宏为司空、扬州刺史，车骑将军、领太子詹事王茂袭用原来的官号开府仪同三司。
English: Wushin, appointed the escort general Shi Xing Wang Xiaohui as the middle guard general, Sitou, the acting prince Taifu Linchuan Wang Xiaohong as Sikuo, Yangzhou Shishi, the cavalry general, and the crown prince Zhanji Wang Maozai with the original official title of Kaifu Yi and the three departments.

古文：丁卯，魏楚王城主李国兴以城内附。
现代文：丁卯，北魏楚王城主李国兴率城归附。
English: Dingwu, Li Guoxing, the lord of the Northern Wei Chu King City, led the city to be annexed.

古文：丙子，以中军将军、丹阳尹王莹为右光禄大夫。
现代文：丙子，任命中军将军、丹阳尹王莹为右光禄大夫。
English: Cun Zi, appointed the general of the Chinese army, Danyang Yin Wang Ying as the doctor of Uguanglu.

古文：五月壬午，诏曰： 学以从政，殷勤往哲，禄在其中，抑亦前事。
现代文：五月壬午，诏令道： 学习是为了从政，关注先哲，禄在其中，或许这是古代的事业。
English: In May at noon, the emperor said, "Study is for politics, pay attention to the sages, the reward is in it, perhaps this is the cause of the ancient times."

古文：朕思阐治纲，每敦儒术，轼闾辟馆，造次以之。
现代文：我思虑光大政治纲纪，每每勤勉于儒家学术，向有德者致敬开辟学馆，从不间断地实施它们。
English: I have been thinking about the political system and discipline of Guangda University, diligently studying Confucianism, opening a school to pay tribute to the virtuous, and implementing them without interruption.

古文：故负帙成风，甲科间出，方当置诸周行，饰以青紫。
现代文：因此游学外地勤奋读书成了风气，考中高等甲科的不时地出现，将要安排他们出任朝官，授予他们高官显爵。
English: Therefore, it has become a custom for students to travel abroad to study diligently. From time to time, students from Grade A of middle and high school examinations will appear, and they will be arranged to serve as imperial officials, and they will be awarded high-ranking officials and peerages.

古文：其有能通一经，始末无倦者，策实之后，选可量加叙录。
现代文：那些有能精通一经、始终不懈怠的，策试核实之后，铨选可衡量才能按等第加以录用。
English: Those who have the ability to master once and never slack off will be recruited according to the criterion of measurable ability after verification.

古文：虽复牛监羊肆，寒品后门，并随才试吏，勿有遗隔。 
现代文：纵令足看管牛的出售羊的人，出身低下寒微门第的人，都依据他们的才能出任官吏，不要有所遗漏。 
English: Even those who sell sheep and look after cattle, and those who come from humble backgrounds, should not be left out, as they are all officials according to their abilities.

古文：秋七月癸巳，巴陵王萧宝义薨。
现代文：秋季七月癸巳，巴陵王萧实义去世。
English: In the autumn of July, the king of Baling, Xiao Siyi, passed away.

古文：八月戊午，老人星见。
现代文：八月戊午，老人星出现。
English: In the afternoon of August, the old man star appeared.

古文：冬十月乙巳，以中军将军始兴王慎为镇北将军、南兗州刺史，南兗州刺史长沙王深业为护军将军。
现代文：冬季十月乙巳，任命中军将军始兴王萧怆为镇北将军、南兖州刺史，南兖州刺史长沙王渊业为护军将军。
English: In the winter of October, the general of the Chinese army, Shi Xing Wang Xiaojun, was appointed as the general of Zhenbei, the general of Nanxingzhou, and the general of Nanxingzhou, Changsha Wang Yuanye, as the general of the escort.

古文：九年春正月乙亥，以尚书令、行太子少傅沈约为左光禄大夫，行少傅如故，右光禄大夫王莹为尚书令，行中抚将军建安王伟领护军将军，镇北将军、南兗州刺史始兴王憺为镇西将军、益州刺史，太常卿王亮为中书监。
现代文：九年春季正月乙亥，任命尚书令、行太子少傅选约为左光禄大夫，行少傅照旧，右光禄大夫旦莹为尚书令，行中抚将军建安王蓝伟领护军将军，镇北将军、南兖州刺史始兴王萧怆为镇西将军、益州刺史，太常卿王亮为中书监。
English: In the spring of the first month of the ninth year of the Heian period, Shang Shurei was appointed, and Prince Xingzixiao Fu was elected as the doctor of Zuo Guanglu, and Xing Shorei was appointed as before, and the doctor of Zuo Guanglu, Tan Ying, was appointed as the doctor of Shang Shurei, and the general of Zhongfu, Jian An Wang Lan Wei, was appointed as the general of the escorting army, the general of Zhenbei, the general of Nanzhou, Shixing Wang Xiaojun, was appointed as the general of Zhenxi, the general of Yizhou, and Wang Liang, the

古文：丙子，以轻车将军晋安王纲为南兗州刺史。
现代文：丙子，任命轻车将军晋安王萧纲为南兖州刺史。
English: Xi Zi, appointed the light vehicle general Jin An Wang Xiao Gang as the governor of South Luzhou.

古文：庚寅，新作缘淮塘，北岸起石头迄东冶，南岸起后渚篱门迄三桥。
现代文：庚寅，新筑沿着淮水的堤岸，北岸起自石头至于束冶，南岸起自后渚篱门至于三桥。
English: Geng Yin, newly built along the embankment of Huai Shui, from the north bank from the stone to the bund, from the south bank from the back to the three bridges.

古文：三月己丑，车驾幸国子学，亲临讲肆，赐国子祭酒以下帛各有差。
现代文：三月己丑，皇上到国子学，亲临讲堂，赏赐国子祭酒以下的人员丝帛各有差别。
English: March is ugly, the emperor goes to study Kuniko, attends the lecture hall in person, and rewards Kuniko's sacrificial wine.

古文：乙未，诏曰： 王子从学，著自礼经，贵游咸在，实惟前诰，所以式广义方，克隆教道。
现代文：乙未，诏令道： 王子就学，载自礼经，显贵同属，实则前诫，用此来推广教子正道，兴隆教道。
English: In the second year of his reign, the emperor issued the following edict: The prince should go to school. It is taken from the Book of Rites. The eminent and the lowly belong to the same class. The precepts of truth should be followed. This edict should be used to promote the righteous path of the godson and the prosperity of the teaching path.

古文：今成均大启，元良齿让，自斯以降，并宜肄业。
现代文：如今大学兴盛，太子谦让年长者，从此以后，都应修习课业。
English: Nowadays, universities are flourishing. Princes should be humble and let the elders lead. From now on, everyone should study their coursework.

古文：皇太子及王侯之子，年在从师者，可令入学。 
现代文：皇太子以及王侯之子，处在跟老师学习的年龄时，可让他们入学。 
English: The crown prince and the prince's son, when they are old enough to study with a teacher, can be sent to school.

古文：于阗国遣使献方物。
现代文：于阗国派遣使者进献本土物产。
English: Envoys were sent to Laos to present local products.

古文：夏四月丁巳，革选尚书五都令史用寒流。
现代文：夏季四月丁巳，淘汰、选拔尚书五都令史时起用出身寒微的人。
English: In the summer of April, the selection of Shangshu Five Capitals was made, and people with humble backgrounds were used from then on.

古文：林邑国遣使献白猴一。
现代文：林邑国派遣使者进献一只白猴。
English: Lin County sent an envoy to present a white monkey.

古文：五月己亥，诏曰： 朕达听思治，无忘日昃。而百司群务，其途不一，随时适用，各有攸宜，若非总会众言，无以备兹亲览。
现代文：五月己亥，诏令道： 我广泛听取意见了解下情想望治世，不顾念日头偏西，而百官的各种政务，其处理的方式不会一样，根据当时的情势适合使用，各有各的合宜方式，如果不是汇集众言，就无从为亲自操持提供准备。
English: At the end of May, the Emperor said, "I have listened to a wide range of opinions to understand the current situation. I want to rule the world, regardless of the direction of the sun, and the various government affairs of a hundred officials will not be handled in the same way. According to the situation at the time, they are suitable for use. Each has its own appropriate way. If it is not a collection of people's opinions, it will not be possible to prepare for personal management.

古文：自今台阁省府州郡镇戍应有职僚之所，时共集议，各陈损益，具以奏闻。 
现代文：从今以后台阁省府州郡镇戍应该有职官僚属的办事机构，按时一起集体讨论，各自陈述兴利除弊的意见，将讨论情况详细奏报。 
English: From now on, all the bureaucratic offices in the provinces, prefectures, counties and towns of Taiwan should have a collective discussion on time, and each of them should present their opinions on the advantages and disadvantages, and report the discussion situation in detail.

古文：中书监王亮卒。
现代文：中书监王亮去世。
English: Wang Liang, the supervisor of Chinese literature, passed away.

古文：六月癸丑，盗杀宣城太守硃僧勇。
现代文：六月癸丑，盗贼杀死宣城太守朱僧勇。
English: In June, thieves killed Zhu Sengyong, the governor of Xuancheng.

古文：癸酉，以中抚将军、领护军建安王伟为镇南将军、江州刺史。
现代文：癸酉，任命中抚将军、领护军建安王萧伟为镇南将军、江州刺史。
English: He appointed Jianan Wang Xiaowei, the general of the Central Military Commission and the leader of the escort army, as the general of Zhenan and the governor of Jiangzhou.

古文：闰月己丑，宣城盗转寇吴兴县，太守蔡撙讨平之。
现代文：闰月己丑，宣城盗贼转而劫掠吴兴县，太守蔡撙讨伐平定了他们。
English: The intercalary month was ugly, the thieves of Xuancheng turned to loot Wuxing County, and the warlord Cai Xuan defeated them.

古文：秋七月己巳，老人星见。
现代文：秋季七月己巳，老人星出现。
English: Autumn in July has arrived, and the elderly star has appeared.

古文：冬十二月癸未，舆驾幸国子学，策试胄子，赐训授之司各有差。
现代文：冬季十二月癸未，皇上到国子学，策试国子学生员，赏赐教授的官员各有差别。
English: In the winter of December, the emperor went to the Imperial Academy to test the students of the Imperial Academy, and the officials who rewarded the professors were all different.

古文：十年春正月辛丑，舆驾亲祠南郊，大赦天下，居局治事赐劳二年。
现代文：十年春季正月辛丑，皇上到南郊亲自祭天，大赦天下，居宫署治事的赏赐慰劳二年。
English: In the first month of the tenth year of spring, the emperor went to the southern suburbs to personally offer sacrifices to the heavens, grant amnesty to the world, and reward the palace administration for two years of hard work.

古文：癸卯，以尚书左仆射张稷为安北将军，青冀二州刺史，郢州刺史鄱阳王恢为护军将军。
现代文：癸卯，任命尚书左仆射张稷为安北将军、青冀二州刺史，郢州刺史鄱阳王萧恢为护军将军。
English: At the same time, he appointed Shangshu's left-hand man Zhang Jie as the general of Anbei, Qinghai and Hebei as the general of the two states, and Shenyang Wang Xiaoguai as the general of the garrison.

古文：甲辰，以南徐州刺史豫章王综为郢州刺史，轻车将军南康王绩为南徐州刺史。
现代文：甲辰，任命南徐州刺史豫章王萧综为郢州刺史，轻车将军南康王萧绩为南徐州刺史。
English: Jiachen, appointed the South Xuzhou chief historian Yu Zhang Wang Xiaoshu as the Shanzhou chief historian, and the light vehicle general Nankang Wang Xiaodi as the South Xuzhou chief historian.

古文：戊申，驺虞一，见荆州华容县。
现代文：戊申，一只骝虞出现于荆州华容县。
English: In Wushin, a python appeared in Huarong County, Jingzhou.

古文：以左民尚书王暕为吏部尚书。
现代文：任命左民尚书王陈为吏部尚书。
English: He appointed the leftist Wang Chen as the secretary of the Ministry of Personnel.

古文：辛酉，舆驾亲祠明堂。
现代文：辛酉，皇上亲临明堂祭祀。
English: Soon after, the Emperor himself came to the Myodo Hall for the ritual.

古文：三月辛丑，盗杀东莞、琅邪二郡太守邓晣，以朐山引魏军，遣振远将军马仙琕讨之。
现代文：三月辛丑，盗贼杀死东莞、琅邪二郡太守邓晰，从朐山引入北魏的军队，派遣振远将军马仙埤讨伐他们。
English: In the ugly month of March, thieves killed the governor of Dongguan and Shiyan County, Deng Qiao, and brought in the Northern Wei army from Lushan, sending Zhenyuan General Ma Xianqi to fight them.

古文：是月，魏徐州刺史卢昶帅众赴朐山。
现代文：逭一月，北魏徐州刺史卢昶率军前往朐山。
English: In January, the Northern Wei Xuzhou Zhishuli Lu Yong led the army to Shaoshan.

古文：夏五月癸酉，安豊县获一角玄龟。
现代文：夏季五月癸酉，安丰县获得一只角的玄龟。
English: At the end of May in summer, a horned tortoise hatched in Anfeng County.

古文：丁丑，领军吕僧珍卒。
现代文：丁丑，领军吕僧珍去世。
English: Ding Yuxiu, the leader of the Liusongzhen, passed away.

古文：己卯，以国子祭酒张充为尚书左仆射，太子詹事柳庆远为领军将军。
现代文：己卯，任命国子祭酒张充为尚书左仆射，太子詹事柳庆远为领军将军。
English: At the same time, he appointed the son of the country, Zhang Zong, as the left-hand man of Shang Shuxu, and the prince Zhan Zhi Liu Qingyuan as the leading general.

古文：六月乙酉，嘉莲一茎三花生乐游苑。
现代文：六月乙酉，一茎三花的嘉莲生于乐游苑。
English: June Acetylene, a stem of three flowers of Jialian was born in Le Youyuan.

古文：秋七月丙辰，诏曰： 昔公卿面陈，载在前史，令仆陛奏，列代明文，所以厘彼庶绩，成兹群务。
现代文：秋季七月丙辰，诏令道： 从前公卿当面陈言，以前的史书有记载，令仆当廷进奏，历代有明文，用此来操持那各种事业，成就这各种政务。
English: At the eleventh hour of the twelfth day of the seventh month in autumn, the emperor issued the following edict: In the past, court nobles made their statements in person, and the previous history books recorded that they ordered their servants to march in front of the court, and there were clear documents from past generations, which were used to manage various undertakings and accomplish various government affairs.

古文：晋氏陵替，虚诞为风，自此相因，其失弥远。遂使武帐空劳，无汲公之奏，丹墀徒辟，阙郑生之履。
现代文：晋氏衰落，荒诞无稽成风，从此相沿袭，其迷失越来越远，于是白白树起置有兵器的帷帐，没有汲公之类的面奏，空辟有宫廷的赤色台阶，缺少郑生之流的光顾。
English: With the decline of the Jin dynasty and the rise of absurdity, the same phenomenon has followed, and its loss has become more and more distant. Therefore, the Bai Bai Tree has set up a curtain with weapons, there is no public appearance, the red steps of the palace are empty, and there is a lack of patronage from the Zheng family.

古文：三槐八座，应有务之百官，宜有所论，可入陈启，庶藉周爰，少匡寡薄。 
现代文：朝廷的三公和八种高官，所有有职务的百官，该有所议论的，可入宫陈说启禀，但愿藉此帮助，稍稍匡助我微薄的才德。 
English: The three nobles and eight high-ranking officials of the imperial court, all the hundreds of officials with positions, who have something to discuss, can enter the palace to present their opinions. I hope that this will help to help my meager talent a little.

古文：九月丙申，天西北隆隆有声，赤气下至地。
现代文：九月丙申，天上西北面隆隆有声响，红色的云气下降至地。
English: In September, there was a rumbling sound in the northwest of the sky, and a red cloud descended to the ground.

古文：冬十二月癸酉，山车见于临城县。
现代文：冬季十二月癸酉，山车在临城县出现。
English: In the winter of December, the roller coaster appeared in Lincheng County.

古文：庚辰，马仙琕大破魏军，斩馘十余万，克复朐山城。
现代文：庚辰，马仙碑大败北魏的军队，杀敌十多万，收复了朐山城。
English: Geng Chen and Ma Xianbei defeated the Northern Wei army, killed more than one hundred thousand enemies, and recovered Lushan City.

古文：是岁，初作宫城门三重楼及开二道。
现代文：这一年，初建皇宫城门三层楼以及开辟二道。
English: In this year, the three-storey palace gate was first built and two roads were opened.

古文：宕昌国遣使献方物。
现代文：宕昌国派遣使者进献本土物产。
English: Tangchang dispatched an envoy to present local products.

古文：十一年春正月壬辰，诏曰： 夫刑法悼耄，罪不收孥，礼著明文，史彰前事，盖所以申其哀矜，故罚有弗及。
现代文：十一年春季正月壬辰，诏令道： 刑法不及幼童和老年人，治罪不收捕妻子和儿女，礼书载有明文，史书彰明前事，遣不外乎用来表达其哀悯，因此惩罚有所不及。
English: On the first day of the first month of the spring of the eleventh year, the imperial edict said: the criminal law is inferior to infants and the elderly, the crime is not to arrest wives and children, the book of etiquette contains clear text, the history book highlights the previous events, and it can only be used to express their sympathy, so the punishment is not enough.

古文：近代相因，厥网弥峻，髫年华发，同坐入愆。
现代文：近代相承，法纲益加严密，年幼者和白发老人，同为一事而牵连获罪。
English: In modern times, the law has become stricter and stricter, and young people and white-haired old people have been implicated and convicted for the same thing.

古文：虽惩恶劝善，宜穷其制，而老幼流离，良亦可愍。
现代文：虽然惩恶劝善，应当彻底查办制裁，但是老幼流离，也确实应该哀怜。
English: Although punishing evil and exhorting good should be thoroughly investigated and sanctioned, the displacement of the old and the young should indeed be pitied.

古文：自今逋谪之家及罪应质作，若年有老小，可停将送。 
现代文：从今以后流配谪放之家以及罪惩应当以人作抵押并役使的，如果其中有老少者，可停止发配他们。 
English: From now on, if there are old and young people in the family of exile and banishment, as well as those whose crimes and punishments should use people as collateral and servants, they can stop distributing them.

古文：加左光禄大夫、行太子少傅沈约特进，镇南将军、江州刺史建安王伟仪同三司，司空、扬州刺史临川王宏进位为太尉，骠骑将军王茂为司空，尚书令、云麾将军王莹进号安左将军，安北将军、青冀二州刺史张稷进号镇北将军。
现代文：加授左光禄大夫、行太子少傅沈约为特进，镇南将军、江州刺史建安王萧伟为仪同三司。司空、扬州刺史临王萧宏进升官位为太尉，骠骑将军王茂为司空。尚书令、云麾将军王莹进升官号为安左将军。安北将军、青冀二州刺史张稷进升官号为镇北将军。
English: Dr. Zuo Guanglu, Prince Xing, and Young Fu Shen were promoted to special promotion, Zhenan General, Jiangzhou General Jian'an Wang Xiaowei were promoted to three-star general, Siku, Yangzhou General Jian'an Wang Xiaohong were promoted to the rank of first lieutenant, and the cavalry general Wang Mao was promoted to special promotion, Shang Shuling and Yunqi General Wang Ying were promoted to the rank of Anzuo General, Anbei General and Qinghai Second State General Jian'an Zhang Ying were promoted to the rank of Zhenbei General.

古文：二月戊辰，新昌、济阳二郡野蚕成茧。
现代文：二月戊辰，新昌、济阳二郡野蚕结成荫。
English: In February, the two counties of Xinchang and Jiyang were covered with silkworms.

古文：三月丁巳，曲赦扬、徐二州。
现代文：三月丁巳，特赦扬、徐二州。
English: In March, Ding Si pardoned Yang and Xu Erzhou.

古文：筑西静坛于钟山。庚申，高丽国遣使献方物。
现代文：在钟山修筑西趋堕。庚申，直星周派遣使者进献本土物产。
English: Goshun and Zhixing Zhou sent envoys to present local products.

古文：四月戊子，诏曰： 去岁朐山大歼丑类，宜为京观，用旌武功；但伐罪吊民，皇王盛轨，掩骼埋胔，仁者用心。
现代文：四月戊子，诏令道： 去年在朐山大歼敌丑，应当聚集其尸首封上筑成高冢，以表彰武功；衹是讨伐有罪的君主抚慰受难的百姓，是古圣王美好的典范，掩埋枯骨腐尸，为有德行人的心地。
English: In April, the Empress Dowager issued the following order: Last year, after wiping out the ugly enemy in Lushan Mountain, the corpses of those who had been killed should be gathered together to build a lofty coffin on top of the seal, in recognition of their military exploits. The coffin was built to appease the suffering people by fighting against the guilty monarch. It was a beautiful example of an ancient holy king, burying dead bones and corpses, and was the heart of a virtuous person.

古文：其下青州悉使收藏。 
现代文：其下青州要将敌人的尸首全部收殓埋葬。 
English: At the same time, Qingzhou will collect and bury all the dead bodies of the enemy.

古文：百济、扶南、林邑国并遣使献方物。
现代文：百济、扶南、林邑国都派遣使者进献本土物产。
English: Baekje, Funan, and Lin'i all sent envoys to present local products.

古文：六月辛巳，以司空王茂领中权将军。
现代文：六月辛巳，任命司空王茂领中权将军。
English: In June, he appointed Sikuo Wangmao as the General of the Central Powers.

古文：九月辛亥，宕昌国遣使献方物。
现代文：九月辛亥，宣垦国派遣使者进献本土物产。
English: In September Xinhai, Xuanwu sent an envoy to present local products.

古文：冬十一月乙未，以吴郡太守袁昂兼尚书右仆射。
现代文：冬季十一月乙未，任命呈郡太守直虽兼尚书右仆射。
English: In November of the following winter, he was appointed as the county's grand marshal, even though he was also the shogun's right-hand man.

古文：己酉，降太尉、扬州刺史临川王宏为骠骑将军、开府同三司之仪。
现代文：己酉，太尉、扬州刺史临川王萧宏降职为骠骑将军、开府同三司之仪。
English: Wang Xiaohong, the first lieutenant of Jizhong, Yangzhou, and the prince of Linchuan, was demoted to the position of general of cavalry, and the ceremony of opening the capital and the three departments.

古文：癸丑，齐宣德太妃王氏薨。
现代文：癸丑，南齐的宣德太妃王区去世。
English: At the same time, the Queen of Xuande Taifei District in Nanqi passed away.

古文：十二月己未，以安西将军、荆州刺史安成王秀为中卫将军，护军将军鄱阳王恢为平西将军、荆州刺史。
现代文：十二月己未，任命安西将军、翅蛆刺史圭盛王芦歪为中卫将军，护军将军鄱阳王芦拯为平西将军、趔姐刺史。
English: In December, General Anxi and Wing Chun general Shih Shih Gui Sheng Wang Lushan were appointed as the middle guard generals, and the escort general Shiyang Wang Lusheng was appointed as the west general Ping Xi and the sister general Shizhi.

古文：十二年春正月辛卯，舆驾亲祠南郊，赦大辟以下。
现代文：十二年春季正月辛卯，皇上到南郊亲自祭天，赦免死刑以下罪犯。
English: In the spring of the twelfth year, in the first month of Xinwu, the emperor went to the southern suburbs to personally worship the heavens and pardon criminals under the death penalty.

古文：二月辛酉，以兼尚书右仆射袁昂为尚书右仆射。
现代文：二月辛酉；任命兼尚书右仆射袁昂为尚书右仆射。
English: In February, Xin Zhao appointed Yuan An, the right-hand man of Shang Shuxu, as his right-hand man.

古文：丙寅，诏曰： 掩骼埋胔，义重周经，槥椟有加，事美汉策。
现代文：丙寅，诏令道： 掩埋枯骨腐尸，其意义被强调于周代经典，加以棺木殓葬，其事情被赞美于汉朝书简。
English: Hsin-yin, the imperial edict said: burying dead bones and corpses, its significance was emphasized in the classics of the Zhou Dynasty, and it was buried in a coffin, and its matter was praised in Han Dynasty calligraphy.

古文：朕向隅载怀，每勤造次，收藏之命，亟下哀矜；而珝县遐深，遵奉未洽，髐然路隅，往往而有，言愍沉枯，弥劳伤恻。
现代文：我独自向隅思慕怀念，常勤奋努力不懈片刻，收殓埋葬之令，急降哀悯；然而天下深远，没有广泛遵行，尸骨空枯路边，还常常有，哀怜日久的枯骨，更加忧愁悲伤同情。
English: I am alone in the corner, thinking and remembering, always diligently working hard and tirelessly for a moment, receiving the order of burial, and falling down in pity; however, the world is far-reaching, not widely followed, the dead bones are empty and dry on the roadside, and there are often, pitying the long-lasting dead bones, more sorrowful sadness and sympathy.

古文：可明下远近，各巡境界，若委骸不葬，或蒢衣莫改，即就收敛，量给棺具。
现代文：可明令远近，各自巡察辖地，如果有弃置尸骨不葬的，或者地榆覆盖没有改葬的，立即就近收葬，度量着供给死者所需的棺材等物。
English: It can be made clear that far and near, they will inspect their respective jurisdictions, and if there are abandoned bones that are not buried, or the ground cover is not changed, they will immediately be buried nearby, and measure the coffins and other items needed to supply the dead.

古文：庶夜哭之魂斯慰，沾霜之骨有归。 
现代文：但愿夜哭之魂得以安慰，被寒霜打湿的尸骨有所归宿。 
English: May the souls of those who wept at night be comforted, and may the bones of the dead, wet with frost, find a home.

古文：辛巳，新作太极殿，改为十三间。
现代文：辛巳，新建太极殿，改为十三间。
English: Soon after, a new Taiji Hall was built and the number of rooms was changed to thirteen.

古文：三月癸卯，以湘州刺史王珍国为护军将军。
现代文：三月癸卯，任命湘州刺史王珍国为护军将军。
English: At the end of March, Wang Zhenguo, the governor of Hunan Province, was appointed as the general of the escorting army.

古文：闰月乙丑，特进、中军将军沈约卒。
现代文：闰三月乙丑，特进、中军将军沈约去世。
English: In the second month of the leap March, the Chinese general Shen Yu passed away.

古文：夏四月，京邑大水。
现代文：夏季四月，京都发大水。
English: In the summer month of April, large amounts of rain fall in Kyoto.

古文：六月癸巳，新作太庙，增基九尺。
现代文：六月癸巳，新建太庙，增高地基九尺。
English: In June, the temple was newly built, and the foundation was raised by nine feet.

古文：庚子，太极殿成。
现代文：庚子，太极殿建成。
English: Geng Zi, the Taiji Hall was completed.

古文：秋九月戊午，以镇南将军、开府仪同三司、江州刺史建安王伟为抚军将军，仪同如故；骠骑将军、开府同三司之仪、扬州刺史临川王宏为司空；领中权将军王茂为骠骑将军、开府同三司之仪、江州刺史。
现代文：秋季九月戊午，任命镇南将军、开府仪同三司、型吐刺史建壁王芦堡为抚军将军，任仪同照旧；任命骠骑将军、开府同三司之仪、扬州刺史临川王盖塞为司空；任命领中权将军玉芦为骠骑将军、开府同三司之仪、江州刺史。
English: On the afternoon of September in the autumn, Zhenan General, Kaifu Yi Tong San Shi, and Qiputuzashi Jianbei Wang Lubao were appointed as the generals of the supporting army, and the ceremony was the same as before; the general of the cavalry, Kaifu Yi Tong San Shi, and Yangzhou Yi Tong Linchuan Wang Ge Xie were appointed as the deputy generals; and the general of the territorial central power, Yulu, was appointed as the general of the cavalry, Kaifu Yi Tong San Shi, and Jiangzhou Yi Tong.

古文：冬十月丁亥，诏曰： 明堂地势卑湿，未称乃心。
现代文：冬季十月丁亥，诏令道： 明堂地势低下潮湿，不合思念之情。
English: In the winter of October, Dinghai, Zhao Lingdao said: Ming Hall's terrain is low and damp, and it does not fit the feeling of nostalgia.

古文：外可量就埤起，以尽诚敬。 
现代文：外可度量完后增补，以竭尽虔诚敬意。 
English: The outside can be added after the measurement is completed, in order to pay the utmost reverence to it.

古文：十三年春正月壬戌，以丹阳尹晋安王纲为荆州刺史。
现代文：十三年春季正月壬戌，任命丹阳尹晋安王芦锢为型赵刺史。
English: In the first month of the spring of the 13th year of Rinchen, Danyang Yin Jian Wang Lushan was appointed as the model of Zhao Zhishi.

古文：癸亥，以平西将军、荆州刺史鄱阳王恢为镇西将军、益州刺史。
现代文：癸亥，任命平西将军、荆州刺史鄱阳王芦拯为镇西将军、益业刺史。
English: Gonghai appointed Pingxi General, Jingzhou appointed Shishi, Poyang appointed Wang Ruzheng as Zhenxi General, and Yiye appointed Shishi.

古文：丙寅，以翊右将军安成王秀为安西将军、郢州刺史。
现代文：丙寅，任命翊右将军玄虚王芦秀为安西将军、题出刺史。
English: Hsin-Yin appointed Geng Yu-Wang, Geng Yu-Wang, Geng Yu-Wang, Geng Yu-Wang, Geng Yu-Wang, Geng Yu-Wang, Geng Yu-Wang, Geng Yu-Wang, Geng Yu-Wang, Geng Yu-Wang, Geng Yu-Wang, Geng Yu-Wang, Geng Yu-Wang, Geng Yu-Wang.

古文：二月丁亥，舆驾亲耕籍田，赦天下，孝悌力田赐爵一级。
现代文：二月丁亥，皇上亲自耕作籍田，大赦天下。有孝顺父母敬爱兄长的和能努力耕作的赏赐爵位一级。
English: In February of Dinghai, the emperor personally cultivated the land he was born in, and granted amnesty to the world. Those who were filial to their parents, respected their elder brothers, and were able to work hard were rewarded with a first-class knighthood.

古文：老人星见。
现代文：老人星出现。
English: The old man star appears.

古文：三月辛亥，以新除中抚将军、开府仪同三司建安王伟为左光禄大夫。
现代文：三月辛亥，任命新任的中抚将军、开府仪同三司建安王萧伟为左光禄大夫。
English: In March of Xinhai, Xiao Wei, the newly appointed General of the Central Military Commission, Kaifu, and the three departments of Jian'an, was appointed as the doctor of the Left Guanglu.

古文：夏四月辛卯，林邑国遣使献方物。
现代文：夏季四月辛卯，挞垦迩派遣使者进献本土物产。
English: In the hot summer months of April and May, envoys are dispatched to present local products.

古文：壬辰，以郢州刺史豫章王综为安右将军。
现代文：壬辰，任命坚业刺史豫章王芦签为安右将军。
English: In Imjin, he appointed Jianye Zhishi Yu Zhang Wang Luxiao as General An Yu.

古文：五月辛亥，以通直散骑常侍韦睿为中护军。
现代文：五月辛亥，任命通直散骑常侍童塑为中护军。
English: In May of Xinhai, he appointed Zongzhizhong Zangjia Changzhi Tongdong as the middle guard.

古文：六月己亥，以南兗州刺史萧景为领军将军，领军将军柳庆远为安北将军、雍州刺史。
现代文：六月己亥，任命南兖州刺史芦量为领军将军，领军将军翅庆达为安北将军、壅业刺史。
English: In June, Ji Hai appointed Nanluozhou Zhishi Lurong as the leading general, the leading general Ying Qingda as the Anbei general, and Zouye Zhishi as the leading general.

古文：秋七月乙亥，立皇子纶为邵陵郡王，绎为湘东郡王，纪为武陵郡王。
现代文：秋季七月乙亥，立皇子萧纶为邵陵郡王，萧绎为湘束郡王，萧纪为武陵郡王。
English: In the autumn, in July of the Year of the Boar, the Prince Xiao Zhen became the King of Sholing County, Xiao Yu became the King of Xiangzhu County, and Xiao Ji became the King of Wuling County.

古文：八月癸卯，扶南、于阗国各遣使献方物。
现代文：八月癸卯，扶南、于阗国各自派遣使者进献本土物产。
English: In August, Funan Province and Yunnan Province each sent envoys to present local products.

古文：是岁作浮山堰。
现代文：这一年修筑浮山堰。
English: This was the year of the construction of the Fushan Weir.

古文：十四年春正月乙巳朔，皇太子冠，赦天下，赐为父后者爵一级，王公以下班赉各有差，停远近上庆礼。
现代文：十四年春季正月乙巳初一，皇太子行加冠礼，大赦天下，赐予作为父亲的继承人爵位一级，王公以下分赏各有差别，停止远近进献吉庆之礼。
English: On the first day of the first month of the spring of the 14th year, the crown prince performed the coronation ceremony, pardoned the world, and bestowed a first-class knighthood on his father's heir. The rewards below the prince were different, and the auspicious celebration ceremony was stopped.

古文：丙午，安左将军、尚书令王莹进号中权将军。
现代文：丙午，安左将军、尚书令王莹进升官号中权将军。
English: In the afternoon of the third day, General An Zuo and Wang Yingjin were promoted to the post of General of the Central Powers.

古文：以镇西将军始兴王憺为中抚将军。
现代文：任命镇西将军始兴王萧怆为中抚将军。
English: Appointed Zhenxi General Shi Xing Wang Xiaoqi as the General of the Middle Fuzhou.

古文：辛亥，舆驾亲祠南郊。
现代文：辛亥，皇上到南郊亲自祭天。
English: At the turn of the year, the emperor went to the southern suburbs to personally worship the heavens.

古文：诏曰： 朕恭祗明祀，昭事上灵，临竹宫而登泰坛，服裘冕而奉苍璧，柴望既升，诚敬克展，思所以对越乾元，弘宣德教；而缺于治道，政法多昧，实伫群才，用康庶绩。
现代文：诏令道： 我恭敬地对待重大祭祀，勤勉地服事上帝，驾临竹宫而升登童擅，身着大裘头戴冠冕而手捧苍璧，柴祭望祭已升，虔诚敬意已展，想用来答谢颂扬上天，弘扬德教；然而缺少治国的方针措施，政治法令多昏乱，因而广聚群才，用来治理各种政务。
English: He said, "I respectfully treated the great sacrificial rites, diligently served God, went to the Bamboo Palace and was promoted to the rank of a disciple, wore a crown and a crown, and held the star in my hand. The fire festival and the festival have been elevated, and piety and respect have been developed. I want to use them to thank and praise God, and promote moral education. However, there is a lack of policies and measures for governing the country, and political decrees are often confused. Therefore, I gather a wide group of talents to manage various government affairs.

古文：可班下远近，博采英异。
现代文：可颁布远近，博采德才非凡的人。
English: It can be promulgated far and wide, and Boca is an extraordinary person with extraordinary talent.

古文：若有确然乡党，独行州闾，肥遁丘园，不求闻达，藏器待时，未加收采；或贤良、方正，孝悌、力田，并即腾奏，具以名上。
现代文：如果乡党裹有诚信笃实的，州阎中有志操高尚的，丘园处有退居隐逸的，他们不求显达，怀才等待施展的时机，还未加收罗采纳；或是贤良、方正，孝悌、力田者，都立即上奏，备列其名呈上。
English: If the township party is honest and solid, the county party has high-minded and noble aspirations, and the hillside party has retired to seclusion, they do not seek publicity, wait for the opportunity to perform, and have not yet accepted; or the virtuous, the upright, the filial piety, and the force field are immediately played, and their names are prepared to be submitted.

古文：当擢彼周行，试以邦邑，庶百司咸事，兆民无隐。
现代文：当提拔他们出任朝廷官吏，试以地方官职，希望百官都称职尽事，百姓裹没有隐逸之士。
English: When they are promoted to serve as officials of the imperial court and try to serve as local officials, I hope that all officials are competent and do their best, and the people have no hidden people.

古文：又世轻世重，随时约法，前以劓墨，用代重辟，犹念改悔，其路已壅，并可省除。 
现代文：又有关从重从轻的问题，当顺应时势而简约刑法，前面用劓刑墨刑，来替代极刑，仍然念及悔改，其出路已被堵塞，都可免除。 
English: In addition, regarding the question of which is more important and which is less important, when the criminal law is simplified in accordance with the current situation, the preceding sentence of whipping with ink is used instead of capital punishment, and repentance is still considered, and the way out has been blocked, all can be exempted.

古文：丙寅，汝阴王刘胤薨。
现代文：丙寅，汝阴王刘胤去世。
English: Liu Yin, the King of Yin, passed away.

古文：二月庚寅，芮芮国遣使献方物。
现代文：二月庚寅，芮芮国派遣使者进献本土物产。
English: In February, Gyeongin sent an envoy to present local products.

古文：戊戌，老人星见。
现代文：戊戌，老人星出现。
English: Wuzhen, the elderly star appeared.

古文：辛丑，以中护军韦睿为平北将军、雍州刺史，新除中抚将军始兴王憺为荆州刺史。
现代文：辛丑，任命中护军韦散为平北将军、壅州刺史，新任的中抚将军始兴王萧儋为荆州刺史。
English: Xin Yuxiu appointed Wei San of the Central Protection Force as the general of Pingbei and the governor of Bozhou, and the newly appointed general of the Central Protection Force, Shi Xing Wang Xiaoqi, as the governor of Jingzhou.

古文：夏四月丁丑，骠骑将军、开府同三司之仪、江州刺史王茂薨。
现代文：夏季四月丁丑，骠骑将军、开府同三司之仪、江州刺史王茂去世。
English: In the summer of April, Ding Yuxiu, the general of the imperial cavalry, Kaifu Tong Sanji, and Wang Mao, the governor of Jiangsu Province, passed away.

古文：五月丁巳，以荆州刺史晋安王纲为江州刺史。
现代文：五月丁巳，任命荆州刺史晋安王萧纲为江州刺史。
English: In May of the same year, Jingzhou governor Jinan Wang Xiaogang was appointed governor of Jiangzhou.

古文：秋八月乙未，老人星见。
现代文：秋季八月乙未，老人星出现。
English: In the autumn of August, the elderly star appears.

古文：九月癸亥，以长沙王深业为护军将军。
现代文：九月癸亥，任命长沙王渊业为护军将军。
English: In September of the Year of the Rooster, Wang Yuanye of Changsha was appointed General of the Guard.

古文：狼牙修国遣使献方物。
现代文：狼牙脩国派遣使者进献本土物产。
English: Many countries sent envoys to present their local products.

古文：十五年春正月己巳，诏曰： 观时设教，王政所先，兼而利之，实惟务本，移风致治，咸由此作。
现代文：十五年春季正月己巳，诏令道： 观察时势实施教化，是国君的政令所首倡的，兼而利之，实为致力根本，转变风气达到治世，都由此而兴起。
English: In the first month of the spring of the fifteenth year, the imperial edict said: Observing the current situation and implementing enlightenment is the first initiative of the sovereign's decree, and it is also beneficial. It is indeed a fundamental effort to change the culture and achieve world domination. All of this arose from this.

古文：顷因革之令，随事必下，而张弛之要，未臻厥宜，民瘼犹繁，廉平尚寡，所以伫旒纩而载怀，朝玉帛而兴叹。
现代文：近来有关因袭与变革之令，根据周围的事物变化而颁布，然而事物的兴废之探求，没有尽到合宜，人民困苦犹多，廉正公平尚少，因此久立垂视听而怀想，执玉帛朝会而兴叹。
English: Recently, the decrees related to causes and changes have been promulgated according to the changes in the surrounding things. However, the exploration of the pros and cons of things has not been done properly, the people are suffering a lot, and integrity and fairness are still few. Therefore, Jiuling is watching and listening and thinking about it, and holding the Jade Emperor's Council is lamenting.

古文：可申下四方，政有不便于民者，所在具条以闻。
现代文：可下令四方，政事有不利于民的，所在之处详备列举奏报。
English: The four parties may be ordered to prepare a report detailing the location of any political matters that are unfavorable to the people.

古文：守宰若清洁可称，或侵渔为蠹，分别奏上，将行黜陟。
现代文：地方长官如是清廉足可称道，或是侵夺成为祸国殃民的人，分别奏上，将实行罢黜或提升。
English: Local governors who are clean and can be praised, or those who encroach on the people and become the scourge of the country, will be dismissed or promoted.

古文：长吏劝课，躬履堤防，勿有不修，致妨农事。
现代文：长吏要鼓励督责，亲自巡行堤防，不能出现没有修缮的地方，以致妨害农事。
English: Officials should encourage supervision, personally patrol the embankment, and should not appear where there is no repair, thus interfering with agricultural work.

古文：关市之赋，或有未允，外时参量，优减旧格。 
现代文：关市之赋税，或有不得当的，外官要时常酌量，宽减旧有规定。 
English: In the case of the imposition of customs duties, or improper imposition, the foreign official should always consider the amount, and there is a provision for leniency.

古文：三月戊辰朔，日有蚀之。
现代文：三月戊辰初？发生日食。
English: A solar eclipse occurred at the beginning of March.

古文：夏四月丁未，以安右将军豫章王综兼护军。
现代文：夏季四月丁未，任命安右将军豫章王萧综兼护军。
English: In the summer of April, General An Yu appointed General Yu Zhang Wang Xiao to lead and protect the army.

古文：高丽国遣使献方物。
现代文：高丽国派遣使者进献本土物产。
English: Koryo dispatches envoys to offer tribute to local specialties.

古文：五月癸未，以司空、扬州刺史临川王宏为中书监，骠骑大将军、刺史如故。
现代文：五月癸未，任命司空、扬州刺史临王萧宏为中书监，骠骑大将军、刺史照旧。
English: At the end of May, Xiao Hong, Siku and Yangzhou scholar Lin Wang, was appointed as the Chinese librarian.

古文：六月丙申，改作小庙毕。
现代文：六月丙申，改建小庙完工。
English: In June, the reconstruction of the small temple was completed.

古文：庚子，以尚书令王莹为左光禄大夫、开府仪同三司，尚书右仆射袁昂为尚书左仆射，吏部尚书王暕为尚书右仆射。
现代文：庚子，任命尚书令王莹为左光禄大夫、开府仪同三司，尚书右仆射袁昂为尚书左仆射，吏部尚书王睐为尚书右仆射。
English: Geng Zi appointed Shang Shuling Wang Ying as Zuo Guanglu Daifu and Kaifu Yi Tong San Si, Shang Shuling's right-hand man Ya Yuan Ang as Shang Shuling's left-hand man Ya, and Shang Shuling Wang Zhen as Shang Shuling's right-hand man Ya in the Personnel Department.

古文：秋八月，老人星见。
现代文：秋季八月，老人星出现。
English: In the autumn, in August, the elderly star appears.

古文：芮芮、河南遣使献方物。
现代文：芮芮、河南派遣使者进献本土物产。
English: Handan and Henan sent envoys to present local products.

古文：九月辛巳，左光禄大夫、开府仪同三司王莹薨。
现代文：九月辛巳，左光禄大夫、开府仪同三司王莹去世。
English: In September, Dr. Sakoroku, Dr. Kaifu, and Dr. Wang Ying passed away.

古文：壬辰，赦天下。
现代文：壬辰，大赦天下。
English: Imjin, amnesty to the world.

古文：冬十月戊午，以丹阳尹长沙王深业为湘州刺史。
现代文：冬季十月戊午，任命丹阳尹长沙王渊业为湘州刺史。
English: In the afternoon of October in winter, Danyang Yin Changsha Wang Yuanye was appointed as the first governor of Hunan Province.

古文：十一月丁卯，以兼护军豫章王综为安前将军。
现代文：十一月丁卯，任命兼护军豫章王萧综为安前将军。
English: In November of Dingwu, Yu Zhangwang Xiao Simi, who was also a military escort, was appointed as the former general of An.

古文：交州刺史李畟斩交州反者阮宗孝，传首京师。
现代文：交州刺史李异斩杀交州的叛逆者阮宗孝，将其首级传至京都。
English: Jiaozhou assassin Li Yan killed Jiaozhou rebel Ruan Zongxiao and sent his head to Kyoto.

古文：曲赦交州。
现代文：特赦交州。
English: Amnesty for Jangju.

古文：壬午，以雍州刺史韦睿为护军将军。
现代文：壬午，任命雍州刺史韦敷为护军将军。
English: In Renwu, he appointed the Yongzhou assassin Shi Wei Shiki as the escorting general.

古文：十六年春正月辛未，舆驾亲祠南郊，诏曰： 朕当扆思治，政道未明，昧旦劬劳，亟移星纪。
现代文：十六年春季正月辛未，皇上到南郊亲自祭天，韶令道： 我临朝听政想望治世，政道不明，破晓便开始劳苦，已是几度春秋。
English: In the first month of the spring of the 16th year, the emperor went to the southern suburbs to personally offer sacrifices to the heavens. He said, "I came to the imperial court to listen to the government and hope to rule the world. I do not know the political path. I began to work at dawn. It has been several times of spring and autumn.

古文：今太皞御气，句芒首节，升中就阳，禋敬克展，务承天休，布兹和泽。
现代文：如今正似太皞御风驰驾，句芒首创功业之时，祭天如葵藿向，表达虔诚的敬意，蒙承天赐之福佑，广施惠及百姓之德泽。
English: Today, just as it was at the time when Emperor Taizong was riding the wind and Emperor Jumang was pioneering his work, we should make offerings to the heavens like the sunflowers, express our pious respect, inherit the blessings given by heaven, and benefit the people.

古文：尤贫之家，勿收今年三调。
现代文：赤贫之家，不收今年的调粟调帛杂调。
English: House of abject poverty, do not collect this year's poppy seed mixture.

古文：其无田业者，所在量宜赋给。
现代文：那些没有田地的，所在之地酌量分配发给。
English: For those who don't have land, they will be given a portion of the land.

古文：若民有产子，即依格优蠲。
现代文：如百姓中有生孩子的，则按制度宽减赋税。
English: If there is a child among the people, the tax will be reduced according to the system.

古文：孤老鳏寡不能自存，咸加赈恤。
现代文：老弱鳏寡不能自立的，都加以救济。
English: The old, the weak, the widows and the widowers who are unable to support themselves are all given relief.

古文：班下四方。
现代文：颁布四方。
English: promulgated by the four parties.

古文：诸州郡县，时理狱讼，勿使冤滞，并若亲览。 
现代文：各州郡县，要及时审理讼案，不要造成滞留未申的冤案，都似我亲自操持一样。 
English: All states, counties and counties should try cases in a timely manner, and should not cause the unjust cases that have not been reported to be delayed, just as if I had personally handled them.

古文：二月庚戌，老人星见，甲寅，以安前将军豫章王综为南徐州刺史。
现代文：二月庚戌，老人星出现。甲寅，任命安前将军豫章王萧综为南徐州刺史。
English: In February, Geng Zheng, the old man star appeared. Ka Yin, appointed the former general of An, Yu Zhang Wang Xiaoshu, as the leader of the history of South Xuzhou.

古文：三月丙子，河南王遣使献方物。
现代文：三月丙子，河南王派遣使者进献本土物产。
English: In March, the king of Henan sent an envoy to present local products.

古文：夏四月甲子，初去宗庙牲。
现代文：夏季四月甲子，开始取消宗庙用牺牲献祭。
English: In the summer of April, the temple began to abolish the use of sacrifices.

古文：潮沟获白雀一。
现代文：潮沟获得一只白雀。
English: The tidal flats gained a white finch.

古文：六月戊申，以庐陵王绩为江州刺史。
现代文：六月戊申，任命庐陵王萧续为江州刺史。
English: In June, Wushin appointed Gongling Wang Xiaozheng as the governor of Jiangsu Province.

古文：七月丁丑，以郢州刺史安成王秀为镇北将军、雍州刺史。
现代文：七月丁丑，任命郢州刺史安成王萧秀为镇北将军、雍州刺史。
English: In July, Ding Wuxi appointed Ancheng Wang Xiao Xiu, the governor of Zhangzhou, as the general of Zhenbei and the governor of Yongzhou.

古文：八月辛丑，老人星见。
现代文：八月辛丑，老人星出现。
English: August is gloomy, the old man star appears.

古文：扶南、婆利国各遣使献方物。
现代文：扶南、婆利国各自派遣使者进献本土物产。
English: Both Funan Province and Borneo Province sent envoys to present their local products.

古文：冬十月，去宗庙荐修，始用蔬果。
现代文：冬季十月，取消宗庙进献干肉，开始用蔬菜水果。
English: In the winter of October, the donation of dried meat to the ancestral temple was cancelled, and vegetables and fruits were used instead.

古文：十七年春正月丁巳朔，诏曰： 夫乐所自生，含识之常性；厚下安宅，驭世之通规。
现代文：十七年春季正月丁巳初一，诏令道： 欢乐源于自身，是众生的本性；使百姓丰足安居乐业，是统治天下的通则。
English: On the first day of the first month of the 17th year of the Spring, the Emperor issued the following edict: Joy comes from oneself, it is the nature of all living beings; enabling the people to live and work in peace and contentment is the general rule for ruling the world.

古文：朕矜此庶氓，无忘待旦，亟弘生聚之略，每布宽恤之恩；而编户未滋，迁徙尚有，轻去故乡，岂其本志？
现代文：我怜悯百姓，无忘待旦，屡屡扩大繁殖人口聚积物力的方略，每每布施宽大体恤的恩惠；然而编入户籍的人口没有增加，迁转流徙的情况还有，轻易离开故乡，难道是其本来的志愿?
English: I have pity on the people, I will never forget, I have repeatedly expanded the strategy of breeding population and accumulating material resources, and I have always given generous and considerate favors; however, the number of people registered for household registration has not increased, the situation of migration is still there, and it is easy to leave their hometown, is it their original will?

古文：资业殆阙，自返莫由，巢南之心，亦何能弭。
现代文：资财产业匮乏，自己无从返回，而居住南方之心，又怎能止息。
English: There is a lack of capital and industry, and there is no way for me to return, but living in the heart of the south, how can I stop?

古文：今开元发岁，品物惟新，思俾黔黎，各安旧所。
现代文：如今开国肇基一年起始，万物更新，想使百姓各安旧居。
English: Now, one year after the founding of the People's Republic of China, everything has been renewed, and people want to keep their old homes safe.

古文：将使郡无旷土，邑靡游民，鸡犬相闻，桑柘交畛。
现代文：将让郡无旷废之地，邑无游荡之民，鶸犬之声相闻，桑树与柘木交植。
English: There will be no waste land in the county, no wandering people in the town, the sound of barking dogs will be heard, and mulberry trees will be interplanted with birch trees.

古文：凡天下之民，有流移他境，在天监十七年正月一日以前，可开恩半岁，悉听还本，蠲课三年。
现代文：凡是天下的民众，有流徙迁移他域的，在天监十七年正月一日以前，可以开恩半年，完全听凭他们返回本土，免除赋税三年。
English: Before the first day of the first month of the seventeenth year of Tianjing, all the people of the world who have migrated to other regions can be forgiven for half a year, fully allowed to return to their home country, and exempted from tax for three years.

古文：其流寓过远者，量加程日。
现代文：那些流落他乡距离太远的，酌量增加路程的日期。
English: For those who live too far away from their hometowns, the date of travel may be increased.

古文：若有不乐还者，即使著土籍为民，准旧课输。
现代文：如有不乐意返回的，即使登记在当地户籍上成为常居不迁的百姓，也照旧征收赋税。
English: If there are people who are not willing to return, even if they are registered as permanent residents on the local household registration, they will still be taxed.

古文：若流移之后，本乡无复居宅者，村司三老及余亲属，即为诣县，占请村内官地官宅，令相容受，使恋本者还有所托。
现代文：如流徙迁移后，本乡再没有住宅的，村长和有声望的老人以及其他亲属，即为他到县衙门，审度村内公家的田宅而请求，命相容纳接受，使留恋本土的回返有所依托。
English: If there is no residence in the hometown after the migration, the village head and the prestigious old people and other relatives should go to the county gate to review the public houses in the village and accept the request, so that the return of nostalgia to the mainland can be supported.

古文：凡坐为市埭诸职，割盗衰灭，应被封籍者，其田宅车牛，是民生之具，不得悉以没入，皆优量分留，使得自止。
现代文：凡是因市埭诸职侵夺盗取赋税致使税收减少而坐罪应当将被查抄的资财登记入册的，其中田宅车牛，是民众生活的工具，不得全部将其没收入官，都要酌量从宽分留，使他们自己能够生活定居。
English: Anyone who commits a crime due to the reduction of tax revenue caused by the theft and theft of taxation caused by the theft and theft of taxation caused by the theft and theft of taxation caused by the theft and theft of taxation caused by the theft and theft of taxation caused by the theft and theft of taxation caused by the theft and theft of taxation caused by the theft and theft of taxation caused by the theft and theft of taxation caused by the theft and theft of taxation caused by the theft and theft of taxation caused by the theft and theft of taxation caused by the theft and theft of taxation caused by the theft and theft of taxation caused by the theft and theft of taxation caused by the theft and theft of taxation caused by the theft and theft of taxation

古文：其商贾富室，亦不得顿相兼并。
现代文：那些商买富户，也不得顿相兼并。
English: Those merchants who buy rich households should not be allowed to merge with each other.

古文：遁叛之身，罪无轻重，并许首出，还复民伍。
现代文：叛逃之人，罪无论轻重，都允许他们出来自首，复归于平民行列。
English: Defectors, regardless of the severity of their crimes, are allowed to turn themselves in and return to civilian life.

古文：若有拘限，自还本役。
现代文：如有被拘限的，自然返回服原役。
English: If they have been detained, they will naturally return to their original duty.

古文：并为条格，咸使知闻。 
现代文：把这些一起立为法规，使所有的人都知道。 
English: Put them all together in a law so that everyone knows about them.

古文：二月癸巳，镇北将军、雍州刺史安成王秀薨。
现代文：二月癸巳，镇北将军、雍州刺史安成王萧秀去世。
English: In February, Zhenbei General and Yongzhou Governor Ancheng Wang Xiao Xiu passed away.

古文：甲辰，大赦天下。
现代文：甲辰，大赦天下。
English: Jia Chen, amnesty to the world.

古文：乙卯，以领石头戍事南康王绩为南兗州刺史。
现代文：乙卯，任命领石头戍事南康王萧绩为南兖州刺史。
English: Second, the appointment of the leader of the stone anecdote, the king of Southern Kangxi, Xiao Yi, as the leader of the history of Southern Zhangzhou.

古文：三月甲申，老人星见。
现代文：三月甲申，老人星出现。
English: In March of Jiaxun, the elderly star appeared.

古文：丙申，改封建安王伟为南平王。
现代文：丙申，改封建安王萧伟为南平王。
English: Bishen changed the fief of Jianan King Xiao Wei to Nanping King.

古文：夏五月戊寅，骠骑大将军、扬州刺史临川王宏免。
现代文：夏季五月戊寅，骠骑大将军、扬州刺史临川王萧宏免职。
English: In the summer of May, Wu Yin, the general of the imperial cavalry, Yangzhou assassin Linchuan Wang Xiaohong was relieved of duty.

古文：己卯、干利国遣使献方物。
现代文：己卯，干陁利国派遣使者进献本土物产。
English: In response, the country sent an envoy to present local products.

古文：以领军将军萧景为安右将军，监扬州。
现代文：任命领军将军萧景为安右将军，监扬丛。
English: He appointed the leading general, Xiao Jing, as General An Yu to supervise Yang Cong.

古文：辛巳，以临川王宏为中军将军、中书监。
现代文：辛巳，任命临川王蓝塞为中军将军、中书监。
English: Soon after, Linchuan King Lansai was appointed as the general of the Chinese army and the supervisor of Chinese books.

古文：六月乙酉，以益州刺史鄱阳王恢为领军将军。
现代文：六月乙酉，任命益州刺史鄱阳王萧恢为领军将军。
English: In June of the same year, he appointed the leading general of Yizhou Province, Zishi Shiyang Wang Xiao Wei.

古文：中军将军，中书监临川王宏以本号行司徒。
现代文：中军将军、中书监临川王萧宏以本官号行司徒。
English: Xiao Hong, the general of the Chinese army and the librarian of the Chinese Academy of Sciences, took the official title of Gyoshu.

古文：癸卯，以国子祭酒蔡撙为吏部尚书。
现代文：癸卯，任命国子祭酒蔡撙为吏部尚书。
English: At the same time, he appointed Cai Qi, the son of the state, as the secretary of the personnel department.

古文：秋八月壬寅，老人星见。
现代文：秋季八月壬寅，老人星出现。
English: In autumn, in August, Ren Yin, the old man's star appears.

古文：诏以兵驺奴婢，男年登六十，女年登五十，免为平民。
现代文：诏令兵骝奴婢，男子年龄达到六十，女子年龄达到五十的，豁免为平民。
English: The edict exempted from military service men and women, aged 60 for men and 50 for women, who were civilians.

古文：冬十月乙亥，以中军将军、行司徒临川王宏为中书监、司徒。
现代文：冬季十月乙亥，任命中军将军、行司徒临王萧宏为中书监、司徒。
English: In the winter of October in the first year of the Heian period, Lin Wang Xiaohong, a general in the Chinese army and a scholar-traveler, was appointed as the book supervisor and scholar-traveler.

古文：十一月辛亥，以南平王伟为左光禄大夫、开府仪同三司。
现代文：十一月辛亥，任命南平王萧伟为左光禄大夫、开府仪同三司。
English: In November of Xinhai, Nanping Wang Xiao Wei was appointed as the doctor of Zuo Guanglu and the third secretary of Kaifu Yi Tong.

古文：十八年春正月甲申，以领军将军鄱阳王恢为征西将军、开府仪同三司、荆州刺史，荆州刺史始兴王憺为中抚将军、开府仪同三司、领军。
现代文：十八年春季正月甲申，任命领军将军鄱阳王萧惬为征西将军、开府仪同三司、荆州刺史，荆塑刺史蛆兴王芦擅为中抚将军、开府仪同三司、领军。
English: In the spring of the first month of the 18th year of Jiaxing, the leading general of the army, the general of the general of the general of the general of the general of the general of the general of the general of the general of the general of the general of the general of the general of the general of the general of the general of the general of the general of the general of the general of the general of the general of the general of the general

古文：以尚书左仆射袁昂为尚书令，尚书右仆射王暕为尚书左仆射，太子詹事徐勉为尚书右仆射。
现代文：任命尚书左仆射袁昂为尚书令，尚书右仆射王味为尚书左仆射，太子詹事徐勉为尚书右仆射。
English: Appointed Shangshu's left-hand servant, Sha Yuan Ang, as Shangshu's second-in-command, Shangshu's right-hand servant, Sha Wangmi, as Shangshu's left-hand servant, and Prince Zhan Zhi Xu Min as Shangshu's right-hand servant.

古文：辛卯，舆驾亲祠南郊，孝悌力田赐爵一级。
现代文：辛卯，皇上到南郊亲自祭天，孝悌力田者赐封爵位一级。
English: Xinwu, the emperor went to the southern suburbs to personally offer sacrifices to heaven, and those who showed filial piety were awarded a first-class knighthood.

古文：二月戊午，老人星见。
现代文：二月戊午，老人星出现。
English: February at noon, the old man star appeared.

古文：四月丁巳，大赦天下。
现代文：四月丁巳，大赦天下。
English: April Ting Si, amnesty to the world.

古文：秋七月甲申，老人星见。
现代文：秋季七月甲申，老人星出现。
English: In autumn, in July of Jiaxin, the old man star appears.

古文：于阗、扶南国各遣使献方物。
现代文：工阖、迭蓝圆各自派遣使者进献本土物产。
English: Each of Tonglu and Diyilangyuan sent envoys to present local products.

