古文：◎职官一
现代文：职官一
English: Staff Officer 1

古文：明官制，沿汉、唐之旧而损益之。
现代文：明朝官制，沿袭汉、唐的旧有制度而有所修改。
English: The official system of the Ming Dynasty followed the old system of the Han and Tang Dynasties, but was modified.

古文：自洪武十三年罢丞相不设，析中书省之政归六部，以尚书任天下事，侍郎贰之。
现代文：从洪武十三年起撤销丞相一职不再设立，分中书省的政务归于六部，用尚书承担国家大事，侍郎辅助他。
English: From the thirteenth year of Hongwu, the post of chancellor was abolished and no longer established, and the government affairs of the book ministry were divided into six departments, with Shangshu taking on national affairs and attendants assisting him.

古文：而殿阁大学士只备顾问，帝方自操威柄，学士鲜所参决。
现代文：而殿阁大学土只用作顾问，皇帝这纔亲自掌握了权柄，学士很少参与决策。
English: However, Tenkaku Daigaku Tsuchi was only used as a consultant, and the emperor personally took control of power. Bachelors rarely participated in decision-making.

古文：其纠劾则责之都察院，章奏则达之通政司，平反则参之大理寺，是亦汉九卿之遗意也。
现代文：纠察弹劾则由都察院负责，奏章则送连通政司，平反错案则由大理寺参议，这也是汉九卿之制的遗意。
English: The picketing and impeachment are the responsibility of the Duka-in, the report is sent to the Lian-tong Secretary of State, and the case of rectifying the mistake is consulted by the Dali Temple, which is also the legacy of the Han Jiuqing system.

古文：分大都督府为五，而征调隶于兵部。
现代文：分大都督府为五，但征调军队属于兵部。
English: There are five major prefectural governments, but the conscript army belongs to the military department.

古文：外设都、布、按三司，分隶兵刑钱谷，其考核则听于府部。
现代文：另外设立都、布、按三司，分别隶属兵、刑、户部，他们的考核则听从府部。
English: In addition, three departments were established for the capital, cloth, and press, respectively belonging to the soldiers, punishment, and household departments, and their assessment was subject to the prefectural department.

古文：是时吏、户、兵三部之权为重。
现代文：这时吏、户、兵三部的权力最大。
English: At this time, officials, households, and soldiers had the greatest power.

古文：迨仁、宣朝，大学士以太子经师恩，累加至三孤，望益尊。
现代文：到仁、宣朝，大学士因为做太子经师获得恩宠，屡次加授到少师、少傅、少保三孤之职，威望更加尊显。
English: During the Jin and Xuan Dynasties, scholars were favored as the prince's scribes, and they were repeatedly awarded the positions of minor teacher, minor tutor, and minor guardian, which made their prestige even more prominent.

古文：而宣宗内柄无大小，悉下大学士杨士奇等参可否。
现代文：而宣宗内权无论大小，都下放给大学士杨士奇等参议可否。
English: However, the internal power of Xuan Zong, no matter how big or small, was delegated to Yang Shichi, a university scholar, and others for consultation.

古文：虽吏部蹇义、户部夏原吉时召见，得预各部事，然希阔不敌士奇等亲。
现代文：即使吏部蹇义、户部夏原吉不时被召见，得以参预各部政事，但疏远比不上杨士奇等亲近。
English: Even though the officials, Shigeyoshi, and the head of the household, Natsuhara no Kichi, were summoned from time to time and were able to participate in the political affairs of various ministries, they were not as close as Yang Shichi.

古文：自是内阁权日重，即有一二吏、兵之长与执持是非，辄以败。
现代文：从此，内阁的权力一天天加重，就算有一两个吏部、兵部的尚书与他们争执是非，也往往失败。
English: Since then, the power of the cabinet has increased day by day. Even if there are one or two officials from the Ministry of Public Administration and the Ministry of Military Affairs to argue with them, they often fail.

古文：至世宗中叶，夏言、严嵩迭用事，遂赫然为真宰相，压制六卿矣。
现代文：到世宗中叶，夏言、严嵩交替当权，于是俨然成为真正的宰相，压制六卿。
English: In the middle of the reign of King Sejong, Xia Yan and Yan Song alternated in power, and he suddenly became the real prime minister, suppressing the six nobles.

古文：然内阁之拟票，不得不决于内监之批红，而相权转归之寺人。
现代文：然而内阁起草文件，不敢不取决于内监的批示，因此相槽转而归于太监。
English: However, the cabinet did not dare to draft a document that did not depend on the order of the internal inspector, so the phase slot was transferred to the eunuch.

古文：于是朝廷之纪纲，贤士大夫之进退，悉颠倒于其手。
现代文：于是朝廷的纲纪，贤人士大夫的提拔斥退，都玩弄于太监的手中。
English: As a result, the discipline of the imperial court, and the promotion and dismissal of wise doctors, all played into the hands of the eunuchs.

古文：伴食者承意指之不暇，间有贤辅，卒蒿目而不能救。
现代文：无所作为的官员奉承他们的意旨惟恐不及，间或有贤能的宰辅，最终祇能蒿目时艰而不能匡救。
English: Officials who do nothing are flattered by their intentions, but they are not afraid, and occasionally there is a virtuous assistant, but in the end they can only stare at the difficulties and cannot help.

古文：初，领五都督府者，皆元勋宿将，军制肃然。
现代文：起初，总领五个都督府的人，都是元勋宿将，军制严肃整饬。
English: At first, the leaders of the five prefectural capitals were all retired generals, and the military system was seriously rectified.

古文：永乐间，设内监监其事，犹不敢纵。
现代文：永乐年间，设立内监督察军队的事务，还不敢放纵。
English: During the Yongle years, the establishment of internal supervision over the affairs of the army did not dare to indulge.

古文：沿习数代，勋戚纨袴司军纪，日以惰毁。
现代文：沿习几代之后，元勋外戚的鱿绔子弟掌管军纪，日渐因为怠惰而毁坏。
English: After several generations of study, the sons and daughters of the mother of the founder were in charge of military discipline, which was gradually destroyed by laziness.

古文：既而内监添置益多，边塞皆有巡视，四方大征伐皆有监军，而疆事遂致大坏，明祚不可支矣。
现代文：随后内监越添置越多，边塞都有这些人巡枧，各地大的征伐都设有监军，所以边防的事就这样导致严重败坏，明朝的基业不能支持下去了。
English: Subsequently, the number of internal supervisors increased more and more, these people patrolled the border fortresses, and supervising troops were set up for large-scale conquests in various regions. Therefore, the border defense caused serious corruption in this way, and the foundation of the Ming Dynasty could not be supported.

古文：迹其兴亡治乱之由，岂不在用人之得失哉！
现代文：探寻明代兴亡治乱的根由，难道不在于用人的得失吗！
English: Exploring the root cause of the rise and fall of the Ming Dynasty, isn't it the gain and loss of employing people?

古文：至于设官分职，体统相维，品式具备，详列后简。
现代文：至于官职的设立，体制的维系，官吏的等级及其法度都齐备，详细列于后篇。
English: As for the establishment of official posts, the maintenance of the system, the ranks of officials and their regulations are complete, and are listed in detail in the second part.

古文：览者可考而知也。
现代文：读者可以查考就知晓了。
English: The reader can look it up and find out.

古文：宗人府三公三孤太子三师三少内阁吏部户部附总督仓场礼部
现代文：宗人府三公三孤太子三师三少内阁吏部户部附总督仓场礼部
English: Sōnin-fu, three princes, three lonely princes, three divisions, three junior cabinet officials, household department, governor's office, warehouse, and ceremonial department

古文：兵部刑部工部
现代文：兵部刑部工部
English: Ministry of Military Affairs, Ministry of Justice, Ministry of Works

古文：宗人府。宗人令一人，左、右宗正各一人，左、右宗人各一人，掌皇九族之属籍，以时修其玉牒，书宗室子女適庶、名封、嗣袭、生卒、婚嫁、谥葬之事。
现代文：宗人府，宗人令一人，左、右宗正各一人，左、右宗人各一人，都是正一品，掌管皇帝九族的宗族名册，按时撰写帝王谱系，记录宗室子女嫡庶、名字封号、嗣袭爵位、生死时间、婚嫁、谧号安葬的事情。
English: The Imperial Household Agency, with one head of the Imperial Household Agency, one head of the Left and Right Imperial Household Agencies, one head of the Left and Right Imperial Household Agencies, and one head of each of the Left and Right Imperial Household Agencies, is in charge of the Imperial Family Register of the nine families of the emperor, compiles the imperial genealogy in a timely manner, and records the children of the imperial family, their names, titles, dates of birth and death, marriage, and burial.

古文：凡宗室陈请，为闻于上，达材能，录罪过。
现代文：凡是宗室陈述请求，替他们向皇上报告，引进贤才能人，记录罪责过失。
English: Whenever there is a request for a statement from the family, report to the emperor on their behalf, bring in wise and talented people, and record the guilt and negligence.

古文：初，洪武三年置大宗正院。
现代文：起初，洪武三年设置大宗正院。
English: At the beginning, Hongwu set up Taizongzheng Academy three years ago.

古文：二十二年改为宗人府，并以亲王领之。
现代文：二十二年改为宗人府，并以亲王掌领。
English: In 1922, it was changed to the Sōjin-fu, and the prince became the head.

古文：其后以勋戚大臣摄府事，不备官，而所领亦尽移之礼部。
现代文：塞至圭塑为令，受至朱榈、夔王朱棣焉左、右宗正，凰玉塞梼、楚王朱桢为左、右宗人。那以后，以元勋外戚大臣兼领宗人府的事情，不专门设官，而它所管辖的事都移交给礼部。
English: Since then, there has not been a special official in charge of the affairs of the Grand Empress Dowager and the head of the Imperial Household Agency, and the matters under its jurisdiction have been transferred to the Ministry of Ceremonies.

古文：其属，经历司，经历一人，典出纳文移。
现代文：它的属官，经历司，经历一人，正五品，掌管发收公文。
English: Its subordinate officials, experienced division, experienced one person, official five products, in charge of issuing and receiving official documents.

古文：太师、太傅、太保为三公，少师、少傅、少保为三孤，掌佐天子，理阴阳，经邦弘化，其职至重。
现代文：太师、太傅、太保为三公，正一品，少师、少傅、少保为三孤，从一品，负责辅佐天子治理天下蓠事，治理国家推广教化，他们的职责最重大。
English: The Great Teacher, the Great Teacher, and the Great Protector are the Three Princes, the First and the Last, and the Minor Teacher, the Minor Teacher, and the Minor Protector are the Three Orphans, the First and the Last. They are responsible for assisting the Son of Heaven in governing the world, governing the country, and promoting enlightenment. Their duties are the most important.

古文：无定员，无专授。
现代文：没有固定人数，不专门授予。
English: There is no fixed number of people, no special award.

古文：洪武三年，授李善长太师，徐达太傅。
现代文：洪武三年，授予李善长为太师，徐达为太傅。
English: In the third year of Hongwu, Li Shanchang was awarded the title of Grand Master, and Xu Da was awarded the title of Grand Master.

古文：三孤无兼领者。
现代文：在此之前，堂荡壹已被赠太保。三孤没有兼任的。
English: Prior to this, Danglangyi had been given the title of grand tutor. Sanguo did not have a concurrent post.

古文：建文、永乐间罢公、孤官，仁宗复设。
现代文：建文、永乐年间罢除三公、三孤官职，仁宗重新设置。
English: During the Jianwen and Yongle dynasties, the three public and three private offices were abolished, and the Nanzong was re-established.

古文：宣德三年，敕太师、英国公张辅，少师、吏部尚书蹇义，少傅、兵部尚书、华盖殿大学士杨士奇，少保兼太子少傅、户部尚书夏原吉，各辍所领，侍左右，咨访政事。
现代文：永乐二十二年八月又设置三公、三少。宣德三年，敕令太师、英国公张辅，少师、吏部尚书蹇义，少傅、兵部尚书、华盖殿大学士杨士奇，少保兼太子少傅、户部尚书夏原吉，各自停止所兼理的事务，侍奉皇帝左右，咨询政事。
English: In August of the 22nd year of Yongle, there were also three kings and three youths. In the three years of Xuan De, the Grand Master of the Imperial Court, the British official Zhang Fu, the Young Master, the Secretary of the General Staff, the Young Master, the Secretary of the General Staff, the Academician of the Huagai Palace, the Young Master Yang Shichi, the Young Master of the General Staff and the Young Master of the Crown Prince, and the Head of the Household, the Young Master Xia Yuanji, each stopped the affairs they were concurrently in charge of, served the emperor around, and consulted on political affairs.

古文：公孤之官，几于专授。
现代文：公、孤的官职，近似于专门授任。
English: A public or isolated official position is similar to a special appointment.

古文：逮义、原吉卒，士奇还领阁务。
现代文：等到蹇义、夏原吉去世后，杨士奇还兼管内阁事务。
English: After the death of Zhai Yi and Xia Yuanji, Yang Shiqi was also in charge of cabinet affairs.

古文：自此以后，公、孤但虚衔，为勋戚文武大臣加官、赠官。
现代文：从此以后，三公、三孤只是虚衔，为勋臣外戚文武大臣加官、赠官。
English: From then on, the three noblemen and three fools were only fictitious titles, and the minister of culture and armed forces promoted and bestowed them on the maternal relatives of the honored vassals.

古文：而文臣无生加三公者，惟赠乃得之。
现代文：而文臣生前没有加授三公的，只有追赠纔能得到。
English: However, Wencheng did not receive the additional award of the Three Princes during his lifetime, only the posthumous award could be obtained.

古文：嘉靖二年加杨廷和太傅，辞不受。
现代文：嘉靖二年，加授杨廷和为太傅，辞谢不受。
English: In the second year of Jiajing, Yang Tinghe was awarded the title of Taifu, and his resignation was not accepted.

古文：其后文臣得加三公惟张居正，万历九年加太傅，十年加太师。
现代文：这以后文臣得以加授三公的，只有张居正，万历九年加授太傅，十年加授太师。
English: After this, Wencheng was able to confer the Three Princes, only Zhang Juzheng, Wanli nine years plus Taifu, ten years plus Taishi.

古文：太子太师、太子太傅、太子太保，掌以道德辅导太子，而谨护翼之。
现代文：太子太师、太子太傅、太子太保，都是从一品，执掌用道德辅佐指导太子，并且谨慎护卫帮助他。
English: The crown prince, the prince's teacher, the prince's tutor, and the prince's bodyguard are all from the same lineage, guiding the prince with the help of moral assistants, and carefully escorting and helping him.

古文：太子少师、太子少傅、太子少保，掌奉太子以观三公之道德而教谕焉。
现代文：太子少师、太子少傅、太子少保，都是正二品，执掌侍奉太子以观察三公的道德从而教育训诲他。
English: The prince's apprentice, the prince's apprentice, the prince's apprentice, and the prince's apprentice are all second-class officials. They serve the prince to observe the morality of the three princes and educate and instruct him.

古文：太子宾客，掌侍太子赞相礼仪，规诲过失。
现代文：太子宾客，正三品，执掌侍奉太子进行赞唱导引礼仪，规劝教诲过失。
English: The prince's guests, the three dignitaries, led by the prince, performed the etiquette of praising and guiding, exhorting and admonishing.

古文：皆东宫大臣，无定员，无专授。
现代文：都是东宫太子的大臣，没有固定人数，不专门授任。
English: They are all ministers of the Crown Prince of the Eastern Court. There is no fixed number of them, and they are not specially appointed.

古文：洪武元年，太祖有事亲征，虑太子监国，别设宫僚或生嫌隙，乃以朝臣兼宫职：李善长兼太子少师，徐达兼太子少傅，常遇春兼太子少保，治书侍御史文原吉、范显祖兼太子宾客。
现代文：洪武元年，太祖有战事亲自出征，顾虑太子监国，另外设置官僚可能产生予盾，就以朝中大臣兼任太予宫中职位：李善长兼任太子少师，徐达兼任太子少傅，常遇春兼任太子少保，治书侍御史文原吉、范显祖兼任太子宾客。
English: In the first year of Hongwu, Emperor Taizu personally went to the front due to the war. He was concerned about the Prince's supervision of the country and the possibility of bureaucrats being set up. Therefore, the Minister of the Middle Kingdom also served as a position in the palace: Li Shanchang also served as the Prince's apprentice, Xu Da also served as the Prince's apprentice, Changyu Chun also served as the Prince's apprentice, Zhi Wen Yuanji and Fan Xianzu also served as the Prince's guests.

古文：三年，礼部尚书陶凯请选人专任东宫官，罢兼领，庶于辅导有所责成。
现代文：三年，礼部尚书陶凯奏请选拔人专门担任东宫官职，罢除兼领，希望对于辅佐教导的事有专人负责。
English: In the third year, the Ministry of Ceremonies requested the selector to exclusively hold the official position of the East Palace, to remove the concurrent leadership, and hoped that there would be a person responsible for the assistant teaching.

古文：帝谕以江充之事可为明鉴，立法兼领，非无谓也。
现代文：皇帝告谕认为汉代江充的事情可以作为明鉴，颁立法令兼领，不是没有道理的。
English: It is not without reason that the emperor's proclamation considered the events of the Han Dynasty to be a clear example and issued a legal decree.

古文：由是东宫师傅止为兼官、加官及赠官。
现代文：因此，东宫的老师，仅仅焉兼官、加官和赠官。
English: Therefore, the teachers of the East Palace are only concurrently appointed, promoted and promoted.

古文：惟永乐间，成祖幸北京，以姚广孝专为太子少师，留辅太子。
现代文：只有永乐年间，成祖巡幸北京，以姚广孝专门为太子少师，留下辅佐太子。
English: Only during the Yongle years, Cheng Zu made a tour of Beijing, with Yao Guangxiao specifically as the prince's young teacher, leaving the prince's assistant.

古文：自是以后，终明世皆为虚衔，于太子辅导之职无与也。
现代文：从这以后，在整个明王朝都为虚衔，与太子辅佐教导的职责没有关涉。
English: From then on, throughout the Ming Dynasty, it was a fictitious title and had nothing to do with the duties of the prince's assistant teacher.

古文：中极殿大学士，建极殿大学士，文华殿大学士，武英殿大学士，文渊阁大学士，东阁大学士，掌献替可否，奉陈规诲，点检题奏，票拟批答，以平允庶政。
现代文：中极殿大学士，旧名茎董壁，建极殿大学士，旧名谨身殿，文华殿大学士，武英殿大学士，文渊阁大学士，东阁大学士，都是正五品，执掌诤言进谏，正言规劝，查核清理奏章，草拟批答文书，以协调各部门政务。
English: The scholars of the Central Pole Hall, the former famous stem wall, the building of the Pole Hall, the former honored body, the scholar of the Wenhua Hall, the scholar of the Wuying Hall, the scholar of the Wenyu Pavilion, and the scholar of the East Pavilion, are all the five dignitaries, who are in charge of the speech, the exhortation, the inspection of the clean-up record, and the drafting of the approval document, in order to coordinate the government affairs of various departments.

古文：凡上之达下，曰诏，曰诰，曰制，曰册文，曰谕，曰书，曰符，曰令，曰檄，皆起草进画，以下之诸司。
现代文：凡是皇上下达给臣下的，称为诏、诰、制、册文、谕、书、符、令、檄，都要起草后进呈皇帝审批，下发到各有关部门。
English: All decrees issued by the emperor to his subjects, known as edict, edict, edict, edict, edict, edict, edict, edict, edict, edict, edict, edict, edict, edict, edict, edict, edict, edict, edict, edict, edict, edict, edict, edict, edict, edict, edict, edict, edict, edict, edict, edict, edict, edict, edict, edict, edict, edict, edict, edict, edict, edict, edict, edict, edict,

古文：下之达上，曰题，曰奏，曰表，曰讲章，曰书状，曰文册，曰揭帖，曰制对，曰露布，曰译，皆审署申覆而修画焉，平允乃行之。
现代文：臣下呈送给皇上的，称为题、奏、表、讲章、书状、文册、揭帖、制对、露布、译，都要明确署名，申请审核而在上面签字，公正逋当纔实行。
English: The titles, reports, forms, lectures, letters, catalogues, posters, collations, expositions, and translations presented to the emperor by his subjects should be clearly signed, and the application for review should be signed on top of them, and justice should be implemented.

古文：凡车驾郊祀、巡幸则扈从。
现代文：凡是皇帝进行郊祀、外出巡幸便陪伴随从。
English: Whenever the emperor carried out suburban worship or went on a tour, he was accompanied by his entourage.

古文：御经筵，则知经筵或同知经筵事。
现代文：驾临御前经史讲席，则知经筵或者同知经筵的事务。
English: If you come to the front of the throne, you will know the sutras or the same sutras.

古文：东宫出阁讲读，则领其事，叙其官，而授之职业。
现代文：东宫出阁讲读经史，便各司其职，按官职品级次序排列，各授予分内工作。
English: The Eastern Palace came out to lecture on the history of scripture, and then they each performed their duties, arranged according to the order of official ranks, and each was assigned to work within the points.

古文：冠婚，则充宾赞及纳征等使。
现代文：冠礼和婚礼，则充任典礼司仪以及纳礼征礼等的使臣。
English: For coronations and weddings, they act as officiants for the ceremony and envoys for the reception of gifts.

古文：修实录、史志诸书，则充总裁官。
现代文：撰写实录、史志等书，则充任总裁官。
English: If he writes books such as records and histories, he will be appointed as the president.

古文：春秋上丁释奠先师，则摄行祭事。
现代文：春、秋雨季上丁之日祭奠孔子，便代行祭祀事。
English: In the spring and autumn rainy season, the day of Shangding is dedicated to Confucius, and sacrifices are performed on his behalf.

古文：会试充考试官，殿试充读卷官。
现代文：会试充任考试官，殿试充任读卷官。
English: He will serve as an examiner on a trial basis, and he will serve as a reader on a trial basis.

古文：进士题名，则大学士一人撰文，立石于太学。
现代文：进士题名，则大学士一人撰文，在太学立石碑。
English: For the title of the winner, one member of the university will write an essay and erect a stone monument at the university.

古文：大典礼、大政事，九卿、科道官会议已定，则按典制，相机宜，裁量其可否，斟酌入告。
现代文：大型典礼、大型政事，九卿、科道官共同商议已定，便按照典制，审察时宜，裁度是否可行，斟酌后票告皇上。
English: Large-scale ceremonies, large-scale political affairs, the nine nobles and the science and technology officials have been jointly agreed upon, and then, in accordance with the ceremony system, they will examine whether it is appropriate and feasible to make a decision, and then report the vote to the emperor after consideration.

古文：颁诏则捧授礼部。
现代文：颁诏便捧授给礼部。
English: When the imperial edict was issued, it was presented to the Ministry of Ceremonies.

古文：会敕则稽其由状以请。
现代文：恰逢敕令便考察原由情状请求于皇土。
English: The imperial decree coincided with an inspection of the grounds for the request in the imperial territory.

古文：宗室请名、请封，诸臣请谥，并拟上。
现代文：宗室请求赐名、请封，臣下请求谧号，一并草拟呈报皇上。
English: The family asked for the name and seal, and the vassals asked for the posthumous name, all of which were drafted and submitted to the emperor.

古文：以其授餐大内，常侍天子殿阁之下，避宰相之名，又名内阁。先是，太祖承前制，设中书省，置左、右丞相，平章政事，左、右丞，参知政事，以统领众职。
现代文：昱元年，命百官礼仪都以左为上，改右相国为左相国，左相国为右相国。送武元年，改为左、右丞相。平章政事，从一品，左、右丞，正二品，参知政事，从二品，以统管众官。
English: In the first year of the Heian period, the etiquette of the 100 officials was changed from left to top, from right to left, and from left to right. In the first year of the Heian period, it was changed to left and right chancellor. Heijo government affairs, from the first grade, left, right chancellor, senior second grade, Sangi government affairs, from the second grade, to control all officials.

古文：置属官，左、右司，郎中，员外郎都事、检校，照磨、管勾，参议府参议，参军、断事官，断事、经历，知事，都镇抚司都镇抚，考功所，考功郎，
现代文：昊元年，革除参议府。洪垂元年，革除考功所。
English: In the first year of the Hao Dynasty, the House of Councillors was abolished. In the first year of the Hongliao Dynasty, the Examination Center was abolished.

古文：洪武九年汰平章政事、参知政事。
现代文：二年革除照磨、检校所、断事官。七年，设直省舍人十人，随即改为中书舍人。洪武九年，废除平章政事、参知政事。
English: In the second year of the Cultural Revolution, the government abolished the post of librarian, the post of school inspector, and the post of adjudicator. In the seventh year of the Cultural Revolution, ten post holders were established in the province, and the post holders were immediately changed to the post holders in the middle school. In the ninth year of the Cultural Revolution, the post holders of the title of Pingzhang and the post of Sangzhi were abolished.

古文：十五年，仿宋制，置华盖殿、武英殿、文渊阁、东阁诸大学士，又置文华殿大学士，以辅导太子。
现代文：十五年，仿照宋朝制度，设置华盖殿、武英殿、文渊合、东阁各大学士，礼部尚书邵质任茎董飕大学士，检讨昊伯宗任武英殿大学士，翰林学士塞塑任文豳大学士，典籍昱坦任塞扬大学士。
English: In the fifteenth year, based on the Song Dynasty system, the academies of Huagai Hall, Wuying Hall, Wenyuanhe Hall, and Donggak Hall were set up. Shangshu Shaoqing of the Ministry of Ceremonies was appointed as the academician of Dongyuan University, Haobozong of the Ministry of Inspection and Quarantine was appointed as the academician of Wuying Hall, Xiezhuang of the Hanlin Academy was appointed as the academician of Wenyuan University, and Jiaotan of the Academy of Classics was appointed as the academician of Saiyang University.

古文：秩皆正五品。二十八年敕谕群臣： 国家罢丞相，设府、部、院、寺以分理庶务，立法至为详善。
现代文：又设置文华殿大学士，征耆老宿儒鲍恂、余诠、张长年等人担任，以辅佐引导太子。官阶都是正五品。二十八年，颂敕谕告群臣： 国家废除丞相，设府、部、院、寺来分管各种政务，立法十分详备完善。
English: In addition, he set up the College of Scholars at the Palace of Literature and Culture, and appointed Ju Baojun, Yu Yan, Zhang Changnian, and others to lead the prince with the help of assistants. The official ranks were all five grades. In 28 years, the edict told the vassals: The state abolished the chancellor, set up the government, ministries, academies, and temples to manage various government affairs, and the legislation was very detailed and perfect.

古文：以后嗣君，其毋得议置丞相。
现代文：以后继位君王，不得提议设置丞相。
English: In the future, the successor to the throne may not propose the establishment of a chancellor.

古文：臣下有奏请设立者，论以极刑。 
现代文：臣下有上奏请求设立的，以死刑论处。 
English: A vassal who has made a request for appeal shall be sentenced to death.

古文：当是时，以翰林、春坊详看诸司奏启，兼司平驳。
现代文：在这个时侯，以翰林、春坊详细阅读各部门奏章，兼及掌管评定驳正是非异议。
English: At this time, it is not objectionable to use Hanlin and Chunfang to read the minutes of each department in detail, as well as to be in charge of evaluation and refutation.

古文：大学士特侍左右，备顾问而已。
现代文：大学士专门随侍左右，备顾问罢了。
English: University graduates are expected to follow their masters around, and only advisers are needed.

古文：建文中，改大学士为学士。
现代文：建文年间，改大学士为学士。
English: During the Kenmon era, the university changed from a bachelor's degree to a bachelor's degree.

古文：成祖即位，特简解缙、胡广、杨荣等直文渊阁，参预机务。
现代文：全部废除各大学士，各设学士一人。又改谨身殿为正心殿，设正，扬学士。成祖即位，特意选择解缙、胡广、杨荣等人值班文渊合，参预机要政务。
English: All university professors were abolished, and one person was appointed as a bachelor. In addition, the hall of honor was changed to the hall of sincerity, and Yang, Yang, Yang, Yang, Yang, Yang, Yang, Yang, Yang, Yang, Yang, Yang, Yang, Yang, Yang, Yang, Yang, Yang, Yang, Yang, Yang, Yang, Yang, Yang, Yang, Yang, Yang, Yang, Yang, Yang, Yang, Yang, Yang, Yang, Yang, Yang, Yang.

古文：阁臣之预务自此始。
现代文：内阁官员参预政务从那时开始。
English: Cabinet officials have been involved in pre-election politics since then.

古文：然其时，入内阁者皆编、检、讲读之官，不置官属，不得专制诸司。
现代文：但那时，进入内阁的人都是编修、检校、讲读之官，不设置下属，不能够独断专擅各部门事务。
English: But at that time, the people who entered the cabinet were all editors, inspectors, and lecturers, without subordinates, and could not arbitrarily monopolize the affairs of each department.

古文：诸司奏事，亦不得相关白。
现代文：各部门上奏事宜，也不能够互相通报。
English: Departments are also unable to inform each other of matters that have been reported.

古文：仁宗以杨士奇、杨荣东宫旧臣，升士奇为礼部侍郎兼华盖殿大学士，荣为太常卿兼谨身殿大学士，阁职渐崇。
现代文：仁宗因为杨士奇、杨荣是东宫旧臣，升迁杨士奇为礼部侍郎兼华盖殿大学士，杨荣为太常卿兼谨身殿大学士，谨身殿大学士，仁宗时纔设置，内阁职位日渐尊崇。
English: Because Yang Shichi and Yang Rong were former vassals of the East Palace, Nanzong promoted Yang Shichi to the position of ceremonial attendant and scholar of the Huagai Hall, Yang Rong to the position of grand secretary and scholar of the Nanzong Hall, and the Nanzong Hall was set up, and the cabinet position was increasingly respected.

古文：其后士奇、荣等皆迁尚书职，虽居内阁，官必以尚书为尊。
现代文：此后杨士奇、杨荣等人都升迁为尚书之职，即使身居内阁，官位一定以尚书为尊贵。
English: Since then, Yang Shiji, Yang Rong and others have been promoted to the post of Shangshu. Even if they are in the cabinet, the official rank must be distinguished by Shangshu.

古文：景泰中，王文始以左都御史进吏部尚书，入内阁。
现代文：景泰年间，王文开始从左都御史升为吏部尚书，进入内阁。
English: During the reign of King Gyeongtae, Wang Wen was promoted from the Left Metropolitan Governor to the Secretary of the Ministry of Civil Service and entered the cabinet.

古文：自后，诰敕房、制敕房俱设中书舍人，六部承奉意旨，靡所不领，而阁权益重。
现代文：自那以后，诰敕房、制敕房都设置中书舍人，六部承奉意旨，无所不管，而内阁权力日渐加强。
English: Since then, the office of the prime minister and the office of the prime minister have both been set up by the central government, and the six ministries have obeyed the will of the central government, regardless of everything, and the power of the cabinet has gradually strengthened.

古文：世宗时，三殿成，改华盖为中极，谨身为建极，阁衔因之。
现代文：世宗年间，三殿建成，改华盖殿为中极殿，谨身殿为建极殿，内阁名衔也随之改动。
English: During the reign of King Sejong, the third hall was completed, and the Hall of Glory was changed to the Hall of the Middle Pole, and the Hall of Respect was changed to the Hall of the Supreme Pole, and the title of the cabinet was also changed.

古文：嘉靖以后，朝位班次，俱列六部之上。
现代文：嘉靖以后，他们在朝廷上的位置，品级排列的次序，都列在六部尚书之上。
English: After Jiajing, their positions in the imperial court and the order of their ranks are listed in the top six Shangshu.

古文：吏部。尚书一人，左、右侍郎各一人。
现代文：吏部，尚书一人，正二品，左、右侍郎各一人，正三品。
English: The head clerk, one courtier, two maids of honor, one left and one right footman, three maids of honor.

古文：其属，司务厅，司务二人，文选、验封、稽勋、考功四清吏司，各郎中一人，员外郎一人，主事一人，
现代文：它的属官，司务厅，司务二人，从九品。文选、验封、稽勋、考功四个清吏司，各有郎中一人，正五品，员外郎一人，从五品，主事一人，正六品。
English: Its subordinate officials, the administrative department, two administrative officers, from nine prizes. The selection of documents, the inspection of seals, the examination of honors, and the examination of merits, four officials, each with one junior official, five prizes, one junior official, from five prizes, one supervisor, six prizes.

古文：尚书，掌天下官吏选授、封勋、考课之政令，以甄别人才，赞天子治。
现代文：送武三十一年增设文选司主事一人。互筮十一年增设考功司主事一人。尚书掌管天下官吏的选拔授予、封赏勋爵、考核政绩的政令，以甄别人才，辅佐天子治国。
English: In the 31st year of the reign of Emperor Wu, an additional person was appointed as the chief of the literary selection office. In the 11th year of the reign of Emperor Wu, an additional person was appointed as the chief of the merit examination office. Shangshu was in charge of the selection and awarding of officials around the world, the awarding of honors, and the evaluation of government performance, in order to screen other talents and assist Tianzi in governing the country.

古文：盖古冢宰之职，视五部为特重。
现代文：实在是古冢宰职务，比其它五部犹为重要。
English: In fact, it is the ancient magistrate's post, which is still more important than the other five.

古文：侍郎为之贰。
现代文：侍郎是他的副手。
English: The chamberlain is his second in command.

古文：司务，掌催督、稽缓、勾销、簿书。
现代文：司务掌管催促督察、稽查延误、注销、登记官署文书。
English: The clerk is in charge of inspectors, inspection delays, cancellations, and registrar's office paperwork.

古文：文选，掌官吏班秩迁升、改调之事，以赞尚书。
现代文：文选掌管官吏位次等级的升迁、改调之事，以辅佐尚书。
English: An anthology of essays dealing with the promotion and transfer of lower-ranking officials, with the assistance of Shang Shu.

古文：凡文官之品九，品有正从，为级一十八。
现代文：所有文官的品第有九品，每品有芷从二种，共为十八级。
English: There are nine grades for all civil servants, with two grades for each grade, for a total of eighteen grades.

古文：不及九品曰未入流。
现代文：不到九品称为未入流。
English: Less than nine items are said to have not entered the stream.

古文：凡选，每岁有大选，有急选，有远方选，有岁贡就教选，间有拣选，有举人乞恩选。
现代文：所有的选拔，每年有大选，有急选，有远方选，有岁贡就教选，问或还有拣选，有举人乞恩选。
English: All the selections, every year there is a general election, there is a primary election, there is a distant election, there is a year-end tribute election, there is a question election, there is a petition election.

古文：选人或登资簿，厘其流品，平其铨注，而序迁之。
现代文：当选人都登记在簿册，分清他们的品级，评定他们的资历成绩按次序升迁。
English: The elected are registered in the register, their ranks are distinguished, their qualifications and achievements are evaluated, and they are promoted in order.

古文：凡升必考满，若员缺当补，不待考满，曰推升。
现代文：所有升迁必须任职期满，如果有缺员需要补充，不等到考任职期满。称为推升。
English: All promotions must be at the end of the term of office. If there is a vacancy that needs to be filled, do not wait until the end of the term of office. It is called a promotion.

古文：类推上一人，单推上二人。
现代文：类推推上一人，单推推上二人。
English: Push up one person by analogy, push up two people one by one.

古文：三品以上，九卿及佥都御史、祭酒，廷推上二人或三人。
现代文：三品以上，九卿及翕都御史、祭酒，廷推推上二人或三人。
English: If there are more than three dishes, then the nine nobles and the imperial eunuchs, the sacrificial wine, and two or three courtiers are recommended.

古文：内阁，吏、兵二部尚书，廷推上二人。
现代文：内阁，吏、兵二部尚书，廷推推上二人。
English: The cabinet, officials, and soldiers were divided into two groups, and the imperial court put forward two people.

古文：凡王官不外调，王姻不内除，大臣之族不得任科道，僚属同族则以下避上。
现代文：所有朝廷官员不从京外调入，王室姻亲不授内廷职位，大臣族亲不得任职科道官，僚属中有同族便以下避上。
English: All officials of the imperial court are not transferred from outside Beijing, royal relatives by marriage are not given positions in the inner court, relatives of ministers are not allowed to hold the post of science and technology officer, and there are members of the same family in the peerage, so they are avoided.

古文：外官才地不相宜，则酌其繁简互换之。
现代文：外官才干与地方不相适应，便斟酌地方的繁简互相调换。
English: If the talents of foreign officials are not compatible with the local conditions, they will be exchanged according to the local complex and simple.

古文：有传升、乞升者，并得执奏。
现代文：有传升、乞升的，一并上奏。
English: If there is a passer-up or a beggar-up, it is played together.

古文：以署职、试职、实授奠年资，以开设、裁并、兼摄适繁简，以荐举、起废、征召振幽滞，以带俸、添注寄恩冗，以降调、除名驭罪过，以官程督吏治，以宁假悉人情。
现代文：按代理官职、试用官职、实授官职定年资，以开设、裁并、兼摄适应繁简，以荐举、起废、征召举拔隐士遗贤，以带俸、添注寄托恩宠和冗余，以降调、除名控制罪过，以赴任里程督促吏治，以省亲休假体贴人情。
English: According to the acting official position, probationary official position, and actual award official position, the length of service is fixed, with the opening, merging, and simultaneous shooting to adapt to the complex and simple, with the recommendation, cancellation, and recruitment of the hermit, with the salary, the additional note, the grace and redundancy, the downgrading, and the removal of the name to control the crime, with the appointment mileage to supervise the officials, and with the parental leave to be considerate.

古文：验封，掌封爵、袭荫、褒赠、吏算之事，以赞尚书。
现代文：验封掌管封赏爵位、世袭祖荫、褒奖封赠、官吏数目的政务，以辅佐尚书。
English: The seal inspection is in charge of the government affairs of awarding titles, hereditary ancestors, award seals, and the number of officials, with the assistance of Shangshu.

古文：凡爵非社稷军功不得封，封号非特旨不得与。
现代文：所有爵位非社稷军功不得封赠，封号非特旨不得赠予。
English: All titles of nobility that are not conferred for military merit shall not be conferred, and titles of nobility that are not conferred for special merit shall not be conferred.

古文：或世或不世，皆给诰券。
现代文：或者世袭，或者不能世袭，都要颁发诰券。
English: Whether hereditary or non-hereditary, vouchers must be issued.

古文：衍圣公及戚里恩泽封，不给券。
现代文：衍圣公以及外戚承恩泽受封，不颁发诰券。
English: Yan Sheng Gong and his maternal relative were awarded the title by virtue of their benevolence, but no certificates were issued.

古文：凡券，左右各一，左藏内府，右给功臣之家。
现代文：所有诰券，左右各一份，左诰券收藏于内府，右诰券颁发给功臣之家。
English: All vouchers, left and right one each, the left vouchers are collected in Nefu, and the right vouchers are awarded to the families of meritorious soldiers.

古文：袭封则征其诰券，稽其功过，核其宗支，以第其世流降除之等。
现代文：从五品之子，用为从九品。正六品之子，于未入流中之上等职内叙用。
English: The children of 5th-grade students are classified as 9th-grade students, and the children of 6th-grade students are classified as middle- and higher-grade students.

古文：土官则勘其应袭与否，移文选司注拟。
现代文：从六品之子，于未入流中之中等职内叔用。
English: From the son of Roppon, it was used by middle-ranking uncles who did not enter the stream.

古文：凡荫叙，明初，自一品至七品，皆得荫一子以世其禄。后乃渐为限制，京官三品以上，考满著绩，始荫一子曰官生，其出自特恩者曰恩生。
现代文：正从七品之子，于未入流中之下等职叔用。以后纔渐渐受到限制，京官三品以上，任职期满考核成绩显著，纔荫一子称为官生，出自特别恩赐的称为恩生。
English: It was used from the seventh grade of sons to the middle and lower grade of uncles who did not join the stream. Later, it was gradually restricted, the Beijing officials were three grades or more, and the examination results at the end of the term of office were significant. The first son of Jinyin was called the official student, and the one who came from the special gift was called the grace student.

古文：凡封赠，公、侯、伯之追封，皆递进一等。
现代文：所有封赠，公、侯、伯的追封，都递进一等。
English: All of the gifts of the imperial seal, and the subsequent seals of dukes, lords, and councillors, were successively promoted to the first class.

古文：三品以上政绩显异及死谏、死节、阵亡者，皆得赠官。
现代文：三品以上政绩特别显著及死谏、死节、阵亡的，都得以追赠。
English: Those with three or more special prizes for outstanding political achievements, and those who died in battle, were given posthumous awards.

古文：其见任则初授散阶，京官满一考，及外官满一考而以最闻者，皆给本身诰敕。
现代文：被任用便起初授以散官品衔，京官满一任，以及外官满一任而以政声最好的，都授予本身诰敕。
English: When he was appointed, he was initially given the rank of San official, and when he completed his term as Beijing official, as well as when he completed his term as foreign official and had the best political reputation, he was awarded his own gong.

古文：七品以上皆得推恩其先。
现代文：七品以上都可以推恩于他的祖：先。
English: More than seven prizes can be attributed to his ancestor: Sen.

古文：五品以上授诰命，六品以下授敕命。
现代文：一品轴用玉，二品轴用犀，三品、四品轴用鋈金，五品以下轴用角。
English: One-grade shaft with beads, two-grade shaft with rhinestones, three-grade, four-grade shaft with sheet metal, five-grade shaft with angles.

古文：曾祖、祖、父皆如其子孙官。
现代文：曾祖、祖父、父亲都和他们子孙的官位一样。
English: Great-grandfathers, grandfathers and fathers have the same official rank as their children and grandchildren.

古文：公、侯、伯视一品。
现代文：公、侯、伯比照一品。
English: A dish for the prince, the lord and the lord's brother.

古文：外内命妇视夫若子之品。
现代文：外内受封号的妇女比照她们的丈夫或儿子的官位。
English: Women who are given the title compare it to the official rank of their husband or son.

古文：生曰封，死曰赠。
现代文：生前称封，去世称赠。
English: He was given the title during his lifetime, and it was given to him as a gift after his death.

古文：若先有罪谴则停给。
现代文：四品称恭人。五品称宜人。
English: Four dishes are said to be "decent," and five dishes are said to be "pleasant."

古文：文之散阶四十有二，以历考为差。
现代文：六品称安人。
English: Six prizes were awarded to the winners.

古文：外命妇之号九。因其子孙封者，加太字，夫在则否。
现代文：七品称孺人。凭借子孙受封的，加太字，丈夫在世则不加太。
English: Those who were given the title by virtue of their children and grandchildren were given the title of daijin, while those whose husbands were still alive were not.

古文：凡封赠之次，七品至六品一次，五品一次，三品、二品、一品各一次。
现代文：所有封赠次数，七品至六品一次，五品一次，初制有四品一次，后省去，三品、二品、一品各一次。
English: Of the total number of times the seals were awarded, seven to six items were awarded once, five items were awarded once, four items were initially awarded once, and then omitted, three items, two items and one item were awarded once.

古文：三母不并封，两封从优品。
现代文：三个母辈不同时受封，两次封赠就依从高的品级。
English: The three matriarchs do not receive the seal at the same time, and the two seal gifts are based on the highest grade.

古文：父职高于子，则进一阶。
现代文：父亲职务高于儿子，便升一级。
English: If the father's position is higher than the son's, he will be promoted to the next level.

古文：父应停给及子为人后者，皆得移封。
现代文：父亲应当停给，儿子遇继给别人作后嗣，都可以转封。
English: The father should stop giving it, and if the son gives it to someone else as an heir, it can all be turned over.

古文：嫡在不封生母，生母未封不先封其妻。
现代文：嫡母在世，不封生母，生母未封，不能先封其妻。
English: If the legitimate mother is alive, the birth mother is not sealed, and if the birth mother is not sealed, the wife cannot be sealed first.

古文：妻之封，止于一嫡一继。
现代文：妻室的封赠，仅限于一个嫡妻一个继妻。
English: A wife's gift of the imperial seal is limited to one legitimate wife and one step-wife.

古文：其封赠后而以墨败者，则追夺。
现代文：从二品，正治卿。正三品，资治尹。
English: From the second grade, Shoji Chie. From the third grade, Kazuchika.

古文：稽勋，掌勋级、名籍、丧养之事，以赞尚书。
现代文：从三品，资治少尹。正四品，赞治尹。从四品，赞治少尹。
English: From the third grade, Zizhi Shao Yin. From the fourth grade, Zanzhi Yin. From the fourth grade, Zanzhi Shao Yin.

古文：凡文勋十。
现代文：正五品，修正庶尹。
English: He was given the official title of Fifth Rank, and his posthumous name was changed to Zeng Yin.

古文：自五品以上，历再考，乃授勋。
现代文：从五品，协正庶尹。从五品以上，经过两次考绩，纔能授勋。
English: From the fifth grade and above, after two performance appraisals, he can be awarded.

古文：凡百官迁除、降调皆开写年甲、乡贯、出身。
现代文：所有官员的升迁除授、降职调用都要出具写有登科年岁、籍贯、中选资格的文书。
English: All officials who are promoted, removed, or demoted must submit a document showing the year they entered the university, their place of origin, and their qualifications for being selected.

古文：每岁十二月贴黄，春秋清黄，皆赴内府。
现代文：每年十二月贴黄，春秋雨季清黄，都到内府。
English: Every year, yellow stickers in December and clear yellow stickers in the rainy season of spring and autumn are sent to Neifu.

古文：有故，揭而去之。
现代文：有去世的，便揭黄除名。
English: Those who died were stripped of their titles.

古文：凡父母年七十，无兄弟，得归养。
现代文：凡是父母年满七十，无兄弟，可以退休归家供养。
English: All parents who have reached the age of seventy and have no brothers may retire and return home to provide for their families.

古文：凡三年丧，解职守制，纠擿其夺丧、匿丧、短丧者。
现代文：凡为父母守丧三年，解职回乡守孝，查处那些丧期未满而做官、隐瞒丧事、居丧不足时间的官员。
English: All officials who have been mourning for their parents for three years and have been relieved of their duties to return to their hometowns to mourn, and investigate and punish those officials who have not completed the mourning period, conceal the mourning, and stay in mourning for insufficient time.

古文：惟钦天监官奔丧三月复任。
现代文：只有钦天监官，奔丧三个月后复任。
English: Only Supervisor Qintian was reinstated three months after his death.

古文：考功，掌官吏考课、黜陟之事，以赞尚书。
现代文：考功掌管官吏考核、升迁黜退的政务，以辅佐尚书。
English: Gao Gong was in charge of the examination of officials, promotion and retirement of government affairs, assisted by Shang Shu.

古文：凡内外官给由，三年初考，六年再考，并引请，九年通考，奏请综其称职、平常、不称职而陟黜之。
现代文：所有内外官员一经任用，三年初考，六年再考，并自请九年通考，奏请综合其称职、平常、不称职而决定升降。
English: As soon as they are appointed, all officials at home and abroad should take a three-year preliminary examination, a six-year re-examination, and a nine-year general examination at their own request. They should be asked to combine their competent, ordinary, and incompetent and decide to be promoted or demoted.

古文：陟无过二等，降无过三等，其甚者黜之、罪之。
现代文：升职不超过二等，降职不超过三等，情节严重的便罢免、处罪。
English: If the promotion does not exceed the second grade, and the demotion does not exceed the third grade, if the circumstances are serious, they will be dismissed and punished.

古文：京官六年一察，察以巳、亥年。
现代文：京官每六年考察一次，考察在巳、亥年。
English: Officials from Beijing inspect it once every six years, in the years of the Snake and the Boar.

古文：五品下考察其不职者，降罚有差；四品上自陈，去留取旨。
现代文：五品以下考察其不称职的，降罚有等差；四品以上自行述职，去留取决于皇上的旨意。
English: Those with five or fewer pins who are found to be incompetent will have their punishment reduced by an equal amount; those with four or more pins will report for duty on their own, and their departure will depend on the emperor's will.

古文：外官三年一朝，朝以辰、戌、丑、未年。
现代文：外官每三年朝见一次，朝见在辰、戌、丑、未年。
English: Foreign ministers meet in the morning once every three years, and the meetings take place in the morning, afternoon, evening, and in the new year.

古文：前期移抚、按官，各综其属三年内功过状注考，汇送覆核以定黜陟。
现代文：事先移交抚、按官，各自综合其属吏三年内的功遇情况备考，汇总上报经复核后决定升降。
English: The officials to be promoted and demoted shall be transferred in advance, and the merits of their subordinate officials within three years shall be comprehensively reviewed, and the promotion and demotion shall be decided after the summary is reported and reviewed.

古文：仓场库官一年考，巡检三年考，教官九年考。
现代文：仓场库官辱年考察一次，巡检每三年考察一次，教官每九年考察一次。
English: The warehouse is inspected once a year, the inspection once every three years, and the instructor is inspected once every nine years.

古文：府州县官之考，以地之繁简为差。
现代文：府州县官的考察，按辖地政务的繁简情况有等差。
English: According to the survey of prefectural and county officials, there is a disparity in the simplification of government affairs according to the jurisdiction.

古文：吏之考，三、六年满，移验封司拨用。
现代文：属吏的考核，三、六年满，移交验封司调拨使用。
English: After three to six years have passed, the appraisal of subordinate officials will be transferred to the Sealing Inspection Division for allocation and use.

古文：九年满，又试授官。
现代文：九年满，又试着授官。
English: At the end of nine years, he tried to be promoted again.

古文：惟王官及钦天、御用等监官不考。
现代文：只有王官及钦天、御用等内监官员不必考察。
English: Only the royal officials and the supervisors of the Ministry of the Interior such as the Qintian and the Goyang do not have to inspect.

古文：凡内外官弹章，稽其功过，拟去留以请上裁。
现代文：所有内外官员弹劾奏章，考察其功过，拟定去留意见以请示皇上裁定。
English: All officials at home and abroad should write an impeachment report, examine their achievements, and prepare to leave comments to request the emperor's ruling.

古文：荐举、保留，则核其政绩旌异焉。
现代文：有举荐、留用，则核实其政绩表彰突出之士。
English: If there is a recommendation or retention, it will be verified that their political achievements are outstanding.

古文：明初，设四部于中书省，分掌钱谷礼仪、刑名、营造之务。
现代文：明朝初年，在中书省设四部，分管财政、礼仪、刑罚、建造的政务。
English: In the first year of the Ming Dynasty, four departments were set up in the Ministry of Literature and Calligraphy, in charge of finance, etiquette, criminal punishment, and construction.

古文：洪武元年始置吏、户、礼、兵、刑、工六部，设尚书、侍郎、郎中、员外郎、主事，仍隶中书省。
现代文：洪武元年，开始设置吏、户、礼、兵、刑、工六部，设尚书、侍郎、郎中、员外郎、主事，尚书正三品，侍郎正四品，郎中正五品，员外郎正六品，主事正七品，仍然隶属于中书省。
English: In the first year of Hongwu, it began to set up six departments of officials, households, etiquette, soldiers, punishment, and work, and set up Shangshu, Zhilang, Langzhong, Zhanwai Zhilang, and Shujie. Shangshu was the third grade, Zhilang was the fourth grade, Langzhong was the fifth grade, Zhilang was the sixth grade, and Shujie was the seventh grade. It still belonged to the Ministry of Literature.

古文：六年，部设尚书二人，侍郎二人。
现代文：六年，各部设尚书二人，侍郎二人。
English: In six years, there were two shojo and two waiters in each department.

古文：吏部设总部、司勋、考功三属部，部设郎中、员外郎各一人，主事各二人。
现代文：吏部设总部、司勋、考功三个属部，各属部设郎中、员外良各一人，主事各二人。
English: The Personnel Department has three subordinate departments: the Headquarters, the Division of Merit, and the Evaluation of Merit. Each subordinate department has one junior member, one senior member, and two supervisors.

古文：十三年，罢中书省，仿《周官》六卿之制，升六部秩，各设尚书、侍郎一人。
现代文：十三年，废中书省，仿效《周官》六卿的制度，提高六部官阶，各设尚书、侍郎一人。
English: In the thirteenth year, the Central Book Ministry was abolished, and the six official ranks were raised in imitation of the system of the six nobles in "Zhou Guan," with each department having its own official book and one attendant.

古文：每部分四属部，吏部属部加司封。
现代文：只有户部侍郎为二人。每部分置四个属部，吏部的属部增加司封。
English: There were only two household attendants. Four subordinate departments were placed in each section, and the subordinate department of the personnel department increased the number of officials.

古文：每属部设郎中、员外郎、主事各一人，寻增侍郎一人。
现代文：每个属部设郎中、员外郎、主事各一人，不久增设侍郎一人。
English: In each subordinate department, there was one assistant, junior assistant, and supervisor, and soon one assistant was added.

古文：二十二年，改总部为选部。
现代文：二十二年，改总部为选部。
English: In 1922, the head office was transformed into a sorting office.

古文：二十九年，定为文选、验封、稽勋、考功四司并五部属，皆称清吏司。
现代文：二十九年，定为文选、验封、稽勋、考功四司和五部属，都称作清吏司。
English: In 1929, it was determined that the four and five departments of selection, seal inspection, examination of merit, and examination of merit would be called the Qingli Division.

古文：建文中，改六部尚书为正一品，设左、右侍中，位侍郎上，除去诸司清吏字。
现代文：建文年间，改六部尚书为正一品，设左、右侍中正二品，位于侍郎之上，废除各司清吏字样。
English: During the Kenmon era, the six Sho books were changed to Sho-ippin, and two Sho-ippin were set up for the left and right attendants, one above the attendant, and the words Seiri for each division were abolished.

古文：成祖初，悉复旧制。
现代文：吏、户、礼、兵、工五曹，郎中、员外郎、主事各一人。
English: In the first year of Chengzu, they all resumed the old system.

古文：永乐元年，以北平为北京，置北京行部尚书二人，侍郎四人，其属置六曹清吏司。后又分置六部，各称行在某部。
现代文：刑曹，郎中一人，员外郎一人，主事四人，照磨、检校各一人，司狱一人。不久户曹也增设主事三人。后来又分别设置六部，各称行在某部。
English: There was a chastising sergeant, a junior sergeant, a second sergeant, four supervisors, a polisher, a school inspector, and a prison warden. Soon, three supervisors were added to the household sergeant. Later, six departments were set up separately, each called a department.

古文：十八年定都北京，罢行部及六曹，以六部官属移之北，不称行在。
现代文：十八年，定都北京，废除行部及六曹，把六部官属迁移到北京，不称行在。
English: In the 18th year, Beijing was designated as the capital, and the line ministries and six departments were abolished, and the subordinates of the six ministries were relocated to Beijing.

古文：其留南京者，加 南京 字。
现代文：其中留在南京的，加 南京 字样。
English: Among them, the one left in Nanjing, with the word "Nanjing," is the best.

古文：洪熙元年，复置各部官属于南京，去 南京 字，而以在北京者加 行在 字，仍置行部。
现代文：洪熙元年，在南京复置各部官员，去掉 南京 字样，而以在北京的官员加 行在 字样，仍置行部。
English: In the first year of Hongxi, the officials of various ministries were resettled in Nanjing, and the word "Nanjing" was removed, while the officials in Beijing were added to the words "in" and the ministry was still placed.

古文：宣德三年复罢行部。
现代文：宣德三年，又废除行部。
English: Xuande three years, and the abolition of the line.

古文：正统六年，于北京去 行在 字，于南京仍加 南京 字，遂为定制。
现代文：正统六年，在北京上面去掉 行在 字样，在南京上面仍加 南京 字样，由此成为定制。
English: After six years of orthodoxy, the words "行在" were removed from the top of Beijing, and the words "Nanjing" were still added to the top of Nanjing, thus becoming a custom.

古文：景泰中，吏部尝设二尚书。
现代文：景泰年间，吏部曹经设置两个尚书。
English: During the reign of King Gyeongtae, two imperial rescripts were set up by Cao Jing.

古文：天顺初，复罢其一。
现代文：天顺初年，又废除其中一个。
English: In the first year of Tianshun, one of them was abolished.

古文：按吏部尚书，表率百僚，进退庶官，铨衡重地，其礼数殊异，无与并者。
现代文：按吏部尚书，督率百官，升黜众官，吏部是选拔官吏的重要部门，其礼数特殊，没有与之并列的。
English: According to the records of the Ministry of Civil Service, the Ministry of Civil Service supervises hundreds of officials and promotes all officials. The Ministry of Civil Service is an important department for selecting officials. Its number of honors is special and is not ranked alongside it.

古文：永乐初，选翰林官入直内阁。
现代文：永乐初年，选拔翰林官入内阁值班。
English: In the first year of Yongle, Han Lin was selected to join the cabinet.

古文：其后大学士杨士奇等加至三孤，兼尚书衔，然品叙列尚书蹇义、夏原吉下。
现代文：其后大学士杨士奇等加官至三孤，兼领尚书头衔，但品级次序位列尚书蹇义、夏原吉之下。
English: Later, university scholar Yang Shichi and others were promoted to Sanguo, and also received the title of Shangshu, but the grade order ranked below Shangshu Xinyi and Xia Yuanji.

古文：景泰中，左都御史王文升吏部尚书，兼学士，入内阁，其班位犹以原衔为序次。
现代文：景泰年间，左都御史王文升任吏部尚书，兼领学士，入内阁，他的朝见班位还是以原先官衔为序次。
English: During the reign of King Jingtai, Wang Wen, the governor of the Left Capital, was promoted to the post of secretary of the personnel department, and also received a bachelor's degree, and entered the cabinet. His position at the imperial court was still in the order of his original title.

古文：自弘治六年二月，内宴，大学士丘濬遂以太子太保、礼部尚书，居太子太保、吏部尚书王恕之上。
现代文：自弘治六年二月，内廷宴请，大学士丘浚就以太子太保、礼部尚书，位于太子太保、吏部尚书王恕之上。
English: In February of the sixth year of the reign of Emperor Hongzhi, at a banquet held by the Inner Court, the university scholar Qiu Jun was named the ethereal son of the eunuch, and the etiquette of the eunuch was placed above the ethereal son of the eunuch and the eunuch of the eunuch.

古文：尚书一人，左、右侍郎各一人，其属，司务厅，司务二人，浙江、江西、湖广、陕西、广东、山东、福建、河南、山西、四川、广西、贵州、云南十三清吏司，各郎中一人。员外郎一人，主事二人，照磨所，照磨一人，检校一人，所辖，宝钞提举司，提举一人，副提举一人。
现代文：其后由侍郎、詹事进入内阁的，班位都列于六部之上了。户部，尚书一人，正二品，左、右侍郎各一人，正三品。其下属，司务厅，司务二人，从九品。浙江、江西、湖广、陕西、广东、山东、福建、河南、山西、四川、广西、贵州、云南十三清吏司，各有郎中一人，正五品。童德以后增设山西司郎中三人，堕亟、贵州、台直三司郎中各二人，山东司郎中一人。
English: After that, those who entered the cabinet as chamberlains and officials were ranked in the top six departments. The household department, Shangshu (尚書) one, was ranked second, the left and right chamberlains one each, were ranked third. Its subordinates, the administrative department, had two clerks, from nine departments. Zhejiang, Jiangxi, Hunan, Shaanxi, Guangdong, Shandong, Fujian, Henan, Shanxi, Sichuan, Guangxi, Guizhou, and Yunnan had thirteen Qing officials, each with one vice-minister and five vice-ministers. After Tongde, three vice-ministers from Shanxi were added, two vice-minister

古文：典史一人，钞纸局，大使、副使各一人，印钞局，大使、副使各一人，宝钞广惠库，大使一人，副使二人，广积库，大使一人，副使一人，典史一人，赃罚库，大使一人，副使二人，甲字、乙字、丙字、丁字、戊字库，大使五人，副使六人，广盈库，大使一人，副使二人。
现代文：丁字库二人，嘉靖年间革除一人，并革除乙字、戊字二库副使。广盈库，大使一人，从九品，副使二人，嘉靖年间革除。外承运库，大使二人，正九品，副使二人，从九品。
English: Two people from the T-category warehouse were dismissed in the Jiajing era, and one person was dismissed from the B-category warehouse and two people from the E-category warehouse. One ambassador from the Guangying warehouse was dismissed from the Jiuping era, and two vice-ambassadors were dismissed from the Jiuping era. Two ambassadors from the foreign carrier warehouse were dismissed from the Zhengzhou era, and two vice-ambassadors were dismissed from the Jiuping era.

古文：外承运库，大使二人，副使二人，承运库，大使一人，副使一人。
现代文：后来大使、副使都被革除。承运库，大使一人，正九品，副使一人，从九品，嘉靖年间革除。
English: Later, both the ambassador and the deputy envoy were dismissed. The carrier depot, one ambassador, was dismissed during the Jiuping era, and one deputy envoy was dismissed from the Jiuping era.

古文：行用库，大使、副使各一人，太仓银库，大使、副使各一人。
现代文：行用库，大使、副使各一人，后来都被革除。太仓银库，大使、副使各一人，嘉靖年间，革除副使。
English: The Bank of Taicang, the ambassador, and the vice-envoy were each expelled, and the vice-envoy was expelled from the Bank of Taicang during the Jiajing period.

古文：御马仓，大使一人，副使一人。
现代文：御马仓，大使一人，从九品，副使一人。
English: Omakura, one ambassador, nine ministers, one vice-envoy.

古文：军储仓，大使一人，副使一人，长安、东安、西安、北安门仓，各副使一人，张家湾盐仓检校批验所，大使、副使各一人。
现代文：军储仓，大使一人，从九品，副使一人，后来大使、副使都被革除。长安、东安、西安、北安门仓，各有副使一人，东安门仓从前有二人，万历八年革除一人。张家湾盐仓检校批验所，大使、副使各一人，隆庆六年都革除。
English: Chang'an, Dong'an, Xi'an and Bei'an gate warehouses each had one deputy envoy, Dong'an gate warehouse previously had two, and one person was expelled in the eighth year of Wanli. Zhangjiagang salt warehouse inspection station, ambassador and deputy envoy were each expelled in the sixth year of Longqing.

古文：尚书，掌天下户口、田赋之政令。
现代文：尚书掌管天下户籍人口、土地赋税的政令。
English: Shangshu issued a decree to control the world's registered population and land taxation.

古文：侍郎贰之。
现代文：侍郎辅佐他。
English: He is assisted by a chamberlain.

古文：稽版籍、岁会、赋役实征之数，以下所司。
现代文：核察户口册、一年收支的总核、赋税劳役实际征收的数目，下达到所属部门。
English: The verification of the household registration book, the total verification of the annual income and expenditure, and the number of taxes and labor actually levied are up to the department.

古文：十年攒黄册，差其户上下畸零之等，以周知其登耗。
现代文：每十年收聚户口册簿，区别户口上下零余之数的等级，以便全面了解增减情况。
English: Every ten years, the household registration book is collected, and the grades of the remaining zeros in the household registration are distinguished, so as to comprehensively understand the increase and decrease.

古文：凡田土之侵占、投献、诡寄、影射有禁，人户之隐漏、逃亡、朋充、花分有禁，继嗣、婚姻不如令有禁。
现代文：所有田土的侵占、赠送、把自己的土地寄托在他人身上以逃税、蒙混差役都禁止，人口的隐瞒漏报、逃亡、合伙蒙混冒充、参杂分立户口都禁止，继嗣、婚姻不按法令的禁止。
English: All land usurpation, gifting, and entrusting one's land to others for tax evasion and misappropriation are prohibited; population concealment and underreporting, escape, partnership and misappropriation, and the establishment of household registration are prohibited; and inheritance and marriage are prohibited in accordance with the law.

古文：条为四科：曰民科，主所属省府州县地理、人物、图志、古今沿革、山川险易、土地肥瘠宽狭、户口物产多寡登耗之数；曰度支，主会计夏税、秋粮、存留、起运及赏赉、禄秩之经费；曰金科，主市舶、鱼盐、茶钞税课，及赃罚之收折；曰仓科，主漕运、军储出纳料粮。
现代文：贵州司带管上林苑监，宝钞提举司，都税司，正阳门、张家湾各宣课司，德胜门、安定门各税课司，崇文门分司，在京济州、会州、富峪三卫，及蓟州、永平、密云、昌平、易州各镇，临清、许墅、九江、淮安、北新、扬州、河西务各钞关。条分为四科：一是民科，负责所属省府州县地理、人物、图志、古今沿革、山川险峻平易、土地肥瘠宽窄、户口物产多少及增加损耗的数目；一是度交，负责总计夏税、秋粮、存留、起运及赏赐、俸禄的经费；一是金科，负责海外贸易、鱼盐、茶钞的税收，以及收赃处罚的收折；一是仓科，负责漕运、军队储备出纳草料粮食。
English: The Guizhou Division is in charge of the Shanglin Garden Supervisor, the Treasure Banknote Issuing Division, the Capital Tax Division, the Zhengyangmen and Zhangjiayuan Issuing Division, the Deshengmen and Stabilitymen Tax Division, the Chongwenmen Sub-Division, and the Beijing-Jizhou, Huizhou, Fuzhou-Sanwei, and Zhangzhou, Yongping, Miyun, Changping, and Yizhou Towns, and the Linqing, Xu Villa, Jiujiang, Huai'an, Beixin, Yangzhou, and Hexi Banknote Issuing Divisions. The section is divided into four subjects: the first is the

古文：凡差三等，由吏部选授曰注差，疏名上请曰题差，劄委曰部差。
现代文：所有差吏有三等，由吏部选授称注差，上疏题名请准称题差，奏札委任称部差。
English: All officers are of the third class. The officers' department selects and awards the title of "Inspector," the title of "Superintendent" is the title of "Inspector," and the title of "Deputy" is assigned by the "Record Card."

古文：或三年，或一年，或三月而代。
现代文：有的三年，有的一年，有的三个月就替换。
English: Sometimes it takes three years, sometimes a year, sometimes three months.

古文：初，洪武元年置户部。
现代文：起初，洪武元年设置户部。
English: At first, the household department was set up in the first year of Hongwu.

古文：六年，设尚书二人，侍郎二人。
现代文：六年，设尚书二人，侍郎二人。
English: Six years later, there were two shojo and two waiters.

古文：分为五科：一科，二科，三科，四科，总科。
现代文：分为五科：一科，二科，三科，四科，总科。
English: It is divided into five subjects: first subject, second subject, third subject, fourth subject, and general subject.

古文：每科设郎中、员外郎各一人，主事四人。
现代文：每科设郎中、员外郎各一人，主事四人。
English: For each subject, there will be one assistant professor and one assistant professor, and four supervisors.

古文：惟总科郎中、员外郎各二人，主事五人。
现代文：只有总科郎中、员外郎各二人，主事五人。
English: There are only two chief clerks and two assistant clerks, and five supervisors.

古文：八年，中书省奏户、刑、工三部事繁，户部五科，每科设尚书、侍郎各一人，郎中、员外郎各二人，主事五人，内会总科主事六人，外牵照科主事二人，司计四人，照磨二人，管勾一人。
现代文：八年，中书省上奏户、刑、工三部事务繁多，户部五科，每科设尚书、侍郎各一人，郎中、员外郎各二人，主事五人，内会总科主事六人，外牵照科主事二人，司计四人，照磨二人，管勾一人。
English: In the eighth year, the Department of Chinese Literature and Calligraphy had many affairs in the three departments of calligraphy, calligraphy, and engineering. In the five departments of the department, there was one senior calligrapher and attendant in each department, two junior clerks and two assistant clerks in each department, five supervisors, six supervisors of the general department of the inner association, two supervisors of the external reference department, four treasurers, two polishers, and one supervisor.

古文：又置在京行用库，隶户部。
现代文：又设在京行用库，隶属户部。
English: It is also located in the Beijing Bank's warehouse and is subordinate to the Household Department.

古文：十三年，升部秩，定设尚书一人，侍郎二人。
现代文：设大使一人，副使二人，典史一人，都监二人。十三年，升迁各部官位品级，定下来设尚书一人，侍郎二人。
English: There was one ambassador, two deputy envoys, one historian, and two supervisors of the capital. In 1913, the promotion of the ranks and ranks of each ministry began, and it was decided to set up one secretary and two chamberlains.

古文：分四属部：总部，度支部，金部，仓部。
现代文：分为四个属部：总部，度支部，金部，仓部。
English: It is divided into four subordinate departments: headquarters, provincial branch, gold department and warehouse department.

古文：每部郎中、员外郎各一人。
现代文：每部郎中、员外郎各一人。
English: One roju from each club and one roju from outside the club left.

古文：总部主事四人，度支部、金部主事各三人，仓部主事二人。
现代文：总部主事四人，度支部、金部主事各三人，仓部主事二人。
English: There are four managers at the head office, three managers each at the branch office and the finance department, and two managers at the warehouse.

古文：寻罢在京行用库。
现代文：随即废置在京行用库。
English: It was then disposed of in the bank's vault.

古文：二十二年，改总部为民部。
现代文：二十二年，改总部为民部。
English: In 1922, the headquarters was changed to the Ministry of Civil Affairs.

古文：二十三年，又分四部为河南、北平、山东、山西、陕西、浙江、江西、湖广、广东、广西、四川、福建十二部。
现代文：二十三年，又分四部为河南、北平、山东、山西、陕西、浙江、江西、湖广、广东、广西、四川、福建十二部。
English: In 2003, it was further divided into four parts: Henan, Beiping, Shandong, Shanxi, Shaanxi, Zhejiang, Jiangxi, Hunan, Guangdong, Guangxi, Sichuan and Fujian.

古文：部设郎中、员外郎各一人，主事二人，各领一布政司户口、钱粮等事，量其繁简，带管京畿。
现代文：四川部兼管昼直。各部设郎中、员外郎各一人，主事二人，各掌管一个布政司的户口、钱粮等事，度量政务的繁简，带管京畿。
English: The Sichuan Department is also in charge of day-to-day affairs. Each department has a vice-minister and a deputy vice-minister, and two supervisors, each of whom is in charge of a political secretary's household registration, money and grain, and other matters. They measure the complexity of government affairs and are in charge of Gyeonggi.

古文：每一部内仍分四科管理。
现代文：每一部内仍分四科管理。
English: Each department is still divided into four management disciplines.

古文：又置照磨、检校各一人，稽文书出入之数而程督之。
现代文：十三年废置，到逭一年重新设置，品级焉正八品。
English: Abandoned for 13 years, it was re-established in the following year, and the grade was raised to eight.

古文：十九年，复置宝钞提举司。二十六年，令浙江、江西、苏松人毋得任户部。
现代文：二十六年，下令浙江、江西、苏松人不得任职户部。
English: In 2006, it was decreed that no one from Zhejiang, Jiangxi or Susong could hold a position in the household department.

古文：二十九年，改十二部为十二清吏司。
现代文：二十九年，改十二部为十二清吏司。
English: In 1929, the 12th Division was renamed the 12th Division of Qing Officials.

古文：建文中，仍为四司。
现代文：建文年间，仍为四司。
English: During the Kenmon era, it was still called Shisho.

古文：成祖复旧制。
现代文：其余参见吏部。成祖恢复旧制。
English: Chengzu restored the old system.

古文：永乐元年，改北平司为北京司。
现代文：永乐元年，改北平司马北京司。
English: In the first year of Yongle, it was changed to Beijing Division of Beijing Sima.

古文：十八年，革北京司，设云南、贵州、交阯三清吏司。
现代文：十八年，革除北京司，设云南、贵州、交阢三清吏司。
English: In 18 years, the Beijing Division was abolished, and the Yunnan, Guizhou, and Jiaozuo Sanqing Division was established.

古文：宣德十年，革交阯司，定为十三司。
现代文：宣德十年，革除交阢司，定为十三司。
English: Ten years after the promulgation of the Constitution of the People's Republic of China, the Department of Foreign Affairs was abolished and reorganized into 13 departments.

古文：其后归并职掌。
现代文：其后归并权限职掌。
English: This was followed by the merging of responsibilities.

古文：凡宗室、勋戚、文武官吏之廪禄，陕西司兼领之。
现代文：所有宗室、功勋大臣和外戚、文武官吏的俸梂，由陕西司兼管。
English: All family heirlooms, ministers of meritorious achievement and maternal relatives, and the salaries of civil and military officials are also managed by the Shaanxi Division.

古文：北直隶府州卫所，福建司兼领之。
现代文：北直隶府州卫所，由福建司兼管。
English: Bei Zhi is subordinate to the Fuzhou Health Bureau, which is also managed by the Fujian Division.

古文：南直隶府州卫所，四川司兼领之。
现代文：直童盏府州卫所，由四川司兼管。
English: Jiaodong County Health Bureau, which is also managed by the Sichuan Division.

古文：天下盐课，山东司兼领之。
现代文：全国盐税，由山东司兼管。
English: The national salt tax will also be managed by the Shandong Division.

古文：关税，贵州司兼领之。
现代文：关税，由贵州司兼管。
English: tariffs, which will also be managed by the Guizhou Division.

古文：漕运及临、德诸仓，云南司兼领之。御马、象房诸仓，广西司兼领之。
现代文：后来设判录司，也废除。洪武十三年，置判录司，掌管在京官吏俸禄、公文、印信。设判录一人，正七品；副判二人，从七品。
English: In the thirteenth year of Hongwu, a record clerk was set up to manage the salaries, official documents, and seals of officials in Beijing. One record clerk was set up, with a rank of Senior Seventh Rank, and two assistant record clerks, with a rank of Junior Seventh Rank.

古文：明初，尝置司农司，寻罢后置判录司，亦罢。
现代文：随即改判录焉司正，副判为左、右司副，十八年废除。
English: Subsequently, the award was changed to "Recording Division" and "Director Division," and the sub-awards were changed to "Left Division" and "Right Division" and abolished in 1918.

古文：皆不隶户部。
现代文：都不隶属于户部。
English: All of them are not affiliated with the Household Ministry.

古文：总督仓场一人，掌督在京及通州等处仓场粮储。
现代文：总督仓场一人，掌管督察在京及通州等处的仓场粮食储备。
English: One person, the general manager of the granary, is in charge of inspecting the grain reserves of the granary in Beijing and Tongzhou.

古文：洪武初，置军储仓二十所，各设官司其事。
现代文：洪武初年，设置军储仓二十所，各设官吏主管其事。
English: In the first year of Hongwu, twenty military warehouses were set up, each with its own official in charge.

古文：永乐中，迁都北京，置京仓及通州诸仓，以户部司员经理之。
现代文：永乐年间，迁都北京，设置京仓及通州各仓，由户部官员经营管理。
English: In the Yongle years, the capital was moved to Beijing, and the Beijing warehouse and Tongzhou warehouses were set up, which were operated and managed by the officials of the Household Department.

古文：宣德五年，始命李昶为户部尚书，专督其事，遂为定制。
现代文：宣德五年，开始任命李昶为户部尚书，专门督察这件事，然后成为固定制度。
English: In the fifth year of Xuande, Li Xi was appointed as the head of the household department of Shangshu, specifically to inspect this matter, and then it became a fixed system.

古文：以后，或尚书，或侍郎，俱不治部事。
现代文：以后，或是尚书，或是侍郎，都不管理本部事务。
English: From then on, neither Shosho nor Jiro managed the affairs of the headquarters.

古文：嘉靖十五年，又命兼督西苑农事。
现代文：嘉靖十五年，又命兼管西蔸农事。
English: In the 15th year of Jiajing, he was also appointed to be in charge of Xidi's agriculture.

古文：隆庆初，罢兼理。
现代文：隆庆初年，废除兼领。
English: In the first year of Longqing, concurrent leadership was abolished.

古文：万历二年，另拨户部主事一人陪库，每日偕管库主事收放银两，季终更替。
现代文：万历二年，另外拨派户部主事一人陪库，每天偕同管库主事收放银两，一季终结更替。
English: In the second year of Wanli, another person in charge of the household department was assigned to accompany the warehouse, and collect and release two pieces of silver every day with the manager of the warehouse, and the replacement was completed in one quarter.

古文：九年裁革，命本部侍郎分理之。
现代文：九年，废除，命令本部侍郎分别担任。
English: Nine years later, it was abolished, and the head waiter was ordered to serve separately.

古文：十一年复设。
现代文：十一年，又设置。
English: Eleven years later, it was set up again.

古文：二十五年，以右侍郎张养蒙督辽饷。
现代文：二十五年，由右侍郎张养蒙督察辽饷。
English: Twenty-five years later, the Right Attendant Zhang Yimeng became Inspector Liao Yao.

古文：四十七年，增设督饷侍郎。
现代文：四十七年，增设督饷侍良拉。
English: In 1947, the post of Dokuzo Samurai Ryora was added.

古文：天启五年，又增设督理钱法侍郎。
现代文：弘治五年，增设主客司主事一人，提督会同馆。
English: In the fifth year of the Hongzhi era, an additional person in charge of the host and guest department was added, and the admiral will be in the same museum.

古文：礼部。尚书一人，左、右侍郎各一人其属，司务厅，司务二人，仪制、祠祭、主客、精膳四清吏司，各郎中一人，员外郎一人，主事一人，所辖，铸印局，大使一人，副使二人。
现代文：所管辖，铸印局，大使一人，副使二人。
English: jurisdiction, a mint, an ambassador, and two deputy envoys.

古文：尚书，掌天下礼仪、祭祀、宴飨、贡举之政令。
现代文：万历九年革除一人。尚书掌管天下礼仪、祭祀、宴飨、贡选拔举的政令。
English: In the ninth year of Wanli, one person was expelled. Shangshu was in charge of the world's etiquette, rituals, banquets, and tribute selection.

古文：侍郎佐之。
现代文：侍郎辅佐他。
English: The waiter assisted him.

古文：仪制，分掌诸礼文、宗封、贡举、学校之事。
现代文：仪制司分别掌管各种礼文、宗亲封赏、选贡拔举、学校的事务。
English: The Department of Ceremonial Affairs is in charge of various ceremonies, the awarding of posthumous titles to relatives, the collection of tributes, and school affairs.

古文：天子即位，天子冠、大婚，册立皇太子、妃嫔、太子妃，上慈宫徽号，朝贺、朝见，大飨、宴飨，大射、宴射，则举诸仪注条上之。
现代文：天子即位，天子举行冠礼、大婚礼，册立皇太子、妃嫔、太子妃，献上皇帝母亲的徽号，朝贺、朝见，大飨、宴飨，大射、宴射，便列举各种仪节详细进呈。
English: The enthronement of the Son of Heaven, the crowning ceremony and grand wedding held by the Son of Heaven, the enthronement of the crown prince, concubine, and princess, the presentation of the emblem of the emperor's mother, the morning greeting, the morning meeting, the grand banquet, the banquet, the grand shower, the banquet, and the various ceremonies are listed in detail.

古文：若经筵、日讲、耕耤、视学、策士、传胪、巡狩、亲征、进历、进春、献俘、奏捷，若皇太子出阁、监国，亲王读书、之藩，皇子女诞生、命名，以及百官、命妇朝贺皇太子、后妃之礼，与诸王国之礼，皆颁仪式于诸司。
现代文：或者御前经传讲席、每日讲习、行亲耕礼、到国学考核学子考察学政、策问进士、殿试揭晓唱名、巡行、御驾亲自出征、进献律历、进春、献俘、奏捷，或者皇太子出宫合、代理国事，亲王读书、出京去藩王府，皇帝子女诞生、命名，以及百官、受封号的妇女朝贺皇太子、后妃的礼仪，与各诸侯王国的礼仪，都要颁布礼仪程序于各部门。
English: In addition, the ceremonial procedures should be promulgated in each department, such as the lecture table for the transmission of the Imperial Regalia, the daily seminars, the performance of the relatives' rituals, the examination of the students in the study of Chinese classics, the examination of the students in the study of politics, the investigation of the candidates for promotion, the palace examination, the announcement of the names, the parade, the personal departure to the front, the presentation of the legal calendar, the arrival of spring, the presentation of prisoners, the report of success, or the crown prince's exit from the palace, the acting state affairs, the prince's reading, the departure from Beijing to the palace of the lord of the

古文：凡传制、诰，开读诏、敕、表、笺及上下百官往来移文，皆授以程式焉。
现代文：所有传达制令、诰令，开读诏书、敕书、表、笺以及上下百官往来公文，都要授以仪程形式。
English: All official documents, such as orders and decrees, imperial rescripts, imperial edicts, imperial rescripts, imperial tables, imperial rescripts, as well as official correspondence between the upper and lower echelons of the government, should be given in the form of a ceremony.

古文：凡岁请封宗室王、郡王、将军、中尉、妃、主、君，各以其亲疏为等。
现代文：所有岁请册封宗室王、郡王、将军、中尉、妃、主、君，各自按其亲疏焉等级。
English: In all years, please record the title of the head of the family, the county king, the general, the lieutenant, the empress, the lord, and the prince, each according to their relative rank.

古文：百官于宗王，具官称名而不臣。
现代文：百官对于宗室藩王，署官称名而不称臣。
English: In the case of the king of a family domain, the magistrate is referred to by his title, not the vassal.

古文：王臣称臣于其王。
现代文：藩壬之臣对他的王称臣。
English: A vassal of the Jin clan is a vassal to his king.

古文：凡宗室、驸马都尉、内命妇、蕃王之诰命，则会吏部以请。
现代文：所有宗室、驸马都尉、内受封号的妇女、藩王的诰命，便会同吏部一起上奏请示。
English: All the family members, the steward of the steed, the woman who received the title, and the death of the lord of the domain would be reported together with the officials.

古文：凡诸司之印信，领其制度。
现代文：所有各部门的印信，统一管理其制度。
English: All departments of the printing of letters, unified management of its system.

古文：征西、镇朔、平羌、平蛮等将军，银印，虎纽，方三寸三分，厚九分，柳叶篆文。
现代文：内阁，银印，直纽，一寸七分见方，厚六分，秦李斯所割之玉箸篆文。征西、镇朔、平羌、平蛮等将军，银印，虎形组，三寸三分见方，厚九分，柳叶形篆文。
English: Cabinet, silver seal, straight knot, one-inch-seven-point-square, six-point-thick, jade chopsticks carved by Qin Li Si, generals such as Zheng Xi, Zhen Shuo, Ping Yao and Ping Man, silver seal, tiger-shaped group, three-inch-three-point-square, nine-point-thick, willow-leaf-shaped seal.

古文：宗人府、五军都督府，俱正一品，银印，三台，方三寸四分，厚一寸。
现代文：宗人府、五军都督府，都是正一品，银印，三台，三寸四分见方，厚一寸。
English: The Sohito-fu and the Gojun-totoku-fu are all one-of-a-kind, silver-stamped, three-tiered, three-and-a-quarter-inch square, and one-inch thick.

古文：六部都察院、各都司，俱正二品，银印，二台，方三寸二分，厚八分。
现代文：六部都察院、各都司，都是正二品，银印，二台，三寸二分见方，厚八分。
English: The six offices of the Imperial Household Agency and the various prefectural offices are all two-tiered, silver-stamped, two-tiered, three-and-a-half centimeters square, and eight-tenths thick.

古文：衍圣公、张真人、中都留守司，俱正二品，各布政司，从二品，银印，二台，方三寸一分，厚七分。
现代文：衍圣公、张真人、中都留守司，都是正二品，各布政司，从二品，银印，二台，三寸一分见方，厚七分。
English: Yan Sheng Gong, Zhang Zhenren, and Zhongdu Ruzhoushi are all two-tiered, each clothed with two-tiered, silver-sealed, two-tiered, three-inch one-point square, seven-point thick.

古文：后赐衍圣公三台银印。
现代文：后来赐衍圣公三台银印。
English: Later, he bestowed three silver seals on Yan Sheng Gong.

古文：顺天、应天二府，俱正三品，银印，方二寸九分，厚六分五厘。
现代文：顺天、应天二府，都是正三品，银印，二寸九分见方，厚六分五厘。
English: Shuntian and Yingtian of the two prefectures are all Zheng Sanpin, silver seal, two-inch-nine-centimeter-square, six-point-five-percent thick.

古文：通政司、大理寺、太常寺、詹事府、京卫、各按察司、各卫，俱正三品，苑马寺、宣慰司，俱从三品，铜印，方二寸七分，厚六分。
现代文：通政司、大理寺、太常寺、詹事府、京卫、各按察司、各卫，都是正三品，苑马寺、宣慰司，都是从三品，钢印，二寸七分见方，厚六分。
English: Tsuchimasa-ji, Dali-ji, Taijo-ji, Zhanji-fu, Jingwei, each of the inspectors, each of the guards, are all three products, and Yuanma-ji, Xuanliao-ji, are all three products, steel stamp, two inches seven minutes square, six minutes thick.

古文：太仆寺、光禄寺、各盐运司，俱从三品，铜印，方二寸六分，厚五分五厘。
现代文：太仆寺、光棣寺、各盐运司，都是从三品，铜印，二寸六分见方，厚五分五厘。
English: Taipo Temple, Guanglu Temple, and each of the salt transportation offices, are from three products, copper seal, two inches and six minutes square, thickness five points and five percent.

古文：鸿胪寺各府，俱正四品，国子监、宣抚司，俱从四品，铜印，方二寸五分，厚五分。
现代文：鸿胪寺，各府，都是正四品，国子监、宣抚司，都是从四品，铜印，二寸五分见方，厚五分。
English: Honjo-ji Temple, and all prefectures, are made of four-stranded copper. The provincial overseer of children and the public relations officer are made of four-stranded copper, with a width of two inches and five minutes, and a thickness of five minutes.

古文：翰林院、左右春坊、尚宝司、钦天监、太医院、上林苑监、六部各司、宗人府经历司、王府长史司、各卫千户所，俱正五品，司经局、五府经历司、招讨司、安抚司，俱从五品，铜印，方二寸四分，厚四分五厘。
现代文：翰林院、左右春坊、尚窦司、钦天监、太医院、上林苑监、六部各司、宗人府经历司、王府长史司、各卫干户所，都是正五品，司经局、五府经历司、招讨司、安抚司，都是从五品，钢印，二寸四分见方，厚四分五厘。
English: The Hanlin Academy, the Left and Right Spring Villages, the Shang Dou Division, the Qin Heavenly Guardianship, the Tai Hospital, the Shanglin Garden Supervision, the six departments, the Zonren Prefecture Experience Department, the Wang Prefecture Chief History Department, and the various health officials' offices are all five products, and the Department of Economic Affairs, the Five Prefecture Experience Department, the Invitation Division, and the Pacification Division are all five products, steel seal, two inches and four minutes square, thickness four points and five percent.

古文：各州，从五品，铜印，方二寸三分，厚四分。
现代文：各州，从五品，铜印，二寸三分见方，厚四分。
English: Each state, from five products, copper seal, two inches three minutes square, thickness four minutes.

古文：都察院经历司、大理寺左右司、五城兵马司，大兴、宛平、上元、江宁四县，僧录司、道录司、中都留守司经历司、断事司，各都司经历司、断事司，各卫百户所、长官司，王府审理所，俱正六品，光禄司各署，各布政司经历司、理问所，俱从六品，铜印，方二寸二分，厚三分五厘。
现代文：都察院经历司、大理寺左右司、五城兵马司，大兴、宛平、上元、江宁四县，僧录司、道录司、中都留守司经历司、断事司，各都司经历司、断事司，各卫百卢所、长官司，王府审理所，都是正六品，光禄司各署，各布政司经历司、理问所，都是从六品，钢印，二寸二分见方，厚三分五厘。
English: The History Division of the Capital Investigating Agency, the Left and Right Division of the Dali Temple, the Five-City Terracotta Warriors and Horses Division, the four counties of Daxing, Wanping, Shangyuan and Jiangning, the Records Division, the Records Division, the Central Remains Division, the History Division, the Judgement Division, the History Division and the Judgement Division of the Capital Investigating Agency, the Hybernia Station, the Chief Officer's Office, and the Wangfu Court of Inquiry are all six-pointed, and the Guanglu Station, the Political Bureau, the History Division, and the Reasoning and Inquiry Office are all six-pointed, steel stamps, two inches

古文：六科行人司、通政司经历司、工部营缮所、太常寺典簿厅、上林苑监各署、各按察司经历司、各县，俱正七品，中书舍人，顺天应天二府经历司、京卫经历司、光禄寺典簿厅、太仆寺主簿厅、詹事府主簿厅、各卫经历司、各盐运司经历司、苑马寺主簿厅、宣慰司经历司，俱从七品，铜印，方二寸一分，厚三分。
现代文：六科行人司、通政司经历司、工部营缮所、太常寺典簿厅、上林苑监各署、各按察司经历司、各县，都是正七品，中书舍人，顺天应天二府经历司、京卫经历司、光橡寺典簿厅、太仆寺主簿厅、詹事府主簿廊、各卫经历司、各盐运司经历司、苑马寺主簿厅、宣慰司经历司，都是从七品，钢印，二寸一分见方，厚三分。
English: The Six Departments of Pedagogy, the Departments of History of the Departments of Science and Technology, the Departments of Government, the Ministry of Industry and Commerce, the Taejongsa Temple Library, and the Shanglin Garden Supervision Bureau, the Departments of History of the Inspectorate, and the Counties, are all of the first seven grades. The Department of History of the People's Republic of China, the Department of History of the People's Republic of China, the Department of History of the People's Republic of China, the Department of History of the People's Republic of China, the Department of History of the People's Republic of China, the Department of History of the People

古文：户部、刑部、都察院各照磨所，兵部典牧所，国子监绳愆厅、博士厅、典簿厅，鸿胪寺主簿厅，钦天监主簿厅，各布政司照磨所，各府经历司，王府纪善、典宝、典膳、奉祀、良医、工正各所，宣抚司经历司，俱正从八品，铜印，方二寸，厚二分五厘。
现代文：户部、刑部、都察院各照磨所，兵部典牧所，园子监绳愆厅、博士厅、典簿厅，鸿胪寺主簿厅，钦天监主簿厅，各布政司照磨所、各府经历司，王府纪善、典寅、典膳、奉祀、良医、工正各所，宣抚司经历司，都是正从八品，铜印，二寸见方，厚二分五厘。
English: The shoemaker's office of the Household Department, the Criminal Investigation Department, and the Investigation Institute, the shepherd's office of the Military Department, the garden supervisor's office, the doctor's office, the bookkeeper's office, the chief bookkeeper's office of the Hongyu Temple, the chief bookkeeper's office of the Qintian, the shoemaker's office of the Political Affairs Department, the experience department of each prefecture, the Wangfu Ji Zen, the Tenzin, the Tenzin, the worship, the good doctor, the construction department, and the experience department of the Propaganda Department, are all from eight products, copper stamp, two inches square

古文：刑部、都察院各司狱司，顺天、应天二府照磨所、司狱司，鸿胪寺各署，国子监典籍厅，上林苑监典簿厅，内府宝钞等各库，御马仓、草仓，会同馆，织染所，文思院，皮作局，颜料局，鞍辔局，宝源局，军器局，都税司，教坊司，留守司司狱司，各都司司狱司，各按察司照磨所、司狱司，各府照磨所、司狱司，王府长史司典簿厅、教授、典义所，各府卫儒学、税课司，阴阳学、医学、僧纲司、道纪司、各巡检司，俱正从九品，铜印，方一寸九分，厚二分二厘。
现代文：刑部、都察院各司狱司，顺天应天二府照磨所、司狱司，鸿胪寺各署，国子监典籍厅，上林苑监典簿厅，内府宝钞等各库，御马仓、草仓，会同馆，织染所，文，思院，皮作局，颜料局，鞍辔局，宝源局，军器局，都税司，教坊司，留守司司狱司，各都司司狱司，各按察司照磨所、司狱司，各府照磨所、司狱司，王府长史司典簿厅、教授、典仪所，各府卫儒学、税课司，阴阳学、医学、僧纲司、道纪司、各巡检司，都是正从九品，钢印，一寸九分见方，厚二分二厘。
English: Department of Justice, all the wardens of the Criminal Investigation Department, all the wardens of the Criminal Investigation Department, all the wardens of the Shun Tian Yingtian, all the wardens of the two prefectures, all the wardens of the Honglu Temple, the National Children's Book Supervisor's Office, the Shanglin Garden Book Supervisor's Office, all the treasuries of the prefectural treasuries, the Horse Warehouse, the Grass Warehouse, the Association Museum, the Weaving and Dyeing Office, the Literature and Thought Institute, the Leather Making Bureau, the Pigment Bureau, the Anvil Bureau, the Treasure Source Bureau, the Armament Bureau, the

古文：各州县儒学、仓库、驿递、闸坝批验所、抽分竹木局、河泊所、织染局、税课局、阴阳学、医学、僧正司、道正司、僧会司、道会司，俱未入流，铜条记，阔一寸三分，长二寸五分，厚二分一厘。
现代文：各州县儒学、仓库、驿递、闸坝批验所、抽分竹木局、河泊所、织染局、税课局、阴阳学、医学、僧正司、道正司、僧会司、道会司，都没有入流，铜条记，宽一寸三分，长二寸五分，厚二分一厘。
English: In all prefectures and counties, Confucianism, warehouses, couriers, dam inspection stations, bamboo and wood extraction bureaus, river berthing stations, weaving and dyeing bureaus, taxation bureaus, yin and yang studies, medicine, priests, priests, priests, priests, priests, priests, priests, priests, priests, priests, priests, priests, priests, priests, priests, priests, priests, priests, priests, priests, priests, priests, priests, priests, priests, priests, priests, priests, priests, priests, priests, priests, priests, priests, priests, priests, priests, priests, priests, priests, priests, priests, priests, priests, priests,

古文：已上俱直纽，九叠篆文。
现代文：以上都是直纽，九迭篆文。
English: All of the above are direct links, and all of them are from Jiudie County.

古文：监察御史，铜印，直纽，有眼，方一寸五分，厚三分，八叠篆文。
现代文：监察御史，钢印，直纽，有眼，一寸五分见方，厚三分，八迭篆文。
English: Supervision of imperial history, steel seal, straight knot, with eyes, one inch and five minutes square, three minutes thick, eight superimposed lines.

古文：总制、总督、巡抚并镇守、公差等官，铜关防，直纽，阔一寸九分五厘，长二寸九分，厚三分，九叠篆文。
现代文：总制、总督、巡抚和镇守、公差等官，铜关防，直纽，宽一寸九分五厘，长二寸九分，厚三分，九迭篆文。
English: The general system, the governor, the inspector and the town guard, the public relations officer and other officials, the copper pass, the straight line, the width of one inch nine point five percent, the length of two inches nine points, the thickness of three points, nine twists and turns.

古文：外国王印三等：曰金，曰镀金，曰银。
现代文：外国王印三等：金，镀金，银。
English: Foreign King's Seal third class: gold, gold-plated, silver.

古文：刓敝则换给之。
现代文：磨损便替换供给。
English: Wear and tear will replace the supply.

古文：凡祥瑞，辨其名物，无请封禅以荡上心。
现代文：所有吉祥符瑞，辨明名物，不要奏请封禅以致动荡皇上心意。
English: All auspicious charms, identify the famous, do not play the seal of Zen so as to disturb the emperor's mind.

古文：以学校之政育士类，以贡举之法罗贤才，以乡饮酒礼教齿让，以养老尊高年，以制度定等威，以恤贫广仁政，以旌表示劝励，以建言会议悉利病，以禁自宫遏奸民。
现代文：用学校制度培养文入学士，用贡举的办法收罗人才，用乡饮酒礼教导按年龄大小相礼让，用养老尊敬老人，用制度规定等级威严，用体恤贫困推广仁政，用表彰昭示勉励，以出谋献策集众议事知晓利弊，用宫廷发出的禁令遏制奸滑之民。
English: Using the school system to train scholars, using the tribute method to attract talents, using the township drinking ceremony to teach courtesy according to age, using the old-age pension to respect the elderly, using the system to stipulate the level of majesty, using the experience of poverty to promote benevolent politics, using the commendation to show encouragement, using the strategy to offer suggestions to gather the public to know the pros and cons, and using the ban issued by the court to curb the people of cheating.

古文：祠祭，分掌诸祀典及天文、国恤、庙讳之事。
现代文：祠祭司分管各种祭祀典礼以及天文、帝后的丧葬、宗庙谧讳的事务。
English: The priests of the ancestral shrine were in charge of various sacrificial ceremonies as well as astronomy, the funeral of the empress, and the affairs of the family temple.

古文：凡祭有三，曰天神、地祇、人鬼。
现代文：所有祭祀有三种，即天神、地神、人鬼。
English: There are three kinds of sacrifices, namely, the heavenly god, the earth god, and the human ghost.

古文：辨其大祀、中祀、小祀而敬供之。
现代文：辨明其大祀、中祀、小祀而恭敬供奉。
English: Distinguish their major, middle, and minor deities and respectfully offer them.

古文：饬其坛壝、祠庙、陵寝而数省阅之。
现代文：谨慎其祭坛、祠庙、陵墓而多次察看。
English: He carefully inspected its altars, temples, and tombs many times.

古文：蠲其牢醴、玉帛、粢羹、水陆瘗燎之品，第其配侑、从食、功德之上下而秩举之。
现代文：清洁牺牲和美酒、瑞玉和缣帛、谷物粢盛和肉羹、水陆痉埋焚烧的物品，次第其拊祭配享、陪祭、功德的高低而按顺序进行。
English: The clean offering and the fine wine, the precious jewels and the ephemera, the grain offering and the meat soup, the water and land offerings and the articles to be buried and burned are carried out in order according to the distribution of the burnt offering, the accompanying offering, and the level of merit.

古文：天下神祇在祀典者，则稽诸令甲，播之有司，以时谨其祀事。
现代文：天下神只在祀典中的，便察考于法令，传达给有关部门，按时恭敬地从事那些祭祀之事。
English: The gods of the world are only in the rituals, they are examined in the laws and regulations, conveyed to the relevant departments, and respectfully engage in those rituals on time.

古文：督日官颁历象于天下。
现代文：督促天文历法官向全国颁市历法天象。
English: Urge the celestial calendar judge to issue a national calendar of celestial objects.

古文：日月交食，移内外诸司救护。
现代文：出现日食月食，发文告知内外有关部门救护。
English: If there is a solar eclipse or a lunar eclipse, a notice will be sent to the relevant departments at home and abroad for assistance.

古文：有灾异即奏闻，甚者乞祭告修省。
现代文：有灾异之象立即上奏，严重的奏请祭祀告神修身反省。
English: If there is any sign of calamity, it should be reported immediately, and if it is serious, it should be reported to the priest for sacrifice, confession, and self-reflection.

古文：凡丧葬、祭祀，贵贱有等，皆定其程则而颁行之。
现代文：所有丧葬、祭祀，贵贱有等级差别，都要规定其仪程准则颁布实行。
English: All funerals and sacrifices, regardless of rank, must stipulate that their code of etiquette be promulgated and implemented.

古文：凡谥，帝，后，妃、太子、太子妃，亲王，郡王，以字为差。
现代文：所有谧号，皇帝十七宇，皇后十三字，妃、太子、太子妃都是二字，亲王一字，郡王二字，以字为差等。
English: All surnames, the emperor seventeen letters, the empress thirteen letters, the princess, the prince, and the princess are two letters, the prince one word, the county king two words, and so on.

古文：勋戚、文武大臣请葬祭赠谥，必移所司，核行能，傅公论，定议以闻。
现代文：功勋外戚、文武大臣奏请葬祭封赠谧号，必须发文给有关部门，考察品行才能，附以公论，拟定意见上奏。
English: If a meritorious maternal relative or the Minister of Education and Culture requests a funeral seal and posthumous name, it is necessary to send a document to the relevant departments, examine the performance ability, attach a public opinion, and submit the proposed opinion.

古文：其侍从勤劳、忠谏死者，官品未应谥，皆得特赐。
现代文：那些侍从勤劳，死于忠谏的，官位品级没有达到应该赠谧的标准，都可以特别封赐。
English: Those attendants who worked hard and died in loyalty, but whose official rank did not meet the standard for the award of the gong, can be specially awarded.

古文：凡帝后愍忌，祀于陵，辍朝不废务。
现代文：所有先帝先后的诞辰，祭祀于陵墓，停止上朝处理事务但不停止办公。
English: On the birthdays of all former emperors, sacrifices are made at the mausoleum, and the emperor stops handling affairs, but does not stop working.

古文：凡天文、地理、医药、卜筮、师巫、音乐、僧道人，并籍领之，有兴造妖妄者罪无赦。
现代文：所有天文、地理、医药、卜筮、巫师、音乐、僧道之人，都登记管理他们，有发起编造妖妄的人惩罪不可赦免。
English: All people of astronomy, geography, medicine, divination, sorcery, music, and monasticism are registered and managed, and those who have initiated the fabrication of magic are punished and cannot be pardoned.

古文：主客，分掌诸蕃朝贡接待给赐之事。
现代文：主客司分管各番国朝见进贡接待赏赐之事。
English: The chief guest officer is in charge of receiving and awarding tributes to the Imperial Family from various countries.

古文：诸蕃朝贡，辨其贡道、贡使、贡物远近多寡丰约之数，以定王若使迎送、宴劳、庐帐、食料之等，赏赉之差。
现代文：各番国朝见进贡，辨明其进贡道路、进贡使节、进贡物品的远近多少丰厚简约的数目，来决定番王或番王使者的迎来送往、宴会犒劳、住宿、粮食草料的不同等级的礼节，赏赐的差别。
English: Each tributary country should pay tribute to the emperor, identify its tribute road, tribute envoys, and the number of tribute items from far and near to rich and simple, to determine the different levels of etiquette and rewards for welcoming and sending the king or the king's envoy, banquet reward, accommodation, grain and herb.

古文：凡贡必省阅之，然后登内府，有附载物货，则给直。
现代文：所有贡品必须查点，然后送到内府，有附载的货物，便给付所值。
English: All tributes must be counted and then sent to the inner palace. If there are goods attached, the value will be paid.

古文：若蕃国请嗣封，则遣颁册于其国。
现代文：如果番国请求承继封号，便派遣使者颁布册命于他的国内。
English: If the vassal requested to succeed to the title, he would send an emissary to promulgate the order in his own country.

古文：使还，上其风土、方物之宜，赠遗礼文之节。
现代文：使节还朝，上奏番国的风土人情、地理特产的事宜，赠送礼节仪式的礼数。
English: In the morning, the envoy reported on the country's customs, people, and geographical specialties, and presented the number of etiquette ceremonies.

古文：诸蕃有保塞功，则授敕印封之。
现代文：所有番国有保卫边塞的功劳，便颁发敕印封赏他。
English: All the tributary states awarded him the seal of honor for his contribution to the defense of the frontier fortress.

古文：各国使人往来，有诰敕则验诰敕，有勘籍则验勘籍，毋令阑入。
现代文：各番国派遣使者往来，有诰敕便检验诰敕，有勘籍便检验勘籍，不许擅自混入。
English: Envoys from various countries are sent to each other. If there is a quarrel, they will check the quarrel, if there is a census, they will check the census, and they are not allowed to mix in.

古文：土官朝贡，亦验勘籍。
现代文：土官朝见进贡，也检验勘籍。
English: The local magistrate paid tribute at the morning inspection, and also inspected the register.

古文：其返，则以镂金敕谕行之，必与铜符相比。
现代文：他们返回，便用镂金敕谕送行，必须和铜符相当。
English: And when they returned, they sent them away with letters of gold, the weight whereof is as the weight of a talent.

古文：凡审言事，译文字，送迎馆伴，考稽四夷馆译字生、通事之能否，而禁饬其交通漏泄。
现代文：所有分辨言语，翻译文字，送迎馆伴，考核四夷馆译字生、翻译人员是否胜任，而严禁他们勾结外邦泄露机密。
English: All speech recognition, text translation, and reception of visitors to the hall, as well as the assessment of the competence of translators and interpreters at the Siyi Hall, are strictly prohibited from colluding with foreign countries to leak secrets.

古文：凡朝廷赐赉之典，各省土物之贡，咸掌之。
现代文：所有朝廷赏赐的典制，各省土特物产的进贡，都要掌管。
English: They should be in charge of all the imperial awards and the tribute of the provincial special products.

古文：精膳，分掌宴飨、牲豆、酒膳之事。
现代文：精膳司分管宴飨、食品餐具、美酒膳食之事。
English: The fine dining department is in charge of banquets, food utensils, fine wine and meals.

古文：凡御赐百官礼食，曰宴，曰酒饭，为上中下三等，视其品秩。
现代文：所有皇上赐予百官礼食，称为宴，称为酒饭，分成上中下三等，看其品位禄秩而定。
English: All of the Emperor's bestowals of ceremonial food for officials, known as feasts and banquets, are divided into the upper, middle, and lower tiers according to their rank.

古文：番使、土官有宴，有下程，皆辨其等。
现代文：番使、土官右赐宴，有下程，宴有一次，有二次，下程有常规，有钦赐，都要辨明其等级。
English: An envoy or a local official who gives a banquet has a next step, a banquet has a first step, a banquet has a second step, a next step has a routine, and a banquet has a favor, all of which need to be distinguished by their rank.

古文：亲王之藩，王、公、将军来朝，及其使人，亦如之。
现代文：亲王到藩封国，王、公、将军来朝见，及其使者，也照此办理。
English: When a prince visits a fief, a king, a duke, or a general comes to see the emperor, and his emissaries, the same procedure is followed.

古文：凡膳羞、酒醴、品料，光禄是供，会其数，而程其出纳焉。
现代文：所有食品、美酒、各种材料，由光禄供给，会计其数目，而衡量其出入。
English: All food, wine, and various materials are supplied by Guanglu, accounting for their number, and measuring their outflow and inflow.

古文：凡厨役，佥诸民，以给使于太常、光禄；年深者，得选充王府典膳。
现代文：所有厨师杂役，从平民中调用，供给太常、光禄分配；资历深的，得以选拔充任王府典膳。
English: All the cooks and assistants were recruited from the common people and provided with regular wages and bonuses. Those with the most seniority were selected to serve as the royal table.

古文：凡岁藏冰、出冰，移所司谨洁之。
现代文：凡是每年藏冰、出冰，移交所属部门谨慎保持清洁。
English: If ice is stored or released each year, it should be carefully cleaned before being handed over to the relevant department.

古文：初，洪武元年置礼部。
现代文：起初，洪武元年，设置礼部。
English: At first, in the first year of Hongwu, a ceremonial department was set up.

古文：六年，设尚书二人，侍郎二人。
现代文：六年，设尚书二人，侍郎二人。
English: Six years later, there were two shojo and two waiters.

古文：分四属部：总部，祠部，膳部，主客部。
现代文：分为四个属部：总部、祠部、膳部、主客部。
English: It is divided into four subordinate departments: the headquarters, the ancestral hall, the dining room, and the main guest department.

古文：每部设郎中、员外郎各一人，主事各三人。
现代文：每部设郎中、员外郎各一人，主事各三人。
English: In each section, there will be one assistant director and one assistant director, and three supervisors.

古文：十三年，升部秩，设尚书、侍郎各一人，每属部设郎中、员外郎、主事各一人。
现代文：十三年，提高礼部品级，设尚书、侍郎各一人，每个属部设郎中、员外郎、主事各一人。
English: In the 13th year, the level of ceremonial parts was raised, and one person each was appointed as a senior clerk and a chamberlain, and one person each was appointed as a junior clerk, a member of the outer circle, and the person in charge of each subordinate department.

古文：寻复增置侍郎一人。
现代文：不久又增设侍郎一人。
English: Soon, one more attendant was added.

古文：二十二年，改总部为仪部。
现代文：二十二年，改总部为仪部。
English: In 1922, the head office was changed to the instrument department.

古文：二十九年，改仪部、祠部、膳部为仪制、祠祭、精膳，惟主客仍旧，俱称为清吏司。
现代文：二十九年，改仪部、祠部、膳部焉仪制、祠祭、精膳，只有主客这个属部照旧，都称为清吏司。
English: In 1929, the ritual department, ancestral hall department, and meal department were reformed, and the ritual system, ancestral hall festival, and fine meal were abolished. Only the host and guest department remained the same, and they were all called the Qing Li department.

古文：按周宗伯之职虽掌邦礼，而司徒既掌邦教，所谓礼者，仅鬼神祠祀而已。
现代文：按周宗伯的职责虽然是掌管国家礼仪，但司徒既然掌管国家政教，所谓礼，仅仅是鬼神祭祀罢了。
English: According to Zhou Zongbo's responsibilities, although he was in charge of the national etiquette, since the scholars were in charge of the country's politics and religion, the so-called etiquette was merely the worship of ghosts and gods.

古文：至合典乐典教，内而宗藩，外而诸蕃，上自天官，下逮医师、膳夫、伶人之属，靡不兼综，则自明始也。
现代文：至于把主管礼乐、主管政教合在一起，内涉及宗藩，外涉及各番国，上白天官，下至医师、厨师、伶人之类，无不都综括在内，便是从明朝开始的。
English: As for combining the person in charge of ceremonial music and the person in charge of politics and education, it began in the Ming Dynasty, and involved the Zong clan on the one hand, and the various provinces on the other, and included officials at the top, doctors, chefs, and eunuchs on the bottom.

古文：成、弘以后，率以翰林儒臣为之。
现代文：成化、弘治以后，大都以翰林儒臣担任。
English: After Chenghua and Hongzhi, most of them were headed by Hanlin Ruxen.

古文：其由此登公孤任辅导者，盖冠于诸部焉。
现代文：由此而登上公孤之位担任辅臣的，人数位于各部之冠。
English: As a result, the number of people who ascended to the position of public orator and served as assistant ministers is the highest among all ministries.

古文：兵部。尚书一人，左、右侍郎各一人。
现代文：兵部，尚书一人，正二品，左、右侍郎各一人，正三品。
English: Hyobu, Shosho one, Senior Second Rank, Left and Right Attendants one each, Senior Third Rank.

古文：其属，司务厅，司务二人，武选、职方、车驾、武库四清吏司，各郎中一人，员外郎一人，主事二人，所辖，会同馆大使一人，副使二人，大通关大使、副使各一人，尚书，掌天下武卫官军选授、简练之政令。
现代文：后来革除。万历十一年，又增设车驾司主事一人。所辖属，会同馆大使一人，正九品，副使二人，从九品。大通关大使、副使各一人，都没有入流。尚书掌管天下武卫官军选拔任命、精选训练的政令。
English: Later, he was expelled. In the eleventh year of the Wanli era, he added a person in charge of the driver's office. Under his jurisdiction, there was an ambassador to the same museum, a senior nine-grade official, and two deputy envoys, from nine grades. A major customs clearance ambassador and a deputy envoy did not join the stream. Shangshu was in charge of the selection and appointment of the world's armed guards and selected training.

古文：侍郎佐之。
现代文：侍郎辅助他。
English: The waiter assisted him.

古文：武选，掌卫所土官选授、升调、袭替、功赏之事。
现代文：武选司负责卫所土官选拔任命、升迁调配、世袭替换、论功行赏的政事。
English: The Military Selection Division is responsible for the selection and appointment of local officials, promotion and transfer, hereditary replacement, and the awarding of merit.

古文：凡武官六品，其勋十有二。
现代文：所有武官有六品，它的勋爵有十二等。
English: All military attachés have six ranks, and its lords have twelve ranks.

古文：散阶三十。岁凡六选。有世官，有流官。
现代文：有世代承袭的世官，有非世袭、非土著的流官。
English: There are hereditary officials, and there are non-hereditary, non-indigenous officials.

古文：世官九等，皆有袭职，有替职。其幼也，有优给。
现代文：世官有九等，指挥使，指挥同知，指挥愈事，卫镇抚，正千户，副千户，百户，试百卢，所镇抚，都有世袭职位，有轮替职位。年幼时，有优厚供给。
English: There are nine ranks of world officials, including commander, commander-in-chief, commander-in-chief, commander-in-chief, commander-in-chief, commander-in-chief, commander-in-chief, commander-in-chief, commander-in-chief, commander-in-chief, commander-in-chief, commander-in-chief, commander-in-chief, commander-in-chief, commander-in-chief, commander-in-chief, commander-in-chief, commander-in-chief, commander-in-chief, commander-in-chief, commander-in-chief, commander-in-chief, commander-in-chief, commander-in-chief

古文：其不得世也，有减革，有通革。
现代文：不得世袭的，有降职革用，有全部革除。
English: Those that cannot be inherited will be demoted or removed altogether.

古文：流官八等，以世官升授，或由武举用之，皆不得世。
现代文：流官八等，左右都督，都督同知，都督愈事，都指挥使，都指挥同知，都指挥翕事，正留守，副智守，以世官升授，或由武举任用，都不能世袭。
English: Eighth-ranking officials, governors to the left and to the right, governors with the same knowledge, governors who have completed their term of office, those who have commanded envoys, those who have commanded with the same knowledge, those who have commanded subordinates, those who are still in office, vice-governors, those who have been promoted to the position of world officials, or those who have been appointed by military coups, cannot be hereditary.

古文：即有世者，出特恩。
现代文：即便有世袭的，是出于特别恩赐。
English: Even if it's hereditary, it's a special gift.

古文：非真授者曰署职，曰试职，曰纳职，战功二等：奇功为上，头功次之。
现代文：不是实际授予的称为署职，署职，累加本职一级当半级，不支取俸禄，没有军功，不得寅授。
English: If it is not actually awarded, it is called a subordinate post. If it is not actually awarded, it is called a subordinate post. If it is not actually awarded, it is called a subordinate post. If it is not actually awarded, it is called a subordinate post. If it is not actually awarded, it is called a subordinate post.

古文：首功四等：迤北为大，辽东次之，西番、苗蛮又次之，内地反寇又次之。
现代文：称为试职，试职作一级，支取一半俸禄，不给诰命。称为纳职，纳职带俸橡，不办理事务。战功二等：奇功为上，头功其次。斩首之功四等：北方为最大，辽东次一等，西番、苗蛮又次一等，内地平定寇贼又次一等。
English: It is called probation, probation is first-class, half of the salary is paid, and no one is killed. It is called acceptance of the post, acceptance of the post with salary, and no business is done. Second-class war merit: miracle merit is the highest, first-class merit is the second. Fourth-class beheading merit: the north is the largest, Liaodong is the second-class, the west is the second-class, Miao Man is the second-class, and the interior is the second-class.

古文：凡比试，有旧官，有新官，军政，五年一考选，先期抚、按官上功过状，覆核而去留之。
现代文：所有比试，有旧官，洪武三十一年以前焉旧，有新官，成祖以后为新。军政，每五年考选一次，此前抚、按官上报功遇状，复核决定去留。
English: In all the competitive examinations, there are old officials, Hongwu was old before 31 years old, there are new officials, and there will be new ones after becoming an ancestor. In military and political affairs, the examination is held once every five years, after which, according to the official report on the merits and conditions, the decision to stay is reviewed.

古文：五府、锦衣卫堂上各总兵官，皆自陈，取上裁。
现代文：五府、锦衣卫堂上各总兵官，都要自我陈述，取决于皇上裁定。
English: The commanders-in-chief of the five prefectures and the Emperor's Palace all have to make their own statements, which depends on the emperor's decision.

古文：推举上二人，都指挥以下上一人。
现代文：推举提拔二人，都指挥以下提拔一人。
English: Two people were elected and promoted, and one person was promoted from the following command.

古文：凡土司之官九级，自从三品至从七品，皆无岁禄。
现代文：所有土司之官九级，自从三品至从七品，都没有每年的俸禄。
English: All officials of the ninth grade of tushi, from the third grade to the seventh grade, do not have an annual salary.

古文：其子弟、族属、妻女、若婿及甥之袭替，胥从其俗。
现代文：土司的子弟、族属、妻女、或女婿及外甥世袭替代，都遵从其风俗。
English: The children, relatives, wives and daughters, or son-in-laws and nephews of the toshi take the place of the hereditary toshi, and all follow their customs.

古文：附塞之官，自都督至镇抚，凡十四等，皆以诰敕辨其伪冒。
现代文：边塞的官，自都督至镇抚，共十四等，都依据诰敕辨别真假。
English: The officials of the border fortress, from the governor to the governor, a total of fourteen, are all based on the yakitori to distinguish between true and false.

古文：赠官死于王事，加二等；死于战阵，加三等。
现代文：赠官为王事而死，加封二等；死于战场，加封三等。
English: Those who died in the service of the king were awarded a second-class seal; those who died on the battlefield were awarded a third-class seal.

古文：凡除授出自中旨者，必覆奏然后行之。
现代文：所有任免直接出自皇帝御旨的，必须回复上奏然后实行。
English: All appointments and removals directly from the emperor's will must be reported and then implemented.

古文：以贴黄征图状，以初绩征诰敕，以效功课将领，以比试练卒徒，以优养恩故绝，以褒恤励死战，以寄禄驭恩幸，以杀降、失陷、避敌、激叛之法肃军机，以典刑、败伦、行劫、退阵之科断世禄。
现代文：以贴黄提要验证图状，以初绩验证诰敕，以功劳考核将领，以比试训练士卒，以优厚的供养施恩于亡故的人，以褒奖抚恤激励将士死战，以寄禄官职驱策宠臣，以杀降、失陷、避敌、激叛的法律整肃军纪，以典刑、败伦、行劫、退阵的科条断绝世禄。
English: Attach the yellow summary to verify the chart, use the initial performance to verify the rank, use the merit assessment to evaluate the generals, use the competitive examination to train the officers and men, use the generous offering and support to the deceased, use the reward and pension to encourage the soldiers to fight to the death, use the reward official position to drive the favorite, use the laws of killing, losing, avoiding the enemy, and rebelling to rectify the military discipline, and use the discipline of sentencing, defeat, robbery, and withdrawal to break the world.

古文：职方，掌舆图、军制、城隍、镇戍、简练、征讨之事。
现代文：职方司掌管地图、军队制度、城池、镇守、简选训练、征讨的事。
English: The Division of Military Affairs is in charge of maps, army system, castle, town guard, simple selection training, and recruitment.

古文：凡天下地里险易远近，边腹疆界，俱有图本，三岁一报，与官军车骑之数偕上。
现代文：所有天下地理险峻平易远近，边防内地疆域地界，都有地图集，每三年上报一次，与官军车马的数目一并上报。
English: There are atlases for all the world's geographical regions, from the most dangerous to the most accessible, from the borders to the hinterland, and they are reported once every three years, together with the number of official and military vehicles and horses.

古文：凡军制内外相维，武官不得辄下符征发。
现代文：所有军制内外互相维系，武官不得动辄下符令征发。
English: All military systems inside and outside maintain mutual relations, and military attachés are not allowed to issue orders without authorization.

古文：自都督府，都指挥司，留守司，内外卫守御、屯田、群牧千户所，仪卫司，土司，诸番都司卫所，各统其官军及其部落，以听征调、守卫、朝贡、保塞之令。
现代文：自都督府，都指挥司，留守司，内外卫守御、屯田、群牧千户所，仪卫司，土司，诸番都司卫所，各自统领自己的官军及其部落，以听候征调、守卫、朝贡、保塞的命令。
English: From the prefectural governor's office, the prefectural commanding officer, the resident guarding officer, the internal and external guards, the garrison, the thousand-household herding station, the ceremonial guarding officer, the land steward, and the guards of the prefectural guarding station, each commanded his own official army and his tribe to obey the orders of conscription, guard, tribute, and fortress protection.

古文：以时修浚其城池而阅视之。
现代文：按时修固疏浚城墙护城河并查看巡视。
English: Dredge the city wall and repair the moat on time and check the inspection.

古文：凡镇戍将校五等：曰镇守，曰协守，曰分守，曰守备，曰备倭。
现代文：所有镇戍将校有五等：称焉镇守，协守，分守，守备，备倭。
English: There are five ranks for all township officers: town guard, assistant guard, branch guard, guard, and waiter.

古文：皆因事增置，视地险要，设兵屯戍之。
现代文：都是因战事增设，根撩地势险要，设兵驻扎守卫。
English: They were all added due to the war, the situation was critical, and soldiers were stationed to guard them.

古文：凡京营操练，统以文武大臣，皆科道官巡视之。
现代文：所有京营操练，以文武大臣统领，都是科道官巡枧。
English: All the Beijing camp drills, led by the Minister of Education and Culture, are the parade of science and technology officials.

古文：若将军营练，将军四卫营练，及勇士、幼官、舍人等营练，则讨其军实，稽其什伍，察其存逸闲否，以教其坐作、进退、疾徐、疏数之节，金鼓、麾旗之号。
现代文：如果是将军营练，将军四卫营练，以及勇士、幼官、舍人等营练，便整治军事物资，查核士卒编制，察看是否闲逸，以教导其起坐行止、进退、缓急、疏密的节制，金鼓、旗帜的信号。
English: If it is a general camp drill, a general four guards battalion drill, and a battalion drill of warriors, junior officers, and subordinates, they will rectify military materials, check the composition of officers and men, and see if they are idle, so as to teach them the sitting posture, advancing and retreating, delaying, and dense restraint, as well as the signal of the golden drum and flag.

古文：征讨请命将出师，悬赏罚，调兵食，纪功过，以黜陟之。
现代文：征讨奏请命令将士出师，悬赏示罚，调配军粮，记录功遇，以此升官降职。
English: To solicit the report, it is necessary to order the soldiers to be discharged, reward and punish, allocate military rations, record the merits, and promote and demote accordingly.

古文：以堡塞障边徼，以烽火传声息，以关津诘奸细，以缉捕弭盗贼，以快壮简乡民，以勾解、收充、抽选、并豁、疏放、存恤之法整军伍。
现代文：以城堡边塞障护边疆，以烽火传递信息，以关卡盘查奸细，以缉捕消除盗贼，以敏捷强壮简选乡民，以逮捕解押、拘捕充军、提拔选举、豁免罪罚、放松约东、慰问抚恤的方法整治军队。
English: Protect the frontier with castle border fortifications, transmit information with bonfires, investigate spies with checkpoints, eliminate thieves with arrests, select villagers with agility and strength, and rectify the army by arresting and releasing, arresting and confining troops, promoting elections, exempting crimes and punishments, relaxing restrictions, and giving condolences.

古文：车驾，掌卤簿、仪仗、禁卫、驿传、厩牧之事。
现代文：车驾司掌管扈从仪卫、仪仗、禁卫、驿站传递、马匹放牧的事务。
English: The driver is in charge of the affairs of the ceremonial guard, the ceremonial battle, the guards, the passing of the station, and the grazing of the horses.

古文：凡卤簿大驾，大典礼、大朝会设之；丹陛驾，常朝设之；武陈驾，世宗南巡时设之。
现代文：凡是皇帝的扈从仪卫，在大典礼、大朝会时陈设；官廷车驾的仪仗，在平常上朝时陈设；武阵车驾的仪仗，世宗南巡时陈设。
English: All of the emperor's attendants were set up during the grand ceremony and the grand imperial meeting; the ceremonial chariot of the official chariot was set up during the ordinary imperial visit; and the ceremonial chariot of the military chariot was set up during the southern inspection of King Sejong.

古文：皆辨其物数，以授所司。
现代文：都要分辨物事数目，以交付给有关部门。
English: They all have to distinguish the number of things in order to be handed over to the relevant departments.

古文：慈宫、中宫之卤簿，东宫、宗藩之仪仗，亦如之。
现代文：太后、皇后的扈从仪卫，太子、宗室藩王的仪仗，也如此。
English: The empress dowager and the empress dowager followed the etiquette, as did the prince and the prince of the clan.

古文：凡侍卫，御殿全直，常朝番直，守卫、亲军卫，画前、后、左、右四门为四行，而日夜巡警之。
现代文：所有侍卫，御殿全部当值，平常上朝轮班当值，守卫、亲军卫，画前、后、左、右四门为四行，而日夜巡逻警卫。
English: All the palace attendants and guards are on duty, and they are usually on duty in the morning shift. The guards and the pro-army guards, the four doors in front, behind, left and right are four lines, and the guards patrol day and night.

古文：凡邮传，在京师曰会同馆，在外曰驿，曰递运所，皆以符验关券行之。
现代文：守卫皇城，前生盟为一行，后玄武门为一行，左东华门为一行，右堕华门为一行。所有邮传，在京城称为会同馆，在外地称为驿，称为递运所，都凭符验关券通行。
English: Guarding the Imperial City, the Former Students' Union is one line, the Rear Xuanwu Gate is one line, the Left East China Gate is one line, and the Right Fallen China Gate is one line. All postcards, known in Beijing as the Student Union, in other places as the, and as the delivery office, are passed with a certificate of inspection.

古文：凡马政，其专理者，太仆、苑马二寺，稽其簿籍，以时程其登耗，惟内厩不会。
现代文：所有马政，其专门负责的，是太仆、苑马二寺，核查其文书簿册，按时计算其增加或损耗，只有内廷马厩不须纳入总计。
English: All the equestrian administration, which is specifically responsible for the courtiers and courtyards of the two monasteries, will check their document books and calculate their increase or loss on time. Only the Neiting Stables do not need to be included in the total.

古文：武库，掌戎器、符勘、尺籍、武学、薪隶之事。
现代文：武库司掌管兵器、符契、军队籍册、武学、供应薪柴和隶仆的事务。
English: The Ordnance Department was in charge of weapons, military documents, military registers, martial arts, the supply of firewood and servants.

古文：凡内外官军有征行，移工部给器仗，籍纪其数，制敕下各边征发。
现代文：所有内外官军要出征，就发公函给兵部给予兵器，造册记录数目，制定敕令下发各边镇征调。
English: If all government officials and troops at home and abroad want to go to war, they should send an official letter to the military department to give them weapons, make a record of the number of records, formulate a royal order and issue a conscription transfer to each border town.

古文：及使人出关，必验勘合。
现代文：及派人出关，必须验证符契。
English: and send someone out of the customs, you must verify the deed.

古文：军伍缺，下诸省府州县勾之。
现代文：军队缺编，下令各省府州县微调。
English: There is a shortage of military personnel, and all provinces, prefectures and counties have been ordered to make fine adjustments.

古文：以跟捕、纪录、开户、给除、停勾之法，核其召募、垛集、罪谪、改调营丁尺籍之数。
现代文：以提调本军、文书记载、家奴以战功单独立户、免除服役、停止微调的办法，核实其招募兵、用垛兵法征兵、罪谪为兵、改变营兵军籍的数目。
English: Verify the number of enlisted soldiers, enlisted soldiers by the method of enlistment, enlisted soldiers by the method of enlistment, enlisted soldiers by the method of enlistment, enlisted soldiers by the method of enlistment, enlisted soldiers by the method of enlistment, enlisted soldiers by the method of enlistment, enlisted soldiers by the method of enlistment, enlisted soldiers by the method of enlistment, enlisted soldiers by the method of enlistment, enlisted soldiers by the method of enlistment, enlisted soldiers by the method of enlistment, enlisted soldiers by the method of enlistment, enlisted soldiers by the method of

古文：凡武职幼官，及子弟未嗣官者，于武学习业，以主事一人监督之。
现代文：所有武职年少为官，及子弟没有继承官位的，在武学练习学业，以主事一名监督他们。
English: All junior officers in the military, and their children who do not inherit the rank, practice and study martial arts, and are supervised by a supervisor.

古文：考稽学官之贤否、肄习之勤怠以闻。
现代文：考查学官的贤能与否、学习者的勤触怠惰上报。
English: Examine whether the scholar is capable or not, and report on the student's diligence and laziness.

古文：诸司官署供应有柴薪，直衙有皂隶，视官品为差。
现代文：各司官署供应有柴薪，值守衙门有隶仆，根据官阶品位有差等。
English: Each magistrate's office supplies firewood, the guards on duty have subordinates, and there are differences in quality according to rank.

古文：初，洪武元年置兵部。
现代文：起初，洪武元年设置兵部。
English: At first, the military department was set up in the first year of Hongwu.

古文：六年，增尚书一人，侍郎一人。
现代文：六年增设尚书一人，侍郎一人。
English: Six years later, one more Shojo and one more Jiro were added.

古文：置总部、驾部并职方三部，设郎中、员外郎、主事，如吏部之数。
现代文：设置总部、驾部和职方三部，设郎中、员外郎、主事，如同吏部的数目。
English: Set up the headquarters, the driving department and the staff three departments, set up the middle manager, the outside manager and the main manager, just like the number of the personnel department.

古文：十三年，升部秩，设尚书、侍郎各一人，又增置库部为四属部，部设郎中、员外郎、主事各一人。
现代文：十三年，提升兵部的品级，设尚书、侍郎各一人，又增加设置库部为四个属部，各部设郎中、员外郎、主事各一人。
English: In 1913, the grade of the military department was raised, and a senior clerk and a chamberlain were each established. In addition, the treasury department was increased to four subordinate departments, and each department had a junior clerk, a junior clerk, and a chief clerk.

古文：十四年，增试侍郎一人。
现代文：十四年，增设试用侍郎一人。
English: Fourteen years later, a probationary attendant was added.

古文：二十二年改总部为司马部。
现代文：二十二年，改总部为司马部。
English: In 1922, the headquarters was changed to the Sima Department.

古文：二十九年，定改四部为武选、职方、车驾、武库四清吏司。
现代文：二十九年，定下来改四部为武选、职方、车驾、武库四个清吏司。
English: In 1929, it was decided to change the four departments into four clean-up officials' departments: Wuxuan, Shifang, Chaozhou, and Wuhan.

古文：景泰中，增设尚书一人，协理部事，天顺初罢。
现代文：只有职方因袭旧名。景泰年间，增设尚书一人，协助处理部事，天顺初年罢除。
English: During the Jing-Tai era, one person was added to assist in handling ministry affairs, but he was dismissed in the first year of Tianshun.

古文：隆庆四年添注侍郎二人，寻罢。
现代文：隆庆四年，添设侍郎二人，不久罢除。
English: In the fourth year of the Longqing era, two attendants were added, but they were soon dismissed.

古文：万历末年复置。
现代文：万历末年又添置。
English: It was added in the last year of the Wanli era.

古文：协理京营戎政一人，掌京营操练之事。
现代文：协助管理京营军政一人，或尚书，或侍郎，或右都御史，掌管京营操练的事务。
English: Assist in the management of the Beijing camp military government, or Shangshu, or Zhilang, or Uto, in charge of the affairs of the Beijing camp drill.

古文：永乐初，设三大营，总于武将。
现代文：水乐初年，设三大营，总揽于武将。
English: In the first year of the water festival, three major camps were set up, all of which were attended by warriors.

古文：景泰元年始设提督团营，命兵部尚书于谦兼领之，后罢。
现代文：景泰元年，开始设提督团营，命兵部尚书于谦兼管，后来罢除。
English: In the first year of King Taejo's reign, an admiral's battalion was established, and the commanding officer of the military department, Shang Shu, was concurrently in charge of it. Later, he was dismissed.

古文：成化三年复设，率以本部尚书或都御史兼之。
现代文：成化三年，又设置，大多以本部尚书或都御史兼任。
English: Three years later, it was set up again, mostly with the headquarters of Shangshu or the capital's history concurrently.

古文：嘉靖二十年，始命尚书刘天和辍部务，另给关防，专理戎政。
现代文：嘉靖二十年，纔命尚书刘天和停止部务，另外颁发关防，专门管理军队政务。
English: In the 20th year of Jiajing, Liu Tian and his subordinates were ordered to stop their ministerial duties, and in addition, they were given the post of defense, specifically to manage the government affairs of the army.

古文：二十九年，以 总督京营戎政 之印畀仇鸾，而改设本部侍郎协理戎政，不给关防。
现代文：二十九年以 总督京营戎政 的印信给予仇鸾，而改设本部侍郎协助处理军政，不给予关防。
English: In 1929, the seal of the Governor-General of the Beijing Military Government was given to the vice-governor, and the vice-governor of the headquarters was set up to assist in dealing with military affairs, but not to defend the border.

古文：万历九年裁革，十一年复设。
现代文：万历九年裁除，十一年又设置。
English: It was abolished nine years ago and reinstated eleven years later.

古文：天启初，增设协理一人，寻革。
现代文：天启初年，增设协助处理一人，不久革除。
English: In the first year of Tianqi, one person was added to assist in the treatment, but was soon dismissed.

古文：崇祯二年复增一人，以庶吉士刘之纶为兵部侍郎充之。
现代文：崇祯二年又增加一人，以庶吉士刘之纶为兵部侍郎充任。
English: In the second year of the reign of Emperor Chongzhen, one more person was added, with the second-in-command, Liu Zhiyao, serving as the attendant of the military department.

古文：刑部。尚书一人，左、右侍郎各一人。
现代文：刑部，尚书一人，正二品，左、右侍郎各一人，正三品。
English: In the Department of Justice, there was one Shosho and two Shonin, and one Left and Right Attendant and three Shonin.

古文：其属，司务厅，司务二人。
现代文：巫筮六年，十三司都增设主事一人。
English: Its subordinate, the Administrative Office, has two administrative officers from nine departments.

古文：浙江、江西、湖广、陕西、广东、山东、福建、河南、山西、四川、广西、贵州、云南十三清吏司，各郎中一人，员外郎一人，主事二人。照磨所，照磨，检校，各一人。
现代文：成化元年，增设旦丛、廑玺二司主事各一人，后来革除。万历年间，又革除塑廑、堕堕、山东、福建四司主事各一人。照磨所，照磨正八品，检校正九品，各一人。
English: In the first year of Chenghua, one person was added to the head of the Tang Cong, and one person was removed from the head of the Second Division of the Bureau of Engraving and Printing. During the Wanli period, one person was removed from the head of the Fourth Division of the Bureau of Engraving and Printing, the Fourth Division of the Bureau of Engraving and Printing, the Fourth Division of the Bureau of Engraving and Printing, the Fourth Division of the Bureau of Engraving and Printing, the Fourth Division of the Bureau of Engraving and Printing, and the Fourth Division of the Bureau of Engraving and Printing.

古文：司狱司，司狱六人，
现代文：司狱司，司狱六人，从丸品。
English: The prison warden, six prison wardens, from Maruhin.

古文：尚书，掌天下刑名及徒隶、勾覆、关禁之政令。
现代文：尚书掌管天下刑法及服役罪犯、勾决复核、关卡禁止的政令。
English: Shangshu is in charge of the world's criminal law and service criminals, the revision of decisions, and the prohibition of checkpoints.

古文：侍郎佐之。十三司，各掌其分省及兼领所分京府、直隶之刑名。照磨、检校，照刷文卷，计录赃赎。
现代文：贵州司带管吏部，吏科，司菜局，以及长芦盐运司，大窒都司，万全都司，直隶苏州、保定、河间、真定、顺德五府，苏州、太仓、蓟州、遵化、镇朔、兴州五屯，忠义中、涿鹿、河间、天津、天津左、天津右、德州、宣府左、宣府右、开平、保安、蔚州、永宁各卫，梁城、兴和、广昌各千户所。照磨、检校，照对印刷文卷，计录贼脏赎金。
English: Guizhou Division with the Administration Department, Administration Science, and the Vegetable Division, as well as Changlu Salt Transportation Division, Datong Capital Division, Wanzhong Division, directly under the five prefectures of Suzhou, Baoding, Hema, Jinding, Shunde, Suzhou, Taicang, Zhangzhou, Zunhua, Zhenshuo, Xingzhou Wutun, Zhongyi, Yili, Hema, Tianjin, Tianjin left, Tianjin right, Dezhou, Xuanfu left, Xuanfu right, Kaiping, Baoan, Ulshu, Yongning, Liangcheng, Xinghe, and Guangchang.

古文：司狱，率狱吏，典囚徒。
现代文：司狱，大多为狱吏，掌管囚徒。
English: Wardens, mostly prison officers, supervise prisoners.

古文：凡军民、官吏及宗室、勋戚丽于法者，诘其辞，察其情伪，傅律例而比议其罪之轻重以请。
现代文：所有军队平民、官吏及宗室、勋臣外戚触犯法律的，诘问其言辞，审察其情由真伪，依据法律条文并比照议定他的罪行的轻重请示皇帝。
English: All military civilians, government officials, their families, and maternal relatives of honored ministers who have violated the law shall be questioned about their words, their true and false conditions shall be examined, and the severity of their crimes shall be determined in accordance with and in accordance with the provisions of the law and shall be reported to the emperor.

古文：诏狱必据爰书，不得逢迎上意。
现代文：钦犯监狱案件必须依据囚犯口供来定罪，不得逢迎皇上的旨意。
English: In the case of the Qin prison, the conviction must be based on the prisoner's confession, and must not meet the emperor's will.

古文：凡有殊旨、别敕、诏例、榜例，非经请议著为令甲者，不得引比。
现代文：凡是有特殊旨意、专门敕命、诏例、榜例，没有经奏请朝议写为法令的，不得援引比照。
English: If there is any special decree, special edict, edict, or example, and it has not been written into a decree after being submitted to the Imperial Court for deliberation, it may not be cited by analogy.

古文：凡死刑，即决及秋后决，并三覆奏。
现代文：凡是死刑，立即处决以及秋后处决，一并三次覆奏。
English: All death sentences, summary executions and posthumous executions are repeated three times.

古文：两京、十三布政司，死罪囚岁谳平之。
现代文：两京、十三布政司，死罪囚犯每年审察评议。
English: In the two capitals, the 13th CPC Central Committee and the 13th CPC National Congress, the death penalty prisoners are reviewed and deliberated every year.

古文：五岁请敕遣官，审录冤滞。
现代文：每五年奏请钦派官员，审录甄别冤案积案。
English: Every five years, it will send an official to the Supreme People's Procuratorate to review and sort out the backlog of cases.

古文：霜降录重囚，会五府、九卿、科道官共录之。
现代文：霜降审察甄别重囚，会同五府、九卿、科道官一起审录甄别。
English: He inspected and screened the serious prisoners, and together with the five prefectures, nine nobles, and the science and technology officials, he auditioned and screened them.

古文：矜疑者戍边，有词者调所司再问，比律者监候。
现代文：罪犯可怜悯、案情有疑问的发配戍边，有申诉词的调所属部门再审问，适用法律的收监候审。
English: Criminals are to be pitied, those whose cases are doubtful are to be released, those who have complaints are to be transferred to the relevant departments for further interrogation, and those who apply the law are to be remanded in custody.

古文：夏月热审，免笞刑，减徒、流，出轻系。
现代文：夏月按例减等处理，免除笞刑，减轻徒刑、流刑，释放小罪囚犯。
English: Xia Yue was reduced in rank as usual, exempted from flogging, commuted his prison sentence and banishment, and released a prisoner for a minor crime.

古文：遇岁旱，特旨录囚亦如之。
现代文：遇上年成干旱，特旨审录甄别囚犯也如此。
English: In the case of last year's drought, the same is true for the special review and screening of prisoners.

古文：凡大祭止刑。
现代文：所有大祭停止行刑。
English: All major festivals have suspended executions.

古文：凡赎罪，视罪轻重，斩、绞、杂犯、徒末减者，听收赎。
现代文：凡赎罪，比照罪行轻重，斩、绞、杂犯、徒末减的，听取收赎。
English: All those who have atoned for their sins, according to the severity of their crimes, including beheading, hanging, miscellaneous criminals, and those who have been reduced to penury, will be heard for redemption.

古文：词诉必自下而上，有事重而迫者，许击登闻鼓。
现代文：诉讼必须自下级而上，有事情重大而急迫的，允许击打登闻鼓。
English: Litigation must start from the lower level. If there is a serious and urgent matter, it is allowed to beat the news drum.

古文：四方有大狱，则受命往鞫之。
现代文：四方有大案，便受命前往审讯。
English: The four parties had a big case, so they were ordered to go to the trial.

古文：四方决囚，遣司官二人往莅。
现代文：四方处决囚犯，派遣司官二人前往亲临监刑。
English: The Quartet executed prisoners and sent two magistrates to visit the prisoners in person.

古文：凡断狱，岁疏其名数以闻，曰岁报；月上其拘释存亡之数，曰月报。
现代文：所有审讯案例，每年上疏将其名数上报，称为岁报；每月上报其拘捕释放存亡的数目，称为月报。
English: For all interrogation cases, the number of persons arrested and released shall be reported annually, referred to as the annual report, and the number of persons arrested and released shall be reported monthly, referred to as the monthly report.

古文：狱成，移大理寺覆审，必期平允。
现代文：审判完后，移交大理寺覆审，一定要平等公允。
English: After the trial is over, the transfer to Dali Temple for a retrial must be equal and fair.

古文：凡提牢，月更主事一人，修葺囹圄，严固扃钥，省其酷滥，给其衣粮。
现代文：凡狱官，每月更换提牢主事一人，修葺监狱，加固门锁，碱省其酷烈滥施，供给其衣粮。
English: Every month, every prison officer is replaced by a person in charge of strengthening the prison, repairing the prison, strengthening the locks, alleviating its severe abuse, and providing it with food and clothing.

古文：囚病，许家人入视，脱械锁医药之。
现代文：囚犯生病，准许家人入监探视，解除枷锁诊断医治。
English: If a prisoner falls ill, his family members are allowed to visit him in prison, and the shackles are removed for diagnosis and treatment.

古文：簿录俘囚，配没官私奴婢，咸籍知之。
现代文：造册记录俘囚，配役官私奴婢，都要登录知遒。
English: Prisoners of war should be recorded in a register, and the servants of officers should be recorded in a register.

古文：官吏有过，并纪录之。
现代文：官吏有遇错，一并记录。
English: If an official makes a mistake, it will be recorded.

古文：岁终请湔涤之。
现代文：年终请求洗刷污秽。
English: Year-end request to wash away the filth.

古文：以名例摄科条，以八字括辞议，以五服参情法，以墨涅识盗贼。
现代文：以法律总则中的刑名体例统摄法律条文，以八个字概括言辞议论，以、准、皆、各、其、及、即、若，以五服参考情理的法律，以刺墨标识盗贼。
English: The sentences in the general principles of the law are used to summarize the legal provisions, and the discussion is summarized in eight words, with, quasi, all, each, its, and, that is, if, the five laws of reference and reason, and the thief is marked with tattoo ink.

古文：籍产不入莹墓，籍财不入度支，宗人不即市，宫人不即狱，悼耄疲癃不即讯。
现代文：籍役产业不包括墓地，籍役财物不包括生活日用，宗室不到市场处死，官人不下狱，怜悯老年残疾不传讯。
English: Civil service property does not include cemeteries, civil service property does not include daily necessities, the family home is not put on the market, officials are not released from prison, and the elderly and disabled are not summoned.

古文：洪武元年置刑部。
现代文：详见《刑法志》。洪武元年，设置刑部。
English: For details, see the "Criminal Law." In the first year of Hongwu, a criminal department was set up.

古文：六年，增尚书、侍郎各一人。
现代文：六年，增设尚书、侍郎各一人。
English: Six years later, Shosho and Jiro were added, one each.

古文：设总部、比部、都官部、司门部，部设郎中、员外郎各二人，惟都官各一人。
现代文：设总部、比部、都官部、司门部，各部设郎中、员外郎各二人，只有都官部各一人。
English: Headquarters, Hibu, Tokanbu, and Shimonbu were set up, and each department had two vice-ministers and two assistant vice-ministers, but only one person from each Tokanbu.

古文：总部、比部主事各六人，都官、司门主事各四人。
现代文：总部、比部主事各六人，都官、司门主事各四人。
English: The head of the headquarters and the head of the statistics department are each six people, and the city official and the head of the gatekeeper are each four people.

古文：八年，以部事浩繁，增设四科，科设尚书、侍郎、郎中各一人，员外郎二人，主事五人。
现代文：八年，因为部事繁多，增设四科，各科设尚书、侍郎、郎中各一人，员外郎二人，主事五人。
English: In the eighth year, due to the large number of ministries, four departments were added, each department having a senior secretary, a secretary, a junior secretary, two junior secretaries, and five supervisors.

古文：十三年，升部秩，设尚书一人，侍郎一人，仍分四属部，部设郎中、员外郎各一人，总部、比部主事各四人，都官、司门主事各二人，寻增侍郎一人。
现代文：十三年提升各部品级，设尚书一人，侍郎一人，仍分四属部，各部设郎中、员外郎各一人，总部、比部主事各四人，都官、司门主事各二人，不久增设侍郎一人。
English: In the 13th year, all component levels were upgraded, with one senior clerk and one attendant, still divided into four subordinate departments, each department having one junior clerk and one outside clerk, four head clerks at the headquarters and four head clerks at the headquarters, two head clerks at the capital and two head clerks at the gate, and one attendant was soon added.

古文：二十二年，改总部为宪部。
现代文：开始分设左、右侍。二十二年，改总部为宪部。
English: Initially, the left and right attendants were separated, and in 1922, the headquarters was changed to the Constitutional Department.

古文：二十三年，分四部为河南、北平、山东、山西、陕西、浙江、江西、湖广、广东、广西、四川、福建十二部，部各设官，如户部之制。
现代文：二十三年，分四部为河南、北平、山东、山西、陕西、浙江、江西、湖广、广东、广西、四川、福建十二部，逝些部兼管云南，每部各设官，全如户部的制度。
English: In 2003, it was divided into four departments: Henan, Beiping, Shandong, Shanxi, Shaanxi, Zhejiang, Jiangxi, Hubei, Guangdong, Guangxi, Sichuan, and Fujian. There are 12 departments, and some departments are also in charge of Yunnan. Each department has its own officials, just like the household department system.

古文：二十九年，改为十二清吏司。
现代文：二十九年，改为十二清吏司。
English: In 1929, it was changed to the 12th Qing Li Division.

古文：永乐元年以北平为北京。
现代文：永乐元年，以北平为北京。
English: In the first year of Yongle, Beiping became Beijing.

古文：十八年，革北京司，增置云南、贵州、交阯三司。
现代文：十八年，革除北京司，增置云南、贵州、交趾三司。
English: In 2018, the Beijing Division was eliminated, and three new divisions were added in Yunnan, Guizhou and Jiaozuo.

古文：宣德十年，革交阯司，遂定为十三清吏司。
现代文：宣德十年，革除交趾司，然后定为十三清吏司。
English: In the 10th year of the Xuande era, the Jiaozi Division was abolished, and then it was designated as the 13th Qing Dynasty Li Division.

古文：工部。尚书一人，左、右侍郎各一人。
现代文：工部，尚书一人，正二品，左、右侍郎各一人，正三品。
English: In the workshop, Shosho is one person, 2nd-ranked, left and right waiters are one person each, 3rd-ranked.

古文：其属，司务厅，司务二人。
现代文：它的下属，司务厅，司务二人，从九品。
English: Its subordinate, the Administrative Office, has two administrative officers from nine departments.

古文：营缮、虞衡、都水、屯田四清吏司，各郎中一人，员外郎一人，主事二人。所辖，营缮所，所正一人，所副二人，所丞二人。
现代文：主事二人，正六品，后增设都水司主事五人，营膳司主事三人，虞衡司主事二人，屯田司主事一人。所辖，营缮所，所正一人，正七品，所副二人，正八品，所丞二人，正九品。
English: There were two supervisors for the sixth grade, and later there were five supervisors for the water division, three supervisors for the kitchen division, two supervisors for the yakitori division, and one supervisor for the tonden division. For the district, there was one supervisor for the seventh grade, two supervisors for the second grade, eight supervisors for the eighth grade, two supervisors for the second grade, and nine supervisors for the ninth grade.

古文：文思院，大使一人，副使二人。
现代文：文思院，大使一人，正九品，副使二人，从九品。
English: Wensi Academy, one ambassador, nine prizes, two vice-ambassadors, nine prizes.

古文：皮作局，大使一人，副使二人。
现代文：皮作局，大使一人，正九品，副使二人，从九品，后来革除。
English: Leatherwork Bureau, one ambassador, nine official products, two deputy envoys, from nine products, later dismissed.

古文：鞍辔局，大使一人，副使一人。
现代文：鞍辔局，大使一人，正九品，副使一人，从九品。
English: Anhui bureau, one ambassador, nine official prizes, one vice-ambassador, nine official prizes.

古文：宝源局，大使一人，副使一人。
现代文：坠鏖元年，大陡、副使都革除。宝源局，大使一人，正九晶，副使一人，从九品，嘉靖年间革除。
English: In the first year of the fall of the Ancien Régime, the Grand Steward and the Vice-Envoy were both dismissed. In the Ho Yuan Bureau, one ambassador, the Chief Jiu Jing, and the Vice-Envoy were all dismissed in the Jiuping and Jiajing years.

古文：颜料局，大使一人，军器局，大使一人，副使二人，节慎库，大使一人，织染所、杂造局，大使一人，副使一人。
现代文：颜料局，大使一人，正九品，后来革除。军器局，大使一人，正九品，副使二人，后来革除一人。节慎库，大使一人，从九品。
English: In the Pigment Bureau, one ambassador was promoted to the 9th grade and later dismissed. In the Ordnance Bureau, one ambassador was promoted to the 9th grade and two vice-ambassadors were promoted to the 9th grade and later dismissed. In the Treasury, one ambassador was promoted to the 9th grade.

古文：广积、通积、卢沟桥、通州、白河各抽分竹木局，大使各一人，副使各一人。
现代文：壶堕八年设。织染所、杂造局，大使一人，正九品，副使一人，从九品。广积、通积、卢沟桥、通州、白河各抽分竹木局，大使各一人，副使各一人。
English: It was established eight years after the fall of the Ming Dynasty. The weaving and dyeing workshop, the handicrafts bureau, one ambassador, nine ministers, one vice-minister, and nine vice-ministers. Guangye, Tongye, Lugouqiao, Tongzhou, Baihe each had a bamboo and wood bureau, one ambassador and one vice-minister.

古文：大通关提举司，提举一人，副提举二人，典史一人。
现代文：大通关提举司，提举一人，正八品，万历二年革除。副提举二人，正九品，典史一人。
English: Daetongguan nominated a secretary, one person was promoted to the eighth grade, and removed from the second year of Wanli. Two people were promoted to the second grade, one person was promoted to the ninth grade, and one person was promoted to the first grade.

古文：柴炭司，大使一人，副使一人。
现代文：后来副提举、典史都革除。柴炭司，大使一人，从九品。副使一人。
English: Later, the deputy was promoted and the official history was eliminated. The charcoal division, one ambassador, was promoted from the ninth grade. One deputy envoy was promoted.

古文：尚书，掌天下百官、山泽之政令。
现代文：尚书掌管天下百官、山泽的政令。
English: Shangshu is in charge of the world's hundred officials, and Yamazawa's decree.

古文：侍郎佐之。
现代文：侍郎辅助它。
English: The waiter assisted him.

古文：营缮，典经营兴作之事。
现代文：营缮司掌管建筑兴建的事务。
English: The Building Maintenance Department is in charge of building construction.

古文：凡宫殿、陵寝、城郭、坛场、祠庙、仓库、廨宇、营房、王府邸第之役，鸠工会材，以时程督之。
现代文：所有宫殿、陵寝、城郭、坛场、祠庙、仓库、官舍、营房、王府邸第的工程，聚集工匠会聚材料，按时监督工程。
English: All the projects of palaces, mausoleums, castles, shrines, temples, warehouses, government offices, barracks, and royal residences, gather craftsmen and materials, and supervise the projects on time.

古文：凡卤簿、仪仗、乐器，移内府及所司，各以其职治之，而以时省其坚洁，而董其窳滥。
现代文：所有卤簿、仪仗、乐器，移交内府及有关部门，各依自己的职责管理它们，而按时检查其牢固洁净，并督察其粗制滥造的情况。
English: All books, ceremonial objects and musical instruments shall be handed over to the Ministry of the Interior and relevant departments, each of which shall manage them according to its own responsibilities, and shall check their firmness and cleanliness on time, and inspect their shoddy workmanship.

古文：凡置狱具，必如律。
现代文：凡是置办狱具，必须按照律令办。
English: All purchases of prison equipment must be made in accordance with the relevant laws and regulations.

古文：凡工匠二等：曰轮班，三岁一役，役不过三月，皆复其家；曰住坐，月役一旬，有稍食。
现代文：所有工匠分二等：一是轮班，每三年服役一次，每次不超过三个月，都免除他家的赋税；一是住坐，每月服役十天，按月发给禄银。
English: All artisans were divided into two classes: the first was to work in shifts, to serve once every three years, and to serve no more than three months at a time, exempting his family from paying taxes; the first was to live at home, to serve ten days a month, and to receive a monthly stipend.

古文：工役二等，以处罪人输作者，曰正工，曰杂工。
现代文：工役分二等，用处罪之人充当的，一称为正工，一称为杂工。
English: The laborers are divided into two classes. Those who are employed by the person who has committed the crime are called regular workers and those are called handymen.

古文：杂工三日当正工一日，皆视役大小而拨节之。
现代文：杂工三天当正工一天，都根据劳役大小而分配。
English: Handyman for three days and regular worker for one day are all allocated according to the size of the labor service.

古文：凡物料储偫，曰神木厂，曰大木厂，以蓄材木，曰黑窑厂，曰琉璃厂，以陶瓦器，曰台基厂，以贮薪苇，皆籍其数以供修作之用。
现代文：所有材料储备，称为神木厂、大木厂，以蓄积木材；称为黑窖厂、琉璃厂，以储存烧制瓦器；称为台基厂，以存贮柴薪，都登记其数目以供修建时使用。
English: All the material reserves, known as the sacred wood plant and the large wood plant, for storing wood; known as the black cellar plant and the glazing plant, for storing fired earthenware; known as the foundation plant, for storing firewood, have their numbers registered for use during construction.

古文：虞衡，典山泽采捕、陶冶之事。
现代文：虞衡司掌管山泽采集捕猎、制陶冶炼的事务。
English: The Yu Heng Division is in charge of the affairs of collecting, hunting and pottery smelting in Yamazawa.

古文：凡鸟兽之肉、皮革、骨角、羽毛，可以供祭祀、宾客、膳羞之需，礼器、军实之用，岁下诸司采捕。水课禽十八、兽十二，陆课兽十八、禽十二，皆以其时。
现代文：所有乌兽的肉、皮革、骨角、羽毛，可以供祭祀、宴客、膳食的需要，礼器、军事物资的使用，每年下令各司采集捕猎水生禽类征收十八种，兽类征收十二种，陆生兽类征收十八种，禽类征收十二种，都遵照时令办治。
English: The meat, hides, horns, and feathers of all wild animals can be used for sacrifices, banquets, meals, ceremonial objects, and military supplies. Each year, the departments are ordered to collect and collect 18 species of aquatic birds, 12 species of wild animals, 18 species of terrestrial animals, and 12 species of birds, all in accordance with the season.

古文：冬春之交，罝罛不施川泽；春夏之交，毒药不施原野。
现代文：冬春之交，罗网不设于川泽；春夏之交，毒药不投放于原野。
English: At the turn of winter and spring, trawling nets are not set up in Kawazawa; at the turn of spring and summer, poison is not released in the field.

古文：苗盛禁蹂躏，谷登禁焚燎。
现代文：禾苗生长茂盛时禁止践踏，谷物结实时禁止焚燎。
English: It is forbidden to trample on grass seedlings when they are growing luxuriantly, and it is forbidden to burn stalks at the time of grain knots.

古文：若害兽，听为陷阱获之，赏有差。
现代文：如果是有害的野兽，听凭设陷阱捕获，赏赐有差等。
English: If it is a harmful beast, it will be caught by setting a trap, and the reward will be different.

古文：凡诸陵山麓，不得入斧斤、开窑冶、置墓坟。
现代文：所有各皇家陵寝所在山麓，不准进山砍伐、开设窖厂冶矿、安置坟墓。
English: All the royal tombs are located at the foot of the mountain, and it is not allowed to enter the mountain to cut, open a smelting plant, or place a tomb.

古文：凡帝王、圣贤、忠义、名山、岳镇、陵墓、祠庙有功德于民者，禁樵牧。
现代文：凡是帝王、圣贤、忠义、名山、岳镇、陵墓、祠庙有功德于人民的，禁止砍伐放牧。
English: Where emperors, sages, loyalty, famous mountains, mountain towns, mausoleums, and ancestral temples have contributed to the people, cutting and grazing are prohibited.

古文：凡山场、园林之利，听民取而薄征之。
现代文：所有山场、园林的利益，听凭百姓获取而稍许征收税利。
English: The interests of all mountain farms and gardens are subject to the people's acquisition and a little tax.

古文：凡军装、兵械，下所司造，同兵部省之，必程其坚致。
现代文：所有军队服装、兵器，下令所属部门制造，会同兵部检查，必须监督其牢固细密。
English: All military clothing and weapons, which are ordered to be manufactured by the department to which they belong, must be inspected in conjunction with the Ministry of Military Affairs, and must be monitored for their firmness and fineness.

古文：凡陶甄之事，有岁供，有暂供，有停减，籍其数，会其入，毋轻毁以费民。
现代文：所有陶器制作的事，有岁供，有暂供，有停减，登记其数目，总计献入，不得随意毁坏而浪费民力。
English: All the things of pottery production, there is annual supply, there is temporary supply, there is a stop reduction, register their number, total input, must not be destroyed at will and waste people's efforts.

古文：凡诸冶，饬其材，审其模范，付有司。
现代文：所有各冶矿，整饬其材料，审查其模型铸范，交付有关部门。
English: All metallurgical mines shall rectify their materials, review their model casting patterns, and submit them to the relevant departments.

古文：钱必准铢两，进于内府而颁之。
现代文：钱币重量必须有标准，进奉内府然后颁行。
English: There must be a standard for the weight of coins, which must be sent to the government and then issued.

古文：牌符、火器，铸于内府，禁其以法式泄于外。
现代文：牌符、火器，在内府铸造，禁止把方法泄露于外。
English: license plates and firearms are cast in Neifu, and it is forbidden to disclose the method to the outside world.

古文：凡颜料，非其土产不以征。
现代文：所有颜料，非其当地盛产不予征收。
English: All pigments that are not locally abundant will not be levied.

古文：都水，典川泽、陂池、桥道、舟车、织造、券契、量衡之事。
现代文：都水司掌管川泽、陂池、桥梁道路、车船、织造、券契、量器衡器的事务。
English: The Metropolitan Water Bureau is in charge of the affairs of Kawazawa, Tsugaike, bridges and roads, cars and ships, weaving, vouchers, and measuring instruments.

古文：水利曰转漕，曰灌田。
现代文：水利一是转漕，一是灌田。
English: One is water conservancy, the other is irrigation.

古文：岁储其金石、竹木、卷埽，以时修其闸坝、洪浅、堰圩、堤防，谨蓄泄以备旱潦，无使坏田庐、坟隧、禾稼。
现代文：每年储备铜铁石料、竹木、埽料，按时维修闸坝、洪流浅滩、堰圩、堤防，谨慎蓄水排水以防备水旱灾害，不使毁坏田园房舍，坟墓隧道、禾苗庄稼。
English: Every year, copper, iron and stone materials, bamboo, and rafting materials should be reserved, dams, floodplains, weirs, and dikes should be repaired on time, water storage and drainage should be carefully carried out to prevent floods and droughts, and rural houses, grave tunnels, and crops should not be destroyed.

古文：舟楫、硙碾者不得与灌田争利，灌田者不得与转漕争利。
现代文：航运、碾房不得与灌田的争抢水源，灌田的不得与转漕争抢水源。
English: Shipping and milling houses may not compete with irrigation fields for water sources, and irrigation fields may not compete with rotary cranes for water sources.

古文：凡诸水要会，遣京朝官专理，以督有司。
现代文：所有各河流汇合要津，派京朝官专门管理，以督察有关部门。
English: All the rivers converge at Yotsu, and the imperial officials in Beijing were sent to supervise the relevant departments.

古文：役民必以农隙，不能至农隙，则僝功成之。
现代文：役使百姓必须是农闲，不能等到农闲，便筹集工料逐步建成工程。
English: The people must be idle when they work, and they cannot wait until they are idle to raise materials to gradually complete the project.

古文：凡道路、津梁，时其葺治。
现代文：所有道路、渡口桥梁，随时修整。
English: All roads, ferry crossings and bridges are to be maintained at all times.

古文：有巡幸及大丧、大礼，则修除而较比之。
现代文：有巡幸以及大丧、大礼，便比照规定修治。
English: If there is a procession as well as a great mourning or a grand ceremony, then it will be repaired according to regulations.

古文：凡舟车之制，曰黄船，以供御用，曰遮洋船，以转漕于海，曰浅船，以转漕于河，曰马船、曰风快船，以供送官物，曰备倭船、曰战船，以御寇贼，曰大车，曰独辕车，曰战车，皆会其财用，酌其多寡、久近、劳逸而均剂之。
现代文：所有车船的形制，有黄船，以供皇帝使用，有遮洋船，以转漕运到海运，有浅船，以转漕运到河运，有马船、有风快船，以供运送官物，有备倭船、战船，以防御敌寇，有大车、独辕车、战车，都计算其费用，斟酌其多少、远近、劳逸而均匀调剂。
English: All the forms of carriages and ships, including the yellow boat for the emperor to use, the ocean-going ship to be transported by rowing boat to the sea, the shallow boat to be transported by rowing boat to the river, the horse-drawn boat and the wind-driven fast boat to be used for transporting official articles, the prepared wafers and warships to defend against enemy pirates, and the big car, the single-deck car and the chariot, all calculate their costs, consider how much, how far and how hard they are, and adjust them evenly.

古文：凡织造冕服、诰敕、制帛、祭服、净衣诸币布，移内府、南京、浙江诸处，周知其数而慎节之。
现代文：凡是织造冕服、诰敕、制帛、祭服、净衣等各种布匹，移交内府、南京、浙江各处，详细了解其数目而谨慎节用。
English: All kinds of cloths such as woven coronation robes, cocoons, ceremonial robes, clean clothes, etc. should be handed over to various places in the prefecture, Nanjing and Zhejiang, and their number should be carefully understood and used sparingly.

古文：凡公、侯、伯铁券，差其高广。
现代文：所有公、侯、伯铁券区别其大小。
English: All public, municipal and provincial railway tickets differ in size.

古文：凡祭器、册宝、乘舆、符牌、杂器皆会则于内府。
现代文：制式详见《礼志》。所有祭器、册宝、乘舆、符牌、杂器都统一规定于内府。
English: For details of the system, see "Rishi." All sacred vessels, treasures, emblems, tokens, and miscellaneous utensils are uniformly specified in the Naifu.

古文：凡度量、权衡，谨其校勘而颁之，悬式于市，而罪其不中度者。
现代文：所有度量、度量器具，谨慎审订然后颁布，在市场上悬挂样式，并且惩处不符合法度的人。
English: All measures, measuring instruments, carefully reviewed and then promulgated, hanging styles on the market, and punish those who do not comply with the law.

古文：屯田，典屯种、抽分、薪炭、夫役、坟茔之事。
现代文：屯田司掌管屯垦、抽取赋税、薪炭、夫役、坟茔的事务。
English: The Tonden no Tsukasa was in charge of the affairs of the settlement, tax collection, firewood and charcoal, husband service, and cemeteries.

古文：凡军马守镇之处，其有转运不给，则设屯以益军储。
现代文：所有军队戍守之处，如有转运供应不上，便设屯以充实军队储备。
English: In all places where the army is garrisoned, if there is no transshipment supply, they will set up a camp to enrich the army reserve.

古文：其规办营造、木植、城砖、军营、官屋及战衣、器械、耕牛、农具之属。
现代文：规划办治建造、木材、城砖、军营、官家房屋以及军衣、器械、耕牛、农具之类事务。
English: Planning, administration, construction, timber, bricks, military camps, government buildings, as well as military uniforms, equipment, cattle, agricultural tools and other matters.

古文：凡抽分征诸商，视其财物各有差。
现代文：所有税收向商人征收，根据财物各有差等。
English: All taxes are levied on merchants, with different rates for different types of property.

古文：凡薪炭，南取洲汀，北取山麓，或征诸民，有本、折色，酌其多寡而撙节之。
现代文：所有薪炭，南方取于沙洲水汀，北方取于山林，或向百姓征收，有收实物、有收折合成钱钞，酌情多少而控制施行。
English: All firewood and charcoal, in the south taken from sandbars, in the north from mountain forests, or collected from the people, will be subject to control and enforcement as appropriate.

古文：夫役伐薪、转薪，皆雇役。
现代文：昱元年，设置将作司，卿，正三品，少卿，正四品，丞，正五品。
English: In the first year of the Heian period, it was set as Shishi, Kyo, Sho Sanbon, Sho Kyo, Sho Shihon, Jo, and Sho Go.

古文：凡坟茔及堂碑、碣兽之制，第宗室、勋戚、文武官之等而定其差。
现代文：左、右提举司提举，正六品，同提举，从六品，司程、典簿、副提举，正七品。军需库大使，从八品，副使，正九品。
English: On the left and on the right, the officers were promoted from the sixth to the sixth grade, the same officers were promoted from the sixth to the seventh grade, the officers, the record books, and the deputies were promoted from the sixth to the seventh grade, the ambassador of the munitions depot was promoted from the eighth to the ninth grade, and the deputy envoy was promoted from the ninth to the tenth grade.

古文：洪武初，置工部及官属，以将作司隶焉。六年，增尚书、侍郎各一人，设总部、虞部、水部并屯田为四属部。
现代文：迭武元年，以将作司隶属于工部。六年增设尚书、侍郎各一人，设总部、虞部、水部及屯田为四个属部。
English: In the first year of the reign of Emperor Jimmu, the post of secretary was added to the work department. In the sixth year, the post of secretary and the post of attendant were added, and four subordinate departments were established, including the head office, the yakitori department, the water department, and the tonden.

古文：总部设郎中、员外郎各二人，馀各一人。
现代文：总部设郎中、员外郎各二人，余部各一人。
English: Two members from the head office and two members from outside the head office, and one member from outside the head office.

古文：总部主事八人，馀各四人。
现代文：总部主事八人，余部各四人。
English: There are eight managers at the head office and four in each of the other departments.

古文：又置营造提举司。
现代文：又设置营造提举司。
English: It also set up a construction and lifting division.

古文：八年，增立四科，科设尚书、侍郎、郎中各一人，员外郎二人，主事五人，照磨二人。
现代文：送亟六年，改将作司为正六品，所属提举司，改为正七品。不久又设置营造提举司及营造提举分司，每司设正提举一人，副提举二人，隶属将作司。八年，增立四科，各科设尚书、侍郎、郎中各一人，员外郎二人，主事五人，照磨二人。
English: In the sixth year, the position of the master craftsman was changed to the sixth grade, and the position of the master craftsman belonging to the master craftsman was changed to the seventh grade. Soon, the master craftsman and the sub-master craftsman were set up, with one master craftsman and two sub-master craftsmen belonging to the master craftsman in each department. In the eighth year, four subjects were added, each subject was set up with one scholar, servant, and apprentice, two assistant masters, five supervisors, and two supervisors.

古文：十年，罢将作司。
现代文：十年，罢除将作司。
English: Ten years, the dismissal will be made by the department.

古文：十三年定官制，设尚书一人，侍郎一人，四属部，各郎中、员外郎一人，主事二人。
现代文：十三年，制定官制，设尚书一人，侍郎一人，四个属部以屯田部为屯部，各有郎中、员外郎一人，主事二人。
English: In the 13th year, the official system was established, with one official and one attendant, and four subordinate departments with the field department as the field department, each with a junior assistant, a junior assistant, and two supervisors.

古文：十五年增侍郎一人。
现代文：十五年，增设侍郎一人。
English: Fifteen years later, a chamberlain was added.

古文：二十二年，改总部为营部。
现代文：二十二年，改总部为营部。
English: In 1922, the headquarters was changed to a camp.

古文：二十五年，置营缮所。
现代文：二十五年，设置营缮所。
English: Twenty-five years later, a camp sanatorium was set up.

古文：二十九年，又改四属部为营缮、虞衡、都水、屯田四清吏司。
现代文：改将作司为营缮所，官秩正七品，设所正、所副、所丞各二人，以各工匠中技艺精湛者担任。十九年，又改四属部为营缮、虞衡、都水、屯田四个清吏司。
English: In 1919, it was decided to change the position of the chief clerk to Yingxiao, with seven official ranks, and two chief clerks, two deputy chief clerks, and two assistant chief clerks, with the most skilled craftsmen in each position. In addition, the four subordinate departments were changed to Yingxiao, Yuheng, Doushui, and Tonden.

古文：嘉靖后添设尚书一人，专督大工。
现代文：嘉靖后，添设尚书一人，专门督管大工程。
English: After Jiajing, Shangshu was appointed to supervise major projects.

古文：提督易州山厂一人，掌督御用柴炭之事。
现代文：提督易州山厂一人，掌管督察御用柴炭的事务。
English: Admiral Yizhou Mountain Plant, in charge of the affairs of the inspector's official charcoal.

古文：明初，于沿江芦洲并龙江、瓦屑二场，取用柴炭。
现代文：明代初年，于沿长江芦洲及龙江、瓦屑二场，取用柴炭。
English: In the first year of the Ming Dynasty, firewood charcoal was used at two sites along the Yangtze River, Louzhou and Longjiang, and at a tile-making site.

古文：永乐间，迁都于北，则于白羊口、黄花镇、红螺山等处采办。
现代文：永乐年间，迁都到北方，便从白羊口、黄花镇、红螺山等处采办。
English: During the Yongle era, when the capital was moved to the north, it was purchased from Baiyangkou, Huanghua Town, Hongluoshan and other places.

古文：宣德四年始设易州山厂，专官总理。
现代文：宣德四年，开始设立易州山厂，专门设官总管。
English: Xuande four years, began to set up the Yizhou Mountain Plant, set up a special officer in charge.

古文：景泰间，移于平山，又移于满城，相继以本部尚书或侍郎督厂事。
现代文：景泰年间，移到平山，又移到满城，相继以本部尚书或侍郎督办山厂事务。
English: During the reign of King Gyeongtae, he moved to Hirayama and then to Manchong, successively handling the affairs of the mountain factory with the title of head office secretary or chamberlain.

古文：天顺元年仍移于易州。
现代文：天顺元年，仍旧移到易州。
English: In the first year of Tianshun, it was still moved to Yizhou.

古文：嘉靖八年罢革，改设主事管理。
现代文：嘉靖八年革除，改设主事管理。
English: In the eighth year of Jiajing, it was removed and the main management was set up.

