古文：刘薛李清郑师辩法庆开元选人崔明达王抡费子玉梅先
现代文：刘薛李清郑师辩法庆开元选人崔明达王抡费子玉梅先
English: Liu Xue, Li Qing, Zheng Shi, Choi Mingda, Wang Xuan, Feizi, Yu Mei Sen

古文：刘薛
现代文：刘薛
English: Liu Xue

古文：晋太元九年，西河离石县有胡人刘薛者，暴疾亡，而心下犹暖。
现代文：东晋孝武帝太元九年，西河离石县有个胡人叫刘薛，患暴病死亡，心窝处却很温热。
English: In the ninth year of the reign of Emperor Xiaowu of the Eastern Jin Dynasty, there was a Hu man named Liu Xue in Xiheyishi County. He died of violent illness, but his heart was very warm.

古文：其家不敢殡殓，经七日而苏。
现代文：家中人不敢殡殓，七日后复活。
English: No one in the family dared to bury him, and he was resurrected seven days later.

古文：言初见两吏录去，向北行，不测远近。至十八重地狱，随报轻重，受诸楚毒。
现代文：他说，起初看见两个小吏带他向北走，不知走多远，到了十八重地狱，随从报告轻罪重罪，受各种刑罚。
English: At first, he said, he saw two henchmen take him north, I don't know how far, to the 18 levels of hell, to report minor and serious crimes, and to receive all kinds of punishments.

古文：忽观世音语云： 汝缘未尽，若再得生，可作沙门。
现代文：忽然观世音说： 你的尘缘未尽，你若再生，可作和尚。
English: Suddenly, Guanyin said, "Your earthly life is not over. If you are reborn, you can become a monk."

古文：今洛下、齐城、丹阳、会稽，并有阿育王塔，可往礼拜。
现代文：洛下、齐城、丹阳、会稽都有阿育王塔，都要去礼拜。
English: There are Ashoka Pagodas in Lushan, Qicheng, Danyang, and Hefei, and they all go to worship.

古文：若寿终，不堕地狱。 
现代文：死了以后，就不用进地狱。 
English: When you die, you don't have to go to hell.

古文：语竟，如坠高岩，忽然醒寤。
现代文：说完，就像从高山上坠下，忽然醒来。
English: After that, it was like falling from a high mountain and suddenly waking up.

古文：因此出家，法名惠达，游行礼塔。
现代文：从此出家，法名惠达。到处游走，礼拜塔庙。
English: Since then, he has become a monk, and his Buddhist name is Huida. He travels everywhere and worships at pagodas and temples.

古文：次至丹阳，未知塔处。
现代文：到了丹阳时，不知塔在何处。
English: When I arrived in Danyang, I didn't know where the tower was.

古文：乃登越西望，见长干里有异气色，因就礼拜，果是先阿育王塔之所也。
现代文：他便登高向西望，见长干里一带有特殊色彩的气，他便礼拜，果然是阿育王塔所在地方。
English: He climbed high and looked westward. He saw a special color in the air in the Changgan Village, and he prayed. It was indeed the place where the Ashoka Pagoda was located.

古文：由是定知必有舍利，乃聚众掘之。
现代文：由此断定这里必有舍利子。
English: From this, it is concluded that there must be a shearling here.

古文：入地一丈，得石牌三，下有铁函，函中复有银函，函中又有金函，盛三舍利及爪发。
现代文：召集人挖掘，入地一丈，得到三个石碑，下面有铁匣子，其中有银匣，银匣中有金匣，盛着三个舍利子和指甲、头发。
English: The convener excavated, went to the ground, and got three stone tablets. Underneath there was an iron box, including a silver box, and a gold box in the silver box, containing three sharps and nails and hair.

古文：薛乃于此处造一塔焉。李清
现代文：刘薛便在这里建了一座塔。李清
English: Liu Xue then built a tower here.

古文：李清者，吴兴于潜人也，仕桓温大司马府参军督护。
现代文：李清是吴兴於潜人。任桓温大司马府参军都护。
English: Li Qing was Wu Xing's subordinate. He served as Kanwen Daishi and Ma Fu's military attache to the capital.

古文：于府得病，还家而死，经夕苏活。
现代文：在府中得病，回家便死了，过了一夜又复活了。
English: He fell ill in the house, died when he got home, and came back to life one night later.

古文：说云，初见传教，持信幡唤之，云： 公欲相见。 
现代文：他说，起初看见来传他的差役，手拿信幡叫他，并说： 公想见你。 
English: He said that when he first saw the messenger who had come to summon him, he called him with a letter in his hand and said: "The public wants to see you."

古文：清谓是温召，即起束带而去。
现代文：李清以为桓温召他，他便起来扎好腰带跟着走了。
English: Li Qing thought that Kanen was calling him, so he stood up, fastened his belt and followed him.

古文：出门，见一竹舆，便令入中，二人推之，疾速如驰。
现代文：一出门看见一竹车，让他坐车，两个人推车很快地奔跑。
English: As soon as he went out, he saw a bamboo cart. He was allowed to take a ride, and the two people pushing the cart ran very fast.

古文：至一朱门，见阮敬。
现代文：到了一座红门前，见了阮敬。
English: When I arrived in front of a red gate, I saw Nguyen Quynh.

古文：时敬死已三十年矣。
现代文：当时阮敬已经死了三十年。
English: At that time, Nguyen Quynh had been dead for 30 years.

古文：敬问清曰： 卿何时来？
现代文：阮敬问李清： 你什么时候来的？
English: Ruan Jing asked Li Qing: When did you come here?

古文：知我家何似？ 
现代文：知道我家的情况吗？ 
English: Do you know anything about my family?

古文：清云： 卿家暴恶。 
现代文：李清说： 你家突然遭到不幸。 
English: Li Qing said: Your family was suddenly struck by misfortune.

古文：敬便雨泪。
现代文：阮敬便流下泪来。
English: Nguyen Quynh burst into tears.

古文：言知吾子孙如何。
现代文：他又问： 知道我的子孙如何？ 
English: He also asked: How can I know my descendants?

古文：答云，且可。
现代文：答道： 还可以。 
English: Answer: It's okay.

古文：敬云： 我今令卿得脱，汝能料理吾家不？ 
现代文：阮敬说： 我现在叫你回去，你能管理好我家吗？ 
English: Nguyen Quynh said, "I am asking you to go back now. Can you manage my home well?

古文：清云： 若能如此，不负大恩。 
现代文：李清说： 若能这样，我不能辜负了你的恩德。 
English: Li Qing said: If I can do this, I can't live up to your kindness.

古文：敬言： 僧达道人是官师，甚被敬礼，当苦告之。 
现代文：阮敬说： 僧达道人是个官师，很受尊重，把我的苦处告诉他。 
English: Nguyen Quynh said: "The monk and Taoist is an official teacher and is highly respected. I told him about my hardships.

古文：还内良久，遣人出云： 门前四层寺，官所起也。
现代文：阮敬进去很久，派人出来说： 门前的四层寺，是官府建造的。
English: Ruan Jing went in for a long time and sent someone out to say: The four-story temple in front of the gate was built by the government.

古文：僧达常以平旦入寺礼拜，宜就求哀。 
现代文：僧达常在每天清晨入寺礼拜，应求他解除苦哀。 
English: The monk often went to the temple every morning to pray, asking him to relieve his suffering.

古文：清往其寺，见一沙门语曰： 汝是我前七生时弟子，已经七世受福，迷著世乐，忘失本业。背正就邪，当受大罪。令可改悔。
现代文：李清就去了那个寺，见一个和尚说： 你是我前七代时的弟子，已经享了七代福，你迷恋世间的欢乐，忘记了本业，背正亲邪，应当受大罪，现在可以改悔。
English: Li Qing went to that temple and saw a monk who said: You were my disciple seven generations ago, and you have already enjoyed seven generations of blessings. You were infatuated with the joys of the world, forgot your vocation, turned your back on righteousness and evil, and should have suffered a great sin. Now you can repent.

古文：和尚明出，当相助。 
现代文：和尚明天出来，定能相助。 
English: If Monk comes out tomorrow, I'm sure he can help.

古文：清还先舆中，夜寒噤冻。
现代文：李清又回到竹车中，夜间寒冷冻的打哆嗦。
English: Li Qing is back in the bamboo cart, snoring in the cold of the night.

古文：至晓门开，僧达果出。清便随逐稽颡。
现代文：天亮时门开了，僧达道人果然出来了，李清便伏地长拜。
English: When the door opened at dawn, the monk and scholar came out, and Li Qing prostrated himself.

古文：僧达云： 汝当革为善，归命佛、法，归命比丘僧。受此三归，可得不横死。受持勤者，亦不经苦难。 
现代文：僧达说： 你应该改恶行善，信奉佛、法，信奉比丘僧，你接受这三条，就能免除横死，经常拜佛也不会遇到苦难。 
English: The monk said, "You should turn from evil and do good. You should believe in Buddha, Dharma, and monks. If you accept these three precepts, you will be able to avoid a violent death, and you will not encounter suffering if you worship Buddha regularly."

古文：清便奉受。
现代文：李清便接受了。
English: Li Qing readily accepted.

古文：又见昨所遇沙门，长跪请曰： 此人僧达宿世弟子，忘正失法，方将受苦。先缘朱所追，今得归余，愿垂慈愍。 
现代文：又看到昨天遇见的和尚，长跪请求说： 这是僧达前七世弟子，忘了正路，失掉了佛法，正要受苦，蒙僧达师父所助，才得以归命，愿你以慈悲之心解除他的痛苦。 
English: He also saw the monk he had met the day before, kneel down and plead with him, saying, "This is a former seventh-generation disciple of the Buddha. He has forgotten the right path, lost the Dharma, and is about to suffer. It was only with the help of the master monk that he was able to return to his life. May you relieve his suffering with compassion."

古文：答曰： 先是福人，当易拔济耳。 
现代文：和尚道： 原先是有福之人，应当容易援救。 
English: Monk said, "Originally, people who are blessed should be easy to rescue.

古文：便还向朱门，俄遣人出云： 李参军可去。 
现代文：说完便走回红门，一会儿派人出来说： 李参军可以回去了。 
English: After saying this, he walked back to the Red Gate, and after a while, he sent someone out to say, "Li Sanjun can go back."

古文：敬时亦出，与清一青竹杖，令闭眼骑之。
现代文：阮敬这时也走出来了，给李清一根青竹杖，叫他闭眼骑上。
English: At this time, Ruan Jing also came out, gave Li Qing a blue bamboo cane, and told him to close his eyes and ride.

古文：清如其言，忽然至家。
现代文：李清照办，忽然到家了。
English: Li Qing did as he was told and suddenly arrived home.

古文：家中啼哭，及乡亲塞堂，欲入不得。
现代文：家人正在啼哭，乡亲挤满了屋，想进却进不去。
English: Family members are wailing, and the townspeople have packed the house, wanting to get in but unable to.

古文：会买材还。家人及客，赴监视之，唯尸在地。
现代文：趁买棺材回来的机会，家人和客人都去看棺材。只剩尸体在地。
English: Taking the opportunity to buy a coffin, the family and guests all went to see the coffin. Only the body was left on the ground.

古文：清入至尸前，闻其尸臭，自念悔还。
现代文：李清到尸体前，闻到了尸臭味，心里后悔回来。
English: Before Li Qing got to the body, he smelled the stench of the corpse and regretted coming back.

古文：得外人逼突，不觉入。少时，于是而活。
现代文：外边的人突然回来，不自觉的进去，于是又活了。
English: The people outside suddenly came back, entered unconsciously, and then came back to life.

古文：即营理敬家，分宅以居。
现代文：立即操劳管理阮敬的家业，各支分宅而居。
English: Work immediately to manage Nguyen Quynh's family business, and live separately in each branch.

古文：于是归心法宝，劝信法教，遂作佳流弟子。
现代文：于是心归佛法，并劝人信奉法教，以后便成了上流弟子。
English: As a result, he turned his heart to Buddhism and persuaded others to believe in the teachings of the Dharma. Later, he became a high-ranking disciple.

古文：郑师辩
现代文：郑师辩
English: Zheng Shiren

古文：唐东官右监门兵曹参军郑师辩，年未弱冠，暴死三日而苏。
现代文：唐朝，东宫右监门兵曹参军郑师辩，年龄不到二十，暴死三日后又复活了。
English: In the Tang Dynasty, Zheng Shifen, a guard at the gate of the East Palace, was less than twenty years old. He died suddenly and was revived three days later.

古文：自言初有数人见收，将人入官府大门。
现代文：他自己说，当初有很多人集在一起，把人带进官府大门。
English: He himself said that at the beginning there were a lot of people who got together and brought people to the gate of the government office.

古文：有见囚百余人，皆重行北面立，凡为六行。
现代文：看见囚徒百多人，排成行向北面站着，共六行。
English: I saw more than a hundred prisoners standing in six rows facing north.

古文：其前行者，形状肥白，好衣服，如贵人。
现代文：前行的人个个身体肥胖白晰，穿好衣服，像富贵之人。
English: The people walking ahead are all fat, white, and well-dressed, like rich people.

古文：复行渐瘦恶，或著枷锁，或但去巾带，偕行连袂，严兵守之。
现代文：第二行身体瘦削面相凶恶，有的戴枷锁，有的没戴头巾腰带，他们一起行动，有士兵严加看管。
English: The second line of emaciated bodies, some wearing shackles, others without headscarves or belts, move together, closely guarded by soldiers.

古文：师辩至，配入第三行，东头第三立，亦巾带连袂。
现代文：师辩去了，排在第三行。东数第三位，也是个挨个的连在一起。
English: The debate is over, and they are in the third row, and the third place is also connected one by one.

古文：辩忧惧，专心念佛。忽见平生相识僧来。入兵团内，兵莫之止。囚至辩所，谓曰： 平生不修福，今忽如何？ 
现代文：师辩很忧虑恐惧，专心念佛，忽然看到一个生时认识的僧人走过来，进入兵团内，兵没阻止他，像囚犯似的规矩地走到师辩所在的地方，对师辩说： 你生时不修福，现在怎么样？ 
English: Shi Rong was very worried and fearful. He was concentrating on chanting Buddha's name. Suddenly, he saw a monk he had known in his lifetime come over and enter the corps. The soldiers did not stop him. He walked to where Shi Rong was, like a prisoner, and said to Shi Rong: "You did not practice blessing when you were alive. How are you now?"

古文：辩求请救。
现代文：师辩请求救他。
English: The defence asked for him to be saved.

古文：僧曰： 吾今救汝得出，可持戒耶？ 
现代文：僧说： 我现在救你出去，你能坚持戒律吗？ 
English: The monk said, "I'll help you out now. Can you keep the precepts?"

古文： 诺。 
现代文：师辩答应了。
English: Shi Rong agreed.

古文：须臾，吏引入诸囚至官前，以次诘问。寻于门外，僧为授五戒，用瓶水灌其额。
现代文：片刻，差役领各囚犯到官前，按次序盘问，又到了门外，僧人为他们传授五戒，用瓶中的水浇他的额头。
English: After a while, the guards led each prisoner to the front of the office and interrogated them in order. Outside the door, the monk taught them the Five Precepts and poured water from a bottle on his forehead.

古文：谓曰： 日西当活。 
现代文：对他说： 日落西山时就可以活了。 
English: Tell him: When the sun sets in the West, you will be able to live.

古文：又以黄帔一枚与辩，曰： 披此至家，置净处也。 
现代文：又拿一件黄披巾给师辩，说： 披着这个到家，然后放在洁静的地方。 
English: He also brought a yellow shawl to his teacher and said, "Wear this when you get home, and then put it in a clean and quiet place.

古文：仍示归路，辩披之而归。
现代文：告诉他回去的路，师辩披着回去了。
English: I told him the way to go back, and he went back wearing his school uniform.

古文：至家掖帔至床角上，既而目开身动，家人惊散，谓死欲起。唯母不去，问曰： 汝活耶。 
现代文：到家，把黄帔掖在床角上。然后，他就睁开了眼睛，身子也会动了，家里人被吓咆了，说要诈尸，只有他母亲没走，问： 你活啦？ 
English: When he got home, he put Huang Qi on the corner of the bed. Then, he opened his eyes, his body would also move, his family members were scared and roared, saying that they wanted to swindle the corpse, only his mother did not leave, asking: Are you alive?

古文：辩曰： 日西当活。 
现代文：师辩说： 日落西山时就活了。 
English: The teacher argued: When the sun sets on the West Mountain, it will come to life.

古文：辩意时疑日午，问母。母曰： 夜半。 
现代文：师辩认为当时是正午，问他母亲，母亲说： 现在是半夜。 
English: He thought it was noon and asked his mother, who said, "It's midnight."

古文：方知死生相违，昼夜相及。
现代文：他才知道生和死是相违的，白天黑夜是相反的。
English: Only then did he know that life and death are opposites, that day and night are opposites.

古文：既到日西，能食而愈，犹见帔在床头。
现代文：了到日头西落时能吃了，便痊愈了。好像看见黄帔在床头上。
English: And when the sun was down, he did eat, and was clean: and his countenance was as it were the countenance of a king in his bed.

古文：及辩能起，帔形渐灭，而尚有光。七日乃尽。
现代文：等到师辩能起来时，黄帔的形象逐渐没有了，可是光却仍在，七天后才完全没有。
English: By the time the debate was able to take place, the image of Huang Qi had gradually disappeared, but the light was still there. It was not completely gone until seven days later.

古文：辩遂持五戒。
现代文：师辩便坚持五戒。
English: Shi Dian adhered to the Five Precepts.

古文：后数年，有友人劝食猪肉。辩不得已，食一脔。是夜。梦己化为罗刹，爪齿各长数尺，捉生猪食之。
现代文：数年后，有朋友劝他吃猪肉，师辩不得已吃了一块，当夜，梦见了自己变成了一个罗刹恶鬼，爪子、牙齿好几尺长，捉生猪吃。
English: A few years later, a friend persuaded him to eat pork. Shi Dian had no choice but to eat a piece of it. That night, he dreamed that he had become a Luo evil spirit, with claws and teeth several feet long, catching and eating pigs.

古文：既晓，觉口醒唾血。使人视口，尽是凝血。
现代文：天亮时，觉得口腥吐血，叫人看口，都是凝结的血块。
English: When it was dawn, I felt nauseous and vomited blood, which made people look at my mouth. It was all clotted blood.

古文：辩惊，不敢复食肉。
现代文：师辩很吃惊，不敢再吃肉了。
English: Shi Rong was very surprised and did not dare to eat meat again.

古文：又数年，娶妻。家逼食，后乃无验。然而辩自五六年来，身臭有大疮，溃烂不愈。或恐以破戒之故也。
现代文：又过了数年，娶了妻，家人逼他吃肉，虽然没出现什么征兆，然而师辩这五六年以来，身上发臭生大疮，溃烂不愈，这恐怕是破戒的缘故吧。
English: After a few more years, he married a wife, and his family forced him to eat meat. Although there were no signs, over the past five or six years, his body had developed a foul smell, large sores, and festering sores. I'm afraid this was due to breaking the precepts.

古文：唐临昔与辩同直东宫，见其自说。
现代文：唐时，临昔和师辩同在东宫，听他自己说的。
English: At the time of the Tang Dynasty, Lin Xi was in the East Palace, listening to what he had to say.

古文：法庆
现代文：法庆
English: Fa Qing

古文：凝观寺有僧法庆。造丈六挟纻像未成暴死。
现代文：法庆是凝观寺的僧人，在建造一丈六尺高夹麻布的塑像时，没完成便暴死了。
English: Fa Qing was a monk at the Gongguan Temple. While building a statue of a six-foot-tall linen cloth, he died without completing it.

古文：时宝昌寺僧大智，同日亦卒。
现代文：当时宝昌寺的僧人大智，也在同天死去。
English: At that time, Daichi, a monk of Baochang Temple, also died on the same day.

古文：三日并苏。
现代文：三日后又都苏醒。
English: They all woke up three days later.

古文：云，见官曹，殿上有人似王者，仪仗甚众。
现代文：说，看见官署大殿上有个像阎王的人，仪仗很多。
English: He said that when he saw a man resembling the king of hell in the main hall of the government office, he felt a lot of pride.

古文：见法庆在前，有一像忽来，谓殿上人曰： 庆造我未成，何乃令死？ 
现代文：看见法庆在前，有一尊像忽然走来，对殿上的人说： 法庆造我的像未成，为什么叫他死？ 
English: Seeing Fa Qing in front of him, a statue suddenly appeared and said to the people in the hall: "Fa Qing did not succeed in making my statue, why did you make him die?"

古文：便检文簿，云： 庆食尽，命未尽。 
现代文：便检视文簿，说： 法庆的饭食已尽，但寿命没尽。 
English: He then examined the textbook and said, "Fa Qing's food has run out, but his life has not.

古文：上人曰： 可给荷叶以终寿。 
现代文：对殿上人说： 可给他荷叶吃让他寿终。 
English: He said to his highness, "You can give him lotus leaves to eat and let him live out his days."

古文：言讫，忽然皆失所在，大智便苏。
现代文：说完，忽然什么都没有了，大智便苏醒了。
English: After saying that, suddenly there was nothing left, and Dazhi woke up.

古文：众异之，乃往凝观寺问庆，说皆符验。
现代文：众人感到惊异，便去凝观寺问法庆，说法都一样。
English: Everyone was surprised, so they went to Gongguan Temple to ask about Fa Qing. They all said the same thing.

古文：庆不复能食，每日朝进荷叶六枝，斋时八枝。如此终身。
现代文：法庆不能吃饭了，每天早晨吃六枝荷叶，进斋时吃八枝，就这样度过终生。
English: Fa Qing can no longer eat. He eats six lotus leaves every morning and eight when he breaks his fast. This is how he has spent his entire life.

古文：同流请乞，以成其像。
现代文：请同流帮助，完成了塑像。
English: With the help of my classmates, I completed the statue.

古文：开元选人
现代文：开元选人
English: Kaigen selects a successor

古文：吏部侍郎卢从愿父，素不事佛。
现代文：吏部侍郎卢从愿的父亲从来不信佛。
English: Lu Zongyan's father never believed in Buddhism.

古文：开元初，选人有暴亡者，以鼻未尽，为地下所由放还。
现代文：唐玄宗开元初年，候补官员中有个得暴病死亡的，因为阳寿未尽，被阴间的官员放回。
English: In the first year of the reign of Emperor Xuanzong of the Tang Dynasty, one of the alternate officials died of a violent illness. Because he was still young, he was sent back to the underworld by the officials.

古文：既出门，逢一老人著枷，谓选人曰： 君以得还，我子从愿，今居吏部。若选事未毕，当见之，可以相谕。
现代文：刚出门，遇一个戴枷的老人，对候补官说： 你能回到人间了，我儿子从愿，在吏部当官，若是选官的事没结束，你可以去见他。
English: Just after leaving home, he met an old man in shackles, who said to the alternate officer: "You can return to the world. My son has agreed to be an officer in the personnel department. If the election of officers is not over, you can go to see him."

古文：己由不事佛，今受诸罪，备极苦痛。可速作经像相救。 
现代文：并告诉他，我由于不信佛，现在受了很多惩罚，受了很多痛苦，叫他赶快塑像诵经作法事我就能得救。 
English: I told him that because I did not believe in Buddhism, I was now suffering a lot of punishment and pain, and that he should quickly make a statue, chant the sutras, and do the rituals so that I could be saved.

古文：其人既活，向铨司为说之。
现代文：这个人活了后，便向吏部说了此事。
English: After the man survived, he told the police department about the incident.

古文：从愿流涕请假，写经像相救毕。
现代文：卢从愿听后痛哭流涕，马上请假写经塑像救他的父亲。
English: Lu listened to his father's wish, wept bitterly, and immediately asked for leave to write to the statue to save his father.

古文：却诣选人辞谢。云： 已生人间，可为白儿。 
现代文：事办完后，却到候补官员处致谢，说： 已经生还人间，可以告诉我的儿子。 
English: After the case was over, he went to the reserve officer to thank him, saying, "I'm still alive, so I can tell my son."

古文：言讫不见。
现代文：说完就不见了。
English: After saying this, he disappeared.

古文：崔明达
现代文：崔明达
English: Choi Myeong-da

古文：崔明达，小字汉子，清河东武城人也。
现代文：崔明达，小字汉子，是清河东武城人。
English: Cui Mingda, a small-character man, is from Dongwucheng, Qinghe.

古文：祖元奖，吏部侍郎杭州刺吏。
现代文：他祖父崔元奖，任吏部侍郎杭州刺史。
English: His grandfather, Cui Yuanfei, was appointed as the secretary of the Ministry of Civil Affairs of Hangzhou.

古文：父庭玉，金吾将军冀州刺史。
现代文：父亲崔庭玉，任金吾将军冀州刺史。
English: His father, Cui Tingyu, was appointed as the military governor of Jizhou Province by General Kingu.

古文：明达幼於西京太平寺出家，师事利涉法师。通《涅槃经》，为桑门之魁柄。
现代文：崔明达幼年时于西京长安太平寺出家，拜利涉法师为师，通晓《涅槃经》，是桑门的掌门。
English: When he was a child, Cui Mingda entered the priesthood at Chang'an Taiping Temple in West Beijing. He was taught by Bai Li Zhu, who was familiar with the "Nirvana Sutra" and was the head of the Mulberry Gate.

古文：开元初，斋后，房中昼寝。及寤，身在檐外。还房，又觉出。如是数四，心甚恶之。
现代文：唐玄宗开元初年，饭后在房中午睡，刚睡，觉得身在屋外，回屋，又觉得出去了，反复了四次，心里很烦。
English: In the first year of Tang Xuan Zong's reign, he took a nap in the middle of the room after dinner. When he fell asleep, he felt like he was outside. When he came back, he felt like he was outside again. He repeated this four times, and he was very annoyed.

古文：须臾，见二牛头卒，悉持死人，於房外炙之，臭气冲塞。
现代文：一会儿，看见两个牛头小卒抱个死人在房外烤，臭气充塞，他问是怎么回事。
English: After a while, he saw two cowherd boys holding a dead man outside the room, roasting him and filling him with stench. He asked what was going on.

古文：问其所以，卒云： 正欲相召。 明达曰： 第无令臭。不惮行。 
现代文：小卒说，正想召你。明达说： 只要不再出臭味，就敢跟你走。 
English: The boy said that he wanted to call you. Minda said: As long as there is no more stench, I dare to go with you.

古文：卒乃於头中拔出其魂，既而引出城中。所历相识甚众，明达欲对人告诉，则不可。
现代文：小卒便从明达的头上拔出他的灵魂，随后便领他走出城外，一路遇见很多熟人，明达想告诉他们，但说不出话。
English: The little soldier plucked his soul from Minda's head, then led him out of the city, meeting many acquaintances along the way. Minda wanted to tell them, but couldn't speak.

古文：行数里，骨复不见。明达惆怅独进，仅至一城，城壁毁坏。见数百人，洋铁补城。明达默然而过，不敢问。
现代文：又走出城西，路很狭窄，突然又不见了两牛头卒，有红绳拴着骨片领明达行走，相距很近。走数里，骨片又不见了，明达惆怅地独行。到了一城，城墙已毁坏，看到数百人熔铁补城，明达默默地走过去，不敢问。
English: He also went out of the west of the city, the road was very narrow, suddenly two oxen disappeared, there was a red rope tied to the bone piece to lead Mingda to walk, the distance was very close. After walking for several miles, the bone piece disappeared again, and Mingda walked alone. When he reached a city, the city wall had been destroyed, and he saw hundreds of people mending the city with molten iron. Mingda walked silently and did not dare to ask.

古文：更行数里，又至一城。城前见卒吏数十人，和墼修方丈室。
现代文：又走数里，又到了一城，在城前见小卒官吏数十人，用砖坯修建一小屋。
English: After walking a few more miles, I arrived at another city. In front of the city, I saw dozens of minor officials and bureaucrats building a small house with bricks.

古文：有绯衫吏，呵问明达，寻令卒吏推明达入室。累墼塞之，明达大叫枉。
现代文：有一穿红衣的官吏，责问明达，随即命令小卒把明达推进屋内，用砖坯将门堵住，明达大叫冤枉。
English: A red-clad official reprimanded Mingda, then ordered a minor to push him inside and block the door with a brick slab. Mingda yelled that he had been wronged.

古文：吏云： 聊欲相试，无苦也。 
现代文：官吏说： 先让你试一下，没什么痛苦。 
English: The official said: Let you try it first, there is no pain.

古文：须臾，内传王教，召明达师。
现代文：一会儿，里边传出阎王的话，召明达法师。
English: After a while, the words of the king of hell came from inside, summoning Minda the mage.

古文：明达随入大厅，见贵彩少年，可二十许。
现代文：明达便跟着是入大厅，看见一个高贵很有风彩的少年，约二十岁。
English: Minda followed him into the hall and saw a noble and elegant boy, about twenty years old.

古文：阶上阶下，朱紫罗列，凡数千人。
现代文：台阶上下排列着数千穿红穿紫的人。
English: Thousands of people dressed in red and purple lined the steps.

古文：明达行入庭，窃心念，王召我，不下阶。
现代文：明达走进庭，心中暗想，阎王召见我，不下台阶。
English: Minda walked into the courtyard, thinking to herself, "The king of hell has summoned me, but I won't come down the steps."

古文：忽见王在阶下，合掌虔敬，谓明达曰： 冥中深要阳地功德，闻上人通《涅槃经》。故使奉迎，开题延寿。 
现代文：忽然看见阎王在台阶下，合掌虔诚恭敬地对明达说： 冥府中也需要阳间的功德，听说你通晓《涅槃经》，所以派人以迎接你，请你讲经，延年益寿。
English: Suddenly, he saw the king of hell at the foot of the steps, clasping his hands reverently and saying to Mingda, "In the underworld, you also need the merits of the sun. I heard that you are familiar with the "Nirvana Sutra," so I sent someone to greet you and ask you to recite the sutra to prolong your life.

古文：明达又念，欲令开讲，不致塔座，何以敷演？
现代文：明达又想，让我讲经为什么不到塔座上演练。
English: Minda also thought, let me explain why I didn't go to the pagoda to practice.

古文：又见塔座在西廊下，王指令明达上座开题，仍於塔下设席。
现代文：立即看见塔座在西廊下，阎王指令明达上塔座开讲。又在塔座下设了很多席位，阎王跪下。
English: He immediately saw that the pagoda was under the west corridor, and ordered the king of hell to go up to the pagoda to speak. There were also many seats under the pagoda, and the king of hell knelt down.

古文：王跪，明达说一行，王云，得矣。
现代文：明达讲了一遍，阎王说，我懂了。
English: Minda said it once, and Yan Wang said, "I understand."

古文：明达下座至，王令左右送明达法师还。
现代文：明达下了塔座，阎王派人送明达法师回去。
English: Minda left the pagoda, and the king of hell sent someone to take Minda back.

古文：临别，谓明达，可为转一切经。
现代文：临别时对明达说，可为我们传授各种经。
English: At the time of parting, he said to Mingda that he could teach us all kinds of scriptures.

古文：既出，忽於途中见车骑数十人，云是崔尚书。
现代文：明达便走出来，在途中忽然见车马数十人，说是崔尚书。
English: Mingda then came out and suddenly saw dozens of carriages and horses on the way, saying that it was Cui Shangshu.

古文：及至，乃是其祖元奖。
现代文：到近前一看，原是他的祖父崔元奖。
English: At a closer look, it turns out to be his grandfather, Cui Yuan.

古文：元奖见明达不悦。
现代文：元奖见明达不太高兴。
English: Minda is not very happy to see the award.

古文：明达大言云： 己是汉子。阿翁宁不识耶？ 
现代文：明达大声说： 我是汉子，老人家不认识我吗？ 
English: Minda said in a loud voice, "I am a man, doesn't the old man know me?"

古文：元奖引至厅，初问蓝田庄，次问庭玉，明达具以实对。
现代文：元奖将明达领进厅内，开始询问兰田庄，又问其父崔庭玉，明达以实相告。
English: Yuan Shou led Mingda into the hall and began to inquire about Lan Tian Zhuo. He also asked his father, Cui Tingyu, and Mingda told him the truth.

古文：元奖云： 吾自没后，有职务，未尝得还家，存亡不之知也。 
现代文：元奖说： 我从死后，在这里有职务，没曾回家，家里生死存亡的情况都不知道。 
English: Yuan Shou said, "After my death, I had a position here, but I never went home. I don't know whether my family is alive or dead.

古文：寻有吏持案至元奖处。明达窃见籍有明达名。云： 太平寺僧，嵩山五品。 
现代文：随即有小吏拿着案卷走到元奖前，明达偷眼看见案卷上有他的名字，上面写道： 太平寺僧，嵩山五品。 
English: Immediately afterwards, a minor official came up to Yuan Shou with a case file, and Mingda stole a glance and saw that his name was on the case file, and it was written: Taiping Temple monk, Songshan five prizes.

古文：既毕，元奖问明达： 得窥也。
现代文：元奖看完后问明达： 你看见了吗？ 
English: After watching the grand prize, he asked Mingda: Did you see it?

古文：明达辞不见。
现代文：明达说没看见。
English: Minda said she didn't see it.

古文：左右数客云： 此是尚书嫡孙，何得以凡客相待，判官乃处分二吏送明达，曰： 此辈送上人者，岁五六辈，可以微贶劳之。 
现代文：便令二吏送明达见判官，令两人送明达回家。判官见明达，不太恭敬，手下人说，这是尚书的嫡孙，不能以普通客人相待。判官便吩咐二吏送明达，说你们这些送人的人，每年五六次，可以要点报酬用以慰劳你们。
English: Then he ordered the two officials to take Mingda to see the judge, and the two officials to take Mingda home. The judge saw Mingda and was not very respectful, and his men said that this was the great-grandson of Shangshu, and he could not be treated like an ordinary guest. The judge then ordered the two officials to take Mingda, saying that those of you who send people away five or six times a year can ask for a little reward to comfort you.

古文：出门，吏各求五百千。
现代文：出门后，两个小吏每人向明达要五百千。
English: After leaving the house, the two minor officials each asked Minda for five hundred thousand.

古文：吏云： 至家，宜便於市致凿之，吾等待钱方去。 
现代文：吏说： 到家了，可以到市上做点什么，我们等拿到钱就回去。 
English: The clerk said, "Now that we're home, we can go to the market and do something. We'll go back when we get the money."

古文：及房，见二老婢披发哭，门徒等并叹息。
现代文：明达到了房中，看见两个老婢妇，披头散发的哭，自己的门徒都在叹息。
English: Ming reached the middle of the room and saw two old maidservants with their heads bowed weeping. His disciples were all sighing.

古文：明不识其尸，但见大坑。吏推明达於坑，遂活。尚昏沉，未能言，唯累举手。
现代文：明达不认识自己的尸体，只见有一大坑，小吏将明达推进坑，明达便活了，但是，神志还有此昏迷，不能说话，唯能经常举手。
English: Minda didn't recognize her own body. All she saw was a big pit. Petty officers pushed Minda into the pit. Minda survived. However, her mind was still in a coma. She couldn't speak, but she could always raise her hand.

古文：左右云： 要纸钱千贯。 
现代文：旁边人说： 要纸钱一千贯。 
English: The man next to him said, "I need 1,000 yuan in paper money."

古文：明达颔之。
现代文：明达点头。
English: Minda nodded.

古文：及焚钱讫，明达见二人各持钱去，自尔病愈。
现代文：等焚烧了纸钱，明达看见那二吏拿钱走了，自己的病痊愈了。
English: After burning the paper money, she saw the two officials take the money and leave, and her illness was cured.

古文：初明达至王门，见数吏持一老姥，至明达所居，云是鄠县灵岩人。
现代文：开始时明达到阎王门前，看见好几个小吏挟持一个老太婆到明达居处，说是鄠县灵岩人。
English: At the beginning, Ming reached the gate of hell and saw several petty officials holding an old woman hostage to Mingda's residence, saying that she was a Lingyan person from Lixian County.

古文：及入，王怒云： 何物老婢，持菩萨戒，乃尔不洁。令放还，可清洁也。 
现代文：进入阎王门后，阎王很生气的说： 你这个老婢，虽然持菩萨戒，却这样不洁净，令人放还，便可清洁了。 
English: After entering the gates of hell, the king of hell was very angry and said, "You old maid, although you hold the precepts of a bodhisattva, are nevertheless so unclean. If you were to be released, you would be clean.

古文：及出，与明达相随行，可百余步，然后各去。
现代文：出来时与明达同行，百多步后各自去了。
English: When I came out, I walked with Mingda, and after more than a hundred steps, we went our separate ways.

古文：明达疾愈，往诣灵岩，见姥如旧识也。王抡
现代文：明达病愈后去灵岩，看到这老太婆好像是旧日相识。王抡
English: After Mingda recovered from his illness, he went to Lingyan and saw this old woman, who seemed to be an old acquaintance.

古文：天宝十一年，朔方节度判官大理司直王抡，巡至中城，病死。
现代文：唐玄宗天宝十一年，朔方节度判官大理司直王抡，巡视到中城时病死，十六天后又复活。
English: In the eleventh year of Tang Xuan Zong's Heavenly Treasure, the judge of the Shuo Fang Festival, Dali Si Zhi Wang Qi, died of illness when he visited the middle of the city, and was resurrected sixteen days later.

古文：凡一十六日而苏。初疾亟属纩之际，见二人追去，恍惚以为人间，不知其死也。
现代文：初病危即将死去的时候，看见两个人追去，恍恍惚惚以为还在人间，不知自己已经死了。
English: At the beginning of his illness, when he was on the verge of death, he saw two people chasing him. He thought he was still alive, but he did not know that he was already dead.

古文：须臾入大城门，见朔方节度李林甫，相见拜揖，以为平生时也。
现代文：不一会儿，进了大城门，看见了朔方节度李林甫，互相拜揖，以为还是生时一样。
English: A short while later, they entered the gate of the city and saw Shuo Fang and Li Linfu, bowing to each other, thinking that it was still the same as when they were alive.

古文：又见李邕、裴敦复数人，於一府庭，言责林甫命。抡方悟死耳。
现代文：又见了李邕、裴敦复等数人在一个官府庭中，谈论责怪李林甫，王抡才悟到自己是死了。
English: He also saw Li Lan, Pei Dunfu and several other people in a government court, talking about blaming Li Linfu. It was only then that Wang Lan realized that he was dead.

古文：林甫手持纸笔，与邕等辩对。
现代文：李林甫手拿纸笔，和李邕等人辩论。
English: With pen and paper in hand, Li Linfu debated with Li Yao and others.

古文：俄而见其案，冥司断曰： 林甫死后破家，杨国忠代为相。 
现代文：一会儿，看见了他的案卷。冥府判词说： 李林甫死后家庭破落，杨国忠代替他当宰相。 
English: After a while, I saw his case file. The Hades Judgement said: After Li Linfu's death, the family fell apart, and Yang Guozhong replaced him as prime minister.

古文：其冬，林甫死。杨国忠果代之。
现代文：这年冬天，李林甫死，杨国忠果然代替他当宰相。
English: This winter, Li Linfu died, and Yang Guozhong succeeded him as prime minister.

古文：抡兄摄，亡已六年，时见之。摄云： 尔未当死，若得钱三千贯，即重生也。 
现代文：王抡的哥哥王摄已死六年，当时见到他，王摄说： 你不应该死，若是拿出三千贯钱，就能重生。 
English: Wang Yao's brother, Wang Zhe, had been dead for six years. When Wang Zhe saw him, he said, "You shouldn't die. If you take out three thousand kroner, you can be reborn."

古文：抡家在西定远，去中城数百里。
现代文：王抡的家在很远的西定，离中城数百里。
English: Wang Yao's home is far away in Xiding, hundreds of miles from Zhongcheng.

古文：便见一山下有崎岖小道，驰归其家。
现代文：看见山下有条崎岖小路，奔跑到家。
English: He saw a rough path at the bottom of the mountain and ran home.

古文：斯须而升堂告妻曰： 我已死矣，若得钱三千贯，即再生。 
现代文：他进屋告诉妻子说，我已经死了，如果拿出三千贯钱，即可再生。
English: He went into the house and told his wife that I was dead, and if he took out three thousand kroner, it would be renewable.

古文：其夕，毕家咸闻窗牖间，窣然有物声，犬亦迎吠。
现代文：这天晚间，全家都听到窗户间好像有什么东西响，狗也叫。
English: That evening, the whole family heard what sounded like a noise between the windows, as well as the dog's barking.

古文：既明，其妻泣言，梦抡已死，求钱三千贯。
现代文：到天亮，他妻子哭着说，我梦见王抡已死，要三千贯钱。
English: At dawn, his wife cried and said, "I dreamt that Wang Yao had died, and I want three thousand kroner."

古文：即取纸剪为钱财，召巫者焚之。抡得之，即与人间钱不殊矣。
现代文：马上取纸剪成纸钱，叫来巫婆焚烧，王抡得到钱，和人间的钱一样。
English: She immediately took the paper, cut it into paper money, called a witch to burn it, and Wang Yao got the money, just like human money.

古文：冥中无昼夜，长如十一月十二月太阴雪时。
现代文：阴间无昼夜之分，长如十一月十二月太阴雪时。
English: In the netherworld there is no distinction between day and night. It is as long as November and December when it is too cloudy and snowy.

古文：有鬼王，衣紫衣，决罪福。判官数十人。
现代文：有个鬼王穿着紫衣，管判决祸福，还有判官数十人。
English: There is a ghost king wearing a purple robe, who is in charge of judging misfortune and fortune, and there are dozens of judges.

古文：其定罪以负心为至重，其被考理者，多僧尼及衣冠。
现代文：他们定罪时以负心为最重，被他们考问的人，多是僧人尼姑和衣冠整洁的人。
English: When convicting them, their most serious crime was having a negative heart. The people they interrogated were mostly monks, nuns, and people with clean clothes.

古文：抡在生时无他过，及定罪，唯举食肉罪。旁见小吏，曰： 此人虽食肉，不故杀。 
现代文：王抡生时没有什么大过错，定罪时，唯有吃肉的罪，旁边的小吏说： 这人虽然吃肉，不杀生。 
English: When Wang Xuan was born, he had no major faults. When he was convicted, he was only guilty of eating meat. The minor official next to him said, "Although this man eats meat, he does not kill animals."

古文：然食肉者信罪矣，杀而食之，罪又甚焉。
现代文：吃肉的人本来就有罪，又杀生又吃肉的人，罪就更深重了。
English: Those who eat meat are already guilty, but those who kill and eat meat are even more guilty.

古文：抡未病时，曾解衣写《金光明经》。手自封裹，置于佛堂内。
现代文：王抡没病时，曾虔诚地写过《金光明经》，亲手封裹，放在佛堂内。
English: When Wang Yao was not ill, he piously wrote the "Golden Light Sutra," which he hand-wrapped and placed in the Buddhist hall.

古文：及冥中，以此业得见地藏菩萨。
现代文：到了阴间，因此见到了地藏王菩萨。
English: When he arrived in the underworld, he saw the Bodhisattva King of the Underworld.

古文：汝同此善，当得更生。
现代文：你有此善举，应当再生。
English: You have this act of kindness, you should be reborn.

古文：即令取经，经即抡所封裹之经也。
现代文：马上叫人取经，这经就是王抡所封裹的经。
English: They immediately called for someone to retrieve the sutra. This sutra was the sutra that Wang Yao had sealed.

古文：鬼王判官数人，皆平生相友善，相见恍惚，不叙故。
现代文：鬼王判官数人，都是生时友好，见面时都恍恍惚惚不能叙说旧事。
English: Several judges of the demon king were friendly in life, and when they met, they were unable to recount the past.

古文：亦见其先府君夫人，拜伏之后，都无问讯，如不相识。
现代文：也见到了他生时的府君夫人，拜揖之后，都无问讯，像不认识似的。
English: I also met the wife of the governor when he was alive. After we paid our respects, there was no inquiry, as if we didn't know each other.

古文：又见诸先亡兄弟，亦无兄弟情。
现代文：又见到先死的兄弟，也没有了兄弟之情。
English: And when he saw his brother who had died first, he no longer had any brotherly feelings.

古文：兄摄近亡，相睦如生，当以日近故也。
现代文：他哥王摄最近死的，像生时一样和睦，是因死的日子近的缘故。
English: His brother, the king's son, who had recently died, was as peaceful as when he was alive, because the day of his death was near.

古文：至其视事之所，见亲故有当贵及寿夭，皆宿命先定，不可移改。
现代文：到了他办事的地方，看见亲属故旧有富贵的和长寿或短命的，都是命中注定，不可更改。
English: When he got to the place where he worked, he saw that his relatives had been rich and long-lived or short-lived, all of which were predestined and could not be changed.

古文：俄而放归，有一吏曰： 君有禄及寿，然此中之事，必不得泄之。 
现代文：一会儿便放他回来，有一小吏说： 你有福有寿。这里的事，一定不要泄露。 
English: After a while, he was allowed to return, and a minor official said: "You are lucky to have a long life. You must not divulge what happened here."

古文：言毕，奄然而活，亡已十六日也。
现代文：说完，他便突然活了，他已死了十六天了。
English: After saying this, he suddenly came back to life. He had been dead for sixteen days.

古文：费子玉
现代文：费子玉
English: Fei Zi Yu

古文：天宝中，犍为参军费子玉官舍夜卧，忽见二吏至床前。费参军子玉惊起，问谁。
现代文：唐玄宗天宝年间，犍为参军费子玉，在官舍中睡觉的时候，忽然见两个小吏到床前，费子玉惊起，问是谁？
English: During Tang Xuan Zong's Tianbao era, Feizidama, who had joined the army, was sleeping in his official residence when he suddenly saw two minor officials arrive at his bedside. Feizidama was startled and asked, "Who are they?"

古文：吏云： 大王召君。 
现代文：吏说： 大王召见你。 
English: The magistrate said, "The great king summons you.

古文：子玉云： 身是州吏，不属王国，何得见召？ 
现代文：子玉说： 我是州官，不属王国。怎么能召见我？ 
English: Zidama said, "I am a state official, not a member of the kingdom. How can I be summoned?"

古文：吏云： 阎罗。 
现代文：吏说： 是阎罗王。 
English: The magistrate said: It is King Yama.

古文：子玉大惧，呼人备马，无应之者。仑卒随吏去。
现代文：子玉很害怕，招呼人备马，可是没人应声，仓促间便跟随二吏走了。
English: Zidama was very scared and called for someone to prepare the horse, but no one answered, so he hurriedly followed the two officials.

古文：至一城，城门内外各有数千人。
现代文：到了一座城，门内外各有数千人。
English: When we arrived at a city, there were thousands of people inside and outside the gates.

古文：子玉持诵金刚经，尔时恒心诵之。
现代文：子玉平日总念《金刚经》，这时就专心地念诵。
English: Zodama usually recites the Diamond Sutra every day, but at this time, he recited it intently.

古文：又切念云，若遇菩萨。当诉以屈。
现代文：又急切地想道，若遇菩萨，应去诉屈。
English: He also thought eagerly that if he met a bodhisattva, he should go and complain.

古文：须臾，王命引入。子玉再拜，甚欢然。
现代文：片刻，阎王命人领他进去，子玉又拜，很高兴。
English: For a moment, Yan Wangmeiren led him inside, and Ziyu bowed again, very happy.

古文：俄见一僧从云中下，子玉前致敬。子玉复扬言，欲见地藏菩萨。
现代文：一会儿见一僧人从云中下来，子玉向前致敬，又说，想见地藏王菩萨。
English: After a while, I saw a monk descend from the clouds. Zidama saluted him and said, "I want to see the Bodhisattva of Tibet."

古文：王曰： 子玉此是也。 
现代文：阎罗王说： 子玉，这就是。 
English: Yan Luo said, "Zodama, this is it.

古文：子玉前礼拜。
现代文：子玉向前致礼拜揖。
English: The ball moves forward to bow.

古文：菩萨云： 何以知我耶？ 
现代文：菩萨说： 你怎么知道我呢？ 
English: Bodhisattva said: How do you know me?

古文：因谓王曰： 此人一生诵金刚经，以算未尽，宜遣之去。 
现代文：他又对阎王说： 此人一生诵念《金刚经》，计算他的寿命没尽，应该让他回去。
English: He also said to the king of hell: This man has been chanting the Diamond Sutra for his entire life. He should be allowed to return, since his life is not over.

古文：王视子玉。忽怒问其姓名。子玉对云： 嘉州参军费子玉。 
现代文：阎王看了看子玉，忽然愤怒地问他的姓名，子玉回答说： 嘉州参军费子玉。 
English: Yan Wang looked at Zidama and suddenly angrily asked him his name. Zidama replied, "Joining the military in Jiazhou is too expensive for Zidama.

古文：王曰： 犍为郡，何嘉州也？
现代文：阎王说： 犍为郡，为什么说嘉州？
English: The king of hell said:  is a county, why is it called Jiazhou?

古文：汝合死。正为菩萨苦论，且释君去。 
现代文：你应该死，因为菩萨苦苦讲情，才放你回去。 
English: You should die, because the Bodhisattva has to work hard to win your affection before he lets you go back.

古文：子玉再拜辞出，菩萨云： 汝还，勿复食肉，当得永寿。
现代文：子玉又拜谢辞别出来，菩萨说： 你回去不要再吃肉，就能长寿。 
English: Bodhisattva said, "If you go back and stop eating meat, you will live a long life."

古文：子玉礼圣容，圣容是铜佛，头面手悉动。
现代文：领子玉到圣容前礼拜，圣容是铜佛，头面，手都能动。
English: The collar bead is worshipped before the holy face. The holy face is a bronze Buddha, and the head and hands can be moved.

古文：菩萨礼拜，手足悉展。
现代文：菩萨礼拜时，手、腿也舒展开了。
English: During the Bodhisattva's prayer, the hands and legs were also spread out.

古文：子玉亦礼，礼毕出门。
现代文：子玉又礼拜，然后出门。
English: Kodama prays for another week, and then leaves.

古文：子玉问： 门外人何其多乎？ 
现代文：子玉问： 门外怎么这么多人？ 
English: Zidama asked: Why are there so many people outside?

古文：菩萨云： 此辈各罪福不明，已数百年为鬼，不得记生。 
现代文：菩萨说： 这些人都是因为罪和福不明，已经当数百年的鬼，不能重生。 
English: The Bodhisattva said, "These people have been ghosts for hundreds of years and cannot be reborn because their sins and good fortune are unknown.

古文：子玉辞还舍，复活。
现代文：子玉辞告回家便复活了。
English: Cody resigned to go home and came back to life.

古文：后三年，食肉又死。为人引证。菩萨见之，大怒云初不令汝食肉，何故违约？
现代文：三年后吃肉又死了，被人领着见菩萨，菩萨见他很愤怒地说，当初我不叫你吃肉，你为什么违约？
English: Three years later, he died again after eating meat. He was taken to see a bodhisattva. The bodhisattva was very angry when he saw him and said, "I didn't tell you to eat meat, why did you break the contract?"

古文：子玉既重生，遂断荤血。
现代文：子玉又重生了，便断绝荤腥。
English: Zidama has been reborn, and it will no longer be a ghost town.

古文：初子玉累取三妻，皆云被追之，亦悉来见。
现代文：当初子玉曾娶了三个妻子，都说被追赶，也都来见他。
English: At first, Ziyu had married three wives. They all said they were being chased, and they all came to see him.

古文：子玉问： 何得来耶？ 妻云： 君勿顾之耳。 
现代文：子玉问： 为什么来？妻说： 你不管我们。 
English: Zidama asked, "Why did you come?" His wife said, "You don't care about us."

古文：小妻： 君於我不足，有恨而来，所用己钱，何不还之？ 
现代文：小妻说： 你对不起我，有恨而来，你用我的钱，为什么还？ 
English: The little wife said, "You feel sorry for me and come here with hatred. You used my money, why do you want it back?

古文：子玉云： 钱亦易得。 
现代文：子玉说： 钱很容易得到。 
English: Kodama said, "Money is easy to get.

古文：妻云： 用我铜钱，今还纸钱耶？ 
现代文：妻说： 用我的铜钱，现在还我纸钱。 
English: My wife said, "You used my copper money, now give me back my paper money."

古文：子玉云： 夫用妇钱，义无还理。 
现代文：子玉说： 丈夫用妻子的钱，没有还的道理。 
English: Zidama said, "If a husband uses his wife's money, there is no reason to pay it back.

古文：妻无以应。迟回各去也。
现代文：妻子无理可说，慢慢地各自走了。
English: Unreasonably, my wife and I slowly walked away.

古文：梅先
现代文：梅先
English: Meisen

古文：钱塘梅先恒以善事自业。
现代文：钱塘人梅先，经常以行善事为自己的事业。
English: Mei Xian, a resident of Qiantang, often takes doing good deeds as his career.

古文：好持佛经，兼造生七斋，邻里呼为居士。
现代文：喜欢持经念佛，同时斋戒不杀生，邻里称他为居士。
English: He likes to recite the sutras, fasts and does not kill. Neighbors call him a householder.

古文：天宝中，遇疾暴卒而活。
现代文：唐玄宗天宝年间得急病死而复活。
English: In the Tenpo era of Emperor Xuanzong of the Tang Dynasty, he died of a sudden illness and was resurrected.

古文：自说，初死为人所领，与徒十余辈见阎罗王。
现代文：自己说，初死时被人领着，和十多人一起见阎王。
English: He said that when he died for the first time, he was led by someone to see the king of hell together with more than ten people.

古文：王问君在生复有何业，先答曰： 唯持经念佛而已。 
现代文：阎王问他在世时以什么为业。梅先答，只有诵经念佛而已。
English: The king of hell asked him what he did for a living. Mei Xian replied that he only chanted sutras and prayed to Buddha.

古文：王曰： 此善君能行之，冥冥之福，不可虚耳。 
现代文：阎王说，你能这样做善事，冥冥之中可以得福，但不可有虚假。 
English: The king of hell said, "If you can do such a good deed, you can receive blessings from time to time, but there must be no deception.

古文：令检先簿，喜曰： 君尚未合死，今放却生，宜崇本业也。 
现代文：令人检查梅先册簿，高兴地说： 你还不该死，现在放你，你应该继续做善事。 
English: Someone checked Mei's record book and said happily, "You don't deserve to die. Now you can go free. You should continue to do good deeds."

古文：再拜。会未有人送，留在署中。
现代文：梅先又拜，恰巧没人送他，留在了阴府中。
English: Mei bowed first, but no one happened to give him a ride, and he remained in the underworld.

古文：王复讯问，次至钱塘里正包直。问何故取李平头钱，不为属户。
现代文：阎王继续讯问，下面轮到钱塘里正包直，问他为什么拿李平头的钱，他又不是你属下的民户。
English: Yan Wang continued his interrogation. Next, it was the turn of Qiantangli Zhengbao Zhizhi to ask him why he took the money from Li Pingkou. He was not a member of your household.

古文：直曰： 直为里长团头身常在县夜归早出实不知山乞追子问。 
现代文：包直说： 我是里长团头，常在县里，早出晚归，实在不知道，请问我儿子。 
English: Bao Zhizhong said: I am the head of the village leader group, I am often in the county, I go out early and come back late, I really don't know, please ask my son.

古文：王令出帖追直子。
现代文：阎王又令人持帖去追捕包直的儿子。
English: The king of hell also sent someone with a banner to hunt down Bao Zhi's son.

古文：须臾有使者至今送直还。
现代文：一会儿，有使者到。
English: A moment later, an emissary arrived.

古文：遂活。说其事，时其子甚无恙，众人皆试之。后五六日，直子果病，即二日死矣。
现代文：叫送包直还阳，包直便活了，说了这事，当时他儿子什么病没有，大家都想看看这事的结果，五六天后，包直儿子果然病了，两天后死了。
English: He told them to send Bao Zhi back to the sun, and Bao Zhi lived. When he said this, his son did not have any illness at that time. Everyone wanted to see the outcome of this matter. Five or six days later, Bao Zhi's son was indeed ill, and he died two days later.

