古文：周隐克张士政陈休复费鸡师岳麓僧强绅彭钉筋崔无斁蜀士陈岷郑山古马处谦赵圣人黄万户何奎孙雄李汉雄
现代文：周隐克张士政陈休复费鸡师岳麓僧强绅彭钉筋崔无斁蜀士陈岷郑山古马处谦赵圣人黄万户何奎孙雄李汉雄
English: Zhou Yingke, Zhang Shizheng, Chen Xiu Fu Fu, Fei Ji, Yuelu Monk, Qiang Sheng, Peng Jian, Cui Wuzhong, Shu Shi, Chen Wei, Zheng Shan, Gu Ma, Qian Zhao, Huang Wanzhou, He Kui, Sun Xiong, Li Han Xiong

古文：周隐克
现代文：周隐克
English: Zhou Yingke

古文：周隐克，有术数，将相大僚咸敬如神明，宰相李宗闵修弟子礼，手状皆云然。
现代文：唐代有个道士叫周隐克，掌握道术和历算，将相大臣都对他敬若神明，宰相李宗闵对他行弟子之礼，行礼恭敬，连手也不放下。
English: In the Tang Dynasty, there was a Taoist named Zhou Yingke, who mastered Taoism and the calendar. The ministers all respected him as if he were a god. The prime minister, Li Zongyao, saluted him as a disciple, saluted him respectfully, and never let go of his hand.

古文：前宰相段文昌镇淮南，染疾，曰： 尊师去年云我有疾，须卧六日。 
现代文：前宰相段文昌镇守淮南，得了病，说： 尊师去年就说我要得病，须要卧床休息六天。 
English: Former Prime Minister Duan Wenchang, the town guard of Huainan, fell ill and said, "Last year, Venerable Master said that I would fall ill and have to stay in bed for six days.

古文：段公与宾客博戏饮茶，周生连吃数碗，段起旋溺不已。
现代文：段相公跟宾客们赌谁能喝茶，周隐克一口气喝了好多碗，段公便起床没完没了地去撒尿。
English: Duan Sangong bet with the guests who could drink tea, Zhou Yingke drank a lot of bowls in one go, Duan Sangong got up and peed endlessly.

古文：良久，惊语尊师曰： 乞且放，虚惫交下不自持。 
现代文：过了好长时间，段公才明白过来，吃惊地对尊师说： 求您暂且放了我吧，我现在已经是虚弱疲惫交加，不能支持了。 
English: After a long time, Duan Gongcai came to understand and said to his teacher in surprise, "Please let me go for the time being. I am already weak and exhausted, and I can no longer support you."

古文：笑曰。
现代文：周隐克笑着说： 跟相公开开玩笑。
English: Zhou Yingke said with a smile: Let's openly joke with each other.

古文：与相公为戏也，盖饮茶慵起，遣段公代之。 
现代文：因为喝多了茶又懒得起来，便让相公替代我。 
English: Because I drank too much tea and was too lazy to get up, I asked my father-in-law to replace me.

古文：张士政
现代文：张士政
English: Zhang Shiming

古文：唐王潜在荆州，百姓张士政善治伤折。
现代文：唐代，王潜驻扎在荆州，一个老百姓叫张士政，善治外伤骨折。
English: In the Tang Dynasty, Wang Qian was stationed in Jingzhou, and a commoner named Zhang Shizheng treated trauma fractures well.

古文：有军人损胫，求张治之。
现代文：有个军人腿部骨折，去求张士政医治。
English: A soldier with a broken leg went to seek treatment from Zhang Shizheng.

古文：张饮以一药酒，破肉，取碎骨一片，大如两指，涂膏封之，数日如旧。
现代文：张先给他一种药酒喝了，然后剖开肉，取出碎骨头一片，像两个手指那么大，便将刀口涂上药膏封好。
English: Zhang first gave him a medicinal liquor to drink, then cut open the meat and took out a piece of broken bone, as big as two fingers, and then sealed the blade with ointment.

古文：经二年余，胫忽痛，复问于张。
现代文：几天之后，伤腿就复原了，长得跟原来一样。
English: A few days later, the injured leg recovered and looked the same as before.

古文：张曰： 前君所出骨寒则痛，可遽觅也。 
现代文：过了两年多，这条腿忽然痛起来，这位军人又去问张士政。张说： 这是因为从前给你取出来的那块骨头寒冷所以你的腿就疼痛，可去立即找到它。 
English: After more than two years, this leg suddenly started to hurt, and the soldier went to ask Zhang Shizheng again. Zhang said: This is because the bone that was taken out for you was cold, so your leg hurts. You can go and find it immediately.

古文：果获于床下，令以汤洗，贮于絮中，其痛即愈。
现代文：果然在床下找到了那块骨头，叫他用热水洗了洗，藏在棉絮里面，这个人的腿痛便立即痊愈了。
English: The bone was found under the bed, washed with hot water and hidden in cotton wool, and the man's leg pain was immediately cured.

古文：王子弟与之狎，尝祈其戏术。
现代文：王潜的子弟们常跟张士政闹着玩，曾求他表演游戏的法术。
English: Wang Qian's children often played pranks on Zhang Shizheng and once asked him to perform a magic trick.

古文：张取草一掬，再三揉之，悉成灯蛾飞去。
现代文：张士政拿来一把草，用手反复揉搓，就都变成小灯蛾飞去了。
English: Zhang Shizheng brought a handful of grass and rubbed it repeatedly with his hands, and they all turned into small moths and flew away.

古文：又画一妇女于壁，酌满杯饮之，酒无遗滴。
现代文：他又画一个女人在墙上，倒一杯酒给她喝，酒喝得一滴也不剩。
English: He also draws a woman on the wall and pours her a glass of wine, which she drinks until there is not a drop left.

古文：逡巡，画妇人面赤半日许。
现代文：过了一会儿，画的女人便面红耳赤了半天。
English: After a while, the woman in the painting turned red.

古文：其术终不传人。
现代文：张士政的法术始终不传授给别人。
English: Zhang Shizheng's magic has never been taught to others.

古文：陈休复
现代文：陈休复
English: Chen Xiufu

古文：唐李当镇兴元，褒城县处士陈休复号陈七子，狎于博徒，行止非常。
现代文：唐朝，李当镇守兴元时，褒城县有个处士叫陈休复，人称陈七子，整日跟赌徒们厮混，行为举止很不规矩。
English: During the Tang Dynasty, when the town of Li Dang guarded Xingyuan, there was an official in Baocheng County named Chen Xiufu, also known as Chen Qizi, who mingled with gamblers all day long and behaved very unruly.

古文：李以其妖诞械之，而市井中又有一休复。
现代文：李当因为他妖里妖气荒诞不经给他带上枷锁关了起来，大街上却又出现一个陈休复。
English: Li Dang was put in chains and locked up for his monstrous and grotesque behavior, but another Chen Xufu appeared on the street.

古文：无何殒于狴牢，遽都腐败，所司收而瘗之。
现代文：关着的这个陈休复没有多久就死在监牢里，很快就腐烂了，看守的人收拾他的尸首埋掉了。
English: The incarcerated man, Chen Xiufu, died in prison not long after being locked up. He quickly decomposed, and the guards collected his body and buried it.

古文：尔后宛在褒城，李惊异不敢复问。
现代文：以后，陈休复仍然活动在褒城，李当十分惊异，不敢再问这件事。
English: Later, Chen Xufu still remained active in Baocheng. Li Dang was very surprised and did not dare to ask about it again.

古文：一旦爱女暴亡，妻追悼成疾，无能疗者。
现代文：一日，李当的爱女突然死了，妻子也同思念痛悼女儿而伤心过度得了病，没有人能治。
English: One day, Li Dang's beloved daughter died suddenly, and his wife, who was also grieving for her daughter, fell ill. No one could cure her.

古文：幕客白曰： 陈处士真道者，必有少君之术，能祈之乎？ 
现代文：有个幕客跟李当说： 陈处士是个真正得道的人，一定有治疗夫人的法术，能去请他吗？ 
English: A curtain caller said to Li Danglu: Officer Chen is a truly enlightened person, he must have a spell to cure his wife, can I invite him?

古文：李然之，因敬而延召，陈曰： 此小事尔。 
现代文：李当同意去请，便把陈休复恭恭敬敬地请了来，陈说： 此乃小事一件而已。 
English: When Li Dang agreed to be invited, he respectfully invited Chen Xufu. Chen said, "This is just a small matter.

古文：于初夜，帷裳设灯炬，画作一门，请夫人下帘屏气。
现代文：入夜，在帷幛里面点上灯，在帷幛上面画了一个门，让夫人放下床头的帘子平心静气地躺下。
English: At night, light a lamp inside the curtains, draw a door on the top of the curtains, and ask the lady to put down the bed curtain and lie down calmly.

古文：至夜分，亡者自画门入堂中，行数遭，夫人愊忆，失声而哭，亡魂倏然灭矣，然后戒勉，令其抑割。
现代文：到了半夜，死亡的女儿便从画的那个门口进入堂屋，在里面走了几圈，夫人忧伤郁结，放声大哭，亡魂一下子就不见了，然后，好一番劝戒勉励，让她不要思念女儿。
English: In the middle of the night, the dead daughter entered the hall from the doorway of the painting, walked a few laps inside, the lady was sad and depressed, crying loudly, the dead soul disappeared all at once, and then, a good exhortation, let her not miss her daughter.

古文：李由是敬之。
现代文：李当因为这件事很敬重陈休复。
English: Li Dang respects Chen Xiufu very much because of this.

古文：费鸡师
现代文：费鸡师
English: Fei Qian Shi

古文：唐蜀有费鸡师，目赤无黑睛，本濮人，段成式长庆初见之，已年七十余。
现代文：唐代，四川有个费鸡师，两眼通红没有黑眼珠，本来是濮地人，段成式在长庆第一次见到他时，已经七十多岁了。
English: In the Tang Dynasty, there was a scholar in Sichuan named Fei Qian Shi. He had two red eyes and no black eyes. He was originally from Shandong Province. When Duan Chengshih met him for the first time in Changqing, he was already over seventy years old.

古文：或为人解疾，必用一鸡，设祭于庭，又取江石如鸡卵，令疾者握之，乃踏步作气嘘叱，鸡旋转而死，石亦四破。
现代文：有时给别人治病，必定用一只鸡放在院里供起来，又从江里面拿块鹅卵石让病人握在手里，他则踏步运气作声，那只鸡扑腾挣扎而死，病人握住的石头也碎成四块。
English: Sometimes, when he was treating someone, he had to put a chicken in the yard and hold it up. He also had to take a pebble from the river and hold it in the patient's hand. As luck would have it, the chicken fluttered and died, and the stone held by the patient broke into four pieces.

古文：成式旧家人永安初不信。
现代文：段成式的旧家人永安开始时并不相信。
English: At first, Yongan, a former member of the Duan family, did not believe it.

古文：尝谓曰： 尔有大厄。 
现代文：费鸡师曾对永安说： 你有大难。 
English: Fei Qian Shi once said to Yong An: You are in big trouble.

古文：因丸符逼令吞之，复去其左足鞋及袜，符展在足心矣。
现代文：于是将一道符做成丸状逼迫他吞下去，又脱掉他左脚上的鞋和袜子，便见那道符已张贴在他的脚心上了。
English: So they forced him to swallow a round mark, and when they took off his left shoe and sock, they found the mark on the sole of his foot.

古文：又谓奴沧海： 尔将病。 
现代文：费鸡师又对家奴沧海说： 你要生病。 
English: Fei Qian Shi also said to his servant Cang Hao: You are going to get sick.

古文：令袒而负户，以笔再三画于外，大言曰： 过过。 
现代文：便令他光着膀子靠门站立，费用毛笔在门的另一面画来画去，大声说道： 过！过！ 
English: Then he made him stand bare-armed by the door, drawing with a brush on the other side of the door, and said aloud: Over!

古文：墨迹遂透著背焉。
现代文：墨迹便透到沧海的背上。
English: The ink stains can be seen on Canghai's back.

古文：岳麓僧
现代文：岳麓僧
English: The monk of Yuelu

古文：唐广南节度下元随军将钟大夫，忘其名，晚年流落，旅寓陵州，多止佛寺。
现代文：唐朝广南节度使的下属元随军将钟大夫，忘记他叫什么名了，晚年流落，旅居在陵州，大多数时日住在佛寺里。
English: Dr. Zhong, a former subordinate of the commander of the Guangnan Festival in the Tang Dynasty, forgot his name and lived in exile in his later years. He resided in Lingzhou and lived in a Buddhist temple most of the time.

古文：仁寿县主簿欧阳衎愍其衰老，常延待之，三伏间患腹疾，卧于欧阳舍，逾月不食。
现代文：仁寿县的主簿欧阳衎可怜他年老体弱，经常筵请招待他，钟大夫在三伏天坏肚子，躺在欧阳的家里，一个多月不吃东西。
English: Ouyang, the chief of Renshou County, took pity on him because he was old and weak, and often invited him to dinner. Dr. Zhong had a bad stomach on the third day of the month, and lay in Ouyang's home, not eating for more than a month.

古文：虑其旦夕溘然，欲陈牒州衙，希取钟公一状，以明行止。
现代文：欧阳担心他马上就会咽气，想陈报州衙，希望得到钟公的一份自述状，以表明他的经历行止。
English: Ouyang was worried that he would soon choke to death, and wanted to report to the prefectural government, hoping to get a self-description from Zhong Gong to show his experience and behavior.

古文：钟曰： 病即病矣，死即未也。
现代文：钟说： 病了就是病了，死却还没死成。
English: "If you are sick, you are sick, but you are not dead yet," Zhong said.

古文：既此奉烦，何妨申报。 
现代文：这件事既然又要麻烦你，那就由你直接申报吧。 
English: Since this matter is going to trouble you again, then you should report it directly.

古文：于是闻官。
现代文：于是，欧阳就把钟公病重的事报告了官府。
English: As a result, Ouyang reported Zhong Gong's serious illness to the government.

古文：尔后疾愈，孙光宪时为郡倅，钟惠然来访，因问所苦之由，乃曰： 曾在湘潭，遇干戈不进，与同行商人数辈就岳麓寺设斋，寺僧有新合知命丹者，且云： 服此药后，要退，即饮海藻汤，或大期将至，即肋下微痛，此丹自下，便须指挥家事，以俟终矣。 
现代文：后来钟的病痊愈了，当时孙光宪任郡守的副职，钟善意地去访问他，问他为何如此苦恼，孙便说： 我曾经在湘潭，遇上打仗不能前进，与同行的几个商人到岳麓寺祭奠，寺僧有新制的知命丹，并对我们说： 吃下这知命丹之后，要想把它打掉，就服用海藻汤，或者到寿命完结时，感觉肋下微微作痛，此丹就会自行排泄下来，那就必须赶紧安排家事，等着咽气。 
English: Later, Zhong's illness was cured. At that time, Sun Guangxian served as the deputy county governor. Zhong kindly went to visit him and asked him why he was so distressed. Sun said: I was once in Xiangtan. I encountered a war and couldn't move forward. I went to Yuelu Temple with several merchants who were traveling with me to pay homage. The temple monk had a newly-made wisdom toothpick. He said to us: After eating this wisdom toothpick, if you want to get rid of it, take seaweed soup. Or when you reach the end of your life, you may feel a slight pain under your ribs. This toothpick will

古文：遂各与一缗，吞一丸。
现代文：我们每人给了他一千文钱，吞了一丸。
English: We each gave him 1,000 yuan and swallowed a pill.

古文：他日入蜀，至乐温县，遇同服丹者商人，寄寓乐温，得与话旧，且说所服之效。
现代文：日后进入蜀地，到了乐温县，遇到一块儿服丹的商人也住在乐温，便与他话旧，而且谈到服丹的功效。
English: Later, when he entered Shudi and came to Levin County, he met a merchant who also lived in Levin, and he struck up a conversation with him and talked about the efficacy of serving dan.

古文：无何，此公来报肋下痛，不日其药果下。
现代文：没过多久，这个人来报告说肋下痛，不几天那吞下去的知命丹果然排泄下来了。
English: It didn't take long before this person came to report pain under the ribs. A few days later, the swallowed deadly nightshade was indeed excreted.

古文：急区分家事，后凡二十日卒。
现代文：他急忙安排了家事，二十天后死了。
English: He hurriedly arranged his household affairs and died twenty days later.

古文：某方神其药，用海藻汤下之，香水洗沐，却吞之。
现代文：我正感到此药神奇，用海藻汤把它打下来，用香水洗涤干净，再吞下去。
English: I'm feeling the magic of this medicine, knocking it down with seaweed soup, washing it clean with perfume, and then swallowing it.

古文：昨来所苦，药且未下，所以知未死。 
现代文：前几天所以苦恼，因为药还没有自己下来，所以知道没到死的日子。 
English: A few days ago, I was distressed because the medicine had not yet come down on its own, so I knew that I would not die.

古文：兼出药相示。
现代文：他同时拿山药来给钟公看。
English: At the same time, he brought yam to show Zhong Gong.

古文：然钟公面色红润，强饮啗，似得药力也，他日不知其所终，以其知命有验，故记之焉。
现代文：但钟公面色红润，勉强喝了药，好像得到药力一样，日后不知他的结局如何，因为这知命丹的功效很灵验，所以记在这里。
English: But Zhong Gong was ruddy-faced and reluctantly drank the medicine, as if he had received the power of the medicine. In the future, he did not know what his outcome would be, because the effect of this life preserver was very effective, so it is recorded here.

古文：强绅
现代文：强绅
English: Strong Gentleman

古文：唐凤州东谷有山人强绅，妙于三戒，尤精云气。
现代文：唐代，凤州东谷有个山人叫强绅，妙于三戒之道，尤精云气之术。
English: In the Tang Dynasty, in the East Valley of Fengzhou, there was a mountain man named Qiang Sheng, who was good at the three precepts, especially the art of Jingyun Qi.

古文：属王氏初并秦凤，张黄于通衢，强公指而谓孙光宪曰： 更十年，天子数员。 
现代文：时值王氏刚刚兼并秦凤之地，正在大街上张扬，强绅指着他们跟孙光宪说： 再过十年就会出现好几个天子。 
English: At the time, the Wang clan had just annexed the land of Qin and Feng, and was promoting themselves on the streets. The strong gentleman pointed to them and said to Sun Guangxian: In another ten years, there will be several heavenly sons.

古文：又曰： 并汾而来悠悠，梁蜀后何为哉。 
现代文：又说： 吞并汾地以来这么长时间了，在蜀地建立梁国后还做些什么呢。 
English: He also said: It has been such a long time since the annexation of Shandong Province, what should we do after the establishment of Liang Province in Shoudi?

古文：于时蜀兵初攻岐山，谓其旦夕屠之。
现代文：当时蜀兵开始攻打歧山，自称旦夕之间就会荡平秦地。
English: At that time, Shu soldiers began to attack Mount Bi, claiming that they would level Qin between dusk and dawn.

古文：强曰： 秦王久思妄动，非四海之主，虽然，死于牖下，乃其分也。
现代文：强绅说： 秦王早就想妄动，要除掉各方的霸主，但他却死在牖下，这是他命中注定的。
English: Qiang Sheng said: King Qin has long wanted to act rashly, to get rid of the overlords of all sides, but he died under the yoke, which was his fate.

古文：蜀人终不能克秦，而秦川亦成丘墟矣。 
现代文：蜀人最后攻不下秦地，而秦川也要变成荒丘的。 
English: In the end, the Shu people were unable to conquer Qin, and the Qin River turned into a barren hill.

古文：尔后大卤与王凤翔不羁，秦王令终，王氏绝祚，果叶强生言。
现代文：后来，大卤与王凤翔不受约束，秦王的法令行不通，王氏也丢了王位，果然应了强绅的话。
English: Later, Dagalo and Wang Fengxiang were not constrained, the decree of King Qin did not work, and the Wang clan also lost the throne, and the strong gentleman's words came true.

古文：有鹿卢跷术。自云老夫耄矣，无人可传，其书藏在深稳处古杉树中。
现代文：有一种鹿卢跷术，强绅自称年老无人可传，把那本书藏在了深山隐蔽处的古杉树里。
English: There is a book on the art of roe deer hunting, which the strong gentleman, claiming to be too old to pass on, hid in an old cedar tree in a mountain hideaway.

古文：因与孙光宪偕诣，开树皮，发蜡缄，取出一通绢书，选吉辰以授，为强妪止之。
现代文：他与孙光宪一起到了那里，剥开树皮和蜡封，取出一册绢子书，选择吉日良辰要向他传授，被强绅的老伴制止了。
English: He went there with Sun Guangxian, peeled off the bark and wax seal, took out a book of dice, and chose a good day to teach him. He was stopped by the strong gentleman's wife.

古文：谓孙少年矣，虑致发狂，俾服膺三年，方议可否。
现代文：她说孙光宪太年轻了，担心他会因为掌握此术之后发狂，等他服务三年之后，才能考虑是否可以向他传授。
English: She said that Sun Guangxian was too young, worried that he would go mad after mastering the art, and would wait until he had served for three years before considering whether to teach him.

古文：彭钉筋
现代文：彭钉筋
English: Pengjian

古文：唐彭濮间。有相者彭克明。号彭钉筋。
现代文：唐朝，在彭濮一带，有个相命人叫彭克明，绰号彭钉筋。
English: In the Tang Dynasty, in the Penghu area, there was a matchmaker named Peng Kemin, nicknamed Peng Nails.

古文：言事多验。人以其必中。是有钉筋之名。
现代文：他说的事情多数应验，人们由于他说的话差不多句句准确，所以才送他一个 钉筋 的绰号。
English: Most of what he said came to pass, and people gave him the nickname "Stiffneck" because he was almost always right.

古文：在水中央。唐谓必致之。乃脱衣泅水。无何为泛波漂没而卒。
现代文：后来有一天，江水泛滥，水潭里漂着一只兔子，正在水的中央，唐氏的儿子以为一定能捉到它，便脱掉衣服泅水游过去，不一会儿便被泛滥的江水冲走淹死了。
English: Then one day, when the river was overflowing, there was a rabbit floating in the middle of the water. Mr. Tang's son thought he could catch it, so he took off his clothes and swam across the water. Soon, he was swept away by the overflowing river and drowned.

古文：所谓一缕不挂也。
现代文：正所谓一丝不挂而身亡。
English: She died completely naked, as they say.

古文：其他皆此类。繁而不载。
现代文：关于彭钉筋的事情都与这件事类似，就不一件件地记载了。
English: Everything about Peng Nail Sinew is similar to this case, so it is not recorded one by one.

古文：崔无斁
现代文：崔无斁
English: Choi Moo-hyun

古文：伪王蜀先主时，有道士李皓，亦唐之宗室，生于徐州，而游三蜀。
现代文：伪王蜀先主时，有个道士李皓，也是唐朝皇帝的宗室，生于徐州而游于三蜀。
English: During the reign of the pseudo-emperor Shu, there was a Taoist priest, Li Qian, who was also the ancestral wife of the emperor of the Tang Dynasty. He was born in Xuzhou and lived in Sanshu.

古文：词辩敏捷，粗有文章。
现代文：他口齿伶俐。能言善辩，而且略有文彩。
English: He is articulate, well-spoken and a bit of a wit.

古文：因栖阳平化，为妖人扶持，上有紫气，乃聚众举事而败，妖辈星散，而皓独罹其祸。
现代文：栖阳平化为妖人扶持，上有紫气，他便聚众起兵作乱，结果失败了，妖人们纷纷逃散，而李皓却身历其祸。
English: When Xiyang was reduced to supporting the evil spirits and had a purple aura, he rallied the troops and started a riot. As a result, he failed, and the evil spirits fled in droves, while Li Yao suffered the same fate.

古文：先是李皓有书，召玉局仙杨德辉赴斋。
现代文：事先，李皓曾经写信召集玉局仙杨德辉等人前来参加斋会。
English: In advance, Li Wei had written a letter to summon the Jade Bureau Xian Yang Dehui and others to come and participate in the feast.

古文：有老道士崔无斁自言患聋，有道而托算术，往往预知吉凶。
现代文：有位老道士崔无斁自称耳聋不去赴会，他是道业很深的人，凭借算术往往预知吉凶。
English: There is an old Taoist priest, Cui Wuxuan, who claims to be deaf and does not go to meetings. He is a man of deep Taoism, and often predicts good and bad fortune with the help of arithmetic.

古文：杨德辉问曰： 将欲北行，如何？ 
现代文：杨德辉问道： 我要到北面去，吉凶如何？ 
English: Yang Dehui asked: I want to go to the north, what about the fortunes?

古文：令崔书地作字，乃书北千两割字，崔公以千插北成乖字，曰： 去即乖觉。 
现代文：他让崔无斁在地上写字，崔便写了 北 和 千 两个分割开的字，然后把 千 字插入 北 字中间成了个 乖 字，说： 去了一定要乖觉，要见机行事。 
English: He asked Cui Wuzhong to write on the ground, and Cui then wrote the characters separated by north and thousand, and then inserted the thousand into the middle of the word north to form a word, saying: "If you go, you must be alert and act according to the situation."

古文：杨坐不果去，而皓斋日就擒，道士多罹其祸。
现代文：杨德辉果然没有去。李皓在斋会的那一天被擒，别的赶会道士也经历了这场祸事。
English: Yang Dehui didn't go after all. On the day of the banquet, Li Lan was arrested, and other Taoists who had come to the banquet also experienced this calamity.

古文：杨之幸免，由崔之力也。
现代文：杨德辉能够幸免于难，是由于崔无斁的帮助。
English: Yang Dehui was able to survive because of Cui Wuxuan's help.

古文：蜀士
现代文：蜀士
English: Shu Shi

古文：伪王蜀有王氏子承协，幼承荫，有文武才，性聪明，通于音律。
现代文：伪王蜀有王氏子承协，自幼承袭受封，兼有文武之才，天资聪明，通晓音律。
English: The pseudo-king Shu was the son of a member of the royal family and received the title of prince from a young age. He was talented in literature and martial arts, intelligent by nature, and familiar with musical notation.

古文：门下常养一术士，潜授战阵之法，人莫知之。
现代文：他在门下长期供养着一个术士，暗中教授他战阵之法，人们都不知道。
English: He kept a sorcerer under his wing for a long time, secretly teaching him the ways of battle, unbeknownst to anyone.

古文：术士褴褛弊衣，亦不受承协之资镪。
现代文：这位术士衣衫褴褛，也不接受承协送给他的钱财。
English: The sorcerer is dressed in rags and does not accept the money given to him by the association.

古文：承协后因蜀主讲武于星宿山下，忽于主前呈一铁枪，重三十余斤，请试之。
现代文：承协后来因为蜀主在星山下讲武，突然在主前呈上一杆铁枪，重三十余斤，请求试练一下。
English: Later, because the Lord of Shu preached martial arts under the starry mountain, the Chenghe Association suddenly presented a steel gun, weighing more than thirty pounds, in front of the Lord and asked him to try it out.

古文：由是介马盘枪，星飞电转。
现代文：于是，承协便勒马轮枪，星飞电转，神出鬼没。
English: As a result, the Chinese People's Political Consultative Conference dropped the horse-drawn wheel gun, the star flew, the electricity turned, and the ghost appeared.

古文：万人观之，咸服其神异。
现代文：万人看了他的表演，人人佩服其武艺神奇。
English: Thousands of people watched his performance, everyone admired his martial arts magic.

古文：及入城，又请盘城门下铁关，五十余斤，两人舁致马上，当街驰之，亦如电闪。
现代文：等到进了城门，又让他挥舞城门下的铁门栓，门栓重约五十多斤，两个人抬到马上之后，承协就在大街上勒马飞舞起来，依然星飞电转，神出鬼没。
English: After waiting until he entered the city gate, he asked him to swing the iron door bolt under the city gate. The door bolt weighs about fifty pounds. After two people lifted it to the horse, Cheng Hie stopped the horse and flew in the street. The horse was still flying, and there was no sign of the ghost.

古文：大赏之，擢为龙捷指挥使。
现代文：蜀主大为赏识，颁以重奖，并任命他为龙捷指挥使。
English: Lord Shu was very appreciative, awarded him a heavy prize, and appointed him as Long Jie's commanding officer.

古文：其诸家兵法，三令五甲，悬之口吻。
现代文：至于诸家兵法，无论三令五甲，他都能口若悬河地熟练背诵。
English: As for the various methods of warfare, he can recite them fluently regardless of whether he is in the third or fifth grade.

古文：以其年幼，终不付大兵柄。
现代文：因为他年幼，所以没有交给他大的兵权。
English: Because he was young, he was not given much military power.

古文：奇异之术，信而有之。
现代文：其他的奇异法术，相信他也能通晓。
English: Other strange spells, I believe he can also understand.

古文：陈岷
现代文：陈岷
English: Chen Yao

古文：后唐庄宗世子魏王继岌伐蜀，回军在道，而有邺都之变。
现代文：后唐庄宗的嫡长子魏王继岌讨伐蜀地，在回军途中发生了邺都之变。
English: Later, the eldest legitimate son of Tang Zhuangzong, Wei Wang, continued to fight against Shu, and on the way back to the army, there was a change in the capital.

古文：庄宗与刘后命内臣张汉宾赍急诏，所在催魏王归阙。
现代文：庄宗与刘后命令内臣张汉宾带着急诏，到魏王所在的地方催他回朝。
English: Zhuang Zong and Liu Hou ordered their vassal Zhang Hanbin to go to the place where Wei Wang was and urge him to return to the imperial court.

古文：张汉宾乘驿，倍道急行，至兴元西县逢魏王，宣传诏旨。
现代文：张汉宾乘着驿马，加速急行，到兴元西县碰到魏王，向他宣读了皇帝的诏旨。
English: Zhang Hanbin rode a steed and sped up the express to Xingyuan West County, where he met Wei Wang and read the emperor's edict to him.

古文：王以本军方讨汉州，康延孝相次继来，欲候之出山，以陈凯歌。
现代文：魏王说自己正在率军讨伐汉州，康延孝接着也要到来，要等他出山之后，再回朝报告胜利的消息。
English: Wei Wang said that he was leading an army to fight against Hanzhou, and Kang Yanxiao would come next, and he would wait for him to go out of the mountain before returning to the North to report the news of victory.

古文：汉宾督之。
现代文：张汉宾督促他赶快回朝。
English: Zhang Hanbin urged him to hurry back to the morning.

古文：有军谋陈岷，比事梁，与汉宾熟，密问张曰： 天子改换，且是何人？ 
现代文：有个军谋陈岷正在勾结投降大梁，他与汉宾熟识，所以密问张汉宾道： 天子已经改换，新登基的天子是谁？ 
English: There was a military strategist, Chen Xuan, who was working with Han Bin on the surrender. He knew him well, so he asked Zhang Han Bin: "The emperor has been replaced. Who is the new emperor?"

古文：张色庄曰： 我当面奉宣诏魏王，况大军在行，谈何容易。 
现代文：张汉宾神色庄严地说： 我奉皇命当面宣诏要魏王回京，况且大军正在行进之中，要想事梁，谈何容易！ 
English: Zhang Hanbin looked solemn and said, "I have been ordered by the emperor to declare in person that the Wei king should return to Beijing. Moreover, the great army is on the march. If you want to talk about something, how easy it is!

古文：陈岷曰： 久忝知闻，故敢谘问。
现代文：陈岷说： 因为过去与您熟识，所以才敢向您打听情况。
English: Chen Yao said: Because I was familiar with you in the past, I dared to ask you about the situation.

古文：两日来有一信风，新人已即位矣，复何形迹？ 
现代文：这两天有一股信风，我知道新人已经即位了。另外还有什么情况？ 
English: In the last two days, there has been a tailwind, and I know that the new emperor has been enthroned. What else is going on?

古文：张乃说： 来时闻李嗣元过河，未知近事。 
现代文：张汉宾便说： 来的时候听说李嗣元已经过了河，近几天的事情我就不知道了。 
English: Zhang Hanbin then said: "When I came, I heard that Li Siyuan had already crossed the river. I don't know what happened in the last few days.

古文：岷曰： 魏王且请盘桓，以观其势，未可前迈。 
现代文：陈岷说： 应当请魏王原地不动，以观形势的变化。不可往前开进。 
English: Chen Yao said: We should ask Wei Wang to stay put and watch the situation change. It is impossible to move forward.

古文：张以庄宗命严，不敢迁延，督令进发。
现代文：张汉宾因为庄宗皇帝的命令极严，不敢拖延，所以督令魏王立即进发。
English: Zhang Hanbin did not dare to delay because Emperor Zhuangzong's order was very strict, so he ordered Wei Wang to leave immediately.

古文：魏王至渭南遇害。
现代文：魏王到渭南时遇害。
English: Wei Wang was killed when he arrived in southern Anhui Province.

古文：郑山古
现代文：郑山古
English: Zhengshan Gu

古文：伪蜀王先主时，有军校黄承真就粮于广汉绵竹县，遇一叟曰郑山古，谓黄曰： 此国于五行中少金气，有剥金之号，曰金炀鬼。
现代文：伪蜀先主时，有个军校叫黄承真催运粮食到了广汉绵竹县，遇见一个老头叫郑山古，对黄承真说： 这个国家在五行之中缺少金气，有个剥金名称，叫金炀鬼。
English: At the time of the False Shu Emperor, there was a military school called Huang Chengzhen that rushed grain to Mianzhu County, Guanghan Province. He met an old man named Zheng Shangu, who said to Huang Chengzhen: This country lacks gold among the five elements, and has a name of stripping gold, called gold-digging ghost.

古文：此年蜀宫大火，至甲申、乙酉，则杀人无数，我授汝秘术，诣朝堂陈之。
现代文：今年蜀国王宫要起大火，到甲申年和乙酉年则有无数人被杀害，我教给你秘密的法术，到朝上去陈述。
English: This year, the Shu King's palace will be set on fire. In the years of Jiaxing and Acetylene, countless people will be killed. I will teach you a secret spell and go to the morning to present it.

古文：傥行吾教以禳镇，庶几减于杀伐。
现代文：倘若施行我教的法术除祸镇灾，可能会免除杀伐的灾难。
English: If you use the spells I teach to ward off evil, you may be spared the calamity of the slaughter.

古文：救活之功，道家所重，延生试于我而取之。
现代文：救人活命的功劳本是道家所看重的，请您为了我而这么办。
English: The merit of saving people's lives is valued by Taoists, so please do this for me.

古文：然三陈此术，如不允行，则止亦不免。
现代文：但是，如果再三陈述我教您的法术，他们仍然不允许施行，那就算了。灾祸不能免除。
English: But if you repeatedly recite the spells I have taught you, and they still do not allow you to perform them, so be it. Disaster cannot be avoided.

古文：盖泄于阴机也，子能从我乎？ 
现代文：那也是暗中注定的机运呀！您能按我说的去办吗？ 
English: That is also a secretly predestined opportunity! Can you do as I say?

古文：黄亦好奇，乃曰： 苟禀至言，死生以之。 
现代文：黄承真也好奇，便说： 如果让我说心里话，那就是：为了此事，生死不惧。 
English: Huang Chengzhen was also curious, so he said, "If I were to speak my mind, it would be: I'm not afraid to die for this cause.

古文：乃赍秘文诣蜀。
现代文：他便带有秘密文书到了蜀国。
English: He arrived in Shu with a secret document.

古文：三上不达，乃呕血而死。
现代文：几次呈报都没有送到国王那里，黄承真便吐血而死。
English: Several times, the report was not sent to the king, and Huang Chengzhen vomited blood and died.

古文：其大火与乙酉亡国杀戮之事果验。
现代文：结果，宫中起火与乙酉亡国杀戮的事情应验发生。
English: As a result, the events of the fire in the palace and the killing of the acetylene dead occurred.

古文：孙光宪与承真相识，窃得窥其秘纬，题云黄帝阴符，与今阴符不同，凡五六千言。
现代文：孙光宪跟黄承真互相认识，当初他曾偷看到那件秘术的大概，里面写道：黄帝的阴符，与现在的阴符不同，共有五六千字。
English: Sun Guangxian and Huang Chengzhen knew each other. At the beginning, he had stolen a glimpse of the outline of the secret art, in which he wrote: The Yin symbols of the Yellow Emperor, unlike the current Yin symbols, totaled five or six thousand characters.

古文：黄云受于郑叟，一画一点，皆以五行属配，通畅亹亹。实奇书也。
现代文：黄承真说这份秘术是一位郑翁交给他的，上面的一画一点，全用阴阳五行对应搭配。通畅流利，实在是一部奇书啊！
English: Huang Chengzhen said that this secret art was given to him by a Zheng Weng, and the above drawing is a little bit, all with yin and yang corresponding to the five elements. Smooth and fluent, it is really a strange book!

古文：然汉代数贤生于绵竹。妙于谶记之学，所云郑叟，岂黄扶之流乎。
现代文：但是，汉代许多贤能之人生于绵竹，精通谶记这门学问，黄承真所说的郑老翁，莫不是黄扶之流吗？
English: However, many talented people in the Han Dynasty were born in Mianzhu, and they were proficient in the discipline of Mengqi. Wasn't Zheng Laowong, as Huang Chengzhen called him, a descendant of Huang Fu?

古文：马处谦
现代文：马处谦
English: Ma Chuanqian

古文：伪王蜀叶逢，少明悟，以词笔求知，常与孙光宪偕诣术士马处谦，问命通塞。
现代文：伪王蜀时有个叶逢，少年聪明，以诗词文章知名，常常跟孙光宪一起拜见术士马处谦，卜问命运通达与否。
English: In the time of the pseudo-king Shu, there was a story about a clever young man who was known for his poetry. He often visited the sorcerer Ma Shideqian together with Sun Guangxian to ask whether he was destined to succeed or not.

古文：马曰： 四十已后，方可图之，未间，苟或先得，于寿不永。 
现代文：马处谦说： 四十岁以后，你才能有官运；不到时候，如果先得到官位，你的寿命就不长。 
English: Ma Shuchuan said: After the age of forty, you can only have a career; before that time, if you get a post first, your life will not be long.

古文：于时州府交辟，以多故参差，不成其事。
现代文：当时，州府交辟，因为种种原因耽误了，升官的事情没有办成。
English: At that time, there was a change of state government, and because of various reasons, there was a delay, and the promotion was not completed.

古文：后充湖南通判官。
现代文：后来充任湖南的通判官。
English: He later served as a judge in Hunan Province.

古文：未除官之前，梦见乘船赴任，江上候吏，旁午而至，迎入石窟。
现代文：未封官之前，他梦见乘船赴任，在江上等候差吏，快到中午时便到了，把他迎接到一个石洞里去。
English: Before he was appointed, he dreamed of taking a boat to his post and waiting for the police on the river. They arrived shortly before noon and welcomed him into a stone cave.

古文：觉后，话于广成先生杜光庭次，忽报敕下，授检校水部员外郎。
现代文：睡醒以后，他在杜广成家里说起此事，忽然传报皇帝的敕命传下来了，封他为检校水部员外郎。
English: After waking up, he talked about the matter at Du Guangcheng's home, and suddenly the news of the emperor's death was passed down, and he was appointed as the water inspector's younger brother.

古文：广成曰： 昨宵之梦，岂小川之谓乎？ 
现代文：广成说： 昨天晚上的梦，指的岂不是小川吗？ 
English: Guangcheng said: Yesterday night's dream, did it not refer to Ogawa?

古文：自是解维，覆舟于犍为郡青衣滩而死，即处谦之生知。
现代文：叶逢于是解维发船，登程赴任，走到犍为群青衣滩时，船翻身亡，这就是马处谦原先的预见。
English: As a result, Ye Feng was relieved of his duties as the ship's captain and embarked on his journey to his new post. When he reached the beach, the ship overturned and he was killed. This was what Ma Shideqian originally foresaw.

古文：叶逢之凶梦，何其效哉。
现代文：叶逢那天晚上做的凶梦，何其见效！
English: Ye Feng's bad dream that night, what an effect!

古文：光宪自蜀沿流，一夕梦叶生云： 子于青衣亦不得免。 
现代文：孙光宪从四川沿着长江顺流而下，一天夜间梦见叶生说： 你在青衣滩也不能幸免。 
English: Sun Guangxian followed the Yangtze River downstream from Sichuan. One night, he dreamed of Ye Sheng and said, "You can't be spared in Qingyi Beach."

古文：觉而异之，泊发嘉州，取阳山路，乘小舟以避青衣之险。
现代文：睡醒之后非常惊异，他停下船来不再沿江直奔嘉州，而取道阳山旱路，然后换乘小船避开青衣滩之险阻。
English: After waking up, he was very surprised. He stopped the boat and no longer went straight along the river to Jiazhou, but took the Yangshan dry road, and then took a small boat to avoid the dangers of Qingyi Beach.

古文：无何篙折，为泛流吸入青衣，幸而获济。
现代文：无奈船篙断了，被激荡的水流吸进青衣滩，幸而又被救了出来。
English: The boat broke its anchor, was sucked into the turbulent waters of Tsing Yi Beach, and was fortunately rescued.

古文：岂鬼神尚能相戏哉。
现代文：难道鬼神也能互相开玩笑吗？
English: Can ghosts and gods play jokes on each other?

古文：赵圣人
现代文：赵圣人
English: Zhao Shengren

古文：伪蜀有赵温圭，善袁许术，占人灾祥，无不神中，蜀谓之赵圣人。
现代文：伪蜀有个赵温圭，擅长袁许的法术，给别人占卜吉祥灾祸，无不神算妙中，蜀人称他为赵圣人。
English: Pseudo-Shu has a Zhao Wengui, who is good at the magic of Yuan Xu, and gives others divination, auspicious and calamitous. Among all the gods and goddesses, Shu people call him Zhao sage.

古文：武将王晖事蜀先主，累有军功。
现代文：武将王晖在蜀国先主手下效力时，战功累累。
English: When the military commander Wang Hui served under the former ruler of Shu, he achieved a great deal of military success.

古文：为性凶悍，至后主时，为一二贵人挤抑，久沈下位，王深衔之。
现代文：他为人性格鲁莽凶悍，到了后主执政时，被一两个权贵的大臣排挤压抑，长时间沉没在低下的职位上，怀恨在心。
English: He had a reckless and fierce personality. When he came to power, he was ousted and suppressed by one or two powerful ministers. For a long time, he sunk into a low position and held grudges.

古文：尝一日，于朝门逢赵公，见之惊愕，乃屏人告之曰： 今日见君面有杀气，怀兵刃，欲行阴谋。
现代文：曾经有一天，他在朝门下面遇见赵公，赵公看见他十分惊愕，便屏退左右告诉他说： 今天看见你面带杀气，怀里藏着刀想暗算别人。
English: One day, he met Zhao Gong under the imperial gate. Zhao Gong was very surprised to see him, so he flinched and told him: "Today I saw you with a murderous face, hiding a knife in your arms, trying to plot against others.

古文：但君将来当为三任郡守，一任节制，自是晚达，不宜害人，以取殃祸。
现代文：但是，你将来会成为三任郡守，一任节制，只是晚一些罢了，不宜害人而招致灾祸。 
English: However, in the future, you will become the third-term county governor and the first-term temperance, but it will be later. You should not harm others and invite disaster.

古文：王大骇，乃于怀中控一匕首掷于地，泣而言曰： 今日比欲刺杀此子，便自引决，不期逢君为开释，请从此而止。 
现代文：王晖十分吃惊，便从怀里掏出一柄匕首扔在地上，哭泣着说： 今天本想刺杀这小子，然后引颈自杀，不料遇到你为我开导解释，我从此以后再不这么蛮干了。 
English: Wang Yao was very surprised, so he pulled out a dagger from his arms and threw it on the ground, crying and saying: Today I wanted to stab this boy and then commit suicide, but when I met you to enlighten me, I won't do this anymore.

古文：勤勤拜谢而退。
现代文：说完，频频拜谢，向赵公告辞。
English: After saying this, he bowed frequently and announced his resignation to Zhao.

古文：王寻为郡，迁秦州节度。
现代文：王晖很快就当了郡守，又迁升为秦州节度使。
English: Wang Qian soon became the county governor, and was promoted to the Qin State Festival envoy.

古文：蜀亡，老于咸阳。
现代文：伪蜀灭亡后，他老死于咸阳。
English: After the death of pseudo-Shu, he always died in Xianyang.

古文：宰相范质亲见王，话其事。
现代文：宰相范质亲眼看见过王晖，王晖跟他说了自己经历的这些事情。
English: The Prime Minister himself saw Wang Xi, and Wang Xi told him about the things he had experienced.

古文：黄万户
现代文：黄万户
English: Huang Wanyu

古文：伪王蜀时，巫山高唐观道士黄万户。
现代文：伪王蜀时，巫山高唐观有个道士叫黄万户。
English: In the time of the pseudo-king Shu, there was a Taoist called Huang Wanzhu in Wushan High Tang Dynasty.

古文：本巴东万户村民，学白虎七变术，又云学六丁法于道士张君。
现代文：黄万户本是巴东万户村民，学过白虎七变术，又说跟道士张君学过六丁法。
English: Huang Wanyu is originally from Wanyu Village, Badong. He has learned the White Tiger and the Seven Transmutation Arts, and is also said to have learned the Six Dharmas from the Taoist Zhang Jun.

古文：常持一铁鞭疗疾，不以财物介怀，然好与乡人争讼，州县不之重也。
现代文：他常常拿着一条铁鞭给别人治病，从不把财物放在心上，然而好与乡邻们打官司，所以州衙县府并不看重他。
English: He often treated others with an iron whip and never cared about possessions. However, he was good at suing his neighbors, so the county government did not value him.

古文：或州刺史文思辂亦有戏术，曾剪纸鱼投于盆内而活，万户投符化獭而食之。
现代文：戎州刺史文思辂也掌握游戏的法术，他曾剪了纸鱼放到盆里就变成活鱼，黄万户则把一道符投进去化成一只獭把鱼吃了。
English: Ebisuchu stabber Shivenshi also mastered the magic of the game. He once cut a paper fish and put it in a basin to turn it into a live fish, while Huang Wanyu threw a charm into it to turn it into a tadpole and ate the fish.

古文：其铁鞭为文思辂收之，归至涪州亡其鞭，而却归黄矣。
现代文：黄的铁鞭被文思辂收了去，往回走到涪州时铁鞭又丢了，结果却回到了黄万户的手里。
English: Huang's iron whip was taken away by Wen Siyu, and when he went back to Zhangzhou, the iron whip was lost again, but it ended up back in the hands of Huang Wanzhong.

古文：有杨希古，欲传其术，坐未安，忽云，子家中已有丧秽，不果传，俄得家讣母亡。
现代文：有个叫杨希古的，想请黄向他传授法术，还没坐好黄忽然说： 你家里出丧事了。 结果没向他传授，很快他就得到母亲死亡的讣告。
English: A man named Yang Xigu wanted to ask Huang to teach him magic, but before he could sit down, Huang suddenly said, "There's been a death in your family." As a result, he didn't teach him, and soon he received an obituary notice of his mother's death.

古文：又蜀先主召入宫，列示诸子，俾认储后，万户乃指后主。
现代文：还有一次蜀国先主召黄万户入宫，先主将自己的儿子一个个介绍给他，让他认认谁是将来王位的继承人，黄便指定是后主。
English: There was also a time when the Emperor of Shu summoned Huang Wanyu to the palace. The Emperor introduced his sons to him one by one and asked him to identify who would be the heir to the throne in the future. Huang was designated as the heir.

古文：其术他皆仿此。
现代文：有关他的法术如何灵验的其他事情，都与这几件事相仿佛。
English: Other things about how well his spells work are similar to these.

古文：唯一女为巫山民妻，有男传授秘诀，将卒，戒家人勿殓，经七八日再活，不久却殒也。
现代文：他只有一个女儿，是巫山一个平民的妻子。有个男儿，向他传授秘诀，说将来自己死了时，要戏诫家人不要入殓，过七八天就能复活，但这个男儿不久就死了。
English: He had only one daughter, who was the wife of a commoner in Wushan. There was a man who taught him a secret, saying that when he died in the future, he would playfully warn his family not to enter the coffin, and that he would be resurrected after seven or eight days, but the man soon died.

古文：青城县旧有马和尚，宴坐三十五年，道德甚高。
现代文：青城县过去有个马和尚，静坐了三十五年，道德非常高。
English: In the past, there was a horse monk in Qingcheng County who had been meditating for thirty-five years and had very high morals.

古文：万户将卒，谓家人曰： 青城马和尚来，我遂长逝也。 
现代文：万户要死时对家人说： 青城马和尚要来，我要与世长辞了。 
English: When a man was about to die, he would say to his family, "The Qingcheng Horse Monk is about to come, and I am about to die."

古文：是年，马师亦迁化。
现代文：在万户长辞的这一年，马和尚也去世了。
English: In this year of all-households dying, Ma Monk also passed away.

古文：何奎
现代文：何奎
English: He Kui

古文：伪王蜀时，阆州人何奎，不知何术，而言事甚效，既非卜相，人号何见鬼，蜀之近贵咸神之。
现代文：伪王蜀时，阆州有个人叫何奎，他不懂什么法术，但说什么事情却非常准确，又不是占卜相面之类，人们都叫他何见鬼，蜀之近贵都把他当作神奇的人物看待。
English: During the time of the pseudo-king Shu, there was a man in Luzhou named He Kui Rong. He didn't know any magic, but what he said was very accurate, and it wasn't divination or anything like that. People called him the devil, and everyone close to Shu regarded him as a magical figure.

古文：鬻银肆有患白癫者，传于两世矣，何见之谓曰： 尔所苦，我知之矣，我为嫁聘，少镮钏钗篦之属，尔能致之乎，即所苦立愈矣。 
现代文：一家银店有患白癜风的，已经流传了两代了，何奎见到他时对他说： 你的苦处我知道，我因为嫁娶的事正缺少镮钏钗篦之类的首饰和化妆用品，你能送给我这些东西吗？
English: When He Kui met a man in a silver shop who had suffered from vitiligo for two generations, he said to him, "I know your plight. Because of my marriage, I am short of jewelry and cosmetics such as bracelets. Can you give me these things?"

古文：癞者欣然许之，因谓曰： 尔家必有他人旧功德，或供养之具在焉，亡者之魂所依，故遣为此崇，但去之必瘳也。 
现代文：如果能办到，你的苦处就立即痊愈。 那个患癫痫病的人欣然答应了他，何奎便跟他说： 你家里肯定有别人以前供佛的事，有供奉用具留在那里，死人的魂灵便依附在它上面，所以用它来作祟害人，只要把它除去，必定消除病患。 
English: If you can do this, your suffering will be cured immediately. The man with epilepsy readily agreed to this, and He Kui said to him: There must be something in your home that someone else used to offer to the Buddha. There must be an offering tool left there, and the dead person's soul is attached to it. Therefore, it is used to haunt people. If you remove it, you will surely eliminate the illness.

古文：患者归视功德堂内，本无他物，忖思久之，老母曰： 佛前纱窗，乃重围时他人之物，曾取而置之，得非此乎？ 
现代文：患者回家仔细察看供佛的殿堂，并没发现什么东西，想了很久，他老母亲便说： 佛像前面的纱窗，原来是重围时别人的东西，我过去拿来放在那里的，莫非就是这件东西？ 
English: The patient went home and carefully examined the hall for the Buddha, but did not find anything. After thinking for a long time, his old mother said: The screen window in front of the Buddha statue was originally someone else's thing when it was re-enclosed. I used to take it and put it there. Could it be this thing?

古文：遽彻去，仍修斋忏，疾遂痊。
现代文：于是立即把它撤掉，仍旧修斋打忏供佛，患者的病便痊愈了。
English: So he immediately took it off and continued to fast and make offerings to the Buddha. The patient's illness was cured.

古文：竟受其镮钏之赠。
现代文：何奎也终于接受了这个人耳环手镯之类的赠品。
English: He Kui also finally accepted the earrings, bracelets and other gifts from the man.

古文：何生未遇，不汲汲于官宦，末年祈于大官，自布衣除兴元小尹，金紫，兼妻邑号，子亦赐绯，不之任，便归阆州而卒，显知死期也。
现代文：何奎年轻时没有做官的机遇，他也不亟亟于官宦之途，晚年才祈求于大官，从平民百姓封为兴元县是小尹，授三五品以上的职衔，他的妻子也被封地封号，儿子也授予五品以上的职衔，他并没去上任，便回到阆州死在故乡，显然，他是预先就知道自己的死期的。
English: He Kui did not have the opportunity to become an official when he was young, and he was not eager to become an official. In his later years, he prayed for a high-ranking official. From the common people, he was given the title of Xingyuan County, Xiao Yin, and the title of more than three-fifths. His wife was also given the title of fief, and his son was also awarded the title of more than five-fifths. He did not go to office, and he returned to Zhangzhou to die in his hometown. Obviously, he knew his death date in advance.

古文：虽术数通神，而名器逾分，识者知后主政悉此类也。
现代文：他虽然法术通神，但晚年的名位已经超过了他的福分。识者知道蜀后主的为政就与这事类似。
English: Although he was a conjurer, his fame in his later years has exceeded his fortune. Those in the know know that Queen Shu's politics are similar to this.

古文：孙雄
现代文：孙雄
English: Sun Xiong

古文：嘉州夹江县人孙雄，号孙卯斋，其言事亦何奎之流。
现代文：孙雄是嘉州夹江县人，字号为孙卯斋，他的料事如神也属于何奎之流。
English: Sun Xiong is from Jiajiang County, Jiazhou, and his pen name is Sun Usai. He is also a disciple of He Kui.

古文：伪蜀主归命时，内官宋愈昭将军数员。
现代文：伪蜀主归顺唐朝时，有位内官宋愈将此事透露给几员将军。
English: When the pseudo-Shu ruler surrendered to the Tang Dynasty, an inner official Song Yu revealed the matter to several generals.

古文：旧与孙相善，亦神其术。
现代文：这几个人过去都跟孙雄很友善，也神奇于他的术数。
English: All of these people had been very friendly with Sun Xiong in the past, and were also amazed at his skill.

古文：将赴洛都，咸问将来升沈。
现代文：他们要去洛阳，便都去询问孙雄将来的升沉如何。
English: If they want to go to Luoyang, they will all go to inquire about Sun Xiong's future rise and fall.

古文：孙俯首曰： 诸官记之，此去无灾无福，但行及野狐泉已来税驾处，曰孙雄非圣人耶，此际新旧使头皆不见矣。 
现代文：孙雄俯首道： 各位官人记着我说的话，这次你们去洛阳，无灾祸也无福气，但是走到野狐泉已到了歇驾住宿之处，你们会说孙雄并非圣人呀，这个时候，新旧使头都见不到了。 
English: Sun Xiong bowed his head and said: "Officials, please remember what I said. This time, when you go to Luoyang, there will be no disaster or misfortune. However, when you get to the Wild Fox Spring, you will say that Sun Xiong is not a saint. At this time, you will not be able to see the old and new envoys.

古文：诸官咸疑之。
现代文：各位官员都很怀疑。
English: Officials are skeptical.

古文：尔后量其行迈，合在咸京左右，后主罹伪诏之祸，庄宗遇邺都之变，所谓新旧使头皆不得见之验也。
现代文：后来，他们估量了自己的行程，当时正在咸京前后，而那个时间正好是蜀后主因为背叛朝廷自立为王而遭祸，唐庄宗皇帝又遇上邺都兵变，所谓 新旧使头皆不得见 正好应验了。
English: Later, they evaluated their itinerary. They were in and around Hamkyong at the time, and that time coincided with the calamity that befell the Empress of Shu for betraying the imperial court and taking the throne herself. Emperor of Tangzhuangzong was also confronted with a mutiny in Shidu, and the so-called old and new envoys were nowhere to be seen, which was exactly what happened.

古文：李汉雄
现代文：李汉雄
English: Li Hanxiong

古文：李汉雄者，尝为钦州刺史，罢郡，居池州。
现代文：李汉雄曾经担任钦州刺使，免除郡守官职后居住在池州。
English: Li Hanxiong once served as the assassin of Qinzhou, and lived in Chizhou after being exempted from the post of county governor.

古文：善风角推步之奇术，自言当以兵死。
现代文：他擅长风角推步的奇异法术，自己说将来一定死在兵器之下。
English: He is good at the strange spell of wind-pushing, and he says that he will definitely die under the weapon in the future.

古文：天祐丙子岁，游浙西，始入府而叹曰： 府中气候甚恶，当有兵乱，期不远矣。吾必速回。 
现代文：唐昭宗天佑丙子年，李汉雄旅游到了浙西，他刚走进府衙时就惊叹道： 府内气氛太恶劣，肯定要出现兵乱，为期不远了，我必须迅速回避。 
English: In the year of Tang Zhaozong, Li Hanxiong traveled to western Zhejiang. As soon as he entered the prefecture, he exclaimed: The atmosphere in the prefecture is too bad, there must be a war, the period is not far away, I must quickly avoid it.

古文：既见，府公厚待之，留旬日，未得遽去。
现代文：见到府公后，主人以厚礼招待他，留他住了十天，所以没能立即离开这里。
English: After seeing the prefect, the owner invited him with great courtesy and kept him for ten days, so he couldn't leave immediately.

古文：一日晚出逆旅，四顾而叹曰： 祸在明日，吾不可留。 
现代文：一天晚上，他走出客店，向周围看了看叹道： 灾祸就在明天，我不能再留在这里。 
English: One evening, he walked out of the inn, looked around and sighed: Disaster is tomorrow, I can't stay here anymore.

古文：翌日晨，入府辞，坐客位中，良久曰： 祸即今至，速出犹或可。 
现代文：第二天早上，他到府内辞行，在客人的位置上坐了好长时间后便说： 灾祸马上就要到来，迅速出去或许还可避过。 
English: The next morning, he went to the residence to take his leave, and after sitting in the position of a guest for a long time, he said: The disaster is about to come, and it may be avoided by going out quickly.

古文：遂出至府门，遇军将周交作乱，遂遇杀害于门下。
现代文：说完往外走，到府门时遇到军将周交作乱，便被杀害于府衙门前。
English: After saying this, he went outside, and when he arrived at the gate of the palace, he encountered the military commander Zhou Jia, who was killed in front of the palace gate.

