古文：晋元帝叔父东安王繇，为成都王颖所害，惧祸及，潜出奔。
现代文：原文晋元帝的叔叔东安王司马繇被成都王司马颖陷害，害怕惹祸上身，于是逃离京城，在渡河的时候却被守军拦了下来。
English: The original text: Emperor Jin Yuan's uncle, Dongan Wang Simak, was framed by Chengdu Wang Simaying. He was afraid of getting into trouble, so he fled the capital, but was stopped by the defenders when crossing the river.

古文：至河阳，为津吏所止，从者宗典后至，以马鞭拂之，谓曰： 舍长，官禁贵人，而汝亦被拘耶？ 
现代文：随行的宗典追赶上来，用马鞭打司马繇，对他说： 朝廷下令禁止朝廷大官渡河，没想到你也被当作贵人拦了下来。 
English: Accompanying Soden chased him up, whipped Sima Yu with a horsewhip, and said to him, "The court has ordered a ban on imperial officials crossing the river. I didn't expect you to be stopped as a noble."

古文：因大笑，由是得释。
现代文：士兵听后没有怀疑他，于是东安王得以平安地渡河脱险。
English: The soldiers did not suspect him after listening to him, so Dongan Wang was able to cross the river safely.

古文：宇文泰与侯景战，泰马中流矢，惊逸，泰坠地。
现代文：南北朝时期的宇文泰和侯景交战的时候，坐骑被箭射中了，受到惊吓四处狂奔，宇文泰从马上摔了下来。
English: During the war between Uwentai and Houjing in the period of the Northern and Southern Dynasties, Uwentai fell from his horse after his horse was hit by an arrow and ran around in fright.

古文：东魏兵及之，左右皆散。
现代文：这个时候东魏的士兵已经越来越近，而宇文泰的侍卫已经走散了。
English: At this time, the soldiers of the Eastern Wei Dynasty were getting closer and closer, and the bodyguards of Wu Wentai had already dispersed.

古文：李穆下马，以策击泰背，骂之曰： 笼东军士，尔曹主何在？ 
现代文：大将李穆在旁边，跳下马来用鞭子抽打宇文泰，骂道： 你这无能的败兵，你的主子在什么地方？
English: General Li Mu, who was nearby, jumped down from his horse and lashed out at Wu Wentai with a whip, cursing: "You incompetent loser, where is your master?

古文：追者不疑是贵人，因舍而过。
现代文：你为什么一个人躺在这里？ 
English: Why are you lying here alone?

古文：穆以马授泰，与之俱逸。
现代文：东魏的士兵没有怀疑就匆匆路过离去了，李穆于是把马让给了宇文泰，和他一起逃跑。
English: The soldiers of the Eastern Wei Dynasty passed by quickly and left without any suspicion. Li Mu then gave his horse to Yu Wentai and ran away with him.

古文：王廒之败，沙门昙永匿其幼子华，使提衣幞自随。
现代文：晋朝时王廒战败之后，有个叫昙永的和尚收容了王廒的幼子王华，让王华提着包袱跟随在自己身后。
English: After the defeat of Wang Hui during the Jin Dynasty, a monk named Jiong Yong sheltered Wang Hui's young son, Wang Hua, and let Wang Hua carry the burden behind him.

古文：津逻疑之，昙永呵华曰： 奴子何不速行？ 
现代文：巡逻的士兵对王华的身份起了疑心，正要上前盘查，昙永灵机一动，对着王华骂道： 你这个下贱的奴才还不赶快走! 
English: The soldiers on patrol became suspicious of Wang Hua's identity and were about to go to the front for an inspection. With a single move, Yan Yongling abused Wang Hua, saying: "You lowly lackey, don't hurry to leave!

古文：捶之数十，由是得免。
现代文：并对他拳打脚踢，就这样安然脱险。
English: He also punched and kicked him, and escaped unharmed.

