古文：范岫，字懋宾，济阳考城人也。
现代文：范岫字懋宾，是济阳考城人。
English: Fan Rongzhe and Fan Bin are from Jiyang Kaocheng.

古文：高祖宣，晋征士。
现代文：高祖范宣，是晋征隐士。
English: Gao Zu Fan Xuan was a hermit of the Jin Conquest.

古文：父羲，宋兗州别驾。
现代文：父亲范羲，担任宋朝兗州别驾。
English: His father, Fan Yu, served as the Song Dynasty governor of Zhangzhou.

古文：岫早孤，事母以孝闻，与吴兴沈约俱为蔡兴宗所礼。
现代文：范岫早年丧父，侍奉母亲以孝顺而闻名，和吴兴人沈约俱为蔡兴宗所礼敬。
English: Fan Jie lost his father at an early age, and was known for his filial piety while serving his mother. He and Wu Xingren Shen were both honored by Cai Xingzong.

古文：泰始中，起家奉朝请。
现代文：泰始年间，出仕为奉朝请。
English: In the first year of the reign of Emperor Taishi, he was asked to serve the Emperor.

古文：兴宗为安西将军，引为主簿。
现代文：兴宗担任安西将军，延聘为主簿。
English: Xingzong served as the Anxi general, and his appointment was the main event.

古文：累迁临海、长城二县令，骠骑参军，尚书删定郎，护军司马，齐司徒竟陵王子良记室参军。
现代文：屡经升迁任临海、长城二县令，骠骑参军，尚书删定郎，护军司马，齐朝司徒竟陵王子良的记室参军。
English: He was repeatedly promoted and appointed as the commander of the two counties of Linhai and the Great Wall, and joined the army on horseback. He was also the secretary of the army, the secretary of the army, the secretary of the army, and the secretary of the army.

古文：累迁太子家令。
现代文：屡经升迁任太子家令。
English: He was repeatedly promoted to the position of crown prince.

古文：文惠太子之在东宫，沈约之徒以文才见引，岫亦预焉。
现代文：文惠太子在东宫时，沈约之徒以文才被征召，范岫也在其中。
English: When Prince Wen Hui was in the East Palace, Shen Yu's followers were conscripted by Wen Cai, and Fan Ye was also among them.

古文：岫文虽不逮约，而名行为时辈所与，博涉多通，尤悉魏晋以来吉凶故事。
现代文：范岫的文才虽然不如沈约，而名声品行为当时的有名人物所赞许，广博涉猎通晓内容多，尤其熟悉魏、置以来吉礼凶礼旧例。
English: Although Fan Yu's literary talent was not as good as Shen Yu's, his famous works were praised by famous figures at the time, and he was very knowledgeable about many things, especially familiar with the old cases of auspicious and inauspicious ceremonies since the Wei and Jie Dynasties.

古文：约常称曰： 范公好事该博，胡广无以加。 
现代文：沈约经常称赞说： 范公善于记事很周详广博，胡广也无法超过。 
English: Shen You often praised: Fan Gong is good at keeping detailed and extensive records, and Hu Guang can't surpass him.

古文：南乡范云谓人曰： 诸君进止威仪，当问范长头。 
现代文：南乡人莲垩对别人说：各位的进退礼仪，应该询问范长头。 
English: Nanxiang person Lianyao said to others: You should ask Fan Changtou about the entry and exit etiquette.

古文：以岫多识前代旧事也。
现代文：是因茎迪记得很多前代旧事的缘故。
English: It's because I remember a lot of things from the previous generation.

古文：迁国子博士。
现代文：调任国子博士。
English: He was reassigned to Dr. Kuniko.

古文：永明中，魏使至，有诏妙选朝士有词辩者，接使于界首，以岫兼淮阴长史迎焉。
现代文：永明年间，魏国使者到来，韶令精选朝廷官员中有文采辩才的人，到边界接待使者，委任范岫兼任淮阴长史去迎接。
English: In the middle of the Yongle year, the emissary of the State of Wei arrived, and the emperor ordered a selection of court officials with literary and debating talents to go to the border to receive the emissary, and appointed Fan Yu to also serve as Huaiyin Changshi to meet.

古文：还迁尚书左丞，母忧去官，寻起摄职。
现代文：返回调任尚书左丞，因母亲去世而离职，不久复出代理职事。
English: Returned and transferred to the post of Shang Shuzo, left the post due to the death of his mother, and soon returned to acting duties.

古文：出为宁朔将军、南蛮长史、南义阳太守，未赴职，迁右军谘议参军，郡如故。
现代文：外出任宁朔将军、南蛮长史、南义阳太守，没有赴任，调任右军谘议参军，郡守职位照旧。
English: He served as Ningshuo General, Nanban Changshi, and Nan Yiyang Daju, but did not take up the post. He was transferred to the right army to consult and join the army, and the position of county governor remained unchanged.

古文：除抚军司马。
现代文：授任抚军司马。
English: He was given the post of Fuzhong Sima.

古文：出为建威将军、安成内史。
现代文：外出任建威将军、安成内史。
English: General Jian Wei is in charge of external affairs, and Yasunari is in charge of internal affairs.

古文：入为给事黄门侍郎，迁御史中丞、领前军将军、南、北兗二州大中正。
现代文：入京任给事黄门侍郎，调任御史中丞、兼前军将军、尘、北兖州二州大中正。
English: After entering Beijing, he was given the post of Huangmen waiter, and was transferred to the posts of Goshi chujo, concurrently ex-army general, Chen, and North Luzhou Erzhou Daizhou Zhongzheng.

古文：永元末，出为辅国将军、冠军晋安王长史，行南徐州事。
现代文：永元末年，外出任辅国将军、冠军晋安王长史，代理南徐州事务。
English: At the end of the Yongyuan era, Wang Changshi, the champion of Jin'an and the general of Fu Guo, went abroad to act as an agent for the affairs of South Xuzhou.

古文：义师平京邑，承制征为尚书吏部郎，参大选。
现代文：起义军队平定京城，秉承制命征召范岫为尚书吏部郎，参与主要官员的选拔。
English: The insurgent army subdued the capital and, adhering to the system of life and death, conscripted Fan Qi as a member of the Ministry of Education, Culture, Sports, Science and Technology and participated in the selection of key officials.

古文：梁台建，为度支尚书。
现代文：梁朝台阁建立，范岫担任度支尚书。
English: Liang Chao-tai Pavilion was built, and Fan Yu served as the chief architect.

古文：天监五年，迁散骑常侍、光禄大夫，侍皇太子，给扶。
现代文：天监五年，调任散骑常侍、光禄大夫，侍奉皇太子，赐给扶持者。
English: After five years of service as a celestial supervisor, he was transferred to the position of horseback riding attendant, doctor of Guanglu, serving the crown prince, and was given to his supporters.

古文：六年，领太子左卫率。
现代文：六年，兼太子左卫率。
English: In the sixth year, he became the second-in-command to the crown prince.

古文：七年，徙通直散骑常侍、右卫将军，中正如故。
现代文：七年，改任通直散骑常侍、右卫将军，中正职位照旧。
English: In the seventh year, he was transferred to the post of Tsuchizane Sanzhijiki no Tsuneishi and Ue no Shogun, but remained in the position of Chujo.

古文：其年表致事，诏不许。
现代文：这年上奏表请求退休，诏令不准许。
English: This year, he submitted a request to retire, but the decree did not allow him to do so.

古文：八年，出为晋陵太守，秩中二千石。
现代文：八年，外出任晋陵太守，品级为中二千石。
English: In the eighth year, he was appointed as the governor of the Jin Mausoleum, with a rank of 2,000 koku.

古文：九年，入为祠部尚书，领右骁骑将军，其年迁金紫光禄大夫，加亲信二十人。
现代文：九年，入京任祠部尚书，兼右骁骑将军，这年调任金紫光禄大夫，加赐亲信二十人。
English: In the ninth year, he entered Beijing as the priest of the ancestral hall, and was also the right-hand cavalry general. In this year, he was transferred to the position of the doctor of Jin Zi Guanglu, and was given 20 relatives.

古文：十三年，卒官，时年七十五。
现代文：十三年，在任上去世，遣年七十五岁。
English: He died in office 13 years later, at the age of 75.

古文：赙钱五万，布百匹。
现代文：赠钱五万，布一百匹。
English: I'll give you fifty thousand in money and a hundred in cloth.

古文：岫身长七尺八寸，恭敬俨恪，进止以礼。
现代文：范岫身高七尺八寸，恭敬严肃，进退依据礼仪。
English: Fan Xuan is seven feet eight inches tall, respectful and serious, and advances and retreats according to etiquette.

古文：自亲丧之后，蔬食布衣以终身。
现代文：自从双亲去世后，吃粗食穿布衣直到去世。
English: Since the death of his parents, he ate coarse food and wore cloth clothes until his death.

古文：每所居官，恒以廉洁著称。
现代文：每当处于官位，总是以廉洁闻名。
English: He's always been known for his integrity whenever he's been in public office.

古文：为长城令时，有梓材巾箱，至数十年，经贵遂不改易。
现代文：任长城令时，有个梓木材质的巾箱用了几十年，到尊贵后还不改换。
English: When he was the Great Wall warden, he used an azusa wood towel box for decades, and did not change it after he became a noble.

古文：在晋陵，惟作牙管笔一双，犹以为费。
现代文：在晋陵时，仅制作牙管笔二只，还以为浪费财产。
English: When he was in Jinling, he only made two dental floss pens, which he thought was a waste of money.

古文：所著文集、《礼论》、《杂仪》、《字训》行于世。
现代文：所撰作的文集《礼论》、《杂仪》、《字训》流行于世上。
English: His collections of essays, "Theory of Etiquette," "Miscellaneous Rites" and "Spoken Etiquette" are popular around the world.

古文：二子褒，伟。
现代文：有两个儿子名叫范褒，范伟。
English: They have two sons named Fan Bo and Fan Wei.

古文：傅昭，字茂远，北地灵州人，晋司隶校尉咸七世孙也。
现代文：傅昭，字茂远，北地灵州人，是晋朝司隶校尉傅咸的七世孙。
English: Fu Zhao, also known as Maoyuan, was a native of Lingshou in the north of the country. He was the seventh-generation grandson of Fu Xian, a colonel of the Jin Dynasty.

古文：祖和之，父淡，善《三礼》，知名宋世。
现代文：祖父和之，父亲傅淡，擅长《三礼》，在宋朝时著名。
English: His grandfather, Kazuchika, and his father, Fu Tan, were good at "Three Rites" and were famous during the Song Dynasty.

古文：淡事宋竟陵王刘诞，诞反，淡坐诛。
现代文：傅淡侍奉宋朝竟陵王刘诞，刘诞反叛，傅淡获罪被杀。
English: In the Song Dynasty, Fu Tan served the mausoleum king Liu Xat, Liu Xat rebelled, and Fu Tan was convicted and killed.

古文：昭六岁而孤，哀毁如成人者，宗党咸异之。
现代文：傅昭六岁而成孤儿，哀伤消瘦如同成年人，宗族乡党都因此感到惊异。
English: Fu Zhao was orphaned at the age of six. He was sad and emaciated like an adult. The clan and township party leaders were surprised by this.

古文：十一，随外祖于硃雀航卖历日。
现代文：十一岁时，跟随外祖父在朱雀航卖历。
English: At the age of eleven, he followed his grandfather to work at Suzakehang as a salesman.

古文：为雍州刺史袁抃客，抃尝来昭所，昭读书自若，神色不改。
现代文：做雍州刺史袁颤的门客，袁颉曾经来到傅昭的住所，傅昭读书跟先前一样，神色不改变。
English: As a disciple of the famous Yongzhou scholar Yuan Tremor, Yuan Qi once came to Fu Zhao's residence. Fu Zhao was reading the same books as before, and his expression did not change.

古文：抃叹曰： 此儿神情不凡，必成佳器。 
现代文：袁颉感叹地说： 这孩子神情不一般，必定成为好人才。 
English: Yuan Yu sighed and said, "This child's appearance is not ordinary, he will surely become a good talent."

古文：司徒建安王休仁闻而悦之，因欲致昭，昭以宋氏多故，遂不往。
现代文：司徒建安王休仁听说后而喜悦，便想招致傅昭，傅昭因宋氏变故多，便不前往。
English: Upon hearing this, King Shuren of Jian'an was so pleased that he wanted to invite Fu Zhao. However, Fu Zhao did not go because the Song Dynasty had changed a lot.

古文：或有称昭于廷尉虞愿，愿乃遣车迎昭。
现代文：有人向廷尉虞愿称赞傅昭，虞愿于是派遣车辆迎接傅昭。
English: Someone praised Fu Zhao to the courtier Yu Xiang, Yu Xiang then sent a vehicle to meet Fu Zhao.

古文：时愿宗人通之在坐，并当世名流，通之赠昭诗曰： 英妙擅山东，才子倾洛阳。
现代文：当时虞愿同宗的人通之在座位中，都是当代的名流，通之赠给傅昭的诗句说： 英俊奇妙擅山东，才子手笔倾洛阳。
English: At that time, Tong Zhi, who belonged to the same family as Guo Zhi, was sitting in the audience, and they were all contemporary celebrities. The poem that Tong Zhi gave to Fu Zhao said: "Handsome and wondrous, he excels in Shandong, and his talent is poured into Luoyang."

古文：清尘谁能嗣，及尔遘遗芳。 
现代文：清静无为谁能继，到你之身遣芬芳。 
English: Who can follow the serenity and tranquility, the fragrance of your presence.

古文：太原王延秀荐昭于丹阳尹袁粲，深为所礼，辟为郡主簿，使诸子从昭受学。
现代文：太原人王延秀向丹阳尹袁粲推荐鳢胆，深为塞塞所礼敬，征用为郡主簿，命几个儿子跟随傅昭求学。
English: Wang Yanxiu, a native of Taiyuan, recommended the gourd to Danyang Yin Yuanqi, deeply respected it, requisitioned it for the county register, and ordered several sons to follow Fu Zhao to study.

古文：会明帝崩，粲造哀策文，乃引昭定其所制。
现代文：遇明帝逝世，袁粲撰作哀策文，于是延引傅昭删改他的初稿。
English: When Emperor Ming died, Yuan Xuan wrote a lamentation, so Yanqian Fu Zhao edited and revised his first draft.

古文：每经昭户，辄叹曰： 经其户，寂若无人，披其帷，其人斯在，岂非名贤！ 
现代文：每当经过傅昭门前，就赞叹说： 经过他门口，寂静如同没有人，打开帷帐，这个人却在，难道不是名人贤士吗? 
English: Whenever they pass in front of Fu Zhao's door, they marvel and say: "Passing through his door, the silence is like no one is there, open the curtain, but this person is there, isn't he a famous sage?"

古文：寻为总明学士、奉朝请。
现代文：不久担任总明学士、奉朝请。
English: He was soon appointed to the post of Chomei Baccalaureate, and was later promoted to the post of Bongcho.

古文：齐永明中，累迁员外郎、司徒竟陵王子良参军、尚书仪曹郎。
现代文：齐朝永明年间，屡经升迁任员外郎、司徒竟陵王子良的参军、尚书仪曹郎。
English: During the reign of Emperor Qi, he was repeatedly promoted and appointed as the second-in-command, the second-in-command of the army, and the second-in-command of the army.

古文：先是御史中丞刘休荐昭于武帝，永明初，以昭为南郡王侍读。
现代文：在这之前御史中丞刘休向武帝推荐傅昭，永明初年，委任傅昭为南郡王侍读。
English: Prior to this, the Imperial Historian Liu Xiu recommended Fu Zhao to Emperor Wu, and in the first year of Yongming, Fu Zhao was appointed as the attendant of the King of Nan County.

古文：王嗣帝位，故时臣隶争求权宠，惟昭及南阳宗夬，保身守正，无所参入，竟不罹其祸。
现代文：王继承帝位后，旧曰臣属仆人争相求取权利恩宠，惟独傅昭和南阳人宗央，保全自身坚守正道，不参与进去，最后免于遭受祸难。
English: After the king's succession to the throne, the former vassal servants vied with each other to obtain the rights and favors, but it was only Fu Showa Nanyang Zongyang who kept himself firmly on the right path, did not participate, and finally was spared from suffering misfortune.

古文：明帝践阼，引昭为中书通事舍人。
现代文：明帝登位，招傅昭为中书通事舍人。
English: Emperor Ming ascended to the throne, and invited Fu Zhao to become the general secretary of the Chinese Academy of Letters.

古文：时居此职者，皆势倾天下，昭独廉静，无所干豫。
现代文：当时担任这个职务的人，都权势遍天下，傅昭独自廉洁恬静，不强行参与过问别人的事。
English: At that time, the people who held this position had power all over the world. Fu Zhao alone was honest and quiet, and did not forcibly participate in the affairs of others.

古文：器服率陋，身安粗粝。
现代文：器物衣服简陋，身体安于粗疏。
English: The utensils and clothes are simple, and the body is comfortable with coarseness.

古文：常插烛于板床，明帝闻之，赐漆合烛盘等，敕曰： 卿有古人之风，故赐卿古人之物。 
现代文：经常插火烛在板床上，明帝听说后，赐给漆盒烛盘等物，下令说： 你有古人的风范，所以赐给你古人的器物。 
English: He often placed a lighted candle on the wooden bed. When Emperor Ming heard about this, he gave him a lacquer box, a candle dish, and other items. He ordered, "You have the manners of the ancients, so I am giving you the utensils of the ancients."

古文：累迁车骑临海王记室参军，长水校尉，太子家令，骠骑晋安王谘议参军。
现代文：屡经升迁任车骑临海王记室参军，长水校尉，太子家令，骠骑晋安王谘议参军。
English: After repeated promotions, he was appointed to join the army as a cavalryman of the Linhai King's Recorder's Office, a captain of the Changshui, a prince's family order, and a cavalryman of the Jinan King's Advisory Council.

古文：寻除尚书左丞、本州大中正。
现代文：不久授任尚书左丞、本州大中正。
English: He was soon promoted to Shoshu-zojo and Honshu University junior high school vice-president.

古文：高祖素悉昭能，建康城平，引为骠骑录事参军。
现代文：高祖素来熟悉傅昭的能力，建康城平定，招恺昭为骠骑录事参军。
English: Gao Zu has always been familiar with Fu Zhao's ability, built Kangcheng and pacified it, and invited Fu Zhao to join the army as a cavalry officer.

古文：梁台建，迁给事黄门侍郎，领著作郎，顷之，兼御史中丞，黄门、著作、中正并如故。
现代文：凿翘台阁建立，调任给事黄门侍郎，兼著作郎，不久，兼御史中丞，黄门、著作、中正的职位都照旧。
English: After the establishment of the cabinet, he was transferred to the post of Huangmen waiter, concurrently with the post of writer, and soon, concurrently with the post of historian, and the posts of Huangmen, writer, and moderator remained the same.

古文：天监三年，兼五兵尚书，参选事，四年，即真。
现代文：天监三年，兼五兵尚书，参与选拔官吏事务。
English: He served as the Heaven's Inspector for three years, and was also in charge of the Five Soldiers' Records, and participated in the selection of officials.

古文：六年，徙为左民尚书，未拜，出为建威将军、平南安成王长史、寻阳太守。
现代文：四年，正式授任。六年，改任左民尚书，没就任，外出任建威将军、平南安成王长史、寻阳太守。
English: Four years later, he was officially appointed. Six years later, he was reappointed as Zuomin Shangshu, but did not take office, and went out to serve as General Jian Wei, Pingnan Ancheng Wang Changshi, and Huanyang Dazhong.

古文：七年，入为振远将军、中权长史。
现代文：七年，入京任振远将军、中权长史。
English: In the seventh year, he entered Beijing as General Zhenyuan, and became the Central Governor.

古文：八年，迁通直散骑常侍，领步兵校尉，复领本州大中正。
现代文：八年，调任通直散骑常侍，兼步兵校尉，又兼本州大中正。
English: In the eighth year, he was transferred to the position of Tsuchida Sanshakite no Tsuneishi, concurrently an infantry lieutenant, and concurrently a junior high school principal of Honshu University.

古文：十年，复为左民尚书。
现代文：十年，又任左民尚书。
English: Ten years later, he was reappointed as Zuomin Shangshu.

古文：十一年，出为信武将军、安成内史。
现代文：十一年，外出任信武将军、安成内史。
English: In the eleventh year, he went abroad to serve as General Nobutake and Minister of Internal Affairs Yasunari.

古文：安成自宋已来兵乱，郡舍号凶。
现代文：安成自从宋朝以来军事战乱，郡舍被称为不吉利的宅第。
English: Ancheng has been plagued by military conflicts since the Song Dynasty. The county seat is known as an unlucky residence.

古文：及昭为郡，郡内人夜梦见兵马铠甲甚盛，又闻有人云 当避善人 ，军众相与腾虚而逝。
现代文：等到傅昭任郡守，郡内的入夜晚梦见兵马钟甲很强盛，又听见有人说 应该避让好人 ，兵众相互飞入空中而消失。
English: When Fu Zhao was appointed as the county governor, at nightfall, everyone in the county dreamed that the soldiers and horses were very strong, and they also heard someone say that good people should be avoided, and soldiers should fly into the air and disappear.

古文：梦者惊起。
现代文：做梦的人受惊起床。
English: The dreamer woke with a start.

古文：俄而疾风暴雨，倏忽便至，数间屋俱倒，即梦者所见军马践蹈之所也。
现代文：不久狂风暴雨，忽然到来，几间屋都倒塌，就是做梦者所见军马践踏的地方。
English: Soon after, a violent storm suddenly arrives and several houses collapse, which is where the dreamer saw the horses trample.

古文：自后郡舍遂安，咸以昭正直所致。
现代文：从此以后郡舍平安，都以为是傅昭正直所招致的。
English: From then on, the county seat of Heian was thought to have been caused by Fu Zhaocheng.

古文：郡溪无鱼，或有暑月荐昭鱼者，昭既不纳，又不欲拒，遂委于门侧。
现代文：郡中水溪没有鱼，有人在夏天送鱼给傅昭，傅昭既不想接受，又不想拒绝，鱼于是放在门旁腐烂了。
English: There are no fish in the streams in the county. Someone sent fish to Fu Zhao in the summer. Fu Zhao did not want to accept or refuse, so the fish was put next to the door to rot.

古文：十二年，入为秘书监，领后军将军。
现代文：十二年，入京任秘书监，兼后军将军。
English: In 1912, he entered Beijing as secretary and superintendent, and also became the general of the rear army.

古文：十四年，迁太常卿。
现代文：十四年，调任太常卿。
English: Fourteen years later, he was transferred to the position of First Secretary of the Central Committee.

古文：十七年，出为智武将军、临海太守。
现代文：十七年，外出任智武将军、临海太守。
English: In the seventeenth year, he was appointed as the general of Chibu and the governor of Linhai.

古文：郡有蜜岩，前后太守皆自封固，专收其利。
现代文：郡中有座产蜜的岩地，前后太守都加以封禁，独收利益。
English: There is a honey-producing rocky area in the county, which has been banned by the governors before and after, and they only collect the profits.

古文：昭以周文之囿，与百姓共之，大可喻小，乃教勿封。
现代文：傅昭以为周文王的园囿，应和百姓共享，大事可明白小事，于是下令不封禁。
English: Fu Zhao thought that the garden of King Zhou Wen should be shared with the people, and that big things can be understood by small things, so he ordered that it should not be banned.

古文：县令常饷栗，置绢于薄下，昭笑而还之。
现代文：县令曾经送栗子，用绢包裹放在帘下，傅昭笑着还给他。
English: The county magistrate once sent chestnuts, wrapped them in straw and put them under the curtain. Fu Zhao gave them back to him with a smile.

古文：普通二年，入为通直散骑常侍、光禄大夫，领本州大中正，寻领秘书监。
现代文：普通二年，入京任通直散骑常侍、光禄大夫，兼本州大中正，不久兼秘书监。
English: Two years later, he entered Beijing and was appointed as Tsuchina Sanshiki no Tsuneishi, Kōroku no daibu, Honshu Daishu chujo, and soon as secretary inspector.

古文：五年，迁散骑常侍、金紫光禄大夫，中正如故。
现代文：五年，调任散骑常侍、金紫光禄大夫，中正照旧。
English: Five years later, he was transferred to the position of Sanzhi (free-riding) regular attendant and Jin Zi Guanglu doctor, and remained in the same position as before.

古文：昭所莅官，常以清静为政，不尚严肃。
现代文：傅昭所任官职，时常以清静施政，不崇尚严厉。
English: Fu Zhaozhe held a government post, and he often administered the government with calmness, not advocating harshness.

古文：居朝廷，无所请谒，不畜私门生，不交私利。
现代文：在朝廷中，不请托拜见，不培植私人门生，不为私利交往。
English: In the imperial court, there is no begging for favors, no fostering of private protégés, no socializing for personal gain.

古文：终日端居，以书记为乐，虽老不衰。
现代文：整日端坐，以圃书为娱乐，虽然年老也不衰减。
English: He sits all day long, reading books in the garden for entertainment, and even though he's getting old, he's not slowing down.

古文：博极古今，尤善人物，魏晋以来，官宦簿伐，姻通内外，举而论之，无所遗失。
现代文：博通古今，尤其擅长人物评论，魏、晋以来，仕宦功绩，婚姻内外，举列论说，没有遗漏。
English: Broadcom, from ancient times to the present, is particularly good at character reviews. Since the Wei and Jin Dynasties, there have been no omissions in the list of achievements, both in and out of marriage.

古文：性尤笃慎。
现代文：性格尤其笃厚谨慎。
English: He is especially cautious.

古文：子妇尝得家饷牛肉以进，昭召其子曰： 食之则犯法，告之则不可，取而埋之。 
现代文：儿媳妇曾经将家中馈赠的牛肉呈献，傅昭招唤儿子说： 吃了就犯法，报官又不可，取走埋掉它。 
English: His daughter-in-law once presented a gift of beef from the family to Fu Zhao, who summoned his son and said: "If you eat it, you will be breaking the law. The reporter should not do that. Take it away and bury it."

古文：其居身行己，不负暗室，类皆如此。
现代文：他处世律己，不辜负已过世的帝王，大都是这样。
English: He behaves according to the rules of the world and lives up to the deceased emperor, which is the case for the most part.

古文：京师后进，宗其学，重其道，人人自以为不逮。
现代文：京城的后辈，崇尚他的学问，尊重他的道义，人人自以为比不上。
English: The younger generation in Beijing admire his learning and respect his morality, but everyone thinks they are no match for him.

古文：大通二年九月，卒，时年七十五。
现代文：大通二年九月，去世，逭年七十五岁。
English: He died in September of the following year, at the age of 75.

古文：诏赙钱三万，布五十匹，即日举哀，谥曰贞子。
现代文：诏令馈赠钱三万，布五十匹，当天举办丧事，谧号为贞子。
English: The imperial edict bestowed thirty thousand in money and fifty in cloth, and a funeral was held on the same day. Her nickname was Sadako.

古文：长子谞，尚书郎，临安令。
现代文：长子傅谓，担任迥尚书郎，临安令。
English: The eldest son Fu Zetsu, served as 尚書郎, Linanling.

古文：次子肱。
现代文：次子名叫傅肱。
English: The second son was named Fu Xing.

古文：映字徽远，昭弟也。
现代文：傅映字徽远，是傅昭的弟弟。
English: Fu Ying Zi Huiyuan is Fu Zhao's younger brother.

古文：三岁而孤。
现代文：三岁而成为孤儿。
English: He was orphaned at the age of three.

古文：兄弟友睦，修身厉行，非礼不行。
现代文：兄弟友爱和睦，修养身心磨砺品行，不合礼仪的不做。
English: Brothers and sisters should love each other and live in harmony. They should cultivate their mind and body and improve their moral conduct. They should not do anything that is not in accordance with etiquette.

古文：始昭之守临海，陆倕饯之，宾主俱欢，日昏不反，映以昭年高，不可连夜极乐，乃自往迎候，同乘而归，兄弟并已斑白，时人美而服焉。
现代文：开始傅昭任临海太守，陆便为他饯行，宾客主人都欢喜，到天黑还不返回，傅映因傅昭年岁大，不可连夜极度娱乐，于是亲自前往迎候，一同乘车返回，兄弟都已头发斑白，当时人赞美而佩服他们。
English: At the beginning, Fu Zhao was appointed as the governor of Linhai, Lu went to visit him, the guests and hosts were all happy, and did not return until dark. Fu Ying, because of Fu Zhao's age, could not be extremely entertained overnight, so he went to meet him in person and returned together by car. The brothers had gray hair. At that time, people praised and admired them.

古文：及昭卒，映丧之如父，年逾七十，哀戚过礼，服制虽除，每言辄感恸。
现代文：等到傅昭去世，傅映如同死去父亲，年遇七十，哀伤超过礼仪，丧服虽然除去，每当说起就感慨悲恸。
English: When Fu Zhao passed away, Fu Ying, like his dead father, was in his seventies, grief-stricken beyond the etiquette, and although he had removed his mourning clothes, whenever he spoke of it, he was filled with emotion and sadness.

古文：映泛涉记传，有文才，而不以篇什自命。
现代文：傅映广泛涉猎历史传记，有文才，而不以文章自任。
English: Fu Ying extensively dabbles in historical biography, has literary talent, but does not take the article as his own.

古文：少时与刘绘、萧琛相友善，绘之为南康相，映时为府丞，文教多令具草。
现代文：年轻时和刘绘、萧琛相友善，刘绘任南康相，傅映当时任府丞，文书命令大多让傅映起草。
English: When he was young, he was friendly with Liu Miao and Xiao Yao. Liu Miao served as the Minister of South China, while Fu Ying served as the prefectural chancellor. Fu Ying was responsible for drafting most of the written orders.

古文：褚彦回闻而悦之，乃屈与子贲等游处。
现代文：褚彦回听说后喜爱他，就委屈他和儿子褚贲等交往。
English: After hearing that Yan Yan liked him, he was offended by his son's association with him.

古文：年未弱冠，彦回欲令仕，映以昭未解褐，固辞，须昭仕乃官。
现代文：还未成年，彦回想让他为官，傅映因傅鳄还未出仕，坚决推辞，等蛔出仕后才为官。
English: He was still a minor, and Hiko recalled that he wanted him to become an official, but Fu Ying, because Fu Yiguo had not yet entered the service, firmly refused, and waited until the Emperor had entered the service before becoming an official.

古文：永元元年，参镇军江夏王军事，出为武康令。
现代文：永元元年，担任镇军丝夏王的参军，外出任武康令。
English: In the first year of the Yongyuan era, he served as a member of the town army of Shixia Wang, and went out as a military commander.

古文：及高祖师次建康，吴兴太守袁昂自谓门世忠贞，固守诚节，乃访于映曰： 卿谓时事云何？ 
现代文：等到高祖军队停驻建康，吴兴太守袁昂自以为家族世代忠贞，固守诚挚节操，于是访问坛迭说： 你以为形势将如何? 
English: When Gao Zu's army was stationed in Jiankang, Wu Xing's eunuch Yuan Ang, who believed that his family had been loyal for generations and adhered to sincere discipline, visited the altar and said: What do you think the situation will be like?

古文：映答曰： 元嘉之末，开辟未有，故太尉杀身以明节，司徒当寄托之重，理无苟全，所以不顾夷险，以殉名义。
现代文：傅映回答说： 五台末年的情形，为开天辟地以来所没有，所以太尉牺牲性命而表明节操，司徒位居辅佐的重任，按道理没有苟且保全的，所以不顾艰险，为标名教化道义而舍生。
English: Fu Ying replied: The situation at the end of the Five Dynasties was unprecedented since the creation of heaven and earth. Therefore, the captain sacrificed his life to show discipline, and the scholar was an assistant. According to the principle, there was nothing to be careful about and preserved. Therefore, regardless of hardships and dangers, he sacrificed his life for the cause of enlightenment and morality.

古文：今嗣主昏虐，狎近群小，亲贤诛戮，君子道消，外难屡作，曾无悛改。
现代文：现在继位的君主昏庸暴虐，亲近小人，亲戚贤人被诛杀，君子的道理削弱，外部祸难屡次发生，竟然不改正。
English: The monarch who is now succeeding to the throne is vulgar and tyrannical, close to villains, relatives and wise men are killed, the principle of a gentleman is weakened, external calamities repeatedly occur, and he does not correct.

古文：今荆、雍协举，乘据上流，背昏向明，势无不济。
现代文：现在荆、壅塑共同发动，占据上游，背叛昏暗归向光明，依情势没有不成功的。
English: Now, Jing and Handan Plastics have jointly launched, occupied the upstream, betrayed the dim and turned to the light, and according to the situation, they have not been unsuccessful.

古文：百姓思治，天人之意可知；既明且哲，忠孝之途无爽。
现代文：百姓思念治理，上天人间的意愿可以得知；既聪明又通达，忠孝的道路是没有差失的。
English: The people yearn for governance, and the will of heaven and man can be known; they are both intelligent and knowledgeable, and the path of loyalty and filial piety is without error.

古文：愿明府更当雅虑，无祇悔也。 
现代文：希望明府再慎重考虑，不要有悔恨。 
English: It is hoped that the Ming government will reconsider carefully and not have any regrets.

古文：寻以公事免。
现代文：不久因公事免职。
English: He was soon relieved of his duties.

古文：天监初，除征虏鄱阳王参军，建安王中权录事参军，领军长史，乌程令。
现代文：天监初年，授任征虏塑垦眨参军，建圭王中权录事参军，领军长史，谜令。
English: In the first year of the Heavenly Supervisor, the conscripts were appointed to join the army, and Jian Gui Wang Zhongquan entered the army and led the army for a long time.

古文：所受俸禄，悉归于兄。
现代文：所得到的俸禄，都交给哥哥。
English: Any salary he received was handed over to his brother.

古文：复为临川王录事参军，南台治书，安成王录事，太子翊军校尉，累迁中散大夫、光禄卿，太中大夫。
现代文：又任临川王绿事参军，南台治书，安成王录事，太子翊军校尉，屡经升迁任中散大夫、光禄卿，太中大夫。
English: He was also appointed as Linchuan Wanglul to join the army, Nantai Zhi Shuo, Ancheng Wang Luo, Prince Zou Jun's lieutenant, and was repeatedly promoted to Zhongshan doctor, Guangluqing, and Taizhong doctor.

古文：大同五年，卒，年八十三。
现代文：左回五年，去世，逭年八十三岁。
English: He died five years later, at the age of 83.

古文：子弘。
现代文：儿子名叫傅弘。
English: His son's name is Fu Hong.

古文：萧琛，字彦瑜，兰陵人。
现代文：萧琛字彦瑜，兰陵人。
English: Xiao Yan Zi Yan Yu, Lanling people.

古文：祖僧珍，宋廷尉卿。
现代文：祖父僧珍，是宋朝廷尉卿。
English: His grandfather, Monk Zhen, was a courtier in the Song Dynasty.

古文：父惠训，太中大夫。
现代文：父亲惠训，是太中大夫。
English: His father, Enshun, was a junior high school teacher.

古文：琛年数岁，从伯惠开抚其背曰： 必兴吾宗。 
现代文：萧琛几岁时，堂伯父塞题抚摸他的背说： 必定振兴我们的家族。 
English: When Xiao Yao was a few years old, his cousin Zetian rubbed his back and said, "I will definitely revitalize our family."

古文：琛少而朗悟，有纵横才辩。
现代文：萧琛年轻时开朗善悟，有奔放的辩才。
English: When he was young, Xiao Yao was cheerful and insightful, and had a talent for free-wheeling argumentation.

古文：起家齐太学博士。
现代文：出仕为查翘太学博士。
English: He will serve as the Chagae Taigaku Doctor.

古文：时王俭当朝，琛年少，未为俭所识，负其才气，欲候俭。
现代文：当时王俭当权，萧琛年轻，不为王俭所赏识，芦拯仗着才气，想探候王俭。
English: At that time, Wang Jian was in power, Xiao Jian was young and was not appreciated by Wang Jian. Lu Zheng, with his talent, wanted to explore Wang Jian.

古文：时俭宴于乐游苑，琛乃著虎皮靴，策桃枝杖，直造俭坐，俭与语，大悦。
现代文：当时王俭在銮游苞设宴，蔻理于是穿着虎皮靴，拄着桃枝杖，径直前往王俭的座位，王俭和他交谈，大喜。
English: At that time, Wang Jian was holding a banquet at the Yingyou Hotel, so Yan Li went straight to Wang Jian's seat wearing tiger skin boots and carrying a peach twig cane. Wang Jian was very happy to talk with him.

古文：俭为丹阳尹，辟为主簿，举为南徐州秀才，累迁司徒记室。
现代文：王俭担任且荡尹，征召他为主簿，推举他为南徐州秀才，屡经升迁任司徒记室。
English: Wang Jian held the post of Jianling Yin, and he was recruited as the main bookkeeper. He was selected as the outstanding talent of South Xuzhou, and was repeatedly promoted to the position of the bookkeeper's office.

古文：永明九年，魏始通好，琛再衔命到桑乾，还为通直散骑侍郎。
现代文：永明九年，舆秀蝈开始通问修好，萧琛两次奉命到叠茎，返回担任通直散骑侍郎。
English: In the ninth year of the Yongming era, Muxiu Yao began to ask for repairs, and Xiao Yao was ordered to the stacking stem twice and returned to serve as a straight horseback riding attendant.

古文：时魏遣李道固来使，齐帝宴之。琛于御筵举酒劝道固，道固不受，曰： 公庭无私礼，不容受劝。 
现代文：当时魏国派遣奎道里前来出使，查童宴请他，芦噩在筵席上举杯劝道凰，道旦不接受，说： 公家庭院没有私人礼节，不能接受劝酒。 
English: At that time, the State of Wei sent an envoy to Qui Dori, and invited him to a banquet. Lougang raised a glass at the banquet to persuade Dao Ying, but Dotan did not accept it, saying: The public family court has no private etiquette, and cannot accept the persuasion of alcohol.

古文：琛徐答曰： 《诗》所谓 雨我公田，遂及我私 。 座者皆服，道固乃受琛酒。
现代文：萧琛慢慢地回答说： 《诗经》说遇 雨点洒到公田裹，同时落到我私田， 在座的人都佩服，道固于是接受了萧琛的劝酒。
English: Xiao Yao slowly replied: "The Book of Songs says that in the event of rain, the raindrops fall on the public fields, and at the same time fall on my private fields. Everyone present was impressed, and Daogu accepted Xiao Yao's advice to drink.

古文：迁司徒右长史。
现代文：萧琛升为司徒右长史。
English: Xiao Jinsheng is the long history of Stou.

古文：出为晋熙王长史、行南徐州事。
现代文：外出任晋熙王长史、行南徐州事。
English: Wang Changshi of Jinxi Province and Xuzhou of Guizhou Province.

古文：还兼少府卿、尚书左丞。
现代文：返回兼任少府卿、尚书左丞。
English: He returned and concurrently held the posts of Shofu-kyo and Shoshu-zojo.

古文：东昏初嗣立，时议以无庙见之典，琛议据《周颂·烈文》、《闵予》皆为即位朝庙之典，于是从之。
现代文：东昏侯起初继位，当时议论因没有入庙拜见的典章，萧琛建议依据《周颂》的《烈文》、《闵予》皆为登位拜见宗庙的典章，于是听从了他的建议。
English: At the beginning of Dongwu Hou's succession, there was a discussion about the ceremony for not entering the temple, and Xiao Yao suggested that according to the "Zhou Song," "Letter to the Martyrs" and "To the Gods" were the ceremony for ascending the throne to visit the ancestral temple, so he listened to his suggestion.

古文：高祖定京邑，引为骠骑谘议，领录事，迁给事黄门侍郎。
现代文：直祖平定京城，征用为骠骑谘议，兼录事，调任给事黄门侍郎。
English: The direct ancestor subdued the capital city, requisitioned the horse and rider for consultation, and recorded the matter, and was transferred to the Yellow Gate Chamberlain.

古文：梁台建，为御史中丞。
现代文：梁朝台阁建立，担任御史中丞。
English: Liang Chao-tai Pavilion was built, and he served as the Vice-President of History.

古文：天监元年，迁庶子，出为宣城太守。
现代文：天监元年，调任庶子，外出任宣城太守。
English: In the first year of Tensho, he was transferred to the position of an illegitimate son, and went out to serve as the governor of the castle.

古文：征为卫尉卿，俄迁员外散骑常侍。
现代文：征入任卫尉卿，不久调任员外散骑常侍。
English: He was conscripted into the Imperial Guard, and soon transferred to the rank of non-commissioned officer.

古文：三年，除太子中庶子、散骑常侍。
现代文：三年，授任太子中庶子、散骑常侍。
English: Three years later, he was given the position of Prince's junior illegitimate son, Sanzhishi no Tsunenari.

古文：九年，出为宁远将军、平西长史、江夏太守。
现代文：九年，外出任宁远将军、乎西长史、江夏太守。
English: In the ninth year, he was appointed as Ningyuan General, Kuxi Changshi, and Jiangxia Governor.

古文：始琛在宣城，有北僧南度，惟赉一葫芦，中有《汉书序传》。
现代文：开始萧琛在宣城，有位北方僧人渡江到南方，仅带了一个葫芦，裹面有《漠书序传》。
English: At the beginning of Xiao Yu's stay in Xuancheng, a monk from the north crossed the river to the south, bringing only a gourd, wrapped in "Desert Story."

古文：僧曰： 三辅旧老相传，以为班固真本。 
现代文：僧人说： 三辅老人相传，以为这是班固的正本。 
English: The monk said, "The three old men handed it down to each other, thinking it was the original manuscript of Ban Gu.

古文：琛固求得之，其书多有异今者，而纸墨亦古，文字多如龙举之例，非隶非篆，琛甚秘之。
现代文：芦堡执意请求得到遣部书，书中多有不同于今本的地方，而且纸墨也久远，文字多如龙头升起的样子，不是隶书不是篆书，萧琛十分珍视。
English: Lubao insisted on asking for a copy of the envoy's book. In the book, there are many places that are different from the present book, and the paper and ink are also long-standing. The text is often like the rising of a faucet. It is not a subordinate book or a copy book. Xiao Yu is very precious.

古文：及是行也，以书饷鄱阳王范，范乃献于东宫。
现代文：到这次外出，把书锁赠给鄱阳王萧范，萧范于是献给太子。
English: At this outing, he presented the book lock to the King of Shenyang, Xiao Fan, and Xiao Fan then dedicated it to the prince.

古文：琛寻迁安西长史、南郡太守，母忧去官，又丁父艰。
现代文：萧琛不久调任安西长史、南郡太守，因母亲去世而离职，又遭父亲去世。
English: Xiao Yao was soon transferred to Anxi Changshi and Nan County Governor. He left the post due to his mother's death, and his father passed away.

古文：起为信武将军、护军长史，俄为贞毅将军、太尉长史。
现代文：复出担任信武将军、护军长史，不久担任贞毅将军、太尉长史。
English: After his comeback, he served as General Nobutake and the chief of the military escort, and soon after as General Zhen Yi and the chief of the military escort.

古文：出为信威将军、东阳太守，迁吴兴太守。
现代文：外出任信威将军、东阳太守，调任吴兴太守。
English: He was appointed as the general of Xinwei, the governor of Dongyang, and transferred to the governor of Wu Xing.

古文：郡有项羽庙，土民名为愤王，甚有灵验，遂于郡厅事安施床幕为神座，公私请祷，前后二千石皆于厅拜祠，而避居他室。
现代文：郡中有项羽庙，当地民众称为垣王，很有灵验，于是在郡中厅事设置帐幕作为神座，公私事务祈求，前后太守都在厅堂拜祭，而避居于其他房屋。
English: There is a feather temple in the county, and the local people call it the king of the hedge, which is very effective. Therefore, in the county office, a tent was set up as a shrine to pray for public and private affairs. Before and after, the governor was in the hall to worship, but he lived in other houses.

古文：琛至，徙神还庙，处之不疑。
现代文：萧琛到来，迁移神座回庙中，泰然处之没有疑心。
English: When Xiao Yao arrived and moved the throne back to the temple, he was calm and did not have any doubts.

古文：又禁杀牛解祀，以脯代肉。
现代文：又禁止杀牛举行祓除灾邪的祭祀，以肉干代替新鲜肉。
English: It is also forbidden to kill cattle to hold a ritual to exorcise the evil of the disaster, and to use dried meat instead of fresh meat.

古文：琛频莅大郡，不治产业，有阙则取，不以为嫌。
现代文：萧琛频繁治理大郡，不经营家产，有缺少时就征取，不视为疑忌。
English: Xiao Wei frequently administers large counties, does not manage family property, and collects when there is a shortage, and is not regarded as suspicious.

古文：普通元年，征为宗正卿，迁左民尚书，领南徐州大中正，太子右卫率。
现代文：普通元年，征入任宗正卿，调任左民尚书，兼南徐州大中正，太子右卫率。
English: In the first year of the common era, he was conscripted as Zong Zhengqing, transferred to Zuomin Shangshu, and concurrently became the vice-president of South Xuzhou University and the head of the Prince's Right Guards.

古文：徙度支尚书，左骁骑将军，领军将军，转秘书监、后军将军，迁侍中。
现代文：调任度支尚书，左骁骑将军，领军将军，改任秘书监、后军将军，升为侍中。
English: He was promoted to Shishangshu, General of the Left Horsemen, General of the Leading Troops, Secretary Supervisor, General of the Rear Troops, and was promoted to Junior Chamberlain.

古文：高祖在西邸，早与琛狎，每朝宴，接以旧恩，呼为宗老。
现代文：高祖在西邸时，很早就和萧琛亲近，每当朝中宴会，以旧日恩情加以接待，称萧琛为宗老。
English: When Gaozu was at the West Residence, he was close to Xiao Yao very early on. Whenever there was a banquet between the emperor and empress, he would receive her with old-fashioned kindness, calling Xiao Yao the patriarch.

古文：琛亦奉陈昔恩，以 早簉中阳，夙忝同闬，虽迷兴运，犹荷洪慈。 
现代文：萧琛也陈述昔日的恩情，说 早先沐浴阳光，昔日愧居同门，虽在国运兴起时迷惑，仍然获得大恩 。
English: Xiao Wei also stated the past favors, saying that he had bathed in the sun earlier, lived with the same family in the past, and although he was confused when the National Movement arose, he still received great grace.

古文：上答曰： 虽云早契阔，乃自非同志；勿谈兴运初，且道狂奴异。 
现代文：皇帝回答说： 虽说早年相交，却是不同心；不要谈起国运兴起时，且说狂悖奴才持异端。 
English: The emperor replied, "Although we had fellowship in the early years, we did not have the same heart. Let's not talk about the rise of the National Movement and say that it was only the ruffian slaves who held heresy.

古文：琛常言： 少壮三好，音律、书、酒。
现代文：萧琛曾经说： 青壮年时有三个喜好，是音律、书、酒。
English: Xiao Wei once said: When you are young and strong, you have three preferences: music, books, and wine.

古文：年长以来，二事都废，惟书籍不衰。 
现代文：年老以后，两件事都废弃了，仅读书没有衰减。 
English: In old age, the two things have been abandoned, only reading has not faded.

古文：而琛性通脱，常自解灶事，毕狖余，必陶然致醉。
现代文：然而萧琛性格旷达，经常自己祭灶神以解祸求福，事情完毕吃祭余之物，必定欢乐畅饮而醉。
English: However, Xiao Yao's character is expansive, he often sacrifices himself to the god to solve the evil and seek blessings. After the event, he will eat the leftovers of the sacrifice, and he will certainly be drunk with joy.

古文：大通二年，为金紫光禄大夫，加特进，给亲信三十人。
现代文：大通二年，担任金紫光禄大夫，加授特进，踢给亲信三十人。
English: In the second year of the general, he served as the doctor of Jin Zi Guanglu, awarded special promotion, and kicked 30 cronies.

古文：中大通元年，为云麾将军、晋陵太守，秩中二千石。以疾自解，改授侍中、特进、金紫光禄大夫。
现代文：中大通元年，担任云麾将军、晋陵太守，品级为中二千石，因疾病自己请求免职，改任侍中、特进、金紫光禄大夫。
English: In the first year of his junior high school career, he served as the general of Yunnan and the governor of Jinling, with a rank of junior high school and 2,000 koku. Due to illness, he asked to be relieved of his duties and was reassigned as a chamberlain, a special envoy, and a doctor of Jinziguanglu.

古文：卒，年五十二。
现代文：去世，逭年五十二岁。
English: He died at the age of fifty-two.

古文：遗令诸子，与妻同坟异藏，祭以蔬菜，葬日止车十乘，事存率素。
现代文：遣令几个儿子，和妻子同一座坟而不在一个墓室，用蔬菜祭祀，安葬的时候仅十辆车，事情尽量简朴。
English: He sent several of his sons to be buried with his wife in the same grave, rather than in the same burial chamber. Vegetables were used for the sacrifice, and only ten cars were used for the burial. Everything was as simple as possible.

古文：乘舆临哭甚哀。
现代文：皇帝前往哭祭十分哀伤。
English: The emperor went to the memorial service very sad.

古文：诏赠本官，加云麾将军，给东园秘器，朝服一具，衣一袭，赙钱二十万，布百匹。
现代文：韶令追赠本来职位，加授云麾将军，赐给棺材，礼服一套，衣服一套，赠钱二十万，布一百匹。
English: He was posthumously awarded his original position, awarded the title of General Yun Qi, given a coffin, a set of ceremonial dress, a set of clothes, a gift of 200,000 yuan and 100 pieces of cloth.

古文：谥曰平子。
现代文：谧号为平子。
English: His nickname was "Hirako."

古文：陆杲，字明霞，吴郡吴人。
现代文：陆杲字明霞，吴郡吴县人。
English: Lu Hao, surnamed Mingxia, from Wuxi, Wuxi County.

古文：祖徽，宋辅国将军、益州刺史。
现代文：祖父陆徽，是塞朝辅国将军、益州刺史。
English: His grandfather, Lu Hui, was a general of the Joseon Dynasty and the governor of Yizhou Province.

古文：父睿，扬州治中。
现代文：父亲陆数，是扬州治中。
English: His father, Lu Ji, was a middle school teacher in Yangzhou.

古文：杲少好学，工书画，舅张融有高名，杲风韵举动，颇类于融，时称之曰： 无对日下，惟舅与甥。 
现代文：陆杲年轻时爱好学习，擅长书法绘画，舅舅张融有大名声，陆杲的风度举止，很类似于张融，当时人称赞他们说： 天下无双，一对舅甥。 
English: When Lu Yao was young, he loved to study and was good at calligraphy and painting. His uncle Zhang Rong had a great reputation. Lu Yao's demeanor was very similar to Zhang Rong's. At that time, people praised them saying, "There is no match in the world, a pair of uncles and nephews."

古文：起家齐中军法曹行参军，太子舍人，卫军王俭主簿。
现代文：出仕为齐朝中军法曹行参军，太子舍人，卫军王俭的主簿。
English: It is the main book of Wang Jian, the prince who renounced the throne and joined the army.

古文：迁尚书殿中曹郎，拜日，八座丞郎并到上省交礼，而杲至晚，不及时刻，坐免官。
现代文：调任尚书殿中曹郎，任命的那一天，尚书八座和丞郎都到上省交相行礼，然而陆呆来晚了，没有赶上，获罪免官。
English: On the day he was transferred to the position of Vice-Minister of the Imperial Household, all eight Vice-Ministers of the Imperial Household came to Shang Province to pay their respects. However, Lu Ding came late and did not catch up, so he was fined and dismissed.

古文：久之，以为司徒竟陵王外兵参军，迁征虏宜都王功曹史，骠骑晋安王谘议参军，司徒从事中郎。
现代文：很久以后，被任命为司徒竟陵王外兵参军，调任征虏宜都王功曹史，骠骑晋安王谘议参军，司徒从事中郎。
English: After a long time, he was appointed as a foreign soldier to join the army, transferred to the conscript Yidu Wang Gong Cao Shi, advised to join the army by King Jinan, and engaged in the middle.

古文：梁台建，以为骠骑记室参军，迁相国西曹掾。
现代文：凿曲台阁建立，被任命为骠骑记室参军，调任相国西曹掾。
English: He was appointed as a member of the cavalry record office, joined the army, and was transferred to the Western Cao Wei Province.

古文：天监元年，除抚军长史，母忧去职。
现代文：天监元年，授任抚军长史，因母亲去世离职。
English: In the first year of Tianjing, he was awarded the post of Fuzhongchangshi, but left the post due to his mother's death.

古文：服阕，拜建威将军、中军临川王谘议参军，寻迁黄门侍郎，右军安成王长史。
现代文：服丧结束，任建威将军、中军临川王谘议参军，不久调任黄门侍郎，右军塞盛王长史。
English: At the end of the funeral, he was appointed by General Jian Wei and the Chinese army's King Linchuan to consult and join the army, and was soon transferred to the Yellow Gate Chamberlain, and the right army of King Saisong Changshi.

古文：五年，迁御史中丞。
现代文：五年，调任御史中丞。
English: Five years later, he was transferred to Goshi chujo.

古文：杲性婞直，无所顾望。
现代文：陆呆性格刚强正直，没有顾忌。
English: Lu Dang has a strong and honest personality, and has no scruples.

古文：山阴令虞肩在任，赃污数百万，杲奏收治。
现代文：山阴令虞肩在位，贪污几百万，陆呆举奏拘捕惩治他。
English: Sangyin put Gu Shoulder on the throne, he embezzled millions, and Lu Diao arrested and punished him.

古文：中书舍人黄睦之以肩事托杲，杲不答。
现代文：中书舍人黄睦之以虞肩的事请托陆呆，陆呆不答应。
English: For the matter of the Chinese scholar Huang Mutsu's shoulder injury, please ask the land to stay, and the land will not agree.

古文：高祖闻之，以问杲，杲答曰 有之 。
现代文：高祖听说后，询问陆杲，陆杲回答说 有遣件事 。
English: After hearing this, Gao Zu inquired about Lu Yao. Lu Yao replied that he had something to do.

古文：高祖曰： 卿识睦之不？ 
现代文：高祖说： 你认识睦之吗? 
English: Gaozu said, "Do you know Mutsuji?"

古文：杲答曰： 臣不识其人。 
现代文：陆呆回答说： 臣下不认识这个人。 
English: Lu Diao replied, "Our vassals do not know this person."

古文：时睦之在御侧，上指示杲曰： 此人是也。 
现代文：当时睦之在皇帝身边，皇帝指着睦之给陆呆看并说： 这个人就是他。 
English: At that time, Mutsuyoshi was at the emperor's side. The emperor pointed to Mutsuyoshi and said, "This man is him."

古文：杲谓睦之曰： 君小人，何敢以罪人属南司？ 
现代文：陆呆对睦之说： 你是个小人，怎敢把罪入托付给南司? 
English: Lu Ding said to Mutsumi: You are a villain, how dare you entrust the crime to Nanshi?

古文：睦之失色。
现代文：睦之脸上变色。
English: Mutsu's face changes color.

古文：领军将军张稷，是杲从舅，杲尝以公事弹稷，稷因侍宴诉高祖曰： 陆杲是臣通亲，小事弹臣不贷。 
现代文：领军将军张稷，是陆呆的堂舅，陆呆曾经因公事弹劾张稷，张稷利用侍奉宴饮时向高祖诉说： 陆呆是臣下亲戚，以小事弹劾臣下而不宽恕。 
English: Zhang Ye, the leading general, was Lu Di's cousin. Lu Di had once impeached Zhang Ye for official business. Zhang Ye told Gao Zu when he was serving a banquet: Lu Di is a relative of a vassal, impeaching a vassal for a small matter and not forgiving.

古文：高祖曰： 杲职司其事，卿何得为嫌！ 
现代文：高祖说： 陆杲的职责管这些事，你怎能有疑忌! 
English: Gao Zu said: Lu Yao's responsibility is in charge of these things, how can you have doubts!

古文：杲在台，号称不畏强御。
现代文：陆呆在御史台，有不畏强暴的称誉。
English: Lu stayed in the Imperial Palace and was known for not being afraid of violence.

古文：六年，迁秘书监，顷之为太子中庶子、光禄卿。
现代文：六年，调任秘书监，不久任太子中庶子、光禄卿。
English: Six years later, he was transferred to the position of secretary superintendent, and shortly after that, he was appointed as the Prince's middle child and the Prince's illegitimate son, Kōroku-kyō.

古文：八年，出为义兴太守，在郡宽惠，为民下所称。
现代文：八年，外出任义兴太守，在郡中宽容施恩，为民众下属所称赞。
English: For eight years, he was appointed as Yixing Taishou, and was praised by his subordinates for his tolerance and kindness in the county.

古文：还为司空临川王长史、领扬州大中正。
现代文：返回任司空临川王长史、兼扬州大中正。
English: He returned to the position of Jikku Linkawa Wangchongshi, and also served as the vice-president of Yangzhou University.

古文：十四年，迁通直散骑侍郎，俄迁散骑常侍，中正如故。
现代文：十四年，调任通直散骑侍郎，不久升为散骑常侍，中正照旧。
English: Fourteen years later, he was transferred to the position of Tsuchizuchika Sanzhiyajiro, and soon rose to the position of Sanzhiyajitsuchizuchisamurai, remaining in the same position as before.

古文：十五年，迁司徒左长史。
现代文：十五年，升为司徒左长史。
English: Fifteen years later, he was promoted to the post of Stuzhongshi.

古文：十六年，入为左民尚书，迁太常卿。
现代文：十六年，征入任左民尚书，升为太常卿。
English: Sixteen years later, Shosho Sadamin was conscripted into the army and promoted to the position of Taijo-kyo.

古文：普通二年，出为仁威将军、临川内史。
现代文：萱迺二年，外出任仁威将军、临!内史。
English: Two years later, he was appointed as General Ren Wei and became the Minister of the Interior.

古文：五年，入为金紫光禄大夫，又领扬州大中正。
现代文：五年，入京任金紫光禄大夫，又兼扬州大中正。
English: Five years later, he entered Beijing as the doctor of Jin Zi Guanglu, and also became the vice-president of Yangzhou University.

古文：中大通元年，加特进，中正如故。
现代文：中大通元年，加授特进，中正照旧。
English: In the first year of the junior high school and college entrance examination, students were given extra points for advancement, and the junior high school entrance examination was held as before.

古文：四年，卒，时年七十四。
现代文：四年。去世，这年七十四岁。
English: He died four years later, at the age of 74.

古文：谥曰质子。
现代文：谧号为质子。
English: Its nickname is the proton.

古文：杲素信佛法，持戒甚精，著《沙门传》三十卷。
现代文：陆基素来信仰佛法，坚持戒律很严格，撰写《沙门传》三十卷。
English: Lu Jiji has always believed in Buddhism, adhered to the strict precepts, and wrote 30 volumes of "Shamon Biography."

古文：弟煦，学涉有思理。
现代文：弟弟陆煦，广博学习有思辩能力。
English: His younger brother, Lu Yao, has extensive learning and reasoning ability.

古文：天监初，历中书侍郎，尚书左丞，太子家令，卒。
现代文：天监初年，历任中书侍郎，尚书左丞，太子家令，去世。
English: In the first year of the Tenko era, successive Chusho-zajiro, Shosho-zajo, and Taishi-keirei passed away.

古文：撰《晋书》未就。
现代文：撰写《晋书》没有完成。
English: The writing of the "Jinshu" was not completed.

古文：又著《陆史》十五卷，《陆氏骊泉志》一卷，并行于世。
现代文：又撰写《陆史》十五卷，《陆氏骊泉志》一卷，都流行于世间。
English: He also wrote 15 volumes of "Lu Shi," and one volume of "Lu Shi Xuan Shi," both of which are popular in the world.

古文：子罩，少笃学，有文才，仕至太子中庶子、光禄卿。
现代文：儿子陆罩，年轻时勤奋学习，有文才，官位至太子中庶子、光禄卿。
English: His son, Luk, studied diligently when he was young, was a man of letters, and rose to the official rank of Prince's middle child and an illegitimate son of Prince Guanglu.

古文：史臣曰：范岫、傅昭，并笃行清慎，善始令终，斯石建、石庆之徒矣。
现代文：史臣曰：范岫、傅昭，都行为纯厚清廉谨慎，善始善终，这是石建、石庆一类的人。
English: The historian said: Fan Yu and Fu Zhao are all pure, honest, prudent, and good at the beginning and good at the end. This is a person like Shi Jian and Shi Qing.

古文：萧琛、陆杲俱以才学著名。
现代文：萧茎、陆基都以才华学问而著名。
English: Xiao Zhu and Lu Ji are both famous for their academic talents.

古文：琛朗悟辩捷，加谙究朝典，高祖在田，与琛游旧，及践天历，任遇甚隆，美矣。
现代文：芦茎开朗善悟论辩敏捷，加之谙熟探究朝廷典章，高祖在野时，和董茎交往，等到登上帝位，芦茎地位待遇十分隆重，美好啊。
English: Lu Shou is cheerful, insightful, quick to argue, and skilled in studying the imperial court regulations. When Gao Zu was in the field, he interacted with Dong Shou. When he ascended to the throne, Lu Shou's status treatment was very grand and beautiful.

古文：杲性婞直，无所忌惮，既而执法宪台，纠绳不避权幸，可谓允兹正色。
现代文：陆呆性格刚强正直，无所顾忌畏惧，随之在南司执法，纠举弹劾不避开权势有宠的人，可以说是公允严肃。
English: Lu Ding is a strong and upright character, fearless and fearless, and follows the law enforcement in Nanshi. He does not evade the powerful and favored people, and can be said to be fair and serious.

古文：《诗》云： 彼己之子，邦之司直。 
现代文：《诗经》说： 他是这样一个人，国家司直美名扬。 
English: "The Book of Songs" says: He is such a person, and he is famous for being the Secretary of State.

古文：杲其有焉。
现代文：陆呆当有逭一风范吧。
English: It's a good idea to be down-to-earth.

