古文：◎河渠六
现代文：河渠六
English: Canal Six

古文：○直省水利
现代文：直省水利
English: Direct provincial water conservancy

古文：三代疆理水土之制甚详。
现代文：三代划分治理山川的制度很详细。
English: The three-generation system for the management of mountains and rivers is very detailed.

古文：自井田废，沟遂堙，水常不得其治，於是穿凿渠塘井陂，以资灌溉。
现代文：自从井田制度废弃之后，田间水道完全堵塞，河水常常不能得到治理，于是开通渠塘井陂，用来供给灌溉。
English: Since the abandonment of the well-field system, the field waterway has been completely blocked, and the river water often cannot be treated, so the canal was opened to supply irrigation.

古文：明初，太祖诏所在有司，民以水利条上者，即陈奏。
现代文：明朝初年，太祖诏令各地主管官吏，百姓因为水利备文向上陈述的，立即向皇帝上奏。
English: In the first year of the Ming Dynasty, Emperor Taizu issued an edict that officials in charge of various regions and the people should immediately report to the emperor if they had any complaints about water conservancy.

古文：越二十七年，特谕工部，陂塘湖堰可蓄泄以备旱潦者，皆因其地势修治之。
现代文：过了二十七年，又特意训谕工部，陂塘湖堰可以蓄积排放水流用来防备旱灾涝灾的，都顺着其地势修筑治理。
English: Twenty-seven years later, the Ministry of Industry and Trade was specifically instructed to construct and manage the Qutang Lake Weir in accordance with its topography, since the weir could accumulate and discharge water to prevent droughts and floods.

古文：乃分遣国子生及人材，遍诣天下，督修水利。
现代文：于是分别派遣国子生及有才能的人，普遍地前往全国各地，监督兴修水利。
English: As a result, students and talented people were sent to various parts of the country to supervise the construction of water conservancy.

古文：明年冬，郡邑交奏。
现代文：第二年冬，郡邑纷纷上奏。
English: In the winter of the second year, the counties and towns began to play.

古文：凡开塘堰四万九百八十七处，其恤民者至矣。
现代文：总共开通塘堰四万零九百八十七处，他体恤百姓算是最周到了。
English: A total of 40,987 weirs have been opened, and he is the most considerate to the people.

古文：嗣后有所兴筑，或役本境，或资邻封，或支官料，或采山场，或农隙鸠工，或随时集事，或遣大臣董成。
现代文：随后有所兴建，有的役使本境，有的靠邻县帮助，有的由官府供给材料，有的开采山场，有的农闲时聚集工役，有的随时完工，有的派遣大臣督促完成。
English: Subsequently, some were built, some were built using local resources, some were built with the help of neighboring counties, some were supplied with materials by the government, some were mined from mountain fields, some were built with the help of laborers gathered during the farmer's leisure time, some were completed at any time, and some were completed by dispatching ministers to supervise.

古文：终明世水政屡修，可具列云。
现代文：整个明朝水政多次整治，可以详尽地陈述于后。
English: The entire water policy of the Ming Dynasty was repeatedly rectified, which can be described in detail later.

古文：洪武元年修和州铜城堰闸，周回二百馀里。
现代文：洪武元年，修建和州铜城堰闸门，周围二百多里。
English: In the first year of Hongwu, Hezhou Tongcheng Weir Gate was built, with a circumference of more than 200 miles.

古文：四年修兴安灵渠，为陡渠者三十六。
现代文：四年，修建兴安灵渠，设置陡渠三十六处。
English: In four years, the Xing'an Lingshi Canal was built, and 36 steep canals were set up.

古文：渠水发海阳山，秦时凿，溉田万顷。
现代文：渠水发源于海阳山，秦朝时开通，灌溉田地上万顷。
English: The canal water originates from Mount Haiyang and was opened during the Qin Dynasty, irrigating 10,000 hectares of farmland.

古文：马援葺之，后圮。
现代文：马援曾经整治它，后来被毁坏。
English: Ma Yuan repaired it, but it was later destroyed.

古文：至是始复。
现代文：到适时纔修复。
English: It will be repaired in due course.

古文：六年发松江、嘉兴民夫二万开上海胡家港，自海口至漕泾千二百馀丈，以通海船，且浚海盐澉浦。
现代文：六年，派遣松江、嘉兴民工二万人开通上海胡家港，从入海口到漕泾一千二百多丈，用来通行海船。并且疏浚海盐澉浦。
English: In the sixth year, 20,000 migrant workers from Songjiang and Jiaxing were dispatched to open the Shanghai Hujia Port, from the entrance to the sea to a height of more than 1,200 meters, to be used for the passage of ships.

古文：八年开登州蓬莱阁河。
现代文：八年，开通登州蓬莱阁河河道。
English: Eight years later, the Dengzhou Penglaigou River Canal was opened.

古文：命耿炳文浚泾阳洪渠堰，溉泾阳、三原、醴泉、高陵、临潼田二百馀里。
现代文：命令耿炳文浚通泾阳洪渠堰，灌溉泾阳、三原、醴泉、高陵、临潼田地二百多里。
English: He ordered Geng Bingwen to dredge through the flood canal weir of Fenyang and irrigate more than 200 miles of fields in Fenyang, Sanyuan, Fuxuan, Gaoling and Linyi.

古文：九年修彭州都江堰。
现代文：九年，修筑彭州都江堰。
English: It took nine years to build Pengzhou Dujiangyan Dam.

古文：十二年，李文忠言： 陕西病咸卤，请穿渠城中，遥引龙首渠东注。 
现代文：十二年，李文忠说： 陕西之地苦于盐咸，请求穿通水渠于城中，远远导引龙首渠往东灌注。 
English: In the twelfth year, Li Wenzhong said: The land of Shaanxi suffers from salt and salty. He asked for a water canal to be drilled through the city, and the dragon's first canal was drained to the east.

古文：从其请，甃以石。
现代文：依从他的请求，用石头砌成。
English: At his request, it was built of stone.

古文：十四年筑海盐海塘。
现代文：十四年，修筑海盐海堤。
English: It took fourteen years to build the sea salt sea wall.

古文：十七年筑磁州漳河决堤。
现代文：十七年，修筑磁州漳河溃决堤岸。
English: In the seventeenth year, the Magizhou Yangtze River breakwater was built.

古文：决荆州岳山坝以灌民田。
现代文：掘荆州岳山坝来灌溉百姓田地。
English: Digging the Jingzhou Yue Mountain Dam to irrigate the people's fields.

古文：十九年筑长乐海堤。
现代文：十九年，修筑长乐沿海堤防。
English: Nineteen years later, the Changle coastal dike was built.

古文：二十三年修崇明、海门决堤二万三千九百馀丈，役夫二十五万人。
现代文：二十三年，修筑崇明、海门演决堤岸二万三千九百多丈，役使人夫二十五万人。
English: In the 23rd year, the construction of Chongming and Haimen broke through the embankment of more than 23,900 meters, and 250,000 people were employed.

古文：四川永宁宣慰使言： 所辖水道百九十滩，江门大滩八十二，皆被石塞。 
现代文：四川丞室宣慰使说： 所管辖的水道有一百九十滩，江门大滩八十二处，都被石头堵塞。 
English: The consolation envoy of the Sichuan imperial court said: The waterway under its jurisdiction has one hundred and ninety beaches, including eighty-two beaches in Jiangmen, all of which are blocked by stones.

古文：诏景川侯曹震往疏之。
现代文：诏令景川侯曹震前去疏通它。
English: He ordered Jingchuan Hou Cao Zhen to clear it.

古文：二十四年修临海横山岭水闸，宁海、奉化海堤四千三百馀丈。
现代文：二十四年，修筑临海横山岭水闸，宁海、奉化沿海堤防四千三百多丈。
English: In the 24th year, the sluice was built in the mountains and mountains along the coast, and the coastal dikes in Ninghai and Fenghua were more than 4,300 meters high.

古文：筑上虞海堤四千丈，改建石闸。
现代文：修筑上虞沿海堤防四千丈，改建石闸门。
English: The construction of a 4,000-meter-high dike along the Shangyu coast and the reconstruction of a stone gate.

古文：浚定海、鄞二县东钱湖，灌田数万顷。
现代文：疏浚定海、鄞二县束钱湖，灌溉田地几万顷。
English: Dozens of thousands of hectares of fields have been irrigated by dredging the Dinghai Sea and the Sokchen Lake in Handan County.

古文：二十五年凿溧阳银墅东坝河道，由十字港抵沙子河胭脂坝四千三百馀丈，役夫三十五万九千馀人。
现代文：二十五年，开通溧阳银墅束坝河道，从十字港到沙子河胭脂坝四千三百多丈，役使人夫三十五万九千多人。
English: In the 25th year, the Poyang Silver Villa Sokba Waterway was opened, with a height of more than 4,300 meters from the Cross Harbor to the Shazihe Rouge Dam, serving more than 359,000 people.

古文：二十七年浚山阳支家河，郁林州民言： 州南北二江相去二十馀里，乞凿通，设石陡诸闸。 
现代文：二十七年，疏通山阳支家河。郁林州百姓说： 州内南北二江相距二十多里，请求凿通，设立石陡各闸门。 
English: In the 27th year, the Sanyang branch of the Jiahe River was dredged. The people of Yulin said: The distance between the two rivers in the north and south of the state is more than 20 miles, and they requested that they should be chiseled and set up stone gates.

古文：从之。
现代文：依从他们的请求。
English: I followed his advice.

古文：二十九年修筑河南洛堤。
现代文：二十九年，修筑河南洛河堤岸。
English: In 1929, the embankment of Luo River in Henan Province was built.

古文：复兴安灵渠。
现代文：修复兴安灵渠。
English: Restoration of the Xing'an Canal.

古文：时尚书唐铎以军兴至其地，图渠状以闻。
现代文：当时，尚书唐铎因为用兵到了那个她方，将沟渠的形状绘成图让朝廷知道。
English: At that time, Shangshu Tang Jun drew a picture of the shape of the ditch to let the imperial court know because the soldiers had reached that side.

古文：请浚深广，通官舟以饷军。
现代文：请求挖深挖宽，通行官船来运送军粮供应军队。
English: Requests were made to dig deeper and wider to allow the passage of government ships to transport military supplies to the army.

古文：命御史严震直烧凿陡涧之石，饷道果通。
现代文：命令御史严震直烧灼开凿陡峭山涧的石头，运送粮饷的道路终于开通。
English: He ordered that the stones of the steep mountains be hewn by the earthquake, and the road for transporting grain and straw was finally opened.

古文：三十一年，洪渠堰圮，复命耿炳文修治之。
现代文：三十一年，洪渠堰毁坏，又命令耿炳文修筑整治。
English: In the 31st year, the flood canal weir was destroyed, and Geng Xiwen was ordered to rebuild and rectify.

古文：且浚渠十万三千馀丈。
现代文：并且疏浚渠道十万三千多丈。
English: In addition, there are more than 103,000 dredged channels.

古文：建文四年疏吴淞江。
现代文：建文四年，疏通吴淞江。
English: It took Jianwen four years to dredge the Wuxi River.

古文：永乐元年，修安陆京山汉水塌岸，章丘漯河东堤，高密、濰决岸，安阳河堤，福山护城决堤，浙江赭山江塘，馀干龙窟坝塘岸，临颍褚河决口，濰县白浪河堤，潜山、怀宁陂堰，高要青岐、罗婆圩，通州徐灶、食利等港，平遥广济渠，句容杨家港、王旱圩等堤，肇庆、凤翔遥头冈决岸，南阳高家、屯头二堰及沙、澧等河堤，夏县古河决口三十馀里。
现代文：永乐元年，修筑安陆京山汉水溃塌的堤岸，章丘漯河东边的堤岸，高密、滩河溃决堤岸，安阳河堤岸，福山护城河溃决堤岸，浙江赭山江边堤防，余干龙窟坝堤岸，临颖褚河决口，滩县白浪河堤岸，潜山、怀宁陂池低坝，高要青岐、罗婆圩，通州徐灶、食利等港口，壬迁广济渠，句容杨家港、玉呈笪等堤岸，肇庆、凤翔迁头冈溃决堤岸，南阳高家、屯头二处低坝及沙、澧等河堤岸，夏县古河决口三十多里。
English: In the first year of Yongle, the embankments of the Anlu-Jingshan Han River were built, the embankments of the east side of the Zhangqiu River were built, the embankments of the Gaomi River and the Tang River were built, the embankments of the Anyang River were built, the embankments of the Fushan Moat were built, the embankments of the Lushan River in Zhejiang Province were built, the embankments of the Yujian Long Grottoes were built, the mouths of the Linying River were built, the embankments of the Bai Lang River in Tang County were built, the low dams of the

古文：修筑和州保大等圩百二十余里，蓄水陡门九。浚昌邑河渠五所，凿嘉定小横沥以通秦、赵二泾，浚昆山葫芦等河。
现代文：修筑和州保大等圩堤一百二十多里，蓄水陡门九处，疏通昌邑河渠五处，开通嘉定小横沥使接通秦、趟二水，疏通昆山葫芦等河道。
English: More than 120 miles of dikes such as Hezhou Baodai have been built, nine steep gates have been built for water storage, five Changyi canals have been dredged, and the Jiading small transverse dike has been opened to connect the Qin, Wadi Ershui, and Kunshan gourd rivers.

古文：命夏原吉治苏、松、嘉兴水患，浚华亭、上海运盐河，金山卫闸及漕泾分水港。
现代文：命令夏原吉治理苏州、松江、嘉兴水灾，疏通华亭、上海运盛河道，金山卫闸门及漕泾分水港口。
English: He ordered Xia Yuanji to control the floods in Suzhou, Songjiang, and Jiaxing, and to dredge the Huating, Shanghai Yunsheng River, Jinshan Weihai Gate, and Caozhou Water Port.

古文：原吉言： 浙西诸郡，苏、松最居下流，嘉、湖、常颇高，环以太湖，绵亘五百里。
现代文：夏原吉说： 浙西各郡，苏州、松江处于最下游，嘉兴、湖州、常州略高，太湖环绕，绵延五百里。
English: Xia Yuanji said: the counties in western Zhejiang, Suzhou and Songjiang are in the lowest reaches, Jiaxing, Huzhou and Changzhou are slightly higher, surrounded by Taihu Lake, stretching for five hundred miles.

古文：纳杭、湖、宣、歙溪涧之水，散注淀山诸湖，以入三泖。
现代文：容纳杭州、湖州、宣州、歙州溪沟之水，分散灌注于淀山各湖，而流入三泖。
English: It accommodates the water of Hangzhou, Huzhou, Xuanzhou, and Zhangzhou creeks and ditches, and is dispersed and perfused in the lakes of Yodoyama, and flows into Sanluo.

古文：顷为浦港堙塞，涨溢害稼。
现代文：不久，被浦港堵塞，水涨泛滥危害庄稼。
English: Soon, it was blocked by the port of Pu, and the rising water and flooding harmed crops.

古文：拯治之法，在浚吴淞诸浦。
现代文：拯救治理的办法，在于疏浚吴淞各处水渠。
English: The way to save governance is to dredge canals everywhere in Wuxi.

古文：按吴淞江袤二百馀里，广百五十馀丈，西接太湖，东通海，前代常疏之。
现代文：按吴淞江长二百多里，宽一百五十多丈，往西连接太湖，往东通到大海，前代经常疏通它。
English: According to the Wuyi River, it is more than two hundred miles long, more than one hundred and fifty feet wide, connects Taihu Lake to the west, and leads to the sea to the east. The previous generation often dredged it.

古文：然当潮汐之冲，旋疏旋塞。
现代文：然而，逭地方正当潮水的冲击，随即疏通随即堵塞。
English: However, in some places, due to the impact of the tide, the dredging was blocked.

古文：自吴江长桥抵下界浦，百二十馀里，水流虽通，实多窄浅。
现代文：从吴江长桥到下界浦，一百二十多里，水流虽然畅通，实际上多处狭窄水浅。
English: From the Wujiang Yangtze River Yangtze Bridge to the Lower Jiepu, more than one hundred and twenty miles, although the water flow is smooth, in fact, many places are narrow and shallow.

古文：从浦抵上海南仓浦口，百三十馀里，潮汐淤塞，已成平陆，氵艳沙游泥，难以施工。
现代文：从下界浦到上海南仓浦口，一百三十多里，潮水淤塞，已经成为平坦的陆地，流沙流泥，难以施工。
English: From Haizhepu to Shanghai Nancangpu, more than one hundred and thirty miles, the tide is silted up, and it has become a flat land, quicksand, and it is difficult to construct.

古文：嘉定刘家港即古娄江，径入海，常熟白茆港径入江，皆广川急流。
现代文：嘉定刘家港就是原来的娄江，径直流入大海，常熟白茆港径直流入大江，都是大河急流。
English: The Liujiagang in Jiading is the original Lijiang River, flowing directly into the sea, and the Baiyun Port in Changshu flows directly into the Yangtze River, both of which are large river rapids.

古文：宜疏吴淞南北两岸、安亭等浦，引太湖诸水入刘家、白茆二港，使其势分。
现代文：应当疏通吴淞南北两岸、安亭等处水沟，导引太湖各水流入刘家、白茆二港口，使其水势分碱。
English: It is necessary to dredge the ditches on the north and south banks of Wuxi, Anting and other places, guide the water of Taihu Lake to flow into the ports of Lujia and Baiyun, and make its water potential alkaline.

古文：松江大黄浦乃通吴淞要道，今下流遏塞难浚。
现代文：松江大黄浦就是通到吴淞的重要水道，现在下游淤塞难以疏通。
English: The Songjiang River's Dahuangpu is an important waterway leading to Wusong. Now, the downstream blockage is difficult to clear.

古文：旁有范家浜，至南仓浦口径达海。
现代文：旁边有范家泪，刭南仓浦口径直到达大海。
English: Next to it, there is the Fanjiazi River, which flows south of Cangpu all the way to the sea.

古文：宜浚深阔，上接大黄浦，达泖湖之水，庶几复《禹贡》 三江入海 之旧。
现代文：应当挖深加宽，往上连接大黄浦，达于泖湖之水，差不多又恢复《禹贡》记载 三江流入大海，的旧道。
English: It is necessary to dig deeper and wider, connect the Dahuangpu upstream, reach the water of Wuhu, and almost restore the old way of the Sanjiang River flowing into the sea, as recorded in "Yugong."

古文：水道既通，乃相地势，各置石闸，以时启闭。
现代文：水道已经畅通，然后察看地势，各自建立石闸门，按照一定的时间开关。
English: The waterway has been unblocked, then inspect the terrain, each establish a stone gate, according to a certain time switch.

古文：每岁水涸时，预修圩岸，以防暴流，则水患可息。 
现代文：每年河水枯竭时：预先修筑圩岸，用来防御突然到来的水流，那么水灾就可以平息。 
English: Every year, when the river is dry: build a bank in advance to protect against sudden water flow, then the flood can be calmed down.

古文：帝命发民丁开浚。
现代文：皇帝命令派遣民工开挖疏浚。
English: The emperor ordered the dispatch of migrant workers to excavate and dredge.

古文：原吉昼夜徙步，以身先之，功遂成。
现代文：夏原吉日夜步行，用自身的行动作为表率，这项工程终于完成。
English: Natsuhara Yoshitaka walked day and night, using his own actions as an example, and this project was finally completed.

古文：二年，修泰州河塘万八千丈，兴化南北堤、泰兴沿江圩岸、六合瓜步等屯。
现代文：永乐二年，修筑泰州河堤一万八千丈，修筑兴化南北堤岸、泰兴沿江圩岸、六合瓜步等河港。
English: In the second year of Yongle, the Taizhou River embankment was built to a height of 18,000 meters, and river ports such as Xinghua South and North Embankments, Taixing Riverside Embankment, and Liuhe Guabou were built.

古文：浚丹徒通潮旧江，又修象山茭湖塘岸，海康、徐闻二县那隐坡、调黎等港堤岸，黄严混水等十五闸、六陡门，孟津河堤，分宜湖塘，武陟马田堤岸，香山竹径水陂，复兴安分水塘。
现代文：疏浚丹徒通往海边的旧河道，又修筑象山茭湖堤岸，海康、徐闻二县那隐坡、调黎等港口堤岸，黄岩混水等十五座闸门、六座陡门，孟津河堤，分宜湖堤，武陟马田堤岸，香山竹径水岸，修复兴安分水堤岸。
English: Dredge the old river channel from Dantu to the seaside, and build the embankment of Xiangshan Lugu Lake, the port embankments of Nainpo and Chaoli in Haikang and Xuwen 2 counties, the fifteen gates and six steep gates of Huangyan mixed water, the embankment of Mengjin River, the embankment of Benyi Lake, the embankment of Wuling Ma Tian, the embankment of Xiangshan Bamboo Path, and repair the embankment of Xing'an watershed.

古文：兴安有江，源出海阳山。
现代文：兴安有江，源出海阳山。
English: Xing'an has a river, the source of which is Haiyang Mountain.

古文：江中横筑石埭，分南北渠，溉民田甚溥。
现代文：江中横向修筑石堤，分成南北水渠，灌溉百姓田地非常广大。
English: A stone dike was built horizontally in the middle of the river, which was divided into a north-south water channel and irrigated a very large area of farmers' fields.

古文：埭上叠石如鳞，以防冲溢。
现代文：堤上累积鳞片一样的石头，用来防止冲击泛滥。
English: Scale-like rocks have accumulated on the levee to prevent flash flooding.

古文：严震直撤石增埭，水迫无所泄，冲塘岸，尽趋北渠，南渠浅涩，民失利。
现代文：严震直撤除石头增筑堤岸，洪水逼近没有地方排放，冲破堤岸，全都直奔北渠，南渠水浅不畅通，百姓失去水的便利。
English: Due to the severe earthquake, the stones were removed and the embankment was built, the flood was approaching and there was no place to discharge, breaking through the embankment, all of them went straight to the north canal, the south canal was shallow and not smooth, and the people lost the convenience of water.

古文：至是修复如旧。
现代文：到这时，修复如原先那样。
English: At this point, the repair should be as it was before.

古文：海门民请发淮安、苏、常民丁协修张墩港、东明港百馀里溃堤。
现代文：海门百姓请求调遣淮安、苏州、常州民工协助修筑张墩港、柬明港一百多里溃决堤岸。
English: The Haimen people requested the dispatch of Huai'an, Suzhou and Changzhou migrant workers to assist in the construction of Zhangye Port and Xiaoming Port.

古文：帝曰： 三郡民方苦水患，不可重劳。 
现代文：皇帝说： 三郡百姓正苦于水灾，不可以加重劳役。 
English: The emperor said: The people of the three counties are suffering from the floods, and they should not be made to work harder.

古文：遣官行视，以扬州民协筑之。
现代文：派遣官吏巡行视察，用扬州民工协助修筑。
English: Officials will be dispatched on inspection tours, and Yangzhou migrant workers will be used to assist in the construction.

古文：当涂民言： 慈湖濒江，上通宣、歙，东抵丹阳湖，西接芜湖。
现代文：当涂百姓说： 慈湖靠近江边，往上通到宣州、歙县，往东到达丹阳湖，往西连接芜湖。
English: Dangtu people said: Cihu is close to the river, leading up to Xuanzhou and Jixian, reaching Danyang Lake in the east, and connecting Jixi Lake in the west.

古文：久雨浸淫，潮涨伤农，宜遣勘修筑。 
现代文：长久下雨土地浸润，潮水泛滥伤害庄稼，应当派遣官吏勘测修治。 
English: Long-term rain has infiltrated the land, and the tidal flooding has damaged crops. Officials should be sent to investigate and repair.

古文：帝从其请，且谕工部，安、徽、苏、松，浙江、江西、湖广，凡湖泊卑下，圩岸倾颓，亟督有司治之。
现代文：皇帝依从他们的请求，并且诏令工部，安庆、徽州、苏州、松江、浙江、江西、湖广凡是湖泊低下，圩岸倒塌之处，赶快督促主管部门治理它。
English: The emperor complied with their request, and ordered the Ministry of Industry, Anqing, Huizhou, Suzhou, Songjiang, Zhejiang, Jiangxi, and Hubei to quickly urge the competent departments to manage it.

古文：夏原吉复奉命治水苏、松，尽通旧河港。
现代文：夏原吉又奉命到苏州、松江治理水患，使河水完全通到旧河港。
English: Xia Yuanji was also ordered to go to Suzhou and Songjiang to control floods, so that the river water could fully flow to the old river port.

古文：又浚苏州千墩浦、致和塘、安亭、顾浦、陆皎浦、尤泾、黄泾共二万九千馀丈，松江大黄浦、赤雁浦、范家浜共万二千丈，以通太湖下流。
现代文：又疏浚苏州千墩浦、致和塘、安亭、顾浦、陆皎浦、尤泾、黄泾水道共计二万九千多丈，松江大黄浦、赤雁浦、范家浜水道共计一万二千丈，以通到太湖游。
English: In addition, a total of more than 29,000 meters of Suzhou's Qianqianpu, Zhiyotang, Anting, Gupu, Luqianpu, Youyi and Huangpi waterways were dredged, and a total of 12,000 meters of Songjiang's Dahuangpu, Akaganpu and Fanjiahama waterways were dredged to reach Taihu Lake.

古文：先是，修含山崇义堰。
现代文：在此之前，修筑含山崇义堰。
English: Prior to this, the construction of the Shanhan Chongyi Weir was completed.

古文：未几，和州民言： 铜城闸上抵巢湖，下扬子江，决圩岸七十馀处，乞修治。 
现代文：不久，和州百姓说： 铜城闸往上到巢湖，往下通到扬子江，冲破圩岸七十多处，请求修筑整治。 
English: Soon, the people of Hezhou said: the Tongcheng Gate goes up to the Lake Chaohu and down to the Yangtze River, breaking through more than seventy banks, and requested that it be repaired and rectified.

古文：其吏目张良兴又言： 水淹麻、澧二湖田五万馀顷，宜筑圩埂，起桃花桥，讫含山界三十里。 
现代文：其州吏目张良兴又说： 河水淹没麻、澧二湖田地五万多顷，应该修筑圩埂，起于桃花桥，止于含山地界三十里。 
English: Zhang Liangxing, its provincial official, also said: The river water has flooded more than 50,000 hectares of fields in the two lakes of Ma and Jie. It is necessary to build a dam, starting from the Peach Blossom Bridge and stopping at 30 miles including the mountainous area.

古文：俱从之。
现代文：全都依从他们的提议。
English: All followed their advice.

古文：三年，修上虞曹娥江坝埂，温县驮坞村堤堰四千馀丈，南海卫莲塘、四会县鸦鹊水等堤岸，无为州周兴等乡及鹰扬卫乌江屯江岸。
现代文：永乐三年，修筑上虞曹娥江堤防，温县驮坞村堤坝四千多丈，南海卫莲塘、四会县鹅鹊水等堤岸，无为州周兴等乡以及鹰扬卫乌江屯江岸。
English: In the three years of Yongle, the embankment of Shangyu Cao'e River was built, the embankment of Weidu Village, Wenshan County was more than 4,000 meters high, the embankment of Nanhai Weiliantang, and the embankment of Queshuishui, Sihui County, the embankment of Wuzhou Zhouxing Township, and the embankment of Yingyang Weiwu River were built.

古文：筑昌黎及历城小清河决堤，应天新河口北岸，从大胜关抵江东驿三千三百丈。
现代文：修筑昌黎及历城小清河溃决堤岸，应天新河口北岸，从大胜关到江束驿三千三百丈。
English: Changli and Licheng Xiaoqing River were built to break through the embankment, and the north bank of the Tianxin estuary was built from Dashengguan to Jiangzucao, with a height of 3,300 meters.

古文：浚海州北旧河，上通高桥，下接临洪场及山阳运盐河十八里。
现代文：疏通海州北边旧河道，往上接通高桥，往下连接临洪场及山阳运盐河十八里。
English: It will dredge the old river channel on the north side of Haizhou, connect Gaoqiao to the top, and connect Linyangfang and Sanyangyun Salt River 18 li to the bottom.

古文：四年，修筑宣城十九圩，丰城穆湖圩岸，石首临江万石堤，溧水决圩。
现代文：永乐四年，修筑宣城十九处圩岸，以及丰城穆湖圩岸，石首临江万石堤，溧水溃决圩岸。
English: In the four years of Yongle, he built 19 embankments of Xuancheng, as well as the embankment of Muhu Lake in Fengcheng, the embankment of Shishou near the river, and the embankment of Shishui.

古文：修怀宁斗潭河、彭滩圩岸，顺天固安，保定荆岱，乐亭鲁家套、社河口，吉水刘家塘、云陂，江都刘家圩港。
现代文：修筑怀宁斗潭河、彭滩圩岸，顺天固安，保定剂岱，乐亭鲁家套、社河口，吉水刘家塘、云陂，江都刘家圩港口。
English: Construct Huaining Doutan River, Pengtan Riverbank, Shun Tian Guan, Baoding Canal, Leting Lujiazui, Shekou, Jishui Liu Jia Tang, Yunnan, Jiangdu Liu Jiazui Port.

古文：筑湖广广济、武家穴等江岸。
现代文：修筑湖广广济武家穴等江岸。
English: The banks of rivers such as Hukangguangjiwu Jiaoxian should be built.

古文：新建石头冈圩岸、江浦沿江堤。
现代文：新建石头冈圩岸、江浦沿江堤防。
English: New stone embankments have been built on the banks of the Ganges and along the banks of the Ganges.

古文：开泰州运盐河、普定秦潼河、西溪南仪阡三处河口，导流兴化、盐城界入海。
现代文：开通泰州运盐河、普定秦潼河、西溪南仪阡三处河口，导引流入兴化、盐城地界流入大海。
English: The three estuaries of Taizhou Yunyan River, Puding Qinqian River and Xixinan Yibao River were opened, and guided to flow into Xinghua, and the Yancheng boundary flowed into the sea.

古文：浚常熟福山塘三十六里。
现代文：疏通常熟福山塘三十六里。
English: It is 36 li away from Jufu Mountain.

古文：五年，修长洲、吴江、昆山、华亭、钱塘、仁和、嘉兴堤岸，馀姚南湖坝，筑高要银冈、金山等溃堤，溉田五百馀顷。
现代文：永乐五年，修筑长洲、吴江、昆山、华亭、钱塘、仁和、嘉兴堤岸，余姚南湖堤坝，修筑高要银冈、金山等处溃决堤岸，灌溉田地五百多顷。
English: In the five years of Yongle, the embankments of Changzhou, Wujiang, Kunshan, Huating, Qiantang, Renhe, Jiaxing and Yuyao South Lake were built, the embankments of Gaobao, Yingang and Jinshan were built, and more than 500 hectares of fields were irrigated.

古文：治杭州江岸之沦者。
现代文：修治杭州江岸的沉没之处。
English: to repair the sinking places along the Hangzhou riverbank.

古文：六年浚浙江平阳县河。
现代文：六年，疏浚浙江平阳县河道。
English: In six years, the dredging of the river in Pingyang County, Zhejiang Province, was completed.

古文：七年修安陆州渲马滩决岸、海盐石堤，筑泰兴拦江堤三千九百馀丈。
现代文：七年，修筑安陆州渲马滩溃决堤岸、海盐石堤，修筑泰兴拦江堤防三干九百多丈。
English: In the past seven years, the breaching embankment and sea salt stone embankment of Renma Beach in Anlu Prefecture have been built, and the dam of Taixing River has been built to more than 900 meters.

古文：且浚大港北淤河，抵县南，出大江，四千五百馀丈。
现代文：并且疏浚大港北边的淤塞河道，直到县南，到大江，四千五百多丈。
English: And dredge the silted river channel on the north side of Dagang, until the south of the county, to the big river, more than 4,500 meters high.

古文：八年修丹阳练湖塘，汝阳汝河堤岸，南陵野塘圩、蚌荡坝，松滋张家坑、何家洲堤岸，平度州濰水、浮糠河决口百十二，堤堰八千馀丈，吴江石塘官路桥梁。
现代文：八年，修筑丹阳练湖堤岸，汝阳汝河堤岸，南陵野塘圩、蚌荡坝，松滋张家坑、何家洲堤岸，平度州潍水、浮糠河决口一百一十二处，堤坝八千多丈，修筑吴江石塘官道的桥梁。
English: In the past eight years, the embankment of Danyangren Lake, the embankment of Ruyangru River, the Nanlingyangtang dam, the Yuhuang dam, the Songzi Zhangjiakeng, the Hejiazhou embankment, the Pingdu County floodplain, the Fulong River mouth 112 places, the embankment of more than 8,000 meters, and the bridge of the Wujiang River Shitang official road were built.

古文：九年，修安福丁陂等塘堰，安仁铙家陂、寿光堤，安陆京山景陵圩岸，长乐官塘，长洲至嘉兴石土塘桥路七十馀里，泄水洞百三十一处，监利车水堤四千四百馀丈，高安华陂屯陂堤，仁和、海宁、海盐土石塘岸万馀丈。
现代文：永乐九年，修筑安福丁陂等堤坝，安仁饶家陂、寿光堤，安陆京山景陵圩堤岸，长乐官塘，长洲到嘉兴石土堤岸桥梁道路七十多里，泄水洞一百三十一处，监利车水堤四千四百多丈，高安华陂屯陂堤，仁和、海宁、海盐土石堤岸一万多丈。
English: In the ninth year of Yongle, the construction of dams such as Anfu Dinglu, Anren Raojialu, Shuguanglu, Anlu Jingshan Jinglinglu embankment, Changle Guangtang, Changzhou to Jiaxing stone embankment bridge road more than 70 miles, 131 drainage holes, supervision and control vehicle embankment more than 4,400 meters high, Gao'an Huayutun embankment, Renhe, Haining, sea salt earth and stone embankment more than 10,000 meters high.

古文：筑沂州沭河口决岸，并瀹述阳述河。
现代文：修筑沂州沭河河口溃决坭岸，并且疏通沭阳沭河。
English: The construction of the estuary of the Biyang River in Bozhou has broken through the bank of the river, and the Biyang River has been dredged.

古文：筑直隶新城张村等口决堤，仁和黄濠塘岸三百馀丈，孙家围塘岸二十馀里。
现代文：修筑直隶新城张村等河口溃决堤岸，仁和黄濠塘堤岸三百多丈，孙家围堤岸二十多里。
English: The construction of the estuary breached embankment of Zhili New Town, Zhangcun and other rivers, the embankment of Renhe and Huangyutang is more than 300 meters high, and the embankment of Sunjiawei is more than 20 miles.

古文：浚濰县干丹河、定襄故渠六十三里，引滹沱水灌田六百馀顷。
现代文：疏浚滩县干丹河、定襄旧渠道六十三里，导引滹沱水灌溉田地六百多顷。
English: Sixty-three miles of old channels in Gandenhe and Dingxiang in Tan County have been dredged, and more than 600 hectares of irrigated fields have been guided by irrigation water.

古文：疏福山官渠，浚江阴青阳河道，邹平白条沟河三十馀里。
现代文：疏通福山官渠，疏浚江阴青阳河道，邹平白条沟河道三十多里。
English: The Fukuyama Canal was dredged, the Jiangyin-Qingyang Canal was dredged, and more than 30 miles of the Binping-Baizhangou Canal were dredged.

古文：丽水民言： 县有通济渠，截松阳、遂昌诸溪水入焉。
现代文：丽水百姓说： 本县有通济渠，截住松阳、遂昌各处溪水流入其中。
English: The people of Lishui said: This county has the Tongji Canal, which intercepts the streams flowing into it from Songyang and Suichang.

古文：上、中、下三源，流四十八派，溉田二千馀顷。
现代文：上、中、下三水源，分流为四十八支流，灌溉田地二千多顷。
English: There are three water sources, upper, middle and lower, with 48 tributaries, irrigating more than 2,000 hectares of fields.

古文：上源民泄水自利，下源流绝，沙壅渠塞。
现代文：在上源的百姓排放渠水自然便利，下源渠水断流，泥沙堵塞渠道。
English: It is naturally convenient for the people in the upper source to discharge canal water, and the lower source canal water is cut off, and the channel is blocked by mud and sand.

古文：请修堤堰如旧。 
现代文：请求如原先那样修筑堤岸。 
English: The request is to build the embankment as it was before.

古文：部议从之。
现代文：工部商议依从他们的请求。
English: The Ministry of Industry and Trade agreed to their request.

古文：齐东知县张升言： 小清河洪水冲决，淹没诸盐场及青州田。
现代文：齐东知县张升说： 小清河被洪水冲决堤岸，淹没各处盐场及青州田地。
English: Zhang Sheng, from Qidongzhi County, said: "The Xiaoqing River broke through the embankment and flooded salt farms and fields in Qingzhou.

古文：请浚上流，修长堤，使水行故道。 
现代文：请求疏通上游，修筑长堤，使河水通行于故道。 
English: The request is to dredge the upstream, build a long dike, and make the river flow in the old way.

古文：皇太子遣官经理之。
现代文：皇太子派遣官吏治理其河。
English: The crown prince dispatched officials to manage the river.

古文：鄜州民言： 洛水横决而西，冲塌州城东北隅。
现代文：墉州百姓说： 洛水从旁边溢出而向西，冲塌本州岛城墙东北角。
English: The people of Zhangzhou said: Luo water overflowed from the side to the west and washed away the northeast corner of the city wall of Honshu Island.

古文：请浚故道，循州东山麓南流。 
现代文：请求疏通故道，顺着州城束边的山脚往南流。 
English: Request to clear the old road and follow the foot of the mountain along the edge of Shuzhenzhu to the south.

古文：从之。
现代文：依从他们的请求。
English: I followed his advice.

古文：十年，修浙江平阳捍潮堤岸，黄梅临江决岸百二十馀里，海门捍潮堤百三十里。
现代文：永乐十年，修筑浙江平阳抵御潮水的堤岸，黄梅临近江边的溃决堤岸一百二十多里，海门抵御潮水的堤岸一百三十里。
English: Yongle ten years, to build Zhejiang Pingyang up against the tide of the embankment, Huangmei near the river side of the broken embankment more than one hundred and twenty miles, Haimen against the tide of the embankment one hundred and thirty miles.

古文：筑新会圩岸二千馀丈，献县、饶阳恭俭等岸，安丘红河决岸，安州直亭等河决口八十九，华容、安津等堤决口四十六。
现代文：修筑新会圩岸二干多丈，献县、饶阳恭俭等堤岸，安丘红河溃决堤岸，安州直亭等河道决口八十九处，华容、安津等河堤决口四十六处。
English: It is planned to build two dry and multi-height banks of the Xinhui River, the banks of the Xianxian and the Raoyang and the Jiaojian Rivers, the broken banks of the Anqiu Red River, 89 river crossings such as the Anzhou Zhoting, and 46 river crossings such as the Huarong River and the Anjin River.

古文：浚上海蟠龙江、濰县白浪河。
现代文：疏通上海蟠龙江、潍县白浪河。
English: The Shanghai Yulong River and the Bai Lang River in Handan County have been dredged.

古文：北京行太仆卿杨砥言： 吴桥、东光、兴济、交河及天津等卫屯田，雨水决堤伤稼。
现代文：北京行太仆卿杨砥说： 昱桥、柬光、兴济、交河及天津等卫屯田，暴雨洪水冲决堤岸损害庄稼。
English: Yang Tuo, the Beijing-bound grand chamberlain, said: "In the watchtower fields of Fenqiao, Camiguang, Xingji, Jiahe and Tianjin, torrential rains and floods broke through the embankment and damaged crops.

古文：德州良店驿东南二十五里有黄河故道，与州南土河通。
现代文：德州良店驿东南二十五里有黄河故道，与州南边土河相通。
English: There is a Yellow River ancient road in the southeast 25th of Texas Liangdian County, which is connected to the southern edge of the state.

古文：穿渠置闸，分杀水势，大为民便。 
现代文：开通渠道建立闸门，分流减缓水势，极大地给百姓带来便利。 
English: The opening of channels, the establishment of sluice gates, and the diversion of water slowed down the water potential, greatly bringing convenience to the people.

古文：命侍郎兰芳往理之。
现代文：命令侍郎蔺芳前去治理它。
English: He ordered his attendant, Yu Fang, to go and take care of it.

古文：十一年，修芜湖陶辛、政和二圩，保定、文安二县河口决岸五十四，应天新河圩岸，天长福胜、戚家庄二塘，荥泽大滨河堤。
现代文：永乐十一年，修筑芜湖陶辛、政和二处圩岸，保定、文安二县河口溃决堤岸五十四处，应天新河圩岸，天长福胜、戚家庄二处堤岸，荣泽大滨河堤岸。
English: In the 11th year of the Yongle era, two dams were built in Tao Xin and Zhenghe in Wuhu, 54 dams were built in the estuaries of Baoding and Wen'an counties, two dams were built in Tianxin River, two dams were built in Tianchang Fuxing and Qijia Zhuang, and a dam was built in Rongze Dabing River.

古文：浚昆山太平河。
现代文：疏通昆山太平河。
English: Dredge the Kunshan Taiping River.

古文：十二年修凤阳安丰塘水门十六座及牛角坝、新仓铺塌岸，武陟郭村、马曲堤岸，聊城龙湾河，濮州红船口，范县曹村河堤岸。
现代文：十二年，修筑凤阳安丰塘水门十六座及牛角坝、新仓铺倒塌堤岸，武陟郭村、马曲堤岸，聊城龙湾河，濮州红船口，范县曹村河堤岸。
English: In 2012, the construction of the 16 Fengyang Anfengtang Water Gate and Niujiao Dam, the new warehouse collapsed embankment, Wuyiguo Village, Maqu Embankment, Liaocheng Longwan River, Zhangzhou Red Ship Port, Fan County Cao Village River Embankment.

古文：筑三河决堤。
现代文：修筑三绦河流的溃决堤岸。
English: Rebuilding the breached embankment of the Sanqi River.

古文：浚海州官河二百四十里。
现代文：疏通海州官河二百四十里。
English: Dredging 240 miles of the Haizhou Guanhe.

古文：解州民言： 临晋涑水河逆流，决姚暹渠堰，入砂地，淹民田，将及盐池。 
现代文：解州百姓说： 临晋涑水河河水倒流，冲决姚暹渠堤堰，流入沙地，淹没百姓田地，将要殃及盐池。 
English: The people of Liaozhou said: The water of the Lijinshui River flows backward, breaks through the dike of the Yao Siam Canal, flows into the sandy land, floods the people's fields, and will affect the salt pond.

古文：寻又言： 硝池水溢，决豁口，入盐池。 
现代文：不久又说： 硝池河水泛滥，冲决豁口，流入盐池。 
English: Soon he said: "The Niochi River water floods, breaks through the gap, and flows into the salt pond.

古文：以涑水渠、姚暹渠并流，故命官修筑如其请。
现代文：因为涑水渠、姚暹渠合流，所以命令官吏依照他们的请求修筑。
English: Due to the confluence of the Lushui Canal and the Yao Siem Canal, officials were ordered to build the canal according to their request.

古文：十三年，修兴济决岸、南京羽林右卫刁家圩屯田堤。
现代文：永乐十三年，修筑兴济溃决堤岸、南京羽林右卫刁家圩屯田堤岸。
English: In the thirteenth year of Yongle, he built the Xingji Breakwater Embankment and the Nanjing U-Lin-U-Wei-Jia-Tuen-Tien Embankment.

古文：吴江县丞李升言： 苏、松水患，太湖为甚，急宜泄其下流。
现代文：吴江县丞李升说： 苏州、松江遭受水灾，太湖就更严重，应当赶快排放其下游河水。
English: Li Sheng, county magistrate of Wujiang County, said: Suzhou and Songjiang have suffered from floods, and Taihu Lake is more serious. It is necessary to quickly discharge its downstream river water.

古文：若常熟白茆诸港，昆山千墩等河，长洲十八都港汊，吴县、无锡近湖河道，皆宜循其故迹，浚而深之。
现代文：像常熟白茆各港，昆山千墩等河，长洲十八都港汊，吴县、无锡靠近湖边河道，都应当沿着其旧有的故道，疏浚而又使其加深。
English: Like the ports of Changshu Baiyao, Kunshan Qianyao and other rivers, the ports of 18 cities in Changzhou, and the rivers in Wuxi and Wuxi near the lake, they should be dredged and deepened along their old routes.

古文：乃修蔡泾等闸，候潮来往，以时启闭。
现代文：因而修筑蔡泾等闸门，根据潮水来去，按照一定的时间开关。
English: As a result, sluice gates such as Cai Ying are built, and they come and go according to the tide, and switch according to a certain time.

古文：则泛滥可免，而民获耕种之利。 
现代文：那么，洪水泛滥就可以避免，因而百姓获得耕种的好处。 
English: Then, flooding can be avoided, and the people can enjoy the benefits of farming.

古文：从之。
现代文：依从他的主张。
English: I followed his advice.

古文：十五年修固安孙家口及临漳固冢堤岸。
现代文：十五年，修筑固安孙家口及临漳固冢堤岸。
English: Fifteen years later, the construction of Gu'ansunjiakou and Linyi's Gu'an embankment began.

古文：十六年，修魏县决岸。
现代文：十六年，修筑魏县溃决堤岸。
English: Sixteen years have passed since the construction of Wei County's broken embankment.

古文：十七年，萧山民言： 境内河渠四十五里，溉田万顷，比年淤塞。
现代文：永乐十七年，萧山百姓说： 境内河流与渠道四十五里，灌溉田地上万顷，近年被淤塞。
English: In the 17th year of Yongle, the people of Xiaoshan said: There are 45 miles of rivers and channels in the territory, and 10,000 hectares of irrigated fields, which have been silted up in recent years.

古文：乞疏浚，仍置闸钱清小江坝东，庶旱潦无忧。 
现代文：请求疏浚，仍然在钱清小江坝柬面建立闸门，差不多就没有旱涝灾害的忧虑。 
English: Dredging is requested, and the sluice gate is still built on the camel face of Qianqing Xiaojiang Dam, so there is almost no concern about drought and flood disasters.

古文：山东新城民言： 县东郑黄沟源出淄川，下流壅沮，霖潦妨农。
现代文：山东新城百姓说： 县柬郑黄沟源出于淄川，下游堵塞，久雨积水妨害农业。
English: The people of Shandong Xincheng said: The source of the county-level Zhenghuang ditch comes from the Fenchuan River, the downstream is blocked, and the long-term rainwater hinders agriculture.

古文：陈家庄南有乾河，上与沟接，下通乌江，乞浚治。 
现代文：陈家庄南有干河，往上与护城河连接，往下通到乌江，请求疏通治理。 
English: There is a dry river in the south of Chenjiazhuang, which connects with the moat upstream and flows down to the Wujiang River, and requires dredging.

古文：并从之。
现代文：全都依从他们的主张。
English: The late emperor agreed.

古文：十八年，海宁诸县民言： 潮没海塘二千六百馀丈，延及吴家等坝。 
现代文：十八年，海宁各县百姓说： 潮水淹没海岸二干六百多丈，连及吴家等堤坝。 
English: In the 18th year, the people in all counties of Haining said: The tides flooded the coast for more than two hundred and six hundred meters, and even the dikes such as Wujia.

古文：通政岳福亦言： 仁和、海宁坏长降等坝，沦海千五百馀丈。
现代文：通政岳福也说： 仁和、海宁之水毁坏长降等堤坝，沉没于海一千五百多丈。
English: Tongzheng Yuefu also said: The water in Renhe and Haining destroyed the long-dropping and other dams, and sank more than 1,500 meters into the sea.

古文：东岸赭山、严门山、蜀山旧有海道，淤绝久，故西岸潮愈猛。
现代文：东岸赭山、岩门山、蜀山原先有海运之道，淤塞阻断了很久，因此西岸潮水更加汹涌。
English: On the east coast, Lushan, Yamen Mountain and Shushan originally had a sea route, but silting blocked it for a long time, so the tides on the west coast became more turbulent.

古文：乞以军民修筑。 
现代文：请求使用军队和百姓来修筑。 
English: The request is to use the army and the people to build it.

古文：并从之。
现代文：全都依从他们的建议。
English: The late emperor agreed.

古文：明年修海宁等县塘岸。
现代文：第二年，修筑海宁等县堤岸。
English: In the second year, the embankments of Haining and other counties were built.

古文：二十一年，修嘉定抵松江潮圮圩岸五千馀丈、交耻顺化卫决堤百馀丈。
现代文：永乐二十一年，修筑嘉定到松江被潮水冲毁的圩岸五千多丈、交肚顺化卫溃决堤岸一百多丈。
English: In the 21st year of Yongle, Jiading to Songjiang built a 5,000-plus-meter-high pier that had been washed away by the tide, and a 100-plus-meter-high pier that had been washed away by the tide in Hupehui.

古文：文水民言： 文谷山常稔渠分引文谷河流，袤三十馀里，灌田。
现代文：文水百姓说： 文谷山常稔渠分流导引文谷河流，长三十多里，灌溉田地。
English: The people of Wenshui said: The diversion of the Wen Valley Mountain's Changlu Canal leads to the Wen Valley River, which is more than 30 miles long and irrigates the fields.

古文：今河溃泄水。 
现代文：现在，河流冲破堤防泄漏河水。 
English: Now, rivers are bursting their levees.

古文：从其奏，葺治之。
现代文：依从他们的奏请，治理这条河道。
English: Heed their plea and manage the waterway.

古文：二十二年，修临海广济河闸。
现代文：三十二年，修建临海广济河闸门。
English: In 32 years, the gate of Guangji River on the coast was built.

古文：洪熙元年修黄岩滨海闸坝。视永乐初，增府判一员，专其事。
现代文：洪熙元年，修筑黄岩靠近海边的闸门和堤坝照永乐年初，增设府判一员，专门管理这件事。
English: In the first year of Hongxi, the construction of the gate and dike near the coast of Huangyan was completed at the beginning of the Yongle year, and a member of the prefectural government was added to specifically manage this matter.

古文：修献县、铙阳恭俭堤及窑堤口。
现代文：修筑献县、饶阳恭俭堤及窑堤口。
English: The construction of the Jian County, Raoyang Gongjian dyke and kiln dike.

古文：宣德二年，浙江归安知县华嵩言： 泾阳洪渠堰溉五县田八千四百馀顷。
现代文：宣德二年，浙江归安知县华嵩说： 泾阳洪渠堰灌溉五县田地八千四百多顷。
English: In the second year of Xuande, Zhejiang returned to Huasong, Anchi County, saying: "The flood canal weir in Fenyang has irrigated more than 8,400 hectares of fields in five counties.

古文：洪武时，长兴侯耿炳文前后修浚，未久堰坏。
现代文：洪武年间，长兴侯耿炳文先后修筑疏浚，没有多久，堤岸被毁坏。
English: During the Hongwu era, the Changxing village of Geng Bingwen successively built dredging, but it didn't take long for the embankment to be destroyed.

古文：永乐间，老人徐龄言於朝，遣官修筑，会营造不果。
现代文：永乐年间，老人徐龄向朝廷建议，派遣官吏修筑，正值营建宫室最终没有实施。
English: During the Yongle era, the old man Xu Ling proposed to the imperial court to send officials to build the palace, but the proposal was not implemented.

古文：乞专命大臣起军夫协治。 
现代文：请求专门命令大臣组织兵士协助治理。 
English: The request specifically ordered the minister to organize soldiers to assist the government.

古文：从之。
现代文：依从他的建议。
English: I followed his advice.

古文：三年修灌县都江等堰四十四。
现代文：三年，修筑灌县都江等堰四十四处。
English: In the past three years, 44 weirs, including Dujiang, have been built in Dujiangyan County.

古文：临海民言： 胡巉诸闸潴水灌田，近年闸坏而金鳌、大浦、湖涞、举屿等河遂皆壅阻，乞为开筑。 
现代文：临海百姓说： 胡巉各处闸门蓄水灌溉田地，近年来，闸门被毁坏，因此金鳌、大浦、湖沫、举屿等河道就都被堵塞，请求给予开通修筑。 
English: People living along the coast said: Locks store water and irrigate fields in all parts of Hubei. In recent years, the locks have been destroyed, so rivers such as Jinyu, Oura, Humen and Huludao have all been blocked. They requested that they be opened for construction.

古文：帝曰： 水利急务，使民自诉於朝，此守令不得人尔。 
现代文：皇帝说： 水利是紧急的事情，让百姓自己告诉朝廷，这是地方官吏没有选到贤人担任而已。 
English: The emperor said, "Water conservancy is an urgent matter. Let the people themselves tell the imperial court that it is because the local officials have not chosen a wise person to serve.

古文：命工部即饬郡县秋收起工。
现代文：命令工部立刻敕令郡县，秋收后开始动工。
English: The order was given to the engineering department to immediately start construction in the county, and to start construction after the autumn harvest.

古文：仍诏天下： 凡水利当兴者，有司即举行，毋缓视。 
现代文：仍然诏令天下： 凡是水利应当兴建的地方，有关部门即刻施行，不要延缓。
English: Still, the world is told: Wherever water conservancy should be built, the relevant departments should implement it immediately, without delay.

古文：巡按江西御史许胜言： 南昌瑞河两岸低洼，多良田。
现代文：巡按江西御史许胜说： 南昌瑞河两岸低下，多有良田。
English: Xu Sheng, the inspector of the Jiangxi History, said: Nanchang Ruihe River is low on both sides, and there are more good fields.

古文：洪武间修筑，水不为患。
现代文：洪武年间修筑，河水不造成灾难。
English: Built during the Hongwu era, the river does not cause disasters.

古文：比年水溢，岸圮二十馀处。
现代文：近年来河水泛滥，堤岸倒塌二十多处。
English: In recent years, the river has flooded and the embankment has collapsed in more than 20 places.

古文：丰城安沙绳湾圩岸三千六百馀丈，永乐间水冲，改修百三十馀丈。
现代文：丰城安沙绳湾圩岸三千六百多丈，永乐年间被河水冲毁，改修一百三十多丈。
English: Fengcheng Ansha Rope Bay is more than 3,600 meters high. During the Yongle period, it was destroyed by the river and renovated to more than 130 meters high.

古文：近者久雨，江涨堤坏。
现代文：近来久雨，江水泛滥堤岸冲坏。
English: Recently, due to the long rain, the river overflowed and the embankment broke.

古文：乞敕有司募夫修理。 
现代文：请求诏令主管官吏招募役夫进行修筑治理。 
English: Request a decree to the competent officials to recruit construction workers to carry out construction management.

古文：中书舍人陆伯伦言： 常熟七浦塘东西百里，灌常熟、昆山田，岁租二十馀万石。
现代文：中书舍人陆伯伦说： 常熟七浦塘东西相距一百里，灌溉常熟、昆山田地，每年租税二十多万石。
English: Lu Bailun, a Chinese scholar, said: The Changshu seven-pond pond is a hundred miles away from east to west. The fields of Changshu and Kunshan are irrigated, and the annual tax is more than 200,000 koku.

古文：乞听民自浚之。 
现代文：请求允许百姓自行疏浚。 
English: The request is to allow the people to dredge themselves.

古文：皆诏可。
现代文：全都韶令许可。
English: All of them are permitted by the imperial edict.

古文：四年，修献县柳林口堤岸。
现代文：宣德四年，修筑献县柳林口堤岸。
English: In the fourth year of Xuande, the embankment of Liulingkou, Xian County, was built.

古文：潜江民言： 蚌湖、阳湖皆临襄河，水涨岸决，害荆州三卫、荆门、江陵诸州县官民屯田无算。
现代文：港江百姓说： 蚌湖、阳湖都临近襄河，洪水泛滥堤岸演决，危害剂州三卫、剂门、江陵各州县官府和百姓的屯田不可计算。
English: The people of the Hongjiang River said: Wuhu and Yanghu are both close to the Xianghe River, the flooding of the embankment is imminent, and the harm to the Jiangzhou Sanwei, Jiangmen, and Gangneung prefectures and counties cannot be calculated.

古文：乞发军民筑治。
现代文：请求派遣军队和百姓修筑治理。 
English: Request to send troops and people to build and govern.

古文：从之。
现代文：依从他们的请求。
English: I followed his advice.

古文：福清民言： 光贤里官民田百馀顷，堤障海水。
现代文：福清百姓说： 光贤里有官府和百姓的田地一百多顷，有堤防阻挡海水。
English: Fu Qing people said: Guangxian has more than one hundred hectares of government and people's fields, and there is a dike to block seawater.

古文：堤坏久，田尽荒。
现代文：堤防毁坏了很久，田地全部荒废。
English: The embankment has been destroyed for a long time, and all the fields are deserted.

古文：永乐中，尝命修治，迄今未举，民不得耕。 
现代文：永乐年间，曾经命令修筑治理，到现在还没有施行，百姓不能耕种。 
English: During the Yongle era, there was an order to build and govern, but it has not yet been implemented, and the people cannot farm.

古文：帝责有司亟治，而谕尚书吴中严饬郡邑，陂池堤堰及时修浚，慢者治以罪。
现代文：皇帝责令主管部门赶快治理，又诏令尚书吴中严厉敕令府县，池塘堤坝及时修筑疏浚，怠慢的人以罪惩处。
English: The emperor ordered the competent departments to speed up the governance, and also ordered Shangshu Wuzhong to severely order the prefectures to timely build and dredge the pond dams, and punish those who were negligent.

古文：五年，巡抚侍郎成均言： 海盐去海二里，石嵌土岸二千四百馀丈，水啮其石，皆已刓敝。
现代文：宣德五年，巡抚侍郎成均说： 海盐距离海边=里，用石头镶嵌土岸二千四百多丈，海水侵蚀土岸上的石头，全都已经损坏。
English: In the 5th year of Xuande, the inspector, Zhi Lang Cheng Jun, said: The sea salt is a mile away from the seashore, the earthen bank is embedded with stones more than 2400 meters high, the sea water has eroded the stones on the earthen bank, and all of them have been damaged.

古文：议筑新石於岸内，而存其旧者以为外障。
现代文：建议在土岸里面修筑新石堤，而保存其原来的土岸把它作为外部屏障。
English: It is proposed to build a new stone embankment inside the embankment, while preserving its original embankment as an external barrier.

古文：乞如洪武中令嘉、严、绍三府协夫举工。 
现代文：请求像洪武年间那样，命令嘉、严、绍三府协助役夫施工。 
English: As in the Hongwu era, the three prefectures of Jiayu, Yan and Shao were ordered to assist the construction workers.

古文：从之。
现代文：依从他的请求。
English: I followed his advice.

古文：六年，修浏阳、广济诸县堤堰，丰城西北临江石堤及西南七圩坝，石首临江三堤。
现代文：宣德六年，修筑浏阳、广济各县堤坝水堰，以及丰城西北靠近江边的石堤及西南的七圩坝，石首靠近江边的三处堤防。
English: Over the past six years, Xuande has built the largest dam and weir in Liuyang and Guangji counties, as well as the stone dike near the river in the northwest of Fengcheng and the Qixi dam in the southwest, and three dikes near the river in Shishou.

古文：浚馀姚旧河池。
现代文：疏浚余姚原先的护城河。
English: Dredging Yuyao's original moat.

古文：巡抚侍郎周忱言： 溧水永丰圩周围八十馀里，环以丹阳、石臼诸湖。
现代文：巡抚侍郎周忱说： 溧水永丰圩周围八十多里，环绕丹阳、石臼各湖。
English: The inspector Zhou Zhenxin said: There are more than eighty miles around the Yongfeng Reservoir, surrounding the lakes of Danyang and Ishinomaki.

古文：旧筑埂坝，通陟门石塔，农甚利之。
现代文：原先修筑堤坝，通到陟门石塔，对农业非常有利。
English: Originally, the construction of a dike, leading to the Qimen Stone Pagoda, was very beneficial to agriculture.

古文：今颓败，请葺治。 
现代文：现在已经垮塌毁坏，请求整治。 
English: It has now collapsed and is in a state of ruin, and is in need of restoration.

古文：教谕唐敏言： 常熟耿泾塘，南接梅里，通昆承湖，北达大江。
现代文：教谕唐敏说： 常熟耿泾塘，往南连接梅里，通到昆承湖，往北到达大江。
English: Tang Min said: Changshu Gengbangtang, south to Meri, through to Kuncheng Lake, north to Dajiang.

古文：洪武中，浚以溉田。
现代文：洪武年间，疏浚来灌溉田地。
English: During the Hongwu era, dredging was used to irrigate fields.

古文：今壅阻，请疏导。 
现代文：现在已经堵塞，请求疏通。 
English: It's blocked now, please unblock it.

古文：并从之。
现代文：全都依从他们的请求。
English: The late emperor agreed.

古文：七年，修眉州新津通济堰。
现代文：宣德七年，修筑眉州新津通济堰。
English: In the seventh year of Xuande, the Xinjin Tongji Weir in Meizhou was built.

古文：堰水出彭山，分十六渠，溉田二万五千馀亩。
现代文：堰水出于彭山，分为十六条沟渠，灌溉田地二万五千多亩。
English: The weir water comes from Pengshan and is divided into 16 channels, irrigating more than 25,000 mu of fields.

古文：河东盐运使言： 盐池近地姚暹河，流入五星湖转黄流河，两岸洼下。
现代文：河东盐运使说： 盐池附近的姚暹河，流入五星湖转入黄流河，两岸地势低下。
English: The salt transport envoy of Hedong said: The Yao Siam River near the salt pond flows into the Five-Star Lake and turns into the Yellow River, and the land on both sides is low.

古文：比岁雨溢水涨，冲至解州。
现代文：近年雨水过多洪水泛滥，冲到解州。
English: In recent years, too much rainwater has caused flooding, rushing to Dezhou.

古文：浪益急，遂溃南岸，没民田三十馀里，盐池护堤皆坏。
现代文：波浪更加急速，于是冲破南岸，淹没百姓田地三十多里，盐池护堤都被毁坏。
English: The waves were more rapid, so they broke through the south bank and flooded more than thirty miles of people's fields. The salt pond berms were all destroyed.

古文：复因下流涑水河高，壅淤逆流，姚暹以决。
现代文：又因下游涑水河河道高，致使河道淤塞河水倒流，姚暹因此溃决。
English: In addition, due to the high river channel of the downstream Lishui River, the river channel was silted up and the river water flowed backwards. As a result, Yao Siam was defeated.

古文：乞起民夫疏瀹。 
现代文：请求征发民工疏通。 
English: Solicitation and dispatch of migrant workers will be eased.

古文：从之。
现代文：依从他的主张。
English: I followed his advice.

古文：苏州知府况钟言： 苏、松、嘉、湖湖有六，曰太湖、庞山、阳城、沙湖、昆承、尚湖。
现代文：苏州知府况锺说： 苏州、松江、嘉兴、湖州有湖六处，叫做太湖、庞山、阳城、沙湖、昆承、尚湖。
English: Suzhou Governor Quanzhang said: Suzhou, Songjiang, Jiaxing and Huzhou have six lakes, called Taihu Lake, Pangshan, Yangcheng, Shahu, Kuncheng and Shanghu.

古文：永乐初，夏原吉浚导，今复淤。
现代文：永乐初年，夏原吉疏通，现在又淤塞。
English: In the first year of Yongle, Xia Yuanji dredged, and now it is silted up again.

古文：乞遣大臣疏浚。 
现代文：请派遣大臣疏浚。 
English: Please send a minister to dredge.

古文：乃命周忱与钟治之。
现代文：于是命令周忱舆况锺治理它。
English: So he ordered Zhou Zhenmin to govern it.

古文：是岁，汾河骤溢，败太原堤。
现代文：这年，汾河突然泛滥，毁坏太原堤防。
English: This year, the Wei River suddenly flooded, destroying the Taiyuan dike.

古文：镇守都司李谦、巡按御史徐杰以便宜修治，然后驰奏。
现代文：镇守都司李谦、巡按御史徐杰根据形势进行修整治理，然后迅速上奏。
English: Li Qian, the commander of the town, and Xu Jie, the inspector, carried out the rectification and control according to the situation, and then played it quickly.

古文：帝嘉奖之。
现代文：皇帝嘉奖他们。
English: The emperor commended them.

古文：八年，葺湖广偏桥卫高陂石洞，完县南关旧河。
现代文：宣德八年，修整湖广偏桥卫高处堤岸石洞，以及完县南门旧河道。
English: In the eighth year of Xuande, the embankment stone cave at the height of the bridge and the embankment of the lake were repaired, and the old river channel of Nanmen County was completed.

古文：复和州铜城堰闸。
现代文：修复和州铜城堰闸门。
English: The gate of Hezhou Tongcheng Weir was repaired.

古文：修安阳广惠等渠，磁州滏阳河、五爪济民渠。
现代文：修治安阳广惠等渠道，磁州滏阳河、五爪济民渠。
English: channels such as the Zhengjingyang and Guanghui canals were repaired, including the Zhengjingyang River and Wuzhouzhu River.

古文：九年修江陵枝江沿江堤岸。
现代文：九年，修筑江陵枝江沿江堤岸。
English: Nine years later, the embankment along the Yangzi River in Jiangling was built.

古文：筑蓟州决岸。
现代文：修筑蓟州溃决的堤岸。
English: Rebuild the levees that burst in Luzhou.

古文：毁苏、松民私筑堤堰。十年筑海盐潮决海塘千五百馀丈。
现代文：撤除苏州、松江百姓私自修筑的堤坝十年，修筑海盐被潮水冲破的海岸一千五百多丈。
English: It will take ten years to remove the levees built by the people of Suzhou and Songjiang, and more than 1,500 meters of coast will be built where the sea salt was washed away by the tide.

古文：主事沈中言： 山阴西小江，上通金、严，下接三江海口，引诸暨、浦江、义乌诸湖水以通舟。
现代文：主事沈中说： 山阴西小江，往上通到金、严，往下连接三江入海口，导引诸暨、浦江、义乌各处湖水来通行船只。
English: Shen, the leader of the project, said, "The West Xiao Jiang River in Shanyin leads up to Jin and Yan, and connects the entrance of the Sanjiang River to the sea, guiding vessels coming from Zhuji, Pujiang, and Yiwu.

古文：江口近淤，宜筑临浦戚堰障诸湖水，俾仍出小江。 
现代文：江口近来被淤塞，应当修筑临浦戚堰来阻拦各处湖水，使其依然出于小江。 
English: The estuary of the river has recently been silted up, and a weir should be built near Puxi to block the lake water everywhere, so that it still flows out of the creek.

古文：诏部覆夺。
现代文：诏令工部审核定夺。
English: The decision was made after the approval of the Ministry of Works.

古文：正统元年，修吉安沿江堤。
现代文：正统元年，修筑吉安沿江堤岸。
English: In the first year of orthodoxy, the embankment along the Ji'an River was built.

古文：筑海阳、登云、都云、步村等决堤。
现代文：修筑海阳、登云、都云、步村等溃决的堤岸。
English: to build the embankments of Haiyang, Dengyun, Duyun, Bucun and other breakwaters.

古文：浚陕西西安灞桥河。
现代文：疏通陕西西安灞桥河。
English: Dredge the Shaanxi Xi'an Fenqiao River.

古文：二年筑蠡县王家等决口。
现代文：二年，修筑蠡县王家等决口。
English: In the second year, the Wangjia and other outcrops in Handan County were built.

古文：修新会鸾台山至瓦塘浦颓岸，江陵、松滋、公安、石首、潜江、监利近江决堤。
现代文：修筑新会鸾台山到瓦塘浦垮塌的堤岸，江陵、松滋、公安、石首、潜江、监利靠近长江的溃决河堤。
English: Xinhui will rebuild the collapsed embankments from Xingtai Mountain to Watanpu, and the breached river embankments near the Yangtze River in Jiangling, Songzhi, Public Security, Shishou, Qianjiang and Jianli.

古文：又修湖广老龙堤，以为汉水所溃也。
现代文：又修筑湖广老龙堤，因为堤是被汉水所冲破。
English: They are also building the Lake Guanglao Dragon Embankment, because the embankment was breached by the Han River.

古文：三年疏泰兴顺德乡三渠，引湖溉田；潞州永禄等沟渠二十八道，通於漳河。
现代文：三年，疏通泰兴顺德乡三条沟渠，导引湖水灌溉田地；潞州永禄等沟渠二十八条，通流于漳河。
English: In three years, three ditches in Taixing Shunde Township were dredged and lake water was guided to irrigate fields; twenty-eight ditches such as Yonglu in Zhangzhou flowed into the Li River.

古文：四年修容城杜村口堤。
现代文：四年，修筑容城杜村口堤岸。
English: It took four years to build the embankment at the entrance to Yongcheng Ducun.

古文：设正阳门外减水河，并疏城内沟渠。
现代文：建立正阳门外碱水河，并且疏通城内沟渠。
English: Establish a river of alkaline water outside Zhengyangmen, and dredge the ditch inside the city.

古文：荆州民言： 城西江水高城十馀丈，霖潦坏堤，水即灌城。
现代文：荆州百姓说： 城西长江水高于城墙十多丈，如果久雨积水毁坏堤岸，洪水立即灌于城中。
English: The people of Jingzhou said: The water of the Yangtze River in the west of the city is more than ten times higher than the city wall. If the accumulated rain destroys the embankment, the flood will immediately flood the city.

古文：请先事修治。 
现代文：请事先进行整治。 
English: Please carry out rectification in advance.

古文：宁夏巡抚都御史金濂言： 镇有五渠，资以行溉，今明沙州七星、汉伯、石灰三渠久塞。
现代文：宁夏巡抚都御史金濂说： 该镇有五条渠道，用来供给实施灌溉，现在，明沙州七星、汉伯、石灰三条渠道长期堵塞。
English: The governor of Ningxia, Guishi Jinjun, said: The town has five channels used to supply irrigation, and now, the three channels of Minshazhou Qixing, Hanbo and Lime have been blocked for a long time.

古文：请用夫四万疏浚，溉芜田千三百馀顷。 
现代文：请使用役夫四万人进行疏浚，可灌溉荒废的田地一千三百多顷。 
English: Please use 40,000 workers to dredge, which can irrigate more than 1,300 hectares of abandoned fields.

古文：并从之。
现代文：全部依从他们的主张。
English: The late emperor agreed.

古文：五年，修太湖堤，海盐海岸，南京上中下新河及济川卫新江口防水堤，漷县、南宫诸堤。
现代文：正统五年，修筑太湖堤岸，海盐海岸，南京上中下新河及济川卫新江口防水河堤，椁县、南宫各处堤岸。
English: In the first five years, the embankment of Taihu Lake, the sea salt coast, the waterproof river embankment of the upper, middle and lower Xinhe River and the mouth of the Jichuan-Weixin River in Nanjing, and the embankments in Jixian County and Nangong were built.

古文：筑顺天、河间及容城杜村口、郎家口决堤。
现代文：修筑顺天、河间及容城杜村口、郎家口溃决堤岸。
English: The levees at Shuntian, Kawama, Yongcheng, Ducunkou and Rongjiakou will be breached.

古文：塞海宁蛎岩决堤口。
现代文：堵塞海宁蛎岩溃决的堤口。
English: Blocking the dike of the Haining rock burst.

古文：浚盐城伍祐、新兴二场运河。
现代文：疏浚盐城伍佑、新兴二处运输河道。
English: The dredging of the salt city Wu You and the emergence of two transport channels.

古文：初，溧水有镇曰广通，其西固城湖入大江，东则三塔堰河入太湖。
现代文：原先，溧水有镇叫做广通，其西边的固城湖流入大江，束边则是三塔堰河流入太湖。
English: Originally, there was a town in Surabaya called Guangtong. On the west side of the town, Gucheng Lake flows into the Yangtze River. On the other side of the town, the Santaiyan River flows into the Taihu Lake.

古文：中间相距十五里，洪武中凿以通舟。
现代文：中间相距十五里，洪武年间，开通它来通行船只。
English: The middle distance is fifteen miles, and during the Hongwu era, it was opened to allow ships to pass.

古文：县地稍洼，而湖纳宁国、广德诸水，遇潦即溢，乃筑坝於镇以御之，而堰水不能至坝下。
现代文：县治地势稍微低下，而湖容纳宁国、广德各河水，遇到大雨就泛滥，于是，在其镇建筑堤坝，用来防御溢水的危害，但是，堰河水不能流到堤坝之下。
English: The county's terrain is slightly low, and the lake accommodates the waters of Ningguo and Guangde rivers, and floods when it rains heavily. Therefore, a dam was built in the town to prevent the harm of overflowing water, but the weir water could not flow under the dam.

古文：是岁，改筑坝於叶家桥。
现代文：这一年，在叶家桥改筑堤坝。
English: In the same year, the construction of a dike began in Yejiabashi.

古文：胭脂河者，溧水入秦淮道也。
现代文：胭脂河，是溧水流入秦淮水道。
English: The Jiaozhi River is a tributary of the Qinhuai Waterway.

古文：苏、松船皆由以达，沙石壅塞，因并浚之。
现代文：苏州、松江的船只都经由这里到达，沙石堵塞其道，因此一起疏通它。
English: Ships from Suzhou and Songjiang arrive here, and sand and stones block their way, so they have to be cleared together.

古文：山阳泾河坝，上接漕河，下达盐城，旧置绞关以通舟，岁久且敝，又恐盗泄水利，遂筑塞河口。
现代文：山阳泾河坝，往上连接漕河，往下到达盐城，原壳，建立绞关来通行船只，年岁太久将要损坏，又担心私自排放水利设施积蓄的水，于是堵塞河口。
English: The Sanyang Yangtze River Dam, which connects the Caohe River upstream and reaches Yancheng, the original shell, has built a dam to allow ships to pass. It will be damaged if it is too old, and it is feared that the water accumulated by the water conservancy facilities will be discharged illegally, thus blocking the estuary.

古文：是岁，从民请，修坝并复绞关。
现代文：这一年，依从百姓的请求，修筑堤坝，并且恢复绞关。
English: This year, in accordance with the request of the people, the dam was built and the suspension bridge was restored.

古文：六年，造宣武门东城河南岸桥。
现代文：正统六年，修建宣武门东边护城河南岸的桥梁。
English: It took six years to build the bridge on the south bank of the moat on the east side of Xuanwu Gate.

古文：修江米巷玉河桥及堤，并浚京城西南河。
现代文：修筑江米巷玉河桥以及堤防，并且疏通京城西南的河道。
English: The Jade River Bridge and embankment along the Yangtze River and the Yangtze River Alley will be built, and the river channel southwest of Beijing will be dredged.

古文：筑丰城沙月诸河堤、芜湖陶辛圩新埂。
现代文：修筑丰城沙月等河道堤防、芜湖陶辛圩新堤。
English: The construction of Fengcheng Shazhou and other river embankments, and the construction of the new embankment of Wuhu Tuxing.

古文：浚海宁官河及花塘河、硖石桥塘河，筑瓦石堰二所。
现代文：疏通海宁官河以及花塘河、破石桥塘河，修筑瓦石水坝二处。
English: Dredge the Haining Guanhe River, Huatang River, and Broken Rock Qiaotang River, and build two shingle dams.

古文：疏南京江洲，杀其水势，以便修筑塌岸。
现代文：疏浚南京长江中的小洲，减缓其水势，以便于修筑溃塌堤岸。
English: Dredging a small island in the Yangtze River in Nanjing to slow down the water level so that a collapsed embankment can be built.

古文：高邮知州韩简言： 官河上下二闸皆圮，河亦不通，且子婴沟塞，减水阴洞闭，致旱涝无所济。
现代文：高邮知州韩简说： 官河上下二闸门都被毁坏，河道也不畅通，而且子婴沟堵塞，减水暗洞闭塞不通，致使旱滂之时没有调济功用。
English: Han Jian of Gaoyou Zhizhou said: The upper and lower two gates of the Guanhe River were destroyed, the river was not smooth, and the baby ditch was blocked, and the water-reducing dark hole was not blocked, resulting in no water supply at the time of drought.

古文：俱乞浚治。 
现代文：都请疏浚整治。 
English: Please dredge and rectify.

古文：诏部核实以行。
现代文：诏令工部核实以后施行。
English: The order will be implemented after verification by the Ministry of Industry and Trade.

古文：七年，修江西广昌江岸、萧山长山浦海塘、彭山通济堰。
现代文：正统七年，修筑江西广昌江边堤岸、萧山长山浦海边堤防、彭山通济堰。
English: In the past seven years, Jiangxi Guangchang River Embankment, Xiaoshan Yangtze River Embankment, and Pengshan Tongji Weir have been built.

古文：筑南京浦子口、大胜关堤，九江及武昌临江塌岸。
现代文：修筑南京浦子口、大胜关堤防，九江及武昌临近长江的溃塌的堤岸。
English: The embankments at Puzigou and Dashengguan in Nanjing and the collapsed embankments along the Yangtze River in Jiujiang and Wuchang will be rebuilt.

古文：浚江陵、荆门、潜江淤沙三十馀里。
现代文：疏通江陵、荆门、潜江淤积泥沙三十多里。
English: More than 30 miles of silted-up sediment have been cleared from the Jiangling, Jingmen and Qianjiang Rivers.

古文：八年修兰溪卸桥浦口堤，弋阳官陂三所。
现代文：八年，修筑兰溪卸桥浦口堤防，弋阳官家陂塘三处。
English: In eight years, the Pukou embankment of the Lanxi Unloading Bridge was built, and three government officials from Shenyang came to Shantang.

古文：浚南京城河。
现代文：疏通南京护城河。
English: Dredging of the Nanjing Moat.

古文：九年，修德州耿家湾等堤岸、杞县离沟堤。
现代文：正统九年，修筑德州耿家湾等处堤岸、杞县离沟堤岸。
English: In the ninth year of orthodoxy, the embankment of Texas Gengjia Bay and other places were built, and the ditch embankment of Handan County was built.

古文：筑容城杜村堤决口。
现代文：堵塞容城杜村堤岸决口。
English: Blocking the break of the embankment in Rongcheng Ducun.

古文：易上虞菱湖土坝为石闸。挑无锡里谷、苏塘、华港、上村、李走马塘诸河，东南接苏州苑山湖塘，北通扬子江，西接新兴河，引水灌田。
现代文：改上虞菱湖土坝为石闸，挖通无锡里谷、苏塘、华港、上村、李走马塘各河道，往东南连接苏州苑山湖塘，往北通到扬子江，往西连接新兴河，导引河水灌溉田地。
English: The earth dam of Shangyu Linghu was changed into a stone gate, and the river channels of Wuxili Valley, Sutang, Huagang, Shangcun and Lihuangmatang were excavated, and the Suzhou Yuanshan Lake was connected to the southeast, the Yangtze River to the north, and the Xinxinghe River to the west, and the river water was guided to irrigate the fields.

古文：浚杞县牛墓冈旧河，武进太平、永兴二河。
现代文：疏通杞县牛墓冈旧河道，武进太平、永兴二河。
English: The dredging of the old river channels of Niu Miao Gang, Wujin Taiping and Yongxing in Handan County.

古文：疏海盐永安河，茶市院新泾、陶泾塘诸河。
现代文：疏通海盐永安河，茶市院新泾、陶泾塘等河道。
English: Dredge the Haiyan Yong'an River, Cha Shi Yuan Xinlu, Tao Yutang and other rivers.

古文：都御史陈镒言： 朝邑多沙硷，难耕。
现代文：都御史陈镒说： 朝邑多沙碱之地，难于耕种。
English: Chen Yao, the Metropolitan Historian, said: Asa-eup is a sandy and alkaline land, which is difficult to cultivate.

古文：县治洛河，与渭水通，请穿渠灌之。 
现代文：其县治在洛河，与渭水相通，请求开通水渠灌注于其中。 
English: Its county seat is in Luohe, which is connected to Surabaya, and it has requested the opening of a water canal to irrigate it.

古文：新安民言： 城南长沟河，西通徐、漕二水，东连雄县直沽，沙土淤塞，请发丁夫疏浚。 
现代文：新安百姓说： 城南长沟河，往西通到徐、漕二水，往东连接雄县直沽，被沙土淤塞，请派遣役夫疏通。 
English: The people of Xin'an said: The Changgou River in the south of the city, which flows westward to Xu, Cao Ershui, and eastward to connect with Xiong County, is silted up with sand. Please send workers to clear it.

古文：海阳民萧瑶言： 县有长溪，源出山麓，流抵海口，周袤潮郡，故登隆等都俱置沟通溉。
现代文：海阳百姓萧瑶说： 县中有长溪，源出山脚，流到入海口，围绕着潮郡，所以登隆等都全部设置沟渠通水灌溉。
English: Xiao Wei, a citizen of Haiyang, said: There are long streams in the county, the source is at the foot of the mountain, flowing to the entrance to the sea, surrounding Chaogun, so all the water channels are set up for irrigation.

古文：惟隆津等都陆野绝水，岁旱无所赖。
现代文：只有隆津等都陆地田野没有水源，每年干旱无所依赖。
English: Only the metropolitan land fields such as Longjin have no water source, and they are not dependent on drought every year.

古文：乞开沟如登隆。 
现代文：请求像登隆那样开通沟渠。 
English: The request is to open a trench like the one in Noboribetsu.

古文：长乐民刘彦梁言： 严湖二十馀里，南接稠溪，西通倒流溪，可备旱溢。又有张塘涵、塘前涵、大塘涵、陈塘港，其利如严湖。
现代文：长乐百姓刘彦梁说： 严湖二十多里，往南连接稠庵溪，往西通到倒流溪，可以防备旱灾和水灾又有张塘涵、塘前涵、大塘涵、陈塘港，它带来的利益与严湖带给百姓的利益一样。
English: Liu Yanliang, a resident of Changle, said: Yanhu is more than 20 miles long. It is connected to the south by Zhuoan Creek, and to the west by Backflow Creek. It can prevent droughts and floods, and has Zhangtanghan, Tangzhanhan, Datanghan, and Chentang Port. The benefits it brings are the same as the benefits Yanhu brings to the people.

古文：乞令有司疏浚。 
现代文：请求命令主管部门疏浚。 
English: The request orders the competent authority to dredge.

古文：广济民言： 县与邻邑黄梅，岁运粮三万石於望牛墩。
现代文：广济百姓说： 县与邻邑黄梅，每年运送军粮三万石到望牛墩。
English: The people of Guangji said: Huangmei County and its neighboring villages transport 30,000 kilos of military grain to Wanganui every year.

古文：小车盘剥，不堪其劳。
现代文：再用小车上下搬运，不能经受其劳苦。
English: And then carry it up and down with a cart. I can't bear the toil.

古文：连城湖港廖家口有沟抵墩前，淤浅不能行船。
现代文：连城湖港廖家口有水沟通到望牛墩前，淤塞水浅，不能通行船只。
English: Liancheng Lake Port Liaojiakou has water communication to the front of Wang Niuqiao, the silting is shallow, and ships cannot pass.

古文：请与黄梅合力浚通，以便水运。 
现代文：请求与黄梅共同出力疏通，以便于水运。 
English: The request and Huangmei jointly output dredging, so as to facilitate water transport.

古文：并从之。
现代文：全都依从他们的请求。
English: The late emperor agreed.

古文：十一年，修洞庭湖堤。
现代文：正统十一年，修筑洞庭湖堤岸。
English: In the eleventh year of orthodoxy, the embankment of Dongting Lake was built.

古文：筑登州河岸。
现代文：修筑登州河岸。
English: Rebuild the Dengzhou riverbank.

古文：浚通州金沙场八里河，以通运渠。
现代文：疏通通州金沙场八里河，使运输渠道畅通。
English: Dredge the Tongzhou Jinshadanbali River to make the transportation channels smooth.

古文：任丘民言： 凌城港去县二十五里，内有定安桥河，北十八里通流，东七里沙塞。
现代文：任丘百姓说： 凌城港距离县城二十五里，内有定安桥河，往北十八里通流水，往东七里被泥沙淤塞。
English: Renqiu people said: Lingcheng Port is 25 miles away from the county seat, including the Ding'an Bridge River, which flows 18 miles to the north and is blocked by mud and sand seven miles to the east.

古文：宜疏通与港相接。入直沽张家湾。 
现代文：应当疏通与港口连接，流入直沽张家湾。 
English: The connection with the port should be unblocked, and the inflow into Zhangjiagang Bay should be improved.

古文：巡抚周忱言： 应天、镇江、太平、宁国诸府，旧有石臼等湖。
现代文：巡抚周忱说： 应天、镇江、太平、宁国等府，原先有石臼等湖。
English: Supervisor Zhou Zhen said: Yingtian, Zhenjiang, Taiping, Ningguo and other prefectures originally had lakes such as Stone Mill.

古文：其中沟港，岁办鱼课。
现代文：其中沟渠小河，每年交纳鱼业赋税。
English: Among them, the fishery tax is paid annually for ditches and small rivers.

古文：其外平圩浅滩，听民牧放孳畜、采掘菱藕，不许种耕。
现代文：外面平圩浅滩，听任百姓放牧繁殖牲畜、采挖菱角莲耦，不许耕种。
English: Outside, there is a flat shoal, and the people are allowed to graze and breed livestock, and to dig rhododendrons, but they are not allowed to farm.

古文：故山溪水涨，有所宣泄。
现代文：所以溪沟洪水泛滥，有地方排放。
English: As a result, streams and ditches are flooded and there are local discharges.

古文：近者富豪筑圩田，遏湖水，每遇泛溢，害即及民，宜悉禁革。 
现代文：近来，有钱有势的人修筑圩田，阻止湖水，每遇泛滥，危害就殃及百姓，应当全部禁止和撤除。 
English: Recently, rich and powerful people have built rice paddies and dams to block the lake. Whenever there is a flood, the harm will affect the people. They should all be banned and removed.

古文：并从之。
现代文：全都依从他们的建议。
English: The late emperor agreed.

古文：十二年，疏平度州大湾口河道，荆州公安门外河，以便公安、石首诸县输纳。
现代文：正统十二年，疏通平度州大湾口河道，剂州公安城门外河道，以便于公安、石首各县缴纳粮食。
English: In the 12th year of the orthodoxy, the Dawankou River in Pingdu Prefecture and the river outside the gate of the public security in Jianzhou were dredged to facilitate the payment of grain by the public security and Shishou counties.

古文：浙江听选官王信言： 绍兴东小江，南通诸暨七十二湖，西通钱塘江。
现代文：浙江听选官王信说： 绍兴束小江，往南通到诸暨七十二湖，往西通到钱塘江。
English: Zhejiang listening officer Wang Xin said: Shaoxing is connected to the Xiaojiang River, southward to Zhuji and the 72nd Lake, and westward to the Qiantang River.

古文：近为潮水涌塞，江与田平，舟不能行，久雨水溢，邻田辄受其害。
现代文：近来被潮水涌来充塞，江水与田地齐平，船不能通行，久雨河水泛滥，相邻的田地便遭受其害。
English: Recently, it has been flooded by tidal surges, the river water is level with the fields, the ship cannot pass, the river water has been flooding for a long time, and the adjacent fields have suffered from it.

古文：乞发丁夫疏浚。 
现代文：请派遣役夫疏浚。 
English: Please send a worker to dredge.

古文：从之。
现代文：依从他的请求。
English: I followed his advice.

古文：十三年，筑宁夏汉、唐坝决口。
现代文：至统十三年，堵塞宁夏汉、唐拦河坝决口。
English: In the 13th year of unification, the Ningxia-Han and Tanglanghe dams were blocked.

古文：疏山西涑水河、南海县通海泉源。
现代文：疏通山西涑水河、南海县通海泉源头。
English: It is necessary to dredge the source of the Lishui River in Shanxi Province and the source of the Tonghai Spring in Nanhai County.

古文：凿宣府城濠，引城北山水入南城大河。
现代文：开凿宣府护城河，导引城北山水流入南城大河。
English: He dug the Xuanfu moat, guiding the landscape north of the city to flow into the Nancheng River.

古文：湖广五开卫言： 卫与苗接，山路峻险。
现代文：湖广五开卫说： 卫与苗地相连，山路陡峭险峻。
English: Hukang Wukai Wei said: Wei is connected to Miao, and the mountain road is steep and precipitous.

古文：去卫三十里有水通靖州江，乱石沙滩，请疏以便输运。 
现代文：离卫三十里有河流通到靖州江，乱石沙滩，请求疏通以便利于运输。 
English: The river flows to the Jingzhou River, a rocky beach, 30 kilometers away from the Wei River. It is requested to be dredged to facilitate transportation.

古文：云南邓川州言： 本州民田与大理卫屯田接壤湖畔，每岁雨水沙土壅淤，禾苗淹没。
现代文：云南邓川州说： 本州岛百姓田地与大理卫屯田在湖畔接壤，每年雨水冲刷泥沙淤积，禾苗被淹没。
English: Yunnan's Dengchuanzhou said: Honshu Island's peasants' fields and Daliwei's fields border the lake. Every year, rainwater washes away the silt and sediment, and the grass seedlings are flooded.

古文：乞命州卫军民疏治。 
现代文：请命令州卫驻军和百姓进行疏浚治理。 
English: Please order the garrison of the State Guard and the people to carry out dredging.

古文：并从之。
现代文：全都依从他们的意见。
English: The late emperor agreed.

古文：十四年，浚南海潘埇堤岸，置水闸。
现代文：正统十四年，疏浚南海潘塥堤岸，建立拦水闸门。
English: In the 14th year of his reign, he dredged the Pan-Yuan dike in the South China Sea and built a sluice gate.

古文：和州民言： 州有姥镇河，上通麻、澧二湖，下接牛屯大河，长七十里许，广八丈。
现代文：和州百姓说： 州内有姥镇河，往上通到麻、澧二湖，往下连接牛屯大河，长七十里左右，宽八丈。
English: And the people of the state said: There is the Uba Town River in the state, which flows up to the Ma and Shiji Lakes, and down to the Niu Tun River. It is about seventy miles long and eight feet wide.

古文：又有张家沟，连铜城闸，通大江，长减姥镇之半，广如之，灌溉降福等七十馀圩及南京诸卫屯田，近年河溃闸圮，率皆淤塞。
现代文：又有张家沟，连接铜城闱，通到大江，长度是姥镇河的一半，宽与其相同，灌溉降福等七十多处圩田及南京各驻军屯田。近年，河堤溃决闸门毁坏，大都被淤塞。
English: There is also Zhangjiagou, which connects the Tongcheng Canal to the Yangtze River. It is half the length of the Uba Town River and has the same width. There are more than 70 irrigation fields and garrisons in Nanjing. In recent years, the gates of the river dike have been destroyed and most of them have been blocked.

古文：请兴役疏浚，仍於姥镇、丰山嘴、叶公坡各建闸以备旱涝。 
现代文：请求兴起工役进行疏浚，仍然在姥镇、丰山嘴、叶公坡各处建立闸门来防备旱涝灾害。 
English: The construction workers were requested to carry out dredging, and floodgates were still built in Uba Town, Fengshanzui, and Yegongpo to prevent drought and flood disasters.

古文：从之。
现代文：依从他的建议。
English: I followed his advice.

古文：景泰元年，筑丹阳甘露等坝。
现代文：景泰元年，修筑丹阳甘露等拦河坝。
English: In the first year of King Taejo, dams such as Danyang Nectar Dam were built.

古文：二年修玉河东、西堤。
现代文：二年，修筑玉河东西两岸河堤。
English: It took two years to build the embankment on both the east and west banks of the Jade River.

古文：浚安定门东城河，永嘉三十六都河，常熟顾新塘，南至当湖，北至扬子江。
现代文：疏通安定门束城河道，以及永嘉三十六都河道，常熟顾新塘，往南到达当湖，往北到达扬子江。
English: and the Yongjia Thirty-Six-Cities River, and the Changshu Gu Xintang River, reaching the Danghu River in the south and the Yangtze River in the north.

古文：三年修泰和信丰堤。
现代文：三年，修筑泰和信丰堤。
English: It took three years to build the Taihexin Feng embankment.

古文：筑延安、绥德决河，绵州西岔河通江堤岸。
现代文：堵塞延安、绥德溃决河口，绵州西岔河通到江边的堤岸。
English: Yan'an and Shunde blocked the mouth of the river, and the Mianzhou Xidi River flowed to the bank of the river.

古文：浚常熟七浦塘，剑州海子。
现代文：疏浚常熟七浦塘，剑州海子。
English: Dredging of Changshu Qiputang, Jianzhou Haizi.

古文：疏孟渎河浜泾十一。
现代文：疏通孟渎河小河沟十一处。
English: Dredge the small ditch of Menghuaghe at eleven places.

古文：工部言： 海盐石塘十八里，潮水冲决，浮土修筑，不能久。 
现代文：工部说： 海盐石堤十八里，被潮水冲破，用疏松的细土修筑，不能持久。 
English: The Ministry of Works said: The sea salt and stone dike is eighteen miles long, it was broken by the tide, and it was built with loose fine soil. It cannot last.

古文：诏别筑石塘捍之。
现代文：下诏另外修筑石堤来护卫它。
English: He also ordered the construction of a stone dike to protect it.

古文：四年，浚江阴顺塘河十馀里，东接永利仓大河，西通夏港及扬子江。
现代文：景泰四年，疏浚江阴顺塘河十多里，往东连接永利仓大河，往西通到夏港及扬子江。
English: In four years, Jing Tai dredged more than ten miles of the Shuntang River in Jiangyin Province, connecting the Wynn Cang River to the east and the Xia Gang River and the Yangtze River to the west.

古文：云南总兵官沐璘言： 城东有水南流，源发邵甸，会九十九泉为一，抵松花坝分为二支：一绕金马山麓，入滇池；一从黑窑村流至云泽桥，亦入滇池。
现代文：云南总兵官沐璘说： 城束有水往南流，水源发端于邵甸，汇合九十九条泉水为一河，到达松花坝分为二支河：一支环绕金马山山脚，流入滇池；一支从黑窑村流到云泽桥，也流入滇池。
English: Yunnan's military commander-in-chief, Mu Xi, said: "There is water flowing south from the city bund. The source of the water originates in Shaodian, and the confluence of ninety-nine springs is a river. When it reaches Songhua Dam, it is divided into two rivers: one surrounds the foot of Mount Jinma and flows into Dianchi Pond; the other flows from Heyao Village to Yunze Bridge and also flows into Dianchi Pond.

古文：旧於下流筑堰，溉军民田数十万顷，霖潦无所泄。
现代文：原先在下游修筑拦河堰，灌溉军队和百姓的田地数十万顷，久雨积水没有地方排放。
English: Originally, a barrage was built downstream to irrigate hundreds of thousands of hectares of fields of the army and the people, and there was no place to discharge long-term rainwater.

古文：请令受利之家，自造石闸，启闭以时。 
现代文：请让受到利益的人家，自己建造石闸门，按照一定的时间开关。 
English: Please let the beneficiaries build their own stone gates and switch them on and off according to a certain time.

古文：报可。
现代文：报告得到许可。
English: Reimbursement agreed.

古文：五年疏灵宝黎园庄渠，通鸿泸涧，溉田万顷。
现代文：五年，疏通垒童鍪园庄渠，通到鸿泸涧，灌溉田地上万顷。
English: In five years, the canal of Dangdangyuan Village will be dredged to reach Hongye, irrigating 10,000 hectares of farmland.

古文：六年浚华容杜预渠，通运船入江，避洞庭险。
现代文：六年，疏通华容杜预渠，通运轮船只进入长江，避开洞庭的危险。
English: In six years, the Huarong River culvert was dredged, and ships entered the Yangtze River to avoid the danger of Dongting.

古文：修容城白沟河杜村口、固安杨家等口决堤。
现代文：修筑容城白沟河杜村口、固安杨家等河口的溃决堤岸。
English: Rebuild the breached embankments at the mouths of the Yongcheng Baigou River, Du Cunkou, Guan Yangjia and other estuaries.

古文：七年，尚书孙原贞言： 杭州西湖旧有二闸，近皆倾圮，湖遂淤塞。
现代文：景泰七年，尚书孙原贞说： 杭州西湖原来有两座闸门，近来全都倒塌，湖于是淤塞。
English: In the seventh year of Jingtai, Shangshu Sun Yuanzhen said: Hangzhou West Lake originally had two gates, but recently they have all collapsed, and the lake is silted up.

古文：按宋苏轼云 杭本江海故地，水泉碱苦。
现代文：按宋朝苏轼说： 杭州本来就是江海故地，泉水咸苦。
English: According to Song Dynasty's Su Shi, "Hangzhou is originally the birthplace of the Jianghai River. The spring water is salty and bitter.

古文：自唐李泌引湖水入城为六井，然后井邑日富，不可许人佃种。 
现代文：自从唐李泌导引湖水流入城内焉六处水井，然后，城乡一天天富裕，不准许人们租种。
English: Since Tang Lixiu guided the lake water to flow into six wells in the city, the urban and rural areas have become increasingly affluent, and people are not allowed to rent seeds.

古文：周淙亦言： 西湖贵深阔。 
现代文：周淙也说： 西湖的可贵在于水深湖宽。
English: Zhou Wei also said: The value of the West Lake lies in the depth and width of the lake.

古文：因招兵二百，专一捞湖。
现代文：于是，招集兵士二百人，专门捞取湖中淤泥。
English: As a result, 200 soldiers were called in to extract the silt from the lake.

古文：其后，豪户复请佃，湖日益填塞，大旱水涸。
现代文：这以后，有钱有势的人家又请求租种，其湖一天天更加淤塞，遇到大旱湖水干涸。
English: After that, the rich and powerful families asked to rent seeds again, and the lake became more and more silted up, and the water dried up in the face of drought.

古文：诏郡守赵与亹开浚，芰荷茭荡悉去，杭民以利。
现代文：韶令郡守赵与葱开挖疏浚，其中菱角、莲藕、茭白全部除去，杭州百姓因此而获利。
English: He ordered the county governors Zhao and Wei to excavate and dredge, in which all the lozenges, lotus shoots, and white gourds were removed, and the people of Hangzhou benefited from this.

古文：此前代经理西湖大略也。
现代文：这是前代人治理西湖的大致办法。
English: This is the general approach of the previous generation to manage the West Lake.

古文：其后，势豪侵占无已，湖小浅狭，闸石毁坏。
现代文：这以后，被有钱有势的人侵占不停，其湖变小水浅狭窄，石闱门被毁坏。
English: After that, it was continuously occupied by rich and powerful people, its lake became shallow and narrow, and the stone gate was destroyed.

古文：今民田无灌溉资，官河亦涩阻。
现代文：现在，百姓田地无法提供灌溉，官府的河道也不通畅。
English: At present, the fields of the common people cannot be irrigated, and the rivers of the government offices are impassable.

古文：乞敕有司兴浚，禁侵占以利军民。 
现代文：请敕令有关部门发动疏浚，严禁侵占以有利于军队和百姓。 
English: Please order the relevant departments to launch dredging, and strictly prohibit encroachment to benefit the army and the people.

古文：从之。
现代文：依从他的意见。
English: I followed his advice.

古文：天顺二年，修彭县万工堰，灌田千馀顷。
现代文：天顺二年，修筑彭县万工堰，灌溉田地一千多顷。
English: In the second year of Tianshun, the construction of the Peng County multi-purpose weir was completed, irrigating more than one thousand hectares of fields.

古文：五年，佥事李观言： 泾水出泾阳仲山谷，道高陵，至栎阳入渭，袤二百里。
现代文：五年，愈事李观说： 泾水出于泾阳仲山谷，经过高陵，到达梁阳流入渭河，南北相距二百里。
English: In the fifth year, Li Guan said: Surabaya water flows from the middle valley of Poyang, passes through Gaoling, reaches Liangyang and flows into the Surabaya River. The distance between north and south is 200 miles.

古文：汉开渠溉田，宋、元俱设官主之。
现代文：汉朝开通沟渠灌溉田地，宋、丞二朝都设立官员掌管这事。
English: The Han Dynasty opened ditches to irrigate fields, and the Song and Joseon Dynasties both set up officials to manage this.

古文：今虽有瓠口郑、白二渠，而堤堰摧决，沟洫壅潴，民弗蒙利。 
现代文：现在虽然有瓠口郑、白二沟渠，然而堤坝被毁坏，田间水道被堵塞，百姓不能蒙受利益。 
English: Although there are now ditches at the mouth of the Zheng and Bai Ditches, the dams have been destroyed and the water channels in the fields have been blocked, so the people cannot benefit from them.

古文：乃命有司浚之。
现代文：于是命令主管官吏疏通它。
English: He then ordered the officials in charge to clear it.

古文：八年，永平民言： 漆河绕城西南流入海，城趾皆石，故水不能决。
现代文：天顺八年，永平百姓说， 漆河环绕城墙西南流入大海，城墙地基都是石头，所以，河水不能使其渍决。
English: In the eighth year of Tianshun, the Yongping people said that the Litchi River flowed around the southwest of the city wall and flowed into the sea. The foundation of the city wall was stone, so the river water could not wash it away.

古文：其馀则沙土易溃，前人於东北筑土堤，西南甓岸。
现代文：其余则是沙土容易溃决，前人在其东北修筑土堤，西南修筑砖石堤岸。
English: The rest is sandy soil, which is easily breached. The predecessors built earth embankments in the northeast and masonry embankments in the southwest.

古文：今岁久日塌，宜作堤於东流，横以激之，使合西流，庶无荡析患。 
现代文：现在，时间久了一天天垮塌，应当在向东的水流修筑堤防，横向来阻拦水流，使其汇合向西的水流，差不多就没有了荡涤离析的灾难。 
English: Now, a day after the collapse, a dike should be built in the eastward water flow to block the water flow in the lateral direction and make it converge with the westward water flow, almost eliminating the disaster of washing and separation.

古文：都御史项忠言： 泾阳之瓠口郑、白二渠，引泾水溉田数万顷，至元犹溉八千顷。
现代文：都御史项忠说： 泾阳的瓠口郑、白二渠道，导引泾水灌溉田地几万顷，到元朝时还灌溉八千顷。
English: Zheng Shiqiangzhong, the governor of the capital, said: the two channels of Zhangkou Zheng and Bai in Fenyang were the best, guiding the irrigation of tens of thousands of hectares of fields with irrigation water, and even irrigating eight thousand hectares in the Yuan Dynasty.

古文：其后渠日浅，利因以废。
现代文：这以后，渠道一天天变浅，有利条件因此而废弃。
English: After that, the channels become shallower day by day, and the favourable conditions disappear.

古文：宣德初，遣官修凿，亩收四三石。
现代文：宣德初年，派遣官吏修治开通，每亩收粮三四石。
English: In the first year of Xuande, officials were dispatched to improve and open the road, collecting three to four koku of grain per mu.

古文：无何复塞，渠旁之田，遇旱为赤地。
现代文：没有多久又被堵塞，渠道两旁的田地，遇到干旱就变为赤地。
English: It didn't take long for it to be blocked again, and the fields on both sides of the canal turned red in the face of drought.

古文：泾阳、醴泉、三原、高陵皆患苦之。
现代文：泾阳、醴泉、三原、高陵全都受其灾患。
English: Shenyang, Jiuquan, Mihara and Gaoling were all affected by the disaster.

古文：昨请於泾水上源龙潭左侧疏浚，讫旧渠口，寻以诏例停止。
现代文：过去，请求在泾水上游源头龙潭左侧进行疏浚，直到旧渠口，不久，皇帝诏令全部停止。
English: In the past, there was a request to dredge the left side of Longtan, the upstream source of Surabaya, up to the mouth of the old canal. Soon, the emperor issued a decree to stop all dredging.

古文：今宜毕其役。
现代文：现在应当完成其工役。
English: It should now complete its work.

古文：西安城西井泉碱苦，饮者辄病。
现代文：西安城西井下泉水既咸又苦，饮用此水的人就生病。
English: The spring water under the west well of Xi'an City is both salty and bitter, and people who drink this water get sick.

古文：龙首渠引水七十里，修筑不易，且利止及城东。
现代文：龙首渠引水七十里，修筑很不容易，并且，有利之处只到达城束。
English: The Dragon's Head Canal drains water for seventy miles. It is not easy to build, and the only advantage is that it reaches the city.

古文：西南皂河去城一舍许，可凿，令引水与龙首渠会，则居民尽利。 
现代文：西南的皂河距城三十里左右，可以凿通，让引来的水与龙首渠汇合，那么，居住在周围的百姓全都获得好处。 
English: The southwestern Soap River is about 30 miles away from the city. It can be chiseled through, so that the water drawn in can meet the Dragon's Head Canal. Then, the people living around will all benefit.

古文：邳州知州孟琳言： 榆行诸社俱临沂河，久雨岸崩二十八处，低田尽淹。
现代文：邳州知州孟琳说： 榆行各社全都靠近沂河，长时间下雨使堤岸毁坏二十八处，低处田地全被淹没。
English: Menglin of Chizhou, Zhangzhou, said: All the communities in Minhang are close to the Minhe River. The long-term rain has destroyed 28 embankments, and all the low-lying fields have been flooded.

古文：乞与修筑。
现代文：请求给予修筑。 
English: The request was granted.

古文：并从之。
现代文：全都依从他们的请求。
English: The late emperor agreed.

古文：成化二年，修寿州安丰塘。
现代文：成化二年，修筑寿州安丰塘。
English: In the second year of Chenghua, Shoushu Anfengtang was built.

古文：四年，疏石州城河。
现代文：四年，疏通石州护城河。
English: In four years, the dredging of the Shishu Moat was completed.

古文：六年，修平湖周家泾及独山海塘。
现代文：六年，修筑平湖周家泾及独山海岸。
English: In six years, the construction of Pinghu Zhujiajie and the Dokshan coast.

古文：七年，潮决钱塘江岸及山阴、会稽、萧山、上虞，乍浦、沥海二所，钱清诸场。
现代文：七年，潮水冲决钱塘江堤岸及山阴、会稽、萧山、上虞等地，和乍浦、沥海二所，以及塑遭各场。
English: In the seventh year, the tides washed away the banks of the Qiantang River and the places of Shanying, Huiqi, Xiaoshan, Shangyu, and so on, as well as the two places of Hachapu and Lichai, and the various places of Shuxian.

古文：命侍郎李颙修筑。
现代文：命令侍郎李颐进行惨筑。
English: He ordered his manservant, Li Xi, to carry out the disastrous construction.

古文：八年，堤襄阳决岸。
现代文：八年，在襄阳溃决河岸筑堤。
English: In eight years, the river bank in Yangyang was breached and a dike was built.

古文：十年，廷臣会议：江浦北城圩古沟，北通滁河浦子口；城东黑水泉古沟，南入大江。
现代文：十年，朝廷大臣会合商议，江浦城北圩旧沟渠，往北通到滁河浦子口；城柬黑水泉旧沟渠，往南流入大江。
English: Ten years later, the Imperial Council of Ministers held a meeting to discuss the old ditch in the northern part of Jiangpu Town, which ran north to the Puzikou of the Min River; the old ditch in the Black Spring of Chengkham, which flowed south into the Dajiang River.

古文：二沟相望，冈垅中截。
现代文：两条沟渠相对，山冈从中拦截。
English: Two ditches opposite, Yamaoka intercepted from them.

古文：宜凿通成河，旱引涝泄。
现代文：应当开通成为河道，旱时引水灌注，滂时开闸排放。
English: It should be opened to become a river channel, with water being diverted for irrigation when it is dry, and the sluice gate being opened for discharge when it is flooded.

古文：从之。
现代文：依从他的主张。
English: I followed his advice.

古文：十一年，浚杭州钱塘门故渠，左属涌金门，建桥闸以蓄湖水。
现代文：成化十一年，疏浚杭州钱塘门旧渠道，往左连接涌金门，建立桥闸来蓄积湖水。
English: In the eleventh year of Chenghua, the old channel of Hangzhou Qiantang Gate was dredged to connect to the left with Chungjin Gate, and a bridge gate was built to accumulate lake water.

古文：巡抚都御史牟俸言： 山东小清河，上接济南趵突诸泉，下通乐安沿海高家港盐场。
现代文：巡抚都御史牟俸说： 山东小清河，往上连接济南趵突各处泉水，往下通到乐安海边高家港盐场。
English: Shandong Xiaoqing River flows up to connect with the springs in Jinan and Hangtou, and down to the salt fields of Gaojia Port on the coast of Le'an.

古文：大清河，上接东平坎河诸泉，下通滨州海丰、利津，沿海富国盐场。
现代文：大清河，往上连接束平坎河各处泉水，往下通到滨州海丰、利津，海边富国盥场。
English: The Daqing River connects the springs of the Shu-Pingkan River upstream, and flows down to Binzhou, Haifeng, Lijin, and the seaside Fuguo.

古文：淤塞，苦盘剥，雨水又患淹没。
现代文：河道淤塞，苦于搬运装卸，又担忧下雨被水淹没。
English: The river is silted up, people are struggling to move, load and unload, and they are worried about being flooded by the rain.

古文：劝农参政唐虞浚河造闸，请令兼治水利。 
现代文：劝农参政唐演疏通河道建立闸门，请命令他同时整治水利工程。 
English: To persuade farmers to participate in politics, Tang Yuen dredged the river channel and built a sluice gate. Please order him to rectify the water conservancy project at the same time.

古文：诏可。
现代文：诏令许可。
English: The royal decree was approved.

古文：十二年，巡按御史许进言： 河西十五卫，东起庄浪，西抵肃州，绵亘几二千里，所资水利多夺於势豪。
现代文：成化十二年，巡按御史许进说： 河西十五卫，束起于庄浪，西到肃州，连绵不断将近二千里，所凭借的水利设施多数被有钱有势的人所强占。
English: In the twelfth year of Chenghua, the inspector general of history Xu Jin said: The 15th Wei Dynasty in the west of the river, stretching from Zhuanglang in the west to Suizhou in the west, stretches for nearly two thousand miles, and most of the water conservancy facilities it relied on were occupied by the rich and powerful.

古文：宜设官专理。 
现代文：应当设置官吏专门进行治理。 
English: Officials should be set up specifically to administer it.

古文：诏屯田佥事兼之。
现代文：诏令屯田愈事兼管这件事。
English: He ordered Tonden to take charge of the matter.

古文：十四年，俸言： 直隶苏、松与浙西各府，频年旱涝，缘周环太湖，乃东南最洼地，而苏、松尤最下之冲。
现代文：成化十四年，牟俸说： 直隶苏州、松江与浙西各府，连年旱滂，因为四周环绕太湖，是东南最低下的地方，而且，苏州、松江更是最低下的地方。
English: In the 14th year of Chenghua, Mou said: The prefectures of Suzhou, Songjiang and West Zhejiang, which are directly attached to Suzhou, have been experiencing droughts for years. Because they are surrounded by Taihu Lake, they are the lowest places in the southeast. Moreover, Suzhou and Songjiang are the lowest places.

古文：故每逢积雨，众水奔溃，湖泖涨漫，淹没无际。
现代文：所以每次遭逢久雨，众水奔流冲破堤防，湖泊上涨泛滥，淹没的土地无边无际。
English: So every time it rains for a long time, torrents of water break through the dike, lakes rise and flood, and the flooded land is endless.

古文：按太湖即古震泽，上纳嘉、湖、宣、歙诸州之水，下通娄、东、吴淞三江之流，东江今不复见，娄、淞入海故迹具存。
现代文：按，太湖就是原先的震泽，往上容纳嘉、湖、宣、歙各州之河水，往下通到娄、束、吴淞三江之水，束江现在不能再见到，娄江、吴淞江流入大海的故道都还存在。
English: According to the legend, Taihu Lake was the original source of the earthquake. Upstream, it accommodated the river water of Jiahu, Huzhou, Xuan and Yunnan provinces. Downstream, it led to the water of the Yunnan, Sichuan and Wuxi rivers. The Sichuan River can no longer be seen now, but the old ways of the Yunnan River and the Wuxi River flowing into the sea still exist.

古文：其地势与常熟福山、白茆二塘俱能导太湖入江海，使民无垫溺，而土可耕种，历代开浚具有成法。
现代文：其地势与常熟福山、白茆二塘都能导引太湖水流入大江大海，使百姓不再淹没在水中，而且土地可以耕种，历代开掘疏浚都有现成的办法。
English: Its topography, together with that of the Changshu-Fushan and Baiyun-Nitang, can guide the water of the Taihu Lake into the big rivers and seas, so that the people are no longer submerged in water, and the land can be cultivated. There are ready-made methods for excavation and dredging in all ages.

古文：本朝亦常命官修治，不得其要。
现代文：本朝也常常命令官吏修建治理，但没有得到治理的关键。
English: This dynasty also often ordered officials to build governance, but did not get the key to governance.

古文：而滨湖豪家尽将淤滩栽莳为利。
现代文：而靠近湖边有钱有势的人家完全把淤积成的滩地用来栽种谋取利益。
English: But the rich and powerful families close to the lake completely use the silted up beach to grow crops for profit.

古文：治水官不悉利害，率於泄处置石梁，壅土为道，或虑盗船往来，则钉木为栅。
现代文：治水官吏不知道利与害，都在排水处建立石桥，堆积泥土成为道路，有的担心盗贼的船只往来，就用木绦钉成栅栏。
English: Water control officials do not know the benefits and harms, they all build stone bridges at the drainage point, pile up dirt to become roads, and some are worried about the ship traffic of thieves, and use wooden rivets to make fences.

古文：以致水道堙塞，公私交病。
现代文：因此导致水道堵塞，公家和私人同时受害。
English: As a result, the water supply is blocked, and both the public and private sectors suffer.

古文：请择大臣深知水利者专理之，设提督水利分司一员随时修理，则水势疏通，东南厚利也。 
现代文：请求选择大臣中深知水利的人专门治理它，设立提督水利分司一员随时修建治理，则水势疏通，东南多有刹。 
English: The request is to select a minister who is familiar with water conservancy to specially manage it, and set up an admiral of the water conservancy division to build and manage it at any time, then the water potential will be dredged, and there will be more floods in the southeast.

古文：帝即令俸兼领水利，听所浚筑。
现代文：皇帝就命令牟俸兼任治理水利之职，听凭疏浚修筑。
English: The emperor ordered Mufeng to take on the role of water conservancy management and construction by dredging.

古文：功成，乃专设分司。
现代文：工程完成，就专门设立分司。
English: Once the project is completed, a special subdivision will be set up.

古文：十五年，修南京内外河道。
现代文：成化十五年，修筑南京内外河道。
English: It took 15 years to complete the construction of waterways in and out of Nanjing.

古文：十八年，浚云南东西二沟，自松华坝黑龙潭抵西南柳坝南村，灌田数万顷。
现代文：十八年，疏浚云南东西二沟，从松华坝黑龙潭到西南柳坝南村，灌溉田地几万顷。
English: In 18 years, the dredging of Yunnan's east and west ditches, from Songhua Dam Heilongtan to Southwest Liuba South Village, irrigated tens of thousands of hectares of fields.

古文：修居庸关水关、城券及隘口水门四十九，楼铺、墩台百二。
现代文：修筑居庸关水关、城门拱券及隘口水门四十九处，楼铺、墩台一百零二处。
English: Forty-nine residential gates, water gates, city gate archways and narrow gateways were built, and 102 buildings and platforms were constructed.

古文：二十年，修嘉兴等六府海田堤岸，特选京堂官往督之。
现代文：二十年，修筑嘉兴等六府海田堤岸，特地派遣京堂官前往督促这件事。
English: In the past 20 years, seawalls in six prefectures, including Jiaxing, have been built, and a Beijing church official was specially dispatched to urge this.

古文：二十二年，浚南京中下二新河。
现代文：二十二年，疏通南京中下二新河。
English: In 1922, the two new rivers in the middle and lower parts of Nanjing were dredged.

古文：弘治三年，从巡抚都御史丘鼐言，设官专领灌县都江堰。
现代文：弘治三年，依从巡抚都御史丘鼐的计策，设立官职专门治理灌县都江堰。
English: In the third year of Hongzhi, in accordance with the strategy of the governor of the capital Shi Qiu, an official position was established to specifically govern Guan County, Dujiangyan.

古文：六年，敕抚民参政朱瑄浚河南伊、洛，彰德高平、万金，怀庆广济，南阳召公等渠，汝宁桃陂等堰。
现代文：六年，敕令抚民参政朱坛疏通河南伊河、洛河，彰德高平、万金，怀庆广济，南阳召公等渠道，汝宁桃陂等水堰。
English: In the sixth year, Zhu Tan was ordered by the Emperor to encourage the people to participate in politics. He dredged the Yihe River, Luohe River, Zhangdegaoping, Wanjin, Huaiqing Guangji, Nanyang Zhao Gong and other channels in Henan Province, as well as water weirs such as Yuning Taojun.

古文：七年，浚南京天、潮二河，备军卫屯田水利。
现代文：弘治七年，疏浚南京天、潮二河，满足卫所屯田水利。
English: In the seventh year of the Hongzhi era, the Nanjing Tian River and the Chao Er River were dredged to meet the requirements of the Tonden Water Conservancy.

古文：七月命侍郎徐贯与都御史何鉴经理浙西水利。
现代文：七月，命令侍郎徐贯与都御史何鉴治理浙西水利。
English: In July, he ordered his aide-de-camp, Xu Ran, and the governor of the capital, Shi He Jian, to manage the western Zhejiang water conservancy.

古文：明年四月告成。
现代文：第二年四月宣告成功。
English: It was declared a success in April of the following year.

古文：贯初奉命，奏以主事祝萃自随。
现代文：徐贯刚刚接受使命时，奏请令主事祝萃跟随自己。
English: When Xu Ran had just accepted the mission, he asked the host to follow him.

古文：萃乘小舟究悉源委。
现代文：祝萃乘着小船探求了解水的源委。
English: Congratulations to the Committee for Exploring and Understanding the Sources of Water by Boat.

古文：贯乃令苏州通判张旻疏各河港水，潴之大坝。
现代文：徐贯然后命令苏州通判张曼疏通各河港之水，蓄积于大坝。
English: Xu Ran then ordered Suzhou Tongzhan Zhang Man to dredge the water of the rivers and harbors and accumulate it in the dam.

古文：旋开白茆港沙面，乘潮退，决大坝水冲激之，沙泥刷尽。
现代文：随即开挖白茆港浮沙，趁潮水退落，打开大坝之水冲击它，泥沙被冲刷干净。
English: Subsequently, the floating sand of Baiyun Port was excavated, and the water of the dam was opened to impact it when the tide receded, and the mud and sand were washed away.

古文：潮水荡激，日益阔深，水达海无阻。
现代文：潮水震荡冲击，一天天加宽加深，河水达于大海不受阻碍。
English: The tidal shock, widening and deepening day by day, the river reaches the sea unimpeded.

古文：又令浙江参政周季麟修嘉兴旧堤三十馀里，易之以石，增缮湖州长兴堤岸七十馀里。
现代文：又命令浙江参政周季麟修筑嘉兴旧堤三十多里，用石堤代替土堤，增修湖州长兴堤岸七十多里。
English: He also ordered Zhou Jilin, a politician from Zhejiang Province, to build more than 30 miles of the old Jiaxing dike, replace the earthen dike with a stone dike, and add more than 70 miles of the Jiaxing dike.

古文：贯乃上言： 东南财赋所出，而水患为多。
现代文：徐贯于是上奏说： 东南是财赋征收所出之地，然而水灾太多。
English: Xu Gang then spoke up and said: Southeast is the place from which wealth is collected, but there are too many floods.

古文：永乐初，命夏原吉疏浚。
现代文：永乐初年，命令夏原吉疏浚。
English: In the first year of Yongle, Xia Yuanji was ordered to dredge.

古文：时以吴淞江氵艳沙浮荡，未克施工。
现代文：当时，因为吴淞江浮沙流动，不能施工。
English: At that time, construction was not possible due to the flow of floating sand in the Wuxi River.

古文：迨今九十馀年，港浦愈塞。
现代文：到现在九十多年，河港沟渠更加堵塞。
English: Now, more than 90 years later, the river and port ditches are even more clogged.

古文：臣督官行视，浚吴江长桥，导太湖散入淀山、阳城、昆承等湖泖。
现代文：臣监督官吏巡行视察，疏通吴江长桥，导引太湖分散流入淀山、阳城、昆承等湖荡。
English: The minister supervised the inspection tour of officials, dredged the Wujiang Yangtze River Bridge, and guided the scattered inflow of Taihu Lake into Yodanshan, Yangcheng, Kuncheng and other lakes.

古文：复开吴淞江并大石、赵屯等浦，泄氵殿山湖水，由吴淞江以达於海。
现代文：又开通吴淞江同大石、趟屯等沟渠，排放淀山湖湖水，经由吴淞江然后到达大海。
English: In addition, ditches such as the Wuxi River, the Dashi River, and the Wudun River were opened to discharge the water of Lake Dianshan, which then flowed through the Wuxi River and reached the sea.

古文：开白茆港白鱼洪、鲇鱼口，泄昆承湖水，由白茆港以注於江。
现代文：开通白茆港白鱼洪、鲇鱼口，排放昆承湖湖水，经由白茆港然后灌注到大江。
English: Opened the Baiyun Port, Baiyonghong and Baiyongkou, discharged the water of Kuncheng Lake, and then poured it through Baiyun Port to Dajiang.

古文：开斜堰、七铺、盐铁等塘，泄阳城湖水，由七丫港以达於海。
现代文：开通斜堰、七铺、盐铁等池塘排放阳城湖湖水，经由七丫港然后到达大海。
English: Yangcheng Lake water is discharged from the inclined weir, the seven ponds, the salt pond and other ponds, and then reaches the sea through the seven ports.

古文：下流疏通，不复壅塞。
现代文：下游疏通，不再堵塞。
English: Dredging downstream, no more blockage.

古文：乃开湖州之溇泾，泄西湖、天目、安吉诸山之水，自西南入於太湖。
现代文：于是，开通湖州的漠泾，排放西湖、天目、安吉各山之水，从西南流入太湖。
English: As a result, the deserts of Huzhou were opened, and the water from the mountains of West Lake, Tianmu and Anji was discharged and flowed into Taihu Lake from the southwest.

古文：开常州之百渎，泄溧阳、镇江、练湖之水，自西北入於太湖。
现代文：开通常州的百渎，排放溧阳、镇江、练湖之水，从西北流入太湖。
English: It drains water from Poyang, Zhenjiang and Lianhu and flows into Taihu Lake from the northwest.

古文：又开诸陡门，泄漕河之水，由江阴以入於大江。
现代文：又打开各陡门，排放漕河之水，经由江阴然后流入大江。
English: It also opened the steep gates, discharging the water of the reservoir, passing through the river Yin and then flowing into the big river.

古文：上流亦通，不复堙滞。 
现代文：上游也畅通，不再堵塞滞留。 
English: The upstream is also unimpeded and no longer blocked.

古文：是役也，修浚河、港、泾、渎、湖、塘、陡门、堤岸百三十五道，役夫二十馀万，祝萃之功多焉。
现代文：这次工程，修建和疏通河、港、泾、渎、湖、塘、陡门、堤岸一百三十五道，使用民夫二十多万，祝萃的功劳大啊。
English: This project involves the construction and dredging of 135 rivers, harbors, estuaries, canals, lakes, ponds, steep gates, and embankments, employing more than 200,000 people. Congratulations on your great achievement.

古文：巡抚都御史王珣言： 宁夏古渠三道，东汉、中唐并通。
现代文：巡抚都御史王殉说： 宁夏往昔有水渠三道，束汉、中唐全都畅通。
English: Wang Jie, the governor of the capital, said: In the past, Ningxia had three canals, and the Sokhan and the Middle Tang were all smooth.

古文：惟西一渠傍山，长三百馀里，广二十馀丈，两岸危峻，汉、唐旧迹俱堙。
现代文：只有西边一道水渠傍着大山，长三百多里，宽二十多丈，两岸危险高峻，汉、唐旧迹全被淹没。
English: There is only one water channel on the west side, next to a large mountain. It is more than three hundred miles long, more than twenty meters wide, and dangerously steep on both sides. Han and Tang Dynasty monuments have all been submerged.

古文：宜发卒浚凿，引水下流。
现代文：应当派遣兵士疏通，引水下流。
English: Soldiers should be sent to dredge and divert the water downstream.

古文：即以土筑东岸，建营堡屯兵以遏寇冲。
现代文：即用泥土修筑柬岸，建造营堡驻扎军队来防止盗贼侵犯。
English: They built the Cambodian coast with mud, built camp forts and stationed troops to prevent thieves from encroaching.

古文：请帑银三万两，并灵州六年盐课，以给其费。 
现代文：请支库银三万两，以及灵州六年的盐税，用来供给其耗费。 
English: Please ask the branch treasury for thirty thousand taels of silver, as well as six years of salt tax in Lingzhou, to be used to supply its consumption.

古文：又请於灵州金积山河，开渠灌田，给军民佃种。
现代文：又请求在灵州金积山河口，开通水渠灌溉田地，给予军队和百姓租种。
English: He also requested that water channels be opened to irrigate fields at the estuary of Jinji Mountain in Lingzhou, and that the army and the people be given the right to lease seeds.

古文：并从之。
现代文：全都依从他们的请求。
English: The late emperor agreed.

古文：十八年，修筑常熟塘坝，自尚湖口抵江，及黄、泗等浦，新庄等沙三十馀处。
现代文：弘治十八年，修筑常熟堤坝，从尚湖口到长江，及黄、泗等浦，新庄等沙滩三十多处。
English: In the 18th year of Hongzhi, the Changshu dam was built, from the Shanghu mouth to the Yangtze River, as well as more than 30 beaches such as Huanglong, Shantou and Xinzhuang.

古文：浚杭州西湖。
现代文：疏浚杭州西湖。
English: Dredging of Hangzhou West Lake.

古文：正德七年，修广平滏阳河口堤岸。
现代文：正德七年，修筑广平滏阳河口堤岸。
English: Zhengde spent seven years building the embankment at the mouth of the Guangping and Shenyang Rivers.

古文：十四年浚南京新江口右河。
现代文：十四年，疏浚南京新江口右边河道。
English: It has been 14 years since the dredging of the right-hand river channel at the mouth of the Nanjing New River.

古文：十五年，御史成英言： 应天等卫屯田在江北滁、和、六合者，地势低，屡为水败。
现代文：十五年，御史成英说： 应天等卫屯田在长江北边的滁、和、六合等县，地势低下，多次被洪水毁坏。
English: In the fifteenth year, Mishi Shing Ying said: In the north of the Yangtze River, Ying Tian et Wei Tun Tian is located in the counties of Handan, He and Liuhe. The terrain is low and has been repeatedly destroyed by floods.

古文：从金城港抵浊河达乌江三十馀里，因旧迹浚之，则水势泄而屯田利。 
现代文：从金城港至浊河到达迭辽三十多里，顺着旧河道疏浚它，那么水势就能排放而屯田有利。 
English: From Jincheng Port to the Minhe River, it is more than 30 miles to Deliiao, and it is dredged along the old river channel. Then the water potential can be discharged, and the tundra is advantageous.

古文：诏可。
现代文：诏令许可。
English: The royal decree was approved.

古文：嘉靖元年，筑浚束鹿、肥乡、献、魏堤渠。
现代文：嘉靖元年，修筑疏浚束鹿、肥乡、献、魏的堤防和沟渠。
English: In the first year of the Jiajing Dynasty, dredged dykes and ditches were built in Zonglu, Feixiang, Xian and Wei.

古文：初，苏、松水道尽为势家所据。
现代文：原来，苏州、松江的水道全被有钱有势的人家所占据。
English: Originally, the waterways of Suzhou and Songjiang were all occupied by rich and powerful people.

古文：巡抚李充嗣画水为井地，示开凿法，户占一区，计工刻日。
现代文：巡抚李充嗣将水道划分成井田一样的地区，告示开通的办法，每户人家占据一个地区，计算工作量限定时间。
English: Superintendent Lee Mitsutsugu divided the waterway into areas similar to rice paddies, announced the method of opening, each household occupied one area, and calculated the workload time limit.

古文：造浚川爬，用巨筏数百，曳木齿，随潮进退，击汰泥沙。
现代文：制造浚川爬，用巨大木筏几百个，拖着木齿，随着潮水进退，敲打除去泥沙。
English: They dredge the river, using hundreds of huge wooden rafts, dragging the wooden teeth, with the tide ebbing and flowing, beating to remove the silt.

古文：置小艇百馀，尾铁帚以导之。
现代文：购置小船一百多只，船尾安装铁扫帚来疏浚它。
English: More than a hundred small boats were purchased, and iron brooms were installed at the stern to dredge it.

古文：浚故道，穿新渠，巨浦支流，罔不灌注。
现代文：疏通旧河道，开通新水渠，大的水沟支流，无不使水灌注。
English: Dredging of old river channels, opening of new canals, large ditch tributaries, all of which are filled with water.

古文：帝嘉其劳，赉以银币。
现代文：皇帝嘉奖他的功劳，用银两彩帛赐予他。
English: The emperor commended him for his service and presented him with a silver candelabra.

古文：二年，修德胜门东、朝阳门北城垣河道，筑仪真、江都官塘五区。
现代文：二年，修建德胜门束、朝阳门北城墙护城河河道，修筑仪真、江都官塘五处。
English: In the second year, the construction of Deshengmenzhu, Chaoyangmen north city wall moat river channel, and the construction of five places in Yizhen and Jiangdu Guangtang.

古文：十年，工部郎中陆时雍言： 良乡卢沟河，涿州琉璃、胡良二河，新城、雄县白沟河，河间沙河，青县滹沱河，下流皆淤。
现代文：嘉靖十年，工部郎中陆时雍说： 良乡卢沟河，涿州琉璃、胡良二河，新城、雄县白沟河，河问沙河，青县滹沱河，下游全都淤塞。
English: In the 10th year of the Jiajing Dynasty, Lu Zhonglu Shiyong of the Ministry of Industry and Trade said: The Lugou River in Liangxiang, the Liuzhou River, the Huliang River, the Xincheng River, the Xiong County Baigou River, the Hefen Sha River, the Qing County Minhe River, and the downstream are all silted up.

古文：宜以时浚，使达於海。 
现代文：应当按季筛疏浚，使通达大海。 
English: It should be dredged on a seasonal basis to provide access to the sea.

古文：诏巡抚议之。
现代文：诏令巡抚商议这件事情。
English: The magistrate ordered that the matter be discussed.

古文：十一年，太仆卿何栋勘畿封河患有二。
现代文：十一年，太仆卿何栋勘测京畿内河水造成的灾害有二。
English: In the eleventh year, there were two disasters caused by the river water in Gyeonggi Province.

古文：一论滹沱河。
现代文：一是评论滹沱河。
English: The first is to comment on the Minhe River.

古文：其一言： 真定鸭、沙、磁三河，俱发源五台。
现代文：其中之一说： 真定的鸭、沙、磁三河，都发源于五台山。
English: One of them said: True duck, sand, magnetic three rivers, all originated from Mount Wutai.

古文：会诸支水，抵唐河兰家圈，合流入河间。
现代文：汇合各支流，到达唐河蔺家圈，汇合流入河间。
English: The confluence of the tributaries, reaching the Tang River Shijiazhuang circle, confluence into the river.

古文：东南经任丘、霸州、天津入海，此故道也。
现代文：往东南经过任丘、霸州、天津流入大海，这是故道。
English: It flows southeast through Renqiu, Bazhou and Tianjin into the sea, which is the old way.

古文：河间东南高，东北下，故水决兰家口，而肃宁、新安皆罹其害。
现代文：河间东南高，东北低，所以河水冲破蔺家口，因此，肃宁、新安都遭受其灾祸。
English: The river is high in the southeast and low in the northeast, so the river bursts through the mouth of the Xingjiakou. As a result, Suning and Xin'an have suffered from the disaster.

古文：宜筑决口，浚故道。
现代文：应当填塞决口，疏浚故道。
English: It is necessary to fill the breach and dredge the old road.

古文：涿州胡良河，自拒马分流，至州东入浑河。
现代文：涿州胡良河，从拒马分流，到州束流入浑河。
English: Luzhou's Huliang River flows into the Hun River from Shoma diversion to Zhouzhuang.

古文：良乡琉璃河，发源磁家务，潜入地中，至良乡东入浑河。
现代文：良乡琉璃河，发源于磁家务，成暗流入地中，到良乡往东流入浑河。
English: The Liangxiang Liuri River originates from the magnetic housework, flows into the earth in the dark, and flows into the Hunhe River to the east of Liangxiang.

古文：比者浑河壅塞，二河不流。
现代文：近来浑河堵塞，二河之水不流。
English: Recently, the Hun River was blocked, and the water of the two rivers did not flow.

古文：然下流淤沙仅四五里，请亟浚之。 
现代文：然而，下游淤积的泥沙只有四五里，请求赶快疏浚它。 
English: However, the silted-up sediment downstream is only four or five miles long, and it is requested to dredge it as soon as possible.

古文：部覆允行。
现代文：工部回复允许施行。
English: The Ministry of Works replied that it was permissible.

古文：郎中徐元祉受命振灾，上言： 河本以泄水，今反下壅；淀本以潴水，今反上溢。
现代文：郎中徐元祉接受使命赈济灾民，上奏说： 河道本来是用来排放河水，现在反而堵塞；湖泊本来是用来蓄积湖水，现在反而向上泛滥。
English: His son-in-law, Xu Yuan Zhi, who accepted the mission to help the victims of the disaster, said: The river was originally used to discharge river water, but now it is blocked; the lake was originally used to accumulate lake water, but now it is flooding upwards.

古文：故畿辅常苦水，顺天利害相半，真定利多於害，保定害多於利，河间全受其害。
现代文：所以，京都附近常常苦于水灾，顺天水带来的利与害各占一半，到真定则利多于害，保定害多于利，河间全受其害。
English: Therefore, the area around Kyoto often suffers from floods, and the benefits and harms brought by downpours account for half each. In the case of Shinding, the benefits outweigh the harms, in the case of Baoding, the harms outweigh the benefits, and in the case of Kawama, all areas are harmed.

古文：弘、正间，尝筑长堤，排决口，旋即溃败。
现代文：弘治、正德年间，曾经修筑长堤，消除决口，随即溃堤毁坏。
English: In the years of Hongzhi and Zhengde, a long dike was built to eliminate the breach, and then the dike was destroyed.

古文：今惟疏浚可施，其策凡六。
现代文：现在，只有疏浚可以施行，其办法有六条。
English: Now, only dredging can be carried out, and there are six ways to do it.

古文：一浚本河，俾河身宽邃。
现代文：一是疏通河干，使河床宽阔深邃。
English: First, the river bed is widened and deepened by dredging the river bed.

古文：九河自山西来者，南合滹沱而不侵真定诸郡，北合白沟而不侵保定诸郡。
现代文：九河从山西来的，往南汇合滹沱而不侵犯真定各郡，往北汇合白沟而不侵犯保定各郡。
English: The nine rivers coming from Shanxi converge in the south and flow into the Yangtze without encroaching on the counties of Zhending, and converge in the north and flow into the Baigou without encroaching on the counties of Baoding.

古文：此第一义也。
现代文：这是首要的办法。
English: This is the primary approach.

古文：一浚支河。
现代文：二是疏浚支河。
English: The second is the dredging of tributaries.

古文：令九河之流，经大清河，从紫城口入；经文都村，从涅槃口入；经白洋淀，从兰家口入；经章哥洼，从杨村河入。
现代文：使九河之水，经过大清河，从紫城口流入；经过文都村，从涅盘口流入；经过白洋淀，从蔺家口流入；经过章哥洼，从杨村河流入。
English: So that the water of the nine rivers, through the Daqing River, flows into the cormorant from the entrance of Zijicheng; through the Wendu Village, flows into the mouth of Niepan; through Baiyangdian, flows into the mouth of Shijia; through Zhanggoua, flows into the Yangcun River.

古文：直遂以纳细流，水力分矣。
现代文：直的通道用来容纳细小水流，水力就分散了。
English: Straight channels are used to accommodate small water flows, and the force of the water is dispersed.

古文：一浚决河。
现代文：三是疏浚溃决河道。
English: The third is to dredge the river channel.

古文：九河安流时，本支二河可受，遇涨则岸口四冲。
现代文：九河安静流动之时，主流支流可以容纳，遇到涨水，堤岸河口就遭受四方冲击。
English: When the nine rivers flow quietly, the mainstream tributaries can be accommodated, but when the water rises, the dike estuary will be subjected to four-way impact.

古文：宜每冲量存一口，复浚令合成一渠，以杀湍急，备淫溢。
现代文：应当在每一冲击之地酌量保留一个河口，再疏浚使其合成为一条水渠，用来减缓湍急的水流，防止泛滥。
English: An estuary should be retained at each impact site and then dredged to form a channel to slow the rush of water and prevent flooding.

古文：一浚淀河。
现代文：四是疏浚浅水湖泊。
English: The fourth is the dredging of shallow lakes.

古文：令淀淀相通，达於本支二河，使下有所泄。
现代文：让湖泊与湖泊相通，到达主流和支流，使下游有地方排放。
English: Allow lakes to communicate with lakes, to reach the mainstream and tributaries, so that there are local discharges downstream.

古文：一浚淤河。
现代文：五是疏浚淤塞河道。
English: Fifth is the dredging of silted river channels.

古文：九河东逝，悉由故道，高者下，下者通。
现代文：九阿往东奔流，全部经由故道，高的地方使其低下，低下之处使其畅通。
English: The Jiua flows eastward, all through the old road, the high places make it lower, and the lower places make it smooth.

古文：占据曲防者抵罪。
现代文：占据并乱设堤防的人，应受到相应的惩罚。
English: Those who occupy and illegally build dykes should be punished accordingly.

古文：一浚下河。
现代文：六是疏浚下游河道。
English: The sixth is to dredge the downstream channel.

古文：九河一出青县，一出丁字沽，二流相匝於苑家口。
现代文：九河一出青县，一出丁字沽，二流互相环绕于苑家旦。
English: The nine rivers flow out of Qingxian, out of Dingzhaojie, and the two streams surround each other in Yuanjiadan.

古文：故施工必自苑家口始，渐有成效，然后次第举行，庶减诸郡水害。 
现代文：所以，施工必须从苑家口开始，渐渐地就有成效，然后依次施行，也许可以减轻各郡的水害。 
English: Therefore, the construction must start from Yuanjiakou, and gradually it will be effective, and then it will be implemented sequentially, and it may be possible to reduce the water damage in each county.

古文：帝嘉纳之。
现代文：皇帝赞许并采纳他的主张。
English: The emperor appreciated and adopted his opinion.

古文：明年，香河郭家庄自开新河一道，长百七十丈，阔五十丈，近旧河十里馀。
现代文：第二年，香河郭家庄自开新河一道，长一百七十丈，宽五十丈，靠近旧河十里多。
English: In the second year, Xianghe Guojiazhuang opened a new river, with a length of 170 meters, a width of 50 meters, and a distance of more than 10 kilometers near the old river.

古文：诏河官亟缮治。
现代文：诏令治河官吏赶快整治。
English: He ordered the river officials to rectify the situation as soon as possible.

古文：十三年，巡抚都御史周金言： 兰家圈决口，塞之则东溢，病河间；不塞则东流渐淤，病保定。
现代文：嘉靖十三年，巡抚都御史周金说： 蔺家圈决口，堵塞它就往东泛滥，危害河问；不堵塞就往东流而逐渐淤塞，危害保定。
English: In the 13th year of Jiajing, the governor of the capital, Zhou Jin, said: "If the Xingjia Circle is cut off, if it is blocked, it will flood to the east, endangering the river; if it is not blocked, it will flow to the east and gradually clog, endangering Baoding."

古文：宜存决口而浚广新河，使水东北平流，无壅涸患。 
现代文：应当保留决口然后挖宽新河，使河水往东北平稳流行，没有堵塞干涸的灾害。 
English: It is necessary to retain the breach and then dig a wide new river, so that the river water flows smoothly to the northeast, without blocking the dried-up disasters.

古文：从之。
现代文：依从他的主张。
English: I followed his advice.

古文：二十四年，浚南京后湖。
现代文：嘉靖二十四年，疏通南京后湖。
English: In the 24th year of Jiajing, the dredging of Nanjing Houhu began.

古文：初，胡体乾按吴，以松江泛溢，进六策： 曰开川，曰浚湖，曰杀上流之势，曰决下流之壑，曰排潮涨之沙，曰立治田之规。
现代文：原先，胡体干巡按吴江，因为松江泛滥，进献六种治理办法：叫做开通河道、疏浚湖底；削减上游的水势、开通下游的水道、排除潮水泛滥时淤积的泥沙、建立治理田地的法度。
English: Originally, the Hu body dry inspection was based on the Wujiang River, but because of the flooding of the Songjiang River, six treatment methods were proposed: it is called opening the river channel and dredging the lake bottom; reducing the upstream water potential, opening the downstream water channel, removing the silt accumulated during tidal flooding, and establishing a law to manage the fields.

古文：是年，吕光洵按吴，复奏苏、松水利五事：
现代文：这年，吕光洵巡按吴江，又上奏苏州、松江水利工程五件事：
English: In this year, Lu Guangya toured the Wujiang River and reported on the progress of the Suzhou and Songjiang water conservancy projects:

古文：一曰广疏浚以备潴泄。
现代文：一是广泛疏浚，以预备蓄水和排水。
English: First, extensive dredging to prepare for water storage and drainage.

古文：三吴泽国，西南受太湖诸泽，水势尤卑。
现代文：三吴是水乡之地，西南容纳太湖各湖泽，水势尤其低下。
English: Sam Wu is a land of water townships. The southwest accommodates the lakes of Taihu Lake, and the water potential is particularly low.

古文：东北际海，冈陇之地，视西南特高。
现代文：东北靠近大海，冈陇之地，比照西南特别高。
English: The northeast is close to the sea, the land of oaks, and is particularly high compared to the southwest.

古文：高苦旱，卑苦涝。
现代文：地势高苦于干旱，地势低苦于水滂。
English: The highlands suffer from drought, the lowlands suffer from floods.

古文：昔人於下流疏为塘浦，导诸湖水北入江，东入海，又引江潮流衍於冈陇外。潴泄有法，水旱无患。
现代文：从前，人们在下游开挖成池塘沟渠，导引各湖水往北流入长江，往东流入大海，又导引入江潮水广泛流布于冈陇之外蓄水排水有法度，发生水灾旱灾没有忧虑。
English: In the past, people dug ditches into ponds in the downstream to guide the waters of various lakes to flow northward into the Yangtze River and eastward into the sea, and also to guide the introduction of tidal water to circulate widely outside the ridges. There are regulations for water storage and drainage, and there is no concern about floods and droughts.

古文：比来纵浦横塘，多堙不治，惟黄浦、刘河二江颇通。
现代文：近来，纵横的沟渠池塘，多被堵塞不去修治，祇有黄浦、刘河二江很畅通。
English: Recently, the vertical and horizontal ditches and ponds are mostly blocked and not repaired. Only the Huangpu River and the Liuhe River are very smooth.

古文：然太湖之水源多势盛，二江不足以泄之。
现代文：然而，太湖之水水源多水势盛大，二江不能满足于排放它。
English: However, the water source of Taihu Lake is abundant and powerful, and Erjiang cannot be satisfied with discharging it.

古文：冈陇支河又多壅绝，无以资灌溉。
现代文：冈陇支河又多被堵塞断流，不能用来供给灌溉。
English: In addition, many branches of the Ganga River are blocked and cut off, and cannot be used to supply irrigation.

古文：於是高下俱病，岁常告灾。
现代文：于是，地势高和地势低都受害，每年经常报告灾祸。
English: As a result, both high- and low-lying areas are affected, and disasters are frequently reported every year.

古文：宜先度要害，於氵殿山等茭芦地，导太湖水散入阳城、昆承、三泖等湖。
现代文：应当首先测量关键之处，在淀山等茭白芦苇之地，导引太湖水分散流入阳城、昆承、三泖等湖。
English: It is necessary to measure the key points first, and guide the dispersed inflow of Taihu Lake water into Yangcheng, Kuncheng, Samcheok and other lakes in places with white reeds such as Yodoyama.

古文：又开吴淞江及大石、赵屯等浦，泄淀山之水以达於海。
现代文：又开通吴淞江及大石、趟屯等沟渠，排放淀山之水使到达大海。
English: In addition, ditches such as the Wushijiang River, Dashi River, and Weten River were opened, discharging water from Mount Yodo to the sea.

古文：浚白茆、鲇鱼诸口，泄昆承之水以注於江。
现代文：疏通白茆、鲇鱼各河口，排放昆承的水使灌注于大江。
English: Dredge the estuaries of paddlefish and sturgeon, and discharge water from Kuncheng so that it can be poured into the river.

古文：开七浦、盐铁等塘，泄阳城之水以达於江。
现代文：开通七浦、盐铁等水塘，排放阳城之水使到达大江。
English: Water reservoirs such as Qipo and Yan Tie have been opened, discharging Yangcheng's water to the Yangtze River.

古文：又导田间之水，悉入小浦，以纳大浦，使流者皆有所归，潴者皆有所泄。
现代文：又导引田问之水，全部流入小沟渠，然后引入大沟渠，使流动的水都有地方归依，蓄积的水都有地方排放。
English: In addition, all the water from the fields is led to flow into small ditches, and then into large ditches, so that the flowing water has a place to return, and the accumulated water has a place to discharge.

古文：则下流之地治，而涝无所忧矣。
现代文：那磨下游之地得到治理水滂发生也用不着忧虑了。
English: Now that the downstream areas of the mill have been treated, there is no need to worry about the occurrence of leeches.

古文：乃浚艾祁、通波以溉青浦，浚顾浦、吴塘以溉嘉定，浚大瓦等浦以溉昆山之东，浚许浦等塘以溉常熟之北，浚臧村等港以溉金坛，浚澡港等河以溉武进。
现代文：于是，疏浚艾祁、通波以便灌溉青浦，疏浚颅浦、吴塘以便灌溉嘉定，疏浚大瓦等沟渠以便灌溉昆山之束，疏浚许浦等水塘以便灌溉常熟之北，疏浚臧村等港汊以便灌溉金坛，疏浚澡港等河道以便灌溉武进。
English: As a result, the dredging of Aiwu and Tongbo to irrigate Qingpu, the dredging of Jianpu and Wutang to irrigate Jiading, the dredging of ditches such as large tiles to irrigate Kunshan Bund, the dredging of reservoirs such as Xupu to irrigate the north of Changshu, the dredging of port dikes such as Dangcun to irrigate Jintan, and the dredging of river channels such as Xiaogang to irrigate Wujin.

古文：凡陇冈支河堙塞不治者，皆浚之深广，使复其旧。
现代文：凡是冈陇支河被堵塞没有修治的地方，都把它挖深加宽，使恢复其原先的水道。
English: Wherever the Ganga tributary was blocked and not repaired, it was dug deep and widened to restore its original waterway.

古文：则上流之地亦治，而旱无所忧矣。
现代文：那么上游之地也得到治理，干旱发生也用不着忧虑了。
English: Then the upstream areas will also be managed, and there will be no need to worry about droughts.

古文：此三吴水利之经也。
现代文：这是三吴水利工程的根本途径。
English: This is the fundamental approach of the Sangwu Water Conservancy Project.

古文：一曰修圩岸以固横流。
现代文：二是修筑圩岸，用来阻塞泛滥之水。
English: The second is to build a dike to block the overflowing water.

古文：苏、松、常、镇东南下流，而苏、松又常、镇下流，易潴难泄。
现代文：苏州、松江、常熟、镇江处于东南下游，而苏州、松江又处于常熟、镇江下游，水流容易聚积难以排放。
English: Suzhou, Songjiang, Changshu and Zhenjiang are located in the lower southeastern reaches, while Suzhou and Songjiang are located in the lower reaches of Changshu and Zhenjiang, and the water flow is easy to accumulate and difficult to discharge.

古文：虽导河浚浦引注江海，而秋霖泛涨，风涛相薄，则河浦之水逆行田间，冲啮为患。
现代文：虽然疏浚河道和沟渠引水灌注于江海，然而，秋天霖雨河水泛滥，风浪相搏击。则河渠之水逆流于田问，冲击侵蚀造成灾难。
English: Although the dredged river channels and ditches diverted water and poured it into the river, however, the autumn rains and floods flooded the river, and the wind and waves fought against each other. The water from the canals flowed back to Tianwen, and the impact erosion caused the disaster.

古文：宋转运使王纯臣尝令苏、湖作田塍御水，民甚便之。
现代文：宋转运使王纯臣曾经令苏州、湖州百姓修筑田埂抵挡洪水，百姓感到非常有利。
English: During the Song Dynasty, Wang Chunchen ordered the people of Suzhou and Huzhou to build flood barriers, which greatly benefited the people.

古文：司农丞郏亦云： 治河以治田为本。 
现代文：司农丞郊直也说： 治理河道应把治理田地作为根本。 
English: Sub-director of the Ministry of Agriculture and Rural Affairs also said: the management of waterways should be based on the management of fields.

古文：故老皆云，前二三十年，民间足食，因馀力治圩岸，田益完美。
现代文：年老的人都说，前二三十年，百姓有充足的粮食，以余力来治理圩岸，田地更加完美。
English: The old people said that in the first two or three decades, the people had enough grain, and they used their spare energy to cultivate the fields, and the fields were more perfect.

古文：近皆空乏，无暇修缮，故田圩渐坏，岁多水灾。
现代文：近来，全都空虚匮乏，没有空闲进行修治，所以水田圩岸渐渐毁坏，每年多遭受水灾。
English: Recently, they are all empty and deficient, and there is no free time for cultivation, so the paddy fields and banks are gradually destroyed, and they are often flooded every year.

古文：合敕所在官司专治圩岸。
现代文：应敕令地方主管官吏专门治理圩岸。
English: The local competent officials should be ordered by the emperor to specially administer the coast.

古文：岸高则田自固，虽有霖涝，不能为害。
现代文：圩岸高水田自然就会巩固，即使有霖雨水滂也不会造成灾害。
English: The rice paddies of Minhanggao will naturally consolidate, and even if there is rain or hail, it will not cause any disasters.

古文：且足制诸湖之水咸归河浦中，则不待决泄，自然湍流。
现代文：而且，足以控制各湖之水全部回到河渠之中，则还没有溃决排泄，自然会水流湍急。
English: Moreover, it is enough to control the water of each lake to return to the river channel, but it has not been discharged, and the water flow will naturally be rapid.

古文：而冈陇之地，亦因江水稍高，又得亩引以资灌溉，不特利於低田而已。
现代文：然而，冈陇之地，也因为江水稍微高于它，又得按田地引水用来供给灌溉，不只是有利于低处田地而已。
English: However, in the foothills, because the river water is slightly higher than it, water has to be diverted according to the fields to provide irrigation, which is not only beneficial to the low-lying fields.

古文：一曰复板闸以防污氵殿。
现代文：三是恢复板闸，用来防止淤积。
English: The third is to restore the sluice gate to prevent siltation.

古文：河浦之水皆自平原流入江海，水慢潮急，以故沙随浪涌，其势易淤。
现代文：河渠之水都从平原流入江海，河水缓慢潮水急速，所以，泥沙随着波浪涌来，其势容易淤积。
English: The water of the canal flows from the plain into the river, the river water is slow and the tide is rapid, so the sediment comes with the waves, and its potential is easily silted up.

古文：昔人权其便宜，去江海十里许夹流为闸，随潮启闭，以御淤沙。
现代文：从前，人们根据具体情况，在距江海十里左右夹河建造闸门，随着潮水涨落而开关，以防御淤积泥沙。
English: In the past, people built sluice gates according to the specific situation, about ten miles away from the river and the sea, and switched them with the tide to prevent silting.

古文：岁旱则长闭以蓄其流，岁涝则长启以宣其溢，所谓置闸有三利，盖谓此也。
现代文：当年岁干旱就长期关闭以便蓄积水流，当年岁水滂就长期开启以便排放多余的水，人们所说的建立闸门有三个好处，大概说的就是这些。
English: The floodgates were closed for a long time in the years of drought in order to accumulate water flow, and the sluice gates were opened for a long time in the years of drought in order to discharge excess water. People said that there were three benefits to setting up floodgates, and this is roughly what they said.

古文：近多堙塞，惟常熟福山闸尚存。
现代文：近年来多被堵塞，只有常熟福山闸还存在。
English: In recent years, most of them have been blocked, and only the Changshu Fushan Gate still exists.

古文：故老以为河浦入海之地，诚皆置闸，自可历久不壅。
现代文：年老的人认为河渠流入大海之地，确实都应当建立闸门，自然可以经历长久而不壅塞。
English: The old man thought that where canals flowed into the sea, locks should indeed be built, so that the river could naturally flow for a long time without obstruction.

古文：一曰量缓急以处工费。
现代文：四是考虑缓急，以便处理工程费用。
English: The fourth is to consider the priority in order to deal with the project costs.

古文：一曰重委任以责成功。
现代文：五是重视委任，以便责求成功。
English: The fifth is to attach importance to the appointment, so as to strive for success.

古文：诏悉如议。
现代文：诏令全部依照他的主张办。
English: All the imperial edicts were issued in accordance with his wishes.

古文：光洵因请专委巡抚欧阳必进。
现代文：吕光洵因此请求专门委任巡抚欧阳必进。
English: Lu Guangyao therefore requested the special appointment of the governor Ouyang Bijin.

古文：从之。
现代文：依从他的请求。
English: I followed his advice.

古文：二十六年，给事中陈斐请仿江南水田法，开江北沟洫，以祛水患，益岁收。
现代文：二十六年，给事中陈斐请求仿照长江以南水田种植的办法，开通长江以北的田间水道，以便消除水灾，增加每年的收成。
English: In 2006, Chen Fei requested to open a field waterway north of the Yangtze River, following the example of planting rice fields south of the Yangtze River, in order to eliminate floods and increase the annual harvest.

古文：报可。
现代文：回复说可以。
English: Reimbursement agreed.

古文：三十八年，总督尚书杨博请开宣、大荒田水利。
现代文：嘉靖三十八年，总督尚书杨博请求开发宣、大灌溉边荒田地的水利工程。
English: In the 38th year of Jiajing, Governor Shangshu Yangbo requested the development of publicity, large irrigation and water conservancy projects in the wasteland.

古文：从之。
现代文：依从他的请求。
English: I followed his advice.

古文：巡抚都御史翁大立言： 东吴水利，自震泽浚源以注江，三江导流以入海，而苏州三十六浦，松江八汇，毗陵十四渎，共以节宣旱涝。
现代文：巡抚都御史翁大立说： 束吴水利工程，从震泽疏通水源使灌注于江，三江导引水流使流入大海，而苏州的三十六条水渠，松江的八处水泽，昆陵的十四条沟渠，全都用来节制和宣泄水流防止旱涝灾害。
English: Shuangwu Water Conservancy Project, the water source is diverted from the tremors to the river, the three rivers guide the water flow to the sea, and the thirty-six canals in Suzhou, the eight water lakes in Songjiang, and the fourteen canals in Kunling are all used to control and vent the water flow to prevent drought and flood disasters.

古文：近因倭寇冲突，汊港之交，率多钉栅筑堤以为捍御，因致水流停潴，淤滓日积。
现代文：近来，因为倭寇侵犯，在汊港的交汇处，大多钉上栅栏修筑堤防将其作为捍御，于是，导致水流停聚，淤渣一天天积累。
English: Recently, due to the encroachment of wokou, at the intersection of Da Nang, most of them have nailed fences and built dikes to defend them. As a result, the water flow has stagnated and silt has accumulated day by day.

古文：渠道之间，仰高成阜。
现代文：渠道之间，向上增高成为小山。
English: Between the channels, the upward rise becomes a hill.

古文：且具区湖泖，并水而居者杂莳茭芦，积泥成荡，民间又多自起圩岸。
现代文：而且，具区湖荡，挨着水边居住的人都栽种茭白芦苇，堆积泥土成为洼地，百姓中间又多自行兴建圩岸。
English: Moreover, in some areas around the lake, people living near the water planted reeds and piled up soil to form depressions, and many people built their own banks.

古文：上流日微，水势日杀。
现代文：上游的水一天天细微，水势一天天削减。
English: The water in the upstream is getting thinner and thinner day by day, and the water potential is decreasing day by day.

古文：黄浦、娄江之水又为舟师所居，下流亦淤。
现代文：黄浦、娄江之水又被水军所占据，下游也淤塞。
English: The waters of the Huangpu and Li River were occupied by naval forces, and the downstream was also silted up.

古文：海潮无力，水利难兴，民田渐硗。
现代文：海潮没有力量，水利难以兴建，百姓田地渐渐桡瘠。
English: The sea tide has no power, water conservancy is difficult to build, and people's fields are gradually silting up.

古文：宜於吴淞、白茆、七浦等处造成石闸，启闭以时。
现代文：应当在吴淞、白茆、七浦等处造成石闸门，按照一定的时间开关。
English: A stone gate should be built in Wuxi, Baiyun, Qipu and other places, and it should be opened and closed according to a certain time.

古文：挑镇江、常州漕河深广，使输挽无阻，公私之利也。 
现代文：将镇江、常州漕河挖深挖宽，使运送物资不受阻碍，这是对官府和私人都有利的事。 
English: It is beneficial to both the government and the private sector to dig the Zhenjiang River and the Changzhou Caohe River deeper and wider so that the transportation of materials is not hindered.

古文：诏可。
现代文：诏令许可。
English: The royal decree was approved.

古文：四十二年，给事中张宪臣言： 苏、松、常、嘉、湖五郡水患叠见。
现代文：嘉靖四十二年，给事中张宪臣说： 苏、松、常、嘉、湖五郡水灾重复出现。
English: In the 42nd year of Jiajing, Zhang Xianchen said in a report: Floods repeatedly occurred in the five counties of Su, Song, Chang, Jia and Hu.

古文：请浚支河，通潮水；筑圩岸，御湍流。
现代文：请求疏通支河，通潮水；修筑圩岸，抵御急流。
English: Request to dredge the tributary, pass the tidal water; build a pier, resist the rapids.

古文：其白茆港、刘家河、七浦、杨林及凡河渠河荡壅淤沮洳者，悉宜疏导。 
现代文：其中自茆港、刘家河、七浦、杨林以及凡是水道河流平坦淤塞低湿之处，全都应当疏通。 
English: Among them, the areas from Da Nang, Liu Jiahe, Qipu, Yanglin and all the places where the waterways are flat, silted and low-moisture should all be cleared.

古文：帝以江南久苦倭患，民不宜重劳，令酌浚支河而已。
现代文：皇帝认为江南长久苦于倭寇的祸害，对百姓不应当加重劳役，命令酌量疏通支河罢了。
English: The emperor believed that the south of the Yangtze River had long suffered from the scourge of Japanese piracy, and that the labor service should not be made more difficult for the people. He ordered that the branch of the river should be dredged as much as possible.

古文：四十五年，参政凌云翼请专设御史督苏、松水利。
现代文：四十五年，参政凌云翼请求专门设立御史监督苏州、松江水利工程。
English: In 1945, Ling Yunyi, a politician, requested the establishment of a special commission to supervise the Suzhou and Songjiang water conservancy projects.

古文：诏巡盐御史兼之。
现代文：诏令巡盐御史兼任这一职务。
English: He also held the post of patrolling salt inspector.

古文：隆庆三年，开湖广竹筒河以泄汉江。
现代文：隆庆三年，开挖湖广竹筒河来排放汉江之水。
English: In the third year of Longqing, the Hukang Bamboo Tube River was excavated to discharge the water of the Han River.

古文：巡抚都御史海瑞疏吴淞江下流上海淤地万四千丈有奇。
现代文：巡抚都御史海瑞疏通吴淞江下游上海淤塞之处一万四千多丈。
English: Shihai Rui, the governor of the capital, dredged more than 14,000 meters of silt in the lower reaches of the Wuling River in Shanghai.

古文：江面旧三十丈，增开十五丈，自黄渡至宋家桥长八十里。
现代文：江面原先宽三十丈，增开十五丈，从黄渡到宋家桥长八十里。
English: The original width of the river was 30 meters, but it has been widened by 15 meters, and it is 80 miles long from Huangdu to Songjiaqiao.

古文：明年春，瑞言： 三吴入海之道，南止吴淞，北止白茆，中止刘河。
现代文：第二年春天，海瑞说： 三吴入海的水道，在南边的只有吴淞，在北边的只有白茆，在中间的只有刘河。
English: In the spring of the following year, Hai Rui said, "In the waterway of the three Wus entering the sea, in the south there is only the Wusong, in the north there is only the Baiyun, and in the middle there is only the Liuhe.

古文：刘河通达无滞，吴淞方在挑疏。
现代文：刘河畅通无阻，吴淞正在疏浚。
English: The Liuhe River is flowing smoothly, while the Wuyi River is being dredged.

古文：土人请开白茆，计浚五千馀丈，役夫百六十四万馀。 
现代文：本地人请求开通白茆，估计疏浚五千多丈，需役夫一百六十四万多。 
English: Local people have requested the opening of the chalk dike, and it is estimated that more than 5,000 meters of dredging will be required, requiring more than 1.64 million laborers.

古文：又言： 吴淞役垂竣，惟东西二坝未开。
现代文：又说： 吴淞工程将近竣工，只有东西二坝没有开通。
English: He also said: The Wuxi project is nearly completed, only the East and West Dams have not been opened.

古文：父老皆言昆山夏驾口、吴江长桥、长洲宝带桥、吴县胥口及凡可通流下吴淞者，逐一挑毕，方可开坝。 
现代文：老年人都说昆山夏驾口、吴江长桥、长洲寅带桥、吴县胥口及凡是可以通行水流下到吴淞的河道，应当一处一处地挖通，纔可以开通东西二坝。 
English: Elderly people all said that the Kunshan Xiajiakou, the Wujiang Yangtze River Long Bridge, the Yangtze River Yangtze River Bridge, the Wuxian Yangtze River estuary, and all the river channels that can be used for water to flow down to Wuxi should be excavated one by one. The Yangtze River can open the East and West Dams.

古文：并从之。
现代文：全都依从他们的意见。
English: The late emperor agreed.

古文：是年筑海盐海塘。
现代文：这年，修筑海盐海岸。
English: This year, the construction of the sea salt coast began.

古文：越四年，从巡抚侍郎徐栻议，复开海盐秦驻山，南至澉浦旧河。
现代文：过了四年，依从巡抚侍郎徐拭的主张，又开通海盐秦驻山，往南到达澉浦旧河道。
English: Four years later, in accordance with the opinion of Xu Wu, the steward of the patrol, the Haiyan Qinzhuang Mountain was opened, and the old Qinpo River was reached to the south.

古文：万历二年，筑荆州采穴，承天泗港、谢家湾诸决堤口。
现代文：万历二年，堵塞剂州采穴，承天泗港、谢塞变各处溃决堤岸的缺口。
English: In the past two years, the plugging agent has been mined in Zhouzhou, and the gaps in the embankment have been breached everywhere in Chengdian Port and Xiejie Port.

古文：复筑荆、岳等府及松滋诸县老垸堤。
现代文：又修筑剂、岳等府及松滋各县的旧垸堤。
English: In addition, the construction agent, Yue and other prefectures and Songzhi counties of the old dike.

古文：四年，巡抚都御史宋仪望言： 三吴水势，东南自嘉、秀沿海而北，皆趋松江，循黄浦入海；西北自常、镇沿江而东，皆趋江阴、常熟。
现代文：万历四年，巡抚都御史宋仪望说： 三墨水势，东南从嘉、秀沿着海边向北流，全都直奔松江，顺着黄浦流入大海；西北从常州、镇江沿着长江向东，全都直奔江阴、常熟。
English: In the fourth year of Wanli, the governor of the capital, Song Yibang, said: "Three ink and water potentials, southeast from Jiashu and Xiu along the coast to the north, all go straight to the Songjiang River and flow into the sea along the Huangpu River; northwest from Changzhou and Zhenjiang along the Yangtze River to the east, all go straight to Jiangyin and Changshu.

古文：其中太湖潴蓄，汇为巨浸，流注庞山、渎墅、淀山、三泖，阳城诸湖。
现代文：其中太湖水蓄积，汇合成为巨大的湖泽，流入庞山、演墅、淀山、三泖、阳城各湖。
English: Among them, the water of Taihu Lake accumulates, merges into a huge lake, and flows into the lakes of Pangshan, Xuanwu, Yodongshan, Sanlu and Yangcheng.

古文：乃开浦引湖，北经常熟七浦、白茆诸港入於江，东北经昆山、太仓穿刘家河，东南通吴淞江、黄浦，各入於海。
现代文：于是，开通沟渠导引湖水，往北经过常熟七浦、白茆各港口流入长江，往东北经过昆山、太仓通过刘家河，往东南通到吴淞江、黄浦，各自流入大海。
English: As a result, a ditch was opened to guide the lake water, which flowed into the Yangtze River to the north through the ports of Changshu Qipo and Baekdu, to the northeast through Kunshan and Taicang through the Liujiahe, and to the southeast to the Wuxi River and Huangpu, each of which flowed into the sea.

古文：诸水联络，四面环护，中如仰盂。
现代文：各条河水互相衔接，四面环绕护卫，中间如同仰置的水盂。
English: The various rivers are connected to each other, surrounded by guards on all sides, and in the middle they rise up like upturned leeches.

古文：杭、嘉湖、常、镇势绕四隅，苏州居中，松江为诸水所受，最居下。
现代文：杭州、嘉兴、湖州、常州、镇江水势环绕四周，苏州处在中间，松江成为各条河水所容纳之处，处在最下游。
English: Hangzhou, Jiaxing, Huzhou, Changzhou, and Zhenjiang are surrounded by the water potential, Suzhou is in the middle, and Songjiang is the place where the water of each river is accommodated, and it is in the lowest reaches.

古文：乞专设水利佥事以裨国计。 
现代文：请专门设立水利余事来给国家谋划。 
English: Please set up a special water conservancy committee to plan for the country.

古文：部议遣御史董之。
现代文：工部商议派遣御史督理这件事。
English: The Ministry of Industry and Trade is discussing the dispatch of an inspector to oversee this matter.

古文：六年，巡抚都御史胡执礼请先浚吴淞江长桥、黄浦。
现代文：万历六年，巡抚都御史胡执礼请求首先疏通吴淞江长桥、黄浦。
English: After six long years, the governor of the capital, Gu Shi Hu, made a request to first dredge the Wusongjiang Yangtze River Bridge and Huangpu.

古文：先是，巡按御史林应训言：
现代文：在此之前，巡按御史林应训说：
English: Prior to this, the chief inspector, Mr. Shilin, said in response to the training:

古文： 苏、松水利在开吴淞江中段，以通入海之势。
现代文：苏州、松江水利在于开通吴淞江中段，使畅通流入大海的水势。
English: The water conservancy of Suzhou and Songjiang is to open the middle section of the Wusong River, so that the water flow into the sea is smooth.

古文：太湖入海，其道有三：东北由刘河，即古娄江故道；东南由大黄浦，即古东江遗意；其中为吴淞江，经昆山、嘉定、青浦、上海，乃太湖正脉。
现代文：太湖水流入大海，其水道有三条：往东北经由刘河，就是原来的娄江故道；往束南经由大黄浦，就是原来的东江留下的痕迹；其中段为吴淞江，经过昆山、嘉定、青浦、上海，这是太湖主河道。
English: The water of the Taihu Lake flows into the sea, and there are three waterways: to the northeast, it flows through the Liu River, which is the original path of the Li River; to the south, it flows through the Dahuangpu, which is the trace left by the original Dongjiang River; one of the sections is the Wuxi River, passing through Kunshan, Jiading, Qingpu and Shanghai, which is the main waterway of the Taihu Lake.

古文：今刘河、黄浦皆通，而中江独塞者，盖江流与海潮遇，海潮浑浊，赖江水迅涤之。
现代文：现在，刘河、黄逋都畅通无阻，而中段吴淞江依然被堵塞，大概是江水与海潮相遇，海潮浑浊，依赖江水疾速洗涤它。
English: Now, the Liu River and the Huangpi River are unimpeded, while the middle section of the Wuxi River is still blocked. It is probably because the river water meets the sea tide. The sea tide is turbid and relies on the river water to rapidly wash it.

古文：刘河独受巴、阳诸湖，又有新洋江、夏驾浦从旁以注；大黄浦总会杭、嘉之水，又有淀山、泖荡从上而灌。
现代文：刘河单独容纳巴、阳各湖之水，又有新洋江、夏驾浦从旁边来灌注其中；大黄浦聚集会合杭州、嘉兴的河水，又有淀山、泖荡从上游灌注。
English: The Liu River alone accommodates the water of the Ba and Yang lakes, and the Xinyang River and Xiajiupu come from the side to perfuse it; the Dahuangpu gathers together the water of Hangzhou and Jiaxing, and the Dianshan and Danglang are perfused from the upstream.

古文：是以流皆清驶，足以敌潮，不能淤也。
现代文：所以水流都是水清流疾，足够用来抵挡海潮，所以不会淤积。
English: As a result, the currents are clear and strong enough to resist the tides, so they do not become silted up.

古文：惟吴淞江源出长桥、石塘下，经庞山、九里二湖而入。
现代文：只有吴淞江源出于长桥、石塘之下，经过庞山、九里二湖而流入。
English: Only the source of the Wuxi River flows from under the Long Bridge and the Stone Pond, through the Pangshan Mountains and the Jiuli Second Lake.

古文：今长桥、石塘已堙，庞山、九里复为滩涨，其来已微。
现代文：现在，长桥、石塘已经堵塞，庞山、九里又被奔流的江水弥浸，流来的水已经细微。
English: Now, Long Bridge and Shitang have been blocked, and Pangshan and Jiuli have been flooded by the rushing river water, and the flowing water has become thin.

古文：又有新洋江、夏驾浦掣其水以入刘河，势乃益弱，不能胜海潮汹涌之势而涤浊浑之流，日积月累，淤塞仅留一线。
现代文：又有新洋江、夏驾浦牵掣其水使流入刘河，水势就更加减弱，不能胜过海潮汹涌之势而涤荡浑浊之水，日积月累，淤塞严重仅仅剩下一线水道。
English: In addition, the Xinyangjiang River and Xiajiupu River diverted their water to flow into the Liu River, and the water potential was further weakened. It could not overcome the turbulent sea tides and wash away the turbid water. It accumulated over time, and only one waterway remained seriously silted up.

古文：水失故道，时致淫滥。
现代文：江水失去故道，常常导致过度泛滥。
English: Rivers have lost their course, often leading to excessive flooding.

古文：支河小港，亦复壅滞。
现代文：支河小港，又被堵塞。
English: A small port on a tributary of the river has been blocked again.

古文：旧熟之田，半成荒亩。
现代文：原先种熟的田地，一半变成荒芜的田亩。
English: Half of the previously well-planted fields have turned into barren acres.

古文：前都御史海瑞力破群议，挑自上海江口宋家桥至嘉定艾祁八十里，幸尚通流。
现代文：前都御史海瑞力排众议，从上海江口宋家桥到嘉定艾祁挑挖八十里，所幸还可以通水流。
English: The former governor of Shanghai, Shihai Ruili, was widely discussed. From Shanghai Jiangkou Songjiaqiao to Jiading Aiqian, 80 miles were excavated, but fortunately, water flow was still possible.

古文：自艾祁至昆山慢水港六十馀里，则俱涨滩，急宜开浚，计浅九千五百馀丈，阔二十丈。
现代文：从艾祁到昆山慢水港六十多里，则都是泥沙淤积成的滩地，应当赶快开挖疏通，估计疏通浅处九千五百多丈，挖宽二十丈。
English: The more than 60 miles from Aizhou to Kunshan Slow Water Port are all beach areas with silt and sediment. They should be dredged and cleared as soon as possible. It is estimated that the dredged shallow area is more than 9,500 meters high and 20 meters wide.

古文：此江一开，太湖直入於海，滨江诸渠得以引流灌田，青浦积荒之区俱可开垦成熟矣。 
现代文：这条江一经开通，太湖水直接流入到大海，靠近江边的各条水渠能够用来引水灌溉田地，青浦很多荒芜的地区全都可以开垦成为熟地了。
English: Once this river is opened, the water of Taihu Lake will flow directly into the sea, and the canals near the river can be used to divert water to irrigate fields. Many barren areas in Qingpu can all be reclaimed as mature land.

古文：并从之。
现代文：一并依从他们的建议。
English: The late emperor agreed.

古文：至是，工成。
现代文：到这时，工程成功。
English: By this time, the project was a success.

古文：应训又言：
现代文：林应训又说：
English: Lin Yingxun also said:

古文： 吴江县治居太湖正东，湖水由此下吴淞达海。
现代文：吴江县治处于太湖正东，湖水经由这里流到吴淞到达大海。
English: Wujiang County is located in the east of Taihu Lake, and the lake water flows through here to Wuxi to reach the sea.

古文：宋时运道所经，畏风阻险，乃建长桥、石塘以通牵挽。
现代文：宋朝时，运道所经之处，害怕大风险阻，于是修建长桥、石塘来通行牵拉船只。
English: During the Song Dynasty, they were afraid of great risks and obstacles in the places where the transportation route passed, so they built long bridges and stone ponds to allow the passage of towing vessels.

古文：长桥百三十丈，为洞六十有二。
现代文：长桥长一百三十丈，设立桥洞六十二处。
English: The long bridge is one hundred and thirty meters long, with sixty-two bridge cavities.

古文：石塘小则有窦，大则有桥，内外浦泾纵横贯穿，皆为泄水计也。
现代文：石塘小则有洞，大则有桥，内外沟渠纵横贯通，都是为排水谋划的。
English: Shitang small has a hole, large has a bridge, internal and external ditches run vertically and horizontally, all are planned for drainage.

古文：石塘泾窦半淤，长桥内外俱圮，仅一二洞门通水。
现代文：石塘沟渠一半被淤塞，长桥内外全都倒塌，只剩一二洞门通水。
English: Half of the stone ditch was blocked, and both the inside and outside of the long bridge collapsed, leaving only one or two doors open to the water.

古文：若不疏浚，虽开吴淞下流，终无益也。
现代文：假若不疏通，即使开通吴淞下游，终究没有益处。
English: If it is not dredged, even if the lower reaches of the Wusong River are opened, it will ultimately be of no benefit.

古文：宜开庞山湖口，由长桥抵吴家港。
现代文：应当开通庞山湖口，从长桥到达吴家港。
English: It is necessary to open the Pangshan Hukou and reach Wujia Port from the Long Bridge.

古文：则湖有所泄，江有所归，源盛流长，为利大矣。
现代文：则湖水就有地方排放，江水有地方归依，水源多水流长，取得剎益就很大了。
English: Then the lake water has local discharge, the river water has local conversion, the water source is multiple and the water flow is long, and the benefit is great.

古文：松江大黄浦西南受杭、嘉之水，西北受氵殿、泖诸荡之水，总会於浦，而秀州塘、山泾港诸处实黄浦来源也。
现代文：松江大黄浦西南容纳杭州、嘉兴的水流，西北容纳淀山、泖荡等荡的水流，集中汇合于大黄浦，而秀州塘、山泾港等处之水实为黄浦来源。
English: The water of Hangzhou and Jiaxing in the southwest of the Songjiang Dahuangpu, and the water of Yodanshan and the rippling water in the northwest, converge in the Dahuangpu, while the water of Xiuzhoutang and Shanzhang Port is the source of the Dahuangpu.

古文：氵殿山湖入黄浦道渐多淤浅，宜为疏瀹。
现代文：淀山湖流入黄浦的水道渐渐多被淤塞变浅，应当给予疏通。
English: The waterway of Yodoyama Lake flowing into Huangpu has gradually been silted up and become shallow, and should be dredged.

古文：而自黄浦、横涝、洙泾，经秀州塘入南泖，至山泾港等处，万四千馀丈，待浚尤急。
现代文：而从黄浦、横滂、洙泾，经过秀州塘流入南泖，到达山泾港等处，一万四千多丈，等待疏浚更加迫切。
English: But from Huangpu, Hengye, Handan, through Xiuzhoutang and into Nanxun, to Shandong Port and other places, there are more than 14,000 meters, and it is more urgent to wait for dredging.

古文：他如苏之茜泾、杨林、白茆、七浦诸港，松之蒲汇、官绍诸塘，常、镇之澡港、九曲诸河，并宜设法开导，次第修举。 
现代文：其它如苏州的茜泾、杨林、白茆、七浦各港，松江的蒲汇、官绍各塘，常州、镇江的澡港、九曲各河，都应当设法开通，依次进行修筑。
English: Others, such as the ports of Qianqian, Yanglin, Baiyun and Qiupo in Suzhou, the ports of Puhui and Guanshaotang in Songjiang, the bathing ports in Changzhou and Zhenjiang, and the rivers of the Nine Bends, should be opened and repaired in turn.

古文：八年，又言： 苏、松诸郡干河支港凡数百，大则泄水入海，次则通湖达江，小则引流灌田。
现代文：万历八年，林应训又说：苏州、松江各郡主河支港总共数百绦，大的则排放河水流入大海，其次则通于湖达于江，小的则引水灌溉田地。
English: In the eighth year of Wanli, Lin Yingxun also said: the main rivers and tributary ports of Suzhou and Songjiang have a total of hundreds of piers. The large one discharges river water into the sea, the second leads to the lake and reaches the river, and the small one draws water to irrigate fields.

古文：今吴淞江、白茆塘、秀州塘、蒲汇塘、孟渎河、舜河、青旸港俱已告成，支河数十，宜尽开浚。 
现代文：现在，吴淞江、白茆塘、秀州塘、蒲汇塘、孟演河、舜河、青旸港全都已经宣告疏浚成功，支河数十条应当全部开掘疏浚。
English: Now, the Wuxi River, Baiyuntang, Xiuzhou River, Puhuitang, Mengyuan River, Fenhe River and Qingdao Port have all been declared dredging success, and dozens of branch rivers should all be excavated and dredged.

古文：俱从其请。
现代文：全都依从他的请求。
English: All complied with his request.

古文：久之，用仪望议，特设苏、松水利副使，以许应逵领之。
现代文：过了很久，采用宋仪望的主张，特地设立苏州、松江水利副使，任用许应逵统领这件事。
English: After a long time, using the idea of Song Yibang, he specially set up the Suzhou and Songjiang Water Conservancy Deputy Envoy, and appointed Xu Yingtao to lead this matter.

古文：乃浚吴淞八十馀晨，筑塘九十馀处，开新河百二十三道，浚内河百三十九道，筑上海李家洪老鸦嘴海岸十八里，发帑金二十万。
现代文：于是，疏通吴淞江八十多里，修筑堤塘九十多处，开通新河一百二十三条，疏通内河一百三十九条，修筑上海李家洪老鸦嘴海岸十八里，调发库银二十万。
English: As a result, more than 80 miles of the Wuxi River were dredged, more than 90 dykes were built, 123 new rivers were opened, 139 inland rivers were dredged, 18 miles of the Li Jia Hong Laozi coast of Shanghai were built, and 200 thousand yuan was allocated to the treasury.

古文：应逵以其半讫工。
现代文：许应逵用了其中的一半便完工。
English: Xu Yingyao used half of it and finished it.

古文：三十七、八年间，霪雨浸溢，水患日炽。
现代文：三十七八年间，霪雨，河水泛滥，水灾一天天严重。
English: In 378 years, torrential rain, river flooding, and severe floods have been increasing day by day.

古文：越数年，给事中归子顾言： 宋时，吴淞江阔九里。
现代文：过了几年，给事中归子颅说： 宋朝时，吴淞江宽九里。
English: A few years later, Gui Ziqian said: In the Song Dynasty, the Wuxi River was nine miles wide.

古文：元末淤塞。
现代文：元朝末年淤塞。
English: It was silted up at the end of the Yuan Dynasty.

古文：正统间，周忱立表江心，疏而浚之。
现代文：正统年间，周忱树立标识于江心，疏通它。
English: During the years of orthodoxy, Zhou Zhen set up the logo in the center of the river and dredged it.

古文：崔恭、徐贯、李充嗣、海瑞相继浚者凡五，迄今四十馀年，废而不讲。
现代文：崔恭、徐贯、李充嗣、海瑞一个接一个疏浚共五次，到现在四十多年，废弃不再治理。
English: Cui Qiong, Xu Ran, Li Chengzhi, and Hai Rui dredged one after another for a total of five times, and now it has been more than forty years, and the waste is no longer managed.

古文：宜使江阔水驶，塘浦支河分流四达。 
现代文：应当使江面宽水流疾，塘浦支河分流达于四方。 
English: It is necessary to make the river surface wide and the water flow is strong, and the diversion of the Tangpu tributary reaches the four directions.

古文：疏入留中。
现代文：奏疏呈入被留在宫中。
English: Sono Sogei was left behind in the palace.

古文：巡按御史薛贞复请行之，下部议而未行。
现代文：巡按御史薛贞又请求施行治理它，下交工部商议而没有施行。
English: The inspecting magistrate, Shi Xuezhen, also requested that it be implemented and regulated, but it was submitted to the Ministry of Industry for discussion and not implemented.

古文：至天启中，巡抚都御史周起元复请浚吴淞、白茆。
现代文：到天启年间，巡抚都御史周起元又请求疏通吴淞、白茆。
English: In the year of the Apocalypse, the governor of the capital, Shou Chi Yuan, also requested the dredging of the Wuxi and Baiyun Rivers.

古文：崇祯初，员外郎蔡懋德、巡抚都御史李待问皆以为请。
现代文：崇祯初年，员外郎蔡懋德、巡抚都御史李待问都为此而呈请。
English: In the first year of the reign of Emperor Chongzhen, Cai Bingde, a member of the Foreign Affairs Office, and Li Zhidong, the governor of the capital, both submitted requests for this purpose.

古文：久之，巡抚都御史张国维请疏吴江长桥七十二〈谷共〉及九里、石塘诸洞。
现代文：过了很久，巡抚都御史张国维请求疏通吴江长桥七十二处桥拱以及九里、石塘各洞口。
English: After a long time, the governor of the capital, Zhang Guowei, requested the dredging of the 72 bridge arches of the Wujiang Yangtze River Bridge as well as the Jiuli and Shitang entrances.

古文：御史李谟复请浚吴淞、白茆。
现代文：御史李谟又请求疏通吴淞、白茆。
English: Goshirimu also asked for the release of Wu Ye and Bai Ye.

古文：俱下部议，未能行也。
现代文：一起下到工部商议，没能施行。
English: We went down to the Ministry of Industry and Trade together to discuss it, but it could not be implemented.

古文：十年，增筑雄县横堤八里，御滹沱暴涨。
现代文：万历十年，增修雄县横堤八里，防御滹沱河突然上涨。
English: After ten years of hard work, the eight-mile lateral embankment in Xiongxian County was repaired, and the defense of Luohe River suddenly rose.

古文：十三年，以尚宝少卿徐贞明兼御史，领垦田使。
现代文：万历十三年，令尚宝少卿徐贞明兼任御史，统领垦田使。
English: In the thirteenth year of Wanli, Shangbao Shaoqing Xu Zhenming was appointed to concurrently serve as imperial historian and head of the imperial envoy to Putian.

古文：贞明为给事中，尝请兴西北水利如南人圩田之制，引水成田。
现代文：徐贞明担任给事中时，曾经请求像南方人修筑圩岸护田的形制那样兴建西北水利工程，引水成为水田。
English: When Xu Zhenming was in charge of affairs, he once requested that the Northwest Water Conservancy Project be built in the same way as the southerners built the Sheshan berm, diverting water into paddy fields.

古文：工部覆议： 畿辅诸郡邑，以上流十五河之水泄於猫儿一湾，海口又极束隘，故所在横流。
现代文：工部回复指出： 京都附近各郡邑，将上游十五条河流之水排放到猎儿一处港湾，入海口又很狭窄，因此，到处泛滥。
English: The Ministry of Works replied: Counties and towns around Kyoto discharge the water from 15 upstream rivers into one harbor. The entrance to the harbor is very narrow, so flooding occurs everywhere.

古文：必多开支河，挑浚海口，而后水势可平，疏浚可施。
现代文：必须多开通支河，疏通入海口，然后其水势可以平缓，疏浚之事可以施行。
English: It is necessary to open more tributaries and dredge the estuary, and then the water level can be smoothed and dredging can be carried out.

古文：然役大费繁，而今以民劳财匮，方务省事，请罢其议。 
现代文：然而，工程浩大耗费繁多，现在因为百姓劳苦财力匮乏，正谋求省事，请取消其主张。 
English: However, the project is huge and costly, and now because of the people's hard work and lack of financial resources, they are seeking to save trouble, please cancel their proposal.

古文：乃已。
现代文：于是停止。
English: Stop faking it.

古文：后贞明谪官，著《潞水客谭》一书，论水利当兴者十四条。
现代文：后来，徐贞明被贬官，着有《潞水客谭》一书，论述水利工程应当兴建的理由有十四条。
English: Later, Xu Zhenming was demoted and wrote a book, "The Water Traveller's Tales," in which he discussed fourteen reasons why the water conservancy project should be built.

古文：时巡抚张国彦、副使顾养谦方开水利於蓟、永有效，於是给事中王敬民荐贞明，特召还，赐敕勘水利。
现代文：当时，巡抚张国彦、副使顾养谦刚刚开通水利工程于蓟、永有功效，于是，给事中王敬民推荐徐贞明，特地召回，赐敕命勘测水利工程。
English: At that time, the governor Zhang Guohan and the vice-envoy Gu Yaoqian had just opened the water conservancy project in Handan, which had permanent effect. Therefore, the king recommended Xu Zhenming, specifically recalled him, and gave him the order to survey the water conservancy project.

古文：贞明乃先治京东州邑，如密云燕乐庄，平谷水峪寺、龙家务庄，三河塘会庄、顺庆屯地。
现代文：徐贞明就首先治理京都束边的州邑，如密云燕乐庄，平谷水峪寺、龙家务莛，三河塘会庄、顺庆屯地。
English: Xu Zhenming was the first to govern the prefectures around Kyoto, such as Miyun Yanle Village, Pinggu Water Margin Temple, Longjiawu Village, Mikawatang Village and Shunqing Township.

古文：蓟州城北黄厓营，城西白马泉、镇国庄，城东马伸桥，夹林河而下别山铺，夹阴流河而下至於阴流。
现代文：蓟州城北黄匡营，城西白马泉、镇国庄，城束马伸桥，沿林河两岸而下到别山铺，沿阴流河两岸而下到阴流。
English: Huang Kuangying in the north of Luzhou City, Bai Maquan in the west of the city, Zhen Guozhuang, Chengzhu Ma Sheng Bridge, along the banks of the Lin River to the other mountains, and along the banks of the Yin River to the Yin River.

古文：遵化平安城，夹运河而下沙河铺西，城南铁厂、涌珠湖以下韭菜沟、上素河、下素河百馀里。
现代文：遵化平安城，沿运河而下到沙河铺西，城南铁厂、涌珠湖以下的韭菜沟、上素河、下素河一百多里。
English: It is more than a hundred miles from the Heian city of Zunhua, along the canal to the west of the Shahe River, the South Railway Station, the Juncai ditch below Lake Zhu, the upper Su River and the lower Su River.

古文：丰润之南，则大寨、剌榆坨、史家河、大王庄，东则榛子镇，西则鸦红桥，夹河五十馀里。
现代文：丰润之南，即大寨、剌榆坨、史家河、大王庄向东则是榛子镇，向西则是鸦红桥，沿河流五十多里。
English: To the south of Fengrun, that is, Dazhai, Handan, Shijiahe, and Dayangzhuang, to the east is Jizi Town, and to the west is Raven Red Bridge, more than fifty miles along the river.

古文：玉田青庄坞、后湖庄、三里屯及大泉、小泉，至於濒海之地，自水道沽关、黑严子墩至开平卫南宋家营，东西百馀里，南北百八十里。
现代文：玉田青庄坞、后湖庄、三里屯以及大泉、小泉，一直到靠近大海之地，从水道沽关、黑岩子墩到开平卫南的宋家营，东西一百多里，南北一百八十里。
English: Tamada Qingzhuang Dock, Houhuzhuang, Sanlitun, as well as Daquan and Koquan, all the way to the land close to the sea, from the waterway Shouguan, Heiwa Ziwan to Songjiaying in Kaiping South, more than one hundred miles east to west, one hundred and eighty miles north to south.

古文：垦田三万九千馀亩。
现代文：开垦田地三万九千多亩。
English: More than 39,000 mu of farmland have been reclaimed.

古文：至真定将治滹沱近堧地，御史王之栋言： 滹沱非人力可治，徒耗财扰民。 
现代文：到真定将治理滹沱附近的田地，御史王之栋说： 滹沱不是用人力可以治理的，白白地耗费钱财烦劳百姓。 
English: When it became clear that the government was going to manage the fields around Handan, the governor Wang Zhidong said: "Handan cannot be managed by manpower. It is a waste of money and resources to bother the people.

古文：帝入其言，欲罪诸建议者。
现代文：皇帝采纳了他的建议，想要治罪于各建议的人。
English: The emperor accepted his suggestion and wanted to punish the person who made the suggestion.

古文：申时行言： 垦田兴利谓之害民，议甚舛。
现代文：申时行说： 开垦田地来兴利被叫做祸害百姓，其主张实在是乖舛。
English: Shen Shixing said, "Clearing fields to make a profit is called a scourge to the people, and it's really an ill-advised idea.

古文：顾为此说者，其故有二。
现代文：考察提出这种说法，其原因有二。
English: There are two reasons for this statement, according to the investigation.

古文：北方民游惰好闲，惮於力作，水田有耕耨之劳，胼胝之苦，不便一也。
现代文：北方的百姓游手好闲，畏惧于劳作，水田有耕种的辛劳，手掌和脚底有生茧子的痛苦，这是不便利之一。
English: It is one of the inconveniences that the people of the north are idle and afraid of work, the rice fields are hard to cultivate, and the palms and soles of the feet have the pain of raw lice.

古文：贵势有力家侵占甚多，不待耕作，坐收芦苇薪刍之利；若开垦成田，归於业户，隶於有司，则已利尽失，不便二也。
现代文：有权势有能力的人家侵占太多，不打算耕作，坐收芦苇薪刍的利益；假若开垦成为水田，归于产业户，隶属于主管部门，那么，自己的利益就完全丧失，这是不便利之二。
English: Powerful and capable people occupy too much land, do not plan to farm, and take advantage of the profits from the reed beds; if the reed beds become rice paddies, are owned by industrial households, and are subordinated to the competent authorities, then their own profits will be completely lost, which is one of the inconveniences.

古文：然以国家大计较之，不便者小，而便者大。
现代文：然而，用国家大的计策与其相比，不便利的地方小，而便利的地方大。
English: However, compared with the large-scale national strategy, the inconvenient place is small, and the convenient place is large.

古文：惟在斟酌地势，体察人情，沙碱不必尽开，黍麦无烦改作，应用夫役，必官募之，不拂民情，不失地利，乃谋国长策耳。 
现代文：只是要斟酌地势，体察人心，沙碱之地不必全部开垦，黍麦不必改种，应当使用的役夫，必须由官府招募，不违逆民情，不丧失地利，纔是图谋国家长久的办法啊。 
English: However, it is necessary to consider the situation and understand the people's hearts. It is not necessary to reclaim all the sandy and alkaline lands. Buckwheat does not need to be replanted. The servants who should be used must be recruited by the government. It is not contrary to the people's will and does not lose its position. This is a long-term way to plan the country.

古文：於是贞明得无罪，而水田事终罢。
现代文：于是，徐贞明得以无罪，而开垦水田的事最终停止。
English: As a result, Xu Zhenming was acquitted, and the reclamation of paddy fields finally stopped.

古文：巡抚都御史梁问孟筑横城堡边墙，虑宁夏有黄河患，请堤西岔河，障水东流。
现代文：巡抚都御史梁问孟修筑横城堡边界城墙，担心宁夏有黄河造成的灾害，请求在西岔河筑堤，防止河水柬流。
English: The governor of the capital, Shi Liang, asked Meng to build a castle boundary wall, worried about the disasters caused by the Yellow River in Ningxia, and requested that a dike be built on the Xidi River to prevent the flow of river water.

古文：从之。
现代文：依从他的主张。
English: I followed his advice.

古文：十九年，尚宝丞周弘禴言： 宁夏河东有汉、秦二坝，请依河西汉、唐坝筑以石，於渠外疏大渠一道，北达鸳鸯诸湖。 
现代文：十九年，尚宝丞周弘檎说： 宁夏黄河东有汉、秦二坝，请求依照黄河西岸汉、唐用石头修筑堤坝，在水渠外疏通大渠一道，往北到达鸳鸯各湖。 
English: In 1919, Shang Baozheng Zhou Hongyi said: "Ningxia has the Han and Qin Dams on the east side of the Yellow River, and requests that the dikes be built with stones according to the Han and Tang Dams on the west side of the Yellow River, and that a large canal be dredged outside the canal to reach the lakes in the north.

古文：诏可。
现代文：诏令许可。
English: The royal decree was approved.

古文：二十三年，黄、淮涨溢，淮、扬昏垫。
现代文：万历二十三年，黄河、淮河泛滥，淮安、扬州困于水灾。
English: In the 23rd year of Wanli, the Yellow River and the Huai River flooded, and Huai'an and Yangzhou were flooded.

古文：议者多请开高家堰以分淮。
现代文：议论的人多请求开通高家堰来分流淮水。
English: Many commenters requested the opening of the Gaojia Weir to divert water from the Huai River.

古文：宝应知县陈煃为御史，虑高堰既开，害民产盐场，请自兴、盐迤东，疏白涂河、石〈石达〉口、廖家港为数河，分门出海；然后从下而上，浚清水、子婴二沟，且多开瓜、仪闸口以泄水。
现代文：宝应知县陈烟担任御史，担心高堰开通以后，危害百姓生产和盐场，请求从兴化、盐城向东，疏通白涂河、石醚口、廖家港成为几条河道，分成几道流到大海；然后从下游往上游，疏通清水、子婴二沟，并且多处开通瓜、仪闸口来排放河水。
English: Bao Yingzhi County's Chen Yan served as imperial historian, worried that after the opening of the high weir, it would harm the production of the people and the salt field, and requested that from Xinghua and Yancheng to the east, the Baitu River, the Seifei Port, and the Liaojia Port be dredged into several rivers, and divided into several streams to the sea; then from the downstream to the upstream, clear water and two ditches for children and infants were dredged, and many melon and instrument gates were opened to discharge river water.

古文：给事中祝世禄亦言： 议者欲放淮从广阳、射阳二湖入海。
现代文：给事中祝世禄也说： 议论此事的人想开放淮水从广阳、射阳二湖流入大海。
English: During the presentation, Zhu Shilu also said: People who discuss this matter want to open up the flow of water from Guangyang and Sheyang into the sea.

古文：广阳阔仅八里，射阳仅二十五丈，名为湖，实河也。
现代文：广阳湖宽只有八里，射阳湖宽只有二十五丈，名为湖泊，实为河流。
English: Guangyang Lake is only eight miles wide, and Sheyang Lake is only twenty-five meters wide. They are called lakes, but they are actually rivers.

古文：且离海三百里，迂回浅窄，高、宝七州县水惟此一线宣泄之，又使淮注焉，田庐盐场，必无幸矣。
现代文：并且距离海边三百里，迂回曲折水浅狭窄，高、宝七州县的河水只有这一条水路来疏散它，又追使淮水注入其中，田地房舍盐场，一定不能幸免于灾。
English: Moreover, it is three hundred miles away from the seashore, the winding water is shallow and narrow, high, and the river water in Baoqizhou County only has this waterway to evacuate it, and it is forced to inject brine into it. The fields and houses of the salt farm must not be spared from the disaster.

古文：广阳湖东有大湖，方广六十里，湖北口有旧官河，自官荡至盐城石〈石达〉口，通海仅五十三里，此导淮入海一便也。 
现代文：广阳湖东边有大湖，面积六十里，其湖北口有旧运河，从官荡到盐城石硅口，通到海边祇有五十三里。这是导引淮水流入大海的一条便利之道。 
English: On the east side of Guangyang Lake, there is a large lake with an area of sixty miles. At the northern mouth of the lake, there is an old canal. From Guanzhang to Yancheng Shishigou, there are only fifty-three miles to the seashore. This is a convenient way to guide the flow of water into the sea.

古文：下部及河漕官议，俱格不行。
现代文：下交工部及河漕官吏商议，都抵制不能施行。
English: Both the Ministry of Transportation and the Ministry of Works and the officials of the river can not be implemented.

古文：既而总河尚书杨一魁言： 黄水倒灌，正以海口为阻。
现代文：随后，总河尚书杨一魁说： 黄河水倒灌，正是因为入海口被堵塞。
English: Afterwards, Yang Yikui, the chief river official, said: The Yellow River is overflowing precisely because the entrance to the sea is blocked.

古文：分黄工就，则石〈石达〉口、廖家港、白驹场海口，金湾、芒稻诸河，急宜开刷。 
现代文：分流黄河工程完成，则石硅口、廖家港、白驹场入海口，金湾、芒稻各河道，应当赶快开通冲刷。 
English: After the completion of the diversion project of the Yellow River, Shishiguchi, Liaojia Port, Baiyao Landing Port, Jinwan and Mengrai river channels should be opened and scoured as soon as possible.

古文：乃命如议行之。
现代文：于是，命令依照他的主张施行治理。
English: As a result, the order was issued to implement governance in accordance with his proposal.

古文：三十年，保定巡抚都御史汪应蛟言： 易水可溉金台，滹水可溉恒山，溏水可溉中山，滏水可溉襄国，漳水可溉邺下，而瀛海当众河下流，故号河中，视江南泽国不异。
现代文：万历三十年，保定巡抚都御史汪应蛟说： 易水可以灌溉金台，滹水可以灌溉恒山，溏水可以灌溉中山，滏水可以灌溉襄国，漳水可以灌溉邺下，而瀛海正对着众河流下游，所以别号河中，比照长江南边的水乡没有不同。
English: Thirty years later, the governor of Baoding, Wang Yingtao, said: "Easy water can irrigate Jintai, salty water can irrigate Hengshan, salty water can irrigate Zhongshan, salty water can irrigate Xiangguo, salty water can irrigate the lower Yangtze River, and the Bohai Sea is facing the downstream of many rivers, so there is no difference in the water townships in the middle of different rivers compared to the south of the Yangtze River.

古文：至於山下之泉，地中之水，所在皆有，宜各设坝建闸，通渠筑堤，高者自灌，下则车汲。
现代文：至于山下面的泉水，地里面的泉水，到处都有，应当在各处修筑堤坝建立闸门，疏通水渠修筑堤防，地势高的泉水自然地灌注，低下的泉水就用水车提升上来。
English: As for the spring water under the mountain and the spring water in the ground, there are springs everywhere. It is necessary to build dams and sluice gates everywhere, clear water channels and build dikes. The high-altitude spring water is naturally perfused, and the low-lying spring water is lifted up by water vehicles.

古文：用南方水田法，六郡之内，得水田数万顷，畿民从此饶，永无旱涝之患。
现代文：采用南方水田蓄水种稻的方法，六郡之内，得到水田数万顷，京郊百姓从此富饶，永久没有旱滂之灾。
English: Using the method of storing water in paddy fields in the south to grow rice, tens of thousands of hectares of paddy fields have been obtained in six counties, and the people in the suburbs of Beijing have been rich ever since, and there has never been a drought.

古文：不幸滨河有梗，亦可改折於南，取籴于北。
现代文：即使不幸靠近河边有阻塞，也可以改收银钱，在北方买入粮食。
English: Even if, unfortunately, there is a blockage near the river, you can change the cash register and buy grain in the north.

古文：此国家无穷利也。 
现代文：这是国家无穷的利益。 
English: This is of infinite benefit to the country.

古文：报可。
现代文：回复许可。
English: Reimbursement agreed.

古文：应蛟乃于天津葛沽、何家圈、双沟、白塘，令防海军丁屯种，人授田四亩，共种五千馀亩，水稻二千亩，收多，因上言： 垦地七千顷，岁可得谷二百馀万石，此行之而效者也。 
现代文：汪应蛟就在天津葛沽、何家圈、双沟、白塘，命令海防驻军开荒耕种，每人给予田地四亩，共种五千多亩，其中水稻二千亩，收获很多，于是上奏说： 开垦土地七千顷，每年可以获得谷子二百多万石，这是施行就有成效的办法。
English: At Gejun, Hejia County, Shuanggou and Baitang in Tianjin, Wang Yingtao ordered the garrison of the coastal defense to open up the wasteland for cultivation. Each person was given four mu of fields and planted a total of more than five thousand mu, including two thousand mu of rice, which yielded a lot. Therefore, the report said: "Opening up seven thousand hectares of land can obtain more than two million stones of grain every year. This is an effective way to implement.

古文：是年，真定知府郭勉浚大鸣、小鸣泉四十馀穴，溉田千顷。
现代文：这年，真定知府郭勉疏浚大鸣、小呜泉水四十多个洞穴，灌溉田地上千顷。
English: In that year, Guo Zhen, the governor of Shandong Province, dredged more than forty caves of Daming and Xiaowu springs to irrigate a thousand hectares of farmland.

古文：邢台达活、野狐二泉流为牛尾河，百泉流为澧河，建二十一闸二堤，灌田五百馀顷。
现代文：邢台达活、野狐二泉水流来合成为牛尾河，百泉流来成为澧河，修建二十一座闸门和二处堤防，灌溉田地五百多顷。
English: The Xingtai Dahuo and the Wild Fox two springs merged to form the Ushiwei River, and the Hundred Springs flowed to form the Lugu River. Twenty-one gates and two embankments were built, and more than 500 hectares of fields were irrigated.

古文：天启元年，御史左光斗用应蛟策，复天津屯田，令通判卢观象管理屯田水利。
现代文：天启元年，御史左光斗采用汪应蛟的办法，恢复天津屯田，让通判卢观象管理屯田水利。
English: In the first year of Tianqi, the imperial historian Zuo Guangdou used Wang Yingtao's method to restore Tianjin's military camps and let Tong Zhanlu Guanxiang manage the water conservancy of the military camps.

古文：明年，巡按御史张慎言言： 自枝河而西，静海、兴济之间，万顷沃壤。
现代文：第二年，巡按御史张慎言说： 从枝河向西，静海、兴济之间，有上万顷肥沃土壤。
English: In the second year, Zhang Shengyan, the inspector-general of history, said: From the branch river to the west, between Jinghai and Xingji, there are more than 10,000 hectares of fertile soil.

古文：河之东，尚有盐水沽等处为膏腴之田，惜皆芜废。
现代文：河的东边，尚有盐水沽等处是肥沃的田地，可惜全都荒废。
English: On the east side of the river, there are still fertile fields such as salt marshes, but unfortunately they are all abandoned.

古文：今观象开寇家口以南田三千馀亩，沟洫芦塘之法，种植疏浚之方，皆具而有法，人何惮而不为？
现代文：现在，卢观象开垦寇家口以南田地三千多亩，沟洫芦塘的方法，种植疏浚的方法，全都详尽而有法度，人们还畏惧什么而不去做呢？
English: Now, more than 3,000 mu of fields south of Lu's home, the method of ditching and dredging, and the method of planting and dredging are all detailed and legal. What are people afraid of and do not do?

古文：大抵开种之法有五：一官种。
现代文：大略闳挖种植的方法有五种。一是官府种植。
English: There are five methods of digging and planting cucumbers. The first is government planting.

古文：谓牛、种、器具、耕作、雇募皆出於官，而官亦尽收其田之入也。
现代文：是说耕牛、种子、器具、耕作、出钱招募全都出于官府，而官府也全部获取其田地的收入。
English: That is to say, the oxen, the seeds, the tools, the cultivation, the payment and the recruitment all come from the government, and the government also gets all the income from the fields.

古文：一佃种。
现代文：二是租地种植。
English: The second is cultivation on leased land.

古文：谓民愿垦而无力，其牛、种、器具仰给於官，待纳稼之时，官十而取其四也。
现代文：是说百姓愿意开垦而没有能力，其中耕牛、种子、器具依赖于官府供给，等到收获粮食的时候，官府收取其收入的十分之四。
English: It means that the people are willing to cultivate but do not have the ability to do so. Among them, the oxen, seeds, and tools depend on the government's supply. When the grain is harvested, the government collects four-tenths of its income.

古文：一民种。
现代文：三是百姓种植。
English: The third is planting by the people.

古文：佃之有力者，自认开垦若干，迨开荒既熟，较数岁之中以为常，十一而取是也。一军种。
现代文：是说租地耕种有能力的人，自己承担开垦若干土地，等到开垦的荒地已经成为熟地，比较几年之中的收成把它作为正常年的收入，收取十分之一的赋税。四是军队种植。
English: That is to say, people who have the ability to lease land and cultivate, undertake to reclaim some land themselves, and wait until the reclaimed wasteland has become a mature land, compare the harvest in a few years, take it as a normal year's income, and collect one-tenth of the tax.

古文：即令海防营军种葛沽之田，人耕四亩，收二石，缘有行、月粮，故收租重也。
现代文：就是让海防驻军耕种葛沽的田地，每人耕种四亩，收取二石赋税，因为有行军粮饷和每月口粮，所以收取赋税很重。
English: That is, let the coastal defense garrison cultivate the fields of kudzu, four mu per person, and collect two stone tax. Because there are marching rations and monthly rations, the tax collection is very heavy.

古文：一屯种。
现代文：五是屯田耕种。
English: Fifth is the cultivation of tonden.

古文：祖宗卫军有屯田，或五十亩，或百亩。
现代文：祖先卫军有屯田，有的五十亩，有的一百亩。
English: The ancestors of the Imperial Guards had their own farmlands, some fifty mu, some one hundred mu.

古文：军为屯种者，岁入十七於官，即以所入为官军岁支之用。
现代文：卫军开荒耕种的田地，每年收入的十分之七交于官府，就把所收入的粮食作为军队每年开支之用。
English: The garrison turned over seven-tenths of its annual income to the government from the fields it had ploughed and cultivated, and used the grain it earned for the army's annual expenses.

古文：国初兵农之善制也。
现代文：这是建国初期军队耕种的最好制度。
English: This is the best system of army cultivation in the early days of the founding of the People's Republic of China.

古文：四法已行，惟屯种则今日兵与军分，而屯仅存其名。
现代文：四种方法已经施行，只有屯田耕种则因今天兵与军分离，因此屯田仅仅保留其名称。
English: Four methods have been implemented, but only the cultivation of tonden is due to the separation of soldiers from the army today, so tonden only retains its name.

古文：当选各卫之屯馀，垦津门之沃土，如官种法行之。 
现代文：应当选择各卫的屯余兵士，开垦津门的肥沃土地，依照官府种植的方法施行耕种。 
English: It is necessary to select the remaining soldiers of each guard, open the fertile land of Jiu Jinmen, and carry out cultivation in accordance with the method of government planting.

古文：章下所司，命太仆卿董应举管天津至山海屯田，规画数年，开田十八万亩，积谷无算。
现代文：奏章下发主管部门，命令太仆卿董应举管理天津到山海的屯田，经营几年，开垦田地十八万亩，积蓄粮食不计其数。
English: issued by the competent department, ordered the great servant Dong Yingjiao to manage the tundra from Tianjin to Shanhai, operate for several years, cultivate 180,000 mu of fields, and accumulate countless grains.

古文：崇祯二年，兵部侍郎申用懋言： 永平泺河诸水，逶迤宽衍，可疏渠以防旱潦。
现代文：崇祯二年，兵部侍郎申用懋说： 永平滦河各水流，连绵宽阔平缓，可以疏通渠道来防止干旱和水滂。
English: In the second year of Chongzhen, Shen Yijun, the secretary of the military department, said: The water flow of the Yongping River is continuous, broad and gentle, and channels can be cleared to prevent droughts and floods.

古文：山坡隙地，便栽种。
现代文：山坡空闲之地，有利于种植。
English: Hillside idle land is conducive to planting.

古文：宜令有司相地察源，为民兴利。 
现代文：应当命令主管官吏察看地形考察水源，为百姓办理有利的事。 
English: The officials in charge should be ordered to inspect the terrain and investigate the water source, and handle favorable matters for the people.

古文：从之。
现代文：依从他的提议。
English: I followed his advice.

