古文：王周，魏州人。
现代文：王周，魏州人。
English: Wang Zhou, from Weizhou.

古文：少勇健，从军事唐庄宗、明宗，稍迁裨校，以战功累历郡守。
现代文：小时勇敢雄健，参加军队跟从后唐庄宗、明宗，逐渐迁升为裨校，因战功多次历任郡守。
English: He was brave and vigorous at an early age, joined the army and followed Emperor Tangzhuangzong and Emperor Mingzong. Gradually, he was transferred to a military school. Due to his war exploits, he was promoted to county governor many times.

古文：晋天福初，范延光叛于魏州，周从杨光远攻降之，安重荣以镇州叛，从杜重威讨平之，以功授贝州节度使。岁余，移镇泾州。
现代文：后晋天福初年，范延光在魏州反叛，王周跟从杨光远进攻并降伏了他。安重荣在镇州反叛，王周又跟随杜重威攻讨平定了他。因功授与贝州节度使，一年多后，调任镇守泾州。
English: In the first year of Tianfu after the Jin Dynasty, Fan Yanguang rebelled in Weizhou, and Wang Zhou followed Yang Guangyuan to attack and surrender him. An Chongrong rebelled in Zhenzhou, and Wang Zhou followed Du Chongwei to attack and subdue him. He was awarded the title of Baizhou Festival envoy for his service, and more than a year later, he was transferred to the position of Zhenzhou town guard.

古文：先是，前帅张彦泽在任苛虐，部民逃者五千余户，及下车，革前弊二十余事，逃民归复，赐诏褒美。
现代文：在这以前，前任贝州统帅张彦泽在任上苛刻暴虐，属下逃亡的人民有五千多户。王周一上任，革除前任弊端二十多种，逃亡的人民又回来了，高祖赐诏予以褒扬赞美。
English: Prior to this, Zhang Yanzhe, the former commander-in-chief of Bozhou, was harsh and tyrannical in office, and there were more than 5,000 families of his people who fled. Wang took office on Monday, eliminated more than 20 kinds of shortcomings of his predecessor, and the people who fled came back, and Gaozhu issued a decree to praise and praise them.

古文：后历邓、陕二镇。
现代文：后来历任邓州、陕州官职。
English: Later, he held posts in Dengzhou and Shaanxi.

古文：阳城之役，周时为定州节度使，大军往来，供馈无阙，未几，迁镇州节度使。
现代文：在阳城战役中，王周当时担任定州节度使，晋朝大军来往经过，王周供应馈送没有中断缺失，不久，调任镇州节度使。
English: During the Battle of Yangcheng, Wang Zhou served as an envoy to the Jingshou Festival. As the large armies of the Jin Dynasty passed by, Wang Zhou's supply feed was not interrupted. Soon, he was transferred to the envoy to the Jingshou Festival.

古文：周禀性宽惠，人庶便之。
现代文：王周禀性宽厚仁惠，平民百姓都熟悉了解他。
English: Wang Zhou is known for his generosity and benevolence, and the common people are familiar with him.

古文：开运末，杜重威降于契丹，引契丹主临城谕之。
现代文：晋少帝开运末年，杜重威投降契丹，带来契丹国主到城下逼降他。
English: At the end of the reign of the Young Emperor Jin, Du Chongwei surrendered to the Khitan and brought the Khitan sovereign to the city to force him to surrender.

古文：周泣曰： 受国重恩，不能死战，而以兵降，何面南行见人主与士大夫乎？ 
现代文：王周哭着说 ：我受晋朝的大恩大德，不能拼死相战，而领兵投降，有什么脸面再去南方见皇上与士大夫呀？ 
English: Wang Zhou cried and said: I am greatly indebted to the Jin Dynasty, I cannot fight to the death, and lead the soldiers to surrender, what face do I have to go to the south to see the emperor and the shidafu?

古文：乃痛饮欲引决，家人止之。事不获已，乃见契丹主，授邓州节度使、检校太师。
现代文：于是大量饮酒后想自杀，家里人阻止他，事情不得了结，于是被迫投降，拜见契丹国主，被授予邓州节度使、检校太师。
English: As a result, after drinking a lot of alcohol, he wanted to commit suicide, but his family members stopped him, and the matter could not be resolved, so he was forced to surrender, meet the head of the Khitan state, and was awarded the title of Dangzhou Festival envoy and school inspector.

古文：高祖定天下，移镇徐州，加同平章事。
现代文：汉高祖平定天下，王周调往镇守徐州，加封同平章事。
English: Emperor Gaozu of Han conquered the whole country, and Wang Zhou was transferred to the town of Xuzhou, and was awarded the title of Tongping.

古文：乾祐元年二月，以疾卒于镇，辍视朝二日，赠中书令。
现代文：乾皊元年二月，因病死于任上，高祖中断上朝两天，追赠王周为中书令。
English: In February of the first year of the Qianlong era, Gao Zu died of illness while in office. Gao Zu interrupted the last two days of his reign and posthumously presented Wang Zhou with the Order of the Middle Epistle.

古文：周性宽恕，不忤物情。
现代文：王周性情宽宏，不违背事物的本性规律。
English: Wang Zhou is broad-minded and does not violate the natural laws of things.

古文：初刺信都，州城西桥败，覆民租车，周曰： 桥梁不饬，刺史之过也。 
现代文：刚任信都刺史时，州城西边桥梁断毁，翻了老百姓交送租粮的车子。王周说 ：桥梁不加修固，是刺史的过失呀。 
English: When Wang Zhou was just appointed as the chief of Xindu, the bridge on the west side of the state capital was destroyed, overturning the car of the common people to deliver the rent grain. Wang Zhou said: The bridge is not repaired, it is the fault of the chief.

古文：乃还其所沈粟，出私财以修之，民庶悦焉。
现代文：于是赔偿百姓沉于河底的粮食，自己出钱来修复桥梁，平民百姓都高兴。
English: As a result, the people were compensated for the grain that sank to the bottom of the river, and they paid to repair the bridge themselves. The common people were happy.

