古文：禽子问曰： 客众而勇，轻意见威，以骇主人；薪土俱上，以为羊坽，积土为高，以临民，蒙橹俱前，遂属之城，兵弩俱上，为之奈何？ 子墨子曰：子问羊坽之守邪？
现代文：译文禽滑厘问道： 敌人人多势众而勇猛，骄豪显威，威吓守方；木头土石一起用上，筑成名叫 羊坽 的土山，堆积土石筑成高台，对我方构成居高临下之势，敌兵以大盾牌为掩护从高台猛攻下来，一下子就接近了我方城头，刀箭齐上，这时候该怎么对付呢？ 墨子先生回答说：你问的是对付 羊坽 进攻的防守办法吗？
English: "The enemy is numerous, powerful, proud, and intimidates the defenders; they use wood, earth, and stone together to build a mound called the "goat mound," and pile up the earth and stone to build a high platform, creating a high-and-falling situation for our side. The enemy soldiers storm down from the high platform with a large shield as a cover, and immediately approach our city, with swords and arrows flying in unison. What should we do at this time?" Mr. Mozi replied, "Are you asking about defensive measures to deal with the "goat mound" attack?"

古文：羊坽者，攻之拙者也，足以劳卒，不足以害城。
现代文：羊坽这种攻城方法是进攻的蠢法子，只会导致进攻一方士兵的疲劳，不足以构成对守城一方的危害。
English: This method of attacking the city is a stupid method of attack, which will only lead to the fatigue of the soldiers on the attacking side, and is not enough to constitute a harm to the defending side.

古文：羊坽之政，远攻则远害，近城则近害，不至城。
现代文：敌人用羊坽进攻，远攻就以远攻的办法对付它，近攻就以近攻的方法对抗它，不会对守城一方造成危害。
English: If the enemy attacks with a shepherd's crook, a long-range attack will be met with a long-range attack, and a short-range attack will be met with a short-range attack, which will not cause harm to the defending side.

古文：矢石无休，左右趣射，兰为柱后，□望以固。
现代文：箭和擂石不停地从左右西边急速地发射，擂石接后，□望以固。
English: The arrows and flints kept shooting out rapidly from the west and right, and the flints caught up with them.

古文：厉吾锐卒，慎无使顾，守者重下，攻者轻去。养勇高奋，民心百倍，多执数少，卒乃不怠。
现代文：激励精兵，谨慎而又不产生顾虑，守城的兵士个个敬重打退敌人的人，攻击敌人的兵士鄙视离开战斗岗位的人，培养兵士高昂的士气，民心百倍加强，多捉拿敌人就多奖赏，这样兵士就不会懈怠。
English: Encourage the elite soldiers to be cautious but not anxious, the soldiers who defend the city respect those who repel the enemy, the soldiers who attack the enemy despise those who leave the combat post, cultivate the high morale of the soldiers, strengthen the people's heart a hundred times, and reward the enemy with more rewards, so that the soldiers will not slack off.

古文：作士不休，不能禁御，遂属之城，以御云梯之法应之。
现代文：假若敌兵不断筑土堆造成高台以便爬攻城墙，不能遭到有效地阻挡，一下子就接近了我方城头，这时我方就用防御云梯攻城的办法予以对付。
English: If the enemy soldiers continue to build mounds of earth to create high platforms in order to climb the city wall and cannot be effectively blocked, they will suddenly approach our city, at which time we will use defensive ladders to attack the city.

古文：凡待烟冲、云梯、临之法，必应城以御之，曰不足，则以木椁之。
现代文：对于敌人填塞护城河，冲车攻城、云梯爬城加筑不够高厚或时间来不及，就用木材加高加固，木椁尺寸为左边百步，右边百步。
English: For the enemy to fill the moat, rush the car to attack the city, climb the ladder to climb the city, and the construction is not high enough or the time is not enough, it is reinforced with wood, and the size of the raft is one hundred paces on the left and one hundred paces on the right.

古文：左百步，右百步，繁下矢、石、沙、炭，以雨之，薪火、水汤以济之。
现代文：用弓箭、石头、沙子、土灰象雨点一样频繁地往下攻击敌兵，又用火把、开水助战，再挑选激励兵士，增强锐气，千万注意不要使士兵有所顾虑。
English: Use bows and arrows, stones, sand, and soil ash to attack the enemy soldiers downwards as frequently as raindrops, and use torches and boiling water to help the battle, and then select and motivate soldiers, strengthen the spirit, and be careful not to make soldiers worry.

古文：选厉锐卒，慎无使顾，审赏行罚，以静为故，从之以急，无使生虑。恚■高愤，民心百倍，多执数赏，卒乃不怠。
现代文：赏罚要分明，以镇静为上但又须当机立断，不使发生变故。培养高昂的士气，使民心百倍增强，多抓俘虏多给奖赏，兵士不致懈怠。
English: Reward and punishment should be clear, with calmness as the top priority, but it must be timely and decisive, so as not to cause accidents. Cultivate high morale, make the people's hearts a hundred times stronger, capture more prisoners and give more rewards, soldiers will not slack off.

古文：冲、临、梯皆以冲冲之。
现代文：冲车、高临、云梯都可以用冲机撞击它们。
English: Punches, high kicks and ladders can all be used to hit them with a punch.

古文：渠长丈五尺，其埋者三尺，矢长丈二尺。
现代文：渠柱长一丈五尺，埋三尺在地下，上端长一丈二尺。
English: The canal pillar is five feet long, buried three feet underground, with the upper end two feet long.

古文：渠广丈六尺，其弟丈二尺，渠之垂者四尺。
现代文：渠宽一丈六尺，梯长一丈二尺，渠下垂部分四尺。
English: The canal is six feet wide, the ladder is two feet long, and the lower part of the canal is four feet long.

古文：树渠无傅叶五寸，梯渠十丈一梯，渠、荅大数，里二百五十八，渠、荅百二十九。
现代文：将渠树立时不要靠在矫墙上，要离开五寸；梯渠十丈一梯，渠和荅大约是一里二百五十八步，渠、荅共一百二十九具。
English: Do not lean against the retaining wall when setting up the drain, but leave five inches; the ladder drain is ten feet high, and the drain and sluice are about one mile and 258 paces, and the drain and sluice are one hundred and twenty-nine.

古文：诸外道可要塞以难寇，其甚害者为筑三亭，亭三隅，织女之，令能相救。
现代文：城外各种交通路口，可以筑起要塞阻挡敌人，在极为要害的地方可筑三个了望亭，三亭的位置按织女三星构成三角形，使三个亭之间可以互相救援。
English: At various traffic intersections outside the city, a fortress can be built to block the enemy, and three watchtowers can be built in the most critical places. The positions of the three pavilions form a triangle according to the three stars of Weaver, so that the three pavilions can rescue each other.

古文：诸距阜、山林、沟渎、丘陵、阡陌、郭门若阎术，可要塞及为微职，可以迹知往来者少多即所伏藏之处。
现代文：在各种大土山、山林、河沟、丘陵田野、城郭门户和里门要道，可以筑要塞立标志，以此了解敌情，根据敌人留下的踪迹推知往来人数多寡和敌兵埋伏的地方。
English: In all kinds of mountains, forests, ravines, hilly fields, gateways and inner gateways, it is possible to build fortress signs to understand the enemy situation and deduce the number of people passing by and the places where enemy soldiers are lying in wait according to the traces left by the enemy.

古文：葆民，先举城中官府、民宅、室署，大小调处，葆者或欲从兄弟、知识者许之。外宅粟米、畜产、财物诸可以佐城者，送入城中，事即急，则使积门内。
现代文：疏散民众，先取城中官府、民房、内室、外厅，按大小分派居住，被疏散的人准许兄弟朋友住在一起，外面的粮食、牲畜等所有可以帮助守城的财物，统统都送入城里，如情况紧急，就堆在城门内。
English: Evacuate the people, first take the government office, private house, inner room, and outer hall in the city, and assign them to live according to size. The evacuated people are allowed to live with brothers and friends. All the property that can help defend the city, such as grain and livestock outside, are sent into the city. If the situation is urgent, they are piled up inside the city gate.

古文：民献粟米、布帛、金钱、牛马、畜产，皆为置平贾，与主券书之。
现代文：对于百姓所缴纳的粮食、布匹、金钱、牛马牲畜，都一律要公平核价，给予收据，写清数量价值。
English: For the grain, cloth, money, cattle, horses and livestock paid by the people, they must all have a fair verification price, give a receipt, and write down the quantity value.

古文：使人各得其所长，天下事当；钧其分职，天下事得；皆其所喜，天下事备；强弱有数，天下事具矣。
现代文：让人们各尽所能，天下的事情就能办妥；各负其责，职责均衡，天下的事情就办得合理；分派的工作都是各人所爱，天下的事情就完备了；强弱有定数，天下的事情就没有遗漏了。
English: Let people do their best, and the world's affairs will be completed; let everyone bear their responsibilities, and the responsibilities will be balanced, and the world's affairs will be reasonable; the assigned work will be loved by everyone, and the world's affairs will be complete; there is a fixed number of strengths and weaknesses, and the world's affairs will not be missed.

古文：筑邮亭者圜之，高三丈以上，令侍杀。
现代文：建造供守望敌人用的邮亭要做成圆形的，三丈高以上，顶部呈斜尖形状。
English: To build a post box for watching the enemy, it should be round, more than three feet high, with a beveled top.

古文：为辟梯，梯两臂，长三尺，连门三尺，报以绳连之。
现代文：设置双柱梯子，宽三尺，每级梯板相距三尺，将梯板和双柱用绳子扎起来。
English: Set up a two-column ladder, three feet wide, with the ladder plates three feet apart at each step, and tie the ladder plates and the two columns together with a rope.

古文：椠再杂，为县梁。
现代文：修濠沟要修成内外两圈，架上悬梁。
English: The repair of the gully should be done in two circles, inside and outside, with a suspended beam.

古文：聋灶，亭一鼓。
现代文：再安置垄灶，每个亭子备一鼓。
English: Relocate the hearth, and prepare a drum for each pavilion.

古文：寇烽、惊烽、乱烽，传火以次应之，至主国止，其事急者引而上下之。
现代文：报告敌人来进攻时点燃的烽火，情况十分紧急时的烽火，混战的烽火，情况不一，要依次传火，直至传到国都为止。假如军情紧急异常，还要上下牵引烽火。
English: Report bonfires lit when the enemy comes to attack, bonfires when the situation is very urgent, bonfires in the melee, the situation is different, it is necessary to pass the fire in turn until it reaches the capital. If the military situation is urgent and abnormal, it is also necessary to pull the bonfire up and down.

古文：烽火以举，辄五鼓传，又以火属之，言寇所从来者少多，旦弇还去来属次，烽勿罢。
现代文：烽火点燃后，就先用鼓击五次传板，接着以烽火报告敌人的来向和人数的多少，切不可淹滞误事。敌人来了又去，去了又来，烽火不要熄灭。
English: After lighting the bonfire, first beat the drum five times to start the relay, and then use the bonfire to report the direction of the enemy and the number of people. Don't drown things. The enemy comes and goes, goes and comes, don't extinguish the bonfire.

古文：望见寇，举一烽；入境，举二烽；射妻，举三烽一蓝；郭会，举四烽二蓝；城会，举五烽五蓝；夜以火，如此数。
现代文：刚望得见敌兵，燃一堆烽烟；敌人已入境，烧两堆烽烟；敌人距离外城只一箭之地了，烧三堆烽烟再加烧一个大柴筐；敌人都聚集在外城，烧四堆加烧两个大柴筐；敌人若聚集到城墙下，则烧五堆烽烟加上五个大柴筐。夜晚时就用烽火代替烽烟，数目同上数相同。
English: When the enemy soldiers are just in sight, burn a pile of smoke; when the enemy has entered the city, burn two piles of smoke; when the enemy is only a stone's throw away from the outer city, burn three piles of smoke and add a large firewood basket; when the enemy is gathered in the outer city, burn four piles and add two large firewood baskets; when the enemy is gathered under the city wall, burn five piles of smoke and add five large firewood baskets. At night, use bonfires instead of smoke, the number is the same as above.

古文：守烽者事急。候无过五十，寇至叶，随去之，唯弇逮。
现代文：派出警戒兵时，每次不要超过五十名，若敌人到达外面矮墙，应赶紧离开入城去，不要滞留。
English: When sending out guards, do not exceed fifty each time. If the enemy reaches the outside low wall, they should quickly leave and enter the city, and should not linger.

古文：日暮出之，令皆为微职。
现代文：天黑派兵出城，务必佩戴徽章标志。
English: If you send soldiers out of the city in the dark, be sure to wear a badge.

古文：距阜、山林皆令可以迹，平明而迹，无，迹各立其表，下城之应。
现代文：一切可以探察敌人踪迹的地方如大土山，山林等地，天亮时都要派人探察，要探察的地段，每里路派出者不能少于三人，他们各自都要树立标志向城上报告，城上看到标记则作出相应的反应。
English: In all places where the enemy's tracks can be detected, such as large soil mountains, mountain forests and other places, people should be sent to investigate at dawn. In the areas to be investigated, there should be no less than three people sent every mile. They should each set up a sign to report to the city, and the city will respond accordingly when it sees the mark.

古文：候出置田表，斥坐郭内外，立旗帜，卒半在内，令多少无可知。
现代文：警戒兵出城立田表，城内警戒兵令其坐在郭内外，竖起旗帜，城内的警戒兵一半在郭内，使警戒兵的数目外人无法得知。
English: The sentries went out of the city to set up the table, and the sentries inside the city ordered them to sit inside and outside the walls and raise the flag. Half of the sentries inside the city were inside the walls, so that the number of sentries could not be known by outsiders.

古文：即有惊，举孔表，见寇，举牧表。
现代文：一旦有紧急情况，就举 外表 ，看得见敌人就举 次表 。
English: In the event of an emergency, take cover, and if you can see the enemy, take cover.

古文：城上以麾指之，斥步鼓整旗，旗以备战从麾所指。
现代文：城上用旗号指挥，警戒兵击鼓竖旗、预备战斗，都要按城上的指挥行动。
English: The city commands with banners, the guards beat drums, erect banners, prepare for battle, and must act according to the command of the city.

古文：田者男子以战备从斥，女子亟走入。
现代文：在城外田野里劳动的男子应跟随警戒兵一起作战，女人便赶紧入城。
English: The men who worked in the fields outside the city had to fight alongside the guards, and the women had to rush into the city.

古文：即见放，到，传到城止。
现代文：如果见到敌人就赶紧击鼓，直到传到城上为止。
English: If you see the enemy, beat the drum until it reaches the city.

古文：守表者三人，更立捶表而望，守数令骑若吏行旁视，有以知为所为。
现代文：守联络标志的三个人，还要立烽火烽烟标志和观望别的地方的标志。守城的主将要不断地派出骑兵和官吏到处巡视，了解他们的行动。
English: The three men guarding the signal will also have to set up bonfires, smoke signals and look out for signals from elsewhere. The lord of the castle will constantly send out cavalry and officials to look around and understand their actions.

古文：其曹一鼓。望见寇，鼓，传到城止。
现代文：守标志的警戒兵备有一鼓，望见敌人，依次出鼓报告，直到传到城上时为止。
English: The soldiers guarding the sign had a drum, and when they saw an enemy, they would beat out a report on the drum until it reached the city.

古文：斗食，终岁三十六石；参食，终岁二十四石；四食，终岁十八石；五食，终岁十四石四斗；六食，终岁十二石。斗食食五升，参食食参升小半，四食食二升半，五食食二升，六食食一升大半，日再食。
现代文：计每天吃一斗粮，一年则吃三十六担；计每天吃三分之二斗，一年则吃二十四担四斗；计每天六分之二斗，则一年吃十八担；计每天吃五分之二斗，则一年吃十四担四斗；计每天吃六分之二斗，则一年吃十二担；计每天吃一斗，则每餐吃五升；计每天吃三分之二斗，则每餐吃三升又一小半升；计每天吃四分之二斗，则每餐吃二升半；计每天吃五分之二斗，则每餐吃二升；计每天吃六分之二斗，则每餐吃一升加大半升；每日吃两餐。
English: If you eat a barrel of grain a day, you will eat 36 cords a year; if you eat two-thirds of a barrel a day, you will eat 24 cords a year; if you eat two-sixths of a barrel a day, you will eat 18 cords a year; if you eat two-fifths of a barrel a day, you will eat 14 cords a year; if you eat two-sixths of a barrel a day, you will eat 12 cords a year; if you eat one barrel a day, you will eat five liters per meal; if you eat two-thirds of a barrel a day, you will eat three liters and one and a half liters per meal;

古文：救死之时，日二升者二十日，日三升者三十日，日四升者四十日，如是而民免于九十日之约矣。
现代文：粮食十分紧缺的时期，每人每天按二升吃二十天，每天三升吃三十天，每天四升的吃四十天，照这样推算和实施，每人只要节约九十天，就有一个老百姓不致饿死。
English: In times of severe food shortages, each person should eat two liters per day for twenty days, three liters per day for thirty days, and four liters per day for forty days. According to this calculation and implementation, as long as each person saves ninety days, one ordinary citizen will not starve to death.

古文：寇近，亟收诸杂乡金器若铜铁及他可以左守事者。先举县官室居、官府不急者，材之大小长短及凡数，即急先发。
现代文：如敌兵逼近，就加紧收集偏远地区的金器，铜铁及其它可以用来帮助守城用的物品，先调查登记县中官吏、官府中不急需用的物品、木材大小、长短及总数，赶紧先发送进城。
English: If enemy soldiers are approaching, they will speed up the collection of gold, copper and iron from remote areas and other items that can be used to help defend the city. First, they will investigate the registration of county officials, items that are not urgently needed in the government, the size, length and total number of wood, and quickly send them to the city.

古文：寇薄，发屋，伐木，虽有请谒，勿听。
现代文：敌人一接近，就摧毁房舍，砍伐树木，即使有人求情也不能依从。
English: As soon as the enemy approached, they destroyed houses and cut down trees. Even if someone pleaded with them, they would not listen.

古文：入柴，勿积鱼鳞簪，当队，令易取也。
现代文：运进城里的柴草，不要象鱼鳞一样一片压一片地堆放，要堆到当路的地方，以便于拿取。
English: Firewood and grass brought into the city should not be piled on top of each other like fish scales, but should be stacked in the right place so that it is easy to pick up.

古文：材木不能尽入者，燔之，无令寇得用之。积木，各以长短、大小、恶美形相从。
现代文：不能全数运进城的木材就就地烧掉，不要让其落入敌手。堆放木材，分别按长短、大小、好坏和曲直堆放。
English: If you can't transport all the wood into the city, burn it on the spot, don't let it fall into the enemy's hands. Stack the wood, stack it according to length, size, quality and warp.

古文：城四面外各积其内，诸木大者皆以为关鼻，乃积聚之。
现代文：城外四面运来的财物仍各按四面堆放在城内，所有大木头都要凿好孔穴，以便搬运到一起。
English: The goods brought from the four directions outside the city were still piled up on all four sides inside the city. All large pieces of wood had to have holes drilled in them so that they could be transported together.

古文：城守，司马以上父母、昆弟、妻子有质在主所，乃可以坚守。
现代文：守卫城池的官吏，职位在司马以上的，父母、兄弟、妻子和儿女有人质留在主帅府，才可以坚守。
English: The officials who guarded the castle, whose positions were higher than Sima's, and whose parents, brothers, wives, and children were held hostage at the commander's residence, were able to hold out.

古文：署都司空，大城四人，候二人，县候面一，亭尉、次司空、亭一人。
现代文：任命都司空、大城四人；候二人，县候，城四面各有一人。亭尉，次司空，每亭一人。
English: Four persons were appointed to be watchman of the capital and four persons to be watchman of the metropolis; two persons to be watchman of the county and one person to be watchman of each of the four quarters of the city; and one person to be watchman of the pavilion and one person to be watchman of the next pavilion.

古文：吏侍守所者财足廉信，父母、昆弟、妻子有在葆宫中者，乃得为侍吏。
现代文：在守城主将衙署中任职的官吏，要选择有才能足以任事。廉洁而诚实、父母兄弟妻子儿女有在葆宫中的人，才能担任侍吏。
English: The officials who serve in the office of the lord of the castle must be talented enough to serve. Only those who are honest and honest, and whose parents, brothers, wives and children are in the palace, can serve as attendants.

古文：诸吏必有质，乃得任事。
现代文：所有官吏都一定要留有人质，才能让他承担任务。
English: All officials must have a hostage in order to assign him to a task.

古文：守大门者二人，夹门而立，令行者趣其外。各四戟，夹门立，而其人坐其下。
现代文：守卫城防大门的二个卫士，夹门站着，促行人快步走开，每个城门有四把戟、夹门放着，卫兵坐在戟下面。
English: The two guards guarding the gate of the city defense stand at the gate and urge pedestrians to walk away quickly. Each gate has four shackles, the gate is open, and the guard sits under the shackles.

古文：吏日五阅之，上逋者名。
现代文：头目每天巡检五次，报告逃离卫兵的姓名。
English: The leader patrols five times a day, reporting the names of guards who have escaped.

古文：池外廉有要有害，必为疑人，令往来行夜者射之，谋其疏者。
现代文：壕池外边岸上的要害之处，如果发现有可疑之人，则命令往来巡夜的士兵向其射箭，对疏忽大意者，斩首。
English: Outside the ditch, at a key spot on the shore, soldiers on night patrols were ordered to shoot arrows at anyone they found suspicious, and to behead anyone who was negligent.

古文：墙外水中为竹箭，箭尺广二步，箭下于水五寸，杂长短，前外廉三行，外外乡，内亦内乡。
现代文：城外的水中插上竹箭，插竹箭的地方宽一丈二尺，箭插入水中要比水面低五寸以上，长短错杂，前排外边三行，外边的竹箭尖向外斜，内边的竹箭尖向内斜。
English: Bamboo arrows are inserted into the water outside the city. The place where the bamboo arrows are inserted is one and two feet wide. The arrows are inserted into the water more than five inches lower than the water surface. The length is mixed. There are three lines on the outside of the front row, the tip of the bamboo arrow on the outside is inclined outward, and the tip of the bamboo arrow on the inside is inclined inward.

古文：三十步一弩庐，庐广十尺，袤丈二尺。
现代文：每隔三十步修座房子，收藏弓箭，房子宽十尺，长一丈二尺。
English: The house is repaired every thirty paces, bows and arrows are collected, the house is ten feet wide and two feet long.

古文：队有急，极发其近者往佐，其次袭其处。
现代文：哪一个部队有紧急情况，就立即派就近的其它部队前去增援，又拨出次近的部队去接替防务。
English: If any unit is in an emergency, it will immediately send other nearby troops to reinforce, and allocate the next closest troops to take over the defense.

古文：守节：出入使，主节必疏书，署其情，令若其事，而须其还报以剑验之。
现代文：守城主将发出的符节凭证：凡是出入的使者，掌管凭证的官吏一定要书写记录在案，记载其详情，等他回报时予以验证。
English: The document issued by the lord of the city: the official in charge of the document must write down and record the details of all the messengers entering and leaving the city, and verify them when he returns.

古文：节出：使所出门者，辄言节出时操者名。
现代文：凭证发出：使者凭证出门，无论从某门经过，一律要向上报告凭证出门的时间和拿凭证人的姓名。
English: Issuance of the certificate: The messenger leaves the house with the certificate. Regardless of whether he passes through a certain door, he must report the time of the certificate's departure and take the name of the certificate witness.

古文：百步一队。
现代文：每一百步远布置一支队。
English: Place a team every hundred paces.

古文：閤通守舍，相错穿室。治复道，为筑墉，墉善其上。
现代文：主将衙门的边门与守城主将的房舍相通，旁门互相交错穿插；修建上下复道，筑好墙，在墙上垒放破瓦等物。
English: The side gate of the main gate is connected to the house of the guard of the castle, and the side gates are interlaced with each other; the construction of the upper and lower passages, the construction of the wall, and the placing of broken tiles and other things on the wall.

古文：取疏：令民家有三年畜蔬食，以备湛旱、岁不为。
现代文：要贮存蔬菜食物：使百姓家贮存的蔬菜粮食供够三年吃，用来防备水旱天灾和没有收成的年景。
English: It is necessary to store vegetable food: so that the vegetable grain stored by the people's homes is enough to eat for three years, and is used to prevent floods, droughts, natural disasters and years of no harvest.

古文：常令边县豫种畜芫、芸、乌喙、袾叶，外宅沟井可填塞，不可，置此其中安则示以危，危示以安。
现代文：要经常让边远县预种一些芫华、莽草、乌头、椒叶等毒性植物，外宅的水沟水井可以填掉，不能填掉的就将上述毒性植物投入其中。
English: It is necessary to often let outlying counties preplant some poisonous plants such as eucalyptus, cow parsnip, aconite, and chili pepper, and the gutter wells of outbuildings can be filled, and if they cannot be filled, the above-mentioned poisonous plants will be put into them.

古文：寇至，诸门户令皆凿而类窍之，各为二类，一凿而属绳，绳长四尺，大如指。
现代文：在和平安定的时期，要向百姓说明战争存在的危险，战乱期间则要向百姓讲明从杀敌中求取和平安定。敌人打来时，所有的门户都要凿上两种孔，其中一种孔是用来穿绳子用的。绳子长四尺，指头大小。
English: In times of peace and stability, it is necessary to explain to the people the danger of war, and during times of war, it is necessary to explain to the people to seek peace and stability by killing the enemy. When the enemy comes, all portals must be drilled with two kinds of holes, one of which is used to pierce the rope. The rope is four feet long and the size of a finger.

古文：寇至，先杀牛、羊、鸡、狗、乌、雁，收其皮革、筋、角、脂、脑、羽。
现代文：敌人打来了，就先杀掉牛、羊、鸡、狗、凫、雁等家畜家禽，并收集这些牲畜的皮革，筋骨、角、油脂、脑、羽毛。
English: When the enemy came calling, they first killed cattle, sheep, goats, chickens, dogs, donkeys, geese and other livestock and poultry, and collected the leather, sinew, horns, grease, brains and feathers of these livestock.

古文：彘皆剥之。
现代文：猪都要剥下皮。
English: All pigs must be skinned.

古文：吏橝桐■，为铁錍，厚简为衡枉。
现代文：官吏们选取槚木，桐木，栗木制成铁錍，厚的木料就选做横柱。
English: The officials selected birch, paulownia, and chestnut to make iron posts, and thick wood to make horizontal posts.

古文：事急，卒不可远，令掘外宅林。谋多少，若治城□为击，三隅之。
现代文：如情况紧急仓猝之间无法从远地弄来，就命令就地取材、挖掘外宅的林木，按修缮城墙和攻敌所需的三倍量征收。
English: If it is not possible to obtain wood from far away during an emergency, it is ordered to collect and excavate the trees of the outbuildings on the spot, and collect three times the amount needed to repair the city wall and attack the enemy.

古文：重五斤已上，诸林木，渥水中，无过一茷。
现代文：将重五斤以上的木材浸入水中，数量不可超过一排。
English: No more than one row of logs weighing more than five pounds may be immersed in water.

古文：涂茅屋若积薪者，厚五寸已上。
现代文：用泥涂抹房屋顶和堆积的柴草，泥巴所涂的厚度要有五寸以上。
English: Use mud to smear the roof of the house and the accumulated firewood. The thickness of the mud should be more than five inches.

古文：吏各举其步界中财物可以左守备者上。
现代文：各级地方官吏都要调查和征收所辖地区内可用以辅助打仗的财物上交。
English: Local officials at all levels should investigate and collect the property that can be used to support the war in the area under their jurisdiction.

古文：有谗人，有利人，有恶人，有善人，有长人，有谋士，有勇士，有巧士，有使士，有内人者，外人者，有善人者，有善门人者，守必察其所以然者，应名乃内之。
现代文：世上有谗间之人，有好利之人，有恶人有善人，有具有专长的人，有谋士，有勇士，有巧士，有使士，有能容人者，有不能容人者，有善于待人的人，有善于守门的人，守城主将务必要考察他们为何具备那种品性或特长，名符其实的便接纳使用。
English: In the world, there are good people, there are good people, there are bad people, there are good people, there are people with expertise, there are advisers, there are warriors, there are clever people, there are envoys, there are people who can tolerate people, there are people who cannot tolerate people, there are people who are good at treating people, there are people who are good at guarding doors. The city guard must examine why they have that character or specialty, and accept and use them according to their name.

古文：民相恶若议吏，吏所解，皆札书藏之，以须告之至以参验之。
现代文：百姓们彼此仇恨或对官吏提出控告、及其被告的辩护，都要一起记录在案并收存起来，以待控告人到来时用以参考验证。
English: If the people hate each other, or make a complaint against an official, and the accused defends himself, they should all be recorded and stored together for reference and verification when the complainant arrives.

古文：睨者小五尺，不可卒者，为署吏，令给事官府若舍。蔺石、厉矢诸材器用皆谨部，各有积分数。为解车以枱，城矣以轺车，轮轱广十尺，辕长丈，为三辐，广三尺。为板箱，长与辕等，高四尺，善盖上治，令可载矢。子墨子曰：凡不守者有五：城大人少，一不守也；城小人众，二不守也；人众食寡，三不守也；市去城远，四不守也；畜积在外，富人在虚，五不守也。率万家而城方三里。
现代文：主要说明前文所述各种具体防守战术之外的其它方法和注意事项。比较复杂，但也具有综论性质。 坽 应作 坽 。 民 前疑脱一 吾 字。同。 坽 应作 坽 ； 政 应作 攻 。 城 应作 攻 。 不至城 前疑脱 害 。 兰 应作 蔺 。 少 应作 赏 。 士 应作 土 。 烟 应作 堙 。 应 应作 广 。 炭 应作 灰 。 恚 应作 恙 ； ■ 应作 恿 。 矢 应伯 夫 。 弟 应作 梯 。 叶 应作 堞 。 二百五十八 后脱一 步 字。 侍 应作 倚 。 门 应作 版 。 椠 应作 堑 。 聋 应作 垄 。 旦 应作 毋 ； 还 应作 逮 。 叶 应作 堞 。 唯 应作 无 。 无 前疑脱 迹者 ； 无 后疑脱 下里三人 。 迹 衍误在此。 下城 应作 城上 ； 之应 应作 应之 。 孔 应作 外 。 牧 应作 次表 。 旗 衍误在此； 备战 应为 战备 。 放 应作 冠 。 到 应作 鼓 。 为 应作 其 。 杂 应作 离 。 谋 应作 诛 。 剑 应作 参 。 芸 应作 芒 。 袾 应作 椒 。 乌 应作 凫 。 橝 应作 粟 。 枉 应作 柱 。 谋 应作 课 。 林 应作 材 。 告 字后脱一 者 字。 解 应作 轺 。 城矣 应作 盛矢 。
English: It mainly explains other methods and matters of attention in addition to the various specific defensive tactics mentioned in the preceding paragraph. It is more complex, but it also has a comprehensive nature.  should be. 民前疑脱一吾字.同.  should be ; 政 should be 攻; 城 should be 攻; 不至城前疑脱害; 兰 should be ; 少 should be 赏; 士 should be 土; 煙 should be ; should be 广; 炭 should be 灰;  should be ; ■ should be ; 矢 should be 伯夫; 弟 should be 梯;

