古文：世谓受福佑者，既以为行善所致；又谓被祸害者，为恶所得。
现代文：社会上认为受上天赐福保祐，完全因为是做好事招致的；又认为遭受祸害，是作恶得来的。
English: In society, it is believed that being blessed and protected by heaven is entirely due to good deeds; it is also believed that suffering misfortune is due to evil deeds.

古文：以为有沉恶伏过，天地罚之，鬼神报之。
现代文：以为有掩藏罪恶隐瞒过错的，天地会惩罚他，鬼神会报应他。
English: Heaven and earth will punish him, and ghosts and gods will take revenge on him, who thinks that he can hide his sins and conceal his faults.

古文：天地所罚，小大犹发；鬼神所报，远近犹至。
现代文：而且凡是天地要惩罚的，不管罪恶大小还是要被发现；凡是鬼神要报应的，不管远近仍然可以达到。
English: Moreover, whatever heaven and earth want to punish, no matter how big or small the crime, still needs to be discovered; whatever ghosts and gods want to retaliate, no matter how far or near, can still be achieved.

古文：传曰： 子夏丧其子而丧其明，曾子吊之，哭。
现代文：传书上说： 子夏失掉了儿子又眼睛失明，曾子去安慰他，于是大哭起来。
English: The letter said: "Zo Xia lost his son and lost his eyesight. Zeng Zi went to comfort him and burst into tears.

古文：予之无罪也！ 
现代文：子夏呼喊道： 天哪，我没有罪！ 
English: Zoxia cried out, "My God, I am not guilty!

古文：曾子怒曰： 商，汝何无罪也？
现代文：曾子生气地说： 商，你没有什么罪？
English: Zeng Zi said angrily: "Shang, do you have any sin?

古文：吾与汝事夫子於洙、泗之间，退而老於西河之上，使西河之民疑汝於夫子，尔罪一也；丧尔亲，使民未有异闻，尔罪二也；丧尔子，丧尔明，尔罪三也。而曰，汝何无罪欤？ 
现代文：我与你在洙水与泗水之间侍奉孔夫子，隐退，养老在西河上，你让西河的百姓拿孔夫子来比你，这是你的罪之一。你死了双亲，没有让百姓听到你有特殊的悲哀，这是你的罪之二。你死了儿子，又哭瞎了眼睛，这是你的罪之三。你说，你怎么没有罪呢？ 
English: You and I served Confucius between Surabaya and Surabaya, retired, and lived on the West River. You let the people of the West River take Confucius to you. This is one of your sins. Your parents died, and you didn't let the people hear about your special sorrow. This is one of your sins. Your son died, and you cried your eyes out. This is one of your sins. You say, how come you don't have any sins?

古文：子夏投其杖而拜，曰： 吾过矣，吾过矣！
现代文：子夏立即去掉拐杖赶快下拜，说： 我有过错，我有过错！
English: Zixia immediately removed the crutches and quickly bowed down, saying: I am at fault, I am at fault!

古文：吾离群而索居，亦以久矣！  
现代文：我离开大家独居，已经太久了！  
English: I've been living alone, away from everyone, for too long!

古文：夫子夏丧其明，曾子责以罪，子夏投杖拜曾子之言，盖以天实罚过，故目失其明，已实有之，故拜受其过。
现代文：子夏丧失了视力，曾子以有罪责备他，子夏便丢掉拐杖下拜，恭敬地接受曾子的指责，大概以为上天确实在惩罚有过的人，所以自己眼睛失明，而且自己确实有曾子指出的那些过错，因此下拜恭敬地接受对他过错的指责。
English: Zixia lost his eyesight, Zengzi accused him of guilt, Zixia threw away his crutch, bowed down, and respectfully accepted Zengzi's accusation, probably thinking that heaven was indeed punishing those who had, so his eyes were blind, and he did indeed have those faults pointed out by Zengzi, so he bowed down and respectfully accepted the accusation of his fault.

古文：始闻暂见，皆以为然；熟考论之，虚妄言也。
现代文：刚一听，猛一看，都以为是这样。但仔细分析评论它，是虚假的说法。
English: At first listen, at first glance, I thought it was so. But it is a false statement to analyze and comment on it carefully.

古文：夫失明犹失听也。
现代文：丧失视力就像丧失听力一样。
English: Losing your sight is like losing your hearing.

古文：失明则盲，失听则聋。
现代文：丧失视力就眼瞎，丧失听力就耳聋。
English: Loss of sight is blindness, loss of hearing is deafness.

古文：病聋不谓之有过，失明谓之有罪，惑也。
现代文：生病耳聋不能说是有过失，丧失视力却说有罪，真使人迷惑。
English: To be deaf is not to be guilty, but to be blind is to be guilty. It's confusing.

古文：盖耳目之病，犹心腹之有病也。
现代文：耳朵眼睛生病，就像心腹有病一样。
English: An ear or an eye that is diseased is like a heart that is diseased.

古文：耳目失明听，谓之有罪，心腹有病，可谓有过乎？
现代文：耳朵眼睛丧失视力听力，认为是有罪，那么心腹有病，不就可以认为是有过错了吗？
English: Ears, eyes, loss of eyesight, hearing, considered to be guilty, then a confidant is ill, can it not be considered to be at fault?

古文：伯牛有疾，孔子自牖执其手，曰： 亡之，命矣夫！
现代文：伯牛有病，孔子从窗外握着他的手，说： 没命啦！
English: Uncle Niu was ill. Confucius shook his hand from outside the window and said, "He's dead!"

古文：斯人也而有斯疾也！ 
现代文：这样的人却会得这个病！ 
English: People like that get the disease!

古文：原孔子言，谓伯牛不幸，故伤之也。
现代文：推究孔子的话，是说伯牛不幸运，因而为他悲伤。
English: Judging by Confucius's words, it means that Uncle Niu is not lucky, so he is sad.

古文：如伯牛以过致疾，天报以恶与子夏同，孔子宜陈其过，若曾子谓子夏之状。
现代文：如果伯牛因为过错而招致生病，天以疾病报应就应该跟子夏一样，孔子应该陈述他的过错，像曾子说子夏的罪状一样。
English: If Bo Niu caused Zixia to fall ill because of his fault, Heaven should punish Zixia with illness, and Confucius should state his fault, just as Zengzi said Zixia's crime.

古文：今乃言命，命非过也。
现代文：如今孔子却说是命，命并非是过错。
English: Today, Confucius said that life is life, and life is not a mistake.

古文：且天之罚人，犹人君罪下也。
现代文：天惩罚人，就像君主惩处臣下一样。
English: Heaven punishes man, just as a monarch punishes his subjects.

古文：所罚服罪，人君赦之。
现代文：被惩罚的人服了罪，君主就该赦免他。
English: When the person punished has served his sentence, the sovereign should pardon him.

古文：子夏服过，拜以自悔，天德至明，宜愈其盲。
现代文：子夏已经心服其过错，下拜而表示自愿悔过，天的圣德已表明，就应该使他的瞎眼痊愈。
English: Zixia had already been convinced of his fault, bowed down and expressed voluntary repentance. Heaven's holiness has shown that his blindness should be cured.

古文：如非天罪，子夏失明，亦换三罪。
现代文：如果不是天的惩罚，子夏眼瞎，也就不是三条罪过造成的。
English: If it were not for the punishment of heaven, Zixia's blindness would not have been caused by the three sins.

古文：且丧明之病，孰与被厉之病？
现代文：况且失明的病哪里比得上身上长癞呢？
English: Besides, what is the disease of blindness compared to the growth of warts on the body?

古文：丧明有三罪，被厉有十过乎？
现代文：失明有三条罪，那长癞不有十条过错了吗？
English: Blindness has three sins, but doesn't that long beard have ten faults?

古文：颜渊早夭，子路菹醢。
现代文：颜渊早死，子路被剁成肉酱。
English: Yan Yuan died early, and Zilu was chopped up into meat sauce.

古文：早死、菹醢，极祸也。
现代文：早死、剁成肉酱，是天下最大灾祸。
English: Early death and being turned into meat sauce are the biggest scourges in the world.

古文：以丧明言之，颜渊、子路有百罪也。
现代文：用子夏失明是天惩罚的说法来推论，那么颜渊、子路就有一百条罪状。
English: Using the argument that Zixia's blindness is a punishment from heaven, Yan Yuan and Zilu have a hundred crimes.

古文：由此言之，曾子之言误矣。
现代文：由此说来，曾子的说法是错误的。
English: Therefore, Zengzi's statement is wrong.

古文：然子夏之丧明，丧其子也。子者人情所通，亲者人所力报也。
现代文：子夏失明，是由于丧子。对子女疼爱，是人共同的感情；对父母恩情，是人应竭力报答的。
English: Blindness of a child is due to the loss of a child. Affection for one's children is a common feeling; one should do one's best to repay the kindness to one's parents.

古文：丧亲民无闻，丧子失其明，此恩损於亲而爱增於子也。
现代文：死了父母，周围的群众不知道；死了儿子，却哭瞎了眼睛，这是对父母的恩情不够，而对儿子的疼爱过分。
English: When parents die, the people around them don't know; when a son dies, he cries his eyes out. This is not enough gratitude to the parents, but too much love for the son.

古文：增则哭泣无数，数哭中风，目失明矣。
现代文：过分地爱就哭泣得没完没了，久哭就会中风，于是眼睛瞎了。
English: If you love too much, you'll cry endlessly. If you cry for too long, you'll have a stroke and go blind.

古文：曾子因俗之议，以著子夏三罪。
现代文：曾子按照百姓的议论，因此指出子夏三条罪状。
English: Zengzi pointed out three crimes of Zixia according to the discussion of the people.

古文：子夏亦缘俗议，因以失明，故拜受其过。
现代文：子夏也根据百姓的议论，由于眼睛已经失明，所以下拜承认自己的过错。
English: According to the people's discussion, Zixia also bowed down and admitted his fault because his eyes had gone blind.

古文：曾子、子夏未离於俗，故孔子门叙行，未在上第也。
现代文：曾子、子夏还没有脱离世俗，所以孔子排次序没有把他们列在上等。
English: Zengzi and Zixia had not yet broken away from the world, so Confucius did not rank them higher.

古文：秦襄王赐白起剑，白起伏剑将自刎，曰： 我有何罪於天乎？ 
现代文：秦昭襄王赐给白起一把剑，白起把它放在脖子上将要自杀，喊道： 我对天有什么罪？ 
English: King Qin Zhaoxiang gave Bai He a sword. Bai He put it around his neck and was about to commit suicide. He shouted, "What is my sin against Heaven?

古文：良久，曰： 我固当死。
现代文：过了好一会儿，说： 我本来该死。
English: After a while, he said: I deserved to die.

古文：长平之战，赵卒降者数十万，我诈而尽坑之，是足以死。 遂自杀。
现代文：长平战役，赵国士兵投降的有好几十万人，我欺骗而且全部坑杀了他们，这足以要我死， 于是自杀了。
English: In the Changping Campaign, there were hundreds of thousands of Zhao soldiers who surrendered. I cheated and killed them all. This was enough to make me die, so I committed suicide.

古文：白起知己前罪，服更後罚也。
现代文：白起知道自己以前的罪过，因此接受了后来的惩罚。
English: Baiqi knew his previous sins, so he accepted the later punishment.

古文：夫白起知己所以罪，不知赵卒所以坑。
现代文：白起知道自己罪过的原因，却不知道赵国士兵被坑杀的原因。
English: Baiqi knew the reason for his sin, but did not know the reason why the soldiers of Zhao were killed.

古文：如天审罚有过之人，赵降卒何辜於天？
现代文：如果天确实惩罚有罪过的人，那么，赵国投降的士兵对天有什么罪呢？
English: If heaven does indeed punish the guilty, then what crime did the soldiers of Zhao surrender to heaven?

古文：如用兵妄伤杀，则四十万众必有不亡，不亡之人，何故以其善行无罪而竟坑之？
现代文：如果任军队乱砍乱杀，那四十万人中一定有不该死的人，不该死的人，为什么以他们的善行无罪而竟然被坑杀了呢？
English: If the army is allowed to kill indiscriminately, there must be people among the four hundred thousand who do not deserve to die. Why should people who do not deserve to die be killed for their good deeds?

古文：卒不得以善蒙天之佑，白起何故独以其罪伏天之诛？
现代文：投降的士兵不能以善行蒙受上天的保祐，白起为什么偏偏因为他的罪过而受到天的惩罚呢？
English: A soldier who surrenders cannot receive heaven's blessing for his good deeds. Why should he be punished by heaven for his sins?

古文：由此言之，白起之言过矣。
现代文：由此说来，白起的话错了。
English: From this point of view, the empty words are wrong.

古文：秦二世使使者诏杀蒙恬，蒙恬喟然叹曰： 我何过於天，无罪而死！ 
现代文：秦二世派使者持诏令去杀蒙恬，蒙恬大声地叹息道： 我对上天犯了什么罪过，却要无罪而死呢？ 
English: Qin II sent an envoy with an imperial edict to kill Meng Yao. Meng Yao sighed loudly, "What crime have I committed against Heaven, but I want to die without guilt?"

古文：良久，徐曰： 恬罪故当死矣。
现代文：过了好一会，又慢慢地说： 我的罪本来该死。
English: After a long while, he slowly said again: My crime deserves to die.

古文：夫起临洮属之辽东，城径万里，此其中不能毋绝地脉。
现代文：起自临洮，直到辽东，筑长城，挖沟渠，经过一万里，这中间不可能不断绝地脉。
English: From Linyi to Liaodong, building the Great Wall, digging ditches, passing through ten thousand miles, it is impossible to keep a continuous line in the middle.

古文：此乃恬之罪也。 
现代文：这就是我的罪过。 
English: That was my sin.

古文：即吞药自杀。
现代文：便立刻服药自杀。
English: He immediately took medicine and committed suicide.

古文：太史公非之曰： 夫秦初灭诸侯，天下心未定，夷伤未瘳，而恬为名将，不以此时强谏，救百姓之急，养老矜孤，修众庶之和，阿意兴功，此其弟诛，不亦宜乎！
现代文：太史公责怪他说： 秦国刚灭掉诸侯，天下人心还没有安定，创伤尚未治好，而蒙恬作为名将，不在这个时候极力规劝皇上，拯救百姓的急需，恤养老人，怜悯孤儿，使百姓能和平地生活，却去迎合皇上心意兴武功，筑长城，这样说来，他们兄弟遭受诛杀，不也应该吗！
English: Tai Shikong reproached him, saying: The Qin State has just eliminated the princes, the hearts of the people of the world are not yet stable, the wounds have not yet healed, and Meng Yao, as a famous general, does not at this time strongly advise the emperor to save the urgent needs of the people, support the elderly, pity the orphans, and enable the people to live in peace, but to meet the emperor's intention to perform military feats and build the Great Wall, so to speak, their brothers suffer and are killed, shouldn't they?

古文：何与乃罪地脉也？ 
现代文：为什么却要怪罪 地脉 呢？
English: But why blame the soil?

古文：夫蒙恬之言既非，而太史公非之亦未是。
现代文：蒙恬的话完全不对，而太史公的责怪也不正确。
English: Meng Rong's words are completely wrong, and it is not correct to blame Tai Shihong.

古文：何则？
现代文：为什么呢？
English: Why is that?

古文：蒙恬绝脉，罪至当死。
现代文：蒙恬绝断地脉，罪过大到该死。
English: The scourge cuts off the veins of the earth, and the sin is so great that it deserves death.

古文：地养万物，何过於人，而蒙恬绝其脉？
现代文：可是土地滋养万物，对人有什么过错，而要绝断它的脉呢？
English: But if the earth nourishes all things, what is wrong with man that he should cut off its vein?

古文：知己有绝地脉之罪，不知地脉所以绝之过。
现代文：蒙恬知道自己有绝断地脉的罪，却不知道绝断地脉为什么有罪。
English: Meng Yao knew that he was guilty of severing the earth's core, but he did not know why he was guilty of severing the earth's core.

古文：自非如此，与不自非何以异？
现代文：像这样责备自己，跟不责备自己有什么两样？
English: What's the difference between blaming yourself like that and not blaming yourself?

古文：太史公为非恬之为名将，不能以强谏，故致此祸。
现代文：太史公是责怪蒙恬作为名将，不能对皇上极力规劝，所以招致这杀身的灾祸。
English: Taishi was blaming Meng Ye, as a famous general, for not being able to strongly persuade the emperor, which led to the fatal disaster.

古文：夫当谏不谏，故致受死亡之戮。
现代文：真是该规劝的不规劝因此导致遭受死刑的耻辱。
English: It is indeed a disgrace that the failure to do so leads to the death penalty.

古文：身任李陵，坐下蚕室，如太史公之言，所任非其人，故残身之戮，天命而至也。
现代文：然而太史公自己由于担保李陵而被判刑关进蚕室。如果根据太史公责怪蒙恬的说法，那么他自己就担保了不该担保的人，所以遭受宫刑的耻辱，是天命落在自己头上。
English: However, Taishi Gong himself was sentenced to the silkworm room for guaranteeing Li Ling. If, according to Taishi Gong's accusation against Meng Yao, then he himself guaranteed someone who should not have been guaranteed, so it was his destiny to suffer the disgrace of palace punishment.

古文：非蒙恬以不强谏，故致此祸，则己下蚕室，有非者矣。
现代文：责怪蒙恬因为不极力规劝皇上，所以招致这灾祸，那么自己被关进蚕室，也有不对的地方了。
English: If he blames Meng Ye for causing this calamity because he didn't try hard enough to persuade the emperor, then there's something wrong with him being locked up in the silkworm room.

古文：己无非，则其非蒙恬，非也。
现代文：如果认为自己没有错，那么责怪蒙恬就错了。
English: If you don't think you're wrong, then it's wrong to blame your ignorance.

古文：作伯夷之传，善恶之行云： 七十子之徒，仲尼独荐颜渊好学。
现代文：太史公作《史记·伯夷列传》，排列善恶的秩序说： 七十二门徒，孔仲尼只推举颜渊好学。
English: "Histories, Biographies of the Peasants," a work of great historical importance, arranging the order of good and evil, said: Seventy-two disciples, Kongzhongni only recommended Yan Yuan, who was eager to learn.

古文：然回也屡空，糟糠不厌，卒夭死。
现代文：然而颜渊却屡屡贫穷，连糟糠也吃不饱，终于早死。
English: However, Yan Yuan was repeatedly poor, and could not even eat enough to fill his stomach, and eventually died early.

古文：天之报施善人如何哉！
现代文：可见，上天报应善人是什么样子！
English: You can see what it is like for a good person to be rewarded by heaven!

古文：盗跖日杀不辜，肝人之肉，暴戾恣睢，聚党数千，横行天下，竟以寿终。
现代文：盗跖天天乱杀无辜的人，烤人肉吃，凶暴、任意胡为，聚集朋党数千人，横行天下，竟然能长寿。
English: Burglars kill innocent people every day, eat roasted human flesh, behave violently and arbitrarily, gather thousands of friends and party members, and run rampant in the world, and they can even live a long life.

古文：是独遵何哉？ 
现代文：这上天又遵循的是什么道德呢？ 
English: What kind of morality does this heavenly being follow?

古文：若此言之，颜回不当早夭，盗跖不当全活也。
现代文：像这样说来，颜渊不该早死，盗跖不当长寿。
English: In this way, Yan Yuan should not have died early, and Zou Qi should not have lived long.

古文：不怪颜渊不当夭，而独谓蒙恬当死，过矣。
现代文：埋怨颜渊不该早死，却又偏偏认为蒙恬该死，这是错误的。
English: It is wrong to complain that Yan Yuan did not deserve to die early, but to think that he deserved to die.

古文：汉将李广与望气王朔燕语曰： 自汉击匈奴，而广未常不在其中，而诸校尉以下，才能不及中，然以胡军攻取侯者数十人。
现代文：汉将李广跟望气的术士王朔私下闲谈说： 从汉打击匈奴以来，我没有不参加的，而手下各校尉以下，才能达不到一般水平，然而因跟匈奴打仗有功得封侯的有好几十人。
English: Han general Li Guang gossiped with hopeful sorcerer Wang Shuo Ru: "Since the Han Dynasty cracked down on the Xiongnu, I have never failed to participate, and my subordinates below the rank of captain can not reach the general level. However, there are dozens of people who have been knighted for their war with the Xiongnu.

古文：而广不为後人，然终无尺之功，以得封邑者，何也？
现代文：我李广不比别人差，但是最终没有得到尺寸功劳来取得封地的原因是什么呢？
English: I think Li Guang is no worse than others, but in the end, what is the reason for not getting the size credit to obtain the fief?

古文：岂吾相不当侯？
现代文：难道是我的骨相不该封侯呢？
English: Wasn't it my bone structure that should have brought me a title of nobility?

古文：且固命也？ 
现代文：还是本来命中注定呢？
English: Or was it meant to be this way?

古文：朔曰： 将军自念，岂常有恨者乎？ 
现代文：王朔问道： 将军自己想想，可曾有过悔恨的事呢？ 
English: Wang Shuo asked: Think about it, General, have you ever had any regrets?

古文：广曰： 吾为陇西太守，羌常反，吾诱而降之八百余人；吾诈而同日杀之。
现代文：李广说： 我做陇西太守的时候，羌人曾反抗，我引诱来投降的八百多人，都被我欺骗在同一天杀了。
English: Li Guang said: When I was the governor of Shaanxi Province, the people of Shaanxi rebelled. I tricked more than 800 people into surrendering, and they were all killed on the same day.

古文：至今恨之，独此矣。 
现代文：这事到今天都还在悔恨，就只此一件。 
English: It's something I still regret to this day, just that one thing.

古文：朔曰： 祸莫大於杀已降，此乃将军所以不得侯者也。 
现代文：王朔说： 灾祸没有比杀害已经投降的士兵更大的，这就是将军你得不到封侯的原因了。 
English: Wang Shuo said, "There is no greater calamity than killing a person who has surrendered, which is why the general cannot be put under house arrest.

古文：李广然之，闻者信之。
现代文：李广认为是这样，听的人也相信是这样。
English: Li Guang thinks so, and those who listen to him also believe so.

古文：夫不侯犹不王者也。
现代文：没有封侯，就像没有当上帝王一样。
English: Not having a title of nobility is like not being a god-king.

古文：不侯何恨，不王何负乎？
现代文：没有被封侯因为有悔恨的事，那么没有当上帝王又有什么亏心事呢？
English: If there is no remorse for not being crowned prince, then what is there to regret for not being God's king?

古文：孔子不王，论者不谓之有负；李广不侯，王朔谓之有恨。
现代文：孔子没有当帝王，评论的人并不认为他有亏心事；李广没有被封侯，王朔却认为他有悔恨的事。
English: Confucius did not become emperor, and the commentators did not think that he had something to regret; Li Guang was not made a prince, but Wang Shuo thought that he had something to regret.

古文：然则王朔之言，失论之实矣。
现代文：这样，王朔的话，违反了论事的道理。
English: In this way, Wang Shuo's words violated the truth of the matter.

古文：论者以为人之封侯，自有天命。
现代文：评论的人认为人被封侯，自然有天命。
English: Commentators believe that people who are knighted have a natural destiny.

古文：天命之符，见於骨体。
现代文：天命的征兆在骨相上表现出来。
English: The signs of predestination are manifest in the bone.

古文：大将军卫青在建章宫时，钳徒相之，曰： 贵至封侯。 
现代文：大将军卫青在建章宫的时候，有个脖子上带铁钳的刑徒给他相面后说： 富贵到封侯。 
English: When the great general Wei Qing was building the Zhang Palace, there was a convict with a spade around his neck who gave him a face-to-face meeting and said: "Rich until you become a vassal.

古文：後竟以功封万户侯。
现代文：后来竟然因为有功被封为万户侯。
English: Later, he was awarded the title of "Wanhu Hou" for his achievements.

古文：卫青未有功，而钳徒见其当封之证。
现代文：卫青还没有立功，钳徒就能看出他该封侯的征兆。
English: Wei Qing has not yet made meritorious contributions, and the followers can see the signs that he should be put under house arrest.

古文：由此言之，封侯有命，非人操行所能得也。
现代文：由此说来，被封侯是有天命的，并非是人的操行好就能得到的东西。
English: From this perspective, being given a title of nobility is a matter of fate, not something that can be obtained by good conduct.

古文：钳徒之言实而有效，王朔之言虚而无验也。
现代文：钳徒的话果真有效验，而王朔的话则虚假没有证明。
English: The words of the ruffians have been proved to be true, while Wang Shuo's words have not been proved to be false.

古文：多横恣而不罹祸，顺道而违福，王朔之说，白起自非、蒙恬自咎之类也。
现代文：更多的是任意横行的人却没有遭受灾祸，而遵循正道的人却得不到福，王朔的说法，就等于白起自己认为自己不对、蒙恬自己承认自己有罪一样。
English: It is more common for those who act arbitrarily to not suffer calamity, while those who follow the right path do not receive blessings. Wang Shuo's statement is tantamount to saying that he thinks he is wrong and confessing his guilt.

古文：仓卒之世，以财利相劫杀者众。
现代文：兵荒马乱的时代，为了财物利益互相抢劫残杀的人多。
English: In the era of war and chaos, there were many people who robbed and killed each other for the sake of property interests.

古文：同车共船，千里为商，至阔迥之地，杀其人而并取其财，尸捐不收，骨暴不葬，在水为鱼鳖之食，在土为蝼蚁之粮；惰窳之人，不力农勉商，以积谷货，遭岁饥馑，腹饿不饱，椎人若畜，割而食之，无君子小人，并为鱼肉：人所不能知，吏所不能觉。
现代文：同乘一辆车，共度一条船，去千里之外做买卖，到了空旷遥远的地方，就杀死同伴并夺取他的财物。
English: They share a car and a boat, travel thousands of miles to do business, and when they get to a faraway place, they kill their companion and seize his property.

古文：千人以上，万人以下，计一聚之中，生者百一，死者十九。
现代文：尸体抛弃不收殓，枯骨暴露不埋葬，丢在水里做鱼鳖的食品，抛在地上成蝼蛄、蚂蚁的粮食。
English: The corpse is thrown away and not collected, the dead bones are exposed and not buried, the food is thrown into the water to be used as bait for fish, and the food is thrown on the ground to become maggots and ants.

古文：可谓无道至痛甚矣，皆得阳达富厚安乐。天不责其无仁义之心，道相并杀；非其无力作而仓卒以人为食，加以渥祸，使之夭命，章其阴罪，明示世人，使知不可为非之验，何哉？
现代文：懒惰的人，不花力气务农却全力经商以便积累谷物和钱财，遇上年景饥荒，腹中饥饿不饱，用槌子打人就像打牲畜一样，并把肉割下来吃，不分君子和小人，都被当作鱼肉，外人不可能知道，官吏也不可能发觉，一千人以上，一万人以下，计算起来在一村之中，活的人只有百分之一，死的人有十分之九，可以说没有道义，到了令人痛心的极点，日后这些人又都公开地飞黄腾达，富裕安乐。天不惩罚他们没有仁义之心，在路上抢劫残杀，不惩罚他们不努力耕作而在荒乱年头把人当作食物，不加以大祸，使他们早死，暴露他们隐蔽的罪恶，清楚地给世人看，让人知道这是不能为非作歹的证明，这是为什么呢？
English: Lazy people, who do not spend much effort in farming, but do their best in business to accumulate grain and money, when faced with famine, their stomachs are not full of hunger, they beat people with a mallet as if they were beating livestock, and cut off the meat to eat, regardless of whether they are nobles or villains, they are treated as fish meat, outsiders cannot know, and officials cannot detect, more than one thousand people, less than ten thousand people, calculated in a village, only one percent of the people are alive, and nine tenths of the people are dead, it can be said that there is no morality, to the most painful extreme, in the future, these people

古文：王朔之言，未必审然。
现代文：可见王朔的话未必真实。
English: It can be seen that Wang Shuo's words are not necessarily true.

古文：传书： 李斯妒同才，幽杀韩非於秦，後被车裂之罪，商鞅欺旧交，擒魏公子卬，後受诛死之祸。 
现代文：传书上说 李斯忌妒与他才能相同的人，在秦国囚禁并逼死韩非，后来遭受被车裂的惩罚；商鞅欺骗老朋友，捉了魏公子卬，后来遭受车裂的灾祸。 
English: According to the biography, Li Si was jealous of people with the same talent as him. He imprisoned and forced Han Fei to death in Qin State, and later suffered the punishment of being chariot-split. Shang Qi cheated his old friend, captured Wei Gongzi, and later suffered the calamity of chariot-split.

古文：彼欲言其贼贤欺交，故受患祸之报也。
现代文：作传的人想说他们陷害贤人，欺骗朋友，所以受到灾祸的报应。
English: The biographers want to say that they set up sages and deceived friends, so they suffered the retribution of calamity.

古文：夫韩非何过而为李斯所幽？
现代文：那韩非有什么过错要被李斯囚禁呢？
English: So what fault did Han Fei have to be imprisoned by Li Si?

古文：公子卬何罪而为商鞅所擒？
现代文：公子卬有什么罪过要被商鞅擒捉呢？
English: What is the crime for which he should be arrested?

古文：车裂诛死，贼贤欺交，幽死见擒，何以致之？
现代文：遭车裂处死，如果是由于陷害贤人欺骗朋友，那么韩非被幽杀，公子卬被擒，又是因为什么造成的呢？
English: If Han Fei's death by being run over by a car was the result of a wise man deceiving a friend, then what caused Han Fei to be tortured to death, and Gongzi Yao to be arrested?

古文：如韩非、公子卬有恶，天使李斯、商鞅报之，则李斯、商鞅为天奉诛，宜蒙其赏，不当受其祸。
现代文：如果韩非、公子卬有罪，天让李斯、商鞅来报应他们，那么李斯、商鞅是奉天命惩罚他们，理应受到奖赏，不该遭到祸灾。
English: If Han Fei and Gong Zi Yao are guilty, and Heaven has sent Li Si and Shang Yao to punish them, then Li Si and Shang Yao were sent by Heaven to punish them, and they should be rewarded instead of suffering calamity.

古文：如韩非、公子卬无恶，非天所罚，李斯、商鞅不得幽擒。
现代文：要是韩非、公子卬没有罪，不是天要惩罚他们，李斯、商鞅就不能囚杀韩非，擒捉公子卬。
English: If Han Fei and Gong Zixuan are not guilty, and it is not God who wants to punish them, Li Si and Shang Zi cannot imprison Han Fei and capture Gong Zixuan.

古文：论者说曰： 韩非、公子卬有阴恶伏罪，人不闻见，天独知之，故受戮殃。 
现代文：评论的人解释说： 韩非、公子卬有隐蔽的罪恶，人们听不到、看不见，只有天知道，所以他们遭到杀害的灾祸。 
English: The commentator explained: Han Fei and Gong Zixu both have hidden sins, people can't hear, can't see, only God knows, so they were killed.

古文：夫诸有罪之人，非贼贤则逆道。
现代文：凡是有罪恶的人，不陷害贤人就违背 道 。
English: Every one that doeth evil hateth the light, neither cometh to the light, but is darkness.

古文：如贼贤，则被所贼者何负？
现代文：如果是陷害贤人，那么被陷害的人又有什么亏心的地方呢？
English: If a wise man is framed, then what is wrong with the person who is framed?

古文：如逆道，则被所逆之道何非？
现代文：要是违背 道 ，那么被违背的 道 又有什么不对的地方呢？
English: If it is a violation of the Fa, then what is wrong with the Fa being violated?

古文：凡人穷达祸福之至，大之则命，小之则时。
现代文：凡是人的穷困、发达、灾祸、福禄的到来，大来说就是天命，小来说就是时运。
English: All human impoverishment, development, calamity, and the arrival of good fortune are, to a large extent, the fate of heaven, and to a lesser extent, the fate of time.

古文：太公穷贱，遭周文而得封。
现代文：姜太公最初贫穷低下，遇到周文王才得封侯。
English: At first, Jiang Taigong was poor and lowly. It was only when he met Zhou Wenwang that he was made a vassal.

古文：甯戚隐厄，逢齐桓而见官。
现代文：宁戚先时处境穷困，遇到齐桓公才被任用当官。
English: Ning Qizhi was in a poor situation at the time, but he was appointed as a government official when he met Qi Huan.

古文：非穷贱隐厄有非，而得封见官有是也。
现代文：并不是贫贱穷困的人有过错，而得到封侯做官的人就一定正确。
English: It is not the fault of the poor and destitute, but the person who gets the title of vassal and becomes an official must be right.

古文：穷达有时，遭遇有命也。
现代文：穷困与发达由时运决定，遭灾还是被提拔重用由命决定。
English: Poverty and development are determined by time, disaster or promotion is determined by fate.

古文：太公、甯戚，贤者也，尚可谓有非。
现代文：姜太公、宁戚是贤人，还可以说有不对的地方。
English: Jiang Taigong and Ning Qi are sages, and it can also be said that there are wrong places.

古文：圣人，纯道者也。
现代文：圣人是道德纯厚的人。
English: A saint is someone who is morally pure.

古文：虞舜为父弟所害，几死再三；有遇唐尧，尧禅舜。立为帝。
现代文：虞舜被父亲和弟弟谋害，几乎多次死去；后来受唐尧赏识，尧让位给他，被立为帝王。
English: His father and younger brother plotted to kill him, and he almost died several times. Later, he was appreciated by Tang Xuan, who gave him the throne and made him emperor.

古文：尝见害，未有非；立为帝，未有是。
现代文：曾被谋害，并没有不对的地方；被立为帝王，并不是就都正确。
English: It is not wrong to have been assassinated; it is not right to have been made emperor.

古文：前时未到，後则命时至也。
现代文：以前是天命时运没有到，后来则是天命时运都具备了。
English: In the past, it was fate that the time did not come, but later it was fate that the time had come.

古文：案古人君臣困穷，後得达通，未必初有恶天祸其前，卒有善神佑其後也。
现代文：考察古代的君主大臣先前贫困，后来能发达的人，未必最初都有罪恶，天要灾害他们在前；后来有了善行，神保祐他们在后。
English: An examination of the monarchs and ministers of ancient times shows that those who were previously poor, but later became prosperous, did not necessarily have evil in the beginning. God wanted to bring disaster to them first; later, they had good deeds, and God protected them later.

古文：一身之行，一行之操，结发终死，前後无异。
现代文：同是一个人的行为，同是一种行为的操行，从小到老死，前后没有差异。
English: The same is the behavior of a person, the same is the behavior of a behavior, from childhood to old age, there is no difference.

古文：然一成一败，一进一退，一穷一通，一全一坏，遭遇适然，命时当也。
现代文：然而一个人或成功或失败，或升官或隐退，或贫困或通达，或保全或毁败，都是因为遭祸得福恰好如此，天命时运该当这样。
English: However, a person either succeeds or fails, or is promoted or retires, or is impoverished or achieves, or is preserved or destroyed, all of this is because the misfortune and good fortune happened just so, and the fate of heaven should be like this.

