古文：天道运而无所积，故万物成；帝道运而无所积，故天下归；圣道运而无所积，故海内服。
现代文：自然规律的运行从不曾有过停留和积滞，所以万物得以生成；帝王统治的规律也从不曾有过停留和积滞，所以天下的百姓归顺；圣人对宇宙万物的看法和主张也没有积滞，所以四海之内的人都来归顺。
English: The operation of the laws of nature has never been stagnant, so all things can be created; the laws of imperial rule have never been stagnant, so the people of the world have surrendered; the views and propositions of the sages on all things in the universe have not been stagnant, so people from all over the world have surrendered.

古文：明于天，通于圣，六通四辟于帝王之德者，其自为也，昧然无不静者矣。
现代文：明白于自然，通晓于圣哲，对于了解帝王之德的人来说，上下四方相通和四季的畅达，全都是自身的运动，晦迹韬光不露形迹从不损伤静寂的心境。
English: For those who understand the emperor's virtue, the connection between the four directions and the smooth flow of the four seasons are all their own movements, and the obscurity of the light does not reveal the shape and does not damage the tranquil state of mind.

古文：圣人之静也，非曰静也善，故静也；万物无足以铙心者，故静也。
现代文：圣明的人内心宁寂，不是说宁寂美好，所以才去追求宁寂；各种事物都不能动摇和扰乱他的内心，因而心神才虚空宁寂犹如死灰。
English: The inner tranquility of a saintly person is not to say that tranquility is beautiful, so he pursues tranquility; all kinds of things can not shake and disturb his heart, so his heart and mind are empty and tranquility is like ashes.

古文：水静则明烛须眉，平中准，大匠取法焉。
现代文：水在静止时便能清晰地照见人的须眉，水的平面合乎水平测定的标准，高明的工匠也会取之作为水准。
English: When the water is still, you can clearly see people's eyebrows. The water's plane meets the standard for level measurement, and skilled craftsmen will also take it as a standard.

古文：水静犹明，而况精神！
现代文：水平静下来尚且清澄明澈，又何况是人的精神！
English: When the water calms down, it is still clear and limpid, not to mention the human spirit!

古文：圣人之心静乎！
现代文：圣明的人心境是多么虚空宁静啊！
English: How empty and tranquil is the state of mind of a holy man!

古文：天地之鉴也；万物之镜也。
现代文：可以作为天地的明镜，可以作为万物的明镜。
English: It can be used as a mirror of heaven and earth, and as a mirror of all things.

古文：夫虚静恬淡寂漠无为者，天地之平而道德之至，故帝王圣人休焉。
现代文：虚静、恬淡、寂寞、无为，是天地的基准，是道德修养的最高境界，所以古代帝王和圣明的人都停留在这一境界上。
English: Emptiness, indifference, loneliness, and inaction are the benchmark of heaven and earth, and the highest realm of moral cultivation. Therefore, the ancient emperors and sages stayed in this realm.

古文：休则虚，虚则实，实则伦矣。
现代文：停留在这一境界上便心境空明虚淡，空灵虚淡也就会显得充实，心境充实就能合于自然之理了。
English: If you stay in this realm, your state of mind will be clear and bright, and the dullness of the ethereal spirit will also appear to be rich, and the richness of the state of mind will conform to the laws of nature.

古文：虚则静，静则动，动则得矣。
现代文：心境虚空才会平静宁寂，平静宁寂才能自我运动，没有干扰地自我运动也就能够无不有所得。
English: The empty state of mind can only calm tranquility, and calm tranquility can only be self-movement, and self-movement without interference can also be achieved.

古文：静则无为，无为也则任事者责矣。
现代文：虚静便能无为，无为使任事的人各尽其责。
English: Idleness leads to idleness, and idleness leads to each man doing his duty.

古文：无为则俞俞，俞俞者忧患不能处，年寿长矣。
现代文：无为也就从容自得，从容自得的人便不会身藏忧愁与祸患，年寿也就长久了。
English: Those who do nothing will be at ease, those who are at ease will not hide sorrow and misfortune, and life expectancy will be long.

古文：夫虚静恬淡寂漠无为者，万物之本也。
现代文：虚静、恬淡、寂寞、无为，是万物的根本。
English: Emptiness, dullness, loneliness, and inaction are the fundamentals of all things.

古文：明此以南乡，尧之为君也；明此以北面，舜之为臣也。
现代文：明白这个道理而居于帝王之位，就象唐尧作为国君；明白这个道理而居于臣下之位，就象虞舜作为臣属。
English: If you understand this principle and live in the position of an emperor, you will be like Tang Xuan as a sovereign; if you understand this principle and live in the position of a subject, you will be like Gu Yao as a subject.

古文：以此处上，帝王天子之德也；以此处下，玄圣素王之道也。
现代文：凭借这个道理而处于尊上的地位，就算是帝王治世的盛德；凭借这个道理而处于庶民百姓的地位，就算是通晓了玄圣素王的看法和主张。
English: By virtue of this principle and being in a position of respect, even if it is the virtue of the emperor's reign; by virtue of this principle and being in the position of the common people, even if it is familiar with the views and opinions of King Gensho.

古文：以此退居而闲游江海，山林之士服；以此进为而抚世，则功大名显而天下一也。
现代文：凭借这个道理退居闲游于江海，山林的隐士就推心折服；凭借这个道理进身仕林而安抚世间百姓，就能功业卓著名扬四海而使天下大同。
English: By virtue of this principle, the hermit of the mountain forest will be satisfied when he retreats to the river and the sea; by virtue of this principle, he will be able to enter the forest and appease the people of the world, and he will be able to make great achievements and make the world the same.

古文：静而圣，动而王，无为也而尊，朴素而天下莫能与之争美。
现代文：清静而成为玄圣，行动而成为帝王，无为方才能取得尊尚的地位，保持淳厚素朴的天性天下就没有什么东西可以跟他媲美。
English: To be serene and become a mystic, to act and become an emperor, to achieve a noble position by doing nothing, to maintain a pure and simple nature, there is nothing in the world that can be compared to him.

古文：夫明白于天地之德者，此之谓大本大宗，与天和者也；所以均调天下，与人和者也。
现代文：明白天地以无为为本的规律，这就叫做把握了根本和宗原，而成为跟自然谐和的人；用此来均平万物、顺应民情，便是跟众人谐和的人。
English: To understand the law of heaven and earth, which is based on non-action, is to grasp the root and origin, and become a person who is in harmony with nature. To use this to equalize all things and conform to people's feelings is to be a person who is in harmony with everyone.

古文：与人和者，谓之人乐；与天和者，谓之天乐。
现代文：跟人谐和的，称作人乐；跟自然谐和的，就称作天乐。
English: What is harmonious with people is called human music; what is harmonious with nature is called heavenly music.

古文：庄子曰： 吾师乎！
现代文：庄子说： 我的老师啊！
English: Zhuo Zi said: My teacher!

古文：吾师乎！
现代文：我的老师啊！
English: My teacher!

古文：赍万物而不为戾，泽及万世而不为仁，长于上古而不为寿，覆载天地刻雕众形而不为巧，此之谓天乐。
现代文：拥有万物并不认为那是罪行，恩泽施及万世而不以仁爱自居，生命长于远古而不自认为是长寿，覆天载地、雕刻众物之形而不觉得自己智巧，这就叫做天乐。
English: To possess all things and not to think it a crime, to bestow bounty on all beings and not to think of oneself as benevolent, to live longer than the ancients and not to think of oneself as long-lived, to cover the earth and carve the shapes of things and not to think of oneself as clever, this is called heavenly joy.

古文：故曰： 知天乐者，其生也天行，其死也物化。
现代文：所以说： 懂得天乐的人，他活在世上顺应自然地运动，他离开人世混同万物而变化。
English: Therefore, it is said: "He who understands heavenly bliss lives in the world according to the movement of nature, and leaves the human world to mingle with all things and change."

古文：静而与阴同德，动而与阳同波。 
现代文：平静时跟阴气同宁寂，运动时跟阳气同波动。 
English: When it is calm, yin and yang fluctuate. When it is in motion, yin and yang fluctuate.

古文：故知天乐者，无天怨，无人非，无物累，无鬼责。
现代文：因此体察到天乐的人，不会受到天的抱怨，不会受到人的非难，不会受到外物的牵累，不会受到鬼神的责备。
English: Therefore, those who perceive the heavenly bliss will not receive complaints from the heavens, will not be criticized by people, will not be affected by external things, and will not be reproached by ghosts and gods.

古文：故曰： 其动也天，其静也地，一心定而王天下；其鬼不祟，其魂不疲，一心定而万物服。 
现代文：所以说： 运动时合乎自然的运行，静止时犹如大地一样宁寂，内心安定专一统驭天下；鬼魔不会作祟，神魂不会疲惫，内心专一安定万物无不折服归附。 
English: Therefore, it is said: When in motion, it runs according to nature; when at rest, it is as quiet as the earth; when in a stable state of mind, it rules the world; when in a state of a stable state of mind, it does not fall prey to evil; when in a state of a spiritual state of mind, it does not get tired; when in a stable state of mind, it is obedient to all things.

古文：言以虚静推于天地，通于万物，此之谓天乐。
现代文：这些话就是说把虚空宁静推及到天地，通达于万物，这就叫做天乐。
English: These words are to say that pushing the emptiness and tranquility to the heavens and earth, reaching all things, this is called heavenly joy.

古文：天乐者，圣人之心，以畜天下也。 
现代文：所谓天乐，就是圣人的爱心，用以养育天下人。 
English: The so-called heavenly joy is the saint's love, which is used to nurture the people of the world.

古文：夫帝王之德，以天地为宗，以道德为主，以无为为常。
现代文：帝王的德行，以天地为根本，以道德为中心，以顺应无为而治为常规。
English: The emperor's moral conduct takes heaven and earth as the foundation, morality as the center, and compliance with inaction as the rule.

古文：无为也，则用天下而有余；有为也，则为天下用而不足。
现代文：帝王无为，役使天下人而且闲暇有余；臣子有为，为天下事竭心尽力而且唯恐不足。
English: Emperors do nothing, but serve the people of the world and have plenty of leisure; courtiers do something, do their best for the world and are afraid of not doing enough.

古文：故古之人贵夫无为也。
现代文：因此，古时候的人都看重帝王无为的态度。
English: Therefore, people in ancient times valued the emperor's do-nothing attitude.

古文：上无为也，下亦无为也，是下与上同德，下与上同德则不臣；下有为也，上亦有为也，是上与下同道，上与下同道则不主。
现代文：处于上位的帝王无为，处于下位的臣子也无为，这样臣子跟帝王的态度相同，臣子跟帝王相同那就不象臣子了；处于下位的臣子有为，处于上位的帝王也有为，这样帝王跟臣子的作法就相同了，帝王跟臣子相同那就不象帝王了。
English: The emperor at a higher level does nothing, and the vassal at a lower level does nothing, so that the vassal has the same attitude as the emperor, and if the vassal is the same as the emperor, it is not like the vassal; the vassal at a lower level does something, and the emperor at a higher level does something, so that the emperor and the vassal are the same, and if the emperor and the vassal are the same, it is not like the emperor.

古文：上必无为而用天下，下必有为为天下用，此不易之道也。
现代文：帝王必须无为方才能役用天下，臣子必须有为而为天下所用，这是天经地义不能随意改变的规律。
English: Emperors must do nothing in order to serve the world, and courtiers must do something in order to be used by the world. This is a law that cannot be changed arbitrarily.

古文：故古之王天下者，知虽落天地，不自虑也；辩虽雕万物，不自说也；能虽穷海内，不自为也。
现代文：所以，古代统治天下的人，智慧即使能笼络天地，也从不亲自去思虑；口才即使能周遍万物，也从不亲自去言谈；才能即使能雄踞海内，也从不亲自去做。
English: Therefore, the ancient rulers of the world, wisdom, even if it can encircle heaven and earth, never thought about it personally; eloquence, even if it can encircle all things, never talked about it personally; talent, even if it can dominate the sea, never did it personally.

古文：天不产而万物化，地不长而万物育，帝王无为而天下功。
现代文：上天并不着意要产生什么而万物却自然变化产生，大地并不着意要长出什么而万物却自然繁衍生长，帝王能够无为天下就会自然得到治理。
English: Heaven does not intend to produce anything, but everything naturally changes, the earth does not intend to grow anything, but everything naturally reproduces and grows. If the emperor can do nothing, the world will naturally be governed.

古文：故曰莫神于天，莫富于地，莫大于帝王。
现代文：所以说没有什么比上天更为神妙，没有什么比大地更为富饶，没有什么比帝王更为伟大。
English: Therefore, there is nothing more wonderful than heaven, nothing more bountiful than the earth, and nothing greater than the emperor.

古文：故曰帝王之德配天地。
现代文：因此说帝王的德行能跟天地相合。
English: Therefore, it is said that the emperor's virtue is compatible with heaven and earth.

古文：此乘天地驰万物，而用人群之道也。
现代文：这就是驾驭天地、驱遣万物而任用天下人的办法。
English: This is the way to control heaven and earth, to drive all things, and to appoint the world's people.

古文：本在于上，末在于下，要在于主，详在于臣。
现代文：道德存在于上古，仁义则推行于当今；治世的纲要掌握在帝王手里，繁杂的事务留在臣子的操劳中。
English: Morality existed in ancient times, while benevolence and righteousness are promoted in the present day; the outline of the reign is in the hands of the emperor, and complicated affairs remain in the hands of courtiers.

古文：三军五兵之运，德之末也；赏罚利害，五刑之辟，教之末也；礼法度数，形名比详，治之末也；钟鼓之音，羽旄之容，乐之末也；哭泣衰绖，隆杀之服，哀之末也。
现代文：军队和各种兵器的运用，这是德化衰败的表现；奖赏处罚利导惩戒，并且施行各种刑法，这是诲谕衰败的表现；礼仪法规度量计数，对事物实体和称谓的比较和审定，这是治理衰败的表现；钟鼓的声音，用鸟羽兽毛装饰的仪容，这是声乐衰败的表现；痛哭流涕披麻戴孝，不同规格的隆重或省简的丧服，这是哀伤情感不能自然流露的表现。
English: The use of the army and various weapons is a manifestation of moral decay; rewards, punishments, guidance and discipline, and the enforcement of various criminal laws is a manifestation of moral decay; etiquette, laws and regulations, measurement and counting, comparison and verification of the entity and appellation of things is a manifestation of governance decay; the sound of the bell and drum, the appearance decorated with bird feathers and animal hair, is a manifestation of vocal decay; weeping and weeping, wearing filial piety, ceremonial or simple mourning clothes of different specifications, is a manifestation that sad emotions cannot be naturally expressed.

古文：此五末者，须精神之运，心术之动，然后从之者也。
现代文：这五种微末之举，等待精神的自然运行和心智的正常活动，方才能排除矫矜、率性而生。
English: These five small actions, waiting for the natural operation of the spirit and the normal activities of the mind, can only eliminate coercion and spontaneity.

古文：末学者，古人有之，而非所以先也。
现代文：追求末节的情况，古人中已经存在，但并不是用它来作为根本。
English: The pursuit of finality already existed among the ancients, but it was not used as a fundamental principle.

古文：君先而臣从，父先而子从，兄先而弟从，长先而少从，男先而女从，夫先而妇从。
现代文：国君为主而臣下从属，父亲为主而子女从属，兄长为主而弟弟从属，年长为主而年少从属，男子为主而妇女从属，丈夫为主而妻子从属。
English: The sovereign is the master and his subjects are subordinate, the father is the master and his children are subordinate, the elder brother is the master and the younger brother is subordinate, the elder is the master and the younger one is subordinate, the man is the master and the woman is subordinate, the husband is the master and the wife is subordinate.

古文：夫尊卑先后，天地之行也，故圣人取象焉。
现代文：尊卑、先后，这都是天地运行的规律，所以古代圣人取而效法之。
English: Superiority and inferiority, successively, these are the laws of the operation of heaven and earth, so the ancient sages emulated them.

古文：天尊地卑，神明之位也；春夏先，秋冬后，四时之序也。
现代文：上天尊贵，大地卑下，这是神明的位次；春夏在先，秋冬在后，这是四季的序列。
English: The heavens are high and the earth is low. This is the order of the gods. Spring and summer come first, followed by autumn and winter. This is the sequence of the four seasons.

古文：万物化作，萌区有状，盛衰之杀，变化之流也。
现代文：万物变化而生，萌生之初便存在差异而各有各的形状；盛与衰的次第，这是事物变化的流别。
English: All things come into being through change. At the very beginning, there are differences and each has its own shape. As things rise and fall, this is how things change.

古文：夫天地至神，而有尊卑先后之序，而况人道乎！
现代文：天与地是最为神圣而又玄妙的，尚且存在尊卑、先后的序列，何况是社会的治理呢！
English: Heaven and earth are the most sacred and mysterious, yet there is still a hierarchy, a sequence of precedence, not to mention social governance!

古文：宗庙尚亲，朝廷尚尊，乡党尚齿，行事尚贤，大道之序也。
现代文：宗庙崇尚血缘，朝廷崇尚高贵，乡里崇尚年长，办事崇尚贤能，这是永恒的大道所安排下的秩序。
English: The ancestral temple reveres blood, the imperial court reveres nobility, the countryside reveres the elderly, and the work reveres virtue. This is the order arranged by the eternal road.

古文：语道而非其序者，非其道也；语道而非其道者，安取道！
现代文：谈论大道却非议大道安排下的秩序，这就不是真正在尊崇大道；谈论大道却非议体悟大道的人，怎么能真正获得大道！
English: To talk about the Great Way but criticize the order of the Great Way is not to truly respect the Great Way; to talk about the Great Way but criticize the understanding of the Great Way is not to truly obtain the Great Way!

古文：是故古之明大道者，先明天而道德次之，道德已明而仁义次之，仁义已明而分守次之，分守已明而形名次之，形名已明而因任次之，因任已明而原省次之，原省已明而是非次之，是非已明而赏罚次之。
现代文：因此，古代通晓大道的人，首先阐明自然的规律而后才是道德，道德已经阐明而后才是仁义，仁义已经阐明而后才是职守，职守已经明确而后才是事物的外形和称谓，外形和称谓已经明确了而后才是依其才而任其职，依才任职已经明确而后才是恕免或废除，恕免或废除已经明确而后才是是非，是非明确而后才是赏罚。
English: Therefore, the ancient sages first clarified the laws of nature, and then morality. Morality has been clarified, and then benevolence. Benevolence has been clarified, and then duty. Duty has been clarified, and then the shape and appellation of things. Shape and appellation have been clarified, and then according to their ability to perform their duties. According to their ability to perform their duties has been clarified, and then forgiveness or abolition. Forgiveness or abolition has been clarified, and then right and wrong. Right and wrong have been clarified, and then reward and punishment.

古文：赏罚已明而愚知处宜，贵贱履位，仁贤不肖袭情。
现代文：赏罚明确因而愚钝与聪颖的人都能相处合宜，尊贵和卑贱的人也都能各安其位；仁慈贤能和不良的人也才能都袭用真情。
English: The reward and punishment are clear, so that the dull and the clever can get along well, the noble and the lowly can also be in their respective positions; the benevolent, the virtuous and the wicked can also use the true feelings.

古文：必分其能，必由其名。
现代文：必须区分各自不同的才能，必须遵从各自不同的名分。
English: We must distinguish their different talents, we must follow their different names.

古文：以此事上，以此畜下，以此治物，以此修身；知谋不用，必归其天，此之谓太平，治之至也。故书曰： 有形有名。 
现代文：用这样的办法来侍奉帝王，用这样的办法来养育百姓，用这样的办法来管理万物，用这样的办法来修养自身；智谋不宜用，必定归依自然，这就叫做天下太平，也就是治理天下的最高境界。因此古书上说： 有形体，有名称。 
English: Use this method to serve the emperor, use this method to nurture the people, use this method to manage all things, and use this method to cultivate yourself; it is not appropriate to use wisdom and strategy, and you must rely on nature. This is called world peace, which is the highest realm of governing the world. Therefore, the ancient book said: There is a body, there is a name.

古文：形名者，古人有之，而非所以先也。
现代文：明了并区分事物的形体和称谓，古代就有人这样做，不过并不是把形、名的观念摆在首位。
English: Some people in ancient times understood and distinguished the form and name of things, but they did not put the concept of form and name in the first place.

古文：古之语大道者，五变而形名可举，九变而赏罚可言也。
现代文：古时候谈论大道的人，从说明事物自然规律开始经过五个阶段方才可以称述事物的形体和名称，经过九个阶段方才可以谈论关于赏罚的问题。
English: In ancient times, when people talked about the Tao, they had to go through five stages before they could describe the form and name of things, and nine stages before they could talk about rewards and punishments.

古文：骤而语形名，不知其本也；骤而语赏罚，不知其始也。
现代文：唐突地谈论事物的形体和称谓，不可能了解 形名 问题演绎的根本；唐突地讨论赏罚问题，不可能知晓赏罚问题的开始。
English: Talking about the form and appellation of things abruptly, it is impossible to understand the fundamental of the deduction of the form name problem; discussing the reward and punishment problem abruptly, it is impossible to know the beginning of the reward and punishment problem.

古文：倒道而言，迕道而说者，人之所治也，安能治人！
现代文：把上述演绎顺序倒过来讨论，或者违背上述演绎顺序而辩说的人，只能是为别人所统治，怎么能去统治别人！
English: Those who reverse the above order of deduction, or argue against the above order of deduction, can only be ruled by others, how can they rule others!

古文：骤而语形名赏罚，此有知治之具，非知治之道；可用于天下，不足以用天下，此之谓辩士，一曲之人也。
现代文：离开上述顺序而唐突地谈论形名和赏罚，这样的人即使知晓治世的工具，也不会懂得治世的规律；可以用于天下，而不足以用来治理天下；这种人就称做辩士，即只能认识事物一隅的浅薄之人。
English: A person who abruptly talks about names and rewards and punishments out of the above order, even if he knows the tools of governing the world, will not understand the laws of governing the world; he can be used for the world, but not enough to govern the world; such a person is called a debater, that is, a shallow person who can only know a corner of things.

古文：礼法数度，形名比详，古人有之，此下之所以事上，非上之所以畜下也。
现代文：礼仪法规计数度量，对事物的形体和名称比较和审定，古时候就有人这样做，这都是臣下侍奉帝王的作法，而不是帝王养育臣民的态度。
English: Counting and measuring, comparing and verifying the shape and name of things, some people did this in ancient times. These are all practices of servants serving the emperor, not the attitude of the emperor raising his subjects.

古文：昔者舜问于尧曰： 天王之用心何如？ 
现代文：过去舜曾向尧问道： 你作为天子用心怎么样？ 
English: In the past, Zou had asked Zou: As the son of Heaven, what is your intention?

古文：尧曰： 吾不敖无告，不废穷民，苦死者，嘉孺子而哀妇人。
现代文：尧说： 我从不侮慢庶民百姓，也不抛弃生活无计走投无路的穷苦人民，为死者苦苦焦虑，很好地对待留下的幼子并悲悯那些妇人。
English: Zou said: I never despise the common people, nor do I abandon the poor people who have no way out of life, I worry about the dead, treat the young children left behind well and pity those women.

古文：此吾所以用心已。 
现代文：这些就是我用心的方式。 
English: These are the ways I sing with my heart.

古文：舜曰： 美则美矣，而未大也。 
现代文：舜说： 这样做好当然是很好了，不过还说不上伟大。 尧说： 如此那么将怎么办呢？ 
English: Zou said, "Of course, it's good to do it this way, but it's not great." Zou said, "If it's like this, then what will happen?"

古文：尧曰： 然则何如？ 舜曰： 天德而出宁，日月照而四时行，若昼夜之有经，云行而雨施矣。 
现代文：舜说： 自然而成形迹安宁，象日月照耀，四季运行，象昼夜交替，形成常规，象云彩随风飘动，雨点布施万物。 
English: Zou said: It is naturally formed and tranquil, shining like the sun and the moon, running through the four seasons, alternating like day and night, forming a routine, like clouds floating with the wind, and raindrops spreading all things.

古文：尧曰： 胶胶扰扰乎！
现代文：尧说： 整日里纷纷扰扰啊！
English: Zou said: There have been disturbances all day!

古文：子，天之合也；我，人之合也。 
现代文：你，跟自然相合；我，跟人事相合。 
English: You, fit with nature; I, fit with people.

古文：夫天地者，古之所大也，而黄帝尧舜之所共美也。
现代文：天和地，自古以来是最为伟大的，黄帝、尧、舜都共同赞美它。
English: Heaven and earth have been the greatest since ancient times, and the Yellow Emperor, the Dragon and the Grasshopper all praise it together.

古文：故古之王天下者，奚为哉？
现代文：所以，古时候统治天下的人，做些什么呢？
English: So, what did the people who ruled the world in ancient times do?

古文：天地而已矣。
现代文：仿效天地罢了。
English: It's just an imitation of heaven and earth.

古文：孔子西藏书于周室。
现代文：孔子想把书保藏到西边的周王室去。
English: Confucius wanted to take the treasure to the Zhou royal family in the west.

古文：子路谋曰： 由闻周之徵藏史有老聃者，免而归居，夫子欲藏书，则试往因焉。 
现代文：子路出主意说： 我听说周王室管理文典的史官老聃，已经引退回到家乡隐居，先生想要藏书，不妨暂且经过他家问问一件。 孔子说： 好。 
English: Zi Lu came up with an idea and said: I heard that Laojun, the historian who manages the literature of the Zhou royal family, has retired and returned to his hometown to live in seclusion. If you want to collect books, you might as well go through his house and ask him one thing. Confucius said: Good.

古文：孔子往见老聃，而老聃不许，于是繙十二经以说。
现代文：孔子前往拜见老聃，老聃对孔子的要求不予承诺，孔子于是引述《六经》加以解释。
English: Confucius went to see Lao Zi. Lao Zi did not agree to Confucius' request, so Confucius quoted the Six Classics to explain.

古文：老聃中其说，曰： 大谩，愿闻其要。 孔子曰： 要在仁义。 
现代文：老聃中途打断了孔子的解释，说： 你说得太冗繁，希望能够听到有关这些书的内容大要。 孔子说： 要旨就在于仁义。 
English: Lao Zi interrupted Confucius's explanation and said, "You are talking too much, I would like to hear the gist of these books.Confucius said, "The gist is benevolence.

古文：老聃曰： 请问，仁义，人之性邪？ 
现代文：老聃说： 请问，仁义是人的本性吗？ 
English: Lao Zi said: Excuse me, is benevolence and righteousness part of human nature?

古文：孔子曰： 然。
现代文：孔子说： 是的。
English: Confucius said, "That's right.

古文：君子不仁则不成，不义则不生。
现代文：君子如果不仁就不能成其名声，如果不义就不能立身社会。
English: If a gentleman is not kind, he cannot make a name for himself, and if he is not honest, he cannot establish himself in society.

古文：仁义，真人之性也，又将奚为矣？ 
现代文：仁义的确是人的本性，离开了仁义又能干些什么呢？ 
English: Human nature is indeed benevolence and righteousness. What can we do without benevolence and righteousness?

古文：老聃曰： 请问，何谓仁义？ 
现代文：老聃说： 再请问，什么叫做仁义？ 
English: Lao Zi said: Again, what is benevolence and righteousness?

古文：孔子曰： 中心物恺，兼爱无私，此仁义之情也。 
现代文：孔子说： 中正而且和乐外物，兼爱而且没有偏私，这就是仁义的实情。 老聃说： 噫！
English: Confucius said, "To be upright and to do what is pleasant, to love and not to hate, this is the truth of benevolence and righteousness." Lao Zi said, "Ha!

古文：老聃曰： 意，几乎后言！
现代文：你后面所说的这许多话几乎都是浮华虚伪的言辞！
English: Almost all of what you say later is just so much rhetoric and hypocrisy!

古文：夫兼爱，不亦迂乎！
现代文：正是因为性情已经发生迁腐，才需要强调兼爱！
English: It is precisely because the disposition has been corrupted that it is necessary to emphasize dual love!

古文：无私焉，乃私也。
现代文：正是因为已经存在自私的现象，才需要强调无私。
English: It is precisely because selfishness already exists that selflessness needs to be emphasized.

古文：夫子若欲使天下无失其牧乎？
现代文：先生你是想让天下的人都失去养育自身的条件吗？
English: Sir, do you want everyone in the world to lose the conditions for raising themselves?

古文：则天地固有常矣，日月固有明矣，星辰固有列矣，禽兽固有群矣，树木固有立矣。
现代文：那么，天地原本就有自己的运动规律，日月原本就存在光亮，星辰原本就有各自的序列，禽兽原本就有各自的群体，树木原本就直立于地面。
English: So, heaven and earth originally had their own laws of motion, the sun and moon originally had light, the stars originally had their own sequence, animals originally had their own groups, trees originally stood upright on the ground.

古文：夫子亦放德而行，循道而趋，已至矣；又何偈偈乎揭仁义意，夫子乱人之性也！ 
现代文：先生你还是仿依自然的状态行事，顺着规律去进取，这就是极好的了。又何必如此急切地标榜仁义，这岂不就象是打着鼓去寻找逃亡的人，鼓声越大跑得越远吗？噫！先生扰乱了人的本性啊！ 
English: Sir, you are still imitating the state of nature, following the law to make progress, which is excellent. And why do you have to be so eager to advertise benevolence and righteousness, isn't it like beating a drum to find a fugitive, and the louder the drum, the farther you run? Ha! Sir, you have disturbed human nature!

古文：士成绮见老子而问曰： 吾闻夫子圣人也，吾固不辞远道而来愿见，百舍重趼而不敢息。
现代文：士成绮见到老子问道： 我听说先生是圣人，我便不辞路途遥远而来，一心希望能见到你，走了上百天，脚掌上结上厚厚的老趼也不敢停下来休息休息。
English: When Shicheng Yao saw Lao Zi, he asked, "I heard that you are a saint, so I came all the way from far away, hoping to see you. I walked for hundreds of days, and with thick calluses on my feet, I didn't dare to stop and rest.

古文：今吾观子，非圣人也。
现代文：如今我观察先生，竟不象是个圣人。
English: Now I look at him and he doesn't look like a saint.

古文：鼠壤而余蔬，而弃妹之者，不仁也，生熟不尽于前，而积敛无崖。 
现代文：老鼠洞里掏出的泥土中有许多余剩的食物，看轻并随意抛弃这些物品，不能算合乎仁的要求；粟帛饮食享用不尽，而聚敛财物却没有限度。 
English: There is a lot of surplus food in the dirt dug out of the rat hole, and it is not reasonable to treat these items lightly and discard them at will; there is no limit to the enjoyment of eating and drinking, and there is no limit to the accumulation of wealth.

古文：老子漠然不应。
现代文：老子好象没有听见似的不作回答。
English: Lao Zi did not answer, as if he had not heard.

古文：士成绮明日复见，曰： 昔者吾有刺于子，今吾心正却矣，何故也？ 
现代文：第二天士成绮再次见到老子，说： 昨日我用言语刺伤了你，今天我已有所省悟而且改变了先前的嫌隙，这是什么原因呢？ 
English: The next day, Shicheng Yao saw Lao Zi again and said, "Yesterday, I stabbed you with words. Today, I have reflected and changed the previous grudge. What is the reason for this?"

古文：老子曰： 夫巧知神圣之人，吾自以为脱焉。
现代文：老子说： 巧智神圣的人，我自以为早已脱离了这种人的行列。
English: Lao Tzu said, "I thought I had already left the ranks of clever and holy people.

古文：昔者子呼我牛也而谓之牛，呼我马也而谓之马。
现代文：过去你叫我牛我就称作牛，叫我马我就称作马。
English: In the past, if you called me a cow, I would call you a cow, and if you called me a horse, I would call you a horse.

古文：苟有其实，人与之名而弗受，再受其殃。
现代文：假如存在那样的外形，人们给他相应的称呼却不愿接受，将会第二次受到祸殃。
English: If there is such a shape and people do not want to call it by its proper name, it will be cursed a second time.

古文：吾服也恒服，吾非以服有服。 
现代文：我顺应外物总是自然而然，我并不是因为要顺应而有所顺应。 
English: I'm always a natural conformist, I don't conform because I want to.

古文：士成绮雁行避影，履行遂进而问， 修身若何？ 
现代文：士成绮象雁一样侧身而行不敢正视自己羞愧的身影，蹑手蹑脚地走向前来问道： 修身之道是怎样的呢？ 
English: Shicheng Yao walked sideways like a goose, not daring to face his shameful figure. He crept forward and asked, "What is the path to self-cultivation?"

古文：老子曰： 而容崖然，而目冲然，而颡頯然，而口阚然，而状义然，似系马而止也。
现代文：老子说： 你容颜伟岸高傲，你目光突视，你头额矜傲，你口张舌利，你身形巍峨，好象奔马被拴住身虽休止而心犹奔腾。
English: Lao Tzu said: Your countenance is majestic and haughty, your gaze is penetrating, your forehead is proud, your mouth is outspoken, and your body is towering. It is as if a galloping horse has been chained, and although the body is at rest, the heart is still racing.

古文：动而持，发也机，察而审，知巧而睹于泰，凡以为不信。边竟有人焉，其名为窃。 
现代文：你行为暂时有所强制，一旦行动就象箭发弩机，你明察而又精审，自持智巧而外露骄恣之态，凡此种种都不能看作是人的真实本性。
English: There is a momentary compulsion in your actions, but once you act, you are like a flying arrow. You are observant and discerning. You are clever but arrogant. None of this can be regarded as the true nature of man.

古文：夫子曰： 夫道，于大不终，于小不遗，故万物备。
现代文：边远闭塞的地方有过这样的人，他们的名字就叫做窃贼。 先生说： 道，从大的方面说它没有穷尽，从小的方面说它没有遗缺，所以说具备于万物之中。
English: There have been such people in remote and congested places, and their names are called thieves.The teacher said: Tao, in the large sense, it is inexhaustible, and in the small sense, it is not lacking, so it is said to be present in all things.

古文：广广乎其无不容也，渊乎其不可测也。
现代文：广大啊，道没有什么不包容，深遽啊，道不可以探测。
English: Broad ah, there is nothing intolerant about the road, deep ah, the road cannot be detected.

古文：形德仁义，神之末也，非至人孰能定之！
现代文：推行刑罚德化与仁义，这是精神衰败的表现，不是道德修养高尚的 至人 谁能判定它！
English: The implementation of the punishment of moralization and benevolence, which is a manifestation of spiritual decay, is not a moral cultivation of high moral standards. Who can judge it!

古文：夫至人有世，不亦大乎！
现代文：道德修养高尚的 至人 一旦居于统治天下的位置，不是很伟大吗？
English: Wouldn't it be great to have a morally upstanding man of the cloth once in a position to rule the world?

古文：而不足以为之累。
现代文：可是却不足以成为他的拖累。
English: But not enough to be a drag on him.

古文：天下奋棅而不与之偕，审乎无假而不与利迁，极物之真，能守其本，故外天地，遗万物，而神未尝有所困也。
现代文：天下人争相夺取权威但他却不会随之趋赴，审慎地不凭借外物而又不为私利所动，深究事物的本原，持守事物的根本，所以忘忽天地，弃置万物，而精神世界不曾有过困扰。
English: People all over the world are competing to seize authority, but he will not follow suit, prudently not relying on external things and not being moved by self-interest, delving into the origin of things, maintaining the fundamentals of things, so forgetting heaven and earth, abandoning everything, and the spiritual world has never been troubled.

古文：通乎道，合乎德，退仁义，宾礼乐，至人之心有所定矣。 
现代文：通晓于道，合乎常规，辞却仁义，摈弃礼乐，至人的内心也就恬淡而不乖违。
English: If one is well-versed in the Tao and conforms to the rules, but speaks with benevolence and righteousness, and abandons ceremonial music, then one's heart will be light-hearted and will not disobey.

古文：世之所贵道者书也，书不过语，语有贵也。
现代文：世人所推崇和称道的是书籍。而书籍没有超越语言，语言自有它的可贵之处，比如它的意义。
English: It is books that the world admires and praises, and books do not transcend language, language has its own preciousness, such as its meaning.

古文：语之所贵者意也，意有所随。
现代文：而意义的指向只可意会不可言传。
English: And the direction of meaning can only be inferred.

古文：故视而可见者，形与色也；听而可闻者，名与声也。
现代文：世人因尊崇语言而流传书籍，无论世人如何尊崇，而我却不看重它，因为他们所看重的并不是真正本质的东西。所以可以看到的是形和色，可以听到的是名和声，可悲啊！
English: No matter how much the world reveres language, I do not value it, because what they value is not the true essence of things. Therefore, what can be seen are shapes and colors, and what can be heard are names and harmonies. How sad!

古文：悲夫，世人以形色名声为足以得彼之情！
现代文：世人以为从形色名声中可以探求事物的本质。
English: The world thinks that the essence of things can be explored from all kinds of reputations.

古文：夫形色名声果不足以得彼之情，则知者不言，言者不知，而世岂识之哉？
现代文：如果形色名声不足以表明事物的本质，知道的人就不会去说，说的人就一定不知道。而世上的人又怎能认识到这一点呢？
English: If reputation is not enough to indicate the essence of things, those who know will not speak, and those who speak will not know. And how can people in the world recognize this?

古文：桓公读书于堂上。
现代文：齐桓公在堂上读书，轮扁在堂下斫削车轮。
English: Qi Kuan Gong is reading in the hall, and Ruan Bian is grinding wheels in the hall below.

古文：轮扁斲轮于堂下，释椎凿而上，问桓公曰： 敢问，公之所读者何言邪？ 公曰： 圣人之言也。 
现代文：他放下锥凿走到堂上，向齐桓公问道： 请问您读的是什么书？ 齐桓公说： 是记载圣人之言的。 
English: He put down the chisel and went to the hall, where he asked Lord Qi Huan: What book are you reading? Lord Qi Huan said: It is a record of the saint's words.

古文：曰： 圣人在乎？ 
现代文：轮扁又问： 圣人还在吗？ 
English: Ruan Bian asked again: Is the sage still around?

古文：公曰： 已死矣。 
现代文：齐桓公说： 已经去世。 
English: Lord Qi Kuan said: He has passed away.

古文：曰： 然则君之所读者，古人之糟魄已夫！ 
现代文：轮扁说： 如果这样，您所读的书，都是古人的糟粕啊！ 
English: Luan Bian said, "In that case, the books you read are the dross of the ancients!"

古文：桓公曰： 寡人读书，轮人安得议乎！
现代文：齐桓公说： 我在读书，制作车轮的人怎能随便议论呢！
English: Qi Kuan Gong said: I am reading a book, how can the person who made the wheel talk about it!

古文：有说则可，无说则死。 
现代文：若能说出道理还可以，若说不出道理，就要被处死。 
English: If you can tell the truth, it's fine, but if you can't tell the truth, you'll be executed.

古文：轮扁曰： 臣也以臣之事观之。
现代文：轮扁说： 我就从我所做的工的角度来观察。
English: Lian Bian said: I just observe from the perspective of the work I do.

古文：斲轮，徐则甘而不可，疾则苦而不入。
现代文：斫削车轮，慢了就会松缓而不牢固，快了就会涩滞而难以削入。
English: The milling wheel, if it is slow, will be loose and not firm, if it is fast, it will be astringent and difficult to cut into.

古文：不徐不疾，得之于手而应于心，口不能言，有数存焉于其间。
现代文：不快不慢，手中做到了却在心中想到，嘴里说不出来，这个快与慢的限度就存在于其间。
English: It's not fast or slow, you do it with your hands but think about it in your heart, you can't say it with your mouth, this limit of fast and slow exists in between.

古文：臣不能以喻臣之子，臣之子亦不能受之于臣，是以行年七十而老斲轮。
现代文：我无法把这个技巧告诉给我的儿子，而我的儿子也无法从我这里接受这个奥秘。因此，我都快七十岁了，还在砍削车轮。
English: I can't tell my son about this technique, and my son can't accept this secret from me, so I'm still chopping wheels at almost 70 years old.

古文：古之人与其不可传也死矣，然则君之所读者，古人之糟魄已夫！ 
现代文：古时候的人和他们那些不可言传的东西都已经消失了，那么您所读到的不过是古人的糟粕罢了！ 
English: The ancients and their unspeakable things are gone, so what you read is nothing but the rubbish of the ancients!

