古文：武帝上高祖武皇帝，讳衍，字叔达，小字练儿，南兰陵中都里人，汉相国何之后也。
现代文：高祖武皇帝名衍，字叔达，小字练儿，是南兰陵中都里人，汉朝相国萧何的后代。
English: Emperor Gao Zuwu, surnamed Nanyan, also known as Shuda and Xiaozha Reiner, was a native of Zhongduli, South Lanling, and a descendant of the Han Dynasty statesman Xiao He.

古文：何生酂定侯延，延生侍中彪，彪生公府掾章，章生皓，皓生仰，仰生太子太傅望之，望之生光禄大夫育，育生御史中丞绍，绍生光禄勋闳，闳生济阴太守阐，阐生吴郡太守冰，冰生中山相苞，苞生博士周，周生蛇丘长矫，矫生州从事逵，逵生孝廉休，休生广陵郡丞豹，豹生太中大夫裔，裔生淮阴令整，整生济阴太守辖，辖生州治中副子，副子生南台治书道赐，道赐生皇考讳顺之，齐高帝族弟也。
现代文：萧何生酆定侯萧延，萧延生侍中萧彪，萧彪生公府掾萧章，萧章生萧皓，萧皓生萧仰，萧仰生太子太傅望之，望之生光禄大夫萧育，萧育生御史中丞萧绍，萧绍生光禄勋萧闳，萧闺生济阴太守萧阐，萧阐生吴郡太守萧冰，萧冰生中山相萧苞，萧苞生博士萧周，萧周生蛇丘长萧矫，萧矫生州从事萧逵，萧逵生孝廉萧休，萧休生广陵郡丞萧豹，萧豹生太中大夫萧裔，萧裔淮阴令萧整，萧整生济阴太守萧辖，萧辖生州治中副子，副子生南台治书道赐。道赐生高祖已故的父亲名叫顺之，是齐高帝的族弟。
English: Xiao Jian, Xiao Jian, Xiao Jian, Xiao Jian, Xiao Jian, Xiao Jian, Xiao Jian, Xiao Jian, Xiao Jian, Xiao Jian, Xiao Jian, Xiao Jian, Xiao Jian, Xiao Jian, Xiao Jian, Xiao Jian, Xiao Jian, Xiao Jian, Xiao Jian, Xiao Jian, Xiao Jian, Xiao Jian, Xiao Jian

古文：参预佐命，封临湘县侯。
现代文：因参与辅佐帝王创业，封爵临湘县侯。
English: For his participation in assisting the emperor in starting a business, he was given the title of Lord of Linxiang County.

古文：历官侍中，卫尉，太子詹事，领军将军，丹阳尹，赠镇北将军。
现代文：历任侍中，尉太子詹事，领军将军，丹阳尹，赐赠镇北将军。
English: Successive chamberlains, lieutenant prince Zhan Zhi, leading general, Danyang Yin, gave gifts to Zhenbei general.

古文：高祖以宋孝武大明八年甲辰岁生于秣陵县同夏里三桥宅。
现代文：高祖在宋孝武大明八年即甲辰年生于秣陵县同夏里三桥的住宅。
English: Gao Zu's house in Sanqiao, Tongxiali, Fuling County, where he was born in the eighth year of Song Xiaowu's reign.

古文：生而有奇异，两胯骈骨，顶上隆起，有文在右手曰 武 。
现代文：生下来就奇特异常，两股之间二骨相连，头顶突起，右手上有纹为 武 。
English: He was born with a strange abnormality. Two bones are connected between the two strands, the top of his head is protruding, and there is a mark on his right hand.

古文：帝及长，博学多通，好筹略，有文武才干，时流名辈咸推许焉。
现代文：皇帝到长大时，博学多通，喜爱谋略，有文武才干，世俗之辈和名流都推重赞许他。
English: When the emperor grew up, he was erudite and versatile, loved strategy, had literary and military talents, and was highly praised by the world and celebrities.

古文：所居室常若云气，人或过者，体辄肃然。
现代文：所居之室常像有云雾缭绕，人有经过的，心神则敬畏。
English: The room you live in often seems to be surrounded by clouds and fog. People pass by, but your soul is awestruck.

古文：起家巴陵王南中郎法曹行参军，迁卫将军王俭东阁祭酒。
现代文：出仕初任巴陵王南中郎法曹行参军，升任卫将军工俭的束合祭酒。
English: At the beginning of his service, Wang Nanzhongro Fa Cao of Baling joined the army and was promoted to General of the Guards.

古文：俭一见，深相器异，谓庐江何宪曰： 此萧郎三十内当作侍中，出此则贵不可言。 
现代文：王俭初次相见就十分看重他，对庐红人蛆说： 这个趸郎三十岁之内就要做诗中，过此就贵不可言。 
English: When Wang Jian met him for the first time, he thought highly of him. He said to the red-bearded man, "This young man will be a poet within thirty years of age. You can't say you're too good for that."

古文：竟陵王子良开西邸，招文学，高祖与沈约、谢朓、王融、萧琛、范云、任昉、陆倕等并游焉，号曰八友。
现代文：竟陵王子良设置酉皿官舍，招致有学问之士，高祖与选趣、谢跳、王融、萧琛、范云、任防、陆便等一并在此交游，号称八友。
English: Emperor Lingzhi Liang set up a gong tray official residence, inviting scholars, Gao Zu and Zengqi, Xie Zi, Wang Rong, Xiao Wei, Fan Yun, Ren Bo, Lu Ben and so on to meet here, known as the eight friends.

古文：融俊爽，识鉴过人，尤敬异高祖，每谓所亲曰： 宰制天下，必在此人。 
现代文：王融英俊清朗，见地和鉴别人才的能力过人，特别敬重高祖。常对其亲近的人说： 统辖天下，一定属于这个人。 
English: Wang Rong is handsome and clear-eyed. He has excellent insight and ability to identify talents. He especially respects Gao Zu. He often says to those close to him: "He who rules over the world must belong to this man."

古文：累迁隋王镇西咨议参军，寻以皇考艰去职。
现代文：屡经升迁为随王的镇西谘议参军，不久由于为亡父守丧离职。
English: He was repeatedly promoted to join the army with the advice of Wang Zhenxi, but soon left the army due to his father's death.

古文：隆昌初，明帝辅政，起高祖为宁朔将军，镇寿春。
现代文：隆昌初年，明帝辅政，起用高祖为宁朔将军，镇守寿春。
English: In the first year of Longchang, Ming Emperor Fu Zheng appointed Gao Zu as the general of Ningshuo and appointed him as the guardian of Shuchun.

古文：服阕，除太子庶子、给事黄门侍郎，入直殿省。
现代文：服丧期满，任太子庶子、给事黄门侍郎，入宫廷与台省值班。
English: At the end of the mourning period, he was appointed the prince's illegitimate son, the attendant of the Yellow Gate, and entered the court and the duty of Taiwan Province.

古文：预萧谌等定策勋，封建阳县男，邑三百户。
现代文：因参与萧谌等谋立天子的功勋，封爵建阳县男，食邑三百户。
English: Because of his participation in the meritorious deeds of Xiao Jie and others, he was awarded the title of knight of Jianyang County and became the patron of 300 households in Jianyang.

古文：建武二年，魏遣将刘昶、王肃帅众寇司州，以高祖为冠军将军、军主，隶江州刺史王广为援。
现代文：建武二年，北魏派遣将领刘昶、王肃统率军队侵犯司州，任命高祖为冠军将军、军主，隶属江州刺史王广作为援军。
English: In the second year of Jianwu, the Northern Wei Dynasty dispatched the generals Liu Xuan and Wang Su Tong to invade Sizhou, appointing Gao Zu as the champion general and commander, and subordinate to Jiangzhou Sisi Wang Guang as reinforcements.

古文：距义阳百余里，众以魏军盛，趑趄莫敢前。
现代文：距离义阳一百多里时，大家因为北魏的军队强盛，畏惧犹豫没有人敢进军。
English: When we were more than a hundred miles away from Yiyang, because the Northern Wei army was strong, everyone was afraid and hesitant, and no one dared to march in.

古文：高祖请为先启，广即分麾下精兵配高祖。
现代文：高祖请命先行，王广便分出部下精兵配隶高祖。
English: Gaozu asked for the order to go first, and Wang Guang then sent out his best soldiers to accompany Gaozu.

古文：尔夜便进，去魏军数里，迳上贤首山。
现代文：那天夜裹便进军，离北魏军队几里远时，径直登上贤首山。
English: That night, Wuchuan marched into the army, and when he was a few miles away from the Northern Wei army, he went straight to the top of Xianshou Mountain.

古文：魏军不测多少，未敢逼。
现代文：北魏军队不知来了多少人马，不敢逼近。
English: The Northern Wei army did not know how many men and horses had come, and did not dare to approach.

古文：黎明，城内见援至，因出军攻魏栅。高祖帅所领自外进战。
现代文：黎明时，城裹人看见援军到，于是军队出城攻打北魏军的营栅，高祖统率所带领的部队从外面进击。
English: At dawn, the people in the city saw reinforcements arrive, so the army went out of the city to attack the camp gate of the Northern Wei Army. The troops led by Gao Zu Tong attacked from the outside.

古文：魏军表里受敌，乃弃重围退走。
现代文：北魏的军队内外受敌，便放弃重围撤走。
English: When the Northern Wei army was attacked by enemies both at home and abroad, they abandoned the encirclement and withdrew.

古文：军罢，以高祖为右军晋安王司马、淮陵太守。
现代文：战罢，任命高祖为右军晋安王司马、淮陵太守。
English: After the war, Gao Zu was appointed as Wang Sima of the Right Army of Jin'an and the governor of Huairing.

古文：还为太子中庶子，领羽林监。
现代文：返回后任太子中庶子，领羽林监。
English: After his return, he was appointed the prince's middle child, the leader of the forest inspectors.

古文：顷之，出镇石头。
现代文：不久，出外镇守石头。
English: Soon after, he went out to guard the stone.

古文：四年，魏帝自率大众寇雍州，明帝令高祖赴援。
现代文：四年，魏帝亲自率领大军侵犯雍州，明帝命直担前往援救。
English: In the fourth year, Emperor Wei personally led a large army to invade Yongzhou, and Emperor Ming directly led the rescue.

古文：十月，至襄阳。诏又遣左民尚书崔慧景总督诸军，高祖及雍州刺史曹虎等并受节度。
现代文：十月，到达襄阳，诏令又派遣左民尚书崔慧景统率众军，高祖与雍州刺史曹虎等都受其节制调度。
English: In October, when he arrived in Yangyang, he issued a decree to dispatch Zuomin Shangshu Cui Hui Jing to lead the army, and Gaozu and Yongzhou assassin Cao Hu were subject to his restrained dispatch.

古文：明年三月，慧景与高祖进行邓城，魏主帅十万余骑奄至。
现代文：第二年三月，慧景与高祖进军行至邓城，魏主帅率十多万骑兵忽然来到。
English: In March of the following year, Hui Jing and Gao Zu marched to Dengcheng. Commander Wei suddenly arrived with more than one hundred thousand cavalry.

古文：慧景失色，欲引退，高祖固止之，不从，乃狼狈自拔。
现代文：姜景惊慌失色，打算退兵，高祖坚决阻止他，不听从，便急忙自撤。
English: Jiang Jing panicked and lost his composure, intending to withdraw, Gaozu resolutely stopped him, but he did not listen and hurriedly withdrew.

古文：魏骑乘之，于是大败。
现代文：北魏的骑兵趁机攻打他，于是大败。
English: The Northern Wei cavalry took the opportunity to attack him and suffered a crushing defeat.

古文：高祖独帅众距战，杀数十百人，魏骑稍却，因得结阵断后，至夕得下船。
现代文：衹有高祖率军抗战，杀敌近百人，北魏的骑兵稍稍退却，因而能够列成队形断后，到傍晚才得以下船。
English: Although Gao Zu led the army to resist the war and killed nearly a hundred of the enemy, the Northern Wei cavalry retreated slightly, so they were able to form a formation. After breaking off, they did not get off the ship until the evening.

古文：慧景军死伤略尽，惟高祖全师而归。
现代文：慧景的军队死伤将尽，衹有高祖保全军队而回。
English: Hui Jing's army will be exhausted, but Gao Zu will return to protect the army.

古文：俄以高祖行雍州府事。
现代文：不久任命高祖行雍州府事。
English: Gao Zu was soon appointed to head the Yongzhou government.

古文：七月，仍授持节、都督雍梁南北秦四州郢州之竟陵司州之随郡诸军事、辅国将军、雍州刺史。
现代文：七月，仍任持节、都督雍梁南北秦四州郢州之竟陵司州之郡诸军事、辅国将军、雍州刺史。
English: In July, he was still appointed to hold the festival, the governor of Yongliang, the north and south of Qin, the four states of Ganzhou, the military of the county, the general of the auxiliary country, and the history of Yongzhou.

古文：其月，明帝崩，东昏即位，扬州刺史始安王遥光、尚书令徐孝嗣、尚书右仆射江祏、右将军萧坦之、侍中江祀、卫尉刘暄更直内省，分日帖敕。
现代文：遣一月，明帝逝世，东昏登位，扬州刺史始安王遥光、尚书令徐孝嗣、尚书右仆射迹、石将军萧坦之、侍中江祀、卫尉刘暄轮流在宫中值勤，逐日在奏章上签署意见作为敕命批发。
English: In January, after the death of Emperor Ming and the enthronement of Emperor Dongwu, Yangzhou Prince An Wang Yaoguang, Shang Shuling Xu Xiaozhi, Shang Shuling's right-hand man, Shi General Xiao Tanzhi, Attendant Zhong Jiangzhi, and Guardsman Liu Hui took turns on duty in the palace, and signed their opinions on the musical score as a desperate wholesale every day.

古文：高祖闻之，谓从舅张弘策曰： 政出多门，乱其阶矣。
现代文：高祖听说后，对母亲的叔伯兄弟张弘策说： 朝政出自多家，是祸乱的缘由啊。
English: After hearing this, Gaozu said to Zhang Hongze, his mother's uncle and brother, "Dynasty politics comes from many people, which is the cause of the calamity.

古文：《诗》云： 一国三公，吾谁适从？ 
现代文：《诗经》说： 一国有三公执政，我们听从谁的呢? 
English: "The Book of Songs" says: A country has three princes in power. Whom should we obey?

古文：况今有六，而可得乎！
现代文：何况现在有六人执政，又怎么能成啊!
English: What's more, there are now six people in power, so how can it be done?

古文：嫌隙若成，方相诛灭，当今避祸，惟有此地。
现代文：仇怨若结成，将相互诛灭，当今避祸，衹有此地。
English: If the grudge is forged, it will destroy each other. Today, there is no place to avoid disaster.

古文：勤行仁义，可坐作西伯。
现代文：勤勉地推行仁义，可以自然成为西伯。
English: By diligently pursuing benevolence and righteousness, one can naturally become a Westerner.

古文：但诸弟在都，恐罹世患，须与益州图之耳。 
现代文：祇是弟弟们在京都，恐怕蒙遭世患，需同益州谋划此事呀。 
English: It's just that my younger brothers are in Kyoto, and I'm afraid they'll suffer from the world's troubles, so we need to plan this together with Ikushu.

古文：时高祖长兄懿罢益州还，仍行郢州事，乃使弘策诣郢，陈计于懿曰： 昔晋惠庸主，诸王争权，遂内难九兴，外寇三作。
现代文：当时高祖的大哥萧懿从益州罢官回来，随后行郢州事，于是派弘策到郢州，向萧懿陈述计谋道： 从前晋惠是个昏庸的主子，众王争夺权柄，于是九次兴起内难，三次引来外寇。
English: At that time, Gaozu's elder brother, Xiao Jue, returned from Yizhou after being dismissed from his post, and then went on a trip to Shanzhou, so he sent Hong Cao to Shanzhou to explain the strategy to Xiao Jue: Formerly, Jin Hui was a dull master, and kings competed for power. As a result, internal difficulties arose nine times, and foreign invaders came three times.

古文：今六贵争权，人握王宪，制主画敕，各欲专威，睚眦成憾，理相屠灭。
现代文：如今六位显贵争夺权柄，每人把持着王法，控制君主在公文上画押，各人想独擅威势，极小的怨愤也结仇，按理将相诛杀。
English: Today, six dignitaries are competing for power, each of them holding the royal law, controlling the monarch's signature on official documents, each of them wants to wield power independently, and the smallest resentment also causes revenge, and they will fight each other according to reason.

古文：且嗣主在东宫本无令誉，媟近左右，蜂目忍人，一总万机，恣其所欲，岂肯虚坐主诺，委政朝臣。
现代文：况且后继的君主在东宫时本来没有好的名声，狎昵亲近左右的人，胡蜂对人残忍，总理万机，便将放纵他的欲望，哪裹肯空据君位衹表示同意，将政务委任给朝廷大臣?
English: Moreover, when the succeeding monarch was in the East Palace, he did not have a good reputation, he did not like people close to him, he was cruel to people, and the prime minister had no choice but to indulge his desires. How could the emperor agree to delegate government affairs to the minister of the court?

古文：积相嫌贰，必大诛戮。
现代文：相互猜疑日积月累，一定会兴起大的诛杀。
English: Mutual suspicion is accumulating day by day, and a big fight is bound to break out.

古文：始安欲为赵伦，形迹已见，蹇人上天，信无此理。
现代文：始安想成为趟伦，迹象已经显露，跛足的人要登天，确实没有这样的道理。
English: Shi'an wants to become Wulun, the signs have already been revealed, lame people want to go to heaven, there is really no such reason.

古文：且性甚猜狭，徒取乱机。
现代文：何况生性非常猜忌狭隘，祇会自取祸乱而已。
English: What's more, they are very suspicious and narrow-minded by nature, and will only bring misfortune upon themselves.

古文：所可当轴，惟有江、刘而已。
现代文：所能居要当权者，衹有江柘、刘喧罢了。
English: Those who want to be in power as long as they can are nothing more than gangsters.

古文：祏怯而无断，暄弱而不才，折鼎覆餗，翘足可待。
现代文：江柘懦怯不果断，刘暄软弱没有才干，力薄任重必致败事，翘足可待。
English: Jiang Chen is cowardly and indecisive, Liu Bei is weak and incompetent, and weak leadership will inevitably lead to defeat.

古文：萧坦之胸怀猜忌，动言相伤，徐孝嗣才非柱石，听人穿鼻，若隙开衅起，必中外土崩。
现代文：萧坦之胸怀猜忌，出言即伤人，徐孝嗣的才干不是顶梁柱石，任人操纵，如果矛盾激化祸乱兴起，一定内外土崩瓦解。
English: Xiao Tan's heart is full of suspicion, his words are hurtful, Xu Xiaozhi's talent is not a pillar, it is manipulated by others. If the contradiction intensifies and the calamity arises, the internal and external soil will collapse.

古文：今得守外籓，幸图身计，智者见机，不俟终日。
现代文：如今得以镇守外藩，幸运圃谋安身之计，明智的人能从事物细微的变化中预见其先兆，不需良久。
English: Nowadays, it is possible to live in a township outside the domain, and it does not take long for a wise person to foresee the signs of subtle changes.

古文：及今猜防未生，宜召诸弟以时聚集。
现代文：趁现今猜疑防范还未大兴之时，应当召唤众位弟弟及时聚集。
English: Taking advantage of the fact that suspicion and prevention are not yet in full swing, it is necessary to summon all the younger brothers to gather in time.

古文：后相防疑，拔足无路。
现代文：晚点再相防备，拔足脱身便无路了。
English: If you wait until later to take precautions, there is no way to extricate yourself.

古文：郢州控带荆、湘，西注汉、沔；雍州士马，呼吸数万，虎视其间，以观天下。
现代文：郢州萦绕着荆州、湘州，西面注入漠水、沔水；雍州兵马，招致几万，虎枧其间，来观察天下。
English: Bozhou encircles Jingzhou and Hunan, and the west is infused with marsh water and brackish water; tens of thousands of soldiers and horses from Yongzhou are invited to observe the world.

古文：世治则竭诚本朝，时乱则为国剪暴，可得与时进退，此盖万全之策。
现代文：时代太平社会安定就对本朝竭尽忠诚，时局大乱就为国剪除暴戾，可得以随着世道的变化而进退自如，遣大约是万全之策。
English: In times of peace and social stability, it is necessary to be loyal to this dynasty. In times of turmoil, it is necessary to rid the country of tyranny. It is possible to advance and retreat freely with the changes in the world.

古文：如不早图，悔无及也。 
现代文：如果不早点图谋，后悔莫及呀。 
English: If you don't plan ahead, you'll regret it.

古文：懿闻之变色，心弗之许。
现代文：萧鲸听了脸色改变，心裹却不赞同。
English: Xiao Yu's face changed, but his heart did not agree.

古文：弘策还，高祖乃启迎弟伟及憺。是岁至襄阳。
现代文：弘策回来，高祖便启程迎接弟弟萧伟和萧儋，逭一年到达襄阳。
English: After Hongke's return, Gao Zu set off to meet his younger brothers Xiao Wei and Xiao Yao, and arrived in Yangyang a year later.

古文：于是潜造器械，多伐竹木，沉于檀溪，密为舟装之备。
现代文：于是暗地裹制造军用器械，大量砍伐竹木，沉没在檀溪之中，秘密地作为造船只的备用材料。
English: So they secretly made military equipment, cut down a lot of bamboo, sank in the sand dunes, and secretly used it as a spare material for building ships.

古文：时所住斋常有五色回转，状若蟠龙，其上紫气腾起，形如伞盖，望者莫不异焉。
现代文：当时所住的房屋常有青赤白黑黄五种颜色环绕，形状有如盘伏的龙，其上紫气腾空而起，形状如伞盖，望见者无不以为奇异。
English: At that time, the houses they lived in were often surrounded by the five colors of blue, red, white, black and yellow. The shape was like a crouching dragon, with violet gas rising into the air above it. It was shaped like an umbrella cover, and people who saw it thought it was strange.

古文：永元二年冬，懿被害。信至，高祖密召长史王茂、中兵吕僧珍、别驾柳庆远、功曹史吉士瞻等谋之。
现代文：永元二年冬季，萧懿被害的消息传来，高祖秘密召来长史王茂、中兵吕僧珍、别驾柳庆远、功曹史吉士瞻等谋划。
English: In the winter of the second year of the Yongyuan era, when news of Xiao Yao's death came, Gao Zu secretly summoned the chancellor Shi Wangmao, the middle-ranking soldier Lü Sozhen, the second-ranking officer Liu Qingyuan, and the meritorious officer Shi Jishizhan to plan.

古文：既定，以十一月乙巳召僚佐集于厅事，谓曰： 昔武王会孟津，皆曰 纣可伐 。今昏主恶稔，穷虐极暴，诛戮朝贤，罕有遗育，生民涂炭，天命殛之。
现代文：计定之后，十一月乙巳在官署办公的厅堂召集僚属，对他们说： 从前武王在孟津会盟，都说 殷纣可以讨伐，如今昏庸的君主恶贯满盈，竭力施虐极端残暴，诛减杀戮朝廷贤臣，很少留下其后裔，使生民涂炭，是上天的旨意要诛杀他。
English: After the calculation, in November, Yixi gathered his colleagues in the hall of the government office and said to them: In the past, King Wu in the Mengjin League said that Yin and Yang could fight. Nowadays, the dull monarch is full of evil, trying his best to inflict extreme cruelty, killing and killing the court's wise men, rarely leaving his descendants, and making the people suffer. It is heaven's will to kill him.

古文：卿等同心疾恶，共兴义举，公侯将相，良在兹日，各尽勋效，我不食言。 
现代文：你们要同心疾恶，一道举义起事，获取公侯将相的地位，的确就在此曰，各位立功尽效吧，我绝不食言。 
English: You must be of the same mind to fight evil, to rise up in righteousness together, and to obtain the status of prince and general. Indeed, it is on this very day that I say, let everyone do their best, I will never renege on my word.

古文：是日建牙。
现代文：遣一天树立起义大旗。
English: One day later, the great flag of the uprising was raised.

古文：于是收集得甲士万余人，马千余匹，船三千艘，出檀溪竹木装舰。
现代文：于是招收聚集得到带甲士兵一万多人，战马一千多匹，船只三干艘，起出檀溪中的竹木装建成战舰。
English: As a result, more than ten thousand armored soldiers, more than a thousand horses, and three ships were recruited and assembled, and the bamboo in the sandalwood was taken up and built into a warship.

古文：先是，东昏以刘山阳为巴西太守，配精兵三千，使过荆州就行事萧颖胄以袭襄阳。
现代文：先前，东昏任命刘山阳为巴西太守，配备精兵三千人，派他前往荆州依随行事萧颖胄去袭击襄阳。
English: Previously, the Eastern Committee appointed Liu Shanyang as the governor of Brazil, equipped with 3,000 elite soldiers, and sent him to Jingzhou to follow Xiao Yingyao to attack Xiangyang.

古文：高祖知其谋，乃遣参军王天虎、庞庆国诣江陵，遍与州府书。
现代文：高祖知道他们的谋划，于是派遣参军王天虎、庞庆国到江陵，致书各州府。
English: Gaozu knew of their plan, so he sent Wang Tianhu and Pang Qingguo, who had joined the army, to Gangneung to write to all the prefectures.

古文：及山阳西上，高祖谓诸将曰： 荆州本畏襄阳人，加脣亡齿寒，自有伤弦之急，宁不暗同邪？
现代文：山阳西上时，高祖对众将领说： 荆州本来畏惧襄阳人，加上唇亡齿寒，自有伤弓之鸟般的危急感，难道不会暗中赞同我吗?
English: When Sanyang was moving westward, Gao Zu said to the generals: "Jingzhou is originally afraid of Xiangyang people, coupled with cold lips and teeth, and has a sense of crisis like a bird with a wounded bow. Won't it secretly agree with me?

古文：我若总荆、雍之兵，扫定东夏，韩、白重出，不能为计。
现代文：我若统荆州、雍州之兵，扫荡平定束夏，就是韩信、白起再世，也不能把我奈何。
English: If I unite the soldiers of Jingzhou and Yongzhou, sweep and pacify Sokha, I will be Han Xin, and my reincarnation will not be in vain.

古文：况以无算之昏主，役御刀应敕之徒哉？
现代文：何况是以无足比量的昏庸之主，役使的那帮近侍左右传达旨意的人呢?
English: And what about those who convey the will of the incomparably dim-witted master, aided and abetted by a gang of courtiers?

古文：我能使山阳至荆，便即授首，诸君试观何如。 
现代文：我能让山阳到荆州，便立刻被杀，诸位试着观看如何。 
English: If I can get Shanyang to Jingzhou, I will be killed immediately. You should try it and see how it goes.

古文：及山阳至巴陵，高祖复令天虎赍书与颖胄兄弟。
现代文：山阳至巴陵时，高祖再命天虎携书信给颖胄兄弟。
English: When Sanyang went to Baling, Gao Zu ordered Tianhu to take a letter to Ying Yao's brothers.

古文：去后，高祖谓张弘策曰： 夫用兵之道，攻心为上，攻城次之，心战为上，兵战次之，今日是也。
现代文：待他离去后，高祖对张弘策说： 用兵之道，攻心为上。攻城次之，心理战为上，两兵交战次之，今天就是这样的。
English: After he left, Gao Zu said to Zhang Hongze: In the way of using soldiers, the offensive is the top priority. The siege is the next priority, the psychological war is the top priority, and the engagement of two soldiers is the next priority. This is how it is today.

古文：近遣天虎往州府，人皆有书。
现代文：不久前派天虎去州府，人人都得到书信。
English: Not long ago, Tianhu was sent to the state capital, and everyone received a letter.

古文：今段乘驿甚急，止有两封与行事兄弟，云 天虎口具 ；及问天虎而口无所说，行事不得相闻，不容妄有所道。
现代文：这次乘驿马非常火急，衹有两封书信给行事兄弟，说 天虎当面陈述；等问及天虎却没有什么所说的，行事不能知道什么，不容随便胡说。
English: This time, he was in a hurry. He wrote two letters to his acting brother, saying that Tianhu had made a statement in person; when asked about Tianhu, he had nothing to say, he could not know anything, and he was not allowed to talk nonsense.

古文：天虎是行事心膂，彼闻必谓行事与天虎共隐其事，则人人生疑。
现代文：天虎足行事的得力亲信，他听到后一定认为行事和天虎共同隐瞒了什么事情，于是人人生疑。
English: A trusted confidant of Tianhu, he must have thought that he and Tianhu were hiding something, so everyone was suspicious.

古文：山阳惑于众口，判相嫌贰，则行事进退无以自明，必漏吾谋内。
现代文：山阳被众人口舌迷惑，对他们心起猜疑，于是行事进退无法自明，必定陷落我的计谋之中。
English: Sanyang was bewitched by the tongues of the masses and became suspicious of them. As a result, his actions were not self-evident and he was bound to fall into my schemes.

古文：是驰两空函定一州矣。
现代文：这是驰送两封空函而决定了一州的命运呀。 
English: This is sending two empty letters and deciding the fate of a state.

古文：山阳至江安，闻之，果疑不上。
现代文：山阳到达江安，得知这一情况，果然猜疑不西上。
English: When Sanyang arrived in Jiang'an and learned of this situation, his suspicions were confirmed.

古文：颖胄大惧，乃斩天虎，送首山阳。
现代文：颖胄非常畏惧，便斩杀天虎，将首级送给山阳。
English: Ying Yao was very afraid, so he killed Tianhu and sent the head to Sanyang.

古文：山阳信之，将数十人驰入，颖胄伏甲斩之，送首高祖。
现代文：山阳相信了他，带着几十人驰马进入，颖胄埋伏甲士将他斩杀，把首级送给高祖。
English: Sanyang believed him and entered on horseback with dozens of people. Yingyao ambushed and killed him, and gave his head to Gaozu.

古文：仍以南康王尊号之议来告，且曰： 时月未利，当须来年二月；遽便进兵，恐非庙算。 
现代文：并禀告推尊南康王为帝的计议，且说： 时候不利，应当等到来年的二月；就匆忙进军的话。
English: He also denounced the plan to promote the venerable King Nankang to emperor, saying, "The time is not propitious, we should wait until February of the coming year; if necessary, we should march in haste."

古文：高祖答曰： 今坐甲十万，粮用自竭，况所藉义心，一时骁锐，事事相接，犹恐疑怠；若顿兵十旬，必生悔吝。
现代文：恐怕不是帝王对战事的谋划。 高祖答道： 如今披甲待敌者十万，粮草军用很快自行穷尽，况且所凭据的道义之心，为一时的骁勇敏锐，日久事多，还是怕生猜疑懈怠；如果屯兵百日，必生悔恨。
English: I'm afraid it wasn't the emperor's plan for the war. Gaozhu replied, "Nowadays, there are a hundred thousand people wearing armor to wait for the enemy, and the army of grain and grass will soon be exhausted by themselves. Moreover, the moral heart of the evidence is a moment of courage and acumen, and it takes a long time, and it is still afraid of suspicion and slackness; if the soldiers stay for a hundred days, they will have regrets.

古文：童儿立异，便大事不成。
现代文：若童儿背离，则大事不能成功。
English: If children turn away, great things cannot succeed.

古文：今太白出西方，仗义而动，天时人谋，有何不利？
现代文：如今太白星出现在西方，依仗道义而行动，有天命有人谋，有什么不利?
English: Nowadays, too many white stars appear in the West, acting on the basis of morality, having a destiny and having a plan, what are the disadvantages?

古文：处分已定，安可中息？
现代文：计划已经确定，怎能中途停止?
English: The plan has been set, how can it be stopped in the middle?

古文：昔武王伐纣，行逆太岁，复须待年月乎？ 
现代文：从前武王讨伐殷纣，行动有逆太岁，还需等待什么年月吗? 
English: In the past, King Wu fought against Yin Xi, and the action was too old, do you still need to wait for what years?

古文：竟陵太守曹景宗遣杜思冲劝高祖迎南康王都襄阳，待正尊号，然后进军。高祖不从。
现代文：竟陵太守曹景宗派遣杜思冲劝说高祖迎接南康王建都襄堡，等正定了帝位，然后进军，高祖不听从。
English: Cao Jingzong, the governor of the Mausoleum, sent Du Si Chong to persuade Gao Zu to meet the Nankang King and build the capital, Yangcheng Fort. Gao Zu did not listen.

古文：王茂又私于张弘策曰： 我奉事节下，义无进退，然今者以南康置人手中，彼便挟天子以令诸侯，而节下前去为人所使，此岂岁寒之计？ 
现代文：王茂又私下对张弘策说： 我侍奉节下，义无犹豫可言；然而现在将南康置于他人手中，他人就可挟天子以令诸侯，而节下前去便会被人使唤，这难道是乱世之计? 
English: Wang Mao also said privately to Zhang Hongze: I have served under the festival, there is no hesitation to speak of; however, if Nankang is now placed in the hands of others, others can blackmail the Son of Heaven to order the princes, and if you go under the festival, you will be forced by others. Is this a scheme of the chaotic world?

古文：弘策言之，高祖曰： 若使前途大事不捷，故自兰艾同焚；若功业克建，威慑四海，号令天下，谁敢不从！
现代文：弘策向高祖说起逭事，产祖说： 假使前途大事不成功，还要良莠贵贱同归于尽；如果功业能建成，威慑四海，号令天下，谁敢不顺从!
English: Hongzhe told Gao Zu an anecdote, and the progenitor said: If the future events are not successful, it is necessary for the good, the noble and the lowly to go down together; if the work can be completed, the four seas will be deterred, and the world will be ordered, who dares not obey!

古文：岂是碌碌受人处分？
现代文：哪襄是平庸无能受人摆布?
English: Where is mediocrity, incompetence and being pushed around?

古文：待至石城，当面晓王茂、曹景宗也。 
现代文：等到了石城，将当面晓谕王茂、曹景宗。 
English: When I get to Shicheng, I will tell Wang Mao and Cao Jingzong in person.

古文：于沔南立新野郡，以集新附。
现代文：在沔水以南建立新野郡，用来聚集新近归附的人。
English: Shinno County was established south of Surabaya to gather the newly annexed people.

古文：三年二月，南康王为相国，以高祖为征东将军，给鼓吹一部。
现代文：三年二月，南康王属相国，任命高祖为征束将军，配给鼓吹一部。
English: In February of the third year, King Nankang was in the same country and appointed Gaozu as a conscript general, and he was assigned to preach.

古文：戊申，高祖发襄阳。
现代文：戊申，高祖从襄阳出发。
English: Wushin, Gao Zu set off from Yangyang.

古文：留弟伟守襄阳城，总州府事，弟憺守垒城，府司马庄丘黑守樊城，功曹史吉士询兼长史，白马戍主黄嗣祖兼司马，鄀令杜永兼别驾，小府录事郭俨知转漕。
现代文：留下弟弟萧伟镇守襄阳城，总理州府事宜，弟弟萧儋镇守垒城，府司马庄丘黑镇守樊城，功曹史吉士询兼长史，白马戍主黄嗣祖兼司马，都县令杜永兼别驾，小府绿事郭俨主掌转运粮饷。
English: He left behind his younger brother Xiao Wei to guard Xiangyang City, the Premier of the State Capital Affairs, his younger brother Xiao Yao to guard Bastion City, the prefectural governor Ma Zhuang Qiu Hei to guard Bastion City, the meritorious Cao Shijishi to inquire into the long history, the white horse to lead Huang Shizuo and Sima, the prefectural governor Du Yong to depart, and the small prefectural governor Guo Yao to transport grain.

古文：移檄京邑曰：夫道不常夷，时无永化，险泰相沿，晦明非一，皆屯困而后亨，资多难以启圣。
现代文：向京都发布檄文道：大道不会常常平夷，时世也不能永久太平，险阻舆通达相袭，阴晴明暗非一，都是经历艰难困窘而后通达顺利，资助凭藉太多反而难以开启圣人。
English: To Kyoto, Gongwen Dao was issued: the road is not always smooth, the times are not always peaceful, the dangers of public access collide, the clouds and the sun are not the same, it is all about experiencing hardships and difficulties and then getting through smoothly, but with too much funding, it is difficult to open the sage.

古文：故昌邑悖德，孝宣聿兴，海西乱政，简文升历，并拓绪开基，绍隆宝命，理验前经，事昭往策。
现代文：因此昌邑背德，孝宣兴起，海西乱政，简文登升，都是扩大了先人的事业开创基业，继承发扬了上天的使命，这些道理应验于以前的经典，事迹昭著于过去的简策。
English: Therefore, Changyur's betrayal of virtue, the rise of Xiaoxuan, the chaos of the Western Sea, and the rise of Jianwen are all to expand the cause of the ancestors, create a foundation, inherit and carry forward the mission of heaven. These principles have been fulfilled in the previous classics, and the deeds are well known in the past concise policy.

古文：独夫扰乱天常，毁弃君德，奸回淫纵，岁月滋甚。
现代文：残暴无道众叛亲离的统治者扰乱纲常伦理，毁弃君王之德，奸恶邪僻之人淫逸放纵，随着时间的推移而愈加严重。
English: Brutal, lawless, renegade rulers upset the code of ethics, destroy the virtue of kings, and the debauchery and licentiousness of the wicked and perverse grow worse with the passage of time.

古文：挺虐于剪之年，植险于髫丱之日。猜忌凶毒，触途而著，暴戾昏荒，与事而发。
现代文：在小儿去发之年就揉和进了残虐的品质，幼年的时候就植入了凶险的性格。猜忌凶毒，处处显明，暴戾昏荒，遇事而发。
English: In the year of the child's departure, the cruel quality was rubbed into the film, and the dangerous character was implanted at an early age. Suspicion and viciousness are evident everywhere, violence is drowsy, and it happens in an emergency.

古文：自大行告渐，喜容前见，梓宫在殡，靦无哀色，欢娱游宴，有过平常，奇服异衣，更极夸丽。
现代文：从新死的皇帝告知病危时，欣喜之容色就早早呈现，帝王的棺椁还未下葬，就面无哀伤的颜色，欢快娱乐游玩宴饮，超过平常，奇装异服，愈加极尽美好绮丽。
English: From the time when the newly dead emperor was told that his illness was critical, the look of joy appeared early. The emperor's coffin had not yet been buried, so there was no sad color on the face, cheerful entertainment, play, feasting, more than usual, strange clothes, and more extremely beautiful.

古文：至于选采妃嫔，姊妹无别，招侍巾栉，姑侄莫辨，掖庭有稗贩之名，姬姜被干殳之服。
现代文：至于选取妃嫔，姊妹无别，招待用的盥洗用具，姑侄莫辨，妃嫔住地有商贩之名，美女着兵戎之服。
English: As for the selection of concubines, there is no difference between sisters, toiletry items for invitations, aunts and nephews are indistinguishable, concubines have the name of merchants, and beautiful women wear military uniforms.

古文：至乃形体宣露，亵衣颠倒，斩斫其间，以为欢笑。
现代文：至于形体裸露。内衣外穿，斫杀其间，以此作为取笑快乐。
English: As for nudity, they wear their underwear on the outside and fight with it on the inside as a joke.

古文：骋肆淫放，驱屏郊邑。
现代文：放肆淫荡，驱逐弃置郊野。
English: licentiousness, expulsion and abandonment of the countryside.

古文：老弱波流，士女涂炭。
现代文：老弱流离，士女涂炭。
English: The old and the weak have been displaced, and women and men have been left behind.

古文：行产盈路，舆尸竟道，母不及抱，子不遑哭。
现代文：途中分娩盈路，车运尸首满道，母亲来不及怀抱，子女无暇哭泣。
English: Midway through the delivery, the road is full of bodies, the mother can't hold them, and the children have no time to cry.

古文：劫掠剽虏，以日继夜。昼伏宵游，曾无休息。
现代文：抢劫掳掠，日夜不停。昼伏夜游，从不休息。
English: Robbery and plunder, day and night non-stop. Day and night, never rest.

古文：淫酗摐肆，酣歌垆邸。
现代文：酗酒荒淫，酣歌酒店。
English: Alcoholism and debauchery, the Yingge Hotel.

古文：宠恣愚竖，乱惑妖甗。
现代文：宠幸纵恣愚蠢的小人，昏乱迷惑于邪恶的奸臣。
English: Favored by a foolish villain, bewildered by an evil traitor.

古文：梅虫儿、茹法珍臧获斯小，专制威柄，诛剪忠良，屠灭卿宰。
现代文：梅虫儿、茹法珍是奴婢小于，独断威权，减除忠良，屠杀大臣。
English: Mei Zuer and Ru Fazhen are less than slaves, arbitrary authority, deduction of loyalty, and minister of slaughter.

古文：刘镇军舅氏之尊，尽忠奉国；江仆射外戚之重，竭诚事上；萧领军葭莩之宗，志存柱石；徐司空、沈仆射搢绅冠冕，人望攸归。
现代文：刘镇军有舅父之尊，尽忠奉国；江仆射有外戚之重，竭诚事上；萧领军为同宗远亲，志在堪当国家重任；徐司空、沈仆射为仕宦之家，众人所属望。
English: Liu Zhenjun has the honor of an uncle and serves the country faithfully; Jiangpu Shao has the weight of a relative and is dedicated to the cause; Xiao Lianjun is a distant relative of the same clan and aspires to be worthy of the heavy responsibilities of the country; Xu Siku and Shenpu Shao are the family of Shao, and everyone hopes to belong to them.

古文：或《渭阳》余感，或勋庸允穆，或诚著艰难，或劬劳王室，并受遗托，同参顾命，送往事居，俱竭心力。
现代文：有的是甥舅之情，有的是淳和有功勋，有的是艰难时忠诚昭著，有的是为了王室奔波劳苦，都受到了遣韶重托，共同参与帝王临终交付的国家大事，祭送死去的君主事奉新立的帝王，一起竭尽心力。
English: Some are nephews, some are honorable and meritorious, some are loyal in difficult times, and some are working hard for the royal family. They have all been entrusted to jointly participate in the national events delivered by the emperor on his deathbed, send the dead monarch to serve the newly established emperor, and make every effort together.

古文：宜其庆溢当年，祚隆后裔；而一朝齑粉，孩稚无遗。
现代文：应该是福泽充溢当时，福运隆盛及于后代；然而一时被灭，孩童不留。
English: At that time, there should have been an abundance of good fortune, and the prosperity of good fortune should have extended to future generations; however, it was destroyed for a while, and no children were left behind.

古文：人神怨结，行路嗟愤。
现代文：人与神怨气郁结，路人叹恨。
English: People and gods are bitterly resentful, and passers-by lament.

古文：萧令君忠公干伐，诚贯幽显。
现代文：萧令君忠正建立功勋，诚信贯通阴阳二界。
English: Xiao Lingjun's loyalty is to establish merit, and integrity runs through the yin and yang worlds.

古文：往年寇贼游魂，南郑危逼，拔刃飞泉，孤城独振。
现代文：从前寇贼似鬼魂游动不定，南郑被逼危险时，他拔刀刺山飞泉涌出，使孤城大振。
English: Once upon a time, robbers swam around like ghosts. When Nan Zheng was forced into danger, he drew his sword and stabbed the mountain, causing the spring to gush out and shaking the lonely city.

古文：及中流逆命，凭陵京邑，谋猷禁省，指授群帅，克剪鲸鲵，清我王度。
现代文：到长江中游一带违命，侵犯京城时，谋略皇宫，指示众帅，减除凶敌，清我王法。
English: To the middle reaches of the Yangtze River, when violating orders and encroaching on the capital, strategize the imperial palace, instruct the generals, reduce the fierce enemy, and clear our king's law.

古文：崔慧景奇锋迅骇，兵交象魏，武力丧魂，义夫夺胆，投名送款，比屋交驰，负粮影从，愚智竞赴。
现代文：崔慧景奇袭敌人的先锋部队迅疾骇人，交战于宫阙，武卒丧魂，义士夺胆，投递名帖降服归顺，家家户户交相奔走往来不断，背送粮食如影随形，愚人智者竞相前往。
English: Cui Huiqing's surprise attack on the enemy's vanguard troops was swift and terrifying, the battle was fought in the palace, the soldiers lost their souls, the righteous men lost their courage, handed in their famous epistles, surrendered, and went back and forth from house to house, carrying back grain like a shadow, and the foolish and the wise competed to go.

古文：复誓旅江甸，奋不顾身，奖厉义徒，电掩强敌，克歼大憝，以固皇基。
现代文：又誓师江南，奋不顾身，奖赏激励义兵，如闪电突袭强敌，消灭元凶，用来巩固皇帝的基业。
English: He also vowed to go south of the Yangtze River, work hard, reward and encourage volunteers, such as lightning raids on strong enemies, eliminate the culprits, and use them to consolidate the emperor's foundation.

古文：功出桓、文，勋超伊、吕；而劳谦省己，事昭心迹，功遂身退，不祈荣满。
现代文：功劳高出齐桓、晋文，勋业超过伊尹、吕尚；却勤劳谦恭自我反省，理事昭明心迹，功成身退，不求荣盛美满。
English: His merits are higher than those of Qi Huan and Jin Wen, and his distinguished career surpasses those of Yi Yin and Lü Shang; however, he is diligent, humble and self-reflective, and the director has made his intentions clear. He does not seek glory.

古文：敦赏未闻，祸酷遄及，预禀精灵，孰不冤痛！
现代文：没有听说有所推崇奖励，反而大祸迅速降及，询问禀告神灵，谁不为之感到冤屈悲痛!
English: It is not heard that there is a reward for praising, but a great calamity quickly descends, ask the obituary gods, who do not feel wronged and saddened!

古文：而群孽放命，蜂虿怀毒，乃遣刘山阳驱扇逋逃，招逼亡命，潜图密构，规见掩袭。
现代文：而且群恶违命，恶人怀毒，还派刘山阳驱策煽动逃亡的罪人，招集威逼亡命之徒，暗中图谋密划，计划突然袭击。
English: Moreover, the group of evildoers disobeyed orders, the evildoers harbored poison, and Liu Shanyang was also sent to instigate and incite the fleeing criminals, to summon and intimidate the outlaws, to secretly plot and plan a surprise attack.

古文：萧右军、夏侯征虏忠断夙举，义形于色，奇谋宏振，应手枭悬，天道祸淫，罪不容戮。
现代文：萧右军、夏侯征虏忠诚果断为平素之举，正义之色现于颜面，奇谋大振，被随手斩首悬挂示众，淫逸过度则天降之以祸，罪恶不能宽容当遭杀戮。
English: For Xiao Yu Jun and Xia Hou, the decision to conscript and capture people was a simple act of loyalty, the color of justice appeared on their faces, they were very resourceful, they were decapitated and hung up for the public to see, and if they were too lascivious, they were doomed to disaster. They could not tolerate evil and were killed.

古文：至于悖礼违教，伤化虐人，射天弹路，比之犹善，刳胎斫胫，方之非酷，尽珝县之竹，未足纪其过，穷山泽之兔，不能书其罪。
现代文：至于违背礼教，损害教化虐待人民，仰射天神伏弹路人，比这还善，剖挖孕妇胎儿斩断人的胆骨，较之不酷，竭尽天下之竹，不足以言眬其过，穷尽山野之兔，不够书写其罪。
English: As for violating etiquette, harming, indoctrinating, and abusing the people, shooting at the gods and shooting at passersby, this is better than that, dissecting a pregnant woman's fetus and cutting off a person's gallbladder are not cool, exhausting all the bamboo in the world is not enough to say it, and exhausting the rabbits in the mountains and fields is not enough to write their sins.

古文：自草昧以来，图牒所记，昏君暴后，未有若斯之甚者也。
现代文：从蒙昧以来，图书所记，昏君暴主，没有如此厉害的了。
English: Not since the Dark Ages has there been such a powerful tyrant, as described in books.

古文：既人神乏主，宗稷阽危，海内沸腾，氓庶板荡，百姓懔懔，如崩厥角，苍生喁喁，投足无地。
现代文：既然入神乏主，宗庙社稷临近危险，海内怨恨沸腾，民众动乱，百姓恐惧，如牲畜崩摧其角那样，黎民仰望期待，投足无地。
English: Since there is a lack of masters, the ancestral temples and shrines are in imminent danger, the resentment at home is boiling, the people are in turmoil, and the people are afraid, as if the cattle were breaking their horns, the Li people are looking up and looking forward, and have no ground to stand on.

古文：幕府荷眷前朝，义均休戚，上怀委付之重，下惟在原之痛，岂可卧薪引火，坐观倾覆！
现代文：幕府荷蒙前朝恩宠，理应休戚与共，上怀托付之重任，下念兄弟之悲痛，哪裹能卧薪引火，坐观倾覆!
English: The shogunate was beholden to the grace of the previous dynasty, and it was right to stand shoulder to shoulder with them. The heavy responsibility entrusted to the upper house, the grief of the brothers remembered by the lower house, how can you ignite a fire while lying down, and watch it topple over!

古文：至尊体自高宗，特钟慈宠，明并日月，粹昭灵神，祥启元龟，符验当璧，作镇陕籓，化流西夏，讴歌攸奉，万有乐推。
现代文：皇上出自高宗，特别倾注慈爱恩宠，光明比并日月，纯洁辉耀神灵。祥瑞启始大龟，符合立为国君之征兆，镇守陕地，德化传市西夏，嘻歌献奉，百姓乐意拥戴。
English: The emperor came from Gaozong, with a special outpouring of benevolence and grace, with the brightness of the sun and the moon, and the purity of the gods. Xiang Rui initiated the Great Turtle, which is in line with the signs of being the ruler of the country, guarding the Shaanxi Province, passing the western summer of the city of Dehua, and dedicating hip-hop songs, which the people are willing to embrace.

古文：右军萧颖胄、征虏将军夏侯详并同心翼戴，即宫旧楚，三灵再朗，九县更新，升平之运，此焉复始，康哉之盛，在乎兹日。
现代文：右军萧颖胄、征虏将军夏侯详都齐心拥戴，就建宫于从前的楚地，天地人再次清朗，九州更新，太平国运，由此复始，太平盛世，在于此时。
English: The right-wing army Xiao Yingqin and the conquering general Xia Houxiao were all united in their support, and the palace was built in the former Chu land. The world and the people were once again clear, Kyushu was renewed, the Taiping Rebellion occurred, and the Taiping prosperity began again. This was the time.

古文：然帝德虽彰，区宇未定，元恶未黜，天邑犹梗。
现代文：然而皇帝仁德尽管彰显，天下未定，元凶未除，去京都之路仍然阻塞。
English: However, despite the Emperor's benevolence, the world is still undecided, the culprit has not been eliminated, and the road to Kyoto is still blocked.

古文：仰禀宸规，率前启路。
现代文：仰领帝王谋略，率兵前行开路。
English: He advised the emperor on strategy and led the troops forward to clear the way.

古文：即日遣冠军、竟陵内史曹景宗等二十军主，长槊五万，骥騄为群，鹗视争先，龙骧并驱，步出横江，直指硃雀。
现代文：当天派冠军、竟陵内史曹景宗等二十位军主，执长稍之士五万，良马成群，勇士争先，骏马并驱，步出横江，直指朱雀。
English: On the same day, twenty military leaders, including the champion of the day, Cao Jingzong, who was actually buried in the mausoleum, led fifty thousand soldiers, good horses in groups, warriors competed for the first place, and horses were driven side by side. They walked out of the Yokoe River and pointed straight at Suzaku.

古文：长史、冠军将军、襄阳太守王茂等三十军主，戈船七万，乘流电激，推锋扼险，斜趣白城。
现代文：长史、冠军将军、襄阳太守王茂等三十位军主，戈船七万只，顺流而下如闪电出击，进兵控制险要，斜趋白城。
English: Thirty military commanders, including Changshi, champion general, and Yangyang governor Wang Mao, led 70,000 goshu, which sailed down the river like a lightning strike, controlling the entry of troops, and slanting towards Baicheng.

古文：南中郎谘议参军、军主萧伟等三十九军主，巨舰迅楫，冲波噎水，旗鼓八万，焱集石头。
现代文：南中郎谘议参军、军主萧伟等三十九位军主，巨履行驶疾速，劈波斩浪，旗鼓八万，迅速聚集石头。
English: Nan Zhong Lang advised the thirty-nine army commanders, including the army commander Xiao Wei, to drive at high speed, break the waves, gather 80,000 flags and drums, and quickly gather stones.

古文：南中郎谘议参军、军主萧憺等四十二军主，熊罴之士，甲楯十万，沿波驰艓，掩据新亭。
现代文：南中郎谘议参军、军主萧儋等四十二位军主，雄师之士，披甲持盾的士兵十万，顺流驰船，突袭占据新亭。
English: Nan Zhong Lang advised to join the army, the army commander Xiao Wei and other forty-two army commanders, men of the master, one hundred thousand soldiers wearing armor and holding shields, sailed down the river and stormed to occupy Xinting.

古文：益州刺史刘季连、梁州刺史柳惔、司州刺史王僧景、魏兴太守裴帅仁、上庸太守韦睿、新城太守崔僧季，并肃奉明诏，龚行天罚。
现代文：益州刺史刘季连、梁州刺史柳谈、司州刺史王僧景、魏兴太守裴师仁、上庸太守韦壑、新城太守崔僧季，都敬遵英明的韶令，奉天命而惩罚。
English: Liu Qilian, the governor of Yizhou, Liu Dan, the governor of Liangzhou, Wang Sangjing, the governor of Sizhou, Pei Shiren, the governor of Wei Xing, Wei Wei, the governor of Shangyong, and Cui Sangji, the governor of Xincheng, all obeyed the wise edict and punished according to the order of heaven.

古文：蜀、汉果锐，沿流而下；淮、汝劲勇，望波遄骛。
现代文：蜀郡、漠中的果敢精锐之师，顺流而下；淮河、汝水流域的顽强勇敢之士，望波急驰。
English: Shu County, the daring elite of the desert, go down the river; the tenacious and brave people of the Huaihe River and the Ye water basin, rush to the waves.

古文：幕府总率貔貅，骁勇百万，缮甲燕弧，屯兵冀马，摐金沸地，鸣鞞聒天，霜锋曜日，硃旗绛珝，方舟千里，骆驿系进。
现代文：幕府统率勇猛之师，骁勇百万，备办兵器良弓，驻扎兵马，鸣金震地，击鼓喧天，白刃曜日，红旗染红天地，方舟绵延千里，连续不断相继进发。
English: The bakufu led the valiant division, gathered millions of warriors, prepared weapons, good bows, stationed soldiers and horses, sounded the gold epicenter, drumming the noisy sky, white-blade Sunday, red flag dyed red heaven and earth, the ark stretched for thousands of miles, continuously advancing one after another.

古文：萧右军訏谟上才，兼资文武，英略峻远，执钧匡世。
现代文：萧右军具有制定远大宏伟谋划的上等才能，兼备文武，英明的谋略高远，执掌权柄挽救世道。
English: Xiao Yu Jun has the superior ability to formulate far-reaching and grand plans, and has both literature and military skills. He has a far-sighted and wise strategy, and holds power to save the world.

古文：拥荆南之众，督四方之师，宣赞中权，奉卫舆辇。
现代文：拥有荆南之众，督率四方之师，弘扬赞助中枢，奉事拱卫御驾。
English: Own the people of Jingnan, supervise the four-way division, promote the sponsorship center, and serve as the arch guard.

古文：旍麾所指，威棱无外，龙骧虎步，并集建业。
现代文：帅旗所指，威力无穷，昂首阔步，聚集建业。
English: As indicated by the handsome banner, the power is infinite, the head is held high, and the construction industry is gathered.

古文：黜放愚狡，均礼海昏，廓清神甸，扫定京宇。
现代文：黜除放逐愚蠢而狡诈的小人，与海昏行对等之礼，肃清京郊，平定国都。
English: Eliminate and expel the stupid and cunning villains, and make a reciprocal salute to Haitou, clean up the suburbs of Beijing, and pacify the national capital.

古文：譬犹崩泰山而压蚁壤，决悬河而注熛烬，岂有不殄灭者哉！
现代文：犹如崩泰山而压蚂蚁的巢穴，决河水而注火后的灰烬，哪襄有不消灭的呢!
English: It is like crushing Mount Tai and crushing the ants' nest, or breaking the river and pouring the ashes into the fire. Which one will not be destroyed?

古文：今资斧所加，止梅虫儿、茹法珍而已。
现代文：如今被诛戮的，祇有梅虫儿、茹法珍罢了。
English: Today, the only things that are being killed are plums, worms, and mushrooms.

古文：诸君咸世胄羽仪，书勋王府，皆俯眉奸党，受制凶威。
现代文：诸位都是世家子弟身居高位为人楷模，功勋载绿王府，却都向奸党低头屈服，受到凶恶淫威的控制。
English: You are all high-ranking and exemplary members of the royal family, with distinguished service to the Green Palace. However, you have all bowed down and submitted to the evil party, and are under the control of the evil and tyrannical party.

古文：若能因变立功，转祸为福，并誓河、岳，永纡青紫。
现代文：如能顺应时变立功，转祸为福，共同对着黄河、五岳立誓，便可永享高贵地位。
English: If you can adapt to the changing times, make meritorious contributions, turn misfortune into blessing, and jointly swear against the Yellow River and the Five Mountains, you can enjoy a noble status forever.

古文：若执迷不悟，距逆王师，大众一临，刑兹罔赦，所谓火烈高原，芝兰同泯。
现代文：如执迷不悟，违抗王师，大军一到，处罚不赦，正是所说的火烧高原。芷和兰等香草一同泯减。
English: If you persist and defy the king's teacher, once the army arrives, the punishment will not be forgiven, it is the so-called fire-burning plateau. Vanilla such as ginger and orchid are reduced together.

古文：勉求多福，无贻后悔。
现代文：努力争取多福，不要留下后悔。
English: Strive for more blessings and leave no regrets.

古文：赏罚之科，有如白水。
现代文：赏罚之刑律，有如指着河水立下的
English: The law of reward and punishment is like pointing at the ripples in a river

古文：高祖至竟陵，命长史王茂与太守曹景宗为前军，中兵参军张法安守竟陵城。
现代文：誓词信守不移。高祖抵达竟陵，令长史王茂与太守曹景宗为先头部队，中兵参军张法安镇守竟陵城。
English: Gao Zu arrived at Qiongling, and ordered the commander Shi Wangmao and the governor Cao Jingzong to lead the troops, while the middle-ranking soldiers joined Zhang Fa'an's army to guard Qiongling.

古文：茂等至汉口，轻兵济江，逼郢城。
现代文：王茂等抵达汉口，部队轻装渡过长江，进逼郢城。
English: Wang Mao and others arrived in Hankou, and the lightly armed troops crossed the Yangtze River and forced their way into Handan City.

古文：其刺史张冲置阵据石桥浦，义师与战不利，军主硃僧起死之。
现代文：其刺史张冲布阵据守石桥浦，义师舆之交战不利，军主朱僧起战死。
English: Zhang Chongbu's army was garrisoned at Shihqiao Pu, and the war was unfavorable for Yishi Myou, and the commander, Zhu Seng, died in the battle.

古文：诸将议欲并军围郢，分兵以袭西阳、武昌。
现代文：众将领谋议将联合部队包围郢城，分派军队去袭击西阳、武昌。
English: The generals led the discussion on encircling Lucheng with the joint forces and dispatching troops to attack Xiyang and Wuchang.

古文：高祖曰： 汉口不阔一里，箭道交至，房僧寄以重兵固守，为郢城人掎角。
现代文：高祖说： 汉口长不过一里，练习射箭的场所交错，房僧寄用重兵固守，与郢城人互相呼应。
English: Gao Zu said: Hankou is only a mile long, the places for practicing archery are staggered, and the house monks use heavy soldiers to stick to it, echoing each other with the people of Lucheng.

古文：若悉众前进，贼必绝我军后，一朝为阻，则悔无所及。
现代文：如果所有的部队一起前进，敌贼一定断绝我军后路，被阻住，就后悔不及。
English: If all the troops advance together, the enemy will definitely cut off our army's rear path. If they are blocked, they will regret it.

古文：今欲遣王、曹诸军济江，与荆州军相会，以逼贼垒。
现代文：现在将派王茂、曹景宗诸军渡过长江，和荆州的部队会合，用来进逼敌贼的营垒。
English: Now Wang Mao and Cao Jingzong will send their armies to cross the Yangtze River and meet with Jingzhou's troops, which will be used to enter the enemy's camp.

古文：吾自后围鲁山，以通沔、汉。
现代文：我从后面包围鲁山，用来保障沔水、汉水的畅通。
English: I surrounded Luzhan from behind to ensure the smooth flow of Surabaya's and Han's water.

古文：郧城、竟陵间粟，方舟而下；江陵、湘中之兵，连旗继至。
现代文：郧城、竟陵之间征收的税粟，可两船相并装载顺流而下；江陵、湘中的士兵，可旗帜相连浩浩荡荡随即开到。
English: The tax on poppies levied between Lucheng and Jingting can be loaded onto two ships at the same time and sailed down the river; soldiers from Jiangling and Hunan can sail down the river with their flags flying side by side.

古文：粮食既足，士众稍多，围守两城，不攻自拔，天下之事，卧取之耳。 
现代文：粮食已足，军队渐多，包围两座城池，将不攻自破，天下之事，躺着就可获取了。 
English: There is enough food, the army is growing, they have encircled two cities, they will not be defeated, and they can obtain the things of the world by lying down.

古文：诸将皆曰 善 。
现代文：众将领都说 好 。
English: All the generals said yes.

古文：乃命王茂、曹景宗帅众济岸，进顿九里。
现代文：于是令王茂、曹景宗率军渡到对岸，进驻九里。
English: As a result, Wang Mao and Cao Jingzong were ordered to lead the army to the opposite bank and stationed in Jiuli.

古文：其日，张冲出军迎战，茂等邀击，大破之，皆弃甲奔走。
现代文：那一天，张冲出军迎战，王茂等拦击，大败他，敌贼都弃甲逃走。
English: On that day, Zhang rushed out of the army to meet the battle, Wang Mao and others intercepted and defeated him, and the enemy thieves abandoned their armor and fled.

古文：荆州遣冠军将军邓元起、军主王世兴、田安等数千人，会大军于夏首。
现代文：荆州派冠军将军邓元起、军主王世兴、田安等几千人，在夏首与大军相会。
English: Several thousand people, including the champion general of the Jingzhou faction, Deng Yuanqi, the commander of the army, Wang Shixing, and Tian An, met with the great army in the early summer.

古文：高祖筑汉口城以守鲁山，命水军主张惠绍、硃思远等游遏江中，绝郢、鲁二城信使。
现代文：高祖修筑汉口的城池以防守鲁山，令水军主张惠绍、朱思远等在江中游弋阻截，禁绝郢城、鲁山二城的往来信使。
English: Gao Zu built the city of Hankou to defend Lushan, so that the navy advocated Huishao, Zhu Siyuan, etc. to intercept the boats in the middle of the river and prohibit the messengers from Lushan and Lushan.

古文：三月，乃命元起进据南堂西陼，田安之顿城北，王世兴顿曲水故城。
现代文：三月，便令元起进军占据南堂西睹，田安之驻扎城北，王世兴驻扎曲水故城。
English: In March, he ordered Yuan Yuan to march into and occupy Nandong Xijin, with Tian Anzhi stationed in the north of the city and Wang Shixing stationed in the ancient city of Qushui.

古文：是时张冲死，其众复推军主薛元嗣及冲长史程茂为主。
现代文：逭时张冲死去，其部众又推戴军主薛元嗣和张冲的长史程茂为主帅。
English: At that time, Zhang Chong died, and his subordinates promoted the army commander Xue Yuan Ci and Zhang Chong's elder Cheng Mao as the main commanders.

古文：乙巳，南康王即帝位于江陵，改永元三年为中兴元年，遥废东昏为涪陵王。
现代文：乙巳，南康王在江陵登上帝位，改永元三年为中兴元年，遥废束昏为涪陵王。
English: At this time, King Nankang ascended to the throne in Gangneung, the third year of the reign of Emperor Yongle was the first year of the reign of Emperor Zhongxing, and King Yaowu was crowned King of Gongneung.

古文：以高祖为尚书左仆射，加征东大将军、都督征讨诸军事，假黄钺。
现代文：任命高祖为尚书左仆射，加官征束大将军、都督征讨诸军事，假黄铁。
English: Gao Zu was appointed as Shang Shuxi's right-hand man, and he was promoted to the post of general of conscription and the post of governor-general of conscription.

古文：西台又遣冠军将军萧颖达领兵会于军。
现代文：西台又派冠军将军萧颖达率兵舆大军相会。
English: West Taiwan also sent champion general Xiao Yingda to lead the soldiers to the grand military meeting.

古文：是日，元嗣军主沈难当率轻舸数千，乱流来战，张惠绍等击破，尽擒之。
现代文：遣一天，元嗣的军主沈难当率领几千只快船，横渡江水来战，张惠绍等将其击败，全部擒获他们。
English: One day, when Yuan He's commander was shipwrecked, he led several thousand swift boats across the river to fight. Zhang Huishao and others defeated them and captured them all.

古文：四月，高祖出沔，命王茂、萧颖达等进军逼郢城。
现代文：高祖出哒，令王王茂、萧颖达等进军逼近郢城。
English: Gao Zu marched out of the capital and ordered Wang Wangmao, Xiao Yingda and others to march into the city.

古文：元嗣战颇疲，因不敢出。
现代文：元嗣的士兵因战事非常疲劳，不敢出战。
English: Genji's soldiers were very tired from the war and did not dare to go to battle.

古文：诸将欲攻之，高祖不许。
现代文：众将领想攻打，高祖不许。
English: The generals wanted to attack, but Gaozu would not allow it.

古文：五月，东昏遣宁朔将军吴子阳、军主光子衿等十三军救郢州，进据巴口。
现代文：五月，东昏派宁朔将军吴子阳、军主光子衿等十三支军队援救郢州，进据。
English: In May, the Eastern Conspiracy dispatched 13 armies, including the Ningshuo General Wu Ziyang and the military leader Guang Ziyang, to rescue Zhangzhou and enter the city.

古文：六月，西台遣卫尉席阐文劳军，赍萧颖胄等议，谓高祖曰： 今顿兵两岸，不并军围郢，定西阳、武昌，取江州，此机已失；莫若请救于魏，与北连和，犹为上策。 
现代文：六月，西台派卫尉席阐文慰劳军队，带来萧颖胄等的计议，对高祖说： 现在驻兵两岸。不集合部队包围郢城，平定西阳、武昌，攻取江州，这种机会已经失去；不如向北魏请求救援，与北方联合，仍是上策。 
English: In June, Xidai sent a guard captain to explain the text of the consolation army, bringing Xiao Yingtao and other suggestions, and said to Gao Zu: Now the troops are stationed on both sides of the strait. Without gathering troops to surround Lucheng, pacify Xiyang and Wuchang, and capture Jiangzhou, this opportunity has been lost; it is better to request rescue from Northern Wei and unite with the north, which is still the best strategy.

古文：高祖谓阐文曰： 汉口路通荆、雍，控引秦、梁，粮运资储，听此气息，所以兵压汉口，连络数州。
现代文：高祖对阐文说： 汉日路通荆、雍，通贯秦、梁，运输粮食积蓄储备，依从逭裹的讯息，所以兵压汉口，联络几州。
English: Gao Zu said to the commentary: The Han-Japanese road passes through Jing and Yong, passes through Qin and Liang, transports grain reserves, and follows the message wrapped in silk. Therefore, the soldiers pressed Hankou and contacted several states.

古文：今若并军围城，又分兵前进，鲁山必阻沔路，所谓扼喉。
现代文：现在如果合兵围城，又分兵前进，鲁山必定阻断迺丞通路，正是所说的扼住喉管。
English: Now, if the joint forces besiege the city, and the detachments advance, Lushan will certainly block the passage of Jiezheng, which is precisely the so-called strangle throat.

古文：若粮运不通，自然离散，何谓持久？
现代文：如果粮运不通，自然会分离溃散，还说什么持久?
English: If grain transportation is impassable, it will naturally separate and break up. What is lasting?

古文：邓元起近欲以三千兵往定寻阳，彼若欢然悟机，一郦生亦足；脱距王师，故非三千能下。
现代文：邓元起近来想率三千兵马前往平定寻阳，他如欢然醒悟，一个郦生就足够了；如果敌贼抗拒王师，固然不是三千兵马能攻下的。
English: Deng Yuanqi recently wanted to lead three thousand soldiers and horses to Pingding and Huanyang. If he was happy to wake up, one twin would be enough; if the enemy resisted Wang Shi, certainly not three thousand soldiers and horses could be captured.

古文：进退无据，未见其可。
现代文：进退没有凭据，未见能行。
English: There is no evidence of advance or retreat, and nothing can be done.

古文：西阳、武昌，取便得耳，得便应镇守。
现代文：酉坠、亘过，攻取就要得到，得到就应镇守。
English: If you want to win, you have to win, and if you want to win, you have to defend the town.

古文：守两城不减万人，粮储称是，卒无所出。
现代文：镇守两城的人数不下万人，粮食储备与此相当，但终究没有地方可出。
English: The number of people guarding the two towns is no less than 10,000, and grain reserves are comparable to this, but in the end there is no place to go.

古文：脱贼军有上者，万人攻一城，两城势不得相救。
现代文：如果贼军有上来的，万人攻打一城，两城一定不能相互援救。
English: If an army of robbers came and attacked a city with ten thousand men, the two cities would not be able to help each other.

古文：若我分军应援，则首尾俱弱；如其不遣，孤城必陷。
现代文：如果我分兵响应援救，便两头都弱；如果不分兵，孤城一定陷落。
English: If my detachment responds to the rescue, then both sides are weak; if there is no division, the lone city will certainly fall.

古文：一城既没，诸城相次土崩，天下大事于是去矣。
现代文：一座城池沦陷之后，众城池将相继土崩，天下大事从此完了。
English: After the fall of one city, many cities will collapse one after another, and the world's major events will be over.

古文：若郢州既拔，席卷沿流，西阳、武昌，自然风靡，何遽分兵散众，自贻其忧！
现代文：如果郢州攻克之后，顺流席卷而下，西阳、武昌，自然望风披靡，怎么能分兵散众，自己遗留忧患!
English: If, after the conquest of Luzhou, Xiyang and Wuchang are swept down the river, they will naturally be invincible. How can they divide their troops and leave behind their worries!

古文：且丈夫举动，言静天步；况拥数州之兵以诛群竖，悬河注火，奚有不灭？
现代文：而且大丈夫举动，言语沉着顺应时运；何况拥有几州兵马用来诛伐群小，如河水倾泻注火，哪有不减的?
English: Moreover, it is okay to act, words calmly conform to the times; what's more, how many states have soldiers and horses used to cut down small flocks, such as pouring water and pouring fire, which is not reduced?

古文：岂容北面请救，以自示弱！
现代文：岂容北向求救，自示其弱!
English: He will not allow the north to ask for help, showing his weakness!

古文：彼未必能信，徒贻我丑声。
现代文：他们未必能信从，空留下我不好的名声而已。
English: They may not be able to believe it, leaving me with nothing but a bad reputation.

古文：此之下计，何谓上策？
现代文：这是下计，是什么上策?
English: That's the bottom line. What's the top line?

古文：卿为我白镇军：前途攻取，但以见付，事在目中，无患不捷，恃镇军靖镇之耳。 
现代文：您替我转告镇军：前面的军队攻取，衹是托付而已，事在眼裹，不患不捷，依仗镇军安定镇抚而已。 
English: You tell the town army for me: the front of the army to capture, but it is only entrusted, the matter is in sight, it is not urgent, it is only relying on the town army to stabilize and pacify.

古文：吴子阳等进军武口，高祖乃命军主梁天惠、蔡道祐据渔湖城，唐修期、刘道曼屯白阳垒，夹两岸而待之。
现代文：吴子阳等进军武口，高祖于是令军主梁天惠、蔡道占据渔湖城，唐修期、刘道曼驻扎白阳垒，对夹两岸而等待他。
English: Wu Ziyang and others marched into Wukou, and Gaozu then ordered the commander Liang Tianhui and Cai Dao to occupy Yuhu City. During the Tang Dynasty, Liu Daoman was stationed at Baiyang Fort, waiting for him on both sides of the river.

古文：子阳又进据加湖，去郢三十里，傍山带水，筑垒栅以自固。
现代文：子阳又进军占据加趔，郢拯三十里，傍山带水，建筑营垒栅栏用来自固。
English: Ziyang also marched to occupy Jiaxuan, Jiezheng thirty miles, the mountainside with water, the construction of barricades and fences with self-strengthening.

古文：鲁山城主房僧寄死，众复推助防孙乐祖代之。
现代文：叠山城主庆擅昼死后，众人又推戴助防珏銮担替代他。
English: After the death of the mayor of Jiaoyang City, the people of Jiaoyang City put forward the idea of replacing him with an assistant watchman.

古文：七月，高祖命王茂帅军主曹仲宗、康绚、武会超等潜师袭加湖，将逼子阳。
现代文：七月。高祖令王茂率军主曹仲宗、康绚、武会超等秘密出兵偷袭加湖，将逼迫子阳。
English: In July, Emperor Gaozuling Wang Mao led by the military commander Cao Zhongzong, Kang Hua and the Military Association secretly sent troops to attack Jiahu and force Ziyang.

古文：水涸不通舰，其夜暴长，众军乘流齐进，鼓噪攻之，贼俄而大溃，子阳等窜走，众尽溺于江。
现代文：水干涸不能通行船艋，当夜暴涨，众军乘船齐进，擂鼓呐喊攻打，敌贼很快大败，子阳等窜逃奔走，部队全部沉溺长江。
English: When the water dried up, it was not possible to pass through the locks. That night, the water rose sharply, and the troops marched into the Yangtze River in boats, beating drums and shouting to attack. The enemy was quickly defeated, and Ziyang and other soldiers ran away. All the troops drowned in the Yangtze River.

古文：王茂虏其余而旋。
现代文：王茂将残余俘获回来。
English: Wang Mao recaptured the rest.

古文：于是郢、鲁二城相视夺气。
现代文：于是郢城、鲁山二城两相对视而丧失了锐气。
English: As a result, the two cities of Fucheng and Lushan lost their vitality.

古文：先是，东昏遣冠军将军陈伯之镇江州，为子阳等声援。
现代文：先前，东昏派冠军将军陈伯之镇守江州，作为子阳等人的声援。
English: Previously, the champion of the Dongming faction, General Chen Bozhi, guarded Jiangzhou as a show of support for Ziyang and others.

古文：高祖乃谓诸将曰： 夫征讨未必须实力，所听威声耳。
现代文：高祖于是对众将领说： 征讨未必需要实力，所定夺的是威名而已。
English: Gaozhu then said to the generals: It is not necessarily strength that is needed for conquest, but prestige.

古文：今加湖之败，谁不弭服。
现代文：现在加湖之败，谁不。
English: Now with the defeat in the lake, who wouldn't.

古文：陈虎牙即伯之子，狼狈奔归，彼间人情，理当忷惧，我谓九江传檄可定也。 
现代文：陈虎牙是伯之的儿子，狼狈逃跑回去，他们中间的人心，理当畏惧，我认为九江传布檄文就可以平定了。 
English: Chen Huya is the son of Bo Zhi, who fled back in disarray. The hearts of the people among them should be afraid. I think that the spread of the slander in Jiujiang can be calmed down.

古文：因命搜所获俘囚，得伯之幢主苏隆之，厚加赏赐，使致命焉。
现代文：便令搜查所获的俘虏，得到伯之的幢主苏隆之，厚加赏赐，让他传达使命给陈伯之。
English: He then ordered a search for the captured prisoners, and received a reward from Sulong Zhi, the owner of Bo Zhi, who asked him to convey a message to Chen Bo Zhi.

古文：鲁山城主孙乐祖、郢城主程茂、薛元嗣相继请降。
现代文：鲁山城主孙乐祖、郢城城主程茂、薛元嗣相继求降。
English: Sun Lezu, the lord of Lushan Castle, Cheng Mao, the lord of Lushan Castle, and Xue Yuanzi successively sought to abdicate.

古文：初，郢城之闭，将佐文武男女口十余万人，疾疫流肿死者十七八，及城开，高祖并加隐恤，其死者命给棺槥。
现代文：起初，郢城封闭时，将领及佐吏文武官员男女人十多万，染上流行性传染病脚气病而死的人占十分之七八，等城门打开后，高祖都加以哀怜抚恤，那些死了的令供给简陋的小棺材。
English: At the beginning, when the city of Handan was closed, there were more than 100,000 generals and officials, men and women, and 78 out of every 10 people died of the epidemic infectious disease beriberi. After the city gates were opened, Gaozou gave them compassionate treatment, and those who died were ordered to provide simple small coffins.

古文：先是，汝南人胡文超起义于滠阳，求讨义阳、安陆等郡以自效，高祖又遣军主唐修期攻随郡，并克之。
现代文：先前，汝南人胡文超在湿阳起义，请求征讨义阳、安陆等郡来主动效命，高祖又派军主唐脩期进攻随郡，并攻占了它。
English: Previously, Hu Wenchao, a man from the south of Ryukyu, rose up in the Shiyang Uprising and requested to conquer Yiyang, Anlu and other counties to take the initiative to fulfill his destiny. Gao Zu also sent the commander of the Tang Dynasty to attack Su County and conquered it.

古文：司州刺史王僧景遣子贞孙入质。
现代文：司州刺史王僧景派儿子贞孙来作人质。
English: King Jing, a monk from Sizhou, sent his son, Zhengsun, as a hostage.

古文：司部悉平。
现代文：司州管辖一带全部平定。
English: The entire area under the jurisdiction of Shizhou has been pacified.

古文：陈伯之遣苏隆之反命，求未便进军。
现代文：陈伯之派苏隆之覆命，请示不便进军。
English: Chen Bo dispatched Sulong to cover the order, and requested inconvenience to march in.

古文：高祖曰： 伯之此言，意怀首鼠，及其犹豫，急往逼之，计无所出，势不得暴。 
现代文：高祖说： 伯之此番言语，表示心中迟疑不决，在他犹豫时，赶紧前往逼迫他，他无计可施，一定不会暴乱。 
English: Gao Zu said, "The words of the count indicate that he hesitates in his heart, and when he hesitates, he quickly goes to persecute him. There is nothing he can do, and he will not riot.

古文：乃命邓元起率众，即日沿流。
现代文：于是令邓元起率军，当天顺流而下。
English: Therefore, he ordered Deng Yuan to lead the army and go down the river that day.

古文：八月，天子遣黄门郎苏回劳军。
现代文：八月，天子派黄门郎苏回慰劳军队。
English: In August, Emperor Taizong sent Huangmenlang Su back to the comfort labor army.

古文：高祖登舟，命诸将以次进路，留上庸太守韦睿守郢城，行州事。
现代文：高祖登船，令众将领依次上路前进，留下上庸太守韦散镇守郢城，行州事。
English: Gao Zu boarded the ship and ordered the generals to advance on the road in turn, leaving Shangyong Daju Wei San Zhen to guard Shicheng and conduct state affairs.

古文：邓元起将至寻阳，陈伯之犹猜惧，乃收兵退保湖口，留其子虎牙守盆城。
现代文：邓元起将到达寻阳，陈伯之仍然疑惧，便收兵退保湖口，留下他的儿子虎牙镇守盆城。
English: Deng Yuanzhi was about to reach Xuanyang, but Chen Bozhi was still suspicious and withdrew his troops from Hukou, leaving his son Huya to guard the capital.

古文：及高祖至，乃束甲请罪。
现代文：高祖到来时，才收起甲衣表示归顺请罪。
English: When Gaozu arrived, he only took off his coat to show his submission and plead guilty.

古文：九月，天子诏高祖平定东夏，并以便宜从事。
现代文：九月，天子诏令高祖平定束夏，并可相机独断行事。
English: In September, the emperor ordered Gaozu to subdue Sokcho, and allowed the camera to act on its own.

古文：是月，留少府、长史郑绍叔守江州城。
现代文：这一月，留下少府、长史郑绍叔镇守江州城。
English: This month, he left Shaofu and Changshi Zheng Shao Shuzhen to guard Jiangzhou City.

古文：前军次芜湖，南豫州刺史申胄弃姑孰走，至是时大军进据之，仍遣曹景宗、萧颖达领马步进顿江宁。
现代文：先头部队驻扎芜湖，南豫州刺史申胄弃守姑孰逃跑，到这时大军进入占据了它，并派曹景宗、萧颖达率骑兵步兵进军驻扎江宁。
English: The vanguard troops were stationed at Wuhu, and the Southern Yu Prefecture troops abandoned Guzheng and fled. At this time, the large army entered and occupied it, and sent Cao Jingzong and Xiao Yingda to lead the cavalry and infantry to march to Jiangning.

古文：东昏遣征虏将军李居士率步军迎战，景宗击走之。
现代文：东昏派征虏将军李居士率步兵迎战，景宗将他击退。
English: Dongdou sent the conscript general Li Kuishi and his infantry to fight, but Jingzong repulsed him.

古文：于是王茂、邓元起、吕僧珍进据赤鼻逻，曹景宗、陈伯之为游兵。
现代文：于是王茂、邓元起、吕僧进军占据赤鼻逻，曹景宗、陈伯之作为机动部队。
English: As a result, Wang Mao, Deng Yuanqi, and Lu Son marched in to occupy the Red Nose Loa, with Cao Jingzong and Chen Bozhi as mobile troops.

古文：是日，新亭城主江道林率兵出战，众军擒之于阵。
现代文：这一天，新亭城主江道林率兵出城作战，众军将他在阵地上俘获。
English: On this day, the lord of Xinting, Jiang Daolin, led his troops out of the city to fight, and the troops captured him at the position.

古文：大军次新林，命王茂进据越城，曹景宗据皁荚桥，邓元起据道士墩，陈伯之据篱门。
现代文：大军驻扎童啦，令王芦进军占据垄球，曹景宗占据皂荚桥，邓元起占据道士墩，陈伯之占据篱门。
English: The large army stationed Tong La, so that Wang Lu marched in to occupy the ridge, Cao Jingzong occupied the Soapstone Bridge, Deng Yuanzhi occupied the Taoist Temple, and Chen Bozhi occupied the Hedge Gate.

古文：道林余众退屯航南，义军迫之，因复散走，退保硃爵，凭淮以自固。
现代文：道林余部退守浮桥以南，义师进逼他们，接着又溃散逃走，退保朱爵，凭藉淮河来巩固自身。
English: The rest of the Dorin retreated south of the pontoon bridge, and Yishi forced them to advance, and then they scattered and fled, leaving Zhu Jie to use the Huai River to consolidate himself.

古文：时李居士犹据新亭垒，请东昏烧南岸邑屋以开战场。
现代文：当时李居士还占据着新亭垒，请示东昏焚烧南岸的村舍用来开辟战场。
English: At that time, Li Ju Shi was still occupying Xin Ting Rong, and he asked Dong Dou to burn the village houses on the south bank to open up a battlefield.

古文：自大航以西、新亭以北，荡然矣。
现代文：从大航以西、新亭以北的地区。已荡平了。
English: From the area west of Dahang and north of Xinting, it has been flattened.

古文：十月，东昏石头军主硃僧勇率水军二千人归降。
现代文：十月，东昏的石头军主朱僧勇率水军二千人归顺投降。
English: In October, the leader of the Stone Army, Zhu Xiangyong, who was in the Eastern Twilight, led 2,000 sailors to surrender.

古文：东昏又遣征虏将军王珍国率军主胡虎牙等列阵于航南大路，悉配精手利器，尚十余万人。
现代文：束昏又派征虏将军王珍国率军主胡虎牙等在浮桥南面的大道布阵，全部配备精兵利器，犹有十多万人。
English: He also sent the conscript general Wang Zhenguo, led by the commander Hu Huya, to set up a line on the avenue south of the pontoon, all equipped with fine soldiers and weapons, with more than one hundred thousand people.

古文：阉人王伥子持白虎幡督率诸军，又开航背水，以绝归路。
现代文：宦官王伥子手执白虎幡督率众军，又开拆浮桥背对河水，以断绝归路。
English: The eunuch Wang Xizhong led the troops under the command of Baihuaban, and tore down the pontoon bridge with his back to the river to cut off the way back.

古文：王茂、曹景宗等掎角奔之，将士皆殊死战，无不一当百，鼓噪震天地。
现代文：王茂、曹景宗等夹击直趋敌军，将士们都殊死而战，无不以一当百，擂鼓呐喊震撼天地。
English: Wang Mao, Cao Jingzong and others clamped down on the approaching enemy army, and the soldiers fought to the death, all with one hundred, and the drums and shouts shook the world.

古文：珍国之众，一时土崩，投淮死者，积尸与航等，后至者乘之以济，于是硃爵诸军望之皆溃。
现代文：珍国之军，顷刻土崩，投入淮河死的，尸体积累得和浮桥一般高，后来的踩在上面渡过，造时在朱爵的各军望见后也都溃散了。
English: Zhenguo's army was crushed in an instant and thrown into the Huaihe River. The dead bodies piled up as high as the pontoon bridge. Later, they were trampled on and passed over. When Zhu Jie's army saw it, they all broke up.

古文：义军追至宣阳门，李居士以新亭垒、徐元瑜以东府城降，石头、白下诸军并宵溃。
现代文：义师追赶到宣阳门，李居士率新亭垒、徐元瑜率束府城投降，石头、白下各军都在夜裹溃散。
English: Yishi chased them to Xuanyang Gate, Li Jushi led Xin Ting Rong, and Xu Yuan Yu led Sokufu to surrender, and the armies of the Stone and White armies were broken up at night.

古文：壬午，高祖镇石头，命众军围六门，东昏悉焚烧门内，驱逼营署、官府并入城，有众二十万。
现代文：壬午，高祖镇守石头，令众军包围六门，束昏焚烧门内的所有房舍，驱逐逼迫营舍、官府裹的人全部进入城中，有部众二十万。
English: At noon, Gaozu Town guarded the stone, ordered the troops to surround the six gates, bundled and burned all the houses inside the gate, and expelled all the people who forced the camp and the government to enter the city, with a total of 200,000 people.

古文：青州刺史桓和绐东昏出战，因以其众来降。
现代文：青州刺史桓和欺骗东昏要出城作战，趁机率军来降。
English: Qingzhou stabbed Shih Huan and deceived Dong Dou to go out of the city to fight, and took advantage of the opportunity to come down.

古文：高祖命诸军筑长围。
现代文：高祖令众军绕城筑起长长的工事。
English: Gaozhu ordered the troops to build a long construction around the city.

古文：初，义师之逼，东昏遣军主左僧庆镇京口，常僧景镇广陵，李叔献屯瓜步，及申胄自姑孰奔归，又使屯破墩以为东北声援。
现代文：起初，义师进逼时，东昏派军主左僧庆镇守京口，常僧景镇守广陵，李叔献镇守瓜步，到申胄从姑孰逃归时，又让他驻守破墩作为东北方面的声援。
English: At first, when Yishi was under pressure, Dongming sent the military leader Zuo Zang Qing Zhen to guard Jingkou, Zang Zang Zang Jing Zhen to guard Guangling, and Li Shu Xian Zhen to guard Guapu. When Shen Yu fled from Guan, he also stationed him in Hailu as a show of solidarity with the Northeast.

古文：至是，高祖遣使晓喻，并率众降。
现代文：到这时，高祖派使者晓谕他们，都率军投降。
English: At this time, Emperor Gaozong sent an envoy to tell them to surrender.

古文：乃遣弟辅国将军秀镇京口，辅国将军恢屯破墩，从弟宁朔将军景镇广陵。
现代文：于是派弟弟辅国将军萧秀镇守京口，辅国将军萧恢驻守破墩，堂弟宁朔将军萧景镇守广陵。
English: As a result, he sent his younger brother, General Xiao Xiuzhen of the Auxiliary State, to guard Jingkou, General Xiao Wei of the Auxiliary State to guard Hailu, and his cousin, General Xiao Jingzhen of Ningshuo, to guard Guangling.

古文：吴郡太守蔡夤弃郡赴义师。
现代文：吴郡太守蔡夤弃郡奔赴义师。
English: The governor of Wu County, Cai Yuxuan, rushed to Yishi.

古文：十二月丙寅旦，兼卫尉张稷、北徐州刺史王珍国斩东昏，送首义师。
现代文：十二月丙寅早晨，兼卫尉张担、北徐州刺史王珍国斩杀东昏，将其首级送给义师。
English: On the morning of December Xinyin, Zhang Tan, who was also a lieutenant of the North Xuzhou Garrison, and Wang Zhenguo, who was also a lieutenant of the North Xuzhou Garrison, beheaded Dong Dou and sent his head to Yishi.

古文：高祖命吕僧珍勒兵封府库及图籍，收甗妾潘妃及凶党王咺之以下四十一人属吏诛之。
现代文：高祖令吕僧珍指挥军队封闭宫府仓库和图书，收捕婢妾遥妃及叛党王晅之以下四十一名属官，全部诛杀。
English: Gao Zu ordered Lü Sozhen to command the army to close the palace warehouse and books, arrest the servant and concubine Yao Fei and the forty-one subordinate officers under the rebel Wang Xi, and kill them all.

古文：宣德皇后令废涪陵王为东昏侯，依汉海昏侯故事。
现代文：宣德皇后命废除涪陵王为东昏侯，依照东昏侯旧例。
English: Empress Xuande ordered the abolition of King Gongling as Dongdimou, in accordance with the old case of Dongdimou.

古文：授高祖中书监、都督扬、南徐二州诸军事、大司马、录尚书、骠骑大将军、扬州刺史，封建安郡公，食邑万户，给班剑四十人，黄钺、侍中、征讨诸军事并如故；依晋武陵王遵承制故事。
现代文：任高祖为中书监、都督扬南徐二州诸军事、大司马、录尚书、骠骑大将军、扬州刺史，封爵建安郡公，食邑一万户，给予持有纹饰剑的武士四十人，黄铁、侍中、征讨诸军事诸职依旧；依照晋朝武陵王司马遵秉承帝意相机行事的旧例
English: Ren Gao Zu was the chief librarian of the Middle Kingdom, the military governor of Yangnan, Xuzhou and Erzhou, the grand secretary of the horse, the record of the book, the general of the cavalry, the history of Yangzhou, the feudal lord of Jian'an County, ten thousand households, forty samurai holding decorated swords, the yellow iron, the attendant, and the conscript of the military are still in place; according to the old example of the Jin Dynasty Wuling King Sima adhering to the imperial camera

古文：己卯，高祖入屯阅武堂。
现代文：己卯，高祖入驻阅武堂。
English: At the same time, Gao Zu was stationed in the Reading Martial Arts Hall.

古文：下令曰： 皇家不造，遘此昏凶，祸挻动植，虐被人鬼，社庙之危，蠢焉如缀。
现代文：下令道： 皇室不幸，遭此祸乱，祸害延及动物和植物，灾难遍布人和鬼神，社稷宗庙倾危，摇摇欲坠。
English: He ordered, "It is unfortunate for the imperial family to suffer from this calamity. The calamity has spread to animals and plants. The disaster has spread to people and ghosts. Shifeng's ancestral temple is in danger and teetering on the brink.

古文：吾身籍皇宗，曲荷先顾，受任边疆，推毂万里，眷言瞻乌，痛心在目，故率其尊主之情，厉其忘生之志。
现代文：我出身皇族，备受先帝的照顾，受任边疆，聘职辽方，回首乱世无所归依的民众，痛心之事历历在，因此依顺自己尊奉君主之情，激励自己舍身忘生之志。
English: I come from a royal family, I was taken care of by the former emperor, I was appointed to the frontier, I was appointed to the Liao side, and I returned to the people who had nothing to do with the chaos of the world. I have experienced painful things, so I obeyed my feelings of honoring the monarch and encouraged myself to give up my life and forget about life.

古文：虽宝历重升，明命有绍，而独夫丑纵，方煽京邑。
现代文：尽管国运重升，帝令有继，然而独夫恶行肆虐，正炽盛京城。
English: Despite the resurgence of the national movement and the succession of imperial edicts, however, one-man misdeeds are rampant and the capital city is flourishing.

古文：投袂援戈，克弭多难。
现代文：奋起操戈，消灭多难。
English: Fight fire with fire, how difficult it is to extinguish it.

古文：虐政横流，为日既久，同恶相济，谅非一族。
现代文：暴政横行，为日已久，同恶相助，相信不是一族。
English: Tyranny has been rampant for a long time, and it is believed that it is not a family that cooperates with evil.

古文：仰禀朝命，任在专征，思播皇泽，被之率土。
现代文：仰受朝廷之命，专任征伐，想洒播皇帝恩泽，广布天下。
English: By the order of the imperial court, full-time conquest, I want to broadcast the emperor's favor and spread it all over the world.

古文：凡厥负衅，咸与惟新。
现代文：所有那些负罪的，都准予改过自新。
English: All those found guilty are granted rehabilitation.

古文：可大赦天下；唯王咺之等四十一人不在赦例。 
现代文：可以大赦天下；衹有王晅之等四十一人不在赦免的规定中。 
English: It is possible to grant a general amnesty to the whole world; forty-one people, including Wang Xi, are not included in the amnesty regulations.

古文：又令曰： 夫树以司牧，非役物以养生；视民如伤，岂肆上以纵虐。
现代文：又命令道： 确立君主，不是役使他物以养生；而要极其顾恤人民疾苦，怎能纵恣在上而肆虐。
English: He also ordered: "The establishment of a monarch is not to serve him as a means of sustenance; but to be extremely considerate of the people's suffering, how can they be allowed to wreak havoc.

古文：废主弃常，自绝宗庙。
现代文：被废的君主毁弃纲常，自绝宗庙。
English: The dethroned monarch destroyed the rules and regulations, and renounced the family temple.

古文：穷凶极悖，书契未有。
现代文：极端凶残悖逆，历代记载所不曾有。
English: The extreme ferocity and rebelliousness are unprecedented in historical records.

古文：征赋不一，苛酷滋章。
现代文：赋税不一，苛刻残酷益发显明。
English: Taxes are uneven, and the harshness and cruelty are becoming more and more obvious.

古文：缇绣土木，菽粟犬马，征发闾左，以充缮筑。
现代文：土木披服高贵的丝织品，粮食喂养狗马，征发平民，充任修造。
English: Civil engineers wear noble silk clothes, feed grain to dogs and horses, conscript civilians, and perform construction.

古文：流离寒暑，继以疫疬，转死沟渠，曾莫救恤，朽肉枯骸，乌鸢是厌。
现代文：寒来暑往流离失所加上瘟疫，弃尸沟壑，没有谁来救恤，朽肉枯骸，填喂了乌鸦和老鹰之腹。
English: Cold and heat, displacement and plague, corpses dumped in ravines with no one to rescue them, and rotting carcasses, have fed the stomachs of crows and eagles.

古文：加以天灾人火，屡焚宫掖，官府台寺，尺椽无遗，悲甚《黍离》，痛兼《麦秀》。
现代文：加上天灾人火，多次焚毁皇宫，官府衙署，尺椽不留，悲伤超过《黍离》之叹，哀痛倍于《麦秀》之咏。
English: In addition to natural disasters and man-made fires, the imperial palace and government offices were burned down many times, and the shakuhachi did not stay. The sadness exceeded the sigh of "The Parting," and the sorrow was twice as great as that of "The Wheat Show."

古文：遂使亿兆离心，疆徼侵弱，斯人何辜，离此涂炭！今明昏递运，大道公行，思治之氓，来苏兹日。
现代文：于是使万民离心，疆界侵弱，这些人有什么罪，遭此涂炭现在晦明交替运转，大道公然推行，想往治世之民，今天因其来而得以在困苦中苏息。
English: So they have alienated the people and weakened the borders. What is the sin of these people? They have been tarnished by this. Now they are alternately operating obscurely, openly promoting the road, and the people who want to rule the world are able to rest in hardship today because of their coming.

古文：猥以寡薄，属当大宠，虽运距中兴，艰同草昧，思阐皇休，与之更始。
现代文：辱以寡德薄才，正当权臣，尽管国运已到中兴，然而艰难如同草创时期，想着阐发皇帝的美德，帮助他除旧布新。
English: Although the national movement has come to ZTE, it is still as difficult as the founding period. I want to expound the emperor's virtues and help him remove the old and create the new.

古文：凡昏制、谬赋、淫刑、滥役，外可详检前源，悉皆除荡。
现代文：凡是昏乱的制度、错误的赋税、苛酷的刑罚、过度的劳役，外可详察以前的源流，全部都荡除干净。
English: All the chaotic systems, incorrect taxation, harsh punishments, and excessive labor service, except for a detailed examination of the previous sources, have all been wiped clean.

古文：其主守散失，诸所损耗，精立科条，咸从原例。 
现代文：那些负责守护者散失的，各种损耗的，精密地设立科目，都遵循原来的法则。 
English: Those who are responsible for the loss of guardians, the various losses, the precise establishment of subjects, all follow the original law.

古文：又曰： 永元之季，乾维落纽。
现代文：又令道： 永元末年，朝纲失统。
English: He also decreed: In the last year of the Yong Yuan Dynasty, the dynasty would be overthrown.

古文：政实多门，有殊卫文之代；权移于下，事等曹恭之时。
现代文：政令实出于多家，有殊卫文之代；权力下移，事同曹恭之时。
English: The decree was actually issued by several people, especially in the era of Weiwen; when the power was downgraded, it was the time of Cao Gong.

古文：遂使阉尹有翁媪之称，高安有法尧之旨。
现代文：于是使管领太监的有老翁老妇之称，高安有效法唐尧的旨令。
English: As a result, the eunuchs in charge of the eunuchs were said to be old men and old women, and Gao An effectively carried out the order of Tang Xi.

古文：鬻狱贩官，锢山护泽，开塞之机，奏成小丑。
现代文：受贿断案钱财卖官，占山据泽，兴革取舍之机，成为卑贱之流。
English: The bribe-taking and bribe-dismissing cases of money and wealth sales officials have become a despicable trend.

古文：直道正义，拥抑弥年，怀冤抱理，莫知谁诉。奸吏因之，笔削自己。
现代文：直道正义，压制多年，怀冤有理，不知向谁申诉奸吏趁机，肆意独断。
English: Straight justice, suppression for many years, grievance and reason, I don't know who to appeal to, the corrupt officials take advantage of the opportunity and arbitrarily arbitrate.

古文：岂直贾生流涕，许伯哭时而已哉！
现代文：难道衹是贾生流泪、许伯哭时而已啊!
English: Is it just when Jia Sheng is in tears and Xu Bo is crying?

古文：今理运惟新，政刑得所，矫革流弊，实在兹日。
现代文：现在气运更新，政刑适当，矫正改变相沿而成的弊端，实在今日。
English: Now, it is really today that the fortune is renewed, the political punishment is appropriate, and the drawbacks caused by the change are corrected.

古文：可通检尚书众曹，东昏时诸诤讼失理及主者淹停不时施行者，精加讯辨，依事议奏。 
现代文：可全面检查尚书众官署，束昏时期众争辩失理以及主管者停辍不及时施行的，严格加以审理，根据事情讨论后将处理意见向皇帝奏报。 
English: It is possible to comprehensively inspect the officials' offices of Shangshu, the irrationality of the public debate during the period of drowsiness, and the failure of the supervisors to implement in a timely manner, and strictly examine them. After discussing the matter, the handling opinions will be reported to the emperor.

古文：又下令，以义师临阵致命及疾病死亡者，并加葬敛，收恤遗孤。
现代文：又下令，在义师中献身疆场以及因疾病死亡的，都加以收葬，收容抚恤他们的遗孤。
English: He also ordered that all the righteous teachers who devoted themselves to the battlefield and those who died of illness should be buried, and their orphans should be taken in and cared for.

古文：又令曰： 硃爵之捷，逆徒送死者，特许家人殡葬；若无亲属，或有贫苦，二县长尉即为埋掩。
现代文：又令道： 朱爵之捷，叛党送死的，特别准许家人殡殓埋葬；如果没有亲属，或是贫苦人家的，两县的长尉即为掩埋。
English: He also ordered, "For Zhu Jianzhe, who was killed by the rebels, the family members are specially allowed to bury him. If there are no relatives, or if the family is poor, the captains of the two counties are to bury him."

古文：建康城内，不达天命，自取沦灭，亦同此科。 
现代文：建康城内，不明白天命，自取覆灭的，也同此则。 
English: In Jiankang City, those who do not understand the fate of heaven and self-destruct are also the same.

古文：二年正月，天子遣兼侍中席阐文、兼黄门侍郎乐法才慰劳京邑。
现代文：二年正月，天子派兼侍中席阐文、兼黄门侍郎乐法才慰问犒劳京都。
English: In the first month of the second year, Tenshi-ha, who was also a member of the Imperial Household Agency's Court Musicians' Club, visited Kyoto to offer his condolences.

古文：追赠高祖祖散骑常侍左光禄大夫，考侍中丞相。
现代文：追赠高祖祖父为散骑常侍左光禄大夫，父亲为侍中丞相。
English: Gao's great-great-grandfather was posthumously awarded the title of Sangyei (free-riding) regular attendant, Dr. Sako Roku, and his father was a junior vice-minister of the Imperial Household Agency.

古文：高祖下令曰： 夫在上化下，草偃风从，世之浇淳，恒由此作。
现代文：高祖下令道：在上者能以德化民，则民之向化犹风吹草伏，世风的浮薄与淳厚，常由此兴。
English: Gao Zu ordered: If those at the top can use virtue to transform the people, then the people can be transformed by the Jewish wind blowing grass and weeds, and the world's style of superficiality and simplicity, often resulting in prosperity.

古文：自永元失德，书契未纪，穷凶极悖，焉可胜言。
现代文：从永元失德后，书籍未记，穷凶极恶，怎可胜言。
English: After losing morality since time immemorial, books have not been written down, and heinous atrocities have been committed.

古文：既而皞室外构，倾宫内积，奇技异服，殚所未见。
现代文：不久玉饰的宫室中与外勾结，巍峨的宫殿裹聚敛财物，奇技淫巧怪异服饰，都是未曾见过的。
English: Before long, there was collusion between the jade-decorated imperial court and the outside world, a vast palace wrapped in accumulated wealth, and strange costumes, all of which had never been seen before.

古文：上慢下暴，淫侈竞驰。
现代文：主上骄傲臣下残暴，淫乱奢侈竞相争逐。
English: The lord is proud, the vassals are cruel, and the lascivious and extravagant compete with each other.

古文：国命朝权，尽移近习。
现代文：国家政权，尽移宠信。
English: The state power, the transfer of favors.

古文：贩官鬻爵，贿货公行。
现代文：卖官售爵，贿赂公行。
English: Selling officials, selling knighthoods, bribing officials.

古文：并甲第康衢，渐台广室。
现代文：都是豪华的住宅，通达的大道，高台巨室。
English: They are all luxury residences, accessible avenues, and high-rise mega-mansions.

古文：长袖低昂，等和戎之赐；珍羞百品，同伐冰之家。
现代文：艺妓歌舞起伏，与和戎礼赐相等；珍奇美味百种，与达官贵族相同。
English: Geisha's songs and dances are as varied as those of the nobility, and there are hundreds of rare and delicious foods, just like those of high-ranking aristocrats.

古文：愚民因之，浸以成俗。
现代文：愚民因袭，浸染成俗。
English: Foolish people are influenced by circumstances, and are impregnated into the world.

古文：骄艳竞爽，夸丽相高。
现代文：以艳丽为骄傲争胜媲美，以绚丽为夸耀追逐争高。
English: To be proud of beauty is to compete with beauty, and to be proud of beauty is to compete with beauty.

古文：至乃市井之家，貂狐在御；工商之子，缇绣是袭。
现代文：竟至市井之家，穿着貂皮狐裘驾驭车马；工商之士，穿戴高贵的丝织品。
English: They even went to the Ichii family, wearing mink coats and riding horses; businessmen, wearing noble silk fabrics.

古文：日入之次，夜分未反，昧爽之朝，期之清旦。
现代文：日落到其夜宿处，半夜不回，拂晓早朝时，待至清晨。
English: When the sun sets, he goes to his place for the night and does not return until the middle of the night, and when the sun rises, he stays until the early morning.

古文：圣明肇运，厉精惟始，虽曰缵戎，殆同创革。
现代文：皇上起兴国运，开始励精图治，虽说是继承帝业，几同创立变革。
English: The emperor started the national movement and began to work hard to govern, although he inherited the empire, he also created change.

古文：且淫费之后，继以兴师，巨桥、鹿台，凋罄不一。
现代文：况且过度的花费之后，接着举兵，巨桥、鹿台，损耗罄尽不一。
English: Moreover, after the excessive expenditure, followed by the raising of troops, the huge bridge, Deer Park, the loss and exhaustion vary.

古文：孤忝荷大宠，务在澄清，思所以仰述皇朝大帛之旨，俯厉微躬鹿裘之义，解而更张，斫雕为朴。
现代文：我蒙恩辱列权臣，务在肃清混乱局面，思念怎样对上敬承皇朝寝服厚帛俭素之旨，在下激励自身鹿裘不完生活简朴之义，改弦更张，去掉浮华雕饰之俗使之重返质朴。
English: I have been honored and humiliated by powerful ministers, and I must clean up the chaotic situation, think about how to uphold the spirit of the emperor and the emperor's bedding, and inspire myself to live a simple life, change the string, remove the custom of embossing and carving, and return it to simplicity.

古文：自非可以奉粢盛，修绂冕，习礼乐之容，缮甲兵之备，此外众费，一皆禁绝。
现代文：如果不是用来供奉祭祀的谷物，修饰官服礼服，学习礼乐之制，整治兵器武备的话，此外各种花费，一律禁绝。
English: If it is not used to offer sacrificial grain, to decorate official dress, to study the system of liturgical music, to repair weapons and armaments, then all other expenses are prohibited.

古文：御府中署，量宜罢省。
现代文：帝王府库宫廷内府，量度减免。
English: The imperial treasury, the inner palace of the imperial court, is exempt from measurement.

古文：掖庭备御妾之数，大予绝郑卫之音。
现代文：宫廷置备女官人数，《大予》禁绝郑地、卫地乐音。
English: The number of court ladies was set at the palace, and the music of Zhengde and Weidi was banned.

古文：其中有可以率先卿士，准的庶，菲食薄衣，请自孤始。
现代文：其问有可以作为官吏表率，百姓榜样，吃粗劣的食物穿简陋的服装的，请从我开始。
English: If there is anyone who can serve as an example to officials and a role model for the people, who eats poor food and wears simple clothes, please start with me.

古文：加群才并轨，九官咸事，若能人务退食，竞存约己，移风易俗，庶期月有成。
现代文：加以众多才士同迹，九卿六部的官员共事，如能人人务求俭朴奉公，竞相省察约束自己，移风易俗，差不多一年就会有成效。
English: With many talented people working together, and officials from nine ministries and six departments working together, if everyone can strive for frugality and simplicity in public service, compete in self-criticism and self-restraint, and change customs, it will be effective for almost a year.

古文：昔毛玠在朝，士大夫不敢靡衣偷食。
现代文：从前毛蚧在朝任职时，士大夫不敢美衣甘食苟且偷生。
English: Once upon a time, when Mao Tse-tung held office in the North, the scholar-officials did not dare to be well-dressed and well-fed.

古文：魏武叹曰： 孤之法不如毛尚书。 
现代文：魏武感叹道： 我的法令不如毛尚书。 
English: Wei Wu lamented: My decree is not as good as Mao's book.

古文：孤虽德谢往贤，任重先达，实望多士得其此心。
现代文：我尽管德操不如以往的贤者，却任重于有德行学问的前辈，实望众多贤士理解我的这种心意。
English: Although I am not as virtuous as the sages of the past, I place more importance on my predecessors who were virtuous and learned. I sincerely hope that many sages will understand my feelings.

古文：外可详为条格。 
现代文：外廷官员可详细地制定法规。
English: Magistrates can make detailed rules.

古文：戊戌，宣德皇后临朝，入居内殿。
现代文：戊戌，宣德皇后临朝听政，入居皇帝召见大臣和处理国事之处。
English: It was the place where Emperor Wu and Empress Xuande held court and listened to the government, and where the emperor summoned ministers and dealt with state affairs.

古文：拜帝大司马，解承制，百僚致敬如前。
现代文：任命皇帝为大司马，解除开府承制之官，百官极其恭敬有如从前。
English: The emperor was appointed as the grand steward, and the officials responsible for opening the government were removed. The officials were extremely respectful as before.

古文：诏进高祖都督中外诸军事，剑履上殿，入朝不趋，赞拜不名。
现代文：诏令晋升高祖为都督中外诸军事，可以佩剑不脱鞋上朝廷，进朝廷时不需疾步而前，朝拜时赞礼的人不直呼其名。
English: The Emperor's edict elevated his ancestor to the rank of military governor of the Middle and Outer Provinces. He could enter the imperial court with a sword and without taking off his shoes. He did not need to rush forward when entering the imperial court, and people did not call his name directly when praising the emperor.

古文：加前后部羽葆鼓吹。
现代文：加赐前后部羽葆鼓吹。
English: In addition, the front and back of the feather kite are blown.

古文：置左右长史、司马、从事中郎、掾、属各四人，并依旧辟士，余并如故。
现代文：设置左右长史，司马、从事中郎、掾、属各四人，并照旧征召任用人，其余全部如前。
English: Set up the left and right long history, Sima, engaged in the middle, Zou, belonging to four people, and as before conscripted appointees, all the rest as before.

古文：诏曰：夫日月丽天，高明所以表德；山岳题地，柔博所以成功。
现代文：诏令道：日月光耀天空。高而明亮所以表彰道德；山岳突起大地，柔而广博所以成就功业。
English: "The sun and the moon shine in the sky. They are high and bright to commend morality; the mountains protrude from the earth, and they are soft and broad to accomplish deeds.

古文：故能庶物出而资始，河海振而不泄。
现代文：因此能万物生出而藉以发生开始，江河湖海汇聚而不泄漏。
English: For this cause all things came into being, and by this cause they came into being, and the rivers and the lakes and the seas were gathered together and did not flow away.

古文：二象贞观，代之者人。
现代文：天地以正道示人，代之以贤人。
English: Heaven and earth have been replaced by sages to show people the right way.

古文：是以七辅、四叔，致无为于轩、昊；韦、彭、齐、晋，靖衰乱于殷、周。
现代文：所以七辅、四叔，致无为之术于轩韩、少吴；豕韦、大彭、齐桓、晋文，平定衰乱于殷朝、周朝。
English: Therefore, the Seven Auxiliaries and the Four Uncles had no effect on Xuan Han and Shao Wu; Zou Wei, Dapeng, Qi Huan, and Jinwen; and the Yin and Zhou dynasties were placated.

古文：大司马攸纵自天，体兹齐圣，文洽九功，武苞七德。
现代文：大司马为上天赋予，自身与圣人齐等，文治遍及水火金木土谷六府和正德、利用、厚生三事，武功包括禁暴、戢兵、保大、定功、安民、和众、丰财等七种德行。
English: Daisima was endowed by the heavens, and he is equal to the saints. The six prefectures of fire and water, wood and metal, soil and valley, and the three virtues of virtue, utilization, and well-being are covered in the literature. The martial arts include seven kinds of virtues such as non-violence, defeating the enemy, safeguarding the country, meritorious service, peace and tranquility among the people, harmony among the people, and wealth.

古文：钦惟厥始，徽猷早树，诚著艰难，功参帷幙。
现代文：敬思起始，美善之道早立，忠诚昭著于艰难之时，功劳参与帷幄运筹，赐子辟土，为常人楷模。
English: He is a model for ordinary people, starting with reverence, establishing the path of beauty and goodness early, being loyal in difficult times, participating in the operation and planning of the curtain wall, and giving birth to children.

古文：锡赋开壤，式表厥庸。
现代文：明帝登位建年号建武时，边境上的争端屡兴。
English: When Emperor Ming ascended the throne in the year of Jianwu, disputes on the border were frequent.

古文：建武升历，边隙屡启，公释书辍讲，经营四方。司、豫悬切，樊、汉危殆，覆强寇于沔滨，僵胡马于邓汭。
现代文：您放下书本停止讲学，规划治理四方。司州、豫州危急，樊城、汉中险危，在沔水之畔覆灭强寇，在邓地水滨毙倒胡马。
English: You should put down your books, stop lecturing, and plan the governance of the four directions. Shizhou and Yuzhou are in a critical situation, Shicheng and Hanzhong are in a critical situation, on the banks of the Surabaya River, strong pirates should be wiped out, and on the waterfront of the Dengdi River, horses should be killed.

古文：永元肇号，难结群丑，专威擅虐，毒被含灵，溥天惴惴，命悬晷刻。
现代文：开建永元年号时，群小作难，独断威势擅自施虐，毒害广被具有灵性的人类，普天之下忧心戒惧，性命危在顷刻。
English: When it was built in the first year of the Yongle Emperor's reign, a group of petty troublemakers, with arbitrary power and arbitrary cruelty, poisoned the widely spiritualized human beings. People all over the world were worried and fearful, and their lives were in danger.

古文：否终有期，神谟载挺，首建大策，惟新鼎祚。
现代文：厄运终有期限，神谋挺出，首定重大决策，更新国运。
English: The bad luck has a deadline, the divine counsel will come forward, the first major decision will be made, and the national movement will be renewed.

古文：投袂勤王，沿流电举，鲁城云撤，夏汭雾披，加湖群盗，一鼓殄拔，姑孰连旍，倏焉冰泮。
现代文：奋起尽力王事，顺流闪电出击，鲁城之敌云散，夏地水滨之贼雾消，加湖众盗，一鼓作气灭尽，姑孰强寇连旗，瞬间冰释。
English: Get up and do your best, the lightning strikes along the river, the enemies of Lucheng are scattered, the thieves of the summer waterfront are gone, the thieves of the lake are added, the drum is exhausted, the guqin is strong, and the banner is raised, and the ice is instantly released.

古文：取新垒其如拾芥，扑硃爵其犹扫尘。
现代文：获得新垒如拾取草芥，倾覆朱爵犹扫去灰尘。
English: Acquiring a new base is like picking up a mustard seed, overturning a scarlet jade is like sweeping away the dust.

古文：霆电外骇，省闼内倾，余丑纤蠹，蚳蝝必尽。
现代文：雷轰电击宫外惊骇，禁内倾覆，其余的小丑小蛀虫，以及小幼虫一定消灭干净。
English: The thunderbolt electric shock shocked the outside of the palace, and the ban was overturned. The remaining clown aphids and small larvae must be eliminated.

古文：援彼已溺，解此倒悬，涂欢里抃，自近及远。
现代文：怨敌已没，解民倒悬，百姓拍手欢欣，由近及远。
English: The vengeful enemy is gone, the solution to the people is upside down, the people clap their hands and rejoice, from near and far.

古文：畿甸夷穆，方外肃宁，解兹虐网，被以宽政。
现代文：京城一带太平和睦，京畿之外肃静安宁，解除暴虐之纲，布施宽柔之政。
English: The capital area is too peaceful and tranquil, the rest of Gyeonggi is quiet and peaceful, the tyranny is lifted, and the policy of leniency is carried out.

古文：积弊穷昏，一朝载廓，声教遐渐，无思不被。
现代文：累积的弊病极端的昏乱，一时清除，声威教化使边远之地潜移默化，不愁不遍及。
English: Accumulated maladies, extreme confusion, are cleared away for a while, and vocalization and education make remote areas subtle and subtle, and are ubiquitous.

古文：虽伊尹之执兹壹德，姬旦之光于四海，方斯蔑如也。
现代文：即使是伊尹拥持美德，姬旦光耀四海，与此相比也不及啊。
English: Even if Yi Yin espouses virtue and Hidan shines all over the world, it is not comparable to this.

古文：昔吕望翼佐圣君，犹享四履之命；文侯立功平后，尚荷二弓之锡，况于盛德元勋，超迈自古。
现代文：从前吕望辅佐圣明的君主，还享有征讨可达到的四境界限的王命；文侯建功平后，尚且承蒙二弓的赏赐，何况对于品德高尚的元勋，超越了自古以来的贤者。
English: In the past, the monarchs who were assisted by Lü Wang and Shen Ming also enjoyed the king's mission to conquer the four bounds that could be reached. After the exploits of Wen Hou and Jian Ping, they also received the reward of the two bows. What's more, they surpassed the sages since ancient times for the high moral qualities.

古文：黔首惵惵，待以为命，救其已然，拯其方斫，式闾表墓，未或能比；而大辂渠门，辍而莫授，眷言前训，无忘终食。
现代文：百姓恐惧，期待您来解决他们的生存问题，解救他们的现状，拯救他们将被斩杀的命运，旌表间里以彰功德以及为死者墓前刻石以扬其善，都不能与此相比；大辖和渠门，已停止不授，回顾从前的准则，不忘终禄。
English: The fear of the people, expecting you to solve the problem of their survival, to rescue their current situation, to save their fate of being slaughtered, to commend their merits and to promote their good deeds on the tombstones of the dead, can not be compared with this; the great jurisdiction and the gate, has stopped not to teach, to review the previous standards, not to forget the final reward.

古文：便宜敬升大典，式允群望。
现代文：斟酌事宜不拘陈规决定恭敬地提高国家大典的赏格，以此来合乎众望。
English: In order to meet the expectations of the public, we have decided to respectfully upgrade the status of the National Grand Award regardless of the stereotype.

古文：其进位相国，总百揆，扬州刺史；封十郡为梁公，备九锡之礼，加玺绂远游冠，位在诸王上，加相国绿綟绶。
现代文：将您进职为相国，总理百官，任扬州刺史；分封十郡为梁公，周备九锡之礼，加授玺绶和远游冠，地位在众王之上，加授相国绿娘绶。
English: You will be promoted to the position of the fatherland, the prime minister of a hundred officials, and the history of Yangzhou; the ten counties will be awarded to Liang Gong, the nine counties will be awarded to Jiuxi, and the status will be above the kings, and the green daughter of the fatherland will be awarded.

古文：其骠骑大将军如故。
现代文：任骠骑大将军照旧。
English: He will continue to serve as grand marshal.

古文：依旧置梁百司。
现代文：依旧为梁公置立百官。
English: He is still the highest-ranking official appointed by Liang.

古文：策曰：二仪寂寞，由寒暑而代行，三才并用，资立人以为宝，故能流形品物，仰代天工。
现代文：策令道：天地寂寞，寒暑更替运行，天地人并用，扶持造就人作为宝贝，所以能够使万物受自然之滋润而运动变化其形体，敬代天的职任。
English: Strategy: Heaven and earth are lonely, hot and cold alternate, heaven and earth are used together, supporting and nurturing people as a treasure, so it is possible to make all things be moisturized by nature and change their shape, and respect the duties of heaven.

古文：允兹元辅，应期挺秀，裁成天地之功，幽协神明之德。
现代文：令人敬重信服的重臣，顺应机运的俊杰，裁制天地之功，深合神圣之德。
English: He is a respected and trustworthy senior vassal, a brilliant man who responds to opportunities, has made great contributions to shaping the heavens and the earth, and is deeply imbued with sacred virtue.

古文：拨乱反正，济世宁民，盛烈光于有道，大勋振于无外，虽伊陟之保乂王家，姬公之有此丕训，方之蔑如也。
现代文：拨乱反正，济世宁民，使荣耀美盛于清明政治，使功业大振于边地远方，即使伊陟治理使王室安定太平，姬公有此重大的训导，但比起这些也不如呀。
English: To set things right, to benefit the world and the people, to make glory and beauty flourish in a clear-cut politics, to make great achievements in remote areas, even if the Ili governance makes the royal family stable and peaceful, Ji Gong has such an important teaching, but it is not as good as these.

古文：今将授公典策，其敬听朕命：上天不造，难钟皇室，世祖以休明早崩，世宗以仁德不嗣，高宗袭统，宸居弗永，虽夙夜劬劳，而隆平不洽。
现代文：现在将授您策命，请敬听我令：天降不幸，难聚皇室，世祖以美好清明早逝，世宗以仁德不继，高宗嗣后，帝位不长，虽然早晚劳苦，但不能使昌盛太平遍布天下。
English: Now I will give you a mission, please listen to my order: the heavens have fallen, it is difficult to gather the royal family, the ancestor died early with beauty and clarity, the dynasty did not continue with benevolence and virtue, the emperor did not last long, although he worked hard in the morning and evening, he could not make prosperity and peace spread all over the world.

古文：嗣君昏暴，书契弗睹。
现代文：继位的君主昏愤暴虐，有书记载以来不曾见过。
English: The monarch who succeeded to the throne was furious and violent, something that had not been seen since records began to be kept.

古文：朝权国柄，委之群甗。
现代文：国家政权，委任群妖。
English: State power, the appointment of a group of devils.

古文：剿戮忠贤，诛残台辅，含冤抱痛，噍类靡余。
现代文：剿杀忠臣贤良，诛减三公宰辅，含冤抱痛，活着的人死亡殆尽。
English: He killed his loyal and virtuous vassals, reduced his three vice-premiers, suffered grievously, and all the living people died.

古文：实繁非一，并专国命。
现代文：这样的事情确实不少，并且专断国命。
English: There are indeed many such things, and they are dictating the fate of the country.

古文：嚬笑致灾，睚眦及祸。
现代文：颦笑招灾，小怨及祸。
English: Sarcastic laughter invites disaster, petty grudges and misfortune.

古文：严科毒赋，载离比屋，溥天熬熬，置身无所。
现代文：严酷的刑罚狠毒的赋税，流离失所比比皆是，普天之下哀愁怨苦，无立身之地。
English: Severe punishments, cruel taxes, displacement everywhere, sorrow and bitterness all over the world, no place to stand.

古文：冤颈引决，道树相望，无近无远，号天靡告。
现代文：引颈自杀的冤屈者，在道路两边的树上相望，无论远近，号天泣地无处相告。
English: The wrongdoers who commit suicide by strangulation look at each other in the trees on both sides of the road, no matter how far or near they are, and cry out to each other.

古文：公藉昏明之期，因兆民之愿，援帅群后，翊成中兴。宗社之危已固，天人之望允塞，此实公纽我绝纲，大造皇家者也。
现代文：您藉昏明之时，顺万民之愿，率领公卿百官，辅佐促成国运中兴，宗庙社稷之危已经安固，天人之期望得到满足，这实在是您系结我绝断之纲维，对皇家的大恩德啊。
English: By the time of dusk, you have carried out the wishes of all the people, led hundreds of nobles and officials, and assisted in the promotion of national prosperity. The danger of the collapse of the patriarchal temples and shrines has been stabilized, and the expectations of the gods have been satisfied. This is really the essence of your commitment to me, and a great boon to the royal family.

古文：永明季年，边隙大启，荆河连率，招引戎荒，江、淮扰逼，势同履虎。
现代文：永明末年，边境争端大起，荆河地方长官招致西戎，长江、淮河之敌侵扰威逼，情形如同踩踏虎尾一样危险。
English: At the end of the Yongming Dynasty, a border dispute broke out. The local governor of Jinghe invited Xi Rong, and the enemies of the Yangtze River and Huaihe River intruded and threatened. The situation was as dangerous as stepping on a tiger's tail.

古文：公受言本朝，轻兵赴袭，縻以长算，制之环中。
现代文：您献言本朝，轻兵往袭，执长策拴缚敌人，制敌于掌中。
English: In your speech this morning, you said that light troops should attack, and that the commander-in-chief should encircle the enemy and subdue the enemy.

古文：排危冒险，强柔递用，坦然一方，还成籓服。
现代文：排除危难冒着风险，刚柔交用，安定一方，即成藩国。
English: Eliminate the danger, take the risk, be tough and soft, and be stable, that is, become a feudal state.

古文：此又公之功也。
现代文：这又是您的一大功劳。
English: It is to your great credit that you sent him back.

古文：在昔隆昌，洪基已谢，高宗虑深社稷，将行权道。
现代文：从前在隆昌年间，大业已凋敝，高宗深为社稷打算，将行变通之道。
English: Once upon a time, during the Longchang period, the great cause had withered away, and Gao Zongxin planned for the society to take a different path.

古文：公定策帷帐，激扬大节，废帝立王，谋猷深著。
现代文：您谋立天子于帷帐之中，激励显扬大节，废帝立王，谋略深着。
English: You are plotting to set up the Son of Heaven in the middle of the curtain, to inspire the great festival, to depose the emperor and establish the king, and you are deep in strategy.

古文：此又公之功也。
现代文：这又是您的一大功劳。
English: It is to your great credit that you sent him back.

古文：建武阐业，厥猷虽远，戎狄内侵，凭陵关塞，司部危逼，沦陷指期。
现代文：建武时发扬帝业，谋略虽然远大，戎狄入侵，进犯关塞，司部危逼，沦陷指日可待。
English: At the time of Jianwu, the imperial cause was promoted, and although the strategy was far-reaching, the army invaded, attacked the pass, the division was in danger, and the fall was just around the corner.

古文：公治兵外讨，卷甲长骛，接距交绥，电激风扫，摧坚覆锐，咽水涂原，执俘象魏，献馘海渚，焚庐毁帐，号哭言归。
现代文：您整饬部队从外征讨，轻兵疾进，交兵接战，如闪电出击风扫落叶，挫败强寇灭敌精锐，使敌尸填塞流遍布原野，捉俘虏于皇宫，献敌耳于海岛，焚烧敌营毁灭帐幕，使贼军号哭归附。
English: Your rectification troops were recruited from outside, light soldiers rushed in, and soldiers engaged in battle, such as lightning striking the wind and sweeping the fallen leaves, defeating the powerful invaders and exterminating the enemy elite, making the enemy corpses fill the flow all over the field, capturing the prisoners in the imperial palace, offering the enemy ears to the island, burning the enemy camp, destroying the tent, and making the enemy army cry to join.

古文：此又公之功也。
现代文：这又是您的一大功劳。
English: It is to your great credit that you sent him back.

古文：樊、汉阽切，羽书续至。
现代文：樊城、汉中危险急迫，插着鸟羽的紧急军事文书接连不断而来。
English: Perak and Hanzhong are in imminent danger, and emergency military documents with bird feathers are coming one after another.

古文：公星言鞠旅，禀命徂征，而军机戎统，事非己出，善策嘉谋，抑而莫允。
现代文：您急速召开誓师大会，禀受命令前往征讨，但军机军政，不由自己决断，好的谋略，被抑制而遭否决。
English: You quickly convened the oath meeting, and were ordered to go to collect, but the military machine and the military government did not decide on their own, and the good strategy was suppressed and rejected.

古文：邓城之役，胡马卒至，元帅潜及，不相告报，弃甲捐师，饵之虎口。
现代文：邓城之战役，胡人兵马突然来临，主帅潜回，不相告知，丢弃军队，喂食虎口。
English: In the battle of Dengcheng, the Hu people's soldiers and horses suddenly came, the commander dived back, without notice, abandoned the army, and fed the tiger's mouth.

古文：公南收散卒，北御雕骑，全众方轨，案路徐归，拯我边危，重获安堵。
现代文：您南收散兵，北御凶猛的敌骑，保全部队车辆并行，按路徐行而回，拯救我边境危险，重新获得安定。
English: You collect the scattered soldiers in the south and the ferocious enemy cavalry in the north, keep all the vehicles of the whole team in parallel, and return slowly along the road, save our border danger, and regain stability.

古文：此又公之功也。
现代文：逭又是您的一大功劳。
English: It is to your great credit that you sent him back.

古文：汉南迥弱，咫尺勍寇，兵粮盖阙，器甲靡遗。
现代文：汉南远弱，强寇当前，兵粮缺乏，器甲无遣。
English: Hannan was far from strong, and at the time of the invasion, there was a shortage of food for the soldiers, and they had no armour.

古文：公作籓爰始，因资靡托，整兵训卒，蒐狩有序，俾我危城，翻为强镇。
现代文：您开始镇守一方，凭藉现有资源而不依赖，整饬部队训练士卒，狩猎习武有条不紊，使我危城，反为强镇。
English: You began to defend one side of the town, relying on existing resources rather than relying on them, reorganizing troops, training officers, hunting and practicing martial arts in an orderly manner, making me a dangerous town, but a strong town.

古文：此又公之功也。
现代文：这又是您的一大功劳。
English: It is to your great credit that you sent him back.

古文：永元纪号，瞻乌已及，虽废昏有典，而伊、霍称难。
现代文：永元作为年号时，人民无归的乱世来到，虽然废除束昏有法度可依，但左右朝政的大臣发难。
English: When Yongyuan was chosen as the year name, the chaotic world of no return for the people had begun. Although there was a law to be followed to abolish shackles, the ministers of the left and right dynasties were in trouble.

古文：公首建大策，爰立明圣，义逾邑纶，勋高代人，易乱以化，俾昏作明。
现代文：您首倡大议，拥立皇上，道义超过同乡纶氏，勋业高于代王之人，以太平代替动乱，使黑暗变作光明。
English: You took the lead in initiating the great discussion, supported the emperor, the morality exceeded that of fellow villagers, and the honors were higher than those of the king, replacing the turmoil with peace, and turning darkness into light.

古文：此又公之功也。
现代文：这又是您的一大功劳。
English: It is to your great credit that you sent him back.

古文：文王之风，虽被江、汉，京邑蠢动，湮为洪流，句吴、於越，巢幕匪喻。
现代文：文王之风教，虽然广布长江、汉水流域，但京都动荡，被洪流覆没，句吴、于越，筑巢于帐幕之上也不能喻其危险。
English: Although the teachings of King Wen spread far and wide in the Yangtze River and Han River basins, Kyoto was in turmoil and was submerged by the torrent. Wu, Yue, and building a nest on top of a tent could not compare to its danger.

古文：公投袂万里，事惟拯溺，义声所覃，无思不韪。
现代文：您奋起征战万里，一心为了解救危难，仁德之声延及之处，没有不善美的。
English: You have set out to travel thousands of miles, with one heart to understand and save the peril, and there is nothing unscrupulous where the voice of benevolence extends.

古文：此又公之功也。
现代文：逭又是您的一大功劳。
English: It is to your great credit that you sent him back.

古文：鲁城、夏汭，梗据中流，乘山置垒，萦川自固。
现代文：鲁城、夏水之畔，阻据中游，登山顶筑建营垒，绕川流自我加固。
English: Lucheng, the bank of Xiashui, the middle reaches of the barrier, the top of the mountain to build a camp, and the stream around the river to strengthen itself.

古文：公御此乌集，陵兹地险，顿兵坐甲，寒往暑移，我行永久，士忘归愿，经以远图，御以长策，费无遗矢，战未穷兵，践华之固，相望俱拔。
现代文：您抵御此乌合之众，驰骋这危险之地，驻扎军队披甲待敌，寒暑交替，我军出征历时长久，兵士忘却回归之愿，用远大的谋略经营，用长久的计策统御，兵力没有微小的耗损，战争没有滥用武力，像登临华山作为城郭一样的险固，也都相继占领。
English: You have resisted this rabble, galloped through this dangerous land, stationed troops in armor to wait for the enemy, alternated between cold and heat, our army has been away for a long time, the soldiers have forgotten the wish to return, operated with far-reaching strategies, ruled with long-term strategies, there is no minor depletion of troops, there is no abuse of force in war, and it is as strong as Mount Linhua as a fortress, and they have all been occupied one after another.

古文：此又公之功也。
现代文：这又是您的一大功劳。
English: It is to your great credit that you sent him back.

古文：惟此群凶，同恶相济，缘江负险，蚁聚加湖。
现代文：这帮群凶，同恶相助，沿着长江凭藉险要，如蚂蚁般聚集加湖。
English: This group of thugs, with the help of evil, gathered like ants along the Yangtze River.

古文：水陆盘据，规援夏首，桴鳷一临，应时褫溃。
现代文：盘据水路和陆路，谋求援助夏首，战舰，立即瓦解溃散。
English: Inventory waterways and land routes, seek assistance from Xia Shou, warships, immediately collapse and disperse.

古文：此又公之功也。
现代文：这又是您的一大功劳。
English: It is to your great credit that you sent him back.

古文：奸甗震皇，复怀举斧，蓄兵九派，用拟勤王。
现代文：奸妖震惊，复怀举兵，您在长江流域湖北、江西一带积蓄兵力，打算救援王朝。
English: The evil demon was shocked and raised an army again. You accumulated troops in the Yangtze River basin, Hubei and Jiangxi regions, intending to rescue the dynasty.

古文：公棱威直指，势逾风电，旌旆小临，全州稽服。
现代文：您威势直指，势逾风驰电掣，军队小临，全州臣服。
English: Your power is direct, your power exceeds the wind and the electric eel, the army is small, and the whole state is submissive.

古文：此又公之功也。
现代文：造又是您的一大功劳。
English: It is to your great credit that you sent him back.

古文：姑孰冲要，密迩京畿，凶徒炽聚，断塞津路。
现代文：姑孰居冲要之地，靠近京都一带，凶恶的匪徒紧密聚结，断绝阻塞水路。
English: Gugu lives in a strategic location, close to Kyoto, where vicious gangsters have gathered to cut off the waterway.

古文：公偏师启涂，排方继及，兵威所震，望旗自骇，焚舟委壁，卷甲宵遁。
现代文：您率偏师启程，大的舰队继至，兵威所震之处，敌人望旗自骇，焚毁舟船放弃壁垒，卷甲夜遁。
English: You and your division set off, followed by a large fleet, where the military power is shaken, the enemy is looking at the flag, burning boats, abandoning barriers, and rolling nightingales.

古文：此又公之功也。
现代文：这又是您的一大功劳。
English: It is to your great credit that you sent him back.

古文：群竖猖狂，志在借一，豕突淮涘，武骑如云。
现代文：群小猖狂，志在决一死战，像野猪一样奔突窜扰淮水之滨，武装的骑兵盛多如云。
English: A small group of rampant, determined to fight to the death, rushing like wild boars to disturb the coast of Huai Shui, armed cavalry as numerous as clouds.

古文：公爰命英勇，因机骋锐，气冠版泉，势逾洹水，追奔逐北，奄有通津，熊耳比峻，未足云拟，睢水不流，曷其能及。
现代文：您于是命令勇敢出众的人，随机躯驰精锐，气冠版泉，势逾洹水，追击逃亡的败兵，全部占有四通八达的津渡，熊耳媲峻，也不足以比拟，睢水不流，又怎能企及。
English: You then ordered the brave and outstanding people to randomly ride the elite, the gas crown version of the spring, the power to exceed the flood, chase the fleeing defeated soldiers, all occupy the Tsudo, the bear's ear, is not enough to compare, the flood does not flow, and how can it be achieved.

古文：此又公之功也。
现代文：这又是您的一大功劳。
English: It is to your great credit that you sent him back.

古文：琅邪、石首，襟带岨固，新垒、东墉，金汤是埒。
现代文：琅邪、石首，山屏障环绕险峻坚固，新垒、束墉，等同金城汤池。
English: Jianye, Shishou, surrounded by a steep and solid mountain barrier, Xinyi, Sokou, are the same as Jincheng Tangchi.

古文：凭险作守，兵食兼资，风激电骇，莫不震叠，城复于隍，于是乎在。
现代文：凭恃险要防守，兵粮兼备，风激电骇，无不震动恐惧，城堡崩塌成沟土，此时还在。
English: With the risk of war to defend, both grain and soldiers, wind and electricity, all shaking fear, the castle collapsed into a ditch, still at this time.

古文：此又公之功也。
现代文：这又是您的一大功劳。
English: It is to your great credit that you sent him back.

古文：独夫昏很，凭城靡惧，鼓钟鞺鞜，慠若有余。
现代文：专断横行的统治者昏乱凶狠，凭据城池无所畏惧，钟鼓声声，仍傲慢有余。
English: The arbitrary and rampant ruler is bewildered and ferocious, with no fear of the city, the sound of bells and drums, and still arrogant.

古文：狎是邪甗，忌斯冠冕，凶狡因之，将逞孥戮。
现代文：亲近这邪妖，猜忌那忠臣，凶顽奸猾之徒利用这些，将肆行诛族。
English: Close to this evil demon, suspicious of that loyal subject, the vicious and treacherous use of these, will be rampant among the Yi people.

古文：公奇谟密运，盛略潜通，忠勇之徒，得申厥效，白旗宣室，未之或比。
现代文：您秘密运筹奇谋，暗中通行大略，忠心勇敢之众，得以施展效力，就是载主帅白旗到宣室，也不能与此相比。
English: Your clandestine operations, covert maneuvers, loyal and brave people, to exert effectiveness, is to carry the coach's white flag to the Xuanwu, can not be compared with this.

古文：此又公之功也。
现代文：遣又是您的一大功劳。
English: It is to your great credit that you sent him back.

古文：公有拯亿兆之勋，重之以明德，爰初厉志，服道儒门，濯缨来仕，清猷映代。
现代文：您有拯救万民的功勋，加上具有美德，从一开始就砥砺志节，潜心修道儒学，操守高洁入仕，清明的谋略辉映当代。
English: You have the merit of saving all the people, plus the virtue of honing your ideals from the very beginning, devoting yourself to monasticism and Confucianism, entering the service with high integrity, and your clear strategy reflects the contemporary world.

古文：时运艰难，宗社危殆，昆岗已燎，玉石同焚。
现代文：时运艰难，宗庙社稷危险，崑岗已被火燎，玉石俱焚。
English: Times are tough, the ancestral temple is in danger, the guard post has been set on fire, and the jade has been burned.

古文：驱率貔貅，抑扬霆电，义等南巢，功齐牧野。
现代文：率领勇武之士，进退上下如电闪雷击，义同成汤放夏桀于南巢，功等武王与殷纣会战于牧野。
English: He led the brave warriors, advancing and retreating up and down like a lightning strike. Yidongcheng Tang released Xia Yao in Nanchao, and King Wu and Yin Yao fought in Makino.

古文：若夫禹功寂漠，微管谁嗣，拯其将鱼，驱其被发，解兹乱网，理此棼丝，复礼衽席，反乐河海。
现代文：至于大禹之功沉寂，要不是管仲谁来接继，拯救那些将被鱼肉的百姓，驱逐那些披发的蛮夷，解开造混乱的罗网，理清这纷扰的乱丝，使礼仪恢复天下太平，使国内又安乐如初。
English: As for the silence of Dayu's work, if it were not for Guanzhong who would succeed, save those people who would be eaten by fish, expel those barbarians who wore hair, untie the net that created chaos, sort out this chaotic mess, make the etiquette restore world peace, and make the country as happy as ever.

古文：永平故事，闻之者叹息；司隶旧章，见之者陨涕。
现代文：永平先例，听到的为之叹息；司隶前典，见到的为之落泪。
English: Yongping precedent, heard it and sighed; Sifu precedent, saw it and shed tears.

古文：请我民命，还之斗极。
现代文：为我民请命，归命于天皇。
English: For the sake of my people, I beg for my life and surrender to the emperor.

古文：悯悯搢绅，重荷戴天之庆；哀哀黔首，复蒙履地之恩。
现代文：忧伤的士大夫，再蒙天恩之福泽；悲哀的老百姓，又受皇朝之恩德。
English: The sad magistrate was blessed by heaven; the sad common people were blessed by the imperial court.

古文：德逾嵩、岱，功邻造物，超哉邈矣，越无得而言焉。
现代文：德过嵩山和泰山，功近造物者，超卓高远啊，无从来评价。
English: Virtue surpasses Mount Song and Mount Tai, achievement is close to the Creator, outstanding is far away, and there is no evaluation.

古文：朕又闻之：畴庸命德，建侯作屏，咸用克固四维，永隆万叶。
现代文：我又听说：选贤任用授命有德之士，封立诸侯作为君王屏障，并用就能巩固以礼、义、廉、耻治国的四纲，使千秋万代永远兴隆。
English: I also heard that the selection and appointment of virtuous people, the establishment of princes as a barrier to kings, and the use of the four principles of governing the country with courtesy, righteousness, integrity, and shame can be consolidated, so that thousands of generations can flourish forever.

古文：是以《二南》流化，九伯斯征，王道淳洽，刑措罔用。
现代文：所以《周南》《召南》流布教化，九州方伯之征，王道淳厚广被，刑罚搁置不用。
English: Therefore, "Southern Zhou" and "Southern Zhao" have been popularized and popularized, the conquest of Kyushu has been carried out, the royal road has been widely known, and there is no need to suspend the punishment.

古文：覆政弗兴，历兹永久，如毁既及，晋、郑靡依。
现代文：毁败的政治不兴，历经永久，如火已及，晋国、郑国顺从。
English: The politics of destruction and defeat is not popular, it has been going on forever, it has reached a fever pitch, and Jin and Zheng are obedient.

古文：惟公经纶天地，宁济区夏，道冠乎伊、稷，赏薄于桓、文，岂所以宪章齐、鲁，长辔宇宙。
现代文：您筹划治理天下大事，安定匡济华夏，道德盖遇伊尹和后稷，赏赐少于齐桓、晋文，难道用得着效法齐地、鲁地，才能有力地统治宇宙?
English: You plan to govern the world's major events, stabilize, improve, and benefit China, the moral cover encounters Yi Yin and Hou Yi, and the reward is less than Qi Huan and Jinwen. Do you need to follow the example of Qi Di and Lu Di in order to effectively rule the universe?

古文：敬惟前烈，朕甚惧焉。
现代文：敬思以前的功业，我很畏惧。
English: Looking back on my previous career, I'm scared.

古文：今进授相国，改扬州刺史为牧，以豫州之梁郡历阳、南徐州之义兴、扬州之淮南宣城吴吴兴会稽新安东阳十郡，封公为梁公。
现代文：现在进升您属相国，改扬州刺史为牧，将豫州的梁郡历阳、南徐州的义兴、扬州的淮南宣城吴郡吴兴会稽新安束阳等十郡，赐封您为梁公。
English: Now that you belong to the same country, you have been appointed as the patriarch of Yangzhou, Liang County, Liyang, South Xuzhou, Yixing, Yangzhou, Huainan, Xuancheng, Wu County, Wu Xing, Xin'an, Sokyang and other ten counties. You have been awarded the title of Liangguo.

古文：锡兹白土，苴以白茅，爰定尔邦，用建冢社。
现代文：赏赐白土，用白茅包裹，安定您的封国，以建立您的冢土。
English: Reward the white soil, wrap it with white maypole, stabilize your fiefdom, and build your rampart.

古文：在昔旦、奭，入居保佑，逮于毕、毛，亦作卿士，任兼内外，礼实宜之。
现代文：从前周公旦、召公奭，入宫保护辅佐，至于毕公、毛公，也做官卿士，兼任朝廷内外，逭确实是礼法相适宜的办法。
English: From the previous week, Gongdan, Zhao Gongjun, entered the palace protection assistant, as for Bi Gong and Mao Gong, they also served as government officials and nobles, concurrently serving both inside and outside the imperial court, it is indeed a suitable method of etiquette.

古文：今命使持节兼太尉王亮授相国扬州牧印绶，梁公玺绂；使持节兼司空王志授梁公茅土，金虎符第一至第五左，竹使符第一至第十左。
现代文：现在命使持节兼太尉王亮授予相国扬州牧印绶，梁公玺绶；使持节兼司空王志授予梁公封爵，金虎符第一至第五左，竹使符第一至第十左。
English: Now, it is ordered that Wang Liang, the envoy of Wang Zhi, the envoy of Wang Zhi, the envoy of Wang Zhi, the envoy of Wang Zhi, the envoy of Wang Zhi, the envoy of Wang Zhi, the envoy of Wang Zhi, the envoy of Wang Liang, the envoy of Wang Zhi, the envoy of Wang Zhi, the envoy of Wang Zhi, the envoy of Wang Zhi, the envoy of Wang Liang, the envoy of Wang Zhi, the envoy of Wang Zhi, the envoy of Wang Zhi, the envoy of Wang Zhi, the en

古文：相国位冠群后，任总百司，恒典彝数，宜与事革。
现代文：相国位居公卿之首，职责总理百官，长掌常法，当然参与变革之事。
English: As the head of the nobility of the country, the prime minister is responsible for hundreds of officials, has a long history of law, and of course participates in change.

古文：其以相国总百揆，去录尚书之号，上所假节、侍中貂蝉、中书监印、中外都督大司马印绶，建安公印策，骠骑大将军如故。
现代文：因为相国总理百官，除去录尚书称号，以上所有的假节、侍中貂蝉、中书监印、中外都督大司马印绶，建安公官印和授爵的策书，骠骑大将军照旧。
English: Because of the hundred officials of the Prime Minister of the same country, all the above-mentioned false festivals, attendants in the middle of the stamping of the cicadas, the supervision of the stamping of the stamping of the stamp of the stamp of the stamp of the stamp of the stamp of the stamp of the stamp of the stamp of the stamp of the stamp of the stamp of the stamp of the stamp of the stamp of the stamp of the stamp of the stamp of the stamp of the stamp of the stamp of the stamp of the stamp of the stamp of the stamp of the stamp of the stamp of the stamp of the stamp of the stamp of the stamp of the stamp of the stamp of the stamp of

古文：又加公九锡，其敬听后命：以公礼律兼修，刑德备举，哀矜折狱，罔不用情，是用锡公大辂、戎辂各一，玄牡二驷。
现代文：又增加九锡，请敬听续发的命令：由于你礼法舆刑律兼修，刑罚与德政备举，心怀哀怜断决诉讼案件，无不用情，因此赐予您大格、戎辖各一乘，黑色公马八匹。
English: He also added nine pennies. Please listen attentively to the following order: Since you are both a practitioner of etiquette, law, public opinion, and criminal law, and are well-versed in punishment and moral government, and you are compassionate in deciding litigation cases, there is no need to be pitiless. Therefore, I will give you a large horse, one horse for each military jurisdiction, and eight black stallions.

古文：公劳心稼穑，念在民天，丕崇本务，惟谷是宝，是用锡公衮冕之服，赤舄副焉。
现代文：您操心农业生产，念及粮食，尊崇根本事务，衹把谷物当作珍宝，因此赐予您帝王及上公穿的绘有卷龙的礼服，配上帝王和诸侯穿的红色的鞋子。
English: You are concerned about agricultural production, think about grain, respect the fundamental affairs, and regard grain as a treasure, so you give you the emperor and the emperor's dress with a curling dragon, and the red shoes worn by the god king and the princes.

古文：公熔钧所被，变风以雅，易俗陶民，载和邦国，是用锡公轩悬之乐，六佾之舞。
现代文：您治理的地方，风气由鄙俚一变为高雅，革除旧有的习俗化育民众，使国家上下和睦，因此赐予您轩悬之乐，六佾之舞。
English: Where you govern, the culture will change from despicable to elegant, the old customs will be eliminated, the people will be educated, and the country will be harmonious. Therefore, I will give you the music of suspense, the dance of six gongs.

古文：公文德广覃，义声远洽，椎髻髽首，夷歌请吏，是用锡公硃户以居。
现代文：您的礼乐教化遍及，德义的名声远播，边远少数民族，唱着夷人的歌曲请求为臣，因此赐予您居户朱红色的大门。
English: Your worship music has spread far and wide, your reputation for virtue and righteousness has spread far and wide, and the outlying ethnic minorities, singing the songs of the barbarians, have asked you to be their vassal. Therefore, I bestow upon you the vermilion-red door of your residence.

古文：公扬清抑浊，官方有序，多士聿兴，《棫呻朴》流咏，是用锡公纳陛以登。
现代文：您扬善斥恶，设官府立常官有序，众多的贤士迅疾崛起，颂扬贤才众多的《诗。大雅、械仆》到处流唱，因此赐予您由纳陛登殿。
English: You have exalted the good and rejected the evil, you have established an orderly system of government officials, numerous sages have risen rapidly, and "Poetry, Elegance, and Cunning Servants," which praises numerous sages, has been sung everywhere. Therefore, Your Majesty has given you the right to ascend to the throne.

古文：公正色御下，以身轨物，式遏不虞，折冲惟远，是用锡公虎贲之士三百人。
现代文：您严肃治理，以身作则，防卫不测，制胜远敌，因此赐予您勇士三百人。
English: You govern seriously, lead by example, defend against the unexpected, and defeat distant enemies, so I give you three hundred warriors.

古文：公威同夏日，志清奸宄，放命圮族，刑兹罔赦，是用锡公鈇、钺各一。
现代文：您的威严如同夏日，立志清除违犯作乱之人，违逆教令毁害族类之徒，严惩他们绝不赦免，因此赐予您鈇、铁各一。
English: Your majesty is like a summer's day, determined to purge those who break the law and make trouble, to destroy those who violate the teachings and destroy the tribe, to punish them severely and never pardon them, so I will give you a shovel and an iron one.

古文：公跨蹑嵩溟，陵厉区宇，譬诸日月，容光必至，是用锡公彤弓一，彤矢百；卢弓十，卢矢千。
现代文：您跨越高山与大海，凌驾于境域之上，犹如日月，光辉必至，因此赐予您红色的弓一把，红色的箭百枝；黑色的弓十把，黑色的箭千枝。
English: You have crossed the high mountains and the sea, you have risen above the territory, like the sun and the moon, the glory will come, so I will give you a red bow and a hundred red arrows; ten black bows and a thousand black arrows.

古文：公永言惟孝，至感通神，恭严祀典，祭有余敬，是用锡公秬鬯一卣，圭瓒副焉。
现代文：您常常记着孝敬，极其诚挚的情感通于神灵，在祭礼的仪礼上恭敬严肃，祭祀时尊敬有加，因此赐予您用黑黍和郁金香草酿造的酒一樽，配上圭瓒酒器。
English: You often remember the filial piety, the extremely sincere feelings for the gods, the reverence and seriousness in the ritual of the festival, and the respect in the sacrifice, so I give you a barrel of wine brewed with black locust and tulip herb, with a Guizhou wine container.

古文：梁国置丞相以下，一遵旧式。
现代文：梁国设置丞相以下官吏，全部遵循旧典。
English: Liang Guo set up officials below the minister of justice, all of which followed the old code.

古文：钦哉！
现代文：钦慕啊!
English: Admiration!

古文：其敬循往策，祗服大礼，对扬天眷，用膺多福，以弘我太祖之休命！
现代文：您谨遵前策，敬服大礼，答谢颂扬帝王的恩宠，因而享受多福，以弘扬我太祖的美善的旨意。
English: You should follow the policy, pay great respect, thank and praise the emperor's grace, and thus enjoy many blessings, in order to promote the good will of my grandfather.

古文：高祖固辞。
现代文：高祖坚决推辞。
English: Gaozu resolutely refused.

古文：府僚劝进曰： 伏承嘉命，显至伫策。
现代文：府僚劝进道： 敬受皇上赐官授爵的敕命，显达积聚策书。
English: A government official advised Chindo: "Respecting the emperor's command to confer a title of nobility on you, it is obvious that you have accumulated a lot of policy documents.

古文：明公逡巡盛礼，斯实谦尊之旨，未穷远大之致。
现代文：您退让盛礼，这实是谦虚之意，未究远大之理。
English: Your concession of the grand salute is indeed a sign of modesty, not of loftiness.

古文：何者？
现代文：为什么呢?
English: Why is that?

古文：嗣君弃常，自绝宗社，国命民主，剪为仇仇，折栋崩榱，压焉自及，卿士怀脯斫之痛，黔首惧比屋之诛。
现代文：继位的君主丢弃常道，自绝于宗庙社稷，朝廷命官民众之主，剪除为仇敌，栋梁崩塌，祸及自身，卿士怀着切肤之痛，百姓害怕挨家挨户被诛。
English: The monarch who succeeded to the throne abandoned the normal way, renounced the patriarchal temple and shrine, the ruler of the people who was appointed by the court, was cut off as an enemy, the pillars collapsed, the disaster was himself, the nobles were in great pain, and the people were afraid of being beaten from house to house.

古文：明公亮格天之功，拯水火之切，再躔日月，重缀参辰，反龟玉于涂泥，济斯民于坑岸，使夫匹妇童儿，羞言伊、吕，乡校里塾，耻谈五霸。
现代文：您展现感通上天之功，救水火之急，使日月再在黄道上运行，使参星辰星重缀大位，使龟甲和宝玉从涂泥中复归世间，使黎民在沟壑中得救，使平民妇女和儿童，羞言伊尹、吕尚，使乡里学校，耻谈春秋五霸。
English: You have demonstrated the power to communicate with the heavens, the urgency to save water and fire, to make the sun and moon run on the ecliptic again, to make the stars and the stars re-decorate the great position, to return the tortoise shell and the precious jewel from the mud, to save the people of Lai in the ravine, to make the civilians and women and children, the shameful Yin and Lushang, to make the village school, and to talk about the Five Dynasties of Spring and Autumn.

古文：而位卑乎阿衡，地狭于曲阜，庆赏之道，尚其未洽。
现代文：然而您的地位低于宰辅之职，领地比曲阜狭小，赏赐之道，尚且不符。
English: However, your position is lower than that of the vice-governor, your territory is smaller than Qufu, and the way of reward is not consistent.

古文：夫大宝公器，非要非距，至公至平，当仁谁让？
现代文：帝位官爵，不要也不拒绝，至公至平，当仁让谁?
English: Don't and don't refuse the imperial title and peerage, be fair and even-handed, and let who be benevolent?

古文：明公宜祗奉天人，允膺大礼。
现代文：您应当敬奉天人之愿，接受大礼。
English: You should respect the wishes of heaven and earth and accept the great gift.

古文：无使后予之歌，同彼胥怨，兼济之人，翻为独善。 
现代文：莫让在我之后的歌谣，和那些百姓怨上的歌谣一样，一个能使天下民众和万物都受惠益的人，反而衹成了一个独善自身的人。 
English: Don't let the songs after me be the same as those songs about the people's grievances. A person who can benefit the people of the world and all things has become a person who is only good for himself.

古文：公不许。
现代文：高祖不同意。
English: Gaozu disagreed.

古文：二月辛酉，府僚重请曰： 近以朝命蕴策，冒奏丹诚，奉被还令，未蒙虚受，搢绅颙颙，深所未达。
现代文：二月辛酉，府僚再次请求道： 近来因为朝廷的任命积聚策书，冒昧呈上赤诚，奉被回旨。未蒙虚心接受，士人期盼，深深未达。
English: As February was drawing to a close, the government official once again made a request: Recently, because of the appointment of the imperial court, we have accumulated policy documents, and we have the temerity to show sincerity, and we have received a reply. We have not been humbly accepted, and the expectations of the scholars have not been met.

古文：盖闻受金于府，通人弘致，高蹈海隅，匹夫小节，是以履乘石而周公不以为疑，赠玉璜而太公不以为让。
现代文：听说受金印于府署，是博学通达之人的大义，隐居海角。是普通百姓的小节，所以踏上天子登车的垫脚石旦公不以为嫌疑，获赠玉璜叁公不作谦让。
English: It is said that receiving the gold seal at the prefectural government office is the great virtue of a well-educated person, who lives in seclusion on the cape. It is a small section of ordinary people, so Shitan Gong is not suspected of stepping on the foot of the heavenly son to board the train, and Tamakazura Gong is not condescending.

古文：况世哲继轨，先德在民，经纶草昧，叹深微管。
现代文：况且世代有圣哲继承前人的轨迹。祖先的德行代代遗传，筹划治理国家大事于草创之时，深深赞叹管仲一样功勋卓著的大臣。
English: Moreover, generations of sages have followed in the footsteps of their predecessors. The virtues of their ancestors have been passed down from generation to generation, and when planning the governance of the country, they deeply admired ministers with outstanding merits like Guanzhong.

古文：加以硃方之役，荆河是依，班师振旅，大造王室。
现代文：加上朱方之战，荆河一带归依，整队凯旋，有大功于皇室。
English: In addition to the Battle of Zhufang, the area around the Jinghe River has been converted, and the whole team has made a triumphant return, which is a great credit to the imperial family.

古文：虽复累茧救宋，重胝存楚，居今观古，曾何足云。
现代文：纵令墨翟足上磨出重重老茧救助宋国，申包胥手脚磨出层层厚茧保存楚国，由今观古，则何足一提。
English: It is said that the longitudinal direction of the ink on the foot of the mandala will help save the Song Dynasty, and the thicker the layer of ink on the hand and foot of the mandala will save the Chu Dynasty. From now on, it is worth mentioning.

古文：而惑甚盗钟，功疑不赏，皇天后土，不胜其酷。
现代文：而且欺惑超过盗钟掩耳，功疑不赏，天神地祇，不堪其酷。
English: Moreover, the deception exceeds the theft of the bell to cover the ears, the achievement is not appreciated, the angels are gods, and it is unbearable.

古文：是以玉马骏奔，表微子之去；金板出地，告龙逢之冤。
现代文：所以贤人急速奔走，表微子之离去；金版克书出于地庭中，告龙逢之沉冤。
English: Therefore, the wise men ran quickly to announce the departure of the child; the gold-plated book came out of the courtyard to announce the misfortune of the dragon.

古文：明公据鞍辍哭，厉三军之志，独居掩涕，激义士之心，故能使海若登祗，罄图效祉，山戎、孤竹，束马影从，伐罪吊民，一匡静乱。匪叨天功，实勤濡足。
现代文：您跨着马鞍止住哭泣，激励三军意志，独居掩泪，激励义士之志向，因此能使海若海神和登山之神，显现图谶之表征呈现福祉，山戎、孤竹，驭马如影随从，讨伐有罪的君主抚慰受难的百姓，使天下匡正平定变乱，不仅承受天功，实在也是自己的努力。
English: You straddle the saddle to stop crying, inspire the will of the three armies, live alone to hide your tears, and inspire the aspirations of the righteous. Therefore, you can make the sea, the god of the sea and the god of mountaineering, show the characteristics of the map to show the welfare, the mountain, the lone bamboo, and the horse as a shadow to follow, to fight the guilty monarch to comfort the suffering people, and to make the world righteous and stable. Not only to bear the merits of heaven, but also to be your own efforts.

古文：且明公本自诸生，取乐名教，道风素论，坐镇雅俗，不习孙、吴，遘兹神武。
现代文：而且您出身儒生，取乐名教，风貌脱俗言论高超，安坐而以德威服雅俗之人，不学孙武、吴起，而成就此神武。
English: Moreover, you are a Confucianist by birth, a famous scholar in music, a superb speaker with a refined demeanor, and a person who sits quietly and serves the elegant and vulgar with virtue. You did not learn from Sun Wu and Wu Qi, but achieved this Shenwu.

古文：驱尽诛之氓，济必封之谷，龟玉不毁，谁之功与？
现代文：役使将被尽灭的民众，拯救必须殓葬的习俗，使龟甲宝玉不毁，是谁的功劳?
English: Who deserves the credit for serving the people who will be exterminated, saving the customs that must be buried, and keeping the tortoise shell gem from being destroyed?

古文：独为君子，将使伊、周何地？ 
现代文：独为有功不受赏赐的君子，将使伊尹、周公旦处于何地? 
English: Where will Yi Yin and Zhou Gongdan, who are the only gentlemen who are not rewarded for their merits, be placed?

古文：于是始受相国梁公之命。
现代文：于是才受相国梁公之命。
English: As a result, he was ordered by his father-in-law, Liang Guo.

古文：是日，焚东昏淫奢异服六十二种于都街。
现代文：这一天，在都市上焚毁东昏过度奢侈的奇装异服六十二种。
English: On this day, 62 kinds of extravagant and extravagant costumes were burned in the city.

古文：湘东王宝晊谋反，赐死。
现代文：湘束王实睦图谋反叛，赐予自杀。
English: Xiangzhu Wang Sam Rong attempted to rebel and was sentenced to suicide.

古文：诏追赠梁公故夫人为梁妃。
现代文：诏令追赠梁公已故夫人为梁妃。
English: The imperial edict posthumously awarded Prince Leung's late wife as Princess Leung.

古文：乙丑，南兗州队主陈文兴于桓城内凿井，得玉镂骐驎、金镂玉璧、水精环各二枚。
现代文：乙丑，南兖州队主陈文兴在桓城内凿井，获得玉雕的骐骈、金雕的玉璧、水晶环各二枚。
English: In the second place, Chen Wenxing, the head of the Southern Luzhou team, dug a well in Kuancheng, and obtained two pieces of jade carving, gold carving jade, and crystal ring.

古文：又建康令羊瞻解称凤皇见县之桐下里。宣德皇后称美符瑞，归于相国府。
现代文：又建康令羊瞻解称凤凰出现于其县的桐下里宣德皇后赞美吉祥的征兆，归属相国府。
English: In addition, Jiankang ordered Yangzhan to explain that the phoenix appeared in the Tongxia Village of his county to praise the auspicious signs of Empress Xuande, and belonged to the provincial capital.

古文：丙寅，诏： 梁国初建，宜须综理，可依旧选诸要职，悉依天朝之制。 
现代文：丙寅曰，诏令道： 梁国始建，当需管理，可照旧典选拔众要职，全部按朝廷之制。 
English: Cui Yin said that the imperial edict said: Liang Guo began to be built, when it is necessary to manage, it can select all important positions according to the old classics, all according to the system of the imperial court.

古文：高祖上表曰：臣闻以言取士，士饰其言，以行取人，人竭其行。所谓才生于世，穷达惟时；而风流遂往，驰骛成俗，媒孽夸炫，利尽锥刀，遂使官人之门，肩摩毂击。
现代文：高祖上表道：我听说根据言论选取士人，士人便修饰其言论；根据行动选取人，人便竭力其行所谓才生于世，是困厄是通达惟靠时运；然而古之遣风已去，奔走争逐成为风俗，诬陷构罪夸伐炫耀，逐利竭尽微捆的锥刀之利。于是使选才授职部门，人来人往密集拥挤。
English: Gao Zu said: I have heard that when a scholar is selected according to his speech, the scholar will embellish his speech; when a person is selected according to his actions, the person will try his best to do what is called being born in the world, and whether it is difficult or easy depends on the time; however, the old way has gone, and running around and competing has become a custom, framing crimes, boasting, and showing off, and chasing profits. Therefore, the selection and awarding department is crowded with people.

古文：岂直暴盖露冠，不避寒暑，遂乃戢屦杖策，风雨必至。
现代文：何止暴盖露冠，不避寒暑，更有束屦拄杖，风雨必至。
English: No matter how much the canopy is exposed, there is no escape from the cold and heat, and there is a bunch of canes, wind and rain will come.

古文：良由乡举里选，不师古始，称肉度骨，遗之管库。
现代文：实由乡里选举，不法远古，称肉度骨，留给管库。
English: Actually elected by the township, illegal since ancient times, called flesh and bones, left to the treasury.

古文：加以山河梁毕，阙舆征之恩；金、张、许、史，忘旧业之替。
现代文：加上江山贤德竭尽，缺乏征召之恩惠；金、张、许、史，忘却旧业之衰微。
English: In addition, the wisdom of the country and the mountains have been exhausted, and there is a lack of favor of conscription; Jin, Zhang, Xu, and Shi have forgotten the decline of the old industry.

古文：吁，可伤哉！
现代文：嗨，可悲呀!
English: Hey, deplorables!

古文：且夫谱牒讹误，诈伪多绪，人物雅俗，莫肯留心。
现代文：况且记载宗族世系的书籍有误，诈伪多端，人物的高雅和粗俗，不肯留意。
English: What's more, the books that recorded the family's lineage were full of errors and fraud, and the characters were both elegant and vulgar, so they refused to pay attention.

古文：是以冒袭良家，即成冠族；妄修边幅，便为雅士；负俗深累，遽遭宠擢；墓木已拱，方被徽荣。
现代文：所以冒名承袭世家，即成显贵的豪门世族；妄修边幅，便为高雅之士；不谐于俗深受世人讥斥之累，才仓猝受到恩宠提拔；墓树长成了围抱之木，才被给予荣誉称号。
English: Therefore, it is only after they have succeeded to the family by assuming the name, that is, they have become a prominent and powerful family; only after they have cultivated themselves, that they are elegant; only after they have been ridiculed by the world for not conforming to the world, that they are suddenly favored and promoted; and only after the tomb tree has grown into a tree for embracing, that they are given the honorary title.

古文：故前代选官，皆立选簿，应在贯鱼，自有铨次。
现代文：因此前代选举官吏，都建立了选举簿册，凡在册者先后有序，选授官职白有次序。
English: Therefore, the previous generation of election officials have established an election book, and those who are on the book are in order, and the election of officials is in order.

古文：胄籍升降，行能臧否，或素定怀抱，或得之余论，故得简通宾客，无事扫门。
现代文：家世门第的升降，行为能力的褒贬，有的已预先在心中确定，有的得之从前的言论，因此能使宾客通达，无需求谒权贵。
English: The promotion and demotion of the family lineage, the praise and criticism of the ability to act, some have been determined in advance in the heart, and some have been obtained from the previous remarks, so that the guests can be accessible, no demand and power.

古文：顷代陵夷，九流乖失。
现代文：近代衰落，九品差错。
English: The decline of modernity, the error of the Nine Treasures.

古文：其有勇退忘进，怀质抱真者，选部或以未经朝谒，难于进用。
现代文：那些勇退忘进，怀质抱真的，选部或许认为未经朝见，难以进用。
English: Those who bravely retreat and forget to advance, cherishing quality and holding true, the selection department may think that it is difficult to advance without foresight.

古文：或有晦善藏声，自埋衡荜，又以名不素著，绝其阶绪。
现代文：有些隐藏善迹声誉，自我埋没在简陋的隐士居室的，又认为素来名声不显著，便绝其进升的阶梯。
English: Some hide their good deeds and reputations, burying themselves in a humble hermit's cell, and think that their reputation is not significant, so they can never climb the ladder.

古文：必须画刺投状，然后弹冠，则是驱迫廉捴，奖成浇竞。
现代文：必须在书简上署名呈递文状，然后才能入仕为官，那么这样便是驱逐逼迫逊让之人，助成追逐名利的浮薄风气。
English: If you have to sign a form before you can become an officer, then you are expelling those who persecute and condescend, and you are contributing to the vainglorious pursuit of fame and fortune.

古文：愚谓自今选曹宜精隐括，依旧立簿，使冠屦无爽，名实不违，庶人识崖涘，造请自息。
现代文：我认为从今后选举部门应当严密审核，依旧建立簿册。使冠屦相合，名实不悖，让众人认清界限，使登门晋见之风自然消失。
English: I think that from now on, the election departments should strictly audit and still establish a book. So that the crown and the name match, the name is true, so that everyone can recognize the boundaries, so that the trend of visiting the door will naturally disappear.

古文：且闻中间立格，甲族以二十登仕，后门以过立试吏，求之愚怀，抑有未达。
现代文：而且我听说朝内订立的标准是，出身世家大族的在二十岁入仕，出身寒微门第的要遇而立之年才出任官吏，依我之见，这也许不通达。
English: Moreover, I have heard that the standard set by the imperial court is that those who come from great families should enter the service at the age of twenty, and those who come from poor families should enter the civil service at an opportune time. In my opinion, this may not be possible.

古文：何者？
现代文：为什么?
English: Why is that?

古文：设官分职，惟才是务。
现代文：设宫分职，衹求贤才。
English: Set up a palace division of labor, and look for talents.

古文：若八元立年，居皁隶而见抑；四凶弱冠，处鼎族而宜甄。
现代文：若八元在而立之年，身居贱役而被压抑；四凶二十岁左右，因处在望族便被选用。
English: If Eight Yuan was at the peak of his career, he was oppressed as a commoner; if Four Thugs was around twenty years old, he was chosen because he was from a respected family.

古文：是则世禄之家，无意为善；布衣之士，肆心为恶。
现代文：这样那么世禄之家，无心为善；布衣之士，肆意为恶。
English: In this way, the people of the world do not have the will to do good, and the people of cloth do not have the will to do evil.

古文：岂所以弘奖风流，希向后进？
现代文：怎么用以大力奖励卓越的人物，吸引后进呢?
English: How can it be used to vigorously reward outstanding people and attract newcomers?

古文：此实巨蠹，尤宜刊革。
现代文：这确实是只大蛀虫，尤当除革。
English: It's really just a big tapeworm, especially when it comes to leather.

古文：不然，将使周人有路傍之泣，晋臣兴渔猎之叹。
现代文：不这样的话，将使周朝人有路边之泣，晋国臣子兴掳掠之叹。
English: Otherwise, it will make the Zhou people weep on the roadside and the Jin courtiers sigh with joy.

古文：且俗长浮竞，人寡退情，若限岁登朝，必增年就宦，故貌实昏童，籍已逾立，滓秽名教，于斯为甚。
现代文：况且世俗增长浮薄竞逐之风，人们少有谦虚退让之情，如果限制年龄进用于朝廷，必然增大入仕之年，因此看起来是一不明事理的童子，簿册上记录的年龄却已过而立，玷污名教，于此为最。
English: Moreover, the secular growth of the style of flimsy competition, people have little sense of modesty and concession. If the age limit is applied to the imperial court, it will inevitably increase the year of entry into service, so it seems to be an unreasonable boy, but the age recorded in the book has passed, tarnishing the famous religion. This is the most.

古文：臣总司内外，忧责是任，朝政得失，义不容隐。
现代文：我总理朝廷内外，担负此任，朝政得失。义不容隐。
English: I, the prime minister, am responsible for this position both inside and outside the imperial court, and the gains and losses of the imperial government are my responsibility.

古文：伏愿陛下垂圣淑之姿，降听览之末，则彝伦自穆，宪章惟允。
现代文：敬愿陛下显示圣明贤达的姿态，俯倾听事览文之耳曰，那么常伦白穆，典制公允。
English: May His Majesty show the attitude of a sage, bow down and listen to the reader's ear and say, "If it's consistent, it's fair."

古文：诏依高祖表施行。
现代文：诏令照高祖奏表施行。
English: The imperial edict was implemented in accordance with Gao Zuo's report.

古文：丙戌，诏曰：嵩高惟岳，配天所以流称；大启南阳，霸德所以光阐。
现代文：丙戌，诏令道：嵩高之岳，由于配天所以相沿这样称呼；在南阳大举义，霸道因此光大。
English: He said: "Mount Songgao is called so because it is a match made in heaven. In the south, it is known for its magnificence, and its domineering ways are renowned.

古文：忠诚简帝，番君膺上爵之尊；勤劳王室，姬公增附庸之地。
现代文：忠诚选择帝王，番君荣膺上等爵位之尊；辛勤为王室奔走，姬公增加附属之地。
English: Faithfully choosing the emperor, the guardian of the emperor won the honor of the highest peerage; diligently working for the royal family, the prince added a subordinate place.

古文：前王令典，布诸方策，长祚字，罔不由此。
现代文：前代帝王的法典，布之简册，使国运长久抚治百姓，无不由此。
English: The code of the previous emperor, the booklet of cloth, made the national movement to rule the people for a long time.

古文：相国梁公，体兹上哲，齐圣广渊。
现代文：相国梁公，承继前哲，具备齐圣广渊四种美德。
English: Liang Gong, the father-in-law of the country and the successor of the former philosopher, possesses the four virtues of Qi Sheng Guangyuan.

古文：文教内洽，武功外畅。
现代文：文教内浸，武功外扬。
English: Culture and education are internalized, and martial arts are externalized.

古文：推毂作籓，则威怀被于殊俗；治兵教战，则霆雷赫于万里。
现代文：辅佐为藩臣，则威德遍布风俗不同的远方；整治军队训练作战，则雷霆显耀万里。
English: If the assistant is a vassal of the domain, then the virtue will spread far and wide in different customs; if the rectification is military training and combat, then the thunder will shine far and wide.

古文：道丧时昏，谗邪孔炽。
现代文：大道沦丧时世混乱，谗媚奸邪之徒横行猖獗。
English: When the road was ruined, the world was in chaos, and the followers of the evil were rampant.

古文：岂徒宗社如缀，神器莫主而已哉！
现代文：哪裹衹是宗庙社稷危绝如丝缀、政权无主而已啊!
English: After all, it's just the patriarchal temples and shrines that are as dangerous as the embroidery, and the government is powerless!

古文：至于兆庶歼亡，衣冠殄灭，余类残喘，指命崇朝，含生业业，投足无所，遂乃山川反覆，草木涂地。
现代文：竟至于兆民被灭，士大夫遭戮，幸存的苟延残喘，旨令短暂，生民危惧，无立锥之地，于是山川倾覆，草木涂地。
English: As for the trillions of people who were exterminated, the scholars and doctors who were slaughtered, the remaining survivors, the order was short-lived, the people were in danger, there was no place to stand, so the mountains and rivers were overturned, and the grass and trees covered the ground.

古文：与夫仁被行苇之时，信及豚鱼之日，何其辽夐相去之远欤！
现代文：与那仁爱施及路边的芦苇时代，信义波及微贱的猪和鱼的日子，相距是多么的遥远啊!
English: How far we are from the days when benevolence extended to the reeds along the roadside, and faithfulness to the humble pigs and fish!

古文：公命师鞠旅，指景长骛。
现代文：您誓师发出出征的号令，不曰急驰远征。
English: Your master has given the order to march out, and we must hasten to the expedition.

古文：而本朝危切，樊、邓遐远，凶徒盘据，水陆相望，爰自姑孰，屈于夏首，严城劲卒，凭川为固。
现代文：可是本朝危急，樊地、鄣地遥远，凶恶的匪徒盘据，水陆接连不断，起自垃塾，达于夏直，处处是戒备森严的城池和凶悍强劲的守敌，凭据江河作为险固。
English: However, this morning is critical, far and far away, vicious bandits are plotting, water and land are in succession, starting from the school and reaching the summer straight, everywhere is a well-guarded city and a fierce and strong defender, with the river as a stronghold.

古文：公沿汉浮江，电激风扫，舟徒水覆，地险云倾，藉兹义勇，前无强阵，拯危京邑，清我帝畿，扑既燎于原火，免将诛于比屋。悠悠兆庶，命不在天；茫茫六合，咸受其赐。
现代文：您沿着汉水而下航行长江之上，如闪电出击狂风劲扫，敌水军如水倾覆。险要似云塌陷，凭此义勇，所向无敌，拯救京都危难，扫清京畿一带，扑减已经燃烧的原野之火，免除将要遍及的诛杀众多的百姓，命运不在天；茫茫宇宙，都受到其恩赐。
English: You sailed down the Han River on the Yangtze River. Like lightning, you struck the wild wind and swept it vigorously. The enemy navy capsized like water. It almost collapsed like a cloud. With this bravery, you were invincible, saving Kyoto from danger, clearing the Gyeonggi area, extinguishing the already burning wildfire, and avoiding the widespread slaughter of many people. Destiny is not in the sky; the vast universe is blessed by it.

古文：匡俗正本，民不失职。
现代文：匡俗正本，民不失其常业。
English: Conform to the original, and the people will not lose their usual business.

古文：仁信并行，礼乐同畅。
现代文：仁爱信义同时施行，礼乐一起畅达。
English: Benevolence, love and faithfulness are practiced at the same time, and ceremonial music is played together.

古文：伊、周未足方轨，桓、文远有惭德。而爵后籓牧，地终秦、楚，非所以式酬光烈，允答元勋。
现代文：伊尹、周公旦不足比肩，齐担、置塞也会远有因言行阙失而内愧于心可是受爵后的所领之地，范围止于秦地、楚地，不能用来酬报伟绩，报答元勋。
English: Yi Yin and Zhou Gongdan are not enough to be compared, and it will be far more difficult to shoulder the burden and put the block, but the place led by the knight after he was knighted is limited to Qin and Chu, and cannot be used to reward great achievements and reward the founder.

古文：实由公履谦为本，形于造次，嘉数未申，晦朔增伫。
现代文：确实由于您以谦让之德为本，显现于片刻之间，嘉运未申，日夜增加企盼。
English: Indeed, because you are based on the virtue of modesty, appearing in a moment, good luck has not been declared, and expectations are increasing day and night.

古文：便宜崇斯礼秩，允副遐迩之望。
现代文：斟酌事宜不拘陈规地增加其爵禄品级，以合乎远近之望。
English: increase his peerage at his discretion, regardless of the stereotype, in order to meet the expectations of the near and far.

古文：可进梁公爵为王。
现代文：可以进封梁公爵位为王。
English: He can be crowned as the Duke of Guoliang.

古文：以豫州之南谯、卢江、江州之寻阳、郢州之武昌、西阳、南徐州之南琅邪、南东海、晋陵、扬州之临海、永嘉十郡，益梁国，并前为二十郡。
现代文：将豫州的南谯庐江、江州的寻阳、郢州的武昌西阳、南徐州的南琅锂南束海晋陵、扬州的临海永嘉等十郡，增加梁国的领地，与先前的合在一起为二十个郡。
English: The territory of Liang Province will be increased by ten counties, including Nanluojiang in Yuzhou, Xiangyang in Jiangzhou, Xiyang in Wuchang in Quzhou, Jinling in Nanxunhai in Xuzhou, and Yongjia in Linhai in Yangzhou, and will be combined with the previous counties to form twenty counties.

古文：其相国、扬州牧、骠骑大将军如故。公固辞。
现代文：其相国、扬州牧、骠骑大将军的职务照旧。
English: The duties of his compatriots, Yangzhou herdsmen and horse-riding generals, will continue as before.

古文：有诏断表。
现代文：高祖坚决推辞。
English: Gaozu resolutely refused.

古文：相国左长史王莹等率百僚敦请。
现代文：有诏令拒绝接受所上辞让的章表。相国左长史王莹等率百官恳请。
English: There was an imperial edict refusing to accept the charter of the above-mentioned resignation. A hundred officials including Shi Wang Ying, the left minister of the same country, implored him.

古文：三月辛卯，延陵县华阳逻主戴车牒称云： 十二月乙酉，甘露降茅山，弥漫数里。
现代文：三月辛卯日，延陵县华阳逻主戴车上书称述说： 十二月乙酉，甘露降于茅山，弥漫数里。
English: On the day of Xinwu in March, the owner of Huayang Logistics in Yanling County wrote on his car: In December, acetylene and nectar fell on Mao Shan, spreading for several miles.

古文：正月己酉，逻将潘道盖于山石穴中得毛龟一。
现代文：正月己酉，逻将潘道盖在山中石穴裹得到一只毛龟。
English: On the first day of the new month, Luo wrapped Pandogai in a stone cave in the mountains to get a turtle.

古文：二月辛酉，逻将徐灵符又于山东见白麞一。
现代文：二月辛酉，暹将徐灵符又在山的束边看到一只白獐。
English: At the end of February, Siamese general Xu Lingfu again saw a white stork on the edge of the mountain.

古文：丙寅平旦，山上云雾四合，须臾有玄黄之色，状如龙形，长十余丈，乍隐乍显，久乃从西北升天。 
现代文：丙寅清晨，山上的云雾四面围拢，不久有玄黄之色，形状似龙，多丈，时隐时现，很久才从西北升天。 
English: In the early morning, the clouds and fog on the mountain surrounded the four sides, and soon there was a dark yellow color, the shape resembled a dragon, it was tall, it appeared and disappeared, and it took a long time for it to rise from the northwest.

古文：丁卯，兗州刺史马元和签： 所领东平郡寿张县见驺虞一。 
现代文：丁卯，兖州刺史马元和上签言： 所辖东平郡寿张县发现一只骝虞。 
English: Ding Wu, Zhangzhou Zhishi Ma Yuanhe signed on: The jurisdiction of Dongping County Shou Zhang County found a dragonfly.

古文：癸巳，受梁王之命。
现代文：癸巳，接受被封梁王的诏命。
English: Soon after, he accepted the imperial command from the enthroned Liang Wang.

古文：令曰： 孤以虚昧，任执国钧，虽夙夜勤止，念在兴治，而育德振民，邈然尚远。
现代文：下令道： 我以虚空愚昧，执掌国政，尽管日夜辛劳，志在兴治，然而距育德济民，尚且遥远。
English: He ordered, "I am holding the reins of state affairs with nothingness and stupidity. Although I work hard day and night and aspire to govern well, I am still far from nurturing virtue and benefiting the people.

古文：圣朝永言旧式，隆此眷命。
现代文：圣朝永言先前的典制，隆重垂此厚爱并赋予重任。
English: The Holy Emperor Yongyan said that the previous ceremony system, solemnly bestowed this great love and given a heavy responsibility.

古文：侯伯盛典，方轨前烈，嘉锡隆被，礼数昭崇。
现代文：诸侯之长的隆重恩典，与前人比肩；朝廷的赏赐丰厚优渥，礼仪制度昭显尊崇。
English: The magnanimous grace of the princes is on a par with that of their predecessors; the rewards of the imperial court are rich and generous, and the etiquette system is highly respected.

古文：徒守愿节，终隔体谅。
现代文：徒劳地守着恭谨之操节，终于未能体谅。
English: In vain I kept the discipline of respect, and finally I failed to understand.

古文：群后百司，重兹敦奖，勉兹厚颜，当此休祚。
现代文：百官群僚，推重敦请，也就勉力厚颜，接受这王位。
English: The centurion and his colleagues urged him to accept the throne, and he did so with a certain amount of bravado.

古文：望昆、彭以长想，钦桓、文而叹息，思弘政涂，莫知津济。
现代文：遥望昆吾、彭祖而追思，钦慕查但、置塞而叹美，想着廓大政道，不知津渡何在。
English: Looking at Kunwu and Pengzu from afar and thinking about them, admiring Chadan and sighing at the imposition of the blockade, thinking about the Kuku Daiseido, and not knowing where Tsudo is.

古文：邦甸初启，籓宇惟新，思覃嘉庆，被之下国。
现代文：京城管辖地区初拓，藩国更新，深思吉祥喜庆，广被天下。
English: The area under the jurisdiction of Beijing was first expanded, the domain was renewed, and the auspicious and festive thoughts were deepened, and it was widely praised by the world.

古文：国内殊死以下，今月十五日昧爽以前，一皆原赦。
现代文：国内斩首的死刑以下囚犯，这个月十五日拂晓以前，全部赦免。
English: Before dawn on the 15th of this month, all prisoners sentenced to death or less who were beheaded in the country were pardoned.

古文：鳏寡孤独不能自存者，赐谷五斛。
现代文：鳏寡孤独自己无力谋生的，赏赐谷物五斛。
English: Widows and widowers who are alone and unable to earn a living are rewarded with five bushels of grain.

古文：府州所统，亦同蠲荡。 
现代文：府州官署所辖，也同样免除。 
English: Those under the jurisdiction of prefectural and state government offices are also exempt.

古文：丙午，命王冕十有二旒，建天子旌旗，出警入跸，乘金根车，驾六马，备五时副车，置旄头云罕，乐舞八佾，设钟鋋宫县。
现代文：丙午，令王冕前后垂十二串玉珠，建置天千旌旗，出入时警戒清道禁止行人，乘金根车，驾六马，配备陪从帝王车驾的五色副车，设置旄头旌旗，乐舞八佾，设立钟虞宫悬。
English: In the afternoon of the third day, the king's crown was hung with twelve strings of jade beads, a thousand flags were set up, pedestrians were prohibited from entering and leaving the street, a golden chariot was used, six horses were driven, a five-colored sidecar was equipped to accompany the emperor's chariot, a skull and crossbones flag was set up, music and dance were set up, and a bell tower was set up.

古文：王妃王子王女爵命之号，一依旧仪。丙辰，齐帝禅位于梁王。
现代文：王妃王子王女封爵受职的名位。全部依照以前的仪制丙辰，变童禅让帝位给梁王。
English: In accordance with the previous ceremonial system, the imperial throne was given to King Liang.

古文：诏曰：夫五德更始，三正迭兴，驭物资贤，登庸启圣，故帝迹所以代昌，王度所以改耀，革晦以明，由来尚矣。
现代文：诏令道：金木水火土五德交互更替周而复始，夏正殷正周正交替兴起，统驭万民凭藉贤者，选拔任用开启圣明，所以帝王的业绩更迭昌盛，王者的德行器度轮换辉耀。除却昏暗代以光明，由来久违啊。
English: The Emperor said: The alternation of gold, wood, water, fire, earth and the five moralities repeats itself. Summer, yin and yang rise alternately. The wise man is needed to govern the people, and the selection and appointment open the sacred light. Therefore, the performance of the emperor changes and flourishes, and the virtue of the king rotates and shines. Except that the darkness is replaced by light, the origin is long gone.

古文：齐德沦微，危亡荐袭。
现代文：南齐德运衰微，危亡接连而至。
English: The fortunes of Nan Zi De were on the wane, and danger and death came one after another.

古文：隆昌凶虐，实违天地；永元昏暴，取紊人神。
现代文：隆昌时凶恶残虐，实违天地；永元时昏乱暴戾，扰乱入神。
English: At the time of Longchang, he was vicious and cruel, truly violating heaven and earth; at the time of Yongyuan, he was confused and violent, disturbing the gods.

古文：三光再沉，七庙如缀。
现代文：月星再沉，七庙毁危如旒之悬。
English: The moon and stars will set again, and the destruction of the seven temples is imminent.

古文：鼎业几移，含识知泯。
现代文：帝王大业几乎毁坏，众生知道泯灭。
English: The Emperor's great undertaking was almost destroyed, and all sentient beings knew annihilation.

古文：我高、明之祚，眇焉将坠。
现代文：我高帝、明帝的福运，微弱将坠。
English: The good fortune of my Emperor Gao and Emperor Ming will fade away.

古文：永惟屯难，冰谷载怀。
现代文：常念艰难，谨慎小心如临危险的境地。
English: Persistence is difficult, and caution is dangerous.

古文：相国梁王，天诞睿哲，神纵灵武，德格玄祇，功均造物。
现代文：相国梁王，天生的圣明，神赋的威灵，德行感动神衹，功业与造物主相等。
English: King Liang of the same country, innate sacredness, divinely endowed benevolence, virtue moves the gods, and merits are equal to the Creator.

古文：止宗社之横流，反生民之涂炭。
现代文：遏止国家的动乱，将百姓从泥火中挽救出来。挽救危局，解救危难。
English: To stop the turmoil in the country, to save the people from the mud and fire, to save the critical situation, and to relieve the critical situation.

古文：扶倾颓构之下，拯溺逝川之中。
现代文：九州再次和合，四方重新巩固。
English: Kyushu is once again at peace, and the four parties are re-consolidated.

古文：九区重缉，四维更纽。绝礼还纪，崩乐复张。
现代文：摒弃的礼仪恢复法度，毁坏的音乐又得以弹奏。
English: Abandoned etiquette is restored, and ruined music is played again.

古文：文馆盈绅，戎亭息警。
现代文：文馆充满绅士，边防停止警报。
English: The literature museum is full of gentlemen, and the border guards are on red alert.

古文：浃海宇以驰风，罄轮裳而禀朔。
现代文：整个海内传播教化，所有车迹所至之地表示臣服。
English: The whole of the sea spread indoctrination, and all the places where the car tracks came from showed submission.

古文：八表呈祥，五灵效祉。
现代文：极远之地呈现祥瑞，麟、凤、神龟、龙、白虎五种灵异乌兽呈现福祉。
English: The faraway land presents auspiciousness, and the unicorn, the phoenix, the tortoise, the dragon, and the white tiger, five kinds of supernatural beasts, present welfare.

古文：岂止鳞羽祯奇，云星瑞色而已哉！
现代文：哪裹祇是鱼乌吉祥奇异，星云瑞气而已啊!
English: Where is the fish, the auspicious, the strange, the nebula, the refreshing!

古文：勋茂于百王，道昭乎万代，固以明配上天，光华日月者也。
现代文：功勋美盛于百王，道德昭示于万代，因而以其高明与上天比并，光照日月呀。
English: Merit and beauty prevail in a hundred kings, and morality is manifested in all generations. Therefore, with its high wisdom, it is comparable to the heavens, shining like the sun and the moon.

古文：河狱表革命之符，图谶纪代终之运。
现代文：黄河、泰山呈革命之征兆，图谶记述取代旧皇朝之运命。
English: The Yellow River and Mount Taishan showed signs of revolution, and Zhu Xi described the fate of replacing the old imperial dynasty.

古文：乐推之心，幽显共积；歌颂之诚，华裔同著。
现代文：乐意拥戴之心，阴间阳间共有；歌功颂德之诚，中原和边远地区同显。
English: The heart that is willing to embrace is common between the sun and the moon; the sincerity of singing and praising virtue is common between the Central Plains and the outlying areas.

古文：昔水政既微，木德升绪，天之历数，实有所归，握镜璇枢，允集明哲。
现代文：以前水德之政已经衰微，木德顺序而升，帝王代天理民的顺序，实有所归，帝王受天命怀明德把持枢要，聚集贤明睿哲。
English: In the past, the government of water virtue had waned, and the order of wood virtue had risen, and the order of the emperor's generation of heavenly people had actually returned, and the emperor was commanded by heaven to hold the key and gather the wise and sagacious.

古文：朕虽庸蔽，暗于大道，永鉴崇替，为日已久，敢忘列代之高义，人祇之至愿乎！
现代文：本人虽然庸俗愚昧，不明大道。然而长久鉴戒兴废盛衰，为曰已久，哪敢忘却历代正大的道理，人与神的最大愿望啊!
English: Although I am vulgar and ignorant, I do not know the road. However, I have long been aware of the ups and downs of prosperity and waste. It has been a long time, how dare I forget the great truth of all ages, the greatest desire of man and God!

古文：今便敬禅于梁，即安姑孰，依唐虞、晋宋故事。
现代文：如今便恭敬地挥位给梁王，随即安居姑孰，依照唐尧禅位给虞舜、束晋禅位给刘宋的旧例。
English: Now, he respectfully waved his rank to Liang Wang, and then to Anju Gu, in accordance with the old example of Tang Xi's rank to Yu Xi, and Shu Jin's rank to Liu Song.

古文：四月辛酉，宣德皇后令曰：
现代文：四月辛酉，宣德皇后下令道：
English: At the end of April, Empress Xuande gave the following order:

古文： 西诏至，帝宪章前代，敬禅神器于梁。
现代文： 西韶到，皇帝效法前代，恭敬禅帝位给梁王。
English: When Xicheng arrived, the emperor, following the example of the previous generation, respectfully gave the imperial throne to King Liang.

古文：明可临轩遣使，恭授玺绂，未亡人便归于别宫。 
现代文：明日可临前殿遣使，敬授玺绶，我便回到别宫。 
English: Tomorrow, the Imperial Household Agency may send an envoy to present me with an Imperial Decoration, and then I will return to Beppu.

古文：壬戌，策曰：咨尔梁王：惟昔邃古之载，肇有生民，皇雄、大庭之辟，赫胥、尊卢之后，斯并龙图鸟迹以前，慌忽杳冥之世，固无得而详焉。
现代文：壬戌日，策令道：梁王啊：从前远古之时，始有人类，伏羞、太庭之帝，赵贵、蔓卢之君，他们都是在龙图鸟迹以前，迷蒙渺茫的时代，因此无法详知其情。
English: On the day of Linglong, Zhao Ling said, "King Liang, from time immemorial, there were human beings, Fuxi, the Emperor of the Great Court, Zhao Gui, the Prince of Manlu, they were all before the dragon and the bird, in the dim and vague era, so they could not know their situation in detail.

古文：洎乎农、轩、炎、皞之代，放勋、重华之主，莫不以大道君万姓，公器御八枿。
现代文：等到了神农、轩辕、炎帝、太嗥之世，唐尧、虞舜之君时，无不用正道统治百姓，贤才管理八方极远之地。
English: In the age of Shennong, Xuan Zang, Yan Di, Taishan, Tang Zang and Yu Zang, there was no need to rule the people in a righteous way. Wise men ruled the land far and wide.

古文：居之如执朽索，去之若捐重负。
现代文：我居位时临事虑危时存戒惧，去位后如释重负。
English: When I was in the position, I was worried about things, and when I was in danger, I was afraid. After I left the position, I felt relieved.

古文：一驾汾阳，便有窅然之志；暂适箕岭，即动让王之心。
现代文：一到汾阳，便有深远之志；暂至箕岭，就动了让王之心。
English: As soon as he arrived in Shenyang, he had a far-reaching ambition; as soon as he arrived in Fuling, he was moved by the heart of the king.

古文：故知戴黄屋，服玉玺，非所以示贵称尊；乘大辂，建旗旌，盖欲令归趣有地。
现代文：因为知道居住皇宫，服用玉玺，不是用来显示尊贵的；乘着大辂，建置旌旗，不外乎想使指归有处。
English: Because they know that living in the imperial palace and wearing jade brooches are not used to show that they are noble; riding a large brooch and erecting a banner are nothing more than trying to put the finger where it belongs.

古文：是故忘己而字兆民，殉物而君四海。
现代文：所以忘己而抚育万民，投身事业而统治天下。
English: Therefore, forget yourself and nurture the people, devote yourself to the cause and rule the world.

古文：及于精华内竭，畚橇外劳，则抚兹归运，惟能是与。
现代文：到了元气内竭，体力外疲时，于是依循遣顺时而至的天运。让舆有能力的人。
English: When it comes to exhaustion of vitality and exhaustion of physical strength, then follow the heavenly fortune that comes from time to time. Let those who have the ability.

古文：况兼乎笙管革文，威图启瑞，摄提夜朗，荧光昼发者哉！
现代文：况且又有音乐要改变繁冗之节，威严的《河图》已开启祥瑞，摄提星夜明，白昼发出光辉来啊!
English: Moreover, there is music to change the tedious festival, the majestic "River Map" has opened the auspicious, the shooting stars are bright, and the day is shining!

古文：四百告终，有汉所以高揖；黄德既谢，魏氏所以乐推。
现代文：四百年告终，有汉所以拱手高揖辞别；土德已经衰微，魏氏所以乐意拥戴。
English: At the end of the four hundred years, the Han Dynasty had to bid farewell to Gaozhou; the local Germanic culture had already declined, so the Wei Dynasty was more than willing to embrace it.

古文：爰及晋、宋，亦弘斯典。
现代文：到了东晋、刘宋，也发扬光大了这些典故。
English: In the Eastern Jin Dynasty and Liu Song Dynasty, these allusions were also carried forward.

古文：我太祖握《河》受历，应符启运，二叶重光，三圣系轨。
现代文：我太祖握持《河图》接受帝业，应验符命开启帝运，二代盛德辉光相承，三位圣帝继承前业。
English: My great-grandfather grasped the "river map" to accept the imperial career, and fulfilled the test to open the imperial career. The second generation of Shengde inherited the glory, and the three holy emperors inherited the previous career.

古文：嗣君丧德，昏弃纪度，毁紊天纲，凋绝地纽。茫茫九域，剪为仇仇，溥天相顾，命县晷刻。
现代文：后来继位之帝丧失道德，昏乱而丢弃法度，毁坏天纲，丧绝地纪，茫茫九州当作冤家对头大加剪除，普天之下的人相顾失色，性命危在旦夕。
English: Later, the emperor who succeeded to the throne lost his morals, abandoned the law in a daze, destroyed the heavenly system, destroyed the earthly discipline, greatly eliminated the vast Kyushu as an enemy, and the people under the whole world lost their color, and their lives were in danger.

古文：斫涉刳孕，于事已轻；求鸡徵杖，曾何足譬。
现代文：斩断冬月涉水者胆骨剖挖孕妇胎儿，比起遣事已很轻微；求鸡征杖，则何足喻。
English: Cutting off a wader's gallbladder, dissecting a pregnant woman's foetus and digging up a pregnant woman's foetus are minor matters compared to sending someone away; asking a chicken for a cane is more than enough.

古文：是以谷满川枯，山飞鬼哭，七庙已危，人神无主。
现代文：所以尸横遍野江河干涸，山野飘荡着悲惨凄厉的哭声，王朝已危急，人舆神无主。
English: Therefore, the corpses are strewn across the fields, the rivers have dried up, the mountains and fields are wafted with the cries of the wretched, the dynasty is in danger, and the gods have no master.

古文：惟王体兹上哲，明圣在躬，禀灵五纬，明并日月。
现代文：梁王继承先哲统绪，具有明达圣哲的品德，秉受金木水火土五星之灵气，高明与日月比并。
English: Liang Wang inherited the previous philosopher, with the virtue of knowing the sages, adhering to the spirit of the five stars of gold, wood, water, fire and earth, and being as wise as the sun and the moon.

古文：彝伦攸序，则端冕而协邕熙；时难孔棘，则推锋而拯涂炭。
现代文：伦常有序，便着玄衣和大冠而协助时世和洽兴盛；时世艰厄，便进兵而拯救黎民于涂炭。
English: He was always orderly, he wore a black coat and a large crown to help the times of peace and prosperity; in times of hardship, he went into the army to save the Li people from burning.

古文：功逾造物，德济苍生，泽无不渐，仁无不被，上达苍昊，下及川泉。
现代文：功业超越造物者，仁德惠及百姓，德泽无不滋润，仁惠无不蒙受，上达苍天，下及川流水泉。
English: Work surpasses the creator, benevolence and virtue benefit the people, virtue and virtue are nourishing, benevolence and benevolence are accepted, up to the sky, down to the river flowing water spring.

古文：文教与鹏翼齐举，武功与日车并运。
现代文：文教舆鸥鹏一起展翅齐飞，武功和太阳一道并驾同驱。
English: Literature, culture, and public opinion fly together. Martial arts and the sun go hand in hand.

古文：固以幽显宅心，讴讼斯属；岂徒桴鼓播地，卿云丛天而已哉！
现代文：本来是因为阴间阳间归心依附，谪歌者与讼狱者纷纷来奔；难道仅仅是迅疾播植，祥瑞的彩云聚集天空而已啊!
English: Originally, it was because the underworld and the sun had become attached to each other, and the wailers and the jailers had come and gone. Was it just a matter of rapid planting and the bright clouds gathering in the sky?

古文：至如昼睹争明，夜飞枉矢，土沦彗刺，日既星亡，除旧之征必显，更姓之符允集。
现代文：至于昼见星光争明，夜襄流星飞逝，土星沉沦彗星刺空，日食星亡，除旧之征兆尽颢，改朝之符瑞汇集。
English: As for the stars that can be seen in the daytime, the meteors that appear at night will fly away, Saturn will sink, comets will pierce the sky, solar eclipses and stars will die, the old signs will be eliminated, and the signs of the new era will be gathered.

古文：是以义师初践，芳露凝甘，仁风既被，素文自扰，北阙藁街之使，风车火徼之民，膜拜稽首，愿为臣妾。
现代文：因此义师初起，香露聚集甘甜，仁德之风已遍及，以往的法令条文自乱，禁城藁街的外国使者，手摇风扇火焰边的民众，膜拜稽首，愿为臣仆。
English: Therefore, since the beginning of the righteous teachers, the fragrant dew has gathered sweetness, the wind of benevolence has spread, the provisions of the previous decrees have been chaotic, the foreign envoys in the Forbidden City, the people around the flame of the hand-cranked fan, worship the chief, and are willing to be servants.

古文：钟石毕变，事表于迁虞；蛟鱼并出，义彰于事夏。
现代文：钟磬之乐尽变，事情表明帝位迁移虞忧；蛟龙和鱼同出，意在昭示将奉事夏朝。
English: The music of the chimes is ever-changing, and events show that the emperor is worried about the transfer of the imperial throne; the dragon and the fish come out at the same time, with the intention of announcing that they will serve the summer dynasty.

古文：若夫长民御众，为之司牧，本同己于万物，乃因心于百姓。
现代文：至于统治民众，作为他们的君主，本应使自己与万物同一，顺应百姓的心愿。
English: As for ruling the people, as their monarch, he should have made himself one with all things and complied with the wishes of the people.

古文：宝命无常主，帝王非一族。
现代文：禀受天命没有恒常的主人，帝王并非出自一姓一族。
English: By the decree of heaven, there is no permanent master, and the emperor does not come from a family.

古文：今仰祗乾象，俯藉人愿，敬禅神器，授帝位于尔躬。
现代文：如今仰敬天象，俯因人心，恭敬惮让政柄，将帝位授于您。
English: Now, with reverence for the heavenly beings, with a humble heart, and with respect and awe, I yield the reins of power and confer the imperial throne upon you.

古文：大祚告穷，天禄永终。
现代文：皇运困穷，帝位永终。
English: The emperor's fortune is poor, and the imperial throne will last forever.

古文：於戏！
现代文：呜呼!
English: Alas!

古文：王允执其中，式遵前典，以副昊天之望。
现代文：您应言行合于不偏不倚的中正之道，效法遵循从前的法典，以符上苍的意愿。
English: You should speak and act in accordance with the unbiased middle way, follow the previous code, and conform to God's will.

古文：禋上帝而临亿兆，格文祖而膺大业，以传无疆之祚，岂不盛欤！
现代文：祭祀上帝而统治百姓，至太祖庙而承受帝业，从而传热穷之帝位，难道不是很兴盛吗?
English: Isn't it very prosperous to worship God and rule the people, and to inherit the imperial inheritance from the Great Ancestor's Temple, and thus pass on the poor imperial throne?

古文：又玺书曰：夫生者天地之大德，人者含生之通称，并首同本，未知所以异也。
现代文：又下玺书道：生育是天地的大功德，人是高等生灵的通称，本来同源共本，未知有什么不同。
English: He also wrote: "Fertility is a great merit of heaven and earth. Man is a common name for higher living beings. Originally, they all came from the same source. It is not known what the difference is.

古文：而禀灵造化，贤愚之情不一；托性五常，强柔之分或舛。
现代文：然而秉受自然之灵气，贤能与愚昧的情形不同；禀性五种伦常道德，刚强与柔弱的区别或异。
English: However, upholding the aura of nature, the situation of virtue and stupidity is different; the difference or difference between the five moral ethics, the strong and the weak.

古文：群后靡一，争犯交兴，是故建君立长，用相司牧。
现代文：四方诸侯不统一，争斗纷起，因此置立君主，使之统治管理。
English: The lords of the four directions were not unified, and conflicts arose. Therefore, a monarch was set up to rule and administer the country.

古文：非谓尊骄在上，以天下为私者也。
现代文：不是要尊贵骄横高高在上，把天下作为一己之私呀。
English: It's not about being noble, arrogant, and lofty, and regarding the world as one's own.

古文：兼以三正迭改，五运相迁，绿文赤字，徵《河》表《洛》。
现代文：并且夏止壁正题正更换，王朝五德之运递相迁移，江回所出的图谶符命之书，应验了《河图》《洛书》。
English: Moreover, the main theme of the Summer Wall is changing, the movement of the Five Dynasties and Five Dynasties is shifting, and the book of the map of the map of the map of the map of the map of the map of the map of the map of the map of the map of the map of the map of the map of the map of the map of the map of the map of the map of the map of the river.

古文：在昔勋、华，深达兹义，眷求明哲，授以蒸民。
现代文：从前的唐尧、虞舜，深达此义。殷切寻求明智睿哲的人，将百姓交给他。
English: In the past, Tang Xuan and Yu Xuan were very profound in this sense. Those who earnestly sought wisdom and sagacity handed over the people to him.

古文：迁虞事夏，本因心于百姓；化殷为周，实受命于苍昊。
现代文：归向卢爱事奉星翘，本是顺应百姓心愿；变殷朝为飓，实是受命于苍天。
English: It was in accordance with the wishes of the people to return to Lu Ai to serve Xingtao; to turn Yin into a hurricane was actually ordered by heaven.

古文：爰自汉、魏，罔不率由；降及晋、宋，亦遵斯典。
现代文：到了汉朝、魏朝，无不沿用；直至塞置、型塞，仍遵循此典。
English: By the Han and Wei dynasties, it was still in use, and it was still followed until the time of setting and corking.

古文：我高皇所以格文祖而抚归运，畏上天而恭宝历者也。
现代文：这是我直皇之所以感通文祖遵循顺时而至的天运，敬畏上天而恭践帝位的原因。
English: This is the reason why I, Emperor Naotsu, felt that the founder of Confucianism should follow the heavenly fortune that comes in accordance with the time, fear the heavens and respect the throne.

古文：至于季世，祸乱荐臻，王度纷纠，奸回炽积。
现代文：到了末世，祸乱接连地来临，王法扰乱，奸恶邪僻之人紧密勾结聚集。
English: In the last days, calamities will come one after another, kings and laws will be disrupted, and the wicked and perverse will gather in close cooperation.

古文：亿兆夷人，刀俎为命，已然之逼，若线之危，跼天蹐地，逃形无所。
现代文：众多的束部地区各部族之人，为刀下和砧板上的鱼肉，暴戾威逼已经如此，危险的生命不绝若线，人民惶惧不安，藏身无处。
English: Many people of various tribes in the Sokobe region are fish meat under the sword and on the chopping board. The violence and intimidation have already become so, dangerous lives are not a straight line, the people are frightened and anxious, and there is nowhere to hide.

古文：群凶挟煽，志逞残戮，将欲先殄衣冠，次移龟鼎。
现代文：群凶仗势猖獗，肆意杀戮，将准备先灭士大夫，接着夺取帝位。
English: The mob is rampant, killing indiscriminately, and will prepare to kill the doctor first, and then seize the throne.

古文：衡、保、周、召，并列宵人。
现代文：衡宰、太保、且公、丑公，都被列为小人。
English: Hengzai, Taibo, Chi Kung and Ugong are all classified as villains.

古文：巢幕累卵，方此非切。
现代文：就是巢幕累卵，也不能喻此险境。
English: Even a nest full of eggs cannot compare to this perilous situation.

古文：自非英圣远图，仁为己任，则鸱枭厉吻，剪焉已及。
现代文：如果不是英明圣人有远大谋略，以恩德济助为己任，那么贪恶之人就下了毒手，灭亡的命运已经降临。
English: If it is not a wise sage who has a far-reaching strategy and takes charity as his duty, then the greedy and evil people will lay their hands on it, and the fate of destruction has already come.

古文：惟王崇高则天，博厚仪地，熔铸六合，陶甄万有。
现代文：梁王高尚效法天，厚博取法地，教化天下，陶冶万物。
English: Liang Wang Gaoshang follows the law of heaven and earth, enriches the law of heaven and earth, enlightens the world and edifies all things.

古文：锋驲交驰，振灵武以遐略；云雷方扇，鞠义旅以勤王。
现代文：传递有关军事文件的车马往来不断，以远谋奋扬威灵；险恶危难方兴，便率义师以勤王。
English: The car and horse traffic of passing the relevant military documents is continuous, and the spirit is carried forward with far-sightedness; the danger is imminent, and the virtuous teacher is led by the diligent king.

古文：扬旍旆于远路，戮奸宄于魏阙。
现代文：奋起旌旗于远方，诛灭乱贼于宫阙。
English: Raising the banner in the distance, wiping out the ruffians in the courtyard.

古文：德冠往初，功无与二。
现代文：道德盖过往古，功业当数第一。
English: Morality is a thing of the past, and merit comes first.

古文：弘济艰难，缉熙王道。
现代文：广为救助危难，光大弘扬王道。
English: The rescue of distress is widespread, and the royal road is widely promoted.

古文：怀柔万姓，经营四方。
现代文：笼络安抚百姓，规划营治四方。
English: to pacify the people, and plan to govern the four directions.

古文：举直措枉，较如画一。
现代文：起用正直者而罢黜奸邪者，明确一致。
English: The appointment of an honest person and the dismissal of a treacherous person are clearly consistent.

古文：待旦同乎殷后，日昃过于周文。
现代文：坐以待旦如同殷后，日昃忘食超过周文。
English: If you sit and wait like Yin Hou, the sun will forget to eat more than Zhou Wen.

古文：风化肃穆，礼乐交畅。
现代文：风教肃然有序，礼乐交互畅达。
English: The etiquette is solemn and orderly, and the interplay of ritual music is smooth.

古文：加以赦过宥罪，神武不杀，盛德昭于景纬，至义感于鬼神。
现代文：加上宽赦恕免罪过，以吉凶祸福威服天下而不用刑杀，盛德辉耀与星，至义感通鬼与神。
English: In addition, he forgives and pardons sins, serves the world with good luck, evil, misfortune, and blessing, and does not use torture and killing. His virtue shines with the stars, and his sense of righteousness communicates with ghosts and gods.

古文：若夫纳彼大麓，膺此归运，烈风不迷，乐推攸在。
现代文：至于领绿那天子之事，接受这顺时而至的天运，遭遇狂风而不迷离，被乐意拥戴在于此。
English: As for the matter of receiving the green talisman, it is to accept this good fortune that comes along with the times, not to stray when encountering a strong wind, and to be willingly embraced.

古文：治五韪于已乱，重九鼎于既轻。
现代文：使已经扰乱的五种气候恢复节序，使已经轻微的国家政权加重分量。
English: Restore order to the already disrupted five climates, and add weight to the already light national regime.

古文：自声教所及，车书所至，革面回首，讴吟德泽。
现代文：声威教化蒙被之地，朝廷制度推行之处，改颜归顺。
English: The place where the imperial court system was implemented, the place where the voice of authority and education became a veil, changed its face and surrendered.

古文：九山灭祲，四渎安流。
现代文：歌颂恩德。九州的大山除灭妖气，长江、黄河、淮河、济水舒缓平稳地流动。
English: The mountains of Kyushu exorcise evil spirits, and the Yangtze River, Yellow River, Huaihe River and Jishui River flow smoothly and smoothly.

古文：祥风扇起，淫雨静息。
现代文：祥瑞之风鼓起，绵绵久雨静息。
English: The wind of auspicious auspiciousness blows, and the long-lasting rain subsides.

古文：玄甲游于芳荃，素文驯于郊苑。
现代文：黑色甲壳动物游于芳荃香草中，《春秋》训释于郊外文苑里。
English: Black crustaceans swim in the fragrant herbs, and "Spring and Autumn" is interpreted in the suburban gardens.

古文：跃九川于清汉，鸣六象于高岗。
现代文：从九州的大河跃升霄汉，高山上有岛叫的凤凰。
English: Rising from the great rivers of Kyushu, there is an island called Phoenix in the high mountains.

古文：灵瑞杂沓，玄符昭著。
现代文：上天显示的祥瑞纷杂繁多，吉祥的符命昭然若揭。
English: The auspicious signs shown by heaven are many and varied, and the auspicious signs of life are obvious.

古文：至于星孛紫宫，水效孟月，飞鸿满野，长彗横天，取新之应既昭，革故之征必显。
现代文：至于彗星呈现在紫微垣，水灾出现在孟月，飞鸿之虫充满田野，长长的彗星横扫天空，更新的符应已显，革旧的征兆必着。
English: As for comets, they appear in the purple and micro-walled areas, floods appear in the monsoon months, flying insects fill the fields, and long comets sweep across the sky. The signs of renewal have already appeared, and the signs of revolution are sure to follow.

古文：加以天表秀特，轩状尧姿；君临之符，谅非一揆。《书》云： 天鉴厥德，用集大命。 《诗》云： 文王在上，於昭于天。 
现代文：加上梁王具有优异特出的天子仪容，轩辕的容貌虞舜的姿态；为君而主宰的征兆，委实不会一样。《尚书》说： 上天明鉴其德，因而聚集天命。 《诗经》说： 文王在上，昭示于天。 
English: In addition, Liang Wang has the excellent and outstanding appearance of the son of heaven, the magnificent appearance of the cormorant and the posture of the cormorant; the signs of dominating for you will not be the same. "Shang Shu" said: Heaven clearly recognizes his virtue, and thus gathers the destiny of heaven. "Shijing" said: King Wen is on the top, revealed to heaven.

古文：所以二仪乃眷，幽明允叶，岂惟宅是万邦，缉兹讴讼而已哉！
现代文：之所以天地恩宠，入神和洽，难道衹是囊括天下，聚集了妪歌者和讼狱者而已吗?
English: Is the reason why heaven and earth are favored with God's favor and are at peace with each other just because the whole world is gathered together, and the wailers and jailers are gathered together?

古文：朕是用拥璇沉首，属怀圣哲。
现代文：我因此手持美玉低头沉思，缅怀圣哲。
English: For this reason, I bow my head with my beads in my hand and meditate, remembering the saint.

古文：昔水行告厌，我太祖既受命代终；在日天禄云谢，亦以木德而传于梁。
现代文：从前水德告衰，我太祖便接受天命取代旧皇朝；我在世之曰帝位衰落，也以木德而传位凿勉。
English: Once upon a time, my great-grandfather accepted the destiny to replace the old imperial dynasty; when I was alive, the imperial throne was in decline, and I tried to pass on the throne with virtue.

古文：远寻前典，降惟近代，百辟遐迩，莫违朕心。
现代文：远寻前典，下思近代，远近百官，莫违我心。
English: Looking far and wide for antecedents, thinking about modern times, and seeing hundreds of officials from near and far, I can't help but be moved.

古文：今遣使持节、兼太保、侍中、中书监、兼尚书令汝南县开国侯亮，兼太尉、散骑常侍、中书令新吴县开国侯志，奉皇帝玺绂。
现代文：现派使持节、兼太保、侍中、中书监、兼尚书令汝南县开国侯王亮，兼太尉、散骑常侍、中书令新吴县开国侯王志，奉上皇帝玺绶。
English: The present envoys are: Ji Jie, concurrently with Taibo, attendant, middle school librarian, concurrently with Shang Shuling, Prince Wang Liang, the founder of Runan County, concurrently with Tai Lai, straggling attendant, and middle school librarian, Prince Wang Zhi, the founder of Xinwu County, to present the imperial edict.

古文：受终之礼，一依唐虞故事。
现代文：承受帝位之礼，全部依循唐尧惮让卢昙的先例。
English: To receive the imperial throne, all follow the precedent of Tang Xiuqiu and Lu Xun.

古文：王其陟兹元后，君临万方，式传洪烈，以答上天之休命！
现代文：銮王请登升天子之位，统治天下各地，传承伟大的功业，用来报答上天的美命!
English: King Gong, please ascend to the throne of the Son of Heaven, rule over all parts of the world, pass down great deeds, and use them to repay the good life of Heaven!

古文：高祖抗表陈让，表不获通。
现代文：高祖向皇帝上奏章表示谦让，奏章没有得到通过。
English: Gaozhu expressed his humility to the emperor on the play chapter, but the play chapter was not approved.

古文：于是，齐百官豫章王元琳等八百一十九人，及梁台侍中臣云等一百一十七人，并上表劝进，高祖谦让不受。
现代文：在这时，南齐百官豫章王元琳等八百一十九人，以及梁王府署侍中臣萧云等一百一十七人，都上表劝进，高祖谦让不接受。
English: At this time, 819 officials including Yu Zhang, Wang Yuanlin, and 117 people including Xiao Yun, the attendant and middle minister of the Liangwang Prefecture, all went to the table to persuade Gao Zu to accept. Gao Qian did not accept.

古文：是日，太史令蒋道秀陈天文符谶六十四条，事并明著。群臣重表固请，乃从之。
现代文：当天，太史令蓝塑上陈天文现象和符圆谶纬共六十四条，所述之事全都明白显著；群臣再次上表坚请，高祖才依从了。
English: On the same day, Taishi issued a total of sixty-four articles on celestial phenomena and signs, all of which were clear and conspicuous; the courtiers once again made a firm request, and Gao Zu complied.

