古文：宋子曰：人群分而物异产，来往懋迁以成宇宙。
现代文：宋先生说：人类分散居住在各地，各地的物产也是各有不同，只有通过贸易交往才能构成整个世界。
English: Mr. Song said: Human beings live scattered all over the world, and the products of each place are also different. Only through trade can the whole world be formed.

古文：若各居而老死，何藉有群类哉？
现代文：如果大家彼此各居一方而老死不相往来，还凭什么来构成人类社会呢？
English: If everyone stays away from each other, what is the basis for human society?

古文：人有贵而必出，行畏周行；物有贱而必须，坐穷负贩。
现代文：有钱、有地位的人要出门到外地的时候，往往怕走远路；有些物品虽然价钱低贱，却也是生活所必需，因为缺乏也就需要有人贩运。
English: When people with money and status want to go out to other places, they are often afraid to travel far. Although some goods are inexpensive, they are also necessary for life, and because they are scarce, they need to be trafficked.

古文：四海之内，南资舟而北资车。
现代文：从全国来看，南方更多是用船运，北方更多是用车运。
English: From a national perspective, more goods are transported by ship in the south, and more goods are transported by car in the north.

古文：梯航万国，能使帝京元气充然。
现代文：人们凭借车和船，翻山渡海，沟通国内外物资贸易，从而使得京都繁荣起来。
English: People made use of cars and boats to travel across the mountains to the sea and to communicate with each other in the domestic and foreign trade of goods, which made Kyoto prosper.

古文：何其始造舟车者不食尸祝之报也。
现代文：既然如此，为什么最早发明并创造车、船的人，却得不到后人的崇敬呢？
English: That being the case, why is it that the people who were the first to invent and create cars and boats do not receive the reverence of posterity?

古文：浮海长年，视万顷波如平地，此与列子所谓御泠风者无异。
现代文：人们驾驶船只漂洋过海，长年在大海中航行，把万顷波涛看成如同平地一样，这和列子乘风飞行的故事没有什么不同。
English: People drift across the ocean in ships, sailing in the sea for many years, seeing thousands of hectares of waves as if they were flat land. This is no different from the story of flying on the wind.

古文：传所称奚仲之流，倘所谓神人者非耶！
现代文：如果把历史书上记载的车辆创造者奚仲等人称为 神人 ，难道不也是可以的吗？
English: If the vehicle creators recorded in the history books, such as Hanzhong and others, are called godmen, isn't that also okay?

古文：○舟
现代文：舟
English: The Boat

古文：凡舟古名百千，今名亦百千，或以形名，或以量名，或以质名，不可殚述。
现代文：从古至今船只的名称已经有成百上千种了，有的根据船的形状来命名，有的按照船的载重量或者船载物的数量来命名，有的依据造船的木质来命名，名称繁多难以一一述说殆尽。
English: From ancient times to the present, there have been hundreds and thousands of names for ships. Some are named according to the shape of the ship, some are named according to the load of the ship or the quantity of the ship's cargo, and some are named according to the wood quality of the shipbuilding. The variety of names is difficult to exhaust.

古文：游海滨者得见洋船，居江湄者得见漕舫。
现代文：在海滨游玩的人可以见到远洋船，在江边居住的人可以看到漕舫。
English: Those who visit the seashore can see ocean-going boats, and those who live along the river can see paddle boats.

古文：若局趣山国之中，老死平原之地，所见者一叶扁舟、截流乱筏而已。
现代文：如果老是局限在山区或平原之中，那就只能见到独木舟或者截流而漂行的筏子罢了。
English: If you are always confined to the mountains or plains, you will only see canoes or rafts drifting in the current.

古文：粗载数舟制度，其余可例推云。○漕舫
现代文：这里粗略记载几种船的形制规格，其余的大家可以自行类推。漕舫
English: Here is a rough record of the shape specifications of several ships, and the rest of you can draw your own conclusions.

古文：凡京师为军民集区，万国水运以供储，漕舫所由兴也。
现代文：京都是军队与百姓聚居的地区，全国各地都要利用水运，把物资运来以满足京城的需要，漕船的制度也就是这样建立起来的。
English: Kyoto is an area where the military and the people live together. All over the country, they have to use water transport to bring materials to meet the needs of the capital. This is how the rowing boat system was established.

古文：元朝混一，以燕京为大都。
现代文：元朝统一全国之后，决定以北京为都城。
English: After the unification of the whole country by the Yuan Dynasty, it was decided to make Beijing the capital.

古文：南方运道由苏州刘家港、海门黄连沙开洋，直抵天津，制度用遮洋船。永乐间因之。
现代文：当时由南方到北方的航道，一条是从苏州的刘家港出发，一条是从海门县的黄连沙出发，都沿海路直达天津，用的是遮洋船，一直到明朝的永乐年间还是这样。
English: At that time, the shipping routes from the south to the north, one was from Liu Jia Gang in Suzhou, and the other was from Huang Linsha in Haimen County, both along the coastal road directly to Tianjin, using ocean-going ships. It was still like this until the Yongle years of the Ming Dynasty.

古文：以风涛多险，后改漕运。
现代文：后来因为海洋中风浪太大，危险过多，因此就改为内河航运了。
English: Later, because the wind and waves in the ocean were too big and there was too much danger, it was changed to inland navigation.

古文：平江伯陈某始造平底浅船，则今粮船之制也。
现代文：当时苏州府的布政使陈某，首先提出要制造平底的浅船，也就是后来的运粮船。
English: At that time, Chen Mou, the political envoy of Suzhou, first proposed to manufacture a flat-bottomed shallow boat, which was later the grain carrier.

古文：凡船制底为地，枋为宫墙，阴阳竹为覆瓦。
现代文：这种船的船底就好像建筑物的地基，船身则相当于墙壁，而船舱的顶棚是用被剖成两半、竹节被挖空后的阴阳竹搭建起来的，有些像屋瓦的作用。
English: The bottom of this kind of boat is like the foundation of a building, the hull is equivalent to a wall, and the roof of the cabin is built with the yin and yang bamboo after being cut into two halves and the bamboo section is hollowed out, somewhat like the role of roof tiles.

古文：伏狮前为阀阅，后为寝堂。桅为弓弩，弦、篷为翼，橹为车马，纤为履鞋，纟聿索为鹰雕筋骨，招为先锋，舵为指挥主帅，锚为扎车营寨。
现代文：船头的那一根大横木类似于屋前的门楼柱；船尾的横木相当于寝室；桅杆好像一张弓的弓身，风帆和附带的帆索就是在上面绑着的弓弦；船桨相当于拉车的马；拉船用的绳子也就是走路的鞋子；而那些系住铁锚的粗缆以及绑紧全船的大索，则像极了鹰、雕等猛禽的筋骨；船头的第一桨乃是开路先锋，而船尾的舵便是指挥航行的主帅；若要安营驻扎，就得用到船锚。
English: The great beam at the prow is like the post of a gate before a house; the beam at the stern is like a bedchamber; the mast is like the body of a bow, and the sail and the sail-rope attached to it are the strings of the bow; the oars are like the horses that draw the cart; the ropes that pull the boat are the shoes for walking; and the coarse cables that hold the iron anchor and the great ropes that hold the whole ship together are like the sinews of eagles, eagles, and other birds of prey; the first oar at the prow is the vanguard, and the rudder at the stern is the captain

古文：粮船初制，底长五丈二尺，其板厚二寸，采巨木楠为上，栗次之。
现代文：早期运粮船的规格是：船底宽长五丈二尺，使用的木板厚二寸，大木之中以选用楠木为最好，其次是栗木。
English: The specifications of early grain ships were as follows: the bottom of the ship was five feet wide and two feet long, and the planks used were two inches thick. Among the large trees, the selection of camphor was the best, followed by chestnut.

古文：头长九尺五寸，梢长九尺五寸。
现代文：船头底宽六尺，长九尺五寸，船尾底宽五尺，长九尺五寸，船头顶部的大横木长八尺，船尾相应的横木长七尺。
English: The bottom of the bow is six feet wide and nine feet five inches long, the bottom of the stern is five feet wide and nine feet five inches long, the large beam at the top of the bow is eight feet long, and the corresponding beam at the stern is seven feet long.

古文：底阔九尺五寸，底头阔六尺，底梢阔五尺，头伏狮阔八尺，梢伏狮阔七尺，梁头一十四座。龙口梁阔一丈，深四尺，使风梁阔一丈四尺，深三尺八寸。
现代文：整个船由船面横梁及其连接木头形成的构架一共有十四个，其中接近船头的龙口梁到船底的距离为四尺，长一丈，树立中桅的使风梁一丈四尺，高出船底三尺八寸。
English: The entire ship is made up of a total of fourteen frames formed by the beams on the ship's surface and the wood connecting them. Among them, the distance from the gantry beam near the bow to the bottom of the ship is four feet, which is one height, and the wind beam for erecting the middle mast is four feet high, which is three feet and eight inches higher than the bottom of the ship.

古文：后断水梁阔九尺，深四尺五寸。两廒共阔七尺六寸。
现代文：船尾的后段水梁长九尺，离船底四尺五寸，船楼两旁的通道共宽七尺六寸。
English: The water beam at the back of the stern is nine feet long, rising four feet five inches from the bottom of the ship, and the passageways on both sides of the ship are a total of seven feet six inches wide.

古文：此其初制，载米可近二千石。
现代文：这些都是初期漕船的尺寸规格，每艘漕船的载米量接近两千石。
English: These are the size specifications of the early rowing boats, with each rowing boat carrying nearly two thousand kilos of rice.

古文：后运军造者私增身长二丈，首尾阔二尺余，其量可受三千石。
现代文：后来由漕运军造的漕船，私自把船身增长了二丈，船头和船尾各加宽了二尺多，这样便可以载米三千石了。
English: Later, he had the hull of the military-made rowing boat lengthened by two feet, widening the bow and stern by more than two feet each, so that it could carry 3,000 koku of rice.

古文：而运河闸口原阔一丈二尺，差可度过。
现代文：运河的闸口原来只有一丈二尺宽，还可以让这种船勉强通过。
English: The canal's lock was originally only two feet wide, allowing the boat to squeeze through.

古文：凡今官坐船，其制尽同，第窗户之间宽其出径，加以精工彩饰而已。
现代文：现在官用的旅游船，大小规格完全与此相同，只不过是船上舱楼的门窗加大一些，精修并装饰一番罢了。
English: The size and specifications of the current official tourist ship are exactly the same, except that the doors and windows of the ship's cabin are larger, refined and decorated.

古文：凡造船先从底起，底面傍靠樯，上承栈，下亲地面。
现代文：船的建造应该要先从船底开始，船底的两侧紧靠着船身，船身上面承受着铺船栈板，漕船下面就接触到地面。
English: The construction of the ship should first start from the bottom of the ship, the two sides of the bottom of the ship are close to the hull, the hull is supported by the laying of the stack board, and the bottom of the rowing boat is in contact with the ground.

古文：隔位列置者曰梁。
现代文：相隔一定距离安置着的一批横贯船身的木头叫梁。
English: A group of beams that run across the hull and are placed a certain distance apart are called girders.

古文：两傍峻立者曰樯。
现代文：在船底两旁串叠着一批木材，构成竖立的船身。
English: On both sides of the bottom of the boat, a pile of wood is stacked to form the upright hull.

古文：盖樯巨木曰正枋，枋上曰弦。
现代文：盖在船身木头上的最顶上的一根粗大方柱形木叫做正枋，而在每根正枋上面还有一片纵长木板叫做弦。
English: Over the top of the wood of the hull, there is a thick, square, cylindrical piece of wood called the mainmast, and above each mainmast there is also a longitudinal board called the string.

古文：梁前竖桅位曰锚坛，坛底横木夹桅本者曰地龙，前后维曰伏狮，其下曰拿狮，伏狮下封头木曰连三枋。
现代文：梁前面竖桅的地方叫做锚坛，锚坛底部固定桅杆根部的结构叫做地龙。船头和船尾各有一根连接船体的大横木叫做伏狮，在伏狮的两端下面紧靠着船身的一对纵向木叫做拿狮，在伏狮之下还有一块由三根木串联着的搪浪板叫做连三枋。
English: The place of the mast in front of the beam is called the anchor platform, and the structure of the mast base fixed at the bottom of the anchor platform is called the ground dragon. The bow and stern of the ship each have a large crossbeam connecting the hull is called the footing lion, a pair of longitudinal trees close to the hull under the two ends of the footing lion is called the carrying lion, and under the footing lion there is a wave board connected by three trees in series is called the connecting beam.

古文：船头面中缺一方曰水井。
现代文：船头中间空开一个方形舱口叫做水井。
English: A square hatch in the middle of the bow is called a well.

古文：头面眉际树两木以系缆者曰将车柱。
现代文：船头两边竖起两根系结缆索的木桩，叫做将军柱。
English: On both sides of the bow, there are two wooden piles with cable ties, called the General's Column.

古文：船尾下斜上者曰草鞋底，后封头下曰短枋，枋下曰挽脚梁，船梢掌舵所居其上者野鸡篷。
现代文：锚坛船尾底下两侧倾斜着的木材叫做草鞋底。在船尾掌舵位置上面盖着的篷叫做野鸡篷。如果船身的长度接近十丈，就要竖立两根桅杆。
English: The wood leaning on both sides under the stern of the anchor platform is called the straw sole. The canopy covered above the stern helm position is called the pheasant canopy. If the length of the hull is close to ten feet, two masts should be erected.

古文：凡舟身将十丈者，立桅必两，树中桅之位，折中过前二位，头桅又前丈余。
现代文：中间的桅杆竖在船中间再朝前两个梁位处，两头桅杆的位置要比中间的桅杆更靠前一丈多。
English: The middle mast stands in the middle of the ship and faces the first two beam positions. The position of the two masts is much closer to the front than the middle mast.

古文：粮船中桅长者以八丈为率，短者缩十之一二。其本入窗内亦丈余，悬篷之位约五六丈。
现代文：运粮船中间的桅杆长的一般达八丈，短的则可能会缩短十分之一二，桅身进入舱楼至舱底的部分长达一丈多，挂帆的地方要占去桅杆总长中的五六丈。
English: The mast in the middle of the grain carrier is generally eight meters long, while the short one may be shortened by two-tenths. The part of the mast body that enters the cabin to the bottom of the cabin is more than one meter long, and the place to hang the sail takes up five or six meters of the total mast length.

古文：头桅尺寸则不及中桅之半，篷纵横亦不敌三分之一。
现代文：两头桅杆的高度还不及中间桅杆的一半，帆的纵横幅度也不到中间的桅杆上所挂帆的三分之一。
English: The height of the two masts is less than half that of the middle mast, and the breadth of the sail is less than a third of that of the sail on the middle mast.

古文：苏、湖六郡运米，其船多过石瓮桥下，且无江汉之险，故桅与篷尺寸全杀。
现代文：苏州、湖州六郡一带运米的船，大多都要经过石拱桥，而且又没有长江、汉水那样的风险，所以桅杆和帆的尺寸都要缩小。
English: Most of the ships transporting rice in the six counties of Suzhou and Huzhou pass through the stone arch bridge, and there is no risk like the Yangtze River and the Han River, so the size of the mast and sail must be reduced.

古文：若湖广、江西省舟，则过湖冲江无端风浪，故锚、缆、篷、桅必极尽制度而后无患。
现代文：但是如果航行到湖广及江西等省的船，由于过湖过江会遇到突然的风浪，所以锚、缆、帆和桅杆等，都必须严格按照规格来建造，这样才能没有后患。
English: However, if a ship sailing to the provinces of Hukang and Jiangxi encounters sudden wind and waves due to crossing the lake and river, the anchor, cable, sail and mast must be built in strict accordance with the specifications, so as to avoid future problems.

古文：凡风篷尺寸，其则一视全舟横身，过则有患，不及则力软。
现代文：此外，风帆的大小也要跟船身的宽度一致，太大了会有危险，太小了就会风力不足。
English: In addition, the size of the sail should be consistent with the width of the hull, too big will be dangerous, too small will be windy.

古文：凡船篷其质乃析篾成片织就，夹维竹条，逐块折叠，以俟悬挂。
现代文：风帆是用剖开后的竹片编织而成的，用绳子编过的竹片既可以一块块地折叠起来，又可让风帆紧贴着桅杆升起，非常方便。
English: The sails are woven from bamboo pieces after being cut open. The bamboo pieces woven with rope can be folded up piece by piece, and the sails can be raised close to the mast, which is very convenient.

古文：粮船中桅篷合并十人力方克凑顶，头篷则两人带之有余。
现代文：粮船的中桅帆一般需要十个人一起用力才能将其升到桅顶，而头帆却只要两个人便足够了。
English: The middle sail of a grain ship generally requires ten people to work together to raise it to the top of the mast, while the head sail is enough for only two people.

古文：凡度篷索先系空中寸圆木关捩于桅巅之上，然后带索腰间缘木而上，三股交错而度之。
现代文：在安装帆绳时，应先将直径约一寸的木制滑轮固定在桅杆顶部，然后一个人在腰间系上绳索并爬上桅杆，将三股绳索交错地穿过上面的滑轮。
English: To rig a sail, a wooden pulley about an inch in diameter should be attached to the top of the mast, and then a person should tie a rope around his waist and climb up the mast, passing three strands of rope interlaced through the upper pulley.

古文：凡风篷之力其末一叶，敌其本三叶。
现代文：上部的风帆受到一分的风力时，底下所承受风力的则为三分。
English: When the upper sail is subjected to a one-point wind, the wind resistance at the bottom is three points.

古文：调匀和畅顺风则绝顶张篷，行疾奔马。若风力氵存至，则以次减下。
现代文：因此，如果调节得准确、恰当，遇到顺风时，将帆打开到最大限度，船前进起来的速度便会像骏马奔跑一样；而如果此时风力不断增大，则要逐渐地减少、收起帆叶。
English: Therefore, if the adjustment is accurate and appropriate, when encountering a tailwind, the sail will be opened to the maximum, and the ship will move forward at the same speed as a horse; and if the wind force continues to increase at this time, it is necessary to gradually reduce and close the sails.

古文：狂甚则只带一两叶而已。凡风从横来名曰抢风。
现代文：当遇到大风时，帆叶会鼓得很厉害，如果降不下来的话，只能使用搭钩将其扯下来，在这种情况下，只打开一两叶帆便足够了。借用从横向吹来的风航行就叫做抢风。
English: When there is a strong wind, the sails will swell very much. If you can't lower them, you can only use the hook to pull them down. In this case, it is enough to open only one or two sails. Sailing with the wind blowing from the side is called catching the wind.

古文：顺水行舟，则挂篷之玄游走，或一抢向东，止寸平过，甚至却退数十丈。
现代文：这时如果是顺水而行，就可以升起船帆按 之 字形或者 玄 字形的路线行进。如果操纵船帆把船抢向东，只能平过对岸，甚至还可能会后退几十丈。
English: At this time, if you are sailing along the water, you can raise the sail to follow the zigzag or zigzag route. If you steer the sail to steer the ship to the east, you can only pass through the opposite bank, and may even retreat dozens of feet.

古文：未及岸时捩舵转篷，一抢向西，借贷水力兼带风力轧下，则顷刻十余里。
现代文：这时趁船还未到达对岸，便应立刻转舵，并把帆调转向另一舷上去，即把船抢向西，这是借助水势和风力的挤压，船沿着斜向前进，一下子便可以行走十多里。
English: At this time, taking advantage of the fact that the ship has not yet reached the opposite shore, it should immediately turn the rudder and turn the sails to the other side, that is, steer the ship to the west. This is done by means of water potential and wind pressure. The ship advances along an oblique direction, and can travel more than ten miles at once.

古文：或湖水平而不流者亦可缓轧。若上水舟则一步不可行也。
现代文：如果是在平静的湖水中，就可以缓慢地转抢斜行了；但如果是逆水行舟，又遇到这种横风，那就一步也难以行进了。
English: If you are in calm lake water, you can slowly turn around and go diagonally; but if you are sailing against the water and encounter this kind of crosswind, it will be difficult to travel even one step.

古文：凡船性随水，若草从风，故制舵障水使不定向流，舵板一转，一泓从之。
现代文：船跟着水流走就如同草随着风儿摆动一样，所以要利用舵来挡水，使水不按原来的方向流动，舵板一转就能引起一股水流。
English: The boat follows the current just as the grass swings with the wind, so it is necessary to use the rudder to block the water, so that the water does not flow in the original direction. A turn of the rudder plate can cause a stream of water.

古文：凡舵尺寸，与船腹切齐。
现代文：舵的尺寸，其下端要同船底平齐。
English: The size of the rudder, the lower end of which should be flush with the bottom of the boat.

古文：其长一寸，则遇浅之时船腹已过，其梢尼舵使胶住，设风狂力劲，则寸木为难不可言。舵短一寸则转运力怯，回头不捷。
现代文：如果舵比船底长出一寸，那么当遇到水浅时，船底已经通过了，而船尾的舵却被卡住了，要是风力很大的话，这一寸木带来的麻烦也就难以形容了；反之，如果舵比船底短了一寸，那么舵的运转力就会太小，船身转动也就不够灵巧。
English: If the rudder is one inch longer than the bottom of the ship, then when the water is shallow, the bottom of the ship has passed, but the stern rudder is stuck, and if the wind is very strong, the trouble caused by this inch of wood is indescribable; on the other hand, if the rudder is one inch shorter than the bottom of the ship, then the operating force of the rudder will be too small, and the rotation of the hull will not be dexterous.

古文：凡舵力所障水，相应及船头而止，其腹底之下俨若一派急顺流，故船头不约而正，其机妙不可言。
现代文：由舵板所挡住的水，相应地流到船头为止，此时船底下的水，好像一股急顺流，所以船头就能自然而然地转到一定方向，这真是非常奇妙。
English: The water, blocked by the rudder plate, accordingly flowed up to the bow, at this time the water under the boat was like a rushing current, so the bow could naturally turn in a certain direction, which was really very strange.

古文：舵上所操柄名曰关门棒，欲船北则南向捩转，欲船南则北向捩转。
现代文：舵上的操纵杆叫做关门棒，要船头向北，就将关门棒推向南；要船头向南，就将关门棒推向北。
English: The joystick on the rudder is called the closing rod. If you want the bow to go north, you push the closing rod south; if you want the bow to go south, you push the closing rod north.

古文：船身太长而风力横劲，舵力不甚应手，则急下一偏披水板以抵其势。
现代文：如果船身太长而横向吹来的风又太猛，舵力不那么充足，就要赶紧放下吹风一侧的那块挡水板，用来抵消风势。
English: If the hull is too long and the wind blowing sideways is too strong, and the steering force is not sufficient, it is necessary to quickly put down the water-retaining board on the side of the wind blowing to counteract the wind.

古文：凡舵用直木一根为身，上截衡受棒，下截界开衔口，纳板其中如斧形，铁钉固拴以障水。
现代文：船舵要用一根直木做舵身，上端凿个横孔插进关门棒，下端锯开个衔口，用来夹紧舵板，构成斧头般的形状，然后用铁钉钉牢便可以挡水了。
English: The ship's rudder was to be made of a piece of straight wood. A cross-hole was to be drilled in the upper end to insert a locking rod, and the lower end was to be sawed open to form an axe-like shape, which was used to clamp the rudder plate, and then fastened with iron nails to block the water.

古文：梢后隆起处，亦名曰舵楼。
现代文：船尾高耸起来的地方，也叫做舵楼。
English: The place where the stern of the ship rises up is also called the wheelhouse.

古文：凡铁锚所以沉水系舟。
现代文：铁锚的作用沉入水底时可以使船固定不动。
English: When the ship sinks to the bottom of the water, the action of the iron anchor can keep the ship fixed.

古文：一粮船计用五六锚，最雄者曰看家锚，重五百斤内外，其余头用二枝，梢用二枝。
现代文：一艘运粮船上共有五或六个锚，其中最大的锚叫做看家锚，重达五百斤左右。其余的锚在船头上的有两个，在船尾部的也有两个。
English: There are five or six anchors on a grain ship, the largest of which is called the house anchor and weighs about five hundred pounds. The remaining anchors are two in the bow and two in the stern.

古文：凡中流遇逆风不可去又不可泊，则下锚沉水底，其所系纟聿缠绕将军柱上，锚爪一遇泥沙扣底抓住，十分危急则下看家锚。
现代文：船在航行之中如果遇到逆风无法前进，而又不能靠岸停泊的话，就要将锚抛下沉到水底，把系锚的缆索系在将军柱上。锚爪子一接触到泥沙，就能陷进泥里抓住。如果情况十分危急，便要抛下看家锚。
English: If the ship encounters headwinds during the voyage and cannot move forward, but cannot moor at the shore, it is necessary to drop the anchor to the bottom of the water, tie the anchor cable to the general's post. As soon as the anchor paws touch the sand, they can sink into the mud and catch it. If the situation is very critical, it is necessary to drop the anchor.

古文：系此锚者名曰本身，盖重言之也。
现代文：系住这个锚的缆索叫做 本身 ，这就是说它至关重要的意思。
English: The cable that holds this anchor is called the anchor itself, which means that it is essential.

古文：或同行前舟阻滞，恐我舟顺势急去有撞伤之祸，则急下梢锚提住，使不迅速流行。
现代文：同一航向航行的船只，如果前面的船受阻了，怕自己的船会顺势急冲向前而有互相撞伤的危险，那就要赶快抛梢锚拖住船只，将速度减下来。
English: Vessels sailing in the same direction, if the ship in front is blocked, fearing that their own ship will rush forward and risk colliding with each other, should quickly drop the anchor to drag the ship and slow down the speed.

古文：风息开舟则以云车纹缆提锚使上。
现代文：风静了要开船，就要用绞车绞缆把锚提起来。
English: If you want to sail when the wind is calm, you must use a winch to lift the anchor.

古文：凡船板合隙缝以白麻斫絮为筋，钝凿扌及入，然后筛过细石灰，和桐油舂杵成团调念。
现代文：修补船板上的缝隙时，需要把剁碎后的白麻做成麻筋，并用钝凿子把这些麻筋塞进缝里，然后再用筛过后的细石灰和桐油搅拌成团，以此来填充船缝。
English: When repairing the cracks on the ship's board, it is necessary to make the crushed white hemp into hemp, and use a blunt chisel to push these hemp into the cracks, and then use the sifted fine lime and tung oil to mix into a mass to fill the ship's seams.

古文：温、台、闽、广即用蛎灰。
现代文：在浙江的温州、台州和福建、广东等地，则用蛤蜊灰来代替石灰补漏，这一点在前面已经说过了。
English: In Zhejiang's Wenzhou, Taizhou and Fujian, Guangdong and other places, fly ash is used instead of lime to plug leaks, which has already been mentioned above.

古文：凡舟中带篷索，以火麻秸绞。粗成径寸以外者即系万钧不绝。
现代文：船上用来绑船帆的绳索是由大麻秆扭绞而成，这根粗绳的直径超过一寸以上，即使绑住万斤以上的东西都不会断开。
English: The rope used to tie the sails on the ship is twisted from hemp reeds. This thick rope has a diameter of more than one inch and will not break even if it is tied to more than ten thousand pounds.

古文：若系锚缆则破析青篾为之，其篾线入釜煮熟然后纠绞。
现代文：系锚用的缆绳，则使用剖开后又劈细的青竹做成，是将竹片放进锅里煮熟后同样进行绞扭制成的。
English: The cable used to tie the anchor is made of green bamboo, which is cut open and then split into small pieces. It is made by twisting a piece of bamboo after it has been cooked in a pot.

古文：拽缱亦煮熟篾线绞成十丈以往，中作圈为接区，遇阻碍可以掐断。
现代文：拉船的绳子也是把竹片煮熟以后绞扭制成。这是因为竹子的质地笔直而坚硬，一条竹制的篾线可以承受千斤的重量。
English: The rope for pulling the boat is also made by twisting and twisting a piece of bamboo after it has been boiled. This is because the texture of bamboo is straight and hard, and a bamboo cord can withstand a weight of one thousand pounds.

古文：凡竹性直，篾一线千钧。
现代文：绳子若需接到十丈以上，就要在中间要加个铁圈作为接环。
English: If the rope needs to be connected to more than ten heights, it is necessary to add an iron ring in the middle as a ring.

古文：三峡入川上水舟，不用纠绞缱，即破竹阔寸许者，整条以次接长，名曰火杖。
现代文：对于那些要经过长江三峡、进入四川的船来说，就不能使用这种扭绞后制成的绳子了，而是应该直接把竹子剖成一寸多宽的整条竹片，将其互相连接，这叫做火杖。
English: For those ships that want to pass through the Yangtze River Three Gorges and enter Sichuan, they cannot use this twisted rope, but should directly cut the bamboo into a whole piece of bamboo more than an inch wide and connect it to each other, which is called a fire stick.

古文：盖沿崖石棱如刃，惧破篾易损也。
现代文：这样做是因为三峡沿岸的石壁像刀刃一样锋利，篾绳很容易损坏。
English: This was done because the stone walls along the Three Gorges are as sharp as a knife blade, and the reins are easily damaged.

古文：凡木色桅用端直杉木，长不足则接，其表铁箍逐寸包围。
现代文：至于船只所用木料的选择，桅杆要选用匀称笔直的杉木，如果一根杉木还不够长的话可以连接，在接合部用铁箍一寸寸箍紧了。
English: As for the choice of wood used by ships, the mast should be made of evenly straight cedar wood. If a cedar tree is not long enough, it can be connected, and it is tightened with a spade at the joint.

古文：船窗前道皆当中空阙，以便树桅。
现代文：在舱楼前面，应当空出一块地方以便树立桅杆。
English: In front of the cabin, a space should be cleared for the mast to be erected.

古文：凡树中桅，合并数巨舟承载，其未长缆系表而起。
现代文：树立船中间的桅杆时，要拼合几条大船来共同承载，然后靠系在桅顶的长缆索将它拉吊起来。
English: When erecting the mast in the middle of the ship, it is necessary to assemble several large ships to carry it together, and then pull it up by means of a long cable tied to the top of the mast.

古文：梁与枋樯用楠木、槠木、樟木、榆木、槐木。栈板不拘何木。舵杆用榆木、榔木、槠木。关门棒用周木、榔木。橹用杉木、桧木、楸木。
现代文：船上的梁和构成船身的长木材都要选用楠木、槠木、樟木、榆木或者槐木来做；衬舱底或者铺面的栈板则不论什么木料都可以；舵杆要使用榆木、榔木或者槠木；关门棒则要用椆木或者榔木；橹要用杉木、桧木或者楸木。
English: The beams on the ship and the long timbers that make up the hull should be made of camphor, birch, beech, elm or birch; the bottom of the hold or the stacking board on the deck can be made of any wood; the rudder bar should be made of birch, beech or elm; the closing rod should be made of birch or elm; the anchor should be made of cedar, beech or elm.

古文：此其大端云。
现代文：以上所阐述的只是一些关于漕船的要点而已。
English: The above are just some of the key points about rowing.

古文：○海舟
现代文：海舟
English: The Sea Boat

古文：凡海舟，元朝与国初运米者曰遮洋浅船，次者曰钻风船所经道里，止万里长滩、黑水洋、沙门岛等处，皆无大险。
现代文：元朝和明朝初年运米的海船叫做遮洋浅船，小一点儿的叫做钻风船。这种船的航道仅限于经由长江口以北的万里长滩、黑水洋和沙门岛等地方，一路上并没有什么大的风险。
English: The seagoing vessels that transported rice in the first years of the Yuan and Ming dynasties were called "shadowing shallow vessels" and the smaller ones were called "drilling wind vessels." The routes of such vessels were limited to places such as Wanli Long Beach, the Black Sea and Shamen Island north of the mouth of the Yangtze River, and there was no great risk along the way.

古文：与出使琉球、日本暨商贾爪哇、笃泥等船制度，工费不及十分之一。
现代文：制造这种海船的工本费，还不到那些出使琉球、日本和到爪哇、笃泥等地经商的海船的十分之一。
English: The cost of building such a ship is less than one-tenth of the cost of the ships sent to Ryukyu, Japan, Java, and other places to do business.

古文：凡遮洋运船制，视漕船长一丈六尺，阔二尺五寸，器具皆同，唯舵杆必用铁力木，念灰用鱼油和桐油，不知何义。
现代文：遮洋浅船跟漕船比较起来，长了一丈六尺，宽了二尺五寸，船上的各种设备都是一样的。只是遮洋浅船的舵杆必须要用铁力木造，糊舱板缝的灰要用鱼油加桐油拌和，不知道这是出于什么理由。
English: Compared with the rowing boat, the rudder of the sheltered shallow boat is six feet longer and two feet and five inches wider, and all kinds of equipment on the boat are the same. However, the rudder of the sheltered shallow boat must be made of iron wood, and the ash at the seams of the deck must be mixed with fish oil and tung oil. I don't know why.

古文：凡外国海舶制度大同小异，闽、广洋船截竹两破排栅，树于两傍以抵浪。
现代文：外国的海船跟遮洋浅船的规格大同小异。福建、广东的远洋船把竹子破成两半编成排栅，放在船的两旁用来挡海浪，山东登州和莱州的海船制作方法也不太一样。
English: The specifications of foreign seagoing ships are quite similar to those of shallow-draft ships. The ocean-going ships of Fujian and Guangdong cut bamboo into two halves and weave it into a grid, which is placed on both sides of the ship to block the waves. The methods of making seagoing ships in Shandong's Dengzhou and Laizhou are not quite the same.

古文：登、莱制度又不然，倭国海舶两傍列橹手栏板抵水，人在其中运力。朝鲜制度又不然。
现代文：日本的海船在船两旁安装带有把手的栏板，由人拨动栏板来挡水。朝鲜的制作方法又不同。
English: Japanese ships install railings with handles on both sides of the ship, and the railings are moved by a person to block the water. North Korea's method of making cranes is different.

古文：至其首尾各安罗经盘以定方向，中腰大横梁出头数尺，贯插腰舵，则皆同也。
现代文：至于在船头、船尾都安装罗盘用来辨别航向，船中腰的大横梁伸出几尺以便于插进腰舵，这些都是相同的。
English: As for the installation of compasses at the bow and stern to discern the course, and the large beam in the middle of the ship's waist extending a few feet to facilitate the insertion of the waist rudder, these are the same.

古文：腰舵非与梢舵形同，乃阔板斫成刀形插入水中，亦不捩转，盖夹卫扶倾之义。
现代文：腰舵的形状跟尾舵不同，它是把宽木板斫成刀的形状，插进水中后并不转动，只是对船身起平衡作用。
English: The shape of the waist rudder is different from that of the stern rudder. It is the shape of a wide plank of wood chiseled into a knife. After being inserted into the water, it does not turn, but only has a balancing effect on the hull.

古文：其上仍横柄栓于梁上，而遇浅则提起，有似乎舵，故名腰舵也。
现代文：它上面还有个横把拴在梁上，遇到搁浅时就可以提起来。因为它有点儿像舵，所以就叫做腰舵。
English: It also has a cross-handle on the beam, which can be raised when it is stranded. Because it is a bit like a rudder, it is called a waist rudder.

古文：凡海舟以竹筒贮淡水数石，度供舟内人两日之需，遇岛又汲。
现代文：海船出海时，要用竹筒储备几百斤的淡水，估计可足够供应船上的人两天食用，一旦遇到岛屿，就再补充淡水。
English: When a seagoing ship goes to sea, it is necessary to use a bamboo tube to store several hundred pounds of fresh water, which is estimated to be enough to supply the people on board with food for two days. Once it encounters an island, it will be replenished with fresh water.

古文：其何国何岛合用何向，针指示昭然，恐非人力所祖。
现代文：无论到什么地方、什么岛屿，需要按什么方向航行，罗盘针都会指示得很清楚，看来这恐怕不是光凭人的经验所能够轻易掌握的。
English: No matter where you go, what islands, what direction you need to sail, the compass needle will indicate very clearly. It seems that this is probably not something that can be easily mastered by human experience alone.

古文：舵工一群主佐，直是识力造到死生浑忘地，非鼓勇之谓也。
现代文：舵工们相互配合操纵海船，他们的见识和魄力简直到了将生死置之度外的境界，那并不是只凭一时鼓起的勇气就能够做到的吧。
English: The helmsmen cooperate with each other to steer the ship, and their insight and courage are almost beyond the realm of life and death, which is not something that can be done with just a momentary courage.

古文：○杂舟
现代文：杂舟
English: Zou Zhou

古文：江汉课船。身甚狭小而长，上列十余仓，每仓容止一人卧息。
现代文：长江、汉水上所行驶的官府用来运载税银的 课船 ，船身十分狭长，前后一共有十多个舱，每个舱只有一个铺位那么大。
English: On the Yangtze River and the Han River, the government boats used to carry tax money are very long and narrow, with a total of more than ten compartments, each of which is only the size of one berth.

古文：首尾共桨六把，小桅篷一座。风涛之中恃有多桨挟持。
现代文：整只船总共有六把桨和一座小桅帆，在风浪当中靠这几把桨推动划行。
English: The whole boat has a total of six oars and a small mast sail, which are used to propel the boat in the wind and waves.

古文：不遇逆风，一昼夜顺水行四百余里，逆水亦行百余里，国朝盐课淮、扬数颇多，故设此运银，名曰课船。
现代文：如果不遇上逆风，仅一昼夜顺水就可行四百多里，逆水也能行驶一百多里。明朝的盐税中，淮阴和扬州一带征收的数额很大，也要用这种船来运送税银，所以就称它为 课船 。
English: If it does not encounter a headwind, it can travel more than four hundred miles in just one day and night along the water, and can travel more than one hundred miles against the water. In the salt tax of the morning, the amount collected in Huaiyin and Yangzhou is very large, and this kind of ship is also used to transport tax money, so it is called a training ship.

古文：行人欲速者亦买之。
现代文：来往旅客想要赶速度的，往往也租用这种船。
English: This type of boat is often hired by commuters who want to travel fast.

古文：其船南自章、贡，西自荆、襄，达于瓜、仪而止。
现代文：课船的航线一般是南从江西省的章水、贡水，西从湖北省的江陵、襄樊等地方出发，到江苏省的仪真、瓜洲为止。
English: The routes of the course ships are generally from Zhangshui and Gongshui in Jiangxi Province in the south, and from Jiangling and Xiangfan in Hubei Province in the west, to Yizhen and Guazhou in Jiangsu Province.

古文：三吴浪船。
现代文：三吴浪船。
English: Sanwu Longboat.

古文：凡浙西、平江纵横七百里内尽是深沟小水湾环，浪船以万亿计。
现代文：在浙江省的西部至江苏省的苏州之间纵横七百里的范围中，布满许多深沟和迂回曲折的小溪，这一带的浪船数以十万计。
English: In the seven-hundred-mile-long area between the western part of Zhejiang Province and Suzhou in Jiangsu Province, there are many deep ditches and winding streams, and there are hundreds of thousands of boats in this area.

古文：其舟行人贵贱来往以代马车、履。
现代文：旅客无论贫富都搭乘这种船往来，以代替车马或者步行。
English: Travellers, rich and poor alike, use these boats to travel between cities, replacing horse-drawn carriages or walking.

古文：舟即小者必造窗牖堂房，质料多用杉木。
现代文：这种船即使很小也要装配上窗户、厅房，所用的木料多是杉木。
English: This kind of ship, even if it is small, needs to be equipped with windows and a hall. The wood used is mostly cedar.

古文：人物载其中，不可偏重一石，偏即欹侧，故俗名天平船。
现代文：人和货物在船里要做到保持两边平衡，不能有多达一石的偏重，否则浪船就会倾斜，因此这种船俗称 天平船 。
English: People and goods should be balanced on both sides in the ship, and there should not be a bias of up to one stone, otherwise the waves will tilt the ship, so this kind of ship is commonly known as a flat boat.

古文：此舟来往七百里内，或好逸便者径买，北达通、津，只有镇江一横渡，俟风静涉过，又渡清江浦，溯黄河浅水二百里则入闸河安稳路矣。
现代文：这种船来往的航程通常在七百里之内。
English: The distance between such ships is usually less than seven hundred miles.

古文：至长江上流风浪，则没世避而不经也。
现代文：长江上游水急浪大，这种浪船是永远不能进去的。
English: The water in the upper reaches of the Yangtze River is very rough, and this kind of boat can never go in.

古文：浪船行力在梢后，巨橹一枝两三人推轧前走，或恃缱。
现代文：浪船的推动力全靠船尾那根粗大的橹，由两三个人合力摇橹而使船前进，或者是靠人上岸拉纤使船前进。
English: The propulsive force of a drifting ship relies entirely on the large anchor at the stern. Two or three people can make the ship move forward by shaking the anchor together, or the ship can move forward by pulling the fiber ashore.

古文：至于风篷，则小席如掌所不恃也。
现代文：至于船的风帆，不过是一块巴掌大小的小席罢了，船的行进完全不依靠它。
English: As for the sail of the ship, it is just a small seat the size of a palm, and the ship's progress does not depend on it at all.

古文：东浙西安船。
现代文：东浙西安船。
English: East Zhejiang Xi'an Ship.

古文：浙东自常山至钱塘八百里，水径入海，不通他道，故此舟自常山、开化、遂安等小河起，至钱塘而止，更无他涉。
现代文：浙江的东部自常山至钱塘江之间流程共约八百里，然后水流入海，不通其他航道，因此这种船的航线是从常山、开化、遂安等小河起一直到钱塘江为止，再也没有行走别处了。
English: The eastern part of Zhejiang from the Changshan to the Qiantang River flows for a total of about eight hundred miles. Then the water flows into the sea and does not pass through other channels. Therefore, the route of this kind of ship is from the small rivers such as Changshan, Kaifu and Suian all the way to the Qiantang River. There is no other place to walk.

古文：舟制箬篷如卷瓦为上盖。缝布为帆，高可二丈许，绵索张带。
现代文：这种船是用箬竹叶编成拱形的篷当顶盖，用棉布为风帆，约两丈多高，帆索也是棉质的。
English: This kind of boat is covered with an arched canopy made of bamboo leaves, with cotton cloth for the sail, about two feet high, and the sail rope is also cotton.

古文：初为布帆者，原因钱塘有潮涌，急时易于收下。
现代文：当初采用布帆，据说是因为钱塘江有潮涌，当情形危急时布帆更容易收起来，但也不一定是出于这个原因。
English: Initially, cloth sails were used, reportedly because the Qiantang River has tidal surges. When the situation is critical, cloth sails are easier to put away, but not necessarily for this reason.

古文：此亦未然，其费似侈于篾席，总不可晓。福建清流、梢篷船。
现代文：它的造价比起竹篾质地的帆要高出很多，人们很难理解当地为什么要使用棉布当船帆。福建清流、梢篷船。
English: Its construction cost is much higher than that of the bamboo sail, and it is difficult to understand why the local people use cotton cloth as a sail.

古文：其船自光泽、崇安两小河起，达于福州洪塘而止，其下水道皆海矣。
现代文：这两种船仅航行于由光泽、崇安两小河起到福州洪塘为止的一段，再下去的水道就是海了。
English: These two kinds of boats only sail in the section from the Sheen and Chong'an creeks to the Fuzhou Hongtang, and the waterway further down is the sea.

古文：清流船以载货物、客商，梢篷船大差可坐卧，官贵家属用之。其船皆以杉木为地。
现代文：清流船用于运载货物和客商，梢篷船则仅可供人坐卧，这是达官贵人及其家属所用的，这种船都是用杉木做船底。
English: Clear-flowing boats were used to transport goods and merchants, while covered boats were only for people to sit and sleep, which was used by dignitaries and their families. These boats were made of cedar wood for the bottom.

古文：滩石甚险，破损者其常，遇损则急舣向岸搬物掩塞。
现代文：途中经过的险滩礁石不少，时常会碰损而引起船底漏水，遇到这种情况就要设法马上靠岸，抢卸货物并且堵塞漏洞。
English: There are a lot of dangerous rocks on the way, often causing damage to the boat and causing water leakage at the bottom of the boat. In this case, it is necessary to try to immediately dock, grab and unload the goods and plug the holes.

古文：船梢径不用舵，船首列一巨招，捩头使转。
现代文：这种船不在船的尾部安装船舵，而是在船的头部安装一把叫做 招 的大桨来使船转动方向。
English: This type of boat does not have a rudder at the back of the boat, but a large paddle called a "sweep" at the head of the boat to turn the direction of the boat.

古文：每帮五只方行，经一险滩则四舟之人皆从尾后曳缆，以缓其趋势。
现代文：为了确保安全，每次出航都要联合五只船才可开行，当经过急流险滩时，后面四只船的人都要上岸用缆索往后拉住第一只船，以减慢它的速度。
English: In order to ensure safety, five boats have to sail together before sailing. When passing through the rapids, the people in the four boats behind have to go ashore and pull the first boat back with a cable to slow it down.

古文：长年即寒冬不裹足，以便频濡。
现代文：船工即便是在寒冷的冬天也不穿鞋子，以便经常涉水。
English: Boatmen do not wear shoes, even in the cold winter, so that they can wade in the water frequently.

古文：风篷竟悬不用云。
现代文：令人不解的是，它的风帆竟然是挂而不用的。
English: Inexplicably, its sails were not in use.

古文：四川八橹等船。
现代文：四川八橹等船。
English: Ships such as the Sichuan Yatai.

古文：凡川水源通江、汉，然川船达荆州而止，此下则更舟矣。
现代文：四川的水源本来是和长江、汉水相通的，但是四川的船只仅仅是航行到湖北省的荆州为止，再往下行驶就必须更换另一种船了。
English: The water source of Sichuan was originally connected to the Yangtze River and the Han River, but the ships of Sichuan only sailed as far as Jingzhou in Hubei Province, and then had to be replaced by another ship.

古文：逆行而上，自夷陵入峡，挽缱者以巨竹破为四片或六片，麻绳约接，名曰火杖。舟中鸣鼓若竞渡，挽人从山石中闻鼓声而咸力。
现代文：从湖北宜昌进入三峡的上水航行，这时拉纤的人用的是火杖。船上像端阳节竞赛那般击鼓，拉缆的人在岸上山石之间听到鼓声就一起出力。
English: When sailing from Yichang, Hubei Province, into the upper reaches of the Three Gorges, the men pulling the cables used fire sticks. They beat drums on the boat like a Dragon Boat Festival competition, and when the men pulling the cables heard the drums between the rocks on the shore, they joined forces.

古文：中夏至中秋川水封峡，则断绝行舟数月。过此消退，方通往来。
现代文：从中夏到中秋期间，江水涨满封峡，船就停航几个月，等到以后水位降低，船只才继续开始往来。
English: During the period from mid-summer to mid-autumn, when the river was full of water and closed the gorge, the ship stopped sailing for a few months. When the water level dropped later, the ships continued to travel.

古文：其新滩等数极险处，人与货尽盘岸行半里许，只余空舟上下。
现代文：这段航道要经过新滩等几处极其危险的地方，这时人与货物都必须在岸上转运半里多路，只剩下空船在江里行走。
English: This section of the waterway passes through several extremely dangerous places such as Xintan. At this time, both people and goods must be transported more than half a mile on the shore, leaving only empty boats to travel in the river.

古文：其舟制腹圆而首尾尖狭，所以辟滩浪云。
现代文：这种船的腹部圆而两头尖狭，便于在险滩附近劈波斩浪。
English: This kind of boat has a round belly and two narrow points, which is convenient for breaking waves near the dangerous beach.

古文：黄河满篷梢。
现代文：黄河满篷梢。
English: The Yellow River is full of canopies.

古文：其船自河入淮，自淮溯汴用之。
现代文：从黄河进入淮河，再从淮河进入河南的汴水，使用的都是这种满篷梢船。
English: From the Yellow River into the Huai River, and then from the Huai River into the Surabaya River in Henan Province, these fully-canopied boats are used.

古文：质用楠木，工价颇优。
现代文：满篷梢船建造时用的是楠木，工本费比较高。
English: The full-canopied boat was built with camphor wood, and the construction cost is relatively high.

古文：大小不等，巨者载三千石，小者五百石。
现代文：船的大小不等，大的可以装载三千石，小的只能载五百石。
English: The size of the ship varies, the large one can carry three thousand stones, the small one can only carry five hundred.

古文：下水则首颈之际，横压一梁，巨橹两枝，两傍推轧而下。
现代文：当顺水行驶时，就在船头与船身交接处安上一根横梁伸出船的两边，挂上两把粗大的橹，人在船两边摇橹而使船前进。
English: When sailing along the water, at the junction of the bow and the hull, a beam is installed on both sides of the boat, and two thick oars are hung. The oars are rocked on both sides of the boat to make the boat move forward.

古文：锚、缆？帆制与江、汉相仿云。
现代文：至于铁锚、绳索和风帆等的规格，和长江、汉水中的船大致相同。
English: As for the specifications of iron anchors, ropes and sails, they are roughly the same as the boats in the Yangtze River and Han River.

古文：广东黑楼船、盐船。
现代文：广东黑楼船、盐船。
English: Guangdong Black Ship and Salt Ship.

古文：北自南雄，南达会省，下此惠、潮通漳、泉则由海汊乘海舟矣。
现代文：北起广东南雄、南到广州都行驶着这两种船，但从广东的惠阳、潮州要到达福建的漳州、泉州，就应在河道的出海口改乘海船了。
English: These two kinds of ships travel from the north to Nanxiong, Guangdong, and from the south to Guangzhou, but if you want to get from Huiyang and Chaozhou in Guangdong to Zhangzhou and Quanzhou in Fujian, you should take a sea ship at the mouth of the river.

古文：黑楼船为官贵所乘，盐船以载货物。
现代文：黑楼船是达官贵人坐的，盐船则用来运载货物。
English: The Black Tower Ship was used by dignitaries, while the Salt Ship was used to transport goods.

古文：舟制两傍可行走。
现代文：人可以在船的两侧行走。
English: You can walk on both sides of the boat.

古文：风帆编蒲为之，不挂独竿桅，双柱悬帆不若中原随转。
现代文：风帆是用草席做成的，但使用的不是单桅杆而是双桅杆，因此不像中原地区的船帆那样可以随意转动。
English: The sails are made of straw mats, but instead of single masts they use double masts, so they cannot be turned at will like the sails in the Central Plains.

古文：逆流冯藉缱力，则与各省直同功云。
现代文：至于逆水航行时要靠纤缆拖动，在这一点上和其他各省的都相同。黄河秦船。
English: As for sailing against the tide, it is necessary to rely on fiber optic cables to drag it, which is the same as in other provinces.

古文：黄河秦船造作多出韩城，巨者载石数万钧顺流而下，供用淮、徐地面。
现代文：这种船大多是在陕西省的韩城县制造的，大的可以装载石头数万斤，顺流而下，供淮阴、徐州一带使用。
English: Most of these boats are made in Hancheng County, Shaanxi Province. The largest ones can carry tens of thousands of pounds of stone down the river for use in Huaiyin and Xuzhou.

古文：舟制首尾方阔均等，仓梁平下不甚隆起，急流顺下，巨橹两傍夹推，来往不冯风力。
现代文：它的船头和船尾都一样宽，船舱和梁都比较低平而并不怎么凸起。当船顺着急流而下的时候，摇动两旁的巨橹而使船前进，船的来往都不利用风力。
English: Its bow and stern are the same width, the cabin and the beam are relatively low and flat and not very convex. When the ship goes down the rapids, shake the giant anchors on both sides to make the ship move forward, the ship's movement does not use wind.

古文：归舟挽缱多至二十余人，甚有弃舟空返者。
现代文：逆流返航的时候，往往需要二十多个人在岸上拉纤才好使，因此甚至有连船也不要而空手返回的。
English: When sailing back against the current, it often takes more than twenty people to pull the fiber on the shore, so there are even people who don't even want to take the boat and return empty-handed.

古文：○车
现代文：车
English: by car

古文：凡车利行平地，古者秦、晋、燕、齐之交，列国战争必用车，故千乘、万乘之号起自战争国。
现代文：车适合于平地上驾驶，战国时期，陕西、山西、河北及山东各诸侯国之间交战都要使用战车，因此就有了所谓 千乘之国 、 万乘之国 的说法。
English: The car is suitable for driving on flat ground. During the Warring States period, the wars between Shaanxi, Shanxi, Hebei and Shandong provinces required the use of chariots. Therefore, there was a so-called "country of thousands" and "country of thousands."

古文：楚、汉血争而后日辟。
现代文：秦末项羽与刘邦血战之后，战车的使用也就逐渐少了。
English: After the bloody battle between Qin Mian Xiang Yu and Liu Bang, the use of chariots gradually decreased.

古文：南方则水战用舟，陆战用步马，北膺胡虏交使铁骑，战车逐无所用之。
现代文：南方的水战用的是船，陆战用的则是步兵和骑兵；向北进攻匈奴的军队，双方都使用骑兵，于是战车也就派不上用场了。
English: In the south, ships were used for naval warfare, while infantry and cavalry were used for land warfare; when attacking the Hun army in the north, both sides used cavalry, so there was no need to send chariots.

古文：但今服马驾车以运重载，则今日骡车即同彼时战车之义也。
现代文：但是当今人们又驭马驾车用来运载重物，可见，今天的骡马车同过去的战车，结构也应该是差不多的。
English: However, nowadays people also use horse-drawn vehicles to carry heavy loads. It can be seen that the structure of today's stagecoach and the chariot of the past should also be similar.

古文：凡骡车之制有四轮者，有双轮者，其上承载支架，皆从轴上穿斗而起。
现代文：骡车的样式有四个轮子的，也有双轮的，车上面的承载支架都是从轴那里连接上去的。
English: There are four-wheeled and two-wheeled models of forklift trucks, and the bearing brackets on the top of the truck are connected from the shaft.

古文：四轮者前后各横轴一根，轴上短柱起架直梁，梁上载箱。
现代文：四轮的骡车，前两轮和后两轮各有一根横轴，在轴上竖立的短柱上面架着纵梁，这些纵梁又承载着车厢。
English: A four-wheeled cart, the first two wheels and the last two wheels each have a horizontal axle, and on the short columns erected on the axle there are longitudinal beams, and these longitudinal beams carry the carriages.

古文：马止脱驾之时，其上平整，如居屋安稳之象。
现代文：当停马脱驾时，车厢平正，就像坐在房子里那样安稳。
English: When the horse is out of the carriage, the carriage is flat, just like sitting in a house.

古文：若两轮者驾马行时，马曳其前则箱地平正，脱马之时则以短木从地支撑而住，不然则欹卸也。
现代文：两轮的骡车，行车时马在前头拉，车厢平正；而停马脱驾时，则用短木向前抵住地面来支撑，否则车就会向前倾倒。
English: A two-wheeled cart, when driving, the horse pulls at the front, the carriage is flat; and when the horse is stopped, it is supported by a short log against the ground, otherwise the car will fall forward.

古文：凡车轮一曰辕。
现代文：马车的车轮叫做辕。
English: The wheels of a carriage are called cogs.

古文：其大车中毂长一尺五寸，所谓外受辐、中贯轴者。
现代文：车轮是由轴承、辐条、内缘与轮圈四个部分组成的：大车中心装轴的圆木周长约一尺五寸，叫做毂，这是中穿车轴外接辐条的部件。
English: A wheel is composed of four parts: the bearing, the spoke, the inner rim and the rim. The log around which the axle is mounted in the center of a large vehicle has a circumference of about one foot and five inches, and is called the hub. This is the part that pierces the outer spoke of the axle in the middle.

古文：辐计三十片，其内插毂，其外接辅。
现代文：辐条共有三十片，它的内端连接毂，外端连接轮的内缘。
English: There were thirty spokes in all, the inner end connecting the yoke and the outer end connecting the inner rim of the wheel.

古文：车轮之中内集轮外接辋，圆转一圈者是曰辅也。
现代文：由于它紧顶住轮圈，也是圆形的，因此也叫做内缘。
English: It is also called the inner rim because it is round and holds the rim tightly.

古文：辋际尽头则曰轮辕也。
现代文：辋外边就是整个轮的最外周，所以叫做轮辕。
English: The outer rim is the outermost circumference of the entire wheel, so it is called the rim.

古文：凡大车脱时则诸物星散收藏。
现代文：大车收车时，一般都把几个部件拆卸下来进行收藏。
English: When a large vehicle is collected, several parts are usually removed for collection.

古文：驾则先上两轴，然后以次间架。
现代文：要用车时先装两轴，然后依次装车架、车厢。
English: If you want to use the car, install the two axles first, and then install the frame and the car in turn.

古文：凡轼、衡、轸、轭皆从轴上受基也。
现代文：因为轼、衡、轸、轭等部件都是承载在轴上的。
English: Because the roller, balance, roller, roller and other components are all carried on the shaft.

古文：凡四轮大车量可载五十石，骡马多者或十二挂或十挂，少亦八挂。
现代文：四轮的大马车，运载量为五十石，所用的骡马，多的有十二匹或者十匹，少的也有八匹。
English: A large four-wheeled carriage, with a carrying capacity of fifty stone, used horses, most of which were twelve or ten, and some were eight.

古文：执鞭掌御者居箱之中，立足高处。
现代文：驾车人站在车厢中间的高处掌鞭驾车。
English: The driver stands high in the middle of the carriage and takes the reins.

古文：前马分为两班，纠黄麻为长索分系马项，后套总结收入衡内两旁。
现代文：车前的马分为前后两排。用黄麻拧成长绳，分别系住马脖子，收拢成两束，并穿过车前中部横木而进入厢内左右两边。
English: The horses in front of the car are divided into two rows, front and back. Use jute to twist the long rope, tie the horse's neck separately, close it into two bundles, and pass through the middle of the front crossbar to enter the left and right sides of the car.

古文：掌御者手执长鞭，鞭以麻为绳，长七尺许，竿身亦相等，察视不力者鞭及其身。
现代文：驾车人手执的长鞭是用麻绳做的，约七尺长，竿也有七尺长。看到有不卖力气的马，就挥鞭打到它身上。
English: The driver wields a long whip made of hemp rope, about seven feet long, and the rod is also seven feet long. When he sees a horse that is not working hard, he whips it.

古文：箱内用二人踹绳，须识马性与索性者为之。马行太紧则急起踹绳，否则翻车之祸从此起也。
现代文：车厢内由两个识马性和会掌绳子的人负责踩绳。如果马跑得太快，就要立即踩住缰绳，否则可能发生翻车事故。
English: Two people in the carriage who know horses and how to handle ropes are responsible for stepping on the ropes. If the horse runs too fast, it is necessary to step on the reins immediately, otherwise a rollover accident may occur.

古文：凡车行时遇前途行人应避者，则掌御者急以声呼，则群马皆止。
现代文：车在行进时，如果前面遇到行人要停车让路，驾车人立即发出吆喝声，马就会停下来。
English: When the car is moving, if there is a pedestrian in front who wants to stop and give way, the driver will immediately shout, and the horse will stop.

古文：凡马索总系透衡入箱处，皆以牛皮束缚，《诗经》所谓 胁驱 是也。
现代文：马缰绳收拢成束并透过衡入车厢，都用牛皮束缚，这就是《诗经》中所说的 胁驱 。
English: The horse reins are gathered into bundles and weighed into the carriage, all bound with cowhide, which is what the "Song of Songs" calls "coercion."

古文：凡大车饲马不入肆舍，车上载有柳盘，解索而野食之。
现代文：大车在中途喂马时，不必将马牵入马厩里，车上载有柳条盘，解索后让马就地进食。
English: When the cart is feeding the horses halfway, there is no need to drag the horses into the stables. The cart carries wicker trays, and the horses are allowed to eat on the spot after the rope is untied.

古文：乘车人上下皆缘小梯。
现代文：乘车的人上下车都要经由小梯。
English: Passengers get on and off the train via a small staircase.

古文：凡过桥梁中高边下者，则十马之中择一最强力者系于车后。
现代文：凡是经过坡度比较大的桥梁时，就要在十匹马之中选出最壮的一匹，系在车的后面。
English: Whenever you pass a bridge with a relatively large slope, you must choose the strongest horse among ten horses and tie it to the back of the car.

古文：当其下坂，则九马从前缓曳，一马从后竭力抓住，以杀其驰趋之势，不然则险道也。
现代文：下坡时，前面九匹马缓慢地拉，后面一匹马拼命把车拖住，以减缓车速，不然就会有危险了。
English: When going downhill, the front nine horses slowly pull the cart, and the back one horse desperately drags the car to slow down the speed, otherwise it will be dangerous.

古文：凡大车行程，遇河亦止，遇山亦止，遇曲径小道亦止。徐、兖、汴梁之交或达三百里者，无水之国所以济舟楫之穷也。
现代文：大车遇到河流、山岭和曲径小道都过不了，徐州、兖州和河南汴梁一带，方圆三百里很少有河流和湖泊，马车正好用于弥补水运的不足。
English: When the carriage encounters rivers, mountains and winding paths, it cannot pass. In the areas of Xuzhou, Zhangzhou and Qiliang in Henan Province, there are very few rivers and lakes within a radius of three hundred miles. The carriage is just used to make up for the lack of water transportation.

古文：凡车质惟先择长者为轴，短者为毂，其木以槐、枣、檀、榆为上。
现代文：造车的木料，先要选用长的做车轴，短的做毂，以槐木、枣木、檀木和榆木为上等材料。
English: The wood used to build a car must first be selected to make long axles and short axles, with birch, jujube, sandalwood and beech as the best materials.

古文：檀质太久劳则发烧，有慎用者合抱枣、槐，其至美也。
现代文：但是黄檀木摩擦久了会发热，因而不太适宜做这些东西，有些细心的人就选用两手才能合抱的枣木或者槐木来做，那当然是最好不过了。
English: However, yellow sandalwood will heat up after being rubbed for a long time, so it is not very suitable for making these things. Some careful people choose to use jujube or eucalyptus, which can be held with both hands. That is of course the best.

古文：其余轸、衡、箱、轭则诸木可为耳。
现代文：轸、衡、车厢及轭等其他部件，则是无论什么木都可以用。
English: Other parts such as axles, scales, carriages and rollers can be made of any kind of wood.

古文：此外，牛车以载刍粮，最盛晋地。
现代文：此外，牛车装载草料的以山西为最多。
English: In addition, Shanxi has the largest number of carts loaded with grass.

古文：路逢隘道则牛颈系巨铃，名曰报君知，犹之骡车群马尽系铃声也。
现代文：到了路窄的地方，就在牛颈上系个大铃，名叫 报君知 ，正如一般骡马车的牲口也都系上铃铛一样。
English: When they came to a narrow place, they tied a large bell around the cow's neck, called "Hakuunzhi," just as the cattle of ordinary horse-drawn carriages are also tied with bells.

古文：又北方独辕车，人推其后，驴曳其前，行人不耐骑坐者，则雇觅之。
现代文：还有北方的独辕车，驴子在前面拉，人在后面推，不能持久骑坐牲口的旅客常常租用这种车。
English: There is also the northern unicycle, which is pulled by a donkey in the front and pushed by a person in the back, and is often rented by travelers who cannot ride the animal for a long time.

古文：鞠席其上以蔽风日。人必两旁对坐，否则欹倒。
现代文：车的座位上有拱形席顶，可以挡风和遮阳，旅客一定要两边对坐，不然车子就会倾倒。
English: The seats of the car have an arched seat top, which can block the wind and shade. Passengers must sit on both sides, otherwise the car will tip over.

古文：此车北上长安、济宁径达帝京。
现代文：这种车子，北上至陕西的西安和山东的济宁，还可以直达北京。
English: This kind of car can go north to Xi'an in Shaanxi and Jining in Shandong, and can also go straight to Beijing.

古文：不载人者，载货约重四五石而止。
现代文：不载人时，载货最多的是四五石。
English: When not carrying people, the largest load is four or five stone.

古文：其驾牛为轿车者，独盛中州。
现代文：还有一种用牛拉的轿车，以河南省一带最多。
English: There is also a kind of ox-drawn car, the largest in Henan Province.

古文：两旁双轮，中穿一轴，其分寸平如水。横架短衡列轿其上，人可安坐，脱驾不欹。
现代文：两旁有双轮，中间穿过一条横轴，这条轴装得非常平，再架起几根短横木，轿就安置在上面，人坐在轿中很安稳，牛停下来而脱驾时车也不会倾倒。
English: There are double wheels on both sides, and a cross axle runs through the middle. This axle is mounted very flat, and then a few short beams are set up, and the car is placed on top. The person sitting in the car is very stable, and the car will not tip over when the cow stops and gets out of the car.

古文：其南方独轮推车，则一人之力是视。容载两石，遇坎即止，最远者止达百里而已。
现代文：至于南方的独轮推车，就只能靠一个人推，这种车可以载重两石，遇到坎坷不平的路就过不去，最远也只能走一百里。
English: As for the one-wheeled cart in the south, it can only be pushed by one person. This kind of car can carry two stones. If it encounters a bumpy road, it cannot pass, and it can only go a hundred miles at the farthest.

古文：其余难以枚述。
现代文：其余的各种车辆在此难以一一列举。
English: It would be difficult to list all the other vehicles here.

古文：但生于南方者不见大车，老于北方者不见巨舰，故粗载之。
现代文：只是考虑到南方人没有见过大骡车，而北方人又没有见过大船只，因此在这里粗略介绍一下。
English: However, considering the fact that people in the south have never seen a large carriage, and people in the north have never seen a large ship, I would like to briefly introduce them here.

