古文：张果翟乾祐凡八兄
现代文：张果翟乾祐凡八兄
English: Zhang Guozhen and Qian Yu, the eight brothers

古文：张果
现代文：张果
English: Zhang Guo

古文：张果者，隐于恒州条山，常往来汾晋间。
现代文：张果，隐居在恒州条山，经常往来于汾、晋之间。
English: Zhang Guo, who lives in seclusion in Jiaoshan, Hengzhou, often travels between Handan and Jin.

古文：时人传有长年秘术。
现代文：当时的人传说他有长寿的秘术。
English: People at the time said he had the secret to a long life.

古文：耆老云： 为儿童时见之，自言数百岁矣。 
现代文：老年人讲： 我儿童时期见过他，他说自己已经几百岁了。 
English: The old man said, "I met him when I was a child, and he said he was hundreds of years old.

古文：唐太宗、高宗累征之，不起。
现代文：唐太宗、唐高宗多次征召他，他都不答应。
English: Emperor Taizong of Tang and Emperor Gaozong of Tang repeatedly conscripted him, but he refused.

古文：则天召之出山，佯死于妒女庙前。
现代文：武则天叫他出山，他装死在妒女庙前。
English: Wu Zetian called him out of the mountain, and he pretended to be dead in front of the Jealousy Temple.

古文：时方盛热，须臾臭烂生虫。
现代文：当时正是大热天，尸体不一会儿便臭烂生蛆。
English: It was a hot day at the time, and the corpse soon turned rancid.

古文：闻于则天，信其死矣。
现代文：武则天听说之后，相信他死了。
English: After hearing this, Wu Zetian believed him to be dead.

古文：后有人于恒州山中复见之。
现代文：后来有人在恒州山中又见到了他。
English: Later, someone saw him again in the mountains of Hengzhou.

古文：果常乘一白驴，日行数万里，休则重叠之，其厚如纸，置于巾箱中；乘则以水噀之，还成驴矣。
现代文：张果经常骑着一头白驴，一天走几万里。休息的时候就把驴叠起来，就像纸那么厚，放到衣箱中。要骑的时候就用水喷一下，它就又变成活驴了。
English: Zhang Guo often rides a white donkey, walking tens of thousands of miles a day. When he rests, he stacks the donkey, which is as thick as paper, and puts it in a wardrobe. When he wants to ride, he sprays it with water, and it turns into a live donkey again.

古文：开元二十三年，玄宗遣通事舍人裴晤，驰驿于恒州迎之。果对晤气绝而死。
现代文：开元二十三年，唐玄宗派通事舍人裴晤骑马到恒州迎接张果，张果在裴晤面前气绝而死。
English: In the 23rd year of the Heian period, Pei Xi, a leading member of the Tang Xuan sect, rode to Hengzhou to meet Zhang Guo. Zhang Guo died of exhaustion in front of Pei Xi.

古文：晤乃焚香启请，宣天子求道之意。
现代文：裴晤就烧香请他起来，向他述说天子求道的诚意。
English: Pei then burned incense and invited him to get up and told him about the sincerity of the Son of Heaven in seeking the way.

古文：俄顷渐苏。
现代文：不多时他渐渐醒了。
English: After a while, he gradually woke up.

古文：晤不敢逼，驰还奏之。
现代文：裴晤不敢强迫他，驰马回来向皇上报告。
English: Pei Xi did not dare to force him, and galloped back to report to the emperor.

古文：乃命中书舍人徐峤，赍玺书迎之。
现代文：皇上就让中书舍人徐峤带着皇帝盖有玉玺图章的信去迎接他。
English: The emperor asked Xu Xi, a scholar of Chinese calligraphy, to greet him with a letter from the emperor stamped with a jade seal.

古文：果随峤到东都，于集贤院安置。肩舆入宫，备加礼敬。
现代文：张果跟着徐峤来到东都。徐峤把他安置在集贤院，用轿子把他抬进宫中，对他非常尊敬。
English: Zhang Guo followed Xu Yao to Dongdu. Xu Yao placed him in Jixian Temple and carried him into the palace in a palanquin. He held him in high esteem.

古文：玄宗因从容谓曰： 先生得道者也，何齿发之衰耶？ 
现代文：唐玄宗于是从容地对他说： 先生是成仙得道的人，为什么牙齿头发如此衰老呢？ 
English: Tang Xuan Zong then calmly said to him, "You are a person who has attained immortality. Why are your teeth and hair so old?

古文：果曰： 衰朽之岁，无道术可凭，故使之然，良足耻也；今若尽除，不犹愈乎。 
现代文：张果说： 正是衰朽的年岁，没什么道术可以依靠，所以才这样。这是很难看的。现在如果把它全去掉，不是更难看吗？ 
English: Zhang Guo said, "It is precisely the decrepit age, and there is no Taoism to rely on, that is why it is like this. It is ugly. Now if it is all removed, isn't it even more ugly?"

古文：因于御前拔去鬓发，击落牙齿，流血溢口。
现代文：于是他在皇帝面前拔掉鬓发，打落牙齿，血从口中流出来。
English: In front of the emperor, he pulled out his hair, knocked out his teeth, and blood flowed from his mouth.

古文：玄宗甚惊，谓曰： 先生休舍，少选晤语。 
现代文：唐玄宗很吃惊，对他说： 先生先回屋休息休息，一会儿咱们再谈。 
English: Tang Xuan Zong was very surprised and said to him, "Sir, first go back to your room and rest. We'll talk later."

古文：俄顷召之。青鬓皓齿，愈于壮年。
现代文：过了一会儿召见他，他居然一头黑发，满口白牙，比壮年人还年轻。
English: After a while, he was summoned, and he actually had black hair, a mouth full of white teeth, and was younger than a man of his age.

古文：一日，秘书监王迥质、太常少卿萧华尝同造焉。
现代文：有一天，秘书监王迥质、太常少卿萧华，曾经同时造访他。
English: One day, the secretary of the Prince Regent, Xiao Hua, visited him at the same time.

古文：时玄宗欲令尚主，果未知之也，忽笑谓二人曰： 娶妇得公主，甚可畏也。 
现代文：当时唐玄宗想让他娶公主，他还不知道。他忽然笑着对二人说： 娶公主为妻，很可怕呀！ 
English: At that time, Tang Xuan Zong wanted him to marry the princess, but he didn't know it yet. He suddenly smiled and said to the two of them: "It's terrible to marry a princess!"

古文：迥质与华相顾，未谕其言。
现代文：王迥质和萧华你看我，我看你，不明白他的话是什么意思。
English: Wang Yuxuan and Xiao Hua, look at me, I'm looking at you, don't understand what he means.

古文：俄顷有中使至，谓果曰： 上以玉真公主早岁好道，欲降于先生。 
现代文：不一会儿，有一位中使来到，对张果说： 皇上因为玉真公主从小喜欢道教，想要把她嫁给你。 
English: Soon after, a middle-ranking envoy arrived and said to Zhang Guo: "Your Majesty, because Princess Yuzhen has loved Taoism since childhood, wants to marry her to you.

古文：果大笑，竟不承诏。
现代文：张果大笑，到底没有接受诏令。
English: Zhang Guo laughed loudly and did not accept the edict after all.

古文：二人方悟向来之言。
现代文：王迥质和萧华二人才明白他刚才那话的意思。
English: Only Wang Yuxuan and Xiao Hua understood the meaning of his words.

古文：是时公卿多往候谒。或问以方外之事，皆诡对之。每云： 余是尧时丙子年人。 
现代文：这时候许多公卿都来拜访他，有的人向他打听世外的事，他总是诡诈地回答，常常说： 我是尧帝时丙子年生的人。
English: At this time, many nobles came to visit him, and some people asked him about the outside world. He always answered deceitfully, often saying, "I am a person who was born in the third year of Emperor Xizong's reign."

古文：时莫能测也。
现代文：当时人无法推测。 
English: At the time, it was impossible to say.

古文：又云： 尧时为侍中。 
现代文：又说： 尧帝时我是侍中。 
English: He also said, "I was a chamberlain when Emperor Shō was alive.

古文：善于胎息，累日不食，食时但进美酒及三黄丸。
现代文：张果善长胎息术，可以很久不吃东西。吃饭的时候只喝美酒，服三黄丸。
English: Zhang Guosen is a long-term breather, and can not eat for a long time. When eating, he only drinks wine and takes three yellow pills.

古文：玄宗留之内殿，赐之酒。辞以山臣饮不过二升。
现代文：唐玄宗把他留在内殿，赐他美酒，他推辞说自己连二升也喝不了。
English: Emperor Xuanzong kept him in the inner hall and gave him fine wine, but he refused, saying that he could not drink even two liters.

古文：有一弟子，饮可一斗。
现代文：他有一个弟子，能喝一斗。
English: He has a disciple who can drink a barrel of wine.

古文：玄宗闻之喜，令召之。
现代文：唐玄宗听说之后很高兴，让人把这个弟子叫来。
English: After hearing this, Tang Xuan Zong was very happy and asked someone to call this disciple.

古文：俄一小道士，自殿檐飞下，年可十六七，美姿容，旨趣雅淡。
现代文：不大一会儿，一个小道士从大殿的屋檐上飞下来，年纪有十六七岁，姿容美丽，情致雅淡，上前来拜谒皇上。
English: Not long after, a little Taoist flew down from the eaves of the main hall. He was sixteen or seventeen years old, had a beautiful appearance, and was very elegant. He came to pay his respects to the emperor.

古文：谒见上，言词清爽，礼貌臻备。玄宗命坐。果曰： 弟子常侍立于侧，未宜赐坐。 
现代文：小道士言词清爽，很有礼貌。唐玄宗让他坐，张果说： 我这弟子常常站在我的身边，不应该赐他坐位。 
English: Tang Xuan Zong let him sit down, and Zhang Guo said, "This disciple of mine often stands by my side. I should not give him a seat."

古文：玄宗目之愈喜，遂赐之酒，饮及一斗，不辞。
现代文：唐玄宗看过之后，更加喜欢这位小道士，就赐酒给他。
English: After Tang Xuan Zong read it, he liked this little Taoist even more, and gave him wine.

古文：果辞曰： 不可更赐，过度必有所失，致龙颜一笑耳。 
现代文：小道士喝够一斗也没有推辞，张果推辞说： 不能再赐了，喝多了一定会有过失的，那要让皇上见笑了。 
English: The little Taoist did not refuse to drink enough for one fight. Zhang Guo refused and said, "I can't give you any more. If you drink too much, you will surely make a mistake. That will make the emperor laugh."

古文：玄宗又逼赐之。酒忽从顶涌出，冠子落地，化为一榼。
现代文：唐玄宗又硬逼小道士喝，酒忽然从小道士的头顶上涌出来，帽子掉到地上，变成了一个酒盒子盖儿。
English: Tang Xuan Zong forced the little Taoist to drink again, the wine suddenly gushed out from the top of the little Taoist's head, the hat fell to the ground and turned into a wine box lid.

古文：玄宗及嫔御皆惊笑，视之，已失道士矣。但见一金榼在地，覆之，榼盛一斗。
现代文：唐玄宗和嫔妃侍者都吃惊、大笑。一看，小道士已经不见了，只见一个金色酒盒子扣在地上。这个盒子正好是盛一斗的盒子。
English: Tang Xuan Zong and Gongfei waiter were surprised and laughed loudly. At a glance, the little Taoist had disappeared, only to see a golden wine box clamped to the ground. This box is just a bucket of boxes.

古文：验之，乃集贤院中榼也。累试仙术，不可穷纪。
现代文：唐玄宗多次试验张果的仙术，不能全部记下来。
English: Emperor Xuanzong of Tang Dynasty tested Zhang Guo's magic many times, and it is impossible to record all of them.

古文：有师夜光者善视鬼，玄宗常召果坐于前，而敕夜光视之。
现代文：有一位叫夜光的法师善于查看鬼神。唐玄宗曾经把张果找来，让张果坐在自己面前，而让夜光法师看着张果。
English: There was a sorcerer named Yaguang who was good at checking out ghosts and gods. Tang Xuan Zong once brought Zhang Guo to him and had him sit in front of him while Yaguang watched Zhang Guo.

古文：夜光至御前奏曰： 不知张果安在乎，愿视察也。 
现代文：夜光来到唐玄宗面前奏道： 不知张果现在在哪，我愿意去视察一番。 
English: Yaguang came to Tang Xuan Zong and said, "I don't know where Zhang Guo is right now, but I'd like to go and have a look."

古文：而果在御前久矣，夜光年不能见。
现代文：其实张果坐在皇帝面前好长时间了，夜光终于不能看见他。
English: In fact, Zhang Guo had been sitting in front of the emperor for a long time, and the night light finally couldn't see him.

古文：又有邢和璞者，有算术。
现代文：另外，有一个叫邢和璞的人，他有算命的法术。
English: In addition, there is a man named Zou and Zou, who has a fortune-telling spell.

古文：每视人，则布筹于前。未几，已能详其名氏、穷远、善恶、夭寿。
现代文：他每次给人算命，就把一些竹签摆放在面前，不一会儿，已经能详细地说出那人的姓名是什么，是穷困还是显达，是好还是坏，是短命还是长寿。
English: Every time he tells someone's fortune, he puts some bamboo sticks in front of him, and after a while, he can already tell in detail what the person's name is, whether he is poor or rich, good or bad, short-lived or long-lived.

古文：前后所计算千数，未常不析其苛细。
现代文：他前后给一千多人算命，没有不分析得很详细，唐玄宗感到惊奇已经好久了。
English: He has been telling the fortunes of more than a thousand people and analyzing them in great detail. Tang Xuan Zong has been surprised for a long time.

古文：玄宗奇之久矣，及命算果，则运筹移时，意竭神沮，终不能定其甲子。
现代文：等到唐玄宗让他给张果算命，却摆弄了老半天竹签，意料枯竭，神色沮丧，到底不能确定张果的年龄。
English: When Tang Xuan Zong asked him to tell Zhang Guo's fortune, he fiddled with a bamboo stick for a long time. Exhausted and depressed, he couldn't be sure of Zhang Guo's age.

古文：玄宗谓中贵人高力士曰： 我闻神仙之人，寒燠不能瘵其体，外物不能浼其中。
现代文：唐玄宗对中贵人高力士说： 我听说成了神仙的人，寒冷和炎热都不能使他的身体生病，外物不污染他的内心。
English: Tang Xuan Zong said to the middle-ranking nobleman, Gao Lixuan: I have heard that a person who has become a immortal, neither cold nor heat can make his body sick, and external things do not pollute his heart.

古文：今张果善算者莫得究其年，视鬼者莫得见其状，神仙倏忽，岂非真者耶。
现代文：现在的张果，善算的人算不出他的年龄，善视鬼神的看不到他的形貌。神仙的行动是极迅速的，莫非他就是真正的神仙吧？
English: Now Zhang Guo, a person who is good at calculating cannot calculate his age, and a person who is good at seeing ghosts and gods cannot see his appearance. The action of the immortal is extremely rapid, is he the real immortal?

古文：然常闻谨斟饮之者死，若非仙人，必败其质，可试以饮之。 
现代文：然而我听说喝了谨斟酒的人会死。如果他不是神仙，喝了这酒就一定会败坏了他的身体。可以让他喝这酒试试。 
English: However, I've heard that if you drink it carefully, you'll die. If he's not a god, drinking this wine will definitely ruin his body. Let him try this wine.

古文：会天大雪，寒甚，玄宗命进谨斟赐果。
现代文：赶上天下大雪，冷得很厉害，唐玄宗就让人把谨斟酒拿进来赐给张果。
English: When the world was hit by heavy snow and it was very cold, Emperor Tang Xuanzong had people bring in carefully-poured wine and give it to Zhang Guo.

古文：果遂举饮，尽三卮，醺然有醉色，顾谓左右曰： 此酒非佳味也。 
现代文：张果举杯就喝。喝了三杯之后，醉醺醺地看着左右说： 这酒不是好味！ 
English: Zhang Guo raised his glass and drank. After drinking three glasses, he drunkenly looked from side to side and said, "This wine is not good!

古文：即偃而寝，食顷方寤。
现代文：于是他就倒在地上睡了。
English: And he fell on the ground and slept.

古文：忽览镜视其齿，皆斑然焦黑。
现代文：一顿饭的时间他才醒，忽然拿起镜子看他的牙齿。他的牙齿全都变得斑驳焦黑。
English: He woke up one meal time and suddenly picked up a mirror to look at his teeth. His teeth were all mottled and charred black.

古文：遽命侍童取铁如意，击其齿尽，随收于衣带中，徐解衣，出药一贴，色微红光莹，果以傅诸齿穴中，已而又寝，久之忽寤，再引镜自视，其齿已生矣，其坚然光白，愈于前也。
现代文：他急忙让侍童取来铁如意，把牙齿打掉，收放到衣袋里。
English: He hurriedly asked the attendant to fetch the iron, knocked out the tooth, and put it in his pocket.

古文：玄宗方信其灵异，谓力士曰： 得非真仙乎。 
现代文：唐玄宗这才相信他的神奇，对高力士说： 大概他是真正的神仙吧？ 
English: It was only then that Tang Xuan Zong believed in his magic and said to Gao Lixi, "He must be a real immortal, right?"

古文：遂下诏曰： 恒州张果先生，游方之外者也，迹先高尚，心入窅冥。久混光尘，应召赵阙。
现代文：于是唐玄宗下诏书说： 恒州张果先生，是云游世外的仙人。他的形迹先进高尚，他的心进入深远的冥冥之中，长久地把光荣和尘浊同样看待，应召进宫来。
English: Therefore, Emperor Xuanzong of the Tang Dynasty issued an edict saying: Mr. Zhang Guorong of Hengzhou is a celestial being who has traveled around the world. His appearance is advanced and noble, his heart has entered the profound darkness, he has long regarded glory and dust as the same, and he has been summoned to the palace.

古文：莫知甲子之数，且谓羲皇上人。
现代文：却不知道他有多大岁数，自己说是在羲皇以前的人。
English: However, he did not know how old he was and said that he was a person before Emperor Qianlong.

古文：问以道枢，尽会宗极。
现代文：向他请教道术，他的道术完全达到极高深完满的程度。
English: He asked him to teach him Daoism, and his Daoism completely reached a very high level of perfection.

古文：今则将行朝礼，爰申宠命，可授银青光禄大夫，仍赐号通玄先生。 
现代文：现在就要举行朝礼，于是申明这加恩特赐的任命，授他 银青光禄大夫 之职。还赐号 通玄先生 。 
English: Now the imperial court ceremony was about to take place, so he confirmed the special appointment bestowed by the emperor and gave him the post of doctor of silver and light. He also gave him the title of Mr. Tong Xuan.

古文：未几，玄宗狩于咸阳，获一大鹿，稍异常者。
现代文：不久，唐玄宗到咸阳打猎，打到一头大鹿。
English: Soon after, Tang Xuan Zong went hunting in Xianyang and killed a big deer.

古文：庖人方馔，果见之曰： 此仙鹿也，已满千岁。
现代文：这头鹿与平常的鹿略有不同。厨师正要杀此鹿做菜，张果看见了，便说： 这是一头仙鹿，它已经活了一千多年。
English: The chef was about to kill the deer for cooking, when Zhang Guo saw it and said, "This is a fairy deer, it has lived for more than a thousand years."

古文：昔汉武元狩五年，臣曾侍从，畋于上林。
现代文：以前，汉武帝元狩五年的时候，我曾经跟从汉武帝在上林打猎，当时活捉了这头鹿。
English: In the past, when I was five years old, I used to go hunting in the forest with Emperor Hanwu. At that time, I caught this deer alive.

古文：时生获此鹿，既而放之。 玄宗曰： 鹿多矣，时迁代变，岂不为猎者所获乎？ 
现代文：然后又把它放了。 唐玄宗说： 鹿多了，时代又变换了，那头鹿难道不能被猎人打去？ 
English: Then he set it free again. Tang Xuan Zong said, "There are more deer and the times have changed. Can't that deer be killed by a hunter?"

古文：果曰： 武帝舍鹿之时，以铜牌志于左角下。 
现代文：张果说： 汉武帝放鹿的时候，把一块铜牌放在鹿的左角下为记号。
English: Zhang Guo said: When Emperor Hanwu released the deer, he put a bronze plate under the left corner of the deer as a mark.

古文：遂命验之，果获铜牌二寸许，但文字凋暗耳。
现代文：于是唐玄宗让检验那鹿，果然找到一块二寸长的铜牌，但文字已经残损了。
English: So Tang Xuan Zong had the deer examined and found a two-inch-long bronze plaque, but the writing was damaged.

古文：玄宗又谓果曰： 元狩是何甲子？
现代文：唐玄宗又对张果说： 元狩年是什么年？
English: Tang Xuan Zong also said to Zhang Guo: What year was the original hunting year?

古文：至此凡几年矣？ 
现代文：到现在有多少年了？ 
English: How many years has it been now?

古文：果曰： 是岁癸亥，武帝始开昆明池；今甲戌岁，八百五十二年矣。 
现代文：张果说： 那一年是癸亥年，汉武帝开始开凿昆明池。现在是甲戌年，已经八百五十二年了。 
English: Zhang Guo said: That year was the Year of the Boar, and Emperor Hanwu began to excavate the Kunming Pool. Now it is the Year of the Horse, and it has been eight hundred and fifty-two years.

古文：玄宗命太史氏校其长历，略无差焉。
现代文：唐玄宗让史官校对这段历史，一点没有差错。
English: Tang Xuan Zong let the historian proofread this period of history, and there was no mistake at all.

古文：玄宗愈奇之。
现代文：唐玄宗更加惊奇。
English: Tang Xuan Zong was even more surprised.

古文：时又有道士叶法善，亦多术。
现代文：当时又有一个叫叶法善的道士，也善道术。
English: At that time, there was also a Taoist named Ye Fa-Zen, who was also good at Taoism.

古文：玄宗问曰： 果何人耶？ 
现代文：唐玄宗问他道： 张果是什么人？ 
English: Tang Xuan Zong asked him, "Who is Zhang Guo?"

古文：答曰： 臣知之；然臣言讫即死，故不敢言。
现代文：他回答说： 我知道，但是我说完就得死，所以不敢说。
English: He replied, "I know, but I'm afraid to say it because I'll die if I say it."

古文：若陛下免冠跣足救，臣即得活。 
现代文：如果陛下能脱去帽子，光着脚走路去救我，我就能活。 
English: If His Majesty can take off his hat and walk barefoot to save me, I can live.

古文：玄宗许之。
现代文：唐玄宗答应了他。
English: Tang Xuan Zong agreed.

古文：法善曰： 此混沌初分白蝙蝠精。 
现代文：叶法善说： 张果是混沌初分时的一只白蝙蝠精。 
English: Ye Fazen said: Zhang Guo is a white bat spirit at the beginning of chaos.

古文：言讫，七窍流血，僵仆于地。
现代文：说完，他七窍流血，僵卧在地上。
English: When he finished, he was lying on the ground, bleeding from his head.

古文：玄宗遽诣果所，免冠跣足，自称其罪。
现代文：唐玄宗急忙跑到张果那里，脱去帽子和鞋子，自己说自己有罪。
English: Tang Xuan Zong hurriedly ran to Zhang Guo, took off his hat and shoes, and said that he was guilty.

古文：果徐曰： 此儿多口过，不谪之，恐败天地间事耳。 
现代文：张果慢慢地说： 这小子口不严，不惩罚他，恐怕他坏了天地间的大事呢！ 
English: Zhang Guo said slowly, "This boy is not strict and does not punish him. I'm afraid he has ruined a great matter between heaven and earth!"

古文：玄宗复哀请久之。果以水噀其面，法善即时复生。
现代文：唐玄宗又哀求了好久，张果用水喷了叶法善的脸，叶法善当时就活了过来。
English: Tang Xuan Zong also begged for a long time. Zhang Guo sprayed Ye Fa Zhen's face with water, and Ye Fa Zhen came back to life.

古文：其后果陈老病，乞归恒州。
现代文：这以后，张果多次说自己又老又病，请求回恒州去。
English: After that, Zhang Guo repeatedly said that he was old and sick and asked to go back to Hengzhou.

古文：诏给驿送到恒州。
现代文：唐玄宗派人把他送到恒州。
English: Tang Xuan sect sent him to Hengzhou.

古文：天宝初，玄宗又遣徵召。果闻之，忽卒。
现代文：天宝年初，唐玄宗又派人征召张果，张果听了之后，忽然死去。
English: At the beginning of the Tianbao year, Tang Xuan Zong sent someone to recruit Zhang Guo. After listening, Zhang Guo suddenly died.

古文：弟子葬之。
现代文：弟子们把他埋葬了。
English: His disciples buried him.

古文：后发棺，空棺而已。
现代文：后来打开棺材一看，是一口空棺罢了。
English: Later, when the coffin was opened, it was nothing but an empty coffin.

古文：翟乾祐
现代文：翟乾祐
English: 乾祐

古文：翟乾祐，云安人也。
现代文：翟乾祐是云安人。
English: Yu Qianyu is from Yunnan.

古文：庞眉广颡，巨目方颐，身长六尺，手大尺余，每揖人，手过胸前。
现代文：他眉毛重额头宽，眼睛大下巴方，身高六尺，手长超过一尺，每次向人作揖手都超过胸前。
English: His eyebrows are heavy and his forehead is wide, his eyes are large and square-jawed, he is six feet tall, his hands are more than a foot long, and every time he shoves someone, his hands go above his chest.

古文：常于黄鹤山师事来天师，尽得其道。
现代文：他曾经在黄鹤山拜来天师为师，完全学到了来天师的道术。
English: He was once a disciple of a heavenly teacher in Huanghe Mountain, and he completely learned the Taoism of the heavenly teacher.

古文：能行气丹篆，陆制虎豹，水伏蛟龙，卧常虚枕。
现代文：他会呼吸吐纳之法，能书写箓符，在陆地上能治服虎豹；在水里边能治服蛟龙。他躺卧的时候，往往头不靠在枕头上。
English: He can breathe in and out, can write Chinese characters, can subdue tigers and leopards on land, and can subdue dragons in the water. When he lies down, he often does not rest his head on the pillow.

古文：往往言将来之事，言无不验。
现代文：他常常谈论将来的事情，说的没有不应验的。
English: He often talked about the future, and there was nothing untrue in what he said.

古文：因入夔州市，谓人曰： 今夜有八人过此，宜善待之。 
现代文：他来到夔州市上，对人说： 今天夜里有八人经过这里，应该很好地对待他们。 
English: He came to the city of Zhangzhou and said to the people, "There are eight people passing by here tonight, you should treat them well.

古文：是夕火烧百余家。
现代文：这天夜里火烧了一百多家。
English: More than a hundred cows were set on fire that night.

古文：晓之者云： 八人乃火字也。 
现代文：聪明的人说：  八人 就是个 火 字。 
English: Clever people say: Eight is a lucky number.

古文：每入山，群虎随之。
现代文：他每次入山，都有一群虎跟着他。
English: Every time he goes into the mountains, a group of tigers follows him.

古文：曾于江上与十许人玩月。或问曰： 月中竟何所有？ 
现代文：他曾经在江上和十几个人一起赏月，有人问道： 月亮里到底有什么呢？ 
English: He once watched the moon on the river with more than a dozen people. Someone asked: What exactly is in the moon?

古文：乾祐笑曰： 可随我手看之。 
现代文：翟乾祐笑道： 随着我的手看看！ 
English: Sukeniyu laughed and said, "Look at my hands!"

古文：乃见月规半天，琼楼金阙满焉。
现代文：于是人们便看到月亮的圆形有半个天那么大，那上面全是琼楼玉阁，好久才隐去。
English: As a result, people saw that the round shape of the moon was as big as half of the sky, and above it was all Qionglou Jade Pagoda. It took a long time for it to disappear.

古文：良久乃隐。云安井自大江溯别派，凡三十里。
现代文：云安井是个邑镇，坐落在长江的一个支流逆水而上三十里的地方。
English: Yun'anjing is a township town, located in a tributary of the Yangtze River, thirty miles upstream.

古文：近井十五里，澄清如镜，舟楫无虞。
现代文：离井十五里这一段，江水像镜子一样清澈，行船的人不必担心触到暗礁。
English: Fifteen miles from the well, the river water is as clear as a mirror. Boaters do not have to worry about touching the reef.

古文：近江十五里，皆滩石险恶，难于沿溯。
现代文：但是离江十五里的这一段，全都是险恶的滩石，很难沿这段小路上行。
English: But this section, fifteen miles from the river, is all treacherous beach stones, and it is difficult to follow this section of the path.

古文：乾祐念商旅之劳，于汉城山上，结坛考召，追命群龙，凡一十四处，皆化为老人，应召而至。
现代文：翟乾祐考虑到商旅的劳苦，就在汉城的山上，筑了一个法坛，作法召唤，让群龙前来。一共十四个地方的龙，都变成老人来到这里。
English: Taking into account the hardships of business travel, Gong Kian Yu built a Dharma altar on the mountain of Seoul, and summoned the dragons to come. A total of fourteen local dragons have become old people and come here.

古文：乾祐谕以滩波之险，害物劳人，使皆平之。
现代文：翟乾祐就把滩石如何艰险，如何让人劳苦对他们说明，让他们全给弄平坦。
English: Yu Qianyu explained to them how difficult the beach stones were, and how hard it was to get people to work, so that they would all be flattened.

古文：一夕之间，风雷震击，一十四里，尽为平潭矣。唯一滩仍旧，龙亦不至。
现代文：一夜之间，风雷大作，有十四里水路全都变成平静的潭水，只有一个险滩没变，龙也没到。
English: Overnight, the wind and thunder caused havoc. Fourteen miles of waterways all turned into a calm pool of water. Only one perilous beach remained unchanged, and the dragon did not arrive.

古文：乾祐复严敕神吏追之。
现代文：翟乾祐又严厉地让神吏去追查。
English: Yu Qianyu also sternly ordered the clergy to investigate.

古文：又三日，有一女子至焉。
现代文：又过了三天，来了一位女子。
English: After another three days, a woman arrived.

古文：因责其不伏应召之意。
现代文：翟乾祐就责备她的不应召。
English: Yu Qianyu scolded her for not responding to the summons.

古文：女子曰： 某所以不来者，欲助天师广济物之功耳；且富商大贾，力皆有余，而佣力负运者，力皆不足。
现代文：女子说： 我之所以不来，是想要帮助天师您使您济物的功劳更大些而已。那些大富商，个个都财力有余。而那些出卖劳力搬运东西的人，财力都不足。
English: The woman said, "The reason why I am not coming is that I want to help you, the heavenly teacher, to make your merit in money and goods even greater. Those rich merchants all have more than enough money, but those who sell their labor to carry things do not have enough money.

古文：云安之贫民，自江口负财货至近井潭，以给衣食者众矣。
现代文：云安的贫民，从江口肩负着东西运到井潭，以此赚钱维持生活的人很多。
English: There are many poor people in Yun'an who carry things on their shoulders from Jiangkou to Jingtan to earn money to sustain their lives.

古文：今若轻舟利涉，平江无虞，即邑之贫民，无佣负之所，绝衣食之路，所困者多矣。
现代文：现在如果有利于轻舟渡过。平江没有任何危险，那么这里的贫民就没有地方帮工赚钱，就断了他们的衣食之路，发生困难的就多了。
English: Now, if it is advantageous to cross the Pingjiang River by light boat without any danger, then the poor people here will not have a place to help workers earn money, they will be cut off from their food and clothing, and there will be more difficulties.

古文：余宁险滩波以赡佣负，不可利舟楫以安富商。
现代文：我宁肯让险滩险浪养活出卖劳力搬运货物的穷人，也不能让它有利于船只而保护富商。
English: I would rather let the perilous beach and perilous waves feed the poor who sell their labor to carry goods, than let it benefit the ships and protect the rich merchants.

古文：所不至者，理在此也。 
现代文：我之所以不来，道理就在这儿。 
English: That's why I'm not coming.

古文：乾祐善其言，因使诸龙各复其故。
现代文：翟乾祐认为她说得好，因此让龙们各自回去又把险滩恢复成原样。
English: Yu Qianyu thought she spoke well, so let the dragons go back and restore the perilous beach to its original state.

古文：风雷顷刻，而长滩如旧。
现代文：一阵风雷之后，长滩如旧了。
English: After a storm, the long beach is the same as before.

古文：唐天宝中，诏赴上京，恩遇隆厚。
现代文：唐朝天宝年间，皇帝诏令他到京城去。
English: During the Tianbao era of the Tang Dynasty, the emperor ordered him to go to Beijing.

古文：岁余还故山，寻得道而去。
现代文：他受到皇上很隆重的接待，很优厚的待遇。
English: He received a very grand reception from the Emperor and was treated very generously.

古文：先是，蜀有道士佯狂，俗号为 灰袋 ，即乾祐晚年弟子也。
现代文：一年多以后，他又回到了故山，不久便得道成仙，飞升而去。在这以前，蜀地有一个装疯的道士，俗号叫 灰袋 ，他就是翟乾祐晚年的弟子。
English: After more than a year, he returned to the old mountain, and soon became a Taoist and flew away. Before this, there was a mad Taoist in Shu, commonly known as "Gray Bag," who was a late disciple of Zou Qianyu.

古文：乾祐每戒其徒曰： 勿欺此人，吾所不及。 
现代文：翟乾祐常常警告其他弟子们说： 不要欺负这个人，他的本事是我所不及的。 
English: Yu Qianyu often warned the other disciples: "Don't bully this person, his ability is beyond my reach."

古文：常大雪中，衣布裙，入青城山，暮投兰若求僧寄宿。僧曰： 贫僧一衲而已，天寒，此恐不能相活。 
现代文：疯道士曾经在一个大雪天，穿布裙冒着风雪走进青城山，天黑的时候到庙上求和尚让他住一宿，和尚说： 贫僧只有一件僧衣，天冷，此处恐怕不能保你活命。 
English: Once, on a snowy day, a mad monk, wearing a cloth skirt and braving the wind and snow, walked into Qingcheng Mountain. When it was dark, he went to the temple to ask the monk to let him stay for one night. The monk said, "The poor monk only has one monk's robe. It's cold. I'm afraid I can't keep you alive here."

古文：道者但云： 容一床足矣。
现代文：疯道士说： 能让我有一张床就足啦！ 
English: The mad monk said, "If you can give me a bed, that's enough!"

古文：至夜半，雪深风起。僧虑道者已死，就视之，去床数尺，气蒸如炉，流汗袒寝。
现代文：到了半夜，风大雪深，和尚担心道士已经冻死了，过去一看，离床几尺就汽蒸如炉，疯道士在床上袒露着身子睡觉还淌汗。
English: In the middle of the night, the wind was blowing and the snow was deep. The monk was worried that the Taoist had frozen to death. When he looked over his shoulder, he saw steam rising like a furnace just a few feet from his bed. The mad Taoist was sleeping naked on his bed and was still sweating.

古文：僧始知其异人。
现代文：和尚这才知道道士是一位异人。
English: It was only then that the monk knew that the Taoist was a stranger.

古文：未明，不辞而去。
现代文：天不亮他就不辞而别。
English: He left without a word before dawn.

古文：多住村落，每住人愈信之。
现代文：他多半住在村落里，每次住过人们就更相信他。
English: He mostly lives in villages, and each time people believe him more.

古文：曾病口疮，不食数月，状若将死。
现代文：他曾经生过口疮，几个月没吃饭，那样子就像马上要死似的。
English: He once had sores on his mouth and didn't eat for months, as if he was about to die.

古文：村人素神之，因为设道斋，斋散，忽起就枕，谓众人曰： 试窥吾口中，有何物也？ 
现代文：村里人一向认为他是神，于是就为他设了道家的斋供。供散，他忽然起来枕到枕头上，对众人说： 你们看看我口里有什么东西！ 
English: The villagers had always thought he was a god, so they set up a Taoist offering for him. After the offering, he suddenly stood up, put his head on the pillow, and said to everyone: "Look at what's in my mouth!

古文：乃张口如箕，五脏悉露。
现代文：于是他就张开簸箕般的大口，五脏全都露了出来。
English: So he opened his beak-like mouth, and all his guts came out.

古文：同类惊异，作礼问之。唯曰： 此足恶！
现代文：人们大吃一惊，行礼问他这是怎么回事，他只是说： 这些东西实在可恶！
English: People were shocked and asked him politely what was going on, but he just said: "These things are really disgusting!"

古文：此足恶！ 
现代文：这些东西实在可恶！ 
English: These things are disgusting!

古文：后不知所终。
现代文：后来不知他到底怎样了。
English: I don't know what will happen next.

古文：凡八兄
现代文：凡八兄
English: Fan Batei

古文：凡八兄者，不知神籍之中何品位也。
现代文：凡八兄，不知在仙籍之中他是什么品位。
English: Of all the eight brothers, I don't know what rank he has among the immortals.

古文：隋太子勇之孙，名德祖，仕唐为尚辇奉御。
现代文：隋太子杨勇的孙子名叫杨德祖，在唐朝做官，是尚辇奉御。
English: Yang Dezu, the grandson of the Sui prince Yang Yong, was an official in the Tang Dynasty. He was a disciple of Shang Di.

古文：性颇好道，以金丹延生为务，炉鼎所费，家无余财，宫散俸薄，往往缺于頔粥。
现代文：他很喜欢道教，把炼丹延寿作为主要业务。炼丹的费用很大，致使他家里没有多余的资财。宫中发放的俸禄很少，他常常吃不上饭。
English: He was very fond of Taoism, and his main business was making elixirs to prolong his life. The cost of making elixirs was very high, so his family had no extra money. The salary paid by the palace was very small, and he often did not have enough to eat.

古文：稍有百金，即输于炭药之直矣。
现代文：稍微有一点钱，他就用在买药买炭的费用上了。
English: If he has a little money, he spends it on buying medicine and charcoal.

古文：凡八兄忽诣其家，谈玄虚，论方术。
现代文：凡八兄忽然来到他家，谈论玄妙虚无的道理和方术。
English: All eight brothers suddenly came to his house to talk about the principles and methods of the mysterious nothingness.

古文：以为金丹之制，不足为劳，黄白变化，咳唾可致。
现代文：凡八兄认为制作金丹，不怎么费事；黄金白银的变化，像咳嗽一声或吐口唾沫那么容易。
English: All the eight brothers think that it is not much trouble to make gold and silver; the change of gold and silver is as easy as coughing or spitting.

古文：德祖愈加尊敬。
现代文：杨德祖更加尊敬他。
English: Yang Dezhu respected him even more.

古文：而凡之刚噪喧杂，嗜酒贪饕，殊不可耐；昼出夜还，不畏街禁；肥鲜醇酎，非时即须。
现代文：但是凡八兄刚烈急躁，说话喧哗，又嗜酒贪吃，令人极不可耐。他白天出去，夜里回来，不怕街禁。鱼肉美酒，他不一定什么时候就需要。
English: However, every eighth brother is impatient and impetuous, speaks loudly, and is greedy for alcohol, which is extremely unbearable. He goes out during the day, comes back at night, and is not afraid of being banned from the street. Fish meat and wine, he does not necessarily need it at any time.

古文：德祖了谙其性，委曲预备，必副所求。
现代文：杨德祖熟悉他的性情，委曲地为他预备了各种东西，一定满足他的需求。
English: Yang Dezu is familiar with his temperament and has prepared a variety of things for him to meet his needs.

古文：由是淹留数月。
现代文：由此，他逗留了几个月。
English: From there, he lingered for months.

古文：一日，令德祖取鼎釜铪锲辈陈于药房中，凡自击碎之，垒铁加炭，烈火以煅焉。
现代文：有一天，他让杨德祖把鼎、锅、铪、锲等铁器弄到药房里来，他亲自把这些东西打碎，把碎铁垒起来加上炭，用烈火煅烧。
English: One day, he asked Yang Dezu to bring iron utensils such as a spoon, pot, pestle and mortar to the pharmacy. He personally broke these things, added charcoal to the broken iron and burned it with fire.

古文：投散药十七匹马于其上，反扃其室，背灯壁隅。
现代文：并在上面投放了十匙的散药，然后反关了门，把灯放在墙壁角。
English: and put ten spoons of powdered medicine on it, then closed the door and put the lamp in the corner of the wall.

古文：乃与德祖庭中步月，中夜谓德祖曰： 我太极仙人也，以子栖心至道，抗节不回，故来相教耳。
现代文：于是他就和杨德祖走在院子的月光下。半夜的时候，他对杨德祖说： 我是太极仙人，因为你专心于道，坚持高尚的志节而永不回头，所以我来教你。
English: So he walked with Yang Dezu under the moonlight in the courtyard. In the middle of the night, he said to Yang Dezu: I am a Taiji immortal, because you concentrate on the Tao, adhere to noble aspirations and never look back, so I come to teach you.

古文：明月良夜，能远游乎？ 
现代文：现在正是明月良夜，能跟我到远处游一游吗？ 
English: It's a bright moonlit night, can you take a trip with me to a faraway place?

古文：德祖诺。
现代文：杨德祖答应了。
English: Yang Dezu agreed.

古文：遂相与出门，及反顾，扃鑰如旧。
现代文：于是二人一块出了门。等到回头一看，门上的锁照常锁着。
English: So the two of them went out the door together. When they looked back, the lock on the door was still locked.

古文：徐行若三二十里，路颇平，憩一山顶，德视觉倦。
现代文：慢慢走了大约二三十里，路很平。在一个山顶上休息。杨德祖觉得困倦。
English: After walking slowly for about twenty or thirty miles, the road was very flat. Yang Dezu rested on the top of a mountain. He felt sleepy.

古文：八兄曰： 此去长安千里矣。
现代文：凡八兄说： 从这到长安已经有一千里了，你觉得挺累吗？ 
English: "It's been a thousand miles from here to Chang'an. Do you feel tired?

古文：当甚劳乎！ 德祖惊其且远，亦以行倦为对。
现代文：杨德祖吃惊离得远，也把走得疲倦告诉了他。
English: Yang Dezu was surprised to be so far away, and also told him that he was tired of walking.

古文：八兄长笑一声，逡巡，有白兽至焉，命德祖乘之，其行迅疾，渐觉弥远。因问长安里数。八兄曰： 此八万里矣。 
现代文：不一会儿，有一头白兽来到，他让杨德祖骑上去。白兽走得很快，渐渐觉得更远了，就问离长安多远了。凡八兄说： 这已经八万里啦！ 
English: After a while, a white beast arrived, and he asked Yang Dezhu to ride on it. The white beast walked quickly, and gradually felt farther away, so he asked how far it was from Chang'an. Every eighth brother said: This is already eighty thousand miles!

古文：德祖悄然。忽念未别家小。
现代文：杨德祖默然不语，忽然想到没有和家小告别。
English: Yang Dezu was silent, suddenly thinking that he had not said goodbye to his family.

古文：白兽屹然不行。
现代文：白兽站在那里不动了。
English: The white beast stood there motionless.

古文：八兄笑曰： 果有尘俗之念，去世未得如术。 
现代文：凡八兄笑着说： 你果然还有尘俗杂念，我也不能用现在的法术，带你成仙。 
English: The eight elder brothers smiled and said, "You still have worldly thoughts. I can't use my current magic to make you immortal."

古文：遽命白兽送德祖诣云宫，谒解空法师。
现代文：他就让白兽送杨德祖到云宫去，拜谒解空法师。
English: He asked the white beast to send Yang Dezu to the Cloud Palace to pray for the release of the sky mage.

古文：俄顷已至。
现代文：片刻就到。
English: I'll be there in a minute.

古文：法师延坐，使青童以金丹饲之。
现代文：解空法师请他们进屋坐下，让一位青衣童子把一粒金丹给杨德祖吃。
English: The magician invited them to enter the house and sit down, and asked a boy in a blue suit to give Yang Dezu a piece of jujube to eat.

古文：德祖捧接，但见毒螫之物，不可取食；又以玉液饮之，复闻其臭，亦不可饮。
现代文：杨德祖捧接过来一看，只见这是一个用毒虫做成的药丸，不能吃。又给他酒，又闻到了它的臭味，也喝不下去。
English: Yang Dezu picked it up and took a look, only to see that it was a pill made of poisonous insects, which he couldn't eat. He also gave him wine, and when he smelled its foul smell, he couldn't drink it.

古文：法师令白兽送德祖还其家。
现代文：解空法师看到这种情形就让白兽送杨德祖回自己家。
English: Seeing this situation, the magician let the white beast take Yang Dezu back to his home.

古文：凡八兄不复见矣。
现代文：凡八兄再也看不见了。
English: All eight brothers were never seen again.

古文：至其家，灯烛宛然，夜未央矣。
现代文：到了家，灯烛还在燃烧，天还没有亮。
English: When I got home, the candles were still burning and it was still dark.

古文：明晨视其所化，黄白灿然。
现代文：第二天早晨看那些化的东西，黄金白银灿然发光。
English: The next morning, looking at the transformed objects, the gold and silver glow brilliantly.

古文：虽资货有余，而八兄仙仪，杳不可睹。
现代文：虽然不缺钱财了，但是凡八兄的仙人仪表却杳不可见了。
English: Although there is no shortage of money, but the eight brothers of the hermit instrument is invisible.

古文：一日，忽见凡八兄之仆，携筐筥而过其门。
现代文：有一天他见到了凡八兄的仆人。那仆人带着竹筐从他门前走过。
English: One day he saw the servant of the eight brothers. The servant walked past his door with a bamboo basket.

古文：问凡君所止。 在仙府矣。使我暂至人寰。若见奉御，亦令同来可也。 
现代文：他向仆人问凡八兄的住址，仆人说： 他已经在仙府了，让我暂时到人间，如果遇到你，带你同去也可以。 
English: He asked the servant for the address of the eight brothers. The servant said, "He is already in the Celestial Capital. Let me go to the human world for a while. If I meet you, I can take you with me."

古文：自是德祖随凡君仙仆而去，不复还矣。
现代文：从此，杨德祖跟着凡八兄的仆人离去，不再回来了。
English: From then on, Yang Dezhu left with the servants of the eight brothers and did not return.

