古文：凡战，所谓势者，乘势也。
现代文：凡是作战中所说的 势 ，就是善于利用形势。
English: What is called "situational awareness" in combat is the ability to take advantage of the situation.

古文：因敌有破灭之势，则我从而迫之，其军必溃。
现代文：趁敌人出现的败灭趋势，我军不失时机地发动攻击，那么，敌人一定会溃败。
English: Taking advantage of the enemy's tendency to defeat, our army will not miss the opportunity to launch an attack, then the enemy will certainly be defeated.

古文：法曰： 因势而破之。 
现代文：诚如兵法所说： 要利用有利态势去击破敌人。 
English: As stated in the art of war, it is necessary to take advantage of a favorable situation to defeat the enemy.

古文：晋武帝密有灭吴之计，而朝议多违，惟羊祜、杜预、张华与帝意合。
现代文：晋武帝司马炎暗中策划了一个灭亡吴国的计划，但交给朝臣讨论时，多数人的主张与帝意相违。唯有羊祜、杜预和张华的看法与武帝意图相合。
English: Emperor Wu of the Jin Dynasty, Sima Yan, secretly planned a plan for the destruction of the State of Wu, but when it was discussed by courtiers, most people's opinions contradicted the emperor's intentions. Only the opinions of Yang Xuan, Du Yueh and Zhang Hua coincided with Emperor Wu's intentions.

古文：祜病，举预自代。及祜卒，拜预镇南大将军，都督荆州诸军事。
现代文：征南大将军羊祜病重时，曾向武帝举荐杜预代替自己职务；等到羊祜一死，晋武帝便任命杜预为镇南大将军，督统荆州一切军务。
English: When the general of the Southern Expedition, Yang Qian, was seriously ill, he recommended Du Yuan to Emperor Wu to take his place; when Yang Qian died, Emperor Jin appointed Du Yuan as the general of the Southern Expedition and the commander of all military affairs in Jingzhou.

古文：既至镇，缮甲兵，耀威武，遂拣精锐，袭破吴西陵都督张政，乃启请伐吴之期。帝报待明年方欲大举。
现代文：杜预奉命到镇后，修缮兵器铠甲以搞好战备，加强部队训练以显扬武威。他在选拔精锐部队大败吴国西陵都督张政之后，就向晋武帝请示大举伐吴的日期，武帝回复说等到明年再考虑大举攻吴之事。
English: After Du Yu was ordered to the town, he repaired weapons and armor to improve combat readiness, and strengthened troop training to show martial prowess. After he selected elite troops and defeated Zhang Zheng, the governor of Xiling in Wuxi Province, he asked Emperor Jinwu for the date of the large-scale attack on Wuxi. Emperor Wuxi replied that he would not consider attacking Wuxi until next year.

古文：预上表曰： 凡事当以利害相期，今此举十有八九之利，而其害一二，止于无功耳。
现代文：为此，杜预再次上表申述己见说： 凡事国家大事应当从利害关系出发，进行相互比较。现在攻吴之举，其有利方面占到十分之八、九，而不利方面只有十分之一、二，要是停止不行动，那就毫无胜利可言了。
English: To this end, Du Yu once again appealed to the table to see for himself, saying: In all matters of national importance, we should proceed from the interests and make comparisons. Now, attacking Wu's move, its favorable aspects account for eight or nine out of ten, while the unfavorable aspects account for only one or two out of ten. If we stop inaction, there will be no victory.

古文：朝臣言破败之形，亦不可得，直是计不出己，功不在身，各耻其前言之失，故违之耳。
现代文：至于朝中大臣有的认为我军可能被打败，则这种估计是毫无根据的，他们之所以这样说，只是因为灭吴的决策不是他们谋划的，胜利后的功绩也无法归于他们，且又都羞于承认自己原来意见的错误，所以至今仍然固执己见而反对伐吴。
English: As for some ministers of the DPRK and China who think that our army may be defeated, this estimate is groundless. The reason why they say so is only because the decision to destroy Wu was not planned by them, the achievements after the victory cannot be attributed to them, and they are all ashamed to admit the error of their original opinion, so they are still stubborn and oppose the destruction of Wu.

古文：昔汉宣帝议赵充国所上事，效之后，责诸议者，皆叩头而谢，以塞异端也。
现代文：往昔汉宣帝在朝臣讨论赵充国关于在羌族地区实行屯田戍边的奏章时，经过反复比较而采纳了充国的建议后，严厉批评了那些参与讨论而持反对意见的大臣，迫使他们各个都叩头请罪。
English: In the past, Emperor Xuan of the Han Dynasty, when his courtiers were discussing Zhao Chongguo's edict on the implementation of military garrisons in the Yi region, after repeated comparison and adopting Chongguo's suggestion, severely criticized those ministers who participated in the discussion and had opposing opinions, forcing them all to bow down and plead guilty.

古文：自秋以来，讨贼之形颇露。
现代文：宣帝这样做为的是杜绝那些固执异说的反对者。
English: Emperor Xuan did this in order to put an end to those stubborn dissenters.

古文：若今中止，孙皓怖而生计，或徙都武昌，更添修江南诸城，远其居人，城不可攻，野无所掠，积大船于夏口，则明年之计或无所及矣。 
现代文：从入秋以来，伐吴之事已经逐渐外露，倘若现在停下来，那么，吴国皇帝孙皓因担心被伐而想出对策来，或如迁都武昌，增修江南城防设施，疏散城镇居民，将会给我们造成城镇不可攻拔，野外无所掠获的被动局面，一旦吴国把大批舰船集中到夏口对我进行防御，那么，明年的伐吴计划便要化为泡影。 
English: Since the beginning of autumn, the affair of the Wu Campaign has gradually come to light. If it were to stop now, then Emperor Sun Yat-sen of the State of Wu, fearing that he would be attacked, would come up with a countermeasure, or, for example, relocate the capital to Wuchang, increase the fortifications south of the Yangtze River, and evacuate the townspeople. This would create a passive situation in which the town would be impregnable and there would be nothing to capture in the field. Once the State of Wu had concentrated a large number of ships to defend against me in Xiakou, then next year's plan to attack Wu would come to

古文：时帝与张华围棋，而预表适至。
现代文：就在晋武帝与中书令张华下围棋兴致正浓之时，恰逢杜预的奏表送到。
English: At a time when Emperor Jinwu was intensely interested in playing Go with the Chinese scholar Zhang Hua, Du Yuan's report card arrived.

古文：华推枰敛手曰： 陛下圣明神武，国富兵强。吴王淫虐，诛杀贤能，当今讨之，可不劳而定。 
现代文：张华立即推开棋盘拱手向武帝说： 陛下英明伟大，战无不胜，国家富饶，兵力强大；吴王孙皓荒淫暴虐，滥杀贤能之人，现在立即出兵进攻他，将不费多大代价就可以平定吴国。 
English: Zhang Hua immediately pushed the chessboard aside and said to Emperor Wu: Your Majesty is great and wise, invincible in battle, the country is rich, and the army is strong; Wu Wangsun was a brutal tyrant who killed all the capable people. If you attack him immediately, you will be able to pacify the State of Wu without much cost.

古文：帝乃许之。
现代文：晋武帝听后，就批准了杜预的建议。
English: The emperor then consented.

古文：预陈兵江陵，遣周旨、伍巢等率奇兵泛舟夜渡，以袭乐乡，多张旗帜，起火巴山，出于要害之地，以夺贼心，遂获吴都督孙歆。
现代文：杜预于是把部队集中到江陵，并派周旨、伍巢等将率军乘船夜渡长江以袭击乐乡；晋军沿途多插旗帜，点火于巴山之上，出击其要害之地，从心理上瓦解敌人的斗志，俘虏了吴军都督孙歆。
English: Du Yuanyuan then concentrated the troops to Gangneung, and sent Zhou Zi, Wu Xue and other generals to take the Yangtze River by boat at night to attack Le Township; the Jin army planted more flags along the way, lit a fire on Bashan, attacked its key areas, psychologically disintegrated the enemy's fighting spirit, and captured the Wu Army Governor Sun Yat-sen.

古文：既平上流，于是湘江以南，至于交、广，吴之州郡，望风归附。预仗节宣诏而绥抚之。
现代文：晋军在平定了长江上游地区后，从湘江以南至交州、广州的广大地区的吴国州郡，都望风不战而降，杜预则亲执符节宣读皇帝诏书，一一加以安抚。
English: After the Jin army had pacified the upper reaches of the Yangtze River, Wu Guozhou County, a vast area from the south of the Hunan River to Jiaozhou and Guangzhou, all hoped for the wind and surrendered without a fight. Du Yuan read out the emperor's edict on the festival of characters to appease them one by one.

古文：时诸将会议，或曰： 百年之寇，未易尽克。
现代文：在晋军众将举行会议时，有人提出说： 已据江南百年的吴国敌寇，是很难一下子把它完全战胜的。
English: When the general meeting of the Jin army was about to be held, someone said: It is difficult to completely defeat the enemy of the State of Wu, which has been in the south of the Yangtze River for a hundred years.

古文：今大暑，水潦方降，疾疫将起，宜伺来冬，更为大举。 
现代文：如今正值酷暑，雨季已经开始，疫病将要流行。因此，我们应当等到冬季到来之时，再大举进攻吧。 
English: Now that the heat is intense, the rainy season has begun, and epidemics are on the rise, we should wait until the winter comes to launch a full-scale offensive.

古文：预曰： 昔乐毅借济西一战，以并强齐。
现代文：杜预则坚定地回答说： 从前燕国大将乐毅凭借济西一战，而一鼓作气地吞并了齐国。
English: Du Yuanzhe replied firmly: Once upon a time, General Le Yi of Yan Province took advantage of the First Battle of Jixi to annex Qi Province.

古文：今兵威已振，譬如破竹，数节之后，皆迎刃而解，无复着手处也。 
现代文：现在，我军已经声威大振，对敌进攻如同刀劈长竹一样，数节劈开之后，其余的就会迎刃而解，不用再费什么劲了。 
English: Now that our army has gained a great deal of prestige, attacking the enemy is like splitting a long bamboo with a knife. After splitting a few knots, the rest will be solved, without any further effort.

古文：遂指授群帅，径造秣陵，所过城邑，莫不束手，遂平孙皓。
现代文：于是，杜预指挥众将率军直趋吴国京都建业，沿途所过城镇的吴军，没有遇上任何抵抗，结果活捉了孙皓，平定了吴国。
English: As a result, Du Yu commanded the generals to lead the army straight to the construction of Kyoto in the State of Wu. The Wu army, which passed through towns along the way, did not encounter any resistance. As a result, Sun Yat-sen was captured alive and the State of Wu was pacified.

