古文：讳威太祖圣神恭肃文武孝皇帝，姓郭氏，讳威，字文仲，邢州尧山人也。
现代文：周太祖圣神恭肃文武孝皇帝，姓郭，讳名威，字文仲，邢州尧山人。
English: Zhou Taizu Sheng Sheng Gong Su Wen Wu Xiao Emperor, surnamed Guo, alias Wei, alias Wen Zhong, from Lushan County, Shandong Province.

古文：或云本常氏之子，幼随母适郭氏，故冒其姓焉。
现代文：有人说他本来是常姓人家的儿子，从小跟随母亲到姓郭的人家里，所以就顶冒了郭家的姓。
English: Some people say that he was originally the son of a family with the surname Chang, and that he followed his mother to a family with the surname Guo from a young age, so he took on the surname Guo.

古文：《五代会要》：周虢叔之后。高祖讳璟，广顺初，追尊为睿和皇帝，庙号信祖，陵曰温陵；高祖妣张氏，追谥睿恭皇后。
现代文：高祖讳名王景，广顺初年，追尊为睿和皇帝，庙号叫信祖，陵墓叫温陵；高祖母张氏，追封谥号叫睿恭皇后。
English: Gao Zu was named Wang Jing, and in the first year of Guangshun, he was honored as Emperor Ruiwa. His temple name was Xun Zu, and his mausoleum was called Wenling. His great-grandmother was named Zhang, and her posthumous name was Empress Rui Jing.

古文：曾祖讳谌，汉赠太保，追尊为明宪皇帝，庙号僖祖，陵曰齐陵；曾祖妣郑国夫人申氏，追谥明孝皇后。
现代文：曾祖父讳名谌，后汉时追赠为太保，后周时追尊为明宪皇帝，庙号叫僖祖，陵墓叫齐陵；曾祖母郑国夫人申氏，追封谥号叫明孝皇后。
English: His great-grandfather, Shou Mingyi, was posthumously awarded the title of Taibo in the late Han Dynasty, and the Ming Dynasty Emperor in the late Zhou Dynasty. His temple was called Shuzo, and his tomb was called Qiling. His great-grandmother, Zheng Guo's wife, was called Shen, and her posthumous title was Ming Xiao's Empress.

古文：祖讳蕴，汉赠太傅，追尊为翼顺皇帝，庙号义祖，陵曰节陵；《五代会要》：温陵、齐陵、节陵皆无陵所，遥申朝拜。
现代文：祖父讳名蕴，后汉时追赠为太傅，后周追尊为翼顺皇帝，庙号叫义祖，陵墓叫节陵；祖母陈国夫人韩氏，追封谥号叫翼敬皇后。
English: His grandfather, 讳名蕴, was posthumously awarded the title of Taifu in the late Han Dynasty, and was later posthumously honored as Emperor Yingshun. His temple was called Yizhu, and his tomb was called Jieling. His grandmother, Mrs. Han of Chen Guo, was posthumously awarded the title of Empress Yingjing.

古文：载诞之夕，赤光照室，有声如炉炭之裂，星火四迸。帝生三岁，家徙太原。
现代文：父亲讳名简，后汉追赠为太师，后周追尊为章肃皇帝，庙号叫庆祖，陵墓叫钦陵；母亲燕国夫人王氏，追封谥号叫章德皇后。
English: His father's family name was Chan, and he was posthumously awarded the title of Grand Master in the Later Han Dynasty. Later, Zhou was posthumously honored as Emperor Zhang Su. His temple name was Qing Zu, and his mausoleum was called Qinling. His mother was Lady Wang of Yan Guo, and her posthumous title was Empress Zhang De.

古文：居无何，皇考为燕军所陷，殁于王事。
现代文：章德皇后在唐代天祐元年七月二十八日在尧山的旧宅里生下了太祖。太祖生下三年，家搬迁到太原。
English: Empress Zhangde gave birth to her great-grandfather in an old house in Shaoshan on July 28, the first year of the Tang Dynasty. Three years after the birth of her great-grandfather, the family moved to Taiyuan.

古文：帝未及龆龀，章德太后蚤世，姨母楚国夫人韩氏提携鞠养。
现代文：住下不多久，太祖父亲被燕军攻击，为唐朝献出了生命。太祖还不到换牙齿的年纪，章德太后就早早地死了，姨母楚国夫人韩氏提携哺养太祖。
English: Not long after moving in, the great-grandfather's father was attacked by the Yan army and gave his life for the Tang Dynasty. The great-grandfather was not old enough to change his teeth, the Empress Dowager Zhang De died early, and his aunt, Lady Han of Chu, was engaged to nurse the great-grandfather.

古文：及长，形神魁壮，趋向奇崛，爱兵好勇，不事田产。
现代文：太祖长大成人时，形态精神魁武雄壮，意趣志向奇特，喜欢兵器爱慕勇力，不从事生产农作。
English: When the great-grandfather grew up as an adult, his form and spirit were vigorous and strong, his interests and aspirations were peculiar, he liked weapons and admired bravery, and he was not engaged in productive farming.

古文：天祐末，潞州节度使李嗣昭常山战殁，子继韬自称留后，南结梁朝，据城阻命，乃散金以募豪杰。
现代文：天末年，潞州节度使李嗣昭在常山战死，他的儿子李继韬自封为常山留后，向南勾通后梁，占据城池抗阻唐朝的命令，又广施钱财招募豪杰。
English: At the end of the last days of the year, Li Shizhao was killed in the battle of Changshan by the Zhangzhou Festival. After his son Li Jizhao stayed in Changshan, he went to the south, occupied the city, resisted the orders of the Tang Dynasty, and spent a lot of money to recruit heroes.

古文：帝时年十八，避吏壶关，依故人常氏，遂往应募。
现代文：太祖当时十八岁，逃避官吏来到壶关，投靠以前的旧好常氏，于是前往应募。
English: The great-grandfather was 18 years old at the time. He escaped from the officials and came to Kuguan to join the former old Kojo clan, so he went to apply for recruitment.

古文：帝负气用刚，好斗多力，继韬奇之，或逾法犯禁，亦多假借焉。
现代文：太祖以勇气自负，行为刚烈，力气大，喜欢打架，李继韬认为他非同一般，所以有时他超越法规违反禁令，李继韬总是开脱宽宥他。
English: The great-grandfather was proud of his courage, he was stubborn, strong, and liked to fight. Li Jizhe thought he was unusual, so sometimes he overstepped the regulations and violated the ban. Li Jizhe always excused and pardoned him.

古文：尝游上党市，有市屠壮健，众所畏惮，帝以气凌之，因醉命屠割肉，小不如意，叱之。
现代文：太祖曾经到上党街市上玩，有一个在街市上卖肉的屠夫雄壮勇健，大家都害怕他，太祖凭借自己的勇力欺凌他，故意趁喝醉了酒命屠夫割肉，有一点不如意的地方，就斥喝他。
English: The great-grandfather once went to the Shangdang Street Market to play. There was a butcher who sold meat in the street market. He was strong and brave, and everyone was afraid of him. The great-grandfather bullied him with his own courage, and deliberately took advantage of the butcher who was drunk to cut meat. If there was anything unsatisfactory, he would scold him.

古文：屠者怒，坦腹谓帝曰： 尔敢刺我否？ 
现代文：屠夫大怒，袒露着肚腹对太祖说 ：你敢用刀刺我吗？ 
English: The butcher was furious and said to the grandfather with a bare belly: "Do you dare to stab me with a knife?

古文：帝即剚其腹，市人执之属吏，继韬惜而逸之。
现代文：太祖拿过刀子就刺进他的肚腹，街上的人抓起他交给官吏，李继韬爱惜他，便让他逃走。
English: The great-grandfather took a knife and stabbed him in the stomach. People on the street picked him up and handed him over to officials. Li Jixuan took pity on him and let him escape.

古文：其年，庄宗平梁，继韬伏诛，麾下牙兵配从马直，帝在籍中，时年二十一。
现代文：那一年，后唐庄宗消灭了后梁，李继韬被诛杀，手下的武将隶配给马直，太祖便在其中，当时年龄二十一岁。
English: That year, after Tang Zhuangzong eliminated Houliang, Li Jizhe was killed, and his generals were subordinated to Ma Zhi, and Taizu was among them. He was 21 years old at the time.

古文：帝性聪敏，喜笔札，及从军旅，多阅簿书，军志戎政，深穷綮肯，人皆服其敏。
现代文：太祖天性聪明灵敏，喜爱文笔书札，从军后，看过很多文书档案书籍。对于兵法战术，能够深入理会其精微意旨，人家都佩服他的敏慧。
English: The great-grandfather was naturally intelligent and sensitive. He loved writing and calligraphy. After his military service, he read a lot of document archives and books. He was able to deeply understand the subtle meaning of military tactics, and people admired his astuteness.

古文：尝省昭义李琼，琼方读《阃外春秋》，即取视之，曰： 论兵也，兄其教我。 
现代文：曾经去探望他的结拜兄弟李琼，李琼正在读《阃外春秋》，太祖就拿过来一看，说： 是讲用兵打仗的，请大哥教教我。 
English: Once he went to visit his cousin, Li Qiong. Li Qiong was reading "Spring and Autumn Outside the Palace." The great-grandfather took a look at it and said, "It's about using soldiers to fight a war. Please let my elder brother teach me."

古文：即授之，深通义理。
现代文：李琼就把书给他，太祖深入地理解了其中的意思道理。
English: Li Qiong gave the book to him, and Taizu deeply understood the meaning.

古文：《东都事略》：柴后资周太祖以金帛，使事汉高祖。
现代文：天成初年，后唐明宗驾临浚城市郊。当时朱守殷据守浚城抗拒旨命，太祖跟随晋高祖石敬瑭的一支部队首先攻上城墙。
English: In the first year of Tiancheng, the late Tang and Ming dynasties marched to the outskirts of Jiancheng City. At that time, Zhu Shouyin, who was guarding Jiancheng, resisted the order, and the great-grandfather followed a troop of Jingao Zushi and first attacked the city wall.

古文：帝尝昼寝，有小虺五色，出入颧鼻之间，后遽见愕然。
现代文：晋高祖当时担任唐明宗的副侍卫，因太祖善于写写算算，就招致到手下，让他掌管军籍。前后大将小臣，没有不亲近喜欢他的。
English: At that time, Jin Gaozu served as the deputy bodyguard of the Tang and Ming dynasties. Because the great-grandfather was good at writing and calculating, he invited his subordinates to let him take charge of the military. There was no general or junior minister who did not like him.

古文：在太原时，有神尼与帝同姓，见帝，谓李琼曰： 我宗天上大仙，顶上有肉角，当为世界主。 
现代文：当初，圣穆皇后嫁给太祖，太祖正贫困缺少资财，而皇后给予了很大资助。太祖曾经在白天睡觉时，有条五种颜色的小蛇，从太祖鼻孔中出来进去，皇后看见后感到非常惊愕。在太原时，有一位神灵的尼姑与太祖同姓，看见太祖，就对李琼说： 我那位家门是天上的大仙，头顶上有肉角，将成为天下的主人。 
English: At first, Empress Shengmu married Grandpa. Grandpa was poor and short of money, but the Empress gave him a lot of financial support. When Grandpa was sleeping during the day, a small snake of five colors came out of Grandpa's nostrils. The Empress was very surprised when she saw it. In Taiyuan, there was a divine nun with the same surname as Grandpa. When she saw Grandpa, she said to Li Qiong: My family is a great fairy in the sky, with meat horns on the top of its head, and will become the master of the world.

古文：清泰末，晋祖起于河东，时河阳节度使张彦琪为侍卫步军都指挥使，奉命北伐，帝从之，营于晋祠。
现代文：清泰末年，晋高祖在河中府登上帝位，这时河阳节度使张彦琪担任侍卫步军都指挥使，奉命北伐，太祖跟随他，驻扎在晋祠。
English: At the end of the Qing dynasty, when Emperor Gaozu ascended to the throne in the central province of Hebei, Zhang Yanqi was appointed by the Hebei Emperor to serve as the commander of the bodyguard and marching troops. He was ordered to march to the north, and Emperor Gaozu followed him and was stationed at the Jinshi.

古文：是时屋坏，同处数人俱毙，唯帝独无所伤。
现代文：这时房屋倒塌，同住一起的几个人都砸死了，只有太祖一个人没有伤着。
English: At this time, the house collapsed, and several people who lived together were killed. Only the great-grandfather was not injured.

古文：汉高祖为侍卫马步都虞候，召置左右。
现代文：后汉高祖刘知远担任侍卫马步军都虞候，将太祖要来安置在身边。
English: Later, Liu Zhiyuan, the founder of the Han Dynasty, served as an attendant guard of the horse-riding army in the capital, and placed the great-grandfather next to him.

古文：所居官舍之邻吴氏，有青衣佳娘者，为山魈所魅，鬼能人言而投瓦石，邻伍无敢过吴氏之舍者。
现代文：所住的公家宿舍旁边有一姓吴的邻居，家有一位叫佳娘的婢女被山里的妖怪迷住了，行为像鬼但能说人话，又乱丢瓦片石头，邻居们都没有人敢从吴家门前经过。
English: There is a neighbor surnamed Wu next to the public dormitory he lives in. The family has a maid named Jia Niang, who is fascinated by a mountain monster, acts like a ghost but can speak human words, and throws tiles and stones randomly. None of the neighbors dare to pass in front of the Wu family.

古文：帝过之，其鬼寂然，帝去如故，如是者再。
现代文：太祖经过吴家，那鬼就安静不做声，太祖一走过后鬼又像以前一样，多次是这样。
English: When the great-grandfather passed by the Wu family, the ghost was quiet and did not make a sound. As soon as the great-grandfather passed by, the ghost did the same as before, many times.

古文：或谓鬼曰： 尔既神，向者客来，又何寂然？ 鬼曰： 彼大人者。 
现代文：有人对鬼说： 你既然是神，刚才那位客人经过时，又为什么一下子就安静了？ 鬼说 ：那是大人。 
English: Someone said to the ghost: Since you are a god, why did you suddenly become quiet when that guest passed by just now? The ghost said: That's an adult.

古文：繇是军中异之。
现代文：因此军队中人都认为太祖很奇异。
English: As a result, everyone in the army thought Taizu was strange.

古文：范延光叛于魏，命杨光远讨之，帝当行，意不愿从。
现代文：范延光在魏州反叛，朝廷命令杨光远征讨他，太祖应参与这次军事行动，心里不愿意相从。
English: Fan Yanguang rebelled in Weizhou, and the imperial court ordered Yang Guang to go on an expedition to deal with him. Grandfather should participate in this military operation, but he did not want to.

古文：或谓帝曰： 杨公当朝重勋，子不欲从，何也？ 
现代文：有人对太祖说： 杨公是当朝立有大功的重臣，您却不想跟随他，为什么呢？ 
English: Someone said to the great-grandfather: Yang Gong is a senior minister who has made great contributions to the establishment of the dynasty, but you don't want to follow him. Why?

古文：帝曰： 杨公素无英雄气，得我何用？
现代文：太祖说 ：杨公一向没有英雄气概，得到我有什么用处？
English: The great-grandfather said: Yang Gong has never been heroic, what is the use of getting me?

古文：能用我其刘公乎！ 
现代文：能发挥我作用的人应该是刘公知远啊！ 
English: The person who can play my role should be Liu Gongzhi Yuan!

古文：汉祖累镇籓阃，皆从之。
现代文：后汉高祖刘知远屡次镇守藩镇和朝廷，太祖都跟随着他。
English: After the Han Dynasty, Liu Zhiyuan, the founder of the Han Dynasty, repeatedly guarded the town and the court, and his great-grandfathers followed him.

古文：及镇并门，尤深待遇，出入帷幄，受腹心之寄，帝亦悉心竭力，知无不为。
现代文：到刘知远镇守并门时，特别优待厚遇太祖，让他在帐营中来来往往，把他当作自己的心腹寄以厚望。太祖也尽心尽力，能做的事没有不做的。
English: When Liu Zhiyuan joined the camp, he treated Taizu especially well, letting him come and go in the camp and placing high hopes on him as his confidant. Taizu also did his best and did everything he could.

古文：及吐浑白可久叛入契丹，帝劝汉祖诛白承福等五族，得良马数千匹、财货百万计以资军。
现代文：当吐谷浑白可久反叛投降契丹时，太祖劝汉高祖诛杀了白承福等五个部族，获得数千匹良马和数以百万计的财货来补充军队费用。
English: When Tugu Hunbaek Kogu rebelled and surrendered to the Khitan, the great-grandfather advised Han Gao Zu to kill five tribes including Bai Chengfu and obtain thousands of good horses and millions of goods to supplement the military expenses.

古文：开运末，契丹入汴，晋帝北迁。
现代文：开运末年，契丹进犯京城，晋少帝被俘虏带往北方。
English: At the end of the first year of his reign, Khitan invaded the capital, and the young Emperor Jin was taken prisoner to the north.

古文：帝与苏逢吉、杨邠、史宏肇等劝汉祖建号，以副人望。
现代文：太祖与苏逢吉、杨、史弘肇等劝导汉高祖建立年号，以满足国人的愿望。
English: The great-grandfather and Su Fengji, Yang, Shi Hongzhao, etc. advised the Han Gao Zu to establish the year name to meet the wishes of the people.

古文：汉高祖即位晋阳，时百度草创，四方犹梗，经纶缔构，帝有力焉。授权枢密副使、检校司徒。
现代文：汉高祖在晋阳登上帝位，这时一切都在开创时期，四方外交特别不通畅，规划治理安邦定国，太祖出了大力，授予临时枢密副使、检校司徒的官职。
English: When Han Gaozu ascended to the throne in Jinyang, everything was in the pioneering period. The four-party diplomacy was particularly difficult, and the planning and governance of Anbang Dingguo was not smooth. The great-grandfather made great efforts to award the official positions of temporary vice-minister of the privy council and school inspector.

古文：汉高祖至汴，正授枢密副使、检校太保。
现代文：汉高祖到汴京后，正式任他为枢密副使、检校太保。
English: After Han Gaozu arrived in Beijing, he was officially appointed as Privy Vice-Minister and Inspector of Schools.

古文：《东都事略魏仁浦传》：仁溥少为刀笔吏，隶枢密院，太祖问以卒乘数，仁溥对曰： 带甲者六万。 太祖喜曰： 天下事不足忧也。 
现代文：乾佑元年春天，汉高祖生病，到病重时，太祖与苏逢吉等人一同接受遗诏托命。汉隐帝即位，任命太祖为枢密使，加封检校太尉。
English: In the spring of the first year of the Qianyu era, Han Gaozu fell ill. When he became seriously ill, the great-grandfather and Su Fengji and others accepted the last will and testament. Emperor Han Yan ascended to the throne and appointed the great-grandfather as a privy councilor, and he was also given the title of inspector of schools.

古文：有顷，河中李守贞据城反，朝廷忧之，诸大臣共议进取之计。
现代文：不久，河中府李守贞占据城池反叛，朝廷为之担忧，各位大臣一起商量进攻夺取的计划。
English: Soon after, Li Shouzhen of the Central Prefecture of Hebei Province occupied the city and rebelled, which worried the imperial court, and the ministers discussed a plan to attack and seize the city.

古文：史宏肇曰： 守贞，河阳一客司耳，竟何能为？ 
现代文：史弘肇说 ：李守贞不过是河阳一个客司，能有什么作为？ 
English: Shi Hongzhao said: Li Shouzhen is nothing more than a guest in Heyang, what can she do?

古文：帝曰： 守贞虽不习戎行，然善接英豪，得人死力，亦勍敌，宜审料之。 
现代文：太祖说： 李守贞虽然不懂用兵打仗，但善于交结英雄豪杰，能得到人为他卖命，是一股劲敌，应该审慎地对付他。 
English: The great-grandfather said: Although Li Shouzhen does not know how to fight with soldiers, he is good at meeting heroes and heroes. If he can get people to work for him, he is a strong opponent and should be dealt with carefully.

古文：乃命白文珂、常思率兵攻取。师未至，而赵思绾窃据永兴，王景崇反状亦露，朝廷遣郭从义、王峻讨赵思绾。
现代文：于是命令白文珂、常思率领部队进攻，部队还没有到达，而赵思绾窃据永兴反叛，王景崇反叛的迹象也有表现，朝廷派郭从义、王峻讨伐赵思绾。
English: Therefore, he ordered Bai Wenke and Chang Si to lead the troops to attack. The troops had not yet arrived, but Zhao Siyuan had already rebelled, and Wang Jingsong also showed signs of rebellion. The imperial court sent Guo Congyi and Wang Jun to fight Zhao Siyuan.

古文：七月，西面师徒大集，未果进取。
现代文：七月，大军四面云集河中，最终未能攻下。
English: In July, a large army gathered on all sides of the river, but ultimately failed to capture it.

古文：其月十三日，制授帝同平章事，即遣西征，以安慰招抚为名，诏西面诸军，并取帝节度。
现代文：同月十三日，诏令任命太祖为同平章事，立即派他西征，以安慰招抚为名，诏谕西面各路军队，都听从太祖的节制调度。
English: On the 13th day of the same month, the imperial edict appointed the great-grandfather as Tongping, and immediately sent him to the western expedition. In the name of consolation and encouragement, he ordered all the armies in the west to obey the great-grandfather's restrained dispatch.

古文：今舍近图远，若景崇、思绾逆战于前，守贞兵其后，腹背受敌，为之奈何？ 
现代文：当时人们认为白文珂、常思不是李守贞的对手，听到太祖西征，都群情振奋。
English: At that time, people thought that Bai Wenke and Chang Si were not the rivals of Li Shouzhen. Hearing that the great-grandfather went to the West, they were all excited.

古文：周祖从其言。
现代文：八月六日，太祖从京师出发。
English: On August 6th, Taizu set off from Kyoto.

古文：命白文珂营于河西，帝营于河东。
现代文：二十日，部队抵达河中府，命令白文珂驻扎在黄河西边，太祖扎营在黄河东边。
English: On the 20th, the troops arrived in Hechong Prefecture and ordered Bai Wenke to camp on the west side of the Yellow River and Taizu to camp on the east side of the Yellow River.

古文：不数日，周设长堑，复筑长连城以迫之。
现代文：不几天，周围挖成长长的战壕，又修筑起长长的堡垒连接起各营以逼迫敌城。
English: Within a few days, long trenches were dug around and long fortresses were built to connect the battalions to pursue the enemy city.

古文：帝在军，居常接宾客，与大将宴语，即褒衣博带；或遇巡城垒，对陈敌，幅巾短后，与众无殊。
现代文：太祖在军中，平常接待宾客，或跟大将们闲谈，就穿着宽大的衣服结着宽长的带子。要是巡视城墙堡垒，与敌人对阵，就扎着短幅穿着短衣，跟大家没有差别。
English: When the great-grandfather was in the army, he usually received guests, or chatted with generals, wearing a wide dress with a wide belt. If he was inspecting the city wall fortress and fighting against the enemy, he wore a short dress, no different from everyone else.

古文：临矢石，冒锋刃，必以身先，与士伍分甘共苦。
现代文：面临弓箭炮石，顶着刀锋剑刃，必定身先士卒，与士兵同甘共苦。
English: In the face of bows and arrows, cannons and stones, and against the edge of swords and swords, we must be the forerunners and share the joys and sorrows with the soldiers.

古文：稍立功效者，厚其赐与；微有伤痍者，亲为循抚。士无贤不肖，有所陈启，温颜以接，俾尽其情，人之过忤，未尝介意，故君子小人皆思效用。
现代文：士兵立有小功，就给与丰厚的赏赐，士兵略受轻伤，就亲自慰问安抚，士兵中无论贤者或不肖，只要有所陈述相告，太祖都和颜悦色地接待，使他们尽情倾告，别人的过失忤逆，都不曾放在心上，所以君子和小人都想为他效力。
English: If a soldier performed a small feat, he would be given a rich reward. If a soldier was slightly injured, he would personally console and pacify him. No matter whether the soldier was wise or not, as long as there was a report, the great-grandfather would graciously receive it, so that they could tell it to their heart's content. They did not care about other people's mistakes and transgressions, so both gentlemen and villains wanted to serve him.

古文：守贞闻之，深以为忧。
现代文：李守贞听到太祖兵临城下，深为忧虑。
English: Li Shouzhen was deeply worried when she heard that Tai Zu's soldiers were approaching the city.

古文：十二月，帝以蜀军屯大散关，即亲率牙兵往凤翔、永兴。相度将发，谓白文珂、刘词曰： 困兽犹斗，当谨备之。 
现代文：十二月，太祖让蜀军驻扎在大散关，然后亲自率领精悍士卒前往凤翔、永兴，收拾停当准备出发时，对白文珂、刘词说 ：困兽犹斗，应当谨慎地防备李守贞。 
English: In December, the great-grandfather stationed the Shu army in Dasankuan, and then personally led the elite soldiers to Fengxiang and Yongxing. When they were preparing to leave, he said to Bai Wenke and Liu Zhi: "The beast is still fighting. You should carefully guard against Li Shuzhen."

古文：帝至华州，闻蜀军退败，遂还。
现代文：太祖到华州，听说蜀军被打败后退，就回来了。
English: When Taizu arrived in Huazhou, he heard that the Shu army had been defeated and had retreated, so he returned.

古文：二年正月五日夜，李守贞遣将王三铁领千余人，夜突河西寨，果为刘词等力战败之。
现代文：二年正月五日夜晚，李守贞派遣将军王三铁带领一千多人，夜袭黄河西边营寨，结果被刘词等人奋力击败。
English: On the evening of the 5th day of the first month of the second year, Li Shouzhen dispatched General Wang Sangtie to lead more than a thousand people to attack the camp on the west side of the Yellow River at night. As a result, they were defeated by Liu Zhi and others.

古文：先是，军中禁酒，帝有爱将李审犯令，斩之以徇。
现代文：在这以前，军中禁止喝酒，太祖有一位心爱的将领李审违犯禁令，太祖杀了他示众。
English: Prior to this, alcohol was prohibited in the army. Grandfather had a beloved general, Li Xian, who violated the ban, and Grandfather killed him in public.

古文：五月九日，取河西寨，主周光逊以寨及部众千余人来降。
现代文：五月九日，敌人进攻河西营寨，贼将周光逊以他的营地以及部下士兵一千多人向太祖投降。
English: On May 9, the enemy attacked the Hexi encampment, and the thieves took Zhou Guangxun to his camp and more than a thousand of his soldiers to surrender to Taizu.

古文：十七日，下令攻城，会西北大风，扬沙晦冥，帝令祷河伯祠，奠讫而风止，自是昼夜攻之。
现代文：十七日，下令攻城，这时刮起西北大风，扬起沙尘搅得天昏地暗，太祖下令到河伯祠祷告神灵，祭奠完后风就停止了，从此昼夜不停地攻城。
English: On the seventeenth day, he ordered to attack the city. At this time, a northwest gale blew up, stirring up sand and dust to make the sky dark. Taizu ordered to go to the Hebei Ancestral Hall to pray to the gods. After the ceremony, the wind stopped, and from then on, the city was attacked day and night.

古文：七月十三日，帝率三寨将士夺贼罗城。
现代文：七月十三日，太祖率领三处营地的将士夺取了外城。
English: On July 13th, Taizu led soldiers from three camps to capture the outer city.

古文：二十一日，城陷，守贞举家自焚而死。
现代文：二十一日，河中府府城被攻陷，李守贞全家自焚而死。
English: On the twenty-first day of the month, Fucheng, Fuchu, was captured, and Li Shouzhen's entire family set themselves on fire and died.

古文：帝前梦河神告曰： 七月下旬，上帝当灭守贞之族。 
现代文：太祖在以前梦见黄河神告诉他说： 七月下旬，上帝将灭掉李守贞的家族。 
English: In the past, the great-grandfather dreamed that the god of the Yellow River told him: In late July, the god will exterminate the family of Li Shouzhen.

古文：翌日，汉帝议赏勋，欲兼方镇，帝辞之，乃止。
现代文：到这时果然收复敌城。城中人说，看见太祖营地上空有紫色祥云，像楼阁华盖一样的形状。二年八月五日，太祖从河中凯旋，同月二十七日回到京师上朝朝拜。
English: At this time, the enemy city was finally recaptured. People in the city said that they saw a purple auspicious cloud in the sky above Taizu's camp, shaped like the roof of a castle. On August 5, the second year, Taizu made a triumphant return from the river, and on the 27th day of the same month, he returned to Beijing to worship.

古文：帝以出征时子都七十三人，具籍献之。
现代文：汉隐帝让他上前，慰劳抚问他，斟上御酒赐给他，赏赐优厚。
English: Emperor Han Yan let him come forward, comforted and caressed him, poured him wine and gave him a generous reward.

古文：九月五日，制加检校太师、兼侍中。
现代文：第二天，汉隐帝商议论功行赏，想要太祖兼任镇守一方的职责，太祖推辞，才作罢。九月五日，诏令加封检校太师、兼侍中。
English: The next day, Emperor Han Yin discussed the merits and rewards, and wanted the great-grandfather to also serve as the town guard, but he did not do so until the great-grandfather declined. On September 5, the imperial edict was issued to add the title of procurator, schoolmaster, and chamberlain.

古文：十月，契丹入寇，前锋至邢、洺、贝、魏，河北告急，帝受诏率师赴北边，以宣徽南院使王峻为监军。
现代文：十月，契丹人进犯，前锋到达邢、氵名、贝、魏等州，河北告急，太祖受令率领军队北伐，以宣徽南院使王峻担任监军。
English: In October, the Khitans attacked, and the vanguard reached the provinces of Shan, Yunnan, Bei, and Wei. Hebei was in a hurry. Taizu was ordered to lead the army in the Northern Expedition, and the Southern Yuan of Xuanhui sent Wang Jun to supervise the army.

古文：其月十九日，帝至邢州，遣王峻前军趋镇、定。
现代文：同月十九日，太祖到邢州，派遣王峻领军前往镇州、定州。
English: On the 19th of the same month, Taizu went to Zhangzhou and sent Wang Jun to lead the army to Zhenzhou and Dingzhou.

古文：时契丹已退，帝大阅，欲临寇境，诏止之。
现代文：这时契丹人已经退回，太祖大喜，想直捣契丹边境，皇上诏令阻止了他。
English: At this time, the Khitans had already retreated, and the great-grandfather was overjoyed and wanted to march straight to the Khitan border, but the emperor's edict stopped him.

古文：三年二月，班师。
现代文：三年二月，班师回京。
English: In February of the following year, the class teacher returned to Kyoto.

古文：三月十七日，制授鄴都留守，枢密使如故。
现代文：三月十七日，诏令授与邺都留守，仍兼任枢密使原职。
English: On March 17th, he was awarded the imperial edict to stay at home, still serving as a privy councillor.

古文：时汉帝以北兵为患，委帝以河朔之任，宰相苏逢吉等议，籓臣无兼枢密使例。
现代文：当时汉隐帝担心北方戎狄，将镇守河朔的重任交付给太祖，宰相苏逢吉等人进言说 ：镇守藩镇的臣子没有兼任枢密使的先例。 
English: At that time, Emperor Han Yin was worried about the military weakness in the north, so he entrusted the important task of guarding the town of Heshaku to Taizu. Prime Minister Su Fengji and others suggested that there was no precedent for a retainer of a town guarding a town to also serve as a privy envoy.

古文：史宏肇以帝受任之重，苟不兼密务，则难以便宜从事。
现代文：史弘肇认为太祖接受的任务重要，如果不兼任朝廷内职，就难以从容处事。
English: Shi Hongzhao believed that the task accepted by Taizu was important, and if he did not concurrently hold a position within the imperial court, it would be difficult for him to handle things calmly.

古文：翌日，牙署中有紫气起于幡竿龙首，凡三日。
现代文：隐帝最后还是听了史弘肇的话，诏令黄河以北各州，所有事情全听从太祖的节制调度。
English: In the end, the Hidden Emperor still listened to Shi Hongzhao's words and ordered all states north of the Yellow River to obey Taizu's temperate schedule in all matters.

古文：十一月十四日，澶州节度使李洪义、侍卫步军都指挥使王殷遣澶州副使陈光穗至鄴都，报京师有变：是月十三日旦，群小等害史宏肇等。
现代文：太祖将出发到北方去时，对汉隐帝说 ：陛下还年轻，一切事情，应审慎地听取断定，文武大臣心系王室，凡事向他们咨询，就没有失败过错。 隐帝郑重地感谢他的忠告。太祖到邺都，全部革除烦琐有害的事情，不到几个月，官府内政治有条有理，境内平安和睦，皇上下诏书褒扬赞美。十一月十四日，澶州节度使李洪义、侍卫步军都指挥使王殷派澶州副使陈光穗到邺都，报告京师变乱：本月十三日早晨，群小杀害了史弘肇等人。
English: When the great-grandfather was about to leave for the north, he said to Emperor Han Yin: Your Majesty is still young, and you should listen carefully to all matters. The Minister of Culture and Military Affairs is close to the royal family, and if you consult with them in all matters, you will not fail. Emperor Yin solemnly thanked him for his advice. The great-grandfather went to Shidu and eliminated all troublesome and harmful matters. Within a few months, the politics within the government offices were well-organized, there was peace and harmony within the country, and the imperial edict was praised and praised. On November 14, the Shizhou Festival made Li Hongyi, the commander of the Foot Guards,

古文：前一夕，李业等遣腹心赍密诏至澶州，令李洪义杀王殷，又令护圣左厢都指挥使郭崇等害帝于鄴城。
现代文：前一天晚上，李业等人派心腹亲信带着密诏到澶州，命令李洪义杀掉王殷，又命令护圣左厢都指挥使郭崇等人在邺城杀害太祖。
English: The night before, Li Ye and others sent a trusted confidant to Zhangzhou with a secret edict, ordering Li Hongyi to kill Wang Yin, and also ordered Guo Zuo to command Guo Chong and others to kill Taizu in Zhangcheng.

古文：十三日，洪义受得密诏，恐事不济，乃以密诏示王殷，殷与洪义即遣陈光穗驰报于帝。
现代文：十三日，李洪义收到密诏，恐怕事情不会成功，就拿密诏给王殷看，王殷与李洪义立即派陈光穗飞马报告太祖。
English: On the 13th, when Li Hongyi received the secret edict, he was afraid that the matter would not succeed, so he showed the secret edict to Wang Yin. Wang Yin and Li Hongyi immediately sent Chen Guanghui's flying horse to report to the patriarch.

古文：十四日，帝方与宣徽使王峻坐议边事，忽得洪义文字，遽归牙署，峻亦未知其事。
现代文：十四日，太祖正与宣徽使王峻坐谈有关边境上的事，忽然得到李洪义书信，立即返回官署，王峻也不知道发生了什么事。
English: On the 14th, while Taizu was having a discussion with Wang Jun, who was sent by Xuan Hui, about the border issue, he suddenly received a letter from Li Hongyi and immediately returned to the government office. Wang Jun did not know what had happened.

古文：帝初知杨、史诸公被诛，神情惘然，又见移祸及己，伸诉无所，即集三军将校谕之曰： 予从微至著，辅佐国家。先皇登遐，亲受顾托，与杨、史诸公，弹压经谋，忘寝与食，一旦无状，尽已诛夷。
现代文：太祖一听到杨、史弘肇诸公被害，神情恍惚失意；又看到移祸到自己身上，申辩诉告没有地方，于是召集三军将校告诉他们说 ：我从默默无闻到声名显著，辅佐国家，先皇驾崩之前，亲自接受遗命，与杨、史诸公，弹劾逆臣镇压叛乱，管理国家谋划国事，废寝忘食。
English: As soon as the great-great-grandfather heard that Yang and Shi Hongzhao were killed, his face was dazed and dejected; he also saw that the misfortune had been transferred to himself, and there was no place for pleading and complaining, so he summoned the three army officers to tell them: I went from obscurity to prominence, assisted the country, and before the death of the first emperor, I personally accepted the last will and testament, and with Yang and Shi Zhu, impeached the traitor, suppressed the rebellion, managed the country, and planned national affairs. I lost sleep and forgot to eat.

古文：今有诏来取予首级，尔等宜奉行诏旨，断予首以报天子，各图功业，且不累诸君也。 
现代文：朝廷一旦失去法度，就杀戮诛夷，现今又有诏令来取我的首级，你们等人应奉行诏令旨意，砍下我的头来回报天子，各自图取功名事业，而且又不连累诸君。 
English: As soon as the imperial court lost control of the law, it began to kill the barbarians. Now there is a decree to take my head. You and others should follow the decree and cut off my head to repay the heavenly son. Each of you is trying to gain fame and fortune, and without burdening the princes.

古文：崇等与诸将校泣于前，言曰： 此事必非圣意，即是左右小人诬罔窃发，假令此辈握重柄，国得安乎！
现代文：郭崇等人与将校们上前哭着说 ：这事一定不是皇上的意思，一定是朝廷小人欺骗假冒私自发出诏令，如果让这些人掌握重权，国家还能安定吗！
English: Guo Chong and others came forward with the officers, crying and saying, "This must not have been the emperor's intention, it must have been a court villain deceiving and impersonating the emperor to issue the edict. If these people are allowed to wield great power, will the country still be stable?"

古文：宜得投论，以判忠佞，何事信单车之使而自弃，千载之下，空受恶名。
现代文：应该投诉申辩，以明辨忠奸，哪能相信单车使者的诏令而自抛自弃，千载之下，冤枉承受恶名。
English: It should complain and plead, to distinguish between the loyal and the traitor, who can believe in the bicycle messenger's edict and abandon themselves, under the thousand years, unjustly suffer the notoriety.

古文：崇等愿从明公入朝，面自洗雪，除君侧之恶，共安天下。 
现代文：郭崇等愿跟您进京上朝，当面洗刷罪名，清除皇上身旁的奸臣，共同安定天下。 
English: Guo Chong et al. would like to follow you to the imperial court in Beijing, face to face to clear the charges, remove the treacherous vassals around the emperor, and jointly stabilize the world.

古文：众然之，遂请帝南行，帝即严驾首途。
现代文：大家都认为说得对，就请太祖南行，太祖就驾起威严的车子走在前面开往京城。
English: Everyone thought he was right, so they asked the great-grandfather to go south, and the great-grandfather drove the majestic car and drove to the capital.

古文：十六日，至澶州，王殷迎谒恸哭。
现代文：十六日，到澶州，王殷迎见太祖，放声大哭。
English: On the 16th, when he arrived in Zhangzhou, Wang Yin greeted his grandfather and burst into tears.

古文：时隐帝遣小竖嵒脱侦鄴军所在，为游骑所执，帝即遣回。令附奏隐帝赴阙之由，仍以密奏置嵒脱衣领中。
现代文：这时隐帝派一名宫中小臣龙鸟脱侦察邺都军队的行踪，被巡逻的骑兵抓住，太祖就放他回去，令他向隐帝奏明进军京师的原因，又将秘密的奏章藏在龙鸟脱的衣领中。
English: At this time, Emperor Inti sent one of the palace's middle and junior ministers, Long Jiao Du, to reconnoiter the whereabouts of the capital's army. He was caught by the patrolling cavalry, and Emperor Taizu let him go back, and made him report to Emperor Inti the reason for marching into the capital, and hid the secret report in Long Jiao Du's collar.

古文：奏曰： 臣发迹寒贱，遭遇圣明，既富且贵，实过平生之望，唯思报国，敢有他图！
现代文：奏章上说 ：臣出身贫寒卑贱，有幸遭逢圣君明主，实在超过了平生的愿望，只想报效国家，哪敢有其他企图！
English: According to the transcript: The vassal was born poor and lowly, and had the good fortune to meet a saint and lord, which really exceeded his lifelong aspirations. He only wanted to serve the country, how dare he have any other intentions!

古文：今奉诏命，忽令郭崇等杀臣，即时俟死，而诸军不肯行刑，逼臣赴阙，令臣请罪上前，仍言致有此事，必是陛下左右谮臣耳。
现代文：现在接到诏令，忽然要郭崇等杀了臣下，臣立时等候处死，而诸位将领不肯动手，逼着我到京城来，令臣亲到陛下面前请罪，反复说招致这种事情，一定是陛下左右有人暗中诽谤臣下。
English: Now that I have received the imperial edict, I suddenly want Guo Chong and others to kill my vassals, and my vassals are waiting to be executed, but your generals are not willing to take action, forcing me to come to the capital, ordering my vassals to plead guilty in front of Your Majesty, and repeatedly saying that someone around Your Majesty must have slandered my vassals to cause this kind of thing.

古文：今嵒脱至此，天假其便，得伸臣心，三五日当及阙朝陛下。
现代文：现龙鸟脱到我这里，上天借给我方便，得以申诉臣下心意，三五天内应当能到殿前朝见陛下。
English: Now the dragon and the bird have flown to me. Heaven has lent me the convenience of being able to appeal to the hearts of my subjects. In three or five days, I should be able to get to the front of the palace to see Your Majesty in the morning.

古文：若以臣有欺天之罪，臣岂敢惜死；若实有谮臣者，乞陛下缚送军前，以快三军之意，则臣虽死无恨。
现代文：若因为臣确有欺天之罪，臣哪里敢吝惜一死；若实在是有暗中诽谤臣下的小人，请陛下捆起来送到三军阵前，以使三军将士心里痛快，那么臣下虽死而无遗憾。
English: If it is true that a vassal has been guilty of deceiving Heaven, how dare that vassal begrudge a death; if it is true that there is a villain who has been secretly slandering his vassal, please, Your Majesty, tie him up and send him to the front of the three armies, so that the soldiers of the three armies will be happy, then the vassal will have no regrets even if he dies.

古文：今托嵒脱附奏以闻。 
现代文：现托龙鸟脱附带奏章以陈告于陛下。 
English: Now, the dragon bird is taken away with a musical score to be presented to His Majesty.

古文：十七日，帝至滑州，节度使宋延渥开门迎纳。
现代文：十七日，太祖到滑州，滑州节度使宋延渥大开城门欢迎接待。
English: On the 17th, Emperor Taizu came to Slanting, and the Slanting Festival made Song Yanwo open the city gate to welcome the reception.

古文：帝将发滑台，召将士谓之曰： 主上为谗邪所惑，诛杀勋臣，吾之此来，事不获己，然以臣拒君，宁论曲直！
现代文：太祖将要离开滑州时，召集将士对他们说 ：皇上被谗言和邪恶小人所蛊惑，诛杀功勋大臣，我今天来到这里，是事情迫不得已，然而以臣下身份抗拒君王，哪能容分曲直。
English: When the great-grandfather was about to leave the city, he called together his soldiers and said to them: "The emperor has been seduced by evil gossips and villains, and has killed the minister of merit. I have come here today out of necessity, but how can I resist the king as a vassal?

古文：汝等家在京师，不如奉行前诏，我以一死谢天子，实无所恨。 
现代文：你们等家在京师，不如还是奉行皇上前次诏令，我以一死告谢天子，实在毫无遗憾。 
English: If you and your families are studying in Beijing, you might as well follow the Emperor's last edict. I thank God with my life. I really have no regrets.

古文：将校前启曰： 国家负公，公不负国。请公速行，无迟久，安邦雪怨，正在此时。 
现代文：将校们上前开导说： 是国家对不起明公，明公没有对不起国家，请明公赶快上路，不要迟误拖延，安定国家洗刷冤怨，正在这个时候。 
English: The officers came forward to enlighten him and said: It is the country that is sorry to Ming Gong, Ming Gong is not sorry to the country, please Ming Gong, hurry up and get on the road, do not delay, stabilize the country and wash away the grievances, it is at this time.

古文：既而王峻谕军曰： 我得公处分，俟平定京城，许尔等旬日剽掠。 
现代文：不久王峻告诉军士们说 ：我已经得到明公吩咐，等平定京城，放任你们抢掠十天。 
English: Wang Jun soon told the officers, "I have received an order from Emperor Ming to wait until the capital is pacified and then let you loot it for ten days.

古文：众皆踊跃。
现代文：众人都跳跃欢呼。
English: Everyone was jumping and cheering.

古文：十九日，隐帝遣左神武统军袁鳷、前邓州节度使刘重进率禁军来拒，与前开封尹侯益等屯赤冈，是夜俱退。
现代文：十九日，隐帝派遣左神武统军袁山义、前邓州节度使刘重进率领禁军前来抵拒，与前开封府尹侯益等屯驻在赤岗，当夜一同撤退。
English: On the 19th, the Hidden Emperor dispatched Yuan Shanyi of the Left Shenwu Unification Army and the former Dengzhou Jiedu to make Liu Chongjin lead the forbidden army to resist, and stationed in Chigang with former Kaifeng governor Yin Houyi and others, and withdrew together that night.

古文：二十日，隐帝整阵于刘子坡。
现代文：二十日，隐帝在刘子陂整顿阵营。
English: On the 20th, Emperor Inti set up a rectification camp in Liu Zixuan.

古文：二十一日，两阵俱列，慕容彦超率军奋击，帝遣何福进、王彦超、李筠等大合骑以乘之。
现代文：二十一日，两军阵营都列好，慕容彦超率领军队奋勇出击，太祖派何福进、王彦超、李筠等会合骑兵进攻他。
English: On the twenty-first day, the two army camps were lined up, Murong Yanchao led the army to attack bravely, and Taizu sent He Fujin, Wang Yanchao, Li Yao and other cavalry to attack him.

古文：慕容彦超退却，死者百余人，于是南军夺气，稍稍奔于北军。
现代文：慕容彦超败退，战死一百多人，于是南方军队士气消沉，士兵渐渐逃奔到北方军队中来。
English: Murongyan was defeated and retreated, and more than a hundred people died in the battle. As a result, the morale of the southern army was depressed, and soldiers gradually fled to the northern army.

古文：慕容彦超与数十骑东奔兗州，吴虔裕、张彦超等相继来见帝。是夜侯益、焦继勋潜至帝营，帝慰劳遣还。
现代文：慕容彦超带着几十位骑兵向东逃往兖州。吴虔裕、张彦超等南军将领相继来见太祖，这夜侯益、焦继勋偷偷来到太祖营帐，太祖慰劳送回他们。
English: Murong Yanchao fled east to Luzhou with dozens of cavalrymen. Wu Qianyu, Zhang Yanchao and other Southern Army generals came to see Taizu one after another. That night, Hou Yi and Jiao Jixun secretly came to Taizu's tent, and Taizu consoled and sent them back.

古文：二十二日旦，郭允明弑汉隐帝于北郊。
现代文：二十二日早晨，郭允明在北郊杀害了隐帝。
English: On the morning of the 22nd, Guo Yunming killed the Emperor in the northern suburbs.

古文：初、官军之败，帝谓宋延渥曰： 尔国亲，可速往卫主上，兼附奏，请陛下得便速奔臣军，免为左右所图。 
现代文：当初，隐帝的军队战败时，太祖对宋延渥说 ：你是皇帝女婿，是皇亲，可赶快去保护皇上，顺便带上奏章，请陛下找机会赶快到我这里来，以免被身边的人谋害。 
English: At the beginning, when Emperor Inti's army was defeated, the great-grandfather said to Song Yanwo: You are the emperor's son-in-law, a relative of the emperor, you can quickly go to protect the emperor. By the way, please bring the record and ask your majesty to find an opportunity to come to me as soon as possible, so as not to be killed by the people around you.

古文：及延渥至，乱兵云合，即惶骇而还。
现代文：当宋延渥赶到时，乱兵像乌云一样挤作一团，他就惶恐害怕而回来了。
English: When Song Yanwoo arrived, the ruffians were huddled together like a dark cloud, and he came back terrified.

古文：是旦，帝望见天子旌旗于高坡之上，谓隐帝在其下，既免胄释马而前，左右虑有不测，请帝止。
现代文：这天早晨，太祖遥望见天子的旌旗插在高坡之上，认为隐帝应在旌旗下面，就解下甲胄放开战马徒步向前，身边的人担心有意外的伤害，请太祖停下。
English: On this morning, the great-grandfather saw from afar that the banner of the heavenly son was planted on the high slope, and thought that the hidden emperor should be under the banner, so he took off his armor, let go of his horse and walked forward. The people around him were worried about accidental injury, so they asked the great-grandfather to stop.

古文：帝泣曰： 吾君在此，又何忧焉！ 
现代文：太祖哭着说 ：我的皇上在那里，我又担心什么呢？ 
English: The great-grandfather cried and said: My emperor is there, what am I worried about?

古文：及至前，隐帝已去矣，帝歔欷久之。
现代文：当走到高坡上时，隐帝已经离开了，太祖抽泣感叹了好久。
English: When they reached the high slope, Emperor Yingdi had already left, and Emperor Taizu sobbed and sighed for a long time.

古文：俄闻隐帝遇弑，号恸不已。
现代文：紧接着听到隐帝遇难，太祖放声大哭不停。
English: Immediately after hearing that Emperor Hidden was killed, Taizu burst into tears.

古文：帝至元化门，刘铢雨射城外，帝回车自迎春门入，诸军大掠，烟火四发，帝止于旧第，何福进以部下兵守明德门。
现代文：太祖来到玄武门，刘铢像雨点一样地把箭射向城外，太祖调转车头从迎春门进城。军士们大肆抢掠，烟火从四面升起，太祖歇息在以前的住宅，何福进领部下士兵把守明德门。
English: The great-grandfather came to the Xuanwu Gate, Liu Ye shot an arrow like a raindrop to the outside of the city, the great-grandfather turned the head of the car to enter the city from the Spring Festival Gate. The soldiers looted extensively, fireworks rose from all sides, the great-grandfather rested in the former residence, and He Fuxin led his soldiers to guard the Mingde Gate.

古文：翌日，王殷、郭崇言曰： 若不止剽掠，比夜化为空城耳。 
现代文：第二天，王殷、郭崇说 ：如不停止抢掠，到夜晚就将变为一座空城。 
English: The next day, Wang Yin and Guo Chong said, "If we don't stop looting, we will become an empty city by night."

古文：由是诸将部分斩其剽者，至晡乃定。
现代文：因此诸将们部署分布杀死抢掠的人，到下午四时左右抢掠才停下来。
English: So the generals deployed to kill the looters, and by 4 p.m. the looting had stopped.

古文：帝与王峻诣太后宫起居，请立嗣君，乃以高祖侄徐州节度使赟入继大统，语在汉纪。
现代文：太祖与王峻到汉太后宫殿问候起居，请求立即位的君主，于是就以汉高祖的侄子徐州节度使刘斌贝入宫继承皇位。
English: The great-grandfather and Wang Jun went to the palace of the empress dowager of the Han Dynasty to greet and live, and requested the monarch to be enthroned immediately. Therefore, Liu Binbei was allowed to enter the palace to inherit the throne with the nephew of the great-grandfather of the Han Dynasty, Xuzhou Jiedu.

古文：二十七日，帝以嗣君未至，请太后临朝，会镇、定州驰奏，契丹入寇，河北诸州告急，太后命帝北征。
现代文：二十七日，太祖因为继君还没来到，就请太后临朝受拜，这时镇州、定州驰马上奏，契丹人来进犯，黄河以北各州告急，太后命令太祖北征契丹。
English: On the 27th day, the great-grandfather, because his successor had not yet arrived, invited the empress dowager to the imperial court for worship. At this time, Zhenzhou and Dingzhou rushed to play, the Khitan people came to attack, and the states north of the Yellow River were in a hurry. The empress dowager ordered the great-grandfather to march north to fight the Khitan.

古文：十二月一日，帝发离京师。
现代文：十二月一日，太祖出发离开京师。
English: On December 1st, Taizu departed from the capital.

古文：四日，至滑州，驻马数日。
现代文：四日，抵达滑州，停驻几天。
English: On the 4th, they arrived in Slate and stayed there for a few days.

古文：会湘阴公遣使慰劳诸将，受宜之际，相顾不拜，皆窃言曰： 我辈陷京师，各各负罪，若刘氏复立，则无种矣。 
现代文：湘阴公刘斌贝派遣使者慰劳众将，众将在接受宣慰时，互相瞧着不拜领谢恩，都偷偷地说： 我们这帮人攻陷了京师，各人都有罪责，若姓刘的又即位为帝，就没有我们的活路了。 
English: Liu Binbei, the Xiangyin Emperor, sent an envoy to console the generals. While receiving the condolences, the generals looked at each other and did not thank each other. They all secretly said, "We are the ones who attacked and captured the capital. Everyone is guilty. If Liu were to become emperor again, there would be no way for us to survive."

古文：或有以其言告帝者，帝愕然，即时进途。
现代文：有人把这些话告诉太祖，太祖惊愕，立时上路前行。
English: Someone told these words to the great-grandfather. The great-grandfather was stunned and immediately went on his way.

古文：十六日，至澶州。
现代文：十六日，到澶州。
English: On the 16th, to Ganzhou.

古文：是日旭旦，日边有紫气来，当帝之马首。
现代文：这天太阳刚刚升起，太阳旁边有紫气，对着太祖的马头直奔而来。
English: On this day, the sun had just risen, and there was purple air next to the sun, rushing straight towards the horse's head of Taizu.

古文：十九日，下令诸军进发。
现代文：十九日，下令各军出发前进。
English: On the 19th, he ordered all the armies to march forward.

古文：二十日，诸军将士大噪趋驿，如墙而进，帝闭门拒之。
现代文：二十日，各军将士大声鼓噪着奔向太祖歇息的驿站，像墙一样推进，太祖关上门拒绝他们。
English: On the 20th, the soldiers of the various armies rushed to the station where the great ancestor was resting, pushing forward like a wall. The great ancestor closed the door and refused them.

古文：军士登墙越屋而入，请帝为天子。
现代文：军士们登上墙壁翻越屋顶进来，请太祖做天子。
English: The sergeants climbed onto the walls, climbed over the roof and came in, asking the great-grandfather to be the godson.

古文：乱军山积，登阶匝陛，扶抱拥迫，或有裂黄旗以被帝体，以代赭袍，山呼震地。
现代文：纷乱的军队像山一样聚集，登上台阶围满廊下，扶着抱着拥着挤着，有人撕下黄旗披在太祖身上，以代替赭色龙袍，高声的呐喊震撼大地。
English: The disorderly army gathered like a mountain, climbing the steps and filling the corridors, supporting, hugging and embracing. Someone tore off the yellow flag draped over the great ancestor to replace the ochre dragon robe, and the high-pitched cry shook the earth.

古文：帝在万众之中，声气沮丧，闷绝数四，左右亲卫，星散窜匿。
现代文：太祖在万众之中，声音嘶哑气色沮丧，数次闷晕过去，身旁的亲信卫士，像星星一样溃散逃藏起来。
English: The great-grandfather was in the crowd, his voice was hoarse, he looked depressed, he fainted several times, and the trusted guards around him scattered like stars and fled into hiding.

古文：帝即登城楼，稍得安息，诸军遂拥帝南行。
现代文：太祖于是登上城楼，军心渐渐得到安定，众将们就拥着太祖向南行进。
English: The great-grandfather then ascended the castle tower, the military spirit gradually stabilized, and the generals embraced the great-grandfather and marched south.

古文：时河冰初解，浮梁未构。
现代文：这时黄河上的冰刚刚融化，浮桥尚未搭成。
English: At this time, the ice on the Yellow River had just melted, and the floating bridge had not yet been built.

古文：是夜北风凛烈，比旦冰坚可渡，诸军遂济，众谓之 凌桥 ，济竟冰泮，时人异之。
现代文：这夜北风凛冽，到第二天一早就结成坚厚的冰可以渡过，诸军于是渡过黄河，大家都把这叫作 凌桥 ，诸军渡完后冰又化解了，人们都对此感到惊异。
English: The north wind blew that night, and by the early morning of the next day, the ice had formed into a solid mass that could be crossed. The armies then crossed the Yellow River. Everyone called this the "crossing bridge." After the armies had crossed, the ice melted again, and people were surprised by this.

古文：时湘阴公已驻宋州，枢密使王峻在京，闻澶州之变，遣侍卫马军指挥使郭崇率七百骑赴宋州，以卫湘阴公。
现代文：这时湘阴公已驻扎宋州，枢密使王峻在京城，听到澶州兵变，就派侍卫马军指挥使郭崇率领七百名骑兵赶赴宋州，以保卫湘阴公。
English: At this time, Prince Xiangyin was already stationed in Songzhou, and the imperial envoy, Wang Jun, was in Beijing. Hearing of the military coup in Zhangzhou, he sent the commander of the Horse Guards, Guo Chong, to rush to Songzhou with seven hundred cavalry to defend Prince Xiangyin.

古文：二十五日，帝至七里店，群臣谒见，遂营于皋门村。
现代文：二十五日，太祖到七里店，群臣拜见他，于是就扎营在皋门村。
English: On the twenty-fifth day, the great-grandfather went to Qili store, and the courtiers paid homage to him, so they camped in Qimen village.

古文：二十七日，汉太后令曰： 枢密使、侍中郭威，以英武之才，兼内外之任，剪除祸乱，宏济艰难，功业格天，人望冠世。
现代文：二十七日，汉朝太后下令说： 枢密使、侍中郭威，以英雄勇武的才能，兼任朝廷内外的要职，翦除祸乱，排除危难，功勋业绩盖天，道德声望盖世。
English: On the 27th, the empress dowager of the Han Dynasty issued a decree saying: Guo Wei, the Privy Envoy and Chamberlain, with his heroic and courageous talents, concurrently held important positions inside and outside the imperial court, eradicated disasters and eliminated dangers, and his meritorious performance was outstanding, and his moral reputation was world-renowned.

古文：今则军民爱戴，朝野推崇，宜总万机，以允群议，可监国。中外庶事，并取监国处分。 
现代文：现在受军民爱戴，朝野推崇，应当总管一切，以顺民意，可以监国，内外所有事务，全都听其处置。 
English: Now he is loved by the military and the people, and respected by both the government and the people. He should be in charge of everything, in accordance with the will of the people. He can supervise all the affairs of the country, both at home and abroad, and all of them should be at his disposal.

古文：二十八日，监国教曰： 寡人出自军戎，本无德望，因缘际会，叨窃宠灵。
现代文：二十八日，太祖发布监国文告说： 本人出身行伍，原无德望，靠着风云际会之时，忝蒙恩宠福佑。
English: On the 28th, the great-grandfather issued a proclamation of the procurator of the state, saying: I was born and raised in the military, so I have no hope of virtue, but I was blessed with grace and blessing when I was in a stormy meeting.

古文：高祖皇帝甫在经纶，待之心腹，洎登大位，寻付重权。
现代文：高祖皇帝开始经营国是时，待我如心腹，登上帝位之后，付我以重任。
English: When Emperor Gaozhu began to run the country, he treated me like a confidant. After he ascended to the throne, he entrusted me with important duties.

古文：当顾命之时，受忍死之寄，与诸勋旧，辅立嗣君。
现代文：当临终托命之时，接受寄望遗诏，与诸位功勋旧臣，辅助拥立即位之君。
English: When he was on his deathbed, he received his last will and testament, and together with his meritorious former retainers, he supported the reigning monarch.

古文：旋属三叛连衡，四郊多垒，谬膺朝旨，委以专征，兼守重籓，俾当勍敌，敢不横身戮力，竭节尽心！冀肃静于疆场，用保安于宗社。
现代文：接着遭逢李守贞、赵思绾、王景崇三镇联合叛乱，四郊战堡林立，我接受朝廷旨令，令我专门征讨，兼任镇守重镇之职责，使我面临强敌，哪敢不舍身努力，竭尽节操忠心，希望在疆场肃清敌人，以保社稷平安。
English: Then, I was faced with the joint rebellion of three towns, including Li Shuzhen, Zhao Siyu and Wang Jingzhong, and the battle fortifications in the four suburbs. I accepted the order of the imperial court, which made me specially recruit, and also served as the duty of the town guard. Faced with a strong enemy, I dared not give up my efforts, tried my best to be loyal, and hoped to clear the enemy in the battlefield to ensure the safety of the community.

古文：不谓奸邪构乱，将相连诛，寡人偶脱锋铓，克平患难，志安刘氏，愿报汉恩，推择长君，以绍丕构。遂奏太后，请立徐州相公，奉迎已在于道途，行李未及于都辇。
现代文：没想到奸邪小人制造祸乱，将相接连被诛杀，我偶然逃脱刀斧之灾，得以平定祸患，志在安定刘氏帝业，心在报效汉朝恩典，推举德高的君主，以继承汉朝大业，于是奏明太后，请立徐州湘阴公，已派人上路奉迎，只是暂时未到京城。
English: I did not expect that the evil villains who created the disaster would be killed one after another. I accidentally escaped the disaster of the sword and axe and was able to quell the disaster. I aspired to stabilize the Liu Dynasty. My heart was to repay the grace of the Han Dynasty and promote the noble monarch to inherit the great cause of the Han Dynasty. Therefore, the Empress Dowager So Ming, please establish Xuzhou Xiangyin, has sent people on the road to welcome, but has not yet arrived in Beijing.

古文：寻以北面事急，寇骑深侵，遂领师徒，径往掩袭，行次近镇，已渡洪河。
现代文：旋即又因北方战事紧急，敌人骑兵深入侵扰，于是率领部下，直奔北面迎击，行军接近边镇，已经渡过滔滔黄河。
English: Suddenly, due to the urgency of the war in the north, the enemy cavalry made a deep intrusion, so he led his subordinates and went straight to the north to meet the attack. The march approached the border town and had already crossed the mighty Yellow River.

古文：十二月二十日，将登澶州，军情忽变，旌旗倒指，喊叫连天，引袂牵襟，迫请为主。环绕而逃避无所，纷纭而逼胁愈坚，顷刻之间，安危莫保，事不获己，须至徇从，于是马步诸军拥至京阙。
现代文：十二月二十日，将抵澶州，军情急剧变化，北进的旌旗倒指南方，叫喊连天，拉着我的衣袖牵着我的衣襟，迫请我作为君主，环顾四周而无处逃避，纷纷嚷嚷胁迫更加强烈，顷刻之间，性命难保，事不由己，以至屈从，于是马步军拥到京城。
English: On the 20th of December, he will arrive in Luzhou, the military situation has changed dramatically, the northward marching banners are upside down, shouting all the time, pulling my sleeves and holding my collar, forcing me as a monarch to look around and have nowhere to escape, shouting and shouting, the coercion is more intense, in an instant, life is difficult to protect, things can't be helped, to the point of submission, so the horse-and-foot army flocked to Beijing.

古文：今奉太后诏旨，以时运艰危，机务难旷，俾令监国，逊避无由，黾勉遵承，夙夜忧愧 云。
现代文：现在奉太后诰命御旨，因为时势艰难危急，各部门事务不能荒废怠慢，令我监察国事，谦让又没有理由，只好俯首遵命，日夜蒙愧操劳。 
English: Now, according to the order of the Empress Dowager, because the situation is difficult and critical, and the affairs of various departments cannot be neglected, I am asked to supervise the state affairs. There is no reason to be humble, so I have to bow my head and obey the order, and work hard day and night.

古文：时文武百官、内外将帅、籓臣郡守等，相继上表劝进。
现代文：这时文武百官、内外将帅、藩臣郡守等，一个接一个上书劝太祖称帝。
English: At this time, one after another, hundreds of civil and military officials, generals at home and abroad, and vassals of the domain, such as county governors, sent letters to the emperor to persuade him to be enthroned.

古文：三十日夜，御营西北隅步军将校因醉扬言： 昨澶州马军扶策，今步军亦欲扶策。 
现代文：三十日夜晚，御营西北角步军将校因为喝醉了酒而扬言说 ：以前是澶州的骑兵要扶立郭公称帝，现在是步兵要扶立郭公称帝。 
English: On the evening of the 30th, the officer of the Northwest Angle Infantry Corps of the Imperial Battalion, because he was drunk, threatened to say: In the past, it was the cavalry of Zhangzhou that wanted to support Guo Gongsheng, now it is the infantry that wants to support Guo Gongsheng.

古文：寻令虞候诘其姓名，昧旦擒而斩之。
现代文：太祖立即命令虞候追查那将校的名字，第二天一早就抓起来杀了。
English: The great-grandfather immediately ordered the constable to track down the officer's name, and the next morning he was arrested and killed.

古文：其一军仍纳甲仗，遣中使监送就粮所。
现代文：他带领的那一支部队仍旧带着甲仗，派中监使送往屯驻军粮的地方。
English: The army he led was still wearing armor, and he sent an envoy to take them to the place where the grain was stored.

古文：广顺元年春正月丁卯，汉太后诰曰： 邃古以来，受命相继，是不一姓，传诸百王，莫不人心顺之则兴，天命去之则废，昭然事迹，著在典书。予否运所丁，遭家不造，奸邪构乱，朋党横行，大臣冤枉以被诛，少主仓卒而及祸，人自作孽，天道宁论。
现代文：广顺元年春正月五日，汉太后颁发诰命说： 从远古以来，承受天命继承帝业，这不是一家一姓，而是传给百姓君王，没有不是顺应人心就兴，天命离弃就废的，事迹明显，记载在典籍中，我刘氏遇上了不顺的命运，遭逢家道衰落无成，奸邪小人制造祸乱，狐朋狗党横行朝廷，大臣冤枉而被诛杀，年少的君主突然招致灾祸，这是自己作孽，不用指望天道相助。
English: On the fifth day of the first month of spring in Guangshun in the first year of the 21st century, the Empress Dowager of the Han Dynasty issued an imperial edict, saying: "Since ancient times, it has been our destiny to inherit the imperial inheritance. This is not a family name, but has been passed down to the people's kings. There are no obvious deeds that are not in accordance with the people's will and abandoned by the will of heaven. It is recorded in the classics. I, Liu, have met with a bad fate. I have suffered from the decline of my family's way and have not achieved anything. Evil villains have created disasters. The Fox and Dog Party

古文：监国威，深念汉恩，切安刘氏，既平乱略，复正颓纲，思固护于基扃，择继嗣于宗室。
现代文：监国郭威，深深追念汉朝恩德，一心一意安定刘氏，既平定动乱的疆土，又扶正颓败的朝纲，殚精竭虑巩固帝业，在宗室中选择继承君位的人。
English: Guo Wei, the supervisor of the country, deeply remembered the benevolence of the Han Dynasty, single-mindedly stabilized the Liu clan, not only pacified the turbulent territory, but also helped the defeated dynasty, worked hard to consolidate the empire, and selected the heir to the throne in the family.

古文：而狱讼尽归于西伯，讴谣不在于丹硃，六师竭推戴之诚，万国仰钦明之德，鼎革斯契，图箓有归，予作佳宾，固以为幸。
现代文：然而攻讦之辞全归之于西伯，谣诼流言不出于丹朱，六军竭尽推举拥戴的诚心，万国仰慕贤明可敬的恩德，改朝换代，天命所归，我刘氏能作为家宾，就深以为幸。
English: However, the words of attack are all attributed to Xibe, the rumors are not from Tanju, the six armies are trying their best to promote the sincerity of support, the nations admire the wise and honorable Ende, the dynasty is changing, and it is the destiny of heaven. I am deeply happy that I can be a guest of the Liu family.

古文：今奉符宝授监国，可即皇帝位。
现代文：今奉上汉朝的印玺国宝给监国，可登上帝位。
English: Now, the Han Dynasty's seal national treasure is presented to the supervising country, and it can ascend to God's throne.

古文：于戏！
现代文：呜呼！
English: Alas!

古文：天禄在躬，神器自至，允集天命，永绥兆民，敬之哉！ 
现代文：天赐的爵禄在他身上，传国的神器自然到达，诚实地保持天命，永远安定万民，要恭敬谨慎啊！ 
English: Heaven-given honor is on him, the sacred artifact of the nation naturally arrives, honestly maintain the destiny, and forever stabilize the people, be respectful and prudent!

古文：是日，帝自皋门入大内，御崇元殿，即皇帝位。
现代文：这一天，太祖从皋门进入天子的居所，登上崇元殿，即皇帝位。
English: On this day, the great-grandfather entered the residence of the heavenly son from the gate and ascended the throne of the emperor.

古文：制曰：
现代文：发布诏令说：
English: The release said:

古文：自古受命之君，兴邦建统，莫不上符天意，下顺人心。
现代文： 自古承受天命的君主，建立国家制定朝纲，无不对上符合天意，对下顺应人心。
English: Since ancient times, the monarchs who have received the mandate of heaven have established the country and formulated the morning program, which is consistent with the will of heaven and conforms to the will of the people.

古文：是以夏德既衰，爰启有商之祚；炎风不竞，肇开皇魏之基。
现代文：因此夏朝的道德既然衰败，于是开创了商朝的国统；炎风竞争不过，才开辟了皇魏的基业。
English: Therefore, since the morality of the Xia Dynasty had decayed, the national unification of the Shang Dynasty was created. However, fierce competition opened up the foundation of the Imperial Wei Dynasty.

古文：朕早事前朝，久居重位。
现代文：我早年服事前一朝代，久居重要职位。
English: In my early years, I served a dynasty and held important positions for a long time.

古文：受遗辅政，敢忘伊、霍之忠；仗钺临戎，复委韩、彭之任。
现代文：接受遗诏辅佐国政，没敢忘记伊尹、霍光的忠诚；拿着刀枪亲临前线，又委以韩信、彭越的重任。
English: He did not dare to forget the loyalty of Yi Yin and Huo Guang when he accepted the imperial edict to assist the national government; he went to the front line with a knife and gun, and entrusted Han Xin and Peng Yue with important tasks.

古文：匪躬尽瘁，焦思劳心，讨叛涣于河、潼，张声援于岐、雍，竟平大憝，粗立微劳。
现代文：舍身尽瘁，焦虑劳心，在黄河、潼关征讨叛逆，在岐阳、雍州大张声援，终于平定奸恶，粗立微小功劳。
English: They devoted themselves to the task, worked hard and anxiously, fought against the rebellion in the Yellow River and Shaoguan, and showed great solidarity in Qiyang and Yongzhou. Finally, they quelled the evil and made a small contribution.

古文：才旋騑于关西，寻统兵于河朔，训齐师旅，固护边陲，只将身许国家，不以贼遗君父。
现代文：才在关西回转旌旗，又紧接着领兵到河朔，整顿军旅，固守边陲，只想将身报效国家，不使贼寇遗害君父。
English: It was only in Kansai that he hoisted the national flag, and then he led the troops to Hexuo to rectify the military brigade and firmly guard the border. He only wanted to serve the country and not let the thieves and robbers harm his father.

古文：外忧少息，内患俄生，群小连谋，大臣遇害，栋梁既坏，社稷将倾。
现代文：外忧稍稍平息，内患骤然发生，群小勾结合谋，大臣遇害，栋梁已坏，社稷将要倾颓。
English: The external worries have subsided a little, the internal problems have suddenly occurred, the small groups have conspired, the minister has been killed, the pillar has been broken, and the society is about to collapse.

古文：朕方在籓维，以遭谗构。
现代文：我正在藩镇，也遭受谗言陷害。
English: I'm in the county town, and I'm also being set up.

古文：逃一生于万死，径赴阙庭；枭四罪于九衢，幸安区宇。
现代文：从万死中逃得一介生命，径奔京师洗刷罪名；在大街上诛杀四位元凶，有幸安定社稷天下。
English: He escaped death by a hair's breadth and ran to Beijing to clear his name; he fought and killed the four culprits on the street, and was fortunate enough to stabilize society and the world.

古文：将延汉祚，择立刘宗，征命已行，军情忽变。
现代文：正将延续后汉国运，选择拥立刘姓宗族，迎君之命已经发出，军情忽然发生变乱。
English: After the Han National Movement was about to continue, Liu Zongzong, surnamed Yingjun, chose to support the movement, and Yingjun's order had already been issued. The military situation suddenly became chaotic.

古文：朕以众庶所迫，逃避无由，扶拥至京，尊戴为主。
现代文：我被众军士卒所逼，无法逃避，扶立拥到京城，尊重推戴作为国主。
English: I was forced by all the officers and men, unable to escape, I was brought to the capital and respected as the head of the country.

古文：重以中外劝进，方岳推崇，■喊虽顺于群心，临御实惭于凉德。
现代文：又加上内外劝我登位，四方推重崇敬，点头应允虽顺乎民心，临朝御宇却有愧于薄德。
English: In addition, I was advised to ascend the throne both at home and abroad, and respected by all four parties. Although the nod of approval was in line with the people's hearts, the enthronement of the emperor was not worthy of virtue.

古文：改元建号，祗率于旧章；革故鼎新，宜覃于霈泽。
现代文：改变纪元建立年号，只是全出于旧典章；革除旧政建立新政，应该精心于施行仁德恩泽。
English: The change of the era and the year of establishment is entirely due to the old regulations; the abolition of the old regime and the establishment of the new regime should be carefully carried out with benevolence and grace.

古文：朕本姬室之远裔，虢叔之后昆，积庆累功，格天光表，盛德既延于百世，大命复集于眇躬，今建国宜以大周为号，可改汉乾祐四年为广顺元年。
现代文： 我本是周朝姬姓王室的后裔，虢叔的后代，历世积累的福气功劳，上通于天下明于地，隆盛的德望已延续到百代，大任又降临于我这渺小的一身，现今建国应以大周作为国号，可将后汉乾佑四年改为广顺元年。
English: I am originally a descendant of the royal family of the Zhou Dynasty, a descendant of Uncle Zou. The blessings and merits accumulated over the ages have been passed down to the world. The prosperity of virtue has extended to a hundred generations. The great task has come to me, this small body. Today, the founding of the country should take Great Zhou as the country name. It is possible to change the four years after Han Qianyou to the first year of Guangshun.

古文：自正月五日昧爽已前，应天下罪人，常赦所不原者，咸赦除之。
现代文：从正月五日黎明以前，凡天下罪人，按通常赦免仍不能原宥的，一律大赦释放他们。
English: From the fifth day of the first month, before dawn, all the sinners in the world who cannot be pardoned according to the usual pardons shall be pardoned and released.

古文：故枢密使杨邠、侍卫都指挥使史宏肇、三司使王章等，以劳定国，尽节致君，千载逢时，一旦同命，悲感行路，愤结重泉，虽寻雪于沈冤，宜更伸于渥泽，并可加等追赠，备礼归葬，葬事官给，仍访子孙叙用。
现代文：已故枢密使杨、侍卫都指挥使史弘肇、三司使王章等，以劳苦安定国家，极尽节操致力于君，千载难以相逢，而一朝共同舍命，悲感他们的辞世，郁愤直通九泉之下，虽然为他们洗刷了沉冤，应该再加以优厚的惠泽，均应加封追赠官爵，备全礼仪归葬，葬事费用由官府供给，再寻访他们的子孙予以录用。
English: Yang, the late Privy Councilor, Shi Hongzhao, the Commander of the Imperial Guards, and Wang Zhang, the Third Secretary, worked hard to stabilize the country and devoted themselves to you with utmost discipline. It would be difficult to meet them in a thousand years, but they gave up their lives together. They were saddened by their deaths, and their anger went straight to the bottom of the well. Although their grievances have been washed away, they should be given more generous benefits. They should all be posthumously awarded the title of peer, prepared for a full ceremonial burial, funeral expenses should be provided by the government, and their descendants should be recruited.

古文：其余同遭枉害者，亦与追赠。
现代文：其他同遭冤枉而杀害的人，也应该追赠官爵。
English: Others who were also unjustly killed should also be posthumously awarded a peerage.

古文：马步诸军将士等，戮力叶诚，输忠效义，先则平持内难，后乃推戴朕躬，言念勋劳，所宜旌赏。
现代文：马步诸军将士等，努力同心，贡献忠心表现节义，先前平定内患，后来推戴本人，记念他们的功劳，应该表彰奖赏。
English: The soldiers and officers of the army should be commended and rewarded for their concerted efforts, loyalty and dedication to the cause, previously to quell internal problems, and later to promote themselves, and their merits should be remembered.

古文：其原属将士等，各与等第，超加恩命，仍赐功臣名号，已带功臣者别与改赐。
现代文：原汉朝将士，各给予等级次第，格外施以恩宠，仍赐给功臣名号，已经是功臣的另外再改赐。
English: The names of meritorious soldiers of the former Han Dynasty are still given to meritorious soldiers with special grace according to the rank they were given. This is another re-awarding of meritorious soldiers.

古文：应左降官，未量移者与量移，已量移者与复资，已复资者量加叙录。
现代文：凡贬斥外放的官吏，没有改近地安置的改近地安置，已改近地安置的恢复他的供俸，已恢复供俸的加以录用。
English: Those officials who denounced the relocation, those who did not relocate were relocated, those who relocated were reinstated, those who relocated were reinstated, and those who reinstated were hired.

古文：亡官失爵之人，宜与齿用，配流徒役人，并许放还。
现代文：丢掉了官爵的人，应给予录用，发配流放服劳役的人，都允许放回。
English: Those who have lost their titles should be hired, and those who have been exiled to labor service should be allowed to return.

古文：诸处有犯罪逃亡之人，及山林草寇等，一切不问，如赦到后一月不归本业者，复罪如初。
现代文：各处若有犯罪逃亡的人，以及在山林中落草为寇的人，一切都不再追究，如果大赦实行后一个月内仍不回来重操故业的人，恢复赦前同样的罪过。
English: If there are criminal fugitives in various places, as well as people who steal weeds in the mountains and forests, everything will no longer be investigated. If a person does not return within one month after the implementation of the amnesty to resume his former occupation, the same crime before the amnesty will be restored.

古文：内外前任、见任文武官僚致仕官，各与加恩。
现代文：朝廷内外前任、现任文武官僚辞职退休归隐的，各与施加恩惠。
English: Both inside and outside the imperial court, former and current civil and military bureaucrats who resign, retire, and go into seclusion will each be granted favors.

古文：应河北沿边州县，自去年九月后来，曾经契丹蹂践处，其人户应欠乾祐三年终已前积年残欠诸色税物，并与除放。
现代文：凡在朝文武臣僚、朝内各部门主管、朝外各道行军副使、各州府马步都指挥使，如父母还健在，没有恩泽的就给予恩泽，已有恩泽的重加恩泽；如父母已去世，未曾追赠封爵者也给予追封，已封赠者再加封赠。 凡天下各州各县，所欠乾佑元年、二年以前的夏、秋两季的残税以及沿袭征收的贡物，和乾佑三年夏季的税收及各种拖欠，全部予以免除。
English: All the courtiers of the imperial court, the heads of departments within the imperial court, the vice-envoys of the imperial and foreign armies, and the commanding envoys of the provincial capitals, if their parents are still alive, will be given a reward if there is no reward, and if there is a reward, they will be given a heavy reward; if their parents have died and have not been awarded a peerage, they will also be given a posthumous seal, and those who have been awarded a seal will be given an additional seal. All the states and counties in the world will be exempted from the remaining taxes and tributes collected in the summer and autumn of the first year and

古文：应系三司主持钱谷败阙场院官取乾祐元年终已前征纳外，灼然无抵当者，委三司分析闻奏。
现代文：凡系三司主管钱粮败缺场院的官吏除收取乾佑元年年终以前征收外，显然没有财物可以抵当的，请三司分析予以报告给我。
English: If the officials in charge of the Three Departments of the Qian Rong Sheng Qiang Yuan clearly have no assets that can be credited, except for the collection of Qian Rong Sheng before the end of the first year of the year, please ask the Three Departments to analyze and report to me.

古文：天下仓场、库务，宜令节度使专切钤辖，掌纳官吏一依省条指挥，不得别纳斗余、秤耗，旧来所进羡余物色，今后一切停罢。
现代文：天下各处仓廪府库的事务，应令节度使专心严格地管理，掌管税收贡纳的官吏一切都要依照执行以上省免条例，不得另外征收斗余、秤耗，以前所进献的羡余贡物，今后全部停止进献。
English: The affairs of the Canggu prefectural treasury in all parts of the world should be strictly managed by the governor, and all officials in charge of tax tribute should be in accordance with the implementation of the above-mentioned provincial exemption regulations. It is not allowed to collect the surplus, the balance consumption, and the surplus tribute previously donated. In the future, all contributions will be stopped.

古文：应乘舆服御之物，不得过为华饰，宫闱器用，务从朴素，大官常膳，一切减损。
现代文： 凡衣食住行的物件，不得过于华丽雕饰，宫廷内的用具器皿，力求朴素，高官显贵们的平常伙食，统统降低标准。
English: All items of clothing, food and accommodation must not be too ornately carved, utensils and dishes in the court must be simple, and the ordinary meals of high-ranking dignitaries must all be of a lower standard.

古文：诸道所有进奉，以助军国之费，其珍巧纤华及奇禽异兽鹰犬之类，不得辄有献贡，诸无用之物、不急之务，并宜停罢。
现代文：各道府所有进贡奉献的东西，应用以资助军队国家的费用，那些珍贵小巧纤细华丽的东西以及奇异禽兽飞鹰猎犬等声色享乐之物，不得擅自献贡，那些无用的东西，非急需的物件，都应停止罢除。
English: All items donated by prefectures as tribute, items that can be used to subsidize the expenses of the military and the state, those precious, small, delicate and gorgeous items, as well as exotic animals such as flying eagles and hunting dogs, shall not be donated without authorization. Those useless items, items that are not urgently needed, should be stopped and removed.

古文：帝王之道，德化为先，崇饰虚名，朕所不取，苟致治之未洽，虽多端以奚为！
现代文：做帝王的方法手段，是以道德教化为首务。崇尚修饰虚名，是我不采用的。如果对于治理国家没有帮助，虽然呈现很多祥瑞又有什么用！
English: The method and means of being an emperor is to take moral enlightenment as the top priority. I do not advocate the embellishment of false names. If it does not help to govern the country, what is the use of showing a lot of happiness!

古文：今后诸道所有祥瑞，不得辄有奏献。
现代文：今后各道府所有祥瑞之事，不得擅自上奏奉献。
English: In the future, all auspicious events of all prefectures must not be recorded and dedicated without authorization.

古文：古者用刑，本期止辟，今兹作法，义切禁非。
现代文： 古人施用刑法，本是希望禁止奸邪。现今制定刑法，着重以道理道德来禁止不法行为。
English: The ancients used criminal law in the hope of prohibiting adultery. Today, criminal law is formulated with an emphasis on prohibiting illegal acts with reason and morality.

古文：盖承弊之时，非猛则奸凶难制；及知劝之后，在宽则典宪得宜。
现代文：因为面对混乱弊败的时代，不用强硬就难以制服奸邪凶恶；到懂得道理听从劝导之后，则宽刑缓法就更加适宜。
English: Because in the face of an era of chaos and failure, it is difficult to subdue evil without being tough; after understanding the truth and listening to persuasion, it is more appropriate to grant a reprieve.

古文：相时而行，庶臻中道。
现代文：根据时世施行不同刑法，才能行于正道而宽严适度。
English: According to the enforcement of different criminal laws at different times, it is only possible to act in a righteous way and be appropriately lenient and strict.

古文：今后应犯窃盗贼赃及和奸者，并依晋天福元年已前条制施行。
现代文：今后凡犯有偷盗抢劫财物以及犯和奸罪的人，都依照后晋天福元年以前条例执行。
English: In the future, all those who have committed theft, robbery of property and adultery will be executed in accordance with the regulations before the first year of Emperor Tianfu.

古文：应诸犯罪人等，除反逆罪外，其罪并不得籍没家产、诛及骨肉，一依格令处分。
现代文：凡各种犯罪的人，除犯叛逆大罪外，其他罪均不得没收家产、诛杀家人，全依法律条文处置。
English: People who commit all kinds of crimes, except for the major crime of treason, are not allowed to confiscate family assets or kill family members for other crimes, and will be dealt with in full accordance with the provisions of the law.

古文：其先于在京诸司差军将充诸州郡元从都押衙、孔目官、内知客等，并可停废，仍勒却还旧处职役。近代帝王陵寝，合禁樵采。
现代文： 天下诸侯，都有亲戚，应自行谨慎择取任用，一定要能有所贡献帮助。朝廷的选择任命，按理如有不恰当的，应改正失误，使能协合统一法规。近代帝王陵墓之地，应禁止砍伐采摘。
English: Princes and lords all over the world have relatives, so they should carefully choose their appointees, and they must be able to contribute help. The choice and appointment of the imperial court, if it is unreasonable, should correct mistakes and enable the unification of laws and regulations. The land of modern imperial tombs should be prohibited from cutting and harvesting.

古文：唐庄宗、明宗、晋高祖，各置守陵十户，以近陵人户充。
现代文：唐庄宗、明宗、晋高祖墓地，各安置十户人家守陵，以邻近陵墓的民户担任。
English: Tangzhuangzong, Mingzong and Jingao ancestral cemeteries, each placed ten households to guard the mausoleum, with the households near the mausoleum serving as guards.

古文：汉高祖皇帝陵署职员及守宫人，时日荐飨，并守陵人户等，一切如故。
现代文：汉高祖皇帝陵墓派职员及守墓人，按时祭祀，守陵的民户等，一切照旧。
English: The mausoleum of Emperor Han Gao Zu dispatched staff members and tomb guards, held the ritual on time, and the private households guarding the mausoleum, and so on, all as before.

古文：以滑州节度副使陈观为左散骑常侍，鄴都留守判官王溥为左谏议大夫，并充枢密院直学士。
现代文：仍以汉、晋的后代作为两王的后代看待，吩咐中书门下予以安排。 七日，上汉太后尊号叫昭圣皇太后。
English: He still regarded the descendants of the Han and Jin dynasties as the descendants of the two kings, and ordered Zhongshu to arrange it.On the seventh day, the honorary title of the Shanghan Empress Dowager was Zhaosheng Empress Dowager.

古文：以元从都押衙郑仁诲为客省使，知客押牙向训为宫苑使。北京留守刘崇遣押牙巩廷美致书，求刘赟归籓。
现代文：这天，诏令有关部门选择日期为已故汉主举行丧礼。北京留守刘崇派遣押牙巩廷美送上书信，请求将他儿子刘斌贝复归藩镇。
English: On this day, the relevant departments were ordered to choose a date for the funeral of the deceased Han master. Liu Chong, who remained in Beijing, sent a letter to Gong Tingmei, requesting that his son Liu Binbei be returned to the town.

古文：帝报曰： 朕在澶州之时，军情推戴之际，先差来直省李光美备见，必想具言，而况遐迩所闻，在后尽当知悉。
现代文：太祖回信说： 朕以前在澶州时，军中推戴为主之际，先派直省官李光美事先拜见你，推想他一定将情况全告诉了你，更何况事变远近都听说了，以后的事应全都知道。
English: The great-grandfather replied in a letter, "When I was in Zhangzhou in the past, when I was promoted to major in the army, I first sent the provincial official Li Guangmei to visit you in advance, thinking that he must have told you everything about the situation, not to mention that he had heard about the events from near and far, and he should know everything about the future.

古文：湘阴公比在宋州驻泊，见令般取赴京，但勿忧疑，必令得所。
现代文：湘阴公近来在宋州停驻，现令他收拾东西到京城来，尽可不必忧虑怀疑，一定让他得到一个适当的位置。
English: Hunan Yin Gong has recently been stationed in Songzhou, and now he has been ordered to pack his things and come to Beijing. There is no need to worry or doubt, and he will definitely get a suitable position.

古文：惟公在彼，固请安心，若能同力扶持，别无顾虑，即当便封王爵，永镇北门，铁券丹书，必无爱惜。
现代文：想公远在北京，请你务必放心，如果能同心扶持本朝，没有其他顾虑想法，便当封王赐爵，永远镇守北方门户，记载功勋盟誓的丹书铁券，一定不会吝惜。
English: If you want to be in Beijing, please be assured that if you can support this dynasty with one heart and mind, and have no other concerns, you will be knighted by the king, forever guard the northern gateway, and record the merits of the oath.

古文：乙亥，郓州节度使、守太师、兼中书令、齐王高行周进位尚书令；襄州节度使、检校太师、守太傅、兼中书令、齐国公安审琦进封南阳王；青州节度使、检校太师、守太保、兼中书令、魏国公符彦卿进封淮阳王，夔州节度使、侍卫亲军马步军都指挥使、检校太傅王殷加同平章事，充鄴都留守，典军如故。丙子，帝赴太平宫，为汉隐帝发丧，百官陪位如仪。
现代文：其他内心的情意，均叫来人口传。 派遣千牛卫将军朱宪充当到契丹的使者。在这以前，去年契丹永康王兀欲寇犯邢州、赵州，攻陷内丘。当返回时，兀欲派使者送给汉隐帝书信，使者到境内，碰上朝廷发生内乱，太祖平定京城，回到澶州，遇上契丹派来的使者，就与他一起进入京城朝廷。到现在，派朱宪伴送契丹使者回契丹，同时送去书信叙述鼎革汉朝天命的原因，又以一副黄金酒器和一副玉带送给兀欲。十四日，太祖到太平宫，为汉隐帝发丧，百官按礼仪各在其位相陪同。
English: Other inner feelings are called folk tales. Qian Niu Wei General Zhu Xian was sent to serve as an envoy to the Khitan Empire. Before this, last year, the Khitan Yongkang Wang Qian wanted to invade Bozhou and Zhaozhou and capture the Inner Hill. When he returned, he wanted to send an envoy to send a letter to Emperor Han Yin. The envoy came to the territory and encountered a civil disturbance in the imperial court. The Great Ancestor conquered Beijing and returned to Bozhou. When he met the envoy sent by the Khitan, he entered the imperial court with him. To date, Zhu Xian has sent a companion to send the

古文：是日，湘阴公元从右都押衙巩廷美、教练使杨温等，据徐州以拒命。
现代文：同一日，湘阴公原从右都押牙巩廷美、教练使杨温等人，占据徐州以抗拒王命。
English: On the same day, Xiangyin Gongyuan pressed Gong Tingmei, coach Yang Wen and others from the right to occupy Xuzhou to resist Wang Mu.

古文：俟新节度入城，当各除刺史，公可更以委曲示之。 
现代文：太祖派遣新任节度使王彦超领兵奔驰赶赴徐州，又赐给巩廷美等人诏书。
English: The great-grandfather dispatched the newly-appointed festival to make Wang Yanchao lead the troops to rush to Xuzhou, and also gave Gong Tingmei and others an imperial edict.

古文：丁丑，荆南高保融奏：去年十一月，朗州节度使马希萼破潭州；十二月十八日，缢杀马希广；至十九日，希萼自称天策上将军、武平静江宁远等军节度使、嗣楚王。
现代文：十五日，荆南高保融上奏，去年十一月，朗州节度使马希萼攻破潭州。十二月十八日，吊死了马希广。到十九日，马希萼自称为天策上将军，任武平、静江、宁远等军节度使，继位楚王。
English: On the fifteenth day of the month, the Jing Nan Gao Bao Rong was played. In November last year, the Langzhou Festival made Ma Xicai conquer Tanzhou. On the eighteenth day of December, he hanged Ma Xicai. On the nineteenth day, Ma Xicai called himself the general of the heavenly policy, and served as the military festival envoy of Wuping, Jingjiang and Ningyuan, and succeeded to the throne of King Chu.

古文：戊寅，湘阴公殂。
现代文：十六日，湘阴公去世。
English: On the 16th, Prince Xiangyin passed away.

古文：是日，诏曰：
现代文：十七日，诏令王彦超领兵进攻徐州。
English: On the 17th, he ordered Wang Yanchao to lead the troops to attack Xuzhou.

古文：朕以眇末之身，托于王公之上，惧德弗类，抚躬靡遑，岂可化未及人而过自奉养，道未方古而不知节量。
现代文：十八日，发表诏令说： 我以微贱的出身，升于王公之上，担心德望不相匹配，抚身自思常感惶恐不安，哪能将别人不够的拿来过多地奉养自己？
English: On the eighteenth day, he issued a decree saying: I am from a humble background, I have risen above the prince, I am worried that my reputation does not match, I am worried and anxious, how can I take too much from others to feed myself?

古文：与其耗费以劳人，曷若俭约而克己。
现代文：德业不如古贤却不知节俭计算，与其为了自身的消耗而使他人劳苦，何不勤俭节约而克制自己！
English: Virtue is not as good as the ancients, but they do not know how to calculate frugality. Instead of making others work hard for their own consumption, why not be diligent and frugal and restrain yourself!

古文：昨者所颁赦令，已述至怀。
现代文：以前颁发的大赦令，已经讲述了我的内心话。
English: The previous amnesty decree has already told my heart's story.

古文：宫闱服御之所须，悉从减损；珍巧纤奇之厥贡，并使寝停。
现代文：皇宫内衣食住行所需之物，全都减少；珍奇纤巧的贡物，都使停止。
English: The palace's supplies of clothing, food and shelter have all been reduced, and the flow of delicate tributes has come to a halt.

古文：尚有未该，再宜条举。
现代文：还有未讲完备的，应当再次列举。
English: There are also incomplete ones, which should be listed again.

古文：应天下州府旧贡滋味食馔之物，所宜除减。
现代文：凡天下各州府原来进贡的美味饮食之物，应该有所减少。
English: There should be a reduction in the amount of delicious foods that the world's prefectures used to pay tribute to.

古文：其两浙进细酒、海味、姜瓜，湖南枕子茶、乳糖、白沙糖、橄榄子，镇州高公米、水梨，易、定粟子，河东白社梨、米粉、绿豆粉、玉屑凡子面，永兴御田红粳米、新大麦面，兴平苏粟子，华州麝香、羚羊角、熊胆、獭肝、硃柿、熊白，河中树红枣、五味子、轻锡，同州石钅敖饼，晋、绛葡萄、黄消梨，陕府凤栖梨，襄州紫姜、新笋、橘子，安州折粳米、糟味，青州水梨，河阳诸杂果子，许州御李子，郑州新笋、鹅梨，怀州寒食杏仁，申州袭荷，亳州萆薢，沿淮州郡淮白鱼，如闻此等之物，虽皆出于土产，亦有取于民家，未免劳烦，率皆糜费。
现代文：如两浙进贡的细酒、海味、姜瓜，湖南的枕子茶、乳糖、白沙糖、橄榄子，镇州的高公米、水梨，易州、定州的栗子，河东的白杜梨、米粉、绿豆粉、玉屑糁子面，永兴的御田红粳米、新大麦面，兴平的苏栗子，华州的麝香、羚羊角、熊胆、獭肝、朱柿、熊白，河中的树红枣、五味子、轻饧，同州的石鏊饼，晋州、绛州的葡萄、黄消梨，陕府的凤栖梨，襄州的紫姜、新笋、桔子，安州的折粳米、糟味，青州的水梨，河阳的诸种杂果，许州的御李子，郑州的新笋、鹅梨，怀州的寒食杏仁，申州的飤荷，亳州的萆，沿淮河一带州郡的淮河白鱼，这些物品，虽然都出于土产，也有取之于民间百姓家中，未免劳顿烦扰，全是奢侈浪费。
English: For example, fine wine, seafood, ginger melon from the two Zhejiang tributes, pillow tea, lactose, white sand sugar, olive from Hunan, high-gluten rice, water pear from Zhenzhou, chestnuts from Yizhou and Dingzhou, white cedar pear, rice flour, mung bean flour, jade hazelnut noodles from Hedong, red glutinous rice and new barley noodles from Yongxing, chestnuts from Xingping, fennel, antelope horn, bear gall, ginger liver, persimmon, bear white from Huazhou, red jujube, five-spice, and light

古文：加之力役负荷，驰驱道途，积于有司之中，甚为无用之物，今后并不须进奉。
现代文：加上役使劳力肩挑背负，奔走在路上，堆积在有关部门，很是没有用处的东西，以后都不要进贡。
English: In addition, the laborers shouldering the burden, running on the road, piling up in the relevant departments, are very useless things, and do not pay tribute in the future.

古文：诸州府更有旧例所进食味，其未该者，宜奏取进止。
现代文：各州府还有按旧例应进贡的美味食品，上面没有包括进去的，应该上奏报告以使停止进贡。 
English: All prefectures also have delicious foods that are subject to tribute according to the old practice. If they are not included above, a report should be filed to stop the tribute.

古文：又诏在朝文武臣僚，各上封事，凡有益国利民之事，速具以闻。
现代文：又诏令在朝文武臣僚，各有奏折章表，凡是有益于国家有利于人民的事，赶快上报让皇上知道。
English: He also decreed that the courtiers in the imperial court should each have a report card, and that anything that was beneficial to the country and the people should be reported to the emperor as soon as possible.

古文：潞州奏，得石会关使王延美报，河东刘崇于正月十六日僭号。
现代文：二十四日，潞州报告，得到石会关使者王延美通告，河东刘崇于正月十六日僭称北汉皇帝帝号。
English: On the 24th, Zhangzhou reported that it had received a notice from Wang Yanmei, the envoy of the Stone Association of Guan, that Liu Chong of Hedong had assumed the title of Emperor of the Northern Han Dynasty on the 16th of the first month.

