古文：○康怀英
现代文：康怀英，充州人。
English: Kang Huaiying, a native of Chongzhou.

古文：康怀英，兗州人也。事硃瑾为牙将，梁兵攻瑾，瑾出略食丰、沛间，留怀英守城，怀英即以城降梁，瑾遂奔于吴。
现代文：跟随朱瑾担任牙将，梁军进攻朱瑾，朱瑾出兵至丰、沛二州问筹粮，留下康怀英守城，康怀英就献城向梁投降，朱瑾于是逃奔到昊。
English: Liang's army attacked Zhu Rong, Zhu Rong sent troops to Feng and Baizhou to ask for grain, leaving Kang Huaiying to defend the city. Kang Huaiying surrendered the city to Liang, and Zhu Rong fled to Hao.

古文：太祖得怀英，大喜。
现代文：梁太祖得到康怀英后极为高兴。
English: Liang Taizu was extremely happy after getting Kang Huaiying.

古文：后从氏叔琮攻赵匡凝，下邓州。
现代文：后来随氏叔琮进攻趟匡凝，打下邓州。
English: Later, he followed his uncle's attack to Congee and defeated Dangzhou.

古文：梁兵攻李茂贞于岐，以怀英为先锋，至武功，击杀岐兵万余人，太祖喜曰： 邑名武功，真武功也。 
现代文：梁军在岐州进攻李茂贞，令康怀英为先锋，到武功时，斩杀岐州兵一万多人，梁太祖高兴地说： 县名叫武功，真是武功啊。 
English: Liang's army attacked Li Maozhen in Qizhou, making Kang Huaiying the vanguard. When they arrived at Wugong, they killed more than 10,000 Qizhou soldiers. Liang Taizu said happily: The county is called Wugong, it really is Wugong.

古文：以名马赐之。
现代文：以名马赏赐康怀英。
English: He rewarded Kang Huaiying with a famous horse.

古文：是时，李周彝以鄜坊兵救岐，屯于三原界，怀英击走之，因取其翟州而还。
现代文：这时，李周彝率郦坊兵救援岐州，驻扎在三原境内，康怀英驱走他们，顺便夺取敌方翟州后返回。
English: At this time, Li Zhouyi led the Weifang soldiers to rescue Qizhou and stationed in the territory of Sanyuan. Kang Huaiying drove them away and returned after capturing the enemy's Weifang.

古文：岐兵屯奉天，怀英栅其东北。
现代文：岐州军队驻扎在奉天，康怀英在奉天东北筑栅下寨。
English: The Qizhou army is stationed in Fengtian, and Kang Huaiying is building a camp in the northeast of Fengtian.

古文：夜半，岐兵攻之，怀英以为夜中不欲惊它军，独以三千人出战，迟明，岐兵解去，身被十余疮。
现代文：半夜，岐州军队进攻他们，康怀英认为夜里不应惊扰别的军队，独自率二干人出战，快天亮时，岐州军队退去，康怀英身上十多处受伤。
English: In the middle of the night, the Qizhou army attacked them. Kang Huaiying believed that other armies should not be disturbed at night. He led two soldiers to fight alone. At dawn, the Qizhou army retreated. Kang Huaiying was injured in more than ten places.

古文：李茂贞与梁和，昭宗还京师，赐怀英 迎銮毅勇功臣 。
现代文：李茂贞和梁讲和，唐昭宗返回京城，赐康怀英 迎銮毅勇功臣 之称号。
English: Li Maozhen and Liang made peace, and Tang Zhaozong returned to Beijing and gave Kang Huaiying the title of "Courageous Hero."

古文：杨行密攻宿州，太祖遣怀英击走之，表宿州刺史。
现代文：杨行密进攻宿州，梁太祖派康怀英驱走他们，表奏为宿州刺史。
English: Yang Xingmi attacked Shuzhou, Liang Taizu sent Kang Huaiying to drive them away, and the performance was the beginning of the history of Shuzhou.

古文：迁保义军节度使。
现代文：调任保义军节度使。
English: He was transferred to the post of the Revolutionary Guard's military attaché.

古文：丁会以潞州叛梁降晋，太祖命怀英为招讨使，将行，太祖戒之，语甚切，怀英惶恐，以谓潞州期必得，乃筑夹城围之。
现代文：丁会盘据潞州背叛梁向晋投降，梁太祖任命康怀英为招讨使，准备出发时，梁太祖告诫他，话说得很急切，康怀英感到慌乱害怕，以为必须夺取潞州，于是修筑夹城包围潞州城。
English: According to Ding's plan, Zhangzhou would betray Liang Xiangjin and surrender. Liang Taizu appointed Kang Huaiying as a recruiting envoy. When preparing to leave, Liang Taizu cautioned him, and the words were very urgent. Kang Huaiying felt panicked and afraid, thinking that it was necessary to seize Zhangzhou, so he built a city to encircle Zhangzhou City.

古文：晋遣周德威屯于乱柳，数攻夹城，怀英不敢出战，太祖乃以李思安代怀英将，降怀英为都虞候。
现代文：晋派周德威驻扎在乱柳，几次进攻夹城，康怀英不敢迎战，梁太祖于是用李思安代替康怀英统兵，贬降康怀英为都虞候。
English: Jin sent Zhou Dewei to be stationed in Ranzhongliu and attacked the city several times. Kang Huaiying did not dare to fight, so Liang Taizu replaced Kang Huaiying's general with Li Si'an and demoted Kang Huaiying to the status of a provincial governor.

古文：久之，思安亦无功，太祖大怒，罢思安，以同州刘知俊为招讨使。
现代文：过了很久，李思安也一无所获，梁太祖大怒，罢免李思安，任命同州刘知俊为招讨使。
English: After a long time, Li Si'an also got nothing. Liang Taizu was furious, dismissed Li Si'an, and appointed Liu Zhijun from Tongzhou as the recruiting envoy.

古文：知俊未至军，太祖自至泽州，为怀英等军援，且督之。
现代文：刘知俊还未到军中，梁太祖已亲自赶到泽州，担任康怀英等人的后备军，并敦促他们。
English: Liu Zhijun had not yet joined the army, but Liang Taizu had personally rushed to Zezhou to serve as a reserve army for Kang Huaiying and others, and urged them on.

古文：已而晋王李克用卒，庄宗召周德威还。
现代文：不久晋王李克用死，唐庄宗召周德威返回。
English: Soon after the death of the Jin king Li Ke, Tang Zhuang Zong summoned Zhou Dewei to return.

古文：太祖闻晋有丧，德威去，亦归洛阳，而诸将亦少弛。
现代文：梁太祖听说晋有丧事，周德威离去，也回到洛阳，众将领也稍稍松弛。
English: Liang Taizu heard that Jin had a funeral, Zhou Dewei left and returned to Luoyang, and the generals also relaxed a little.

古文：庄宗谓德威曰： 晋之所以能敌梁，而彼所惮者，先王也。
现代文：唐庄宗对周德威说： 晋之所以能够和梁匹敌，而又为梁所害怕，是因为有先王。
English: Tang Zhuangzong said to Zhou Dewei: The reason why Jin is able to compete with Liang and Liang is afraid of him is because there was a previous king.

古文：今闻吾王之丧，谓我新立，未能出兵，其意必怠，宜出其不意以击之，非徒解围，亦足以定霸也。 
现代文：如今梁听说我们的先王死了，认为我刚刚登位，不能出兵打仗，他们的戒备一定很松懈，应当出其不意地攻击他们，不只是解围，也足以奠定霸业。 
English: Now that Liang heard that our former king had died, he thought that I had just ascended the throne and could not send troops to fight, that their defenses must be very lax, and that he should attack them unexpectedly, not only to relieve the siege, but also to establish hegemony.

古文：乃与德威等疾驰六日至北黄碾，会天大昏雾，伏兵三垂冈，直趋夹城，攻破之。
现代文：于是和周德威等人骑马飞奔六天赶到北黄碾，正碰上漫天大雾，在三垂冈设下埋伏，直奔夹城，将它攻破。
English: So he and Zhou Dewei and others galloped on horseback for six days to get to Beihwangnian. They encountered a thick fog, set up an ambush on Sankueoka, ran straight to Jiancheng, and broke through it.

古文：怀英大败，亡大将三百人，怀英以百骑遁归，诣阙请死。
现代文：康怀英大败，损失大将三百人，康怀英带着骑兵百人逃回，到朝廷请求赐死。
English: Kang Huaiying suffered a crushing defeat, losing a total of three hundred men. Kang Huaiying fled back with a hundred cavalrymen and went to the imperial court to plead for death.

古文：太祖曰： 去岁兴兵，太阴亏食，占者以为不利，吾独违之而致败，非尔过也。 
现代文：梁太祖说： 去年起兵时，月亮亏食，占卜的人认为出兵不利，我偏偏不听而导致失败，不是你的过错。 
English: Liang Taizu said, "Last year, when the troops were mobilized, the moon was waning, and soothsayers thought that it would be bad to send troops. It is not your fault that I did not listen and caused the failure.

古文：释之，以为右卫上将军。
现代文：故不再追究康怀英，任命他为右卫上将军。
English: Therefore, Kang Huaiying was no longer investigated, and he was appointed as the right guard general.

古文：刘知俊叛，奔于岐，以怀英为保义军节度使、西路副招讨使。
现代文：刘知俊反叛，逃奔到岐州，梁太祖任命康怀英为保义军节度使、西路副招讨使。
English: Liu Zhijun rebelled and fled to Qizhou. Liang Taizu appointed Kang Huaiying as the envoy of the Guoying Army and the deputy envoy of the Western Road.

古文：知俊以岐兵围灵武，太祖遣怀英攻邠宁以牵之。
现代文：刘知俊率岐州军围攻灵武，梁太祖派康怀英进攻邰宁来牵制他。
English: Liu Zhijun led the Qizhou army to besiege Lingwu, and Liang Taizu sent Kang Huaiying to attack Huning to contain him.

古文：怀英取宁、庆、衍三州，还至升平，知俊掩击之，怀英大败。
现代文：康怀英夺取宁、庆、衍三州，返回时走到升平，刘知俊袭击他们，康怀英大败。
English: Kang Huaiying captured Ning, Qing and Yan three prefectures, and went to Shengping when he returned. Liu Zhijun attacked them, and Kang Huaiying was defeated.

古文：徙镇感化。
现代文：调任镇守感化军。
English: Transferred to the post of town guard of the Kanka reform army.

古文：其后硃友谦叛附于晋，以怀英讨之，与晋人战白径岭，怀英又大败。
现代文：后来朱友谦反叛依附晋，命康怀英讨伐他，和晋军在白径岭作战，康怀英又大败。
English: Later, Zhu Youqian rebelled and attached himself to Jin, and ordered Kang Huaiying to fight against him. He fought against Jin's army in Baiji Ridge, and Kang Huaiying was defeated again.

古文：徙镇永平，卒于镇。
现代文：调任镇守永平，死在任上。
English: Transferred to the post of town guard Yongping, died in office.

古文：○刘掞刘掞，密州安丘人也。
现代文：刘郭，密州安丘人。
English: Liu Guo, a native of Anqiu, Mizhou.

古文：少事青州王敬武。敬武卒，子师范立。棣州刺史张蟾叛，师范遣指挥使卢洪讨蟾，洪亦叛。师范伪为好辞召洪，洪至，迎于郊外，命掞斩之座上，因使掞攻张蟾，破之。
现代文：年轻时跟随青州王敬武，王敬武死后，儿子王师范继位，棣州刺史张蟾反叛，王师范派指挥使卢洪讨伐张蟾，卢洪也反叛了，王师范假装好言好语召卢洪前来，卢洪到达，在郊外迎接，命令刘郡在座位上将他杀死，于是派刘郡进攻张蟾，并打败了他。
English: When he was young, he followed Qingzhou Wang Jingwu. After the death of Wang Jingwu, his son Wang Shifan succeeded to the throne. Zhang Xuan rebelled in Zhangzhou. Wang Shifan sent Lu Hong to fight Zhang Xuan. Lu Hong also rebelled. Wang Shifan called Lu Hong to come, pretending to be friendly. Lu Hong arrived, greeted him in the suburbs, ordered Liu County to kill him on the seat, and then sent Liu County to attack Zhang Xuan and defeated him.

古文：师范表掞登州刺史，以为行军司马。
现代文：王师范表奏刘郭为登州刺史，任命为行军司马。
English: Wang Shifan played the role of Liu Guo in the history of the march to the capital, and was appointed as the leader of the march.

古文：梁太祖西攻凤翔，师范乘梁虚，阴遣人分袭梁诸州县，它遣者谋多漏泄，事不成。
现代文：梁太祖向西进攻凤翔，王师范趁梁内部空虚，秘密派军队分别袭击梁的各个州县，其它被派遣的人多泄露计谋，没有成功。
English: Liang Taizu attacked Fengxiang to the west, Wang Shifan took advantage of Liang's internal emptiness and secretly sent troops to attack Liang's various states and counties separately. Other people who were dispatched mostly leaked the plot, but did not succeed.

古文：独掞素好兵书，有机略。
现代文：只有刘郡一向好读兵书，有谋略。
English: Only Liu County has always been good at reading military books and has a strategy.

古文：是时，梁已破硃瑾等，悉有兗、郓，以葛从周为兗州节度使，从周将兵在外，掞乃使人负油鬻城中，悉视城中虚实出入之所。
现代文：这时，梁已打败朱瑾等人，全部占据充、郓二州，任命葛从周为兖州节度使，葛从周在外带兵，刘郡于是派人担着油在城中卖，详细侦察城中虚实和进出要道。
English: By this time, Liang had defeated Zhu Xi and others, occupied all of the two prefectures of Chengdu and Handan, appointed Ge Zhou as the delegate of the Handan Festival, and Ge Zhou led the troops outside. Liu County then sent people to carry oil to sell in the city, and to conduct detailed reconnaissance of the city's facts and figures and the important routes in and out of the city.

古文：油者得罗城下水窦可入，掞乃以步兵五百从水窦袭破之，徙从周家属外第，亲拜其母，抚之甚有恩礼。
现代文：卖油的人发现罗城下水洞可以进入，刘郡于是派五百步兵从水洞进城袭击，攻破充州，迁移葛从周的家属到城外府宅，亲自拜见葛从周的母亲，很有礼节地安抚他们，照顾十分周到。
English: The oil salesman found that the Luocheng underwater cave could be entered, so Liu County sent five hundred infantrymen to attack the city from the cave, break through the state, relocate Ge from Zhou's family to the mansion outside the city, personally meet Ge from Zhou's mother, very politely appease them, and take very good care of them.

古文：太祖已出昭宗于凤翔，引兵东还，遣硃友宁攻师范、从周攻掞。
现代文：梁太祖把唐昭宗迁出凤翔后，率兵东归，派朱友宁进攻王师范，葛从周进攻刘郭。
English: After Liang Taizu moved Tang Zhaozong out of Fengxiang, he led the troops back east, sent Zhu Youning to attack Wang Shifan, and Ge Zhou to attack Liu Guo.

古文：掞以版舆置从周母城上，母呼从周曰： 刘将军待我甚厚，无异于汝。
现代文：刘郡用板车将葛从周的母亲抬到城墙上，葛母对葛从周喊道： 刘将军待我很好，和你没有什么不同。
English: Liu County used a flatbed truck to carry Ge Zhou's mother to the city wall. Ge's mother shouted to Ge Zhou: "General Liu treated me very well, no different from you.

古文：人臣各为其主，汝可察之！ 
现代文：臣子各自为其主，你要仔细考虑！ 
English: Each vassal is his or her own master, so think carefully!

古文：从周为之缓攻。
现代文：葛从周因此暂缓进攻。
English: As a result, Ge Cong Zhou suspended his attack.

古文：掞乃悉简妇人及民之老疾不足当敌者出之，独与少壮者同辛苦，分衣食，坚守以待。
现代文：刘郡于是挑选出所有妇女和百姓中老弱病残不能够抗敌的人，疏散他们出城，他只和年轻力壮的人同甘共苦，平分衣食，坚守待援。
English: Liu County then selected all women and people who were old, weak, sick or unable to resist the enemy, and evacuated them out of the city. He only shared his joys and sorrows with young and strong people, shared his food and clothing equally, and insisted on waiting for assistance.

古文：外援不至，人心颇离，副使王彦温逾城而奔，守陴者多逸。
现代文：城外援军未到，人心很涣散，副使王彦温越城而逃，守城的人很多也逃跑了。
English: Before the arrival of reinforcements from outside the city, the hearts of the people were very scattered. The deputy envoy Wang Yanwen fled across the city, and many of the defenders also fled.

古文：掞乃遣人阳语彦温曰： 副使勿多以人出，非吾素遣者，皆勿以行。 
现代文：刘郡于是派人假装对王彦温说： 你不要带太多人出去，不是我平常派遣的人，都不要带出去。 
English: Liu County then sent someone to pretend to say to Wang Yanwen: Don't take too many people out. Don't take anyone out who I don't usually send.

古文：又下令城中曰： 吾遣从副使者得出，否者皆族。 
现代文：又在城中下令说： 我派去跟随副使的人可以出去，其它人如果出城全部灭族。 
English: And he made a decree in the city, saying, Whomsoever I shall send with the deputy, let him go out: but if any man come out of the city, let him be put to death.

古文：城中皆惑，奔者乃止。
现代文：城里的人都很迷惑，逃跑的人于是不再继续。
English: The townspeople were puzzled, and the fugitives did not continue.

古文：已而梁兵闻之，果疑彦温非实降者，斩之城下，由是城守益坚。
现代文：不久梁军听说了，果然怀疑王彦温不是真心投降，在城下将他斩首，于是城中守备更加坚牢。
English: Soon after Liang's army heard about it, they suspected that Wang Yanwen wasn't really surrendering and beheaded him outside the city. As a result, the city's defenses were strengthened.

古文：师范兵已屈，从周以祸福谕掞，掞报曰： 俟吾主降，即以城还梁。 
现代文：玉盐范的军队已山穷水尽，葛从周用祸福得失开导刘郭，刘郭回答说： 等我的主人投降了，就把城归还给梁。 
English: Yu Yan Fan's army was exhausted. Ge Zhou used misfortune and fortune to enlighten Liu Guo. Liu Guo replied, "When my master surrenders, I will return the city to Liang."

古文：师范败，降梁，掞乃亦降。
现代文：王师范被打败，向梁投降。
English: Wang Shifan was defeated and surrendered to Liang.

古文：从周为具赍装，送掞归梁，掞曰： 降将蒙梁恩不诛，幸矣，敢乘马而衣裘乎！ 
现代文：刘郡于是也投降。葛从周为刘郡准备行装，送刘郡回梁，刘郡说： 我这个投降的将领承蒙梁的恩惠没有被杀，已很幸运了！怎敢骑马穿裘衣呢？ 
English: Therefore, Liu County also surrendered. Ge prepared the baggage for Liu County from Zhou and sent Liu County back to Liang. Liu County said: I, the surrendering general, was very lucky not to have been killed by the grace of Liang. How dare I ride a horse and wear a fur coat?

古文：乃素服乘驴归梁。
现代文：靛是穿着白色衣服骑着驴子回到梁。
English: The stork was dressed in white and rode a donkey back to Liang.

古文：太祖赐之冠带，饮之以酒，掞辞以量小，太祖曰： 取兗州，量何大乎？ 
现代文：梁太祖赏赐给他帽子、衣带，用酒招待他，刘郭以酒量小推辞，梁太祖说： 攻占充州，气量为何那么大呵？ 
English: Liang Taizu rewarded him with a hat and a sash, and invited him with wine. Liu Guo declined the offer, saying that the amount of wine was too small. Liang Taizu said, "Why do you have so much energy to capture Chengzhou?

古文：以为元从都押衙。
现代文：任命他为元从都押衙。
English: He was appointed to the post of deputy governor of the capital.

古文：是时，太祖已领四镇，将吏皆功臣旧人，掞一旦以降将居其上，及诸将见掞，皆用军礼，掞居自如，太祖益奇之。
现代文：适时，梁太祖已统领四镇，将吏都是功臣和老部下，刘郡一下子以降将身份位居他们之上，众将领见到刘郡时，都行军礼，刘郭坐在那儿神态自如，梁太祖更觉得他不寻常。
English: At the right time, Liang Taizu was already in command of the four towns. The generals were all meritorious soldiers and old subordinates. Liu County suddenly ranked higher than them. When the generals saw Liu County, they all performed military salutes. Liu Guo sat there with a relaxed demeanor. Liang Taizu thought he was unusual.

古文：太祖即位，累迁左龙武统军。
现代文：梁太祖登位，刘郡屡经升迁任左龙武统军。
English: Liang Taizu ascended to the throne, and Liu County was repeatedly promoted and transferred to the United Left Armies.

古文：刘知俊叛，陷长安，太祖遣掞与牛存节讨之，知俊走凤翔，太祖乃以长安为永平军，拜掞节度使。
现代文：刘知俊反叛，攻陷长安，梁太祖派刘郡和牛存节讨伐他，刘知俊逃到凤翔，梁太祖于是将长安改焉永平军，拜刘部为节度使。
English: Liu Zhijun rebelled and captured Chang'an. Liang Taizu sent Liu County and Niu Cun Festival to fight him. Liu Zhijun fled to Fengxiang. Liang Taizu then changed Chang'an into Yongping Army, and Bai Liu Department became the festival envoy.

古文：末帝即位，领镇南军节度使，为开封尹。
现代文：梁末帝登位后，领镇南军节度使，任开封尹。
English: After the enthronement of Emperor Liang Mucu, he led the Southern Army as the envoy of the festival, and was appointed as Kaifeng Yin.

古文：杨师厚卒，分相、魏为两镇，末帝恐魏兵乱，遣掞以兵屯于魏县。
现代文：杨师厚死，分相、魏为两个镇，梁末帝怕魏兵作乱，派刘郡率兵屯驻魏县。
English: Yang Shih Hou died, and Wei was divided into two towns. Emperor Liang sent Liu County and his soldiers to Wei County, fearing that Wei soldiers would make trouble.

古文：魏兵果乱，劫贺德伦降晋。
现代文：魏兵果然作乱，劫持贺德伦向晋投降。
English: The Wei soldiers indeed rioted, abducted Hedren and surrendered to the Jin.

古文：庄宗入魏，掞以谓晋兵悉从庄宗赴魏，而太原可袭，乃结草为人，执以旗帜，以驴负之往来城上，而潜军出黄泽关袭太原。
现代文：唐庄宗进入魏，刘郡认为晋车全部跟随唐庄宗去魏，因而叮以袭击太原，于是编成草人，让草人扛上旗帜，用驴背着在城上来往，军队却暗中取道黄泽关袭击太原。
English: When Tang Zhuangzong entered Wei, Liu County thought that all Jin chariots had followed Tang Zhuangzong to Wei, so they attacked Taiyuan with a jingle, so they formed a straw man, let the straw man carry the flag, and used a donkey to carry it around the city. However, the army secretly attacked Taiyuan through Huangze Pass.

古文：晋兵望梁垒旗帜往来，不知其去也，以故不追。
现代文：晋军望见梁的营垒旗帜来往穿梭，不知道梁军已离去，因此没有追赶。
English: The Jin army could see Liang's camp flags shuttling back and forth. They did not know that Liang's army had left, so they did not chase them.

古文：掞至乐平，遇雨，不克进而旋，急趋临清，争魏积粟，而周德威已先至，掞乃屯于莘县，筑甬道及河以馈军。
现代文：刘郭到达乐平，遇上下雨，不能前进而返回，急赴临清，争夺魏屯积的粮食，但周德威已经先到，刘郡于是驻扎在莘县，修筑甬道至黄河以便供应军需。
English: Liu Guo arrived in Leping. When it rained, he couldn't go forward and had to turn back. He rushed to Linqing to compete for the grain accumulated in Wei. However, Zhou Dewei had already arrived first, so Liu Guo was stationed in Jixian to build a railway to the Yellow River to supply the war supplies.

古文：久之，末帝以书责掞曰： 阃外之事全付将军，河朔诸州一旦沦没。
现代文：过了很久，梁末帝用书信责备刘郡说： 军中之事全部托付给你，河朔各州一下子全部丧失。
English: After a long time, Emperor Liang Muei wrote a letter to Liu County, saying: "I have entrusted everything in the army to you, and all the states in Hebei Province have been lost at once.

古文：今仓储已竭，飞輓不充，将军与国同心，宜思良画！ 
现代文：如今仓库中的储备已尽，军粮运送也不足，你和国家同心，应当想个好办法！ 
English: Now that the reserves in the warehouse have been exhausted, and the delivery of military food is not enough, you and the country should think of a good way!

古文：掞报曰： 晋兵甚锐，未可击，宜待之。 
现代文：刘郡回答说： 晋军锐不可挡，不能出击，应等待时机。 
English: Liu County replied: Jin's army is unstoppable, it cannot attack, it should wait for the right time.

古文：末帝复遣问掞必胜之策，掞曰： 臣无奇术，请人给米十斛，米尽则敌破矣！ 
现代文：梁末帝又派人向刘郭询问必胜敌军的计策，刘郭回答说： 我没有什么神奇的方法，请每人供给十斛米，米吃完敌人就被打败了！ 
English: Liang Mu Di also sent someone to Liu Guo to inquire about the strategy of the victorious enemy army. Liu Guo replied: I have no magic method, please provide ten stalks of rice for each person. After eating rice, the enemy will be defeated!

古文：末帝大怒，诮掞曰： 将军蓄米，将疗饥乎？
现代文：梁末帝大怒，讥讽刘郭说： 你储备粮食，是准备充饥呢？
English: Liang Mu Di flew into a rage, mocked Liu Guo and said: Are you stockpiling grain in preparation for famine relief?

古文：将破敌乎？ 
现代文：还是准备破敌？ 
English: Or are you ready to defeat the enemy?

古文：乃遣使者监督其军。
现代文：于是派遣使臣监督刘郡的军队。
English: So he sent an envoy to supervise the troops in Liu County.

古文：掞召诸将谋曰： 主上深居禁中，与白面兒谋，必败人事。
现代文：刘郭召见众将领商议说： 皇上深居宫禁之中，和白面书生谋划，一定会坏事。
English: Liu Guo summoned the generals for consultation and said: The emperor is under house arrest, and if he plans with white-faced scholars, it will surely be a bad thing.

古文：今敌盛，未可轻动，诸君以为如何？ 
现代文：如今敌人强大，不可轻举妄动，各位认为怎么样？ 
English: Now that the enemy is strong, we must not act rashly. What do you think?

古文：诸将皆欲战，掞乃悉召诸将坐之军门，人以河水一杯饮之，诸将莫测，或饮或辞，掞曰： 一杯之难犹若此，滔滔河流可尽乎？ 
现代文：将领们都想作战，刘郡于是召集全部将领坐在军门上，每人拿一杯黄河水给他们喝，将领们不知其意，有的喝有的推辞，刘郡说： 喝一杯水还这样作难，滔滔黄河水喝得完吗？ 
English: The generals all wanted to fight, so Liu Shun called all the generals to sit on the gate, and each of them took a glass of Yellow River water to drink. The generals did not know what to do, some of them drank and some of them made excuses. Liu Shun said, "Is it still so difficult to drink a glass of water, can the Yellow River water be drunk?

古文：诸将皆失色。
现代文：将领们脸色都变了。
English: The faces of the generals changed.

古文：是时，庄宗在魏，数以劲兵压掞营，掞不肯出，而末帝又数促掞，使出战。
现代文：逭时，唐庄宗在魏，几次率强兵逼近刘郡的军营，刘郭不愿迎战，而梁末帝又多次催促刘郡，要他迎战。
English: At that time, Tang Zhuangzong was in Wei, and several times he led strong soldiers to approach Liu County's military camp. Liu Guo did not want to fight, but Emperor Liang urged Liu County many times to fight.

古文：庄宗与诸将谋曰： 刘掞学《六韬》，喜以机变用兵，本欲示弱以袭我，今其见迫，必求速战。 
现代文：唐庄宗和将领们商议说： 刘郭学遇《六韬》，喜欢靠机谋权变打仗，原想先显示弱小再袭击我，现在他被逼迫，一定会寻求速战速决。 
English: Tang Zhuangzong and the generals discussed and said: Liu Guo learned from "Six Degrees of Separation" and likes to rely on opportunism to change the war. Originally, he wanted to show weakness first and then attack me. Now that he is being persecuted, he will definitely seek a quick war.

古文：乃声言归太原，命符存审守魏，阳为西归，而潜兵贝州。
现代文：于是声称要返回太原，命令符存审守魏，假装西归，在贝州埋伏军队。
English: So he claimed that he wanted to return to Taiyuan, ordered Fu Xun to defend Wei, pretended to return to the West, and ambushed the army in Bechu.

古文：掞果报末帝曰： 晋王西归，魏无备，可击。 
现代文：刘郡果然报告梁末帝说： 晋王已经西归，魏没有防备，可以出击。 
English: Liu County did indeed report to Liang Masti that: Jin Wang has returned to the west, Wei is unprepared and can attack.

古文：乃以兵万人攻魏城东，庄宗自贝州返趋击之。
现代文：于是率兵一万人进攻魏城束，唐庄宗从贝州急速返回袭击他们。
English: So he led ten thousand soldiers to attack Wei Chengzhu, and Tang Zhuozong quickly returned from Beizhou to attack them.

古文：掞忽见晋军，惊曰： 晋王在此邪！ 
现代文：刘郡忽然看见晋军，惊慌地说： 晋王在这里呢！ 
English: Liu County suddenly saw the Jin army and said in panic, "The Jin king is here!"

古文：兵稍却，追至故元城，庄宗与符存审为两方阵夹之，掞为圆阵以御晋人。
现代文：军队稍稍退却，追到旧时的元城，唐庄宗和符存审布成两个方阵夹击他们，刘郭布成圆阵抵御晋军。
English: The army retreated a little and chased them to the old Yuancheng. Tang Zhuangzong and Fuxinbu formed two square lines to attack them, and Liu Guobu formed a round line to resist the Jin army.

古文：兵再合，掞大败，南奔，自黎阳济河，保滑州。
现代文：两军再次交锋，刘郭大败，向南逃跑，从黎阳渡过黄河，退保滑州。
English: The two armies clashed again, Liu Guo was heavily defeated and fled southwards, crossing the Yellow River from Liyang and withdrawing to the safety of Shizhou.

古文：末帝以为义成军节度使。
现代文：梁末帝任命刘郡为义成军节度使。
English: Emperor Liangmu appointed Liu County to be the envoy of the Yicheng Army.

古文：明年，河朔皆入于晋，降掞亳州团练使。
现代文：第二年，河朔之地都被晋占领，贬降刘郡为毫州团练使。
English: In the second year, all the places in Hexuo were occupied by the Jin Dynasty, and Liu County was demoted to the rank of milling state regimental training envoy.

古文：兗州张万进反，拜掞兗州安抚制置使。
现代文：充州张万进反叛，拜刘郡为兖州安抚制置使。
English: Zhang Wanjin of Chenzhou rebelled, and Bai Liu County was assigned as the pacification envoy of Bozhou.

古文：万进败死，乃拜掞泰宁军节度使。
现代文：张万进失败死去，于是拜刘邮为泰奎里节度使。
English: Zhang Wanjin failed and died, so Bai Liupo became the secretary of the Taiquiri Festival.

古文：硃友谦叛，陷同州，末帝以掞为河东道招讨使，行次陕州，掞为书以招友谦，友谦不报，留月余待之。
现代文：朱友谦反叛，攻陷同州，梁末帝任命刘郡为河东道招讨使，行进到陕州，刘郡写信招降朱友谦，朱友谦没有回音，在此停留一个多月等待他。
English: Zhu Youqian rebelled, invaded and occupied Tongzhou, Emperor Liang Mudu appointed Liu County as the host of the river to recruit envoys, marched to Shaanxi, Liu County wrote a letter to recruit Zhu Youqian, Zhu Youqian did not reply, and stayed here for more than a month waiting for him.

古文：尹皓、段凝等素恶掞，乃谮之，以为掞与友谦亲家，故其逗留以养贼。
现代文：尹皓、段凝等人一向讨厌刘郡，于是诬告他，认为刘郡和朱友谦是亲家，因此纔逗留不前以便贼军羽翼丰满。
English: Yin Qi, Duan Jian and others always hated Liu County, so they falsely accused him, thinking that Liu County and Zhu Youqian were relatives, so they stayed behind to make the wings of the bandits full.

古文：已而掞兵数败，乃罢掞归洛阳，酖杀之，年六十四，赠中书令。
现代文：不久刘郡的军队多次被打败，于是罢免刘郡，让他返回洛阳，用毒酒杀了他，时年六十四岁，赠官中书令。
English: Soon, the army of Liu County was defeated many times, so he dismissed Liu County, let him return to Luoyang, and killed him with poisoned wine. He was 64 years old at the time, and he was awarded the Order of the People's Republic of China.

古文：子遂凝、遂雍，事唐皆为刺史。
现代文：刘郡的儿子刘遂凝、刘遂雍，在唐做官都任刺史。
English: The sons of Liu County, Liu Sui Jing and Liu Sui Yong, were both appointed as officials in Tang.

古文：掞妾王氏有美色，掞卒后，入明宗宫中，是为王淑妃。
现代文：刘郭的小妾王氏容貌美丽，刘郭死后，进入唐明宗宫中，这就是王淑妃。
English: Liu Guo's concubine, Wang Shi, was beautiful. After Liu Guo's death, she entered the court of the Tang and Ming dynasties. This is Wang Shu Fei.

古文：明宗晚年，淑妃用事，掞二子皆被恩宠。
现代文：唐明宗晚年，淑妃专权，刘郡的两个儿子都受到宠幸。
English: In Tang Mingzong's later years, Shufei had exclusive power, and Liu County's two sons were favored.

古文：潞王从珂反于凤翔，时遂雍为西京副留守，留守王思同率诸镇兵讨凤翔，战败东归，遂雍闭门不内，悉封府库以待潞王。
现代文：潞王李从珂在凤翔反叛，当时刘遂雍任西京副留守，留守王思同率领各镇军队讨伐凤翔，被打败后东归，刘遂雍关闭城门不让他们入城，查封历有仓库等待潞王。
English: The warlord Li Congke rebelled in Fengxiang. At that time, Liu Suiyong stayed behind in Xijing as deputy warlord. The warlord Wang Sicong led the troops of the towns to fight against Fengxiang. After being defeated, he returned to the east. Liu Suiyong closed the city gate to prevent them from entering the city, and sealed the warehouse to wait for the warlord.

古文：潞王前军至者，悉以金帛给之。
现代文：潞王的先头部队到达，全都用金银绸缎供给他们。
English: The vanguard of the king's army arrived, and they were all supplied with gold, silver, and silk.

古文：潞王见遂雍，握手流涕，由是事无大小皆与图议。
现代文：潞王见到刘遂雍，握手哭泣，从此事情不论大小都和刘遂雍商量。
English: When King Zhai saw Liu Suiyong, he shook hands with him and wept. From then on, he discussed all matters with Liu Suiyong, no matter how big or small.

古文：废帝入立，拜遂雍淄州刺史，以掞兄琪之子遂清代遂雍为西京副留守。
现代文：唐废帝入官登位，拜刘遂雍为淄州刺史，令刘郡的哥哥刘琪的儿子刘遂清代替刘遂雍任西京副留守。
English: Emperor Tang Wulao ascended to the throne, and Liu Suiyong became the history of Zhangzhou. Liu Suiqing, the son of Liu County's brother Liu Qi, replaced Liu Suiyong as deputy governor of Xijing.

古文：遂清历易、棣等五州刺史，皆有善政，迁凤州防御使、宣徽北院使，判三司。
现代文：刘遂清历任易、棣等五州刺史，都有好的政绩，调任凤州防御使、宣徽北院使，判三司。
English: Liu Suiqing was successively appointed as the defense minister of Fengzhou and the envoy of the Northern Yuan Dynasty, and was awarded the title of Third Division.

古文：晋开运中为安州防御使以卒。
现代文：晋开连年间任安州防御使而死。
English: He died while serving as a defense attaché in Anzhou during the reign of Emperor Jin Kai Lian.

古文：遂清性至孝，居父丧哀毁，乡里称之。
现代文：刘遂清天性极孝顺，为父亲服丧悲哀得身体几乎不支，乡人很赞赏他。
English: Liu Suiqing was extremely filial by nature. He was so saddened by his father's death that he could barely stand. The villagers admired him very much.

古文：尝为淄州刺史，迎其母，母及郊，遂清为母执辔行数十里，州人咸以为荣。
现代文：曾任淄州刺史，迎接他的母亲到州，母亲到郊外时，刘遂清为母亲驾车行走几十里，州人都以此为荣。
English: When Liu Suiqing, who was once the governor of Zhangzhou, welcomed his mother to Zhangzhou and her mother to the suburbs, Liu Suiqing drove and walked dozens of miles for his mother. People in Zhangzhou are proud of this.

古文：○牛存节牛存节，字赞正，青州博昌人也。
现代文：牛存节字赞正，青州博昌人。
English: Niu Cunxu, a member of the Qingzhou Baochang people.

古文：初名礼，事诸葛爽于河阳，爽卒，存节顾其徒曰： 天下汹汹，当得英雄事之。 
现代文：原名牛礼，在河阳跟随谙葛爽，诸葛爽死后，牛存节望着他的随从说： 天下大乱，应当选择英雄投靠他。 
English: Formerly known as Niu Li, he followed Zhuge Shuang in Kheyang, and after Zhuge Shuang died, Niu Cunjie looked at his followers and said: The world is in turmoil, and heroes should be chosen to support him.

古文：乃率其徒十余人归梁太祖。
现代文：于是率领他的随从十多人归附梁太祖。
English: He then led more than ten of his followers to join Liang Taizu.

古文：存节为人木强忠谨，太祖爱之，赐之名字，以为小校。
现代文：牛存节为人淳朴刚强、忠心谨慎，梁太祖很喜欢他，赐给他名和字，让他作小校。
English: Niu Cunjie is a simple, strong, loyal and prudent person. Liang Taizu liked him very much, gave him his name and character, and let him be a small school.

古文：张晊攻汴，存节破其二寨。
现代文：张睫进攻汴州，牛存节攻破他的两个营寨。
English: Zhang Lash attacked Zhangzhou, and Niu Cunjie broke through his two encampments.

古文：梁攻濮州，战南刘桥、范县，存节功多。
现代文：梁进攻濮州，在南刘桥、范县作战，牛存节功劳最多。
English: Liang attacked Zhangzhou and fought in South Liuqiao and Fan County. Niu Cunxu received the most credit.

古文：李罕之围张全义于河阳，全义乞兵于梁，太祖以存节故事河阳，知其间道，使以兵为前锋。
现代文：李罕之在河阳围攻张全义，张全义向梁求兵援助，梁太祖因为牛存节曾经在河阳做官，熟悉那里的小路，让他率兵担任前锋。
English: Li Hanzhi besieged Zhang Quanyi in Heyang, and Zhang Quanyi appealed to Liang for military assistance. Liang Taizu had been an official in Heyang because of the Cow Festival, and was familiar with the back roads there, so he led the troops as a forward.

古文：是时岁饥，兵行乏食，存节以金帛就民易干葚以食军，击走罕之。
现代文：这年闸饥荒，出兵之后缺乏粮食，牛存节用金银绸缎向老百姓换取干桑果给士兵作为食物，打跑了李罕之。
English: This year, there was a famine in Zhaozhou, there was a shortage of grain after the soldiers were sent out, and the cattle preservation festival used gold and silver silk cocoons to exchange dried mulberries for the people to give to the soldiers as food, which made Li Hanzhi run away.

古文：太祖攻魏，存节下魏黎阳、临河，杀魏万二千人，与太祖会内黄。
现代文：梁太祖进攻魏，牛存节攻克魏黎阳、临河，斩杀魏军一万二干人，和梁太祖在内黄会师。
English: Liang Taizu attacked Wei, Niu Cunjie attacked Wei Liyang, Linhe, killed twelve thousand Wei soldiers, and Liang Taizu joined the Huang division.

古文：迁滑州牢城遏后指挥使。
现代文：迁任滑州牢城遏后指挥使。
English: He was transferred to the commanding officer of the Slushuo Prison after the uprising.

古文：梁兵攻郓，存节使都将王言藏船郓西北隅濠中，期以日午渡兵逾濠急攻之。
现代文：梁军进攻郫州，牛存节派都将王言在郓州西北角的城濠中埋伏战船，约定中午用船渡兵跨越城濠，迅速进攻敌军。
English: Liang's army attacked Zhangzhou, and the Niu Cun Festival faction ambushed Wang Yan's warship in the city wall in the northwest corner of Zhangzhou, and agreed to cross the city wall by boat at noon and quickly attack the enemy army.

古文：会营中火起，郓人登城望火，言伏不敢动，与存节失期，存节独破郓西甕城门，夺其濠桥，梁兵得俱进，遂破硃宣。
现代文：恰逢军营中起火，郫州人登上城墙观火，王言伏在城濠中不敢行动，和牛存节失约，牛存节独自攻破郓州西面瓮城门，抢占濠沟上的吊桥，梁军得以全部进城，于是打败朱宣。
English: At the same time, a fire broke out in the military camp, the people of Zhangzhou climbed the city wall to watch the fire, Wang Yan crouched in the battlements and did not dare to act. He broke the contract with Niu Cunjie, and Niu Cunjie alone broke through the west gate of Zhangzhou and seized the suspension bridge on the Yinggu. Liang's army was able to enter the city and defeated Zhu Xuan.

古文：从葛从周攻淮南，从周败渒河，存节收其散卒八千以归。
现代文：随葛从周进攻淮南，葛从同在淬河被打败，牛存节收容溃散的士兵八千人返回。
English: With Ge Zhou's attack on Huainan, Ge Zhou's defeat at the Yangtze River, and Niu Cunjie's taking in of the scattered soldiers, eight thousand returned.

古文：拜亳、宿二州刺史。
现代文：太祖拜他为亳、宿二州刺史。
English: His great-great-grandfather worshipped him as a god, and he lived in two states.

古文：硃瑾走吴，召吴兵攻徐、宿，存节谋曰： 淮兵必不先攻宿，然宿沟垒素固，可以御敌。 
现代文：朱瑾逃到昊，召集昊兵进攻宿、徐二州，牛存节谋划说： 淮军一定不会先进攻宿州，因为宿州的濠沟营垒素来坚固，可以抗敌。 
English: Zhu Xi fled to Hao and summoned soldiers from Hao to attack Shuzhou and Xu Erzhou. Niu Cunjie made a plan and said, "The Huai Army will definitely not advance to attack Shuzhou, because Shuzhou's Yugu camp is usually strong and can resist the enemy.

古文：乃夜以兵急趣徐州，比傅徐城下，瑾兵方至，望其尘起，惊曰： 梁兵已来，何其速也！ 
现代文：于是夜晚率兵急赴徐州，等赶到徐州城下时，朱瑾的军队刚到，他们望着飞起的烟尘，惊慌地说： 梁军已到，为何如此迅速！ 
English: So he rushed to Xuzhou at night, and when they arrived at the foot of Xuzhou Castle, Zhu Xi's army had just arrived. They looked at the flying smoke and dust and said in panic: Liang's army has arrived, why so quickly!

古文：不能攻而去。
现代文：没能进攻就离去了。
English: He left without being able to attack.

古文：已而太祖使者至，授存节军机，悉与存节意合，由是诸将益服其能。
现代文：不久梁太祖的使臣来到，向牛存节传达军事计划，都和牛存节的主意不谋而合，从此将领们更加佩服他的才能。
English: Soon, Liang Taizu's envoys came to convey the military plan to Niu Cunjie, which coincided with the idea of Niu Cunjie. From then on, the generals admired his talent even more.

古文：迁潞州都指挥使。
现代文：迁任潞州都指挥使。
English: He was transferred to the post of commanding envoy of Bozhou.

古文：太祖攻凤翔，使召存节。
现代文：梁太祖进攻凤翔，派人召回牛存节。
English: Liang Taizu attacked Fengxiang and sent someone to call back the cattle.

古文：存节为将，法令严整而善得士心，潞人送者皆号泣。
现代文：牛存节作为将领，法令严整而又善于嬴得士兵的欢心，潞州送行的人都号哭流泪。
English: As the commander of the Cow Survival Day, the laws are strict and good at winning the favor of the soldiers. The people who saw off the soldiers from Zhangzhou cried and shed tears.

古文：累拜邢州团练使、元帅府左都押衙。
现代文：历次升迁至邢州团练使、元帅府左都押衙。
English: He was promoted to Bozhou regimental drill sergeant several times, and was assigned to the Left Division of the Marshal's Office.

古文：太祖即位，拜右千牛卫上将军。
现代文：梁太祖登位，拜他为右干牛卫上将军。
English: Liang Taizu ascended to the throne, and he was worshipped as the Right-Handed Cow-Guardian General.

古文：从康怀英攻潞州，为行营排阵使。
现代文：随康怀英进攻潞州，任行营排阵使。
English: With Kang Huaiying's attack on Bozhou, he served as a battalion platoon commander.

古文：晋兵已破夹城，存节等以余兵归，行至天井关，闻晋兵攻泽州，存节顾诸将曰： 吾行虽不受命，然泽州要害，不可失也。 
现代文：晋军攻破夹城后，牛存节等人率领残兵返回，行进到天井关时，听说晋军进攻泽州，牛存节望着将领们说： 我这次出征虽没有接到其它命令，但泽州是紧要的地方，不能丢失。 
English: After the Jin army broke through Jiancheng, Niu Cunjie and others led the remnants of the army to return. When they marched to Dingguan, they heard that the Jin army attacked Zezhou. Niu Cunjie looked at the generals and said: Although I have not received any other orders this time, Zezhou is an important place and cannot be lost.

古文：诸将皆不欲救之。
现代文：将领们都不想去救援泽州。
English: The generals do not want to go to the rescue of Zezhou.

古文：存节戒士卒熟息，已而谓曰： 事急不赴，岂曰勇乎！ 
现代文：牛存节命令士兵好好休息，然后说道： 事情危急而不赶去，难道称得上勇敢吗！ 
English: Cattle Preservation Day ordered the soldiers to have a good rest, and then said: If things are critical and you don't hurry, can you really be called brave!

古文：举策而先，士卒随之。
现代文：于是举鞭打马当先而行，士兵们都随他而去。
English: So the whipping horse led the way, and the soldiers followed him.

古文：比至泽州，州人已焚外城，将降晋，闻存节至，乃稍定。
现代文：到达泽州时，州中人已经焚烧外城，准备向晋投降，听说牛存节到来，纔稍稍安定下来。
English: When they arrived in Zezhou, the people in the middle of the state had already burned the outer city and were preparing to surrender to Jin. Hearing that the Cow Preservation Day was coming, they settled down a little.

古文：存节入城，助泽人守，晋人穴地道以攻之，存节选勇士数十，亦穴地以应之，战于隧中，敌不得入，晋人解去。
现代文：牛存节进入城中，协助泽州人守城，晋人挖地道攻城，牛存节挑选几十个勇士，也挖地道对付他们，在地道中发生战斗，敌人无法进城，晋人撤围而去。
English: Niu Cunjie entered the city and helped the people of Zhejiang to defend the city. The Jin people dug tunnels to attack the city. Niu Cunjie selected dozens of warriors and dug tunnels to deal with them. A battle took place in the tunnels. The enemy was unable to enter the city, and the Jin people withdrew.

古文：迁左龙虎统军、六军都指挥使、绛州刺史，迁鄜州留后。
现代文：迁任左龙虎统军、六军都指挥使、绛州刺史，调任邱州留后。
English: He was transferred to the post of commander of the United Army of the Left Dragon and the Tiger and the Six Armies. He was assigned to Zhangzhou and stayed in Qiuzhou.

古文：同州刘知俊叛，奔凤翔，乃迁存节匡国军节度使。
现代文：同州刘知俊反叛，逃奔凤翔，于是调任牛存节为匡国军节度使。
English: Liu Zhijun of the same state rebelled and fled to Fengxiang, so he was transferred to the Cattle Preservation Section as the commander of the Kuangguo Army.

古文：友珪立，硃友谦叛附于晋，西连凤翔，存节东西受敌。
现代文：朱友珪登位，朱友谦反叛依附晋，西面和凤翔相连，牛存节东西两面受敌。
English: Zhu Youjun ascended to the throne, Zhu Youqian rebelled and clung to Jin, the west side was connected to Fengxiang, and the east and west sides of Niu Cunjie were attacked by enemies.

古文：同州水咸而无井，知俊叛梁，以渴不能守而走，故友谦与岐兵合围持久，欲以渴疲之，存节祷而择地凿井八十，水皆甘可食，友谦卒不能下。
现代文：同州水咸而又没有井，刘知俊背叛梁后，因为缺水不能坚守而逃跑，因此朱友谦和岐兵一起包围同州，旷日持久，想用缺水来拖垮他们，牛存节祈祷后选地凿井八十口，井水都甘甜可饮，朱友谦最终不能攻克同州。
English: Tongzhou has salty water but no wells. After Liu Zhijun betrayed Liang, Liu Zhijun fled because he could not hold out due to the lack of water. Therefore, Zhu Youqian and Qi soldiers surrounded Tongzhou for a long time, trying to use the lack of water to drag them down. After praying for the Cow Preservation Day, they dug 80 wells at selected places. The well water was sweet and drinkable. Zhu Youqian could not conquer Tongzhou in the end.

古文：末帝立，加同中书门下平章事，徙镇天平。
现代文：梁末帝登位，加授同中书门下平章事头衔，调任镇守天平军。
English: Emperor Liang Mucai ascended to the throne, conferred the title of Tongzhong Shumen Shimo Pingzhangji, and transferred to the town guard of the Tianping Army.

古文：蒋殷反徐州，遣存节攻破之，以功加太尉。
现代文：蒋殷在徐州反叛，派牛存饰攻破徐州，因功加官太尉。
English: Jiang Yin rebelled in Xuzhou, sent Niu Cunzhu to break through Xuzhou, and was promoted to lieutenant for his efforts.

古文：梁、晋相距于河上，存节病痟，而梁、晋方苦战，存节忠愤弥激，治军督士，未尝言病。
现代文：梁、晋在黄河上相持，牛存节患头痛病，而梁、晋正在苦战，牛存节更加忠勇激发，整治军队督促士兵，不曾谈起他的病情。
English: Liang and Jin held each other on the Yellow River. Niu Cunjie suffered from a headache, while Liang and Jin were fighting hard. Niu Cunjie inspired more loyalty and courage, rectified the army and urged soldiers, and never talked about his illness.

古文：病革，召归京师，将卒，语其子知业曰： 忠孝，吾子也。 
现代文：病情危急，被召回京城，临死前，牛存节对他的儿子牛知业说： 要做到忠孝，纔算是我的儿子。 
English: In critical condition, he was called back to Beijing. Before his death, Niu Cunjie said to his son Niu Zhiyuan: "To be loyal and filial, Niu is my son."

古文：○张归霸弟归厚归弁张归霸，清河人也。
现代文：再没有提到别的事。赠官太师。张归霸，清河人。
English: Nothing else was mentioned. The bestowal of the title of Grand Master. Zhang Guiba, a native of Qinghe.

古文：末帝娶其女，是为德妃。
现代文：梁末帝娶他的女儿，这就是德妃。
English: Emperor Liang Muyang married his daughter, this is the German Empress.

古文：归霸少与其弟归厚、归弁俱从黄巢，巢败东走，归霸兄弟乃降梁。
现代文：张归霸年轻时和弟弟张归厚、张归弁都跟随黄巢，黄巢被打败后束逃，张归霸兄弟于是向梁投降。
English: When Zhang Guiba was young, he and his younger brothers Zhang Gui Hou and Zhang Guiben all followed Huang Chao. Huang Chao was defeated and fled. Zhang Guiba's brothers then surrendered to Liang.

古文：秦宗权攻汴，归霸战数有功。
现代文：秦宗权进攻汴州，张归霸数次作战有功。
English: Qin Zongquan attacked Bozhou, and Zhang Guibao made several successful operations.

古文：张晊军赤冈，以骑兵挑战，矢中归霸，归霸拔之，反以射贼，一发而毙，夺其马而归。
现代文：张昵驻扎在赤冈，派骑兵挑战，箭射中张归霸，张归霸拔出箭，反过来射向敌人，一箭射死，并抢遇战马返回。
English: Zhang Ni stationed in Akaoka, sent cavalrymen to challenge, Zhang Guiba was shot with arrows, Zhang Guiba pulled out arrows, shot back at the enemy, shot dead with an arrow, and returned to the horse.

古文：太祖从高丘望见，甚壮之，赏以金帛，并以其马赐之。
现代文：梁太祖从高丘上望见，觉得他十分豪壮，赏赐给金银绸缎，并把自己的马也赏赐给张归霸。
English: Liang Taizu saw him from the hill and thought he was very strong. He gave Zhang Guiba gold, silver and silk brocade, as well as his own horse.

古文：使以弓手五百人伏湟中，太祖以骑数百为游兵，过晊栅，晊出兵追太祖，归霸发伏，杀晊兵千人，夺马数十匹。
现代文：梁太祖派张归霸率领弓箭手五百人埋伏在低洼处，自己率领几百骑兵作为流动兵力，经过张睫的栅寨，张昵出兵追击梁太祖，张归霸出动伏兵，斩杀张睫兵千人，缴获战马几十匹。
English: Liang Taizu sent 500 archers led by Zhang Guiba to lie in ambush in a low-lying area. He himself led several hundred cavalry as a mobile force. After passing through Zhang Yao's stockade, Zhang Ni sent troops to chase Liang Taizu, Zhang Guiba sent ambush troops, killed a thousand Zhang Yao soldiers, and captured dozens of horses.

古文：太祖攻蔡州，蔡将萧颢急击太祖营，归霸不暇请，与徐怀玉分出东南壁门，合击败之，太祖得拔营去。
现代文：梁太祖进攻蔡州，蔡州将领萧颢迅速攻击梁太祖的军营，张归霸来不及请示，就和徐怀玉分别出东南壁门，合擎打败萧颢，梁太祖得以拔营离去。
English: Liang Taizu attacked Caizhou, Caizhou's general Xiao Tong quickly attacked Liang Taizu's camp. Zhang Guiba was too late to ask for instructions, so he and Xu Huaiyu went out of the southeast wall gate separately, and together they defeated Xiao Tong. Liang Taizu was able to leave the camp.

古文：太祖攻兗、郓，取曹州，使归霸以兵数千守之，与硃瑾逆战金乡，大败之。
现代文：梁太祖进攻充、鄣二州，夺取曹州，派张归霸率领几千士兵守卫，和朱瑾在金乡迎战，大败敌军。
English: Liang Taizu attacked Chengdu and Handan and captured Caozhou. He sent Zhang Guiba to lead several thousand soldiers to guard, and fought with Zhu Xi in Jinxiang, defeating the enemy army.

古文：又破濮州。
现代文：又攻破濮州。
English: It also broke through Zhangzhou.

古文：晋人攻魏，归霸从葛从周救魏，战洹水，归霸擒克用子落落以与魏人。
现代文：晋人进攻魏州，张归霸随葛从周救援魏州，在洹水作战，张归霸活捉李克用的儿子落落，交给魏州人。
English: Jin people attacked Weizhou, Zhang Guiba followed Ge from Zhou to rescue Weizhou, fought in Surabaya, Zhang Guiba captured Li Kegui's son alive and handed him over to Weizhou people.

古文：又破刘仁恭于内黄，功出诸将右。
现代文：又在内黄击败刘仁恭，战功在众将领之上。
English: In addition, Neihwang defeated Liu Rengong, and his war exploits were superior to those of all generals.

古文：光化二年，权知邢州。
现代文：光化二年，权知邢州。
English: After two years in Gwanghwa, Kwon Chih moved to Jeonju.

古文：迁莱州刺史，拜左卫上将军、曹州刺史。
现代文：调任莱州刺史，拜左卫上将军、曹州刺史。
English: He was transferred to the position of Laizhou chief historian, General Baizawei, and Caozhou chief historian.

古文：开平元年，拜右龙虎统军、左骁卫上将军。
现代文：开平元年，又拜为右龙虎统军、左骁卫上将军。
English: In the first year of the Heian period, he was appointed as the right dragon and tiger united army and the left guardian general.

古文：二年，拜河阳节度使，以疾卒。
现代文：二年，拜河阳节度使，因病而死。
English: In the second year, Baiheyang died of illness.

古文：子汉杰，事末帝为显官，以张德妃故用事。
现代文：儿子张汉杰，跟随梁末帝做过高官，凭借张德妃的关系专权。
English: His son, Zhang Hanjie, was a high-ranking official under Emperor Liang, and had exclusive power due to his relationship with Empress Zhang.

古文：梁亡，唐庄宗入汴，遂族诛。
现代文：梁灭亡，唐庄宗进入汴州，于是被灭族。
English: After Liang's death, Tangzhuangzong entered Zhangzhou, whereupon he was exterminated.

古文：弟归厚，字德坤。
现代文：弟弟张归厚，字德坤。
English: His younger brother, Zhang Guihou, is known as Dekun.

古文：为将善用弓槊，能以少击众。
现代文：作为将领擅长使用弓箭和长矛，能够以少胜多。
English: As a general, he is good at using bows and arrows and spears, and can do more with less.

古文：张晊屯赤冈，归厚与晊独战阵前，晊惫而却，诸将乘之，晊遂大败。
现代文：张啰屯驻赤冈，张归厚和张啰二人在阵前交战张眨疲惫而后撤，众将领乘胜追击，张睫于是大败。
English: Zhang Qitun was stationed in Akaoka, Zhang Guihuo and Zhang Yao were in the forefront of the battle, Zhang Bing was exhausted and retreated, the generals took advantage of the victory to pursue, and Zhang Jian was defeated.

古文：太祖大悦，以为骑长。
现代文：梁太祖大喜，令张归厚作骑长。
English: Liang Taizu was overjoyed and appointed Zhang Guitou as the cavalry commander.

古文：梁攻时溥，归厚以麾下先进九里山，遇徐兵而战，梁故将陈璠叛在徐，归厚望见识之，瞋目大骂，驰骑直往取之，矢中其左目。
现代文：梁进攻时溥，张归厚率部下率先进军九里山，碰上徐州兵发生战斗，梁旧将陈墦反叛后留在徐州，被张归厚认出他，瞪眼大骂，骑马飞驰，直奔敌军去捉陈墦，被箭射中左眼。
English: At the time of Liang's attack, Zhang Guihou and his subordinates led the advanced army to Jiulishan. They encountered the Xuzhou soldiers in battle. Liang had left Chen Qi in Xuzhou after he rebelled. Zhang Guihou recognized him, stared at him, cursed him, rode a horse at high speed, went straight to the enemy army to catch Chen Qi, and was shot in the left eye with an arrow.

古文：郴王友裕攻郓，屯濮州，太祖从后至，友裕徙栅，与太祖相失。
现代文：郴王朱友裕进攻郫州，屯驻在濮州，梁太祖随后到达，朱友裕迁走栅寨，和梁太祖错过。
English: Zhu Youyu, the king of Zhang, attacked Zhangzhou and settled in Zhangzhou. Liang Taizu arrived later. Zhu Youyu moved away from Zhangzhai and missed Liang Taizu.

古文：太祖卒与郓兵遇，太祖登高望之，郓兵才千人，太祖与归厚以子军直冲之，战已合，郓兵大至，归厚度不能支，以数十骑卫太祖先还。
现代文：梁太祖结果和郸州军队遭遇，梁太祖登高观望敌军，郫州兵纔一千多人，于是梁太祖和张归厚率厅子军直冲敌阵，交战后，郫州军蜂拥而至，张归厚估计支持不住，率几十名骑兵护卫梁太祖先回。
English: As a result, Liang Taizu encountered the Bozhou army. Liang Taizu climbed high to watch the enemy army, more than a thousand soldiers from Bozhou, so Liang Taizu and Zhang Guihou led the troops of the hall straight into the enemy line. After the war, the Bozhou army swarmed in, Zhang Guihou estimated that he could not support it, and led dozens of cavalry to escort Liang Taizu's ancestors back.

古文：归厚马中矢僵，乃持槊步斗。
现代文：张归厚的战马中箭而倒，于是手持长矛徒步格斗。
English: Zhang Guichou's horse was hit by an arrow and fell, so he fought on foot with a spear in his hand.

古文：太祖还军中，遣张筠驰骑第取之，以为必死矣。
现代文：梁太祖，回到军营中，派张筠驰马去接张归厚回来，认为他一定已经战死。
English: When Liang Taizu returned to the camp, he sent Zhang Qichima to fetch Zhang Guitou, thinking that he must have been killed in the battle.

古文：归厚体被十余箭，得筠马乃归，太祖见之，泣曰： 尔在，丧军何足计乎！ 
现代文：张归厚身中十多箭，得到张筠的马纔得以返回，梁太祖见到他，哭着说： 只要你还活着，丧失军队又有什么关系呢！ 
English: Zhang Guifu had more than ten arrows in his body, and he was able to get Zhang Ye's horse to return. When Liang Taizu saw him, he cried and said: As long as you are alive, what does it matter if you lose the army!

古文：使舁归宣武。
现代文：派人抬张归厚回到宣武军。
English: He sent people back to the Xuanwu army.

古文：迁右神武统军，历洺、晋、绛三州刺史。与晋人屡战未尝屈。
现代文：升任右神式统军，历任沼、晋、绛三州刺史，和晋人多次作战都不曾失败。
English: He was promoted to the Ushin-style unified army, and successively served as marshal of the three states of Numa, Jin, and Qi, and fought against the Jin people many times without failure.

古文：乾化元年，拜镇国军节度使，以疾卒。
现代文：干化元年，拜为镇国军节度使，因病而死。
English: In the first year of the Heian period, he died of illness while serving as the commander of the town's national army.

古文：子汉卿。
现代文：儿子张汉卿。
English: The son of Zhang Hanqing.

古文：归弁，为将亦善战，开平初为滑州长剑指挥使。
现代文：张归弁，作为将领也擅长打仗，开平初任滑州长剑指挥使。
English: Zhang Zuiben, as a general, was also good at fighting wars, and Kaiping was the first governor of Liaoning Province.

古文：子汉融。
现代文：儿子张漠融。
English: His son, Zhang Mu Rong.

古文：梁亡，皆族诛。
现代文：凿灭亡后，都被灭族。
English: After the death of the chisel, they were all exterminated.

古文：○王重师
现代文：王重师，许州长社人。
English: Wang Chung-shih, a member of the Xu Chuan Society.

古文：王重师，许州长社人也。
现代文：为人沉默多智谋，擅长击剑和使用长矛。
English: They are silent and resourceful. They are good at fencing and using spears.

古文：为人沈嘿多智，善剑槊。秦宗权陷许州，重师脱身归梁，从太祖平蔡，攻兗、郓，为拔山军指挥使。
现代文：秦宗权攻陷许州，王重师脱身归附梁，随梁太祖平定蔡州，进攻充、郫二州，任拔山军指挥使。
English: Qin Zongquan invaded and occupied Huzhou, Wang Chongshih escaped to attach Liang, followed Liang Taizu to subdue Caizhou, attacked and occupied two states, and served as commander of the mountain army.

古文：重师苦战齐、鲁间，威震邻敌。
现代文：王重师在齐、鲁间苦战，威震周围敌军。
English: Wang Chong's division fought hard in Qi and Lu, and the surrounding enemy forces were shaken.

古文：迁颍州刺史。
现代文：升任颖州刺史。
English: Promoted to the post of Yingzhou chief historian.

古文：太祖攻濮州，已破，濮人积草焚之，梁兵不得入。
现代文：梁太祖进攻濮州，已经攻破，濮州人堆积柴草焚烧州城，梁军无法进城。
English: Liang Taizu attacked Zhangzhou and was defeated. The Zhangzhou people piled up firewood and burned the state capital. Liang's army was unable to enter the city.

古文：是时，重师方病金疮，卧帐中，诸将强之，重师遽起，悉取军中氈毯沃以水，蒙之火上，率精卒以短兵突入，梁兵随之皆入，遂取濮州。
现代文：适时，王重师正患金疮病，躺在营帐中，将领们强迫他起来，王重师急忙起身，取来军中所有毡毯浇上水，盖在火上，率领精兵手持短突击进城，梁军随之而入，于是攻占了濮州。
English: At the right time, Wang Chung-shih was suffering from scrofula and was lying in his tent. The generals forced him to get up. Wang Chung-shih hurriedly got up, took all the straw blankets in the army, poured water on them, covered them with fire, and led the elite soldiers into the city with a short assault. Liang's army followed and conquered Zhangzhou.

古文：重师身被八九疮，军士负之而还。
现代文：王重师身上八九处受伤，军士背着他回来。
English: Wang Chongshi was wounded in eight or nine places on his body, and the sergeant carried him back.

古文：太祖闻之，惊曰： 柰何使我得濮州而失重师乎！ 
现代文：梁太祖听说后，吃惊地说道： 怎么能让我得到濮州而失去王重师呢！ 
English: After hearing this, Liang Taizu said in surprise, "How can I gain Zhangzhou and lose Wang Chongshi?"

古文：使医理之，逾月乃愈。
现代文：派医师为他治疗，一个多月后纔痊愈。
English: A doctor was sent to treat him, and he recovered after more than a month.

古文：王师范降，表重师青州留后，累迁佑国军节度使、同中书门下平章事。
现代文：王师范投降，表奏王重师为青州留后，历次升迁至佑国军节度使、同中书门下平章事。
English: After Wang Shifan surrendered and Wang Chongshi stayed in Qingzhou, he was repeatedly promoted to the assistant of the Nationalist Army, and he was promoted to the same rank as Zhongshumen.

古文：居数年，甚有威惠。
现代文：在任几年，很有威望政绩。
English: During his few years in office, he achieved a lot of prestige and political achievements.

古文：重师与刘捍故有隙，捍尝构之太祖，太祖疑之。
现代文：王重师和刘捍原来有矛盾，刘捍曾在梁太祖面前陷害他，梁太祖开始怀疑王重师。
English: Wang Chongshi and Liu Han originally had a conflict. Liu Han had framed him in front of Liang Taizu, and Liang Taizu began to suspect Wang Chongshi.

古文：重师遣其将张君练西攻邠、凤而不先请，君练兵小败，太祖以其擅发兵，挫失国威，将召而罪之，遣刘捍代重师。
现代文：王重师派遣他的将领张君练向西进攻郇、凤二州而没有事先请示。张君练的军队小败，梁太祖因焉王重师擅自出兵，有损国威，准备召回他治罪，派刘捍代替他。
English: Wang Chongshi sent his general Zhang Junren to the west to attack the two states of Fen and Feng without prior notice. Zhang Junren's army suffered a small defeat, and Liang Taizu was prepared to recall Wang Chongren to punish him and send Liu Han to replace him because Wang Chongren had sent troops without authorization, which was detrimental to national prestige.

古文：重师不知太祖怒己，捍至，重师不出迎，见之青门，礼又倨，捍因驰白太祖，言重师有二志。
现代文：王重师不知道梁太祖对自己发怒，刘捍到时，王重师不出来迎接，在青门会见刘捍，礼节又很傲慢，刘捍于是飞马回去告诉梁太祖，说王重师有二心。
English: Wang Chongshi didn't know that Liang Taizu was angry with him. When Liu Han arrived, Wang Chongshi didn't come out to greet him. When he met Liu Han at Qingmen, his etiquette was arrogant. So Liu Han flew back to tell Liang Taizu that Wang Chongshi had two hearts.

古文：徐怀玉，亳州焦夷人也。
现代文：梁太祖更加愤怒，贬降王重师为溪州刺史，再贬降为崖州司户参军，还未出发，即被赐死。
English: Liang Taizu was even more enraged. He demoted Wang Chongshi to the position of the governor of Xizhou, and then to the position of the governor of Yazhou. He joined the army, but before he could leave, he was sentenced to death.

古文：少事梁太祖，与太祖俱起微贱。
现代文：徐怀玉，毫州焦夷人。年轻时跟随梁太祖，和梁太祖一样都出身低贱。
English: Xu Huaiyu, a native of Jiaoyi, Maozhou, followed Liang Taizu when he was young. Like Liang Taizu, he was born in a low-class family.

古文：怀玉为将，以雄豪自任，而勇于战阵。
现代文：徐怀玉作将领，以英雄豪壮自负，在战阵上十分勇猛。
English: Xu Huaiyu as a general, with the hero's heroic conceit, is very brave in the battle.

古文：从太祖镇宣武，为永城镇将。
现代文：随梁太祖镇守宣武军，任永城镇将。
English: He followed Liang Taizu as the commander of the Xuanwu army and became the commander of Ren Yong Town.

古文：秦宗权攻梁，壁金堤、灵昌、酸枣，怀玉以轻骑连击破之，俘杀五千余人，迁左长剑都虞候。
现代文：秦宗权进攻梁，在金堤、灵昌、酸枣修筑营垒，徐怀玉率领轻骑兵接连进攻，击败敌军，俘虏及斩杀敌军五千多人，升任左长剑都虞候。
English: Qin Zongquan attacked Liang and built fortresses in Jintai, Lingchang and Zhouzhuang. Xu Huayu led the light cavalry to attack successively, defeated the enemy, captured and killed more than 5,000 enemy troops, and was promoted to the position of Zuo Changjian.

古文：又破宗权于板桥、赤冈，拔其八栅。
现代文：又在板桥、赤冈击溃秦宗权，钟除他的八个栅寨。
English: He also defeated Qin Zongquan in Banqiao and Akaoka, and destroyed his eight fortresses.

古文：从太祖东攻兗、郓，破徐、宿。
现代文：随梁太祖向东进攻充、郫二州，攻克徐、宿二州。
English: Accompanied by Liang Taizu, he attacked eastward the two prefectures of Chengdu and Handan, and conquered the two prefectures of Xu and Shuku.

古文：怀玉金创被体，战必克捷，所得赏赉，往往以分士卒，为梁名将。
现代文：徐怀玉遍体刀伤，每战必胜，得到的赏赐，常常用来分给士兵，是梁的名将。
English: Xu Huaiyu was wounded by knives all over his body. He won every battle, and the rewards he received were often used to distribute to soldiers. He was a famous general of Liang.

古文：本名琮，太祖赐名怀玉。
现代文：他原名叫徐琮，梁太祖赐名怀玉。
English: His original name was Xu Jun, but Liang Taizu gave him the name Huaiyu.

古文：从太祖攻魏，败魏兵黎阳，遂东攻兗，破硃瑾于金乡。
现代文：随梁太祖进攻魏州，在黎阳打败魏州军队，于是向东进攻充州，在金乡击败朱瑾。
English: He followed Liang Taizu to attack Weizhou, defeated the Weizhou army in Liyang, then attacked eastward to Chenzhou, and defeated Zhu Xi in Jinxiang.

古文：又从庞师古攻杨行密，师古败清口，怀玉独完一军，行收散卒万余人以归。
现代文：又随庞师古进攻杨行密，庞师古在清口被打败，只有徐怀玉一军无恙，随即收聚溃散士兵一万多人而回。
English: With Pang Shigu's attack on Yang Xingmi, Pang Shigu was defeated at Qingkou, only Xu Huaiyu's army was unharmed, and then more than 10,000 soldiers were gathered and returned.

古文：迁沂州刺史，属岁屡丰，乃缮兵治壁，为战守具。
现代文：升任沂州刺史，恰逢连续丰年，于是修缮兵器，整治营垒，为进攻防守作准备。
English: He was promoted to the post of the chief historian of Zhangzhou, which coincided with consecutive years of prosperity, so he repaired weapons, renovated camps, and prepared for the offensive and defense.

古文：已而王师范叛梁，攻东境，怀玉屡以州兵击破之。
现代文：不久王师范背叛銮，进攻束部边境，徐怀玉多次率州中军队击败他。
English: Wang Shifan soon betrayed Zhai and attacked the Sokube border, and Xu Huayu repeatedly led the middle-level troops of the state to defeat him.

古文：迁齐州防御使。
现代文：调任齐州防御使。
English: He was transferred to the post of defense attaché of Qizhou.

古文：天复四年，以州兵辽昭宗都洛阳，迁华州观察留后，以兵屯雍州。
现代文：天复四年，率本州岛军队向西迎接唐昭宗迁都洛阳，升任华州观察留后，率兵屯驻雍州。
English: In the fourth year of Tianfu, he led the troops of Honshu Island to the west to welcome the relocation of Tang Zhaozong to the capital Luoyang. After being promoted to the position of Huazhou observer, he led the troops stationed in Yongzhou.

古文：迁右羽林统军，屯于泽州，晋人攻之，为隧以入，怀玉击之隧中，晋人乃却。
现代文：调任右羽林统军，屯驻在泽州，晋人进攻他，挖掘隧道而入，徐怀玉在隧道中攻击他们，晋人于是退去。
English: He was transferred to the Right Feather Forest United Army and stationed in Zezhou. The Jin attacked him, dug a tunnel and entered. Xu Huaiyu attacked them in the tunnel, and the Jin then retreated.

古文：太祖时，历曹、晋二州刺史，晋数攻之，怀玉坚守，败晋兵于洪洞。
现代文：梁太祖时，他历任曹、晋二州刺史，晋人多次进攻他，徐怀玉始终坚守，在洪洞打败了晋兵。
English: When Liang Taizu, he successively served as Cao and Jin in the history of the two states, the Jin people attacked him many times, Xu Huaiyu always stood firm and defeated the Jin soldiers in Hongdong.

古文：拜保大军节度使。
现代文：拜为保大军节度使。
English: Pray for the Great Military Festival.

古文：太祖崩，友珪自立，硃友谦附于晋，以袭鄜州，执怀玉杀之。
现代文：梁太祖死，朱友珪篡位登基，朱友谦依附晋，袭击郦州，抓获徐怀玉将他杀死。
English: Liang Taizu died, Zhu Youyou usurped the throne, Zhu Youqian attached to Jin, attacked Zhangzhou, captured Xu Huaiyu and killed him.

