古文：胡铨，字邦衡，庐陵人。
现代文：胡铨字邦衡，庐陵人。
English: The name of the village is "Bongheng" and he is from Fuling.

古文：建炎二年，高宗策士淮海，铨因御题问 治道本天，天道本民 ，答云： 汤、武听民而兴，桀、纣听天而亡。
现代文：建炎二年，高宗在淮海策问进士，胡铨对御题问 治道本天，天道本民 ，回答说： 汤、武顺从民众而兴起，桀、纣顺应天道而灭亡。
English: In the second year of Jianyan, Gao Zong inquired in Huaihai about entering the priesthood, and Hu Yao replied to the question, "To govern the way of heaven, the way of heaven is the way of the people," saying, "Tang and Wushun arose from the people, while Yao and Yao followed the way of heaven and perished.

古文：今陛下起干戈锋镝间，外乱内讧，而策臣数十条，皆质之天，不听于民。 又谓： 今宰相非晏殊，枢密、参政非韩琦、杜衍、范仲淹。 策万余言，高宗见而异之，将冠之多士，有忌其直者，移置第五。
现代文：现在陛下起于干戈锋镝之间，外乱内讧，而策问臣下数十条，都质问于天道，而不倾听民众呼声。 又说： 现在的宰相不比过去的晏殊，枢密、参政又不是过去的韩琦、杜衍、范仲淹。 答问长达一万多字，高宗看到而惊异，打算把他列为众多进士中的第一名，有人忌恨他的耿直，移为第五名。
English: At present, His Majesty is caught in the middle of conflicts, external and internal, and has asked dozens of questions to his vassals, all of which are questions about the heavenly way, without listening to the voices of the people. He also said: The current prime minister is no different from the past, and the privy council and participation in politics are not the past of Han Zheng, Du Yan, and Fan Zhongyan. The answer is more than ten thousand words long. Gaozong was surprised to see it, and intends to rank him first among the many scholars, and some people hate him, moving him to the fifth place.

古文：授抚州军事判官，未上，会隆祐太后避兵赣州，金人蹑之，铨以漕檄摄本州幕，募乡丁助官军捍御，第赏转承直郎。
现代文：授予抚州军事判官，没有上任，恰逢隆佑太后逃避金兵到赣州，金军随后追击，胡铨以漕司檄文统摄本州幕僚，召募乡丁辅佐官军抵御，受赏转承直郎。
English: Awarded Fuzhou military judge, did not take office, coincided with the empress dowager Longyou escaping from the gold soldiers to Ganzhou, the gold army then pursued, Hu Yao took the staff of the state staff with Cao Shiwen, called up the village of Ding Fu to resist the adjutant army, and was awarded the succession of Nairo.

古文：丁父忧，从乡先生萧楚学《春秋》。
现代文：服父丧，从乡先生萧楚学习《春秋》。
English: After his father's death, he learned "Spring and Autumn" from Mr. Xiao Chu.

古文：绍兴五年，张浚开督府，辟湖北仓属，不赴。
现代文：绍兴五年，张浚设都督府，辟举胡铨任湖北仓属，胡铨没有赴任。
English: In the fifth year of Shaoxing, Zhang Jun set up the governor's office, and promoted Hu Wei to the post of Hubei Cangren, but Hu Wei did not go to the post.

古文：有诏赴都堂审察，兵部尚书吕祉以贤良方正荐，赐对，除枢密院编修官。
现代文：有诏令到都堂审察，兵部尚书吕祉以贤良方正推荐他，赐对，任枢密院编修官。
English: He was sent to Tudang for examination by imperial edict. He was recommended by the commander of the military department, Shangshu Lv Zhi, as a virtuous person, and was appointed editor of the Privy Council.

古文：八年，宰臣秦桧决策主和，金使以 诏谕江南 为名，中外汹汹。
现代文：绍兴八年，宰相秦桧主持议和，金使以 诏谕江南 为名南来，朝廷内外群情激愤。
English: In the eighth year of Shaoxing, the prime minister Qin Hui presided over the peace talks, and the envoy came to the south of the Yangtze River in the name of the edict, which aroused great indignation both inside and outside the imperial court.

古文：铨抗疏言曰：
现代文：胡铨违抗诏令上疏说：
English: Hu Yao defied the imperial edict and said:

古文：臣谨案，王伦本一狎邪小人，市井无赖，顷缘宰相无识，遂举以使虏。
现代文： 臣谨案，王伦本是一狎邪小人，市井无赖，由于宰相无知，于是推举他出使敌国。
English: Wang Lun was originally an evil villain, a villain, and because of the prime minister's ignorance, he was chosen to be sent to an enemy country.

古文：专务诈诞，欺罔天听，骤得美官，天下之人切齿唾骂。
现代文：专门从事诡作怪诞之事，欺骗蒙蔽皇上视听，骤然得到高官美职，天下之人都切齿唾骂。
English: Specializing in tricks and grotesque things, deceiving and blinding the emperor's audio-visual, suddenly getting a high-ranking post, people all over the world are swearing with their teeth.

古文：今者无故诱致虏使，以 诏谕江南 为名，是欲臣妾我也，是欲刘豫我也。
现代文：现在无故引诱敌使前来，以 诏谕江南 为名，是想让我朝臣服它，是想让我朝充当刘豫的角色。
English: Now, without any reason, he is luring the enemy envoys to come here, using the name of the Southern Dictate to make me submit to him, and to make me play the role of Liu Yu.

古文：刘豫臣事丑虏，南面称王，自以为子孙帝王万世不拔之业，一旦豺狼改虑，捽而缚之，父子为虏。
现代文：刘豫以臣子之礼侍奉敌人，南面称王，自以为奠定子孙万代不变的大业，而一旦豺狼改变主意，便突然揪住绑缚他们，父子都成为阶下之囚。
English: Liu Yu served the enemy with the courtesy of a vassal, and claimed to be the king of the south, thinking that he would establish a great cause that would remain unchanged for generations to come. But once the wolves changed their minds, they suddenly seized and bound them, and both father and son became prisoners of their subordinates.

古文：商鉴不远，而伦又欲陛下效之。
现代文：借鉴并不遥远，而王伦又想让陛下仿效刘豫。
English: The reference is not far away, and Wang Lun also wants His Majesty to emulate Liu Yu.

古文：夫天下者祖宗之天下也，陛下所居之位，祖宗之位也。奈何以祖宗之天下为金虏之天下，以祖宗之位为金虏藩臣之位！
现代文：天下，是祖宗的天下，陛下所居的皇位，是祖宗的皇位，怎么能以祖宗的天下送给金人，将祖宗的皇位变成金朝藩臣的位子！
English: The world is the world of the ancestors, and the imperial throne where His Majesty resides is the imperial throne of the ancestors. How can the world of the ancestors be given to the Kim people, and the imperial throne of the ancestors be turned into the seat of the vassal of the Kim dynasty!

古文：陛下一屈膝，则祖宗庙社之灵尽污夷狄，祖宗数百年之赤子尽为左衽，朝廷宰执尽为陪臣，天下士大夫皆当裂冠毁冕，变为胡服。
现代文：陛下一旦屈膝，那么祖宗在天之灵蒙受夷狄的污辱，祖宗数百年赤子臣民，全部沦为奴隶，朝廷宰执全部成为陪臣，天下士大夫都会撕毁冠冕，变穿胡服。
English: Once your majesty bends the knee, then the ancestors in the spirit of heaven will suffer the humiliation of the Yidi, the ancestors of hundreds of years of infant subjects will all be reduced to slavery, the imperial officials will all become vassals, and the world's officials will tear off their crowns and change into Hu clothing.

古文：异时豺狼无厌之求，安知不加我以无礼如刘豫也哉？
现代文：以后豺狼的欲求将更加贪得无厌，怎么能知道它不会像无礼对待刘豫那样对待我朝呢？
English: In the future, the jackal's desire will be even more insatiable. How can I know that it will not treat me as rudely as it treated Liu Yu?

古文：夫三尺童子至无识也，指犬豕而使之拜，则怫然怒。
现代文： 三尺孩童是没有什么知识的，但如果指着猪狗让他下拜，他也会怫然大怒。
English: A three-foot-tall child has little knowledge, but if you point at a pig dog and make him bow down, he will also fly into a rage.

古文：今丑虏则犬豕也，堂堂大国，相率而拜犬豕，曾童孺之所羞，而陛下忍为之耶？
现代文：现在的金人就是猪狗，我朝堂堂大国，一个接着一个朝拜猪狗，这种举动，连童孺都会感到羞耻，而陛下能够忍心这样做吗？
English: The current golden man is a pig dog, I am a great country, one after another worshiping a pig dog, this kind of behavior, even a toddler will feel ashamed, and your majesty can bear to do this?

古文：伦之议乃曰： 我一屈膝则梓宫可还，太后可复，渊圣可归，中原可得。 呜呼！
现代文：王伦的议论这样说 ：我一屈膝那么棺椁就能回来，太后能够归来，钦宗也能归来，中原土地可以得到。 哎呀！
English: Wang Lun's argument goes like this: If I bend my knees, then the coffin can come back, the empress dowager can return, Qin Zong can return, and the Central Plains land can be obtained.

古文：自变故以来，主和议者谁不以此说啖陛下哉！
现代文：自从发生变故以来，主持和议的人谁不以此劝说引诱陛下呢！
English: Since the incident, who among those who presided over the peace talks would not use this persuasion to seduce His Majesty?

古文：然而卒无一验，则虏之情伪已可知矣。
现代文：但是最终没有一次应验，由此就可以知道敌人的真实意图了。
English: But in the end, none of them came to pass, which is how we know the enemy's true intentions.

古文：而陛下尚不觉悟，竭民膏血而不恤，忘国大仇而不报，含垢忍耻，举天下而臣之甘心焉。
现代文：但陛下至今仍没有醒悟，竭尽人民膏血而不加抚恤，忘记国家奇耻大辱而不报复，含垢忍羞，甘心情愿举大宋江山而臣服敌人。
English: However, His Majesty still hasn't woken up to the fact that he is willing to sacrifice the blood of the people without compensation, forget the national shame without retaliation, and willingly surrender to the enemy.

古文：就令虏决可和，尽如伦议，天下后世谓陛下何如主？
现代文：即使是金朝一定可以和好，全部像王伦所说的那样，天下和后代将把陛下看成一位什么样的皇帝呢？
English: Even if the Kim dynasty can definitely be reconciled, all as Wang Lun said, what kind of emperor will the world and future generations see His Majesty as?

古文：况丑虏变诈百出，而伦又以奸邪济之，梓宫决不可还，太后决不可复，渊圣决不可归，中原决不可得，而此膝一屈不可复伸，国势陵夷不可复振，可为痛哭流涕长太息矣！
现代文：况且敌人时常变诈毫无信义，而王伦又以奸邪辅助，棺椁一定不会交还，太后一定不会回来，钦宗一定不会南归，中原土地一定不会得到，而此时一旦屈膝以后不能再伸，国势陵夷不能再振，可以痛哭流涕长久叹息了。
English: Moreover, the enemy often deceives and has no credibility, and Wang Lun is assisted by treachery and evil. The coffin must not be returned, the empress dowager must not return, Qin Zong must not return to the south, and the Central Plains land must not be obtained. At this time, once the knee is bent, it can no longer be extended, the national situation can no longer be reinvigorated, and you can weep and sigh for a long time.

古文：向者陛下间关海道，危如累卵，当时尚不忍北面臣虏，况今国势稍张，诸将尽锐，士卒思奋。
现代文： 过去陛下曾辗转海上，势如危卵，当时还不忍北面臣服敌人，况且现在国势稍振，众将尽锐，士卒思奋报效。
English: In the past, His Majesty had been tossed about on the sea, his position precarious. At that time, he could not bear to surrender to the enemy in the north. Moreover, now that the country's position has been slightly shaken, the generals are at their best, and the soldiers are working hard to achieve results.

古文：只如顷者丑虏陆梁，伪豫入寇，固尝败之于襄阳，败之于淮上，败之于涡口，败之于淮阴，校之往时蹈海之危，固已万万，偿不得已而至于用兵，则我岂遽出虏人下哉？
现代文：比如不久前金人嚣张，伪齐入侵，曾经失败于襄阳，失败于淮上，失败于涡口，失败于淮阴，这同以前被迫蹈海那种危险的局面相比较，已是大大不同，倘若不得已而用兵，我朝岂会一定败在金军手下呢？
English: For example, not long ago, the Kim people were arrogant and invaded the pseudo-Qi. They failed in Xiangyang, failed in Huai Shang, failed in Turukou, and failed in Huai Yin. Compared with the dangerous situation of being forced to cross the sea before, this is very different. If I had to use troops, would I definitely be defeated by the Kim army?

古文：今无故而反臣之，欲屈万乘之尊，下穹庐之拜，三军之士不战而气已索。
现代文：现在无故反而臣服金人，打算屈皇帝之尊，下穹庐之拜，三军将士未战而士气已懈。
English: Now, without any reason, they have surrendered to the Jin people, intending to bow to the emperor's dignity and bow down to the dome. The morale of the three armies has weakened without a fight.

古文：此鲁仲连所以义不帝秦，非惜夫帝秦之虚名，惜天下大势有所不可也。
现代文：这就是鲁仲连所以义不称秦为帝，不是珍惜以秦为帝这一虚名，而是珍惜天下有不能尊其为帝的形势。
English: This is why Lu Zhonglian did not call Qin an emperor, not to cherish the false name of Qin as an emperor, but to cherish the situation that the world could not respect him as an emperor.

古文：今内而百官，外而军民，万口一谈，皆欲食伦之肉。
现代文：现在朝内的百官，朝外的军民，万众一声，都要吃王伦之肉。
English: Now, all the officials in the imperial court, as well as the soldiers and civilians outside the imperial court, unanimously want to eat Wang Lun's meat.

古文：谤议汹汹，陛下不闻，正恐一旦变作，祸且不测。
现代文：议论纷纷，陛下没有听到，恐怕一旦发生变故，将有不测的祸患。
English: There has been a lot of discussion, but His Majesty has not heard about it. I'm afraid that if something were to happen, there would be an unforeseen disaster.

古文：臣窃谓不斩王伦，国之存亡未可知也。
现代文：臣私下认为不斩除王伦，国家的安危存亡不可知。
English: Privately, the vassal thought that if Wang Lun was not eliminated, the safety and survival of the country would be uncertain.

古文：虽然，伦不足道也，秦桧以腹心大臣而亦为之。
现代文： 虽然如此，王伦并不足道，秦桧以腹心大臣竟然也这样做。
English: Despite this, Wang Lun did not go far enough, and Qin Hui, as the minister's confidant, actually did the same.

古文：陛下有尧、舜之资，桧不能致君如唐、虞，而欲导陛下为石晋，近者礼部侍郎曾开等引古谊以折之，桧乃厉声责曰： 侍郎知故事，我独不知！ 则桧之遂非愎谏，已自可见，而乃建白令台谏、侍臣佥议可否，是盖畏天下议己，而令台谏、侍臣共分谤耳。
现代文：陛下有尧、舜那样的天资，秦桧不能辅助皇上如同唐、虞，而打算引导陛下成为后晋石敬瑭。近来礼部侍郎曾开等引用古代教训阻止他，秦桧竟然厉声斥责说： 侍郎了解过去的事例，难道只有我不知道！ 那么秦桧坚持己见拒绝谏言，已由此可见，而又奏请命令台谏、侍臣计议能否和议，大概是害怕天下议论自己，而让台谏、侍臣共同分担指责罢了。
English: His Majesty has the same talent as Emperor Qin and Emperor Wu, and Qin Yu cannot assist the Emperor like Tang and Emperor Yu, but intends to guide His Majesty to become the next Emperor. Recently, the etiquette attendant Zeng Kai and others cited ancient teachings to stop him, and Qin Yu even rebuked him in a strong voice, saying, "Does the attendant understand the past cases? Is it only me who does not know!" Then Qin Yu insisted on his own opinion and refused to criticize, which can be seen from this. However, he also requested to order the eunuch and the attendant to discuss whether it could be a peaceful discussion, probably because he was afraid of

古文：有识之士皆以为朝廷无人，吁，可惜哉！
现代文：有识之士都认为朝廷没有人才，哎，可惜啊！
English: People with insight all think that the imperial court has no talent. Alas, what a pity!

古文：孔子曰： 微管仲，吾其被发左衽矣。 夫管仲，霸者之佐耳，尚能变左衽之区，而为衣裳之会。
现代文： 孔子说： 没有管仲，我们都会披发左衽变成少数民族的奴隶了！ 管仲，是霸者的辅佐，尚能变左衽之区，而为衣裳之会。
English: Confucius said: "Without Guanzhong, we would all become slaves of the ethnic minorities!" Guanzhong is an assistant to the overlord, but it can still be a district of Guanzhong, but it is a clothing association.

古文：秦桧，大国之相也，反驱衣冠之俗，而为左衽之乡。
现代文：秦桧，是大国的宰相，反而驱使衣冠之俗，变成左衽之乡。
English: Qin Hui, the prime minister of a large country, instead drove the custom of the crown to become the hometown of Zuo Hui.

古文：则桧也不唯陛下之罪人，实管仲之罪人矣。
现代文：这样秦桧不仅是陛下的罪人，实际上也是管仲的罪人。
English: In this way, Qin Hui is not only a sinner of His Majesty, but also a sinner of Guanzhong.

古文：孙近傅会桧议，遂得参知政事，天下望治有如饥渴，而近伴食中书，漫不敢可否事。
现代文：孙近附和秦桧，于是得到参知政事的官职，天下希望得到治理如同饥渴，而孙近位居重位，不敢对事情否定认可。
English: Sun Qianxu and Qin Zhe thus obtained the official post of political advisor. The world was hungry and thirsty for governance, but Sun Qianxu held a high position and did not dare to deny the matter.

古文：桧曰虏可和，近亦曰可和；桧曰天子当拜，近亦曰当拜。
现代文：秦桧说可和，孙近也说可和；秦桧说皇上当拜领金朝国书，孙近也说当拜。
English: Qin Hui said it was acceptable, and Sun Qian also said it was acceptable; Qin Hui said the emperor should bow to receive the state book of the Jin Dynasty, and Sun Qian also said he should bow.

古文：臣尝至政事堂，三发问而近不答，但曰： 已令台谏、侍从议矣。 呜呼！
现代文：臣曾到政事堂，三次质问而孙近避而不答，只是说 ：已令台谏、侍从计议。 哎呀！
English: The vassal once went to the State Council and asked questions three times, but Sun nearly evaded the questions and did not answer, but only said, "I have asked the empress and attendants to have a discussion.

古文：参赞大政，徒取充位如此。
现代文：参赞国家大政，只是这样占居要位。
English: The State Counsellor of the Grand Council of State only occupies an important position in this way.

古文：有如虏骑长驱，尚能折冲御侮耶？
现代文：假如敌骑长驱直入，还能折冲御侮吗？
English: If the enemy cavalry drove straight in, would it still be possible to break through?

古文：臣窃谓秦桧、孙近亦可斩也。
现代文：臣个人认为秦桧、孙近也应当斩首。
English: The vassal personally believed that Qin Yu and Sun Qian should also be beheaded.

古文：臣备员枢属，义不与桧等共戴天，区区之心，愿断三人头，竿之藁街，然后羁留虏使，责以无礼，徐兴问罪之师，则三军之士不战而气自倍。
现代文： 臣身为枢密院官属，同秦桧等人不共戴天，区区之心，希望砍下三人头颅，挂在大街之上，然后拘留金使，以无礼谴责，兴问罪之师，这样三军将士未战而士气倍增。
English: As a subject of the Privy Council and a subordinate of an official, he did not share the same fate as Qin Yu and others, and he hoped to cut off the three heads and hang them on the street, and then detain the envoy, condemn him for rudeness, and ask him about the crime. In this way, the morale of the soldiers of the three armies would be doubled without fighting.

古文：不然，臣有赴东海而死尔，宁能处小朝廷求活邪！
现代文：不然，臣只有投东海而死，怎能身处小朝廷苟求活命呢！ 
English: Otherwise, the vassal had only to throw himself into the East Sea and die. How could he beg for his life in the small imperial court?

古文：书既上，桧以铨狂妄凶悖，鼓众劫持，诏除名，编管昭州，仍降诏播告中外。
现代文：奏疏上报之后，秦桧认为胡铨狂妄凶悖，鼓众劫持，诏令除名，贬送昭州管制，并降诏传告朝廷内外。
English: After the report of the report, Qin Yu believed that Hu Yao was arrogant and ferocious, encouraged the crowd to kidnap, ordered him to be removed from the list, sent him to the control of Zhaozhou, and announced the imperial edict inside and outside the court.

古文：给、舍、台谏及朝臣多救之者，桧迫于公论，乃以铨监广州盐仓。
现代文：给事中、中书舍人、台谏以及朝臣中有许多人出面营救，秦桧迫于公论，于是以胡铨监广州盐仓。
English: During the incident, many Chinese scholars, Taiwanese and courtiers came forward to rescue, Qin Yu was forced to make a public statement, so he appointed Hu Yu as the supervisor of Guangzhou Yancang.

古文：明年，改签书威武军判官。
现代文：次年，改为签书威武军判官。
English: The following year, it was changed to the signature of Weiwu Jun, the judge.

古文：十二年，谏官罗汝楫劾铨饰非横议，诏除名，编管新州。
现代文：绍兴十二年，谏官罗汝楫弹劾胡铨饰非横议，诏令除名，贬送新州管制。
English: In the 12th year of Shaoxing, the eunuch Luo Ruxuan impeached Hu Yao, and ordered him to be expelled and sent to the new state control.

古文：十八年，新州守臣张棣讦铨与客唱酬，谤讪怨望，移谪吉阳军。
现代文：绍兴十八年，新州守臣张棣攻讦胡铨与宾客唱酬对答，诽谤怨恨朝廷，贬谪到吉阳军。
English: In the 18th year of Shaoxing, Xinzhou's vassal Zhang Xuan attacked the Jiyang army, slandering and hating the imperial court.

古文：二十六年，桧死，铨量移衡州。
现代文：绍兴二十六年，秦桧死去，胡铨移到衡州。
English: In the 26th year of Shaoxing, Qin Yu died and Hu Yu moved to Hengzhou.

古文：铨之初上书也，宜兴进士吴师古鋟木传之，金人募其书千金。
现代文：胡铨当初上书时，宜兴进士吴师古刻版印刷传播，金人用千金求购其书。
English: At the time of Hu Yao's book launch, Yixing scholar Wu Shi's ancient engraving was printed and disseminated, and the rich demanded thousands of dollars to buy his book.

古文：其谪广州也，朝士陈刚中以启事为贺。其谪新州也，同郡王延珪以诗赠行。
现代文：胡铨谪居广州，朝士陈刚中写信向他表示问候，谪居新州时，同郡王廷王圭写诗赠行。
English: When Hu Rong lived in Guangzhou, Chen Gangzhong wrote him a letter to express his greetings. When he lived in Xinzhou, he wrote a poem with the county king Ting Wanggui.

古文：皆为人所讦，师古流袁州，廷珪流辰州，刚中谪知虔州安远县，遂死焉。
现代文：都被人告发，吴师古流放袁州，王廷王圭流放辰州，陈刚中贬知虔州安远县，于是死去。
English: They were all denounced, and Wu Shigu was exiled to Yuanzhou, Wang Ting Wang Gui was exiled to Chenzhou, and Chen Gangzhong was exiled to Anyuan County, Qianzhou, where he died.

古文：三十一年，铨得自便。
现代文：绍兴三十一年，胡铨得以随便居住。
English: In the 31st year of Shaoxing, Hu Yao was able to live casually.

古文：孝宗即位，复奉议郎、知饶州。
现代文：孝宗即位后，胡铨恢复官职任奉议郎、知饶州。
English: After the enthronement of Emperor Xiaozong, Hu Yao resumed his official posts as Bongye Rong and Zhiraozhou.

古文：召对，言修德、结民、练兵、观衅，上曰： 久闻卿直谅。 除吏部郎官。
现代文：召他入对，胡铨上奏修德、结民、练兵、观衅四事。孝宗说 ：我很早就听说你耿直诚实。 任命他为吏部郎官。
English: He called him into the court, and told him four things: cultivating virtue, winning over the people, training soldiers, and watching provocations. Xiaozong said, "I have long heard that you are straightforward and honest. I appointed him as the steward of the cadre department."

古文：隆兴元年，迁秘书少监，擢起居郎，论史官失职者四：一谓记注不必进呈，庶人主有不观史之美；二谓唐制二史立螭头之下，今在殿东南隅，言动未尝得闻；三谓二史立后殿，而前殿不立，乞于前后殿皆分日侍立；四谓史官欲其直前，而阁门以未尝预牒，以今日无班次为辞。
现代文：隆兴元年，迁任秘书少监、擢任起居郎，论述史官失职的情况有四点：一是记注不必进呈，使皇上有不观史之弊病；二是唐制两史立于殿前雕有螭头形的石阶之下，现在立在殿的东南角，皇上言行不能听到；三是两史官立于后殿，而前殿不立，请于前后殿都分别侍立；四是史官想到皇帝面前，而门以未曾预告通报，今日无班次推辞。
English: In the first year of the Longxing era, the secretary-junior proctor and the secretary-junior proctor were transferred and promoted, and the situation of the historian's dereliction of duty was discussed with four points: First, the notes did not need to be submitted, so that the emperor had the malady of not observing history; second, the two historians of the Tang Dynasty stood in front of the hall under the stone steps carved with a skull and crossbones, now standing in the southeast corner of the hall, and the emperor's words and deeds could not be heard; third, the two historians stood in the back of the hall, but did not stand in the front of the hall

古文：乞自今直前言事，不必预牒阁门，及以有无班次为拘。
现代文：请求自今以后到皇帝面前言事，不必预先通报门，及以有无班次作为拘束。
English: From now on, it is no longer necessary to inform the door in advance, and the presence or absence of a flight as a constraint.

古文：诏从之。
现代文：诏令听从了他的意见。
English: He complied.

古文：兼侍讲、国史院编修官。
现代文：胡铨兼任侍讲、国史馆编修官。
English: Hu Yao also served as an assistant lecturer and an editor of the National History Museum.

古文：因讲《礼记》，曰： 君以礼为重，礼以分为重，分以名为重，愿陛下无以名器轻假人。 
现代文：通过讲解《礼记》，说： 君以礼为重，礼以分为重，分以名为重，希望陛下不要把名号和官职轻易假手他人。 
English: Through the explanation of the "Rites and Etiquette," he said: You attach great importance to courtesy, you attach great importance to courtesy, and you attach great importance to the name. I hope that His Majesty will not easily pass on the name and official position to others.

古文：又进言乞都建康，谓： 汉高入关中，光武守信都。大抵与人斗，不搤其亢，拊其背，不能全胜。
现代文：又进言请求将都城设在建康，说： 汉高祖进入关中，光武帝刘秀守卫信都，大抵与人作战，不扼敌人咽喉，不打击敌人侧背，不能获得全胜。
English: He also made a further request that the capital city be located in Jiankang, saying, "When the Han Emperor Gaozong entered Guanzhong, the Guangwu Emperor Liu Xiu was guarding the capital, and he usually fought against people, and he did not strangle the enemy's throat, did not strike the enemy's flank, and could not win a complete victory.

古文：今日大势，自淮以北，天下之亢与背也，建康则搤之拊之之地也。
现代文：今天天下形势，自淮河以北，就是天下的咽喉和侧背，建康就是控扼敌人、打击敌人的险要之地。
English: Today's world situation, from the north of the Huaihe River, is the throat and dorsal of the world, and Jiankang is the crucial place to control the enemy and fight the enemy.

古文：若进据建康，下临中原，此高、光兴王之计也。 
现代文：如果进据建康，下临中原，这是高祖、光武帝兴复大业的计谋。 
English: If we advance to Jiankang and descend to the Central Plains, this is the strategy of Gaozu and Emperor Guangwu to revive the great cause.

古文：诏议行幸，言者请纾其期，遂以张浚视师图恢复，侍御史王十朋赞之。
现代文：下诏计议皇帝出行，言者请求延缓行期，于是让张浚视察军队图谋恢复失地，侍御史王十朋赞同这种做法。
English: In the following edict, the emperor was scheduled to travel, and the speaker requested a delay in the travel time, so he asked Zhang Jun to inspect the army and try to recover the lost land. The attendant Shi Wang Shihong agreed with this approach.

古文：克复宿州，大将李显忠私其金帛，且与邵宏渊忿争，军大溃。
现代文：收复宿州，大将李显忠私吞金帛，并同邵宏渊发生纷争，军队大溃。
English: After regaining Suzhou, General Lee Hsien Loong devoured the gold, and quarreled with Shao Hongyuan, leading to a rout of the army.

古文：十朋自劾。
现代文：王十朋上章自劾。
English: The first chapter of Wang Shifeng's autobiography is a self-accusation.

古文：上怒甚，铨上疏愿毋以小衄自沮。
现代文：皇帝十分震怒，胡铨上疏希望不要因小败而自馁。
English: The emperor was furious, and he hoped that Hu Yao Shangsuo would not beat himself up because of the small defeat.

古文：时旱蝗、星变，诏问政事阙失，铨应诏上书数千言，始终以《春秋》书灾异之法，言政令之阙有十，而上下之情不合亦有十，且言： 尧、舜明四目，达四聪，虽有共、鲧，不能塞也。
现代文：当时发生旱灾、蝗灾和星变，皇帝下诏垂询政事缺失，胡铨应诏上书数千言，全篇引用《春秋》记载灾异的方法，论述政令缺失的情况有十种，而上下情不合的情况也有十种，并说： 尧、舜四目明白，四耳通达，虽有共、鲧之乱，不能堵塞。
English: At that time, droughts, locust plagues, and star changes occurred. The emperor issued an edict to inquire about the lack of government affairs, and Hu Yao wrote thousands of words in response to the edict. He quoted the methods of "Spring and Autumn" to record disasters and anomalies in the whole article. There were ten kinds of situations in which government orders were missing, and there were also ten kinds of situations in which the situation did not match the situation. He also said: "The four eyes of the dragonfly and the dragonfly are clear, and the four ears are accessible. Although there is a common chaos, it cannot be blocked."

古文：秦二世以赵高为腹心，刘、项横行而不得闻；汉成帝杀王章，王氏移鼎而不得闻；灵帝杀窦武、陈蕃，天下横溃而不得闻；梁武信朱异，侯景斩关而不得闻；隋炀帝信虞世基，李密称帝而不得闻；唐明皇逐张九龄，安、史胎祸而不得闻。
现代文：秦二世以赵高为腹心，刘邦、项羽横行而没有听说；汉成帝杀死王章，王氏移鼎而没有听说；灵帝杀死窦武、陈蕃，天下崩溃而没有听说；梁武帝信任朱异，侯景斩关夺隘而没有听说；隋炀帝信任虞世基，李密称帝而没有听说；唐明皇驱逐张九龄，安、史包藏祸胎而没有听说。
English: Qin II took Zhao Gao as a confidant, Liu Bang and Xiang Yu ran amok without being heard of; Han Chengdi killed Wang Zhang, Wang Shidingting without being heard of; Lingdi killed Dou Wu and Chen Qi, and the world collapsed without being heard of; Liangwu Di trusted Zhu Ying, and Hou Jing cut off the pass without being heard of; Sui and Yan Di trusted Yu Shiji, and Li Mi claimed to be the emperor without being heard of; Tang Ming Emperor expelled Zhang Jiuling, and An and Shi hid the fetus without being heard of.

古文：陛下自即位以来，号召逐客，与臣同召者张焘、辛次膺、王大宝、王十朋，今焘去矣，次膺去矣，十朋去矣，大宝又将去，惟臣在尔。
现代文：陛下自从即位以后，号召延揽宾客，与我同时召来的张焘、辛次膺、王大宝、王十朋，现在张焘已离开朝廷了，辛次膺离开朝廷了，王十朋离开朝廷了，王大宝也将离去，只有臣还在。
English: Your Majesty, since ascending the throne, has called for the extension of the guest list. Zhang Ye, Xin Zi Ye, Wang Dabao, and Wang Shibo, who were summoned at the same time as me, have now left the imperial court. Xin Zi Ye has left the imperial court. Wang Shibo has left the imperial court. Wang Dabao will also leave. Only the ministers remain.

古文：以言为讳，而欲塞灾异之源，臣知其必不能也。 
现代文：以言论为避讳，而想堵塞灾异的根源，臣知道必然不能做到。 
English: With speech as a taboo, and wanting to plug the root cause of the disaster, the minister knew that it would not be possible.

古文：铨又言： 昔周世宗为刘旻所败，斩败将何徽等七十人，军威大震，果败旻，取淮南，定三关。
现代文：胡铨又说： 过去周世宗被刘击败，周世宗处斩败将何徽等七十人，军威大震，果然打败刘，夺取淮南，抚定三关。
English: Hu Yao also said: In the past, Zhou Shizong was defeated by Liu, Zhou Shizong defeated 70 people including He Hui, and the military power was a great shock. He defeated Liu, captured Huainan, and settled Sankuan.

古文：夫一日戮七十将，岂复有将可用？
现代文：一天之内处死七十位将领，哪里还有将领可以使用？
English: Seventy generals were executed in one day. Where are there any more generals to use?

古文：而世宗终能恢复，非庸懦者去，则勇敢者出耶！
现代文：但周世宗终能恢复失地，这难道不是因为无能懦弱的人离开，而勇敢的人出来了吗？
English: But Zhou Shizong was eventually able to recover the lost territory. Isn't this because the incompetent and cowardly people left, and the brave people came out?

古文：近宿州之败，士死于敌者满野，而败军之将以所得之金赂权贵以自解，上天见变昭然，陛下非信赏必罚以应天不可。 其论纳谏曰： 今廷臣以箝默为贤，容悦为忠。
现代文：近来宿州之败，将士死于敌手的布满原野，而败军之将以得到的金银贿赂权贵以求得自解，上天以灾异昭示人们，陛下必须信赏必罚以顺应天道变化。 他又谈论台谏官说： 今朝廷大臣以箴默不言为贤，取悦陛下为忠，导致唐德宗时 卖直 那样的事发生，正所谓 一言丧邦 。 
English: Recently, in the defeat of Cangzhou, the soldiers died in the fields full of the enemy's horses, and the defeated army used the gold and silver they received to bribe the dignitaries to seek self-relief. Heaven showed people with disasters and signs that His Majesty must believe in reward and punishment and conform to the changes of heaven. He also talked about the eunuchs and said: This morning, the Minister of the Imperial Court was wise in silence and loyal to please His Majesty, which led to the occurrence of such a thing as Tang Dezong selling out, which is called a word of death.

古文：驯至兴元之幸，所谓 一言丧邦 。 上曰： 非卿不闻此。 
现代文：皇上说： 不是你，我听不到这些。 金朝请求和议，胡铨说： 金朝知道陛下锐意恢复中原，因此用好话欺骗我，希望绝口不要说 和 字。 
English: The emperor said, "It's not you, I can't hear these things." The Kim dynasty asked for conciliation, and Hu Yao said, "The Kim dynasty knows that Your Majesty is determined to recover the Central Plains, so they deceived me with kind words, hoping that I would never say the word "conciliation."

古文：金人求成，铨曰： 金人知陛下锐意恢复，故以甘言款我，愿绝口勿言 和 字。 上以边事全倚张浚，而王之望、尹穑专主和排浚，铨廷责之。
现代文：皇上将边防事宜全部交付张浚，而王之望、尹穑等人专主议和排挤张浚，胡铨当廷斥责他们。
English: The emperor entrusted all border defense matters to Zhang Jun, while Wang Zhifang, Yin Qi and others exclusively discussed and excluded Zhang Jun, and Hu Yao rebuked them in court.

古文：兼权中书舍人、同修国史。
现代文：胡铨兼任权中书舍人、同修国史。
English: Hu Yao also served as a scholar and a scholar of national history.

古文：张浚之子栻赐金紫，铨缴奏之，谓不当如此待勋臣子。
现代文：张浚儿子张木式被赐金紫，胡铨收缴上奏，认为不应当这样对待勋臣子弟。
English: Zhang Jun's son, Zhang Muxi, was given gold and purple, and Hu Yao was confiscated. He believed that this should not be the way to treat the son of an honored minister.

古文：浚雅与铨厚，不顾也。
现代文：张浚与胡铨交情深厚，胡铨不顾忌这一点。
English: Zhang Jun and Hu Yao have a deep friendship, and Hu Yao does not care about this.

古文：十一月，诏以和戎遣使，大询于庭，侍从、台谏预议者凡十有四人。
现代文：十一月，诏令派遣使者到金朝讲和，在朝臣中征求意见，侍从、台谏参加计议的共有十四人。
English: In November, the imperial edict sent an envoy to the Kim dynasty to talk about peace and solicit opinions from the courtiers. A total of fourteen attendants and courtiers participated in the deliberation.

古文：主和者半，可否者半，言不可和者铨一人而已，乃独上一议曰： 京师失守自耿南仲主和，二圣播迁自何主和，维扬失守自汪伯彦、黄潜善主和，完颜亮之变自秦桧主和。
现代文：力主和议的占一半，模棱两可的占一半，说不能议和的不过胡铨一人，于是独自提出一项建议说： 京师失守是由于耿南仲主和，徽、钦二帝流落远方是由于何主和，维阳失守是由于汪伯彦、黄潜善主和，完颜亮南侵是由于秦桧主和。
English: Half of them advocated peace, half of them were ambiguous, and only Hu Xun said that peace could not be negotiated, so he independently put forward a proposal saying: the loss of the capital was due to the peace of Geng Nanzhong, the exile of Hu and Qin Erdi was due to the peace of He, the loss of Weiyang was due to the peace of Wang Bohian and Huang Xuan Zhen, and the invasion of the south was due to the peace of Qin Yu.

古文：议者乃曰： 外虽和而内不忘战。
现代文：议者都这样说 ：外号和而内不忘战。 
English: The councillors all said the same thing: make peace externally, but don't forget the war internally.

古文：此向来权臣误国之言也。
现代文：这是权臣一向的误国言论。
English: This is the kind of erroneous statement that has always been made by government officials.

古文：一溺于和，不能自振，尚能战乎？ 除宗正少卿，乞补外，不许。
现代文：一旦沉溺于讲和，不能自拔，还能战吗？ 朝廷任命他为宗正少卿，胡铨请求外任，没被允许。
English: Once you indulge in peace talks, you can't extricate yourself, can you still fight? The court appointed him as Zong Zheng Shaoqing, Hu Yao asked for an outside post, but was not allowed.

古文：先是，金将蒲察徒穆、大周仁以泗州降，萧琦以军百人降，诏并为节度使。
现代文：早先，金将蒲察徒穆、大周仁以泗州地投降，萧琦率兵一百人投降，诏令都授予他们节度使。
English: Earlier, Kim Jong-il's generals Puchatmu and Da Zhou Ren surrendered in Bozhou, and Xiao Tong led a hundred soldiers to surrender, and the imperial edict awarded them with the title of special envoy.

古文：铨言： 受降古所难，六朝七得河南之地，不旋踵而皆失；梁武时侯景以河南来奔，未几而陷台城；宣、政间郭药师自燕云来降，未几为中国患。
现代文：胡铨说 ：接受投降自古以来都是件棘手的事情，六朝七次得到河南地区，但很快又都丧失；梁武帝时侯景将河南地区来投降，不久台城沦陷；本朝政和、宣和年间，郭药师从燕云来投，不久成为中国祸患。
English: Hu Yao said: "Accepting surrender has always been a difficult matter since ancient times. The Six Dynasties gained the Henan region seven times, but soon lost it all; when Emperor Liang Wu, Hou Jing surrendered the Henan region, and soon Taicheng fell; during the Political Peace and the Proclamation of Peace in this dynasty, Guo Yakushi came from Yanyun to invest, and soon became a disaster for China.

古文：今金之三大将内附，高其爵禄，优其部曲，以系中原之心，善矣。
现代文：现在金朝三大将前来归附，给予高官厚禄，优待他们的部队，以维系中原民心，是不错的。
English: Now, the three major dynasties of the Kim dynasty will come to annex it, give high-ranking officials generous salaries, and give preferential treatment to their troops in order to maintain the hearts of the Central Plains people.

古文：然处之近地，万一包藏祸心，或为内应，后将噬脐，愿勿任以兵柄，迁其众于湖、广以绝后患。 
现代文：但让他们驻在都城附近，万一他们包藏祸心，作为内应，将来会后悔莫及，希望不要任命他们掌管兵权，把他们的部众迁移到湖、广地区以杜绝后患。 
English: But let them be stationed near the capital, in case they harbor evil intentions, as an internal response, they will regret it in the future. I hope they will not be appointed to control the military, and their subordinates will be relocated to the lake and the wider area to prevent future problems.

古文：二年，兼国子祭酒，寻除权兵部侍郎。
现代文：隆兴二年，胡铨兼任国子监祭酒，不久任权兵部侍郎。
English: In the second year of the Longxing, Hu Yao also served as the provincial overseer of the sacrificial wine, and soon he was appointed as the right attendant of the military department.

古文：八月，上以灾异避殿减膳，诏廷臣言阙政急务。
现代文：八月，皇上因灾异避住偏殿减少膳食，诏令廷臣议论政事缺失和当前急务。
English: In August, the Emperor avoided the hall due to a natural disaster and cut down on meals, ordering courtiers to discuss the lack of government affairs and current urgent matters.

古文：铨以振灾为急务，议和为阙政，其议和之书曰：
现代文：胡铨认为救灾是当务之急，同金讲和是政事缺失，他评论议和的奏疏说：
English: Hu Wei believes that disaster relief is the top priority, and talking peace with Kim is a political failure. He commented on the report of the discussion and said:

古文：自靖康迄今凡四十年，三遭大变，皆在和议，则丑虏之不可与和，彰彰然矣。
现代文： 从靖康之难至今已有四十年，遭到三次大的变故，都是由于议和，那么不能同敌人议和，已经十分明显了。
English: It has been forty years since the Battle of Jingkang, and three major changes have taken place, all of which were caused by peace talks. It has become very clear that it is impossible to talk peace with the enemy.

古文：肉食鄙夫，万口一谈，牢不可破。
现代文：鄙夫无能之辈，众口一辞，牢不可破，并不是不知道和议的害处。
English: It is not the lack of knowledge of the harm of peaceful discussion that makes the words of a bunch of incompetent people unbreakable.

古文：非不知和议之害，而争言为和者，是有三说焉：曰偷懦，曰苟安，曰附会。偷懦则不知立国，苟安则不戒鸩毒，附会则觊得美官，小人之情状具于此矣。
现代文：但争着主张和议的，有三种情况：一是偷懦，二是苟安，三是附会。偷懦就不知道立国，苟安就不会根除积病，附会则是为了得到美官，小人的情状都在这里。
English: However, there are three cases of contending for and advocating conciliation: the first is cowardice, the second is complacency, and the third is collusion. Cowardice does not know the founding of the country, complacency will not eradicate the accumulated disease, and collusion is to get the beautiful official, the situation of the villain is all here.

古文：今日之议若成，则有可吊者十；若不成，则有可贺者亦十。
现代文： 今天的和议如果成功，那么就有十种可为悲哀的事情；如果不成功，那么就有十种情形可以表示祝贺。
English: If today's peace talks succeed, there are ten things to be sad about; if they fail, there are ten things to be happy about.

古文：请为陛下极言之。何谓可吊者十？
现代文：请让我为陛下详细说明什么是可以悲哀的十种情况。
English: Please allow me to elaborate for Your Majesty on what are the ten situations that can be sad.

古文：真宗皇帝时，宰相李沆谓王旦曰： 我死，公必为相，切勿与虏讲和。
现代文： 真宗皇帝时宰相李沅对王旦说： 我死后，你一定会做宰相，切记不要同敌人讲和。
English: The prime minister at the time of Emperor Jianzong, Li Xi, said to Wang Dan: "After my death, you will surely become prime minister. Remember not to make peace with the enemy."

古文：吾闻出则无敌国外患，如是者国常亡，若与虏和，自此中国必多事矣。 旦殊不以为然。
现代文：我听说出则无敌国外患，像这样国家常亡，如果同敌人讲和，从此以后中国必然多事了。 王旦很不以为然。
English: I heard that if you make peace with your enemy, there will be many troubles in China in the future. Wang Dan did not agree.

古文：既而遂和，海内乾耗，旦始悔不用文靖之言。
现代文：同敌人议和之后，国内耗费殆尽，王旦才后悔没有听取李沅的话。
English: After negotiating peace with the enemy, the domestic expenditure was exhausted, and Wang Dan only regretted not listening to Li Xi's words.

古文：此可吊者一也。
现代文：这是可以悲哀的第一种情况。
English: This is the first situation that can be sad.

古文：中原讴吟思归之人，日夜引领望陛下拯溺救焚，不啻赤子之望慈父母，一与虏和，则中原绝望，后悔何及。
现代文： 中原地区讴歌吟咏想要归顺的民众，日夜翘首盼望陛下将他们拯救出水火之中，如同赤子盼望慈祥的父母，一旦同金议和，那么中原地区民众绝望，将后悔莫及。
English: The people of the Central Plains, who want to submit to Yingge Yingge, hope day and night that His Majesty will save them from the water and fire, like a baby hoping for loving parents. Once they discuss peace with Kim, then the people of the Central Plains are desperate and will regret it.

古文：此可吊者二也。
现代文：这是第二种可以悲哀的情况。
English: This is the second sad situation.

古文：海、泗今日之藩篱咽喉也，彼得海、泗，且决吾藩篱以瞰吾室，扼吾咽喉以制吾命，则两淮决不可保。
现代文： 海、泗两州是现在的藩篱咽喉之地，敌人得到海、泗，将会打开我朝藩篱瞰视我朝内室，扼住我朝咽喉控制我朝生命，那么两淮地区决不能保住。
English: The sea and the two provinces of Yunnan and Hebei are now the land of the fences and fences. If the enemy gets the sea and the fences, he will open my fences and fences, look into my inner chamber, strangle my throat and control my life. Then the two provinces of Hebei and Hebei can never be preserved.

古文：两淮不保，则大江决不可守，大江不守，则江、浙决不可安。
现代文：两淮不保，那么长江决不能守住；长江不能守，那么江、浙决不会安全。
English: If the two rivers are not secured, then the Yangtze River can never be protected; if the Yangtze River cannot be protected, then the Yangtze River and Zhejiang will never be safe.

古文：此可吊者三也。
现代文：这是第三种可以悲哀的情况。
English: This is the third sad situation.

古文：绍兴戊午，和议即成，桧建议遣二三大臣如路允迪等，分往南京等州交割归地。
现代文： 绍兴八年，和议达成后，秦桧建议派遣二三位大臣如路允迪等，分道前往南京等地交割归还的土地。
English: In the eighth year of Shaoxing, after the peace agreement was reached, Qin Hui proposed to send two or three ministers, such as Lu Yun Di, to go to Nanjing and other places to hand over the returned land.

古文：一旦叛盟，劫执允迪等，遂下亲征之诏，虏复请和。
现代文：金朝突然背叛盟约，拘留路允迪等人，于是皇上下诏亲征，金朝又请求议和。
English: The Kim dynasty suddenly reneged on the treaty and detained Lu Yun Di and others. As a result, the emperor issued an edict calling for conscription, and the Kim dynasty asked for peace talks.

古文：其反覆变诈如此，桧犹不悟，奉之如初，事之愈谨，赂之愈厚，卒有逆亮之变，惊动辇毂。
现代文：其反复无常如此狡诈，秦桧还不醒悟，奉金犹如当初，事金更加恭谨，贿赂更加优厚，终于致使完颜亮南侵，惊动皇上。
English: Its capriciousness is so cunning, Qin Hui has not yet woken up, offering money is still the same as in the beginning, the money is more respectful, the bribe is more generous, finally leading to the invasion of the south, alarming the emperor.

古文：太上谋欲入海，行朝居民一空，覆辙不远，忽而不戒，臣恐后车又将覆也。
现代文：高宗计划避入海中，朝中居民一空，前鉴不远，不以为戒，臣恐怕又将重蹈覆辙。
English: Gao Zong planned to take refuge in the sea, and the residents of the Middle Kingdom were completely wiped out. The precedent is not far away, and if we do not take it as a warning, we are likely to repeat the same mistakes.

古文：此可吊者四也。
现代文：这是第四种可以悲哀的情况。
English: This is the fourth sad situation.

古文：绍兴之和，首议决不与归正人，口血未干，尽变前议。
现代文： 绍兴和议，先计定决不交还前来归顺的民众，墨迹未干，全部改变以前的决定。
English: In the Shaoxing peace talks, it was decided in advance that the people who came to surrender would never be returned. The ink was not dry, and all the previous decisions were changed.

古文：凡归正之人一切遣还，如程师回、赵良嗣等聚族数百，几为萧墙忧。
现代文：凡是归顺的人一律遣返，如程师回、赵良嗣等聚集部族数百家，几乎酿成萧墙之祸。
English: All those who surrendered were repatriated, such as Cheng Shihai, Zhao Liangzi and hundreds of other tribes, which almost led to the disaster of Xiaowan.

古文：今必尽索归正之人，与之则反侧生变，不与则虏决不肯但已。
现代文：现在金一定要全部索取投奔我朝的民众，交还它就会反侧生变，不交还它就决不肯罢休。
English: Now, we must demand all the money from the people who have defected to our country. If we give it back, things will change. If we don't give it back, they will never give it up.

古文：夫反侧则肘腋之变深，虏决不肯但已，则必别起衅端，猝有逆亮之谋，不知何以待之。
现代文：反侧是肘腋的深患，金不肯罢休，就必然会另外挑起事端，突然遭完颜亮那样南侵的谋划，不知道怎么样来对待它。
English: On the other hand, it is a deep-rooted problem. If Kim refuses to give up, he will inevitably provoke another incident. Suddenly, the plan to invade the south has been exposed, and I don't know how to deal with it.

古文：此可吊者五也。
现代文：这是第五种可以悲哀的情况。
English: This is the fifth sad state of affairs.

古文：自桧当国二十年间，竭民膏血以饵犬羊，迄今府库无旬月之储，千村万落生理萧然，重以蝗虫水潦。
现代文： 在秦桧当政的二十年间，竭尽民众膏血以喂养犬羊，至今府库之中已没有旬月储蓄，千村万户生理萧然，又加上蝗害水灾不断。
English: During the twenty years that Qin Hui was in power, the people were exhausted to feed the dogs and sheep. So far, there has been no monthly savings in the government treasury, thousands of villages and households are physiologically depressed, and locust plagues and floods continue.

古文：自此复和，则蠹国害民，殆有甚焉者矣。
现代文：自此讲和，扰国害民，情况就会更加严重。
English: From now on, the situation will be more serious.

古文：此可吊者六也。
现代文：这是第六种可以悲哀的情况。
English: This is the sixth sorrowful condition.

古文：今日之患，兵费已广，养兵之外又增岁币，且少以十年计之，其费无虑数千亿。
现代文： 今天之患，兵费已很巨大，供养军队之外，又增加给金的岁币，就以十年计算，费用不少于数千亿。
English: Today's problem is that the military expenses are already huge. In addition to providing for the military, the annual amount of money added to the payment is calculated for ten years, and the cost is not less than hundreds of billions.

古文：而岁币之外，又有私觌之费；私觌之外，又有贺正、生辰之使；贺正、生辰之外，又有泛使。
现代文：而岁币之外，又有私觌之费；私觌之外，又有贺正、生辰使节费用；贺正、生辰之外，还有平时各种各样的使用。
English: But in addition to the New Year's coins, there are also private money expenses; in addition to private money, there are He Zheng and birthday envoy expenses; in addition to He Zheng and birthday, there are also various uses in peacetime.

古文：一使未去，一使复来，生民疲于奔命，帑廪涸于将迎，瘠中国以肥虏，陛下何惮而为之。
现代文：一使还没离开，另一使节又来到，民众疲于奔命，仓廪涸于迎送，贫瘠自己而养肥敌人，陛下何忍这样做。
English: One envoy has not yet left, another envoy has arrived, the people are exhausted from running for their lives, the barns are dry from the welcome, they are barren and fatten the enemy, how can His Majesty bear to do this.

古文：此其可吊者七也。
现代文：这是第七种可以悲哀的情况。
English: This is the seventh sorrowful condition.

古文：侧闻虏人嫚书，欲书御名，欲去国号 大 字，欲用再拜。
现代文： 从侧面听说金人书信侮辱我朝，想直呼皇上之名，想去掉我朝国号 大 字，想拜迎其国书。
English: From the side, I heard that the letter from Jinren insulted my country, and I wanted to call the emperor by his name, I wanted to remove my country's name, and I wanted to salute his national anthem.

古文：议者以为繁文小节不必计较，臣切以为议者可斩也。
现代文：议论者认为繁文小节不必计较，臣切以为这样议论的人应该斩首。
English: Commentators believe that there is no need to pay attention to the red tape, and the minister believes that those who argue in this way should be beheaded.

古文：夫四郊多垒，卿大夫之辱；楚子问鼎，义士之所深耻； 献纳 二字，富弼以死争之。
现代文：四郊多壁垒，是卿大夫的侮辱；楚子问鼎，为义士所深耻； 献纳 二字，富弼以死抗争。
English: The four suburbs have many barriers, which is an insult to the noble doctor; Chu Zi is the best-known, which is deeply ashamed of the righteous; two words of offering, and Fuxi will fight to the death.

古文：今丑虏横行与多垒孰辱？
现代文：现在敌人横行与多垒哪更耻辱？
English: Now that the enemy is rampant with multiple bases, what is more shameful?

古文：国号大小与鼎轻重孰多？ 献纳 二字与再拜孰重？
现代文：国号大小同鼎轻重哪更严重？ 献纳 二字同再拜哪更严重？
English: Which is more serious, that a country's name and size are of equal importance, or that the word "offering" and the word "worship" are the same?

古文：臣子欲君父屈己以从之，则是多垒不足辱，问鼎不必耻， 献纳 不必争。
现代文：臣子想让君父屈己以服从敌人，就是多垒不足为辱，问鼎不必为耻， 献纳 不必争执。
English: If a vassal wants to make his sovereign father bow down to him by obeying the enemy, it is a disgrace to fall short of many bases. There is no need to be ashamed of asking for advice, and there is no need to argue about offering.

古文：此其可吊者八也。
现代文：这是第八种可以悲哀的情况。
English: This is the eighth sorrowful condition.

古文：臣恐再拜不已必至称臣，称臣不已必至请降，请降不已必至纳土，纳土不已必至衔壁，衔壁不已必至舆榇，舆榇不已必至如晋帝青衣行酒然后为快。
现代文： 臣恐怕再拜不已至于对金称臣，称臣不已必至于向金请降，请降不已必至于向金纳土，纳土不已必至于衔壁出降，衔壁不已必至于载棺以随，表示决死；舆榇不已必至于像晋帝那样青衣行酒然后为快。
English: I'm afraid the vassals will continue to bow down to Kim, to call him a vassal, to call him a vassal, to ask Kim to abdicate, to ask Kim to abdicate, to abdicate to Kim, to abdicate to Kim, to abdicate to Kim, to abdicate to Kim, to abdicate to Kim, to abdicate to Kim, to abdicate to Kim, to abdicate to Kim, to abdicate to Kim, to abdicate to Kim, to abdicate to Kim.

古文：此其可吊者九也。
现代文：这是第九种应该感到悲哀的情况。
English: This is the ninth sorrowful condition.

古文：事至于此，求为匹夫尚可得乎？
现代文： 事情到了这个地步，即使是求为匹夫还能得到吗？
English: Things have come to this point, even if you ask for a partner, can you still get one?

古文：此其可吊者十也。
现代文：这是第十种可以悲哀的情况。
English: This is the tenth sorrowful condition.

古文：窃观今日之势，和决不成，傥乾刚独断，追回使者魏杞、康湑等，绝请和之议以鼓战士，下哀痛之诏以收民心，天下庶乎其可为矣。
现代文： 我私自观察今天的形势，和议决不能成功，倘若当机立断，追回使者魏杞、康蔍等人，断绝讲和的议论以鼓动战士，下哀痛之诏令以收起民心，天下才有可作为。
English: From my personal observation of today's situation, the peace talks can never succeed. If we seize the opportunity to recover the emissaries Wei Wei, Kang Xi and others, cut off the talk of peace to encourage the soldiers, and issue a sad edict to calm the people's hearts, the world can only do something.

古文：如此则有可贺者亦十：省数千亿之岁币，一也；专意武备，足食足兵，二也；无书名之耻，三也；无去 大 之辱，四也；无再拜之屈，五也；无称臣之忿，六也；无请降之祸，七也；无纳土之悲，八也；无衔璧、舆榇之酷，九也；无青衣行酒之冤，十也。
现代文：这样可以庆贺的情况也有十种：节省数千亿的岁币，这是一；专意讲求武备，足食足兵，这是二；没有直呼皇上之名的奇耻，这是三；没有去掉 大 字的大辱，这是四；没有拜受金朝国书的屈辱，这是五；没有对金称臣的忿愤，这是六；没有请求投降的祸患，这是七；没有交纳土地的悲哀，这是八；没有衔壁、舆榇的残酷，这是九；没有青衣行酒的冤屈，这是十。
English: There are also ten types of situations that can be celebrated in this way: saving hundreds of billions of years of coins, this is one; special attention is paid to military preparedness and foot soldiers, this is two; there is no shame in calling the emperor's name directly, this is three; there is no great humiliation of removing the capital letter, this is four; there is no humiliation of worshiping the national book of the Kim dynasty, this is five; there is no anger against the Kim dynasty, this is six; there is no disaster of requesting surrender, this is seven; there is no sorrow of surrendering land, this is eight; there is no wall, the cruelty of public opinion, this is

古文：去十吊而就十贺，利害较然，虽三尺童稚亦知之，而陛下不悟。
现代文： 去掉十种悲哀而得到十种应该庆贺的事情，利害得失比较，即使是三尺童稚也知道，而陛下不醒悟。
English: Eliminate ten kinds of sorrow and get ten kinds of things that should be celebrated, compare the pros and cons, even a three-foot child knows, but His Majesty does not wake up.

古文：《春秋左氏》谓无勇者为妇人，今日举朝之士皆妇人也。
现代文：《春秋左氏传》说无勇是妇人，今天全朝之士都是妇人。
English: "Chunqiu Zuo's Biography" says that Wu Yong is a woman, today all the men of the dynasty are women.

古文：如以臣言为不然，乞赐流放窜殛，以为臣子出位犯分之戒。
现代文：如果认为我说的不是这样，请将我流放到极边，以为臣子超出职位冒犯本分的劝戒。 
English: If you think that what I said is not true, please banish me to the farthest reaches of the land, and admonish me for thinking that a courtier is exceeding his position and offending his duty.

古文：自符离之败，朝论急于和戎，弃唐、邓、海、泗四州与虏矣。
现代文：自从符离失败之后，朝廷舆论急于同金讲和，放弃唐、邓、海、泗四州给金。
English: Since the failure of the unification, the public opinion of the imperial court has been eager to make peace with Kim and give up Tang, Deng, Hai and Handan provinces to Kim.

古文：金又欲得商、秦地，邀岁币，留使者魏杞，分兵攻淮。
现代文：金朝又想得到商、秦地区，增加岁币，扣留使者魏杞，分兵进攻淮河地区。
English: The Kim dynasty also wanted to get the Shang and Qin regions, increase the annual currency, detain the envoy Wei Wei, and attack the Huaihe region.

古文：以本职措置浙西、淮东海道。
现代文：胡铨以本职安排处置浙西、淮东海道防务。
English: Hu Wei is responsible for the defense of the West Zhejiang and East Huaihai sea routes.

古文：时金使仆散忠义、纥石烈志宁之兵号八十万，刘宝弃楚州，王彦弃昭关，濠、滁皆陷。
现代文：当时金朝派仆散忠义、纥石烈志宁率兵号称八十万，刘宝放弃楚州，王彦放弃昭关，濠、滁州都沦陷。
English: At that time, the Kim dynasty dispatched 800,000 soldiers under the command of minions such as Zan Zhongyi and Zou Shi Liuzhining. Liu Bao gave up Chuzhou, Wang Yan gave up Zhaoguan, and both Quzhou and Zhangzhou fell.

古文：惟高邮守臣陈敏拒敌射阳湖，而大将李宝预求密诏为自安计，拥兵不救。
现代文：只有高邮守将陈敏在射阳湖抵拒敌人，而大将李宝预求密诏以保全自己，拥兵不救。
English: Only the high-ranking postmaster Chen Min resisted the enemy at Sheyang Lake, while the general Li Bao requested a secret edict in advance to protect himself, not to save the soldiers.

古文：铨劾奏之，曰： 臣受诏令范荣备淮，李宝备江，缓急相援。
现代文：胡铨上章弹劾他，说： 臣受诏命令范荣防备淮河，李宝防备长江，紧急时互相救援。
English: He was impeached by the last chapter of the Book of Hu, which said: "The emperor ordered Fan Rong to be prepared for the Huai River, Li Bao to be prepared for the Yangtze River, and to rescue each other in an emergency.

古文：今宝视敏弗救，若射阳失守，大事去矣。 宝惧，始出师掎角。
现代文：今天李宝坐视陈敏不往救援，如果射阳失守，大事去了。 李宝害怕，才出师牵制敌人。
English: Today, Li Bao watched Chen Min not go to the rescue. If Shiyang lost its defense, a big event would happen. Li Bao was afraid, so he sent out a division to contain the enemy.

古文：时大雪，河冰皆合，铨先持铁锤锤冰，士皆用命，金人遂退。
现代文：当时天降大雪，河上结冰连成一片，胡铨先用铁凿开结冰，士卒都人人服从命令，金军于是退走。
English: At that time, there was heavy snowfall, and the river was covered with ice. Hu Yao first used an iron chisel to break the ice. All the soldiers obeyed the order, and the Golden Army then retreated.

古文：久之，提举太平兴国宫。
现代文：过了很久，胡铨提举太平兴国宫。
English: After a long time, Hu Jintao raised the Taiping Xingguo Palace.

古文：乾道初，以集英殿修撰知漳州，改泉州。
现代文：乾道初年，胡铨以集英殿修撰的身份知漳州，改任泉州。
English: In the first year of the dry road, Hu Yao, who knew Zhangzhou as the compiler of Shueiden, was reassigned to Quanzhou.

古文：趣奏事，留为工部侍郎。
现代文：上朝奏事，留任工部侍郎。
English: He reported to the Emperor and remained as a chamberlain in the Ministry of Works.

古文：入对，言： 少康以一旅复禹绩，今陛下富有四海，非特一旅，而即位九年，复禹之效尚未赫然。 又言： 四方多水旱，左右不以告，谋国者之过也，宜令有司速为先备。 乞致仕。
现代文：入朝对策，说： 少康以一旅之师恢复夏禹基业，今陛下富有四海，不只一旅，而即位已经九年，恢复过去基业的效果还未显著。 又说： 天下多水旱灾害，左右不上报，这是为国谋画者的过错，应该命令有关部门迅速做好防灾准备。 
English: He also said: There are many floods and droughts around the world, but they are not reported, which is the fault of those who plan for the country, and the relevant departments should be ordered to quickly prepare for disaster prevention.

古文：七年，除宝文阁待制，留经筵。
现代文：请求退休。乾道七年，任宝文阁待制，留经筵。
English: He asked to retire. After seven years of dry road, he was assigned to the Baobeng Pavilion as a standby system, and stayed at the Great Wall of China.

古文：求去，以敷文阁直学士与外祠。
现代文：请求离职。以敷文阁直学士出外任宫观官。
English: He requested to resign from the post. He was appointed as a palace inspector with the title of Shikibunkaku Jitsugaku.

古文：陛辞，犹以归陵寝、复故疆为言，上曰： 朕志也。 且问今何归，铨曰： 归庐陵，臣向在岭海尝训传诸经，欲成此书。 特赐通天犀带以宠之。
现代文：辞行时，还以归还陵寝、恢复故疆上言，皇上说： 这是我的志向。 并问他回到哪里，胡铨说： 回到庐陵，臣以前在岭海曾经训解经书，想写成此书。 皇上特赐通天犀带以示宠荣。
English: At the time of his resignation, he also used the words "return to the mausoleum" and "restore to the motherland" as his motto. The emperor said, "This is my aspiration." When asked where he would return to, Hu Yao said, "Back to the mausoleum, my minister used to teach and interpret scriptures in Linghai, and he wanted to write this book. The emperor specially bestowed the Belt of Heaven on me to show his favor."

古文：铨归，上所著《易》、《春秋》、《周礼》、《礼记解》，诏藏秘书省。
现代文：胡铨归去后，献上所著《易》、《春秋》、《周礼》、《礼记解》，皇上诏令收藏于秘书省。
English: After Hu Yao's return, he presented his works "Yi," "Spring and Autumn," "Weekly Rituals" and "An Explanation of Etiquette," which were collected in the Ministry of Secretaries by imperial edict.

古文：寻复元官，升龙图阁学士、提举太平兴国宫，转提举玉隆万寿宫，进端明殿学士。
现代文：不久复任原官，升龙图阁学士、提举太平兴国宫，转提举玉隆万寿宫，进为端明殿学士。
English: He was soon reinstated as the original official, promoted to the Dragon Academy, promoted to the Taiping Palace, promoted to the Yulong Palace, and promoted to the Duanming Palace.

古文：六年，召归经筵，铨引疾力辞。
现代文：淳熙六年，召胡铨归经筵，胡铨以疾病极力推辞。
English: In the sixth year of Chunxi, Hu Yao was summoned to return to Jingyao, but he refused to do so, saying he was ill.

古文：十八年卒。
现代文：淳熙七年，以资政殿学士身份退休。
English: In the seventh year of Atsuhiro's reign, he retired as a scholar of the House of Councillors.

古文：赵开，字应祥，普州安居人。
现代文：去世后，谥号 忠简 。著有《澹庵集》一百卷流传于世。赵开字应祥，普州安居人。
English: After his death, his posthumous name was Zhong Jian. He was the author of the hundred-volume "Ancestor's Collection," which has been passed down to the world. Zhao Kaiji Yingxiang, a resident of Puzhou.

古文：登元符三年进士第。
现代文：元符三年中进士及第。
English: In the third year of the Yuanfu era, he was promoted to the first and second rank.

古文：大观二年，权辟廱正。
现代文：大观二年，权辟颿正。
English: In the second year of the Great View, the power was restored.

古文：用举者改秩，即尽室如京师，买田尉氏，与四方贤俊游，因诇知天下利病所当罢行者。
现代文：由于举荐改变官秩，全家迁居京师，买田尉氏，同四方贤俊交游，因此洞察到天下利弊应当除去和施行的。
English: As a result of the recommendation to change the official rank, the whole family moved to Beijing, bought the Tianyi clan, and made friends with the Shifang Xianjun, so he saw that the world's advantages and disadvantages should be eliminated and implemented.

古文：如是七年，慨然有通变救弊志。
现代文：像这样经过七年时间，慨然有变革除弊的志向。
English: After seven years of this, there is clearly an appetite for change.

古文：宣和初，除礼制局校正检阅官。数月局罢，出知鄢陵县。
现代文：宣和初年，任礼制局校正检阅官，数月后礼制局废罢，出知鄢陵县。
English: In the first year of the declaration of peace, he was appointed as a proofreading inspector of the Bureau of Etiquette. A few months later, the Bureau of Etiquette was abolished, and he moved to Deming County.

古文：七年，除讲议司检详官。
现代文：宣和七年，任讲议司检详官。
English: Seven years after the proclamation of peace, he was appointed procurator of the Department of Public Discussions.

古文：开善心计，自检详罢，除成都路转运判官，遂奏罢宣和六年所增上供认额纲布十万匹，减绵州下户支移利州水脚钱十分之三，又减蒲江六井元符至宣和所增盐额，列其次第，谓之 鼠尾帐 ，揭示乡户岁时所当输折科等实数，俾人人具晓，乡胥不得隐匿窜寄。
现代文：赵开善长心计，自罢检详官后，任成都路转运判官，于是奏请罢免宣和六年所增上供认额纲布十万匹，减免下户输纳利州水脚钱的十分之三，又减免蒲江六所盐井在元符到宣和时所增加的盐额，排列其顺序，叫作 鼠尾账 ，揭榜告示乡户所应当交纳的赋税的实际数目，使人人都能知道了解，乡村胥吏不得隐匿转寄。
English: Zhao Kaishan had a long-term plan. He was appointed as the judge of Chengdu Road Transportation after he became the strike inspector. Therefore, he submitted a petition to revoke the declaration of peace and the increase of 100,000 horses in the six-year declaration, reduce and exempt three-tenths of the amount of salt lost by households in the state of Nali, and reduce and exempt the amount of salt added by six salt wells in the Pudong River in the Yuan Dynasty to the declaration of peace. He arranged the order, called the rat's tail account, to reveal the actual amount of tax that the villagers should pay, so that everyone could know and understand that the village officials should not hide the

古文：尝言： 财利之源当出于一，祖宗朝天下财计尽归三司，诸道利源各归漕计，故官省事理。
现代文：曾经说： 财利之源应当出于一处，祖宗时天下财计尽归三司管理，各种利源各归漕司管理，因此官省而事理。
English: He once said: The source of wealth and profit should come from one place. In the time of our ancestors, all the world's wealth and profit came under the management of the three departments, and all kinds of sources of profit came under the management of the overseers. Therefore, it was a matter for the government and the ministries.

古文：并废以还，漕司则利害可以参究，而无牵掣窒碍之患矣。 因指陈榷茶、买马五害，大略谓： 黎州买马，嘉祐岁额才二千一百余。
现代文：合并废罢，漕司可以参究利害，而没有互相牵制阻碍的弊端。 并陈述榷茶、买马五大弊端，大概是说： 黎州买马，在嘉时每年花费才二千一百余。
English: If the merger is scrapped, the brewers can study the interests, but not the drawbacks that hinder each other, and state the five drawbacks of brewing tea and buying horses, probably saying: to buy a horse in Lizhou, it only costs more than 2,100 yuan a year in Jiaxing.

古文：自置司榷茶，岁额四千，且获马兵逾千人，犹不足用，多费衣粮，为一害。
现代文：自从设置榷茶机关以后，每年花费四千，并且需要护马士卒超过千人，还不够用，多费衣粮，这是一害。
English: Since the tea-serving office was set up, it has cost four thousand a year, and requires more than a thousand horse guards, which is not enough, and it costs more for clothing and food, which is a harm.

古文：嘉祐以银绢博马，价皆有定。
现代文：嘉时以银绢买马，都有定价。
English: Jiaxing buys horses with silver ingots, and all of them are priced accordingly.

古文：今长吏旁缘为奸，不时归货，以空券给夷人，使待资次，夷人怨恨，必生边患，为二害。
现代文：现在有关官员狼狈为奸。不按时交归货物，只将空头支票交给当地少数民族民众，让他们等待货物，因此产生怨恨，必然导致边患发生，这是二害。
English: At present, the relevant officials are in cahoots with each other. If the goods are not returned on time, only a bad check will be given to the local ethnic minority people to wait for the goods, which will cause resentment and inevitably lead to the occurrence of border problems. These are the two evils.

古文：初置司榷茶，借本钱于转运司五十二万缗，于常平司二十余万缗。
现代文：当初设置榷茶机关，向转运司借贷本钱五十二万缗，向常平司借贷二十余万。
English: At the beginning, a tea-brewing organ was set up, borrowing 520,000 baht from the Forwarding Department and more than 200,000 baht from the Changping Department.

古文：自熙宁至今几六十年，旧所借不偿一文，而岁借乃准初数，为三害。
现代文：自熙宁至今近六十年，原来所借贷的没有偿还一分钱，而每年借贷仍以当初数目为标准，这是三害。
English: It has been nearly 60 years since Xianning, and not a penny of the original loan has been repaid, and the annual loan is still based on the original amount. These are the three evils.

古文：榷茶之初，预俵茶户本钱，寻于数外更增和买，或遂抑预俵钱充和买，茶户坐是破产，而官买岁增。茶日滥杂，官茶既不堪食，则私贩公行，刑不能禁，为四害。
现代文：实行榷茶之初，预先分给茶户本钱，不久于数外改变增加和买，或者扣留分给茶户的本钱充当和买，茶户因此破产，而官买每年增加，茶叶质量日益泛杂，官茶既不能饮食，私贩茶叶随之公行，法令不能禁止，这是四害。
English: At the beginning of the implementation of tea brewing, the capital was allocated to tea households in advance, and soon it was changed to increase and buy, or the capital allocated to tea households was withheld to act as and buy. As a result, tea households went bankrupt, while government purchases increased every year, the quality of tea became increasingly mixed, government tea could not be used for eating and drinking, and private tea traders went public, and laws and regulations could not be banned. These were the four evils.

古文：承平时，蜀茶之入秦者十几八九，犹患积压难售。
现代文：过去天下太平之时，四川茶叶进入秦陇地区的十占八九，还怕积压难以出售。
English: In the past, when the world was at peace, Sichuan tea entered the Qinhuangdao region in eight out of ten cases, and it was difficult to sell the backlog.

古文：今关、陇悉遭焚荡，仍拘旧额，竟何所用？
现代文：现在关、陇地区全遭战火焚毁，仍拘留旧额，究竟有什么用呢？
English: Now that Guan and Handan regions have all been burned by the war, and the old amount is still detained, what is the use?

古文：茶兵官吏坐縻衣粮，未免科配州县，为五害。
现代文：茶兵官吏坐费衣粮，不免给州县摊派杂税，这是五害。
English: There are five harms for the tea soldiers and officials to spend money on food and clothing, but still have to pay miscellaneous taxes to the counties.

古文：请依嘉祐故事，尽罢榷茶，仍令转运司买马，即五害并去，而边患不生。
现代文：请求依照嘉的旧例，全部罢免榷茶，仍令转运司买马，那么五官并去，而边患不会发生。
English: The request is to follow the old example of Jia, cancel the tea ceremony altogether, but still order the transportation department to buy a horse, then the five officials will go together, and the border trouble will not occur.

古文：如谓榷茶未可遽罢，亦宜并归转运司，痛减额以苏茶户，轻立价以惠茶商，如此则私贩必衰，盗贼消弭，本钱既常在，而息钱自足。 
现代文：如认为榷茶不能急忙废罢，也应该并归转运司管理，痛下决心减免数额以减轻茶户负担，降价以优惠茶商，这样私自贩卖必然衰落，盗贼消弭平定，本钱既常在，而利息自足。 
English: If it is thought that brewing tea cannot be abandoned in a hurry, it should also be under the management of the forwarding department. It is painfully determined to reduce the amount to reduce the burden on tea households, and reduce the price to give preferential treatment to tea merchants. In this way, the private sale will inevitably decline, the thieves will be eliminated, the capital will always be there, and the interest will be self-sufficient.

古文：朝廷是其言，即擢开都大提举川、陕茶马事，使推行之。
现代文：朝廷感到赵开说得正确，即提升他为都大提举川、陕茶马事，让他推行。
English: The imperial court felt that Zhao Kai's words were correct, that is, he was promoted to the capital to promote the Huchuan and Shaanxi tea and horse affairs, and let him implement them.

古文：时建炎二年也。
现代文：这是建炎二年的事情。
English: This is a matter of two years.

古文：于是大更茶马之法，官买官卖茶并罢，参酌政和二年东京都茶务所创条约，印给茶引，使茶商执引与茶户自相贸易。
现代文：于是大变茶马之法，官买官卖一齐废罢，参照政和二年东京都茶务所制定的条款，印制茶引，让茶商执引同茶户自相贸易。
English: As a result, the law of the tea-horse was drastically changed, and the government-buyer-government-seller principle was scrapped altogether. Based on the terms established by the Tokyo Metropolitan Tea Office in 1902, tea guides were printed, and tea merchants were allowed to conduct their own trade with tea houses.

古文：改成都旧买卖茶场为合同场买引所，仍于合同场置茶市，交易者必由市，引与茶必相随。
现代文：将成都过去的买卖茶场改为合同场买引所，仍在合同场设立茶市，交易者必经过茶市，茶引和茶必须相随一起。
English: Chengdu's former tea market will be changed to a contract market, and a tea market will still be set up at the contract market. Traders must pass through the tea market, and the tea market and tea must be accompanied.

古文：茶户十或十五共为一保，并籍定茶铺姓名，互察影带贩鬻者。凡买茶引，每一斤春为钱七十，夏五十，旧所输市例头子钱并依旧。
现代文：茶户十户或十五户为一保，并确定茶铺姓名，互相监督贩鬻的人，凡是买茶引，春季每斤为钱七十，夏季为五十，原来所交纳的市例头子钱仍依旧。
English: Ten or fifteen tea households are insured, the names of tea shops are determined, and those who supervise the sellers are mutually supervised. In the spring, the price per kilo of tea is 70 yuan, and in the summer, it is 50 yuan. The money originally paid by the mayor is still the same.

古文：茶所过每一斤征一钱，住征一钱半。
现代文：茶经过的关口每斤征发一钱，住下征收一钱半。
English: For every catty of tea that passes through the checkpoint, one yuan will be collected and distributed, and one and a half yuan will be collected at the checkpoint.

古文：其合同场监官除验引、秤茶、封记、发放外，无得干预茶商、茶户交易事。
现代文：合同场监官员除了验引、秤茶、封记、发放等事务外，不得干预茶商、茶户交易事宜。
English: In addition to matters such as inspection, weighing tea, sealing, and distribution, the contract inspector is not allowed to intervene in the transactions of tea merchants and tea households.

古文：旧制买马及三千匹者转一官，比但以所买数推赏，往往有一任转数官者。
现代文：原来的制度买马达到三千匹转一官，这只是以所买的数目多少进行奖赏，往往有一任数次转官的情况。
English: The original system of buying horses up to three thousand horses for one official, this is only to reward the number of horses bought, often there is a situation of several transfers.

古文：开奏： 请推赏必以马到京实收数为格，或死于道，黜降有差。 比及四年冬，茶引收息至一百七十余万缗，买马乃逾二万匹。
现代文：赵开上奏说 ：谁奖赏必须以马匹到京实际验收的数目为准，有的马匹死在途中，应降黜不等。 到建炎四年冬，茶引收取利息达到一百七十多万，买马超过二万匹。
English: Zhao Kai Shangsuo said: Whoever rewards must be based on the number of horses arriving in Beijing for actual acceptance, and some horses died on the way should be reduced. By the winter of the fourth year of construction, the interest charged by the tea guide reached more than 1.7 million, and more than 20,000 horses were bought.

古文：张浚以知枢密院宣抚川蜀，素知开善理财，即承制以开兼宣抚处置使司随军转运使，专一总领四川财赋。
现代文：张浚以知枢密院身份宣抚川蜀，素知赵开善于理财，即承制任命赵开兼任宣抚处置使司随军专运使，专门总领四川财赋。
English: Zhang Jun, as a member of the Privy Council, appointed Zhao Kai as the special envoy to accompany the army, and as he knew that Zhao Kai was good at financial management, he also appointed Zhao Kai as the special envoy to accompany the army, and he was specially appointed as the general manager of Sichuan's financial resources.

古文：开见浚曰： 蜀之民力尽矣，锱铢不可加，独榷货稍存赢余，而贪猾认为己有，互相隐匿。
现代文：赵开见到张浚说 ：四川民众的财力已经耗尽了，一点也不能增加，只有榷货稍有赢余，而贪猾官吏将其据为己有，互相隐瞒藏匿。
English: When Zhao Kai saw Zhang Jun, he said: The financial resources of the people of Sichuan have been exhausted and cannot be increased at all. Only hoarding goods has a slight surplus, while greedy officials have taken it as their own and hide it from each other.

古文：惟不恤怨詈，断而敢行，庶可救一时之急。 
现代文：只有不顾忌怨恨，果断敢行，才能救济一时之急。 
English: Only by acting decisively, regardless of resentment, can we relieve the urgency of the moment.

古文：浚锐意兴复，委任不疑，于是大变酒法，自成都始。
现代文：张浚锐意兴复宋朝大业，对赵开委任不疑，于是大改酒法，从成都开始。
English: Zhang Junrui intended to revive the great cause of the Song Dynasty, and he had no doubt about the appointment of Zhao Kai, so he drastically changed the liquor law, starting from Chengdu.

古文：先罢公使卖供给酒，即旧扑买坊场所置隔槽，设官主之，曲与酿具官悉自买，听酿户各以米赴官场自酿，凡一石米输三千，并头子杂用等二十二。
现代文：首先罢免公使卖供给酒，在原来扑买坊场所设置隔槽，设官主持其事，曲和酿具官全部自买，听任酿酒户各以米到官场自酿，凡一石米交钱三千，加上头子杂用钱二十二。
English: First of all, the minister was dismissed to sell the supply of wine, a partition was set up in the original place of buying and selling, an official was set up to preside over the matter, all the tuns and brewing equipment were bought by the official, and the brewers were allowed to brew their own rice at the official site. Each stone of rice paid 3,000 yuan, plus 22 yuan for the boss and miscellaneous expenses.

古文：其酿之多寡，惟钱是视，不限数也。
现代文：酿酒多少，只看纳钱的多少，不限制数目。
English: There is no limit to how much wine can be produced, only how much money can be collected.

古文：明年，遂遍四路行其法。
现代文：次年，在四路遍行此法。
English: The following year, this law was implemented in all four provinces.

古文：又法成都府法，于秦州置钱引务，兴州鼓铸铜钱，官卖银绢，听民以钱引或铜钱买之。
现代文：又依照成都府法，在秦州设钱引务，兴州鼓铸铜钱，官卖银绢，听凭民众用钱引或铜钱购买。
English: In accordance with the Chengdu Prefecture Law, Qinzhou set up a money-lending business, Xingzhou made copper money, and the government sold silver ingots, allowing the public to buy them with money or copper money.

古文：凡民钱当入官者，并听用引折纳，官支出亦如之。
现代文：凡是民钱应交给官府的，听凭民用钱引折纳，官府支出也像这样。
English: All the people's money that should be handed over to the government is deducted from the people's money, and the government's expenditure is also like this.

古文：民私用引为市，于一千并五百上许从便增高其直，惟不得减削。
现代文：民众私自用钱引交易，在一千五百以上准许从便增高其值，只是不得削减。
English: If people use their own money to conduct transactions, it is allowed to increase its value from more than 1,500 yuan, but it must not be reduced.

古文：法既流通，民以为便。
现代文：此法实行之后，民众感到十分方便。
English: After the implementation of this law, people feel very convenient.

古文：初，钱引两料通行才二百五十万有奇，至是添印至四千一百九十余万，人亦不厌其多，价亦不削。
现代文：当初，钱引两样通行的才二百五十余万，到这时添印到四千一百九十余万，人也不嫌其多，价格也没有削减。
English: At the beginning, the circulation of the two kinds of money was only more than 2.5 million, and by this time the printing had increased to more than 4.19 million. There were not many people, and the price was not reduced.

古文：宣司获伪引三十万，盗五十人，浚欲从有司议当以死，开白浚曰： 相君误矣。
现代文：宣抚司缴获假引三十万，捉拿盗贼五十人，张浚准备听从有关部门的决定处死他们，赵开报告张浚说： 相君错了。
English: The Department of Publicity and Appeals seized 300,000 fake citations, arrested 50 thieves, and Zhang Jun was ready to obey the decision of the relevant departments to execute them. Zhao Kai reported to Zhang Jun: Friend is wrong.

古文：使引伪，加宣抚使印其上即为真。
现代文：引是假的，但加盖宣抚使印章就变成了真的。
English: The citation was false, but stamping it with a seal made it true.

古文：黥其徒使治币，是相君一日获三十万之钱，而起五十人之死也。 浚称善，悉如开言。
现代文：把这些人黥面而然后让他制造钱币，这是相君一天之内获得三十万钱，而又让五十人起死回生。 张浚认为很好，全部采纳了他的建议。
English: Zhang Jun thought it was a good idea to have these people killed and then have him make coins. This was a way for him to get three hundred thousand dollars in one day and bring fifty people back to life. He accepted all of his suggestions.

古文：最后又变盐法，其法实视大观东南、东北盐钞条约，置合同场盐市，与茶法大抵相类。
现代文：最后又改革盐法，其方法实际是根据大观时期东南、东北地区盐钞条例，设置合同场盐市，与茶法大体类似。
English: Finally, the salt method was reformed. The method was actually based on the regulations on salt banknotes in the southeast and northeast regions during the Taikan period, setting up a contract salt market, which is roughly similar to the tea method.

古文：盐引每一斤纳钱二十五，土产税有增添等共纳九钱四分，所过每斤征钱七分，住征一钱五分，若以钱引折纳，别输称提勘合钱共六十。
现代文：盐引每一斤纳钱二十五，土产税及增添等共交纳九点四钱，所经过的关口每斤征收钱七分，住下征收一点五钱，如果用钱引折纳，另外交纳称提勘合钱共六十。
English: For salt, 25 cents per kilo, 9.4 cents per kilo for local taxes and surcharges, 7 cents per kilo for passing through customs, 1.05 cents per kilo for staying, and a total of 60 cents per kilo for additional fees if money is used for discounts.

古文：初变榷法，怨詈四起，至是开复议更盐法，言者遂奏其不便，乞罢之以安远民，且曰： 如谓大臣建请，务全事体，必须更制，即乞札与张浚照会。 诏以其章示浚，浚不为变。
现代文：变革榷法的开头，怨言四起，到这时赵开又计议变革盐法，言者遂上奏称改革不便于民，请求罢免以安定民众，并说 ：如果说大臣建议请求，务全事体，必须改变制度，即请写信与张浚照会协商。 诏令这个奏章交给张浚，张浚不为所动。
English: At the beginning of the reform of the salt law, there were four complaints. At this time, Zhao Kai also proposed to reform the salt law. The speaker finally made a report saying that the reform was inconvenient for the people, requested to be dismissed to stabilize the people, and said: If the minister suggested the request, the whole thing must be done, and the system must be changed, then please write a letter and consult with Zhang Jun. Zhao Kai gave this report to Zhang Jun, and Zhang Jun was not moved.

古文：时浚荷重寄，治兵秦川，经营两河，旬犒月赏，期得士死力，费用不赀，尽取办于开，开悉知虑于食货，算无遗策，虽支费不可计，而赢赀若有余。
现代文：当时张浚肩负重任，在秦川治理军队，经营两河地区，旬犒月赏，以求得到士卒拼死效力，费用不计其数，全部由赵开办理。赵开对经济十分熟悉，算无遗策，虽然开支费用不可数计，但仍有赢余。
English: At that time, Zhang Jun shouldered the heavy responsibility of governing the army in the Qin River, managing the two river areas, and awarding monthly rewards in order to gain the effectiveness of the soldiers. The expenses were countless, and all of them were handled by Zhao Kai. Zhao Kai was very familiar with the economy, and there was no way out. Although the expenses were incalculable, there was still a surplus.

古文：吴玠为四川宣抚副使，专治战守，于财计盈虚未尝问，惟一切以军期趣办，与开异趣。
现代文：吴任四川宣抚副使，专门负责战守，对于财用的盈亏未曾过问，只是一切以军队需要催促办理，同赵开意趣不同。
English: Wu was appointed as the vice-envoy of the Sichuan Proclamation and was specifically responsible for the war defense. He did not ask about the financial profit and loss, but everything needed to be handled urgently by the army, which was different from Zhao Kai's intention.

古文：玠数以饷馈不继诉于朝，开亦自劾老惫，丐去。
现代文：吴多次以供给不继向朝廷投诉，赵开也自己弹劾年老疲惫，请求离任。
English: Wu repeatedly complained to the imperial court about the lack of supply, and Zhao Kai also impeached himself for being old and tired and asked to leave his post.

古文：朝廷未许，乃特置四川安抚制置大使之名，命席益为之。
现代文：朝廷没有允许，于是专门设置四川安抚制置大使的官职，任命席益担任。
English: The imperial court did not allow it, so the official post of Sichuan pacification system ambassador was specially set up, and Shi Yi was appointed.

古文：益前执政，诏位宣抚司上，朝论恐未安，仍诏张浚视师荆、襄、川、陕。
现代文：席益以前曾任执政，诏令他位在宣抚司之上，朝廷议论恐怕不妥，仍诏令张浚视察荆、襄、川、陕各部队。
English: Shi Yik, who had previously been in power, ordered him to be placed above the Propaganda and Guidance Department, and the imperial court was afraid that the discussion was not appropriate. He still ordered Zhang Jun to inspect the troops in Jing, Xiang, Sichuan and Shaanxi.

古文：六年，罢绵州宣抚司，玠仍以宣抚治兵事，军马听玠移拨，钱物则委开拘收。
现代文：绍兴六年，朝廷废罢绵州宣抚司，吴仍以宣抚身份负责军事，军队听凭吴指挥，钱物则委任赵开管理。
English: Six years after the founding of Shaoxing, the imperial court abolished the Mianzhou Propaganda Department. Wu was still in charge of the military as a propaganda official. The army was under Wu's command, and Zhao Kai was appointed to manage money and goods.

古文：寻除开徽猷阁待制，加玠两镇节钺。
现代文：不久任命赵开为徽猷阁待制，加吴两镇节度使。
English: Soon after, Zhao Kai was appointed as the ambassador of Huiyang Pavilion, and the ambassador of the two towns of Jiawu.

古文：复降旨，都转运使不当与四路漕臣同系衔，成都、潼川两路漕臣与都转运使坐应副军支钱物愆期，各贬二秩。
现代文：又降旨，都转运使不应同四路漕臣同系衔，成都、潼川两路漕臣与都转运使由于供应军需钱物延期受到牵连，各自贬官二秩。
English: It was also decreed that the two transit officers should not be promoted to the same rank as the four-way cavalry officers, and that the two cavalry officers from Chengdu and Luochuan and the two transit officers should be involved in the delay of the supply of military supplies and materials, and each should be demoted to the second rank.

古文：朝廷故抑扬之，使之交解间隙、趣办饷馈也。
现代文：朝廷故意压制他们，让他们互相解除隔阂，办理军需补给。
English: The imperial court deliberately suppressed them, forcing them to break away from each other and handle war supplies.

古文：而开复与席益不和，抗疏乞将旧来宣抚司年计应副军期，不许他司分擘支用。又指陈宣抚司截都漕运司钱，就果、阆籴米非是。
现代文：而赵开又同席益不和，抗疏请求将原来宣抚司每年的收入供应军队开支，不许其他机构分支挪用，又指责宣抚司截留都漕运司钱，到果、阆等州籴米不对。
English: However, Zhao Kai and his colleagues did not get along well, and he resisted the request to divert the annual income of the Relief Division to the supply of military expenses and not to allow other branches of the organization to misappropriate it. He also accused the Relief Division of withholding money from the Capital Transportation Division, and it was not right to send rice to Gou, Handan and other states.

古文：又言应副吴玠军须，绍兴四年总为钱一千九百五十五万七千余缗，五年视四年又增四百二十万五千余缗。
现代文：又说支付吴军费用，绍兴四年总计为一千九百五十五点七万余缗，绍兴五年根据绍兴四年情况又增加了四百二十点五万余缗。
English: He also said that the total amount of payment for the expenses of the Wu Army in Shaoxing in the past four years was 1,955.70 thousand yuan, and the amount of payment in Shaoxing in the past five years increased by more than 4.25 million yuan according to the situation in Shaoxing in the past four years.

古文：蜀今公私俱困，四向无所取给，事属危急，实甚可忧，气许以茶马司奏计诣阙下，尽所欲言。
现代文：四川现在公私俱困，四向无处取给，事情危急，实在十分让人担扰，请求准许以茶马司奉计到朝廷，畅所欲言。
English: Sichuan is now in a difficult situation both publicly and privately. There is nowhere to get supplies from, and the situation is critical. It is really very disturbing. I request permission to go to the imperial court as a tea master and speak freely.

古文：朝廷既知开与玠及席益有隙，乃诏开赴行在，以李迨代之。
现代文：朝廷既知赵开同吴和席益不和，于是诏令赵开到朝廷，以李迨代替他。
English: The imperial court knew that Zhao Kai was not on good terms with Wu and Shiyi, so they ordered Zhao Kai to come to the imperial court and replaced him with Li Xunrong.

古文：会疾作不行，提举江州太平观。
现代文：恰逢赵开生病没有成行，朝廷任命他提举江州太平观。
English: When Zhao Kai fell ill and was unable to travel, the imperial court appointed him to promote the Jiangzhou Taiping concept.

古文：七年，复右文殿修撰、都大主管川陕茶马。
现代文：绍兴七年，复职任右文殿修撰、都大主管川陕茶马。
English: In the seventh year of Shaoxing, he was reinstated as the editor of the Right Literature Hall and the head of the Capital University of Shaanxi.

古文：开已病，累疏丐去，诏从所乞，提举太平观。
现代文：赵开已病，多次上奏请求辞职，诏令答应他的请求，提举太平观。
English: Zhao Kai was already ill and repeatedly petitioned for resignation. The imperial edict agreed to his request and elevated Taiping Guan.

古文：十一年卒。
现代文：绍兴十一年去世。
English: Shaoxing died eleven years ago.

