古文：伊馛，代人也。
现代文：伊馛，代地人。
English: I'm from Ili, I'm a local.

古文：少而勇健，走及奔马，善射，多力，曳牛却行。
现代文：年轻时勇猛刚健，跑起来可以追上奔跑的马，善于骑射，力大无比，能够拖住牛不让它跑动。
English: When he was young, he was brave and vigorous. When he ran, he could catch up with a running horse. He was good at riding and shooting, and his strength was incomparable. He could hold back a cow and prevent it from running.

古文：神初，擢为侍郎，转三郎，赐爵汾阳子，加振威将军。
现代文：神初年，伊馛擢升为侍郎，转为三郎，被赐予汾阳子的爵位，加授振威将军。
English: In the first year of the god's reign, Ili was promoted to the position of chamberlain, then to the position of saber-bearer, and was given the title of Shanyangzi, as well as the title of General Zhenwei.

古文：世祖之将讨凉州也，议者咸谏，唯司徒崔浩劝世祖决行。
现代文：世祖准备征讨凉州的时候，朝中参议此事的大臣都进行谏劝，只有司徒崔浩劝世祖下决心行动。
English: When the patriarch was preparing to invade Liangzhou, the ministers of the central government who were advising him on the matter all advised him, but it was only the scholar Cui Hao who persuaded the patriarch to act with determination.

古文：群臣出后，馛言于世祖曰： 若凉州无水草，何得为国？
现代文：群臣走出宫廷之后，伊馛对世祖说： 如果凉州没有水草，怎么能在那里建立政权呢？
English: After the courtiers left the court, Yili said to Shizu: "If there are no water plants in Liangzhou, how can you establish a government there?

古文：议者不可用也，宜从浩言。 
现代文：参议的人当中阻止此事的意见不能采用，应当听从崔浩的意见。 
English: The opinions of the councillors to stop this matter cannot be adopted, and the opinions of Cui Hao should be followed.

古文：世祖善之。
现代文：世祖听了对他十分称赞。
English: The patriarch appreciated his words.

古文：既克凉州，世祖大会于姑臧，谓群臣曰： 崔公智计有余，吾亦不复奇之。
现代文：凉州被平定之后，世祖在姑臧举行盛大的宴会，他在宴会上对群臣说： 崔公的智力和计谋都很高超，我对此也不再感到奇怪。
English: After the subjugation of Liangzhou, Shizu held a grand banquet in Guzhen. At the banquet, he said to the courtiers: "Cui Gong's intelligence and strategy are superb, and I am no longer surprised by this.

古文：吾正奇馛弓马之士，而所见能与崔同，此深自可奇。 
现代文：我奇怪的是伊馛这个只会骑马射箭的人，他的见解竟能与崔浩相同，这事实在是令人惊奇。 
English: What I find strange is the fact that Yili, a man who can only ride a horse and shoot arrows, can have the same opinion as Cui Hao. This is truly amazing.

古文：顾谓浩曰： 馛智力如此，终至公相。 
现代文：世祖又回头对崔浩说： 伊馛有这样强的智力，终究会到达公相的地位的。 
English: The patriarch turned back to Cui Hao and said, "With such a strong intellect, Yijie will eventually reach the position of consul."

古文：浩曰： 何必读书，然后为学？
现代文：崔浩说： 一个人何必去读书，然后去做学问。
English: Cui Hao said: Why does one have to go to school and then go to study?

古文：卫青、霍去病亦不读书，而能大建勋名，致位公辅。 
现代文：卫青、霍去病也不曾读书，却能够建立如此大的功勋，以致位在三公和辅相。 
English: Wei Qing and Huo Jia did not study, but they were able to build such a great merit that they ranked in the three public and complementary aspects.

古文：世祖笑曰： 诚如公言。 
现代文：世祖笑着说道： 你说得精彩。 
English: The ancestor smiled and said, "You have said a wonderful thing.

古文：馛性忠谨，世祖爱之，亲待日殊，赏赐优厚。
现代文：伊馛性情忠实谨慎，世祖对他十分喜爱，亲近相待日益殊异，赏赐非常优厚。
English: Yixing's disposition was loyal and cautious. The ancestor loved him very much, treated him with increasingly special closeness, and rewarded him very generously.

古文：真君初，世祖欲拜馛为尚书，封郡公。
现代文：太平真君初年，世祖打算授任伊馛为尚书，封爵为郡公。
English: In the first year of Taiping Zhenjun, the ancestor planned to confer the title of Ili as Shangshu and the title of County Duke.

古文：馛辞曰： 尚书务殷，公爵至重，非臣年少愚近所宜荷任，请收过恩。 
现代文：伊馛辞让道： 尚书事务重大，公爵位为显贵，都不是我这年轻愚昧的人所适宜于担任的，请求陛下收回过分的恩信。 
English: I apologized and said, "I am too young and stupid to be entrusted with the important affairs of the palace and the prestigious title of duke. I ask Your Majesty to take back the excessive credit."

古文：世祖问其欲，馛曰： 中、秘二省多诸文士，若恩矜不已，请参其次。 
现代文：世祖问他想要做什么，伊馛说： 中书省和秘书省的官员大多是文士，如果陛下对我体恤之情不能免去，请求让我去那里位居其次。 
English: The patriarch asked him what he wanted to do, and Ili said: Most of the officials in the Ministry of Chinese Literature and the Ministry of Secretaries are scribes. If His Majesty cannot help but feel sympathy for me, then asking me to go there is second best.

古文：世祖贤之，遂拜为中护将军、秘书监。
现代文：世祖认为他非常贤明，就授任他为中护将军、秘书监。
English: The patriarch considered him to be very wise, so he appointed him as the middle guardian general and secretary supervisor.

古文：以功赐爵魏安侯，加冠军将军。
现代文：凭他的功劳赐爵为魏安侯，加授冠军将军。
English: On the basis of his merits, Wei Anhou was given a knighthood, and he was also awarded the title of champion general.

古文：后出为东雍州刺史，恩化大行，百姓思之。
现代文：后来伊馛出任为东雍州刺史，他到任之后大力推行恩德教化，当地百姓都很思念他。
English: Later, Iyi was appointed as the governor of East Yongzhou. After he took office, he vigorously promoted the "Ende enlightenment," and the local people missed him very much.

古文：转殿中尚书，常典宿卫。
现代文：伊馛回朝后转任殿中尚书，长期掌管宫廷守卫工作。
English: After Yili returned to the imperial court, he was transferred to the post of palace secretary, and was in charge of the palace guard for a long time.

古文：世祖亲任之。
现代文：世祖对他非常亲近信任。
English: The patriarch was very close to him and trusted him.

古文：从幸瓜步，频有战功，进号镇军将军。
现代文：伊馛随从皇帝去到瓜步，屡立战功，进号为镇军将军。
English: Ili followed the emperor to Guapu, repeatedly distinguished himself in battle, and was promoted to general of the town's army.

古文：兴安二年，迁征北大将军、都曹尚书，加侍中，进爵河南公。
现代文：兴安二年，伊馛迁任征北大将军、都曹尚书，加授侍中之职，晋爵为河南公。
English: In the second year of Xing'an, Yixin was transferred to be the general of the Northern Expeditionary Army, Du Cao Shangshu, and was additionally awarded the position of chamberlain, and was promoted to the rank of Henan Gong.

古文：初为内行令。
现代文：兴光元年，任司空之职。
English: In the first year of Xingguang, he assumed the post of Secretary.

古文：太和六年，迁弩库曹下大夫，卒。
现代文：及至伊馛位为三公，他都能做到清廉简约、自守节操，治理政务只是抓住要领而已，不刻意追求繁杂琐碎。
English: Up to Ili's position as the three princes, he was able to achieve a clean and simple, self-preservation and discipline. Governance is just grasping the essentials, not deliberately pursuing the complicated and trivial.

古文：苟颓，代人也。
现代文：太安二年，伊馛兼任太子太保。
English: In the second year of Taian, Ili also served as Crown Prince Taibo.

古文：曾祖乌提，登国初，有勋于太祖，赐吴宁子。
现代文：太安三年，与司徒陆丽等人并列治理尚书省之事。太安五年伊馛去世。苟颓，代地人。他的曾祖父苟乌提，登国初年，为太祖建立了功勋，赐爵为吴宁子。
English: In the third year of Taian, he was in charge of the administration of Shangshu Province along with the likes of Stut Luli and others. In the fifth year of Taian, Yixuan passed away. Gou Yu, a local resident. His great-grandfather Gou Wu Ti, in the first year of his arrival in China, established a merit for his great-grandfather and conferred a knighthood on Wu Ningzi.

古文：父洛跋，内行长。
现代文：其父苟洛跋，曾任内行长。
English: His father, Goro, was a former governor.

古文：颓性厚重少言，严毅清直，武力过人。
现代文：苟颓性情厚重，寡言少语，严厉刚毅，清廉正直，武力过人。
English: He is a man of strong morals, a man of few words, a man of stern fortitude, a man of honesty and integrity, and a man of great strength.

古文：擢为中散，小心谨敬。
现代文：后被擢升为中散，为官细心恭谨。
English: Later, he was promoted to Zhongshan, and he was very careful and respectful as an official.

古文：世祖南讨，以颓为前锋都将，每临敌对战，常先登陷陈。
现代文：世祖征讨南方，以苟颓为前锋都将，每逢临敌对战，苟颓经常率先冲锋陷阵。
English: The forefathers conquered the south, with Goh Chun as the vanguard, and whenever there was a hostile battle, Goh Chun often took the lead in the charge.

古文：世祖至江，赐爵建德男，加宁远将军。
现代文：世祖到达长江，给苟颓赐爵为建德男，加授宁远将军。
English: When the founder of the world reached the Yangtze River, he gave a knighthood to Guo Jun for being a virtuous man, and a posthumous award to General Ningyuan.

古文：还，迁奏事中散，典凉州作曹。
现代文：回到朝廷之后，苟颓迁任奏事中散，掌管凉州作曹。
English: After returning to the imperial court, he was dismissed in the middle of the transfer of power, and took charge of Liangzhou.

古文：迁内行令，转给事中，迁司卫监。
现代文：又迁任内行令，转给事中，迁司卫监。
English: He was also transferred to the post of internal affairs, transferred to the case, and transferred to the health inspector.

古文：以本将军拜洛州刺史。
现代文：以本将军任洛州刺史。
English: This general is regarded as the history of Loshou.

古文：为政刚严，抑强扶弱，山蛮畏威，不敢为寇。
现代文：苟颓为政刚直严厉，抑强扶弱，山蛮都畏惧他的威猛，不敢前来侵犯骚扰。
English: He is a stern and strict ruler, suppressing the strong and supporting the weak, and the mountain barbarians are afraid of his might, and dare not come to encroach and harass.

古文：承明元年，文明太后令百官举才堪干事、人足委仗者，于是公卿咸以颓应选。
现代文：承明元年，文明太后令朝中文武百官推举才能可以干事、为人足以委托依赖的人，于是朝廷公卿都推荐苟颓应选。
English: In the first year of the Ming Dynasty, the Empress Dowager of Civilization ordered the Chinese military to nominate 100 officials who could be officers and people who could be entrusted and relied on, so the court nobles all recommended Gou Ye to be elected.

古文：征拜散骑常侍、殿中尚书，进爵成德侯，加后将军。
现代文：朝廷征召颓回京授任为散骑常侍、殿中尚书，进封爵位为成德侯，加授为后将军。
English: He was called up by the imperial court and returned to Beijing, where he was appointed as a knight errant, a courtier, given a title of nobility as the lord of Chengde, and promoted to the rank of general.

古文：太和元年，加散骑常侍，寻迁侍中、安东将军、都曹尚书，进爵河南公。
现代文：太和元年，加授苟颓为散骑常侍，不久迁任侍中、安东将军、都曹尚书，晋爵为河南公。
English: In the first year of the Taisho era, Gao Jun was awarded the title of stallion attendant, and soon he was transferred to the position of chamberlain, General Anton, Du Cao Shangshu, and promoted to Henan Gong.

古文：颓方正好直言，虽文明太后生杀不允，颓亦言至恳切，未曾阿谀。
现代文：苟颓为人品端喜欢直言，尽管文明太后生杀予夺很不公允，苟颓进言也至为恳切，从来不曾阿谀逢迎。
English: Although it is very unfair for the Empress Dowager of Civilization to take life and death, she is also very sincere in her speech, and she has never been flattered.

古文：李诉、李敷之诛也，颓并致谏，太后不从。
现代文：李斤、李敷被杀的时候，苟颓曾为他们二人极力谏劝，文明太后不听。
English: When Li Jin and Li Shiki were killed, Gou Ye tried to persuade them, but the Empress Dowager did not listen.

古文：三年，迁征北大将军、司空公，进爵河东王。
现代文：太和三年，苟颓迁任征北大将军、司空公，晋爵为河东王。
English: In the third year of the Taihe era, he was transferred to be a general of the Northern Expeditionary Force, and promoted to King of Hedong.

古文：以旧老，听乘步挽，杖于朝。大驾行幸三川，颓留守京师，沙门法秀谋反，颓率禁卫收掩毕获，内外晏然。
现代文：皇帝行幸三川，苟颓留守京师，僧人法秀阴谋反叛朝廷，苟颓率禁卫乘其不备进行搜捕，把他们全部抓获，朝廷内外太平无事。
English: Emperor Xingxing of the Three Rivers, Goguo staying in the capital, and the monk Fa Xiu conspiring to rebel against the imperial court, Goguo led the guards to search and arrest them, and all of them were arrested. There was no trouble inside or outside the imperial court.

古文：驾还饮至，文明太后曰： 当尔之日，卿若持疑不即收捕，处分失所，则事成不测矣。
现代文：皇帝征伐得胜回都，在宗庙设宴，宴席之上文明太后对苟颓说： 当事变发生的时候，你如果稍有迟疑不立即进行收捕，处置不当，那么事情的后果就难以设想了。
English: The emperor returned to the capital after winning the war and held a banquet in the ancestral temple. At the banquet, the Empress Dowager of Civilization said to Gou Ye: When an incident occurs, if you hesitate a little and do not immediately arrest and arrest, if you do not handle it properly, then the consequences of the incident will be difficult to imagine.

古文：和平中，除平南将军、并州刺史，进爵河东公。
现代文：如今京城周围不受骚扰，宗庙社稷得以安宁，实在是你的功劳啊。 太和七年，皇帝下诏说： 苟颓身居三公，不负于这种委托，历奉四朝君主，功绩传布遐迩。
English: It is to your credit that the area around the capital is now free from disturbance, and that the ancestral temples and shrines have been left in peace. In the seventh year of the Taiwa era, the emperor issued an edict saying: "I am honored to be one of the Three Sovereigns, and I am not responsible for this commission. I have served the monarchs of four dynasties, and I will spread the news of my achievements."

古文：转太州刺史，在治有声。
现代文：应当受到特殊的尊崇，以表彰他的功勋。
English: He should be accorded special reverence in recognition of his service.

古文：卒，年六十一。
现代文：从此以后，可以永久受到免除处罚的优厚待遇。 
English: From now on, they can receive the preferential treatment of being exempted from punishment forever.

古文：赠散骑常侍、大将军、并州刺史，谥曰简。
现代文：太和十三年苟颓去世。高祖久久地为他沉痛哀悼。并且赐予他丰厚的葬殡用的财物，赠谥号为僖王。
English: His mother-in-law passed away at the age of thirteen. Gaozu mourned for him for a long time and gave him rich funeral goods and the posthumous title of "King of the Dragonflies."

古文：子虎子，姿貌壮伟，明断有父风。
现代文：薛野月者之子薛虎子，相貌姿态强壮伟岸，遇事明断颇有父亲的遗风。
English: Xue Chuzi, the son of Xue Yue, is a strong and powerful person with a strong appearance and posture. He has a strong influence from his father.

古文：年十三，入侍高宗。
现代文：年仅十三岁，入宫侍奉高宗。
English: He was only thirteen years old when he entered the imperial court to serve Emperor Gaozong.

古文：太安中，迁内行长，典奏诸曹事。
现代文：太安年间，任内行长之职，掌管奏诸曹事。
English: During the Taian era, he held the post of president of the board of governors and was in charge of the affairs of the Song Dynasty.

古文：当官正直，内外惮之。
现代文：薛虎子为官正直，朝廷内外都畏惧他。
English: Xue Huo Zi was an honest official, and he was feared inside and outside the imperial court.

古文：及文明太后临朝，出虎子为枋头镇将。
现代文：及至文明太后临朝执政，让薛虎子出任为枋头镇将。
English: Until the reign of the Empress Dowager of Civilization, let Xue Hu Zi serve as the commander of Shantou.

古文：虎子素刚简，为近臣所疾，因小过黜为镇门士。
现代文：薛虎子一向刚直清简，为朝廷近臣所嫉恨，由于他犯了一点小过失被贬黜为镇门士。
English: Xue Hu Zi had always been straightforward and honest, and was envied by the courtiers of the imperial court. Because he made a small mistake, he was demoted to the position of town gatekeeper.

古文：及显祖南巡，次于山阳。
现代文：及至显祖南征，临时屯驻在山阳。
English: and to the Southern Expedition of Emperor Xianzu, temporarily stationed in Shanyang.

古文：虎子拜诉于路，曰： 臣昔事先帝，过沾重恩。
现代文：薛虎子在大路上拜诉于显祖，说： 臣往日侍奉先帝，过分地蒙受重恩。
English: On the highway, Xue Huo Zi paid homage to Xian Zu, saying, "In the past, I served the former emperor, and I was greatly blessed.

古文：陛下在谅暗之日，臣横罹非罪，自摈黜此蕃，已经多载，不悟今日得奉圣颜。 
现代文：陛下在居丧的时候，臣横遭非分之罪，自从被贬黜到这里，已经有许多年了，不想今天得以见到圣上。 
English: During His Majesty's funeral, a vassal committed a heinous crime. It's been many years since I was banished here, and I don't want to see His Holiness today.

古文：遂流涕呜咽。
现代文：于是呜咽抽泣说不出话来。
English: So I sobbed and sobbed and couldn't speak.

古文：显祖曰： 卿先帝旧臣，久屈非所，良用怃然。 
现代文：显祖对他说： 你是先帝的旧臣，长期受委屈居于非人之所，以致心情怃然不乐。 
English: Xianzu said to him, "You are an old vassal of the former emperor. You have been wronged for a long time and have been living in an inhuman place. As a result, your mood is very unhappy.

古文：诏虎子侍行，访以政事，数十里中，占对不绝。
现代文：显祖令薛虎子侍奉出行，察访政事，几十里之内，接待来访者应答不绝。
English: Emperor Xianzu ordered Xue Hu Zi to travel as a servant and inspect political affairs. Within a few dozen miles, the reception of visitors responded incessantly.

古文：时山东饥馑，盗贼竞起。
现代文：当时崤山之东饥荒严重，四处盗贼蜂起。
English: At that time, there was a severe famine in eastern Lushan, and thieves rose up everywhere.

古文：相州民孙诲等五百余人，称虎子在镇之日，土境清晏，诉乞虎子。
现代文：相州民众孙诲等五百余人，称赞薛虎子在镇所任事期间，境内清静太平，向朝廷申诉请求留任薛虎子。
English: More than 500 people, including Songzhou citizen Sun Yan, praised Xue Huo Zi for keeping the town clean and peaceful during his tenure, and petitioned the imperial court to allow Xue Huo Zi to remain in office.

古文：乃复除枋头镇将，即日之任。
现代文：于是朝廷再次任命他为枋头镇将，即日前往赴任。
English: As a result, the imperial court reappointed him as Shantou Town Marshal, and he went to work the same day.

古文：至镇，数州之地，奸徒屏迹。
现代文：薛虎子来到镇所，几个州的地方，奸邪之徒销声匿迹。
English: Xue Hu Zi came to the town hall, several states away, the traitor disappeared.

古文：显祖玺书慰喻。
现代文：显祖用以印章封记的文书慰劳和晓喻薛虎子。
English: Xianzu used the seal to seal the document of consolation and enlightenment of Xue Hu Zi.

古文：后除平南将军、相州刺史。
现代文：后来授任他为平南将军、相州刺史。
English: Later, he was appointed as the general of Binan and the governor of Sangju.

古文：显祖崩，不行。
现代文：显祖驾崩，他未能前往上任。
English: He died before he could take office.

古文：太和二年，袭爵。
现代文：太和二年，薛虎子袭承父亲的爵位。
English: In the second year of the Taiwa era, Xue Hu Zi succeeded to his father's title.

古文：三年，诏虎子督三将出寿春，与刘昶南讨。
现代文：太和三年，皇帝令薛虎子督率三将从寿春出发，与刘昶一起征讨南方。
English: In the third year of Tahe, the emperor ordered Xue Huzi to lead the third expedition from Shuchun to conquer the south together with Liu Bei.

古文：四年，徐州民桓和等叛逆，屯于五固。
现代文：太和四年，徐州之民桓和等叛逆，屯驻在五固。
English: In the fourth year of the Taihe era, the people of Xuzhou rebelled and resided in Wugu.

古文：诏虎子为南征都副将，与尉元等讨平之。
现代文：高祖诏令薛虎子为南征督副将，与尉元等人前往征讨平定了叛乱。
English: Gao Zu's edict made Xue Huzi the vice-commander of the Southern Expeditionary Force, and he went to conquer and quell the rebellion together with the lieutenant and others.

古文：以本将军为彭城镇将。
现代文：薛虎子以本将军任彭城镇将。
English: Xue Huizi appointed this general as the general of Pengcheng.

古文：至镇，雅得民和。
现代文：他到镇所上任以后，得到当地人民的拥护。
English: After he took office at the town hall, he received the support of the local people.

古文：除开府、徐州刺史。
现代文：朝廷授任他为开府、徐州刺史。
English: The imperial court appointed him as the first governor of Kaifu and the first governor of Xuzhou.

古文：时州镇戍兵，资绢自随，不入公库，任其私用，常苦饥寒。
现代文：当时各州镇的戍卒，用以购物的资绢都是随身自带，不入公家库室，取资花销，因此士卒经常苦于饥寒。
English: At that time, the poor in all prefectures and towns brought their own money with them for shopping, and did not go to the public treasury to obtain money for spending. As a result, the poor often suffered from hunger and cold.

古文：虎子上表曰： 臣闻金汤之固，非粟不守；韩白之勇，非粮不战。
现代文：薛虎子向皇帝上表说： 臣闻金汤之固，没有粮食就不能坚守；韩信、白起的勇猛，没有粮食就不能作战。
English: Xue Huo Zi said to the emperor on the table: The vassal hears the solidity of gold and soup, and cannot hold fast without grain; Han Xin and Bai Zhui are brave, and cannot fight without grain.

古文：故自用兵以来，莫不先积聚，然后图兼并者也。
现代文：所以自古以来用兵，莫不事先积聚粮草，然后再谋划兼并之策。
English: Therefore, since ancient times, soldiers have been used to accumulate grain and grass in advance, and then to plan the annexation.

古文：今江左未宾，鲸鲵待戮，自不委粟彭城，以强丰沛，将何以拓定江关，扫一衡霍？
现代文：现在江东一带尚未归附，凶顽有待于诛戮，如果不在彭城积聚粮食，用以加强丰、沛，将来用什么去拓定江关，扫平衡、霍？
English: At present, the eastern part of the Yangtze River has not yet been annexed, and the rebels have yet to be defeated. If we do not accumulate grain in Pengcheng to strengthen the abundance, what will we use in the future to open up the Yangtze River, sweep the balance, and ho?

古文：窃惟在镇之兵，不减数万，资粮之绢，人十二匹，即自随身，用度无准，未及代下，不免饥寒。
现代文：我私下考虑在各镇的兵卒，人数不少于几万，用来买粮的绢，每人十二匹，都随身自带，使用起来没有准度，不能用来交换必需物品，不免造成饥寒。
English: Privately, I considered that the soldiers in each town, numbering not less than several tens of thousands, carried with them twelve mules each, which they used to buy grain. The mules were not properly used and could not be exchanged for necessities, which inevitably led to hunger and cold.

古文：论之于公，无毫厘之润；语其利私，则横费不足。
现代文：从公事来说，没有毫厘的利益；对其私利来说，那就会出现任其花费而感到不足的问题。
English: In terms of business, there is not the slightest benefit; in terms of their self-interest, there will be a problem of feeling inadequate at any cost.

古文：非所谓纳民轨度，公私相益也。
现代文：这不是通常所说的接纳人民的法度，公私互相有利的做法。
English: This is not what is commonly referred to as the acceptance of the people's rule of law and the mutually beneficial practice of public and private.

古文：徐州左右，水陆壤沃，清、汴通流，足盈激灌。
现代文：徐州一带，水陆兼有土地肥沃，清、汴两河畅通，足以满足农田灌溉。
English: In the Xuzhou area, both land and water have fertile land, and the Qing and Yunnan rivers flow smoothly, which is enough to meet the needs of farmland irrigation.

古文：其中良田十万余顷。
现代文：其中有良田十万余顷。
English: Among them, there are more than 100,000 hectares of good fields.

古文：若以兵绢市牛，分减戍卒，计其牛数，足得万头。
现代文：如果用兵绢去交换耕牛，拿来分配给戍卒，计算可以买换来的耕牛，足以得到上万头。
English: If the soldiers are used to exchange farm cattle and distribute them to the peasants, the number of farm cattle that can be bought and exchanged is enough to get tens of thousands of cattle.

古文：兴力公田，必当大获粟稻。
现代文：尽力兴办公田，一定会获得大量的粟稻。
English: If we do our best to develop rice fields, we will surely get a large amount of millet rice.

古文：一岁之中，且给官食，半兵耘植，余兵尚众，且耕且守，不妨捍边。
现代文：在一年之内，就可满足官家需要，用一半戍兵耕耘种植，余下的士卒仍旧众多，一边耕种一边守卫，并不妨碍捍卫边境。
English: Within a year, it can meet the needs of officials and families. Half of the soldiers can be used to cultivate and plant, and the remaining soldiers are still numerous. While cultivating and guarding, it does not hinder the defense of the border.

古文：一年之收，过于十倍之绢；暂时之耕，足充数载之食。
现代文：一年的收入，可以超过资绢的十倍；短时内耕种所得，足以充用几年的粮食。
English: A year's harvest is more than ten times the value of straw, and short-term farming can meet food needs for several years.

古文：于后兵资，唯须内库，五稔之后，谷帛俱溢。
现代文：以后的兵资，只须纳入库府，五年之后，谷物布帛都很充足。
English: In the future, military supplies only need to be included in the treasury, and five years later, grain stocks are sufficient.

古文：匪直戍士有丰饱之资，于国有吞敌之势。
现代文：不但戍士有丰富饱足的资用，对于国家来说更有吞敌之势。
English: Not only do we have abundant and sufficient resources, but we also have the potential to devour enemies for the country.

古文：昔杜预田宛叶以平吴，充国耕西零以强汉。
现代文：昔日杜预在宛、叶兴良田而消灭了吴国，充国耕种于西零而使汉代强盛。
English: Once upon a time, Du Yu in Wan and Ye Xing in Liang eliminated Wu, while Chong cultivated in Xizhe and made the Han Dynasty strong.

古文：臣虽识谢古人，任当边守，庶竭尘露，有增山海。 
现代文：臣虽然见识不如古人，在边关任职，也希望能竭尽微力，有利于国家。 
English: Although the vassals are not as knowledgeable as the ancients, they work at the border and hope to do their best to benefit the country.

古文：高祖纳之。
现代文：高祖采纳了他的建议。
English: Gaozu accepted his suggestion.

古文：又上疏曰： 臣闻先王建不易之轨，万代承之；圣主垂不刊之制，千载共仰。
现代文：薛虎子又向朝廷上疏说： 臣闻先王建立不容改变的法度，万代都继承它；圣主留下不容删改的制度，千载共同遵循它。
English: Xue Huo Zi also wrote to the imperial court: Subordinate to King Wen, he established an unchangeable legal system, which has been inherited by all generations; the Lord left an unalterable system, which has been followed for thousands of years.

古文：伏惟陛下道洽群生，恩齐造化，仁德所覃，迹超前哲。
现代文：我考虑陛下王道滋润众生，恩德齐于万物，仁德所及，超过前哲。
English: I consider that His Majesty's royal way nourishes all living beings, that virtue is in all things, and that benevolence reaches and surpasses previous sages.

古文：远崇古典，留意治方，革前王之弊法，申当今之宜用。
现代文：遵崇古代典章，留意治理方法，革除前王有弊的法规，申张当今宜用的制度。
English: Adhere to the ancient regulations, pay attention to the governance methods, eliminate the regulations of the former king, and advocate a system that is suitable for use today.

古文：定贡赋之轻重，均品秩之厚薄，庶令百辟足以代耕，编户享其余畜。
现代文：确定人民贡赋的轻重，平均官员品秩的厚薄，期望能使百官俸禄充足，平民享有余下的积蓄。
English: Determine the weight of the people's tribute, the thickness of the average official's rank, and expect to make the salary of the hundred officials sufficient, and the civilians enjoy the remaining savings.

古文：巍乎焕焉，不可量也。
现代文：高大而又光明，不可估量啊。
English: Tall and bright, immeasurable.

古文：臣窃寻居边之民，蒙化日浅，戎马之所，资计素微。
现代文：臣私下探究居于边地之民，蒙受恩化日益浅薄，戎马屯驻之所，资储素来微少。
English: The vassals privately inquired about the people who lived in the outlying areas. The favors they received were increasingly shallow, and the places where the military horses were stationed had very few resources.

古文：小户者一丁而已，计其征调之费，终岁乃有七缣。
现代文：小户人家只有一丁而已，计算其征调的费用，一年竟有布帛七匹。
English: There is only one small household, but when calculating the cost of requisitioning it, there are actually seven pigeons a year.

古文：去年征责不备，或有货易田宅，质妻卖子，呻吟道路，不可忍闻。
现代文：去年征调之数没有交齐，有的变卖田宅，典妻卖子，百姓呻吟于道路，其惨耳不忍闻。
English: Last year, the number of requisitions and transfers did not reach the same level. Some sold their farmhouses, married their wives and sold their children. The people moaned on the road, and their misery was unbearable to hear.

古文：今淮南之人，思慕圣化，延颈企足，十室而九。
现代文：如今淮南的人民，思慕朝廷圣化，延颈企足，十室有九。
English: Nowadays, the people of Huainan, yearning for the sanctification of the imperial court, are stretching their necks and stomping their feet. There are nine of the ten chambers.

古文：恐闻赋重，更怀进退。
现代文：恐怕其听说赋税苛重，又怀进退犹豫之心。
English: I'm afraid they've heard that taxes are onerous, and they're hesitant to move forward.

古文：非惟损皇风之盛，虑伤慕义之心。
现代文：非但有损于大魏皇威之盛，而且有害于百姓慕义之心。
English: It not only undermined the grandeur of the imperial power of the Great Wei Dynasty, but also harmed the people's desire for righteousness.

古文：且臣所居，与南连接，民情去就，实所谙知。
现代文：况且臣所居之地，与南朝连接，对民情的去留，确实有所熟知。
English: Moreover, the place where the vassal lived was connected with the Southern Dynasty, and he was indeed familiar with the people's feelings.

古文：特宜宽省，以招未至。
现代文：故此朝廷应当特别予以宽免，以招抚未来归附之众。
English: Therefore, the imperial court should grant special pardon to appease the people who will be affiliated in the future.

古文：其小郡太守，数户而已。
现代文：这里小郡的太守，食邑仅数户而已。
English: There are only a few eateries in this small county.

古文：一请止六尺绢，岁不满匹。
现代文：俸禄一次只有六尺绢，一年不满一匹。
English: The stipend is only six shaku at a time, less than one a year.

古文：既委边捍，取其必死，邀之士重，何吝君轻？
现代文：既委付其守卫边境，是取其必死之志，对士人要求如此重，而朝廷所给待遇又何其轻。
English: Even though he was entrusted with guarding the border, it was his dying wish to do so. The demands made of him were so heavy, but the treatment he received from the imperial court was so light.

古文：今班制已行，布之天下，不宜忤冒，以乱朝章。
现代文：如今颁发的制度已经下行，传布于天下，不应当违忏冒犯，以使朝廷章程混乱。
English: Now that the issued system has been downgraded and spread to the world, it should not be violated and offended, so that the imperial court regulations are confused.

古文：但猥藉恩私，备位蕃岳，忧责之地，敢不尽言。 
现代文：但我蒙受朝廷恩信，任职于边镇，忧心于尽责之地，不敢不尽我所言。 
English: But I have been trusted by the imperial court, I work in a border town, I am concerned about fulfilling my duties, and I dare not not do what I say.

古文：书奏，文明太皇太后令曰： 俸制已行，不可以小有不平，便亏通式。 
现代文：书表奏上朝廷之后，文明太皇太后下令说： 俸禄制度已经颁行，不能因为稍有不平均，就损坏通行之制。 
English: After the book list was submitted to the Imperial Court, Empress Dowager Bunmei issued an order saying, "The salary system has already been issued, and it is not possible to damage the system of circulation because there is a slight imbalance.

古文：在州戍兵，每岁交代，虎子必亲自劳送。
现代文：在这个州的戍兵，每年换防交接，薛虎子都要亲自前去慰劳相送。
English: Xue Hu Zi would personally go to the front to comfort and see off the soldiers in this state every year when they were transferred from one army to another.

古文：丧者给其敛帛。
现代文：士卒有死亡的他都供给殡葬用的财物。
English: When a soldier died, he provided the funeral goods.

古文：州内遭水，二麦不收，上表请贷民粟，民有车牛者，求诣东衮给之。
现代文：州内遭到水灾，大小麦都没有收成，他就给朝廷上表请求借给老百姓粮食。百姓中有车牛的，是请求由东兖州供给他们的。
English: When floods hit the prefecture and there was no harvest of wheat and barley, he petitioned the imperial court to lend grain to the common people. Among the common people, those who had oxen and carts requested that they be supplied from East Luzhou.

古文：并如所奏，民得安堵。
现代文：他的奏请都得到允准，人民生活得以安定。
English: All of his requests were granted, and the people's lives were stabilized.

古文：高祖曾从容问秘书丞李彪曰： 卿频使江南，徐州刺史政绩何如？ 
现代文：高祖曾经从容地问秘书丞李彪说： 你多次出使江南，徐州刺史的政绩怎么样？ 
English: Gao Zu once calmly asked his secretary, Zheng Li Biao, "You have been dispatched to the south of the Yangtze River many times, how is the political performance of Xuzhou Jinshi?

古文：彪曰： 绥边布化，甚得其和。 
现代文：李彪回答说： 他安抚边地广布教化，百姓得以非常安定融洽。 
English: Li Biao replied: He pacified the border and spread enlightenment, and the people were able to be very stable and harmonious.

古文：高祖曰： 朕亦知之。 
现代文：高祖说： 我也知道这些情况。 
English: Gaozu said, "I also know these things.

古文：沛郡太守邵安、下邳太守张攀咸以赃污，虎子案之于法。
现代文：沛郡太守邵安、下邳太守张攀都由于贪赃枉法，薛虎子对他们立案审查绳之以法。
English: The governor of Pei County, Shao An, and the governor of the Lower Yunnan Province, Zhang Pang, were both brought to justice by Xue Huzi for corruption.

古文：安等遣子弟上书，诬虎子南通贼虏。
现代文：邵安等就让其子弟向朝廷上书，诬告薛虎子勾结南边的贼虏。
English: Shao An and others had their sons write a letter to the imperial court, falsely accusing Xue Hu Zi of colluding with the southern bandits.

古文：高祖曰： 此其妄矣，朕度虎子必不然也。 
现代文：高祖说： 这全是虚妄之言，我揣度薛虎子必定不会做这样的事。 
English: Gao Zu said, "This is all nonsense. I'm sure Xue Huo will never do such a thing.

古文：推案果虚。
现代文：派人调查的结果证明果然是属于捏造。
English: The results of the investigation proved that it was indeed a fabrication.

古文：乃下诏曰： 夫君臣体合，则功业可兴；上下猜惧，则治道替矣。
现代文：于是高祖下诏说： 君臣互相体察融洽，那么功业就可以振兴；上下相互猜忌畏惧，那么治政之道就会废弃。
English: Therefore, Gao Zu said in his edict: If the officials and the subjects are in harmony with each other, then the cause can be revitalized; if they are suspicious and fearful of each other, then the way of governance will be abandoned.

古文：沛郡太守邵安、下邳太守张攀咸以贪惏获罪，各遣子弟诣阙，告刺史虎子纵民通贼，妄称无端。
现代文：沛郡太守邵安、下邳太守张攀都因为贪污而获罪，各自派其子弟到朝廷，状告刺史薛虎子纵容百姓、勾结寇贼，妄言无端。
English: The governor of Pei County, Shao An, and the governor of the Lower Yunnan Province, Zhang Pan, were both found guilty of corruption. They each sent their sons to the imperial court to sue Shi Xuehuzi for conniving with the people, colluding with the bandits, and making unreasonable remarks.

古文：安宜赐死，攀及子僧保鞭一百，配敦煌。
现代文：邵安应当赐死，张攀及其子张僧保各鞭一百，发配敦煌。
English: Shao An should be put to death, Zhang Pang and his son Zhang Sangbo should be given 100 lashes each and sent to Dunhuang.

古文：赠都督瀛沧二州诸军事、本将军、仪同三司、瀛州刺史。
现代文：邵安之子邵他生鞭一百。处理时，可以召集州中官员兵士百姓等，当众宣告执行。堵塞那轻率狡诈之源，伸张这为国尽力之功。 
English: The son of Shao'an, Shao was flogged a hundred times. When dealing with him, officials, soldiers and common people of the state could be summoned to publicly announce the execution. Block the source of the imprudence and cunning, and claim this as a national effort.

古文：子仲芬，武定中，齐文襄王中外府中兵参军。
现代文：薛虎子在徐州任事十一年，于太和十五年去世，终年五十一岁。
English: Xue Hu Zi served in Xuzhou for eleven years, and died in Tahe in the fifteenth year, at the age of fifty-one.

古文：昙尚弟琡，字昙珍。武定末，仪同三司、尚书右仆射。
现代文：高祖追赠他为散骑常侍、镇南将军、相州刺史，定谥号为文。
English: Gaozu posthumously bestowed upon him the titles of strolling equerry, general of Zhenan, and historian of Xiangzhou, and his posthumous name was Yu.

古文：宇文福，河南洛阳人。
现代文：薛虎子有六个儿子。宇文福，河南洛阳人。
English: Xue Hu Zi has six sons, including Yu Wenfu, from Luoyang, Henan Province.

古文：其先南单于之远属，世为拥部大人。
现代文：其祖先是南单于的远亲，世代为拥部大人。
English: His ancestor was a distant relative of Nan Shan Yu, and he was a member of the Hanfu clan for generations.

古文：祖浩拨，仕慕容垂，为唐郡内史、辽东公。
现代文：宇文福的祖父宇文活拨，在慕容垂属下做官，任唐郡刺史、辽东公。
English: Uwenfu's grandfather, Uwen Zhouzhu, worked as an official under Muronglu and served as Tang County chief historian and governor of Liaodong Province.

古文：太祖之平慕容宝，活拨入国，为第一客。
现代文：太祖平定慕容宝之后，宇文活拨来到魏国，为第一门客。
English: After the great-great-grandfather Pingding Murongbao, Uwen Zhouzhi came to Wei and was the first guest.

古文：福少骁果，有膂力。
现代文：宇文福年轻时骁勇果敢，膂力过人。
English: When he was young, Yu Wenfu was brave and courageous, and his strength was outstanding.

古文：太和初，拜羽林郎将，迁建节将军，赐爵新昌侯、南征都将。
现代文：太和初年，被授任为羽林郎将，迁任建节将军，赐爵为新昌侯、南征都将。
English: In the first year of the reign of Empress Dowager Cixi, he was awarded the title of General of Ulin, transferred to General of Jianjie, given the title of Duke of Xinchang and the title of General of the Southern Expedition.

古文：击萧赜有功，授显武将军。
现代文：宇文福因攻击萧赜有功，被授为显武将军。
English: For his successful attack on Xiao Yu, Yu Wenfu was awarded the title of Xianwu General.

古文：寻除恢武将军、北征都将，特赐戎服。
现代文：不久除任恢武将军、北征都将，并特别赐给戎服。
English: He was soon relieved of his duties as general and commander of the Northern Expedition, and was given a special military uniform.

古文：破蠕蠕别部，获万余。
现代文：宇文福率军打败了蠕蠕族别部，俘获部众万余人。
English: Yu Wenfu led the army to defeat the Cree Cree tribe and captured more than ten thousand people.

古文：还，除都牧给事。
现代文：回到京师，授任为都牧给事。
English: He returned to the capital and was appointed to the post of mayor.

古文：十七年，车驾南讨，假冠军将军、后军将军。
现代文：太和十七年，皇帝征讨南方，授予他冠军将军、后军将军。
English: In the 17th year of the Taihe era, the emperor conquered the south and awarded him the title of Champion General and Rear-Army General.

古文：时仍迁洛，敕福检行牧马之所。
现代文：当时正在迁都洛阳，朝廷令宇文福考察确定牧马的场所。
English: At that time, the capital Luoyang was being relocated, and the imperial court ordered Uwenfu to investigate and determine the location of the pasture.

古文：福规石济以西、河内以东，拒黄河南北千里为牧地。
现代文：宇文福规划石济以西、河内以东，沿黄河南北方圆千里之地作为牧场。
English: To the west of Sheki, to the east of Hanoi, and along the Yellow River to the north and south, Uwenfu plans to use a thousand miles of land as a pasture.

古文：事寻施行，今之马场是也。
现代文：此事不久就得以施行，现今的牧马场就是他划定的。
English: This was soon put into effect, and he laid out what is now the ranch.

古文：及从代移杂畜于牧所，福善于将养，并无损耗，高祖嘉之。
现代文：及至从代地转移各种牲畜到牧场，宇文福妥善地进行饲养，一点也没有损耗，高祖对此十分称赞。
English: As far as the transfer of various livestock from the substitute land to the pasture, Uwenfu has been properly raised, and there has been no loss at all. Gaozu highly praised this.

古文：寻补司卫监。
现代文：不久宇文福补任司卫监。
English: Soon after, Uwenfu was appointed as the supplemental director of the Department of Sanitation.

古文：从驾豫州，加冠军将军、西道都将、假节、征虏将军。
现代文：宇文福随从皇帝去到豫州，加授为冠军将军、西道都将、假节、征虏将军。
English: Yu Wenfu went to Yuzhou with the emperor, and was awarded the title of champion general, West Road General, False Festival General, and Conscript General.

古文：领精骑一千，专殿驾后。
现代文：宇文福率领精锐骑兵一千，专门在皇帝后面保卫。
English: Uwenfu led a thousand elite cavalry to protect behind the emperor.

古文：未几，转骁骑将军，仍领太仆、典牧令。
现代文：没过多久，他转任骁骑将军，仍兼太仆、典牧令。
English: Before long, he was transferred to the post of cavalry general, while still serving as eunuch and herdsman.

古文：从驾征南阳，兼武卫将军。
现代文：后随从皇帝征伐南阳，兼武卫将军。
English: Later, he followed the emperor to conquer Nanyang and became the general of Wuwei.

古文：二十二年，车驾南讨，遣福与右卫将军杨播为前军。
现代文：太和二十二年，高祖征讨南边，派宇文福与右卫将军杨播为前军。
English: In the 22nd year of the Taihe era, Gaozhu invaded the south and sent Wu Wenfu and Yang Bi, the right guard general, as the vanguard.

古文：至邓城，福选兵简将，为攻围之势。
现代文：到达邓城，宇文福挑选士卒精选部将，为围攻邓城作准备。
English: Arriving in Dengcheng, Uwenfu selected a select group of officers and men to prepare for the siege of Dengcheng.

古文：高祖望福军法齐整，将士闲习，大被褒叹。
现代文：高祖看到宇文福军队布阵整齐，将士武艺娴熟，大为叹息并加以褒奖。
English: Gaozu saw that the army of Yuwenfu was neatly arrayed and that the soldiers were skilled in martial arts. He sighed deeply and praised them.

古文：萧鸾遣其尚书崔慧景、黄门郎萧衍率众十万来救。
现代文：萧鸾派他的尚书崔慧景、黄门郎萧衍率领部众十万人前来救援。
English: Xiao Yu sent his disciple Cui Hui Jing and Huangmen Lang Xiao Yan to lead hundreds of thousands of people to come to the rescue.

古文：高祖指麾将士，敕福领高车羽林五百骑出贼南面，夺其桥道，遏绝归路。
现代文：高祖亲自指挥将士，令宇文福率领高车部羽林五百骑突袭敌军南面，占领其桥梁道路，阻遏斩绝其归路。
English: Gaozu personally commanded the soldiers, and ordered Uwenfu to lead Gao's cavalry unit, Ulin 500 cavalry, to raid the south of the enemy army, occupy its bridges and roads, and block and cut off its way back.

古文：贼众大恐，六道来战。
现代文：敌军大为惊恐，分兵六路前来迎战。
English: The enemy was greatly alarmed, and six detachments of soldiers came to meet the battle.

古文：福据鞍誓众，身先士卒，贼不得前，遂大奔溃。
现代文：宇文福就在坐骑上带领部众宣誓，身先士卒，敌军不能前进一步，终于大败奔逃溃散。
English: On horseback, Uwenfu led the troops to swear an oath, leading the way, the enemy army could not advance any further, and finally they were defeated and fled.

古文：赐爵昌黎伯，正武卫，加征虏将军。
现代文：高祖赐给他爵位为昌黎伯，授任为正武卫，加授征虏将军。
English: Gao Zu gave him the title of Chang Li Bo, the title of Zhengwuwei, and the title of Conscript General.

古文：寻以高车叛，命加征北将军、北征都将，追讨之。
现代文：不久由于高车部反叛，朝廷令加授宇文福为征北将军、北征都将，率军追击征讨高车军。
English: Soon, due to the rebellion of Gao Chebu, the imperial court ordered that Uwenfu be awarded the title of Northern Expeditionary General and Northern Expeditionary General, and led the army to pursue and conquer Gao Chebu's army.

古文：军败被黜。
现代文：后来打了败仗，宇文福被贬黜。
English: Later, the battle was lost, and Uwenfu was dethroned.

古文：景明初，乃起拜平远将军、南征统军。
现代文：景明初年，宇文福被重新起用授任为平远将军、南征统军。
English: In the first year of the reign of King Jingming, Uwenfu was reinstated and appointed as General Pingyuan, leader of the Southern Expeditionary Army.

古文：进计于都督彭城王勰曰： 建安是淮南重镇，彼此要冲。
现代文：宇文福向都督彭城王勰进计说： 建安是淮南重镇，敌我双方的要冲。
English: Yu Wenfu said to the governor of Pengcheng, Wang Yujin: Jian'an is a key town in Huainan, and it is a strategic point for both the enemy and us.

古文：得之则义阳易图，不获则寿春难保。 
现代文：占领了它义阳就容易得手，放弃了它寿春就难以保全。 
English: If Yiyang occupies it, it will be easy to succeed, and if Shuchun abandons it, it will be difficult to preserve.

古文：勰然之。
现代文：元勰认为他说得有理。
English: Yuan Qi thought he was right.

古文：及勰为州，遂令福攻建安。
现代文：及至元勰任刺史，就令宇文福进攻建安。
English: As far as the history of the Yuan Dynasty, he ordered Uwenfu to attack Jian'an.

古文：建安降，以勋封襄乐县开国男，邑二百户。
现代文：建安投降后，宇文福因功被封为襄乐县开国男，食邑二百户。
English: After the surrender of Jian'an, Yu Wenfu was awarded the title of founding father of Xiangle County for his service, and his family owned 200 households.

古文：除太仆少卿。
现代文：又被授任为太仆少卿。
English: He was also awarded the title of Taihoku Shokei.

古文：寻以衍将寇边，假节、征虏将军，领兵出三关讨之。
现代文：不久因为萧衍打算侵犯边境，宇文福受任为假节、征虏将军，率军出三关进行征讨。
English: Soon, because Xiao Yan planned to invade the border, Yu Wenfu was appointed as a false festival and conscript general, and led the army out of the Three Passes to carry out the requisition.

古文：又诏福行豫州事，与东豫州刺史田益宗共相影援，绥遏蛮楚。
现代文：后又任命宇文福为豫州刺史，与东豫州刺史田益宗相互支援，绥靖并遏制南方蛮楚。
English: Later, he appointed Uwenfu as the governor of Henan Province, and supported Tian Yuxong, the governor of East Henan Province, to pacify and contain the southern barbarians.

古文：还，为光禄大夫，转太仆卿。
现代文：宇文福回到朝廷，任光禄大夫，转任太仆卿。
English: Uwenfu returned to the imperial court and was appointed doctor of Guanglu, and later he was transferred to the position of eunuch.

古文：延昌中，以本官领左卫将军，除散骑常侍、都官尚书，加安东将军、营州大中正。
现代文：延昌年间，宇文福以本官兼任左卫将军，升授散骑常侍、都官尚书，加授安东将军、营州大中正。
English: During the Yanchang period, Uwenfu served concurrently as the General of the Left Division, and was promoted to the rank of Cavalryman of the Imperial Cavalry, to the rank of Senior Civil Servant, to the rank of Senior Civil Servant of the Imperial Capital, to the rank of Senior Civil Servant of the Imperial Capital, to the rank of Senior Civil Servant of the Imperial Capital, to the rank of Senior Civil Servant of the Imperial Capital, to the rank of Senior Civil Servant of the Imperial Capital, to the rank of Senior Civil Servant of the Imperial Capital.

古文：熙平初，除镇北将军、瀛州刺史。
现代文：熙平初年，宇文福被任命为镇北将军、瀛州刺史。
English: In the first year of Heiping, Uwenfu was appointed as the general of Zhenbei and the governor of Zhangzhou.

古文：福性忠清，在公严毅，以信御民，甚得声誉。
现代文：宇文福性情忠厚清简，为官严厉刚毅，取信于民，在百姓中有很高的声誉。
English: Uwenfu was loyal, clean and simple-minded. He was a stern and resolute official who won the trust of the people. He had a high reputation among the people.

古文：解任，复除太仆卿。
现代文：不久解除官任回京，被授任为太仆卿。
English: He was soon relieved of his post and returned to the capital, where he was given the title of Taihoku-kyo.

古文：又为金紫光禄大夫。
现代文：又任金紫光禄大夫之职。
English: He was also appointed to the post of Jin Zi Guanglu Doctor.

古文：太和初，除平南将军、梁国镇将。
现代文：出任散骑常侍、都督怀朔、沃野、武川三镇诸军事、征北将军、怀朔镇将。
English: He served as a samurai on horseback, the military of the three towns of Waisaku, Wano, and Bukawa, the general of the Northern Expedition, and the general of Waisaku Town.

古文：后高祖南伐，万从驾渡淮，战殁。
现代文：宇文福到了镇所，因病去世。朝廷诏遣主书乐安嘉前往吊唁。
English: Uwenfu arrived at the town hall and passed away due to illness. The imperial court sent Shule Anjia to pay condolences.

古文：赠镇东将军、冀州刺史。
现代文：追赠他为车骑大将军、定州刺史，开国男的爵位照旧，定谥号为贞惠。
English: He was posthumously given the title of General of Chariot and Cavalry, Dingzhou Jishi, the title of the founding father as before, and the posthumous name Zhenhui.

古文：子穆，字朗兴。
现代文：费于之子费穆，字朗兴。
English: Feiyu's son, Feimu, is called Langxing.

古文：性刚烈，有壮气，颇涉书史，好尚功名。
现代文：费穆生情刚烈，有豪壮之气，涉猎书史颇多，崇尚功名。
English: Fei Mu was a strong-willed person with a heroic spirit. He read a lot of history books and was a great admirer of merit.

古文：世宗初，袭男爵。
现代文：世宗即位之初，袭承父亲的男爵。
English: At the beginning of Sejong's reign, he succeeded his father as a baron.

古文：后除夏州别驾，寻加宁远将军，转泾州平西府长史。
现代文：后来被授任为夏州别驾，不久加授宁远将军，转任泾州平西府长史。
English: Later, he was awarded the title of Xiazhou Distinguished Driver, and soon after, he was awarded the title of Ningyuan General and transferred to the post of the governor of Pingxi Prefecture in Zhangzhou.

古文：时刺史皇甫集，灵太后之元舅，恃外戚之亲，多为非法。
现代文：当时泾州刺史皇甫集，是灵太后的长舅，倚仗外戚之亲，干了许多违法的事。
English: At that time, Zhangzhou Jishi Huang Fuxi, the eldest brother of the Empress Dowager, relied on relatives and did many illegal things.

古文：穆正色匡谏，集亦惮之。
现代文：费穆严肃地对他进行劝谏匡正，皇甫集对他也感到有所畏惧。
English: Fei Mu earnestly advised him to rectify the situation, and the emperor also felt a little afraid of him.

古文：转安定太守，仍为长史。
现代文：费穆转任安定太守，仍任长史之职。
English: Feimu was transferred to the post of Steady Governor-General, but he still held the post of Chief Historian.

古文：还朝，拜左军将军，转河阴令，有严明之称。
现代文：回到朝廷后，被授为左军将军，转任河阴令，有治政严明的称誉。
English: After returning to the imperial court, he was awarded the title of General of the Left Army and transferred to the post of General of the River Yin. He was praised for his strict governance.

古文：时蠕蠕主婆罗门自凉州归降，其部众因饥侵掠边邑，诏穆衔命宣慰，便皆款附。
现代文：当时蠕蠕部族主帅婆罗门从凉州来归降朝廷，他的部众因饥荒而侵犯抢掠边境城邑，朝廷令费穆前往宣示抚慰，其部众全都诚心归附。
English: At that time, the leader of the Demu-Demu tribe, Brahman, came from Liangzhou to surrender to the imperial court. Because of the famine, his followers invaded and plundered the border towns. The imperial court ordered Feimu to go to declare consolation, and all his followers wholeheartedly agreed.

古文：明年复叛，入寇凉州。
现代文：第二年，蠕蠕人再次反叛，入侵凉州。
English: The next year, another rebellion broke out and attacked Liangzhou.

古文：除穆辅国将军、假征虏将军、兼尚书左丞、西北道行台，仍为别将，往讨之。
现代文：朝廷授任费穆为辅国将军、假征虏将军、兼尚书左丞、西北道行台，仍为配合主军作战的部将，前往征讨蠕蠕。
English: The imperial court appointed Feimu as an auxiliary general, a fake conscript general, a concurrently appointed left-handed general, and a commander of the Northwest Passage, and he still went to fight against Crum Crum as a commander who cooperated with the main army.

古文：穆至凉州，蠕蠕遁走。
现代文：费穆率军到达凉州，蠕蠕军逃走。
English: He led the army to Liangzhou, and the rebels of the Demu-Demu ethnic group fled.

古文：穆谓其所部曰： 夷狄兽心，唯利是视，见敌便走，乘虚复出。
现代文：费穆对他的部下说： 夷狄有野兽之心，只能看到眼前的利益，遇见强敌就逃走，乘虚就再出来骚扰。
English: Feimu said to his subordinates: Yidi has the heart of a beast, can only see the immediate benefits, run away when encountering a strong enemy, and take advantage of the opportunity to harass again.

古文：今王师来讨，虽畏威逃迹，然军还之后，必来侵暴。
现代文：如今王师前来征讨，他们虽然惧怕威势而逃遁，但我军归还之后，必然又来侵犯。
English: Now, Wang Shi has come to invade. Although they were afraid of his might and fled, after our army returned, they inevitably invaded again.

古文：今欲羸师诱致，冀获一战，若不令其破胆，终恐疲于奔命。 
现代文：现在我想用羸弱之军招诱敌人，以求一战，假如不能让他们吓破胆，恐怕终久会使我军疲于奔命。 
English: Now I want to lure the enemy with a weak army for a battle, and if I can't scare them, I'm afraid my army will be exhausted in the end.

古文：众咸然之。
现代文：众将都认为这个计策很好。
English: Everyone thought he was right.

古文：穆乃简练精骑，伏于山谷，使羸步之众为外营以诱之。
现代文：于是费穆就布置精选的精锐的骑兵，埋伏在山谷之中，派老弱的步兵作为外营用以诱惑敌军。
English: So Fema arranged a selection of elite cavalry to lie in wait in the valley, sending weak infantry as a battalion to lure the enemy.

古文：贼骑觇见，谓为信弱，俄而竞至。
现代文：蠕蠕军的骑哨见到这样的情况，以为魏军果真虚弱，不一会就蜂涌而至。
English: Seeing such a situation, the cavalry sentries of the Cree Cree army thought that the Wei army was really weak, and soon they swarmed.

古文：穆伏兵奔击，大破之，斩其帅郁厥乌尔、俟斤十代等，获生口杂畜甚众。
现代文：费穆的伏兵奋起奔击，大败蠕蠕军，斩掉其部帅郁厥乌尔、大臣十代等人，缴获牲口杂畜非常多。
English: Feimu's ambush troops rose up and attacked, defeating the Cree army, beheading its commander Yu Jiu-ul, ten generations of ministers and others, and capturing a large number of livestock.

古文：及六镇反叛，诏穆为别将，隶都督李崇北伐。
现代文：及至六镇反叛之时，朝廷令费穆为别将，隶属于都督李崇进行北伐。
English: When the six towns rebelled, the imperial court ordered Feimu to be second-in-command, subordinate to the governor Li Chong, to lead the Northern Expedition.

古文：都督崔暹失利，崇将班师，会诸将议曰： 朔州是白道之冲，贼之咽喉，若此处不全，则并肆危矣。
现代文：都督崔暹失败，李崇打算班师回朝，召集诸将商议说： 朔州是白道的要冲，贼寇的咽喉，倘若此处不能保全，那么并、肆二州就会危急。
English: After the failure of Governor Cui Siam, Li Chong planned to send a team back to the North, and gathered the generals for discussion, saying: Shuozhou is the key to the White Road, the throat of the bandits. If this place cannot be preserved, then both Shuozhou and He two states will be in danger.

古文：今欲选诸将一人，留以镇捍。
现代文：现在我想从众将中挑选一个人，让他留下来镇守。
English: Now I want to choose a person from the generals and let him stay to defend the town.

古文：不知谁堪此任？ 
现代文：不知道谁能担当此任？ 
English: I don't know who could be in charge of this.

古文：佥曰： 无过穆者。 
现代文：众将都说： 没有人能超过费穆的。 
English: The generals all said: No one can surpass Fema.

古文：崇乃请为朔州刺史，仍本将军，寻改除云州刺史。
现代文：李崇就上表请授费穆为朔州刺史，仍为本将军，不久改授他为云州刺史。
English: On the basis of the above table, Li Chong requested that Feimu be awarded the history of Shuozhou, still as the general, and soon he would be awarded the history of Yunnan.

古文：穆招离聚散，颇得人心。
现代文：费穆招聚当地离家逃散的人，颇得人心。
English: Feimoo's initiative to bring together local people who have run away from home has been very popular.

古文：时北境州镇，悉皆沦没，唯穆独据一城，四面抗拒。
现代文：当时北部边境的州镇，全都沦陷于敌军，惟独费穆据守一城，四面抗拒敌军。
English: At that time, the northern border towns all fell to the enemy army, but Feimu defended one city and resisted the enemy army on all sides.

古文：久之，援军不至，兼行路阻塞，粮仗俱尽。
现代文：过了许久，援军没有到来，加之道路阻塞，粮草兵器全都用尽。
English: After a long time, reinforcements did not arrive, and in addition to the road blockage, the grain and grass weapons were all exhausted.

古文：穆知势穷，乃弃城南走，投尔朱荣于秀容。
现代文：费穆知道势力穷尽，就弃城南走，到秀容投奔尔朱荣。
English: Knowing that his strength was exhausted, Feimu abandoned the south of the city and went to Xiurong to join Bener Zhu Rong.

古文：既而诣阙请罪，诏原之。
现代文：不久他到朝廷请罪，皇帝宽宥了他。
English: Soon after, he returned to the imperial court to request punishment, and the imperial court issued an edict forgiving him.

古文：孝昌中，二绛蜀反，以穆为都督，讨平之。
现代文：孝昌年间，绛、蜀二地反叛朝廷，朝廷以费穆为都督，率军前往征讨，平定了叛乱。
English: During the reign of Emperor Xiaochang, the provinces of Shandong and Shandong rebelled against the imperial court. The imperial court, with Feimu as the governor, led an army to subjugate and quell the rebellion.

古文：拜前将军、散骑常侍，迁平南将军、光禄大夫。
现代文：费穆被授任为前将军、散骑常侍，迁任平南将军、光禄大夫。
English: Feimu was appointed as a former general, straggler, transferred to the post of General Pingnan, and became a doctor of Guanglu.

古文：妖贼李洪于阳城起逆，连结蛮左，诏穆兼武卫将军，率众讨击，破于关中之南。
现代文：妖贼李洪在阳城起兵叛乱，勾结蛮民，朝廷令费穆兼武卫将军，率领部众讨击，大败敌军于关口南面。
English: Li Hong, the demon thief, started a rebellion in Yangcheng and colluded with the barbarians. The imperial court ordered Fei Mu, also known as General Wuwei, to lead the troops to counterattack and defeat the enemy army in the south of Guankou.

古文：迁金紫光禄大夫，正武卫将军。
现代文：费穆迁任金紫光禄大夫，正武卫将军。
English: Fei Mu was transferred to the post of Jin Zi Guanglu Doctor, and became General Wu Wei.

古文：尔朱荣向洛，灵太后征穆，令屯小平。
现代文：尔朱荣入朝，灵太后征召费穆，令其屯军于小平。
English: After Zhu Rong's accession to the throne, Fei Mu was conscripted by the Empress Dowager and his troops were stationed in Xiaoping.

古文：及荣推奉庄帝，河梁不守，穆遂弃众先降。
现代文：及至尔朱荣推奉庄帝即位，河梁不能自守，费穆就抛弃部众先降于尔朱荣。
English: When Er Zhurong promoted Zhuangdi to the throne, He Liang could not defend himself, and Fei Mu abandoned his subordinates and surrendered to Er Zhurong.

古文：穆素为荣所知，见之甚悦。
现代文：费穆一向为尔朱荣所知遇，尔朱荣见了他非常高兴。
English: Feimu had always been a familiar face to Le Zhurong, and Le Zhurong was very happy to see him.

古文：穆潜说荣曰： 公士马不出万人，今长驱向洛，前无横陈者，正以推奉主上，顺民心故耳。
现代文：费穆暗中游说尔朱荣说： 你的兵马不过万人，如今长驱直向洛阳，前面没有军队敢于阻挡，正是因为你推奉主上，顺应民心的缘故。
English: Fei Mu secretly lobbied Le Zhu Rong to say: Your soldiers and horses are no more than ten thousand, and now they are driving straight to Luoyang, and no army in front dares to stop them, precisely because you serve the Lord and conform to the people's will.

古文：既无战胜之威，群情素不厌伏。
现代文：既没有战胜者之威严，群情一向都不佩服。
English: There is neither the majesty of the victor, nor the admiration of the crowd.

古文：今以京师之众，百官之盛，一知公之虚实，必有轻侮之心。
现代文：现在京师凭着将士之众，百官之盛，听说你的兵力情况，必然对你有轻视侮慢之心。
English: Now that the Beijing division, with its legions of generals and hundreds of officials, has heard of your military strength, it is bound to look down on you with disdain.

古文：若不大行诛罚，更树亲党，公还北之日，恐不得度太行而内难作矣。 
现代文：如果不大行诛罚，建树亲党，你回到北边的时候，恐怕不等到越过太行，内难就会兴起。 
English: If you don't carry out discipline and discipline, and build a pro-family party, when you return to the north, I'm afraid you won't wait until you cross the Taihang, and internal difficulties will arise.

古文：荣心然之。
现代文：尔朱荣内心里同意他的说法。
English: In his heart, Le Zhurong agreed with him.

古文：于是遂有河阴之事。
现代文：于是就有后来河阴大诛戮的事发生。
English: As a result, the Hebei Massacre happened later.

古文：天下闻之，莫不切齿。
现代文：天下之人听说如此，莫不切齿痛恨。
English: After hearing about it, people all over the world gritted their teeth and hated it.

古文：荣入洛，穆迁中军将军、吏部尚书，鲁县开国侯，食邑八百户，又领夏州大中正。
现代文：尔朱荣进入洛阳，费穆迁任中军将军、吏部尚书，被封为鲁县开国侯，食邑八百户，又兼夏州大中正。
English: Le Zhu Rong entered Luoyang, Fei Mu was transferred to serve as a general of the Chinese army, and was awarded the title of Lu County's founding marquis, 800 households in food villages, and Xiazhou University's junior high school.

古文：萧衍遣将军曹义宗逼荆州，诏穆为使持节、南征将军、都督南征诸军事、大都督以援之。
现代文：萧衍派其将军曹义宗进逼荆州，皇帝令费穆为使持节、征南将军、都督南征诸军事、大都督，率军前往援助。
English: Xiao Yan sent his general Cao Yizong to force Jingzhou, and the emperor ordered Feimu to be the envoy of the festival, the general of the Southern Expedition, the governor of the Southern Expedition, and the grand governor, and led the army to help.

古文：穆潜军径进，出其不意，至既大破之，生擒义宗送阙。
现代文：费穆秘密行军径直进取，出其不意，一到荆州就大败萧衍军，生擒曹义宗送到京师。
English: Feimu's secret march went straight ahead and took him by surprise. Once he arrived in Jingzhou, he defeated Xiao Yan's army and sent Cao Yizong, still alive, to Beijing.

古文：以功迁卫将军，进封赵平郡开国公，增邑一千户。
现代文：费穆因功迁任卫将军，进封为赵平郡开国公，增加食邑一千户。
English: As a result of his meritorious service, Feimu was transferred to the position of General of the Imperial Guards, and became the founding father of Zhao Ping County, increasing the number of food villages by a thousand.

古文：迁使持节，加侍中、车骑将军、假仪同三司、前锋大都督。
现代文：费穆又迁任使持节，加授侍中、车骑将军、假仪同三司、前锋大都督。
English: Feimu was also transferred to the position of envoy to hold the festival, and was additionally awarded the title of chamberlain, chariot and cavalry general, false ceremony and three divisions, and vanguard grand governor.

古文：与大将军元天穆东讨邢杲，破平之。
现代文：与大将军元天穆东讨邢杲，剿灭敌军。
English: He negotiated with the great general Yuan Tianmudong and annihilated the enemy army.

古文：时元颢内逼，庄帝北幸，颢入京师。
现代文：当时元颢威逼朝廷，庄帝逃往北方，元颢进入京师。
English: At that time, Yuan Shao forced the imperial court, Zhuangdi fled to the north, and Yuan Shao entered the capital.

古文：穆与天穆既平齐地，回师将击颢。
现代文：费穆与元天穆平定齐地以后，回师准备攻击元颢。
English: After Feimu and Yuan Tianmu were leveled, the returning division prepared to attack Yuan Shao.

古文：穆先驱围虎牢，尽锐攻之。
现代文：费穆为先驱围攻虎牢，率精锐部队进行攻击。
English: Feimu was a pioneer in besieging the Tiger's Lair, leading elite troops to attack.

古文：将拔，属天穆北渡，既无后继，人表离沮，穆遂降颢。
现代文：将要攻克虎牢的时候，正逢元天穆率军北渡，既没有后续部队，军情又悖离沮丧，费穆于是就投降于元颢。
English: When the time came to conquer the Tiger's Lair, it was just as the army led by Yuan Tianmu was crossing the North Sea. As there were no follow-up troops and the military situation was disheartening, Feimu surrendered to Yuan Shao.

古文：以河阴酷滥事起于穆，引入诘让，出而杀之，时年五十三。
现代文：由于河阴残酷滥杀之事起于费穆，元颢把他带进京都诘问斥责，把他杀掉，费穆时年五十三岁。
English: As the cruel and indiscriminate killing of Kawashin started with Feimu, Motohiro took him to Kyoto to reprimand him and killed him. Feimu was 53 years old at the time.

古文：庄帝还宫，追赠侍中、司徒公，谥曰武宣。
现代文：庄帝还宫以后，追赠费穆为侍中、司徒公，定谥号为武宣。
English: After Emperor Zhuang returned to the palace, Feimu was posthumously made an attendant and tutor, and his posthumous name was Wu Xuan.

