古文：十有六年春，王正月，晋人灭赤狄甲氏及留吁。
现代文：十六年春季，周历正月，晋国人灭掉赤狄甲氏和留吁。
English: In the spring of the 16th year, in the first month of the lunar calendar, the Jin people exterminated the Red Dikga clan and the Ruusu.

古文：夏，成周宣榭火。
现代文：夏季，成周的宣榭失火。
English: In the summer, Cheng Zhou's proclamation failed.

古文：秋，郯伯姬来归。
现代文：秋季，郯伯姬回来。
English: In the autumn, Zou Bo Ji returned.

古文：冬，大有年。
现代文：冬季，鲁国大丰收。
English: In the winter, the harvest in Russia was very good.

古文：十六年春，晋士会帅师灭赤狄甲氏及留吁铎辰，三月献狄俘。
现代文：十六年春季，晋国的士会率领军队灭亡了赤狄的甲氏和留吁、铎辰。三月，晋国向周定王进献俘虏的狄人。
English: In the spring of the 16th year of the Jin Dynasty, the Jin Taxpayers' Association led the army to exterminate the K clan of the Red Di, as well as Ruoxi and Shuchen. In March, Jin Province presented the captured Di people to King Zhou Dingjin.

古文：晋侯请于王。戊申，以黻冕命士会将中军，且为大傅。
现代文：晋景公向周定王请求，二十七日，把礼服赐给士会命令他率领中军，并且担任太傅。
English: Prince Jinjing asked King Zhou Ding to come, and on the 27th, he gave the ceremonial robes to the warrior association and ordered him to lead the Chinese army and serve as taifu.

古文：于是晋国之盗逃奔于秦。
现代文：在这种情况下，晋国的盗贼逃奔到秦国。
English: In this case, the thief from Jin fled to Qin.

古文：羊舌职曰： 吾闻之，禹称善人，不善人远。
现代文：羊舌职说： 我听说， 禹提拔好人，不好的人因此远离 ，说的就是这样的事情吧！
English: Sheep Tongue said: I heard that Yu promoted good people and kept bad people away, that's what he said!

古文：此之谓也夫。《诗》曰： 战战兢兢，如临深渊，如履薄冰。 善人在上也。
现代文：《诗》说， 战战兢兢，如同面临深渊，如同踩着薄冰 ，这是因为有好人在上面执政。
English: The poem says, trembling, as if facing the abyss, as if treading on thin ice, this is because there are good people ruling above.

古文：善人在上，则国无幸民。
现代文：有好人在上面，国家中就没有心存侥幸的百姓。
English: If there are good people at the top, there will be no people in the country who are lucky.

古文：谚曰： 民之多幸，国之不幸也。 是无善人之谓也。 
现代文：俗话说， 百姓多存侥幸，就是国家不幸 ，这就是没有好人在位的说法。 
English: As the saying goes, if the people have too much luck, the country will be unlucky, which is to say that there are no good people in power.

古文：夏，成周宣榭火，人火之也。
现代文：夏季，成周的宣榭失火，这是由于人放火烧着的。
English: In the summer, the Xuancheng Tower caught fire, which was caused by arson.

古文：凡火，人火曰火，天火曰灾。
现代文：凡是失火，人为的火叫做火。天降的火叫做灾。
English: All misfires, man-made fires, are called fires. Fires that come from the sky are called disasters.

古文：秋，郯伯姬来归，出也。
现代文：秋季，郯伯姬回来，这是由于被遗弃送回娘家。
English: In the autumn, Zou Bo Ji returned, this was due to being abandoned and sent back to her daughter's home.

古文：为毛、召之难故，王室复乱。王孙苏奔晋，晋人复之。
现代文：由于毛氏、召氏祸难的缘故，周王室又发生动乱，王孙苏逃亡到晋国。晋国人让他重新恢复了卿士。
English: Due to the calamity of Mao and Zhao, the Zhou royal family was in turmoil again, and Wang Sun Su fled to Jin. The people of Jin reinstated him as a noble.

古文：冬，晋侯使士会平王室，定王享之。
现代文：冬季，晋景公派遣士会调解王室的纠纷，周定王设享礼招待他。
English: In winter, Prince Jinjing sent an envoy to mediate the royal dispute, and King Zhou set up a ceremony to invite him.

古文：原襄公相礼，殽烝。
现代文：周大夫原襄公主持典礼，把切开的带骨的肉放在盛肉的器具里。
English: Dr. Zhou Yuanxiang presided over the ceremony and placed the cut bone-in meat in the meat serving utensil.

古文：武子私问其故。
现代文：士会暗中问这是什么缘故。
English: The scholars will secretly ask the reason for this.

古文：王闻之，召武子曰： 季氏，而弗闻乎？
现代文：周定王听到，召见士会说： 季氏，你没有听说过吗？
English: When Zhou Dingwang heard this, the summoner would say: Mr. Ji, haven't you heard?

古文：王享有体荐，宴有折俎。
现代文：天子设享礼有摆而不食的 体荐 ，设宴礼有把肉切成块的 折俎 。
English: The Son of Heaven set up a banquet with a ceremonial wreath that was not to be eaten, and a banquet with a bowl that cut the meat into pieces.

古文：公当享，卿当宴，王室之礼也。 
现代文：诸侯应当设享礼招待，卿、大夫应当设宴会招待。这是王室的礼节。 
English: Princes should set up an invitation to enjoy the ceremony, and lords and doctors should set up an invitation to the banquet. This is the etiquette of the royal family.

古文：武子归而讲求典礼，以修晋国之法。
现代文：士会回国以后就讲求典礼，以修明晋国的法度。
English: After returning to China, the scholars' association held a ceremony to clarify the laws of the Jin Dynasty.

