古文：耨碗温敦思忠，本名乙剌补，阿补斯水人。
现代文：耨碗温敦思忠本名乙剌补，阿补斯水人。
English: Wyndham Sitchin's real name was Wyndham Sitchin, and he was a sailor.

古文：太祖伐辽，是时未有文字，凡军事当中复而应密者，诸将皆口授思忠，思忠面奏受诏，还军传致诏辞，虽往复数千言，无少误。
现代文：金太祖攻打辽国，当时金人没有文字，凡是军事机密，军队的将领们就口头交待给耨碗温敦思忠，耨碗温敦思忠当面上奏皇帝，然后再接受皇帝的诏令，回到军中把皇帝的命令传达给军帅，即使往返来回需要捎几千句话，也没有一点错误。
English: When King Taizu attacked Liao, there was no written language in China. The generals of the army would verbally convey all military secrets to the bowl of Wyndham Sizhong, and the bowl of Wyndham Sizhong would play the emperor in front of the emperor, and then accept the emperor's edict and return to the army to convey the emperor's order to the commander. Even if it takes thousands of words to go back and forth, there is no mistake.

古文：及辽人议和，思忠与乌林答赞谋往来专对其间，号闸剌。
现代文：等到辽国人与金朝议和，耨碗温敦思忠与乌林答赞谋往来两国专门传达两国旨意，这种工作叫闸剌。
English: Wait until the Liao people and the Kim dynasty discuss peace, and the bowl Wyndon Sizhong and Ulin Atsanzang plan to go back and forth between the two countries to specifically convey the will of the two countries. This kind of work is called sluice.

古文：闸剌者，汉语云行人也。
现代文：闸剌，汉语意思是行人。
English: The Chinese word for "pedestrian" is "闸."

古文：自收国元年正月，辽人遣僧家奴来，使者三往反，议不决。
现代文：从收国元年正月，辽国人派僧家奴来到金朝，使者三次往返，议和之事没有决定。
English: From the first month of the first year of the Reunification of China, the Liao people sent monks and servants to the Kim dynasty. The envoys went back and forth three times, and the matter of peace was not decided.

古文：使者赛剌至辽，辽人杀之。
现代文：金朝使者赛剌到辽国，辽国的人杀死了他。
English: The emissary of the Kim dynasty, Sayyong, went to Liao, and the people of Liao killed him.

古文：辽主自将，至驼门，大败，归，复遣使议和。
现代文：辽国君主亲自率领军队到达驼门，被金朝军队打败，辽军回去后，又派使者谈判议和。
English: The monarch of Liao personally led the army to the Camel Gate and was defeated by the Kim dynasty army. After the Liao army returned, he sent an envoy to negotiate a peace.

古文：太祖使胡突衮往，书曰： 若不从此，胡突衮但使人送至界上，或如赛剌杀之，惟所欲者。 
现代文：金太祖派胡突衮前往辽国，并下文书说： 如果我们的议和条件不被接受，你们要派人把胡突衮送到边界上，如果他像赛剌那样被杀，我们就按我们的愿望去做。 
English: Kim Taejo sent Hu Tujuan to Liao Province and wrote: "If our proposal and conditions are not accepted, you should send someone to take Hu Tujuan to the border. If he is killed like Sayu, we will do as we wish."

古文：天辅三年六月，辽大册使太傅习泥烈以册玺至上京一舍，先取册文副录阅视，文不称兄，不称大金，称东怀国。
现代文：天辅三年六月，辽国大册使太傅习泥烈携带文书玉玺到达金朝上京，首先取出文书副本请金朝阅看，文书中不称兄、不称大金，而称呼东怀国。
English: In June of the third year of Tianshu, the Liao Guo Brochure sent Taifu Xi Duering to bring the document Yutu to the Jin Dynasty in Beijing. First, he took out a copy of the document and asked the Jin Dynasty to read it. In the document, he did not call it brother or big money, but called it Donghuai Guo.

古文：太祖不受，使宗翰、宗雄、宗干、希尹商定册文义指，扬朴润色，胡十答、阿撒、高庆裔译契丹字，使赞谋与习泥烈偕行。
现代文：金太祖不接受辽国的议和文书，命令完颜宗翰、完颜宗雄、完颜宗干、完颜希尹商定议和文书的意旨，杨朴对文书润色，胡十答、阿撒、高庆裔把它译成契丹语，派赞谋与习泥烈共同前往辽国。
English: King Taizu did not accept the proposal and document of Liaoning Province, and ordered Yan Zonghan, Yan Zongxiong, Yan Zongkang, and Yan Xiyin to agree on the intention of the proposal and document, Yang Pu to polish the document, Hu Shuta, Asa, and Gaoqing to translate it into Khitan, and sent Zhan Zang to Liaoning Province together with Xi Duering.

古文：赞谋至辽，见辽人再撰册文，复不尽如本国旨意，欲见辽主自陈，阍者止之。
现代文：赞谋到达辽国，见辽国人第二次撰写议和文书，但和自己国家的议和旨意不完全一样，想见辽国君主亲自陈述旨意，宫门卫士阻止赞谋。
English: When the imperial edict arrived in Liao, the people of Liao wrote the second imperial edict and document, but it was not exactly the same as the imperial edict and will of their own country. They wanted to see the monarch of Liao personally declare the imperial edict, but the palace guards stopped the imperial edict.

古文：赞谋不顾，直入。
现代文：赞谋不顾这些，径直朝宫中闯去。
English: In spite of all this, Zhan Zhuo went straight to the Imperial Palace.

古文：阍者相与搏撠，折其信牌。
现代文：宫门卫士相互来拉扯他，折断了他的信牌。
English: The palace guards tugged at him and broke his badge.

古文：辽人惧，遽遣赞谋归。
现代文：辽国人害怕，于是让赞谋回金朝。
English: The people of Liao were afraid, so they sent Zanpo back to the Kim dynasty.

古文：太祖再遣赞谋如辽。
现代文：金太祖第二次派赞谋出使到辽国。
English: It was the second time that Kim Taejo sent an envoy to Liao.

古文：辽人前后十三遣使，和议终不可成。
现代文：辽国前后十三次派遣使者到金朝，议和最终没有达成协议。
English: Liao sent envoys to the Kim dynasty 13 times, but ultimately no agreement was reached.

古文：太祖自将，遂克临潢。
现代文：金太祖亲自率领军队出兵辽国，于是攻克了临潢。
English: Kim Taejo personally led the troops to Liaoning Province and conquered Linyi.

古文：其后伐宋，思忠从宗翰军，封刘豫为齐帝，思忠为传宣使，俄授谋克。
现代文：后来金朝攻打宋朝，耨碗温敦思忠跟随完颜宗翰军队，金朝封刘豫做齐国皇帝，耨碗温敦思忠为传宣使，不久授予他谋克。
English: Later, the Kim dynasty attacked the Song dynasty, and the bowl of Wyndon Sizhong followed Yan Zonghan's army. The Kim dynasty made Liu Yu the emperor of Qi, and the bowl of Wyndon Sizhong was a propagandist, and soon awarded him the title of strategist.

古文：从宗弼克和尚原。
现代文：后来他跟从完颜宗弼攻克和尚原。
English: Later, he followed Gan Yan Zongqi to conquer He Shangyuan.

古文：还为同知西京留守事。
现代文：返回后任同知西京留守事。
English: After returning, he was assigned to stay with a friend in Saikyo.

古文：天眷初，改蒲州防御使。
现代文：天眷初年，耨碗温敦思忠改任蒲州防御使。
English: In the first year of the Tianxin era, Zhou Bowl Wyndon Sizhong was reappointed as the defense envoy of Puzhou.

古文：元帅府在陕西者，其官属往往豪压贫民为奴，起遣工匠千人东来，至河上，思忠留止其人以闻，诏皆还之。
现代文：元帅府在陕西时，其中有的官员压迫贫民为奴，他们派遣千人工匠前去东面，到了黄河边上，耨碗温敦思忠截住他们并向上禀告，皇帝下令让他们回去。
English: When the marshal's office was in Shaanxi, some of the officials oppressed the poor as slaves. They sent a thousand artisans to the east, and when they reached the edge of the Yellow River, the bowl Wyndon Sizhong intercepted them and reported to the emperor. The emperor ordered them to go back.

古文：为行台尚书左丞。
现代文：耨碗温敦思忠任行台尚书左丞。
English: Gong Bowl Wyndun Sizhong appointed Gangtai Shangshu Zuoxiao.

古文：是时，赞谟为行台参知政事，思忠黩货无厌，赞谟鄙之，两人由是交恶。
现代文：这时，赞谟为行台参知政事，耨碗温敦思忠贪财无厌，赞谟很鄙视他，两个人因此变成冤家对头。
English: At this time, Zammo was a member of the Taiwanese Council of Elders in charge of political affairs, and he was greedy for money. Zammo despised him very much, and the two men became bitter enemies.

古文：海陵杀左丞相秉德于行台。
现代文：海陵王在行台杀了左丞相秉德。
English: King Hailing killed Zuo Zhengxian Bingde on his way to the capital.

古文：赞谟妻，秉德乳母也。
现代文：赞谟的妻子是秉德的奶妈。
English: Zammo's wife is the wet nurse of Hind.

古文：思忠因构赞谟。杀之。
现代文：耨碗温敦思忠因此编织赞谟的罪名陷害他，海陵王杀了赞谟。
English: Therefore, the bowl of Wyndon Sizhong framed him with the accusation of weaving Zhamo, and King Hailing killed Zhamo.

古文：是岁，思忠入为尚书右丞。
现代文：这一年，耨碗温敦思忠进朝做尚书右丞。
English: In the same year, Gong Bowl Wyndun Sizhong entered the imperial court as Shang Shuyuan.

古文：俄进平章政事，封郜国公。
现代文：不久进为平章政事，封为郜国公。
English: He was soon promoted to the post of Taira no Shosho and given the title of Shogun.

古文：进拜左丞相兼侍中，封沂国公。
现代文：进而授予他为左丞相兼侍中，封为沂国公。
English: In addition, he was awarded the title of Sadajo (Minister of the Left) and Samurai Junior Middle Officer, as well as the title of Prince of Shikoku.

古文：天德三年，致仕。
现代文：天德三年，耨碗温敦思忠离休。
English: In the third year of Tiande, Gong Bowl Wyndun Sizhong retired.

古文：贞元二年十月，海陵率三品以上官幸思忠第，使以家礼见，谓思忠曰： 卿神气康实，习先朝旧事，舍卿无能知者，当为朕起，共治国政。 
现代文：贞元二年十月，海陵王率领三品以上的官员到耨碗温敦思忠的家去，让他用家礼相见，海陵王对耨碗温敦思忠说 ：你气色很好，又熟悉前朝的事，离开你很多事不知该如何处理，你应当为我复出，共同掌管国政。 
English: In October of the second year of Zhengyuan, King Hailing led more than three hundred officials to the home of Gongwan Wyndon Sizhong and asked him to meet him with a family ceremony. King Hailing said to Gongwan Wyndon Sizhong: You look good, and you are familiar with the affairs of the previous dynasty. I don't know how to deal with many things without you. You should come back for me and jointly take charge of national affairs.

古文：对曰： 君之命，臣敢不敬从，但恨老病疏谬，无以塞责耳。 
现代文：耨碗温敦思忠回答说 ：你的命令，我不敢不敬从，遗憾的是我体老病弱容易出差错，没法对工作负责。 
English: Gong bowl Wyndon Sizhong replied: Your order, I dare not disobey, unfortunately I am old and weak, prone to error, unable to take responsibility for the work.

古文：遂命思忠乘马从入宫，拜太傅，领三省事，封齐国王。
现代文：于是海陵王命令耨碗温敦思忠乘马一块进宫，授予他太傅，领三省事，封为齐国王。
English: As a result, King Hailing ordered the cupbearer, Wyndun Sizhong, to ride into the palace on a horse, awarding him the title of Taifu, leading three provincial affairs, and crowning him as the king of Qi.

古文：寻拜太师兼劝农使。
现代文：后来他又被授予太师兼劝农使。
English: Later, he was awarded the title of Grand Master and Minister of Agriculture.

古文：已而罢中书门下省，不置领三省事。
现代文：不久金朝废除中书门下省，不设置领三省事。
English: Soon after, the Kim dynasty abolished the province of Zhongshumen and did not set up the three provinces.

古文：置尚书令，位丞相上。
现代文：设置尚书令一官，位在丞相之上。
English: A post of Shangshurei was established, which was above the position of chancellor.

古文：思忠为尚书令，特置散从八人，听随至宫，省奏赐坐。
现代文：耨碗温敦思忠任尚书令，特别给他配以八人随从，他随时可以进到宫廷，被皇帝赐坐查看奏章。
English: Wyndham Shih-chung was appointed to the post of imperial secretary, and he was specially equipped with eight attendants. He could enter the court at any time and was given a seat by the emperor to inspect the musical scores.

古文：海陵欲定封爵制度，风思忠建白之。
现代文：海陵王想议定封爵制度，授意耨碗温敦思忠提议此事。
English: King Hailing wanted to agree on a knighthood system, so he sent his emissary, Wyndham Sizhong, to propose the matter.

古文：封王者皆降封，异姓或封公或一品、二品阶。
现代文：封王的人都降封，异姓的或者封公或者封一品、二品的官阶。
English: Those who were given the title of king were demoted, and those with different surnames were either given the title of duke or the official rank of Ippon or Ippon.

古文：惟封思忠广平郡王，赐以玉带。
现代文：只是封耨碗温敦思忠为广平郡王，赏赐给他玉带。
English: However, it was decided to seal the gong bowl of Wyndon Sizhong as the king of Guangping County and give him a jade belt.

古文：思忠言百官不当封妻，海陵从之。
现代文：耨碗温敦思忠说官员们的妻子不应赐封，海陵王听从了他的建议。
English: Wyndon Sizhong said that the wives of officials should not be given titles, and King Hailing heeded his advice.

古文：惟封思忠次室为郡夫人。
现代文：只是封耨碗温敦思忠的第二房室为郡夫人。
English: Only the second room of Wyndham Sinclair, the county's first lady, is sealed.

古文：而思忠亦自谓太祖旧臣，颇自任，虽海陵遂非拒谏，而思忠尽言无所避。
现代文：而耨碗温敦思忠也自称是金太祖时的旧臣，很放任，即使海陵王不拒谏，而耨碗温敦思忠也不隐瞒所有要说的话。
English: On the other hand, Gong Bowl Wyndon Sizhong also claimed to be an old minister from the time of King Taizu, and he was very permissive. Even though King Hailing did not refuse Gong, Gong Bowl Wyndon Sizhong did not hide everything he had to say.

古文：海陵将伐宋，问诸大臣，皆不敢对。
现代文：海陵王准备攻打宋朝，向各个大臣询问这件事，大臣们都不敢回答。
English: King Hailing was preparing to attack the Song Dynasty, and he asked the ministers about it, but they did not dare to answer.

古文：思忠曰： 不可。 
现代文：耨碗温敦思忠说 ：不可以做这件事。 
English: Gong bowl Wyndon Sizhong said: You can't do this.

古文：海陵不悦，谓思忠曰： 汝勿论可否，但云何时克之。 
现代文：海陵王不高兴，对耨碗温敦思忠说： 你说不可以，那什么时间可以呢？ 
English: Unhappy, King Hailing said to the bowl of Wyndham Sizhong: If you say it is not allowed, then what time is it allowed?

古文：思忠曰： 以十年为期。 
现代文：耨碗温敦思忠说 ：需要十年的时间。 
English: "It will take ten years," said the bowl's chairman, Wyndham Sizhong.

古文：海陵曰： 何久也？
现代文：海陵王问 ：为什么这么久？
English: Hailing Wang asked: Why did it take so long?

古文：期月耳。 
现代文：一个月就罢了。 
English: It's only been a month.

古文：思忠曰： 太祖伐辽，犹且数年。
现代文：耨碗温敦思忠说 ：金太祖攻打辽国，况且还需要几年。
English: "It will take several years for Kim Taejo to invade Liaoning Province," said Wyndon Sizhong, the bowl.

古文：今百姓愁怨，师出无名。
现代文：现在百姓忧虑怨恨，出兵没有名义。
English: Now the people are worried and resentful, and there is no name for sending troops.

古文：江、淮间暑热湫湿，不堪久居，未能以岁月期也。 
现代文：况且长江、淮河之间炎热潮湿，不能常久居住，不能用一年一月来计算。 
English: Moreover, it is hot and humid between the Yangtze River and the Huaihe River, so it is not possible to live there for a long time, and it is not possible to calculate from one month to the next.

古文：海陵怒，顾视左右，若欲取兵刃者。
现代文：海陵王大怒，环视左右，好像是想拿兵器。
English: Hailing Wang flew into a rage and looked around, as if he wanted to grab a weapon.

古文：思忠无所畏恐，复曰： 老臣历事四朝，位至公相，苟有补于国家，死亦何憾。 
现代文：耨碗温敦思忠无所畏惧，又说： 老臣经历过四个朝代，职位到国公丞相，如果对国家有所贡献，死没有可以遗憾的。 
English: He also said, "The old minister has experienced four dynasties and served as the minister of state. If he has contributed to the country, there is nothing to regret about his death."

古文：有顷，海陵曰： 自古帝王混一天下，然后可为正统。
现代文：一会儿，海陵王说 ：自古以来帝王都是把天下杂合在一起，然后才能正直地领导。
English: After a while, King Hailing said, "Ever since ancient times, emperors have mixed the world together, and only then can they lead it honestly.

古文：尔耄夫固不知此，汝子乙迭读书，可往问之。 
现代文：你年老之人原本不知道这些，你的儿子耨碗温敦乙迭读过书，可前去问他。 
English: Your old man didn't know all this. Your son, who has read more books than you, can go and ask him.

古文：思忠曰： 臣昔见太祖取天下，此时岂有文字耶？
现代文：耨碗温敦思忠说： 我以前见金太祖夺取天下，当时难道有文字吗？
English: Gong bowl Wyndon Sizhong said: I used to see Kim Taejo conquer the world, was there any writing at that time?

古文：臣年垂七十，更事多矣，彼乳臭子，安足问哉！ 
现代文：我将近七十岁了，经历的事很多，他一个乳臭未干的小孩子，怎么值得去问他。 
English: I'm almost seventy years old, I've been through a lot, he's a wet-behind-the-ears kid, how is it worth asking him?

古文：海陵既不用思忠言，运四方甲仗于中都。思忠曰： 州郡无兵，何以备盗贼？ 
现代文：海陵王已不听耨碗温敦思忠的谏言，把国内的军队调运到中都，耨碗温敦思忠说： 州郡没有部队，怎么防备盗贼。 
English: King Hailing did not listen to the nagging words of the bowl of Wyndon Sizhong and transferred the domestic army to the central capital. The bowl of Wyndon Sizhong said: There is no army in the state and county, how can we guard against thieves.

古文：海陵尽籍丁壮为兵，思忠曰： 山后契丹诸部，恐未可尽起。 
现代文：海陵王按户口册招募全部丁壮年当兵，耨碗温敦思忠说： 山后契丹各部恐怕不可能全部出征。 
English: King Hailing recruited all able-bodied men as soldiers according to the household registration book, and the bowl of Wyndham Sizhong said: I am afraid that it is impossible for all the Qidan departments to go to war.

古文：皆不听。
现代文：这些海陵王都不听。
English: These kings of the sea don't listen.

古文：其后，州郡盗起，守令不能制。
现代文：后来，州郡发生盗贼，州郡守令们不能遏制。
English: Later, thieves occurred in the state county, and the state county guards could not contain them.

古文：契丹撒八、窝斡果反，期年乃克之。
现代文：契丹的撒八、窝斡果然谋反，一年内就攻下了很多地方。
English: The Qidan's Saba and Wo Yeo successfully plotted a rebellion and conquered many places within a year.

古文：当是时，海陵伐宋，祁宰谏而死，张浩进言被杖，思忠见疏，孔彦舟画策先取两淮，他无及者。
现代文：正当此时，海陵王攻打宋朝，祁宰因劝谏而被杀，张浩因进言而遭杖打，耨碗温敦思忠看见奏章，孔彦舟出谋献策首先攻下两淮，其他地方不要考虑。
English: It was at this time that King Hailing attacked the Song Dynasty, Ying Zai was killed for his advice, Zhang Hao was beaten with a cane for his advice, Gong Wan and Wyndon Sizhong saw the play chapter, and Kong Yan Zhou made a plan to attack the two Huai first. Do not consider other places.

古文：正隆六年，思忠薨，年七十三。
现代文：正隆六年，耨碗温敦思忠死去，终年七十三岁。
English: In the sixth year of Zheng Long's reign, Gong Bowl Wyndun Sizhong died at the age of seventy-three.

古文：海陵深悼惜之，亲临奠，赙赠加等，赐金螭头车，使者监护，给道路费。
现代文：海陵王沉痛地悼念，亲自前去祭奠，成倍地赠给丧葬财物，并赏赐给金螭头车，派人监护，沿路撒纸钱。
English: Hailing Wang mournfully mourned the memory, went to pay tribute in person, gave away funeral goods in multiples, and awarded a gold-plated carriage, sent someone to supervise, and scattered paper money along the road.

古文：大定十二年，诏复乌林答赞谟官爵，赠特进。
现代文：大定十二年，皇帝金世宗下诏恢复乌林答赞谟的官爵，赐特进。
English: In the twelfth year of Dading, Emperor Jin Shizong issued an edict to restore the title of nobility to Ulin Dazhanyu, and granted him a special promotion.

古文：且思忠之最可罪者，构害赞谟，又纳其室而敓其赀，此何异于杀越人于货者乎！阴报不在其身，在其子孙，亦已晚矣。正隆之末，奔睹位三公，居上将，内不肯与谋，外不肯与战，逼侧趑趄，苟免自全，大臣之道，固若是乎？高桢，辽阳渤海人。五世祖牟翰仕辽，官至太师。
现代文：高桢，辽阳渤海人。其第五代祖父高牟翰在辽国做官，官至太师。
English: Gao Wei, a native of Bohai Sea, Liaoyang. His fifth-generation grandfather Gao Muhan was an official in Liaoning Province and rose to the rank of grandmaster.

古文：桢少好学，尝业进士。
现代文：高桢少年好学，曾经得过进士。
English: The high school boy is eager to learn and was once awarded a prize.

古文：斡鲁讨高永昌，已下沈州，永昌惧，伪送款以缓师。
现代文：金朝斡鲁攻打高永昌，攻下渖州后，高永昌害怕，假装送投降文书作为缓兵之计。
English: Kim Jong Il ordered the attack on Gao Yongchang. After the capture of Ganzhou, Gao Yongchang was afraid and pretended to send a surrender document as a delaying tactic.

古文：是时，桢母在沈州，遂来降，告以永昌降款非诚，斡鲁乃进攻。
现代文：此时，高桢的母亲在渖州，于是前来投降，高桢告诉斡鲁高永昌送投降文书不是诚意，斡鲁于是进攻他。
English: At this time, Gao Gan's mother was in Zhangzhou, so she came to surrender. Gao Gan told Yang Lu that Gao Yongchang was not sincere in sending the surrender document, and Yang Lu then attacked him.

古文：既破永昌，遂以桢同知东京留守事，授猛安。
现代文：打败高永昌后，任高桢为同知东京留守事，授予猛安。
English: After defeating Gao Yongchang, Ren Gaoqi stayed in Tokyo as a friend of Gao Yongchang, and was awarded Meng'an.

古文：天会六年，迁尚书左仆射，判广宁尹，加太子太傅。
现代文：天会六年，高桢升尚书左仆射，判广宁尹，加封太子太傅。
English: In the sixth year of the Heavenly Reunion, Gao Jian rose to the rank of Shang Shuxi's left-hand man, and was given the title of Guang Ning Yin. He was also given the title of Prince Taifu.

古文：在镇八年，政令清肃，吏畏而人安之。
现代文：他在位八年，政治清明，官吏敬服而人民安定。
English: During his eight-year reign, the politics were clear, the officials were respectful and the people were stable.

古文：十五年，加太子太师，提点河北西路钱帛事。
现代文：天会十五年高桢被加封太子太师，提点河北西路钱帛事。
English: In the 15th year of the Heavenly Association, Gao Yao was awarded the title of crown prince. He mentioned the story of the money on the west road of Hebei Province.

古文：天眷初，同签会宁牧。
现代文：天眷初年，高桢为同签会宁牧。
English: At the beginning of the year, Gao Yao became a member of the Ningmu Association.

古文：及熙宗幸燕，兼同知留守，封戴国公，改同知燕京留守。
现代文：等到金熙宗到达燕京，高桢兼同知留守，封为戴国公，改任同知燕京留守。
English: When Kim Hee-jong arrived in Yanjing, Gao Jiong and Tong Chi stayed behind, and he was given the title of Dai Guogong, while Tong Chi Yanjing stayed behind.

古文：魏王道济出守中京，以桢为同判，俄改行台平章政事，为西京留守，封任国公。
现代文：魏王完颜道济出兵守卫中京，任高桢做同判，不久改任行台平章政事，任西京留守，封为任国公。
English: The Wei king, Guan Yan Daoji, sent troops to guard central Beijing and appointed Gao Jian to do the same, and soon he was appointed to govern Tai Pingzhang, stayed in western Beijing, and was appointed to be the acting governor.

古文：是时，奚、霫军民皆南徙，谋克别术者因之啸聚为盗。
现代文：这时，奚、靅地军队百姓都向南迁移，谋克别术因此聚集为盗。
English: At this time, the soldiers and civilians of the Shandong and Fujian armies all migrated to the south, and thus gathered to steal.

古文：海陵患之，即以桢为中京留守，命乘驿之官，责以平贼之期。
现代文：皇帝海陵王对此很担忧，就任高桢做中京留守，命令他乘驿马赴任，并限定他平定盗贼的期限。
English: Emperor Hailing Wang was very worried about this. He appointed Gao Jun to stay in Beijing, ordered him to take a horse to take office, and limited the time he had to subdue the thieves.

古文：贼平，封河内郡王。
现代文：盗贼平定后，高桢被封为河内郡王。
English: After the thieves were subdued, Gao Gan was crowned the king of Hanoi County.

古文：海陵至中京，桢警夜严肃。
现代文：海陵王到达中京，高桢戒备森严。
English: King Hailing arrives in Chukyo, and Takatsuki is on high alert.

古文：有近侍冯僧家奴李街喜等皆得幸海陵，尝夜饮干禁，桢杖之濒死，由是权贵皆震慑。
现代文：皇帝的贴身侍卫冯僧的家奴李街喜等都得到海陵王的宠爱，他们曾经夜里饮酒冒犯了皇帝住的地方，高桢把他们打得要死，对此权贵们很震惊恐惧。
English: The emperor's personal bodyguard, Feng Monk's manservant Li Jiexi, and others were favored by King Hailing. They once offended the emperor's place of residence by drinking alcohol at night, and Gao Yao beat them to death. The dignitaries were shocked and afraid.

古文：迁太子太保，行御史大夫，封莒王。
现代文：高桢升为太子太保，行御史大夫，封为莒王。
English: Gao Jun was promoted to Crown Prince Taibo, Acting Imperial Historian, and Crown Prince.

古文：策拜司空，进封代王，太子太保、行御史大夫如故。
现代文：高桢被策授为司空，进封代王，仍为太子太保、行御史大夫。
English: Gao Yao was given the title of Siku (司空) and appointed acting king, but he was still the prince's bodyguard and acting imperial historian.

古文：桢久在台，弹劾无所避，每进对，必以区别流品，进善退恶为言，当路者忌之。
现代文：高桢久在位，检举官吏的罪状无所回避，每次到朝廷回报，一定区别官级，推荐好的官员，撤职坏的官员。
English: Gao Gan has been on the throne for a long time, and there is no way to avoid the prosecution of officials. Every time he returns to the imperial court, he must distinguish between official ranks, recommended good officials, and dismissed bad officials.

古文：荐张忠辅、马讽为中丞，二人皆险诐深刻，欲令以事中桢。
现代文：掌权的人很憎恨他，就推荐张忠辅、马讽做中丞。这二人非常阴险邪恶，想把事情做的符合高桢的要求。
English: The people in power hated him very much, so they recommended Zhang Zhongyu and Ma Lin to be vice-chairmen. These two were very insidious and evil, and they wanted to do things in line with Gao Yao's requirements.

古文：正隆例封冀国公，桢因固辞曰： 臣为众小所嫉，恐不能免，尚可受封爵耶？ 
现代文：正隆年间高桢以例封为冀国公。高桢借故推辞说 ：我被很多小人所嫉妒，恐怕不能免除，怎么可以接受封爵呢？ 
English: During the reign of Zhenglong, Gao Qi was given the title of Prince of Ji Province. Gao Qi said, "I am envied by many villains, I am afraid I cannot be exempted, how can I accept a knighthood?"

古文：海陵知其忠直，慰而遣之。
现代文：海陵王知道他忠诚正直，安慰并且命令他接受。
English: King Hailing, knowing his loyalty and honesty, consoled him and ordered him to accept.

古文：及疾革，书空独语曰： 某事未决，某事未奏，死有余恨。 
现代文：等到高桢因病免官，他还留言交待： 某事还未决定，某事还未上奏，死了也有遗憾。 
English: When Gao Rong was relieved of his duties due to illness, he also left a message: Something has not yet been decided, something has not yet been played, I am sorry to die.

古文：薨，年六十九。
现代文：高桢六十九岁时死去。
English: Takahata died at the age of 69.

古文：海陵悼惜之，遣使致奠，赙赠加等。
现代文：海陵王很惋惜，派使臣前去祭奠，加倍赠送丧葬财物。
English: King Hailing was very sorry and sent an envoy to pay his respects, doubling his gift of funeral goods.

古文：桢性方严，家居无声伎之奉。
现代文：高桢性情威严，家里没有供养歌伎。
English: Takahata is a dignified person, and there is no kabuki theater in his family.

古文：虽甚暑，未尝解衣缓带。
现代文：即使很炎热，也未曾解带脱衣。
English: Even though it was very hot, I never undressed.

古文：对妻孥危坐终日，不一谈笑，其简默如此。
现代文：他和妻子儿子面对面坐一天，也不谈笑一句，他就是这样缄默无语。
English: He sat face-to-face with his wife and son for a day without a single word of laughter. He was speechless.

古文：白彦敬，本名遥设，部罗火部族人。
现代文：白彦敬本名白遥设，是部罗火部族人。
English: Bai Yan Kei, whose real name is Bai Yaoshi, is a member of the Department of Luohu Tribe.

古文：初名彦恭，避显宗讳，改焉。
现代文：开始他名叫白彦恭，因避讳显宗名允恭，而改为白彦敬。
English: At first, his name was Shirohiko-kyo, but he changed it to Shirohiko-kei because he shunned the name Shinno-kyo.

古文：祖屋仆根。
现代文：他的祖父是白屋仆根。
English: His grandfather was a White House footman.

古文：父阿斯，仕辽为率府率。
现代文：父亲是白阿斯，在辽国做率府率。
English: His father was Bai As, who was the governor of Liao Province.

古文：彦敬善骑射，起家为吏，补元帅府令史。
现代文：白彦敬擅长骑马射箭，他起家于做官，为补元帅府令史。
English: Bai Yanjing is good at horse riding and archery. He started his career as an official to supplement the history of the marshal's office.

古文：伐宋，为钱帛司都管勾。
现代文：金朝攻打宋朝，白彦敬做钱帛司都管勾。
English: The Jin Dynasty attacked the Song Dynasty, and Bai Yanjing was in charge of making money.

古文：立三省，选为尚书省令史，除都元帅府知事。
现代文：金设立三省，白彦敬升为尚书省令史，授予都元帅府知事。
English: Jin established three provinces, and Bai Yan was promoted to Shangshu provincial governor, and was awarded the title of prefectural governor.

古文：招谕诸部，授以金牌，行数千里，有功，超迁兵部郎中。
现代文：白彦敬招谕各部，被授给金牌，他行了几千里，功绩显著，破格升为兵部郎中。
English: Bai Yan respectfully invited all the ministries, was awarded a gold medal, he traveled thousands of miles, his achievements were remarkable, and he was exceptionally promoted to the middle of the military department.

古文：熙宗罢统军司改招讨司，遣彦敬分僚属改牌印，谕诸部隶招讨司。
现代文：金熙宗废除统军司而改设招讨司，派白彦敬分别指挥同事去收回以前的牌印，晓谕各部归属招讨司。
English: Kim Hee-jong abolished the Office of the General of the Korean People's Army and replaced it with the Office of the Chief of the General Staff of the Korean People's Army. He sent Bai Yan-kei to separately command his colleagues to take back the previous badges and to tell each department to belong to the Office of the General of the Korean People's Army.

古文：还为本部侍郎，迁大理卿，出为通州防御使，改刑部侍郎。
现代文：回来后白彦敬任招讨侍郎，升为大理卿，离开朝廷后任通州防御使，改为刑部侍郎。
English: After his return, Shirahiko Takeru was appointed as a courtier of the Imperial Court, and was promoted to the rank of Lord of Dali. After leaving the Imperial Court, he was appointed as a defense attaché of Tongzhou, and was changed to a courtier of the Imperial Court.

古文：怨家告诬开府慎思与西北路部族谋叛，彦敬鞫得其实，海陵嘉之。
现代文：有人告发开府慎思与西北路部族谋反，白彦敬审讯他们得到了口供，海陵王赞扬他。
English: Some people accused Kaifu Shansi of plotting a rebellion with the Northwest Road tribe. Bai Yanjing interrogated them and obtained a confession. King Hailing praised him.

古文：迁签书枢密院事，以便宜措置边防。
现代文：后升签书枢密院事，派往边疆灵活处置战事。
English: Later, he was promoted to the Privy Council and sent to the frontier to flexibly handle the war.

古文：正隆六年，调诸路兵伐宋，及调民马，使彦敬主会宁、蒲与、胡里改三路事。
现代文：正隆六年，金朝调集各路军队攻打宋朝，又调集老百姓的马匹，派白彦敬掌管会宁、蒲与、胡里改三路事。
English: In the sixth year of Zhenglong, the Kim dynasty mobilized all kinds of armies to attack the Song dynasty, and also mobilized the horses of the common people, and sent Bai Yanjing to take charge of Huining, Puye and Huli to change the three roads.

古文：改吏部尚书，充南征万户，迁枢密副使。
现代文：他改任吏部尚书、充南征万户，升为枢密副使。
English: He was reassigned to the personnel department of Shangshu, and promoted to the vice-minister of privy council.

古文：契丹撒八反，枢密使仆散忽土等以无功坐诛，以彦敬为北面行营都统，与副统纥石烈志宁以便宜往，赐御服皮袄。
现代文：契丹人撒八反叛，枢密使仆散忽土等因为没有功劳被连坐杀死。任白彦敬为北面行营都统，与副统纥石烈志宁前往灵活处置事态，赏赐给他御服皮袄。
English: The Khitans rebelled eight times, and the confidential envoy, Podusan Khutro, was killed by a company of soldiers for no merit. Ren Baiyan respected Du Du for his northern campaign, and went to deal with the situation flexibly with the deputy leader, Zou Shi Leshining, and rewarded him with a ceremonial leather belt.

古文：行至北京，闻南征诸军逃归者皆奔东京，欲推戴世宗。
现代文：白彦敬走到北京，听说南征各军逃回来的兵都跑到东京，想拥戴世宗做皇帝。
English: When Bai Yanjing went to Beijing, he heard that all the soldiers who had escaped from the Southern Expedition had fled to Tokyo and wanted to make Dai Shizong emperor.

古文：彦敬与志宁谋，阴结会宁尹完颜蒲速赉、利涉军节度使独吉义以图之。
现代文：白彦敬同纥石烈志宁商议，暗地里联合会宁尹完颜蒲速赉、利步军节度使独吉义共同图谋这件事。
English: Bai Yanjing discussed with Zou Shi Li Zhining, and secretly the Union of Ning Yin and Li Bu's army secretly conspired together to do this.

古文：世宗已即位，使石抹移迭、移剌曷补等九人招彦敬、志宁。
现代文：金世宗即皇帝位后，派石抹移迭、移剌曷补等九人去招降白彦敬、纥石烈志宁。
English: After the enthronement of Emperor Kim Sejong, he sent nine people to recruit Bai Yan Kei and Jangseok Ryechuning.

古文：彦敬拒之，使移迭跪。
现代文：白彦敬拒降，让石抹移迭跪下。
English: Shirahiko respectfully refused to give in and let the stone erase and move to his knees.

古文：移迭不屈，皆杀之。
现代文：石抹移迭不跪，白彦敬全部杀了他们。
English: Without kneeling down, Bai Yanjing killed them all.

古文：及完颜谋衍将兵攻北京，彦敬使偏将率兵拒于建州之境，而独吉义先归世宗，蒲速赉称疾不至。
现代文：等到完颜谋衍率军队攻打北京，白彦敬派偏将率兵在建州之境抵抗，然而独吉义首先归顺了金世宗，蒲速赉称病不到。
English: After Yan Muyan led the army to attack Beijing, Bai Yanjing sent the general to lead the army to resist in the territory of Jianzhou. However, Du Jiyi first surrendered to Kim Sejong, and Pu Haotong said that he was not ill.

古文：世宗密遣人乘夜揭榜于北京市，购以官赏。
现代文：金世宗秘密派人乘着黑夜潜入北京张贴告示，重金收买官吏。
English: The Kim Sejong Sect secretly sent people to sneak into Beijing under the cover of darkness to post notices and bribe officials.

古文：彦敬、志宁恐为人图己，遂降。
现代文：白彦敬、纥石烈志宁恐怕被人图谋，于是投降金世宗。
English: Shirahiko Kei and Shoseki Retshinin, fearing that someone was plotting against them, surrendered to Kim Sejong.

古文：以为曷速馆节度使。
现代文：白彦敬被任命为曷速馆节度使。
English: Bai Yanjing was appointed as the envoy of the Qinghai-Hong Kong Museum of Natural History.

古文：不数月，召为御史大夫。
现代文：没过几个月，被召为御史大夫。
English: A few months later, he was called to the position of chief historian.

古文：窝斡慄帝号。
现代文：移剌窝斡冒用皇帝的尊号。
English: The emperor's honorary title was used by the embezzler.

古文：诸军马瘦弱，遣彦敬往西北路招讨司市马，得六千余匹。
现代文：各路军的战马都很瘦弱，即派白彦敬到西北路招讨司买马，买到六千多匹。
English: The war horses of all the armies were very thin and weak, so they sent Bai Yanjing to the Northwest Road to solicit buyers for horses, and bought more than six thousand horses.

古文：窝斡败，西走山后。
现代文：移剌窝斡被打败，逃到西边的后山。
English: After being defeated, he fled to the mountains to the west.

古文：完颜思敬以新马三千备追袭。
现代文：完颜思敬带领换上新买的三千匹战马的军队准备追击移剌窝斡。
English: Yan Shijing led the newly bought three thousand horses to prepare for the pursuit of the imperial army.

古文：彦敬屯于夏国两界间。
现代文：白彦敬在夏金两国边界间防守。
English: Shirahiko Kei defends the border between the two countries in Shakin.

古文：窝斡平，召还为兵部尚书，出为凤翔尹，改太原尹，兼河北东路兵马总管，寻改河中尹。
现代文：移剌窝斡被平定，白彦敬被召升为兵部尚书，离开朝廷后任凤翔尹，改任太原尹，兼河北东路兵马总管，不久改任河中尹。
English: After the transfer of Xiangwu was settled, Bai Yanjing was promoted to the military department of Shangshu. After leaving the imperial court, he served as Feng Xiangyin, changed his name to Taiyuan Yin, and was also the head of the East Hebei Military Horse Corps, and soon changed his name to Huazhong Yin.

古文：大定九年，卒于官。
现代文：大定九年，白彦敬死在职位上。
English: In the ninth year of Dading, Bai Yan Kei died in office.

古文：张景仁，字寿甫，辽西人。
现代文：张景仁，字寿甫，辽西人。
English: Zhang Jingren, surnamed Shufu, from western Liaoning Province.

古文：累官翰林待制。
现代文：做官到翰林待制。
English: To be an official in Hanlin is to be on standby.

古文：贞元二年，与翟永固俱试礼部进士，以 尊祖配天 为赋题，忤海陵旨，语在永固传。
现代文：贞元二年，与翟永固一同参加礼部进士考试，以《尊祖配天》为题做赋，与海陵王的旨意相抵触，他的话记在《永固传》。
English: In the second year of the Zhengyuan era, he and Zou Yonggu took part in the entrance examination for the Ministry of Rites and Ceremonies. He was given the assignment of "Honoring the Ancestors and Matching with Heaven," which was contrary to the will of King Hailing. His words are recorded in "The Biography of Yonggu."

古文：大定二年，仆散忠义伐宋，景仁掌其文辞。
现代文：大定二年，仆散忠义攻伐宋国，景仁掌管他的文章之事。
English: In the 2nd year of Dading, Jingren was in charge of the matter of his article, after his subordinate Zhuan Zhongyi invaded Song.

古文：宋人议和，朝廷已改奉表为国书，称臣为侄，但不肯世称侄国。往复凡七书，然后定，其书皆景仁为之。
现代文：宋人商议讲和，朝廷已经将奉表改为国书，称臣国为侄国，但是宋国不肯世称侄国，因此双方来往投书七次，然后事情才议定，这些国书都出自景仁之手。
English: The Song people discussed peace, and the imperial court had changed the title to the state book, calling the subject state a nephew state, but the Song state refused to be called a nephew state, so the two sides exchanged letters seven times, and then things were agreed. These state books were all from the hands of Jingren.

古文：世宗称其能，尝曰： 今之文章，如张景仁与宋人往复书，指事达意，辨而裁，真能文之士也。 
现代文：世宗完颜雍称赞他有才能，曾经说： 当今的文章像张景仁和宋人往来起草的国书，写得事尽通达思辩清楚而能发挥作用的，才是真正的能文之士啊！ 
English: Shizong Guan Yan Yong praised him for his talent, once saying: Today's article is like the national book drafted by Zhang Jingren and Song people, and it is only a true man of letters who can write everything thoroughly and think clearly and can play a role!

古文：五年，罢兵，入为翰林直学士。
现代文：五年，金、宋两国停止交战，张景仁入朝做了翰林直学士。
English: Five years later, when the war between Kim and Song was over, Zhang Jingren entered the imperial court as Hanlin Jiu Bao.

古文：七年，迁侍讲。
现代文：七年，改任侍讲。
English: Seven years later, he was appointed as an assistant lecturer.

古文：八年，为详读官。
现代文：八年，又做了详读官。
English: Eight years later, he became a detailed reader.

古文：宋国书中有 宝邻 字，景仁奏 邻 字太涉平易。
现代文：宋国国书中有 宝邻 二字，景仁上奏皇上说 邻 字太涉平易。
English: In the book of Song Dynasty, there was a word "宝邻" (treasure-neighbor), but Emperor Jingren said that the word "鄰" (neighbor) was too simple.

古文：上问累年国书有 邻 字否，命一一校勘。
现代文：皇上询问往年国书中是否有 邻 字，命令一一校对勘查。
English: The emperor asked whether there were any "neighboring words" in the previous years' national anthem, and ordered that they be checked one by one.

古文：六年书中亦有之，上责问六年详读官刘仲渊，右丞石琚亦请罪曰： 臣尝预六年详读。 
现代文：结果发现六年国书中也有这个字，皇上责问六年详读官刘仲渊，右丞相石琚也请罪说： 臣曾经参与六年详读。 
English: It turned out that there was also this word in the six-year state book. The emperor reprimanded Liu Zhongyuan, the six-year detailed reading official, and the minister of justice Shi Yan also pleaded guilty, saying: The minister had participated in the six-year detailed reading.

古文：上曰： 此有司之过，安得一一责宰臣邪？ 
现代文：皇上说 ：这件事是有司的过错，怎么能一一责罚宰相大臣呢？ 
English: The emperor said, "This matter is the fault of the magistrate. How can the prime minister be punished one by one?"

古文：诏有司就谕宋臣王瀹，使归告其主，后日国书不得复尔。
现代文：于是诏令有司马上传谕宋国大臣王瀹，让他回去告诉他的君主，以后国书中不得再有 邻 字。
English: Therefore, the imperial edict was immediately transmitted to the Song minister, Wang Qi, and he was told to go back and tell his sovereign that there should be no more "neighboring" characters in state documents.

古文：仲渊时为礼部侍郎，降石州刺史，景仁迁翰林学士兼同修国史。
现代文：仲渊当时是礼部侍郎，被降职为石州刺史，景仁升迁为翰林学士兼同修国史。
English: At that time, Nakafuchi was an attendant of the Ceremonial Department, and was demoted to the position of Sekishu Sashishi, and Kagehito was promoted to the position of Hanlin Baccalaureate and a student of national history.

古文：久之，上召景仁读陈言文字。
现代文：时间长了，皇上召见景仁令他读陈言文字。
English: After a long time, the emperor summoned Jingren and ordered him to read the speech.

古文：上问 事款几何？ 
现代文：皇上问 ：典章制度有多少款？ 
English: The Emperor asked: How many types of award system are there?

古文：景仁率易，少周密，对曰： 二十余事。 
现代文：景仁轻率简单，缺乏周密思考，回答说： 有二十多条。 
English: Jingren, thoughtlessly simple and lacking in careful thought, replied, "There are more than twenty."

古文：复曰： 其中如某事某事十事可行，余皆无谓也。 
现代文：又说： 其中如某条某条有十条可行，其余的都是无所谓的。 
English: He also said: Among them, for example, there are ten possible reasons for a certain item, and the rest are irrelevant.

古文：明日，上召景仁责之曰： 卿昨言可行者，朕观之，中复有不可行者。
现代文：第二天，皇上召见景仁斥责他说： 卿昨天说可行的条款，朕看了，其中又有不可行的。
English: The next day, the emperor summoned Jingren and scolded him, saying, "Your Excellency said yesterday that the terms were feasible, but I have read them and they are not feasible.

古文：卿谓无谓者，中亦有可行者。
现代文：卿说无所谓的条款，其中却有可行的。
English: Sir says no matter the clause, there are workable ones.

古文：朕未尝使卿分别可否，卿辄专可否，何也？
现代文：朕未曾让卿分别可行与不可行，卿却自做主张分可行不可行，这怎么行呢？
English: I have not asked you to distinguish between what is feasible and what is not feasible, but you have made your own assertions about what is feasible and what is not feasible. How can this be done?

古文：自今戒之。 
现代文：卿自己要从现在改正。 
English: Sir wants to correct himself from now on.

古文：十年，兼太常卿，学士、同修国史如故。
现代文：大定十年，张景仁兼任太常卿、学士同时依然修国史。
English: In the 10th year of Dading, Zhang Jingren was concurrently serving as the First Secretary of the Central Military Commission and a bachelor while still studying national history.

古文：转承旨，兼修国史。
现代文：后又转任承旨、兼修国史。
English: Later, he was transferred to the position of Zojirushi and concurrently studied national history.

古文：改河南尹。
现代文：后又改任河南尹。
English: Later, he was reappointed as Henan Yin.

古文：二十一年，召为御史大夫，仍兼承旨、修国史。
现代文：二十一年，奉召出任御史大夫，仍然兼任承旨、修国史。
English: In 1921, he was called to the post of Imperial Historian, and still concurrently held the posts of Emperor's Counselor and State Historian.

古文：世宗谓景仁曰： 卿博学老儒，求如古之御史大夫，然后行之，期为称矣。不能如古之人，众人不独诮卿，亦谓朕不能知人。
现代文：世宗对景仁说： 卿是一位博学老儒，要求像古代的御史大夫，然后行事，这样才是称职，不能像古代的普通人一样，众人不单独讥诮卿，也会说朕不能知人善任。
English: Shizong said to Jingren, "Your Excellency is a learned old man. He demands to be treated like an ancient imperial historian, and then he acts accordingly. This is the only way to be competent. You cannot be like an ordinary person in ancient times. People not only ridicule your Excellency, but also say that I cannot be trusted.

古文：卿醉中颇轻脱失言，当以酒为戒。 
现代文：卿酒醉的时候很有轻脱失言之处，应当戒备酒后失言才好。 
English: Sir, when you are drunk, it is easy to make a slip of the tongue. You should beware of making a slip of the tongue after drinking.

古文：初，朝臣言景仁有文艺而颇率易，不可任台察。
现代文：当初，朝中大臣们说景仁有文才技艺然而很轻率简单，不能胜任台察。
English: At first, the ministers of the North and the Middle Kingdom said that Jing Ren had literary talent and skill, but he was very frivolous and simple, and he was not competent to inspect Taiwan.

古文：景仁被诏，就台中治监察罪，辄以便服视决罚。
现代文：景仁被诏做台察，即在台中治监察罪，就随便看情况决定处罚。
English: Jingren was ordered to do the inspection, that is, the crime of supervision in Taichung, and the punishment was decided according to the situation.

古文：上闻之，责景仁曰： 朕初用卿为大夫，或言卿不可居此官，今果不用故事，率易如此。
现代文：皇上听说了这些，责问景仁： 朕当初用卿当大夫，有人说不可以让卿做这个官，现在果然不用旧日的典章制度，轻率简单竟然像这样。
English: When the emperor heard about this, he scolded Jingren: At the beginning, I used the title of chancellor as a doctor. Some people said that the title of chancellor should not be used for this position. Now, we do not use the old system of awards. How thoughtless and simple can it be?

古文：卿自慎，不然黜罚及矣！ 
现代文：卿要自己谨慎，不然要罢黜处罚了！ 
English: Sir, you should be careful, otherwise you will be punished!

古文：景仁顿首谢。
现代文：景仁叩头谢恩。
English: Thank you for kowtowing to Jingren.

古文：未几，诏葬元妃李氏于海王庄。
现代文：没过多久，皇帝下诏把元妃李氏安葬在海王庄。
English: It didn't take long for the emperor to issue an edict to bury Empress Dowager Yi in Haiwangzhuang.

古文：平章政事乌古论元忠提控葬事，都水监丞高杲寿治道路不如式，元忠不奏，决之四十。
现代文：平章政事乌古论元忠负责监控安葬元妃一事，都水监丞高杲寿治道路不合标准，元忠不上奏，景仁决断责打他四十大板。
English: Pingzhang Zhengji Wugu said that Yuanzhong was responsible for monitoring and supervising the burial of the Empress Dowager, and the way of capital water inspector Gao Junzhi was not up to standard, Yuanzhong did not play, and Jingren decided to beat him with a forty-one-meter board.

古文：景仁劾奏元忠辄断六品官，无人臣礼。
现代文：景仁上奏弹劾元忠妄自断送了六品官职责，没有履行作为大臣的礼节。
English: After the impeachment of Gen Tadamasa, Jingren took it upon himself to give up his duties as the sixth-ranked official, failing to perform the etiquette of a minister.

古文：上曰： 卿劾奏甚当。 
现代文：皇上说 ：卿的劾奏很恰当。 
English: The emperor said, "Your impeachment is very appropriate."

古文：使左宣徽使蒲察鼎寿传诏戒敕元忠曰： 监丞六品，有罪闻奏，今乃一切趋办，擅决六品官，法当如是耶？
现代文：派左宣徽使蒲察鼎寿传诏书训戒元忠说： 监丞六品，有罪闻奏，现在是一切事赶忙办，擅自决定处罚六品官，依法制应当像这样做吗？
English: He sent Zuo Xuanhui to make Pu Zha Ding Shou deliver an edict to admonish Yuan Zhong, saying: "Judge six, find guilty, now everything is done in a hurry, arbitrarily decide to punish six officials, should the legal system be like this?

古文：御史在尊朝廷，汝当自咎，勿复再！ 
现代文：御史在朝廷受尊重，你应当自责，不要再发生类似事件！ 
English: Your history is respected in the imperial court. You should reproach yourself so that similar incidents do not happen again!

古文：元忠尚豫国公主，怙宠自任，倨慢朝士。
现代文：元忠娶的是豫国公主，依仗受宠任意专行，倨傲侮慢朝中人士。
English: Yuan Zhong married a princess of the State of Yunnan, a person who was favored by others and could do whatever he wanted. He was arrogant and disdainful of the people in the court.

古文：景仁劾之，朝廷肃然。
现代文：景仁上奏弹劾了他，满朝上下对景仁肃然起敬。
English: He was impeached by Jingren Shangso, and the whole dynasty revered Jingren.

古文：是岁，薨。
现代文：就在这一年，景仁逝世。
English: He died that year.

