古文：霍小玉传
现代文：霍小玉传
English: Ho Siu Tam Chuan

古文：大历中，陇西李生名益，年二十，以进士擢第。
现代文：唐代宗大历年间，甘肃陇西有位叫李益的书生，二十岁时考中了进士。
English: During the Tang Dynasty, there was a scholar named Li Yi in the west of Gansu Province. At the age of 20, he passed the entrance examination and became a scholar.

古文：其明年，拔萃，俟试于天官。
现代文：到了第二年，朝廷进行拔萃考试，由礼部主持。
English: In the second year, the imperial court conducted an outstanding examination, presided over by the Ministry of Ceremonies.

古文：夏六月，至长安，舍于新昌里。
现代文：农历六月份，李生到了长安，住在新昌里。
English: In June of the lunar calendar, Li Sheng arrived in Chang'an and lived in Xinchangli.

古文：生门族清华，少有才思，丽词嘉句，时谓无双，先达丈人，翕然推伏。
现代文：李生门第清高显贵，少年时就有文学才能，文章辞藻华丽，语句精彩，当时的人都说没有第二个能比，有名望的前辈长者无不推崇赞许。
English: Li Sheng's lineage was noble and distinguished. He had literary talent when he was a boy. His articles were eloquent and his sentences were brilliant. People at that time said that there was no second to him, and his famous predecessors all praised and praised him.

古文：每自矜风调，思得佳偶，博求名妓，久而未谐。
现代文：李生对自己的风度才华也非常自信，一直想找一个理想的配偶，各处寻求名妓，但很久没有找到。
English: Li Sheng is also very confident of his poise and talent. He has always wanted to find an ideal spouse and has been looking for a famous prostitute everywhere, but has not found one for a long time.

古文：长安有媒鲍十一娘者，故薛驸马家青衣也，折券从良，十余年矣。
现代文：长安有个媒婆叫鲍十一娘，是原先薛驸马家的婢女，后来用钱赎身取得了平民身份，至今已十多年了。
English: There is a matchmaker in Chang'an called Bao XI's daughter, who was originally a servant of Xue Yima's family. Later, she used money to redeem herself and obtained civilian status. It has been more than ten years.

古文：性便僻，巧言语，豪家戚里，无不经过，追风抉策，推为渠帅。
现代文：鲍氏善于逢迎讨好，很会说话，那些权势之家以及皇帝的外戚家她都去过。她腿勤脚快，到处保媒拉纤，被公认为这个行业的头面人物。
English: Ms. Bao is good at ingratiating, very talkative, she has been to those powerful houses as well as the emperor's maternal relatives. She is diligent, she is everywhere in the media, and she is recognized as the leading figure in this industry.

古文：常受生诚托厚赂，意颇德之。
现代文：鲍氏多次受到李生诚恳的拜托和厚礼，心里很感激李生。
English: Mr. Bao has received many sincere requests and gifts from Li Sheng. He is very grateful to Li Sheng.

古文：经数月，李方闲居舍之南亭，申未间，忽闻扣门甚急。云是鲍十一娘至。
现代文：过了几个月，一天下午申时前后，李生正在家里的南亭中闲坐，忽听到急促的敲门声，说是鲍十一娘来了。
English: A few months later, one afternoon around 9 p.m., Li Sheng was sitting idly in the south pavilion of his home, when he suddenly heard a hurried knock on the door, saying that his eleven-year-old daughter had arrived.

古文：摄衣从之，迎问曰： 鲍卿，今日何故忽然而来？ 
现代文：李生提起衣襟迎着声音往外来，迎面问道： 鲍卿今日什么原因来我这里？ 
English: Li Sheng lifted up his shirt collar and faced the outside world, and asked, "What is the reason for Sir Bao to come here today?"

古文：鲍笑曰： 苏姑子作好梦也未？
现代文：鲍氏笑着说： 又梦见美女苏小小了吗？
English: Mr. Bao said with a smile: Did you dream of the beautiful Su Xiao Xiao again?

古文：有一仙人，谪在下界，不邀财货，但慕风流。如此色目，共十郎相当矣。 
现代文：我可是找到了一位被贬到了人间的仙女，人家不要钱财，只慕风流，这样的才貌，跟你十郎是再相配不过了！ 
English: However, I have found a fairy who has been relegated to the human world. People don't want money, they only crave luxury. Such talent is a perfect match for you, Juro!

古文：生闻之惊跃，神飞体轻，引鲍手且拜且谢曰： 一生作奴，死亦不惮。 
现代文：李生听了惊喜得跳了起来，只觉得身体轻飘飘的，魂儿都要飞走了。他拉着鲍氏的手边拜边感谢说： 我这辈子就是为她作奴才也行，死了也不怕。 
English: Li Sheng was so surprised that he jumped to his feet, only to feel that his body was light and his soul was about to fly away. He took Ms. Bao's hand and bowed as he thanked her, saying, "I can be her slave for the rest of my life, and I'm not afraid to die."

古文：因问其名居，鲍具说曰： 故霍王小女字小玉，王甚爱之。
现代文：于是询问对方的姓名住处。鲍氏详细告诉他说： 她是原先霍王的小女儿，字叫小玉。霍王很喜欢她。
English: So he asked the other person's name and address. Mr. Bao told him in detail: She was originally the youngest daughter of King Huo, called Xiao Yuping. King Huo liked her very much.

古文：母曰净持，净持即王之宠婢也。王之初薨，诸弟兄以其出自贱庶，不甚收录，因分与资财，遣居于外。易娃为郑氏，人亦不知其王女。
现代文：她母亲叫净持，是霍王宠爱的婢女，霍王死后不久，弟兄们认为她是微贱之人所生，不愿容留她，便分给她钱财，让她到外面去住，并让她改姓郑，人们也就不知道她是霍王的女儿了。
English: Her mother's name was Jingzhi, and she was a beloved servant of King Huo. Shortly after King Huo's death, her brothers thought that she was a low-born person and did not want to keep her, so they gave her money and let her live outside, and let her change her surname to Zheng. People did not know that she was the daughter of King Huo.

古文：资质秾艳，一生未见。高情逸态，事事过人，音乐诗书，无不通解。
现代文：她容貌品德才能都极为出色，我一生都未见过，她情趣高雅，举止不同凡俗，事事都超过别人。音乐诗书，无不通晓。
English: Her appearance, character and talent are all extremely outstanding, I have never seen in my life, her taste is elegant, her manners are different from the ordinary, and she surpasses others in everything.

古文：昨遣某求一好儿郎，格调相称者。
现代文：昨天她托我找一位好男子，要志趣品德相配就行。
English: Yesterday she asked me to find a good man with the right character.

古文：某具说十郎，他亦知有李十郎名字，非常欢惬。
现代文：我向她详细地介绍了你，她也知道有李十郎这个名字，听后非常高兴满意。
English: I introduced you to her in detail, she also knew the name Li Juro, and was very happy and satisfied after listening.

古文：住在胜业坊古寺曲，甫上车门宅是也。
现代文：她住在胜业坊古寺巷，刚进巷口的第一个大门就是她家。
English: She lives in Guji Lane, Shengye Fong, and as soon as you enter the lane, the first gate is her house.

古文：已与他作期约，明日午时，但至曲头觅桂子，即得矣。 
现代文：我已跟她约好，明日午时，你只要到巷口找侍女桂子就能行了。 
English: I've made an appointment with her. Tomorrow at noon, you just need to go to the corner of the alley to find the maid Keiko.

古文：鲍既去，生便备行计。遂令家僮秋鸿，于从兄京兆参军尚公处，假青骊驹，黄金勒。
现代文：鲍氏走后，李生马上做了出发的准备，让家僮秋鸿到堂兄京兆参军尚公那里，借来青骊驹和黄金的马笼头。
English: After Mr. Bao left, Li Sheng immediately made preparations for the departure, and asked his cousin, Qiu Hong, to go to his cousin, Jing Zhao, Shang Gong, to borrow the green and gold horses.

古文：其夕，生浣衣沐浴，修饰容仪、喜跃交并，通夕不寐。
现代文：当天晚上，李生洗澡更衣，修饰容貌仪表，欣喜若狂，通宵未睡。
English: In the evening of the same day, Li Sheng took a bath and changed his clothes, beautified his appearance and appearance, was ecstatic, and stayed up all night.

古文：迟明，巾帻，引镜自照，惟惧不谐也。
现代文：天亮时，戴上头巾，拿起镜子照了一番，唯恐事情不能成功。
English: At dawn, put on a headscarf, pick up a mirror and take a look, lest things don't work out.

古文：徘徊之间，至于亭午。遂命驾疾驱，直抵胜业。
现代文：好不容易盼到了约定的中午，匆匆上了马，命令御手赶马快跑，直奔胜业坊。
English: At last, the agreed noon arrived, and he hurriedly mounted his horse and ordered his rider to run fast, heading straight for Shengyefang.

古文：至约之所，果见青衣立候，迎问曰： 莫是李十郎否？ 
现代文：到了约定的地方，果然看见婢女站在那里等候。婢女迎上去问： 莫不是李十郎吗？ 
English: When he arrived at the agreed place, he actually saw the maid standing there waiting. The maid greeted him and asked, "Isn't that Li Juro?"

古文：即下马，令牵入屋底，急急锁门。
现代文：李生急忙下马，叫人把马牵到屋子下面，又匆忙锁上了门。
English: Li Sheng got off the horse in a hurry, asked someone to lead the horse under the house, and hurriedly locked the door.

古文：见鲍果从内出来，遥笑曰： 何等儿郎造次入此？ 
现代文：这时看见鲍氏从里边走出，远远地笑着说： 哪家的莽小伙敢随便进入此地？ 
English: At this time, he saw Mr. Bao come out from inside, smiled at a distance and said: "What kind of reckless young man would dare to enter this place?

古文：生调诮未毕，引入中门。
现代文：李生玩笑还没开完，就被带进中门。
English: Before Li Sheng's joke was over, he was taken into the middle gate.

古文：庭间有四樱桃树，西北悬一鹦鹉笼，见生入来，即语曰： 有人入来，急下帘者。 
现代文：院子里有四棵樱桃树，西北角处挂着一个鹦鹉笼。看到生人来了，鹦鹉就叫道： 有人进来了，赶快放下帘子！ 
English: There are four cherry trees in the courtyard, and a parrot cage hangs in the northwest corner. Seeing the stranger coming, the parrot called out, "Someone has come in, quickly lower the curtain!"

古文：生本性雅淡，心犹疑惧，忽见鸟语，愕然不敢进。
现代文：李生本性规矩恬淡，又加上心中还有些疑心害怕，忽然听见鸟说的话，惊讶得不敢往里走，站在那里犹豫。
English: Li Sheng, who is naturally timid and has some suspicion and fear in his heart, suddenly heard the bird's words, and was so surprised that he did not dare to go in, and stood there hesitating.

古文：逡巡，鲍引净持下阶相迎，延入对坐。
现代文：鲍氏于是领着净持走下台阶迎接，延请到屋内，对面坐下。
English: Mr. Bao then led the net holding down the steps to meet, invited to go inside and sit down opposite.

古文：年可四十余，绰约多姿，谈笑甚媚。因谓生曰： 素闻十郎才调风流，今又见容仪雅秀，名下固无虚士。
现代文：净持年龄大约四十多岁，颇有风韵，谈笑很招人喜欢，对李生说： 一向听说十郎是位风流才子，现在又看到容貌仪表美好清秀，果然名不虚传。
English: Net holding age of about forty-plus years old, quite charming, very amusing, said to Li Sheng: I have always heard that Juro is a flirtatious talent, and now I see that his appearance is beautiful and handsome, so his reputation is not false.

古文：某有一女子，虽拙教训，颜色不至丑陋，得配君子，颇为相宜。
现代文：我有一个女孩儿，虽然没受过良好的教育，但容貌还不算丑陋，能跟这样的君子相配，是很合适的。
English: I have a girl, ill-educated though she is, who is not so ugly as to be suitable for such a gentleman.

古文：频见鲍十一娘说意旨，今亦便令永奉箕帚。 
现代文：经常听鲍十一娘说起您的意思，现在就让她永远侍候您吧。 
English: I have often heard Bao XI's daughter talk about you, so let her serve you forever.

古文：生谢曰： 鄙拙庸愚，不意顾盼，倘垂采录，生死为荣。 
现代文：李生谢道： 我这个人浅薄笨拙，平庸愚钝，没想到能被看中。如蒙不弃，生死都感到荣幸。 
English: Li Sheng Xie said: I am a shallow, clumsy, mediocre and dull person, I did not expect to be favored. If I am not abandoned, I will feel honored in life and death.

古文：遂命酒馔，即令小玉自堂东阁子中而出，生即拜迎。
现代文：于是让人摆设酒宴，就叫霍小玉从堂屋东面的阁子中出来。
English: So they had a wine banquet set up, and then asked Huo Xiaotang to come out of the pavilion on the east side of the hall.

古文：但觉一室之中，若琼林玉树，互相照曜，转盼精彩射人。
现代文：李生急忙拜见迎接，只觉得满屋就像琼林玉树，互相映照，看那霍小玉的眼波流动，更是光彩射人。
English: Li Sheng hurried to meet and greet, only to feel that the full house was like Qionglin Yushu, mirroring each other, watching the flow of Huo Xiaotu's eyes, and even more brilliantly shooting people.

古文：既而遂坐母侧，母谓曰： 汝尝爱念 开帘风动竹，疑是故人来， 即此十郎诗也。
现代文：见面之后，小玉便坐到了母亲旁边。母亲对她说： 你曾爱念 开帘风动竹，疑是故人来 ，就是这位李十郎的诗句。
English: After the meeting, Xiao Yu sat next to her mother. Her mother said to her: You used to love to recite the poem, "The wind moves the bamboo when the curtain is open," which is a poem by Li Juro.

古文：尔终日吟想，何如一见？ 
现代文：你终日吟诵想念，怎比得上真正见上一面？ 
English: You spend all day chanting "I miss you," how does that compare to actually seeing each other?

古文：玉乃低鬟微笑，细语曰： 见面不如闻名，才子岂能无貌？ 
现代文：小玉就低头微笑，轻轻地说： 见面不如闻名，才子怎能没有好相貌呢？ 
English: Xiao Yu just looked down, smiled and said softly, "It's not as good as meeting someone famous. How can a talented person not have good looks?"

古文：生遂连起拜曰： 小娘子爱才，鄙夫重色，两好相映，才貌相兼。 
现代文：李生站起连连谢说： 小娘子爱才，鄙陋的我重视容貌，两好相映，真可谓才貌兼备了。 
English: Li Sheng stood up and said, "Little girls love talent, but I, a despicable person, value appearance. The two go hand in hand. I truly have both talent and appearance."

古文：母女相顾而笑，遂举酒数巡。
现代文：母女二人相视而笑。于是喝了几巡酒，李生站起来，请求小玉唱歌。
English: The mother and daughter looked at each other and laughed. So they drank a few rounds of wine, and Li Sheng stood up and asked Xiao Yu to sing.

古文：生起，请玉唱歌，初不肯，母固强之。发声清亮，曲度精奇。
现代文：小玉起先不肯，她母亲硬让她唱，她只好唱了一曲。只听发声清亮，节奏精妙出奇。
English: Xiao Yu refused at first, her mother forced her to sing, so she had to sing a song. Just listen to the clear sound and the exquisite rhythm.

古文：酒阑及暝，鲍引生就西院憩息。
现代文：酒喝完了，天也黑了，鲍氏就领着李生到西院去歇息。
English: When the wine was finished and it was dark, Mr. Bao led Li Sheng to the West Courtyard to rest.

古文：闲庭邃宇，帘幕甚华。
现代文：只见庭院幽静，房屋深邃，帘幕非常华丽。
English: The courtyard is secluded, the house is deep, and the curtain is very gorgeous.

古文：鲍令侍儿桂子、浣沙，与生脱靴解带。
现代文：鲍氏叫侍女桂子、浣纱给李生脱靴解带。
English: Mr. Bao asked his maid, Keiko, to take off Li Sheng's shoes and untie his belt.

古文：须臾玉至，言叙温和，辞气宛媚。
现代文：不一会儿小玉来了，言谈温和，语气委婉，脱下罗衣的时候，体态有说不尽的美好。
English: After a while, Xiao Yu came, her speech was gentle and her tone was euphemistic. When she took off her robe, her body was indescribably beautiful.

古文：解罗衣之际，态有余妍，低帏昵枕，极其欢爱，生自以为巫山洛浦不过也。
现代文：帐子低垂，枕上亲昵，二人极其欢乐相爱。李生自己认为此时他们之间的爱情，即使是楚怀王与巫山神女或曹植与洛神都不能相比。
English: The curtain is hanging low, they are cuddling on the pillow, the two are extremely happy and in love. Li Sheng himself thinks that the love between them at this time cannot be compared even to the love between King Chu Huai and the Wushan Goddess or Cao Zhi and Luo Sheng.

古文：中宵之夜，玉忽流涕观生曰： 妾本倡家，自知非匹，今以色爱，托其仁贤。
现代文：半夜时候，小玉忽然流着泪，看着李生说： 我的母亲是婢女出身，自己知道配不上你。
English: In the middle of the night, Xiao Yu suddenly burst into tears, looked at Li Sheng and said: My mother was born as a maid, I know I am not worthy of you.

古文：但虑一旦色衰，恩移情替，使女萝无托，秋扇见捐。极欢之际，不觉悲至。 
现代文：现在你因为喜欢我的容貌爱我，使我托身于仁贤，只是担心一旦我容貌衰老，你恩情转移，情意更替，就会使藤萝失去托身之树，像秋后的扇子被人丢弃，在这极为欢乐的时候，我想到这一点，不禁悲从中来。 
English: Now, because you like my looks, you love me and keep me in good graces, but you are afraid that once my looks get old, your favor will shift and your affections will change, and you will make the wisteria lose its tree of refuge, and it will be discarded like a fan after the fall. In this time of great joy, I think about this and can't help but feel sad.

古文：生闻之，不胜感叹，乃引臂替枕，徐谓玉曰： 平生志愿，今日获从。粉骨碎身，誓不相舍。
现代文：李生听了这些话，非常感慨，就伸出胳膊让小玉枕着，慢慢地对她说： 我平生的愿望，今日得以实现，即使粉身碎骨，也决不会丢弃你。
English: When Li Sheng heard these words, he was very emotional, so he stretched out his arm and let Xiao Yu lie down, and slowly said to her: My lifelong wish has been realized today, even if I am crushed, I will never abandon you.

古文：夫人何发此言？
现代文：夫人怎么说出这种话来？
English: How could she say such a thing?

古文：请以素缣，著之盟约。 
现代文：现在就让我在白缣上写上我的誓言吧！ 
English: Now let me write my vows on the egret!

古文：玉因收泪，命侍儿樱桃，褰幄执烛，授生笔研。
现代文：小玉于是停止了哭泣，命侍女樱桃揭起帐幔，拿着蜡烛，又把笔砚交给了李生。
English: Xiao Yu then stopped crying, and the maid of honor, Cherry, opened the curtain, took the candle, and handed the pen to Li Sheng.

古文：玉管弦之暇，雅好诗书，筐箱笔研，皆王家之旧物。
现代文：小玉吹奏弹唱之余，很喜欢诗书，书箱、笔砚，都是霍王家原来的东西。
English: In addition to playing and singing, Xiao Yu likes poetry books, bookcases, and pencil cases, all of which are original to the Huo Wang family.

古文：遂取绣囊，出越姬乌丝栏素缣三尺以授生。
现代文：于是取出绣囊，从中找出了吴越女子织的乌丝栏绸三尺交给了李生。
English: So he took out an embroidered bag and found a three-foot-thick piece of Wu Yue women's silk handkerchief, which he gave to Li Sheng.

古文：生素多才思，援笔成章，引谕山河，指诚日月，句句恳切，闻之动人。
现代文：李生一向富于文学才能，拿过笔来就写成了文章，引山河作比喻，指日月表诚心，句句都很恳切，听了很使人感动。
English: Li Sheng has always been rich in literary talent. Once he picked up a pen, he wrote an article, used mountains and rivers as metaphors, and showed sincerity. Every sentence was very sincere, and it was very moving to listen to.

古文：染毕，命藏于宝箧之内。
现代文：写完了，让小玉藏在宝匣里边。
English: When you have finished writing, hide the small ball inside the treasure chest.

古文：自尔婉娈相得，若翡翠之在云路也。
现代文：从此以后，二人相亲相爱地生活在一起，像翡翠鸟比翼云中飞翔一样。
English: From then on, the two lived together lovingly, like an emerald bird flying through the clouds.

古文：如此二岁，日夜相从。
现代文：这样过了两年，日夜相随。
English: This went on for two years, day and night.

古文：其后年春，生以书判拔萃登科，授郑县主簿。
现代文：第三年春天，李生以书判的资格参加拔萃考试，结果考中，被授予郑县主簿的官职。
English: In the spring of the third year, Li Sheng took part in the outstanding examination with the qualification of a book judge. As a result, he was awarded the official post of the chief bookkeeper of Zheng County.

古文：至四月，将之官，便拜庆于东洛。
现代文：到四月份，将去赴任，便到东都洛阳去给父母请安报喜。
English: In April, when he was about to take office, he went to Luoyang, the eastern capital, to give his parents the good news.

古文：长安亲戚，多就筵饯。
现代文：长安的亲戚，都来参加了送行的宴会。
English: Relatives from Chang'an all came to attend the farewell banquet.

古文：时春物尚余，夏景初丽，酒阑宾散，离恶萦怀。
现代文：当时正是春末时节，初夏的景色已经出现。酒喝完了，宾客尽散，离别的心绪充满了胸怀。
English: At that time, it was the late spring season, and the scenery of early summer had already appeared. The wine had been drunk, the guests had dispersed, and the mood of parting was filled with the heart.

古文：玉谓生曰： 以君才地名声，人多景慕，愿结婚媾，固亦众矣。况堂有严亲，室无冢妇，君之此去，必就佳姻，盟约之言，徒虚语耳。
现代文：小玉对李生说： 凭您的才能、地位、名声，人们都很景仰羡慕您，愿意与您结成婚姻关系的人多得很，况且你堂上有母亲，家中又没有正妻，你这一去，一定会遇上好姻缘。盟约上的话，只不过是些空话罢了。
English: Xiao Yu said to Li Sheng: With your talent, status, and reputation, people admire and envy you, and there are many people who are willing to enter into a marriage relationship with you. Moreover, you have a mother in your family, and there is no legal wife in your family. You will surely meet a good marriage partner. The words in the covenant are just empty words.

古文：然妾有短愿，欲辄指陈，永委君心，复能听否？ 
现代文：不过我还有个小小的愿望，打算就此机会告诉你，永远记在你的心里。你愿意听吗？ 
English: But I still have a small wish, I'm going to take this opportunity to tell you, always in your heart. Would you like to hear it?

古文：生惊怪曰： 有何罪过，忽发此辞，试说所言，必当敬奉。 
现代文：李生惊讶奇怪地说： 我有什么罪过，你突然说出这些话？有什么想法你尽管说吧，我一定恭敬地接受。 
English: Surprised and surprised, Li Sheng said, "What is my fault that you suddenly said these words? If you have any thoughts, please say them, I will respectfully accept them."

古文：玉曰： 妾年始十八，君才二十有二。迨君壮室之秋，犹有八岁。一生欢爱，愿毕此期，然后妙选高门，以谐秦晋，亦未为晚。
现代文：小玉说： 我年龄才十八，您才二十二，等到你三十岁时，还有八年，我希望能再和你度过这八年美好的时日，把我一生对你的情爱都奉献给你，然后你再去好好选择一个高贵的门第，结成美满的婚姻，也不算晚。
English: Xiao Yu said, "I am only eighteen years old, and you are only twenty-two. By the time you are thirty years old, there are still eight years left. I hope I can spend these eight beautiful years with you again, and devote all my love for you to you, and then you can choose a noble family and make a happy marriage. It is not too late.

古文：妾便舍弃人事，剪发披缁，夙昔之愿，于此足矣。 
现代文：到那时我就剪去头发，穿上黑色的衣服去出家，平素的心愿，到此也就满足了。 
English: At that time, I would cut off my hair, put on black clothes and go out of the house, and my simple wish would be fulfilled.

古文：生且愧且感，不觉涕流，因谓玉曰： 皎日之誓，死生以之。
现代文：李生又惭愧又感动，不觉流下泪来。于是对小玉说： 我在青天白日下对你发的誓言，无论生死都会信守着它。
English: Li Sheng was both ashamed and moved, and shed tears unconsciously. So he said to Xiao Yu: The oath I swore to you in broad daylight, I will keep it no matter whether I live or die.

古文：与卿偕老，犹恐未惬素志，岂敢辄有二三？
现代文：跟你白头到老还怕不能满足平素的心愿，怎么敢有三心二意呢？
English: If you are afraid that you will not be able to satisfy your ordinary wishes when you are old, how dare you have second thoughts?

古文：固请不疑，但端居相待。
现代文：请您一定不要有疑心，只须像平日那样在家等着我。
English: Please do not be suspicious, just wait for me at home as usual.

古文：至八月，必当却到华州，寻使奉迎，相见非远。 
现代文：到八月份，我一定会回到华州，派人来迎你，相见的日子绝不会太远的。 
English: By August, I will definitely be back in Washington, and I will send someone to welcome you. The day we meet will not be too far away.

古文：更数日，生遂诀别东去。
现代文：又过了几天，李生就告别小玉向东走了。
English: A few days later, Li Sheng said goodbye to Xiao Yu and headed east.

古文：到任旬日，求假往东都觐亲。
现代文：到任后十天，李生就请假到东都洛阳去拜见母亲。
English: Ten days after taking office, Li Sheng took time off to visit his mother in the eastern city of Luoyang.

古文：未至家日，太夫人已与商量表妹卢氏，言约已定。
现代文：在李生还没到家的日子里，李生的母亲已经给他定下了表妹卢氏，并说婚约已定，李生的母亲一向严厉、果断，李生犹犹豫豫，但不敢推辞。
English: In the days before Li Sheng arrived home, Li Sheng's mother had already set a cousin Lu for him, and said that the marriage had been arranged. Li Sheng's mother had always been strict and decisive, and Li Sheng hesitated, but did not dare to refuse.

古文：太夫人素严毅，生逡巡不敢辞让，遂就礼谢，便有近期。卢亦甲族也，嫁女于他门，聘财必以百万为约，不满此数，义在不行。
现代文：于是按礼答谢，就定近期内结婚。卢氏也是高门望族，嫁女给别人家，聘礼约定必须达到百万，不够这个数，婚事就不能办。
English: The Lu family is also a high-ranking and prestigious family. If a daughter marries into another family, the bride price must reach one million. If this number is not enough, the marriage cannot take place.

古文：生家素贫，事须求贷，便托假故，远投亲知，涉历江淮，自秋及夏。
现代文：李生家一向不富裕，办这事得向人借贷，李生便假托有事，到远地投靠亲友，远涉江淮一带，从秋一直到夏。
English: Li Sheng's family had never been wealthy. To do this, they had to borrow money from others. Li Sheng would pretend to have something to do, go to distant places to rely on relatives and friends, and travel far and wide around the Huai River, from autumn to summer.

古文：生自以孤负盟约，大愆回期，寂不知闻，欲断其望。
现代文：李生自认为单方面违背了盟约，大大地错过了和小玉约定回去的日子，就无声无息地不给她通音信，想让她断绝念头。
English: Li Sheng thought that he had unilaterally violated the covenant and greatly missed the day he had agreed to go back with Xiao Yu, so he silently did not give her a phone call and wanted her to give up the idea.

古文：遥托亲故，不遣漏言。
现代文：又老远地去拜托亲戚朋友，不让他们走露消息。
English: They also went far and wide to beg relatives and friends not to let the news get out.

古文：玉自生逾期，数访音信。
现代文：小玉从李生超过了约定日期后，就多次探听音信，但听到了不少空话假话，一天一个样。
English: After Li Sheng passed the agreed date, Xiao Yu repeatedly listened to the messages, but heard a lot of empty words and lies, one day at a time.

古文：虚词诡说，日日不同。
现代文：小玉多次求问巫师，到处询问算卦，仍无音信。
English: Xiao Yu repeatedly asked the sorcerer and inquired about the calculation everywhere, but there was still no news.

古文：博求师巫，遍询卜筮。怀忧抱恨，周岁有余，羸卧空闺，遂成沉疾。
现代文：她心中越来越忧虑怨恨，身体一天天瘦弱下去，一人躺在空荡荡的闺房中，一年之后终于得了重病。
English: She became more and more worried and resentful, and her body became thinner and thinner day by day. She lay alone in an empty boudoir, and finally fell seriously ill a year later.

古文：虽生之书题竟绝，而玉之想望不移。
现代文：虽然李生的书信断绝，可是小玉的想念盼望却没有改变。
English: Although Li Sheng's letters were cut off, Xiao Yu's longing and hope did not change.

古文：赂遗亲知，使通消息，寻求既切，资用屡空。
现代文：于是小玉把财物送给亲友，让他们给打听消息。寻找既很迫切，资财因此常常缺乏。
English: As a result, Xiao Yuping gave his belongings to relatives and friends so that they could ask for news. The search was so urgent that resources were often lacking.

古文：往往私令侍婢潜卖箧中服玩之物，多托于西市寄附铺侯景先家货卖。
现代文：于是常常私下里让侍女偷偷去卖掉箱子中的服装和玩赏的东西。一般大多是托西市寄卖店侯景先家变卖。
English: As a result, they often secretly asked their maids to secretly sell the clothes and trinkets in the boxes. Most of them were sold by the Houjing family, a consignment store in Tosi.

古文：曾令侍婢浣沙，将紫玉钗一只，诣景先家货之。
现代文：她曾叫侍女浣纱拿着一支紫玉钗到景先家托卖，在路上碰到了皇宫内的作坊里的老玉工。
English: She once asked her maid, Gongsa, to take a purple jade bracelet to Jingxian's house to sell it, and on the way she met an old jade craftsman from the workshop in the palace.

古文：路逢内作老玉工，见浣沙所执，前来认之曰： 此钗吾所作也。
现代文：老玉工看见浣纱所拿的，走上前来辨认说： 这个钗是我做的。
English: When the old jade craftsman saw what the spindle was holding, he came forward to identify it and said, "I made this spindle."

古文：昔岁霍王小女，将欲上鬟，令我作此，酬我万钱，我尝不忘。
现代文：从前霍王的小女儿，将要挽上发髻时，叫我做了这个钗，给了我一万钱的报酬，我不曾忘记。
English: Once upon a time, when King Huo's little daughter was about to tie her hair in a bun, she asked me to make this bun and gave me a reward of ten thousand yuan. I have never forgotten this.

古文：汝是何人？
现代文：你是什么人？
English: Who are you?

古文：从何而得？ 
现代文：从哪里弄来的？ 
English: Where did you get it?

古文：浣沙曰： 我小娘子即霍王女也。
现代文：浣纱说： 我家小娘子就是霍王的女儿，家破人散，失身于别人。
English: Haisa said, "My little daughter is the daughter of King Huo. My family is scattered and lost to others.

古文：家事破散，失身于人，夫婿昨向东都，更无消息。悒怏成疾，今欲二年。令我卖此，赂遗于人，使求音信。 
现代文：丈夫去年就到东都洛阳去了，至今再也没有音信，因而抑郁成疾。现在快到两年了，叫我卖了这件东西，换来钱好去求人打听音信。 
English: My husband went to Luoyang, the eastern capital, last year, and we haven't heard from him since, which led to depression. Now it's been almost two years, and I've been asked to sell this thing in exchange for money so that I can ask someone to find out what happened.

古文：玉工凄然下泣曰： 贵人男女，失机落节，一至于此。
现代文：老玉工伤心地流下了眼泪，说： 贵人家儿女，竟落难到这步田地！
English: The old jade worker shed tears of sorrow and said, "Children of a noble family, it is so difficult to get to this step of the field!

古文：我残年向尽，见此盛衰，不胜伤感。 
现代文：我这把年纪，余年不多，看到这兴衰景象，非常伤感！ 
English: At my age, with not many years left, it is very sad to see this rise and fall!

古文：遂引至延先公主宅，具言前事。
现代文：于是把浣纱领到了延光公主的家中，把上述情况都说了。
English: So he took Hatshepsut to the home of Princess Yeonggwang and told her all of the above.

古文：公主亦为之悲叹良久，给钱十二万焉。
现代文：公主为此事也悲伤叹息了好久，然后给了十二万钱。
English: The princess also sighed sadly for a long time, and then gave her 120,000 yuan.

古文：时生所定卢氏女在长安，生既毕于聘财，还归郑县。
现代文：当时李生所聘下的卢氏女也在长安。李生凑足了彩礼，回到了郑县。
English: At that time, the Lu woman hired by Li Sheng was also in Chang'an. Li Sheng collected the bride price and returned to Zheng County.

古文：其年腊月，又请假入城就亲，潜卜静居，不令人知。
现代文：那年腊月又请假进城到亲戚家中，然后偷偷地找了一个僻静的住处住下，不叫人知道。
English: That year, Ms. Lazy also took a leave of absence to go to a relative's home in the city, and then secretly found a secluded place to live without anyone knowing.

古文：有明经崔允明者，生之中表弟也，性甚长厚。昔岁常与生同欢于郑氏之室，杯盘笑语，曾不相间，每得生信，必诚告于玉。
现代文：有个考中明经的人叫崔允明，是李生的表弟，为人忠厚，从前经常与李生一起到郑氏家中娱乐，喝酒玩乐，说说笑笑，一点隔膜也没有。
English: There was a man named Cui Yunming, who was Li Sheng's cousin, and he was a loyal person. In the past, he often went to Zheng's home with Li Sheng to have fun, drink and have fun, talk and laugh, and there was no barrier.

古文：玉常以薪刍衣服，资给于崔，崔颇感之。
现代文：崔生每当知道了李生的消息，一定如实地告诉小玉，小玉也常把衣服，柴米送给崔生，崔生因此很感激。
English: Whenever Cui Sheng learned of Li Sheng's news, he would tell Xiao Yu the truth. Xiao Yu often gave clothes and firewood to Cui Sheng, so Cui Sheng was very grateful.

古文：生既至，崔具以诚告玉，玉恨叹曰： 天下岂有是事乎？ 
现代文：这次李生回来后，崔生又老老实实地把全部情况告诉了小玉。小玉怨恨叹息说 天下怎么会有这样的事呢？ 
English: After Li Sheng returned this time, Cui Sheng again honestly told Xiao Yu the whole situation. Xiao Yu grudgingly sighed and said, "How could such a thing happen in the world?"

古文：遍请亲朋，多方召致，生自以愆期负约，又知玉疾候沉绵，惭耻忍割，终不肯往。
现代文：于是求了很多亲戚朋友，用各种办法去请李生。李生自己觉得误了日期违背了誓言，又得知小玉病得很厉害，很为自己的狠心抛弃而感到惭愧羞耻，因此始终不肯去。
English: So he asked a lot of relatives and friends to use various methods to invite Li Sheng. Li Sheng himself felt that he had missed the date and violated his oath, and learned that Xiao Yu was very ill. He was very ashamed of his cruel abandonment, so he always refused to go.

古文：晨出暮归，欲以回避。
现代文：早晨出去，晚上回来，想尽办法躲避。
English: Go out in the morning, come back in the evening, try to avoid it.

古文：玉日夜涕泣，都忘寝食，期一相见，竟无因由。
现代文：小玉日夜哭泣，寝食全废，希望见上一面，终无因由。
English: Xiao Yu cried day and night, her food and sleep were all wasted, she hoped to see the other side, but in the end there was no reason.

古文：冤愤益深，委顿床枕。
现代文：由于怨恨气愤加深，因而病得更厉害，卧床不起了。
English: As his resentment and anger deepened, he became even more ill and was bedridden.

古文：自是长安中稍有知者，风流之士，共感玉之多情；豪侠之伦，皆怒生之薄行。
现代文：从这时起，长安城里渐渐有人知道了这件事。风流的人，都被小玉的多情所感动；豪侠之辈都对李生的薄情行为感到气愤。
English: Since then, more and more people in Chang'an City have come to know about this matter. People of the upper class have all been moved by Xiao Yuping's amorous behavior; members of the heroic generation have all been angered by Li Sheng's amorous behavior.

古文：时已三月，人多春游，生与同辈五六人诣崇敬寺玩牡丹花，步于西廊，递吟诗句。
现代文：当时已是三月份，人们大都去春游，李生与同伙五六个人也到崇敬寺去玩赏牡丹花，在西廊上漫步，唱和诗句。
English: At that time, it was already March, and people mostly went on spring tours. Li Sheng and his five or six companions also went to Chongye Temple to enjoy the peony flowers, stroll on the west corridor, and sing and recite poetry.

古文：有京兆韦夏卿者，生之密友，时亦同行，谓生曰： 风光甚丽，草木荣华。
现代文：有位京城的韦夏卿，是李生亲密的朋友，当时也一起散步，对李生说： 风光这样美丽，草木如此欣欣向荣，然而霍小玉的命运是多么可怜，她只能含冤于空房。
English: There is a Beijing Wei Xiaqing, a close friend of Li Sheng, who was also walking together at that time, and said to Li Sheng: The scenery is so beautiful, the plants are so thriving, but the fate of Huo Xiaotang is so pitiful, she can only hold a grudge against the vacant room.

古文：伤哉郑卿，衔冤空室，足下终能弃置，实是忍人。
现代文：您这样抛弃了她，实在是太无情了！男儿的心，不应该这样，您应该为这事好好想一想。 
English: It's heartless of you to abandon her like this! Man, you should think about it.

古文：丈夫之心，不宜如此，足下宜为思之。 
现代文：正在叹息责备的时候，忽然来了一位豪侠的壮士。
English: While he was sighing and reproaching, suddenly a valiant warrior appeared.

古文：叹让之际，忽有一豪士，衣轻黄纻衫，挟朱弹，丰神隽美，衣服轻华，唯有一剪头胡雏从后，潜行而听之，俄而前揖生曰： 公非李十郎者乎？
现代文：只见他穿着淡黄的紵麻衫，腋下夹着一只红色弹弓，神采焕发，容颜俊美，穿的衣服轻软华丽，带着一个剪去头发的胡人小孩。这人悄悄地走着，听大家谈话。不久这人走上前来向李生作了一揖，说： 您不是李十郎吗？
English: He was wearing a pale yellow nettle shirt, with a red slingshot under his arm. He was radiant, with a beautiful face. The clothes he wore were soft and gorgeous, and he was carrying a bearded child who had cut off his hair. The man walked quietly, listening to everyone's conversation. Soon, the man came up and made a gesture to Li Sheng, saying: "Aren't you Li Juro?"

古文：某族本山东，姻连外戚，虽乏文藻，心尝乐贤。
现代文：我家在山东，和皇上家的外亲连上了姻亲关系。
English: My family is in Shandong, and I am related to the Emperor's family by marriage.

古文：仰公声华，常思觏止，今日幸会，得睹清扬。
现代文：我虽然缺乏文采，却喜欢和文人雅士结交，一直仰慕您的声望文采，渴望能见到你。今日有幸相会，得以亲眼见到您的风采。
English: Although I lack literary talent, I like to make friends with literati and aristocrats. I have always admired your reputation for literary talent and longed to meet you. Today, I have the honor of meeting you and seeing your style with my own eyes.

古文：某之敝居，去此不远，亦有声乐，足以娱情。
现代文：我的住所，离此不远，也有歌舞音乐，足以使您心情高兴。
English: My house, not far from here, also has song and dance music, enough to make you happy.

古文：妖姬八九人，骏马十数匹，唯公所欲。但愿一过。 
现代文：还有八九个漂亮女子，十几匹骏马，任凭你选择，只希望你能赏光去一趟。 
English: There are also eighty-nine beautiful women and more than a dozen beautiful horses. You are free to choose, I just hope you can take a trip.

古文：生之侪辈，共聆斯语，更相叹美。
现代文：李生于是与壮士骑着马一块走了。
English: Li Sheng then rode away with the strong man.

古文：因与豪士策马同行，疾转数坊，遂至胜业。生以近郑之所止，意不欲过。便托事故，欲回马首。
现代文：他们很快转过几条街，就到了胜业坊。李生因为觉得靠近郑氏住的地方，不想经过，就推托有事，想调转马头。
English: They quickly went through several streets and arrived at Shengyefang. Because Li Sheng felt that he was close to the place where Zheng lived and did not want to pass by, he pretended that he had something to do and wanted to change horses.

古文：豪士曰： 敝居咫尺，忍相弃乎？ 
现代文：壮士说： 离我的住处只有几尺了，你忍心丢下我吗？ 
English: The strong man said, "I am only a few feet away from my home, can you bear to leave me?

古文：乃挽挟其马，牵引而行，迁延之间，已及郑曲。
现代文：就拉着李生的马，牵着马走。推让之间，已到了小玉住的巷口。
English: He pulled Li Sheng's horse and led the horse away. Between pushing and pulling, he reached the alleyway where Xiao Yu lived.

古文：生神情恍惚，鞭马欲回。
现代文：李生神情显得十分慌乱，用鞭子抽马想回去。
English: Li Sheng looked very flustered and wanted to go back with a whip.

古文：豪士遽命奴仆数人，抱持而进，疾走推入车门，便令锁却。报云： 李十郎至也。 
现代文：那壮士急忙叫来几个仆人挟持着李生往前走，迅速地把他推进小玉家的大门，马上叫人锁上门，并高声喊道： 李十郎到了！ 
English: The strong man hurriedly called several servants to carry Li Sheng forward, quickly pushed him into the door of Xiaotama's house, immediately asked someone to lock the door, and shouted loudly: Li Juro has arrived!

古文：一家惊喜，声闻于外。
现代文：小玉一家人又惊又喜的声音，在门外都能听到。
English: The sounds of surprise and joy from Kodama's family could be heard outside the door.

古文：先此一夕，玉梦黄衫丈夫抱生来，至席，使玉脱鞋。
现代文：在此之前的一个晚上，小玉梦见一个黄衫男子抱着李生来了，放到了床上，让小玉脱鞋。
English: One night before this, Xiao Yu dreamed that a man in a yellow shirt came to hold Li Sheng, put him on the bed, and asked Xiao Yu to take off his shoes.

古文：惊寤而告母，因自解曰： 鞋者谐也，夫妇再合。脱者解也，既合而解，亦当永诀。
现代文：惊醒后告诉了母亲。于是自己解释说： 鞋，就是 谐 的意思，意味着夫妻再相见；脱就是 解 ，意思是相见后就分开，也就该永远分别了。
English: After waking up, she told her mother. So she explained: Shoes, which means harmony, means that the husband and wife will meet again; off is the solution, which means that they will be separated after meeting, and they should be separated forever.

古文：由此征之，必遂相见，相见之后，当死矣。 
现代文：由此推求，终会相见，相见之后，就会死了 。
English: From this supposition, they will eventually meet, and after meeting, they will die.

古文：凌晨，请母妆梳。
现代文：到了早晨，小玉就请母亲给自己梳妆。
English: In the morning, Xiao Yuping asked her mother to do her makeup.

古文：母以其久病，心意惑乱，不甚信之。
现代文：母亲认为她久病，心意迷乱，不大相信，勉强为她梳妆打扮。
English: Her mother thought she had been ill for a long time, was bewildered, did not believe her, and reluctantly dressed her up.

古文：黾勉之间。
现代文：梳妆才完，李生果然来了。
English: Only after putting on make-up, Li Sheng actually came.

古文：强为妆梳。妆梳才毕，而生果至。玉沉绵日久，转侧须人，忽闻生来，欻然自起，更衣而出，恍若有神。
现代文：小玉久病不愈，平日行动都得人帮着，听到李生来了，猛然自己站起来，换上衣服，走了出来，好像有神在帮助。
English: Little Tamaku had been ill for a long time, and needed help with her daily activities. When she heard Li Sheng was coming, she suddenly stood up, put on her clothes, and walked out, as if God was helping her.

古文：遂与生相见，含怒凝视，不复有言。
现代文：小玉看见李生后，怒目注视，不再说话。
English: When Xiao Yu saw Li Sheng, she glared at him angrily and stopped talking.

古文：羸质娇姿。如不胜致，时复掩袂，返顾李生。
现代文：瘦弱的体质，娇柔的身姿，软绵无力，好像不能经风的样子，几次以袖掩面，回看李生。
English: Thin and weak physique, delicate figure, limp and weak, as if unable to withstand the wind, several times hiding his face with his sleeves, looking back at Li Sheng.

古文：感物伤人，坐皆唏嘘。
现代文：感物伤心，坐中的人都呜咽起来。
English: Feeling sad, everyone in the audience began to sob.

古文：顷之，有酒馔数十盘，自外而来，一座惊视。遽问其故，悉是豪士之所致也。
现代文：过了一会儿，忽然有几十盘酒饭，从外面拿了进来，满座的人都惊讶地看着，急问怎么回事，原来都是那个壮士派人送来的。
English: After a while, suddenly dozens of plates of rice and wine were brought in from outside, and everyone in the auditorium looked at them in surprise and asked what was going on. It turned out that the strong man had sent someone to bring them.

古文：因遂陈设，相就而坐。
现代文：酒宴摆好以后，大家互相挨着坐下。
English: After the wine banquet was set up, everyone sat down next to each other.

古文：玉乃侧身转面，斜视生良久，遂举杯酒酬地曰： 我为女子，薄命如斯；君是丈夫，负心若此。
现代文：小玉侧身转过脸斜视了李生好久，先举起一杯酒浇到地上，说： 我作为一个女子，如此薄命；你是男儿，竟这样负心！
English: Xiao Yu turned sideways and squinted at Li Sheng for a long time. First, she held up a glass of wine and poured it on the ground, saying: I, as a woman, am so weak; you, as a man, are so negative!

古文：韶颜稚齿，饮恨而终。
现代文：我年纪轻轻，就含恨而死。
English: I died young and full of hate.

古文：慈母在堂，不能供养。绮罗弦管，从此永休。
现代文：慈母在堂，不能供养，人生的种种享受从此永远告终。
English: Mother in the hall, unable to support, all kinds of enjoyment of life from now on forever ended.

古文：征痛黄泉，皆君所致。
现代文：我带着痛苦葬身黄泉，这一切都是你造成的。
English: I went to hell in pain, and it was all because of you.

古文：李君李君，今当永诀，我死之后，必为厉鬼，使君妻妾，终日不安。 
现代文：李君李君，今天该永远分别了！我死之后，必为恶鬼，使您的妻妾终日不安。 
English: Li Jun Li Jun, today is the day we should part forever! After my death, I will surely become an evil spirit, making your wife and concubine uneasy all day long.

古文：乃引左手握生臂，掷杯于地，长恸号哭数声而绝。
现代文：于是伸出左手握住李生的胳膊，把酒杯丢到了地上，放声痛哭了几声就断了气。
English: So he stretched out his left hand and grasped Li Sheng's arm, threw the wine glass to the ground, and burst into tears.

古文：母乃举尸置于生怀，令唤之，遂不复苏矣。
现代文：小玉的母亲抱起尸体放在李生的怀中，让他呼唤，但是终于没苏醒过来。
English: Xiao Yuping's mother picked up the body and placed it in Li Sheng's arms. She asked him to call her, but he did not wake up.

古文：生为之缟素，旦夕哭泣甚哀。
现代文：李生为她带孝，早晨晚上都哭得很伤心。
English: Li Sheng took care of her and cried bitterly in the morning and evening.

古文：将葬之夕，生忽见玉繐帷之中，容貌妍丽，宛若平生。
现代文：将要埋葬的那天晚上，李生忽然看见灵帐中的小玉，容貌非常美丽，仿佛像生前那样。
English: On the evening of the day he was to be buried, Li Sheng suddenly saw a small bead in the reliquary. It looked very beautiful, as if it had been there when he was alive.

古文：着石榴裙，紫袔裆，红绿帔子，斜身倚帷，手引绣带，顾谓生曰： 愧君相送，尚有余情。幽冥之中，能不感叹？ 
现代文：穿着石榴裙，紫色长袍，红绿色披肩，斜着身子靠着帏帐，手拽着绣带，看着李生对他说： 你来送我，我有点惭愧，看来你对我还有些情意，在阴曹地府我能没有感慨吗？ 
English: Wearing a pomegranate skirt, purple robe, red and green shawl, leaning his body against the curtain, pulling the embroidered ribbon with his hand, watching Li Sheng said to him: You came to see me off, I'm a little ashamed, it seems you still have some affection for me, can I not have any emotion in the hell of hell?

古文：言毕，遂不复见。
现代文：说完就再也看不见了。
English: After that, I couldn't see anymore.

古文：明日，葬于长安御宿原，生至墓所，尽哀而返。
现代文：第二天，人们把小玉埋葬在长安御宿原。李生到了墓地，尽情地哭了一场才回来。
English: The next day, people buried Xiao Yu in Chang'an Onsukubara. Li Sheng went to the cemetery and cried heartily before returning.

古文：后月余，就礼于卢氏。
现代文：过了一个多月，李生跟卢氏结了婚。
English: After more than a month, Li Sheng and Lu got married.

古文：伤情感物，郁郁不乐。
现代文：但他睹物伤情，常常郁郁不乐。
English: But he has seen a lot of things, and he is often depressed.

古文：夏五月，与卢氏偕行，归于郑县。
现代文：夏天五月份，李生与卢氏一起回到郑县。
English: In the summer of May, Li Sheng returned to Zheng County with Mr. Lu.

古文：至县旬日，生方与卢氏寝，忽帐外叱叱作声，生惊视之，则见一男子，年可二十余，姿状温美，藏身映幔，连招卢氏。
现代文：到县里才十天，李生刚与卢氏上床睡觉，忽听床帐外面有奇怪的声音。李生吃惊地看那发声音的地方，只见一个男子，年龄大约二十多岁，姿态温和风雅，躲藏在遮蔽的幔子中，连连向卢氏招手。
English: Only ten days after arriving in the county, Li Sheng had just gone to bed with Mr. Lu and suddenly heard a strange sound outside the bed curtain. Li Sheng was surprised to see the place where the sound was made, only to see a man, about twenty years old, with a gentle and elegant posture, hiding in the sheltered rafters, beckoning to Mr. Lu.

古文：生惶遽走起，绕幔数匝，倏然不见。
现代文：李生慌忙下床，绕着幔子找了几圈，忽然不见了。
English: Li Sheng hurriedly got out of bed, circled the dice for a few laps, and suddenly disappeared.

古文：生自此心怀疑恶，猜忌万端，夫妻之间，无聊生矣。
现代文：李生从此心中产生怀疑和厌恶，对卢氏开始了无尽无休地猜忌，夫妻之间产生了越来越深的隔阂。
English: From then on, Li Sheng became suspicious and disgusted, and began to have endless suspicions about Mr. Lu. The estrangement between husband and wife became deeper and deeper.

古文：或有亲情，曲相劝喻，生意稍解。
现代文：有的亲戚，委婉地进行了劝说解释，李生的疑心才渐渐化解。
English: Some relatives euphemistically tried to persuade and explain, but Li Sheng's suspicions gradually dissipated.

古文：后旬日，生复自外归，卢氏方鼓琴于床，忽见自门抛一斑屏钿花合子，方圆一寸余，中有轻绢，作同心结，坠于卢氏怀中。
现代文：后来过了十天，李生又从外面回来，卢氏正在床上弹琴。忽然看见从门外抛进一个杂色犀牛角雕成的嵌花盒子，方圆一寸多，当中有薄绢结成的同心结，落入卢氏怀中。
English: Ten days later, when Li Sheng returned from outside, Lu was playing the piano on the bed. Suddenly, he saw a flower-inlaid box made of multi-colored rhinoceros horn, with a circumference of more than one inch, including a thin knot of concentric knots, thrown into Lu's arms from outside the door.

古文：生开而视之，见相思子二，叩头虫一，发杀觜一，驴駨媚少许。
现代文：李生打开一看，有相思子二颗，叩头虫一个，发杀觜一个，驴驹媚少许。
English: When Li Sheng opened it, there were two lovesick children, a kowtowing insect, a hawk, and a little donkey.

古文：生当时愤怒叫吼，声如豺虎，引琴撞击其妻，诘令实告。
现代文：李生当时愤怒吼叫，声如豺狼老虎，拿起琴来就砸他妻子，质问她让她说实话。
English: Li Sheng shouted angrily at that time, sounding like a jackal tiger, picked up the piano and smashed his wife, questioning her to tell her the truth.

古文：卢氏亦终不自明。
现代文：卢氏却始终不明白是怎么回事。
English: Mr Lu still doesn't understand what happened.

古文：尔后往往暴加捶楚，备诸毒虐，竟讼于公庭而遣之。
现代文：从那以后，李生，常常凶暴地用杖或板子打他妻子，各种凶狠虐待都使用了，最后告到公堂把卢氏休了。
English: From then on, Li Sheng, often violently beating his wife with a cane or board, used all kinds of vicious abuse, and finally went to court to dismiss Lu.

古文：卢氏既出，生或侍婢媵妾之属，暂同枕席，便加妒忌，或有因而杀之者。
现代文：卢氏走了以后，李生有时同侍女小妾同睡，不久又对小妾产生了妒忌，有的竟因此被杀死。
English: After Mr. Lu left, Li Sheng sometimes slept with his concubine. Soon, he became jealous of the concubine, and some of them were killed as a result.

古文：生尝游广陵，得名姬曰营十一娘者，容态润媚，生甚悦之。
现代文：李生曾到广陵去游览，得到一位美女叫营十一娘，姿容体态丰润妩媚，李生很喜欢她。
English: Li Sheng once went to Guangling for a tour and got a beautiful woman named Ying XI daughter. She had a plump figure and charming physique. Li Sheng liked her very much.

古文：每相对坐，尝谓营曰： 我尝于某处得某姬，犯某事，我以某法杀之。 
现代文：每当二人对坐时，李生就对营说： 我曾在某处得到某个女人，她犯了什么事，我用某法杀了她。 
English: Whenever the two sat opposite each other, Li Sheng said to the camp: I once got a certain woman somewhere, she did something, I killed her with a certain method.

古文：日日陈说，欲令惧己，以肃清闺门。
现代文：他每天都说，想让营氏惧怕自己，以便肃清闺门中的不正当的事。
English: He said every day that he wanted Ying to be afraid of him in order to clean up the wrongdoings in her family.

古文：出则以浴斛覆营于床，周回封署，归必详视，然后乃开。
现代文：李生外出时，就用澡盆把营扣在床上，周围加封；回来时仔细查看，然后再打开。
English: When Li Sheng went out, he would use the bathtub to fasten the camp to the bed and seal it around; when he came back, he would check it carefully and then open it again.

古文：又畜一短剑，甚利，顾谓侍婢曰： 此信州葛溪铁，唯断作罪过头。 
现代文：李生还藏着一把短剑，很锋利，看着侍女们说： 这把剑是信州葛溪的铁制成的，单砍有罪者的脑袋。 
English: Li Sheng also hid a short sword, very sharp, and looked at the maids and said: This sword is made of iron from Shinshu Gexi, and can single-handedly cut off the heads of the guilty.

古文：大凡生所见妇人，辄加猜忌，至于三娶，率皆如初焉。
现代文：大凡李生所见过的女人，他都会加以猜忌，以至于娶妻三次，但全都跟当初的情况相同。
English: Of all the women Li Sheng had ever met, he was always suspicious of them, so much so that he married three times, but they all ended up in the same situation.

