古文：张缅弟缵绾张缅，字元长，车骑将军弘策子也。
现代文：张缅字元长，是车骑将军弘策的儿子。
English: Zhang Yanzhong, the son of the chariot and cavalry general Hong Zhao.

古文：年数岁，外祖中山刘仲德异之，尝曰： 此儿非常器，为张氏宝也。 
现代文：年龄仅几岁，外祖父中山人刘仲德便认为他很特异，曾说： 此儿不是普通的人，是张氏的贵实。 
English: When he was only a few years old, his maternal grandfather Liu Zhongde, a native of Zhongshan, thought he was very special. He once said: "This is not an ordinary person, but a member of the Zhang family."

古文：齐永元末，义师起，弘策从高祖入伐，留缅襄阳，年始十岁，每闻军有胜负，忧喜形于颜色。
现代文：齐朝永元末年，义师兴起，弘策跟从高祖入京讨伐，将张缅留在襄阳，年刚十岁，每闻军队有胜负，忧喜便表现在脸面上。
English: At the end of the first year of the reign of Emperor Yongzheng of the Qi Dynasty, Yishi arose, and Hongtao followed Gao Zu into the capital to fight, leaving Zhang Meng in Yangyang. He was just ten years old, and whenever he heard that the army had won or lost, his face would show sadness.

古文：天监元年，弘策任卫尉卿，为妖贼所害，缅痛父之酷，丧过于礼，高祖遣戒喻之。
现代文：天监元年，弘策任卫尉卿，被妖贼杀害，张缅悲痛父亲死得很惨，服丧超过常礼，直塑遣人告诫劝谕。
English: In the first year of the Tenjin era, Hongze was appointed Captain of the Imperial Guards, and was killed by a thief. Zhang Meng's grief-stricken father died a very tragic death. The mourning ceremony exceeded the usual rituals, and the sculptor sent people to admonish and advise.

古文：服阕，袭洮阳县侯，召补国子生。
现代文：服丧期满除服，承袭洮阳县侯，召补国子生。
English: At the end of the mourning period, he removed his clothes, inherited the fief of Fenyang County, and summoned his sons and sons-in-law.

古文：起家秘书郎，出为淮南太守，时年十八。
现代文：从家中征召出来任秘书郎，出任淮南太守、时年十八岁。
English: He was 18 years old when he was called from home to serve as secretary and became the governor of Huainan Province.

古文：高祖疑其年少未闲吏事，乃遣主书封取郡曹文案，见其断决允惬，甚称赏之。
现代文：趟疑虑他年少不熟悉官务，便遣主书封取郡曹的文案，见他断决妥帖，极称赏他。
English: He was not familiar with government affairs when he was young, so he sent his master's letter to obtain Gu Cao's copy. Seeing that his decision was final, he highly praised him.

古文：还除太子舍人、云麾外兵参军。
现代文：回京师授任太子舍人、云麾外兵参军。
English: Returning to Beijing, he was conferred the title of Crown Prince, and foreign soldiers from Yunnan Province joined the army.

古文：缅少勤学，自课读书，手不辍卷，尤明后汉及晋代众家。
现代文：张缅年少时勤学，自己完成规定的读书，手不辍卷，格外明了厘选及置伐众学术流派。
English: Zhang Ming was a diligent student when he was young, he completed the required reading on his own, he did not drop out of school, and he was particularly clever in selecting and felling many academic schools.

古文：客有执卷质缅者，随问便对，略无遗失。
现代文：客有执书卷求教时，随问便对答，丝毫没有遗失。
English: When a guest asked for advice, he would answer any questions, and nothing was lost.

古文：殿中郎缺，高祖谓徐勉曰： 此曹旧用文学，且居鹓行之首，宜详择其人。 
现代文：殿中郎空缺，产担对涂垫说： 这个职务旧例是任用有文才的人，而且位处朝班之首，应详选所任用的人。 
English: When there was a vacancy for a palace chamberlain, the steward said to the coiffeur: In the olden days, people with literary talent were appointed to this position, and it was at the head of the morning shift. The person appointed should be carefully selected.

古文：勉举缅充选。
现代文：推举张面入选。
English: Zhang Mian was elected.

古文：顷之，出为武陵太守，还拜太子洗马，中舍人。
现代文：不久，出任武陵太守，还京师授任太子洗马，中舍人。
English: Soon after, he was appointed the governor of Wuling and the prince of Saima.

古文：缅母刘氏，以父没家贫，葬礼有阙，遂终身不居正室，不随子入官府。
现代文：张缅的母亲刘压，因张面的父亲去世时家贫，安葬的礼仪有不周，于是终身不居正室，不跟随儿子住入官府。
English: Zhang Meng's mother, Liu Peng, was poor when Zhang Meng's father died, and the funeral etiquette was not good. Therefore, she did not live with her legal wife for life, and did not follow her son to live in the government office.

古文：缅在郡所得禄俸不敢用，乃至妻子不易衣裳，及还都，并供其母赈赡亲属，虽累载所畜，一朝随尽，缅私室常阒然如贫素者。
现代文：强面在郡所得禄俸不敢用，甚至妻子儿女不更换新衣裳，当他回到都城，全都供给母亲赈赡亲属，虽然是他多年的积蓄，一时便全被用尽，张面私室常是空无财物像贫困的平常人家。
English: When he returned to the capital, he provided everything for his mother and relatives. Although he had saved for many years, it was all used up in an instant. His spacious private room was often empty and without belongings, like an ordinary poor person's home.

古文：累迁北中郎谘议参军、宁远长史。
现代文：累经升迁任北中郎谘议参军、宁适长史。
English: After promotion, he was appointed to the post of Kitanakuro, advising on joining the army, and he had a long history.

古文：出为豫章内史。
现代文：出任豫章内史。
English: He was appointed to the post of Yuzhang Naishi.

古文：缅为政任恩惠，不设钩距，吏人化其德，亦不敢欺，故老咸云 数十年未之有也 。
现代文：张缅为政施用恩惠，不因为有怀疑而反复调查，官吏百姓被他的德行感化，也不敢有欺诈，故老都说： 数十年没有这样的人。 
English: Zhang Meng used favors for politics and did not repeatedly investigate because of suspicions. Officials and people were influenced by his virtue and did not dare to commit fraud. Therefore, the elders all said: There has been no such person for decades.

古文：大通元年，征为司徒左长史，以疾不拜，改为太子中庶子，领羽林监。
现代文：大通元年，征入任司徒左长史，因有病没有受任，改任太子中庶子，领羽林监。
English: In the first year of the Taisho era, he was conscripted to serve as Sito Sadanaga, but was not appointed due to illness, and was reassigned as the prince's middle child, the leader of the forest inspectors.

古文：俄迁御史中丞，坐收捕人与外国使斗，左降黄门郎，兼领先职，俄复为真。
现代文：不久迁任御史中丞，因收捕人与外国使者斗殴获罪，降职任黄门郎，兼领先前职务，不久改为实授。
English: He was soon transferred to the position of goshi chujo, and was found guilty of fighting with a foreign envoy. He was demoted to the position of huangmenro, which was also his previous position, but was soon changed to the position of full professor.

古文：缅居宪司，推绳无所顾望，号为劲直。高祖乃遣画工图其形于台省，以励当官。
现代文：张缅担任御史，处事按法无所畏忌踌躇，号称劲直，高祖便遣画工为他画像放在尚书治事的官署，以勉励任职官员。
English: Zhang Meng served as the imperial historian. He was fearless in doing things according to the law, and was known for his straightforwardness. Gaozhu sent an artist to place his picture in the government office of Shangshu to encourage the officials.

古文：中太通三年，迁侍中，未拜，卒，时年四十二。
现代文：中大通三年，迁任侍中，没有受任，去世，时年四十二岁。
English: In the third year of junior high school, he was transferred to the position of a chamberlain, but did not accept the position and died at the age of forty-two.

古文：诏赠侍中，加贞威将军，侯如故。
现代文：韶令追赠侍中，加贞威将军，侯爵照旧。
English: The imperial edict posthumously bestowed upon the chamberlain, General Jia Zhenwei, the marquis as before.

古文：赙钱五万，布五十匹。
现代文：赠送丧葬用钱五万，布五十匹。
English: Funeral gifts of 50,000 yuan and 50 pieces of cloth.

古文：高祖举哀。
现代文：高祖痛哭以哀悼。
English: Gao Zu wept bitterly in mourning.

古文：昭明太子亦往临哭，与缅弟缵书曰： 贤兄学业该通，莅事明敏，虽倚相之读坟典，郄縠之敦《诗》《书》，惟今望古，蔑以斯过。
现代文：昭明太子也前往哭吊，给张缅弟张缵的信说： 你哥哥学问博通，作官任事明敏，虽然倚相读三坟五典，郄壳研治《诗》、《书》，纵使从今望古，没有能超过他的。
English: Prince Zhaoming also went to Weizhang and wrote a letter to Zhang Ming's younger brother Zhang Xuan, saying: Your brother is well-versed in learning, and is an astute official. Although he read the Three Grave Scriptures and the Five Classics, and studied "Poetry" and "Books" in his shell, even though he is ancient, he has not been able to surpass him.

古文：自列宫朝，二纪将及，义惟僚属，情实亲友。
现代文：自他来到宫朝，差不多二十四年，道理上他仅是我的僚属，但情感上我们实如亲友。
English: Since he came to the Imperial Court, almost twenty-four years ago, technically he is just my colleague, but emotionally we are really like relatives and friends.

古文：文筵讲席，朝游夕宴，何曾不同兹胜赏，共此言寄。
现代文：在文筵讲席上，我们朝游夕宴，何尝不是共同快意赏会，一同用言辞相寄托。
English: At the Wenju lecture, our morning tour and evening banquet, what is not the common pleasure of appreciation, together with the words of each other.

古文：如何长谢，奄然不追！
现代文：怎么就去世了，死去不能挽回!
English: How did he die? You can't undo death!

古文：且年甫强仕，方申才力，摧苗落颖，弥可伤惋。
现代文：而且他年刚四十，正要施展才华，幼苗被摧毁，有才能的人逝去，真让人伤惋。
English: And he was in his early forties, just about to show his talent. It's heartbreaking to see seedlings destroyed and talented people pass away.

古文：念天伦素睦，一旦相失，如何可言。
现代文：想到往日像兄弟般和睦，一旦相失，怎么能够用言语来表达。
English: When I think of the brotherly harmony of the past, how can I put it into words if we lose each other?

古文：言及增哽，巉笔无次。 
现代文：说到这些，更使人哽咽，举笔写信没有伦次。 
English: Speaking of these, it is even more choking, and there is no sense in writing a letter.

古文：缅性爱坟籍，聚书至万余卷。
现代文：张缅禀性喜爱古典书籍，聚集的书多至万余卷。
English: Zhang Benying likes classic books, and has collected more than 10,000 volumes.

古文：抄《后汉》、《晋书》，众家异同，为《后汉纪》四十卷，《晋抄》三十卷。
现代文：抄录《后漠》、《晋书》众家的异同，编撰成《后汉纪》四十卷，《晋抄》三十卷。
English: He transcribed the similarities and differences between the families of "Houma" and "Jin Shu" and compiled them into 40 volumes of "Houhan Ji" and 30 volumes of "Jin Shu."

古文：又抄《江左集》，未及成。
现代文：又抄《江左集》，未得完成。
English: He also copied "Jiang Zha Shu" but did not complete it.

古文：文集五卷。
现代文：文集五卷。
English: The anthology is in five volumes.

古文：子傅嗣。
现代文：儿子名傅，承继爵位。
English: His son, Meifu, succeeded to the peerage.

古文：缵字伯绪，缅第三弟也，出后从伯弘籍。
现代文：张缵字伯绪，是张缅的三弟，过继给从伯父弘籍。
English: Zhang Xizhi Buxu, the third younger brother of Zhang Meng, was adopted by his uncle Hong Que.

古文：弘籍，高祖舅也，梁初赠廷尉卿。
现代文：弘籍是高祖的舅舅，梁朝初年追赠廷尉卿。
English: Hong Qi was Gao Zu's uncle, and the first year of the Liang Dynasty, he was posthumously awarded the title of Imperial Lieutenant.

古文：缵年十一，尚高祖第四女富阳公主，拜驸马都尉，封利亭侯，召补国子生。
现代文：张缵年十一岁，娶高祖担第四女富阳公主为妻，授任驸马都尉，封为利亭侯，召补国子生。
English: At the age of eleven, Zhang Ye married Princess Fuyang, the fourth daughter of Gao ZuTan, and was awarded the title of Lieutenant of the Horse, given the title of Prince of Liting and summoned to supplement the sons and daughters of the country.

古文：起家秘书郎，时年十七。
现代文：从家中征召出来任秘书郎，时年十七岁。
English: He was seventeen years old when he was called from home to work as a secretary.

古文：身长七尺四寸，眉目疏朗，神采爽发。
现代文：身高七尺四寸，眉目清秀，神采焕发。
English: He is seven feet four inches tall, with a clear, radiant face.

古文：高祖异之，尝曰： 张壮武云 后八叶有逮吾者 ，其此子乎？ 
现代文：高祖感到他很奇异，曾说： 退茎说 我以后八世有超过我的人 ，那人就是此子呀。 
English: Gaozu felt that he was very strange, and once said, "If I die, there will be someone who surpasses me in the eighth generation, and that person will be this child."

古文：缵好学，兄缅有书万余卷，昼夜披读，殆不辍手。
现代文：张缆好学，兄张缅藏书万余卷，昼夜披读，几乎从不停手。
English: Zhang Kan was eager to learn, while his brother Zhang Mye collected more than ten thousand volumes of books and read them day and night, almost never stopping.

古文：秘书郎有四员，宋、齐以来，为甲族起家之选，待次入补，其居职，例数十百日便迁任。
现代文：秘书郎有四人，宋朝、齐朝以来，成为世家大族起家时选择的官职，然后等待位次入补，他们任此职，按例敷十百便迁任他职。
English: There are four secretaries, and since the Song and Qi dynasties, it has become the official position chosen by the family when starting the family, and then waiting for the rank to be filled, they hold this position, and according to the example, they will be transferred to another position.

古文：缵固求不徙，欲遍观阁内图籍。
现代文：张缵坚决请求不转迁，想遍观阁内图书。
English: Zhang Jun firmly requested not to be transferred, and wanted to see all the books in the pavilion.

古文：尝执四部书目曰： 若读此毕，乃可言优仕矣。 
现代文：曾执四部书目说： 如果把这些书读完了，才可言迁任好的职务。 
English: Once, a person who was in charge of a four-volume bibliography said, "If you finish reading these books, you can be transferred to a better position."

古文：如此数载，方迁太子舍人，转洗马、中舍人，并掌管记。
现代文：如此敷年，才迁任太子舍人，转任洗马、中舍人，并掌管记。
English: It was only at the turn of the century that he was transferred to the position of the prince's steward, and then to the positions of the steward of the horse wash and the middle steward, as well as being in charge of the records.

古文：缵与琅邪王锡齐名。
现代文：张缵与琅邪人王锡齐名。
English: Zhang Ye is as famous as the evil king Xi.

古文：普通初，魏遣彭城人刘善明诣京师请和，求识缵。
现代文：普通初年，北魏遣彭城人刘善明来京师请求讲和，要求认识张缵。
English: In the first year of the Common Era, Liu Shanming, a resident of Pengcheng in the Northern Wei Dynasty, came to Beijing to ask for peace and to get to know Zhang Ye.

古文：缵时年二十三，善明见而嗟服。
现代文：张缆时年二十三岁，善明见了极为佩服。
English: Zhang Kan was 23 years old at the time, and he was very impressed by his good eyesight.

古文：累迁太尉谘议参军，尚书吏部郎，俄为长史兼侍中，时人以为早达。
现代文：张缆屡经升迁任太尉谘议参军，尚书吏部郎，不久任长兼侍中，时人认为他年少早达。
English: Zhang Kan was repeatedly promoted and appointed to the rank of lieutenant to advise him to join the army, he was also a clerk, and soon became a captain and a chamberlain. At that time, people thought that he was too young to join the army.

古文：河东裴子野曰： 张吏部在喉舌之任，已恨其晚矣。 
现代文：河东人裴子野说： 张吏部任喉舌重任，已遗憾任命晚了。 
English: Pei Zino, a person from the east of the river, said: It is regrettable that the appointment of Zhang Libu as a mouthpiece is too late.

古文：子野性旷达，自云 年出三十，不复诣人。 
现代文：子野性情豁达，自说： 年过三十岁，不再往访人。 
English: With an open-minded nature, he said to himself, "After the age of thirty, I will no longer visit people."

古文：初未与缵遇，便虚相推重，因为忘年之交。
现代文：当初没有与张缆相遇，便虚心地推重他，因而成为忘年之交。
English: At the beginning, he didn't meet Zhang Kan, so he humbly pushed him, thus becoming a long-lost friend.

古文：大通元年，出为宁远华容公长史，行琅邪、彭城二郡国事。
现代文：大通元年，出任宁远华容公长史，兼摄琅邪彭城二郡国事。
English: In the first year of Datong, he served as the chief historian of Ningyuan Huarong, and also oversaw the national affairs of the two counties in Pengcheng.

古文：二年，仍迁华容公北中郎长史、南兰陵太守，加贞威将军，行府州事。
现代文：二年，便迁任华容公北中郎长史、亩兰陵太守，加授贞威将军，行府州事。
English: Two years later, he was transferred to the position of Hua Rong Gong, Northern Middle Lord, Long History, Mu Lanling Governor, and awarded the title of General Zhenwei, and was in charge of the prefectural affairs.

古文：三年，入为度支尚书，母忧去职。
现代文：三年，入朝任度支尚书，居母亲丧离职。
English: Three years later, he was appointed to the imperial court, but resigned after the death of his mother.

古文：服阕，出为吴兴太守。
现代文：服丧期满除服，出任吴兴太守。
English: At the end of the mourning period, Wu Xing was relieved of his duties and became the new governor-general.

古文：缵治郡，省烦苛，务清静，民吏便之。
现代文：张缵治理郡政，减去烦苛的事务，为政清简，民吏均感便利。
English: Zhang Ye's governance of county government has eliminated tedious affairs, simplified politics, and made it more convenient for civil servants.

古文：大同二年，征为吏部尚书。
现代文：大同二年，征入任吏部尚书。
English: In the second year of Datong, he was conscripted into the cadre department.

古文：缵居选，其后门寒素，有一介皆见引拔，不为贵要屈意，人士翕然称之。
现代文：张缵担任铨选之官，走他后门的都是家世寒素的人，耿介的人皆被引拔，不为贵要的人改变自己的意见，士人一致称赞他。
English: Zhang Jun served as the selection officer. The people who followed him were all cold-blooded people from poor families. Geng Shu's people were all promoted. He did not change his opinion for the important people. The scholars unanimously praised him.

古文：五年，高祖手诏曰： 缵外氏英华，朝中领袖，司空以后，名冠范阳。
现代文：大同五年，高祖亲笔韶书说： 张缵是外祖父家的英华，朝廷中的领袖，司空张缅之后，他的名声在范阳为第一。
English: In the fifth year of the same year, Gao Zu wrote in his own handwriting: Zhang Ye is the Yinghua of his grandfather's family, the leader in the imperial court, after Sikuo Zhang Mye, his reputation is the first in Fanyang.

古文：可尚书仆射。 
现代文：可任他为尚书仆射。 
English: He can be left to write and shoot.

古文：初，缵与参掌何敬容意趣不协，敬容居权轴，宾客辐凑，有过诣缵者，辄距不前，曰： 吾不能对何敬容残客。 
现代文：当初，张缵与参掌何敬容的意趣不和谐，敬容担任卿相，宾客聚集，他的客人有过路拜访张缵的，他总是拒绝不让前来，说： 我不能酬对何敬容的残客。 
English: At the beginning, Zhang Ye's and He Jing Rong's interests were not in harmony. As He Jing Rong served as the prime minister, guests gathered. When his guests came to visit Zhang Ye, he always refused to let them come, saying, "I can't pay for He Jing Rong's leftover guests."

古文：及是迁，为表曰： 自出守股肱，入尸衡尺，可以仰首伸眉，论列是非者矣。
现代文：当这次迁任，他上表说： 自从出任辅佐君主的臣子，入主铨选人才之职，可以仰首伸眉，评列是非了。
English: When he was transferred to this post, he said, "Since I became a vassal of the monarch's aide-de-camp and assumed the position of selecting talent, I can raise my head, raise my eyebrows, and judge right and wrong.

古文：而寸衿所滞，近蔽耳目，深浅清浊，岂有能预。
现代文：然而为狭小的心胸所阻碍，又近蔽耳目，深与浅，清舆浊，他哪有能力过问。
English: However, hampered by his narrow mind, his eyes and ears are too close together, and he is unable to distinguish between the deep and the shallow.

古文：加以矫心饰貌，酷非所闲，不喜俗人，与之共事。 
现代文：加上他掩饰心意粉饰面目，绝非所能防止，又不喜欢极不安闲的俗人，同他共事。 
English: In addition, he conceals his intentions and whitewashes his face, which can by no means be prevented, and he does not like the extremely restless laity to work with him.

古文：此言以指敬容也。
现代文：此言是指堑容的。
English: This is said to refer to the appearance of the face.

古文：缵在职，议南郊御乘素辇，适古今之衷；又议印绶官备朝服，宜并著绶，时并施行。
现代文：张缆在职，提议南郊大祀皇帝应乘坐不雕饰的车，适合古今的意思；又提议给印绶宫制备朝服，应当都在印上系丝带，当时一并施行。
English: Zhang Kan, who was on duty, proposed that Emperor Nanjiao Daishi should ride in a car without carvings, which was suitable for the meaning of ancient and modern times; he also proposed to prepare imperial clothing for the Palace of the Great Seal, which should all be printed with ribbons, which was implemented at the same time.

古文：九年，迁宣惠将军、丹阳尹，未拜，改为使持节、都督湘、桂、东宁三州诸军事、湘州刺史。述职经途，乃作《南征赋》。
现代文：九年，迁任宣惠将军、丹阳尹，未受任，改任使持节、都督渔挂塞空三州诸军事、渔业刺史，在就职的途中，便写了《南征赋》。
English: In the ninth year, he was transferred to the post of General Xuan Hui, and Danyang Yin, before being appointed, was transferred to the post of envoy to hold the festival, the governor of the fishing industry, and the military and fishing industries of the three states were suspended. On the way to take office, he wrote "Southern Conquest."

古文：其词曰：
现代文：其词说：
English: The text says:

古文：岁次娵訾，月惟中吕，余谒帝于承明，将述职于南楚。
现代文：岁星在鲰訾，时间是四月，我觐见皇帝在承明殿，将要任职去南楚。
English: The time was April, and I saw the emperor in the Chengming Palace, about to leave for Nanchu.

古文：忽中川而反顾，怀旧乡而延伫；路漫漫以无端，情容容而莫与。
现代文：忽至中川而回望，怀念旧乡停住脚步；路漫漫没有边际，情容容无人可诉。
English: Suddenly, I looked back to the middle of the river and paused to remember the old town. The road was long and there was no edge, and there was no one to complain.

古文：乃弭节叹曰：人之寓于宇宙也，何异夫栖蜗之争战，附蚋之游禽。
现代文：于是我停车叹息道：人寄寓在宇宙中，舆蜗牛角上的两国为微小的土地而争战，与集于蚊睫的飞虫焦螟有什么不同。
English: So I stopped and sighed: What is the difference between humans living in space, and the two countries on Cape Horn fighting over a tiny piece of land, and the flying insects that gather in the eyelashes of mosquitoes?

古文：而盈虚倚伏，俯仰浮沉，矜荣华于尺影，总万虑于寸阴。
现代文：而且盈与虚是相互依附的，俯舆仰是有浮沉的，可以在短暂的时光裹夸耀荣华，也会在短暂的时光裹聚集万种忧虑。
English: Moreover, ying and yang are mutually dependent, and there are ups and downs in the ups and downs. You can boast of glory in a short time, and you can also gather all kinds of worries in a short time.

古文：彼忘机于粹日，乃圣达之明箴。
现代文：在纯净的日子裹你忘掉机谋，这是圣达的教训。
English: On a pure day, you forget the stratagem. This is the teaching of the saints.

古文：妙品物于贞观，曾何足而系心。
现代文：在身兼澄清天下、恢宏正道之职时，品赏奇妙的万物，还有什么事使我系心。
English: What else is there for me to think about when I'm fulfilling my duties of clarifying the world and magnifying the righteous path, and appreciating the wonder of all things?

古文：抚余躬之末迹，属兴王之盛世；蒙三栾之休宠，荷通家之渥惠。
现代文：回想我那渺小的业绩，正成就在兴王的盛世；蒙受到三乐的恩宠，承受到帝姻的厚恩。
English: Looking back on my paltry achievements, I am now living in the golden age of King Heung-Won; I have received the grace of the Three Graces and the benevolence of the imperial marriage.

古文：登石渠之三阁，典校文乎六艺。
现代文：登上石渠藏书三合，负责考校儒家六艺。
English: He was responsible for the examination of the six arts of Confucianism.

古文：振长缨于承华，眷储皇之上睿。
现代文：在任职承华殿时，爱重太子的通达明智。
English: When he was in office at the Chenghua Palace, Prince Aizhong of Tongda was wise.

古文：居衔觞而接席，出方舟以同济。
现代文：平居时衔杯饮酒接席而坐，出则两船齐头并进。
English: When they live together, they drink and sit together, but when they go out, the two boats go hand in hand.

古文：彼华坊与禁苑，常宵盘而昼憩。
现代文：那华丽的官署与园囿，常在夜晚游乐白日休息。
English: The ornate government offices and gardens are often enjoyed at night and rested during the day.

古文：思德音其在耳，若清尘之未逝。
现代文：思念他的清音犹在耳旁，好像他车后扬起的灰尘没有消失。
English: The clear sound of missing him is still in my ears, as if the dust raised by his car has not disappeared.

古文：经二纪以及兹，悲明离之永翳。
现代文：经过二十四个岁月到如今，我悲伤与皇太子的永久分离。
English: Twenty-four years later, I am saddened by the permanent separation from the crown prince.

古文：惟平生之褊能，实有志于栖息。
现代文：衹因为平生的褊能，实有引退的志向。
English: Because of his lifelong ability, he really has the ambition to retire.

古文：惭灭没之千里，谢韩哀于八极。
现代文：惭愧骏马飞奔千里之遥，在八极辞谢驾车高手韩哀。
English: Embarrassed, the horse galloped thousands of miles away, leaving the driving expert Han Ai at the eight pole.

古文：如蓑裘之代用，譬轮辕之曲直。
现代文：如同蓑衣舆裘衣的交替使用，好比车轮舆车辕各有曲直。
English: Like the alternating use of clothes, it is like the wheels of a car, each with its own curve.

古文：愧周任之清规，谅无取于陈力。
现代文：有愧于周任制定的清规，自量我没有可贡献的才能。
English: I am unworthy of the clear regulations formulated by Zhou Ren, and I have no talent to contribute.

古文：逢濯缨之嘉运，遇井汲之明时。
现代文：遇到了清明之世的好运，碰到了没用人才的时代。
English: Encountered the good luck of the age of clarity, encountered the era of useless talent.

古文：怀君恩而未答，顾灵琐而依迟。
现代文：思念君恩而未报答，回枧宫阁依依不舍。
English: He missed his benefactor and did not return the favor. He reluctantly returned to the Imperial Palace.

古文：总端揆以居副，长庶僚而称师。犹深泉之短绠，若高墉而无基。
现代文：掌管尚书省担任副职，位列众官之首而称作师友，这好比用短绳汲取深深的泉水，像高的城墙没有好的根基。
English: To be in charge of Shangshu Province as a deputy, to be at the head of all officials and to be called a mentor, is like using a short rope to draw deep spring water, like a high city wall without a good foundation.

古文：伊吾人之罪薄，岂斯满之能持。
现代文：我这个人的过失就是浅薄，像这样的荣誉难道能持久。
English: I'm a person whose faults are shallow, so how can an honor like this last?

古文：奉皇命以奏举，方驱传于衡疑。
现代文：奉皇命被奏举，正要驱驿马去衡疑。
English: He was summoned by order of the emperor and was about to drive his horse to investigate.

古文：遵夕宿以言迈，戒晨装而永辞。
现代文：遵昨夜的叮嘱开始远行，准备晨装而永辞。
English: Following last night's exhortation, we started our journey, prepared our morning attire and left for good.

古文：行摇摇于南逝，心眷眷而西悲。
现代文：行程遥远向南离去，心中恋恋不舍而面西悲伤。
English: The journey is far away to the south, the heart is in love and the face is sad.

古文：尔乃横济牵牛，傍瞻雉库；前观隐脉，却视云布。
现代文：横渡牵牛星，傍瞻雉门舆库门；前观隐脉，回视云布。
English: The Cowherd Star is seen in the distance, the Gate of Public Library is seen in the distance; the Hidden Vein is seen in the foreground, and the Cloud Cloth is seen in the background.

古文：追晋氏之启戎，覆中州之鼎祚。鞠三川于茂草，沾两京于朝露。
现代文：追忆司马炎发起的战争，颠覆了中原的王朝。 三川沃野衰败荒芜，两京之地朝不保夕。
English: Recall the war initiated by Sima Yan, which overthrew the dynasty of the Central Plains. Mikawa-Wono fell into decay and desolation, and the land of the two capitals was insecure day and night.

古文：故黄旗紫盖，运在震方；金陵之兆，允符厥祥。
现代文：因此黄色旗紫色伞盖，皇帝出现的运数在东方；而在金陵出现的征兆，是完全符合这个瑞祥。
English: Therefore, the yellow flag, the purple umbrella cover, the auspicious number of the emperor's appearance in the East, and the signs appearing in Jinling are all in line with this auspicious cycle.

古文：及归命之衔璧，爰献玺于武王；启中兴之英主，宣十世而重光。
现代文：等到归命侯孙皓战败投降，把皇帝的玉玺献给晋武帝；开创中兴的英主，传十代而辉光相承。
English: When he was ordered to surrender, he presented the Emperor's Jade Scepter to Emperor Jinwu. The founder of ZTE has been passed down for ten generations.

古文：观其内招人望，外攘干纪；草创江南，缔构基址。
现代文：观他在内招致众人的仰望，在外铲除不法之徒；在江南创始建国，缔造根基。
English: He has attracted the admiration of the people at home, eradicated the wrongdoers outside, and founded and built a foundation in the south of the Yangtze River.

古文：岂徒能布其德，主晋有祀，《云汉》作诗，《斯干》见美而已哉！
现代文：难道衹是能布化他的德行，主持晋朝的祭祀，像周宣王那样作《云汉》诗，咏《斯干》诗被称颂而已呀!
English: Could it be that he was able to embellish his virtue, preside over the sacrificial rites of the Jin Dynasty, and compose the "Yunhan" poem like King Zhou Xuan, while the "Skan" poem was praised?

古文：乃得正朔相承，于兹四代；多历年所，二百余载。
现代文：他终于能使帝位在金陵相继承，到如今有柬置、塞、查、凿四个朝代，经过了许多年，约计二百多载。
English: He was finally able to succeed to the throne in Jinling phase, and now there are four dynasties of Khmer placed, blocked, investigated and chiseled, after many years, about more than two hundred years.

古文：割疆埸于华戎，拯生灵于宇内；不被发而左衽，翙明德其是赉。
现代文：分割华夏舆夷戎的边界，在天下拯救了人民；使他们不再受外族的侵扰，这是他的美德所赐予的。
English: His virtue gave him the power to divide the borders of China and Japan and save the people of the world from foreign invasion.

古文：次临沧之层巘，寻叔宝之旧埏；蕴珠玉之余润，昭罗绮之遗妍。
现代文：来到面临沧水的重叠山峰，寻找卫蚧的旧墓；蕴藏珠玉般容貌的余润，显著华美罗绮的遣妍。
English: Came to the overlapping peaks facing the vicissitudes of time, looking for the old tomb of Wei Zheng; containing the pearl-like appearance of Yu Run, the remarkable beauty of Luo Zheng.

古文：怀若人之远理，岂喜愠其能迁。
现代文：怀念此人信奉的深远道理，难道能随喜怒而改变面容。
English: Can one change one's countenance according to one's joy or anger, remembering the far-reaching principles this man espoused?

古文：虽魂埋于百世，犹映澈于九泉。
现代文：虽然他的灵魂已埋没百年，但他的光彩还照耀在九泉之下。
English: Although his soul has been buried for a hundred years, his brilliance still shines beneath the surface.

古文：经法王之梵宇，睹因时之或跃；从四海之宅心，故取乱而诛虐。
现代文：经过法王的庙寺，目睹顺应时代的喜悦；因为能顺从天下人的心愿，因此能征服动乱惩治暴虐。
English: Passing through His Holiness's temples, I witnessed the joy of conforming to the times; because we can obey the wishes of the people of the world, we can conquer turmoil and punish tyranny.

古文：在苍精之将季，剪洪柯以销落；既观蝎而逞刑，又施兽而为谑。
现代文：在百姓的精诚到了末期，剪除大的枝干使它自行衰落；既观看到了树中的蠹虫而肆用刑法，又陈兽尸而取乐。
English: At the end of the people's sincerity, the cutting of large branches and trunks caused it to decline on its own; not only did they see the maggots in the tree and use criminal law, but they also made fun of the dead bodies of animals.

古文：候高熢以巧笑，俟长星而欢噱。
现代文：等侯边防的烽火而展现笑容，待彗星出现而欢乐开怀。
English: Wait for the bonfire of the border guards to show a smile, and wait for the comet to appear and be happy.

古文：何惵惵之黔首，思假命其无托。
现代文：百姓为何恐惧，是因为想生存而没有依托。
English: The reason why the people are afraid is because they want to survive and have no support.

古文：信人欲而天从，爰物睹而圣作。
现代文：确实是人的欲望由天操纵，于是万物看见圣人兴作。
English: It is true that man's desires are manipulated by heaven, so all things see the saint's work.

古文：我皇帝膺箓受图，聪明神武，乘衅而运，席卷三楚。
现代文：我朝皇帝得受图录应运而兴，聪明神武，趁机遇而运筹，席卷了三楚。
English: The emperor of my dynasty was inspired by the picture book, clever and powerful, took advantage of the opportunity to make plans, and swept the three Chu.

古文：师克在和，仁义必取；形犹积决，应若飚举。
现代文：军队取胜在于和，仁义之师定能成功；形势犹如堤防的崩溃，来势急速像刮起的暴风。
English: The army's victory lies in harmony, and the teacher of benevolence and righteousness can certainly succeed; the situation is like the collapse of the dike, and the situation is as rapid as the storm.

古文：于是殪桑林之封豨，缴青丘之大风，戢干戈以耀德，肆《时夏》而成功。
现代文：于是杀死羹麸的大猪，捕射童旦的惊鸟；收起兵器以耀德，大奏《时夏》庆祝成功。
English: So he killed the giant pig of the yakitori and shot the frightened bird of the child; he put away his weapons and played "Summertime" to celebrate his success.

古文：放流声于郑、卫，屏艳质于倾宫；配轩皇以迈迹，岂商、周之比隆。
现代文：放逐郑国、卫国淫荡之音，摒绝美女放出皇宫；匹配黄帝的开创事业，岂止舆商、周的兴盛相并论。
English: Zheng Guo and Wei Guo banished the sounds of lewdness, and refused to let beautiful women out of the imperial palace; matching the pioneering cause of the Yellow Emperor, not only the prosperity of public merchants and Zhou were discussed.

古文：化致长平，于兹四纪；六夷膜拜，八蛮同轨。
现代文：带来天下太平，至今四十多年；六夷服拜称臣，八蛮与中原同轨。
English: It has brought peace to the world for more than forty years; the Liugi have served and worshiped the emperor, and the Hachiman have been on the same track as the Central Plains.

古文：教穆于上庠，冤申于大理；显三光之照烛，降五灵之休祉。
现代文：在太学教导敦厚和睦，在大理寺冤屈得以昭雪；颢扬了日月五星之光照耀，降下了麟凤龙龟白虎遣五灵的福运。
English: He taught harmony and harmony in Taixue, and cleared up grievances in Dali Temple; he made the light of the sun, moon and five stars shine, and brought down the good fortune of the unicorn, the phoenix, the dragon, the turtle and the white tiger.

古文：谅殊功于百王，固无得而称矣。
现代文：相信其功劳不同于历代帝王，本来就没有恰当的辞语来称颂。
English: I believe that, unlike the emperors of previous generations, there is no proper word to praise his achievements.

古文：溯金牛之迅渚，睹灵山之雄壮，实江南之丘墟，平云霄而竦状。
现代文：顺着金牛渚的急流，看到雄壮的灵山，确实是江南的一座大山，上接云霄而高耸。
English: Following the rapids of the Taurus Crest and seeing the majestic Lingshan, it is indeed a large mountain in the south of the Yangtze River, towering above the clouds.

古文：标素岭乎青壁，葺赪文于翠嶂；跳巨石以惊湍，批冲岩而骇浪。
现代文：青壁上耸立着白色的山岭，翠山上累积红色的条纹；急流冲荡着矗立的巨石，骇浪撞击向前突出的山崖。
English: White mountains tower on the blue wall, red stripes accumulate on the green mountains; rapids rush against standing boulders, and rogue waves crash against protruding cliffs.

古文：铲千寻之峭岸，巘万流之大壑；隐日月以蔽亏，抟风烟而回薄。
现代文：冲刷千丈高的峭岸，汇成众水相流的大壑；掩蔽了日月暗淡无光，聚集的风烟来回搏击。
English: Scouring the cliff of a thousand heights, merging into a large raft of water phase flow; covering the sun and moon dim and dull, the gathered wind and smoke fight back and forth.

古文：崖映川而晃朗，水腾光而倏烁；积霜霰之往还，鼓波涛之前却。
现代文：山崖映着水光而明亮，水中跳腾着阳光而闪烁；积聚的雪珠飘去飘回，鼓动的波涛前进又后却。
English: The mountain cliffs reflect the light and brightness of the water, and the sun shines brightly in the water; the accumulated snowflakes float back and forth, and the agitated waves advance and retreat.

古文：下流沫以洊险，上岑崟而将落；闻知命之是虞，故违风而靡托。
现代文：下面的流沫再次逞险，上面的高山像要坠落；听说知天命的为之忧虑，所以把避开风势作为依托。
English: The foam below is again taking risks, the mountain above seems to be falling; I heard that those who know the fate are worried about it, so they rely on avoiding the wind.

古文：讯会骸之诡状，云怒特之来奔。
现代文：讯问遇到的奇特的尸体，说是发怒的壮牛奔此而没。
English: Interrogation encountered a strange corpse, said to be an angry bull ran here and disappeared.

古文：及渔人之垂饵，沉潜锁于洪源。
现代文：以及渔人的垂饵，沉潜锁在洪源。
English: as well as the fisherman's coveted, submerged locks at the headwaters.

古文：鉴幽涂于忠武，驰四马之高轩。
现代文：忠武侯鉴明幽途，乘坐四匹马驾驭的高盖车。
English: Chungwu Hou, traveling on a four-horse-drawn covered wagon.

古文：不语神以征怪，情存之而勿论。
现代文：不要说神灵不征引怪异，存有情理而不要评说。
English: Let it not be said that the gods do not command strange things, or that they are rational and do not judge.

古文：晒姑孰之旧朔，访遗迹兮宣武；挟仲谋之雄气，朝委裘而作辅。
现代文：光曝姑孰的旧史，探访宣武王桓温的遗迹；挟有孙权的英雄气质，朝先帝裘衣而任辅臣。
English: Light exposes the old history of Guzheng, visits the relics of King Kanwen of the Xuanwu Dynasty, and shares the heroic temperament of Sun Quan, who served as an aide to the former Emperor Qiuyi.

古文：历祖宗之明君，犹负芒于盛主；势倾河以覆岱，威回天而震宇。
现代文：经历了历代开明的君主，他就像芒刺一样扎在盛主的背上；权势能倾覆黄河毁灭泰山，威力能旋转上天震动宇宙。
English: Having experienced the enlightened monarchs of all ages, he is like a thorn in the back of the sovereign; power can overturn the Yellow River and destroy Mount Tai, and power can rotate the sky and shake the universe.

古文：虽明允之笃诚，在伊、稷而未举；矧有功而无志，岂季叶其能处。
现代文：他虽然明白地表示忠诚，这样的事情连伊尹、后稷都未曾做过；何况有功劳而无大志，怎能在王朝衰落时期存身。
English: Although he clearly expressed his loyalty, such a thing has never been done even by Yi Yin and Hou Yi; what's more, how can he survive during the decline of the dynasty if he has merit but no ambition?

古文：惧贻笑于文、景，忧象贤之覆餗；虽苞蘖以代兴，终夷宗而殄族。
现代文：他惧怕被汉朝的文、景二帝嗤笑，忧虑帝子不能效法先人的贤德而失败；虽然子孙后代更迭兴起，但最终仍使宗族遭到了夷减。
English: He was afraid of being ridiculed by the Han Dynasty's Wen and Jing II Emperors, worried that the emperor could not imitate the virtues of his predecessors and fail; although the descendants of the descendants of the descendants of the descendants of the descendants of the descendants of the descendants of the descendants of the descendants of the descendants of the descendants of the descendants of the descendants of the descendants of the descendants of the descendants of the descendants of the descendants of the descendants of the descendants of the descendants of the descendants of the descendants of the descendants of the descendants of the descendants of the descendants of the descendants of the descendants of the descendants of the descendants of the descendants of the descendants of the descendants of the descendants of the descendants of the

古文：彼儋石之赢储，尚邀之而俟福；况神明之大宝，乃暗干于天禄。
现代文：那些人仅有少量的财富，尚且依恃它等待福运的降临；何况神圣的皇帝之实，在暗中乞求天赐福禄。
English: Those people have only a small amount of wealth, but they still cling to it to wait for the arrival of good fortune; not to mention the sacred emperor's fruit, secretly begging for blessings.

古文：造扃键之候司，发传书于关尉；据蒐辕乎伊洛，守衡津于河渭。
现代文：掌握门户关锁的候司，发传书给关尉；在伊洛流域占据辗辕关，在黄河、渭河守护横渡口。
English: Master the gate keeper of the gate, send a letter to the gate keeper; occupy the gate in the Ilo basin, and guard the crossings of the Yellow River and the Min River.

古文：无矫且以招宾，阙捐繻而待贵。
现代文：没有假托的君命且以招宾，没有凭证也能待贵。
English: There is no pretense of the king's life and to invite guests, there is no evidence can also be expensive.

古文：宾祗敬于王典，怀鞠躬而屏气。
现代文：衷心地敬重王朝法度，怀着恭敬而屏气。
English: Sincerely respect the dynastic law, and hold your breath with respect.

古文：惟函谷之襟带，疑武库之精兵。
现代文：函谷关山川屏障环绕，好像是武库中的精良兵器。
English: Surrounded by the barrier of the Hakodate mountain river, it seems to be an excellent weapon in the arsenal.

古文：采风谣于往昔，闻乳虎于宁成。
现代文：采集过去民间的歌谣，闻说宁见母虎而不愿见关都尉宁成发怒。
English: Collecting folk songs from the past, they heard that it was better to see the tigress than to see Guan, and Captain Ning Cheng became angry.

古文：在当今而简易，止讥鉴其奸情；陋文仲之废职，鄙耏门之食征。
现代文：在当今简单易行，衹察鉴那奸情；鄙薄臧孙辰弃关不守，轻视形班据关门而征税。
English: In today's simple and easy-to-do, look at that treacherous situation; despise Sun Chen's abandonment of customs, despise the class according to the closed door and tax.

古文：于是近睇赭岑，遥瞻鹊岸，岛屿苍茫，风云萧散。
现代文：于是近览赭山，遥瞻鹊岸，水中岛屿旷远无边，风云悄然离散。
English: As a result, a close-up view of Lushan Mountain, a distant view of Lushan Coast, a vast island in the water, and the wind and clouds quietly dispersed.

古文：属时雨之新晴，观百川之浩涆；水泓澄以暗夕，山参差而辨旦。
现代文：适逢时雨过后的新晴，观览百川的广大辽阔；在昏暗的夜晚水清澈宁静，山参差而辨旦。
English: When the weather is fine after the rain, you can see the vast expanse of the hundred rivers; in the dark night, the water is clear and calm, and the mountains are jagged and different.

古文：忽临睨于故乡，眇江天其无畔；逆洄流而右阻，遵长薄而左贯。
现代文：忽然临视故乡，渺渺江天没有界限；面对迥旋的水流右行受阻，沿着野丛左行贯通。
English: Suddenly, I saw my hometown. The vastness of the vastness of the vastness of the vastness of the vastness of the vastness of the vastness of the vastness of the vastness of the vastness.

古文：独向风以舒情，搴芳洲其谁玩。
现代文：独自向风舒展情怀，拔取洲上的芳草舆谁赏玩。
English: Extend your feelings to the wind on your own and pick the fragrant grasses on the island for everyone to enjoy.

古文：息铜山而系缆，访叔文之灵宇；得旧名而犹存，皆攒芜而积楚。
现代文：在铜山停舟休息，寻访叔文的灵堂；得知旧名依然存在，都已荒芜草木丛生。
English: In Tongshan, we stopped the boat to rest and search for Shouwen's funeral hall. We learned that the old name still existed, but it was deserted and overgrown with grass and trees.

古文：想夫君之令问，实有声于前古；拯巴汉之废业，爰配名于邹鲁。
现代文：回想大夫美好的声名，在前古确实有名声；拯救巴漠的废业，能舆孔、孟配名。
English: Recall the doctor's beautiful reputation, in the ancients indeed famous; to save the waste industry of Bam, can be named Meng, Meng.

古文：辨山精以息讼，对祠星而寤主。
现代文：明察山精而息止诉讼，面对祠堂上空的星象使主人醒悟。
English: The lawsuit was halted after a careful inspection of the mountain, and the owner was awakened by the starry sky over the ancestral hall.

古文：每抚事以怀人，非末学其能睹。
现代文：每抚感今事以怀念古人，不是那肤浅无知的人所能见到的。
English: It is not for the shallow and ignorant to see that this is all about remembering the ancients.

古文：嘉梅根之孝女，尚乘肥于媵姬；嗟吴人之重辟，忧峻网于将贻。
现代文：称赞梅根冶铁官的孝女，胜过那些生活豪华的姬妾；慨叹吴人的重刑，忧虑将给父亲施以酷刑。
English: Praise Megan Ye, the filial daughter of an iron official, over those concubines who live in luxury; lament the heavy punishment of the Wu people, and worry that her father will be tortured.

古文：彼沈瓜而显义，指沧波而为期；此浮履以明节，赴丹沄其何疑。
现代文：她水中沉瓜而显示情义，手指水波作为约定的期限；逭熔铁炉裹漂浮的鞋子表明志节，她跳进烈焰中还有什么可疑。
English: Her melon in the water shows the meaning, the finger waves as the agreed deadline; the molten iron stove wrapped in floating shoes shows the meaning, and there is something suspicious about her jumping into the flames.

古文：信理感而情悼，实忄妻怅于余悲；空沈吟以遐想，愧邯郸之妙词。
现代文：相信事理感人让人怜惋，实在凄怅令我悲伤；空沉思而想得很远，惭愧没有邯郸淳那妙词表达。
English: I believe that the truth of the matter is touching and pitiable, and it is really sad and makes me sad; I think about it for a long time, and I am ashamed that I did not find the right words to express it.

古文：望南陵以寓目，美牙门之守志；当晋师之席卷，岂籓篱而不庇。
现代文：望南陵以观看，赞美驻守武将的守志；当晋朝军队席卷而来，难道屏障也不能庇护。
English: Look at the Nanling Mausoleum to watch and praise the morale of the generals stationed there; when the Jin Dynasty army swept in, couldn't the barrier protect them?

古文：携老弱于穷城，犹区区乎一篑。
现代文：在穷城中携带老弱，仍是区区一筐。
English: Carrying the old and weak in a poor city is still a basket case.

古文：虽挈瓶之小善，实君子之所识。
现代文：虽然是汲水瓶般的小善，实在是君子的所识见。
English: Although it is a small good like a water bottle, it is really a gentleman's insight.

古文：是谓事人之礼。
现代文：阙一句这是称作侍奉人的礼规。
English: This is called the "servant" etiquette.

古文：入雷池之长浦，想恭、岱之芳尘；临鱼官以辍膳，践寒蒲之抽筠。
现代文：进入大雷池的长水域，想起孟仁、岱的美好事迹；儿为鱼官母就停止食鱼，踏严寒为母寻笋菖蒲为之抽芽。
English: Entering the long waters of the Great Thunder Pool, I thought of the wonderful deeds of Meng Ren and Yao Yu; as a child, the fish official mother stopped eating fish, and stepped on the severe cold as a mother looking for irises to sprout.

古文：又有生为令德，没为明神。
现代文：又有人活着有美德，死后成为明神。
English: There are also people who live a virtuous life and become gods after death.

古文：或捐家事主，携手拜亲；或正身殉义，哀感市人。
现代文：或舍家奉事主人，挽着手拜见亲人；或修身为忠义殉命，使市人哀戚感动。
English: Or give up their homes to serve their masters, and hold hands to worship their relatives; or cultivate themselves to be loyal martyrs, so that the citizens are moved with sorrow.

古文：所以家称纯孝，国号能臣。
现代文：所以家裹称纯孝，国家称能臣。
English: Therefore, the family is called chunko, and the country is called nouson.

古文：扬清徽于上列，并异世而为邻。
现代文：在朝廷大臣之位播扬清操，舆不同时代的人等列相近。
English: In the position of imperial court minister, he propagated cleanliness, and people from different eras were in the same ranks.

古文：发晓渚而溯风，苦神吴之难习。
现代文：早上迎风从水边出发，苦神吴的难习。
English: In the morning, we set out from the water's edge into the wind.

古文：岸曜舟而不进，水腾沙以惊急。
现代文：岸上的太阳照耀着舟而不向前，水浪腾沙惊遏急迫。
English: The sun on the shore shines on the boat, but it does not move forward. The waves and sand are surging and rushing.

古文：天曀曀其垂阴，雨霏霏而来集；愍征夫之劳瘁，每搴帷而伫立。
现代文：天昏暗阴云低垂，雨霏霏而来集；哀怜役人的劳瘁，每每揭开帷帐久立。
English: The sky is gloomy, dark clouds hang low, raindrops come and gather; pity the toil of the officials, every time they open the curtains, they stand for a long time.

古文：由江沲之派别，望彭汇之通津，涂未中乎及绛，日已盈于浃旬。
现代文：从江沲的支流，望见彭汇的通津，行程未至一半到了绛，时间已过十多天。
English: From the tributary of the Yangtze River, I could see Tongjin in Penghui. I arrived in Handan before the trip was half over, and more than ten days had passed.

古文：于是千流共归，万岭分状；倒影悬高，浮天泻壮。
现代文：于是千流共归一处，万岭形态纷呈；倒影悬高，飘浮的云彩倾洒出雄伟景象。
English: As a result, thousands of streams come together in one place, and the shape of the mountains is varied; reflections hang high, and floating clouds spill out a majestic scene.

古文：清江洗涤，平湖夷畅；翻光转彩，出没摇漾。
现代文：清的江水好像经过洗涤，宁静的湖面平畅疏旷；阳光转幻着色彩，出没摇漾。
English: The clear water of the river seems to have been washed, the calm lake surface is smooth and sparse; the sunlight transforms the colors, and there are ripples.

古文：岷山、嶓冢，悠远寂寥；青湓、赤岸，控汐引潮。
现代文：岷山、蟠冢，悠远静寂；青湓、赤岸，控制晚潮引来早潮。
English: Lushan, Longjing, Long-distance silence; Qingcheng, Red Bank, control the evening tide to attract the morning tide.

古文：望归云之蓊蓊，扬清风之飘飘；界飞流于翠薄，耿长虹于青霄。
现代文：望浓密的归云，扬飘飘的清风；在青草丛中飞流分界，在青霄中横亘着长虹。
English: Looking at the thick clouds, the wind is blowing; in the green grass, the flying stream divides, and the rainbow stretches across the sky.

古文：若夫灌莽川涯，层潭水府，游泳之所往还，喧鸣之所攒聚。
现代文：至于灌莽川涯，多有深潭水域，鱼类游泳之所往还，喧闹的禽鸟之所攒聚。
English: As for the impetuous river, there are many deep pools of water, where fish swim, and where noisy birds gather.

古文：群飞沙涨，掩薄草渚；奇甲异鳞，雕文綷羽。
现代文：群飞沙涨，掩薄草渚；奇甲异鳞，雕文谇羽。
English: Clusters of flying sand rise, covering thin grass banks; strange scales, carved feathers.

古文：听寡鹤之偏鸣，闻孤鸿之慕侣；在客行而多思，独伤魂而忄妻楚。
现代文：听孤鹤的独鸣，闻只鸿的慕侣；在旅途中的客人多有思虑，独自伤怀凄凉痛苦。
English: Listen to the lonely crane's monotonous song, listen to the lonely crane's admirer; the guests on the journey are more thoughtful, and they are lonely and desolate.

古文：美中流之冲要，因习坎以守固。
现代文：赞美中流地的冲要，凭藉险要牢固防守。
English: Praise the rush of the midstream, rely on the danger to firmly defend.

古文：既固之而设险，又居之而务德。
现代文：既加固它又设置险要，又居之而务德。
English: It is necessary to both strengthen it and set the key points, as well as to practice virtue while living in it.

古文：南通珠崖、夜郎，西款玉津、华墨。
现代文：向南沟通珠崖、夜郎，向西款服玉津、华墨。
English: To the south are Zhuyao and Yelang, and to the west are Tamazu and Huamo.

古文：莫不内清奸宄，外弭苛慝，篱屏京师，事有均于齐德也。
现代文：无不内清奸贼，外消邪恶，护卫京师，事功也就与有德之人齐等。
English: There is no such thing as internal cleansing of traitors, external elimination of evil, guarding the capital, and the achievements are the same as those of virtuous people.

古文：眄匡岭以踌躇，想霞裳于云仞；流亘娥之逸响，发王子之清韵。
现代文：侧枧匡岭俳徊不前，想望在云端中的华丽彩衣；飘流着垣娥的奔放音声，发出王子叠的清澈韵律。
English: The side pier of the Kuangling Haiku lingers, longing to see the gorgeous colored clothes floating in the clouds; the boisterous sound of the Kaki-e floats, emitting the clear rhythm of the prince's stack.

古文：若夜光而可投，岂荣华之难摈。
现代文：像夜光实玉都可弃，难道荣华富贵还不容易抛弃。
English: Like the luminous solid jade can be discarded, is it not easy to discard the glory and wealth?

古文：羡还丹其何术，伫一丸于来信。
现代文：羡慕升仙的丹丸它有什么法术，久望信使到来得到一丸。
English: Envious of the Danmaru of the Ascended Immortals, what magic does it have? The long-awaited messenger arrives and receives a Danmaru.

古文：径遵途乎鄂渚，迹孙氏之霸基；陈利兵而蓄粟，抗十倍之锐师。
现代文：快速地按着行途到了鄂渚，追寻孙权的霸基；陈列精兵蓄储粮草，对抗曹操十倍的锐师。
English: He quickly followed the route to Hunan, in pursuit of Sun Quan's base of operations; displaying elite soldiers to stockpile grain and grass, and confronting Cao Cao's ten times sharper division.

古文：在贤才之必用，宁推诚而忍欺；图富强以法立，属贞臣而日嬉。
现代文：贤才必定任用，宁可推诚待人而忍受欺辱；图谋富强设立法规，聚会忠贞大臣日以欢娱。
English: Wise men are sure to be appointed, but it is better to be honest with others than to suffer humiliation; they try to get rich and establish laws and regulations, and gather loyal ministers to have fun.

古文：识徐基于江畔，云钓台之旧址；方战国之多虞，犹从容而宴喜。
现代文：在江畔识辨残存的遗址，说是驻兵钓台的旧址；正在交战各国多有欺诈，他仍然从容宴喜。
English: On the banks of the river, he identified the remaining ruins, which were said to be the former site of the garrison's fishing platform; the belligerent countries were mostly fraudulent, and he still indulged in feasting.

古文：钦辅吴之忠谅，叹仲谋之虚己；处君臣而并得，良致霸其有以。
现代文：钦佩整昱将军强周的忠诚，赞叹逻擅的虚心容人；各处君臣之位两相得宜，能称霸他确实是有原因的。
English: Admire the loyalty of the rectifying general Qiang Zhou, and praise the humble appearance of the logician; the positions of the monarchs and ministers are suitable for each other, and there is indeed a reason for him to be able to dominate.

古文：伊文侯之雅望，诚一代之伟人；祢观书以心服，玉比德而誉均。
现代文：他张昭的高尚人望，的确是一代的伟人；裯衡看到他的书信心悦诚服，美玉与他的德行相比声誉均等。
English: He Zhang Zhao's noble reputation, is indeed a generation of great men; Zou Heng saw his book confidence pleasing sincerity, beauty and his virtue compared to the reputation of parity.

古文：遘时雄之应运，方协义以经纶；名既逼而愈赏，言虽闻而弥亲。
现代文：有了创造时代英雄的顺应期运，才能够齐心协力出谋献策；名誉逼主而更受到主子的奖赏，议论虽有听闻对他更加亲密。
English: With the creation of the hero of the times, it is possible to make a concerted effort to come up with suggestions; the honor is forced by the master and is rewarded by the master, and the discussion is more intimate to him although there is hearsay.

古文：惜勤王于延献，俾汉京之惟新；何天命其弗与，悲盛业之未申。
现代文：惜董卓出兵立了漠献帝，使漠京有了新的生命；为什么天命不给予他，悲痛创立盛业之志没有伸展。
English: It is a pity that Dong Zhuo sent troops to set up the Emperor of the Desert, so that the desert city had a new life; why the fate of heaven did not give him, the grief of creating a prosperous career did not extend.

古文：泛芦洲以延伫，闻伍员之所济；出怀珠而免仇，归投金以答惠。
现代文：泛舟至芦洲久久停立，听说是伍子胥渡江去吴的地方；拿出怀珠躲避仇敌，归来投金江中报答洗衣女的恩惠。
English: The boat ride to Loushou stopped for a long time. It is said that Wu Ziqi crossed the river to the place of Wu. He took out his pearl necklace to avoid the enemy and returned to cast it into the Golden River to repay the favor of the washerwoman.

古文：彼无求于万钟，唯长歌而鼓世；慨斯诚之未感，乃沈躯以明誓。
现代文：渔人对高官厚禄无所求，仅衹深情地歌唱摇动船桨；感慨这样的忠诚不被理解，于是投水自尽以表明贞心。
English: The fisherman did not ask for a high-ranking official's generous reward, but only sang and rocked the boat's oars affectionately; feeling that such loyalty was not understood, he threw himself into the water to show his chastity.

古文：空负恨其何追，徒临飡而先祭；及旋师于郑国，美邀福于来裔。
现代文：空怀恨它有何补救，祇有在临餐前先行祭奠；等到从郑国胜利回军，很好的为他的后代谋到福运。
English: There is no remedy for empty hatred, but to first offer a sacrifice before the meal; and wait until he returns from Zhengguo victorious, it is good to seek good fortune for his descendants.

古文：入郢都而抵掌，壮天险之难窥；允分荆之胜略，成百代之良规。
现代文：进入郢都而抵掌，赞叹天险的难窥；称许分治楚国是高明的谋略，成了百代的良规。
English: Entering the capital of Shu, he clapped his hands and praised the impenetrability of natural hazards; praised the division and governance of Chu as a brilliant strategy, and became a good rule for hundreds of generations.

古文：贾生方于指大，应侯譬之木披。
现代文：贾谊比做指头肿大，范睢比做果多枝折。
English: The finger of Jia Yi Bi is swollen, and Fan Yao Bi is multi-branched.

古文：所以居宗振末，强本弱枝，闻古今之通制，历盛衰而不移，可不谓然与，美经国之远体也。
现代文：所以居位要振兴子孙，强固本体削弱枝杈，听说这是古今的通制，历经朝代改换而不变易，可不说正是这样吗?
English: Therefore, it is necessary to revitalize the children and grandchildren, strengthen the body and weaken the branches. I heard that this is the common system of ancient and modern times, and it has not changed after the dynasties. Is this not exactly the case?

古文：酌忠言于城郢，播终古之芳猷；忘我躬之匪阅，顾社稷而怀忧。
现代文：这是多么好的经国的长久之道呵。在郢城酌取忠言，播下了千古的好谋略；忘了自己的被人不容，顾念国家心怀忧伤。
English: What a good and long-term way to run a country. In Lucheng, he received loyal advice and planted a thousand-year-old good strategy; he forgot that he was not accepted by others, and was saddened by the country.

古文：服庄王之高义，乃征名于夏州；耻蹊田之过罚，纳申叔之嘉谋。
现代文：佩服楚庄王的高义，在陈国建立夏州成就了大名；耻于踏田夺牛的过分惩罚，采纳了申叔时的良好计谋。
English: He admired the high-mindedness of the king of Chuzhuang and achieved a great name by establishing Xiazhou in the State of Chen; he was ashamed of the excessive punishment of trampling the fields to seize cattle, and adopted the good strategy of Uncle Shen.

古文：观巫臣之献箴，鉴《周书》以明喻；何自谋其多僻，要桑中而远赴。
现代文：观看屈巫臣的献言，借鉴《周书》的明喻；为什么做事他有许多邪僻，偷娶夏姬远逃晋国。
English: Watch the dedication of Qu Wuxian, draw on the simile of "Zhou Shu"; why he has many perverse things to do, steal and marry Haji and flee to Jin.

古文：若葆申之诛丹，实匡君以成务；在两臣而优劣，居二主其并裕。
现代文：像葆申的诛减丹地美女，实在是辅佐君主成就事业；在两臣各有优劣，居二主他们都很宽弘。
English: The beauty of Dandi, like the beauty of Kushin, is really to assist the monarch's achievement. Both ministers have their own strengths and weaknesses, and they are both very broad-minded.

古文：临赤崖而慷忾，榷雄图于魏武；乘战胜以长驱，志吞吴而并楚。
现代文：面对赤壁情绪激昂，魏武帝在商讨雄图；乘在北方的战胜长驱南下，志在吞并吴国占有楚地。
English: In the face of the intense emotions of the Red Wall, Emperor Wei Wudi was discussing his plans; taking advantage of the victory in the north, he drove southward, aiming to annex Wu and occupy Chu.

古文：总八州之毅卒，期姑苏而振旅；时有便乎建瓴，事无留于萧斧。
现代文：孙权总会八州的勇敢士卒，预期在姑苏整治军旅；当时很容易形成居高临下之势，在刀斧下事无留情。
English: The brave soldiers of the Eight Prefectures of the Grandchildren's Rights Association were expected to rectify the military brigade in Gusu. At that time, it was easy to form a domineering tendency, and there was no mercy under the sword.

古文：霸孙赫其霆奋，杖迈俗之英辅；裂宇宙而三分，诚决机乎一举。
现代文：称霸的孙权怒如雷霆激发，杖打杰出超众的辅佐大臣；割裂天下而三分，的确取决于逭关键一举。
English: The domineering Sun Quan's anger is like a thunderbolt, and the vice-minister who is outstanding and superior is a stick; it is indeed a key move that divides the world into three parts.

古文：嗟玄德之矫矫，思兴复于旧京；招卧龙于当世，配管仲而称英。
现代文：叹赏刘备的勇武，在旧京想兴复汉朝；在当世招致诸葛卧龙，他匹配管仲称为英豪。
English: Appreciating Liu Bei's bravery, he wanted to revive the Han Dynasty in the old Beijing; he invited Zhuge Wolong in the contemporary world, and he was called a hero when he matched Guanzhong.

古文：收散亡之余弱，结与国而连横，延五纪乎岷汉，绍四百于炎精。
现代文：收聚散亡的老弱，结交吴国东西连横，使岷汉延伸六十年，使汉朝的历史承继共四百年。
English: He gathered together the scattered old and weak, made friends with the east and west of Wu, extended the Han Dynasty by sixty years, and made the history of the Han Dynasty last for a total of four hundred years.

古文：望巴丘以邅回，遵洞庭而敞恍，沉轻舟而不系，何灵胥之浩荡。
现代文：望巴陵山难以前行，沿着洞庭湖而感到失意，沉轻舟于水中不系揽，波涛多么浩荡。
English: It is difficult to go to the Wangbaling Mountains, along the Dongting Lake and feel frustrated, the boat is not in the water, and the waves are so huge.

古文：眺君、褊之双峰，徒临风以增想；偿瑶觞而一酌，驾彩蜺而独往。
现代文：远望君、褊两座山峰，对着风空白增怀想；酬报玉杯一饮酒，驾驭轻舟而独往。
English: Gaze at the distant horizon, climb the two peaks, and think about the wind blank; reward the jade cup with a drink, drive the light boat and go alone.

古文：尔乃南奠衡、霍，北距沮、漳；包括沅、澧，汲引潇、湘。
现代文：它南荐衡山、霍山，北距沮水、漳水；包含了沅水、澧水，汲引了潇水、湘水。
English: It recommended Hengshan and Huoshan in the south, and Deshui and Lishui in the north; it included Lishui and Lishui, and drew Xiaoshui and Xiangshui.

古文：滮々长迈，漫漫回翔；荡云沃日，吐霞含光。
现代文：长长流水，无边无际迥旋奔流；飘浮的云层冲荡着太阳，喷吐彩霞蕴含光芒。
English: Long flowing water, boundless endless rushing current; floating clouds rushing the sun, spewing color haze containing light.

古文：青碧潭屿，万顷澄澈；绮兰从风，素沙被雪。
现代文：青绿色的深潭岛屿，万顷清透明静的湖水；美丽的兰花随风，白沙被雪。
English: Deep blue-green lake islands, thousands of hectares of clear, transparent and calm lake water; beautiful orchids with the wind, white sand covered with snow.

古文：杂云霞以舒卷，间河洲而断绝；回晓仄于中川，起长飚而半灭。
现代文：夹杂在云霞裹舒卷，间隔着小岛而断绝；在中流疏导周旋从旁流过，兴起狂风而半灭。
English: It is interspersed with clouds, interspersed with islets, and cut off; in the middle of the stream, the diversion flows by, and a strong wind arises and it is half extinguished.

古文：税遗构之旧浦，瞻汨罗以陨泗；岂怀宝而迷邦，犹殷勤而一致。
现代文：停在前代留有建筑物的旧港汊，瞻望汨罗河而落泪；难道怀异才而隐居不仕，仍然殷勤而与从前一致。
English: Stopped at the old port pier with buildings left behind by the previous generation, looking out over the Jiao Luo River and shedding tears; Is it possible to live in seclusion with a sense of uniqueness, still attentive and consistent with the past.

古文：蕴芳华以襞积，非党人之所媚；合《小雅》之怨辞，兼《国风》之美志。
现代文：积聚香花折叠为衣，不是党人的所爱；会集《小雅》的怨辞，兼有《国风》的美志。
English: The accumulation of fragrant flowers folded into clothes is not loved by party members; the grievances of "Small Elegance" are combined with the beauty of "National Style."

古文：譬弹冠而振衣，犹自别于泥滓；且杀身以成义，宁露才而扬己？
现代文：譬如弹抖衣帽上的灰尘，自己仍在从泥滓中脱身；并且杀身以成就道义，宁可显露才华表现自己。
English: For example, shaking the dust on his coat and hat, he is still getting out of the mud; and killing himself to achieve morality, he would rather show his talent to express himself.

古文：悲先生之不辰，逢椒、兰之妒美；有骅骝而不驭，焉遑遑于千里。
现代文：悲哀先生生不逢时，受到子椒、司马子兰的妒美；有千里马而不驾驭，怎么在千里之遥心神不定。
English: Mr. Sadness was born at an inopportune time, and was envied by Zi Zi Chang and Sima Zilan. He had a thousand horses to ride, but couldn't control them. How could he be so restless when he was thousands of miles away?

古文：既践境以思人，弥流连其无已。
现代文：既入境而思念遣人，更加徘徊留恋不能自已。
English: As soon as I entered the country and thought about sending someone back, I couldn't help but linger.

古文：修行潦之薄荐，敢凭诚于沼沚。
现代文：在行舟中治办微薄的祭品，在沼址敢凭忠诚祭祀。
English: In the procession of the boat, they offer meager offerings, and in the swamp they dare to offer sacrifices with loyalty.

古文：谒黄陵而展敬，奠瑶席乎川湄。
现代文：谒见黄帝陵表达敬意，以圣洁的宴席在水边祭祀。
English: They visited the Yellow Emperor's Mausoleum to pay their respects and held a sacred banquet at the water's edge.

古文：具兰香以膏沐，怀椒糈而要之。
现代文：用兰香洗涤头发，怀置椒酒、好米而祈求。
English: Wash your hair with lilac incense and pray for pepper wine and good rice.

古文：延帝子于三后，降夔、龙于九疑。
现代文：延帝子于三后，在九疑降临夔、龙。
English: Emperor Yan was born on the 3rd day of the 3rd month of the 3rd year of the 3rd month of the 3rd year of the 3rd year.

古文：腾河灵之水驾，下太一之灵旗。
现代文：驾黄河神灵的水车，下塞二天神的旌旗。
English: The water chariots of the Yellow River deities are driving, and the flags of the two gods are waving.

古文：抚安歌以会儛，疏缓节而依迟。
现代文：随安逸的歌曲共同舞蹈，疏缓的节奏从容不迫。
English: They danced together to the relaxed song, the slow rhythm unhurried.

古文：日徘徊以将暮，情眇默而无辞。
现代文：太阳徘徊将要落山，情怀空寂没有言辞。
English: The sun is about to set, the mood is empty and there are no words.

古文：愠秦皇之巡幸，尤土壤以加戮；昧天道之无亲，勤望祀以祈福。
现代文：恼怒秦始皇的南巡，归咎土壤加以砍伐；逮背天道的无亲，殷勤地望祀祈求福分。
English: Enraged by Qin Shihuang's southern inspection, he blamed the soil and cut it down; he did not have any relatives who betrayed the heavenly way, and diligently visited the shrine to pray for good fortune.

古文：将人怨而神怒，故飞川而荡谷；推冥理以归愆，遂刊山而赭木。
现代文：被人怨恨使神发怒，因此川水激飞荡涤山谷；推测昏昧的事理归罪神明，于是砍伐树木使山赤裸。
English: The gods were angered by the people's hatred, so the river water was stirred up and swept through the valley; the gods were blamed for speculating about obscure matters, so the trees were cut down and the mountain was stripped bare.

古文：于是下车入部，班条理务，砥课庸薄，夕惕兢惧。
现代文：于是到任进入衙署，颁布条例治理政务，以平庸浅薄之能勉励督促交纳赋税，日夕谨慎戒惧不敢怠慢。
English: As a result, he was appointed to the Tax Bureau, promulgated regulations to govern government affairs, encouraged and urged the payment of taxes with mediocre and shallow ability, and did not dare to neglect day and night.

古文：存问长老，隐恤氓庶，奉宣皇恩，宽徭省赋。
现代文：慰问年长者，抚恤老百姓，奉命宣示皇帝的恩惠，宽免徭役减轻赋税。
English: He consoled the elderly, gave alms to the common people, was ordered to proclaim the emperor's bounty, and reduced taxes.

古文：远哉盛乎，斯邦之旧也。
现代文：远哉盛乎，这是邦国的旧制。
English: Far from flourishing, this is the old system of the state.

古文：有虞巡方以托终，夏后开图而疏决，太伯让嗣以来游，□臣祈仙而齐洁。
现代文：虞舜巡察四方死后埋在逭裹，大禹开图而疏浚河流，吴太伯礼让嗣位来此漫游，口臣祈仙而齐洁。
English: After the death of Gu Yu, the inspector of the four quarters, he was buried in a coffin, Dayu opened the map and dredged the river, Wu Taibeli let the heir come here to roam, and the courtiers prayed to the gods and were clean.

古文：固是明王之尘轨，圣贤之踪辙也。
现代文：本是明王的尘世轨辙，是圣贤哲人的踪迹。
English: Originally, it was the earthly path of King Ming, the trail of sages and philosophers.

古文：若夫屈平《怀沙》之赋，贾子游湘之篇，史迁摛文以投吊，扬雄《反骚》而沉川。
现代文：至于屈原作《怀沙》之赋，贾谊游湘水的篇章，司马迁作文章以寄托凭吊之意，扬雄作《反离骚》投入江流。
English: As for the endowment of Qu Yuan's "Wai Sha," the chapter of Jia Yi Yu Xiangshui, Sima Qian's article with the meaning of hanging, Yang Xiong's "Anti-separation" into the river flow.

古文：其风谣雅什，又是词人之所流连也。
现代文：楚地风俗歌讹典雅篇章，又是词人所爱慕留恋的。
English: The classical and elegant chapters of the Song of Chu customs and customs are loved and cherished by poets.

古文：亦有仲宁、咸德，仍世相继，父子三台，缁衣改敝。
现代文：也有仲宁、咸德，便是世代相继，父子任三公辅佐君主，朝服破旧了百姓愿为改做。
English: There are also Zhongning and Hamde, that is, generation after generation, father and son are appointed as three princes and assistants to the monarch, and the people are willing to change the dilapidated imperial robes.

古文：古初抱于烈火，刘先高而忤世，蒋公琰之弘通，桓柏绪之匡济，邓兗时之绝述，谷思恭之藻丽，实川岳之精灵，常间出而无替也。
现代文：古初在烈火中抱护父亲的灵柩，刘先高傲不随世俗，蒋琬的宏量通达，桓阶的匡时救主，邓兖时的绝妙陈述，谷思恭的华丽辞藻，实在是川岳的精灵，通常是偶尔出现没有人能代替。
English: At the beginning of the ancient times, Liu Xian held his father's coffin in the blazing fire. Liu Xian was proud and did not follow the world. Jiang Chen was magnanimous and open-minded. Kuang Hoa was the savior of Kuang Hoa. Deng Rong Shi was a brilliant statement. Gu Xikong's gorgeous words were really the spirit of Chuangyu. They usually appeared occasionally and no one could replace them.

古文：至于殊庭之客，帝乡之贤，神奔鬼化，吐吸云烟。
现代文：至于仙庭异域的来客，天帝家乡的贤人，神奔鬼化，吐吸云烟。
English: As for the guests from the foreign land of Sendai, the wise men from the hometown of the Emperor of Heaven, they are running around like ghosts and spitting clouds of smoke.

古文：玉笥登之而却老，金人植杖以尊泉，苏生骑龙而出入，处静驾鹿以周旋。
现代文：玉笥山登上会长生不老，铜人植杖尊礼山泉，苏耽骑龙而出入，陶淡驾鹿来应酬。
English: Those who climb Yulun Mountain will live forever, bronze people will plant sticks to honor the mountain spring, Su Tan will ride a dragon, and Tao Tan will drive a deer to entertain.

古文：配北烛之神女，偶南荣之偓佺。
现代文：匹配北烛仙人的神女，成双到南地的僵佺。
English: Matching the goddess of the North Candle Immortal, the storks fly in pairs to the Southland.

古文：时仿佛其遥见，亦往往而有焉。
现代文：时而仿佛遥逾看见她们，也往往有这样的情况。
English: Sometimes it seems as if they are far away from seeing them, and this is often the case.

古文：尔乃历省府庭，周行街术，山川远览，邑居近悉。
现代文：不久历观官署的厅堂，遍行街道，山川速览，民居近悉。
English: Soon, the hall of the government office, the streets, the mountains and rivers, and the residences were known.

古文：割黔中以置守，献青阳而背质，邹生所谓还舟，楚王于焉乘驲。
现代文：分出黔中之地设置郡守。奉献青阳违背盟约，这是邹阳所说还舟之地，是楚王乘驿车出兵灭庸之所。
English: The dedication of Qingyang violated the covenant, this is the place of the return of the boat, which is said to be the place where the king of Chu dispatched soldiers to destroy the yang.

古文：巡高山之累仞，褒吴文之为宰；彼非刘而八王，皆国亡而身醢。
现代文：巡视高山的万丈，赞美吴芮的任职县令；那些非刘姓而受封的八王，皆国亡而身成肉酱。
English: They inspected the height of the mountains and praised the appointment of Wu Xi as the county magistrate; those eight kings who were not surnamed Liu were all killed and turned into meat sauce.

古文：在长沙而著令，经五叶其未改；知天道之福谦，胜一时之经始。
现代文：在长沙特殊地任他为长沙王，历传五代他都没有改换；知天道的福谦，胜过一时的经始。
English: In Changsha, he was specially appointed as the King of Changsha, and it is said that he has not changed for five generations. Knowing the way of heaven is better than the beginning of a period.

古文：寻太傅之故宅，今筑室以安禅；邑无改于旧井，尚开流而冽泉。
现代文：寻找太傅贾谊的故宅，今已筑室为佛堂；对旧井邑未做改变，仍能涌出寒冽的清泉。
English: Looking for the former residence of Tai Fu Jia Yi, now the room has been built as a Buddhist temple; the old wells have not been changed, but still can gush out the cold spring.

古文：怀伊、管之政术，遇庸臣而见迁；终被知于时主，嗟汉宗之得贤。
现代文：怀有伊尹、管仲的治国本领，遇到庸臣被贬谪；最终受到时主的知遇，感叹汉王朝得到贤才。
English: He cherished the ability to govern the country of Yi Yin and Guanzhong, and was demeaned when he encountered a mediocre minister; he was eventually treated well by the ruler of the time, and he lamented that the Han Dynasty had gained a wise man.

古文：受齐君之远托，岂理谢而生全；哀怀王之不秀，遂抱恨而伤年。
现代文：受到齐君的远托，哪能辞谢为了活命；悲哀矾堡王的不成才，于是心怀遣憾损伤年华。
English: Abandoned by Qijun, he could not give up in order to survive; saddened by the failure of the Bunker King, he regretted his damaged youth.

古文：修定祀于北郭，对林野而幽蔼；庶无吐于馨香，祀琼茅而沃酹。
现代文：在北郊修定祠宇，面对的林野茂盛深远；庶无吐于馨香，祭祀用华贵的苞茅而以酒浇地。
English: In the northern suburb of Shuiding ancestral shrine, the woodland in front of it is luxuriant and far-reaching; the shepherds do not spit in the incense, and the sacrificial rites are performed with the precious yakitori and the ground is poured with wine.

古文：景十三以启国，惟君王其能大；迨炎正之中微，实斯籓而是赖。
现代文：景帝十三子立国封王，惟有这位君主后世发达；在汉王朝中期衰微之时，实际是这个藩国成为依靠。
English: Emperor Jing's thirteenth son founded the country and became the king, but only this monarch developed in later generations; when the Han Dynasty was in decline in the middle of the century, it was actually this domain that became a source of support.

古文：顾四阜之纡余，乍升高以游目；审山川之面带，将取名于衡麓。
现代文：回枧四面丘陵的曲折延伸，忽然升高以游目；审视遣一带的山川，将在衡山取得名称。
English: The meandering extension of the hills on all sides of the Yunnan River, suddenly rising to the level of the eye; examining the mountains and rivers in the Yunnan area, the name will be obtained in Hengshan.

古文：下弥漫以爽垲，上钦亏而重复；风瑟瑟以鸣松，水琤琤而响谷。
现代文：山下辽远爽垲，山上曲折亏缺而重复；大风瑟瑟使松树呜叫，水流净净使山谷作响。
English: Under the mountain, the vast expanse is lush, and the twists and turns on the mountain are short and repetitive; the wind makes the pine trees whine, and the clear water makes the valley sound.

古文：低四照于若华，竦千寻于建木。
现代文：若木之花低临四照，建木高耸千丈。
English: The blossoms of the young trees hang low in the sun, while the trees tower above them.

古文：冀嚣尘之可屏，登岩阿而寤宿。
现代文：希望能够摒弃纷乱的尘世，登上岩阿山领悟归宿。
English: I hope to be able to abandon the chaotic earthly world and climb the rock of Mount Asama to return home.

古文：舍域中之常恋，慕游仙之灵族。
现代文：舍去对人世间的常恋。追慕游仙的灵族。
English: Give up the eternal love for the human world. Pursue the spiritual family of wandering immortals.

古文：是时凉风暮节，万实西成，华池迥远，飞阁凄明。
现代文：是时凉风到了重阳节，万物秋季成熟，昆仑山的仙池相距遥远，凌空的高阁凄凉寒冷。
English: When the cool wind arrives at the Double Ninth Festival, everything is ripe for autumn, the fairy ponds of Kunlun Mountain are far away, and the lofty gazebos are bleak and cold.

古文：嘉南州之炎德，爱兰蕙之秋荣。
现代文：称许南方温暖的阳光，喜爱兰花蕙草的秋荣。
English: Appreciate the warm sunshine of the south, love the autumn glory of orchids.

古文：下名柑于曲榭，采芳菊于高城。
现代文：在曲榭摘下名柑，在高城采集芳菊。
English: The famous mandarin oranges were picked in Quzhou and the fragrant chrysanthemums were collected in Gaocheng.

古文：树罗轩而并列，竹被岭而丛生。
现代文：树木围环堂宇而并列，竹子覆盖山岭而丛生。
English: The trees surrounding the hall are lined up side by side, and the bamboo covers the mountains and clumps together.

古文：玩栖禽之夕返，送旅雁之晨征。
现代文：观赏栖禽傍晚返归，目视旅雁清晨远行。
English: Watching the roosting birds return in the evening, and seeing the migratory geese travel far in the morning.

古文：悲去乡而远客，寄览物而娱情。
现代文：悲伤离乡远客异地，寄托于览物而娱情。
English: The sadness of being far away from home, entrusted to the entertainment of the exhibits.

古文：惟传车之所骛，实鹰扬其是掌，或解组以立威，乍露服而加赏。
现代文：衹有驿车在奔驰，实是鹰扬都尉他的执掌，或辞去官职树立威望，突然宣布任用而加赏。
English: If there is a stolen car in the Mercedes, it is actually Captain Ying Yang who is in charge of it, or he resigned from his official position to build prestige, suddenly announced his appointment and increased the reward.

古文：遵圣主之恩刑，荷天地之厚德。
现代文：遵照圣主的恩德刑赏，承受天地的深厚恩德。
English: According to the Lord's bounty and punishment, receive the profound bounty of heaven and earth.

古文：沾河润于九里，泽自家而刑国。
现代文：在九里之地沾河润，是泽及自家而伤害国家。
English: In the land of Jiu Li, it is Zhe and his family who are harming the country.

古文：阙小道之可观，宁畏涂其易克；眄高衢而愿骋，忧取累于长纆。
现代文：缺少小道的可观，难道艰险可怕的道路容易制服；侧看高畅的大道愿意驰骋，忧虑会被长索所牵绊。
English: The lack of a trail is noticeable, but the arduous and terrible road is easy to subdue; if you look at the smooth road, you are willing to gallop, and you are worried about being tripped by the long rope.

古文：闻困石之非据，承炯戒乎明则；愧寿陵之余子，学邯郸而匍匐也。
现代文：听闻困石不可据，接受清楚的告诫明则；羞愧寿陵的少年孩子，学邯郸人走路不成而伏地爬行。
English: It is a clear rule to listen to and accept clear admonitions. Shame-stricken boys and children crawl on their bellies when they can't walk.

古文：缵至州，停遣十郡慰劳，解放老疾吏役，及关市戍逻先所防人，一皆省并。
现代文：张蛮至周，停遣十郡慰劳，解放了年老有病的吏役，以及关市戍守巡逻的兵士先前处所防备的人员，全部裁减合并。
English: From Zhang Man to Zhou, the conscription of ten counties was suspended, the old and sick officials were released, and the soldiers who patrolled the city of Guan were all reduced and merged.

古文：州界零陵、衡阳等郡，有莫徭蛮者，依山险为居，历政不宾服，因此向化。
现代文：湘州边界零陵、衡阳等郡，有莫徭蛮，依山险为居住处，历来都不臣服官府，因为这些政治措施而归附。
English: In counties such as Liling and Hengyang on the border of Hunan Province, there are many people who live in the mountains, and they have never submitted to the government because of these political measures.

古文：益阳县人作田二顷，皆异亩同颖。
现代文：益阳县人耕田二顷，皆异亩而长同样谷穗。
English: People in Yiyang County cultivate two hectares of land, but they all have different mu and grow the same ears of corn.

古文：缵在政四年，流人自归，户口增益十余万，州境大安。
现代文：张缵任政四年，外流的人都自归，户口增加十多万，湘州境内大安。
English: In the four years that Zhang Ye has been in power, the outflow of people has returned, the number of household accounts has increased by more than 100,000, and there is greater stability in Hunan.

古文：太清二年，征为领军，俄改授使持节、都督雍、梁、北秦、东益、郢州之竟陵司州之随郡诸军事、平北将军、宁蛮校尉。
现代文：太清二年，征入任领军，不久改授使持节、都督雍、梁、北秦、东益、郢州之竟陵司州的郡诸军事、平北将军、宁蛮校尉。
English: In the second year of the Taiching Dynasty, he was enlisted as the leader of the army, and soon he was awarded the title of Jizhixi, the governor of Yong, Liang, North Qin, Dongyixi, and Zhangzhou, the military commander of the counties of Jingling and Shizhou, the general of Pingbei, and the captain of Ningban.

古文：缵初闻邵陵王纶当代己为湘州，其后定用河东王誉，缵素轻少王，州府候迎及资待甚薄，誉深衔之。
现代文：张缆初闻邵陵王萧输要代己任渔业刺史，后来的决定是任用回墓王蕴誉，蛋趱平时就轻视少王，州府候迎的礼节及物资待遇极薄，萧誉深深怨恨他。
English: Zhang Kan first heard that Shao Ling Wang Xiao Fang wanted to be appointed as a fishery historian on his behalf. Later, the decision was made to appoint back to the tomb King Yun Rong, the cake dumpling usually despised Shao Wang, the courtesy and material treatment of the state government was extremely thin, and Xiao Rong deeply resented him.

古文：及至州，遂托疾不见缵，仍检括州府庶事，留缵不遣。
现代文：萧誉到了湘炒，便托病不见退继，就去考察州府诸事，留下张缆不让他离任。
English: When Xiao Rong arrived in Hunan Province, he did not see his successor due to illness, so he went to inspect the affairs of the prefectural government, leaving Zhang Gang to prevent him from leaving office.

古文：会闻侯景寇京师，誉饰装当下援，时荆州刺史湘东王赴援，军次郢州武城，缵驰信报曰： 河东已竖樯上水，将袭荆州。 
现代文：逭时得知侯景侵犯京师，萧誉整治行装将要去援助，而这时荆州刺史湘东王也要去赴援，军队停留在郢州武城，张缆急速派使者向湘束王报告： 河东王已竖起船的桅杆进入水中，将要袭击荆州。 
English: At that time, it was learned that Houjing had invaded Beijing Division, Xiaoying Rectification and Equipping was going to go to help, and at that time, Jingzhou Governor Shandong King was also going to go to help. The army stayed in Wucheng, Zhangqian quickly sent an emissary to report to Xiangzhu King: The King of Hedong had erected the mast of the ship into the water and was going to attack Jingzhou.

古文：王信之，便回军镇，荆、湘因构嫌隙。
现代文：湘东王相信了，便回军镇守荆州，荆州、湘州刺史间由猜疑结下怨恨。
English: The king of eastern Hunan believed him and returned to defend Jingzhou. Suspicion and resentment grew between Jingzhou and Hunan.

古文：寻弃其部伍，单舸赴江陵，王即遣使责让誉，索缵部下。
现代文：不久张缆丢弃他的部队，单舸赴江陵，湘束王立即遣使责备萧誉，索取张缵的部下。
English: Not long after, Zhang Jian abandoned his troops and went to Jiangling alone. Hunan Shu Wang immediately sent an envoy to reprimand Xia Rong and demand Zhang Jian's subordinates.

古文：既至，仍遣缵向襄阳，前刺史岳阳王察推迁未去镇，但以城西白马寺处之。
现代文：既至，便遣张缆去襄阳，而前任刺史岳阳王萧察推故迁延不离镇守，衹让他住在城西白马寺。
English: As soon as he arrived, he sent Zhang Gao to Yangyang, while his predecessor, Yueyang Wang Xiao Cao, did not leave the town, but let him live in Baima Temple in the west of the city.

古文：会闻贼陷京师，察因不受代。
现代文：这时得知贼攻陷京师，萧察因此不让张缵接替自己。
English: At this time, it was learned that a thief had attacked and trapped the Beijing division, so Xiao Cao did not allow Zhang Ye to succeed him.

古文：州助防杜岸绐缵曰： 观岳阳殿下必不容使君，使君素得物情，若走入西山，招聚义众，远近必当投集，又帅部下继至，以此义举，无往不克。 
现代文：州助防杜岸欺骗张缵说： 观察岳阳王殿下必不容纳使君，使君向来得人心，如果走入西山。招聚义众，远近的人一定会投奔会集，我又率部下随后赶到，以造正义举兵，无往不胜。 
English: Zhang Ye said: "Observe that His Royal Highness King Yueyang will not accommodate the envoys. Envoys have always won the hearts of the people. If you go to the West Mountain and gather the righteous, people from far and near will certainly rush to the meeting. I also led my subordinates to arrive later to raise an army to create justice, invincible.

古文：缵信之，与结盟约，因夜遁入山。
现代文：张缵相信他的话，与他缔结盟约，在夜间遁入山中。
English: Zhang Ye believed his words, made an alliance with him, and rode into the mountains at night.

古文：岸反以告察，仍遣岸帅军追缵。
现代文：杜岸反而把这事告给萧察，萧察便派遣杜岸率军追张缵。
English: On the contrary, Dugan reported the matter to Xiao Cao, who then sent troops led by Dugan to chase Zhang Ye.

古文：缵众望岸军大喜，谓是赴期，既至，即执缵并其众，并俘送之。
现代文：张缵兵众望见杜岸军大喜，以为是来赴约，杜岸既至，立即拘捕张缵和他的兵众，一并俘送。
English: Zhang Ye's soldiers saw Dugan's troops celebrating and thought they were on their way to a rendezvous. When Dugan arrived, he immediately arrested Zhang Ye and his soldiers and took them away as prisoners.

古文：始被囚絷，寻又逼缵剃发为道人。
现代文：开始是被囚絷，不久又逼张钻剃发为道人。
English: At first he was imprisoned, and soon he was forced to shave his head and become a Taoist.

古文：其年，察举兵袭江陵，常载缵随后。
现代文：遣一年，芦察举兵袭击红肿，常载至匡攫随后。
English: One year later, Lucha raised an army to attack the Red Plague, and was often sent to Guanzhong afterwards.

古文：及军退败，行至湕水南，防守缵者虑追兵至，遂害之，弃尸而去，时年五十一。
现代文：当军队退败时，行至淀水南，防守张缵的人担心追兵会来，于是杀死他，弃尸而去，时年五十一岁。
English: When the army was defeated, he went to the south of Dianshui. The defenders of Zhang Ye feared that the pursuers would come, so they killed him and abandoned his body. He was fifty-one years old.

古文：元帝承制，赠缵侍中、中卫将军、开府仪同三司。
现代文：元帝秉承皇帝的旨意，追赠张缵侍中、中卫将军、开府仪同三司。
English: Emperor Yuan, adhering to the emperor's will, posthumously presented Zhang Ye with the titles of Vice Admiral, General of the Middle Guard, Keifu Yi and Sanji.

古文：谥简宪公。
现代文：谧号为简宪公。
English: His nickname was Jian Xingguo.

古文：缵有识鉴，自见元帝，便推诚委结。
现代文：张缵有见地和识别人才的能力，自见到元帝，便以诚结交。
English: Zhang Ye was insightful and had the ability to recognize talent. Ever since he saw the Yuan Emperor, he made friends with sincerity.

古文：及元帝即位，追思之，尝为诗，其《序》曰： 简宪之为人也，不事王侯，负才任气，见余则申旦达夕，不能已已。
现代文：等到元帝即位，追思他，曾为他作诗，诗《序》说： 简宪的为人，不奉侍王侯，仗恃才能意气用事，见我则自宵达旦，自旦至夜，不能中断。
English: When Emperor Yuan ascended the throne, she pined for him and once wrote a poem for him. The poem "Introduction" said: "Jian Xian is a person who does not serve the prince, who can only do things with courage, and who can not be interrupted from dawn to dusk.

古文：怀夫人之德，何日忘之。 
现代文：怀念这个人的品德，什么时候能忘记他。 
English: Remember this man's character, when can you forget him.

古文：缵著《鸿宝》一百卷，文集二十卷。
现代文：张缵着有《鸿宝》一百卷，文集二十卷。
English: Zhang Xuan has a hundred volumes of "Hongbao" and twenty volumes of anthologies.

古文：次子希，字子颜，早知名，选尚太宗第九女海盐公主。
现代文：次子名希，字子颜，很早就知名，娶太宗第九女海盐公主为妻。
English: The second son, Nagi, also known as Kazuchika, married Princess Haiyan, the ninth daughter of Emperor Taizong.

古文：承圣初，官至黄门侍郎。
现代文：承圣初年，官作到黄门侍郎。
English: In the first year of his consecration, he was appointed to the post of Yellow Gate Attendant.

古文：绾字孝卿，缵第四弟也。
现代文：张绾字孝卿，张缵的四弟。
English: ZHANG Yu Zi Xiaoqing, ZHANG Yu's fourth younger brother.

古文：初为国子生，射策高第。
现代文：初为国子生，射策的成绩最优秀。
English: He was a Kuniko student at first, and his marksmanship was the best.

古文：起家长兼秘书郎，迁太子舍人，洗马，中舍人，并掌管记。
现代文：从家中征召出来任长兼秘书郎，迁任太子舍人，洗马，中舍人，并掌管记。
English: He was recruited from his family to serve as the chief and secretary, and transferred to the post of the prince's attendant, the horse washer, the middle attendant, and in charge of the records.

古文：累迁中书郎，国子博士。
现代文：累经升迁任中书郎，国子博士。
English: He was promoted to Chushiro and became Dr. Kuniko.

古文：出为北中郎长史、兰陵太守，还除员外散骑常侍。
现代文：出任北中郎长史、兰陵太守，还京师授任员外散骑常侍。
English: He was appointed to the position of Kitanakatsuro Choshi and Lanling Taishu, and he was also appointed to the post of Keijinshi (Master of the Capital) and the post of Sanzhijishi (regular attendant).

古文：时丹阳尹西昌侯萧渊藻以久疾未拜，敕绾权知尹事，迁中军宣城王长史，俄徙御史中丞。
现代文：逭时丹阳尹西昌侯萧渊藻因久病未受任，敕令张绾权知尹事，迁任中军宣城王长史。
English: At that time, Danyang Yin Xichang Hou Xiao Yuanmao did not accept the post due to a long-term illness, and ordered Zhang Xuanquan to know the situation and transferred to the Chinese army Xuancheng Wang Changshi.

古文：高祖遣其弟中书舍人绚宣旨曰： 为国之急，惟在执宪直绳，用人本不限升降。
现代文：不久徙移御史中丞，高祖遣张绾弟中书舍人张绚宣布圣旨说： 治国当务之急，惟在执行法令的人能正直如绳墨，用人本应不限制在是升官或降职。
English: Soon after, Emperor Gaozong transferred to the position of Imperial Historian, and Emperor Gaozong sent Zhang Xuan's younger brother Zhang Hua, a scholar, to announce the sacred edict, saying, "Governing the country is an urgent matter, but those who implement laws and regulations can be as honest as ink on a rope. The employment of people should not be limited to promotion or demotion.

古文：晋宋之世，周闵、蔡廓并以侍中为之，卿勿疑是左迁也。 
现代文：晋朝、宋朝之世，周闵、蔡廓并以侍中任御史中丞，卿不要怀疑这是降职。 
English: During the Jin and Song dynasties, Zhou Qi and Cai Kuo were appointed as chamberlains to the Grand Historian, Sir, do not doubt that this is a demotion.

古文：时宣城王府望重，故有此旨焉。
现代文：当时宣城王府名望很大，所以有此圣旨。
English: At that time, the royal palace of Xuancheng was very famous, so it had this sacred purpose.

古文：大同四年元日，旧制仆射中丞坐位东西相当，时绾兄缵为仆射，及百司就列，兄弟导驺，分趋两陛，前代未有也，时人荣之。
现代文：大同四年元，旧制仆射中丞二职座位东西等级相当，遣时张绾兄张缵任仆射，当百司就列，兄弟各引导队列快步行走，分别前往两边的台阶，这种情形是前代未有的，受到时人的称誉。
English: In the year of Datong four years ago, the old system of minions, middle-ranked second-ranked seats, and east-west grades were equivalent. When dispatching, Zhang Ye's brother, Zhang Ye, was the minion. When the hundreds were lined up, the brothers led the queue to walk quickly and separately to the steps on both sides. This situation was unprecedented in the previous generation and was praised by the people at the time.

古文：岁余，出为豫章内史。
现代文：一年多后，出任豫章内史。
English: A little more than a year later, he was appointed as the director of the History Department of Yuzhang.

古文：绾在郡，述《制旨礼记正言》义，四姓衣冠士子听者常数百人。
现代文：张绾在郡时，讲述《制旨礼记正言》的义理，名门贵族、士大夫官绅、应考的读书人听讲者常有数百人。
English: When Zhang Ye was in the county, he spoke about the principles of the "Precepts of the Book of Rites and Decrees," and there were often hundreds of famous aristocrats, dignitaries, officials, and scholars who were taking the exam to listen to him.

古文：八年，安成人刘敬宫挟祅道，遂聚党攻郡，内史萧侻弃城走。
现代文：八年，安成人刘敬宫挟持袄道，便聚集同党攻郡，内史萧悦弃城逃走。
English: Eight years later, when Liu Jing Gong, an adult of An, held Shandao hostage, he gathered the same party to attack the county, and Xiao Yue, a member of the Inner Shi, abandoned the city and fled.

古文：贼转寇南康、庐陵，屠破县邑，有众数万人，进寇豫章新淦县。
现代文：贼转侵亩尘、庐陵，攻破县邑，有众敷万人，又攻侵豫章新淦县。
English: The bandits invaded Mu Deng and Fuling, broke through the county towns, with many tens of thousands of people, and invaded Yuzhang Xinlu County.

古文：南中久不习兵革，吏民恇扰奔散。
现代文：南方久不习战争，吏民惧慌奔散。
English: The South has not been accustomed to war for a long time, and officials and people are panicking.

古文：或劝绾宜避其锋，绾不从，仍修城隍，设战备，募召敢勇，得万余人。
现代文：有人劝张绾应躲避贼的锐锋，张绾不听从，仍然修筑城壕，设置战备，招募敢勇的人，得到一万多。
English: Some people advised Zhang Ye that he should hide from the thief's sharp front, but Zhang Ye did not listen, he still built trenches, set up combat readiness, recruited brave people, and got more than ten thousand.

古文：刺史湘东王遣司马王僧辩帅兵讨贼，受绾节度，旬月间，贼党悉平。
现代文：刺史湘东王遣司马王僧辩率兵讨贼，接受张绾指挥，一个月之间，贼党全部被平定。
English: According to the historical record, the king of Shandong sent Sima Wang, a monk, to lead an army to fight the bandits and accept Zhang Ye's command. Within a month, the bandits were all subdued.

古文：十年，复为御史中丞，加通直散骑常侍。
现代文：十年，再任御史中丞，加通直散骑常侍。
English: Ten years later, he was reappointed as Goshi Chujo, and became a regular attendant.

古文：绾再为宪司，弹纠无所回避，豪右惮之。
现代文：张绾再次担任御史，弹纠无所回避，豪强大族都畏惧他。
English: Zhang Xuan once again served as imperial historian, and there was no way to avoid him. The powerful and powerful clans were afraid of him.

古文：是时城西开士林馆聚学者，绾与右卫硃异、太府卿贺琛递述《制旨礼记中庸》义。
现代文：遣时城西开设士林馆聚集求学的人，张绾舆右卫朱异、太府卿贺琛相递讲述的义理。
English: At the time of the Emperor's visit, Shilin Hall was opened in the western part of the city to gather students, and Zhang Yimou, Zhu Yi, Zhu Wei, and He Xuan, Taifuqing, delivered the sermon.

古文：太清二年，迁左卫将军。
现代文：太清二年，迁任左卫将军。
English: In the second year of the Taiqing Dynasty, he was transferred to the position of General of the Left Division.

古文：会侯景寇至，入守东掖门。
现代文：适逢侯景侵犯到京城，张绾入守束掖门。
English: At the right time, Houjing invaded the capital, and Zhang Rong entered the gate of Shuxuan.

古文：三年，迁吏部尚书。
现代文：三年，迁任吏部尚书。
English: Three years later, he was transferred to the cadre department of Shangshu.

古文：宫城陷，绾出奔，外转至江陵。湘东王承制，授侍中、左卫将军、相国长史，侍中如故。
现代文：宫城失陷，张绾出城逃奔，外转至江陵，湘束王秉承皇帝的旨意，授张绾侍中、左卫将军、相国长史，侍中照旧。
English: After the fall of Miyagi, Zhang Xuan fled the city and went to Gangneung. In accordance with the emperor's will, Hunan Shu Wang awarded Zhang Xuan the titles of chamberlain, General of the Left Division, Minister of State, and chamberlain as before.

古文：出为持节、云麾将军、湘东内史。
现代文：出任持节、云麾将军、湘东内史。
English: He was appointed to the posts of Jisetsu, General Yunhyeon, and Secretary of the Inner History of Shandong Province.

古文：承圣二年，征为尚书右仆射，寻加侍中。
现代文：承圣二年，征入任尚书右仆射，不久加任侍中。
English: In the second year after his ordination, he was conscripted into the Shoshu Utsukudakusha, and was soon appointed as a chamberlain.

古文：明年，江陵陷，朝士皆俘入关，绾以疾免，后卒于江陵，时年六十三。
现代文：第二年，江陵失陷，朝士皆被俘获入关，张绾因有病幸免，后在江陵去世，时年六十三岁。
English: The following year, Gangneung fell, and all the Asa soldiers were captured and imprisoned. Zhang Ye was spared due to illness, and later died in Gangneung at the age of sixty-three.

古文：次子交，字少游，颇涉文学，选尚太宗第十一女安阳公主。
现代文：次子张交，字少游，颇涉猎文学，娶太宗第十一女安阳公主为妻。
English: Zhang Jiao, the second son, was a poet, dabbled in literature, and married Princess Anyang, the 11th daughter of Emperor Taizong.

古文：承圣二年，官至太子洗马，秘书丞，掌东宫管记。
现代文：丞圣二年，官作至太子洗马，秘书丞，掌东宫管记。
English: In the second year of the Emperor's reign, the official work was transferred to the Prince's horse-washing room, the secretary to the Emperor, and the person in charge of the eastern palace administration.

古文：陈吏部尚书姚察曰：太清版荡，亲属离贰，缵不能叶和籓岳，成温陶之举，苟怀私怨，构隙潇湘，遂及祸于身，非由忠节；继以江陵沦覆，实萌于此。
现代文：陈朝吏部尚书姚察曰：太清年间政局变乱社会动荡，亲属异心，张缵不能和合诸王，成就温崤、陶侃那样的举动，却苟怀私怨，使萧绎与萧誉结怨，结果自身被杀害，不是死于忠节；继以江陵沦覆，确实萌芽于此事。
English: Shang Shiuyao, an official of the Chen Dynasty, said: "During the Taiching Dynasty, the political situation was chaotic, the society was in turmoil, relatives were of different minds, Zhang Ye could not reconcile with the kings, and he achieved such actions as being kind and courteous, but he harbored personal grudges, and caused Xiao Yu and Xiao Ren to have grudges. As a result, he was killed, but he did not die of loyalty; after the fall of Jiangling, it really sprouted from this matter.

古文：以缵之风格，卒为梁之乱阶，惜矣哉。
现代文：以张缵的风格，最终成为梁朝的乱阶，可惜呀。
English: It's a pity that Zhang Ye's style eventually became the chaotic steps of the Liang Dynasty.

