古文：战而惧水，此谓澹灭。
现代文：作战而惧怕涉水，这叫作没有胆量。
English: To be afraid of wading into the water in battle is to lack courage.

古文：小事不从，大事不吉。
现代文：这种人小事不顺，大事不吉。
English: This kind of person is not good at small things, and is not good at big things.

古文：战而惧险，此谓迷中。
现代文：作战而怕行险路，这叫作心中无数。
English: There are countless people who are afraid to take the dangerous road in the war.

古文：分其师众，人既迷芒，必其将亡之道。
现代文：这种人只能使军队混乱，全军陷入迷茫，注定要走向灭亡的道路。
English: This kind of person can only make the army confused, the whole army is confused, and is doomed to go down the road of destruction.

古文：动静者比于死，动作者比于丑，动信者比于距，动诎者比于避。
现代文：用兵在强调静止的时侯，应当象死尸一样不动；在强调运动的时侯，应当象鬼神一样出没；在强调扩展的时侯，应当象鸡距一样伸张有力；在强调收缩的时侯，应当象瘸腿者一样屈曲退避。
English: When emphasizing stillness, soldiers should be as motionless as a corpse; when emphasizing movement, they should haunt like ghosts and gods; when emphasizing expansion, they should stretch out like a chicken; when emphasizing contraction, they should bend and retreat like a cripple.

古文：夫静与作，时以为主人，时以为客，贵得度。
现代文：静止或者运动，有时被放在主位，有时被放在客位，这贵在得其法则。
English: Stillness or movement, sometimes placed in the main position, sometimes placed in the guest position, this is a matter of principle.

古文：知静之修，居而自利；知作之从，每动有功。
现代文：懂得静止时所应遵循的法则，驻兵自然有利；懂得运动时所应服从的法则，一动兵就会成功。
English: If you know the rules to be followed when standing still, you will naturally have an advantage in garrisoning troops; if you know the rules to be obeyed when moving, you will succeed in moving troops.

古文：故曰，无为者帝，其此之谓矣。
现代文：所以说，能作到无为而治的可成帝业，就是这个道理。
English: Therefore, this is the reason why it is possible to become an emperor without doing anything.

古文：逆节萌生，天地未形，先为之政，其事乃不成，缪受其刑。
现代文：敌方的悖逆之事才刚刚开始发生，天地都没有什么表现，就提早对他征讨，事情不会成功，反而将不断地受到惩罚。
English: The enemy's disobedience has just begun to happen, and there is nothing in heaven and earth to show for it. If he is challenged early, the matter will not succeed, but will be continuously punished.

古文：天因人，圣人因天。
现代文：天根据人的善恶予以祸福，圣人根据天的征象而进行征伐。
English: Heaven bestows blessings and curses according to people's good and evil, and sages carry out conquests according to the signs of heaven.

古文：天时不作勿为客，人事不起勿为始。
现代文：敌方没有天时之灾，不可轻易进攻，没有人事之祸，也不可开始宣战。
English: If the enemy does not have a natural disaster, he should not easily attack; if he does not have a man-made disaster, he should not begin to declare war.

古文：慕和其众，以修天地之从。
现代文：慕和自己军众，等待天时利地。
English: He pined for his troops and waited for the right time and place.

古文：人先生之，天地刑之，圣人成之，则与天同极。
现代文：首先是人们在那里生事，然后天地表现出惩罚的征兆，最后由圣人通过征伐来完成，这就与天的准则一致。
English: First the people make trouble there, then the heavens and the earth show signs of punishment, and finally it is accomplished by the saints through conquest, which is in accordance with the principles of heaven.

古文：正静不争，动作不贰，素质不留，与地同极。
现代文：当然，若保持正静而不事争夺，行动没有差错，本质上无杀戮之心，也可以与地的准则相同。
English: Of course, if you remain calm and do not fight, there is no mistake in your actions, and there is essentially no killing heart, you can also follow the same principles as the earth.

古文：未得天极，则隐于德；已得天极，则致其力。
现代文：不合于天的准则，就应当隐而修德；已合于天的准则，则发挥自己实力。
English: If the principle does not conform to the heavenly standard, then one should secretly cultivate virtue; if the principle does conform to the heavenly standard, then one should exert one's strength.

古文：既成其功，顺守其从，人不能代。
现代文：一旦得到成功，就顺守其成功的业绩，任何人都不能取而代之。
English: Once success is achieved, it follows its successful performance, and no one can replace it.

古文：成功之道，嬴缩为宝。
现代文：成功之道，贵在能伸能屈。
English: The way to success is to be able to stretch and bend.

古文：毋亡天极，究数而止。
现代文：不可忘天的准则，尽天数就应停止。
English: Do not forget the rule of days, as soon as the number of days should be stopped.

古文：事若未成，毋改其形，毋失其始，静民观时，待令而起。
现代文：举事如果不成，既不必改变常态，也无须毁弃最初的基础，休息民力，观测时机，待天命起事就是了。
English: If things do not work out, it is not necessary to change the normal situation, nor is it necessary to abandon the initial foundation, rest the people's strength, observe the time, and wait for the fate to start things.

古文：故曰，修阴阳之从，而道天地之常。
现代文：所以说，要遵循阴阳运行的轨道，而履行天地的常规。
English: Therefore, it is necessary to follow the orbit of yin and yang, and fulfill the routine of heaven and earth.

古文：嬴嬴缩缩，因而为当；死死生生，因天地之形。
现代文：伸伸屈屈，要并用而掌握适当；隐隐显显，要根据天地的征象行事。
English: Stretching, bending, and flexing should be used in conjunction to grasp the appropriate; implicitly and explicitly, it is necessary to act according to the signs of heaven and earth.

古文：天地之形，圣人成之。小取者小利，大取者大利，尽行之者有天下。
现代文：天地显示征象，圣人完成征伐之事，这样就谋取小事有小利，谋取大事有大利，全面谋取者则据有天下。
English: Heaven and earth show signs, and only a sage can complete the conquest. In this way, those who seek small things will have small profits, those who seek great things will have great profits, and those who seek everything will have the whole world.

古文：故贤者诚信以仁之，慈惠以爱之，端政象不敢以先人，中静不留，裕德无求，形于女色。
现代文：所以，贤者对人总是诚信而仁，慈惠而爱，决策广求民意，而不敢先自为定。内心安静，不主张杀伐，道德饶裕，不愿意求索，闲适的形色像女子一样。
English: Therefore, the wise are always honest and kind to people, benevolent and loving, and seek public opinion in decision-making, but do not dare to be self-determined. They are quiet at heart, do not advocate killing, have abundant morals, do not want to search, and are like women.

古文：其所处者，柔安静乐，行德而不争，以待天下之濆作也。
现代文：他的平时自处，总是柔安静乐，行德而不与人争，用这种情态等待天下动乱的到来。
English: In his usual self, he is always soft and quiet, and does not fight with others. With this attitude, he waits for the arrival of turmoil in the world.

古文：故贤者安徐正静，柔节先定，行于不敢，而立于不能，守弱节而坚处之。
现代文：所以，贤者都安详平静，和柔克制而率先保持镇定，行事立足于不敢，建功立足于不能，奉守谦弱的品格而始终坚持着。
English: Therefore, the sages are calm and tranquil, take the lead in maintaining composure with gentleness and restraint, act on the basis of not daring, build on the basis of not being able to, adhere to the character of modesty and always adhere to it.

古文：故不犯天时，不乱民功，秉时养人，先德后刑，顺于天，微度人。
现代文：所以，他能做到不违背天时，不打乱民功，行时政顺养国人，先用德后用刑杀，既顺于天道，又揣度人心行事。
English: Therefore, he can do so without violating the heavenly time, without disrupting the people's work, carry out the politics of the times and raise the people of the country, first with virtue and then with torture, both in accordance with the heavenly way and in the way of the people.

古文：善周者，明不能见也；善明者，周不能蔽也。
现代文：善于保密的，明察也不能发现；善于明察的，保密也不能隐蔽。
English: Those who are good at keeping secrets cannot be found out; those who are good at keeping secrets cannot be hidden.

古文：大明胜大周，则民无大周也；大周胜大明，则民无大明也。
现代文：我方高度明察胜过对方的高度保密，则对方之人无高度保密可言；我方高度保密胜过对方的高度明察，则对方之人无高度明察可言。
English: If our high degree of secrecy is better than the other side's high degree of secrecy, then the other side's people are not highly confidential; if our high degree of secrecy is better than the other side's high degree of secrecy, then the other side's people are not highly confidential.

古文：大周之先，可以奋信；大明之祖，可以代天。下索而不得，求之招摇之下。
现代文：创造高度保密的，可以使进军迅速，创造高度明察的，可代替天的启示：在下面查索不得，那就最大限度地向上探索好了。
English: The creation of a high degree of secrecy can make the march faster, and the creation of a high degree of discernment can replace the revelation of heaven: if you can't search below, then it's best to explore upwards.

古文：兽厌走，而有伏网罟。
现代文：野兽极力奔跑，可能碰上暗伏的网罟。
English: Running hard, the beast might run into a lurking net.

古文：一偃一侧，不然不得。
现代文：为政也必须有起有伏，否则不行。
English: Politics must also have its ups and downs, otherwise it is not possible.

古文：大文三曾，而贵义与德；大武三曾，而偃武与力。
现代文：大规模的文治实行三年，天下就能重视义与德；大规模的武事实行三年，天下才能平息刀兵与暴力。
English: After three years of large-scale civil rule, the world will be able to attach importance to righteousness and virtue; after three years of large-scale martial law, the world will be able to quell saber-rattling and violence.

