古文：夫乐者、乐也，人情之所必不免也。
现代文：音乐，就是欢乐的意思，它是人的情感绝对不能缺少的东西。
English: Music, which means joy, is something that human emotions absolutely cannot do without.

古文：故人不能无乐，乐则必发于声音，形于动静；而人之道，声音动静，性术之变尽是矣。
现代文：人不可能没有欢乐；欢乐了就一定会在歌唱吟咏的声音中表现出来，在手舞足蹈的举止中体现出来；可见人的所作所为一一包括声音、举止、性情及其表现方式的变化，就全都体现在这音乐之中了。
English: It is impossible for a person to be without joy; if one has joy, it will certainly be expressed in the sound of singing and chanting, and in the behavior of hand and foot dancing; it can be seen that one's actions - including voice, behavior, temperament and changes in its expression - are all reflected in this music.

古文：故人不能不乐，乐则不能无形，形而不为道，则不能无乱。
现代文：所以，人不可能不快乐，快乐了就不可能不表现出来，但这种表现如果不进行引导，就不可能没有祸乱。
English: Therefore, it is impossible for people not to be happy, and if they are happy, it is impossible not to show it, but if this expression is not guided, it is impossible without disaster.

古文：先王恶其乱也，故制雅颂之声以道之，使其声足以乐而不流，使其文足以辨而不諰，使其曲直繁省廉肉节奏，足以感动人之善心，使夫邪污之气无由得接焉。
现代文：古代的圣王憎恶那祸乱，所以创作了《雅》、《颂》的音乐来引导他们，使那歌声足够用来表达快乐而不淫荡，使那歌词足够用来阐明正确的道理而不流于花巧，使那音律的宛转或舒扬、繁复或简单、清脆利落或圆润丰满、节制停顿或推进加快，都足够用来感动人的行善之心，使那些邪恶肮脏的风气没有途径能和民众接触。
English: The ancient sages abhorred that calamity, so they composed the music of the Song of Songs to guide them, so that the song is enough to express happiness without lewdness, the lyrics are enough to clarify the correct principles without flowing into flowery tricks, the melody of the melody is either soothing, complex or simple, crisp and sharp or rounded and full, the restraint is paused or the advancement is accelerated, all of which are enough to move the hearts of people to do good, so that those evil and filthy customs have no way to contact the people.

古文：是先王立乐之方也，而墨子非之奈何！
现代文：这就是古代圣王设置音乐的原则啊。但是墨子却反对音乐，又能怎么样呢？
English: This is the principle of the ancient holy king setting music. But Mozi is against music, so what can be done?

古文：故乐在宗庙之中，君臣上下同听之，则莫不和敬；闺门之内，父子兄弟同听之，则莫不和亲；乡里族长之中，长少同听之，则莫不和顺。
现代文：所以音乐在祖庙之中，君臣上下一起听了它，就再也没有人不和谐恭敬的了；在家门之内，父子兄弟一起听了它，就再也没有人不和睦相亲的了；在乡村里弄之中，年长的和年少的一起听了它，就再也没有人不和协顺从的了。
English: Therefore, when music is played in ancestral temples, and princes and ministers listen to it together, there will no longer be anyone who is not harmonious and respectful; within the family, when fathers and sons listen to it together, there will no longer be anyone who is not harmonious and friendly; in the countryside, when the elderly and the young listen to it together, there will no longer be anyone who is not harmonious and obedient.

古文：故乐者审一以定和者也，比物以饰节者也，合奏以成文者也；足以率一道，足以治万变。
现代文：音乐，是审定一个主音来确定其他和音的，是配上各种乐器来调整节奏的，是一起演奏来组成众音和谐的乐曲的；它足能用来率领统一的原则，足能用来整治各种变化。
English: Music is the verification of a keynote to determine the other chords, is matched with various musical instruments to adjust the rhythm, is played together to form a musical composition of the harmony of the voices; it is enough to lead the principle of unity, enough to rectify various changes.

古文：是先王立乐之术也，而墨子非之奈何！
现代文：这就是古代圣王设置音乐的方法啊。可是墨子却反对音乐，又能怎么样呢？
English: This is the strategy of the ancient holy king to set music. But Mozi is against music, so what can be done?

古文：故听其雅颂之声，而志意得广焉；执其干戚，习其俯仰屈伸，而容貌得庄焉；行其缀兆，要其节奏，而行列得正焉，进退得齐焉。
现代文：所以，人们听那《雅》、《颂》的音乐，志向心胸就能宽广了；拿起那盾牌斧头等舞具，练习那低头抬头弯曲伸展等舞蹈动作，容貌就能庄重了；行动在那舞蹈的行列位置上，迎合那舞曲的节奏，队列就能不偏不斜了，进退就能整齐一致了。
English: Therefore, people can listen to the music of "Elegance" and "Ode" and be broad-minded; pick up the shield, axe and other dance equipment, and practice the dance movements such as bowing, lifting, bending and stretching, and the appearance can be solemn; the action can be in the position of the dance line and meet the rhythm of the dance music, and the queue can not be skewed, and the advance and retreat can be uniform.

古文：故乐者、出所以征诛也，入所以揖让也；征诛揖让，其义一也。
现代文：所以音乐，对外可用来征伐，对内可用来行礼让。对于征伐与礼让，音乐的作用是一样的。
English: Therefore, music can be used to conquer externally and to make concessions internally. For conquest and concessions, the role of music is the same.

古文：出所以征诛，则莫不听从；入所以揖让，则莫不从服。
现代文：对外用音乐作为征伐的工具，那就没有人不听从；对内用音乐作为礼让的手段，那就没有人不服从。
English: If music is used as a tool of conquest abroad, then no one will disobey; if music is used as a means of courtesy at home, then no one will disobey.

古文：故乐者、天下之大齐也，中和之纪也，人情之所必不免也。
现代文：所以音乐是齐一天下的工具，是中正和平的要领，是人的情感绝对不能脱离的东西。
English: Therefore, music is a tool for harmony, a key to peace, and something that human emotions absolutely cannot be separated from.

古文：是先王立乐之术也，而墨子非之奈何！
现代文：这就是古代圣王设置音乐的策略。可是墨子却反对音乐，又能怎么样呢？
English: This is the strategy of the ancient holy king to set music. But Mozi is against music, so what can be done?

古文：且乐者、先王之所以饰喜也；军旅鈇钺者，先王之所以饰怒也。
现代文：况且音乐，是古代的圣王用来表现喜悦的；军队和刑具，是古代的圣王用来表现愤怒的。
English: Moreover, music was used by ancient sages to express joy; armies and instruments of torture were used by ancient sages to express anger.

古文：先王喜怒皆得其齐焉。
现代文：古代圣王的喜悦和愤怒都能通过音乐与军队刑具而表达得恰如其分。
English: The joy and anger of the ancient sage-kings can be aptly expressed through music and military instruments of torture.

古文：是故喜而天下和之，怒而暴乱畏之。
现代文：所以，圣王喜悦了，天下人就附和他；圣人愤怒了，凶暴作乱的人就害怕他。
English: Therefore, when the holy king is pleased, the whole world is pleased with him; when the holy man is angry, the violent are afraid of him.

古文：先王之道，礼乐正其盛者也。而墨子非之。
现代文：古代圣王的政治原则中，礼制和音乐正是其中的大事，但墨子却反对它们。
English: Among the political principles of the ancient holy kings, ritual and music were among the most important, but Mozi opposed them.

古文：故曰：墨子之于道也，犹瞽之于白黑也，犹聋之于清浊也，犹欲之楚而北求之也。
现代文：所以说：墨子对于正确的政治原则，就好像是瞎子对于白色和黑色不能分辨一样，就好像是聋子对于音质的清浊不能区别一样，就好像是想到南方的楚国却到北方去寻找它一样。
English: Therefore, it is said that Mozi's correct political principles are like a blind person's inability to distinguish between white and black, like a deaf person's inability to distinguish between the clarity of sound quality, and like thinking of the southern country of Chu but going to the north to look for it.

古文：夫声乐之入人也深，其化人也速，故先王谨为之文。
现代文：那音乐渗入人心是很深的，它感化人心是很快的，所以古代的圣王谨慎地给它文饰。
English: That music penetrates the human heart very deeply, it affects the human heart very quickly, so the ancient sages were careful to give it literary decoration.

古文：乐中平则民和而不流，乐肃庄则民齐而不乱。
现代文：音乐中正平和，那末民众就和睦协调而不淫荡；音乐严肃庄重，那末民众就同心同德而不混乱。
English: When there is peace in the music, the people are in harmony and not disorderly; when there is solemnity in the music, the people are in harmony and not disorderly.

古文：民和齐则兵劲城固，敌国不敢婴也。
现代文：民众和睦协调、同心同德，那末兵力就强劲，城防就牢固，敌国就不敢来侵犯了。
English: If the people act in harmony and with one heart and one mind, then the military strength will be strong, the city defense will be firm, and the enemy country will not dare to invade.

古文：如是，则百姓莫不安其处，乐其乡，以至足其上矣。
现代文：像这样，那末老百姓就无不满足于自己的住处，喜欢自己的家乡，以使自己的君主获得满足。
English: In this way, then, the people are all satisfied with their own abode, and like their own hometown, so that their monarch can be satisfied.

古文：然后名声于是白，光辉于是大，四海之民莫不愿得以为师，是王者之始也。
现代文：音乐妖冶轻浮而邪恶，那末民众就淫荡轻慢卑鄙下贱了。民众淫荡轻慢，就会混乱；卑鄙下贱，就会争夺。
English: The music of devils is frivolous and wicked, and the people are lascivious, frivolous, and base; the people are lascivious, frivolous, and confused; and base, base, and quarrelsome.

古文：乐姚冶以险，则民流僈鄙贱矣；流僈则乱，鄙贱则争；乱争则兵弱城犯，敌国危之如是，则百姓不安其处，不乐其乡，不足其上矣。
现代文：混乱又争夺，那就会兵力衰弱、城池被侵犯，敌国就会来危害了。像这样，那末老百姓就不会安居在自己的住处，就不会喜欢自己的家乡，也不会使自己的君主满足了。
English: Confusion and strife will weaken the army, the city will be invaded, and the enemy country will be harmed. In this way, the people will not live in their own place, they will not like their hometown, and they will not satisfy their monarch.

古文：故礼乐废而邪音起者，危削侮辱之本也。
现代文：所以，礼制雅乐被废弃而靡靡之音兴起来，这是国家危险削弱、遭受侮辱的根源。
English: Therefore, the etiquette of elegant music has been abandoned and the popular music has been revived, which is the root cause of the country's dangerous weakening and humiliation.

古文：故先王贵礼乐而贱邪音。
现代文：所以古代的圣王看重礼制雅乐而鄙视靡靡之音。
English: That is why the ancient holy kings valued ceremonial and elegant music and despised the sounds of chaos.

古文：其在序官也，曰： 修宪命，审诗商，禁淫声，以时顺修，使夷俗邪音不敢乱雅，太师之事也。 
现代文：他在论列官职时，说： 遵循法令，审查诗歌乐章，禁止淫荡的音乐，根据时势去整治，使蛮夷的落后风俗和邪恶的音乐不敢扰乱正声雅乐，这是太师的职事。 
English: When discussing the official position, he said: It is the duty of the Grand Master to follow the laws and regulations, review the poetry and music, prohibit the obscene music, and rectify according to the current situation, so that the barbaric backward customs and evil music do not dare to disturb the positive classical music.

古文：墨子曰： 乐者、圣王之所非也，而儒者为之过也。 
现代文：墨子说： 音乐，是圣明的帝王所反对的，而儒者却讲求它，那是错误的。 
English: Mozi said, "Music is opposed by the emperors of wisdom, but Confucians are in favor of it. That is wrong."

古文：君子以为不然。
现代文：君子认为并不是这样。
English: The gentleman does not think so.

古文：乐者，圣王之所乐也，而可以善民心，其感人深，其移风易俗。故先王导之以礼乐，而民和睦。
现代文：音乐是圣人所喜欢的，而且可以用来改善民众的思想，它感人至深，它改变风俗也容易，所以古代的圣王用礼制音乐来引导人民而人民就和睦了。
English: Music is loved by sages and can be used to improve people's minds, it is deeply moving, it is easy to change customs, so the ancient holy kings used ritual music to guide the people and the people were reconciled.

古文：夫民有好恶之情，而无喜怒之应则乱；先王恶其乱也，故修其行，正其乐，而天下顺焉。
现代文：民众有了爱憎的感情而没有表达喜悦愤怒的方式来和它相应，就会混乱。古代的圣王憎恶这种混乱，所以修养自己的德行，端正国内的音乐，因而天下人就顺从他了。
English: When the people have feelings of love and hate, but no way of expressing joy or anger to correspond with them, there will be chaos. The ancient sage-kings hated this chaos, so they cultivated their virtues and perfected the music of the country, and the people of the world obeyed him.

古文：故齐衰之服，哭泣之声，使人之心悲。带甲婴胄，歌于行伍，使人之心伤；姚冶之容，郑卫之音，使人之心淫；绅、端、章甫，舞韶歌武，使人之心庄。
现代文：那披麻戴孝的丧服，哭泣的声音，会使人的内心悲痛；穿上铠甲，系上头盔，在部队中歌唱，会使人的内心忧伤；妖艳的容貌，郑国、卫国的靡靡之音，会使人的内心淫荡；系着宽大的腰带、穿着礼服、戴着礼帽，随着《韶》《武》的乐曲载歌载舞，会使人的内心严肃。
English: Wearing mourning clothes and the sound of weeping will make a person's heart sad; putting on armor and a helmet and singing in the army will make a person's heart sad; the glamorous appearance, the sweeping sound of Zheng Guo and the national anthem will make a person's heart lascivious; wearing a wide belt, a formal dress and a ceremonial hat, and singing and dancing to the music of "" and "Wu" will make a person's heart serious.

古文：故君子耳不听淫声，目不视邪色，口不出恶言，此三者，君子慎之。
现代文：所以君子耳朵不聆听淫荡的音乐，眼睛不注视女子的美貌，嘴巴不说出邪恶的语言。这三件事，君子是慎重地对待的。
English: Therefore, a gentleman does not listen to lewd music with his ears, does not gaze at a woman's beauty with his eyes, and does not speak evil words with his mouth.

古文：凡奸声感人而逆气应之，逆气成象而乱生焉；正声感人而顺气应之，顺气成象而治生焉。
现代文：大凡淫邪的音乐感动人以后就有歪风邪气来应和它，歪风邪气形成了气候，那么混乱的局面就产生了。正派的音乐感动人以后就有和顺的风气来应和它，和顺的风气成了社会现象，那么秩序井然的局面就产生了。
English: After being moved by great and wicked music, people respond to it with perverse winds and evil spirits, and the perverse winds and evil spirits form a climate, and a chaotic situation arises. After being moved by decent music, people respond to it with a harmonious atmosphere, and the harmonious atmosphere becomes a social phenomenon, and a well-ordered situation arises.

古文：唱和有应，善恶相象，故君子慎其所去就也。君子以钟鼓道志，以琴瑟乐心；动以干戚，饰以羽旄，从以磬管。故其清明象天，其广大象地，其俯仰周旋有似于四时。
现代文：拿着盾牌斧头等舞具来跳舞，用野鸡毛和牦牛尾等舞具做装饰，用石磬、箫管来伴奏。所以那乐声的清朗像天空，广大像大地，那舞姿的俯仰旋转又和四季的变化相似。
English: They danced with shields, axes, and other dancing tools, decorated with pheasant feathers and ox tails, and accompanied by bells and gongs. Therefore, the clarity of the music was like the sky, the vastness was like the earth, and the pitch rotation of the dance was similar to the changes of the four seasons.

古文：故乐行而志清，礼修而行成，耳目聪明，血气和平，移风易俗，天下皆宁，美善相乐。
现代文：所以音乐推行后人们的志向就会高洁，礼制遵循后人们的德行就能养成。要使人们耳聪目明，感情温和平静，改变风俗，天下都安宁，没有什么比音乐更好的了。
English: Therefore, after the implementation of music, people's aspirations will be noble, and after following the etiquette, people's virtues can be developed. It is necessary to make people's ears and eyes bright, their emotions warm and calm, change customs, and the world will be peaceful. There is nothing better than music.

古文：故曰：乐者、乐也。
现代文：所以说：音乐，就是欢乐的意思。
English: So he said, "Music means joy."

古文：君子乐得其道，小人乐得其欲；以道制欲，则乐而不乱；以欲忘道，则惑而不乐。
现代文：君子把从音乐中获得道义作为欢乐，小人把从音乐中满足欲望当作欢乐。用道义来控制欲望，那就能欢乐而不淫乱；为满足欲望而忘记了道义，那就会迷惑而不快乐。
English: The gentleman regards the acquisition of morality from music as joy, the villain regards the satisfaction of desire from music as joy. If you use morality to control desire, then you can have joy without fornication; if you forget morality in order to satisfy desire, then you will be confused and unhappy.

古文：故乐者，所以道乐也，金石丝竹，所以道德也；乐行而民乡方矣。
现代文：所以音乐是用来引导人们娱乐的。金钟石磬琴瑟管箫等乐器，是用来引导人们修养道德的。音乐推行后民众就向往道义了。
English: Therefore, music is used to guide people's entertainment. Musical instruments such as the amethyst harp, the lyre and the pipe organ are used to guide people to cultivate morality. After the introduction of music, the people yearn for morality.

古文：故乐也者，治人之盛者也，而墨子非之。
现代文：所以音乐是治理人民的重大工具，但墨子却反对它。
English: Therefore, music is an important tool for governing the people, but Mozi is against it.

古文：且乐也者，和之不可变者也；礼也者，理之不可易者也。
现代文：况且音乐，是协调人情时不可变更的手段；礼制，是治理社会时不可更换的原则。
English: Moreover, music is an unchangeable means of coordinating human feelings; etiquette is an irreplaceable principle in governing society.

古文：乐合同，礼别异，礼乐之统，管乎人心矣。
现代文：音乐使人们同心同德，礼制使人们区别出等级的差异。所以礼制音乐的纲领，可以总管人们的思想了。
English: Music brings people together, and the etiquette system allows people to distinguish differences in rank. Therefore, the etiquette music program can always control people's thoughts.

古文：穷本极变，乐之情也；着诚去伪，礼之经也。
现代文：深入地触动、极大地改变人的心性，是音乐的实际情形；彰明真诚、去掉虚伪，是礼制的永恒原则。
English: Deeply touching and greatly changing people's mentality is the actual situation of music; highlighting sincerity and eliminating hypocrisy is the eternal principle of etiquette.

古文：墨子非之，几遇刑也。
现代文：墨子反对它们，近乎犯罪。
English: Mozi opposed them, almost criminally.

古文：明王已没，莫之正也。
现代文：圣明的帝王已经死去，没有人来加以纠正。
English: The Holy Emperor is dead, and there is no one to correct him.

古文：愚者学之，危其身也。
现代文：愚蠢的人学习他，会危害自己的生命。
English: A foolish man will endanger his life by following him.

古文：君子明乐，乃其德也。
现代文：君子彰明音乐，这才是仁德。
English: A gentleman praises music. This is benevolence.

古文：乱世恶善，不此听也。
现代文：混乱的社会厌恶善行，不听这提倡音乐的话。
English: The chaotic society abhors good deeds and does not listen to the words of this advocate of music.

古文：于乎哀哉！
现代文：唉呀可悲啊！
English: Alas, how sad!

古文：不得成也。
现代文：音乐因此而不能见成效。
English: That's why music doesn't work.

古文：弟子勉学，无所营也。
现代文：学生们努力学习吧，不要因为墨子的反对而有所迷惑啊。
English: Students, study hard, and don't be confused by Mozo's objections.

古文：声乐之象：鼓大丽，钟统实，磬廉制，竽笙箫和，筦钥发猛，埙篪翁博，瑟易良，琴妇好，歌清尽，舞意天道兼。
现代文：音乐的象征：鼓声弘大高亢，钟声洪亮浑厚，磬声清越明朗，竽、笙、箫、和、管、籥等管乐器的声音昂扬激越，埙、篪的声音浩瀚磅礴，瑟的声音平易温良，琴的声音柔婉优美，歌声清朗而曲尽其情，舞蹈的意象则包容了自然界的一切现象。
English: Symbols of music: the sound of drums is large and high-pitched, the sound of bells is loud and rich, the sound of gongs is clearer and clearer, the sound of gongs, cymbals, gongs, pipes, gongs and other pipe instruments is uplifting and exciting, the sound of gongs and gongs is vast and magnificent, the sound of seraphim is easy and gentle, the sound of the harp is gentle and beautiful, the singing voice is clear and melodious, and the image of dance embraces all phenomena of nature.

古文：鼓其乐之君邪。
现代文：鼓，大概是音乐的主宰吧？
English: Drums, probably the mainstay of music, right?

古文：故鼓似天，钟似地，磬似水，竽笙箫和筦钥，似星辰日月，鼗柷、拊鞷、椌楬似万物。
现代文：所以鼓声像天，钟声像地，磬声像水，竽、笙、箫、和、管、籥等管乐器的声音像日月星辰，鞉、柷、拊、鞷、椌、楬的声音像万物。
English: Therefore, the sound of the drum is like the sky, the sound of the bell is like the earth, the sound of the gong is like water, the sound of the gong, gong, gong, gong, gong, gong and other wind instruments is like the sun, moon and stars, and the sound of the gong, gong, gong, gong, gong, gong and gong is like all things.

古文：曷以知舞之意？
现代文：凭什么来了解舞蹈的意象呢？
English: What is the basis for understanding the dance imagery?

古文：曰：目不自见，耳不自闻也，然而治俯仰、诎信、进退、迟速，莫不廉制，尽筋骨之力，以要钟鼓俯会之节，而靡有悖逆者，众积意謘謘乎！
现代文：回答说：跳舞的人眼睛不能看见自己的形体，耳朵不能听到自己的声音，但是处理低头、抬头、弯曲、伸直、前进、后退、缓慢、快速的动作时无不干净利落明白清楚，尽身体的力量去迎合钟、鼓的节奏，而无所违背，众人集中注意力真认真啊！
English: He replied, "Dancers cannot see their own bodies with their eyes, nor can they hear their own voices with their ears, but when they perform the movements of bowing, raising, bending, straightening, advancing, retreating, slow, and fast, they do so neatly and clearly, and do their best to meet the rhythm of the bells and drums, without violating anything. Everyone is so serious about concentrating!

古文：吾观于乡，而知王道之易易也。
现代文：我看到了乡中请人喝酒的礼仪就知道先王的政治原则实施起来是容易又容易的了。
English: When I saw the etiquette of inviting people to drink in the countryside, I knew that the political principle of the former king was easy and easy to implement.

古文：主人亲速宾及介，而众宾皆从之。至于门外，主人拜宾及介，而众宾皆入；贵贱之义别矣。
现代文：主人亲自去邀请贤德的贵宾和德行稍次的陪客，而一般客人就都跟着他们来了；来到门外，主人向贵宾和陪客拱手鞠躬，而一般客人就都进门了；对高贵者和卑贱者的不同礼仪就这样分别开来了。
English: The host himself went to invite the virtuous guests and the virtuous guests, and the ordinary guests followed them; when they came to the door, the host bowed to the guests and the guests, and the ordinary guests entered the door; the different etiquettes for the nobles and the lowly were thus separated.

古文：三揖至于阶，三让以宾升。拜至、献、酬，辞让之节繁，及介省矣。至于众宾，升受、坐祭、立饮，不酢而降；隆杀之义辨矣。
现代文：主人拱手作揖三次才与贵宾来到厅堂的台阶下，再谦让三次而使贵宾登上厅堂，再拜谢贵宾的到来，主人献酒酬宾，推辞谦让的礼节十分繁多；至于陪客，那礼节就减少了；至于一般客人，登堂受酒，坐着酹酒祭神，站着饮酒，不用酒回敬主人就退下堂去了；隆重与简省的礼仪就这样分别开来了。
English: There are many etiquettes for the host to bow three times before coming to the steps of the hall with the guest of honor, three times to make a humble concession to allow the guest of honor to ascend the hall, and then to thank the guest of honor for his arrival, the host to offer wine to the guest of honor, and to decline the humble concession; as for the accompanying guests, the etiquette is reduced; as for the general guests, they enter the hall to receive the wine, drink the wine while sitting, drink the wine while standing, and leave the hall without drinking the wine to pay tribute to the host; grand and simple etiquette are thus separated.

古文：工入，升歌三终，主人献之；笙入三终，主人献之；间歌三终，合乐三终，工告乐备，遂出。
现代文：乐工进来，登上厅堂，把《鹿鸣》、《四牡》、《皇皇者华》三首歌各唱一遍，主人敬酒；吹笙的人进来，把《南陔》、《白华》、《华黍》三支乐曲各吹奏一遍，主人敬酒；乐工与吹笙的间隔着轮流歌唱演奏各三曲，再合着歌唱演奏各三曲，乐工报告乐曲已经完备，就出去了。
English: The musicians come in, go up to the hall, sing the three songs of "Deer Song," "Four Horses" and "Emperor and Empress" one by one, and the host makes a toast; the trumpeters come in, play the three pieces of music of "Nanjing," "Baihua" and "Huaqin" one by one, and the host makes a toast; the musicians and the trumpeters take turns singing and playing the three songs at intervals, and then sing and play the three songs together. The musicians report that the music has been completed and go out.

古文：二人扬觯，乃立司正，焉知其能和乐而不流也。
现代文：主人的两个侍从举起酒杯帮助敬酒，于是又设置了监督行礼的专职人员。从这些礼仪之中可以知道他们能够和睦安乐而不淫荡。
English: Two of the master's attendants raised their glasses to help with the toast, and a full-time attendant was appointed to supervise the ceremony. From these etiquettes, it can be seen that they can be harmonious and happy without being lewd.

古文：宾酬主人，主人酬介，介酬众宾，少长以齿，终于沃洗者，焉知其能弟长而无遗也。
现代文：贵宾向主人敬酒表示答谢，主人向陪客敬酒表示答谢，陪客向一般客人敬酒表示答谢，宾主对年轻的年长的都根据年龄依次酬谢，最后轮到向主人手下盥洗酒杯的人酬谢。从这些礼仪之中可以知道他们能够尊重年轻的尊敬年长的而不遗漏一个人。
English: The guest of honor thanks the host for the toast, the host thanks the hostess for the toast, the host thanks the hostess for the toast, the host thanks the hostess for the toast, the guest thanks the host for the toast, the host thanks the host for the toast, the host thanks the host for the toast, the host thanks the host for the toast, the host thanks the host for the toast, the host thanks the host for the toast, the host thanks the host for the toast, the host thanks the host for the toast, the host thanks the host for the toast, the guest thanks the host for the toast, the host thanks the host for the toast, the guest thanks the host for the toast

古文：降，说屦升坐，修爵无数。
现代文：退下堂去，脱去鞋子，再登堂就坐，依次不断地敬酒。
English: He retreated down the hall, took off his shoes, re-entered the hall, sat down, and continued to toast in turn.

古文：饮酒之节，朝不废朝，莫不废夕。
现代文：请人喝酒的限度是，在早晨饮酒不耽误早上的工作，在傍晚喝酒不耽误晚上的事情。
English: Mastering drinking time is based on the principle of not delaying drinking in the morning and not delaying work in the evening.

古文：宾出，主人拜送，节文终遂，焉知其能安燕而不乱也。
现代文：贵宾出门，主人拱手鞠躬送行，礼节仪式就完成了。从这些礼仪中可以知道他们能够逸乐而不乖乱。
English: When the guests leave, the host bows to them, and the formalities are complete. From these etiquettes, you can see that they can enjoy themselves without being disorderly.

古文：贵贱明，隆杀辨，和乐而不流，弟长而无遗，安燕而不乱，此五行者，足以正身安国矣。
现代文：高贵者和卑贱者被区别清楚，隆重的礼仪和简省的礼仪被分别开来，和睦安乐而不淫荡，尊重年轻的尊敬年长的而不遗漏一个人，逸乐而不乖乱，这五种行为，足够用来端正身心安定国家了。
English: The nobility and lowliness of the guests are clear, the level of the invitation specification is clear, the harmony is happy and does not miss the etiquette, the elders and children are blessed and do not miss anything, they have fun and play in an orderly manner. If you do these five things, it is enough to make yourself not make mistakes and the country is stable.

古文：彼国安而天下安。
现代文：那国家安定了，那么整个天下也就安定了。
English: When a country is stable, the world is naturally stable.

古文：故曰：吾观于乡，而知王道之易易也。
现代文：所以说：我看到了乡中请人喝酒的礼仪就知道先王的政治原则实施起来是极其容易的。
English: So I said: I watched the town drinking ceremony and knew that it was easy to promote the royal way.

古文：乱世之征：其服组，其容妇。其俗淫，其志利，其行杂，其声乐险，其文章匿而采，其养生无度，其送死瘠墨，贱礼义而贵勇力，贫则为盗，富则为贼；治世反是也。
现代文：混乱的社会的迹象：那里的服装华丽，男人的容貌打扮得像妇女一样妖媚，那里的风俗淫荡，人们的志向是唯利是图，人们的行为驳杂不纯，那里的音乐邪恶怪僻，那里的文章内容邪恶而辞藻华美，那里的人将养身体没有限度，葬送死人俭省刻薄，轻视礼制与道义而崇尚勇敢与武力，贫穷的就盗窃，富裕的就贼害他人。治理得好的社会则与此相反。
English: The signs of a disordered society: where the dress is sumptuous, where the appearance of men is dressed up like women, where the customs are lascivious, where the aspirations of men are mercenary, where the actions of men are mixed and impure, where the music is evil and eccentric, where the content of the articles is evil and the words are beautiful, where there is no limit to the maintenance of the body, where the burial of the dead is frugal and mean, where propriety and morality are despised but bravery and force are revered, where the poor steal and the rich rob. A well-governed society is the opposite of this.

