古文：转圆者，无穷之计也。
现代文：运用计谋要像转动圆的事物，就像是效法猛兽的动作。
English: To use stratagem is like spinning a round thing, like imitating the movement of a wild beast.

古文：无穷者，必有圣人之心，以原不测之智；以不测之智而通心术，而神道混沌为一。
现代文：所谓要像圆珠那样运转自如，便是指计谋层出不穷，没有尽头。要能使计谋无穷运转，必须要有圣人的胸怀，才可以探究不可估量的智慧，以这种不可估量的智慧来通晓心术。自然之道是神妙莫测的，处于一种混沌的统一状态。
English: To function like a ball, means that the stratagems are endless, without end. For the stratagems to function endlessly, one must have the mind of a sage, in order to be able to explore the immeasurable wisdom, and with this immeasurable wisdom to understand the art of the mind. The way of nature is unfathomable, in a state of chaotic unity.

古文：以变论万类，说意无穷。
现代文：运用变化的观点来讨论万事万物，所阐明的道理是无穷无尽的。
English: There is no end to the wisdom to be gleaned from discussing all things from a variety of perspectives.

古文：智略计谋，各有形容，或圆或方，或阴或阳，或吉或凶，事类不同。
现代文：智慧和计谋，各有各的形态。有的灵活圆转，有的方正直率，有的公开，有的隐秘，有的顺利，有的凶险，按照事类各有不同。
English: Wisdom and cunning have their own forms. Some are flexible, some are honest, some are open, some are secret, some are smooth, some are dangerous, and they are different according to the type of matter.

古文：故圣人怀此，用转圆而求其合。
现代文：所以，圣人根据这种情况以运用智谋，像圆珠运转，以求计谋与事物状况相吻合。
English: Therefore, the sage, according to the situation, operates like a ball with the use of wisdom, in order to match the situation with the situation.

古文：故与造化者为始，动作无不包大道，以观神明之域。
现代文：他发扬自然造化之道，谋略开始后的一切举动无不包容自然造化之道，从而能观察研究神妙莫测的领域。
English: He promotes the way of natural creation, and all actions after the beginning of the strategy are all inclusive of the way of natural creation, so that he can observe and study the mysterious field.

古文：天地无极，人事无穷，各以成其类；见其计谋，必知其吉凶成败之所终。
现代文：天地无边无际，人事也吉凶循环，无穷无尽，各有种类归属。观察一个人的计谋，便可预测他的吉凶，是成还是败。
English: Heaven and earth are boundless, and there is an endless cycle of good luck and bad luck for people, with different types of belonging. By observing a person's strategy, you can predict his good luck and bad luck, and whether he will succeed or fail.

古文：转圆者，或转而吉，或转而凶，圣人以道，先知存亡，乃知转圆而从方。
现代文：计谋像圆珠一样运转变化，有的转化为吉，有的转化为凶险。圣人凭借自然之道，能够预先了解事物的成败，因此能够灵活运转而确立某种方正的策略，抓住事物成败的关键。
English: A sage, by virtue of nature, can understand the success or failure of things in advance, so he can operate flexibly to establish a certain correct strategy and grasp the key to the success or failure of things.

古文：圆者，所以合语；方者，所以错事。
现代文：圆转灵活，是为了使彼此意见融洽；方正直率，是为了正确地处理事务。
English: Circularity and flexibility are for the purpose of harmonizing each other's opinions; rectitude and honesty are for the purpose of correctly handling affairs.

古文：转化者，所以观计谋；接物者，所以观进退之意。
现代文：运转变化，是为了观察计谋的得失；接触外物，即与人交往，是为了观察别人进退的意图。
English: The change in the operation is to observe the gains and losses of the strategy; the contact with foreign objects, that is, the interaction with people, is to observe the intention of others to advance and retreat.

古文：皆见其会，乃为要结以接其说也。
现代文：看清事物症结所在，进而把握问题的关键，找到游说他人的办法。
English: See clearly the crux of the matter, then grasp the key to the problem, and find a way to lobby others.

