古文：荆州牧刘表不供职贡，多行僭伪，遂乃郊祀天地，拟斥乘舆。
现代文：原文东汉献帝的时候，荆州牧刘表不仅不按规定向朝廷缴纳税负，还冒用天子的排场执事，郊祭天地，越级乘坐天子用的马车。
English: When the Eastern Han Dynasty offered the emperor, Jingzhou Moku Liu table not only did not pay the tax burden to the imperial court according to regulations, but also pretended to use Tianzi's parade deacon, suburb festival heaven and earth, and cross-grade to ride Tianzi's carriage.

古文：诏书班下其事，孔融上疏，以为 齐兵次楚，唯责包茅，今王师未即行诛，且宜隐郊祀之事，以崇国体。若形之四方，非所以塞邪萌。 
现代文：献帝下诏斥责，孔融上书劝谏说： 如今王师正如齐桓公兵伐楚国只能责备不上贡的茅包一样，并没有能力去惩罚刘表，陛下不能提及刘表祭祀天地的事情，以维护朝廷尊严；如果轻易地张扬，让天下人知道，不是阻止其邪念的方法。 
English: Presenting the imperial edict of reprimand to the emperor, Kong Rong wrote a letter of persuasion to the emperor, saying: Today, Wang Shi, just as the soldiers of Qi Huan can only reproach the state of Chu for not paying tribute, does not have the ability to punish Liu Biao. His Majesty cannot mention the matter of Liu Biao's sacrifice to heaven and earth in order to maintain the dignity of the imperial court; if it is easy to publicize, let the world know, it is not a way to stop his evil thoughts.

古文：凡僭叛不道之事，骤见则骇，习闻则安。
现代文：类似这种大逆不道的事情，百姓初次听说，不免震惊害怕，但是听多了，也就习惯了。
English: When the people first heard of such an act of high treason, they were shocked and frightened, but as they heard more, they got used to it.

古文：力未及剪除而章其恶，以习民之耳目，且使民知大逆之逋诛，朝廷何震之有？
现代文：如果朝廷能力尚不足以除恶，就轻率诏告天下，只会让百姓习惯叛逆不受惩罚，在百姓面前显露出朝廷的无能。
English: If the ability of the imperial court is not enough to eliminate evil, it will rashly announce to the world, which will only make the people accustomed to rebellion without punishment, and reveal the incompetence of the imperial court in front of the people.

古文：召陵之役，管夷吾不声楚僭，而仅责楚贡，取其易于结局，度势不得不尔。
现代文：春秋齐桓公在召陵伐楚，管仲就不以楚王僭尊号为由，而只是责备楚王不纳贡赋，为的就是日后易于收场，衡量当时局势，真的是不得不如此啊。
English: In the spring and autumn, when King Qi Huan was calling for the tomb of King Chu, Guanzhong did not use King Chu's honorific title as a reason, but only accused King Chu of not paying tribute, in order to make it easier to close the game in the future. Judging from the situation at that time, it really had to be so.

古文：孔明使人贺吴称帝，非其欲也，势也。
现代文：三国时孔明派使臣向孙权道贺称帝，并非孔明真有道贺之意，而是形势所迫，不得不通权达变的做法。
English: At the time of the Three Kingdoms, the envoys of Confucius and Ming sent to congratulate Sun Quan on his accession to the throne. It was not that Confucius really wanted to congratulate, but that he was forced by the situation to change the power.

古文：儒家 虽败犹荣 之说，误人不浅。
现代文：儒家那种虽败犹荣的论调，实在是害人不浅啊。
English: The argument that Confucianism is victorious in spite of defeat is really harmful to people.

