古文：世谓古人君贤，则道德施行，施行则功成治安；人君不肖，则道德顿废，顿废则功败治乱。
现代文：世俗的人认为古代君王贤明所以道德教化得以施行，施行道德教化就政事成功社会稳定；君王不贤明道德教化被舍弃而衰败，道德教化衰败就政事失败社会动乱。
English: Secular people believe that the ancient kings were wise, so moral education was able to be implemented, and the implementation of moral education led to political success and social stability; the kings were not wise, and moral education was abandoned and declined, and the moral education and decline led to political failure and social turmoil.

古文：古今论者，莫谓不然。
现代文：从古至今论述此事的人，没有认为不是这样的。
English: No one who has discussed the matter from ancient times to the present has suggested otherwise.

古文：何则？
现代文：为什么呢？
English: Why is that?

古文：见尧、舜贤圣致太平，桀、纣无道致乱得诛。
现代文：这表现在尧、舜圣贤招致天下太平，桀、纣政治昏庸招致社会动乱而被杀。
English: This is manifested in the fact that the sages and saints brought about world peace, while the political dullards brought about social turmoil and were killed.

古文：如实论之，命期自然，非德化也。
现代文：按照实际情况来评论，命运的期数本来如此，并不是君王的道德教化在起作用。
English: To comment on the actual situation, the number of periods of fate is as it is, and it is not the moral education of the king that is at work.

古文：吏百石以，若食以，居位治民，为政布教，教行与止，民治与乱，皆有命焉。
现代文：凡 百石 以下和 斗食 以上的各级官吏，处在一定的官位治理老百姓，办理政事施行教化，教化行得通行不通，老百姓安定与动乱，都是由 命 决定的。
English: All officials at all levels who are under a hundred stone and above the level of "fighting for food" are in a certain official position to govern the people, handle government affairs and carry out enlightenment. Enlightenment is not possible, and the people's stability and turmoil are determined by fate.

古文：或才高行洁，居位职废；或智浅操洿，治民而立。
现代文：有的人才智高超行为廉洁，当官却没有取得成效；有的人才智浅薄品行不正，却治民有方而取得成功。
English: Some people have superior intelligence and clean behavior, but they have not achieved any results as officials; some people have shallow intelligence and dishonest behavior, but they have the ability to govern the people and succeed.

古文：上古之黜陟幽明，考功，据有功而加赏，案无功而施罚。
现代文：远古时代罢免昏庸的官吏，提拔贤明的官吏，要考核官吏的政绩，根据政绩而加以奖赏，也根据没有政绩而加以惩罚。
English: In ancient times, officials with mediocrity should be dismissed and officials with wisdom should be promoted. Officials' political achievements should be evaluated, and they should be rewarded according to their political achievements and punished according to their lack of political achievements.

古文：是考命而长禄，非实才而厚能也。
现代文：其实这是在考察他们的 命 而推崇他们的 禄 ，并不是核实他们的才干，重视他们的能力。
English: In fact, this is looking at their lives and praising their merits, not verifying their talents and valuing their abilities.

古文：论者因考功之法，据效而定贤，则谓民治国安者，贤君之所致；民乱国危者，无道之所为也。
现代文：那些论事者由于考察官吏政绩的方法，是根据功效来评定官吏贤与不贤，就说百姓安定国家太平，是贤君的政治带来的；百姓动乱国家危险，是君王无道造成的。
English: Those commentators, because of the method of inspecting the political performance of officials and evaluating officials as wise or unwise according to their effectiveness, said that the people's stability and the country's peace were brought about by the politics of the wise men; the people's turmoil and the country's danger were caused by the king's folly.

古文：故危乱之变至，论者以责人君，归罪於为政不得其道。
现代文：所以预兆国家危乱的灾变出现时，论事者就据此责备君王，把罪过归结到君王施政不符合天道上来。
English: Therefore, when a calamity foreshadowing a national crisis occurs, commentators blame the monarch on this basis, attributing the crime to the fact that the monarch's governance does not conform to the heavenly way.

古文：人君受以自责，愁神苦思，撼动形体，而危乱之变，终不减除。
现代文：君王接受了责备并自我进行追究，精神思想愁苦不已，身心操劳，而预兆国家危乱的灾变最终也没有减少消除。
English: The monarch accepted the reproach and self-investigated, the spirit and mind were saddened, the body and mind were exhausted, and the calamity that foreshadowed the national crisis did not reduce and eliminate in the end.

古文：空愤人君人心，使明知之主，虚受之责，世论传称，使之然也。
现代文：白白地使君王的心情沉痛烦闷，让明智的君王平白无故地受到那种责备，这是社会舆论和流言造成的结果。
English: It is the result of public opinion and gossip that a king's heart is grieved and vexed in vain, and that a wise king is reproached in vain.

古文：夫贤君能治当安之民，不能化当乱之世。
现代文：贤君能够治理命当安定的百姓，而不能够改变命当危乱的世道。
English: A wise ruler can govern a people whose fate is stable, but cannot change a world that is in peril.

古文：良医能行其针药，使方术验者，遇未死之人，得未死之病也。
现代文：良医能够施行他的针药，使药方医术产生疗效，是因为他遇到了暂时还不会死的人，得的是不危及生命的病。
English: The good doctor is able to administer his injections, to make the medicine work, because he has met someone who is not going to die for the time being, who has a non-life-threatening illness.

古文：如命穷病困，则虽扁鹊末如之何。
现代文：如果寿命到了尽头，病已无法医治，那么即使是扁鹊也毫无办法。
English: If you are at the end of your life and the disease is incurable, then even a tonsillectomy will not help.

古文：夫命穷病困之不可治，犹夫乱民之不可安也；药气之愈病，犹教导之安民也，皆有命时，不可令勉力也。
现代文：寿命到了尽头病已无法医治，如同动乱的百姓不能安定一样。药力能治好病，如同教化疏导能安定老百姓一样。这都有它的命数和时运，不能全靠人力去改变。
English: At the end of life, the disease can no longer be cured, just as the people in turmoil cannot be stabilized. Medicine can cure the disease, just as education and guidance can stabilize the people. All of this has its life and time, and can not be changed by manpower.

古文：公伯寮诉子路於季孙，子服景伯以告孔子。孔子曰： 道之将行也与，命也！
现代文：公伯寮在季孙那里说子路的坏话，子服景伯把这件事告诉了孔子，孔子说： 我的政治主张能够实行，这是天命决定的！
English: At Ji Sun's place, Gongbo Liao spoke ill of Zilu, and Zifu Jingbo told this to Confucius. Confucius said, "If my political proposition can be put into practice, it is determined by the will of heaven!"

古文：道之将废也与，命也！ 
现代文：我的政治主张没法实行，这也是天命决定的啊！ 
English: My political ideas can't be implemented, which is also decided by fate!

古文：由此言之，教之行废，国之安危，皆在命时，非人力也。
现代文：据此说来，教化行不行得通，国家的安定危乱，都是由命数时运决定的，并不决定于人的力量。
English: According to this view, whether the indoctrination is effective or not, and whether the country is stable or unstable, are all determined by the fate of life and death, and are not determined by human strength.

古文：夫世乱民逆，国之危殆，灾害系於上天，贤君之德，不能消却。
现代文：世道混乱百姓叛逆，国家的危险灾害，决定于上天，贤君的德行不能使它们消退。
English: The chaos of the world, the rebellion of the people, and the dangerous disasters of the country are determined by heaven, and the virtuous deeds of the wise men cannot make them recede.

古文：《诗》道周宣王遭大旱矣。
现代文：《诗经》上说周宣王时遭受大旱灾。
English: "The Book of Songs" says that during the reign of King Zhou Xuan, the country suffered from a severe drought.

古文：《诗》曰： 周余黎民，靡有孑遗。 
现代文：《诗经》上说： 周朝留下的众民，没有一人不受罪。 
English: "The Book of Songs" says: "Of all the people left behind by the Zhou Dynasty, not a single one will not be punished."

古文：言无有可遗一人不被害者。
现代文：讲的是没有一个人可能遗漏而不受灾害。
English: It is said that no one can be left out of the disaster.

古文：宣王贤者，嫌於德微。仁惠盛者，莫过尧、汤，尧遭洪水，汤遭大旱。
现代文：如果周宣王只是个贤君，在道德上还嫌不足的话，那么仁慈完美的君王，谁也超不过尧和汤，然而尧却遭受洪水之灾，汤却遭受大旱之灾。
English: If Zhou Xuan Wang was only a wise ruler, but morally deficient, then no benevolent and perfect king could surpass Zou and Tang, but Zou suffered from floods, while Tang suffered from droughts.

古文：水旱，灾害之甚者也，而二圣逢之，岂二圣政之所致哉？
现代文：洪水干旱是灾害中最厉害的了，然而两位圣王却遇上了。难道是由于两位圣王的政治所造成的吗？
English: Floods and droughts are the most severe of disasters, yet they befell the two holy kings. Was it caused by the politics of the two holy kings?

古文：天地历数当然也。
现代文：是天地间的期数决定了出现这样的灾害。
English: It is the number of periods between heaven and earth that determines the occurrence of such disasters.

古文：以尧、汤之水旱，准百王之灾害，非德所致，非德所致，则其福佑非德所为也。
现代文：用尧和汤遭受的水旱灾害，权衡历代帝王所遭受的自然灾害，说明这不是由于君王的道德好坏所造成的。
English: Using the flood and drought disasters suffered by Tong and Tang to weigh the natural disasters suffered by successive emperors, it shows that this is not caused by the morality of the monarchs.

古文：贤君之治国也，犹慈父之治家。
现代文：不由君王的道德造成灾害，那么国家承受上天的福祐也并不是君王的品德所带来的。
English: If the king's morals do not cause disasters, then the country's ability to receive blessings from heaven is not brought about by the king's character.

古文：慈父耐平教明令，耐使子孙皆为孝善。
现代文：贤君治理国家，好比慈父管理家庭。慈父能进行正确的教育和明白的告诫，也不能使子孙都成为孝善的人。
English: A wise ruler governs a country, just as a kind father governs a family. A kind father cannot give correct education and clear admonition, nor can he make his children and grandchildren become filial.

古文：子孙孝善，是家兴也；百姓平安，是国昌也。
现代文：子孙是孝善的人，是家庭兴旺的表现；百姓平安，是国家昌盛的表现。
English: If one's children and grandchildren are filial, it is a sign of a prosperous family; if the people are peaceful, it is a sign of a prosperous country.

古文：昌必有衰，兴必有废。
现代文：昌盛到一定的时候就必定会衰微，兴旺到一定的时候必定会废败。
English: When prosperity reaches a certain point, it will inevitably decline. When prosperity reaches a certain point, it will inevitably fail.

古文：兴昌非德所能成，然则衰废非德所能败也。
现代文：兴旺昌盛不是君王的道德所能造成的，同样衰微废败也不是君王的道德所能引起的。
English: Prosperity is not caused by the king's morality, nor is decline caused by the king's morality.

古文：昌衰兴废，皆天时也。
现代文：昌衰兴废，都是由天时决定的。
English: Prosperity, decline, prosperity and waste are all determined by the weather.

古文：此善恶之实，未言苦乐之效也。
现代文：以上说的只是关于善恶方面的实际情况，还没有谈到痛苦和欢乐方面的效验。
English: The above is only about the actual situation of good and evil, and has not yet talked about the effectiveness of pain and joy.

古文：家安人乐，富饶财用足也。
现代文：家庭平安老少欢乐，是因为家庭富饶财物费用丰足的缘故。
English: The reason why families are safe and happy, whether young or old, is because they are rich in wealth and resources.

古文：案富饶者命厚所致，非贤惠所获也。
现代文：考察富饶的人，是因为他的 命厚 而带来的，并不是因为他贤惠而获得的。
English: Consider the rich man, that he was made rich by his prosperity, and not by his poverty.

古文：人皆知富饶居安乐者命禄厚，而不知国安治化行者历数吉也。
现代文：人们都知道家境富饶处在安乐之中的人是因为他 命禄 厚重，却不知道国家安定，教化施行，是由于 历数 吉利所决定的。
English: It is well known that those who are well-off and live in comfort do so because of their good fortune, but they do not know that the stability of the country and the implementation of enlightenment are determined by the auspiciousness of the calendar.

古文：故世治非贤圣之功，衰乱非无道之致。
现代文：所以天下太平不是贤圣的功劳，天下衰微动乱也不是君王无道造成的。
English: Therefore, the world's peace is not the merit of the saints, and the world's decline and turmoil are not caused by the kings.

古文：国当衰乱，贤圣不能盛；时当治，恶人不能乱。
现代文：国家该当衰乱，即使是贤圣也不能使它昌盛；时势该当太平，即使是恶人也不能使它动乱。
English: The country should be in a state of decay, even if the wise cannot make it flourish; the situation should be peaceful, even if the wicked cannot make it turbulent.

古文：世之治乱，在时不在政；国之安危，在数不在教。
现代文：天下的太平与动乱，决定于时运而不决定于政治；国家的安危，决定于气数而不决定于教化。
English: The world's peace and turmoil are determined by the current situation and not by politics; the country's security is determined by the number of qi and not by enlightenment.

古文：贤不贤之君，明不明之政，无能损益。
现代文：君王贤与不贤，政治清不清明，对此都不能加以改变。
English: Whether the ruler is virtuous or not, whether the politics are clear or not, none of this can be changed.

古文：世称五帝之时，天下太平，家有十年之蓄，人有君子之行。
现代文：世人称颂五帝的时候，天下太平，每户人家都有十年的积蓄，人人都具有君子的品行。
English: When the world was praising the Five Emperors, the world was at peace, every household had ten years of savings, and everyone had the manners of a gentleman.

古文：或时不然，世增其美，亦或时政致。
现代文：也许事实不是这样，而是人们夸大了那时的美好情况；也或许是这样，但都不是由于政治造成的。
English: Maybe it wasn't, and people exaggerated the good times; maybe it was, but it wasn't because of politics.

古文：何以审之？
现代文：用什么来说明这一点呢？
English: What can be used to illustrate this?

古文：夫世之所以为乱者，不以贼盗众多，兵革并起，民弃礼义，负畔其上乎？
现代文：社会之所以造成混乱的原因，不是由于盗贼众多，到处发生战争，老百姓抛弃了礼义，背叛了他们的君王而造成的吗？
English: Wasn't the reason for the chaos in society caused by the fact that there were so many thieves, there were wars everywhere, and the common people abandoned civility and betrayed their king?

古文：若此者，由谷食乏绝，不能忍饥寒。
现代文：像这类事情，是由于粮食缺乏，人们不能忍受饥饿寒冷所造成的。
English: Things like this are caused by lack of food, people can't stand the cold and hunger.

古文：夫饥寒并至而能无为非者寡，然则温饱并至而能不为善者希。传曰： 仓禀实，民知礼节；衣食足，民知荣辱。 
现代文：在饥寒交迫的情况下而能不做坏事的人是很少的，那么在衣食充足的情况下不能做好事的人也是很少的。传上说： 谷仓米库充足，老百姓就会知道礼节；衣服食物富足，老百姓就会知道荣辱。 
English: There are very few people who can not do bad things when they are hungry and cold, so there are very few people who can not do good things when they have enough food and clothing. Legend says: If there is enough rice in the barn, the people will know the etiquette; if there is enough clothes and food, the people will know the honor and disgrace.

古文：让生於有余，争起於不足。
现代文：谦让产生于富余，争斗起因于不足。
English: Humility comes from abundance, strife from scarcity.

古文：谷足食多，礼义之心生；礼丰义重，平安之基立矣。
现代文：谷物充足食物丰富，礼义之心就会产生；礼仪盛多讲究礼义，国家安定的基础就奠定了。
English: When grain is plentiful and food is abundant, a sense of propriety arises; when etiquette is abundant and propriety is emphasized, the foundation for national stability is laid.

古文：故饥岁之春，不食亲戚，穰岁之秋，召及四邻。
现代文：因此，荒年的春天，不拿东西给亲戚吃；丰年的秋天，邀请四邻共同享受。
English: Therefore, in the spring of a bad year, do not take things to relatives to eat; in the autumn of a good year, invite four neighbors to enjoy together.

古文：不食亲戚，恶行也；召及四邻，善义也。
现代文：不拿东西给亲戚吃，是恶劣的行为；邀请四邻共同享受，是善良的义举。
English: It is a bad deed not to take food to relatives; it is a good deed to invite four neighbors to enjoy together.

古文：为善恶之行，不在人质性，在於岁之饥穰。
现代文：产生善恶行为的原因，不在于人的本质特性，而在于年岁的丰歉。
English: The cause of good and evil behavior does not lie in the essential characteristics of human beings, but in the age-old apologies.

古文：由此言之，礼义之行，在谷足也。
现代文：因此说来，礼义的推行，在于谷物的充足。
English: Therefore, the promotion of etiquette lies in the sufficiency of grain.

古文：案谷成败，自有年岁。
现代文：考察谷物收成的好坏，本来是由年岁决定的。
English: The quality of the grain harvest was originally determined by the number of years.

古文：年岁水旱，五谷不成，非政所致，时数然也。
现代文：发生水灾或旱灾的年头，庄稼没有收成，这并不是由于政治所造成的，而是 时数 本该如此。
English: In a flood or drought year, crops fail, not because of politics, but because of timing.

古文：必谓水旱政治所致，不能为政者莫过桀、纣，桀、纣之时，宜常水旱。
现代文：如果一定认为水旱灾害是因为政治所造成的，不善于治理国家的人莫过于桀和纣了，那么桀、纣当政之时，应该经常发生水灾和旱灾。
English: If we are to believe that floods and droughts are caused by politics, and that the only people who are not good at governing the country are Shao and Zou, then floods and droughts should occur frequently when Shao and Zou are in power.

古文：案桀、纣之时，无饥耗之灾。
现代文：考察桀、纣当政之时，却没有发生饥荒灾害。
English: When the governments of Chiang Kai-shek and Chiang Kai-shek were in power, there were no famines.

古文：灾至自有数，或时返在圣君之世。
现代文：灾害出现自有一定的 时数 ，也许反而在圣君当政之世出现。
English: Disasters occur naturally over a certain period of time, but may instead occur during the reign of a saint.

古文：实事者说尧之洪水，汤之大旱，皆有遭遇，非政恶之所致。
现代文：据实论事的人解释尧时的洪水、汤时的大旱，都认为碰巧遇到这样的 时数 ，并不是因为政治不好而造成的。
English: According to the explanation of the truth-tellers, the floods in the flood season and the drought in the soup season are all believed to have happened by chance, and are not caused by bad politics.

古文：说百王之害，独谓为恶之应，此见尧、汤德优，百王劣也。
现代文：解释历代帝王遇到的灾害，却偏偏说是政治不好的征兆，这种解释只是为了表明尧、汤道德高尚，历代帝王都不好而已。
English: The explanation of the disasters encountered by the emperors of past generations, but biased as a sign of bad politics, this explanation is only to show that the emperor is moral and the emperors of past generations are not good.

古文：审一足以见百，明恶足以照善。
现代文：知道了一件事就足以了解一百件，明白了什么叫恶就足以比照什么是善。
English: To know one thing is enough to know a hundred, to know what is evil is enough to know what is good.

古文：尧、汤证百王，至百王遭变，非政所致，以变见而明祸福。
现代文：根据尧、汤的情况来论证历代帝王，历代帝王遇到的灾害，都不是由于政治所造成的。
English: On the basis of the situation of the soup and stew, it is argued that the disasters encountered by the emperors of all ages are not caused by politics.

古文：五帝致太平，非德所就，明矣。
现代文：根据灾变的出现而辨明是祸还是福，五帝时代出现的太平社会，不是由于道德所造成的，就很清楚了。
English: It is clear that the peaceful society that emerged in the era of the Five Emperors was not caused by morality.

古文：人之温病而死也，先有凶色见於面部。
现代文：人患了温病将要死的时候，事先会有带病态的气色在面部出现。
English: When a person is suffering from hypothermia and is about to die, a sickly look appears on the face beforehand.

古文：其病，遇邪气也，其病不愈。至於身死，命寿讫也。
现代文：生这种病，是遇到邪气了。这种病治不好，会引起死亡，寿命就会终结。
English: If you have this disease, you have encountered evil. This disease is not curable, it will cause death, and your life will end.

古文：国之乱亡，与此同验。
现代文：国家的混乱危亡，与人生病是同样的征兆。
English: The chaos of a country in danger of collapse is the same sign as a person falling ill.

古文：有变见於天地，犹人温病而死，色见於面部也。
现代文：天地间有灾变出现，如同人患温病将死的时候，病态气色出现在面部一样。
English: There is a cataclysm between heaven and earth, just as when a person is about to die from a fever, a sickly look appears on the face.

古文：有水旱之灾，犹人遇气而病也。
现代文：出现水旱灾害，如同人遇到邪气而生病一样。
English: The occurrence of floods and droughts is like people getting sick when they encounter evil spirits.

古文：灾祸不除，至於国亡，犹病不愈，至於身死也。
现代文：灾祸不消除，就会引起国家灭亡；如同病治不好，会引起人死亡一样。
English: If the scourge is not eliminated, it will lead to the destruction of the country; just as if the disease is not cured, it will lead to death.

古文：论者谓变征政治，贤人温病色凶，可谓操行所生乎？
现代文：论者认为灾变是政治好坏的征兆，贤人患了温病气色呈现病态，可以认为是由于他的操行所产生出来的吗？
English: Some commentators believe that the cataclysm is a sign of good or bad politics. The sage suffered from hypothermia and his appearance was sickly. Can it be said that it was caused by his behavior?

古文：谓水旱者无道所致，贤者遭病，可谓无状所得乎？
现代文：认为水旱灾害是由于君王无道所造成的，贤人生了病，可以认为是他的行为恶劣而得的病吗？
English: Do you think that the floods and droughts were caused by the king's lack of morality? If a wise man falls ill, can it be said that his illness was caused by his bad behavior?

古文：谓亡者为恶极，贤者身死，可谓罪重乎？
现代文：认为国家灭亡是政治坏到了极点，贤人死了，可以认为是他的罪行深重吗？
English: To think that the country's demise is the culmination of bad politics and the death of a wise man, can we say that his crime is serious?

古文：夫贤人有被病而早死，恶人有完强而老寿，人之病死，不在操行为恶也。
现代文：贤人有得病而早死的，恶人有身强力壮而长寿的。病死的人，不在于他的品行恶劣。
English: The wise die young from disease, the wicked live long and vigorous lives. It is not because of bad conduct that a man dies of disease.

古文：然则国之乱亡，不在政之是非。
现代文：那么国家的动乱危亡，也不在于政治的正确与错误。
English: Then the country's turmoil and peril does not lie in political correctness and error.

古文：恶人完强而老寿，非政平安而常存。
现代文：恶人身强力壮而长寿，政治不好国家也能平安而长期地存在下去。
English: The villain is strong and long-lived, and the country can continue to exist safely and for a long time if the politics are not good.

古文：由此言之，祸变不足以明恶，福瑞不足以表善，明矣。
现代文：由此说来，祸变产生不足以说明政治不好，福瑞出现也不足以说明政治好，就很清楚了。
English: From this, it is clear that the occurrence of calamity is not enough to show that politics is bad, nor is the appearance of forgery enough to show that politics is good.

古文：在天之变，日月薄蚀，四十二月日一食，五六月月亦一食食有常数，不在政治，百变千灾，皆同一状，未必人君政教所致。
现代文：在天上出现的变化，是日月遮光而发生日食、月食现象，四十二个月发生一次日食，每五六个月发生一次月食。日食、月食的发生，有一个固定的期数，不在于政治的好坏。千百次灾变，都是同一种情况，不一定是由于君王施政设教不当所造成的。
English: The changes that appear in the sky are solar eclipses and lunar eclipses that occur when the sun and moon are eclipsed. A solar eclipse occurs once every forty-two months, and a lunar eclipse occurs once every five or six months. The occurrence of solar eclipses and lunar eclipses has a fixed number of periods, which is not due to the quality of politics. The thousands of disasters are all the same situation, and are not necessarily caused by the king's improper governance.

古文：岁害鸟帑，周、楚有祸；綝然之气见，宋、卫、陈、郑皆灾。
现代文：岁星冲犯朱雀的尾部，周、楚两国将有灾祸；慧星出现，宋、卫、陈、郑四国都遭受了灾害。
English: When the star of the year impinges on the tail of the scarlet ibis, the two countries of Zhou and Chu will have a disaster; when the comet appears, the four countries of Song, Wei, Chen and Zheng have all suffered disasters.

古文：当此之时，六国政教未必失误也。
现代文：正当这个时候，这六个国家的施政设教，不一定有什么失误。
English: At this very moment, the political leaders of these six countries are not necessarily making any mistakes.

古文：历阳之都，一夕沈而为湖，当时历阳长吏未必诳妄也。
现代文：历阳县城，在一个晚上就沉陷下去成为湖泊，当时的历阳地方官吏，不一定有欺诈妄为的过失。
English: The county seat of Liyang sank into a lake in one night. The local officials of Liyang at that time may not have committed fraud.

古文：成败系於天，吉凶制於时。
现代文：成败决定于上天，吉凶决定于时数。
English: Success or failure is determined by the heavens, and good or bad luck is determined by the number of hours.

古文：人事未为，天气已见，非时而何？
现代文：人还没有具体行动，天上的征兆已经出现，不是时数又是什么呢？
English: People have not yet taken concrete actions, but the signs in the heavens have already appeared. If not the number of hours, then what?

古文：五谷生地，一丰一耗；谷粜在市，一贵一贱。
现代文：五谷生长在田地里，有时丰收有时歉收；在市场上出售的谷物，价格有时高有时低。
English: Grain is grown in the fields, sometimes with a good harvest and sometimes with a bad harvest; the price of grain sold in the market is sometimes high and sometimes low.

古文：丰者未必贱，耗者未必贵。
现代文：丰收年景谷物不一定便宜，歉收年头谷物不一定价钱高。
English: Cereals harvested in good years are not necessarily cheap, and those harvested in bad years are not necessarily expensive.

古文：丰耗有岁，贵贱有时。
现代文：丰收歉收有一定的年头，价高价低有一定的时数。
English: Harvest failure has a certain number of years, price highs and lows have a certain number of hours.

古文：时当贵，丰谷价增；时当贱，耗谷直减。
现代文：时数注定谷价应当高，丰收的谷物价值大增；时数注定谷价应当低，歉收的谷物价值大减。
English: Time predetermines that grain prices should be high, and the value of grain from a good harvest will increase greatly; time predetermines that grain prices should be low, and the value of grain from a poor harvest will decrease greatly.

古文：夫谷之贵贱不在丰耗，犹国之治乱不在善恶。
现代文：谷物的价格高低，不在于丰收歉收，如同国家的治乱不在于政治的好坏一样。
English: Whether the price of grain is high or low does not depend on whether the harvest is good or bad, just as whether the country is in a state of chaos does not depend on whether the government is good or bad.

古文：贤君之立，偶在当治之世，德自明於上，民自善於下，世平民安，瑞佑并至，世则谓之贤君所致。
现代文：贤君登位，刚巧遇到社会注定该当安定的时代，在上的君王的道德自然很好，在下的老百姓自然良善，天下太平百姓安乐，祥瑞福祐，一齐到来，世人就认为这是贤君所带来的。
English: When a wise man ascends to the throne and coincidentally encounters an era in which society is destined to be stable, the morality of the kings above is naturally good, the people below are naturally good, the world is peaceful, the people are happy, and the world is prosperous, the world thinks that this is brought about by the wise man.

古文：无道之君，偶生於当乱之时，世扰俗乱，灾害不绝，遂以破国亡身灭嗣，世皆谓之为恶所致。
现代文：无道的君王，刚巧生逢社会注定该当变乱的时代，世道混乱社会不安定，灾害接连不断，竟至于国破身亡子孙后代断绝，世人都认为这是政治不良所造成的。
English: The king without a path happened to be born at a time when the society was destined to be in turmoil, the world was in chaos, the society was unstable, and disasters were continuous. As for the country being ruined and the future generations being cut off, the world believed that this was caused by bad politics.

古文：若此，明於善恶之外形，不见祸福之内实也。
现代文：诸如此类的说法，只看到善恶的表面现象，没有看到祸福的内在实情。
English: Such kind of argument only sees the surface phenomenon of good and evil, and does not see the inner reality of good and evil.

古文：祸福不在善恶，善恶之证不在祸福。
现代文：遭祸受福不在于为善或为恶，善恶的验证也不在于遭祸还是受福。
English: Suffering and blessing is not about being good or evil, and the test of good and evil is not about suffering and blessing.

古文：长吏到官，未有所行，政教因前，无所改更。然而盗贼或多或寡，灾害或无或有，夫何故哉？
现代文：地方官上任，没有什么作为，施政教化完全因袭前任的做法，没有什么更改变动，然而盗贼或许多或许少，灾害有时有有时无，这是什么缘故呢？
English: When local officials take office, they do nothing, and their governance and education are entirely based on the practices of their predecessors. Nothing has changed. However, there may be many or few thieves, and disasters may or may not occur. What is the reason for this?

古文：长吏秩贵，当阶平安以升迁，或命贱不任，当由危乱以贬诎也。
现代文：如果地方官命中注定要做大官，就该当借助安定局面而得到升迁提拔，或者他的命贱享受不了当官的福份，就该当因为社会危乱而受到降职罢免。
English: If a local official is destined to be a high-ranking official, he should be promoted with the help of a stable situation, or if his lowly life cannot enjoy the blessings of being an official, he should be demoted and dismissed due to social crisis.

古文：以今之长吏，况古之国君，安危存亡，可得论也。
现代文：用现在的地方官的情况，去比照古代的国君，国家的安危存亡，产生的原因，就可以得出结论了。
English: Using the current situation of local officials and comparing it to the ancient sovereigns, the reasons for the survival of the country, we can come to a conclusion.

