古文：八年春，王正月，公会王人、齐侯、宋公、卫侯、许男、曹伯、陈世子款，盟于洮。
现代文：八年春季，周历正月，僖公与周王室使者、齐侯、宋公、卫侯、许僖公、曹伯、陈世子款在洮地会盟。
English: In the spring of the eighth year, in the first month of the lunar calendar, Zeng Gong and the Zhou royal envoys, Qi Hou, Song Gong, Wei Hou, Xu Zeng Gong, Cao Bo, and Chen Shizi made an alliance in Xuan Di.

古文：郑伯乞盟。
现代文：郑文公请求参加盟会。
English: Zheng Wengong requested to join the alliance.

古文：夏，狄伐晋。
现代文：夏季，狄人进攻晋国。
English: In the summer, the Di people attacked Jin.

古文：秋七月，禘于大庙，用致夫人。
现代文：秋季七月，举行宗庙合祭，把哀姜的神主放在太庙里。
English: In the autumn, in July, the ancestral temple festival was held, and the god of mourning cranes was placed in the ancestral temple.

古文：冬十有二月丁未，天王崩。
现代文：冬季十二月丁未，周天子去世。
English: In the winter of December, Zhou Tianzi passed away.

古文：八年春，盟于洮，谋王室也。郑伯乞盟，请服也。
现代文：八年春季，鲁僖公和周王室的使者、齐桓公、宋桓公、卫文公、许僖公、曹共公、陈世子款在洮地会盟，商谈安定王室。郑文公请求参加盟会，表示顺服。
English: In the spring of the eighth year, Lu Wei Gong and the emissaries of the Zhou royal family, Qi Huan Tong, Song Huan Gong, Wei Wen Gong, Xu Rong Gong, Cao Gong Gong Gong, and Chen Shizi, met at the Shiji League to discuss the stability of the royal family. Zheng Wen Gong requested to participate in the league and expressed his obedience.

古文：襄王定位而后发丧。
现代文：襄王的君位安定后，才举行丧礼。
English: The funeral was held only after King Xiang's reign was stabilized.

古文：晋里克帅师，梁由靡御，虢射为右，以败狄于采桑。
现代文：晋国的里克率领军队，梁由靡驾御战车，虢射作为车右，在采桑打败了狄人。
English: Rick from Jin Province led the army, and Liang Yu drove the chariot, shooting arrows as the chariot's right, and defeated Di Ren in Tsezang.

古文：梁由靡曰： 狄无耻，从之必大克。 
现代文：梁由靡说： 狄人不以逃走为耻，如果追击，必然大胜。 
English: Liang Yimai said: "People should not be ashamed of running away. If they pursue, they will surely win.

古文：里克曰： 拒之而已，无速众狄。 
现代文：里克说： 吓唬一下就行了，不要因为追击招来更多的狄人。 
English: Rick said, "It's just a scare, don't invite more demons to chase you."

古文：虢射曰： 期年，狄必至，示之弱矣。 
现代文：虢射说： 只要一年，狄人必然再来，不去追击，就是向他们示弱了。 
English: Li Ya said: As long as it is only one year, the Di people will inevitably come again. If you do not pursue them, you will show them weakness.

古文：夏，狄伐晋，报采桑之役也。
现代文：夏季，狄人进攻晋国，这是为了报复采桑这一战役，应验了，虢射所说一年的预言。
English: In the summer, the Di people attacked Jin Province. This was in retaliation for the Tsezang campaign, and fulfilled the one-year prophecy that Li Ya had said.

古文：复期月。秋，禘而致哀姜焉，非礼也。
现代文：秋季，举行宗庙合祭，把哀姜的神主放在太庙里，这是不合于礼的。
English: In autumn, when the ancestral temple festival is held, it is not proper to place the god of mourning ginger in the main temple.

古文：凡夫人不薨于寝，不殡于庙，不赴于同，不祔于姑，则弗致也。
现代文：凡是夫人，如果不死在正房里，不在祖庙里停棺，不向同盟国家发讣告，不陪祀祖姑，就不能把神主放进太庙里去。
English: If the wife does not die in the main house, does not stop the coffin in the ancestral temple, does not issue an obituary notice to the allied countries, and does not accompany the ancestral aunt, she cannot put the god into the temple.

古文：冬，王人来告丧，难故也，是以缓。
现代文：冬季，周王室的使者来鲁国讣告丧事，由于发生祸难，所以讣告迟了。
English: In winter, an emissary of the Zhou royal family came to Lu to announce the funeral. Due to the disaster, the obituary was delayed.

古文：宋公疾，大子兹父固请曰： 目夷长，且仁，君其立之。 
现代文：宋桓公得了重病，太子兹父再三请求说： 目夷年长而且仁爱，君王应该立他为国君。 
English: When Prince Song Huan fell seriously ill, the prince's father repeatedly pleaded with him, saying, "Since he is so old and benevolent, the king should make him the sovereign.

古文：公命子鱼。
现代文：宋桓公就下令要目夷继位。
English: King Song Huan ordered that Mei succeed to the throne.

古文：子鱼辞，曰： 能以国让，仁孰大焉？
现代文：目夷推谢说： 能够把国家辞让给别人，还有比这更大的仁爱吗？
English: "Is there any greater kindness than to be able to give up one's country to others?

古文：臣不及也，且又不顺 遂走而退。
现代文：下臣不如他！而且又不符合立君的顺序。 
English: His vassals are not as good as him! Moreover, they do not correspond to the order of enthronement.

