古文：世祖文皇帝下黄初四年
现代文：起，尽，一共五年。魏文帝黄初四年
English: from the beginning to the end, a total of five years. Emperor Wen of Wei and Emperor Huang of the first four years

古文：春，正月，曹真使张郃击破吴兵，遂夺据江陵中洲。
现代文：春季，正月，曹真派张击溃吴军一部，攻占江陵的中洲。
English: In the spring, in the first month of the year, Cao Zhen sent Zhang to defeat a part of the Wu army and capture Zhongzhou in Jiangling.

古文：二月，诸葛亮至永安。
现代文：二月，诸葛亮到达永安。
English: In February, Zhuge Liang arrived in Yong'an.

古文：曹仁以步骑数万向濡须，先扬声欲东攻羡溪，硃桓分兵赴之。
现代文：曹仁率步、骑兵数万人进军濡须，先放出风声说向东进攻羡溪，吴军濡须守将朱桓分派部队增援羡溪。
English: Cao Ren led tens of thousands of cavalry marching into Nuxu, first releasing rumors that they would attack Enshi Creek to the east, and the Wu Army sent Zhu Huan to reinforce Enshi Creek.

古文：既行，仁以大军径进。桓闻之，追还羡溪兵，兵未到而仁奄至。
现代文：援军刚出发，曹仁即率大军直扑濡须，朱桓得知后，急忙派人追回增援羡溪的部队，这支部队尚未返回，曹仁突然杀到。
English: As soon as the reinforcements set out, Cao Ren immediately led a large army to attack. After Zhu Huan learned of this, he hurriedly sent people to recover the troops that had been sent to reinforce Qianxi. The troops had not yet returned, and Cao Ren suddenly died.

古文：时桓手下及所部兵在者才五千人，诸将业业各有惧心，桓喻之曰： 凡两军交对，胜负在将，不在众寡。
现代文：当时，朱桓的守军仅有五千人，部下将领都惶惶有畏惧之心。朱桓对他们分析说： 两军交战，胜负的关键在于将领如何，而不在人数多寡。
English: At that time, Zhu Huan's defending army was only five thousand strong, and his subordinate generals were panicked and fearful. Zhu Huan analyzed them and said: The two armies are at war, and the key to victory and defeat lies in how the generals are, not in the number of people.

古文：诸君闻曹仁用兵行师，孰与桓邪？
现代文：诸位认为曹仁指挥作战的能力，会比我朱桓高明吗？
English: You have all heard of Cao Ren's ability to use soldiers in battle. How does he compare to me, Zhu Huan?

古文：兵法所以称 客倍而主人半 者，谓俱在平原无城隍之守，又谓士卒勇怯齐等故耳。
现代文：兵法所说， 远来进攻的军队要超过当地防守军队的一倍 ，是就平原旷野，没有城池坚守而言，也是针对双方战斗力相同而言。
English: According to the law of war, the attacking army from far away should be more than double the local defending army, both in terms of the plains and the wilderness, without a castle, and in terms of the same combat effectiveness of both sides.

古文：今仁既非智勇，加其士卒甚怯，又千里步涉，人马罢困。
现代文：如今，曹仁智勇不足，再加上所率兵将胆怯畏惧，又是千里跋涉，人困马乏。
English: Nowadays, Cao Ren's wisdom and courage are insufficient, coupled with the fact that the soldiers he leads are timid and afraid, and they have to travel thousands of miles, and they are short of manpower.

古文：桓与诸君共据高城，南临大江，北背山陵，以逸待劳，为主制客，此百战百胜之势，虽曹丕自来，尚不足忧，况仁等邪！ 
现代文：我和诸位高据坚城，南临长江，北靠山岭，以逸待劳，就地作好准备以制伏远来的敌人，这是百战百胜的形势，即使曹丕亲自来，我们尚且无忧，更不用说区区曹仁了。
English: I and all of you live in a fortified city, facing the Yangtze River to the south and the mountains to the north. We use leisure to wait for labor, and make preparations on the spot to subdue the distant enemy. This is a situation of a hundred victories. Even if Cao Pi comes in person, we are still worry-free, not to mention Cao Ren.

古文：桓乃偃旗鼓，外示虚弱以诱致仁。
现代文：于是朱桓偃旗息鼓，显赤虚弱以引诱曹仁。
English: As a result, Zhu Huanqin gave up the fight and appeared weak to lure Cao Ren away.

古文：仁遣其子泰攻濡须城，分遣将军常雕、王双等乘油船别袭中洲。
现代文：曹仁派儿子曹泰进攻濡须城，又派将军常雕、王双等人乘牛皮油船袭击濡须附近的中洲。
English: Cao Ren sent his son Cao Tai to attack the city of Nusu, and also sent generals Chang Zhao and Wang Shuang and others to attack the Middle Continent near Nusu on a cowhide oil ship.

古文：中洲者，桓部曲妻子所在也。
现代文：中洲，是朱桓的亲兵部队及其妻子、儿女所在地。
English: Nakasu is the location of Zhu Huan's troops and his wife and children.

古文：蒋济曰： 贼据西岸，列船上流，而兵入洲中，是为自内地狱，危亡之道也。 
现代文：蒋济说： 敌人据守长江西岸，船只停泊在上游，而我军却进攻中洲，这如同步入地狱，自取灭亡。 
English: Jiang Ji said: "The enemy is holding the west bank of the Yangtze River, the ships are anchored upstream, but our army is attacking Zhongzhou. This is like walking into hell and self-destruction.

古文：仁不从，自将万人留橐皋，为泰等后援。
现代文：曹仁不听，亲率一万人留驻橐，作为曹泰的后援部队。
English: Cao Ren did not listen, and his relatives and 10,000 men remained in Handan as Cao Tai's backup troops.

古文：桓遣别将击雕等而身自拒泰，泰烧营退。桓遂斩常雕，生虏王双，临陈杀溺死者千馀人。
现代文：朱桓分派将领进攻常雕，自己抗击曹泰，曹泰烧毁营盘退走；朱桓斩杀常雕，生擒王双，临阵被杀死淹死的魏军有一千余人。
English: Zhu Huan dispatched generals to attack the standing eagles, and fought against Cao Tai himself. Cao Tai burned the camp and retreated. Zhu Huan killed the standing eagles, but Wang Shuang was still alive. More than a thousand Wei soldiers were killed and drowned in the battle.

古文：初，吕蒙病笃，吴王问曰： 卿如不起，谁可代者？ 
现代文：当初吕病重，吴王问他： 如果你的病情不能好转，谁可以接替你的职务？ 
English: At that time, Lu was seriously ill. Wu Wang asked him, "If your condition does not improve, who can take over your position?"

古文：蒙对曰： 硃然胆守有馀，愚以为可任。 
现代文：吕蒙回答说： 朱然胆略过人，注重节操，我认为他可接替。 
English: Lv Meng replied, "Zhu Ran is more daring than others and pays attention to discipline. I think he can take over.

古文：硃然者，九真太守硃治姊子也；本姓施氏，治养以为子，时为昭武将军。
现代文：朱然是九真太守朱治的外甥，本姓施，被朱治收为养子，当时为昭武将军。
English: Zhu Ran was the nephew of Zhu Zhen, the 9th Empress Dowager, whose real surname was Shi. Zhu Zhen adopted him as his son, and at that time he was General Zhou Wu.

古文：蒙卒，吴王假然节，镇江陵。
现代文：吕蒙去世，吴王授予朱然符节，镇守江陵。
English: After Lv Meng's death, King Wu granted Zhu Ran the Festival of the Rune, and the town of Jiangling.

古文：及曹真等围江陵，破孙盛，吴王遣诸葛瑾等将兵往解围，夏侯尚击却之。
现代文：曹真等人包围江陵，打败了孙盛，吴王派诸葛瑾等人率军前去解围，再度被夏侯尚击退。
English: Cao Zhen and others encircled Jiangling and defeated Sun Sheng. King Wu sent Zhuge Liang and others to lead the army to relieve the siege, but they were once again repulsed by Xia Hou Shang.

古文：江陵中外断绝，城中兵多肿病，堪战者裁五千人。
现代文：江陵城内外断绝联系，城中许多士兵浮肿患病，能够参加战斗的只有五千人。
English: The city of Gangneung was cut off from the outside world, many soldiers in the city were swollen and ill, and only five thousand were able to participate in the battle.

古文：真等起土山，凿地道，立楼橹临城，弓矢雨注，将士皆失色；然晏如无恐意，方厉吏士，伺间隙，攻破魏两屯。
现代文：曹真命令士兵堆土山、挖地道，临城立起无顶高台楼橹，向城中放箭，箭如雨下，守城将士都大惊失色；朱然却泰然若，没有丝豪恐惧，不断激励将士，寻找知薄弱之处，率军出击，攻破魏军两座营垒。
English: Cao Zhen ordered the soldiers to pile up mounds of earth, dig tunnels, erect roofless high-rise towers in front of the city, and shoot arrows into the city. The arrows fell like rain, and the defenders of the city were shocked and disgraced; Zhu Ran, however, was calm, had no fear of giants, constantly inspired the soldiers, looked for weaknesses, led the army to attack, and broke through the two camps of the Wei army.

古文：魏兵围然凡六月，江陵令姚泰领兵备城北门，见外兵盛，城中人少，谷食且尽，惧不济，谋为内应，然觉而杀之。
现代文：魏军包围江陵长达六个月，江陵令姚泰率兵防守北门，见敌军力量经大，守城军队兵少，粮食将尽，害怕守不住，阴谋作魏军的内应，被朱然发觉后处死。
English: The Wei army encircled Jiangling for six months. Jiangling ordered Yao Tai to lead the troops to defend the north gate. Seeing that the enemy forces were large, the garrison troops were few, and the grain was exhausted, he was afraid that he could not defend it. He plotted to do the Wei army's dirty work, and was executed after being discovered by Zhu Ran.

古文：时江水浅狭，夏侯尚欲乘船将步骑入渚中安屯，作浮桥，南北往来，议者多以为城必可拔。
现代文：当时长江水浅，江面狭窄，夏侯尚企图乘船率步、骑兵进入江陵中洲驻扎，在江面上架设浮桥，以便和北岸来往，魏军参与计议的人都认为一定能够攻克江陵。
English: At that time, the Yangtze River was shallow and the river was narrow. Xia Hou Shang tried to take the boat and the cavalry into the middle of the Yangtze River to station, and set up a floating bridge on the river to communicate with the north bank. The people who participated in the deliberation of the Wei Army believed that they would be able to conquer the Yangtze River.

古文：董昭上疏曰： 武皇帝智勇过人，而用兵畏敌，不敢轻之若此也。
现代文：董昭却上书文帝说： 武皇帝智勇过人，用兵却很谨慎，从不敢像今天这样轻视敌人。
English: However, Dong Zhao wrote to Emperor Wen saying, "Emperor Wu is a man of great wisdom and courage, but he is very cautious in the use of soldiers. He would never dare to despise the enemy as he does today.

古文：夫兵好进恶退，常然之数。
现代文：打仗时，进兵容易，退兵难，这是最平常的道理。
English: The military approach, which prefers to advance rather than retreat, has always been the most common.

古文：平地无险，犹尚艰难，就当深入，还道宜利，兵有进退，不可如意。
现代文：平原地带，没有险阻，退兵都困难，即使要深入进军，还要考虑撤退的便利。军队前进与后退，不能只按自己的想象意图行事。
English: In a flat place, there is no critical situation. Still, we should consider it according to the difficult situation. For example, if we go deep into the enemy army, the way back should be smooth. The army has advances and retreats. It cannot come according to our idea.

古文：今屯渚中，至深也；浮桥而济，至危也；一道而行，至狭也。
现代文：如今在中洲驻扎军队，是最深入的进军；在江上架设浮桥往来，是最危险的事；只有一条道路可以通行，是狭隘的道路。
English: Today, stationing troops in Zhongzhou is the most in-depth advance; erecting floating bridges on the river is the most dangerous thing; only one road is passable, it is a narrow road.

古文：三者，兵家所忌，而今行之，贼频攻桥，误有漏失，渚中精锐非魏之有，将转化为吴矣。
现代文：这三者，都是军事行动的大忌，而我们却正在做。如果敌人集中力量攻击浮桥，我军稍有疏漏，中洲的精税部队将不再属于魏，而为吴所有。
English: If the enemy concentrates its forces on attacking the pontoon bridge, and our army makes a slight mistake, the fine tax troops in Zhongzhou will no longer belong to Wei, but to Wu.

古文：臣私戚之，忘寝与食，而议者怡然不以为忧，岂不惑哉！
现代文：我对这件事非常忧虑，寝食不安，而谋划此事的人却很坦然，毫不担忧，真令人困惑不解！
English: I'm very worried about this, I can't sleep, I can't eat, and the people who are planning this are very calm, they're not worried, it's baffling!

古文：加江水向长，一旦暴增，何以防御！
现代文：加之长江水位正在上升，一旦暴涨，我军将如何防御！
English: In addition, the water level of the Yangtze River is rising. Once it skyrockets, how will our army defend itself?

古文：就不破贼，尚当自完，奈何乘危，不以为惧！
现代文：如果无法击败敌人，就应该保全自己，为什么在这样危险的情况下，不感到恐惧呢？
English: If you can't beat the enemy, you should protect yourself, why not feel fear in such a dangerous situation?

古文：惟陛下察之。 
现代文：希望陛下认真考虑。 
English: Please consider it, Your Majesty.

古文：帝即诏尚等促出，吴人两头并前，魏兵一道引去，不时得泄，仅而获济。
现代文：文帝立即下诏，命令夏侯尚等人迅速退出中洲。吴军两面并进，魏军大队人马只从一条通道退却，挤在一起，一时很难退出，最后勉强撤回北岸。
English: Emperor Wen immediately issued an edict, ordering Xia Hou Shang and others to quickly withdraw from Zhongzhou. The Wu army advanced on both sides, the Wei army brigade retreated from only one channel, crowded together, it was difficult to withdraw for a while, and finally reluctantly withdrew to the north shore.

古文：吴将潘璋已作荻筏，欲以烧浮桥，会尚退而止。
现代文：吴将潘璋已制好芦苇筏子，准备烧魏军的浮桥，恰巧夏侯尚率兵退回，未得实施。
English: Wu general Pan Ye had prepared the reed rafts and was preparing to burn the Wei army's pontoon bridge. Coincidentally, Xia Hou Shang led the troops back, but did not implement it.

古文：后旬日，江水大涨，帝谓董昭曰： 君论此事，何其审也！ 
现代文：十天过后，江水暴涨，文帝对董昭说； 你的预料，竟如此准确！ 
English: Ten days later, when the river was swollen, Emperor Wen said to Dong Zhao, "Your prediction is so accurate!

古文：会天大疫，帝悉召诸军还。
现代文：当时又赶上闹瘟疫，文帝遂命令各军全线撤退。
English: At that time, the plague was raging, and Emperor Wen ordered the entire army to retreat.

古文：三月，丙申，车驾还洛阳。
现代文：三月，丙申，文帝回到洛阳。
English: In March, Hsin and Wendi returned to Luoyang.

古文：初，帝问贾诩曰： 吾欲伐不从命，以一天下，吴、蜀何先？ 
现代文：以前，文帝曾问贾诩： 我计划坟不服从命令的人，以统一天下，吴、蜀两国，应先讨代哪一个？ 
English: In the past, Emperor Wen once asked Jia Yu: I plan to bury those who disobey orders in order to unify the country. Which of the two countries, Wu or Shu, should be discussed first?

古文：对曰： 攻取者先兵权，建本者尚德化。
现代文：贾诩回答说： 进攻他国，应首先在军事上权衡；完成统一的根本大计，则当崇尚道德教化。
English: Jia Wei replied: In order to attack and seize, military strength should be the first, fundamental construction should be carried out, and morality and enlightenment should be promoted.

古文：陛下应期受禅，抚临率土，若绥之以文德而俟其变，则平之不难矣。
现代文：陛下顺应形势，接受汉朝禅让，统治全国，如果广文教、道德以安抚人心，静候形势变化，平定天下并不难。
English: Your majesty, you should conform to the timing of the movement to accept Zen and appease and govern the world. If you appease them with virtue and enlightenment, and then wait for them to change, then it will not be difficult to pacify them.

古文：吴、蜀虽蕞尔小国，依山阻水。
现代文：吴、蜀虽然都是小国，但是地势险要，有长江天险。
English: Although both Wu and Shu are small countries, their terrain is precarious, with the Yangtze River as a natural hazard.

古文：刘备有雄才，诸葛亮善治国；孙权识虚实，陆逊见兵势。据险守要，泛舟江湖，皆难卒谋也。
现代文：刘备有雄诸大略，诸葛亮善于治国；孙权长于辨别虚实，陆逊精通军事；蜀汉固守险要，吴国泛舟江湖，我们很难在短期内将他们击败。
English: Liu Bei is a great strategist, Zhuge Liang is good at governing the country; Sun Quan is good at distinguishing between truth and falsehood, and Lu Xun is proficient in military affairs; Shuhan is a staunch defender of vital interests, and Wuzhong is a great traveller. It is difficult for us to defeat them in a short period of time.

古文：用兵之道，先胜后战，量敌论将；故举无遗策。
现代文：用兵的原则是，先了解夺取胜利的途径，然后再作战；根据敌人的力量，任命将领，这样才能做到攻战无误。
English: The principle of using soldiers is to first understand the way to win victory, and then fight; according to the strength of the enemy, appoint generals, so that the offensive can be flawless.

古文：臣窃料群臣无备、权对，虽以天威临之，未见万全之势也。
现代文：我料想我们的文臣武将汉有人是刘备、孙权的对手，即使陛下亲自对付他们，也未必一定有取胜的把握。
English: I expect that some of our scholars and generals are rivals of Liu Bei and Sun Quan, and even if His Majesty personally deals with them, he may not be sure of winning.

古文：昔舜舞干戚而有苗服，臣以为当今宜先文后武。 
现代文：从前虞舜在朝廷上作战争舞蹈，有苗部落就归服了。我认为陛下目前应首先修明文治，然后再用武力征讨。 
English: Once upon a time, the imperial eunuch performed a war dance at the imperial court, and the Miao tribe submitted. I think that His Majesty should first amend the civil code, and then use force to collect.

古文：帝不纳，军竟无功。
现代文：文帝不听，出动大军，结果无功而回。
English: Emperor Wen did not listen and sent out a large army, but it returned without success.

古文：丁未，陈忠侯曹仁卒。
现代文：丁未，陈忠侯曹仁去世。
English: Ding Wei, Chen Zhonghou Cao Ren passed away.

古文：初，黄元为诸葛亮所不善，闻汉主疾病，惧有后患，故举郡反，烧临邛城。时亮东行省疾，成都单虚，元益无所惮。
现代文：此前，黄元被诸葛亮所嫌弃，知道汉王患病，恐怕诸葛亮加害，因而率领汉嘉全郡反叛，火烧临邛城，当时诸葛亮由成都东下看望刘备，成都守备单薄虚弱，黄元因此无所忌惮。
English: Previously, Huang Yuan was disliked by Zhuge Liang. Knowing that Han Wang was ill, he feared that Zhuge Liang would harm him, so he led Han Jiachuan County to rebel and burn Linyi City. At that time, Zhuge Liang went from Chengdu to the east to visit Liu Bei. Chengdu's defense was weak, so Huang Yuan had nothing to fear.

古文：益州治中从事杨洪，启太子遣将军陈曶、郑绰讨元。
现代文：益州治中从事杨洪，报告太子刘禅，派将军陈、郑绰讨伐黄元。
English: Yang Hong was engaged in the governance of Yizhou, reported to the prince Liu Zen, and sent the generals Chen and Zheng Cao to fight Huang Yuan.

古文：众议以为元若不能围成都，当由越巂据南中。
现代文：大臣们谇为，如果黄元不能包围成都，会经越占据南中。
English: The ministers agreed that if Huangyuan could not encircle Chengdu, it would try to occupy Nanzhong.

古文：洪曰： 元素性凶暴，无他恩信，何能办此！
现代文：杨洪说： 黄元一向性情凶狠残暴，对下属不施恩德信义，没有能力那样做！
English: Yang Hong said: Huang Yuan has always had a ferocious and cruel disposition, and he does not show mercy and loyalty to his subordinates. He does not have the ability to do so!

古文：不过乘水东下，冀主上平安，面缚归死；如其有异，奔吴求活耳。
现代文：不过是顺青衣江东下，盼望主公平安，再捆起自己，请求治罪；即使吸其他变化，也不过逃奔吴国求条活命而已。
English: We only need to sail eastward along the water, hope for the Lord's safety, capture him and put him to death. If things take a turn for the worse, he will only flee to the State of Wu in order to survive.

古文：但敕曶、绰于南安峡口邀遮，即便得矣。 
现代文：只要命伶陈、郑绰在南安峡口拦截，就可将他生擒。 
English: As long as Chen and Zheng are intercepted at the mouth of Nan'an Gorge, they can be captured alive.

古文：元军败，果顺江东下，曶、绰生获，斩之。
现代文：黄元叛乱失败果然顺青衣江东下，被陈、郑绰生擒后斩首。
English: Huang Yuan's rebellion failed and he went east along the Qingyi River. He was beheaded after being stabbed by Chen and Zheng Cao Sheng.

古文：汉主病笃，命丞相亮辅太子，以尚书令李严为副。
现代文：汉王病重，命令丞相诸葛亮辅佐太子刘禅，以尚书令李严作诸葛亮的副手。
English: Han Wang was seriously ill, and he ordered the chancellor Zhuge Liang to assist the crown prince Liu Zen, and he also ordered Li Yan to be Zhuge Liang's deputy.

古文：汉主谓亮曰： 君才十倍曹丕，必能安国，终定大事。
现代文：汉王对诸葛亮说： 你的才干胜过曹丕十倍，必定能安定国家，完成大业。
English: Han Wang said to Zhuge Liang: Your talent is ten times better than Cao Pi, you will surely be able to stabilize the country and complete the great cause.

古文：若嗣子可辅，辅之；如其不才，君可自取。 
现代文：如果刘禅还可以辅佐，你就辅佐他；如果他汉有才德，你可取而代之。 
English: If Liu Zhen can still be assisted, you will assist him; if he has talent, you can replace him.

古文：亮涕泣曰： 臣敢不竭股肱之力，效忠贞之节，继之以死！ 
现代文：诸葛亮淌着泪说： 臣下怎敢不竭尽全力辅佐太子，忠贞不二地为国效命，至死不渝！ 
English: Zhuge Liang shed tears and said, "How dare our vassals not do their utmost to assist the crown prince and serve the country loyally until death!"

古文：汉主又为诏敕太子曰： 人五十不称夭，吾年已六十有馀，何所复恨，但以卿兄弟为念耳。
现代文：汉王又下诏给太子： 人活五十而死不能称为夭折，我已经活了六十多岁，还有什么遗憾，只是牵挂你们兄弟。要努力，再努力啊！
English: The King of Han also issued an edict to the Crown Prince: "One cannot live to be fifty and die young. I have already lived for more than sixty years. I have no regrets, but I am concerned about your brothers. You must work hard, and work harder!"

古文：勉之，勉之！勿以恶小而为之，勿以善小而不为！
现代文：不要因坏事很小就去做，也不要因为好事很小就不去做！
English: Don't do bad things because they are small, and don't do good things because they are small!

古文：惟贤惟德，可以服人。
现代文：只有贤明和德行，才会使人折服。
English: It is wisdom and virtue that make a man great.

古文：汝父德薄，不足效也。
现代文：父亲德行浅薄，不值得你们效法。
English: Your father's virtue is shallow and not worthy of your imitation.

古文：汝与丞相从事，事之如父。 
现代文：你与丞相共同处理政务，对待他要像父亲一样。 
English: You and the prime minister jointly handle government affairs and treat him like a father.

古文：夏，四月，癸巳，汉主殂于永安，谥曰昭烈。
现代文：夏季，四月，癸巳，汉王刘备病逝于永安，谥号为昭烈皇帝。
English: In the summer, in April, King Liu Bei of Han died of illness in Yong'an. His posthumous name was Emperor Zhaorong.

古文：丞相亮奉丧还成都，以李严为中都护，留镇永安。
现代文：丞相诸葛亮护送灵车回到成都，由李严作中都护，留下镇守永安。
English: The chancellor Zhuge Liang escorted the hearse back to Chengdu, and Li Yan acted as the middle guard of the capital, leaving the town guard of Yong'an.

古文：五月，太子禅即位，时年十七。尊皇后曰皇太后，大赦，改元建兴。
现代文：五月，太子间禅即位为蜀汉皇帝，当时十七岁，尊奉皇后为皇太后，大赦罪犯，改年号为建兴。
English: In May, Prince Zen ascended the throne as the Emperor of Shuhan. At that time, he was seventeen years old, honored the empress as the empress dowager, pardoned criminals, and changed his era name to Jianxing.

古文：封丞相亮为武乡侯，领益州牧，政事无巨细，咸决于亮。
现代文：封丞相诸葛亮为武乡侯，兼任益州牧，国事无论大小，都取决于诸葛亮。
English: Zhuge Liang, the minister of war, was the mayor of Wuxiang, and also served as the pastor of Yizhou. National affairs, no matter how big or small, all depended on Zhuge Liang.

古文：亮乃约官职，修法制，发教与群下曰： 夫参署者，集众思，广忠益也。
现代文：于是诸葛亮精简官职，修订法制，向百官发下文告说： 所谓参预朝政，署理政务，就是要集合众人的心思，采纳有益国家的意见。
English: As a result, Zhuge Liang streamlined official positions, revised the legal system, and issued the following notice to hundreds of officials: The so-called participation in pre-dictatorial politics and acting government affairs is to gather the thoughts of many people and adopt opinions that are beneficial to the country.

古文：若远小嫌，难相违覆，旷阙损矣。
现代文：如果因为一些小隔阂而彼此疏远，就无法到不同意见，我们的事业将会受到损失。
English: If we alienate each other because of petty differences, we will not be able to disagree, and our cause will suffer.

古文：违覆而得中，犹弃敝趫而获珠玉。
现代文：听取不同意见而能得出正确的结论，如同扔掉破草鞋而获得珍珠美玉。
English: Listening to different opinions and being able to come to the right conclusion is like throwing away a worn-out shoe and getting a pearl.

古文：然人心苦不能尽，惟徐元直处兹不惑。
现代文：然而人们很难做到这一点，只有徐庶在听取各种意见时不受困惑。
English: However, it is difficult for people to do this, and only Xu Zhao is not confused when listening to various opinions.

古文：又，董幼宰参署七年，事有不至，至于十反，来相启告。
现代文：还有董和，参预朝政、署理政务七年，某项措施有不稳妥之处，反复十次征求意见，向我报告。
English: There is also Dong He, who has been involved in pre-imperial politics and acting government affairs for seven years. He repeatedly asked for advice ten times and reported to me that there was something unstable about a certain measure.

古文：苟能慕元直之十一，幼宰之勤渠，有忠于国，则亮可以少过矣。 
现代文：如果能做到徐庶的十分之一，像董和那样勤勉、尽职、效忠，我就可以减少过失了。 
English: If I can be one-tenth as diligent, conscientious and loyal as Dong He, I can reduce my mistakes.

古文：又曰： 昔初交州平，屡闻得失；后交元直，勤见启诲；前参事于幼宰，每言则尽；后从事于伟度，数有谏止。
现代文：他又说： 过去我结交崔州平，他多次指出我的优缺点；后来又结交徐庶，得到很多启发和教诲；先前与董和商议事情，他每次都能做到知无不言，言无不尽；随后又与胡伟度共事，他的多次劝谏，使我避免了很多失误。
English: He also said: In the past, I made friends with Cui Zhouping, who pointed out my strengths and weaknesses many times; later, I made friends with Xu Shiao, and received a lot of inspiration and instruction; previously, when discussing things with Dong He, he was always able to know everything and say everything; then I worked with Hu Weidu, and his many persuasions made me avoid many mistakes.

古文：虽资性鄙暗，不能悉纳，然与此四子终始好合，亦足以明其不疑于直言也。 
现代文：我虽然生性愚昧，见识浅陋，对他们给我的教益不能全部吸取，然而和这四人的始终很好，也可表明我对直言是不疑的。 
English: Although I am stupid by nature, my knowledge is shallow, and I cannot absorb all the lessons they have taught me, I have always been on good terms with these four people, and I can also show that I have no doubt about speaking frankly.

古文：伟度者，亮主簿义阳胡济也。
现代文：胡伟度，就是诸葛亮的主簿义阳人胡济。
English: Hu Weidu is the main character of Zhuge Liang.

古文：亮尝自校簿书，主簿杨颙直入，谏曰： 为治有体，上下不可相侵。
现代文：诸葛亮曾经亲自校对公文，主簿杨径直入内劝他说： 治理国家是有制度的，上司和下级做的工作不能混淆。
English: Zhuge Liang had once personally proofread official documents, and Yang, the chief accountant, went straight in to persuade him: There is a system for governing the country, and the work done by superiors and subordinates should not be confused.

古文：请为明公以作家譬之。今有人，使奴执耕稼，婢典炊爨，鸡主司晨，犬主吠盗，牛负重载，马涉远路。私业无旷，所求皆足，雍容高枕，饮食而已。
现代文：请您允许我以治家作比喻：现在有一个人，命奴仆耕田，婢女烧饭，雄鸡所晓，狗咬盗贼，以牛拉车，以马代步；家中事务无一旷废，要求的东西都可得到满足，优闲自得，高枕无忧，只是吃饭饮酒而已。
English: Allow me to use the analogy of a householder: there is now a man who orders his slaves to plough the fields, his maids to cook the meals, his rooster knows everything, his dog bites thieves, his ox pulls the cart, and his horse walks with him; there is no waste in the household affairs, everything that is asked for can be satisfied, there is plenty of leisure, no worries, just eating and drinking.

古文：忽一旦尽欲以身亲其役，不复付任，劳其体力，为此碎务，形疲神困，终无一成。
现代文：忽然有一天，对所有的事情都要亲自去做，不用奴婢、鸡狗、牛马，结果劳累了自己的身体，陷身琐碎事务之中，弄得疲惫不堪，精神萎靡，却一事无成。
English: All of a sudden, one day, he had to do everything himself, without slaves, dogs, chickens, or horses. As a result, he overworked his body, got caught up in trivial matters, became exhausted and weak, but accomplished nothing.

古文：岂其智之不如奴婢鸡狗哉？
现代文：难道他的才能不及奴婢和鸡狗吗？
English: Is his talent not equal to that of a slave or a dog?

古文：失为家主之法也。
现代文：不是，而是因为他忘记了作为一家之主的职责。
English: No, but because he forgot his duties as head of the family.

古文：是故古人称 坐而论道，谓之王公；作而行之，谓之士大夫。 
现代文：所以古人说 坐着讨论问题，作出决定的人是王公；执行命令，亲身去做事情的人，称作士大夫 。
English: Therefore, the ancients said that the person who sat and discussed the problem and made the decision was the prince; the person who carried out the order and did things himself was called the scholar.

古文：故丙吉不问横道死人而忧牛喘，陈平不肯知钱谷之数，云 自有主者 ，彼诚达于位分之体也。
现代文：因此，丙吉不过问路上杀人的事情，却担心耕牛因天热而喘；陈平不去了解国家的钱、粮收入，而说 这些自有具体负责的人知道 ，他们都真正懂得各司其职的道理。
English: Therefore, Bingji did not ask about the killing of people on the road, but was worried that the oxen were panting due to the heat; Chen Ping did not want to know the country's money and grain income, but said that these people who have specific responsibilities know that they all really understand the principle of performing their duties.

古文：今明公为治，乃躬自校簿书，流汗终日，不亦劳乎！ 
现代文：如今您管理全国政务，却亲自校改公文，终日汗流浃背，不是太劳累了吗？ 
English: Now you manage the national government affairs, but you personally proofread official documents and sweat all day long. Aren't you too tired?

古文：亮谢之。
现代文：诸葛亮深深表示感谢。
English: Zhuge Liang expressed his deep gratitude.

古文：及颙卒，亮垂泣三日。
现代文：杨去世，诸葛亮哭泣了三天。
English: When Yang died, Zhuge Liang cried for three days.

古文：六月，甲戌，任城威王彰卒。
现代文：六月，甲戌，任城威王曹彰去世。
English: In June, in Jiaxuan, Cao Zhang, the Prince of Chengwei, passed away.

古文：甲申，魏寿肃侯贾诩卒。
现代文：甲申，魏寿肃侯贾诩去世。
English: Jia Sheng, Wei Shou Su Hou Jia Wei passed away.

古文：大水。
现代文：发生水灾。
English: It's a big mess.

古文：吴贺齐袭蕲春，虏太守晋宗以归。
现代文：吴将贺齐袭击蕲春，俘虏太守晋宗，然后退兵。
English: Wu attacked Hechi to Hunchun, captured Emperor Jinzong, and then withdrew.

古文：初，益州郡耆帅雍闿杀太守正昂，因士燮以求附于吴，又执太守成都张裔以与吴，吴以闿为永昌太守。
现代文：以前，益州郡的地方土豪雍杀死太守正昂，通过吴交趾太守土燮向吴请求归附，又把益州郡的新任太守、成都人张裔抓起来献给吴，吴任命雍为永昌太守。
English: In the past, Yong, a local local hero in Yizhou County, killed the governor Zheng Aang, and through Wu Jiaozi, the governor of Yizhou County, he asked Wu for annexation. He also arrested Zhang Rong, the new governor of Yizhou County and a native of Chengdu, and dedicated him to Wu. Wu appointed Yong as the governor of Yongchang.

古文：永昌功曹吕凯、府丞王伉率吏士闭境拒守，闿不能进，使郡人孟获诱扇诸夷，诸夷皆从之。
现代文：永昌郡功曹吕凯、府丞王伉率后封锁边界，坚守城池。雍不能进城，派同郡人孟获惑和煽动各地的夷族纷纷跟着叛乱。
English: Yongchang County Gong Cao Lu Kai and Fuzhong Wang Yao led the blockade of the border and defended the city. Yong could not enter the city, and sent Meng Wuzhu, a county man, to instigate and incite the local barbarians to follow the rebellion.

古文：牂柯太守硃褒、越巂夷王高定皆叛应闿。
现代文：柯太守朱褒、越的夷族酋长高定。都起兵响应雍。
English: Zhu Bo, the governor of Ke, and Gao Ding, the chief of the Yue people, both raised their armies in response to Yong.

古文：诸葛亮以新遭大丧，皆抚而不讨，务农殖谷，闭关息民，民安食足而后用之。
现代文：诸葛亮因为刚刚遇上国葬，对叛众只是抚慰，没有派兵征讨；一心发展农业，种植粮食，坚守关隘，使百姓休养生息，等人民生活安定，粮食充足以后，才使用民力。
English: Zhuge Liang, because he had just had a state funeral, only consoled the rebels, and did not send troops to recruit; he was committed to developing agriculture, planting grain, adhering to barriers, allowing the people to rest and recuperate, and waiting for the people's lives to be stable and food to be sufficient before using people's power.

古文：秋，八月，丁卯，以廷尉钟繇为太尉，治书执法高柔代为廷尉。
现代文：秋季，八月，丁卯，任命廷尉钟繇为太尉，治书执法高柔代理廷尉。
English: In the autumn, in August, Dingwu appointed the imperial lieutenant Zhong Qi as the second lieutenant, and the book-keeping law enforcement Gao Ju as the acting imperial lieutenant.

古文：是时三公无事，又希与朝政，柔上疏曰： 公辅之臣，皆国之栋梁，民所具瞻，而置之三事，不使知政，遂各偃息养高，鲜有进纳，诚非朝廷崇用大臣之义，大臣献可替否之谓也。
现代文：当时三公没有具体事务，又很少参预朝廷的政治决策，高柔向文帝上书说： 三公辅佐大臣，都是国家的栋梁，为百姓所瞩目。现在虽设置三公的职位，却不使他们参预朝政，他们只好各自休养，安度晚年，很少提出建议，这实在不是朝廷尊崇和使用大臣、要他们献计献策的本意。
English: At that time, the three princes did not have specific affairs and rarely participated in the political decision-making of the imperial court. Gao Rong wrote to Emperor Wen saying: The three princes, the vice-premiers, and the ministers are the pillars of the country, attracting the attention of the people. Although the positions of the three princes are set up now, they are not allowed to participate in the pre-imperial government. They have to recuperate separately, spend their old age in peace, and rarely make suggestions. This is really not the original intention of the imperial court to respect and use the ministers and ask them to make suggestions.

古文：古者刑政有疑，辄议于槐、棘之下。
现代文：在古代，刑罚和政令有疑冲时，都与三公和大臣在槐树、棘木之下商议。
English: In ancient times, when there was a conflict between a punishment and a government decree, the three princes and the minister would discuss it under the eucalyptus and the thorn tree.

古文：自今之后，朝有疑议及刑狱大事，宜数以咨访三公。
现代文：从今以后，朝廷在政治措施上有疑问，以及关系到刑狱的大事，应该多询问三公的意见。
English: From now on, when there is a difficult question or a criminal case in the imperial court, the three princes should be asked many times.

古文：三公朝朔、望之日，又可特延入讲论得失，博尽事情，庶有补起天听，光益大化。 
现代文：三公在每月初一、十五上朝的时候，还要特别请他们分析讲解政策得失，以求尽量了解事实，这样既可以启发您的思路，弥补考虚不周之处，还能使您的威德更加发扬光大。 
English: On the first day of the first month and the fifteenth day of the first month, when the three princes go to the morning, they should also specially ask them to analyze and explain the policy gains and losses, in order to understand the facts as much as possible. This can not only inspire your thinking, make up for the shortcomings of the examination, but also make your virtue more prosperous.

古文：帝嘉纳焉。
现代文：文帝很赞赏地采纳了这一建议。
English: Emperor Wen approved and adopted his suggestion.

古文：辛未，帝校猎于荥阳，遂东巡。
现代文：辛未，文帝到荥阳打猎，顺便巡视东部。
English: Shortly after Xinwei, Emperor Wen went hunting in Fenyang and inspected the eastern region.

古文：九月，甲辰，如许昌。
现代文：九月甲辰，前往许昌。
English: September Jia Chen, went to Xuchang.

古文：汉尚书义阳邓芝言于诸葛亮曰： 今主上幼弱，初即尊位，宜遣大使重申吴好。 
现代文：汉尚书、义阳人邓芝对诸葛亮说： 如今皇上年幼弱小，刚刚即位，应派重要使臣到吴再次申明和好的愿望。 
English: Han Shangshu and Yiyang man Deng Zhi said to Zhuge Liang: Now that the emperor is young and weak, and has just ascended the throne, he should send important envoys to Wu to reaffirm his wish for reconciliation.

古文：亮曰： 吾思之久矣，未得其人耳，今日始得之。 芝问： 其人为谁？ 
现代文：诸葛亮说： 我对事事已考虑很久了，只是一直没有合适的人选，现在找到了。 邓芝问： 这人是谁？ 
English: Zhuge Liang said: I have been thinking about things for a long time, but I have not found the right person, and now I have found it. Deng Zhi asked: Who is this person?

古文：亮曰： 即使君也。 
现代文：诸葛亮说： 就是使君你啊。 
English: Zhuge Liang said, "It's you."

古文：乃遣芝以中郎将修好于吴。
现代文：于是派邓芝以中郎将的身份与吴重建友好关系。
English: Therefore, he sent Deng Zhi to reestablish friendly relations with Wu as a middle-ranking general.

古文：冬，十月，芝至吴。
现代文：冬季，十月，邓芝到达吴。
English: In winter, in October, Deng Zhi arrived in Wu.

古文：时吴王犹未与魏绝，狐疑，不时见芝。
现代文：当时吴王尚未和魏断绝关系，所以犹豫不决，没有立即接见邓芝。
English: At that time, King Wu had not yet severed ties with Wei, so he hesitated and did not immediately meet with Deng Zhi.

古文：芝乃自表请见曰： 臣今来，亦欲为吴，非但为蜀也。 
现代文：邓芝便自己上表请求接见，上表说： 臣下这次来，也是为吴着想，不仅仅只为蜀的利益。 
English: Deng Zhi then asked for an audience with the table, and the table said: The vassal came this time for Wu's sake, not just for Shu's benefit.

古文：吴王见之，曰： 孤诚愿与蜀和亲，然恐蜀主幼弱，国小势逼，为魏所乘，不自保全耳。 
现代文：吴五这才接见了他，说； 孤确实愿意与蜀和好，可是恐怕蜀国君主幼弱，疆域狭窄，势力不强，给魏以可乘之机，你们无法保全自己。 
English: It was only then that Wu Wu met with him and said: You are indeed willing to make peace with Shu, but I am afraid that the monarch of Shu is young and weak, the territory is narrow, and the power is not strong. Give Wei a chance, and you will not be able to protect yourselves.

古文：芝对曰： 吴、蜀二国，四州之地。
现代文：邓芝对他说： 吴、蜀两国，占有四个州的地域。
English: Deng Zhi said to him: Wu and Shu are two countries, occupying four states.

古文：大王命世之英，诸葛亮亦一时之杰也；蜀有重险之固，吴有三江之阻。
现代文：大王您是当世的英雄，诸葛亮也是一代人杰。蜀国地势险要，防守坚固，吴国有长江等三条大江的阻隔。
English: Great King, you are a hero of our time, and Zhuge Liang is also a great man of our generation. Shu has a precarious geographical position, strong defenses, and is separated from Wuzhou by the Yangtze River and three other large rivers.

古文：合此二长，共为脣齿，进可并兼天下，退可鼎足而立，此理之自然也。
现代文：两国的优势加在一起，再联合起来像唇齿一样相辅相依，进可兼并天下，退可与魏鼎足而立，这是很自然的道理。
English: It is a very natural reason that the advantages of the two countries can be added together, and then united to complement each other like lips and teeth, so that the former can annex the world, and the latter can stand with the Wei dynasty.

古文：大王今若委质于魏，魏必上望大王之入朝，下求太子之内侍，若不从命，则奉辞伐叛，蜀亦顺流见可而进。如此，江南之地非复大王之有也。 
现代文：假如大王归附于魏，魏一定会进一步提出无理要求，上逼您朝拜，下求太子作人质，如果不服从，便以讨伐叛逆为借口，发动进攻，蜀则顺流东下，趁机分取利益，到那时，江南之地可就不再为大王您所有了。 
English: If the great king is attached to Wei, Wei will certainly make further unreasonable demands, force you to worship, and ask the prince to be a hostage. If you do not obey, he will launch an attack under the pretext of fighting and rebelling. Shu will go east along the river and take advantage of the opportunity to take advantage of the benefits. By then, the land south of the river will no longer be owned by the great king.

古文：吴王默然良久曰： 君言是也。 
现代文：吴王沉默了很久，说： 你说得很对 。
English: King Wu was silent for a long time and said, "You are quite right.

古文：遂绝魏，专与汉连和。
现代文：于是和魏断绝关系，专与蜀汉和好。
English: As a result, it broke off relations with Wei and made peace exclusively with Shu Han.

古文：是岁，汉主立妃张氏为皇后。
现代文：同年，蜀汉后主立妃子张氏为皇后。
English: In the same year, the Dowager Empress of Shu Han, Princess Zhang, became the Empress.

古文：世祖文皇帝下黄初五年
现代文：黄初五年春季，二月，魏文帝从许昌返回洛阳。
English: In the spring of the 5th year of the Yellow Emperor's reign, in February, Emperor Weiwen returned to Luoyang from Xuchang.

古文：春，三月，帝自许昌还洛阳。
现代文：自汉献帝初平年以来，教育制度废弛。
English: Since the Han Dynasty, the education system has been in decline.

古文：初平以来，学道废坠。夏，四月，初立太学；置博士，依汉制设《五经》课试之法。
现代文：夏季，四月，开始建立太学，设博士的职务，依照汉朝制度，采取以《五经》考试的办法。
English: In the summer, in April, the establishment of Taixue began, the position of doctor was set up, and in accordance with the Han Dynasty system, the "Five Classics" exam was adopted.

古文：吴王使辅义中郎将吴郡张温聘于汉，自是吴、蜀信使不绝。
现代文：吴王派辅议中郎将吴郡人张温到蜀汉聘问，从此以后，吴、蜀两国使者和书信往来不断。
English: The king of Wu sent his assistant to recruit Zhang Wen, a resident of Wu County, to Shuhan for questioning. Since then, there has been a continuous exchange of letters between the envoys of Wu and Shu.

古文：时事所宜，吴主常令陆逊语诸葛亮；又刻印置逊所，王每与汉主及诸葛亮书，常过示逊，轻重、可否有所不安，每令改定，以印封之。
现代文：有事需要互通消息，吴王常令陆逊告诉诸葛亮；还专刻一枚自己的印章放在陆逊那里，吴王给蜀汉后主或诸葛亮写信，常先给陆逊看过，言辞轻重、处事可否，有不当之处，即令陆逊改正，再用印封好发出。
English: When there was a need to exchange information, King Wu often ordered Lu Xun to tell Zhuge Liang. He also specially placed a seal of his own in Lu Xun's place. When King Wu wrote a letter to the Empress of Shu Han or Zhuge Liang, he often read it to Lu Xun first. If there was anything wrong with the weight of the words, whether the matter could be handled or not, he would ask Lu Xun to correct it and then use the seal to send it.

古文：汉复遣邓芝聘于吴，吴主谓之曰： 若天下太平，二主分治，不亦乐乎？ 
现代文：蜀汉再次派邓芝到吴拜会，吴王对他说： 如果天下太平，由两国君主分而治之，不也是很好吗？ 
English: Shu Han sent Deng Zhi to Wu again for a meeting, and the king of Wu said to him: If the world is peaceful, wouldn't it be great if the two monarchs ruled separately?

古文：芝对曰： 天无二日，土无二王。
现代文：邓芝回答说： 天上没有两个太阳，地上也不能并存两个皇帝。
English: Deng Zhi replied: There are not two suns in the sky, and there cannot be two emperors on the earth.

古文：如并魏之后，大王未深识天命，君各茂其德，臣各尽其忠，将提枹鼓，则战争方始耳。 
现代文：在兼并魏之后，假如大王未能深刻领会上天的意旨，两国国君各自发扬德行，两国的臣子为各自的君王尽忠，将出擂起战鼓，那时战争才刚刚开始。 
English: After the annexation of Wei, if the great king fails to deeply understand the will of heaven, the princes of the two countries will develop their own virtues, and the courtiers of the two countries will be loyal to their respective kings, and the war drums will be raised. At that time, the war has just begun.

古文：吴王大笑曰： 君之诚款乃当尔邪！ 
现代文：吴王大笑说： 你的诚实竟到了这个地步吗！ 
English: Wu Wang laughed loudly and said: Has your honesty actually reached this level!

古文：秋，七月，帝东巡，如许昌。
现代文：秋季，七月，文帝东部巡视，前往许昌。
English: In the autumn, in July, Emperor Wen inspected the eastern part of the country and went to Xuchang.

古文：帝欲大兴军伐吴，侍中辛毘谏曰： 方今天下新定，土广民稀，而欲用之，臣诚未见其利也。
现代文：文帝欲图大举攻吴，侍中辛毗劝谏说： 现在国家初步安定，土地虽然广阔，人口却很稀少，在这时动用百姓的力量，臣下实在看不出有什么好处。
English: Emperor Wen wanted to attack Wu in a big way, and his aide-de-camp Xin Pi advised him: "Now that the country is initially stable, although the land is vast, the population is very sparse. At this time, using the power of the people, the vassals really do not see any benefits.

古文：先帝屡起锐师，临江而旋。
现代文：武皇帝多次出动精锐，只能到达长江边便要退兵。
English: The former emperor repeatedly sent out elite soldiers, but they all returned to the riverbank.

古文：今六军不增于故，而复循之，此未易也。
现代文：现在，我们的军队在数量和实力上并不比从前强大，却要再次前去报仇，这不是件容易的事。
English: Now, our army is not stronger in numbers and strength than before, but it is not easy to go forward again to take revenge.

古文：今日之计，莫若养民屯田，十年然后用之，则役不再举矣。 
现代文：目前我们应采取的策略，莫过于休养民力，开垦田地，十年之后，再用兵打仗，就能够一举成功了。 
English: At present, the strategy we should adopt is nothing more than resting and recuperating the people's strength, reclaiming the fields, and after ten years, fighting with soldiers, we can succeed in one fell swoop.

古文：帝曰： 如卿意，更当以虏遗子孙邪？ 
现代文：文帝说： 依你的意思，是要把孙权这个后患留给子孙了。 
English: Emperor Wen said, "According to your intention, you want to leave the legacy of grandchildren's rights to your descendants.

古文：对曰： 昔周文王以纣遗武王，惟知时也。 
现代文：辛毗回答说： 从前周文王所以把商纣王留给武王去消灭，是因为他知道时机尚未成熟。 
English: Xinwei replied, "The reason why King Zhouwen left King Shangguan to King Wu to exterminate was because he knew that the time was not ripe.

古文：帝不从，留尚书仆射司马懿镇许昌。
现代文：文帝不听劝谏，留下尚书仆射司马懿镇守许昌。
English: Emperor Wen did not listen to his advice and left Shang Shufu (尚書仆射司馬) to guard Xu Chang.

古文：八月，为水军，亲御龙舟，循蔡、颍，浮淮如寿春。
现代文：八月，亲自乘龙舟指挥水军，沿着蔡河、颍水进入淮河，到达寿春。
English: In August, he personally took the dragon boat to command the navy, along the Cai River and the Surabaya River into the Huai River, and arrived in Shuchun.

古文：九月，至广陵。
现代文：九月，抵达广陵。
English: In September, he arrived in Guangling.

古文：吴安东将军徐盛建计，植木衣苇，为疑城假楼，自石头至于江乘，联绵相接数百里，一夕而成；又大浮舟舰于江。
现代文：吴安东将军徐盛建议，在竖立的木桩上包起苇席，做成假城池和望楼，分布在石头城至江乘一线，联绵相接，长达数百里，一夜之间全部建成，又在长江上布下许多舰船，往返巡航。
English: Wu Andong's general Xu Sheng suggested wrapping the banquet on the erected wooden piles, making fake city pools and watchtowers, distributed in the stone city to the river by a line, continuous, hundreds of miles long, all built overnight, and many ships were laid on the Yangtze River, cruising back and forth.

古文：时江水盛长，帝临望，叹曰： 魏虽有武骑千群，无所用之，未可图也。 
现代文：当时长江水位迅猛上涨，文帝临江而望，叹息说： 尽管魏有铁骑成千上万，却毫无用武之地，看来无法取胜了！ 
English: At that time, the water level of the Yangtze River was rising rapidly. Emperor Wen looked at the river and said with a sigh: Although Wei had thousands of cavalrymen, they were useless. It seemed that they could not win!

古文：帝御龙舟，会暴风漂荡，几至覆没。
现代文：文帝乘坐的龙舟，在狂风大浪中上下颠簸，几乎被巨浪掀翻。
English: The dragon boat in which Emperor Wen was riding was tossed up and down in the strong winds and waves, and was almost overturned by the huge waves.

古文：帝问群臣： 权当自来否？ 
现代文：文帝问群臣： 孙权会亲自前来吗？ 
English: Emperor Wen asked the courtiers: Will Sun Quan come in person?

古文：咸曰： 陛下亲征，权恐怖，必举国而应。又不敢以大众委之臣下，必当自来。 
现代文：大臣们都说： 陛下亲率大军攻吴，孙权恐惧，一定要调动全国的力量来应付，但他又不敢把大批军队交给臣下指挥，肯定会亲自前来。 
English: The ministers all said: His Majesty personally led a large army to attack Wu, Sun Quan was afraid, and must mobilize the strength of the whole country to cope, but he did not dare to give a large number of troops to the command of his vassals, and would certainly come in person.

古文：刘晔曰： 彼谓陛下欲以万乘之重牵己，而超越江湖者在于别将，必勒兵待事，未有进退也。 
现代文：刘晔却说： 孙权一定认为陛下打算以亲征将他引出来，而另派将领渡江跨湖，所以他肯定部署军队等待进攻，既不会亲自前来，他的军队也不会退走。 
English: But Liu Bei said, "Sun Quan must have thought that His Majesty intended to lead him out by personally recruiting him, and sent another general to cross the river across the lake, so he must have deployed the army to wait for the attack. He would neither come in person, nor would his army retreat.

古文：大驾停住积日，吴王不至，帝乃旋师。
现代文：文帝大驾在江边停留很多天，吴王却仍然没有来，于是下令撤军。
English: Emperor Wen stayed by the river for many days, but King Wu still did not come, so he ordered the troops to withdraw.

古文：是时，曹休表得降贼辞： 孙权已在濡须口。 
现代文：当时，曹休上书，说吴投降的人供称： 孙权已经在濡须口。 
English: At that time, Cao Xiu wrote in a letter that the person who said that Wu had surrendered confessed: Sun Quan had already surrendered.

古文：中领军卫臻曰： 权恃长江，未敢亢衡，此必畏怖伪辞耳！ 
现代文：中领军卫臻说： 孙权只依恃长江天险，而不敢与我军在军事上抗衡，这一定是掩饰畏惧心理而制造的假话。 
English: Wei Zhen, the leader of the middle army, said: Sun Quan only relies on the Yangtze River natural hazard, but does not dare to compete with our army militarily. This must be a lie created to hide the fear.

古文：考核降者，果守将所作也。
现代文：再去拷打审问投降的人，果然是吴守将散布的谎言。
English: To torture and interrogate those who surrendered is a lie that Wu Shou will spread.

古文：吴张温少以俊才有盛名，顾雍以为当今无辈，诸葛亮亦重之。
现代文：吴国张温年轻时，以聪明才智享有盛名，顾雍认为当时无人能与他相比，诸亮也很推重他。
English: When Zhang Wen of Wu was young, he was famous for his intelligence. Gu Yong believed that no one could compare with him at that time, and all the luminaries also respected him.

古文：温荐引同郡暨艳为选部尚书。
现代文：张温推荐同郡人暨艳作吴的选部尚书。
English: Zhang Wen recommended the same county people and Yan Zuo Wu's selection of Shang Shu.

古文：艳好为清议，弹射百僚，覈奏三署，率皆贬高就下，降损数等，其守故者，十未能一；其居位贪鄙，志节污卑者，皆以为军吏，置营府以处之；多扬人闇昧之失以显其谪。
现代文：暨艳喜欢议论朝政，弹劾朝廷百官，对五官、左右三署郎官，审查尤其严格，几乎都被降职，甚至被降数级，能够保住原来官位的，十个人中也没有一个；那些为官贪婪鄙下，没有志向和节操的人，都被他发落成为军吏，安插在军队的各营各府。他还经常揭发别人的隐私，加以夸大张扬，以证明他处罚得当。
English: Ji Yan liked to discuss the politics of the imperial court, and impeached hundreds of officials of the imperial court. He was particularly strict in the examination of the five officials and the three subordinate officials of the left and right departments. Almost all of them were demoted, and even several levels were reduced. None of the ten people were able to retain their original official positions. Those who were greedy and contemptuous of officials, and had no ambition or discipline, were sent by him to become military officials and placed in each battalion and headquarters of the army. He also often exposed the privacy of others and exaggerated it to prove that his punishment was appropriate.

古文：同郡陆逊、逊弟瑁及侍御史硃据皆谏止之。瑁与艳书曰： 夫圣人嘉善矜愚，忘过记功，以成美化。
现代文：同郡人陆逊、陆瑁写信给暨艳说： 圣贤的人赞扬善行，而体谅别人的愚昧；忘记别人的过错，而记住人家的功劳，以形成美好的风化。
English: Fellow county residents Lu Xun and Lu Yao wrote to Cai Yan, saying, "Saints and sages praise good deeds, while understanding the stupidity of others; forget the faults of others, but remember the merits of others, so as to form a beautiful demeanor.

古文：如今王业始建，将一大统，此乃汉高弃瑕录用之时也。
现代文：如今大王的伟业刚刚开始，将要统一全国，现在正是如同汉高祖不求全责备，广泛招揽人才的时代。
English: Now the great cause of the great king has just begun, and the whole country will be unified. Now is the era of widely recruiting talents, just like the ancestors of the Han Dynasty.

古文：若令善恶异流，贵汝、颍月旦之评，诚可以厉俗明教，然恐未易行也。
现代文：如果一定要在善恶好坏之间划出一条清楚的界限，重视像过去许劭所作的人物口评，固然可以改变风俗，申明教化，然而恐怕目前很难推行。
English: If it is necessary to draw a clear line between good and evil and good and bad, and attach importance to the character's verbal comments like those made by Xu Yao in the past, it is true that customs can be changed and enlightenment can be affirmed, but I am afraid that it is difficult to implement at present.

古文：宜远模仲尼之泛爱，近则郭泰之容济，庶有益于大道也。 
现代文：应该远学孔子的泛爱亲仁，近效郭泰的宽厚容人，这才有益于正道常理。 
English: One should learn from afar Confucius's all-encompassing love and benevolence, and from up close Guo Tai's benevolence and tolerance. This is beneficial to the righteous path of common sense.

古文：据谓艳曰： 天下未定，举清厉浊，足以沮劝；若一时贬黜，惧有后咎。 
现代文：朱据也对暨艳说： 天下尚未平定，如果只举荐那些完全清白的人，而容不得一丝缺点，恰恰破坏了劝导作用；如果一下子都被免职，恐怕会带来祸患。 
English: Zhu Zhen also said to Ji Yan: The world has not yet been pacified. If only those who are completely innocent are recommended, and not a single flaw is tolerated, it will destroy the role of persuasion; if they are all dismissed at once, I am afraid it will bring disaster.

古文：艳皆不听。
现代文：暨艳不听。
English: And she doesn't listen.

古文：于是怨愤盈路，争言艳及选曹郎徐彪专用私情，憎爱不由公理。艳、彪皆坐自杀。
现代文：于是怨恨之声遍布于路途，人们都争着告发暨艳和选曹郎徐彪专凭私人感情任用官吏，爱憎不以公理作标准；暨艳和徐彪都被治罪自杀了。
English: As a result, the voice of resentment spread all over the road, people were fighting for the right to denounce Ji Yan and the election of Cao Lang Xu Biao to appoint officials solely on the basis of personal feelings, love and hate are not based on justice; Ji Yan and Xu Biao were both convicted and committed suicide.

古文：温素与艳、彪同意，亦坐斥还本郡以给厮吏，卒于家。
现代文：张温和暨艳、徐彪素来意见一致，也被牵连治罪，逐回本郡的官府做杂役，后来死在家中。
English: Zhang Mianling and Xu Biao, who always had the same opinion, were also implicated in the crime and sent back to the county government to work as a handyman, and later died at home.

古文：始，温方盛用事，馀姚虞俊叹曰： 张惠恕才多智少，华而不实，怨之所聚，有覆家之祸。吾见其兆矣。 
现代文：当当，在张温得势的时候，余姚人虞俊叹息说： 张温才能有余而明智不足，华而不实，人们的怨忿将会聚集在他身上，有败家之祸，我已经看见先兆了。 
English: When Zhang Wen was gaining momentum, Yu Yao Ren and Yu Jun sighed and said: Zhang Wen's talent is more than enough but not wise enough, he is flashy but not real, people's resentment will gather on him, there will be a disaster, I have already seen the signs.

古文：无几何而败。
现代文：不久，张温果然被治罪逐回。
English: Soon, Zhang Wen was indeed punished and expelled.

古文：冬，十月，帝还许昌。
现代文：冬季，十月，魏文帝回到许昌。
English: In the winter, in October, Emperor Weiwen returned to Xuchang.

古文：十一月，戊申晦，日有食之。
现代文：十一月，戊申，出现日食。
English: In November, Boshin, a solar eclipse occurred.

古文：鲜卑轲比能诱步度根兄扶罗韩杀之，步度根由是怨轲比能，更相攻击。
现代文：鲜卑族酋长轲比能诱杀另一酋长步度根的兄长扶罗韩，因此步度根十分怨恨轲比能，二人率部互相攻击。
English: Xianbei chieftain Zou Bi Neng booby-trapped another chieftain Bu Dugen's brother, Fu Luo Han, so Bu Dugen was very resentful of Zou Bi Neng, and the two leaders attacked each other.

古文：步度根部众稍弱，将其众万馀落保太原、雁门；是岁，诣阙贡献。
现代文：步度根的部众弱于轲比能，遂率领其部一万余户退保太原、雁门。当年，步度根入朝进贡。
English: Budugen's troops were weaker than Shibinen's, so he led more than ten thousand of his troops to retreat to Taiyuan and Ganmen. That year, Budugen paid tribute to the court.

古文：而轲比能众遂强盛，出击东部大人素利。
现代文：轲比能的部落从此强盛起来，攻击东部酋长素利。
English: From then on, the tribes of Zoubineng became more powerful and attacked the eastern chieftain Suri.

古文：护乌丸校尉田豫乘虚掎其后，轲比能使别帅琐奴拒豫，豫击破之。
现代文：护乌丸校尉田豫，乘轲比能后方空虚，从背后发起攻击；轲比能另派将领琐奴对抗田豫，被击败。
English: Tian Yu, the captain of the Wu maru guard, took advantage of the emptiness behind Zou Bineng and launched an attack from behind; Zou Bineng sent another general Zonnu to confront Tian Yu and was defeated.

古文：轲比能由是携贰，数为边寇，幽、并苦之。
现代文：从此以后，轲比能更怀二心，经常进入边塞抢掠，幽、并二州深受其害。
English: From then on, Zou Bineng was more ambivalent, often entering the border fortress to plunder, and the two states suffered from it.

古文：世祖文皇帝下黄初六年
现代文：黄初六年
English: Six years after the Yellow Revolution

古文：春，二月，诏以陈群为镇军大将军，随车驾董督众军，录行尚书事；司马懿为抚军大将军，留许昌，督后台文书。
现代文：春季，二月，文帝下诏，以陈群为镇军大将军，随御驾出征，负责督察各路军队，总领随驾尚书台事务；以司马懿为抚军大将军，留守许昌，负责处理留守尚书台公文。
English: In the spring, in February, Emperor Wen issued an edict, with Chen Qun as the general of the town army, accompanied by the emperor to go to war, responsible for inspecting all the armies, and the commander-in-chief accompanied by Shang Shudai affairs; with Sima Yi as the general of the army, staying in Xu Chang, responsible for handling the official documents left behind in Shang Shudai.

古文：三月，帝行如召陵，通讨虏渠；乙巳，还许昌。
现代文：三月，文帝前往召陵，开通讨虏渠；乙巳，回到许昌。
English: In March, Emperor Wen went to Zhaoling and opened the Toru Canal; later, he returned to Xuchang.

古文：并州刺史梁习讨轲比能，大破之。
现代文：并州刺史梁习讨伐轲比能，大获全胜。
English: and won a sweeping victory in the state-level struggle against the warlord Liang Xi.

古文：汉诸葛亮率众讨雍闿等，参军马谡送之数十里。
现代文：蜀汉诸葛亮率兵讨伐雍，参军马谡送行数十里。
English: Zhuge Liang of Shuhan led an army to fight against the Mongolian invaders, and he was escorted dozens of miles by his horse.

古文：亮曰： 虽共谋之历年，今可更惠良规。 
现代文：诸葛亮说： 虽然我们一起谋划此事多年，今天请你再一次提出好计划。 
English: Zhuge Liang said: Although we have been planning this together for many years, today I would like to ask you to once again come up with a good plan.

古文：谡曰： 南中恃其险远，不服久矣。
现代文：马谡说： 南中依恃地形险要和路途遥远，叛乱不服已经很久了。
English: Ma Yu said: The terrain in the south-central part of the country is dangerous and the distance is far. The rebellion has not been satisfied for a long time.

古文：虽今日破之，明日复反耳。
现代文：即使我们今天将其击溃，明天他们还要反叛。
English: Even if we defeat them today, they will still rebel tomorrow.

古文：今公方倾国北伐以事强贼，彼知官势内虚，其叛亦速。
现代文：目前您正准备集中全国的力量北伐，以对付强贼，叛匪知道国家内部空虚，就会加速反叛。
English: At present, you are preparing to concentrate the strength of the whole country on the Northern Expedition to deal with the strong thieves. The rebels know that there is emptiness inside the country and will accelerate the rebellion.

古文：若殄尽遗类以除后患，既非仁者之情，且又不可仓卒也。
现代文：如果将他们全部杀光以除后患，既不是仁厚者所为，也不可能在短期内办到。
English: If all of them were to be killed in order to eliminate the after-effects, it would not be the act of a benevolent person, nor would it be possible to do it in the short term.

古文：夫用兵之道，攻心为上，攻城为下，心战为上，兵战为下，愿公服其心而已。 
现代文：用兵作战的原则，以攻心为上，攻城为下；以心理战为上，以短兵相接为下，望您能使其真心归服。 
English: The principle of using soldiers in combat is to take the offensive spirit as the top and the siege as the bottom; to take the psychological warfare as the top and the short-term contact as the bottom. I hope that you can truly submit to it.

古文：亮纳其言。
现代文：诸葛亮采纳了马谡的建议。
English: Zhuge Liang accepted Ma Jun's suggestion.

古文：谡，良之弟也。
现代文：马谡是马良的弟弟。
English: Ma Ying is Ma Liang's younger brother.

古文：辛未，帝以舟师复征吴，群臣大议，宫正鲍勋谏曰： 王师屡征而未有所克者，盖以吴、蜀脣齿相依，凭阻山水，有难拔之势故也。
现代文：辛未，魏文帝将率水军大举攻吴，召集群臣讨论。宫正鲍勋劝谏说： 朝廷屡次出动大军征讨，之所以没有取得成果，是因为吴、蜀两国唇齿相依，凭借地势险要和长江的阻隔，有难以攻克的优越条件。
English: In Xinwei, Emperor Weiwen led the navy to attack Wu in a big way, and summoned a group of ministers to discuss. Gongzheng Baoxun advised him: The reason why the imperial court repeatedly sent out a large army to solicit, but did not achieve results, is because the two countries of Wu and Shu are closely related, and by virtue of the terrain and the Yangtze River, there are superior conditions that are difficult to overcome.

古文：往年龙舟飘荡，隔在南岸，圣躬蹈危，臣下破胆，此时宗庙几至倾覆，为百世之戒。
现代文：去年亲征，龙船被波涛漂荡在长江南岸遇阻，陛下身陷危境，大臣们心惊胆破，那时朝廷几乎被倾覆，应作为后世百代的警戒。
English: Last year, the dragon boat was blocked by the waves on the south bank of the Yangtze River. His Majesty was in danger, and the ministers were terrified. At that time, the imperial court was almost overturned, which should serve as a warning for future generations.

古文：今又劳兵袭远，日费千金，中国虚耗，令黠虏玩威，臣窃以为不可。 
现代文：如今又劳师动众，远途征讨，每天的经费需要用千金，国家的钱财都白白耗费掉了，而狡猾的敌人仍在那里耀武扬威，我认为再不可以这样了。 
English: Now it is necessary to mobilize the army to attack distant places, daily loss of thousands of dollars, the Central Plains region's financial resources are consumed in vain, and let the cunning enemy despise the national prestige. The minister himself believes that this is not feasible.

古文：帝怒，左迁勋为治书执法。
现代文：文帝听到鲍勋这番议论，大为愤怒，将鲍勋降职为治书执法。
English: When Emperor Wen heard this argument from Bao Xun, he was very angry and demoted Bao Xun to the post of book enforcement.

古文：勋，信之子也。
现代文：鲍勋是鲍信的儿子。
English: Baoxun is the son of Baoxin.

古文：夏，五月，戊申，帝如谯。
现代文：夏季，五月，戊申，文帝前往谯郡。
English: In the summer, in May, Wushen, Wendi went to Shixian.

古文：吴丞相北海孙劭卒。
现代文：吴丞相北海人孙劭去世。
English: Sun Yat-sen, the Minister of the North Sea, passed away.

古文：初，吴当置丞相，众议归张昭，吴王曰： 方今多事，职大事责重，非所以优之也。 
现代文：当初，吴国要设置丞相一职，大家首推昭。吴王说： 如今是多事之秋，职位越高，责任愈重，这一职务对张昭来说，并非优待。 
English: At first, the State of Wu wanted to set up the post of chancellor, and everyone first recommended Zhang Zhao. Wu Wang said: Today is an eventful autumn, the higher the position, the heavier the responsibility, this position is not a preferential treatment for Zhang Zhao.

古文：及劭卒，百僚复举昭，吴王曰： 孤岂为子布有爱乎！
现代文：孙劭去世，文武官员再次推举张昭，吴王又说： 孤岂不敬爱张子布？
English: After Sun Yat-sen's death, Zhang Zhao was once again nominated by the civil and military officials. King Wu also said: "Isn't it lonely to love Zhang Zibu?

古文：领丞相事烦，而此公性刚，所言不从，怨咎将兴，非所以益之也。 
现代文：丞相负责的政务烦多，而张昭性情刚烈，我若不听从他，他就会不满和怨忿，这对他并没有什么好处。 
English: The political affairs that the prime minister is responsible for are troublesome, and Zhang Zhao is stubborn. If I don't listen to him, he will be dissatisfied and resentful, which is not good for him.

古文：六月，以太常顾雍为丞相、平尚书事。
现代文：六月，任太顾雍为丞相，平尚书事。
English: In June, Ren Taigun Yong became chancellor, and Ping Shang became secretary.

古文：雍为人寡言，举动时当，吴王尝叹曰： 顾君不言，言必有中。 
现代文：顾雍为人沉默寡言，举止稳妥，吴王曾赞叹说： 顾君不说话则已，话即能抓住要害。 
English: Gu Yong was a taciturn person with a steady demeanor. King Wu once said in admiration: "If Gu Jun does not speak, he is already finished. Words can grasp the essence."

古文：至饮宴欢乐之际，左右恐有酒失，而雍必见之，是以不敢肆情。
现代文：每次设筵饮酒作乐，大臣们都恐怕酒后失态，被在场的顾雍到，所以不敢放开酒量。
English: Every time they set up a drinking game, the ministers are afraid of making a mistake after drinking and being caught by Gu Yong, so they dare not let go of the amount of alcohol.

古文：吴王亦曰： 顾公在座，使人不乐。 
现代文：吴王也说： 顾公在座，使人不乐。 
English: The king of Wu also said, "Kugong's presence makes people unhappy.

古文：其见惮如此。
现代文：可见大臣和吴王多么忌惮他。
English: Emperor-in-waiting Wang Feng has come to such a pass.

古文：初领尚书令，封阳遂乡侯；拜侯还寺，而家人不知，后闻，乃惊。
现代文：顾雍刚兼任尚书令的时候，被封变阳遂乡侯；拜过爵位后，回到官邸，家人仍不知道他已被封侯，后来听说，都很吃惊。
English: When Gu Yonggang concurrently served as Shang Shuling, he was given the title of Xuanyang and became a township lord. After he was knighted and returned to the official residence, his family still did not know that he had been given the title of township lord. When they heard about it later, they were all surprised.

古文：及为相，其所选用文武将吏，各随能所任，心无适莫。
现代文：及至受任为丞相，他选用文官武将，都各按才能加以任用，而不夹杂自己的好恶。
English: When he was appointed as chancellor, he chose civil officers and military commanders, each of whom was appointed according to his abilities, without mixing his own likes and dislikes.

古文：时访逮民间及政职所宜，辄密以闻。若见纳用，则归之于上；不用，终不宣泄。吴王以此重之。
现代文：常常私下到民间访查政治得失，每当有好的建议，都秘密上报，如被采纳，将功劳归于主上；如不被采纳，则始终不泄露出去；吴王为此很看重他。
English: He often privately visited the people to investigate political gains and losses. Whenever he had a good suggestion, he secretly reported it. If it was accepted, he would give credit to the Lord; if it was not accepted, he would never reveal it. King Wu valued him very much for this.

古文：然于公朝有所陈及，辞色虽顺而所执者正；军国得失，自非面见，口未尝言。
现代文：然而他在朝廷发表意见时，言辞虽然和顺，却能将正确意见坚持到底；对于政治得失，若非亲眼所见，决不妄加评论。
English: However, when he expressed his opinions in court, although his words were conciliatory, he was able to stick to the correct opinions to the end; he would never comment on political gains and losses if he did not see them with his own eyes.

古文：王常令中书郎诣雍有所咨访，若合雍意，事可施行，即相与反覆究而论之，为设酒食；如不合意，雍即正色改容，默默不言，无所施设。
现代文：吴王有事情，常令中书郎到顾雍那里咨询访问。如果顾雍同意，觉得此事可以施行，便与中书郎反复讨论研究，并为他预备酒饭；如果不同意，顾雍便表情严肃，默然无语，什么都不预备。
English: If Gu Yong agreed and felt that the matter could be carried out, he would repeatedly discuss and study with Zhong Shulang and prepare wine and rice for him; if he disagreed, Gu Yong would have a serious expression, silent and speechless, and would not prepare anything.

古文：郎退告王，王曰： 顾公欢悦，是事合宜也；其不言者，是事未平也。孤当重思之。 
现代文：中书郎回去将情况报告吴王，吴王说： 顾公高兴，说明此事应该办；他不发表意见，表明办法还不稳妥，孤应当反复考虑。 
English: Zhong Shulang went back to report the situation to King Wu, and King Wu said: Gu Gong was pleased and said that the matter should be handled; he did not express his opinion, indicating that the method was not stable and should be considered repeatedly.

古文：江边诸将，各欲立功自效，多陈便宜，有所掩袭。
现代文：驻守长江岸边的将领，都想建功立业，报效国家，很多人上书，认为时机有利，应发兵袭击魏军。
English: The generals stationed on the banks of the Yangtze River all wanted to make a contribution and serve the country. Many of them wrote that the time was favorable and that they should send troops to attack the Wei army.

古文：王以访雍。雍曰： 臣闻兵法戒于小利，此等所陈，欲邀功名而为其身，非为国也。
现代文：吴王为此事询访顾雍，顾雍说： 我听说贪图小利为兵家所戒，他们的这些条陈，是要为自己邀取功名，而不是为国家着想。
English: King Wu visited Gu Yong to inquire about this matter. Gu Yong said: I have heard that soldiers are forbidden to seek small profits. Their actions are to seek fame for themselves, not for the sake of the country.

古文：陛下宜禁制，苟不足以曜威损敌，所不宜听也。 
现代文：陛下应加制止，如果不能扬我威武，重创敌人，就不应听从。 
English: Your Majesty should put a stop to it. If you can't wield your power and inflict heavy losses on the enemy, then you shouldn't listen to them.

古文：王从之。
现代文：吴王采纳了顾雍的意见。
English: King Qin agreed to Wang Yao's request.

古文：利成郡兵蔡方等反，杀太守徐质，推郡人唐咨为主，诏屯骑校尉任福等讨平之。
现代文：利成郡士兵蔡方等人造反，杀太守徐质，推举同郡人唐咨作首领。文帝命令屯骑校尉任福等讨平叛乱。
English: Licheng County soldiers Cai Fang and others rebelled, killed the Tai Shou Xu Qian, and promoted the same county man Tang Zi as the leader. Emperor Wen ordered the cavalry captain Ren Fu and others to quell the rebellion.

古文：咨自海道亡入吴，吴人以为将军。
现代文：唐咨从海路逃到吴国，被吴国任命为将军。
English: Tang Zi fled by sea to the State of Wu, and was appointed general by the State of Wu.

古文：秋，七月，立皇子鉴为东武阳王。
现代文：秋季，七月，魏文帝立皇子曹鉴为东阳武王。
English: In the autumn, in July, Emperor Weiwen made Prince Cao Jian the King of Dongyang.

古文：汉诸葛亮至南中，所在战捷，亮由越巂入，斩雍闿及高定。
现代文：蜀汉诸葛亮到达南中，征讨叛乱，所到必胜。诸葛亮从越进兵，斩杀雍柯和高定。
English: Zhuge Liang of Shu Han arrived in Nanzhong to fight against the rebellion and won. Zhuge Liang marched in from Yue and killed Yong Ke and Gao Ding.

古文：使庲降督益州李恢由益州入，门下督巴西马忠由牂柯入，击破诸县，复与亮合。孟获收闿馀众以拒亮。
现代文：派降督、益州人李恢从益州进兵，门下督、巴西人马忠从进兵，击溃南中各县的叛军，再度和诸葛亮会合，孟获收拾雍的残部抗拒诸葛亮。
English: He sent Li Huai, a demoted governor and a native of Yizhou, to march in troops from Yizhou, and his subordinate governor, the Brazilian Ma Zhong, to march in troops. They defeated the rebels in various counties in south-central China, and met with Zhuge Liang again. Meng Guo took control of the remnants of Yong and resisted Zhuge Liang.

古文：获素为夷、汉所服，亮募生致之，既得，使观于营陈之间，问曰： 此军何如？ 
现代文：孟获深得当地汉人和夷族的信赖，诸葛亮要生擒孟获，以后果然将孟获俘获，让他参观了蜀军的军营战阵，问他说： 这样的军队如何？ 
English: Meng Guo won the deep trust of the local Han people and the Yi people. Zhuge Liang wanted to capture Meng Guo alive. Later, Meng Guo was indeed captured. He was allowed to visit the military camp of the Shu army and asked him: How is such an army?

古文：获曰： 向者不知虚实，故败。
现代文：孟获说： 以前不知道你们的虚实，所以遭到失败。
English: Meng Huo said: I didn't know the truth about you before, so I was defeated.

古文：今蒙赐观营陈，若只如此，即定易胜耳。 
现代文：如今蒙您允许我参观你们的军营战阵，如果贵军只是这样的军队，我一定能轻易取胜。 
English: Now that you have allowed me to visit your camp and battle line, if your army is just such an army, I will surely be able to win easily.

古文：亮笑，纵使更战。
现代文：诸葛亮笑了笑，将孟获释放，要他再战。
English: Zhuge Liang smiled, released Meng and asked him to fight again.

古文：七枞七禽而亮犹遣获，获止不去，曰： 公，天威也，南人不复反矣！ 
现代文：前后把孟获放回七次，又生擒七次，最后诸葛亮仍将孟获释放，孟获却不再走了，对诸葛亮说： 您有天威南方人不会再反叛了！ 
English: Zhuge Liang released Meng Huo seven times back and forth, and he was captured seven times. In the end, Zhuge Liang still released Meng Huo, but Meng Huo did not leave. He said to Zhuge Liang, "You have the power of heaven, and people in the south will no longer rebel!"

古文：亮遂至滇池。
现代文：于是诸葛亮到达滇池。
English: So Zhuge Liang arrived in Dianchi.

古文：益州、永昌、牂柯、越巂四郡皆平，亮即其渠率而用之。
现代文：益州、永昌、柯、越四郡都被平定了，诸葛亮仍然任用当地原来的首领为四郡的地方官吏。
English: The four counties of Yizhou, Yongchang, Ke and Yue were all pacified, but Zhuge Liang still appointed the original local leaders as local officials of the four counties.

古文：或以谏亮，亮曰： 若留外人，则当留兵，兵留则无所食，一不易也；加夷新伤破，父兄死丧，留外人而无兵者，必成祸患，二不易也；又，夷累有废杀之罪，自嫌衅重，若留外人，终不相信，三不易也。
现代文：有人劝诸葛亮不要这样做，诸葛亮说： 如果留外地人为官，则要留驻军队，留驻军队，则粮秣供应困难，这是第一个难题；这些夷族刚受过战争之苦，父兄多有死伤，怨气未消，任用外地人而不留驻军队，定有祸患，这是第二个难题；这些夷族叛乱分子屡次三番杀死和废掉官吏，自知有罪，与我们隔阂很深，若留下外地人为官，终究难以被他们信任，这是第三个难题。
English: Some people advised Zhuge Liang not to do so. Zhuge Liang said, "If you keep officials from out of town, you will have to keep them in the army. If you keep them in the army, it will be difficult to supply grain and rice. This is the first problem. These barbarians have just suffered from the war. Many of their parents and brothers have been killed and wounded. Their grudges have not been eliminated. If you appoint foreigners and do not keep them in the army, there will be a disaster. This is the second problem. These barbarian rebels have repeatedly killed and abolished officials. They know that they are guilty and are very far away from us. If they keep foreign officials

古文：今吾欲使不留兵，不运粮，而纲纪粗定，夷、汉粗安故耳。 
现代文：我现在是要不留军队，不转运粮食，使法令、政纪大体得以贯彻，让夷族和汉人大何安定下来。 
English: What I want to do now is not to keep troops and not to transport grain, so that the laws and regulations and political discipline can be generally implemented, and so that the barbarians and the Han people can be more or less stable.

古文：亮于是悉收其俊杰孟获等以为官属，出其金、银、丹、漆、耕牛、战马以给军国之用。
现代文：于是诸葛亮网罗孟获等当地的著名人物，任命为地方官使，让他们贡献金、银、丹、漆、耕牛、战马，供给军队和朝廷使用。
English: As a result, Zhuge Liang recruited local famous figures such as Luo Menghuo and appointed them as local envoys, asking them to contribute gold, silver, copper, lacquer, oxen and war horses to supply the army and the imperial court.

古文：自是终亮之世，夷不复反。
现代文：从此之后，在诸葛亮的有生之年，这一地区的夷族再也没有反叛。
English: From then on, during Zhuge Liang's lifetime, the barbarians in this area never rebelled again.

古文：八月，帝以舟师自谯循涡入淮。
现代文：八月，魏文帝命令水军从谯沿涡水进入淮河。
English: In August, Emperor Weiwen ordered the navy to enter the Huaihe River from the estuary along the swirling water.

古文：尚书蒋济表言水道难通，帝不从。
现代文：尚书蒋济上表说水路很难通行，文帝不听。
English: Emperor Wen did not listen to Shangshu Jiang Jie when he said that the waterway was difficult to pass.

古文：冬，十月，如广陵故城，临江观兵，戎卒十馀万，旌旗数百里，有渡江之志。
现代文：冬季，十月，前往广陵故城，在长江岸边检阅军队，魏军将士十余万，旌旗飘荡数百里，大有跨过长江的意图。
English: In winter and October, he went to the ancient city of Guangling to review the troops on the banks of the Yangtze River. There were more than ten thousand Wei soldiers and the banner flew for hundreds of miles, with the intention of crossing the Yangtze River.

古文：吴人严兵固守。
现代文：吴布置军队严阵以待。
English: Wu arranged the army in a tight formation to wait.

古文：时大寒，冰，舟不得入江。
现代文：当时天气寒冷，江边结冰，战船无法入江。
English: At that time, the weather was cold, the river was frozen, and warships could not enter the river.

古文：帝见波涛汹涌，叹曰： 嗟乎，固天所以限南北也！ 
现代文：文帝眼望长江的汹涌波涛，叹息说： 哎！这是上天注定要分割大江南北啊！ 
English: Emperor Wen looked at the turbulent waves of the Yangtze River and said with a sigh: Ah! This is God's predestined way of dividing the Yangtze River into north and south!

古文：遂归。
现代文：于是下令撤军。
English: I went back to my country.

古文：孙韶遣将高寿等率敢死之士五百人，于径路夜要帝，帝大惊。
现代文：孙韶派部将高寿等率敢死队五百人，从小路夜袭文帝，文帝大惊。
English: Sun Yat-sen's faction sent a death squad of 500 people with a high life expectancy to attack Emperor Wen from a side street at night. Emperor Wen was shocked.

古文：寿等获副车、羽盖以还。
现代文：高寿等缴获了文帝的副车、羽盖而回。
English: Gao Shou and others captured Emperor Wen's second car, Feather Cover, and returned.

古文：于是战船数千皆滞不得行，议者欲就留兵屯田，蒋济以为： 东近湖，北临淮，若水盛时，贼易为寇，不可安屯。 
现代文：当时，魏军战船数千艘因阻滞无法撤退，有人建议留下军队就地屯田，蒋济认为： 此地东近高邮湖，北滨准河，在水在的时候，很容易被吴军抄掠，不能在这里屯田。 
English: At that time, the thousands of warships of the Wei army could not retreat due to the blockage, and some people suggested that the army should be left to occupy the fields in place. Jiang Ji thought: This place is near Gaoyou Lake in the east and Beibin Junhe in the north. When the water is there, it is easy to be plundered by the Wu army, and it is impossible to occupy the fields here.

古文：帝从之，车驾即发。
现代文：文帝采纳了蒋济的意见，车驾和军队当即开拔。
English: Emperor Wen heeded his advice and set off immediately.

古文：还，到精湖，水稍尽，尽留船付济。
现代文：撤至精湖，水路几乎没有了，文帝将船只都留给了蒋济。
English: Retreating to Jinghu, the waterway was almost gone, and Emperor Wen left the ships to Jiang Jie.

古文：船连延在数百里中，济更凿地作四五道，蹴船令聚；豫作土豚遏断湖水，皆引后船，一时开遏入淮中，乃得还。
现代文：战船前后相连数百里，蒋济令人挖开四五条水道，将船全部集中在一起；并提前堆好土坝，截断湖水，把后面的船都拖入，再掘开水坝，船只全部随水涌入淮河，这样，魏军的舰船才得以返回。
English: The warships were connected back and forth for hundreds of miles. Jiang Jie made people dig up four or five waterways and concentrated all the ships together. He also built an earth dam in advance, cut off the lake water, dragged all the ships behind into it, and then dug a dam. The ships all poured into the Huai River with the water. In this way, the ships of the Wei Army were able to return.

古文：十一月，东武阳王鉴薨。
现代文：十一月，东武阳王曹鉴去世。
English: In November, Dongwuyang King Cao Jian passed away.

古文：十二月，吴番阳贼彭绮攻没郡县，众数万人。
现代文：十二月，吴番阳贼人彭绮攻陷郡县城池，有部众数万人。
English: In December, the Wu Panyang thief Peng Yao captured the county seat of the county with tens of thousands of troops.

古文：世祖文皇帝下黄初七年春，正月，壬子，帝还洛阳，谓蒋济曰： 事不可不晓。
现代文：黄初七年春季，正月，壬子，魏文帝返回洛阳，对蒋济说： 对事情不能不弄清楚。
English: In the spring of the 7th year of the Yellow Emperor's reign, in the first month of the year, Emperor Wen of Wei returned to Luoyang and said to Jiang Ji: "You must be clear about things.

古文：吾前决谓分半烧船于山阳湖中，卿于后致之，略与吾俱至谯。
现代文：我先前决定将一半船只毁在山阳湖中，幸亏你设法将船只解救，虽然在我后面，却几乎与我同时到达谯郡。
English: I had previously decided to destroy half of the ship in Sanyang Lake, but fortunately you managed to save the ship, although behind me, but almost at the same time as I arrived in Jixian.

古文：又每得所陈，实入吾意。
现代文：还有你每次提的建议，都很合我的心意。
English: And every time I see your statements, they really resonate with me.

古文：自今讨贼计画，善思论之。 
现代文：今后征讨孙权的计划，要认真研究讨论。 
English: From now on, please think about and discuss the strategy of fighting against the enemy.

古文：汉丞相亮欲出军汉中，前将军李严当知后事，移屯江州，留护军陈到驻永安，而统属于严。
现代文：蜀汉丞相诸葛亮准备出兵至汉中，前将军李严负责后方事务，移驻江州，留护军陈到驻军永安，归属李严指挥。
English: Zhuge Liang, the prime minister of Shu Han, prepared to send troops to Hanzhong, the former general Li Yan was in charge of the rear affairs and moved to Jiangzhou, and the remaining troops Chen to the Yong'an garrison, under the command of Li Yan.

古文：吴陆逊以所在少谷，表令诸将增广农亩。
现代文：吴将陆逊因为所在地区粮谷匮乏，上表请求命令各位将领广开田地，增加粮食产量。
English: Because of the shortage of grain and grain in the region, Wu general Lu Xun requested the above table to order the generals to expand the fields and increase grain production.

古文：吴王报曰： 甚善！
现代文：吴王回复说： 你的建议很好。
English: Wu Wang replied, "Your suggestion is very good.

古文：令孤父子亲受田，车中八牛，以为四耦，虽未及古人，亦欲与众均等其劳也。 
现代文：让我父子亲自下田，以八头牛犁地，四张犁耕作，虽然不及古代的帝王，也是想和大家一起劳作。 
English: Let my father and son go to the fields in person, plough the land with eight oxen and four ploughs, although they are not as good as the ancient emperors, they also want to work with everyone.

古文：帝之为太子也，郭夫人弟有罪，魏郡西部都尉鲍勋治之；太子请，不能得，由是恨勋。
现代文：文帝做太子的时候，郭夫人的弟弟犯法，被当时的魏郡西部都尉鲍勋治罪；太子曹丕向鲍勋请求赦免，遭到拒绝，因此对鲍勋心怀忌恨。
English: When Emperor Wen was crown prince, Mrs. Guo's younger brother broke the law and was punished by Bao Xun, then the western captain of Wei County; Prince Cao Pi asked Bao Xun for a pardon and was refused, so he harbored a grudge against Bao Xun.

古文：及即位，勋数直谏，帝益忿之。
现代文：等到即位做了皇帝。鲍勋又多次直言对谏，更使文帝恨不上加恨。
English: He waited until he ascended the throne and became emperor. Baoxun repeatedly spoke directly to Emperor Wen, which made Emperor Wen even more angry.

古文：帝伐吴还，屯陈留界。
现代文：魏军征讨吴国后退兵，驻扎在陈留地区。
English: The Wei army withdrew after conquering Wu and was stationed in the Chenliu area.

古文：勋为治书执法，太守孙邕见出，过勋。时营垒未成，但立标埒，邕邪行，不从正道，军营令史刘曜欲推之，勋以堑垒未成，解止不举。
现代文：鲍勋任治书执法，太守孙邕晋见文帝，出来后，顺路去鲍勋那里拜访；当时营垒尚未筑好，刚刚立下界标，孙邕穿行，汉有起正路，军营令史刘曜要追究孙邕，鲍勋认为营垒尚未建成，劝止了刘曜，没有上所。
English: Bao Xun was in charge of book-keeping and law enforcement. Grand Prince Sun Yat-sen went to see Emperor Wen, and when he came out, he stopped by to visit Bao Xun. At that time, the camp had not yet been built, the boundary marker had just been erected, Sun Yat-sen was passing through, the Han Dynasty had taken the right road, the camp ordered Shi Liu You to investigate Sun Yat-sen, Bao Xun thought that the camp had not yet been built, dissuaded Liu You, and did not go to the camp.

古文：帝闻之，诏曰： 勋指鹿作马，收付廷尉。 
现代文：文帝知道后，下诏说： 鲍勋指鹿为马，抓起来交给廷尉治罪。 
English: After Emperor Wen learned of this, he issued the following edict: Bao Xun called a deer a horse, arrested it and handed it over to a court official to be punished.

古文：廷尉法议， 正刑五岁 ，三官驳， 依律，罚金二斤 ，帝大怒曰： 勋无活分，而汝等欲纵之！收三官已下付刺奸，当令十鼠同穴！ 
现代文：廷尉根据法律议定， 应处五年徒刑 ，廷尉正、廷尉监、廷尉平三位官员所驳说： 依照律法，只应罚黄金二斤 ，文帝大为生气说： 鲍勋该处死，而你们却要放掉他，将廷尉正、监、平三官及其下属官员抓起来交给刺奸治罪，要把你们这些老鼠埋在一个坑里！ 
English: The courtier, according to the law, should be sentenced to five years in prison, the courtier, the courtier, and the courtier Ping three officials refuted: According to the law, only two kilos of gold should be fined, Emperor Wen was very angry and said: Bao Xun should be put to death, but you want to release him, arrest the courtier, the courtier, and the courtier and their subordinate officials and give them the crime of stabbing, and bury you rats in a pit!

古文：钟繇、华歆、陈群、辛毘、高柔、卫臻等并表勋父信有功于太祖，求请勋罪，帝不许。
现代文：钟繇、华歆、陈群、辛毗、高柔、卫臻等人一起上表，说鲍勋的父亲鲍信有功于武皇帝，请求赦免鲍勋，文帝不许。
English: Zhong Qian, Hua Qian, Chen Qun, Xin Pi, Gao Rong, Wei Zhen and others went to the table together, saying that Bao Xun's father Bao Xin had contributed to Emperor Wu, and asked for a pardon for Bao Xun, but Emperor Wen did not allow it.

古文：高柔固执不从诏命，帝怒甚，召柔诣台，遣使者承指至廷尉诛勋。
现代文：廷尉高柔拒不服从文帝的诏命，文帝更加愤怒，把高柔召至尚书台，然后，派使者秉承旨意到廷尉监狱将鲍勋处死。
English: Gao Rong, a courtier, refused to obey Emperor Wen's edict. Emperor Wen was even more angry and summoned Gao Rong to Shang Shudi. Then, he sent an envoy to the courtier's prison to execute Bao Xun.

古文：勋死，乃遣柔还寺。
现代文：鲍勋处死之后，才放高柔回廷尉官府。
English: It was only after Bao Xun was executed that Gao Rong was allowed to return to the palace.

古文：票骑将军都阳侯曹洪，家富而性吝啬，帝在东宫，尝从洪贷绢百匹，不称意，恨之。
现代文：票骑将军都阳侯曹洪，家中富有，但很吝啬。文帝做太子时，曾向曹洪借用一百匹娟，未能满意，所以心怀忌恨。
English: When Emperor Wen was crown prince, he borrowed a hundred mules from Cao Hong, but was not satisfied, so he harbored a grudge.

古文：遂以舍客犯法，下狱当死，群臣并救，莫能得。
现代文：后来，曹洪宾客犯法，便将曹洪逮捕入狱，判处死刑，大臣们都为曹洪求情，仍不赦免。
English: Later, Cao Hong's guests broke the law, so Cao Hong was arrested and sentenced to death. The ministers all pleaded for Cao Hong, but still did not pardon him.

古文：卞太后责怒帝曰： 梁、沛之间，非子廉无有今日！ 
现代文：卞太后气愤地责备文帝： 当年在梁沛之间大战时，若没有曹洪，我们怎么会有今天。 
English: Empress Dowager Guan angrily reproached Emperor Wen: If there had been no Cao Hong during the war between Liang and Pei, how would we be today?

古文：又谓郭后曰： 令曹洪今日死，吾明日敕帝废后矣！ 
现代文：又对郭皇后说： 皇帝今天处死曹洪，我明天就要他废掉你这个皇后！ 
English: He also said to Empress Guo, "The emperor executed Cao Hong today, and tomorrow I want him to abolish you, the empress!"

古文：于是郭后泣涕屡请，乃得免官，削爵土。
现代文：于是，郭皇后多次哭着为曹洪求情，曹洪才免于一死，被免去官职，削去爵位和封地。
English: As a result, Empress Guo repeatedly cried and begged for Cao Hong's forgiveness. Cao Hong was spared death, removed from his official position, and stripped of his title and fiefdom.

古文：初，郭后无子，帝使母养平原王睿；以睿母甄夫人被诛，故未建为嗣。
现代文：当初，郭皇后没有儿子，文帝让她以母亲的名义抚养平原王曹睿，曹睿因为母亲甄夫人被杀，没有被立为太子。
English: At first, Empress Guo did not have a son, and Emperor Wen asked her to raise the Plains King Cao Rui in the name of her mother. Cao Rui was not made crown prince because his mother, Lady Zhen, was killed.

古文：睿事后甚谨，后亦爱之。
现代文：他谨慎侍奉郭皇后，深得郭皇后喜爱。
English: He carefully served the Empress Guo and was deeply loved by the Empress Guo.

古文：帝与睿猎，见子母鹿，帝亲射杀其母，命睿射其子。睿泣曰： 陛下已杀其母，臣不忍复杀其子。 
现代文：一天，文帝和曹睿父子二人射猎，见到一只母鹿带着一只小鹿，文帝亲手射死了母鹿，要曹睿射那只小鹿，曹睿哭着说： 陛下已经杀了母亲，我不忍心再杀她的儿子。 
English: One day, Emperor Wen and Cao Rui, father and son, were out shooting. They saw a doe with a fawn. Emperor Wen shot the doe with his own hand, and asked Cao Rui to shoot the fawn. Cao Rui cried and said, "Your Majesty has already killed the mother, I can't bear to kill her son again."

古文：帝即放弓矢，为之恻然。
现代文：文帝当即放下弓箭，恻然心伤。
English: Emperor Wen immediately put down his bow and arrow and was heartbroken.

古文：夏，五月，帝疾笃，乃立睿为太子。
现代文：夏季，五月，文帝病重，立曹睿为太子。
English: In the summer, in May, Emperor Wen fell seriously ill, and Cao Rui was appointed crown prince.

古文：丙辰，召中军大将军曹真、镇军大将军陈群、抚军大将军司马懿，并受遗诏辅政。
现代文：丙辰，召中军大将军曹真、镇军大将军陈群、抚军大将军司马懿，发布遗诏，命令他们辅佐太子曹睿主持政事。
English: Bing Chen summoned Cao Zhen, the general of the Central Army, Chen Qun, the general of the Zhen Army, and Sima Yao, the general of the Fuzhou Army, and issued a will, ordering them to assist Cao Rui, the crown prince, to preside over political affairs.

古文：丁巳，帝殂。
现代文：丁巳，文帝去世。
English: Soon after, Emperor Wen passed away.

古文：陈寿评曰：文帝天资文藻，下笔成章，博闻强识，才艺兼该。
现代文：陈寿评曰：文帝有文学天赋，下笔成章，博闻强记，才艺都很有造诣。
English: Chen Shou commented: Emperor Wen had a talent for literature. He was able to write a complete book from start to finish. He had a strong knowledge of history. He was very accomplished in his talents.

古文：若加之旷大之度，励以公平之诚，迈志存道，克广德心，则古之贤主，何远之有哉！
现代文：如果再加以宽博旷达的气度和公平挚诚之心，激励自己维护道义的志向，尽心广布贤德恩惠，则比古代的贤明君主，也不会相差太远！
English: If you then add a broad-minded and open-minded spirit and a fair and sincere heart, inspire yourself to uphold moral aspirations, and do your best to spread virtue and grace, you will not be too far from the wise monarchs of ancient times!

古文：太子即皇帝位，尊皇太后曰太皇太后，皇后曰皇太后。
现代文：太子曹睿即帝位，尊皇太后卞氏为太皇太后，养母郭皇后为皇太后。
English: Prince Cao Rui is the imperial throne, His Majesty the Empress Dowager Guo is the grand empress dowager, and his adoptive mother Empress Guo is the empress dowager.

古文：初，明帝在东宫，不交朝臣，不问政事，惟潜思书籍；即位之后，群下想闻风采。
现代文：当初，魏明帝曹睿在东宫做太了的时候，不结交朝廷大臣，不过问政事，只是埋头读书。即位后，大臣们都想见识他的风采。
English: At first, when Wei Ming Emperor Cao Rui was too busy in the East Palace, he did not make friends with the imperial court ministers, but asked about politics, just buried his head in reading. After his enthronement, the ministers all wanted to see his style.

古文：居数日，独见侍中刘晔，语尽日，众人侧听，晔既出，问： 何如？ 
现代文：过了数天，只接见了侍中刘晔，谈了一整天，其他人在外侧耳而听。刘晔出来，都问 怎么样？ 
English: After a few days, only the chambermaid Liu Wei was received, and they talked for a whole day, while the others listened from the outside. Liu Wei came out and asked, "How are you?"

古文：曰： 秦始皇、汉孝武之俦，才具微不及耳。 
现代文：刘晔说： 志向可与秦始皇、汉武帝相比，只是才智稍稍及不上。 
English: Liu Wei said: The ambition can be compared with Qin Shihuang and Emperor Wu of Han, but the talent is slightly less.

古文：帝初莅政，陈群上疏曰： 夫臣下雷同，是非相蔽，国之大患也。
现代文：明帝开始主持政事，陈群上书说： 大臣随声附和，是非不分，是国家的大祸害。
English: When Emperor Ming began to preside over political affairs, Chen Qun wrote a letter saying: The minister's compliance, regardless of the rights and wrongs, is a great scourge to the country.

古文：若不和睦则有雠党，有雠党则毁誉无端，毁誉无端则真伪失实，此皆不可不深察也。 
现代文：但是，如果不和睦相处，则又各树党羽；必然互相仇视，无端诋毁、诽谤；无端诋毁、诽谤，造成真假难辨，这些都不可以不深入考察。 
English: However, if they do not get along harmoniously, then the various factions of the party will gather; they will inevitably hate each other and slander and defame each other without reason; the slander and defamation without reason will make it difficult to distinguish between the true and the false. All of these must be examined in depth.

古文：癸未，追谥甄夫人曰文昭皇后。
现代文：癸未，曹睿追谥生母甄夫人谥号为文昭皇后。
English: At the time, Cao Rui's birth mother, Lady Zhen, was known as Empress Wenzhao.

古文：壬辰，立皇弟蕤为阳平王。
现代文：壬辰，立弟弟曹蕤为阳平王。
English: On the 23rd, Cao Pi, the younger brother of Cao Feng, became the Yangping King.

古文：六月，戊寅，葬文帝于首阳陵。
现代文：六月，戊寅，将文帝的遗体安葬在首阳陵。
English: In June, Wu Yin buried Emperor Wen's remains in the Shouyang Mausoleum.

古文：吴王闻魏有大丧，秋，八月，自将攻江夏郡，太守文聘坚守。
现代文：吴王听说魏文帝去世。秋季，八月，亲自率军进攻江夏郡，太守文聘率兵坚守。
English: Wu Wang heard that Emperor Weiwen died. In autumn and August, he personally led the army to attack Jiangxia County, and the eunuch Wenwei led the soldiers to hold out.

古文：朝议欲发兵救之。帝曰： 权习水战，所以敢下船陆攻者，冀掩不备也。
现代文：朝廷商议派兵增援，明帝说： 孙权的军队惯于水上作战，他们如今敢于弃船从陆上进攻，不过是盼望我军没有准备。
English: The imperial court discussed sending reinforcements, and Emperor Ming said: Sun Quan's army is accustomed to fighting on the water, and they now dare to abandon ship and attack from the land, but they hope that our army is not ready.

古文：今已与聘相拒。夫攻守势倍，终不敢久也。 
现代文：目前文聘已经据城坚守，而进攻的一方需要比防守的力量大一倍才能互相对抗，孙权终究不敢在江夏城下久留。 
English: At present, Wenyi has been holding fast to the city, and the attacking side needs to be twice as strong as the defensive side in order to compete with each other. After all, Sun Quan does not dare to stay for a long time under the Jiangxia city.

古文：先是，朝廷遣治书侍御史荀禹慰劳边方，禹到江夏，发所经县兵及所从步骑千人乘山举火，吴王遁走。
现代文：不久前，朝廷曾派治书侍御史荀禹慰劳边防将士，他进入江夏境，便调动所经各县的士卒，和自己的随从步、骑兵一千人，登山放火，吴王便悄悄撤走了。
English: Not long ago, the imperial court had dispatched a border guard officer, who had entered the Jiangxia region, to mobilize the officers from all the counties he had passed through, and his entourage, a thousand cavalry, to set fire to the mountain, and the king of Wu quietly withdrew.

古文：辛巳，立皇子冏为清河王。
现代文：辛巳，立皇子曹为清河王。
English: In December, Emperor Ming proclaimed Prince Cao Pi as the King of Qinghe.

古文：吴左将军诸葛瑾等寇襄阳，司马懿击破之，斩其部将张霸。曹真又破其别将于寻阳。
现代文：吴左将军诸葛瑾等进攻襄阳，司马懿把他击败，并斩杀了吴将张霸；曹真又在寻阳击败诸葛瑾的另一部将。
English: Wu Zuo's general Zhuge Liang and others attacked Xiangyang, Sima Yi defeated him and killed Wu general Zhang Ba; Cao Zhen defeated Zhuge Liang's other general in Xiangyang.

古文：吴丹杨、吴、会山民复为寇，攻没属县。
现代文：吴地丹阳、吴、会三郡山民再度叛乱，攻克三郡的属县。
English: The mountain people of the three counties of Danyang, Wu and Hui in Wuxi rebelled again and conquered the subordinate counties of the three counties.

古文：吴王分三郡险地为东安郡，以绥南将军全琮领太守。
现代文：吴王以三郡险要山地新设东安郡，任命绥南将军全琮兼太守。
English: The king of Wu, taking advantage of the three counties that were on the verge of becoming mountainous, newly established Dong'an County and appointed the general of southern Anhui Province, Quanzhang, as the governor.

古文：琮至，明赏罚，招诱降附，数年，得万馀人。
现代文：全琮上任后，申明并严格执行赏罚办法，引诱、招降那些随从叛乱的人，几年间，就收纳了一万余人。
English: After Quanzhang took office, he affirmed and strictly implemented the reward and punishment measures, lured and recruited those who followed the rebellion, and received more than 10,000 people in a few years.

古文：吴王召琮还牛渚，罢东安郡。
现代文：吴王将全琮召回牛渚，撤销了东安郡。
English: King Wu recalled Quanzhang to Ulsan and revoked Dong'an County.

古文：冬，十月，清河王冏卒。
现代文：冬季，十月，清河王曹去世。
English: In the winter, in October, Qinghe Wang Cao passed away.

古文：吴陆逊陈便宜，劝吴王以施德缓刑，宽赋息调。
现代文：吴陆逊对有利于国家的措施提出建议，劝吴王广施德政，缓和刑罚，放宽赋税，免征徭役。
English: Wu Luxun proposed measures that were beneficial to the country, and advised Wu Wangguang to practice virtue, relax criminal penalties, relax taxation, and exempt corvee service.

古文：又云： 忠谠之言，不能极陈；求容小臣，数以利闻。 
现代文：又说： 忠诚善良的建议，不能彻底向君王陈述；取悦君王的小臣，才反复以小利上奏。 
English: He also said: "Faithful and good advice cannot be thoroughly presented to the king; to please the king's ministers, it is only repeated with a small profit."

古文：王报曰： 《书》载： 予违汝弼 ，而云不敢极陈，何得为忠谠哉！ 
现代文：回复说： 《尚书》上记载： 我不错误，你要帮我改正 。你在信中不敢彻底陈述，怎么能称作忠心善良呢？ 
English: The reply said: "It is recorded in the Shang Shu: I am not mistaken, you must help me correct it. You dare not make a thorough statement in your letter, how can you be called loyal and kind?

古文：于是令有司尽写科条，使郎中褚逢赍以就逊及诸葛瑾，意所不安，令损益之。
现代文：于是命令有关人员，把将要实施的条款拟好，派郎中令褚逢带给陆逊和诸葛瑾，让他们对其中的不妥之处进行删改或增添。
English: He then ordered the relevant personnel to draw up the provisions to be implemented and send Lu Xun and Zhuge Liang to Lu Xun and Zhuge Liang to delete or add the incorrect parts.

古文：十二月，以钟繇为太傅、曹休为大司马，都督扬州如故；曹真为大将军，华歆为太尉，王朗为司徒，陈群为司空，司马懿为票骑大将军。
现代文：十二月，魏明帝任钟繇为太傅，曹休为大司马，仍然负责扬州方面的军务。任曹真为大将军，华歆为太尉，王朗为司徒，陈群为司空，司马懿为票骑大将军。
English: In December, Emperor Ming of Wei appointed Zhong Xi as Taifu and Cao Xiu as Da Sima, still in charge of military affairs in Yangzhou. He appointed Cao Zhen as Da Gen, Hua Xi as Taifu, Wang Lang as Sito, Chen Qun as Sikuo, and Sima Xi as Hakkai Da Gen.

古文：歆让位于管宁，帝不许。
现代文：华歆要将职位让给管宁，明帝不同意。
English: Hua Wei wanted to give up his position to Guanning, but Ming Di disagreed.

古文：征宁为光禄大夫，敕青州给安车吏从，以礼发遣，宁复不至。
现代文：征调管宁为光禄大夫，给管宁所在青州的官府下达命令，要他们以对待朝廷大臣的礼仪，用可坐乘的安车并派官吏将管宁护送到都城，但是管宁仍不应召。
English: Guan Ning was conscripted as a doctor of Guanglu, and an order was issued to the government office in Qingzhou, where Guan Ning was stationed, asking them to treat Guan Ning with the etiquette of a minister of the imperial court, and to escort Guan Ning to the capital in a safe car, but Guan Ning still should not be summoned.

古文：是岁，吴交趾太守士燮卒，吴王以燮子徽为安远将军，领九真太守，以校尉陈时代燮。
现代文：这一年，吴交趾太守士燮去世，吴王任命士燮的儿子士徽为安远将军，兼任九真太守，以校尉陈时接任士燮的交趾太守职位。
English: In the same year, Wu King appointed Shih Hui, the son of Wu Jiazi, as the general of Anyuan. He also served as the governor of Jiu Zhen. Lieutenant Chen Shi took over the position of the governor of Jiazi.

古文：交州刺史吕岱以交趾绝远，表分海南三郡为交州，以将军戴良为刺史；海东四郡为广州，岱自为刺史；遣良与时南入。
现代文：交州刺史吕岱认为交趾太遥远，上表请求将海南三郡划归交州，由将军戴良任刺史；海东四郡设立广州，吕岱为刺史；派戴良和陈时南下。
English: Lyu Wei, the governor of Jiaozhou, thought that Jiaozhou was too far away. The above table requested that the three counties of Hainan be assigned to Jiaozhou, with General Dai Liang as governor; the four counties of the East China Sea be set up in Guangzhou, with Lyu Wei as governor; and that Dai Liang and Chen Shi go south.

古文：而徽自署交趾太守，发宗兵拒良，良留合浦。
现代文：而士徽自封为交趾太守，率自己的宗族的军队抗拒戴良，戴良在合浦停留。
English: However, Shi Hui appointed himself as Koji Taishu and led his clan's army to resist Dai Liang. Dai Liang stayed in Hepu.

古文：交趾桓邻，燮举吏也，叩头谏徽，使迎良。
现代文：交趾人柏邻，以前经士燮推荐在郡中作吏员，叩头劝士徽迎接戴良来交趾上任。
English: A neighbor of Dai Liang, he had previously been recommended by Shi Yan to be a county official, and he kowtowed to persuade Shi Hui to welcome Dai Liang to take office.

古文：徽怒，笞杀邻，邻兄治合宗兵击，不克。
现代文：士徽大怒，将柏邻活活打死，柏邻的哥哥柏治召集自己的宗族士兵进攻士徽，未获成功。
English: Shi Hui was so angry that he beat his neighbor, Baoji, to death. His brother, Bai Zhi, gathered his own soldiers to attack Shi Hui, but was unsuccessful.

古文：吕岱上疏请讨徽，督兵三千人，晨夜浮海而往。
现代文：吕岱上书请求征讨士徽，他指挥三千士兵，日夜兼程，渡海前往。
English: Lv Ying wrote a letter requesting the collection of shields, he commanded three thousand soldiers, traveled day and night, and crossed the sea to go.

古文：或谓岱曰： 徽藉累世之恩，为一州所附，未易轻也。 
现代文：有人对吕岱说： 士微凭借他家几代对交趾人的恩德，为一州人所归附，不可轻视。 
English: Some people said to Lv Ying: Shi Hui, by virtue of the grace of several generations, has been attached by the people of the whole state, do not despise him.

古文：岱曰： 今徽虽怀逆计，未虞吾之卒至；若我潜军轻举，掩其无备，破之必也。稽留不速，使得生心，婴城固守，七郡百蛮云合响应，虽有智者，谁能图之！ 
现代文：吕岱说： 现在士徽虽然图谋不轨，却不知我已迅速到达这里；如果我隐蔽行动，轻装出发，突然打他个措手不及，必定一举获胜；假如我行动国迟缓，使他产生疑心，绕城固守，七个郡的上百个蛮族部落，群起响应即使有才智很高的人，谁又能够谋取他呢！ 
English: Lv Ying said: Now, although Shi Hui is plotting, he does not know that I have quickly arrived here; if I act covertly, set out lightly, and suddenly catch him off guard, I will surely win at one stroke; if I act slowly, make him suspicious, and stick around the city, hundreds of barbarian tribes in seven counties will flock to respond, even if there is a highly intelligent person, who can seek him?

古文：遂行，过合浦，与良俱进。
现代文：于是下令行动，过合浦时，与戴良联合进军。
English: As a result, he marched into the army, and when he passed Hepu, he marched together with Dai Liang.

古文：岱以燮弟子辅为师友从事，遣往说徽。
现代文：吕岱以士燮的侄子士辅为从事，待以师友之礼，派他前去劝士徽投降。
English: Lv Ying took Shijun's nephew Shifu as his apprentice and sent him to persuade Shihai to surrender.

古文：徽率其兄弟六人出降，岱皆斩之。
现代文：士徽领兄弟六人出降，吕岱把他们都斩首了。
English: Shihui led six brothers to surrender, and Lv Ying beheaded them all.

古文：孙盛论曰：夫柔远能迩，莫善于信。
现代文：孙盛论曰：安扶边远地区的人，亲近他们，最好的办法是讲信义。
English: Sun Sheng said: "The best way to support people in remote areas and be close to them is to be trustworthy.

古文：吕岱师友士辅，使通信誓；徽兄弟肉袒，推心委命，岱因灭之以要功利，君子是以知吕氏之祚不延者也。
现代文：吕岱以师友之礼对待士辅，要他信誓旦旦地去劝降士徽，士徽兄弟坦露臂膀，表示投诚，吕岱却为邀功名、谋私利将他们杀害，明智的人由此可知吕氏为什么没有后代延续下来。
English: Lv Ying treated Shifu with the courtesy of a teacher and a friend, and asked him to earnestly persuade Shihai to abdicate. Shihai's brothers opened their arms to show their sincerity, but Lv Ying killed them for the sake of fame and personal gain. Wise people can see from this why the Lv clan has no descendants.

古文：徽大将军甘醴及桓治率吏民共攻岱，岱奋击，破之。
现代文：士徽的大将甘醴及柏治率领交趾的官员和百姓共同攻击吕岱，吕岱奋力抵抗，才将甘醴等人击败。
English: The general of Shihou, Kam Ying, and the officials and common people led by Bai Zhi jointly attacked Lv Ying. Lv Ying fought back and defeated Kam Ying and the others.

古文：于是除广州，复为交州如故。
现代文：于是又撤销广州，恢复原来的交州建置。
English: As a result, Guangzhou was cancelled, but the exchange with Guangzhou was still resumed as before.

古文：岱进讨九真，斩获以万数；又遣从事南宣威命，暨徼外扶南、林邑、堂明诸王，各遣使入贡于吴。
现代文：吕岱进军九真，杀死和俘获近万人；又派从事向南深入，传布吴王的声威，促使境外扶南、林邑、堂明的各王，分别派使臣向吴进贡。
English: Lv Ying marched into Jiu Zhen and killed and captured nearly ten thousand people. He also sent envoys to go deep into the south to spread the fame of the king of Wu, prompting the kings of Funan, Linyi and Doming to send envoys to pay tribute to Wu.

古文：烈祖明皇帝上之上
现代文：烈祖明皇帝上之上
English: Above Emperor Ming

古文：世祖文皇帝下太和元年
现代文：魏明帝太和元年
English: Emperor Ming of the Wei Dynasty died in the first year of the Heian period

古文：春，吴解烦督胡综、番阳太守周鲂击彭绮，生获之。
现代文：春季，吴解烦督胡综、番阳太守周鲂讨伐彭绮，将其生擒。
English: In the spring, Wu Jie Du Du Hu Zong and Panyang Dazhu Zhou Jie fought against Peng Jie and captured him.

古文：初，绮自言举义兵，为魏讨吴，议者以为因此伐吴，必有所克。
现代文：当初，彭绮自称举兵起义，为魏征吴，有些大臣建议，借机攻吴，一定会成功。
English: At first, Peng Rong claimed that he would raise an army to revolt and conquer Wu for Wei. Some ministers suggested that he would take the opportunity to attack Wu, which would certainly be successful.

古文：帝以问中书令太原孙资，资曰： 番阳宗人，前后数有举义者，众弱谋浅，旋辄乖散。
现代文：明帝询问中书令太原人孙资，孙资说： 番阳的强宗大族，前后数次起事，但人数不多，见识浅陋，很快就都散了。
English: When Emperor Ming asked Sun Zi, a Taiyuan native, about the Chinese edict, Sun Zi said: The powerful clans of Panyang rebelled several times, but their numbers were small, their knowledge was shallow, and they soon dispersed.

古文：昔文皇帝尝密论贼形势，言洞浦杀万人，得船千数，数日间，船人复会。江陵被围历月，权裁以千数百兵住东门，而其土地无崩解者，是有法禁上下相维之明验也。
现代文：以前文皇帝曾详细分析过吴的形势，说我军在洞浦杀吴军民一万人，缴获一千余艘战船，可是在数日之间，吴军又把人和船聚集到一起；江陵被围数月，孙权仅率一千几百名士兵驻在江陵东门，而吴地并未发生大的动乱；这是他们法纪严密，上下共相维护的明显证据。
English: Previously, Emperor Wen had analyzed the situation in Wu in detail, saying that our army killed 10,000 Wu soldiers and civilians in Dongpu and captured more than 1,000 warships. However, within a few days, the Wu army gathered people and ships together again; Gangneung was besieged for several months, and Sun Quan only led a few hundred soldiers stationed at the east gate of Gangneung, but there was no major turmoil in Wu. This is clear evidence of their strict laws and regulations and the maintenance of communism.

古文：以此推绮，惧未能为权腹心大疾也。 
现代文：以此推论经彭绮的起事，恐怕不会成为孙权的心腹之患。 
English: Inferring from this that the uprising was instigated by Peng Rong, I'm afraid it won't be a problem for Sun Quan's inner circle.

古文：至是，绮果败亡。
现代文：到这时，彭绮果然失败了。
English: By this time, Peng Rong had indeed failed.

古文：二月，立文昭皇后寝园于鄴。王朗往视园陵，见百姓多贫困，而帝方营修宫室，朗上疏谏曰： 昔大禹欲拯天下之大患，故先卑其宫室，俭其衣食；勾践欲广其御儿之疆，亦约其身以及家，俭其家以施国；汉之文、景欲恢弘祖业，故割意于百金之台，昭俭于弋绨之服；霍去病中才之将，犹以匈奴未灭，不治第宅。
现代文：二月，在邺城为文昭皇后设立陵园，王朗前往陵园巡视，见那里的百姓多数贫困，而明帝当时正在修建宫室，王朗上书劝谏说： 从前大禹要拯救天下的人民免于灾难，所以先使自己的宫室尽量简陋，衣食尽量节俭；越王勾践为拓展御儿的疆界，也约束自己和家人，节俭家用补充国用；汉朝的文帝、景帝，为了发扬祖先的事业，停修了自己很喜欢、而且只需要百金的楼台，只穿很俭朴的粗厚衣；霍去病仅是个中等才能的将领仍认为匈奴尚未消灭，不置宅邸。
English: In February, a cemetery was set up for Empress Wenzhao in Handan. Wang Lang went to the cemetery to inspect it. He saw that the majority of the people there were poor, and Emperor Ming was building a palace at the time. Wang Lang wrote a letter to persuade him, saying: Once upon a time, King Yu wanted to save the people of the world from disaster, so he first made his palace as simple as possible and his food and clothing as frugal as possible. In order to expand the boundaries of his son, King Wenzhao also restrained himself and his family, and his frugal household supplemented the national use. Emperor Wenzhou and Emperor Jing of the Han Dynasty, in order to

古文：明恤远者略近，事外者简内也。
现代文：这些都说明，有远虑者，近时要简略；要对付外敌，必须要内部简朴。
English: All this shows that those who have foresight should be concise in the near future; to deal with external enemies, they must be internally simple.

古文：今建始之前，足用列朝会；崇华之后，足用序内官；华林、天渊，足用展游宴。
现代文：目前，建始殿前面，足够大臣列班上朝；崇华殿后面，足够内官侍候问安；华林园和天渊池，足够用于宴会和游乐。
English: At present, the front of Jinshi Hall is large enough for ministers to go to the Imperial Palace in a row; the back of Chonghua Hall is large enough for officials to wait for greetings; and the Hualin Garden and Tianyuan Pond are large enough for banquets and amusement.

古文：若且先成象魏，修城池，其馀一切须丰年，专以勤耕农为务，习戎备为事，则民充兵强而寇戎宾服矣。 
现代文：不妨先建成宫廷外的门阙，修筑好城池，其余的工程等年景好的时候再兴建。当前应当专劝民农耕为主要工作，整顿军队为紧迫任务。在人民富裕、军队强大以后，敌人自然会前来归服。 
English: It may be a good idea to first complete the gates outside the palace, build the castle, and wait for the rest of the projects to be built in good times. At present, it is necessary to persuade the people to make agriculture their main work, and rectify the army as an urgent task. After the people are rich and the army is strong, the enemy will naturally come to submit.

古文：三月，蜀丞相亮率诸军北驻汉中，使长史张裔、参军蒋琬统留府事。
现代文：三月，蜀汉丞相诸葛亮率领各路军队向北挺进，驻军汉中，以长史张裔、参军蒋琬留下处理丞相府的各项政务。
English: In March, Zhuge Liang, the prime minister of Shu Han, led all the troops to the north and stationed them in Hanzhong. He left Changshi Zhang Rong and Chiang Kai-shek, who had joined the army, to handle the various government affairs of the prime minister's office.

古文：临发，上疏曰： 先帝创业未半，而中道崩殂。
现代文：出发前，诸葛亮上书说： 先皇帝开创大业，刚刚见些成效，却中途溘然长逝了。
English: Before leaving, Zhuge Liang wrote: The first emperor started a great cause, and just saw some results, but died suddenly in the middle of it.

古文：今天下三分，益州疲敝，此诚危急存亡之秋也。
现代文：如今的天下分成三个政权鼎足而立，要算益州的蜀国最为贫穷困乏，这正是一个生死存亡的时刻。
English: Today, the world is divided into three regimes, with Shu in Yizhou being the poorest and most destitute. This is a time of life and death.

古文：然侍卫之臣不懈于内，忠志之士忘身于外者，盖追先帝之殊遇，欲报之于陛下也。
现代文：然而身边近臣仍能兢兢业业、毫不怠懈地在朝内尽其职守；忠勇将士舍身奋战在沙场，出生入死，是因为追念先皇帝的知遇之恩，想要全力报答给陛下。
English: However, the close vassals around him are still able to conscientiously and tirelessly perform their duties within the imperial court; the loyal and brave soldiers give up their lives to fight in the battlefield, from birth to death, because they remember the grace of the previous emperor and want to repay His Majesty with all their strength.

古文：诚宜开张圣听，以光先帝遗德，恢弘志士之气；不宜妄自菲薄，引喻失义，以塞忠谏之路也。
现代文：陛下正应虚心听取各方面意见，发扬光大先皇帝遗下的威德，振奋有志之士的气节；而不应自己轻视自己，讲出不合道理的话来，以致阻塞忠臣进谏的渠道。
English: His Majesty should listen to the opinions of all sides with an open mind, carry forward the virtues left by the late emperor, and encourage the spirits of the aspirants; but he should not despise himself and speak unreasonable words, thus blocking the channels for loyal subjects to enter the palace.

古文： 宫中、府中，俱为一体，陟罚臧否，不宜异同。
现代文： 宫廷和相府，是一个整体，提升、贬黜、表彰、指责，不应有什么区别。
English: The court and the prime minister's office are a whole, and there should be no difference between promotion, demotion, commendation, and criticism.

古文：若有作奸犯科及为忠善者，宜付有司论其刑赏，以昭陛下平明之理，不宜偏私，使内外异法也。
现代文：如果有触犯法纪的行为，或尽忠立功的表现，应该让有关部门按规定给予处罚、奖赏，以显示陛下公允、明察，不能有偏私之心，使宫廷内外执法不统一。
English: If there are those who commit treason, violate discipline and laws, and those who are loyal and do good deeds, they should be handed over to the competent officials, and they should be punished or rewarded to show His Majesty's fair and strict governance, and there should be no favoritism and selfishness, so that the methods of reward and punishment in the palace and the court are different.

古文：侍中、侍郎郭攸之、费祎、董允等，此皆良实，志虑忠纯，是以先帝简拔以遗陛下。
现代文：侍中郭攸之、费、侍郎董允等人，都是善良诚实、思想纯正的忠臣，所以先皇帝特意选拔他们留下来辅佐陛下。
English: The chamberlains, attendants Guo Youzi, Fei Yao, Dong Yun and others were all good and honest people, and their aspirations and minds were loyal. Therefore, the former emperor selected them to assist his majesty.

古文：愚以为宫中之事，事无大小，悉以咨之，然后施行，必能裨补阙漏，有所广益。
现代文：我以为宫廷中事务，不论大小，都应先和他们商议，然后再付诸实施，这样一定能弥补缺漏，得到更多的好处。
English: I think that the things in the palace, no matter how big or small, should be discussed with them, so that when they are implemented in the future, they will definitely be able to make up for shortcomings and omissions, and can gain a lot of benefits.

古文：将军向宠，性行淑均，晓畅军事，试用于昔日，先帝称之曰能，是以众议举宠为督。
现代文：将军向宠，品行平和公正，通晓军事，在以前经过考验，先皇帝答赞他很有才能，所以被大家推举为掌管禁兵的中部督。
English: The general was well-liked, his conduct was peaceful and just, and he was well-versed in military affairs. He had been tested in the past, and the former emperor praised him for his talent. Therefore, he was elected as the governor of the central region in charge of the forbidden soldiers.

古文：愚以为营中之事，悉以咨之，必能使行陈和睦，优劣得所。
现代文：我认为各项军务，都应征求他的意见，必定会令将士和睦，使才智出众和能力较差的人都能各得其所。
English: I think that he should be consulted in all military affairs, which will surely bring harmony to the generals, so that those who are more intelligent and less capable can have their own place.

古文：亲贤臣，远小人，此先汉所以兴隆也；亲小人，远贤臣，此后汉所以倾颓也。
现代文：亲近贤臣，疏远小人，这是前汉得以兴盛的原因；亲近小人，疏远贤臣，这是后汉衰败的根由。
English: To be close to the wise men and distant from the villains is the reason for the prosperity of the Western Han Dynasty; to be close to the villains and distant from the wise men is the reason for the decline of the Eastern Han Dynasty.

古文：先帝在时，每与臣论此事，未尝不叹息痛恨于桓、灵也。
现代文：先皇帝在世，每次与我谈起这些，没有一次不对桓帝、灵帝时代的政治腐败痛心疾首。
English: When the former emperor was alive, every time he talked to me about these things, there was never a time when he did not bitterly complain about the political corruption in the era of Emperor Kan and Emperor Ling.

古文：侍中、尚书、长史、参军，此悉端良、死节之臣，愿陛下亲之，信之，则汉室之隆，可计日而待也。
现代文：侍中郭攸之、费，尚书陈震，长史张裔，参军蒋琬，都是端正善良、能以死报国的忠臣，希望陛下亲近他们，信任他们，则汉室的兴盛，将指日可待。
English: The chamberlains Guo Youzhi and Fei, Shangshu Chen Zhen, Changshi Zhang Zhi, and Chiang Kai-shek, who joined the army, are all upright and good, loyal servants who can serve the country with death. I hope that His Majesty will be close to them and trust them, and then the prosperity of the Han family will be just around the corner.

古文： 臣本布衣，躬耕南阳，苟全性命于乱世炁不求闻达于诸侯。
现代文： 我本是一介平民，在南阳亲自耕作，本来只想在风雨飘摇的动荡年代保全性命，从未想通达贵显，名扬天下。
English: I was originally a commoner, farming in Nanyang myself. Originally, I only wanted to preserve my life in the turbulent times of the storm. I never wanted to become famous.

古文：先帝不以臣卑鄙，猥自枉屈，三顾臣于草庐之中，咨臣以当世之事；由是感激，遂许先帝以驱驰。
现代文：先皇帝不嫌弃我地位卑下，屈尊俯就，三次往茅庐相访，向我询问天下形势，使我感激万分，这才答应为先皇帝奔走效命。
English: The former emperor was not averse to me abdicating my position and condescending to him. He paid three visits to Mao Kun and asked me about the situation in the world, which made me extremely grateful. It was only then that I agreed to run for the former emperor and work for him.

古文：后值倾覆，受任于败军之际，奉命于危难之间，尔来二十有一年矣。
现代文：后来军事上遇到挫折，在败军之际承担重任，在危难时刻接受使命，从那时至今，已整整二十一年了。
English: Since then, it has been a full 21 years since I encountered military setbacks, shouldered heavy responsibilities at the time of defeat, and accepted a mission in a time of crisis.

古文：先帝知臣谨慎，故临崩寄臣以大事也。
现代文：先皇帝深知我行事谨慎，因此在临终前托付国家大事。
English: The late Emperor knew that I was careful and prudent, so on his deathbed he entrusted the affairs of state to me.

古文：受命以来，夙夜忧叹，恐托付不效，以伤先帝之明。
现代文：自从接受先皇帝遗命以来，日夜忧虑叹息，唯恐辜负重托，有损先皇帝知人之明。
English: Since accepting the last emperor's behest, he has been worried and sighing day and night, lest he should fail to live up to the heavy trust and damage the reputation of the last emperor.

古文：故五月渡泸，深入不毛。
现代文：于是五月渡过泸水，深入到荒凉的不毛之地。
English: So in May, they crossed Surabaya and went deep into the desolate barrens of Tibet.

古文：今南方已定，甲兵已足，当奖率三军，北定中原，庶竭驽钝，攘除奸凶，兴复汉室，还于旧都，此臣所以报先帝，而忠陛下之职分也。
现代文：如今南方已经平定，军力弃足，正应当激励将士，统率三军北定中原，我愿竭尽平庸之力，铲除奸贼，恢复大汉皇室，重返故都，这正是我报答先皇帝，效忠陛下的本分。
English: Now that the south has been pacified and the military forces have been abandoned, it is time to inspire the soldiers and lead the three armies to the central plains of Beidings. I am willing to do my best to eradicate the traitors, restore the Han royal family, and return to the ancient capital. This is exactly my duty to repay the former emperor and his loyalty.

古文：至于斟酌损益，进尽忠言，则攸之、祎、允之任也。
现代文：至于处理政事，掌握分寸，进纳忠言，则是郭攸之、费、董允等人的职责。
English: Guo Youzhi, Fei, Dong Yun and others are responsible for handling political affairs, controlling the balance, and recruiting loyal advisors.

古文：愿陛下托臣以讨贼兴复之效，不效，则治臣之罪以告先帝之灵，责攸之、祎、允等之慢以彰其咎。
现代文：希望陛下将讨伐国贼、复兴大汉朝廷的重任交给我，若无成效，请您治罪，以告先皇帝在天之灵；如果郭攸之、费、董允疏忽失职，就责备追究他们的过错。
English: I hope that Your Majesty will entrust me with the important task of fighting against traitors and reviving the Han Dynasty. If there is no effect, please punish the crime to inform the Emperor in the spirit of heaven; if Guo Youzhi, Fei, and Dong Yun negligently fail to perform their duties, blame them and investigate their faults.

古文：陛下亦宜自谋，以谘诹善道，察纳雅言，深追先帝遗诏。
现代文：陛下自己也应慎重考虑，征询和选择妥善的治国方略，访察、采纳好的建议，真正遵循先皇帝遗训。
English: His Majesty himself should also carefully consider, solicit and choose a proper strategy for governing the country, visit and adopt good suggestions, and truly follow the last emperor's teachings.

古文：臣不胜受恩感激，今当远离，临表涕零，不知所言。 
现代文：如此则臣下我就受恩不浅，感激不尽了。现在将要远离陛下，在写这份表章时激动得泪流不止，不知该说些什么。 
English: I can't thank you enough. Today I'm going to say goodbye to His Majesty, and I can't help but shed tears in front of this record, and I don't know what I said.

古文：遂行，屯于沔北阳平石马。
现代文：于是率军出发，驻屯在沔水北岸的阳平石马。
English: As a result, he led his army to Yangpyeong Shima on the northern coast of Surabaya.

古文：亮辟广汉太守姚伷为掾，伷并进文武之士，亮称之曰： 忠益者莫大于进人，进人者各务其所尚。
现代文：诸葛亮征召广汉太守姚为丞相掾，姚同时推荐了很多文武官员，诸葛亮称赞他说： 对国家效忠进益，莫过于举荐人才，但推荐者往往根据自己的崇尚。
English: Zhuge Liang conscripted the Guanghan Emperor Yao as the prime minister. Yao also recommended many civil and military officials. Zhuge Liang praised him and said: "There is nothing more loyal to the country than recommending talents, but the recommenders are often based on their own admiration.

古文：今姚掾并存刚柔以广文武之用，可谓博雅矣。
现代文：而今掾属姚举荐官员，却能刚柔并济地同时推举文官武将，以备国家之用，可称广博典雅。
English: Now, although he is an official recommended by Yao, he is able to concurrently promote civil officers and military commanders to prepare for the state, which can be said to be broad and elegant.

古文：愿诸掾各希此事以属其望。 
现代文：希望各位掾属都以姚为榜样，不负我对你们的期望。 
English: I hope all of you will follow Yao's example and live up to my expectations.

古文：帝闻诸葛亮在汉中，欲大发兵就攻之，以问散骑常侍孙资，资曰： 昔武皇帝征南郑，取张鲁，阳平之役，危而后济，又自往拔出夏侯渊军，数言 南郑直为天狱，中斜谷道为五百里石穴耳， 言其深险，喜出渊军之辞也。
现代文：明帝得到诸葛亮抵达汉中的报告，准备大举出兵向诸葛亮发起进攻。他就这件事询问散骑常侍孙资，孙资说： 以前武皇帝攻打南郑，征讨张鲁，在阳平之战中，身临险境，而后才勉强取胜，后来又亲自率兵救出夏侯渊的军队。他曾多次说： 南郑真像天上的监狱，中间的斜谷道简直是五百里石穴。 由于那里的地形险恶，他庆幸救夏候渊的军队脱离险境，才说了上面的话。
English: The Ming Emperor received a report that Zhuge Liang had arrived in Hanzhong and was preparing to attack Zhuge Liang with a large number of troops. He inquired about this matter from the horseback riding attendant Sun Zi. Sun Zi said: Previously, Emperor Wu attacked Nan Zheng and solicited Zhang Lu. In the Battle of Yangping, he was in a dangerous situation, and then he barely won. Later, he personally led the troops to rescue Xia Houyuan's army. He said many times: Nan Zheng is really like a prison in the sky, and the middle valley road is simply a five-hundred-kilometer stone cave. Because the terrain there is dangerous,

古文：又，武皇帝圣于用兵，察蜀贼栖于山岩，视吴虏窜于江湖，皆桡而避之，不责将士之力，不争一朝之忿，诚所谓见胜而战，知难而退也。
现代文：再者，武皇帝用兵如神，深知蜀贼栖息在崇山峻岭之间，吴匪流窜于江河大湖之上，因而加以容忍，暂时避开，不强迫将士们死打硬拼，不争一朝一夕的气忿，这就是所谓有可胜的机会便战，无取胜的把握便退的战略。
English: Moreover, Emperor Wu used soldiers like gods, knowing that the Shu bandits lived in the mountains and the Wu bandits lived in the rivers and lakes. Therefore, he tolerated them, avoided them temporarily, did not force his generals to fight to the death, and did not fight for the wrath of the day and night. This is the so-called strategy of fighting when there is a chance to win, and retreating when there is no chance to win.

古文：今若进军就南郑讨亮，道既险阻，计用精兵及转运、镇守南方四州，遏御水贼，凡用十五六万人，必当复更有所发兴。天下骚动，费力广大，此诚陛下所宜深虑。
现代文：如果现在进兵南郑讨伐诸葛亮，不但道路艰险，还要调集精兵，转运物资，再加上镇守南方的荆、徐、扬、豫四州，防止吴的水上进犯，共需兵力十五六万人，这样，就还需要征发更多的兵役，调集更多的物资，全国都会因此骚动起来，耗费巨大，这的确需要陛下深思。
English: If soldiers are sent to South Zheng to fight Zhuge Liang now, not only will the road be arduous and dangerous, but they will also have to mobilize elite soldiers and transport materials, plus garrison the four southern states of Jing, Xu, Yang and Henan to prevent Wu from attacking by water. A total of 156,000 soldiers will be needed. In this way, more military service will be required and more materials will be mobilized. The whole country will be in turmoil as a result, and the cost will be huge. This really requires His Majesty to think deeply.

古文：夫守战之力，力役参倍。
现代文：防守和进攻相比，仅需二分之一的力量。
English: In comparison with defense and attack, only one half of the strength is needed.

古文：但以今日见兵分命大将据诸要险，威足以震摄强寇，镇静疆场，将士虎睡，百姓无事。
现代文：但以我军现有的兵力，份派重要将领据守各险关要隘，威力即足以使强敌震恐，使我国边境安然无事，将士可以养精蓄锐，百姓也不受劳役之苦。
English: However, with the existing strength of our army, important generals are assigned to defend each dangerous pass. The power is enough to make the strong enemy tremble, so that our border is safe and sound, soldiers can keep their energy and sharpness, and the people are not subjected to the hardships of labor.

古文：数年之间，中国日盛，吴、蜀二虏必自罢敝。 
现代文：数年之后，我国国力强，吴、蜀二敌必然自己疲惫下去。 
English: After a few years, China's national strength is strong, and the two enemies of Wu and Shu will inevitably exhaust themselves.

古文：帝乃止。
现代文：明帝就停止了攻击计划。
English: Emperor Wu then gave up.

古文：初，文帝罢五铢钱，使以谷帛为用，人间巧伪渐多，竞湿谷以要利，薄绢以为市，虽处以严刑，不能禁也。
现代文：当初，帝废止了五铢钱，以粮食和丝绢代替钱币。社会上弄巧作假的理解越来越多，争相把粮食搞湿以获利，用很薄的丝绢买卖东西，虽然严刑处罚，仍不能禁止。
English: At first, the emperor abolished the five-baht coin and replaced it with grain and silk cocoons. There is more and more understanding in the society of deception and forgery. People compete to wet the grain to make a profit, and use very thin silk cocoons to buy and sell things. Although they are severely punished, they still cannot be banned.

古文：司马芝等举朝大议，以为： 用钱非徒丰国，亦所以省刑，今不若更铸五铢为便。 
现代文：司马芝等人在朝廷上展开讨论，认为： 以钱作贷币不仅仅为了增加国家的收入，还可以减省刑罚，现在不如恢复铸造五铢钱更为有利。 
English: Sima Zhi and others held a discussion at the imperial court, arguing that: using money as loan money is not only to increase the country's income, but also to reduce the penalty. Now it is more advantageous to resume the minting of 50 yuan coins.

古文：夏，四月，乙亥，复行五铢钱。
现代文：夏季，四月，乙亥，恢复使用五铢钱。
English: In the summer, in April, during the Chinese Year of the Pig, the five-baht coin was reintroduced.

古文：甲申，初营宗庙于洛阳。
现代文：甲申，开始在洛阳营建宗庙。
English: Jiaxing, began to build a family temple in Luoyang.

古文：六月，以司马懿都督荆、豫州诸军事，率所领镇宛。
现代文：六月，任命司马懿都督荆、豫二州诸军事，率自己所属军队镇守宛城。
English: In June, he appointed Sima Ye as the military governor of Jing and Henan Provinces, and led his own army to guard Wancheng.

古文：冬，十二月，立贵嫔河内毛氏为皇后。
现代文：冬季，十二月，立贵嫔河内人毛氏为皇后。
English: In the winter, in December, she was crowned as the empress.

古文：初，帝为平原王，纳河内虞氏为妃；及即位，虞氏不得立为后，太皇卞太后慰勉焉。
现代文：以前，明帝为平原王时，娶河内人虞氏为妃；即位为帝以后，虞氏没有被立为皇后，太皇卞太后因此而安慰和劝抚她。
English: In the past, when Emperor Ming was the king of the plain, he married a Hanoi person, Yu Shi, as his wife. After he ascended the throne as emperor, Yu Shi was not appointed as empress, so the great empress and the great empress consoled and persuaded her.

古文：虞氏曰： 曹氏自好立贱，未有能以义举者也。
现代文：虞氏说： 曹氏家族本来就好立地位低贱、没有按照礼义推举的人。
English: Mr. Yu said: Mr. Cao has always liked to make a lowly person the empress, and has never commented on virtue.

古文：然后职内事，君听外政，其道相由而成；苟不能以善始，未有能令终者也，殆必由此亡国丧祀矣！ 
现代文：然而皇后管理宫内事务，国君负责朝廷政事，内外相辅而成；如果没有好的开端，就决不会有好的结果，恐怕一定会因此而亡国灭宗了。 
English: However, the empress manages the affairs of the palace, the sovereign is responsible for the affairs of the court, and the internal and external complement each other; if there is no good beginning, there will never be a good result, and I am afraid that the country will perish and the dynasty will be destroyed.

古文：虞氏遂绌还鄴宫。
现代文：由于卞太后也是低贱出身，虞氏因此被贬回邺城的皇宫。
English: Since Empress Dowager Zou was also from a lowly background, the Yu clan was therefore relegated back to the imperial palace in Fucheng.

古文：初，太祖、世祖皆议复肉刑，以军事不果。
现代文：当初，魏武帝、文帝都议论恢复肉刑，因为不断有战争而未能实施。
English: At first, Emperor Wu of Wei and Emperor Wen both discussed the resumption of corporal punishment, but were unable to implement it because of the constant war.

古文：及帝即位，太傅钟繇上言： 宜如孝景之令，其当弃市欲斩右趾者，许之；其黥、劓、左趾、官刑者，自如孝文易以髡笞，可以岁生三千人。 
现代文：明帝即位，太傅钟繇建议： 应仿汉景帝的命令，应当斩首示众的人如果自愿以砍去右脚代替，应允许；对黥面、割鼻、砍左脚、宫刑等刑罚，仍然按照汉文帝的法令，以剃发和鞭打代替，这样一年可以使三千人保留性命。 
English: When Emperor Ming ascended to the throne, Taifu Zhongyi suggested that: Those who should be beheaded and paraded in public should follow the order of Emperor Han Jing; if they voluntarily cut off their right foot instead, they should be allowed; for punishments such as being beheaded, cutting off their nose, cutting off their left foot, and palace punishment, they should still be shaved and whipped in accordance with the decrees of Emperor Hanwen. In this way, three thousand people could be spared in one year.

古文：诏公卿以下议，司徒朗以为： 肉刑不用已来，历年数百；今复行之，恐所减之文未彰于万民之目，而肉刑之问已宣于寇雠之耳，非所以来远人也。
现代文：明帝下诏要公卿及以下的臣僚讨论，司徒王朗认为： 不用肉刑至今已经数百年了，现在恢复，恐怕所减刑罚的好处还未使人民见到，而恢复肉刑的恶名已经传到贼寇的耳朵里，这不是招抚远方人士的办法。
English: Emperor Ming issued an edict calling for the discussion of the court nobles and the following ministers. Wang Lang, a scholar, opined: It has been hundreds of years since corporal punishment was abolished, but now it has been restored. I am afraid that the benefits of the reduced punishment have not yet been seen by the people, and the notoriety of the restoration of corporal punishment has already reached the ears of thieves. This is not a way to appease people from far away.

古文：今可按繇所欲轻之死罪，使减死髡刑，嫌其轻者，可倍其居作之岁数。
现代文：现在不妨根据钟繇减免死刑的建议，将死刑减为剃发做苦工，如果认为这样的处罚太轻了，可以延行他们服刑的时间。
English: Now, according to Zhong Wei's proposal to commute the death penalty, the death penalty may be reduced to shaving their hair and doing hard labor. If such a punishment is considered too light, the time they serve may be extended.

古文：内有以生易死不訾之恩，外无以刖易釱骇耳之声。 
现代文：如此，对内有以生代死的广大无量的恩德，对外则没有以砍脚代替脚镣的骇人听闻的恶名。 
English: Internally, there is the immeasurable benefit of replacing the death penalty with life, and externally, there is no shocking discussion of replacing the shackles with amputation.

古文：议者百馀人，与朗同者多。
现代文：讨论的人有百余名，多数同意王朗的意见。
English: More than a hundred people took part in the discussion, and most of them had the same opinion as Wang Lang.

古文：帝以吴、蜀未平，且寝。
现代文：明帝因为吴、蜀两国尚未平定，也就把此事放下子。
English: Because Eastern Wu and Western Shu had not yet been pacified, Emperor Ming temporarily shelved the matter.

古文：是岁，吴昭武将军韩当卒，其子综淫乱不轨，惧得罪，闰月，将其家属、部曲来奔。
现代文：这一年，吴昭武将军韩当去世，他的儿子韩综道德败坏，不守法令，害怕被治罪，闰十二月，率领家属和宗族军队来投魏。
English: In this year, Han Dang, the general of Wu Zhaowu, passed away. His son Han Zheng, who was morally corrupt, disobeyed the law, and was afraid of being punished, led his family members and clan army to join Wei in leap December.

古文：初，孟达既为文帝所宠，又与桓阿阶、夏侯尚亲善；及文帝殂，阶、尚皆卒，达心不自安。
现代文：当初，孟达受文帝宠信，又和桓阶、夏侯尚关系密切，文帝去世后，桓阶和夏侯尚也相继故去，孟达心中忧虑不安。
English: At first, Mengda was favored by Emperor Wen, and had a close relationship with Huanzhang and Xia Hou Shang. After the death of Emperor Wen, Huanzhang and Xia Hou Shang also passed away one after another, and Mengda was worried and anxious.

古文：诸葛亮闻而诱之，达数与通书，阴许归蜀。达与魏兴太守申仪有隙，仪密表告之。
现代文：诸葛亮知道后，便引诱孟达，孟达和诸葛亮多次通信，秘密答应归蜀；孟达和魏兴太守申仪有隔阂，申仪秘密上表告发了孟达。
English: After Zhuge Liang knew, he lured Meng Da, Meng Da and Zhuge Liang corresponded many times, secretly promised to return to Shu; Meng Da and Wei Xingta guarding Shen Yi had a rift, Shen Yi secretly denounced Meng Da on the table.

古文：达闻之，惶惧，欲举兵叛。司马懿以书慰解之，达犹豫未决，懿乃潜军进讨。
现代文：孟达听说后，惊惶恐惧，企图举兵反叛；司马懿写信安慰劝解了他，孟达因此犹豫不决。
English: When Meng Da heard about this, he panicked and attempted to raise an army to rebel; Sima Yi wrote a letter of consolation to persuade him, and Meng Da hesitated.

古文：诸将言： 达与吴、汉交通，宜观望而后动。 
现代文：司马懿则秘密率军进讨，部下将领说： 孟达已和吴、蜀互相串通，我们应先观察他的动向，然后再采取行动。 
English: Sima Qian secretly led the army to discuss, and his subordinate generals said: Meng Da has colluded with Wu and Shu, we should first observe his movement, and then take action.

古文：懿曰： 达无信义，此其相疑之时也。
现代文：司马懿说： 孟达是个不讲信义的人，这时正在怀疑观望。
English: Sima Yi said: Meng Da is an untrustworthy person. At that time, he was doubting and waiting.

古文：当及其未定促决之。 
现代文：我军应趁他尚未作出决定，迅速加以解决。 
English: Our army should take advantage of the fact that he has not yet made a decision and solve it quickly.

古文：乃倍道兼行，八日到其城下。
现代文：于是司马懿率军急速行军，日夜兼程，仅用八天就抵达孟达的新城城下。
English: So he sped up, driving day and night, and reached his hometown in eight days.

古文：吴、汉各遣偏将向西城安桥、木阑塞以救达，懿分诸将以距之。
现代文：吴、蜀各派将领进兵西城的安桥、木兰塞援救孟达，司马懿则派将领进兵西城的安桥、木兰塞援救孟达，司马懿则派将领分路拦阻。
English: Wu and Shu sent generals to Anqiao and Mulansei in Xicheng to rescue Meng Da, while Sima Yu sent generals to Anqiao and Mulansei in Xicheng to rescue Meng Da, and Sima Yu sent generals to block the branch road.

古文：初，达与亮书曰： 宛去洛八百里，去吾一千二百里。
现代文：当初，孟达写信给诸葛亮说： 宛城距洛阳八百里，距我所在新城一千二进里。
English: At first, Mengda wrote to Zhuge Liang, saying, "Wancheng is 800 miles away from Luoyang, and 112 miles away from my new city.

古文：闻吾举事，当表上天子，比相反复，一月间也，则吾城已固，诸军足办。
现代文：听说我起兵，自然要向明帝报告，连续往返，要用一个月的时间，那时我的城池已防守坚固，各军也作好充分的准备。
English: Hearing that I had raised an army, I naturally wanted to report to Emperor Ming. The continuous round trip would take a month. At that time, my castle was well-defended and all the troops were well-prepared.

古文：吾所在深险，司马公必不自来；诸将来，吾无患矣。 
现代文：我的防区地形险要，司马懿肯定不会亲自前来，其他将领来，不会对我造成威害。 
English: Moreover, our army is far away and dangerous, Sima Yi will certainly not come in person, other generals will attack, I have nothing to worry about.

古文：及兵到，达又告亮曰： 吾举事八日而兵至城下，何其神速也！ 
现代文：及至司马懿的军队兵临城下，孟达又写信对诸葛亮说： 我起兵仅八天，司马懿便兵临城下，怎么如此神速！ 
English: When Sima Qian's army was approaching the city, Meng Da also wrote to Zhuge Liang, saying: I only raised an army for eight days, and Sima Qian's army is approaching the city, how can it be so fast!

