古文：章懋，字德懋，兰溪人。
现代文：章懋，字德懋，浙江兰溪人。
English: Zhang Qian, a native of Lanxi, Zhejiang Province.

古文：成化二年会试第一，成进士，改庶吉王。
现代文：成化二年，会试第一名，考中进士，改任庶吉士。
English: In the second year of Chenghua, he won the first place in the examination, and was promoted to the junior high school entrance examination, and was appointed to the junior high school entrance examination.

古文：明年冬，授编修。
现代文：第二年冬，授编修职。
English: In the winter of the following year, he was awarded the editorship.

古文：宪宗将以元夕张灯，命词臣撰诗词进奉。
现代文：明宪宗将在元宵节的晚上张灯结彩，命令词臣撰写诗词进献。
English: In the evening of the Lantern Festival, the Ming Xian Zong will light the lanterns and order the poet to write a poem.

古文：懋与同官黄仲昭、检讨庄昶疏谏曰： 顷谕臣等撰鳌山烟火诗词，臣等窃议，此必非陛下本怀，或以两宫圣母在上，欲备极孝养奉其欢心耳。
现代文：章懋与编修黄仲昭、检讨庄日永上疏劝谏道： 臣等刚奉谕撰写鳌山烟火诗词，臣等私下议论，这必定不是陛下的本意，或许因为两宫太后在上，想极尽孝心，讨其欢心罢了。
English: Zhang Ye and compiler Huang Zhong Zhao, reviewing Zhuang Rai Yong Shang Zuo, advised him: "Your majesty's majesty must not have intended for you and your ministers to have a private discussion after you had just ordered them to write the poem about the fireworks on Mount Lushan. Perhaps it was because the Empress Dowager of the Two Palaces wanted to do her best to satisfy her filial piety and please her.

古文：然大孝在乎养志，不可徒陈耳目之玩以为养也。
现代文：然而竭心尽孝在乎养志，不可仅仅用摆样子的玩赏就认为是尽孝。
English: However, filial piety is all about nurturing one's aspirations, and it should not be considered as filial piety if it is only used as a form of entertainment.

古文：今川东未靖，辽左多虞，江西、湖广赤地数千里，万姓嗷嗷，张口待哺，此正陛下宵旰焦劳，两宫母后同忧天下之日。
现代文：现在川东尚未安定，辽东有很多令人忧患的事，江西、湖广由于旱灾数千里地不长庄稼，人民被饥饿所困，急待救济，这正是陛下日夜忧心操劳、两宫母后共同为天下担扰的时期。
English: At present, the eastern Sichuan is not yet stable, the eastern Liaodong has a lot of worrying things, the crops are not growing in thousands of miles of Jiangxi and Hunan due to drought, and the people are trapped by hunger and are in urgent need of relief. This is the time when His Majesty is worried and working day and night, and the two queens are jointly worrying for the world.

古文：至翰林官以论思为职，鄙俚之言岂宜进于君上。
现代文：至于翰林官是以议论思考为职，粗俗之言怎么适合进献给君王。
English: As for the librarian, his job is to discuss and think about how vulgar language is suitable for presenting to the king.

古文：伏读宣宗皇帝御制《翰林箴》有曰 启沃之言，唯义与仁。尧、舜之道，邹、鲁以陈。 
现代文：我读宣宗皇帝御制的《翰林箴》中说 ：竭诚忠告之言，唯有义与仁，尧、舜之道显现在邹鲁之邦。 
English: I read in Emperor Xuanzong's "Analects of Confucius" that: "In the words of the earnest admonition, only the way of righteousness and benevolence, the way of truth and justice, the way of righteousness and justice, the way of benevolence and justice, the way of righteousness and justice, the way of benevolence and justice, the way of benevolence and justice, the way of benevolence and justice, the way of benevolence and justice, the way of benevolence and justice, the way of benevolence and justice, the way of benevolence and justice, the way of benevolence and justice, the way of

古文：张灯岂尧、舜之道，诗词岂仁义之言？
现代文：张灯岂为尧、舜之道，诗词岂为仁义之言。
English: Is the hanging of a lamp a bad omen, or the path of a bad omen, or the words of a poem a word of kindness and righteousness?

古文：若谓烟火细故不足为圣德累，则舜何必不造漆器，禹何必不嗜旨酒，汉文何必不作露台？
现代文：如果说烟火小事不足对至高无上的德行有影响，那么舜何必不制造漆器、禹何必不嗜饮美酒、汉文帝何不建造高台呢？
English: If the lack of fireworks and trifles has an impact on the supreme virtue, then why did Yu not make lacquerware, why did Yu not drink wine, and why did Han Wendi not build a high platform?

古文：古帝王慎小谨微必矜细行者，正以欲不可纵，渐不可长也。伏乞将烟火停止，移此视听以明目达聪，省此资财以振饥恤困，则灾祲可销，太平可致。 
现代文：古代帝王谨小慎微必定注重细小方面，正是因为欲望不能放纵，不好的事端不能任其发展，恳请将烟火停止，将注意力转移到时事政务上，节省此项钱财用来救济饥民抚恤贫困，那么不祥的灾气就可以消失，就能得到太平。 
English: The ancient emperors were prudent and cautious, and they must pay attention to small aspects. It is precisely because desires cannot be indulged, and bad things cannot be allowed to develop. Please stop the fireworks, shift your attention to current affairs and government affairs, and save this money to help the hungry and alleviate poverty. Then the ominous disaster can disappear and peace can be achieved.

古文：帝以元夕张灯，祖宗故事，恶懋等妄言，并杖之阙下，左迁其官。
现代文：皇帝以元宵晚上张灯是祖宗留下的老习惯，讨厌章懋等胡言乱语，在宫门外对懋等人处以杖刑，并予降职处分。
English: The emperor lights lanterns on the evening of the Lantern Festival, which is an old custom left by his ancestors. He dislikes the gibberish of Zhang Ye and others, and punishes them with a cane and demotion outside the palace gate.

古文：修撰罗伦先以言事被黜，时称 翰林四谏 。
现代文：修撰罗伦以前因为进言而被贬退，当时称为 翰林四谏 。
English: Shoshen Loren was previously disparaged because of his opinions, and was then called Hanlin Siqi.

古文：懋既贬临武知县，未行，以给事中毛弘等论救，改南京大理左评事。
现代文：章懋已经贬为临武知县，还未成行，由于给事中毛弘等人的帮助，改任南京大理左评事。
English: Zhang Ye had already been reduced to Linwu County, but had not yet been promoted. Due to the help of Mao Hong and others in the matter, he was reappointed as the left commentator of Nanjing Dali.

古文：逾三年，迁福建佥事。
现代文：过了三年，升福建佥事。
English: Three years later, he was promoted to Fujian Province.

古文：平泰宁、沙、尤贼，听福安民采矿以杜盗源，建议番货互通贸易以裕商民，政绩甚著。满考入都，年止四十一，力求致仕。吏部尚书尹旻固留之，不可。
现代文：平定泰宁、沙县、尤溪县的叛乱，允许福安人民采矿以杜绝作乱之源，建议与海外互通贸易，使商人和人民都得到好处，政绩十分显著，任满后进京，只有四十一岁，极力要求辞官返乡，吏部尚书尹执意挽留他，他仍然坚辞官职。
English: He quelled the rebellions in Taining, Sha County and Youxi County, allowed the people of Fu'an to mine in order to eliminate the source of unrest, proposed mutual trade with overseas countries, so that both businessmen and people would benefit. His political achievements are very remarkable. After he entered Beijing, he was only forty-one years old. He strongly requested to return home after his resignation. Shang Shuyun, the head of the cadre department, insisted on retaining him. He still firmly resigned from his post.

古文：既归，屏迹不入城府。奉亲之暇，专以读书讲学为事，弟子执经者日益进。
现代文：返回故乡后，从不进入官府，侍奉双亲之闲暇，专门用于读书讲学，弟子学生日渐长进。
English: After returning to his hometown, he never entered the government office. He served his parents' leisure time, which was dedicated to reading and lecturing, and his disciples and students gradually progressed.

古文：贫无供具，惟脱粟菜羹而已。
现代文：家贫没有摆设酒食的器具，只有小米蔬菜而已。
English: The poor family had no utensils for drinking and eating, only millet and vegetables.

古文：四方学士大夫高其风，称为 枫山先生 。家居二十余年，中外交荐，部檄屡起之，以亲老坚不赴。
现代文：四方的学者大夫崇尚他的风操，称之为枫山先生，在家闲居二十余年，朝廷内外很多官员向上推荐，屡次发来檄文起用他，他都以双亲年老坚持不去赴任。
English: The scholar doctors in Shifang admired his manners and called him Mr. Fengshan. He had been idle at home for more than 20 years. Many officials both inside and outside the imperial court recommended him to the higher ranks and sent him letters of recommendation repeatedly. He insisted that he would not go to work because his parents were too old.

古文：弘治中，孝宗登用群贤。众议两京国学当用名儒，起谢铎于北监。及南监缺祭酒，遂以懋补之。懋方遭父忧不就。
现代文：弘治年间，明孝宗任用有道德有才能的人，众人建议两京国学应当任用名儒，起用谢铎任职北监，赶上南监正缺祭酒，就以章懋补任，恰好遇到章懋父亲去世而未去就职。
English: During the Hongzhi era, Ming Xiaozong appointed people with morality and talent. People suggested that the Beijing and Beijing schools of Confucianism should appoint famous Confucianists, appointing Xie Jun to serve as the North Supervisor, catching up with the South Supervisor who was short of sacrificial wine, and filling the position with Zhang Jun. It just so happened that Zhang Jun's father died before he could take office.

古文：时南监缺司业且二十年，诏特以罗钦顺为之，而虚位以待懋。
现代文：这时南监缺司业已有二十余年，皇帝下诏仅任罗钦顺，而空着职位以待章懋。
English: At this time, the Southern Supervision and Quarantine Bureau had been in operation for more than 20 years. The emperor decreed that only Luo Qinshun would be appointed, and the vacant position was to be filled.

古文：十六年，服阕，懋复固辞。不允，始莅任。
现代文：十六年，章懋三年服满，他又再三推辞，朝廷不答应，他才到任。
English: Sixteen years later, when Zhang Ye had completed his three-year term of service, he again and again declined, but the imperial court did not agree, and he finally took up his post.

古文：六馆士人人自以为得师。
现代文：六馆士人都自认为得到了好老师。
English: All six staff members think they have found a good teacher.

古文：监生尤樾母病，例不得归省，昼夜泣。懋遣之归，曰： 吾宁以违制获罪。 
现代文：监生尤木越母亲病重，按例是不能回去探视，只有日夜暗自流泪，章懋知道后就要他回去看望母亲，并且说： 我宁愿因违背制度而判罪。 
English: Yumiyoshi's mother was seriously ill, and as usual, he couldn't go back to visit her. He could only shed tears day and night. When Zhang Ye found out, he asked him to go back to visit his mother, and said, "I'd rather be convicted for violating the system."

古文：武宗立，陈勤圣学、隆继述、谨大婚、重诏令、敬天戒五事。
现代文：明武宗即位，章懋陈述勤于圣贤之学，注重接续前代迄今的可述之事，恭敬地举行大婚之礼，重视诏书诰令的权威，尊重上天的禁戒五件事。
English: Mingwuzong ascended to the throne, Zhangye stated that he was diligent in the study of saints and sages, paid attention to the continuation of the things that could be said from the previous generation to the present, respectfully held the wedding ceremony, attached importance to the authority of the imperial edict, and respected the five prohibitions of heaven.

古文：正德元年乞休，五疏不允。
现代文：正德元年，他请求退休，接连五次上疏请求，皇帝都不批准。
English: In the first year of Zhengde, he asked to retire, and the emperor did not approve of his five consecutive requests.

古文：复引疾恳辞，明年三月始得请。
现代文：他又以身体有病恳求辞官，一直到第二年三月朝廷才接受他辞官的请求。
English: He also pleaded that he was ill, and it was not until March of the following year that the Imperial Court accepted his request to resign.

古文：五年起南京太常卿，明年又起为南京礼部右侍郎，皆力辞不就。
现代文：五年，起用任为南京太常卿，第二年又被起用任为南京礼部右侍郎，他都极力推辞不去任职。
English: Five years later, he was appointed to the post of Nanjing Taizhongqing, and the following year he was appointed as the Right Attendant of the Nanjing Ceremonial Department, but he tried his best to decline the post.

古文：言者屡陈懋德望，请加优礼，诏有司岁时存问。
现代文：有人屡次向朝廷陈述章懋的品德和威望，请求朝廷对他多加礼遇，下诏命有关部门每年按时慰问章懋。
English: Some people repeatedly told the imperial court about Zhang Ye's character and prestige, asked the imperial court to treat him with more courtesy, and ordered the relevant departments to pay condolences to Zhang Ye on time every year.

古文：世宗嗣位，即家进南京礼部尚书，致仕。
现代文：明世宗即位，在家进职为南京礼部尚书，后退休。
English: After the enthronement of Emperor Mingzizong, he was promoted to the post of secretary of the Nanjing Ceremonial Department at home, and then retired.

古文：其冬，遣行人存问，而懋已卒，年八十六。
现代文：这年冬天，朝廷派使者慰问他，而章懋已去世，享年八十六岁。
English: In the winter of that year, the imperial court sent an envoy to console him, and Zhang Ye died at the age of eighty-six.

古文：赠太子少保，谥文懿。
现代文：追赠太子少保，谥号文懿。
English: He was posthumously awarded the title of Prince Junior Protector, and given the posthumous title of Prince Senior Protector.

古文：懋为学，恪守先儒训。
现代文：章懋治学恪守古代儒者的警训。
English: Zhang Rongji adhered to the ancient Confucian police training.

古文：或讽为文章，曰： 小技耳，予弗暇。 
现代文：有人劝他写文章，他说： 此雕虫小技，我没有空闲。 
English: Someone advised him to write an article, and he said, "I don't have time for this little trick of carving insects.

古文：有劝以著述者，曰： 先儒之言至矣，芟其繁可也。 通籍五十余年，历俸仅满三考。难进易退，世皆高之。
现代文：有人劝他撰述经义，他说： 古代儒者已经说尽了，我只能做些删繁就简的工作， 居官五十余年，仅经过三次考核，难于进升而易于退位，人们都很看重他。
English: Someone advised him to write down the sutras, and he said, "The ancient Confucians have already said it all, I can only do some simple work of cutting and pasting. I have been in office for more than fifty years, and after only three examinations, it is difficult to advance and easy to abdicate. People value him very much.

古文：生三子，兼令业农。县令过之，诸子释耒跪迎，人不知其贵公子也。
现代文：章懋生了三个儿子，多次要他儿子务农，县令经过农田时，几个儿子放下手中的农具跪迎县令，人们都不知道是贵家子弟。
English: When the county magistrate passed by the farmland, several sons put down their farm tools and knelt down to greet the county magistrate. People did not know that they were the children of the noble family.

古文：又明年京祭，尚书倪岳以老疾罢之。居二年卒，年六十三。
现代文：有个儿子到南监探望章懋，徒步前往，在路上被巡检所殴打，事后巡检得知打了章懋的儿子很害怕，而上章懋处请罪，章懋安慰他，并送他回来。
English: There was a son who went to the Southern Supervision Bureau to visit Zhang Ye. He walked to Changchun and was beaten by the inspection office on the way. After the incident, the inspection office learned that the son who hit Zhang Ye was very scared, and the upper Zhang Ye pleaded guilty. Zhang Ye consoled him and sent him back.

古文：天启初，追谥文节。邹智，字汝愚，合州人。
现代文：章懋晚年时，三个儿子及一个孙子都死了，章懋八十二岁生最小的儿子章接，后来荫封为国子监生。邹智，字汝愚，合州人。
English: In his later years, Zhang Ye's three sons and one grandson all died. Zhang Ye's eighty-two-year-old youngest son, Zhang Zhi, later became the son-in-law of the emperor.

古文：年十二能文。
现代文：十二岁能写文章。
English: Twelve-year-olds can write articles.

古文：家贫，读书焚木叶继晷者三年。
现代文：家境贫穷，他利用烧树枝树叶发出的火光，夜以继日地读书三年。
English: His family was poor, and he used the firelight emitted by burning branches and leaves to read day and night for three years.

古文：举成化二十二年乡试第一。
现代文：成化二十二年，乡试中获第一名。
English: In the 22nd year of Chenghua, he won the first place in the township test.

古文：时帝益倦于政，而万安、刘吉、尹直居政府，智愤之。
现代文：当时明宪宗愈加懒理朝政，而万安、刘吉、尹直位居内阁权力机构，邹智十分愤恨。
English: At that time, the Ming Dynasty Constitutionalists were becoming more and more lazy in governing the government, while Wan'an, Liu Ji, and Yin Zhiguo were in the cabinet authority, which greatly angered Zou Zhi.

古文：道出三原，谒致仕尚书王恕，慨然曰： 治天下，在进君子退小人。
现代文：途经三原时，求见辞官返乡的尚书王恕，感慨地说： 要想治理好天下，在于任用君子斥退小人。
English: When he was passing through Mihara, he asked to see the retired official Wang Shuxu, who was returning home, and said with emotion: To govern the world well, it is necessary to appoint a gentleman to repel villains.

古文：方今小人在位，毒痡四海，而公顾屏弃田里。
现代文：当今小人在位，祸害天下，而您却被屏弃乡村。
English: Now the villain is in power, the scourge of the world, and you have been banished to the countryside.

古文：智此行非为科名，欲上书天子，别白贤奸，拯斯民于涂炭耳。 
现代文：我此行并不是为了科举功名，是想上书天子，请皇帝辨别贤臣与奸佞，将人民从水深火热中拯救出来。 
English: My purpose of this trip is not to win glory in the imperial examinations, but to appeal to the emperor, asking him to distinguish between a wise minister and a traitor, and to save the people from the abyss.

古文：恕奇其言，笑而不答。
现代文：王恕认为他说的话不寻常，笑笑没有应声。
English: Wang Shou thought that what he said was unusual, but there was no response.

古文：明年登进士。改庶吉士。遂上疏曰：陛下于辅臣，遇事必咨，殊恩异数必及，亦云任矣。
现代文：第二年邹智考中进士，任庶吉士，邹智于是上疏道 ：陛下对于辅臣，每当遇到政事必定同他们商议，并对他们施以隆重的礼遇和特殊的恩惠，也可以说很信任了。
English: In the second year, he was promoted to the rank of junior high school student and was appointed to the rank of junior high school student, after which he was promoted to the rank of junior high school student. He said, "His Majesty has come to have great trust in his aides-de-camp. Whenever there is a political issue, he always consults with them and treats them with great courtesy and special favors.

古文：然或进退一人，处分一事，往往降中旨，使一二小人阴执其柄，是既任之而又疑之也。
现代文：然而遇到升降一个人的职位，或是处理一件事，往往直接由宫廷发出诏谕，使一二个小人暗中掌握其权柄，这实际上是对辅臣既任用他而又怀疑他。
English: However, when it comes to the promotion and demotion of a person's position, or to deal with a matter, the palace often issues an edict directly from the palace, so that one or two villains secretly seize their power, which is actually to appoint him and suspect him.

古文：陛下岂不欲推诚待物哉？
现代文：陛下难道不想推诚布公地待人吗？
English: Doesn't your majesty want to treat people with sincerity?

古文：由其进身之初，多出私门，先有以致陛下之厌薄。及与议事，又唯诺惟谨，伈伈伣伣，若有所不敢，反不如一二俗吏足以任事。
现代文：由于这些辅臣升官之初，大多出自权贵的人推荐，在先就有人使陛下憎恶，看不起的地方，每当与他们商议政事，他们又是唯唯诺诺，一副诚惶诚恐的样子，好像什么都不敢承担，反而不如一二个平常的官吏顶用。
English: Since most of these aides-de-camp were recommended by powerful people at the beginning of their promotion, whenever they were consulted on political affairs, they were always meek and submissive, with a look of fear and trepidation, as if they did not dare to take on anything, but were more like one or two ordinary officials.

古文：此陛下所为疑也，臣窃以为过矣。
现代文：这就是陛下对辅臣持怀疑态度的原因，我认为陛下这种态度是错误的。
English: That is why His Majesty is suspicious of his aides, and I think His Majesty's attitude is wrong.

古文：昔宋仁宗知夏竦怀诈则黜之，知吕夷简能改过则容之；知杜衍、韩琦、范仲淹、富弼可任则不次擢之。故能北拒契丹，西臣元昊。未闻一任一疑，可以成天下事也。
现代文：以前宋仁宗了解到夏竦心怀奸诈就罢免了他，知道吕夷简能改正错误就宽容了他，知道杜衍、韩琦、范仲淹、富弼可以任用就越级提拔他们，因此就能北面抵御住契丹，西边臣服元昊，从未听说既任用又怀疑能够成就天下大事的。
English: Previously, Song Renzong knew that Xia Yao was treacherous and dismissed him. He knew that Lü Yijian could correct mistakes and tolerated him. He knew that Du Yan, Han Zheng, Fan Zhongran, and Fuxi could be appointed and promoted to higher levels. Therefore, he could resist Khitan in the north and submit to Yuan Hao in the west. He had never heard of anyone who was appointed and doubted that he could achieve great things in the world.

古文：愿陛下察孰为竦，孰为夷简，而黜之容之，孰为衍、琦、仲淹、弼而擢之，日与讲论治道，不使小人得参其间，则天工亮矣。
现代文：希望陛下仔细考察谁是夏竦类的人，谁是吕夷简类的人，对他们或罢免，或宽容，考察谁是像杜衍、韩琦、范仲淹、富弼之类人，由此提拔他，同他讨论治理国家的方法，不让小人参入，那么就能昭示上天的圣明。
English: It is hoped that His Majesty will carefully examine who is a person like Xia Yao, who is a person like Lü Yizhen, and either dismiss or tolerate them, examine who is a person like Du Yan, Han Qi, Fan Zhongyun, and Fuxi, and thus promote him, discuss with him the method of governing the country, and do not allow villains to enter, then it will be able to show the holiness of heaven.

古文：臣又闻天下事惟辅臣得议，惟谏官得言。谏官虽卑，与辅臣等。
现代文： 臣又听说国家的事情只有辅臣能够商议，只有谏官才能发表评论，谏官官职虽然卑微，但起的作用与辅臣相同。
English: The vassal also heard that only the vassal could discuss state affairs, and only the eunuch could comment on them. Although the eunuch's post was lowly, it played the same role as that of the vassal.

古文：乃今之谏官以躯体魁梧为美，以应对捷给为贤，以簿书刑狱为职业。不畏天变，不恤人穷。或以忠义激之，则曰： 吾非不欲言，言出则祸随，其谁吾听？ 
现代文：现在的谏官以身材魁梧为美，以对答敏捷为贤，以案卷刑狱为职业，不怕天象变化、不抚恤人民的困穷，有人用忠诚道义来激励他，他则说： 我并非不想说，而话一出口祸就降临，那时谁又听我的？ 
English: The eunuchs of the present day are distinguished by their large stature, their ability to answer questions quickly, and their profession of writing prison records. They are not afraid of changes in the heavenly bodies, and they do not care about the poverty of the people. Some people inspire him with loyalty and morality, but he says, "I don't want to say it, but if I say it, disaster will come. Who will listen to me then?"

古文：呜呼！既不能尽言效职，而复引过以归于上。有人心者固如是乎？
现代文：呜呼，既不能极言进谏，忠于职守，而且又将过失归咎皇帝，有良心的人会如此吗？
English: Alas, is it possible for a man of conscience not to be overzealous, to be loyal to his duties, and to blame the emperor for his mistakes?

古文：臣愿罢黜浮冗，广求风节之臣。
现代文：臣希望罢免那些多余闲散的官员，多方寻求有风骨气节的臣子。
English: The minister hopes to dismiss those superfluous idle officials, and many are looking for courteous courtiers.

古文：令仗下纠弹，入阁参议。或请对，或轮对，或非时召对，霁色接之，温言导之，使得毕诚尽蕴，则天听开矣。
现代文：使他们在朝廷检举弹劾官吏不法行为，入内阁参加政事议论，对这些臣子，或者直接请他发表意见，或者轮流发表意见，或者不时召来讨论某事，陛下严肃接待他们，用温和的言语开导他们，使他们竭诚奉献自己的才智，这样就能使圣人听到各种意见择善而从。
English: Let them accuse and impeach officials of wrongdoing in the imperial court, enter the cabinet to participate in political discussions, and invite these courtiers to express their opinions directly, or take turns to express their opinions, or call them from time to time to discuss something. Your Majesty receives them seriously, enlightens them with gentle words, and makes them devote their talents wholeheartedly. In this way, you can make the saints hear all kinds of opinions and choose the best.

古文：臣又闻汲黯在朝，淮南寝谋，君子之有益人国也大矣。
现代文： 臣又听说西汉的汲黯在朝廷做官时，淮南王不敢谋变，君子所起的作用对国家是很大的。
English: The minister also heard that when the Western Han Dynasty's Qiu Ying was an official in the imperial court, King Huainan did not dare to seek change, and the role played by the gentleman was great for the country.

古文：以陛下之聪明，宁不知君子可任而故屈抑之哉？
现代文：以陛下的聪明才智，难道不知道君子可以任用，而故意委屈压抑人才吗？
English: With His Majesty's ingenuity, don't you know that a gentleman can appoint, but deliberately oppress and suppress talent?

古文：乃小人巧谗间以中伤之耳。
现代文：这是由于小人巧妙地进谗言离间中伤所致。
English: This is due to the villain cleverly insinuating and slandering.

古文：今硕德如王恕，忠鲠如强珍，亮直刚方如章懋、林俊、张吉，皆一时人望，不宜贬锢，负上天生才之意。
现代文：现在具有大德的如王恕，忠诚耿直的如强珍，耿直、严正的如章懋、林俊、张吉，他们都是现今众人所仰望的人才，不应该贬斥禁锢，有负于上天创造人才的本意。
English: Nowadays, those with great virtue such as Wang Shu, those who are loyal and straightforward such as Qiang Zhen, and those who are straightforward and strict such as Zhang Qi, Lin Jun, and Zhang Ji, are all talents that people look up to nowadays. They should not disparage those who are imprisoned, which is against the original intention of God to create talents.

古文：陛下诚召此数人，置要近之地，使各尽其平生，则天心协矣。
现代文：陛下诚心召来这几个人才，设置在关键部门任职，使他们各尽其平生智慧，那么就天人协调合一。
English: His Majesty sincerely summoned these few talents, set them to work in key departments, and let them each do their best in their lifetime wisdom, so as to harmonize heaven and man.

古文：臣又闻高皇帝制阍寺，惟给扫除，不及以政。
现代文： 臣又听说高皇帝规定守宫门的太监、宦官，只能充任打扫清洁之类的工作，不能参入政事。
English: The minister also heard that Emperor Gao stipulated that the eunuchs and eunuchs who guarded the palace gate could only perform cleaning and other work, and could not enter politics.

古文：近者旧章日坏，邪径日开，人主大权尽出其手。内倚之为相，外倚之为将，藩方倚之为镇抚，伶人贱工倚之以作奇技淫巧，法王佛子倚之以恣出入宫禁，此岂高皇帝所许哉！
现代文：近来旧有的规章日益被毁坏，歪门邪道大开，君王的大权尽被这些宦官所把持，朝廷内倚之为宰相，外倚之为将领，藩王依靠他们为镇抚，乐官、卑微的工匠依靠他们制造过度奇巧的东西，喇嘛教教主、佛教徒依靠他们随意进出皇宫，这些难道是高皇帝所允许的吗？
English: In recent times, the old rules and regulations have been increasingly destroyed, crooked doors have been opened, and the power of the monarch has been completely controlled by these eunuchs. The imperial court relies on them as prime ministers, and the outside world relies on them as generals. The lords rely on them as pacemakers. Musicians and lowly craftsmen rely on them to make excessively wonderful things. The lamas and Buddhists rely on them to enter and leave the imperial palace at will. Is this allowed by Emperor Gao?

古文：愿陛下以宰相为股肱，以谏官为耳目，以正人君子为腹心，深思极虑，定宗社长久之计，则大纲正矣。
现代文：希望陛下以宰相为手足，以谏官为耳目，用正人君子做心腹，深思熟虑，制定国家长久之计，那么朝纲就匡正了。
English: It is hoped that His Majesty will take the prime minister as his hands and feet, the eunuchs as his eyes and ears, and the upright gentlemen as his confidants, and make a long-term plan for the country in a thoughtful manner. Then the program of the government will be rectified.

古文：然其本则在陛下明理何如耳。窃闻侍臣进讲无反复论辨之功，陛下听讲亦无从容沃心之益。
现代文： 然而这最根本的则在于陛下对道理的理解如何，我听说侍臣进讲没有做反复的论辩，陛下听讲亦无从容接受臣下意思的雅量。
English: However, what is most fundamental is His Majesty's understanding of the truth. I heard that the courtier did not make repeated arguments, and His Majesty did not tolerate the elegance of the subject's intention.

古文：如此而欲明理以应事，臣不信也。
现代文：像这样而想明白事理，处理朝政，臣是不相信的。
English: If you want to understand the reason for things and deal with the imperial government like this, I don't believe it.

古文：愿陛下念义理之难穷，惜日月之易迈，考之经史，验之身心，使终岁无间，则圣学明而万事毕治，岂特四事之举措得其当已耶。
现代文：希望陛下想到道理难以穷尽，珍惜时光易逝，考察经书史书，检验自己的思想和行为，终年不间断，那么儒家的学说得到昌明，而且万事都治理得好，岂只上列四件事得到妥善处理呢？ 
English: I hope that Your Majesty will think of the fact that reason is inexhaustible, cherish the fact that time is fleeting, study the scriptures and history books, and examine your own thoughts and actions, all year round, so that the Confucian doctrine will be enlightened, and everything will be well managed. Will only the above four things be properly handled?

古文：疏入，不报。
现代文：疏送呈皇帝，皇帝不给答复。
English: There has been no response since the complaint was filed.

古文：智既慷慨负奇，其时御史汤鼐、中书舍人吉人、进士李文祥亦并负意气，智皆与之善。
现代文：邹智生性大方豪气自负，当时御史汤鼐、中书舍人吉人、进士李文祥也都意见相投，邹智同他们关系都不错。
English: Zou Zhi was generous, proud and arrogant. At that time, Gishi Tang Jun, Zhongshuo Renren Ji Ren, and Jin Shi Li Wenxiang also shared the same opinion, and Zou Zhi had a good relationship with them.

古文：因相与品核公卿，裁量人物。
现代文：他们在一起品评朝臣，议论人物。
English: Together, they review courtiers and discuss characters.

古文：未几，孝宗嗣位，弊政多所更。
现代文：不久，明孝宗即位，对以往的弊政多有改革。
English: Soon after, Emperor Mingxiao Zong ascended to the throne, and many reforms were made to the previous bad government.

古文：智喜，以为其志且得行，乃复因星变上书曰：伏读明诏云 天下利弊所当兴革，所在官员人等条具以闻 。
现代文：邹智很高兴，认为自己的计划能够实行，趁着因星象异变，朝廷广开言路的机会，又上书说 ：圣明的诏书上说 天下的利弊应当兴革，所有的官员都可以把自己的看法列为条目向上陈述 。
English: Zou Zhi was very happy, thinking that his plan could be implemented. Taking advantage of the opportunity for the imperial court to open up the discussion due to the astrological phenomenon, he also wrote: The sacred edict said that the advantages and disadvantages of the world should be reformed, and all officials could state their views as an article.

古文：此殆陛下知前日登极诏书为奸臣所误，禁言官毋风闻挟私言事，物论嚣然，故复下此条自解耳。
现代文：这大概是因为陛下已知道前几天登基诏书被奸臣所歪曲，禁止谏议之官不要利用传闻夹杂私心来谈论政事，诏书发出后，舆论沸腾，所以又下这条诏令自行调解。
English: This is probably because His Majesty already knew that the imperial edict of enthronement issued a few days ago had been distorted by treacherous vassals, and that he had forbidden the deliberation officers not to use hearsay mixed with selfishness to talk about political affairs. After the imperial edict was issued, public opinion boiled over, so he issued this imperial edict to mediate on his own.

古文：夫不曰 朕躬有过，朝政有阙 ，而曰 利弊当兴革 ；不曰 许诸人直言无隐 ，而曰 官员人等条具以闻 。
现代文：不说 朕自身有过失，朝政有缺点 ，而说 利弊应当兴革 ；不说 允许大家直言不讳 而说 所有的官员都可以把自己的意见列为条目向上陈述 。
English: It does not say, "I myself am at fault, the government has shortcomings," but "advantages and disadvantages should be reformed"; it does not say, "Allow everyone to be outspoken," but "All officials can state their opinions as an article."

古文：陛下所以求言者，已不广矣。
现代文：陛下所用来征求意见的范围太不广泛。
English: The scope of His Majesty's consultation is too narrow.

古文：今欲兴天下之利，革天下之弊，当求利弊之本原而兴且革之，不当毛举细故，以为利弊在是也。
现代文：现在想振兴天下之利，革除天下的弊病，首先应该寻求造成这些利弊的根源，再来决定是振兴或是革除，不应该列举些鸡毛蒜皮的琐碎小事，以为这就是利弊所在。 根据在哪里？
English: Now, if you want to revitalize the world's interests and eliminate the world's ills, you should first seek the root causes of these advantages and disadvantages, and then decide whether to revitalize or eliminate them. You should not list some petty trifles, thinking that this is where the advantages and disadvantages are. Where is the basis?

古文：本原何在？
现代文：就在内阁大臣身上。
English: On a cabinet minister.

古文：阁臣是已。少师安持禄怙宠，少保吉附下罔上，太子少保直挟诈怀奸，世之小人也。
现代文：少师万安恃位取宠，少保刘吉对上欺骗对下附和，太子少保尹直心怀奸诈，都是些世上的小人。
English: Shao Shi Wan An, Shao Bao Liu Ji, Shao Bao Yin Zhi, Shao Bao Liu Ji, Shao Bao Liu Ji, Shao Bao Liu Ji, Shao Bao Liu Ji, Shao Bao Liu Ji, Shao Bao Liu Ji, Shao Bao Liu Ji, Shao Bao Liu Ji, Shao Bao Liu Ji,

古文：陛下留之，则君德必不就，朝政必不修，此弊所当革者也。
现代文：陛下留用他们，那么君王的德行必不完善，朝政必定整治不好，此弊病是应当革除的。
English: If His Majesty continues to use them, then the moral conduct of the monarch is bound to be imperfect, and the government of the dynasty is bound to be difficult to rectify. This malady should be eradicated.

古文：致仕尚书王恕忠亮可任大事，尚书王竑刚毅可寝大奸，都御史彭韶方正可决大疑，世之君子也。陛上用之，则君德开明，朝政清肃，此利所当兴也。
现代文：退休尚书王恕忠诚聪慧，可以担当重任，尚书王刚强果断，可以止息大奸之谋，都御史彭韶端平正直，可以决断大政方针，他们是世间的君子，陛下任用他们，那么君王的恩惠能畅通无阻地施泽到人民中间，朝政就能清明严正，这就是应当振兴之利。
English: Retired emperors are loyal and wise, and can take on important responsibilities; emperors are strong and decisive, and can put an end to treasonous plots; emperors are dignified and upright, and can decide on major policies. They are the gentlemen of the world, and His Majesty appoints them. Then the king's favor can flow unimpeded to the people, and the government can be clear and strict. This is the advantage of revitalization.

古文：然君子所以不进，小人所以不退，大抵由宦官权重而已。
现代文： 然而君子之所以不被任用，小人之所以不被罢免，大抵是由于宦官掌握权柄过重而已。
English: However, the reason why gentlemen are not appointed and villains are not dismissed is mostly due to the fact that eunuchs have too much power.

古文：汉元帝尝任萧望之、周堪矣，卒制于弘恭、石显。
现代文：汉元帝曾任用萧望之、周堪，最终被弘恭、石显所控制。
English: Emperor Han Yuan once appointed Xiaowanzhi and Zhou Kan, who were eventually controlled by Hongxiong and Shi Xian.

古文：宋孝宗尝任刘俊卿、刘珙矣，卒间于陈源、甘昇。
现代文：宋孝宗曾任用刘俊卿、刘珙，最后被陈源、甘升所离间。
English: Song Xiaozong had appointed Liu Junqing and Liu Yao, but was eventually ousted by Chen Yuan and Gan Sheng.

古文：李林甫、牛仙客与高力士相附和，而唐政不纲。贾似道、丁大全与董宋臣相表里，而宋室不振。
现代文：唐代的李林甫、牛仙客与高力士相互勾结，而造成唐代朝政混乱，贾似道、丁大全与董宋臣内外勾结，而宋王朝委靡不振。
English: Li Linfu, Niu Xianke and Gao Lixin of the Tang Dynasty colluded with each other, resulting in the chaos of the Tang Dynasty. Jia Xian Dao and Ding Daquan colluded with Dong Song Zhen inside and outside, while the Song Dynasty was in a slump.

古文：君子小人进退之机，未尝不系此曹之盛衰。
现代文：君子小人的任用或罢免的机遇，未尝不是和这类宦官的盛衰紧密相连。
English: The opportunities for the appointment or dismissal of noble villains are closely linked to the rise and fall of such eunuchs.

古文：愿陛下鉴既往，谨将来，揽天纲，张英断。凡所以待宦官者，一以高皇帝为法，则君子可进，小人可退，而天下之治出于一矣。
现代文：希望陛下以历史为鉴，谨慎地把握未来，总揽皇权，采取果断措施，以高皇帝的成法来对待宦官，那么君子就可以任用，小人就会被罢免，这样天下的政令就会归一了。
English: I hope that His Majesty will take history as a guide, cautiously grasp the future, always seize the imperial power, take decisive measures, and treat eunuchs with the high emperor's law, then the gentleman can be appointed, and the villain will be dismissed, so that the decrees of the world will be unified.

古文：以陛下聪明冠世，岂不知刑臣不可委信，然而不免误用者，殆正心之学未讲也。
现代文： 以陛下的聪明盖世，岂有不知道对宦官不能够委任信用，然而难免误用，大概是没有讲习端正本心的学问。
English: With the wisdom of his majesty, do you not know that eunuchs cannot be entrusted with credit, but it is unavoidable to misuse it, and there is probably no knowledge of proper training.

古文：心发于天理，则耳目聪明，言动中节，何宦官之能惑。
现代文：本心发源于天理，就耳聪目明，言行合乎法度，怎会被宦官所迷惑？
English: The true heart originates from the heavenly law, the ears are sharp, the eyes are clear, and the words and deeds are in accordance with the law. How can it be confused by eunuchs?

古文：发于人欲，则一身无主，万事失纲，投间抵隙，蒙蔽得施。
现代文：万事发源于人欲，那么自身即无主张，万事失去纲常，宦官就趁势寻找到时机，蒙蔽陛下。
English: Everything originates from human desire, then there is no assertion, everything is out of the ordinary, and the eunuch takes advantage of the situation to find an opportunity to deceive His Majesty.

古文：虽有神武之资，亦将日改月化而浸失其初。欲进君子退小人，兴天下之利，革天下之弊，岂可得哉？
现代文：陛下虽然有神明而威武的天份，也将日月削渐渐地失去本来的圣明，而想任用君子，罢免小人，振兴天下之利，革除天下的弊病，岂能实现？ 
English: Although His Majesty has the divine and mighty talent, he will gradually lose the original sacredness of the sun and moon, and if he wants to appoint a gentleman, dismiss a villain, revitalize the world's interests, and eliminate the world's ills, can he achieve it?

古文：帝得疏，颔之。
现代文：皇帝看完疏，点头表示赞赏。
English: The emperor nodded his appreciation after watching the performance.

古文：居无何，安、直相继罢斥。
现代文：过了不久，万安、尹直相继被罢免。
English: Soon after, Wan An and Yin Zhi were dismissed one after another.

古文：而吉任寄如故，衔智刺骨。
现代文：而刘吉仍居旧职，他对邹智恨之入骨。
English: But Liu Jie is still in his old position, and he has a visceral hatred for Zou Zhizhi.

古文：鼐常朝当侍班，智告之曰： 祖宗盛时，御史侍班，得面陈政务得失，立取进止。
现代文：汤鼐经常在朝廷值班，邹智告诉汤鼐说 ：先世兴盛，御史值班，得当面向皇帝陈述朝政的得失情况，皇帝即刻决定是采用或是禁止。
English: Tong Yao was often on duty at the imperial court. Zou Zhi told Tong Yao, "You are on duty at the imperial court. You have to present the merits and demerits of the imperial government to the emperor. The emperor will immediately decide whether to adopt or ban it."

古文：自后惟退而具疏，此君臣情意所由隔也。君幸值维新之日，盍仿先朝故事行之。 
现代文：到后来只有等到退朝后用疏来陈述，这样君臣之间不能相互交流，你有幸遇到朝廷革新的时候，何不效仿先朝事例行事。 
English: Later, it was necessary to wait until after the abdication of the emperor to make a statement with a distraction, so that the monarchs and ministers could not communicate with each other. When you are fortunate enough to encounter a reform of the imperial court, why not follow the example of the previous dynasty.

古文：及恕赴召至京，智往谒曰： 后世人臣不获时见天子，故事多苟且。愿公且勿受官，先请朝见，取时政不善者历陈之，力请除革，而后拜命，庶其有济。
现代文：等到王恕接诏到了京城，邹智前去拜见王恕说： 后世做臣子的没有机会见到天子，因此处理政事大都马虎草率，希望您暂且不接受官职，先请求朝见皇帝，将时政治理不善的一些情况一一向皇帝陈述，极力要求革除，然后再接受官职，这样就可能于政事有所益。
English: When Wang Shu received the imperial edict and arrived at the capital, Zou Zhi went to meet Wang Shu and said, "In the future, as a courtier, you will not have the opportunity to meet the Son of Heaven. Therefore, the handling of political affairs is mostly sloppy and hasty. I hope that you will not accept the official post for the time being, but first request to see the emperor, explain to the emperor all the circumstances of the current political reasonableness, strongly request to be expelled, and then accept the official post. This may be beneficial to political affairs.

古文：若先受官，无复见天子之日矣。 
现代文：如果先接受官职，就再没有见天子的日子了。 
English: If you accept an official position first, you will never see the Son of God again.

古文：鼐与恕亦未能用其言。
现代文：汤鼐与王恕也未能采用他的建议。
English: Tang Jun and Wang Shu also failed to adopt his suggestion.

古文：会刘概狱起，吉使其党魏璋入智名，遂下诏狱。智身亲三木，仅属喘息，慷慨对簿曰： 智见经筵以寒暑辍讲，午朝以细事塞责，纪纲废驰，风俗浮薄，生民憔悴，边备空虚，私窃以为忧。与鼐等往来论议诚有之，不知其他。 
现代文：时逢审理刘概的案子，刘吉指使同党魏璋把邹智名字牵涉进去，邹智被捕关进诏狱，颈、手、足上都套上刑具，仅能呼吸，邹智在接受审问时，慷慨地回答： 我见御前讲席在寒暑间停止讲习，午朝以皮毛小事敷衍塞责，朝政纲纪毁坏，风俗轻浮，人民生活困苦，边境防备空虚，我暗自为此担忧，与汤鼐等来往时议论这些情况是有的，其他什么就不知道了。 
English: At the time of the trial of Liu Zhi's case, Liu Ji instructed his party colleague Wei Gan to involve Zhi Zhi's name in it. Zhi Zhi was arrested and put in the imperial prison, with torture tools on his neck, hands and feet, and could only breathe. Zhi Zhi, when being interrogated, generously replied: I saw the imperial lecture hall stop the lecture in the cold and hot weather, the afternoon and morning were punished with petty things, the political discipline of the DPRK was destroyed, the customs were frivolous, the people's life was difficult, and the border defense was empty. I was secretly worried about this, and discussed these situations

古文：谳者承吉意，竟谪广东石城所吏目，事具《汤鼐传》。
现代文：议罪的官员承奉刘吉的意图，最终将邹智贬到广东石城所任吏目。
English: The officials who pleaded guilty followed Liu Ji's intention and eventually demoted Zou Zhi to the position of an official in Shicheng, Guangdong.

古文：智至广东，总督秦纮檄召修书，乃居会城。
现代文：邹智到了广东，总督秦用檄文召他撰写有关著作，这才住在省会城市。
English: When Zou Zhi arrived in Guangdong, Governor Qin sent him a letter to write about it. This is why he lived in the provincial capital.

古文：闻陈献章讲道新会，往受业，自是学益粹。
现代文：他听说陈献章在新会讲学，前去拜师学习，由此学问更加精深。
English: He heard that Chen Xianzhang lectured at the new association and went to visit his teacher to study, which made his knowledge more profound.

古文：弘治四年十月得疾遽卒，年二十有六。
现代文：弘治四年十月得病突然去世，年仅二十六岁。
English: In October of the fourth year of the Hongzhi era, he suddenly fell ill and died at the age of only twenty-six.

古文：同年生吴廷举为顺德知县，殓而归其丧。
现代文：同科生员吴廷举任顺德知县，为邹智备置棺材，送回家乡安葬。
English: Wu Ting, a fellow student, was assigned to Shunde County to prepare a coffin for Zou Zhi and send him home for burial.

古文：天启初，追谥忠介。
现代文：天启初年，追赠忠介谥号。
English: In the first year of Tianqi, he was posthumously awarded the title of Zhong Jie.

古文：舒芬，字国裳，进贤人。
现代文：舒芬，字国裳，江西进贤人。
English: Shu Fen, Zi Guo Mo, Jiangxi Jin Xianren.

古文：年十二，献《驯雁赋》于知府祝瀚，遂知名。
现代文：十二岁时，作《驯雁赋》献给知府祝瀚，于是名声逐渐传开。
English: At the age of twelve, he dedicated his work "Taming the Wild Geese" to Governor Zhu Han, and his fame gradually spread.

古文：正德十二年举进士第一，授修撰。
现代文：正德十二年，考中进士第一名，授修撰职。
English: In the twelfth year of Zhengde, he won the first place in the junior high school entrance examination, and was assigned to the post of teacher.

古文：时武宗数微行，畋游无度。
现代文：当时明武宗多次便服出行，打猎游玩毫无节制。
English: At that time, Mingwuzong made many casual trips, hunting and playing without restraint.

古文：其明年，孝贞皇后崩甫逾月，欲幸宣府。托言往视山陵，罢沿道兵卫。
现代文：第二年，孝贞皇后死去刚过一个月，武宗就想去宣府巡幸，假借要去皇陵视察，撤去沿路的卫兵。
English: In the second year, just a month after the death of Empress Xiaozhen, Emperor Wuzong wanted to go on a tour of Xuanfu, under the pretext of inspecting the imperial mausoleum and removing the guards along the way.

古文：芬上言： 陛下三年之内当深居不出，虽释服之后，固俨然茕疚也。
现代文：舒芬上言劝道： 陛下在三年之内理应深居不出，即使已经服满三年，行为仍然应该庄重，表情应该悲伤。
English: Shu Fen advised: His Majesty should not be able to live deeply in three years. Even if he has served for three years, his behavior should still be solemn and his expression should be sad.

古文：且自古万乘之重，非奔窜逃匿，未有不严侍卫者。
现代文：况且自古以来天子皇帝为天下的至尊，又不是东奔西窜的逃难，从未有不注重侍卫保护的。
English: Moreover, since ancient times, the emperor, the son of heaven, has been the highest in the world, and he has never been fleeing from danger. He has never paid less attention to the protection of the bodyguards.

古文：又等威莫大于车服，以天子之尊下同庶人，舍大辂衮冕而羸车亵服是御，非所以辨上下、定礼仪。 
现代文：另外显示皇帝等级威严的莫过于随行仪仗，以天子之尊降同一般老百姓，舍弃皇袍车仗，而穿着猥琐的衣服，乘坐瘦马车，这有悖于辨别上下尊卑，确定礼仪的原则。 
English: In addition, there is nothing that shows the dignity of the emperor's rank than to accompany the ceremonial battle, to defer to the general people with the respect of the son of heaven, to abandon the imperial robe car battle, but to wear obscene clothes and take a thin carriage, which is contrary to the principle of distinguishing the superior and inferior, and determining the etiquette.

古文：不听。
现代文：武宗不接受。
English: The emperor does not allow it.

古文：孝贞山陵毕，迎主祔庙，自长安门入。
现代文：孝贞皇后的陵墓竣工，迎接孝贞皇后的神主纎享到太庙，从长安门迎入。
English: The mausoleum of Empress Xiaozhen was completed, and the deity to welcome Empress Xiaozhen arrived at the Imperial Temple and entered through the Chang'an Gate.

古文：芬又言： 孝贞皇后作配茂陵，未闻失德。祖宗之制，既葬迎主，必入正门。昨孝贞之主，顾从陛下驾由旁门入，他日史臣书之曰 六月己丑，车驾至自山陵，迎孝贞纯皇后主入长安门 ，将使孝贞有不得正终之嫌，其何以解于天下后世？
现代文：舒芬又说 ：孝贞皇后婚配宪宗从未听说做过什么违反礼仪道德的事，祖宗的制度，安葬完毕，迎接其神主，必须从正门走，考虑到孝贞皇后的神主随陛下车驾由旁边进来，以后史官写为 六月四日，皇帝车驾从皇陵，迎回孝贞纯皇后的神主进入长安门 ，将使人们对孝贞皇后有不得善终的怀疑，这如何向天下后世的人们做解释？
English: Shu Fen also said: The marriage of Empress Xiaozhen and Emperor Jianzong has never been heard of doing anything that violates etiquette and morality. The ancestral system, after burial, to greet its god, must go through the main gate. Considering that the god of Empress Xiaozhen came in with His Majesty's car, the historian later wrote that on June 4, the emperor drove from the imperial mausoleum to welcome back the god of Empress Xiaozhen into Chang'an Gate, which will make people doubt the end of Empress Xiaozhen. How can this be explained to the people of the world?

古文：昨祔庙之夕，疾风迅雷甚雨，意者圣祖列宗及孝贞皇后之灵，儆告陛下也。
现代文：昨天纎太庙的傍晚，刮狂风、响炸雷、下暴雨，这是圣明的列祖列宗以及孝贞皇帝在显灵，警告陛下的。
English: Yesterday, in the evening, the wind blew wildly, thunder and lightning sounded, and it rained heavily. This was the Holy Light's ancestors and the Emperor Xiaozhen's spirit appearing to warn His Majesty.

古文：陛下宜即明诏中外，以示改过。 
现代文：陛下应当立即下诏书，向朝廷内外表示悔改。 
English: His Majesty should immediately issue an imperial edict to express his repentance both inside and outside the Imperial Court.

古文：不报。
现代文：明武宗不予答复。
English: It didn't make the papers.

古文：遂乞归养，不许。又明年三月，帝议南巡。
现代文：舒芬于是请求辞官回乡，武宗不批准，又过了一年的三月，武宗计划南巡。
English: So Shu-fen asked the dictionary officer to return to his hometown, but Bu-tsung did not approve. A year later, in March, Bu-tsung planned a southern tour.

古文：时宁王宸濠久蓄异谋，与近幸相结，人情惶惧。
现代文：这时宁王朱宸濠早就图谋不轨，与武宗左右的宠臣相勾结，人心惶恐不安。
English: At this time, Zhu Xi, the king of Ning, had long been plotting evil, colluding with the favored ministers around Wu Zong, and his heart was filled with fear and anxiety.

古文：言官伏阙谏，忤旨被责让。
现代文：言官伏在宫门下谏止南巡，违背了武宗的旨意而受到责备。
English: The magistrate, crouching under the palace gate, halted the southern inspection and was rebuked for violating the will of Emperor Takemune.

古文： 古帝王所以巡狩者，协律度，同量衡，访遗老，问疾苦，黜陟幽明，式序在位，是以诸侯畏焉，百姓安焉。
现代文：舒芬对此很担忧，与吏部员外郎夏良胜、礼部主事万潮、庶吉士汪应轸邀各官署接连上奏章劝谏武宗南巡，大家都答应上奏章。舒芬于是与编修崔桐，庶吉士江晖、王廷陈、马汝骥、曹嘉以及汪应轸一块上疏说 ：古代帝王之所以都出巡，是为了统一全国的法令和度量标准。寻访前朝故臣，访贫问苦，惩恶扬善，按功行赏，因此诸侯敬畏，百姓安居乐业。
English: Shu Fen was very worried about this. He and the members of the clerk's office, the second son of Xia Liangsheng, the head of the ritual department, Wanchao, and the second son of Guizhou Wang, invited the government departments to successively play the song to encourage the southern inspection of the Emperor Wu, and everyone agreed to play the song. Shu Fen then said together with the editor Cui Tong, the second son of Guizhou Jiang, Wang Ting Chen, Ma Rong, Cao Jia, and Wang Yingjun: The reason why the ancient emperors went on a tour was to unify the laws and measurement standards of the whole country. To search for

古文：若陛下之出，不过如秦皇、汉武，侈心为乐而已，非能行巡狩之礼者也。
现代文：如果陛下的巡行不过同秦始皇、汉武帝放纵地寻欢作乐相同，那就达不到巡行的目的。
English: If His Majesty's procession is nothing more than the same as that of the First Emperor of Qin and the Emperor of Han, indulgently seeking pleasure, it will not achieve the purpose of the procession.

古文：博浪、柏谷，其祸亦可鉴矣。
现代文：博浪、柏谷的祸患也可作为借鉴。
English: The disasters in Bo-lang and Kashiwagaya can also be used as a reference.

古文：近者西北再巡，六师不摄，四民告病。哀痛之声，上彻苍昊。传播四方，人心震动。
现代文：不久前陛下第二次巡行西北，军容不整，士、农、工、商叫苦不迭，人民哀伤悲痛的声音，上达苍天，传播四方，人心震动。
English: Not long ago, His Majesty made his second tour of the northwest. The military was in disarray, and the clamor of soldiers, farmers, workers, and merchants was incessant. The sound of the people's sorrow and grief reached the heavens and spread in all directions, and the hearts of the people were shaken.

古文：故一闻南巡诏书，皆鸟惊兽散。
现代文：因此一听到南巡诏书，都被吓得如鸟兽般地四处逃散。
English: Therefore, as soon as they heard of the Southern Inspection Proclamation, they were all scared and fled everywhere like birds and beasts.

古文：而有司方以迎奉为名，征发严急，江、淮之间萧然烦费。万一不逞之徒，乘势倡乱，为祸非细。
现代文：而有关部门以迎驾为名，紧急地征集人力和物力。江、淮之间骚动不安，万一有为非作歹之徒乘势煽动叛乱，就会酿成大祸。
English: However, the relevant departments urgently recruited manpower and material resources in the name of welcoming. The agitation between Jiang and Huai was uneasy, and in the unlikely event that a criminal took advantage of the situation to instigate a rebellion, it would lead to a catastrophe.

古文：且陛下以镇国公自命，苟至亲王国境，或据勋臣之礼以待陛下，将北向朝之乎，抑南面受其朝乎？
现代文：尚且陛下自命为 镇国公 ，如果来到亲王封地，有的以待功臣之礼对待陛下，你是北面下拜呢？还是南面受拜呢？
English: In addition, His Majesty has appointed himself as the prince of the town. If you come to the prince's fief, some will treat His Majesty with the courtesy of a meritorious subject. Do you bow to the north? Or do you bow to the south?

古文：假令循名责实，深求悖谬之端，则左右宠幸无死所矣。
现代文：假如就其名而求其实，深究荒谬的根子，那么陛下的左右的宠臣该死无葬身之地。
English: If we were to seek the truth in its name, and delve into the roots of the absurd, then His Majesty's favorites on either side of him would have nowhere to go.

古文：尚有事堪痛哭不忍言者：宗藩蓄刘氵鼻之衅，大臣怀冯道之心。以禄位为故物，以朝署为市廛，以陛下为弈棋，以革除年间为故事。
现代文：还有令人痛哭而不忍心说的：宗室藩王蓄有刘濞谋反的念头，大臣身怀冯道首鼠两端之心，鄙视官禄，视朝廷办事机构为交易场所，把陛下当作棋子，以明成祖夺取建文帝位为效法的成例。
English: There are also things that are too painful to say: the king of the ancestral house of the clan harbors the idea of Liu Xuan's rebellion, the minister is the heart of both ends of Feng Dao's head rat, despises the official salary, regards the imperial court office as a trading place, treats his majesty as a chess piece, and takes the example of Ming Chengzu seizing the throne of Jianwen as an example.

古文：特左右宠幸知术短浅，无能以此言告陛下耳。使陛下得闻此言，虽禁门之外，亦将警跸而出，尚敢轻骑慢游哉？ 
现代文：只是陛下左右的宠臣近幸目光短浅，不可能告诉陛下这些，使陛下得知这些情况，即使在宫门之外，也应该左右警戒而出，又怎敢轻骑漫游呢？ 
English: It's just that the favorites around His Majesty are fortunately short-sighted, it's impossible to tell His Majesty these things, to let His Majesty know these things, even outside the palace gates, they should be on the alert left and right, how dare they roam lightly?

古文：疏入，陆完迎谓曰： 上闻有谏者辄恚，欲自引决。
现代文：疏送上去了，陆完迎着对舒芬说： 皇帝听说有人劝谏总是发怒。
English: When the escort went up, Lu Gan said to Shu Fen, "The emperor always gets angry when he hears that someone is trying to persuade him.

古文：诸君且休，勿归过君上，沽直名。 
现代文：要进谏者自杀，诸位算了吧，不要把过失归在君王身上，博取正直的名声。 
English: If you want to commit suicide, forget it, don't blame the king and gain a reputation for honesty.

古文：芬等不应而出。有顷，良胜、潮过芬，扼腕恨完。
现代文：舒芬等不理他走出来，不一会儿，夏良胜、万潮来探望舒芬，得知陆完说的话，都扼腕痛恨。
English: Shu Fen ignored him and walked out. Soon, Xia Liangsheng and Wanchao came to visit Shu Fen. When they learned what Lu Gan had said, they all hated him.

古文：芬因邀博士陈九川至，酌之酒曰： 匹夫不可夺志，君辈可遂已乎？ 
现代文：舒芬于是邀来博士陈九川，给陈九川斟酒说 ：匹夫不可以夺志，你们难道就这样算了吗？ 
English: Shu Fen then invited Dr. Chen Jiuchuan to come, poured wine for Chen Jiuchuan and said: "A man can't lose his heart, is that how you've worked it out?

古文：明日遂偕诸曹连疏入。
现代文：第二天就同各官署一起接连上疏。
English: The next day, they went up the stairs one after another, together with all the government agencies.

古文：帝大怒，命跪阙下五日，期满复杖之三十。芬创甚，几毙，舁至翰林院中。
现代文：皇帝大怒，命令上疏的大臣跪在皇宫门外五天，五天后又每人罚杖责三十，舒芬棒伤很重，几乎死去，抬到翰林院中。
English: The emperor was so angry that he ordered the high-ranking ministers to kneel outside the palace gate for five days. Five days later, each of them was punished with thirty strokes of the cane. Shufen was seriously injured by the cane, almost died, and was carried to the Hanlin Courthouse.

古文：掌院者惧得罪，命摽出之，芬曰： 吾官此，即死此耳。 
现代文：主管翰林院的害怕连累自己，命令将舒芬丢出去，舒芬说： 我在此处做官，就死在这里。 
English: The director of the Khanlin Institute, fearing to implicate himself, ordered Shufen to be thrown out. Shufen said: "I am an official here, I will die here."

古文：竟谪福建市舶副提举，裹创就道。
现代文：竟然被贬为福建市舶提举副使，他带着包扎的伤口起程赴任。
English: He was even demoted to vice-envoy of Fujian Shipping Promotion Committee. He went to work with a bandaged wound.

古文：世宗即位，召复故官。
现代文：明世宗即位，召还旧职。
English: Ming Shizong ascended to the throne and was called back to his former position.

古文：嘉靖三年春，昭圣太后寿旦，诏免诸命妇朝贺。
现代文：嘉靖三年春，昭圣太后寿辰，皇帝下诏免诸位命妇朝贺。
English: In the spring of the third year of Jiajing, the birthday of the Empress Dowager Zhaosheng, the emperor issued an edict exempting all of you from the morning greetings.

古文：芬言： 前者兴国太后令旦，命妇朝贺如仪。今遇皇太后寿节，忽行传免，恐失轻重之宜。乞收成命，以彰圣孝。 
现代文：舒芬说 ：先前兴国太后生日，官宦夫人朝贺一如礼仪，现在皇太后生日，忽然免去此项礼仪，恐怕轻重不当，请求收回成命，以表示对皇上的孝心。 
English: Shufen said: Previously, on the birthday of the Empress Dowager Xingguo, it was the custom for the wife of the official concubine to offer morning greetings, but now, on the birthday of the Empress Dowager, this custom was suddenly dispensed with. I am afraid it is not appropriate. I would like to request that this custom be revoked in order to show my filial piety to the Emperor.

古文：帝怒，夺俸三月。
现代文：世宗发怒，削去舒芬三个月俸禄。
English: Sejong was furious and cut off Shufen's three-month salary.

古文：时帝欲尊崇本生，芬偕其僚连章极谏。
现代文：这时世宗要尊崇自己的的亲生父母。舒芬与同僚一起接连上奏章极力进谏。
English: At this time, Sejong wanted to honor his own biological parents. Together with his colleagues, Shufen tried his best to reach the top of the movement one after another.

古文：及张璁、桂萼、方献夫骤擢学士，芬及同官杨维聪、编修王思羞与同列，拜疏乞罢。
现代文：等到张璁、桂萼、方献夫一下子提升为学士，舒芬和修撰杨维聪、编修王思羞与张璁等同伍，上疏请求辞职。
English: When Zhang Xuan, Gui Caly, and Fang Xianfu were promoted to bachelor at once, Shu Fen and the essayist Yang Weicong, the editor Wang Sixi and Zhang Xuan were on the same team, and Shang Shu requested to resign.

古文：未几，复偕同官杨慎等伏左顺门哭争。帝怒，下狱廷杖，夺俸如初。
现代文：没多久，又与修撰杨慎等伏在左顺门哭着劝谏世宗，世宗发怒，将他们下诏狱，并施以杖刑，又同上一次一样削去三个月俸禄。
English: Not long after, together with the practitioner Yang Shen and others, they prostrated themselves at the Zuo Shun Gate, weeping and exhorting Yu Shizong. Shizong became angry, put them under the imperial prison, and punished them with a cane, and cut off their three-month salary, just like the previous time.

古文：旋遭母丧归，卒于家，年四十四。
现代文：不久舒芬因母亲去世而回家，后来死在家里，终年四十四岁。
English: Soon after, Sophie came home to her mother's death and later died at home at the age of 44.

古文：世称 忠孝状元 。
现代文：世称 忠孝状元 。
English: World-renowned for his loyalty and filial piety.

古文：芬丰神玉立，负气峻厉，端居竟日无倦容，夜则计过自讼。
现代文：舒芬身材挺拔，神采飞扬，气节高尚，端坐整日而无倦容，晚上则检查自己有否过失，有就进行自我批评。
English: Shu Fen is tall, sprightly, and noble. She sits all day without fatigue, and in the evening she checks herself for mistakes and self-criticizes.

古文：以倡明绝学为己任。
现代文：将倡导传统学术为己任。
English: He will take it upon himself to promote traditional scholarship.

古文：其学贯串诸经，兼通天文律历，而尤精于《周礼》。
现代文：舒芬的学问贯通诸经，并且通晓天文律令和历法，尤其精通《周礼》。
English: Shu's knowledge of the classics, as well as knowledge of the astronomical rites and calendar, is particularly proficient in the "Weekly Ritual."

古文：尝曰： 《周礼》视《仪礼》、《礼记》，犹蜀之视吴、魏也。
现代文：他曾说 ：《周礼》和《仪礼》、《礼记》的关系，就像三国的蜀和东吴、曹魏一样。
English: He once said: "The relationship between "Weekly Rituals" and "Rites and Ceremonies" and "Rites and Ceremonies" is like that between Shu of the Three Kingdoms and Dongwu and Cao Wei.

古文：贾氏谓《仪礼》为本，《周礼》为末，妄矣。
现代文：贾氏说《仪礼》为本，《周礼》为末，这样说是荒谬的。
English: Mr. Jia said that "Rite" is the beginning and "Weekly Ritual" is the end, which is absurd.

古文：朱子不加是正，何也？ 
现代文：朱子不加订正，为什么呢？ 
English: Zhu Zi is not revised, why?

古文：疾革，其子请所言，惟以未及表章《周礼》为恨。
现代文：舒芬病危时，儿子问他有什么话要说，他仅只提及未来得及弘扬《周礼》为自己终生的遗憾。
English: When his son asked him what he had to say when he was critically ill, he only mentioned his lifelong regret that he had not been able to promote "Zhou Li" in the future.

古文：学者称 梓溪先生 。
现代文：有学问的人称舒芬为 梓溪先生 。
English: The learned call Shu-fen Mr. Zi-xi.

古文：万历中，追谥文节。
现代文：万历年间，追赠谥号 文节 。
English: During the Wanli era, the posthumous award of the honorary title of "Wen Jie" was made.

古文：先是，修撰罗伦以谏谪福建提举，逾六十年而芬继之。
现代文：先前修撰罗伦由于进谏被贬任福建提举，过了六十年而舒芬步其后尘。
English: Six decades have passed since Shu Zhen followed in the footsteps of Luo Lun, who was demoted to Fujian Province due to his involvement in the Jin Dynasty.

古文：与伦同乡同官，所谪地与官又同，福建士大夫遂祀芬配伦云。
现代文：舒芬与罗伦是同经秀同官职，所贬任的地方和贬任的官职又相同，福建士大夫在祀祭舒芬时，将罗伦一起祀祭。
English: Shufen and Loren are the same as Jingxiu and the same official position, and the place of demotion and the demotion of the official position are the same. When the Fujian scholar-doctor was worshiping Shufen, he worshiped Loren together.

