古文：黄帝曰：医之治病也，一病而治各不同，皆愈，何也？
现代文：黄帝问道：医生医疗疾病，同病而采取各种不同的治疗方法，但结果都能痊愈，这是什么道理呢？
English: Huang Di asked: What is the reason for doctors to treat diseases, take various different treatment methods for the same disease, but the results can be cured?

古文：岐伯对曰：地势使然也。
现代文：岐伯回答说：这是因为地理环境不同，而治法各有所宜的缘故。
English: Qibo replied: This is because the geographical environment is different, and the treatment methods are different.

古文：故东方之域，天地之所始生也。
现代文：所以，东方地区，是太阳初升之地，气候有如春天般温和。
English: Therefore, the eastern region is the place where the sun rises, and the climate is as mild as spring.

古文：鱼盐之地，海滨傍水，其民食鱼而嗜咸，皆安其处，美其食。
现代文：是出产鱼和盐的地方，由于地处海滨而接近于水，所以该地方的人们多吃鱼类而喜欢咸味,他们安居在这个地方，以鱼、盐为美食。
English: It is a place where fish and salt are produced. Because it is located on the coast and close to the water, the people in this place eat more fish and like salty taste. They live in this place and eat fish and salt.

古文：鱼者使人热中，盐者胜血，故其民皆黑色疏理，其病皆为痈疡，其治宜砭石。
现代文：但由于多吃鱼类，鱼性属火会使人热积于中，而过多的吃盐，咸能走血，又会耗伤血液，所以该地的人们大都皮肤色黑且肌理松疏，该地多发痈肿、疮疡之类的疾病，对其治疗，大都宜用砭石刺法。
English: However, due to the fact that they eat a lot of fish, fishy fire will make people heat up in the middle, and eating too much salt and salty can take blood and consume blood, so the people in this place are mostly dark-skinned and loose-textured. This place often has diseases such as abscesses and sores. For its treatment, it is mostly advisable to use the flint piercing method.

古文：故砭石者，亦从东方来。
现代文：因此，砭石的治病方法，也是从东方传来的。
English: Therefore, the healing method of ocher also came from the East.

古文：西方者，金玉之域，沙石之处，天地之所收引也。
现代文：西方地区，盛产黄金和玉石，遍地沙石，这里是日落的地方，气候有如秋天般收敛引急。
English: The western region, rich in gold and jade, sandstone everywhere, here is the place of sunset, the climate is like autumn.

古文：其民陵居而多风，水土刚强，其民不衣而褐荐，其民华食而脂肥，故邪不能伤其形体，其病生于内，其治宜毒药。
现代文：该地的人们，依山陵而住，其地多风，水土的性质又属刚强，而他们的生活，穿粗织衣服，睡草席毛毡，但饮食都是鲜美酥酪牛羊肉之类，因此体肥，外邪不容易侵犯他们的身体，他们发病，大都属于内伤类疾病，对其治疗，宜用药物。
English: The people of this place live in the mountains, the land is windy, the nature of the soil and water is strong, and their life is to wear coarse-woven clothes, sleepy straw mats, but the diet is delicious cheese, beef and mutton, etc. Therefore, body fat, external evil is not easy to invade their bodies, and their diseases mostly belong to internal injury diseases, and it is advisable to use drugs to treat them.

古文：故毒药者，亦从西方来。
现代文：所以药物疗法，是从西方传来的。
English: That's why drug therapy came from the West.

古文：北方者，天地所闭藏之域也。
现代文：北方地区，自然气候如同冬天的闭藏气象，地形较高。
English: In the northern region, the natural climate is similar to that of winter in Tibet, and the terrain is higher.

古文：其地高陵居，风寒冰洌。其民乐野处而乳食，脏寒生满病，其治宜灸焫。故灸焫者，亦从北方来。
现代文：人们依山陵而居住，经常处在风寒凛冽的环境中，该地的人们，喜好游牧生活，四野临时住宿，吃的是牛羊奶酪，因此内脏受寒，易生脾胃胀满的疾病。对其治疗，宜用艾火炙灼，所以艾灸的治疗方法，是从北方传来的。
English: People live in the mountains and are often in a cold environment. The people in this area prefer nomadic life, temporary accommodation in the four fields, and eat cow and goat cheese. As a result, the internal organs are cold and prone to diseases of the spleen and stomach. For its treatment, it is advisable to use moxibustion, so the treatment method of moxibustion was introduced from the north.

古文：南方者，天地所长养，阳之所盛处也。
现代文：南方地区，像自然界万物长养的夏天炎热气候，是阳光最盛的地方。
English: The hot summer climate of the southern region, where all things in nature grow and grow, is the place with the most sunshine.

古文：其地下，水土弱，雾露之所聚也。其民嗜酸而食胕，故其民皆致理而赤色，其病挛痹，其治宜微针。
现代文：而地势又低下，土地湿润，因此雾露经常聚集，该地的人们，喜欢吃酸类和发酵腐熟的食品，其皮肤腠理致密而带红色，易发生筋脉拘急、麻木不仁等风湿类疾病，对其治疗，宜用微针针刺。
English: But the terrain is low and the land is wet, so the mist often gathers. The people in this area like to eat acidic and fermented rotten foods. Their skin is tight and red, and they are prone to rheumatic diseases such as myocardial stress and insensitivity. For its treatment, it is advisable to use micro-needling.

古文：故九针者，亦从南方来。
现代文：所以九针的治病方法，是从南方传来的。
English: Therefore, the nine-needle treatment method came from the south.

古文：中央者，其地平以湿，天地所以生万物也众。
现代文：中央之地，地形平坦而多潮湿，物产丰富。
English: In the center of the country, the terrain is flat and humid, and the products are abundant.

古文：其民食杂而不劳，故其病多瘘厥寒热，其治宜导引按蹻。
现代文：所以人们的食物种类很多而混杂，生活比较安逸，这里发生的疾病，多是痿厥寒热，这类病的治疗，宜用导引、按蹻的方法。
English: Therefore, people's food types are many and mixed, and life is relatively comfortable. The diseases that occur here are mostly colds and fevers. For the treatment of such diseases, it is advisable to use the method of guiding and pressing the gills.

古文：故导引按蹻者，亦从中央出也。
现代文：所以导引、按蹻的治法，是从中央地区推广出去的。
English: Therefore, the methods of guiding and pressing moles have been promoted from the central region.

古文：故圣人杂合以治，各得其所宜。故治所以异而病皆愈者，得病之情，知治之大体也。
现代文：从以上情况来看，一个高明的医生，是能够将这许多治病方法综合起来，根据具体情况，随机应变，灵活运用，使患者得到适宜治疗。所以治法尽管各有不同，而结果是疾病都能痊愈。这是由于医生能够了解病情，并掌握了治疗方法的缘故。
English: From the above situation, a clever doctor is able to integrate these many treatment methods, according to the specific situation, random contingency, flexible use, so that the patient can get appropriate treatment. Therefore, although the treatment methods are different, the result is that the disease can be cured. This is because the doctor can understand the condition and master the treatment method.

