古文：又东过武功县北，渭水于县，斜水自南来注之。
现代文：又往东流过武功县北边，渭水到了武功县，斜水从南方流来注入。
English: It also flowed eastward through the northern side of Wugong County. Surabaya water reached Wugong County, and the slanting water flowed in from the south.

古文：水出县西南衙岭山，北历斜谷，径五丈原东。
现代文：斜水发源于武功县西南的衙岭山，往北流经斜谷，流过五丈原东边。
English: The oblique water originates from the Qilian Mountains in the southwest of Wugong County, flows northward through the valley, and flows through the eastern edge of Wuzhongyuan.

古文：诸葛亮《与步骘书》曰：仆前军在五丈原，原在武功西十里余。
现代文：诸葛亮《与步鹭书》说：我的先头部队在五丈原，那地方在武功西十里余。
English: Zhuge Liang's "Book of the Way" said: My vanguard troops are in the Wuzhen Plain, which is more than ten miles west of Wugong.

古文：司马懿因水长，攻琰营，臣作竹桥，越水射之。
现代文：斜水发源于武功县，因此也叫武功水。所以诸葛亮《表》说：我派虎步监孟淡占据武功水东岸，司马鳃趁着水涨，进攻孟淡的营地。
English: The sloping water originates from Wugong County, so it is also called Wugong Water. Therefore, Zhuge Liang of the "Table" said: I sent Meng Tan, the tiger's guardian, to occupy the eastern bank of Wugong Water. Sima Yi took advantage of the rising water to attack Meng Tan's camp.

古文：桥成驰去。其水北流注于渭。
现代文：我建造竹桥，隔水放箭射他们，桥建成后，敌兵也就逃走了。斜水北流，注入渭水。
English: I built a bamboo bridge across the water and shot arrows at them. After the bridge was completed, the enemy soldiers also fled.

古文：《地理志》曰：斜水出衙岭北，至郿注渭。
现代文：《地理志》说：斜水发源于衙岭北，流到郡，注入渭水。
English: "Geography" said: the oblique water originates from the north of Fuling, flows to the county, and is injected into Surabaya.

古文：渭水又东，径马冢北。
现代文：渭水又往东流经马家北边。
English: Surabaya water also flows eastward through the northern part of Makiya.

古文：诸葛亮《与步骘书》曰：马冢在武功东十余里，有高势，攻之不便，是以留耳。
现代文：诸葛亮《与步鹭书》说：马家在武功东十余里，地势较高，不易攻取，所以把它留着。
English: Zhuge Liang's "Book of the Wayfarer" said: Ma's house is more than ten miles east of Wu Gong, the terrain is higher, it is not easy to capture, so keep it.

古文：渭水又径武功县故城北，王莽之新光也。
现代文：渭水又流经武功县老城北边，就是王莽的新光。
English: Surabaya also flows through the northern side of the old city of Wugong County, which is the new light of Wang Mang.

古文：《地理志》曰：县有太一山，古文以为终南。杜预以为中南也。亦曰：太白山在武功县南，去长安二百里，不知其高几何。
现代文：《地理志》说：县里有太一山，《古文》里称为终南，杜预称为中南，又名太白山，在武功县南边，离长安二百里，不知道到底有多少高。
English: "Geography" said: There is Taiyi Mountain in the county. In the "Ancient Texts," it is known as the final south, and Duyuan is known as the central south, also known as Taibaishan. It is in the south of Wugong County, two hundred miles from Chang'an, and it is not known exactly how high it is.

古文：俗云：武功太白，去天三百。
现代文：俗语说：武功太白，离天三百。
English: As the saying goes: martial arts are too white, and they are three hundred years away from heaven.

古文：山下军行，不得鼓角，鼓角则疾风雨至。
现代文：山下行军，不可用鼓角；如用鼓角，就会有急风暴雨。
English: If you march down the mountain, you can't use the horn. If you use the horn, there will be a sudden storm.

古文：杜彦达曰：太白山，南连武功山，于诸山最为秀杰，冬夏积雪，望之皓然。
现代文：杜彦达说：太白山南连武功山，非常高峻秀丽，在群山中最为突出；山上冬夏都积雪不化，望去一片稿白。
English: Du Yanda said: Taibai Mountain, south of Wugong Mountain, is very high and beautiful, and is the most prominent among the mountains. In winter and summer, snow does not melt on the mountain, leaving a blank landscape.

古文：山上有谷春祠。
现代文：山上有谷春祠。
English: There is a valley spring shrine on the mountain.

古文：春，栎阳人，成帝时病死而尸不寒，后忽出栎南门及光门上，而入太白山。
现代文：谷春，栋阳人，成帝时病死，但尸体仍保持温暖，后来忽然走出栋阳南门，又出现在光门上，到太白山里去了。
English: Gu Chun, a Doyang man, died of illness during the reign of Emperor Chengdu, but his body was still kept warm. Later, he suddenly walked out of the South Gate of Doyang, reappeared at the Gate of Light, and went to the Taibai Mountains.

古文：民为立祠于山岭，春秋来祠，中上宿焉。
现代文：人们在山岭上为他立祠。每年春秋二季，都到祠中来住宿。
English: People built a shrine for him on the mountain ridge. Every spring and autumn, they come to the shrine to stay.

古文：山下有太白祠，民所祀也。
现代文：山下有太白祠，也是民众常来祭祀的地方。
English: At the foot of the mountain, there is the Taibai Shrine, which is also a place where people often come to worship.

古文：刘曜之世，是山崩，长安人刘终于崩所得白玉，方一尺，有文字，曰：皇亡皇亡败赵昌，井水竭，构五梁，咢西小衰困嚣丧。
现代文：刘耀统治时期，太白山崩，长安人刘终在山崩的地方捡到一块白玉，大小约一尺见方，玉上刻着几行字：皇亡皇亡败赵昌，井水竭，构五梁，粤酉小衰困嚣丧。
English: During Liu Yao's reign, there was a landslide in Taibai Mountain. Liu, a resident of Chang'an, eventually found a piece of white jade in the place of the landslide. It was about one foot square in size. The jade was engraved with a few lines of words: "The emperor died, the emperor was defeated by Zhao Chang, the well was drained, the structure was five beams high, and the small decline of the Yue and Han dynasties was lamented."

古文：呜呼！
现代文：呜呼！
English: Alas!

古文：呜呼！
现代文：呜呼！
English: Alas!

古文：赤牛奋靷其尽乎！
现代文：赤牛奋鞘其尽乎！
English: The Red Bull has done its best!

古文：时群官毕贺。中书监刘均进曰：此国灭之象，其可贺乎？
现代文：当时群官都来庆贺，但中书监刘均却说：这是国家将亡的预兆，有什么可以庆贺呢？
English: At that time, all the officials came to celebrate, but Liu Jun, the Chinese librarian, said: This is a harbinger of the country's imminent demise. What is there to celebrate?

古文：终如言矣。
现代文：结果他真的说中了。
English: Turns out he was right.

古文：渭水又东，温泉水注之。
现代文：渭水又东流，有温泉水注入。
English: Surabaya's water also flows to the east and is infused with hot spring water.

古文：水出太一山，其水沸涌如汤。
现代文：温泉水发源于太一山，一乱清泉像开水似的沸腾翻涌，杜彦达说：那泉水可治百病。
English: The hot spring water originates from Mount Taiyi. A clear spring gushes forth like boiling water. Du Yanda said, "That spring water can cure all kinds of diseases."

古文：杜彦达曰：可治百病，世清则疾愈，世浊则无验。
现代文：时世清明，病就可以治好；时世恶浊，治病就无效。
English: When the times are clear, the disease can be cured; when the times are bad, the treatment is ineffective.

古文：其水下合溪流，北注十三里，入渭。
现代文：水在下流与溪流汇合，往北奔流十三里注入渭水。
English: Downstream, the water merges with the stream, and rushes northward for thirteen miles, where it is injected with brackish water.

古文：渭水又东，径漦县故城南。旧邰城也。
现代文：渭水又往东流经篇县老城南，老城就是古时的部城―后樱的封邑。
English: Surabaya also flows eastward through the south of the old city of Henan County. The old city is the ancient capital - the fief of Houyao.

古文：后稷之封邑矣，《诗》所谓即有邰家室也。城东北有姜漦祠，城西南百步有稷祠，郿之漦亭也。
现代文：《诗经》说的：到部去成家，就指此城。城内东北边有姜姬祠，西南边百步有樱祠，就是郡县的藻亭。
English: "The Book of Songs" says: "If you go to the capital to start a family, this is the city you should go to." There is a ginger shrine on the northeast side of the city, and a cherry shrine on the southwest side, which is the county's algae pavilion.

古文：王少林之为漦县也，路径此亭。
现代文：王少林去郡县做县令，路上曾经过此亭。
English: Wang Shaolin went to the county to be the county magistrate, and he passed this pavilion on the way.

古文：亭长曰：亭凶杀人。
现代文：亭长说：这亭里有妖孽，会害死人。
English: The innkeeper said, "There is a witch in this inn who can kill people.

古文：少林曰：仁胜凶邪，何鬼敢忤？
现代文：王少林说：仁德会战胜凶邪，什么鬼魅胆敢侵犯我！
English: Wang Shaolin said: benevolence will overcome evil, what ghosts dare to invade me!

古文：遂宿。
现代文：就在里面住宿。
English: There's accommodation right inside.

古文：夜中，闻女子称冤之声。少林曰：可前来理。
现代文：夜里听到女人喊冤的声音，王少林说：上来申诉吧！
English: In the night, he heard a woman's voice crying for justice. Wang Shaolin said, "Come and appeal!"

古文：女子曰：无衣，不敢进。
现代文：女人说：我没穿衣服，不敢上来。
English: The woman said: "I'm not wearing any clothes, I don't dare to come up.

古文：少林投衣与之。女子前诉曰：妾夫为涪令，之官过宿此亭，为亭长所杀。
现代文：王少林丢了一件衣服给她，那女人于是上前诉说道：我丈夫当涪县县令，上任时途经这里，晚上宿在亭内，被亭长谋杀了。
English: Wang Shaolin lost a piece of clothing to her, the woman then came forward and said: My husband was the county magistrate of Jixian County, he passed through here when he took office, he stayed in the pavilion at night, and he was murdered by the pavilion chief.

古文：少林曰：当为理寝冤，勿复害良善也。
现代文：王少林说：我会替你伸雪这件沉冤的，以后不要再伤害好人了。
English: Wang Shaolin said, "I will take care of this grievous wrong for you. Don't hurt good people in the future."

古文：因解衣于地，忽然不见。
现代文：那女人于是脱下衣裳，放在地上，忽然不见了。
English: The woman then took off her clothes, laid them on the ground and disappeared.

古文：明告亭长，遂服其事，亭遂清安。
现代文：明日审问亭长，亭长只得服罪，亭也不再闹鬼了。
English: They will interrogate the manager of the pavilion tomorrow. The manager will have to admit his guilt, and the pavilion will no longer be haunted.

古文：渭水又东径雍县南，雍水注之。
现代文：渭水又往东流经雍县南边，有雍水注入。
English: The floodwaters also flowed eastward through the southern part of Yongxian County, with the influx of Yongshui.

古文：俗名也。盖秦惠公之故居，所谓祈年宫也。孝公又谓之为橐泉宫，按《地理志》曰在雍。崔駰曰：穆公冢在橐泉宫祈年观下，《皇览》疥言是矣。
现代文：雍水发源于雍山，往东南流经中牢溪，人们称为中牢水，又叫冰井水；又往南流经胡城东边。胡城是俗名，原为秦惠公的故居，即所谓祈年宫，孝公又称为聚泉宫。《地理志》说此宫在雍，崔胭说：穆公墓在案泉宫祈年观下。《皇览》也这样说。
English: The Yongshui originates from the Yongshan Mountains and flows southeast through Zhongduo Creek. People call it Zhongduo Water, also known as Ice Well Water. It flows south through the east side of Hucheng. Hucheng is a common name. It was originally the former residence of Qin Huigong, the so-called Prayer Palace. Xiaogong is also known as Juquan Palace. "Geography" says that this palace is in Yongshui. Cui Wei said: Mu Cemetery is under the view of the Spring Palace. "Imperial Review" also says so.

古文：刘向曰：穆公葬无丘垄处也。
现代文：刘向说：穆公葬处没有坟垄。
English: Liu Xiang said: There is no grave mound in Mu Gong's burial place.

古文：《史记》曰：穆公之卒，从死者百七十七人，良臣子车氏奄息，仲行、鍼虎，亦在从死之中。秦人哀之，为赋《黄鸟》焉。
现代文：《史记》说：穆公死后，殉葬者多达一百七十七人，贤臣车氏的儿子奄息、仲行、械虎等都在殉葬之列，秦人哀悼他们，作了《黄鸟》一诗。
English: "History" says: After the death of Mu Gong, as many as one hundred and seventy-seven people were martyred and buried. The son of the wise minister Che, the dying, the intermediary, the mechanical tiger, etc. were all in the line of martyrdom and burial. Qin people mourned them and wrote a poem "Yellow Bird."

古文：余谓崔駰及《皇览》谬志也。
现代文：我以为崔驰和《皇览》的记载是荒唐的。
English: I thought the accounts of Cui Qi and the "Imperial Review" were absurd.

古文：惠公、孝公并是穆公之后，继世之君矣，子孙无由起宫于祖宗之坟陵矣。以是推之，知二证之非实也。
现代文：惠公、孝公都是穆公的后代，是世代继承下来的国君，子孙是不会在祖宗的坟墓上建造宫殿的，从这一点来推理，就可以知道这两条引证是不确实的。
English: Both Huigong and Xiaogong are descendants of Mu Gong, and are the sovereigns inherited from generation to generation. Their descendants would not build palaces on the graves of their ancestors. From this, we can deduce that these two quotations are not true.

古文：雍水又东，左会左阳水，世名之西水。
现代文：雍水又东流，在左边汇合了左阳水，世人称为西水。
English: The Yongshui also flows eastward, and the Zuoyangshui joins it on the left, which is known to the world as the West Water.

古文：水北出左阳溪，南流径岐州城西。魏置岐州刺史治。
现代文：左阳水发源于北方的左阳溪，往南流经岐州城西边，魏在此城设置岐州刺史治所。
English: Zuoyang Water originates from Zuoyang Creek in the north and flows south through the west of Qizhou City. Wei set up the Qizhou History Research Institute in this city.

古文：左阳水又南流，注于雍水，雍水又与东水合，俗名也。
现代文：左阳水又南流，注入雍水。雍水又与东水汇合。
English: The Zuoyang River flows south again and flows into the Yongshui River, which then merges with the Dongshui River.

古文：乱流南，径岐州城东，而南合雍水，州居二水之中，南则两川之交会也。世亦名之为淬空水。
现代文：东水也是俗名，发源于北方的河桃谷，往南流，在右边汇合了南源，人们称为返眼泉，往南乱流，经过岐州城东边，又南流与雍水汇合。岐州城在二水之间，城南就是两川的汇流处，人们也把这条水叫淬空水。
English: Dongshui is also a common name. It originates in the north of Hetao Valley, flows southward, and merges with Nanyuan on the right. People call it Fuye Spring. It flows southward, passes through the east side of Qizhou City, and merges with Yongshui. Qizhou City is between the two waters. The south of the city is the confluence of the two rivers. People also call this water Jiaokou Water.

古文：东流，邓公泉注之，水出邓艾祠北，故名曰邓公泉。数源俱发于雍县故城南。
现代文：雍水东流，邓公泉注入。邓公泉发源于邓艾祠北，所以叫邓公泉，几个源头都从雍县老城南边流出。
English: East of Yongshui flows into Denggong Spring. Denggong Spring originates from the north of Dengai Ancestral Hall, so it is called Denggong Spring. Several sources flow out from the south of the old city of Yongxian.

古文：县故秦德公所居也。
现代文：雍县是从前秦德公居住的地方。
English: Yongxian is the place where the former Qin Emperor lived.

古文：《晋书地道记》以为西虢地也。
现代文：《晋书•地道记》认为是西貌的地方。
English: "Jinshu•Jidoki" considers it to be a place of western appearance.

古文：《汉书。地理志》以为西虢县。
现代文：《汉书•地理志》认为是西状县。
English: "Hanshu•Geography" considers it to be Xijiao County.

古文：《太康地记》曰：虢叔之国矣，有虢宫，平王东迁，叔自此之上阳为南虢矣。
现代文：《太康地记》则说是拢叔之国。那里有貌宫，周平王东迁后，藐叔就从这里去上阳，就是南貌。
English: "Tai Kang Di Ji" is said to be the country of Uncle Ho. There is Maenggong there. After Zhou Ping Wang moved to the east, Uncle Ho went from here to Shangyang, that is, Nanmao.

古文：雍有五峙祠，以上祠祀五帝。
现代文：雍县有五峙祠，以奉祀五帝。
English: Yong County has the Five-Faced Ancestral Hall, which is dedicated to the Five Emperors.

古文：昔秦文公田于汧、渭之间，梦黄蛇自天下属地，其口止于鄜衍，以为上帝之神，于是作鄜畤，祀白帝焉。
现代文：从前秦文公在沂水、渭水之间打猎，梦见黄蛇从天上直拖到地下，蛇口搁在娜衍，认为这是上天的神灵，于是修建娜峙来奉祀白帝。
English: Once upon a time, Qin Wenguang was hunting between Surabaya and Surabaya. He dreamed of a yellow snake dragging from the sky straight to the ground, with the faucet resting on Nayan. He thought that this was the god of heaven, so he built Naying to worship the White Emperor.

古文：秦宣公作密畤于渭南，祀青帝焉。
现代文：秦宣公在循南修建密峙，奉祀青帝。
English: Qin Xuan Gong built a watchtower to the south and worshiped the young emperor.

古文：灵公又于吴阳作上畤，祀黄帝，作下畤，祀炎帝焉。
现代文：灵公又在吴阳建上峙，奉祀黄帝；建下峙，奉祀炎帝。
English: Ling Gong also built a temple in Wuyang and worshipped the Yellow Emperor; he also built a temple and worshipped the Burning Emperor.

古文：献公作畦畤于栎阳而祀白帝。
现代文：献公在栋阳建畦峙，奉祀白帝。
English: The dedication ceremony was held in Dongyang, and Emperor Paik was worshipped.

古文：汉高帝问曰：天有五帝，今四何也？
现代文：汉高帝问道：天上有五帝，但现在只有四帝，这是什么道理呢？
English: Emperor Han Gao asked: There were five emperors in heaven, but now there are only four. What is the reason for this?

古文：博士莫知其故。
现代文：博士也不知道是什么缘故。
English: He doesn't know why.

古文：帝曰：我知之矣，待我而五。
现代文：高帝说：我知道了，等到我来时，就有五帝了。
English: Gao Di said: I know, when I come, there will be five Gods.

古文：遂立北畤，祀黑帝焉。
现代文：于是修建北峙来奉祀黑帝。
English: As a result, the North Stand was built to enshrine the Black Emperor.

古文：应劭曰：四面积高曰雍。
现代文：应韵说：把四面堆高，叫做雍。
English: According to the rhyme: the four sides are piled high, called Yong.

古文：阚駰曰：宜为神明之隩，故立群祠焉。
现代文：阐胭说：这里适宜作神明的居处，所以建造了一批祠庙。
English: "This is a suitable place for the residence of gods, so a number of ancestral temples were built here," said Xuan Zang.

古文：又有凤台、凤女祠。
现代文：还有凤台和凤女祠。
English: There is also a phoenix tower and a phoenix shrine.

古文：秦穆公时，有箫史者，善吹箫，能致白鹄、孔雀。
现代文：秦穆公时，有个叫箫史的人，善于吹箫，他的箫声能招致白天鹅和孔雀。
English: In the time of Qin Mu Gong, there was a man named Zou Shi, who was good at playing the flute. His flute could attract white swans and peacocks.

古文：穆公玄弄玉好之，公为作凤台以居之。
现代文：穆公的女儿弄玉爱上了他，穆公就造了一座凤台，让他们居住。
English: Mu Gong's daughter, Noryu, fell in love with him, and Mu Gong built a phoenix tower for them to live in.

古文：积数十年，一旦随凤去，云雍宫世有箫管之声焉。
现代文：他们在那里住了数十年，一天随着凤凰飞去了。据说雍宫常有箫管的声音。
English: They lived there for decades, and one day they flew away with the phoenix. It is said that the Yonggong Palace often has the sound of a flute.

古文：今台倾祠毁，不复然矣。
现代文：现在凤台已塌，凤女祠也毁了，再也听不到箫声了。
English: Now, the phoenix tower has collapsed, the phoenix shrine has been destroyed, and the chirping sound can no longer be heard.

古文：邓泉东流注于雍，自下虽会他津，犹得通称。故《禹贡》有雍、沮会同之文矣。
现代文：邓泉东流，注入雍水，自此以下虽然也汇合了别的支流，但还是保存了这个通称，所以《禹贡》里有雍水、沮水汇合在一起的文句。
English: Dengquan East Stream, injected into the Yongshui, since then, although other tributaries have also converged, but still preserved this common name, so "Yugong" has a phrase of Yongshui and Depuyu converging together.

古文：雍水又东径召亭南，世谓之树亭川，盖召、树声相近，误耳。
现代文：雍水又往东流经召亭南边，世人称为树亭川，大概是由于召、树二字音近致误的。
English: The Yongshui also flows eastward through the south side of Zhao Ting, known to the world as Shu Ting River, probably due to the near miss of the two-character sounds of Zhao and Shu.

古文：亭故召公之采邑也。
现代文：召亭是古时召公的采邑。
English: In ancient times, a yakitori was a place for courting nobles.

古文：京相璠曰：亭在周城南五十里。
现代文：京相潘说：亭在周城南五十里。
English: Beijing's Minister of Foreign Affairs Pan said: "The pavilion is located 50 miles south of Zhucheng.

古文：《后汉。郡国志》曰：郿县有召亭。
现代文：《后汉书•郡国志》说：郡县有召亭，说的就是这地方。
English: "Hou Han Shu • Gu Gu Guo Zhi" said: There is a place of worship in the county, and it is this place.

古文：谓此也。雍水又东南流，与横水合。
现代文：雍水又往东南流，与横水汇合。
English: The Yongshui also flows to the southeast, merging with the Hengshui.

古文：水出杜阳山。其水南流，谓之杜阳川。
现代文：横水发源于杜阳山，水往南流，称为杜阳川。
English: The lateral water originates from Duyang Mountain, and the water flows southward, known as the Duyang River.

古文：东南流。
现代文：往东南流，在左边汇合了漆水。
English: Flowing southeast, the lacquered water merges on the left.

古文：左会漆水，水出杜阳县之漆溪，谓之漆渠。
现代文：漆水发源于杜阳县的漆溪，称为漆渠。
English: The lacquer water originates from the Lacquer Creek in Duyang County, known as the Lacquer Canal.

古文：故徐广曰：漆水出杜阳之岐山者，是也。漆渠水南流，大峦水注之。
现代文：所以徐广说：漆水发源于杜阳的岐山。漆渠水南流，有大峦水注入。
English: Therefore, Xu Guang said: the lacquer water originates from the Qishan Mountain in Duyang. The lacquer canal water flows south and is infused with large amounts of brackish water.

古文：水出西北大道川，东南流入漆，即故岐水也。
现代文：大峦水发源于西北方的大道川，往东南流，注入漆水，就是旧时的岐水。
English: The Dafeng Water originates from the Daodu River in the northwest and flows to the southeast, injecting lacquer water, which is the old watershed.

古文：《淮南子》曰，岐水出石桥山，东南流。
现代文：《淮南子》说：岐水发源于石桥山，往东南流。
English: "Huai Nanzi" said: The waters of the cross-strait originated from Shihqiao Mountain and flowed to the southeast.

古文：相如《封禅书》曰：收龟于岐。
现代文：司马相如《封禅书》说：在岐水捕龟。
English: Sima Xiangru said in "Fu Zenshu": Catching turtles at the crossroads.

古文：《汉书音义》曰：岐，水名也，谓斯水矣。
现代文：《汉书音义》说：岐是水名，说的就是这条水。
English: "Hanshu Yinyi" says: Qi is the name of water, it is this water that is spoken of.

古文：二川并逝，俱为一水，南与横水合，自下通得岐水之目，俗谓之小横水，亦或名之米流川。
现代文：两水同流，合为一水，南流与横水汇合，从此以下也有了岐水这个通称了，民间则称为小横水，也有人叫米流川。
English: The two rivers flow together, merging into one river, and the south stream merges with the side stream. From then on, it has also been commonly known as the watershed, and the people call it the small side stream. Some people also call it the rice stream river.

古文：径岐山西，又屈径周城南。
现代文：此水流经岐山西边，又折向周城以南。
English: This current flows through the western side of the Qishan Mountains and turns south of Zhoucheng.

古文：城在岐山之阳而近西，所谓居岐之阳也，非直因山致名，亦指水取称矣。
现代文：周城在岐山以南而偏西，所谓居岐之阳，就指周城。这地名不但是因山而来，同时也是因水而来的。
English: Zhoucheng is located south of Qishan and west of it. The so-called "Yuqi no Yang" refers to Zhoucheng. This place name comes not only from the mountain, but also from the water.

古文：又历周原下，北则中水乡成周聚，故曰有周也。
现代文：又流经周原境，北岸是中水乡的成周聚，所以叫有周。
English: It also flows through the surrounding countryside, and the north bank is the middle water town of Cheng Zhou Ju, so it is called Zhou.

古文：水北即岐山矣。昔秦盗食穆公马处也。
现代文：水北就是岐山，从前秦国的村夫，就在这里偷吃掉穆公的马。
English: Mizubei is Qishan. Once upon a time, a villager in the former Qin state stole Mu Gong's horse and ate it here.

古文：岐水又东，径姜氏城南为姜水。
现代文：岐水又往东流经姜氏城南边，称为姜水。
English: The waters of the cross-river flow eastward through the southern side of Jiang's Castle, and are known as Jiangshui.

古文：按《世本》，炎帝姜姓。
现代文：按《世本》，炎帝姓姜。
English: According to "Seibo," Emperor Yan's family name was Jiang.

古文：《帝王世纪》曰：炎帝，神农氏，姜姓。
现代文：《帝王世纪》说：炎帝就是神农氏，姓姜。
English: "Imperial Century" said: Yan Di is Shennong, surnamed Jiang.

古文：母女登，游华阳，感神而生炎帝，长于姜水，是其地也。
现代文：他的母亲女登游华阳，与神发生感应，于是生了炎帝；炎帝在姜水长大，就是这地方。
English: His mother, a woman named Dengyou Huayang, had an encounter with the gods and gave birth to Yan Di; Yan Di grew up in Jiangsu, which is where this place is.

古文：东注雍水。雍水又南，径美阳县之中亭川，合武水。
现代文：姜水往东注入雍水，雍水又往南流经美阳县的中亭川，与武水汇合。
English: The ginger water flows eastward into the Yongshui, and the Yongshui flows southward through the Zhongting River in Miyang County, and merges with the Wushui.

古文：水发杜阳县大岭侧，东西三百步，南北二百步，世谓之赤泥岘，沿波历涧，俗名大横水也。疑即杜水矣。
现代文：武水发源于杜阳县的大岭旁。大岭东西长三百步，南北宽二百步，人们称为赤泥现；清波流经山涧，俗名大横水，可能就是杜水。
English: Wushui originates from the side of Daling in Duyang County. Daling is three hundred paces long from east to west and two hundred paces wide from north to south, and is known as red mud; Qingbo flows through the mountains, commonly known as large horizontal water, and may be Du water.

古文：其水东南流，东径杜阳县故城，世谓之故县川。
现代文：水往东南流，向东经杜阳县老城，人们称为故县川。
English: The water flows southeastward and eastward through the old town of Duyang County, and people call it the late county river.

古文：又故虢县有杜阳山，山北有杜阳谷，有地穴，北入，亦不知所极，在天柱山南。
现代文：此外，旧藐县有杜阳山，山北有杜阳谷，谷中有个地洞，向北通进去，也不知尽头在哪里，地点在天柱山以南。
English: In addition, Duyang Mountain is located in the old Miao County, and Duyang Valley is located in the north of the mountain. There is a cave in the valley, which leads to the north, and I don't know where the end is, but it is located south of Tianzhu Mountain.

古文：故县取名焉；亦指是水而摄目矣，即王莽之通杜也。
现代文：所以杜阳县的取名，既是来自山名，同时也是因水而得名的。杜阳，就是王莽的通杜。
English: Therefore, the name of Duyang County comes from both the name of the mountain and the name of the water. Duyang is the Tongdu of Wang Mang.

古文：故《地理志》曰：县有杜水。
现代文：所以《地理志》说：县里有杜水。
English: Therefore, "Geography" said: the county has a lot of water.

古文：杜水又东，二坑水注之；水有二源，一水出西北，与渎水合，而东历五将山，又合乡谷水。
现代文：水又往东流，有二坑水注入。二坑水有两个源头，一个发源于西北，与读雌水汇合，往东流经五将山，又汇合了乡谷水。
English: The water from the two pits has two sources, one originates in the northwest, merges with the Yomiomi water, flows eastward through the Wushang Mountain, and merges with the township water.

古文：水出乡溪，东南流入杜水，谓之乡谷川。
现代文：乡谷水发源于乡溪，往东南流，注入杜水，称为乡谷川。
English: The Xiangyuan River originates from the Xiangyuan Creek, flows to the southeast, and is fed by the Du River. It is called the Xiangyuan River.

古文：又南，莫水注之。
现代文：又往南流，有莫水注入。
English: It's flowing south again, and there's no water coming in.

古文：水出好畤县梁山大岭东，南径梁山宫西，故《地理志》曰：好畤有梁山宫，秦始皇起。
现代文：莫水发源于好峙县梁山大岭东麓，往南流经梁山宫西，所以《地理志》说：好峙有梁山宫，是秦始皇所建。
English: The water originates from the eastern foothills of Liangshan Mountains in Haojing County and flows south through the west of Liangshan Palace. Therefore, "Geography" said: Haojing has Liangshan Palace, which was built by Qin Shihuang.

古文：水东有好畤县故城，王莽之好邑也。
现代文：水东有好峙县老城，就是王莽的好邑。
English: The old town of Suidong has a good face-off, which is the good town of Wang Mang.

古文：世租建武二年，封建成大将军耿弇为侯国。
现代文：世祖建武二年，把这地方封给建威大将军耿弃，立为侯国。
English: In the second year of Jianwu, the founder of Jianwu abandoned the fief of this place to General Jian Wei and established it as a vassal state.

古文：又南径美阳县之中亭川，注雍水，谓之中亭水。
现代文：莫水又往南流经美阳县中亭川，注入雍水，称为中亭水。
English: Moshui also flows southward through Zhongting River in Miyang County, injecting Yongshui, known as Zhongting Water.

古文：雍水又南径美阳县西。
现代文：雍水又往南流经美阳县西边。
English: The Yongshui also flows south through the western part of Miyang County.

古文：章和二年，更封彰侯耿秉为侯国。
现代文：章和二年，把这地方改封给彰侯耿秉，立为侯国。
English: In the second year of Zhang He, this place was renamed to Zhang Hou Geng Bing and established as a county.

古文：其水又南流注于渭。
现代文：雍水又南流，注入渭水。
English: The Yongshui also flows to the south, injecting turbid water.

古文：渭水又东，洛谷之水，出其南山洛谷，北流径长城西。
现代文：渭水又东流，洛谷之水发源于南山洛谷，往北流经长城以西。
English: Surabaya's water also flows eastward. The water of Luo Valley originates from the Nanshan Luo Valley and flows northward to the west of the Great Wall.

古文：魏甘露二年，蜀遣姜维出洛谷，围长城，即斯地也。
现代文：魏甘露三年，蜀汉派姜维出兵洛谷，围长城，就是这地方。
English: In the third year of the Wei and Han dynasties, Shu Han sent Jiang Wei to send troops to the Luo Valley to encircle the Great Wall. This is the place.

古文：又东，芒水从南来流注之。
现代文：又往东流，芒水从南方流来注入。
English: It also flows eastward, and the manganese water is injected from the south.

古文：芒水出南山芒谷，北流径玉女房。
现代文：芒水发源于南山芒谷，往北流经玉女房。
English: The Mang Shui originates from the Nanshan Mang Valley and flows north through the Jade Maidens.

古文：水侧山际有石室，世谓之玉女房。
现代文：水边山麓有个石室，人们叫玉女房。
English: There is a stone room at the foot of the mountain near the water. People call it the Jade Maid.

古文：芒水又北径盩厔县之竹圃中，分为二水。
现代文：芒水又往北流经盆屋县的竹圃中，分成两条水。
English: Mangsui also flows north through the bamboo groves of Bonya County, splitting into two streams.

古文：汉冲帝诏曰：翟义作乱于东，霍鸿负倚盩厔芒竹，即此也。
现代文：汉冲帝诏令说：翟义在东方作乱，霍鸿依恃盆屋的芒竹据守，就是指这地方。
English: Emperor Hanchong's edict said: "Xiyi caused turmoil in the East, and Hohong was protected by the bamboos of Yunnan Basin. This refers to this place."

古文：其水分为二流，一水东北为枝流，一水北流注于渭也。
现代文：芒水分成两条：一条往东北流去，是支流；一条北流注入渭水。
English: The Manchurian waters form two streams: one flows to the northeast and is a tributary; a northern stream injects the Manchurian waters.

