古文：桓公问于管子曰： 寡人幼弱惛愚，不通诸侯四邻之义，仲父不当尽语我昔者有道之君乎？
现代文：桓公问管子说： 我幼弱昏愚，不懂得与四邻诸侯如何交往的道理，仲父还不应当把从前有道之君的表现尽量告诉我么？
English: Kuan Gong asked Guanzi, "I am young, weak, and stupid, and I do not know how to interact with the four neighboring princes. Shouldn't the matchmaker tell me as much as possible about the performance of the once virtuous prince?"

古文：吾亦鉴焉。 
现代文：我也好有所借鉴。 
English: I hope I can learn something from it.

古文：管子对曰： 夷吾之所能与所不能，尽在君所矣，君胡有辱令？ 
现代文：管子回答说： 我之所能与不能，您都全部知道，您为什么还让我讲呢？ 
English: The pipe replied, "You know all that I can and cannot do. Why do you still ask me to speak?

古文：桓公又问曰： 仲父，寡人幼弱惛愚，不通四邻诸侯之义，仲父不当尽告我昔者有道之君乎？
现代文：桓公再一次问管子说： 仲父，我幼弱昏愚，不懂得与四邻诸侯交往的道理，您还不应该给我讲讲古代的有道之君么？
English: Once again, Prince Kuan asked Guanzi, "Junior father, I am young, weak, and stupid, and do not understand the principle of interacting with the four neighboring princes. Shouldn't you tell me about the wise princes of ancient times?"

古文：吾亦鉴焉。 
现代文：我也好有所借鉴。 
English: I hope I can learn something from it.

古文：管子对曰： 夷吾闻之于徐伯曰，昔者有道之君，敬其山川、宗庙、社稷，及至先故之大臣，收聚以忠而大富之。
现代文：管子回答说： 我听到徐伯说过，从前的有道之君，都是敬礼山川、宗庙和社程的，对于先故的大臣，施以恩德，并且使其大富。
English: Guanzi replied, "I heard Xubei say that in the past, all the wise princes paid homage to mountains, rivers, ancestral temples, and social programs, and they were kind to the late minister and made him very rich.

古文：固其武臣，宣用其力。
现代文：巩固武将的官位，发挥他们的能力。
English: We will consolidate the positions of military commanders and give full play to their capabilities.

古文：圣人在前，贞廉在侧，竟称于义，上下皆饰。
现代文：圣人在前，贞廉之士在左右，互相提倡行义，上下都有修治。
English: The saints are in the front, the virtuous people are on the left and right, advocating each other to do righteousness, and there are practices up and down.

古文：形正明察，四时不贷，民亦不忧，五谷蕃殖。
现代文：刑政明察，四时的行事安排没有失误，人民无忧虑，五谷都有繁殖。
English: The administration of criminal justice has a clear vision, there is no mistake in the arrangement of the four o'clock, the people are not worried, and the grain is multiplied.

古文：外内均和，诸侯臣伏，国家安宁，不用兵革。
现代文：外内和睦，诸侯臣服，国家安宁，不用兵革。
English: Peace at home and abroad, submission of princes, national tranquility, no need for war.

古文：受币帛，以怀其德；昭受其令，以为法式。
现代文：把币帛授于邻国，以感怀邻国的德惠；把政令昭示于邻国，以作为他们的规范。
English: Give money to your neighbors, so that they may feel the benefits of your country; show your decrees to your neighbors, so that they may be guided by them.

古文：此亦可谓昔者有道之君也。 
现代文：这也就可以称作从前的有道之君了。 
English: This can also be called the former wayward prince.

古文：桓公曰： 善哉！ 
现代文：桓公说： 讲得好呵！ 
English: Kanko said, "That was a good speech!

古文：桓公曰： 仲父既己语我昔者有道之君矣，不当尽语我昔者无道之君乎？
现代文：桓公说： 您既已给我讲过古代的有道之君了，是不是应该再给我讲讲古代无道之君呢？
English: Prince Kuan said, "Since you have already told me about the virtuous princes in ancient times, should you also tell me about the wicked princes in ancient times?"

古文：吾亦鉴焉。 
现代文：我也好有所借鉴。 
English: I hope I can learn something from it.

古文：管子对曰： 今若君之美好而宣通也，既官职美道，又何以闻恶为？ 
现代文：管子回答说： 像您这样美好而明通，既已明察美的道理，又何必再听恶事呢？ 
English: The pipe replied, "As you are so beautiful and clear-sighted, why do you need to listen to bad things, since you have clearly observed the principles of beauty?

古文：桓公曰： 是何言邪？
现代文：桓公说： 怎么能这样说呢？
English: Prince Kan said, "How can you say that?

古文：以繬缁缘繬，吾何以知其美也？
现代文：用黑色给黑衣服沿边，我怎么知道它的美？
English: How can I know the beauty of a black dress when it is edged with black?

古文：以素缘素，吾何以知其善也？
现代文：用白色给白衣服沿边，我怎么知道它的好？
English: How do I know it's good to use white to line a white dress?

古文：仲父已语我其善，而不语我其恶，吾岂知善之为善也？ 
现代文：您已对我讲了善，而没有讲恶，我怎样了解 善 之所以为善呢？ 
English: You have spoken to me of good, and not of evil; how shall I know what is good?

古文：管子对曰： 夷吾闻之徐伯曰，昔者无道之君，大其宫室，高其台榭，良臣不使，谗贼是舍。
现代文：管子回答说： 我听到徐伯说过，从前的无道之君，都是把宫室搞得大大的，把台榭盖得高高的，不用良臣，只是留用谗贼。
English: Guanzi replied, "I heard Xu Bo said that the former wayless princes always made the palace large and built the throne high. They didn't need good ministers, they just used thieves.

古文：有家不治，借人为图，政令不善，墨墨若夜，辟若野兽，无所朝处，不修天道，不鉴四方，有家不治，辟若生狂，众所怨诅，希不灭亡。进其谀优，繁其钟鼓，流于博塞，戏其工瞽。诛其良臣，敖其妇女，撩猎毕弋，暴遇诸父，驰骋无度，戏乐笑语。
现代文：诛杀良臣，戏弄妇女，不停地进行田猎，凶暴地对待诸侯。驰骋无度，戏乐笑语。
English: He killed good ministers, teased women, hunted ceaselessly, and treated lords with ferocity. He galloped without restraint, and his play was full of laughter.

古文：式政既輮，刑罚则烈。
现代文：施政既有偏差，刑罚就要酷烈，对内侵削人民，还自以为有功。
English: There are deviations in governance, the punishment must be severe, and they think they have done a good job of domestic abuse of the people.

古文：内削其民，以为攻伐，辟犹漏釜，岂能无竭。
现代文：就好象有漏洞的锅一样，怎么能不枯竭呢？
English: Just like a leaky pot, how can it not run dry?

古文：此亦可谓昔者无道之君矣。 
现代文：这也就可以称作古代的无道之君了。 
English: This can also be called the ancient wayless prince.

古文：桓公曰： 善哉！ 
现代文：桓公说： 讲得好呵！ 
English: Kanko said, "That was a good speech!

古文：桓公曰： 仲父既已语我昔者有道之君与昔者无道之君矣，仲父不当尽语我昔者有道之臣乎？
现代文：桓公说： 您既已给我讲了古代的有道之君和古代的无道之君了，您还不应该给我讲古代的有道之臣么？
English: Prince Kuan said, "Since you have already told me about the virtuous princes and the wicked princes in ancient times, shouldn't you also tell me about the virtuous vassals in ancient times?"

古文：吾以鉴焉。 
现代文：我也好有所借鉴。 
English: I hope I can learn something from it.

古文：管子对曰： 夷吾闻之于徐伯曰，昔者有道之臣，委质为臣，不宾事左右；君知则仕，不知则已。
现代文：管子回答说： 我听到徐伯说过，古代的有道之臣，自从下拜为臣，从不去事奉君主的左右宠臣。君主了解他就出来做官，不了解他 就在野。
English: Guanzi replied, "I heard Xube said that the virtuous vassals in ancient times never served the monarch's right and left favorite vassals since they bowed down as vassals. If the monarch understands him, he will come out to be an official, and if he does not understand him, he will be in the field.

古文：若有事，必图国家，遍其发挥。
现代文：国家有事，就一定为国家利益着想，而充分出力。
English: If there is something wrong with the country, we must think about the interests of the country and make full efforts.

古文：循其祖德，辩其顺逆，推育贤人，谗慝不作。
现代文：他遵循祖德，明辨顺逆，推荐贤人，又能使谗慝不敢活动。
English: He follows the ancestor, clearly distinguishes between good and evil, recommends the wise, and can make the dragonfly dare not move.

古文：事君有义，使下有礼，贵贱相亲，若兄若弟，忠于国家，上下得体。
现代文：事奉国君有义，使用部下有礼，贵贱相亲，有如兄弟，忠于国家，使上下各得其所。
English: Serve the country with righteousness, use subordinates with courtesy, treat the high and low alike as brothers, be loyal to the country, and let the upper and lower ranks have their own place.

古文：居处则思义，语言则谋谟，动作则事。居国则富，处军则克，临难据事，虽死不悔。
现代文：平居则多加思考，谈话则经过谋虑，行动起来则有所建树 治国则富，治军则胜，遇到危难或事变，虽死不悔。
English: If you live in a flat place, you will think more. If you talk, you will think more. If you act, you will create something. If you govern a country, you will be rich. If you govern an army, you will be victorious. If you encounter a crisis or incident, you will never regret it.

古文：近君为拂，远君为辅，义以与交，廉以与处。
现代文：在近处是国君辅佐，在远处也是国君辅佐，以义来相交，以廉来处事。
English: In the vicinity is the sovereign's aide-de-camp, in the distance is also the sovereign's aide-de-camp, with righteousness to fellowship, with integrity to deal with.

古文：临官则治，酒食则慈，不谤其君，不毁其辞。
现代文：执行公务则尽职，遇到酒食则辞谢，不诽谤国君，也不隐讳意见。
English: When performing official duties, they are conscientious, when drinking and eating, they are grateful, they do not slander the sovereign, and they do not hide their opinions.

古文：君若有过，进谏不疑；君若有忧，则臣服之。
现代文：国君若有过错，进谏而不疑；国君有忧虑之事，自己承担起来。
English: If the sovereign is at fault, he will not hesitate to intervene; if the sovereign is worried, he will take it upon himself.

古文：此亦可谓昔者有道之臣矣。 
现代文：这也就可以称作古代的有道之臣了。 
English: This can also be called a virtuous vassal of ancient times.

古文：桓公曰： 善哉！ 
现代文：桓公说： 讲得好呵！ 
English: Kanko said, "That was a good speech!

古文：桓公曰： 仲父既以语我昔者有道之臣矣，不当尽语我昔者无道之臣乎？
现代文：桓公说： 您既已给我讲了古代的有道之臣了，还不应该给我讲讲古代的无道之臣么？
English: Prince Kan said, "Since you have already told me about the virtuous vassals in ancient times, shouldn't you also tell me about the wicked vassals in ancient times?"

古文：吾亦鉴焉。 
现代文：我也好有所借鉴。 
English: I hope I can learn something from it.

古文：管子对曰： 夷吾闻之于徐伯曰，昔者无道之臣，委质为臣，宾事左右；执说以进，不蕲亡己；遂进不退，假宠鬻贵。
现代文：管子回答说： 我听到徐伯说过，从前的无道之臣，自下拜为臣以后，就敬事君主左右的宠臣。用邪说以求升进，从不想忘掉自己；知进而不知退，并利用君宠来显示自己的高贵。
English: Guanzi replied, "I heard Xubei say that the former unscrupulous vassal, since he became a vassal, has respected the favorite vassals around the monarch. Using evil theories to advance, he never wants to forget himself; knowing how to advance without retreating, and using the monarch's favor to show his nobility.

古文：尊其货贿，卑其爵位；进曰辅之，退曰不可，以败其君，皆曰非我。
现代文：只重视货财，而看轻爵位身分；在朝廷辅佐国君，在下面却加以诽议，这样来败坏国君名誉，还推说 与我无干 。
English: He only valued goods and wealth, and looked down on the status of a knighthood; he assisted the sovereign in the imperial court, but slandered him below, thus damaging the reputation of the sovereign, and insinuated that he had nothing to do with me.

古文：不仁群处，以攻贤者，见贤若货，见贱若过。
现代文：纠集一群不仁之辈，攻击贤人，对待贵人就象追逐财货一般，对待贱者就象路人一样躲开。
English: Assemble a group of ruthless people, attack the wise, treat the noble as if they were chasing goods, and treat the lowly as if they were passers-by.

古文：贪于货贿，竟于酒食，不与善人，唯其所事。
现代文：贪贿赂，争酒食，不亲近善人，只亲近自己的爪牙。
English: Greed and bribery, fighting over food and drink, not getting close to good people, only getting close to their own minions.

古文：倨敖不恭，不友善士，谗贼与斗，不弥人争，唯趣人诏。湛湎于酒，行义不从。
现代文：为人傲慢，不结交善士却与谗贼相勾结。不排解人们的纠纷，只鼓动人们诉讼，沉溺于饮酒，仪容举止都很不整肃。
English: They are arrogant, do not associate with good people but collude with thieves, do not resolve people's disputes, only encourage people to litigate, indulge in drinking, and their manners are not clean.

古文：不修先故，变易国常，擅创为令，迷或其君，生夺之政，保贵宠矜。
现代文：不遵循祖先的旧法，又改动国家的常规，擅立法令，蒙蔽国君，夺取国家政务，来保全地位和放纵其矜夸习气。
English: They do not follow the old laws of their ancestors, but change the country's routine, arbitrarily issue decrees, deceive the sovereign, and seize state affairs to preserve their status and indulge their boastful habits.

古文：迁损善士，捕援货人，入则乘等，出则党骈，货贿相入，酒食相亲，俱乱其君。
现代文：不用好人，提携市侩之类，在朝廷内部陵越等级，在朝廷外部发展私党，货贿相入，洒食相亲，全都来祸乱国君。
English: It is not necessary to be a good person, to form alliances with merchants and the like, to rise through the ranks within the imperial court, to develop one's own party outside the imperial court, to bribe with goods, and to make friends with food, all of which will bring disaster to the sovereign.

古文：君若有过，各奉其身。
现代文：而国君一旦有祸。又都去各保其身了。
English: But as soon as there is a calamity for the sovereign, they all go to protect themselves.

古文：此亦谓昔者无道之臣。 
现代文：这也就可以叫作古代的无道之臣了。 
English: This can also be called the ancient lawless vassal.

古文：桓公曰： 善哉！ 
现代文：桓公说： 讲得好呵！ 
English: Kanko said, "That was a good speech!

