古文：谓赵王曰： 三晋合而秦弱，三晋离而秦强，此天下之所明也。
现代文：有人对赵武灵王说： 三晋联合秦国就弱小，三晋疏远秦国就强大，这是天下人看得明明白白的事情。
English: Someone said to King Zhao Wuling: If the three Jin states unite with the Qin state, they will be weak, but if the three Jin states separate from the Qin state, they will be strong. This is something that people around the world can see clearly.

古文：秦之有燕而伐赵，有赵而伐燕；有梁而伐赵，有赵而伐梁；有楚而伐韩，有韩而伐楚；此天下之所明见也。
现代文：秦国与燕国亲近，则进攻赵国，与赵国亲近，则进攻燕国；秦国与粱国亲近，则进攻赵国，与赵国亲近，就进攻魏国；秦国与楚国亲近，就进攻韩国，与韩国亲近，就进攻楚国；这是天下人看得明明白白的事情。
English: If Qin is close to Yan, it will attack Zhao; if it is close to Zhao, it will attack Yan; if Qin is close to Yao, it will attack Zhao; if it is close to Zhao, it will attack Wei; if Qin is close to Chu, it will attack Korea; if it is close to Korea, it will attack Chu; this is something that people all over the world can see clearly.

古文：然山东不能易其略，兵弱也。
现代文：然而华山以东的六个国家不能改变秦国的连横之路，是因为兵力弱小。
English: However, the six countries to the east of Mount Huashan could not change Qin's continuous and horizontal path, because their military strength was weak.

古文：弱而不能相壹，是何楚之知，山东之愚也。
现代文：兵力弱小的国家又不能团结一致，这是秦国何等明智，山东六国是何等愚蠢。
English: How wise is Qin and how foolish are the six Shandong provinces that a country with a weak military cannot be united.

古文：是臣所为山东之忧也。
现代文：这是臣下为山东六国忧虑的地方。
English: This is where the vassals of the Six Kingdoms of Shandong are worried.

古文：虎将即禽，禽不知虎之即己也，而相斗两罢，而归其死于虎。
现代文：老虎将要靠近野兽，野兽不知道老虎靠近自己，而两个野兽互相斗得很疲劳，可是最终它们都死在老虎口里。
English: The tiger is going to approach the beast, the beast does not know that the tiger is approaching him, and the two beasts fight each other very tired, but eventually they both die in the tiger's mouth.

古文：故使禽知虎之即己，决不相斗矣。
现代文：所以使野兽知道老虎靠近自己，决不互相争斗了。
English: So the beasts knew that the tigers were close to them and would never fight each other.

古文：今山东之主不知秦之即己也，而尚相斗两敝，而归其国于秦，知不如禽远矣。愿王熟虑之也。
现代文：如今山东六国的君主不知道秦国正在靠近自己，而且互裙争斗两败俱伤，最终使自己的国家归于秦国，智慧比野兽差远了，希望君王仔细考虑一下这些事。
English: Nowadays, the monarchs of the six countries in Shandong do not know that Qin is getting closer to them, and they are both defeated in the skirmish, and eventually make their own country belong to Qin. Wisdom is far worse than beasts. I hope the monarchs will carefully consider these things.

古文： 今事有可急者，秦之欲伐韩梁，东窥于周室甚，惟寐亡之。
现代文： 如今有十分危急的事情，是秦国想要进攻韩国、魏国，向东很注意窥伺周王室，只有在睡觉的时候它才能忘。
English: Now there is a very critical situation. Qin wants to attack South Korea and Wei, and pays great attention to the east to spy on the Zhou royal family. It can only forget when it is sleeping.

古文：今南攻楚者，恶三晋之大合也。
现代文：如今秦国向南进攻楚国的原因，是憎恶三晋的互相联合。
English: The reason why Qin is now attacking Chu to the south is that it hates the alliance of the three Jin states.

古文：今攻楚休而复之，已五年矣，攘地千余里。
现代文：如今秦国对楚国罢兵并免除它的赋役，已经五年了，侵夺了千余里土地。
English: Now, it has been five years since Qin invaded Chu and exempted it from military service, seizing more than a thousand miles of land.

古文：今谓楚王： 苟来举玉趾而见寡人，必与楚为兄弟之国，必为楚攻韩、梁，反楚之故地。 
现代文：如今秦王对楚王说： 您如果迈动贵步来会见寡人，一定和楚国结为兄弟之国，一定为楚国进攻韩国、魏国，返回楚国原来的土地。 
English: Now King Qin said to King Chu: "If you take the precious step of meeting so many people, you will surely become a brotherly country with the State of Chu. You will surely attack Korea and Wei for the State of Chu and return to the original land of the State of Chu."

古文：楚王美秦之语，怒韩、梁之不救己，必入于秦。
现代文：楚王认为秦王的话很友好，恼怒韩国、魏国不援救自己，一定到秦国去朝见。
English: King Chu thought that King Qin's words were very friendly, and he was angry that Korea and Wei did not help him, so he had to go to Qin to see the emperor.

古文：有谋故杀使之赵，以燕饵赵而离三晋。
现代文：秦国又谋划派使者到赵国去，用共同进攻燕国利诱赵国，而离阔三晋。
English: Qin also planned to send an envoy to Zhao, using a joint attack on Yan to lure Zhao away from the Three Kingdoms.

古文：今王美秦之言，而欲攻燕，攻燕，食未饱而祸已及矣。
现代文：如今君王认为秦国的话很友好而想要进攻燕国，进攻燕国，还没有从燕国得到多少利益而祸患就已经来到了。
English: Now the king thinks that the words of Qin are very friendly and wants to attack Yan, attack Yan, and has not yet received much benefit from Yan, and the disaster has already come.

古文：楚王入秦，秦、楚为一，东面而攻韩。
现代文：楚王进入秦国朝见，秦国、楚国联合一致，向东面的韩国进攻。
English: King Chu entered the court of Qin, and Qin and Chu united to attack Korea to the east.

古文：韩南无楚，北无赵，韩不待伐，割挈马兔而西走。
现代文：韩国南面没有楚国的援助，北面没有赵国的援助，韩国没有等到秦楚进攻，就会拿着割让的土地向西跑到秦国去如同马和兔一样迅疾。
English: In the south of Korea, there was no assistance from the State of Chu, and in the north, there was no assistance from the State of Zhao. Korea did not wait for the attack of Qin and Chu, but took the ceded land and ran westward to the State of Qin as fast as a horse and a hare.

古文：秦与韩为上交，秦祸安移于梁矣。
现代文：秦国与韩国有了好交情：秦国的兵祸予是就会移到魏国。
English: Qin and Korea had a good relationship: the military disaster of Qin would be transferred to Wei.

古文：以秦之强，有楚、韩之用，梁不待伐矣。割挈马兔而西走，秦与梁为上交，秦祸案攘于赵矣。
现代文：凭借秦国的强大，有楚国、韩国可以利用，魏匡没有等秦国进攻就会拿着割让的土地向西跑到秦国去如同马和兔一样迅疾。秦国与魏国有了好交情，秦国看赵国就像自己环中的物。
English: With the strength of Qin, Chu and Korea could be used. Wei Kuang did not wait for Qin to attack, he took the ceded land and ran west to Qin as fast as a horse and a rabbit. Qin and Wei had a good relationship, and Qin looked at Zhao like a thing in its own circle.

古文：以强秦之有韩、梁、楚，与燕之怒，割必深矣。
现代文：凭借秦国的强大并有韩、魏、楚的支持：加上燕国对赵国恼怒，他们共同对付赵国，赵国一定要被割取很多土地了。
English: With the strength of Qin and the support of Han, Wei and Chu: plus the anger of Yan against Zhao, they jointly dealt with Zhao. Zhao must have been deprived of a lot of land.

古文：国之举此，臣之所为来。
现代文：国家走到这种地步，臣下就是为此而来。
English: When a country gets to this point, that's why the vassals come.

古文：臣故曰：事有可急为者。
现代文：臣下因此说：事情有急于要做的。
English: The vassal therefore said, "Things are in a hurry to be done."

古文： 及楚王之未入也，三晋相亲相坚，出锐师以戍韩、梁西边，楚王闻之，必不入秦，秦必怒而循攻楚，是秦祸不离楚也，便于三晋。
现代文： 趁楚王没有入秦的时候，三晋互相亲近签订盟约，派出精锐军队戍守韩国、魏国的西部边境，楚王听到消息，一定不会到秦国去，秦国一定恼怒并像以前一样攻打楚国，这样秦国的兵祸不会离开楚国，有利于三晋。
English: Taking advantage of the fact that King Chu did not enter Qin, the three Jin states approached each other and signed a treaty, sending elite troops to guard the western borders of Korea and Wei. When King Chu heard the news, he would definitely not go to Qin, and Qin would certainly be angry and attack Chu as before. In this way, the military disaster of Qin would not leave Chu, which would be beneficial to the three Jin states.

古文：若楚王入，秦见三晋之大合而坚也，必不出楚王，即多割，是秦祸不离楚也，有利于三晋。
现代文：如果楚王进入秦国，秦国看到三晋联合并签订盟约，一定不放楚王回国，定会要求楚国多割让土地，这样秦国兵祸不离开楚国，有利于三晋。
English: If King Chu enters Qin, and Qin sees that the three Jin have united and signed a treaty, it will definitely not let King Chu return to the country, and it will definitely ask Chu to cede more land. In this way, the soldiers of Qin will not leave Chu, which is beneficial to the three Jin.

古文：愿王之熟计之也急。 
现代文：希望君王迅速谋划这些事！ 
English: Let the king make haste to do these things.

古文：赵王因起兵南戍韩、梁之西边。
现代文：赵王因此向南发兵戍守韩国、魏国的西部边境。
English: As a result, Zhao Wang sent troops to the south to guard the western borders of Korea and Wei.

古文：秦见三晋之坚也，果不出楚王卬，而多求地。
现代文：秦国看到三晋坚定盟约，果然不放楚王回国而要求多割让土地。
English: Qin saw that the Three Kingdoms of Jin were firmly committed to the treaty, and did not let King Chu return to the country, but demanded that he cede more land.

