古文：国之所以治者三：一曰法，二曰信，三曰权。
现代文：国家能够安定的三个因素：一是法度，二是信用，三是权力。
English: There are three factors that can stabilize a country: first, the rule of law, second, trust, and third, power.

古文：法者，君臣之所共操也；信者，君臣之所共立也；权者，君之所独制也，人主失守则危。
现代文：法度是君臣共同执掌的；信用是君臣共同树立的；权力是君主独自控制的。君主不能掌握权力，国家就面临危机。
English: The law is jointly administered by the monarch and the ministers; the credibility is jointly established by the monarch and the ministers; the power is solely controlled by the monarch. If the monarch cannot control the power, the country will face a crisis.

古文：君臣释法任私必乱。
现代文：君臣抛弃法度只顾私利，国家必然混乱。
English: When princes and ministers abandon the rule of law for personal gain, the country is bound to be in chaos.

古文：故立法明分，而不以私害法，则治。
现代文：所以确立法度明确公私的界线，并且不因为私利而损害法度，那么国家就会安定。
English: Therefore, it is necessary to establish a legal system that clearly defines the boundaries between the public and the private, and does not damage the legal system because of self-interest, then the country will be stable.

古文：权制独断于君则威。
现代文：君主独掌权力控制人民就树立了威信。
English: The monarch's sole power to control the people established prestige.

古文：民信其赏，则事功成；信其刑，则奸无端。
现代文：人民相信君主的赏赐，事业就会办成；相信君主的惩罚，犯罪就不会发生。
English: The people believe in the reward of the monarch, the cause will be accomplished; believe in the punishment of the monarch, the crime will not occur.

古文：惟明主爱权重信，而不以私害法。
现代文：只有贤明的君主才珍惜权力看重信用，不会因为私利而损害法度。
English: Only a wise monarch would cherish power and value trust, and would not damage the rule of law for personal gain.

古文：故上多惠言而不克其赏，则下不用；数加严令而不致其刑，则民傲死。
现代文：所以君主许下很多施予恩惠的空话而不能实现，臣下就不会愿意为他所用；屡次颁布严厉的法令而从不执行，民众就会轻视死刑。
English: For this reason the prince promises many empty words of favour, which he cannot fulfil, and his subjects do not want to be used by him; he repeatedly issues harsh decrees, which are never carried out, and the people despise the death penalty.

古文：凡赏者，文也；刑者，武也。
现代文：所有的奖赏都是文治，而惩罚是武治。
English: All rewards are civil, and all punishments are martial.

古文：文武者，法之约也。
现代文：赏罚是法度的枢纽。
English: Reward and punishment are the crux of the law.

古文：故明主任法。
现代文：所以贤明的君主是看重法制的。
English: That is why wise monarchs value the rule of law.

古文：明主不蔽之谓明，不欺之谓察。
现代文：贤明的君主不被蒙蔽叫贤明，不被欺骗叫明察。
English: A wise ruler is called wise when he is not deceived, and discerning when he is not deceived.

古文：故赏厚而信，刑重而必；不失疏远，不违亲近，故臣不蔽主，而下不欺上。
现代文：所以重赏之下树立了信用，而重罚也是必然的。不忘关系疏远的人，不回避关系亲近的人。这样臣子就不会蒙蔽君主，百姓就不会欺骗君主。
English: Therefore, trust is established under heavy reward, and heavy punishment is inevitable. Do not forget those who are distant, do not avoid those who are close. In this way, courtiers will not deceive the monarch, and the people will not deceive the monarch.

古文：世之为治者，多释法而任私议，此国之所以乱也。
现代文：世上的统治者大多数都抛弃了法度而任由私人意见来统治国家，这是国家混乱的原因。
English: Most of the world's rulers have abandoned the rule of law and allowed private opinion to rule the country, which is the cause of the country's chaos.

古文：先王县权衡，立尺寸，而至今法之，其分明也。
现代文：先王制定秤砣和秤杆，确立尺寸的标准，作为标准沿用至今，是因为度量的标准明确。
English: The first king established the standard for the size of the balance and the balance rod, which has been used as the standard ever since, because the standard of measurement was clear.

古文：夫释权衡而断轻重，废尺寸而意长短，虽察，商贾不用，为其不必也。
现代文：如果抛弃了权衡而判断轻重，废除尺寸而估计长短，即使估计的很准，商人也不会用这种办法，因为那样不精准。
English: If we discard the weighing and judge the weight, and abolish the size and estimate the length, even if the estimate is accurate, the merchant will not use this method, because it is not accurate.

古文：故法者，国之权衡也。
现代文：所以法度也是治国的权衡。
English: Therefore, legislation is also a trade-off for governing the country.

古文：夫倍法度而任私议，皆不知类者也。
现代文：违背法度而靠个人意见，都是不知类推事理的。
English: Those who violate the law and rely on personal opinions are not able to reason by analogy.

古文：不以法论知、能、贤、不肖者，惟尧；而世不尽为尧。
现代文：不用法度就可断定人是智慧还是愚笨，是贤明还是无能的，只有尧，但世上不是人人都是尧。
English: There is no rule to determine whether a person is wise or stupid, wise or incompetent, just a number, but not everyone in the world is a number.

古文：是故先王知自议誉私之不可任也，故立法明分，中程者赏之，毁公者诛之。
现代文：所以先王知道不可以任由私议和称誉个人来治理国家，必须规定法律明确标准，符合法律的就奖励他，危害国家的就要惩罚。
English: Therefore, the former king knew that he could not allow private discussions and praise of individuals to govern the country, and must stipulate clear legal standards, reward him if he complies with the law, and punish him if he harms the country.

古文：赏诛之法，不失其议，故民不争。
现代文：赏罚的法度不失标准，民众就不会有争议。
English: The law of reward and punishment will not fall short of the standard, and the public will not have any disputes.

古文：不以爵禄便近亲，则劳臣不怨；不以刑罚隐疏远，则下亲上。
现代文：不按功劳来授予官爵，忠臣就不会尽力办事；不按军功行赏赋禄，战士就不会打仗。
English: If the title of nobility is not awarded according to merit, loyal subjects will not do their best; if rewards are not awarded according to military merit, soldiers will not fight.

古文：故授官予爵不以其劳，则忠臣不进；行赏赋禄不称其功，则战士不用，凡人臣之事君也，多以主所好事君。
现代文：大臣侍奉君主，多数投君主所好。
English: The ministers serve the monarch, and most of them vote in the monarch's favour.

古文：君好法，则臣以法事君；君好言，则臣以言事君。
现代文：君主好法度大臣就以法律奉君，君主爱听好话大臣就以谗言奉君。
English: If the monarch is good at law, the minister will serve you with the law. If the monarch is good at listening, the minister will serve you with admonitions.

古文：君好法，则端直之士在前；君好言，则毁誉之臣在侧。
现代文：君主好法度身边就会聚集正直之士，君主好谗言身边就都是奸臣。
English: If the monarch is good at laws, honest people will gather around him. If the monarch is bad at words, treacherous people will gather around him.

古文：公私之分明，则小人不疾贤，而不肖者不妒功。
现代文：公私界限分明，平庸的人就不会忌妒有才干的人，无能的也不会忌妒功臣。
English: The boundaries between public and private are clear. Mediocre people will not be jealous of talented people, and incompetent people will not be jealous of heroes.

古文：故尧、舜之位天下也，非私天下之利也，为天下位天下也；论贤举能而传焉，非疏父子亲越人也，明于治乱之道也。
现代文：所以尧舜统治天下，不是从天下获取私利，是为天下而治理天下；选择能人而传位给他，不是疏远亲生儿子而亲近无血缘关系的人，而是明白治理国家的道理。
English: Therefore, to rule the world, it is not to obtain self-interest from the world, but to govern the world for the world; to choose a capable person and pass the position to him, is not to alienate the biological son and be close to those who are not related by blood, but to understand the principle of governing the country.

古文：故三王以义亲，五霸以法正诸侯，皆非私天下之利也，为天下治天下。
现代文：所以三王靠仁义得天下，五霸靠法律控制诸侯，都不是从天下掠取私利的，而是为天下治理天下。
English: Therefore, the three kings won the world by virtue of benevolence and righteousness, and the five tyrants controlled the states by law. They did not plunder the world for their own benefit, but governed the world for the world.

古文：是故擅其名而有其功，天下乐其政，而莫之能伤也。
现代文：所以有功名的君主，天下的人都满意他的统治，没有谁能动摇他的统治。
English: Therefore, a meritorious monarch, people all over the world are satisfied with his rule, and no one can shake his rule.

古文：今乱世之君、臣，区区然皆擅一国之利而管一官之重，以便其私，此国之所以危也。
现代文：如今乱世的君臣都渺小得只重一国的利益和掌管自己官府的权力，这也是国家陷于危机的原因。
English: In today's turbulent world, princes and ministers are so insignificant that they only care about the interests of one country and the power to control their own government, which is also the reason why the country is in crisis.

古文：故公私之交，存亡之本也。
现代文：所以是否公私分明是国家存亡的根本。
English: Therefore, whether there is a clear distinction between public and private is fundamental to the country's survival.

古文：夫废法度而好私议，则奸臣鬻权以约禄，秩官之吏隐下而渔民。
现代文：废除法度喜欢私议，那么奸臣就会卖官来求财，一般官吏就会隐瞒民情而鱼肉百姓。
English: If the abolition of laws and regulations prefers private discussion, then treacherous ministers will sell officials to seek wealth, and ordinary officials will conceal the people's conditions and prey on the people.

古文：谚曰： 蠹众而木析，隙大而墙坏。 
现代文：谚语说： 蛀虫多了，大树就会折断；缝隙大了，墙就会坍塌。 
English: A proverb says: If there are too many maggots, the tree will break; if the gap is too large, the wall will collapse.

古文：故大臣争于私而不顾其民，则下离上。
现代文：如果大臣争相谋取私利而不顾及百姓，那民众就会远离君主，这是国家是 缝隙 。
English: If ministers vie for personal gain without regard for the people, then the people will turn away from the monarch. This is the crevice of the state.

古文：下离上者，国之 隙 也。秩官之吏隐下以渔百姓，此民之 蠹 也。
现代文：国家常设官吏隐瞒下情，侵犯民众的利益，这就是民众的 蛀虫 。
English: Permanent state officials who conceal the truth and infringe on the interests of the people are the maggots of the people.

古文：故有 隙 、 蠹 而不亡者，天下鲜矣。
现代文：而国家有了 蛀虫 、 缝隙 而不灭亡的，天下少有。
English: And there are few countries in the world that do not perish because they have a worm, a crevice.

古文：是故明王任法去私，而国无 隙 、 蠹 矣。
现代文：所以贤明的君主确定法律摒去私利，国家就不会有 蛀虫 、 缝隙 了。
English: Therefore, the wise monarch determined that the law should abandon self-interest, and there would be no worm or gap in the country.

