古文：周必大留正胡晋臣周必大，字子充，一字洪道，其先郑州管城人。
现代文：周必大字子充，又字洪道，其祖先是郑州管城人。
English: Zhou Bida, also known as Hong Dao, was the ancestor of Zhengzhou Guancheng people.

古文：祖诜，宣和中卒庐陵，因家焉。
现代文：祖父周诜，宣和年间在庐陵任副职，因此定居在这里。
English: His grandfather, Zhou Qi, was a vice-premier in Fuling during the Xuanwu era, so he settled here.

古文：父利建，太学博士。
现代文：父亲周利建，是太学博士。
English: His father, Zhou Lijian, is a doctor of science.

古文：必大少英特，父死，鞠于母家，母亲督课之。
现代文：年少时就特别杰出，父亲死后，他被寄养在外祖母家，母亲亲自督促他学习。
English: He was particularly outstanding at a young age. After his father's death, he was fostered at his grandmother's house, and his mother personally urged him to study.

古文：绍兴二十年，第进士，授徽州户曹。
现代文：绍兴二十年，周必大考中进士，被授予徽州户曹之职。
English: After 20 years in Shaoxing, he was awarded the post of Huizhou Household Cao.

古文：中博学宏词科，教授建康府。
现代文：周必大考中博学宏词科，任建康府教授。
English: Zhou Bida University entrance examination in the erudite macro subject, appointed as a professor of Jiankang.

古文：除太学录，召试馆职，高宗读其策，曰： 掌制手也。 守秘书省正字。
现代文：周必大拜官太学录，被召去应试馆职，高宗读了他的策文，说： 是个负责起草诏书的人才。 周必大任秘书省正字。
English: Zhou Bida was summoned to the examination hall, Gao Zong read his essay and said, "He is a talented person who is responsible for drafting the edict."

古文：馆职复召试自此始。
现代文：馆职恢复由朝廷诏试从此开始。
English: The restoration of the post of librarian by Imperial edict began from this time.

古文：兼国史院编修官，除监察御史。
现代文：周必大兼国史院编修官，拜官监察御史。
English: Zhou Bida is also an editor-in-chief of the National Academy of History, and an adjunct inspector of history.

古文：孝宗践祚，除起居郎。
现代文：孝宗即位后，周必大拜官起居郎。
English: After the enthronement of Emperor Xiaozong, Zhou Bi became a high-ranking courtier.

古文：直前奏事，上曰： 朕旧见卿文，其以近作进。 上初御经筵，必大奏： 经筵非为分章析句，欲从容访问，裨圣德，究治体。 先是，左右史久不除，并记注壅积，必大请言动必书，兼修月进。
现代文：直接到皇上面前奏事，皇上说： 我过去看过你写的文章，把你的近作拿来看看。 皇上当初亲临经筵，周必大奏道： 经筵并不是分析文章讲解句子的地方，想从容不迫地了解情况，增益于圣德，就要探求治理之本。 开始，左右史很久没有任命人担任，史事记载被中断、累积，周必大请求必须记下君臣们的言行举止，他日夜兼程修史，每月一次呈给皇上看。
English: Directly reporting to the emperor, the emperor said: I have read the articles you have written in the past, take a look at your recent work. When the emperor first came to the sutra, Zhou Bida said: The sutra is not a place to analyze articles and explain sentences, if you want to understand the situation unhurriedly and benefit from sanctity, you must explore the source of governance. At the beginning, the left and right history did not appoint people for a long time, the historical record was interrupted and accumulated, Zhou Bida requested that the words and deeds of the monarchs and ministers must be recorded. He studied history day and night and presented it to the emperor once a

古文：乃命必大兼编类圣政所详定官，又兼权中书舍人。
现代文：于是皇上命令周必大兼编类圣政所详定官，又兼权中书舍人。
English: As a result, the emperor ordered Zhou Bida to be appointed as a detailed official of the Sacred Government Office, and also as a scholar.

古文：侍经筵，尝论边事，上以蜀为忧，对曰： 蜀民久困，愿诏抚谕，事定宜宽其赋。 应诏上十事，皆切时弊。
现代文：周必大在经筵侍讲，曾论及边境之事，皇上为蜀感到担忧，周必大回答说： 蜀中百姓受困苦已很久了，希望陛下颁布安抚令，要使政局稳定应减少赋税。 周必大应皇上诏令奏上十件事，都切中时弊。
English: Zhou Bida said in his speech to the eunuchs that he had talked about the border and the emperor was worried about Shu, Zhou Bida replied: The people of Shu have been suffering for a long time, I hope that His Majesty will issue a pacification order, and taxes should be reduced to stabilize the political situation.

古文：权给事中，缴驳不辟权幸。
现代文：周必大暂代给事中，封驳政令之失当，不任用权贵、宠臣。
English: Zhou Bida temporarily took over the case, but he did not appoint any dignitaries or favorite vassals, as it would have been improper to reject the decree.

古文：翟婉容位官吏转行碍止法，争之力，上曰： 意卿止能文，不谓刚正如此。 金索讲和时旧礼，必大条奏，请正敌国之名，金为之屈。
现代文：翟婉容对官吏进行升调时违反了有关法令，周必大竭力争执，认为不妥。皇上说： 原以为你只会写文章，没想到你如此刚强正直。 金索取讲和时的旧礼，周必大一一上奏，请求端正敌国之称呼，金国为之气沮。
English: The emperor said, "I thought you could only write articles, I didn't expect you to be so strong and honest. When Jin asked for the old etiquette, Zhou had to make a big fuss and ask for the correct name of the enemy country, which made Jin frustrated.

古文：曾觌、龙大渊得幸，台谏交弹之，并迁知阁门事，必大与金安节不书黄，且奏曰： 陛下于政府侍从，欲罢则罢，欲贬则贬，独于二人委曲迁就，恐人言纷纷未止也。 明日宣手诏，谓： 给舍为人鼓扇，太上时小事，安敢尔！ 必大入谢曰： 审尔，则是臣不以事太上者事陛下。 退待罪，上曰： 朕知卿举职，但欲破朋党、明纪纲耳。 旬日，申前命，必大格不行，遂请祠去。
现代文：曾觌、龙大渊被皇上宠幸，台谏官交替弹劾他们，一起被调任知门事，周必大与金安节不书写备案录黄，并奏道： 陛下对于政府侍从，想罢就罢，想贬就贬，唯独对这二个人委屈迁就，这样恐怕公众的议论会纷纷而至不得停止。 第二天皇上宣布手诏，说： 给事中、中书舍人为人煽风点火，太上皇时的小事情，怎么可以乱说。 周必大进宫谢罪道 ：如此看来，那是我没有像侍奉太上皇一样侍奉陛下。 周必大退朝待罪，皇上说： 我知道你很尽职，只是想破除朋党、端正纲纪。 十天后，皇上重申以前的任命，周必大阻止不了，于是请求任宫观官。
English: Zeng Yao and Long Dayuan were favored by the emperor, and the eunuchs of Taiwan impeached them alternately, and they were transferred to the position of the gatekeeper together. Zhou Bida and Jinan Festival did not write the record of the record, and wrote: His Majesty, for the government attendants, can do whatever he wants, and can be demoted if he wants, but only for these two people, so I am afraid that the public discussion will continue. The second emperor announced a decree, saying: In this matter, the Chinese Library is fanning the flames, and how can the small things of the emperor be said. Zhou Bida entered the palace and said, "

古文：久之，差知南剑州，改提点福建刑狱。
现代文：很久后，周必大被差遣任南剑州知州，又改为提点福建刑狱。
English: After a long time, Zhou Bida was sent to Chizhou, South Jianzhou, and then to Fujian Penal Prison.

古文：入对，愿诏中外举文武之才，区别所长为一籍，藏禁中，备缓急之用。
现代文：周必大进宫回答皇上的提问，希望皇上令中外各地举荐文武人才，分别把他们的长处记在一本册子上，藏于禁中，以备缓急之用。
English: Zhou Bida entered the palace to answer the emperor's questions, hoping that the emperor would order all parts of China and abroad to recommend literary and military talents, and separately record their strengths in a booklet and hide it in the Forbidden City for emergency use.

古文：除秘书少监、兼直学士院，兼领史职。
现代文：周必大拜为秘书少监、兼直学士院，兼任史职。
English: Zhou Bidaoba was the secretary of the junior superintendent, and also the director of the academy, and also served as a historian.

古文：郑闻草必大制，上改窜其末，引汉宣帝事。
现代文：郑闻起草，周必大定稿，最后由皇上修改，这是模仿汉宣帝时的制度所为的。
English: It was drafted by Zheng Wen, finalized by Zhou Bida, and finally revised by the emperor. This was done in imitation of the system at the time of Emperor Xuan of Han.

古文：必大因奏曰： 陛下取汉宣帝之言，亲制赞书，明示好恶。
现代文：于是上奏说 ：陛下根据汉宣帝时的例子，亲自制定赞书，明确表示自己的好恶。
English: Then the prelude said: His Majesty, according to the example of Emperor Han Xuan, personally formulated a praise letter, clearly expressing his likes and dislikes.

古文：臣观西汉所谓社稷臣，乃鄙朴之周勃，少文之汲黯，不学之霍光。
现代文：我看西汉时所说的国家大臣，乃是浅陋朴实的周勃，缺乏文采的汲黯，不学无术的霍光。
English: I think that the Minister of State mentioned in the Western Han Dynasty is a shallow and simple-minded Zhou Bo, a lack of literary skills, and an uneducated and unskilled Huo Guang.

古文：至于公孙弘、蔡义、韦贤，号曰儒者，而持禄保位，故宣帝谓俗儒不达时宜。
现代文：至于公孙弘、蔡义、韦贤，号称儒者，只是拿俸禄保全地位，所以汉宣帝说俗儒不合时宜。
English: As for Gongsunhong, Cai Yi and Wei Xian, who were known as Confucians, they only took the salary to maintain their status, so it was inappropriate for Han Xuandi to say that they were ordinary Confucians.

古文：使宣帝知真儒，保至杂伯哉？
现代文：如果宣帝了解真正的儒士，怎么会把他们混淆呢？
English: If Emperor Xuanzong knew the real Confucianists, how could he confuse them?

古文：愿平心察之，不可有轻儒名。 上喜其精洽，欲与之日夕论文。
现代文：希望陛下平心观察，不可有轻视儒士的名声。 皇上喜爱他论述精辟，知识广博，想与他日夜讨论文章。
English: I hope that His Majesty will observe with equanimity and not despise the reputation of the Confucianist. The Emperor likes his incisive discourse and broad knowledge, and would like to discuss articles with him day and night.

古文：德寿加尊号，必大曰： 太上万寿，而绍兴末议文及近上表用嗣皇帝为未安。
现代文：高宗要加尊号，周必大说： 太上皇万岁，而绍兴末年所议之文及近来上的表使用嗣皇帝的称呼不妥。
English: Gao Zong wanted to add the honorific, and Zhou Bida said: Long live the Emperor, but the text discussed at the end of Shaoxing and the recent table are not appropriate to use the title of the Heir Emperor.

古文：按建炎遥拜徽宗表，及唐宪宗上顺宗尊号册文，皆称皇帝。 议遂定。
现代文：按照建炎年间遥拜徽宗表，以及唐宪宗献给唐顺宗尊号的册文，都称皇帝。 决议于是定下。
English: According to the record of Emperor Huizong, who was worshipped at a distance during the Jianyan period, and the record of Emperor Xianzong of the Tang Dynasty, which was dedicated to Emperor Shunzong of the Tang Dynasty, both were called emperor.

古文：赵雄使金，赍国书，议受书礼。
现代文：赵雄出使金朝，要携带国书，朝廷讨论受国书的礼节。
English: When Zhao Xiong sent an envoy to the Kim dynasty, he had to carry the imperial rescript, and the court discussed the etiquette of receiving the imperial rescript.

古文：必大立具草，略谓： 尊卑分定，或较等威；叔侄亲情，岂嫌坐起！ 上褒之曰： 未尝谕国书之意，而卿能道朕心中事，此大才也。 
现代文：周必大立即具体草拟，大致内容是： 尊卑名分之定，有人计较等级、威风；叔侄亲戚关系，难道还计较是坐着还是站立。 皇上赞赏地说 ：我未曾告诉国书的内容，而你能道出我心中所想，真是真正的人才呀。 
English: Zhou Bida immediately made a detailed draft, the general content of which was: the degree of superiority and inferiority is determined, some people care about rank and prestige; the relationship between uncles, nephews and relatives, do they also care about whether to sit or stand.The emperor said with appreciation: I have not told the content of the national book, and you can tell what I think, it is really a real talent.

古文：兼权兵部侍郎。
现代文：周必大兼权兵部侍郎。
English: Zhou Bida concurrently served as the Minister of the Ministry of Military Affairs.

古文：奏请重侍从以储将相，增台谏以广耳目，择监司、郡守以补郎官。
现代文：奏请敬重侍从以储备将相之才，增设台谏官以广开言路，选择监司、郡守以补充郎官之不足。
English: The report asked the respected attendants to reserve the talent of the commander-in-chief, to increase the number of eunuchs to broaden the way of speech, and to select supervisors and county governors to supplement the shortage of officials.

古文：寻权礼部侍郎、兼直学士院，同修国史、实录院同修撰。
现代文：不久，周必大暂代礼部侍郎、兼直学士院，同修国史、实录院同修撰。
English: Soon after, Zhou Bida temporarily became the attendant of the Department of Ceremonial Arts and the Academy of Direct and Indirect Speech, and he also studied national history and the Academy of Historical Records.

古文：一日，诏同王之奇、陈良翰对选德殿，袖出手诏，举唐太宗、魏征问对，以在位久，功未有成，治效优劣，苦不自觉，命必大等极陈当否。
现代文：一天，皇上令周必大同王之奇、陈良翰到选德殿回答问题，皇上从袖中拿出手诏，举出唐太宗与魏征关系之例，询问他在位久，而功绩未成，治政的好坏，他自己不能发觉的解决办法，命令周必大等人尽言是否。
English: One day, the emperor ordered Zhou Bida, Wang Zhiqi, and Chen Lianghan to come to the Zhengde Hall to answer questions. The emperor took out a seal from his sleeve, gave an example of the relationship between Tang Taizong and Wei Zheng, asked him if he had been in power for a long time, but his achievements had not been achieved, how good or bad his governance was, and what solutions he could not find, and ordered Zhou Bida and others to say whether or not.

古文：退而条陈： 陛下练兵以图恢复而将数易，是用将之道未至；择人以守郡国而守数易，是责实之方未尽。
现代文：周必大一一陈述 ：陛下训练士兵以图谋恢复国土而将领多次更换，这是用将的法则未掌握好；选择人戍守郡国而郡守多次变换，这是把责任落在实处的方法不完善。
English: Zhou Bida's one-on-one statement: His Majesty trained soldiers to seek to restore the country and changed generals many times, which is not a good grasp of the law of using generals; choosing people to defend the county and changing the county's governor many times, which is an imperfect method of putting responsibility on the ground.

古文：诸州长吏，倏来忽去，婺州四年易守者五，平江四年易守者四，甚至秀州一年而四易守，吏奸何由可察，民瘼何由可苏！ 上善其言，为革二弊。
现代文：各州官吏，一下子上任一下子罢职，婺州四年而地方官换了五次，平江四年换守臣四次，更有甚者秀州一年而四次换守臣，官吏奸邪如何得以考察清楚，百姓疾苦怎么可能得到缓和！ 
English: Officials in various prefectures take office and leave office at the same time. In Ganzhou, local officials are changed five times in four years, in Pingjiang four times in four years, and even in Xiuzhou four times in one year. How can officials' evil doings be investigated clearly, and how can people's suffering be alleviated?

古文：江、湖旱，请捐南库钱二十万代民输，上嘉之。
现代文：皇上认为他的话很对，于是革除了这二种弊端。江湖二州干旱，周必大请求捐出南库钱二十万代民交税，皇上很赞赏。
English: The emperor thought that his words were right, so he eliminated these two drawbacks. Jianghu two states drought, Zhou Bida requested to donate 200 thousand generations of people to pay taxes, the emperor was very appreciative.

古文：兼侍讲，兼中书舍人。
现代文：周必大兼侍讲，又兼任中书舍人。
English: Zhou Bida is also an assistant lecturer, and also serves as a middle school teacher.

古文：未几，辞直学士院，从之。
现代文：不久，他辞去直学士院之职，得到批准。
English: Soon after, his resignation from the directorship of the academy was approved.

古文：张说再除签书枢密院，给事中莫济封还录黄，必大奏曰： 昨举朝以为不可，陛下亦自知其误而止之矣。
现代文：张说再次拜为签书枢密院，给事中莫济封驳回录黄，周必大奏道： 过去全朝廷的人都认为张说这个任命不适合，陛下自己也知道错了而加以制止了。
English: Zhang said that he once again bowed to the Privy Council to sign the letter, but in the process, the letter was rejected, and Zhou Bida said: In the past, all the people in the imperial court thought that Zhang said that this appointment was not suitable, and His Majesty himself knew that he was wrong and stopped it.

古文：曾未周岁，此命复出。
现代文：未到一年，这个任命又下发。
English: Less than a year later, the appointment was renewed.

古文：贵戚预政，公私两失，臣不敢具草。 上批： 王〈日严〉疾速撰入。
现代文：贵戚参预政事，公私两方面都受到损失，我不敢草拟此令。 皇上批示： 王日严立即撰写任命书。
English: I do not dare to draft this order, as I have suffered losses both in public and private due to my relatives' participation in pre-election politics.The Emperor's instruction: Wang Rian should immediately write a letter of appointment.

古文：济、必大予宫观，日下出国门。 说露章荐济、必大，于是济除温州，必大除建宁府。
现代文：莫济、周必大降为宫观官，傍晚离开国都。 张说公开奏章的内容，让被弹劾者知道，又荐举莫济、周必大二人，于是莫济被派往温州任职，周必大到建宁府任职。
English: Moji and Zhou Bida were demoted to palace observers, and left the capital in the evening. Zhang said that he would disclose the contents of the record to let the impeached person know, and also recommended that Moji and Zhou Bida be promoted. Therefore, Moji was sent to Wenzhou to serve, and Zhou Bida was sent to Jianningfu to serve.

古文：济被命即出，必大至丰城称疾而归，济闻之大悔。
现代文：莫济接到任命立即离朝，周必大到丰城后称病而归，莫济听说后很后悔自己的行动。
English: Upon receiving the appointment, Mozi immediately left the country. After Zhou Bida went to Fengcheng, he called in sick and returned. After hearing this, Mozi regretted his actions.

古文：必大三请祠，以此名益重。
现代文：周必大三次请求一宫观职，因此名气更大了。
English: Zhou Bida asked for Ichinomiya's resignation three times, so his fame became even greater.

古文：久之，除敷文阁待制兼侍读、兼权兵部侍郎、兼直学士院。
现代文：时间过了很久，周必大拜官敷文阁待制兼侍读、暂代兵部侍郎、兼直学士院。
English: A long time has passed, and Zhou Bidaibai official Shibunkaku has become a trainee and attendant, a temporary attendant of the military department, and a direct graduate of the academy.

古文：上劳之曰： 卿不迎合，无附丽，朕所倚重。 除兵部侍郎，寻兼太子詹事。
现代文：皇上安慰他说： 你不迎合别人，不附会权贵，我十分倚重你。 周必大拜为兵部侍郎，不久兼任太子詹事。
English: The emperor comforted him and said, "You don't cater to others, you don't pander to the powerful, and I rely on you very much. Zhou will be greatly honored as the attendant of the military department, and soon he will also serve as the prince Zhanji.

古文：奏言： 太宗储才为真宗、仁宗之用，仁宗储才为治平、元祐之用。
现代文：他上奏说 ：太宗储备人才为真宗、仁宗所用，仁宗储备人才为英宗、哲宗所用。
English: He went on to say: Taizong reserve talents are used by Shinshu and Ninshu, and Ninshu reserve talents are used by Yingzong and Zhezong.

古文：自章、蔡沮士气，卒致裔夷之祸。
现代文：自从章、蔡京打击了士气后，最终导致外族入侵之祸。
English: Ever since Zhang and Caijing hit the morale, it eventually led to the disaster of foreign invasion.

古文：秦桧忌刻，逐人才，流弊至今。
现代文：秦桧嫉妒刻薄，驱逐人才，其弊端遗留至今。
English: Qin Hui was jealous and harsh, and expelled talented people, the drawbacks of which remain to this day.

古文：愿陛下储才于闲暇之日。 
现代文：希望陛下在闲暇之时储备人才。 
English: It is hoped that His Majesty will reserve talent in his spare time.

古文：上日御球场，必大曰： 固知陛下不忘阅武，然太祖二百年天下，属在圣躬，愿自爱。 上改容曰： 卿言甚忠，得非虞衔橛之变乎？
现代文：皇上一天亲临场，周必大说： 我固然知道陛下不会忘记检阅战备，然而太祖二百年的天下，其希望在于圣上的勤勉，希望皇上自爱。 皇上脸色大变说： 你的话很忠心，是不是为了预防衔橛之变？
English: One day, when the Emperor was present in person, Zhou Bida said, "Of course, I know that Your Majesty will not forget to review the war preparations, but in the world of two hundred years ago, its hope lies in the diligence of the Holy Father, and hope in the Emperor's self-love." The Emperor's face changed dramatically and he said, "Your words are very faithful, is it to prevent a change in the succession?

古文：正以仇耻未雪，不欲自逸尔。 升兼侍读，改吏部侍郎，除翰林学士。
现代文：我正以国仇未报、耻辱未雪为念，不想自寻安逸。 周必大升兼侍读，改任吏部侍郎，拜为翰林学士。
English: I am thinking of the unrequited national enmity and shame, and I do not want to seek comfort for myself. Zhou Bi was promoted to the rank of major and attendant, and was appointed as the attendant of the cadre department, and became the scholar of Hanlin.

古文：久雨，奏请减后宫给使，宽浙郡积逋，命省部议优恤。
现代文：天上下了很长时间雨，周必大奏请减少后宫供给，松缓对浙郡长期以来积欠的租税的逼责，令省部讨论对百姓抚恤之事。
English: It has been raining for a long time. Zhou Bidao requested to reduce the supply of harem, relax the enforcement of tax arrears in Zhejiang County for a long time, and let the provincial government discuss the matter of pension for the people.

古文：内直宣引，论： 金星近前星，武士击球，太子亦与，臣甚危之。 上俾语太子，必大曰： 太子人子也，陛下命以驱驰，臣安敢劝以违命，陛下勿命之可也。 
现代文：内直宣引，上责说： 金星靠近前面的星，武士踢，太子参与，我们很担心。 皇上让周必大把这些话转告太子，周必大说： 太子是人子，陛下令他驱驰，我怎么敢劝他违抗命令，陛下不要命令他就可以了。 
English: The emperor asked Zhou Bida to convey these words to the prince, and Zhou Bida said: The prince is the son of man, Your Majesty ordered him to drive away, how dare I advise him to disobey the order, Your Majesty can just not order him.

古文：乞归，弗许。
现代文：周必大乞求回乡，未得到批准。
English: Zhou Bida begged to return to his hometown, but was not approved.

古文：上欲召人与之分职，因问： 吕祖谦能文否？ 对曰： 祖谦涵养久，知典故，不但文字之工。 除礼部尚书兼翰林学士，进吏部兼承旨。
现代文：皇上想召人为他分担职责，于是问周必大： 吕祖谦能写文章吗？ 周必大回答说： 吕祖谦的涵养很深，了解典故，不仅仅工于文字。 周必大拜为礼部尚书兼翰林学士，升为吏部兼承旨。
English: The emperor wanted to call someone to share his duties, so he asked Zhou Bida: Can Lyu Zuqian write an article? Zhou Bida replied: Lyu Zuqian's cultivation is very deep, he understands allusions, not only works in writing.

古文：诏礼官议明堂典礼，必大定圜丘合宫互举之议。
现代文：皇上令礼官讨论明堂典礼，周必大提出祭天与祭地分别举行的意见。
English: The emperor ordered the etiquette officials to discuss the Myeongdong ceremony, and Zhou Bida proposed the idea of holding the festival day and the festival site separately.

古文：被旨撰《选德殿记》及《皇朝文鉴序》。
现代文：周必大受旨撰写《选德殿记》及《皇朝文鉴序》。
English: Zhou Bida was commissioned to write "Zhengde's Diary" and "Preface to Imperial Literature."

古文：必大在翰苑几六年，制命温雅，周尽事情，为一时词臣之冠。
现代文：周必大在翰苑近六年，制命文字温和、雅致，考虑事情周到、全面，是一时文学侍从之臣中的第一人。
English: Zhou Bida has been in Han Yuan for nearly six years. The appointment letter is gentle and elegant, the consideration is thoughtful and comprehensive, and he is the first among the literary attendants.

古文：或言其再入也，实曾觌所荐，而必大不知。
现代文：有人说他再次入翰苑任职，实际上是曾觌所荐，而周必大不知道真相。
English: Some people said that he was re-appointed to Han Yuan. In fact, it was recommended by Zeng Yao, but Zhou Bida did not know the truth.

古文：除参知政事，上曰： 执政于宰相，固当和而不同。
现代文：周必大拜官参知政事，皇上说： 执政与宰相，本来应当和睦而又有不同之处。
English: Zhou Bidaibai, a high-ranking official, participated in the political affairs of the governor, and the emperor said: The ruling and the prime minister should have been harmonious, but there are differences.

古文：前此宰相议事，执政更无语，何也？ 必大曰： 大臣自应互相可否。
现代文：在这之前宰相论述某事，而执政再没有什么可补充的了，这是为什么？ 周必大说： 大臣本来应该相互支持或反对。
English: Prior to this, the prime minister discussed something, and the government had nothing more to add. Why is this? Zhou Bida said: Ministers should have supported or opposed each other.

古文：自秦桧当国，执政不敢措一辞，后遂以为当然。
现代文：自从秦桧当权后，执政不敢讲一句话，以后于是成为理所当然。
English: Since Qin Hui took power, the government did not dare to say a word, and later it became a matter of course.

古文：陛下虚心无我，大臣乃欲自是乎？
现代文：陛下虚心请教抛开自己的尊严，大臣哪敢自以为是？
English: His Majesty humbly asked for advice, leaving his dignity behind. How dare the minister be so presumptuous?

古文：惟小事不敢有隐，则大事何由蔽欺。 上深然之。
现代文：只要小事不敢隐瞒，那么大事又有什么理由要隐瞒。 皇上深以为然。
English: As long as one does not dare to hide small things, what reason is there to hide big things? The Emperor was deeply convinced of this.

古文：久旱，手诏求言。
现代文：天久旱，皇上手诏求直言。
English: The weather has been dry for a long time, and the emperor has issued an edict to speak frankly.

古文：宰相谓此诏一下，州郡皆乞振济，何以应之，约必大同奏。
现代文：宰相认为此诏令一下，各州郡都会乞求赈济，如何应付，于是约周必大一起上奏反对此令。
English: The prime minister thought that once this edict was issued, every prefecture and county would be begging for aid and how to deal with it. Therefore, all prefectures and counties should jointly appeal against this edict.

古文：必大曰： 上欲通下情，而吾侪阻隔之，何以塞公论。 
现代文：周必大说 ：皇上想了解下面的情况，而我们却要加以阻拦，怎么可以堵塞公众的言路呢？ 
English: Zhou Bida said: The emperor wants to know the following situation, but we want to stop it. How can we block the public's way of speech?

古文：有介椒房之援求为郎者，上俾谕给舍缴驳，必大曰： 台谏、给舍与三省相维持，岂可谕意？
现代文：有人借助后妃的引荐请求为郎官，皇上把此事交给给事中与中书舍人处理，周必大说： 台谏、给舍与三省互相牵制，怎能禀承旨意办事呢？
English: Someone asked to be a vassal with the help of the recommendation of the empress dowager. The emperor handed the matter over to the person who gave the matter and the Chinese calligrapher to deal with. Zhou Bida said: Taiwan, China and the three provinces are mutually constrained, how can they carry out the will?

古文：不从失体，从则坏法。
现代文：不听从旨意有失于礼节，听从了又有损于法则。
English: To disobey is a breach of etiquette; to obey is a breach of the law.

古文：命下之日，臣等自当执奏。 上喜曰： 肯如此任怨耶？ 必大曰： 当予而不予则有怨，不当予而不予，何怨之有！ 上曰： 此任责，非任怨也。 除知枢密院。
现代文：旨令下达之日，我们应当一起上奏。 皇上高兴地说 ：肯如此任劳任怨吗？ 周必大说 ：当给而未给就会有怨恨，不当给而不给，有什么怨恨呢！ 皇上说： 这是负责任，不是任怨。 周必大拜官知枢密院。
English: On the day the imperial decree was issued, we should play together. The emperor said happily: "Is it possible to work so hard and bear a grudge?" Zhou Bida said: "If you give and don't give, there will be resentment. If you don't give and don't give properly, what is there to be resentful about?" The emperor said: "This is being responsible, not bearing a grudge." Zhou Bida became an official of the Privy Council.

古文：上曰： 每见宰相不能处之事，卿以数语决之，三省本未可辍卿也。 
现代文：皇上说： 每次看见宰相不能处理之事，你用几句话就解决了，三省根本不能少了你。 
English: The emperor said: Every time you see something that the prime minister can't handle, you can solve it with a few words. The three provinces simply can't do without you.

古文：山阳旧屯军八千，雷世方乞止差镇江一军五千，必大曰： 山阳控扼清河口，若今减而后增，必致敌疑。
现代文：山阳过去屯兵八千，雷世方乞求只差遣镇江一支军队五千人驻守山阳，周必大说 ：山阳控扼黄河口，如果今天减少驻军而后又增加驻军，必然导致敌人的怀疑。
English: Sanyang used to have a garrison of eight thousand soldiers, and Lei Shifang begged for only one army of five thousand to be sent to Zhenjiang to garrison Sanyang. Zhou Bida said: Sanyang controls the mouth of the Yellow River, if the garrison is reduced today and then increased, it will inevitably lead to the suspicion of the enemy.

古文：扬州武锋军本屯山阳者，不若岁拨三千，与镇江五千同戍。 郭杲请移荆南军万二千永屯襄阳，必大言： 襄阳固要地，江陵亦江北喉襟。 于是留二千人。
现代文：扬州武锋军本来驻守山阳，不如每年拨三千人，与镇江五千人一同驻守山阳。 郭杲请求把荆南军队一万二千人移至襄阳永久屯守，周必大说： 襄阳固然是要地，江陵也是江北的襟喉。 于是留下二千人驻扎江陵。
English: Yangzhou Wufeng Army was originally stationed in Sanyang, it would be better to allocate three thousand people each year to be stationed in Sanyang together with five thousand people from Zhenjiang. Guo Wei requested that twelve thousand people from the Jingnan Army be moved to Xiangyang for permanent garrison, Zhou Bida said: Xiangyang is certainly a place of need, and Jiangling is also the neck of the northern part of the river. So two thousand people were left to be stationed in Jiangling.

古文：上谕以 金既还上京，且分诸子出镇，将若何？ 必大言： 敌恫疑虚喝，正恐我先动。
现代文：皇上问 ：金主已经回到上京，并分派他几个儿子镇守各地，将怎么办？ 周必大说： 敌人的恫吓可能只是虚探，正担心我们先行动。
English: The emperor asked, "The rich man has already returned to Beijing, and has assigned several of his sons to guard various regions. What will you do?" Zhou Bida said, "The enemy's threats may just be a false alarm. They are worried that we will act first."

古文：当镇之以静，惟边将不可不精择。 
现代文：我们应当静守，只是边地将领不可不精选。 
English: We should be vigilant, but the generals on the sidelines must be carefully selected.

古文：拜枢密使。
现代文：周必大拜官枢密使。
English: Zhou Bidaibai is a Privy Counsellor.

古文：上曰： 若有边事，宣抚使惟卿可，他人不能也。 上诸军升差籍，时点召一二察能否，主帅悚激，无敢容私。
现代文：皇上说 ：如果边境出事，宣抚使之职只有你可胜任，他人不行。 各位统帅呈上各军升迁名单，周必大不时点名召见一二人考察其才能优劣，统帅十分恐惧，不敢容于私情。
English: The emperor said, "If there is an incident at the border, you are the only one qualified to make the announcement and assign the duties, and no one else can do it. Each commander submitted a list of promotions for each army, and Zhou Bida called one or two people from time to time to examine their talents. The commander was very afraid and did not dare to tolerate personal feelings.

古文：创诸军点试法，其在外解发而亲阅之。
现代文：周必大创造了诸军点试法，对分散在外的军队就亲自去检阅。
English: Zhou Bida created the military point test method, and personally inspected the scattered troops.

古文：池州李忠孝自言正将二人不能开弓，乞罢军。
现代文：池州李忠孝自己说有二名正将不能拉开弓，乞求罢去他们的军职。
English: Chizhou Li Zhongxiao himself said that there were two generals who could not draw a bow and begged to be dismissed from their military posts.

古文：上曰： 此枢使措置之效也。 金州谋帅，必大曰： 与其私举，不若明扬。 令侍从、管军荐举。
现代文：皇上说 ：这是枢密使措置的效果。 金州寻求将帅，周必大说： 与其让人私下举荐，不如正大光明地选报。 皇上命令侍从、管军举荐将帅。
English: The emperor said, "This is the effect of the measures taken by the Privy Council." When Jinzhou was looking for a general, Zhou Bida said, "Instead of having people recommend him privately, it would be better to choose a general openly." The emperor ordered his attendants and commanders to recommend a general.

古文：或传大石林牙将加兵于金，忽鲁大王分据上京，边臣结约夏国。
现代文：有人传言大石林牙将要加兵攻金，忽鲁大王分别占据上京，边境大臣与夏国订下盟约。
English: It was rumored that Daishi Linya was going to send more troops to attack Jin, that the Great King of Kulu would separately occupy Shangjing, and that the Minister of the Frontier would sign a treaty with Xia Guo.

古文：必大皆屏不省，劝上持重，勿轻动。
现代文：周必大都一概不理会，劝皇上持重，不要轻举妄动。
English: Zhou would ignore most of them, and advised the emperor to keep a low profile and not to make any rash moves.

古文：既而所传果妄。
现代文：果然所传之言都是妄言。
English: As it turned out, the rumours were completely untrue.

古文：上曰： 卿真有先见之明。 
现代文：皇上说 ：你真有先见之明。 
English: The emperor said, "You really have foresight."

古文：淳熙十四年二月，拜右丞相。
现代文：淳熙十四年二月，周必大拜官右丞相。
English: In February of the 14th year of Aung Hee, Zhou Bi became the Grand Vice-Minister of the Right.

古文：首奏： 今内外晏然，殆将二纪，此正可惧之时，当思经远之计，不可纷更欲速。 秀州乞减大军总制钱二万，吏请勘当，必大曰： 此岂勘当时耶？ 立蠲之。
现代文：他首先奏道 ：现在国内外安定，这种安定局面大约将近有二十四年了，这正是令人担心之时，应考虑国家的长远之计，不可以频频更改治国方针以图速强。 秀州乞求减去大军总制钱二万缗，官吏请求核审是否合适，周必大说： 这难道是审核的时候？ 
English: First of all, he made a speech: At present, there is stability at home and abroad, and this stable situation has been around for nearly twenty-four years. This is a worrying time. The country's long-term strategy should be considered. It is not possible to frequently change the policy of governing the country in order to be faster. Xiuzhou begged to reduce the total amount of money for the army by twenty thousand baht. Officials asked for a verification of whether it was appropriate. Zhou Bida said: Is this the time for verification?

古文：封事多言大臣同异，必大曰： 各尽所见，归于一是，岂可尚同？
现代文：立即蠲免了秀州的总制钱。密封的奏章多说大臣们的同异，周必大说： 各尽所见，归纳到一处，怎么可能还相同呢？
English: The sealed report mostly said that the ministers were the same and different, and Zhou Bida said: How could they all be the same if they were all concentrated in one place?

古文：陛下复祖宗旧制，命三省覆奏而后行，正欲上下相维，非止奉行文书也。 
现代文：陛下恢复祖宗过去的制度，令三省反复阅读奏章后行动，正是想使上下互相牵持，并不是只奉行文书。 
English: His Majesty's action to restore the system of the past, and to have the three provinces read and reread the record, is precisely to make the upper and lower levels hold each other, and is not just to follow the document.

古文：高宗升遐，议用显仁例，遣三使诣金。
现代文：高宗逝世，议定根据显仁的例子，派三位使者报告金朝。
English: After the death of Gaozong, it was agreed to send three emissaries to report to the Kim dynasty, following the example of Xianren.

古文：必大谓： 今昔事殊，不当畏敌曲徇。 止之。
现代文：周必大说 ：今天的事很特殊，不应当害怕敌人而曲意顺从。 
English: Zhou Bida said, "Today's event is very special. We should not be afraid of the enemy, but should obediently obey."

古文：贺正使至，或请权易淡黄袍御殿受书，必大执不可，遂为缟素服，就帷幄引见。
现代文：阻止了派使者之事。金的贺正使来到宋，有人请求皇上暂且穿淡黄袍在御殿接受国书，周必大执意不肯，于是皇上穿素色丧服，在帷幄中接见金使。
English: The envoys sent by Kim Hezheng came to Song, and someone asked the emperor to temporarily wear a light yellow robe to receive the imperial edict in the imperial palace. Zhou Bida stubbornly refused, so the emperor wore plain mourning clothes and received the envoys in drapery.

古文：十五年，思陵发引，援熙陵吕端故事，请行，乃摄太傅，为山陵使。
现代文：淳熙十五年，思陵出殡，周必大根据熙陵吕端的故事，请求随同前往，于是皇上给他太傅头衔，为山陵使。
English: In the fifteenth year of the reign of Emperor Junxi, there was a funeral in Shiling, and Zhou Bida requested to go with him according to the story of Lugang of Shiling, so the emperor gave him the title of Taifu, which means "mountain mausoleum envoy."

古文：明堂加恩，封济国公。
现代文：明堂大礼时皇上对周必大加封恩赐，封他为济国公。
English: During the great ceremony in the Ming Hall, the emperor bestowed a great boon on Zhou Bi, naming him the Prince of the State of Qi.

古文：十一月，留身乞去，上奖劳再三。
现代文：皇上忽然宣谕道： 近年来我经常生病且感到疲倦，想传位给太子，但你必须暂且留下。 
English: The Emperor suddenly proclaimed, "In recent years, I have often been ill and tired. I would like to pass the throne to the Crown Prince, but you must stay for the time being."

古文：忽宣谕： 比年病倦，欲传位太子，须卿且留。 必大言： 圣体康宁，止因孝思稍过，何遽至倦勤。 上曰： 礼莫大于事宗庙，而孟飨多以病分诣；孝莫重于执丧，而不得自至德寿宫。
现代文：周必大说： 圣上身体安康，只是由于思念高宗稍稍过度了些，怎么至于倦于辛苦。 皇上说 ：最大的礼仪没有比得上事奉宗庙的，而初享时我大多是带病前往坚持祭祀的；最大的礼仪没有大于执丧的，而我不能亲自到德寿宫去。
English: Zhou Bida said, "The saint is in good health, but because I miss Gaozong a little too much, how can I be tired of hard work." The emperor said, "The greatest etiquette is not comparable to serving the ancestral temple, and when I first enjoyed it, I was mostly sick and went to the sacrificial rites; the greatest etiquette is not greater than mourning, and I can't go to Dezhou Palace in person.

古文：欲不退休，得乎？
现代文：想不退休，可以吗？
English: Is it okay not to want to retire?

古文：朕方以此委卿。 必大泣而退。
现代文：我才把这个重任委托给你。 周必大哭着退下了。
English: I just entrusted this important task to you. Zhou Biao cried and retreated.

古文：十二月壬申，密赐绍兴传位亲札。
现代文：十二月十一日，皇上秘密赐给周必大绍兴时制定的传皇位亲札。
English: On December 11th, the emperor secretly gave Zhou Bida the imperial succession certificate, which had been drawn up in Shaoxing.

古文：辛卯，命留身议定。
现代文：三十日，皇上令周必大留下商议。
English: On the 30th, the emperor ordered Zhou Bida to stay and discuss.

古文：二月壬戌，又命预草诏，专以奉几筵、侍东朝为意。
现代文：二月初二日，又令周必大参与草拟诏书，专门论述了供奉灵位、侍奉太子之事。
English: On the second day of February, Zhou Bida was also asked to participate in the drafting of the edict, which specifically discussed the dedication of the spiritual position and the service of the prince.

古文：拜左丞相、许国公。
现代文：周必大拜为左丞相、许国公。
English: Zhou Bidaoba was the Left Minister, Xu Guoguo.

古文：参政留正拜右丞相。
现代文：参政留正拜为右丞相。
English: Remaining in politics, Zhengbei became the Minister of the Right.

古文：壬子，上始以内禅意谕二府。
现代文：壬子日，皇上才把传位的打算告诉二府。
English: It was not until the following day that the Emperor told the two prefectures of his intention to abdicate.

古文：二月辛酉朔，降传位诏。
现代文：二月初一，皇上降传位令。
English: On the first day of February, the Emperor issued an order of demotion.

古文：翼日，上吉服御紫宸殿。
现代文：第二天，皇上穿着吉祥的衣服到紫宸殿。
English: The next day, the emperor went to Shishinden wearing auspicious clothes.

古文：必大奏： 陛下巽位与子，盛典再见，度越千古。
现代文：周必大奏道 ：陛下传位给皇子，再观盛典，流芳千古。
English: Zhou Bida recited: His Majesty passed the throne to the prince, and the grand ceremony has been loved for thousands of years.

古文：顾自今不得日侍天颜。 因哽噎不能言，上亦泫然曰： 正赖卿等协赞新君。 
现代文：看来从今后不能每天侍奉皇上了。 于是哽噎不能说下去，皇上也流泪说： 只有靠你们协助新君主。 
English: It seemed that he would not be able to serve the Emperor every day in the future, so he could not continue, and the Emperor said with tears in his eyes, "I can only rely on you to assist the new monarch."

古文：光宗问当世急务，奏用人、求言二事。
现代文：光宗询问当今急务，周必大奏称为用人、求言二件事。
English: Guangzong inquired about today's urgent matters, Zhou Bidao called two things: employing people and soliciting opinions.

古文：三月，拜少保、益国公。
现代文：三月，周必大拜官少保、益国公。
English: In March, Zhou Bi Daibai, Shao Bao, and Masukuni came.

古文：李巘草二相制，抑扬不同，上召巘令帖麻改定，既而斥巘予郡。
现代文：李山献草拟了二相制度，大家对此贬褒不一，皇上召李山献令他用麻纸另拟文书，不久把李山献贬斥到一郡任职。
English: Li Shan Xian drafted a two-phase system, and everyone gave it mixed praise. The emperor summoned Li Shan Xian and ordered him to use hemp paper to draft another document. Soon, Li Shan Xian was relegated to a county post.

古文：必大求去。
现代文：周必大请求离朝。
English: Zhou Bida asked to leave.

古文：何澹为司业，久不迁，留正奏选之。
现代文：何澹为司业，在职很久都没有升迁，留正奏请提拔他。
English: He Xuan is a division manager, and he has not been promoted for a long time. Please promote him.

古文：澹憾必大而德正，至是为谏长，遂首劾必大。
现代文：何澹对周必大不满而感激留正，到他为谏长时，于是首先弹劾周必大。
English: He was dissatisfied with Zhou Bida and was grateful to remain in power. When he became the leader of the Kuomintang, he first impeached Zhou Bida.

古文：诏以观文殿大学士判潭州。
现代文：皇上诏令周必大以观文殿大学士之职任潭州判官。
English: The emperor decreed that Zhou Bida be appointed judge of Tanzhou as a scholar of the Academy of Confucianism.

古文：澹论不已，遂以少保充醴泉观使。
现代文：何澹对周必大的谴责不停，于是周必大以少保充当醴泉观使。
English: He Yan kept condemning Zhou Bida, so Zhou Bida used Shao Bao to act as an observer.

古文：判隆兴府，不赴，复除观文殿学士、判潭州，复大观文。
现代文：周必大任隆兴府判官，没有赴任，又拜为观文殿学士、潭州判官，恢复大观文之职。
English: Zhou Bida was appointed as a magistrate of Longxing Prefecture, but did not take up the post. He also became a scholar of Guanwen Temple and a magistrate of Tanzhou, and resumed the post of Da Guanwen.

古文：坐所举官以贿败，降荥阳郡公。复益国公，改判隆兴，辞，除醴泉观使。
现代文：周必大被所举官吏受贿败露之事牵连，降职为荣阳郡公，又复为益国公，改任隆兴判官，他辞去此职，拜官醴泉观使。
English: Zhou Bida was implicated in the bribe-taking scandal of the appointed officials. He was demoted to Rongyang County official, and then reinstated to Yekuo County official, and was appointed to Longxing judge. He resigned from this position and became an official of Quan Guanzhi.

古文：宁宗即位，求直言，奏四事：曰圣孝，曰敬天，曰崇俭，曰久任。
现代文：宁宗即位，令大臣直言朝政得失，周必大奏上四件事：至孝、敬天、崇俭、久任。
English: Ningzong's accession to the throne caused the minister to speak frankly about the gains and losses of the government, and Zhou Bida played four things: filial piety, respect for heaven, frugality, and long tenure.

古文：庆元元年，三上表引年，遂以少傅致仕。
现代文：庆元元年，周必大三次上表引退，于是以少傅身份退休。
English: In the first year of the Qing Dynasty, Zhou Bida retired from the table three times, so he retired as a junior master.

古文：先是，布衣吕祖泰上书请诛韩侂胄，逐陈自强，以必大代之。
现代文：开始，平民吕祖泰上书请求杀韩胄，驱逐陈自强，以周必大代替他。
English: In the beginning, Lu Zu Tai, a commoner, petitioned to kill Han Qi, expel Chen Ziqiang, and replace him with Zhou Bida.

古文：嘉泰元年，御史施康年劾必大首唱伪徒，私植党与，诏降为少保。
现代文：嘉泰元年，御史施康年弹劾周必大首先为诡诈之徒唱赞歌，又私植党派，皇上令降周必大为少保。
English: In the first year of the Jia Tai Dynasty, Emperor Shi Kang impeached Zhou Bida, first of all, he sang praises for the deceivers and planted a party. The emperor ordered to demote Zhou Bida as a minor protector.

古文：自庆元以后，侂胄之党立伪学之名，以禁锢君子，而必大与赵汝愚、留正实指为罪首。
现代文：自庆元以后，韩胄之党以建立伪学的名义，来禁锢君子，而周必大与赵汝愚、留正被指责为罪魁祸首。
English: After Qingyuan, Han Xizhi's party, in the name of establishing pseudoscience, came to imprison the gentleman, and Zhou Bida and Zhao Rugu and Ruzheng were accused of being the culprits.

古文：二年，复少傅。
现代文：嘉泰二年，周必大又为少傅。
English: In the second year of Jia Tai, Zhou Bida was promoted to Shao Fu.

古文：四年，薨，年七十有九。
现代文：嘉泰四年死去，终年七十九岁。
English: Katai died four years later, at the age of 79.

古文：赠太师，谥文忠。
现代文：皇上赠他为太师，谥号 文忠 。
English: The emperor gave him the title of Grand Master and the posthumous name of Wenzhong.

古文：宁宗题篆其墓碑曰 忠文耆德之碑。 
现代文：宁宗为他的墓碑题写篆文 忠文耆德之碑 。
English: Ning Zong inscribed his tombstone with the words "Loyal, virtuous and virtuous."

古文：自号平园老叟，著书八十一种，有《平园集》二百卷。
现代文：周必大自己号称平园老叟，著书八十一种，有《平园集》二百卷。
English: Zhou Bida himself is known as the Old Man of Pingyuan. He has written eighty-one books, including the two-hundred-volume "Pingyuan Collection."

古文：尝建三忠堂于乡，谓欧阳文忠修、杨忠襄邦乂、胡忠简铨皆庐陵人，必大平生所敬慕，为文记之，盖绝笔也。
现代文：周必大曾在乡里建三忠堂，说欧阳修、杨邦、胡铨都是庐陵人，他平生所敬慕的人，故写文章记下他们的事迹，这是他的绝笔。
English: Zhou Bida once built the Sanchong Hall in the countryside, saying that Ouyang Xiu, Yang Bang and Hu Yao were all from Fuling. He admired them all his life, so he wrote an article to record their deeds. This was his last piece of writing.

古文：一子，纶。
现代文：周必大有一子，名周纶。
English: Zhou Bida had one son, named Zhou Xuan.

古文：留正，字仲至，泉州永春人。
现代文：留正字仲至，泉州永春人。
English: Remaining in Zhengzha Zhongzhi, Quanzhou Yongchun people.

古文：六世祖从效，事太祖，为清远军节度使，封鄂国公。
现代文：他的六世祖留从效，事奉宋太祖，为清远军节度使，被封为鄂国公。
English: His sixth-generation ancestor stayed on to serve Song Taizu, and was appointed as the Qingyuan Army's envoy to the Qing Dynasty, and was named the Prince of H Province.

古文：绍兴十三年，第进士，授南恩州阳江尉、清海军节度判官。
现代文：绍兴十三年，留正考中进士，被授予南恩州阳江尉、清海军节度判官之职。
English: In the thirteenth year of Shaoxing, he passed the junior high school entrance examination, and was awarded the post of Yangjiang Lieutenant of Nanzhou and the judge of the Qing Navy Festival.

古文：龚茂良守番禺，正言： 在法：劫盗脏满五贯死，海盗加等。
现代文：龚茂良驻守番禺，留正说： 法律规定：抢劫之赃物满了五贯要判死刑，海盗定罪还要加一等。
English: Zou Maoliang stationed in Panyu, Ruzheng said: The law stipulates that if the stolen goods of robbery are full, the death penalty shall be imposed, and the conviction of piracy shall be increased by one grade.

古文：小民饵利，率身陷重辟。
现代文：百姓受利引诱，听任自身陷于严重违法的境地。
English: People have been lured by profits and allowed themselves to fall into a situation of serious violations of the law.

古文：请镂梓海上，使户知之。 民始知避。
现代文：请雕刻有关法令立于海上，使每户百姓知道。 百姓始知遵守法令。
English: Please engrave the relevant laws and regulations on the sea, so that every household will know.

古文：用茂良荐，赴都堂审察。
现代文：留正由于龚茂良的推荐，赴都堂审察。
English: Due to the recommendation of Zou Moliang, Ruizheng went to Tudang for examination.

古文：宰相虞允文奇之，荐于上。
现代文：宰相虞允文认为他很奇特，向皇上推荐。
English: The prime minister, Yu Yunwen, thought he was very special and recommended him to the emperor.

古文：得对，正言： 国家右文而略武备，祖宗以天下全力用于西夏，承平日久，边不为备，至敌人长驱而不能支。
现代文：留正得以与皇上对话，他说： 国家偏重文辞而忽略武备，祖宗竭尽天下全力对付西夏，天下安定日久，边境不做战争准备，以致敌人长驱直入难以抵挡，今天应当改变过去的做法，使文武都得到重视。 
English: Ru Zheng was able to have a dialogue with the emperor. He said, "The country focuses on literature and ignores military preparedness. Our ancestors did their best to deal with the Western Xia. The world has been stable for a long time. The border did not prepare for war, so that the enemy drove straight into it and it was difficult to resist. Today, we should change the past practice and attach importance to literature and military preparedness.

古文：今当改辙，使文武并用。 孝宗嘉叹，书札中要语下三省施行。
现代文：孝宗很赞赏，把他奏札中重要的话记下，下发给三省贯彻施行。
English: Xiaozong appreciated it very much, wrote down the important words in his report card, and sent it to the three provinces for implementation.

古文：知循州，陛辞，言： 士大夫名节不立，国家缓急无所倚仗。靖康金人犯阙，死义者少，因乱谋利者多。
现代文：留正任循州知州，他到宫中辞行时对皇上说： 士大夫的名节不建立，国家缓急之时无所倚仗，靖康时金人侵入国都，为义而死的人很少，趁乱谋利的人很多。
English: When he went to the Imperial Palace to resign, he said to the Emperor: "The title of Shidafu is not established, there is nothing to rely on when the country is in a hurry, the Jin people invade the capital when it is peaceful, there are few people who die for righteousness, and there are many people who take advantage of chaos for profit.

古文：今欲恢复，当崇尚名节。 上益喜，明日谕辅臣： 留正奏事，议论耿耿，可与职事官。 除军器监簿，历官考功郎官。
现代文：今天要恢复国土，应当崇尚名节。 皇上更加高兴，第二天告诉辅臣说： 留正的奏议，所发议论正直，可给与他职事官之职。 留正拜为军器监簿，历官考功郎官。
English: The emperor was even more pleased, and the next day he told his aide-de-camp, "The proposal made by Remy Zheng, which is honest, can be given to him as a staff officer.

古文：太常谥叶义问 恭简 ，正覆谥，言： 义问将兵出疆，不知敌人情伪，及金犯边，督视寡谋，几至败事。 下太常更议，时论韪之。
现代文：太常给叶义问谥号 恭简 ，留正到此反对，他说： 叶义问率兵出征，不知道敌人阴险诡诈，以致金兵入侵边境，他管理军队缺乏谋略，几乎一败涂地。 
English: He said: "Ye Yee Kuk led troops into battle, unaware of the enemy's insidiousness and cunning, so that gold soldiers invaded the border. He lacked a strategy to manage the army, and almost lost everything.

古文：擢起居舍人，寻权中书舍人。
现代文：皇上把此事下发给太常再讨论，当时大家肯定了留正的观点。留正被提为起居舍人，不久任权中书舍人。
English: The emperor sent the matter down to the emperor for further discussion. At that time, everyone affirmed Ruzheng's point of view. Ruzheng was raised to the position of a resident scholar, and soon he was appointed as a scholar in the middle of power.

古文：光宗自东宫朝，顾见正，谓左右曰： 修整如此，其人可知。 乃请于上，兼太子左谕德。
现代文：光宗从东宫来拜见皇上，看见留正，便对左右人说： 仪表如此整洁，这个人可用。 于是向皇上请求，留正于是兼太子左谕德。
English: Guangzong came from the East Palace to see the emperor, and when he saw Ruizheng, he said to the right and left, "The appearance is so neat, this person can be used.

古文：正言： 记注进御，非设官本意。
现代文：留正说 ：记注官要把所书内容呈给皇上过目，这并非设此官的本意。
English: Ruzheng said, "It is not the intention of the annotation officer to present the contents of the book to the emperor for review.

古文：乞自今免奏御。 诏从之。
现代文：乞求从今免去进呈皇上过目的程序。 
English: begging to be excused from going through the formalities of presenting a petition to the emperor.

古文：为中书舍人兼侍讲，兼权兵部侍郎，除给事中。
现代文：皇上下令遵从。留正为中书舍人兼侍讲，兼权兵部侍郎，拜为给事中。
English: The Emperor's orders were obeyed. Remyongzheng was the chancellor of the middle school and also the chancellor, and he was also the chancellor of the military department. He was in the middle of giving a speech.

古文：张说子荐往视镇江战舰，挟势游观，沉舟溺卒，除知阁门事、枢密副承旨，正封对还词头。
现代文：张说之子张荐前往视察镇江的战船，他倚仗权势到处游玩，造成船沉士兵溺死，朝廷任他为知门事、枢密副承旨，留正驳回了朝廷的谕旨。
English: Zhang's son, Zhang Recommend, went to inspect the warships on the Zhenjiang River. He relied on his power to play around, causing the shipwreck and drowning of soldiers. The imperial court appointed him as secretary and privy counsellor, but Remy Zheng rejected the imperial court's decree.

古文：洪邦直除御史，正言： 邦直为邑人所讼，不宜任风宪。 
现代文：洪邦直拜为御史，留正说： 洪邦直被邑人所诉讼，不宜任风宪之职。 
English: Hong Bang was sued by the townspeople, and it is not appropriate for him to hold the post of constitutional scholar, Ruizheng said.

古文：兼权吏部尚书，言： 用人莫先论相。
现代文：留正兼代吏部尚书，他说： 用人没有先于考虑宰相的人选的。
English: "There is no need to consider the appointment of a prime minister before appointing a new person," said Shosho, who is also the acting chief of staff.

古文：陛下志在恢复，而相位不能任辅赞。
现代文：陛下的志愿在于恢复国土，而宰相之位不能担当起辅佐襄赞之重任。
English: His Majesty's will is to restore the country, and the position of prime minister cannot take on the heavy responsibility of being a vice-president.

古文：望精选人才，与图大计。 时相益不乐，以显谟阁直学士出知绍兴府。
现代文：希望精选人才，与之图谋大计。 当时的宰相很不高兴，于是留正以显谟阁直学士之职出任绍兴府知府。
English: The prime minister at the time was not happy, so Ruizheng took up the post of governor of Shaoxing with the title of Hsien Mokgou Direct Bachelor.

古文：侍御史范仲芑劾前帅脏六十万，有诏核责。
现代文：侍御史范仲艹己弹劾前帅贪赃六十万，皇上诏令加以核实。
English: Emperor's attendant, Fan Zhongxuan, impeached the former general, Guo Jian, for embezzling 600,000 yuan, and the Emperor's edict was issued to verify this.

古文：正明其非辜，御史怒，并劾正，降显谟合待制、提举玉隆万寿宫。
现代文：留正清楚他没有罪，御史大怒，同时又弹劾留正，留正被降职为显谟阁待制、提举玉隆万寿宫。
English: Yu Zheng knew that he was not guilty, and the Emperor was furious. At the same time, he impeached Yu Zheng. Yu Zheng was demoted to the status of a provisional member of the Council of State, and elevated to the position of the Grand Duke of the Manchukuo.

古文：寻复职。
现代文：不久复职。
English: He was soon reinstated.

古文：知赣州，奏减上供米，不报。
现代文：留正任赣州知州，奏请减少上供米，未得到回音。
English: Remaining in charge of Bozhou and Chizhou, he requested a reduction in the supply of rice, but received no response.

古文：及为相，蠲一万八千石。
现代文：等到他为宰相后，蠲免赣州上供米一万八千石。
English: After he became prime minister, he exempted Bozhou from providing 18,000 koku of rice.

古文：知隆兴府。
现代文：留正为隆兴府知府。
English: Ruzheng is the governor of Longxing Prefecture.

古文：进龙图阁直学士、四川制置使，兼知成都府。
现代文：留正被提为龙图阁直学士、四川制置使、兼任成都府知府。
English: Ruzheng was promoted to the direct bachelor of Longtu Pavilion, the Sichuan Minister, and also served as the prefect of Chengdu.

古文：平四蜀折租价，岁减酒课三十八万。
现代文：他使四蜀折租价得以稳定，每年减去酒税三十八万。
English: He stabilized the rental price of four shu folds, up to three hundred and eighty thousand a year minus liquor tax.

古文：乾道初，羌酋奴儿结越大渡河，据安静砦，侵汉地几百里。
现代文：乾道初年，羌族首领奴儿结渡过大渡河，占据了安静砦，侵占了汉族几百里的土地。
English: In the first year of the dry road, the leaders of the Yi people crossed the Dadu River, occupied the Quiet Fort, and occupied hundreds of miles of land belonging to the Han people.

古文：正密授诸将方略，擒奴儿结以归，尽俘其党，羌平。
现代文：留正秘密授给各将方略，抓住了奴儿结，把他的党徒全部捕俘，羌族被平。
English: Yu Zheng secretly gave the strategy to the generals, caught the ruffian, captured all his party members, and the Yao people were leveled.

古文：进敷文阁学士，寻诏赴行在。
现代文：留正被升为敷文阁学士，不久皇上诏令他赴行在。
English: Ruzheng was promoted to Shibunkaku Baccalaureate, and soon the emperor ordered him to leave for China.

古文：正在蜀以简素化民，归装仅书数簏，人服其清。
现代文：留正在蜀时以简单、朴素教化百姓，他回朝时只装有几竹箱书，人人信服他的廉洁。
English: When he stayed in Shu, he educated the people with simplicity and simplicity. When he returned to China, he only had a few bamboo boxes of books, and everyone was convinced of his integrity.

古文：除端明殿学士、签书枢密院事，参知政事，同知枢密院事。
现代文：留正拜官端明殿学士、签书枢密院事、参知政事、同知枢密院事。
English: Resignation from the post of vice-premier to the post of vice-premier of the Imperial Court, signing a letter to the Privy Council, attending the Council of State, and attending the Council of Privy Council.

古文：孝宗密谕内禅意，拜右丞相。
现代文：孝宗私下告诉他想传位的事，留正拜为右丞相。
English: Takamune privately told him that he wanted to pass on the throne, and Remy Zhengbei became the minister of the right.

古文：一日奏事，皇太子参决侍立，上顾谓太子曰： 留正纯诚可托。 
现代文：一天他向皇上奏事，皇太子参与决策正侍立于旁，皇上回头对太子说： 留正纯正、忠诚，可以依托。 
English: One day he was reporting to the Emperor, and the Crown Prince, who was involved in the decision-making, was standing next to him. The Emperor turned to the Crown Prince and said, "Stay pure and loyal, you can rely on me."

古文：光宗受禅，主管左右春坊姜特立随龙恩擢知阁门事，声势浸盛。
现代文：光宗即位，主管左右春坊的姜特立随着皇上的恩宠被提为知门事，其声势更加兴盛。
English: With the enthronement of Emperor Guangzong, Jiang Teli, who was in charge of the Left and Right Spring Palaces, was elevated to the position of courtier with the emperor's grace, and his reputation flourished even more.

古文：正列其招权预政状，乞斥逐，上意犹未决。
现代文：留正列举出他揽权预政的罪状，请求将他加以责斥驱逐，皇上心中还未决定。
English: Ruzheng listed his crimes of pre-emptive power grabbing and requested that he be reprimanded and expelled. The emperor's mind was still undecided.

古文：会副参阙，特立谒正曰： 上以丞相在位久，欲迁左相，叶翥、张枃当择一人执政，未知孰先？ 正奏之，上大怒，诏特立提举兴国宫。
现代文：正好副参知政事一职空缺，姜特立拜见留正说 ：皇上由于丞相你在位很久了，想提你为左相，叶翥、张木匀应当选一人为执政，不知哪个人在先？ 留正奏告皇上，皇上大怒，令姜特立提举兴国宫。
English: Just as the post of vice-councilor of state and political affairs was vacant, Jiang Tridong went to see Ruzheng and said, "Emperor, since you have been reigning as prime minister for a long time, I would like to nominate you as the left councillor. Ye Xuan and Zhang Muyan should choose one person to govern. I don't know who should go first." Ruzheng appealed to the emperor, and the emperor was furious, forcing Jiang Tridong to nominate Xingguo Palace.

古文：孝宗闻之，曰： 真宰相也。 
现代文：孝宗听说此事后，说： 这是真正的宰相。 
English: After hearing about this, Takamune said, "This is the real prime minister."

古文：绍熙元年，进左丞相。
现代文：绍熙元年，留正升为左丞相。
English: In the first year of the Shaoxi era, Ruzheng was promoted to minister of the left.

古文：正谨法度，惜名器，豪发不可干以私。
现代文：留正严格法律制度，爱惜名声与才能，一丝一毫不可以受私情干扰。
English: He adheres to a strict legal system, cherishes his reputation and talent, and cannot be disturbed by personal feelings at all.

古文：引赵汝愚首从班，卒与之共政。
现代文：他引荐赵汝愚，先为他的部属，最后与他一同执政。
English: He introduced Zhao Ruwu, first as his subordinate, and finally to govern with him.

古文：用黄裳为皇子嘉王翊善，世号得人。
现代文：留正选用黄棠为皇子嘉王的助手，世称真正得到人才。
English: Yu Zheng selected Huang Tang to be the assistant of the prince Ji Wang, and was known worldwide as a true talent.

古文：嘉王感疾，正言： 陛下只有一子，隔在宫墙外非便，乃令蚤正元良之位，入居东宫，则朝夕相见甚顺。 又奏： 太子，天下本。
现代文：嘉王感染疾病，留正说： 陛下只有一个儿子，隔绝在宫墙外不方便，应早日确定他的太子之位，入居东宫，那么陛下与太子朝夕相见很方便了。 他又奏道： 太子，是天下的根本。
English: When Jia Wang contracted the disease, Ruizheng said, "Your Majesty has only one son, and it is inconvenient to be isolated outside the palace walls. You should determine his position as crown prince as soon as possible and move into the East Palace, then it will be convenient for Your Majesty to meet with the crown prince in the morning and evening." He also said, "The crown prince is the foundation of the world."

古文：《传》曰： 豫建太子，所以重宗庙社稷 。
现代文：《传》说 ：预备立太子，就是重视宗庙国家。 
English: "Legend" says: to prepare to establish a crown prince is to attach importance to the country of the ancestral temple.

古文：汉文帝即位，即建太子。
现代文：汉文帝即位，就立太子。
English: When Emperor Hanwen ascended the throne, he established the position of crown prince.

古文：本朝皇子居冢嫡，有未出阁而正储位者。
现代文：本朝皇子为嫡长子，有没出门而被立为太子的。
English: The prince of this dynasty is the eldest legitimate son, but he has never been out of the house and has been established as the prince.

古文：皇子嘉王既居冢嫡，出合已久，宜早正储位，以定天下本。 再月不报。
现代文：嘉王既为嫡长子，出门也很久了，应该早日立他为太子，以安定天下的人心。 过了一个月没有回音。
English: Since King Jia is the eldest legitimate son and has been away from home for a long time, he should have been made crown prince as soon as possible in order to stabilize the hearts of the people around the world.

古文：检《汉文帝纪》及本朝真宗立仁宗典故，并吕诲、张方平两奏，节其要语缴奏。
现代文：留正检阅《汉文帝纪》以及本朝真宗立仁宗为太子的事例，以及吕诲、张方平两人的奏札，摘节他们奏札中重要的话写成奏章呈上。
English: Ruo Zheng reviewed the "Han Wen Di Ji" and the case of this dynasty's True Sect's enthronement of Ren Zong as the prince, as well as Lu Ji and Zhang Fangping's playing cards, and excerpted the important words from their playing cards into a playing chapter.

古文：上不豫，外议汹汹，正与同列间至福宁殿奏事，处分得宜，人情以安。
现代文：皇上身体不适，宫外议论纷纷，留正与同僚间或到福宁殿奏事，处理事情十分合宜，人心因此得以安定。
English: The Emperor was unwell and there was a lot of discussion outside the Imperial Palace. It was very appropriate to deal with the matter by staying with his colleagues or going to the Fu Ning Palace to report the matter, and thus the people's minds were stabilized.

古文：进封申国公。
现代文：留正被封为申国公。
English: Ruzheng was given the title of Shen Guo Guo.

古文：上疾浸平，正乞归政，不许。
现代文：皇上的病慢慢好了，留正请求归还皇上执政权，未得到批准。
English: The emperor's illness gradually improved, and Remyongzheng's request for the return of the emperor's executive power was not approved.

古文：初，正帅蜀，虑吴氏世将，谋去之。
现代文：当初，留正统帅蜀时，考虑到吴氏世代为将，想设法去除他。
English: At first, General Shu, considering that Wu's generation was the future, tried to get rid of him.

古文：至是，朝廷议更蜀帅，正言： 西边三将，惟吴氏世袭兵柄，号为 吴家军 ，不知有朝廷。 遂以户部侍郎丘崈行。
现代文：到这时，朝廷有意见更换蜀帅，留正说： 西边三位将领，只有吴氏世袭兵权，号称 吴家军 ，他们不知道还有朝廷。 于是以户部侍郎丘宗山代理其职。
English: At this time, the imperial court had the opinion to replace Shu Shu, and Ruizheng said: The three generals in the west only have the Wu hereditary military power, known as the Wu family army, they do not know that there is also the imperial court.

古文：及吴挺死，韩侂胄为吴氏地，使吴曦世袭。
现代文：等到吴挺死后，韩胄为吴氏打算使吴曦世袭将职。
English: After Wu Ting's death, Han Yan planned for the Wu clan to have Wu Xi succeed to the throne.

古文：正力请留曦环卫，遣张诏代挺。
现代文：留正竭力请求留吴曦为环卫官，派张诏继任吴挺的职位。
English: Ruizheng tried his best to ask Rui Wu Xi to be the environmental protection officer and sent Zhang Zhao to succeed Wu Ting in the position.

古文：后数岁，曦入蜀，卒稔变。
现代文：以后数年，吴曦入蜀，最终没有改变吴氏世袭将帅之职的局面。
English: In the next few years, Wu Xi entered Shu, but ultimately did not change the situation of the Wu clan's hereditary position of general.

古文：寿皇圣政成，进少保，封卫国公。
现代文：《德皇圣政》一书写成，留正被升为少保，封为卫国公。
English: After the book "The Holy Government of the German Emperor" was written, Ruzheng was promoted to the rank of Shao Bao and given the title of "Defender of the Fatherland."

古文：李端友以椒房亲，手诏除郎，正缴还，上不纳，复执奏曰： 昔馆陶公主为子求郎，明帝不许。
现代文：李端友因为与后妃有亲戚关系，皇上手诏他拜为郎官，留正交还手诏，皇上不收，留正又拿着奏札说 ：过去馆陶公主为儿子求郎官之职，明帝不答应。
English: Since Li Duanyou was related to the empress dowager, the emperor made a formal request that he be made a vassal of the emperor, but the emperor did not accept the request, so Li Duanyou held up a card and said, "In the past, Princess Guantao asked the emperor to make her son a vassal of the emperor, but the emperor did not agree."

古文：今端友依凭内援，恐累圣德。 姜特立除浙东副总管，寻召赴行在，正引唐宪宗召吐突承璀事，乞罢相。
现代文：今天李端友凭着内亲，求郎官之职，恐怕会有损于圣德。 姜特立拜为渐东副总管，不久皇上召他赴行在，留正引用唐宪宗召见吐突承璀的事例，乞求罢去宰相之职。
English: Today, Li Duanyou, by virtue of his position as an in-law and solicitor, is likely to be detrimental to sanctity. Jiang Teli Bai is the vice-governor of Zhendong, and soon the emperor called him to go there, and Ru Zheng cited the example of Tang Xianzong's invitation to see Tutu Chengjun, and begged to be removed from the post of prime minister.

古文：上批： 成命已行，朕无反汗，卿宜自处。 正待罪六和塔，奏言： 陛下近年，不知何人献把定之说，遂至每事坚执，断不可回。
现代文：皇上批示 ：命令已经颁行，不能反悔，你应该自己处理。 留正在六和塔待罪，他奏言： 近年来，不知是谁进献了那么有把握的策略，以致陛下每件事都坚决执行，断断不能改变。
English: The Emperor's order: The order has been issued, it cannot be reversed, you should deal with it yourself. Remaining at the Six Harmonies Tower to await punishment, he reported: In recent years, I do not know who has presented such a sure strategy that His Majesty resolutely implements everything and cannot change anything.

古文：天下至大，机务至烦，事出于是，则人无异词，可以固执；事出于非，则众论纷起，必须惟是之从。
现代文：天下很大，机要事务至烦，事情出于正确方面，那么无不同意见，皇上可以坚持执行；事情出于不正确的方面，那么大家会议论纷纷，必须只按正确的去做。
English: The world is big, and important matters are troublesome. If a matter is in the right direction, then there will be no difference of opinion, and the emperor can insist on its implementation. If a matter is in the wrong direction, then everyone will discuss it at meetings, and it must only be done in the right way.

古文：臣恐自此以往，事无是非，陛下壹持把定之说，言路遂塞。 因缴进前后锡赍及告敕，待罪范村，乞归田里，不许。
现代文：我担心从此以后，事情不管对错，陛下一概坚定既定之策，谏言之路就会被堵塞。 留正于是交回前后所得的赏赐及收回请求休假的报告，在范村待罪，乞求回归田里，皇上不答应。
English: I am afraid that from now on, no matter whether things are right or wrong, His Majesty will firmly follow the established policy, and the path of criticism will be blocked. Therefore, Ruzheng returned the rewards he received before and after and withdrew the report of requesting leave, waiting for the crime in Fancun, and begged to return to the fields, but the emperor did not agree.

古文：寿圣太后将以冬至上尊号册宝，以正为礼仪使，摄太傅。
现代文：寿圣太后将要在冬至上尊号册书宝玺，以留正为礼仪使，给他太傅的头衔。
English: The Dowager Empress Dowager Shousheng will bestow the title of Taifu (Grand Maid of Honour) on Ruo Zheng, who will serve as the ceremonial envoy, at the Winter Solstice.

古文：于是上遣左司徐谊谕旨，正复入都堂视事。
现代文：于是皇上派左司徐谊宣旨，留正又进入都堂办公。
English: As a result, the emperor sent his left-hand man, Xu Yi, to proclaim the imperial edict, and Ruzheng went back to work in the capital hall.

古文：是行也，待罪凡一百四十日。
现代文：到这次任职，留正待罪共一百四十天。
English: By this time in office, he had been suspended for a total of one hundred and forty days.

古文：册宝礼成，拜不傅，封鲁国公。
现代文：册宝礼结束，留正拜官少傅，封为鲁国公。
English: At the end of the treasure-listing ceremony, Rem Zhengbai, a minor official, was named the Prince of Lu.

古文：正力辞。
现代文：留正极力推辞。
English: Rumyoshi strenuously denied it.

古文：五年正月，孝宗疾革，正数请车驾过宫。
现代文：绍熙五年正月，孝宗病情恶化，留正多次请求光宗到宫中去拜见孝宗。
English: In the first month of the fifth year of the reign of Emperor Xiaoxi, the condition of Emperor Xiaozong worsened, and Emperor Ruizheng repeatedly asked Emperor Guangzong to visit Emperor Xiaozong in the palace.

古文：一日，上拂衣起，正引裾泣谏，随至福宁殿门。
现代文：一天，光宗拂袖而起，留正拉着他衣服的大襟哭着劝谏，又随同光宗来到福宁殿门口。
English: One day, Guangzong whipped up his sleeves and stood up, tugging at the collar of his robe, crying and pleading, and followed Guangzong to the door of the Fu Ning Palace.

古文：正退上疏，言极激切。
现代文：留正退朝上疏，其言词十分激切。
English: His words were very passionate.

古文：六月戊戌，孝宗崩，光宗以疾未能执丧，正率同列屡奏，乞早正嘉王储位，又拟指挥付学士院降诏。
现代文：六月初九，孝宗逝世。光宗因为生病未能主持丧事，留正率同僚多次上奏，乞求早点定下嘉王王储的位子，又拟定指挥交给学士院降诏。
English: On the 9th day of the 6th month, Emperor Xiaozong passed away. Since Emperor Guangzong was unable to preside over the funeral due to illness, Ru Zheng and his colleagues repeatedly appealed to the emperor, begging for the position of Crown Prince Jiawang to be determined earlier, and also for the imperial edict to be handed over to the Academy.

古文：寻有手诏： 朕历事岁久，念欲退闲。 正得之始惧，请对，复不报。
现代文：不久皇上有手诏说： 我执政年久，打算退下养闲。 留正得到这个消息后开始害怕，请求对话，未得到回音。
English: Soon after, the emperor issued an edict saying, "I have been in power for a long time, and I plan to retire to enjoy my leisure," and upon receiving this news, Ruzheng became afraid and requested a dialogue, but received no response.

古文：即出国门，上表请老，末曰： 愿陛下速回渊鉴，追悟前非，渐收人心，庶保国祚。 
现代文：留正于是离开国都，上表请求告老，在表的末尾说： 希望陛下迅速收回所说的话，追悟前非，慢慢收回人心，以保全国家。 
English: Ruizheng then left the capital, and at the end of his request to retire, he said, "I hope that His Majesty will quickly retract what he said, learn from his mistakes, and slowly win back the hearts of the people in order to preserve the country."

古文：正始议以上疾未克主丧，宜立皇太子监国；若终丧未倦勤，当复辟。
现代文：留正开始提出由于皇上生病未完全主持孝宗的丧事，应该立皇太子监国；如果丧事办完不感到疲倦，应当恢复以前的局面。
English: Ruzheng began to propose that since the emperor was ill and did not fully preside over the funeral of Emperor Xiaozong, the crown prince should be appointed as the supervisor of the country; if the funeral is not tired, the previous situation should be restored.

古文：设议内禅，太子可即位。
现代文：如果讨论内禅之意，太子可以即位。
English: If we discuss the meaning of Nei Zen, the crown prince can be enthroned.

古文：时从臣郑湜奏与正同。
现代文：当时侍从郑奏言与留正相同。
English: At that time, the attendant Zheng Songyan was the same as Ruizheng.

古文：既而赵汝愚以内禅请于宪圣，正谓： 建储诏未下，遽及此，他日必难处。 论既违，以肩舆逃去。
现代文：不久赵汝愚把内禅的意见请示于宪圣太后，留正说： 建储的诏令未下达，就做到这一步，他日一定难以收拾。 
English: Soon after, Zhao Ruwu asked Empress Dowager Xian Sheng for advice on inner meditation, and Ruizheng said, "If the edict to build the reservoir has not been issued, then this is the first step, and it will be difficult to clean up the next day."

古文：及嘉王即位，尊皇帝为太上皇帝，以正为大行攒宫总护使，宁宗即位。入谢，复出。
现代文：留正的意见未被采纳，他于是乘轿子逃走了。等到嘉王即位，尊光宗为太上皇帝，以留正为大行攒宫总护使。宁宗即位，留正进宫谢罪，又离朝。
English: His suggestion was not accepted, so he fled in a palanquin. When King Jia ascended the throne, Sun Guangzong became the supreme emperor, and Ruizheng became the chief palace guard. Ningzong ascended the throne, Ruizheng entered the palace to apologize, and left the court.

古文：宪圣命速宣押，时汝愚亦以为请，上亲札，遣使召正还。
现代文：宪圣太后令立即宣诏把他押回，当时赵汝愚也请求如此做，皇上亲书札状，派人召回留正。
English: The Empress Dowager Gensheng immediately issued an edict to recall him. At that time, Zhao Rugu also requested to do so, and the emperor personally wrote a letter and sent someone to recall him.

古文：侍御史张叔椿请议正弃国之罚，乃徙叔椿吏部侍郎，而正复相。
现代文：侍御史张叔椿请求论留正弃国之罪，于是改张叔椿为吏部侍郎，而留正恢复宰相之职。
English: The attendant historian Zhang Shuzhu requested that the crime of abandoning the country be discussed, so Zhang Shuzhu was changed to the attendant of the cadre department, and Ruzheng resumed the post of prime minister.

古文：入贺，且请车驾一出，慰安都人心；及定寿康宫南向，撤去新增禁旅。
现代文：留正进宫向宁宗祝贺，并请求皇上出宫一次，以安定国都的人心；以及确定寿康宫朝南，撤去新增禁军。
English: Ruzheng entered the palace to congratulate Ningzong, and asked the emperor to leave the palace once to stabilize the people's hearts in the capital; and to determine the southern direction of Shukang Palace and remove the newly banned troops.

古文：诏悉从之。
现代文：皇上诏令全部依从。
English: Zhaozong's edict all followed Han Jian's request.

古文：进少傅，屡辞不拜，奏言： 陛下勉徇群情，以登大宝，当遇事从简，示天下以不得已之意，实非颁爵之时。 
现代文：留正进升为少傅，他多次辞去不受，并奏道： 陛下勤勉，顺应民情，登上了帝位，应当遇事从简，以示天下不得已之意，实在不是封爵之时呀。 
English: When he was promoted to sous-chef, he repeatedly refused to accept his resignation, and wrote: Your Majesty is diligent, conforms to the people's will, ascended to the throne, and should step down in the event of an emergency, to show the world's last resort, it is really not the time for a knighthood.

古文：韩侂胄浸谋预政，数诣都堂，正使省吏谕之曰： 此非知阁日往来之地。 侂胄怒而退。
现代文：韩胄想渐渐谋取参政权，他多次到都堂去，留正派省吏告诉他说： 这不是知每天往来之地。 韩胄愤怒地退出。
English: Han Zheng, who wanted to gradually seek participation in political power, went to Tudang many times, and the provincial official told him: "This is not a place I know every day." Han Zheng angrily withdrew.

古文：会经筵晚讲赐坐，正执奏以为非，上不怿。
现代文：遇到晚上在经筵侍讲时，皇上赐座，留正认为不可，皇上不高兴。
English: In the evening, when the attendant of the Imperial Household Agency was giving a lecture, the emperor gave the seat to Ryo, but Ryo was not happy because he thought it was impossible.

古文：侍御史黄度论马大同罪，正拟度补外，上知其情，除度右正言。
现代文：侍御史黄度论述马大同的罪行，留正拟请让黄度补为朝外官，皇上了解情况后，让黄度拜为右正言。
English: Attendant Shi Huangdu discussed the crimes of Ma Datong, and Ru Zhengqui asked Huangdu to be appointed as the foreign minister of the DPRK. After the emperor understood the situation, Huangdu Bai was appointed as the right advocate.

古文：正请推恩随龙人，上曰： 朕未见父母，可恩及下人耶？ 积数事失上意，侂胄从而间之。
现代文：留正请求推恩给随龙人，宁宗说 ：我未见父母，可以推恩到身边的人吗？ 累积有几件事留正都违背了皇上的意愿，韩胄又从中挑拨。
English: Ruizheng asked for the favor of the dragon follower, Ningzong said: I haven't seen my parents, can I show favor to the people around me? There were several things that Ruizheng did against the emperor's wishes, and Han Zheng picked on them.

古文：八月，手诏正以少师、观文殿大学士判建康府。
现代文：八月，皇上手诏留正为少师、观文殿大学士之职为建康府判官。
English: In August, Empress Dowager Empress Dowager Empress Dowager Empress Dowager Empress Dowager Empress Dowager Empress Dowager Empress Dowager Empress Dowager Empress Dowager Empress Dowager Empress Dowager Empress Dowager Empress Dowager Empress Dowager Empress Dowager Empress Dowager Empress Dowager Empress Dowager Empress Dowager

古文：寻又以谏议大夫张叔椿言，落职。
现代文：不久又因为谏议大夫张叔椿的谏言，留正失去职位。
English: Soon after, he lost his position because of the harsh words of Dr. Zhang Shuzhu.

古文：庆元元年六月，诏正以上皇付正手诏八字进入，宣付史馆。
现代文：庆元元年六月，皇上诏令留正把太上皇交给他的手诏共八个字呈入，宣布交给史馆。
English: In June of the first year of the Qing Dynasty, Emperor Dairei Ruzheng presented the eight-character imperial edict handed over to him by the Empress Dowager, and announced that it would be handed over to the history museum.

古文：复观文殿大学士。
现代文：留正恢复观文殿大学士之职。
English: Ruzheng was reinstated as a scholar of the Academy of Confucianism.

古文：初，刘德秀自重庆入朝，未为正所知，谒正客范仲黼请为言，正曰： 此人若留之班行，朝廷必不静。 乃除大理簿，德秀憾之。
现代文：当初，刘德秀从重庆进入朝廷，留正不清楚此事，他拜见留正的门客范仲黼请他说句话，留正说： 此人如留在朝廷做官，朝廷一定不得安宁。 于是让他任大理簿，刘德秀深感不满。
English: At first, Liu Dexiu entered the imperial court from Chongqing, but Ru Zheng did not know about this. He met with Ru Zheng's protégé, Fan Zhongyi, and asked him to say a few words. Ru Zheng said, "If this person remains in the imperial court as an official, the imperial court will certainly not be at peace." Therefore, Liu Dexiu was deeply dissatisfied with having him as the chief accountant.

古文：至是为谏议大夫，论正四大罪，褫职，自是弹劾无虚岁。
现代文：到他为谏议大夫时，就论述留正有四大罪行，革除了留正的职位，从此刘德秀年年弹劾留正。
English: When he was a doctor of public deliberation, he discussed that there were four major crimes committed by Rem Zheng and dismissed the position of Rem Zheng. Since then, Liu Dexiu has impeached Rem Zheng every year.

古文：以张釜言，责授中大夫、光禄卿，分司西京，邵州居住。
现代文：因为张釜的意见，留正贬为中大夫、光禄卿，分司西京，在邵州居住。
English: Because of Zhang Kama's opinion, Ruizheng was demoted to the position of junior doctor, Guangluqing, sub-department of West Beijing, and lived in Shaozhou.

古文：明年，令自便。
现代文：第二年，皇上令他自便。
English: The following year, the Emperor told him to do as he pleased.

古文：给事中谢源明封还录黄，量移南剑州，再许自便。
现代文：给事中谢源明驳回录黄，留正遇恩赦迁移至南剑州，再次允许他自便。
English: In the case, Xie Yuanming dismissed Luo Huang, and relocated Luo Zheng to Nanjianzhou under the amnesty, allowing him to take advantage of it again.

古文：复光禄大夫、提举洞霄宫。
现代文：留正又为光禄大夫、提举洞霄宫。
English: He was also appointed as the doctor of Guanglu and promoted to the palace of Dongxiao.

古文：上章乞纳禄，诏复元官职致仕。
现代文：他上书乞求发给俸禄，皇上诏令他恢复原官职退休。
English: He sent a letter begging to be paid a salary, but the emperor ordered him to resume his former official position and retire.

古文：又以御史林采言，依旧官光禄大夫致仕。
现代文：又根据御史林采的意见，留正依旧以禄大夫的职衔退休。
English: In addition, according to the opinion of M. Shlintse, Ruzheng still retired with the title of Dr. Luo.

古文：俄复观文殿学士、金紫光禄大夫。
现代文：不久被授予观文殿学士、金紫光禄大夫。
English: Soon after, he was awarded a bachelor's degree from the Academy of Confucius and a doctor's degree from the Jin Zi Guanglu Hospital.

古文：嘉泰元年，进封魏国公，复少师、观文殿大学士。
现代文：嘉泰元年，留正进封为魏国公，恢复少师、观文殿大学士之职。
English: In the first year of the Jia Tai Dynasty, Ruzheng was promoted to Wei Guogong and resumed his duties as a junior teacher and a scholar of the Academy of Confucius.

古文：开禧二年七月，薨，年七十八。
现代文：开禧二年七月，死去，终年七十八岁。
English: He died in July of the second year of the Heian period, at the age of 78.

古文：赠太师。
现代文：朝廷赠他太师之职。
English: He was posthumously awarded the title of Grand Master.

古文：正出处大致如绍熙去国，耻与姜特立并位而待罪近郊，五月复入，议者犹惜其去之不勇。
现代文：留正进退情况大致如下：绍熙年间离开朝廷，他耻于与姜特立在同一位子共事而在近郊待罪，五月又入朝，人们仍可惜他离朝不坚决。
English: The progress and retreat of Ruizheng is roughly as follows: He left the imperial court during the reign of Shoxi, he was ashamed to work with Jiang Teli in the same person and waited for the crime in the suburbs, and in May he entered the imperial court. It is still a pity that he did not firmly leave the imperial court.

古文：首发大议，蚤正嘉王储位，遂致言者深文，指为弃国，岂弘毅有所不足耶？
现代文：他入朝后首先发表意见，要求早日确定嘉王的王储位子，于是招致言官苛刻地授用法律条文，指责他抛弃国家，难道是他抱负不够远大，意志不够坚强？
English: After he entered the imperial court, he was the first to express his opinion, demanding that the crown prince position of Ji Wang be determined as soon as possible, so he invited the spokesman to rigorously grant legal provisions, accusing him of abandoning the country. Was he not ambitious enough and strong-willed enough?

古文：或问范仲黼： 留、赵二公处变不同如何？ 仲黼曰： 赵，同姓之卿也；留则异姓之卿，反复之而不听，则去。 闻者以为名言。
现代文：有人以此问范仲黼： 留正、赵汝愚二人处理变故方式有何不同？ 范仲黼说： 赵汝愚，是与皇上同姓的大臣，留正则是异姓大臣，他被反复降职而不接受教训，最终离朝。 
English: Someone asked Fan Zhongyao about this: What is the difference between the way Ruizheng and Zhao Rugu handled the succession? Fan Zhongyao said: Zhao Rugu was a minister with the same surname as the emperor, and Ruizheng was a minister with a different surname. He was repeatedly demoted and did not accept the lesson, and eventually left the court.

古文：有《诗文》、《奏议》、《外制》二十卷行于世。
现代文：听的人认为这是至理名言。留正著有《诗文》、《奏议》、《外制》二十卷留传于世。
English: Those who listen to it believe it to be a wise saying. Twenty volumes of poems, speeches, and essays written by Ru Zheng have been handed down to the world.

古文：宝庆三年，谥忠宣。
现代文：宝庆三年朝廷赠他谥号 忠宣 。
English: In the third year of Baoqing, the imperial court gave him the nickname Zhongxuan.

古文：子恭、丙、端，皆为尚书郎。
现代文：其子留恭、留丙、留端，都是尚书郎。
English: His sons, Ryukyung, Ryuhei, and Ryuhata, are all Shoshuro.

古文：孙元英，工部侍郎；元刚，起居舍人。
现代文：其孙子留元英，是工部侍郎；留元刚，是起居舍人。
English: His grandson, Ruyuan Ying, is a chamberlain of the Ministry of Industry; Ruyuan Gang, is a layman.

