古文：房玄龄，齐州临淄人也。
现代文：房玄龄，山东临淄人。
English: Fang Xuanling, from Linyi, Shandong Province.

古文：初仕隋，为隰城尉。
现代文：在隋朝为官时担任隰城的县尉。
English: When he was an official in the Sui Dynasty, he served as the county lieutenant of Lucheng.

古文：坐事，除名徙上郡。
现代文：后来因为一件事情获罪被革去官职，流放上郡。
English: Later, because of a crime, he was stripped of his official position and banished to Shang County.

古文：太宗徇地渭北，玄龄杖策谒于军门。
现代文：唐太宗攻占渭北的时候，房玄龄拄着拐杖到军门拜见。
English: When Emperor Taizong of Tang conquered northern Anhui, Fang Xuanling went to the military gate on crutches.

古文：太宗一见，便如旧识，署渭北道行军记室参军。
现代文：唐太宗与他一见如故，任命他为渭北道行军记室参军。
English: Emperor Taizong of Tang Dynasty saw him as he was and appointed him to join the army of the Military Recorder's Office of North Gansu Province.

古文：玄龄既遇知己，遂罄竭心力。
现代文：房玄龄蒙受知遇之恩，决心涌泉相报。
English: Fang Xuanling received the grace of being known and determined to report to Yuquan.

古文：是时，贼寇每平，众人竞求金宝，玄龄独先收人物，致之幕府，及有谋臣猛将，与之潜相申结，各致死力。
现代文：当时，每次打了胜仗，大家都忙着各处搜集财宝，只有房玄龄首先收拢人才，将富有谋略和骁勇善战的人安置在他的幕府中，私下与他们结为朋友，共同为李世民效力。
English: At that time, every time a battle was won, everyone was busy collecting treasures from all over the place. However, it was Fang Xuanling who was the first to gather talented people, place those who were resourceful and brave in his shogunate, make friends with them privately, and work together for Li Shimin.

古文：累授秦王府记室，兼陕东道大行台考功郎中。
现代文：他多次担任秦王府记室，兼任陕东道大行台考功郎中。
English: He served as the record office of the Qin royal court for many times, and also served as the host university of Shaanxi Province.

古文：玄龄在秦府十余年，恒典管记。
现代文：房玄龄在秦王府十几年，都担任记室一职。
English: For more than ten years, Fang Xuanling worked as a secretary in Qinwangfu.

古文：隐太子、巢刺王以玄龄及杜如晦为太宗所亲礼，甚恶之，谮之高祖，由是与如晦并遭驱斥。
现代文：当时的太子和巢刺王因为房玄龄和杜如晦深得李世民的重用，心怀嫉恨，就在唐高祖面前恶语中伤，于是房玄龄和杜如晦遭到了打击排斥。
English: At that time, the prince and the king of the nests were deeply envious of the heavy use of Li Shimin because of Fong Xuanling and Du Rubei, and they slandered him in front of Tang Gao Zu, so Fong Xuanling and Du Rubei were repulsed.

古文：及隐太子将有变也，太宗召玄龄、如晦，令衣道士服，潜引入閤谋议。
现代文：后来太子发动叛乱，李世民秘密召见房玄龄和杜如晦，让他们穿上道士的衣服，派人暗中将他们带入内宫商议对策。
English: Later, when the crown prince launched a rebellion, Li Shimin secretly summoned Fang Xuanling and Du Rugao, dressed them in the clothes of Taoist priests, and sent someone to secretly bring them into the inner palace to discuss countermeasures.

古文：及事平，太宗入春宫，擢拜太子左庶子。
现代文：叛乱平定之后，李世民成为东宫太子，就请房玄龄担任太子左庶子。
English: After the rebellion was quelled, Li Shimin became the crown prince of the East Palace, and asked Fang Xuanling to serve as the prince's second son.

古文：贞观元年，迁中书令。
现代文：贞观初年，李世民提升他为中书令。
English: In the first year of Zhenguan, Li Shimin promoted him to the position of Zhongshirong.

古文：三年，拜尚书左仆射，监修国史，封梁国公，实封一千三百户。
现代文：贞观三年，又封他为尚书左仆射。同时，命他撰写国史，封为梁国公，食邑一千三百户。
English: In the third year of Zhenguan's reign, he was given the title of Shangshu Zuofei. At the same time, he was ordered to write a national history, and was named Liang Guogong, with 1,300 households.

古文：既总任百司，虔恭夙夜，尽心竭节，不欲一物失所。
现代文：房玄龄为官兢兢业业，负责百官的任命，责任重大，常常夜以继日地工作，不在政务上出现半点闪失。
English: Fang Xuanling was a conscientious and diligent official, responsible for the appointment of hundreds of officials, with great responsibility. He often worked day and night, and never missed a beat in government affairs.

古文：闻人有善，若己有之。
现代文：他待人宽厚，胸襟宽阔，看见别人比自己出色，也从不嫉妒。
English: He is generous, broad-minded, sees others as better than himself, and is never envious.

古文：明达吏事，饰以文学，审定法令，意在宽平。
现代文：他富有才识，撰写的国史文采出众，审定的法令宽容公平。
English: He was full of talent, wrote outstanding national history, and approved laws that were tolerant and fair.

古文：不以求备取人，不以己长格物，随能收叙，无隔疏贱。论者称为良相焉。
现代文：他在德行方面也为人称道，对人从不求全责备，不以自己的标准去苛求别人，不分亲疏贵贱，一视同仁，因此被众人赞誉为良相。
English: He is also praised for his virtue, never seeking to blame others, not demanding others according to his own standards, not discriminating between relatives and nobles, and treating everyone equally. Therefore, he is praised by everyone as a good face.

古文：十三年，加太子少师。
现代文：贞观十三年，他又被尊为太子少师。
English: In the thirteenth year of Zhenguan, he was honored as the youngest teacher of the prince.

古文：玄龄自以一居端揆十有五年，频抗表辞位，优诏不许。
现代文：房玄龄担任宰相之职共有十五年，其间，他多次上书辞官，唐太宗都未允许。
English: Fong Xuanling held the post of prime minister for a total of fifteen years, during which he repeatedly wrote to the dictionary, but Tang Taizong did not allow it.

古文：十六年，进拜司空，仍总朝政，依旧监修国史。
现代文：贞观十六年，他又被封为司空，仍然总管朝政，著述国史。
English: In the 16th year of Zhenguan, he was again appointed as Siku, still the head of the court, and wrote a national history.

古文：玄龄复以年老请致仕，太宗遣使谓曰： 国家久相任使，一朝忽无良相，如失两手。
现代文：不久，房玄龄又以年老为由，提出辞官，唐太宗派使者回复一封信，上面写道： 你担任丞相这么多年了，很多大事我都能够放心地交给你处理，假如没有了你这个良相，我就像失去了双臂一样力单势薄。
English: Not long after, Fong Xuanling, on the grounds of old age, put forward the idea of appointing a chancellor, and the emissary of the Tang Dynasty Sect replied with a letter, which read: You have served as chancellor for so many years, I can confidently entrust you with many important matters. If I did not have your good looks, I would be as powerless as if I had lost my arms.

古文：公若筋力不衰，无烦此让。
现代文：如果你的精力允许，就不要解甲归田。
English: If you have the energy, don't give up.

古文：自知衰谢，当更奏闻。 
现代文：如果有一天你真的感到力不从心了，再上奏告诉我也不迟。 
English: If one day you really feel overwhelmed, it's not too late to tell me again.

古文：玄龄遂止。
现代文：看过这封言辞恳切的信，房玄龄终于打消了辞官的念头。
English: After reading this earnest letter, Fang Xuanling finally dispelled the idea of a dictionary.

古文：太宗又尝追思王业之艰难，佐命之匡弼，乃作《威凤赋》以自喻，因赐玄龄，其见称类如此。杜如晦，京兆万年人也。
现代文：后来，唐太宗回顾艰难创业的岁月，良臣辅佐自己所立下的卓越功勋，不禁感慨万千，写下《威风赋》赐给房玄龄，由此可见他们君臣之间深厚的情谊。杜如晦，祖籍陕西万年。
English: Later, Tang Taizong looked back on the difficult years of starting a business, and was moved by the outstanding achievements made by the good vassals who assisted him. He wrote down the "Dignity" and gave it to Fang Xuanling. This shows the deep friendship between their vassals. Du Rugao, ancestral home of Shaanxi for thousands of years.

古文：武德初，为秦王府兵曹参军，俄迁陕州总管府长史。
现代文：武德初年，担任秦王府兵曹参军，不久就被提升为陕州总管长史。
English: In the first year of Wude, he joined the army as a Qinwangfu petty officer, and was soon promoted to the post of chief administrator of Shaanxi Province.

古文：时府中多英俊，被外迁者众，太宗患之。
现代文：当时秦王府中人才济济，外迂的人也非常多，对此，李世民表示忧虑。
English: At that time, there were a lot of talented people in the Qin royal court, and there were also a lot of outsiders. Li Shimin expressed concern about this.

古文：记室房玄龄曰： 府僚去者虽多，盖不足惜。
现代文：记室房玄龄说： 王府中的幕僚离开得多，这并不值得惋惜。
English: "It is not to be regretted that so many staff members in the royal palace have left," said the recorder, Genling.

古文：杜如晦聪明识达，王佐才也。
现代文：可是杜如晦非常能干，有见识，是辅佐帝王的良才。
English: However, Du Rubei was very capable and insightful, and was a good talent to assist the emperor.

古文：若大王守藩端拱，无所用之；必欲经营四方，非此人莫可。 
现代文：如果您只做一个守住领地的藩王，那么用不着他，可是如果您要统领四海，那么非此人不可。 
English: If you only want to be a feudal lord who protects his territory, then you don't need him, but if you want to rule the four seas, then this person is a must.

古文：太宗自此弥加礼重，寄以心腹，遂奏为府属，常参谋帷幄。
现代文：太宗从此便对杜如晦以礼相待，视为心腹，经常让他参与密谋。
English: From then on, Emperor Taizong treated Du Rubei with courtesy and regarded him as a confidant, often letting him participate in conspiracies.

古文：时军国多事，剖断如流，深为时辈所服。
现代文：当时，权力之争激烈，战事很多，每次杜如晦都能为太宗出谋划策，提出良好的建议，令人十分佩服。
English: At that time, the power struggle was fierce and there were many battles. Every time Du Ruge was able to make suggestions for Taizong and put forward good suggestions, which was very admirable.

古文：累除天策府从事中郎，兼文学馆学士。
现代文：后来，他被封为天策府从事中郎，兼任文学馆学士。
English: Later, he was appointed as the vice-governor of Tianzhefu, and also served as a bachelor of literature.

古文：隐太子之败，如晦与玄龄功第一，迁拜太子右庶子。
现代文：在平定太子的叛乱中，杜如晦和房玄龄功劳最大，杜如晦被提升为太子右庶子。
English: In quelling the rebellion of the prince, Du Rugao and Fang Xuanling made the greatest contribution. Du Rugao was promoted to the prince's right illegitimate son.

古文：俄迁兵部尚书，进封蔡国公，实封一千三百户。
现代文：不久又迁任兵部尚书，封为蔡国公，食邑一千三百户。
English: Soon after, he was transferred to the Ministry of Military Affairs and given the title of Cai Guogong. He served 1,300 households.

古文：贞观二年，以本官检校侍中。
现代文：贞观二年，他担任检校侍中。
English: In the second year of Zhenguan, he served as a school inspector.

古文：三年，拜尚书右仆射，兼知吏部选事。
现代文：贞观三年，拜为尚书右仆射，兼任吏部选事。
English: Zhenguan served for three years as Shangshu's right-hand man and concurrently served as the head of the personnel department.

古文：仍与房玄龄共掌朝政。至于台阁规模，典章文物，皆二人所定，甚获当时之誉，时称房、杜焉。
现代文：他和房玄龄共同掌管朝廷的政务，有关修筑宫殿的规模、典章制度等事情，都由二人商议决定，二人的政绩深得人们的称道，说起当时的良相，人们就会以 房谋杜断 加以赞许。
English: He and Fang Xuanling were jointly in charge of the government affairs of the imperial court. The scale of the construction of the palace, the award system and other matters were decided by the two of them. The political achievements of the two were highly praised by the people. When talking about the good situation at that time, people would praise Fang Xuan and praise him.

古文：魏征，巨鹿人也。近徙家相州之内黄。
现代文：魏徵，钜鹿人，前不久迁居到相州的内黄。
English: Wei Zheng, an Elk native, recently moved to Neihwang, Sangju.

古文：武德末，为太子洗马。
现代文：武德末年，做太子洗马。
English: In the last years of Wude's life, he became a prince and washed horses.

古文：见太宗与隐太子阴相倾夺，每劝建成早为之谋。
现代文：当他看到太宗同隐太子李建成暗中倾轧争夺，常劝建成早做打算。
English: When he saw Taizong Tongyin Prince Li Jiancheng secretly competing, he often advised Jiancheng to make plans early.

古文：太宗既诛隐太子，召征责之曰： 汝离间我兄弟，何也？ 
现代文：太宗杀了隐太子后，把魏徵叫来责问： 你为什么要离间我们兄弟？ 
English: After Emperor Taizong killed Prince Yin, he summoned Wei Zhao to ask: "Why did you separate our brothers?

古文：众皆为之危惧。征慷慨自若，从容对曰： 皇太子若从臣言，必无今日之祸。 
现代文：当时大家都替魏徵担惊受怕，魏徵慷慨自若，不慌不忙地回答说： 皇太子如果听我的话，肯定不会有今天的杀身之祸。 
English: At that time, everyone was terrified for Wei Xizhong. Wei Xizhong was generous and self-confident, and replied unhurriedly: "If the crown prince listens to me, there will certainly not be today's killing disaster."

古文：太宗为之敛容，厚加礼异，擢拜谏议大夫。数引之卧内，访以政术。
现代文：太宗听了这话肃然起敬，对他分外敬重，提升他为谏议大夫，多次把他请进卧室，向他请教治理国家的办法。
English: When Emperor Taizong heard this, he was awestruck and held him in the highest esteem. He promoted him to the position of advisor and repeatedly invited him into his bedroom to ask him for advice on how to govern the country.

古文：征雅有经国之才，性又抗直，无所屈挠。
现代文：魏徵本有治国的才能，性情刚直不阿，绝不随意放弃自己的主张。
English: Wei Zhiben had the ability to govern the country, his temperament was upright, and he would never arbitrarily give up his position.

古文：太宗每与之言，未尝不悦。
现代文：太宗每次和他交谈，从来没有不高兴。
English: Whenever Taizong talked to him, he was never unhappy.

古文：征亦喜逢知己之主，竭其力用。
现代文：魏徵欣幸遇到了赏识自己的主子，竭尽才力来效劳。
English: Wei Zhengxin was fortunate to meet a master who appreciated her, and she did her best to serve him.

古文：又劳之曰： 卿所谏前后二百余事，皆称朕意。非卿忠诚奉国，何能若是！ 
现代文：太宗又安慰他说： 你以前直言劝谏前后二百多件事，都称我的心意，不是你忠心为国，怎能如此？ 
English: Emperor Taizong also comforted him, saying, "You used to advise me more than 200 times, and all of them were in accordance with my heart's desire. If it wasn't for your loyalty to the country, how could this be?

古文：三年，累迁秘书监，参预朝政，深谋远算，多所弘益。
现代文：贞观三年，魏徵几次升迁做上秘书监，参预朝政，深谋远虑，起了很好的作用。
English: In the three years of Zhenguan, Wei Zheng was promoted several times to be a secretary supervisor, participated in pre-dawn politics, and had foresight, which played a very good role.

古文：太宗尝谓曰： 卿罪重于中钩，我任卿逾于管仲，近代君臣相得，宁有似我于卿者乎？ 
现代文：太宗曾对他说： 论你的罪过比当年管仲射中齐桓公的带钩还要严重，而我对你的信任却超过了齐桓公对管仲的信任，近代君臣之间融洽相处，难道还有谁能像我这样对你吗？ 
English: Emperor Taizong once said to him, "Your sins are more serious than Prince Qi Huan's tie-hook in the middle of the Guanzhong shooting, and my trust in you exceeds Prince Qi Huan's trust in Guanzhong. Modern monarchs and ministers get along well. Is there anyone else who can treat you like me?

古文：六年，太宗幸九成宫，宴近臣，长孙无忌曰： 王珪、魏征，往事息隐，臣见之若仇，不谓今者又同此宴。 
现代文：贞观六年，唐太宗驾幸九成宫，设宴招待亲近的大臣，长孙无忌说： 王珪、魏徵，过去侍奉隐太子，我见到他们就像见到仇敌一样，想不到今天能在一起参加宴会。 
English: In the sixth year of Zhenguan, Emperor Taizong of Tang drove to Jiucheng Palace and held a banquet to invite close ministers. The eldest grandson said, "Wang Xi and Wei Zheng, who used to serve the crown prince, I saw them as if they were enemies, and I couldn't imagine being able to attend the banquet together today."

古文：太宗曰： 魏征往者实我所仇，但其尽心所事，有足嘉者。
现代文：太宗说： 魏徵过去确实是我的仇敌，但他能为侍奉的主子尽心出力，这是很值得称道的。
English: Taizong said: Wei Zheng was indeed my enemy in the past, but he was able to do his best for his master, which is very commendable.

古文：朕能擢而用之，何惭古烈？
现代文：我能够提拔重用他，自比古人应无愧色！
English: I can promote and reuse him, since the ancients should be well-deserved!

古文：征每犯颜切谏，不许我为非，我所以重之也。 
现代文：魏徵常常不顾情面恳切劝谏，不许我做错事，所以我器重他。 
English: Wei Zheng often, regardless of his feelings, earnestly advised me not to do anything wrong, so I respected him.

古文：征再拜曰： 陛下导臣使言，臣所以敢言。
现代文：魏徵再拜说： 陛下引导我提意见，我才敢提意见。
English: Wei Zhengzai said: Your Majesty has guided me to make a suggestion, so I dare to make a suggestion.

古文：若陛下不受臣言，臣亦何敢犯龙鳞，触忌讳也！ 
现代文：如果陛下不接受我的意见，我又怎么敢去犯龙鳞、触忌讳。 
English: If Your Majesty does not accept my opinion, how can I dare to break the taboo?

古文：太宗大悦，各赐钱十五万。
现代文：太宗龙心大悦，赏赐每人十五万钱。
English: Taizong Longxin was overjoyed and rewarded each of them with 150,000 yuan.

古文：七年，代王珪为侍中，累封郑国公。
现代文：贞观七年，魏徵替代王珪任侍中，加封到郑国公。
English: In the seventh year of Zhenguan, Wei Zheng replaced Wang Xi as an attendant and was awarded the title of Zheng Guogong.

古文：寻以疾乞辞所职，请为散官。
现代文：不久因病请求辞去所任的官职，只做个闲职散官。
English: Due to illness, he soon asked to resign from his post, and only worked as a slacker.

古文：太宗曰： 朕拔卿于仇虏之中，任卿以枢要之职，见朕之非，未尝不谏。
现代文：太宗说： 我把你从仇敌中选拔出来，委任你中枢机要的职务，你看到我不对的地方，从没有不劝谏的。
English: Emperor Taizong said, "I chose you from among my enemies and appointed you to the important post of cardinal. Whenever you saw something wrong with me, you never failed to advise me.

古文：公独不见金之在矿，何足贵哉？
现代文：你难道没看到黄金埋在矿里，有什么可贵的呢？
English: Don't you see the gold buried in the mine, how precious it is?

古文：良冶锻而为器，便为人所宝。
现代文：若遇上高明的冶金工匠把它锻炼成器物，就会被人们当做宝贝。
English: If a skilled metallurgist were to temper it into a vessel, it would be treasured by people.

古文：朕方自比于金，以卿为良工。
现代文：因此我把自己比作黄金，把你当做高明的冶炼工匠。
English: For this reason I have compared myself to gold, and you to a skilled craftsman.

古文：虽有疾，未为衰老，岂得便尔耶？ 
现代文：你虽然有病，但还不算衰老，怎能想就此辞职呢？ 
English: You're sick, but you're not senile, so how can you resign?

古文：征乃止。
现代文：魏徵听了只好作罢。
English: After listening to Wei, he had no choice but to give up.

古文：后复固辞，听解侍中，授以特进，仍知门下省事。
现代文：后来又坚决要辞职，太宗同意解除他侍中的职务，任为特进，仍旧管门下省政事。
English: Later, he resolutely wanted to resign, and Emperor Taizong agreed to relieve him of his position as an aide-de-camp, appointing him as a special envoy, but he was still in charge of the provincial government.

古文：十二年，太宗以诞皇孙，诏宴公卿。帝极欢，谓侍臣曰： 贞观以前，从我平定天下，周旋艰险，玄龄之功无所与让。
现代文：贞观十二年，太宗因为皇孙诞生，下诏宴请公卿大臣，太宗在酒席间极其高兴，对大臣们说： 贞观以前，跟我平定天下，转战于艰险危难之间，房玄龄功劳之大是没有人能比得上的。
English: In the twelfth year of Zhenguan, Emperor Taizong invited court nobles and ministers to the next imperial banquet because of the birth of the emperor's grandson. Emperor Taizong was extremely happy during the banquet and said to the ministers: Before Zhenguan, I pacified the world and turned to war between hardships and dangers. No one can match the great merit of Fang Xuanling.

古文：贞观之后，尽心于我，献纳忠谠，安国利人，成我今日功业，为天下所称者，惟魏征而已。
现代文：自贞观以来，对我竭尽心力，进献忠直之言，安定国家，造福百姓，成就我今天的功业，被天下人所称道的人，就只有魏徵了。
English: Since the time of the Zhenguan, only Wei Zheng has devoted all his efforts to me, offered loyal and honest words, stabilized the country, benefited the people, and accomplished my work today. He is the only one who has been praised by the world.

古文：古之名臣，何以加也。 
现代文：即使古代的名臣，也不过如此罢了。 
English: Even if they were famous ministers in ancient times, it was nothing more than that.

古文：于是亲解佩刀以赐二人。
现代文：于是亲自解下佩刀赐给他们二人。
English: So he took off his sword and gave it to the two of them.

古文：庶人承乾在春宫，不修德业；魏王泰宠爱日隆，内外庶寮，咸有疑议。
现代文：庶人承乾在东宫做太子时，不讲品德不干好事，魏王泰越来越得到宠爱，内外百官对承乾是否还能做太子都有疑议。
English: When the commoner Cheng Qian became the crown prince in the East Palace, he did not talk about morality or do good deeds. Wei Wang Tai became more and more favored. Hundreds of officials at home and abroad doubted whether Cheng Qian could still become the crown prince.

古文：太宗闻而恶之，谓侍臣曰： 当今朝臣，忠謇无如魏征，我遣傅皇太子，用绝天下之望。 
现代文：太宗听到后很厌恶，对侍从的大臣们说： 当今朝臣之中，讲忠诚正直没有比得上魏徵的，我派他做皇太子的师傅，用来断绝天下人的想法。 
English: When Emperor Taizong heard this, he was disgusted and said to his attendant ministers, "Among today's courtiers, there is no one who is as loyal and honest as Wei Zheng. I have sent him to be the crown prince's teacher, to break the world's people's thoughts.

古文：十七年，遂授太子太师，知门下事如故。
现代文：贞观十七年，就任命魏徵做太子太师，仍旧管门下省的政事。
English: In the seventeenth year of Zhenguan, he appointed Wei Zheng to be the prince and daishi, and was still in charge of the political affairs of the province under his disciple.

古文：征自陈有疾，太宗谓曰： 太子宗社之本，须有师傅，故选中正，以为辅弼。
现代文：魏徵陈述自己有病，太宗对他说： 太子是宗庙社稷的根本，一定要有好的师傅，所以挑选你这样中正无私之臣，作为太子的辅弼。
English: Wei Zheng stated that he was ill, and Emperor Taizong said to him: The prince is the foundation of the family, temple and community, and must have a good teacher, so choose a righteous and selfless vassal like you to be the prince's assistant.

古文：知公疹病，可卧护之。 
现代文：我知道你有病，不妨躺在床上来教导太子。 
English: I know you are ill, so you might as well stay in bed and teach the prince.

古文：征乃就职。
现代文：魏徵只得就职。
English: Wei Zheng had no choice but to take office.

古文：寻遇疾。征宅内先无正堂，太宗时欲营小殿，乃辍其材为造，五日而就。
现代文：不久魏徵得了重病，他家里原先没有正厅，太宗当时本想给自己建造一座小殿，就停下工来把材料给魏徵造正厅，五天完工。
English: Soon after, Wei Zheng fell seriously ill. His family did not have a main hall before. At that time, Taizong originally wanted to build a small hall for himself, so he stopped work to collect materials for Wei to build a main hall. It took five days to complete.

古文：遣中使赐以布被素褥，遂其所尚。
现代文：又派宫中的使者赐给他布被和素色的垫褥，以顺从他的喜好。
English: And he sent messengers to the king's house, and they gave him a linen ephod and a pillow of fine linen, according to all his desire.

古文：后数日，薨。太宗亲临恸哭，赠司空，谥曰文贞。
现代文：过了几天，魏徵去世，太宗亲自到他的灵柩前痛哭，追赠他为司空，赐谥号文贞。
English: A few days later, Wei Zheng died, Taizong personally went to his coffin to weep bitterly, posthumously awarded him the title of Siku and gave him the posthumous title of Wenzhen.

古文：太宗亲为制碑文，复自书于石。
现代文：太宗亲自给他撰写碑文，还亲笔书写在石碑上。
English: Emperor Taizong personally wrote an inscription for him, and also wrote his own handwriting on the stone monument.

古文：特赐其家食实封九百户。
现代文：又特赐给他家食实封九百户。
English: He was also given a special gift of home-cooked meals for 900 households.

古文：太宗后尝谓侍臣曰： 夫以铜为镜，可以正衣冠；以古为镜，可以知兴替；以人为镜，可以明得失。
现代文：太宗后来常对身边的大臣们说： 用铜作镜子，可以端正衣冠；用历史作镜子，可以知道历代兴衰更替；用人作镜子，可以明白自己的得失。
English: Later, Emperor Taizong often said to the ministers around him: If you use copper as a mirror, you can straighten your clothes; if you use history as a mirror, you can know the rise and fall of each generation; if you use people as a mirror, you can understand your own gains and losses.

古文：朕常保此三镜，以防己过。
现代文：我常常保有这三面镜子，用来防止自己犯过错。
English: I often keep these three mirrors to prevent myself from making mistakes.

古文：今魏征殂逝，遂亡一镜矣！ 
现代文：如今魏徵去世，就失掉一面镜子了！ 
English: Now that Wei Zheng has passed away, we have lost a mirror!

古文：因泣下久之。
现代文：因而哭了很久。
English: I cried for a long time.

古文：乃诏曰： 昔惟魏征，每显予过。
现代文：于是下诏说： 过去只有魏徵，经常指责我的过错。
English: So he said: In the past, only Wei Zheng, often accused me of wrongdoing.

古文：自其逝也，虽过莫彰。
现代文：自从他去世后，我虽有过错也没有人敢公开指出。
English: Since his death, even though I was at fault, no one dared to publicly point it out.

古文：朕岂独有非于往时，而皆是于兹日？
现代文：难道我只在过去有错误，而今天全是正确的吗？
English: Did I only make mistakes in the past and everything is right today?

古文：故亦庶僚苟顺，难触龙鳞者欤！
现代文：恐怕还是百官苟且顺从，不敢来触犯龙鳞吧！
English: I'm afraid it's still a matter of obedience and obedience, don't dare to offend the dragon scale!

古文：所以虚己外求，披迷内省。言而不用，朕所甘心；用而不言，谁之责也？
现代文：所以我再次虚心征求意见，以便清醒头脑进行反省，你们直言劝谏了而我不采用，我愿承担责任。我需要采纳忠言而大家又不说，这个责任谁来承担？
English: Therefore, I once again humbly solicit opinions so that I can reflect with a clear mind. If you advise me and I do not take it, I am willing to take responsibility. I need to take advice and everyone does not say, who will take this responsibility?

古文：自斯已后，各悉乃诚。若有是非，直言无隐。 
现代文：从今以后，大家都得竭尽忠诚，我如有对或不对的言行，你们要直言劝谏不要保留隐瞒。 
English: From now on, all of you must be loyal to the best of your ability. If I have said or done something wrong, you must tell me frankly and not keep it a secret.

古文：王珪，太原祁县人也。
现代文：王珪，太原祁县人。
English: Wang Yao, a native of Taiyuan County.

古文：武德中，为隐太子中允，甚为建成所礼。
现代文：武德年间，担任太子中允，太子李建成对他礼遇有加。
English: During the reign of Emperor Wu De, he served as the middle son of the crown prince, and the crown prince Li Jiancheng treated him with great courtesy.

古文：后以连其阴谋事，流于嶲州。
现代文：后来由于李建成阴谋作乱之事所牵连，王珪被流放到云南嶲州。
English: Later, because Li Jiancheng was implicated in a conspiracy to create turmoil, Wang Yao was exiled to Ganzhou, Yunnan.

古文：建成诛后，太宗即位，召拜谏议大夫。
现代文：建成被诛杀后，太宗即位，王珪被太宗召回，拜官为谏议大夫。
English: After Jiancheng was assassinated, Emperor Taizong ascended to the throne. Wang Yao was recalled by Emperor Taizong, and he was appointed as the chief adviser to the emperor.

古文：每推诚尽节，多所献纳。
现代文：作为臣子，王珪忠心耿耿，尽职尽责。他所进献的言论，多被太宗采纳。
English: As a vassal, Wang Xi was loyal and devoted to his duties. Most of his speeches were adopted by Emperor Taizong.

古文：珪尝上封事切谏，太宗谓曰： 卿所论皆中朕之失，自古人君莫不欲社稷永安，然而不得者，只为不闻己过，或闻而不能改故也。
现代文：王珪曾经上书批评太宗过失，太宗说： 你所谈论的，一一点中我的过失。自古以来，没有哪一个国君不想把自己的国家治理好，永享安定太平的。然而，他们的愿望都没有实现，不是他们看不到自己的过失，而是因为他们看到了自己的过错却不能改正的缘故。
English: Wang Yao once wrote a letter criticizing Taizong's faults, and Taizong said: What you are talking about is my fault in one point. Since ancient times, there has never been a ruler who did not want to govern his country well and enjoy stability and peace forever. However, their wishes were not realized, not because they could not see their mistakes, but because they saw their mistakes but could not correct them.

古文：今朕有所失，卿能直言，朕复闻过能改，何虑社稷之不安乎？ 
现代文：现在我有过错，你能直言不讳，我也能知错就改，何必担心国家不能长治久安呢？ 
English: Now I am at fault, you can speak frankly, I can also correct myself, why worry about the country's long-term stability?

古文：太宗又尝谓珪曰： 卿若常居谏官，朕必永无过失。 
现代文：太宗还曾经对王珪说： 你如果一直做谏官，我必定永远没有过错。 
English: Emperor Taizong also once said to Wang Xi: "If you remain a eunuch, I will never be at fault."

古文：顾待益厚。
现代文：因而更加器重厚待他。
English: Therefore, they treat him more generously.

古文：贞观元年，迁黄门侍郎，参预政事，兼太子右庶子。
现代文：贞观元年，王珪官至黄门侍郎，参与国家政务，并兼任太子的老师。
English: In the first year of Zhenguan, Wang Yiguan became a Yellow Gate attendant, participated in national government affairs, and also served as the prince's teacher.

古文：二年，进拜侍中。时房玄龄、魏征、李靖、温彦博、戴胄与珪同知国政，尝因侍宴，太宗谓珪曰： 卿识鉴精通，尤善谈论，自玄龄等，咸宜品藻。
现代文：第二年，王珪又被提升为侍中，与房玄龄、魏徵、李靖、温彦博、戴胄一起处理国家政事。一次，他们六人与太宗一起进宴，太宗问王珪： 你识别能力很强，尤其擅长谈论和评价别人。
English: The following year, Wang Jun was promoted to the position of chamberlain, and he dealt with state affairs together with Fang Xuanling, Wei Zheng, Li Jing, Wen Yanbo, and Dai Jun. Once, the six of them had a banquet with Taizong. Taizong asked Wang Jun: You have a strong ability to recognize, and you are especially good at talking about and evaluating others.

古文：又可自量孰与诸子贤。 
现代文：从玄龄开始，你一个个给我评价一下，也可以估量一下你们中间谁最贤德能干。 
English: Starting from middle age, you can evaluate me one by one, and you can also estimate who is the most virtuous and capable among you.

古文：对曰： 孜孜奉国，知无不为，臣不如玄龄。
现代文：王珪回答说： 为国兢兢业业，干事果断精明，我比不上玄龄。
English: Wang Yao replied, "I am a conscientious and diligent officer, a resolute and shrewd officer, but I am no match for Xuanling.

古文：每以谏诤为心，耻君不及尧、舜，臣不如魏征。
现代文：以纠正偏颇为任，犯颜直谏，为皇上无法与尧舜的圣明比肩而感到羞耻，我比不上魏徵。
English: I took it upon myself to correct the bias, and I was ashamed that the emperor could not stand shoulder to shoulder with the shameless Sheng Ming. I was no match for Wei Zheng.

古文：才兼文武，出将入相，臣不如李靖。
现代文：文武全才，既能带兵又能治国，文韬武略俱佳，我比不上李靖。
English: I am an all-round talent in literature and martial arts. I can both lead an army and govern a country. I am good at literature and martial arts. I am no match for Li Jing.

古文：敷奏详明，出纳惟允，臣不如温彦博。
现代文：奏章严密清楚，言行有理有据，规规矩矩，没有疏失，我比不上温彦博。
English: The playbook is clear and precise, the words and deeds are reasonable and well-founded, the rules are correct, and there are no omissions. I am no match for Wen Yanbo.

古文：处繁理剧，众务必举，臣不如戴胄。
现代文：处理纷繁复杂的事务，有条有理，万无一失，我比不上戴胄。
English: I'm no match for a shovel when it comes to dealing with a myriad of complicated matters in an orderly and foolproof manner.

古文：至于激浊扬清，嫉恶好善，臣于数子，亦有一日之长。 
现代文：可是对于弘扬正气，惩恶扬善，疾恶如仇，我比起各位，也有我自己的独到之处！ 
English: However, when it comes to promoting righteousness, punishing evil, and promoting goodness, I have my own uniqueness compared to everyone else!

古文：太宗深然其言，群公亦各以为尽己所怀，谓之确论。李靖，京兆三原人也。
现代文：太宗认为他说得很对，在座的诸位大臣也各抒己见，都认为他评价得恰如其分，十分准确。李靖，陕西三原人。
English: Emperor Taizong thought he was right, and all the ministers present also expressed their opinions, and all thought his evaluation was appropriate and very accurate.Li Jing, a native of Sanyuan, Shaanxi Province.

古文：大业末，为马邑郡丞。
现代文：隋炀帝末年，为马邑的郡丞。
English: In the last years of the Sui Dynasty, he was the county magistrate of Ma'iu.

古文：会高祖为太原留守，靖观察高祖，知有四方之志，因自锁上变，诣江都。
现代文：这时，高祖李渊任太原留守。李靖观察高祖，知道他有夺取天下的志向，便装成罪犯，把自己锁进囚车，打算趁押赴江都的机会向隋炀帝告发李渊。
English: At this time, the great ancestor Li Yuan was left behind in Taiyuan. Li Jing observed Gao Zu and knew that he had the ambition to conquer the world, so he disguised himself as a criminal, locked himself in a prison van, and planned to take the opportunity to go to Jiangdu to denounce Li Yuan to the Sui and Qian Emperors.

古文：至长安，道塞不能而止。
现代文：走到长安，因为道路阻塞不能前行，李靖只好滞留长安。
English: After reaching Chang'an, Li Jing had to stay in Chang'an because the road was blocked.

古文：高祖克京城，执靖，将斩之，靖大呼曰： 公起义兵除暴乱，不欲就大事，而以私怨斩壮士乎？ 
现代文：高祖攻克长安后，抓住了李靖，想要杀掉他。在千钧一发之际，李靖大声叫道： 李公率领仁义的军队，扫除暴乱，不想成就大事，只想凭个人的恩怨杀害有才能的人而逞一时之快吗？ 
English: After Gaozhu conquered Chang'an, he caught Li Jing and wanted to kill him. In the heat of the moment, Li Jing shouted: Li Gong led the army of benevolence and righteousness, swept away the riots, did not want to achieve great things, but just wanted to kill talented people with personal grudges and act quickly?

古文：太宗亦加救靖，高祖遂舍之。
现代文：太宗也极力劝阻高祖，加以营救，高祖于是赦免了他。
English: Taizong also tried his best to dissuade Gaozu from rescuing him, and Gaozu pardoned him.

古文：武德中，以平萧铣、辅公祏功，历迁扬州大都督府长史。
现代文：武德年间，因平定萧铣、辅公祏的功劳，李靖被升迁为扬州大都督府长史。
English: During the reign of Emperor Wu De, Li Jing was promoted to the post of governor-general of Yangzhou due to his achievements in pacifying Xiao Qi and Fu Gongyi.

古文：太宗嗣位，召拜刑部尚书。
现代文：太宗继位后，他又被召回京城，任命为刑部尚书。
English: After Emperor Taizong succeeded to the throne, he was called back to Beijing and appointed as the head of the Penal Department.

古文：贞观二年，以本官检校中书令。
现代文：贞观二年，被提升为中书令。
English: In the second year of Zhenguan, he was promoted to Zhongshirong.

古文：三年，转兵部尚书，为代州行军总管，进击突厥定襄城，破之。
现代文：贞观三年，转任兵部尚书，兼任代州行军总管，率领军队进攻突厥，平定襄城，大破突厥，使突厥各部落逃亡碛北。
English: In the third year of Zhenguan, he was transferred to the military department of Shangshu, and concurrently served as the acting state marching chief, led the army to attack the Turks, pacified Xiangcheng, broke the Turks, and made the Turkish tribes flee to the north.

古文：突厥诸部落俱走碛北，北擒隋齐王暕之子杨道政，及炀帝萧后，送于长安。
现代文：在这次战争中，李靖擒获了隋朝齐王杨暕的儿子杨道政以及隋炀帝的皇后萧氏，并将他们押送到长安。
English: In this war, Li Jingyi captured Yang Daozheng, the son of the Sui Dynasty's King Yang Jie, and Empress Xiao of the Sui Dynasty, and sent them to Chang'an.

古文：突利可汗来降，颉利可汗仅以身遁。
现代文：后来，突利可汗前来投降，只剩下颉利可汗一个人逃跑了。
English: Later, the Turi Khan came to surrender, leaving only the Meli Khan alone to escape.

古文：太宗谓曰： 昔李陵提步卒五千，不免身降匈奴，尚得名书竹帛。
现代文：太宗说： 汉代李陵率领五千步兵作战，还免不了投降匈奴，即使这样，也可以名垂青史。
English: Taizong said, "During the Han Dynasty, Li Ling led five thousand infantrymen into battle, and was forced to surrender to the Xiongnu. Even so, he can still be remembered in history.

古文：卿以三千轻骑，深入虏庭，克复定襄，威振北狄，实古今未有，足报往年渭水之役矣。 
现代文：你能够凭三千骑兵，深入敌人内部并战胜敌人，平定襄城，威震北方夷狄，这样的事的确亘古未有，如此功劳足可以弥补过去渭水之战的过失了。 
English: With three thousand cavalrymen, you can penetrate deep into the enemy and defeat the enemy, pacify Xiangcheng, and dominate the northern barbarians. Such a thing has never happened before. Such a feat can make up for the mistakes of the past Battle of Surabaya.

古文：以功进封代国公。
现代文：由于李靖功勋显赫，唐太宗加封他为代国公。
English: Due to Li Jing's distinguished service, Tang Taizong crowned him as the acting prince.

古文：此后，颉利可汗大惧，四年，退保铁山，遣使入朝谢罪，请举国内附。
现代文：从此，颉利可汗对唐军十分害怕，不敢轻举妄动。贞观四年，他们退到西北一带，并派遣使者到唐朝谢罪，请求全国归降，作为唐的臣民。
English: From then on, the Qili Khan was very afraid of the Tang army and did not dare to act rashly. In the fourth year of Zhenguan, they retreated to the northwest, and sent an envoy to the Tang Dynasty to apologize and ask the whole country to surrender as Tang's subjects.

古文：又以靖为定襄道行军总管，往迎颉利。
现代文：接到投降的消息，太宗又任命李靖为行军总管，前往迎接颉利可汗。
English: After receiving the news of the surrender, Emperor Taizong appointed Li Jing as the commander-in-chief of the marching troops, and went to meet the Qili Khan.

古文：颉利虽外请降，而心怀疑贰。
现代文：颉利可汗虽然表面称降，其实心怀不轨。
English: Although he appears to be stepping down, Khan is in fact on the wrong track.

古文：诏遣鸿胪卿唐俭、摄户部尚书将军安修仁慰谕之，靖谓副将张公谨曰： 诏使到彼，虏必自宽，乃选精骑赍二十日粮，引兵自白道袭之。 
现代文：李靖看出投降者的险恶用心，决定将计就计。他对副将张公谨说： 传诏书的使者到了那儿的时候，敌人必然放松警惕，你挑选精锐的骑兵带好二十天的粮食，领兵从白道偷袭攻击他们。 
English: Li Jing saw the sinister intentions of the surrenderers and decided to take action. He said to Vice Admiral Zhang Gongjun: "When the messenger of the edict arrives there, the enemy will inevitably relax their vigilance. You should select elite cavalry to bring twenty days of grain, and lead the troops to sneak attack them from the White Road.

古文：公谨曰： 既许其降，诏使在彼，未宜讨击。 
现代文：张公谨不解其意，说： 既然我们答应他们投降，我们的使者又在他们那里，征讨恐怕不合适吧。 
English: Zhang Gongxian puzzled, saying: Since we promised to surrender to them, and our envoys are still with them, I'm afraid it's not appropriate to invade them.

古文：靖曰： 此兵机也，时不可失。 
现代文：李靖说道： 这是用兵消灭他们的大好机会，千万不可以失去。 
English: Li Jing said, "This is a great opportunity to use soldiers to wipe them out, and we must not lose it."

古文：遂督军疾进。行至阴山，遇其斥候千余帐，皆俘以随军。
现代文：于是他率领军队迅速前进，行到阴山的时候，凡是遇到颉利可汗的人，都抓住他们随军前行。
English: So he led the army to advance quickly, and when they reached the gloomy mountains, everyone who met the Qili Khan grabbed them and marched with the army.

古文：颉利见使者甚悦，不虞官兵至也。
现代文：颉利可汗看到唐的使者，十分高兴，根本没有料到唐的军队到了。
English: The Qili Khan was very happy to see Tang's envoy, and did not expect Tang's army to arrive at all.

古文：靖前锋乘雾而行，去其牙帐七里，颉利始觉，列兵未及成阵，单马轻走，虏众因而溃散。
现代文：李靖军队的前锋凭借大雾前进，十分隐秘，到了距离颉利可汗的军帐七里左右才被他们发觉。颉利可汗的军队措手不及，还没来得及摆好阵势，颉利可汗一个人就骑马逃跑了，敌兵乱作一团，四处溃逃。
English: The vanguard of Li Jing's army advanced by virtue of the fog, very stealthily, and they were only discovered when they were about seven miles away from the military headquarters of Muli Khan. Muli Khan's army was caught off guard, and before they had time to set up their positions, Muli Khan fled alone on horseback, and the enemy soldiers scattered and fled in all directions.

古文：斩万余级，杀其妻隋义成公主，俘男女十余万，斥土界自阴山至于大漠，遂灭其国。寻获颉利可汗于别部落，余众悉降。
现代文：这次战争，唐兵斩杀敌人万余人，杀死颉利可汗的夫人一一隋朝的义成公主，俘虏男女十多万人，灭掉了颉利可汗的国家。颉利可汗余下的其他部落，全部投降。
English: In this war, Tang soldiers slaughtered more than 10,000 of the enemy, killed the wife of the Qili Khan - the Yicheng Princess of the Sui Dynasty, captured more than 100,000 men and women, and destroyed the Qili Khan's country. The remaining tribes of the Qili Khan all surrendered.

古文：太宗大悦，顾谓侍臣曰： 朕闻主忧臣辱，主辱臣死。
现代文：此役使唐的边境从阴山扩展到大漠以北。战后，太宗十分高兴，对大臣们说： 我听说国君忧虑，大臣就要受到屈辱；国君受到侮辱，那么臣子的性命也难保全。
English: After the war, Emperor Taizong was very happy and said to his ministers: "I heard that if the sovereign is worried, the ministers will be humiliated; if the sovereign is humiliated, the lives of the ministers will be hard to save."

古文：往者国家草创，突厥强梁，太上皇以百姓之故，称臣于颉利，朕未尝不痛心疾首，志灭匈奴，坐不安席，食不甘味。
现代文：过去在国家刚刚建立的时候，突厥国势强大，太上皇因为不想牵连百姓，故而向颉利可汗称臣。我当时感到十分痛心，睡不安寝，食不知味。
English: In the past, when the country was just established, the Turkic nation was powerful, and the emperor did not want to implicate the people, so he offered his allegiance to the Meli Khan. I felt very sad at the time, I couldn't sleep, and I didn't know what to eat.

古文：今者暂动偏师，无往不捷，单于稽颡，耻其雪乎！ 
现代文：为此我励精图治，立志要消灭匈奴。今天，我们只要一出动军队，可谓攻无不克，战无不胜，匈奴单于俯首称臣，我们的羞耻洗雪了。 
English: To this end, I worked hard and determined to eliminate the Huns. Today, if we just send out an army, it can be said to be invincible, invincible, the Huns only bow down and bow down, our shame has been washed away.

古文：群臣皆称万岁。
现代文：殿上的群臣都大声欢呼万岁。
English: The courtiers in the hall cheered loudly.

古文：寻拜靖光禄大夫、尚书右仆射，赐实封五百户。
现代文：不久，太宗封李靖为光禄大夫，尚书右仆射，赏赐食禄五百户。
English: Soon after, Emperor Taizong appointed Li Jing as the doctor of Guanglu, and he rewarded 500 households with food.

古文：又为西海道行军大总管，征吐谷浑，大破其国。
现代文：后来李靖又担任西海道行军大总管征伐吐谷浑，灭了这个国家。
English: Later, Li Jing also served as the general manager of the West Road Campaign to conquer Tugu Hun, eliminating this country.

古文：改封卫国公。
现代文：李靖因功改封为卫国公。
English: Li Jing was awarded the title of "Defender of the Fatherland" for his service.

古文：及靖身亡，有诏许坟茔制度依汉卫、霍故事，筑阙象突厥内燕然山、吐谷浑内碛石二山，以旌殊绩。
现代文：李靖死后，太宗下诏，允许他的坟墓可以按照汉代卫青、霍去病坟墓的模样去修建，坟墓周围筑起土丘，使它们像突厥国内的燕山、吐谷浑国的碛石二山，用以象征他卓越的功绩。
English: After the death of Li Jing, Emperor Taizong issued an edict, allowing his tomb to be built in accordance with the appearance of the tombs of Wei Qing and Huo Gui in the Han Dynasty. Mounds were built around the tomb, making them look like Yanshan in Turkey and the two mountains of flint in the country of Tugu Hun, to symbolize his outstanding achievements.

古文：虞世南，会稽余姚人也。
现代文：虞世南，浙江余姚人。
English: Yu Shiminan, Zhejiang Yuyao people.

古文：贞观初，太宗引为上客，因开文馆，馆中号为多士，咸推世南为文学之宗。
现代文：贞观初年，唐太宗尊他为上宾，设立文馆，文馆中人才济济，但都推举虞世南为文学的宗师。
English: In the first year of Zhenguan, Tang Taizong honored him as a guest of honor and set up a library. There were many talented people in the library, but they all recommended Yu Shennan as the master of literature.

古文：授以记室，与房玄龄对掌文翰。
现代文：唐太宗授予他记室的官职，同房玄龄一起掌管文化方面的事情。
English: Emperor Taizong of Tang awarded him the official post of the record office, and together with his colleague Xu Rong, he was in charge of cultural affairs.

古文：尝命写《列女传》以装屏风，于时无本，世南暗书之，一无遗失。
现代文：虞世南曾经受命书写《列女传》用来装饰屏风，当时没有现成的书，虞世南就凭记忆将书默写了出来，竟没有一点差错。
English: Yu Shennan was once ordered to write "The Legend of the Column Girl" to decorate the screen. At that time, there was no ready-made book, so Yu Shennan silently wrote the book from memory, and there was not a single mistake.

古文：贞观七年，累迁秘书监。
现代文：贞观七年，虞世南提升为秘书监。
English: In the seventh year of Zhenguan, Yu Shennan was promoted to secretary supervisor.

古文：太宗每机务之隙，引之谈论，共观经史。
现代文：唐太宗处理完政务，一有空闲就召见虞世南，和他畅谈历史，探讨治国方面的道理。
English: After Tang Taizong had dealt with government affairs, he summoned Yu Shiminan whenever he had free time to talk with him about history and discuss the principles of governing the country.

古文：世南虽容貌懦弱，如不胜衣，而志性抗烈，每论及古先帝王为政得失，必存规讽，多所补益。
现代文：虞世南外表弱不禁风，一副书生模样，性情却十分刚烈，志趣高远，每次谈论起历代帝王的政治得失，都能够有所针砭，进行一番很好的评论和判断。
English: Outwardly, Yushinan is a weakling, with the appearance of a scholar, but he is very strong-willed and ambitious. Every time he talks about the political gains and losses of emperors throughout the ages, he is able to pinpoint and make the best comments and judgments.

古文：及高祖晏驾，太宗执丧过礼，哀容毁悴，久替万机，文武百寮，计无所出，世南每入进谏，太宗甚嘉纳之，益所亲礼。
现代文：唐高祖去世之后，唐太宗由于为他操办隆重的丧事而操劳过度，形容憔悴，国事有所耽误，文武百官无计可施。但是无论在哪种情形下，虞世南每次进宫进谏，唐太宗都欣然接受。
English: After the death of Emperor Gaozu of Tang, Emperor Taizong of Tang was overworked due to the grand funeral held for him. He described the situation as "chaotic," saying that there were delays in state affairs, and that there was nothing that the civil and military officials could do. However, no matter under what circumstances, Emperor Taizong of Tang gladly accepted every time that Yu Shennan entered the palace.

古文：尝谓侍臣曰： 朕因暇日，每与虞世南商榷古今。
现代文：从此以后，唐太宗对他也就更加亲近和尊重。唐太宗曾经对身边的侍臣说： 我一有空闲就与虞世南商讨古今大事。
English: From then on, Emperor Taizong became even closer to and respected him. Emperor Taizong once said to the attendants around him: Whenever I have free time, I discuss ancient and modern events with Yu Shennan.

古文：朕有一言之善，世南未尝不悦；有一言之失，未尝不怅恨。
现代文：我一有好的见解，虞世南总是非常高兴，可是一旦我的观点有失偏颇，他就十分担忧。
English: As soon as I have a good opinion, Yu Shennan is always very happy, but once my opinion is biased, he is very worried.

古文：其恳诚若此，朕用嘉焉。
现代文：他如此诚恳，我非常欣赏。
English: He's so sincere, I really appreciate it.

古文：群臣皆若世南，天下何忧不治？ 
现代文：如果各位大臣都像虞世南那样，我哪还用得着担心天下治理不好呢？ 
English: If all the ministers are like Yu Shiminan, why should I worry that the world is not well governed?

古文：太宗尝称世南有五绝：一曰德行，二曰忠直，三曰博学，四曰词藻，五曰书翰。
现代文：唐太宗称赞虞世南有五绝：一是德行，二是忠直，三是博学，四是辞藻，五是书翰。
English: Emperor Taizong of Tang praised Yu Shennan for his five qualities: one is virtue, two is loyalty, three is erudition, four is eloquence, and five is scholarship.

古文：及卒，太宗举哀于别次，哭之甚恸。丧事官给，仍赐以东园秘器，赠礼部尚书，谥曰文懿。
现代文：虞世南去世后，唐太宗失声痛哭，非常悲伤，为他举办了丧事，赐以丧具，并追封他为礼部尚书，谥号文懿。
English: After the death of Yu Shiminan, Tang Taizong lost his voice, wept bitterly and was very sad. He held a funeral for him, gave him a funeral tool, and made him the ceremonial secretary of the Ministry of Culture, and his nickname was Wenjun.

古文：太宗手敕魏王泰曰： 虞世南于我，犹一体也。
现代文：唐太宗在写给魏王李泰的信中说道： 虞世南对于我，就像我身体的一部分。
English: Tang Taizong said in a letter to Li Tai, the Wei king: "For me, Yu Shennan is like a part of my body.

古文：拾遗补阙，无日暂忘，实当代名臣，人伦准的。
现代文：他提醒和纠正我的遗漏和过失，一刻都不曾忘记。他实在是当代名臣、人伦道德的榜样啊。
English: He reminded me and corrected my omissions and mistakes, and never forgot a moment. He is truly a contemporary dignitary and a model of human ethics.

古文：吾有小善，必将顺而成之；吾有小失，必犯颜而谏之。
现代文：过去，我有一点成绩，他必定加以肯定，我有一点小过失，他必定冒着触犯我的危险毫无保留地指出来。
English: In the past, I have a little achievement, he must affirm it, I have a little fault, he must point it out without reservation at the risk of offending me.

古文：今其云亡，石渠、东观之中，无复人矣，痛惜岂可言耶！ 
现代文：现在他去世了，国中再无这样的人了，这怎不让我痛惜。 
English: Now that he has passed away, there is no one else like him in the country, and I can't help but regret that.

古文：未几，太宗为诗一篇，追思往古理乱之道，既而叹曰： 钟子期死，伯牙不复鼓琴。
现代文：不久，唐太宗作了一首诗，凭借古人的事迹来发表感慨： 钟子期去世之后，伯牙失去知音，再也没有弹过琴。
English: Soon, Tang Taizong wrote a poem, using the deeds of the ancients to express his feelings: After the death of the bell period, Baoga lost his familiar sound and never played the piano again.

古文：朕之此篇，将何所示？ 
现代文：我这首诗，又写给谁看呢？ 
English: To whom did I write this poem?

古文：因令起居褚遂良诣其灵帐读讫焚之，其悲悼也若此。
现代文：于是唐太宗让褚遂良把诗拿到虞世南灵帐外诵读并焚烧，可见他哀痛之深切。
English: As a result, Emperor Taizong of Tang let Zou Suiliang take the poem to Yu Shennan's tomb, read it aloud and burn it, which shows the depth of his grief.

古文：又令与房玄龄、长孙无忌、杜如晦、李靖等二十四人，图形于凌烟阁。
现代文：然后，太宗又下令将虞世南和房玄龄、长孙无忌、杜如晦、李靖等二十四位功臣的图像，画在凌烟阁内，作为永久的纪念。
English: Then, Emperor Taizong also ordered that the images of twenty-four meritorious retainers, such as Yu Shennan and Fang Xuanling, the eldest grandson Mujie, Du Rugao, and Li Jing, be painted in Lingyakou, as a permanent memorial.

古文：李勣，曹州离狐人也。本姓徐，初仕李密，为左武侯大将军。
现代文：李，曹州离狐人，本姓徐，起初在李密部下做左武侯大将军。
English: Li, the fox from Caozhou, whose real surname was Xu, initially served as General of Zuowu under Li Mi.

古文：密后为王世充所破，拥众归国，勣犹据密旧境十郡之地。
现代文：李密后来被王世充打败，带领兵众往回降唐朝。李仍占有李密原来控制的个郡。
English: Li Mi was later defeated by Wang Shichong and led his troops back to the Tang Dynasty. Li Mi still holds the one county he originally controlled.

古文：武德二年，谓长史郭孝恪曰： 魏公既归大唐，今此人众土地，魏公所有也。吾若上表献之，则是利主之败，自为己功，以邀富贵，是吾所耻。
现代文：武德二年，李对长史郭孝恪说： 魏公李密既已经回顺大唐，这些郡的人口和土地，本是魏公所有，我假如上表献给大唐，那就是乐于主子的失败，来自己居功，以谋求富贵，我感到可耻。
English: In the second year of Wude, Li said to the prefect Guo Xiaoqi: Since Wei Gong Li Mi has already returned to Shun Datang, the population and land of these counties are originally owned by Wei Gong. If I dedicate the above table to Datang, it is to be happy with the master's failure, to take credit for myself, to seek wealth, I feel shameful.

古文：今宜具录州县及军人户口，总启魏公，听公自献，此则魏公之功也，不亦可乎？ 
现代文：现在应该完整地登录州县名称和军人户口，一并报送魏公，由魏公自己来献给朝廷，这就是魏公的功劳了，不是很好吗？ 
English: Now it is time to fully register the name of the prefecture and county and the military household registration, and submit it to Wei Gong at the same time. Wei Gong himself will present it to the imperial court. This is Wei Gong's achievement, isn't it great?

古文：乃遣使启密。
现代文：于是派使者报送李密。
English: So they sent an envoy to report to Li Mi.

古文：使人初至，高祖闻无表，惟有启与密，甚怪之。
现代文：使者刚到长安，唐高祖听说没有表奏，只有报告给李密，感到很不满意。
English: Just after the envoy arrived in Chang'an, Tang Gaozu heard that there was no performance, only a report to Li Mi, and felt very dissatisfied.

古文：使者以勣意闻奏，高祖方大喜曰： 徐勣感德推功，实纯臣也。 
现代文：使者把李的用意奏报，高祖才很兴奋地说： 徐感故主之德，给故主推功，真是纯臣啊！ 
English: When the messenger reported Li's intention, Gao Zu was very excited and said, "Xu sensed the old master's virtue, and gave the old master a promotion. What a pure vassal!

古文：拜黎州总管，赐姓李氏，附属籍于宗正。封其父盖为济阴王，固辞王爵，乃封舒国公，授散骑常侍。
现代文：任命他做黎州总管，赐姓李氏，把户籍登进宗正寺，封他的父亲李盖为济阴王，李盖果断辞谢王爵，就改封舒国公，授予散骑常侍的官职。
English: He appointed him as the general manager of Lizhou, gave him the surname Li, entered his family register into the Sozheng Temple, and made his father Li Gai the king of Jilin. When Li Gai decided to resign, he changed his title to the prince of Shu, and awarded him the official post of horseback riding attendant.

古文：寻加勣右武侯大将军。
现代文：不久又加授李为右武侯大将军。
English: Soon after, Li was awarded the title of "Uwuhou Grand General."

古文：及李密反叛伏诛，勣发丧行服，备君臣之礼，表请收葬。
现代文：到李密反叛被诛，李为他发丧并穿上丧服，具备君臣的礼节，上表请求收葬。
English: When Li Mi, the rebel, was arrested, Li mourned for him and put on mourning clothes. With the etiquette of a monarch and a minister, he requested that his body be buried.

古文：高祖遂归其尸。
现代文：高祖就把李密的遗体交给他。
English: Gaozu then handed over Li Mi's body to him.

古文：于是大具威仪，三军缟素，葬于黎阳山。礼成，释服而散，朝野义之。
现代文：于是他大规模地预备仪仗，全军都穿上白色的丧服，将李密埋葬在黎阳山；葬礼完毕，才脱去丧服解散，朝廷上下都以为李真讲道义。
English: So he prepared a large-scale ceremonial battle. The whole army put on white mourning clothes and buried Li Mi on Liyang Mountain. After the funeral, they took off their mourning clothes and disbanded. Everyone in the imperial court thought that Li Zhen was preaching morality.

古文：寻为窦建德所攻，陷于建德，又自拔归京师。从太宗征王世充、窦建德，平之。
现代文：不久，受到窦建德的攻击，李被俘，又逃回往返到京师，跟随太宗征讨王世充、窦建德，把他们打败。
English: Soon, under the attack of Dou Jiande, Li was captured, and he fled back to Beijing Division, followed the Taizong to fight Wang Shichong and Dou Jiande, and defeated them.

古文：贞观元年，拜并州都督，令行禁止，号为称职，突厥甚加畏惮。
现代文：贞观元年，李被任命为并州都督，都令则行有禁则止，大家都说他称职，突厥对他十分畏惧。
English: In the first year of Zhenguan, Li was appointed as the governor of the annexed prefecture, but he was prohibited from acting as governor. Everyone said that he was competent, and the Turks were very afraid of him.

古文：太宗谓侍臣曰： 隋炀帝不解精选贤良，镇抚边境，惟远筑长城，广屯将士，以备突厥，而情识之惑，一至于此。
现代文：太宗对随从的大臣们说： 隋炀帝不懂得精选贤良、镇抚边境，只往远筑长城，派大批将士屯驻，来防范突厥，见识糊涂，竟到了这种地步。
English: Emperor Taizong said to the ministers who accompanied him: Emperor Sui and Qian did not know how to select good men and govern the border, but only built the Great Wall far away and sent a large number of soldiers to guard against the Turks. They were confused and ended up in this situation.

古文：朕今委任李勣于并州，遂得突厥畏威远遁，塞垣安静，岂不胜数千里长城耶？ 
现代文：我如今委任李镇守并州，就使得突厥畏威远逃，边塞城垣安宁，岂不胜过几千里的长城吗？ 
English: If I were to assign Li Zhen to guard the town and annex it to the state, the Turks would flee in fear, and the border fortress would be at peace. Wouldn't that be better than the Great Wall, which is thousands of miles long?

古文：其后并州改置大都督府，又以勣为长史，累封英国公。
现代文：后来并州改设大都督府，又任命李为长史，加封到英国公。
English: Later, he merged the prefecture with the state to set up a grand governor's office, and appointed Li as Changshi, adding a title to the British prince.

古文：在并州凡十六年，召拜兵部尚书，兼知政事。
现代文：他在并州镇守了年，召回任命为兵部尚书，兼知政事。
English: He served in the town of Wenzhou for a year, was recalled and appointed as a military officer, and also knew about politics.

古文：勣时遇暴疾，验方云须灰可以疗之，太宗自剪须为其和药。
现代文：李有次忽然重病，验方上说用胡须烧的灰可以治好，太宗亲身剪下自己的胡须给他和药。
English: On one occasion, Li suddenly fell seriously ill. The doctor said that the ashes burned from his beard could cure him. Taizong personally cut off his own beard to give him the cure.

古文：勣顿首见血，泣以陈谢。
现代文：李叩头出血，哭着谢恩。
English: Li Baotou head bleeding, crying Shane.

古文：太宗曰： 吾为社稷计耳，不烦深谢。 
现代文：太宗说： 我这是为社稷打算，不用感谢。 
English: Taizong said, "I'm planning this for the sake of the community, so no thanks."

古文：十七年，高宗居春宫，转太子詹事，加特进，仍知政事。
现代文：贞观十七年，高宗还在东宫时，调任李为太子詹事，追加特进的待遇，仍担任知政事。
English: In the seventeenth year of Zhenguan, when Gaozong was still in the East Palace, he transferred Li to be the prince Zhanji, added special treatment, and still served as the governor.

古文：太宗又尝宴，顾勣曰： 朕将属以孤幼，思之无越卿者。
现代文：太宗又曾设宴，宴席上，太宗回头对李说： 我想托付年幼的太子，考虑下来没有再比你合适的人选。
English: Emperor Taizong once held a banquet. At the banquet, Emperor Taizong turned to Li and said, "I would like to entrust the young prince to you. Considering this, there is no one more suitable than you."

古文：公往不遗于李密，今岂负于朕哉！ 
现代文：你过往能不忘李密，如今怎么会做对不起我的事情！ 
English: If you could not forget Li Mi in the past, how could you do such a thing to me now!

古文：勣雪涕致辞，因噬指流血。
现代文：李擦着眼泪回话，把自己的手指咬出血来。
English: Wiping away tears, Li replied, biting her own finger until it bled.

古文：俄沉醉，御服覆之，其见委信如此。
现代文：不一会李喝得大醉，太宗把御服盖在他身上。他就是这样地被委任信用。
English: Soon after, Li became very drunk, and Emperor Taizong put the imperial robe on him. This is how he was appointed.

古文：勣每行军，用师筹算，临敌应变，动合事机。
现代文：李每次行军作战，用兵筹划，临敌应变，都能做得很确当。
English: Every time Li marched into battle, he was able to do a proper job of planning with soldiers and adapting to the enemy.

古文：自贞观以来，讨击突厥、颉利及薛延陀、高丽等，并大破之。
现代文：从贞观以来，李奉令讨伐突厥颉利可汗和薛延陀、高丽等，都把他们打得大败而逃。
English: From the time of Zhenguan, Li was ordered to fight the Turkic Qili Khan, Xue Yanta, and Goryeo. He defeated them all and fled.

古文：太宗尝曰： 李靖、李勣二人，古之韩、白、卫、霍岂能及也！ 
现代文：太宗曾说： 李靖、李二人，古代的名将韩信、白起、卫青、霍去病岂能比得上啊！ 
English: Emperor Taizong once said: Li Jing and Li Duo, ancient famous generals Han Xin, Bai Qi, Wei Qing and Huo Dezi, how can they be compared!

古文：马周，博州茌平人也。
现代文：马周，博州茌平人。
English: Ma Zhou, a native of Bozhou.

古文：贞观五年，至京师，舍于中郎将常何之家。
现代文：贞观五年，他到京师长安，住在中郎将常何家里。
English: In the fifth year of Zhenguan, he went to Beijing Shichang'an and lived in the home of Zhong Lang Zheng He.

古文：时太宗令百官上书言得失，周为何陈便宜二十余事，令奏之，事皆合旨。
现代文：当时唐太宗要百官上书讲政事得失，马周替常何陈述了有利于国家百姓的二十多件事情，让常何上奏朝廷，事事都很合太宗心意。
English: At that time, Emperor Taizong of the Tang Dynasty wanted all officials to write a letter on the merits and demerits of politics. Ma Zhou, on behalf of Chang He, stated more than 20 things that were beneficial to the people of the country, and asked Chang He to write a letter to the imperial court. Everything was in line with the heart of Emperor Taizong.

古文：太宗怪其能，问何，何对曰： 此非臣所发意，乃臣家客马周也。 
现代文：太宗奇怪常何会有这样的才能，便问常何，常何回答说： 这些并不是我想出来的，而是我家里的一位叫马周的宾客代我写的。 
English: Taizong wondered how Chang Ho could have such a talent, so he asked Chang Ho, and Chang Ho replied, "I didn't come up with these, but a guest in my home named Ma Zhou wrote them on my behalf."

古文：太宗即日召之，未至间，凡四度遣使催促。
现代文：太宗当天就要召见马周，马周还没有赶到，便派使者催促了四次。
English: On the same day, Emperor Taizong wanted to summon Ma Zhou, but Ma Zhou had not arrived yet, so he sent an envoy to urge him four times.

古文：及谒见，与语甚悦。令直门下省，授监察御史，累除中书舍人。
现代文：到谒见时，太宗同他谈得很高兴，便把他安置在门下省，授予监察御史的官职，后来升迁到中书舍人。
English: At the audience, Emperor Taizong was very pleased to talk with him. He placed him in a subordinate province and gave him the official post of inspector of imperial history. Later, he was promoted to the position of Chinese scholar.

古文：周有机辩，能敷奏，深识事端，故动无不中。太宗尝曰： 我于马周，暂时不见，则便思之。 
现代文：马周机敏善辩，长于陈奏，对事情了解得很清楚，所以讲的话都符合实际。太宗曾说： 我对马周只要一刻不见面，就很想念他。 
English: Ma Zhou was a shrewd debater, better than Chen Zhou, and knew the situation very well, so what he said was realistic. Taizong once said: "If I don't see Ma Zhou for a moment, I miss him very much."

古文：十八年，历迁中书令，兼太子左庶子，周既职兼两宫，处事平允，甚获当时之誉。
现代文：贞观十八年，马周一直升迁到中书令，兼任太子左庶子，身兼朝廷和东宫的官职。他处理事情公平允当，很受当时人赞誉。
English: In the 18th year of Zhenguan, Ma Zhou was promoted all the way to the middle secretary, concurrently serving as the prince's left illegitimate son, holding the official position of the imperial court and the East Palace. He handled things fairly and appropriately, and was highly praised by the people at the time.

古文：又以本官摄吏部尚书。
现代文：后来又兼代吏部尚书职务。
English: Later, he concurrently held the post of secretary of the Ministry of Civil Affairs.

古文：太宗尝谓侍臣曰： 周见事敏速，性甚慎至。
现代文：太宗曾对侍从的大臣说： 马周看问题敏捷，办事慎重周到。
English: Emperor Taizong once said to his attendant minister Rama: Ma Zhou is quick to see problems and careful in his work.

古文：至于论量人物，直道而言，朕比任使之，多称朕意。
现代文：至于评论人物，能秉公直言，我近来任用他所推荐的人，多数都能合我的心意。
English: As for the reviewer, I can honestly say that most of the people I have recently appointed on his recommendation have been to my liking.

古文：既写忠诚，亲附于朕，实藉此人，共康时政也。 
现代文：他既然竭尽忠诚，亲近依附于我，我定要依靠他来共同地把政事办好。 
English: Since he has been loyal and close to me, I will definitely rely on him to jointly run the government well.

