古文：起上章摄提格，尽柔兆涒滩，凡七年。
现代文：起上章摄提格，尽柔兆涒滩，一共七年。
English: A total of seven years have passed since the last chapter of "Tigger" was shot.

古文：懿宗昭圣恭惠孝皇帝下咸通十一年春，正月，甲寅朔，群臣上尊号曰睿文英武明德至仁大圣广孝皇帝。赦天下。
现代文：唐懿宗咸通十一年春季正月，甲寅朔，唐朝群臣给皇帝李上尊号，称为睿文英武明德至仁大圣广孝皇帝；大赦天下。
English: In the first month of the spring of the eleventh year of the reign of Emperor Xianzong of the Tang Dynasty, the Tang Dynasty ministers gave the emperor the title of Li Shangzong, known as the Emperor Li Wenying, Wu Mingde, and the most benevolent Great Saint Guangxiao; the world was pardoned.

古文：西川之民闻蛮寇将至，争走入成都。
现代文：西川人民听说南诏蛮军将要入侵，争相避难逃入成都，使城中人口爆满。
English: When the people of Xichuan heard that the Nanzhao barbarian army was about to invade, they scrambled for refuge and fled to Chengdu, causing the population of the city to explode.

古文：时成都但有子城，亦无壕，人所占地各不过一席许，雨则戴箕盎以自庇。
现代文：当时成都只有内城，连护城壕也没有，每人平均所占不过一席之地，因无住房，下雨天只好戴斗笠和木盆以避雨淋。
English: At that time, Chengdu only had the inner city, and there was not even a moat. On average, each person occupied only one seat. Because there was no housing, people had to wear a raincoat and a wooden basin to keep out the rain.

古文：又乏水，取摩诃池泥汁，澄而饮之。
现代文：又缺乏饮水，只好取摩诃池泥汁，待沉淀见清后饮用。
English: There was also a lack of drinking water, so they had to take muddy water from the muddy pond and wait for it to settle before drinking it.

古文：将士不习武备，节度使卢耽召彭州刺史吴行鲁使摄参谋，与前泸州刺史杨庆复共修守备，选将校，分职事，立战棚，具砲檑，造器备，严警逻。
现代文：西川军队缺少训练，将士不习武备，节度使卢耽为此召彭州刺史吴行鲁充当参谋，与前泸州刺史杨庆复共同修复守备，选拔将校，分配守城职事。又搭起临时战棚，储存大量石炮和檑木，修造各种军用器械。
English: The Nishikawa army lacked training, the soldiers were not accustomed to armament, and Lu Tan summoned the Pengzhou general Wu Xinglu to act as a staff officer. Together with the former Zhangzhou general Yang Qingfu, he repaired the defenses, selected officers, and assigned duties for the defense of the city. He also set up temporary battlements, stored a large number of stone cannons and maples, and repaired various military equipment.

古文：先是，西川将士多虚职名，亦无禀给。
现代文：并在城内设警备巡逻。先前，西川将士中很多是虚额职名，也没有固定的粮饷给养。
English: Previously, many of Nishikawa's soldiers had fictitious titles and did not have a fixed food ration.

古文：至是，揭榜募骁勇之士，补以实职，厚给粮赐，应募者云集。
现代文：至此开始揭榜公开招募，招徕骁勇之士以补充军队缺额，充实军官队伍，并厚给粮饷，因而应募的人很多。
English: At this point, open recruitment began to be unveiled, and brave men were recruited to supplement the army's shortage, enrich the officer corps, and provide more grain, so there were many applicants.

古文：庆复乃谕之曰： 汝曹皆军中子弟，年少材勇，平居无由自进，今蛮寇凭陵，乃汝曹取富贵之秋也，可不勉乎！ 
现代文：杨庆复教谕应募者说： 你们都是军人子弟，年轻有为，有智有勇，平时太平无事，没有施展才能的机会，而今南蛮入侵，欺凌百姓，这正是你们报效国家，获取功名富贵的时刻，与诸位共勉，切莫错失良机啊！ 
English: Yang Qingfu instructed the recruits: "You are all soldiers' sons and daughters, young and promising, wise and brave. In normal times, there is nothing to worry about, and there is no opportunity to display your talents. But now, the South Vietnamese are invading and bullying the people. This is exactly the time for you to serve the country, gain fame and wealth, and work hard together with everyone. Don't miss the opportunity!

古文：皆欢呼踊跃。
现代文：应募者听后都情绪高涨，欢呼雀跃。
English: Applicants were in high spirits and cheered after listening to the speech.

古文：于是列兵械于庭，使之各试所能，两两角胜，察其勇怯而进退之，得选兵三千人，号曰 突将 。
现代文：于是在大庭排列各式兵器，让应募者大央手，各试所能，并让他们两人一组进行角力，通过考察选用勇者，辞退怯者。于是选得精壮三千人。号称 突将 。
English: So they lined up all kinds of weapons in the courtyard, let the applicants take the lead and try their best, and let them wrestle in a group of two. Through the investigation, they selected the brave and rejected the coward. So they selected three thousand strong people. They are known as "breakers."

古文：行鲁，彭州人也。
现代文：吴行鲁是彭州人。
English: Wu Xinglu is from Pengzhou.

古文：戊午，蛮至眉州，耽遣同节度副使王偃等赍书见其用事之臣杜元忠，与之约和。蛮报曰： 我辈行止，只系雅怀。 
现代文：戊午，南诏军队进行至眉州，卢耽派遣同节度副使王偃等人带着书信往见蛮军掌握权柄的官员杜元忠，与其约和，杜元忠称： 我军的行止，一定尊重贵方 。
English: In the afternoon, the Nanzhao army marched to Meizhou. Lu Dang sent his vice-envoy Wang Qi and others with a letter to Du Yuanzhong, the official in charge of the barbarian army, and made a peace treaty with him. Du Yuanzhong said: "Our army's conduct must be respected by your side."

古文：路岩、韦保衡上言： 康承训讨庞勋时，逗桡不进，又不能尽其馀党，又贪虏获，不时上功。 
现代文：路岩、韦保衡向唐懿宗上言弹劾康承训说： 康承训征讨庞勋时，逗留不进，既不能剿尽庞勋余党，反而贪图虏获，动不动就上表请功。 
English: Lu Yan and Wei Baoheng appealed to Tang Xizong to impeach Kang Chengxun, saying: "When Kang Chengxun was collecting the grand decoration, he did not stay and advance, and he could not exhaust the remaining grand decoration. On the contrary, he was greedy for conquest, and constantly asked for merit from the table above.

古文：辛酉，贬蜀王傅、分司，寻再贬恩州司马。
现代文：辛酉朝廷贬康承训为蜀王傅，分司东都。不久，再贬为恩州司马。
English: The Xinjiang imperial court demoted Kang Jianjun to Shu Wangfu, Branch Chief of Dongdu. Soon, he was demoted again to Enzhou Sima.

古文：南诏进军新津，定边之北境也。
现代文：南诏进军新津，进入定边北境。
English: Nanzhao marched into Xinjin and entered the northern border of Dingbian.

古文：卢耽遣同节度副使谭奉祀致书于杜元忠，问其所以来之意。
现代文：唐西川节度使卢耽又遣同节度副使谭奉祀致书于杜元忠，质问南诏军来犯意图，杜元忠将谭奉祀扣留。
English: The Tang Xichuan Festival sent Lu Tan and the vice-envoy of the same festival, Tan Fongshi, to write to Du Yuanzhong, questioning the intention of the Nanzhao Army to commit crimes. Du Yuanzhong detained Tan Fongshi.

古文：蛮留之不还。耽遣使告急于朝，且请遣使与和，以纾一时之患。
现代文：卢耽于是遣使向朝廷告急，希望朝廷出面遣使与南诏王国请和，以缓解当前的边患。
English: Lu Tan then sent an envoy to the imperial court to express his urgency, hoping that the imperial court would send an envoy to make peace with the Nanzhao Kingdom in order to alleviate the current border problems.

古文：朝廷命知四方馆事、太仆卿支详为宣谕通和使。
现代文：朝廷任命知四方馆事、太仆卿支详为宣谕通和使，赶赴成都。
English: The imperial court appointed Zhishifang's librarian, Taiboqing Shizhao, as an envoy to deliver the proclamation, and he rushed to Chengdu.

古文：蛮以耽待之恭，亦为之盘桓，而成都守备由是粗完。
现代文：南诏军见卢耽待他们相当恭顺，也就稍事盘桓，进军速度放慢，而成都城内的守备由此得以大致完工。
English: The Nanzhao army saw that Lu was waiting for them quite obediently, so they hesitated a little, and the speed of their advance slowed down, and the defense of Chengdu city was thus roughly completed.

古文：甲子，蛮长驱而北，陷双流。
现代文：甲子，南诏军队长驱北进，攻陷双流。
English: Gao Zi, the commander of the Southern Zhao army, drove northward and captured Shuangliu.

古文：庚午，耽遣节度副使柳槃往见之，杜元忠授槃书一通，曰： 此通和之后，骠信与军府相见之仪也。 其仪以王者自处，语极骄慢。
现代文：庚午，卢耽再遣节度副使柳入南诏军见其统帅，杜元忠授予柳一封书信，说 信中写有关于此次通和之后，我南诏骠信与贵节度使府相见的礼仪 ，其言语极端骄横傲慢，而其信中所规定的礼仪，更是处处以王者自居。
English: In the afternoon of the 7th day of the 7th month, Lu Tan re-sent Liu, the vice-envoy of Cao Cao, to enter the Nanzhao army to see its commander. Du Yuanzhong gave Liu a letter, saying that the letter contained the etiquette for the meeting between our Nanzhao envoy and your Cao Cao envoy after this peace treaty. His words were extremely arrogant and arrogant, and the etiquette stipulated in his letter was to act like a king everywhere.

古文：又遣人负彩幕至城南，云欲张陈蜀王厅以居骠信。
现代文：杜元忠甚至派人将彩色帷幕搬到成都城南，声称要在城内蜀王厅布置，以便南诏骠信居处。
English: Du Yuanzhong even sent people to move the colorful curtain to the south of Chengdu, claiming that it would be placed in the Shu Wang Hall in the city, so that the residence of Nan Zhaoxin could be seen.

古文：癸酉，废定边军，复以七州归西川。
现代文：癸酉，唐废定边军，将其所领七州复归西川节度使管辖。
English: At that time, Tang abolished the Dingling Frontier Army and returned the seven states under its jurisdiction to the jurisdiction of the West River Jiedu.

古文：是日，蛮军抵成都城下。前一日，卢耽遣先锋游弈使王昼至汉州诇援军，且趣之。
现代文：这一天，南诏军队进抵成都城下，而前一天，卢耽已派遣先锋游奕使王昼往汉州催促援军。
English: On this day, the Nanzhao army entered and arrived at the city of Chengdu, and the day before, Lu Tan had sent the vanguard Yu Yi to send Wang Rong to Hanzhou to urge reinforcements.

古文：时兴元六千人、凤翔四千人已至汉州，会窦滂以忠武、义成、徐宿四千人自导江奔汉州，就援军以自存。
现代文：当时有兴元兵六千人、凤翔兵四千人已到达汉州，恰在此时窦滂也以忠武、义成、徐宿之兵四千人自导江来到汉州，与援军会合以自保。
English: At that time, six thousand soldiers of Xingyuan and four thousand soldiers of Fengxiang had arrived in Hanzhou. At the same time, Dou Yu also came to Hanzhou with four thousand soldiers of Zhongwu, Yicheng and Xu Shuku from the Yangtze River to meet with reinforcements to protect himself.

古文：丁丑，王昼以兴元、资、简兵三千馀人军于毘桥，遇蛮前锋，与战不利，退保汉州。
现代文：丁丑，王昼率兴元、资州、简州之兵三千余人进军于毗桥，与南诏军前锋遭遇，王昼出战失利，退保汉州。
English: Ding Gou and Wang Rong led more than 3,000 soldiers from Xingyuan, Zhizhou and Jianzhou to march into Biqiao, where they encountered the vanguard of the Nanzhao Army. Wang Rong lost the battle and withdrew from Hanzhou.

古文：时成都日望援军之至，而窦滂自以失地，欲西川相继陷没以分其责。每援军自北至，辄说之曰： 蛮众多于官军数十倍，官军远来疲弊，未易遽前。 
现代文：当时成都军民日夜盼望援军的到来，而窦滂自以为所领定边军辖地尽失，希望西川也相继失陷，以便分担和减轻自己的罪责，因而每有援军自北而至，即往游说： 南蛮兵众多于官军数十倍，官军远道而来，疲惫不堪，最好不要贸然前进。 
English: At that time, the people of Chengdu were hoping day and night for the arrival of reinforcements, while Dou Yu thought that he had lost all the territories under the jurisdiction of the frontier army, and hoped that the West River would also fall successively in order to share and alleviate his guilt. Therefore, whenever reinforcements came from the north, he would lobby: the Southern barbarians were dozens of times more numerous than the official army, the official army had come a long way and was exhausted, it was best not to advance rashly.

古文：诸将信之，皆狐疑不进。
现代文：唐援军将领听后都狐疑不敢进。
English: After hearing the general of the Tang reinforcements, they all hesitated and dared not enter.

古文：成都十将李自孝阴与蛮通，欲焚城东仓为内应，城中执而杀之。
现代文：成都十将李自孝暗中与南诏军通款，企图焚城东仓为蛮军作内应，被城中军民察觉，而被逮捕处死。
English: Li Zixiao, the 10th commander of Chengdu, secretly exchanged money with the Nanzhao Army and attempted to set fire to the eastern warehouse of the city to help the barbarian army. He was discovered by the soldiers and civilians in the city and was arrested and executed.

古文：后数日，蛮果攻城，久之，城中无应而止。
现代文：数天后，蛮军果然来攻城，等待许久，未得城中李自孝的接应而退兵。
English: A few days later, the barbarian army came to attack the city, waited for a long time, and withdrew before receiving a response from Li Zi Xiao in the city.

古文：二月，癸未朔，蛮合梯冲四面攻成都，城上以钩缳挽之使近，投火沃油焚之，攻者皆死。
现代文：二月，癸未朔，南诏蛮军架云梯和冲车向成都城四面围攻，城上唐军用环钩套住云梯，向下浇滚烫的沸油，并投火焚烧，城下攻城的蛮军大都被烧死。
English: In February, at the dawn of the new year, the Nanzhao barbarian army set up ladders and rushing vehicles to besiege Chengdu on all sides. The Tang military on the city hooked the ladders, poured boiling oil down, and set them on fire. Most of the barbarians attacking the city were burned to death.

古文：卢耽以杨庆复、摄左都押牙李骧各帅突将出战，杀伤蛮二千馀人，会暮，焚其攻具三千馀物而还。
现代文：卢耽命杨庆复和摄左都押牙李骧各率突将出城袭击，杀伤南诏蛮军二千余人，至日暮之时，焚南诏攻城器械三千余具，回到城中。
English: Yang Qingfu, who delayed Lu's death, and Li Yao, who captured the left side of the capital, each led an attack out of the city, killing more than two thousand barbarians. By nightfall, more than three thousand pieces of equipment used to attack the city were burned and returned to the city.

古文：蜀人素怯，其突将新为庆复所奖拔，且利于厚赏，勇气自倍，其不得出者，皆愤郁求奋。
现代文：蜀人一向懦怯，而 突将 却是最近选拔出来的勇士，加上给赏优厚，所以勇气百倍，未能出城作战的人，也个个求战请缨，深为自己未能出战而惋惜。
English: The people of Shu had always been cowardly, but the sudden generals were recently selected warriors, and they were rewarded generously, so they were a hundred times more courageous. Those who could not go out to fight also asked for permission to fight, and deeply regretted that they could not go out to fight.

古文：后数日，贼取民篱，重沓湿而屈之，以为蓬，置人其下，举以抵城而劚之，矢石不能入，火不能然。
现代文：几天之后，南诏军又取民间的篱笆，用水浇湿后编成竹篷，兵将在其下举着进抵城下，一时城上矢石不能入，火也不能燃烧。
English: A few days later, the Nanzhao army also took folk fences, moistened them with water and woven them into bamboo canopies, under which the soldiers would hold up and enter the city. For a while, the city could not be entered, and the fire could not burn.

古文：庆复溶铁汁以灌之，攻者又死。
现代文：南诏军在竹篷掩护下挖掘城墙，杨庆复命唐军熔铁汁往下顷倒，结果城下蛮军全被烧死。
English: The Nanzhao army dug the city wall under the cover of a bamboo canopy, Yang Qing was rescued by the Tang army, and the molten iron juice fell down immediately. As a result, the barbarians under the city were all burned to death.

古文：乙酉，支详遣使与蛮约和。
现代文：乙酉，唐朝廷宣谕通和使支详遣使与南诏通和。
English: At the same time, the Tang court issued a proclamation to support the peace and sent an envoy to make peace with Nanzhao.

古文：丁亥，蛮敛兵请和。戊子，遣使迎支详。
现代文：丁亥，南诏始收兵请和，戊子，又派遣使者来迎接支详。
English: Dinghai, Nanzhao began to call up troops to invite peace, Wuzi, and sent an envoy to meet the support.

古文：时颜庆复以援军将至，详谓蛮使曰： 受诏诣定边约和，今云南乃围成都，则与向日诏旨异矣。
现代文：当时颜庆复以为唐援军将赶到，支详因而未赴南诏军中，并对面诏的使者说： 我受诏到定边城约和，而你们却在围攻成都，这与我不久所受诏旨迥异。
English: At that time, Yan Qingfu thought that the Tang reinforcements would arrive, so he did not go to the Nanzhao army. He said to the envoys of the Nanzhao: "I was ordered to the Dedian City Treaty, but you are besieging Chengdu. This is very different from the order I received soon.

古文：且朝廷所以和者，冀其不犯成都也。今矢石昼夜相交，何谓和乎！ 
现代文：况且我朝廷所以约和，正是希望你们不要侵犯成都，而今昼夜矢石相交，怎么谈得上是请和呢? 
English: Moreover, the reason why I made a peace treaty with the imperial court was that I hoped that you would not invade Chengdu, but now that the two sides are at each other's throats day and night, how can we talk about asking for peace?

古文：蛮见和使不至，庚寅，复进攻城。
现代文：南诏军见和使不到，庚寅，复又攻城。
English: When the Nanzhao army could not make peace, Geng Yin attacked the city again.

古文：辛卯，城中出兵击之，乃退。
现代文：辛卯，城中出兵迎击，南诏军才退。
English: Soon after, troops were dispatched from the city to meet the attack, and the Nanzhao army retreated.

古文：初，韦皋招南诏以破吐蕃，既而蛮诉以无甲弩，皋使匠往教之，数岁，蛮中甲驽皆精利。
现代文：先前，韦皋招致南诏军队以进攻吐蕃，南诏军声称没有兵甲弓弩，韦皋于是派工匠往南诏教其制造，几年后，南诏所造兵甲弓弩都很精制锋利。
English: Previously, Wei Zhao invited Nanzhao's army to attack Tubo. Nanzhao's army claimed that there was no armor-piercing crossbow, so Wei Zhao sent craftsmen to Nanzhao to teach them how to make it. A few years later, the armor-piercing crossbows made by Nanzhao were all refined and sharp.

古文：又，东蛮苴那时、勿邓、梦冲三部助皋破吐蕃有功。其后边吏遇之无状，东蛮怨唐深，自附于南诏，每从南诏入寇，为之尽力，得唐人，皆虐杀之。
现代文：另外，东蛮苴那时、勿邓、梦冲三部曾协助韦皋击破吐蕃军队，有功于唐朝，而后来唐朝的边境官吏却对他们敲诈勒索，引致东蛮怨恨唐朝，依附于南诏，经常随南诏军入侵唐朝边境，为南诏尽力，凡捕获唐人，都横加虐待并杀死。
English: In addition, at that time, the three Eastern Barbarians, Bu Deng and Meng Chong, had assisted Wei Gan in defeating the Tubo army, and had contributed to the Tang Dynasty. Later, the border officials of the Tang Dynasty extorted and blackmailed them, which led to the Eastern Barbarians resenting the Tang Dynasty, adhering to Nanzhao, often invading the border of the Tang Dynasty with the Nanzhao Army, and doing their best for Nanzhao. Anyone who was captured by the Tang Dynasty was abused and killed.

古文：朝廷贬窦滂为康州司户，以颜庆复为东川节度使，凡援蜀诸军，皆受庆复节制。
现代文：朝廷将窦滂贬为康州司户，任颜庆复为东川节度使，凡援蜀的诸路军队，全都受颜庆复节制。
English: The imperial court relegated Dou Qi to the position of the Kangzhou governor, and appointed Yan Qingfu as the Dongchuan festival envoy. All the armies that came to the aid of Shu were all controlled by Yan Qingfu.

古文：癸巳，庆复至新都，蛮分兵往拒之。
现代文：癸巳颜庆复到达新都，南诏分兵往新都抗拒颜庆复。
English: When Yan Qingfu arrived at Xindu, the Nanzhao detachment resisted Yan Qingfu all the way to Xindu.

古文：甲午，与庆复遇，庆复大破蛮军，杀二千馀人，蜀民数千人争操芟刀、白棓以助官军，呼声震野。
现代文：甲午，南诏军与颜庆复所统率的唐军相遇，颜庆复指挥唐军大破南诏蛮军，杀死二千多人，蜀中老百姓数千人也拿着刀和木棒争先恐后地赶来助战，呼喊声震动山野。
English: In the afternoon of January 1, the Nanzhao army met the Tang army led by Yan Qingfu. Yan Qingfu commanded the Tang army to defeat the Nanzhao barbarian army, killing more than two thousand people. Thousands of ordinary people in Shuzhong also rushed to help with swords and wooden sticks, and the shouts shook the mountains and fields.

古文：乙未，蛮步骑数万复至，会右武卫上将军宋威以忠武军二千人至，即与诸军会战，蛮军大败，死者五千馀人，退保星宿山。威进军沱江驿，距成都三十里。
现代文：乙未，南诏蛮军步骑数万人又来拒战，恰好唐右武卫上将军宋威率忠武军二千人赶到，与颜庆复指挥的诸路唐军会合，南诏蛮军被杀得大败，死者五千多人，蛮军退守星宿山，宋威率军进至沱江驿，距成都仅三十里。
English: On the 2nd day of the 2nd month, the Southern Zhao barbarian army of tens of thousands of people on foot and horseback again came to resist the war. It just so happened that Song Wei, the general of the Tang Right Wuwei, arrived with 2,000 loyal troops and met with the Tang troops commanded by Yan Qingfu. The Southern Zhao barbarian army was defeated and more than 5,000 people were killed. The barbarian army retreated to Xingshu Mountain. Song Wei led the army into the Lijiang River, only 30 miles from Chengdu.

古文：蛮遣其臣杨定保诣支详请和，详曰： 宜先解围退军。 
现代文：这时，南诏再遣使臣杨定保往支详处请秘，支详声言： 应先解成都围退军 。
English: At this time, Nanzhao sent the envoy Yang Dingbao to the support office to ask for the secret, and the support office said: The siege of Chengdu should be lifted and the army should retreat first.

古文：定保还，蛮围城如故。
现代文：杨定保回到军中，南诏军仍然围城如故。
English: Yang Dingbao returned to the army, but the Nanzhao army still besieged the city.

古文：城中不知援军之至，但见其数来请和，知援军必胜矣。
现代文：成都城内并不知道唐援军已至，但见到南诏屦派使者来请和，推测援军必定胜利。
English: The city of Chengdu did not know that Tang reinforcements had arrived, but when they saw Nanzhao sent an envoy to invite peace, they surmised that the reinforcements would certainly be victorious.

古文：戊戌，蛮复请和，使者十返，城中亦依违答之。
现代文：戊戌，南诏又遣使者来成都请和，使者往返十来次，城中也不给予明确答复。
English: Nanzhao also sent an envoy to Chengdu to ask for peace. The envoy went back and forth ten times, and the city did not give a clear answer.

古文：蛮以援军在近，攻城尤急，骠信以下亲立矢石之间。
现代文：南诏军见唐援军就在成都近边，攻城更加急迫，骠信以下军官都亲自立于矢石之间。
English: The Nanzhao army saw that the Tang reinforcements were near Chengdu, and the siege of the city was even more urgent. Officers from Yan Xin on down personally stood between the arrow stones.

古文：庚子，官军至城下与蛮战，夺其升迁桥，是夕，蛮自烧攻具遁去，比明，官军乃觉之。
现代文：庚子，唐官军赶到城下与蛮军接战，夺得南诏的升迁桥，至夜晚，南诏军烧毁其攻城器具而遁走，至第二天清晨，唐军才察觉南诏蛮军已离去。
English: Geng Zi, the Tang government army rushed to the city to fight with the barbarian army and won the promotion bridge of Nanzhao. At night, the Nanzhao army burned their siege equipment and fled. It was not until the morning of the next day that the Tang army realized that the Nanzhao barbarian army had left.

古文：初，朝廷使颜庆复救成都，命宋威屯绵，汉为后继。
现代文：起初，朝廷派颜庆复往救成都，而命宋威率军屯于绵州、汉州作后继。
English: At first, the imperial court sent Yan Qingfu to rescue Chengdu, and ordered Song Wei to lead the army in Mianzhou and Hanzhou to succeed him.

古文：威乘胜先至城下，破蛮军功居多，庆复疾之。
现代文：但宋威乘胜先至成都城下，破南诏蛮军所立战功最多，遭到颜庆复的妒嫉。
English: However, Song Wei was the first to reach the outskirts of Chengdu after the victory, and achieved the most war exploits in defeating the Southern Zhao barbarian army, which made Yan Qingfu jealous.

古文：威饭士，欲追蛮军，城中战士亦欲与北军合势俱进，庆复牒威，夺其军，勒归汉州。
现代文：南诏蛮军乘夜逃走后，宋威令士兵赶紧吃饭，企图追击蛮军，成都城中的战士也想与自北而来的唐军合势共同追击，颜复行文给宋威，收夺其兵权，令宋威归汉州据守。
English: After the Nanzhao barbarian army fled by night, Song Wei ordered the soldiers to eat quickly and attempted to pursue the barbarian army. The soldiers in Chengdu also wanted to pursue together with the Tang army coming from the north. Yan Fu Xingwen gave Song Wei, seized his military power, and ordered Song Wei to return to Hanzhou to defend.

古文：蛮至双流，阻新穿水，造桥未能成，狼狈失度。三日，桥成，乃得过，断桥而去，甲兵服物遗弃于路，蜀人甚恨之。
现代文：南诏蛮军退至双流，被新穿水阻挡，一时造桥不成，军队狼狈拥挤失去控制，三天后才造好桥，得以通过新穿水，其兵甲器物衣服很多都遗弃于路上。
English: The Nanzhao barbarian army retreated to Shuangliu, and was blocked by the new water crossing. For a while, the bridge could not be built, and the army was overwhelmed and lost control. It took three days to build the bridge and pass through the new water crossing. Many of their armor and clothing were abandoned on the road.

古文：黎州刺史严师本收散卒数千保邛州，蛮围之，二日，不克，亦舍去。
现代文：蜀中人士对颜庆复不准宋威追击蛮军的举动极为痛恨。黎州刺史严师本收集散卒数千人保据邛州，被南诏军围困，围攻两天不能克，南诏军也只得舍城而去。
English: The people of Shu were extremely bitter about Yan Qingfu's refusal to allow Song Wei to pursue the barbarian army. Li Zhou stabbed Shi Yan and collected thousands of scattered soldiers to secure Zhangzhou, which was besieged by the Nanzhao army. The siege could not be broken for two days, and the Nanzhao army had to leave the city.

古文：颜庆复始教蜀人筑壅门城，穿堑引水满之，植鹿角，分营铺。
现代文：颜庆复开始教蜀中士民筑壅门城，即于城门之外再筑垣墙以遮住城门，又挖壕堑并灌满水，在城外空旷之地插木杈为鹿角，在城上分立营寨，住守士卒。
English: Yan Qingfu began to teach the Shu sergeants to build the gate city, that is, to build a wall outside the gate to cover the gate, to dig a trench and fill it with water, to insert a wooden stake for antlers in the open space outside the city, to set up a camp on the city, and to live as guards.

古文：蛮知有备，自是不复犯成都矣。
现代文：南诏知唐人已严加守备，自后不再进犯成都了。
English: Nanzhao knew that the Chinese had been on high alert and would not attack Chengdu again.

古文：先是，西川牙将有职无官，及拒却南诏，四人以功授监察御史，堂帖，人输堂例钱三百缗；贫者苦之。
现代文：先前，西川牙将虽有其职而无其官，及至击退南诏蛮军后，有四人以功授官为监察御史，按照政事堂的通知，每人要交堂例钱三百缗；家境贫苦的人深感忧虑。
English: Previously, although Saikawaga had his duties, he did not have his officials, and after the defeat of the Nanzhao barbarian army, there were four people who were awarded the post of inspector of history. According to the notice of the Government House, each person had to pay the court's usual money of 300 baht; people from poor families were deeply worried.

古文：三月，左仆射、同平章事曹确同平章事，充镇海节度使。
现代文：三月，左仆射、同平章事曹确以同平章事衔，充任镇海节度使。
English: In March, Zuo Fuxia and Tongping Zhang Ji Cao assumed the title of Tongping Zhang Ji and served as the Zhenhai Festival envoy.

古文：夏，四月，丙午，以翰林学士承旨、兵部侍郎韦保衡同平章事。
现代文：夏季，四月，丙午，任命翰林学士承旨、兵部待郎韦保衡为同平章事。
English: In the summer, on the afternoon of the third day of the fourth month, Hanlin Scholar Zheng Zi and Hyobusi Wait Lang Wei Baoheng were appointed to the same rank.

古文：徐贼馀党犹相聚闾里为群盗，散居兗、郓、青、齐之间，诏徐州观察使夏侯瞳招谕之。
现代文：徐州庞勋余党仍然相聚于乡闾为盗贼，散居于兖州、郓州、青州、齐州之间，诏命徐州观察使夏侯瞳对这群人进行招谕。
English: The Xuzhou Pang Xun Yu Party was still gathered in the township of Zhou as thieves, scattered between Zhou, Zhou, Qingzhou and Qizhou, and ordered the Xuzhou observation to make Xia Houyi invite this group of people.

古文：五月，丁丑，以邛州刺史吴行鲁为西川留后。
现代文：五月，丁丑，任命邛州刺史吴行鲁为西川留后。
English: In May, Ding Yuxi appointed Wu Xinglu, the governor of Zhangzhou, as the successor of Xi Chuan.

古文：光州民逐刺史李弱翁，弱翁奔新息。
现代文：光州民众驱逐刺史李弱翁，出奔李弱翁新息。
English: The people of Gwangju evicted the assassin Li Weiyong, and Li Weiyong fled to a new life.

古文：左补阙杨堪等上言： 刺史不道，百姓负冤，当诉于朝廷，置诸典刑，岂得群党相聚，擅自斥逐，乱上下之分！
现代文：左补阙杨堪等向朝廷进言称： 刺史贪暴无道，使百姓冤狱遍地，应当及时上诉于朝廷，按朝廷刑典来进行处置，怎么可以民众群党相聚，擅自驱逐刺史，扰乱上下名份！
English: Yang Kan, the Left Complementary, and others made suggestions to the imperial court, saying, "The instigators of history are greedy and ruthless, and the people are unjustly imprisoned everywhere. They should appeal to the imperial court in a timely manner, and be dealt with according to the imperial criminal code. How can the masses of the people gather together, expel the instigators of history without authorization, and disturb the upper and lower ranks!

古文：此风殆不可长，宜加严诛，以惩来者！ 
现代文：决不能助长这种风气，应该严刑诛杀这些人，以使今后不再发生此类事情 。
English: This culture must not be encouraged, and these people should be severely punished and killed so that such things will not happen in the future.

古文：上令百官议处置徐州之宜。
现代文：唐懿宗令朝廷百官议论如何处置徐州的党羽。
English: Emperor Tang Xizong ordered hundreds of officials in the imperial court to discuss how to deal with the Xuzhou faction.

古文：六月，丙午，太子少傅李胶等状，以为： 徐州虽屡构祸乱，未必比屋顽凶；盖由统御失人，是致奸回乘衅。今使名虽降，兵额尚存，以为支郡则粮饷不给，分隶别落则人心未服；或旧恶相继，更成披猖。
现代文：六月，丙午，太子少傅李胶等给懿宗进状，认为 徐州虽然屡次发生祸乱，不见得所有的人都是凶顽，那是由于治民官不得其人，致使奸诈之人乘隙起事，今天虽然将节度使降为观察使，但兵额却仍然很多，将这些军队交由郡来管辖，郡又无法提供足够的粮饷，将其交由别的藩镇来管辖，军士们必定不服；或许和旧的怨恨搅在一起，造成更大的祸乱。
English: In June, in the afternoon of the 4th day of the 6th month, the young prince Fu Li Jia and others sent a letter to the Xizong, saying that although there were repeated disasters in Xuzhou, not all people were fierce. It was because the civil officials were not allowed to have their own people, causing treacherous people to take advantage of the loophole to rise up. Today, although the festival was reduced to an observation mission, the number of soldiers was still large. These troops were placed under the jurisdiction of the county, and the county could not provide enough grain and rice. They were placed under the jurisdiction of other towns. The soldiers would not accept it. Perhaps they were mixed with

古文：惟泗州向因攻守，结衅已深，宜有更张，庶为两便。 
现代文：徐州所领，只有泗州向来因为攻守，与其他州结怨已深，应该有所更改，使两者都能相安无事。 
English: Led by Xuzhou, only Ganzhou has always been on the offensive and defensive, and has deep grudges with other states. It should be changed so that both can be safe and sound.

古文：诏从之，徐州依旧为观察使，统徐、濠、宿三州，泗州为团练使，割隶淮南。
现代文：懿宗听从李胶的建议，诏命徐州依旧置观察使，统辖徐州、濠州、宿州三州，泗州置团练使，从徐州改隶于淮南。
English: Heeding Li Jiau's suggestion, Emperor Taizong ordered that Xuzhou still set up an observation envoy to supervise the three states of Xuzhou, Zhangzhou and Suzhou, and that Zhangzhou should set up a group of training envoys to report from Xuzhou to Huainan.

古文：加幽州节度使张允伸兼侍中。
现代文：朝廷加幽州节度使张允伸官，命他兼任侍中。
English: The Imperial Court and the Yuzhou Festival made Zhang Yunshen an official, and ordered him to also serve as a chamberlain.

古文：秋，八月，乙未，同昌公主薨。
现代文：秋季，八月，乙未，同昌公主病死。
English: In the autumn, in August, in the middle of the year, Princess Tongchang died of illness.

古文：上痛悼不已，杀翰林医官韩宗劭等二十馀人，悉收捕其亲族三百馀人系京兆狱。
现代文：唐懿宗极为痛苦，悲伤不已，竟下令杀翰林院医官韩宗劭等二十余人，并将他们的亲族三百余人全部逮捕，关押在京兆监狱。
English: Tang Xizong was extremely pained and grief-stricken. He ordered the killing of more than 20 people, including Han Zongyi, the medical officer of Hanlin Hospital, and arrested all of their relatives, more than 300 people, and detained them in Jingzhao Prison.

古文：中书侍郎、同平章事刘瞻召谏官使言之，谏官莫敢言者，乃自上言，以为： 修短之期，人之定分。
现代文：中书侍郎同平章事刘瞻召请诸谏官，请他们上言劝谏，但谏官竟没有一人敢进谏，刘瞻只好自己上言，认为： 生命的长短，每个人都有定分。
English: In the middle of the book, Liu Zhan called all the eunuchs and asked them to advise him, but none of the eunuchs dared to enter the court. Liu Zhan had to advise himself, thinking: Everyone has a certain amount of time to live.

古文：昨公主有疾，深轸圣慈。宗劭等诊疗之时，惟求疾愈，备施方术，非不尽心，而祸福难移，竟成差跌，原其情状，亦可哀矜。
现代文：昨天公主患有疾病，受到陛下深深的慈爱，医官韩宗劭等为公主诊断治疗时，只是希望能将病治好，施展了多种医术和药方，不能说是不尽，但人的祸福难移，竟然不能妙手回春，各种医术未能奏效，当时医官们的情状，也是值得哀怜。
English: Yesterday, the princess was suffering from an illness, and was deeply loved by His Majesty. When the medical officer Han Zonglu and others diagnosed and treated the princess, they only hoped to cure the disease. They applied a variety of medical techniques and prescriptions, which cannot be said to be inexhaustible. However, human misfortune and good fortune are hard to shift. It is impossible to miraculously turn back the clock, and various medical techniques failed to work. The situation of the medical officers at that time was also worthy of pity.

古文：而械系老幼三百馀人，物议沸腾。道路嗟叹。
现代文：但因此怪罪医官，用刑具收捕医官们的家属老幼三百余人，致使朝野议论纷纷，群情沸腾，道路上也常听到人的叹息声。
English: But because of this, they blamed the medical officers and used torture instruments to arrest more than three hundred members of the medical officers' families, both young and old, which led to a lot of discussion in the morning and evening, heated emotions, and people's sighs were often heard on the road.

古文：奈何以达理知命之君，涉肆暴不明之谤！
现代文：知天命达人理的君主，何至于要遭到肆行暴虐不明事理的诽谤呢！
English: Why should the sovereign, who knows the fate of the heavens and is reasonable, be subjected to violent and unreasonable slander?

古文：盖由安不虑危，忿不思难之故也。
现代文：大概是由于居安不忧虑危难，愤怒时不思常理的缘故吧。
English: It's probably due to the fact that they don't worry about safety or danger, and they don't think rationally when they are angry.

古文：伏愿少回圣虑，宽释系者。 
现代文：希望陛下能回心转意，宽大并释放这些无辜被捕人吧。 
English: Let us hope that His Majesty will have a change of heart, show clemency and release these innocent detainees.

古文：上览疏，不悦。
现代文：懿宗看到刘瞻疏文，很不高兴。
English: Xizong was not happy to see Liu Zhan Shouwen.

古文：瞻又与京兆尹温璋力谏于上前，上大怒，叱出之。
现代文：刘瞻又与京兆尹温璋在朝堂当面力谏；唐懿宗勃然大怒，喝令刘瞻、温璋退出朝堂。
English: Liu Zhan and Jing Zhaoyun also quarreled with each other in front of the imperial court; the Tang Dynasty Yongzheng Emperor was furious and ordered Liu Zhan and Wen Zhan to leave the imperial court.

古文：魏博节度使何全皞年少，骄暴好杀，又减将士衣粮。
现代文：魏博节度使何全年纪较轻，骄横残暴，动不动就杀人，又减扣将士的衣粮。
English: The Wei Bo Festival made the whole year less disciplined, arrogant and brutal, killing people at every turn, and reducing the soldiers' clothing and food.

古文：将士作乱，全皞单骑走，追杀之，推大将韩君雄为留后。
现代文：其部下将士作乱，何全单骑逃走，被乱军追杀而死。魏博将士推大将韩君雄为留后。
English: His subordinates caused a riot, and He Quan rode away alone and was chased down and killed by the rioters. Wei Bo pushed General Han Junxiong to stay behind.

古文：成德节度使王景崇为之请旌节。
现代文：成德节度使王景崇向朝廷为韩君雄请求留后的旌旗节钺。
English: The Chengde Festival made Wang Jingsong ask the imperial court for Han Junxiong to stay behind.

古文：九月，庚戌，以君雄为魏博留后。
现代文：九月，庚戌。朝廷命韩君雄为魏博留后。
English: In September, Geng Hui, the imperial court ordered Han Junxiong to stay in Weibo.

古文：丙辰，以刘瞻同平章事，充荆南节度使。贬温璋振州司马。
现代文：丙辰，唐懿宗命刘瞻以同平章事衔，充当荆南节度使，贬温璋为振州司马。
English: Liu Zhan, a member of the Tang Dynasty, was given the title of Tongpingzhang and served as Jingnan's festival envoy, while Wen Zang was demoted to Zhenzhou's secretary.

古文：璋叹曰： 生不逢时，死何足惜！ 
现代文：温璋叹息说： 生不逢时，死又保足惜 ！
English: Wen Rong sighed and said: Life is too short, death is too short!

古文：是夕，仰药卒。
现代文：这天晚上，饮药自杀而亡。
English: That night, he took pills and committed suicide.

古文：庚申，敕曰： 苟无蠹害，何至于斯！
现代文：唐懿宗为此下敕： 如果不是蠹害，何至于此！
English: Tang Xizong said, "If it is not a crime, what is it?"

古文：恶实贯盈，死有馀责。宜令三日内且于城外权瘗，俟经恩宥，方许归葬，使中外快心，奸邪知惧。 
现代文：温璋实在是恶贯满盈，死有余辜，三天内暂且埋尸于城外，待有恩宥之时，方许归葬，使中外人心大快，奸邪之人知道畏惧。 
English: In fact, Wen Xuan was full of evil, and his death was not without guilt. He was temporarily buried outside the city for three days. When he was pardoned, he was allowed to be buried, so that the hearts of both Chinese and foreigners would be quickened, and those who committed evil would know fear.

古文：己巳，贬右谏议大夫高湘、比部郎中知制诰杨知至、礼部郎中魏筜等于岭南，皆坐与刘瞻亲善，为韦保衡所逐也。
现代文：己巳，贬右谏议大夫高湘、比部郎中知制诰杨知至、礼部郎中魏等人，皆流于岭南，这些人都是由于平时与刘瞻相亲善，因而遭到韦保衡的贬逐。
English: It is worth noting that Gao Xiang, the right-hand man of the right-hand man of the right-hand man of the right-hand man of the right-hand man of the right-hand man of the right-hand man of the right-hand man of the right-hand man of the right-hand man of the right-hand man of the right-hand man of the right-hand man of the right-hand man of the right-hand man of the right-hand man of the right-hand man of the right-hand man of the right-hand man of the right-hand man of the right-hand man of the right-hand man of the right-hand man of

古文：知至，汝士之子；筜，扶之子也。
现代文：杨知至是杨汝士的儿子、魏是魏扶的儿子。
English: Yang Zhizhi is the son of Yang Rushi, and Wei is the son of Wei Fu.

古文：保衡又与路岩共谮刘瞻，去与医官通谋，误投毒药。
现代文：韦保衡又与路岩共同奏劾刘瞻，称刘瞻与翰林医官通谋，误投毒药，导致同昌公主死亡。
English: Wei Baoheng and Luyan jointly filed a complaint against Liu Zhan, saying that Liu Zhan conspired with the Hanlin medical officer to inject poison by mistake, leading to the death of the Tongchang princess.

古文：丙子，贬瞻康州刺史。
现代文：丙子，再贬刘瞻为康州刺史。
English: C'mon, let's relegate Liu Zhan to a footnote in the history of Kangzhou.

古文：翰林学士承旨郑畋草瞻罢相制辞曰： 安数亩之居，仍非己有；却四方之赂，惟畏人知。 
现代文：翰林学士承旨郑畋起草罢免刘瞻宰相的制文，其中有 安居于数亩之地，却非自己所有；拒绝四方贿赂，也生怕有人知道。 
English: Under the order of Zheng Zhen, Hanlin Baccalaureate drafted a document to recall the prime minister Liu Zhan, which included living safely on several acres of land, but not owned by himself; refusing the four-way bribe, but also afraid that someone would know.

古文：岩谓畋曰： 侍郎乃表荐刘相也！ 
现代文：路岩为此指责郑畋说： 这明明是表荐刘瞻宰相嘛！ 
English: Lu Yan blamed Zheng Qi for this, saying: This is clearly the recommendation of Prime Minister Liu Zhan!

古文：坐贬梧州刺史。
现代文：郑畋竟因此被贬为梧州刺史。
English: As a result, Zheng Yao was reduced to the status of a mere footnote in the history of Wuzhou.

古文：御史中丞孙瑝坐为瞻所擢用，亦贬汀州刺史。
现代文：御史中丞孙因为是刘瞻所引荐重用，也被贬为汀州刺史。
English: Because he was recommended by Liu Zhan, he was also relegated to Tingzhou's history.

古文：路岩素与刘瞻论议多不叶，瞻既贬康州，岩犹不快，阅《十道图》，以欢州去长安万里，再贬欢州司户。
现代文：路岩平素与刘瞻论政事多不合，刘瞻被贬至康州，路岩仍觉得贬得不够远，而犹感不快，遍查《十道图》，找到州距长安有万里，于是再贬刘瞻为州司户。
English: Lu Yan and Liu Zhan disagreed on many political issues. Liu Zhan was demoted to Kangzhou. Lu Yan still felt that the demotion was not far enough, and still felt unhappy. He searched through the "Ten-Way Map" and found that the state was thousands of miles away from Chang'an. Therefore, Liu Zhan was relegated to the position of the state secretary.

古文：冬，十月，癸卯，以西川留后吴行鲁为节度使。
现代文：冬季，十月，癸卯，唐廷任命西川留后吴行鲁为西川节度使。
English: In the winter, in October, the Tang Dynasty appointed Wu Xinglu as the chief envoy of the Xichuan Festival after Xichuan's stay.

古文：十一月，辛亥，以兵部尚书、盐铁转运使王鐸为礼部尚书、同平章事。
现代文：十一月，辛亥，唐懿宗任命兵部尚书、盐铁转运使王铎为礼部尚书、同平章事。
English: In November, Xinhai, Tang Xizong appointed the military department Shangshu and the salt and iron transportation department Wang Xi as the ceremonial department Shangshu and Tongping.

古文：鐸起之兄子也。
现代文：王铎是王起之兄王炎的儿子。
English: Wang Qi is the son of Wang Qi's brother Wang Yan.

古文：丁卯，复以徐州为感化军节度。
现代文：丁卯，朝廷复以徐州为感化军，置节度使。
English: Dingwu, the imperial court reverted to Xuzhou as an army of influence, and set up an envoy.

古文：十二月，加成德节度使王景崇同平章事，以左金吾上将军李国昌为振武节度使。
现代文：十二月，唐懿宗下令加成德节度使王景崇为同平章事。任命左金吾上将军李国昌为振武节度使。
English: In December, Emperor Taizong of Tang ordered that the Chengde Festival be added to make Wang Jingsong the same level. He appointed General Li Guochang as the Zhenwu Festival envoy.

古文：懿宗昭圣恭惠孝皇帝下咸通十二年春，正月，辛酉，葬文懿公主。
现代文：咸通十二年春季，正月，辛酉，为文懿公主下葬。
English: In the spring of the twelfth year of Hamdang, in the first month of the year, in Xinlu, the funeral of Princess Wenyi took place.

古文：韦氏之人争取庭祭之灰，汰其金银。
现代文：在韦氏的家中设祭，韦氏家人争相拾取庭祭后的灰，淘出其中的金银。
English: A festival was held at Wei's home, and Wei's family members scrambled to pick up the ashes after the garden festival, scavenging the gold and silver from them.

古文：凡服玩，每物皆百二十舆，以锦绣、珠玉为仪卫、明器，辉焕二十馀里。
现代文：公主的服装玩具，每种都有一百二十车，送葬时用锦绣、珠玉为仪卫、明器，五彩缤纷的送葬队伍延绵三十余里。
English: The princess's costume toys, each of which has one hundred and twenty cars, are embroidered with brocade and jewels as ceremonial guards and bright objects during the funeral. The colorful funeral procession stretches for more than thirty miles.

古文：赐酒百斛、饼饣炎四十橐驼，以饲体夫。
现代文：又赐酒一百多斛，装了四十骆驼的饼，以给抬柩的役夫食用。
English: He also gave more than a hundred jars of wine filled with bread for forty camels, to be eaten by those who carried the donkeys.

古文：上与郭淑妃思公主不已，乐工李可及作《叹百年曲》，其声忄妻惋，舞者数百人，发内库杂宝为其首饰，以絁八百匹为地衣，舞罢，珠玑覆地。
现代文：唐懿宗与郭淑妃追思公主不已，乐工李可及为此创作了《叹百年曲》，曲声切惋转，感动人心，舞女数百人配以舞蹈，懿宗又调发内库杂宝为舞女作首饰，用八百匹作地毯，一曲歌舞过后，地毯上尽是珠宝玑玉。
English: Tang Yizong and Guo Shufei thought about the princess for a long time. Musician Li Keji composed the "Centennial Song" for this purpose. The song cut through and moved people's hearts. Hundreds of dancers accompanied the dance. Yizong also dispatched the miscellaneous treasures in the vault to make jewelry for the dancers, and used 800 horses to make carpets. After a song and dance, the carpet was full of jewels.

古文：以魏博留后韩君雄为节度使。
现代文：朝廷正式任命魏博留后韩君雄为节度使。
English: The imperial court officially appointed Han Junxiong as the Minister of Ceremonies after Wei Bo left.

古文：门下侍郎、同平章事路岩与韦保衡素相表里，势倾天下。
现代文：门下侍郎、同平章事路岩与韦保衡相互勾结，互为表里，权势倾于天下。
English: Subordinate chamberlains, Tongping Zhiluyan and Wei Baoheng colluded with each other, each other, and the power was poured into the world.

古文：既而争权，浸有隙，保衡遂短岩于上。
现代文：但不久两人互相争权，渐渐有了隔阂。韦保衡于是在唐懿宗面前揭路岩的短，并进行诋毁。
English: Soon, however, the two fought for power and gradually became estranged. Wei Baoheng then exposed the shortcoming of the rock in front of Tang Xizong and slandered him.

古文：夏，四月，癸卯，以岩同平章事，充西川节度使。
现代文：夏季，四月癸卯，唐懿宗命路岩挂同平章事衔，充任西川节度使，贬出京城。
English: In the summer, at the end of April, Tang Xizong, with the title of Tongpingzhang, served as the envoy to the Nishikawa Festival and left the capital.

古文：岩出城，路人以瓦砾掷之。
现代文：路岩出长安城时，街道上的百姓用瓦砾向他掷去。
English: When Lu Yan left Chang'an City, the people on the street pelted him with rubble.

古文：权京兆尹薛能，岩所擢也，岩谓能曰： 临行，烦以瓦砾相饯！ 
现代文：当时暂任京兆尹的薛能是路岩所提拔，路岩于是向薛能打招呼，说； 我临行时，恐怕要受到瓦砾的饯行 ！
English: At that time, Xue Neng, who was temporarily in charge of Jing Zhaoyun, was promoted by Luyan. Luyan then greeted Xue Neng, saying, "When I go, I'm afraid I'll be crushed by the rubble!"

古文：能徐举笏对曰： 向来宰相出，府司无例发人防卫。 
现代文：薛能慢吞吞地举起笏回答说： 向来宰相出城，京兆府司没有派兵防卫的惯例。 
English: Xue Neng slowly raised his eyebrows and replied: It has always been the custom for the prime minister to leave the city, but the prefectural governor did not send troops to defend the city.

古文：岩甚惭。
现代文：路岩听后惭愧极了。
English: Luyan was very ashamed after listening.

古文：能，汾州人也。
现代文：薛能是汾州人。
English: Xue Neng is from Zhangzhou.

古文：五月，上幸安国寺，赠僧重谦、僧澈沉檀讲座二，各高二丈。
现代文：五月，唐懿宗来安国寺，赐予佛僧重谦、僧澈两个用沉香、檀香木制作的讲座椅子，每个都有二丈高。
English: In May, Emperor Taizong of Tang Dynasty came to Anguo Temple and gave two lecture chairs, made of agarwood and sandalwood, to Buddhist monks Chong Qian and Zong Che. Each chair is two stories high.

古文：设万人斋。
现代文：又设万人斋戒。
English: A million-person fast has also been instituted.

古文：秋，七月，以兵部尚书卢耽同平章事，充山南东道节度使。
现代文：秋季，七月，唐懿宗任命兵部尚书卢耽挂同平章事衔，充任山南东道节度使。
English: In the autumn, in July, Emperor Taizong of Tang appointed Shang Shulu of the Military Department to hold the title of Tongpingzhang and serve as the host festival envoy of Shannan.

古文：冬，十月，以兵部侍郎、盐铁转运使刘鄴为礼部尚书、同平章事。
现代文：冬季，十月，唐懿宗任命兵部侍郎、盐铁转运使刘邺为礼部尚书、同平章事。
English: In the winter, in October, Emperor Taizong of Tang appointed the attendant of the military department and the salt and iron transport commander Liu Xi as the ceremonial secretary and the secretary of the same level.

古文：懿宗昭圣恭惠孝皇帝下咸通十三年
现代文：咸通十三年
English: Hamdang Thirteen Years

古文：春，正月，幽州节度使张允伸得风疾，请委军政就医。许之，以其子简会为留后。
现代文：春季，正月，唐幽州节度使张允伸患中风病，向朝廷请求将幽州镇军政事务委交他人，自己就医治疗，得到朝廷的准许，于是以张允伸之子张简会为幽州留后。
English: In the spring, the first month of the year, the Yuzhou Festival of the Tang Dynasty caused Zhang Yunshen to suffer from a stroke, and he asked the imperial court to hand over the Yuzhou Town Military and Political Affairs Committee to others. He sought medical treatment and received permission from the imperial court. As a result, Zhang Jianhui, the son of Zhang Yunshen, stayed behind in Yuzhou.

古文：疾甚，遣使上表纳旌节。丙申，薨。
现代文：不久疾病转重，张允伸又派遣使者上表朝廷请交还节度使旌旗节钺，丙申，因病不治而死。
English: Soon the disease worsened, and Zhang Yunshen sent an envoy to petition the imperial court to return the scepter and make the flag festival. Bishen died of the disease.

古文：允伸镇幽州二十三年，勤俭恭谨，边鄙无警，上下安之。
现代文：张允伸坐镇幽州二十三年，勤于军政事务，处事恭谨小心，使边境没有出现过危机，军民上下和睦相处，安居乐业。
English: Zhang Yunxin has been in Yuzhou for 23 years. He has been diligent in military and political affairs. He has handled affairs with respect and caution, so that there has never been a crisis at the border, and the military and the people have lived and worked in harmony.

古文：二月，丁巳，以兵部侍郎、同平章事于琮为山南东道节度使，以刑部侍郎、判户部奉天赵隐为户部侍郎、同平章事。
现代文：二月，丁巳唐懿宗任命兵部侍郎、同平章事于琮出朝为山南东道节度使；任命刑部侍郎、判户部奉天人赵隐为户部侍郎、同平章事。
English: In February, Emperor Taizong of the Tang Dynasty appointed the attendant of the Military Department and Tongping Zhangji to be the host of the festival in Shannan Province; appointed the attendant of the Criminal Department and the judge of the Household Department, Zhao Yin, to be the attendant of the Household Department and Tongping Zhangji.

古文：平州刺史张公素，素有威望，为幽人所服。
现代文：唐平州刺史张公素，平时很有威望，为幽州人所信服。
English: Tang Pingzhou's chief historian Zhang Gongsu, who is usually very prestigious, convinced the people of Yuzhou.

古文：张允伸薨，公素帅州兵来奔丧。
现代文：张允伸死后，张公素率领平州兵为幽州奔丧。
English: After the death of Zhang Yunxin, Zhang Gongsu led the Pingju soldiers to Yuzhou.

古文：张简会惧，三月，奔京师，以为诸卫将军。
现代文：张简会害怕张公素将不利于己，三月，投奔京城，被朝廷任命为诸卫将军之一。
English: Zhang Jiankui was afraid that Zhang Gongsu would be unfavorable to him. In March, he fled to Beijing and was appointed by the imperial court as one of the generals of the Guards.

古文：夏，四月，立皇子保为吉王，杰为寿王，倚为睦王。
现代文：夏季，四月，唐懿宗立皇子李保为吉王，李杰为寿王，李倚为睦王。
English: In the summer, in April, Li Bao, the prince of the Tang Dynasty, was crowned the auspicious king, Li Jie was crowned the auspicious king, and Li Yi was crowned the auspicious king.

古文：以张公素为平卢留后。
现代文：朝廷任命张公素为卢龙留后。
English: After the imperial court appointed Zhang Gongsu to stay in Lulong.

古文：五月，国子司业韦殷裕诣阁门告郭淑妃弟内作坊使敬述阴事。
现代文：五月，国子司业韦殷裕来到禁内阁门，告发郭淑妃之弟内作坊使郭敬述所作许多见不得人的事。
English: In May, the Secretary of the State Council, Wei Yinyu, came to the gate of the forbidden cabinet and denounced Guo Shuhui's brother's workshop to make Guo Jing describe the many unseemly things he had done.

古文：上大怒，杖杀殷裕，籍没其家。
现代文：唐懿宗勃然大怒，将殷裕杖杀，并籍没其家产。
English: Tang Xizong flew into a rage, killed Yin Yu Jie, and confiscated his family property.

古文：乙亥，阁门使田献銛夺紫，改桥陵使，以其受殷裕状故也。
现代文：乙亥，阁门使田献被剥夺穿紫衣的权利，改任桥陵使，他所以降职是因为接受韦裕所上的诉状。
English: Yihai, the gatekeeper, deprived Tian Xian of the right to wear purple clothes and replaced him as the bridge and tomb envoy. He was demoted because he accepted Wei Yu's complaint.

古文：殷裕妻父太府少卿崔元应、妻从兄中书舍人崔沆、季父君卿皆贬岭南官；给事中杜裔休坐与殷裕善，亦贬端州司户。
现代文：韦殷裕的岳父太府少卿崔元应、韦殷裕妻子的堂兄中书舍人崔沆、叔父韦君卿也都受到牵连，贬往岭南。给事中杜裔休因为与韦殷裕友善，也被贬为端州司户。
English: Wei Yin Yu's father-in-law, Taifu Shaoqing Cui Yuanying, Wei Yin Yu's wife's cousin, middle school teacher Cui Yan, and Wei's uncle, Wei Junqing, were also implicated and demoted to Lingnan. Because of his friendship with Wei Yin Yu, he was also demoted to the position of Hanzhou steward.

古文：沆，铉之子也。
现代文：崔沆是崔铉的儿子。
English: Cui Wei is Cui Wei's son.

古文：裔休，悰之子也。
现代文：杜裔休是杜的儿子。
English: Du Xiu is the son of Du Wu.

古文：丙子，贬山南东道节度使于琮为普王傅、分司，韦保衡谮之也。
现代文：丙子，唐懿宗下令贬山南东道节度使于琮为普王李俨的师傅、分司东都。这也是由于韦保衡的诋毁。
English: Incidentally, Emperor Taizong of Tang ordered that the southern host of the festival in Shanshan be downgraded to make Yu Xi the teacher and branch chief of the eastern capital of King Li Xi of Pu. This was also due to Wei Baoheng's slander.

古文：辛巳，贬尚书左承李当、吏部侍郎王沨、左散骑常侍李都、翰林学士承旨兵部侍郎张杨、前中书舍人封彦卿、左谏议大夫杨塾；癸未，贬工部尚书严祁、给事中李贶、给事中张鐸、左金吾大将军李敬仲、起居舍人萧遘、李渎、郑彦特、李藻，皆处之湖、岭之南，坐与琮厚善故也，贶，汉之子；遘，置之子也。
现代文：辛巳，朝廷又贬尚书左丞李当、吏部侍郎王、左散骑常侍李都、翰林学士承旨兵部侍郎张裼、前中书舍人封彦卿、左谏议大夫杨塾等人的官，癸未，再贬工部尚书严祁、给事中李贶、给事中张铎、左金吾大将军李敬仲、起居舍人萧遘、李渎、郑彦特、李藻等人的官，全都流放湖南、岭南，而遭贬的原因，也都是平素与于琮相友善。
English: To make matters worse, the imperial court also demoted the officials of Shangshu Zuorong Li Dang, Li Bu attendant Wang, Zuo Zanzhijian Zongzi Li Du, Hanlin Baccalaureate Zongzhi Heibu attendant Zhang Jie, former middle school teacher Fuhang Xie, Zuo Jie deliberation doctor Yang Ju and so on, and further demoted the officials of the Ministry of Industry Shangshu Yan Jie, Zengzhong Li Jie, Zengzhong Zhang Jie, Zuo Kingu general Li Jingzhong, and Zengzhong Xiao, Li Guo, Zheng Yan Te, and Li

古文：甲申，贬前平卢节度使于琄为凉王府长史、分司，前湖南观察使于瑰袁州刺史。
现代文：李贶是李汉的儿子；萧遘是萧的儿子。甲申，贬前平卢节度使于为凉王府长史、分司东都，贬前湖南观察使于为袁州刺史。
English: Li Qian is the son of Li Han; Xiao Qian is the son of Xiao. Jiashen, formerly Pinglu Jiedu, was appointed to be the chief historian of Liangwangfu and the deputy governor of Dongdu, and formerly Hunan Jiedu, was appointed to be the chief historian of Yuanzhou.

古文：瑰、琄，皆琮之兄也。
现代文：于、于都是于琮之兄。
English: Yu and yu are both the older brothers of Yu Yao.

古文：寻再贬琮韶州刺史。
现代文：不久，再贬于琮为韶州刺史。
English: Soon after, it was downgraded to a prefecture-level city.

古文：琮妻广德公主，上之妹也，与琮皆之韶州，行则肩舆门相对，坐则执琮之带，琮由是获全。
现代文：于琮的妻子广德公主是唐懿宗的妹妹，与于琮一同往韶州，行时与于琮的轿子门相对，坐时牵着于琮的衣带，所以于琮得以保全性命。
English: Yu Yao's wife, Princess Guangde, was the sister of Tang Xizong. She went to Zhangzhou with Yu Yao, walking opposite Yu Yao's palanquin, and holding Yu Yao's belt while sitting, so Yu Yao was able to save his life.

古文：时诸公主多骄纵，惟广德动遵法度，事于氏宗亲尊卑无不如礼，内外称之。
现代文：当时唐诸位公主大多骄慢放纵，只有广德公主举动遵守法度，对于氏一家宗亲无论尊卑均待之以礼，受到内外人士的称道。
English: At that time, most of the Tang princesses were arrogant and self-indulgent. Only Princess Guangde acted in accordance with the law. She treated all her family members with courtesy, regardless of their rank, and was praised by people at home and abroad.

古文：六月，以卢龙留后张公素为节度使。
现代文：六月，朝廷任命卢龙留后张公素为节度使。
English: In June, the imperial court appointed Zhang Gongsu as the regent after Lulong's stay.

古文：韦保衡欲以其党裴条为郎官，惮左丞李璋方严，恐其不放上，先遣人达意。
现代文：韦保衡企图用自己的党羽裴条为郎官，怕尚书左丞李璋太严厉，不同意裴条赴省供职，于是事先派人向李璋打招呼。
English: Wei Boheng tried to use his own party feather, Pei Jie, as a vassal, fearing that Shangshu's left-hand man, Li Jie, was too strict and would not agree to Pei Jie going to work in the province, so he sent someone to greet Li Jie in advance.

古文：璋曰： 朝廷迁除，不应见问。 
现代文：李璋回答说： 朝廷官员的升迁，是不应该来问的。 
English: Li Lan replied, "It is not proper to ask about the promotion of court officials.

古文：秋，七月，乙未，以璋为宣歙观察使。
现代文：秋季，七月，乙未，李璋被贬出朝，任宣歙观察使。
English: In the autumn, in July of the same year, Li Xi was expelled from the imperial court and appointed as the observation envoy of Xuan Zang.

古文：八月，归义节度使张义潮薨，沙州长史曹义金代领军府。
现代文：八月，唐归义军节度使张义潮去世，沙州长史曹义金代张义潮领掌军府。
English: In August, Zhang Yichao died during the Tang Dynasty's "Return to the Fatherland" festival, and Governor Shi Cao Yijin took charge of the military government on Zhang Yichao's behalf.

古文：制以义金为归义节度使。
现代文：懿宗下诏，任曹义金为归义军节度使。
English: Emperor Xizong issued an edict appointing Cao Yijin as the envoy to the Qing Dynasty.

古文：是后中原多故，朝命不及，回鹘陷甘州，自馀诸州录归义者多为羌、胡所据。
现代文：自此以后，中原地区变故很多，朝廷的命令不能及时传达至边远，于是甘州沦陷于回鹘之手，归义军所隶其余诸州也多被羌人、胡族所占据。
English: Since then, many things have changed in the Central Plains region. The imperial order could not be promptly conveyed to the outlying areas. As a result, Gansu fell into the hands of the Uighurs, and the remaining provinces under the control of the rebels were mostly occupied by the Xiongnu and Hu ethnic groups.

古文：冬，十二月，追上宣宗谥曰元圣至明成武献文睿智章仁神聪懿道大孝皇帝。
现代文：冬季，十二月，唐懿宗令朝臣追上唐宣宗谥号为元圣至明成武献文睿智章仁神聪懿道大孝皇帝。
English: In winter, in December, Tang Xuan Zong ordered his courtiers to catch up with Tang Xuan Zong, who was called Yuan Sheng Zi Ming Chengwu Xianwu Xianwu Rui Zhi Zhang Ren Shencong Xianwu Da Xiao Emperor.

古文：振武节度使李国昌，恃功恣横，专杀长吏。
现代文：唐振武节度使李国昌自恃有功，骄横恣肆，专杀朝廷任命的官吏。
English: The Tang Zhenwu Festival made Li Guochang boast of his achievements, be arrogant and wanton, and kill officials appointed by the imperial court.

古文：朝廷不能平，徙国昌为大同军防御使，国昌称疾不赴。
现代文：朝廷对此极表不满，于是将李国昌调换为大同军防御使，李国昌抗拒朝令，竟假称有病而不赴大同。
English: The imperial court was extremely dissatisfied with this, so Li Guochang was transferred to the Datong Army as a defense envoy. Li Guochang resisted the imperial order and pretended to be ill instead of going to Datong.

古文：懿宗昭圣恭惠孝皇帝下咸通十四年
现代文：咸通十四年
English: Hamdong 14 years old

古文：春，三月，癸巳，上遣敕使诣法门寺迎佛骨，群臣谏者甚众，至有言宪宗迎佛骨寻晏驾者。
现代文：春季，三月，癸巳，唐懿宗派遣宦官使者往法门寺迎佛骨，满朝大臣有许多人出来劝谏，有的人甚至说唐宪宗迎佛骨不久便崩驾。
English: In the spring, in March, Emperor Jianzong of the Tang Dynasty sent eunuch envoys to Famen Temple to welcome the Buddha's bones. Many ministers of the Manchu Dynasty came out to persuade Emperor Jianzong, and some even said that Emperor Jianzong of the Tang Dynasty would soon die.

古文：上曰： 朕生得见之，死亦无恨！ 
现代文：唐懿宗说： 朕在世时能见到佛骨，死了也无遗恨！ 
English: Tang Yanzong said: I can see the Buddha's bones when I am alive, and I will not regret it when I am dead!

古文：广造浮图、宝帐、香舆、幡花、幢盖以迎之，皆饰以金玉、锦绣、珠翠。
现代文：于是大量建造佛塔、宝帐、香、幡花、幢盖，并且都以金玉、锦绣、珠翠修饰，准备迎接佛骨。
English: As a result, a large number of pagodas, treasure chests, incense, flags, and lids were built, and they were all decorated with gold, brocade, and jade, in preparation for welcoming the Buddhist bones.

古文：自京城至寺三百里间，道路车马，昼夜不绝。
现代文：自京城长安至法门寺之间有三百里，道路上的车马昼夜不绝。
English: There are three hundred miles between the capital Chang'an and Famen Temple, and the traffic on the road is incessant day and night.

古文：夏，四月，壬寅，佛骨至京师，导以禁军兵仗、公私音乐，沸天烛地，绵亘数十里。
现代文：夏季，四月，壬寅，佛骨被运到京城，迎接队伍以禁军兵仗为前导，公家和私人的音乐之声响成一片，欢迎的人群铺天盖地，绵延数十里。
English: In the summer, in April, in Ren'in, the Buddha's bones were transported to Beijing. The welcoming procession was led by a military parade. The sounds of public and private music resounded together, and the welcoming crowd was overwhelming, stretching for dozens of miles.

古文：仪卫之盛，过于郊祀，元和之时不及远矣。
现代文：盛大的仪卫，较郊祀有过之而无不及，空前的盛况远超过了元和之时。
English: The grandeur of the ceremonial guards far exceeded that of the suburban shrines, and the unprecedented pomp far exceeded that of the Yuan and Qing dynasties.

古文：富室夹道为彩楼及无遮会，竞为侈靡。
现代文：长安富室在道路两旁结彩楼，并举办赦免诸恶的无遮会，竞相靡费奢侈。
English: The rich families in Chang'an built a lottery hall on both sides of the road, and held an open meeting to pardon all evils, competing with each other to spend extravagantly.

古文：上御安福门，降楼膜拜，流涕沾臆，赐僧及京城耆老尝见元和事者金帛。
现代文：唐懿宗登上安福门，从楼上走下，向佛骨顶礼膜拜，激动得连眼泪都流了下来。于是赐予佛教僧侣及长安城中年高望重并曾亲眼见过元和年间迎佛骨的人金子和玉帛。
English: Tang Xizong boarded the Anfu Gate, walked down from the upper floor, bowed to the top of the Buddha's bones, and was so excited that he even shed tears. He then gave the Buddhist monks and the middle-aged people in Chang'an City who were highly respected and had seen with their own eyes the welcoming of the Buddha's bones during the Yuan and Zhou Dynasties, gold and jade bracelets.

古文：迎佛骨入禁中，三日，出置安国崇化寺。
现代文：唐懿宗将佛骨迎入禁宫，三天后又将佛骨运出，放置于安国崇化寺。
English: Tang Xizong welcomed the Buddha's bones into the Forbidden City, and three days later they were transported out and placed in the An Guo Chonghua Temple.

古文：宰相已下竞施金帛，不可胜纪。
现代文：宰相以下百官大臣又竞相施舍金、帛等物，其数无法胜记。
English: Hundreds of ministers from the Prime Minister on down competed for alms, money and other things, the number of which is beyond counting.

古文：因下德音，降中外系囚。
现代文：为此唐懿宗发布德音，关押在狱囚犯酌量减刑。
English: For this reason, Tang Yanzong issued a decree to reduce the sentence of prisoners in prison.

古文：五月，丁亥，以西川节度使路岩兼中书令。
现代文：五月，丁亥，唐懿宗命西川节度使路岩兼任中书令。
English: In May, during the reign of Emperor Dinghai, the Tang Dynasty's Yongzheng Emperor ordered Saikawa Jiedu to make Luyan concurrently serve as Chushirei.

古文：南诏寇西川，又寇黔南，黔中经略使秦匡谋兵少不敌，弃城奔荆南。荆南节度使杜悰囚而奏之。
现代文：南诏派军队侵犯西川，又侵犯黔南，唐经略使秦匡谋因兵少不能抵御，弃黔中城逃奔荆南；荆南节度使杜将秦匡谋囚禁并奏告朝廷。
English: Nanzhao sent troops to invade the West River, and also invaded southern Hunan. Tang Jingli ordered Qin Kuangmo, unable to resist due to the small number of soldiers, to abandon the central city of Hunan and flee to Jingnan; Jingnan Jiedu ordered the Du commander Qin Kuangmo to be imprisoned and reported to the imperial court.

古文：六月，乙未，敕斩匡谋，籍没其家赀，亲族应缘坐者，令有司搜捕以闻。
现代文：六月，乙未，唐懿宗下令将秦匡谋斩首，并籍没其家产，其亲属家族因秦匡谋罪连坐在逃的人员，则命官府进行搜捕并上告朝廷。
English: In June, Tang Xizong ordered the beheading of Qin Kuangzong and the confiscation of his property. His relatives and family members, who were also fugitives for the crime of Qin Kuangzong, ordered the government to conduct a search and appeal to the imperial court.

古文：匡谋，凤翔人也。
现代文：秦匡谋是凤翔人。
English: Qin Kuangmo is a Fengxiang person.

古文：以中书侍郎、同平章事王鐸同平章事，充宣武节度使。
现代文：朝廷任命中书侍郎、同平章事王铎为同平章事，充任宣武节度使。
English: The Imperial Court appointed the Chushushijiro and the Tongpei Shogito Wang Xi as Tongpei Shogito, and they served as the envoys of the Imperial Proclamation.

古文：时韦保衡挟恩弄权，以刘瞻、于琮先在相位，不礼于己，谮而逐之。
现代文：当时韦保衡仗恃着唐懿宗对他的恩宠专政弄权，由于刘瞻、于琮在他之先居宰相位，对自己不够恭敬，因此在唐懿宗面前进行谮毁，以致被贬逐远外。
English: At that time, Wei Bo Hengqun tried to usurp the power of Tang Xizong's benevolent dictatorship over him. Since Liu Zhan and Yu Xi occupied the position of prime minister before him, he did not respect himself enough, so he destroyed himself in front of Tang Xizong and was banished far away.

古文：王鐸，保衡及第时主文也，萧遘，同年进士也，二人素薄保衡之为人，保衡皆摈斥之。
现代文：王铎是韦保衡科举考试及第时的礼部校文主司，萧遘与韦保衡是同年进士，二人一贯鄙薄韦保衡的为人，为此韦保衡又将二人都摈斥排挤。
English: Wang Hao was Wei Baoheng's supervisor of the entrance examination and the head of the school's literature department at that time. Xiao Hao and Wei Baoheng entered the same year. Both of them always despised Wei Baoheng. For this reason, Wei Baoheng expelled both of them.

古文：秋，七月，戊寅，上疾大渐，左军中尉刘行深、右军中尉韩文约立少子普王俨。
现代文：秋季，七月，戊寅，唐懿宗得病转危，神策军左军中尉刘行深、右军中尉韩文约立懿宗最小的儿子普王李俨嗣位。
English: In the autumn, in July, Wu Yin, Tang Xizong's illness took a turn for the worse, and Liu Xingshen, a lieutenant of the Left Army of the Shen Zhe Army, and Han Wen, a lieutenant of the Right Army, appointed Xizong's youngest son, Pu Wang, as the heir to the throne.

古文：庚辰，制： 立俨为皇太子，权句当军国政事。 
现代文：庚辰诏 立李俨为皇太子，暂时掌管军国政事。 
English: Geng Chen Zhao made Li Xi the crown prince and temporarily took charge of the military and state affairs.

古文：辛巳，上崩于咸宁殿。遗诏书韦保衡摄冢宰。
现代文：辛巳，懿宗于咸宁殿驾崩，立下遗诏以韦保衡摄冢宰。
English: Soon after, Emperor Taizong passed away at Xianning Palace and issued a posthumous edict appointing Wei Bo Heng as regent.

古文：僖宗即位。
现代文：当天唐僖宗李俨即皇帝位。
English: On the same day, Emperor Jianzong of the Tang Dynasty ascended to the throne.

古文：八月，丁未，追尊母王贵妃为皇太后，刘行深、韩文约皆封国公。
现代文：八月，丁未，唐僖宗追尊其生母王贵妃为皇太后，刘行深、韩文约皆被封为国公。
English: In August, Ding Wei, Tang Xizong and his real mother, Wang Guifei, were named empress dowager, and Liu Xingshen and Han Wenju were both made princes.

古文：关东、河南大水。
现代文：关东、河南地区发生大水灾。
English: Major flooding occurred in the Kanto and Henan regions.

古文：九月，有司上先太后谥曰惠安。
现代文：九月，有关官府给已去世的皇太后王氏上谥号，称惠安太后。
English: In September, the relevant authorities gave the deceased Empress Dowager Wang the posthumous title of Empress Dowager Hui An.

古文：司徒、门下侍郎、同平章事韦保衡，怨家告其阴事，贬保衡贺州刺史。
现代文：司徒、门下侍郎、同平章事韦保衡因冤家告发他的阴私、被贬为贺州刺史。
English: As a result of being denounced as a traitor by his enemies, Wei Baoheng, a tutor, a subordinate waiter, and Tongping Zhangji, was relegated to a footnote in the history of Hezhou.

古文：乐工李可及流岭南。
现代文：乐工李可及被流放到岭南。
English: Musician Li Kegui was exiled to Lingnan.

古文：可及有宠于懿宗，尝为子娶妇，懿宗赐之酒二银壶，启之无酒而中实。
现代文：李可及得到唐懿宗的宠爱，其儿子娶媳妇时，唐懿宗曾赐给两个银酒壶，打开酒壶盖，无酒而壶却是实的。
English: Li Kegui was favored by Emperor Taizong of Tang. When his son married his daughter-in-law, Emperor Taizong gave him two silver wine jugs. He opened the lids, but the jugs contained no wine.

古文：右军中尉西门季玄屡以为言，懿宗不听。
现代文：神策军右军中尉西门季玄屡次向唐懿宗劝说不宜对李可及优宠太过，懿宗不听。
English: Ximen Ji Xuan, a lieutenant of the right army of the Shen Zhe Army, repeatedly persuaded Tang Xizong that it was not appropriate to be too kind to Li Ke and You Ji, but Xizong did not listen.

古文：可及尝大受赐物，载以官车。
现代文：李可及曾经受到唐懿宗大量的财物赏赐，用官府的车子运载回私宅。
English: Li Kegui was once given a large amount of property by Emperor Tang Xizong, which he transported back to his private residence in a government car.

古文：季玄谓曰： 汝它日破家，此物复应以官车载还。
现代文：西门季玄对人说： 李可及今后必定破家，这些财物必定还会用官府的车子运还。
English: Ximen Jixuan said to the man: Li Ke will certainly break up the family in the future, and these belongings will certainly be transported back by the government car.

古文：非为受赐，徒烦牛足耳！ 
现代文：倒不可惜赐给他这么多财物，而是徒然耗费了拉车的牛的足力罢了！ 
English: It is not a pity to have given him so much wealth, but to have wasted the strength of the ox that pulled the cart!

古文：及流岭南，籍没其家，果如季玄言。
现代文：待到李可及被流放到岭南，籍没其家中一切财产，果然如西门季玄先前所预言的那样。
English: By the time Li Kegui was exiled to Lingnan, he had lost all of his family's property, just as Ximen Jixuan had predicted.

古文：以西川节度使路岩兼侍中，加成德节度使王景崇中书令，魏博节度使韩君雄、卢龙节度使张公素、天平节度使高骈并同平章事。
现代文：唐僖宗命西川节度使路岩兼任侍中，加给成德节度使王景崇中书令的官号，并加给魏博节度使韩君雄、卢龙节度使张公素、天平节度使高骈等人同平章事的官号，均为使相。
English: Tang Xizong ordered Xichuan Jiedu to make Lu Yan concurrently serve as an attendant, added the official title of Chengde Jiedu to make Wang Jingtong the middle secretary, and added the official titles of Weibo Jiedu to make Han Junxiong, Lulong Jiedu to make Zhang Gongsu, and Tianping Jiedu to make Gao Junxiong, all of which were envoys.

古文：君雄仍赐名允中。
现代文：又赐韩君雄名为韩允中。
English: He also gave Han Junxiong the name Han Yongzhong.

古文：冬，十月，乙未，以左仆射萧亻放为门下侍郎、同平章事。
现代文：冬季，十月，乙未，任命左仆射萧为门下侍郎、同平章事。
English: In the winter, in October, in the middle of the year, he appointed his left-hand man, Sha Xiao, as his under-waiter and a peer.

古文：韦保衡再贬崖州澄迈令，寻赐自尽；又贬其弟翰林学士、兵部侍郎保乂为宾州司户，所亲翰林学士、户部侍郎刘承雍为涪州司马。
现代文：再贬韦保衡为崖州澄迈县令，不久又赐韦保衡自尽。又贬韦保衡之弟翰林学士、兵部侍郎韦保义为宾州司户，韦保衡的亲信翰林学士、户部侍郎刘承雍被贬为涪州司马。
English: He then demoted Wei Baoheng to the county magistrate of Jiaozhou, Chengmai County, and soon gave Wei Baoheng the order to commit suicide. He also demoted Wei Baoheng's brother, Hanlin Baccalaureate, and military aide, Wei Baoyi, to the governor of Pengzhou, and Wei Baoheng's close confidant, Hanlin Baccalaureate, and household aide, Liu Chengyong, to the governor of Zhangzhou.

古文：承雍，禹锡之子也。
现代文：刘承雍是刘禹锡的儿子。
English: Liu Chengyong is the son of Liu Yuxi.

古文：癸卯，赦天下。
现代文：癸卯，宣告大赦天下囚徒。
English: Therefore, I declare a general amnesty for all prisoners.

古文：西川节度使路岩，喜声色游宴，委军府政事于亲吏边咸、郭筹，皆先行后申，上下畏之。
现代文：唐西川节度使路岩喜好声色，游宴无度，将节度使军府的政事委托给其所亲信的官吏边咸、郭筹等人，边咸、郭筹处置军政事务时都是先自行其事，然后才申报路岩，上下官吏对二人十分畏惧。
English: The Tang Xichuan Festival made Lu Yan's liking for fame and fortune and banqueting extravagant. He entrusted the military government's political affairs to his trusted officials Bian Xian and Guo Qiao. When dealing with military and political affairs, Bian Xian and Guo Qiao first did their own thing, and then declared Lu Yan. Officials at all levels were very afraid of the two men.

古文：尝大阅，二人议事，默书纸相示而焚之，军中以为有异图，惊惧不安。
现代文：有一次军府议事，边咸与郭筹二人不说话，却互相在纸条上写字，传阅后烧毁，军府官兵疑惑不解，以为二人密谋有异图，都惊恐不安。
English: Once, during a military government meeting, Bian Xian and Guo Qiao did not speak, but wrote on each other's slips of paper, which were passed around and then burned. The officers and soldiers in the military government were puzzled, thinking that the two of them were plotting something else. They were both frightened and uneasy.

古文：朝廷闻之，十一月，戊辰，徙岩荆南节度使。
现代文：朝廷得之这些情况后，于十一月戊辰，将路岩调任为荆南节度使。
English: After learning of these circumstances, the imperial court appointed Lu Yan as the Jingnan Festival envoy in November.

古文：咸、筹潜知其故，遂亡命。
现代文：边咸、郭筹私下里也得知路岩改官的原因，于是赶忙逃走。
English: Bian Xian and Guo Qiao also learned the reason for Lu Yan's change of post in private, so they hurriedly fled.

古文：以右仆射萧鄴同平章事，充河东节度使。
现代文：唐僖宗任命右仆射萧邺为同平章事，出任河东节度使。
English: Emperor Taizong of Tang appointed his right-hand man, Jie Xiaojun, as Tongping Zhengji, and he served as the envoy to the Hedong Festival.

古文：十二月，巳亥，诏送佛骨还法门寺。
现代文：十二月，己亥，唐僖宗下诏将佛骨送还法门寺。
English: In December, Ji Hai, Tang Xizong issued an edict to return the Buddhist bones to Famen Temple.

古文：再贬路岩为新州刺史。
现代文：朝廷再将路岩贬为新州刺史。
English: The imperial court then relegated the road rock to the new state history.

古文：僖宗惠圣恭定孝皇帝上之上
现代文：僖宗惠圣恭定孝皇帝上之上
English: Emperor Yongzheng and Emperor Yongzheng

古文：懿宗昭圣恭惠孝皇帝下乾符元年
现代文：唐僖宗乾符元年
English: The first year of Emperor Qianfu of the Tang Dynasty

古文：春，正月，丁亥，翰林学士卢携上言，以为： 陛下初临大宝，宜深念黎元。
现代文：春季，正月，丁亥，翰林学士卢携向唐僖宗上言，认为： 陛下刚刚登临皇帝宝座，应该多关心百姓的生活。
English: In the spring, the first month of the year, Ding Hai, Hanlin Scholar Lu and others appealed to Tang Yanzong, saying: Your Majesty has just ascended the throne of the emperor, you should be more concerned about the lives of the people.

古文：国家之有百姓，如草木之有根柢，若秋冬培溉，则春夏滋荣。
现代文：国家有百姓，就象草木有根柢一样。如果秋天和冬天着力培育和灌溉，春天和夏天就能滋长繁茂。
English: A country has its people, just as plants have their roots. If we cultivate and irrigate them in autumn and winter, they will flourish in spring and summer.

古文：臣窃见关东去年旱灾，自虢至海，麦才半收，秋稼几无，冬菜至少，贫者硙蓬实为面，蓄槐叶为齑。
现代文：我在关东地区看到了去年的旱灾，自虢州东至大海的广大地方，小麦仅仅只有一半收成，秋季的庄稼几乎没有，冬季的蔬菜就更少了。百姓贫苦之家只好将草籽捣碎当面粉，将槐树叶子收藏起来当菜。
English: I saw last year's drought in the Kanto region. In the vast area from the east of Luzhou to the sea, only half of the wheat was harvested, there were almost no crops in the fall, and fewer vegetables in the winter. People's poor families had to mash grass seeds into flour and collect eucalyptus leaves as a dish.

古文：或更衰赢，亦难采拾。
现代文：有些老弱病残的百姓，连草籽、槐叶也无力采集。
English: Some old, weak and sick people are unable to collect even grass seeds and leaves.

古文：常年不稔，则散之邻境。今所在皆饥，无所依投，坐守乡闾，待尽沟壑。
现代文：以往没有收成的年头，老百姓就逃散到相邻的州县，而现在到处都是饥荒，连一处投靠的地方都没有，只好坐守在本乡本土，待饿死后就抛尸至沟壑，悲惨极了。
English: In the past, when there was no harvest, the common people fled to the neighboring prefectures and counties, but now there is famine everywhere, and there is not even a place to rely on, so they have to stay in their hometown, and when they die of starvation, they throw their bodies into the ravine, which is extremely tragic.

古文：其蠲免馀税，实无可征。而州县以有上供及三司钱，督趣甚急，动如捶挞，虽撤屋伐木，雇妻鬻子，止可供所由酒食之费，未得至于府库也。
现代文：说是免除灾区的余税，实际上是无税可征，但州、县官吏因为有上供的税钱以及户部、转运、盐铁三司钱要向朝廷交纳，仍然急迫地督促百姓交粮交款，动不动就捶打鞭挞无法交齐税款的百姓。一般民户虽然拆除自己的房屋，砍倒门前的树木加以变卖，甚至卖儿卖女，卖妻室，所得的钱也只可供催督租税的吏卒的酒食费用，一文钱也到不了官府的仓库。
English: It was said that the surplus tax in the disaster area would be exempted, but in fact there was no tax to be levied. However, the state and county officials, because they had to pay the tax to the imperial court, as well as the tax to the household department, the transportation department, and the three departments of salt and iron, still urgently urged the people to pay the grain tax. At every turn, they beat and whipped the people who could not pay the tax. Although ordinary households demolished their houses, cut down the trees in front of their doors and sold them, and even sold their sons and daughters, and sold their wives, the money earned could only be used to pay the liquor and food expenses

古文：或租税之外，更有他徭。
现代文：有时租税之外，还有其他各类徭役。
English: Sometimes, in addition to taxes, there are other types of taxes.

古文：朝廷倘不抚存，百姓实无生计。
现代文：百姓已苦到了极处，朝廷如果还不加以救抚，老百姓们就没有活路了。
English: The people have suffered to the extreme, and if the imperial court does not come to their rescue, the people will have no way to survive.

古文：乞敕州县，应所欠残税，并一切停征，以俟蚕麦。
现代文：希望陛下开恩，下令各州、县官吏，停征一切还没有收上来的租税，待到蚕丝和小麦都有收获时再说。
English: I hope that His Majesty will be gracious and order all state and county officials to suspend the collection of all taxes that have not yet been collected, and wait until there is a harvest of silk and wheat.

古文：仍发所在义仓，亟加赈给。至深春之后，有菜叶木牙，继以桑椹，渐有可食。
现代文：并且将各地的义仓打开，迅速赈给饥饿无粮的百姓，一直到春暖花开之时，树木发芽菜长叶，桑树长出了桑椹，百姓有充饥的食物之时，才能停止义仓的赈给。
English: In addition, the donation warehouses in various regions will be opened and quickly distributed to the people who are hungry and have no food, until the spring flowers bloom, the trees sprout vegetables and grow leaves, the mulberry trees grow mulberries, and the people have food to satisfy their hunger, before the donation of the donation warehouses can be stopped.

古文：在今数月之间，尤为窘急，行之不可稽缓。 
现代文：在目前几个月之间，饥馑尤其危急，赈救行动的推行切不可有迟疑稽缓。 
English: In the current months, famine is particularly critical, and the implementation of relief operations must not be delayed.

古文：敕从其言，而有司竟不能行，徒为空文而己。
现代文：唐僖宗对卢携的上言和建议表示同意，即下诏按卢携所说的办，但官府最后不能推行，僖宗的诏令徒具一纸空文而已。
English: Tang Xizong agreed with Lu Tzu's suggestion and suggestion, that is, the next edict should be carried out as Lu Tzu said, but the government could not implement it in the end, and the edict of Emperor Xizong was just a piece of paper.

古文：路岩行至江陵，敕削官爵，长流儋州。
现代文：路岩行至江陵，又得到唐僖宗敕令，削去一切官爵，长流于儋州。
English: Lu Yan went to Gangneung, and received the imperial edict from the Tang Dynasty's Yongzheng Emperor. He removed all the officials and nobles, and settled in Zhangzhou.

古文：岩美姿仪，囚于江陵狱再宿，须发皆白，寻赐自尽，籍没其家。
现代文：路岩仪表堂堂，被囚禁于江陵监狱中住宿，一夜之间胡须和头发全部白了。不久，唐僖宗又赐路岩自尽，并籍没其家产。
English: He was imprisoned and lodged in Gangneung Prison, and his beard and hair turned white overnight. Soon after, Emperor Taizong ordered him to commit suicide, and he lost his family property.

古文：岩之为相也，密奏， 三品以上赐死，皆令使者剔取结喉三寸以进，验其必死。 
现代文：路岩在唐懿宗朝任宰相时，曾密奏说： 凡三品以上的大官赐死，都应让使者将死者结喉三寸处喉骨剔下，交给有关衙门，以验正死者已必死无疑。 
English: When Lu Yan was appointed prime minister of the Tang Dynasty, he once said in a secret message: Whenever a high-ranking official with three or more court ranks dies, the messenger should be asked to remove the larynx from three inches from the throat of the deceased and hand it over to the relevant authorities to verify that the deceased has undoubtedly died.

古文：至是，自罹其祸，所死之处乃杨收赐死之榻也。
现代文：到如今，自己也遭杀身之祸。处死路岩正是在先时杨收赐死时所睡的床上。
English: To this day, he himself has also been killed. He was put to death on the very bed where he was sleeping at the time of his death.

古文：边咸、郭筹捕得，皆伏诛。
现代文：另外，边咸、郭筹也被捕获，也都被处死。
English: In addition, Bian Xian and Guo Qiao were also captured and executed.

古文：初，岩佐崔铉于淮南，为支使，铉知其必贵，曰： 路十终须作彼一官。 
现代文：先前，路岩在淮南任崔铉的佐吏，为掌文书的支使，崔铉测知路岩日后必定有富贵，亲昵地称路岩的排行说： 路十最终将做到宰相的高位。 
English: Previously, Lu Yan had served as Choi Min's aide-de-camp in Huainan Province, and was the envoy of the chief secretary. Choi Min knew that Lu Yan must be rich in the future, and he affectionately called the ranking of Lu Yan: Lu X will eventually achieve the high position of prime minister.

古文：既而入为监察御史，不出长安城，十年至宰相。
现代文：不久路岩即调到朝廷任监察御史，以后迁官不出长安城，十年后升任宰相。
English: Soon after, Lu Yan was transferred to the imperial court to serve as inspector of imperial history. Later, he was transferred to Chang'an City, and ten years later he was promoted to prime minister.

古文：其自监察入翰林也，铉犹在淮南，闻之，曰： 路十今已入翰林，如何得老！ 
现代文：当路岩由监察御史升任翰林学士时，崔铉却仍然在淮南任观察使，崔铉得到消息时羡慕地说： 路十如今已入翰林官，哪里得老？
English: When Lu Yan was promoted from Supervisor and Historian to Hanlin Scholar, Cui Yao was still in Huainan as an observer. When Cui Yao got the news, he said admiringly: Lu Xiu has now entered the Hanlin official, where does he get old?

古文：皆如铉言。
现代文：还会升迁！ 
English: You'll get promoted!

古文：以太子少傅于琮同平章事，充山南东道节度使。
现代文：果然，路岩官运亨通，就象崔铉所预言的那样。唐僖宗任命太子少傅于琮以同平章事衔充任山南东道节度使。
English: Sure enough, Luyan Guan Yun was successful, just as Cui Yao had predicted. Tang Yizong appointed the young prince Fu Yu to serve as the Shannan host festival envoy with the title of Tong Ping Zhang.

古文：二月，甲午，葬昭圣恭惠孝皇帝于简陵，庙号懿宗。
现代文：二月，甲午，将昭圣恭惠孝皇帝葬于简陵，庙号为懿宗。
English: In February, in the afternoon of the first day of the second month, Emperor Shoshen, Gong Hui Xiao was buried in the Jianling Mausoleum, with the temple name of Jianzong.

古文：以中书侍郎、同平章事赵隐同平章事，充镇海节度使；以华州刺史裴坦为中书侍郎、同平章事；以虢州刺史刘瞻为刑部尚书。
现代文：唐僖宗任命中书侍郎、同平章事赵隐以同平章事衔，充任镇海节度使；又任华州刺史裴坦为中书侍郎、同平章事。唐僖宗任命虢州刺史刘瞻为刑部尚书。
English: Emperor Taizong of Tang appointed Zhao Yin to the position of Zhenhai Festival Delegate with the title of Zhongshu Zirong and Tongping Zirong, and appointed Huazhou Zishi Peitan to the position of Zhongshu Zirong and Tongping Zirong. Emperor Taizong of Tang appointed Zhangzhou Zirong Liu Zhan to the position of Shanshu Zirong.

古文：瞻之贬也，人无贤愚，莫不痛惜。
现代文：刘瞻贬官之时，人们不管是贤者愚者，没有不深感痛惜的。
English: When Liu Zhan was demoted, people, whether they were wise or foolish, were deeply sorry.

古文：及其还也，长安两市人率钱雇百戏迎之。瞻闻之，改期，由他道而入。
现代文：及刘瞻由虢州回京，长安东西两市百姓花钱雇百戏来欢迎，刘瞻闻知此情，恐百姓破费，更改入京日期，改走其他道路而入京。
English: When Liu Zhan returned to Beijing from Zhangzhou, the people in the eastern and western cities of Chang'an spent money to hire a hundred plays to welcome him. Liu Zhan knew this and was afraid that the people would spend money to change the date of entry into Beijing and take other roads to enter Beijing.

古文：夏，五月，乙未，裴坦薨。以刘瞻为中书侍郎、同平章事。
现代文：夏季，五月，乙未，裴坦去世，唐僖宗任命刘瞻为中书侍郎、同平章事。
English: In the summer of May, shortly after the death of Pei Tan, Tang Xizong appointed Liu Zhan as the secretary of the Central Committee and Tongping Zhangji.

古文：初，瞻南迁，刘鄴附于韦、路，共短之。
现代文：先前，刘瞻贬官南迁，刘邺依附于韦保衡、路岩，共同诋毁刘瞻。
English: Previously, Liu Zhan was demoted and moved to the south, and Liu Hui was attached to Wei Baoheng and Luyan, and they jointly slandered Liu Zhan.

古文：及瞻还为相，鄴内惧。
现代文：及刘瞻回京再任宰相，刘邺内心十分恐惧。
English: When Liu Zhan returned to Beijing to be reappointed as prime minister, Liu Yao was very afraid.

古文：秋，八月，丁巳朔，鄴延瞻，置酒于盐铁院。瞻归而遇疾，辛未，薨。时人皆以为鄴鸩之也。
现代文：秋季，八月，丁巳朔，刘邺邀请刘瞻，于盐铁院设宴置酒，刘瞻宴罢归宅后发病，辛未病逝；当时人都认为是刘邺在酒中下毒将刘瞻鸠杀。
English: In the autumn, in August, Liu Zhen invited Liu Zhan to a banquet at the Salt and Iron Institute. After the banquet, Liu Zhen fell ill and died. At that time, it was believed that Liu Zhen poisoned Liu Zhan with wine.

古文：以兵部侍郎、判度支崔彦昭为中书侍郎、同平章事。
现代文：唐僖宗任兵部侍郎、判度支崔彦昭为中书侍郎、同平章事。
English: Tang Xizong was appointed as the attendant of the military department, and Guandu's subordinate, Cui Yan Zhao, was appointed as the attendant of the middle school, and Tongping was appointed as the secretary.

古文：彦昭，群之从子也。
现代文：崔彦昭是崔群的侄子。
English: Cui Yanhao is Cui Qun's nephew.

古文：兵部侍郎王凝，正雅之从孙也，其母，彦昭之从母。
现代文：兵部侍郎王凝是王正雅的侄孙，而其母亲又是崔彦昭的姨母。
English: Wang Jian, the attendant of the military department, is the grandnephew of Wang Zhengya, and his mother is the aunt of Cui Yanhao.

古文：凝、彦昭同举进士，凝先及第，尝衩衣见彦昭，且戏之曰： 君不若举明经。 
现代文：王凝与崔彦昭一同参加科举进士科考试，王凝先进士及第，曾经穿着便衣往见崔彦昭，戏辱崔彦昭说： 你还不如去参加明经科的考试呢！ 
English: Wang Geng and Cui Yan Zhao both took the entrance examination for the College of Liberal Arts and Sciences together. Wang Geng was the first and the second. He once went to see Cui Yan Zhao in plain clothes. He mocked Cui Yan Zhao and said, "You might as well take the entrance examination for the College of Liberal Arts and Sciences!"

古文：彦昭怒，遂为深仇。
现代文：崔彦昭被羞辱后十分愤怒，于是表兄弟俩结下了深仇。
English: Cui Yanhao was very angry after being humiliated, so the two cousins formed a deep-rooted hatred.

古文：及彦昭为相，其母谓侍婢曰： 为我多作袜履，王侍郎母子必将窜逐，吾当与妹偕行。 
现代文：及崔彦昭当上宰相，其母亲吩咐侍侯她的婢女说： 为我多制作些袜子和鞋子，我儿必定要将王侍郎母子贬逐至边远，我将跟随我妹妹同行。 
English: When Cui Yan Zhao became the prime minister, his mother ordered her maid to say: "Make more socks and shoes for me. My son will surely banish Wang Jiro's mother and son to the periphery. I will follow my sister."

古文：彦昭拜且泣，谢曰： 必不敢。 
现代文：崔彦昭听到后赶忙下拜并哭泣，拜谢母亲说： 儿必不敢妄为。 
English: After hearing this, Cui Yan Zhao hurriedly bowed down and wept, thanking his mother and saying, "My son will not dare to do anything reckless."

古文：凝由是获免。
现代文：王凝于是免除了贬官流放的命运。
English: Wang Geng was thus spared the fate of being demoted and exiled.

古文：冬，十月，以门下侍郎、同平章事刘鄴同平章事，充淮南节度使。
现代文：冬季，十月，唐僖宗任命门下侍郎、同平章事刘邺以同平章事衔，充当淮南节度使。
English: In the winter, in October, Tang Xizong appointed his servant, Tongping Zhangji Liu Qi, to the title of Tongping Zhangji, to serve as Huainan Festival envoy.

古文：以吏部侍郎郑畋为兵部侍郎，翰林学士承旨、户部侍郎卢携守本官，并同平章事。
现代文：又任命吏部侍郎郑畋为兵部侍郎，翰林学士承旨、户部侍郎卢携仍旧任户部侍郎，二人均为同平章事。
English: He also appointed Zheng Qi, the attendant of the cadre department, as the attendant of the military department, while Hanlin Baizhangzhi and Lu Qi, the attendant of the household department, remained the attendants of the household department. Both of them were of equal rank.

古文：十一月，庚寅，日南至，群臣上尊号曰圣神聪睿仁哲孝皇帝。改元。
现代文：十一月，庚寅，冬至，满朝大臣给唐僖宗上尊号，称圣神聪睿仁哲孝皇帝；改年号为乾符。
English: In November, Goyang, the winter solstice, the minister of the Manchu Dynasty gave Tang Xizong the honorific title, calling him Emperor Shengjin CuiRen ZheXiao; the year name was changed to QianFu.

古文：魏博节度使韩允中薨，军中立其子节度副使简为留后。
现代文：魏博节度使韩允中去世，军中立韩允中之子魏博节度副使韩简为留后。
English: Han Yunzhong, the son of the neutral Han Yunzhong, was killed by Wei Bo Jiedu, and the vice-envoy of Wei Bo Jiedu, Han Jian, stayed behind.

古文：南诏寇西川，作浮梁，济大渡河。
现代文：南诏派军队侵犯西川，架浮桥渡过大渡河。
English: Nanzhao sent troops to invade the West River and built a floating bridge to cross the Dadu River.

古文：防河都知兵马使、黎州刺史黄景复俟其半济，击之，蛮败走，断其浮梁。
现代文：唐防河都知兵马使、黎州刺史黄景复待南诏军队刚渡过一半时，突然发兵袭击，南诏蛮军被击败退走，唐军将浮桥拆断。
English: When the Nanzhao army was just half way across the Tang's Fang River, Huang Jing, the commander of the Tang's River Defense Army, and Li Zhou, the commander of the Li Zhi Army, suddenly launched an attack. The Nanzhao barbarian army was defeated and retreated, and the Tang army tore down the floating bridge.

古文：蛮以中军多张旗帜当其前，而分兵潜出上、下流各二十里，夜，作浮梁，诘朝，俱济，袭破诸城栅，夹攻景复。
现代文：南诏以中路军举着许多旗帜走在前面，而分兵两路偷偷地潜往大渡河上游和下游各二十里，入夜，又造起浮桥，到第二天早上，全部渡过大渡河，袭破唐军许多城堡栅寨，并夹击黄景复军。
English: Nanzhao marched ahead with the middle army holding many flags, while the detachment sneaked to the upper and lower reaches of the Dadu River for twenty miles each. At night, they also built a pontoon bridge. By the next morning, they all crossed the Dadu River, broke through many castle fences of the Tang army, and clamped down on the Huangjing Restoration Army.

古文：力战三日，景复阳败走，蛮尽锐追之。景复设三伏以待之，蛮过三分之二，乃发伏击之，蛮兵大败，杀二千馀人，追至大渡河南而还。复修完城栅而守之。
现代文：黄景复率唐军奋力拼战了三天，假装败走，南诏蛮军全力追击，黄景复设伏三处等待着，待蛮军通过了三分之二，即发伏兵攻击，南诏蛮兵被打得大败，杀死二千余人，唐军一直追到大渡河南才还军，并修复好城栅进行防守。
English: Huang Jing restored the Tang army fought hard for three days, pretended to be defeated and left, the Nanzhao barbarian army pursued with all their might, Huang Jing restored three ambushes and waited. When the barbarian army passed two-thirds, it launched an ambush attack. The Nanzhao barbarian army was defeated and killed more than two thousand people. The Tang army did not return until it chased Dadu Henan, and repaired the city gate for defense.

古文：蛮归，至之罗谷，遇国中发兵继至，新旧相合，钲鼓声闻数十里。复寇大渡河，与唐夹水而军，诈云求和，又自上下流潜济，与景复战连日。西川援军不至，而蛮众日益，景复不能支，军遂溃。
现代文：南诏蛮军因败归国，行至之罗谷，遇到南诏国发出的援兵，新旧两军相合，锣鼓声震荡数十里，于是再举兵入侵大渡河，与唐军夹水对峙，假称求和，却又自上游和下游偷渡，与黄景复率领的唐军连日激战，由于西川援军不能到达，而南诏蛮军日渐增加，黄景复支撑不住蛮军的进攻，唐军于是溃散。
English: The Nanzhao barbarian army returned to the country due to defeat, went to the valley of the Luo, encountered the reinforcements sent by the Nanzhao country, the old and new armies met, and the sound of drums shook for dozens of miles, so they again raised an army to invade the Dadu River, confronted the Tang army in the water, pretended to seek peace, but smuggled from the upstream and downstream, and fought fiercely with the Tang army led by Huang Jingfu for several days. Since the West River reinforcements could not reach, and the Nanzhao barbarian army was increasing day by day, Huang Jingfu could not support the barbarian army's attack,

古文：十二月，党项、回鹘寇天德军。
现代文：十二月，党项、回鹘侵犯唐天德军防境。
English: In December, the troops of Danzhong and Huiyang invaded the German army.

古文：感化军奏群盗寇掠，州县不能禁。敕兗、郓等道出兵讨之。
现代文：徐州感化军向朝廷奏称庞勋余党攻掠剽盗，州县官府不能禁止；唐僖宗下令兖州、郓州等道出兵帮徐州进行征讨。
English: The Xuzhou Revolutionary Army reported to the imperial court that the Pang Xun Yu Party attacked, plundered and pillaged, and the state and county governments could not prohibit it; Tang Yanzong ordered the soldiers from Zhangzhou, Zhangzhou and other provinces to help Xuzhou to carry out the requisition.

古文：南诏乘胜陷黎州，入邛峡关，攻雅州。
现代文：南诏蛮军乘胜攻陷黎州，进入邛崃关，又攻雅州。
English: The Nanzhao barbarian army took advantage of the victory to invade Lizhou, enter Shaoguan, and invade Yazhou.

古文：大渡河溃兵奔入邛州，成都惊扰，民争入城，或北奔他州。
现代文：大渡河溃散下来的唐兵逃奔入邛州，消息传来，成都一片惊慌，士民争先恐后地逃入成都城，有的人还向北逃奔其他州府。
English: The Tang soldiers scattered by the Dadu River fled into Ganzhou, and news came that Chengdu was in a panic. The scholars and citizens fled into Chengdu City in a hurry, and some people also fled north to other provincial capitals.

古文：城中大为守备，而堑垒比向时严固。
现代文：成都城中更加强守备，修筑的堑壕与保垒比先时更中严固。
English: Chengdu city has strengthened its defenses, and the trenches and ramparts built are more rigorous than before.

古文：骠信使其坦绰遗节度使牛丛书云： 非敢为寇也，欲入见天子，面诉数十年为谗人离间冤抑之事。倘蒙圣恩矜恤，当还与尚书永敦邻好。
现代文：南诏骠信遣其官员给唐节度使牛丛送信，声称： 我们不敢侵犯唐境，是想入朝见唐天子，当面诉说数十年来南诏受小人进谗离间所遭受的冤屈事，若蒙唐天子的圣恩怜悯和抚恤，我们就将与牛尚书永远结为睦邻友好。
English: Nan Zhaoxuan sent its officials to Tang Jiedu to send a letter to Niu Cong, saying: "We dare not encroach on Tang territory. We want to enter the court to see Tang Tianzi and tell him face-to-face about the grievances that Nanzhao has suffered from the villains for decades. If we receive the grace and mercy of Tang Tianzi, we will forever be good neighbors with Niu Shangshu."

古文：今假道贵府，欲借蜀王厅留止数日，即东上。 
现代文：今天借道来到贵军府，希望能借成都城内的蜀王厅留住数天，然后我们就东上长安。 
English: Today, I took a detour to your military headquarters, hoping to borrow the Shu Wang Hall in Chengdu to stay for a few days, and then we went east to Chang'an.

古文：丛素懦怯，欲许之，杨庆复以为不可。斩其使者，留二人，授以书，遣还，书辞极数其罪，詈辱之。
现代文：牛丛一向胆小懦怯，想要准许南诏的要求，杨庆复认为这样做不可；于是斩南诏使者，仅留下二人，让他们持回信回到南诏蛮军中。
English: Cows have always been timid and cowardly, and Yang Qingfu thought it was impossible to grant Nanzhao's request; so he killed Nanzhao's envoy, leaving only two, and let them return to Nanzhao's barbarian army with a reply letter.

古文：蛮兵及新津而还，丛恐蛮至，豫焚城外，民居荡尽，蜀人尤之。
现代文：牛丛的复信尽数南诏蛮军侵犯唐境的罪恶，并恶语辱骂，南诏军进至新津后即退走。牛丛恐怕蛮军来攻，事先将成都城外的居民住屋烧了个精光，使蜀地百姓非常怨恨。
English: Niu Cong's reply enumerated the evils of the Nanzhao barbarian army's invasion of the Tang territory, and the abusive language. The Nanzhao army retreated immediately after entering Xinjin. Niu Cong feared that the barbarian army would attack, and burned the residents' houses outside Chengdu to a crisp in advance, making the people of Shu very resentful.

古文：诏发河东、山南西道、东川兵援之，仍命天平节度使高骈诣西川制置蛮事。
现代文：唐僖宗颁下诏书调发河东、山南西道、东川的军队救援成都，并且命令天平军节度使高骈前往西川布置和指挥对南诏蛮军抗战之事。
English: Tang Xizong issued an edict to dispatch troops from the eastern part of He Dong, the western part of Shannan, and the eastern part of Dongchuan to rescue Chengdu, and ordered the Tianping Army to send Gao Wei to the western part of He Dong to organize and command the resistance against the southern barbarian army.

古文：以韩简为魏博留后。
现代文：朝廷任命韩简为魏博留后。
English: After the imperial court appointed Han Jian to stay in Weibo.

古文：商州刺史王枢以军州空窘，减折籴钱，民相帅以白梃殴之，又殴杀官吏二人。
现代文：商州刺史王枢因军府库和州府库均相当空虚，下令减少唐德宗以来形成的以税物折钱，使输米粟的折钱，让民户交已升值的钱纳税，引起民变。农民相率以铁棍殴打收税钱的官吏，并打死官吏二人。
English: Because the military treasury and the state treasury were both quite empty, the king of Shang Province, Shishi Wang Zu, ordered to reduce the tax money that had been formed since Tang Dezong, to make the export of rice poppy money, and to let the households pay taxes on the money that had appreciated, causing a popular change. The peasants beat the officials who collected the tax money with iron sticks, and killed two officials.

古文：朝廷更除刺史李诰到官，收捕民李叔汶等三十人，斩之。
现代文：朝廷改任李诰为商州刺史，李诰上任后即逮捕起事的农民李叔汶等三十余人，将他们全部斩首。
English: The imperial court appointed Li Qian to write the history of Shangzhou. After Li Qian took office, he immediately arrested more than 30 people, including the peasant Li Shubun, who had rioted, and beheaded them all.

古文：初，回鹘屡求册命，诏遣册立使郗宗莒诣其国。
现代文：起初，回鹘屡屡请求唐朝给予册命，于是唐僖宗下诏派遣册立使郗宗莒来到回鹘。
English: At first, the Uighurs repeatedly requested the Tang Dynasty to give them the mission, so the Tang Dynasty sent an envoy to the Uighurs.

古文：会回鹘为吐谷浑、嗢末所破，逃遁不知所之。诏宗莒以玉册、国信授灵盐节度使唐弘夫掌之，还京师。
现代文：恰值回鹘被吐谷浑、吐蕃末部攻破，其可汗酋领不知逃往何处，于是唐僖宗诏命郗宗莒将玉册、国印交给唐灵盐节度使唐弘夫收掌，并命郗宗莒回到京师。
English: At the right time, Huizhou was invaded by Tujugun and the end of Tujun, and its khan chieftain did not know where to flee, so Tang Xizong issued an edict ordering Zang Zongyi to hand over the jade book and the national seal to Tang Lingzhi Jiedu to make Tang Hongfu shake hands, and ordered Zang Zongyi to return to Beijing.

古文：上年少，政在臣下，南牙、北司互相矛楯。
现代文：唐僖宗年龄尚小，军国大政多听从臣下，南衙朝官和北司宦官为争权互相攻击，矛盾很深。
English: The Tang Dynasty was still young, and the military and political leaders mostly listened to their subordinates. The officials of the Southern Han Dynasty and the officials of the Northern Qi Dynasty attacked each other for the sake of competing for power. The contradiction was very deep.

古文：自懿宗以来，奢侈日甚，用兵不息，赋敛愈急。
现代文：自从唐懿宗以来，奢侈之费一日甚过一日，加上用兵不息，加给人民的赋税也愈益急迫。
English: Since the time of Tang Xizong, the extravagant expenses have increased day by day, and with the continuous use of soldiers, it has become more and more urgent to tax the people.

古文：关东连年水、旱，州县不以实闻，上下相蒙，百姓流殍，无所控诉。相聚为盗，所在蜂起。
现代文：潼关以东地区连年水旱灾害，州县官吏不以实情上报朝廷，上下蒙骗，百姓却大批饿死，处于水深火热中的农民无处控诉，只好相聚为盗，以求生路，于是到处盗贼成群，犹如蜂起云涌。
English: In the areas east of Shaoguan, there were consecutive years of floods and droughts. The state and county officials did not report the true situation to the imperial court and deceived the people. However, a large number of people starved to death. The farmers, who were in a deep water and heat, had nowhere to complain, so they had to gather together to steal in order to survive. As a result, there were groups of thieves everywhere, as if the clouds were rising.

古文：州县兵少，加以承平日久，人不习战，每与盗遇，官军多败。
现代文：唐地方州县的兵员很少，加上过了很长一段时间的太平日子，一般人也久不习惯于战阵，每次遭遇盗贼，官军多半被打败。
English: There are very few soldiers in the counties and prefectures of the Tang Dynasty. In addition, after a long period of peaceful days, ordinary people have not been accustomed to battle for a long time. Every time they encounter thieves, the government army is mostly defeated.

古文：是岁，濮州人王仙芝始聚众数千，起于长垣。
现代文：这一年，濮州人王仙芝开始聚众数千人，在长垣县起事。
English: In this year, Wang Xianzhi, a native of Zhangzhou, began to gather thousands of people to rise up in Nagagaki County.

古文：懿宗昭圣恭惠孝皇帝下乾符二年春，正月，丙戌，以高骈为西川节度使。辛已，上祀圆丘；赦天下。
现代文：乾符二年春季，正月，丙戌，朝廷任命高骈为西川节度使。辛巳唐僖宗在圆丘祭天；大赦天下。
English: In the spring of the second year of the Kianfu era, in the first month of the year, the imperial court appointed Gao Qi as the envoy of the Nishikawa festival. It was the beginning of the Tang Dynasty in the round mound festival; the world was forgiven.

古文：高骈至剑州，先遣使走马开成都门。或谏曰： 蛮寇逼近成都，相公尚远，万一豨突，奈何？ 
现代文：高骈来到剑州，先派遣使者骑马让成都打开诸城门，有人声称： 南诏蛮寇已逼近成都，高相公距成都尚很远，万一出现意外，将如何是好？ 
English: Gao Gan came to Jianzhou and first sent an envoy on horseback to let Chengdu open the city gates. Some people claimed: Nanzhao barbarians have approached Chengdu, Gao Gan is still far away from Chengdu. In case of an accident, what will happen?

古文：骈曰： 吾在交趾破蛮二十万众，蛮闻我来，逃窜不暇，何敢辄犯成都！
现代文：高骈回答说： 我在交趾大破蛮军二十万众，蛮军听说我来了，逃窜都来不及，如何敢在这时侵犯成都！
English: Gao Yao replied: I defeated 200,000 barbarians in Jiaozuo. The barbarians heard that I was coming, and they could not escape. How dare they invade Chengdu at this time!

古文：今春气向暖，数十万人蕴积城中，生死共处，污秽郁蒸，将成疠疫，不可缓也！ 
现代文：目前春季气候转暖，数十万军民拥挤在城中，虽生死共处，但污秽郁积，恐怕发生疾疫，这就更难办了。
English: At present, the spring weather is getting warmer, hundreds of thousands of soldiers and civilians are crowded in the city, although life and death coexist, but the filth is accumulated, I am afraid that a disease will occur, which is more difficult to do.

古文：使者至成都，开城纵民出，各复常业，乘城者皆下城解甲，民大悦。
现代文：请传我命令，开城门切不可缓！ 使者赶到成都，打开诸城门纵士民出城使他们各自恢复日常产业，守城的军人也都下城解去兵甲，一时士民欢悦，紧张的情绪一下子放松了。
English: The messenger arrived in Chengdu, opened the gates of the cities, and sent the soldiers and people out of the city so that they could each restore their daily industries. The soldiers who guarded the city also went out of the city to remove their armor. The people were happy for a while, and the tense mood suddenly relaxed.

古文：蛮方攻雅州，闻之，遣使请和，引兵去。
现代文：南诏蛮军正进攻雅州，听到高骈到来，成都解除戒备，也遣使向唐军请和，引兵归国。
English: The Nanzhao barbarian army was attacking Yazhou. Hearing the arrival of Gao Qi, Chengdu lifted its alert, and also sent an envoy to the Tang army to invite peace and lead the troops back to the country.

古文：骈又奏： 南蛮小丑，易以枝梧。
现代文：高骈因此又上奏朝廷： 南蛮小丑，很容易对付。
English: As a result, Takahata appealed to the imperial court again: Nanban clowns are easy to deal with.

古文：今西川新旧兵已多，所发长武、鄜坊、河东兵，徒有劳费，并乞勒还。 
现代文：目前西川新兵、旧兵已很多，原先征发来赴援的长武、坊、河东军队自远道来赴，只是徒然耗费军饷，请求让这些军队归还原处。 
English: At present, there are a lot of new recruits and old soldiers in Xichuan. The Changwu, Fang and Hedong armies that were originally conscripted and sent to help came all the way from far away, but they spent their military pay in vain and asked for these armies to return to their original places.

古文：敕止河东兵而己。
现代文：朝廷得到高骈奏文后，只是下令河东兵归镇而已。
English: After the imperial court received Gao Yao's report, it only ordered the soldiers from Hedong to return to the town.

古文：上之为普王也，小马坊使田令孜有宠，及即位，使知枢密，遂擢为中尉。
现代文：唐僖宗为普王时，宦官小马坊使田令孜受到宠爱，至登上皇帝位，任命田令孜知枢密使，这时更提升为掌禁兵的神策军中尉。
English: When Tang Yanzong was the king of Pu, the eunuch Xiaoma Fang made Tian Lingzi a favorite, and when he ascended to the emperor's throne, he appointed Tian Lingzi as a confidential envoy, and at that time he was promoted to the lieutenant of the Shinshao Army, who was in charge of the forbidden soldiers.

古文：上时年十四，专事游戏，政事一委令孜，呼为 阿父 。
现代文：当时僖宗才十四岁，特别喜欢游戏玩乐，军国政事一概委交田令孜办，称呼田令孜为 阿父 。
English: At that time, Emperor Taizong was only fourteen years old, and he especially liked to play games. The Central Military and Political Affairs Commission sent him to Tian Lingzi's office, and he called Tian Lingzi "father."

古文：令孜颇读书，多巧数，招权纳贿，除官及赐绯紫皆不关白于上。
现代文：田令孜颇读过一些书，很有心计巧思，招致权柄，收纳贿赂，任命官吏并赐给官吏绯衣、紫衣均不请示僖宗。
English: Tian Lingzhe read a lot of books, was very cunning and ingenious, invited authority, received bribes, appointed officials and gave them the imperial robe and purple robe without asking the emperor.

古文：每见，常自备果食两盘，与上相对饮啖，从容良久而退。
现代文：每次与唐僖宗相见，总是准备水果食物两盘，与僖宗一起边吃边饮酒，二人相对慢饮，从从容容，许久田令孜才退。
English: Every time he met with Tang Xizong, he always prepared two plates of fruit food, and drank alcohol while eating with Xizong. The two of them drank relatively slowly, and did not hesitate. It took him a long time to retreat.

古文：上与内园小儿狎昵，赏赐乐工、伎儿，所费动以万计，府藏空竭。
现代文：唐僖宗与禁中内园小儿亲昵戏狎，给陪他玩耍的乐工、伎儿的赏赐动不动就以万计，以致内府库藏空竭。
English: Tang Xizong had intimate banter with the children of the inner garden of the Forbidden City, and rewarded the musicians and acrobats who played with him with tens of thousands of dollars, resulting in the depletion of the inner palace treasury.

古文：令孜说上籍两市商旅宝货悉输内库，有陈诉者，付京兆杖杀之。
现代文：田令孜又给僖宗出主意，令籍没长安东西两市商旅的宝货，全部收归内库，有谁敢陈诉，即行逮捕，交付京兆府用乱棍打死。
English: Tian Lingzi also suggested to Shanzong that all the treasures of the merchants and travelers in the eastern and western cities of Chang'an, who had no citizenship, should be returned to the internal treasury. Anyone who dared to file a complaint would be immediately arrested and delivered to Jingzhao Prefecture to be beaten to death with a club.

古文：宰相以下，钳口莫敢言。
现代文：自宰相以下满朝大臣对此事谁也不敢上言劝谏，犹如铁钳钳住了口，都不敢发言。
English: No one from the Prime Minister down to the Manchurian Minister dared to speak out on the matter, as if they had been gagged.

古文：高骈至成都，明日，发步骑五千追南诏，至大渡河，杀获甚众，擒其酋长数十人，至成都，斩之。
现代文：高骈到达成都，第二天即调发步兵和骑兵五千人追击南诏军队，至大渡河，俘获和杀死南诏军人很多，并擒获南诏酋长几十人，送至成都斩首。
English: Gao Gan arrived in Chengdu, and on the next day, he dispatched 5,000 infantry and cavalry to chase the Nanzhao army to Dadu River, captured and killed many Nanzhao soldiers, and captured dozens of Nanzhao chiefs and sent them to Chengdu to be beheaded.

古文：修复邛崃关、大渡河诸城栅，又筑城于戎州马湖镇，号平夷军；又筑城于沐源川，皆蛮入蜀之要道也，各置兵数千戍之。
现代文：高骈又下令修复邛崃关和大渡河诸城堡、栅寨，并于戎州马湖镇筑城，号为平夷军，又于沐源川筑城，这些城堡都是南诏入蜀的要路，每个城堡和栅寨均各置数千士兵戍守。
English: Gao Jun also ordered the restoration of the castles and fortresses in Shaoguan and the Dadu River, and the construction of a castle in the town of Ma Hu in Eunshu, which was called the Pingyi Army, and the construction of a castle in Muyuan River. These castles are important routes for Nanzhao to enter Shu. Each castle and fortress is guarded by thousands of soldiers.

古文：自是蛮不复入寇。
现代文：此后南诏蛮军不再敢侵犯蜀地。
English: After that, the Nanzhao barbarian army no longer dared to invade Shu.

古文：骈召黄景复，责以大渡河失守，腰斩之。
现代文：高骈将黄景复召至西川节度使府，指责他在大渡河失守，处以腰斩。
English: Gao Gan recalled Huang Jing to the Nishikawa Prefecture, accused him of failing to defend the Dadu River, and sentenced him to beheading.

古文：骈又奏请自将本管及天平、昭义、义成等军共六万人击南诏，诏不许。
现代文：高骈又上奏朝廷，请求亲自率领西川兵马及天平、昭义、义成等军队共六万人进击南诏，僖宗下诏不许。
English: Takahata also appealed to the imperial court, requesting that he personally lead the sixty thousand soldiers and horses of the Saikawa army and the armies of Tenpyo, Shōyoshi, and Yoshinari to attack Nanzhao, which was not allowed under Shinsō.

古文：先是，南诏督爽屡牒中书，辞语怨望，中书不答。
现代文：先前，南诏督爽屡次向唐中书门下送牒文，牒文辞语怨望无礼，中书门下不予回答。
English: Previously, Nanzhao Governor Shuang repeatedly sent ultimatums to Tang Zhongshumen. The ultimatums were disrespectful and the subordinate did not answer.

古文：卢携奏称： 如此，则蛮益骄，谓唐无以答，宜数其十代受恩以责之。
现代文：卢携上奏称： 倘若这样不理不睬，南蛮必定越来越骄横，以为唐廷无言以答，应该历烽南诏十代受恩于唐，责备他们负义背恩。
English: Lu said in his report: If they ignore this, Nanban will become more and more arrogant, thinking that the Tang Dynasty is speechless, and that they should go through the ten generations of Nan Zhao's gratitude to the Tang Dynasty, and reproach them for being ungrateful.

古文：然自中书发牒，则嫌于体敌，请赐高骈及岭南西道节度使辛谠诏，使录诏白，牒与之。 
现代文：然而由朝廷中书门下发牒文，又有将南蛮置与朝廷平起平坐的地位的嫌疑，请将诏文赐于高骈及岭南西道节度使辛谠，让他们抄录诏文，以地方官的身份给南诏下牒文。 
English: However, since the Imperial Court had issued the Imperial Rescript and there were suspicions that the Southern Yuan Dynasty had been placed on an equal footing with the Imperial Court, please give the Imperial Rescript to Gaocheng and Lingnan Xi Dao Jiedu to make Xin Xuan copy the Imperial Rescript and issue the Imperial Rescript to Nanzhao as a local official.

古文：从之。
现代文：唐僖宗遵从卢携的建议。
English: I followed his advice.

古文：三月，以魏博留后韩简为节度使。
现代文：三月，朝廷正式任命魏博留后韩简为魏博节度使。
English: In March, the imperial court officially appointed Han Jian as Wei Bo's special envoy after Wei Bo left.

古文：去岁，感化军发兵诣灵武防秋，会南诏寇西川，敕往救援。
现代文：去年，感化军曾发兵往灵武防备北方，正值南诏入侵西川，唐僖宗即令他们往西川救援。
English: Last year, the Chinese Revolutionary Army had sent troops to Lingwu to defend the north, just as the Southern Zhao invaded the West River, Tang Yizong ordered them to come to the rescue of the West River.

古文：未至成都，蛮退，遣还；至凤翔，不肯诣灵武，欲擅归徐州。
现代文：南蛮退兵后，将感化军遣还，及至凤翔，却不肯往灵武防边，企图擅自返回徐州。
English: After Nanban's retreat, he sent back the affected troops to Cangzhou, and to Fengxiang, but he refused to go to Lingwu's defense and attempted to return to Xuzhou without authorization.

古文：内养王裕本、都将刘逢搜擒唱帅者胡雄等八人，斩之，众然后定。
现代文：军中宦官内养王裕本、都将刘逢将其中倡议闹事的头头胡雄等八人逮捕斩首，才使这支军队安定下来。
English: Only after the eunuchs in the army, including Wang Yuben and Liu Feng, arrested and beheaded eight people, including Hu Xiong, the ringleader of the riot, did this army settle down.

古文：初，南诏围成都，杨庆复以右职优给募突将以御之，成都由是获全。
现代文：起初，南诏军队围困成都时，杨庆复用军职和优厚的俸给招募突将抵御蛮军，使成都获得安全。
English: At the beginning, when the Nanzhao army besieged Chengdu, Yang Qingfu used his military position and generous salary to recruit generals to resist the barbarians and make Chengdu safe.

古文：及高骈至，悉令纳牒，又托以蜀中屡遭蛮寇，人未复业，停其禀给，突将皆忿怨。
现代文：高骈来到成都后，命令突将们职牒全部交至军府，又托言称蜀中因屡遭南蛮侵犯，百姓尚未恢复产业，将突将的俸给停发，突将都异常怨愤。
English: After Gao Yao arrived in Chengdu, he ordered the generals to submit all of their official certificates to the military government. He also gave the excuse that because Shu Zhong had been repeatedly invaded by the Southern Barbarians, the people had not yet restored their industry, and the generals' salaries had been suspended. The generals were extremely resentful.

古文：骈好妖术，每发兵追蛮，皆夜张旗立队，对将士焚纸画人马，散小豆，曰： 蜀兵懦怯，今遣玄女神兵前行。 
现代文：高骈喜好妖术，每当调发军队追南蛮时，都要于夜晚张开旗帜，排列队形，对着将士焚烧纸画的人和马，并散发小豆，说道： 蜀中士兵懦弱胆怯，今天我要派遣玄女神兵在前面行进。 
English: Gao Yao was fond of magic, and whenever he dispatched troops to chase the Southern Barbarians, he would unfurl banners at night, line them up in formation, and say to the soldiers who were burning paper and horses and scattering red beans, "Shu Zhong soldiers are cowardly and timid, today I will send Xuan Goddess soldiers to march in front.

古文：军中壮士皆耻之。
现代文：成都军中的壮士听后都感到耻辱。
English: The brave men of the Chengdu army all felt humiliated after hearing this.

古文：又索阖境官有出于胥吏者，皆停之。
现代文：高骈又搜索境内官员中出身于胥吏者，全部停官。
English: Gao Gan also searched for local officials who were born in Shili and suspended all of them.

古文：令民间皆用足陌钱，陌不足者皆执之，劾以行赂，取与皆死。
现代文：又命令民间均使用足陌钱进行交易，钱不足百的人都要被逮捕，以行贿罪受审劾，全部处以死刑。
English: He also ordered the people to use foreign money for transactions. Anyone with less than 100 yuan would be arrested, tried for bribery, and all of them would be sentenced to death.

古文：刑罚严酷，由是蜀人皆不悦。
现代文：由于刑罚严厉残酷，蜀中百姓均感不安。
English: Due to the severity and cruelty of the punishment, the people of Shuzhong are all uneasy.

古文：夏，四月，突将作乱，大噪突入府廷。骈走匿于厕间，突将索之，不获。
现代文：夏季四月，成都突将起事作乱，大喊大叫攻入节度使府廷；高骈逃走藏于厕所里，突将搜索未获。
English: In the summer of April, the mayor of Chengdu suddenly started a riot, shouting and shouting to break into the palace; Gao Yao fled and hid in the toilet, and the search for the mayor was unsuccessful.

古文：天平都将张杰帅所部数百人被甲入府击突将，突将撤牙前仪注兵仗，无者奋梃挥拳，乘怒气力斗，天平军不能敌，走归营。
现代文：天平都将张杰率领所部兵几百人披甲入节度使府向突将进攻，突将将节度使府衙前的兵仗仪卫撤下来进行抵抗，无兵器者就挥舞木棍，有的挥拳战斗，他们乘着满腹怒气奋斗拼杀，天平军抵挡不住，败走归营。
English: Zhang Jie led several hundred soldiers from the headquarters of the Tianping Division into the city to attack the assaulting general. The assaulting general removed the guard of honor in front of the city gate to resist. Those without weapons waved sticks, and some fought with fists. They fought and killed with full bellies of anger. The Tianping Army could not resist and returned to camp defeated.

古文：突将追之，营门闭，不得入。
现代文：突将追至天平军营，由于营门紧闭而不得进入。
English: The head of the raid was chased to the Tianping military camp, which could not be entered because the gate was closed.

古文：监军使人招谕，许以复职名禀给，久之，乃肯还营。
现代文：宦官监军派人出来招谕突将，许以恢复军职和禀给，许久，突将才肯还归本营。
English: The eunuch overseer of the army sent someone out to invite the sudden general, promising to restore the military post and pay. It was a long time before the sudden general was willing to return to the home camp.

古文：天平军复开门出，为追逐之势。至城北，时方修球场，役者数百人，天平军悉取其首，还，诣府，云 已诛乱者 。
现代文：天平军见突将退走，开营门出击，作出追逐突将的架势；追至城北，正值有役夫数百人在修筑球场，天平军竟将这些役夫全部杀死，砍下首级，还至节度使府，宣称已将作乱者诛尽。
English: When the Tianping Army saw the rebel commander retreating, they opened the gate to attack and made a stand to chase the rebel commander; they chased him to the north of the city. At the same time, hundreds of yakuza were building the stadium. The Tianping Army actually killed all of these yakuza, chopped off their heads, and went to the seat of government to declare that they had killed all the troublemakers.

古文：骈出见之，厚以金帛赏之。
现代文：高骈出来接见，给天平军丰厚的金、帛作为奖赏。
English: Gao Yao came out to meet them, and gave the Tianping Army a large amount of gold and silver as a reward.

古文：明日，榜谢突将，悉还其职名、衣粮。
现代文：第二天，揭榜告示突将，将所扣突将的职名与衣粮全部归还。
English: The next day, the list was unveiled to announce the sudden generals, and the detained sudden generals' titles and clothing were all returned.

古文：自是日令诸道将士从己来者更直府中，严兵自卫。
现代文：自后，高骈日夜令随从自己入蜀的诸道将士在节度使府轮流值班，严兵以作自卫，以防备突将再行叛乱。
English: From then on, Goguryeo ordered the Taoist generals who followed him into Shu to take turns on duty in the festival, and the soldiers were strictly used for self-defense to prevent the generals from rebelling again.

古文：加成德节度使王景崇兼侍中。
现代文：朝廷加成德节度使王景崇官，使其兼任侍中。
English: The Imperial Court made Wang Jing a high-ranking official in the Chengde Festival, and he also served as a chamberlain.

古文：浙西狼山镇遏使王郢等六十九人有战功，节度使赵隐赏以职名而不给衣粮，郢等论诉不获，遂劫库兵作乱，行收党众近万人，攻陷苏、常，乘舟往来，泛江入海，转掠二浙，南及福建，大为人患。
现代文：浙西狼山镇遏使王郢等六十九人因作战而立有战功，浙西节度使赵隐仅赏给他们空头职名，却不赏给衣服粮食，王郢等人不服，上诉论理而未得结果，于是抢劫府库兵器进行叛乱，招收到党徒近万人，攻陷苏州、常州，乱军乘船往来于长江大海之中，转而剽掠浙东和淅西，最南及于福建，成为这一带的大患。
English: Sixty-nine people, including Wang Hui, from the town of Wolsan in western Zhejiang Province, were awarded military merit for their service in the war. Zhao Ying, the governor of western Zhejiang Province, only gave them empty titles, but did not give them food and clothing. Wang Hui and others were not satisfied, and the appeal was not successful. Therefore, they robbed the treasury of weapons to carry out the rebellion, recruited nearly ten thousand party members, invaded Suzhou and Changzhou, and the rebel army traveled by boat in the Yangtze River sea, and then plundered eastern Zhejiang and western Shaanxi, as far south as Fujian, becoming a big problem in this

古文：五月，以太傅、分司令狐綯同平章事，充凤翔节度使。
现代文：五月，唐僖宗任命太傅、分司东都为闲官的令狐以同平章事衔，充任凤翔节度使。
English: In May, Emperor Taizong of Tang appointed the Taifu and the Sub-bureaucrat Dongdu as idle officials, and appointed the fox as the Fengxiang Festival Envoy with the title of Tongping Zhang.

古文：司空、同平章事萧亻放薨。
现代文：司空、同平章事萧去世。
English: Siku and Tongping Zhang passed away.

古文：六月，以御史大夫节蔚为中书侍郎、同平章事。
现代文：六月，唐僖宗任命御史大夫李蔚为中书侍郎、同平章事。
English: In June, Emperor Taizong of Tang appointed the imperial historian Li Wei to the post of chancellery attendant, and Tongping to the post of secretary.

古文：辛未，高骈阴籍突将之名，使人夜掩捕之，围其家，挑墙坏户而入，老幼孕病，悉驱去杀之，婴儿或扑于阶，或击于柱，流血成渠，号哭震天，死者数千人，夜，以车载尸投之于江。
现代文：辛未，高骈暗中记下突将的姓名，派人乘夜逮捕突将，他们先将突将的家围住，跳墙破户入其宅，不管是老幼和孕妇病人，全都赶出去处死，有的婴儿被扑杀于门阶上，有的被在柱上撞死，一时流血成渠，哭喊之声震天，被杀死者达数千人。夜晚，派人用车载以尸体投入江中。
English: Xin Wei, Gao Yao secretly wrote down the name of the rebel general and sent people to arrest the rebel general at night. They first surrounded the rebel general's home, broke through the wall into his house, and drove out all the old and young, pregnant women and patients to be executed. Some babies were slaughtered on the doorstep, and some were killed on the pillar. They bled to death in an instant, and the sound of their cries shook the heavens. The number of those killed reached several thousand. At night, people were sent to throw the bodies into the river by car.

古文：有一妇人，临刑，戟手大骂曰： 高骈！
现代文：有一位妇女临刑时挥手大骂： 高骈！
English: There was a woman who, when she was about to be sentenced, waved her hand and shouted: "Go to jail!

古文：汝无故夺有功将士职名、衣粮，激成众怒。幸而得免，不省己自咎，乃更以诈杀无辜近万人，天地鬼神，岂容汝如此！
现代文：你无辜剥夺有功将士的职名和衣粮，激怒众人攻打府廷，虽有幸得以免死，不但不反省自己的错误，反而用狡诈奸计滥杀近万无辜士民，天地鬼神岂能容忍你如此作恶！
English: You innocently deprived meritorious soldiers of their titles and salaries, incited the people to attack the imperial court, and although you were fortunate enough to be spared death, instead of reflecting on your mistakes, you used cunning and deceit to indiscriminately kill nearly ten thousand innocent people. How can heaven and earth tolerate you doing such evil!

古文：我必诉汝于上帝，使汝他日举家屠灭如我今日，冤抑污辱如我今日，惊忧惴恐如我今日！ 
现代文：我一定要到上天那里控诉你，使你象我今日一样举家遭屠灭，象我今日一样含冤受辱，象我今日一样遭受惊忧！ 说完后向天跪拜，从容就刑。
English: I will surely complain to the heavens about you, so that your entire family will be slaughtered just like mine today, and you will be wronged and humiliated just like me today, and you will be terrified just like me today!

古文：言毕，拜天，怫然就戮。久之，突将有自戍役归者，骈复欲尽族之，有元从亲吏王殷谏曰： 相公奉道，宜好生恶杀，此属在外，初不同谋，若复诛之，则自危者多矣！ 
现代文：有的突将自戍役处归来，高骈又想将他们举族杀尽，有跟随高骈多年的亲吏王殷劝谏说： 高相公既奉信道教，应尊重生命，厌恶杀人。这些突将在外戍役，起初并没有参与叛乱阴谋，如果将他们也诛杀，恐怕使人人自危，反而不利于军府！ 
English: Some of the mutineers returned from the executioner's office, and Gaozong wanted to kill them all. Wang Yin, a court official who had followed Gaozong for many years, advised Gaozong that since Gaozong believed in Taoism, he should respect life and abhor killing people. These mutineers, who had served as executioners abroad, did not participate in the rebellion plot at first. If they were to be killed, it would endanger everyone, but would be detrimental to the military government!

古文：骈乃止。
现代文：高骈觉得有理，这才停止屠杀。
English: Gao Yao felt justified, and that's when the killing stopped.

古文：王仙芝及其党尚君长攻陷濮州、曹州，众至数万。天平节度使薛崇出兵击之，为仙芝所败。
现代文：王仙芝及其党羽尚君长率军攻陷濮州、曹州，其队伍发展至数万人，唐天平军节度使薛崇出兵讨伐，被王仙芝打败。
English: Wang Xianzhi and his henchman Shang Junlong led the army to conquer Zhangzhou and Caozhou, and their ranks grew to tens of thousands. Tang Tianping's army sent troops to fight against Xue Chong, who was defeated by Wang Xianzhi.

古文：冤句人黄巢亦聚众数千人应仙芝。
现代文：冤句人黄巢也聚集了数千人响应王仙芝。
English: Thousands of people also gathered in Huang Chao to respond to Wang Xianzhi.

古文：巢少与仙芝皆以贩私盐为事，巢善骑谢，喜任侠，粗涉书传，屡举进士不第，遂为盗，与仙芝攻剽州县，横行山东，民之困于重敛者争归之，数月之间，众至数万。
现代文：黄巢少年时与王仙芝都以贩私盐为生，黄巢善于骑马射箭，性格豪爽任侠，粗略地猎涉了史传经书，但屡次参加进士科考试均未及第，于是成为盗贼，与王仙芝攻略州、县，横行于山东，农民在官府重敛下无以为生，于是争相投奔黄巢，几个月内，队伍即发展到数万人。
English: When Huang Chao was a teenager, he and Wang Xianzhi both made a living by smuggling salt. Huang Chao was good at riding horses and shooting arrows. He had a bold and heroic personality. He briefly dabbled in the history books. However, he repeatedly failed to pass the entrance examination. So he became a thief. Together with Wang Xianzhi, he attacked provinces and counties and rampaged through Shandong. Farmers could not make a living under the government's heavy hand. So they rushed to join Huang Chao. Within a few months, the team had grown to tens of thousands.

古文：卢龙节度使张公素，性暴戾，不为军士所附。
现代文：唐卢龙节度使张公素，性情凶狠残暴，不为士卒所依附。
English: Tang Lulong's moderation made Zhang Gongsu, with a ferocious and brutal temperament, not to be attached by his subordinates.

古文：大将李茂勋，本回鹘阿布思之族，回鹘败，降于张仲武；仲武使戍边，屡有功，赐姓名。
现代文：大将李茂勋本是回鹘阿布思的后裔，回鹘败亡时，投降卢龙节度使张仲武，张仲武收下他，并让他入军籍戍边，因屡立战功，赐予他李茂勋的姓名。
English: General Li Maoxun was originally a descendant of Huizhou Abu Si. When Huizhou was defeated, Zhang Zhongwu was made to surrender to the Lulong Festival. Zhang Zhongwu took him in and made him a member of the military in Fujian. Because of his many military exploits, he was given the name Li Maoxun.

古文：纳降军使陈贡言者，幽之宿将，为军士所信服，茂勋潜杀贡言，声云贡言举兵向蓟；公素出战而败，奔京师。茂勋入城，众乃知非贡言也，不得已，推而立之，朝廷因以茂勋为留后。
现代文：纳降军使陈贡言是幽州的宿将，受到军士们的信服，李茂勋暗中将陈贡言杀死，却打着陈贡言的旗号举兵攻蓟州，张公素出战失败，逃奔京师，李茂勋进入幽州城，众人这才知道并不是陈贡言，但不得已也只好推李茂勋为主，朝廷因此任命李茂勋为卢龙军留后。
English: Li Maoxun secretly killed Chen Gongyan, but under the banner of Chen Gongyan, he raised an army to attack Bozhou. Zhang Gongsu failed to go to war and fled to the Beijing division, and Li Maoxun entered Yuzhou City. It was only then that everyone knew that it was not Chen Gongyan, but they had no choice but to put Li Maoxun in charge. The court therefore appointed Li Maoxun to stay behind as the Lulong Army.

古文：秋，七月，蝗自东而西，蔽日，所过赤地。
现代文：秋季，七月，蝗虫自东飞到西边，遮天蔽日，所过之地尽为赤地，草木五谷皆被吃尽。
English: In autumn, in July, the locusts fly from the east to the west, covering the sky and the sun. The land they pass through is completely red, and all the plants and trees are eaten up.

古文：京兆尹杨知至奏 蝗入京畿，不食稼，皆抱荆棘而死。 
现代文：京兆尹杨知至向唐僖宗上奏称： 蝗虫飞入京畿地区，不吃庄稼，全都抱着荆棘而死去。 
English: Jing Zhao Yin Yang Zhizhi reported to Tang Xizong: Locusts flew into the Gyeonggi region, did not eat crops, and all died holding thorns.

古文：宰相皆贺。
现代文：宰相们都来致贺。
English: All the prime ministers came to congratulate us.

古文：八月，李茂勋为卢龙节度使。
现代文：八月，朝廷正式任命李茂勋为卢龙节度使。
English: In August, the imperial court officially appointed Li Maoxun as the Lulong Festival envoy.

古文：九月，左补阙董禹谏上游畋、乘驴击球，上赐金帛以褒之。
现代文：九月，右补阙董禹上言谏唐僖宗施猎太过、乘驴击球，僖宗赐给董禹金、帛，以示褒奖。
English: In September, the Right Rev. Dong Yu said that Tang Yizong's hunting was too excessive and that he hit the ball with a donkey. To show his appreciation, Yizong gave Dong Yu gold and a donkey.

古文：邠宁节度使李侃奏为假父华清宫使道雅求赠官，禹上疏论之，语颇侵宦官。
现代文：宁节度使李侃是已故宦官华清宫使道雅的义子，因而上奏僖宗为其义父求赠官，董禹又上疏对此事提出异论，其疏文有一些冒犯宦官的言语。
English: According to Ning Jiedu, Li Kan was the son-in-law of the late eunuch Hua Qing Palace envoy Tao Ya. Therefore, Shangso Shanzong asked for the gift of an eunuch for his father-in-law, and Dong Yu and Shangso raised objections to this matter. His letter had some words that offended the eunuch.

古文：枢密使杨复恭等列诉于上，冬，十月，禹坐贬郴州司马。
现代文：枢密使杨复恭等人在僖宗面前列举诉说，冬季，十月，董禹因冒犯宦官被贬为郴州司马。
English: In the winter, in October, Dong Yu was demoted to the position of Zhangzhou Sima for offending eunuchs.

古文：复恭，钦义之养孙也。
现代文：杨复恭是杨钦义的养孙。
English: Yang Fookong is the adopted grandson of Yang Qin Yi.

古文：昭义军乱，大将刘广逐节度使高湜，自为留后。以左金吾大将军曹翔为昭义节度使。
现代文：唐藩镇昭义军发生变乱，大将刘广将节度使高驱逐，自任留后，朝廷任命左金吾大将军曹翔为昭义节度使。
English: When a mutiny broke out among the Shouyi troops in the town of Tang, General Liu Guang came to expel the commander Gao. After he resigned, the imperial court appointed General Cao Xiang of the Zuo Kingu Army as the commander of the Shouyi garrison.

古文：回鹘还至罗川，十一月，遣使者同罗榆禄入贡；赐拯接绢万匹。
现代文：回鹘部族回到罗川，十一月，派遣同罗榆禄为使节向唐朝进贡，唐僖宗赐给绢万匹，以接济回鹘。
English: The Uighur tribe returned to Luochuan. In November, they sent an envoy with Luo Yulu to pay tribute to the Tang Dynasty. The Tang Dynasty Emperor Xuanzong gave the Uighur tribe ten thousand horses to help the Uighurs.

古文：群盗侵淫，剽掠十馀州，至于淮南，多者千馀人，少者数百人。诏淮南、忠武、宣武、义成、天平五军节度使、监军亟加讨捕及招怀。
现代文：各路盗贼势力转盛，攻掠十余个州，势力达于淮南，多的有千余人，少的也有数百人；唐僖宗颁下诏书命令淮南、忠武、宣武、义成、天平等五军节度使、监军迅速加以征讨搜捕，并用计怀柔招抚。
English: The forces of thieves from all directions flourished, attacking and plundering more than ten states, and their forces reached as far as Huainan, with more than a thousand people, and a few hundred people; Tang Xizong issued an edict ordering the five armies of Huainan, Zhongwu, Xuanwu, Yicheng, and Tianbei to quickly recruit, search, and arrest, and use tact and gentle persuasion.

古文：十二月，王仙芝寇沂州，平卢节度使宋威表请以步骑五千别为一使，兼帅本道兵所在讨贼。
现代文：十二月，王仙芝率军侵入沂州，唐平卢节度使宋威上表，请求发步兵和骑兵五千人，另给招讨使名义，让他兼领本道兵在盗贼众多的地方进行征讨。
English: In December, Wang Xianzhi led an army to invade Zhangzhou. Tang Pinglu sent Song Wei to the table and asked him to send five thousand infantry and cavalry, and also gave him the name of recruiting envoy, so that he could also lead his own Taoist soldiers to recruit in a place where there were many thieves.

古文：乃以威为诸道行营招讨草贼使，仍给禁兵三千、甲骑五百。
现代文：朝廷于是任命宋威为诸道行营招讨草贼使，并调发禁兵三千人、铁甲骑兵五百人交宋威指挥。
English: As a result, the imperial court appointed Song Wei as the commander of the campaign to recruit grass thieves, and dispatched three thousand soldiers and five hundred cavalrymen to Song Wei.

古文：因诏河南方镇所遣讨贼都头并取威处分。
现代文：又下诏给河南方镇，命令各镇所派遣的讨贼军都头一并接受宋威的布置和指挥。
English: He also issued an edict to the town of Henan Province, ordering the anti-thief troops dispatched by all towns to accept Song Wei's deployment and command.

古文：懿宗昭圣恭惠孝皇帝下乾符三年
现代文：乾符三年
English: Three years of dry run

古文：春，正月，天平军奏遣将士张晏等救沂州，还，至义桥，闻北境复有盗起，留使扞御。晏等不从，喧噪趣郓州。
现代文：春季，正月，唐天平军上奏朝廷，宣称已经派遣将士张晏等人往沂州救授，大军归还时，来到义桥，闻知北方又有盗贼起事，于是留下来捍卫，张晏等人不服从命令，大喊大闹前往郓州。
English: In the spring, the first month of the year, Tang Tianping's army reported to the imperial court, claiming that they had sent the general Zhang Qian and others to Quzhou to rescue the professor. When the army returned, they came to Yibiao. They heard that thieves had risen up in the north, so they stayed to defend. Zhang Qian and others disobeyed orders and shouted loudly to go to Quzhou.

古文：都将张思泰、李承祐走马出城，裂袖与盟，以俸钱备酒肴慰谕，然后定。
现代文：郓州都将张思泰、李承骑马出城，撕下袖子与张晏等人起盟，并用自已的薪俸买酒菜抚慰劝喻张晏等，使事情得以平息。
English: Zhang Sitai and Li Cheng rode out of the city, tore off their sleeves and formed an alliance with Zhang Ye and others, and used their own salaries to buy wine and vegetables to soothe and persuade Zhang Ye and others, so that the matter could be calmed down.

古文：语本军宣慰一切，无得穷诘。
现代文：唐僖宗下诏，令天平军对这一切都进行宣慰，不对张晏等人穷加追究。
English: Tang Xizong issued an edict, ordering the Tianping Army to express consolation for all of this, and not to pursue Zhang Ye and others.

古文：二月，敕福建、江西、湖南诸道观察、刺史，皆训练士卒。又令天下乡村各置弓刀鼓板以备群盗。
现代文：二月，唐僖宗下令福建、江西、湖南等诸道观察使、刺史，都应训练本道士卒；又命令全国各地乡村都应自备弓箭、刀枪、鼓板，以防备盗贼。
English: In February, Emperor Taizong ordered the emissaries and historians of Fujian, Jiangxi, Hunan and other provinces to train their own Taoist disciples. He also ordered that all villages throughout the country should prepare their own bows and arrows, swords and guns, and drumboards to guard against thieves.

古文：赐兗海节度号泰宁军。
现代文：朝廷给兖海节度使府赐以泰宁军的称号。
English: The imperial court gave the title of the Taining Army to the Bohai Festival.

古文：三月，卢龙节度使李茂勋请以其子幽州左司马可举知留后，自求致仕。
现代文：三月，唐卢龙节度使李茂勋请求让他的儿子幽州左司马李可举为留后，自己请求退休。
English: In March, the Tang Lulong Festival made Li Maoxun ask for retirement after he asked his son, Yuzhou Zuosima Li Ke to stay.

古文：诏茂勋以左仆射致仕，以可举为卢龙留后。
现代文：唐僖宗下诏给李茂勋以左仆射的官衔退休，并任命李可举为卢龙留后。
English: Emperor Taizong of Tang Dynasty decreed that Li Maoxun retire with the title of Left Footman, and appointed Li Keju as the successor of Lu Long.

古文：门下侍郎、同平章事崔彦昭罢为太子太傅。以左仆射王鐸兼门下侍郎、同平章事。
现代文：门下侍郎、同平章事崔彦昭被唐僖宗罢，任太子太傅，又命左仆射王铎兼任门下侍郎、同平章事。
English: Choi Hikosho, a subordinate chamberlain and a peer, was ousted by Emperor Taejong of Tang and appointed Crown Prince Taifu. He also ordered his left-hand man, Sho Wangsheng, to also serve as a subordinate chamberlain and a peer.

古文：南诏遣使者诣高骈求和而盗边不息，骈斩其使者。
现代文：南诏一面派遣使者至成都向高骈求和，一面又不断地侵盗边境，高骈于是将南诏使者斩首。
English: On the one hand, Nanzhao sent an envoy to Chengdu to sue for peace from Gaozhou, and on the other hand, it continuously invaded the border. Gaozhou then beheaded the Nanzhao envoy.

古文：蛮之陷交趾也，虏安南经略判官杜骧妻李瑶。
现代文：南诏于唐懿宗咸通六年攻陷交趾时，曾虏获唐安南经略判官杜骧的妻子李瑶。
English: Nanzhao captured the wife of Tang Annan's magistrate Du Xuan, Li Xuan, during the siege of Hamdang in the sixth year of the Tang Dynasty.

古文：瑶，宗室之疏属也。
现代文：李瑶是唐朝皇帝宗室远亲。于是南诏送李瑶回唐朝。
English: Li Xi was a distant relative of the emperor's family in the Tang Dynasty. Therefore, Nanzhao sent Li Xi back to the Tang Dynasty.

古文：蛮遣瑶还，递木夹以遗骈，称 督爽牒西川节度使 ，辞极骄慢。
现代文：让她给高骈传送一个木夹信件，信中称 督爽牒西川节度使 ，其信言辞极其傲慢。
English: Let her deliver a wooden-clamped letter to Gao Yu, in which she called him "Supreme Commander Saikawa Setsudo," whose words were extremely arrogant.

古文：骈送瑶京师。
现代文：高骈于是将李瑶送归京师。
English: Gao Yao then sent Li Yao back to Beijing.

古文：甲辰，复牒南诏，数其负累圣恩德、暴犯边境、残贼欺诈之罪，安南、大渡覆败之状，折辱之。
现代文：甲辰，再向南诏送上一牒，历数南诏辜负唐朝的恩德，残暴地侵犯唐朝边境，以及其侵唐失败回国后欺诈的罪恶，还有蛮军在安南、大渡河惨遭失败的情状，以折煞羞辱南诏君臣。
English: Jia Chen then sent an ultimatum to Nanzhao, listing the ways in which Nanzhao had failed to live up to the Tang Dynasty's benevolence, brutally violated the Tang Dynasty's borders, and the evils of fraud after returning to China after failing to invade Tang, as well as the circumstances of the barbarian army's disastrous defeat in Annan and Dadu River, in order to humiliate Nanzhao's princes and ministers.

古文：原州刺史史怀操贪暴，夏，四月，军乱，逐之。
现代文：唐原州刺史史怀操贪鄙残暴；夏季，四月，原州发生军乱，史怀操被乱军驱逐。
English: In the summer, in April, there was a military conflict in Yuanzhou, and Shi Huaixu was expelled by the rebels.

古文：赐宣武、感化节度、泗州防御使密诏，选精兵数百人于巡内游奕，防卫纲船，五日一具上供钱米平安状闻奏。
现代文：唐僖宗赐予宣武军节度使、感化军节度使、泗州防御使密诏，让他们在所部选出精兵数百人于其辖地巡游，防卫沿汴水向关中输运东南财赋的纲船，五天即要向朝廷上一奏状，汇报上供的钱米是否平安。
English: Emperor Taizong of Tang Dynasty issued a secret edict to the festival envoys of the Xuanwu Army, the festival envoys of the Qianhua Army, and the defense envoys of Zhangzhou, asking them to select hundreds of elite soldiers to patrol in their areas of jurisdiction, and to guard the ships that transported Southeast Asian wealth to Guanzhong along the Surabaya River. Five days later, they were to send a report to the imperial court to report whether the money and rice supplied were safe.

古文：五月，昭王汭薨。
现代文：五月，唐宣宗之子昭王李去世。
English: In May, Tang Xuan Zong's son, Zhao Wang Li, passed away.

古文：以卢龙留后李可举为节度使。
现代文：朝廷任命卢龙留后李可举为卢龙节度使。
English: After the imperial court appointed Lulong to stay, Li Ke became Lulong's special envoy.

古文：六月，抚王纮薨。
现代文：六月，唐顺宗之子抚王李去世。
English: In June, Tang Shunzong's son Fu Wang Li passed away.

古文：雄州地震裂，水涌，坏州城及公私户舍俱尽。
现代文：雄州发生地震，地表裂开，水喷涌而出，毁坏州城，使城内公私房屋全部毁坏。
English: An earthquake occurred in Xiongzhou. The earth's surface cracked and water gushed out, destroying the city of Xiongzhou and causing all public and private houses in the city to be destroyed.

古文：秋，七月，以前岩州刺史高杰为左骁卫将军，充缘海水军都知兵马使，以讨王郢。
现代文：秋季，七月，朝廷任命前岩州刺史高杰为左骁卫将军，充任沿海水军都知兵马使，专门征讨王郢。
English: In the autumn, in July, the imperial court appointed Gao Jie, the former governor of Iwashu Province, as the general of the Left Division of the National Guard, and he served as the envoy of the Coastal Naval Forces to collect soldiers and horses for the purpose of conscripting Wang Qian.

古文：鄂王润薨。
现代文：唐宣宗之子鄂王李润去世。
English: King of Hubei Li Run passed away.

古文：加魏博节度使韩简同平章事。
现代文：朝廷加魏博节度使韩简同平章事的官街。
English: The imperial court and the Wei Bo Festival made Han Jian Tong Ping the official street of the event.

古文：宋威击王仙芝于沂州城下，大破之，仙芝亡去。
现代文：宋威在沂州城下讨伐王仙芝，大破王仙芝军，王仙芝因兵败逃走。
English: Song Wei fought Wang Xianzhi at the foot of Zhangzhou Castle, defeated Wang Xianzhi's army, and Wang Xianzhi fled because of the defeat.

古文：威奏仙芝已死，纵遣诸道兵，身还青州。百官皆入贺。
现代文：宋威上奏称王仙芝已死，请将诸道讨贼军遣还，自己回到青州；朝廷百官听说王仙芝已被宋威打死，都入朝向唐僖宗祝贺。
English: Song Wei made a speech saying that Wang Xianzhi was dead, please send all the traitors back and return to Qingzhou; hundreds of officials of the imperial court heard that Wang Xianzhi had been killed by Song Wei, and they all came to the court to congratulate Tang Xizong.

古文：居三日，州县奏仙芝尚在，攻剽如故。
现代文：过了三天，州、县上奏称王仙芝仍然生存，并且和原先一样攻剽州县。
English: Three days later, the prefectural and county officials reported that Wang Xianzhi was still alive and was attacking Zhangzhou County as before.

古文：时兵始休，诏复发之，士皆忿怨思乱。
现代文：当时诸道兵刚开始休整，即又得到诏命被调发去追剿，士兵几经折腾，也都愤怒怨恨，一心想造反作乱。
English: At that time, the soldiers of all sects had just begun to take a rest, when they received the imperial command to be sent to chase the herdsmen. After several trials and tribulations, the soldiers were also angry and resentful, bent on creating a rebellion.

古文：八月，仙芝陷阳翟、郏城，诏忠武节度使崔安潜发兵击之。
现代文：八月，王仙芝率军攻陷阳翟、郏城，唐僖宗下诏书命忠武节度使崔安潜去发兵讨伐。
English: In August, Wang Xianzhi led the army to invade and capture the cities of Yangtze and Fengtai, and the Emperor of Tang Dynasty issued an edict ordering Zhongwu Jiedu to force Cui An to sneak away and send troops to fight.

古文：安潜，慎由之弟也。
现代文：崔安潜是崔慎由的弟弟。
English: Choi An Guk is Choi Shin Yoo's younger brother.

古文：又命昭义节度使曹翔将步骑五千及义成兵卫东都宫，以左散骑常侍曾元裕为招讨副使，守东都，又诏山南东道节度使李福选步骑二千守汝、邓要路。
现代文：唐僖宗又命令昭义节度使曹翔率领步兵和骑兵五千人，加上义成兵守卫东都洛阳的宫殿。任命左散骑常侍曾元裕为招讨副使，据守东都洛阳。又下诏命令山南东道节度使李福选步兵、骑兵二千人守卫汝州、邓州的重要道路。
English: Tang Xizong also ordered the Shouyi Festival to let Cao Xiang lead 5,000 infantry and cavalry, plus Yicheng soldiers, to guard the palace of Luoyang, the eastern capital. He appointed Zeng Yuanyu, a left-handed cavalryman, as vice-envoy to invite and guard Luoyang, the eastern capital. He also ordered the Shannan Host Festival to let Li Fu select 2,000 infantry and cavalry to guard the important roads of Ruzhou and Dengzhou.

古文：仙芝进逼汝州，诏邠宁节度使李侃、凤翔节度使令狐綯选步兵一千、骑兵五百守陕州、潼关。
现代文：王仙芝率军进逼汝州，唐僖宗又下诏命令宁节度使李侃、凤翔节度使令狐选拔步兵一千、骑兵五百据守陕州、潼关。
English: Wang Xianzhi led the army to push into Ruzhou, and Tang Xizong also issued a decree ordering Ning Jietu to make Li Kan, Feng Xiang Jietu to make Ling Fox select one thousand infantry and five hundred cavalry to defend Shaanxi and Shaoguan.

古文：加成德节度使王景崇兼中书令。
现代文：朝廷加成德节度使王景崇兼任中书令。
English: The Imperial Court added the Chengde Festival to make Wang Jingsong concurrently serve as the middle secretary.

古文：九月，乙亥朔，日有食之。
现代文：九月，乙亥朔，出现日食。
English: In September, a solar eclipse occurred.

古文：丙子，王仙芝陷汝州，执刺史王镣。
现代文：丙子，王仙芝攻陷汝州城，活捉唐汝州刺史王镣。
English: On the second day of the junior high school, Wang Xianzhi broke through Ruzhou and captured Jishi Wang Yao.

古文：镣，鐸之从父兄弟也。
现代文：王镣是王铎的叔伯堂兄弟。
English: Wang Yao is Wang Yao's uncle's cousin.

古文：东都大震，士民挈家逃出城。
现代文：消息传来，东都洛阳人心震动，一片惊慌，士民携带家眷争先恐后地逃出城去。
English: When the news came, the people of Luoyang, the eastern capital, were shocked and panicked. The scholars and their families scrambled to flee the city.

古文：乙酉敕王仙芝、尚君长罪，除官，以招谕之。
现代文：乙酉，颁下诏敕赦免王仙芝、尚君长的罪，给二人任以官爵，企图招降他们。
English: He issued an edict to pardon Wang Xianzhi and Shang Junlong, and appointed the two men as official barons in an attempt to lure them to surrender.

古文：仙芝陷阳武，攻郑州，昭义监军判官雷殷符屯中牟，击仙芝，破走之。
现代文：王仙芝攻陷阳武，又转攻郑州，唐昭义监军判官雷殷符率军屯驻于中牟县，领兵袭击王仙芝军，将其攻破并击退。
English: Wang Xianzhi attacked Yangwu and then Zhengzhou. The judge of Tang Zhaoyi's army, Lei Yinfu, led the army stationed in Zhongmou County. He led the army to attack Wang Xianzhi's army, defeated and repulsed it.

古文：冬，十月，仙芝南攻唐、邓。
现代文：冬季，十月，王仙芝向南攻打唐州、邓州。
English: In winter and October, Wang Xianzhi went south to attack Tangzhou and Dengzhou.

古文：西川节度使高骈筑成都罗城，使僧景仙规度，周二十五里，悉召县令庀徒赋役，吏受百钱以上皆死。
现代文：西川节度使高骈在成都修筑罗城，让和尚景仙进行设计规划，罗城周长二十五里，并将所辖县的县念悉数召来，让他们将各县的赋税尽行交来，并分派役夫，县吏受贿超过百钱以上者统统处死。
English: The Xichuan Festival made Gao Gan build Luocheng in Chengdu, and let the monk Jingsian carry out the design and planning. The circumference of Luocheng is twenty-five miles. He also summoned all the county officials of the counties under his jurisdiction, and asked them to pay the taxes of each county as much as possible. He also assigned officials, and all the county officials who took bribes of more than one hundred yuan were executed.

古文：蜀土疏恶，以甓甃之，还城十里内取土，皆划丘垤平之，无得为坎埳以害耕种；役者不过十日而代，众乐其均，不费扑挞而功办。
现代文：蜀中土质疏松，于是先将土制成砖块，在环城十里内取土，取土后又挖丘将原取土处填平，不准破坏田地造成坑洼而损害农家耕种，各县赴役的农民不过十天就可轮换，所以赴役的农夫认为派役均平，都乐于接受，不用皮鞭督役而工效卓著。
English: The soil quality in Shuzhong is sparse, so the soil was first made into bricks, and the soil was taken within ten miles of the ring city. After the soil was taken, the hill was dug up and the original soil was filled in. It is not allowed to damage the fields and cause potholes to damage farmers' farming. Farmers from all counties who go to work can be rotated in just ten days. Therefore, the farmers who go to work think that the assignment is even and are willing to accept it. They do not use the whip to supervise the work, and the work is outstanding.

古文：自八月癸丑筑之，至十一月戊子毕功。
现代文：从八月癸丑开始筑城。到十一月戊子工程就圆满完毕。
English: The construction of the city began in August, and by November, the Boshi project was successfully completed.

古文：役之始作也，骈恐南诏扬声入寇，虽不敢决来，役者必惊扰，乃奏遣景仙托游行入南诏，说谕骠信使归附中国，仍许妻以公主，因与议二国礼仪，久之不决。
现代文：罗城修筑开始，高骈恐怕南诏扬言入侵，虽然不一定敢真的闯来，但在心理上必定会造成役夫的惊慌，于是上奏朝廷派遣和尚景仙托言云游而入南诏之境，劝说南诏骠信归附中国，并且许以唐朝公主和亲，景仙与南诏骠信议论两国礼仪，各不相让，因此久议不能决。
English: At the beginning of the construction of Luocheng, Gao Wei feared that Nanzhao would threaten to invade. Although he did not necessarily dare to actually break in, psychologically it would certainly cause panic among the officials. Therefore, the imperial court sent the monk Jing Xian to travel to Nanzhao and persuade Nanzhao Xianxin to accede to China, and allowed the Tang Dynasty princess and relative, Jing Xian and Nanzhao Xianxin to discuss the etiquette of the two countries. They did not give in to each other, so they could not decide for a long time.

古文：骈又声言欲巡边，朝夕通烽火，至大渡河，而实不行，蛮中惴恐。
现代文：高骈又声言要巡视边境，自早至晚烽火通天，来到大渡河，却并不前行，南诏蛮人听说高骈率军南下，惶恐不安。
English: Gao Yao also claimed that he wanted to inspect the border. From morning to night, he kindled fire to the sky, came to the Dadu River, but did not go forward. The barbarians in Nanzhao heard that Gao Yao and his army were going south, and they were terrified.

古文：由是讫于城成，边候无风尘之警。
现代文：于是一直到罗城筑完，边防哨所没有出现一点警报。
English: So until the completion of Luocheng, there was no alarm at the border guard post.

古文：先是，西川将吏入南诏，骠信皆坐受其拜，骈以其俗尚浮屠，故遣景仙往，骠信果帅其大臣迎拜，信用其言。
现代文：先前，西川将吏去南诏，均无一例外地要向南诏骠信行跪拜礼，高骈却以南诏有崇尚佛教的风俗，特意派遣景仙前往，由于景仙是高僧大德，南诏骠信果然率国中大臣迎拜景仙，并相信景仙所说的话，采用景仙之策。
English: Previously, when the Nishikawa shogunate officials went to Nanzhao, they all, without exception, had to kneel and worship Nanzhao Shuxin. However, Gaozhou had the custom of advocating Buddhism in Nanzhao, and specially sent Jingsian to visit. Since Jingsian was a great monk, Nanzhao Shuxin led the Minister of the Middle Kingdom to worship Jingsian, and believed in what Jingsian said, and adopted Jingsian's strategy.

古文：王仙芝攻郢、复二州，陷之。
现代文：王仙芝率军攻陷郢州、复州。
English: Wang Xianzhi led the army to invade Zhangzhou and Fuzhou.

古文：王郢因温州刺史鲁寔请降，寔屡为之论奏，敕郢诣阙。
现代文：王郢向唐温州刺史鲁请降，鲁屡次为王郢向朝廷上表论奏，唐僖宗于是下诏让王郢前往长安朝见。
English: Wang Xi asked Tang Wenzhou's Zhang Shilu to abdicate, and Lu repeatedly argued for Wang Xi's abdication to the imperial court. Tang Shizong then issued an edict to let Wang Xi go to Chang'an to see the imperial court.

古文：郢拥兵迁延，半年不至，固求望海镇使；朝廷不许，以郢为右率府率，仍令左神策军补以重职，其先所掠之财，并令给与。
现代文：王郢拥兵拖延，半年未能入朝，并请求任望海镇使；朝廷不答应，任王郢官为右率府率，并且许王郢入朝可于左神策禁军中补给重要军职，王郢先前攻剽州县所掠夺的财物统统归他所有。
English: Wang Hui's supporters delayed his entry into the imperial court for half a year, and he requested to be appointed as the envoy of the town of Wanghai; the imperial court did not agree, and appointed Wang Hui as the right leader of the government, and allowed Wang Hui to enter the imperial court to supply important military posts in the Zuo Shenze Forbidden Army. All the property that Wang Hui had previously captured in Zhangzhou County belonged to him.

古文：十二月，王仙芝攻申、光、庐、寿、舒、通等州。
现代文：十二月，王仙芝率军进攻申州、光州、庐州、寿州、舒州、通州等地。
English: In December, Wang Xianzhi led the army to attack Shenzhou, Gwangju, Zhangzhou, Shuzhou, Shuzhou, Tongzhou and other places.

古文：淮南节度使刘鄴奏求益兵，敕感化节度使薛能选精兵数千助之。
现代文：唐淮南节度使刘邺上奏朝廷要求增派军队。唐僖宗下诏命令感化军节度使薛能选派精兵数千人往淮南救助刘邺。
English: The Southern Huainan Festival of the Tang Dynasty caused Liu Bei to appeal to the imperial court to request the dispatch of more troops. The Southern Huainan Festival of the Tang Dynasty caused Xue to send thousands of elite soldiers to Huainan to rescue Liu Bei.

古文：郑畋以言计不行，称疾逊位，不许，乃上言： 自沂州奏捷之后，仙芝愈肆猖狂，屠陷五六州，疮痍数千里。
现代文：郑畋由于自己谋划讨平贼乱的策略得不到朝廷的采纳，借口有疾病而要求去职逊位，唐僖宗不予批准。于是郑畋又向僖宗上言： 自从宋威于沂州上奏告捷之后，王仙芝更加猖狂，攻陷屠杀五六个州，战乱造成疮痍数千里。
English: As Zheng Xuan's strategy of planning to quell the bandit rebellion was not accepted by the imperial court, he requested to resign on the pretext of illness, but Tang Xizong did not approve. Therefore, Zheng Xuan also appealed to Xizong: Since Song Wei's victory in Zhangzhou, Wang Xianzhi became more rampant, attacked and slaughtered five or six states, and caused thousands of miles of war.

古文：宋威衰老多病，自妄奏以来，诸道尤所不服，今淹留毫州，殊无进讨之意。
现代文：招讨草贼使宋威已衰老并且多病，自从妄奏告捷以来，诸道军尤其对宋威不服，而今宋威滞留于毫州一带，根本没有向草贼进攻征讨的意思。
English: Inviting the weed thief has made Song Wei old and sickly. Since the delusion of success, the various armies have been particularly dissatisfied with Song Wei. Now Song Wei is stranded in the area of Millizhou and has no intention of attacking the weed thief.

古文：曾元裕拥兵蕲、黄，专欲望风退缩。
现代文：招讨草贼副使曾元裕拥兵于蕲州、董州一带，更是一心想望风退缩。
English: Vice-envoy Zeng Yuanyu, who had been soliciting the support of soldiers in the areas of Ganzhou and Dongzhou, withdrew in the hope of gaining the upper hand.

古文：若使贼陷扬州，则江南亦非国有。
现代文：如果让草贼攻陷扬州，就会使江南地区脱离朝廷的控制， 后果不堪设想。
English: If the grass thieves were allowed to invade Yangzhou, the southern part of the Yangtze River would be taken out of the control of the imperial court, with unimaginable consequences.

古文：崔安潜威望过人，张自勉骁雄良将，宫苑使李晟，西平王晟之孙，严而有勇。
现代文：我以为崔安潜有过人的威望，张自勉是最骁勇雄壮的良将，宫苑使李是西平王李晟的孙子，治军严厉而勇猛。
English: I thought that Cui Anqian had more prestige than human beings, Zhang Zimin was the most courageous and strong general, and Li Gongyuan was the grandson of Xiping King Lixuan, who ruled the army strictly and bravely.

古文：请以安潜为行营都统，彖为招讨使代威，自勉为副使代元裕。 
现代文：请求陛下能任命崔安潜为行营都统，李为招讨使，取代宋威，张自勉为招讨副使，取代曾元裕。 
English: I would like to ask Your Majesty to appoint Cui Anqian as General Secretary of the Communist Party of China, Li as Envoy to Solicit Donations to replace Song Wei, and Zhang Zimin as Deputy Envoy to Solicit Donations to replace Zeng Yuanyu.

古文：上颇采其言。
现代文：唐僖宗对郑畋的建议大都采纳。
English: Tang Xizong accepted most of Zheng Yao's suggestions.

古文：青、沧军士戍安南，还至桂州，逐观察使李瓚。
现代文：青州、沧州军远戍安南，归还原籍时，来到桂州，将桂州观察使李瓒驱逐。
English: Qingzhou and Cangzhou troops were far away from Annan, and when they returned to their hometowns, they came to Guizhou and expelled Li Jun from Guizhou.

古文：瓚，宗闵之子也。
现代文：李瓒是李宗闵的儿子。
English: Li Yong is the son of Li Zongyao.

古文：以右谏议大夫张禹谟为桂州观察使。
现代文：朝廷为此任命右谏议大夫禹谟为桂州观察使。
English: To this end, the imperial court appointed Dr. Yumo, a doctor of right-wing politics, as the Guizhou observation envoy.

古文：桂管监军李维周骄横，瓚曲奉之，浸不能制。
现代文：桂管监军李维周骄横暴虐，李瓒对他曲意奉承，渐渐不能控制。
English: Li Wei Zhou, the military governor of Guizhou Province, was arrogant and tyrannical, while Li Xi fawned over him and gradually became uncontrollable.

古文：桂管有兵八百人，防御使才得百人，馀皆属监军。又预于逐帅之谋，强取两使印，擅补知州官，夺昭州送使钱。
现代文：桂管军有兵八百人，防御使只能统领一百人，其余全统属于监军；监军李维周又参预了驱逐观察使李瓒的阴谋，并强迫观察使和防御使交出使印，擅自补选下属知州官，抢夺昭州送于本道的送使钱。
English: There were 800 soldiers in the Guizhou Guanjun Army, but only 100 were under the command of the defense envoys, and the rest all belonged to the supervision army; the supervision army Li Weizhou also participated in the conspiracy to expel the observation envoy Li Wei, and forced the observation envoy and the defense envoy to hand over the envoy seal, arbitrarily selected subordinate Zhizhou officials, and robbed the envoy money sent by Zhaozhou to Hongdao.

古文：诏禹谟并按之。禹谟，彻之子也。
现代文：为此唐僖宗下诏命令张禹谟对此调查，对监军李维周作出处置。张禹谟是张彻的儿子。
English: Therefore, Emperor Taizong issued an edict to Zhang Yumu, the son of Zhang Che, ordering him to investigate the matter and deal with Li Weizhou, the military governor.

古文：招讨副使、都监杨复光奏尚君长弟让据查牙山，官军退保邓州。
现代文：招讨副使、都监宦官杨光上奏朝廷，告尚君长之弟尚让率军占据查牙山，唐官军退保邓州。
English: Yang Guang, the vice envoy and the eunuch of the city supervisor, appealed to the imperial court, telling the younger brother of Shang Junchang, Shang Zhan, to lead the army to occupy Chaga Mountain, and the Tang government army to retreat to Dengzhou.

古文：复光，玄价之养子也。
现代文：杨复光是宦官杨玄价的养子。
English: Yang Fuguang was the adopted son of the eunuch Yang Xuanquan.

古文：王仙芝攻蕲州，蕲州刺史裴渥，王鐸知举时所擢进士也。
现代文：王仙芝率军攻蕲州。蕲州刺史裴是王铎主掌科举考试时所选取的进士。
English: Wang Xianzhi led the army to attack Bozhou. Bozhou Zishi Pei was selected by Wang Xianzhi when he was in charge of the entrance examination.

古文：王镣在贼中，为仙芝以书说渥。渥与仙芝约，敛兵不战，许为之奏官；镣亦说仙芝许以如约。
现代文：王镣被俘后在贼军中，为王仙芝写书信劝说裴，于是裴与王仙芝约和，将军队收回不再进行争战，并答应为王仙芝向朝廷奏请求得一个官爵。王镣也劝说王仙芝准许裴的约和请求。
English: After Wang Yao was captured, he wrote a letter for Wang Xianzhi to persuade Bae, so Bae made a peace treaty with Wang Xianzhi, withdrew the army and no longer fought, and promised to request a peerage for Wang Xianzhi from the court. Wang Yao also persuaded Wang Xianzhi to grant Bae's peace treaty request.

古文：渥乃开城延仙芝及黄巢辈三十馀人入城，置酒，大陈货贿以赠之，表陈其状。
现代文：于是裴大开蕲州城请王仙芝及黄巢等三十余人入城，置酒投宴，并摆出大量的宝货赠送给王仙芝等人，以表示其约和的城意。
English: Therefore, Pei Dazhong invited more than 30 people, including Wang Xianzhi and Huang Chao, to enter the city, held a wine banquet, and presented a large number of treasures to Wang Xianzhi and others to show his willingness to make peace.

古文：诸宰相多言： 先帝不赦庞勋，期年卒诛之。今仙芝小贼，非庞勋之比，赦罪除官，益长奸宄。 
现代文：朝廷诸宰相大都以为不可，说： 先帝唐懿宗不赦宠勋之罪，当年就将庞勋诛除，今天王仙芝不过是一个小贼，其势力无法与庞勋相比，赦免他的罪而给予官爵，只能是更加助长奸贼的反叛气焰。 
English: Most of the prime ministers of the imperial court thought it was impossible, saying: The previous emperor Tang Xizong did not forgive the crime of favoritism, and that year he eliminated Pang Xun. Today, Wang Xianzhi is nothing more than a petty thief, whose power cannot be compared to Pang Xun. Pardoning his crime and giving it to the official, can only further encourage the traitor's rebellious spirit.

古文：王鐸固请，许之。乃以仙芝为左神策军押牙兼监察御史，遣中使以告身即蕲州授之。
现代文：只有王铎坚持招降王仙芝，唐僖宗听信王铎之言，准许招降；于是任命王仙芝为左神策军押牙兼监察御史，派遣宦官中使将委任状送到蕲州以授给王仙芝。
English: Only Wang Xuan insisted on recruiting Wang Xianzhi, but Tang Xizong listened to Wang Xuan's words and allowed him to recruit. Therefore, he appointed Wang Xianzhi as the left divine strategist and overseer of imperial history, and dispatched a eunuch envoy to send the letter of appointment to Zhangzhou to grant it to Wang Xianzhi.

古文：仙芝得之甚喜，镣、渥皆贺。
现代文：王仙芝得到委任状欢喜万分，王镣、裴均来祝贺。
English: Wang Xianzhi was overjoyed to receive the letter of appointment, and Wang Xi and Pei Jun came to congratulate him.

古文：未退，黄巢以官不及己，大怒曰： 始者共立大誓，横行天下，今独取官赴左军，使此五千馀众安所归乎！ 
现代文：王仙芝等尚未退出蕲州，黄巢以朝廷给官没有自己的份，勃然大怒，对王仙芝说： 我与你曾共同立下誓言，要横行天下，今天你独自获得朝廷的官爵而要赴长安为禁军左军军官，让我们五千多弟兄怎么办？归于何处？ 
English: Wang Xianzhi and others had not yet withdrawn from Zhangzhou. Huang Chao, who had used the imperial court to appoint officials without his own share, flew into a rage and said to Wang Xianzhi: I once made a joint oath with you to run rampant in the world. Today, you alone have obtained the official title of the imperial court and want to go to Chang'an as an officer of the Left Army of the Forbidden Army. What should we do with more than five thousand brothers? Where should we go?

古文：因殴仙芝，伤其首，其众喧噪不已。
现代文：愤怒之余，黄巢竟殴打王仙芝，将王仙芝的头打伤，其余部众也喧闹不已。
English: Out of anger, Huang Chao actually beat Wang Xianzhi, wounding Wang Xianzhi's head, and the rest of the crowd was also noisy.

古文：仙芝畏众怒，遂不受命。大掠蕲州，城中之人，半驱半杀，焚其庐舍。
现代文：王仙芝畏惧士众的怒气，于是不接受唐廷的委任状，在蕲州大肆剽掠，蕲州城内的百姓，一半被驱出城外，一半被屠杀，居民的房屋被焚毁。
English: Wang Xianzhi was afraid of the anger of the people, so he did not accept the Tang Dynasty's letter of appointment and plundered Zhangzhou. Half of the people in Zhangzhou were driven out of the city, half were slaughtered, and the houses of the residents were burned.

古文：渥奔鄂州，敕使奔襄州，镣为贼所拘。
现代文：唐蕲州刺史裴逃奔鄂州，宦官中使逃奔襄州，王镣被贼军拘留。
English: Tang Bozhou's secretary Pei fled to Ezhou, the eunuch's middle-ranking envoy fled to Xiangzhou, and Wang Xi was detained by the thief army.

古文：贼乃分其军三千馀人从仙芝及尚君长，二千馀人从巢，各分道而去。
现代文：于是贼军分兵行动，三千余人跟从王仙芝及尚君长，二千余人随黄巢北上。
English: As a result, more than 3,000 people followed Wang Xianzhi and Shang Junlong, and more than 2,000 people followed Huang Chao to the north.

