古文：起强圉作噩，尽上章困敦十月，凡三年有奇。
现代文：起强圉作噩，尽上章困敦十月，凡三年有奇。
English: It's a strange thing to happen in the third year of the Heian period.

古文：僖宗圣恭定孝皇帝上之下乾符四年春，正月，王郢诱寔入舟中，执之，将士从寔者皆奔溃。
现代文：唐僖宗乾符四年春季正月，王郢将唐温州刺史鲁诱骗入他的船中，将鲁逮捕，随从鲁的将士全部逃奔溃散。
English: In the first month of the spring of the fourth year of the Tang Dynasty, Wang Yao tricked Tang Wenzhou Jinshi Lu into his ship, arrested Lu, and all of Lu's soldiers fled and dispersed.

古文：朝廷闻之，以右龙武大将军宋皓为江南诸道招讨使，先征诸道兵外，更发忠武、宣武、感化三道、宣、泗二州兵，新旧合万五千馀人，并受皓节度。
现代文：朝廷得知情报，任命史龙武大将军宋皓为江南诸道招讨使，除先征发诸道兵以外，更调发忠武、宣武、感化三道兵和宣州、泗州二州兵，新旧合计调集军队一万五千余人，全部接受宋皓的节度。
English: The imperial court learned of the information and appointed Song Xi, the general of Shilongwu, as the envoy of the Southern Jiangsu provinces. In addition to the soldiers of the provinces, he also dispatched the soldiers of the three provinces of Zhongwu, Xuanwu, and Xuanwu, as well as the soldiers of Xuanzhou and Zhangzhou. In total, more than 15,000 troops, old and new, were mobilized, all of which accepted Song Xi's invitation.

古文：二月，郢攻陷望海镇，掠明州，又攻台州，陷之；刺史王葆退守唐光。
现代文：二月，王郢率军攻陷望海镇，剽掠明州，转而攻陷台州；台州刺史王葆退到唐兴拒守。
English: In February, Wang Hui led his army to capture the town of Wanghai, plundered Mingzhou, and then invaded Taizhou; the Taizhou governor, Wang Hui, retreated to Tangxing and refused to defend.

古文：诏二浙、福建各出舟师以讨之。
现代文：唐僖宗下诏令浙东浙西和福建各调发水师乘船讨击王郢。
English: Emperor Taizong of Tang Dynasty issued an edict to dispatch naval officers from East Zhejiang, West Zhejiang and Fujian to attack Wangye by ship.

古文：王仙芝陷鄂州。
现代文：王仙芝率军攻陷鄂州。
English: Wang Xianzhi led the army to invade Ezhou.

古文：黄巢陷郓州，杀节度使薛崇。
现代文：黄巢率军攻陷郓州，杀死唐节度使薛崇。
English: Huang Chao led the army to invade Zhangzhou, killing Tang Jiedu's general Xue Chong.

古文：南诏酋龙嗣立以来，为边患殆二十年，中国为之虚耗，而其国中亦疲弊。
现代文：南诏酋龙自嗣位为国王以来，为唐朝边患几乎达二十年，朝廷为抵御其侵犯致使府库虚耗，而南诏国中也由于连年战争而疲弊不堪。
English: Nanzhao Chulong, since he succeeded to the throne as king, suffered from the Tang Dynasty for almost twenty years. The imperial court wasted the treasury in order to resist its encroachment, and Nanzhao State was exhausted due to years of war.

古文：酋龙卒，谥曰景庄皇帝；子法立，改元贞明承智大同，国号鹤拓，亦号大封人。
现代文：酋龙去世，其子法嗣立为国王，谥酋龙号为景庄皇帝，改其年号为贞明承智大同，国号为鹤拓，又号称大封人。
English: When Chulong died, his son Fa Tsung was appointed as the king, and Zou Chulong became the emperor of Jingzhuang. He changed his era name to Zhenming Chengzhi Datong, and his country name to He Tuo. He was also known as Da Fu Ren.

古文：法好畋猎酣饮，委国事于大臣。
现代文：南诏王法喜欢打猎和饮酒，将国政委交给大臣。
English: Nanzhao Wang Fa liked hunting and drinking, and handed over the National Political Committee to the minister.

古文：闰月，岭南西首节度使辛谠奏南诏遣陁西段瑳宝等来请和，且言 诸道兵戍邕州岁久，馈饷之费，疲弊中国，请许其和，使赢瘵息肩。 
现代文：闰二月，唐岭南西道节度使辛谠上奏朝廷称南诏派遣西段宝来请和，并且宣称： 我诸道军队在邕州戍守多年，军队粮饷费用使得中原疲弊，请许与南诏约和，使病弱的人民得到喘息的机会。 
English: In the intercalary month of February, the festival of Nanxi Road, Tangling, caused Xin Zhao to report to the imperial court that Nanzhao had sent Xidan Bao to invite peace, and declared: Our armies have been stationed in Zhangzhou for many years, and the cost of army rations has caused the Central Plains to be exhausted. Please make peace with Nanzhao, so that the weak people can get a respite.

古文：诏许之。
现代文：唐僖宗下诏准许。
English: The emperor issued an imperial edict approving it.

古文：谠遣大将杜弘等赍书币，送瑳宝还南诏，但留荆南、宣歙数军戍邕州，自馀诸道兵什减其七。
现代文：于是辛谠派遣大将杜弘等人带着书信和钱物，送段宝回归南诏国，只留下荆南、宣歙等数支军队戍守邕州，其余诸道军队裁减十分之七。
English: As a result, Xin Zheng sent General Du Hong and others with letters and money to return to Nanzhao Province, leaving only several armies such as Jing Nan and Xuan Zheng to defend Zhangzhou, and the remaining armies were reduced by seven-tenths.

古文：王郢横行浙西，镇海节度使裴璩严兵设备，不与之战，密招其党硃实降之，散其徒六七千人，输器械二十馀万，舟航、粟帛称是。
现代文：王郢乱军横行于浙西，镇海节度使裴琚调集军队严加守备，不与王郢军交战，而暗中招纳王郢党羽朱实投降，使王郢党徒六七千人散伙逃走，朱实又向裴琚输缴军用器械二十余万件，舟船、粟米布帛数量也很多。
English: Wang Hui's rebel army was rampant in western Zhejiang. The Zhenhai Festival caused Pei Hui to mobilize his army to maintain a strict defense, not to fight with Wang Hui's army, but to secretly recruit Wang Hui's party feather Zhu Xi to surrender, so that Wang Hui's 67,000 party members scattered and fled. Zhu Xi also transferred more than 200,000 pieces of military equipment to Pei Hui, and the number of ships and corn cloth was also large.

古文：敕以实为金吾将军。
现代文：唐僖宗下诏敕任命朱实为金吾将军。
English: Emperor Zhaozong of Tang Dynasty appointed Zhu Xi as the Kingo general.

古文：于是郢党离散。郢收馀众，东至明州，甬桥镇遏使刘巨容以筒箭射杀之，馀党皆平。
现代文：于是王郢乱党大都离散；王郢收集余众，东窜至明州，被甬桥镇遏使刘巨容用筒箭射死，其余乱党全部平定。
English: As a result, most of Wang Hui's rebel party dispersed; Wang Hui gathered the rest of the crowd, from Donghu to Mingzhou, and Liu Juroong was shot dead with a barrel arrow by the town of Qiaqiao, and the rest of the rebels were all subdued.

古文：璩，谞之从曾孙也。
现代文：裴琚是裴的曾侄孙。
English: Pei Xuan is Pei's great-nephew.

古文：三月，黄巢陷沂州。
现代文：三月，黄巢率军攻陷沂州。
English: In March, Huang Chao led an army to invade Zhangzhou.

古文：夏，四月，壬申朔，日有食之。
现代文：夏季四月，壬申朔，出现日食。
English: In the summer month of April, the Jinshen New Year, a solar eclipse occurs.

古文：贼帅柳彦璋剽掠江西。
现代文：贼军首领柳彦璋率军剽掠江西地区。
English: Yanukovych, the leader of the Kleptocratic Army, led his troops to plunder the Jiangxi region.

古文：陕州军乱，逐观察使崔碣；贬碣杯州司马。
现代文：陕州发生军乱，观察使崔碣被乱军驱逐；朝廷将崔碣贬为怀州司马。
English: An army mutiny occurred in Shaanxi Province, and Cui Gan was expelled by the mutinous army as a result of his observation; the imperial court relegated Cui Gan to the position of Sima of Waizhou Province.

古文：黄巢与尚让合兵保查牙山。
现代文：黄巢与尚让合兵据守查牙山。
English: Huang Chao and Shang Zhan jointly guarded Chaga Mountain.

古文：五月，甲子，以给事中杨损为陕虢观察使。
现代文：五月，甲子，朝廷任命给事中杨损为陕虢观察使。
English: In May, the imperial court appointed Yang Jia as the Shaanxi and Fujian observation envoy.

古文：损至官，诛首乱者。
现代文：杨损到官上任，诛除乱军为首分子。
English: Yang Jiasu took office as an official, and he was the leader in eliminating the rebel army.

古文：损，嗣复之子也。
现代文：杨损是杨嗣复的儿子。
English: Yang Zai is the son of Yang Shifu.

古文：初，桂管观察使李瓚失政，支使薛坚石屡规正之，瓚不能从。
现代文：起初，唐桂管观察使李瓒使政事败坏，观察支使薛坚石屡次向李瓒规劝指正，但李瓒不能听从。
English: At first, Tang Gui Guan's observation caused Li Qiye to corrupt the political affairs, and the observation leader Xue Jianshi repeatedly advised Li Qiye to correct, but Li Qiye could not obey.

古文：及瓚被逐，坚石摄留务，移牒邻道，禁遏乱兵，一方以安。
现代文：等到李瓒被乱军驱逐，薛坚石暂代留守职务，下府牒移达邻道，将乱兵遏制禁止，使一方得以安定。
English: After Li Xi was expelled by the rebels, Xue Jianshi temporarily took over the remaining duties, moved the capital to a neighboring province, restrained and banned the rebels, and stabilized one side.

古文：诏擢坚石为国子博士。
现代文：唐僖宗于是下诏提拔薛坚石为国子博士。
English: Tang Yanzong then issued an edict to promote Xue Jianshi to the position of a national doctor.

古文：六月，柳彦璋袭陷江州，执刺史陶祥，使祥上表，彦璋亦自附降状。
现代文：六月，贼军柳彦璋部袭击并攻陷江州，擒获唐江州刺史陶祥，于是让陶祥向朝廷上表，柳彦璋自己也附上一份乞降状子一同呈上。
English: In June, Yanukovych's bandits attacked Yanukovych's entourage and invaded Jiangzhou. They captured the Tang governor of Jiangzhou, Tao Xiang, and ordered Tao Xiang to present himself to the imperial court. Yanukovych himself also submitted a petition for abdication.

古文：敕以彦璋为右监门将军，令散众赴京师。以左武卫将军刘秉仁为江州刺史。
现代文：唐僖宗上诏敕任命柳彦璋为右监门将军，并命令柳彦璋将部众解散后奔赴京师做官；又下诏任命左武卫将军刘秉仁为江州刺史。
English: Emperor Tang Xizong made an imperial edict to appoint Liu Yanyan as the right guard gate general, and ordered Liu Yanyan to dismiss his subordinates and go to Beijing to become an official; he also made an imperial edict to appoint the left guard general Liu Bingren as the governor of Jiangzhou.

古文：彦璋不从，以战舰百馀固湓江为水寨，剽掠如故。
现代文：柳彦璋接到诏敕后不肯答应，率领战船百余艘在湓江投立水寨，仍然和以前一样剽掠州县。
English: After receiving the imperial edict, Yanukovych refused to comply and led more than a hundred warships to set up a watchtower on the Li River, continuing to occupy Zhouzhou County as before.

古文：忠武都将李可封戍边还，至邠州，迫胁主帅，索旧欠粮盐，留止四月，阖境震惊。
现代文：忠武军都将李可封从戍边地还许州，路过州，胁迫其军队主帅，索取先前所欠粮食和盐，在州滞留四天，使州全境惊恐不安。
English: The loyalist troops took Li Kefeng back to Huzhou from the borderlands, passing through Huzhou, coerced his army commander, demanded the grain and salt previously owed, and stayed in Huzhou for four days, causing the entire territory of Huzhou to be terrified and uneasy.

古文：秋，七月，还至许州，节度命名崔安潜悉按诛之。
现代文：秋季，七月，李可封等回到许州，节度使崔安潜将他们全部逮捕诛杀。
English: In the autumn, in July, Li Kefeng and others returned to Huzhou, and Cui Anqian arrested and killed all of them.

古文：庚申，王仙芝、黄巢攻宋州，三道兵与战，不利，贼遂围宋威于宋州。
现代文：庚申，王仙芝、黄巢进攻宋州，唐平卢、宣武、忠武三道兵赶来与其交战，官军失利，贼军于是将宋威围困于宋州城内。
English: Goshun, Wang Xianzhi, and Huang Chao attacked Songzhou, Tang Pinglu, Xuanwu, and Zhongwu soldiers came to fight with them. The government army lost, and the thief army then besieged Songwei in Songzhou.

古文：甲寅，右威卫上将军张自勉将忠武兵七千救宋州，杀贼二千馀人，贼解围遁去。
现代文：甲寅，唐左威卫上将军张自勉率领忠武兵七千人来救宋州，斩杀贼军二千余人，解宋州之围，贼军逃走。
English: Emperor Jia Yin, Tang Zuo Wei and Admiral Zhang Zimin led 7,000 loyal soldiers to rescue Songzhou, killed more than 2,000 bandits, lifted the siege of Songzhou, and the bandits fled.

古文：王鐸、卢携欲使张自勉以所将兵受宋威节度，郑畋以为威与自勉已有疑忿，若在麾下，必为所杀，不肯署奏。
现代文：宰相王铎和卢携企图让张自勉将所部兵接受宋威的节度，另一宰相郑畋认为宋威与张自勉之间已产生疑虑，并各怀愤恨，如果将张自勉归于宋威麾下，必为宋威杀害，所以不肯在奏状上署名。
English: The Prime Minister Wang Qian and Lu Jie attempted to have Zhang Zimin send his soldiers to accept Song Wei's offer. The other Prime Minister, Zheng Qian, believed that Song Wei and Zhang Zimin had become suspicious of each other, and each harbored resentment. If Zhang Zimin were to come under Song Wei's command, he would surely be killed by Song Wei, so he refused to sign the petition.

古文：八月，辛未，鐸、携诉于上，求罢免；庚辰，畋请归浐川养疾；上皆不许。
现代文：八月，辛未，王铎、卢携在唐僖宗面前指诉郑畋，要求僖宗将郑畋宰相职罢免；庚辰，郑畋请求归川养病，唐僖宗对两方的请求均不予批准。
English: In August, Xinwei, Wang Qian and Lu Jizhe sued Zheng Qian in front of Tang Xizong, demanding that Tang Xizong remove Zheng Qian from the post of prime minister; in Geng Chen, Zheng Qian requested to return to Sichuan to recover from illness, and Tang Xizong did not approve the request of both parties.

古文：王仙芝陷安州。
现代文：王仙芝攻陷安州。
English: Wang Xianzhi invaded Anzhou.

古文：盐州军乱，逐刺史王承颜，诏高品牛从珪往慰谕之，贬承颜象州司户。
现代文：盐州发生军乱，刺史王承颜被乱军驱逐，唐僖宗令高品位宦官牛从往盐州抚慰劝谕，同时将王承颜贬为象州司户。
English: There was a military conflict in Yanzhou, and Prince Wang Chengyan was driven out by the rebels. Tang Yanzong ordered high-grade eunuch cattle to go to Yanzhou for consolation and advice, and at the same time relegated Wang Chengyan to the position of Xiangzhou steward.

古文：承颜及崔碣素有政声，以严肃为骄卒所逐，朝廷与贪暴致乱者同贬，时人惜之。
现代文：王承颜与崔碣为官严正，都很有政绩，却因为过于严肃而为部下骄兵悍将驱逐，朝廷不问青红皂白，将他们同暴致乱的地方官吏一样贬官，当时舆论深表痛惜。
English: Wang Chengyan and Cui Gan were strict and upright officials with great political achievements. However, because they were too serious, their subordinates were expelled. The imperial court did not ask any questions and demoted them to the same level as the local officials who caused the violence. At that time, the public opinion expressed deep regret.

古文：从珪自盐州还，军中请以大将王宗诚为刺史。诏宗诚诣阙，将士皆释罪，仍如优给。
现代文：牛从自盐州回朝廷，盐州军人请牛从向朝廷奏请任命大将王宗诚为刺史，唐僖宗下诏让王宗诚入朝，盐州作乱的将士全都不加追究，反而给予优厚的禀给。
English: The cattle returned to the imperial court from Yanzhou, the soldiers of Yanzhou asked the cattle to report to the imperial court to appoint the general Wang Zongcheng as the crown prince, Tang Yanzong issued an edict to let Wang Zongcheng enter the imperial court, and the soldiers who caused the disturbance in Yanzhou were not investigated, but were given a generous allowance.

古文：乙卯，王仙芝陷随州，执刺史崔休征。
现代文：乙卯，王仙芝率军攻陷随州，活捉唐随州刺史崔休征。
English: Second, Wang Xianzhi led the army to attack and capture Suizhou, and captured the Tang Suizhou assassin Cui Xuejun alive.

古文：山南东道节度使李福遣其子将兵救随州，战死。
现代文：山南东道节度使李福派遣自己的儿子率兵往救随州，被贼军打死。
English: The Shannan Host Festival caused Li Fu to send his son to lead an army to rescue Suizhou, and he was killed by the bandits.

古文：福奏求援兵，遣左武卫大将军李昌言将凤翔五百骑赴之，仙芝遂转掠复、郢。
现代文：李福上奏朝廷请求援兵，朝廷派遣左武卫大将军李昌言率领凤翔骑兵五百赶赴随州。王仙芝转而攻掠复州、郢州。
English: Li Fook appealed to the imperial court for reinforcements, and the imperial court dispatched General of the Left Division of the Imperial Guard Li Changyan and led 500 cavalrymen of Fengxiang to Suizhou. Wang Xianzhi turned to attack and plunder Fuzhou and Zhangzhou.

古文：忠武大将张贯等四千人与宣武兵援襄州，自申、蔡间道逃归。
现代文：唐忠武军大将张贯等四千人与宣武军赴援襄州，却从小道自申州、蔡州逃归原籍。
English: Tang Zhongwu army general Zhang Ran and other four thousand people went to support Xiangzhou with the Xuanwu army, but fled back to their hometowns from Shinshu and Caizhou.

古文：诏忠武节度使崔安潜、宣武节度使穆仁裕遣人约还。
现代文：唐僖宗又下诏令忠武节度使崔安潜、宣武节度使穆仁裕派人戒约张贯等将士，要他们还赴襄州救援。
English: Tang Xizong also issued a decree ordering the soldiers such as Cui Anqian and Mu Renyu, who had been ordered to be loyal to the emperor during the military festival, and Zhang Gang, who had been ordered to be loyal to the emperor during the martial festival, to go to Xiangzhou for rescue.

古文：冬，十月，邠宁节度使李侃奏遣兵讨王宗诚，斩之，馀党悉平。
现代文：冬季，十月，宁节度使李侃上表奏称已派遣军队讨伐王宗诚，并将王宗诚斩首，其余乱党全部讨平。
English: In the winter, in October, the Ning Festival made Li Kan announce that he had dispatched an army to fight Wang Zongcheng, and that he had beheaded Wang Zongcheng and leveled the rest of the rebels.

古文：郑畋与王鐸、卢携争论用兵于上前，畋不胜，退，复上奏，以为： 自王仙芝亻叔扰，崔安潜首请会兵讨之，继发士卒，罄供资粮。贼往来千里，涂炭诸州，独不敢犯其境。
现代文：宰相郑畋与王铎、卢携在唐僖宗面前争论如何用兵征讨王仙芝等，郑畋争论未获胜，退朝后再上表奏称： 自王仙芝开始起事以来，崔安潜最先奏请诸道会兵征过，按着就调发本道士卒，竭尽本道所有以供行征士卒的资粮，王仙芝贼众四处剽掠，往来千里，使诸州涂炭，而唯独不敢侵犯崔安潜所领地区。
English: In front of Tang Xizong, Prime Minister Zheng Qi, Wang Hui, and Lu Jizhong argued about how to use soldiers to recruit Wang Xianzhi, etc. Zheng Qi did not win the argument, and after retiring from the court, he went on to say: Since Wang Xianzhi began to rise, Cui Anqian was the first to invite the soldiers of the Taoist Association to recruit, and then dispatched the Taoist soldiers according to the plan, and exhausted the resources of the Taoist Association to provide the soldiers. Wang Xianzhi's thieves plundered everywhere, traveled thousands of miles, and made the states burn coal, but only they dared not

古文：又以本道兵援张自勉，解宋州围，使江、淮漕运流通，不输寇手。
现代文：崔安潜又将本道兵授予张自勉指挥，使宋州之围得以解脱，江、淮的漕运得以流通，东南财赋不致输入贼寇之手。
English: Cui Anqian also awarded Zhang Zimin the command of the local soldiers, so that the siege of Songzhou could be relieved, the river and river transport could be circulated, and the southeastern wealth would not be imported into the hands of thieves.

古文：今蒙尽以自勉所将七千兵令张贯将之，隶宋威。
现代文：今天陛下又尽将张自勉所统率的七千兵交予张贯率领，隶属于宋威。
English: Today, His Majesty also handed over the seven thousand soldiers under the command of Zhang Zimin to Zhang Gangru, who is subordinate to Song Wei.

古文：自勉独归许州，威复奏加诬毁。
现代文：而让张自勉独自归还许州，宋威又上奏诬毁张自勉。
English: But Zhang Zimin was allowed to return to Huzhou on his own, and Song Wei played up the false destruction of Zhang Zimin.

古文：因功受辱，臣窃痛之。
现代文：张自勉因立战功而受到诬辱，我深感痛心。
English: I am deeply saddened that Zhang Zimin was slandered for his war achievements.

古文：安潜出师，前后克捷非一，一旦强兵尽付它人，良将空还，若勍敌忽至，何以枝梧！
现代文：崔安潜出师征讨王仙芝以来，前后胜利捷报不止一次，一旦将强兵全部交付于他人，良将空自回城，而强敌急然来进攻，又如何抵挡，作何交待！
English: Since Cui An sneaked out to recruit Wang Xianzhi, he has been victorious more than once. Once he has handed over all the strong soldiers to others, Liang will return to the city empty-handed, and the strong enemy will suddenly attack. How to resist and what to do!

古文：臣请以忠武四千人授威，馀三千人使自勉将之，守卫其境，既不侵宋威之功，又免使安潜愧耻。 
现代文：我请求将忠武军四千人授予宋威指挥，其余三千人让张自勉率领，守卫其本道，这样既不侵夺宋威的战功，又能使崔安潜史去耻辱和羞愧。 
English: I request that the 4,000 loyal soldiers be given to Song Wei to command, and the remaining 3,000 be led by Zhang Zimin to guard his true path, so as not to encroach on Song Wei's war exploits, but also to remove the shame and disgrace from Choi An's hidden history.

古文：时卢携不以为然，上不能决。
现代文：当时卢携对郑畋的奏言表示反对，唐僖宗不能作出裁决。
English: At that time, Lu Jizhe objected to Zheng Yi's speech, and Tang Yanzong could not make a ruling.

古文：畋复上言： 宋威欺罔朝廷，败衄狼藉。
现代文：郑畋又再次上言： 宋威欺骗朝廷，被王仙芝打败得不成样子。
English: Zheng Yao said again: Song Wei deceived the imperial court and was defeated by Wang Xianzhi.

古文：又闻王仙芝七状请降，威不为闻奏。朝野切齿，以为宜正军法。
现代文：我又听说王仙芝曾七次上状请求投降，宋威都不上报朝廷，朝野对此恨得咬牙切齿，我认为应该将宋威按军法处置。
English: I also heard that Wang Xianzhi had made seven requests for surrender, but Song Wei did not report to the imperial court. The imperial court hated this to the teeth. I think Song Wei should be dealt with according to military law.

古文：迹状如此，不应复典兵权，愿与内大臣参酌，早行罢黜。 
现代文：宋威劣迹昭彰，不应该再让他典掌兵权，希望能与左、右神策军中尉和左、右枢密使商量，尽早将败将宋威罢免。 
English: Song Wei's bad deeds are well known, and he should no longer be allowed to hold military power. It is hoped that he will discuss with the left and right lieutenants of the Divine Providence Army and the left and right Privy Councilors, and remove the defeated Song Wei as soon as possible.

古文：不从。
现代文：唐僖宗没有听从。
English: Le Zhu Rong did not listen.

古文：河中军乱，逐节度使刘侔，纵兵焚掠。
现代文：河中发生军乱，节度使刘侔被乱军驱逐，乱军纵兵四处烧杀剽掠，无人能禁。
English: There was a military conflict in the river, and Liu Ye was expelled by the rebel army. The rebel soldiers burned and pillaged everywhere, and no one could stop them.

古文：以京兆尹窦璟为河中宣慰制置使。
现代文：朝廷任命京兆尹窦为河中宣慰制置使。
English: The imperial court appointed Jing Zhao and Yin Dou as envoys to convey condolences in the middle of the river.

古文：黄巢寇掠蕲、黄，曾元裕击破之，斩首四千馀级。
现代文：黄巢率军侵掠蕲州、黄州，曾元裕出兵击破黄巢军，斩首四千级。
English: Huang Chao led the army to invade and plunder Zhangzhou and Huangzhou. Zeng Yuanyu sent troops to defeat the Huang Chao army and beheaded 4,000 troops.

古文：巢遁去。
现代文：黄巢率军逃走。
English: Huang Chao and his army fled.

古文：十一月，己酉，以窦璟为河中节度使。
现代文：十一月，已酉，朝廷任命窦为河中节度使。
English: At the end of November, the imperial court appointed Dou as the envoy of the Mid-Heaven Festival.

古文：招讨副使、都监杨复光遣人说谕王仙芝，仙芝遣尚君长等请降于复光，宋威遣兵于道中劫取君长等。
现代文：招讨副使、宦官都监杨复光派遣使者往王芝处劝谕，王仙芝派遣尚君长等为代表向杨复光请降，宋威企图邀功，派遣士兵于道路上将尚君长等人劫走。
English: Vice-envoy and eunuch Yang Fuguang sent an envoy to Wang Zhi to persuade him, Wang Xianzhi sent Shang Junlong as a representative to ask Yang Fuguang to abdicate, and Song Wei tried to claim credit by sending soldiers to kidnap Shang Junlong and others on the road.

古文：十二月，威奏与君长等战于颍州西南，生擒以献；复光奏君长等实降，非威所擒。
现代文：十二月，宋威向朝廷奏称与贼帅尚君长等在颖州西南战斗，生擒尚君长等献给朝廷；杨复光向朝廷奏称尚君长等人确实是来投降，并不是宋威于战阵中擒获。
English: In December, Song Wei reported to the imperial court that he had fought in the southwestern part of Yingzhou with the thief-commander Shang Junchang and others, and that the live donkey of Shang Junchang and others was dedicated to the imperial court; Yang Fuguang reported to the imperial court that Shang Junchang and others had indeed come to surrender, not that Song Wei had captured them in the battle.

古文：诏侍御史归仁绍等鞫之，竟不能明。斩君长等于狗脊岭。
现代文：唐僖宗下诏命侍御使归仁绍等进行审查，居然无法查明真相；于是将尚君长等人斩于狗脊岭。
English: Emperor Taizong of Tang Dynasty issued an edict ordering the imperial envoy Quirinshao and others to investigate, but they were unable to find out the truth, so they beheaded Shang Junlong and others on the Dog Ridge.

古文：黄巢陷匡城，遂陷濮州。
现代文：黄巢率军攻陷匡城县，接着又攻陷濮州。
English: Huang Chao led the army to invade Kuangcheng County, and then invaded Zhangzhou.

古文：诏颍州刺史张自勉将诸道兵击之。
现代文：唐僖宗下诏令颖州刺史张张自勉率诸道军队进击。
English: Under the Emperor Tang Xizong, Yingzhou was ordered to attack by Zhang Zhang Zimian and the armies of various provinces.

古文：江州刺史刘秉仁乘驿之官，单舟入柳彦璋水。贼出不意，即迎拜，秉仁斩彦璋，散其众。
现代文：唐江州刺史刘秉仁乘驿马上任，单独驾一小船来到柳彦璋水寨中，贼军出乎意料，一时不知所措，当即迎拜，刘秉仁乘机将柳彦璋斩首，将柳彦璋所部贼军解散。
English: Liu Bingren, the governor of Tangjiang Province, was appointed to the post immediately. He drove a small boat alone to the water village of Liu Yanyan. The thief army was unexpected, at a loss for words, and immediately bowed. Liu Bingren took the opportunity to behead Liu Yanyan and disband the thief army of Liu Yanyan.

古文：王仙芝寇荆南。
现代文：王仙芝进犯荆南。
English: Wang Xianzhi invaded Jingnan.

古文：节度使杨知温，知至之兄也，以文学进，不知兵，或告贼至，知温以为妄，不设备。
现代文：荆南节度使杨知温是杨知至的兄长，以文章才学仕进，不知用兵，有人报告盗贼来到，杨知温以为是妄造遥言，不设戒备。
English: The Jingnan Festival made Yang Chih-Wen the elder brother of Yang Chih-Zhi. He learned by writing, but he did not know how to use soldiers. Someone reported that thieves were coming. Yang Chih-Wen thought it was a far-fetched rumor and did not take precautions.

古文：时汉水浅狭，贼自贾堑度。
现代文：当时正值汉水浅而河道较窄，贼军于是从贾堑渡过汉水。
English: At that time, the Han River was shallow and the river was narrow, so the bandits crossed the Han River from Jiaxuan.

古文：僖宗圣恭定孝皇帝上之下乾符五年
现代文：乾符五年
English: Five years of dry run

古文：春，正月，丁酉朔，大雪，知温方受贺，贼已至城下，遂陷罗城。
现代文：春季正月，丁酉朔，天下大雪，荆南节度使杨知温正在接受将吏的新年祝贺，王仙芝率军已来到江陵城下，攻陷外围罗城。
English: In the first month of spring, Dingwanshuo, the world was covered with heavy snow, and the Jingnan Festival was approaching, so Yang Zhiwen was receiving the New Year's congratulations from the generals. Wang Xianzhi led the army to the outskirts of Gangneung and captured the outlying city of Luocheng.

古文：将佐共治子城而守之，及暮，知温犹不出。
现代文：荆南将佐齐心协力将内城修治以拒守，至天黑，杨知温仍然没有出节度使府。
English: Jingnan General Zaza made a concerted effort to repair the inner city and refused to defend it, and by nightfall, Yang Zhiwen still had not left the imperial capital.

古文：将佐请知温出抚士卒，知温纱帽皁裘而行；将佐请知温擐甲以备流矢，知温见士卒拒战，犹赋诗示幕僚，遣使告急于山南东道节度使李福，福悉其众自将救之。
现代文：将佐们请杨知温出来抚尉士兵，杨知温不着戎装，穿戴纱帽皮衣而出，于是将佐们又请杨知温披甲以防备暗箭流矢。杨知温见士兵们正在拒战，却仍然赋诗给幕僚们听，又派遣使者向山南东道节度使李福告急，李福调集部下全部下马，亲自率领赶往赴救。
English: The generals asked Yang Chih-Wen to come out and escort the soldiers. Yang Chih-Wen did not wear a military uniform, but came out wearing a fur coat with a cape. So the generals also asked Yang Chih-Wen to wear armor to guard against hidden arrows. Yang Chih-Wen saw that the soldiers were refusing to fight, but still composed a poem for the staff members to listen to. He also sent an envoy to Shannan host festival to alert Li Fu. Li Fu mobilized all his subordinates to dismount and personally led them to the rescue.

古文：时有沙陀五百在襄阳，福与之俱至荆门，遇贼，沙陀纵骑奋击，破之。
现代文：当时有五百沙陀族士兵驻扎襄阳，李福与他们会合，行到荆门，与贼军遭遇，沙陀骑兵纵马横冲直撞，大破贼军。
English: At that time, there were five hundred Shado soldiers stationed in Xiangyang. Li Fu met with them, went to Jingmen, encountered the thief army, and the Shado cavalrymen rammed their horses and smashed the thief army.

古文：仙芝闻之，焚掠江陵而去。
现代文：王仙芝得到消息，在江陵一带大肆烧杀抢掠一阵后离去。
English: Wang Xianzhi got the news and left after a period of rampant burning, looting and pillaging in the Gangneung area.

古文：江陵城下旧三十万户，至是死者什三四。
现代文：以前江陵城下有户三十余万，经这次杀掠，约有十分之三四的居民死去。
English: In the past, there were more than 300,000 households under the city of Gangneung. After this killing and looting, about three-fourths of the residents died.

古文：壬寅，招讨副使曾元裕大破王仙芝于申州东，所杀万人，招降散遣者亦万人。
现代文：壬寅，唐招讨副使曾元裕在申州以东大破王仙芝军，杀死万人，招降遣散的也有万人。
English: Jinyin, Tang's deputy envoy Zeng Yuanyu defeated Wang Xianzhi's army east of Shenzhou, killing ten thousand people, and there were also ten thousand people who were demobilized.

古文：敕以宋威久病，罢招讨使，还青州。
现代文：唐僖宗下诏，以宋威生病许久为理由，罢免他招讨草贼使的职务，归还青州本镇。
English: Emperor Tang Xizong issued an edict, citing Song Wei's long-term illness as the reason for dismissing him from the post of chief weeder and returning him to his hometown of Qingzhou.

古文：以曾元裕为招讨使，颍州刺史张自勉为副使。
现代文：任命曾元裕为招讨使，颍州刺史张自勉为招讨副使。
English: Zeng Yuanyu was appointed as the recruiting envoy, and Zhang Zimin, the governor of Zhangzhou, was appointed as the deputy recruiting envoy.

古文：庚戌，以西川节度使高骈为荆南节度使兼盐铁转运使。
现代文：庚戌，唐僖宗任命西川节度使高骈为荆南节度使，并兼任盐铁转运使。
English: Geng Zong, Tang Xizong appointed the West River Festival to make Gao Zong the Jingnan Festival, and also served as the Salt and Iron Transportation.

古文：振武节度使李国昌之子克用为沙陀副兵马使，戍蔚州。
现代文：振武节度使李国昌的儿子李克用为沙陀副兵马使，戍守蔚州。
English: Zhenwu Jiedu appointed Li Ke, the son of Li Guochang, as the deputy military envoy of Shado to defend Ulshu.

古文：时河南盗贼蜂起，云州沙陀兵马使李尽忠与牙将康君立、薛志勤、程怀信、李存璋等谋曰： 今天下大乱，朝廷号令不复行于四方，此乃英雄立功名富贵之秋也。
现代文：这时，河南地区的盗贼纷纷起兵，云州沙陀兵马使李尽忠与牙将康君立、薛志勤、程怀信、李存璋等人谋划说： 当今天下大乱，唐朝廷的号令不再能行四方。这正是英雄树立功名、获取富贵的好时机。
English: At this time, the thieves in Henan Province raised an army one after another, and Li Jinzhong and the generals Kang Junli, Xue Zhiqin, Cheng Huaxin, Li Cunxu and others in Yunnan Shatou's army and cavalry made a plan and said: "Today, when there is a great turmoil, the order of the Tang Dynasty can no longer go in all directions. This is a good time for heroes to establish their fame and gain wealth.

古文：吾属虽各拥兵众，然李振武功大官高，名闻天下，其子勇冠诸军。若辅以举事，代北不足平也。 
现代文：我们虽然各自都拥有兵众，但振武节度使李国昌功大官高，名闻于天下，他的儿子也勇冠诸军，如果我们辅佐他们来举事，平定代北是没有问题的。 
English: Although each of us has a large number of soldiers, it is the Zhenwu Festival that made Li Guochang a great official and famous in the world, and his son also won the title of the army. If we help them to do things, there will be no problem in pacifying the north.

古文：众以为然。
现代文：众人都觉得有道理。
English: Everyone thought he had a point.

古文：君立，兴唐人；存璋，云州人；志勤，奉诚人也。
现代文：康君立为兴唐人，李存璋是云州人，薛志勤是奉诚人。
English: Kang Junli is from Xingtang, Li Cunxu is from Yunnan, and Xue Zhiqin is from Fengcheng.

古文：会大同防御使段文楚兼水陆发运使，代北荐饥，漕运不继。文楚颇减军士衣米，又用法稍峻，军士怨怒。
现代文：恰值大同防御使段文楚兼任水陆发运使，当时代北地区一再饥荒，加上漕运不断，朝廷无法接济，段文楚于是经常减扣军士的衣粮；且用刑法稍严峻，使军士怨恨愤怒。
English: Just at the time of the Datong defense, Duan Wenchu also served as a land and water transport envoy. At that time, the northern region of the dynasty suffered repeated famines, coupled with continuous rowing, the court was unable to provide aid, so Duan Wenchu often deducted the sergeant's clothing and grain; and the criminal law was slightly severe, making the sergeant resentful and angry.

古文：尽忠遣君立潜诣蔚州说克用起兵，除文楚而代之。
现代文：李尽忠暗中派遣康君立往蔚州劝说李克用起兵，除掉段文楚而取代其大同防御使的职位。
English: Li Jinzhong secretly sent Kang Junli to Ulshu to persuade Li Ke to use troops to remove Duan Wenchu and replace his position as Datong defense envoy.

古文：克用曰： 吾父在振武，俟我禀之。 
现代文：李克用回答： 我的父亲在振武，请等我禀告他后作决定。 
English: Li Ke replied: My father is stirring up trouble. Please wait until I denounce him before making a decision.

古文：君立曰： 今机事已泄，缓则生变，何暇千里禀命乎！ 
现代文：康君立说： 今天机密已经泄漏，起事缓了恐怕发生变故，哪有时间往返千里禀告承命呢！ 
English: Kang Junli said: Today, the secret has been leaked, the uprising has been delayed, and I'm afraid there will be a change of circumstances. Who has the time to travel thousands of miles to report for duty?

古文：于是尽忠夜帅牙兵攻牙城，执文楚及判官柳汉璋等系狱，自知军州事，遣召克用。
现代文：于是李尽忠连夜率领牙兵攻下牙城，将段文楚及其判官柳汉璋逮捕关押于监狱中，自己暂掌州事，并派遣人召李克用来主政。
English: As a result, Li Jianzhong led the Fang soldiers to capture Fangcheng in the middle of the night, arrested Duan Wenchu and his judge Liu Hanqi, and detained them in prison. He temporarily took charge of state affairs, and sent someone to summon Li Ke to take charge of the government.

古文：克用帅其众趣云州，行收兵，二月，庚午，至城下，众且万人，屯于斗鸡台下。
现代文：李克用率领他的部众赶往云州，一边行军一边招兵，二月，庚午，到达云州城下，其部众已达万人，屯军于斗鸡台下。
English: Li Ke used to lead his subordinates to rush to Yunnan. While marching, he recruited soldiers. In February, at noon, he arrived at the foot of Yunnan City. His subordinates had reached ten thousand people, and the troops were under the cockfighting stage.

古文：壬申，尽忠遣使送符印，请克用为防御留后。
现代文：壬申，李尽忠派遣使者向李克用送符印，请李克用任大同防御留后。
English: In Jinshin, Li Jianzhong sent an envoy to Li Ke with a seal of delivery, and asked Li Ke to stay behind at Datong Defense.

古文：癸酉，尽忠械文楚等五人送斗鸡台下，克用令军士玼食之，以骑践其骸。
现代文：癸酉，李尽忠用刑具将段文楚等五人押送至斗鸡台下，李克用令士兵们用刀剐他们身上的肉吃，又用铁骑践踏他们剩下的骨骸。
English: Suddenly, Li Jianzhong used torture tools to send five people, including Duan Wenchu, under the cockfighting table. Li Ke ordered the soldiers to eat the meat on their bodies with a knife, and trampled their remaining bones with an iron horse.

古文：甲戌，克用入府舍视事，令将士表求敕命；朝廷不许。
现代文：甲戌，李克用入防御使府处理事务。并命将士们上表朝廷请求皇帝的正式任命；朝廷不予同意。
English: Armour-plated, Li Ke used the defense embassy to deal with affairs. And ordered the officers to go to the court to request the emperor's official appointment; the court did not agree.

古文：李国昌上言： 乞朝廷速除大同防御使。若克用违命，臣请帅本道兵讨之，终不爱一子以负国家。 
现代文：李国昌上言： 请求朝廷速任命大同防御使；倘若李克用违抗朝廷命令，我请求率领本道兵马讨伐他，决不会因爱自己一个儿子而背负国家。 
English: Li Guochang's last words: I request the imperial court to quickly appoint a Datong defense envoy; if Li Ke defies the imperial order, I request to lead the local soldiers and horses to fight him, I will never carry the country because I love my only son.

古文：朝廷方欲使国昌谕克用，会得其奏，乃以司农卿支详为大同军宣慰使，诏国昌语克用，令迎候如常仪，除克用官，必令称惬。
现代文：朝廷正想让李国昌去劝谕李克用，恰好得到他的奏状，于是唐僖宗任命司农卿支详为大同军宣慰使，并下诏命李国昌告诉李克用，要求李克用用平常的礼仪迎候支详，朝廷会给李克用官职，必定会使他满意。
English: The imperial court was trying to get Li Guochang to advise Li Kegui, and just happened to get his petition, so Tang Xizong appointed the Secretary of the Ministry of Agriculture and Rural Affairs Shizhao as the Daedong Army's messenger of consolation, and ordered Li Guochang to tell Li Kegui, asking Li Kegui to greet Shizhao with the usual etiquette. The imperial court would give Li Kegui an official post, which would certainly satisfy him.

古文：又以太仆卿卢简方为大同防御使。
现代文：又任命太仆卿卢简方为大同防御使。
English: He also appointed Lu Jianfang as the Datong defense envoy.

古文：贬杨知温为郴州司马。
现代文：朝廷下令将杨知温贬为郴州司马。
English: The imperial court ordered Yang Chih-Wen to be demoted to the rank of Cangzhou Sima.

古文：曾元裕奏大破王仙芝于黄梅，杀五万馀人，追斩仙芝，传首，馀党散去。
现代文：曾元裕上奏，称在黄梅大破王仙芝率领的贼军，杀五万余人，并追斩王仙芝，传首京师，王仙芝党羽大都散去。
English: Zeng Yuanyu made a speech, saying that he defeated the bandit army led by Wang Xianzhi in Huangmei, killed more than 50,000 people, and chased and beheaded Wang Xianzhi, bequeathed the head of the Beijing division, and most of Wang Xianzhi's party members dispersed.

古文：黄巢方攻亳州未下，尚让帅仙芝馀众归之，推巢为王，号冲天大将军，改元王霸，署官属。
现代文：黄巢率军正围攻亳州不下，尚让率领王仙芝余众来归，合兵一处，众人共推黄巢为盟主，号称 冲天大将军 ，改年号为王霸，设置官职属僚。
English: The army led by Huang Chao was besieging and besieging Bozhou. However, he allowed Wang Xianzhi, who led the army, to return home. When the soldiers gathered, they all pushed Huang Chao to be the commander-in-chief, known as General Chong Tian, and changed his name to Wang Ba, and set up official subordinates.

古文：巢袭陷沂州、濮州。
现代文：又领兵攻陷沂州、濮州。
English: He also led troops to invade Zhangzhou and Ganzhou.

古文：既而屡为官军所败，乃遗天平节度使张裼书，请奏之。
现代文：然后却屡次被唐朝官军打败，于是黄巢给唐天平节度使张杨一封求信降，请求代向朝廷上奏。
English: However, he was repeatedly defeated by the Tang Dynasty's official army. Therefore, Huang Chao gave Tang Tianping the power to make Zhang Yang write a letter of surrender, requesting him to appeal to the imperial court on his behalf.

古文：诏以巢为右卫将军，令就郓州解甲。巢竟不至。
现代文：唐僖宗得到奏文后下诏任命黄巢为右卫将军，命令黄巢率部众到郓州解除武装；黄巢没有从命，根本未去郓州。
English: After Tang Yanzong received the report, he issued an edict appointing Huang Chao as the right guard general and ordered Huang Chao to lead the troops to Zhangzhou to disarm; Huang Chao did not obey the order and did not go to Zhangzhou at all.

古文：加山南东道节度使李福同平章事，赏救荆南之功也。
现代文：唐僖宗加给山南东道节度使李福同平章事的官号，以奖赏他援救刑南的战功。
English: Tang Yanzong gave the official title of Li Fudongping to Li Fudongping, the host of the Shannan Festival, to reward him for his war service of rescuing the Southern Capital.

古文：三月，群盗陷朗州、岳州。
现代文：三月，一群盗贼攻陷朗州、岳州。
English: In March, a group of thieves invaded Langzhou and Yuezhou.

古文：招讨使曾元裕屯荆、襄，黄巢自濮州掠宋、汴，乃以副使张自勉充东南面行营招讨使。
现代文：曾元裕率唐军屯驻于荆州、襄州，黄巢率军自滑州攻略宋州、汴州，朝廷于是以招讨副使张自勉充任东南面行营招讨使。
English: Zeng Yuan Yu led the Tang army stationed in Jingzhou and Xiangzhou, Huang Chao led the army from Liaozhou to capture Songzhou and Zhangzhou, and the imperial court appointed Zhang Jimin as the southeastern campaigning and recruiting envoy.

古文：黄巢攻卫南，遂攻叶、阳翟。
现代文：黄巢率军进攻卫南县，接着进攻叶县、阳翟等县。
English: Huang Chao led the army to attack Wei Nan County, and then attacked Ye County, Yang Di and other counties.

古文：诏发河阳兵千人赴东都，与宣武、昭义兵二千人共卫宫阙。以左神武大将军刘景仁充东都应援防遏使，并将三镇兵，仍听于东都募兵二千人。
现代文：唐僖宗下诏调发河阳兵一千人赶赴东都洛阳，与宣武、昭义兵二千人共同保卫宫阙；又任命左神武大将军刘景仁充任东都应援防遏使，并且统帅河阳、宣武、昭义三镇军队，同时听任在东都招募二千兵员。
English: Under the edict of Tang Xizong, one thousand soldiers from Heyang were sent to Luoyang, the eastern capital, to defend the palace together with two thousand soldiers from Xuanwu and Zhaoyi. Liu Jingren, the general of Zuo Shenwu, was appointed as the commander of the three towns of Heyang, Xuanwu and Zhaoyi, and was also assigned to recruit two thousand soldiers in Dongdu.

古文：景仁，昌之孙也。
现代文：刘景仁是刘昌的孙子。
English: Liu Jingren is the grandson of Liu Chang.

古文：又诏曾元裕将兵径还东都，发义成兵三千守轘辕、伊阙、河阴、武牢。
现代文：僖宗又下诏命曾元裕将兵直接归还东都，调发义成兵三千人守卫辕、伊阙、河阴、武牢。
English: Emperor Taizong also issued an imperial edict ordering Zeng Yuanyu to return the soldiers directly to Dongdu, and dispatched three thousand soldiers to guard Ye, Yili, Heyin and Wudang.

古文：王仙芝馀党王重隐陷洪州，江西观察使高湘奔湖口。
现代文：王仙芝余党王重隐率部攻陷洪州，唐江西观察使高湘逃奔至湖口。
English: Wang Xianzhi and the rest of the party led by Wang Chongyin invaded Hongzhou, and Gao Xiang fled to Hukou after observing Tang Jiangxi.

古文：贼转掠湖南，别将曹师雄掠宣、润。
现代文：贼军转而攻掠湖南，王重隐部别将曹师雄还攻掠了宣州、润州。
English: The invaders attacked and plundered Hunan Province instead, and Cao Shixiong, Wang Chongyin's subordinate, also attacked and plundered Xuanzhou and Runzhou.

古文：诏曾元裕、杨复光引兵救宣、润。
现代文：朝廷命令曾元裕、杨复光率军队援救宣州、润州。
English: The imperial court ordered Zeng Yuanyu and Yang Fuguang to lead the army to rescue Xuanzhou and Runzhou.

古文：湖南军乱，都将高杰逐观察使崔瑾。
现代文：湖南发生军乱，都将高杰将观察使崔瑾驱逐。
English: When there was a military conflict in Hunan, Gao Jie ordered Cui Gan to be expelled.

古文：瑾，郾之子也。
现代文：崔瑾是崔郾的儿子。
English: Cui Wei is Cui Wei's son.

古文：黄巢引兵度江，攻陷虔、吉、饶、信等州。
现代文：黄巢指挥贼军渡过长江，攻陷虔州、吉州、饶州、信州。
English: Huang Chao led a bandit army across the Yangtze River and conquered Kianzhou, Jizhou, Raozhou and Xinshou.

古文：朝廷以李克用据云中，夏，四月，以前大同军防御使卢简方为振武节度使，以振武节度使李国昌为大同节度使，以为克用必无以拒也。
现代文：朝廷由于李克用占据着云中，于夏季四月任命前大同军防御使卢简方为振武节度使，又以振武节度使李国昌任大同节度使，认为这样处置李克用必定不会抵制。
English: As Li Kegui was in the ascendant, the imperial court appointed Lu Jianfang as the envoy of Zhenwu Festival and Li Guochang as the envoy of Zhenwu Festival in the summer of April in the wake of the former Datong Army's defense, believing that Li Kegui would not resist such a treatment.

古文：诏以东都军储不足，贷商旅富人钱谷以供数月之费，仍赐空名殿中侍御史告身五通，监察御史告身十通，有能出家财助国稍多者赐之。
现代文：唐僖宗下诏，以东都洛阳军粮储备不足，向商人富家借贷钱谷，以便能供数月的费用，于是赐予空名殿中待御史委任状五份，监察御史委任状十份，赐给能借出家财资助国家并出资稍多的人。
English: Emperor Tang Xizong decreed that Luoyang, the capital of the East, had insufficient reserves of military grain, and borrowed money from rich merchants in order to cover several months of expenses. Therefore, he granted five letters of appointment to wait for the history in the empty hall, ten letters of appointment to supervise the history, and to those who could lend their family money to support the country and invest a little more.

古文：时连岁旱、蝗，寇盗充斥，耕桑半废，租赋不足，内藏虚竭，无所亻次助。
现代文：但由于当时连年旱灾、蝗灾，以及盗贼充斥，农桑废坏大半，连租赋都难以足数，各家各户内藏虚竭，竟致没有人出来资助。
English: However, due to consecutive years of droughts, locust plagues, and thieves abounding at that time, most of the agricultural mulberries were destroyed, and it was difficult to even count the rent, and every house was exhausted, resulting in no one coming out to help.

古文：兵部侍郎、判度支杨严三表自陈才短，不能济办，乞解使务，辞极哀切。诏不许。
现代文：兵部侍郎、判度支杨严三次上表自诉自己才能短浅，无法办理，言辞极为哀痛悲切，但唐僖宗不予批准。
English: Yang Yan, the attendant of the military department and the judge, sued himself three times for being too short-sighted and unable to handle the case. His words were extremely sad and sorrowful, but the Tang Dynasty did not approve it.

古文：曹师雄寇湖州，镇海节度使裴璩遣兵击破之。
现代文：曹师雄进犯湖州，唐镇海节度使裴琚遣军队将其击破。
English: Cao Shixiong invaded Huzhou, and Tang Zhenhai Jiedu sent Pei Xuan's army to defeat him.

古文：王重隐死，其将徐唐莒据洪州。
现代文：王重隐死去，其部将徐唐莒占据洪州。
English: Wang Chongyin died, and his subordinate Xu Tangjun occupied Hongzhou.

古文：饶州将彭幼璋合义营兵克复饶州。
现代文：唐饶州将领彭幼璋会合自发组织起来抵抗王重隐的义营失，收复饶州。
English: Tang Raozhou's general Peng Yunyun self-organized to resist Wang Chongyin's loss of righteousness and recapture Raozhou.

古文：南诏遣其酋望赵宗政来请和亲，无表，但令督爽牒中书，请为弟而不称臣。
现代文：南诏派遣其酉望赵宗政来唐朝，请求和亲，但没有上给唐朝皇帝的表文，却让其国中督爽官上牒文于中书门下，请求对唐朝皇帝称弟而不称臣。
English: Nanzhao sent his emissary Zhao Zongzheng to the Tang Dynasty to request a reconciliation, but he did not send a letter to the Emperor of the Tang Dynasty. Instead, he asked the vice-governor of his country Shuang Guan to send a letter to the Emperor of the Tang Dynasty, requesting that the Emperor of the Tang Dynasty be called a younger brother rather than a minister.

古文：诏百官议之，礼部侍郎崔澹等以为： 南诏骄僭无礼，高骈不达大体，反因一僧呫嗫卑辞诱致其使，若从其请，恐垂笑后代。 
现代文：唐僖宗下诏请百官议论，礼部侍郎崔澹等人认为： 南诏王骄横僭越，实属无礼，西川节度使高骈不识大体，反倒因为一介和尚的主意，就卑辞诱来南诏国的使者，如果听从南诏的请求，恐怕要垂笑于后代。 
English: Emperor Gaozong of Tang Dynasty invited hundreds of officials to discuss, and the attendant of the Ceremonial Department, Cui Yao, and others thought: Nanzhao Wang's arrogance and arrogance is really disrespectful, and the West River Festival made Gao Yao ignorant of the general situation, but because of the idea of a monk, he sneered to lure the envoy of Nanzhao. If you listen to Nanzhao's request, I am afraid you will laugh at future generations.

古文：高骈闻之，上表与澹争辩，诏谕解之。
现代文：高骈听到这番议论，上表朝廷与崔澹争辩，唐僖宗下诏劝谕高骈，解释此事。
English: When Gao Gan heard this argument, the imperial court argued with Cui Gan, and the Tang Dynasty issued an edict to Gao Gan to explain the matter.

古文：澹，玙之子也。
现代文：崔澹即崔的儿子。
English: Choe Son is Choe's son.

古文：五月，丙申朔，郑畋、卢携议蛮事，携欲与之和亲，畋固争以为不可。
现代文：五月，丙申朔，宰相郑畋、卢携议论关于南诏蛮人的事，卢携主张与南诏和亲，郑畋却力争，认为不可和亲。
English: In May, Zheng Shenshuo, Prime Minister Zheng He, and Lu Jiao discussed the barbarians in Nanzhao. Lu Jiao advocated making peace with Nanzhao, but Zheng He argued that they should not make peace.

古文：携怒，拂衣起，袂罥砚堕地，破之。
现代文：卢携勃然大怒，拂衣而起，其衣袖挂起桌上的砚台堕于地上摔碎。
English: Lu Jie flew into a rage, whipped up his clothes, hung up his sleeves on the table, fell to the ground and broke.

古文：上闻之，曰： 大臣相诟，何以仪刑四海！ 
现代文：唐僖宗闻知后，很不高兴地说： 大臣相骂，怎么能成为四海表率呢？ 
English: After hearing this, Tang Xizong was very displeased and said, "How can a minister become a role model when he curses each other?

古文：丁酉，畋、携皆罢为主子宾客、分司。
现代文：丁酉，郑畋、卢携都被罢免为太子宾客、分司东都。
English: Ding Rong, Zheng Rong, and Lu Zhi were all dismissed as guests of the crown prince and sub-secretaries of the East Capital.

古文：以翰林学士承旨、户部侍郎豆卢彖为兵部侍郎，吏部侍郎崔沆为户部侍郎，并同平章事。
现代文：而任命翰林学士承旨、户部侍郎豆卢为兵部侍郎，吏部侍郎崔沆为户部侍郎，并均为同平章事。
English: However, Hanlin Baccalaureate Zong Ji, Household Attendant Dou Lu were appointed as Household Attendant of the Military Department, and Cui Yao, Household Attendant of the General Staff Department, were appointed as Household Attendant of the General Staff Department, and all of them were given the same rank.

古文：时宰相有好施者，常使人以布囊贮钱自随，行施丐者，每出，褴褛盈路。
现代文：当时宰相中有人喜好施舍，上朝时经常让随从用布袋装钱跟随，以向乞丐行施，宰相每次朝会出殿，衣着褴褛的乞丐充盈于道路。
English: At that time, some of the chancellors were fond of giving alms. When they ascended to the throne, they often had their attendants follow them with cloth bags filled with money in order to give alms to beggars. Every time the chancellor left the palace for the imperial court, the roads were filled with shabbily dressed beggars.

古文：有朝士以书规之曰： 今百姓疲弊，寇盗充斥，相公宜举贤任能，纪纲庶务，捐不急之费，杜私谒之门，使万物各得其所，则家给人足，自无贫者，何必如此行小惠乎！ 
现代文：有的朝士上书规劝宰相说： 如今天下百姓疲弊，寇盗充斥于各地，相公们应该举贤任能，整顿纲纪，着力处置庶务，将不急用的费用捐献出来，杜绝私下拜竭你们的门路，使天下万物各得其所，才能使各家各户富足自给，自然就没有贫困无活路的人，又何必这样施行小惠，而邀取虚名呢？ 
English: Some asaji wrote to the prime minister, saying, "If the people are exhausted and the robbers are rampant in various regions today, the relatives of the emperor should raise their ability, rectify the discipline, deal with the general affairs, donate the non-urgent expenses, and prevent the private ways of the people, so that everything in the world can have its place, so that each family can be rich and self-sufficient. Naturally, there is no poor person who has no way to live. Why do you have to do small favors in this way, but invite false names?

古文：宰相大怒。
现代文：宰相们闻知后竟恼羞成怒。
English: When the prime ministers heard about this, they were outraged.

古文：邕州大将杜弘送段瑳宝至南诏，逾年而还。
现代文：唐邕州大将杜弘将段宝护送到南诏，一年多后才回国。
English: Tang Bozhou General Du Hong escorted Duan Bao to Nanzhao, and he returned to China more than a year later.

古文：甲辰，辛谠复遣摄巡官贾宏、大将左瑜、曹朗使于南诏。
现代文：甲辰，辛谠再遣摄巡官贾宏、大将左瑜、曹朗出使南诏。
English: Jia Chen, Xin Yao then sent the inspector Jia Hong, the general Zuo Yu, and Cao Lang to Nanzhao.

古文：李国昌欲父子并据两镇，得大同制书，毁之，杀监军，不受代，与李克用合兵陷遮虏军，进击宁武及岢岚军。
现代文：李国昌企图父子俩共同占据有两镇，得到唐僖宗令他任大同节度使的制书时，竟将诏制毁掉，并杀死监军，不接受卢简方来代替他振武节度使的职位，又与李克用合兵攻陷遮虏军，进而攻击宁武及岢岚军。
English: Li Guochang tried to occupy two towns together with his father and son, and when he obtained the book production that Tang Xizong ordered him to appoint as Datong festival envoy, he actually destroyed the imperial edict system and killed the supervising army, did not accept Lu Jianfang to replace him as Zhenwu festival envoy, and used Li Ke to join forces to capture the Qarru army, and then attacked Ningwu and Shan army.

古文：卢简方赴振武，至岚州而薨。
现代文：卢简方于赴振武去上任的路上，至岚州时去世。
English: Lu Jianfang died in Zhangzhou on his way to Zhenwu to take office.

古文：丁巳，河东节度使窦浣发民堑晋阳。
现代文：丁巳，为对付李国昌父子，唐河东节度使窦浣调发民夫至晋阳挖壕堑。
English: According to Ding, in order to deal with Li Guochang and his son, the Tang Hedong Jiedu ordered Dou Jun to send the Minfu to Jinyang to dig trenches.

古文：己未，以都押衙康传圭为代州刺史，又发土团千人戍代州。
现代文：已未，任命都押牙康传圭为代州刺史。又调发地方的土团千余人赴代州。
English: In addition, more than a thousand members of local clans were sent to Daizhou.

古文：土团至城北，娖队不发，求优赏。
现代文：土团行至晋阳城北，整顿好队伍后却不出发，向窦浣请求丰厚的赏赐。
English: The soil group went to the north of Jinyang City, but did not set out after the team was reorganized, and asked Dou Qi for a rich reward.

古文：时府库空竭，浣遣马步都虞候邓虔往慰谕之，土团寛虔，床舁其尸入府。
现代文：当时河东府库空竭，窦浣派遣马步都虞侯邓虔前往慰问劝谕，土团竟将邓虔活活剐死，用床将邓虔尸体抬入节度使府。
English: At that time, the treasury of Hedong Prefecture was depleted, and Dou Ying sent Deng Qian, the governor of Maabou, to offer condolences and advice. The troops actually strangled Deng Qian alive, and carried Deng Qian's corpse in a bed into the Festival Delegate's Office.

古文：浣与监军自出慰谕，人给钱三百，布一端，众乃定。
现代文：窦浣只好与监军亲自出城向土团士卒宣谕慰问，每人给钱三百，布一端，才使土团安定下来。
English: Dou Xuan had to personally go out of the city with the supervisors to express his condolences to the members of the soil group. He gave each of them 300 yuan and a piece of cloth to help the soil group settle down.

古文：押牙田公锷给乱军钱布，从遂劫之以为都将，赴代州，浣借商人钱五万缗以助军。
现代文：押牙官田公锷给乱军发放钱、布，士兵们将田公锷劫持，让他当都将，奔赴代州。窦浣又借商人五万缗钱以助军。
English: The overseer, Tian Gongyao, was distributing money and cloth to the rebels. The soldiers kidnapped Tian Gongyao and sent him to Daizhou. Douyao also borrowed 50,000 baht from a merchant to help the troops.

古文：朝廷以浣为不才，六月，以前昭义节度使曹翔为河东节度使。
现代文：而朝廷竟认为窦浣没有才干，六月，任命前昭义节度使曹翔为河东节度使。
English: However, the imperial court actually considered Dou Ye to be incompetent. In June, Cao Xiang, a former aide to Emperor Zhao Yi, was appointed as a special envoy to the Hedong Festival.

古文：王仙芝馀党剽掠浙西，朝廷以荆南节度使高骈先在天平有威名，仙芝党多郓人，乃徙骈为镇海节度使。
现代文：王仙芝的余党仍然在浙西一带剽掠，朝廷以荆南节度使高骈原先在天平军中时威名卓著，而王仙芝余党多为郓州人，于是将高骈移为镇海节度使。
English: The rest of Wang Xianzhi's party was still raiding in western Zhejiang. The imperial court used the Jingnan Festival to make Gao Xizhi famous in the Tianping Army, while the rest of Wang Xianzhi's party was mostly from Zhangzhou, so Gao Xizhi was moved to the Zhenhai Festival.

古文：沙陀焚唐林、崞县，入忻州境。
现代文：沙陀军队焚烧唐林、崞县，入侵忻州地境。
English: Shado's army burned Tanglin and Ye County and invaded the territory of Ye Prefecture.

古文：秋，七月，曹翔至晋阳。己亥，捕土团杀邓虔者十三人，杀之。
现代文：秋季，七月，河东节度使曹翔来到晋阳；已亥，将杀害邓虔的土团士卒十三人逮捕并诛杀。
English: In the autumn, in July, the Hedong Festival made Cao Xiang come to Jinyang; already in the winter, he arrested and killed the thirteen local soldiers who killed Deng Qian.

古文：义武兵至晋阳，不解甲，欢噪求优赏，翔斩其十将一人，乃定。
现代文：义武兵来至晋阳，不解衣甲，大喊大叫要求优厚的赏赐，曹翔斩其十将中的一员，于是安定下来。
English: When the volunteers came to Jinyang, they did not loosen their armor and shouted for a generous reward. Cao Xiang killed one of his ten generals, and then settled down.

古文：发义成、忠武、昭义、河阳兵会于晋阳，以御沙陀。
现代文：朝廷调发义成、忠武、昭义、河阳军队于晋阳会合，以抵御沙陀族军队。
English: The imperial court dispatched the armies of Yicheng, Zhongwu, Zhao Yi, and Heyang to meet in Jinyang to resist the Satoru army.

古文：八月，戊寅，曹翔引兵救忻州。
现代文：八月，戊寅，曹翔率军队援救忻州。
English: In August, Wu Yin and Cao Xiang led the army to rescue Zhangzhou.

古文：沙陀攻岢岚军，陷其罗城，败官军于洪谷，晋阳闭门城守。
现代文：沙陀族军队进攻岢岚军，将外围罗城攻陷，又于洪谷打败唐朝官军，晋阳将城门关闭拒守。
English: The Shado army attacked the Han army, captured the outlying city of Luo, and defeated the Tang Dynasty government army in Honggu. Jinyang closed the city gate and refused to defend.

古文：黄巢寇宣州，宣歙观察使王凝拒之，败于南陵。
现代文：黄巢进犯宣州，宣歙观察使王凝率兵抵抗，在南陵战败。
English: Huang Chao attacked Xuanzhou, and Xuan Zang's observation made Wang Ge and his soldiers resist, and they were defeated in Nanling.

古文：巢攻宣州不克，乃引兵入浙东，开山路七百里，攻剽福建诸州。
现代文：黄巢攻宣州未能攻克，引兵转攻浙东，开辟山路七百里，进入福建，攻剽诸州。
English: Huang Chao's attack on Xuanzhou failed to conquer, and the army was diverted to attack eastern Zhejiang, opening up a seven-hundred-mile mountain road, entering Fujian, and attacking Zhuzhou.

古文：九月，平卢军奏节度使宋威薨。
现代文：九月，平卢军奏报朝廷，称节度使宋威去世。
English: In September, the Pinglu army reported to the imperial court that Song Wei had died as a result of the festival.

古文：辛丑，以诸道行营招讨使曾元裕领平卢节度使。
现代文：辛丑，朝廷以诸道行营招讨使曾元裕兼领平卢节度使。
English: In a cruel twist of fate, the imperial court invited the envoy Zeng Yuanyu and the envoy of Pinglu Jiedu to the camp.

古文：壬寅，曹翔暴薨。
现代文：壬寅。河东节度使曹翔突然暴亡。
English: Ren Yin. Cao Xiang's sudden violent death was caused by the Hedong Festival.

古文：丙午，昭义兵大掠晋阳，坊市民自共击之，杀千馀人，乃溃。
现代文：丙午，昭义兵在晋阳大肆抢劫，坊市居民自己动手共同讨击，杀昭义军乱兵千余人，使乱军溃散。
English: In the afternoon of the third day, the rebels carried out a large-scale robbery in Jinyang, and the residents of Fang City took the initiative to fight together, killing more than a thousand rebels and dispersing the rebels.

古文：中书侍郎、同平章事李蔚罢为东都留守。
现代文：中书侍郎、同平章事李蔚被罢为东都留守。
English: Li Wei, the secretary of the Central Committee of the Communist Party of China, was left behind in Dongdu.

古文：以吏部尚书郑从谠为中书侍郎、同平章事。
现代文：唐僖宗又以吏部尚书郑从谠为中书侍郎、同平章事。
English: Tang Xizong also made Shangshu Zheng Conglu, the head of the cadre department, the attendant of the middle book, and Tongping Zhangji.

古文：从谠，馀庆之孙也。
现代文：郑从谠是郑余庆的孙子。
English: Zheng Conglu is the grandson of Zheng Yuqing.

古文：以户部尚书、判户部事李都同平章事兼河中节度使。
现代文：唐僖宗任命户部尚书、判户部事李都为同平章事，兼任河中节度使。
English: Tang Xizong appointed the head of the household, Shang Shu, and the judge of the household, Li, to be the same rank and title, and also served as the deputy of the Mid-Heaven Festival.

古文：冬，十月，诏昭义节度使李钧、幽州节度使李可举与吐谷浑酋长赫连鐸、白义诚、沙陀酋长安庆、萨葛酋长米海万，合兵讨李国昌父子于蔚州。
现代文：冬季，十月，唐僖宗下诏命令诏义节度使李钧、幽州节度使李可举与吐谷浑酉长赫连铎、白义诚、沙陀族酋长安庆、萨葛部酋长米海万，合兵于蔚州讨伐李国昌父子。
English: In the winter, in October, Emperor Taizong of Tang Dynasty issued an edict that the Zhaoyi Festival should be held to honor Li Qichang, and the Yuzhou Festival should be held to honor Li Qichang, together with Tu Gu, Hunyu, Changheliang, Bai Yicheng, Shatou chief Anqing, and Sagdebu chief Mi Haiwan, and they joined forces to fight Li Guochang and his son in Ulju.

古文：十一月，甲午，岢岚军翻城应沙陀。
现代文：十一月，岢岚军翻越城墙接应沙陀军。
English: In November, the Shan army overran the city wall to meet the Shatou army.

古文：丁未，以河东宣慰使崔季康为河东节度、代北行营招讨使。
现代文：丁未，唐僖宗任命河东宣尉使崔季康为河东节度、代北行营招讨使。
English: At the same time, Tang Xizong appointed the Hengtong Xuanli to make Cui Jikang the Hengtong Festival and the Northern Campaign Recruitment Envoy.

古文：沙陀攻石州，庚戌，崔季康救之。
现代文：沙陀军攻打石州，康戌，崔季康率兵往石州援救。
English: Shatou's army attacked Shizhou, and Kangxi and Cui Jikang led their troops to rescue Shizhou.

古文：十二月，甲戌，黄巢陷福州，观察使韦岫弃城走。
现代文：十二月，甲戌，黄巢攻陷福州，福州观察使韦岫弃城逃走。
English: In December, the Armor and Yellow Nest invaded Fuzhou, and the Fuzhou observation made Wei Xuan abandon the city and flee.

古文：南诏使者赵宗政还其国，中书不答督爽牒，但作西川节度使崔安潜书意，使安潜答之。
现代文：南诏的使者赵宗政归还本国。唐中书门下对南诏督爽的牒文不直接回答，而以西川节度使的名义写了一封信，让崔安潜以地方官的身份答复南诏。
English: Zhao Zongzheng, the emissary of Nanzhao, returned to his home country. Tang Zhongshu's disciple did not directly respond to Nanzhao Du Shuang's ultimatum, but wrote a letter in the name of Saikawa Setsudoshi, asking Cui Anqian to respond to Nanzhao as a local official.

古文：崔季康及昭义节度使李钧与李克用战于洪谷，两镇兵败，钧战死。
现代文：崔季康及昭义节度使李钧率军与李用率领的沙陀军在洪谷大战，唐河东、昭义二镇兵被打败，李钧战死。
English: Cui Jikang and Zhaoyi Jiedu led the army led by Li Kun and the Shatou army led by Li Ying in the Honggu War. The soldiers from Tang Hedong and Zhaoyi were defeated, and Li Kun died in the battle.

古文：昭义兵还至代州，士卒剽掠，代州民杀之殆尽，馀众自鸦鸣谷走归上党。
现代文：昭义兵退还至代州，士卒四处抢劫，几乎被代州百姓杀净，残余兵自鸦鸣谷归走上党。
English: The volunteer soldiers were returned to Daizhou. The soldiers robbed everywhere and were almost killed by the people of Daizhou. The remaining soldiers returned to the party from Minggu.

古文：王郢之乱，临安人董昌以土团讨贼有功，补石镜镇将。
现代文：王郢之乱时，临安人董昌在本乡组织土团参与讨伐，并立有战功，被补为石镜镇将。
English: During the Wang Hui Rebellion, Dong Chang, a Lin'an native, organized a local group to participate in the crusade in his hometown, and was awarded the title of general of Shizhen Town.

古文：是岁，曹师雄寇二浙，杭州募诸县乡兵各千人以讨之，昌与钱塘刘孟安、阮结、富阳闻人宇、盐官徐及、新城杜棱、馀杭凌文举、临平曹信各为之都将，号杭州八都，昌为之长。
现代文：这一年，曹师雄侵犯二浙地区，杭州府帅召募所属诸县乡兵各出千人征讨，董昌与钱塘县人刘孟安、阮结、富阳县人闻人宇、盐官县人徐及、新城县人杜棱、余杭县人凌文举、临平县人曹信等各率所部土团应征，任都将，号称杭州八都。
English: In that year, Cao Shixiong invaded two Zhejiang regions, and the governor of Hangzhou called for the enlistment of a thousand soldiers from each of the counties and townships. Dong Chang, Liu Meng'an and Ruan Jie from Qiantang County, Wenren Yu from Fuyang County, Xu Ji from Yanquan County, Du Ren from Xincheng County, Ling Wenju from Yuhang County, Cao Xin from Linping County, and other local groups from various provinces enlisted, and all of them were drafted, known as the eight cities of Hangzhou.

古文：其后宇卒，钱塘人成及代之。
现代文：后来闻人宇去世，钱塘人成及代领其军职。
English: Later, Wen Renyu passed away, and Qiantang Rencheng took over his military post.

古文：临安人钱镠以骁勇事昌，以功为石镜都知兵马使。
现代文：临安人钱跟随董昌，以骁勇著称，团立战功而升任石境都知兵马使。
English: Lin'an's Qian followed Dong Chang, who was known for his bravery, and was promoted to the post of Shijiazhuang Duzhi Troops and Horses Envoy.

古文：僖宗圣恭定孝皇帝上之下乾符六年
现代文：六年春季，正月，唐懿宗之子魏王李佾去世。
English: In the spring of the sixth year, in the first month, the son of Tang Yanzong, Wei Wang Lijun, died.

古文：春，正月，魏王佾薨。镇海节度使高骈遣其将张璘、梁缵分道击黄巢，屡破之，降其将秦彦、毕师鐸、李罕之、许勍等数十人，巢遂趣广南。
现代文：唐镇海节度使高骈遣其部将张、梁缵分道围剿黄巢军，屡次将黄巢军击破。黄巢部下将领秦彦、毕师铎、李罕之、许等数十人投降高骈。
English: The Tang Zhenhai Festival made Gao Gan send his troops to Zhang and Liang Gan to encircle the Huang Chao Army, and repeatedly defeated the Huang Chao Army. Dozens of Huang Chao's generals, including Qin Yan, Bi Shizhao, Li Han Zhi and Xu, surrendered to Gao Gan.

古文：彦，徐州人；师鐸，冤句人；罕之，项城人也。
现代文：黄巢于是率军向广南进军。秦彦是徐州人；毕师铎是冤句了；李罕之是项城人。
English: Huang Chao then led the army to march to Guangnan. Qin Yan was from Xuzhou; Bi Shizhao was a misjudgment; Li Han Zhi was from Xiangcheng.

古文：贾宠等未至南诏，相继卒于道中，从者死亦太半。
现代文：贾宏等人未能到达南诏，而相继在道中去世，随从他们出使的人员也死了大半数。
English: Jia Hong and others failed to reach Nanzhao, and died one after another on the way, and most of the people who followed them also died.

古文：时辛谠已病风痹，召摄巡官徐云虔，执其手曰： 谠已奏朝廷发使入南诏，而使者相继物故，奈何？
现代文：这时辛谠已得了风痹病，将部下摄巡官徐云虔召来，握着他的手说： 我已经向朝廷上奏请求派遣使者入南诏，但使者相继病死，怎么办？
English: At this time, Xin Yao was already ill with rheumatism. He summoned his subordinate, the inspector of photography, Xu Yun Qian, shook his hand and said: I have petitioned the imperial court to send an envoy to Nanzhao, but the envoys have died one after another. What should I do?

古文：吾子既仕则思询国，能为此行乎？
现代文：你既然入仕做官，就应该想着报效国家，是否能出使南诏？
English: Since you have entered the service and become an official, you should think about the country you will serve. Will you be able to send Nanzhao?

古文：谠恨风痹不能拜耳。 
现代文：我痛恨自己患风痹不能拜你呀！ 
English: I hate that I can't worship you because I've got a cold!

古文：因呜咽流涕。
现代文：说完后即痛哭流泪。
English: After saying this, she immediately burst into tears.

古文：云虔曰： 士为知己死！
现代文：徐云虔回答说： 士为知已者死！
English: Xu Yunqian replied: "Death to those who know!

古文：明公见辟，恨无以报德，敢不承命！ 
现代文：既然明公能任用我，一直恨自己没有机会报告恩德，岂敢不尊承您的命令。 
English: Since it is clear that the public can appoint me, I have always hated myself for not having the opportunity to report the benefits, I dare not disobey your order.

古文：谠喜，厚具资装而遣之。
现代文：辛谠听后心里十分欢喜，给徐云虔准备丰厚的行装和钱物，作为使者出使南诏王国。
English: After hearing this, Xin Yao was very happy and prepared a rich outfit and money for Xu Yunqian to be sent as an envoy to the Kingdom of Nanzhao.

古文：二月，丙寅，云虔至善阐城，骠信见大使抗礼，受副使以下拜。
现代文：二月，丙寅，徐云虔来到善阐城，南诏王国骠信见朝王朝的大使徐云虔不肯行礼，只好接受副使以下人员的跪拜。
English: In February, Hsin Yin and Xu Yun Qian came to Zhenyao City. The Nanzhao Kingdom sent a letter to see that the ambassador of the dynasty, Xu Yun Qian, refused to bow, and had to accept the kneeling of the deputy envoy and the following personnel.

古文：己巳，骠信使慈双羽、杨宗就馆谓云虔曰： 贵府牒欲使骠信称臣，奉表贡方物；骠信已遣人自西川入唐，与唐约为兄弟，不则舅甥。
现代文：已巳，骠信派慈双羽、杨宗到馆舍，对徐云虔说： 贵节度使府的牒文想使南诏骠信称臣，向唐朝奉表贡献方物；骠信已经派遣人自西川入唐廷，与唐朝皇帝约为兄弟，要不就约为舅甥。
English: At this time, Yixin sent Cixiang Yu and Yang Zong to the embassy and said to Xu Yunqian, "Your embassy's ultimatum is to make Nanzhao Yixin be praised as a minister and send a gift to the Tang Dynasty. Yixin has sent someone from the West River to the Tang Dynasty to be a brother or nephew to the Tang Emperor.

古文：夫兄弟舅甥，书币而已，何表贡之有？ 
现代文：不管是兄弟还是舅甥，通书信或输钱币而已，哪有上表纳贡的道理？ 
English: Whether it is a brother or a nephew, a letter or a lost coin, what is the reason for the fee?

古文：云虔曰： 骠信既欲为弟、为甥，骠信景庄之子，景庄岂无兄弟，于骠信为诸父，骠信为君，则诸父皆称臣，况弟与甥乎！
现代文：徐云虔说： 骠信既然想称弟，或为甥，而骠信正是已故景庄王酋龙的儿子，景庄又岂能没有兄弟，他们是骠信的叔父辈，而现在骠信为君主，叔父辈对骠信也都要称臣，更何况弟和甥呢！
English: Xu Yunqian said, "Since Yixin wants to be called a younger brother or a nephew, and Yixin is the son of the late King Hailong of Jingzhuang, how can there be no brothers in Jingzhuang? They are Yixin's uncles, and now that Yixin is the monarch, his uncles should also be called subordinates to Yixin, not to mention his younger brother and nephew!

古文：且骠信之先，由大唐之命，得合六诏为一，恩德深厚，中间小忿，罪在边鄙。
现代文：况且骠信的先祖，是由大唐册立，才得以将六诏合而为一，唐朝皇帝对南诏有深恩厚德，虽然中间有些小的摩擦，但罪过都在于边境官吏。
English: Moreover, the ancestors of Xuanxin were established by the Great Tang Dynasty, and only then were they able to merge the six precepts into one. The Tang Emperor was deeply grateful to the Southern Precepts, and although there was some minor friction in the middle, the fault lay with the border officials.

古文：今骠信欲修旧好，岂可违祖考之故事乎！
现代文：今天骠信想与唐朝重修旧好，怎么能违背祖宗的惯例呢？
English: Today, Xuan Xin wants to restore the old friendship with the Tang Dynasty. How can he go against the practice of his ancestors?

古文：顺祖考，孝也；事大国，义也；息战争，仁也；审名分，礼也。
现代文：顺从祖先，可称为孝；服事大国，可称为义；平息战争，可称为仁；审正名分，可称为礼。
English: To obey one's ancestors can be called filial piety; to serve a great country can be called righteousness; to quell a war can be called benevolence; and to examine one's own merits can be called worship.

古文：四者，皆令德也，可不勉乎！ 
现代文：这四项，都是最高的美德，难道不可勉力而行吗！ 
English: These four are the highest virtues. Shouldn't we strive to practice them?

古文：骠信待云虔甚厚，云虔留善阐十七日而还。
现代文：骠信于是待徐云虔以厚礼；徐云虔留居善阐城十七天才返回。
English: Yanxin then waited for Xu Yunqian with a heavy gift; Xu Yunqian stayed in the city for seventeen days before returning.

古文：骠信以木夹二授云虔，其一上中书门下，其一牒岭南西道，然犹未肯奉表称贡。
现代文：南诏骠信将木二片交给徐云虔，一片是交中书门下的信，一片是给岭南西道的牒文，终于没有向唐朝廷奉表称臣纳贡。
English: Nanzhao's letter gave two pieces of wood to Xu Yunqian, one was a letter under the door of the Chinese diplomatic mission, and one was an ultimatum to Lingnan Xi Dao. Finally, he did not pay tribute to the Tang court.

古文：辛未，河东军至静乐，士卒作乱，杀孔目官石裕等。
现代文：辛未，河东军开到静乐，士卒作乱，将孔目官石裕等人杀死。
English: In Xinwei, the Hedong army drove to Jingle, and the soldiers made a riot, killing Kongme official Shi Yu and others.

古文：壬申，崔季康逃归晋阳。
现代文：壬申，节度使崔季康逃回到晋阳。
English: In Jinshin, the festival made Cui Jikang flee back to Jinyang.

古文：甲戌，都头张锴、郭昢帅行营兵攻东阳门，入府，杀季康。
现代文：甲戌，乱军都头张锴、郭率领行营兵进攻东阳门，进入节度使府，杀崔季康。
English: Armor-plated, the rebel army led by Zhang Xuan and Guo attacked Dongyang Gate, entered the seat of the embassy, and killed Cui Jikang.

古文：辛巳，以陕虢观察使高浔为昭义节度使；以邠宁节度使李侃为河东节度使。
现代文：辛巳，朝廷任命陕虢观察使高浔为昭义节度使；任命宁节度使李侃为河东节度使。
English: Soon after, the imperial court appointed Gao Jian as the delegate to the Shao Yi Festival, and Li Kan as the delegate to the Hedong Festival.

古文：三月，天平军节度使张裼薨，牙将崔君裕自知州事，淄州刺史曹全晸讨诛之。
现代文：三月，天平军节度使张裼去世，牙将崔君裕自任知州，被淄州刺史曹全发兵诛讨杀死。
English: In March, the Tianping Army Festival caused Zhang Xuan to die, and the tooth general Cui Junyu was appointed to Zhizhou, and was killed by the Zhizhou assassin Cao Quanzhang.

古文：夏，四月，庚申朔，日有食之。
现代文：夏季，四月，庚申朔，出现日食。
English: Summer, April, Geng Sheng Shuo, the occurrence of a solar eclipse.

古文：西川节度使崔安潜到官不诘盗，蜀人怪之。
现代文：西川节度使崔安潜到官上任不追究盗贼，蜀中人感奇怪。
English: Nishikawa Setsudo made Choi Anhyun take office without investigating the thief, which made people in Shuzhong feel strange.

古文：安潜曰： 盗非所由通容则不能为。今穷核则应坐者众，搜捕则徒为烦扰。 
现代文：崔安潜说： 盗贼不是因为捕盗官吏的通容是无所作为的，如今要追究恐怕牵连很多人，进行大搜捕只能是徒劳烦扰。 
English: Cui Anqian said: Thieves are not thieves because the tolerance of officials in charge of catching thieves is inaction. Nowadays, many people are likely to be implicated in the investigation, and a large-scale search and arrest can only be a futile distraction.

古文：甲子，出库钱千五百缗，分置三市，置榜其上曰： 有能告捕一盗，赏钱五百缗。
现代文：甲子，崔安潜拨出节度使府库钱一千五百缗，分别放置于成都蚕市、药市、七宝市等三市，在市上张榜，称： 有能告发并逮捕一个盗贼者，赏钱五百缗。
English: In the first place, Cui Anqian allocated 1,500 baht to the prefectural treasury, which was placed in three cities including Chengdu Silkworm Market, Medicine Market, and Qi Bao Market, and posted on the market, saying: Anyone who can report and arrest a thief will be rewarded with 500 baht.

古文：盗不能独为，必有侣。侣者告捕，释其罪，赏同平人。 
现代文：盗贼不可能独自一个行窃，必定有同伙，若同伙告发，可以释免他的罪，和平常人一样领赏。 
English: It is impossible for a thief to steal alone. He must have an accomplice. If the accomplice denounces him, he can be absolved of his crime and receive a reward like an ordinary person.

古文：未几，有捕盗而至者，盗不服，曰： 汝与我同为盗十七年，赃皆平分，汝安能捕我！我与汝同死耳。 
现代文：不久，就有人捕获盗贼来到官府的，盗贼不服，说： 你与我同伙为盗已十七年，脏物都是平分，你怎么敢逮捕我，即使到官府，你与我与一样要被处死。 
English: Not long after, someone caught a thief who came to the government office. The thief was not satisfied, saying: "You have been stealing with me for seventeen years, and the dirty goods are divided equally. How dare you arrest me? Even if you go to the government office, you will be executed just like me."

古文：安潜曰： 汝既知吾有榜，何不捕彼以来！则彼应死，汝受赏矣。
现代文：崔安潜对盗贼说： 你既然知道我有榜，为何不将你的同伙逮捕送官府，如果你这样做，他就该处死，你就该受到奖赏了。
English: Cui Anqian said to the thief: Since you know that I have a list, why don't you arrest your accomplice and send him to the government. If you do so, he should be put to death, and you should be rewarded.

古文：汝既为所失，死复何辞！ 
现代文：现在你既然被他告发，还有什么话好说！ 
English: Now that you've been denounced by him, what else is there to say!

古文：立命给捕者钱，使盗视之，然后盗于市，并灭其家。
现代文：于是立即给捕贼的人赏钱，让盗贼看见，然后将盗贼押到市上剐死，并诛灭其一家。
English: So he immediately rewarded the person who caught the thief with money, let the thief see it, and then pushed the thief to the market to strangle him to death and destroy his family.

古文：于是诸盗与其侣互相疑，无地容足，夜不及旦，散逃出境，境内遂无一人为盗。
现代文：于是盗贼与他们的同伙互相猜疑，在成都无容身之地，不到第二天天亮，盗贼们就乘夜逃跑，西川境内没有一个盗贼。
English: As a result, the thieves and their partners were suspicious of each other, to the point that they scattered and fled the country overnight, and from then on, no one in the country was a thief.

古文：安潜以蜀兵怯弱，奏遣大将赍牒诣陈、许诸州募壮士，与蜀人相杂，训练用之，得三千人，分为三军，亦戴黄帽，号黄头军。
现代文：崔安潜以蜀中士兵懦弱胆怯，上奏朝廷请奉牒文到陈州、许州招募壮士，与蜀人混合编排，经训练后作为军队，共得三千士兵，分成三军，每人头裁黄帽，号称黄头军。
English: Cui Anqian called the Shu soldiers cowardly and timid, and requested the imperial court to send an ultimatum to Chenzhou and Huzhou to recruit strong men, mixed with Shu people, and after training as an army, a total of three thousand soldiers were divided into three armies, each with a yellow hat, known as the Yellow Army.

古文：又奏乞洪州弩手，教蜀人用弩走丸而射之，选得千人，号神机弩营。
现代文：又上奉朝廷乞求派来洪州弓弩手，教蜀人用弓弩射丸的技术，又选得弓弩手一千人，号称神机弩营。
English: He also petitioned the imperial court to send archers to Hongzhou to teach the Shu people the technique of shooting bullets with a bow and arrow, and selected a thousand archers, known as the "divine machine."

古文：蜀兵由是浸强。
现代文：蜀兵于是渐渐强悍起来。
English: As a result, Shu soldiers gradually became tougher.

古文：凉王侹薨。
现代文：唐懿宗子凉王李去世。
English: Li Yueting, the king of cool, has passed away.

古文：上以群盗为忧，王鐸曰： 臣为宰相之长，在朝不足分陛下之忧，请自督诸将讨之。 
现代文：唐僖宗因为群盗猖狂而十分忧虑。王铎说： 我为宰相之首，在朝廷不足以分担陛下的忧虑，请让我出朝督促诸将讨伐盗贼。 
English: Tang Xizong was very worried because the bandits were rampant. Wang Yao said: I am the head of the prime minister, and I am not enough to share the worries of His Majesty in the court. Please let me go to the court to urge the generals to fight the thieves.

古文：乃以鐸守司徒兼侍中，充荆南节度使、南面行营招讨都统。
现代文：于是以王铎为试署司徒兼侍中，充当荆南节度使、南面行营招讨都统。
English: As a result, Wang Qi was appointed as a probation officer and attendant, and served as the Jingnan Festival envoy, traveling to the south to encourage the rise of the Tudor dynasty.

古文：五月，辛卯，敕赐河东军士银。
现代文：五月，辛卯，唐僖宗下诏敕赐给河东军士银饷。
English: In May, Xinwu, Tang Xizong issued an imperial edict to give a silver medal to a sergeant from Hedong.

古文：牙将贺公雅所部士卒作乱，焚掠三城，执孔目官王敬送马步司。节度使李侃与监军自由慰谕，为之斩敬于牙门，乃定。
现代文：河东牙将贺公雅部下的士卒起而作乱，焚烧并劫掠晋阳三城，并将孔目官王敬逮捕押送至马步司，河东节度使李侃与宦官监军亲自出来宣慰劝谕，在乱军逼迫下将王敬斩杀于牙门，乱事才平定。
English: Hedong Jia incited the soldiers under He Gongya to riot, burned and looted the three cities of Jinyang, and arrested the Confucian official Wang Jing and escorted him to Ma Bu Si. Hedong Jiedu made Li Kan and the eunuch overseer army personally come out to offer consolation and advice, and under the persecution of the riot army, Wang Jing was beheaded at Jamen, and the turmoil was settled.

古文：泰宁节度使李系，晟之曾孙也，有口才而实无勇略，王鐸以其家世良将，奏为行营副将统兼湖南观察使，使将精兵五万并土团屯潭州，以塞岭北之路，拒黄巢。
现代文：泰宁节度使李系是李晟的曾孙，能说会道，而实际上无勇无谋，王铎以为他一家世代出良将，上奏请任李系为行营副都统兼湖面南观察使，让他率领精兵五万加上土团屯于潭州，用以堵塞南岭以北的道路，以抗拒黄巢军的北进。
English: The Taining Festival made Li Jie, the great-grandson of Li Jie, able to speak eloquently, but in fact he had no courage or strategy. Wang Jie thought that his family had been a good general for generations. At the ceremony, he invited Li Jie to be the deputy commander and the southern observation envoy of the lake, and let him lead fifty thousand elite soldiers and the local troops to Tangzhou to block the road north of Nanling to resist the northward advance of the Yellow Nest Army.

古文：河东都虞候每夜密捕贺公雅部卒作乱者，族灭之。
现代文：河东都虞候每夜秘密逮捕贺公雅所部曾参与作乱的士卒，抓到后即杀其全家族。
English: In the capital of Hedong, every night, He Gongya's department would secretly arrest a soldier who had participated in the riot, and then kill his entire family.

古文：丁巳，馀党近百人称 报冤将 ，大掠三城，焚马步都虞候张锴、府城都虞候郭昢家。
现代文：丁巳，乱军余党近百人自称 报冤将 ，于晋阳三城大肆抢掠，焚烧马步都虞候张锴、府城都虞候郭的家。
English: At the same time, nearly a hundred members of the rebel army, claiming to be avenging the wrongs, looted the three cities of Jinyang and burned the homes of Zhangye, the capital of Maabou, and Guogu, the capital of Fucheng.

古文：节度使李侃下令，以军府不安，曲顺军情，收锴、昢，斩于牙门，并逐其家；以贺公雅为马步都虞候。
现代文：河东节度使李侃以军府不得安宁，曲意顺从乱军的愿望，竟下令将张锴、郭逮捕，于牙门斩首，并驱逐他们的家属；任命贺公雅为马步都虞候。
English: The Hedong Festival made Li Kan, who was in charge of the military government, restless and inclined to follow the wishes of the rebels. He ordered the arrest of Zhang Xuan and Guo, beheading them at the Gate of the Teeth, and the expulsion of their families; He Gongya was appointed the governor of Maabou.

古文：锴、昢临刑，泣言于众曰： 所杀皆捕盗司密申，今日冤死，独无烈士相救乎！ 
现代文：张锴、郭监刑时，哭着对众人说： 我们只是奉命而行，所杀的人都是捕盗司所申报的名单，今日死得实在是兔枉，难道这里就没有英烈之士仗义相救吗？ 
English: When Zhang Qian and Guo Guo were imprisoned, they cried and said to the crowd: "We were just following orders. The people we killed were all on the list declared by the thief-catching department. Today's death was really unjustified. Are there no brave soldiers here to fight for justice?

古文：于是军士复大噪，篡取锴、昢归都虞候司。
现代文：军士们听后再次喧噪起来，将张锴、郭劫下刑场，送归都虞候衙门。
English: After hearing this, the sergeants clamored again, abducted Zhang Ye and Guo from the execution site, and sent them back to the capital to await the execution.

古文：寻下令，复其旧职，并召还其家。收捕盗司元义宗等三十馀家，诛灭之。
现代文：不久李侃下令恢复二人旧职，并且召还他们的家属；将捕盗司元义宗等三十余人收捕，连同其全家一起诛杀。
English: Soon after, Li Kan ordered that the two men be reinstated to their former positions and their families be recalled; more than thirty people, including the chief of the police force, Yuan Yizong, were arrested and killed together with his entire family.

古文：己未，以马步都教练使硃玫等为三城斩斫使，将兵分捕报冤将，悉斩之，军城始定。
现代文：已示，又任命马步都教练使朱玫等为三城所斩斫使，率领士兵分头逮捕报冤将，将他们全部斩首，军城始得以安定下来。
English: It has been shown that he also appointed coach Ma Budu to make Zhu Mei and others the executioners of the three cities, led the soldiers to arrest the leaders of the retaliation, and beheaded them all, and the military city began to stabilize.

古文：黄巢与浙东观察使崔璆、岭南东道节度使李迢书，求天平节度使，二人为之奏闻，朝廷不许。
现代文：黄巢为唐浙东观察使崔、岭南东道节度使李迢投书，请求天平节度使的职位，崔和李迢为黄巢奏闻于朝廷；朝廷不准。
English: Huang Chao sent a letter to Cui, the observer of the eastern part of Tang and Zhejiang, and to Li Xi, the host of the Lingnan Festival, requesting the post of the Tianping Festival envoy. Cui and Li Xi reported to the imperial court for Huang Chao; the imperial court did not allow it.

古文：巢复上表求广州节度使，上命大臣议之。
现代文：黄巢再向朝廷上表乞求广州节度使的职位，唐僖宗命满朝大臣对此事讨论。
English: Huang Chao again begged the imperial court for the post of Guangzhou Festival Commissioner, and Tang Xizong ordered the imperial minister to discuss the matter.

古文：左仆射于琮以为： 广州市舶宝货所聚，岂可令贼得之！ 
现代文：左仆射于琮认为： 广州有市舶司，每年蕃船往来，聚集到大量宝货，这样重要的地方岂能让盗贼控制。 
English: Zuopu Zhaoyu believed that: Guangzhou has a municipal shipping company, ships come and go every year, and a large number of treasures are gathered. Such an important place can not be controlled by thieves.

古文：亦不许，乃议别除官。
现代文：于是又不批准黄巢乞任广州节度使的要求，而让大臣们议论给黄巢其他官职。
English: As a result, they did not approve Huang Chao's request to be appointed as Guangzhou's ceremonial envoy, but let the ministers discuss giving Huang Chao other official positions.

古文：六月，宰相请除巢率府率，从之。
现代文：六月，宰相们提出可任黄巢为率府率，唐僖宗表示同意。
English: In June, the prime ministers suggested that Huang Chao could be appointed as the head of the prefecture, and Tang Xizong agreed.

古文：河东节度使李侃以军府数有乱，称疾，请寻医。
现代文：由于军府经常发生变乱，河东节度使李侃称病请求朝廷批准他寻医治疗。
English: Due to frequent turmoil in the military government, the Hedong Festival made Li Kan plead illness and request the imperial court to approve him to seek medical treatment.

古文：敕以代州刺史康传圭为河东行军司马，征侃诣京师。
现代文：唐僖宗于是下诏任命代州刺史康传圭为河东行军司马，将李侃征还京师。
English: Tang Xizong then issued an edict appointing the daizhou general Kang Chuan-gui as the commander of the army marching to the east of the river, and recruiting Li Kan-so as the commander of the army returning to Beijing.

古文：秋，八月，甲子，侃发晋阳。
现代文：秋季，八月，甲子，李侃自晋出发赴京。
English: In autumn, in August, Li Kan left Jin for Beijing.

古文：寻以东都留守节蔚同平章事，充河东节度使。
现代文：不久，唐僖宗任命东都留守李蔚以同平章事衔，充任河东节度使。
English: Soon after, Tang Xizong appointed Li Wei, who remained in Dongdu, as the Dongdu Festival envoy with the title of Tongpingzhang.

古文：镇海节度使高骈奏： 请以权舒州刺史郎幼复充留后，守浙西，遣都知兵马使张璘将兵五千于郴州守险，兵马留后王重任将兵八千于循、潮二州邀遮，臣将万人自大庾岭趣广州，击黄。巢闻臣往，必当遁逃，乞敕王鐸以所部兵三万于梧、昭、桂、永四州守险。 
现代文：镇海节度使高骈向朝廷上奏： 请任命暂代舒州刺史郎幼复为镇海军留后，守浙西，调遣都知兵马使张充兵五千到郴州据守险要，兵马留后王重任统兵八千于循州、潮州阻挡黄巢军，我亲自统领一万军队翻过大瘐岭直趋广州进攻黄巢，黄巢得知我来，必定要北逃，请朝廷命令王铎以所部军队三万人于梧州、桂州、昭州、永州等四州扼守险要。 
English: The Zhenhai Festival made Gao Gan appeal to the imperial court: Please appoint the temporary Shuzhou Zishi Lang Youfu as the town navy to stay behind and guard the west of Zhejiang, dispatch the Duqi soldiers and horses to make Zhang Chong soldiers five thousand to Bozhou to guard the critical point, after the soldiers and horses stay behind, Wang Chong will lead eight thousand soldiers to block the Yellow Nest Army in Xuzhou and Chaozhou, I personally led ten thousand troops across the Dalian Mountains to Guangzhou to attack the Yellow Nest, when the Yellow Nest learned that I was coming, I must escape to the north, please order the imperial court to order Wang Gan to guard the critical point with thirty thousand

古文：诏不许。
现代文：唐僖宗不予批准。
English: The edict does not allow it.

古文：九月，黄巢得率府率告身，大怒，诟执政，急攻广州，即日陷之，执节度使李迢，转掠岭南州县。
现代文：九月，黄巢得到朝廷给予的率府率的的委任状，大怒，大骂当朝宰相，并率军急攻广州，当天即将广州攻陷，活捉广州节度使李迢，并挥师转掠岭南地区各州县。
English: In September, Huang Chao received a letter of appointment from the imperial court to lead the provincial government. He was furious and cursed the prime minister of the time. He led the army to attack Guangzhou in a hurry. On the same day, he was about to capture Guangzhou. He captured Li Qian, the governor of Guangzhou, alive, and sent his division to plunder various counties in the Lingnan region.

古文：巢使迢草表述其所怀，迢曰： 予代受国恩，亲戚满朝，腕可断，表不可草。 
现代文：黄巢又让李迢草写表文向朝廷申述自己想当广州节度使的愿望，李迢回答说： 我世代蒙受国家的恩典，亲戚当官的布满朝廷，我宁愿被斩断手腕，决不为你草写表文。 
English: Huang Chao also asked Li Yingcao to write a petition to the imperial court to express his desire to be the Guangzhou Festival envoy. Li Yingcao replied: My generation has been blessed by the state, relatives and officials are all over the imperial court. I would rather have my wrists amputated than write a petition for you.

古文：巢杀之。
现代文：黄巢将其杀死。
English: Huang Chao killed him.

古文：冬，十月，以镇海节度使高骈为淮南节度使，充盐铁转运使，以泾原节度使周宝为镇海节度使，以山南东道行军司马刘臣容为节度使。
现代文：冬季，十月，唐僖宗任命镇海节度使高骈为淮南节度使，并充任盐铁转运使，而以泾原节度使周宝为镇海节度使；又任命山南东道行军司马刘巨容为山南东道节度使。
English: In the winter, in October, Tang Xizong appointed Zhenhai Jie as Huainan Jie and Gao Jie as Huainan Jie, and Zhenhai Jie as Salt and Iron Jie and Zhou Bao as Zhenhai Jie, and appointed Ma Liu Jirong as Shannan Jie.

古文：宝，平州人也。
现代文：周宝是平州人。
English: Zhou Bao is from Pingzhou.

古文：黄巢在岭南，士卒罹瘴疫死者什三四，其徒劝之北还以图大事，巢从之。
现代文：黄巢军在岭南地区，士卒得瘴疫死者有十分之三四，黄巢的部下劝黄巢北还以图大事，黄巢表示赞同。
English: Huang Chao's troops in the south of Lingnan, three-fourths of the soldiers died of the plague. Huang Chao's subordinates advised Huang Chao to make great efforts in the north, and Huang Chao agreed.

古文：自桂州编大筏灵数千，乘暴水，沿湘江而下，历衡、永州，癸未，抵潭州城下。
现代文：于是自桂州编制大木筏数十个，乘洪水沿湘江顺流而下，穿过衡州、永州，癸未，抵达潭州城下。
English: As a result, dozens of large wooden rafts were prepared from Guizhou, and they took the flood along the Xiangjiang River, passed through Hengzhou, Yongzhou, and Yiwu, and arrived under the city of Tanzhou.

古文：李系婴城不敢出战，巢急攻，一日，陷之，系奔朗州。
现代文：李系紧把城门不敢出来迎战，黄巢急攻一日，将城攻陷，李系逃奔朗州。
English: The Li clan held the city gate tightly and dared not come out to fight. Huang Chao made a sudden attack and captured the city. The Li clan fled to Langzhou.

古文：巢尽杀戍兵，流尸蔽江而下。
现代文：黄巢将潭州戍兵全部杀死，将尸体抛入湘江顺流而下，以致死尸把江面都遮盖住了。
English: Huang Chao killed all the Tanzhou soldiers and threw their bodies into the Hunan River downstream, so that the dead bodies covered the surface of the river.

古文：尚让乘胜进逼江陵，众号五十万。
现代文：尚让率军乘胜进逼江陵，号称五十万。
English: Shangzhang led the army to take advantage of the victory to force Jiangling, known as five hundred thousand.

古文：时诸道兵未集，江陵兵不满万人，王鐸留其将刘汉宏守江陵，自帅众趣襄阳，云欲会刘巨容之师。
现代文：当时诸道军队尚未集结，江陵官军兵不满万人，王铎留下部将刘汉宏据守江陵，自己率众赶往襄阳，宣称将要会合刘巨容所率军队。
English: At that time, the armies of all provinces had not yet assembled, and the number of officers and soldiers in Gangneung was less than ten thousand. Wang Xi left his subordinate Liu Hanhong to defend Gangneung, and led his people to Yangyang, declaring that he would meet the army led by Liu Jirong.

古文：鐸既去，汉宠大掠江陵，焚荡殆尽，士民逃窜山谷。会大雪，僵尸满野。
现代文：王铎既已离去，刘汉宏趁机对江陵大肆抢劫，几乎将江陵城烧了个干净。士民逃窜于山谷，值天降大雪，大批冻死于山野，使山上一片僵尸。
English: After Wang Qian had already left, Liu Hanhong took advantage of the opportunity to loot Gangneung and almost burned Gangneung City to the ground. The scholars and citizens fled to the valley, when heavy snow fell, and a large number of them froze to death in the mountains, leaving a mountain full of zombies.

古文：后旬馀，贼乃至。
现代文：十多天后，黄巢的军队才赶到。
English: More than ten days later, Huang Chao's army arrived.

古文：汉宏，兗州人也，帅其众北归为群盗。
现代文：刘汉宏是兖州人，这时率领其部队向北逃亡成为群盗。
English: Liu Hanhong, a native of Zhangzhou, then led his troops to flee north and became a bandit.

古文：闰月，丁亥朔，河东节度使李蔚有疾，以供军副使李邵权观察留后，监军李奉皋权兵马留后。
现代文：闰十月，丁亥朔，唐河东节度使李蔚患疾病，让供军副使李邵暂时任观察留后，监军李奉皋暂时任兵马留后。
English: Leap October, Dinghai Shuo, Tang Hedong Festival caused Li Wei to suffer from illness, so that the deputy supply envoy Li Shao temporarily stayed as an observer, and the supervisor Li Fengyao temporarily stayed as a soldier.

古文：己丑，蔚薨。
现代文：己丑，李蔚病逝。
English: Li Wei died of illness.

古文：都虞侯张锴、郭昢署状纳邵，以少尹丁球知观察留后。
现代文：都虞侯张锴、郭签署奏状将李邵废黜，让少尹丁球任知观察留后。
English: The magistrates Zhang Ye and Guo signed a petition to dethrone Li Shao, and allowed Shao Yin Dingqiu to remain as an observer.

古文：十一月，戊午，以定州已来制置使万年王处存为义武节度使、河东行军司马，雁门关已来制置使康传圭为河东节度使。
现代文：十一月，戊午，朝廷任命定州已来制置使万年人王处存为义武军节度使，又任命河东行军司马、雁门关已来制置使康传圭为河东节度使。
English: In the afternoon of November, the imperial court appointed Dingzhou to be the festival envoy of the People's Liberation Army, and appointed Sima and Yanmenguan to be the festival envoys of the People's Liberation Army, and Kang Chuan Gui to be the festival envoy of the People's Liberation Army.

古文：黄巢北趣襄阳，刘巨容与江西招讨使淄州刺史曹全晸合兵，屯荆门以拒之。
现代文：黄巢向北进攻襄阳，唐山南东道节度使刘巨容与江西招讨使淄州刺史曹全合兵，屯于荆门以抗拒黄巢。
English: Huang Chao attacked Xiangyang to the north, and the southern Tangshan hosted the festival, which made Liu Jirong and Jiangxi recruit and make Zhangzhou stab Cao Quan join forces and camp in Jingmen to resist Huang Chao.

古文：贼至，巨容伏兵林中，全晸以轻骑逆战，阳不胜而走。贼追之，伏发，大破贼众，乘胜逐北。比至江陵，俘斩其什七八。
现代文：贼军赶到，刘巨容在林中埋下伏兵，曹全率轻骑迎战，假装不胜而走，贼军追赶，伏兵齐发，大破贼军，并乘胜追逐到江陵，俘虏和斩杀贼军十分之七八。
English: The bandits arrived, Liu Jirong planted an ambush in the forest, Cao Quan led a light cavalry to meet the battle, pretended to be invincible and walked away, the bandits chased, ambushed, broke the bandits, and chased to Gangneung with victory, capturing and killing seven-eighths of the bandits.

古文：巢与尚让收馀众渡江东走。
现代文：黄巢与尚让收集余众渡过长江向东转移。
English: Huang Chao and Shang let the rest of the gathering cross the Yangtze River and move eastward.

古文：或劝巨容穷追，贼可尽也。巨容曰： 国家喜负人，有急则抚存将士，不爱官赏，事宁则弃之，或更得罪。不若留贼以为富贵之资。 
现代文：有人劝刘巨容穷追不舍，可将贼军杀尽，但刘巨容却有不同看法，他说： 国家常说话不算数，有危急时就抚存将士，不惜赏官予人，事情平定下来时就将我们抛弃于一边，有的人甚至因功得罪；不如将残留下来，以为我辈取富贵的资本。 
English: Some people advised Liu Jiazhong to relentlessly pursue and kill the thief army, but Liu Jiazhong had a different view. He said: The state often does not count. When there is a crisis, it will keep soldiers, reward officials, and abandon us when things settle down. Some people even sin because of their merits. It is better to leave what is left behind, thinking that we will be rich capital.

古文：众乃止。
现代文：部众于是不再提追击黄巢之事。
English: As a result, the club members no longer mentioned the pursuit of Huang Chao.

古文：全晸度江追贼，会朝廷以泰宁都将段彦谟代为招讨使，全晸亦止。
现代文：曹全率军渡过长江追赶贼军，恰好朝廷任命泰宁都将段彦谟代曹全为招讨使，于是曹全也停止了追击。
English: Cao Quan led the army across the Yangtze River to chase the bandits, and the court appointed Taining Duan Yan Moo as Cao Quan's envoy, so Cao Quan also stopped the pursuit.

古文：由是贼势复振，攻鄂州，陷其外郭，转掠饶、信、池、宣、歙、杭等十五州，众至二十万。
现代文：贼军得以逃走，势力复振，进攻鄂州，将其外城攻陷，转而挥师掠夺饶州、信州、池州、宣州、歙州、杭州等十五州之地，部众又发展到二十万人。
English: The bandit army was able to escape, revive its strength, attack Ezhou, capture its outer city, and turn to plunder the land of fifteen states such as Raozhou, Xinshou, Chizhou, Xuanzhou, Zhangzhou, and Hangzhou, and the number of followers grew to 200,000 people.

古文：康传圭自代州赴晋阳，庚辰，至乌城驿。张锴、郭昢出迎，乱刀斫杀之，至府，又族其家。
现代文：康传圭自代州赶赴晋阳，庚辰，来到乌城驿；河东都虞候张锴、郭出城来迎接，康传圭命部下用乱刀将二人砍杀。
English: Kang Chuan Gui rushed to Jinyang and Gengchen from Dayaizhou, and came to Wucheng; the governor of Hedong waited for Zhang Ye and Guo to come out of the city to meet him, and Kang Chuan Gui's subordinates hacked the two men to death with machetes.

古文：十二月，以王鐸为太子宾客、分司。
现代文：进入河东军府，又将二人家族全部诛灭。十二月，朝廷任命王铎为太子宾客、分司东都任闲职。
English: In December, the imperial court appointed Wang Qian as the prince's guest, and the branch chiefs were all appointed to non-commissioned positions.

古文：初，兵部尚书卢携尝荐高骈可为都统，至是，骈将张璘等屡破黄巢，乃复以携为门下侍郎、平章事，凡关东节度使，王鐸、郑畋所除者，多易置之。
现代文：起初，兵部尚书卢携曾举荐高骈可担任都统，至此，高骈部将张等屡次攻破黄巢，于是唐僖宗再任卢携为门下侍郎、平章事，举凡关东诸镇的节度使，由王铎、郑畋所任命的多罢免改任。
English: At first, Gao Qi was recommended by Shangshu Lu Jie of the Ministry of Military Affairs to serve as the governor of the capital. At this point, the Gao Jie Department repeatedly defeated the Yellow Nest, so Tang Yanzong re-appointed Lu Jie as a subordinate attendant, Ping Zhangji, and appointed him as the festival envoy of all the towns in Guandong. He was often dismissed and reassigned by Wang Jie and Zheng Jie.

古文：是岁，桂阳贼陈彦廉陷郴州，杀刺史董岳。
现代文：这一年，桂阳贼帅陈彦谦攻陷郴州，将郴州刺史董岳杀死。
English: In the same year, Chen Yanqian, the Guiyang thief, invaded Zhangzhou and killed the Zhangzhou assassin, Dong Yue.

古文：僖宗圣恭定孝皇帝上之下广明元年
现代文：广明元年春季，正月，乙卯朔，改年号为广明元年。
English: In the spring of the first year of Guangming, the first month, the second day of the month, the year was changed to the first year of Guangming.

古文：春，正月，乙卯朔，改元。沙陀入雁门关，寇忻、代。二月，庚戌，沙陀二万馀人逼晋阳，辛亥，陷太谷。
现代文：沙陀族军队侵入雁门关，进犯忻州、代州。二月，庚戌，沙陀族军队二万余人进逼晋阳，辛亥，攻陷太谷。
English: The Shado army invaded Ganmen Pass, and invaded Bozhou and Daizhou. In February, Geng Zhou, the Shado army of more than 20,000 people forced their way into Jinyang, Xinhai, and conquered Taiyuan.

古文：遣汝州防御使博昌诸葛爽帅东都防御兵救河东。
现代文：朝廷派遣汝州防御使博昌人诸葛爽率领东都防御兵援救河东。
English: The imperial court dispatched the defense of Ruzhou so that the Bochang people Zhuge Shuang led the Dongdu defense soldiers to rescue Hedong.

古文：河东节度使康传圭，专事威刑，多复仇怨，强取富人财。
现代文：河东节度使康传圭，对部下专用威刑，结下了许多仇怨，又强夺富人家财。
English: The Hedong Festival made Kang Chuan Gui, a special threat to his subordinates, forged many vendettas, and forcibly seized the wealth of the rich.

古文：遣前遮虏军使苏弘轸击沙陀于太谷，至秦城，遇沙陀，战不利而还，传圭怒，斩弘轸。
现代文：康传圭派遣前遮虏军使苏弘轸讨击沙陀军于太谷，在秦城与沙陀军遭遇，作战失利后退兵。康传圭发怒，将苏弘轸斩首。
English: Kang Chuan-gyu sent Su Hongtao to fight the Shatang army in Taiyuan before dispatching the Chahar army. He encountered the Shatang army in Qincheng and retired after losing the battle. Kang Chuan-gyu was angry and beheaded Su Hongtao.

古文：时沙陀已还代北。传圭遣都教练使张彦球将兵三千追之。
现代文：这时沙陀军已退回代北，康传圭派遣都教练使张彦球率领三千军队追击。
English: At this time, Shatou's army had retreated to the north of Dai, and Kang Chuan Gui dispatched the capital coach to make Zhang Yanqiu lead three thousand troops to pursue.

古文：壬戌，至百井，军变，还趣晋阳。
现代文：壬戌，到来百井，军队发生变乱，回归晋阳。
English: In Nyingchi, when Momii arrived, there was a mutiny in the army and they returned to Jinyang.

古文：传圭闭城拒之，乱兵自西明门入，杀传圭。监军周从寓自出慰谕，乃定，以彦球为府城都虞候。
现代文：康传圭关闭城们将乱军拒于城外，乱兵自西明门进入，杀康传圭；监军周从寓亲自出来抚慰劝喻，才使局面平定下来，于是以张彦球为府城都虞候。
English: Kang Chuan Gui closed the city to keep the rebels out of the city, the rebels entered from the Ximing Gate and killed Kang Chuan Gui; the supervisor of the army, Zhou, personally came out from the residence to comfort and advise, only to calm down the situation, so Zhang Yanqiu became the capital city.

古文：朝廷闻之，遣使宣尉曰： 所杀节度使，事出一时，各宜自安，勿复忧惧。 
现代文：朝廷得知情况，派遣使者宣慰说： 你们杀了节度使，事出于一时，大家各自安心，不要再忧惧了。 
English: When the Imperial Court learned of the situation, they sent an envoy to offer consolation, saying, "You have killed the festival envoy. This is a temporary matter. Everyone should be at ease, and stop worrying."

古文：左拾遗侯昌业以盗贼满关东，而上不亲政事，专务游戏，赏赐无度，田令孜专权无上，天文变异，社稷将危，上疏极谏。
现代文：左拾遗侯昌业认为盗贼遍于潼关以东，而唐僖宗却不亲政事，一心游戏，对臣下赏赐没有节度，宦官田令孜专权，无视皇上，使天象发生变异，社稷将有危险，因而向唐僖宗上疏极谏。
English: Zuoqi's widower, Changye, thought that thieves were everywhere east of Shaoguan, while Tang Xizong was not involved in political affairs, was only interested in games, had no restraint in rewarding his subjects, had exclusive power over eunuchs, ignored the emperor, caused the celestial objects to mutate, and the society would be in danger, so he was extremely alienated from Tang Xizong.

古文：上大怒，召昌业至内侍省，赐死。
现代文：唐僖宗恼羞成怒，将侯昌业召至内侍省，赐他自尽。
English: Tang Xizong was so angry that he summoned Hou Changye to the Inner Palace and ordered him to commit suicide.

古文：上好骑射、剑槊、法算，至于音律、蒱博，无不精妙；好蹴鞠、斗鸡，与诸王赌鹅，鹅一头至直五十缗。
现代文：唐僖宗好骑马射箭，舞剑弄槊，还喜爱阴阳算学，对音律、掷色子赌博也无不精妙；常玩蹴鞠、斗鸡，与诸王赌鹅，一只鹅赌五十缗钱。
English: Tang Yanzong was good at horse riding, archery, and sword dancing. He was also fond of yin and yang arithmetic. He was also very good at gambling on musical rhythms and throwing dice. He often played football and cockfighting, and gambled with kings on geese, and gambled fifty yuan on one goose.

古文：尤善击球，尝谓优人石野猎曰：朕若应击球进士举，须为状元。 
现代文：尤其是善于击马球，曾经对伎优石野猪说： 朕如果参加击球进士的考试，必定考得状元。 
English: In particular, he is good at hitting polo balls. He once said to Gi Youshi Wild Boar: "If I take part in the test of hitting balls, I will surely get the first place."

古文：对曰： 若遇尧、舜作礼部侍郎，恐陛下不免驳放。 
现代文：石野猪回答说： 如果遇到尧、舜作礼部侍郎，恐怕陛下不免要被放逐。 
English: Ishino Inu replied, "If you meet a yakitori waitress, I'm afraid your majesty will be banished."

古文：上笑而已。
现代文：唐僖宗听后大笑。
English: Tang Yanzong burst out laughing.

古文：度支以用度不足，奏借富户及胡商货财。
现代文：度支官因国家国度不足，上奏请借富户及胡商的财产、货物。
English: Due to the country's lack of statehood, the provincial governor requested the property and goods of rich households and merchants to borrow.

古文：敕借其半。盐铁转运使高骈上言： 天下盗贼蜂起，皆出于饥寒，独富户、胡商未耳。 
现代文：唐僖宗颁下诏数，令富户、胡商将一半财货借给国家。盐铁转运使高骈上言朝廷： 如今天下盗贼蜂起，起因都是由于饥寒交迫，只有富户、胡商没有造反了。 
English: Emperor Gaozong of Tang Dynasty issued an imperial edict, ordering rich households and merchants to lend half of their wealth to the state. The salt and iron transport made Gaozhou appeal to the imperial court: If thieves revolt today, the cause is due to hunger and cold, only rich households and merchants have not rebelled.

古文：乃止。高骈奏改杨子院为发运使。
现代文：唐僖宗于是撤销借富户、胡商一半财产的诏令。淮南节度使高骈上奏请求将杨州留后所居的扬子院改为发运使。
English: Tang Xizong then revoked the imperial decree to borrow half of the property of rich households and Hu merchants. The Huainan Festival made Gao Yao appeal for the Yangzi Court, where he lived after staying in Yangzhou, to be changed to the Emissary.

古文：三月，庚午，以左金吾大将军陈敬瑄为西川节度使。
现代文：三月，庚午，唐僖宗任命左金吾大将军陈敬为西川节度使。
English: In the afternoon of March, Emperor Taizong of Tang appointed General Chen Jing of the Left Kingu to be the chief envoy of the Nishikawa Festival.

古文：敬瑄，许州人，田令孜之兄也。
现代文：陈敬是许州人，为田令孜的兄长。
English: Chen Jing is from Huzhou and is Tian Lingzi's older brother.

古文：初，崔安潜镇许昌，令孜为敬瑄求兵马使，安潜不许。
现代文：起初，崔安潜坐镇许昌，田令孜为陈敬向崔安潜求兵马使的官位，崔安潜没有许诺。
English: At first, Choe An Guk sat in the town of Xuchang, and Tian Ling Zi as Chen Jing asked Choe An Guk for the position of an envoy. Choe An Guk did not promise.

古文：敬瑄因令孜得录左神策军，数岁，累迁至大将军。
现代文：陈敬又因田令孜得到左神策军的军籍，几年后，多次迁官作到大将军。
English: Chen Jing also received the military registration of the Zuoshenchao Army due to Tian Lingzi, and several years later, he was transferred to the general for many times.

古文：令孜见关东群盗日炽，阴为幸蜀之计，奏以敬瑄及其腹心左神策大将军杨师立、牛勖、罗元杲镇三川，上令四人击球赌三川，敬瑄得第一筹，即以为西川节度使，代安潜。
现代文：田令孜看到潼关以东广大地区群盗势力日益壮大，暗中为日后逃入西蜀作准备，于是上奏请以陈敬及其心腹左神策大将军杨师立、牛勖、罗元杲坐镇三川，唐僖宗命令四人以击来打睹，陈敬获得第一筹，僖宗即以陈敬为西川节度使，以取代崔安潜。
English: Seeing the growing strength of the bandits in the vast area east of Shaoguan, Tian Lingzi secretly prepared to escape to West Shuxi in the future. Therefore, he invited Chen Jing and his henchman, General Yang Shili, Niu Xuan and Luo Yuanqi to sit in the town of Sanchuan, and Tang Yanzong ordered four people to fight. Chen Jing won the first prize, and Yanzong used Chen Jing as the West River festival envoy to replace Cui Anqian.

古文：辛未，以门侍郎、同平章事郑从谠同平章事，充河东节度使。
现代文：辛未，朝廷任命门下侍郎、同平章事郑从谠以同平章事衔，充任河东节度使。
English: Soon after, the imperial court appointed Zheng Congyi, a subordinate attendant and a member of the Tongping chapter, with the title of Tongping chapter, to serve as the Hedong Festival envoy.

古文：康传圭既死，河东兵益骄，故以宰相镇之，使自择参佐。
现代文：康传圭既已死亡，河东兵更加骄横，所以任命宰相坐镇河东，并让郑从谠自己选择辅佐官。
English: Since Kang Chuan-gyu had already died, the soldiers of Hedong were even more arrogant, so they appointed a prime minister to sit in the town of Hedong, and let Zheng Conglu himself choose an assistant officer.

古文：从谠奏以长安令王调为节度副使，前后部员外郎、史馆修撰刘崇龟为节度判官，前司勋员外郎、史馆修撰赵崇为观察判官，前进士刘崇鲁为推官。
现代文：郑从谠上奏请以长安令王调为节度副使，前兵部员外郎、史馆修撰刘崇龟为节度判官，前司勋员外郎、史馆修撰赵崇为观察判官，进士及第而尚未授官的刘崇鲁为推官。
English: Zheng Zongzheng requested that Chang'an Lingwang be appointed as the deputy envoy of the festival, Liu Chongke, the former deputy of the military department and the author of the history museum, as the judge of the festival, Zhao Chong, the former deputy of the military department and the author of the history museum, as the observer of the judge, and Liu Chonglu, who was promoted to the first and has not yet been awarded the position, as the supervisor.

古文：时人谓之小朝廷，言名士之多也。
现代文：当时人将郑从谠这个班子称为小朝廷，指的是这个班子名士众多。
English: At that time, people referred to Zheng Conglu's group as a small imperial court, referring to the large number of celebrities in the group.

古文：崇龟、崇鲁，政会之七世孙也。
现代文：刘崇龟和刘崇鲁是刘政会七世孙。
English: Liu Chongke and Liu Chongru are the seventh generation of Liu Zhengkai's grandchildren.

古文：时承晋阳新乱之后，日有杀掠，从谠貌温而气劲，多谋而善断，将士欲为恶者，从谠辄先觉，诛之，奸猾惕息。
现代文：当时正是晋阳新近发生军乱之后，每日都出现杀掠，郑从谠面貌温和而内气刚劲，多谋善断，有企图作恶的将士，郑从谠总是先有察觉，将他诛杀，使心术不正的人有所警惕。
English: At that time, just after the recent military turmoil in Jinyang, there were daily killings and robberies. Zheng Conglu was mild-mannered but strong-willed. He was a good decision-maker. If there was a soldier who attempted to do evil, Zheng Conglu would always be the first to notice and kill him, so that those who were mentally dishonest would be alerted.

古文：为善者抚待无疑，知张彦球有方略，百井之变，非本心，独推首乱者杀之，召彦球慰谕，悉以兵柄委之，军中由是遂安。
现代文：郑从谠对善良的人抚慰亲信不加怀疑，如张彦球很有方略，百井之变，不是他的本心，郑从谠只是将首谋作乱者查出处死，而将张彦球召来慰问劝谕，将全部兵权委交给他，军中于是逐渐得到安定。
English: Zheng Conglu did not doubt that kind-hearted people would comfort their relatives and friends. For example, Zhang Yanqiu was very cunning, and the change of the manor was not his original intention. Zheng Conglu only found out and executed the ringleader of the riot, but called Zhang Yanqiu for condolences and advice, and handed over the entire Military Commission to him. The army gradually became stable.

古文：彦球为从谠尽死力，卒获其用。
现代文：张彦球也为郑从谠竭尽死力，发挥了很大的作用。
English: Zhang Yanqiu also did his best for Zheng Conglu and played a great role.

古文：淮南节度使高骈遣其将张璘等击黄巢屡捷，卢携奏以骈为诸道行营兵马都统。
现代文：淮南节度使高骈派遣其部将张等人讨击黄巢军，屡次获得胜利，卢携于是上奏唐僖宗请以高骈为诸道行营兵马都统。
English: The Huainan Festival made Gao Gan send his general Zhang and others to fight against the Yellow Nest Army, and they repeatedly won victories. Lu and his followers then appealed to Tang Xizong to ask Gao Gan to be the general of all the armies and horses.

古文：骈乃传檄征天下兵，且广召募，得土客之兵共七万，威望大振，朝廷深倚之。
现代文：高骈于是传檄征发天下兵马，并且广为招募，得到淮南本土士兵和诸道军队士兵共七万人。势力的壮大使高骈威望大振，朝廷对他更深加倚重。
English: Gao Jiong then issued a proclamation to recruit soldiers and horses from all over the world, and recruited widely, obtaining a total of seventy thousand soldiers from the local soldiers of Huainan and the soldiers of various armies. The strength of Gao Jiong's forces greatly enhanced his prestige, and the imperial court relied on him more deeply.

古文：安南军乱，节度使曾衮出城避之，诸道兵戍邕管者往往自归。
现代文：安南发生军乱，节度使曾衮逃出城外躲避乱军。诸道戍守邕管的士兵纷纷擅自返归原籍。
English: A military disturbance broke out in Annan, and the governor sent Zeng Yao out of the city to escape the disorderly troops. The soldiers of various provinces who had been guarding the capital returned to their hometowns without permission.

古文：夏，四月，丁酉，以太仆卿李琢为蔚、朔等州招讨都统、行营节度使。
现代文：夏季，四月，丁酉，朝廷任命太仆卿李琢为蔚、朔等州招讨都统、行营节度使。
English: In the summer, in April of Ding Hui, the imperial court appointed the great servant Li Tuo as the envoy of Wei, Shuo and other states to invite the capital and hold the festival.

古文：琢，听之子也。
现代文：李琢是李听的儿子。
English: Li Taku is Li He's son.

古文：张璘渡江击贼帅王重霸，降之。屡破黄巢军，巢退保饶州，别将常宏以其众数万降。
现代文：张璘渡过长江袭击贼军将帅王重霸，迫使王重霸投降；又屡次袭破黄巢军，于是黄巢退保饶州，其部下别将常宏率所部数万人降唐。
English: Zhang Ye crossed the Yangtze River to attack the thief army commander Wang Chongba, forcing Wang Chongba to surrender; he repeatedly attacked and defeated the Yellow Nest Army, so the Yellow Nest withdrew to Raozhou, and his subordinates sent tens of thousands of people to Tang led by Changhong.

古文：璘攻饶州，克之，巢走。
现代文：张进攻饶州，将城攻克，黄巢又撤走。
English: Zhang attacked Raozhou, conquered the city, and withdrew from Huangxiao.

古文：时江、淮诸军屡奏破贼，率皆不实，宰相已下表贺，朝廷差以自安。
现代文：这时江、淮间诸官军屡有破贼报捷的奏文，几乎全不是实情，宰相以下百官得到虚假的捷报，都上表唐僖宗表示祝贺，朝廷便自觉安稳。
English: At this time, Jiang and Huai's officials and soldiers often sent messages to break the bandits and report success, almost all of which were not true. Hundreds of officials from the prime minister down received false reports of success, and all congratulated Tang Xizong on the table, and the imperial court was consciously stable.

古文：以李琢为蔚朔节度使，仍充都统。
现代文：朝廷任命李琢为蔚朔节度使，并仍旧充任都统。
English: The imperial court appointed Li Tuo as the imperial envoy to the Wei-Shuo Festival, and he remained in charge of the capital.

古文：以杨师立为东川节度使，牛勖为山南西道节度使。
现代文：又任命杨师立为东川节度使；牛勖为山南西道节度使。
English: In addition, Yang Shili was appointed as the Dongchuan Festival Envoy; Niu Yao as the Shannan West Road Festival Envoy.

古文：以诸葛爽为北面行营副招讨。
现代文：任命诸葛爽为北面行营副招讨。
English: Zhuge Shuang was appointed as the vice-invitation to the north.

古文：初，刘巨容既还襄阳，荆南监军杨复光以忠武都将宋浩权知府事，泰宁都将段彦谟以兵守其城。诏以浩为荆南安抚使，彦谟耻居其下。
现代文：起初，刘巨容在大破黄巢后回到襄阳，荆南监军杨复光命令忠武都将暂时掌管府事，泰宁都将段彦率所部兵守荆南城；唐僖宗下诏任命宋浩为荆南安抚使，段彦感到居于宋浩之下是耻辱。
English: At first, Liu Jiazhong returned to Xiangyang after defeating Huang Chao. Yang Fuguang, the military governor of Jingnan, ordered Zhongwu to temporarily take charge of government affairs. Tainin sent Duan Yan and his troops to guard the southern city of Jing. Song Hao was appointed as the pacifying envoy of Jingnan by the edict of Emperor Xuanzong. Duan Yan felt it was a disgrace to live under Song Hao.

古文：浩禁军士翦伐街中槐柳，彦谟部卒犯令，浩杖其背。彦谟怒，扶刃驰入，并其二子杀之。
现代文：宋浩禁止伐街中的槐柳树，段彦所部士卒违犯禁令，宋浩用刑杖打犯禁士兵的背，段彦极感愤怒，怀挟利刀驰入军府，杀宋浩及其两个儿子。
English: Song Hao banned the felling of willow trees in the streets, Duan Yan's subordinates violated the ban, Song Hao used a cane to beat the back of the banned soldiers, Duan Yan was extremely angry, and rushed into the military headquarters with a sword, killing Song Hao and his two sons.

古文：复光奏浩残酷，为众所诛。诏以彦谟为朗州刺史，以工部侍郎郑绍业为荆南节度使。
现代文：杨复光上奏朝廷称宋浩残酷，被激愤的士众诛杀；于是唐僖宗下诏任命段彦为朗州刺史，又任命工部待郎郑绍业为荆南节度使。
English: Yang Fuguang reported to the imperial court that Song Hao was cruel and was killed by the enraged scholars; therefore, Tang Xizong issued an edict appointing Duan Yan as the official historian of Langzhou, and also appointed Zheng Shaoye, the head of the Ministry of Works, as the Jingnan Festival envoy.

古文：五月，丁巳，以汝州防御使诸葛爽为振武节度使。
现代文：五月，丁巳，朝廷任命汝州防御使诸葛爽为振武节度使。
English: In May, the imperial court appointed Zhuge Shuang, the defense minister of Ruzhou, as the military governor of Zhenwu.

古文：刘汉宏之党浸盛，侵掠宋、兗。甲子，征东方诸道兵讨之。
现代文：刘汉宏的部众逐渐壮大，侵入宋州，兖州劫掠；甲子，朝廷征东方诸道兵讨伐刘汉宏。
English: Liu Hanhong's followers gradually grew in strength, invaded Songzhou and plundered Zhangzhou; in Jiazi, the imperial court enlisted soldiers from all over the East to fight Liu Hanhong.

古文：黄巢屯信州，遇疾疫，卒徒多死。
现代文：黄巢军驻扎在信州，遇到传染病，士卒死了很多。
English: The Huang Chao Army was stationed in Xinshou, encountered an infectious disease, and many soldiers died.

古文：张璘急击之，巢以金啖璘，且致书请降于高骈，求骈保奏。骈欲诱致之，许为之求节钺。
现代文：张趁机急攻贼军，黄巢以黄金引诱张，并向高骈致书请降，请求高骈向朝廷保奏；高骈也想诱黄巢上钩，许诺愿为黄巢向朝廷求得节。
English: Zhang took advantage of the opportunity to quickly attack the bandits. Huang Chao lured Zhang with gold, and sent a letter to Gao Kun to ask for surrender and request Gao Kun to make a guarantee to the imperial court. Gao Kun also wanted to lure Huang Chao onto the hook, promising that he would seek compensation from the imperial court for Huang Chao.

古文：时昭义、感化、义武等军皆至淮南，骈恐分其功，乃奏贼不日当平，不烦诸道兵，请悉遣归。
现代文：当时昭义、感化、义武等军队都赶到淮南，高骈恐怕这些军队瓜分他的功劳。于是上奏朝廷说贼众不几日就当平定，不用麻烦诸道军队，请求将诸道军队全部遣归本镇。
English: At that time, the armies of Zhao Yi, Xuan Hua, and Yi Wu had all arrived in Huainan, and Gao Gan was afraid that these armies would divide his credit. Therefore, he reported to the imperial court that the bandits should be pacified in a few days, and that there was no need to trouble the armies of various provinces, and requested that all the armies of various provinces be sent back to his town.

古文：朝廷许之。
现代文：朝廷相信高骈，批准了他的奏请。
English: The Imperial Court promised to do so.

古文：贼诇知诸道兵已北渡淮，乃告绝于骈，且请战。
现代文：黄巢刺探到唐诸道兵已经北渡淮河，于是与高骈绝交，并且出战。
English: Huang Chao's spies discovered that Tang's Taoist soldiers had already crossed the Huai River to the north, so they broke off diplomatic relations with Gao Wei and went to war.

古文：骈怒，令璘击之，兵败，璘死，巢势复振。
现代文：高骈得知后怒气冲天，命令张向黄巢军进攻，被杀得大败，张也战死，于是黄巢的势力复振。
English: After Gao Yao learned of this, he flew into a rage and ordered Zhang to attack the Yellow Nest Army. He was soundly defeated and killed, and Zhang also died in the battle. As a result, the Yellow Nest forces were reinvigorated.

古文：乙亥，以枢密使西门思恭凤翔监军。
现代文：乙亥，朝廷派宦官枢密使西门思恭为凤翔监军。
English: In the second year of the Heian period, the imperial court sent the eunuch and confidential envoy, Simon Sikyong, to supervise Fengxiang's army.

古文：丙子，以宣徽使李顺融为枢密使。
现代文：丙了，唐僖宗任宣微使李顺融为枢密使。
English: C, Tang Xizong appointed Xuan Wei to make Li Shunlun a privy envoy.

古文：皆降白麻，于閤门出案，与将相同。
现代文：对这些宦官的任命，都是由阁门出案降白麻，与朝官将相命官的手续相同。
English: The appointment of these eunuchs was made by the cabinet, and the procedure was the same as that for the appointment of imperial officials.

古文：西川节度使陈敬瑄素微贱，报至蜀，蜀人皆惊，莫知为谁。
现代文：西川节度使陈敬向来很微贱，让他主管西蜀的消息传出，蜀中人士都感到惊讶，不知道陈敬是谁。
English: The West Sichuan Festival has always made Chen Jing very humble, and the news that he is in charge of West Shu has spread. People in Shu are surprised and do not know who Chen Jing is.

古文：有青城妖人乘其声势，帅其党诈称陈仆射，止逆旅，呼巡虞候索白马甚急。马步使瞿大夫觉其妄，执之，沃以狗血，即引服，悉诛之。
现代文：有一个青城无名妖人借用这种声势，率领其徒伪称是陈仆射，马步使瞿大夫察觉其妖妄，将他逮捕，灌以狗血，他便服罪了，将他及其党羽全部诛死。
English: There was a nameless demon in Qingcheng who borrowed this slogan and led his followers to falsely claim to be Chen Puxia. Dr. Zou was made aware of his delusion by Ma Pu, who arrested him and doused him with dog's blood. He then confessed his guilt and strangled him and all his followers to death.

古文：六月，庚寅，敬瑄至成都。
现代文：六月，庚寅，陈敬到达成都。
English: In June, Geng Yin and Chen Jing arrived in Chengdu.

古文：黄巢别将陷睦州、婺州。
现代文：黄巢别将攻陷睦州、婺州。
English: Huang Chao will not invade Muzhou and Zhangzhou.

古文：卢携病风不能行，谒告。己亥，始入对，敕勿拜，遣二黄门掖之。
现代文：卢携得中风病不能行走，请假居于私宅养病；已亥，始上朝议政，唐僖宗令他不用下拜，派两个宦官扶掖着他视事。
English: Lu suffered a stroke and couldn't walk, so he took a leave of absence to stay at a private home to recuperate. He had already begun to discuss politics with the previous emperor, Tang Xizong ordered him not to bow down, and sent two eunuchs to support him and take care of him.

古文：携内挟田令孜，外倚高骈，上宠遇甚厚，由是专制朝政，高下在心。
现代文：卢携在内挟恃着宦官田令孜的势力，在外倚靠高骈的军事力量，加上唐僖宗对他极为宠信，所以专制朝政，政事无论高下都出自他的主意。
English: Lu took the power of the eunuch Tian Lingzi with him, and relied on Gao Gan's military strength. In addition, Tang Xizong was extremely fond of him. Therefore, the autocratic government and government affairs, both high and low, came from his mind.

古文：既病，精神不完，事之可否决于亲吏杨温、李修，货赂公行。
现代文：既已病倒，精神不好，政事由他的亲吏杨温、李修裁决，贿赂公然而行。
English: He had already fallen ill and was not in a good state of mind. His relatives Yang Wen and Li Xiu adjudicated political affairs, and bribery was openly practiced.

古文：豆卢彖无他材，专附会携。
现代文：宰相豆卢没有什么才能，专意附会卢携。
English: Prime Minister Doulu has little talent, and is only interested in being affiliated with Lu Zi.

古文：崔沆时有启陈，常为所沮。
现代文：另一宰相崔沆对政事时常有一些建议，常为卢携所阻遏。
English: Another prime minister, Choe Son, often has some suggestions on political affairs, which are often blocked by Roh.

古文：庚子，李琢奏沙陀二千来降。
现代文：庚子，李琢奏告朝廷，称有沙陀族二千人来降。
English: Geng Zi and Li Tuo So sued the imperial court, claiming that two thousand people from the Shado tribe had come to surrender.

古文：琢时将兵万人屯代州，与卢龙节度使李可举、吐谷浑都督赫连鐸共讨沙陀。
现代文：李琢当时统率军队万人驻屯代州，与卢龙节度使李可举、吐谷浑都督赫连铎共同讨伐沙陀。
English: At that time, Li Taku led an army of ten thousand people stationed in Dazhou, and together with Lulong Jiedu, Li Keju, and Hunduk, the governor of Tuyun, jointly fought against Satoru.

古文：李克用遣大将高文集守朔州，自将其众拒可举于雄武军。
现代文：李克用派遣大将高文集据守朔州，自己率军抗拒李可举于雄武军。
English: Li Ke used the dispatch of General Gao Wenshu to defend Shuozhou, and led his own army to resist Li Ke's rise to power.

古文：鐸遣人说文集归国，文集执克用将傅文达，与沙陀酋长李友金、萨葛都督米海万、安庆都督史敬存皆降于琢，开门迎官军。
现代文：赫连铎派遣人游说高文集归附国家，高文集逮捕李克用部将傅文达，与沙陀酋长李友金、萨葛都督米海万、安庆都督史敬存等人均投降于李琢，开城门迎接唐官军。
English: He Lianyu sent people to lobby for Gaowenshu to be annexed to the state, Gaowenshu arrested Li Ke's minister Fu Wenda, and Shato chief Li Youjin, Sagat governor Mihaivan, and Anqing governor Shi Jingcun all surrendered to Li Tuo and opened the city gate to welcome the Tang government army.

古文：友金，克用之族父也。
现代文：李友金是李克用的族父。
English: Li Youjin is the patriarch of Li Kegui.

古文：庚戌，黄巢攻宣州，陷之。
现代文：庚戌，黄巢军进攻宣州，将城攻陷。
English: Geng Xuan and the Yellow Nest Army attacked Xuanzhou and captured the city.

古文：刘汉宏南掠申、光。
现代文：刘汉宏向南攻掠申州、光州。
English: Liu Hanhong raided Shenzhou and Gwangju in the south.

古文：赵宗政之还南诏也，西川节度使崔安潜表以崔澹之说为是，且曰： 南诏小蛮，本云南一郡之地。今遣使与和，彼谓中国为怯，复求尚主，何以拒之！ 
现代文：赵宗政回到南诏时，当时的西川节度使崔安潜上表朝廷，指出崔澹所说的对付南诏蛮人的政策是对的，并且声言： 南诏小蛮，本不过云南一郡之地；今天派遣使者与我朝约和，是他们以为中国怯弱，如果再来求公主，将以何种理由拒绝！ 
English: When Zhao Zongzheng returned to Nanzhao, the then West River Festival made Cui An sneak up to the front of the imperial court, pointing out that the policy of dealing with the barbarians of Nanzhao was right, and saying: Nanzhao is a small barbarian, but it is only a county in Yunnan; sending an envoy to make peace with me today is because they think China is weak, if they come to ask the princess again, what reason will they refuse!

古文：上命宰相议之。
现代文：唐僖宗命令宰相就此事议论。
English: Tang Yanzong ordered the prime minister to discuss the matter.

古文：卢携、豆卢琢上言： 大中之末，府库充实。
现代文：卢携、豆卢说： 大中末年，府库充实。
English: Lu Zhi and Dou Lu said: In the late years of college and junior high school, the prefectural treasury was enriched.

古文：自咸通以来，蛮两陷安南、邕管，一入黔中，四犯西川，征兵运粮，天下疲弊，逾十五年，租赋太半不入京师，三使、内库由兹虚竭。战士死于瘴疠，百姓困为盗贼，致中原榛杞，皆蛮故也。
现代文：而自咸通年以来，南诏蛮军两次攻陷安南、邕管，一次侵入黔中，四次进犯西川，朝廷征兵运粮，天下百姓疲弊至极，已超过十五年，有大半租赋不能输入京师，度支、户部、盐铁三使和禁宫内库由此而空竭，战士由于荒蛮之地的瘴气瘟疫而死亡，百姓由于贫困无告而结伙为盗贼，以致中原地区只剩下榛子杞柳，这都是由于南诏蛮人的缘故。
English: However, since the year of Hamantong, the Nanzhao barbarian army has twice invaded Annan and Shigang, once invaded Shizhong, and four times invaded Xichuan. The imperial court has conscripted soldiers to transport grain. The people of the world are extremely exhausted. It has been more than fifteen years. Most of the rents cannot be imported into Beijing Division. As a result, the treasury, the household department, the three envoys of salt and iron, and the inner treasury of the Forbidden City have been depleted. The soldiers died due to the plague of radon in the wild land. The people, due to poverty, ganged up as thieves without

古文：前岁冬，蛮不为寇，由赵宗政未归。
现代文：前年冬季，南诏蛮人没有侵犯唐境，是由于赵宗政尚未归国。
English: In the winter of the previous year, the Nanzhao barbarians did not invade Tang territory because Zhao Zongzheng had not yet returned to China.

古文：去岁冬，蛮不为寇，由徐云虔复命，蛮尚有冀望。
现代文：去年冬季，南诏蛮人没有侵犯唐境，是由于徐云虔自南诏回朝复命，使南诏蛮人尚存有约和的企望。
English: Last winter, the Nanzhao barbarians did not invade Tang territory, because Xu Yunqian returned from Nanzhao to the North to answer the order, so that the Nanzhao barbarians still have the hope of a peace treaty.

古文：今安南子城为叛卒所据，节度使攻之未下，自馀戍卒，多已自归，邕管客军，又减其半。
现代文：今天安南内城被叛乱的士卒占据，节度使曾衮率军围攻不能克，其余戍卒，大多已擅自归返原籍，邕管军辖下的外来诸道戍兵已减少一半。
English: Today, the inner city of Annan is occupied by insurgent soldiers. Due to the state of emergency, the siege led by Zeng Rong's army cannot be broken. Most of the remaining soldiers have returned to their hometowns without permission. The number of foreign soldiers under the command of the Guan Guan Army has been reduced by half.

古文：冬期且至，倘蛮寇侵轶，何以枝梧！
现代文：冬季就要来临，倘若南诏蛮军入寇侵犯，将如何对付！
English: Winter is coming, if the barbarian army invades from the south, how will they be dealt with!

古文：不若且遣使臣报复，纵未得其称臣奉贡，且不使之怀怨益深，坚决犯边，则可矣。 
现代文：还不如暂且派遣使臣往南诏回报，即使不能使得南诏王向大唐皇帝称臣纳贡，也不会使他们对我大唐王朝怀抱更深的怨恨，而坚持要进犯我边境，若能达到这样的目的，也就可以了。 
English: It would be better to temporarily send envoys to Nanzhao to reciprocate. Even if it cannot make Nanzhao Wang pay tribute to the Great Tang Emperor, it will not make them harbor deeper resentment against my Great Tang Dynasty and insist on invading our border. If such a goal can be achieved, it will be fine.

古文：乃作诏赐陈敬瑄，许其和亲，不称臣，令敬瑄录诏白，并移书与之，仍增赐金帛。
现代文：于是唐僖宗令作诏书赐予西川节度使陈敬，准许与南诏和亲，而不必强求其向唐朝称臣。命令陈敬抄录诏书，并将书派人送往南诏，又增赐黄金玉帛。
English: Therefore, Emperor Xizong of Tang Dynasty issued an imperial edict to grant Chen Jing, an envoy of the Xichuan Festival, permission to make peace with Nanzhao without having to force him to declare his allegiance to the Tang Dynasty. Chen Jing was ordered to copy the imperial edict and send it to Nanzhao, and he was also given a golden gong.

古文：以嗣曹王龟年为宗正少卿充使，以徐去虔为副使，别遣内使，共赍诣南诏。
现代文：任命嗣曹王李龟年为宗正少卿充当使臣，任命徐云虔为副使，另外还派遣宦官中使随同，一道带着书信前往南诏。
English: He appointed Cao Wang's heir, Li Guiming, as the envoy of Zong Zheng Shaoqing, and appointed Xu Yunqian as the deputy envoy. In addition, he also sent the eunuch envoy to Nanzhao with letters.

古文：秋，七月，黄巢自采石渡江，围天长、六合，兵势甚盛。
现代文：秋季，七月，黄巢军从采石渡过长江，围攻天长、六合。兵势相当强大。
English: In the autumn, in July, the Yellow Nest Army crossed the Yangtze River from the quarry and besieged Tianchang and Liuhe. The army was quite strong.

古文：淮南将毕师鐸言于高骈曰： 朝廷倚公为安危，今贼数十万众乘胜长驱，若涉无人之境，不据险要之地以击之，使逾长淮，不可复制，必为中原大患。 
现代文：淮南军将毕师铎向高骈进言： 朝廷把安危倚仗于您，如今贼众数十万乘胜长途驱进，有如进入无人之境，倘若不及时占据险要之地攻击贼军，让他们越过长淮，就再也没有办法制服他们了，必这要成为中原的大患。 
English: The South Huai'an Army sent Bi Shisheng to Gao Wei with the following message: The imperial court relies on you for its safety and security. Now, the bandits are driving hundreds of thousands of people over long distances, as if into no man's land. If you do not occupy the critical position in time to attack the bandits and let them cross the Changhuai River, there will be no way to subdue them. This will surely become a major disaster for the Central Plains.

古文：骈以诸道兵已散，张璘复死，自度力不能制，畏怯不敢出兵，但命诸将严备，自保而已，且上表告急，称： 贼六十馀万屯天长，去臣城无五十里。 
现代文：高骈因诸道援军已遣散，张又战死，自己感到不能制止黄巢北进，畏惧之心加上懦怯使他不敢出兵，只是命令诸将严加戒备，采取自保策略而已，并且上表朝廷告急，声称： 黄巢贼六十余万众屯聚天长，距我城不到五十里。 
English: As reinforcements from all directions had been dispatched and Zhang was killed in battle, Gao Wei felt that he could not stop the Yellow Nest from marching north. Fear and cowardice made him afraid to send troops. He only ordered the generals to be on high alert and adopt a self-protection strategy. He also expressed his anxiety to the imperial court, claiming: The Yellow Nest thieves have gathered more than 600,000 people in Tianchang, less than 50 miles from my city.

古文：先是，卢携谓 骈有文武长才，若悉委以兵柄，黄巢不足平。 
现代文：先前，卢携声言： 高骈有文武大才，如果将兵柄全都委交于他，平定黄巢将不在话下。 
English: Earlier, Lu Jizhe said: Gao Jizhe is a great man of letters and martial arts. If he were to be entrusted with all military affairs, it would be impossible to quell the Yellow Nest.

古文：朝野虽有谓骈不足恃者，然犹庶几望之。
现代文：朝野人士虽然有不少人说高骈不足以依恃，但犹对他抱有一线希望。
English: Although many people in the Asano faction say that Takahata is not good enough, they still have a glimmer of hope for him.

古文：乃骈表至，上下失望，人情大骇。
现代文：当高骈的表文送达朝廷，使朝野上下一片失望，人情震恐。
English: When Gao Yao's petition reached the imperial court, the imperial court was disappointed, and the people were shocked.

古文：诏书责骈散遣诸道兵，致贼乘无备渡江。
现代文：唐僖宗下诏谴责高骈妄自遣散诸道军，致使黄巢贼众乘唐军无备而渡过长江。
English: Emperor Taizong of Tang Dynasty issued an edict condemning Gao Yu's arrogance in dismissing the Taoist armies, which caused the Yellow Nest thieves to cross the Yangtze River with the unprepared Tang army.

古文：骈上表言： 臣奏闻遣归，亦非自专。
现代文：高骈上表辩解说： 我上奏建议遣归诸道军队，不能算是自我专权。
English: Gao Yao said in his defense: My proposal to be transferred to the army of all realms cannot be regarded as self-exclusive.

古文：今臣竭力保卫一方，必能济办。但恐贼迤逦过淮，宜急敕东道将士善为御备。 
现代文：今天我竭尽全力保卫一方，必定是能办到的，只是恐怕贼众连绵曲折渡过淮河，应紧急命令东面诸道将士加强戒备，奋力抵御为是。 
English: Today, I will do my best to defend one side, it must be possible, but I am afraid that the thieves will continue to meander across the Huaihe River. I should urgently order the soldiers in the eastern provinces to strengthen their vigilance and fight hard to resist.

古文：遂称风痹，不复出战。
现代文：于是高骈宣称患风痹症，不再派兵与黄巢作战。
English: As a result, Gao Gan claimed that he was suffering from rheumatism and would no longer send soldiers to fight the Yellow Nest.

古文：诏河南诸道发兵屯溵水，泰宁节度使齐克让屯汝州，以备黄巢。
现代文：唐僖宗下诏命令河南诸道调发军队驻扎在水，泰宁节度使齐克让驻扎在汝州，以防备黄巢。
English: Emperor Tang Xizong issued an edict ordering the armies of the provinces of Henan to be stationed in the water, and the emperor of Tainin issued an edict ordering the armies of the provinces of Qi and Jia to be stationed in Ruzhou to guard against the Yellow Nest.

古文：辛酉，以淄州刺史曹全晸为天平节度使、兼东面副都统。
现代文：辛酉，任命淄州刺史曹全为天平军节度使，兼任东面副都统。
English: Xin Rong appointed Zhang Shizhu Cao Quan as the envoy of the Tianping Army, and also served as the deputy governor of Dongmen.

古文：刘汉宏请降。戊辰，以为宿州刺史。
现代文：刘汉宏向唐朝廷请求投降；戊辰，朝廷任命刘汉宏为宿州刺史。
English: Liu Hanhong asked the Tang court to surrender; in Wu Chen, the court appointed Liu Hanhong as the prefect of Suzhou.

古文：李克用自雄武军引兵还，击高文集于朔州，李可举遣行军司马韩玄绍邀之于药儿岭，大破之，杀七千馀人，李尽忠、程怀信皆死；又败之于雄武军之境，杀万人。
现代文：沙陀李克用自雄武军率领军队回朔州，还击背叛自己的高文集部，唐卢龙节度使李可举派遣行军司马韩玄绍于药儿岭邀击，大破李克用军，杀死七千余人，李尽忠、程怀信也都被杀死，李克用军又在雄武军境内被打败，上万人被杀。
English: Shado Li Ke led the army back to Shuozhou with the Self-Strengthening Armed Forces, and fought back against Gao Wenshu, who betrayed him. Tang Lulong set the stage for Li Ke to send the marching division, Ma Han Xuan Shao, to attack in Yaliling, and defeated Li Ke's army, killing more than seven thousand people. Li Jizhong and Cheng Huaixin were also killed. Li Ke's army was defeated in the territory of the Self-Strengthening Armed Forces, and tens of thousands of people were killed.

古文：李琢、赫连鐸进攻蔚州，李国昌战败，部众皆溃，独与克用及宗族北入达靼。
现代文：李琢、赫连铎率军进攻蔚州，沙陀李国昌被击败，其部众全部溃散，只身与李克用及其宗族向北逃入鞑靼部落。
English: Li Tuo and Hereng Yao led an army to attack Ulshu. The satrapy of Li Guochang was defeated, and all of its members were dispersed. Li Keyan and his family fled north to the Tatar tribe.

古文：诏以鐸为云州刺史、大同军防御使，吐谷浑白义成为蔚州刺史，萨葛米海万为朔州刺史，加李可举兼侍中。
现代文：唐僖宗下诏任命赫连铎为云州刺史、大同军防御使；吐谷浑人白义成为蔚州刺史；萨葛人米海万为朔州刺史；又加李可举官兼侍中。
English: Emperor Tang Xizong issued an edict appointing Hereng Yao as the governor of Yunnan Province and the defense envoy of the Datong Army; Bai Yi, a native of Tuyun, as the governor of Ulsan Province; Mai Hai Wan, a native of Sagat, as the governor of Shuozhou Province; and Li Ke as an officer and a chamberlain.

古文：达靼本靺羯之别部也，居于阴山。后数月，赫连鐸阴赂达靼，使取李国昌父子，李克用知之。时与其豪帅游猎，置马鞭、木叶或悬针，射之无不中，豪帅心服。
现代文：鞑靼本是族的别部，居住阴山一带，以后数月，赫连铎暗中贿赂鞑靼，让他们捕送李国昌父子，李克用知道其中阴谋，经常与鞑靼豪帅出游巡猎，将马鞭、木叶或悬针放在远处当靶子，没有一次不中靶心，使鞑靼豪帅心服。
English: The Tartars were originally a different part of the tribe, living in the area of the Yin Mountains. Over the next few months, Helian secretly bribed the Tartars to let them capture Li Guochang and his son. Li Ke used to know the conspiracy, often went on a hunting trip with the Tartar grand marshal, and placed a horse whip, a leaf or a needle in the distance as a target. He never missed the bull's-eye, which made the Tartar grand marshal satisfied.

古文：又置酒与饮，酒酣，克用言曰： 吾得罪天子，愿效忠而不得。今闻黄巢北来，必为中原患，一旦天子若赦吾罪，得与公辈南向共立大功，不亦快乎！
现代文：又设酒宴与鞑靼豪帅对饮，喝到兴头上，李克用说： 我得罪了大唐天子，愿为唐效忠而没有门路，如今听说黄巢大军北进，必定成为中原的大患，一旦大唐天子要赦免我的罪过，就将会同你们一起南下，共立大功，不是也很痛快吗！
English: He also held a wine banquet with the Tatar grand marshal, and drank until he was merry, and Li Kegui said: I have offended the Great Tang Emperor, and I am willing to be loyal to Tang, but there is no way out. Now I have heard that the Yellow Nest army is advancing north, and it will certainly become a big problem in the Central Plains. Once the Great Tang Emperor wants to forgive my sins, he will go south with you and make great achievements together. Isn't it also very pleasant?

古文：人生几何，谁能老死沙碛邪！ 
现代文：人生并不长久，谁愿意老死于沙碛之中！ 
English: Life is not long, who wants to die in the sand all the time!

古文：达靼知无留意，乃止。八月，甲午，以前西川节度使崔安潜为太子宾客、分司。
现代文：鞑靼听说这些话后，知道李克用并无留在鞑靼的意思，于是不再接受赫连铎的贿赂以谋害李克用等。八月，甲午，朝廷任命前川节度使崔安为太子宾客，分司东都充闲职。
English: After hearing these words, the Tartars knew that Li Kegui had no intention of staying in Tartary, so they no longer accepted the bribe from Khelian to assassinate Li Kegui, etc. In the afternoon of August 1, the imperial court appointed Maekawa Seto to make Cui An the prince's guest, and the division chiefs were all idle.

古文：九月，东都奏： 汝州所募军李光庭等五百人自代州还，过东都，烧安喜门，焚掠市肆，由长夏门去。 
现代文：九月，东都上表奏告朝廷： 汝州所招募的军队李光庭百人从代州还朝，路过东都时，烧安喜门进入洛阳坊市，在坊市大肆焚烧抢劫，由长夏门出走。 
English: In September, Dongdu issued a report to the imperial court: Li Guangting's hundred-man army recruited by Ruzhou came from Daizhou, and when passing Dongdu, they burned Anxi Gate and entered Luoyangfang City. They burned and looted extensively in Fang and left from Changxia Gate.

古文：黄巢众号十五万，曹全晸以其众六千与之战，颇有杀获。以众寡不敌，退屯泗上，以俟诸军至，并力击之。而高骈竟不之救，贼遂击全晸，破之。
现代文：曹巢军号称十五万，唐将曹全率所部兵六千人与黄巢军接战，杀获不少人，但由于寡不敌众，退兵屯于泗州，以等待诸道援军的到来，并合力围剿；但高骈居然不出兵救援，黄巢派兵攻击曹全军，将其击败。
English: Cao Chao's army was reputed to be 150,000 strong. The Tang sent Cao Quan and his 6,000 soldiers to fight against the Yellow Nest army, and many were killed. However, as they were outnumbered, they withdrew to Bozhou to await the arrival of reinforcements from all directions and to jointly encircle the capital. However, Gao Pi did not come to the rescue, and the Yellow Nest sent soldiers to attack Cao Quan's army and defeat it.

古文：徐州遣兵三千赴溵水，过许昌。
现代文：徐州派遣三千兵赴水，经过许昌。
English: Xuzhou sent three thousand soldiers to the water, passing through Xuchang.

古文：徐卒素名凶悖，节度使薛能，自谓前镇彭城，有恩信于徐人，馆之球场。
现代文：徐州士卒一惯有凶狠的名声。节度使薛能自称以前曾镇守彭城，对徐州人有恩信，于是将士兵安排在场宿营。
English: Xuzhou's officers and men had a reputation for being fierce. This made Xue Neng boast that he had once guarded Pengcheng, and that he was grateful to the people of Xuzhou, so he arranged for the soldiers to camp there.

古文：及暮，徐卒大噪，能登子城楼问之，对以供备疏阙，慰劳久之，方定。
现代文：至入夜之时，徐州士卒大声喧噪，薛能登上内城楼问讯，徐州士卒回答说宿地设备太差，供应缺少，薛能慰劳许久，众情才安定。
English: At nightfall, the Xuzhou officers made a loud noise. Xue Neng boarded the inner city tower to inquire. The Xuzhou officers replied that the lodging facilities were too poor and the supply was lacking. Xue Neng consoled the labor for a long time, and the general mood was stable.

古文：许人大惧。
现代文：许州人闻知后惊恐万状。
English: After hearing the news, the people of Huzhou were terrified.

古文：时忠武亦遣大将周岌诣溵水，行未远，闻之，夜，引兵还，比明，入城，袭击徐卒，尽杀之。且怨能之厚徐卒也，遂逐之。
现代文：当时忠武军也派遣大将周岌率兵往水，未走多远，闻知城中徐州士卒闹事，引兵还，到第二天天亮，忠武军入许州城袭击徐州军队，将徐州兵全部杀死；又怨薛能待徐州兵卒太厚，将薛能驱逐。
English: At that time, the Zhongwu army also dispatched General Zhou Rui to lead the soldiers to the water, but they did not go far. They heard that there was a disturbance among the Xuzhou soldiers and officers in the city, and they also led the soldiers. By the next morning, the Zhongwu army entered the Xuzhou city to attack the Xuzhou army and killed all the Xuzhou soldiers; they also complained that Xue Neng waited for the Xuzhou soldiers and officers too long, and expelled Xue Neng.

古文：能将奔襄阳，乱兵追杀之，并其家。
现代文：薛能将要逃奔襄阳，乱兵将他追杀，并杀其全家。
English: Xue Neng was about to flee to Xiangyang, but the soldiers chased him down and killed his entire family.

古文：岌自称留后。
现代文：于是周岌自称留后。
English: As a result, Zhou pretended to stay behind.

古文：汝、郑把截制置使齐克让恐为岌所袭，引兵还兗州，于是，诸道屯溵水者皆散。
现代文：唐汝、郑把截制置使齐克让恐怕遭到周岌袭击，带着军队归还兖州，屯于水的诸道军队也全部散去。
English: Tang Ru, Zheng put the interception system in place, so that Zhi Ke Jang was afraid of being attacked by Zhou Du, and returned to Zhangzhou with the army. All the armies stationed in the water also dispersed.

古文：黄巢遂悉众渡淮，所过不虏掠，惟取丁壮以益兵。
现代文：黄巢于是乘机率全部军队渡过淮河，所过之处不虏不掠，只是收纳丁壮以扩充兵员。
English: Huang Chao then took advantage of the opportunity to cross the Huai River with his entire army. He did not loot or plunder the places he passed, but only received Ding Zhuang to expand the number of soldiers.

古文：先是征振武节度使吴师泰为左金吾大将军，以诸葛爽代之。
现代文：先前，唐僖宗征振武节度使吴师泰为左金吾大将军，以诸葛爽代吴师泰任振武军节度使。
English: Previously, Wu Shitai was appointed as the general of Zuo Kingu, and Zhuge Shuo as the envoy of Wu Shitai to Zhenwu.

古文：师泰见朝廷多故，使军民上表留己。
现代文：吴师泰看到唐朝朝廷多有变故，私下让军民上表请留自己。
English: Wu Shitai saw that there were many changes in the Tang Dynasty court, and privately asked the military and the people to please stay away.

古文：冬，十月，复以师泰为振武节度使，以爽为夏绥节度使。
现代文：冬季，十月，理任吴师泰为振武节度使，任诸葛爽为夏绥节度使。
English: In winter, in October, Wu Shitai was appointed as the envoy of the Zhenwu Festival, and Zhuge Shuang was appointed as the envoy of the Xiaqi Festival.

古文：黄巢陷申州，遂入颍、宋、徐、兗之境，所至吏民逃溃。
现代文：黄巢率军攻陷申州，于是进入颍州、宋州、徐州、兖州境内，所到之处，吏民均逃跑溃散。
English: Huang Chao led the army to invade Shenzhou, and then entered the territory of Zhangzhou, Songzhou, Xuzhou and Zhangzhou. Wherever they went, the officials and the people fled and dispersed.

古文：群盗陷澧州，杀刺史李询、判官皇甫镇。
现代文：一群盗贼攻陷澧州，将刺史李询、判官皇甫镇杀死。
English: A group of thieves invaded Zhangzhou and killed the judge Wangfuzhen and the judge Li Xun.

古文：镇举进士二十三上，不中第，询辟之。
现代文：皇甫镇参加科举进士科考试达二十三次，都未中举，被李询召辟入幕府。
English: Hwangfu Town took part in the imperial examination for admission to the priesthood for the 23rd time, but did not make it to the second round, and was summoned to the shogunate by Li Xun.

古文：贼至，城陷，镇走，问人曰： 使君免乎？ 
现代文：黄巢军攻陷州城，皇甫镇逃出城，向出城者询问： 李使君得出城否？ 
English: Huang Chao's army captured the state capital, and Wangfuzhen fled the city, asking those who left the city: Did Li Qijun leave the city?

古文：曰： 贼执之矣。 
现代文：有人告诉说： 刺史李询已被贼捉住。 
English: One person said: "The thief has already caught the thief.

古文：镇曰： 吾受知若此，去将何之！ 
现代文：皇甫镇说： 我受李询知遇大恩，出城又能往何处去！ 
English: Wangfuzhen said: I have been greatly blessed by Li Yingzhi, where can I go after I leave the city?

古文：遂还诣贼，竟与同死。
现代文：于是回到城中，竟与李询同死。
English: So he returned to the city and died together with Li Xun.

