古文：柳浑，字夷旷，襄州人，其先自河东徙焉。
现代文：柳浑的字叫夷旷，是襄州人，他的祖先从河东搬来这里。
English: Liu Hun's character is called Yiguang. He is from Xiangzhou, and his ancestors moved here from Hedong.

古文：六代祖惔，梁仆射。
现代文：他的六代祖柳忄炎，是梁朝的仆射。
English: His sixth-generation ancestor, Liu Xuanyan, was a pupil of the Liang Dynasty.

古文：浑少孤，父庆休，官至渤海丞，而志学栖贫。
现代文：柳浑年少时成了孤儿，他的父亲是柳庆休，官当到渤海县县丞，柳浑安于贫穷立志求学。
English: When Liu Hun was young, he became an orphan. His father, Liu Qingxiu, was a government official who served as the county magistrate of Bohai County. Despite his poverty, Liu Hun An was determined to study.

古文：天宝初，举进士，补单父尉。
现代文：天宝初年，他考中了进士，被任命为单父县县尉。
English: In the first year of Tianbao, he passed the entrance examination and was appointed as a single father county officer.

古文：至德中，为江西采访使皇甫侁判官，累除衢州司马。
现代文：至德年间，他任江南西道采访使皇甫亻先的判官，多次升官后任衢州司马。
English: During his stay in Germany, he served as a judge of the West Jiangnan Province, and was promoted several times to the post of Zhangzhou Sima.

古文：未至，召拜监察御史。
现代文：他还没到任，又被任命为监察御史。
English: He had not yet taken up his post when he was appointed inspector general of history.

古文：台中执法之地，动限仪矩，浑性放，不甚检束，僚长拘局，忿其疏纵。
现代文：御史台是执行法规的部门，行动都受规矩礼仪限制，柳浑生性放纵旷达，不大检点注意，上司拘泥规定，讨厌他的放纵。
English: The Office of the Historian is a department that enforces laws and regulations. All actions are restricted by rules and etiquette. Liu Hun Sheng's sexual indulgence is extensive, and he does not pay much attention to rules and regulations. His boss is a stickler for rules and regulations and hates his indulgence.

古文：浑不乐，乞外任，执政惜其才，奏为左补阙。
现代文：柳浑不高兴，请求到京城外任职，当权的人爱惜他的才干，任命他任左补阙。
English: Liu Hun was not happy and asked to work outside the capital. The people in power cherished his talent and appointed him to the post of Zuo Zuo.

古文：明年，除殿中侍御史，知江西租庸院事。
现代文：第二年，升任殿中侍御史，知江南西道租庸院事。
English: In the following year, he was promoted to the position of palace attendant to the Emperor, and to the position of academician of the Zenyang Academy of the Southwestern Jiangsu Province.

古文：大历初，魏少游镇江西，奏署判官，累授检校司封郎中。
现代文：大历初年，魏少游镇守江南西道，任命他为判官，多次升官后任检校司封郎中。
English: In the first year of the Great Calendar, Wei Shaoyou, the town guard of the South West Road of the Yangtze River, appointed him as a judge, and he was promoted several times, and then he was appointed as the inspector of the school.

古文：州理有开元寺僧与徒夜饮，醉而延火，归罪于守门瘖奴，军候亦受财，同上其状，少游信焉。
现代文：辖州判案中有开元寺僧人和徒弟夜晚喝酒，喝醉后失了火，把责任推给守门的哑巴仆人，军中执法官也接受了贿赂，按原判上报，魏少游相信了。
English: In the case of Guizhou, the monks and apprentices of Kaiyuan Temple drank alcohol at night, got drunk and lost the fire, and put the responsibility on the dumb servant who guarded the door. The military judge also accepted the bribe and reported according to the original judgment. Wei Shaoyou believed it.

古文：人知奴冤，莫肯言。
现代文：人们都知道仆人冤枉，但没人肯说。
English: Everyone knew that the servant had been wronged, but no one would say why.

古文：浑与崔祐甫遽入白，少游惊问，醉僧首伏。
现代文：柳浑和崔甫知道后急忙到官府报告，魏少游吃惊地立即审讯，喝醉酒的僧人服罪了。
English: After Liu Hun and Cui Fu found out, they hurried to the government office to report, Wei Shao You was surprised and immediately interrogated, and the drunken monk confessed.

古文：既而谢曰： 微二君子，几成老夫暗劣矣。 
现代文：事后魏少游感谢道： 没有二位正直的人，差点让人说我糊涂昏庸。 
English: Afterwards, Wei Shaoyou thanked: "There are no two honest people, I almost let people say that I am confused and dull.

古文：自此以公正闻。
现代文：他从这以后因公正出了名。
English: He has since become known for his even-handedness.

古文：及路嗣恭领镇，复以为都团练副使。
现代文：到路嗣恭接任，又任命他为都团练副使。
English: He was succeeded by Lu Zhigong, who also appointed him as the deputy envoy of the capital's regimental drill.

古文：十二年，拜袁州刺史。
现代文：大历十二年，他被任命为袁州刺史。
English: In the 12th year of the lunar calendar, he was appointed as the chief historian of Yuanzhou.

古文：居二年，崔祐甫入相，荐为谏议大夫、浙江东西黜陟使，累迁尚书左丞。
现代文：过了两年，崔甫进京任宰相，推荐他任谏议大夫，浙东、西道黜陟使。多次升官后任尚书左丞。
English: Two years later, Cui Fu entered Beijing to serve as prime minister, recommending him to serve as the secretary of the Central Military Commission, and as the envoy to the eastern and western provinces of Zhejiang. He was promoted several times and later served as Shang Shuzhong.

古文：及驾在奉天，微服徒行，遁终南山谷，逾旬方达行在。
现代文：到皇帝逃到奉天，他穿便服步行，从终南山谷逃出叛军手掌，走了十多天才逃到皇帝驻地。
English: When the emperor fled to Mukden, he put on civilian clothes and walked. He escaped from the rebels' clutches from the southern valley and walked for more than ten days to escape to the emperor's residence.

古文：扈从至梁州，改左散骑常侍。
现代文：后随从皇帝到了梁州，改任左散骑常侍。
English: Later, he followed the emperor to Liangzhou and was appointed as the left horseman.

古文：初，浑之归行在，贼泚籍其名甚，愿以致之，犹疑匿在闾里，乃加宰相。
现代文：先前，柳浑逃往皇帝驻地时，朱氵此因他名望甚高，想拉拢他，还怀疑他藏在民间，就加封他为宰相。
English: Previously, when Liu Hun fled to the emperor's residence, Zhu Xi, because of his high reputation, wanted to woo him, and suspected that he was hiding among the people, so he added him as prime minister.

古文：及克复，浑尚名载，乃上言： 顷为狂贼点秽，臣实耻称旧名，矧字或带戈，时当偃武，请改名浑。 
现代文：到收复京城后，柳浑还叫旧名柳载，他于是上奏说： 先前我的名字被叛贼污蔑，我不愿再叫过去的名字，况且过去的名字字形中有戈字，现在息兵罢战，请求改叫柳浑。 
English: After the recapture of the capital, Liu Hun was still called by his old name, Liu Zai. He then said in a speech: Previously, my name was slandered by traitors. I don't want to be called by my old name anymore. Moreover, my old name had the Chinese character for "go" in its glyph. Now the soldiers are on strike and asking to be called Liu Hun.

古文：贞元二年，拜兵部侍郎，封宜城县伯。
现代文：贞元二年，他被任命为兵部侍郎，封为宜城县伯爵。
English: In the second year of the Zhengyuan era, he was appointed as an attendant of the military department and given the title of Count of Yicheng County.

古文：三年正月，加同平章事，仍判门下省。
现代文：贞元三年正月，升任同中书门下平章事，又兼管门下省。
English: In the first month of the third year of the Zhengyuan era, he was promoted to the position of the second secretary of the middle school, and he was also in charge of the next province.

古文：时上命玉工为带，坠坏一銙，乃私市以补；及献，上指曰： 此何不相类？ 
现代文：当时皇帝令琢玉的工匠制作玉带，失手摔碎了一块扣板，工匠于是偷偷买了一块补上；到献上玉带时，皇帝指着那块说： 这块怎么不一样？ 
English: At that time, the emperor ordered the craftsman who carved the jade to make a jade belt. He accidentally broke a buckle plate, so the craftsman secretly bought a patch; when presenting the jade belt, the emperor pointed to the piece and said: How is this piece different?

古文：工人伏罪，上命决死。
现代文：玉工承认了过错，皇帝命将他处死。
English: The jeweler admitted his fault, and the emperor ordered him to be put to death.

古文：诏至中书，浑执曰： 陛下若便杀则已，若下有司，即须议谳。
现代文：诏命发到中书省，柳浑坚持说： 皇上如当时杀死了就算了，如交给有关部门，就应按法律审判。
English: The imperial edict was sent to the Ministry of Literature, and Liu Hun insisted: If the emperor was killed at that time, it was all right, but if he was handed over to the relevant departments, he should be tried according to the law.

古文：且方春行刑，容臣条奏定罪。 
现代文：况且春天不能执行死刑，请让我按法律定罪。 
English: Besides, the death penalty cannot be carried out in the spring, so please let me be convicted according to the law.

古文：以误伤乘舆器服，杖六十，余工释放，诏从之。
现代文：他按失误损坏皇帝车辆器具服饰罪，将过失者打了六十大板，其余的玉工无罪放释，皇帝下诏同意了。
English: According to the crime of damaging the emperor's vehicle, equipment and clothing by mistake, he slapped the culprits with sixty-ten boards, and released the rest of the jade workers without charge. The emperor agreed.

古文：复奏： 故尚书左丞田季羔，公忠正直，先朝名臣。
现代文：他又上奏说： 旧任尚书左丞田季羔，忠诚耿直，是先帝朝中有名的臣子。
English: He went on to say, "Tan Ji Lam, the former left-hand man of Shangshu, is loyal and upright, and was a famous courtier in the previous emperor's court.

古文：其祖、父皆以孝行旌表门闾，京城隋朝旧第，季羔一家而已。
现代文：他的祖父、父亲都因行孝被赐匾额立牌坊，京城中隋朝旧时的宅院，只剩下田季羔这一处了。
English: His grandfather and father were both given the honor of erecting a monument for their filial piety. Of the old mansions of the Sui and Qing dynasties in Beijing, only this one, Tian Jizhe, remains.

古文：今被堂侄伯强进状，请货宅召市人马，以讨吐蕃。
现代文：现在他的侄儿田伯强呈上奏章，请求卖掉宅院召募军队，来讨伐吐蕃。
English: Now his nephew, Tian Boqiang, has submitted a petition to sell the house and recruit an army to fight the Tuyu.

古文：一开此门，恐滋不逞。
现代文：有了这个先例，恐怕会助长不法之徒。
English: With this precedent, I'm afraid it will encourage the wrongdoers.

古文：讨贼自有国计，岂资侥幸之徒？
现代文：讨伐敌人自有国家安排，哪里能靠图侥幸的人呢？
English: Where is the man who can rely on luck to defeat the enemy's own national arrangements?

古文：且毁弃义门，亏损风教，望少责罚，亦可惩劝。 
现代文：况且他败坏了祖传家风，有伤仁义，希望略加惩罚，以表劝诫。 
English: Moreover, he has corrupted the ancestral family style, has hurt benevolence and righteousness, and hopes to be punished slightly as a form of admonition.

古文：上可其奏。
现代文：皇帝同意了他的意见。
English: The emperor approved his music.

古文：先时，韩滉自浙西入觐，朝廷委政待之，至于调兵食，笼盐铁，勾官吏赃罚，锄豪强兼并，上悉仗焉。
现代文：此前，韩从浙西道进京朝拜，皇帝将主要职务留给他，以至调动军队、粮草，专卖盐铁，督察处罚官吏，抑制兼并土地的恶霸，皇帝都依靠他。
English: Previously, Han went to Beijing from West Zhejiang Province to pay homage, and the emperor left the main duties to him, even mobilizing the army, grain and grass, monopolizing salt and iron, inspecting and punishing officials, and restraining the bully of land annexation. The emperor relied on him.

古文：每奏事，或日旰，他相充位而已，公卿救过不能暇，无敢枝梧者。
现代文：每次上奏议事，有时直到天黑，其他的宰相只是陪衬罢了，大臣们因挽救施政过失而终日忙乱，但没人敢提出异议。
English: Every time there is a debate, sometimes until nightfall, the other chancellors are mere sideshows, the ministers scramble all day to save the day, but no one dares to raise objections.

古文：浑虽滉所引，心恶其专政，正色让之曰： 先相公以狷察为相，不满岁而罢；今相公搒吏于省中至死，且非刑人之地，奈何蹈前非而又甚焉？
现代文：柳浑虽然是韩推荐的，但心里讨厌他专断政务，就严肃地责备他说： 您的先任宰相由于苛察，不到一年就被罢免了；现在您又在官府中对官吏施刑以至打死了人，况且宰相官府不是用刑的地方，您为什么重蹈覆辙又变本加厉呢？
English: Although he was recommended by Han, Liu Hun disliked his arbitrary conduct of government affairs, and seriously reproached him, saying: Your previous prime minister was removed from office less than a year ago due to his harshness; now you are punishing officials in the government office and have even killed people. Moreover, the prime minister's office is not a place for punishment. Why are you repeating the same mistake and making it worse?

古文：专立威福，岂尊主卑臣之礼！ 
现代文：耍威风图享受，难道合于尊奉皇帝抑制臣下的礼制吗！ 
English: Isn't it in accordance with the etiquette of honoring the emperor and restraining his vassals to enjoy the pomp and circumstance?

古文：滉感悟愧悔，为霁威焉。
现代文：韩因此醒悟后悔，收敛了威风。
English: As a result, Han woke up and regretted it, and curbed his arrogance.

古文：及白志贞除浙西观察使，浑奏曰： 志贞一末吏憸人，纵称廉谨，不当顿居重职。 
现代文：到白志贞被任命为浙西道观察使，柳浑上奏说： 白志贞是一个小官奸臣，即使被认为廉洁谨慎也不应一下子担任重要职务。 
English: When Bai Zhizhen was appointed as the Western Zhejiang Provincial Supervisor, Liu Hun said: Bai Zhizhen is a minor official and a traitor, even if he is considered to be honest and prudent, he should not suddenly hold an important position.

古文：适遇浑以疾称告，即日诏下。
现代文：正好碰到柳浑因病请假，当天诏书就交付执行了。
English: It just so happened that Liu Hun took a leave of absence due to illness, and the edict was delivered and implemented the same day.

古文：疾间，因乞骸骨，优诏不许。
现代文：他病好后，就请求辞职，皇帝特下诏不同意。
English: After he recovered from his illness, he asked to resign, but the emperor did not agree.

古文：其判门下，主吏白当过官，浑愀然曰： 列官分职，复更挠之，非礼法也。
现代文：他主持门下省时，主管官吏说应该审定吏、兵部拟任命的六品以下官员，柳浑脸上露出同情的神色说： 各部门分管事务，又去更换他们的决定，这不合礼制法律。
English: When he presided over his subordinate ministry, the responsible official said that the officials below the rank of six who were to be appointed by the Ministry of Military Affairs should be examined and approved, and Liu Hun said with a sympathetic look on his face: It is not in accordance with the rules of etiquette to change the decisions of various departments in charge of affairs.

古文：千里辞家，以干微禄，邑主辞办，岂虑无能，矧旌善进贤，事不在此。 
现代文：官员们为得到这一点俸禄，离家千里，主持一个小地方的事务，难道担心办不好吗？况且奖赏善政贤才，不靠这个。 
English: To get this kind of salary, officials travel thousands of miles from home to preside over the affairs of a small place. Aren't they worried that they won't be able to do a good job? Moreover, rewarding good governance is not dependent on this.

古文：故其年注拟，无退量者。
现代文：因此这年审定任命的官员，没有做改变。
English: As a result, no changes have been made to the officers appointed this year.

古文：及浑瑊与吐蕃会盟之日，上御便殿谓宰相曰： 和戎息师，国之大计，今日将士与卿同欢。 
现代文：到浑王咸和吐蕃签订盟约的那天，皇帝在便殿对宰相们说： 和吐蕃和好停止战争，是国家的大政方针，今天兵将们要和你们一起高兴了。 
English: On the day of the signing of the treaty between Hun Wang Xian and Tubo, the emperor said to the prime ministers in the hall: To stop the war by making peace with Tubo is the country's major policy. Today, the soldiers will be happy with you.

古文：马燧前贺曰：今之一盟，百年内更无蕃寇。 
现代文：马燧上前祝贺说： 现在一经结盟，一百年以内就没有吐蕃入侵了。 
English: "Now that we have formed an alliance, there will be no invasion by Tibetans in the next 100 years," he said.

古文：浑曰： 五帝无诰誓之盟，皆在季末。
现代文：柳浑说： 五帝时没有结盟之事，结盟都在他们的末年。
English: Liu Hun said: There was no alliance between the five emperors, and all alliances were made in their later years.

古文：今盛明之代，岂又行于夷狄！
现代文：现在是明主盛世，怎么却和异族结盟！
English: Now is the golden age of the Ming Dynasty, how can they ally with a foreign nation!

古文：人面兽心，难以信结，今日盟约，臣窃忧之。 
现代文：异族外形是人但心如禽兽，很难守信用，今天的盟誓，我很担心。 
English: The alien looks like a human but has the heart of a beast. It's hard to keep a promise. I'm worried about today's oath.

古文：李晟继言曰： 臣生长边城，知蕃戎心，今日之事，诚如浑言。 
现代文：李晟接着说： 我生长在边境，了解吐蕃的用心，今天的盟誓，确实像柳浑说的那样。 
English: Li Yan continued, "I grew up on the border and understand the intentions of the Tibetans. Today's oath is indeed as Liu Hunma said.

古文：上变色曰： 柳浑书生，未达边事；大臣智略，果亦有斯言乎！ 
现代文：皇帝显出生气的脸色说： 柳浑是读书人，不懂得边境的情况；以您的智慧谋略，怎么也说出这样的话！ 
English: The emperor looked angry and said, "Ryuhun is a reader and does not understand the situation at the border. With your wisdom and strategy, how can you say such a thing!

古文：皆顿首俯伏，遽令归中书。
现代文：他俩于是跪拜谢罪，皇帝立刻命令他们回中书省。
English: Both of them then knelt down to confess their sins, and the emperor immediately ordered them to return to the Chinese Literature Department.

古文：其夜三更，邠宁节度韩游瑰飞驿叩苑门，奏盟会不成，将校覆没，兵临近镇，上惊叹，即递其表以示浑。
现代文：这天晚上三更时分，宁节度韩腢派人乘驿马飞速到宫门报告，说盟誓没成功，参盟官兵都没回来，吐蕃兵已攻到近郊的军营，皇帝吃惊叹服，立即将报告转交给柳浑看。
English: At three o'clock in the evening of this day, the Ning Festival Han Yu sent a person to report to the palace gate on a fast horse, saying that the oath was not successful, the officers and soldiers who joined the alliance did not return, and the Tu Wei soldiers had attacked the military camp in the suburbs. The emperor was amazed and immediately transferred the report to Liu Hun.

古文：诘旦，临轩慰勉浑曰： 卿文儒之士，而万里知军戎之情。 
现代文：第二天一早，皇帝到朝堂前勉励柳浑说： 您是文人，却能在千里之外知道军队情况。 
English: The next morning, the emperor went to the front of the imperial court to encourage Liu Hun and said: You are a man of letters, but you can know the military situation thousands of miles away.

古文：自此骤加礼异。
现代文：从此更加敬重他了。
English: I respect him even more now.

古文：时张延赏与浑同列，延赏怙权矜己，而嫉浑守正，俾其所厚谓浑曰： 相公旧德，但节言于庙堂，则重位可久。 。
现代文：当时张延赏与柳浑同为宰相，他仗权显示才能，讨厌柳浑主持正义，派他的亲信对柳浑说： 您是朝廷老臣，只要在朝中不要多说话，那么任高官就可以长久。 
English: At that time, Zhang Yanbo and Liu Hun were both prime ministers. He had the power to show his talent, and hated Liu Hun to preside over justice. He sent his cronies to say to Liu Hun: You are an old court official, as long as you don't talk too much in the court, then you can be a high-ranking official for a long time.

古文：浑曰： 为吾谢张相公，柳浑头可断，而舌不可禁也。 
现代文：柳浑说： 为我向张丞相道歉，我的头可以砍掉，但舌头不能受限制。 
English: Liu Hun said, "I apologize to Minister Zhang, my head can be cut off, but my tongue cannot be restricted.

古文：自是为其所挤，寻除常侍，罢知政事。
现代文：从此被他排挤，不久被任命为常侍官，罢免了宰相职务。
English: From then on, he was ousted by him, and was soon appointed as a regular attendant, and dismissed from the post of prime minister.

古文：贞元五年二月，以疾终，年七十五。
现代文：贞元五年二月，他因病去世，享年七十五岁。
English: In February of the fifth year of the Zhengyuan era, he died of illness at the age of seventy-five.

古文：有文集十卷。
现代文：他撰有文集十卷。
English: He has written ten volumes of anthologies.

古文：浑母兄识，笃意文章，有重名于开元、天宝间，与萧颖士、元德秀、刘迅相亚。
现代文：柳浑母亲的哥哥识，有志于文章写作，在开元、天宝年间很出名，和萧颖士、元德秀、刘迅齐名。
English: Liu Hun's mother's elder brother Zhi, who was interested in writing articles, was very famous in the years of the founding of the Yuan Dynasty and the Tianbao Dynasty, and was as famous as Xiao Yingshi, Yuan Dexiu, and Liu Xun.

古文：其练理创端往往诣极，当时作者，咸伏其简拔，而趣尚辨博。
现代文：他的文章练达、条理分明又有创新，往往到了极高的境界，当时写文章的人，都佩服他的文章简练高雅，并又立意明晰雄浑。
English: His articles are well-rehearsed, well-organized and innovative, often to a very high level. People who wrote articles at that time all admired his articles for their conciseness and elegance, as well as their clarity and strength.

古文：浑亦善为文，然趋时向功，非沉思之所及。
现代文：柳浑也善于写文章，但追随时尚以求功业，赶不上深思作者的作品。
English: Liu Hun is also good at writing articles, but he is still pursuing his career and can't keep up with the author's works.

古文：浑警辩，好谐谑放达，与人交，豁然无隐。
现代文：柳浑精明善辩，喜欢诙谐幽默和随意旷达，和人交往，直爽没有隐瞒。
English: Yanagihun is a shrewd debater, likes wit and humor and a free-wheeling attitude, mingles with people, and is forthright and open.

古文：性节俭，不治产业，官至丞相，假宅而居。
现代文：生性节约俭朴，不置家产，官当到宰相，还借房子住着。
English: They are thrifty and frugal by nature, do not own any property, have served as prime minister, and still live in borrowed houses.

古文：罢相数日，则命亲族寻胜，宴醉方归，陶陶然忘其黜免。
现代文：被罢免宰相后几天，就令亲戚一起去寻访名胜，喝醉后才回来，高高兴兴忘记自己被罢免了。
English: A few days after he was ousted as prime minister, he ordered his relatives to go sightseeing, only to return drunk, happily forgetting that he had been ousted.

古文：时李勉、卢翰皆退罢居第，相谓曰： 吾辈方柳宜城，悉为拘俗之人也。 
现代文：当时李勉、卢翰都因退职罢免呆在家里，互相说： 我们和柳浑比，都是有些俗气的人。 
English: At that time, both Li Tian and Lu Han stayed at home due to their dismissal and said to each other: We and Liu Hunbi are somewhat vulgar people.

