古文：凡治国之道，必先富民。民富则易治也，民贫则难治也。
现代文：大凡治国的道理，一定要先使百姓富裕，百姓富裕就容易治理，百姓贫穷就难以治理。
English: According to the great principle of governing the country, we must first make the people rich. If the people are rich, it is easy to govern, but if the people are poor, it is difficult to govern.

古文：奚以知其然也？
现代文：何以知其然？
English: How can you be so sure?

古文：民富则安乡重家，安乡重家则敬上畏罪，敬上畏罪则易治也。
现代文：百姓富裕就安于乡居而爱惜家园，安乡爱家就恭敬君上而畏惧刑罪，敬上畏罪就容易治理了。
English: If the people are rich, they will live in the countryside and cherish their homes. If they live in the countryside and love their homes, they will respect their lords and fear criminal punishment. If they respect and fear criminal punishment, it will be easy to govern.

古文：民贫则危乡轻家，危乡轻家则敢凌上犯禁，凌上犯禁则难治也。
现代文：百姓贫穷就不安于乡居而轻视家园，不安于乡居而轻家就敢于对抗君上而违犯禁令，抗上犯禁就难以治理了。
English: If the people are poor, they will be uneasy about living in the countryside and despise their homes. If they are uneasy about living in the countryside and despise their homes, they will dare to fight against the ruler and violate the ban. If they resist and violate the ban, it will be difficult to govern.

古文：故治国常富，而乱国常贫。
现代文：所以，治理得好的国家往往是富的，乱国必然是穷的。
English: Therefore, well-governed countries tend to be rich, and chaotic countries are inevitably poor.

古文：是以善为国者，必先富民，然后治之。
现代文：因此，善于主持国家的君主，一定要先使百姓富裕起来，然后再加以治理。
English: Therefore, a monarch who is good at presiding over the country must first make the people rich and then govern them.

古文：昔者，七十九代之君，法制不一，号令不同，然俱王天下者，何也？
现代文：从前，历代的君主，法度不一，号令不同，然而都能统一天下，这是什么原因呢？
English: In the past, the monarchs of all ages had different laws and different orders, but they could all be unified. What is the reason for this?

古文：必国富而粟多也。
现代文：必定是国富而粮多的缘故。
English: It must be because the country is rich and there is plenty of grain.

古文：夫富国多粟生于农，故先王贵之。
现代文：国富粮多来源于农业，所以先代圣王都是重视农业的。
English: The country's wealth of grain mostly comes from agriculture, so the previous holy kings all attached importance to agriculture.

古文：凡为国之急者，必先禁末作文巧，末作文巧禁则民无所游食，民无所游食则必农。
现代文：凡属于治国之急务，一定要先禁止奢侈性的工商业和奢侈品的制造，禁止了这些，百姓便无法游荡求食，百姓无法游荡求食，就只好从事农业。
English: For the urgent task of governing the country, we must first ban luxury industry and commerce and the manufacture of luxury goods. If these are banned, the people will not be able to roam for food. If the people cannot roam for food, they will have to engage in agriculture.

古文：民事农则田垦，田垦则粟多，粟多则国富。国富者兵强，兵强者战胜，战胜者地广。
现代文：百姓从事农业则土地得到开垦，土地开垦则粮食增加，粮食增加则国家富裕，国富则兵力可以强大，兵强则战争可以取胜，战胜则土地也就广阔了。
English: If the people engage in agriculture, the land will be reclaimed. If the land is reclaimed, the grain will increase. If the grain increases, the country will be rich. If the country is rich, the army can be strong. If the army is strong, the war can be won. If the war is won, the land will be vast.

古文：是以先王知众民、强兵、广地、富国之必生于粟也，故禁末作，止奇巧，而利农事。
现代文：因此，先代圣王懂得人口多、兵力强、国土广和国家富都一定来源于粮食，因而都禁止奢侈性的工商业和奢侈品的制作，以利于发展农业。
English: Therefore, the previous holy king understood that the large population, strong military, vast territory and national wealth must come from grain, and therefore banned luxury industry and commerce and the production of luxury goods in order to facilitate the development of agriculture.

古文：今为末作奇巧者，一日作而五日食。
现代文：现今从事奢侈性的工商业和奢侈品制作的人们，干一天可以吃用五天。
English: Nowadays, people engaged in luxury industry and commerce and the production of luxury goods can eat for five days in one day.

古文：农夫终岁之作，不足以自食也。
现代文：农民终年劳动，却不能维持自家生活。
English: Farmers work all year round, but cannot maintain their own lives.

古文：然则民舍本事而事末作。
现代文：这样，百姓就放弃农业而从事奢侈性的工商业。
English: In this way, the people give up agriculture and engage in luxury industry and commerce.

古文：舍本事而事末作，则田荒而国贫矣。
现代文：弃农而从事奢侈性的工商业，那土地也就荒芜而国家贫穷了。
English: Abandon the peasantry for luxury industry and commerce, and the land is wasted and the country impoverished.

古文：凡农者月不足而岁有余者也，而上征暴急无时，则民倍贷以给上之征矣。
现代文：凡是农业，其收入的特点是按月算往往不足，按年算才可能有余。然而，官府征税却急如星火，没有定时，农民只好借 一还二 的高利贷来应付上面征课。
English: In agriculture, the characteristic of income is that it is often insufficient on a monthly basis, and it may be more than enough on an annual basis. However, the government is in a hurry to collect taxes. There is no fixed time, and farmers have to borrow one or two usury loans to pay for the above levy.

古文：耕耨者有时，而泽不必足，则民倍贷以取庸矣。
现代文：耕田锄草都有季节限制，但雨水不一定及时够用，农民又只好借 一还二 的高利贷来雇人浇地。
English: There are seasonal restrictions on ploughing and weeding, but the rainwater may not be enough in time, and farmers have to borrow a loan shark to hire someone to water the land.

古文：秋籴以五，春粜以束，是又倍贷也。
现代文：商人秋天买粮的粮价是 五 ，春天卖粮的粮价是 十 ，这又是一项 一还二 的高利贷。
English: The grain price for merchants to buy grain in the autumn is five, and the grain price to sell grain in the spring is ten, which is another one-two usury loan.

古文：故以上之证而倍取于民者四，关市之租，府库之征粟十一，厮舆之事，此四时亦当一倍贷矣。
现代文：所以，把上面的征索算进来，成倍索取农民的地方就达到四项，因为关市的租税、府库的征收、十分之一的征粮和各种劳役放在一起。一年四季加起来，也等于一项 一还二 的高利贷了。
English: Therefore, taking the above-mentioned collection into account, the places where farmers are required to pay twice as much amount to four items, because the taxes of the customs city, the collection of the prefectural treasury, the collection of one-tenth of grain and various labor services are put together. Adding up the four seasons of the year, it is also equal to a one-to-two loan shark.

古文：夫以一民养四主，故逃徙者刑而上不能止者，粟少而民无积也。
现代文：一个农民要养四个债主，国君对逃跑的人处刑也不能制止流民散失，这乃是粮少而农民没有积蓄的缘故。
English: A farmer has to support four creditors. The sovereign cannot punish those who run away and stop the dispersion of the refugees. This is due to the shortage of grain and the farmers' lack of savings.

古文：嵩山之东，河汝之间，蚤生而晚杀，五谷之所蕃孰也，四种而五获。
现代文：从高山东麓到黄河、汝水之间。作物生长期早，凋落期迟，是粮食增产的好地方。四季皆种而五谷皆收。
English: From the eastern foothills of the high mountains to the Yellow River and Ru Shui. Crops grow early and wither late, making it a good place to increase grain production. All seasons are planted and all crops are harvested.

古文：中年亩二石，一夫为粟二百石。
现代文：中等年成亩产两石粮食。一个劳力可以耕百亩收二百石。
English: A medium-sized mu can produce two kilos of grain per year. A laborer can cultivate one hundred mu and collect two hundred kilos.

古文：今也仓廪虚而民无积，农夫以粥子者，上无术以均之也。
现代文：如今国家粮仓空虚而百姓没有积存。农民卖儿卖女，其原因就在于君主没有办法均衡人们的收入。
English: Now the granaries of the state are empty and the people have nothing to save, the peasants are selling their sons and daughters, and the reason for this is that the monarch has no way of balancing the people's income.

古文：故先王使农、士、商、工四民交能易作，终岁之利无道相过也。
现代文：所以先代圣王总是注意让农、士、商、工四民即使互换其行业，他们每年的收入也无法互相超过。
English: Therefore, the previous holy king always paid attention to the fact that the four people of farmers, soldiers, merchants and workers could not exceed each other's annual income even if they exchanged their industries.

古文：是以民作一而得均。
现代文：这样，农民专一务农而收入可以与其他各业均衡。
English: In this way, farmers can focus on farming and their income can be balanced with other industries.

古文：民作一则田垦，奸巧不生。
现代文：农民专一务农田野就得到开垦，奸巧之事也不会发生。
English: If farmers concentrate on farming, the fields will be cultivated, and there will be no cheating.

古文：田垦则粟多，粟多则国富。
现代文：田野开垦则粮食增多，粮食多则国家富裕。
English: When fields are ploughed, there is more grain, and when there is more grain, the country becomes rich.

古文：奸巧不生则民治。
现代文：没有奸巧之事百姓又会安定。
English: If there is no treachery, the people will be stable again.

古文：富而治，此王之道也。
现代文：富裕而安定，这正是成王业的道路。
English: Wealthy and stable, this is the road to becoming a king.

古文：不生粟之国亡，粟生而死者霸，粟生而不死者王。
现代文：不生产粮食的国家要灭亡，生产粮食而吃光用尽的国家仅能称霸，生产粮食而又能食用不尽的国家才可以成其王业。
English: The country that does not produce grain will perish. The country that produces grain and runs out of food can only dominate. The country that produces grain and can eat without running out can only become its king.

古文：粟也者，民之所归也；粟也者，财之所归也；粟也者，地之所归也。
现代文：粮食，能吸引百姓；粮食，能招引财富；粮食，也能使领土开拓。
English: Food can attract people; food can attract wealth; food can also make the territory open up.

古文：粟多则天下之物尽至矣。
现代文：粮食一多，则天下的物产都来了。
English: If there is more grain, then all the goods in the world will come.

古文：故舜一徙成邑，二徙成都，参徙成国。
现代文：所以，舜第一次率民迁安发展农耕建成 邑 ，第二次迁徒建成 都 ，第三次迁徒建成 国 。
English: Therefore, he led the people to move to An'an for the first time to develop agriculture and build a town, to move to the capital for the second time, and to build a country for the third time.

古文：舜非严刑罚重禁令，而民归之矣，去者必害，从者必利也。
现代文：舜没有采用严重的刑罚和禁令，而百姓都跟定他了。因为离开他必然受害，跟着他必然有利。
English: He did not use severe punishments and prohibitions, and the people all followed him, because to leave him was bound to be harmful, and to follow him was bound to be beneficial.

古文：先王者善为民除害兴利，故天下之民归之。
现代文：先代圣王，正是善于为百姓除害兴利，所以天下百姓都归附他。
English: The previous holy king was good at eliminating harm and creating benefits for the people, so the people all over the world followed him.

古文：所谓兴利者，利农事也；所谓除害者，禁害农事也。
现代文：所谓兴利，就是有利于农业。所谓除害，就是禁害于农业。
English: The so-called prosperity is conducive to agriculture. The so-called elimination of harm is the prohibition of harm to agriculture.

古文：农事胜则入粟多，入粟多则国富，国富则安乡重家，安乡重家则虽变俗易习、驱众移民，至于杀之，而民不恶也。
现代文：农业发展则粮食收入增多，粮食收入增多则国富，国富则百姓安于乡居而爱惜家园，安乡爱家则虽改变他们的风俗和习惯，对他们驱使和调遣，以至于有所杀戮，百姓都是不憎恶的。
English: Agricultural development means an increase in grain income, an increase in grain income means a rich country, a rich country means that the people live peacefully in the countryside and cherish their homes, and a peaceful and loving home means that although they change their customs and habits, they are driven and dispatched to the point of killing, the people do not hate them.

古文：此务粟之功也。
现代文：这都是致力于粮食生产的功效。
English: This is all due to the effectiveness of the commitment to grain production.

古文：上不利农则粟少，粟少则人贫，人贫则轻家，轻家则易去、易去则上令不能必行，上令不能必行则禁不能必止，禁不能必止则战不必胜、守不必固矣。
现代文：人君不发展农业则粮食必少，粮少则百姓贫困，贫困则轻视家园，轻家则容易外逃，百姓轻易外逃则君令不能做到 必行 ，君令不能行则禁律也不能做到 必止 ，禁律不能必止则战争不能做到必胜，防守也不能做到必固了。
English: If the people do not develop agriculture, there will be less food; if there is less food, the people will be poor; if there is poverty, the people will despise their homeland; if the people are poor, it will be easy for them to flee abroad; if the people easily flee abroad, the king's order cannot be carried out; if the king's order cannot be carried out, the prohibition cannot be carried out; if the prohibition cannot be carried out, the war cannot be won, and the defense cannot be defended.

古文：夫令不必行，禁不必止，战不必胜，守不必固，命之曰寄生之君。
现代文：法令不能必行。禁律不能必止，出战不能必胜，防守不能必固，这叫作寄生的君主。
English: Laws cannot be enforced, prohibitions cannot be lifted, wars cannot be won, and defenses cannot be fortified. This is called a parasitic monarch.

古文：此由不利农少粟之害也。
现代文：这都是不发展农业缺少粮食的危害。
English: All of this is the result of not developing agriculture and the dangers of a lack of food.

古文：粟者，王之本事也，人主之大务，有人之涂，治国之道也。
现代文：所以增产粮食乃是成王业的根本大事，是人君的重大任务，是招引民众的途径和治国的道路。
English: Therefore, increasing grain production is a fundamental event in the king's career, a major task for the prince, a way to attract the people and a way to govern the country.

