古文：所谓治国者，主道明也；所谓乱国者，臣术胜也。
现代文：所谓治理得好的国家，是因为君道强明；所谓混乱的国家，是因为臣下的 私术 太盛。
English: The so-called well-governed country is because the monarch is strong; the so-called chaotic country is because the vassals are too prosperous.

古文：夫尊君卑臣，非计亲也，以势胜也；百官识，非惠也，刑罚必也。
现代文：君尊臣卑，不是由于臣对君的亲爱，而是君主通过权势压服的；百官尽职，不是由于君对臣的恩惠，而是刑罚坚决的结果。
English: The fact that the king is higher than the vassal is not because the vassal is dear to the prince, but because the prince is overpowered by the power; the fact that the officials do their duty is not because of the prince's favor to the vassal, but is the result of the punishment.

古文：故君臣共道则乱，专授则失。
现代文：所以，君道与臣道混淆不分，国家就要混乱；把国权专授于人，君主就会失园。
English: Therefore, if there is no distinction between the way of the monarch and the way of the subject, the country will be in chaos; if sovereignty is given exclusively to someone, the monarch will be ruined.

古文：夫国有四亡：令求不出谓之灭，出而道留谓之拥，下情求不上通谓之塞，下情上而道止谓之侵。
现代文：国家有四种危亡的表现：法令一开始就发不出去，叫作 灭 ；发出而中道停留，叫做 壅 ；下情一开始就不能上达，叫作 塞 ；上达而中道停止，叫作 侵 。
English: There are four manifestations of a country in danger: a decree cannot go out at the beginning, which is called "extinction"; a decree is issued but the middle course is stopped, which is called "suspension"; a situation cannot be reached at the beginning, which is called "blockage"; and a situation is reached but the middle course is stopped, which is called "invasion."

古文：故夫灭、侵、塞、拥之所生，从法之不立也。
现代文：灭、侵、塞、壅现象的产生，都是由于法度没有确立造成的。
English: The emergence of the phenomena of extinction, encroachment, obstruction, and usurpation are all caused by the failure to establish laws and regulations.

古文：是故先王之治国也，不淫意于法之外，不为惠于法之内也。
现代文：所以先王治国。不在法度外浪费心机，也不在法度内私行小惠。
English: Therefore, the former king ruled the country. He did not waste his time outside the law, nor did he seek personal benefits within the law.

古文：动无非法者，所以禁过而外私也。
现代文：所谓任何行动都不离开法度，就正是为了禁止过错而排除行私的。
English: To say that no action is exempt from the law is precisely to prohibit wrongdoing and exclude selfishness.

古文：威不两措，政不二门，以法治国，则举措而已。
现代文：君权不能由两家占有，政令不能由两家制定。以法治国不过是一切都按法度来处理而已。
English: Royal power cannot be held by two families, and government decrees cannot be made by two families. The rule of law is nothing more than everything being handled according to the law.

古文：是故有法度之制者，不可巧以诈伪；有权衡之称者，不可欺以轻重；有寻丈之数者，不可差以长短。
现代文：因此，有了法度的裁断，人们就不能通过伪诈来取巧；有了权衡的称量，人们就不能利用轻重搞欺骗；有了寻丈的计算，人们就不能利用长短搞差错。
English: Therefore, with the judgment of the rule of law, people can't use deception to gain advantage through deception; with the weighing of trade-offs, people can't use weight to cheat; with the calculation of height, people can't use length to make mistakes.

古文：今主释法以誉进能，则臣离上而下比周矣；以党举官，则民务交而不求用矣。
现代文：君主若放弃法度，按照虚名用人，群臣就背离君主而在下结党营私；君主若听信朋党任官，人民就专务结交而不求工作实效。
English: If the monarch abandons the rule of law and employs people under false pretenses, the courtiers will turn away from the monarch and form their own parties; if the monarch listens to the party and appoints officials, the people will focus on making friends without seeking practical results.

古文：是故官之失其治也，是主以誉为赏，以毁为罚也。
现代文：因此，官吏的治理不好，正是君主按照虚名行赏，根据诽谤行罚的结果。
English: Therefore, the bad governance of officials is precisely the result of the monarch's reward according to the false name and punishment according to the slander.

古文：然则喜赏恶罚之人，离公道而行私木矣。
现代文：而这样下去，那些喜赏恶罚的人们就要背离公法而推行私术，也就是朋比为奸共同做伪。
English: And if this continues, those who relish evil punishment will deviate from public law and promote private art, that is, friends and foes will work together to commit fraud.

古文：比周以相为慝，是忘主私佼，以进其誉。故交众者誉多，外内朋党，虽有大奸，其蔽主多矣。
现代文：于是他们忘记君主，拼命结交，而进用同党；所以交人多同党也多，朝廷内外都成朋党，虽有大的奸恶，也是多半能把君主蒙蔽过去的。
English: So they forgot about the monarch, and tried their best to make friends, but ended up making use of the same party. As a result, they made more friends with the same party, and both inside and outside the court became friends. Although there was great treachery, it was mostly able to hoodwink the monarch.

古文：是以忠臣死于非罪，而邪臣起于非功。
现代文：因此忠臣往往无罪而遭死，邪臣往往无功而发迹。
English: Therefore, loyal vassals often die without guilt, and evil vassals often prosper without merit.

古文：所死者非罪，所起者非功也，然则为人臣者重私而轻公矣。
现代文：由于无罪遭死和无功发迹，那么，为人臣的就自然重私轻公了。
English: Since he died without guilt and achieved nothing, it was natural for a courtier to value his private life more than his public duties.

古文：十至私人之门，不一至于庭；百虑其家，不一图国。
现代文：他们可以十次奔走于私人的家门，而一次不到朝廷；百般考虑其自家，而一次不谋国事。
English: They can run ten times to private homes, and once not to the imperial court; consider their own homes in various ways, and once not to seek state affairs.

古文：属数虽众，非以尊君也；百官虽具，非以任国也；此之谓国无人。
现代文：朝廷所属的人员虽然很多，但不是拥护君主的；百官虽然很齐备，但不是治理国事的。这种情况就叫作国中无人。
English: Although there are many people belonging to the imperial court, they do not support the monarch; although there are many officials, they do not govern the affairs of state. This situation is called "nobody in the country."

古文：国无人者，非朝臣之衰也，家与家务于相益，不务尊君也；大臣务相贵，而不任国；小臣持禄养交，不以官为事，故官失其能。
现代文：所谓 国中无人 ，并不是说朝廷大臣不足，这是说私家之间力求互相帮助，不力求尊奉国君；大臣之间力求互相抬举，而不肯为国任事；小臣拿着奉禄搞拉拢交结，也不以公职为事，所以官吏就没有作用了。
English: The so-called "nobody in the country" does not mean that there are not enough ministers in the imperial court. It means that private individuals strive to help each other, but do not strive to honor and serve the sovereign; ministers strive to elevate each other, but do not want to serve the country; junior ministers take the vassalage to make friends, but do not take public office, so there is no role for officials.

古文：是故先王之治国也，使法择人，不自举也；使法量功，不自度也。
现代文：因此，先王的治国，用法度录取人材，自己并不推荐；用法度计量功劳，自己并不裁定。
English: Therefore, I do not recommend the former king's method of governing the country to be used to recruit talent; I do not judge the use of the method to measure merit.

古文：故能匿而不可蔽，败而不可饰也；誉者不能进，而诽者不能退也。
现代文：所以贤能不可能被掩蔽，败类也不可能伪装；夸誉者不能进用人，诽谤者也不可能罢免人。
English: Therefore, it is impossible for the virtuous to be covered up, and it is impossible for the scum to be disguised; the praiser cannot employ people, and the slanderer cannot dismiss people.

古文：然则君臣之间明别，明别则易治也，主虽不身下为，而守法为之可也。
现代文：这样，君臣的界限就分明了，分明就容易治理因为君主虽不自身下去办事，依靠法度去办就行了。
English: In this way, the boundaries between monarch and subject are clear, and it is easy to govern clearly, because although the monarch does not go to work himself, it is enough to rely on the law to do it.

