古文：传曰： 视之不明，是谓不哲，厥咎舒，厥罚恒奥，厥极疾。
现代文：传上说： 眼光不明，这叫做不哲，其过错在于办事缓慢不振作，受到的惩罚就是常燠，其严重后果就是疾病流行。
English: According to the legend: The eyesight is not clear, this is called bad luck, the fault lies in the slowness of doing things, the punishment is frequent vomiting, and the serious consequence is the disease epidemic.

古文：时则有草妖，时则有蠃虫之孽，时则有羊祸，时则有目疴，时则有赤眚赤祥。
现代文：有时有草妖，有时有蠃虫之孽，有时则有羊祸，有时则有目痫，有时则有赤眚赤祥。
English: Sometimes there's a grass demon, sometimes there's a ladybug, sometimes there's a sheep plague, sometimes there's an eclampsia, sometimes there's a red kite.

古文：惟水沴火。 
现代文：水伤火。 
English: It's water versus fire.

古文： 视之不明，是谓不哲 ，哲，知也。
现代文： 眼光不明，这叫做不哲 ，哲，就是明智。
English: To be blind is not to be wise, but to be wise is to be blind.

古文：《诗》云： 尔德不明，以亡陪亡卿；不明尔德，以亡背亡仄。 
现代文：《诗经》上说： 你为政不明智，就要失去辅佐，失去卿大夫；你为政极明智，就不会有背叛者或奸邪小人。 
English: "The Book of Songs" says: "If you are not wise in politics, you will lose your assistant, you will lose your doctor; if you are very wise in politics, there will be no traitor or villain."

古文：言上不明，暗昧蔽惑，则不能知善恶，亲近匀，长同类，亡功者受赏，有罪者不杀，百官废乱，失在舒缓，故其咎舒也。
现代文：造就是说为君的若不明智，糊涂昏庸受蒙蔽，就无法分辨是非善恶，只亲近亲信的人，提拔重用同类之人，无功的受到奖赏，有罪的不杀，百官都废职乱行，因为萎靡不振，什么事都干不成，所以错就错在萎靡不振上。
English: If you are not wise, if you are confused, if you are deluded, you will not be able to distinguish between good and evil. Only those who are close to relatives and friends will be promoted, and those who are of the same kind will be promoted. Those who are useless will be rewarded, and those who are guilty will not be killed. All officials will abandon their posts and misbehave. Because they are weak, they can't accomplish anything, so the fault is in their weakness.

古文：盛夏日长，暑以养物，政弛缓，故其罚常奥也。
现代文：盛夏季节白天的时间很长，暑热利于生物滋长，所以为政弛缓无效，引发出的惩罚就是长期燠暖。
English: In the midsummer season, the day time is long, and the heat is beneficial to the growth of organisms. Therefore, the relaxation of the policy is ineffective, and the punishment caused is the long-term heat.

古文：奥则冬温，春夏不和，伤病民人，故极疾也。
现代文：燠暖就是冬天不冷，春夏不和，季节失调，人们的身体受到伤害，所以严重的后果就是疾病流行。
English: Warming means that winter is not cold, spring and summer are not harmonious, the seasons are out of balance, people's bodies are harmed, so the serious consequence is the epidemic of diseases.

古文：诛不行则霜不杀草，繇臣下则杀不以时，故有草妖。
现代文：该杀的不杀，就会有秋霜不能杀草的现象，把诛罚大权交给臣下就会刑罚误时，所以就出现草妖。
English: If the punishment is not carried out, the frost will not kill the weeds, and if the vassal is forgiven, the punishment cannot be carried out on time, so there is a grass demon.

古文：凡妖，貌则以服，言则以诗，听则以声。
现代文：凡是妖，都是用服饰表现其外貌，用诗歌抒发其言论，用声音让人们听到它们。
English: For all demons, their appearance is manifested in clothing, their speech in poetry, and their hearing in sound.

古文：视则以色者，五色物之大分也，在于眚祥，故圣人以为草妖，失秉之明者也。
现代文：用颜色让人们看到它们，是因为五色本来就是天地万物的分类大纲，如出现眚祥，圣人认为草妖，是大权旁落有失的明证。
English: Using color to let people see them is because the five colors are originally the classification outline of all things in heaven and earth. If there is a good omen, the sage believes that the grass demon is a clear evidence of the loss of power.

古文：温奥生虫，故有蠃虫之孽，谓螟螣之类当死不死，未当生而生，或多于故而为灾也。
现代文：气温常暖就会生虫子，所以有赢虫之孽，这是指螟塍之类，该死不死，不该生的时候却生出来，或者是多于往常，从而造成灾害。
English: When the temperature is usually warm, worms will be born, so there is the evil of winning insects, which refers to maggots and the like, which should not die, but are born when they should not be born, or are more than usual, causing disasters.

古文：刘歆以为属思心不容。
现代文：刘歆认为这属于思虑同愿望不相包容而导致的灾害。
English: Liu Wei believes that intolerance belongs to the thinking heart.

古文：于《易》，刚而包柔为 离 ， 离 为火为目。
现代文：在《易经》上，刚包含柔为《离》，《离》为火，为目。
English: In the I Ching, just contains soft for "separation," "separation" for fire, for eyes.

古文：羊上角下蹄，刚而包柔，羊大目而为精明，视气毁故有羊祸。
现代文：羊，头上长角，足下有蹄，可说是刚中有柔。羊长着大眼睛却不精明，所以如果是视觉不明，就有羊祸的出现。
English: A sheep with long horns on its head and hoofs under its feet can be said to be soft-hearted. A sheep with big eyes is not clever, so if its vision is unclear, there will be a sheep disaster.

古文：一曰，暑岁羊多疫死，及为怪，亦是也。
现代文：有一种说法认为，气温高的年度，羊多得疫病而死，以致出现怪异，也有道理。
English: There is a saying that in years with high temperatures, more sheep die from disease, leading to strange occurrences, and it makes sense.

古文：及人，则多病目者，故有目疴。
现代文：关系到人，就是好多人害眼病，所以有日疴。
English: As far as people are concerned, many people suffer from eye diseases, which is why there is sunstroke.

古文：火色赤，故有赤眚赤祥。
现代文：火是赤色的，所以有赤告赤祥。
English: The color of fire is red, so there is a red dragonfly called Akasho.

古文：凡视伤者病火气，火气伤则水沴之。
现代文：凡是视力受损的都是病于火气，火气伤那么水就来侵犯。
English: Anyone who is visually impaired is suffering from fire, and if they are injured by fire, the water will invade.

古文：其极疾者，顺之，其福曰寿。
现代文：严重了就致病。如火气得顺，就有福寿。
English: If it is serious, it will cause illness. If the fire is smooth, there will be good luck.

古文：刘歆视传曰有羽虫之孽，鸡祸。说以为于天文南方喙为鸟星，故为羽虫；祸亦从羽，故为鸡；鸡于《易》自在 巽 。
现代文：刘歆对于传上所说的羽虫之孽就是鸡祸的解释是：在天文上，南方喙是乌星，所以叫羽虫；祸也从羽而言，所以叫鶸祸。其实鶸在《易经》上本在《巽》卦。
English: Liu Bei's explanation for the legend that the evil of the caterpillar is the evil of the chicken is: in astronomy, the southern dragonfly is the black star, so it is called the dragonfly; the evil is also from the feather, so it is called the dragonfly evil. In fact, the dragonfly in the "I Ching" was originally in the "Dragonfly" gua.

古文：说非是。
现代文：刘歆的说法不对。
English: Liu Wei's statement is not correct.

古文：庶征之恒奥，刘向以为《春秋》亡冰也。
现代文：多种征兆中的恒焕即常暖，刘向认为是《春秋》上说的无冰雪。
English: Among the many signs of Henghuan is normal warmth, Liu Xiang believes that it is the absence of ice and snow mentioned in "Spring and Autumn."

古文：小奥不书，无冰然后书，举其大者也。
现代文：小燠一般不记载。无冰雪才记，即衹记大的情况。
English: Small hail is generally not recorded. Only when there is no ice and snow is it recorded, i.e. when there is large hail.

古文：京房《易传》曰： 禄不遂行兹谓欺，厥咎奥，雨雪四至而温。
现代文：京房《易传》中说： 俸禄不正常颁发叫做欺骗，其灾就是燠，四处下雪天气却温暖不冷。
English: Peking House said in "Easy Biography": The irregular awarding of salaries is called deception, and its disaster is bad luck. It is snowing everywhere, but the weather is neither warm nor cold.

古文：臣安禄乐逸兹谓乱，奥而生虫。
现代文：臣下要享福禄沉溺安逸玩乐，这叫做乱，就要引起天气温暖而虫子滋生。
English: If the vassals want to enjoy the happiness and indulge in leisure and play, which is called chaos, it is necessary to cause the weather to be warm and the worms to breed.

古文：知罪不诛兹谓舒，其奥，夏则暑杀人。冬则物华实。
现代文：明知有罪却不加诛罚，这叫做办事不力，引起的燠灾，就是夏天热死人，冬天则植物开花结果。
English: Knowingly guilty but not punished, this is called incompetence, causing calamity, that is, the summer heat kills people, and plants bloom in winter.

古文：重过不诛，兹谓亡征，其咎当寒而奥六日也。 
现代文：桓公十五年 春天，无冰雪 。刘向认为周代的春天，相当于现今的冬天。
English: In the 15th year of King Kan, there was spring without snow and ice. Liu Xiang believed that the spring of the Zhou Dynasty was equivalent to the winter of today.

古文：桓公十五年 春，亡冰 。
现代文：在那年之前鲁国跟邻国接连打仗，三次战争，而一再失败。
English: Prior to that year, Russia had fought three successive wars with its neighbors, losing each time.

古文：刘向以为周春，今冬也。
现代文：国内失去民心，国外失和于诸侯各国。
English: The loss of the people's heart at home, the loss of harmony abroad in the principalities.

古文：先是，连兵邻国，三战而再败也，内失百姓，外失诸侯，不敢行诛罚，郑伯突篡兄而立，公与相亲，长养同类，不明善恶之罚也。
现代文：不敢严格执行诛罚。郑伯突篡夺兄长的君位而自立，鲁桓公却与他亲善，助长同类入，不懂善恶的惩罚。无冰之灾就是对这些事的惩罚。
English: He did not dare to strictly enforce the punishment. Zheng Bo suddenly usurped his brother's throne and became independent, but Lu Huan was friendly with him, promoted similarity, and did not understand the punishment of good and evil. The ice-free disaster is the punishment for these things.

古文：董仲舒以为象夫人不正，阴失节也。
现代文：董仲舒认为无冰是象征了夫人作风不正，阴气失节。
English: Dong Zhongshu believes that the absence of ice is a symbol of the wife's dishonest style, and the gloomy mood is out of line.

古文：成公元年 二月，无冰 。
现代文：成公元年 二月，无冰 。
English: In February, there was no ice.

古文：董仲舒以为方有宣公之丧，君臣无悲哀之心，而炕阳，作丘甲。
现代文：董仲舒认为，这是因为当时鲁宣公刚去世时，正在服丧之期，而成公君臣都无悲痛之情，反而张皇自大，制定按丘征收军赋的税法。
English: Dong Zhongshu believed that this was because at that time, when Lu Xuan Gong just died, he was in the period of mourning, and Cheng Gong and his courtiers were not sad, but Zhang Huang was arrogant and formulated a tax law to collect military tax according to the hill.

古文：刘向以为时公幼弱，政舒缓也。
现代文：刘向则认为是因为当时鲁成公年幼，朝政萎靡不振引发的。
English: Liu Xiang, on the other hand, believed that it was due to the fact that Lu Chenggong was young at the time, and the doldrums of the imperial government.

古文：襄公二十八年 春，无冰 。
现代文：襄公二十八年 春季，无冰 。
English: In the spring, there is no ice.

古文：刘向以为先是公作三军，有侵陵用武之意，于是邻国不和，伐其三鄙，被兵十有余年，因之以饥馑，百姓怨望，臣下心离，公惧而弛缓，不敢行诛罚，楚有夷狄行，公有从楚心，不明善恶之应。
现代文：刘向认为，在此之前鲁襄公把军队扩建为三军，有对外侵略而好战的心意，从而与邻国发生矛盾，邻国从三个方向讨伐进入边境，战祸连接十几年，因而造成饥荒，百姓不满，臣下离心离德，鲁襄公恐慌而放松了朝政，不敢对有罪者施行诛罚。再者，楚国有夷狄族的野蛮行为，鲁襄公却有亲楚之意，善恶是非分辨不清。
English: Liu Xiang believed that before this, Prince Lu Xiang expanded the army into three armies, had the intention of foreign aggression and belligerence, and thus conflicted with neighboring countries. Neighboring countries entered the border from three directions, and the war scourge was connected for more than ten years, resulting in famine, people's dissatisfaction, and vassals leaving the country. Prince Lu Xiang panicked and relaxed the government, and did not dare to impose punishment on the guilty. Furthermore, the barbaric behavior of the Yidi people in Chu State, but Prince Lu Xiang had a familiar meaning, and good and evil were indistinguishable.

古文：董仲舒指略同。
现代文：这些事情的天应就是春季无冰。董仲舒的说法与此大致相同。
English: This is similar to what Dong Zhongshu pointed out.

古文：一曰，水旱之灾，寒暑之变，天下皆同，故曰 无冰 ，天下异也。
现代文：一种说法认为，水旱之灾，寒暑之变，天下各地都一样，所以说 无冰 ，这是全天下的灾异。
English: According to one view, the disasters of drought and flood, and changes in heat and cold are the same everywhere in the world, so to say that there is no ice is a catastrophe for the whole world.

古文：桓公杀兄弑君，外成宋乱，与郑易邑，背畔周室。
现代文：鲁桓公杀死哥哥而篡取君位，对外助成宋国政变，与郑国交换城邑，背叛了周室。
English: Prince Lu Huan killed his brother and usurped the throne, supported the coup in Song, exchanged cities and towns with Zheng, and betrayed the Zhou family.

古文：成公时，楚横行中国，王札子杀召伯、毛伯，晋败天子之师之贸戎，天子皆不能讨。
现代文：成公之时，楚国横行中原，王札子杀了周大夫召伯和毛伯，晋国在贸戎打败周天子的军队，对这些事，周天子都无力讨伐。
English: At the time of his accession to the throne, Chu was rampant in the Central Plains, Wang Fazi killed Zhou Zhaobing and Maobing, and Jin defeated Zhou Tianzi's army in Moyun. Zhou Tianzi was powerless to fight against these things.

古文：襄公时，天下诸侯之大夫皆执国权，君不能制。
现代文：襄公之时，天下各诸侯国的大夫都掌握了国家大权，国君无力控制，情况日益严重，善恶不分，惩罚不行。
English: At the time of Emperor Xiangong, the doctors of all the principalities in the world had seized the power of the state, the sovereign was powerless to control, the situation was becoming increasingly serious, good and evil were indistinguishable, and punishment was impossible.

古文：渐将日甚，善恶不明，诛罚不行，周失之舒，秦失之急，故周衰亡寒岁，秦灭亡奥年。
现代文：周朝的失败在于萎靡不振，秦朝的失败在于急切苛暴。所以周朝衰败，而天气年年不冷；秦朝灭亡，则无冬暖之年。
English: The failure of the Zhou Dynasty was due to apathy, and the failure of the Qin Dynasty was due to impatience and harshness. Therefore, the Zhou Dynasty fell, and the weather was not cold every year; the death of the Qin Dynasty was a year without winter warmth.

古文：武帝元狩六年冬，亡冰。
现代文：汉武帝元狩六年冬季，无冰冻。
English: In the winter of the sixth year of the Hanwu Emperor's reign, there was no frost.

古文：先是，比年遣大将军卫青、霍去病攻祁连，绝大幕，穷追单于，斩首十余万级，还，大行庆赏。
现代文：在此之前，连年派大将军卫青、霍去病进军祁连山，跨越大沙漠，穷追匈奴单于，斩首十余万级，回朝后，大行庆功封赏。
English: Prior to this, he had sent generals Wei Qing and Huo to march into the Qilian Mountains year after year, crossing the great desert, chasing the Xiongnu alone, beheading more than 100,000 people, and after returning to the DPRK, he was awarded a reward for his great achievements.

古文：乃闵海内勤劳，是岁遣博士褚大等六人持节巡行天下，存赐鳏寡，假与乏困，举遗逸独行君子诣行在所。
现代文：后来体恤国内人民的勤苦辛劳，当年派博士褚大等六人奉持皇帝的符节巡视全国各地，慰问和赏赐孤老无家之人，赈贷贫困之户，举荐隐逸洁行的君子到天子出行所驻之地。
English: Later, in sympathy with the hard work of the people in the country, he sent six people, including Dr. Zou Da, to hold the Emperor's festival to visit all parts of the country, to offer condolences and rewards to the homeless, to lend money to poor households, and to recommend the discreet and chaste gentleman to the place where the heavenly son was stationed.

古文：郡国有以为便宜者，上丞相、御史以闻。
现代文：地方上有什么可行的建议，上报丞相、御史转奏天子。
English: If there are any feasible suggestions at the local level, they should be reported to the prime minister and the minister of history.

古文：天下咸喜。
现代文：这样，天下百姓都很高兴。
English: In this way, people all over the world are happy.

古文：昭帝始元二年冬，亡冰。
现代文：昭帝始元二年冬季，无冰冻。
English: In the winter of the second year of the reign of Emperor Zhao, there was no frost.

古文：是时上年九岁，大将军霍光秉政，始行宽缓，欲以说下。
现代文：当时皇帝刚九岁，大将军霍光执政，开始施行宽松缓和的政策，想以此取悦臣民。
English: At that time, the emperor was just nine years old, and the great general Huo Guang was in power. He began to implement a policy of easing and easing, hoping to please his subjects.

古文：僖公三十三年 十二月，陨霜不杀草 。
现代文：鲁僖公三十三年 十二月，下了霜雪而草没冻死 。
English: In December of the thirty-third year of Lu Ye Gong, frost and snow fell, but the grass did not freeze to death.

古文：刘歆以为草妖也。
现代文：刘歆认为这是草妖。
English: Liu Wei thought it was a grass demon.

古文：刘向以为今十月，周十二月。
现代文：刘向认为现在的十月是周朝时的十二月。
English: Liu Xiang believes that the current October is the December of the Zhou Dynasty.

古文：于《易》，五为天位，君位，九月阴气至，五通于天位，其卦为 剥 ，剥落万物，始大杀矣，明阴从阳命，臣受君令而后杀也。
现代文：在《易经》上，五是天位、君位，九月裹阴气来到，五通于天位，其卦是《剥》卦，剥即剥落万物，开始一片肃杀了，表明这是阴从阳命，即臣受君令而执行杀罚。
English: In the "I Ching," five is the heavenly throne, the royal throne, and September comes wrapped in yin, and five is in the heavenly throne. Its gua is "stripping" gua, stripping is to peel off everything, and it began to kill, indicating that this is the yin from the sun, that is, the vassal is ordered by the monarch to carry out the punishment of killing.

古文：今十月陨霜而不能杀草，此君诛不行，舒缓之应也。
现代文：现在到了十月，下了霜而不能使草木凋零枯死，这正是与君主诛罚之令不被执行，朝政舒缓不振的情况相应合。
English: Now that it is October, the frost has come and the grass cannot be allowed to wither and die. This is exactly in line with the fact that the monarch's edict of punishment is not being carried out, and the government is sluggish.

古文：是时，公子遂颛权，三桓始世官，天戒若曰，自此之后，将皆为乱矣。
现代文：当时，公子遂专权，三桓开始父子相继为卿，天帝的告诫似乎在说，从此之后，将会出现普遍大乱了。
English: At that time, the nobles gained absolute power, and the three kings began to succeed one another as lords. The emperor's admonition seemed to say that from then on, there would be widespread chaos.

古文：文公不寤，其后遂杀子赤，三家逐昭公。
现代文：文公不醒悟，这之后公子遂杀了子赤，季氏、叔孙、孟孙三家大夫驱逐了昭公。
English: Wengong did not come to his senses, after which the prince killed his son, and the three doctors, Ji, uncle and grandson, and Mengsun expelled the prince.

古文：董仲舒指略同。
现代文：董仲舒的看法大致相同。
English: This is similar to what Dong Zhongshu pointed out.

古文：京房《易传》曰： 臣有缓兹谓不顺，厥异霜不杀也。 
现代文：京房的《易传》说： 臣下执行政令弛缓，这叫做不顺从，带来的灾异就是霜不杀草。 
English: According to the "Easy Biography" by Kyobo: The execution of government orders by vassals is lax, which is called disobedience, and the disaster brought about is that frost does not kill grass.

古文：《书序》曰： 伊陟相太戊，亳有祥桑穀共生。 
现代文：《书序》上说： 伊陟辅佐太戊，亳地出现妖异，桑与谷两种树长在一起。 
English: In the preface, it is said that: Ying Zhe Zuo Taewu, strange things appear on the earth, and two kinds of trees, Mulberry and Valley grow together.

古文：传曰： 俱生乎朝，七日而大拱。
现代文：《传》上说： 两树一起生在朝廷，七天后就长成两手合拱那么粗。
English: "Legend" says: The two trees were born together at the imperial court, and after seven days they grew to be as thick as two hands joined in an arch.

古文：伊陟戒以修德，而木枯。 
现代文：伊陟告诫太戊必须修德治国。后来树就枯死了。 
English: Yi Xuan admonished Tai E that he must cultivate virtue and govern the country. Later, the tree withered away.

古文：刘向以为殷道既衰，高宗承敝而起，尽凉阴之哀，天下应之，既获显荣，怠于政事，国将危亡，故桑穀之异见。
现代文：刘向认为，殷商的国运已经出现衰落，高宗在这种不好的情况下继位，三年处庐中不说话，真正做到了服丧的哀痛，天下臣民为他所感而相应，但获得大的荣耀之后，又怠于政事，国家将要走向危亡，所以有桑谷并生于朝的怪异出现。
English: Liu Xiang believed that the national movement of Yin Shang had already declined, Gao Zong succeeded to the throne under such a bad situation, did not speak for three years during the funeral, truly achieved the grief of mourning, and the subjects of the world felt correspondingly for him, but after gaining great glory, he was lazy in politics, and the country would go to peril, so there was a strange appearance of Mulberry Valley and born in the morning.

古文：桑犹丧也，穀犹生也，杀生之秉失而在下，近草妖也。
现代文：桑就是丧，谷如生命，这意味着生杀予夺的大权落到臣下手中。这一怪异近乎草妖。
English: The mulberry is mourning, the valley is life, which means that the power of life and death falls into the hands of the vassals. This weirdness is close to the grass demon.

古文：一曰，野木生朝而暴长，小人将暴在大臣之位，危亡国家，象朝将为虚之应也。
现代文：有一种说法认为，野树生在朝廷而迅速长大，预示着小人将要很快占居大臣之位而危害国家，这是象征朝廷将成废墟的预兆。
English: There is a saying that wild trees growing rapidly in the imperial court indicate that villains will soon occupy the position of ministers and endanger the country. This is a sign that the imperial court will fall into ruins.

古文：《书序》又曰： 高宗祭成汤，有蜚雉登鼎耳而雊。 
现代文：《书序》上还说： 高宗祭祀成汤的时候，有飞来的雉鶸落到鼎耳上雊雊地呜叫。 
English: The "Preface" also says: When Gaozong's sacrificial rites turned into soup, there were crickets flying and falling on Ding's ears, making him howl.

古文：祖己曰： 惟先假王，正厥事。 
现代文：祖己说： 这是说先要端正为王之道，做好为工之事。 
English: The ancestor said: This means that we must first correct the way of the king and do the work well.

古文：刘向以为雉雊鸣者雄也，以赤色为主。
现代文：刘向认为，雉鸡中雊雊而鸣的是雄的，以赤为主色。
English: Liu Xiang believes that the male is the most vocal of the pheasants, with red as the main color.

古文：于《易》， 离 为雉，雉，南方，近赤祥也。
现代文：在《易经》上，《离》为雉，雉在南方，雉的出现近乎赤祥。
English: In the I Ching, "separation" is,  in the south, and's appearance is close to 赤祥.

古文：刘歆以为羽虫之孽。
现代文：刘歆认为这是羽虫之孽。
English: Liu Wei thought that this was the evil of the caterpillars.

古文：《易》有 鼎卦 ，鼎，宗庙之器，主器奉宗庙者长子也。
现代文：《易经》上有《鼎》卦，鼎是宗庙中的礼器，主管礼器而奉祀宗庙的是长子。
English: "I Ching" has "Ding" Gua, Ding is the ceremonial instrument in the ancestral temple, and the eldest son is the person in charge of the ceremonial instrument and worships the ancestral temple.

古文：野鸟自外来，入为宗庙器主，是继嗣将易也。
现代文：野乌从外边飞来，进来成为宗庙礼器之主，造意味着继位之人要改变。
English: The wild goose flew in from the outside and became the master of the ceremonial objects of the ancestral temple, which meant that the successor had to change.

古文：一曰，鼎三足，三公象，而以耳行。
现代文：一种说法认为，鼎有三足，是三公之象，而提耳才能搬动。
English: According to one theory, the Ding has three legs and is the symbol of the Three Kingdoms, but it can only be moved by lifting its ears.

古文：野鸟居鼎耳，小人将居公位，败宗庙这祀。
现代文：野乌落到鼎耳上，预示小人将要占居三公之位，败坏宗庙的祭祀。
English: The wild oats fell on the king's ear, foretelling that the villain would occupy the position of the three kings and corrupt the sacrificial rites of the ancestral temple.

古文：野木生朝，野鸟入庙，败亡之异也。
现代文：野树生在朝廷，野鸟飞入宗庙，这都是预示国家败亡的怪异。
English: Wild trees growing in the imperial court, wild birds flying into the ancestral temple, all of these are signs of the country's decline and fall.

古文：武丁恐骇，谋于忠贤，修德而正事，内举傅说，授以国政，外伐鬼方，以安诸夏，故能攘木、鸟之妖，致百年之寿，所谓 六沴作见，若是共御，五福乃降，用章于下 者也。
现代文：武丁很害怕，找忠贤之士商议，修养德行整顿国事，在内提拔傅说，让他执掌国政，对外征伐鬼方，使华夏各邦得以安定，所以才能攘除木鸟之妖祥，得以长寿百年，造就是所谓 六灾出现，如能这样恭治国事，五福就会降临，把这向天下宣扬 。
English: Wuding was very afraid. He consulted with the loyal and wise men to cultivate virtue and rectify state affairs. He promoted Fu inside and said that he would let him take charge of state affairs, conquer the evil forces outside, and make the states of China stable. Therefore, he could drive away the evil spirits of the woodpeckers and live for a hundred years. This was the so-called six disasters. If he could rule the country in such a respectful manner, the five blessings would come, and he would proclaim this to the world.

古文：一曰，金沴木曰木不曲直。
现代文：一种说法，认为金克木是木不能曲直。
English: There is a saying that Jinque wood is wood that cannot be straightened.

古文：僖公三十三年 十二月，李梅实 。
现代文：僖公三十三年 十二月，李梅结果实 。
English: In December of the 33rd year of King Gong's reign, Li Mei's dream came true.

古文：刘向以为周十二月，今十月也，李梅当剥落，今反华实，近草妖也。
现代文：刘向认为，周代的十二月是现在的十月，此时李梅到了花果剥落的时节，却反而开花结果，这近似草妖。
English: Liu Xiang believes that the December of Zhou Dynasty is now October. At this time, Li Mei arrived at the time of the peeling of flowers and fruits, but instead blossomed, which is similar to the grass demon.

古文：先华而后实，不书华，举重者也。
现代文：本为先开花而后结果，不写花衹写果，这是捡重要的写。
English: It is important to pick the flowers first and then write the results, not to write the flowers and write the fruits.

古文：阴成阳事，象臣颛君作威福。
现代文：阴完成了本为阳气才能做到的事，这象征着臣子专了君的大权而作威作福。
English: The yin accomplished what the yang was originally able to do, which symbolized that the vassal had monopolized the sovereign's power and used it as a blessing.

古文：一日，冬当杀，反生，象骄臣当诛，不行其罚也。
现代文：一种说法认为，冬天本为肃杀之季，反而使植物生长起来，象征着骄臣本应诛灭，却没有施行惩罚。
English: One theory is that winter, which is supposed to be the season of punishment, actually caused plants to grow, symbolizing that the arrogant vassals should have been annihilated, but no punishment was carried out.

古文：故冬华者，象臣邪谋有端而不成，至于实，则成矣。
现代文：所以冬天开花，象惩臣子奸计阴谋已有端倪衹是还没实现，到有了果实，那就成为现实了。
English: Therefore, the winter bloom, like the punitive minister's son's treacherous plot, has not yet been realized, and when it bears fruit, it will become a reality.

古文：是时僖公死，公子遂颛权，文公不寤，后有子赤之变。
现代文：当时鲁僖公死了，公子遂专权，鲁文公不醒悟，后来发生了子赤的变乱。
English: At that time, Prince Lu Xun died, and his son gained absolute power. Prince Lu Wen did not wake up, and later the Zicheng Rebellion occurred.

古文：一曰，君舒缓甚，奥气不臧，则华实复生。
现代文：一种说法是，君主太萎靡不振了，暖气藏不住了，于是花果又生出来。
English: One theory is that the monarch was too weak to hide the heat, so the flowers came out again.

古文：董仲舒以为李梅实，臣下强也。
现代文：董仲舒认为李梅结果实，象征臣下强大。
English: Dong Zhongshu believes that Li Mei's result is real, symbolizing the strong vassal.

古文：记曰： 不当华而华，易大夫；不当实而实，易相室。 
现代文：记上说： 不该开花而开花，换大夫；不当结果而结果，换相国。 
English: The note said: If a flower blooms when it shouldn't, change the doctor; if a result comes when it shouldn't, change the country.

古文：冬，水王，木相，故象大臣。
现代文：冬，以水为代表，木为相，所以象征大臣。
English: Winter, with water as its representative and wood as its aspect, is the symbol of the minister.

古文：刘歆以为庶征皆以虫为孽，思心蠃虫孽也。
现代文：刘歆认为很多灾害的征兆都以虫子为孽，心中的灾祸表现为蠃虫孽。
English: Liu Wei believes that many signs of disasters are caused by insects, and the evil in his heart is manifested by the evil of maggots.

古文：李梅实，属草妖。
现代文：李梅结实，属于草妖。
English: The plum tree is strong and belongs to the grass demon.

古文：惠帝五年十月，桃李华，枣实。
现代文：汉惠帝五年十月，桃李开花，枣树结果。
English: In October of the fifth year of Emperor Han Hui, the peach and plum blossomed, and the jujube trees produced fruit.

古文：昭帝时，上林苑中大柳树断仆地，一朝起立，生枝叶，有虫食其叶，成文字，曰 公孙病已立 。
现代文：汉昭帝时，上林苑中的大柳树折断倒在地上，一天自己立起来了，长了枝叶，有虫子吃它的叶子，现出字形，说是 公孙病已立 。
English: At the time of Emperor Han Zhao, the big willow tree in Shanglin Yuan was broken and fell to the ground. One day, it stood up on its own, grew branches and leaves, insects ate its leaves, and a glyph appeared, saying that the grandson was sick.

古文：又，昌邑王国社有枯树复生枝叶。
现代文：另有昌邑王的国社中有枯死的树又生出枝叶。
English: In addition, dead trees in the national shrine of the King of Chang'e have sprouted leaves and branches.

古文：眭孟以为，木阴类，下民象，当有故废之家公孙氏从民间受命为天子者。
现代文：眭孟认为木属于阴类，下民的象征，会有从前废黜败落的人家名叫公孙氏的从民间出来，接受天命成为天子。
English: Yao Meng believed that the tree belonged to the yin category and was a symbol of the common people. There would be a family of people called the Gongsun clan, who had been dethroned and defeated in the past, who would come out of the common people and accept the destiny to become the son of heaven.

古文：昭帝富于春秋，霍光秉政，以孟妖言，诛之。
现代文：当时汉昭帝正年轻，霍光执政，认为眭孟说的是疯话，就杀了他。
English: At that time, Emperor Han Zhao was young, and Huo Guang was in power. He thought that Yao Meng was talking nonsense, so he killed him.

古文：后昭帝崩，无子，征昌邑王贺嗣位，狂乱失道，光废之，更立昭帝兄卫太子之孙，是为宣帝。宣帝本名病已。
现代文：后来昭帝驾崩，没有儿子，就征召昌邑王刘贺嗣位为帝，昌邑王狂乱无道，霍光又废了他，改立昭帝哥哥卫太子的孙子，造就是汉宣帝，宣帝本名叫病已。
English: Later, when Emperor Zhao died without a son, Liu He, the king of Changyi, was summoned to succeed him as emperor. The king of Changyi was mad and had no way out. Huo Guang abolished him and replaced him with Han Xuan, the grandson of Emperor Zhao's brother, Emperor Wei. Emperor Xuan's real name was Ill.

古文：京房《易传》曰： 枯杨生，枯木复生，人君亡子。 
现代文：京房《易传》说： 枯杨生嫩芽，枯木复活，这预示君王没有子嗣。 
English: Kyobo's "I Chuan" says: "Withered poplars sprout shoots, dead trees come to life, which indicates that the monarch has no heirs."

古文：元帝初元四年，皇后曾祖父济南东平陵王伯墓门梓柱卒生枝叶，上出屋。
现代文：汉元帝初元四年，皇后曾祖父济南柬平陵王伯的墓门梓柱上突然长出枝叶，长出了屋子。
English: In the first year of the 4th year of the Hanyuan Emperor, branches and leaves suddenly sprouted on the door and pillar of the tomb of the queen's great-grandfather, Jinan Kamping Mausoleum Wang Bo, and a house grew up.

古文：刘向以为王氏贵盛，将代汉家之象也。
现代文：刘向认为这是王氏富贵强盛将要代替汉家的象征。
English: Liu Xiang believes that this is a symbol of the Wang family's wealth and prosperity that will replace the Han family.

古文：后王莽篡位，自说之曰： 初元四年，莽生之岁也，当汉九世火德之厄，而有此祥兴于高祖考之门。
现代文：后来王莽篡位，自己就这件事说： 初元四年，是我出生的那年，正当汉朝九代火德之灾厄，却有这一祥瑞出现在我高祖的墓门上。
English: Later, Wang Mang usurped the throne, and he himself said about this matter: "In the fourth year of the first century, the year I was born, just as the Han Dynasty was plagued by nine generations of fire and virtue, this Xiang Rui appeared on the tomb door of my great-grandfather.

古文：门为开通，梓犹子也，言王氏当有贤子开通祖统，起于柱石大臣之位，受命而王之符也。 
现代文：门是通道，梓就是子，造就是王家当有贤德之子开拓打通祖宗的皇统，从做朝廷的柱石大臣开始，受天命而为天下之主的符命啊。 
English: The gate is the passage, the vine is the son, and the building is the royal family. It is the duty of the virtuous sons of the royal family to open up the imperial lineage of the ancestors, starting with the pillar ministers of the imperial court. It is the destiny of the gods to be the lord of the world.

古文：建昭五年，兗州刺史浩赏禁民私所自立社。
现代文：建昭五年，兖州刺史浩赏禁止民间私自建立社神庙。
English: In the fifth year of Jian Zhao, Zhangzhou Zhi Shi Hao banned people from building shrines and temples.

古文：山阳橐茅乡社有大槐树，吏伐断之，其夜树复立其故处。
现代文：山阳橐茅乡社神庙有棵大槐树，官吏把它砍断了，当晚这棵树自己又立在了原处。
English: There was a big eucalyptus tree in the temple of Shanyang Qimiao Township. The officials cut it down, but that night the tree itself stood in its original place.

古文：成帝永始元年二月，河南街邮樗树生支如人头，眉、目、须皆具亡发、耳。
现代文：成帝永始元年二月，河南街邮的樗树生出支权像人头一样，眉目胡须都有，但没有头发和耳朵。
English: In February of the first year of Emperor Chengdu's reign, an eucalyptus tree at Henan Street Post Office sprouted like a human head, with eyebrows and whiskers, but no hair or ears.

古文：哀帝建平三年十月，汝南西平遂阳乡柱仆地，生支如人形，身青黄色，面白，头有须发，稍长大，凡长六寸一分。
现代文：哀帝建平三年十月，汝南西平遂阳乡有个柱子倒在地上，生出新枝如人的形状，身子青黄色，面为白色，头上有髭发，稍为长大，共长六寸一分。
English: In October of the third year of Emperor Jianping's reign, a pillar fell to the ground in Suiyang Township, Xiping, Yunnan Province. It produced a new branch in the shape of a human being, with a blue-yellow body, a white face, and a beard on its head. It was slightly overgrown, with a total length of six inches and one minute.

古文：京房《易传》曰： 王德衰，下人将起，则有木生为人状。 
现代文：京房《易传》说： 君王德衰，下边的臣民将要起来，这时就会有木生出入的形状来。 
English: Jing Fang's "I Chuan" said: "When the king's virtue declines, the subjects below will rise up. At this time, there will be a wooden entrance and exit shape."

古文：哀帝建平三年，零陵有树僵地，围丈六尺，长十丈七尺。
现代文：哀帝建平三年，零陵有树倒在地上，干围一丈六尺，长十丈七尺。
English: In the three years after Emperor Ai's death, there was a tree that fell to the ground in his mausoleum. It measured six feet in circumference and seven feet in length.

古文：民断其本，长九尺余，皆枯。
现代文：百姓砍断了它的干，取去一段有九尺多，整棵树都枯死了。
English: The villagers cut off its trunk, removing a section of more than nine feet, and the whole tree died.

古文：三月，树卒自立故处。
现代文：三月裹，这树突然自己立在原处。
English: Around March, the tree suddenly stood on its own.

古文：京房《易传》曰： 弃正作淫，厥妖木断自属。
现代文：京房《易传》说： 不走正道，行为荒淫，出现的妖怪就是树木被砍断了能自己再接上。
English: Jing Fang's "I Chuan" said: "If one forsakes the righteous path and engages in sexual misconduct, his yōki will break and he will be chained."

古文：妃后有颛，木仆反立，断枯复生。
现代文：对妃后有专宠偏爱，倒下的树木就会自己立起来，砍断而枯死的能够复活再生。
English: The fallen trees will stand up on their own, and those that have been cut down and withered can be revived and regenerated.

古文：天辟恶之。 
现代文：上天厌恶这些事。 
English: Heaven abhors these things.

古文：光帝永光二年八月，天雨草，而叶相胶结，大如弹丸。
现代文：元帝永光二年八月，天上下草，草的叶子互相绕结，有弹丸那么大。
English: In August of the second year of the Yuan Emperor Yongguang, grass was everywhere. The leaves of the grass wrapped around each other and were as big as marbles.

古文：平帝元始三年正月，天雨草，状如永光时，京房《易传》曰： 君吝于禄，信衰贤去，厥妖天雨草。 
现代文：平帝元始三年正月，天空落下草来，样子和永光二年那次一样。京房《易传》说： 国君少给了俸禄，忠信就要消失，贤人就要离去，这时出现的妖祥就是天上下草。 
English: In the first month of the third year of the Heian era, the sky fell to the grass, looking the same as it did in the second year of the Yongguang era. The Kyobo "I Chuan" said: The sovereign gave less salary, loyalty will disappear, wise men will leave, and the evil omen that appeared at this time was the sky falling to the grass.

古文：昭公二十五年 夏，有雊鹆来巢 。
现代文：昭公二十五年 夏季有鹳鹤来筑巢 。
English: In the summer of the 25th year of the reign of King Zhaogong, cranes come to build their nests.

古文：刘歆以为，羽虫之孽 其色黑，又黑祥也，视不明、听不聪之罚也。
现代文：刘歆认为，羽虫类的妖孽，颜色黑的，又叫黑祥，这是预示对眼光不明，耳听失聪的惩罚。
English: Liu Yao believed that the black-colored sorcery of the winged insects, also known as the black omen, was an omen of punishment for those with poor eyesight and deaf ears.

古文：刘向以为，有蜚有蜮不言来者，气所生，所谓眚也；雊鹆言来者，气所致，所谓祥也。
现代文：刘向认为，出现了蜚、蜮两种虫子，而不说是从外地来的，这是气产生的，即所谓眚；鹳鹄乌则说是由外地而来，这是由气导致的，即所谓祥。
English: Liu Xiang believed that there were two kinds of worms, maggots and worms, and did not say that they came from other places, which was caused by gas, that is, the so-called maggots; the maggots said that they came from other places, which was caused by gas, that is, the so-called maggots.

古文：雊鹆，夷狄穴藏之禽，来至中国，不穴而巢，阴居阳位，象季氏将逐昭公，去宫室而居外野也。
现代文：鸜鹄，是夷狄地区穴居的禽类，来到中原，不穴居而筑巢，是阴居阳位，象征着季氏将要驱逐昭公，离走宫室而退居外地。
English: The cormorant is a bird that lives in a cave in the Yidi region. When it comes to the Central Plains, it does not live in a cave but builds a nest. It is a ying to yang position, symbolizing that the Ji clan will expel the Akogimi, leave the palace and retire to the countryside.

古文：雊鹆白羽，旱之祥也；穴居而好水，黑色，为主急之应也。
现代文：鹳鹄之羽白色，是旱情的祥异；穴居而喜欢在水中游弋，水为黑色，这是君主危急的象征。
English: The white of the dragonfly's feathers is auspicious in dry conditions; the dragonfly lives in caves and likes to swim in water, and the water is black, which is a symbol of the crisis of the monarch.

古文：天戒若曰，既失众，不可急暴；急暴，阴将持节阳以逐尔，去宫室而居外野矣。
现代文：天帝似乎在告诫说，既然已经失去大众，不可急躁而采取暴力；否则，阴将持节掌权把你赶走，就要远离宫室而流亡外域了。
English: The celestial emperor seems to be warning that since he has lost the masses, he must not be impatient and resort to violence; otherwise, the Yin will hold the power and drive you away, and you will have to leave the palace and go into exile.

古文：昭不寤，而举兵围季氏，为季氏所败，出奔于齐，遂死于外野。
现代文：昭公不醒悟，就发兵围攻季氏，被季氏打败，出逃到齐国，最后死在外地。
English: Unable to come to his senses, Akihito sent troops to besiege the Ji clan, was defeated by the Ji clan, fled to Qi Province, and finally died in a foreign land.

古文：董仲舒指略同。
现代文：董仲舒对此事的看法与上面大致相似。
English: This is similar to what Dong Zhongshu pointed out.

古文：景帝三年十一月，有白颈乌与黑乌群斗楚国吕县，白颈不胜，堕泗水中，死者数千。
现代文：汉景帝三年十一月，有白颈乌鸦与黑乌鸦在楚国吕县成群搏斗，白颈的战败，掉在泗水中，死了数千之多。
English: In November of the third year of the reign of Emperor Han Jing, there was a fight between white-necked crows and black crows in groups in Lv County, Chu Province. The white-necked crows were defeated and fell into the brackish water, killing thousands.

古文：刘向以为近白黑祥也。
现代文：刘向认为这近似白黑灾祥。
English: Liu Xiang believes that this approximation is a blessing in disguise.

古文：时楚王戊暴逆无道，刑辱申公，与吴王谋反。
现代文：当时楚王刘戊暴戾犯上没有为臣之道，施刑而侮辱了申公，与吴王刘濞谋划造。
English: At that time, King Liu Wu of Chu did not have the means to be a vassal when he committed a violent crime. He punished and insulted Shen Gong, and plotted with King Liu Yu of Wu.

古文：乌群斗者，师战之象也。
现代文：乌鸦成群相斗，这是军队打仗的象征。
English: Crowds of crows fighting each other is a symbol of an army at war.

古文：白颈者小，明小者败也。
现代文：白颈乌鸦个子小，说明小的一方要失败。
English: The white-necked raven is small, indicating that the small side will fail.

古文：堕于水者，将死水地。
现代文：掉进水中，说明将要死于水地。
English: If you fall into the water, it means that you will die in the water.

古文：王戊不寤，遂举兵应吴，与汉大战，兵败而走，至于丹徒，为越人所斩，堕死于水之效也。
现代文：楚王刘戊不醒悟，于是举兵响应吴王，与朝廷大战，兵败而逃，跑到丹徒，被越地人斩首。这便是死于水地的应验。
English: Liu Wu, the king of Chu, did not wake up, so he raised an army in response to the king of Wu, fought with the imperial court, fled in defeat, ran to Dantu, and was beheaded by the Viet people. This was the fulfillment of death by water.

古文：京房《易传》曰： 逆亲亲，厥妖白黑乌斗于国。 
现代文：京房《易传》说： 皇亲叛逆，出现的妖异就是白黑乌鸦在国内相斗。 
English: Kyobo's "I Chuan" said: The imperial family is rebellious, and the strange phenomenon that occurs is that the white and black crows fight each other in the country.

古文：昭帝元凤元年，有乌与鹊斗燕王宫中池上，乌堕池死，近黑祥也。
现代文：昭帝元凤元年，有乌鸦与喜鹊在燕王宫中的水池上空相斗，乌鸦掉进池中淹死，近乎黑祥。
English: In the first year of Emperor Zhao's reign, a crow and a magpie fought over a pool in the Yanwang Palace. The crow fell into the pool and drowned, nearly blackening the sky.

古文：时燕王旦谋为乱，遂不改寤，伏辜而死。
现代文：当时燕王刘旦阴谋作乱，竞不悔改，伏罪而死。
English: At that time, Yan Wang Liu Dan plotted to make trouble, but he did not repent and died for his crime.

古文：楚、燕皆骨肉籓臣，以骄怨而谋逆，俱有乌鹊斗死之祥，行同而占合，此天人之明表也。
现代文：楚、燕二王都是宗室骨肉至亲的藩臣，因骄横和对朝廷的怨恨而谋划叛逆，都有乌鹊相斗而死这种妖祥出现，行为相同，所占之象也一样，这是天人相应的明显表现啊。
English: The two kings Chu and Yan were both vassals who were blood relatives of the imperial family. Due to their arrogance and resentment of the imperial court, they plotted a rebellion. Both of them died in a battle of wits. This kind of ominous appearance, the same behavior, the same occupation, this is a clear manifestation of the corresponding heavenly beings.

古文：燕一乌鹊斗于宫中而黑者死，楚以万数斗于野外而白者死，象燕阴谋未发，独王自杀于宫，故一乌水色者死，楚炕阳举兵，军师大败于野，故众乌金色者死，天道精微之效也。
现代文：在燕，是单个的乌鸦与喜鹊在宫中相斗而黑色的乌鸦死了，在楚，是上万只在野外相斗而白色的死亡。象征燕王的阴谋尚未发动，衹王一入伏罪自杀在宫中，所以是一只水色即黑色的乌鸦死掉。而楚王则是张皇自大举兵叛乱，大军在野外大败，所以是众多的颈为金色即白色的乌鸦死掉。这是天道精微无误的表现。
English: In Yan, a single crow and a magpie fought in the palace, and the black crow died. In Chu, tens of thousands of crows fought in the field, and the white crow died. The conspiracy that symbolized the king of the swans had not yet been launched, and the king of the dragonflies committed suicide in the palace, so a light-colored ie black crow died. And the king of Chu was the rebellion of the Zhang Emperor, and the army was defeated in the field, so many crows with golden necks ie white crows died. This is an unmistakable manifestation of the heavenly way.

古文：京房《易传》曰： 专征劫杀，厥妖乌鹊斗。 
现代文：京房《易传》说： 背命专征的劫杀，其妖祥就是乌鹊相斗。 
English: Beijing House "Easy Biography" said: The robbing and killing of the treacherous special enlistment, its evil omen is the blackbird fight.

古文：昭帝时有鹈鹕或曰秃鹙，集昌邑王殿下，王使人射杀之。
现代文：昭帝时有鸩鹏或叫秃骛的乌，飞来聚集在吕邑王的殿下，昌邑王派入射杀。
English: At the time of Emperor Zhao, there were black vultures or black vultures that flew to gather at the royal palace of the King of Lyuyi. The King of Changyi sent crows to shoot and kill them.

古文：刘向以为，水鸟色青，青祥也，时，王驰骋无度，慢侮大臣，不敬至尊、有服妖之象，故青祥见也。
现代文：刘向认为这些水乌是青色的，这是青祥的出现。当时昌邑王驰骋放纵不遵法度，怠慢侮辱大臣，不尊敬皇帝，并有服妖的表现，所以出现了青祥。
English: Liu Xiang thought that these water drops were blue, which was the appearance of Qingxiang. At that time, Wang Qizhi of Changyi indulged in non-compliance with the law, neglected to insult the minister, did not respect the emperor, and had the performance of obeying the devil, so Qingxiang appeared.

古文：野鸟入处，宫室将空。
现代文：野鸟飞入宫中，预示宫室将要空废而无人再住。
English: Wild birds fly into the palace, indicating that the palace will be empty and no one will live there.

古文：王不悟，卒以亡。
现代文：昌邑王不醒悟，终于获罪而亡。
English: Changyi Wang did not come to his senses, and was eventually convicted and killed.

古文：京房《易传》曰： 辟退有德，厥咎狂，厥妖水鸟集于国中。 
现代文：京房《易传》说： 君罢退有德之臣，他的遇错是狂傲，由此导致的妖祥是水乌聚集在城中。 
English: Jing Fang's "Easy Biography" said: You have ousted a virtuous retainer, his mistake is arrogance, and the resultant evil omen is water and dust gathering in the city.

古文：成帝河平元年二月庚子，泰山山桑谷有鸢焚其巢。
现代文：成帝河平元年二月庚子曰，泰山山桑谷有猫头鹰把自己的巢烧掉了。
English: In February of the first year of Chengdi Heping, Geng Zi said that an owl in the Kuang Valley of Mount Tai had burned down its nest.

古文：男子孙通等闻山中群鸟鸢鹊声，往视，见巢然，尽堕地中，有三鸢鷇烧死。
现代文：一个名叫孙通的男子及其同伙，听见山裹一群猫头鹰乱叫，到跟前一看，见是鸟巢烧了，全掉在地上，有三只雏鸟已被烧死。
English: A man named Sun Tong and his companions heard a group of owls screaming wildly in the mountains. When they looked ahead, they saw that the nest was burned and they all fell to the ground. Three chicks had been burned to death.

古文：树大四围，巢去地五丈五尺。
现代文：那棵树有四围粗，鸟巢离地面五丈五尺。
English: The tree is thick all around, and the bird's nest is five feet from the ground.

古文：太守平以闻。
现代文：太守平把这件事上报了朝廷。
English: Tai Shouhei reported the matter to the Imperial Court.

古文：鸢色黑，近黑祥，贪虐之类也。
现代文：猫头鹰是黑色的，近乎黑祥，它是贪婪暴虐的鸟类。
English: The owl is black, almost black-cheeked, and it is a voracious and violent bird.

古文：《易》曰： 鸟焚其巢，旅人先笑后号眺。 
现代文：《易经》上说： 鸟焚其巢，旅人先笑后号啕。 
English: In the I Ching, it says, "When a bird sets fire to its nest, the traveler first laughs and then howls."

古文：泰山，岱宗，五岳之长，王者易姓告代之处也。
现代文：泰山，就是岱宗，五岳之首，称王天下之人上告天帝代为天子之处。
English: Mount Tai, the head of the Five Mountains, is the place where those who claim to be the king of the world appeal to the emperor to be the son of heaven.

古文：天戒若曰，勿近贪虐之人，听其贼谋，将生焚巢自害其子绝世易姓之祸。
现代文：鸟在此烧巢是天帝藉之告诫说：别亲近贪婪而狠毒的人，如听从了他们的坏主意，就会有焚巢自害己子而绝后易姓的灾祸。
English: The bird burning its nest here is a warning from the heavenly emperor: do not get close to greedy and vicious people. If you listen to their bad ideas, you will have the calamity of burning your own nest, harming your own son, and dying and changing your surname.

古文：其后，赵蜚燕得幸，立为皇后，弟为昭仪，姊妹专宠，闻后宫许美人，曹伟能生皇子也，昭仪大怒，令上夺取而杀之，皆并杀其母。
现代文：这事之后赵飞燕得到宠爱，立为皇后，她的妹妹被册立为昭仪，姐妹二人独占了成帝的宠爱，得知后宫许美人、曹伟能生了皇帝的儿子，昭仪大怒，让成帝把孩子夺来并杀死，还杀了孩子的母亲。
English: After this, Zhao Feiyan was favored and became the empress. Her younger sister was registered as Zhaoyi, and the two sisters monopolized the favor of Emperor Cheng. When Zhaoyi learned that the harem beauty, Cao Wei Neng, had given birth to the emperor's son, Zhaoyi was furious and let Emperor Cheng seize and kill the child, and also killed the child's mother.

古文：成帝崩，昭仪自杀，事乃发觉，赵后坐诛。
现代文：成帝驾崩，昭仪自杀，事情终于败露，赵后飞燕因罪被杀。
English: Emperor Cheng died, Zhaoyi committed suicide, the affair was finally exposed, and Zhao Houfeiyan was killed for his crime.

古文：此焚巢杀子后号之应也。
现代文：造就是焚巢杀子然后败亡号啕的应验。
English: To create is to burn the nest, kill the children, and then be defeated.

古文：一曰，王莽贪虐而任社稷之重，卒成易姓之祸云。
现代文：另一说法是指王莽贪婪暴虐，却被任为国家的重臣，终于酿成篡位易姓改朝换代之祸。
English: Another theory is that Wang Mang was greedy and tyrannical, but was appointed as the chief minister of the country, which eventually led to the disaster of usurping the throne, changing the family name, and changing the dynasty.

古文：京房《易传》曰： 人君暴虐，鸟焚其舍。 
现代文：京房《易传》说： 人君暴虐，乌就烧自己的巢。 
English: Kyobo's "I Chuan" said: When a tyrant becomes tyrannical, he burns his own nest.

古文：鸿嘉二年三月，博士行大射礼，有飞雉集于庭，历阶登堂而雊。
现代文：鸿嘉二年三月，博士们行大射礼，有雉鸡飞来聚集在庭院，然后又沿着台阶升到厅内叫了起来。
English: In March of the second year of Hongjia, the doctors made a grand salute, and a pheasant flew to gather in the courtyard, and then climbed the steps to the hall and called out.

古文：后雉又集太常、宗正、丞相、御史大夫、大司马车骑将军之府，又集未央宫承明殿屋上。
现代文：后来雉鸡又同样飞集到太常、宗正、丞相、御史大夫、大司马车骑将军等大臣府上，还飞集到未央宫承明殿的屋顶上。
English: Later, the pheasants also flew to the minister's office such as Taizhang, Zongzheng, the prime minister, the secretary of state, the grand secretary of the carriage and cavalry general, and also flew to the roof of the Weiyang Palace Chengming Hall.

古文：时大司马车骑将军王音、待诏宠等上言： 天地之气，以类相应，谴告人君，甚微而著。
现代文：当时大司马车骑将军王音、待诏宠等人对皇帝说： 天地之间的气，同类相应，儆告人君的天意，是从微小之事让人看到大的方面。
English: At that time, people such as the chariot-driving general Wang Yin and the emperor's favorite said to the emperor: The qi between heaven and earth are of the same kind, and it is the will of heaven to tell people about you. It is from the small things that people can see the big aspects.

古文：雉者听察，先闻雷声，故《月令》以纪气。
现代文：雉鸟听得最清楚，能最先听到雷声，所以《月令》上说雉鸟报知节气。
English: The ostrich hears the most clearly and can hear the thunder first, so the "Lunar Calendar" says that the ostrich announces the solar terms.

古文：经载高宗雊雉之异，以明转祸为福之验。
现代文：经书上记载了殷商高宗之时雉登鼎耳而叫的异象，已表明了转祸为福的验证。
English: The book of scripture records the vision of Yin Shang Gaozong at the time of the great earthquake, which has shown the verification of turning misfortune into blessing.

古文：今雉以博士行礼之日大众聚会，飞集于庭，历阶登堂，万众睢睢，惊怪连日。
现代文：现在雉鸟在博士行礼之日大群聚集，飞聚到庭院，沿阶升到厅堂，万众之人睢睢仰视，一连几惊慌不解其故。
English: Now the storks gather in large flocks on the day of the doctor's ceremony, fly to the courtyard, climb up the steps to the hall, and all the people look up, a few panic and do not understand why.

古文：径历三公之府，太常宗正典宗庙骨肉之官，然后入宫。
现代文：后来又挨个到了三公大臣的府邸及太常、宗正等主持宗庙和宗室之事的官府，然后进入皇宫。
English: Later, they went one by one to the residences of the three ministers of state and the government offices where the Imperial Family's temples and ancestral residences were presided over by the Grand Duke and Grand Duchess, and then entered the Imperial Palace.

古文：其宿留告晓人，具备深切，虽人道相戒，何以过是！ 
现代文：这样的停留告诫人们，已最为周到深切，就是人的劝诫，也比不过这样！ 
English: This kind of stopping to admonish people is the most thoughtful and profound, it is the exhortation of man, it is more than that!

古文：后帝使中常侍晁闳诏音曰： 闻捕得雉，毛羽颇摧折，类拘执者，得无人为之？ 
现代文：后来成帝派中常侍鼂闳传旨王音说： 听说捕到的雉乌，羽毛多有损伤，好像是被抓住捆绑遇，不至于是有人故意抓来而放飞的吧？ 
English: Later, Wang Yin, a frequent attendant of the Emperor Cheng faction, said: It is said that the quail feathers caught are mostly damaged, as if they were caught and tied. It is not as if someone deliberately caught and released them, right?

古文：音复对曰： 陛下安得亡国之语？
现代文：王音回说： 陛下怎可说出这种亡国丧家的话？
English: Wang Yin replied, "How can Your Majesty say such words about losing your country and your home?"

古文：不知谁主为佞谄之计，诬乱圣德如此者！
现代文：不知道是谁编出这种奸佞谗言，这样来诬害圣德！
English: I don't know who concocted this false accusation to slander the sanctity of life!

古文：左右阿谀甚众，不待臣音复谄而足。
现代文：陛下左右亲近臣子中阿谀奉承者很多，用不着为臣王音再说这些无稽之谈了。
English: There are many flatterers among the courtiers who are close to His Majesty, so there is no need to repeat such nonsense for the sake of the vassal king.

古文：公卿以下，保位自守，莫有正言。
现代文：现今公卿大臣以下，个个衹图保住自己的官位而无所做为，没人敢出来讲真话。
English: Nowadays, no one below the rank of court noble or minister dares to come out and speak the truth, as they all try to retain their official positions without doing anything.

古文：如令陛下觉寤，惧大祸且至身，深责臣下，绳以圣法，臣音当先受诛，岂有以自解哉！
现代文：如能让陛下觉悟过来，因担心大祸将要落到身上，而严厉责怪臣下，用庄严的法律予以惩罚，为臣王音会第一个被处罚，能有什么理由为自己辩解啊！
English: If we can make His Majesty come to his senses and, fearing that a great calamity is about to befall him, severely blame his vassals and punish them with a solemn law, for the vassal Wangyin will be the first to be punished, what reason can he have to justify himself!

古文：今即位十五年，继嗣不立，日日驾车而出，失行流闻，海内传之，甚于京师。
现代文：时至今日陛下即位已十五年了，太子未立，曰曰驾车出游，淫逸之行远近传说，世人皆知，外地说得比京城还热闸。
English: To this day, it has been fifteen years since His Majesty ascended the throne. The crown prince has yet to be crowned. He is said to travel by car, and his lascivious behavior is legendary. It is known all over the world, and is said to be hotter than the capital.

古文：外有微行之害，内有疾病之忧，皇天数见灾异，欲人变更，终已不改。
现代文：现在是外有微行私游带来的有害影响，内有身体得病的忧愁，老天多次显示灾异，要您有所改正，却终于不改。
English: Now it is the harmful effects brought about by the micro-traveling of the outside world, the sorrow of the body getting sick inside, and God has repeatedly shown disasters and abnormalities, and you have to correct it, but you finally do not change it.

古文：天尚不能感动陛下，臣子何望？
现代文：老天都不能感动陛下，臣子我还能抱什么希望？
English: If even the heavens cannot move His Majesty, what hope can I, a courtier, have?

古文：独有极言待死，命在朝暮而已。
现代文：不过是把话说尽等待处死，我的命衹有朝夕罢了。
English: It's just a matter of waiting for the sentence to be carried out. My life is on the line day and night.

古文：如有不然，老母安得处所，尚何皇太后之有！
现代文：如果陛下终究不听天谴人谏，以行改正，老母怎得安居，还能再做皇太后吗！
English: If your majesty does not listen to God's reprimand and make corrections, how can my mother live in peace and still be the empress dowager?

古文：高祖天下当以谁属乎！
现代文：高祖创立的帝业江山还有可以归属之人吗！
English: Is there still anyone who can belong to the empire that Gaozu founded?

古文：宜谋于贤知，克己复礼，以求天意，继嗣可立，灾变尚可销也。 
现代文：应该找贤能智慧的人，好好谋划，克制而改正自己的不良行为，遵从而恢复礼义，以此求得老天的恩德之意，然后才能有太子可立，灾变也才可消除。 
English: It is necessary to find a virtuous and wise person, make a good plan, restrain and correct one's bad behavior, and comply with the restoration of etiquette, in order to obtain God's grace, and then a prince can be established, and the disaster can be eliminated.

古文：成帝绥和二年三月，天水平襄有燕生爵，哺食至大，俱飞去。
现代文：成帝绥和二年三月，天水的平襄有燕生雀，喂大了之后，雀都飞走了。
English: In March of the second year of Emperor Chengdu's reign, there was a sparrow finch in Pingxiang, Tianshui. After it was fed, the finch flew away.

古文：京房《易传》曰： 贼臣在国，厥咎燕生爵，诸侯销。 
现代文：京房《易传》说： 奸臣在朝，由之而出的灾祥就是燕子生雀，诸侯王被罢黜。 
English: Kyobo's "I Chuan" said: A treacherous vassal is in the court, and the calamity arising from it is a swallow giving birth to a sparrow, and the prince is deposed.

古文：一曰，生非其类，子不嗣世。
现代文：一种说法认为，生了不是同类的东西，预示自己的儿子不能继位。
English: One theory is that if you give birth to something that is not of the same kind, it means that your son will not be able to succeed.

古文：史记鲁定公时，季桓子穿井，得土缶，中得虫若羊，近羊祸也。
现代文：史书上记载，鲁定公的时候，季桓子掘井，得到一个上盆，盆中有个像羊一样的小动物，这近乎羊祸。
English: According to historical records, when Lu Ding Gong, Ji Huan Zi dug a well and obtained a upper basin. In the basin, there was a small animal like a sheep, which was close to a sheep disaster.

古文：羊者，地上之物，幽于土中，象定公不用孔子而听季氏，暗昧不明之应也。
现代文：羊，本是生活在地面上的动物，却埋藏在地下土中，这是象征鲁定公不任用孔子而听从季氏，黑白不分、是非不明的应验。
English: The sheep was originally an animal that lived on the ground, but it was buried in the underground soil. This is a symbol that Luding did not appoint Confucius, but obeyed the Ji clan, regardless of black and white, and whether it is right or wrong is unknown.

古文：一曰，羊去野外而拘土缶者，象鲁君失其所而拘于季氏，季氏亦将拘于家臣也。
现代文：另一种说法认为，羊不在野外却扣在土盆裹，这象征鲁君失其君位而被季氏所拘留，季氏也将被自己的家臣所拘留。
English: Another view is that the sheep is not out in the open but is wrapped in an earthenware pot, which symbolizes that Lu Jun lost his royal position and was detained by Ji, who will also be detained by his vassals.

古文：是岁，季氏家臣阳虎囚季桓子。
现代文：这一年季氏家臣阳虎囚禁了季桓子。
English: In the same year, Yang Hu, a vassal of the Ji clan, imprisoned Ji Huan Zi.

古文：后三年，阳虎劫公伐孟氏，兵败，窃宝玉大弓而出亡。
现代文：三年后，阳虎劫持鲁定公以讨伐孟孙氏，军队失败，就盗走宝玉大弓而叛走。
English: Three years later, Yang Hu kidnapped Luding in order to fight against the Meng Sun clan. When the army failed, he stole the precious jade bow and rebelled.

古文：《左氏传》鲁襄公时，宋有生女子赤而毛，弃之堤下，宋平公母共姬之御者见而收之，因名曰弃。
现代文：《左氏传》载，鲁襄公的时候，宋国有人生下一个身长红毛的女儿，女儿被遣弃在河堤之下，宋平公之母共姬的赶车人发现而收养下来，于是取名叫弃。
English: According to "The Legend of Zuo," when Lu Xianggong was alive, someone in Song gave birth to a red-haired daughter. The daughter was abandoned under the river embankment. The driver of Song Pinggong's mother's car found her and adopted her, so she was named "Abandoned."

古文：长而美好，纳之平公，生子曰佐。
现代文：长大成人后很漂亮，就被平公纳为姬妾，生下一子名字叫佐。
English: She was very beautiful when she became an adult, and was accepted as a concubine by Ping Gong. She gave birth to a son named Zuo.

古文：后宋臣伊戾谗太子痤而杀之。
现代文：后来宋臣伊戾向平公进谗言杀了太子痤。
English: Later, Song Zhenyi told Ping Gong to kill the crown prince.

古文：先是，大夫华元出奔晋，华弱奔鲁，华臣奔陈，华合比奔卫。
现代文：在此之前，大夫华元逃到晋国，华弱逃到鲁国，华臣逃到陈国，华合比逃到卫国。
English: Prior to this, Dr. Hua Yuan fled to Jin, Hua Weak fled to Lu, Hua Chen fled to Chen, and Hua Hebi fled to Wei.

古文：刘向以为时则火灾赤眚之明应也。
现代文：刘向认为当时就是火灾赤眚的明验。
English: Liu Xiang believes that at that time, the fire was the epitome of red ink.

古文：京房《易传》曰： 尊卑不别，厥妖女生赤毛。 
现代文：京房《易传》说： 尊卑不分，就会出现女孩身长红毛的妖异。 
English: Beijing-based "Easy Biography" said: No matter who is superior or inferior, a girl with long red hair will appear.

古文：惠帝二年，天雨血于宜阳，一顷所，刘向以为赤眚也。
现代文：汉惠帝二年，在宜阳，天空下血雨，有一顷地那么大的地方。刘向认为这是赤眚。
English: In the second year of Emperor Han Hui, in Yiyang, the sky rained blood, there was a place as big as a hectare. Liu Xiang thought it was the Red Dragonfly.

古文：时又冬雷，桃李华，常奥之罚也。
现代文：当时又正值冬天打雷，桃李开花，出现了冬季常暖的天罚。
English: At that time, it was also the time of thunder in winter, the peach and plum blossomed, and there was a natural punishment for the warm winter.

古文：是时，政舒缓，诸吕用事，谗口妄行，杀三皇子，建立非嗣，及不当立之王，退王陵、赵尧、周昌。
现代文：那时朝政萎靡不振，吕氏诸人任职掌权，谗言诬陷为所欲为，杀了三个皇于，立了不是嗣子的人为太子，以及不该立王的封了王，罢免了王陵、赵尧、周昌等重臣。
English: At that time, the government of the dynasty was sluggish, and people of the Lv clan held positions of power. They killed three emperors, set up a prince who was not the heir, and crowned a king who should not have been set up, and dismissed senior ministers such as Wang Ling, Zhao Wei, and Zhou Chang.

古文：吕太后崩，大臣共诛灭诸吕，僵尸流血。
现代文：后来吕太后驾崩，大臣们一起消灭了吕氏各王，人死血流。
English: Later, after the death of Empress Lv, the ministers together eliminated all the kings of the Lv clan, and bloodshed ensued.

古文：京房《易传》曰： 归狱不解，兹谓追非，厥咎天雨血；兹谓不亲，民有怨心，不出三年，无其宗人。 
现代文：京房《易传》说： 归罪不释，就叫做所追不当或执迷不悟，由此而出现的灾象就是天上下血；这叫做为政不善不亲，民有怨愤之心，不出三年，就会亡族灭宗。 
English: Jingfang's "Easy Biography" said: "If the culprit is not pardoned, it is called improper pursuit or obstinacy, and the resulting disaster is bloodshed; this is called bad politics, the people are resentful, and within three years, the nation will be destroyed.

古文：又曰： 佞人禄，功臣僇，天雨血。 
现代文：又说： 坏人得官禄，功臣遭杀戮，天上就下血。 
English: He also said, "When a bad person gets an official reward, and a meritorious person is killed, blood will fall from the sky."

古文：哀帝建平四年四月，山阳湖陵雨血，广三尺。
现代文：哀帝建平四年四月，山阳湖陵天空血雨，有宽三尺、长五尺那么一片。
English: In April of the fourth year of Emperor Jianping's reign, the sky over Sanyang Lake was covered in blood and rain. It was about three feet wide and five feet long.

古文：长五尺，大者如钱，小者如麻子。
现代文：血雨点，大的像钱币，小的像麻子。
English: Blood raindrops, large like coins, small like pockmarks.

古文：后二年，帝崩。王莽擅朝，诛贵戚丁、傅，大臣董贤等皆放徙远方，与诸吕同象，诛死者少，雨血亦少。
现代文：两年后，哀帝驾崩，王莽把持朝政，诛杀了丁氏、傅氏两家国戚，把大臣董贤等都放逐到远方，与当年吕氏一伙逆行所招致的天象一样。
English: Two years later, after the Emperor's death, Wang Mang took control of the imperial government, killed the two relatives of the Ding and Fu families, and banished the minister Dong Xian and others to a faraway place, just like the celestial elephant caused by the Lv group's retrograde act.

古文：传曰： 听之不聪，是谓不谋，厥咎急，厥罚恒寒，厥极贫。
现代文：衹是因为杀人少，所以下的血雨也少了。传上说： 听之不聪，是谓不谋，厥咎急，厥罚恒寒，厥极贫。
English: It is because there are fewer homicides that there is less bloodshed. Legend has it that: If you don't listen, you won't succeed, if you rush to blame, if you punish, if you remain cold, if you are extremely poor.

古文：时则有鼓妖，时则有鱼孽，时则有豕祸，时则有耳疴，时则有黑眚黑祥。
现代文：时则有鼓妖，时则有负孽，时则有豕祸，时则有耳疴，时则有黑眚黑祥。
English: Sometimes there is a drum demon, sometimes there is an evil spirit, sometimes there is a misfortune, sometimes there is a deafness, sometimes there is a darkness.

古文：惟火沴水。 
现代文：惟火渗水。 
English: It's fire and water.

古文： 听之不聪，是谓不谋 ，言上偏听不聪，下情隔塞，则不能谋虑利害，失在严急，故其咎急也。
现代文： 听之不聪，是谓不谋 ，是说国君偏听不明，对下情隔塞不知，从而不能考虑而知晓事情的利害之所在，往往因为处理严厉急切而造成失败，所以说过错在于急。
English: If you don't listen, it means you don't have a plan, which means that the sovereign is not listening well, is not aware of the situation, and therefore can't consider and know the interests of the matter, and often fails because of the strict and urgent handling, so it is said that the mistake lies in the urgency.

古文：盛冬日短，寒以杀物，政促迫，故其罚常寒也。
现代文：隆冬季节曰短夜长，寒冷的天气能冻杀生物，所以，如果为政治国急促迫切，就会导致天气长期寒冷的惩罚。
English: In midwinter, the days are short, the cold hurts everything, and politics is urgent, so the punishment is a long cold.

古文：寒则不生百谷，上下俱贫，故其极贫也。
现代文：天寒就使百谷不能生长，国家和百姓都陷于贫困，所以说其不良后果是贫穷。
English: Cold will make the hundred grains can not grow, up and down are poor, so it is ultimately poverty.

古文：君严猛而闭下，臣战栗而塞耳，则妄闻之气发于音声，故有鼓妖。
现代文：当国君的严猛寡恩，就使下边的人闭口不敢说话，使臣子们提心吊胆，也就等于塞上自己的耳朵，于是胡听妄间之气变成声音发出来，所以有鼓妖。
English: The monarch is stern and powerful and makes the subordinates closed, the courtiers are afraid and panicked and can not listen to opinions, and the spirit of listening will occur, so there is a drum demon.

古文：寒气动，故有鱼孽。
现代文：寒气动，就有鱼受灾。
English: It's cold and windy, so there's fish poop.

古文：雨以龟以孽，龟能陆处，非极阴也；鱼去水而死，极阴之孽也。
现代文：雨多而龟为孽，龟能生活在陆地上，小是最阴之物；鱼离开水就死，则是极阴之妖孽的表现。
English: If it rains a lot, the turtle is evil; if the turtle can live on land, the small turtle is the most shadowy thing; if the fish leaves the water and dies, it is the manifestation of the evil of extreme shade.

古文：于《易》， 坎 为豕，豕大耳而不聪察，听气毁，故有豕祸也，一曰，寒岁豕多死，及为怪，亦是也。
现代文：在《易经》上《坎》为猪，猪耳大却听力不好，所以听气有伤，就有猪祸的出现。一种说法认为，天气寒冷之年猪多死，等到变成怪物，也是这个原因。
English: In "I Ching," "Kan" is a pig. The pig's ear is large, but its hearing is not good. Therefore, if there is a hearing loss, there will be a pig disaster. One theory is that pigs die more in cold weather, and this is also the reason why they turn into monsters.

古文：及人，则多病耳者，故有耳疴。
现代文：波及到人，则往往是耳朵受损，所以有耳病。
English: When it affects people, it is often the ear that is damaged, so there is an ear disease.

古文：水色黑，故有黑眚黑祥。
现代文：水为黑色，所以有黑眚黑祥。
English: The color of the water is black, so there are black disasters and black auspicious signs.

古文：凡听伤者病水气，水气病则火疴之。
现代文：凡听力受伤的都是病于水气，水气有损火气就来加害。
English: All hearing injuries are caused by water vapour. Water vapour damages hearing, while fire vapour damages it.

古文：其极贫者，顺之，其福曰富。
现代文：到了贫穷之时，如能顺天而行，得到的福气就是富足。
English: In the end, it is poverty, and after compliance, its blessing is called wealth.

古文：刘歆听传曰有介虫孽也，庶征之恒寒。
现代文：刘歆相信传上说的有介虫妖孽，多见的征兆就是常寒。
English: Liu Wei believed in the legend that there were maggots, and the most common symptom was the common cold.

古文：刘向以为春秋无其应，周之末世舒缓微弱，政在臣下，奥暖而已，故籍秦以为验。
现代文：刘向认为在春秋时代没有这种应验，当时正值周朝的末世，为政萎靡不振，国势微弱，朝政被臣下把持，出现的天象都是燠暖而已，所以到秦朝得到应验。
English: Liu Xiang believed that there was no such fulfillment in the Spring and Autumn Period. At that time, it was the last days of the Zhou Dynasty. The government was sluggish, the country was weak, the government was controlled by the vassals, and the celestial objects that appeared were only warm, so they were fulfilled in the Qin Dynasty.

古文：秦始皇即位尚幼，委政太后，太后淫于吕不韦及嫪毐，封毐为长信侯，以太原郡为毐国，宫室苑囿自恣，政事断焉。
现代文：秦始皇帝刚即位时尚在幼年，朝政交给太后，太后与吕不韦以及穋毒通奸，封穋毒为长信侯，把太原郡作为穋毒的封国，宫室苑囿任他进出，为所欲为，朝政也由他决断。
English: When Emperor Qin Shi Huang ascended to the throne, he was still a child. He gave the dynastic power to the empress dowager, the empress dowager and Lü Buwei committed adultery, and the dynastic power was held by Changxin Hou. He made Taiyuan County a dynastic power, and allowed him to enter and leave the palace and do whatever he wanted. He also decided the dynastic power.

古文：故天冬雷，以见阳不禁闭，以涉危害，舒奥迫近之变也。
现代文：所以老天在冬季打雷，表现出阳气没有得到禁闭，而造成危害，已经陷入舒缓松弛的变化。
English: Therefore, God thundered in the winter, showing that the yang qi was not confined, but caused harm, and has fallen into a change of soothing relaxation.

古文：始皇即冠，毒惧诛作乱，始皇诛之，斩首数百级，大臣二十人，皆车裂以徇，夷灭其宗，迁四千余家于房陵。
现代文：秦始皇成年后，穋毒害怕被处死而发动叛乱，秦始皇杀了他，斩了二百多人，二十多个大臣都被车裂而死，抄灭了他们的宗族，另外还把有牵连的四千多家迁徙到房陵。
English: After Qin Shi Huang became an adult, he was afraid of being executed and started a rebellion. Qin Shi Huang killed him and beheaded more than two hundred people. More than twenty ministers were killed by the chariot, exterminating their clans. In addition, more than four thousand people who were implicated were moved to the mausoleum.

古文：是岁四月，寒，民有冻死者。
现代文：这年四月，天气寒冷，有人被冻死。
English: In April of this year, the weather was cold and people froze to death.

古文：数年之间，缓急如此，寒奥辄应，此其效也。
现代文：数年之间，政治如此由舒缓而转为严酷，天气相应而由暖变寒，造就是明显的应验。
English: In the space of a few years, politics has gone from soothing to grim, and the weather has gone from warm to cold in response, creating a palpable sense of fulfilment.

古文：刘歆以为大雨雪，及未当雨雪而雨雪，及大雨雹，陨霜杀叔草，皆常寒之罚也。
现代文：刘歆认为下大雪，或不该下雪而下雪，以及下大冰雹，或下霜冻死庄稼、草木，都是表现了常寒的天罚。
English: Liu Wei believes that heavy snowfall, or snow that should not snow, as well as heavy hail, or frost that kills crops and plants, are all manifestations of the eternal cold.

古文：刘向以为常雨属貌不恭。
现代文：刘向认为常雨不止属于态度不恭敬导致的。
English: Liu Xiang believes that frequent rain is not only caused by disrespectful attitude.

古文：京房《易传》曰： 有德遭险，兹谓逆命，厥异寒。
现代文：京房《易传》说： 有道德的人遭到危险，这叫做违反天命，由之导致的变异是寒冷。
English: Jing Fang's "I Chuan" said: A moral person is in danger, which is called a violation of fate, and the mutation caused by it is cold.

古文：诛过深，当奥而寒，尽六日，亦为雹，害正不诛，兹谓养贼，寒七十二日，杀蜚禽。
现代文：诛罚过重，就会出现该热而寒的变化，持续六天，也会变成冰雹。对危害正人正事的奸佞不施行诛罚，这叫做养贼，就会大寒七十二日。死飞禽。
English: If the punishment is too severe, there will be a change from hot to cold, which will last for six days, and will also turn into hail. If the punishment is not imposed on the traitors who endanger the rights and duties of the righteous, which is called raising thieves, there will be a severe cold for 72 days. Dead birds.

古文：道人始去兹谓伤，其寒物无霜而死，涌水出。
现代文：有道之人被贬逐，这叫做伤，由之导致的天寒往往是生物无霜而死，有水外涌。
English: When a virtuous person is dethroned, this is called a wound, and the resulting cold is often the death of a creature without frost, with water gushing out.

古文：战不量敌，兹谓辱命，其寒虽雨物不茂。
现代文：作战而不了解敌人的力量，这叫做有负于君命，由之导致天寒，虽然有雨作物也不茂盛。
English: To fight without understanding the strength of the enemy is to fail in one's duty, and this leads to cold weather, and even if there is rain, the crops do not grow well.

古文：闻善不予，厥咎聋。 
现代文：听到了善事却不予以实行，病在耳聋。 
English: If he hears a good thing and does not accept it, he is guilty of deafness.

古文：桓公八年 十月，雨雪 。
现代文：桓公八年 十月，下雪 。
English: In October of the eighth year of King Kan, it snowed.

古文：周十月，今八月也，未可以雪，刘向以为时夫人有淫齐之行，而桓有妒媢之心，夫人将杀，其象见也。
现代文：周代的十月，是现在的八月，不是下雪的时候，刘向认为，当时鲁桓公夫人有与齐君淫乱的行为，鲁桓公因此有妒恨之心，夫人要杀死桓公，于是显示了这一天象。
English: In the October of Zhou Dynasty, it is now August, not the time of snow. Liu Xiang believed that Lu Huan's wife had sexual intercourse with Qi Jun at that time, so Lu Huan had a jealous heart, and his wife wanted to kill Huan, so she showed this celestial elephant.

古文：桓不觉寤，后与夫人俱如齐而杀死。
现代文：桓公不觉悟，后来与夫人一起到了齐国而果然被杀。
English: Emperor Kan did not repent, and later he and his wife went to Qi Province, where he was killed.

古文：凡雨，阴也，雪又雨之阴也，出非其时，迫近象也。
现代文：凡是雨，都属阴气，而雪又是雨中更阴的，不该下雪的时候下雪，这是危急迫近的天象。
English: All rain is gloomy, but snow is even gloomier in the rain. It snows when it shouldn't. This is a sign of impending danger.

古文：董仲舒以为象夫人专恣，阴气盛也。
现代文：董仲舒认为这象征了夫人的专横恣肆，阴气过盛。
English: Dong Zhongshu thought that this symbolized his wife's tyranny and arrogance.

古文：釐公十年 冬，大雨雪 。
现代文：僖公十年 冬天，下大雪 。
English: In the winter of the 10th year of Xingguo, it snowed heavily.

古文：刘向以为，先是釐公立妾为夫人，阴居阳位，阴气盛也。
现代文：刘向认为，这是先前僖公立妾为夫人，阴居阳位，即阴气遇盛造成的。
English: Liu Xiang believed that this was caused by the previous public concubine being the wife and the yin being in the yang position, that is, the yin and qi met with prosperity.

古文：《公羊经》曰 大雨雹 。
现代文：《公羊经》上说 下大冰雹 。
English: The Book of the Ram says that there will be a great hailstorm.

古文：董仲舒以为，公胁于齐桓公，立妾为夫人，不敢进群妾，故专一之象见诸雹，皆为有所渐胁也，行专一之政云。
现代文：董仲舒认为，鲁僖公迫于齐桓公的威胁，立妾为夫人，不敢亲近其他姬妾，所以宠幸独占之象表现在冰雹上，这都是阴气曰趋严重形成威胁，从而造成宠幸独占而导致的。
English: Dong Zhongshu believed that Prince Lu Xun was forced by the threat of Prince Qi Huan to take a concubine as his wife and did not dare to get close to other concubines, so the phenomenon of favor monopoly was manifested on the ice axe. This was all caused by the threat of yin qi becoming more serious, resulting in favor monopoly.

古文：昭公四年 正月，大雨雪 。
现代文：昭公四年 正月，下大雪 。
English: In the first month of the fourth year of the reign of King Zhao, it snowed heavily.

古文：刘向以为，昭取于吴而为同姓，谓之吴孟子。君行于上，臣非于下。
现代文：刘向认为，昭公从吴国娶来同为姬姓的女子，称之为吴孟子，国君在上面行此非礼之事，臣子们自然在下面非议。
English: Liu Xiang believed that Zhaogong married a woman with the same surname of Ji from the State of Wu and called her Wu Mengzi. The sovereign did this impolite thing above, and the courtiers naturally criticized it below.

古文：又三家已强，皆贱公行，慢侮之心生。
现代文：再者季氏、孟孙、叔孙三家大夫已经强大，都鄙视昭公的行为，已生轻慢侮辱之心。
English: In addition, the three doctors, Ji, Meng Sun and Meng Sun's uncle and grandson, were already powerful. They all despised the behavior of Zhaogong, and they had a heart of contempt and insult.

古文：董仲舒以为季孙宿任政，阴气盛也。
现代文：董仲舒认为当时季孙宿执掌国政，阴气盛而造成这一天象。
English: Dong Zhongshu believed that at that time, Ji Sunju was in charge of state affairs, and the gloomy weather caused this phenomenon.

古文：文帝四年六月，大雨雪。
现代文：汉孝文帝四年六月，下大雪。
English: In June of the fourth year of Emperor Han Xiaowen, it snowed heavily.

古文：后三岁，淮南王长谋反，发觉，迁，道死。
现代文：三年后，淮南王刘长谋反，被发觉，遭到流放，死在道上。
English: Three years later, Liu Chang, the king of Huainan, plotted a rebellion, was discovered, exiled, and died on the road.

古文：京房《易传》曰： 夏雨雪，戒臣为乱。 
现代文：塞屋《易传》说： 夏天降雪，告诫有臣叛乱。 
English: Saiya's "I Chuan" said: Snowfall in summer is a warning that there will be a rebellion of vassals.

古文：景帝中六年三月，雨雪。
现代文：景帝中六年三月，下雪。
English: In March of the sixth year of Jingdi Middle School, it snowed.

古文：其六月，匈奴入上郡取苑马，吏卒战死者二千余人。
现代文：这年六月，匈奴侵入上皱掠取苑中喂养的马匹，将士战死了二千多人。
English: In June of that year, the Huns invaded Shangfu and plundered the horses that were being fed in the courtyard. More than two thousand soldiers were killed in the fighting.

古文：明年，条侯周亚夫下狱死。
现代文：第二年，条侯周亚夫下狱而死。
English: The following year, the warlord Zhou Yafu was released from prison and died.

古文：武帝元狩元年十二月，大雨雪，民多冻死。
现代文：武帝元狩元年十二月，下大雪，百姓很多被冻死。
English: In December of the first year of Emperor Wu's reign, there was heavy snowfall, and many people froze to death.

古文：是岁，淮南、衡山王谋反，发觉，皆自杀。
现代文：这一年，淮南王、衡山王谋反，被发觉，都畏罪自杀。
English: This year, Huainan Wang and Hengshan Wang plotted a rebellion and were discovered, and both committed suicide.

古文：使者行郡国，治党与，坐死者数万人。
现代文：钦差大臣巡行淮南、衡山等郡国，查办参与谋反的人，治罪处死了数万人。
English: The Minister of Justice toured Huainan, Hengshan and other counties to investigate and deal with those who participated in the rebellion, and tens of thousands of people were sentenced to death.

古文：元鼎二年三月，雪，平地厚五尺。
现代文：元鼎二年三月，下雪，平地雪厚五尺。
English: In March of the second year of the Yuan Dynasty, it snowed. The snow on the flat ground was five feet thick.

古文：是岁，御史大夫张汤有罪自杀，丞相严青翟坐与三长史谋陷汤，青翟自杀，三长史皆弃市。
现代文：这一年御史大夫张汤有罪自杀，丞相严青翟被判与三名长史阴谋陷害张汤之罪。严青翟自杀，三长史也都被斩首。
English: In this year, the imperial historian Zhang Tang was found guilty and committed suicide, and the minister of justice Yan Qingyu was found guilty of conspiring with three long-term historians to frame Zhang Tang. Yan Qingyu committed suicide, and the three long-term historians were also beheaded.

古文：元鼎三年三月水冰，四月雨雪，关东十余郡人相食。
现代文：元鼎三年三月河水结冰，四月下雪，关东有十几郡闸灾人吃人。
English: In the third year of the Yuan Dynasty, the river froze in March and snowed in April. In the eastern Kanto region, more than a dozen counties were affected by floods.

古文：是岁，民不占缗线有告者，以半畀之。
现代文：这一年百姓中有人不自报缯钱之税而被人告发的，告发者可得缯钱的一半。
English: In this year, if someone among the common people is reported for not self-reporting the stolen money tax, the whistleblower can get half of the stolen money.

古文：元帝建昭二年十一月，齐、楚地大雪，深五尺。
现代文：元帝建昭二年十一月，齐、楚两地下大雪，雪厚五尺。
English: In November of the second year of Emperor Jian Zhao of the Yuan Dynasty, there was heavy snow on the ground in Qi and Chu, and the snow was five feet thick.

古文：是岁，魏郡太守京房为石显所告，坐与妻父淮阳王舅张博、博弟光劝视淮阳王以不义。
现代文：这一年魏郡太守京房被石显诬告，被判为与岳父即淮阳王之舅张博、以及张博的弟弟张光，劝导淮阳王谋反之罪。
English: In this year, Wei County Governor Jingfang was falsely accused by Shi Xianlu and convicted of conspiring with his father-in-law Zhang Bo, the uncle of King Huaiyang, and Zhang Bo's brother Zhang Guang, to persuade King Huaiyang to rebel.

古文：博要斩，光、房弃市，御史大夫郑弘坐免为庶人。
现代文：张博被腰斩，张光、京房被斩首，御史大夫郑弘被治罪免官成为百姓。
English: Zhang Bo was beheaded, Zhang Guang and Jing Fang were beheaded, and the chief historian Zheng Hong was exonerated and became a commoner.

古文：成帝即位，显伏辜，淮阳王上书冤博，辞语增加，家属徙者复得还。
现代文：成帝即位后，石显伏法，淮阳王上书为张搂伸冤，说明互题妄加不实之词。这样，受害者的家属才得还乡。
English: After the enthronement of Emperor Cheng, Shi Xianfufo and Huaiyang Wang sent a letter to Zhang Xuan to redress the grievances, explaining that the words of each other were exaggerated and untrue. In this way, the victims' families had to return to their hometowns.

古文：建昭四年三月，雨雪，燕多死。
现代文：建昭四年三月，下雪，燕子死了很多。
English: In March of Jian Zhao's fourth year, it snowed, and many swallows died.

古文：谷永对曰： 皇后桑蚕以治祭服，共事天地宗庙，正以是日疾风自西北，大寒雨雪，坏败其功，以章不乡。
现代文：谷永答覆天子说： 皇后有种桑养蚕治办祭祀所需服装与恭敬奉事天地宗庙之责，正在这一天却刮起强烈的西北风，大寒、下雪，败坏了皇后的功业，这表示皇后未能符合天帝的心愿。
English: Gu Yong replied to the heavenly son, saying: The empress has a kind of mulberry to raise silkworms, and the necessary clothing to carry out the sacrificial rites and respectfully serve the responsibility of the heaven and earth ancestral temple. On this day, however, a strong northwest wind blew, and it was cold and snowy, which spoiled the work of the empress. This indicates that the empress failed to meet the wishes of the heavenly emperor.

古文：宜斋戒辟寝，以深自责，请皇后就宫，鬲闭门户，毋得擅上。
现代文：现在应该斋戒避免伴寝，以便深自反省。请皇后回到自己的宫中，关闭上门户，不得独占天子之爱。
English: Now is the time to fast, to avoid sleeping with someone, to reflect deeply, to ask the queen to return to her palace, to close the upper gate, and not to monopolize the love of the Son of God.

古文：且令众妾人人更进，以时博施。
现代文：再让其他姬妾人人轮流伴君就寝，按时而普遍施恩。
English: Then let other concubines take turns to accompany you to bed, and give grace on time and in general.

古文：皇天说喜，庶几可以得贤明之嗣。
现代文：这样老天高兴了，差不多就可以得到贤明的子嗣。
English: In this way, God is pleased, and it is almost possible to get a wise son.

古文：即不行臣言，灾异俞甚，天变成形，臣民欲复捐身关策，不及事已。 
现代文：如不按为臣的话去做，灾异就会愈益严重，天变有形，到那时臣下我就是想再捐弃生命来劝说天子，也无济于事了。 
English: If you don't do as your vassal says, the disasters will become more and more serious, and the heavens will become tangible. At that time, my vassal, even if I wanted to give up my life to persuade the Son of Heaven, it would not help.

古文：其后许后坐祝诅废。
现代文：造之后，许皇后因祝诅之罪被废黜。
English: After it was built, Empress Xu was deposed for the crime of cursing.

古文：阳朔四年四月，雨雪，燕雀死。
现代文：阳朔四年四月，下雪，燕雀死。
English: In Yangshuo in April of the fourth year, it snowed and the chaffinch died.

古文：后十二年，许皇后自杀。
现代文：十六年后，许皇后自杀。
English: Sixteen years later, Empress Xu committed suicide.

古文：定公元年 十月，陨霜杀菽 。
现代文：定公元年 十月，降霜冻死豆类植物 。
English: In October of the same year, the frost killed the bean plants.

古文：刘向以为，周十月，今八月也。消卦为 观 ，阴气未至君位而杀，诛罚不由君出，在臣下之象也。
现代文：刘向认为周代的十月，就是现在的八月，消卦为《观》，阴气没到君位就肃杀菽类，这是诛罚之令不由国君发出，而由臣下把持的象征。
English: Liu Xiang believed that the October of Zhou Dynasty was the present August, and the elimination of gossip was the "view," and the gloomy spirit did not reach the throne to kill the vultures. This was a symbol that the order to punish the vultures was not issued by the sovereign, but by the vassals.

古文：是时，季氏逐昭公，公死于外，定公得立，故天见灾以视公也。
现代文：当时季氏驱逐昭公，昭公死在外地，定公得立为鲁君，所以天帝用灾来提醒定公。
English: At that time, the Ji clan expelled Zhaogong, Zhaogong died in a foreign country, and Dingong became Lu Jun, so the Heavenly Emperor used the calamity to remind Dingong.

古文：釐公二年 十月，陨霜不杀草 ，为嗣君微，失秉事之象也。
现代文：僖公二年 十月，陨霜不杀草 ，是继位之君微弱而丧失执政之权的象征。
English: In October, the meteorological frost does not kill the grass, it is a symbol of the weak successor and the loss of power.

古文：其后卒在臣下，则灾为之生矣。
现代文：后来终于受制于臣下，灾害也就发生了。
English: Later, they were finally subdued by their vassals, and the disaster happened.

古文：异故言草，灾故言菽，重杀谷。
现代文：出现怪异的时候说杀草，出现灾害的时候说杀菽，有了重灾就说杀谷。
English: When there is a strange occurrence, it is said to kill grass, when there is a disaster, it is said to kill reeds, and when there is a serious disaster, it is said to kill valleys.

古文：一曰菽，草之难杀者也，言杀菽，知草皆死也；言不杀草，知菽亦不死也。
现代文：有一种说法认为，菽是草中难死的一种，如讲杀菽，就可知草都死了；说不杀草，也就知道菽不会死。
English: There is a saying that the grasshopper is a kind of grass that is hard to die. If you kill the grasshopper, you can know that the grass is dead; if you do not kill the grass, you know that the grasshopper will not die.

古文：董仲舒以为，菽，草之强者，天戒若曰，加诛于强臣。
现代文：董仲舒认为菽是草类中的强者，天帝的告诫似乎是说，诛掉强臣。
English: Dong Zhongshu believes that the grasshopper is the strongest of the grasses, and the heavenly emperor's admonition seems to say, "Cut off the strong minister."

古文：言菽，以微见季氏之罚也。
现代文：说到菽，是略微显示了季氏将要受到的惩罚。
English: Speaking of shackles, it's a small indication of the punishment Ji is about to receive.

古文：武帝元光四年四月，陨霜杀草木。
现代文：汉武帝元光四年四月，下霜冻死草木。
English: In April of the 4th year of Emperor Yuan Guang of Hanwu, the grass and trees froze to death.

古文：先是二年，遣五将军三十万众伏马邑下，欲袭单于，单于觉之而去。
现代文：此前二年，派遣了五位将军三十万大军埋伏在马邑，准备袭击匈奴单于，单于发觉而逃离。
English: Two years earlier, five generals had sent 300,000 troops to lie in ambush in Maye, ready to attack the Xiongnu only to flee when they were discovered.

古文：自是始征伐四夷，师出三十余年，天下户口减半。
现代文：从此开始了征伐四夷的过程，出征三十多年，全国户口因耗损或逃亡减少了一半。
English: From then on, the process of the conquest of Shiyi began. After more than thirty years of war, the national hukou was reduced by half due to wear and tear or escape.

古文：京房《易传》曰： 兴兵妄诛，兹谓亡法，厥灾霜，夏杀五谷，冬杀麦。
现代文：京房《易传》说： 发动战争大肆杀戮，这叫做有失法度，引发的天灾就是下霜，夏天霜杀五谷，冬天霜杀麦苗。
English: Beijing House "I Chuan" said: Waging war and killing indiscriminately is called illegal, and the natural disaster caused by it is frost. In summer, frost kills grain, and in winter, frost kills wheat seedlings.

古文：诛不原情，兹谓不仁，其霜，夏先大雷风，冬先雨，乃陨霜，有芒角。
现代文：诛罚不符罪情，这叫做不仁，由之引发下，夏天是先有大雷大风，冬天是先下雨，然后再下霜，形成芒角。
English: The punishment does not fit the crime. This is called unkindness, which causes thunderstorms in the summer and rain and frost in the winter, leading to the formation of horns.

古文：贤圣遭害，其霜附木不下地。
现代文：如圣贤遭到杀害，下的霜就附在草木上，不落到地面。
English: The saints and sages were killed, and the frost clung to the trees and did not come down to the ground.

古文：佞人依刑，兹谓私贼，其霜在草根土隙间。
现代文：佞邪之人掌握了刑罚，这叫做私人行害，霜就落在草根土隙间。
English: Punishment is in the hands of the evil-doer; it is called personal injury, and frost falls on the grass.

古文：不教而诛兹谓虐，其霜反在草下。 
现代文：不行教化而专施诛罚这叫做暴虐，霜不在草上，反在其下。 
English: Punishing without educating is called cruel and unusual punishment.

古文：元帝永兴元年三月，陨霜杀桑；九月二日，陨霜杀稼，天下大饥。
现代文：元帝永光元年三月，下霜冻死桑树；九月二，下霜冻死庄稼，全国发生大的饥荒。
English: In March of the first year of Emperor Yongguang of the Yuan Dynasty, the mulberry trees froze to death; on September 2, the crops froze to death, and a great famine occurred throughout the country.

古文：是时，中书令石显用事专权，与《春秋》定公时陨霜同应。
现代文：当时中书令石显执政专权，这与《春秋》所载鲁定公时的下霜应验相同。
English: At that time, the imperial edict of Shi Xian took effect, which was the same as the fulfillment of the prediction of Luding Gongji in "Spring and Autumn."

古文：成帝即位，显坐作威福诛。
现代文：成帝即位，石显因作威作福之罪被杀。
English: Emperor Cheng ascended the throne, and Shi Xian was killed for the crime of arrogance.

古文：釐公二十九年 秋，大雨雹 。
现代文：僖公二十九年 秋季，下大冰雹 。
English: In the autumn of the year 29 of the Monkey King, there was a great hailstorm.

古文：刘向以为，盛阳雨水，温暖而汤热，阴气胁之不相入，则转而为雹；盛阴雨雪，凝滞而冰寒，阳气薄之不相入，则散而为霰。
现代文：刘向认为，阳气盛就下雨，温暖而水热，阴气夹持而合不进来，就转成冰雹；阴气盛就下雪，凝结而冰寒，阳气夹持而合不进去，就散发而变成霰。
English: According to Liu Xiang, when yang qi is high, it rains, when it is warm, water is hot, when yin qi is restrained and cannot enter, it turns into hail; when yin qi is high, it snows, it condenses and is cold, when yang qi is restrained and cannot enter, it disperses and turns into sleet.

古文：故沸汤之在闭器，而湛于寒泉，则为冰，及雪之销，亦冰解而散，此其验也。
现代文：所以把滚开的水封闭在容器中，然后沉入寒冷的泉水，就变成了冰，而当化雪的时候，冰也就化解而散开，造就是验证。
English: Therefore, the rolled water is enclosed in a container, and then sinks into the cold spring water, it turns into ice, and when the snow melts, the ice also dissolves and spreads, and the creation is the verification.

古文：故雹者阴胁阳也，霰者阳胁阴也，《春秋》不书霰者，犹月食也。
现代文：所以说冰雹是阴气夹持阳气而生，霰是阳气夹持阴气而生。《春秋》不载下霰，如同不载月食一样。
English: Therefore, it is said that hailstones are born from the yin air holding the yang air, and hailstones are born from the yang air holding the yin air. "Spring and Autumn" does not carry hailstones, just as it does not carry lunar eclipses.

古文：釐公末年信用公子遂，遂专权自恣，将至于杀君，故阴胁阳之象见。
现代文：僖公末年信任公子遂，公子遂专权曰恣，甚至于要杀死君主，所以出现了阴气夹持阳气而有冰雹之天象的出现。
English: In the last years of his reign, he trusted his son, and the boy gained absolute power, and even wanted to kill the monarch. Therefore, the appearance of the celestial elephant with hail appeared.

古文：釐公不寤，遂终专权，后二年杀子赤，立宣公。
现代文：僖公没醒悟，公子遂终于掌握大权，两年后杀了子赤，拥立宣公为君。
English: Yan Gong did not wake up, and his son finally seized power. Two years later, he killed his son and made Xuan Gong his heir.

古文：《左氏传》曰： 圣人在上无雹，虽有不为灾。 
现代文：《左氏传》上说： 圣人在位有权就不会有冰雹，就是下了冰雹也成不了灾。 
English: "The Legend of Zuo" says: If a sage has the right to rule, there will be no hail, and even if there is hail, it will not be a disaster.

古文：说曰： 凡物不为灾不书，书大，言为灾也。
现代文：有人解释说：凡是不成灾的事情都不记载，衹记严重的事情，即造成灾害的。
English: It was explained that anything that did not result in a disaster was not recorded, and that serious events, i.e. those that caused disasters, were taken into account.

古文：凡雹，皆冬之愆阳，夏之伏阴也。 昭公三年， 大雨雹 。
现代文：凡是冰雹，都是冬天阳气过盛而成暖，夏天阴气藏伏而生寒所造成的。昭公三年， 大雨有雹 。
English: All hailstorms are caused by the winter yang that is too strong and warms up, and the summer yin that hides and causes cold. In the three years of Zhaogong, there were heavy rains.

古文：是时季氏专权，胁君之象见。
现代文：当时季氏专权，雹为国君受到威胁的象征。
English: At that time, the power of the Ji clan was absolute, and the swastika was a symbol of the threat to the sovereign.

古文：昭公不寤，后季氏卒逐昭公。
现代文：昭公不醒悟，后来季氏终于把昭公驱逐。
English: Akihiro did not wake up, and later the Ji clan finally expelled Akihiro.

古文：元封三年十二月，雷雨雹，大如马头。
现代文：元封三年十二月，雷雨夹雹，雹子大如马头。
English: In December of the third year of Yuanfeng, thunderstorms and hailstorms, hailstones as big as horses' heads.

古文：宣帝地节四年五月，山阳济阴雨雹如鸡子，深二尺五寸，杀二十人，蜚鸟皆死。
现代文：宣帝地节四年五月，山阳济阴下的雹子有鸡子大小，入地二尺五寸深，砸死二十人，飞鸟都被砸死。
English: In May of the 4th year of Emperor Xuanzong's reign, the pheasants under the sun and moon were the size of chickens. They sank two feet and five inches into the ground, killing twenty people. All the birds were killed.

古文：其十月，大司马霍禹宗族谋反，诛，霍皇后废。
现代文：这年十月，大司马霍禹宗族谋反，被诛，霍皇后被废黜。
English: In October of that year, Grand Master Ma Huoyu's clan plotted a rebellion and was arrested, and Empress Huo was deposed.

古文：成帝河平二年四月，楚国雨雹，大如斧，蜚鸟死。
现代文：成帝河平二年四月，楚国下雹子，大如斧头，飞鸟被砸死。
English: In April of the second year of Emperor Cheng Heping, a bird as big as an axe was killed in Chu.

古文：《左传》曰釐公三十二年十二月己卯， 晋文公卒，庚辰，将殡于曲沃，出绛，柩有声如牛 。
现代文：《左传》上说僖公三十二年十二月己卯曰，晋文公去世，庚辰日，将葬于曲沃，送葬之仪从缕出发，灵柩中有牛叫的声音。
English: "Zo Zhuan" said that in December of the 32nd year of King Gong's reign, Zi Wu said that after the death of King Jinwen, on the day of Geng Chen, he would be buried in Quwo, the funeral ceremony would start from Wanzhong, and there would be the sound of cow bellowing in the coffin.

古文：刘向以为近鼓妖也。
现代文：刘向认为这近乎鼓妖！
English: Liu Xiang thinks that this is almost a drum demon!

古文：丧，凶事；声如牛，怒象也。
现代文：丧葬本为凶事；有声如牛吼，造是发怒的象征。
English: Funerals are inherently violent; the sound of a cow's bellow is a symbol of anger.

古文：将有急怒之谋，以生兵革之祸。
现代文：将要有急怒躁烈的谋划，由之发生战祸。
English: There will have to be a quick and furious scheme to bring about the catastrophe of war.

古文：是时，秦穆公遣兵袭郑而不假道，还，晋大夫先轸谓襄公曰，秦师过不假涂，请击之。
现代文：当时，秦穆公派兵去袭击郑国而不通知晋国借路，在返回的时候，晋国大夫先轸对晋襄公说，蠢迩军队从我们境内过却不向我们借路，我建议袭击他们。
English: At that time, Qin Mu Gong sent soldiers to attack Zheng Guo without notifying Jin Guo to take the road. On his return, Jin Guo's doctor first told Jin Xiang Gong that the Jackal army had passed through our territory but did not take the road from us. I suggested attacking them.

古文：遂要崤厄，以败秦师，匹马觭轮无反者，操之急矣。
现代文：于是在崤山之险拦截，打败秦军，一匹马一只车轮都没返回秦国，操之过急，太过分了。
English: So they intercepted and defeated the Qin army at the risk of Lushan. Not a single horse or cart wheel returned to Qin. It was too hasty and excessive.

古文：晋不惟旧，而听虐谋，结怨强国，四被秦寇，祸流数世，凶恶之效也。
现代文：晋国不念旧好，却听从了狠毒的阴谋。与强国结下仇怨，四次被秦国进犯。战祸连接数代人，造就是凶恶的效验，
English: The state of Jin did not remember the good old days, but obeyed the vicious conspiracy of Mao. It forged a grudge with a powerful country and was attacked four times by the state of Qin. The scourge of war has connected several generations.

古文：哀帝建平二年四月乙亥朔，御史大夫朱博为丞相，少府赵玄为御史大夫，临延登受策，有大声如钟鸣，殿中郎吏陛者皆闻焉。
现代文：哀帝建平二年四月乙亥初一，御史大夫朱博为丞相，少府趟玄为御史大夫，当进宫登殿接受封拜之韶时，忽然有如同敲钟一样的巨响传来，殿中的郎、吏等官员以及在台陛两侧的卫士都听到了。
English: On the first day of the second month of the second year of the fourth month of the second year of the second year of the second year of the second year of the second year of the second year of the second year of the second year of the second year of the second year of the second year of the second year of the second year of the second year of the second year of the second year of the second year of the second year of the second year of the second year of the second year of the second year of the second year of the second year of the second year of the second year of the second year of the second year of the second year of the second year of the second year of the second year of the second year

古文：上以问黄门侍郎杨雄、李灵，寻对曰： 《洪范》所谓鼓妖者也。
现代文：皇上询问黄门侍郎扬雄、李寻，李寻回答说： 这就是《洪范》上讲的鼓妖啊。
English: The emperor asked the Yellow Gate attendants, Yang Xiong and Li Xun, about it, and Li Xun replied: "This is the drum demon mentioned in "Hong Fan."

古文：师法以为人君不聪，为众所惑，空名得进，则有声无形，不知所从生。
现代文：经师的传授，认为如果国君视听不灵，被人们的表象所迷惑，致使有名无实的人得到进用，就会有无形的声音，不知从哪里传来。
English: According to the teachings of the scribes, if the king is not good at seeing and hearing, and is confused by people's appearances, resulting in the use of fictitious people, there will be an invisible voice coming from somewhere.

古文：其传曰岁月日之中，则正卿受之。
现代文：对此事的传注说，如发生在年、月、中的中间一段时间，就要应在正卿大臣身上。
English: The notice on this matter said that if it happened in the middle of the year, month or month, it should be on the minister.

古文：今以四月日加辰巳有异，是为中焉。
现代文：今因四月份的子裹多了一一个辰而与往常不同，这就成了年的中段。
English: Now, because of the extra hour in April, it's different from usual, and it's the middle of the year.

古文：正卿谓执政大臣也。
现代文：正卿就是执政大臣。
English: Zhengqing is the ruling minister.

古文：宜退丞相、御史，以应天变。
现代文：应该罢退丞相、御史，以与天变相应。
English: The prime minister and the imperial historian should be dismissed in accordance with the changes in the heavens.

古文：然虽不退，不出期年，其人自蒙其咎。 
现代文：既然是这样，就是不罢退他们，不出一周年，这些人也要自己犯事受祸。 
English: Since this is the case, even if they are not ousted and the one-year anniversary does not come, these people will have to face their own misdeeds.

古文：杨雄亦以为鼓妖，听失之象也。
现代文：扬雄也认为是鼓妖，是听觉有误的象征。
English: Yang Xiong also believes that it is a drum demon, a symbol of faulty hearing.

古文：失博为人强毅多权谋，宜将不宜相，恐有凶恶亟疾之怒。
现代文：朱博为人强硬坚毅富有权谋机智，适宜当将不宜当相，恐怕要有凶恶可怕急躁狠厉的怒火发生。
English: Zhu Bo is a man of strong fortitude, rich in power and wit, suitable to be a leader, but not suitable to be a follower. I am afraid that he will have a ferocious, terrible, impetuous and fierce anger.

古文：八月，博、玄坐为奸谋，博自杀，玄减死论。
现代文：到了八月，朱博、趟玄被判阴谋作奸之罪，朱博自杀，赵玄免死论处。
English: In August, Zhu Bo and Zhao Xuan were convicted of conspiracy to commit treason, Zhu Bo committed suicide, and Zhao Xuan was spared the death penalty.

古文：京房《易传》曰： 今不修本，下不安，金毋故自动，若有音。 
现代文：塞房《易传》说： 政令不求实务本，下面就不得安宁，金器就会无故自动，发出声音。 
English: "I Chuan" said: If the government order does not seek a practical basis, there will be no peace below, and the goldware will automatically make a sound for no reason.

古文：史记秦二世元年，天无云而雷。
现代文：史书上记载秦二世元年，天上无云却打雷。
English: The history books record that in the first year of Qin II, there was no cloud in the sky, but there was thunder.

古文：刘向以为，雷当托于云，犹君托于臣，阴阳之合也。
现代文：刘向认为雷应是被云托着，就像臣托着君那样，阴阳相合。
English: Liu Xiang thought that the thunder should be supported by the cloud, just as the vassal supports you, and the yin and yang coincide.

古文：二世不恤天下，万民有怨畔之心。
现代文：秦二世不顾念全国百姓的疾苦，从而万众怀有怨愤反叛之心。
English: Qin II did not care about the suffering of the people across the country, so everyone harbored resentment and a rebellious heart.

古文：是岁，陈胜起，天下畔，赵高作乱，秦遂以亡。
现代文：这年陈胜起事，天下叛乱，赵高乘机作乱，秦朝因之灭亡。
English: In this year, Chen Sheng started an uprising, the whole country rebelled, Zhao Gao took advantage of the opportunity to create turmoil, and the Qin Dynasty died as a result.

古文：一曰，《易》， 震 为雷，为貌不恭也。
现代文：一种说法认为，《易经》上《震》卦为雷，是态度不恭的表现。
English: One view is that the "shock" in the I Ching is a sign of disrespect.

古文：史记秦始皇八年，河鱼大上。
现代文：史书上记载秦始皇八年，河中的鱼大量逆流而卜。
English: The history books record that in the eighth year of the Qin Dynasty, a large number of fish in the river swam against the current.

古文：刘向以为近鱼孽也。
现代文：刘向认为这种现象近于鱼孽。
English: Liu Xiang believes that this phenomenon is close to fish poisons.

古文：是岁，始皇弟长安君将兵击赵，反、死屯留，军吏皆斩，迁其民于临洮。
现代文：这一年，秦始皇的弟弟长安君率军攻打趟国，途中谋反，在屯留被处死，他的军吏也都被斩首，屯留的百姓被迁徙到临洮。
English: In the same year, Chang Anjun, the younger brother of Qin Shi Huang, led an army to attack the country, plotted a rebellion on the way, and was executed in the camp. His military officials were also beheaded, and the people who remained in the camp were moved to Linyi.

古文：明年，有嫪毐之诛。
现代文：第二年有缪毒被处死之事。
English: The following year, Miao Yuxing was put to death.

古文：鱼阴类，民之象，逆流而上者，民将不从君令为逆行也。
现代文：鱼属于阴类，象征民众，逆流而上，就象征民众将要不服从国君的统治而逆行造。
English: The fish belongs to the female category, symbolizing the people, swimming upstream, symbolizing that the people will disobey the rule of the sovereign and go against it.

古文：其在天文，鱼星中河而处，车骑满野。
现代文：这事在天文上，就是鱼星处于银河之中，就要车骑兵马布满旷野。
English: Astronomically, this means that Pisces is in the Milky Way, so there will be chariots, cavalry and horses all over the wilderness.

古文：至于二世，暴虐愈甚，终用急亡。
现代文：到了秦二世时，暴虐的统治越发残酷，终于迅速灭亡。
English: By the time of Qin II, the tyrannical rule became more and more cruel, and finally quickly died out.

古文：京房《易传》曰： 众逆同志，厥妖河鱼逆流上。 
现代文：京房《易传》上说 民众同心犯上，出现的妖异就是河中的鱼逆流而上。 
English: Kyobo said in "Ekiden" that the public committed the crime with one heart, and the strange phenomenon that appeared was the fish in the river swimming upstream.

古文：武帝元鼎五年秋，蛙与虾蟆群斗。
现代文：武帝元鼎五年秋季，青蛙与蟾蜍成群搏斗。
English: In the autumn of the fifth year of Emperor Wu's reign, frogs fought with swarms of toads.

古文：是岁，四将军众十万征南越，开九郡。
现代文：这一年，派四位将军率军十万征伐南越，开拓了九郡。
English: That year, he sent four generals to lead an army of 100,000 to invade South Vietnam, opening up nine counties.

古文：成帝鸿嘉四年秋，雨鱼于信都，长五寸以下。
现代文：成帝鸿嘉四年秋季，在信都有鱼从天空降落，鱼长不足五寸。
English: In the autumn of the fourth year of Chengdi Hongjia, there were fish landing from the sky in the letter. The fish was less than five inches long.

古文：成帝永始元年春，北海出大鱼，长六丈，高一丈，四枚。
现代文：成帝永始元年春天，北海跳出大鱼，长六丈，高一丈，有四头。
English: In the spring of the first year of Emperor Chengdu's reign, a large fish jumped out of the North Sea. It was six meters long, one meter high, and had four heads.

古文：哀帝建平三年，东莱平度出大鱼，长八丈，高丈一尺，七枚，皆死。
现代文：哀帝建平三年，东莱的平度县出现大鱼，长八丈，高一丈一尺，共七头，都死了。
English: In the third year of Emperor Jianping's reign, a large fish appeared in Pingdu County, Donglai. It was eight meters long and one meter high, with a total of seven heads. All of them died.

古文：京房《易传》曰： 海数见巨鱼，邪人进，贤人疏。 
现代文：京房《易传》上说： 海中多次出现大鱼，意味着邪佞小人升官，贤德之人被疏远。 
English: Jing Fang said in "I Chuan": The repeated appearance of big fish in the sea means that evil villains are promoted, and virtuous people are alienated.

古文：桓公五年 秋，螽 。
现代文：桓公五年 秋季，出现螽灾。 
English: In the autumn of the fifth year of King Kan, there was a hailstorm.

古文：刘歆以为贪虐取民则螽，介虫之孽也，与鱼同占。
现代文：刘歆认为，贪婪残酷地榨取人民的财物，就会出现螽这种虫子，这是介虫类的妖孽，与鱼类的妖孽所应相同。
English: Liu Wei believed that when greed brutally squeezes people's wealth, worms such as maggots will appear. This is the magic of insects, which should be the same as the magic of fish.

古文：刘向以为介虫之孽属言不从。
现代文：刘向认为介虫之孽是由说话不顺情理而引发的。
English: Liu Xiang believes that the evil of insects is caused by unreasonable speech.

古文：是岁，公获二国之聘，取鼎易邑，兴役起城。
现代文：这一年，桓公获得宋、郑二国的来访，取得鼎，交换了采邑之地，动工筑城。
English: In this year, King Huan was visited by Song and Zheng of the two countries, won the tripod, exchanged the land of the mining town, and started building the city.

古文：诸螽略皆从董仲舒说云。
现代文：各种螽灾之说都依董仲舒的说法。
English: All kinds of disaster relief theories are based on Dong Zhongshu's theory.

古文：严公二十九年 有蜚 。
现代文：庄公二十九年 有蜚灾 。
English: In the 29th year of King Zhuang, there was a flood.

古文：刘歆以为负蠜也，性不食谷，食谷为灾，介虫之孽。
现代文：刘歆认为蜚是负銮，本性不吃谷物，吃谷就成了灾，属介虫类的妖孽。
English: Liu Yao thought that the grasshopper was a negative grasshopper, its nature did not eat grain, and eating grain became a disaster, and it belonged to the magicians of the insectoid class.

古文：刘向以为蜚色青，近青眚也，非中国所有。
现代文：刘向认为蜚是青色的，因而近乎青眚，不是中原所原有的。
English: Liu Xiang believes that the dragonfly is blue, so it is close to the blue dragonfly, which is not original to the Central Plains.

古文：南越盛暑，男女同川泽，淫风所生，为虫臭恶。
现代文：南越那地方气候很热，男女都在水中洗浴，风俗淫荡就生了这种东西，是一种臭而可恶的虫子。
English: In that part of South Vietnam, where the weather is very hot and both men and women bathe in the water, the lascivious customs gave birth to this thing, a stinky and disgusting bug.

古文：是时，严公取齐淫女为夫人，既入，淫于两叔，故蜚至。
现代文：当时庄公娶齐国的淫荡之女做夫人，娶来之后，与两个小叔子私通，所以才有蜚灾的出现。
English: At that time, Zhuang Gong married the lewd daughter of Qi Guo as his wife. After the marriage, he had sexual intercourse with his two younger brothers-in-law, which is why the calamity occurred.

古文：天戒若曰，今诛绝之尚及，不将生臭恶，闻于四方。
现代文：天帝的告诫似乎是说：现在诛罚灭绝他们还来得及，否则就要产生臭而可恶之事，让四方之人都知道。
English: God's admonition seems to be saying: Now is the time to punish and exterminate them, otherwise they will produce foul and abominable things, so that people from all over the world will know.

古文：严不寤，其后夫人与两叔作乱，一嗣以杀，卒皆被辜。
现代文：庄公不醒悟，后来夫人与两个小叔子作乱，两个儿子都被杀害，而他们终于也都因罪被杀。
English: Zhuang didn't come to his senses. Later, his wife and two younger brothers-in-law got into a fight. Both sons were killed, and they were eventually also killed for their crimes.

古文：董仲舒指略同。
现代文：这些看法与董仲舒的看法大致相同。
English: This is similar to what Dong Zhongshu pointed out.

古文：釐公十五年 八月，螽 。
现代文：僖公十五年 八月，有螽灾 。
English: In August of the 15th year of King Min, there was a hailstorm.

古文：刘向以为，先是釐有咸之会，后城缘陵，是岁，复以兵车为牡丘会，使公孙敖帅师，及诸侯大夫救徐，丘比三年在外。
现代文：刘向认为，此前僖公有与诸侯在咸地的会盟，后又在缘陵筑城，这一年又带领兵车到牡丘会盟，派公孙敖领军队与其他国家的大夫一起救徐国，连续三年出兵在外，从而有此螽灾。
English: Liu Xiang believed that previously, Gong Gongyu had made an alliance with the princes in the Aral Sea, and then built a city in Jianling. In the same year, he led a troop car to the Miaoqiu alliance, and sent Gongsun Gong to lead the army together with doctors from other countries to save Xu Guo. For three consecutive years, he sent troops abroad, resulting in this calamity.

古文：文公三年 秋，雨螽于宋 。
现代文：文公三年 秋天，在宋国天空降落螽虫 。
English: In the autumn of the third year of Wenguo, a ladybug landed in the sky of Song.

古文：刘向以为，先是宋杀大夫而无罪。有暴虐赋敛之应。
现代文：刘向认为这是因为宋国先前杀了无罪的大夫，以及对民众暴虐征收赋税而引起的天应。
English: Liu Xiang believed that this was due to the fact that Song had previously killed an innocent doctor and imposed taxes on the people.

古文：《穀梁传》曰上下皆合，言甚。
现代文：《谷梁传》上说上上下下都是，是说太多了。
English: "Guliangzhuan" is all up and down, it is too much to say.

古文：董仲舒以为宋三世内取，大夫专恣，杀生不中，故螽先死而至。
现代文：董仲舒认为，宋国三代君主都娶国内大夫之女为夫人，大夫专权放肆，生杀之刑不符法制情理，所以螽先死而后落下。
English: Dong Zhongshu believed that the three generations of monarchs in the Song Dynasty all married the daughter of a domestic doctor as their wife. The doctor's absolute power was reckless, and the punishment of life and death did not conform to the legal system. Therefore, he died first and then fell.

古文：刘歆以为，螽为谷灾，卒遇贼阴，坠而死也。
现代文：刘歆认为螽是有害谷物的，突然遇到阴气的袭击，就坠落而死。
English: Liu Yao believed that cadmium was harmful to grain, and when suddenly attacked by a gloomy atmosphere, he fell to his death.

古文：八年 十月，螽 。
现代文：八年 十月，出现螽灾 。
English: In October, there was a hailstorm.

古文：时公伐邾取须朐，城郚。
现代文：当时文公征伐邾国取得须朐，在部地建城。
English: At that time, the state of Wenkongzheng obtained Suye and built a city in the province.

古文：宣公六年 八月，螽 。
现代文：宣公六年 八月，出现螽灾 。
English: In August, six years after the proclamation of the Republic, a hailstorm occurred.

古文：刘向以为，先是时宣伐莒向，后比再如齐，谋伐莱。
现代文：刘向认为这是因为，在此之前宣公征伐莒国向邑，后来又连续到齐国，谋划征伐莱国。
English: Liu Xiang believed that this was because, before this, he had proclaimed the conquest of the Warring States to Xiangyue, and later he went to Qi Province to plan the conquest of the Warring States.

古文：十三年 秋，螽 。
现代文：十三年 秋季，有螽灾 。
English: In the autumn of the 13th year, there was a hailstorm.

古文：公孙归父会齐伐莒。
现代文：公孙归父会同齐军征伐莒国。
English: His great-grandson Guifu will join the Qi army to invade Yunnan.

古文：十五年 秋，螽 。
现代文：十五年 秋天，出现螽灾 。
English: In the autumn of the fifteenth year, there was a great flood.

古文：宣亡熟岁，数有军旅。襄公七年 八月，螽 。
现代文：宣公在歉收之年，多次兴兵动武。襄公七年 八月，有螽灾 。
English: In the year of poor harvest, Xuan Gong repeatedly mobilized the army. In August of the seventh year of Xiang Gong, there was a hailstorm.

古文：刘向以为，先是襄兴师救陈，滕子、郯子、小邾子皆来朝。
现代文：刘向认为先前襄公兴师去救陈国，滕子、郯子、小邾子都来朝见。
English: Liu Xiang thought that before Xiang Gongxing went to save Chen Guo, Teng Zi, Zang Zi and Xiao Zang Zi all came to see the emperor.

古文：夏，城费。
现代文：夏天，在费建城。
English: It's summertime in Philadelphia.

古文：哀公十二年 十二月，螽 。
现代文：哀公十二年 十二月，出现螽灾 。
English: In December of the twelfth year of mourning, there was a hailstorm.

古文：是时，哀用田赋。
现代文：当时哀公实行田赋改革。
English: At that time, Aiko implemented the rice field reform.

古文：刘向以为春用田赋，冬而螽。
现代文：刘向认为春天实施田赋制度的改革，冬天就出现了螽灾。
English: Liu Xiang believes that the implementation of the reform of the Tianfu system in the spring, the winter has been a disaster.

古文：十三年 九月，螽；十二月，螽 。
现代文：十三年九月，螽灾；十二月，螽灾 。
English: September 13th, disaster relief; December, disaster relief.

古文：比三螽，虐取于民之效也。
现代文：这连续三次的螽灾，是暴虐榨取民众财物引发的天应。
English: This third consecutive disaster relief is a natural response triggered by the tyrannical extraction of people's property.

古文：刘歆以为，周十二月，夏十月也，火星既伏，蛰虫皆毕，天之见变，因物类之宜，不得以螽，是岁，再失闰矣。
现代文：刘歆认为周代的十，是夏历的十月，这时火星既已藏伏，休眠的虫类都已休眠，天的显示变异，就物类的应时说，不能有螽，这是因为这一年再次该置闰月而设置。
English: Liu Wei believed that the tenth day of the Zhou Dynasty was the October of the summer calendar. At this time, Mars was already hiding, the dormant insects were already dormant, and the sky's display of variation, as far as the nature of things was concerned, could not be disturbed. This was because this year was once again set for the intercalary month.

古文：周九月，夏七月，故传曰： 火犹西流，司历过也 。
现代文：周历的九月是夏历的七月，所以传注上说 火星还往西行，这是司历之官的过失 。
English: The September of the lunar calendar is the July of the summer calendar, so the notice said that Mars was still heading west, which was the fault of the calendar official.

古文：宣公十五年 冬，蝝生 。
现代文：宣公十五年 冬季，蟓生 。
English: The 15th anniversary of the proclamation of the People's Republic of China.

古文：刘歆以为，蝝，蚍蜉之有翼者，食谷为灾，黑眚也。
现代文：刘歆认为蟓是蚍蜉类中有翼的那种，吃谷物造成灾害，属黑眚。
English: Liu Wei thought that the dragonfly was the winged kind of dragonfly, and it was a black dragonfly that caused disasters by eating grain.

古文：董仲舒、刘向以为，蝝，螟始生也，一曰蝗始生。
现代文：董仲舒、刘向认为，蟓是刚生出来的螟，另一说法认为是刚生的蝗。
English: Dong Zhongshu and Liu Xiang believe that the grasshopper is a newly born grasshopper, and another view is that it is a newly born locust.

古文：是时，民患上力役，解于公田。
现代文：当时民众苦于君主征发的力役，对公田怠工。
English: At that time, the people were suffering from the forced labor imposed by the monarch, and they were slacking in the public fields.

古文：宣是时初税亩。
现代文：宣公在这时开始按田亩征税。
English: At this time, Xuan Gong began to levy taxes according to acres.

古文：税亩，就民田亩择美者税者什一，乱先王制而为贪利，故应是而蝝生，属蠃虫之孽。
现代文：按田亩征税，即就庶民的田亩选择产量高的为标准，征取其产量的十分之一，这是毁坏先王传下来的制度而衹为贪图利益，所以报应此事而有蟓灾的发生，此属赢虫之孽。
English: Taxing according to acres, that is, collecting one-tenth of the production of the common people's acres according to the standard of selecting the highest yield. This is to destroy the system passed down by the forefathers and covet the interests. Therefore, there is the occurrence of calamity in response to this matter. This is the evil of winning insects.

古文：景帝中三年秋，蝗。
现代文：景帝中三年秋季，有蝗灾。
English: In the autumn of the third year of Jingdi Middle School, there was a locust plague.

古文：先是，匈奴寇边，中尉不害将车骑材官士屯代高柳。
现代文：在此之前匈奴侵边，中尉魏不害率领车骑材官之军屯驻代郡的高柳。
English: Prior to this, the Xiongnu invaded the border, and Lieutenant Wei Fuhong led the cavalry officer's army stationed in Gaoliu, Dai County.

古文：武帝元光五年秋，螟；六年夏，蝗。
现代文：武帝元光五年秋季，发生螟灾；六年夏天，发生蝗灾。
English: In the autumn of the fifth year of Emperor Wuyuan, there was a hailstorm; in the summer of the sixth year, there was a locust plague.

古文：先是，五将军众三十万伏马邑，欲袭单于也。
现代文：在此之前，五位将军率军三十万埋伏于马邑，打算袭击匈奴单于。
English: Prior to this, five generals led an army of 300,000 to lie in ambush in Mayup, intending to attack the Xiongnu in Shan.

古文：是岁，四将军征匈奴。
现代文：这一年，四位将军征伐匈奴。
English: The following year, the imperial court sent four generals to conquer the Huns.

古文：元鼎五年秋，蝗。
现代文：元鼎五年秋季，有蝗灾。
English: In the autumn of the fifth year of the Yuan Dynasty, there was a locust plague.

古文：是岁，四将军征南越及西南夷，开十余郡。
现代文：造一年，派四位将军征伐南越以及西南夷，扩增十余郡。
English: In the first year, four generals were sent to conquer South Vietnam and Southwest Vietnam, and more than ten counties were added.

古文：元封六年秋，蝗。
现代文：元封六年秋天，有蝗灾。
English: In the autumn of the sixth year of the Yuan Dynasty, there was a plague of locusts.

古文：先是，两将军征朝鲜，开三郡。
现代文：在此之前，派两位将军征伐朝鲜，扩增三郡。
English: Prior to this, he sent two generals to invade Korea and expand three counties.

古文：太初元年夏，蝗从东方蜚至敦煌；三年秋，复蝗。
现代文：太初元年夏季，蝗虫从东方飞到敦煌；三年秋季，再次发生蝗灾。
English: At the beginning of the first year of the summer, the locusts flew from the east to Dunhuang; in the autumn of the third year, the locust plague occurred again.

古文：元年，贰师将军征大宛，天下奉其役连年。
现代文：从元年贰师将军征伐大宛起，全国连年忙于这一战争的供需。
English: From the beginning of the First Year of the Twentieth Century, the whole country has been busy with the supply and demand of this war.

古文：征和三年秋，蝗；四年夏，蝗。
现代文：征和三年秋季，发生蝗灾；四年夏季，发生蝗灾。
English: In the autumn of the third year of Zheng He, a locust plague occurred; in the summer of the fourth year, a locust plague occurred.

古文：先是一年，三将军众十余万征匈奴。
现代文：前一年，派三位将军率军十余万征伐匈奴。
English: The previous year, he sent three generals to lead an army of more than 100,000 to conquer the Huns.

古文：征和三年，贰师七万人没不还。
现代文：征和三年，贰师将军的七万军队覆灭未还。
English: After three years of war, the 70,000 troops of General Gong's division have not yet been defeated.

古文：平帝元始二年秋，蝗，遍天下。
现代文：平帝元始二年秋季，发生蝗灾，遍及全国。
English: In the autumn of the second year of the Heian period, a plague of locusts swept across the country.

古文：是时，王莽秉政。
现代文：这时王莽执政。
English: At this time Wang Mang came to power.

古文：《左氏传》曰严公八年齐襄公田于贝丘，见豕。
现代文：《左氏传》说庄公八年齐襄公在贝丘打猎，看到一只猪。
English: "The Legend of Zuo" says that in the eighth year of Zhuang Zong's reign, Qi Xiangong went hunting in Beqiu and saw a pig.

古文：从者曰： 公子彭生也。 
现代文：随从人员说： 这是公子彭生。 
English: The attendants said: This is Prince Peng Sheng.

古文：公怒曰： 射之！ 
现代文：齐襄公生气地说： 射死他！ 
English: Qi Xianggong said angrily: Shoot him!

古文：豕人立而啼，公惧，坠车，伤足丧屦。
现代文：猪像人一样立起来大叫，襄公大惊，从车上摔下来，脚受了伤，鞋也丢了。
English: The pig stood up like a human and shouted. Xiang Gong was so shocked that he fell off the cart, injuring his foot and losing his shoe.

古文：刘向以为近豕祸也。
现代文：刘向认为这近乎猪祸。
English: Liu Xiang believes that this is close to a pig disaster.

古文：先是，齐襄淫于妹鲁桓公夫人，使公子彭生杀桓公，又杀彭生以谢鲁。
现代文：在此之前，齐襄公与妹妹即鲁桓公夫人通奸，让公子彭生杀死桓公，后来又杀死彭生以向鲁国表示谢罪。
English: Prior to this, Prince Qixiang committed adultery with his sister, the wife of Prince Lu Huan, and had Prince Peng Sheng kill Prince Huan, and later killed Prince Peng Sheng to express his gratitude to the State of Lu.

古文：公孙无知有宠于先君，襄公绌之，无知帅怨恨之徒攻襄于田所，襄匿其户间，足见于户下，遂杀之。
现代文：公孙无知为前鲁君所宠爱，襄公罢黜了他，无知率领一些怨恨襄公的人在打猎的地方袭击襄公，齐襄公藏在门后面，脚露在门下被发现，于是被杀。
English: Gu Xiang led some people who resented Gu Xiang and attacked Gu Xiang at a hunting ground. Gu Xiang hid behind a door, his bare feet were found under the door, and he was killed.

古文：伤足丧屦，卒死于足，虐急之效也。
现代文：伤脚丢鞋，终于因为脚的暴露而被杀，这是为政暴虐峻急所受的报应。
English: He hurt his foot when he dropped his shoe, and was finally killed because his foot was exposed. This was the retribution he received for his political brutality.

古文：昭帝元凤元年，燕王宫永巷中豕出，坏都灶，衔其鬴六、七枚置殿前。
现代文：昭帝元凤元年，燕王宫中长巷裹的猪从猪圈中跑出来，撞坏了大宠，叼走灶前六、匕口锅，放到大殿前面。
English: In the first year of Emperor Zhao Yuanfeng, a pig wrapped in a long alley in the Yan Wang Palace ran out of the pigsty, broke the big pet, dragged away the stove and the crock pot, and placed it in front of the main hall.

古文：刘向以为近豕祸也。
现代文：刘向认为这近于猪祸。
English: Liu Xiang believes that this is close to a pig disaster.

古文：是时，燕王旦与长公主、左将军谋为大逆，诛杀谏者，暴急无道。
现代文：当时燕王刘旦与长公主、左将军谋划叛逆造，诛杀进谏劝诫的人，暴虐峻急不讲为人之道。
English: At that time, Yan Wang Liu Dan, together with the First Princess and General Zuo, plotted to rebel against the government, killing and torturing anyone who dared to oppose them.

古文：灶者，生养之本，豕而败灶，陈鬴于庭，鬴灶将不用，宫室将废辱也。
现代文：灶是生活做饭所必需的，猪却把灶撞坏，把锅摆到庭院，锅灶都要用不着了，宫室将要被废弃。
English: The stove is essential for cooking, but the pig breaks the stove and puts the pot in the courtyard. The pot and the stove are no longer needed, and the palace will be abandoned.

古文：燕王不改，卒伏其辜。
现代文：燕王不悔改，终于依法被诛。
English: Yan Wang did not repent and was finally arrested according to the law.

古文：京房《易传》曰： 众心不安君政，厥妖豕人居室。 
现代文：京房《易传》上说： 众人心中不满君主的政治行为，就会出现猪入居室的妖异之事。 
English: Kyofusa said in "Ekiden": If the people are dissatisfied with the political behavior of the monarch, a strange thing will happen: a pig will enter the living room.

古文：史记鲁襄公二十三年，穀、洛水斗，将毁王宫。
现代文：史书上记载鲁襄公二十三年，谷、洛二水交汇相斗，将要冲毁王宫。
English: The history books record that in the 23rd year of the reign of King Lu Xiang, the valley, Luo and the two rivers fought against each other and were about to destroy the royal palace.

古文：刘向以为近火沴水也。
现代文：刘向认为这近乎火克水。
English: Liu Xiang thought that the building was closer to the fire than the water.

古文：周灵王将拥之，有司谏曰： 不可。
现代文：周灵王要阻塞水流，有关官员进谏说： 不可这样。
English: Zhou Lingwang wanted to block the flow of water, but the officials said, "This is not allowed.

古文：长民者不崇薮，不堕山，不防川，不窦泽。
现代文：为民之主的人，不垫高草洼，不削平山丘，不阻遏河川，不排泻湖水。
English: Those who are the masters of the people do not level the high grasslands, do not flatten the hills, do not block the rivers, and do not drain the lagoon water.

古文：今吾执政毋乃有所辞，而滑夫二川之神，使至于争明，以防王宫室，王而饰之，毋乃不可乎！
现代文：现在我们朝政是不是有所不当，而影响了两河之神，使他们争夺水道，从而威胁了王宫，大王您如果因此就加固堤防以遏制河水，恐怕是不太合适吧！
English: Now, is there something improper about our government that has affected the gods of the two rivers, causing them to fight over the waterway, thus threatening the royal palace? Your Majesty, if you strengthen the dike to contain the river, I'm afraid it's not appropriate!

古文：惧及子孙，王室愈卑。 
现代文：我担心到子孙一代，王室将会越来越衰微。 
English: I fear that the royal family will become more and more dilapidated in the next generation.

古文：王卒拥之。
现代文：周王最后还是把水挡住了。
English: In the end, Zhou Wang blocked the water.

古文：以传推之，以四渎比诸侯，穀、洛其次，卿大夫之象也，为卿大夫将分争以危乱王室也。
现代文：从史传上分析，以济、淮、河、江这四大水渎比作诸侯，而谷、洛二水仅次于四渎，那就是卿大夫的象征了，这就意味着卿大夫将要分争权势而危害王室了。
English: According to historical analysis, the four great waters of Jizhi, Huai, He and Jiang are comparable to princes, while Gu and Luo Ershui are second only to the four great waters, which is the symbol of the noble doctor. This means that the noble doctor will compete for power and endanger the royal family.

古文：是时，世卿专权，儋括将有篡杀之谋，如灵王觉寤，匡其失政，惧以承戒，则灾祸除矣。
现代文：当时为卿的世家专权把持朝政，儋括将进行篡杀周王的谋划，如果周灵王有所觉悟，修正朝政之失，小心接受劝诫，灾祸也就可以避免。
English: At that time, the imperial government was under the exclusive control of the lord's family, and the conspirators were planning to assassinate King Zhou. If King Zhou Ling became aware of the situation, corrected the mistakes of the imperial government, and carefully accepted the admonition, the disaster could be avoided.

古文：不听谏谋，简慢大异，任其私心，塞埤拥下，以逆水势而害鬼神。
现代文：不听谏议劝说，不重视怪异的征兆，白以为是，填塞低洼垫高卑下，来阻逆水势而妨害了鬼神。
English: Don't listen to persuasion, don't pay attention to strange signs, take it for granted, fill low-lying mats high and low, to block against the water and interfere with ghosts and gods.

古文：后数年有黑如日者五。
现代文：几年后天空出现五个像太阳那么大而黑色的东西。
English: A few years later, five black objects as big as the sun appeared in the sky.

古文：是岁蚤霜，灵王崩。
现代文：造年提前下霜，周灵王驾崩。
English: Early frosts in the new year, the death of King Zhou Ling.

古文：景王立二年，儋括欲杀王，而立王弟佞夫。
现代文：周景王即位后两年，儋括要杀死周王，改立周王的弟弟佞夫。
English: Two years after Zhou Jingwang ascended to the throne, Zeng Guo wanted to kill Zhou Wang and replace him with Zhou Wang's younger brother, Zhu Rong.

古文：佞夫不知，景王并诛佞夫。
现代文：佞夫不知，景王却连同杀死了佞夫。
English: Unbeknownst to the woodcutter, however, King Gyeongbokgung had killed the woodcutter along with him.

古文：及景王死，五大夫争权，或立子猛，或立子朝，王室大乱。
现代文：到景王一死，有五位大夫争权，有的拥立子猛，有的拥立子朝，王室大乱。
English: When King Jing died, there were five doctors competing for power, some of them supported Takeshi, some supported Takeshi's dynasty, and the royal family was in turmoil.

古文：京房《易传》曰： 天子弱，诸侯力政，厥异水斗。 
现代文：京房《易鳓说： 天子势弱，诸侯致力于征伐，就会出现水斗的异常现象。 
English: Jingfang "Ili said: The emperor is weak, the princes are committed to the conquest, there will be an abnormal phenomenon of water buckets.

古文：史记曰，秦武王三年渭水赤者三日，昭王三十四年渭水又赤三日。
现代文：史书上说：秦武王三年渭水发红三天，到秦昭王三十四年渭水又红了三天。
English: The history book said: In the third year of Qin King Wu, the water of the spring turned red for three days, and in the thirty-fourth year of Qin King Zhaozhao, the water of the spring turned red for three days.

古文：刘向以为近火沴水也。
现代文：刘向认为造近于火克水。
English: Liu Xiang thought that the building was closer to the fire than the water.

古文：秦连相坐之法，弃灰于道者黥，罔密而刑虐，加以武伐横出，残贼邻国。至于变乱五行，气色谬乱。
现代文：秦国施行连坐之法，有人把灰撤在道上就要被处以黥面之刑，法密而刑罚残酷，加以征伐没有节制，残害邻国，以至于变乱了五行，使气色大乱。
English: Qin State implemented the law of joint sitting. If someone removed the ashes on the road, he would be punished with the punishment of the face, the law was secret and the punishment was cruel, the conquest was unrestrained, and the neighboring countries were destroyed, so that the five elements were disturbed and the appearance was chaotic.

古文：天戒若曰，勿为刻急，将致败亡。
现代文：天帝的告诫好像是说，不要再施行刻毒峻急的残暴政治，否则将要导致败亡。
English: The admonition of the heavenly emperor seems to be saying, do not implement the harsh and cruel politics any more, otherwise it will lead to ruin.

古文：秦遂不改，至始皇灭六国，二世而亡。
现代文：秦国终于不改，直到秦始皇灭六国，传至二世而灭亡。
English: The Qin state finally did not change until Qin Shi Huang destroyed six countries, passed down to the second generation and perished.

古文：昔三代居三河，河洛出图书，秦居渭阳，而渭水数赤，瑞异应德之效也。
现代文：过去夏都河东，殷都河内，周都河南洛阳，河、洛出现图、书，秦都于渭水之阳，而渭水几次变红，这都是嘉瑞异象与德相应的验证啊。
English: In the past, the summer capital was Hedong, the winter capital was Hanoi, the weekday capital was Luoyang in Henan Province, and the river and Luoyang appeared in maps and books. Qin was in the sun of Surabaya, and Surabaya turned red several times. These are all the corresponding verification of Jia Rui's vision and virtue.

古文：京房《易传》曰： 君湎于酒，淫于色，贤人潜，国家危，厥异流水赤也 。
现代文：京房《易传》说： 国君沉溺于酒宴，淫乱于女色，从而致使贤德之人潜藏而远离，国家面临危亡，由之而出现的异常之象就是河水变红。 
English: According to the "I Chuan" of the Imperial Household Agency: The sovereign indulged in wine feasts and fornicated with women, which caused the virtuous people to hide and stay away, the country was in danger of dying, and the abnormal phenomenon that emerged from this was the river turning red.

