古文：李袭吉，自言左相林甫之后，父图，为洛阳令，因家焉。
现代文：李袭吉，自己说是唐朝左相李林甫的后代，父亲李图，为洛阳令，所以居家洛阳。
English: Li Zaiji said that he was a descendant of Li Linfu, the left minister of the Tang Dynasty. His father, Li Tu, was the governor of Luoyang, so he lived in Luoyang.

古文：袭吉访旧至太原，武皇署为府掾，出宰榆社。
现代文：李袭吉在乾符末年应进士举，遇战乱，逃避到河中，服事节度使李都，提升为盐铁判官。
English: In the last years of the Qianfu era, Li Heji was promoted to the position of judge. When the war broke out, he fled to the river and served as a judge of salt and iron.

古文：光启初，武皇遇难上源，记室殁焉，既归镇，辟掌奏者，多不如旨。或有荐袭吉能文，召试称旨，即署为掌书记。
现代文：到王重荣任节度使时，不喜欢文士。此时是丧乱之后，士族绅士多逃难到汾、晋二地，武皇的记室死了，有人推荐说李袭吉能文，召来一试果然合意，即刻任他掌管文书。
English: When Wang Chongrong was appointed as the festival envoy, he did not like the scribes. At this time, after the turmoil, most of the gentry gentry fled to Shun and Jinji. Emperor Wu's notetaking office died. Some people recommended that Li He Ji Nengwen, which brought about a successful agreement to immediately put him in charge of the clerical work.

古文：袭吉博学多通，尤谙悉国朝近事，为文精意练实，动据典故，无所放纵，羽檄军书，辞理宏健。
现代文：李袭吉博学通识，特别是熟悉国朝近事，写的文章精意练实，引经据典，无所放纵，檄文军书，辞理宏大雄健。
English: Li Hejihong studied general knowledge, especially familiar with the recent affairs of the country and the DPRK, and wrote articles that were ingenious and practical, quoted scriptures, indulged in nothing, read military books, and had a grand and powerful rhetoric.

古文：自武皇上源之难，与梁祖不协，乾宁末，刘仁恭负恩，其间论列是非，交相聘答者数百篇，警策之句，播在人口，文士称之。
现代文：自从武皇在上源遭暗算后，与梁太祖不合。乾宁末年，刘仁恭负恩，这期间他写的论列各方是非，交相聘答的文书几百篇，名言警句，人人传诵，文士称赞。
English: Since Emperor Wu was assassinated in Shangyuan, he did not get along with Liang Taizu. At the end of Qianning's life, Liu Rengong was indebted to him. During this period, he wrote about the rights and wrongs of all parties, hundreds of documents of mutual engagement, famous sayings and aphorisms, everyone recited, and scribes praised.

古文：三年，迁节度副使，从讨王行瑜，拜右谏议大夫。
现代文：光启三年，迁升为节度副使，随行征讨王行瑜，任右谏议大夫。
English: In the third year of Guangqi, he was promoted to the vice-envoy of the Festival, accompanied by Wang Xingyu, and served as the doctor of the Right Division.

古文：及师还渭北，武皇不获入觐，为武皇作违离表，中有警句云： 穴禽有翼，听舜乐以犹来；天路无梯，望尧云而不到。 
现代文：到回师渭北，武皇没获准入宫见唐昭宗，李袭吉为武皇做违离表，里面有警句： 洞中飞禽有翼，听到舜乐仍飞来；天路没有长梯，望见尧云而不到。 
English: When he arrived in the north of Hebei Province, Emperor Wu was not allowed to enter the palace to see Tang Zhaozong, and Li Huijie made a watch for the Emperor Wu to leave the palace, which contained an epigram: The birds in the cave have wings, and they still fly when they hear the music; there is no long ladder on the heavenly road, and it is impossible to see the clouds.

古文：昭宗览之嘉叹。
现代文：唐昭宗看了后赞叹。
English: Tang Zhaozong was impressed after watching it.

古文：洎袭吉入奏，面诏谕之，优赐特异。
现代文：到李袭吉上奏后，当面教导他，优待赏赐特别多。
English: After the performance of Li Zaiji, he taught him in person, and received a lot of preferential treatment and rewards.

古文：其年十二月，师还太原，王珂为浮梁于夏阳渡，袭吉从军，时笮断航破，武皇仅免，袭吉坠河，得大冰承足，沿流七八里，还岸而止，救之获免。
现代文：这一年十二月，回师太原，王珂在夏阳渡浮桥，李袭吉随军。这时竹索断开船只破裂，武皇仅免于落难，李袭吉掉进河里，落在一块大冰上，漂流七八里路，搁岸边停住而得救。
English: In December of that year, after returning to Taiyuan, Wang Ke was crossing the pontoon bridge in Xiayang, and Li Weiji was following the army. At this time, the bamboo rope broke and the ship broke. Emperor Wu was only saved from falling into the river. Li Weiji fell into the river, landed on a large piece of ice, drifted seven or eight miles, stopped on the shore and was saved.

古文：天复中，武皇议欲修好于梁，命袭吉为书以贻梁祖，书曰：
现代文：天复年中，武皇想和梁朝修好，命李袭吉写信给梁太祖，信上说：
English: In the middle of the second lunar month, Emperor Wu wanted to mend fences with the Liang Dynasty, so he ordered Li Weiji to write to Liang Taizu, saying in the letter:

古文：一别清德，十有余年，失意杯盘，争锋剑戟。
现代文： 一别之后，十五年多，失意杯盘，争锋剑戟。
English: After parting, more than fifteen years later, frustrated cups and plates, competing swords and daggers.

古文：山长水阔，难追二国之欢；雁逝鱼沉，久绝八行之赐。
现代文：山高水阔，难追二国之交欢；雁去鱼沉，久断八行之书信。
English: The mountains are high and the water is wide, it is difficult to catch up with the two countries; the geese go to the fish sink, and the letter of the eight lines is broken.

古文：比者仆与公实联宗姓，原忝恩行，投分深情，将期栖托，论交马上，荐美朝端，倾向仁贤，未省疏阙。
现代文： 近来，我与你联上同宗同姓，原先忝受您的恩知，意气相合，期望依托于您，在马背上论交，在朝廷上荐举，倾慕仁贤，不嫌我的疏缺。
English: Recently, I have been connected with you, the same family and the same surname. Originally, I received your gratitude, the spirit is the same, the expectation is to rely on you, to discuss on horseback, to recommend at the court, to admire the virtuous, and I do not like my lack.

古文：岂谓运由奇特，谤起奸邪。
现代文：哪想到命运突起变化，诽谤起于奸邪。
English: Who would have thought that fortune would change, that slander would spring from treachery.

古文：毒手尊拳，交相于幕夜；金戈铁马，蹂践于明时。
现代文：毒手尊拳，在晚上相加；金戈铁马，在白天交战。
English: Fierce hand and noble fist, add up in the evening; jingle bells, fight in the daytime.

古文：狂药致其失欢，陈事止于堪笑。
现代文：狂药引来我们失欢，往事只是值得一笑。
English: Crazy pills have brought us unhappiness, the past is only worth a laugh.

古文：今则皆登贵位，尽及中年，蘧公亦要知非，君子何劳用壮。
现代文：现在都已登高位，均到中年，蘧公也知道过错，君子何必自恃强壮。
English: Now they have all ascended to high positions and are all middle-aged. The Duke of Xing also knows his faults. Why should a gentleman pretend to be strong?

古文：今公贵先列辟，名过古人。
现代文：今天您的尊贵超过同列，大名高过古人。
English: Today, your dignity surpasses that of your peers, and your renown surpasses that of the ancients.

古文：合纵连衡，本务家邦之计；拓地守境，要存子孙之基。
现代文：合纵连横，是建立国家的计策；扩地守境，要留存给子孙基业。
English: To connect the vertical and horizontal is a strategy for building a country; to expand the land and protect the borders should be preserved for the children and grandchildren of the foundation.

古文：文王贵奔走之交，仲尼谭损益之友，仆顾惭虚薄，旧忝眷私，一言许心，万死不悔，壮怀忠力，犹胜他人，盟于三光，愿赴汤火。
现代文：文王看重相随奔走的交情，孔子谈过损友益友的不同，我惭愧自己空虚浅薄，但以前和您有私交，许诺一言，万死不悔，壮怀忠力，仍然胜过他人，当着上天誓盟，愿赴汤蹈火而不辞。
English: Confucius talked about the difference between losing friends and gaining friends. I am ashamed of my emptiness and shallowness, but I used to have a personal friendship with you. I made a promise, I will never regret it, I am loyal, and I am still better than others. In the face of heaven, I am willing to go through thick and thin.

古文：公又何必终年立敌，恳意相窥，徇一时之襟灵，取四郊之倦弊，今日得其小众，明日下其危墙，弊师无遗镞之忧，邻壤抱剥床之痛。
现代文：您又何必终年树敌，专心窥视他人，逞自己一时的心愿，在倦敝时占取，今天得到一些部众，明天攻下他的危城，军队劳累，邻国怀恨。
English: And why shouldst thou make thyself enemies all the year round, and watch others intently, and do what thou wilt for a time, and occupy when thou art weary, and gain men today, and capture his strongholds tomorrow, when his army is weary, and his neighbors hate him?

古文：又虑悠悠之党，妄渎听闻，见仆韬勇枕威，戢兵守境，不量本末，误致窥觎。
现代文：又有荒谬之徒，以狂言扰乱您的听闻，看见我藏勇收威，息兵保境，便不量本末轻重，误引窥伺我们。
English: There are also absurd people who disturb your hearing with wild talk, and when they see me hiding my courage to take revenge and save the country, they do not weigh the merits and demerits, and mistakenly spy on us.

古文：且仆自壮岁已前，业经陷敌，以杀戮为东作，号兼并为永谋。
现代文： 而且我从壮年以前，历经冲锋陷阵，以杀戮之事当作日常耕作，把兼并当作长远目标。
English: Moreover, since before I was of age, I have been through the storming of the battlefield, taking killing as daily cultivation, and taking annexation as a long-term goal.

古文：及其首陟师坛，躬被公兗，天子命我为群后，明公许我以下交，所以敛迹爱人，蓄兵务德，收燕蓟则还其故将，入蒲坂而不负前言。
现代文：等到首登将台，身穿公侯衣服，皇帝命我为公卿，您与我结与朋友，所以收敛锋芒爱护他人，藏起武器务求德业，收复燕蓟后归还他的故将，进入蒲坂而不负以前的诺言。
English: Waiting for the first time to stand on the general's platform, wearing the clothes of a prince, the emperor ordered me to be a noble, and you made friends with me, so I gathered my strength and loved others, hid my weapons to seek virtue, returned his former general after recovering the terns, and entered Busaka without failing to keep my previous promise.

古文：况五载休兵，三边校士，铁骑犀甲，云屯谷量。
现代文：何况休兵五年，三边将士，铁骑犀甲，像云那么多，似谷粒一样数不清。
English: What's more, the five-year truce, the tri-lateral soldiers, and the iron horsemen in armor are as numerous as clouds, and as innumerable as grains of corn.

古文：马邑兒童，皆为锐将；鹫峰宫阙，咸作京坻。
现代文：马邑的儿童，都是锐将；鹫峰的宫阙，都作为京城。
English: The children of Ma'eup are all top-ranked athletes; the children of the imperial palace, the pinnacle of the country, are regarded as the capital city.

古文：问年犹少于仁明，语地幸依于险阻，有何觇睹，便误英聪。
现代文：若问年岁我比您小，若说到地方则幸能凭依险阻，不知有什么可以图取的，影响了您英明的视听。
English: If you ask me how old I am, I am younger than you, but when it comes to places, I am lucky to be able to rely on obstacles, I don't know what can be drawn, affecting your wise audio-visual.

古文：况仆临戎握兵，粗有操断，屈伸进退，久贮心期。
现代文： 况且我遇到战事指挥士兵，也略有策谋决断，屈伸进退，心中早有计划。
English: Moreover, when I met the soldiers in charge of the war, I also had a little bit of planning and decision-making, and I had a plan in my heart.

古文：胜则抚三晋之民，败则征五部之众，长驱席卷，反首提戈。
现代文：胜了就安抚三晋之民，败了就征召五部之众，能长驱席卷，回首提戈。
English: If he wins, he will pacify the people of Sanjin; if he loses, he will call up the people of Wubu, sweep them away, and return to Tigo.

古文：但虑隳突中原，为公后患，四海群谤，尽归仁明，终不能见仆一夫，得仆一马。
现代文：只是担心在中原奔突践踏，成为您的后患，四海群谤，尽归于您，终究不能见我一人，得我一马。
English: I'm just worried about being trampled in the Central Plains, becoming your afterthought, and being slandered by the whole world. It's all up to you, after all, you can't see me alone, you have to get me one horse.

古文：锐师傥失，则难整齐，请防后艰，愿存前好。
现代文：倘若精锐军队有个差错，则难以保证整齐，请为预防事后的艰险，愿保留从前的友好。
English: If there is a mistake in the elite army, it is difficult to ensure neatness. In order to prevent difficulties afterwards, please be willing to retain the former friendship.

古文：矧复阴山部落，是仆懿亲；回纥师徒，累从外舍。
现代文：再说阴山部落是我的至亲；回鹘军队，多是我的后盾。
English: In addition, the Yinshan tribe is my closest relative; the Uighur army is mostly my back-up.

古文：文靖求始毕之众，元海征五部之师，宽言虚词，犹或得志。
现代文：以前文靖求始毕之众，元海征集五部之师，只是说些宽泛虚空的话，还能做得到、实现心愿。
English: In the past, the people of Wenzhong asked for the completion of the beginning, and the teachers of the five departments were recruited by the Yuanhai, but they only said some broad and empty words, but they could still do it and realize their wishes.

古文：今仆散积财而募勇辈，辇宝货以诱义戎，征其密亲，啗以美利，控弦跨马，宁有数乎！
现代文：现在我散发积财募集壮勇之士，运去宝物招来节义之兵，征召亲戚，给他利益，带弓骑马的士兵，还会数得清吗？
English: Shall I now scatter my treasure, and gather the mighty men of valor, and carry away the precious things, and bring in the soldiers of righteousness, and call my kinsmen, and give them victuals, and make my horsemen go forth with bows?

古文：但缘荷位天朝，恻心疲瘵，峨峨亭障，未忍起戎。亦望公深识鄙怀，洞回英鉴，论交释憾，虑祸革心，不听浮谭，以伤霸业。
现代文：但因为在天朝任职有恻隐之心，不忍心起兵。也希望您理解我的心怀，洞察事理英明识断，论交情忘怨仇，考虑利害关系改变心意，不听浮议邪谈，以免损害霸业。
English: However, because I have a compassionate heart for serving in the heavenly court, I cannot bear to take up arms. I also hope that you will understand my heart, discern the facts, be wise and discerning, forget about friendship and grudge, consider the interests and change your mind, and do not listen to idle talk, so as not to damage the hegemony.

古文：夫《易》惟忌满，道贵持盈，傥恃勇以丧师，如擎盘而失水，为蛇刻鹤，幸赐徊翔，
现代文：《周易》说要防止太满，大道看重持盈，如果恃勇而丧失军队，就像高举盘子而失水，为蛇刻鹤，幸赐回心转意。
English: "Zhou Yi" said that to prevent being too full, the avenue should attach importance to keeping profits. If you are brave and lose the army, it is like holding up a plate and losing water. If you are a snake and carve a crane, luck will give you a change of heart.

古文：仆少负褊心，天与直气，间谋诡论，誓不为之。
现代文： 我少时心地狭窄，性格耿直，离间诡计一类的事，发誓不干。
English: When I was young, I had a narrow mind, a straightforward personality, and I swore not to do anything like scheming.

古文：唯将药石之谭，愿托金兰之分。
现代文：只想说些劝人改过的话，愿维持兄弟情谊。
English: I just want to say a few words to persuade people to make amends, and I am willing to maintain the brotherhood.

古文：傥愚衷未豁，彼抱犹迷，假令罄三朝之威，穷九流之辩，遣回肝膈，如俟河清。
现代文：如果我的衷心不露，别人的心仍然迷惑，即使用尽三朝的威信，说完九流的辩言，要使别人回心转意，就像等黄河水清一样难以实现。
English: If I do not reveal my heart, and the hearts of others are still confused, even if I use the prestige of the three dynasties and say the arguments of the nine streams, it is as difficult to make others change their minds as it is to wait for the Yellow River to be clear.

古文：今者执简吐诚，愿垂保鉴。
现代文：现在写信表明诚意，愿您鉴察。
English: I am writing to express my sincerity, and I hope you will read it.

古文：仆自眷私睽隔，翰墨往来，或有鄙词，稍侵英听，亦承嘉论，每赐骂言。
现代文： 我自从与您私交断绝后，往来书信，有时会说些难听的话，伤害了您，也曾接到您的高论，每次赐给骂言。
English: Since I severed personal relations with you, I have exchanged letters, sometimes saying some unpleasant words that hurt you, and I have also received your high-sounding speech, each time giving me abuse.

古文：叙欢既罢于寻戈，焚谤幸蠲其载笔，穷因尚口，乐贵和心，愿祛沉阏之嫌，以复埙篪之好。
现代文：叙述欢乐能放弃打仗，消除诽谤能使文笔清洁，争言斗口就走不通，和心悦意就能快乐，愿意去掉旧嫌，修复兄弟之好。
English: Describing joy can give up fighting, eliminating slander can make the writing clean, quarrels will not go through, and the heart can be happy, willing to remove old grudges and repair the good of brothers.

古文：今者卜于嚬分，不欲因人，专遣使乎，直诣铃阁。
现代文：今天看在以前情份，不想托人，专门派遣使者，直到阁下跟前。
English: Today, as in the past, we do not want to rely on others, so we have sent a special emissary to your excellency.

古文：古者兵交两地，使在其间，致命受辞，幸存前志。
现代文：古时两地交兵，使者在于其间，送信接信，幸存前志。
English: In ancient times, the two places exchanged troops, and the messenger was in the middle, sending and receiving letters, and survived.

古文：是时梁有敬翔，燕有马郁，华州有李巨川，荆南有郑准，《唐新纂》云：郑准，士族，未第时，佐荆门上欲莲幕，飞书走檄，不让古人，秉直去邪，无惭往哲，考准为成汭书记，汭封上谷郡王。
现代文：昔贤看重意气相合，义士难于委屈事仇，若不是留恋恩情私谊，怎么会轻易说心里话。凄凄丹心，炳炳血情，临纸向往之情，千万中难述其一。 梁太祖看信，到 毒手尊拳 一句时，高兴地对敬翔说 ：李公占据着一小角地方，怎么会得到这种文士，如果用我的智谋，再得到李袭吉的文才，就像老虎添了翅膀。 又读到 马邑儿童 、 阴山部落 等句，梁太祖生气地对敬翔说： 李克用只剩下一口气，仍然气吞宇宙，可以臭骂他。 
English: In the past, the wise men valued the harmony of the mind and spirit, and it was difficult for the righteous to take revenge on the wrongdoers. If it were not for the longing for kindness and friendship, how would it be easy to speak the words of the heart? The terrible heart, the yearning for blood, the yearning for paper, it is difficult to describe one in ten million. When Liang Taizu read the letter and came to the sentence about the vengeful fist, he said happily to Qian Xiang: Li Gong occupies a small corner, how can he get this kind of scribe? If I use my wisdom to get the literary talent of Li Xi, it is like

古文：凤翔有王超，《北梦琐言》：唐末，凤翔判官王超，推奉李茂贞，挟曹、马之势，笺奏文檄，恣意翱翔。后为兴元留后，遇害，有《凤鸣集》三十卷行于世。钱塘有罗隐，魏博有李山甫，皆有文称，与袭吉齐名于时。
现代文：敬翔写回信时，词句理气均超不过原信，因此李袭吉的名气更大。自从广明大乱后，诸侯割据各地，竞相延揽名士，掌管文书军檄，此时梁朝有敬翔，燕地有马郁，华州有李巨川，荆南有郑准，钱塘有罗隐，魏博有李山甫，都以文章出名，与李袭吉一起著称于当时。
English: When Jing Xiang wrote a reply to the letter, the words and sentences were not more rational than the original letter, so the fame of Li Zaiji was greater. Since the Guangming Rebellion, the princes were divided into various regions, competing to recruit celebrities, in charge of the clerical army. At this time, Liang Dynasty had Jing Xiang, Yan Di had Ma Yu, Huazhou had Li Juchuan, Jing Nan had Zheng Jun, Qiantang had Luo Ying, and Wei Bo had Li Shan Fu. They were all famous for their articles, and were famous at that time together with Li Zaiji.

古文：袭吉在武皇幕府垂十五年，视事之暇，唯读书业文，手不释卷。
现代文：李袭吉在武皇幕府有十五年，办公事之余，只是读书作文，手不释卷。
English: Li Weiji has been in the Emperor Wu's Shogunate for fifteen years, and in addition to office work, he only reads and writes.

古文：性恬于荣利，奖诱后进，不以己能格物。
现代文：性格淡泊于名利，提拔后进，不以自己的才能求财物。
English: Character indifferent to fame and fortune, promotion backward, do not use their own talent to seek wealth.

古文：参决府事，务在公平，不交赂遗，绰绰有士大夫之风概焉。
现代文：参预决策公事，务必公平，不互相送礼，绰绰有士大夫的风度气概。
English: When participating in the decision-making of public affairs, it is necessary to be fair, not to give gifts to each other, and to have the demeanor of a doctor.

古文：天祐三年六月，以风病卒于太原。
现代文：天三年因患风病死于太原。
English: He died in Taiyuan on the 3rd day of the 3rd month of the 4th month of the 5th month of the 5th month of the 6th month of the 5th month of the 6th month of the 5th month of the 6th month of the 5th month of the 6th month of the 6th month of the 6th month of the 6th month of the 7th month of the 9th month of the 9th month of the 10th month of the 11th month of the 12th month of the 12th month of the 12th month of the 11th month of the 12th month of the 12th month of the 12th month of the 12th month of the

古文：同光二年，追赠礼部尚书。
现代文：同光二年，追赠礼部尚书。
English: Two years later, he was posthumously awarded the honorific title of Shosho.

