古文：十有七年春正月丙辰，公会齐侯、纪侯盟于黄。
现代文：十七年春季，正月丙辰日，桓公在黄地与齐侯、纪侯结盟。
English: In the spring of the seventeenth year, on the first day of the first month, Huan Gong made an alliance with Qi Hou and Ji Hou in Huangdi.

古文：二月丙午，公会邾仪父，盟于趡。
现代文：二月丙午日，桓公在趡地与邾仪父会面结盟。
English: On the afternoon of the third day of February, Emperor Kan met with Puyi's father in Handan to form an alliance.

古文：夏五月丙午，及齐师战于奚。
现代文：夏季五月丙午日，鲁军与齐军在奚地发生战争。
English: On the afternoon of the third day of the fifth month in summer, there was a war between the Russian army and the Qi army in Handan.

古文：六月丁丑，蔡侯封人卒。
现代文：六月丁丑，蔡桓侯去世。
English: In June, Ding Xi, Cai Huan Hou passed away.

古文：秋八月，蔡季自陈归于蔡。
现代文：秋季八月，蔡季从陈国回到蔡国。
English: In the autumn of August, Cai Ji returned to Cai Guo from Chen Guo.

古文：癸巳，葬蔡桓侯。
现代文：癸巳日，安葬蔡桓侯。
English: On the following day, Cai Huanhou was buried.

古文：及宋人、卫人伐邾。
现代文：鲁国军队和宋国、卫国一起攻打邾国。
English: The armies of the State of Lu, the State of Song and the State of Wei jointly attacked the State of Ya.

古文：冬十月朔，日有食之。
现代文：冬季十月初一，发生日食。
English: In winter, on the first day of October, a solar eclipse.

古文：十七年春，盟于黄，平齐、纪，且谋卫故也。
现代文：十七年春季，鲁桓公和齐襄公、纪侯在黄地结盟，目的是为了促成齐、纪的和议，同时商量对付卫国。
English: In the spring of the seventeenth year, Prince Lu Huan allied with Prince Qi Xiang and Prince Ji Hou in Huangdi, with the aim of promoting peace talks between Qi and Ji, and at the same time discussing how to deal with the defense of the country.

古文：及邾仪父盟于趡，寻蔑之盟也。
现代文：桓公和邾仪父在趡地结盟，这是由于重申蔑地的盟约。
English: Prince Kan and Puyi's father made an alliance in Shunde, which was due to the renewal of the treaty of defiance.

古文：夏，及齐师战于奚，疆事也。于是齐人侵鲁疆。
现代文：夏季，鲁军与齐国军队在奚地发生战争，这是边境局部冲突。
English: In the summer, there was a war between the Russian army and the Qi army in Handan, which was a local border conflict.

古文：疆吏来告，公曰： 疆埸之事，慎守其一而备其不虞，姑尽所备焉。
现代文：当时齐国人入侵鲁国的边境，边境官吏前来报告。桓公说： 边境上的事情，谨慎地防守自己一边而且防备发生意外。暂且尽力防备就是了。
English: At that time, the Qi people invaded the border of Lu, and the border officials came to report. Huan Gong said: On the border, guard your side carefully and be prepared for accidents. For the time being, do your best to be prepared.

古文：事至而战，又何谒焉。 
现代文：发生了事情就迎战，又何必先行请示报告呢？ 
English: When something happens, you go to war, and why do you have to ask for a report first?

古文：蔡桓侯卒，蔡人召蔡季于陈。
现代文：蔡桓侯去世了，蔡国人把蔡季从陈国召回来。
English: Cai Huan Hou passed away, and the people of Cai Guo brought Cai Ji back from Chen Guo.

古文：秋，蔡季自陈归于蔡，蔡人嘉之也。
现代文：秋季，蔡季从陈国回到蔡国，被立为国君，因为蔡国人都拥护他。
English: In the autumn, Cai Ji returned to Cai Guo from Chen Guo and was appointed as the sovereign, because Cai Guo people all supported him.

古文：伐邾，宋志也。
现代文：进攻邾国，这是宋国的意愿。
English: It was the will of the Song Dynasty to attack Shandong.

古文：冬十月朔，日有食之。
现代文：冬季，十月初一，日蚀。
English: In winter, on the first day of October, a solar eclipse.

古文：不书日，官失之也。
现代文：《春秋》没有记载日子，这是史官的漏记。
English: "Spring and Autumn" does not record the date, which is the omission of the historian.

古文：天子有日官，诸侯有日御。
现代文：天子有日官，诸侯有日御。
English: The Son of Heaven has His ministers, and the lords have their emperors.

古文：日官居卿以厎日，礼也。
现代文：日官居于卿的地位，以推算历象，这是合于礼的。
English: It is proper for a Japanese official, who holds a position of nobility, to learn from historical events.

古文：日御不失日，以授百官于朝。
现代文：日御详细记载每月大小和干支，无所遗漏，在朝廷上通告百官。
English: The Japanese government kept a detailed record of the monthly size and expenditures, without omission, and notified all officials at the Imperial Court.

古文：初，郑伯将以高渠弥为卿，昭公恶之，固谏不听。
现代文：当初，郑庄公准备任命高渠弥做卿，昭公讨厌他，坚决劝阻，庄公不听从。
English: At the beginning, Zheng Zhuang was preparing to appoint Gao Quiya as a lord, but Zhao disliked him and strongly discouraged him. Zhuang did not listen.

古文：昭公立，惧其杀己也。辛卯，弑昭公而立公子亹。
现代文：昭公即位后，高渠弥畏惧昭公会杀掉自己，就在十月二十二日，杀死昭公而立公子亹。
English: After the enthronement of the Shogun, Gao Quiya feared that the Shogun would kill himself, so on October 22nd, he killed the Shogun and executed the prince.

古文：君子谓昭公知所恶矣。
现代文：君子认为 昭公了解他所讨厌的人 。
English: The gentleman thinks that Akihiro knows the people he hates.

古文：公子达曰： 高伯其为戮乎，复恶已甚矣。 
现代文：公子达说： 高伯恐怕要被诛杀的吧！因为他报仇报得太过分了。 
English: He said, "I'm afraid that Gao Bo will be beaten to death, because he took revenge too far."

