古文：◎礼十三
现代文：礼十三
English: The Thirteenth Rite

古文：皇后陵寝兴宗帝后陵寝睿宗帝后陵寝皇妃等丧葬皇太子及妃丧葬诸王及妃公主丧葬
现代文：皇后陵寝兴宗帝后陵寝睿宗帝后陵寝皇妃等丧葬皇太子及妃丧葬诸王及妃公主丧葬
English: Funeral of Empress Dowager Empress Dowager Empress Dowager Empress Dowager Empress Dowager Empress Dowager Empress Dowager Empress Dowager Empress Dowager Empress Dowager Empress Dowager Empress Dowager

古文：皇后陵寝
现代文：皇后陵寝
English: The Empress's Mausoleum

古文：洪武十五年，皇后马氏崩。
现代文：洪武十五年，皇后马氏死。
English: In the 15th year of Hongwu, Empress Ma died.

古文：礼部引宋制为请。
现代文：礼部引用宋朝制度请示皇帝。
English: The Ministry of Ceremonies invoked the Song Dynasty system to petition the emperor.

古文：于是命在京文武官及听除官，人给布一匹，令自制服，皆斩衰二十七日而除，服素服百日。
现代文：于是命令在京城的文武官员以及听候选拔的官员，每人供给布一匹，命令各自裁制丧服，都服斩衰，二十七天后除服，穿素服一百天。
English: He then ordered the civil and military officials in Beijing, as well as the officials who were listening to the candidates, to each provide a piece of cloth, and ordered that they each cut their mourning clothes, and that they all wear them until they are worn out, and that they remove their clothes after 27 days, and wear plain clothes for 100 days.

古文：凡在京官，越三日素服至右顺门外，具丧服入临毕，素服行奉慰礼，三日而止。
现代文：凡是在京的官员，过三天穿素服到右顺门外面，穿上丧服进入，号哭哀悼完毕，穿着素服举行奉慰礼，三天而停止。
English: All officials in Beijing, after three days, wear plain clothes to the outside of the right door, wear mourning clothes to enter, cry and mourn, hold a memorial service in plain clothes, and stop for three days.

古文：武官五品以上、文官三品以上命妇，亦于第四日素服至乾清宫入临。用麻布盖头，麻布衫裙鞋，去首饰脂粉。
现代文：武官五品以上、文官三品以上受封的妇女，也在第四天穿素服到干清官入内号哭哀悼，用麻布盖头，穿麻布衫裙鞋，除去首饰脂粉。
English: On the fourth day, the women who were appointed as military officers of the Fifth Rank and above, and civilian officials of the Third Rank and above, also wore plain clothes to the dry-cleaning office to cry and mourn, covered their heads with linen, wore linen shirts, skirts and shoes, and removed jewelry powder.

古文：其外官服制与京官同。
现代文：那些外地官员的丧服制度，与京官相同。
English: The mourning dress system for those foreign officials is the same as that for Beijing officials.

古文：闻讣日于公厅成服，命妇服亦与在京命妇同，皆三日而除。
现代文：听到讣告之日在公家厅上穿丧服，地方受封号的妇女的丧服也与在京受封号的女相同，都三天除服。
English: On the day of hearing the obituary notice, the mourning clothes are worn in the public hall. The mourning clothes of the women who have been sealed in the local area are the same as those of the women who have been sealed in Beijing. They are removed from their clothes for three days.

古文：军民男女素服三日。
现代文：军民男女穿素服三天。
English: Military and civilian men and women wear vegetarian clothing for three days.

古文：禁屠宰，在京四十九日，在外三日。
现代文：禁止宰杀牲口，在京四十九天，在地方三天。
English: The slaughter of livestock is prohibited for forty-nine days in Beijing and three days in the provinces.

古文：停音乐祭祀百日。
现代文：停止音乐祭祀一百天。
English: The music festival will be suspended for 100 days.

古文：嫁娶，官停百日，军民一月。
现代文：出嫁娶妇，官员停止一百天，军民停止一个月。
English: For married couples, officials will be suspended for 100 days, and military and civilians will be suspended for one month.

古文：将发引，告太庙，遣官祭金水桥、午门等神及钟山之神。
现代文：将要出殡，祭告太庙，派官员祭祀金水桥、午门等神以及钟山神。
English: A funeral will be held, a memorial service will be held for the Great Temple, and officials will be dispatched to offer sacrifices to the gods of the Jinshui Bridge, the Midday Gate, and the Bell Mountain.

古文：帝亲祭于几筵，百官丧服诣朝阳门外奉辞。
现代文：皇帝亲自在灵座祭祀，百官穿丧服到朝阳门外举行告别礼。
English: The emperor himself held a memorial service at the shrine, and hundreds of officials wore mourning clothes to hold a farewell ceremony outside the Chaoyang Gate.

古文：是日，安厝皇堂。
现代文：这一天，安置于墓室。
English: On this day, it was placed in the burial chamber.

古文：皇太子奠，玄纁玉璧，行奉辞礼。
现代文：皇太子祭奠，用玄缥以及玉璧，举行告别礼。
English: The Crown Prince's memorial service was held, and a farewell ceremony was held with the use of the imperial scepter and the jade arrow.

古文：神主还宫，百官素服迎于朝阳门外，仍行奉慰礼。
现代文：神位牌返回宫中，百官穿素服在朝阳门外迎接，仍然举行奉慰礼。
English: The shinitai plaque returned to the Imperial Palace, and hundreds of officials in plainclothes greeted them outside the Asahiyama Gate, still holding a memorial service.

古文：帝复以醴馔祭于几筵殿，自再虞至九虞，皆如之。
现代文：皇帝又在灵座殿用酒醴肴僎祭祀，从第二次虞祭到第九次虞祭，都像这样。
English: The emperor also used wine, food and drink to celebrate the sacrifices in the Hall of the Spirits, and it was like this from the second to the ninth state festival.

古文：遣官告谢钟山之神。
现代文：派遣官吏告祭拜谢钟山的神灵。
English: Officials were dispatched to pay homage to the deities of Zhongshan.

古文：卒哭，以神主诣庙行祔享礼。
现代文：行卒哭祭之后，把神位牌送到宗庙举行拊祭礼。
English: After the procession and wailing ceremony, the shinitai plaques were sent to the ancestral temple for the purification ceremony.

古文：丧满百日，帝辍朝，祭几筵殿，致钦不拜。
现代文：丧满一百天，皇帝停止上朝，在灵座殿祭祀，致敬而不拜。
English: After a hundred days of mourning, the emperor ceased to ascend the throne and offered sacrifices in the shrine hall, paying homage but not bowing.

古文：东宫以下奠帛爵，百官素服行奉慰礼。
现代文：东宫太子以下祭奠帛爵，百官穿素服行奉慰礼。
English: From the Crown Prince of the Eastern Court on down, dignitaries and officials wore plain clothes to pay their respects.

古文：东宫、亲王、妃、主以牲醴祭孝陵，公侯等从。
现代文：东宫太子、亲王、妃、公主用牲醴祭祀孝陵，公侯等人跟从。
English: The Crown Prince, princes, queens, and princesses of the East Court used animal skulls to offer sacrifices at the Imperial mausoleum, followed by princes and others.

古文：命妇诣几筵殿祭奠。
现代文：受封号的妇女到灵座殿祭奠。
English: The women who received the title went to the main hall to pay their respects.

古文：自后凡节序及忌日，东宫亲王祭几筵及陵。
现代文：从此之后凡是节气和死亡纪念日，东宫太子、亲王在灵座和陵墓祭祀。
English: From then on, on the solar terms and death anniversaries, the Crown Prince of the Eastern Court and princes were sacrificed at the shrine and the mausoleum.

古文：小祥，辍朝三日。
现代文：周年行小祥祭礼，停止朝拜三天。
English: The anniversary will be celebrated with a small auspicious festival, and worship will be suspended for three days.

古文：禁在京音乐屠宰，设醮于灵谷寺、朝天宫各三日。
现代文：禁止在京城奏音乐、屠宰牲口，在灵谷寺、朝天宫设祭各三天。
English: It is forbidden to play music or slaughter animals in the capital, and it is forbidden to hold a festival in Linggu Temple or the Asotengu Palace for three days.

古文：帝率皇太子以下诣几筵殿祭。
现代文：皇帝率领皇太子以下到灵座殿祭祀。
English: The emperor led the crown prince and his entourage to the main hall for the ritual.

古文：百官素服，诣宫门。
现代文：百官穿素服，到宫门。
English: All officials wear plain clothes and go to the palace gate.

古文：进香讫，诣后右门奉慰。
现代文：进香完毕，到后右门举行列班进名奉慰礼。
English: After the incense was burned, a procession was held to the back right door to offer condolences.

古文：外命妇诣几筵殿进香。
现代文：卿大夫受封号的妇女到灵座殿进香。
English: The women who received the title of "Kyo-daifu" go to the shrine hall to make incense.

古文：皇太子、亲王熟布练冠九衤取，皇孙七衤取，皆去首绖。负版辟领衰。
现代文：皇太子、亲王戴有九条游缝的熟布练冠，皇孙七条游缝，都去掉麻制环形首绖，背披粗麻布穿左右辟领的衰服。
English: The crown prince and the prince wore a crown of nine interlaced seams of well-worn cloth, and the grandson of the king seven interlaced seams. They all removed the hemp ring-shaped headdress, wore a backcloth of coarse linen, and wore a faded dress with a left and right open collar.

古文：见帝及百官则素服、乌纱帽、乌犀带。
现代文：拜见皇帝和百官便穿素服、戴乌纱帽、系乌犀带。
English: When meeting the emperor and other dignitaries, they would wear plain clothes, a woollen cap, and a black sash.

古文：妃、主以下，熟布盖头，去腰绖。
现代文：妃、公主以下，用熟布盖头，去掉腰上的麻绖带。
English: For princesses and princesses below, cover the head with a piece of old cloth, and remove the girdle around the waist.

古文：宗室驸马练冠，去首绖。
现代文：宗室驸马戴练冠，去掉麻制环形首绖。
English: In the family room, the horse wears a training crown, and the ring-shaped hemp headdress is removed.

古文：内尚衣、尚冠，以所释服于几筵殿前丙位焚之。
现代文：内官尚衣、尚冠，把脱下的丧服在灵座殿前的南方位置焚烧。
English: The eunuchs, Shang Yi and Shang Guan, took off their mourning clothes and burned them in the southern position in front of the Holy Sepulchre.

古文：皇太子、亲王复诣陵行礼。
现代文：皇太子、亲王又到陵墓行礼。
English: The Crown Prince and the Prince again went to the mausoleum to pay their respects.

古文：大祥，奉安神主于奉先殿，预期斋戒告庙。
现代文：二周年的大祥祭，把神位牌安放到奉先殿，预先确定日期斋戒告祭宗庙。
English: On the second anniversary of the Taisho Festival, the divine tablet was placed in the Bonsen-den, and the date of the fast-breaking ceremony of the ancestral temple was determined in advance.

古文：百官陪祀毕，行奉慰礼。
现代文：百官陪祀结东，行奉慰礼。
English: Hundreds of officials accompanied and paid tribute to Yedong and offered condolences.

古文：成祖皇后徐氏崩，自次日辍朝，不鸣钟鼓。
现代文：成祖皇后徐氏死，从第二天停止朝拜，不奏乐。
English: When Empress Xu, the founder of the dynasty, died, the next day they stopped worshipping and stopped playing music.

古文：帝素服御西角门，百官素服诣思善门外哭临毕，行奉慰礼。
现代文：皇帝穿素服驾临西角门，百官穿素服到思善门外哭临，号哭哀悼完毕，举行列班进名奉慰礼。
English: The emperor, dressed in plain clothes, drove to the West Angle Gate, and hundreds of officials, dressed in plain clothes, went to the outside of the Shishan Gate to weep and mourn. After the crying and mourning, the procession was held to pay tribute.

古文：三日成服，哭临如上仪。
现代文：三日穿丧服，百官哭临号哭致哀如同上面所述的仪节。
English: Wearing mourning clothes for three days, hundreds of officials wept and wailed in mourning, just like the above-mentioned ceremonies.

古文：自次日为始，各就公署斋宿，二十七日止。
现代文：从第二天开始，各自到官署斋戒留宿，二十七天停止。
English: Starting from the next day, each of them went to the government office for fasting and lodging, and stopped fasting for 27 days.

古文：文武四品以上命妇成服日为始，诣思善门内哭临三日。
现代文：文武官四品以上受封号的妇女从服丧服之日开始，到思善门内哭临，号哭哀悼三天。
English: From the day of wearing mourning clothes, the women who have been awarded the title of civil and military officers with four or more awards come to the Shishan Gate to cry and mourn for three days.

古文：听选办事官，俱丧服。
现代文：听候选拔的办事官，都穿丧服。
English: The clerks listening to the candidates were all dressed in mourning clothes.

古文：人材监生、吏典、僧道、坊厢耆老各素服。
现代文：人才监生、吏典、僧道、坊厢间的年高有德的人各自服素服。
English: Talented supervisors, officials, monks, and virtuous people of all ages should wear plain clothes.

古文：自成服日始，赴应天府举哀三日，余悉遵高后时仪。
现代文：从服丧服之日开始，到应天府号哭哀悼三天，其余的全部遵照高后时的仪节。
English: From the day of mourning, to the three days of mourning in response to the call of heaven, the rest all follow the rituals of the High Queen.

古文：又定诸王、公主等服制，世子郡王皆齐衰不杖期。
现代文：又制定诸王、公主等人的丧服制度，世子、郡王都服齐衰，期服不用杖。
English: In addition, a mourning dress system was established for kings, princesses, and other people. The heir and the county king all wore the same dress, and they did not have to wear a cane.

古文：世子郡王妃、郡主皆大功。
现代文：世子、郡王妃、郡主都服大功九个月。
English: The heir to the throne, the county princess and the lord of the county all served for nine months.

古文：周、楚诸王及宁国诸公主及郡王之子皆小功。
现代文：周、楚等王以及宁国各公主以及郡王的儿子都服小功五个月。
English: Zhou, Chu and other kings, as well as the princesses of Ning and the sons of the county king, all served five months.

古文：遣中官讣告诸王府，造祔里，谒太庙。
现代文：派宦官讣告各王府，拊葬，拜谒太庙。
English: Eunuchs were sent to denounce the royal palaces, to bury the dead, and to pay homage to the imperial temple.

古文：祭器、谥册、谥宝悉用檀香。
现代文：祭器、谧号簿册、谧号寅印全部用檀香。
English: Sandalwood was used for the sacrificial vessels, the memorial book, and the seal.

古文：将册，帝躬告天地于奉天殿丹陛上。
现代文：将要册赐，皇帝在奉天殿台阶上亲自告祭天地。
English: The imperial edict was issued, and the emperor personally offered sacrifice to heaven and earth on the steps of the Bongten Hall.

古文：御华盖殿，鸿胪寺官引颁册宝官入行礼，传制曰： 永乐五年十月十四日，册谥大行皇后，命卿行礼。 
现代文：驾临华盖殿，鸿胪寺官员导引颁册宝官进入行礼，传布制命说： 永乐五年十月十四日，册谧大行皇后，命令卿举行礼仪。 
English: Arriving at the Huagai Hall, the officials of Hongye Temple guided the officials to enter the ceremony, and spread the order saying: On October 14, Yongle Year 5, the empress of the grand procession, ordered the lord to hold the ceremony.

古文：四拜毕，序班举册宝案至奉天殿丹陛上，置彩舆中，由中道出，入右顺门至几筵殿，以册宝置案，退俟于殿外。
现代文：拜四拜完毕，序班官举起册宾几案到奉天殿台阶上，放在彩车中，从中路出去，进入右顺门到灵座殿，把册宝放在几案上，退到殿外等待。
English: At the end of the four prostrations, the officer in charge of the procession held up several cases of the registered guests to the steps of the Bonten Hall, placed them in the floats, walked out from the middle of the road, entered the right-hand door to the Seance Hall, placed the registered treasures on several cases, and retreated to wait outside the hall.

古文：尚仪女官诣香案前，跪进曰： 皇帝遣某官册谥大行皇后，谨告。 
现代文：尚仪女官到香案前，跪着进言说： 皇帝派某官册谧大行皇后，恭敬地上告。 
English: Before Shang Yi's lady-in-waiting arrived at the incense case, she knelt down and said, "The emperor has sent a certain official to summon the empress and respectfully report to him.

古文：赞宣册，女官捧册宣于几筵之右，置册于案，宣宝如之。
现代文：礼赞宣唱册，女官捧册在灵座的右面宣读，把册放在案上，宣唱宝印也如同这样。
English: When the hymn book is read, the maidservant takes the book and reads it on the right side of the altar, and places the book on the case. The same applies to the reading of the seal.

古文：尚仪奏礼毕，女官以册宝案置几筵之左。
现代文：尚仪官上奏典礼完毕，女官把册宝案放在灵座的左面。
English: After the ceremony, the maid of honor placed the treasure case on the left side of the hearse.

古文：内官出报礼毕，颁册宝官复命。
现代文：内官出来报告典礼完毕，颁布册宝的官员复命。
English: After the report ceremony was over, the official who promulgated the Treasure Catalogue was relieved of his duties.

古文：百日，礼部请御正门视朝，鸣钟鼓，百官易浅淡色服。
现代文：一百天，礼部请求驾临正门上朝理政，奏乐，百官改换浅淡色的服饰。
English: On the 100th day, the Ministry of Ceremonies requested that all officials come to the front gate to conduct the government, play music, and change their light-colored clothing.

古文：帝以梓宫未葬，不允。
现代文：皇帝因灵柩没有下葬，不同意。
English: The emperor did not agree because the coffin was not buried.

古文：至周期，帝素服诣几筵致祭，百官西角门奉慰，辍朝三日。
现代文：到了一周年，皇帝穿素服到灵座殿进行祭祀，百官在西角门列班进名拜慰天子的奉慰礼，停止上朝三天。
English: On the first anniversary, the emperor wore plain clothes to the Holy Sepulchre to perform a religious service, and hundreds of officials lined up at the West Angle Gate to pay homage to the Son of Heaven, stopping the procession for three days.

古文：在京停音乐、禁屠宰七日。
现代文：在京城停止音乐、禁止屠宰牲口七天。
English: Music was stopped in the capital and the slaughter of animals was banned for seven days.

古文：礼部官于天禧寺、朝天宫斋醮。
现代文：礼部官在天禧寺、朝天宫斋戒祭祀。
English: The ritual officials will hold a fasting ritual at Tenji Temple and Choten-gu Shrine.

古文：其明日，帝吉服御奉天门视朝，鸣钟鼓。
现代文：第二天，皇帝穿吉服驾临奉天门处理国政，敲钟鼓。
English: The next day, the emperor arrived at the Gate of Heaven dressed in auspicious clothing to handle state affairs and ring the bells and drums.

古文：百官服浅淡色衣、乌纱帽、黑角带，退朝署事仍素服。
现代文：百官穿浅淡色衣服，戴乌纱帽、弃黑角带，退朝处理官署事务仍穿素服。
English: All officials wear light-colored clothes, wear a black cap, abandon the black-cornered belt, and still wear plain clothes when dealing with government affairs.

古文：遇朔望，朝见庆贺如常仪。
现代文：遇到朔日、望日，朝见庆贺如同平常的仪式。
English: When it comes to the New Year's Eve and New Year's Day, the morning greeting and celebration is just like an ordinary ceremony.

古文：几筵祭祀，熟布练冠。
现代文：灵座祭祀，戴熟布练冠。
English: Lingza ritual, wearing a well-worn cloth crown.

古文：及发引，斋三日，遣官以葬期告郊庙社稷。
现代文：到出殡，斋戒三天，派官员把安葬日期祭告郊庙社稷。
English: At the time of the funeral, he fasted for three days and sent officials to inform the suburban temples and shrines of the burial date.

古文：帝素服祭告几筵，皇太子以下衰服行礼，遣官祭所过桥门及沿途祀典诸神。
现代文：皇帝穿素服祭告灵座，皇太子以下穿衰服行礼，派官员祭祀所经过的桥、门以及沿途祀典规定的众神灵。
English: The emperor wore a vegetarian costume to offer his last rites, while the crown prince and his entourage wore formal attire and performed a ritual. Officials were dispatched to offer sacrifices to the bridges and gates they passed, as well as to the deities specified in the ritual along the way.

古文：百官及命妇俱素服，以次路祭。
现代文：百官以及受封号的妇女都穿素服，依次路祭。
English: All the officials and the women who received the title wore plain clothes, and the procession followed.

古文：梓宫至江滨，百官奉辞于江滨。
现代文：灵柩到达江边，百官在江边行告别礼。
English: The coffin arrived at the riverside, and hundreds of officials came to the riverside to bid farewell.

古文：皇太子送渡江，汉王护行，途中朝夕哭奠。
现代文：皇太子护送渡过长江，汉王护送，途中早晚号哭祭奠。
English: Crown Prince escorted across the Yangtze River, Han Wang escorted, on the way morning and evening crying and offering prayers.

古文：官民迎祭者，皆素服。
现代文：官吏平民迎接祭奠的，都穿素服。
English: Civil servants and commoners wore plain clothes to greet the mourners.

古文：既葬，赐护送官军及舁梓官军士钞米有差。
现代文：安葬以后，赏赐护送官军和抬灵柩的军士各有不同数目的钱钞粮食。
English: After the burial, the escorting government troops and the soldiers who carried the coffin were each given different amounts of money and grain.

古文：正统中，仁宗皇后张氏崩，礼部定大行太皇太后丧礼。
现代文：正统年间，仁宗皇后张氏死，礼部制定大行太皇太后丧礼。
English: During the orthodox period, the Empress Jang of the Rinzong Dynasty died, and the Ministry of Ceremonies set up a grand funeral for the grand empress dowager.

古文：皇帝成服三日后，即听政。
现代文：皇帝服丧三天后，便处理政务。
English: Three days after the emperor's funeral, he resumed his government duties.

古文：祀典皆勿废，诸王以下内外各官及命妇哭临如前仪，衰服二十七日而除，军民男女素服十三日。
现代文：祭祀的典礼都不废弃，诸王以下朝廷内外各官员以及受封号的妇女如同先前的仪节，定时哭临，号哭哀悼也一样，服衰服二十七天后除服，军民男女服穿素服十三天。
English: Sacrificial ceremonies are not abandoned. All officials inside and outside the imperial court, from the king on down, as well as women who have received the title of nobility, will, as in previous ceremonies, regularly weep and mourn. They will remove their uniforms after 27 days of wearing them, and both men and women will wear plain uniforms for 13 days.

古文：诸王勿会葬，外官勿进香，臣民勿禁音乐嫁娶。
现代文：诸王不参加会葬，地方官不进献香，大臣平民不禁止音乐和嫁女娶妇。
English: Kings do not attend funerals, local officials do not go to offer incense, ministers and commoners do not forbid music and the marriage of women.

古文：及葬，遣官告太庙。
现代文：安葬以后，派官吏祭告太庙。
English: After the burial, officials were dispatched to pay respects at the Imperial Temple.

古文：帝亲奉太后衣冠谒列祖帝、后及仁宗神位，又奉宣宗衣冠谒太后神位，其礼视时享。
现代文：皇帝亲手捧持太后的衣冠拜谒列祖帝、后以及仁宗神位，又捧持宣宗的衣冠拜谒太后的神位，其礼仪与四时祭享相同。
English: The emperor personally held the crown of the empress dowager to worship the ancestral emperors, empresses, and the god of Rinzong, and also held the crown of the emperor's empress dowager to worship the god of the empress dowager. The etiquette is the same as the four-hour offering.

古文：天顺中，宣帝皇后孙氏崩，仪如故事，止改哭临于清宁门。
现代文：天顺年间，宣宗皇后孙氏死，仪节如同旧例，只是把定时哭临号哭哀悼改在清宁门。
English: During the Tenshun era, when the Empress Sun of the Xuanzong Dynasty died, the ceremony was the same as before, except that the regular wailing and mourning was changed to the Qingning Gate.

古文：英宗皇后钱氏崩，礼如旧，惟屠宰止禁七日，外国使臣免哭临。
现代文：英宗皇后钱氏死，礼仪如同旧制，只是宰杀牲口只禁止七天，外国使臣免去哭临的仪式。
English: After the death of the British empress Qian, the etiquette was the same as the old system, except that the slaughter of animals was only prohibited for seven days, and foreign envoys were exempted from the crying ceremony.

古文：正德元年，景帝后汪氏薨。
现代文：正德元年，景帝皇后汪氏死。
English: In the first year of Zhengde, Empress Wang of the Qing Dynasty died.

古文：礼部会群臣言，宜如皇妃例，辍朝三日，祭九坛。
现代文：礼部会同群臣说，应该按照皇妃的礼仪办，停止朝拜三天，在九坛祭祀。
English: The Ministry of Ceremonies, together with the ministers, said that it should be done in accordance with the etiquette of the empress, stop worshipping for three days, and perform the ritual at the nine altars.

古文：太后、中宫、亲王以下文武大臣命妇皆有祭。
现代文：太后、中宫皇后、亲王以下文武大臣受封号的妇女都有祭礼。
English: The empress dowager, the empress dowager, the prince, and the women who have been given the title of minister of education and the armed forces all have festivals.

古文：制可。
现代文：皇帝制命同意。
English: The post-Bukou system can work.

古文：宪宗废后吴氏，正德四年薨，以大学士李东阳等言，礼如英宗惠妃故事。
现代文：宪宗废黜的皇后吴氏，正德四年死，用大学士李东阳等人的建议，其礼仪如同英宗惠妃的旧例。
English: The etiquette of Empress Wu, who was dethroned by Emperor Xianzong and died four years later, is the same as that of Empress Hui of Emperor Yingzong, according to suggestions from university scholar Li Dongyang and others.

古文：宪宗皇后王氏，正德十三年崩。
现代文：宪宗皇后王氏，正德十三年死。
English: Zhengde, the empress of the Wang clan, died 13 years later.

古文：越三日，帝至自宣府，乃发丧。
现代文：遇了三天，皇帝从宣府返回，纔发丧。
English: After three days, the emperor returned from Xuanfu and went into mourning.

古文：百官具素服，于清宁宫门外听宣遗诰。
现代文：百官穿素服，在清宁宫门外听候宣读遣诰。
English: Hundreds of officials, dressed in plain clothes, wait outside the gate of the Qingning Palace for the imperial edict to be read.

古文：及发引，先期结平台，与顺天府交衢相值。
现代文：到出殡，事前搭好平台，与顺天府的十字路口相接。
English: At the funeral, set up a platform in advance to connect with the crossroads of Shun Tianfu.

古文：帝晨出北安门迎，皇太后及皇后御平台候殡。
现代文：皇帝早晨出北安门迎候，皇太后和皇后驾临平台等候出殡。
English: In the morning, the emperor went out of the Bei'an Gate to greet the mourners. The empress dowager and the empress came to the platform to wait for the funeral.

古文：复入至清宁宫，亲奉梓宫朝祖。
现代文：又进入到达清宁官，亲自捧着灵柩朝拜祖宗。
English: He also went to the Qingning official and personally held the coffin to pay homage to his ancestors.

古文：百官步送德胜门外，惟送丧官骑送。
现代文：百官步行送到德胜门外，只有送丧官员骑马送行。
English: Hundreds of officials walked to Deshengmen, only the funeral officials rode to see them off.

古文：明日，帝奉神主还京，百官迎于德胜门。
现代文：第二天，皇帝捧持神位牌回京，百官在德胜门迎候。
English: The next day, the emperor returned to Beijing holding the divine tablet, and hundreds of officials greeted him at the Desheng Gate.

古文：帝素服、腰绖御西角门，百官奉慰。
现代文：皇帝穿着素服、腰系麻绖驾临西角门，百官列班进各行奉慰礼。
English: The emperor, wearing plain clothes and a loincloth, drove to the West Corner Gate, and hundreds of officials marched in formation to offer condolences.

古文：卒哭，始释服。
现代文：行卒哭祭后，纔脱下丧服。
English: After the procession and wailing ceremony,  took off his mourning clothes.

古文：孝宗母纪氏，宪宗妃也。
现代文：孝宗的母亲纪氏，是宪宗的妃子。
English: Takamune's mother, Ki, was a concubine of Kenso.

古文：成化中薨，辍朝如故事。
现代文：成化年问死，停止上朝如同旧例。
English: Chenghua year of death, stop the previous morning as the old case.

古文：自初丧及葬，帝及皇太后、中宫、妃、主、皇子皆致祭。
现代文：从初丧到安葬，皇帝以及皇太后、中宫皇后、妃、公主、皇子都进行祭奠。
English: From the initial mourning to the burial, the emperor, the empress dowager, the empress dowager, the empress dowager, the princess, the princess, and the prince all paid their respects.

古文：遣皇子奉祝册行礼，茔域、葬仪俱从厚。
现代文：派皇子捧持祝册行礼，坟茔、丧葬仪节都优厚办理。
English: The prince was sent to hold the congratulatory book and perform the ceremony, and the graves and funeral ceremonies were handled well.

古文：皇亲百官及命妇送葬设祭，皆如仪。
现代文：皇亲、百官以及受封号的妇女送葬设祭，都按照礼仪进行。
English: The funerals of imperial relatives, dignitaries, and women who received the title of nobility were all conducted in accordance with etiquette.

古文：世宗祖母邵氏，嘉靖元年崩。
现代文：世宗祖母邵氏，嘉靖元年死。
English: His great-great-grandmother, Shao Shi, died in the first year of the Jiajing Dynasty.

古文：服除，部臣毛澄等请即吉视事。
现代文：丧服除去之后，礼部大臣毛澄等人请求穿吉服处理政事。
English: After the removal of the mourning clothes, the Minister of Ceremonies, Mao Cheng, and others requested to wear the lucky clothes to deal with political affairs.

古文：议再上，命考孝肃太皇太后丧礼。
现代文：奏议两次上呈，命令考察孝肃太皇太后丧礼。
English: The report was submitted twice, and the funeral of Empress Dowager Xiaoshu was ordered to be investigated.

古文：澄等言： 孝肃崩时，距葬期不远，故暂持凶服，以待山陵事竣，与今不同。
现代文：毛澄等人说： 孝肃太皇太后死时，距离安葬日期不远，所以暂时穿丧服，以等待坟墓完工，与今天的情况不同。
English: Mao Cheng and others said: When Empress Dowager Xiaoshu died, the burial date was not far away, so she temporarily wore mourning clothes to wait for the tomb to be completed, which is different from today's situation.

古文：况当正旦朝元，亦不宜缟衣临见万国。
现代文：况且正当正月旦日朝贺皇上，也不应穿缟衣临朝接见天下臣民。
English: Moreover, on the first day of the lunar new year, Emperor He should not wear the imperial robe to receive the world's subjects.

古文：若孝思未忘，第毋御中门及不鸣钟鼓足矣。 
现代文：如果孝顺的思念不忘，只是不要驾临中门，以及不奏乐就足够了。 
English: If the thought of filial piety is not forgotten, it is enough not to go to the middle gate and not to play music.

古文：从之，仍免朔望日升殿。
现代文：皇帝听从，仍然免除朔日、望日升殿。
English: The emperor obeyed, and still exempted the New Year's Day and the Day of the Rising Sun.

古文：既葬四日，帝御奉天门，百官行奉慰礼，始从吉。
现代文：安葬后四天，皇帝驾临奉天门，百官举行列班进名奉慰礼，纔穿吉服。
English: Four days after the funeral, the emperor arrived at the Gate of Heaven, and hundreds of officials held a procession to offer condolences and wear auspicious clothes.

古文：嘉靖中，孝宗皇后张氏崩，礼臣以旧制上。
现代文：嘉靖年间，孝宗皇后张氏死，礼官以旧有礼仪上奏。
English: During the reign of Emperor Jiajing, when Empress Xiaozong of the Zhang family died, the etiquette officials performed the eulogy with the old etiquette.

古文：帝谓郊社不宜渎，罢祭告。
现代文：皇帝认为郊宫社庙礼仪不应烦琐，罢除祭告的礼仪。
English: The emperor believed that the etiquette of suburban palaces, shrines and temples should not be cumbersome, and abolished the etiquette of proclamation.

古文：又谓躬行诸礼，前已谕代，亦罢谒庙礼。
现代文：又说亲自举行各种礼仪，先前已经告谕代替，也罢除拜谒宗庙礼。
English: He also said that he would personally hold all kinds of ceremonies, and that he had previously issued an edict to replace and abolish the temple worship of the Jurchen Sect.

古文：及太常寺以朝祖祔庙，请各庙捧主官，诏主俱不必出，盖从杀也。
现代文：及太常寺因朝拜祖先拊祭宗庙，请各庙捧持神位牌的官，皇帝下诏神位牌都不必出，因为要按减损的礼仪办。
English: And because of the worship of ancestors at the ancestral temple of Taizho-ji Temple, all temples are invited to hold the official of the divine tablet. The divine tablet does not have to be issued by the emperor, because it is necessary to follow the derogatory etiquette.

古文：先是，武宗皇后夏氏崩，礼部上仪注，有素冠、素服、绖带举哀及群臣奉慰礼。
现代文：在此之前，武宗皇后夏氏死，礼部呈上仪注，有服素冠、素服、麻布带号哭哀悼以及群臣列班进名拜慰的礼仪。
English: Prior to this, when Empress Xia of the Wuzong Dynasty died, the etiquette department presented a ceremonial notice, with the etiquette of wearing a plain crown, a plain dress, a linen sash, crying and mourning, as well as the etiquette of courtiers lining up to pay their respects.

古文：帝曰： 朕于皇兄后无服，矧上奉两宫，又迫圣母寿旦，忍用纯素。
现代文：皇帝说： 朕对于皇兄后没有服丧关系，况且上奉雨宫，又迫近圣母寿辰，不忍心穿纯素。
English: The emperor said, "I have nothing to do with the death of the emperor's brother, and besides, I have to go to the Rain Palace, and it is close to the birthday of the Virgin Mary. I can't bear to wear vegan.

古文：朕青服视事，诸仪再拟。 
现代文：朕穿青服处理政事，各种礼仪重新拟定。 
English: I wore a youth uniform to deal with political affairs, and all kinds of etiquette were re-drafted.

古文：于是尚书夏言等言： 庄肃皇后丧礼，在臣民无容议。
现代文：于是尚书夏言等人说： 庄肃皇后丧礼，对大臣平民不容议论。
English: Therefore, Shangshu Xiayan and others said: The solemn funeral of the empress is over, and it is not permissible to discuss the ministers and commoners.

古文：惟是皇上以天子之尊，服制既绝，不必御西角门。
现代文：祇是皇上以天子的尊严，按丧服制度已经断服，不必驾临西角门。
English: Only the emperor, with the dignity of the son of heaven, has broken the mourning dress system, and does not have to go to the West Angle Gate.

古文：群臣成服后，不当素服朝参。 
现代文：群臣服丧服以后，不应当穿素服朝见参拜。 
English: After the courtiers wear mourning clothes, they should not wear plain clothes to visit the temple in the morning.

古文：及上丧葬仪，帝复谕： 毅皇后事宜与累朝元后不同，无几筵之奉，当即行祔庙，令皇后摄事于内殿。 
现代文：到了呈上丧葬仪式之后，皇帝又告谕： 毅皇后的丧事应该与历朝的帝王嫡妻不同，没有灵座的供奉，应当随即举行拊祭宗庙礼，命令皇后在内殿代理主持丧事。 
English: After presenting the funeral ceremony, the emperor also announced: The funeral of Empress Yi should be different from that of the emperors' legitimate wives of all dynasties. There should be no memorial service. A funeral rite should be held immediately, and the empress should be ordered to preside over the funeral in the inner hall.

古文：言等议： 按礼，卒哭乃行祔里告。
现代文：夏言等人提议： 按礼仪，卒哭祭后便举行拊祭告庙。
English: Xia Yan and others proposed: According to the etiquette, after the wailing ceremony, the sacrificial offering to the temple will be held.

古文：盖以新主当入，旧主当祧，故预以告也。
现代文：因新的神位牌应当送入太庙，旧的神位牌应当送入祧庙，所以预先告祭。
English: Because the new tablet should be sent to the Imperial Temple, and the old tablet should be sent to the Imperial Temple, they announced the sacrifice in advance.

古文：此在常典则然，非今日议例。
现代文：这在平常的典制便是对的，不是今日的义例。
English: This is true in the ordinary canonical system, not today's canon.

古文：毅皇后神主诚宜即祔太庙，以妥神灵，而祔告之礼宜免。 
现代文：毅皇后神位牌确实应该随即拊祭太庙，以安妥神灵，而拊祭售庙的礼仪应该免去。 
English: It is true that the throne plaque of Empress Yi should immediately be offered to the Imperial Temple to ensure the safety of the gods, and the etiquette of selling the temple should be dispensed with.

古文：因具上其仪。
现代文：于是详细呈上丧葬礼仪。
English: As a result, the funeral ceremony was presented in detail.

古文：制可。
现代文：皇帝制命同意。
English: The post-Bukou system can work.

古文：嘉靖七年，世宗皇后陈氏崩。
现代文：嘉靖七年，世宗皇后陈氏死。
English: In the seventh year of the Jiajing Dynasty, Queen Chen of the Sejong Dynasty died.

古文：礼部上丧祭仪，帝疑过隆。
现代文：礼部呈上丧葬祭祀的礼仪，皇帝怀疑过于隆重。
English: The ceremonial department presented the funeral rites, which the emperor suspected of being too grand.

古文：议再上，帝自裁定，概从减杀，欲九日释服。
现代文：提议第二次呈上，皇帝亲自裁定，一概依从碱省，要想九天就脱丧服。
English: When the proposal was presented for the second time, the emperor personally ruled that everyone should follow the government's advice and remove their mourning clothes after nine days.

古文：阁臣张璁等言： 夫妇之伦，参三纲而立。
现代文：内阁大臣张璁等说： 夫妇的伦常，参照三纲而制定。
English: Cabinet Minister Zhang Ye et al. said: "The morals of couples should be formulated with reference to the Three Principles.

古文：人君乃纲常之主，尤不可不慎。
现代文：国君是纲常的根本，尤其不可不慎重。
English: The sovereign is the foundation of discipline, and in particular must not be careless.

古文：《左传》昭公十五年六月乙丑，周景王太子寿卒。
现代文：《左传》昭公十五年六月乙丑，周景王的太子寿死。
English: In the 15th year of King Zhaogong's reign, in the month of June, the Prince of Zhou King died.

古文：秋八月戊寅，王穆后崩。
现代文：秋八月戊寅，周景王穆后死。
English: In the autumn, on August 22nd, Wang Mu Huan passed away.

古文：叔向曰： 王一岁而有三年之丧二焉。 
现代文：叔向说： 周景王一年中而有需服丧三年的丧事两起。
English: Uncle Xiang said: Zhou Jing Wang had two three-year funerals in one year.

古文：盖古礼，父为子，夫为妻，皆服报服三年。
现代文：因为古礼，父亲为儿子，丈夫为妻子，都服祭服三年。
English: Because of the ancient rite, the father for the son, the husband for the wife, all wear the sacrificial clothing for three years.

古文：后世，夫为妻，始制为齐衰杖期，父母在则不杖。
现代文：后世，丈夫为妻子，纔定制为服齐衰一年用杖的礼仪，父母在便不用杖。
English: In later generations, the husband is the wife, and the bridegroom is custom-made to wear a cane for one year, and the parents do not use a cane.

古文：《丧服》，自期以下，诸侯绝，然特为旁期言。
现代文：《丧服》上说，从服一年丧以下，诸侯不为旁亲服，但只是指旁系亲属的丧事。
English: "The Funeral Robe" says that the lords do not wear it for the next-of-kin, but only for the next-of-kin's funeral.

古文：若妻丧，本自三年报服，杀为期年，则固未尝绝者。
现代文：如果是妻子之丧，本来从服三年的丧期，减损为服一年的丧期，那么本来就不曾断绝。
English: If it was the death of his wife, he would have had to serve a three-year mourning period, and the deduction would have been a one-year mourning period, so he would not have been cut off.

古文：今皇上为后服期，以日易月，仅十二日。
现代文：现在皇上为皇后服一年的丧，用日替换月，祇有十二天。
English: Now the emperor is mourning for the empress for a year, replacing the month with the day, only twelve days.

古文：臣子为君母服三年，以日易月，仅二十七日。
现代文：臣为君、子焉母服三年丧，用日来替换月，只有二十七天。
English: It has been three years since the death of the mother of the minister for you and the son, and the month has been replaced by the day, only 27 days.

古文：较诸古礼，已至杀矣。
现代文：与古礼相比，已经减损到最少了。
English: Compared with the ancient rite, it has been reduced to a minimum.

古文：皇上宜服期，十二日，臣子素服，终二十七日。
现代文：皇上应该服一年的丧，即服丧十二天；臣子穿素服，二十七日而终。
English: An emperor should mourn for one year, that is, for twelve days; a vassal should wear plain clothes for twenty-seven days.

古文：不然，则恩纪不明，典礼有乖。 
现代文：不然，便恩情不明，典章礼制乖连。 
English: Otherwise, the situation will be unclear, and the rules and etiquette will continue.

古文：礼臣方献夫亦杂引《仪礼·丧服》等篇，反覆争辨，并《三朝圣谕》所载仁孝皇后崩，太宗衰服后，仍服数月白衣冠故事以证之。
现代文：礼官方献夫也错杂引用《仪礼，丧服》等篇，反复劝谏争辩，并且用《三朝圣谕》所载仁孝皇后死，太宗服衰服后，仍然服数月白衣冠的旧例来证明。
English: The official eulogy also misquoted "Rites, Funeral Robe" and other articles, repeatedly exhorted and argued, and used the old example of the white crown for several months after the death of Empress Ninko and the decline of Taizong clothing as contained in the "Three Holy Orders" to prove.

古文：帝言： 文皇后丧时，上无圣母，下有东宫，从重尽礼为宜。
现代文：皇帝说： 文皇后死时，上没有圣母，下有东宫太子，依从隆重丧服竭尽礼仪是应该的。
English: The emperor said, "When Empress Wen died, there was no Virgin Mary on the top, but there was a crown prince on the bottom. It is proper to follow the etiquette of solemn mourning.

古文：今不敢不更其制。 
现代文：现在不能不更正那个制度。 
English: The time has come to correct that system.

古文：已，詹事霍韬言： 今百官遭妻丧，无服衰莅事之礼。
现代文：随后，詹事霍韬说： 现在百官遇上妻子之丧，没有服衰服办事的礼仪。
English: Afterwards, Zhan Zhihuo said: Now that a hundred officials have lost their wives, there is no etiquette for doing business.

古文：盖妻丧内而不外，阴不可当阳也。
现代文：因为妻丧在内而不在外，是阴不能抵挡阳。
English: Because wife mourning is inside and not outside, yin cannot resist yang.

古文：圣谕云： 素服十日，仿辍朝之义。 于内廷行之则可。
现代文：皇上的告谕说 素服十天，仿照停止上朝的意思 ，在内廷施行便可以。
English: The emperor's proclamation said that plainclothes for ten days, in imitation of the meaning of stopping the last dynasty, can be implemented in the inner court.

古文：若对临百官，总理万几，履当阳之位，行中宫之服则不可。
现代文：如果面对百官，全面管理纷繁政务，登上帝王之位，为中官皇后的服丧便不可以。
English: If you face hundreds of officials, comprehensively manage complex government affairs, and ascend to the throne of God, it is not possible to be the funeral of the lieutenant general's queen.

古文：百官为皇后服衰，为其母仪天下也。
现代文：百官为皇后服衰服，因为她作天下母亲的仪范。
English: The dignitaries fall all over themselves for the empress, because she is the epitome of the mother of the world.

古文：礼，父在为母，杖不上于堂，尊父也。
现代文：依礼，父在为母服丧，期服用杖不上于堂，这是尊重父亲。
English: According to the etiquette, my father is in mourning for my mother, and he does not go to the hall when he takes the cane. This is respect for my father.

古文：于朝廷何独不然？
现代文：对于朝廷为什么单单不这样呢？
English: For the imperial court, why not simply do the same?

古文：臣请陛下玄冠素服，御西角门十日，即玄冠玄服御奉天门，百官入左掖门则乌纱帽、青衣侍班。
现代文：臣请求陛下戴黑色冠，穿素服，驾隐西角门十天，便穿戴黑冠黑服驾临奉天门，百官入左掖门便戴乌纱帽，穿青衣侍立班位。
English: The minister requested that His Majesty wear a black crown and plain clothes, and drove to the West Angle Gate for ten days. He then drove to the Gate of Heaven wearing a black crown and black clothes, and when entering the Left Hand Gate, he wore a black cap, and when entering the Gate of Heaven, he wore a blue dress and stood at the guard post.

古文：退出公署及私室，则仍素服白帽二十七日。
现代文：退出公家官署到私室，则仍然穿素服戴白帽二十七天。
English: If they quit the public office and go to their private room, they will still wear plain clothes and a white cap for 27 days.

古文：若曰于礼犹有未慊，则山陵事毕而除。 
现代文：如果说对于礼还有不足之处，那么坟墓工程完毕后再除服。 
English: If there are still shortcomings in the ritual, then it will be removed after the grave project is completed.

古文：帝从其言。
现代文：皇帝听从了他的提议。
English: Emperor Wen listened to his advice.

古文：寻定进册谥仪，礼部议： 先期，帝衮冕告奉先殿、崇先殿。
现代文：不久制定进册谧的礼仪，礼部提议： 正式行礼的日子之前，皇帝穿戴衮冕告祭奉先殿、崇先殿。
English: Soon, the etiquette for entering the register of imperial eunuchs was established, and the etiquette department proposed: Before the day of the official ceremony, the emperor would wear a crown and make an offering to the Emperor's ancestral hall, the Chongxian Hall.

古文：至期，帝常服御奉天门，正副使常服，百官浅淡色衣、黑角带，入班行礼如仪。
现代文：到期，皇帝穿着平常服饰驾临奉天门，正副使穿着平常的服饰，百官穿戴浅淡色的衣服和黑角带，按礼仪入班列行礼。
English: At the end of the period, the emperor arrived at the Fengtianmen Gate in his usual attire, the officials and vice-ministers wore their usual attire, and the officials wore light-colored clothes and black sashes. They entered the ranks and performed the salute according to etiquette.

古文：节册至右顺门，内侍捧入正门，至几筵前置于案。
现代文：节册到右顺门，内侍捧入正门，到达灵座前面放置在案上。
English: The hymn book is brought to the right door, the chambermaid brings it to the front door, and it is placed on the case in front of the altar.

古文：内赞赞就位上香，宣册官立宣讫，复置册于案。
现代文：内赞官唱赞就位，上香，宣册官站立宣读完毕，又把册放在案上。
English: After the praising officer sings the praises and places the incense, the proclamation officer stands up and finishes reading, and then places the book on the case.

古文：内侍持节由正门出，以节授正副使，报礼毕，正副使持节复命。 
现代文：内侍持着符节从正门出去，把符节交给正副使，报称典礼结东，正副使持符节回复命令。 
English: The attendant went out from the main gate holding the festival, handed the festival to the chief and deputy envoys, reported that the ceremony was concluded, and the chief and deputy envoys held the festival to reply to the order.

古文：次日，礼部誊黄颁示天下。
现代文：第二天，礼部誊写在黄纸上，颁布告示于天下。
English: The next day, the Ministry of Ceremonies wrote a notice on yellow paper and announced it to the world.

古文：时中宫丧礼自文皇后而后，至是始再行。
现代文：当时中宫皇后的丧礼自从文皇后之后，到这时纔再次举行。
English: The funeral of the then-empress dowager had not been held since that of Empress Wen.

古文：永乐时典礼毁于火，《会典》所载皆略，乃断自帝心，著为令。
现代文：永乐时期的典章礼制被火烧毁，《会典》记载的内容都很简略，于是由皇帝裁断，定着为法令。
English: The ceremonial system of the Yongle period was destroyed by fire. The contents recorded in the Code were very brief, so the emperor made a ruling and established it as a law.

古文：梓宫将葬，帝新定诸仪，亦从减损。
现代文：灵柩将要安葬，皇帝亲自制定各种仪节，也依从碱损。
English: The coffin will be buried, and the emperor himself will set up various ceremonies, also in accordance with the alkali damage.

古文：以思善门逼近仁智殿，命百宫哭临止一日，亦罢辞祖礼，丧由左王门出。
现代文：因思善门逼近仁智殿，命令百官聚集定时号哭致哀只举行一天，也罢除向祖庙告别的礼仪，灵柩从左王门出去。
English: Because the Shishan Gate was approaching the Nanzhi Palace, he ordered the officials to gather at regular intervals to weep and mourn for only one day. He also abolished the ritual of bidding farewell to the ancestral temple, and the coffin went out from the Left King's Gate.

古文：二十六年，皇后方氏崩，即日发丧，谕礼部： 皇后尝救朕危，其考元后丧礼行之。 
现代文：二十六年，皇后方氏死，当天发丧，告谕礼部： 皇后曾经救朕于艰危，请考察按皇帝嫡妻的丧礼举行仪式。 
English: On the day of Empress Fang's death in 1926, the funeral was held, and an announcement was made to the Ceremonial Department: The Empress once saved me from a difficult situation, please consider holding the funeral ceremony according to the Emperor's legitimate wife.

古文：礼部定仪： 以第四日成服，自后黑冠素服，十日后易浅色衣，俱西角门视朝。
现代文：礼部制定仪节： 在第四天服丧服，此后戴黑冠穿素服，十天以后改换成浅色衣服，都在西角门上朝处理政务。
English: The etiquette department set up the ceremony: On the fourth day, they wore mourning clothes, then wore black crowns and plain clothes, and changed to light-colored clothes after ten days. They all went to the West Corner Gate to deal with government affairs.

古文：百官十日素服绖带，自后乌纱帽、黑角带、素服，通前二十七日。
现代文：百官在十天内穿素服系麻布带，此后戴乌纱帽、黑角带，穿素服，合先前总计二十七天。
English: The officials wore plain clothes with a linen belt for ten days, and then wore a black yarn cap, a black horn belt, and plain clothes for a total of twenty-seven days.

古文：帝常服于奉天门视朝，百官浅色衣，鸣钟鼓、鸣鞭如常，朔望不升殿。
现代文：皇帝穿平常服饰在奉天门临朝处理政务，百官穿浅色衣服，像平常一样敲钟鼓、岛鞭，朔日、望日不升殿。
English: The emperor wore his usual attire to attend to government affairs at the Front Gate of the Imperial Palace. The officials wore light-colored clothes and, as usual, rang the bells and drums and cracked the whips. The sun did not rise in the morning and the sun did not rise in the afternoon.

古文：梓宫发引，百官始常服。
现代文：灵柩出殡，百官纔服平常服饰。
English: The coffin is carried out of the funeral, and the officials are dressed in their usual attire.

古文：帝于奉先等殿行礼，俱常服。
现代文：皇帝在奉先等殿行礼，都穿平常服饰。
English: The emperors wore their usual attire as they bowed before the emperor.

古文：于几筵祭则服其服。
现代文：在灵座殿祭祀，便穿丧服。
English: When a memorial service is held in the chapel, the mourners wear mourning clothes.

古文：服满日，命中官代祭。 
现代文：服丧期满之日，命令宦官代替祭祀。 
English: On the day of the expiration of the mourning period, eunuchs were ordered to replace the sacrifices.

古文：从之。
现代文：听从礼部议。
English: I followed his advice.

古文：寻谕： 皇妃列太子后非礼，其改正。 
现代文：不久训谕 皇妃列在太子之后不合礼制，望改正 。
English: He soon issued an edict that it was not proper for the empress to be listed after the prince, and that it should be corrected.

古文：及葬，部臣以旧仪请。
现代文：到安葬时，礼部大臣请示按旧有仪节办。
English: At the time of burial, the Minister of Ceremonies requested that the old rituals be followed.

古文：诏梓宫由中道行，虞祭如制用九数。
现代文：下诏灵柩从中路出行，葬后虞祭按如同旧制用九数。
English: According to the following edict, the coffin will travel along the middle road, and the post-funeral ceremony will be held according to the old system of nine numbers.

古文：安玄宫居左，他日即配祀。
现代文：安放玄宫处于左边，以后便配祭。
English: On the left is the resting place of Xuan Gong, which will later be used for the festival.

古文：部臣复上仪注，改席殿曰行享殿。
现代文：礼部大臣又呈上仪节制度，改称席殿为行享殿。
English: The Minister of Ceremonies also presented the introduction of the ceremonial system, and the seat hall was renamed the Gyoko hall.

古文：又以孝洁皇后自发引至神主还京将半载，遇令节百官常服，今孝烈皇后初十日发引，十五日即还，事礼不同，以诸臣服制请。
现代文：又因拳洁皇后从出殡到神位牌返回京城将近半年，遇到节日时令百官穿平常服饰。现在孝烈皇后初十日出殡，十五日神位牌便返回，事情礼数不同，以众大臣服丧的礼制向皇帝请示。
English: Also, due to the fact that it took nearly half a year for the Empress Keng Jie to return to the capital from the funeral to the shrine plaque, when there is a festival, all officials wear ordinary clothes. Now, the Empress Xiaoling will attend the funeral on the 10th day of the first month, and the shrine plaque will return on the 15th day. The number of things is different, and the ministers will ask the emperor for instructions.

古文：帝命随丧往来者，仍制服。
现代文：皇帝命令跟随丧葬往来的官员，仍然按礼制服丧服。
English: The emperor ordered the officials who followed the funeral procession to still wear ceremonial uniforms.

古文：祭毕，乌纱帽素服入朝，素冠素服办事。
现代文：祭祀完毕，戴乌纱帽，穿素服入朝，戴素冠、穿素服办政事。
English: After the ritual is over, they wear a black silk cap and plain clothes to enter the imperial court, and wear plain crowns and plain clothes to conduct political affairs.

古文：迎主仍制服，思善门外行安神礼，更素冠素服从事。
现代文：迎接神位牌仍然按礼制服丧服，思善门外举行安神礼，改为素冠、素服办理事务。
English: To welcome the deity, the plaques were still in ceremonial uniform and funeral attire, and the Anshin ceremony was held outside Shizan Gate, but it was changed to a simple crown and simple clothing.

古文：先是，帝命孝烈居左，而迁孝洁。
现代文：在此之前，皇帝命令孝烈皇后牌位放置在左，而迁走孝洁皇后的牌位。
English: Prior to this, the emperor ordered the plaques of the Empress Xiaoling to be placed on the left, while the plaques of the Empress Xiaojie were moved.

古文：既而以孝洁久安，不宜妄动，罢不行。
现代文：随后因孝洁皇后的牌位安放已久，不宜随意改动，罢除不施行。
English: Subsequently, due to the fact that the card rank of the filial piety queen has been placed for a long time, it is not appropriate to change it at will, and the cancellation will not be implemented.

古文：乃更命孝烈居右，而虚其左以自待。
现代文：于是重新命令孝烈皇后的牌位放置在右，而空出左面等待自己。
English: So he re-ordered the position of the card of the filial queen to be placed on the right, and waited for himself on the left.

古文：穆宗母杜氏，三十三年薨。
现代文：穆宗的母亲杜氏，嘉靖三十三年死。
English: Mu Zong's mother, the brewer Jiaying, died at the age of 33.

古文：礼部言： 宜用成化中淑妃纪氏丧制。
现代文：礼部说： 应该用成化年间淑妃纪氏的丧葬制度。
English: The Ministry of Ceremonies said, "We should use the funeral system of Shu Fei Ji during the Chenghua period."

古文：且裕王已成婚，宜持服主丧，送葬出城。 
现代文：并且裕王已经成婚，应该服丧主持丧事，送葬出城。 
English: Moreover, Yu Wang was already married, so he should preside over the funeral and send the funeral out of the city.

古文：乃议辍朝五日，裕王遵《孝慈录》斩衰三年。
现代文：于是议定停止上朝五天，裕王遵照《孝慈录》服斩衰三年。
English: As a result, it was agreed that the emperor would not ascend the throne for five days, and that King Hirohito would follow the "Record of Filial Piety" and not ascend for three years.

古文：钦遣大臣题主，开茔掩圹，祠谢后土，并用工部官，送葬仪仗人数皆增于旧。
现代文：皇帝派遣大臣题写神位牌，开坟茔掩闭坟圹，祭祀告谢地神，并用工部官员，送葬的仪仗队的人数都比旧制度有所增加。
English: The emperor dispatched ministers to inscribe the deity plaques, opened and closed cemeteries, held sacrifices to thank the gods, and employed officials from the Ministry of Works. The number of honor guards at funerals has increased compared to the old system.

古文：帝谓非礼之正，令酌考贤妃郑氏例。
现代文：皇帝认为不合正礼，命令斟酌考察贤妃郑氏的旧例。
English: The emperor thought it was improper and ordered a careful examination of the old case of the virtuous Empress Zheng.

古文：于是尚书欧阳德等复上仪注，辍朝二日，不鸣钟鼓。
现代文：于是尚书欧阳德等又上仪节制度，停止上朝两天，不敲击钟鼓。
English: As a result, Shangshu Ouyangde and others went back to the ceremonial festival system, stopped going to the temple for two days, and did not strike the bell and drum.

古文：帝服浅淡色衣，奉天门视事，百官浅色衣、乌纱帽、黑角带朝参。
现代文：皇帝穿浅淡色衣服，在奉天门处理政事，百官穿浅色衣、戴乌纱帽、黑角带朝拜参见。
English: The emperor wore light-colored clothes and handled political affairs at the Gate of Heaven, and the officials wore light-colored clothes, wore black hats, and wore black belts to pay homage.

古文：命裕王主馈奠之事，王率妃入宫，素服哭尽哀，四拜视殓。
现代文：命令裕王主持债食祭奠的事情，王率妃入官，穿素服号哭竭尽哀伤，拜四拜，亲临入殓。
English: He ordered King Yu to preside over the offering of oblations, and the king and his consort entered the palace, wore plain clothes, wept bitterly, bowed four times, and personally entered the coffin.

古文：成服后，朝夕哭临三日。
现代文：服丧后，早晚定时哭临，号哭哀悼三天。
English: After the funeral, there will be regular crying in the morning and evening, and crying and mourning for three days.

古文：后每日一奠，通前二十七日而止。
现代文：以后每天祭奠一次，连同以前共二十七天而止。
English: From now on, the memorial service will be held once a day for a total of 27 days, the same as before.

古文：仍于燕居尽斩衰三年之制。
现代文：仍在平常居处时尽斩衰三年的丧制。
English: The three-year mourning period was carried out while he was still in his usual residence.

古文：册谥焚黄日，陈祭仪，裕王诣灵前行礼。
现代文：册加谧号祭告祝文焚烧黄纸之日，陈设祭祀仪式，裕王到灵位前行礼。
English: On the day of the burning of the yellow paper, a memorial service was held, and a sacrificial ceremony was set up. Yu Wang bowed before the altar.

古文：丧出玄武门，裕王步送至京城门外，路祭毕，还宫。
现代文：灵柩出玄武门，裕王徒步送到京城门外，路祭礼完毕，返回宫中。
English: The coffin was carried out of the Xuanwu Gate, and Yue Wang was carried on foot outside the Capital Gate. After the roadside ceremony, the coffin was returned to the palace.

古文：帝谓焚黄乃制命，非王可行，仍如常仪。
现代文：皇帝认为祭告祝文焚烧黄纸是敕命，不是王可以施行的，仍然如同平常的仪节。
English: The emperor thought that it was not proper for the king to perform the ritual of offering congratulations and burning yellow paper, but it was still an ordinary ceremony.

古文：礼部覆奏： 皇妃焚黄仪，传讹已久。
现代文：礼部又上奏： 皇妃祭告祝文焚烧黄纸的仪节，错误地流传已很久。
English: The ceremonial part is played again: The ritual of burning yellow paper with a congratulatory message from the empress has been erroneously passed down for a long time.

古文：皆拜献酒，跪读祝，乃参用上尊谥之仪，而未思赐谥为制命，其祭文称皇帝遣谕，与上尊谥不同。
现代文：都拜献酒，跪着读祝文，于是参照使用上尊谧的仪节，而没有考虑赐谧为敕命，所用祭文称皇帝派遣告谕，与上尊谧不相同。
English: They both bowed down to offer wine and read a congratulatory message on their knees, and then referred to the ritual of using the upper mandarin, but did not consider giving the mandarin as a death sentence. The sacrificial text used said that the emperor sent a proclamation, which was different from the upper mandarin.

古文：今奉旨以常礼从事，当改议赐谥，如赐祭礼。
现代文：现在奉圣旨用平常礼制办理，应当改议赐谧礼，如同赐祭祀礼。
English: Now, in accordance with the Holy Will, the ordinary ritual is used, and it should be changed to the bestowal rite, just like the bestowal ritual.

古文：读祝、宣册皆平立不拜。 
现代文：宣赞祝文、宣布册命都平立不拜。 
English: The proclamation of praise and congratulations, and the announcement of the book of life are all flat and do not worship.

古文：报可，著为令。
现代文：回复同意，确定写成条令。
English: The reply agreed, and it was decided to write an order.

古文：穆宗皇后李氏，裕邸元妃也，先薨，葬西山。
现代文：穆宗皇后李氏，是穆宗为裕王时的嫡妻，先死，葬在西山。
English: Empress Li of Mu Zong, who was the legitimate wife of Mu Zong when he was King Yu, died first and was buried in the West Mountain.

古文：隆庆元年，加谥孝懿皇后，亲告世宗几筵。
现代文：隆庆元年，加谧号为孝懿皇后，亲自告祭世宗的灵座。
English: In the first year of the Longqing era, she was given the posthumous title of the Empress of Filial Piety, and personally offered a sacrifice to the Sejong's shrine.

古文：御皇极门，遣大臣持节捧册宝诣陵园上之。
现代文：驾临皇极门，派大臣持符节捧册宝到陵墓献上。
English: Arriving at the imperial gate, he sent a minister to take the treasure to the mausoleum to present it.

古文：神宗母皇太后李氏，万历四十二年崩。
现代文：神宗母亲皇太后李氏，万历四十二年死。
English: Emperor Jinzong's mother, Empress Dowager Ri, died 42 years ago.

古文：帝谕礼部从优具仪，帝衰服行奠祭礼。
现代文：皇帝告谕礼部从优具备仪节。皇帝服衰服举行奠祭礼。
English: The emperor decreed that the ritual department should have a ceremony from the superior. The emperor held a ceremonial ceremony.

古文：穆庙皇妃、中宫妃嫔、太子、诸王、公主以下皆成服。
现代文：穆宗皇妃、中官妃嫔、太子、诸王、公主以下都服丧服。
English: The Empress Mu Zong, the Vice-regent Empress Dowager, the Crown Prince, the kings, the princesses and so on all wore mourning clothes.

古文：百官诣慈宁宫门外哭临。命妇入宫门哭临。
现代文：百官到慈宁宫门外哭临，定时号哭哀悼，受封号的妇女入官门哭临，号哭哀悼。
English: Hundreds of officials came to the gate of the Jining Palace to cry, crying and mourning at regular intervals. Women who were sealed with the number came to the gate to cry, crying and mourning.

古文：馀俱如大丧礼。
现代文：其余都按大丧礼进行。
English: The rest of the service was conducted as a full-scale funeral.

古文：兴宗帝后陵寝
现代文：兴宗帝后陵寝
English: Emperor Xingzong's Empress Dowager Mausoleum

古文：洪武二十五年，皇太子薨，命礼部议丧礼。
现代文：洪武二十五年，皇太子死，命令礼部议定丧礼。
English: In the 25th year of Hongwu, the crown prince died, and the ceremonial department was ordered to arrange a funeral.

古文：侍郎张智等议曰： 丧礼，父为长子服齐衰期年。
现代文：侍郎张智等人议论说： 丧礼，父亲为长子服齐衰一周年。
English: Chamberlain Zhang Zhi and others commented: "The funeral, the father is the first anniversary of the death of the eldest son.

古文：今皇帝当以日易月，服齐衰十二日，祭毕释之。
现代文：现在皇帝应当以日代替月，服齐衰十二天，祭祀完毕脱去丧服。
English: Now the emperor should replace the month with the day, wear the uniform for twelve days, and take off the mourning clothes after the sacrifice.

古文：在内文武官公署斋宿。
现代文：在京文武官员在官署斋戒留宿。
English: In Beijing, martial arts officials stayed overnight at the government office.

古文：翌日，素服入临文华殿，给衰麻服。
现代文：第二天，穿素服入文华殿哭丧致哀，给予衰麻服。
English: The next day, he entered the Wenhua Hall in plain clothes to mourn, and was given a withered hemp robe.

古文：越三日成服，诣春和门会哭。
现代文：过三天服丧服，到春和门聚会哭丧。
English: Three days later, they put on mourning clothes, and in the spring, they gather at the gate to mourn.

古文：明日，素服行奉慰礼。
现代文：第二天，穿素服举行列班进名奉慰礼。
English: The next day, the students in plainclothes marched in formation to pay their respects.

古文：其当祭祀及送葬者，仍衰绖以行。
现代文：应当祭祀以及送葬的，仍然服衰绖随行。
English: Those who are to perform religious rites and attend funerals should still accompany the procession.

古文：在京，停大小祀事及乐，至复土日而止。
现代文：在京城，停止大小祭祀之事以及音乐，到覆土筑坟之日停止。
English: In the capital, large and small religious services and music are suspended until the day of the burial.

古文：停嫁娶六十日。
现代文：停止嫁女娶妇六十天。
English: Stop marrying women for sixty days.

古文：在外，文武官易服，于公署发哀。
现代文：在地方，文武官吏改换服饰，在官署举哀。
English: At the local level, civil and military officials changed their attire and mourned at government offices.

古文：次日，成服行礼。
现代文：第二天，服丧服举行丧礼。
English: A wake was held the next day.

古文：停大小祀事及乐十三日，停嫁娶三十日。 
现代文：停止大小祭祀之事以及音乐十三天，停止嫁女娶妇三十天。 
English: Large and small religious ceremonies and music will be suspended for 13 days, and the marriage of women will be suspended for 30 days.

古文：其内外官致祭者，帝令光禄寺供具，百官惟致哀行礼。
现代文：那些来祭祀的内外官，皇帝命令光禄寺供给器物，百官只是致哀行礼。
English: The emperor ordered the supply of utensils to Koroku-ji Temple for the dignitaries from both inside and outside the country who came to pay their respects. The dignitaries only came to pay their respects.

古文：建文帝即位，追谥为兴宗孝康皇帝，所荐陵号不传。
现代文：建文帝即位，追谧为兴宗孝康皇帝，所进献的陵号不传于世。
English: Emperor Jianwen ascended to the throne, and his posthumous name was Emperor Xingzong Xiaokang. The mausoleum name he donated is not known to the world.

古文：元妃常氏，先兴宗薨。
现代文：嫡妃常氏，在兴宗之前死。
English: His heir, Tsuneuji, died before the enthronement.

古文：太祖素服，辍朝三日。
现代文：太祖穿素服，停止上朝三天。
English: The great-grandfather wore vegetarian clothes and stopped eating for three days.

古文：中宫素服哀临，皇太子齐衰。
现代文：中宫皇后穿素服号哭致哀，皇太子服齐衰。
English: The Empress of the Middle Court wore a plain dress and wept in sorrow, and the Crown Prince's dress was in decline.

古文：葬毕，易常服。
现代文：丧葬结东，改换穿平常服饰。
English: After the funeral, they changed into their regular clothes.

古文：皇孙斩衰，祭奠则服之。
现代文：皇孙服斩衰，祭奠便服丧服。
English: The emperor's grandson is dressed in formal attire, and the mourners are dressed in formal attire.

古文：诸王公主服如制。
现代文：诸王、公主按制度服丧。
English: All the kings and princesses are in mourning according to the system.

古文：建文初，追谥曰孝康皇后。
现代文：建文初年，追谧为孝康皇后。
English: In the first year of Jianwen, she became the Empress of Xiaokang.

古文：永乐初，皆追削。
现代文：永乐初年，都追夺削除。
English: In the first year of Yongle, all pursuits were eliminated.

古文：福王立南京，复帝后故号。
现代文：福王在南京即位，恢复兴宗帝、后的原有封号。
English: King Fu ascended the throne in Nanjing and restored the original title of Emperor Xingzong and Empress Dowager.

古文：睿宗帝后陵寝
现代文：睿宗帝后陵寝
English: Emperor Ruizong's Mausoleum

古文：睿宗帝后陵寝在安陆州。
现代文：睿宗帝、后陵寝在安陆州。
English: Emperor Ruizong's tomb lies in Anlu Prefecture.

古文：世宗入立，追谥曰睿宗献皇帝。
现代文：世宗入京即位，追谧为睿宗献皇帝。
English: Sejong ascended to the throne in Beijing, and Tsuge became Emperor Ruizongken.

古文：葺陵庙，荐号曰显陵。
现代文：修葺陵庙，进尊号为显陵。
English: The mausoleum was repaired, and the name of the temple was changed to Xianling.

古文：既而希进之徒屡言献皇帝梓宫宜改葬天寿山。
现代文：随后希求进升之徒屡次说献皇帝灵柩应该改葬天寿山。
English: Subsequently, those who wished to be promoted repeatedly said that the emperor's coffin should be reburied on Tianshou Mountain.

古文：帝不听。
现代文：皇帝不听从。
English: Emperor Xuan did not listen.

古文：嘉靖十七年，帝母蒋太后崩。
现代文：嘉靖十七年，皇帝母亲蒋太后死。
English: In the 17th year of Jiajing, the emperor's mother, Empress Dowager Chiang, died.

古文：礼部言： 岁除日，大行皇太后服制二十七日已满，适遇正旦，请用黑冠、浅淡服受朝。 
现代文：礼部说： 岁末之日，刚去世出皇太后服丧二十七天已满期，恰好遇到正月初一，请求戴黑色冠、穿浅淡衣服接受朝拜。 
English: The etiquette department said: On the last day of the year, the twenty-seven days of mourning for the empress dowager, who had just passed away, had expired. It happened to be the first day of the first month, and she asked to wear a black crown and light clothes to receive worship.

古文：疏未下，帝谕大学士夏言： 元旦玄极殿拜天，仍具祭服，先期一日宜变服否？ 
现代文：奏疏没有下发，皇帝训谕大学士夏言： 元旦在玄极殿拜祭上天，仍然准备好祭服，在这个日期之前的一天应改变服饰吗？ 
English: When the report was not issued, the emperor ordered the scholar Xia Yan: On New Year's Day, we will worship God at the Temple of Heaven, and we still have the sacrificial clothing ready. Should we change the clothing the day before this date?

古文：礼部请 正旦拜天、受朝，及先一日俱青服，孟春时享，前三日斋，青服，臣下同之，馀仍孝贞皇太后丧礼例 。
现代文：礼部请求 正月初一拜祭上天，接受朝拜，以及前一天都服青色服。孟春时享礼，前三天斋戒，服青色服饰，臣下相同，其余仍然按孝贞皇太后丧礼之例办 。
English: The Ministry of Ceremonies requested that on the first day of the first month of the lunar month, a worship festival be held, and that the emperor and empress receive worship, and that they wear blue clothes the day before. When Mengchun was celebrated, the first three days of fasting, they wore blue clothes, the same as the subjects, and the rest was still done according to the funeral of the Empress Dowager Xiaozhen.

古文：不从。
现代文：皇帝不听从。
English: Le Zhu Rong did not listen.

古文：于是定议，岁除日变服玄色吉衣，元旦祭服玄极殿行告祀礼，具翼善冠、黄袍御殿，百官公服致词，鸣钟鼓、鸣鞭，奏堂上乐。
现代文：于是决定，岁末除夕日改变穿玄色吉衣，元旦穿祭服在玄极殿举行告祀礼，准备翼善冠、黄袍驾临宫殿，百官穿官服致词，敲钟鼓，呜鞭炮，奏堂上音乐。
English: As a result, it was decided that at the end of the year, on New Year's Eve, they would change to wearing dark-colored lucky clothes, and on New Year's Day, they would wear ceremonial clothes to hold a memorial service in the Hall of the Ancestors, prepare winged crowns and yellow robes to visit the palace, and hundreds of officials would wear official uniforms to give speeches, ring bells and drums, blow firecrackers, and play music in the hall.

古文：是时议南北迁祔，久不决。
现代文：这时讨论是母迁往南方还是父迁到北方合葬，很久不能决定。
English: At this time, the discussion of whether the mother moved to the south or the father moved to the north to be buried together could not be decided for a long time.

古文：帝亲诣承天。
现代文：皇帝亲自到承天殿。
English: The emperor himself went to the Jotendo Hall.

古文：及归，乃定议梓宫南祔。
现代文：返回后，纔决定灵柩迁往南方合葬。
English: After returning, Zou decided to move the coffin to the south to be buried together.

古文：礼部上葬仪，自常典外，帝复增定太庙辞谒、承天门辞奠、朝阳门遣奠、题主后降神飨神，及梓宫登舟、升岸等祭。
现代文：礼部呈上丧葬仪节，在平常典制之外，皇帝又增加拜谒太庙告别礼、承天门告别祭奠礼、朝阳门遣送祭奠礼、题写神位牌后降神飨神礼，以及灵柩登船、登岸等祭礼。
English: The ceremonial department presented the funeral ceremony festival. In addition to the usual ceremony system, the emperor also added the farewell ceremony of worshipping the Jingtian Temple, the farewell ceremony of the Jingtian Gate, the departure ceremony of the Chaoyang Gate, the ceremony of the descent of the god after the inscription of the god's tablet, and the ceremony of the coffin boarding the ship and landing.

古文：梓宫发引，帝衰服行诸礼如仪。
现代文：灵柩出殡，皇帝服衰服按礼制举行各种礼仪。
English: The funeral procession of the casket, the emperor's robe, and various ceremonies were held according to the etiquette.

古文：百官步送朝阳门外，奠献，使行遣奠礼。
现代文：百官徒步送到朝阳门外，进献祭品以祭祀，命令举行遣奠礼。
English: A hundred officials were sent on foot to the outside of the Chaoyang Gate, where they offered sacrifices and ordered a memorial service to be held.

古文：至通州，题主官复命。
现代文：到达通州，题写神位牌的官员回复命令。
English: Arriving in Tongzhou, the official who inscribed the tablet replied with an order.

古文：神主回京，百官奉迎于门外，帝衰服率皇后以下哭迎午门内，奉安于几筵殿。
现代文：神位牌返回京城，百官在城门外奉迎，皇帝服衰服率领皇后以下在午门内哭迎，供奉安放在灵座殿。
English: The divine tablet was returned to the capital, hundreds of officials greeted it outside the city gate, the emperor led the empress in the morning gate, and the offering was placed in the spiritual seat hall.

古文：梓宫所过河渎江山神祇，俱牲醴致祭。
现代文：灵柩经过的河渎江山的神只，都供献牺牲酒醴进行祭祀。
English: The deities of the rivers, rivers and mountains that the coffin passes through are all offered as sacrificial libations for sacrifice.

古文：勋臣青服行礼，梓宫升席殿。
现代文：勋臣穿青服行礼，灵柩升上席殿。
English: The honored minister wore a blue suit and performed a salute, and the coffin was raised to the throne.

古文：先诣睿宗旧陵，奉迁于祾恩殿，复奉梓宫至殿，合葬于新寝。
现代文：先拜谒睿宗旧时的陵墓，奉迁到棱恩殿，又奉灵柩到殿上，合葬在新的墓室。
English: First, they paid homage to the old mausoleum of Zhaoruizong, and then they were moved to Ren'en Hall, and then they were buried together in the new burial chamber.

古文：皇妃等丧葬
现代文：皇妃等丧葬
English: Funeral of Empress Dowager and Others

古文：洪武七年九月，贵妃孙氏薨。
现代文：洪武七年九月，贵妃孙氏死。
English: In September of the seventh year of Hongwu, Guifei Sun died.

古文：无子，太祖命吴王橚主丧事，服慈母服，斩衰三年。
现代文：没有儿子，太祖命令昊王朱梼主持丧事，穿慈母去世纔穿的丧服，斩衰三年。
English: Without a son, the great-grandfather ordered Hao Wang Zhu Xi to preside over the funeral and wear the mourning clothes worn by his beloved mother after her death, which lasted for three years.

古文：东宫诸王皆服期。
现代文：东宫太子、诸王都服一年的丧。
English: The Crown Prince of the Eastern Palace and all the kings are in mourning for one year.

古文：由是作《孝慈录》。
现代文：为此作《孝慈录》。
English: For this reason, he wrote "The Record of Filial Piety."

古文：永乐中，贵妃王氏薨。
现代文：永乐年间，贵妃王氏死。
English: During the Yongle era, Guifei Wang died.

古文：辍朝五日，御祭一坛，皇后、皇妃、皇太子各祭一坛，亲王共祭一坛，公主共祭一坛。
现代文：停止上朝五天，垒帝祭一坛，皇后、皇妃、皇太子各祭一坛，亲王共祭一坛，公主共祭一坛。
English: Five days after the Emperor's enthronement, there will be one altar dedicated to Emperor Yotei, one altar dedicated to the Empress, the Empress Dowager, and the Crown Prince, one altar dedicated to the Prince, and one altar dedicated to the Princess.

古文：七七、百日期、再期，皆祭赠谥册，行焚黄礼。
现代文：七七期、百日期、两年期，都祭祀赠予谧册，举行祭告家庙焚烧黄纸告文的礼仪。
English: The 77th, 100th, and 2nd years of the year are all dedicated to the ritual of donating the gongs and holding the ritual of burning the yellow paper of the temple.

古文：开茔域，遣官祠后土。
现代文：开启坟茔，派官祭祀地神。
English: Tombs were opened, and officials were dispatched to offer sacrifices to the earth god.

古文：发引前期，辞灵祭坛与初丧同，惟增六尚司及内官、内使各一坛。
现代文：出殡之前，告别灵柩、祭祀坛台与初丧相同，只是增加六尚司以及内官、内使各一坛。
English: Before the funeral, the farewell casket and the sacrificial altar were the same as for the first funeral, except that there were six priests and one altar for each of the officials and envoys.

古文：启奠、祖奠、遣奠各遣祭一坛。
现代文：灵柩启迁前的祭奠、出殡前的祭奠、将葬之前的祭奠各自遣祭一坛。
English: The memorial service before the reburial of the coffin, the memorial service before the funeral, and the memorial service before the burial all take place at the same altar.

古文：发引日，百官送至路祭所，皇亲驸马共一坛，公侯伯文武共一坛，外命妇共一坛。
现代文：出殡之日，百官送到路祭之处，皇亲、驸马共一坛，公侯伯文武官员共一坛，外受封号的妇女共一坛。
English: On the day of the funeral, hundreds of officials were sent to the place of the road festival. The imperial family and the horses had a common altar, the officials of the prince Bo Wenwu had a common altar, and the women who were sealed outside had a common altar.

古文：所过城门祭祀，内门遣内官，外门遣太常寺官。
现代文：沿途经过城门的祭祀，肉门派肉官，外门派太常寺官。
English: The sacrificial rites that pass through the city gate along the way, the flesh gate faction of the flesh officer, the outer gate faction of the Taijo temple officer.

古文：下葬，遣奠、遣祭一坛。
现代文：下葬时，将葬时的祭奠、遣祭一坛。
English: At the time of burial, the funeral eulogy will be performed and a memorial service will be held.

古文：掩圹，遣官祀后土，迎灵轿至享堂，行安神礼，遣祭一坛。
现代文：掩闭坟圹，派官祭祀地神，迎接灵轿到祭享堂，举行安神礼，遣祭一坛。
English: The graves were closed, officials were dispatched to offer sacrifices to the gods of the earth, a hearse was brought to the hall for the ceremony, a ceremony was held for the repose of the souls of the dead, and an altar was set up for the ceremony.

古文：天顺七年，敬妃刘氏薨。辍朝五日，帝服浅淡黄衣于奉天门视事，百官浅淡色衣、乌纱帽、黑角带朝参。
现代文：天顺七年，敬妃刘氏死，停止上朝互天，皇帝穿浅淡黄衣在奉天门处理政事，百官穿浅淡色衣，戴乌纱帽、黑角带朝见参拜。
English: In the seventh year of Tianshun, the death of Princess Liu stopped the rivalry between the two dynasties. The emperor wore a light yellow robe to deal with political affairs at the Gate of Heaven, and the officials wore light yellow robes, wore a black silk cap and a black square belt to visit the imperial court.

古文：册文置灵柩前，皇太子以下行三献礼。
现代文：封册文放在灵柩前面，皇太子以下行三献礼。
English: The envelope was placed in front of the casket, and the crown prince followed with three offerings.

古文：灵柩前仪仗，内使女乐二十四人，花幡、雪柳女队子二十人，女将军十一人。
现代文：灵柩前的仪仗，内使女乐二十四人，花施、雪柳女队子二十人，女将军十一人。
English: At the ceremonial battle before the coffin, twenty-four maids of honour, twenty flower girls, twenty willow girls, and eleven female generals marched.

古文：自初丧至期年辞灵，各于常祭外增祭一坛。
现代文：从初丧到丧期满周年向灵柩行告别礼，各自在正常祭祀之外增加祭祀一坛。
English: From the first day of mourning to the anniversary of the end of the period of mourning, a farewell ceremony is held for the deceased, and an altar of sacrifice is added in addition to the normal sacrifice.

古文：弘治十四年，宪庙丽妃章氏发引，辍朝一日。
现代文：弘治十四年，宪庙的丽妃章氏行出殡礼，停止上朝一天。
English: In the 14th year of the Hongzhi era, the Li Fei Zhang clan of the Constitutional Temple performed a funeral rite, stopping for one day.

古文：凡陪葬诸妃，岁时俱享于殿内。
现代文：凡是陪葬各妃，每年的一定时节都在殿内享祀。
English: Those who accompany the funeral of each princess are enshrined in the hall at a certain time of the year.

古文：其别葬金山诸处者，各遣内官行礼。
现代文：那些另外葬在金山等处的，各自派内官举行祭礼。
English: Those who were buried in other places, such as on the mountain, each sent their officials to hold a ceremony.

古文：嘉靖间，始命并入诸陵，从祭祾恩殿之两旁，以红纸牌书曰 某皇帝第几妃之位 ，祭毕，焚之。
现代文：嘉靖年间，纔命令并入诸陵，陪从祭祀于棱恩殿的两旁，用红纸牌写上 某皇帝第几妃之位 ，祭祀完毕，把牌焚烧掉。
English: During the Jiajing period, the imperial edict ordered the tombs to be merged into the mausoleums, accompanied the sacrificial rites on both sides of the Ren En Hall, and wrote the position of a certain emperor's first consort on a red card. When the sacrificial rites were completed, the card was burned.

古文：后改用木刻名号。
现代文：后来改用木刻名号。
English: Later, the name was changed to a woodcut name.

古文：嘉靖十三年，谕礼工二部： 世妇、御妻皆用九数。
现代文：嘉靖十三年告谕礼、工二部： 宫内女官世妇、御妻都用九数。
English: In the 13th year of the reign of Emperor Jiajing, the announcement ceremony, the second part of the work: the court ladies, the court ladies, and the wives all use nine numbers.

古文：九妃同一墓，共一享殿，为定制。 
现代文：九妃同在一墓，共在一个享殿，作为确定不变的制度。 
English: The nine empresses are together in one tomb, together in one hall of fame, as a fixed and unchanging system.

古文：皇太子及妃丧葬
现代文：皇太子及妃丧葬
English: Crown Prince and Princess to be buried

古文：自洪武中懿文太子后，至成化八年悼恭太子薨，年甫三岁。
现代文：从洪武年间，懿文太子之后，到成化八年悼恭太子死，年龄刚三岁。
English: From the Hongwu years, after Prince Gongwen, to Chenghua eight years, Prince Gongyong died, just three years old.

古文：帝谕礼部，礼宜从简，王府及文武官俱免进香帛。
现代文：皇帝告谕礼部，丧礼应该从简，王府和文武官都免于进献香帛。
English: The emperor told the ritual department that the funeral should be simple, and the royal court and the military attache were exempted from donating champagne.

古文：礼部具仪上。
现代文：礼部详列仪节呈上。
English: The details of the ceremony are listed below.

古文：自发丧次日，辍朝三日。
现代文：从发丧的次日起，停止上朝三天。
English: From the day after the funeral, the mourning period will be suspended for three days.

古文：帝服翼善冠、素服，七日而除。
现代文：皇帝服翼善冠、素服，七天除去丧服。
English: The emperor wears a winged crown and plain clothes, and removes his mourning clothes for seven days.

古文：又三日，御西角门视朝，不鸣钟鼓，祭用素食。
现代文：又过三天，驾临西角门处理政事，不敲钟鼓，祭祀用素食。
English: Three days later, he arrived at the West Point Gate to deal with political affairs, without ringing bells and drums, and with vegetarian food for sacrifices.

古文：文武群臣，素服、麻布、绖带、麻鞋、布裹纱帽，诣思善门哭临，一日而除。
现代文：文武群臣，服素服、麻布、麻织绖带、麻鞋、布裹纱帽，到思善门定时哭临，号哭哀悼，一天而除服。
English: The civil and military courtiers, dressed in plain clothes, linen, linen ribbons, linen shoes, and cloth-wrapped caps, regularly came to Shishan Gate to weep, wail, and mourn, and one day they took off their clothes.

古文：第四日，素服朝西角门奉慰。
现代文：第四天，穿素服朝见于西角门列班进名奉慰。
English: On the fourth day, people in plainclothes lined up at the West Point Gate to receive their names in the morning.

古文：在外王府并文武官，素服举哀，二日而除。
现代文：在各地的王府和文武官员，穿素服举哀，两天而除服。
English: In the royal court and civil and military officials around the country, they wore plain clothes to mourn, and took off their clothes for two days.

古文：嘉靖二十八年，庄敬太子薨。
现代文：嘉靖二十八年，庄敬太子死。
English: In the 28th year of Jiajing, Prince Zhuang Jing died.

古文：礼部上丧礼。
现代文：礼部呈上丧礼。
English: The Ministry of Ceremonies presented the funeral rites.

古文：帝曰： 天子绝期。
现代文：皇帝说： 天子不服期服。
English: The emperor said, "The Son of Heaven is not pleased with the term of service.

古文：况十五岁外方出三殇，朕服非礼，止辍朝十日。
现代文：何况十五岁外刚刚处在三殇的范围，朕服丧不合礼法，只是停止土朝十天。
English: What's more, I was only 15 years old and was just in the range of the Three Stages of Mourning. I did not follow the etiquette of mourning, but only stopped mourning for ten days.

古文：百官如制成服，十二日而除。
现代文：百官按照制度服丧，十二天除服。
English: In accordance with the system, all officials will wear mourning clothes and will be removed from duty for 12 days.

古文：诣停柩所行，罢诣门哭临。葬遣戚臣行礼。 
现代文：到停灵柩处行礼，罢除到门哭临号哭哀悼的礼节。
English: The etiquette of bowing at the coffin and crying and wailing at the door has been abolished.

古文：万历四十七年二月，皇太子才人王氏薨，命视皇太子妃郭氏例。
现代文：安葬时派戚属大臣举行葬礼。 万历四十七年二月，皇太子的才人王氏死，命令按照皇太子妃郭氏的旧例办。
English: In February of the 47th year of the Manchurian calendar, when the talented Crown Prince Wang died, the order was to follow the old practice of the Crown Princess Guo.

古文：辍朝五日，不鸣钟鼓。
现代文：停止上朝五天，不敲钟鼓。
English: Stop getting up in the morning for five days without ringing the bells and drums.

古文：帝服浅淡色衣，百官青素服、黑角带朝参，皇长孙主馈奠。
现代文：皇帝服浅淡色衣服，百官穿青色素服、黑角带朝见参拜，皇长孙主持馒送祭奠。
English: The emperor wore light-colored clothes, and hundreds of officials wore cyan-colored clothes and black-cornered belts to pay homage to the emperor, and the emperor's eldest grandson presided over the ceremony.

古文：诸王及妃公主丧葬诸仪
现代文：诸王及妃公主丧葬诸仪
English: Kings, queens and princesses attend funerals

古文：洪武二十八年，秦王樉诋薨，诏定丧礼。
现代文：洪武二十八年，秦王朱棱死，下韶确定丧礼。
English: In the 28th year of Hongwu, King Zhu Ren of Qin died, and the funeral ceremony was decided.

古文：礼部尚书任亨泰言： 考宋制，宜辍朝五日。
现代文：礼部尚书任亨泰说： 考察宋代礼制，应该停止上朝五天。
English: Shang Shuren Heng Tai, a member of the Ministry of Ceremonies, said: "The examination of the Song Dynasty ceremonial system should be suspended for five days.

古文：今遇时享，请暂辍一日。
现代文：现在遇到太庙四时的祭祀，请暂时停止一天。
English: If you come across the 4:00 p.m. ritual at Taimiao Temple, please stop for one day.

古文：皇帝及亲王以下，至郡主及靖江王宫眷服制，皆与鲁王丧礼同。
现代文：皇帝和亲王以下，至郡主以及靖江王宫眷属按丧服制度，都与鲁王的丧礼同。
English: From the emperor and the prince down to the princess and the relatives of the Jingjiang Royal Palace, according to the funeral dress system, they are the same as the funeral of King Lu.

古文：皇太子服齐衰期，亦以日易月，十二日而除，素服期年。 
现代文：皇太子服齐衰一周年，也以日替换月，十二天除丧服，穿素服一周年。 
English: The one-year anniversary of the decline of the crown prince's uniform, the replacement of the month with the day, the removal of mourning clothes on the twelfth day, and the one-year anniversary of wearing plain clothes.

古文：从之。
现代文：皇帝听从。
English: I followed his advice.

古文：定制：亲王丧，辍朝三日。
现代文：确定丧制：亲王丧，停止上朝三天。
English: Confirmation of mourning system: Prince's funeral, stopping the procession for three days.

古文：礼部奏遣官掌行丧葬礼，翰林院撰祭文、谥册文、圹志文，工部造铭旌，遣官造坟，钦天监官卜葬，国子监监生八名报讣各王府。
现代文：礼部上奏派官执掌举行丧葬礼，翰林院撰写祭文、赐谧册文、墓志文，工部制造写有身份地位姓名的铭旌，派遣官吏建造坟茔，钦天监官吏卜葬，国子监监生八名讣告各王府。
English: The Ministry of Ceremonies sent officials to preside over the funeral and burial, the Hanlin Academy wrote the dedicatory poem, the epitaph, and the epitaph, the Ministry of Works made the epitaph with the name of the status, dispatched officials to build the tomb, the Qingtian Supervisor was responsible for the burial, and eight students of the National Children's Supervisor reported to each royal palace.

古文：御祭一，皇太后、皇后、东宫各一，在京文武官各一。
现代文：皇帝祭一坛，皇太后、皇后、东宫太子各一坛，在京的文武官员各一坛。
English: There is one altar for the Emperor, one altar each for the Empress Dowager, the Empress, and the Crown Prince, and one altar each for the civil and military officials in Kyoto.

古文：自初丧至除服，御祭凡十三坛，封内文武祭一。
现代文：从初丧到除去丧服，皇帝共祭十三坛，国内文武官祭祀一坛。
English: From the first mourning to the removal of mourning clothes, the emperor had thirteen altars, and the domestic civil and military officers had one altar.

古文：其服制，王妃、世子、众子及郡王、郡主，下至宫人，斩衰三年，封内文武官齐衰三日，哭临五日而除。
现代文：其丧服制度，王妃、世子、众子以及郡王、郡主，下至宫人，服斩衰三年。国内文武官员齐衰三天，定时哭临号哭哀悼五天而除丧。
English: According to the mourning dress system, the empress dowager, her sons and grandsons, as well as the county king and the county lord, go down to the palace people, and the mourning period lasts for three years. The domestic civil and military officials have a three-day mourning period, and they cry and mourn for five days at a time.

古文：在城军民素服五日。
现代文：在城中的军队平民服素服五天。
English: The army civilians in the city wore plain clothes for five days.

古文：郡王、众子、郡君，为兄及伯叔父齐衰期年，郡王妃小功。
现代文：郡王、众子、郡君，为兄以及伯叔父齐衰一周年，郡王妃服丧五个月。
English: It is the first anniversary of the death of the county king, his sons, and the county prince, as well as his brother and uncle, and the county princess has been in mourning for five months.

古文：凡亲王妃丧，御祭一坛，皇太后中宫、东宫、公主各祭一坛。
现代文：凡是亲王妃丧，皇帝祭一坛，皇太后、中宫皇后、东宫太子、公主各祭一坛。
English: Whenever a prince or princess is in mourning, there is one altar for the emperor, and one altar for the empress dowager, empress of the middle court, crown prince of the eastern court, and princess.

古文：布政司委官开圹合葬。
现代文：布政司派官员开启坟圹合葬。
English: The Secretary for Political Affairs dispatched officials to open the graves and co-burial.

古文：继妃、次妃祭礼同。
现代文：继妃、次妃的祭礼相同。
English: The rituals for the second and third wives are the same.

古文：其夫人则止御祭一坛。
现代文：夫人则只是皇上祭一坛。
English: On the other hand, the Empress's altar is only for the Emperor.

古文：俱造圹祔葬。
现代文：都建造坟圹合葬。
English: They all built cemeteries to be buried together.

古文：郡王丧，辍朝一日。
现代文：郡王丧，停止上朝一天。
English: After the death of the county king, the parade was suspended for one day.

古文：行人司遣掌行丧葬礼，余多与亲王同，无皇太后、皇后祭。
现代文：行人司派遣官员主管举行丧葬礼，其余多与亲王相同，没有皇太后、皇后的祭祀。
English: The Pedestrian Division dispatches officials in charge of holding funerals and funerals, and the rest are mostly the same as the prince, without the sacrifice of the empress dowager and the queen.

古文：郡王妃与亲王妃同，无公主祭。
现代文：郡王妃与亲王妃的丧礼相同，没有公主祭祀。
English: The funerals of county princesses and princesses are the same, there is no princess sacrifice.

古文：合葬郡王继妃次妃丧礼，俱与正妃同。
现代文：合葬邵王继妃、次妃的丧礼，都与正妃相同。
English: The funerals of Shao Wang's second and third wives, who were buried together, were the same as that of the first wife.

古文：凡世子丧，御祭一，东宫祭一。
现代文：凡是世子丧，皇帝祭祀一坛，东宫太子祭祀一坛。
English: In the event of the death of a great-grandson, one altar is dedicated to the emperor, and one altar to the crown prince of the Eastern Court.

古文：遇七及百日、下葬、期年、除服，御祭各一。
现代文：遇七日期和百日、下葬、一周年。除丧服，皇帝祭祀各一坛。
English: On the 7th day of the month, the 100th day of the month, the day of the burial, and the 1st anniversary of the death.

古文：凡世孙丧礼，如世子，减七七及大祥祭。
现代文：凡是世孙的丧礼，如同世子，碱损七七期以及二周年祭祀。
English: All funerals for grandchildren, like those for great-grandchildren, begin with the seventy-seventh period and the two-year anniversary sacrifice.

古文：凡镇国将军，止闻丧、百日、下葬三祭，奉国将军以下，御祭一。
现代文：凡是镇国将军，只是闻丧、百日、下葬三次祭祀，奉国将军以下，皇帝祭祀一坛。
English: For the general of the county, there are only three ceremonies: mourning, 100 days, and burial. For the general of the province and below, there is only one ceremony for the emperor.

古文：初，洪武九年五月，晋王妃谢氏薨，命议丧服之制。
现代文：当初，洪武九年五月，晋王妃谢氏死，命令讨论丧服的礼制。
English: At the beginning, in May of the ninth year of Hongwu, the death of the Empress Dowager of Jin, Princess Xie, ordered the discussion of the funeral dress code.

古文：侍讲学士宋濂等议曰： 按唐制，皇帝为皇妃等举哀。
现代文：侍讲学士宋濂等人提议说： 按照唐朝制度，皇帝为皇妃等号哭哀悼。
English: According to the Tang Dynasty system, the emperor should cry and mourn for the empress and other empresses.

古文：宋制，皇帝为皇亲举哀。
现代文：宋朝制度，皇帝为皇亲号哭哀悼。
English: During the Song Dynasty, the emperor wept and mourned for the imperial family.

古文：今参酌唐、宋之制，皇帝及中宫服大功，诸妃皆服小功，南昌皇妃服大功，东宫、公主、亲王等皆服小功，晋王服齐衰期，靖江王妃小功，王妃服緦麻，辍朝三日。
现代文：现在参考酌情采纳唐、宋的制度，皇帝和中宫皇后服大功九个月丧，诸妃都服小功五个月丧，南昌皇妃服大功九个月丧，东宫太子、公主、亲王等都服小功五个月丧，晋王服齐衰一周年，靖江王妃服小功五个月丧，王妃服总麻。停止上朝三天。
English: Now, with reference to the system of Tang and Song adopted as appropriate, the emperor and the empress of the Middle Court will serve nine months for major achievements, the empresses will serve five months for minor achievements, the empress of Nanchang will serve nine months for major achievements, the princes, princesses and princes of the Eastern Court will serve five months for minor achievements, the emperor of Jin will serve for one year, the empress of Jingjiang will serve for five months for minor achievements, and the empress will serve for a total of three days.

古文：既成服，皇帝素服入丧次，十五举音。
现代文：服丧服后，皇帝穿着素服进入停丧之处，早晚定时放声哀哭悼丧。
English: After wearing mourning clothes, the emperor dressed in plain clothes to enter the place of mourning, and in the morning and evening, he would regularly cry and mourn.

古文：百官奉慰，皇帝出次释服，服常服。 
现代文：百官列位进名奉慰。皇帝从停丧处出来脱下丧服，改穿平常服饰。 
English: The Emperor came out of the funeral parlour, took off his mourning clothes and put on his usual attire.

古文：制曰 可 。
现代文：皇帝制命说 可以 。
English: Emperor Jing agreed.

古文：其后，王妃丧视此。
现代文：此后，王妃的丧礼与此相同。
English: Since then, the Queen's funeral has followed the same pattern.

古文：正统十三年，定亲王茔地五十亩，房十五间。
现代文：正统十三年，规定亲王的坟茔土地五十亩，房屋十五间。
English: In the thirteenth year of the orthodox rule, it was stipulated that the prince's grave should have fifty mu of land and fifteen houses.

古文：郡王茔地三十亩，房九间。
现代文：郡王的坟茔土地三十亩，房屋九间。
English: The county king's burial ground has 30 mu of land and nine houses.

古文：郡王子茔地二十亩，房三间，郡主、县主茔地十亩，房三间。
现代文：郡王的儿子坟茔土地二十亩，房屋三问。郡主、县主坟茔土地十亩，房屋三间。
English: The son of the county king owned twenty mu of land and three houses. The county lord and the county head owned ten mu of land and three houses.

古文：天顺二年，礼部奏定，亲王以下，依文武大臣例。
现代文：天顺二年，礼部上奏确定制度，亲王以下，依照文武大臣的规定办。
English: In the 2nd year of Tenshun, the system of ascending to the Ministry of Ceremonies was established, and those below the rank of prince were appointed in accordance with the regulations of the Minister of Education and Culture.

古文：或王、或妃先故者，合造其圹。
现代文：或者王，或者王妃先死的，命令建造他们的坟地。
English: Either the king or the queen, who died first, ordered their tombs to be built.

古文：后葬者，止令所在官司安葬。
现代文：后葬的，只命令所在的地方官安葬。
English: In the case of a later burial, only the local government official in charge will be ordered to perform the burial.

古文：继妃则祔葬其旁，同一享堂。
现代文：继妃便合葬在旁边，同在一个举行享礼的庭堂。
English: She was buried next to her husband, in the same courtyard where the ceremony was held.

古文：成化八年二月，忻王见治薨。
现代文：成化八年二月，忻王朱见治死。
English: In February of the 8th year of Chenghua, the king of Zhai, Zhu Miao, was put to death.

古文：发引日，帝不视朝。
现代文：举行出殡祭祀礼这天，皇帝不上朝处理事务。
English: On the day of the funeral rites, the emperor did not go to the court to deal with affairs.

古文：及葬，辍朝一日。
现代文：到安葬，停止上朝一天。
English: To be buried, stop morning for a day.

古文：十三年，四川按察使彭韶言： 亲王郡王薨逝，皆遣官致祭，使臣络绎，人夫劳扰。
现代文：成化十三年，四川按察使彭韶上言说： 亲王、郡王死，都派官前去祭祀，出使之臣络绎不绝，人夫劳顿困扰。
English: In the thirteenth year of Chenghua, Sichuan's inspector general Peng Yao said: When the prince and the county king died, they all sent officials to go to the sacrifice, and they sent their subjects in an endless stream. The laborers were troubled.

古文：自后惟亲王如旧，其郡王初丧遣官一祭，馀并遣本处官。
现代文：从此之后只有亲王的丧礼如旧制，那些郡王初丧派官祭祀一次，其余一并派遣本处官。
English: Since then, only the funerals of princes have been conducted according to the old system, with those of county dukes having their funerals officiated once, and the rest having their funerals officiated together.

古文：凡王国母妃之丧，俱遣内官致祭。
现代文：凡是藩王国母妃的丧礼，都派遣内官前去祭祀。
English: Whenever there was a funeral for the queen mother of a feudal kingdom, officials were dispatched to attend the service.

古文：今宗妇众多，其地有镇守太监者，宜遣行礼。
现代文：现在宗室妇女众多，其地有镇守太监的，应派他举行丧礼。
English: Now there are many women in the family, and if there is a town eunuch, he should be sent to hold a funeral.

古文：又王国茔葬，夫妇同穴。
现代文：又王国安葬坟茔，夫妇同穴合葬，初造的时候，派官员监督修建。
English: In addition, the kingdom buried the grave, and the couple was buried together. When it was first built, officials were sent to supervise the construction.

古文：初造之时，遣官监修，开圹合葬，乞止命本处官司。 帝从礼部覆奏，王妃祭礼如旧，馀依议行。
现代文：开启坟茔合葬，请只命令本处主管官员办理。 皇帝听从礼部覆奏，王妃的祭祀礼仪照旧，其余依从他的提议施衍。
English: For the opening of the graves and the joint burial, please only order the competent official of this office to handle it. The emperor will listen to the replay of the ritual department, the ritual etiquette of the princess will remain the same, and the rest will follow his proposal.

古文：弘治十六年七月，申王祐楷薨。
现代文：弘治十六年七月，申王朱佑楷死。
English: In July of the 16th year of Hongzhi, Shen Wang Zhu Youkai died.

古文：礼部言： 前沂穆王薨，未出府。
现代文：礼部说： 先前沂穆王死，没有出府。
English: The Ministry of Ceremonies said: King Jimmu died earlier and did not leave the capital.

古文：申王已出府而未之国，拟依沂穆参以在外亲王例行之。 
现代文：申王已出府而没有到封国，拟依照沂穆王参照在外亲王的事例施行。 
English: King Shin has left the capital without visiting the fief, and it is planned to follow the example of King Jimmu by referring to the prince in exile.

古文：王妃葬地载于《会典》者，明初追封寿春等十王及妃，坟在凤阳府西北二十五里白塔，设祠祭署、陵户。
现代文：王妃葬地记载于《会典》的，明朝初年追封寿春等十王以及王妃。坟在凤阳府西北二十五里的白塔，设置祠庙管理祭祀的官署和陵户。
English: The tombs of the ten kings and queens, including Shuchun, who were exiled in the first year of the Ming Dynasty, are recorded in the "Society Code." The tombs are in the White Pagoda, 25 miles northwest of Fengyang Prefecture, and the government offices and mausoleums for the management of religious services are set up in ancestral temples.

古文：南昌等五王及妃祔葬凤阳皇陵，有司岁时祭祀，皆与享。
现代文：南昌等五王以及王妃合葬在凤阳皇陵，主管部门每年的一定节令举行祭祀，都参与祭享。
English: Nanchang and other five kings and empresses are buried together in the Fengyang Imperial Mausoleum. The competent department holds a certain festival every year, and they all participate in the festival.

古文：怀献世子以下诸王未之国者，多葬于西山，岁时遣内官行礼。
现代文：怀献世子以下诸王没有到藩国的，多葬在西山，每年一定节令派遣内官举行祭祀礼。
English: The kings who did not come to the domain to dedicate their heirs were often buried in the West Mountain, and a certain number of eunuchs were dispatched every year to hold a ritual.

古文：永乐十五年正月，永安公主薨。
现代文：永乐十五年正月，永安公主死。
English: In the first month of the 15th year of Yongle, Princess Yongan died.

古文：时初举张灯宴，遂罢之。
现代文：当时初次举行张灯宴，于是罢除。
English: At that time, the Zhang Lantern Festival was held for the first time, so it was canceled.

古文：辍朝四日，赐祭，命有司治丧葬。
现代文：停止上朝四天，赐予祭祀，命令有关部门主管丧葬。
English: The emperor stopped for four days, bestowed sacrificial rites, and ordered the heads of relevant departments to hold funerals.

古文：二月，太祖第八女福清公主薨，辍朝三日。
现代文：二月，太祖的第八个女儿福清公主死，停止上朝三天。
English: In February, the eighth daughter of the great-grandfather, Princess Fu Qing, died, stopping the morning for three days.

古文：定制，凡公主丧闻，辍朝一日。
现代文：规定制度，凡是公主的丧事上报，便停止上朝一天。
English: According to the regulation system, whenever the death of a princess is reported, it will be suspended for one day.

古文：自初丧至大祥，御祭凡十二坛。
现代文：从初丧到二周年祭祀，皇帝祭共十二坛。
English: From the first mourning to the second anniversary ceremony, there are a total of twelve altars for the emperor's festival.

古文：下葬，辍朝一日。
现代文：下葬日停止上朝一天。
English: The burial day was moved up one day.

古文：仪视诸王稍杀，丧制同，惟各官不成服，其未下嫁葬西山者，岁时遣内官行礼。
现代文：礼仪比诸王稍微碱省，服丧制度相同，只有各官员不服丧。那些没有出嫁安葬在西山的，每年一定节令派内官举行祭祀礼。
English: The etiquette is a little more basic than that of the kings, and the mourning system is the same, only the officials do not mourn. Those who are not married and buried in the West Mountain, send the officials to hold a ritual every year.

