古文：魏豹，故魏诸公子也。
现代文：魏豹是六国时魏国的公子。
English: Wei panther was a noble son of Wei state during the Six Kingdoms period.

古文：其兄魏咎，故魏时封为宁陵君，秦灭魏，为庶人。
现代文：他的哥哥魏咎在当时被封为宁陵君，秦灭魏国后，把他废为庶人。
English: At that time, his brother Wei Wei was given the title of Ningling Jun. After Qin destroyed Wei, he was abolished as a commoner.

古文：陈胜之王也，咎往从之。
现代文：陈胜起义称王后，魏咎便去投效。
English: Chen Sheng rebelled and claimed to be the queen, and Wei Gui went to the capital.

古文：胜使魏人周市徇魏地，魏地已下，欲立周市为魏王。
现代文：陈胜派魏人周市率兵攻占魏地，占领后，想立周市作魏王。
English: Chen Sheng sent Zhou Shi, a Wei man, to lead an army to conquer Wei territory. After the occupation, he wanted to make Zhou Shi the king of Wei.

古文：市曰： 天下昏乱，忠臣乃见。
现代文：周市说： 天下混乱的时候，方能看出忠臣的节义。
English: Zhou Shi said: When the world is in chaos, you can see the loyalty of loyal subjects.

古文：今天下共畔秦，其谊必立魏王后乃可。 
现代文：现在天下都背叛了秦，照理应该立魏王之后才对。 
English: Now the whole world has betrayed the Qin Dynasty, and it is only right that the Wei Dynasty should be established.

古文：齐、赵使车各五十乘，立市为王。
现代文：齐国、趟国各派兵车五十辆相助，支持立周市为王。
English: Qi Province and Wuchang Province each sent fifty military vehicles to assist, supporting the establishment of Zhou City as the king.

古文：市不受，迎魏咎于陈，五反，陈王乃遣立咎为魏王。
现代文：周市拒绝接受，派人到陈县去迎接魏咎，往返了五次，陈王才答应立魏咎为魏王。
English: Zhou refused to accept and sent someone to Chen County to meet Wei Jian. After five trips back and forth, Chen Wang finally agreed to appoint Wei Jian as Wei King.

古文：章邯已破陈王，进兵击魏王于临济。
现代文：章邯打败陈王，又举兵向临济进攻魏王。
English: Zhang Ye defeated Chen Wang and raised an army to attack Wei Wang in Linji.

古文：魏王使周市请救齐、楚。
现代文：魏王派周市到齐国、楚国请求援兵。
English: The Wei king sent Zhou Shi to Qi and Chu to request reinforcements.

古文：齐、楚遣项它、田巴将兵，随市救魏。
现代文：齐国、楚国派项它、田巴带领军队同周市一起去救助魏国。
English: The states of Qi and Chu sent troops, and Tianba led the army to go with Zhou to rescue Wei.

古文：章邯遂击破杀周市等军，围临济。
现代文：章邯又把他们打败，杀了周市等人，把临济包围了起来。
English: Zhang Ye actually defeated the reinforcements, killed Zhou Shi, and surrounded Linji.

古文：咎为其民约降。
现代文：魏咎为了保全城里的百姓，向秦军约定投降。
English: Wei Wei, for the sake of the soldiers and people in the city, proposed the terms of surrender.

古文：约降定，咎自杀。
现代文：约定讲好后，魏咎自杀而死。
English: After the agreement was reached, Wei Wei committed suicide and died.

古文：魏豹亡走楚。
现代文：魏豹逃到了楚国。
English: The white leopard fled to Chu.

古文：楚怀王予豹数千人，复徇魏地。
现代文：楚怀王派给魏豹几千人的军队，又去夺回魏国土地。
English: King Chu Huai sent an army of several thousand men to Wei Pan to recapture the land of Wei.

古文：项羽已破秦兵，降章邯，豹下魏二十余城，立为魏王。
现代文：这时项羽已经打败秦军，抓获章邯，魏豹攻克了二十多个城邑，被项羽立为魏王。
English: At this time, Xiang Yu had already defeated the Qin army and captured Zhang Ye, and Wei Pan had conquered more than twenty cities and towns, and was established as the king of Wei by Xiang Yu.

古文：豹引精兵从项羽入关。
现代文：魏豹率领军队跟随项羽入关。
English: Wei Piao led the elite troops and followed Xiang Yu into the pass.

古文：羽封诸侯，欲有梁地，乃徙豹于河东，都平阳，为西魏王。
现代文：汉元年，项羽分封诸侯，自己想占大梁这个地方，就迁魏豹到河东，建都平阳，号西魏王。
English: In the first year of the Han Dynasty, Xiang Yu divided the fiefs of the princes, and if he wanted to occupy this place, he moved Wei Leopard to Hedong, built the capital Pingyang, and called himself the West Wei King.

古文：汉王还定三秦，渡临晋，豹以国属焉，遂从击楚于彭城。
现代文：汉王乎定三秦，从临晋渡过黄河，魏王魏豹举国归附汉王，跟随汉王在彭城进攻楚军。
English: The Han king, Hu Ding Sanqin, crossed the Yellow River from Linjin. The Wei king, Wei Pan, annexed the whole country to the Han king and followed the Han king to attack the Chu army in Pengcheng.

古文：汉王败，还至荥阳，豹请视亲病，至国，则绝河津畔汉。
现代文：汉王失败，退回到荣阳。魏豹请求回去探望母亲的病情，回到魏国后，便封锁了黄河渡，背叛汉王。
English: The Han king failed and retreated to Rongyang. The Wei panther asked to go back to visit his mother's illness. After returning to Wei, he blocked the Yellow River crossing and betrayed the Han king.

古文：汉王谓郦生曰： 缓颊往说之。 
现代文：汉王对郦生说： 你去说服魏豹归顺。 
English: Han Wang said to Zeng Sheng: You go and persuade Wei Leopard to submit.

古文：郦生往，豹谢曰： 人生一世间，如白驹过隙。
现代文：郦生到了魏。魏豹婉辞拒绝说： 人生一世非常短暂。
English: He was born in the Wei Dynasty. The Wei panther politely refused, saying, "A lifetime is very short.

古文：今汉王嫚侮人，骂詈诸侯群臣如奴耳，非有上下礼节，吾不忍复见也。 
现代文：汉王对人随意侮骂，叱骂诸侯群臣就像对奴仆一样，一点都不讲上下之礼，我不愿忍气再去见他了。 
English: The king of Han abuses people at will, scolds the lords and courtiers as if they were slaves, and doesn't show any courtesy at all. I can't bear to see him again.

古文：汉王遣韩信击豹，遂虏之，传豹诣荥阳，以其地为河东、太原、上党郡。
现代文：于是汉王派韩信攻打魏豹，并俘获了他，押送到荣阳，把魏豹原有的国土分割成河东、太原、上党三郡。
English: Therefore, the Han king sent Han Xin to attack Wei Piao, and captured him and escorted him to Rongyang, and divided Wei Piao's original territory into three counties: Hedong, Taiyuan, and Shangdang.

古文：汉王令豹守荥阳。
现代文：汉王让魏豹驻守荣阳。
English: The Han king ordered the Wei panther to be stationed in Fenyang.

古文：楚围之急，周苛曰： 反国之王，难与共守。 
现代文：当时楚军正进攻荣阳，形势紧迫，周苛说： 不可与背叛国家的入一起防守。 
English: At that time, the Chu army was attacking Rongyang, the situation was urgent, Zhou Cao said: Do not defend together with the betrayal of the country.

古文：遂杀豹。
现代文：便杀死了魏豹。
English: and killed the leopard.

古文：田儋，狄人也，故齐王田氏之族也。
现代文：田儋，狄县人，是六国时齐王田氏的族人。
English: Tian Qi, a native of Di County, was a member of the Wang Tian clan in the Six Kingdoms period.

古文：儋从弟荣，荣弟横，皆豪桀，宗强，能得人。
现代文：田儋的堂弟田荣，田荣的弟弟田横，都是豪杰，他们的宗族强大，又很受人尊敬。
English: Tian Rong, Tian Rong's cousin, and Tian Yang, Tian Rong's younger brother, were both heroes. Their clan was powerful and highly respected.

古文：陈涉使周市略地，北至狄，狄城守。
现代文：陈涉派周市攻占魏地，北边打到狄县，却最终没能攻克。
English: Chen Zhan sent Zhou Shi to conquer Wei, and the north side hit Di County, but ultimately failed to conquer.

古文：儋阳为缚其奴，从少年之廷，欲谒杀奴。
现代文：田儋假装要杀他的家奴，带着年轻的手下，绑了奴仆来拜见狄县县令，见到县令时就趁机把他杀了。
English: Pretending that he wanted to kill his family's slave, Tian Qi took his young subordinates and tied up the slave to pay a visit to the county magistrate of Di County. When he saw the county magistrate, he took the opportunity to kill him.

古文：见狄令，因击杀令，而召豪吏子弟曰： 诸侯皆反秦自立，齐，古之建国，儋，田氏，当王。 
现代文：然后召集豪吏子弟说： 各路诸侯都自立为王，反抗秦国，齐国是古代分封的国家，我田儋是齐王田氏的族人，应当称王。 
English: When they saw the Di County magistrate, they took the opportunity to kill him, and then gathered powerful officials and young people to say: All the local princes have become anti-Qin and self-reliant, Qi is a country established in ancient times, and I Tianyao is a member of the Qi Wang Tian clan and should be king.

古文：遂自立为齐王，发兵击周市。
现代文：于是田儋自立为王，派军队攻打周市。
English: As a result, Tian Xuan declared himself king and sent an army to attack Zhou.

古文：市军还去，儋因率兵东略定齐地。
现代文：周市军队败退，田儋趁机向东扩展平定了齐国的地方。
English: Zhou's army was defeated and fell back, and Tianyao took advantage of the opportunity to expand eastward and leveled the rest of Qi Province.

古文：秦将章邯围魏王咎于临济，急。
现代文：秦国将领章邯的军队把魏王魏咎包围在临济，情况紧急。
English: The Qin general Zhang Ye's army encircled the Wei king Wei Wei in Linji, the situation was urgent.

古文：魏王请救于齐，儋将兵救魏。
现代文：魏王向齐国求救，齐王田儋亲自率军队来援救魏王。
English: The Wei king appealed to the state of Qi for help, and the king of Qi himself led an army to rescue the Wei king.

古文：章邯夜衔枚击，大破齐、楚军，杀儋于临济下。
现代文：章邯派兵夜裹街枚偷袭，打败了齐、楚军队，在临济城下杀死了田儋。
English: Zhang Ye sent soldiers to attack the streets at night, defeated the Qi and Chu armies, and killed Tian Ye at the foot of Linji Castle.

古文：儋从弟荣收儋余兵东走东阿。
现代文：田儋的堂弟田荣收拾齐国的残兵向东逃往东阿。
English: Tian Rong, Tian Yao's cousin, gathered the remaining soldiers of Qi and fled eastward to Dong'a.

古文：齐人闻儋死，乃立故齐王建之弟田假为王，田角为相，田闲为将，以距诸侯。
现代文：齐国人听说田儋战死，就立以前齐王田建的弟弟田假为齐王，田角任丞相，田闲做将帅，来抗拒诸侯。
English: When the people of Qi heard that Tian Xuan had died in battle, they set up the younger brother of the former king of Qi, Tian Jian, as the king of Qi, with Tian Jian as the prime minister and Tian Xian as the general, to resist the princes.

古文：荣之走东阿，章邯追围之。
现代文：田荣败逃束阿，章邯又追赶并包围了他。
English: Tian Rongfei fled, but Zhang Ye chased and surrounded him.

古文：项梁闻荣急，乃引兵击破章邯东阿下。
现代文：项梁听到田荣告急的消息，就率兵在东阿城下打败了章邯军队。
English: When Cao Liang heard the news that Tian Rong was in a hurry, he led his troops to defeat Zhang Ye's army under Dong'a Castle.

古文：章邯走而西，项梁因追之。
现代文：章邯向西边逃跑，项梁趁势追击。
English: Zhang Ye fled to the west, while Xiang Liang took advantage of the victory to pursue.

古文：而荣怒齐之立假，乃引兵归，击逐假。
现代文：田荣得知齐国立田假为王非常气愤，率军回到齐国，打败齐王田假。
English: Tian Rong was very angry when he learned that the king of Qi was the king of Tianfu. He led his army back to Qi and defeated the king of Qi, Tianfu.

古文：假亡走楚。相角亡走赵。
现代文：田假逃往楚国，丞相田角逃到赵国。
English: Tian Hui fled to Chu, and the chancellor, Tian Jiao, fled to Zhao.

古文：角弟闲前救赵。因不敢归。
现代文：田角的弟弟田闲在此之前到赵国请求援兵，因此留在赵国不敢回来。
English: Tian Jiao, the younger brother of Tian Jiao, had previously gone to Zhao to request reinforcements, so he did not dare to return after staying in Zhao.

古文：荣乃立儋市为王，荣相之，横为将，平齐地。
现代文：于是田荣立田儋的儿子田市为齐王，田荣辅佐他，田横做将帅，平定了齐国。
English: As a result, Tian Rong made Tian Qi's son, Tian Shi, the king of Qi, with Tian Rong as his assistant, and Tian Yang as his commander, and the state of Qi was pacified.

古文：项梁既追章邯，章邯兵益盛，项梁使使趣齐兵共击章邯。
现代文：项梁追击章邯，但章邯的军队却曰益强大，项梁派使者敦促齐国出兵与楚军合击章邯。
English: Xiang Liang pursued Zhang Ye, but Zhang Ye's army became stronger and stronger. Xiang Liang sent an envoy to urge Qi to send troops to join the Chu army to attack Zhang Ye.

古文：荣曰： 楚杀田假，赵杀角、闲，乃出兵。 
现代文：田荣说： 衹有楚国杀死田假，趟国杀死田角、田闲才肯出兵。 
English: Tian Rong said: "If the state of Chu killed Tian Hui, the state of Zhou killed Tian Jiao, and the state of Tian Jiao killed Tian Jiao, then Tian Jiao is willing to send troops."

古文：楚怀王曰： 田假与国之王，穷而归我，杀之不谊。 
现代文：楚怀王说： 田假是我盟国的君王，无路可走才归附于我，把他杀了不合道义。 
English: King Chu Hui said, "Tan Hui is the king of my allied country. He had no choice but to join me. It is immoral to kill him."

古文：赵亦不杀田角、田闲以市于齐。
现代文：趟国也不愿杀田角、田闲以讨好齐国。
English: The country is not willing to kill field corners and idle fields to please the country.

古文：齐王曰： 蝮蠚手则斩手，蠚足则斩足。
现代文：齐王说： 蝮蛇咬伤了手，就砍去手；咬伤了脚就砍掉脚。
English: King Qi said, "If a boa constrictor bites your hand, cut off your hand; if it bites your foot, cut off your foot."

古文：何者？
现代文：为什么呢?
English: Why is that?

古文：为害于身也。
现代文：因为不这样做就会祸及全身。
English: Because if you don't, it will affect your whole body.

古文：田假、田角、田闲于楚、赵，非手足戚，何故不杀？
现代文：田假、田角、田闲对楚国、趟国来说都不是手足之戚，为什么不杀掉他们呢?
English: Tianfu, Tianquan, and Tianyou are not blood relatives to Chu or Wuchang, so why not kill them?

古文：且秦复得志于天下，则齮龁首用事者坟墓矣。 
现代文：况且秦国如果再能统治天下的话，对那些首先起兵而称王的人不但要身受其侮，而且死后还要被挖坟呢。 
English: Moreover, if Qin could once again rule the world, those who were the first to raise an army and proclaim themselves kings would not only be insulted, but their graves would also be dug after their death.

古文：楚、赵不听齐，齐亦怒，终不肯出兵。
现代文：楚国、趟国没有听从齐国的建议，齐国也很恼怒，始终不肯出兵。
English: Chu and Wuchang did not listen to Qi's suggestion, and Qi was very angry and always refused to send troops.

古文：章邯果败杀项梁，破楚兵。
现代文：章邯果然打败楚军、杀了项梁。
English: Zhang Ye defeated the Chu army and killed Xiang Liang.

古文：楚兵东走，而章邯渡河围赵于巨鹿。
现代文：楚军向东逃走，章邯则渡河在钜鹿把赵国包围了起来。
English: The Chu army fled to the east, while Zhang Ye crossed the river at Elk and encircled Zhao.

古文：项羽由此怨荣。
现代文：项羽也因此而怨恨田荣。
English: As a result, he also resented Tian Rong.

古文：羽既存赵，降章邯，西灭秦，立诸侯王，乃徙齐王市更王胶东，治即墨。
现代文：项羽既已保住了赵国，降服了章邯，西入咸阳消灭了秦国，封侯立王，他把齐王田市改封为胶东王，建都即墨。
English: Xiang Yu had already saved the State of Zhao, had surrendered Zhangye, had entered the West into Xianyang, had destroyed the State of Qin, and had set up a vassal state. He changed the name of Qi Wang Tian City to Jiaodong Wang, and built the capital at that time.

古文：齐将田都从共救赵，因入关，故立都为齐王，治临菑。
现代文：齐国将领田都因参与救助赵国，使项羽得以入关，所以立田都为齐王，定都临苗。
English: The generals of the State of Qi all participated in the rescue of the State of Zhao, which allowed Xiang Yu to enter the customs. Therefore, the Tiantian was the king of Qi, and the capital was Linyi.

古文：故齐王建孙田安，项羽方渡河救赵，安下济北数城，引兵降项羽，羽立安为济北王，治博阳。
现代文：原六国时齐王田建的孙子田安，因在项羽渡河援救赵时，攻克了济北的几个城邑，并带领军队投奔项羽，故项羽立田安为济北王，定都博阳。
English: At the time of the Six Kingdoms, Tian An, the grandson of King Tian Jian of Qi, conquered several cities and towns in northern Ji when he crossed the Xiang Yu River to rescue Zhao, and led the army to Xiang Yu. Therefore, Xiang Han Li Tian An was the king of northern Ji and set the capital at Boyang.

古文：荣以负项梁，不肯助楚攻秦，故不得王。
现代文：田荣因背负项梁，不肯出兵帮助楚军进攻秦军，所以没有封王。
English: Tian Rong, because of the burden on his back, refused to send troops to help the Chu army attack the Qin army, so there was no king.

古文：赵将陈馀亦失职，不得王。
现代文：赵国将领陈余也因有失职守，没有封王。
English: Chen Yu, the general of Zhao, was also dismissed for dereliction of duty.

古文：二人俱怨项羽。
现代文：这二人心裹都怨恨项羽。
English: Both of them are full of bitterness.

古文：荣使人将兵助陈馀，令反赵地，而荣亦发兵以距击田都，都亡走楚。
现代文：田荣派人带兵去帮助陈余，让他进攻赵国，田荣自己也派兵攻打田都，田都逃到楚国。
English: Tian Rong sent soldiers to help Chen Yu and let him attack Zhao Province, Tian Rong himself also sent soldiers to attack Tian Du, and Tian Du fled to Chu Province.

古文：荣留齐王市毋之胶东。
现代文：田荣扣留齐王田市，不让他到胶束去。
English: Tian Rong detained Qi Wang Tian and did not allow him to go to Jiuquan.

古文：市左右曰： 项王强暴，王小就国，必危。 
现代文：田市的亲信说： 项王强悍暴躁，你如不去胶束赴任，肯定会有灾难。 
English: Tianshi's cronies said: "Xiang Wang is tough and hot-tempered. If you don't go to work with a rubber band, there will definitely be a disaster."

古文：市惧，乃亡就国。
现代文：田市害怕，就偷偷地逃到胶束去就任。
English: Tianshi was very scared, so he ran away to Jiaodong.

古文：荣怒，追击杀市于即墨，还攻杀济北王安，自立为王，尽并三齐之地。
现代文：田荣大怒，在即墨追上田市并杀了他，回头又进攻济北王田安。于是田荣自立为齐王，吞并了三齐的领地。
English: Tian Rong flew into a rage, and in the blink of an eye, he caught up with Tian Shi and killed him. He then turned around and attacked Tian An, the king of Northern Jibei. As a result, Tian Rong declared himself the king of Qi and annexed the territory of Sanqi.

古文：项王闻之，大怒，乃北伐齐。
现代文：项羽听说了遣件事，大怒，出兵北伐齐国。
English: After hearing this news, Cao Yu was very angry, so he raised an army to invade Qi.

古文：荣发兵距之城阳。
现代文：田荣派兵在城阳抵御项羽。
English: Tian Rong sent troops to resist Xiang Yu in Chengyang.

古文：荣兵败，走平原，平原民杀荣。
现代文：田荣战败，逃到平原，被当地的百姓所杀。
English: Tian Rong was defeated and fled to the plain, where he was killed by the local people.

古文：项羽遂烧夷齐城郭，所过尽屠破。
现代文：项羽烧平了齐国的城郭，所到之处大肆屠杀。
English: Xiang Yu burned down the city walls of Qi and slaughtered people wherever he went.

古文：齐人相聚畔之。
现代文：于是齐国人聚集起来反抗他。
English: As a result, the people of Qi gathered to oppose him.

古文：荣弟横收齐散兵，得数万人，反击项羽于城阳。
现代文：田荣的弟弟田横收拾齐国的残兵，得到好几万人，在城阳攻击项羽军队。
English: Tian Rong's younger brother, Tian Yang, gathered the remaining soldiers of Qi, got tens of thousands of people, and attacked Xiang Yu's army in Chengyang.

古文：而汉王帅诸侯败楚，入彭城。
现代文：这时汉王刘邦带领各路诸侯打败了楚军，进入彭城。
English: At this time, Han King Liu Bang led all the princes to defeat the Chu army and enter Pengcheng.

古文：项羽闻之，乃释齐而归击汉于彭城，因连与汉战，相距荥阳。
现代文：项羽得到消息，就放过齐国，回兵彭城攻打汉军，因此连连与漠作战，双方在荣阳一带相持不下。
English: When Xiang Yu received the news, he left Qi Province and returned to Pengcheng to attack the Chinese army. As a result, he fought against the Chinese army continuously, and the two sides could not stand each other in the Rongyang area.

古文：以故横复收齐城邑，立荣子广为王，而横相之，政事无巨细皆断于横。
现代文：于是田横又恢复了齐国的城邑，拥立田荣的儿子田广做齐王，田横来辅佐他，齐国的政事无论大小全都由田横决定。
English: As a result, Tian Yang restored the cities and towns of Qi. He installed Tian Guang, the son of Tian Rong, as the king of Qi. Tian Yang came to assist him. The government affairs of Qi, no matter how big or small, were all decided by Tian Yang.

古文：定齐三年，闻汉将韩信引兵且东击齐，齐使华毋伤、田解军历下以距汉。
现代文：田横平定齐国已经三年，忽听说汉王的将领韩信率兵向东来攻打齐国。齐国派华毋伤、田解领军驻守历下抗击汉军。
English: It had been three years since Tian Youping had conquered Qi. Suddenly, he heard that Han Wang's general, Han Xin, had led an army to the east to attack Qi. Qi sent Hua, who was unharmed, and the leader of Tian Liang's army to defend against the Chinese army.

古文：会汉使郦食其往说王广及相横，与连和。
现代文：正巧汉王使者郦食其来齐国劝说齐王田广、丞相田横和汉王联合攻楚。
English: It just so happened that an emissary of the Han king came to Qi to persuade the Qi king Tian Guang, the chancellor Tian Yang and the Han king to jointly attack the enemy.

古文：横然之，乃罢历下守备，纵酒，且遣使与汉平。韩信乃渡平原。袭破齐历下军，因入临菑。
现代文：田横答应了，于是解除了历下的防守，兵士放纵饮酒。正要派使者和汉王媾和，这时韩信已渡过平原，打败了齐国驻守在历下的军队，进入临苗。
English: Tian Yang agreed, so he lifted the siege, and the soldiers indulged in drinking. Just as he was about to send an envoy to make peace with the Han king, Han Xin had crossed the plain, defeated the troops of Qi stationed in the siege, and entered Linmiao.

古文：王广、相横以郦生为卖己而亨之。
现代文：齐王田广、丞相田横认为郦生与韩信同谋，就把郦生烹煮了。
English: The King of Qi, Tian Guang, and the Minister of the Empire, Tian Heng, thought that Han Sheng was a co-conspirator with Han Xin, so they cooked up Han Sheng.

古文：广东走高密，横走博，守相田光走城阳，将军田既军于胶东。
现代文：田广向东逃到高密，田横逃到博县，守相田光逃到城阳，将军田既驻军在胶东。
English: Tian Guang fled eastward to Gaomi, Tian Yang fled to Bo County, Guo Ao Tian Guang fled to Chengyang, and General Tian Yu was stationed in Jiaodong.

古文：楚使龙且救齐，齐王与合军高密。
现代文：楚国派龙且来救助齐国，齐王和龙且的军队在高密会合。
English: At this time, Chu sent Long and led the army to rescue Qi. Qi Wang Tianguang and Long were in a high-level secret meeting.

古文：汉将韩信、曹参破杀龙且，虏齐王广。
现代文：汉朝将领韩信、曹参打败楚军，杀了龙且，抓住了齐王田广。
English: Han Dynasty generals Han Xin and Cao San defeated the Chu army, killed Long Qi, and captured Qi Wang Tian Guang.

古文：汉将灌婴追得守相光，至博。
现代文：汉将灌婴追擒齐国守相田光，来到博县。
English: Han Zhaojing pursued Qi Guo, Aida Guang, and came to Bo County.

古文：而横闻王死，自立为王，还击婴，婴败横军于赢下。
现代文：田横听说齐王已死，便自立为王，返回来攻打灌婴，灌婴在赢下打败了田横军队。
English: When Tian Yang heard that King Qi was dead, he declared himself king and returned to attack Guanzhong. Guanzhong won and defeated Tian Yang's army.

古文：横亡走梁，归彭越。
现代文：田横逃到梁地，归附彭越。
English: Tianyang fled to Liangdi and was annexed by Peng Yue.

古文：越时居梁地，中立，且为汉，且为楚。
现代文：这时彭越驻守在梁地，他对漠、楚两面讨好，保持中立。韩信杀了龙且之后，接着进军胶东，杀死了田既。
English: At this time, Peng Yue was stationed in Liangdi. He courted the two sides of Mu and Chu and remained neutral. After Han Xin killed Long Jie, he then marched into Jiaodong and killed Tian Ye.

古文：韩信已杀龙且，因进兵破杀田既于胶东，灌婴破杀齐将田吸于千乘，遂平齐地。汉灭项籍，汉王立为皇帝，彭越为梁王。
现代文：灌婴打败了齐将田吸，并在千乘杀死了田吸，于是韩信平定了齐国。汉灭了项籍，汉王自立为皇帝，彭越被封为梁王。
English: Gan Zi defeated Qizhong Tian Su and killed Tian Su in Qizhong, so Han Xin leveled Qizhong. Han destroyed Xiang Zeki, Han Wang became emperor, and Peng Yue was crowned as Liang Wang.

古文：横惧诛，而与其徒属五百余人入海，居隝中。
现代文：田横害怕被杀，就和他的部属五百多人逃往海中，住在岛上。
English: Fearing that he would be killed, Tian Yang and more than five hundred of his subordinates fled to the sea and lived on the island.

古文：高帝闻之，以横兄弟本定齐，齐人贤者多附焉，今在海中不收，后恐有乱，乃使使赦横罪而召之。
现代文：漠高祖刘邦听说了这个消息，认为田横兄弟本来已平定了齐国，齐国的贤士许多人都归附于他，如今他住在海上若不收揽，恐怕以后会有变乱，于是派使者赦免田横的罪而召见他。
English: Liu Bang, the ancestor of the Mogao, heard the news and thought that Tian Yang's brothers had already pacified Qi, and many sages of Qi had joined him. Now that he was living on the sea, if he did not receive them, there would be turmoil in the future, so he sent an envoy to pardon Tian Yang's sin and summon him.

古文：横谢曰： 臣亨陛下之使郦食其，今闻其弟商为汉将而贤，臣恐惧，不敢奉诏，请为庶人，守海隝中。 
现代文：田横婉辞谢绝说： 我烹煮了陛下的使者郦食其，听说他的弟弟郦商现在为汉军将领而且贤能，我很担忧，因此不敢奉诏，我期望做个寻常百姓，住在海岛上。 
English: Tian Yoko politely declined, saying, "I cooked and ate your majesty's envoy. I heard that his brother, the merchant, is now a general in the Chinese army and is very capable. I'm worried, so I don't dare to issue an edict. I hope to be an ordinary citizen and live on the island."

古文：使还报，高帝乃诏卫尉郦商曰： 齐王横即至，人马从者敢动摇者致族夷！ 
现代文：使者回来报告了皇上。高祖召见卫尉郦商，对他说： 齐王田横将来，谁敢动他的人马部属，就会招致灭族之罪！ 
English: The messenger came back and reported to the emperor. Gaozu summoned the guard and merchant, and said to him: In the future, if the king of Qi behaves arrogantly, anyone who dares to touch his subordinates will incur the crime of exterminating the people!

古文：乃复使使持节具告以诏意，曰： 横来，大者王，小者乃侯耳；不来，且发兵加诛。 
现代文：于是又派使者拿着符节把高祖给郦商的命令告诉了田横，又说： 田横来后，大者封王，小者封侯；如果不来，就派兵去讨伐。 
English: Therefore, he also sent an envoy with a rune to inform Tian Yang of Gao Zu's order to the merchants. He also said, "After Tian Yang comes, the great man will be crowned king, and the small man will be crowned lord; if he does not come, he will send troops to fight.

古文：横乃与其客二人乘传诣雒阳。
现代文：田横于是带着两位门客乘传车往雒阳而来。
English: As a result, Tian Yang took two of his guests by car to Poyang.

古文：至尸乡厩置，横谢使者曰： 人臣见天子，当洗沐。 
现代文：走到尸乡备马传驿的地方，田横对使者说： 作为臣子拜见天子，应该沐浴净身。 
English: When he came to the place where the corpse was being prepared for the funeral, Tian Yang said to the messenger: As a vassal to worship the Son of Heaven, you should take a bath to purify yourself.

古文：止留。
现代文：于是停了下来。
English: So they moved in.

古文：谓其客曰： 横始与汉王俱南面称孤，今汉王为天子，而横乃为亡虏，北面事之，其愧固已甚矣。
现代文：田横对他的门客说： 起初我和汉王一样都是面南而称王的人物，如今汉王做了天子。而我则成了亡国的俘虏，要北面称臣降服于他，实在是令人羞愧难当啊。
English: Tian Yang said to his protégé: At first, like the Han king, I was a person who faced south and praised the king, but now the Han king has become the son of heaven, while I have become a captive of a ruined country. It is truly shameful to have to surrender to him while facing north and praising him.

古文：又吾亨人之兄，与其弟并肩而事主，纵彼畏天子之诏，不敢动摇，我独不愧于心乎？
现代文：况且我又煮了别人的兄长，却要和那个人的弟弟一起为同一个主人效力，即使是他害怕天子的诏令不敢动我，难道我心裹就不感到惭愧吗?
English: Moreover, I cooked someone else's brother, but I have to work for the same master with that person's younger brother. Even if he is afraid of God's edict and does not dare to touch me, does my heart not feel ashamed?

古文：且陛下所以欲见我，不过欲壹见我面貌耳。
现代文：而且陛下之所以召见我，衹不过是想看看我的面貌而已。
English: And your majesty has summoned me only to see my face.

古文：陛下在雒阳，今斩吾头，驰三十里间，形容尚未能败，犹可知也。 
现代文：陛下在洛阳，现在把我的头砍下来奔跑三十里，容貌还不至于腐败，还可以看看我是什么样子。 
English: Your Majesty is in Luoyang, now cut off my head and run for thirty miles, my appearance is not yet corrupt, you can still see what I look like.

古文：遂自刭，令客奉其头，从使者驰奏之高帝。
现代文：说完自杀，让门客捧着他的头，跟随使者尽快给高帝上奏。
English: After he finished speaking, he hanged himself. He ordered two courtiers to hold his head in their hands and follow the messenger as he sped into the morning to inform Han Gao Zu.

古文：高帝曰： 嗟乎，有以！
现代文：高帝说： 唉，不简单啊！
English: Gaudi said: Alas, it is not easy!

古文：起布衣，兄弟三人更王，岂非贤哉！ 
现代文：以平民的身份起家，兄弟三个人相继称王，实在是贤能啊！ 
English: He started his family as a commoner, and three of his brothers became kings one after another. That's real talent!

古文：为之流涕，而拜其二客为都尉，发卒二千，以王者礼葬横。
现代文：为此流下了眼泪，并且赐拜田横的两个门客做都尉，派兵二千人，用侯王的礼节来安葬田横。
English: For this, he shed tears, and made two of Tian Yang's disciples captains, and sent two thousand soldiers to bury Tian Yang with the etiquette of a feudal lord.

古文：既葬，二客穿其冢旁，皆自刭从之。
现代文：安葬完后，两个门客在田横墓边挖了个洞，都自杀而死。
English: After the burial, two of the gatekeepers dug a hole next to the grave in Tianyang and both committed suicide.

古文：高帝闻而大惊，以横之客皆贤者，吾闻其余尚五百人在海中，使使召至，闻横死，亦皆自杀。
现代文：高帝听了大为惊异，认为田横的门客都很贤能，听说还有五百门客在海中岛上，派使者韶令他们到洛阳，门客们听说田横已死，也都自杀而亡。
English: Gao Di was very surprised to hear this, and thought that Tian Yang's clients were all very capable. He heard that there were still five hundred clients on the island in the middle of the sea, and sent an envoy to order them to Luoyang. When the clients heard that Tian Yang had died, they all committed suicide.

古文：于是乃知田横兄弟能得士也。
现代文：由此可知田横兄弟的确是能得到贤士拥戴的人。
English: From this, it can be seen that the Toyoko brothers are indeed people who can be supported by sages.

古文：韩王信，故韩襄王孽孙也，长八尺五寸。
现代文：韩王信是原来韩襄王的庶孙，他身高八尺五寸。
English: Han Wangxin is the great-grandson of the original Han Xiang Wang. He is eight feet five inches tall.

古文：项梁立楚怀王，燕、齐、赵、魏皆已前王，唯韩无有后，故立韩公子横阳君成为韩王，欲以抚定韩地。
现代文：项梁立楚怀王时，燕、齐、趟、魏都在此之前称王，衹有韩国没有后代，因而立韩国公子横阳君成做韩王，想以此来安抚稳定韩国。
English: When Xiang Liang made Chu Huai king, Yan, Qi, Wai and Wei had all been kings before that, but Korea had no descendants, so they made the Korean prince, Hengyang Juncheng, king of Korea, hoping to appease and stabilize Korea.

古文：项梁死定陶，成奔怀王。
现代文：项梁死在定陶后，韩王成投奔楚怀王。
English: After Xiang Liang's death in Dingtao, Han Wangcheng defected to Chuhuai Wang.

古文：沛公引兵击阳城，使张良以韩司徒徇韩地，得信，以为韩将，将其兵从入武关。
现代文：沛公带兵攻打阳城，派张良以韩国司徒的身份去占领韩国，发现了信，让信统率韩国的兵马，率领军队跟随沛公到武关。
English: Pei Gong led the troops to attack Yangcheng, and sent Zhang Liang to occupy South Korea as a South Korean soldier. When he discovered Xin, he asked Xin to lead the South Korean soldiers and lead the troops to follow Pei Gong to Wuguan.

古文：沛公为汉王，信从入汉中，乃说汉王曰： 项王王诸将，王独居此，迁也。
现代文：沛公做了汉王，信跟随他进入汉中，信劝汉王说： 项王分封诸将，你却单独驻守在这裹，换个地方吧。
English: Pei Gong became the king of Han, and Xin followed him into Han. Xin advised the king of Han, saying, "The king has appointed generals, but you are stationed here alone. Go somewhere else."

古文：士卒皆山东人，竦而望归，及其蜂东乡，可以争天下。 
现代文：跟随你的士卒都是山东人，都盼望着回去，一旦东归的意愿强烈，你就可以藉此争夺天下了。 
English: The soldiers following you are all from Shandong, and they are all looking forward to going back. Once the will to return to the East is strong, you can use it to compete for the world.

古文：汉王还定三秦，乃许王信，先拜为韩太尉，将兵略韩地。
现代文：汉王回师平定了三秦的地方，答应以后立信为王，先拜他为韩国的太尉，带兵进占韩地。
English: Han Wang Hui's division levelled the area of Sanqin, and promised to make Xinyin the king after that. At first, he was worshipped as the captain of Korea, and led the army to occupy Korea.

古文：项籍之封诸王皆就国，韩王成以不从无功，不遣之国，更封为穰侯，后又杀之。
现代文：项籍分封的各诸侯王都回各自的封国。韩王成因未随军征战，没有立功劳，因而不派他到韩国，改封为穣侯，后来又把他杀了。
English: Because Han Wangcheng did not go to war with the army and did not do any meritorious deeds, he was not sent to Korea, he was changed to a vassal lord, and later he was killed.

古文：闻汉遣信略韩地，乃令故籍游吴时令郑昌为韩王距汉。
现代文：听说汉王派信来抢占韩地，于是任命他过去在吴县时的县令郑昌为韩王，以抗击汉王的军队。
English: Hearing that the Han king had sent a letter to seize Korea, he appointed Zheng Chang, the county magistrate when he was in Wuxian, as the king of Korea to fight against the Han king's army.

古文：汉二年，信略定韩地十余城。
现代文：漠二年，信平定了韩的十多个城邑。
English: In the past two years, more than ten cities and towns in South Korea have been leveled.

古文：汉王至河南，信急击韩王昌，昌降汉。
现代文：汉王来到河南，信急攻韩王昌，韩王昌降汉。
English: Han Wang came to Henan, Xinqu attacked Han Wangchang, and Han Wangchang surrendered to Han.

古文：汉乃立信为韩王，常将韩兵从。
现代文：汉王刘邦立信为韩王，让他经常带着韩兵随侍左右。
English: Han King Liu Bang believed himself to be the king of Korea, so he often brought Korean soldiers with him.

古文：汉王使信与周苛等守荥阳，楚拔之，信降楚。
现代文：汉王让韩王信和周苛等人驻守荣阳，城池被楚军攻克，韩王信投降了楚军。
English: The Han king stationed Han Wangxin and Zhou Cao and others in Rongyang. The city was conquered by the Chu army, and Han Wangxin surrendered to the Chu army.

古文：已得亡归汉，汉复以为韩王，竟从击破项籍。
现代文：不久他找机会又逃回了汉，汉王又封他为韩王，最后他跟随汉王打败了项籍。
English: He soon found an opportunity to escape back to Han, and the Han king made him the king of Korea. Finally, he followed the Han king and defeated Xiang Quan.

古文：五年春，与信剖符，王颖川。
现代文：五年春天，汉王与他剖符，在颖！
English: In the spring of the fifth year, Han Wang and he cut the sign, in Ying!

古文：六年春，上以为信壮武，北近巩、雒，南迫宛、叶，东有淮阳，皆天下劲兵处也，乃更以太原郡为韩国，徙信以备胡，都晋阳。
现代文：为韩王。六年春，皇上认为韩王信勇武，所分领地北面接近巩县和洛阳，南面邻近宛县和叶县，束边则有淮阳重镇，这些地方都由精锐的军队驻守，于是把太原郡也分给韩国，让韩王信抵御胡人，并迁都晋阳。
English: In the spring of the sixth year, the emperor believed that Han Wangxin was a brave warrior. The territory he divided was close to Gong County and Luoyang in the north, close to Wan County and Ye County in the south, and there were important towns in Huaiyang in the periphery. These places were guarded by elite troops. Therefore, Taiyuan County was also divided to South Korea, so that Han Wangxin could resist the Hu people, and the capital was moved to Jinyang.

古文：信上书曰： 国被边，匈奴数入，晋阳去塞远，请治马邑。 
现代文：韩王信上书说： 国土靠近边界，匈奴人多次入侵，而晋阳却距边塞遥远，请求定都马邑。 
English: In the letter, Han wrote: My fiefdom is close to the border, the Huns have invaded many times, and Jinyang is far from the border. Please allow me to build the capital, Ma'eup.

古文：上许之。
现代文：皇上答应了他的要求。
English: Emperor Jing agreed with this opinion.

古文：秋，匈奴冒顿大入围信，信数使使胡求和解。
现代文：造年秋天，匈奴首领冒顿带领大军围攻韩王信，韩王信多次派使者向胡人寻求和解。
English: In the autumn of the same year, the leader of the Xiongnu led a large army to besiege Han Wangxin. Han Wangxin repeatedly sent envoys to the Hu people to seek reconciliation.

古文：汉发兵救之，疑信数间使，有二心。
现代文：汉朝派援军救了韩王信，怀疑韩王信多次派使者私下向匈奴求和，有二心。
English: The Han Dynasty sent reinforcements to save Han Wangxin. It is suspected that Han Wangxin repeatedly sent emissaries to privately sue for peace with the Xiongnu.

古文：上赐信书责让之曰： 专死不勇，专生不任，寇攻马邑，君王力不足以坚守乎？
现代文：皇上赐书信责备韩王信说： 作为将军，一心去战死算不得勇敢，一心求生不能胜任军事指挥，敌人围攻马邑，你的兵力难道不能坚守吗?
English: The emperor sent a letter to rebuke Han Wangxin, saying: As a general, it is not brave to fight and die with one's heart, and it is not competent to be a military commander with one's heart set on survival. The enemy is besieging Ma'eup. Can't your troops hold out?

古文：安危丰亡之地，此二者朕所以责于君王。 
现代文：虽处危亡之地，也要坚持忠实诚信，这是我要责备你的。 
English: I want to reproach you for insisting on being faithful and honest, even though you are in a dangerous place.

古文：信得书，恐诛，因与匈奴约共攻汉，以马邑降胡，击太原。
现代文：韩王信得到信，害怕被杀，因此和匈奴商定共同攻打漠，拱手把马邑送给胡人，投降了匈奴，出兵攻打太原。
English: Han Wangxin received the letter and was afraid of being killed, so he agreed with the Xiongnu to jointly attack the desert, handed over Ma'i to the Hu people, surrendered to the Xiongnu, and sent troops to attack Taiyuan.

古文：七年冬，上自往击破信军铜鞮，斩其将王喜。
现代文：七年冬，皇上亲自率军在铜千打败了韩王信，杀死了他的将领王喜。
English: In the winter of the seventh year, the emperor personally led the army to defeat Han Wangxin and kill his general Wang Xi.

古文：信亡走匈奴其将白土人曼丘臣、王黄立赵苗裔赵利为王，复收信散兵，而与信及冒顿谋攻汉。
现代文：韩王信逃到匈奴。他的部将曼丘臣、王黄是白土县人，他们立六国时趟的后裔趟利为王，又收拾韩王信的残兵，和韩王信、冒顿勾结，合谋攻汉。
English: Han Wangxin fled to the Xiongnu. His subordinates, Manchu Chen and Wang Huang, were from Baidu County. They made the descendant of the Six Kingdoms Warlord Wang Li the king, and gathered the remnants of Han Wangxin's army. They conspired with Han Wangxin to attack Han.

古文：匈奴使左右贤王将万余骑与王黄等屯广武以南，至晋阳，与汉兵战，汉兵大破之，追至于离石，复破之。
现代文：匈奴派左右贤王率领一万多骑兵和王黄等驻扎在广武南边，到晋阳同汉兵作战，被汉兵打败，一直追到离石，又一次被漠军打败。
English: The Xiongnu sent more than ten thousand cavalrymen led by Wang Xianwang and Wang Huang to the south of Guangwu. They went to Jinyang to fight with the Han soldiers, were defeated by the Han soldiers, chased them all the way to Liishi, and were once again defeated by the Muslim army.

古文：匈奴复聚兵楼烦西北。
现代文：匈奴又聚集军队在楼烦西北。
English: The Xiongnu again gathered an army in the northwest of the country.

古文：汉令车骑击匈奴，常败走，汉乘胜追北。
现代文：汉军又派战车战马攻打匈奴，经常把匈奴人打败，汉军则乘胜往北追击他们。
English: The Han army also sent chariots and horses to attack the Huns, often defeating the Huns, while the Han army took advantage of the victory to pursue them to the north.

古文：闻冒顿居代谷，上居晋阳，使人视冒顿，还报曰 可击 。
现代文：听到冒顿住在代谷这个消息，皇上亲临晋阳，派人侦察冒顿，回报说： 可以攻打。 
English: Hearing the news that the emperor was staying in Daejeon, the emperor himself came to Jinyang, sent someone to spy on the emperor, and said in return: You can attack.

古文：上遂至平城，上白登。
现代文：皇上于是来到平城，上了白登山。
English: The emperor then came to Pingcheng and climbed Mount Bai.

古文：匈奴骑围上，上乃使人厚遗阏氏。
现代文：没想到皇上被匈奴骑兵包围，皇上派人给匈奴单子的妻子板氏送了很多贵重的礼物。
English: Unexpectedly, the emperor was surrounded by Hun cavalry, and the emperor sent someone to send a lot of precious gifts to the Hun's wife, Ban.

古文：阏氏说冒顿曰： 今得汉地，犹不能居，且两主不相厄。 
现代文：阙氏劝冒顿说： 现在取得了汉地，还是不能居住，况且两主相遇，也不能相迫使陷于窘迫境地呀。 
English: "Now that we have obtained Han territory, we still can't live there. Moreover, if two masters meet, they can't force each other into a predicament.

古文：居七日，胡骑稍稍引去。
现代文：对峙了七天，胡人的骑兵才稍往后退了一点。
English: After a seven-day standoff, Wu Ren's cavalry retreated a little.

古文：天雾，汉使人往来，胡不觉。
现代文：天降大雾，汉军派人往来走动，胡人也觉察不出来。
English: Heavy fog descends from the sky, the Chinese army sends people to and fro, and the Hu people do not notice it.

古文：护军中尉陈平言上曰： 胡者全兵，请令强弩傅两矢外乡，徐行出围。 
现代文：护军中尉陈平对皇上说： 胡人的兵器是弓矛，请让士兵在每个强弩上加上两个箭头，方向朝外，慢慢地移动，突出包围。 
English: The guard lieutenant Chen Ping said to the emperor: "The Hu people's weapons are bows and spears. Please let the soldiers add two arrows to each crossbow, facing outward, move slowly, and surround them.

古文：入平城，汉救兵亦至，胡骑遂解去，汉亦罢兵归。
现代文：皇上跑入平城时，汉朝的援军也到了。匈奴骑兵于是散去，汉朝也收兵回师。
English: When the emperor ran into Pingcheng, the Han Dynasty reinforcements also arrived. The Xiongnu cavalry then dispersed, and the Han Dynasty also withdrew its troops.

古文：信为匈奴将兵往来击边，令王黄等说误陈豨。
现代文：此后，韩王信便带领匈奴兵往来边境，攻击汉军，还让王黄等人劝说陈稀。
English: After that, Han Wangxin led the Xiongnu soldiers to and from the border to attack the Chinese army, and also let Wang Huang and others persuade Chen Xiru.

古文：十一年春，信复与胡骑入居参合。
现代文：十一年春，韩王信又同胡人骑兵驻扎在参合县。
English: In the spring of the eleventh year, Han Wangxin and the Hu cavalry were stationed in Sanghe County.

古文：汉使柴将军击之，遗信书曰： 陛下宽仁，诸侯虽有叛亡，而后归，辄复故位号，不诛也。
现代文：汉朝派柴将军去攻打，柴将军先送给韩王信一封信说： 陛下宽厚仁爱，诸侯虽然有叛逃的，但归附后，立即又恢复过去的封号，不杀他。
English: The Han Dynasty sent General Chai to attack. General Chai first sent a letter to Han Wangxin, saying, "Your Majesty is generous and kind. Although some lords have defected, they immediately restored their former titles and did not kill him.

古文：大王所知。
现代文：这你是知道的。
English: You know all this.

古文：今王以败亡走胡，非有大罪，急自归。 
现代文：如今你因兵败逃到胡人那儿，没有什么大的罪过，希望你赶快来归顺。 
English: Now that you have fled to the Huns because of your military defeat, there is no great sin on your part. I hope you will quickly come to submit.

古文：信报曰： 陛下擢仆闾巷，南面称孤，此仆之幸也。
现代文：韩王信回报说： 陛下把我从间巷之中提拔起来，以至南面而称王，这是我的荣幸。
English: Han Wangxin replied, "It is my honor that your majesty has promoted me from the alley to the south and made me king.

古文：荥阳之事，仆不能死，囚于项籍，此一罪也。
现代文：荣阳之战，我没有战死，而做了项籍的囚徒，这是我的头一条罪状。
English: In the Rongyang War, I did not die in battle, but became a prisoner of war, which is my first charge.

古文：寇攻马邑，仆不能坚守，以城降之，此二罪也。
现代文：胡寇攻击马邑，我没能坚守住，却把城作礼物投降了敌人，这是第二条罪状。
English: Huko attacked Ma'eup, I could not hold out, but I surrendered the city as a gift to the enemy. This is the second charge.

古文：今为反寇，将兵与将军争一旦之命，此三罪也。
现代文：现在我成了反叛之寇，带领军队和你拼死而战，这是第三条罪状。
English: Now I've become a rebel thief, leading an army to fight you to the death, which is the third charge.

古文：夫种、蠡无一罪，身死亡；仆有三罪，而欲求活，此伍子胥所以偾于吴世也。
现代文：昔日的大夫文种和范蠡，什么罪过也没有，却一死一逃；我有三条罪状，而想求生，逭就是当年伍子胥得罪了夫差，而不知逃离，终于死在吴国的原因。
English: The former doctors Wenzhuang and Fan Rong did not commit any crimes, but they died and escaped; I have three crimes, but I want to live. Rong is the reason why Wu Zi Rong committed a crime and did not know how to escape, and finally died in Wuzhong.

古文：今仆亡匿山谷间，旦暮乞貣蛮夷，仆之思归，如痿人不忘起，盲者不忘视，势不可耳。 
现代文：现在我逃到山谷之中，日夜向蛮夷乞讨过活，我思归的愿望十分强烈，像瘫痪的人希望站立起来，瞎子渴望重新看见光明一样，衹不过是情形不允许我这么做而已。 
English: Now I have fled into the valley, and I live day and night begging from the savages, and my longing to return is as strong as the paralyzed man's longing to stand, and the blind man's longing to see again, except that circumstances do not permit me to do so.

古文：遂战。
现代文：于是双方交战。
English: The two sides then went to war.

古文：柴将军屠参合，斩信。
现代文：柴将军带兵洗劫参合，杀死了韩王信。
English: General Chai led soldiers to participate in the ransacking and killed Han Wangxin.

古文：信之入匈奴，与太子俱，及至穨当城，生子，因名曰穨当。
现代文：韩王信逃往匈奴时，太子跟他在一起，到了颓当城，韩王信又生了一个儿子，取名叫颓当。
English: When Han Wangxin fled to the Huns, the prince was with him. When they arrived at Shantang, Han Wangxin gave birth to another son, named Shantang.

古文：韩太子亦生子婴 至孝文时，穨当及婴率其众降。
现代文：韩太子也生了一个男孩，取名婴。到孝文皇帝时，颓当和韩婴率领部属投降了汉朝。
English: Han Taizi also gave birth to a boy, a baby named Take. When Emperor Xiaowen arrived, Shantang and Han Bao led their subordinates to surrender to the Han Dynasty.

古文：汉封穨当为弓高侯，婴为襄城侯。
现代文：汉朝封韩颓当为弓高侯，韩婴为襄城侯。
English: During the Han Dynasty, Han Zheng was the governor of Qian Gao, and Han Jiao was the governor of Xiangcheng.

古文：吴、楚反时，弓高侯功冠诸将。
现代文：吴国、楚国反叛时，弓高侯平叛功高，位于众将之首。
English: When the states of Wu and Chu rebelled, Bow Gao Hou Ping was at the head of the generals, due to his great contribution to the rebellion.

古文：传子至孙，孙无子，国绝。
现代文：他的爵位传给儿子、孙子，由于孙子没有后代，失去了封国。
English: His title was passed down to his son and grandson, but since the grandson had no descendants, he lost the title to the country.

古文：婴孙以不敬失侯。
现代文：韩婴的孙子因不敬之罪也失去了侯位。
English: Han's grandson was stripped of his marquis title for committing the crime of disrespect.

古文：穨当孽孙嫣，贵幸，名显当世。
现代文：颓当的庶孙韩嫣，受到宠幸，当时名声很大。
English: Han Xuan, the great-grandson of Xuan Dang, was favored and had a great reputation at that time.

古文：嫣弟说，以校尉击匈奴，封龙额侯。
现代文：韩嫣的弟弟韩悦，以校尉的身份率兵攻击匈奴，被封为龙领侯。
English: Han Yu's younger brother, Han Yue, led an army to attack the Xiongnu as a lieutenant, and was crowned Dragon Lord.

古文：后坐酎金失侯，复以待诏为横海将军，击破东越，封按道侯。
现代文：后来因犯酎金份量不足之罪失去了侯位，又以待诏的身份被封为横海将军，率军打败束越，被封为按道侯。
English: Later, he lost his position as a vassal for committing the crime of insufficient weight of shochu gold, and as a vassal, he was appointed as the general of Henghai, led the army to defeat Sokue, and was appointed as a vassal.

古文：太初中，为游击将军屯五原外列城，还为光禄勋，掘蛊太子宫，为太子所杀。
现代文：太初年间，作为游击将军驻兵在五原外的城邑中，回去后被任命为光禄勋，因在太子宫挖木偶人，被太子杀死。
English: During the first year of the reign of the Emperor, as a guerrilla general, he stationed soldiers in towns outside the Wuhara region. After his return, he was appointed as a member of the Order of the Star of Glory. He was killed by the crown prince for digging up a puppet in the prince's womb.

古文：子兴嗣，坐巫蛊诛。
现代文：他的儿子韩兴继承侯位，犯巫蛊之罪被杀。
English: His son, Han Xing, succeeded to the throne and was killed for the crime of witchcraft.

古文：上曰： 游击将军死事，无论坐者。 
现代文：皇上说： 游击将军死于国事，忠诚可悯。
English: The emperor said, "The guerrilla general died in the service of the state, his loyalty is pitiful."

古文：乃复封兴弟增为龙额侯。
现代文：今韩兴虽以巫蛊见诛，其昆弟宗族应从坐者，可勿论之。 
English: Although Han Xing is now known as a sorcerer, his Kunzite clan should not be confused with those who sit.

古文：增少为郎，诸曹、侍中、光禄大夫，昭帝时至前将军，与大将军霍光定策立宣帝，益封千户。
现代文：于是又封韩兴的弟弟韩增为龙额侯。韩增少年时为郎，做过各曹侍中光禄大夫，昭帝时做过前将军，因同大将军霍光定策拥立宣帝，又加封食邑千户。
English: As a result, Han Xing's younger brother, Han Zeng, was also made the Dragon Prince. When Han Zeng was a boy, he was the son-in-law of a dragon, and he served as the doctor of honor among the Cao attendants, and he was a former general during the reign of Emperor Zhao, and because he and the great general, Huo Guang, decided to support Emperor Xuan, he was also given the title of the thousand households of Zhiyi.

古文：本始二年，五将征匈奴，增将三万骑出云中，斩首百余级，至期而还。
现代文：本始二年，五位将军征讨匈奴，韩增率三万骑兵从云中出发，杀死匈奴一百多人，如期回师。
English: In the first two years of the war, five generals gathered to fight the Huns, and 30,000 cavalrymen set out from the clouds, killed more than 100 Huns, and returned to the division as scheduled.

古文：神爵元年，代张安世为大司马车骑将军，领尚书事。
现代文：神爵元年，代替张安世作大司马车骑将军，兼任尚书。
English: In the first year of Jinshaku, he replaced Zhang Anshi as the grand secretary of the carriage riding general, and also served as Shangshu.

古文：增世贵，幼为忠臣，事三主，重于朝廷。
现代文：韩增世代尊贵，自幼便是忠臣，先后侍奉三主，有功于朝廷。
English: Han Zeng was a member of the noble generation. He was a loyal subject since childhood, served three masters successively, and contributed greatly to the imperial court.

古文：为人宽和自守，以温颜逊辞承上接下，无所失意，保身固宠，不能有所建明。
现代文：他为人宽厚自守，对皇上、下属都是和颜谦辞，没有什么失误，以受宠保身，但没有什么建树。
English: He was a generous and self-sacrificing man, he was kind and humble to the emperor and his subordinates, there were no mistakes, he protected himself by being favored, but there was nothing he could do.

古文：五凤二年薨，谥曰安侯。
现代文：五凤二年去世，封谧号为安侯。
English: Wu Feng died two years later, and his posthumous name was An Hou.

古文：子宝嗣，亡子，国除。
现代文：他的儿子韩宝继承其位，韩宝没有儿子，失去了封国。
English: His son Han Bao succeeded to the throne. Han Bao did not have a son and lost his fiefdom.

古文：成帝时，继功臣后，封增兄子岑为龙额侯，薨，子持弓嗣。
现代文：成帝时，为使功臣后继有人，封韩增哥哥的儿子韩岑为龙额侯。死后，儿子持弓继位。
English: When he became emperor, Han Zeng's elder brother's son, Han Xuan, was made the prince of Longyuan in order to ensure the succession of meritorious vassals. After his death, Han Zeng's son took the throne holding a bow.

古文：王莽败，乃绝。
现代文：王莽败后，就断了侯位。
English: After Wang Mang's defeat, he gave up his post.

古文：赞曰：周室既坏，至春秋末，诸侯耗尽，而炎、黄、唐、虞之苗裔尚犹颇有存者。
现代文：赞曰：周王室已经衰败，到春秋末年，诸侯已减少殆尽，但炎帝、黄帝、唐尧、虞舜的后代却大有人在。
English: Zang said: The Zhou royal family has been in decline. By the end of the Spring and Autumn Period, the number of princes had been reduced to nothing. However, the descendants of Emperor Yan, Emperor Huang, Emperor Tang and Emperor Yu still exist.

古文：秦灭六国，而上古遗烈扫地尽矣。
现代文：秦灭掉了六国，上古的遣业也都不复存在了。
English: Qin wiped out the Six Kingdoms, and the ancient yakuza no longer existed.

古文：楚、汉之际，豪桀相王，唯魏豹、韩信、田儋兄弟为旧国之后，然皆及身而绝。
现代文：楚、汉战争之际，豪杰相继称王，衹有魏豹、韩王信、田儋兄弟是六国的后代，但到了他们这代也都绝迹了。
English: At the time of the Chu-Han War, the heroes successively became kings, including Wei Pan, Han Wangxin, and Tian Qi brothers, who were descendants of the Six Kingdoms, but by their generation they had all disappeared.

古文：横之志节，宾客慕义，犹不能自立，岂非天虖！
现代文：田横的志节，宾客们追慕道义的精神，都不能使国家建立，这难道不是天意吗！
English: Isn't it the will of heaven that Tianyoko's festival and the guests' pursuit of the spirit of morality can't make the country established?

古文：韩氏自弓高后贵显，盖周烈近与！
现代文：韩氏从被封为弓高侯后又开始显贵，可能是因为皇巡作为固曲后裔，相距三伐最近了吧！
English: Mr. Han became prominent again after he was awarded the title of Bow High Marquis, probably because, as a descendant of Guqu, the distance between the three falls is recent!

