古文：《易》曰： 有天地然后有万物，有万物然后有男女，有男女然后有夫妇。 
现代文：《易》说： 有了天地然后才有万物，有了万物然后才有男女，有了男女然后才有夫妇。 
English: "Yi" said: If there is heaven and earth, then there will be all things; if there are all things, then there will be men and women; if there are men and women, then there will be couples.

古文：夫妇之义尚矣哉！周礼，王者立后六宫，三夫人、九嫔、二十七世妇、八十一御妻，以听天下之内治。
现代文：夫妇间的道义是至高无上的周的礼仪制度是，帝王设立后妃，有三夫人、九嫔、二十七世妇、八十一御妻，用来断决天下的妇女教化的问题。
English: Morality between husband and wife is supreme. Zhou's etiquette system was that the emperor set up a concubine with three wives, nine concubines, twenty-seven wives, and eighty-one wives to solve the problem of women's enlightenment in the world.

古文：故《昏义》云： 天子之与后，犹日之与月，阴之与阳，相须而成者也。 
现代文：所以《昏义》说： 天子和帝后，犹如日和月。阴和阳，是相辅相成的。 
English: That's why the "Consciousness" says: The Son of Heaven and the Queen of Heaven are like the sun and the moon. Yin and yang complement each other.

古文：汉初因秦称号，帝母称皇太后，后称皇后，而加以美人、良人、八子、七子之属。
现代文：濩代初期沿袭秦的称号，皇帝的母亲称皇太后，皇帝的妻子称皇后，其余的妇人则加上美人、良人、八子、七子这些称号。
English: At the beginning of the Qin Dynasty, the emperor's mother was called the empress dowager, the emperor's wife was called the empress, and the remaining women were given the titles of beauty, lover, eight children, and seven children.

古文：至孝武制婕妤之徒凡十四等。
现代文：到垄茎时确定婕妤之类的称号共十四等。
English: When it comes to rhizomes, there are a total of fourteen classifications for determining the type of alfalfa.

古文：降及魏、晋，母后之号，皆因汉法；自夫人以下，世有增损焉。
现代文：自魏、置以来，母后的称号，都沿袭漠代的规则；从夫人以下，各代有增有减。
English: Since the Wei and Jie Dynasties, the title of empress dowager has followed the rules of the desert dynasties; from the wife down, each generation has increased and decreased.

古文：高祖拨乱反正，深鉴奢逸，恶衣菲食，务先节俭。
现代文：高祖治平乱世、回复正常，深以骄奢淫逸导致亡国的先例为借鉴，就吃粗劣的食物穿简陋的衣物，凡事务必先讲求节俭。
English: Gao Zu ruled the turbulent world and restored normalcy, taking the precedent of the country's downfall caused by arrogance and lasciviousness as a reference. He ate poor food and wore poor clothing, and he had to be frugal in all matters.

古文：配德早终，长秋旷位，嫔嫱之数，无所改作。
现代文：他的原配妻子早亡，皇后的位置一直空着，嫔嫱的数目，没有什么改动。
English: His original wife died young, the position of empress has been vacant, and the number of empresses has not changed.

古文：太祖献皇后张氏，讳尚柔，范阳方城人也。
现代文：太宗、世担出自分封在外的皇嗣，而妃子们都在先前就殂逝了，他们又不营建后妃闺房增其数目。现在撰写记录的几位，祇是作为补阙备用罢了。
English: The Emperor Taizong and the world provided their own heirs who were excluded, and the concubines had all died before, and they did not build a concubine's boudoir to increase their number. The few who are writing records now are only as a backup.

古文：祖次惠，宋濮阳太守。
现代文：越的幽题，名龌，溯姻人。祖父捣，塞选盐太守。
English: The more beautiful the theme, the more famous the name, and the more distant the in-laws. Grandfather Mashi, Ceselected Salt Taishu.

古文：后母萧氏，即文帝从姑。
现代文：皇后生母萧氏，即是塞童的堂姑。
English: The Empress's birth mother, Lady Xiao, was Saido's cousin.

古文：后，宋元嘉中嫔于文帝，生长沙宣武王懿、永阳昭王敷，次生高祖。
现代文：皇后在塞丞台年间作了塞童的嫔，生了长沙宣武王芦登、永阳昭王芦题，其次生了直担。
English: During the reign of Emperor Xizong, the empress was the mother of Emperor Xizong's children, and gave birth to Emperor Xuanwu of Changsha, Emperor Lu Deng, Emperor Zhao of Yongyang, and Emperor Zhitang.

古文：初，后尝于室内，忽见庭前昌蒲生花，光彩照灼，非世中所有。
现代文：当初，皇后曾在屋内，忽然看见堂前的昌蒲生花，光彩闪灼，不是尘世间有的。
English: At first, the empress had been indoors, when she suddenly saw the magnolia blossoms in front of the hall, shining brightly, unlike anything else in the world.

古文：后惊视，谓侍者曰： 汝见不？ 
现代文：皇后吃惊地看了后，对侍者说： 你见到了没有? 
English: The Queen looked startled and said to the waiter: "Did you see that?

古文：对曰： 不见。 
现代文：回答说： 没见到。 
English: He replied: I didn't see it.

古文：后曰： 尝闻见者当富贵。 
现代文：皇后说： 我曾听说凡看得见的人就可获得富贵。 
English: The queen said, "I have heard that anyone who can see can become rich.

古文：因遽取吞之。
现代文：因而急忙摘取来吞下。
English: So he hastily picked it up and swallowed it.

古文：是月产高祖。
现代文：这个月就生了高祖。
English: This month, Gaozu was born.

古文：将产之夜，后见庭内若有衣冠陪列焉。
现代文：将要生的那一夜，皇后看见堂内就像有衣冠之士重叠排列。
English: On the night she was to be born, the Empress saw that the people in the hall were lined up on top of each other like people wearing crowns.

古文：次生衡阳宣王畅、义兴昭长公主令。
现代文：其次生了衡阳宣王萧畅、盏兴昭长公士令媳。
English: The next to give birth were Hengyang's Xuan Wang Xiao Chang and Zhan Xing Zhao Chang's daughter-in-law.

古文：宋泰始七年，殂于秣陵县同夏里舍，葬武进县东城里山。
现代文：宋泰始七年，在秣陵县同夏里的居室殂逝，葬在武进县东城里山。
English: Song Taishi was seven years old when he passed away in Tongxia Li's living room in Fuling County. He was buried in Dongchengli Mountain in Wujin County.

古文：天监元年五月甲辰，追上尊号为皇后。谥曰献。
现代文：天监元年闰四月甲辰曰，追加尊号为皇后，谧号献。
English: In the leap month of April in the first year of Tianjing, the additional honorific title was given to the empress, and the posthumous title was presented.

古文：父穆之，字思静，晋司空华六世孙。
现代文：父亲穆之，字思静，晋司空张华的第六代孙。
English: His father Mu Zhi, also known as Si Jing, was the sixth-generation grandson of the Jin emperor Kuanzhang Hua.

古文：曾祖舆坐华诛，徙兴古，未至召还。
现代文：曾祖张舆因张华牵连获罪被责惩，调职到兴直，但还未到那裹，就被召回。
English: Zengzu Zhang Myou was punished for the crime of implicating Zhang Hua and transferred to Xingzhi, but before he got there, he was recalled.

古文：及过江，为丞相掾，太子舍人。
现代文：等到南渡过江后，任丞相掾、太子舍人。
English: After crossing the river to the south, he was appointed chancellor and crown prince.

古文：穆之少方雅，有识鉴。
现代文：穆之年轻时方正文雅，有见识。
English: When Mu Zhi was young, Fang Zheng was elegant and insightful.

古文：宋元嘉中，为员外散骑侍郎。
现代文：宋元嘉年间，任员外散骑侍郎。
English: During the Song and Yuan Dynasties, he was appointed as a non-commissioned officer riding horseback.

古文：与吏部尚书江湛、太子左率袁淑善，淑荐之于始兴王浚，浚深引纳焉。
现代文：与吏部尚书江湛、太子左率袁淑交情好，袁淑向赵星王塑瞳荐举他，型坛深加接纳。
English: He had a good friendship with Shangshu Jiangtang of the cadre department and Yuan Shuxu, the left-hand leader of the prince. Yuan Shuxu recommended him to Zhao Xingwang Shuxiu, and the template was deeply accepted.

古文：穆之鉴其祸萌，思违其难，言于湛求外出。
现代文：垂蛙察觉他会有灾祸发生，想避开这场祸害，就向江湛请求外出任职。
English: The frog realized that a calamity would happen to him, and wanted to avoid this calamity, he asked Jiang Zhan to go out to work.

古文：湛将用为东县，固乞远郡，久之，得为宁远将军、交址太守。
现代文：江湛将要委任他到束县，他则坚持请求到远郡去，很久后，他得任宁远将军、交耻太守。
English: Jiang Zhan was going to appoint him to Sok County, but he insisted on going to Yuan County. After a long time, he was appointed as the General of Ningyuan and the Shameful Governor.

古文：治有异绩。
现代文：治理地方上有不平凡的政绩。
English: There have been extraordinary achievements in local governance.

古文：会刺史死，交土大乱，穆之威怀循拊，境内以宁。
现代文：后来恰逢刺史死，交地大乱，垂蛙胸怀威严进行安抚，境内因此安宁。
English: Later, it coincided with the death of Jishi, and there was a great disturbance in the transfer of land. Dang Frog calmly and majestically carried out the pacification, and the territory was therefore peaceful.

古文：宋文帝闻之嘉焉，将以为交州刺史，会病卒。
现代文：塞文帝听说这事后嘉奖他，将要任用他作蛮业刺史，他恰在遣时病死了。
English: When Severinus heard of this, he praised him afterwards and was about to appoint him to write a history of barbarism, but he died of illness just as he was about to do so.

古文：子弘籍，字真艺，齐初为镇西参军，卒于官。
现代文：儿子弘籍，字真艺，变初任镇西参军，死在任上。
English: His son, Hironori, alias Shingei, became the first to join the army in the west of the town and died in office.

古文：高祖践阼，追赠穆之光禄大夫，加金章。
现代文：高祖即皇帝位，追赠穆之官衔为光禄大夫，加金章。
English: Gaozu, that is, the emperor's throne, posthumously awarded Mu the official title of Guanglu Doctor, and a gold medal.

古文：又诏曰： 亡舅齐镇西参军，素风雅猷，夙肩名辈，降年不永，早世潜辉。
现代文：又下诏令说： 亡故的舅舅齐镇西参军，道德风尚纯洁高雅，早年身负高贵的名望辈分，降生后年寿却不长久，早逝掩藏了他的光辉。
English: The imperial edict also said: "The late uncle Qi Zhenxi joined the army. His moral style was pure and elegant. In his early years, he was a member of a noble and famous generation. However, his longevity did not last long after his birth. His early death concealed his brilliance.

古文：朕少离苦辛，情地弥切，虽宅相克成，辂车靡赠，兴言永往，触目恸心。
现代文：我年轻时遭际艰辛，处境严峻，外甥我虽说能成就显贵，却没有赠予遇他天子所用的辖车，现在言及永往之人，真是即景生情、触目伤心。
English: When I was young, I suffered hardships and was in a serious situation. Although my nephew could achieve great things, I did not give him the chariot used by the son of heaven. Now, when I talk about those who have passed away, it is really sad and sad.

古文：可追赠廷尉卿。 
现代文：可以追赠他为廷尉卿。 
English: He can be posthumously made a Lord Lieutenant.

古文：弘籍无子，从父弟弘策以第三子缵为嗣，别有传。
现代文：弘签没有儿子，叔伯弟弟弘策让他的第三个儿子张缆作为他的继承人，另外有传。
English: Hong Qi did not have a son, but his uncle and younger brother Hong Ce had his third son, Zhang Kan, as his heir, and there is another legend.

古文：高祖德皇后郗氏，讳徽，高平金乡人也。
现代文：梁武帝萧衍皇后，名徽，高平金乡人也。
English: Emperor Liangwu, Empress Xiaoyan, the name of the emblem, Gaoping Jin, also a villager.

古文：祖绍，国子祭酒，领东海王师。
现代文：祖父郗绍，任国子祭酒，兼任束海王的老师。
English: His grandfather, Zou Shao, served as Kuniko's sacrificial cupbearer, and also served as Sokai Wang's teacher.

古文：父烨，太子舍人，早卒。
现代文：父亲郗烨，任太子舍人，早死。
English: His father, the crown prince, abdicated and died young.

古文：初，后母寻阳公主方娠，梦当生贵子。
现代文：当初，皇后的母亲寻阳公主刚怀孕，做梦显示该生贵子。
English: At first, the empress's mother, Princess Guanyang, had just become pregnant, and a dream showed that the baby would be a prince.

古文：及生后，有赤光照于室内，器物尽明，家人皆怪之。
现代文：到生皇后时，有红光在室内照耀，器物都被照亮了，家人都觉得这事奇怪。
English: When the queen was born, a red light shone in the room, illuminating all the utensils. The family thought this was strange.

古文：巫言此女光采异常，将有所妨，乃于水滨祓除之。
现代文：巫师说这个女儿光彩异常，将对家人有所妨害，于是就在水边为她举行了祓除仪式以除去凶垢。
English: The sorcerer said that the daughter was unusually beautiful and would be a hindrance to the family, so he held an exorcism ceremony for her at the water's edge to remove the evil.

古文：后幼而明慧，善隶书，读史传。
现代文：皇后年幼时就聪慧，擅长隶书，喜欢读史传。
English: When she was young, the empress was intelligent, excelled at calligraphy, and enjoyed reading historical biographies.

古文：女工之事，无不闲习。
现代文：纺绣缝纫等女红之事，没有不熟练通晓的。
English: There is no such thing as a spinster who is not proficient in spinning, embroidery and sewing.

古文：宋后废帝将纳为后；齐初，安陆王缅又欲婚：郗氏并辞以女疾，乃止。
现代文：宋后废帝将要娶她作皇后；齐初，安陆王萧缅又想与她成婚：郗氏藉口有妇女病都一概拒绝了，这才停止。
English: Emperor Song was going to marry her as his empress; at the very beginning, Anlu King Xiao Ming also wanted to marry her: the excuse of "women's diseases" was completely rejected, and this only stopped.

古文：建元未，高祖始娉焉。
现代文：建元末，高祖才得以与她订婚。
English: At the end of the 19th century, Gao Zu was able to get engaged to her.

古文：生永兴公主玉姚，永世公主玉婉，永康公主玉嬛。
现代文：生了永兴公主玉姚，永世公主玉婉，永康公主玉握。
English: Yongxing Princess Yuyao, Yongxing Princess Yuwan and Yongkang Princess Yu Jia were born.

古文：建武五年，高祖为雍州刺史，先之镇，后乃迎后。
现代文：丞台元年，直担任壅蛆刺史，先到镇，后才迎接皇后去。
English: In the first year of the reign of Emperor Taizong, he was in charge of the imperial eunuchs. He went to the town first, and then went to meet the empress.

古文：至州未几，永元元年八月殂于襄阳官舍，时年三十二。
现代文：到州中不久，永元元年八月在襄阳的官宅殂逝，时年三十二岁。
English: Shortly after arriving in Suzhou, Yongyuan passed away at the age of thirty-two in August of the first year in the official residence in Xiangyang.

古文：其年归葬南徐州南东海武进县东城里山。
现代文：这一年归葬在南徐州南束海武进县东城里山。
English: This year, he was buried in Dongchengli Mountain, Nanzukaihwujin County, South Xuzhou.

古文：中兴二年，齐朝进高祖位相国，封十郡，梁公，诏赠后为梁公妃。
现代文：中兴二年，齐朝升高祖职为相国，封十郡、梁公，下诏追封皇后为梁公妃。
English: In the second year of the rise of the Qing Dynasty, the Qi Dynasty elevated the position of the ancestor to the status of a sister state, sealed ten counties and Liang Gong, and the next imperial edict was to seal the empress as Liang Gongfei.

古文：高祖践阼，追崇为皇后。
现代文：高祖即皇帝位，就追加她尊号为皇后。
English: Gaozu, that is, the emperor, added her honorific title of empress.

古文：有司议谥，吏部尚书兼右仆射臣约议曰： 表号垂名，义昭不朽。
现代文：有司议定她的谧号时，吏部尚书兼右仆射大臣沈面建议说： 表明谧号垂留嘉名，用意在于使之永远不朽。
English: When her posthumous name was being discussed, Shang Shu of the General Staff Department and Shen Mian, the right-hand man of the Minister of Propaganda, suggested, "Let it be known that her posthumous name will be immortalized forever."

古文：先皇后应祥月德，比载坤灵，柔范阴化，仪形自远。
现代文：先皇后应玉兔的祥和，并充满大地的灵气，具有阴柔的风范以作表率，容貌姿态自是深沉。
English: First, the empress should be peaceful like the jade rabbit, and full of the aura of the earth. She has a feminine demeanor to set an example, and her appearance and posture are deep.

古文：伣天作合，义先造舟，而神猷夙掩，所隔升运。宜式遵景行，用昭大典。
现代文：天作之合，义先作桥，而神道早早被掩蔽，升登的吉运被阻隔，应该遵照她高尚的德行，以此来显明国家的大典。
English: Heaven made the match, righteousness built the bridge, but Shinto was covered up early, and the good fortune of ascending was blocked. It is necessary to follow her noble virtue to reveal the country's grand script.

古文：谨按《谥法》，忠和纯备曰德，贵而好礼曰德。
现代文：在此我们恭谨地按照《谧法》来定，忠和纯兼备叫德，高贵而善礼叫德。
English: Here, we respectfully follow the "Law of the Dragon" to determine that loyalty and purity are both virtues, and nobility and courtesy are virtues.

古文：宜崇曰德皇后。 
现代文：应该尊号为德皇后。 
English: She should be called the Empress of Germany.

古文：诏从之。
现代文：皇上韶令依从。
English: He complied.

古文：陵曰修陵。
现代文：她的陵墓称为脩陵。
English: Her mausoleum is known as Gongling.

古文：后父烨，诏赠金紫光禄大夫。
现代文：皇后的父亲郗烨，被下诏追封为金紫光禄大夫。
English: The Empress's father, Zou, was posthumously awarded the title of "Doctor of the Golden Purple Light."

古文：烨尚宋文帝女寻阳公主，齐初降封松滋县君。
现代文：整銮娶宋文帝的女儿寻阳公主，蛮初贬封为松滋县君。
English: Zhengyu married Song Emperor's daughter, Princess Huanyang, and was at first demoted to Songzhi County.

古文：烨子泛，中军临川王记室参军。
现代文：整烟的儿子塑泛，是中军临川的记室参军。
English: Plastic Pan, the son of the whole smoke, is the record room of the Chinese army in Linchuan to join the army.

古文：太宗简皇后王氏，讳灵宾，琅邪临沂人也。
现代文：太宗的简皇后王氏，名灵宾，琅邪临沂人。
English: Emperor Taizong's Empress Jian Wang, a famous spiritual figure, was a follower of the evil Linyi sect.

古文：祖俭，太尉、南昌文宪公。
现代文：祖父王俭，是太尉、南昌文宪公。
English: His grandfather, Wang Jian, was a second lieutenant and the Prince of Nanchang.

古文：后幼而柔明淑德，叔父暕见之曰： 吾家女师也。 
现代文：皇后幼年就温柔明智贤淑，叔父王味见了她之后说： 她是我们家女人的楷模。 
English: As a child, the empress was gentle, wise and virtuous. After Uncle Wang met her, he said, "She is the model of a woman in our family."

古文：天监十一年，拜晋安王妃。
现代文：天监十一年，拜为晋安王妃。
English: In the eleventh year of the celestial overseer, she was crowned as the princess of Jinan.

古文：生哀太子大器，南郡王大连，长山公主妙纮。
现代文：生了哀太子大器，南郡王左连，长山公主塑塑。
English: Prince Ying Zi Daqi was born, Nan County Wang Zu Lian, and Changshan Princess Shaping.

古文：中大通三年十月，拜皇太子妃。
现代文：中大通三年十月，立为皇太子妃。
English: In October of the following year, Nakamichi became crown princess.

古文：太清三年三月，薨于永福省，时年四十五。
现代文：立渣三年三月，在丞福省去世，时年四十五岁。
English: Li Jia passed away at the age of 45 in March of the third year of his reign in Chengfu Province.

古文：其年，太宗即位，追崇为皇后，谥曰简。
现代文：这一年，太宗即皇帝位，追加她尊号为皇后，谧号简。
English: In the same year, Emperor Taizong ascended to the throne, adding her honorific title of Empress and the nickname Jane.

古文：大宝元年九月，葬庄陵。
现代文：大宝元年九月，葬在庄陵。
English: In September of the first year of the Great Treasure, he was buried in the village mausoleum.

古文：先是诏曰： 简皇后窀穸有期。
现代文：在此以前曾有皇命说： 简皇后的丧葬应有期限。
English: Previously, a royal decree had said: "There should be a time limit for the funeral of Empress Jane."

古文：昔西京霸陵，因山为藏；东汉寿陵，流水而已。
现代文：过去西京的霸陵，凭藉山势而隐藏；东汉帝后生前预筑的寿陵，不过是依顺水势而建罢了。
English: In the past, the domineering tombs of the Western Capital were hidden by the mountains; the funerary tombs pre-built during the lifetime of the Eastern Han Dynasty emperors were only built in accordance with the water flow.

古文：朕属值时艰，岁饥民弊，方欲以身率下，永示敦朴。
现代文：我在位正值时势艰难，年成饥荒、百姓疲乏，正打算亲身作臣下的楷模，长久地表率敦厚淳朴。
English: I am reigning at a time when the situation is difficult, the year is full of famine, the people are tired, I am planning to personally serve as a model for my subjects, and I hope to be dignified and simple for a long time.

古文：今所营庄陵，务存约俭。 
现代文：现在所建造的庄陵，务必保持节俭。 
English: It is necessary to be thrifty in the construction of the mausoleum.

古文：又诏金紫光禄大夫萧子范为哀策文。
现代文：又下韶命令金紫光禄大夫萧子范作哀策文。
English: He also ordered Jin Zi Guanglu's doctor Xiao Zi Fan to write a lamentation.

古文：父骞，字思寂，本名玄成，与齐高帝偏讳同，故改焉。
现代文：父亲王骞，字思寂，本名玄成，与齐高帝的偏名相同，所以改了。
English: His father, Wang Xizhao, whose real name was Xuancheng, had the same middle name as Emperor Qigong, so he changed it.

古文：以公子起家员外郎，迁太子洗马，袭封南昌县公，出为义兴太守。
现代文：凭着公子的身份从家中被征召起用任员外郎，后升职为太子洗马，承袭祖爵封为南昌县公，出任义兴太守。
English: By virtue of his status as a prince, he was conscripted from his family to serve as an appointed official, after which he was promoted to the position of prince of Saima, inherited the ancestral title of Nanchang County, and served as the governor of Yixing.

古文：还为骠骑谘议，累迁黄门郎，司徒右长史。
现代文：回京任骠骑谘议，多次升职为黄门郎，司徒右长史。
English: He returned to Beijing to serve as a riding adviser, and was promoted to Huangmen Lang several times.

古文：性凝简，不狎当世。
现代文：他生性沉稳简慢，不喜欢迎合当世。
English: By nature, he is calm and simple, and does not like to cater to the modern world.

古文：尝从容谓诸子曰： 吾家门户，所谓素族，自可随流平进，不须苟求也。 
现代文：曾经安闲舒缓地对诸子说： 论我家门第，正是所谓的普通氏族，自然可以顺流按资历进升，不必去苛求。 
English: He once said to his sons in a relaxed and soothing manner, "As far as my family lineage is concerned, it is precisely the so-called ordinary clan that can naturally be promoted according to seniority, without having to be demanding.

古文：永元末，迁侍中，不拜。
现代文：永元末，升职为侍中，但没有拜受。
English: At the end of the 11th century, he was promoted to the position of chamberlain, but he did not receive it.

古文：高祖霸府建，引为大司马谘议参军，俄迁侍中，领越骑校尉。
现代文：高祖的霸府建立，就引进他任大司马谘议参军，不久升职侍中，领越骑校尉。
English: When Gao Zu's hegemonic government was established, he was brought in to join the army as a senior steward and soon rose to the rank of chamberlain, leading the cavalry regiment.

古文：高祖受禅，诏曰： 庭坚世祀，靡辍于宗周，乐毅锡壤，乃昭于洪汉。
现代文：直祖接受禅让后，就下令说： 庭坚的世代祭祀，直至宗周不曾停止，乐毅受封土地，在大连仍然昭明。
English: After the direct ancestor accepted Zen's concession, he ordered: "Tu Jian's generation of sacrifices did not stop until Zong Zhou, and the land where Le Yi was sealed is still clear in Dalian.

古文：齐故太尉南昌公，含章履道，草昧兴齐，谟明翊赞，同符在昔。
现代文：查原来的太尉卢旦公，内怀美质遵行正道，在混乱的时世中助君创建了齐，辅佐扶助谋略高明，与往昔的贤臣相同。
English: The original Taifeng Lu Danggong, with virtue in his heart, followed the right path. In the chaotic times, he created Qi, assisted and supported the wise, the same as the wise men of the past.

古文：虽子房之蔚为帝师，文若之隆比王佐，无以尚也。
现代文：虽然子房做皇帝的老师兴盛一世，文若身列帝王的辅佐兴隆一时，也没有能超过他。
English: Although Zifang was the emperor's teacher, Geng Sheng I, and Wen Ruo was the emperor's assistant, Geng Sheng Rong, they could not surpass him.

古文：朕膺历受图，惟新宝命，莘莘玉帛，升降有典。
现代文：我承受国家之命登上帝位，应运而兴起，惟新国家运命，众多财物，赏罚应有制度。
English: I ascended to the throne at the behest of the state, and arose in response to the movement, but the new national destiny, many possessions, reward and punishment should have a system.

古文：永言前代，敬惟徽烈，匪直懋勋，义兼怀树。
现代文：用辞章歌咏前代，敬重的是宏伟的事业，而不仅仅是大功劳，兼有怀念仁政的含义。
English: The previous generation is eulogized with the words, and respect is given to the grand cause, not just the great merit, which also has the meaning of nostalgia for benevolent politics.

古文：可降封南昌公为侯，食邑千户。 
现代文：可以降封南昌县公为侯，封地一千户。 
English: The fief of Nanchang County can be reduced to 1,000 households.

古文：骞袭爵，迁度支尚书。
现代文：王画承袭祖爵，升职为度支尚书。
English: Wang Ga succeeded his ancestor and was promoted to Doushi Shangshu.

古文：天监四年，出为东阳太守，寻徙吴郡。
现代文：天监四年，出任塞匮太守，不久又调职到呈璺。
English: For four years, he served as the celestial inspector, and was soon transferred to the position of chancellor.

古文：八年，入为太府卿，领后军将军，迁太常卿。
现代文：八年，入京任太府卿，领后军将军，升职太常卿。
English: Eight years later, he entered Beijing as Taifu-kyo, led the rearguard as a general, and was promoted to Taijo-kyo.

古文：十一年，迁中书令，加员外散骑常侍。
现代文：十一年，升职为中书令，加员外散骑常侍。
English: In the eleventh year of his reign, he was promoted to the position of Chushiro, and the number of non-regular attendants was increased.

古文：时高祖于钟山造大爱敬寺，骞旧墅在寺侧，有良田八十余顷，即晋丞相王导赐田也。
现代文：当时产担在钟山建造大爱敬寺，王画的旧别墅在寺的一旁，有良田八十多顷，是先祖晋丞相王遵受赐的田亩。
English: At that time, the production manager was building the Dai Aikei Temple in Zhongshan, and Wang Yao's old villa was next to the temple. There were more than eighty hectares of good fields, which were the fields given to the ancestors of Emperor Jinjo.

古文：高祖遣主书宣旨就骞求市，欲以施寺。
现代文：直担派主书通告帝意向王画要求买下造田亩，想拿来送给寺庙。
English: Directly responsible for sending the main letter to notify the emperor's intention to buy the mu of land for the painting, and wanted to give it to the temple.

古文：骞答旨云： 此田不卖；若是敕取，所不敢言。 
现代文：王骞答覆帝意说： 造田我不卖；如果这是皇帝下令要拿去，那就不敢说什么了。 
English: Wang Yao replied to the emperor, "I won't sell the farmland; if the emperor ordered me to take it, then I wouldn't dare to say anything."

古文：酬对又脱略。
现代文：他的应答又表现得轻慢不拘。
English: His response was again dismissive.

古文：高祖怒，遂付市评田价，以直逼还之。
现代文：于是高祖很生气，就交付市场评估造田亩的价格，然后按价值强迫偿还他。
English: As a result, Gao Zu was very angry, he delivered the market to assess the price of the mu of cultivated land, and then forced to repay him according to the value.

古文：由是忤旨，出为吴兴太守。
现代文：由于这事抵触了帝意，就被调出京任吴兴太守。
English: As this conflicted with the emperor's wishes, he was transferred out of Beijing to become Wu Xing's governor-general.

古文：在郡卧疾不视事。
现代文：在郡中他卧病不办公。
English: He is on sick leave from his county job.

古文：征还，复为度支尚书，加给事中，领射声校尉。
现代文：后来征召回朝，重新任度支尚书，加给事中，领射声校尉。
English: Later, he was called back to the imperial court and reappointed to the post of imperial secretary. In addition, he was promoted to the rank of captain.

古文：以母忧去职。
现代文：后因母亲逝世而离职。
English: Xie Chan left his job because of his mother's death.

古文：普通三年十月卒，时年四十九。
现代文：普通三年十月去世，时年四十九岁。
English: He died in October of the same year, at the age of 49.

古文：诏赠侍中、金紫光禄大夫，谥曰安。
现代文：下诏追封为侍中、金紫光禄大夫，谧号安。
English: He was posthumously awarded the title of Samurai Junior Middle Officer, Jin Zi Guanglu Doctor, and his posthumous name was An.

古文：子规袭爵，别有传。
现代文：他的儿子王规承袭祖爵，另外有传。
English: His son, Wang Jie, inherited the title, and there is another legend.

古文：高祖丁贵嫔，讳令光，谯国人也，世居襄阳。
现代文：高祖的丁贵嫔，名令光，谯国人，世代居住在襄阳。
English: Gao Zu's Ding Guizhou, a famous light, a native of Guizhou, has lived in Xiangyang for generations.

古文：贵嫔生于樊城，有神光之异，紫烟满室，故以 光 为名。
现代文：贵嫔生在樊城，生的时候有奇特的神光，满屋紫烟，所以用 光 来取名。
English: He was born in Lucheng. When he was born, there was a strange divine light, and the house was full of purple smoke, so he was named after the light.

古文：相者云： 此女当大贵。 
现代文：看相的人说： 这个女儿会有大贵。 
English: The person who saw the photo said: This daughter will be very expensive.

古文：高祖临州，丁氏因人以闻。
现代文：高祖到她所在的州，丁氏就通过别人向高祖介绍。
English: When Gaozu came to her state, Ms. Ding introduced him to Gaozu through others.

古文：贵嫔时年十四，高祖纳焉。
现代文：贵嫔当时才十四岁，高祖就娶了她。
English: Guizhen was only fourteen years old at the time, and Gaozu married her.

古文：初，贵嫔生而有赤痣在左臂，治之不灭，至是无何忽失所在。
现代文：当初，贵嫔出生时左臂上有颗红痣，治取过却没弄掉，到遣时候无缘无故忽然消失了。
English: At first, Guizhou Guizhou was born with a red birthmark on her left arm. Although it was treated, it did not go away. When she was discharged, it suddenly disappeared for no reason.

古文：事德皇后小心祗敬，尝于供养经案之侧，仿佛若见神人，心独异之。
现代文：她侍候德皇后小心恭敬，曾经在供奉神佛经典的几案旁，仿佛看见了神人，她心裹独自感到奇怪。
English: She served Empress De carefully and respectfully, and once, beside several cases of offering to the gods and Buddhas, it was as if she saw a god-man. She felt strangely alone.

古文：高祖义师起，昭明太子始诞育，贵嫔与太子留在州城。
现代文：高祖义军兴起，逭时昭明太子才诞生，贵嫔和太子都留在州城。
English: Gao Zu's volunteer army arose, and it was only when Zou Shouming was crowned that the prince was born. Both Gui Zou and the prince stayed in Suzhou.

古文：京邑平，乃还京都。
现代文：京都地区平定后，才回到京都。
English: He returned to Kyoto only after the region had been pacified.

古文：天监元年五月，有司奏为贵人，未拜；其年八月，又为贵嫔，位在三夫人上，居于显阳殿。
现代文：天监元年五月，有司奏请封她为贵人，但还没有正式册立；这一年的八月，她又被封为贵嫔，地位在三夫人之上，住在显阳殿。
English: In May of the first year of the Tenko era, Siso asked for her to be made a noblewoman, but it has not yet been officially established; in August of this year, she was again made a noblewoman, with a status above the three ladies, living in the Hsien Yang Palace.

古文：及太子定位，有司奏曰：礼，母以子贵。
现代文：等到确立了太子，有司就上奏说：按照礼仪，母亲凭靠儿子而颢贵。
English: When the crown prince was confirmed, Yushi made a report saying, "According to etiquette, a mother is more valuable because of her son.

古文：皇储所生，不容无敬。
现代文：生皇太子的母亲，不容许人们不尊敬。
English: The mother, who gave birth to the crown prince, does not allow people to disrespect her.

古文：宋泰豫元年六月，议百官以吏敬敬帝所生陈太妃，则宋明帝在时，百官未有敬。
现代文：宋泰豫元年六月，曾主张百官用吏的身份来尊敬敬帝的生母陈太妃，这样宋明帝在位时，百官没有不尊敬她的。
English: In June of the first year of Song Taiyuan, Song Taiyuan had advocated that the officials should use their official status to respect Chen Taifi, the birth mother of Emperor Qianlong. Thus, when Emperor Songming was on the throne, the officials did not disrespect her.

古文：臣窃谓 母以子贵 ，义著《春秋》。
现代文：我在此私自认为， 母亲凭靠儿子而显贵 ，意义著录在《春秋》中。
English: Here, I personally think that mothers are distinguished by their sons, which is recorded in "Spring and Autumn."

古文：皇太子副贰宸极，率土咸执吏礼，既尽礼皇储，则所生不容无敬。
现代文：皇太子辅佐帝位，疆域内的人都恪守吏的礼节来对待他，既然已对皇太子尽了礼数，那么不容许不尊敬他的生母。
English: The crown prince is the heir to the throne, and people in the territory treat him according to the etiquette of officials. Since they have done their best for the crown prince, it is unacceptable to disrespect his birth mother.

古文：但帝王妃嫔，义与外隔，以理以例，无致敬之道也。
现代文：但是帝王的妃嫔，内宫的义理与外边一向是分开的，凭法则凭先例，都没有向她们表达敬意的道理。
English: But the emperors' concubines, the inner palace of justice and the outside world have always been separate, by law by precedent, there is no reason to express respect to them.

古文：今皇太子圣睿在躬，储礼夙备，子贵之道，抑有旧章。
现代文：现今皇太子身怀聪明，太子的礼仪早就已齐备，母以子贵的道理，则有原来的法规。
English: Nowadays, the crown prince is clever, the prince's etiquette has long been prepared, and the principle of mother and child is precious, there are original regulations.

古文：王侯妃主常得通信问者，及六宫三夫人虽与贵嫔同列，并应以敬皇太子之礼敬贵嫔。
现代文：王侯妃子公主常能流通音讯问候者，及六宫三夫人虽然与贵嫔地位相同，但却应该用尊敬皇太子的礼仪来同样地尊敬贵嫔。
English: Princes, princesses, princes' wives, princesses, princes' wives, princes' wives, princes' wives, princes' wives, princes' wives, princes' wives, princes' wives, princes' wives, princes' wives, princes' wives, princes' wives, princes' wives, princes' wives, princes' wives, princes' wives, princes' wives, princes' wives, princes' wives, princes' wives, princes' wives, princes' wives, princes' wives, princes' wives, princesses' wives, princes' wives, princes' wives, princes' wives, princes' wives, princes' wives, princes' wives, wives' wives' wives, wives' wives' wives' wives'

古文：宋元嘉中，始兴、武陵国臣并以吏敬敬所生潘淑妃、路淑媛。
现代文：宋元嘉年间，始兴、武陵国的臣子都用吏的身份来同样地尊敬皇太子的生母潘淑妃、路淑媛。
English: During the Song and Yuan dynasties, the courtiers of Shixing and Wuling used their official status to similarly honor the crown prince's birth mother, Pan Shuxi and Lu Shuyuan.

古文：贵嫔于宫臣虽非小君，其义不异，与宋泰豫朝议百官以吏敬敬帝所生，事义正同。
现代文：对于宫中的臣于们来说贵嫔虽说不是诸侯的妻子，但遣义理其实也没有不同，与宋泰豫朝主张百官用吏的身份去尊敬敬帝的生母的事理正是相同的。
English: For the courtiers in the palace, although the noblewoman is not the wife of the princes, the principle of sending the noblewoman is actually no different. It is the same principle as the Song and Taiyuan Dynasties advocated that the officials should respect the birth mother of the emperor.

古文：谓宫阉施敬宜同吏礼，诣神虎门奉笺致谒；年节称庆，亦同如此。
现代文：认为太子官属实施的尊敬，应当同吏的礼仪相同，到神虎门恭敬地捧着笺叩见；过年过节时应道贺，也同这一样。
English: It is believed that the respect shown by members of the crown prince's staff should be the same as the etiquette of officials, and they should respectfully hold the gong and knock at the gate of the gods; the same should be done when congratulating the Chinese New Year.

古文：妇人无阃外之事，贺及问讯笺什，所由官报闻而已。
现代文：妇女没有闺门外的事情，如果道贺涉及问讯笺奏等事务的话，就由主管的官吏上报即可。
English: Women do not have affairs outside the boudoir. If the greeting involves matters such as asking questions and playing music, it can be reported by the responsible official.

古文：夫妇人之道，义无自专，若不仰系于夫，则当俯系于子。
现代文：妇女的规则，从义理上来说是不能自专，如果不是卜攀于夫，那也应是下附于子。
English: Women's rule, from the point of view of justice, is that they cannot be self-exclusive. If they are not subordinate to their husbands, they should be subordinate to their children.

古文：荣亲之道，应极其所荣，未有子所行而所从不足者也。
现代文：使亲人荣耀的道理，应当是使亲人荣耀到极点，还没有儿子所享受的待遇而生母却享受不到的道理。
English: The principle of glorifying relatives should be to glorify relatives to the extreme, not to have the treatment enjoyed by the son, but the birth mother can not enjoy the truth.

古文：故《春秋》凡王命为夫人，则礼秩与子等。
现代文：所以在《春秋》中凡是被帝王封为夫人的，就应在礼仪品级俸禄上舆儿子相同。
English: Therefore, in "Spring and Autumn," anyone who is given the title of wife by the emperor should receive the same salary as the eldest son.

古文：列国虽异于储贰，而从尊之义不殊。前代依准，布在旧事。
现代文：各封国诸王虽然与太子不相同，但尊从尊者这个义理并没有什么不同，前代依据的准则，都表述在前代的史实中。
English: Although the kings of various countries are not the same as the princes, the principle of respecting and obeying the reverend is no different. The principles of the previous generation are expressed in the historical facts of the previous generation.

古文：贵嫔载诞元良，克固大业，礼同储君，实惟旧典。
现代文：贵嫔生育了太子，能巩固国家的大业，礼制上应与太子相同，这确实也是前代的制度。
English: When a noblewoman gives birth to a prince, she can consolidate the great cause of the country, and the etiquette should be the same as that of the prince. This is indeed the system of the previous generation.

古文：寻前代始置贵嫔，位次皇后，爵无所视；其次职者，位视相国，爵比诸侯王。
现代文：探寻前代才设置了贵嫔，地位次于皇后，爵位之高没有可与之相比的；再次一等的职位，地位可与相国看齐，爵位与诸侯王并列。
English: It was only by searching for the previous generation that the nobility was set up, the status was second only to the empress, and there was no peerage that could be compared with it; again, a first-class position, the status could be on a par with that of a neighboring country, and the peerage was on a par with that of a prince.

古文：此贵嫔之礼，已高朝列；况母仪春宫，义绝常算。
现代文：这贵嫔的礼仪，已比朝廷百官高；况且束宫太子的生母作为人母的典范，礼仪上应超越寻常的标准。
English: The etiquette of this noblewoman is already higher than that of hundreds of officials in the imperial court; moreover, the birth mother of the crown prince, as a model of a human mother, should exceed the usual standards in etiquette.

古文：且储妃作配，率由盛则；以妇逾姑，弥乖从序。
现代文：而且太子妃作为太子的配偶，也应遵循成规大法；如果以妻子的身份超越了丈夫的母亲，就更违背了长幼主次的排列秩序。
English: Moreover, as the prince's spouse, the princess should also follow the established law; if she surpasses her husband's mother as a wife, it will further violate the order of priority of the eldest child.

古文：谓贵嫔典章，太子不异。
现代文：所以认为贵嫔的法则，与太子一应俱同。
English: Therefore, it is believed that the rule of nobles should be the same as that of princes.

古文：于是贵嫔备典章，礼数同于太子，言则称令。
现代文：从这时起具备了贵嫔的法规礼仪，与太子相同，出言即称为令。
English: From this time on, there was a code of etiquette for court nobles, which was the same as for princes, and the utterance of a word was called an order.

古文：贵嫔性仁恕，及居宫内，接驭自下，皆得其欢心。
现代文：贵嫔生性仁慈宽恕，到了住在宫裹时，从接待车驾的人到以下的臣仆，她都能得到他们的喜爱。
English: Noble, kind and forgiving, she endeared herself to everyone in the palace, from the drivers to the courtiers.

古文：不好华饰，器服无珍丽，未尝为亲戚私谒。
现代文：她不爱好华丽的装饰，器服用具都没有珍奇豪华的，不曾为亲戚的事私自禀告请托。
English: She is not fond of ornate decoration, the utensils and fittings are not rare and luxurious, and she has never made a private complaint about a relative.

古文：及高祖弘佛教，贵嫔奉而行之，屏绝滋腴，长进蔬膳。
现代文：到了高祖弘扬佛教时，贵嫔尊奉实行，她拒绝吃肉食，长久地进食蔬菜便饭。
English: When it came to Gao Zu's promotion of Buddhism, she refused to eat meat and ate vegetables for a long time.

古文：受戒日，甘露降于殿前，方一丈五尺。
现代文：在她受戒的那一天，甘美的雨露降落在殿前，纵横一丈五尺。
English: On the day of her ordination, the luscious rain and dew fell in front of the temple, covering a length and breadth of one and a half meters.

古文：高祖所立经义，皆得其指归。尤精《净名经》。
现代文：高祖所创立的经书义理，基本的意思都是从她这裹获得。她特别精通《净名经》。
English: The basic meaning of the sutras and doctrines established by Gaozu were all derived from her. She was particularly proficient in the Pure Land Sutra.

古文：所受供赐，悉以充法事。
现代文：所得到的贡品和赏赐，都用来作法事。
English: All the tributes and rewards received are used to perform the Dharma.

古文：普通七年十一月庚辰薨，殡于东宫临云殿，年四十二。
现代文：普通七年十一月庚辰曰去世，在束宫临云殿停放灵柩，时年四十二岁。
English: Geng Chen passed away in November of the 7th year, and his coffin was placed in the Sokugyo Rinyuden Hall. He was forty-two years old.

古文：诏吏部郎张缵为哀策文曰：轩纬之精，江汉之英；归于君袂，生此离明。
现代文：韶命吏部郎张缆作哀策文说：灵柩已经打开，桂花酒器虚空地凝止着，帝皇的帷布已经拉启，绘有夫人纹饰的衣服将要升天。
English: Zhang Zhan, the eulogist who died, wrote: "The casket has been opened, the osmanthus wine container is empty, the emperor's curtains have been opened, and the clothes with the lady's decoration will rise to the sky.

古文：诞自厥初，时维载育；枢电绕郊，神光照屋。
现代文：在她诞生之初，天枢星的光电环绕郊外，神光照耀着屋宇。
English: At the beginning of her birth, the light and electricity of the heavenly pivot star surrounded the suburbs, and the divine light shone on the house.

古文：爰及待年，含章早穆；声被洽阳，誉宣中谷。
现代文：等到她待嫁时，已是内心怀着美好早就显露出娇美温和；名声传到洽阳，美誉遍及中谷。
English: By the time she was about to be married, she had already revealed her beauty and gentleness with a beautiful heart; her fame spread to Chaoyang, and her reputation spread throughout the Central Valley.

古文：龙德在田，聿恭兹祀；阴化代终，王风攸始。
现代文：皇帝的大德散播到四野，恭谨地增益了祭祀活动；阴柔的风尚遣才更换终结，帝王的风尚才开始盛行。
English: The emperor's great virtue spread to the four provinces, respectfully enriching the sacrificial activities; the effeminate style was only replaced and ended, and the emperor's style began to prevail.

古文：动容谘式，出言顾史；宜其家人，刑于国纪。
现代文：她举止仪容均是征询的样子，说的话都是引用回顾史书；使得她的家人和顺亲善，成为国家法规的典范。
English: Her demeanor is that of a solicitor, and everything she says is a quote from a retrospective history book; she has made her family and Shun friendly and become a model for national laws and regulations.

古文：膺斯眷命，从此宅心；狄缀采珩，珮动雅音。
现代文：她受了这样的眷爱身负重任，从此归心；羽毛装饰彩色的佩玉，佩玉摇动发出优雅的声音。
English: She received such affection and took on a heavy responsibility, and has since returned to her heart; feathers decorate the colored beads, and the beads vibrate to make an elegant sound.

古文：日中思戒，月满怀箴；如何不跼，天高照临。
现代文：她每天都在考虑虔诚斋戒，每月终了时都在思考箴言；叫她怎不小心谨慎，有上天高朗的阳光照耀着她呢。
English: She meditates every day on pious fasting, and at the end of each month she meditates on the sutras; how could she not be cautious, with the heavenly sun shining on her?

古文：玄紞莫修，袆章早缺；成物谁能，芳猷有烈。
现代文：她不去修饰礼帽的丝带，祭服的纹彩也早已残破，除了她谁能成就事功呢，她那美好的法规光耀地永存。
English: She does not adorn the ribbons of the ceremonial hat, and the patterns of the sacrificial vestments have long since been destroyed. Who can accomplish anything except her, and her beautiful law shines brightly forever.

古文：素魄贞明，紫宫照晰；逮下靡伤，思贤罔蔽。
现代文：月亮端正而明朗，紫宫星也明晰；她恩惠施及臣下不损害别人，思慕贤人不使之被埋没。
English: The moon is just and clear, and the purple planet is also clear; she does not harm others with her benevolence and subjects, and thinks of the wise people not to be buried.

古文：躬俭则节，昭事惟虔；金玉无玩，筐筥不捐。
现代文：能亲身从事节俭，衹用虔诚来彰明事理，不玩赏金玉，不丢弃竹筐。
English: Can personally engage in frugality, use piety to clarify the facts, do not play bounty, do not discard the bamboo basket.

古文：祥流德化，庆表亲贤；甄昌轶启，孕鲁陶燕。
现代文：吉祥仁德传播演化，奖赏模范亲善贤人；造就昌，超过启，培养鲁，培育燕。
English: The auspicious virtue of benevolence spreads and evolves, rewards the model of good-neighborly and wise people; creates prosperity, surpasses enlightenment, cultivates Lu, and cultivates Yan.

古文：方论妇教，明章阃席；玄池早扃，湘沅已穸。
现代文：正在讨论妇女的教化问题，明确妇女的规章地位，遣憾的是玄池早已关闭，湘、沅已然埋葬。
English: The issue of women's indoctrination is being discussed, and the status of women's regulations is being clarified. Unfortunately, Xuanchi has already been closed, and Hunan and Handan have already been buried.

古文：展衣委华，硃幩寝迹；慕结储闱，哀深蕃辟。
现代文：王后的白展衣褪去了华彩，大红的帧帛已经消失；太子宫中思慕聚结，藩王府内哀痛极深。唉，悲伤呵!
English: The queen's white gown has lost its luster, the crimson cape has disappeared; in the prince's womb, thoughts are converging, and there is deep sorrow in the palace of the king of the clan. Alas, sorrow!

古文：呜呼哀哉！令龟兆良，葆引迁祖；具僚次列，承华接武。
现代文：如果龟卜的征兆良好，就将保佑导引她离去；官吏们按次序排列，太子慢慢地小步随行。
English: If the signs of the turtle are good, the blessing will guide her away; the officials will be arranged in order, and the prince will slowly walk with her.

古文：日杳杳以霾春，风凄凄而结绪；去曾掖以依迟，饰新宫而延伫。
现代文：曰光昏暗隐没了春意，风凄凉使人情绪郁结；依依不舍地离开深宫掖庭，久立等待着修整新建的宗庙。唉，悲伤呵!
English: The light is dim and the spring has faded, the wind is bleak and the mood is gloomy. Reluctantly, I leave the Shingong Courtyard and wait for a long time to repair the newly built ancestral temple. Alas, sadness!

古文：呜呼哀哉！启丹旗之星璟，振容车之黼裳；拟灵金而郁楚，泛凄管而凝伤。
现代文：展开彩旗上细碎的装饰品，抖动整顿送葬容车上死者的礼服，摹仿神灵的金器郁结着痛楚，吹奏凄切的乐管凝聚着哀伤。
English: The delicate decorations on the bunting are unfurled, the ceremonial dress of the deceased on the hearse is shaken and straightened, the gold objects that imitate the gods are full of pain, and the sad music played on the pipe condenses the sadness.

古文：遗备物乎营寝，掩重阍于窒皇；椒风暖兮犹昔，兰殿幽而不阳。
现代文：在营寝留下了美好的器物，在甬道关上重叠的宫门；嫔妃居室温暖如昔，芳雅的殿堂幽暗不受日晒。唉，悲伤呵!
English: In the camp bed, beautiful utensils have been left behind, the overlapping palace doors have been closed in the hallway; the empress's room is warm as before, and the fragrant hall is dark and dark from the sun. Alas, sadness!

古文：呜呼哀哉！侧闱高义，彤管有怿；道变虞风，功参唐迹。
现代文：宫中侧室道义高尚，红管蕴含着悦愉；道义改变了虞时的风尚，功德盖过了唐时的业绩。
English: The morals in the middle wing of the palace are noble, and the red pipe contains pleasure; morality has changed the fashion of the state, and the merits have exceeded the performance of the Tang Dynasty.

古文：婉如之人，休光赤舄；施诸天地，而无朝夕。
现代文：温顺贤淑，美德留传；不分朝夕，把自己献给了天地。唉，悲伤呵!
English: Gentle, virtuous, and virtuous; she devoted herself to heaven and earth, morning and evening. Alas, how sad!

古文：呜呼哀哉！
现代文：有司奏请赐谧号穆。
English: Alas, alas!

古文：有司奏谥曰穆。太宗即位，追崇曰穆太后。
现代文：太宗即皇帝位后，给她追加尊号为穆太后。
English: After Emperor Taizong ascended the throne, she was given the additional honorific title of Empress Dowager Mu.

古文：太后父仲迁，天监初，官至兗州刺史。
现代文：太后的父亲倥逼，型初年，做官到奎业刺史。
English: The father of the empress dowager was forced to become an official in the first year of his reign.

古文：高祖阮修容，讳令嬴，本姓石，会稽余姚人也。
现代文：高祖的医赵要，名全巫，原本姓互，盒稽筐姚人。
English: Gao Zu's doctor, Zhao Yao, was named Zhenwu, but his original surname was Wu, and he was originally from Yao.

古文：齐始安王遥光纳焉。
现代文：查始安王继先纳她为妾。
English: King Cha Shih An later took her as a concubine.

古文：遥光败，入东昏宫。
现代文：董光败亡后，她又被东昏侯收入宫中。
English: After the defeat of Dong Guang, she was once again brought into the court by Dong Dou Hou.

古文：建康城平，高祖纳为彩女。
现代文：建尘垣平定后，直担就收她做了宫女。
English: After Jian Ducheng was pacified, he took her as his concubine.

古文：天监七年八月，生世祖。
现代文：越七年八月，她生下了世担。
English: In August last year, she gave birth to a son.

古文：寻拜为修容，常随世祖出蕃。
现代文：不久就被封为修容，经常跟随世祖出京住在封地。
English: He was soon ennobled and often followed his ancestor out of Kyoto to live in the fief.

古文：大同六年六月，薨于江州内寝，时年六十七。
现代文：左回六年六月，她在江州的内室去世，时年六十七岁。
English: In June, she passed away at the age of 67 in her home in Jiangzhou.

古文：其年十一月，归葬江宁县通望山。
现代文：这一年的十一月，回葬在江宁县通望山。
English: In November of this year, he was reburied in Tongwang Mountain, Jiangning County.

古文：谥曰宣。
现代文：谧号宣。
English: The call went out.

古文：世祖即位，有司奏追崇为文宣太后。
现代文：世担即皇帝位后，有司奏请追尊她为文宣太后。
English: After the emperor's enthronement, she was honored as the empress dowager of Emperor Wenxuan.

古文：承圣二年，追赠太后父齐故奉朝请灵宝散骑常侍、左卫将军，封武康县侯，邑五百户；母陈氏，武康侯夫人。
现代文：丞圣二年，给太后的父亲蛮已故奉朝请灵实追赠官衔散骑常侍、左卫将军，追封为武康县侯，封地五百户；母亲陈氏，为武康侯夫人。
English: In the second year of the Joseon Dynasty, the late Emperor Bongchong asked Ling Si to bestow upon the Empress Dowager's father the official rank of straggler equerry, General of the Left Division, the posthumous title of the Marquis of Wukang County, and 500 fiefs; her mother, Chen, was the wife of the Marquis of Wukang.

古文：世祖徐妃，讳昭佩，东海郯人也。
现代文：世祖的徐妃，名昭佩，东海郯人。
English: The ancestor's Xu Fei, known as Zhao Pei, was from the East China Sea.

古文：祖孝嗣，太尉、枝江文忠公。
现代文：祖父孝嗣，做官做到太尉、枝江文忠公。
English: His grandfather, Takatsugu, rose to the rank of captain and Edae no Munetada as a government official.

古文：父绲，侍中、信武将军。
现代文：父亲徐绲，做官做到侍中、信武将军。
English: His father, Xu Xi, was a high-ranking officer and served as a general of the Xinwu army.

古文：天监十六年十二月，拜湘东王妃。
现代文：天监十六年十二月，封她为湘束王妃。
English: In December of the 16th year of Tianjing, she was named Hunan Princess.

古文：生世子方等、益昌公主含贞。
现代文：生了长子方等、益昌公主含贞。
English: The eldest son, Fang, was born, and Princess Yichang, Han Zhen, was born.

古文：太清三年五月，被谴死，葬江陵瓦官寺。
现代文：太清三年五月，被责令自尽，死后葬在江陵瓦官寺。
English: In May of the third year of the Taiqing Dynasty, he was ordered to commit suicide, and was buried in Gangneung Wakan Temple after his death.

古文：史臣曰：后妃道赞皇风，化行天下，盖取《葛覃》、《关雎》之义焉。
现代文：史臣曰：后妃在道义上辅助皇室风尚，风尚流传在天下，大概是取之于《葛覃》、《关雎》的意义了。
English: Shichen said, "The empress dowager morally assisted the imperial style, and the style spread throughout the world, which was probably taken from the meaning of "Kezhao" and "Guanxuan."

古文：至于穆贵嫔，徽华早著，诞育元良，德懋六宫，美矣。
现代文：至于穆贵嫔，美好的光辉早就显扬出来，生养了太子，以自己的德行勉励六宫，美好呵。
English: As for Mu Guijuan, her beautiful radiance has already been revealed. She has given birth to a prince, and encouraged the Sixth Palace with her own virtues. How wonderful.

古文：世祖徐妃之无行，自致歼灭，宜哉。
现代文：世祖的徐妃没有德行，而自取灭亡，应该啊。
English: The ancestor Xu Fei did not have virtue, but self-destruction, it should be.

