古文：刘宪张汶隰州佐史邓俨贝禧干庆陈良杨大夫李主簿妻
现代文：刘宪张汶隰州佐史邓俨贝禧干庆陈良杨大夫李主簿妻
English: Liu Xian, Zhang Wenzhou, Zushi, Deng Yubei, Xi Jianqing, Chen Liang, Yang Dr. Li, the bookkeeper's wife

古文：刘宪
现代文：刘宪
English: Liu Xian

古文：尚书李寰，镇平阳时，有衙将刘宪者，河朔人，性刚直，有胆勇。
现代文：尚书李寰在镇守平阳时，有个衙将叫刘宪，河朔人。性情刚直。有胆有勇。
English: When Shangshu Li Yao was in the garrison of Pingyang, there was a general named Liu Xian, a native of Hexuo. He had a straightforward temperament. He was bold and courageous.

古文：一夕，见一白衣来至其家，谓宪曰： 府僚命汝甚急，可疾赴召也。 
现代文：一天晚上，看到一个穿白衣的人来到他家，对刘宪说： 府官命你急速去应召。 
English: One evening, he saw a man dressed in white come to his house and say to Liu Xian: "The prefect has ordered you to rush to answer the call."

古文：宪怒曰： 吾军中裨将，未尝有过，府僚安得见命乎？ 
现代文：对宪很愤怒地说： 我是军中一员副将，没曾有过过错，府官为什么召我去？ 
English: He said angrily to Xian: I am a vice-general in the army, I have never made a mistake, why did the government official call me?

古文：白衣曰： 君第去，勿辞，不然祸及。 
现代文：白衣人说： 你只管去，不要推辞，不然的话要大祸临头。 
English: The man in white said, "Just go, don't refuse, otherwise a great disaster will befall you."

古文：宪震声叱之，白衣驰去，行未数步，已亡所在。
现代文：刘宪大声斥责他，白衣人急忙走了，走过几步，便不知哪里去了。
English: Liu Xian loudly rebuked him, and the man in white hurried away. After walking a few steps, he did not know where he was going.

古文：宪方悟鬼也。
现代文：刘宪才悟到是鬼。
English: Only then did Liu Xian realize that it was a ghost.

古文：夜深又至，呼宪。宪私自计曰，吾闻生死有命，焉可以逃之。
现代文：夜深时白衣人又来招呼刘宪，刘宪自己寻思，我听说生死有命，怎么能逃脱呢？
English: In the middle of the night, the man in white came to greet Liu Xian again. Liu Xian thought to himself, I have heard that life and death are intertwined, how can I escape?

古文：即与偕往。
现代文：便和他一同前往。
English: So they went with him.

古文：出城数里，至一公署，见冥官在厅，有吏数十辈，列其左右。冥官闻宪至，整中帻，降阶尽礼。已而延坐，谓宪曰： 吾以子勇烈闻，故遣奉命。 
现代文：出城数里，到了一个公署，见地府的官在大厅内，有好几十小吏，站在他的左右，地府的官听说刘宪来了，整理衣帽，走下台阶以礼相迎，就坐后对刘宪说： 我听说你勇敢刚烈，所以派人请你。 
English: A few miles out of the city, he arrived at a public office and saw the prefectural government official in the hall, with dozens of minor officials standing on his right and left. The prefectural government official heard that Liu Xian had arrived, arranged his clothes and hat, walked down the steps to greet him, and then sat down and said to Liu Xian: I heard that you are brave and strong, so I sent someone to invite you.

古文：宪曰： 未委明公见召之旨。 
现代文：刘宪说： 我不知道你为什么召我。 
English: Liu Xian said: I don't know why you called me.

古文：冥官曰： 地府有巡察使，以巡省岳渎道路，有不如法者，得以察之。
现代文：地府官说： 地府中有巡察使，用来巡查各省管事的官吏，如果有不守法的，给予察办。
English: The prefectural official said: There are inspectors in the prefectures, who are used to inspect the officials in charge of each province. If there is any non-compliance with the law, they will be investigated.

古文：亦重事，非刚烈者不可以委焉。愿足下俯而任之。 
现代文：这也是件重要事，不是刚直勇烈的人是不能委任的，希望你俯就此任。 
English: This is also an important matter. A person who is not upright and courageous cannot be appointed. I hope you will accept this responsibility.

古文：宪谢曰： 某无他才，愿更择刚勇者委之。 
现代文：刘宪感谢地说： 我没有这种才能，希望你另选刚烈勇敢的人委任。 
English: Liu Xian said gratefully, "I don't have such talent. I hope you will appoint another brave and courageous person."

古文：冥官又曰： 子何拒之深耶？ 
现代文：地府的官又说： 你为什么这么坚决的拒绝呢？ 
English: The magistrate of the prefectural government also said: Why did you refuse so resolutely?

古文：于是命案掾立召洪洞县吏王信讫，即遣一吏送宪归。宪惊寤。
现代文：于是又命令掌管案卷的人立即去召洪洞县县吏王信。随即派一个小吏送刘宪回家，刘宪惊醒。
English: He then ordered the person in charge of the case file to immediately call Wang Xin, the county official of Hongdong County, and immediately sent a minor official to take Liu Xian home. Liu Xian woke up.

古文：复数日，寰命宪使北都，行次洪洞县，因以事话於县寮。
现代文：数日后，李寰命刘宪去北都，走到洪洞县，便把这事告诉了县寮。
English: A few days later, Li Yu ordered Liu Xian to go to the North Capital, and when he reached Hongdong County, he told the county office about this.

古文：县寮曰： 县有吏王信者，卒数日矣。 
现代文：县寮说，我们县有个小吏叫王信，已经死了好多天了。
English: The county office said that Wang Xin, a minor official in our county, had been dead for several days.

古文：张汶
现代文：张汶
English: Zhang Wen

古文：右常侍杨潜，尝自尚书郎出刺西河郡。
现代文：京官右常侍杨潜，曾经由尚书郎出任西河郡刺史。
English: Yang Qian, the right-hand man of the Beijing official, was once appointed by Shang Shuro as the chief historian of Xihe County.

古文：时属县平遥，有乡吏张汶者，无疾暴卒，数日而寤。
现代文：当时下属平遥县有个乡吏叫张汶，无病暴死，几天后又苏醒。
English: At that time, there was a township official in Pingyao County called Zhang Wen, who died suddenly without any illness, and woke up a few days later.

古文：初汶见亡兄来诣其门，汶甚惊，因谓曰： 吾兄非鬼耶？
现代文：当初张汶看到已死的哥哥来到家门，张汶很吃惊，就问他： 你不是鬼吗？
English: At first, Zhang Wen was very surprised when she saw her dead brother come to the house. She asked him, "Aren't you a ghost?"

古文：何为而来？ 
现代文：你来干什么？ 
English: What are you doing here?

古文：兄泣曰： 我自去人间，常常属念亲友，若瞽者不忘视也。
现代文：兄哭泣说： 我自从离开人间，常常想念亲友，就像盲人渴望光明一样。
English: My brother wept and said, "Since I left this world, I often miss my relatives and friends, just as a blind man longs for light.

古文：思平生欢，岂可得乎？
现代文：思念平生的欢乐，怎么可能得到呢？
English: Missing the joys of life, how is that possible?

古文：今冥官使我得归而省汝。 
现代文：现在地府的官让我回来看看你。 
English: Now the officials of the prefectural government want me to come back and see you.

古文：汶曰： 冥官为谁？ 
现代文：张汶说： 地府的官是谁？ 
English: Zhang Wen said: Who is the local government official?

古文：曰： 地府之官，权位甚尊。吾今为其吏，往往奉使至里中。
现代文：他哥说： 地府的官权力也很大，我现在在他手下当小吏，经常奉命到下边来。
English: His brother said: The magistrate of the prefectural government also has great power. I am now a minor official under him, and I am often ordered to come down.

古文：比以幽明异路，不可诣汝之门。
现代文：阴间与阳间不同，不能随便到你家门。
English: Unlike the underworld and the sun, you can't just walk up to your door.

古文：今冥官召汝，汝可疾赴。 
现代文：今天是因为地府的冥官要召你，你要赶紧去。 
English: Today is because the Necromancer of the Underworld wants to summon you, and you must hurry.

古文：汶惧，辞之不可，牵汶袂而去。
现代文：张汶害怕，推辞不去，被亡兄牵着衣袖而去。
English: Zhang Wen was afraid, refused to go, and was led away by his dead brother.

古文：行十数里，路矄黑不可辨，但闻马车驰逐，人物喧语。亦闻其妻子兄弟呼者哭者，皆曰： 且议丧具。 
现代文：走了十多里，路很黑不能辨认，只听见车马奔跑和人们的喧闹声，也能听到妻子兄弟呼叫和哭泣的声音，都说： 快准备丧葬用具吧。 
English: After walking for more than ten miles, the road was very dark and unrecognizable. All I could hear was the sound of cars and horses running and the noise of people. I could also hear the voices of my wife and brother calling and crying, saying, "Quickly prepare the funeral equipment."

古文：汶但与兄俱进，莫知道途之几何。
现代文：张汶只知和亡兄往前走，不知走了多远。
English: Zhang Wen only knew how far she had walked with her late brother.

古文：因自念，我今死矣，然常闻人死，当尽见亲友之殁者。今我即呼之，安知其不可哉。
现代文：自己暗想，我现在已经死了，常听人说，人死后都能见到已死亡的亲友，今天我就喊他们，看看能不能见到他们。
English: I thought to myself, I'm dead now. I've always heard that when you die you can see your dead friends and relatives. Today I'll call them and see if I can see them.

古文：汶有表弟武季伦者，卒且数年，与汶善，即呼之。果闻季伦应曰： 诺。 
现代文：张汶有个表弟叫武季伦，已死多年，和张汶很好，张汶便叫他，果然听到季伦的答应声。
English: Zhang Wen has a cousin named Wu Jilun, who has been dead for many years, and Zhang Wen is very good, Zhang Wen called him, and he heard Jilun's promise.

古文：既而俱悲泣。
现代文：随即两人相见都悲伤哭泣。
English: Both of them immediately burst into tears when they saw each other.

古文：又曰： 恨不可尽，今将去矣。 
现代文：张汶问表弟说： 你现在住的是什么地方？为什么这样黑？ 季伦说： 阴间的路晦暗，是因为没有日月之光。 
English: Zhang Wen asked his cousin, "Where do you live now? Why is it so dark?" Ji Lun said, "The path in the underworld is dark because there is no light from the sun or moon.

古文：汶曰： 今何往？ 
现代文：又说： 悔恨难尽，现在我要走了。 张汶说： 你去哪里？ 
English: He also said, "I am filled with remorse, and now I have to leave." Zhang Wen said, "Where are you going?

古文：季伦曰： 吾平生时，积罪万状。自委身冥途，日以戮辱。
现代文：季伦说： 我生时积罪很多，自从到阴间，每天都受到摧残和羞辱。
English: Kiren said: I have accumulated a lot of sins in my life, and since I went to the underworld, I have been devastated and humiliated every day.

古文：向闻兄之语，故来与兄言。今不可留。 
现代文：方才听到你的喊声，所以才来和表兄说话，现在不能久留。 
English: I just heard you shouting, that's why I came to talk to my cousin. I can't stay long now.

古文：又悲泣久之，遂别。
现代文：又悲伤地哭泣了很久，才分别。
English: and wept bitterly for a long time before parting.

古文：呼亲族中亡殁者数十，咸如季伦，应呼而至。多言身被涂炭，词甚凄咽。
现代文：又呼叫了死去的亲友几十个，都像季伦那样应声而到，都说身体受罪的情况，话语都很凄恻。
English: They also called dozens of dead relatives and friends, all of whom answered the call like Ji Lun, all of whom said that their bodies were suffering, and their words were very sad.

古文：汶虽前去，亦不知将止何所，但常闻妻子兄弟号哭及语音，历然在左右。因遍呼其名，则如不闻焉。
现代文：张汶虽然往前走，也不知要走到什么地方，但经常听到妻子兄弟号哭和说话的声音，好像就在身边，可张汶喊叫他们的名字，就像没听见似的。
English: Although Zhang Wen walked forward, he did not know where to go, but he often heard the voices of his wife's brothers crying and talking, as if they were nearby, but Zhang Wen shouted their names, as if he did not hear them.

古文：久之，有一人厉呼曰： 平遥县吏张汶。 
现代文：过了很久，有一人厉声喊道： 平遥县吏张汶。 
English: After a long time, one person shouted in a loud voice: Pingyao County official Zhang Wen.

古文：汶既应曰诺。
现代文：张汶立即应声回答。
English: Zhang Wen immediately answered.

古文：又有一人责怒汶，问平生之过有几。
现代文：又有一人愤怒的斥责张汶，问他平生犯过多少过错。
English: Another person angrily rebuked Zhang Wen, asking him how many mistakes he had made in his life.

古文：汶固拒之。
现代文：张汶拒不回答。
English: Zhang Wen refused to answer.

古文：於是命案掾出文之籍。
现代文：于是又令掌管命案的取出张汶的册籍。
English: As a result, he also ordered the person in charge of the murder case to take out Zhang Wen's register.

古文：顷闻案掾称曰： 张汶未死。
现代文：不一会儿听到案掾说： 张汶还不应该死，应把他送回去。 
English: Not long after, I heard the judge say: Zhang Wen should not die yet, he should be sent back.

古文：愿遣之。 冥官怒曰： 汶未当死，何召之？ 
现代文：冥官愤怒地说： 张汶不应当死，为什么把他召来？ 
English: The underworld official said angrily: Zhang Wen should not die, why did you call him?

古文：掾曰： 张汶兄今为此吏，向者许久处冥途，为投且甚，请以弟代。虽未允其请，今召至此。 
现代文：案掾说： 张汶的哥在这当小吏，已经很长时间了，受罪很多，想叫他弟弟替代他，虽然没允许他的请求，现在他却把弟弟召来。 
English: The court said: Zhang Wen's brother has been a minor official here for a long time and has suffered a lot. He wanted his brother to replace him. Although he did not allow his request, he has now summoned his brother.

古文：冥官怒其兄曰： 何为自召生人，不顾吾法。 
现代文：冥官对着张汶兄发怒说： 为什么自己随意召来应活着的人，不顾我们的法条。 
English: The netherworld official was angry with Zhang Wen's brother and said, "Why do you arbitrarily summon someone who should be alive, disregarding our laws?

古文：即命囚之，而遣汶归。
现代文：立即将他囚禁了起来，而让张汶回去。
English: He was immediately imprisoned, and Zhang Wen was allowed to return.

古文：汶谢而出，遂独行。以道路熏晦，惶惑且甚。
现代文：张汶感谢后而走出。他一人独行，因为道路黑暗，他很惶恐。
English: Zhang Wen thanked him and walked out. He walked alone, because the road was dark, he was very frightened.

古文：可行百余里，方觉其形稍近。
现代文：不一会儿，忽然看见一点烛光在数十里外，光影很小。张汶高兴地说，这烛光就是有人住。
English: After a while, he suddenly saw a candlelight dozens of miles away, with very little light and shadow. Zhang Wen happily said that this candlelight was someone living there.

古文：迫而就之，乃见己身偃卧于榻。
现代文：他快走，奔光影而去。又走了百多里，才感觉光影稍近，急忙走近光影，才看到自己躺在床上。屋内有烛光。
English: He walked quickly, running away from the light and shadow. He walked more than a hundred miles, only to feel the light and shadow slightly closer. He hurriedly approached the light and shadow, only to see himself lying on the bed. There was candlelight in the house.

古文：其室有烛，果汶见者。
现代文：果然就是张汶方才看到的那烛光，到此才苏醒。
English: It was indeed the candlelight that Zhang Wenfang had just seen, and only then did he wake up.

古文：自是寤。汶即以冥中所闻妻子兄弟号哭及议丧具，讯其家，无一异者。
现代文：张汶便把在冥府中听到妻子兄弟号哭和议论丧具的事询问家人，没有一件不同的。
English: Zhang Wen asked his family members about hearing his wife and brother crying and discussing the loss of their belongings in the Netherworld. Nothing was different.

古文：隰州佐史
现代文：隰州佐史
English: Chenzhou Sashi

古文：隰州佐史死，数日后活。
现代文：隰州佐史死后数日又复活了。
English: A few days after his death, Zhangzhou Sashi came back to life.

古文：云：初阎罗王追为典史，自陈素不解案。王令举其所知，某荐同曹一人，使出帖追。
现代文：他说，初到冥府时阎罗王封他为典史，他说他从来没办过案子，阎王又叫他举荐他所知道的人，他便举荐了一个和他同事的人，阎王便派人拿帖去追召。
English: He said that when he first arrived at the Hades, the king of hell named him as a historian. He said that he had never handled a case. The king of hell also asked him to recommend someone he knew. He recommended a person and his colleague. The king of hell then sent someone to fetch him.

古文：王问佐史，汝算既未尽，今放汝还。
现代文：阎王向佐史说，你的寿数还没到，现在放你回去。
English: The king of hell said to Sashi, "You haven't reached your life expectancy yet, let you go back now."

古文：因问左右，此人在生有罪否。
现代文：又问他左右的官吏，这人在生时有没有罪？
English: He also asked the officials around him whether the man had committed any crimes while he was alive.

古文：左右云： 此人曾杀一犬一蛇。 
现代文：左右说： 这人曾杀死过一犬一蛇。 
English: They say: This man has killed a dog and a snake.

古文：王曰： 犬听合死，蛇复何故？
现代文：阎王说： 犬是应该死的，杀蛇是为什么？
English: The king of hell said: A dog deserves to die, but why kill a snake?

古文：枉杀蛇者。法合殊死。 
现代文：无故杀蛇的，应受到特殊的惩罚。 
English: Those who kill snakes without reason should be subject to special punishment.

古文：令某回头，以热铁汁一杓，灼其背。
现代文：令佐史回头，用一勺热铁汁烫他的背。
English: He ordered Sashi to turn around and rubbed his back with a spoonful of hot iron juice.

古文：受罪毕，遣使送还。
现代文：受罪后，派人送他回来。
English: After he was convicted, they sent someone to bring him back.

古文：吏就某索钱一百千文。
现代文：送他的小吏向佐史索要一百千文钱。
English: The minor official who sent him asked Sashi for one hundred thousand mon.

古文：某云： 我素家贫，何因得办？ 
现代文：佐史说： 我家一向很贫困，我怎么能办到？ 
English: Sashi said: My family has always been very poor, how can I manage?

古文：吏又觅五十千，亦答云无。
现代文：小吏又要五十千，佐史也说没有。
English: The petty official wanted another fifty thousand, but Sashi said no.

古文：吏云： 汝家有胡钱无数，何得诉贫？ 
现代文：小吏说：  你家有无数胡钱，怎么能说贫穷？ 
English: The petty official said, "Your family has countless money, so how can you say that you are poor?"

古文：某答： 胡钱初不由己。 
现代文：佐史说： 胡钱不由我用。 
English: Sashi said: I don't have the power to use the money.

古文：吏言取之即得，何故不由。
现代文：小吏说拿来就是了，怎么说不由你用。
English: If a petty official says, "Bring it here," it is up to you to use it.

古文：领某至家取钱。胡在床上卧，胡儿在钱堆上坐，未得取钱。且暂入庭中。
现代文：小吏领佐史到家取钱，胡在床上躺着，胡儿在钱堆上坐着，没法取钱，只好暂时回到院中。
English: A petty official took Zushi home to get the money. Hu was lying on the bed and Hu'er was sitting on the pile of money. Unable to get the money, they had to go back to the hospital for a while.

古文：狗且吠之，某以脚蹴，狗叫而去。
现代文：狗在咬，佐史用脚踢狗，狗叫着跑了。
English: The dog was biting, Sashi kicked the dog with his foot, and the dog ran away yelping.

古文：又见其妇营一七斋，取面做饭。
现代文：又看见他的妇人为了给他烧头七，拿面作饭。
English: And he saw that his wife was making a meal of unleavened bread to warm himself.

古文：极力呼之，妇殊不闻。
现代文：他用力大叫，妇人好像没听到。
English: He screamed so loudly that the woman didn't seem to hear.

古文：某怒，以手牵领巾，妇踬于地。
现代文：佐史大怒，用手扯她的领巾，妇人倒在地上。
English: Enraged, Sashi tore off her headscarf with his hand, and the woman fell to the ground.

古文：久之，外人催之。
现代文：很久，外面的小吏又催他，他才出来。
English: It was a long time before he came out, with the petty official outside urging him on.

古文：及出，胡儿犹在钱上。某劲以拳拳其肋，胡儿闷绝，乃取五十千付使者。因得放，遂活。
现代文：胡儿仍在钱堆上，佐史使劲用拳打胡儿的两肋，胡儿昏过去，他拿了五十千给了那小吏，这才把他放了，他才活了。
English: Hu'er was still on the pile of money, Sashi punched Hu'er hard in the ribs, Hu'er fainted, he took fifty thousand and gave it to the clerk, only then was he released, only then did he live.

古文：活时，胡儿病尚未愈。
现代文：活了后，胡儿的病还没好。
English: After being revived, Hu'er's illness did not improve.

古文：后经纪竟折五十千也。邓俨
现代文：后来做买卖正好赔五十千。邓俨
English: Later, when doing business, he lost exactly fifty thousand.

古文：会昌元年，金州军事典邓俨，先死数年。
现代文：唐武宗会昌元年，金州军事典官邓俨先死了数年。
English: In the first year of Tang Wuzong Huichang, the Jinzhou military magistrate Deng Yao died a few years earlier.

古文：其案下书手蒋古者，忽心痛暴卒。如人捉至一曹司，见邓俨喜曰： 我主张甚重，籍尔录数百幅书也。 
现代文：他手下的书记员蒋古忽然心痛暴死，被人抓到一个地府中，看到了邓俨，他高兴地说： 我的事物很重，请你帮我抄录几百幅文书。 
English: His clerk, Jiang Gu, suddenly died of a broken heart. He was caught in an underground palace. When he saw Deng Yao, he said happily, "My things are very heavy. Please help me transcribe hundreds of documents."

古文：蒋见堆案绕壁，皆涅楮朱书。乃绐曰： 近损右臂，不能搦管。 
现代文：蒋古一看文书案卷堆积很多，都是黑纸红字。便欺骗说： 近来损伤了右臂，不能拿笔。 
English: When Jiang Gu saw that there were a lot of documents piled up, all of which were black paper with red characters, he lied and said: I recently injured my right arm and can't hold a pen.

古文：旁有一人谓邓： 既不能书，可令还也。 
现代文：旁边有一人对邓俨说： 既然不能书写，就叫他回去吧。 
English: Beside him, someone said to Deng Yao, "Since he can't write, let him go back."

古文：蒋草草被领还，陨一坑中而觉。
现代文：蒋古被急忙忙的领着回去，掉到一个大坑中后苏醒了。
English: Jiang Gu was hurriedly led back, fell into a big pit and woke up.

古文：因病，右手遂废。
现代文：后来因病，废了右手。贝禧
English: Later, due to illness, he lost his right hand.

古文：贝禧义兴人贝禧，为邑之乡胥。乾宁甲寅岁十月，宿於茭渎别业。
现代文：义兴人贝禧，在小镇中当一个小官吏，唐昭宗乾宁甲寅年十月，宿在茭渎的别墅中。
English: Bei Xi, a philanthropist, worked as a minor official in a small town, and Tang Zhaozong Qianning, in October of the year of the Horse, stayed in a villa in Zhaozhou.

古文：夜分，忽闻叩门者，人马之声甚众。
现代文：半夜时。忽然听到有人敲门，有很多人叫马嘶的声音。
English: In the middle of the night, I suddenly heard someone knocking on the door, and the sound of many people calling for horses.

古文：出视之，见一人绿衣秉简，西面而立，从者百余。
现代文：出去看，见到一个穿绿衣拿竹简的人，面朝西站着，随从百多人。
English: I went out to have a look and saw a man in green with a bamboo sling, standing facing west, followed by more than a hundred people.

古文：禧摄衣出迎，自通曰： 隆，姓周，弟十八。 
现代文：贝禧穿衣出门迎接，绿衣人自我介绍说： 我姓周，名隆，排行第十八。 
English: Bei Xi dressed up and went out to meet him. The man in green introduced himself and said, "My surname is Zhou, my rank is 18th.

古文：即延入坐，问以来意。
现代文：贝禧请他到屋内坐，并询问他们的来意。
English: Bei Xi invited him to sit inside and inquired about their visit.

古文：曰： 身为地府南曹判官，奉王命，召君为北曹判官尔。 
现代文：绿衣人说： 我是地府南曹判官，奉阎王之命，召你为北曹判官。 
English: The man in green said, "I am the magistrate of the Southern Cao, and by order of the King of Hell, I call you to be the judge of the Northern Cao.

古文：禧初甚惊惧。隆曰： 此乃阴府要职，何易及此，君无辞也。 
现代文：贝禧开始很惊惧，周隆说： 这是阴府中重要的职务，很不易得到。你不要推辞。 
English: Bei Xi was startled. Zhou Long said, "This is an important position in the underworld, and it's not easy to get. Don't turn it down."

古文：俄有从者，持床榻食案帷幕，陈设毕，满置酒食，对饮良久。
现代文：一会儿，随从便拿来了床榻，饭桌、和帷幔，摆设好后，又摆满了酒、菜、饭食。
English: After a while, the attendant brought the bed, the dining table, and the curtains. After they were set up, they were filled with wine, vegetables, and food.

古文：一吏趋入白： 殷判官至。 
现代文：二人对饮了很久，一个小吏进来说，殷判官到。
English: The two of them had been drinking for a long time. A minor official came in and said, "Judge Yin is here."

古文：复有一绿衣秉简，二从者捧箱随之，箱中亦绿衣。
现代文：又有一个穿绿衣拿竹简的人来了，两个随从捧箱跟随，箱中也装着绿衣。
English: Another man in a green coat came with bamboo slats, followed by two attendants with a box, which also contained a green coat.

古文：殷揖禧曰： 命赐君，兼同奉召。 
现代文：殷判官向贝禧作揖说： 这是阎王命令赐给你的，并同时奉召。 
English: Judge Yin said to Bei Xizhong: "This is a command given to you by the king of hell, and you are called at the same time.

古文：即以绿裳为禧衣之。
现代文：马上为贝禧穿上绿衣，并就坐共饮。
English: He immediately put on a green coat for Bei Xi and sat down to drink with him.

古文：就坐共饮，可至五更。曰： 王命不可留矣。 
现代文：快要到五更天时，说： 阎王命令不可久留。 
English: When he was about to reach the fifth heaven, he said, "The king of hell ordered me not to stay long.

古文：即相与同行。
现代文：邀贝禧同行。
English: He invited Bei Xi to accompany him.

古文：禧曰： 此去家不远，暂归告别，可乎。 
现代文：贝禧说： 这离我家不远，暂时回去告别家人，可以不？ 
English: Bei Xi said: This is not far from my home. Can I go back to say goodbye to my family for a while?

古文：皆曰： 君今已死，纵归，可复与家人相接耶？ 
现代文：都说： 你现在已经死了，就是回去，也不能和家人接触。 
English: They all said: You're dead now, even if you go back, you can't contact your family.

古文：乃出门，与周殷各乘一马，其疾如风，涉水不溺。
现代文：贝禧便出门与周、殷各骑一马，行走如风，涉水不溺。
English: Bei Xi then went out with Zhou and Yin, each riding a horse, walking like the wind, wading in the water without drowning.

古文：至暮，宿一村店，店中具酒食，而无居人。
现代文：到傍晚时，宿在一村庄店中，店中备了酒食，却无人居住。
English: By late afternoon, they were staying in a village shop, which was stocked with food and drink, but was unoccupied.

古文：虽设灯烛，如隔帷幔。
现代文：虽然点了灯烛，却如隔着帷幔一样昏暗。
English: Though the candle is lit, it is as dim as if it were behind a curtain.

古文：云已行二千余里矣。
现代文：他们说已经走了两千多里。
English: They say they have walked more than two thousand miles.

古文：向晓复行，久之，至一城，门卫严峻。
现代文：天亮了又往前走，很久，到了座城，门卫森严。
English: Daybreak and go forward, for a long time, to the city, the guards are strict.

古文：周殷先入，复出召禧。
现代文：周、殷先入，又出来召贝禧。
English: Zhou and Yin entered first, and then came out to summon Bei Xi.

古文：凡经三门，左右吏卒，皆趋拜。
现代文：经过三道门，左右吏卒都前来揖拜。
English: After passing through the three gates, officials on both sides came to pay homage.

古文：复入一门，正北大殿垂帘。禧趋走参谒，一同人间。
现代文：又进入一门，正北大殿悬挂门帘，贝禧趋步向前参拜，和人间一样。
English: Entering another door, the north-facing main hall hung a curtain, and Bei Xi stepped forward to pay homage, just like on earth.

古文：既出，周谓禧曰： 北曹阙官多年，第宅曹署，皆须整缉。君可暂止吾家也。 
现代文：出来后，周隆对贝禧说，北曹缺判官多年，宅院、曹署都须整修，你可暂住我家。
English: After coming out, Zhou Long said to Bei Xi, "Beijing Cao has been short of judges for many years. Both the house and Cao's office need to be renovated. You can stay at my house for a while."

古文：顷之，有同官可三十余人，皆来造请庆贺。遂置宴。宴罢，醉卧。
现代文：便出殿门向东走，约一里，有一大宅，让贝禧住在东厅。一会儿，有三十多官吏都来庆贺，便设宴，宴后醉卧休息。
English: He went out of the gate of the palace and walked eastward for about a mile. There was a big mansion for him to live in the east hall. In a short time, more than thirty officials came to celebrate. They held a banquet and rested after the banquet.

古文：至晓，遍诣诸官曹报谢。
现代文：天亮时，贝禧又向各官曹拜谢。
English: At dawn, Bei Xi went back to thank the officials.

古文：复有朱衣吏。以王命至，钱帛车马饔饩甚丰备。
现代文：又有穿红衣的官吏，是奉阎罗王之命而来，送来了很多钱帛车马和山珍海味。
English: There were also officials dressed in red, who came by order of King Yama, and brought a lot of money, horses, carts, and rare seafood.

古文：翌日，周谓禧曰： 可视事矣。 
现代文：第二天，周隆对贝禧说，你可以管事了。
English: The next day, Zhou Long said to Bei Xi, "You can take charge."

古文：又相与向王殿之东北，有大宅，陈设甚严，止禧于中。
现代文：又和贝禧走到阎王殿东北，又有一大宅院，陈设甚严，让贝禧住在这里。
English: He and Bei Xi also walked to the northeast of the Hall of Hell, and there was another large mansion, which was very tightly furnished, for Bei Xi to live in.

古文：有典吏可八十余人，参请给使。
现代文：有典吏八十多人，请求给予差使。
English: There were more than eighty ushers who requested to be sent.

古文：厅之南大屋数十间，即曹局，簿书充积。
现代文：厅南有大屋数十间，就是北曹的曹局，堆满了册簿文书。
English: There are dozens of large houses in the south of the hall, that is, the North Cao's Cao Bureau, which is full of books and documents.

古文：其内厅之北，别室两间，有几案及数书厨，皆杂宝饰之。
现代文：内厅北有别室两间，有几案和一些书厨，都装饰着宝物。
English: In the north of the inner hall, there are two other rooms, several cases and some book kitchens, all decorated with treasures.

古文：周以金钥授禧曰： 此厨簿书，最为秘要，管钥恒当自掌，勿轻委人也。 
现代文：周隆将金钥匙授给贝禧说： 这厨簿书最机密，最重要，钥匙你要永远自己掌管，不要轻易委于他人。 
English: Zhou Long gave the golden key to Bei Xi and said: This cookbook is the most confidential and important, you should always be in charge of the key, do not easily entrust it to others.

古文：周既去，禧开视之。书册积叠，皆方尺余。
现代文：周隆走后，贝禧开厨看视，书册堆积，都一尺见方。
English: After Zhou Long left, Bei Xiyi opened the kitchen and watched, the books piled up, all a foot square.

古文：首取一册，金题其上陕州字。其中字甚细密，谛视之，乃可见，皆世人之名簿也。
现代文：他首先拿了一册，题有陕州两个金字，里面的字很细密，仔细看，乃可看到，都是世上人的名簿。
English: He first took out a book with the title "Shaanxi Two Golden Characters." The characters inside were very detailed. If you looked closely, you could see that it was a directory of people from all over the world.

古文：禧欲知其家事，复开一厨，乃得常州簿。阅其家籍，见身及家人世代名字甚悉，其已死者，以墨钩之。
现代文：贝禧想知道他家的事，又开了一厨，便得到了常州簿，看他的家籍，见到他和家里世世代代的名字，很熟悉。已死的，有墨笔钩掉。
English: Bei Xi wanted to know about his family, so he opened a kitchen and got a copy of the Changzhou Book. He looked at his family register and saw that he and his family had the same name for generations. He was very familiar with it.

古文：至晚，周判官复至曰： 王以君世寿未尽，遣暂还，寿尽，当复居此职。 
现代文：到了晚上，周判官又回来说： 阎王说你的阳寿未尽，让你暂时回去，到寿尽时再回来任此职。 
English: In the evening, Judge Zhou came back again and said, "The King of Hell said that you have not reached the end of your life, so he asked you to go back temporarily. When you reach the end of your life, you will come back to take up this post."

古文：禧即以金钥还授于周。
现代文：贝禧便将金钥匙还给周判官。
English: Bei Xi then returned the golden key to Zhou Hanjun.

古文：禧始阅簿时，尽记其家人及己祸福寿夭之事，至是昏然尽忘矣。
现代文：贝禧在开始看册簿时，便记住了家人寿夭祸福之事，可现在却昏昏然都忘了。
English: When Bei Xi began to read the record book, he remembered the family's misfortune and fortune, but now he has faintly forgotten everything.

古文：顷之，官吏俱至，告别。周殷二人送之归。
现代文：一会儿，官吏都到了，相互告别，周、殷二人送贝禧回来。
English: After a while, the officials all arrived and said goodbye to each other. Zhou and Yin both sent Bei Xi back.

古文：翌日夜，乃至茭渎村中。入室，见己卧于床上，周殷与禧各就寝。
现代文：第二天晚上才到茭渎村，进入室内，看见自己躺在床上，周、殷与贝禧各自就寝。
English: It was only the next evening that he arrived at Zougu village, entered the room, and saw himself lying on the bed, while Zhou, Yin and Bei Xi all went to bed.

古文：俄而惊寤，日正午时，问其左右，云，死始半日。
现代文：片刻后惊醒，正是午时。问他的左右，说，死了已经半天了。
English: A few moments later he woke up, it was midday. I asked him about it and he said that he had been dead for half a day.

古文：而地府已四日矣。
现代文：而地府中已经四天了。
English: But it's already been four days since the prefectural election.

古文：禧既愈，一如常人，亦无小异。又四十余年乃卒。
现代文：贝禧痊愈后，与平常人一样，没有一点不同之处，又活了四十多年才死亡。
English: After Bei Xi recovered, he was just like an ordinary person, with no difference at all. He lived for more than forty years before he died.

古文：干庆
现代文：干庆
English: Ganqing

古文：晋有干庆者，无疾而终。
现代文：晋时有个叫干庆的人，无病而终。
English: In Jin Dynasty, there was a man named Ganqing who died without any illness.

古文：时有术士吴猛，语庆之子曰： 干侯算未穷。我为试请命，未可殡敛。 
现代文：当时有个术士叫吴猛，他对干庆的儿子说，你父亲干侯的阳寿未尽，我可以为他试请复生，你先不要殡敛。
English: At that time, there was a sorcerer named Wu Meng. He said to the son of Gan Qing, "Your father, Gan Hou, has not yet reached the end of his days. I can try to bring him back to life. Don't delay."

古文：尸卧静舍，唯心下稍暖。
现代文：尸体躺在清静的室内，只有心窝处稍有热气。
English: The corpse lay in the quiet room, only slightly warm in the heart.

古文：居七日，猛凌晨至，以水激之，日中许，庆苏焉。旋遂张目开口，尚未发声。阖门皆悲喜。
现代文：躺了七天后，吴猛早晨到了，用水激尸体，到了中午，干庆苏醒，接着便能睁眼张嘴，还没说话，全家都由悲转喜。
English: After lying down for seven days, Wu Meng woke up in the morning, stirred up the corpse with water, and woke up at noon. Then he could open his eyes and open his mouth. Before he could speak, the whole family went from sadness to joy.

古文：猛又令以水含洒。乃起。吐血数声，兼能言语。
现代文：吴猛又叫用水喷洒干庆，干庆的身体站起来了，吐了几口血，又能说话了。
English: Wu Meng also sprayed Gan Qing with water. Gan Qing's body stood up, spat out a few mouthfuls of blood, and was able to speak again.

古文：三日平复。
现代文：三日后完全康复。
English: He made a full recovery three days later.

古文：初见十数人来，执缚桎梏到狱。同辈十余人，以次旋对。
现代文：当初，他见十几个人来，拿着枷锁把他捉到狱中，和他一齐来的还有十余人，按次序讯问。
English: At first, he saw more than a dozen people come and take the shackles to catch him in prison, and more than a dozen people came with him to interrogate him in order.

古文：次未至，俄见吴君北面陈释，王遂敕脱械令归。
现代文：还没有问到他，就看见吴猛在北面陈述解释，阎王便下令给他脱掉枷锁回家。
English: Before he was asked, he saw Wu Meng giving a speech in the north, and the king of hell ordered him to take off his shackles and go home.

古文：所经官府，皆见迎接吴君。而吴君与之抗礼，即不知悉何神也。陈良
现代文：所经过的官府，都见到迎接吴君的人，吴君也以同等的礼节回报他们，却不知道是什么神。陈良
English: All the government offices he passed by saw the people who greeted Wu Jun, and Wu Jun returned the same courtesy to them, but he did not know which god it was. Chen Liang

古文：大元中，北地人陈良与沛国刘舒友善，又与同郡李焉共为商贾，曾获厚利，共致酒相庆。
现代文：大元年间，北地人陈良和沛国人刘舒很要好，陈良又与同郡的李焉共同做买卖。曾获厚利，共同饮酒庆贺。
English: During the first year of the 21st century, Chen Liang from the North and Liu Shu from Pei Province were very friendly. Chen Liang also did business with Li Yan from the same county. They once made a large profit and celebrated by drinking together.

古文：焉遂害良，以苇裹之，弃之荒草，经十许日，良复生归家。
现代文：李焉借机杀害了陈良，用苇子包裹他的尸体，抛在荒草之中。过了十几天，陈良又复生回家。
English: Li Yan took the opportunity to kill Chen Liang, wrapped his body with a pair of pliers and left it in the weeds. Ten days later, Chen Liang came back to life and returned home.

古文：说死时，见一人著赤帻，引良去，造一城门。
现代文：他说死时曾见一个戴红头巾的人，领着他走去，到了一个城门。
English: He said that at the time of his death he had seen a man in a red turban who led him to a gate.

古文：门下有一床，见一老人，执朱笔，点校籍。
现代文：门下有一床，见一老人手拿朱笔校点册籍。
English: There is a bed under the door. I see an old man with a red pen in his hand, marking books.

古文：赤帻人言曰： 向下土有一人姓陈名良，游魂而已，未有统摄，是以将来。 
现代文：戴红头巾的人说： 下边有一人姓陈名良，是一个游魂，无处管理，所以带来了。
English: A person wearing a red headscarf said, "There is a person with the surname Chen Mingliang downstairs. He is a wandering soul, and there is nowhere to manage him, so I brought him here."

古文：校籍者曰： 可令便去。 
现代文：校籍者说： 可以叫他回去。 
English: A member of the school said: You can ask him to go back.

古文：良既出，忽见友人刘舒，谓曰： 不图于此相见。卿今幸蒙尊神所遣，然我家厕屋后桑树中有一狸，常作妖怪，我家数数横受苦恼。卿归，岂能为我说此耶。 
现代文：陈良出来后，忽然见到好友刘舒，他对陈良说： 我没想到在此相见，你能有幸遇见尊神放你回来，然而我家厕屋后桑树中有一只狐狸，常兴妖作怪，我家多次遭受苦恼，你回去，能为我说这件事吗？ 
English: After Chen Liang came out, he suddenly saw his friend Liu Shu. He said to Chen Liang, "I didn't expect to meet you here. Would you be lucky enough to meet a god to let you come back? However, there is a fox in the mulberry tree behind my toilet. It is a recurring monster. My family has suffered many hardships. Can you go back and tell me about it?"

古文：良然之。
现代文：陈良答应了。
English: Chen Liang agreed.

古文：既苏，乃诣官疏李焉而伏罪。
现代文：苏醒之后，去官府告了李焉，李焉伏法。
English: After he woke up, he went to the government and reported Li Yan, Li Yan Fuxing.

古文：仍特报舒家，家人涕泣云，悉如言。
现代文：又特意去刘舒家转告相托之事，刘舒家人哭着说，照着他说的办。
English: He also specifically went to Liu Shu's home to tell him about the entrustment. Liu Shu's family members cried and said that they would do as he said.

古文：因伐树，得狸杀之，其怪遂绝。
现代文：于是，伐桑树，杀了狐狸，兴妖作怪的事便没有了。
English: So they cut down the mulberry tree, killed the fox, and there was no more demon-worship.

古文：杨大夫
现代文：杨大夫
English: Dr. Yang Zong

古文：杨大夫者，宦官也，亡其名。
现代文：杨大夫是宦官，不知其名。
English: Dr. Yang is a eunuch whose name is unknown.

古文：年十八岁，为冥官所摄，无疾而死。
现代文：十八岁时被冥府官员拘捕，无病而死，几日后又复活。
English: At the age of eighteen, he was arrested by Hades officials, died without illness, and was resurrected a few days later.

古文：经日而苏，云：既到阴冥间，有廨署官属，与世无异。阴官以案牍示之，见名字历历然。云，年寿十八岁而已。杨亦无言请托。
现代文：他说，到了阴间，也有官署衙门，和世间一样。阴官拿案卷给他看，他的名字历历在目，并说年寿只有十八岁，杨大夫看过之后也就无话可说。
English: He said that in the underworld, there is also a government office, just like in the world. The inquisitor showed him the case file, his name flashed before his eyes, and said that he was only eighteen years old. After Dr. Yang read it, he had nothing to say.

古文：旁有一人，为其请乞，愿许再生，词意极切。久之而冥官许，即令却还。
现代文：旁边有一人，却为他请求，希望放他再生，言词恳切，乞求了很长时间冥官准许了，命杨大夫回到世间。
English: There was a person next to him, but he begged for him, hoping to let him be reborn, his words were earnest, he begged for a long time for the permission of the netherworld official, and ordered Dr. Yang to return to the world.

古文：其人亦送杨数百步，将别，杨愧谢之： 不知即今再生之恩，何以为报？ 
现代文：那人送杨大夫送出几百步，临别时，杨大夫很羞愧地感谢他，说： 你对我的再生之恩，我如何报答呢？ 
English: The man walked several hundred steps to see Dr. Yang off, and at the end of the day, Dr. Yang was ashamed to thank him, saying, "How can I repay your kindness to my rebirth?

古文：问其所欲，其人曰： 或遗鸣砂弓，即相报也。 
现代文：问他有什么要求。那人说： 你能找到鸣砂弓，就是报答我了。 
English: Asked what he wanted, the man said: "If you can find the sandbows, that will be my reward."

古文：因以大铜钱一百余与杨，俄然而觉，平复无苦。
现代文：同时给了杨大夫一百多大铜钱。一会儿便苏醒了，和平常一样没痛苦。
English: At the same time, he gave Dr. Yang more than one hundred large copper coins. He woke up in a short time and was not in pain as usual.

古文：自是求访鸣砂弓，亦莫能致。
现代文：杨大夫便到外寻找鸣砂弓，也没有找到。
English: Dr. Yang then went out to look for the singing sand bow, but did not find it.

古文：或作小宫阙屋子，焚而报之，如是者数矣。
现代文：有时用纸扎制些宫殿房屋焚烧，用来答谢再生之恩，这样做了好多次。
English: Sometimes they make paper palaces and burn them to thank the gods for their rebirth, and they have done this many times.

古文：杨颇留心炉鼎，志在丹石，能制返魂丹。
现代文：杨大夫又特别留心炉鼎，想要炼丹，自己能制返魂丹。
English: Dr. Yang also paid special attention to the furnace, and if he wanted to make alchemy, he could make soul-restoring alchemy.

古文：有疾疫暴病死者，研丹一粒，拗开其口，灌之即活。尝救数人。
现代文：有得急病暴死的，只要用一粒返魂丹，挠开嘴灌下就能复活，曾救活数人。
English: In the case of a person who died suddenly and violently, as long as he used a grain of soul retriever, he could be revived by opening his mouth and swallowing it, and several people were saved.

古文：有阉官夏侯，得杨丹五粒。戒云，有急即吞一丸。
现代文：有个宦官叫夏侯，他得到了杨大夫的五粒返魂丹，杨告戒说，特别危急时只服一粒。
English: There was a eunuch named Xia Hou, who received five pills of soul-restoration medicine from Dr. Yang. Yang told him that he should only take one pill when he was in a particularly critical situation.

古文：夏侯一旦得疾，状甚危笃，取一粒以服之。既而为冥官追去，责问之次，白云： 某曾服杨大夫丹一粒耳。 冥官即遣还。
现代文：一天早晨，夏侯得病，病情危险，取了一粒丹丸服下，便被冥官追到阴间，责他之后，他便说他曾服了杨大夫一粒丹药，冥官又叫他生还。
English: One morning, Xia Hou fell ill and was in a dangerous condition. He took a pill and was chased to the underworld by the necromancer. After chastising him, he said that he had taken a pill from Dr. Yang, and the necromancer had allowed him to survive.

古文：夏侯得丹之效，既苏，尽服四丸。
现代文：夏侯得到丹药的效力便活了，又把那四丸吃光了。
English: Xia Hou got the potency of the elixir and lived, and then ate up the four pills.

古文：岁余，又见黄衣者追捕之。云，非是冥曹，乃太山追之耳。
现代文：一年多后，又有黄衣使者追捕他，对他说，不是阴曹抓他，是太山神追捕他，夏侯便跟着去了。
English: More than a year later, another yellow-clothed messenger chased him and told him that it was not the Evil One who had caught him, but the god of the mountains who was chasing him. Xia Hou followed him.

古文：夏侯随去，至高山之下，有宫阙焉。及其门，见二道士，问其平生所履，一一对答。
现代文：到了高山下，看到宫殿，走进门看见两个道士，问夏侯的生平经历，他都一一回答。
English: When he got to the foot of the mountain, he saw the palace, and when he walked through the door, he saw two Taoists. He asked Xia Hou about his life experience, and he answered them all.

古文：徐启曰，某曾服杨大夫丹五粒矣。
现代文：他慢慢地说，我曾服杨大夫五粒丹药。
English: He said slowly, "I once took Dr. Yang's five camphor pills.

古文：道士却令即回。夏侯拜谢曰： 某是得神丹之力，延续年命，愿改名延，可乎？ 
现代文：道士让他回去，夏侯拜谢道士，说： 我是得了神丹之力，延年益寿，想改名叫延，可以吗？ 
English: The Taoist asked him to go back. Xia Hou bowed and thanked the Taoist, saying, "I have gained the power of Shintan, extended my life, I want to change my name to Yan, is that okay?

古文：道士许之。复活，因改名延矣。
现代文：道士允许，他便复活了，因此改名延。
English: With the permission of the priest, he was resurrected, and his name was changed.

古文：杨自审丹之灵效，常以救人。
现代文：杨大夫也看出了丹药的神效，经常用它救人。
English: Dr. Yang also saw the miraculous effect of the herbal medicine and often used it to save people.

古文：其子暄，因自畿邑归京。未明，行二十余里，歇于大庄之上。忽闻庄中有惊喧哭泣之声。
现代文：他的儿子杨暄，因从城郊回京，天不亮就走了二十多里，在一个大庄上休息，忽然听到庄内有哭叫之声，他问是怎么回事？
English: His son Yang Hui, because he returned to Beijing from the outskirts of the city, walked more than twenty miles before dawn, rested on a large farm, and suddenly heard the sound of crying in the farm. He asked what was going on?

古文：问其故，主人之子暴卒。暄解衣带中，取丹一粒，令研而灌之，良久亦活。
现代文：是因为主人的儿子暴死，杨暄便从袋中取丹药一粒，叫人研碎灌服，过了一段时间也复活了。
English: It was because the owner's son died violently that Yang Hui took a grain of herbal medicine from his bag and had someone grind it and drink it. After a while, he also revived.

古文：杨物产赡足，早解所任，纵意闲放，唯以金石为务。
现代文：杨大夫积下很多家产，自己也解职还乡，随意闲游，唯有不忘炼丹。
English: Dr. Yang has accumulated a lot of family property. He has also been relieved of his duties and returned to his hometown. He can travel at will, but he must not forget to make dan.

古文：未尝有疾，年九十七而终。
现代文：未曾有过病，活到九十七岁。
English: He had never been ill and lived to the age of ninety-seven.

古文：晚年，遇人携一弓，问其名。
现代文：他晚年时，遇一人携一张大弓，他便问这弓叫什么名。
English: In his later years, when he met a man carrying a large bow, he asked him what the name of the bow was.

古文：云： 鸣砂弓也。
现代文：那人说： 是鸣砂弓。
English: The man said, "It is the sound of a sand bow."

古文：於角面之内，中有走砂。 
现代文：在角面内装有流动的砂子。 
English: The corner faces are filled with flowing sand.

古文：杨买而焚之，以报见救之者。
现代文：杨大夫买来焚烧，以报他当年在冥府中的再生之恩。
English: Dr. Yang bought it to burn as a reward for his rebirth in the underworld.

古文：其返魂丹方，云是救者授之，自密修制，故无能得其术者。
现代文：他的返魂丹药方，也说是救他的人传授给他的，他自己密秘配制，所以没办法能得到他的处方。
English: His soul-recovering potion, also said to have been given to him by his rescuer, was secretly concocted by himself, so there was no way to get his prescription.

古文：李主簿妻
现代文：李主簿妻
English: Lee's bookkeeper wife

古文：选人李主簿者，新婚。东过华岳，将妻入庙，谒金天王。
现代文：候补官员李主簿新婚不久，东过华山时，他和妻子进入庙中，参拜金天王。
English: When Li Muzhuo, an alternate official, was newly married, he and his wife went to the temple to worship the King of Heaven when they passed Huashan in the east.

古文：妻拜次，气绝而倒，唯心上微暖。
现代文：妻子拜完后便断气倒在地上，唯有心窝有些温热。
English: After the wife finished her prostration, she collapsed on the ground, only her heart was a little warm.

古文：过归店，走马诣华阴县求医卜之人。
现代文：回到店中，骑上马去华阴县城请医生和占卜的人。
English: Back in the shop, he got on his horse and rode to Huayin County to ask for a doctor and a fortuneteller.

古文：县宰曰： 叶仙师善符术，奉诏投龙回。去此半驿，公可疾往迎之。 
现代文：县官说： 叶仙师很会符术，奉皇帝旨意去做法事，去那里只有半站路，你要快去迎他。 
English: The prefectural official said: Ye Xianshi is very good at the art of writing, and will do things according to the emperor's will. There is only half a station to go there. You must go quickly to meet him.

古文：李公单马奔驰五十余里，遇之。
现代文：李主簿自己骑马跑了五十多里，遇到了。
English: Li Zhanbo ran more than fifty miles on horseback and encountered a dragon.

古文：李生下马，拜伏流涕，具言其事。
现代文：李主簿下马，向叶仙师伏地而拜，并痛哭流涕地讲了妻子急病的经过。
English: Master Li dismounted from his horse, bowed down to Ye Xian Shi, and tearfully told the story of his wife's sudden illness.

古文：仙师曰： 是何魅怪敢如此。 
现代文：仙师说： 是什么鬼怪敢这样？ 
English: The sorcerer said, "What kind of monster would dare to do such a thing?"

古文：遂与先行。谓从者曰： 鞍驮速驰来。待朱钵及笔。 
现代文：便和李先走了，并告诉跟从的人说，快骑马回去取东西，急等用朱钵和笔。
English: He and Li left first, and told his followers that they should quickly ride back to pick up the things, and use the crayons and pens as soon as possible.

古文：至店家，已闻哭声。
现代文：到了店家，已听到哭声。
English: When I got to the store, I heard crying.

古文：仙师入，见事急矣。且先将笔墨及纸来。遂画符焚香，以水噀之。
现代文：仙师走进，看到情况紧急，他先将笔墨和纸取出，便画符烧香，用水喷符。
English: When the sorcerer walked in, he saw that the situation was urgent. He first took out the pen, ink and paper. Then he drew a symbol, burned incense and sprayed a symbol with water.

古文：符化北飞去，声如旋风，良久无消息。
现代文：符化成灰往北飞去，声音像刮旋风似的，很久没动静。
English: It turned to ash and flew north. The sound was like a whirlwind, and it didn't move for a long time.

古文：仙师怒，又书一符，其声如雷，又无消息。
现代文：仙师大怒，又画一符，声音如雷，又没动静。
English: The sorcerer was enraged, and struck another chord. The sound was like thunder, but there was no movement.

古文：少顷，鞍驮到，取朱笔等，令李左右煮少许薄粥，以候其起。
现代文：待会儿，东西驮到，取出朱笔等，又让李主簿手下人煮少许薄粥，用以等李妻起来时食用。
English: After a while, he found something, took out the crayon, etc., and asked Li Shoubu's subordinates to cook some thin gruel for him to eat when Li's wife woke up.

古文：乃以朱画一道符，喷水叱之，声如霹雳。
现代文：又用红笔画了一道符，喷水呼叫，声如霹雳。
English: He also drew a sign with a red pen, sprayed water and called out, sounding like a cricket.

古文：须臾，口鼻有气，渐开眼能言。
现代文：不一会儿，李妻口鼻有气，渐渐睁开眼能说话了。
English: After a while, Li Zhen's mouth and nose were full of air, and she gradually opened her eyes and was able to speak.

古文：问之，某初拜时，金天王曰，好夫人。第二拜云，留取。
现代文：问她，她说，她刚拜时金天王说好夫人，第二拜时又说留下，并派左右把我扶进院。
English: When I asked her about it, she said that the first time she bowed to the King of Heaven, he said that she was a good wife. The second time she bowed to him, he said that she should stay, and he sent someone to escort me to the hospital.

古文：遣左右扶归院，适已三日。亲宾大集，忽闻敲门，门者走报王。王曰： 何不逐却。 
现代文：到第三天，亲朋都来了，忽听敲门声，守门人来报告金天王，金天王说： 为何不赶走？ 
English: On the third day, relatives and friends all came. Suddenly, they heard a knock at the door. The doorkeeper came to report to King Jintian. King Jintian said, "Why don't you drive them away?"

古文：乃第一符也。
现代文：这是第一道符。
English: This is the first sign.

古文：逡巡，门外闹甚。门者数人，细语於王耳。
现代文：很快，门外有吵闹声，好几个守门人对金天王细声耳语，金天王说： 准备叫她走。 
English: Soon, there was a commotion outside the door. Several doorkeepers whispered to King Jin Tianwang. King Jin Tianwang said, "Prepare to ask her to leave."

古文：王曰： 且发遣。 第二符也。
现代文：这是第二道符。
English: This is the second charm.

古文：俄有赤龙飞入，正扼王喉，才能出声。曰： 放去。 
现代文：一会儿有红色的龙飞进来，扼住金天王的咽喉，刚能发出声来，说： 放回去。 
English: A moment later, a red dragon flew in, grabbed the throat of the golden king, and just before he could utter a sound, he said, "Put it back."

古文：某遂有人送。乃第三符也。
现代文：就有人送我，这是第三道符。
English: Someone gave it to me. This is the third sign.

古文：李生罄装以谢，叶师一无所取。
现代文：李主簿厚谢仙师，叶仙师却一无所取。
English: Master Li thanked Master Ye profusely, but Master Ye got nothing.

古文：是知灵庙女子不得入也。
现代文：由此可以知道，神灵的庙女子是不能进的。
English: From this, we can know that the temple girls of the gods cannot enter.

