古文：国朝未改官制以前，从官丞、郎、直学士以降，身没太抵无赠典，唯尚书、学士有之，然亦甚薄。
现代文：宋朝元丰年间改革官制以前，从官丞、郎、直学士以下，死亡一般没有赠典，只尚书、学士有，不过也很微薄。
English: Before the reform of the official system during the Song Dynasty and Yuanfeng Dynasty, there was generally no award for the death of officials below the rank of vice-minister, junior minister, and direct bachelor. Only the title of Shangshu and bachelor were awarded, but they were very meager.

古文：余襄公、王素自工书得刑书，蔡君谟自端明、礼侍得吏侍耳。
现代文：余襄公，王素只不过从工部尚书得到刑部尚书，蔡君谨从端明殿学士、礼部侍郎得到吏部侍郎罢了。
English: Yu Xianggong, Wang Su only received the title of the Minister of Justice from the Minister of Industry, and Cai Junyi received the title of the Minister of the Ministry of Civil Service from the Minister of Ceremonies.

古文：元丰以后，待制以上皆有四官之恩，后遂以为常典，而致仕又迁一秩。
现代文：元丰以后待制以上的官员都可得到升四级官阶的恩惠，后来就把它作为定规，而退休辞官又升迁一级。
English: After Yuanfeng, all officials above the level of "pending retirement" could receive the benefit of promotion to the fourth level of official rank. Later, it was made a fixed rule, and retired officials were promoted to the first level.

古文：梁扬祖终宝文学士、宣奉大夫，既以致仕转光禄，遂赠特进、龙图学士，盖以为银青、金紫、特进只三官，故增其职，是从左丞得仆射也。
现代文：梁扬祖最终官做到宝文阁学士、宣奉大夫，辞官之后转为光禄大夫，于是赠给特进、龙图阁学士，因为银青光禄大夫、金紫光禄大夫、持进只三个官阶，所以增一级官职，这就是从左丞得到仆射了。
English: Liang Yangzu was finally promoted to Baowen Pavilion Bachelor and Xuanbo Pavilion Doctor, and after he was promoted to Guanglu Pavilion Doctor, he was awarded the Special Promotion and Longtu Pavilion Bachelor. Because the Silver and Blue Guanglu Pavilion Doctor and the Gold and Purple Guanglu Pavilion Doctor were only promoted to three ranks, he was promoted to the next rank. This is how he was promoted from the left to the right.

古文：节度使旧制赠侍中或太尉，官制行，多赠开府。
现代文：节度使按旧规定赠给侍中或太尉，元丰官制实行后，大多赠给开府仪同三司。
English: According to the old regulations, the award was given to a chamberlain or a captain, but after the implementation of the Yuanfeng official system, most of them were given to the Kaifu ceremony and the three departments.

古文：秦桧创立检校少保之例，以赠王德、叶梦得、张澄，近岁王彦遂用之，实无所益也。
现代文：秦桧创立检校少保的例规，把它赠给王德、叶梦得、张澄，近年来王彦就采用它，实际上没有什么益处。
English: Qin Hui created the regulations for the inspection of school junior guards, and gave it to Wang De, Ye Mengde, and Zhang Cheng. In recent years, Wang Yan has adopted it, but it is actually of little benefit.

古文：元祐中，王岩叟终于朝奉郎、端明殿学士，以尝签书枢密院，故超赠正议大夫。
现代文：元祐年间，王岩叟官做到朝奉郎、端明点学士，因为曾任枢密院签书，所以超级赠给正议大夫。
English: During the Yuan Dynasty, Wang Yan, a eunuch, became a court eunuch and a Duanming point scholar. Because he had been a signatory of the Privy Council, he was given the super-award of the chief councilor.

古文：杨愿终于朝奉郎、资政殿学士，但赠朝请大夫，以执政而赠郎秩，轻重为不侔，皆掌故之失也。
现代文：杨愿官做到朝奉郎、资政殿学士，只赠给朝请大夫，因为执政而赠给郎官级别，轻重不同等，都属于旧制的失误。
English: Yang Jianguan achieved the rank of courtier and the title of scholar of the House of Councillors, but only gave it to the courtier-in-waiting, and because he was in power, he was given the rank of courtier-in-waiting, with different levels of importance, all of which were mistakes of the old system.

