古文：凡战，若敌众我寡，暴来围我，须相察众寡、虚实之形，不可轻易遁去，恐为尾击。当圆阵外向，受敌之围，虽有缺处，我自塞之，以坚士卒心。四面奋击，必获其利。
现代文：凡是在作战中，如果敌众我寡，敌人突然对我实施包围时，我必须在查明敌人众寡强弱情况后采取行动，不可轻易未经交战就逃走，这主要怕被敌人尾随追击，我应布列成圆形阵地而外向，以迎战敌人的围攻；敌人即使留有缺口处，我军应当自己把它堵塞，以此坚定士卒拚死一战的决心，四面奋击围攻之敌，这样就一定能获得胜利。
English: Whenever in battle, if the enemy is outnumbered and the enemy suddenly encircles me, I must take action after ascertaining the number and strength of the enemy. I must not easily flee without engaging. This is mainly for fear of being followed and pursued by the enemy. I should set up a circular position and face outward to meet the enemy's siege. Even if the enemy leaves a gap, our army should plug it by itself, so as to strengthen the determination of the soldiers to die in a battle, and fight the besieging enemy on all sides. In this way, we will surely win victory.

古文：法曰： 敌若众，则相众而受敌。 
现代文：诚如兵法所说： 敌人如果兵力众多，就要在查明敌情后，准备在可能被包围的情况下迎战敌人。 
English: As it is said in the Art of War: If the enemy has a large number of troops, after ascertaining the enemy's situation, it is necessary to prepare to meet the enemy in a situation where it may be surrounded.

古文：《北史》：魏普泰元年，高欢讨并州刺史尔朱兆。孝武帝永熙元年春，拔邺。
现代文：《北史》记载：北魏节闵帝普泰元年，高欢进攻邺地，孝武帝永熙元年春季，攻下邺城。
English: "Northern History" records: In the first year of the Northern Wei Dynasty, Emperor Pu Tai, Gao Huan attacked Fucheng, and Emperor Yongxi, in the spring of the first year of the Northern Wei Dynasty, captured Fucheng.

古文：尔朱光自长安，兆自并州，度律自洛阳，仲远自东郡，同会于邺，众二十万，挟漳水而军。
现代文：这时，尔朱光率军自长安出发，尔朱兆率军自晋阳出发，尔朱度律率军自洛阳出发，尔朱仲远率军自东郡出发，企图四路会师于邺城地区围攻高欢军，共有兵力二十万人，凭据洹水而扎营。
English: At this time, Er Zhu Guang led the army from Chang'an, Er Zhu Zhao led the army from Jinyang, Er Zhu Du Li led the army from Luoyang, and Er Zhu Zhongyuan led the army from Dong County, attempting to gather four divisions to besiege the Gaohuan army in the Lucheng area, with a total of 200,000 troops, and camped according to Surabaya.

古文：欢出顿紫陌，马不满三千，步不满三万。
现代文：高欢领兵自邺南下进驻紫陌，其部队有骑兵不足二千人、步兵不满三万人，双方兵力相差悬殊。
English: Gao Huan led his troops from the south of Shan into Zhimo. His troops had less than two thousand cavalry and less than thirty thousand infantry, and there was a great disparity in the strength of the two sides.

古文：乃于韩陵为圆阵，连牛驴以塞归路，将士皆为必死，选精锐步骑从中出，四面击之，大破兆等。
现代文：高欢将其部队于韩陵山布列成环形阵地，又把牛驴连缀一起，堵塞了自己的退路。将士看见这种情况就认为非拼死决战不可。高欢挑选精锐步骑兵从阵地中突然冲出，四面袭击围攻之敌，打垮了尔朱光、尔朱兆等军的包围。
English: Gao Huan arranged his troops into a ring-shaped position on Hanling Mountain, and also linked the cattle and donkeys together, blocking his escape route. When the generals saw this situation, they thought that a desperate battle was inevitable. Gao Huan selected elite infantry and cavalry to suddenly rush out of the position, attacked the besieging enemy on all sides, and broke the encirclement of Lzhu Guang, Lzhu Zhao and other troops.

