古文：起强圉大荒落，尽屠维协洽，凡三年。
现代文：起强圉大荒落，尽屠维协洽，一共三年。
English: a total of three years. The thirteenth year of Emperor Jian of An

古文：昭宗圣穆景文孝皇帝中之上乾宁四年
现代文：唐昭宗乾宁四年
English: Tang Zhaozong Qianning four years

古文：春，正月，甲申，韩建奏： 防城将张行思等告睦、济、韶、通、彭、韩、仪、陈八王谋杀臣，劫车驾幸河中。 
现代文：春季正月，甲申，韩建向朝廷上奏说： 华州防城将张行思等控告皇室的睦、济、韶、通、彭、韩、仪、陈八王图谋杀害我，要劫持皇上的车驾到河中去。 
English: In the first month of spring, in Jiaxing, Han Jian made a report to the imperial court, saying: Huazhou Fucheng will sue Zhang Xingshi and other members of the imperial family for attempting to murder me and hijack the emperor's car and drive it into the river.

古文：建恶诸王典兵，故使行思等告之。
现代文：韩建憎恨各王掌管军队，因此指使张行思等控告他们。
English: Han Jian hated the kings in charge of the army, so he ordered Zhang Xingsi and others to sue them.

古文：上大惊，召建谕之，建称疾不入。
现代文：昭宗接到韩建的表章大为惊慌，召见韩建，想向他说明，韩建以有病为托词拒不前来。
English: Shozong was greatly alarmed to receive Han Jian's signature and summoned him to explain that Han Jian refused to come on the pretext that he was ill.

古文：令诸王诣建自陈，建表称： 诸王忽诣臣理所，不测事端。
现代文：唐昭宗又命令各王到韩建那里去自行陈述，韩建上表道： 各王若忽然来我的住所，变乱之事难以揣测。
English: Tang Zhaozong also ordered the kings to go to Han Jian to make their own statements. Han Jian said: If the kings suddenly come to my residence, it is difficult to predict what will happen.

古文：臣详酌事体，不应与诸王相见。 
现代文：我仔细斟酌这件事，不应当和各王见面。 
English: I have carefully considered this matter, and it is not right for me to meet with kings.

古文：又称： 诸王当自避嫌疑，不可轻为举措。
现代文：韩建又说： 各王应当自动避开嫌疑，不可轻举妄动。
English: Han Jian also said: All kings should automatically avoid suspicion and should not act rashly.

古文：陛下若以友爱含容，请依旧制，令归十六宅，妙选师傅，教以诗书，不令典兵预政。 
现代文：陛下如果因为同祖同宗的友爱之情而宽容他们，就请依照旧制，命令诸王回到十六宅，精心挑选师傅，教他们学习诗文书画，而不让他们掌管军队干预朝政。 
English: If Your Majesty tolerates them out of the love for their ancestors, please order the kings to return to the Sixteen Mansions according to the old system, carefully select masters, teach them to study poetry and painting, and not let them control the army to interfere in the government.

古文：且曰： 乞散彼乌合之兵，用光麟趾之化。 
现代文：韩建并且说： 请求解散各王手下的乌合之众，以光大大唐皇室子孙的教化。 
English: Han Jian also said: Request the dissolution of the rabble under the hands of each king, and the enlightenment of the descendants of the Tang royal family.

古文：建虑上不从，仍引麾下精兵围行宫，表疏连上。
现代文：韩建担心唐昭宗不依从他的意见，就带领手下精壮士兵围困昭宗的行宫，表章奏疏接二连三地向朝廷呈递。
English: Han Jian was worried that Tang Zhaozong would not follow his advice, so he led his able-bodied soldiers to besiege Zhaozong's imperial palace and presented the imperial resumes to the imperial court one after another.

古文：上不得已，是夕，诏诸王所领军士并纵归田里，诸王勒归十六宅，其甲兵并委韩建收掌。
现代文：昭宗不得已，在这天傍晚，诏令各王所管领的军中士兵全都解散遣回田间故里，强迫诸王回到十六宅，各王原有的盔甲兵器全部交给韩建掌管。
English: As a last resort, in the evening of that day, Emperor Zhaozong ordered all the soldiers in the army under the command of the kings to be disbanded and sent back to the fields, forced the kings to return to the Sixteen Mansions, and handed over all the original armored weapons of the kings to Han Jian.

古文：建又奏： 陛下选贤任能，足清祸乱，何必别置殿后四军。
现代文：韩建又上奏说： 陛下挑选贤良任用能人，这样足可以清除祸患平定战乱，何必另外设置安圣、捧宸、保宁、宣化这四支亲军呢！
English: Han Jian also said in his report: His Majesty selects virtuous and appoints capable people, so that he can remove the scourge and quell the war. Why do you need to set up the four pro-armies of Anshan, Huping, Boryeong and Xuanhua?

古文：纵有厚薄之恩，乖无偏无党之道。
现代文：显然皇恩有厚薄亲疏之分，与没有偏向没有私党这样的王道相背离。
English: It is clear that the royal favor is divided into thick and thin kinship and estrangement, which is contrary to the royal way of no partiality and no private party.

古文：且所聚皆坊市无赖奸猾之徒，平居犹思祸变，临难必不为用，而使之张弓挟刃，密迩皇舆，臣窃寒心，乞皆罢。 
现代文：况且这四支陛下亲军里，聚集的都是市镇里巷中游手好闲奸邪狡猾的无赖，他们的平静安居的时候还企图作乱惹祸发动变乱，当朝廷遇到艰难处境他们一定不会为陛下效力的，可是现在却让这帮人拉弓拔刀，紧紧地跟随陛下的车驾，我私下里为陛下担惊受怕，请求立即把亲军全部解散。 
English: Moreover, these four armies of His Majesty's loyal subjects are made up of the most unscrupulous and crafty scoundrels in the streets and alleys of the town. When they were living peacefully, they tried to stir up trouble and start a riot. When the imperial court is in a difficult situation, they would certainly not be of any use to His Majesty. However, now that they are following closely behind His Majesty's carriage, I am privately worried and frightened for His Majesty and request that all the loyal subjects be disbanded immediately.

古文：遣诏亦从之。
现代文：昭宗颁下诏书，又依从了韩建的意见。
English: Zhaozong issued an edict and followed Han Jian's advice.

古文：于是殿后四军二万馀人悉散，天子之亲军尽矣。
现代文：于是，护卫昭宗的四支军队二万余人全部解散，天子的亲军完全裁撤了。
English: As a result, the four armies of more than 20,000 men guarding Akizong were all disbanded, and the pro-Son of Heaven army was completely abolished.

古文：捧日都头李筠，石门扈从功第一，建复奏斩于大云桥。
现代文：捧日都头李筠，当初在石门跟随护卫昭宗，功劳堪数第一，韩建又上奏朝廷，将李筠在华州大云桥斩杀。
English: Li Jian, who was the head of the capital at that time, initially followed the escort Akimune in Shimen, and was the first to do so. Han Jian then appealed to the imperial court and had Li Jian beheaded in Huazhou Dayun Bridge.

古文：建又奏： 玄宗之末，永王璘暂出江南，遽谋不轨。
现代文：韩建接着又向昭宗奏道： 玄宗末年，永王李暂时调出京师到江南任职，马上就背叛朝廷图谋不轨。
English: Han Jian then recited to Akimune: In the last years of Emperor Xuanzong, Yong Wang Li temporarily transferred the Beijing division to serve in the south of the Yangtze River, and immediately betrayed the imperial court and plotted.

古文：代宗时吐蕃入寇，光启中硃玫乱常，皆援立宗支以系人望。
现代文：代宗时，吐蕃侵入，拥立广武王李承宏。光启年间，朱玫叛逆作乱，拥立襄王李。
English: During the reign of Emperor Taizong, Tubo invaded and supported the Guangwu King, Li Chenghong. During the reign of Emperor Guangqi, Zhu Mei rebelled and supported the Xiang Wang Li.

古文：今诸王衔命四方者，乞皆召还。 
现代文：他们都是靠着拥立皇族宗室的分支来笼络民心。现在奉陛下之命在各地的皇室诸王，请求把他们全都召回朝廷。 
English: They are all relying on the support of the branch of the royal family to win the hearts and minds of the people. Now, on the orders of His Majesty, the royal kings from all over the world are requesting that they all be recalled to the imperial court.

古文：又奏： 诸方士出入禁庭，眩惑圣听，宜皆禁止，无得入宫。 
现代文：韩建还奏称： 那些鼓吹仙术的方士在皇宫出出进进，迷惑皇帝的耳目，应当一律禁止，不许他们进入皇宫。 
English: Han Jian also said: Those sorcerers who propagate magic and go in and out of the imperial palace, confusing the emperor's ears and eyes, should be banned, and they should not be allowed to enter the imperial palace.

古文：诏悉从之。
现代文：昭宗下诏全都依从韩建的奏请。
English: Zhaozong's edict all followed Han Jian's request.

古文：建既幽诸王于别第，知上意不悦，乃奏请立德王为太子，欲以解之。
现代文：韩建把皇室各王幽禁在其他府第后，知道昭宗心中不高兴，便上呈奏章请求立德王为太子，想以此来缓解。
English: After Han Jian banned all the kings of the imperial family to other prefectures, he knew that Zhaozong was not happy, so he presented a petition to request the enthronement of King De as the crown prince, hoping to alleviate the situation.

古文：丁亥，诏立德王祐为皇太子，仍更名裕。
现代文：丁亥，昭宗颁下诏令，立德王李为皇太子，按成制改名为李裕。
English: Dinghai, Zhaozong issued a decree, making King Li the crown prince and changing his name to Li Yu.

古文：庞师古、葛从周并兵攻郓州，硃瑄兵少食尽，不复出战，但引水为深壕以自固。
现代文：庞师古、葛从周联合军队攻打郓州的朱，朱人马较少粮食也吃尽，便不再出城交战，只是引水灌满堑壕自行固守。
English: Pang Shigu and Ge Cong Zhou's joint army attacked Zhu in Luzhou, but Zhu's men and horses ate less food and ran out, so they no longer went out of the city to fight, but filled the trenches with water and defended themselves.

古文：辛卯，师古等营于水西南，命为俘梁。
现代文：辛卯，庞师古等在水流的的西南安设营寨，命令士兵建造浮桥。
English: Xinwu, Pang Shigu and others set up camps in the southwest of the current and ordered soldiers to build a pontoon bridge.

古文：登已，潜决濠水。
现代文：癸巳，庞师古的士兵偷偷挖开堑壕放水。
English: Suddenly, Pang Shigu's soldiers secretly dug a trench to release water.

古文：丙申，浮梁成，师古夜以中军先济。
现代文：丙申，浮桥造成，庞师古夜里派遣中军首先越过堑壕。
English: Bishen, caused by the floating bridge, Pang division sent the Chinese army to cross the trench first in the ancient night.

古文：瑄闻之，弃城奔中都，葛从周逐之，野人执瑄及妻子以献。
现代文：朱听说后放弃郓州城逃奔中都县，葛从周随即追击，乡下农人抓获朱和他的妻子儿子交送葛从周。
English: After hearing the news, Zhu abandoned Zhangzhou City and fled to Zhongdu County. Ge Cong Zhou immediately pursued him. Rural farmers captured Zhu and his wife and son and handed them over to Ge Cong Zhou.

古文：己亥，罢孙亻屋凤翔四面行营节度等使，以副都统李思谏为宁塞节度使。
现代文：已亥，朝廷免去孙的凤翔四面行营节度等使的官职，任命副都统李思谏为宁塞节度使。
English: In the year of the boar, the imperial court removed Sun's Fengxiang from the official position of the festival envoy, and appointed Deputy Metropolitan Li Siyu as the Ningxia festival envoy.

古文：钱镠使行军司马杜稜救婺州。
现代文：钱派令行军司马杜棱救援婺州。
English: Qian sent marching troops led by Sima Duren to rescue Zhangzhou.

古文：安仁义移兵攻睦州，不克而还。
现代文：围攻婺州的安仁义于是调动军队去攻打睦州，结果没有攻克而率众返回。
English: An Renyi, who was besieging Bozhou, then mobilized his army to attack Mutsu Province. As a result, he was not defeated and led his people back to Muzhou.

古文：硃全忠入郓州，以庞师古为天平留后。
现代文：朱全忠进入郓州，任命庞师古为天平留后。
English: Zhu Quanzhong entered Zhangzhou and appointed Pang Shigu as the chief of the balance.

古文：硃瑾留大将康怀贞守兗州。与河东将史俨、李承嗣掠徐州之境给军食。
现代文：朱瑾留下大将康怀贞守卫兖州，他自己与河东李克用的将领史俨、李承嗣一起到徐州境内抢掠以供给军需粮食。
English: Zhu Xi left the general Kang Huai Zhen to guard Ganzhou, and he himself, together with the generals Shi Xi and Li Cheng Ci, who were used by Li Ke of Hedong, went to loot the territory of Xuzhou to supply the army with grain.

古文：全忠闻之，遣嵩从周将兵袭兗州。
现代文：朱全忠得知，便派葛从周带领军队袭击兖州。
English: When Zhu Quanzhong learned of this, he sent Ge Zhou to lead an army to attack Zhangzhou.

古文：怀贞闻郓州已失守，汴兵奄至，遂降。
现代文：康怀贞得知郓州已经失守，朱全忠的汴州军队突然来到，于是向葛从周投降。
English: When Kang Huai Zhen learned that Zhangzhou had been lost, Zhu Quanzhong's Zhangzhou army suddenly arrived, so she surrendered to Ge Cong Zhou.

古文：二月，戊申，从周入兗州，获瑾妻子。
现代文：二月，戊申，葛从周进入兖州城，抓获朱瑾的妻子、儿子。
English: In February, Wu Shen and Ge Zhou entered Zhangzhou City and captured Zhu Xi's wife and son.

古文：硃瑾还，无所归，帅其众趋沂州，刺史尹处宾不纳，走保海州，为汴兵所逼，与史俨、李承嗣拥州民度淮，奔杨行密。
现代文：朱瑾返回兖州时，没有归处，便率领手下人马奔往沂州，沂州刺史尹处宾不接纳，珠瑾无奈又奔往海州固守，又受到汴州军队的进攻逼迫，最后与史俨、李承嗣裹挟海州的百姓渡过淮水，投奔杨行密。
English: When Zhu Xi returned to Zhangzhou, he had no place to return to, so he led his men to rush to Zhangzhou. Zhangzhou did not accept Shi Yin as a guest, Zhu Xi reluctantly rushed to Haizhou to hold on, and was attacked and persecuted by the Zhangzhou army. Finally, he crossed Huai Shui with Shi Xi and Li Chengzhi, and rushed to Yang Xingmi.

古文：行密逆之于高邮，表瑾领武宁节度使。
现代文：杨行密在高邮迎接朱瑾，并向朝廷表请任命朱瑾遥领武宁节度使。
English: Yang Xingmi met Zhu Rong at Gaoyou, and asked the imperial table to appoint Zhu Rongyao as the ambassador to the Wu Ning Festival.

古文：全忠纳瑾之妻，引兵还，张夫人逆于封丘，全忠以得瑾妻告之。
现代文：朱全忠收纳的朱瑾的妻子，带领军队返回汴州，朱全忠的妻子张夫人在封丘县迎接，朱全忠把收纳朱瑾妻子的事告诉张夫人。
English: Zhu Quanzhong received Zhu Xi's wife and led the army back to Zhangzhou. Zhu Quanzhong's wife, Mrs. Zhang, met him in Fengqiu County. Zhu Quanzhong told Mrs. Zhang about receiving Zhu Xi's wife.

古文：夫人请见之，瑾妻拜，夫人答拜，且泣曰： 兗、郓与司空同姓，约为兄弟，以小故恨望，起兵相攻，使吾姒辱于此。
现代文：张夫人请求会见朱瑾妻子，朱瑾妻子拜见张夫人，张夫人以同样的礼节答谢，并且流着眼泪说： 兖州的朱瑾、郓州的朱与司空朱全忠是同姓，他们相约结为兄弟，因为很小的缘故而产生怨恨，竟兵戎相见互相攻打，以致使嫂子你受到这样的侮辱。
English: Mrs. Zhang asked to meet Zhu Quanzhong's wife, Zhu Quanzhong's wife asked to meet Mrs. Zhang, Mrs. Zhang replied with the same courtesy, and said with tears: Zhu Quanzhong of Zhangzhou, Zhu Quanzhong of Zhangzhou and Zhu Quanzhong of Sikuo have the same surname. They made an appointment to become brothers, but because of a very small reason, resentment arose, and they fought against each other, so that your sister-in-law suffered such an insult.

古文：他日汴州失守，吾亦如吾姒之今日乎！ 
现代文：将来有一天汴州失守，我也要象嫂子你今天这样了！ 
English: One day in the future, Zhangzhou will be lost, and I want to be like my sister-in-law, like you are today!

古文：全忠乃送瑾妻于佛寺为尼，斩硃宣于汴桥。
现代文：朱全忠这才把朱瑾妻子送到佛寺里做尼姑，在汴桥斩杀朱。
English: It was then that Zhu Quanzhong sent Zhu Xi's wife to become a nun in a Buddhist temple and beheaded Zhu on the bridge.

古文：于是郓、齐、曹、棣、兗、沂、密、徐、宿、陈、许、郑、滑、濮皆入于全忠。
现代文：于是，天平节度使管辖的郓州、齐州、曹州、棣州，秦宁节度使管辖的兖州、沂州、密州，感化节度使管辖的徐州、宿州，忠武节度使管辖的陈州、许州，宣义节度使管辖的郑州、滑州、濮州，全都归属朱全忠统管。
English: As a result, the Tianping Festival under the jurisdiction of Zhangzhou, Qizhou, Caozhou and Zhangzhou, the Qin Ning Festival under the jurisdiction of Zhangzhou, Zhangzhou and Mizhou, the Qianhua Festival under the jurisdiction of Xuzhou and Suzhou, the Zhongwu Festival under the jurisdiction of Chenzhou and Huzhou, and the Xuan Yi Festival under the jurisdiction of Zhengzhou, Nanzhou and Zhangzhou, all belong to Zhu Quanzhong.

古文：惟王师范保淄青一道，亦服于全忠。
现代文：只有王师范保存淄青一道，也服从了朱全忠。
English: Only Wang Shifan preserved indigo and also obeyed Zhu Quanzhong.

古文：李存信在魏州，闻兗、郓皆陷，引兵还。
现代文：这时，李存信在魏州，他听说兖州、郓州都被朱全忠攻占，便带领人马返回晋阳。
English: At this time, Li Cunxin was in Weizhou. When he heard that Bozhou and Zhangzhou had been occupied by Zhu Quanzhong, he led his men back to Jinyang.

古文：淮南旧善水战，不知骑射，及得河东、兗、郓兵，军声大振。
现代文：淮南节度使杨行密的军队以往擅长水上作战，而不熟悉骑马射箭，等到杨行密接收了河东李克用、兖州朱瑾、郓州朱人马，军队声势大为振作。
English: The Huainan Festival made Yang Xingmi's army good at water combat in the past, but not familiar with horse riding and archery. When Yang Xingmi received Li Keying from Hedong, Zhu Xi from Zhangzhou, and Zhu Renma from Zhangzhou, the army was very excited.

古文：史俨、李承嗣皆河东骁将，李克用深惜之，遣使间道诣杨行密请之。
现代文：史俨、李承嗣都是河东节度使李克用手下的勇猛战将，李克用对他们到杨行密那里很是惋惜，派遣使者从小道前去向杨行密请求放回史俨、李承嗣。
English: Shi Yan and Li Chengzhi were both brave generals who had been sent by Li Ke to the Hedong Festival. Li Ke was very sorry to see them go to Yang Xingmi, and sent an envoy to Yang Xingmi to request the release of Shi Yan and Li Chengzhi.

古文：行密许之，亦遣使诣克用修好。
现代文：杨行密同意，也派出使者到李克用那里重修和好。
English: Yang Xingmi agreed and also sent an envoy to Li Keqiang to restore the peace.

古文：戊午，王建遣邛州刺史华洪、彭州刺史王宗祐将兵五万攻东川，以戎州刺史王宗谨为凤翔西面行营先锋使，败凤翔李继徽等于玄武。
现代文：戊午，西川节度使王建派遣邛州刺史华洪、彭州刺史王宗带领军队五万攻打东川节度使顾彦晖，任命戎州刺史王宗谨为凤翔西南行营先锋使，在梓州玄武县打败凤翔节度使李茂贞的将领李继徽等。
English: In the afternoon of the 3rd day of the 3rd month, Wang Jian, the governor of the West River, dispatched the governor of Bozhou, Shishi Hua Hong, and the governor of Pengzhou, Shishi Wang Zong, to lead an army of 50,000 to attack the governor of the East River, Shishi Gu Yan, and appointed the governor of Eunshu, Shishi Wang Zong, to be the vanguard of Fengxiang's southwest campaign. Li Jihui, the general who defeated Fengxiang's governor, Shishi Li Maozhen, in Xuanwu County, Zizhou, and so on.

古文：继徽本姓杨，名崇本，茂贞之假子也。
现代文：李继徽本来姓杨，名崇本，是李茂贞的养子。
English: Originally, Li Jihui's surname was Yang, his name was Chong, and he was the adopted son of Li Maozhen.

古文：己未，赦天下。
现代文：己未，朝廷诏令天下大赦。
English: Not long after, the Imperial Court issued a decree granting amnesty to the whole world.

古文：上飨行庙。
现代文：唐昭宗到行庙祭献。
English: Tang Zhaozong went to the temple to offer sacrifices.

古文：庚申，王建以决云都知兵马使王宗侃为应援开峡都指挥使，将兵八千趋渝州；决胜都知兵马使王宗阮为开江防送进奉使，将兵七千趋沪州。
现代文：庚申，王建任命决云都知兵马使王宗侃为应援开峡都指挥使，带领军队八千奔赴渝州；任命决胜都知兵马使王宗阮为开江防送进奉使，带领军队七千奔赴泸州。
English: According to Goshun, Wang Jian appointed Wang Zongqian, commander of the victorious soldiers and horses of the decisive battle of Yundu, as the commander of the supporting troops of Kaixia, and led the army of eight thousand to Yuzhou; appointed the victorious soldiers and horses of the victorious soldiers and horses of the decisive battle of Yundu, Wang Zong Ruan, as the commander of the defending troops of Kaijiang, sent the envoy, and led the army of seven thousand to Luzhou.

古文：辛未，宗侃取渝州，降刺史牟崇厚；癸酉，宗阮拔泸州，斩刺史马敬儒，峡路始通。
现代文：辛未，王宗侃攻取渝州，渝州刺史牟崇厚投降。癸酉，王宗阮攻克泸州，斩杀泸州刺史马敬儒，峡路开始打通。
English: Xinwei, Wang Zongkan conquered Yuzhou, Yuzhou stabbed Shimu Chonghuo surrendered., Wang Zong Ruan conquered Zhangzhou, killed Zhangzhou stabbed Ma Jingru, and the gorge road began to open.

古文：凤翔将李继昭救梓州，留偏将守剑门，西川将王宗播击擒之。
现代文：凤翔节度使李茂贞的将领李继昭救援梓州，留下属将据守剑门，西川将领王宗播袭击擒获了他。
English: The Fengxiang Festival made Li Maozhen's general Li Jizhao rescue Zizhou, leaving his subordinates to guard the Jianmen, and the West River general Wang Zonghan attacked and captured him.

古文：乙亥，门下侍郎、同平章事孙亻屋罢守本官，中书侍郎、同平章事硃朴罢为秘书监。
现代文：乙亥，朝廷将门下侍郎、同平章事孙罢去官衔，只留本职，将中书侍郎、同平章事朱朴罢职贬为秘书监。
English: At the end of the 19th century, the imperial court removed the official title of the servant of the door and the grandson of Tongping Zhang Jizhi, leaving only their duties, and demoted the position of Zhongshu waiter and Tongping Zhang Jizhi Zhu Pu to secretary supervisor.

古文：朴既秉政，所言皆不效，外议沸腾。
现代文：朱朴充任宰相主持朝政后，事先所说的话都没有见效，朝外议论纷纷。
English: After Zhu Puchong was appointed as prime minister to preside over the government, the words spoken in advance had no effect, and there were many discussions outside the DPRK.

古文：太子詹事马道殷以天文，将作监许岩士以医得幸于上，韩建诬二人以罪而杀之，且言亻屋、朴与二人交通，故罢相。
现代文：太子詹事马道殷因为通晓天文，将作监许岩士因为懂医而得到唐昭宗宠爱，韩建诬陷马道殷、许岩士二人有罪而斩杀了他们，并且又说孙、朱朴与这两个人相互交往窜通信息，因此将他们罢去了宰相官职。
English: Prince Zhan Zhi Ma Dao Yin was a connoisseur of astronomy, and he was the favorite of Tang Zhaozong because he knew medicine. Han Jian framed Ma Dao Yin and Xu Yanshi and killed them, and he also said that Sun and Zhu Pu communicated with each other and exchanged information with these two people, so he removed them from the prime minister's post.

古文：诏以杨行密为江南诸道行营都统，以讨武昌节度使杜洪。
现代文：唐昭宗颁下诏令，任命杨行密为江南诸道行营都统，以便讨伐武昌节度使杜洪。
English: Emperor Zhaozong of Tang Dynasty issued a decree, appointing Yang Xingmi as the governor of the southern part of the Yangtze River, in order to fight against Du Hong, the military governor of Wuchang.

古文：张佶克邵州，擒蒋勋。
现代文：张佶攻克邵州，擒获邵州刺史蒋勋。
English: Zhang Ye attacked Shaoshou and captured Shaoshou's assassin, Jiang Xun.

古文：三月，丙子，硃全忠表曹州刺史葛从周为泰宁留后，硃友裕为天平留后，庞师古为武宁留后。
现代文：三月，丙子，朱全忠向朝廷进呈表请求任命曹州刺史葛从周为泰宁留后，朱友裕为天平留后，庞师古为武宁留后。
English: In March, Zhi Zi, Zhu Quanzhong submitted a petition to the imperial court requesting the appointment of Caozhou Zhi Shige from Zhou to stay in Taining, Zhu Youyu to stay in Tianping, and Pang Shigu to stay in Wuning.

古文：保义节度使王珙攻护国节度使王珂，珂求援于李克用，珙求援于硃全忠。
现代文：保义节度使王珙攻打护国节度使王珂，王珂向李克用求援，王珙则向朱全忠求援。
English: The Festival of Defending Righteousness made Wang Yao attack and defend the country; the Festival of Defending the Country made Wang Ke attack and defend the country; Wang Ke asked Li Ke for help; Wang Yao asked Zhu Quanzhong for help.

古文：宣武将张存敬、杨师厚败河中兵于猗氏南。河东将李嗣昭败陕兵于猗氏，又败之于张店，遂解河中之围。
现代文：宣武军将领张存敬、杨师厚在猗氏南部打败河中军队；河东军队将领李嗣昭在猗氏打败陕州人马，接着又在张店再次打败陕州军队，于是解除了对河中的围困。
English: Zhang Cunjing and Yang Shihou, the generals of the Xuanwu army, defeated the Hechu army in the southern part of the Shan State; Li Shizhao, the general of the eastern part of the Hechu army, defeated the Shaanxi soldiers and horses in the Shan State, and then defeated the Shaanxi army again in Zhangdian, thus lifting the siege of Hechu.

古文：师厚，斤沟人；嗣昭，克用弟克柔之假子也。
现代文：杨师厚是斤沟镇人，李嗣昭是李克用胞弟李克柔的养子。
English: Yang Shihou is from Jinguo Town, and Li Shizhao is the adopted son of Li Kejun's brother Li Ke Rong.

古文：更名感义军曰昭武，治利州，以前静难节度使苏文建为节度使。
现代文：朝廷诏令，将感义军改名为昭武军，节度使司设在利州，任命以前的静难节度使苏文建为昭武节度使。
English: The Imperial Court issued a decree to change the name of the Revolutionary Army to the Shouwu Army, and to set up the festival envoy office in Lizhou. The former Jingnan Festival envoy, Su Wenjian, was appointed as the Shouwu Festival envoy.

古文：夏，四月，以同州防御使李继瑭为匡国节度使。
现代文：夏季四月，朝廷任命同州防御使李继瑭为匡国节度使。
English: In the summer of April, the imperial court appointed the defense minister of Tongzhou, Li Jizhe, as the Kuangguo Festival envoy.

古文：继瑭，茂贞之养子也。
现代文：李继瑭是李茂贞的养子。
English: Li Jizhe is the adopted son of Li Maozhen.

古文：以右谏议大夫李洵为两川宣谕使，和解王建及顾彦晖。
现代文：朝廷任命右谏议大夫李洵为两川宣谕使，前往劝说西川节度使王建与东川节度使顾彦晖和解。
English: The imperial court appointed the doctor of the Right Division of the Council of Elders, Li Yan, as the envoy of the two rivers, and he went to persuade the West River Sect to make Wang Jian and the East River Sect to make Gu Yan to reconcile.

古文：辛亥，钱镠遣顾全武等将兵三千自海道救嘉兴，己未，至城下，击淮南兵，大破之。
现代文：辛亥，钱派遣顾全武等带领军队三千乘船由海道前往救援嘉兴，己未，来到嘉兴城下，攻打正在围攻嘉兴的淮南军队，结果把淮南军队打得大败。
English: In Xinhai, Qian dispatched Gu Quanwu and others to lead an army of three thousand by boat from the sea to rescue Jiaxing. He did not come to Jiaxing, but attacked the Huainan army that was besieging Jiaxing. As a result, the Huainan army was defeated.

古文：杜洪为杨行密所攻，求救于硃全忠。全忠遣其将聂金掠泗州，硃友恭攻黄州。
现代文：杜洪受到杨行密的进攻，向朱全忠求救，朱全忠派遣手下将领聂金掠扰泗州，命朱友恭攻打黄州。
English: Du Hong was attacked by Yang Xingmi and appealed to Zhu Quanzhong for help. Zhu Quanzhong dispatched his generals to raid Zhangzhou, and ordered Zhu Youqong to attack Huangzhou.

古文：行密遣右黑云都指挥使马珣等救黄州。
现代文：杨行密则派遣右黑云都指挥使马等救援黄州。
English: Yang Xingmi, on the other hand, dispatched Right Hei Yun Du to command the horses and other horses to rescue Huangzhou.

古文：黄州刺史瞿章闻友恭至，弃城，拥众南保武昌寨。
现代文：黄州刺史瞿章听说朱友恭前来，便放弃黄州城，裹挟民众向南逃往武昌寨固守。
English: After hearing that Zhu Youqiong was coming, Zhang Shishi of Huangzhou abandoned Huangzhou City and forced the people to flee south to Wuchangzhai.

古文：癸亥，两浙将顾全武等破淮南十八营，虏淮南将士魏约等三千人。
现代文：癸亥，两浙军队将领顾全武等攻破围攻嘉兴的淮南军队十八个营寨，虏获淮南军队将士魏约等三千人。
English: In Xianhai, the two Zhejiang armies led by Gu Quanwu and others broke through the 18 encampments of the Huainan army besieging Jiaxing, and captured about 3,000 soldiers of the Huainan army, including Wei.

古文：淮南将田頵屯驿亭埭，两浙兵乘胜逐之。
现代文：淮南军队将领田当时驻扎在驿亭埭，两浙军队乘胜驱逐田。
English: General Lian Tian of the Huainan army was stationed in Fengting at the time, and the two Zhejiang armies took advantage of the victory to expel Tian.

古文：甲戌，頵自湖州奔还，两浙兵追败之，頵众死者千馀人。
现代文：甲戌，田从湖州逃回，两浙军队在后面紧追，田军队大败，死亡达一千余人。
English: In Jiaozuo, Tian fled back from Huzhou, with the two Zhejiang armies in hot pursuit. Tian's army was soundly defeated, and more than a thousand people were killed.

古文：韩建恶刑部尚书张祎等数人，皆诬奏，贬之。
现代文：韩建憎恨刑部尚书张等几个人，他上呈奏章，全都进行诬陷，结果张等人被朝廷贬职。
English: Han Jian hated several people such as Shang Shuxu Zhang of the Criminal Investigation Department. He wrote a report on it, and all of them were framed. As a result, Zhang and others were demoted by the court.

古文：五月，加奉国节度使崔洪同平章事。
现代文：五月，朝廷加封奉国节度使崔洪为同平章事。
English: In May, the imperial court made Cui Hong an honorary citizen of the country.

古文：辛巳，硃友恭为浮梁于樊港，进攻武昌寨，壬午，拔之，执瞿章，遂取黄州。马珣等皆败走。
现代文：辛巳，朱友恭在樊港建造跨江浮桥，进攻武昌营寨，壬午，予以攻克，抓获刺史瞿章，于是占取黄州，马等都战败逃跑。
English: Soon after, Zhu Yougong built a floating bridge across the Yangtze River in Da Nang, attacked Wuchang Yingzhai and Renwu, defeated them, captured Zhishihongzhang, and then occupied Huangzhou. Ma and others were defeated and fled.

古文：丙戌，王建以节度副使张琳守成都，自将兵五万攻东川。
现代文：丙戌，西川节度使王建命令节度副使张琳据守成都，自己带领军队五万攻打东川节度使顾彦晖。
English: In the west river festival, Wang Jian ordered Zhang Lin, the vice-envoy of the festival, to defend Chengdu, and led an army of fifty thousand to attack the east river festival, Gu Yanqi.

古文：更华洪姓名曰王宗涤。
现代文：王建把华洪的姓名改为王宗涤。
English: Wang Jian changed Hua Hong's name to Wang Zong Polyester.

古文：六月，己酉，钱镠如越州，受镇东节钺。
现代文：六月，己酉，钱到达越州，接受镇东节度使的旌旗节。
English: In June, Ji Xuan and Qian arrived in Yuezhou to receive the Zhendong Festival envoy for the Flag-Raising Festival.

古文：李茂贞表： 王建攻东川，连兵累岁，不听诏命。 
现代文：李茂贞上表朝廷说： 王建一再攻打东川，多年以来兴兵作乱，拒不听从朝廷的诏令。 
English: Li Maozhen reported to the imperial court: "Wang Jian has repeatedly attacked Dongchuan. For many years, he has been stirring up trouble and refusing to obey the imperial edict.

古文：甲寅，贬建南州刺史。
现代文：甲寅，唐昭宗颁下诏令，把王建贬为南州刺史。
English: In the 11th century, Emperor Zhaozong of the Tang Dynasty issued an edict to relegate Wang Jian to the status of a minor official in Nanzhou.

古文：乙卯，加茂贞为西川节度使，以覃王嗣周为凤翔节度使。
现代文：乙卯，朝廷任命李茂贞为西川节度使。同时任命覃王李嗣周为凤翔节度使。
English: Second, the imperial court appointed Li Maozhen as the envoy to the Nishikawa festival, and at the same time appointed the king of the Xiongnu, Li Shizhou, as the envoy to the Fengxiang festival.

古文：癸亥，王建克梓州南寨，执其将李继宁。
现代文：癸亥，王建攻克梓州南寨，抓获南寨将领李继宁。
English: Yanhai, Wang Jian conquered Nanzhai, Zizhou, and captured the Nanzhai general Li Jining.

古文：丙寅，宣谕使李洵至梓州，己巳，见建于张杷砦，建指执旗者曰： 战士之情，不可夺也。 
现代文：丙寅，朝廷派出的宣谕使李洵到达梓州，己巳，李洵在张杷砦会晤王建，王建指着手拿旗帜的人说： 攻打东川是军中士兵的意意，不能强夺。 
English: The imperial edict sent by the imperial court brought Li Xi to Zizhou, and Li Xi met Wang Jian at Zhangye Fort. Wang Jian pointed to the person holding the flag and said: Attacking the East River is the intention of soldiers in the army, and it cannot be taken by force.

古文：覃王赴镇，李茂贞不受代，围覃王于奉天。
现代文：覃王李嗣周前赴凤翔镇所，凤翔节度使李茂贞不接受李嗣周的替代，并在奉天将李嗣周围困起来。
English: The Dragon King, Lisi Zhou, went to Fengxiang Town Hall, but the Fengxiang Festival made Li Maozhen not accept Lisi Zhou's replacement, and trapped Lisi Zhou's entourage in Fengtian.

古文：置宁远军于容州，以李克用大将盖寓领节度使。
现代文：朝廷在容州设置宁远军，任命李克用的大将盖寓兼任宁远节度使。
English: The imperial court set up the Ningyuan army in Rongzhou, and appointed Li Ke as the general to serve as the Ningyuan special envoy.

古文：秋，七月，加荆南节度使成汭兼侍中。
现代文：秋季七月，朝廷加封荆南节度使成兼侍中。
English: In the autumn, in July, Jingnan Jiedu was given the title of Jicheng (侍中) by the imperial court.

古文：韩建移书李茂贞，茂贞解奉天之围，覃王归华州。
现代文：韩建给李茂贞送去书信，李茂贞于是解除对奉天的围困，覃王李嗣周回到华州。
English: Han Jian sent a letter to Li Maozhen. Li Maozhen then lifted the siege on Fengtian, and the warlord Li Shizhou returned to Huazhou.

古文：以天雄节度使李继徽为静难节度使。
现代文：朝廷任命天雄节度使李继徽为静难节度使。
English: The imperial court appointed Tianxiong Jietuo to make Li Jihui the Jingnan Jietuo envoy.

古文：庚戌，钱镠还杭州，遣顾全武取苏州。乙未，拔松江。戊戌，拔无锡。辛丑，拔常熟、华亭。
现代文：庚戌，钱从越州返回杭州，派顾全武攻取苏州；乙未，攻克松江；戊戌，攻占无锡；辛丑，又占据常熟、华亭。
English: Geng Wei, Qian returned to Hangzhou from Yuezhou, and sent his whole army to conquer Suzhou; Yi Wei, conquered Songjiang; Wu Wei, conquered Wuxi; Xin Qiu, occupied Changshu and Huating.

古文：初，李克用取幽州，表刘仁恭为节度使，留戍兵及腹心将十人典其机要，租赋供军之外，悉输晋阳。
现代文：当初，李克用攻取幽州，向朝廷进呈表章请求任命刘仁恭为节度使，留下戍兵和亲信将领十人掌管机要事务，幽州一带的田租赋税除了供给军需之外，全部运送到晋阳。
English: At first, Li Ke used the capture of Yuzhou to submit a petition to the imperial court to request the appointment of Liu Rengong as the regent, leaving ten soldiers and trusted generals in charge of the most important affairs. In addition to supplying military supplies, all the land rent and taxes in the Yuzhou area were transported to Jinyang.

古文：及上幸华州，克用征兵于仁恭，又遣成德节度使王镕、义武节度使王郜书，欲与之共定关中，奉天子还长安。
现代文：等到唐昭宗避难前往华州后，李克用向刘仁恭征调军队，又给成德节度使王熔、义武节度使王郜送去书信，想和他们一起平定关中的叛乱，奉送天子返回京师长安。
English: After Tang Zhaozong took refuge in Huazhou, Li Ke used the opportunity to recruit and transfer troops to Liu Rengong, and also sent letters to Chengde Jiedu to Wang Liao, and to Yiwu Jiedu to Wang Yao. He wanted to work with them to quell the rebellion in Guanzhong and send Tianzi back to Beijing Division Chang'an.

古文：仁恭辞以契丹入寇，须兵扞御，请俟虏退，然后承命。
现代文：刘仁恭以契丹人正在入侵抢掠，需要有军队防备，请等契丹人退走后，然后再接受李克用的命令，予以推辞。
English: Liu Renkong said that the Khitans were invading and looting, and that there was a need for an army to be prepared. Please wait for the Khitans to retreat, and then accept Li Keyi's order and refuse.

古文：克用屡趣之，使者相继，数月，兵不出。
现代文：李克用再三催促，派出的使者接二连三地到达幽州，可是几个月过去，刘仁恭的军队还是不出发。
English: Li Ke repeatedly urged and sent emissaries to Yuzhou one after another, but after several months, Liu Renkong's army still did not set out.

古文：克用移书责之，仁恭抵书于地，慢骂，囚其使者，欲杀河东戍将，戍将遁逃获免。
现代文：李克用送去书信责备刘仁恭，刘仁恭把信扔在地上，大肆谩骂，并把派来的使者囚禁起来，还想杀害留在幽州驻守的河东将领，那些河东将领立即逃跑才免遭杀身之祸。
English: Li Ke sent a letter to reprimand Liu Rengong. Liu Rengong threw the letter on the ground, cursed profusely, imprisoned the envoy sent, and also wanted to kill the generals of Hedong stationed in Yuzhou. Those generals of Hedong immediately fled to avoid being killed.

古文：克用大怒，八月，自将击仁恭。
现代文：李克用勃然大怒，八月，亲自率领军队攻打刘仁恭。
English: Li Keqiang was so enraged that he personally led an army to attack Liu Rinkong in August.

古文：上欲幸奉天亲讨李茂贞，令宰相议之。
现代文：昭宗想前往奉天亲自督率军队讨伐李茂贞，命令宰相商议这件事。
English: Zhaozong wanted to go to Bongtian to personally lead the army to fight against Li Maozhen, and ordered the prime minister to discuss the matter.

古文：宰相切谏，乃止。
现代文：宰相极力劝阻，昭宗才打消了亲征的打算。
English: The prime minister tried his best to dissuade him, but it was only then that Akimune abandoned his plan to enlist himself.

古文：延王戒丕还自晋阳，韩建奏： 自陛下即位以来，与近辅交恶，皆因诸王典兵，凶徒乐祸，致銮舆不安。
现代文：延王李戒丕从晋阳返回华州，韩建从奏说： 自从陛下即位以来，朝廷与靠近京师的藩镇关系恶化，这都是因为皇室各王掌管兵权，逞凶作恶之徒喜好惹祸生灾，使陛下的车驾不能安稳。
English: When Yan Wang Li Jiechi returned to Huazhou from Jinyang, Han Jianzong said: Since His Majesty ascended the throne, the relationship between the imperial court and the towns near Beijing has deteriorated. This is because the kings of the royal family control the military power, and the evil-doers like to cause trouble and disaster, so that His Majesty's car can not drive safely.

古文：比者臣奏罢兵权，实虑不测之变。
现代文：近来我向朝廷奏请罢免各王的兵权，实在是担心会有难以预测的变乱。
English: I recently petitioned the imperial court to revoke the war powers of the kings. I am really worried that there will be unpredictable upheavals.

古文：今闻延王、覃王尚苞阴计，愿陛下圣断不疑，制于未乱，则社稷之福。 
现代文：现在我听说延王李戒丕、覃王李嗣周正在酝酿阴谋诡计，希望陛下圣明果断毫不迟疑，在没有发生变乱前就采取措施，那就是大唐天下的福气了。 
English: Now that I have heard that Yan Wang, Li Jing, and Zou Wang, Li Shizhou, are plotting and scheming, I hope that His Majesty will not hesitate to take measures before there is any turmoil. That is the blessing of Datang.

古文：上曰： 何至于是！ 
现代文：唐昭宗看了韩建的奏章说： 哪里至于这样呀！ 
English: Tang Zhaozong looked at Han Jian's score and said, "What's the matter with this?

古文：数日不报。
现代文：几天过去都没有答复。
English: There has been no response for several days.

古文：建乃与知枢密刘季述矫制发兵围十六宅。诸王被发，或缘垣，或登屋，或升木，呼曰： 宅家救儿！ 
现代文：韩建于是与知枢密刘季述假借朝廷的诏令发兵围攻各王的住所十六宅，诸王披头散发，有的攀援爬上墙头，有的登高跑到屋顶，狂呼道： 皇上快来救我！ 
English: Han Jian then discussed with Liu Ji, a privy councillor, the use of the imperial edict to send troops to besiege the sixteen residences of the kings. The kings scattered, some climbing up the walls, some climbing up to the roof, shouting: Emperor, come and save me!

古文：建拥通、沂、睦、济、韶、彭、韩、陈、覃、延、丹十一王至石堤谷，尽杀之，以谋反闻。
现代文：韩建把通王、沂王、睦王、济王、韶王、彭王、韩王、陈王、覃王、延王、丹王这十一个王裹挟到华州西部的石堤谷，全部杀掉，然后向唐昭宗奏报说他们谋反因而处死。
English: Han Jian took the eleven kings, including King Tong, King Gong, King Mut, King Jie, King Gong, King Peng, King Han, King Chen, King Gong, King Yan, and King Dan, and took them to Shidi Valley in western Huazhou. He killed them all, and then reported to Tang Zhaozong that they had plotted a rebellion and were therefore executed.

古文：贬礼部尚书孙亻屋为南州司马。
现代文：朝廷将礼部尚书孙贬职为南州司马。
English: The imperial court demoted Shang Shusun from the Ministry of Ceremonies to Nanzhou Sima.

古文：秘书监硃朴先贬夔州司马，再贬郴州司户。
现代文：秘书监朱朴先贬为夔州司马，再次贬职降为郴州司户。
English: Secretary Inspector Zhu Pu was first demoted to Cangzhou Sima, and then demoted again to Cangzhou Sido.

古文：朴之为相，何迎骤迁至右谏议大夫，至是亦贬湖州司马。
现代文：朱朴做宰相时，何迎的官职突然升到右谏议大夫，到这时也被贬职为湖州司马。
English: When Zhu Pu was the prime minister, He Ying's official position suddenly rose to the position of doctor of right-hand speech, and at this time he was also demoted to the position of Huzhou Sima.

古文：钟传欲讨吉州刺史襄阳周琲，琲帅其众奔广陵。
现代文：钟传想要讨伐吉州刺史、襄阳人周，周率领所部人马逃奔广陵。
English: Zhong Chuan wanted to fight against Jizhou Zhishi and Xiangyang Zhou, and Zhou led the staff to flee Guangling.

古文：王建与顾彦晖五十馀战，九月，癸酉朔，围梓州。
现代文：西川的王建与东川的顾彦晖大小交战五十多次，九月，癸酉朔，王建围攻梓州。
English: Wang Jian of the West River and Gu Yanqi of the East River fought more than 50 times. In September, Wang Jian besieged Zizhou.

古文：蜀州刺史周德权言于建曰： 公与彦晖争东川三年，士卒疲于矢石，百姓困于输輓。
现代文：蜀州刺史周德权对王建说： 你与顾彦晖争夺东川已经三年，士兵对征战已感到疲惫，地方百姓对运输接送军需已感到困乏。
English: Zhou Dequan, the chief historian of Shuzhou, said to Wang Jian: It has been three years since you and Gu Yanzhong fought over the Dongchuan River. The soldiers are tired of fighting, and the local people are tired of transporting and transporting military supplies.

古文：东川群盗多据州县，彦晖懦而无谋，欲为偷安之计，皆啗以厚利，恃其救援，故坚守不下。
现代文：东川的州县大多被一群强盗贼寇占据着，顾彦晖怯懦而没有智谋，想用苟且偷安的办法，对州县属官都用丰厚的利益来引诱笼络他们，倚仗他们的救援，而坚守梓州使我们不能攻克。
English: Most of the counties in Dongchuan were occupied by a group of bandits and thieves. Gu Yanqi was cowardly and did not have a strategy. He wanted to use the method of stealing security. He lured and enticed the officials of the counties with rich profits and relied on their rescue, but adhering to Zizhou made it impossible for us to conquer.

古文：今若遣人谕贼帅以祸福，来者赏之以官，不服者威之以兵，则彼之所恃，反为我用矣。 
现代文：现在你如果派人向贼寇的头目说明祸福利弊，对于前来附顺的人赏给官职，对于拒不服从的人就派出军队威逼，这样顾彦晖所依伏的势力，便反被我们利用了。 
English: Now, if you send someone to explain the benefits and drawbacks to the ringleaders of thieves and robbers, reward those who come to obey with official positions, and send an army to intimidate those who refuse to obey, then the power that Gu Yanjun relies on will be used by us.

古文：建从之，彦晖势益孤。
现代文：王建采纳了周德权的意见，于是顾彦晖的势力越来越孤单。
English: Wang Jian adopted Zhou Dequan's opinion, so Gu Yanjun's forces became more and more isolated.

古文：德权，许州人也。
现代文：周德权是许州人。
English: Zhou Dequan is a native of Huzhou.

古文：丁丑，李克用至安塞军，辛巳，攻之。
现代文：丁丑，李克用率领人马到达安塞军，辛巳，李克用进攻安塞军。
English: Ding Yuxi, Li Ke used to lead the cavalry to reach the Ansei army, Xin Si, Li Ke used to attack the Ansei army.

古文：幽州将单可及引骑兵至，克用方饮酒，前锋曰： 贼至矣。 
现代文：幽州的将领单可及带领骑兵赶到这里，李克用这时正在喝酒，前锋将士报信说： 幽州的贼寇来到了！ 
English: Yuzhou's generals and cavalry rushed here. Li Ke used this time to drink, and the forward soldiers reported: Yuzhou's bandits have arrived!

古文：克用醉，曰： 仁恭何在？ 
现代文：李克用喝得大醉，说； 刘仁恭在哪里？ 
English: Li Ke used to get very drunk and say; Where is Liu Renkong?

古文：对曰： 但见可及辈。 
现代文：手下人回答他说： 只看到单可及一伙人。 
English: His subordinates replied: "We only saw one group of people.

古文：克用瞋目曰： 可及辈何足为敌！ 
现代文：李克用瞪着眼说： 单可及这伙人哪里是我的对手！ 
English: Li Ke stared and said, "This group of people alone is my opponent!"

古文：亟命击之。
现代文：当即下令向幽州军队发动进攻。
English: He immediately ordered an attack on the Yuzhou army.

古文：是日大雾，不辨人物，幽州将杨师侃伏兵于木瓜涧，河东兵大败，失亡太半。
现代文：这一天大雾弥漫，分辨不清人和物，幽州将领杨师侃在木瓜涧埋伏下军队，李克用的河东军队在交战中大败，丧失人马超过多半。
English: On this day, the fog was thick and it was difficult to distinguish between people and objects. Yang Shikan, the general of Yuzhou, led the army under the ambush of papaya rafts. The army of Hedong led by Li Ke was defeated in the battle and lost more than half of its men and horses.

古文：会大风雨震电，幽州兵解去。
现代文：适逢狂风暴雨电闪雷鸣，幽州军队于是解围离去。
English: Due to the storm, lightning and thunder, the Yuzhou army was relieved and left.

古文：克用醒而后知败，责大将李存信等曰： 吾以醉废事，汝曹何不力争！ 
现代文：李克用醒酒后知道自己的人马吃了败仗，便责怪大将李存信等人说： 我因为喝醉酒而耽误大事，你们为什么不极力劝阻！ 
English: After sobering up, Li Ke knew that his men had lost the battle, so he blamed the general Li Cunxin and others saying: I delayed the event because I was drunk, why didn't you try your best to dissuade me!

古文：湖州刺史李彦徽欲以州附于杨行密，其众不从。彦徽奔广陵，都指挥使沈攸以州归钱镠。
现代文：湖州刺史李彦徽想要献出湖州归附杨行密，他手下众人不依从；李彦徽逃奔广陵，湖州的都指挥使沈攸率领湖州归附钱。
English: Li Yanhui, the historian of Huzhou, wanted to offer Yang Xingmi to annex Huzhou, but his subordinates did not obey; Li Yanhui fled to Guangling, and Shen You, the commander of Huzhou, led the money to annex Huzhou.

古文：以彰义节度使张琏为凤翔西北行营招讨使，以讨李茂贞。
现代文：朝廷任命彰义节度使张琏为凤翔西北行营诏讨使，以讨伐李茂贞。
English: The imperial court appointed Zhang Yi Jiedu to make Zhang Ye the envoy of Feng Xiang's northwest campaign to fight Li Maozhen.

古文：复以王建为西川节度使、同平章事。
现代文：昭宗重新任命王建为西川节度使、同平章事。
English: Akimune reappointed Wang Jian as Saikawa Setsudoshi, a post of the same rank.

古文：加义武节度使王郜同平章事。
现代文：加封义武节度使王郜为同平章事。
English: The addition of the Boxing Day and Martial Arts Festival made Wang Xi a peerage.

古文：削夺新西川节度使李茂贞官爵，复姓名宋文通。
现代文：革除不久前任命的西川节度使李茂贞的官职爵位，恢复李茂贞原来的姓名宋文通。
English: Li Maozhen's official title and knighthood were revoked by the recently appointed Saikawa Setsudo, and Li Maozhen's original name, Song Wentong, was restored.

古文：硃全忠既得兗、郓，甲兵益盛，乃大举击杨行密，遣庞师古以徐、宿、宋、滑之兵七万壁清口，将趣扬州，葛从周以兗、郓、曹、濮之兵壁安丰，将趋寿州，全忠自将顿宿州。淮南震恐。
现代文：朱全忠获得兖州、郓州之后，军队的势力更加强盛，于是大规模发动军队进攻杨行密，他派遣庞师古带领徐州、宿州、宋州、滑州的军队七万人在清口安设营垒，准备进军扬州，又派遣葛从周带领兖州、郓州、曹州、濮州的军队在安丰县设置营垒，准备进军寿州，朱全忠自己率领人马在宿州驻扎；淮南军队得知十分震惊恐慌。
English: After Zhu Quanzhong gained Quzhou and Zhangzhou, the strength of the army was even stronger, so he launched a large-scale army to attack Yang Xingmi. He sent Pang Shigu to lead the armies of Xuzhou, Suizhou, Songzhou and Nanzhou to set up a camp of 70,000 people in Qingkou and prepare to march into Yangzhou. He also sent Ge Cong Zhou to lead the armies of Quzhou, Zhangzhou, Caozhou and Zhangzhou to set up a camp in Anfeng County and prepare to march into Shuzhou. Zhu Quanzhong himself led the troops stationed in Suizhou. The Huainan army was very shocked and

古文：匡国节度使李继瑭闻朝廷讨李茂贞而惧，韩建复从而摇之，继瑭奔凤翔。
现代文：匡国节度使李继瑭听说朝廷要讨伐李茂贞，十分惧怕，韩建又从中威逼他，李继瑭于是逃奔凤翔。
English: During the Kuang Guo Festival, Li Jizhe heard that the imperial court wanted to attack Li Maozhen, and he was very afraid. Han Jian tried to intimidate him, and Li Jizhe fled to Fengxiang.

古文：冬，十月，以建为镇国、匡国两军节度使。
现代文：冬季，十月，朝廷任命韩建为镇国、匡国两军节度使。
English: In the winter, in October, the imperial court appointed Han Jian as the commander-in-chief of the two armies of Zhen and Kuang.

古文：壬子，知遂州侯绍帅众二万，乙卯，知合州王仁威帅众千人，戊午，凤翔将李继溥以援兵二千，皆降于王建。
现代文：壬子，主持遂州事务的侯绍率领所部人马二万，乙卯，主持合州事务的王仁威带领手下一千人，戊午，凤翔将领李继溥带领增援队伍二千，都先后向王建投降。
English: Imzi, led by Hou Shao, who presided over the affairs of Suizhou, led 20,000 men and horses of the headquarters department, Biao, led by Wang Renwei, who presided over the affairs of Hezhou, led a thousand people, and Wu, led by Fengxiang General Li Jixuan, led a reinforcement team of two thousand, all surrendered to Wang Jian.

古文：建攻梓州益急。
现代文：王建攻打梓州便更加猛烈。
English: Wang Jian attacked Zizhou more fiercely.

古文：庚申，顾彦晖聚其宗族及假子共饮，遣王宗弼自归于建。
现代文：庚申，梓州城内的顾彦晖招聚他的宗族和养子共同饮酒，把从前擒获的西川将领王宗弼遣返到王建那里。
English: Goshun, Gu Yanqi in the city of Zizhou gathered his clan and adopted son to drink together, and repatriated the former captured West River general Wang Zongqi to Wang Jian.

古文：酒酣，命其假子瑶杀己及同饮者，然后自杀。
现代文：顾彦晖开怀畅饮之后，命令养子顾瑶将自己和一同喝酒的人杀死，然后顾瑶本人自杀。
English: After Gu Yanjun opened his arms to drink, he ordered his adopted son Gu Jun to kill himself and the people who were drinking with him, and then Gu Jun himself committed suicide.

古文：建入梓州，城中兵尚七万人，建命王宗绾分兵徇昌、普等州，以王宗涤为东川留后。
现代文：王建于是进入梓州城，城内的军队还有七万人，王建命令王宗绾分兵前往昌州、普州等地巡行，又委任王宗涤为东川留后。
English: Wang Jian then entered the city of Zizhou, and there were still seventy thousand troops in the city. Wang Jian ordered Wang Zongya's detachment to march to Changzhou, Puzhou and other places, and also appointed Wang Zongya to stay behind in Dongchuan.

古文：刘仁恭奏称： 李克用无故称兵见讨，本道大破其党于木瓜涧，请自为统帅以讨克用。 
现代文：刘仁恭向朝廷上表奏称： 李克用无缘无故发动军队来讨伐我，我已经在木瓜涧将他的人马打得大败，现在我请求自己做统帅征伐李克用。 
English: Liu Rengong made a report to the imperial court, saying: Li Ke used to unleash an army to fight me for no reason. I have already defeated his men and horses in the Papaya Plough, and now I ask myself to be the commander of the army to fight Li Ke.

古文：诏不许。
现代文：唐昭宗下诏不准。
English: The edict does not allow it.

古文：又遗硃全忠书。
现代文：刘仁恭又给朱全忠送去书信。
English: Liu Renkong also sent a letter to Zhu Quanzhong.

古文：全忠奏加仁恭同平章事，朝廷从之。
现代文：朱全忠便向朝廷奏请加封刘仁恭为同平章事，朝廷予以同意。
English: Zhu Quanzhong then petitioned the imperial court to add Liu Rengong as a peerage, and the imperial court agreed.

古文：仁恭又遣使谢克用，陈去就不自安之意。
现代文：刘仁恭又派遣使者前赴李克用那里道歉，陈述他与李克用分手而不能自安的心情。
English: Liu Renkong also sent an envoy to Li Keqiang to apologize, stating that he and Li Keqiang had broken up and could not calm down.

古文：克用复书略曰： 今公仗钅戊控兵，理民立法，擢士则欲其报德，选将则望彼酬恩。己尚不然，人何足信！
现代文：李克用给刘仁恭回信大略说道： 现在你凭借朝廷符节控制军队，管理百姓自立法度，提拔人才要让他报答你的恩德，选用将领希望他酬谢你的恩惠；而你自己就不是这样，对别人又怎么能够充分相信呢！
English: Li Ke replied to Liu Renkong in a letter, saying in summary: Now you control the army by virtue of the imperial insignia, manage the people autonomously, promote talents to let him repay your kindness, select generals and hope that he will repay your favor; but you are not like that yourself, how can you fully believe in others!

古文：仆料猜防出于骨肉，嫌忌生于屏帷，持干将而不敢授人，捧盟盘而何词著誓！ 
现代文：我估计你会猜忌亲人骨肉，疑心身边的文武官员，手持利剑而不敢转授他人，那么你手捧盟誓之盘时在誓词里又能说些什么呢！ 
English: I estimate that you will be suspicious of your relatives, suspicious of the military and civilian officials around you, holding a sharp sword and not daring to pass it on to others, so what can you say in the oath when you hold the oath plate in your hand!

古文：甲子，立皇子祕为景王，祚为辉王，祺为祁王。
现代文：甲子，昭宗颁发诏令，立皇子李秘为景王，李祚为辉王，李祺为祁王。
English: Emperor Akihito and Emperor Shōzō issued an imperial edict, appointing the prince Lihi as King of Jing, Lihong as King of Hui, and Lihong as King of Zhou.

古文：加彰义节度使张琏同平章事。
现代文：朝廷加封彰义节度使张琏为同平章事。
English: The Imperial Court's addition of the Zhangyi Festival made Zhang Ye a peerage.

古文：杨行密与硃瑾将兵三万拒汴军于楚州，别将张训自涟水引兵会之，行密以为前锋。
现代文：杨行密与朱瑾领军队三万在楚州抗击朱全忠的汴州军队，另一员大将张训从涟水带领人马与他们会合。杨行密委任张训做前锋。
English: Yang Xingmi and Zhu Xi led an army of 30,000 in Chuzhou to resist Zhu Quanzhong's Zhangzhou army, and another general, Zhang Xun, led men and horses from Surabaya to join them. Yang Xingmi appointed Zhang Xun as a forward.

古文：庞师古营于清口，或曰： 营地汙下，不可久处。 
现代文：庞师古在清口安营扎寨，有人向庞师古建议说： 这个营地低洼如同池塘，不能长久停留。 
English: Pang Shigu set up camp at Qingkou. Someone suggested to Pang Shigu, "This camp is low-lying, like a pond. You can't stay here for long."

古文：不听。
现代文：庞师古拒不听从。
English: The emperor does not allow it.

古文：师古恃众轻敌，居常弈棋。
现代文：他倚仗人马众多而轻视敌手，在住地常常下棋取乐。
English: He relies on a large number of people and horses and despises his opponents. He often plays chess for fun where he lives.

古文：硃瑾壅淮上流，欲灌之。或以告师古，师古以为惑众，斩之。
现代文：朱瑾堵塞淮水上游的水流，打算灌淹庞师古的营地；有人把这一消息告诉庞师古，庞师古却认为这人是在蛊惑众心，竟把他斩杀。
English: Zhu Xi blocked the water flow in the upper reaches of Huai Shui, intending to flood the camp of Pang Shigu; someone told this news to Pang Shigu, but Pang Shigu thought that this person was trying to seduce the hearts of the people, and killed him.

古文：十一月，癸酉，瑾与淮南将侯瓚将五千骑潜渡淮，用汴人旗帜，自北来趣其中军，张训逾栅而入。
现代文：十一月，癸酉，朱瑾与准南军队将领侯瓒带领五千骑兵偷偷渡过淮水，打首汴州军队的旗帜，从北面奔赴庞师古的中军，张训越过栅栏冲入营帐。
English: In November, Yao, Zhu Xi and the quasi-Southern army general Hou Xuan led five thousand cavalry to sneak across Huai Shui, put down the banner of the Zhangzhou army, and the Chinese army rushed to Pangshigu from the north. Zhang Xun crossed the fence and rushed into the camp.

古文：士卒苍黄拒战，淮水大至，汴军骇乱。
现代文：庞师古的士兵仓惶迎战抵抗，准水又决口滚滚而来，汴州军队顿时惊惶失措混乱不堪。
English: The soldiers of Pangshigu's division rushed to meet the resistance, the floodwaters and the breach came rolling in, and the Zhangzhou army was suddenly panicked and confused.

古文：行密引大军济淮，与瑾等夹攻之，汴军大败。斩师古及将士首万馀级，馀众皆溃。
现代文：杨行密率领大军渡过淮水，与朱瑾等两面夹击庞师古，结果汴州军队大败，庞师古和将士一万余人被斩杀，剩下的人马都溃散逃跑。
English: Yang Xingmi led a large army across Huai Shui, and together with Zhu Xi and others clamped down on Pang Shigu on both sides. As a result, the Zhangzhou army was defeated. Pang Shigu and more than 10,000 soldiers were killed, and the remaining people scattered and fled.

古文：葛从周屯于寿州西北，寿州团练使硃延寿击破之，退屯濠州，闻师古败，奔还。
现代文：葛从周在寿州西北安营扎寨，寿州团练使朱延寿攻破他的营寨，葛从周被迫退到濠州固守，他听说庞师古战败后，便逃奔返回。
English: Ge Cong Zhou set up camp in the northwest of Shoushou. Zhu Yan Shou was forced to retreat to Zhangzhou to hold his camp. He heard that Pang Shigu was defeated, so he ran away and returned.

古文：行密、瑾、延寿乘胜追之，及于淠水。
现代文：杨行密、朱瑾、朱延寿乘胜追击葛从周，一直追到淠水。
English: Yang Xingmi, Zhu Xi and Zhu Yanshou used their victory to chase Ge from Zhou all the way to Surabaya.

古文：从周半济，淮南兵击之，杀溺殆尽，从周走免。
现代文：葛从周的人马涉渡淠水到一半的时候，淮南军队发起进攻，葛从周的军队几乎全部被斩杀和溺死，葛从周本人逃跑免于一死。
English: When Ge Zhou's men were halfway through wading across the Yunnan River, the Huainan army launched an attack. Almost all of Ge Zhou's troops were killed and drowned, and Ge Zhou himself fled to avoid death.

古文：遏后都指挥使牛存节弃马步斗，诸军稍得济淮，凡四日不食，会大雪，汴卒缘道冻馁死，还者不满千人。
现代文：遏后都指挥使牛存节下马徒步战斗，各军才稍得渡过淮水，连续四天军中士兵没有进食，又恰逢天降大雪，汴州军队士兵连冻带饿纷纷死亡的路上，返回的人还不至一千。
English: After the curfew, all the commanders ordered the cattle to dismount and fight on foot, and the armies only had to cross Huai Shui for a short time. The soldiers in the army did not eat for four consecutive days. It also coincided with heavy snowfall. The soldiers of the Zhangzhou Army died of starvation on the road, and the number of returnees was less than a thousand.

古文：全忠闻败，亦奔还。
现代文：朱全忠听说他的人马打了大败伏，也逃跑返回。
English: When Zhu Quanzhong heard that his men had been defeated, he also fled and returned.

古文：行密遗全忠书曰： 庞师古、葛从周，非敌也，公宜来淮上决战。 
现代文：杨行密给朱全忠送去书信说： 诚师古、葛从周，都不是我的对手，你亲自来淮水上游一决胜负。 
English: Yang Xingmi sent a letter to Zhu Quanzhong saying: Cheng Shigu and Ge Cong Zhou are not my rivals. You should come to the upper reaches of Huai Shui to decide the outcome.

古文：行密大会诸将，谓行军副使李承嗣曰： 始吾欲先趣寿州，副使云不如先向清口。师古败，从周自走，今果如所料。 
现代文：杨行密与各位将领举行隆重的宴会进行庆贺，他对行军副使李承嗣说； 开始时，我想先奔寿州，你说不如先前往清口，庞师古溃败后，葛从周自然逃跑，现在果然象你预料的那样。 
English: Yang Xingmi held a grand banquet with the generals to celebrate, he said to the deputy envoy Li Chengzhi; At the beginning, I wanted to go to Shuzhou first, you said it would be better to go to Qingkou first, after the defeat of Pangshigu, Ge naturally fled from Zhou, now it is as you expected.

古文：赏之钱万缗，表承嗣领镇海节度使。
现代文：杨行密于是赏给李承嗣一万缗钱，向朝廷上表请任命李承嗣兼任镇海节度使。
English: Yang Xingmi then rewarded Li Chengzhi with 10,000 baht and asked the imperial court to appoint Li Chengzhi as the chief envoy of the Zhenhai Festival.

古文：行密待承嗣及史俨甚厚，第舍、姬妾，咸选其尤者赐之，故二人为行密尽力，屡立功，竟卒于淮南。
现代文：杨行密对待李承嗣和史俨相当优厚，居住的府第房舍，美女姬妾，杨行密都挑选最好的赏赐给他们，所以李承嗣、史俨二人也为杨行密尽忠效力，多次建立战功，最终死在淮南。
English: Yang Xingmi treated Li Chengzhi and Shi Jie very generously. He chose the best reward for them, including the residence, the beautiful concubine, and Yang Xingmi. Therefore, Li Chengzhi and Shi Jie also served Yang Xingmi loyally, repeatedly established military exploits, and finally died in Huainan.

古文：行密由是遂保据江、淮之间，全忠不能与之争。
现代文：杨行密因此而占据固守长江、淮水之间，朱全忠不能够与他再争夺。
English: As a result, Yang Xingmi was stuck between the Yangtze River and Huai Shui, and Zhu Quanzhong was no longer able to compete with him.

古文：戊寅，立淑妃何氏为皇后。
现代文：戊寅唐昭宗立淑妃何氏为皇后。
English: Wu Yin Tang Zhaozong crowned Shu Fei He as empress.

古文：后，东川人，生德王、辉王。
现代文：何皇后是东川人，生下德王、辉王。
English: Queen Ho was from Higashikawa and gave birth to King De and King Hui.

古文：威武节度使王潮弟审知，为观察副使，有过，潮犹加捶挞，审知无怨色。
现代文：威武节度使王潮的弟弟王审知，是福建观察副使，他曾经犯有过错，王潮对他也捶打惩处，王审知丝毫没有怨恨。
English: Wang Zizhi, the younger brother of Wang Chao, who was the vice-envoy of Fujian observation, was punished by Wang Chao for making a mistake. Wang Zizhi did not hold any grudge against him.

古文：潮寝疾，舍其子延兴、延虹、延丰、延休，命审知知军府事。
现代文：王潮卧病在床时，舍去他的儿子王延兴、王延虹、王延丰、王延休不用，而命令胞弟王审知主持节度使司事宜。
English: When Wang Chao fell ill, he gave up his sons Yanxing, Yanhong, Yanfeng, and Yanju, and appointed Wang Jianzhi to be in charge of military affairs.

古文：十二月，丁未，潮薨。
现代文：十二月，丁未，王潮死去。
English: In December, Ding Wei, Wang Chaozong died.

古文：审知以让其兄泉州刺史审邽，审邽以审知有功，辞不受。
现代文：王审知让他的哥哥泉州刺史王审来接替，王审认为王审知立有功劳，坚决推辞而不接受。
English: Wang Xizhi asked his brother, Quanzhou Zishi Wang Xizhi, to succeed him. Wang Xizhi believed that Wang Xizhi had made great contributions, and firmly declined to accept.

古文：审知自称福建留后，表于朝廷。
现代文：王审知于是自称福建留后，进呈表章上报朝廷。
English: After Wang Xizhi said he would stay in Fujian, he informed the Imperial Court of the above.

古文：壬戌，王建自梓州还。戊辰，至成都。
现代文：壬戌，王建从梓州启程返回；戊奈，到达成都。
English: Wang Jian started from Zizhou and returned to Ningbo; from Bo'nai, he went to Chengdu.

古文：是岁，南诏骠信舜化有上皇帝书函及督爽牒中书木夹，年号中兴。
现代文：这一年，南诏骠信舜化有上奏给昭宗的书函及督爽官送给唐中书省用木板夹着的书牒，上面写的年号是中兴。
English: In this year, there was a letter from the Southern Zhao Dynasty to the Emperor Zhao Zong and a letter from the Governor Shuang to the Tang Dynasty Book Province, which was clipped with a wooden board. The year written on it was Zhongxing.

古文：朝廷欲以诏书报之。
现代文：朝廷想要颁发诏书来答复南诏王。
English: The imperial court wanted to issue an imperial edict to reply to King Nanzhao.

古文：王建上言： 南诏小夷，不足辱诏书。
现代文：王建向朝廷进言说： 南诏不过是小小的蕃夷，不值得颁发诏书。
English: Wang Jian said to the imperial court: Nanzhao is just a small edict, it is not worth issuing an edict.

古文：臣在西南，彼必不敢犯塞。 
现代文：我身在西南，南诏王一定不敢进犯边塞。 
English: I am in the south-west, and the Nanzhao Wang will certainly not dare to invade the border.

古文：从之。
现代文：朝廷听从了王建的建议。
English: I followed his advice.

古文：黎、雅间有浅蛮曰刘王、郝王、杨王，各有部落，西川岁赐缯帛三千匹，使觇南诏，亦受南诏赂诇成都虚实。
现代文：在黎州、雅州之间有接近汉化的蛮人，其中刘王、郝王、杨王三个王分别有自己的部落，西川节度使每年向他们赠送绢帛三千匹，让他们监视南诏的举动，这三个王也接受南诏的馈送，侦探成都的虚实。
English: Between Lizhou and Yazhou, there are barbarians who are close to Sinicization. Among them, the three kings, Liu Wang, Qian Wang and Yang Wang, each have their own tribe. The West River Festival gives them three thousand yakitori every year, allowing them to monitor the behavior of Nanzhao. These three kings also accept the feed of Nanzhao, the detective of Chengdu's truth and falsehood.

古文：每节度使到官，三王帅酋长诣府，节度使自谓威德所致，表于朝廷。
现代文：每当有西川节度使到任，这三个王就率领地方酋长前往节度使司恭贺，节度使自以为是朝廷的威武恩德使他们顺从敬服，就上表呈报朝廷。
English: Whenever a Saikawa festival envoy arrived, these three kings led the local chiefs to congratulate the festival envoy. The festival made the self-righteous imperial court submit to them, and reported the above to the imperial court.

古文：而三王阴与大将相表里，节度使或失大将心，则教诸蛮纷扰。
现代文：可是刘王、郝王、杨王这三个王却在暗中与节度使手下的大将相互勾结串通，有的节度使失去大将的拥护，这三个王就指使各地蛮人纷纷滋扰变乱。
English: However, these three kings, Liu Wang, Qian Wang, and Yang Wang, secretly colluded with their subordinate generals, and some lost the support of their generals, and these three kings ordered the barbarians from all over the country to disturb and disrupt.

古文：先是节度使多文臣，不欲生事，故大将常籍此以邀姑息，而南诏亦凭之屡为边患。
现代文：以前，朝廷派往西川的节度使大多是文臣，不想惹事生非，因此属下大将常常凭借节度使的心理姑息怂恿蛮人的作乱，而南诏也借助这点在边地多次扰乱为患。
English: In the past, most of the officials sent to Saikawa by the imperial court were courtiers who did not want to cause trouble. As a result, their subordinate generals often resorted to the psychological appeasement of the officials to prevent the barbarians from causing trouble, and Nanzhao also took advantage of this to repeatedly cause trouble in the outlying areas.

古文：及王建镇西川，绝其旧赐，斩都押牙山行章以惩之。
现代文：等到王建做了西川节度使，断绝了以往对三个王的赏赐，斩杀与三王相通的都押牙将山行章以示惩治。
English: When Wang Jian became the envoy of the West River Festival, he cut off the rewards given to the three kings in the past, and killed all the commoners with the three kings to show his punishment.

古文：邛崃之南，不置鄣候，不戍一卒，蛮亦不敢侵盗。
现代文：在邛崃关以南的地方，不设置要塞与内线，不驻扎一兵一卒，蛮人也不敢入侵抢掠。
English: In the south of Shaoguan, there are no fortifications and interior lines, no soldiers are stationed, and the barbarians do not dare to invade and plunder.

古文：其后遣王宗播击南诏，三王漏泄军事，召而斩之。
现代文：后来王建派遣王宗播攻打南诏，三王泄漏了军事消息，王建便把他们召来斩杀。
English: Later, Wang Jian sent Wang Zonghan to attack Nanzhao. The three kings leaked military information, and Wang Jian summoned them to slaughter them.

古文：右拾遗张道古上疏，称： 国家有五危、二乱。
现代文：右拾遗张道古向昭宗上疏奏请： 现在国家有五大危机、二大祸乱。
English: Zhang Daogu, a disciple of the late Zhaozong, wrote to the late Zhaozong: The country is now facing five major crises and two major calamities.

古文：昔汉文帝即位未几，明习国家事。
现代文：从前，汉文帝即位不久，就已明了熟悉国家的政务大事。
English: Once upon a time, soon after Emperor Hanwen ascended the throne, he was already familiar with the country's political affairs.

古文：今陛下登极已十年，而曾不知为君驭臣之道。
现代文：现在陛下登极已经十年了，却还不曾知晓作为帝王驾驭天下群臣的方法。
English: It's been ten years since His Majesty ascended to the throne, yet he still doesn't know how to manage the world's subjects as an emperor.

古文：太宗内安中原，外开四夷，海表之国，莫不入臣。
现代文：唐太宗时对内安定中原，对外开拓四周蕃夷疆土，四海之国，没有不向大唐朝廷称臣归附的。
English: When Emperor Taizong of Tang stabilized the Central Plains domestically and explored the surrounding barbarian territories and the country of the four seas, there was no country that did not claim to be a vassal of the Great Tang Dynasty.

古文：今先朝封域，日蹙几尽。
现代文：可是现在，先朝开壁留下的疆界日益紧缩，几乎丧尽。
English: But now, the borders left behind by the former government are shrinking day by day and are almost exhausted.

古文：臣虽微贱，窃伤陛下朝廷社稷始为奸臣弄，终为贼臣所有也。 
现代文：我虽然低微下贱，却认为陛下、朝廷、社稷，开始时受到奸臣的捉弄，最终会被那些乱臣贼子篡夺！ 
English: Although I am a lowly person, I believe that Your Majesty, the Imperial Court, and the society were initially fooled by treacherous vassals, and will eventually be usurped by those ruffian thieves!

古文：上怒，贬道古施州司户。
现代文：昭宗大为愤怒，把张道古贬职为施州司户。
English: Enraged, Akimune demoted Zhang Daogu to the position of Shishu steward.

古文：仍下诏罪状道古，宣示谏官。
现代文：还颁下诏令历数张道古的罪状，向进谏言官们宣示。
English: He also issued a gazette notice listing several of Daogu's criminal charges and announced them to the officials at the Foreign Ministry.

古文：道古，青州人也。
现代文：张道古是青州人。
English: Zhang Daogu is from Qingzhou.

古文：昭宗圣穆景文孝皇帝中之上光化元年
现代文：光化元年
English: The first year of Gwanghwamun

古文：春，正月，两浙、江西、武昌、淄青各遣使诣阙，请以硃全忠为都统，讨杨行密。诏不许。
现代文：春季正月，两浙的钱、江西的钟传、武昌的杜洪、淄青的王师范分别派遣使者前赴昭宗的驻地，请任命朱全忠为都统，讨伐杨行密；唐昭宗下诏不准。
English: In the first month of spring, Qian of Zhejiang, Zhong Chuan of Jiangxi, Du Hong of Wuchang, and Wang Shifan of Jiaqing separately sent envoys to the residence of Zhaozong, asking him to appoint Zhu Quanzhong as the ruler of the capital to fight against Yang Xingmi; Tang Zhaozong did not allow it.

古文：加平卢节度使王师范同平章事。
现代文：朝廷加封平卢节度使王师范为同平章事。
English: The Imperial Court sealed the Pinglu Festival and made Wang Shifan a peer.

古文：以兵部尚书刘崇望同平章事，充东川节度使。以昭信防御使冯行袭为昭信节度使。
现代文：朝廷任命兵部尚书刘崇望为同平章事，充任东川节度使；任命昭信防御使冯行袭为昭信节度使。
English: The imperial court appointed Liu Chongwang of the Ministry of Military Affairs as Tongping Zhengji and served as the Dongchuan Festival envoy; appointed Feng Xinggang, the defense envoy of Zhaoxin, as the Zhaoxin Festival envoy.

古文：上下诏罪己息兵，复李茂贞姓名官爵，应诸道讨凤翔兵皆罢之。
现代文：昭宗颁下诏书检讨自己的过失，下令停止攻战，恢复李茂贞的姓名和官职爵位，把各道讨伐凤翔李茂贞的军队全都撤退。
English: Zhaozong issued an edict to review his mistakes, ordered a halt to the offensive, restored Li Maozhen's name and official title, and withdrew all of Fengxiang Li Maozhen's troops.

古文：壬辰，河中节度使王珂亲迎于晋阳，李克用遣其将李嗣昭守河中。
现代文：壬辰，河中节度使王珂到晋阳亲自迎接李克用，李克用派遣属下将领李嗣昭前往据守河中。
English: In Imjin, the mid-river festival made Wang Ke come to Jinyang to personally meet Li Ke, and Li Ke sent his subordinate general Li Shizhao to the middle of the river.

古文：李茂贞、韩建皆致书于李克用，言大驾出幸累年，乞修和好，同奖王室，兼乞丁匠助修宫室，克用许之。
现代文：李茂贞、朝建都给李克用送去书信，说皇帝的车驾离开京师外出巡行已经多年了，请求和睦相处友好交往，共同辅助大唐皇室，同时请李克用派出人丁匠役帮助修建长安的宫殿，李克用予以同意。
English: Both Li Maozhen and the imperial architect sent a letter to Li Kegui, saying that it had been many years since the emperor's chariot had left Beijing to go on a parade, requesting that they live in harmony and have friendly exchanges, and jointly assist the Great Tang Dynasty royal family. At the same time, Li Kegui asked him to send a person to help build the palace of Chang'an, and Li Kegui agreed.

古文：初，王建攻东川，顾彦晖求救于李茂贞，茂贞命将出兵救之，不暇东逼乘舆，诈称改过，与韩建共翼戴天子。
现代文：当初，王建攻打东川，东川节度使顾彦晖向李茂贞请求救援，李茂贞命令手下将领出动军队救援顾彦晖，而无暇向东逼攻昭宗的车驾，因此假称改过悔罪，与韩建共同辅助拥戴天子。
English: At first, Wang Jian attacked Dongchuan, and the Dongchuan Sect sent Gu Yanqi to Li Maozhen to ask for rescue. Li Maozhen ordered his generals to mobilize an army to rescue Gu Yanqi, but there was no time to attack the east of Zhaozong's car, so he pretended to have repented and assisted Han Jian in holding Tianzi.

古文：及闻硃全忠营洛阳宫，累表迎车驾，茂贞、韩建惧，请修复宫阙，奉上归长安。
现代文：等到听说朱全忠营建东都洛阳宫殿，并一再上呈表章要迎接昭宗的车驾去洛阳，李茂贞、韩建很是恐惧，请求立即修复京师宫殿，奉陪唐昭宗返回长安。
English: When they heard that Zhu Quanzhong was building a palace in Luoyang, the eastern capital, and repeatedly presented a badge to welcome Zhaozong to drive to Luoyang, Li Maozhen and Han Jian were very afraid and requested to immediately repair the palace in Beijing and accompany Tang Zhaozong to return to Chang'an.

古文：诏以韩建为修宫阙使。诸道皆助钱及工材。建使都将蔡敬思督其役。
现代文：唐昭宗诏令任命韩建为修宫阙使，各道都援助资财和工役材料；韩建派都将蔡敬思监督修复宫殿的工程。
English: Emperor Zhaozong of Tang Dynasty issued a decree to appoint Han Jian as the palace repair envoy, and all provinces assisted with funds and materials; Han Jian sent Cai Jingsi to supervise the restoration of the palace.

古文：既成，二月，建自往视之。
现代文：长安宫殿修复完善后，二月份，韩建亲自前往京师察看。
English: After the Chang'an Palace was restored and perfected, Han Jian personally went to Beijing in February to inspect it.

古文：钱镠请徙镇海军于杭州，从之。
现代文：钱请求把镇海节度使司从润州迁往杭州，朝廷依从了他的请求。
English: Qian requested that the Zhenhai Festival envoy be moved from Renzhou to Hangzhou, and the imperial court complied with his request.

古文：复以李茂贞为凤翔节度使。
现代文：朝廷重新任命节茂贞为凤翔节度使。
English: The imperial court reappointed Jie Maozhen as Fengxiang's regent.

古文：三月，己丑，以王审知充威武留后。
现代文：三月，己丑，朝廷任命王审知为威武留后。
English: In March, the imperial court appointed Wang Xizhi as the empress dowager.

古文：硃全忠遣副使万年韦震入奏事，求兼镇天平，朝廷未之许，震力争之。
现代文：朱全忠派遣副使万年县人韦震入朝奏报事宜，请求兼任天平度使，朝廷没有准许，韦震极力争取。
English: Zhu Quanzhong dispatched the deputy envoy of Wannen County, Wei Zhen, to the court to report the matter to the court, and requested that he also serve as a balance envoy. The court did not grant permission, and Wei Zhen tried his best.

古文：朝廷不得已，以全忠为宣武、宣义、天平三镇节度使。
现代文：朝廷出于不得已，任命朱全忠为宣武、宣义、天平三镇节度使。
English: As a last resort, the imperial court appointed Zhu Quanzhong as the envoy of the three towns of Xuanwu, Xuanyi and Tianping.

古文：全忠以震为天平留后，以前台州刺史李振为天平节度副使。
现代文：朱全忠便委任韦震为天平留后，委任以前的台州刺史李振为天平节度副使。
English: After Zhu Quanzhong appointed Wei Zhen to stay in Tianping, he appointed Li Zhen, the former governor of Taizhou, as the deputy envoy of Tianping.

古文：振，抱真之曾孙也。
现代文：李振是李抱真的第四代孙子。
English: Li Zhen is the fourth-generation grandson of Li Bozhen.

古文：淮南将周本救苏州，两浙将顾全武击破之。
现代文：准南军队将领周本救援苏州，两浙军队将领顾全武将周本打败。
English: Zhou Ben, the general of the quasi-south army, rescued Suzhou, and Gu Quanwu, the general of the two Zhejiang armies, defeated Zhou Ben.

古文：淮南将秦裴以兵三千人拔昆山而戍之。
现代文：准南军队将领秦裴带领三千人马攻占昆山县并驻扎下来。
English: Qin Pei, the general of the quasi-Southern army, led three thousand horses to occupy Kunshan County and stationed there.

古文：以潭州刺史、判湖南军府事马殷知武安留后。
现代文：朝廷任命潭州刺史、判湖南军府事马殷主持武安留后事宜。
English: The imperial court appointed Tanzhou Zhishi and ordered the Hunan Military Government to appoint Ma Yin to preside over Wu An's post-retirement affairs.

古文：时湖南管内七州，贼帅杨师远据衡州，唐世旻据永州，蔡结据道州，陈彦谦据郴州，鲁景仁据连州，殷所得惟潭、邵而已。
现代文：当时湖南管辖境内有七个州，贼寇头目杨师远占据衡州，唐世占据永州，蔡结占据道州，陈彦谦占据郴州，鲁景仁占据连州，这样马殷所得到的只是潭州、邵州两个州而已。
English: At that time, there were seven prefectures under the jurisdiction of Hunan. Yang Shiyuan, the leader of the bandits, occupied Hengzhou, Tang Shiyuan occupied Yongzhou, Cai Jie occupied Daozhou, Chen Yanqian occupied Zhangzhou, and Lu Jingren occupied Lianzhou. As a result, Ma Yin obtained only two prefectures, Tanzhou and Shaozhou.

古文：义昌节度使卢彦威，性残虐，又不礼于邻道。
现代文：义昌节度使卢彦威，性情残忍暴虐，对邻近各道又不礼善。
English: The Yichang Festival made Lu Yanwei cruel and tyrannical, and he was rude to the neighbors.

古文：与卢龙节度使刘仁恭争盐利，仁恭遣其子守文将兵袭沧州，彦威弃城，挈家奔魏州。罗弘信不纳，乃奔汴州。
现代文：卢彦威与卢龙节度使刘仁恭争夺盐利，刘仁恭派遣他的儿子刘守文带领军队袭击沧州，卢彦威放弃沧州城，带着家人逃奔魏州；魏州的罗弘信拒不接纳，卢彦威便投奔汴州。
English: Lu Yanwei and Lu Long Jiedu made Liu Rengong compete for salt, Liu Rengong sent his son Liu Shouwen to lead the army to attack Cangzhou, Lu Yanwei abandoned Cangzhou City and fled to Weizhou with his family; Luo Hongxin of Weizhou refused to accept, and Lu Yanwei fled to Ganzhou.

古文：仁恭遂取沧、景、德三州，以守文为义昌留后。
现代文：刘仁恭于是占取沧州、景州、德州三个州，委任刘守文为义昌留后。
English: Liu Renkong then occupied the three states of Cangzhou, Jingzhou and Texas, and appointed Liu Shouwen to stay in Yichang.

古文：仁恭兵势益盛，自谓得天助，有并吞河朔之志，为守文请旌节，朝廷未许。
现代文：刘仁恭的军队势力更加强盛，自以为得到上天的帮助，便有了吞并黄河以北地盘的企图，向朝廷为刘守文请求节度使旌旗节，朝廷没有准许。
English: Liu Renkong's army was even more powerful. He thought that he had received help from heaven, so he attempted to annex the territory north of the Yellow River. He asked the court to set a festival for Liu Shouwen to celebrate the Flag Day, but the court did not allow it.

古文：会中使至范阳，仁恭语之曰： 旌节吾自有之，但欲得长安本色耳，何为累章见拒，为吾言之！ 
现代文：适逢宦官到达范阳，刘仁恭对宦官说： 节度使的旌旗节我自己就有，只是想得到京师长安颁发的正宗而已，为什么我一再上呈表章请求却被拒绝！替我向朝廷说说！ 
English: When the eunuch arrived at Fanyang, Liu Rengong said to the eunuch: I have the eunuch's eunuch's eunuch's eunuch's eunuch's eunuch's eunuch's eunuch's eunuch's eunuch's eunuch's eunuch's eunuch's eunuch's eunuch's eunuch's eunuch's eunuch's eunuch's eunuch's eunuch's eunuch's eunuch's eunuch's eunuch'

古文：其悖慢如此。
现代文：刘仁恭的狂妄傲慢竟到达这种地步。
English: Liu Renkong's arrogance has reached such a level.

古文：硃全忠与刘仁恭修好，会魏博兵击李克用。
现代文：朱全忠与刘仁恭和好亲善，恰逢魏博军队攻打李克用。
English: Zhu Quanzhong and Liu Renkong were reconciled and friendly, which coincided with the Wei Bo army's attack on Li Kejun.

古文：夏，四月，丁未，全忠至巨鹿城下，败河东兵万馀人，遂北至青山口。
现代文：夏季，四月，丁未，朱全忠到达钜鹿城下，打败河东李克用的军队一万余人，一直追赶到青山口
English: In the summer, in April, Ding Wei, Zhu Quanzhong arrived at the foot of the Elk Castle, defeated the army of more than ten thousand people used by Hedong Li Ke, and chased them all the way to Qingshankou

古文：以护国节度使王珂兼侍中。
现代文：朝廷任命护国节度使王珂兼任侍中。
English: The imperial court appointed Wang Ke as an aide-de-camp during the National Day.

古文：丁卯，硃全忠遣葛从周分兵攻洺州，戊辰，拔之，斩刺史邢善益。
现代文：丁卯，朱全忠派遣葛从周分兵攻打州，戊辰，予以攻克，斩杀州刺史邢善益。
English: Dingwu, Zhu Quanzhong dispatched Ge from Zhou to attack the state, Boshen, to be conquered, and to kill the state assassin Shi Zhengyi.

古文：五月，己巳朔，赦天下。
现代文：五月，己巳朔，朝廷大赦天下。
English: In May, the Imperial Court granted amnesty to the whole world.

古文：葛从周攻邢州，刺史马师素弃城走。
现代文：葛从周攻打邢州，剌史马师素放弃邢州城逃跑。
English: Ge attacked Zhangzhou from Zhou, and Zou Shima abandoned Zhangzhou and fled.

古文：辛未，磁州刺史袁奉滔自刭。
现代文：辛未，磁州剌史袁奉滔自杀。
English: Xin Wei, Zhengzhou Zushi Yuan Bongtao committed suicide.

古文：全忠以从周为昭义留后，守邢、洺、磁三州而还。
现代文：朱全忠委任葛从周为昭义留后，守卫邢州、州、磁州三州，然后他自己返回汴州。
English: Zhu Quanzhong appointed Ge to guard the three states of Ganzhou, Zhoushou and Maganzhou after he left Zhou for Zhao Yi, and then he himself returned to Ganzhou.

古文：以武定节度使李继密为山南西道节度使。
现代文：朝廷任命武安节度使李继密为山南西道节度使。
English: The imperial court appointed Wu'an festival envoy Li Jimi as the Shannan West Road festival envoy.

古文：朝廷闻王建已用王宗涤为东川留后，乃召刘崇望还，为兵部尚书，仍以宗涤为留后。
现代文：朝廷听说王建已经委任王宗涤为东川留后，于是召刘崇望返回，任命他为兵部尚书，仍以王宗涤为东川留后。
English: The imperial court heard that Wang Jian had appointed Wang Zongjia to stay behind in the East River, so he called Liu Chongwang back and appointed him as the secretary of the military department. Wang Zongjia remained behind in the East River.

古文：湖南将姚彦章言于马殷，请取衡、永、道、连、郴五州，仍荐李琼为将。
现代文：湖南军队将领姚彦章向马殷进言，请求攻取衡、永、道、连、郴五个州，仍然荐举李琼为统军将领。
English: The general of the Hunan army, Yao Yanzhang, proposed to Ma Yin, requesting to capture Heng, Yong, Dao, Lian and Yao five states, and still recommended Li Qiong as the general of the unified army.

古文：殷以琼及秦彦晖为岭北七州游奕使，张图英、李唐副之，将兵攻衡州，斩杨师远，引兵趣永州，围之月馀，唐世旻走死。
现代文：马殷任命李琼和秦彦晖为岭北七州游弈使，张图英、李唐为副使，带领军队攻打衡州，斩杀衡州剌史杨师远，接着又率领军队奔赴永州，围攻了一个多月，剌史唐世逃跑后死去。
English: Ma Yin appointed Li Qiong and Qin Yanyu as envoys to the seven states of Lingbei, and Zhang Tuying and Li Tang as deputy envoys. They led the army to attack Hengzhou, killed Yang Shiyuan, the governor of Hengzhou, and then led the army to Yongzhou. They besieged the city for more than a month. The governor of Hengzhou, Tang Shiyuan, died after escaping.

古文：殷以李唐为永州刺史。
现代文：马殷于是任命李唐为永州剌史。
English: Ma Yin then appointed Li Tang as the leader of Yongzhou.

古文：六月，以濠州刺史赵珝为忠武节度使。
现代文：六月，朝廷任命濠州剌史赵为忠武节度使。
English: In June, the imperial court appointed Zhangzhou Zizhi Zhao as the envoy of Zhongwu Festival.

古文：珝，犨之弟也。
现代文：赵是赵的胞弟。
English: Zhao is Zhao's younger brother.

古文：秋，七月，加武贞节度使雷满同平章事，加镇南节度使钟传兼侍中。
现代文：秋季七月，朝廷加封武贞节度使雷满为同平章事，加封镇南节度使钟传兼任侍中。
English: In the autumn of July, the imperial court added the title of Wuzhen Festival to make Lei Man a peerage, and the title of Zhenan Festival to make Zhong Chuan a chamberlain.

古文：忠义节度使赵匡凝闻硃全忠有清口之败，阴附于杨行密。
现代文：山南东道的忠义节度使赵匡凝听说朱全忠的人马在清口打了败仗，暗中依附淮南的杨行密。
English: Due to the loyalty of Shannan Dongdao, Zhao Kuangning heard that Zhu Quanzhong's men had lost the battle in Qingkou and secretly adhered to Yang Xingmi of Huainan.

古文：全忠遣宿州刺史尉氏氏叔琮将兵伐之，丙申，拔唐州，擒随州刺史赵匡璘，败襄州兵于邓城。
现代文：朱全忠派遣宿州剌史尉氏人氏叔琮带领军队讨伐赵匡凝，丙申，氏叔琮攻克唐州，擒获随州剌史赵匡，在邓城打败襄州军队。
English: Zhu Quanzhong dispatched the army led by Shuzhou's Zou Shifu, who led the army to fight against Zhao Kuangning, and Bishen, who led the army to conquer Tangzhou, captured Zou Shifu Zhao Kuang, and defeated the army of Xiangzhou in Dengcheng.

古文：八月，庚戌，改华州为兴德府。
现代文：八月，庚戌，朝廷把华州改名为兴德府。
English: In August, the Imperial Court changed the name of Huazhou to Xingdefu.

古文：戊午，汴将康怀贞袭邓州，克之，擒刺史国湘。
现代文：戊午，汴州军队将领康怀贞袭击邓州，予以攻克，擒获邓州剌史国湘。
English: At noon, Kang Huai Zhen, the general of the Zhangzhou army, attacked Dengzhou, conquered it, and won the victory of Dengzhou and Hunan.

古文：赵匡凝惧，遣使请服于硃全忠，全忠许之。
现代文：赵匡凝十分惧怕，派出使者请求臣服于朱全忠，朱全忠予以同意。
English: Zhao Kuangning was so afraid that he sent an envoy to ask Zhu Quanzhong to submit to him, and Zhu Quanzhong agreed.

古文：己未，车驾发华州。壬戌，至长安。甲子，赦天下，改元。
现代文：己未，昭宗的车驾从华州出发；壬戌，到达京师长安；甲子，朝廷诏令天下大赦，改年号为光化。
English: Before long, Zhaozong's car set off from Huazhou; after passing through Renmin, he arrived in Beijing and Chang'an; after passing through Jiazi, the imperial court issued a general amnesty and changed the year name to Guanghua.

古文：上欲籓镇相与辑睦，以太子宾客张有孚为河东、汴州宣慰使，赐李克用、硃全忠诏，又令宰相与之书，使之和解。
现代文：唐昭宗希望天下藩镇相互和睦，便任命太子宾客张有孚为河东、汴州宣慰使，向李克用、朱全忠颁赐诏书，又命令宰相致信李克用、朱全忠，让他们和解。
English: Tang Zhaozong hoped that the world's provinces and towns would be reconciled with each other, so he appointed Zhang Youfu, the prince's guest, as the consoling envoy to Hedong and Zhangzhou, issued an imperial edict to Li Kegui and Zhu Quanzhong, and ordered the prime minister to send a letter to Li Kegui and Zhu Quanzhong to reconcile them.

古文：克用欲奉诏，而耻于先自屈，乃致书王镕，使通于全忠。全忠不从。
现代文：李克用想要遵奉诏令与朱全忠讲和，可是又为自己首先屈服而感到耻辱，于是他给王熔送去书信，让王熔与朱全忠沟通解释，但朱全忠拒不答应。
English: Li Ke used to want to obey the edict and make peace with Zhu Quanzhong, but he felt ashamed that he was the first to give in. So he sent a letter to Wang Rong, asking Wang Rong to communicate and explain with Zhu Quanzhong, but Zhu Quanzhong refused to agree.

古文：九月，乙亥，加韩建守太傅、兴德尹，加王镕兼中书令，罗弘信守侍中。
现代文：九月，乙亥，朝廷加封韩建守太傅、兴德府尹；加封王兼任中书令，罗弘信守侍中。
English: In September, Yihai, the imperial court added Han Jian Shou Taifu and Xingdefu Yin; the king of the addition also served as the middle secretary, and Luo Hongshu served as a chamberlain.

古文：己丑，东川留后王宗涤言于王建，以东川封疆五千里，文移往还，动逾数月，请分遂、合、泸、渝、昌五州别为一镇，建表言之。
现代文：己丑，东川留后王宗涤对王建说，东川的封土疆界有五千里，公文往返投送，常常超过几个月，请将遂、合、泸、渝、昌五个州分出去另外设置一镇；王建向朝廷进呈表章陈述。
English: After Wang Zongjia stayed in Dongchuan, he said to Wang Jianlu, "Dongchuan's fief border is five thousand miles long, official documents are sent back and forth, often more than a few months, please separate the five states of Sui, He, Min, Chong and Chang and set up another town; Wang Jian submitted a written statement to the court.

古文：顾全武攻苏州，城中及援兵食皆尽。甲申，淮南所署苏州刺史台濛弃城走，援兵亦遁。
现代文：钱属将顾全武攻打苏州；苏州城内以及前来救援的军队粮食都吃尽，甲申，淮南杨行密所委任的苏州剌史台放弃苏州城逃跑，前来救援的军队也纷纷逃走。
English: Qian Zhen will attack Suzhou with all his might; the food in Suzhou city and the troops that came to rescue were all eaten up. The Suzhou Military History Station, which was commissioned by Jia Shen and Huainan Yang Xingmi, abandoned Suzhou city and fled, and the troops that came to rescue also fled.

古文：全武克苏州，追败周本等于望亭。
现代文：顾全武攻克苏州城后，又追击周本，在望亭镇将他打败。
English: After Gu Quanwu conquered Suzhou City, he pursued Zhou Ben and defeated him in Wanting Town.

古文：独秦裴守昆山不下，全武帅万馀人攻之。
现代文：唯独由秦裴据守的昆山县城未被攻下，顾全武率领一万余人展开进攻。
English: However, the Kunshan county seat, which was defended by Qin Pei, was not taken, and Gu Quanwu led more than ten thousand people to launch an attack.

古文：裴屡出战，使病者被甲执矛，壮者彀弓弩，全武每为之却。
现代文：秦裴多次出城交战，让病弱的士兵身披戎衣手持长矛，身强力壮的士兵张满弓弩，顾全武的人马往往被打退。
English: Qin Pei repeatedly went out of the city to fight, so that the sick soldiers were dressed in uniforms and armed with spears, the strong soldiers were armed with bows and arrows, and the soldiers were often repulsed.

古文：全武檄裴令降。
现代文：顾全武送去檄文命令秦裴投降。
English: Gu Quanwu sent Xingwen to order Qin Pei to surrender.

古文：全武尝为僧，裴封函纳款，全武喜，召诸将发函，乃佛经一卷，全武大惭，曰： 裴不忧死，何暇戏予！ 
现代文：因为顾全武曾经当过和尚，秦裴便封上给顾全武的信函派人送去表示降服，顾全武大喜，召来各位将领当众打开信函，里面竟然是一卷佛经，顾全武十分羞恼，说： 秦裴不怕死到临头，还有什么功夫戏弄我！ 
English: Because Gu Quanwu had once been a monk, Qin Pei sent a sealed letter to Gu Quanwu to express his surrender. Gu Quanwu was overjoyed and summoned the generals to open the letter in public. It turned out to be a volume of Buddhist scriptures. Gu Quanwu was very embarrassed and said: Qin Pei is not afraid of dying, what else can he do to tease me!

古文：益兵攻城，引水灌之，城坏，食尽，裴乃降。
现代文：于是增调军队进攻昆山城，并引水灌城，城墙塌坏，城内粮食吃尽，秦裴才表示投降。
English: As a result, more troops were dispatched to attack Kunshan City, and water was brought in to flood the city. The city walls collapsed, and the food in the city was exhausted. It was only then that Qin Pei surrendered.

古文：钱镠设千人馔以待之，及出，羸兵不满百人。
现代文：钱准备下一千人的食物等待他率众出城，秦裴出来，只有不到一百名瘦弱不堪的士兵。
English: Qin Pei prepared food for the next thousand people waiting for him to lead them out of the city. When he came out, there were less than a hundred emaciated soldiers.

古文：镠怒曰： 单弱如此，何敢久为旅拒！ 
现代文：钱气愤地对秦裴说： 你势单力薄到了这种地步，怎么还敢顽固抗拒！ 
English: Qian angrily said to Qin Pei, "How dare you stubbornly resist when your power is so weak!

古文：对曰： 裴义不负杨公，今力屈而降耳，非心降也。 
现代文：秦裴回答说： 我秦裴讲义气不辜负杨行密，今天不过是因为兵力衰竭而降服罢了，并不是从内心里归顺你， 钱很赞赏秦裴说的话。
English: Qin Pei replied, "I, Qin Pei, have the spirit of loyalty to live up to Yang Xingmi. Today, I only surrendered because of the exhaustion of my forces. I did not surrender to you from the bottom of my heart. Qin Pei appreciated Qin Pei's words.

古文：镠善其言。顾全武亦劝镠宥之，镠从之。时人称全武长者。
现代文：顾全武也劝钱宽恕秦裴，钱便依从顾全武的意见。当时人们都称顾全武是个宽厚的人。
English: Gu Quanwu also advised Qian to forgive Qin Pei, and Qian followed Gu Quanwu's advice. At that time, people said that Gu Quanwu was a generous person.

古文：魏博节度使罗弘信薨，军中推其子节度副使绍威知留后。
现代文：魏博节度使罗弘信死去，军中将士推举他的儿子节度副使罗绍威主持留后事宜。
English: Wei Bo Jiedu caused Luo Hongxin to die, and the lieutenant generals elected his son Jiedu's deputy, Luo Shaowei, to preside over the succession.

古文：汴将硃友恭将兵还自江、淮，过安州，或告刺史武瑜潜与淮南通，谋取汴军，冬，十月，己亥，友恭攻而杀之。
现代文：汴州军队将领朱友恭带领军队从长江、淮水一带返回，经过安州，有的人向朱友恭告发说安州剌史武瑜暗中与淮南的杨行密相互勾通，企图攻击汴州军队，冬季，十月，己亥，朱友恭率军攻打安州，将武瑜杀死。
English: Zhu Youqiong, the general of the Zhangzhou army, led the army to return from the Yangtze River and Huai Shui area, passing through Anzhou. Some people told Zhu Youqiong that the Anzhou general Shi Wuyu secretly colluded with Yang Xing of Huainan and attempted to attack the Zhangzhou army. In winter, October, Ji Hai, Zhu Youqiong led the army to attack Anzhou and killed Wu Yu.

古文：李克用遣其将李嗣昭、周德威将步骑二万出青山，将复山东三州。
现代文：李克用派遣属下将领李嗣昭、周德威带领步兵骑兵二万人出青山，打算收复山东的邢州、州、磁州三个州。
English: Li Ke dispatched his subordinate generals Li Shizhao and Zhou Dewei to lead 20,000 infantry and cavalry out of Qingshan, intending to recover Shandong's three provinces of Ganzhou, Zhoushou and Maganzhou.

古文：壬寅，进攻邢州，葛从周出战，大破之。
现代文：壬寅，河东军队进攻邢州；邢州剌史葛从周出城迎战，把河东军队打得大败。
English: The Jinin and Hedong armies attacked Zhangzhou; Zhangzhou's Zhang Shige came out of the city to fight, and defeated the Hedong army.

古文：嗣昭等引兵退入青山，从周追之，将扼其归路。步兵自溃，嗣昭不能制。
现代文：李嗣昭等带领军队退回青山，葛从周跟随追击，想要截断河东军队的退路；河东军队的步兵自行溃散，李嗣昭不能控制。
English: Li Shizhao and others led the army back to Qingshan, Ge Zhou followed the pursuit, trying to cut off the escape route of the Hedong army; the infantrymen of the Hedong army scattered on their own, and Li Shizhao could not control them.

古文：会横冲都将李嗣源以所部兵至，谓嗣昭曰： 吾辈亦去，则势不可支矣，我试为公击之。 
现代文：适逢横冲都将李嗣源带领所部人马赶到，他对李嗣昭说： 我们这些人如果也离去，那么河东军队的势力就支持不住了，让我试为你攻打葛从周的邢州军队。 
English: When the time came for the rampaging, Li Siyuan led his men and horses to arrive. He said to Li Shizhao, "If we also leave, then the strength of the Hedong army will not be able to support it. Let me try to attack Ge Cong Zhou's Zhangzhou army for you."

古文：嗣昭曰： 善，我请从公后。 
现代文：李嗣昭说： 太好了！我愿意跟随在你的后面。 
English: Li Shizhao said: Great! I am willing to follow behind you.

古文：嗣源乃解鞍厉镞，乘高布阵，左右指画，邢队莫之测。
现代文：李嗣源于是命令解下鞍具让战马休息，磨砺箭头，整修刀剑，登上高处布置作战阵容，左右来回指指画画，邢州军队揣测不出李嗣源的意图。
English: Li Siyuan then ordered to take off the saddles to let the horses rest, sharpen the arrows, repair the sword, climb to a high place to arrange the battle lineup, and point and draw around. The Zhangzhou army could not guess Li Siyuan's intention.

古文：嗣源直前奋击，嗣昭继之，从周乃退。
现代文：李嗣源率领军队径直向前奋勇进攻，李嗣昭在后面紧跟，葛从周的军队于是向后败退。
English: Li Siyuan led the army straight forward to attack bravely, Li Shizhao followed closely behind, and Ge Zhou's army was defeated and retreated.

古文：德威，马邑人也。
现代文：周德威是马邑人。
English: Zhou Dewei is a native of Ma'i.

古文：癸卯，以威武留后王审知为节度使。
现代文：癸卯，朝廷任命威武留后王审知为威武节度使。
English: At the same time, the imperial court appointed Wang Xizhi, the empress dowager of Weiwu, as the empress dowager of Weiwu.

古文：以罗绍威知魏博留后。
现代文：朝廷任命罗弘信的儿子罗绍威主持魏博留后事宜。
English: The imperial court appointed Luo Hongxin's son, Luo Shaowei, to preside over Wei Bo's post-retirement affairs.

古文：丁巳，以东川留后王宗涤为节度使。
现代文：丁巳，朝廷任命东川留后王宗涤为东川节度使。
English: Soon after, the imperial court appointed Wang Zongya, who had stayed behind in Dongchuan, as Dongchuan's regent.

古文：加佑国节度使张全义兼侍中。
现代文：朝廷加封佑国节度使张全义兼任侍中。
English: The Imperial Court's addition of the title of Imperial Prince on the occasion of the National Day of Japan made Zhang Zengyi concurrently serve as an aide-de-camp.

古文：王珙引汴兵寇河中，王珂告急于李克用。克用遣李嗣昭救之，败汴兵于胡壁，汴人走。
现代文：王带领汴州军队侵扰河中，王向李克用告急；李克用派遣李嗣昭救援王珂，在胡壁镇打败汴州军队，汴州人马逃跑。
English: Wang led the Bozhou army to invade the middle of the river, Wang sent an urgent message to Li Ke; Li Ke sent Li Shizhao to rescue Wang Ke, defeated the Bozhou army in Hubi Town, and the Bozhou people fled.

古文：前常州刺史王柷，性刚介，有时望。诏征之，时人以为且入相。
现代文：以前的常州剌史王，性情刚正耿直，很有威望；朝廷下诏征召王，人们都认为他将要做宰相。
English: The former King of Changzhou, Zangshi Wang, had a straightforward and upright disposition and was very prestigious. The imperial court issued an edict to conscript Wang, and people all thought that he would become the prime minister.

古文：过陕，王珙延奉甚至，请叙子侄之礼拜之，柷固辞不受。
现代文：王应召前往经过陕州，王接迎侍奉王十分周到，请用子侄的礼节行礼下拜，王坚决推辞而不接受。
English: Wang accepted the invitation to travel through Shaanxi Province. Wang was very thoughtful in welcoming and serving Wang. Please bow down with the etiquette of a nephew. Wang firmly declined and did not accept.

古文：珙怒，使送者杀之，并其家人悉投诸河，掠其资装，以覆舟闻。朝廷不敢诘。
现代文：王转为愤怒，指使送行的人将王杀害，连同王的家人全都投进黄河，又将王的资财行装全都抢去，然后向朝廷奉报说王船翻而亡。朝廷竟不敢追查。
English: The king became enraged and ordered those who were escorting him to kill the king and throw him and his family into the Yellow River. They also stole all of the king's belongings. The court was then informed that the king's ship had capsized and he had died. The court did not dare to investigate.

古文：闰月，钱镠以其将曹圭为苏州制置使，遣王球攻婺州。
现代文：闰十月，钱任命属下将领曹圭为苏州制置使，派遣王球攻打婺州。
English: In leap October, Qian appointed his subordinate general Cao Gui as the envoy to Suzhou and dispatched Wang Qiu to attack Zhangzhou.

古文：十一月，甲寅，立皇子祯为雅王，祥为琼王。
现代文：十一月，甲寅，唐昭宗立皇子李祯为雅王，李祥为琼王。
English: In November, Jia Yin, the prince of Tang Zhaozong, made Li Xi the king of Ya and Li Xiang the king of Qiong.

古文：以魏博留后罗绍威为节度使。
现代文：朝廷任命魏博留后罗绍威为魏博节度使。
English: After Wei Bo left, the imperial court appointed Luo Shaowei as Wei Bo's regent.

古文：衢州刺史陈岌请降于杨行密，钱镠使顾全武讨之。
现代文：衢州剌史陈岌向杨行密请求投降，钱得知后派顾全武讨伐陈岌。
English: After learning of the request for surrender from Yang Xingmi, Zhangzhou sent a full-strength army to fight Chen Ru.

古文：硃全忠以奉国节度使崔洪与杨行密交通，遣其将张存敬攻之。洪惧，请以弟都指挥使贤为质，且言： 将士顽悍，不受节制，请遣二千人诣麾下从征伐。 
现代文：朱全忠因为淮西的奉国节度使崔洪与淮南的杨行密交通往来，便派遣属下将领张存敬攻打崔洪；崔洪十分惧怕，向朱全忠请求让他的胞弟都指挥使崔贤去做人质，并且说： 手下将领士兵愚笨蛮横，不接受我的指挥调遣，请允许派遣二千人到你的手下跟随征伐。 
English: Zhu Quanzhong sent his subordinate general Zhang Cunjing to attack Cui Hong because the Huaxi National Service Festival brought Cui Hong into close contact with Yang Xingjun of Huainan. Cui Hong was very afraid and asked Zhu Quanzhong to command his brothers to make Cui Xian a hostage, and said: My subordinate generals and soldiers are stupid and arrogant, they do not accept my command and dispatch, please allow me to send two thousand people to your men to follow the conquest.

古文：全忠许之，召存敬还。
现代文：朱全忠予以准许，召令张存敬返回。
English: Zhu Quanzhong granted permission and ordered Zhang Cunjing to return.

古文：存敬，曹州人也。
现代文：张存敬是曹州人。
English: Zhang Cunjing is from Caozhou.

古文：十二月，昭义节度使薛志勤薨。
现代文：十二月，昭义节度使薛志勤死去。
English: In December, the Shouyi Festival caused the death of Xue Zhiqin.

古文：李克用之平王行瑜也，李罕之求邠宁于克用。
现代文：李克用平定王行瑜时，李罕之向李克用谋求守节度使官职。
English: When Li Ke used to pacify Wang Xingyu, Li Hanzhi used to seek to maintain the balance of power to Li Ke.

古文：克用曰： 行瑜恃功邀君，故吾与公讨而诛之。
现代文：李克用对李罕之说： 王行瑜倚仗有功胁迫皇帝，因而我与你讨伐并将他杀死。
English: Li Kegui said to Li Hanzhi, "Wang Xingyu was successful in coercing the emperor, so I fought with you and killed him.

古文：昨破贼之日，吾首奏趣苏文建赴镇。
现代文：日前打败王行瑜这一贼寇时，我首先上奏朝廷催促苏文建赴任宁节度使。
English: When I defeated the bandit Wang Xingyu a few days ago, I first appealed to the imperial court to urge Su Wenjian to be appointed as the Ning Festival envoy.

古文：今才达天听，遽复二三，朝野之论，必喧然谓吾辈复如行瑜所为也。
现代文：现在这一奏请刚刚送达朝廷，我们又马上出尔反尔，朝廷内外的舆论，一定会喧然，指责我们的所做所为象王行瑜一样。
English: Now, this appeal has just been delivered to the imperial court, and we have immediately backtracked. Public opinion inside and outside the imperial court is sure to be vociferous, accusing us of doing the same thing as Wang Xingyu.

古文：吾与公情如同体，固无所爱，俟还镇，当更为公论功赏所为也。
现代文：我和你情深谊长如同一人，所以没给你什么恩惠，等到返回镇所，我会再为你论功行赏的。 
English: I have a deep friendship with you as a person, so I did not give you any favors. When I return to the town, I will reward you for your merits.

古文：吾与公情如同体，固无所爱，俟还镇，当更为公论功赏耳。 
现代文：李罕之闷闷不乐地退了下去，私下对盖寓说： 我李罕之自从河阳失守以后，就依靠大王李克用的庇护，已是多少年月了。
English: Li Hanzhi sullenly retreated and privately said to Gai Yue: I, Li Hanzhi, have been relying on the protection of the great king Li Ke for how many years since the loss of Kheyang.

古文：罕之不悦而退，私于盖寓曰： 罕之自河阳失守，依托大庇，岁月已深。比来衰老，倦于军旅，若蒙吾王与太傅哀愍，赐一小镇，使数年之间休兵养疾，然后归老闾阎，幸免。 
现代文：近些年来，我越来越衰老，对出征攻战已感到疲倦，如果承蒙大王李克用和太傅你的怜悯，就请赏赐给我一个小镇，让我用几年的时间停止戎马生涯治疗疾病，然后回到里巷做个平民，那就是我的万幸了。 
English: In recent years, I've been getting older and older, and I'm tired of going to war. If you have mercy on me, please grant me a small town, let me stop my military career for a few years to treat my illness, and then return to the alley to be a civilian. That would be my great fortune.

古文：寓为之言，克用不应。
现代文：盖寓为李罕之说情，李克用仍不答应。
English: Gaie pleaded for Li Han, but Li Kegui still did not agree.

古文：每籓镇缺，议不及罕之，罕之甚郁郁。
现代文：每当有藩镇官缺出现，商议人选时总是不考虑李罕之，李罕之心情相当忧闷。
English: Whenever there is a shortage of officials in a domain or town, Li Han is always disregarded when candidates are discussed. Li Han's mood is quite gloomy.

古文：寓恐其有它志，亟为之言，克用曰： 吾于罕之岂爱一镇，但罕之，鹰也，饥则为用，饱则背飞。 
现代文：盖寓担心李罕之会产生异心，再三地为李罕之说话，李克用对盖寓说： 我对于李罕之哪里是舍不得一个镇，只是李罕之这个人，象鹰一样，饥饿的时候为你效力，吃饱了以后就会背离飞去！ 
English: Ge Yue was worried that Li Han Zhi would have a different opinion, and repeatedly spoke for Li Han Zhi. Li Ke used to say to Ge Yue: I can't spare a town for Li Han Zhi, but this person Li Han Zhi, like an eagle, will work for you when he is hungry, and when he is full, he will fly away!

古文：及志勤薨，旬日无帅，罕之擅引泽州兵夜入潞州，据之，以状白克用，曰： 薛铁山死，州民无主，虑不逞者为变，故罕之专命镇抚，取王裁旨。 
现代文：等到薛志勤死去，潞州地方十几天的时间没有统帅，李罕之擅自带领泽州军队在夜间进入潞州，占据了潞州城，然后送上状文告诉李克用，说： 薛志勤死后，潞州民众没有主帅，我担心不得志的人会发动变乱，因此未作请示就擅自进入潞州城镇守安抚，请大王你裁定。 
English: After Xue Zhiqin's death, there was no commander-in-chief in Zhangzhou for more than ten days. Li Hanzhi led the Zezhou army into Zhangzhou at night without authorization, occupied Zhangzhou City, and then sent a letter to Li Ke, saying: After Xue Zhiqin's death, the Zhangzhou people have no commander-in-chief. I am afraid that those who are not ambitious will start a riot. Therefore, without making a request, he entered the towns of Zhangzhou without authorization to keep the peace. I ask the king to make a ruling.

古文：克用怒，遣人让之。
现代文：李克用十分愤怒，派人前去责备李罕之。
English: Li Ke was very angry and sent someone to scold Li Han.

古文：罕之遂遣其子颢请降于硃全忠，执河东将马溉等及沁州刺史傅瑶送汴州。
现代文：李罕之于是派遣他的儿子去向朱全忠请求投降，抓获河东军队将领马溉等人和沁州剌史傅瑶送往汴州朱全忠那里。
English: Li Han Zhi then sent his son to request Zhu Quanzhong to surrender, and captured the general of the Hedong army Ma Rui and others, as well as the governor of Zhangzhou, Shishi Fu Jun, and sent them to Zhu Quanzhong in Zhangzhou.

古文：克用遣李嗣昭将兵讨之，嗣昭先取泽州，收罕之家属送晋阳。
现代文：李克用派李嗣昭带领军队讨伐李罕之，李嗣昭首先攻取泽州，搜获李罕之的家属送往晋阳李克用那里。
English: Li Ke used to send Li Shizhao to lead the army to fight against Li Han. Li Shizhao first conquered Zezhou, seized Li Han's family members and sent them to Jinyang, where Li Ke used them.

古文：杨行密遣成及等归两浙以易魏约等，钱镠许之。
现代文：杨行密把从前擒获的两浙将领成及遣返回去，以换回被两浙的钱俘获的淮南将领魏约等人，钱同意交换。
English: Yang Xingmi led the previously captured two Zhejiang generals to Chengdu and sent them back, in exchange for Huainan general Wei You and others who were captured by the money from the two Zhejiang provinces. The money agreed to be exchanged.

古文：韶州刺史曾兗举兵攻广州，州将王璙帅战舰应之。清海行军司马刘隐一战破之。
现代文：韶州剌史曾衮发动军队攻打广州，广州将领王率领战舰接应曾衮；清海行军司马刘隐一交战就将曾衮的人马打败。
English: Zhangzhou warlord Zeng Zheng launched an army to attack Guangzhou, and Guangzhou warlord Wang led a warship to meet Zeng Zheng; Qinghai marching army commander Ma Liuyin defeated Zeng Zheng's men in a single battle.

古文：韶州将刘潼复据浈、浛，隐讨斩之。
现代文：韶州将领刘潼重新占据了浈阳县、县，刘隐率军讨伐，将刘潼斩杀。
English: The Bozhou general Liu Hui reoccupied the county and county of Fenyang. Liu Ying led the army in a crusade and killed Liu Hui.

古文：昭宗圣穆景文孝皇帝中之上光化二年春，正月，丁未，中书侍郎兼吏部尚书、同平章事崔胤罢守本官。以兵部尚书陆扆同平章事。
现代文：光化二年春季正月，丁未，朝廷将中书侍郎兼吏部尚书崔胤罢官留职；任命兵部尚书陆为同平章事。
English: In the first month of the spring of the second year of the Gwanghwa era, the imperial court dismissed and retained Choi In, the attendant of the middle secretary and the secretary of the general staff, and appointed Choi Lu, the secretary of the general staff, as a peer.

古文：硃全忠表李罕之为昭义节度使，又表权知河阳留后丁会、武宁留后王敬荛、彰义留后张珂并为节度使。
现代文：朱全忠向朝廷上表请求任命李罕之为昭义节度使，又表请将暂任河阳留后丁会、武宁留后王敬尧、彰义留后张珂一同任命为节度使。
English: Zhu Quanzhong petitioned the imperial court to appoint Li Han as the chief delegate to the Shouyi Festival, and also petitioned to appoint the temporary delegate to the Shouyi Festival as the delegate to the Shouyi Festival, together with the temporary delegate to the Shouyi Festival as the delegate to the Shouyi Festival, the temporary delegate to the Shouyi Festival as the delegate to the Shouyi Festival, the temporary delegate to the Shouyi Festival as the delegate to the Shouyi Festival, and the temporary delegate to the Shouyi Festival as the delegate to the Shouyi Festival.

古文：杨行密与硃瑾将兵数万攻徐州，军于吕梁，硃全忠遣骑将张归厚救之。
现代文：杨行密与朱瑾带领军队几万人攻打徐州，在吕梁驻扎，朱全忠派遣骑兵将领张归厚前往救援徐州。
English: Yang Xingmi and Zhu Xi led an army of tens of thousands to attack Xuzhou, stationed in Luliang. Zhu Quanzhong dispatched cavalry general Zhang Gui Hou to rescue Xuzhou.

古文：刘仁恭发幽、沧等十二州兵十万，欲兼河朔。
现代文：刘仁恭征发幽州、沧州等十二个州的军队十万人，想兼并黄河以北地盘。
English: Liu Rengong conscripted and dispatched 100,000 troops from 12 states, including Yuzhou and Cangzhou, in an attempt to annex territory north of the Yellow River.

古文：攻贝州，拔之，城中万馀户，尽屠之，投尸清水。
现代文：先去攻打贝州，予以攻克，城内一万余户居民，全都遭受屠杀，尸体被扔弃到清河水中。
English: They first attacked and conquered Beizhou, and more than ten thousand residents of the city were all slaughtered, and their bodies were thrown into the water of the Qinghe River.

古文：由是诸城各坚守不下。
现代文：从此各城都顽强固守不投降。
English: From then on, every city stubbornly held out and refused to surrender.

古文：仁恭进攻魏州，营于城北。魏博节度使罗绍威求救于硃全忠。
现代文：刘仁恭进军攻打魏州，在城北安营扎寨，魏博节度使罗绍威向朱全忠求救。
English: Liu Rengong marched to attack Weizhou and set up a camp in the north of the city. The Wei Bo festival made Luo Shaowei call for help from Zhu Quanzhong.

古文：硃全忠遣崔贤还蔡州，发其兵二千诣大梁。
现代文：朱全忠把蔡州剌史崔洪的弟弟遣送回蔡州，征发蔡州军队二千人前赴大梁。
English: Zhu Quanzhong sent Cai Hong's younger brother back to Caizhou and sent 2,000 Caizhou troops to Dalian.

古文：二月，蔡将崔景思等杀贤，劫崔洪，悉驱兵民度淮奔杨行密。
现代文：二月份，蔡州军队将领崔景思等杀害了崔贤，劫持崔洪，驱赶蔡州的全部军队和百姓渡过淮水投奔杨行密。
English: In February, Cai Zhou's army general Cui Jingsi and others killed Cui Xian, kidnapped Cui Hong, and drove all of Cai Zhou's army and people across Huai Shui to Yang Xingmi.

古文：兵民稍稍遁归，至广陵者不满二千人。
现代文：士兵和百姓渐渐地都逃了回去，到达广陵的人不到二千名。
English: Soldiers and civilians gradually fled back, and less than two thousand people reached Guangling.

古文：全忠命许州刺史硃友裕守蔡州。
现代文：朱全忠命令许州剌史朱友裕兼守蔡州事宜。
English: Zhu Quanzhong ordered Zhu Youyu, the governor of Huzhou, to take charge of the affairs of Caizhou.

古文：硃全忠自将救徐州，杨行密闻之，引兵去。
现代文：朱全忠亲自率领军队救援徐州，杨行密得知，带领人马离去。
English: Zhu Quanzhong personally led the army to rescue Xuzhou. Yang Xingmi learned of this and led his men away.

古文：汴人追及之于下邳，杀千馀人。
现代文：朱全忠军队一直追击到下邳县，杀死一千余人。
English: Zhu Quanzhong's army chased them all the way to Xiamen County, killing more than a thousand people.

古文：全忠行至辉州，闻淮南兵已退，乃还。
现代文：朱全忠赶到辉州时，听说淮南军队已经撤退，于是返回。
English: When Zhu Quanzhong arrived in Huizhou, he heard that the Huainan army had withdrawn, so he returned.

古文：三月，硃全忠遣其将李思安、张存敬将兵救魏博，屯于内黄。癸卯，全忠以中军军于滑州。
现代文：三月，朱全忠派遣属下将领李思安、张存敬带领军队救援魏博节度使罗绍威，在内黄县驻扎，癸卯，朱全忠派中军在滑州安营。
English: In March, Zhu Quanzhong dispatched his subordinate generals Li Si'an and Zhang Cunqian to lead the army to rescue Wei Bo, and stationed in Neihuang County. However, Zhu Quanzhong sent the Chinese army to camp in Nanzhou.

古文：刘仁恭谓其子守文曰： 汝勇十倍于思安，当先虏鼠辈，后擒绍威耳！ 
现代文：刘仁恭对他的儿子刘守文说： 你的勇猛是李思安的十倍，你应当首先俘虏这些无能鼠辈，然后再擒获罗绍威！ 
English: Liu Renkong said to his son Liu Shouwen: Your bravery is ten times that of Li Si'an. You should first capture these incompetent rats, and then capture Roshowe!

古文：乃遣守文及其妹婿单可及将精兵五万击思安于内黄。
现代文：刘仁恭于是派遣刘守文和他的妹夫单可及带领精兵五万人在内黄攻打李思安。
English: Liu Rengong then dispatched Liu Shouwen and his brother-in-law to single-handedly lead 50,000 elite soldiers to attack Li Si'an in Inner Huang.

古文：丁未，思安使其将袁象先伏兵于清水之右，思安逆战于繁阳，阳不胜而却，守文逐之。及内黄之北，思安勒兵还战，伏兵发，夹击之。
现代文：丁未，李思安派遣手下将领袁象先在清河水的右侧埋伏下军队，李思安在繁阳迎战刘守文，假装不能取胜而后退；刘守文追击李思安，到内黄县的北部，李思安率领军队回头攻打，埋伏下的军队也发起进攻，两面夹击。
English: Ding Wei, Li Sian sent his subordinate general Yuan Xiang first to ambush the army on the right side of the Qinghe River. Li Sian met Liu Shouwen in the bustling sun, pretended that he could not win and retreated; Liu Shouwen chased Li Sian, to the north of Neihuang County, Li Sian led the army back to attack, and the ambushed army also launched an attack, sandwiched on both sides.

古文：幽州兵大败，斩可及，杀获三万人，守文仅以身免。
现代文：结果刘仁恭的幽州军队打了大败仗，单可及被斩杀，三万人被斩杀擒获，刘守文本人仅仅免于一死。
English: As a result, Liu Rengong's Yuzhou army suffered a great defeat and was decapitated, 30,000 people were killed and captured, and Liu Shouwen himself was only spared one death.

古文：可及，幽州骁将，号 单无敌 ，燕军失之丧气。
现代文：单可及是幽州的勇猛将领，号称 单无敌 ，刘仁恭的军队失去单可及后大伤元气。
English: Duan Ercan is a brave and fierce general in Yuzhou, known as Duan Invincible, and Liu Renkong's army was greatly weakened after losing Duan Ercan.

古文：思安，陈留人也。
现代文：李思安是陈留人。
English: Li Sian is a Chen resident.

古文：时葛从周自邢州将精骑八百已入魏州。
现代文：这时，葛从周从邢州带领精壮骑兵八百人已进入魏州。
English: At this time, Ge Cong Zhou led eight hundred strong cavalry from Bozhou into Weizhou.

古文：戊申，仁恭攻上水关、馆陶门。从周与宣义牙将贺德伦出战，顾门者曰： 前有大敌，不可返顾。 
现代文：戊申，刘仁恭攻打上水关、馆陶门，葛从周与宣义牙将贺德伦出城交战，回头对守护城门的士兵说： 前方有强大的敌人，不能让出战的将士有返回念头。 
English: Wushin, Liu Renkong attacked Shuiguan and Guangtoumen. Ge Cong Zhou fought with Xuan Yiga to take He Delun out of the city. He turned to the soldiers guarding the city gate and said, "There is a powerful enemy in front of us. We can't let the soldiers who went out to fight have the idea of returning."

古文：命阖其扉。
现代文：命令把城门关死。
English: The order was given to close the city gates.

古文：从周等殊死战，仁恭复大败，擒其将薛突厥、王郐郎。
现代文：葛从周等率军拼死奋战，刘仁恭的人马又一次大败，他的手下将领薛突厥、王郐郎被擒获。
English: Ge Cong Zhou led the army to fight to the death, Liu Rinkong's men suffered another crushing defeat, and his subordinate generals Xue Turk and Wang Yulang were captured.

古文：明日，汴、魏乘胜合兵击仁恭，破其八寨，仁恭父子烧营而遁。
现代文：第二天，汴州军队和魏州军队联合起来乘胜追击刘仁恭，攻破八个营寨，刘仁恭、刘守文父子烧毁营帐逃跑。
English: The next day, the Zhangzhou army and the Weizhou army united to pursue Liu Renkong and broke through eight camps. Liu Renkong and Liu Shouwen father and son burned the camp and fled.

古文：汴、魏之人长驱追之，至临清，拥其众入永济渠，杀溺不可胜纪。
现代文：汴州和魏州的军队长驱直追，到达临清，把刘仁恭的人马拥挤逼迫到永济渠里，被斩杀和溺死的数不胜数。
English: The military commanders of Zhangzhou and Weizhou drove straight after him, reached Linqing, crowded Liu Renkong's men and forced them into the Yongji Canal. Countless people were killed and drowned.

古文：镇人亦出兵邀击于东境，自魏至沧五百里间，僵尸相枕。
现代文：镇州的王也派出军队在东边的深州、冀州一带拦击刘仁恭。从魏州到沧州五百里的范围内，僵硬的尸体相互枕籍。
English: The king of Zhenzhou also sent troops to intercept Liu Renkong in the eastern regions of Shenzhou and Jizhou. In the five-hundred-mile range from Weizhou to Cangzhou, the stiff corpses were piled on top of each other.

古文：仁恭自是不振，而全忠益横矣。
现代文：刘仁恭从此一蹶不振，而朱全忠更加骄横。
English: Since then, Liu Rengong has suffered a setback, while Zhu Quanzhong has become even more arrogant.

古文：德伦，河西胡人也，刘仁恭之攻魏州也，罗绍威遣使修好于河东，且求救。
现代文：贺德伦是河西的胡人。刘仁恭攻打魏州时，魏博节度使罗绍威派遣使者向河东的李克用谋求和好，并且请求李克用救援。
English: He Delun was a Hu from the west of the river. When Liu Renkong attacked Weizhou, Wei Bo sent an envoy to Li Ke in the east of the river to seek reconciliation and request Li Ke's rescue.

古文：壬午，李克用遣李嗣昭将兵救之。
现代文：壬午，李克用派遣李嗣昭带领军队救援刘仁恭。
English: At noon, Li Ke dispatched Li Shizhao to lead the army to rescue Liu Renkong.

古文：会仁恭已为汴兵所败，绍威复与河东绝，嗣昭引还。
现代文：恰逢刘仁恭已经被汴州军队打败，罗绍威于是又与河东李克用绝交，李嗣昭带领军队返回。
English: Just as Liu Rengong was defeated by the Zhangzhou army, Rossowei broke off diplomatic relations with Li Kejun of Hedong, and Li Shizhao led the army back.

古文：葛从周乘破幽州之势，自土门攻河东，拔承天军。
现代文：葛从周乘着打败幽州刘仁恭的威势，从土门攻打河东军队，攻克承天军。
English: Ge took advantage of Zhou's power to defeat Yuzhou's Liu Rengong, and attacked Hedong's army from Tumen, defeating Heaven's army.

古文：别将氏叔琮自马岭入，拔辽州乐平，进军榆次。
现代文：汴州军队的另一将领氏叔琮从马岭攻入，攻克辽州乐平县，进军榆次县驻扎。
English: Another general of the Zhangzhou army, Mr. Zhu Xi, invaded from Ma Ling, conquered Liaozhou Leping County, and entered and stationed in Shuangzi County.

古文：李克用遣内牙军副周德威击之。
现代文：李克用派遣内牙军副周德威予以抗击。
English: Li Ke used the dispatch of Inner Mongolia Army Deputy Zhou Dewei to fight back.

古文：叔琮有骁将陈章，号 陈夜叉 ，为前锋，请于叔琮曰： 河东所恃者周杨五，请擒之，求一州为赏。 
现代文：氏叔琮手下有一员猛将陈章，绰号 陈夜叉 ，是军中前锋，他向氏叔琮请求说： 河东李克用所依赖的人是周德威，请让我去擒获他，给我一个州作为奖赏。 
English: One of Mr. Shu's subordinates, the fierce general Chen Zhang, nicknamed Chen Yasha, was a forward in the army. He pleaded with Mr. Shu: The person whom Hedong Li Ke used to rely on was Zhou Dewei. Please let me capture him and give me a state as a reward.

古文：克用闻之，以戒德威，德威曰： 彼大言耳。
现代文：李克用得知这一消息，告诉周德威让他有所戒备，周德威说： 陈章不过是说大话罢了。 
English: When Li Keqiang learned of this news, he told Zhou Dewei to be on his guard. Zhou Dewei said: Chen Zhang is just talking nonsense.

古文：闭接诙次鞋德威微服往挑战，谓其属曰： 汝见陈夜叉即走。 
现代文：双方在洞涡展开激战，周德威身穿便服前往挑战，并对属下将领说： 你看见陈夜叉就走开。 
English: The two sides fought a fierce battle in the cave vortex. Zhou Dewei dressed in civilian clothes to challenge, and said to his subordinate generals: If you see Chen Yasha, walk away.

古文：章果逐之，德威奋铁楇击之坠马，生擒以献。
现代文：陈章果然追逐周德威，周德威奋力挥舞铁将陈章打下马，活捉他献给李克用。
English: Chen Zhang really chased Zhou Dewei, and Zhou Dewei waved the iron to knock Chen Zhang off his horse and capture him alive for Li Ke.

古文：因系叔琮，大破之，斩首三千级。
现代文：又趁势攻打氏叔琮，将氏叔琮打得大败，斩杀三千人。
English: He also took advantage of the situation to attack Ujitsugu, defeated Ujitsugu and killed three thousand people.

古文：叔琮弃营走，德威追之，出石会关，又斩千余级。
现代文：氏叔琮放弃营寨逃跑，周德威紧追不舍，出了石会关，又斩杀一千余人。
English: His uncle and aunt abandoned the camp and fled, and Zhou Dewei chased them relentlessly, leaving the stone meeting gate and killing more than a thousand people.

古文：后周亦引还。
现代文：葛从周也带领军队撤回。
English: Ge Zhou also withdrew with his army.

古文：丁巳，硃全忠遣河阳节度使丁会攻泽州，下之。
现代文：丁巳，朱全忠派遣河阳节度使丁会攻打泽州，予以攻克。
English: At that time, Zhu Quanzhong sent Heyang Jiedu to ask the Ding Association to attack and conquer Zezhou.

古文：婺州刺史王檀为两浙所围，求救于宣歙观察使田頵。夏，四月，頵遣行营都指挥使康儒救之。
现代文：婺州剌史王坛被两浙钱的军队围困，向宣歙观察使田求救，夏季，四月，田派遣行营都指挥使康儒等救援王坛。
English: The Bozhou and Shishi royal shrines were besieged by the armies of the two Zhejing dynasties, and sent Tian for help to Xuanwu observation. In summer and April, Tian dispatched camp commanders such as Kangru to rescue the royal shrines.

古文：五月，甲午，置武信军于遂州，以遂、合等五州隶之。
现代文：五月，甲午，朝廷在遂州设置武信节度使司，划出遂州、合州等五个州隶属其下。
English: In the afternoon of the first day of May, the imperial court set up the Wu Xin Zhengdu Envoy Office in Suizhou, and designated Suizhou, Hezhou and other five provinces as subordinate to it.

古文：李克用遣蕃、汉马步都指挥使李君庆将兵攻李罕之，己亥，围潞州。硃全忠出屯河阳，辛丑，遣其将张存敬救之，壬寅，又遣丁会将兵继之。大破河东兵，君庆解围去。
现代文：罕之，己亥，李君庆围攻潞州。朱全忠派出军队驻扎河阳，辛丑，朱全忠派遣属下将领张存敬救援潞州的李罕之，壬寅，朱全忠又派丁会带领军队相继增援，把河东军队打得大败，李君庆被迫解除潞州之围退去。
English: Han Zhi, Ji Hai, Li Junqing besieged Bozhou. Zhu Quanzhong sent troops stationed in Heyang, Xin Qiu, Zhu Quanzhong dispatched his subordinate general Zhang Cunqian to rescue Li Han Zhi from Bozhou, Ren Yin, Zhu Quanzhong also sent Ding Hui to lead the army to reinforce successively, defeated the Hedong army, and Li Junqing was forced to lift the siege of Bozhou and retreat.

古文：克用诛君庆及其裨将伊审、李弘袭，以李嗣昭为蕃、汉马步都指挥使，代之攻潞州。
现代文：李克用把败将李君庆及其副将伊审、李弘袭斩杀；任命李嗣昭为蕃、汉马步都指挥使、代替李君庆继续攻打潞州。
English: Li Ke used the defeat to kill Li Junqing and his vice-commanders Yixin and Li Hongzhu; appointed Li Shizhao as commander and Han Maubudu as commander, and continued to attack Zhangzhou in place of Li Junqing.

古文：庚戌，康儒等败两浙兵于龙丘，擒其将王球，遂取婺州。
现代文：庚戌，田派遣的行营都指挥使康儒等在龙丘县打败两浙钱的军队，擒获两浙军队将领王球，于是占据婺州。
English: Geng Yao, the commander of the camp dispatched by Tian Du, made Kang Ru and others defeat the two Zheqian armies in Longqiu County, captured the two Zhe army generals Wang Qiu, and then occupied Zhangzhou.

古文：六月，乙丑，李罕之疾亟。
现代文：六月，乙丑，李罕之病重。
English: In June, the second ugly, Li Han's serious illness.

古文：丁卯，全忠表罕之为河阳节度使，以丁会为昭义节度使。
现代文：丁卯，朱全忠向朝廷上呈表章请求任命李罕之为河阳节度使，任命丁会为昭义节度使。
English: Ding Yu and Zhu Quanzhong presented a petition to the imperial court requesting the appointment of Li Han as the Heyang Festival Envoy, and the appointment of Ding Hui as the Shouyi Festival Envoy.

古文：未几，又以其将张归霸守邢州，遣葛从周代会守潞州。
现代文：不久，朱全忠又委派属下将领张归霸据守邢州，派遣葛从周代替丁会据守潞州。
English: Soon after, Zhu Quanzhong also appointed his subordinate general Zhang Guiba to hold Bozhou, and sent Ge from Zhou to hold Bozhou in place of Dinghui.

古文：以西川大将王宗佶为武信节度使。
现代文：朝廷任命西川大将王宗佶为武信节度使。
English: The imperial court appointed Wang Zongqi, the general of the West River, as the special envoy of Wu Xin.

古文：宗佶，本姓甘，洪州人也。
现代文：王宗佶本姓甘，是洪州人。
English: Wang Zongyu, whose family name is Gan, is from Hongzhou.

古文：丁丑，李罕之薨于怀州。
现代文：丁丑，李罕之在怀州死去。
English: Ding Xi, Li Han Zhi died in Huai Zhou.

古文：保义节度使王珙，性猜忍，虽妻子亲近，常不自保。
现代文：保义节度使王珙，性情猜忌残忍，即使是妻子儿子这样的骨肉亲人，也常常为自己的安危担忧。
English: Even his wife and son, who are blood relatives, often worry about their own safety.

古文：至是军乱，为麾下所杀，推都将李璠为留后。
现代文：这时军中发生变乱，王珙被手下人马斩杀，大家推举都将李为保义留后。
English: At this time, there was a mutiny in the army, Wang Yao was killed by his subordinates, and everyone chose Li as a guarantor.

古文：秋，七月，硃全忠海州戍将陈海宾请降于杨行密。
现代文：秋季七月，朱全忠属下海州守将陈汉宾向杨行密请求投降。
English: In the autumn of July, Chen Hanbin, Zhu Quanzhong's subordinate governor of Haizhou, asked Yang Xingmi to surrender.

古文：淮海游奕使张训以汉宾心未可知，与涟水防遏使庐江王绾将兵二千直趣海州，遂据其城。
现代文：杨行密属将淮海游弈使张训认为陈汉宾居心难测，便与涟水防遏使、庐江人王绾带领军队二千直接奔赴海州，于是占据海州城。
English: Yang Xingxian, a close relative of Chen Hanbin, thought that Chen Hanbin's intentions were hard to fathom, so he led an army of two thousand directly to Haizhou with the prevention and control of Surabaya and the people of the Bohai River, and then occupied Haizhou City.

古文：加荆南节度使成汭兼中书令。
现代文：朝廷加封荆南节度使成兼任中书令。
English: The imperial court sealed the Jingnan Festival and made him concurrently serve as a middle-ranking official.

古文：马殷遣其将李唐攻道州，蔡结聚群蛮，伏兵于隘以击之，大破唐兵。
现代文：长沙的武安节度使马殷派遣属下将领李唐攻打道州，道州剌史蔡结聚集众多蛮人，在险要地段埋伏下军队予以抗击，把李唐的人马打得大败。
English: The Wu'an Festival in Changsha caused Ma Yin to dispatch his subordinate general Li Tang to attack Daozhou. Daozhou's warlord, Cai Jie, gathered many barbarians, ambushed the army in a critical area, and the army fought back, defeating Li Tang's men and horses.

古文：唐曰： 蛮所恃者，山林耳。若战平地，安能败我！ 
现代文：李唐说： 蛮人所依仗的不过是山林罢了，如果在平地交战，他们怎么会打败我！ 
English: Li Tang said, "What savages rely on is the mountains and forests. If they fight on flat land, how can they defeat me!

古文：乃命因风燔林，火烛天地，群蛮惊遁，遂拔道州，擒结，斩之。
现代文：便下令借助风势放火焚烧山林，顿时天是间一片火海，蛮人惊惶逃跑，李唐于是攻克道州，擒获蔡结，将他斩杀。
English: He then ordered to set fire to the mountains and forests with the help of the wind. Suddenly, the sky was a sea of fire, and the barbarians fled in panic. Li Tang then attacked Doushou, captured Cai Jie, and killed him.

古文：硃全忠召葛从周于潞州，使贺德伦守之。
现代文：朱全忠召回在潞州的葛从周，委令贺德伦前去据守。
English: Zhu Quanzhong recalled Ge Zong Zhou from Bozhou and ordered He Delun to go and defend the castle.

古文：八月，丙寅，李嗣昭引兵至潞州城下，分兵攻泽州。
现代文：八月，丙寅，李嗣昭带领军队到达潞州城下，分兵攻打泽州。
English: In August, Hsin Yin and Li Shizhao led the army to the city of Zhangzhou, and the detachment attacked Zhezhou.

古文：己巳，汴将刘弃泽州走，河东兵进拔天井关。以李孝璋为泽州刺史。
现代文：己巳，汴州军队将领刘放弃泽州城逃跑，河东军队开进攻克天井关，李克用委任李孝璋为泽州剌史。
English: At this time, Liu, the general of the Zhangzhou army, abandoned the city of Zhezhou and fled. The army of Hedong launched an attack to conquer the pass. Li Ke used the opportunity to appoint Li Xiaojuan as the governor of Zhezhou.

古文：贺德伦闭城不出，李嗣昭日以铁骑环其城，捕刍牧者，附城三十里禾黍皆刈之。
现代文：潞州的贺德伦关闭城门拒不出战，李嗣昭每天派出骑兵环绕潞州城巡游，捕捉打草放牧的人，把靠近潞州城三十里方圆的田禾稻谷都割光。
English: He Delun of Zhangzhou closed the city gate and refused to fight. Li Shizhao sent cavalry to patrol around Zhangzhou City every day, catching people who were grazing, and cutting the fields and rice fields close to Zhangzhou City with a radius of 30 miles.

古文：乙酉，德伦等弃城宵遁，趣壶关，河东将李存审伏兵邀击之，杀获甚众。
现代文：乙酉，贺德伦等放弃潞州城，乘夜逃跑，奔赴壶关县，河东军队将领李存审埋伏下士兵拦截攻打，斩杀擒获相当多。
English: Acetylene, He Delun and others abandoned Zhangzhou City, fled by night, and rushed to Kuguan County. The soldiers under the ambush of the general of the Hedong Army, Li Cunxin, intercepted and attacked, and killed and captured quite a lot.

古文：葛从周以援兵至，闻德伦等已败，乃还。
现代文：葛从周带领救援人马赶到，听说贺德伦等已经失败，于是率众返回。
English: Ge arrived from Zhou with rescuers. Hearing that He Delun and others had failed, he led the crowd back.

古文：九月，癸卯，以凤翔节度使李茂贞为凤翔、彰义节度使。
现代文：九月，癸卯，朝廷任命凤翔节度使李茂贞为凤翔、彰义节度使。
English: In September, the imperial court appointed Fengxiang as the festival delegate and Li Maozhen as the Fengxiang and Zhangyi festival delegate.

古文：李克用表汾州刺史孟迁为昭义留后。
现代文：李克用向朝廷进呈表章，请求任命汾州剌史孟迁为昭义留后。
English: Li Ke presented a seal to the imperial court to request the appointment of Zhangzhou Zishi Meng Qian as the successor of Zhao Yi.

古文：淄青节度使王师范以沂、密内叛，乞师于杨行密。
现代文：淄青节度使王师范因为沂州、密州发生内部叛乱，向杨行密请求派军队救援。
English: The Qing Dynasty sent Wang Shifan to Yang Xingmi to request an army rescue because of the internal rebellion in Zhangzhou and Mizhou.

古文：冬，十月，行密遣海州刺史台濛、副使王绾将兵助之，拔密州，归于师范。将攻沂州，先使觇之，曰： 城中皆偃旗息鼓。 
现代文：冬季，十月，杨行密派遣海州剌史台、副使王绾带领军队求助王师范，攻占密州城，归还王师范；接着要攻打沂州，先派人前去侦察，回来的人说： 城内偃旗息鼓，毫无动静。 
English: In the winter, in October, Yang Xingmi dispatched Haizhou Shidai, and the deputy envoy Wang Qi led the army to seek help from Wang Shifan, captured the city of Meizhou, and returned Wang Shifan; then he wanted to attack Zhangzhou. He first sent people to scout, and those who came back said: The city is quiet, there is no movement.

古文：绾曰： 此必有备，而救兵近，不可击也。 
现代文：王绾说： 沂州城内一定有所准备，而救援的军队又很近，因此不能前去攻打。 
English: Wang Yao said: There must be some preparations in Zhangzhou city, and the rescue army is very close, so they can't attack.

古文：诸将曰： 密已下矣，沂何能为！ 
现代文：各位将领却说： 密州都已攻下了，沂州还能怎么样！ 
English: However, the generals said, "We have already conquered all of Myeongju, what can we do with Yeongju?"

古文：绾不能止，乃伏兵林中以待之。
现代文：王绾不能阻止属下将领，便在树林中埋伏下军队，以待战事发展。
English: Unable to stop his subordinate generals, Wang Qi ambushed the troops in the woods to wait for the development of the war.

古文：诸将攻沂州不克，救兵至，引退。
现代文：各位将领攻打沂州未能攻克，沂州的援兵又赶到了，便率兵后退。
English: The generals who led the attack on Luzhou failed to conquer it. Luzhou's reinforcements also arrived, and they retreated with their soldiers.

古文：州兵乘之，绾发伏击败之。
现代文：沂州城内的军队乘机追击，王绾发动埋伏军队将沂州人马打败。
English: The army in the city of Zhangzhou took the opportunity to pursue, and Wang Qi launched an ambush army to defeat the Zhangzhou people and horses.

古文：十一月，陕州都将硃简杀李璠，自称留后，附硃全忠，仍请更名友谦，预于子侄。
现代文：十一月，陕州都将朱简杀死李，自称留后，归附朱全忠，请求更改名字为朱友谦，加入到朱全忠的子侄辈中。
English: In November, all of Shaanxi Province claimed that Zhu Jian had killed Li and stayed behind to attach himself to Zhu Quanzhong, and requested that his name be changed to Zhu Youqian and that he be added to Zhu Quanzhong's sons and nephews.

古文：加忠义节度使赵匡凝兼中书令。
现代文：朝廷加封忠义节度使赵匡凝兼任中书令。
English: The imperial court added the title of loyalty to Zhao Kuangning, making him concurrently serve as the Chinese envoy.

古文：马殷遣其将李琼攻郴州，执陈彦谦，斩之；进攻连州，鲁景仁自杀，湖南皆平。
现代文：马殷派遣属下将领李琼攻打郴州，抓获陈彦谦，将他斩杀；又进军攻打连州，鲁景仁自杀身亡，湖南各州全部平定。
English: Ma Yin dispatched his subordinate general Li Qiong to attack Zhangzhou, captured Chen Yanqian and killed him; he also invaded Lianzhou, Lu Jingren committed suicide and died, and all the states in Hunan were pacified.

古文：十二月，加魏博节度使罗绍威同平章事。
现代文：十二月，朝廷加封魏博节度使罗绍威为同平章事。
English: In December, the imperial court added the Wei Bo Festival to make Roshowe a peerage.

