古文：足太阳之筋，起于足小趾上，结于踝，邪上结于膝，其下循足外侧，结于踵，上循跟，结于腘。
现代文：足太阳膀胱经的经筋，起始于足小趾爪甲的外侧，向上结聚于足外踝，再斜向上结聚于膝关节处，然后向下沿着足的外踝，在足跟部结聚，沿着足跟向上行，在腘部结聚。
English: The meridians of the foot's solar plexus begin on the outside of the toenail, converge upward at the outer ankle, then obliquely upward at the knee joint, then downward along the outer ankle of the foot, converge at the heel, travel upward along the heel, and converge at the hip.

古文：其别者，结于腨外，上腘中内廉，与腘中并上结于臀，上挟脊上项。
现代文：该经筋的别支，从外踝向上行，结聚于小腿肚的外侧，向上到达腘窝中部的内侧，与从足跟上行的一支并行向上，结聚于臀部，再沿着脊柱两侧上行至颈项部。
English: The other branch of this meridian runs up from the outer ankle, accumulates on the outside of the calf's belly, up to the inside of the middle of the armpit, runs up parallel to the one running up from the heel, accumulates on the buttocks, and then runs up along both sides of the spine to the neck.

古文：其支者，别入结于舌本。
现代文：由颈部分出的一支，别出这一条经筋，进入舌，并在舌体结聚。
English: From the cervical region, one of the meridians emerges, enters the tongue, and aggregates on the tongue.

古文：其直者，结于枕骨，上头，下颜，结于鼻。
现代文：另一条由颈部分出的经筋直行向上结聚于枕骨，向上到达头顶，又沿着颜面下行，结聚于鼻。
English: Another meridian from the neck goes straight up and collects in the occipital bone, up to the top of the head, and down along the face and collects in the nose.

古文：其支者，为目上网，下结于頄。
现代文：下行经筋中分出一支，向上行于上眼睑的纲维，向下结聚于颧骨部位。
English: One of the descending meridians branches out, travels upwards in the dimension of the upper eyelid, and converges downwards in the tibial region.

古文：其支者，从腋后外廉，结于肩髃。
现代文：还有一条分支由挟脊上行的经筋别出，从腋窝后侧的外廉，上行结聚于肩髃穴。
English: There is also a branch from the ascending meridians of the sacrum, from the loin on the posterior side of the armpit, ascending to the epiglottis.

古文：其支者，入腋下，上出缺盆，上结于完骨。
现代文：另一条从腋窝的后外廉进入腋下，向上行至缺盆穴，再向上在耳后的完骨穴处结聚。
English: The other one enters the armpit from the posterior lamina of the armpit, travels up to the defect of the pelvis, and then gathers up at the postorbital fossa behind the ear.

古文：其支者，出缺盆，邪上出于頄。
现代文：另一支从缺盆穴分出，斜向上进入颧骨部分，与从颜面部下行的结于颧骨的支筋相合。
English: The other protrudes from the pelvic fissure and enters obliquely upward into the tibial part, where it joins the stapes that runs from the lower part of the face to the tibia.

古文：其病小趾支跟肿痛，腘挛，脊反折，项筋急，肩不举，腋支缺盆中纽痛，不可左右摇。
现代文：太阳经的经筋发病，主要表现由足小趾分出的一支的症状，可见足跟肿痛，腘窝部拘挛，脊柱反张，颈部筋脉拘挛疼痛，肩不能抬举；腋窝处的分支还可见到缺盆中有扭痛，不能左右摇摆。
English: The disease of the solar meridians, mainly manifested by the symptoms of a branch separated from the tip of the little toe, can be seen in heel swelling, axillary constriction, spinal dorsiflexion, neck muscle constriction pain, shoulder can not be lifted; the branch at the armpit can also be seen in the absent pelvis, can not swing from side to side.

古文：治在燔针劫刺，以知为数，以痛为输。
现代文：治疗用火针迅速进针出针，一旦病人感到灼热就要立即停止；哪里痛就针刺哪里。
English: In the treatment, a hot needle is used to quickly insert and remove the needle. Once the patient feels hot, it should be stopped immediately; where there is pain, there is needling.

古文：名曰仲春痹也。
现代文：这种病证叫做仲春痹。
English: This kind of pathology is called mid-spring paralysis.

古文：足少阳之筋，起于小趾次趾，上结外踝，上循胫外廉，结于膝外廉。
现代文：足少阳胆经的经筋，起于足第四趾端，沿足背上行结聚于外踝，再沿着胫骨外侧，向上结聚在膝部的外缘。
English: The meridians of the trabecular meshwork begin at the tip of the fourth toe, run up the instep and collect at the outer ankle, then along the outside of the tibia and up to the outer edge of the knee.

古文：其支者，别起外辅骨，上走髀，前者结于伏兔之上，后者结于尻。
现代文：足少阳经筋的一条分支，从外辅骨处分出，向上行至大腿部，在此又分为两支。行于前面的一支，结聚在伏兔穴之上。行于后面的一支，结聚在尾骶部。
English: A branch of the tarsal meridian, branching out from the epididymis, travels up to the thigh, where it divides into two branches. One branching out in the front, converges on the tarsal fossa. One branching out in the back, converges on the coccyx.

古文：其直者，上乘䏚季胁，上走腋前廉，系于膺乳，结于缺盆。
现代文：其直行的一支，向上行至胁下空软处及季肋部位，再向上行于腋部的前缘，横过胸旁，连结乳部，向上结聚于缺盆。
English: One of its straight branches goes up to the hollow soft part under the stress and the quarter-rib part, and then goes up on the front edge of the chin, across the chest, connects the breast, and gathers up in the breech.

古文：直者，上出腋，贯缺盆，出太阳之前，循耳后，上额角，交巅上，下走颔，上结于頄。
现代文：它的另一直行支线，出腋部，穿过缺盆，穿出后行于足太阳经筋的前面，沿耳后绕至上额角，交会于巅顶，从头顶侧面向下走至颔部，又转向上结聚于颧部。
English: It has another straight branching line, exiting the crotch, passing through the notch, exiting the crotch and passing in front of the solar meridian of the foot, going around behind the ear to the upper corner of the forehead, meeting at the apex, going down from the side of the head to the crotch, and turning up to accumulate in the crotch.

古文：支者，结于目眦为外维。
现代文：还有一支支筋，从颧部发出，结聚在外眼角，成为眼的外维。
English: There is also a supporting sinew that emanates from the chin and gathers at the outer corner of the eye, becoming the outer dimension of the eye.

古文：其病小指次指支转筋，引膝外转筋，膝不可屈伸，腘筋急，前引髀，后引尻，即上乘䏚季胁痛，上引缺盆、膺乳，颈维筋急。
现代文：足少阳经的经筋发病时，见足第四趾掣引转筋，并牵扯膝部外侧转筋，膝部不能屈伸；腘窝部位筋脉拘急，前面牵引髀部疼痛，后面牵引尻部疼痛，向上则牵引胁下空软处及软肋部作痛，向上牵引缺盆、胸侧乳部、颈部所维系的筋发生拘急。
English: When the disease of the meridians of Shao Yangjing occurs, the fourth metatarsophalangeal abductor muscle of the foot is affected, and the lateral abductor muscle of the knee is involved, and the knee cannot be flexed and extended; the muscle pulse in the armpit is urgent, the anterior traction of the hip is painful, the posterior traction of the buttock is painful, and the upward traction of the hollow soft spot and soft ribs is painful, and the upward traction of the muscles maintained by the pelvis, the thoracic side of the breast, and the neck is urgent.

古文：从左之右，右目不开，上过右角，并蹻脉而行，左络于右，故伤左角，右足不用，命曰维筋相交。
现代文：若是从左侧向右侧维络的筋拘急，则右眼不能张开，因为经筋上过右额角与跷脉并行，而阴、阳跷脉在这里互相交叉，左右经筋也是互相交叉的，左侧的筋维络右侧，所以左额角筋伤，会引起右足不能活动，这就是 维筋相交 。
English: If the muscle of the left-to-right meridian is strained, the right eye cannot be opened, because the right frontal horn is parallel to the radial artery on the meridian, and the yin and yang meridians intersect each other here. The left and right meridians also intersect each other. The left side of the meridian is on the right side, so the left frontal horn muscle injury will cause the right foot to be unable to move. This is the intersection of the meridians.

古文：治在燔针劫刺，以知为数，以痛为输。
现代文：治疗用火针迅速进针出针，一旦病人感到灼热就要立即停止；哪里痛就针刺哪里。
English: In the treatment, a hot needle is used to quickly insert and remove the needle. Once the patient feels hot, it should be stopped immediately; where there is pain, there is needling.

古文：名曰孟春痹也。
现代文：这种病证就叫做孟春痹。
English: This kind of disease is called Mengchun paralysis.

古文：足阳明之筋，起于中三趾，结于跗上，邪外上加于辅骨，上结于膝外廉，直上结于髀枢，上循胁，属脊。
现代文：足阳明胃经的经筋，起于足次趾与中趾之间，结聚于足背上。斜行的一支，从足背的外侧向上至辅骨，结聚于膝外侧，再直行向上结聚于跨关节，又向上沿着胁部络属于脊柱。
English: The meridians of the soleus medialis arise between the big toe and the middle toe, and converge on the instep. The oblique one, from the outside of the instep up to the accessory bone, converges on the outside of the knee, and then straight up converges on the straddle joint, and up along the webbing network belongs to the spine.

古文：其直者，上循骭，结于膝。
现代文：直行的一支，从足背向上沿胫骨，结聚在膝部。
English: Straight one, from the instep up along the tibia, accumulating in the knee.

古文：其支者，结于外辅骨，合少阳。
现代文：由此分出的支筋，结聚于外辅骨，与足少阳的经筋相合。
English: The supporting ligament, which is separated from this ligament, collects in the external accessory bone and joins with the meridians of the foot.

古文：其直者，上循伏兔，上结于髀，聚于阴器，上腹而布，至缺盆而结，上颈，上挟口，合于頄，下结于鼻，上合于太阳。
现代文：其直行的支筋，沿辅骨上行，结聚在大腿部，并结聚于阴器，又向上行，散布在腹部，上行至缺盆部结聚，然后上行通过颈部，环绕在口的周围，再汇合于颧部，向下结于鼻，从鼻旁上行与太阳经筋相合。
English: Its straight supporting sinews, ascending along the accessory bone, condense in the thigh, and condense in the genitals, and ascend, spreading in the abdomen, ascending to the absent pelvis, and then ascending through the neck, encircling around the mouth, and then converging in the jaw, descending to the nose, and ascending from the nose to the solar meridians.

古文：太阳为目上网，阳明为目下网。
现代文：足太阳是上眼睑的纲维，足阳明是下眼睑的纲维。
English: The foot sun is the dimension of the upper eyelid, and the foot sun is the dimension of the lower eyelid.

古文：其支者，从颊结于耳前。
现代文：太阳经行于眼上的晴明穴，阳明经行于眼下的承泣穴。
English: The sun passes through the sunny hole above the eye, and the sun passes through the weeping hole below the eye.

古文：其病足中趾支胫转筋，脚跳坚，伏兔转筋，髀前肿，㿉疝，腹筋急，引缺盆及颊，卒口僻急者，目不合。热则筋纵，目不开。
现代文：另一条从颧部发出的支筋，通过颊部结聚于耳前。足阳明经的经筋发病，可见足中趾、胫部转筋，足部有跳动感并有强直的感觉，伏兔穴附近转筋，大腿外侧肿，阴囊肿大，腹部筋脉拘急，向上牵引到缺盆及颊部，突然发生口角歪斜，筋脉拘急眼睑不能闭合，如有热则筋脉弛纵眼不能睁开。
English: Another supporting muscle emanating from the hip is concentrated in front of the ear through the cheek. The meridians of the foot are affected, the metatarsus of the middle toe and the hip are visible, the foot has a throbbing sensation and a strong straight feeling, the metatarsal near the rabbit hole, the outer thigh is swollen, the scrotum is enlarged, the abdominal muscle is tense, pulled upward to the isthmus and the cheek, the angle of the mouth is suddenly skewed, the muscle is tense, the eyelid cannot be closed, and if it is hot, the muscle relaxes and the eye cannot be opened.

古文：颊筋有寒，则急引颊移口。有热则筋弛纵缓不胜收，故僻。
现代文：颊筋如果有寒就发生拘急、牵引颊部而致口角歪斜；有热则筋脉弛缓、收缩无力，发生口部歪向一侧。
English: If there is cold, the buccal muscle becomes tense, pulling the cheek and causing the angle of the mouth to be skewed; if there is heat, the muscle relaxes, the contraction is weak, and the mouth is skewed to one side.

古文：治之以马膏，膏其急者；以白酒和桂，以涂其缓者，以桑钩钩之，即以生桑炭置之坎中，高下以坐等。
现代文：治疗口角歪斜的方法，是用马脂油涂在拘急一侧的面颊上，以润养其拘急之筋，再以白酒调和桂末，涂在弛缓一侧的面颊上，使筋脉温通，然后再用桑钩钩住病人的口角，以调整其歪斜，使其复位。
English: The method of treating the oblique angle of the mouth is to apply horse fat oil to the cheek of the anxious side to moisturize the anxious muscle, then mix it with white wine and cinnamon powder, apply it to the relaxed side of the cheek to warm the muscle pulse, and then hook the patient's mouth angle with a mulberry hook to adjust its oblique angle and reset it.

古文：以膏熨急颊，且饮美酒，噉美炙肉，不饮酒者，自强也，为之三拊而已。
现代文：另外，用桑木炭火放入地坑，坑的高低以患者坐位时能烤到颊部为宜，同时用马脂油温熨拘急一侧的面颊，令患者喝一些酒，吃些烤肉之类的美味，不能饮酒的病人也要勉强喝一些，并再三地用手抚摩患处，以舒筋活络。
English: In addition, with the mulberry charcoal fire into the pit, the height of the pit to the patient sitting position can be roasted to the cheek is appropriate, while using horse fat oil temperature to iron the urgent side of the cheek, so that patients drink some wine, eat some grilled meat and other delicacies, patients who can not drink should be forced to drink some, and repeatedly rub the affected area with the hand to relieve the sinew.

古文：治在燔针劫刺，以知为数，以痛为输。
现代文：其他病的治疗用火针迅速进针出针，一旦病人感到灼热就要立即停止；哪里痛就针刺哪里。
English: In the treatment, a hot needle is used to quickly insert and remove the needle. Once the patient feels hot, it should be stopped immediately; where there is pain, there is needling.

古文：名曰季春痹也。
现代文：这种病证叫做季春痹。
English: This kind of pathology is called "quarter-spring paralysis."

古文：足太阴之筋，起于大趾之端内侧，上结于内踝；其直者，络于膝内辅骨，上循阴股，结于髀，聚于阴器，上腹，结于脐，循腹里，结于肋，散于胸中。
现代文：足太阴脾经的经筋，起于足大趾端的内侧，上行结聚于内踝。其直行的支线，向上结聚于膝内的腓骨，沿大腿内侧上行，结聚于大腿外侧，继而结聚在前阴，再上行至腹部，结聚于脐部，沿腹内上行，然后结于两胁，散布于胸中。
English: The meridians of the plantar fascia arise from the inside of the tip of the big toe and converge in the inner ankle in the upward direction. Their straight-line branches converge in the fibula in the knee in the upward direction, along the inner thigh in the upward direction, in the outer thigh in the upward direction, in the anterior pubis in the upward direction, in the abdomen in the upward direction, in the groin in the upward direction, in the groin in the upward direction, in the abdomen in the upward direction, in the groin in the upward direction, in the groin in the upward direction, in the groin in the upward direction, in

古文：其内者，着于脊。
现代文：其行于内侧的一支附着于脊柱两旁。
English: One of its rows on the inner side is attached to both sides of the spine.

古文：其病足大趾支内踝痛，转筋痛，膝内辅骨痛，阴股引髀而痛，阴器纽痛，上引脐两胁痛，引膺中脊内痛。
现代文：足太阴经的经筋发病，可见足大趾牵引内踝作痛，转筋，膝内腓骨疼，大腿内侧牵引至外侧作痛，阴器像扭转一样拘紧疼痛，并向上牵引脐部及两胁作痛，进而牵引胸及脊内作痛。
English: The pathogenesis of the longitudinal muscle of the foot is too yin, and the big toe can be seen to pull the inner ankle for pain, the rotator cuff, the inner fibula of the knee for pain, the inner thigh is pulled to the outside for pain, the pubic organ is tight like a twist for pain, and the hip and the diaphragm are pulled upward for pain, and then the chest and the spine are pulled for pain.

古文：治在燔针劫刺，以知为数，以痛为输。
现代文：治疗用火针迅速进针出针，一旦病人感到灼热就要立即停止；哪里痛就针刺哪里。
English: In the treatment, a hot needle is used to quickly insert and remove the needle. Once the patient feels hot, it should be stopped immediately; where there is pain, there is needling.

古文：命曰孟秋痹也。
现代文：这种病证叫做仲秋痹。
English: This kind of disease is called mid-autumn paralysis.

古文：足少阴之筋，起于小趾之下，并足太阴之筋，邪走内踝之下，结于踵，与太阳之筋合，而上结于内辅之下，并太阴之筋而上循阴股，结于阴器，循脊内，挟膂，上至项，结于枕骨，与足太阳之筋合。
现代文：足少阴肾经的经筋，起始于足小趾的下方，然后进入足心，行于足的内侧，与足太阴经筋并行，再斜行向上，至内踝之下，结聚于足跟，向下与足太阳经筋相合，向上结聚于腓骨下方，在此与足太阴经筋并行，向上沿大腿根部内侧结聚于阴器，再沿着脊柱旁肌肉上行至项部，结聚于头后部的枕骨，与足太阳经筋相合。
English: The meridians of the tarsal meridians begin below the little toe, then enter the center of the foot, travel on the inner side of the foot, parallel to the tarsal meridians, then slope upward to below the inner ankle, converge at the heel, downward to meet the tarsal meridians, upward to converge below the fibula, parallel to the tarsal meridians here, upward along the inner side of the thigh root to converge at the pubic organ, then up along the muscles next to the spine to the neck, converge at the occipital bone at the back of the head, and meet the tarsal mer

古文：其病足下转筋，及所过而结者皆痛及转筋。
现代文：足少阴经的经筋发病，可见足心发生转筋，且其经筋所经过和所结聚的部位，都有疼痛和转筋的证候出现。
English: When the meridian of the foot with few yin meridians is affected, it can be seen that the metatarsus occurs, and the parts where the meridians pass through and accumulate have pain and symptoms of the metatarsus.

古文：病在此者，主癎瘈及痉，在外者不能俛，在内者不能仰。
现代文：足少阴经筋发生的主要病证还有痫证、抽搐和项背反张等。病在背侧的不能前俯，病在胸腹侧的不能后仰。
English: The main pathologies that occur in the leg less yin meridian are also epilepsy, convulsions and dorsiflexion, etc. Those with the disease on the back cannot bend forward, and those with the disease on the chest and abdomen cannot bend backwards.

古文：故阳病者腰反折不能俛，阴病者不能仰。
现代文：背为阳，腹为阴，阳病项背部筋急，腰部向后反折，身体就不能前俯；阴病腹部筋急，使身体向前曲，就不能后仰。
English: The back is yang, the abdomen is yin, and the yang disease is that the back is twisted sharply and the waist is bent backward, so the body cannot bend forward; the yin disease is that the abdomen is twisted sharply and the body is bent forward, so it cannot bend backward.

古文：治在燔针劫刺，以知为数，以痛为输。
现代文：治疗用火针迅速进针出针，一旦病人感到灼热就要立即停止；哪里痛就针刺哪里。
English: In the treatment, a hot needle is used to quickly insert and remove the needle. Once the patient feels hot, it should be stopped immediately; where there is pain, there is needling.

古文：在内者熨引饮药，此筋折纽，纽发数甚者死不治。
现代文：病在胸腹内不宜针刺的，可熨贴患处，加以按摩导引以舒筋脉，并饮用汤药以养血。若本经的经筋反折纠结，而且发作次数频繁，病情很重的，往往是不治之证。
English: If the disease is not suitable for acupuncture in the chest and abdomen, the affected area can be ironed, massaged and guided with a muscle relaxant, and drink a decoction to raise blood. If the warp and weft of the warp are entangled, and the attacks are frequent and the disease is severe, it is often incurable.

古文：名曰仲秋痹也。
现代文：这种病称做孟秋痹。
English: This disease is called Mengqiu paralysis.

古文：足厥阴之筋，起于大趾之上，上结于内踝之前，上循胫，上结内辅之下，上循阴股，结于阴器，络诸筋。
现代文：足厥阴肝经的经筋，起始于足大趾的上方，上行结聚在内踝之前，再向上沿着胫骨结聚于内侧腓骨之下，又沿着大腿根部的内侧上行结聚于前阴，并联络足三阴及足阳明各经的经筋。
English: The meridians of the tarsal meridians begin at the top of the big toe, converge in the ascending direction before the inner ankle, then converge under the medial fibula along the tibia, and converge in the anterior anterior along the medial ascending direction of the base of the thigh, and connect the meridians of the tarsal meridians and the tarsal meridians.

古文：其病足大趾支内踝之前痛，内辅痛，阴股痛，转筋，阴器不用，伤于内则不起，伤于寒则阴缩入，伤于热则纵挺不收，治在行水清阴气；其病转筋者，治在燔针劫刺，以知为数，以痛为输。
现代文：足厥阴经的经筋发病，可见足大趾牵引内踝前部疼痛，内侧腓骨处也感到疼痛，腿的内侧疼痛转筋，前阴不能发挥作用，如果房劳过度耗伤了阴精，就会发生阳痿不举。伤于寒邪就会发生阴器内缩，伤于热邪则出现阴器挺长不收。治疗本病应采用利水渗湿及清化湿热的方法调节厥阴经之气；对于疼痛转筋一类的疾患，治疗用火针迅速进针出针，一旦病人感到灼热就要立即停止；哪里痛就针刺哪里。
English: The pathogenesis of the meridian of the anus can be seen. The big toe pulls the ankle pain, and the medial fibula also feels pain. The medial pain of the leg turns the muscle, and the anus can not play a role. If the excessive housework consumes the yin essence, impotence will occur. If the injury is cold, the internal contraction of the anus will occur, and if the injury is heat, the anus will appear elongated. The treatment of this disease should be to adjust the qi of the anus by means of absorbing moisture and purifying moisture and heat; for diseases such as pain and muscle, the treatment is to use

古文：命曰季秋痹也。
现代文：这病称为季秋痹。
English: This disease is called seasonal affective disorder.

古文：手太阳之筋，起于小指之上，结于腕，上循臂内廉，结于肘内锐骨之后，弹之应小指之上，入结于腋下。
现代文：手太阳小肠经的经筋，起始于手小指的上部，结聚于手腕，沿前臂内侧上行，结聚于肘内高骨的后边。如果用手指弹拨此处的筋，酸麻的感觉能反映到小指上，再上行入结于腋下。
English: The small intestine meridian of the hand starts from the upper part of the little finger, collects in the wrist, travels up the inner side of the forearm, and collects at the back of the high bone in the elbow. If the finger is played here, the feeling of sourness can be reflected on the little finger, and then go up and enter the knot under the armpit.

古文：其支者，后走腋后廉，上绕肩胛，循颈出走太阳之前，结于耳后完骨。
现代文：其分支，向后行至腋窝的后缘，上绕肩胛，沿颈部行于足太阳经筋的前面，结聚在耳后的完骨穴。
English: Its branches run backward to the posterior edge of the armpit, up around the shoulder blade, along the neck in front of the soleus of the foot, and gather in the postorbital fossa behind the ear.

古文：其支者，入耳中。
现代文：由此又分出一条支筋，进入耳中。
English: From this, a supporting muscle branches out and enters the ear.

古文：直者，出耳上，下结于颔，上属目外眦。
现代文：它的直行部分，从耳出，上行，又向下结聚于腮部，再折上行，联属外眼角。
English: Its straight part, from the ear, goes up, and then gathers down in the cheek, and then folds up, and is associated with the outer corner of the eye.

古文：其病小指支肘内锐骨后廉痛，循臂阴入腋下，腋下痛，腋后廉痛，绕肩胛引颈而痛，应耳中鸣痛，引颔、目，瞑良久乃得视。
现代文：手太阳经的经筋发病，可见手小指掣引肘内高骨后缘疼痛，沿手臂侧至腋下及腋下后侧的部位，都感到疼痛，环绕肩胛并牵引到颈部也发生疼痛，并出现耳中鸣响疼痛，同时牵引颔部、眼部疼痛，痛时必须闭目休息一段时间才能看见东西。
English: The disease of the hand meridian, can be seen in the pain of the high bone posterior margin of the little finger pulling the elbow, pain along the side of the arm to the armpit and the back of the armpit, pain also occurs around the shoulder blade and traction to the neck, and there is ringing pain in the ear, while traction of the hip and eye pain, pain must close the eyes for a period of time to see things.

古文：颈筋急，则为筋瘘、颈肿。
现代文：寒热发于颈部而筋拘急，就生鼠瘘、颈肿一类疾病。
English: Colds and fevers occur in the neck and the muscles are strained, leading to rickets, neck swelling and other diseases.

古文：本支者，上曲牙，循耳前，属目外眦，上颔，结于角，其痛当所过者支转筋。治在燔针劫刺，以知为数，以痛为输。名曰仲夏痹也。
现代文：寒热发生于颈部的，治疗用火针迅速进针出针，一旦病人感到灼热就要立即停止；哪里痛就针刺哪里。刺后颈肿不消退的，再改用锐利的针刺治。这种疾病称为仲夏痹。
English: Cold and fever occur in the neck, the treatment is to use a hot needle to quickly enter and exit the needle. Once the patient feels hot, it should be stopped immediately; where the pain is, the needles should be pricked. If the neck swelling does not subside after pricking, then it should be treated with sharp needles. This disease is called midsummer paralysis.

古文：手少阴之筋，起于小指次指之端，结于腕，上循臂，结于肘，上绕臑外廉，上肩，走颈，合手太阳。
现代文：手少阳三焦经的经筋，起始于无名指靠近小指的一侧，上行结聚在腕部，再沿着手臂上行结聚于肘部，向上绕着大臂的外侧，经过肩部行至颈部，与手太阳的经筋相合。
English: The meridians of the three-focal meridian of the Shao Yang of the hand begin on the side of the ring finger near the tip of the little finger, converge upward on the wrist, then along the arm, converge upward on the elbow, go up around the outside of the upper arm, pass through the shoulder to the neck, and coincide with the meridians of the sun of the hand.

古文：其支者，当曲颊入系舌本。
现代文：从颈部分出的一支，在下颌角的部位深入于里，联系舌根。
English: One branch from the neck goes deep into the groin at the corner of the lower jaw and connects to the base of the tongue.

古文：其支者，上曲牙，循耳前，属目外眦，上乘颔，结于角。
现代文：另一分支，向下走至颊车穴，沿着耳向前行进，联属外眼角，向上经过额部，最终结聚在额角。
English: The other branch, going down to the buccal fossa, travels forward along the ear, joins the outer corner of the eye, goes up through the forehead, and finally aggregates in the forehead corner.

古文：其病当所过者，即支转筋，舌卷。
现代文：手少阳经的经筋发病，可见本经的经筋循行部位发生掣引、转筋和舌体卷曲的现象。
English: When the meridians of Shao Yangjing are affected, it can be seen that the meridians of this sutra are pulled, twisted, and the tongue is curled.

古文：治在燔针劫刺，以知为数，以痛为输。名曰季夏痹也。
现代文：治疗用火针迅速进针出针，一旦病人感到灼热就要立即停止；哪里痛就针刺哪里。这种病称为季夏痹。
English: The treatment is to use a hot needle to quickly enter and exit the needle. Once the patient feels hot, it should be stopped immediately; where the pain is, the needle should be pricked. This disease is called summer paralysis.

古文：手阳明之筋，起于大指次指之端，结于腕，上循臂，上结于肘外，上臑，结于髃。
现代文：手阳明大肠经的经筋，起始于食指靠近大指的侧端，结聚于腕部，沿着手臂上行，结聚在肘的外侧，沿大臂上行，进而结聚于肩髃穴。
English: The meridians of the carpal tunnel begin at the side of the index finger near the thumb, converge at the wrist, travel up the arm, converge on the outside of the elbow, travel up the forearm, and then converge at the shoulder socket.

古文：其支者，绕肩胛，挟脊。
现代文：它的分支，绕过肩胛，挟于脊柱的两侧。
English: Its branches, bypassing the shoulder girdle, are sandwiched on either side of the spine.

古文：直者，从肩髃上颈。
现代文：它的直行部分，从肩髃穴上行至颈部。
English: Its straight part, from the epiglottis, goes up to the neck.

古文：其支者，上颊，结于頄。
现代文：从这里分出的一支，上行至颊部，结聚在颧部。
English: From here, a branch branches upwards to the cheeks and gathers at the cheeks.

古文：直者，上出手太阳之前，上左角，络头，下右颔。
现代文：直行的分支，从颈部向上，出于手太阳经筋的前方，上行至左额角，网络头部，再下行进入右腮部。
English: Straight branch, from the neck upwards, out of the hand in front of the solar meridians, ascending to the left front corner, the head of the network, and then descending into the right hip.

古文：其病当所过者，支痛及转筋，肩不举，颈不可左右视。
现代文：手阳明经的经筋发病，可见该经筋所循行和结聚的部位掣引转筋及疼痛，肩部不能抬举，颈部不能左右转动、顾视。
English: The incidence of the meridian of the hand yangmingjing, it can be seen that the meridian is followed and agglomerated by the site of the abductor and pain, the shoulder can not be lifted, the neck can not rotate left and right, and the eyes can not be seen.

古文：治在燔针劫刺，以知为数，以痛为输。名曰孟夏痹也。
现代文：治疗用火针迅速进针出针，一旦病人感到灼热就要立即停止；哪里痛就针刺哪里。这种病称为孟夏痹。
English: The treatment is to use a hot needle to quickly enter and exit the needle, and once the patient feels hot, it should be stopped immediately; where the pain is, the needle is pricked. This disease is called monsoon paralysis.

古文：手太阴之筋，起于大指之上，循指上行，结于鱼后，行寸口外侧，上循臂，结肘中，上臑内廉，入腋下，出缺盆，结肩前髃，上结缺盆，下结胸里，散贯贲，合贲下，抵季胁。
现代文：手太阴肺经的经筋，起始于手大指的末端，沿大指上行，结聚在手小鱼际之后，继续上行于寸口部位的外侧，再沿手前臂上行，结聚在肘中，再上行至臂部的内侧，进入腋下，出于缺盆穴，结聚在肩髃穴之前，又返回，向上结于缺盆，自腋下行的一支进入胸中，结于胸内，分散贯穿贲门，与手厥阴经的经筋合于贲门下面，继而下行抵达季胁部位。
English: The meridians of the palmar-pancreatic meridians start from the end of the thumb, move up along the thumb, gather after the palmar-pancreatic, continue to move up on the outside of the crotch, then move up along the forearm, gather in the elbow, then move up to the inside of the arm, enter the armpit, out of the defect basin, gather before the epiglottis, and return, knot up in the defect basin, one from the defect basin enters the chest, knots in the chest, disperses through the fontanel, joins the meridians of the palmar-pancreatic mer

古文：其病当所过者，支转筋，痛甚成息贲，胁急，吐血。
现代文：手太阴经的经筋发病，可见本经筋所循行结聚的部位掣引、转筋、疼痛，严重的可发展为息贲病，呼吸急促，气逆喘息，或胁下拘急，吐血。
English: The incidence of the meridian of the hand is too yin, and it can be seen that the parts of the meridian that are aligned and agglomerated are pulling, turning, and painful. In severe cases, it can develop into dyspnea, shortness of breath, wheezing, or urgency under duress, and vomiting blood.

古文：治在燔针劫刺，以知为数，以痛为输。
现代文：治疗用火针迅速进针出针，一旦病人感到灼热就要立即停止；哪里痛就针刺哪里。
English: In the treatment, a hot needle is used to quickly insert and remove the needle. Once the patient feels hot, it should be stopped immediately; where there is pain, there is needling.

古文：名曰仲冬痹也。
现代文：这种病证叫做仲冬痹。
English: This condition is called "midwinter paralysis."

古文：手心主之筋，起于中指，与太阴之筋并行，结于肘内廉，上臂阴，结腋下，下散前后挟胁。
现代文：手厥阴心包经的经筋，起始于手中指端，沿指上行，通过掌后与手太阳经筋并行，结聚于肘的内侧，向上行经过肘的内侧而结聚于腋下，从腋下前后布散，挟两胁分布。
English: The meridian of the hand begins at the tip of the middle finger and runs up along the finger. It runs parallel to the solar meridian of the hand through the back of the hand and collects on the inner side of the elbow. It goes up through the inner side of the elbow and collects under the armpit. It spreads from the armpit back and forth and is distributed between the two sides.

古文：其支者，入腋，散胸中，结于贲。
现代文：它的分支，入于腋下，散布于胸中，结聚于贲门。
English: Its branches enter under the armpits, spread in the chest, and gather in the pelvis.

古文：其病当所过者，支转筋，前及胸痛、息贲。
现代文：手厥阴心包经的经筋发病，可见本经筋所循行、结聚的部位掣引、转筋，以及胸痛或成息贲病。
English: The pathogenesis of the meridians of the hand, heart, and abdomen can be seen in the tracing and agglutination of the meridians, muscle twisting, and chest pain or dyspnea.

古文：治在燔针劫刺，以知为数，以痛为输。
现代文：治疗用火针迅速进针出针，一旦病人感到灼热就要立即停止；哪里痛就针刺哪里。
English: In the treatment, a hot needle is used to quickly insert and remove the needle. Once the patient feels hot, it should be stopped immediately; where there is pain, there is needling.

古文：名曰孟冬痹也。
现代文：这种病就叫孟冬痹。
English: This disease is called mengdongpoli.

古文：手少阴之筋，起于小指之内侧，结于锐骨，上结肘内廉，上入腋，交太阴，挟乳里，结于胸中，循贲，下系于脐。
现代文：手少阴心经的经筋，起始于手小指的内侧，循小指上行，结聚于掌后小指侧高骨，再向上结聚于肘的内侧，继而上行入腋内，与手太阴经筋相交，走向胸部，伏行于乳内，结聚在胸中，沿贲门下行，联系脐部。
English: The meridians of the carpal-femoral meridians start from the inside of the little finger, follow the little finger upwards, gather at the high bone on the side of the little finger at the back of the palm, then gather upwards on the inside of the elbow, then go up into the armpit, intersect with the carpal-femoral meridians, go to the chest, go under the breast, gather in the chest, go down along the fontanel, and contact the hip.

古文：其病内急，心承伏梁，下为肘网。
现代文：手少阴经的经筋发病，可见胸内拘急，心下有积块坚伏，名为伏梁病。
English: The disease of the meridians of the hands with less yin and yang, can be seen in the chest, and there is a block under the heart, which is called Fu Liang disease.

古文：其病当所过者，支转筋，筋痛。
现代文：上肢的经筋发病，肘部牵引拘急，屈伸不利。本筋是肘部屈伸的纲维，本筋经过的部位，有转筋和疼痛的症状。
English: Upper limb meridian disease, elbow traction is urgent, flexion and extension is unfavorable. This muscle is the dimension of elbow flexion and extension, the part through which this muscle passes, has symptoms of muscle twisting and pain.

古文：治在燔针劫刺，以知为数，以痛为输。
现代文：治疗用火针迅速进针出针，一旦病人感到灼热就要立即停止；哪里痛就针刺哪里。
English: In the treatment, a hot needle is used to quickly insert and remove the needle. Once the patient feels hot, it should be stopped immediately; where there is pain, there is needling.

古文：其成伏梁唾血脓者，死不治。
现代文：若病已发展成伏梁而出现吐脓血的，为脏气已损，病情加剧的死证。
English: If the disease has developed into a trachea and there is spitting blood, it is a death certificate that the dirty air has been damaged and the condition has worsened.

古文：名曰季冬痹也。
现代文：这类疾病称为季冬痹。
English: This type of disease is called "winter paralysis."

古文：经筋之病，寒则反折筋急，热则筋弛纵不收，阴痿不用。
现代文：大凡经筋发病，遇寒则筋脉拘急，遇热则筋脉松弛，甚至出现阳痿不举。
English: When cold, the myocardium is in a hurry, when hot, the myocardium is relaxed, and even impotence occurs.

古文：阳急则反折，阴急则俛不伸。
现代文：背部的筋挛急，则脊背向后反张；腹部的筋挛急，则身体向前弯曲而不能伸直。
English: If the muscles in the back are strained, the spine is pulled backward; if the muscles in the abdomen are strained, the body is bent forward and cannot straighten out.

古文：焠刺者，刺寒急也，热则筋纵不收，无用燔针。
现代文：焠刺是用加热的针，以治疗因受寒造成的筋急之病；如果是因热而造成的筋脉弛缓的病证，便不宜采用火针疗法。
English: Hot needling is used to treat acute muscle pain caused by cold; if it is a symptom of muscle relaxation caused by heat, it is not appropriate to use hot needle therapy.

古文：足之阳明，手之太阳，筋急则口目为僻，眦急不能卒视，治皆如右方也。
现代文：如果足阳明胃经和手太阳小肠经的筋拘急，就会出现口眼歪斜，眼角拘急，不能全面看到东西。治疗时，可用以上所说的火针疗法。
English: If the muscles of the foot, stomach and small intestine are strained, the mouth and eyes will be crooked, the corners of the eyes will be strained, and you will not be able to see everything. For treatment, you can use the above-mentioned fire acupuncture therapy.

