古文：始合诸侯于虚朾以救宋，使张老延君誉于四方，且观道逆者。
现代文：晋悼公初次会合诸侯是在虚朾，目的是援救宋国。他派遣张老到各诸侯国去宣扬国君的声誉，并且观察哪些诸侯是有德的，哪些诸侯是逆乱的。
English: The initial meeting of the princes to mourn the death of Emperor Jin was a sham, the purpose of which was to save Song. He sent Zhang Lao to all the princes to promote the reputation of the sovereign, and to observe which princes were virtuous and which were rebellious.

古文：吕宣子卒，公以赵文子为文也，而能恤大事，使佐新军。
现代文：吕宣子死，悼公认为赵文子有文德，而且能够关心军国大事，便派他辅佐新军。
English: After the death of Lu Xunzi, the mourners believed that Zhao Wenzi had virtue and was able to care about military affairs, so he was sent to assist the new army.

古文：三年，公始合诸侯。
现代文：悼公三年，悼公开始会合各国诸侯。
English: After three years of mourning, the mourners began to gather from all over the country.

古文：四年，诸侯会于鸡丘，于是乎布命、结援、修好、申盟而还。
现代文：悼公四年，诸侯在鸡丘会盟，于是就发布命令，缔结援助条约，加强友好，重申盟约，然后回国。
English: After four years of mourning, the princes met at the chicken hill, and issued an order to conclude a treaty of assistance, strengthen friendship, reaffirm the covenant, and then return home.

古文：令狐文子卒，公以魏绛为不犯，使佐新军。
现代文：令狐文子死，悼公认为魏绛军纪严整，派他辅佐新军。
English: After the death of the fox Wen Zi, the mourning public believed that the Wei Wei army was disciplined, and sent him to assist the new army.

古文：使张老为司马，使范献子为候奄。
现代文：任命张老为司马，范献子为候奄。
English: Zhang Lao was appointed as the secretary and Fan Xianzi as the candidate.

古文：公誉达于戎。
现代文：悼公的声誉传到了戎族部落。
English: The eulogy's reputation spread to the Ebisu tribe.

古文：五年，诸戎来请服，使魏庄子盟之，于是乎始复霸。
现代文：悼公五年，各戎族部落前来请求归服，悼公派魏庄子与他们结盟，于是晋国开始重新称霸诸侯。
English: In the fifth year of the mourning period, each tribe of the Rong people came to request submission, and the mourning period sent Wei Zhuangzi to ally with them, so Jin Province began to dominate the princes again.

古文：四年，会诸侯于鸡丘，魏绛为中军司马，公子扬干乱行于曲梁，魏绛斩其仆。
现代文：悼公四年，在鸡丘会盟诸侯，当时魏绛任中军司马，公子扬干在曲梁扰乱了军队的行列，魏绛杀了他的车夫。
English: In the four years of mourning for the prince, in the Quqiu League of Princes, when Wei Zhen served as the Sima of the Chinese army, his son Yang Gan disrupted the ranks of the army in Qu Liang, and Wei Zhen killed his coachman.

古文：公谓羊舌赤曰： 寡人属诸侯，魏绛戮寡人之弟，为我勿失。 
现代文：悼公对羊舌赤说： 寡人会合诸侯，魏绛却羞辱寡人的弟弟，给我抓起来，不要让他跑掉。 
English: Yue Gong said to Sheep Tongue Red: Many princes have gathered together, but Wei Wei has humiliated the younger brother of a few. Arrest him for me, and don't let him run away.

古文：赤对曰： 臣闻绛之志，有事不避难，有罪不避刑，其将来辞。 
现代文：羊舌职回答说： 我听说魏绛的志向，他遇事不避危难，有了罪过不避刑罚，恐怕他会自己来说明情况。 
English: Sheep Tongue replied: I have heard of Wei Wei's ambition. He does not avoid danger in case of trouble, and he does not avoid punishment if he commits a crime. I am afraid that he will explain the situation himself.

古文：言终，魏绛至，授仆人书而伏剑。
现代文：话刚说完，魏绛就到了，他把信交给仆人，就准备拔剑自刎。
English: As soon as he had finished speaking, Wei Wei arrived. He handed the letter to his servant and prepared to draw his sword and kill himself.

古文：士鲂、张老交止之。
现代文：士鲂和张老一齐劝阻他。
English: Shi Yan and Zhang Lao both tried to dissuade him.

古文：仆人授公，公读书曰： 臣诛于扬干，不忘其死。
现代文：仆人把信交给了悼公，悼公读了他的信，内容说： 我惩罚扬干，知道犯了死罪。
English: The servant handed the letter to the mourner, who read his letter, which said: I punished Yang Gan, knowing that I had committed a capital crime.

古文：日君乏使，使臣狃中军之司马。
现代文：日前国君缺乏使唤的人，让我担任中军的司马。
English: Recently, the sovereign lacked someone to call on, so I served as the Sima of the Chinese army.

古文：臣闻师众以顺为武，军事有死无犯为敬，君合诸侯，臣敢不敬，君不说，请死之。 
现代文：我听说军队服从命令才能显出力量，宁死不犯军法才是敬肃。君主会合诸侯，我怎敢不敬奉职守？君主为此不高兴，我愿请求一死。 
English: I have heard that an army can show its strength only by obeying orders, and that it would rather die than violate military law. The monarch meets the princes, how dare I not respect my duties? The monarch is not happy about this, and I would like to ask for death.

古文：公跣而出，曰： 寡人之言，兄弟之礼也。
现代文：悼公光着脚赶紧跑出来，说： 寡人所说的话，是出于兄弟之礼。
English: Mueigong quickly ran out barefoot and said, "What others have said is out of brotherly courtesy.

古文：子之诛，军旅之事也，请无重寡人之过。 
现代文：你对扬干的治罪，是按军法办事，请您不要加重寡人的过错。 
English: Your punishment of Yang Gan is in accordance with military law. Please do not aggravate the fault of others.

古文：反役，与之礼食，令之佐新军。
现代文：从盟会回国后，悼公在太庙设宴招待魏绛，任命他为新军副帅。
English: After returning from the alliance, Yigong set up a banquet in the Great Temple to invite Wei Wei, and appointed him as the deputy commander of the new army.

