古文：二十六日鸡再鸣，饭而出店，即北向循西山行。
现代文：二十六日鸡叫两遍，吃过饭后从旅店出发，就向北顺着西山走。
English: On the 26th, the rooster crowed twice. After eating, we left the inn and walked north along the West Mountain.

古文：三里，曙色渐启。
现代文：三里，天色渐渐亮起来。
English: After three miles, the sky gradually brightened up.

古文：见有岐自西南来者，有岐自东北来者，而中道则直北逾坳。
现代文：看得见有条岔路从西南伸过来，有条岔路从东北伸过来，而正中的道路则直直地往北穿越山坳。
English: You can see a fork coming from the southwest, a fork coming from the northeast, and the middle road going straight north through the mountains.

古文：盖西界老山至此度脉而东，特起一峰，当关中突，障扼川流，东曲而盘之，流为所扼，稍东逊之，遂破峡北西向，坠级争趋，所谓石龙坝也。
现代文：原来西部大山延伸到这里后向东分出一支脉，独特地竖立为一座山峰，在关口中部突起，阻扼蝗螂川流，山峰向东折而盘旋，河流被山峰阻扼，遂渐往东退后，就往北穿破峡谷向西，争着朝石级上坠流下去，这就是所说的石龙坝。
English: Originally, after the western mountains extended here, a vein branched out to the east. It was uniquely erected as a mountain peak. It protruded in the middle of the pass, blocking the flow of the Locust River. The mountain peak turned to the east and circled. The river was blocked by the mountain peak, and then gradually retreated to the east. It then broke through the canyon to the west to the north, and flowed down the morning stone steps. This is the so-called Shilong Dam.

古文：此山名为九子山，实海口下流当关之键，平定哨在其南，大营庄在其东，石龙坝在其北。
现代文：这座山峰名九子山，其实是海口下游关口的门户，平定哨位于山南面，大营庄在山东面，石龙坝在山北面。
English: This peak, known as Mount Jiu Zi, is actually the gateway to the lower reaches of Haikou Pass. Pingding Sentinel is located on the south side of the mountain, Dayingzhuang is on the east side of the mountain, and Shilongba is on the north side of the mountain.

古文：山不甚高大，圆阜特立，正当水口，故自为雄耳。
现代文：其山不十分高大，圆圆的山峰奇特地耸立着，正好位于水口，所以自然显得很雄伟。
English: The mountain is not very tall, but the rounded peak stands out strangely, right at the mouth of the water, so it naturally appears very majestic.

古文：山巅有石九枚，其高逾于人，骈立峰头，土人为建九子母庙，以石为九子，故以山为九子母也。
现代文：山顶上有九枚石头，比人还高，并立在峰头上，当地人因此建了九子母庙，把九块石头当作九子，因而把山作为九子的母亲。
English: There are nine stones on the top of the mountain, which are taller than people, and stand on the peak. Therefore, the local people built the Nine Sons Temple, and regarded the nine stones as the nine sons, and thus regarded the mountain as the mother of the nine sons.

古文：余时心知正道在中，疑东北之岐为便道，且可一瞰川流，遂从之。
现代文：我知道正路是中间这条，猜想东北伸过来的岔路是便道，而且可以一直看着蝗螂川流，于是从岔路走。
English: I know that the main road is the middle one, and I guess that the side road stretching from the northeast is a side road, and I can always watch the stream of locusts and cockroaches, so I walk from the side road.

古文：一里抵大营庄，则川流轰轰在下，舟不能从水，陆不能从峡，必仍还大路，逾坳乃得；于是返辙，从峰西逾岭北下。
现代文：一里抵达大营庄，而蝗螂川流在下面轰轰作响，水上不能行船，陆上不能从峡谷穿过，必须仍然返回走大路，越过山坳才行；于是从原路返回去，顺着山峰西面越过山岭往北下。
English: One mile to Dayingzhuang, with the Locust River roaring below, no boat on the water, no canyon on the land, you still have to go back and take the main road to cross the mountains. So I returned from the original road and followed the west side of the mountain to cross the mountains to the north.

古文：共二里，有小水自西南峡来，渡之。
现代文：一共走了二里，有条小溪从西南峡谷流来，渡过小溪。
English: We walked a total of two miles. A stream came from the southwest canyon and crossed the creek.

古文：复西上逾坡，则坡北峡中，螳川之水，自九子母山之东破峡北出，转而西，绕山北而坠峡，峡中石又横岨而层阂之，水横冲直捣，或跨石之顶，或窜石之胁，涌过一层，复腾跃一层，半里之间，连坠五六级，此石龙坝也。
现代文：又往西上，越过山坡，而山坡北面的峡谷中，蝗螂川水从九子母山的东边穿破峡谷往北流出，转向西，绕流到九子母山北边后坠落峡谷，峡谷中又是山石充塞而层层阻隔，水流横冲直撞，有时从山石顶上跨越，有时从山石侧面窜出去，流过一层，又跳跃到另一层，半里以内，连续下坠五六级，这就是石龙坝。
English: Further westward, across the mountain slope, and in the canyon on the north side of the mountain slope, the water of the Locust River flows from the east side of the Jiu Zi Mother Mountain through the canyon to the north, turns to the west, and flows around to the north side of the Jiu Zi Mother Mountain and then falls into the canyon. In the canyon, the rock is blocked and the layers are blocked. The water rushes headlong, sometimes crossing over the top of the rock, sometimes rushing out from the side of the rock, flowing through one layer, and jumping to another layer. Within half a mile, it continuously falls five or six levels. This is the

古文：此水之不能通舟，皆以此石为梗。
现代文：蝗螂川水不能全程通船的原因，都是因为这些山石从中作梗。
English: The reason why the water of the Locust Mantis River cannot pass through the entire ship is because these mountains and rocks obstruct it.

古文：昔治水者多燔石凿级，不能成功，土人言凿而辄长，未必然也。
现代文：从前治水的人多次烧石头凿掉石阶，都没有成功，当地人说石头凿后又长出来，未必真是这样。
English: In the past, water managers repeatedly burned stones and chiseled away stone steps without success. Locals say that the stones grow back after they are chiseled, but this may not be true.

古文：石级既尽，峡亦北转。
现代文：蝗螂川水流完石阶，峡谷也向北转。
English: After the water of the Locust River flows through the stone steps, the canyon turns to the north.

古文：路从峡西山上，随之北行。
现代文：道路从峡谷西边的山上走，顺着道路往北行。
English: Take the road up the hill on the west side of the canyon and follow the road north.

古文：下瞰级尽处，峡中有水一方，独清潴，土人指为青鱼塘，言塘中青鱼大且多。
现代文：往下看石阶尽处，有一方形的塘水在峡谷中，特别清，当地人称做青鱼塘，说塘中的青鱼又大又多。
English: Looking down at the end of the stone steps, there is a square-shaped pond in the canyon, which is particularly clear. Locals call it a bluefish pond, saying that the bluefish in the pond are large and numerous.

古文：按《志》，昆阳平定乡小山下有三洞，泉出汇而为潭，中有青鱼白鱼，俗呼随龙鱼，岂即此耶？
现代文：考证志书记载，昆阳州平定乡小山下有三个洞，洞中的泉水流出后汇积成潭，潭中有青鱼白鱼，俗称随龙鱼，会不会就是这里呢？
English: According to the reference book, there are three caves at the foot of a small mountain in Pingding Township, Kunyang Province. The spring water in the cave flows out and accumulates into a pool. There are bluefish and whitefish in the pool, commonly known as dragonfish. Could it be here?

古文：北二里，峡稍开，有村在其下，为青鱼塘村。
现代文：往北走二里，峡谷逐渐开阔，峡谷底下有个村子，是青鱼塘村。
English: Two miles to the north, the canyon gradually widens. At the bottom of the canyon, there is a village, Qingyutang Village.

古文：北二里，西北蹑一岭，此岭最高，始东见观音山与罗汉寺碧鸡山，两峰东峙。
现代文：往北走二里，转向西北登上一座岭，这座岭最高，才能往东看到观音山和罗汉寺所在的碧鸡山，两座山峰在东边对峙。
English: Walk two miles to the north, turn to the northwest and climb a ridge, the highest ridge, to the east to see Mount Guanyin and Mount Biji, where Luohan Temple is located. The two peaks face each other in the east.

古文：惟西向诸山稍伏而豁，大道之往迤西者从之，而老脊反自伏处南度。老龙之脊，西北自丽江、鹤庆东，南下至楚雄府南，又东北至禄丰、罗次北境，又东至安宁州西北境，东突为龙山；遂南从安宁州之西，又南度三泊县之东，又南向绕昆阳州之西南，乃折而东经新兴州北，为铁炉关；又东经江川县北，为关索岭。
现代文：又往北看到远处有一重山，横列在众山北面，西边尽头处独特地耸起一座最高的山峰，是笔架山；其西面又另外耸立着一座山峰，和笔架山并列耸立，是主峰山脉龙山；东边尽头处有两座山峰分开耸立，也最高，叫进耳山，山南面的山坳比较低平而且开阔，是大路上的碧鸡关。东西两边最高的山峰之间，有座特别锐利的尖峰，从横列的山梁南面透出来，这是龙马山，山下是沙河水所流过来的地方。
English: Looking to the north, there is a heavy mountain in the distance, which is horizontally lined up on the north side of the mountains. At the end of the west side, there is a unique highest peak, which is Penjia Mountain. On the west side, there is another mountain, which stands side by side with Penjia Mountain, which is the main peak of the Longshan Mountains. At the end of the east side, there are two separate peaks, also the highest, called the Ear Mountain. The ridge on the south side of the mountain is relatively low, flat and open, and is the big road. Between the highest peaks on both sides of the east and west, there is a particularly sharp peak

古文：又东峙为屈颡巅山，乃折而东北，为罗藏山，则滇池、抚仙湖之界脊也。始西一里，逾其巅。
现代文：只有往西看才觉得群山比较低平而且开阔，去滇西的大路顺着群山往西走，而主峰山梁反而顺低处往南延伸。从岭上开始往西走，一里，越过岭巅。
English: It is only when you look to the west that you feel that the mountains are relatively low, flat and open. The main road to Shaanxi follows the mountains to the west, while the main peak, Shan Liang, extends to the south along the lower part. Start walking west from the ridge, one mile, over the top of the ridge.

古文：又西北下一里，则螳川之水，自岭之北麓环而西，又转而南。
现代文：又往西北下一里，看到蝗螂川水从岭北麓绕向西，又转向南。
English: Another mile to the northwest, I saw the water of the Locust River flowing west from the northern foot of the ridge, and then turning south.

古文：岭西有村，濒川而居，置渡川上，是曰武趣河，昆阳西界止此，过渡即为安宁州界。
现代文：岭西边有个村庄，位于蝗螂川边，河边设有渡口，这是武趣河，昆阳州西界到这里为止，过了渡口就是安宁州界。
English: There is a village on the west side of the Ling River. It is located on the bank of the Locust River. There is a ferry on the river. This is the Wuchu River. The western border of Kunyang Province ends here. After the ferry, it is the border of Anning Province.

古文：武趣之河，绕村南曲，复转西峡去；路渡河即西北上坡。
现代文：武趣河之水绕着村庄往南弯曲，然后又转入西边峡谷中流走；道路过河后就往西北上坡。
English: The water of the Wuchu River bends south around the village, and then flows into the west canyon; after the road crosses the river, it goes uphill to the northwest.

古文：连越土垅二重，共五里，北下，有水一塘在东坞中。
现代文：接连越过两道小土山，共走了五里，往北下，东边坞中有一塘水。
English: I crossed two small hills in succession, walking a total of five miles, heading north. There was a pool of water in the east dock.

古文：又北二里，有水一塘在西坞中。
现代文：又往北走二里，西边坞中有一塘水。
English: Two miles further north, there is a pool of water in the western dock.

古文：又北一里半，有村在路东。
现代文：又往北走一里半，路东边有个村子。
English: A mile and a half further north, there is a village on the east side of the road.

古文：又北一里半，坡乃北尽，坡北始开东西大坞。乃下坡西向行坞中，二里，有水东北自北界横亘中尖峰下来，是为沙河。
现代文：又往北走一里半，才到山坡北面尽头处，山坡下有北方才有的东西走向的大山坞，于是下坡顺着山坞往西走，二里，东北边有条河从横贯山坞北部的尖峰中流下来，这是沙河。
English: I walked another mile and a half to the north until I reached the northern end of the slope. At the bottom of the slope, there was a large dock facing north, so I walked downhill along the dock to the west. Two miles to the northeast, there was a river flowing down from the spikes that run across the northern part of the dock. It was the Sand River.

古文：其流颇大，石梁东西跨之。
现代文：其水流较大，石桥横跨在东西两岸。
English: The water flow is large, and the stone bridge spans the east and west banks.

古文：河从梁下南去，螳川之水，自武趣西峡转而北来，二水合于梁南，半里，遂西北至安宁州城之南，于是北向经城东而北下焉。
现代文：河水从桥下往南流去，蝗螂川水从武趣河西边峡谷中转往北流来，与沙河水在桥南汇合，半里，就往西北流到安宁州城的南部，从这里往北流经安宁州城东面而再往北流去。
English: The river water flows from under the bridge to the south, the water of the Locust and Mantis River flows from the western canyon of the Wuchu River to the north, and merges with the water of the Sand River to the south of the bridge. After half a mile, it flows northwest to the south of Anningzhou City, and from here it flows north through the east of Anningzhou City and then flows north.

古文：过沙河桥，又西北一里，则省中大道自东北来，螳大川自城南来，俱会于城东，有巨石梁东西跨川上，势甚雄壮。
现代文：过了沙河桥，又往西北走一里，去省城的大路又从东北边延伸过来，膛螂川从安宁州城南部流来，都在城东交会，有座巨大的石桥横跨在蝗螂川东西两岸，气势非常雄伟壮观。
English: After crossing the Shahe Bridge, walk one mile to the northwest, and the highway to the provincial capital extends from the northeast, and the Robe Cockroach River flows from the southern part of Anning Prefecture, all at the eastern intersection of the city. There is a huge stone bridge spanning the east and west banks of the Locust Cockroach River, which is very magnificent.

古文：过梁即为安宁城。
现代文：过了桥就是安宁州城。
English: Across the bridge is Anningzhou City.

古文：入其东门，阛阓颇集，乃沽饮于市，为温泉浴计。
现代文：从东门进城，市场店铺较集中，于是在市场上买酒喝，因为考虑到要到温泉沐浴。
English: Entering the city from the east gate, the market stores are more concentrated, so I bought alcohol in the market to drink, because I wanted to take a bath in the hot springs.

古文：饮毕，忽风雨交至。始持伞从南街西行，已而知道禄裱大道，乃返而至东门内，从东街北行。
现代文：喝完酒，忽然间风雨交加而至，就打着伞顺着南街往西走走一会才知道这是通往禄裱的大路，就返回到东门内，顺着东街往北走。
English: After drinking wine, when the wind and rain suddenly increased, I walked west along South Street with an umbrella for a while before I knew that this was the main road to Lukou. I returned to the East Gate and walked north along East Street.

古文：安宁一州，每日夜煎盐千五百斤。城内盐井四，城外盐井二十四。
现代文：半里，经过州治前面，从州治东面又转向北走了半里，有座朝东的庙，门额上题写着 灵泉 二字，我以为是三潮圣水所在处，走进去。
English: Half a mile, passing in front of Shuzhu, from the east of Shuzhu and turning to the north, I walked half a mile. There was a temple facing east, with the words "Spiritual Spring" inscribed on the front of the door. I thought it was the location of the holy water of the three tides. I walked in.

古文：每井大者煎六十斤，小者煎四十斤，皆以桶担汲而煎于家。
现代文：庙门内左边有口巨大的井，井口上累起木头，横架成梁，栏上装设着用来汲水的装置，原来是盐井。
English: There is a huge well on the left inside the temple gate. Wood has piled up on the wellhead and has been strung into beams. A device used to draw water has been installed on the rail. Originally, it was a salt well.

古文：又西转过城隍庙而北，半里，出北门。
现代文：井水又咸又苦而且非常浑浊，有人在井旁监督，每天两次汲水熬盐。又往西转过城煌庙向北走，半里，从北门出城。
English: The well water is salty, bitter and very muddy. Someone supervises at the well, drawing water twice a day to boil salt. They turn west and walk north past the city temple, half a mile, out of the city from the north gate.

古文：风雨凄凄，路无行人，余兴不为止，冒雨直前。
现代文：风寒雨冷，路上没有行人，我的游兴却不因此而止，冒雨一直往前走。
English: The wind was cold, the rain was cold, and there were no pedestrians on the road, but my enjoyment of the trip did not stop because of this. I kept walking in the rain.

古文：随螳川西岸而北，三里半，有村在西山麓，其后庙宇东向临之，余不入。
现代文：顺蝗螂川西岸往北走三里半，有村子坐落在西山麓，村后的庙宇向东对着村子，我没有进去。
English: I walked three and a half miles north along the west bank of the Locust River. There was a village located at the foot of the west mountain, and the temple behind the village faced the village to the east. I did not go inside.

古文：又北二里半，大路盘山西北转；有岐下坡，随川直北行。
现代文：又往北走二里半，大路绕着山朝西北转；有条路岔下坡，顺着水道一直往北。
English: Another two and a half miles to the north, the main road around the mountain to the northwest; there is a road winding downhill, along the waterway all the way north.

古文：余乃下从岐，一里半，有舟子舣舟渡，上川东岸，雨乃止。
现代文：我于是顺着岔路下去，一里半，有船夫和船停泊在渡口，上船渡到河东岸，雨才停。
English: So I followed the old road down. After a mile and a half, there was a boatman and a boat moored at the ferry port. I got on the boat and crossed to the east bank of the river, and the rain stopped.

古文：复循东麓而北，抵北岭下，川为岭扼，西向盘壑去，路乃北向陟岭。
现代文：又顺着东边的山麓往北走，抵达北岭下，河流被北岭阻扼，往西绕着沟壑流去，道路仍然往北上岭。
English: He also followed the eastern foothills to the north and arrived at the foot of the North Ridge. The river was blocked by the North Ridge and flowed westward around the gully. The road still went to the North Upland.

古文：岭颇峻，一里逾岭北，又一里，下其北坞，有小水自东北来，西注于川，横木桥度之。
现代文：岭很陡，一里后翻越到岭北面，又一里，下到岭北的坞中，有条小溪从东北边流来，往西注人膛螂川，小溪上有木桥横跨，过桥。
English: The ridge is very steep. After one mile, it climbs over to the north side of the ridge, and after another mile, it descends to the dock in the north of the ridge. There is a creek flowing from the northeast to the west, which feeds into the Renpo Mantis River. There is a wooden bridge across the creek.

古文：共一里，又西北上坡，有村当坡之北，路从其侧，一里，逾坡而北。
现代文：一共走了一里，又往西北上坡，有村子坐落在山坡北面，道路从村旁边经过，一里，越过山坡往北走。
English: I walked a total of one mile, and then went uphill to the northwest. There was a village located on the north side of the hill, and the road passed by the village. I walked one mile and crossed the hill to the north.

古文：再下再上，共三里，西瞰螳川之流，已在崖下。
现代文：两下两上，一共走了三里，往西俯视蝗螂川水，已在山崖下。
English: Two down, two up, walked a total of three miles, looking west down the water of the Locust River, already at the foot of the cliff.

古文：崖端有亭，忽从足底涌起，俯瞰而异之。
现代文：崖端有亭子，忽然出现在脚底下蔺我从上面看到后感到惊异。
English: There is a pavilion at the edge of the cliff, suddenly appearing under my feet. I was surprised when I saw it from above.

古文：亟舍路西向下，入亭中，见亭后石骨片片，如青芙蓉涌出。
现代文：急忙离开道路往西下去，走进亭中，看到亭子后面一片片的石头，像青色的荷花从地上涌出。
English: I hurriedly left the road to the west, walked into the pavilion, and saw the stone pieces behind the pavilion, like blue lotus flowers pouring out of the ground.

古文：其此复有一亭，下乃架木而成者。
现代文：北面还有一个亭子，亭下是用木架支撑。
English: There is also a pavilion to the north, which is supported by a wooden frame.

古文：瞰其下，则中空如井，有悬级在井中，可以宛转下坠。余时心知温泉道尚当从上北行，而此奇不可失，遂从级坠井下。
现代文：看亭子下面，则像井一样是中空的，井中有很陡的阶梯，可以转着往下坠二当时，我知道去温泉还应当从上面往北行，但这一奇观不能不看，于是顺着石阶坠入井中。
English: Looking under the pavilion, it is hollow like a well. There is a very steep staircase in the well, which can be turned around and fallen down.2 At that time, I knew that I should go to the hot springs from above to the north, but I couldn't ignore this wonder, so I fell down the stone steps into the well.

古文：其级或凿石、或嵌木，或累梯，共三转，每转约二十级，共六十级而至井底。
现代文：井中的阶梯有的凿石而成，有的嵌木而成，有的用梯子搭成，有三转，每转大约二十级，一共六十级到井底。
English: Some of the steps in the well are made of hewn stone, some are made of embedded wood, and some are built with ladders. There are three turns, each turn is about twenty steps, and a total of sixty steps to the bottom of the well.

古文：井孔中仅围四尺，其深下垂及底约四五丈。
现代文：井孔周长只有四尺，而到底的深度大约有四五丈。
English: The perimeter of the borehole is only four feet, while the depth at the bottom is about four or five meters.

古文：井底平拓，旁裂多门，西向临螳川者为正门，南向者为旁门。旁门有屏斜障，屏间裂窍四五，若窗棂户牖，交透叠印，土人因号之曰 七窍通天 。 七窍 者，谓其下之多门： 通天 者，谓其上之独贯也。
现代文：井底很平整，崖旁侧开有多门，朝西、对着蝗螂川的是正门，朝南的是侧门 侧门里有斜斜的屏障，屏障间裂出四五个孔，像窗格、门户一样，交叉贯穿，重叠相印，当地人因此把这里为 七窍通天 。 七窍 是说门多， 通天 是指洞上面单独贯通。
English: The bottom of the well is very flat, and there are many doors on the side of the cliff. The west-facing, facing the Locust River, is the main door, and the south-facing is the side door. There is a diagonal barrier in the side door, and four or five holes are split between the barriers. Like windows and portals, they intersect and overlap, and the locals therefore refer to this place as the Seven Gates to Heaven. Seven Gates means more than one door, and Heaven is a separate passage through the top of the cave.

古文：旁门之南，崖壁巉削，屏列川上；其下洞门，另辟骈开，凡三四处，皆不甚深透，然川漱于前，崖屏于上，而洞门累累，益助北洞之胜。
现代文：侧门的南面，陡削的岩壁像屏风一样列在蝗螂川边；洞下的其它洞门，另外并排着分开，一共有三四处，都不太深、不太透，然而蝗螂川水从洞前流过，洞上是屏风般的岩石，而且洞门一个接～个，更增添了北洞的奇观。
English: On the south side of the side gate, the steep rock wall is lined up like a screen on the side of the Locust River; the other cave doors under the cave are also separated side by side, a total of three or four, which are not too deep and not too permeable. However, the water of the Locust River flows in front of the cave, the cave is a screen-like rock, and the cave doors are one by one, adding to the wonder of the North Cave.

古文： 虚明 二字，非此洞不足以当之。 虚明 大书之下，又有刻 听泉 二字者，字甚古拙，为燕泉笔。
现代文：再往南到岩壁转角的突起处，有一块巨石坠落在岩壁侧面，迎流分道，上面写有 醒石 二字，是冷然的笔迹。巨石北面的陡岩上，有 虚明洞 三个大字，因在高处而不能看清是什么人的手笔。
English: Further south to the protrusion at the corner of the rock wall, there is a boulder that has fallen on the side of the rock wall, a fork in the river, with the words "醒石" written on it, which is a cold handwriting. On the steep rock on the north side of the boulder, there are "虚明洞" three large characters, which cannot be seen because of the height.

古文：燕泉，都宪何孟春号。何，郴州人，又自叙为吾邑人。又其侧，有 此处不可不饮 ，为升庵笔，升庵，杨太史慎号。而刻不佳，不若中洞。
现代文：其上面的南崖，有石头横着斜卧、像手垂下来的形状，其下面也有朝西的山洞，洞较大而中部拓开，但缺乏嵌在空中和穿透漏光的奇妙。 虚明 二字，除了北洞没有其它洞能够相称。 虚明 大字下面，又刻有 听泉 二字，字迹很古，是燕泉的笔迹。在 听泉 二字旁边，又有 此处不可不饮 的石刻，是升庵的笔迹，但刻得不好，赶不上中洞的石刻。
English: The south cliff above it has stones lying diagonally, like the shape of a hand hanging down, and there is also a west-facing cave below it. The cave is larger and the middle is open, but it lacks the wonder of being embedded in the air and penetrating light. The word "vaguely bright," except for the north cave, there is no other hole that can match it. Below the word "vaguely bright," there is also the word "listening spring," the writing is very old, it is the handwriting of Yanquan. Next to the word "listening spring," there is also the stone engraving "here must not drink," it is the handwriting

古文：门右有 此处不可不醉 ，为冷然笔，刻法精妙，遂觉后来者居上。
现代文：洞口右边有 此处不可不醉 的石刻，是冷然的笔迹，雕刻手法精妙，于是有后来者居上的感觉。
English: On the right side of the mouth of the cave, there is a stone carving of "Here you must not get drunk." The handwriting is cold, the carving technique is exquisite, so there is a feeling that the latecomer is ahead.

古文：又 听泉 二字上，刻醒石诗一绝，标曰 姜思睿 ，而醒石上亦刻之，标曰 谱明 。
现代文：还有， 听泉 二字上面，刻有 首绝句醒石诗，落名是 姜思睿 ，而醒石上也刻着这首诗，落名是 谱明， 不知道谱明是什么人？
English: Also, above the two characters of "listening spring," there is an engraving of the first sentence of a famous poem, the name of which is "Jiang Si Rui," and this poem is also engraved on the famous stone, the name of which is "Fu Ming," I don't know who Fu Ming is?

古文：谱明不知何人，一诗二标，岂谱明即姜之字耶？
现代文：一首诗落两个名字，会不会谱明就是姜思睿的字呢？
English: A poem with two names, will it be clear that it is the word of Jiang Sirai?

古文：此处泉石幽倩，洞壑玲珑，真考槃贤者隐居深谷之胜地，惜无一人栖止。
现代文：这里山水幽静秀丽，石洞沟壑玲珑剔透，真是贤人隐居的胜地，可惜没有一个人来这里安身。
English: Here, the landscape is quiet and beautiful, and the stone grooves are exquisite. It is truly a retreat for the wise, but it is a pity that no one comes here to settle down.

古文：大洞之左，穹崖南尽，复有一洞，见烟自中出，亟入之。
现代文：大洞的左边，弯形岩壁南端尽头，又有一个洞，只见洞中冒出火烟，急忙进入洞中。
English: On the left side of the big hole, at the southern end of the curved rock wall, there is another hole. I saw fire smoke coming out of the hole and hurriedly entered the hole.

古文：其洞狭而深，洞门一柱中悬，界为二窍，有儸儸囚发赤身，织草履于中，烟即其所炊也。洞南崖尽，即前南来之坞，下而再上处也。
现代文：此洞狭窄而且深，洞门口有一根石柱悬立在正中，将洞分成二边，有个赤身裸体、像囚犯一样的锣侈在洞里编织草鞋，火烟就是他烧火煮饭冒出的。 石洞南面岩壁尽头，就是先前从南边过来的山坞，是我下去后又上来的地方。
English: The cave is narrow and deep, at the entrance of the cave there is a stone pillar hanging in the middle, dividing the cave into two sides, there is a naked, prisoner-like toad knitting straw sandals in the cave, and the smoke is from the fire he cooks.The end of the rock wall on the south side of the cave is the dock that came from the south, where I went down and came up again.

古文：时顾仆留待北洞，余复循崖沿眺而北。北洞之右，崖复北尽，遂蹑坡东上，仍出崖端南来大道。
现代文：这时顾仆还留在北洞等我，我又顺着岩壁边往北走，北洞右边，又是岩壁北端尽头，于是爬坡往东上，仍然走到岩壁边南面伸过来的大路上。
English: At this time, Gu Min also stayed in the north cave to wait for me. I walked north along the edge of the rock wall. The right side of the north cave is the northern end of the rock wall, so I climbed up the slope to the east and still walked to the road stretching south of the rock wall.

古文：半里，有庵当路左，下瞰西崖下，庐舍骈集，即温泉在是矣。
现代文：半里，路左边有座庙庵，往下看西边山崖下，聚集着排排房舍，温泉就在那里了。
English: Half a mile away, on the left side of the road, there is a temple hermitage. Looking down from the cliff on the west side, row after row of houses are gathered, and the hot spring is right there.

古文：庵北又有一亭，高缀东峰之半，其额曰 冷然 。
现代文：庙庵北部又有一亭子，高高地点缀在东边峰腰上，亭子的匾额上写着 冷然 。
English: There is another pavilion in the northern part of the temple and hermitage, high up on the east side of the peak. The pavilion's plaque reads "冷然" (Coldly).

古文：当温泉之上，标以御风之名，杨君可谓冷暖自知矣。
现代文：正当温泉上面，写上 御风 的亭名，杨君称得上冷暖自明了。
English: Right on top of the hot spring, with the name of the pavilion "Gofu" written on it, Yangjun can be called a self-evident cold and warm.

古文：由亭前蹑石西下，石骨棱厉。
现代文：从亭子前面踩着石头西下，这些石头棱角分明，边沿锋利。
English: From the front of the pavilion, you step on the stones to the west, these stones are angular and sharp.

古文：余爱其石，攀之下坠，则温池在焉。
现代文：我喜爱这里的石头，攀越着往下走，就到了温泉浴池的所在地。
English: I like the stones here, and climb down to the hot spring bath.

古文：池汇于石崖下，东倚崖石，西去螳川数十步。
现代文：浴池汇集在石崖下面，东面紧靠崖石，西面距离蝗螂川数十步。
English: The baths are gathered under the cliff, the eastern side is close to the cliff, and the western side is a few dozen steps from the Locust River.

古文：池之南，有室三楹，北临池上。
现代文：池南面，有三间房屋，北面对着浴池。
English: On the south side of the pond, there are three houses. On the north side, there is a bath.

古文：池分内外，外固清莹，内更澄澈，而浴者多就外池。
现代文：浴池分内池外池，外池本来就泉水清莹，内池泉水更加清澈，沐浴的人大多在外池。
English: The baths are divided into an inner pool and an outer pool. The outer pool has naturally clear spring water, while the inner pool has clearer spring water. Most people bathe in the outer pool.

古文：内池中有石，高下不一，俱沉水中，其色如绿玉，映水光艳烨然。
现代文：内池中有石头，高低不一，全部沉在池水中，石色像绿玉一样，映衬得池水光艳明亮。
English: There are stones in the inner pool, varying in height, all submerged in the pool water. The stone color is like green jade, contrasting with the bright pool water.

古文：余所见温泉，滇南最多，此水实为第一。
现代文：我所见到的温泉，滇南最多，这里的水质确实才是第一。
English: The hot springs I have seen are mostly in the south of Laos, and the water quality here is really the best.

古文：池室后，当东崖之上，有佛阁三楹，额曰 暖照 ，南坡之上，有官宇三楹，额曰 振衣千仞 。
现代文：浴池房屋背后，在东边崖石上面，有三间佛阁，匾额上写着 暖照 ，南面的山坡上，有三间官府的房屋，匾额上写着 振衣千初 。
English: Behind the bathhouse, on top of the cliff on the east side, there are three Buddhist pavilions with "warmth" written on the plaque, and on the hillside to the south, there are three government buildings with "the beginning of the millennium" written on the plaque.

古文：皆为土人锁钥，不得入。
现代文：佛阁和官房都被当地人锁着，不能进去。
English: The Buddha pavilion and the government office were both locked by the locals and could not be entered.

古文：余浴既，散步西街，见卖浆及柿者，以浴热买柿啖之。
现代文：我沐浴之后，在西街散步，看到卖浆和柿子的人，因沐浴后很热而买柿子吃。
English: After my bath, I took a walk on West Street and saw people selling syrup and persimmons, buying persimmons to eat because it was very hot after the bath.

古文：因问知虚明之南，尚有云涛洞，川之西岸，曹溪寺旁，有圣水，相去三里，皆反在其南，可溯螳川而游也。
现代文：就着询问，知道虚明洞的南部，还有云涛洞，蝗螂川西岸、曹溪寺旁有圣水，距离此处三里，都反而在温泉南面，可以顺着蝗螂川往上游览。
English: As far as I know, there is Yuntao Cave to the south of the Huoming Cave, the west bank of the Locust River, and there is holy water next to Caoxi Temple, which is three miles away from here. On the other hand, they are all south of the hot spring, and you can follow the Locust River.

古文：盖温池之西滨螳川东岸，夹庐成衢，随之面北，百里而达富民。
现代文：原来温泉浴池西靠近蝗螂川东岸，两边房舍之中是大路，顺大路往北走，一百里就抵达富民县。
English: Originally, the west side of the hot spring bath was close to the east bank of the Locust River, and the houses on both sides were on the main road. If you walked north along the main road, you would reach Fumin County in a hundred miles.

古文：川东岸山最高者为笔架峰，即在温池东北，《志》所谓岱晟山也；川西岸山最高者为龙山，曹溪在其东陇之半，《志》所谓葱山也。
现代文：蝗螂川东岸最高的山是笔架峰，就在温泉浴池的东北，是志书上记载的岱最山；蝗螂川西岸最高的山是龙山，曹溪寺位于龙山东面的半坡上，是志书上记载的葱山。
English: The highest mountain on the east bank of the Locust River is Penjia Peak, just northeast of the hot spring bath, which is the highest mountain recorded in the book; the highest mountain on the west bank of the Locust River is Longshan, Caoxi Temple is located on the eastern half of Longshan, which is the highest mountain recorded in the book.

古文：二山夹螳川而北流，而葱山则老脊之东盘者矣。
现代文：蝗螂川夹在这两座山中间往北流，而葱山则是主峰山脉往东盘绕。
English: The Locust River is sandwiched between the two mountains and flows to the north, while the Onion Mountains are coiled around the main peak mountains to the east.

古文：余时抵川上，欲先觅曹溪圣水，而渡舟在川西岸，候之不至，遂南半里，过虚明诸洞下。
现代文：我来到蝗螂川边时，打算先寻找曹溪寺圣水，但渡船在蝗螂川西岸，等了一阵没过来，于是往南走半里，从虚明等洞下边过去。
English: When I came to the edge of the Locust River, I planned to first search for the holy water of Caoxi Temple, but the ferry was on the west bank of the Locust River. I waited for a while, but it didn't come, so I walked half a mile south and passed under the Houming Cave.

古文：南抵崖处，坡曲为坞，宜仍循川岸而南，以无路，遂上昔来大路隅，由小岐盘西崖而南。
现代文：往南抵达山崖的地方，山坡弯曲形成山坞，应当仍旧顺蝗螂川边往南走，因为没有路，于是上到先前走过来的大路边，从小路绕着西边的山崖往南走。
English: When you reach the cliff to the south, the slope bends to form a dock. You should still follow the Locust River to the south, because there is no road, so go up to the edge of the road you came from before, and walk south from the path around the cliff on the west side.

古文：亦再下再上，一里半，有一村在坡南，是为沈家庄。
现代文：也是两下两上，走了一里半，有个村庄坐落在坡南，这是沈家庄。
English: It's also a two-up, two-down, one-and-a-half-mile walk. There is a village located on the south slope, which is Shenjiazhuang.

古文：老妇指云涛洞尚在南坡外。
现代文：一位老年妇女指给我看云涛洞还在南坡以外。
English: An elderly woman pointed out to me that Yuntao Cave was still off the southern slope.

古文：又南涉坞，半里登坡，路绝而不知洞所在。
现代文：又往南穿过山坞，走半里后上坡，路断了却不知道云涛洞在哪里。
English: I went south through the dock, walked half a mile and then uphill. The road was broken, but I didn't know where Yuntao Cave was.

古文：西望隔川，有居甚稠，其上有寺，当即曹溪。
现代文：往西看蝗螂川对岸，居家很稠密，山上有寺庙，应当就是曹溪寺。
English: Looking west across the Locust River, the houses are very dense, and there is a temple on the mountain, which should be Caoxi Temple.

古文：有村童拾薪川边，遥呼而问所谓云涛洞者，其童口传手指，以川隔皆不能辨。
现代文：看到村童在河边捡柴，就远远的呼叫，询问云涛洞在哪里，这村童一边说一边指，因为隔着河，他所说的、指的都听不清楚。
English: Seeing the village boy collecting firewood by the river, he called out from a distance, asking where Yuntao Cave was. The village boy spoke and pointed at the same time, because across the river, he could not hear what he was saying or pointing at.

古文：望见南坡之下，有石崖一丛，漫趋之。
现代文：看到南坡下面，有一丛石崖，便漫步走去。
English: Seeing a clump of rocks at the bottom of the south slope, he strolled over.

古文：至其下，仰视石隙，丛竹娟娟，上有朱扉不掩。
现代文：来到石崖下面，抬头看到石头缝隙中，丛丛的竹子非常秀丽，上面有红色的门扇没有关。
English: When I came to the bottom of the cliff, I looked up and saw that in the stone crevice, the bamboo clumps were very beautiful, and the red door above was not closed.

古文：登之，则磴道逶迤，轩亭幽寂，余花残墨，狼藉蹊间，云牖石床，离披洞口。
现代文：我登上去，石阶弯弯曲曲，长廊亭阁十分幽静，残存的花卉、墨迹，乱七八糟的散在小路上，很多窗格、石床，散乱在洞口。
English: When I climbed up, the stone steps were crooked, the long corridor pavilion was very quiet, the remaining flowers and ink stains were scattered all over the path, and many window panes and stone beds were scattered at the mouth of the cave.

古文：轩后有洞门下嵌，上有层楼横跨，皆西向。
现代文：长廊后面镶嵌有洞门，洞上面有一层楼横跨，都是朝西的座向。
English: At the back of the promenade, there is a door inlaid with a hole. Above the hole, there is a floor across, all facing west.

古文：先登其楼，楼中供大士诸仙像，香几灯案，皆以树根为之，多有奇古者。
现代文：我先上楼，楼里供奉着观音大士等神仙的塑像，烧香的茶几，放灯的案桌，都是树根制成的，大多显得奇特、古老。
English: I went upstairs first. The statues of deities such as the Goddess of Mercy, the incense-burning coffee table, and the desk with a lamp were all made of tree roots, and most of them looked strange and ancient.

古文：其南有卧室一楹，米盎即米缸书簏书箱，犹宛然其内，而苔衣萝网，封埋已久，寂无径行，不辨其何人所构，何因而废也。
现代文：楼南部有一间卧室，米罐书箱，仿佛还留在房里，但长满青苔藤萝，则表明封存、埋没已经很久了，空无一人，可任意直行，不知道是什么人修建，因为什么而废坏。
English: There is a bedroom in the southern part of the building. A rice canister and a bookcase seem to still be in the room, but they are covered with moss and poison ivy, indicating that they have been sealed and buried for a long time. They are empty and can be walked straight through at will. It is not known who built them or why they were destroyed.

古文：下楼入洞，初入若室一楹，侧有一窞ｄｎ，下陷窈黑。
现代文：下楼后进洞，一进去就像进入一间房屋，洞侧面有个小洞穴，又深又黑地下陷进去。
English: After going downstairs, you enter a hole. Once inside, it's like entering a house. On the side of the hole, there's a small cave, and you fall into a deep, dark hole.

古文：其北又裂一门，透裂入，有小窍斜通于外，见竹影窜入，即堕黑而下。
现代文：洞北面又开了一道门，穿过这道门进去，有个小孔斜斜地通到外面，我看见竹影钻入孔中，就从黑暗中往下走。
English: On the north side of the cave, another door opened, and through this door, there was a small hole leading diagonally to the outside. I saw a bamboo shadow enter the hole and walk down from the darkness.

古文：南下杳不知其所底，北眺亦有一牖上透，第透处甚微，光不能深烛，以手扪隘，以足投空，时时两无所著，又时时两有所碍。
现代文：往南下深得不知道洞底在哪里，往北看也有一道窗户，光从上面透进来，只是透入的光十分微弱，亮度照不到深处，我用手在狭窄的洞中摸索，用脚探索空间，时时手脚都没有附着的地方，又时时手脚都被阻碍。
English: To the south, it is so deep that I don't know where the bottom of the cave is, and to the north, there is also a window. Light penetrates from above, but the light that penetrates is very weak, and the brightness cannot illuminate the depths. I grope with my hands in the narrow hole, explore the space with my feet, and there is always a place where my hands and feet are not attached, and my hands and feet are always obstructed.

古文：既至其底，忽望西南有光烨然，转一隘，始见其光自西北顶隙透入，其处底亦平，而上复穹焉高盘。
现代文：到了洞底后，忽然看到西南有很亮的光，转过一段狭窄处，才看见亮光从西北边洞顶的缝隙透进来，这里底部也是平的，而上部还是弯形顶高高环绕。
English: After reaching the bottom of the cave, I suddenly saw a very bright light in the southwest. After turning around a narrow section, I saw the bright light coming through the gap at the top of the cave on the northwest side. Here, the bottom is also flat, while the upper part is still surrounded by a curved top.

古文：倏然有影掠隙光而过，心异之，呼顾仆，闻应声正在透光之隙，其所过影即其影也。
现代文：突然有个身影从缝隙前闪过，我感到奇怪，呼叫顾仆，听到答应声正好在透光的缝隙那里，闪过的就是他的影子。
English: Suddenly, a figure flashed in front of me through the crack, I felt strange, called for a servant, heard the promise right there in the light-permeable gap, and it was his shadow that flashed by.

古文：复转入暗底，隙隘崖悬，无由著足，然而机关指内部结构渐熟，升跻似易，觉明处之魂悸害怕，不若暗中之胆壮也。
现代文：我又转进黑暗的底部，间隙狭窄、崖壁悬空，不知道从哪里落脚，然而对洞中的关键部位逐渐熟悉，攀爬似乎容易了，感到在明处心有余悸，不如在黑暗中那样胆大。
English: I turn again into the dark bottom, the gap is narrow, the cliff is overhanging, I don't know where to land, but I'm getting familiar with the key parts of the cave, climbing seems easy, I feel nervous in the light, not as bold as in the dark.

古文：再上一层，则上牖微光，亦渐定中生朗，其旁原有细级，宛转崖间，或颓或整，但初不能见耳。
现代文：又上了一层，于是从上面窗户透入的微弱光线，也逐渐使一定的范围显得明亮，原来侧面有很小的阶梯，顺崖壁弯曲，有的废坏了，有的很完整，只是当初没有看见。
English: Another floor was added, so the weak light coming through from the window above gradually made a certain area appear bright. Originally, there were very small steps on the side, curved along the cliff wall, some were broken, some were very complete, but they were not seen at first.

古文：出洞，仍由前轩出扉外，见右崖有石刻一方，外为棘刺结成窠网，遥不能见。
现代文：从洞里出来，仍然从前廊走到门外，看到右边的石崖下有一块石刻，外面荆棘、灌木结成网样的鸟兽窝，远处看不见。
English: Coming out of the cave, I still walked from the front porch to the door, and saw a stone carving under the stone cliff on the right. Outside, thorns and shrubs formed a net-like bird and animal nest, which could not be seen in the distance.

古文：余计不能去，竟践而入之，巾履俱为钩卸，又以布缚头护网，始得读之。
现代文：我考虑无法除去这些荆棘和灌木，就踩着荆刺、灌木钻进去，帽子、鞋都被刺钩掉了，我又用布包住头作为保护网，才能读碑刻。
English: Considering that I couldn't remove these thorns and bushes, I stepped on the thorns of the thorns and bushes to get in, my hat and shoes were hooked off by the thorns, and I wrapped my head in a cloth as a protective net before I could read the inscription.

古文：乃知是庵为天启丙寅州人朱化孚所构。
现代文：于是知道这座庙庵是天启丙寅年安宁州人朱化孚修建的。
English: Thus, it was known that this temple hermitage was built by Zhu Huafu, a native of Anning Prefecture, in the year of the Dragon.

古文：朱，壬辰进士。其楼阁轩亭，俱有名额匾，住山僧亦有名有诗，未久而成空谷，遗构徒存，只增慨耳！
现代文：这里的楼阁廊亭，都有名称、匾额，住山僧也有姓名、诗文，但没多久就成了寂静的山谷，遗弃的建筑白白存在，只能使人增添感慨啊！
English: The pavilions and pavilions here all have names and inscriptions, and the resident mountain monks also have names and poems, but it didn't take long for it to become a silent valley. Abandoned buildings exist for nothing, and can only add emotion to people!

古文：既下至川岸，若一航渡之，即西上曹溪。
现代文：从庙庵下来后到蝗螂力岸，如果有一只船渡过去，就能往西上曹溪寺。
English: After coming down from the temple hermitage to the locust-roach bank, if there is a boat crossing, you can go west to Caoxi Temple.

古文：时不得舟，仍北三里至温泉，就舟而渡，登西岸，溯川南行。望川东虚明崖洞，若即若离，杳然在落花流水之外。
现代文：等了悦阵没有船来，只好仍然往北走三里，抵达温泉，乘船渡过蝗螂川，登上西岸，溯河流往南行，看着河东岸的虚明崖洞，好像很近，又好像很远，仿佛在残春景色之外。
English: After waiting for no boat to come, I still had to walk three miles north to reach the hot spring, cross the Locust River by boat, board the west bank, follow the river to the south, and look at the east bank of the river. It seems to be very close, and it seems to be very far away, as if it is outside the late spring scenery.

古文：南一里，又见川东一崖，排突阵列突出亦如虚明，其下亦有多洞迸裂，门俱西向，有大书其上为 青龙洞 、为 九曲龙宫 者，隔川望之，不觉神往。
现代文：往南走一里，又看见河东岸有一座山崖，也像虚明洞崖那样横列、突出，下面也分裂出很多洞，洞门都朝西，崖上面写有 青龙洞 和 九曲龙宫 的大字，隔河相望，禁不住非常神往。
English: Walking one mile to the south, I saw a cliff on the east bank of the river. It was also lined up and protruded like the cliff of Chu Ming Dong, and many holes were also split below. The cave doors all faced west. On the cliff, there were large characters of Qinglong Cave and Jiuqu Dragon Palace, looking across the river. I couldn't help but be very fascinated.

古文：土人言此二洞甚深，篝火以入，可四五里，但中黑无透明处。
现代文：当地人说这两个洞很深，点着火把进去，大约有四五里，只是洞中漆黑一片，没有透光的地方。
English: Locals say that these two holes are very deep, and it takes about four or five miles to get into them with a torch. However, the cave is pitch black, with no light coming through.

古文：此洞即在沈家庄北，余前从虚明沿川岸来，即可得之，误从其上，行崖端而不知，深为怅怅遗憾而不快；然南之云涛，北之虚明，既已两穷游遍，此洞已去而复得之对涯，亦未为无缘也。
现代文：这两个洞就在沈家庄北面，我先前从虚明洞顺着河岸过来，就能看到了，而误从上面走，走到洞崖边却不知道，为此感到很不痛快；然而南边的云涛洞，北边的虚明洞，两处都已经穷究，这两个洞错过之后又得以从对岸看到，也不是没有缘份。
English: These two caves are on the north side of Shenjiazhuang. Previously, I could see them when I walked along the riverbank from Wu Ming Cave, but when I mistakenly walked from above and walked to the edge of the cave cliff without knowing it, I felt very unhappy about it. However, the Yuntao Cave on the south side and the Wu Ming Cave on the north side have been studied in both places. After missing these two holes, I was able to see them from the opposite bank, which is not without a predestined relationship.

古文：又南一里，抵川西村聚。
现代文：又往南走一里，来到河西岸的村落。
English: Walk another mile south to the village of Maro on the west bank of the river.

古文：从其后西上山，转而南，又西上，共一里，遂入曹溪寺。
现代文：从村落背后往西上山，转向南走，又往西上，一共一里，就到了曹溪寺。
English: From the back of the village, go west up the mountain, turn south, and go west, a total of one mile, to Caoxi Temple.

古文：寺门东向，古刹也。
现代文：曹溪寺寺门朝东，是座古庙。
English: Caoxi Temple, east of the Temple Gate, is an ancient temple.

古文：余初欲入寺觅圣泉，见殿东西各有巨碑，为杨太史升庵所著，乃拂碑读之，知寺中有优昙花树诸胜，因觅纸录碑，遂不及问水。
现代文：我一进寺就想去找圣泉，看到大殿东边、西边各有一块巨大的石碑，是太史杨升庵写的碑文，于是拂拭石碑读碑文，知道寺中有优昙花树等名胜，因为找纸录碑文，就来不及询问圣泉。
English: As soon as I entered the temple, I wanted to find the holy spring. I saw a huge stone tablet on the east and west sides of the main hall, which was an inscription written by the great scholar Yang Sheng'an. So I wiped the stone tablet to read the inscription. I knew that there were famous places in the temple such as the magnolia tree. Since I was looking for a paper to record the inscription, it was too late to inquire about the holy spring.

古文：是晚，炊于僧寮，宿于殿右。
现代文：这天晚上，在僧人房舍中烧火做饭，住在大殿右边。
English: That evening, we cooked over an open fire in the monk's quarters, which is located on the right side of the main hall.

古文：二十七日晨起，寒甚。
现代文：二十七日早晨起床时很冷。
English: It was cold when I got up in the morning on the 27th.

古文：其树在殿前东北隅二门外坡间，今已筑之墙版中，其高三丈余，大一人抱，而叶甚大，下有嫩枝旁丛。
现代文：这棵树种在大殿前东北角二门外的山坡上，现在已经修筑在墙版中，有三丈多高，一抱粗，而叶子非常大，下面有丛丛嫩枝从旁边长出来。
English: This tree was planted on the hillside two doors away from the north-east corner in front of the main hall. It has now been built into the wall plate. It is as tall as three and as thick as an arm, and its leaves are very large, with clumps of young branches growing out from the side below.

古文：闻开花当六月伏中，其色白而淡黄，大如莲面瓣长，其香甚烈而无实果实。
现代文：听说在六月伏天开花，花色白中呈淡黄，像荷花一样大而花瓣长，香气十分浓烈但不结果实。
English: It is said to bloom in June. The flowers are white to pale yellow, as big as a lotus with long petals. The fragrance is very strong, but the fruit is not ripe.

古文：余摘数叶置囊中。
现代文：我摘了几片树叶放在袋里。
English: I picked a few leaves and put them in a bag.

古文：遂同党生由香积北下坡，循坳而北，一里半，观圣泉。
现代文：于是和党生从僧厨北面下坡，沿着山坳往北走，一里半，看到了圣泉。
English: So he and the party students walked downhill from the north side of the monk's kitchen, along the ridge to the north, a mile and a half, and saw the holy spring.

古文：泉从山坡大树根下南向而出，前以石环为月池，大丈余，潴水深五六寸余，波淙淙由东南坡间泻去。
现代文：泉水从山坡上大树根下往南流出，树前用石头砌成月池围住泉水，池方圆一丈多，积水深五六寸，泉水涂涂向东南坡流去。
English: The spring water flows out from under the roots of the large tree on the hillside to the south. In front of the tree, a moon pool is built with stones to surround the spring water. The pool is more than a meter in circumference, the depth of the water is five or six inches, and the spring water flows to the southeast slope.

古文：余至当上午，早潮已过，午潮未至，此正当缩时，而其流亦不绝，第潮时更涌而大耳。
现代文：我来到时正当上午，泉水的早潮已经过了，午潮还没有到时间，泉水正好处于收缩的时候，然而水流也不断，只是涨潮时涌出的水更大。
English: I arrived just in the morning, the early tide of the spring water had passed, the afternoon tide had not yet arrived, the spring water was just at the time of contraction, but the water flow was also continuous, but the water gushed out more at high tide.

古文：党生言，穴中时有二蟾蜍蛤蟆出入，兹未潮，故不之见，即碑所云 金崷 ，号曰 神泉 者矣。
现代文：党生说，洞中时时有两只蟾赊出入，现在没有涨潮，所以看不见，就是碑文中说的 金醒 ，名为 神泉 之事了。
English: Party students said that there are always two cormorants in and out of the cave, and now there is no high tide, so they can't see it, which is what the inscription says about Jin Xing, called the Divine Spring.

古文：月池南有亭新构，扁曰 问潮亭 ，前巡方使关中张凤翮为之记。
现代文：月池南边有座新建的亭子，匾额上写着。间潮亭 ，前任巡方使、关中人张凤翩为亭子作了一篇记。
English: There is a newly-built pavilion on the south side of the Moon Pool, with the inscription: "Me Chaotie Pavilion." Zhang Fenglian, the former envoy and the person in charge of the inspection, wrote an article about the pavilion.

古文：党生又引余由泉西上坡，西北缘岭上，半里，登水月庵。
现代文：党生又带着我从圣泉西边上坡，往西北沿岭攀登，半里，登上水月庵。
English: The party students also took me from the west side of the holy spring uphill, climbing along the ridge to the northwest, half a mile, and climbing up to the water moon hermitage.

古文：庵东北向，乃葱山之东北坳中矣。
现代文：水月庵面向东北，位于葱山东北面的山坳中。
English: Suigetsu-an faces the northeast and is located in the foothills of the northeastern part of Onion Mountain.

古文：庵洁而幽，为乡绅王姓者所建。
现代文：庵里清洁而幽静，是一个姓王的乡绅修建的。
English: The hermitage is clean and secluded. It was built by a squire surnamed Wang.

古文：庭中水一方，大仅逾尺，乃建庵后劚ｚｈú挖掘地而出者。
现代文：庭院中有一潭水，边长只有一尺多点，是建庵后挖地而成的出水潭。
English: There is a pool of water in the courtyard, the edge of which is only a little more than a foot long. It was dug out of the ground after the hermitage was built.

古文：庵前有深池，泉不能蓄也。
现代文：庵前有一个深池，不能蓄住泉水。
English: There is a deep pool in front of the hermitage, but it cannot store spring water.

古文：既复下至圣泉，还至曹溪北坡坳，党生别余上寺，余乃从岐下山。
现代文：不久又下到圣泉，回到曹溪寺北面的坡坳，党生和我告别后囱曹溪寺，我于是从岔路下山。
English: Soon after, I went down to the holy spring and returned to the slope north of Caoxi Temple. The party students and I said goodbye to the back of Caoxi Temple, so I went down the mountain from the path.

古文：一里，抵昨村后上山处。
现代文：一里，来到昨天从村后上山的地方。
English: One mile, I came to the place where I went up the mountain from the village yesterday.

古文：由村后南行半里，复东望川东回曲中，石崖半悬，飞楼临丹，即云涛洞也。
现代文：从村后往南走半里，又往东看到蟆螂川曲折向东流之处，石崖悬挂在半空中，凌空的高楼正对红日，那就是云涛洞。
English: After walking half a mile south from the village, and then eastward, I saw the place where the Mantis River meanders eastward, the stone cliff hanging in mid-air, and the soaring high-rise building facing the red sun, that is Yuntao Cave.

古文：川水已从东盘曲，路犹循西山南向下，因其山坞自南而转也。
现代文：蝗螂川水已经往东边曲折流去，道路仍然沿着西岸山往南下，顺着其山坞向南转。
English: The water of the Locust River has meandered to the east, and the road is still going south along the West Coast Mountain, turning south along its dock.

古文：一里余，始循南山而东。
现代文：走了一里多，开始沿着南山往东走。
English: I walked more than a mile and started walking east along Nanshan.

古文：二里，则其川自坞北曲而南，与路遇，既过，路又循东山溯溪转而北，一里，乃东向陟南山之北，一里乃转东南行。
现代文：二里，则蝗螂川从山坞北面绕向南流，与道路相遇，过了蝗螂川，道路又沿着东山溯流转向北，一里，于是往东登上南山的北面，一里，转向东南走。
English: After two miles, the Locust River flows from the north side of the dock to the south, and meets the road. After passing the Locust River, the road turns north along the Dongshan upstream for one mile, and then eastward to the north side of the Nanshan for one mile, turning to the southeast.

古文：手执纨扇，嫣然在前，后有一老妇随之，携牲盒纸锭，将扫墓郊外。
现代文：一里，往南穿越一道从西边伸过来的峡谷，又往南上坡。一里，岔路与先前去温泉、渡到蝗螂川西岸的大路会合，开始一直往南走。
English: One mile to the south, through a canyon stretching from the west, and then uphill to the south. One mile, the Kushiro road meets the road that previously went to the hot springs and crossed to the west bank of the Locust River, and begins to go all the way south.

古文：此间重十月朝祭扫。家贫不及者，至月终亦不免也。南中所见妇女，纤足姣好，无逾此者。
现代文：六里，从北门进入安宁州城犷看见有二个女郎，两股发辫垂在肩后，手里拿着绢做的团扇，漂漂亮亮走在前面，后面跟着一个老年妇女，提着祭奠用的盒子、纸钱，大概是去郊外扫墓。在西南地区所见到的妇女，在脚小和容貌美丽方面，没有超过她们的。
English: Six miles from the north gate into the city of Anningzhou, I saw two girls, their hair in two braids hanging down behind their shoulders, holding a fan made of reeds in their hands, walking beautifully in front, followed by an elderly woman, carrying a box for offering, paper money, probably to sweep the graves in the suburbs. The women I saw in the southwest region did not surpass them in terms of small feet and beautiful appearance.

古文：入城一里半，饭于东关，乃出，逾巨石梁，遵大道东北行。
现代文：进城走一里半，在东关吃过饭后出城，过了大石桥，顺着大路往东北行。
English: Walk a mile and a half into the city, have lunch in Dongguan and then leave the city. Cross the Great Stone Bridge and follow the main road to the northeast.

古文：半里，有小溪自东坞来，溯之行。
现代文：半里，有条小溪从东边山坞流过来，溯小溪往上走。
English: Half a mile away, there is a stream flowing from the dock on the eastern side of the mountain. Follow the stream uphill.

古文：从桥南东去，三里半，上坡。
现代文：从桥南往东去，三里半，上坡。
English: Go east from the south of the bridge, three and a half miles, uphill.

古文：又一里，逾东安哨岭。
现代文：又走一里，过东安哨岭。
English: I walked another mile and passed Dongan Sentinel.

古文：岭不甚峻，东北从横亘大山分陇西南下，为安宁东第一护城之砂亦即障碍的意思者也。过岭东下，始见沙河之水，自东北来。
现代文：岭不十分陡，从东北横贯的大山支脉往西南延伸下来，是安宁州东边的第一道保护墙。越过岭往东下，才看见沙河水从东北流来。
English: The ridge is not very steep. It extends southwestward from the large mountain branch that runs across the northeast. It is the first protective wall on the east side of Anning Prefecture. After crossing the ridge to the east, the water of the Sand River can be seen flowing from the northeast.

古文：随其坞东入，过站摩村，共十五里，为始甸铺。
现代文：随着水流过来的山坞往东进去，经过站摩村，一共十五里，到始甸铺。
English: As the water flowed through the dock to the east, it passed through the station of Mamura, a total of fifteen miles, to the beginning of the shop.

古文：又四里，过龙马山，屼屼北透，横亘大山之南。
现代文：又走四里，越过龙马山，龙马山光秃秃地往北伸过去，横列在大山南面。
English: I walked another four miles and crossed Longma Mountain. Longma Mountain stretched baldly to the north and lined up on the south side of the big mountain.

古文：路绕其前而东，又四里，始与沙河上流之溪遇。
现代文：道路绕过龙马山前往东走，又四里，才与沙河上游的溪流相遇。
English: The road bypassed Longma Mountain and headed east, and it was another four miles before it met the upstream stream of the Sand River.

古文：有三巩石梁东跨其上，是曰大桥。
现代文：有一座三拱石桥在东横跨溪流，这是大桥。
English: There is a three-arch stone bridge across the stream in the east, this is the Great Bridge.

古文：其水自东北进耳二尖峰西、棋盘山南峡来，西南至安宁城东，南入于螳川者也。
现代文：桥下的水从东北边进耳山二尖峰西面、棋盘山南面的峡谷中流来，往西南流到安宁城东边，再往南流进蝗螂川。
English: The water under the bridge flows from the northeast into the middle of the canyon on the west side of the two spires of Jinshan Mountain and the south side of Shibanshan Mountain, flows southwest to the east side of Anning City, and then flows south into the Locust River.

古文：又半里，东上坡，宿于高枧桥村。
现代文：又走半里，往东上坡，住在高视桥村。
English: I walked another half-mile, uphill to the east, and lived in Gaoweiqiao Village.

古文：二十八日平明，东行一里半，上坡，为安宁东界，由此即为昆明地。
现代文：二十八日天亮时，往东走一里半，上坡，到安宁州东部边界，从这里开始就是昆明县的地域。
English: At dawn on the 28th, I walked east for a mile and a half, uphill, to the eastern border of Anning Prefecture. From here, the area of Kunming County began.

古文：陂陀高低不平高下，以渐升陟而上，八里，其坞自双尖后进耳山来，路遂由南陇上。
现代文：山坡倾斜、高低不平，因而慢慢地往上攀登。八里，其山坞从双尖峰背后的进耳山延伸过来，道路于是顺着南陇而上。
English: The slope is sloping and uneven, so it's a slow climb up. Eight miles later, the dock extends from the mountain behind the twin peaks, and the road then follows the South Fork.

古文：又二里，山坳间有聚庐当尖，是为碧鸡关。
现代文：又走二里，山坳中有一些房舍坐落在山顶上，这是碧鸡关。
English: After another two-mile walk, there are some houses on the top of the mountain in the foothills. This is Bijiguan.

古文：盖进耳之山峙于北，罗汉之顶峙于南，此其中间度脊之处，南北又各起一峰夹峙，以在碧鸡山之北，故名碧鸡关，东西与金马即金马关遥对者也。
现代文：大致进耳山耸立在北面，罗汉山的顶峰耸立在南面，碧鸡关是两座山脉中间的过梁，其南北又分别耸起一座山峰、峙立在两边，因为位于碧鸡山的北面，所以叫做碧鸡关，东边和金马关遥遥相对。
English: Generally speaking, Jinyi Mountain stands in the north, the peak of Luohan Mountain stands in the south, Biji Pass is the bridge between the two mountains, and a mountain rises from the north and south and stands on both sides. Because it is located on the north side of Biji Mountain, it is called Biji Pass, and the east side is far away from Jinma Pass.

古文：关之东，向东南下为高峣，乃草海西岸山水交集处，渡海者从之；向西北下为赤家鼻，官道之由海堤者从之。
现代文：碧鸡关以东，往东南方下去为高晓，是草海西岸山水交汇的地方，渡草海就从这里上船；往西北方下去是赤家鼻，顺草海堤坝进城的大路从这里走。
English: To the east of Big Chicken Pass and to the southeast, it is high noon. It is the place where the mountains and rivers meet on the west coast of the Grass Sea, and it is from here that you can board a boat to cross the Grass Sea. To the northwest, it is Akaja Nasu, and the main road into the city along the Grass Sea dike is from here.

古文：余时欲游进耳，遂西北下坡半里，循西山北行。
现代文：我此时打算游进耳山，于是往西北下坡半里，顺着西山往北行走。
English: At this time, I planned to swim into Ear Mountain, so I walked half a mile down the northwest slope and walked north along West Mountain.

古文：二里，有村在西山之麓，是为赤家鼻。
现代文：二里，有村子在西山脚，这是赤家鼻。
English: Two miles away, there is a village at the foot of the West Mountain, which is Akaya Nasu.

古文：大道由其前北去，乃西折而入村。
现代文：大路从赤家鼻前面往北伸去，我于是往西转进村子。
English: The main road stretched north from in front of Akaja Nasu, so I turned west into the village.

古文：村倚山而庐建房。
现代文：衬民靠山建房。
English: Build houses with the support of the people.

古文：有池潴坡侧，大不逾五尺，村人皆仰汲焉。
现代文：山坡侧面有一池水，水池边长不超过五尺，村民都靠从水池里提水用。
English: There is a pool of water on the side of the hillside. The edge of the pool is no more than five feet long. The villagers rely on the water from the pool for drinking.

古文：中复有鱼，有垂钓其上者，亦龙潭之浅者也。
现代文：池中还有鱼，有人在池边钓鱼，这也是比较浅的龙潭。
English: There are still fish in the pool, and some people are fishing on the edge of the pool, which is also a relatively shallow dragon pool.

古文：由池南上坡，岭道甚峻。
现代文：从水池南面上坡，岭上的路很陡。
English: From the pool south uphill, the road on the ridge is steep.

古文：半里，登冈上，稍北而曲，有坊当道，则进耳山门外坊也，其寺尚隔一坑。
现代文：半里，登上山冈，逐渐往北转，有座门坊位于路中，是进耳山山门外的门坊，离山上的寺庙还隔着一个坑。
English: Half a mile up the mountain, gradually turning north, there is a gate in the middle of the road. It is the gate outside the gate of the mountain, and there is a pit across from the temple on the mountain.

古文：由坊西望，见寺后大山环于上，此冈绕于前，内夹深坑，旋转而入，若耳内之孔，寺临孔上盘朵边，以 进耳 取名之义，非身履此冈，不见其亲切贴切也。
现代文：顺着门坊往西看，看见寺庙背后大山环绕在上面，所登上的山冈绕在寺庙前面，山冈和大山之间夹着很深的大坑，旋转着进坑，像进入耳朵孔一样，寺庙正对耳孔之上的耳盘边缘，用 进耳 取名的含义，不亲身登临这山冈，是感受不出这名称的贴切之处的。
English: Looking westward along the gateway, you will see the mountain behind the temple encircled above, and the mountain ridge you climbed around in front of the temple. Between the mountain ridge and the mountain, there is a very deep pit, rotating into the pit, like entering an ear hole. The temple is facing the edge of the ear disk above the ear hole, with the meaning of "entering the ear" to take the name. If you do not personally visit this mountain, you cannot feel the appropriateness of this name.

古文：进坊，西向沿坑入，半里，有岐西逾大山之坳；而入寺之路，则沿坑南转。
现代文：走进门坊，往西顺着坑朝里走，半里，有条岔道往西越过大山山坳；而进寺庙的路汉吐顺着坑往南转。
English: After entering the gate, walk westwards along the pit towards the east. Half a mile further on, there is a winding road westwards over the large mountains; while the road to the temple, the Han Tu, follows the pit to the south.

古文：盘崖半里，西上入寺中。
现代文：绕着山崖走了半里、往西上到寺中。
English: I walked half a mile around the cliff and went west to the middle of the temple.

古文：寺门东向，登其殿，颇轩爽，似额端，不似耳中也。
现代文：寺门朝东，登临大殿，很开阔，好像在额头上，而不像在耳朵里。
English: The temple gate faces east, leading up to the main hall. It is very open, as if on the forehead, rather than in the ear.

古文：方丈在殿北，有楼三楹在殿南。
现代文：方丈位于大殿北面，大殿南面有三间楼房。
English: The abbot is located on the north side of the main hall, and there are three buildings on the south side.

古文：其楼下临环坑，遥览滇海，颇如太华之一碧万顷，而此深远矣。
现代文：楼下正对圆坑，朝远处观赏滇池，很像太华寺的一碧万烦阁，但这里比较深远。
English: The downstairs is facing the round pit, and in the morning, you can see Dianchi Lake in the distance. It is very similar to the Yu Bi Wan Dui Pavilion of Taihua Temple, but here it is more far-reaching.

古文：入方丈，有辛贡士伯敏者叫辛伯敏的贡士，迎款殷勤。
现代文：进入方丈，有个叫辛伯敏的贡士，殷勤地迎接、款待。
English: Entering the abbot, there is a gongzhi named Xin Bomin, who graciously greets and entertains.

古文：僧宝印欲具餐，辛挥去，令其徒陈履、陈履温二陈乃甲戌进士履忠弟。及其弟出见，且为供荤食。
现代文：僧人宝印打算准备午饭，辛伯敏挥手让宝印离去，叫他的徒弟陈履撑、陈履温以及他的弟弟出来相见，而且为我提供荤食。
English: The monk, Po Yin, was about to prepare lunch. Xin Bomin waved Po Yin away and called his disciples, Chen Luping, Chen Luan and his younger brother, to come out and meet him, and to provide me with snacks.

古文：复引余登殿南眺海楼，坐谈久之。
现代文：又带领我登上大殿南面的眺海楼，坐在一起交谈了很久。
English: He also led me up to the sea-view tower on the south side of the main hall, where we sat and talked for a long time.

古文：余欲趋棋盘山，问道于宝印。
现代文：我准备去棋盘山，向宝印询问道路。
English: I'm going to go to Chessboard Mountain and ask Po Yin for directions.

古文：宝印曰： 由坊东下山，自赤鼻山宝珠寺上为正道，路且三十里。
现代文：宝印说厂顺着门坊东边下山，从赤鼻山的宝珠寺上去是大路，路程将近三十里。
English: Baoying said that the factory went down the mountain along the east side of the gate, and it was a long way from the Baozhu Temple of the Red Nose Mountain, a distance of nearly thirty miles.

古文：由此寺北，西逾大山之坳，其路半之，但空山多岐，路无从觅耳。 
现代文：顺着进耳山寺北面，往西越过大山之坳，路程只有大路的一半，只是山上没人，岔路很多，路不好找。 
English: Along the north side of Jinshan Temple and westward across the ridge of Dashan, the distance is only half of the highway, but there is no one on the mountain, there are many side roads, and it is difficult to find the road.

古文：乃同辛君导余从殿后出，遂北至坳下东来岐路，始别去。
现代文：于是宝印和辛伯敏君带领我从大殿后面出寺，往北走到山坳下东边伸来的岔路上，才告别离去。
English: So Hoin and Simbo Min led me out of the temple from behind the main hall and walked north to the footpath that stretched out on the east side of the lower part of the mountain, before saying goodbye and leaving.

古文：余乃西上，半里逾坳，半里西北稍下，一里涉中洼。
现代文：我于是往西上，半里越过山坳，半里往西北逐渐下山，一里穿过中洼之地。
English: So I headed west, half a mile over the mountains, half a mile northwest and gradually down the mountain, and a mile through the lowlands.

古文：洼西复有大山，南北横峙，与东界进耳后双尖，并坳北之巅，东西夹成中洼。
现代文：洼地西边又有大山，从南到北横峙洼边，与东部进耳山后的双尖峰，以及山坳北面的山峰，从东西两边夹成中洼之地。
English: On the west side of the depression, there are also large mountains. From the south to the north, they stand across the depression. From the east, there are the twin peaks behind the mountain, and the mountain peaks on the north side of the ridge. From the east to the west, they are sandwiched into the depression.

古文：由洼西复循西山之东北行，一里，循岭北转而西，稍下一里，度峡西上。
现代文：从洼地西边再顺着西山往东北行，一里，沿着山岭北面转向西，逐渐往下走一里，穿过峡谷往西上。
English: From the west side of the depression, follow the West Mountain to the northeast for one mile, turn west along the north side of the mountain, gradually walk down for one mile, and cross the canyon to the west.

古文：其西复有大山，南北横峙，遂西向横蹑之，一里半，登其冈。
现代文：峡谷西边又有大山，从南到北横列耸立，于是往西横穿大山，一里半，登上山冈。
English: On the west side of the canyon, there are also large mountains, which rise in a row from south to north, so they cross the mountains to the west, a mile and a half, and climb up the mountain.

古文：见西南随坞有路，上逾其脊，将趋之。
现代文：看见西南边顺着山坞有条路，往上穿越大山山梁，正准备从这条路走。
English: He saw that there was a road along the southwestern side of the dock, and he was preparing to walk from this road up through the mountains.

古文：有负刍者背草的人来，曰： 棋盘路在北，不在西也。 
现代文：有个背草的人走来，他说： 去棋盘山的路在北边，不在西边。 
English: A weaver came along and said, "The way to Checkerboard Mountain is to the north, not to the west.

古文：乃循西山之东，又北行，其路甚微，若断若续。
现代文：于是顺着西山的东面，又往北行，这条路很窄小，时断时续。
English: So I followed the eastern side of the West Mountain and headed north again. This road is very narrow and intermittent.

古文：二里半，从西山北坳透脊西出，始望见三家村在西坞中，村西盘峙一峰，自北而南，如屏高拥，即棋盘山也。
现代文：二里半，从西山北坳穿过山梁往西出去，才看到三家村在西边坞中，村子西部环立着一座山峰，从北向南，像屏障一样高高矗立，就是棋盘山。
English: Two and a half miles, from the West Mountain Beilun through the mountain beam to the west, only to see the three villages in the west side dock, the western part of the village is surrounded by a mountain peak, from north to south, standing tall like a barrier, is the chessboard mountain.

古文：其脉北自妙离寺三华山西南来，复耸此峰。
现代文：其山脉从妙高寺的三华山西南延伸过来，再耸起这座山峰。
English: Its mountains extend from the southwest of Myoko-ji Temple's Sanhakusan Mountain, and then rise up to form this peak.

古文：分支西度，为温泉之笔架山；分支南下，为始甸后之龙马山；南环东亘，即为所逾之脊；而南度为进耳、碧鸡者也。
现代文：棋盘山往西延伸的支脉，就是温泉的笔架山；往南延伸的支脉，是始甸背后的龙马山；往南绕着向东横贯的支脉，就是我所翻越的山梁；再往南延伸为进耳山、碧鸡山。
English: The westward-extending branch of the Checkerboard Mountain is the Pen Stand Mountain of the hot spring; the southward-extending branch is the Longma Mountain behind the East River; the southward-going around the eastward-crossing branch is the mountain beam I have climbed over; and the southward-extending branch is the Jiri Mountain and the Biji Mountain.

古文：脊北山复横列东北，至宝珠、赤鼻而止，为三家村东界护山。余昔来自金马以东，即遥望西界山横如屏，其顶复有中悬如覆釜倒覆的锅，高出其上者，即此棋盘峰也，而不知尚在重壑之内，外更有斯峰护之，洵实在是西峰之领袖矣。
现代文：山梁北部又有山横列在东北方，延伸到宝珠寺、赤鼻山为止，是三家村的东界护山，我从前从金马山东边来昆明，就远远地看到昆明西界的山脉像屏风一样的横列耸立，其顶部还有如同铁锅倒扣、高出众山的山，就是这棋盘峰。但不知道它在重重沟壑之内，外部还有这些山峰护卫着，确实称得上是昆明西部山峰的领袖。
English: In the north of the mountain, there are mountains in a row in the northeast, extending to Baozhu Temple and Red Nose Mountain, which are the eastern mountain guards of the three villages. When I came to Kunming from the eastern side of Mount Jinma, I saw the mountains in the western part of Kunming standing in a row like a screen from far away. At the top, there is a mountain that is like a kettle upside down and higher than many mountains, which is the chessboard peak. However, I did not know that it is in a lot of ravines, and there are also these peaks guarding it from the outside. It can truly be called the leader of the peaks in western Kunming

古文：从坳西转，循东山北崖半里，乃西向下。
现代文：顺山坳往西转，沿着东山北崖走了半里，仍然往西下山。
English: I turned west along the ridge of the mountain, walked half a mile along the north cliff of the east mountain, and still went west down the mountain.

古文：一里，行壑中，有水北流，西涉之。又半里抵三家村，其村倚棋盘东麓。
现代文：一里，在沟壑中行走，其中有河往北流，往西过河，又走半里抵达三家村，三家村坐落在棋盘山东麓。
English: One mile, walking in the gully, of which the river flows to the north, crossing the river to the west, and walking half a mile to reach the three villages, the three villages are located at the eastern foot of the chessboard mountain.

古文：路当从村北西上，乃误由村南度脊处循峡西南上，竟不得路。
现代文：道路应当从村子北面往西上，而我误从村子南面山梁伸来之处顺着峡谷往西南上，最终没有路可走。
English: The road should go from the north of the village to the west, but I mistakenly went from the south of the village along the canyon to the southwest, and eventually there was no way to go.

古文：攀蹑峡中三里，登一冈，有庵三楹踞坪间，后倚绝顶，其前东瞰滇中，乃发僧玄禅与僧裕庵新建者。
现代文：在峡谷中攀爬了三里，登上一座山冈，有三间庙庵位于平地上，背靠绝顶，前方往东俯瞰省城中，这是发僧玄禅和僧人裕庵刚刚修建的寺庙。
English: After climbing three miles through the canyon and ascending a mountain, there are three temples and hermitages located on the plain, with their backs against the peak and their fronts overlooking the provincial capital to the east. This is the temple that was just built by the founder of Zen Buddhism, Zen Master Xuanzang, and the monk Yuan.

古文：玄禅有内功，夜坐峰头，晓露湿衣，无所退怖退缩害怕；庵中四壁未就，不以为意也。
现代文：玄禅有内功，夜里坐在峰顶上，早晨露水将衣服打湿，也无所退缩和害怕；寺庙的墙壁还没完工，也不放在心上。
English: There is an inner strength to Zen meditation. You can sit on a peak at night, and in the morning the dew will wet your clothes, without flinching or fear. The walls of the temple are not yet finished, and you don't care about it.

古文：日已西昃，迎余瀹即煮茗煮粥，抵暮乃别。
现代文：太阳已经偏西，他们泡茶煮粥迎接我，到太阳落山才告别离开。
English: The sun had already set, and they made tea and porridge to welcome me. They didn't leave until the sun had set.

古文：西上跻峰，一里，陟其巅。
现代文：往西边登上山峰，一里，上到峰顶。
English: Go west up the mountain, one mile, to the top.

古文：又西向平行顶上一里，有寺东北向，则棋盘寺也。
现代文：又往西在顶上平平走了一里，看到一座寺庙面向东北方，这就是棋盘寺。
English: Another mile to the west on the flat top, I saw a temple facing the northeast, this is the chessboard temple.

古文：时已昏黑，遂啜茗喝茶而就榻。
现代文：这时天已经黑了，于是喝茶后在寺里就寝。
English: By this time it was already dark, so I drank tea and went to bed in the temple.

古文：二十九日凌晨起，僧为余炊，余乃独蹑寺后绝顶。
现代文：二十九日凌晨起床，僧人为我做饭，我就独自去攀登寺庙背后的绝顶。
English: On the morning of the 29th, I got up, the monk cooked for me, and I went alone to climb the peak behind the temple.

古文：时晓露甚重，衣履沾透。
现代文：清晨时露水很重，衣服鞋子都湿透了。
English: In the early morning, the dew was so heavy that my clothes and shoes were soaked.

古文：顶间无高松巨木，即丛草亦不甚深茂，盖高寒之故也。
现代文：峰顶上没有高大的松木，就是草丛也不太茂盛，大概是因为又高又冷的缘故。
English: There are no tall pine trees on the top of the peak, and even the grass is not very lush, probably because it is high and cold.

古文：顶颇平迥。
现代文：山顶很平、很开阔。
English: The top of the mountain is very flat, very open.

古文：其西南皆石崖矗突，其性平直而中实，可劈为板，省中取石，皆于此遥负之，然其上反不能见，以坳于内也因为藏于山坳中。
现代文：其西南都是突起矗立的石崖，石崖的质地平直而且中间结实，可以劈成石板材，省城需要石材，都从这遥远的地方运载，然而从上面反而看不到这些石崖，因为山坳在里边。
English: To the southwest of it, there are jutting cliffs. The quality of the cliffs is straight and solid in the middle, which can be split into stone plates. The provincial capital needs stone, which is transported from this distant place. However, these cliffs cannot be seen from above, because the mountains are inside.

古文：西北坞中，有大壑回环，下有水二方，村庐踞其上，即《志》所载勒甸村龙泉也，其水分青、白色。
现代文：西北边的山坞中，有大沟壑环绕回旋，下面有两塘水，村舍坐落在水塘边，就是志书记载的勒甸村龙泉，塘中的水分为青色、白色。
English: In the dockyard on the northwest side, there is a large gully circling the circling, below there are two pools of water, the village house is located on the edge of the pond, that is, the village of Le Dian Longquan recorded in the history book, the water in the pond is divided into blue and white.

古文：西南峡中水，则循龙马山东而去，当即沙河之源矣。
现代文：西南峡谷中的水，则顺着龙马山东面流去，应当就是沙河的源头了。
English: The water in the southwest canyon flows along the eastern side of Longma Mountain, which should be the source of the Sand River.

古文：东南即三家之流。
现代文：东南就是三家村的河流。
English: To the southeast is the river that flows through the village of Sanya.

古文：是顶亦三面分水之处，第一入滇池，两入螳川，皆一派耳。
现代文：这山顶也是将水分成三股的分水岭，只是一股水流入滇池，其余的两股流入蝗螂川，其实都是一条水系。
English: The top of the mountain is also a watershed that divides the water into three streams. Only one stream flows into the Dianchi Lake, while the other two streams flow into the Locust River. In fact, they are all one water system.

古文：由顶远眺，则东北见尧林山尖耸，与邵甸梁王山并列；东南见罗藏山，环峙海外；直南见观音山屼岦光秃而高耸，为碧鸡绝顶掩映，半浮半隐；直西则温泉笔架山连翩而去；惟西北崇山稍豁，则螳川之所向也。
现代文：从顶上往远处眺望，则东北看到尧林山尖耸，和邵甸的梁王山并列；东南看到罗藏山，环绕着耸立在滇池之外；直往南看到光秃秃的观音山，被碧鸡山顶峰掩映，半现半隐；直往西看，是温泉笔架山连绵不断地延伸下去；只有西北方的崇山峻岭逐渐开阔，是蝗螂川所流走的方向。
English: Looking from the top to the distance, in the northeast, you can see the spires of the Qilin Mountains, which are on a par with the Liangwang Mountains in Shandong; in the southeast, you can see the Lozang Mountains, which surround and stand outside the Dianchi Lake; straight to the south, you can see the bare Guanyin Mountains, which are covered by the peak of the Biji Mountains, and are half-present and half-hidden; looking straight to the west, you can see the hot spring Penjia Mountain, which extends continuously; only the lofty mountains in the northwest gradually open up, which is the direction of the Locust River.

古文：下饭于寺。
现代文：下到棋盘寺中吃饭。
English: Go down to the chessboard temple for dinner.

古文：乃同寺僧出寺门东行三十步，观棋盘石。
现代文：于是和寺里的僧人一同出寺门，往东走三十步，去观看棋盘石。
English: So, together with the monks of the temple, they left the temple gate and walked thirty paces to the east to see the checkerboard.

古文：石一方横卧岭头，中界棋盘纹，纵横各十九道。
现代文：一块方石横睡在岭头，方石中间是棋盘纹，纵纹横纹各十九道。
English: A square stone is lying at the foot of the ridge. In the middle of the square stone is a checkerboard pattern, with nineteen stripes on each side.

古文：其北卧石上，楷书 玉案晴岚 四大字，乃碧潭陈贤所题。
现代文：其北边的卧石上面，用楷书写着 玉案晴岚 四个大字，是碧潭的陈贤题写的。
English: Above the bedrock on its northern side, the four large characters "玉案晴" were written in block letters. They were inscribed by Chen Xian of Bitan.

古文：南有二石平庋置放，中夹为穴，下坠甚深，僧指为仙洞，昔有牧子坠羊其中，遂以石填塞之。
现代文：南边有两块石头平平地置放着，中间夹着一个洞，洞往下坠得很深，僧人指着说是仙洞，从前有个牧童的羊掉进洞中，于是用石头填塞洞口。
English: On the south side, there are two stones lying flat, with a hole in the middle. The hole has fallen very deep. The monk points to it and says that it is a fairy cave. Once, a shepherd boy's sheep fell into the hole, so he filled the hole with stones.

古文：僧言此山之腹皆崆峒，但不得其门而入耳。
现代文：僧人说这座山内部都是空洞，只是找不到洞门进去。
English: The monk said that the inside of the mountain was full of caverns, but he couldn't find a door to get in.

古文：穴侧亦有陈贤诗碑，已剥斑剥脱落不可读。
现代文：洞旁边也有陈贤的诗文碑刻，字迹已经脱落得不能读了。
English: There is also a poem inscribed by Chen Xian next to the cave, but the writing has fallen off and cannot be read.

古文：乃还寺，录昆明令汪从龙诗碑。
现代文：于是返回寺中，抄录昆明县令汪从龙的诗文碑刻。
English: So he returned to the temple and copied the inscriptions of the poems of Wang Conglong of Kunming County.

古文：仍令幼僧导往峰西南，观凿石之崖。
现代文：并且让年轻的僧人带领我去棋盘峰西南，观看采凿石材的山崖。
English: And let the young monk lead me to the southwest of Checkerboard Peak to see the mountains and cliffs of quarried stone.

古文：其崖上下两层，凿成大窟如厦屋。
现代文：那里的石崖分上下两层，采凿石材后形成的大洞穴如同高大房屋。
English: The cliffs there are divided into two layers, with large caves formed after quarrying stone, resembling tall houses.

古文：其石色青绿者，则腻而实；黄白者，则粗而刚坚硬。
现代文：石头颜色是青绿色的，其质地细腻而结实；颜色是黄白色的，则粗糙而刚脆。
English: The color of the stone is turquoise, its texture is delicate and strong; the color is yellow-white, it is rough and brittle.

古文：其崖间中嵌青绿色者两层，如带围，各高丈余，故凿者依而穴之。
现代文：山崖中间镶嵌有两层青绿色的石头，像围着两条彩带，每层的厚度有一丈多高，所以石匠顺着采凿从而形成洞穴。
English: The middle of the cliff is inlaid with two layers of turquoise stone, like two ribbons around it, each layer being a few feet thick, so the stonemasons followed the chisel to form the cave.

古文：其板即取出的石板有方有长，方者大径五六尺，长者长径二三丈，皆薄一二寸，其平如锯，无纤毫凹凸，真良材也。
现代文：采下的石板有方形的、有长条形的，方形大石板每边有五亦尺长，长的大石条长达二三丈，都只有一二寸那么厚薄，石面平整得像锯出来的一样，没有丝毫的凹凸不平，真是良材。
English: The quarried stone slabs are square-shaped and long-strip-shaped. The large square stone slabs are five feet long on each side, and the long large stone strips are two or three feet long. They are only one or two inches thick and thin. The stone surface is as flat as if it were sawn, without the slightest bumpiness. It is really good material.

古文：还从寺前东向下，一里，过新庵之左。
现代文：返回去从寺前面往东边下，一里，从新建的庙庵左边经过。
English: Returning to the temple, go down the east side, one mile, and pass the newly built temple on the left.

古文：直下者一里半，过三家村左，渡涧。
现代文：直直地往下走一里半，从三家村左边经过，越过溪涧。
English: Go straight down for a mile and a half, pass the three villages on the left, and cross the creek.

古文：又一里半，东逾石山之坳。
现代文：又走了一里半，往东穿过石山之坳。
English: I walked another mile and a half, eastward through Ishiyama no Shaku.

古文：其山乃东界北走之脉，至此复突一峰，遂北尽焉。
现代文：这座山是东部往北走向的支脉，到这里后又突起一座山峰，于是往北延伸结束。
English: This mountain is a branch of the east to the north, and after reaching here, another peak rises, so the northward extension ends.

古文：从坳东坠崖而下，复渐成一坑，随之行三里，为宝珠寺。
现代文：从山坳东边顺着山崖往下坠，又逐渐形成一个坑，顺着路走三里，到宝珠寺。
English: From the eastern side of the ridge, I fell down along the cliff and gradually formed a pit. I walked three miles along the road to Bozhu Temple.

古文：未至寺，其西坠峡处，坑水溃破堤而出而为瀑，悬崖三级下，深可十五六丈，但水细如络丝，不如疋练也。
现代文：还没走到寺中，看到西边深坠的峡谷中，坑里的水往外冲而形成瀑布，悬挂在崖壁上分三级流下去，深处大约十五六丈，只是水流细得如同蚕丝缠绕，不像成匹悬挂的布帛。
English: Before I got to the temple, I saw that in the deep canyon on the west side, the water in the pit rushed out and formed a waterfall. It hung on the cliff wall and flowed down in three stages, with a depth of about fifteen or sixteen meters, but the water flow was as thin as twisted silk, not like hanging cloths.

古文：宝珠寺东向，倚山之半，亦幽亦敞。
现代文：宝珠寺面向东方，靠在半山腰上，既幽静又宽敞。
English: Baozhu Temple faces the east and is located halfway up the mountain. It is both quiet and spacious.

古文：由其前坠坡直下，五里抵山麓，为石鼻山，聚落甚盛，盖当草海之西，碧鸡关大道即出其下也。
现代文：从宝珠寺前面顺着山坡一直下去，五里抵达山脚，是石鼻山，这里的村落很大，因为位于草海西岸，通往碧鸡关的大路就从村落下面伸出去。
English: From the front of the Bozhu Temple, the slope goes all the way down, and it is five miles to the foot of the mountain, which is the Stone Nose Mountain. The village here is very large, because it is located on the west coast of the Grass Sea, and the road leading to Bijiguan stretches out from under the village.

古文：由村转北一里半，东北与大道合，于是东向湖堤。
现代文：顺着村落往北转一里半，往东北过去与大路会合，从这里往东走向湖堤。
English: Following the village, turn north for a mile and a half, go northeast past the junction with the main road, and from here head east towards the lake's edge.

古文：二里半，有村当堤之冲，曰夏家窑。
现代文：二里半，有一个村礁坐落在湖堤要道上，名夏家窑。
English: Two and a half miles away, there is a village reef located on the road leading to the lake embankment, known as Xia Jia Yao.

古文：过此，遂遵堤行湖中。
现代文：过了夏家窑，就沿着湖堤在草海中行走。
English: After passing the summer cottage kiln, I walked along the lake embankment in the sea of grass.

古文：堤南北皆水洼当时水位较高，故堤两边皆水，现已干涸而成田地，堤界其间，与西子苏堤无异和杭州西湖苏堤一样。盖其洼即草海之余，南连于滇池，北抵于黄土坡，西濒赤鼻山之麓，东抵会城，其中支条错绕，或断或续，或出或没，其濒北者，《志》又谓之西湖，其实即草海也。
现代文：湖堤南北两边都是水注，湖堤从中间把水洼分成两边，和杭州西湖的苏堤没有什么不同。原来这水洼就是草海的一部分，南边连着滇池，北边抵达黄土坡，西边濒临赤鼻山麓，东边抵达省会昆明，水洼中小路交错环绕，时断时续，时隐时现，靠北面的一片，志书上又称做西湖，其实就是草海。
English: Both the north and south sides of the lake embankment are filled with water, and the lake embankment divides the puddle into two sides from the middle, which is no different from the Su Embankment of Hangzhou West Lake. Originally, this puddle is part of the grass sea. The south side is connected to the Dianchi Lake, the north side reaches the loess slope, the west side is near the foot of the Red Nose Mountains, and the east side reaches the provincial capital Kunming. The small and medium roads of the puddle are interlaced, intermittently, intermittently, and the north side is a piece. It is also called the West Lake in the book,

