古文：黄帝画野，始分都邑；夏禹治水，初奠山川。
现代文：黄帝划分了中国的疆域，才有了都邑的界限；夏禹治理好了洪水，才奠定了山川的位置。
English: It was only when the Yellow Emperor divided China's territory that the boundaries of the capital cities were established; it was only when Hsia Yu controlled the floods that the position of the mountains and rivers was established.

古文：宇宙之江山不改，古今之称谓各殊。
现代文：天地间的山川河脉虽然不曾更改，它们的称呼古今却各有不同。
English: Although the mountains and rivers between heaven and earth have not changed, their names have varied from ancient to modern times.

古文：北京原属幽燕，金台是其异号；南京原为建业，金陵又是别名。
现代文：北京古时称 幽州 或 燕国 ，别名又叫 金台 ；南京就是 建业 ，别名又叫 金陵 。
English: In ancient times, Beijing was called Yuzhou or Yan Guo, also known as Jintai; Nanjing was Jianye, also known as Jinling.

古文：浙江是武林之区，原为越国；江西是豫章之地，又曰吴皋。
现代文：浙江从前称作 武林 ，是越王的故国；江西旧时称作 豫章 、 吴皋 。
English: Zhejiang, formerly known as Wulin, is the homeland of King Yue; Jiangxi, formerly known as Yuzhang and Wuzhong.

古文：福建省属闽中，湖广地名三楚。
现代文：福建古时统称七闽，湖广地方旧名叫做三楚。
English: In ancient times, Fujian was collectively known as Qixing, and the old name of Huguang was Sanchu.

古文：东鲁西鲁，即山东山西之分；东粤西粤，乃广东广西之域。
现代文： 东鲁 、 西鲁 就是山东、山西的旧名， 东粤 、 西粤 即为广东、广西。
English: Donglu and Xilu are the old names of Shandong and Shanxi, and Dongyue and Xiyue are the old names of Guangdong and Guangxi.

古文：河南在华夏之中，故曰中州；陕西即长安之地，原为秦境。
现代文：河南位于中原的中心位置，所以又称为中州；长安是陕西的首府，古时候是秦国的辖地。
English: Henan is located in the center of the Central Plains, so it is also called Zhongzhou; Chang'an is the capital of Shaanxi, and in ancient times it was under the jurisdiction of Qin.

古文：四川为西蜀，云南为古滇。
现代文：四川就是 西蜀 ，云南就是古时候的 滇 国。
English: Sichuan is Xishu, Yunnan is the ancient Shu.

古文：贵州省近蛮方，自古名为黔地。
现代文：贵州接近南方少数民族的地域，是古时黔中之地。
English: Guizhou is close to the regions of ethnic minorities in the south, and has been a place of prosperity in ancient times.

古文：东岳泰山，西岳华山，南岳衡山，北岳恒山，中岳嵩山，此为天下之五岳。
现代文：东岳泰山、西岳华山、南岳衡山、北岳恒山、中岳嵩山，这是中国著名的五大高山。
English: East Mount Tai, West Mount Huashan, South Mount Heng, North Mount Heng, and Middle Mount Song are the five famous mountains in China.

古文：饶州之鄱阳，岳州之青草，润州之丹阳，鄂州之洞庭，苏州之太湖，此为天下之五湖。
现代文：饶州的鄱阳湖、湘阴的青草湖、润州的丹阳湖、巴陵的洞庭湖、苏州的太湖，这是中国著名的五大淡水湖。
English: Poyang Lake in Raozhou, Qingcao Lake in Hunan, Danyang Lake in Rongzhou, Dongting Lake in Baling, and Taihu Lake in Suzhou are the five famous freshwater lakes in China.

古文：金城汤池，谓城池之巩固；砺山带河，乃封建之誓盟。
现代文：金城汤池形容城墙和护城河坚固、牢不可破，如金铸成的城，如汤沸热的池。
English: Jincheng Tangchi described the city wall and moat as solid and unbreakable, like a city made of gold, like a boiling hot pool.

古文：帝都曰京师，故乡曰梓里。蓬莱弱水，惟飞仙可渡；方壶员峤，乃仙子所居。
现代文：黄河像衣带万古流长，泰山像砺石与天共存，是帝王分封功臣时的誓盟之辞，祝他永久存在，并誓立永久和好的盟书。皇帝居住的都城称为 京师 ，旅居在外的人，称自己的故乡为 梓里 。
English: The Yellow River has flowed for aeons like a girdle, and Mount Tai has coexisted with the heavens like flint. It is the emperor's oath of allegiance when awarding the title of meritorious subject, wishing him eternal existence, and swearing to establish a covenant of eternal peace. The capital city where the emperor lives is called Jingshi, and those who live abroad call their hometown Zizili.

古文：沧海桑田，谓世事之多变；河清海晏，兆天下之升平。
现代文： 蓬莱 和 弱水 只有神仙才能飞渡到那里； 方壶 和 员峤 ，只有仙人才能居住在那里。 沧海桑田 比喻世事变迁很大； 河清海晏 是天下太平的征兆。
English: Penglai and Weak Water, only immortals can fly there; Fang Jug and Jian Ye, only immortals can live there; Canghai Mulberry Fields, metaphor of great changes in the world; Heqing Seagull, a sign of world peace.

古文：水神曰冯夷，又曰阳侯，火神曰祝融，又曰回禄。
现代文：掌管河水的神称为冯夷又叫做阳侯；管理火的神称为祝融又叫回禄。
English: The god in charge of the river is called Feng Yi, also known as Yang Hou; the god in charge of fire is called Zhu Rong, also known as Huiluo.

古文：海神曰海若，海眼曰尾闾。
现代文：海神的名字叫海若，海眼是海下泄水的洞孔，又称为尾闾。
English: The sea god's name is Kairo, and the eye of the sea is the underwater drainage hole, also known as the caudal fin.

古文：望人包容曰海涵，谢人恩泽曰河润。
现代文：希望得到别人的包容，要说 海涵 ；感谢别人的恩惠，要说 河润 。
English: If you hope to be tolerated by others, you should say "Hain"; if you want to thank others for their favors, you should say "Hairun."

古文：无系累者曰江湖散人，负豪气者曰湖海之士。
现代文：没有任何牵挂的人叫做 江湖散人 ；自负豪气的人叫做 湖海之士 。
English: Those who do not have any concern are called Jianghu Sanren; those who are conceited and arrogant are called Huheizhi.

古文：问舍求田，原无大志；掀天揭地，方是奇才。
现代文：一个人只会寻问屋舍讲求田亩，那就表示胸无大志；能够做大事的人，才能称为有才能的奇人。
English: A person will only ask for a house or a mu of land, which means that he has no ambition; a person who can do great things can only be called a talented person.

古文：凭空起事，谓之平地风波；独立不移，谓之中流砥柱。
现代文：凭空挑起事端，称为 平地生波 ；能担当大任，遇事毫不动摇者，可称为 中流砥柱 。
English: Those who stir up trouble out of thin air are called flat-earthers; those who can take on big tasks and stand firm in the face of trouble can be called mainstays.

古文：黑子、弹丸，漫言至小之邑；咽喉、右臂，皆言要害之区。
现代文： 黑子 和 弹丸 都是形容很小的地域； 咽喉 和 右臂 都是身体上重要的部位，用来形容险要的地方。
English: "Black spot" and "bullet" both describe very small areas; "throat" and "right arm" are important parts of the body, used to describe dangerous places.

古文：独立难持，曰一木焉能支大厦；英雄自恃，曰丸泥亦可封函关。
现代文：势单力孤难以完成大事业，就说 一木焉能支大厦 ；英雄好汉夸耀自己的胆识本领，可说 丸泥亦可封函关 。
English: If it is difficult to accomplish a great cause with one's own strength, it is said that a tree cannot support a building; a hero can boast of his courage and ability, and it can be said that mud can also seal the post office.

古文：事先败而后成，曰失之东隅，收之桑榆；事将成而终止，曰为山九仞，功亏一篑。
现代文：做事先失败，后来才得以成功，叫做 失之东隅，收之桑榆 。事情将要成功，只差最后一点点，半途忽然停止了，就称为 为山九仞，功亏一篑 。
English: To fail in advance, and then succeed, is called the loss of the east corner, the loss of the mulberry. The thing is about to succeed, only the last bit is missing, and it suddenly stops halfway. It is called the mountain nine mountains, the loss of one mountain.

古文：以蠡测海，喻人之见小；精卫衔石，比人之徒劳。
现代文：拿瓠瓢来测量海水，比喻人的见识太浅；精卫的衔石填海，是指做事徒劳无功。
English: To use a plough to measure seawater is to say that one's knowledge is too shallow; to refill the sea with the keystone of the jingwei is to say that one has done something in vain.

古文：跋涉谓行路艰难，康庄谓道路平坦。
现代文： 跋涉 是说行路非常艰难， 康庄大道 是说道路非常宽广平坦。
English: "Trek" means that the road is very difficult, and "Kangzhuang Avenue" means that the road is very wide and flat.

古文：硗地曰不毛之地，美田曰膏腴之田。
现代文：地面长不出五谷草木的土地，称为 不毛之地 。肥沃丰饶的田地，叫做 膏腴之田 。
English: The land where grain and plants cannot grow on the ground is called barren land, and the fertile fields are called fertile fields.

古文：得物无所用，曰如获石田；为学已大成，曰诞登道岸。
现代文：得到某物却一无所用，就说 如获石田 ；做学问而有了成就，则可用 诞登道岸 来形容。
English: If one obtains something, but it is of no use, it is said that one obtains Ishida; if one obtains knowledge and achieves something, it can be described as "having been born on the path."

古文：淄渑之滋味可辨，泾渭之清浊当分。
现代文：淄水、渑水味道的区别是可以辨别的，泾水、渭水的水质清浊也是应当分开的。
English: The difference between the taste of brackish water and brackish water can be distinguished, and the water quality of brackish water and brackish water should be separated.

古文：泌水乐饥，隐居不仕；东山高卧，谢职求安。
现代文：拿涌出的泉水来充饥，也觉得很快乐；所以东晋的谢安多次谢绝朝廷的诏令，以求轻松悠闲。
English: Taking the gushing spring water to satisfy his hunger, he also felt very happy; therefore, Eastern Jin's Xie'an repeatedly refused the imperial edict in order to relax.

古文：圣人出则黄河清，太守廉则越石见。
现代文：圣人降临世间，黄河的水也会呈现清澈，太守清廉爱民，越王石才会显现于世。
English: When a saint descends to the world, the water of the Yellow River will also appear clear. Only when the emperor is pure and virtuous and loves the people will the Yuewang Stone appear in the world.

古文：美俗曰仁里，恶俗曰互乡。
现代文：风俗淳朴的乡里称为仁里，风俗恶劣的地方叫做互乡。
English: Towns with simple customs are called Renli, and places with bad customs are called Mutago.

古文：里名胜母，曾子不入；邑号朝歌，墨翟回车。
现代文：孝顺父母的曾子，不愿进入里名叫胜母的地方是恨它不孝；主张非乐的墨子，车子走到名叫朝歌的城邑时，就掉头而返，是嫌它失时。
English: If a filial great-grandson does not want to go to a place called Shengmao, it is because he hates it and is not filial; if a non-happy Mozi does not want to go to a town called Chaoga, he will turn around and go back, because he does not want to waste his time.

古文：击壤而歌，尧帝黎民之自得；让畔而耕，文王百姓之相推。
现代文： 击壤而歌 ，是说尧帝时黎民百姓都能怡然自得； 让畔而耕 ，是说周文王时的百姓朴实讲仁义。
English: "Strike the ground and sing a song" means that the people of Limin were able to enjoy themselves when Emperor Qian was alive; "Let the riverside be cultivated" means that the people of the time of King Zhouwen spoke about benevolence and righteousness in a simple manner.

古文：费长房有缩地之方，秦始皇有鞭石之法。
现代文：费长房通晓收缩土地，化远为近的方法；秦始皇时有挥鞭驱赶石头造桥的奇术。
English: Fei Changfang was familiar with the method of shrinking the land and making the distant near; Qin Shihuang had the magic of waving a whip to drive away stones to build a bridge.

古文：尧有九年之水患，汤有七年之旱灾。
现代文：尧帝时有九年的水患，商汤时有七年的大旱天灾。
English: There was a nine-year flood in the time of Emperor Gong and a seven-year drought in the time of Emperor Shang.

古文：商鞅不仁而阡陌开，夏桀无道而伊洛竭。
现代文：商鞅没有仁德，废除自古以来的井田制度，开阡陌奖军功。夏桀暴虐无道，上天便使伊、洛二水同时枯竭，以示惩戒。
English: Shangguan had no benevolence, abolished the well-field system since ancient times, and rewarded military merit. Xia Yu was ruthless, and the heavens dried up the two waters of I and Luo at the same time to show discipline.

古文：道不拾遗，由在上有善政；海不扬波，知中国有圣人。
现代文：路上不捡拾他人的失物，是因为在上的人治理有方的缘故。海里扬不起大波浪来，由此可知中国境内有了圣明的人。
English: If you don't pick up other people's lost property on the road, it's because the people on the top have good governance. The sea can't raise big waves, so you can know that there are holy people in China.

