古文：他日，秦伯将享公子，公子使子犯从。
现代文：有一天，秦穆公将设宴款待公子重耳，重耳叫子犯随从。
English: One day, Emperor Qin Mu will hold a banquet to entertain his son Chong Er, and Chong Er will call his son-in-law to follow him.

古文：子犯曰： 吾不如衰之文也，请使衰从。 
现代文：子犯说： 我不如赵衰那样善于辞令，请让赵衰跟您同去吧。 
English: The child criminal said, "I'm not as good with words as Zhao Zhen. Please let Zhao Zhen go with you."

古文：乃使子余从。
现代文：于是，重耳便叫赵衰随从前往。
English: As a result, he asked Zhao Sheng to accompany him.

古文：秦伯享公子如享国君之礼，子余相如宾。
现代文：秦穆公用款待国君的礼节来招待重耳，赵衰做宾相，完全按照宾礼进行。
English: Qin Mu used the etiquette of entertaining the sovereign to invite heavy ears, and Zhao Fen was the guest of honor, which was carried out in full accordance with the guest of honor.

古文：卒事，秦伯谓其大夫曰： 为礼而不终，耻也。
现代文：宴会结束后，秦穆公对大夫们说： 举行礼仪而不能够善始善终，是耻辱。
English: After the banquet, Qin Mu Gong said to the doctors: It is a shame to hold a ceremony and not be able to have a good beginning and end.

古文：中不胜貌，耻也。
现代文：内在的思想感情和外貌不一致，是耻辱。
English: It is a shame when one's inner thoughts and feelings do not match one's appearance.

古文：华而不实，耻也。
现代文：形式华丽而没有实际内容，是耻辱。
English: It is a shame to have a magnificent form but no real content.

古文：不度而施，耻也。
现代文：不估量自己的能力而施恩德，是耻辱。
English: It is a disgrace to be generous without considering one's own ability.

古文：施而不济，耻也。
现代文：施德于人而不能助人成功，是耻辱。
English: It is a shame to do good to others and fail to help them succeed.

古文：耻门不闭，不可以封。
现代文：不关闭这些羞耻之门，不足以立国。
English: It is not enough to be a nation without closing these doors of shame.

古文：非此，用师则无所矣。
现代文：不这样，对外用兵就会一无所成。
English: Otherwise, the use of foreign troops will achieve nothing.

古文：二三子敬乎！ 
现代文：你们在这方面必须恭敬谨慎从事啊！ 
English: You must proceed with respect and caution in this regard!

古文：明日宴，秦伯赋《采菽》，子余使公子降拜。
现代文：在第二天举行的宴会上，秦穆公朗诵了《采菽》这首诗，赵衰让重耳下堂拜谢。
English: At the banquet held on the second day, Qin Mu Gong recited the poem "Cherry Picking," and Zhao Shengyang listened attentively and bowed down.

古文：秦伯降辞。
现代文：秦穆公也下堂辞谢。
English: Qin Mu Gong also resigned.

古文：子余曰： 君以天子之命服命重耳，重耳敢有安志，敢不降拜？ 
现代文：赵衰说： 国君用天子接待诸侯的待遇来接待重耳，重耳怎敢有苟安的想法，又怎敢不下堂拜谢呢？ 
English: Zhao Zhen said: The sovereign uses the treatment of the son of heaven to receive the princes to receive the heavy ears. How dare the heavy ears have the idea of peace, and how dare they not go down to the hall to give thanks?

古文：成拜卒登，子余使公子赋《黍苗》。
现代文：拜谢完毕后又登堂，赵衰让公子朗诵《黍苗》这首诗。
English: After the thanksgiving, they went back to the hall, and Zhao Zhen asked the prince to recite the poem "Seedlings."

古文：子余曰： 重耳之仰君也，若黍苗之仰阴雨也。
现代文：赵衰说： 重耳仰望国君，就像久旱的黍苗仰望上天下雨一样。
English: Zhao Zhen said: Looking up to the sovereign with a heavy ear is like a long-droughted seedling looking up to the rain.

古文：若君实庇■膏泽之，使能成嘉谷，荐在宗庙，君之力也。
现代文：如果承蒙国君庇护滋润，使他能成长为嘉谷，奉献给宗庙，那是依靠国君的力量啊。
English: If, thanks to the protection and nourishment of the sovereign, he can grow into Jia Gu and be dedicated to the ancestral temple, that is relying on the strength of the sovereign.

古文：君若昭先君之荣，东行济河，整师以复强周室，重耳之望也。
现代文：国君如果能发扬光大先君襄公的荣耀，东渡黄河，整顿军队使周王室再度强大起来，这是重耳所盼望的。
English: If the sovereign can carry forward the glory of his great predecessor, Prince Xiang, and cross the Yellow River to the east, and rectify the army to make the Zhou royal family strong again, this is what the heavy ear hopes for.

古文：重耳若获集德而归载，使主晋民，成封国，其何实不从。
现代文：重耳如果能得到国君的这些恩惠而归祀宗庙，成为晋国百姓的君主，得到封国，那他一定是会相从的。
English: If Chong Er can obtain these favors from the sovereign and be enshrined in the ancestral temple, become the monarch of the people of Jin, and be granted the title of state, then he will surely follow suit.

古文：君若恣志以用重耳，四方诸侯，其谁不惕惕以从命！ 
现代文：国君如果能放心大胆地任用重耳，四方的诸侯，谁还敢不小心翼翼地听从您的命令呢？ 
English: If the sovereign can safely and boldly appoint heavy-eared, four-sided lords, who would dare to carelessly obey your orders?

古文：秦伯叹曰： 是子将有焉，岂专在寡人乎！ 
现代文：秦穆公叹息道： 这个人将会获得这些，哪里是单靠我呢！ 
English: Qin Mu Gong sighed and said, "This person will obtain these things, how can I do it on my own!"

古文：秦伯赋《鸠飞》，公子赋《河水》。
现代文：秦穆公朗诵了《鸠飞》这首诗，重耳也朗诵了《沔水》这首诗。
English: Qin Mu Gong recited the poem "Flight of the Dragonfly," and the poem "Water of the Dragonfly" was also recited.

古文：秦伯赋《六月》子余使公子降拜。
现代文：秦穆公又朗诵《六月》这首诗，赵衰让公子重耳下堂拜谢。
English: Qin Mu Gong also recited the poem "June," and Zhao Zhen let the prince listen attentively and bow.

古文：秦伯降辞。
现代文：秦穆公也下堂辞谢。
English: Qin Mu Gong also resigned.

古文：子余曰： 君称所以佐天子匡王国者以命重耳，重耳敢有惰心，敢不从德？ 
现代文：赵衰说： 国君把辅助周天子、匡正诸侯国的使命交付给重耳，重耳怎敢有怠惰之心，怎敢不遵从有德者的命令呢？ 
English: Zhao Zhen said: The sovereign entrusted the mission of assisting Zhou Tianzi and rectifying the principalities to the heavy ears. How dare the heavy ears have a lazy heart, how dare they disobey the orders of the virtuous?

