古文：郦生食其者，陈留高阳人也。
现代文：郦食其是陈留高阳人。
English: It is the Chen Liu Gaoyang people who eat it.

古文：好读书，家贫落魄，无以为衣食业，为里监门吏。
现代文：他非常喜欢读书，但家境贫寒，穷困潦倒，连能供得起自己穿衣吃饭的产业都没有，只得当了一名看管里门的下贱小吏。
English: He was very fond of reading, but his family was poor and destitute. They did not even have an industry that could afford to clothe and feed him, so he had to work as a lowly clerk guarding the inner gate.

古文：然县中贤豪不敢役，县中皆谓之狂生。
现代文：但是尽管如此，县中的贤士和豪强却不敢随便役使他，县里的人们都称他为 狂生 。
English: But in spite of this, the sages and heroes in the county did not dare to use him arbitrarily, and the people in the county all called him "crazy."

古文：及陈胜、项梁等起，诸将徇地过高阳者数十人，郦生闻其将皆握齱好苛礼自用，不能听大度之言，郦生乃深自藏匿。
现代文：等到陈胜、项梁等人反秦起义的时候，各路将领攻城略地经过高阳的有数十人，但郦食其听说这些人都是些气量狭小，喜欢烦琐细小的礼节，刚愎自用、不能听豁达之言的人，他就深居简出，躲藏起来，不去逢迎这些人。
English: When Chen Sheng, Xiang Liang and others revolted against the Qin Dynasty, there were dozens of people passing through Gaoyang with the generals leading the attack on the city. However, when he heard that these people were narrow-minded, fond of tedious and petty etiquette, self-willed, and unable to listen to the words of open-minded people, he lived a simple life, hid, and did not go to meet these people.

古文：後闻沛公将兵略地陈留郊，沛公麾下骑士適郦生里中子也，沛公时时问邑中贤士豪俊。
现代文：后来，他听说沛公带兵攻城略地来到陈留郊外，沛公部下的一个骑兵恰恰是郦食其邻里故人的儿子，沛公时常向他打听他家乡的贤士俊杰。
English: Later, he heard that Pei Gong led an army to attack the city and came to the outskirts of Chenliu. One of Pei Gong's cavalrymen was the son of a deceased neighbor. Pei Gong often asked him about the wise man Junjie from his hometown.

古文：骑士归，郦生见谓之曰： 吾闻沛公慢而易人，多大略，此真吾所原从游，莫为我先。
现代文：一天，骑兵回家，郦食其看到他，对他说道： 我听说沛公傲慢而看不起人，但他有许多远大的谋略，这才是我真正想要追随的人，只是苦于没人替我介绍。
English: One day, a cavalryman came home, saw him, and said to him: "I heard that Pei Gong is arrogant and despises people, but he has many far-reaching strategies. This is the person I really want to follow, but I am suffering from no one to introduce me.

古文：若见沛公，谓曰 臣里中有郦生，年六十馀，长八尺，人皆谓之狂生，生自谓我非狂生 。 
现代文：你见到沛公，可以这样对他说， 我的家乡有位郦先生，年纪已有六十多岁，身高八尺，人们都称他是狂生，但是他自己说他并非狂生。  
English: When you meet Pei Gong, you can say to him, "In my hometown, there is a Mr. Zou, who is over sixty years old and eight feet tall. People call him a madman, but he says he is not mad.

古文：骑士曰： 沛公不好儒，诸客冠儒冠来者，沛公辄解其冠，溲溺其中。
现代文：骑兵回答说： 沛公并不喜欢儒生，许多人头戴儒生的帽子来见他，他就立刻把他们的帽子摘下来，在里边撒尿。
English: The cavalry replied, "Pe Gong did not like Confucianism. Many people came to see him wearing Confucian hats, and he immediately took off their hats and urinated inside.

古文：与人言，常大骂。
现代文：他跟人谈话的时候，动不动就破口大骂。
English: When he talks to people, he is quick to lash out.

古文：未可以儒生说也。 
现代文：所以您最好不要以儒生的身份去向他游说。 
English: So you'd better not lobby him as a Confucian.

古文：郦生曰： 弟言之。 
现代文：郦食其说： 你只管像我教你的这样说。 
English: He said, "Just say what I tell you to say."

古文：骑士从容言如郦生所诫者。
现代文：骑士回去之后，就按郦生嘱咐的话告诉了沛公。
English: After the knight returned, he told Pei Gong what he was told.

古文：沛公至高阳传舍，使人召郦生。
现代文：后来沛公来到高阳，在旅舍住下，派人去召郦食其前来拜见。
English: Later, Pei Gong came to Gaoyang, stayed in a hostel, and sent someone to summon Yan Yan to come and see him.

古文：郦生至，入谒，沛公方倨床使两女子洗足，而见郦生。
现代文：郦生来到旅舍，沛公正叉开腿坐在床上让两个女子替他洗脚，就叫郦生来见。
English: When he arrived at the hostel, Pei Zhengyi sat cross-legged on the bed and asked two women to wash his feet. They then called him to come and see them.

古文：郦生入，则长揖不拜，曰： 足下欲助秦攻诸侯乎？且欲率诸侯破秦也？ 
现代文：郦生进去，只是作个长揖而没有倾身下拜，并且说： 您是想帮助秦国攻打诸侯呢，还是想率领诸侯灭掉秦国？ 
English: The eunuch went in, just made a long bow without bowing down, and said: Do you want to help Qin attack the princes, or do you want to lead the princes to destroy Qin?

古文：沛公骂曰： 竖儒！
现代文：沛公骂道： 你个儒生！
English: Pei Gong scolded: You are a Confucian!

古文：夫天下同苦秦久矣，故诸侯相率而攻秦，何谓助秦攻诸侯乎？ 
现代文：天下的人同受秦朝的苦已经很久了，所以诸侯们才陆续起兵反抗暴秦，你怎么说帮助秦朝攻打诸侯呢？ 
English: The people of the world have been suffering from the Qin Dynasty for a long time, so the lords have been rising up against the tyrannical Qin. How can you say that you helped the Qin Dynasty attack the lords?

古文：郦生曰： 必聚徒合义兵诛无道秦，不宜倨见长者。 
现代文：郦生说： 如果您下决心聚合民众，召集义兵来推翻暴虐无道的秦王朝，那就不应该用这种倨慢不礼的态度来接见长者。 
English: He said: "If you are determined to gather the people and call for volunteers to overthrow the tyrannical Qin Dynasty, then you should not use such a rude attitude to meet the elders.

古文：於是沛公辍洗，起摄衣，延郦生上坐，谢之。
现代文：于是沛公立刻停止了洗脚，整理衣服，把郦生请到了上宾的座位，并向他道歉。
English: So Pei Gong immediately stopped washing his feet, straightened his clothes, invited his son-in-law to the guest's seat, and apologized to him.

古文：郦生因言六国从横时。沛公喜，赐郦生食，问曰： 计将安出？ 
现代文：郦生谈了六国合纵连横所用的谋略，沛公非常高兴，命人端上饭来，让郦生进食，然后问道： 那您看今天我们的计策该怎么制定呢？ 
English: Zeng Sheng talked about the strategy used by the Six-Nation Alliance. Pei Gong was very happy and ordered someone to serve dinner so that Zeng Sheng could eat, and then asked: So how do you think our strategy should be formulated today?

古文：郦生曰： 足下起纠合之众，收散乱之兵，不满万人，欲以径入强秦，此所谓探虎口者也。
现代文：郦生说道： 您把乌合之众，散乱之兵聚集起来，总共也不满一万人，如果以此来直接和强秦对抗的话，那就是人们所常说的探虎口啊。
English: Zeng Sheng said, "You have gathered the rabble, the scattered soldiers, a total of less than ten thousand people. If you use this to directly confront Qiang Qin, that is what people often call a trap.

古文：夫陈留，天下之旻，四通五达之郊也，今其城又多积粟。
现代文：陈留是天下的交通要道，四通八达的地方，现在城里又有很多存粮。
English: Chenliu is one of the world's most important transportation routes, a place with access to all corners of the globe, and now there is a lot of stored grain in the city.

古文：臣善其令，请得使之，令下足下。
现代文：我和陈留的县令很是要好，请您派我到他那里去一趟，让他向您投降。
English: I am on very good terms with Chen Liu's county magistrate. Please send me to him so that he will surrender to you.

古文：即不听，足下举兵攻之，臣为内应。 
现代文：他若是不听从的话，您再发兵攻城，我在城内又可以作为内应。 
English: If he doesn't listen, you can send troops to attack the city again, and I can act as a mediator within the city.

古文：於是遣郦生行，沛公引兵随之，遂下陈留。号郦食其为广野君。
现代文：于是沛公就派遣郦生前往，自己带兵紧随其后，这样就攻取了陈留，赐给郦食其广野君的称号。
English: As a result, Pei Gong dispatched his son to go, followed closely by his own soldiers. In this way, he captured Chen Rui and gave him the title of Hirono-kun.

古文：郦生言其弟郦商，使将数千人从沛公西南略地。
现代文：郦生又荐举他的弟弟郦商，让他带领几千人跟随沛公到西南攻城略地。
English: Zeng Sheng also recommended his younger brother, Zeng Shang, and asked him to lead several thousand people to follow Pei Gong to the southwest to attack the city.

古文：郦生常为说客，驰使诸侯。
现代文：而郦生自己常常担任说客，以使臣的身份奔走于诸侯之间。
English: However, he often acted as a lobbyist himself, so that he could act as a vassal between the lords.

古文：汉三年秋，项羽击汉，拔荥阳，汉兵遁保巩、洛。
现代文：在汉王三年的秋天，项羽攻打汉王，攻克了荥阳城，汉兵逃走去保卫巩、洛。
English: In the autumn of the third year of King Han, Xiang Yu attacked King Han and conquered the city of Shenyang. The Han soldiers fled to defend Gong and Luo.

古文：楚人闻淮阴侯破赵，彭越数反梁地，则分兵救之。
现代文：不久之后，楚国人听说淮阴侯韩信已经攻破赵国，彭越又多次在梁地造反，就分出一部人马前去营救。
English: Soon after, the people of Chu heard that Huaiyin Hou Hanxin had defeated Zhao and that Peng Yue had rebelled several times in Liang, so they sent out a group of people to rescue him.

古文：淮阴方东击齐，汉王数困荥阳、成皋，计欲捐成皋以东，屯巩、洛以拒楚。
现代文：淮阴侯韩信正向东进攻齐国，汉王又多次在荥阳、成皋被项羽围困，因此想放弃成皋以东的地盘；屯兵巩、洛以与楚军对抗。
English: The Huaiyin vassal Han Xin was attacking Qi to the east, and the Han king was besieged by Xiang Yu several times in Shenyang and Chengdu, so he wanted to give up the territory east of Chengdu; the troops of Gong and Luo Yi confronted the Chu army.

古文：郦生因曰： 臣闻知天之天者，王事可成；不知天之天者，王事不可成。
现代文：郦生便就此进言道： 我听说能知道天之所以为天的人，可以成就统一大业；而不知道天之所以为天的人，统一大业不可成。
English: I have heard that those who can know why heaven is heaven can achieve the great cause of unification, while those who do not know why heaven is heaven cannot achieve the great cause of unification.

古文：王者以民人为天，而民人以食为天。
现代文：作为成就统一大业的王者，他以平民百姓为天，而平民百姓又以粮食为天。
English: As the king of achieving the great cause of unification, he took the common people as his god, and the common people took grain as their god.

古文：夫敖仓，天下转输久矣，臣闻其下乃有藏粟甚多，楚人拔荥阳，不坚守敖仓，乃引而东，令適卒分守成皋，此乃天所以资汉也。
现代文：敖仓这个地方，天下往此地输送粮食已经有好长时间了。
English: The world has been sending grain to this place, Kamakura, for a long time.

古文：方今楚易取而汉反郤，自夺其便，臣窃以为过矣。
现代文：我听说现在此处贮藏的粮食非常多。楚国人攻克了荥阳，却不坚守敖仓，而是带兵向东而去，只是让一些罪犯来分守成皋，这是上天要把这些粮食资助给汉军。
English: I heard that there is a lot of grain stored here now. The people of Chu conquered Poyang, but they did not hold on to Kamakura, but led the troops to the east, only to let some criminals keep it. This is God's will to subsidize this grain to the Chinese army.

古文：且两雄不俱立，楚汉久相持不决，百姓骚动，海内摇荡，农夫释耒，工女下机，天下之心未有所定也。
现代文：当前楚军很容易击败，而我们却反要退守，把要到手的利益反扔了出去，我私下里认为这样做是错了。更何况两个强有力的对手不能同时并立，楚汉两国的战争经久相持不下，百姓骚动不安，全国混乱动荡，农夫放下农具停耕，织女走下织机辍织，徘徊观望，天下百姓究竟心向哪一方还没有决定下来。
English: At present, the Chu army is easy to defeat, but we, on the other hand, want to retreat and throw out the benefits to be obtained. I secretly think that doing so is wrong. What's more, two strong opponents cannot stand side by side at the same time. The war between the two countries of Chu and Han cannot be sustained for a long time. The people are agitated and uneasy, the country is in turmoil. The farmer has put down his farm tools and stopped farming, the weaver has stepped down from the loom and stopped weaving, and is wandering and watching. The people of the world have not yet decided which side they want to be on.

古文：原足下急复进兵，收取荥阳，据敖仓之粟，塞成皋之险，杜大行之道，距蜚狐之口，守白马之津，以示诸侯效实形制之势，则天下知所归矣。
现代文：所以请您赶快再次进军，收复荥阳，占有敖仓的粮食，阻塞成皋的险要，堵住太行交通要道，扼制住蜚狐关口，把守住白马津渡，让诸侯们看看今天的实际形势，那么天下的人民也就知道该归顺哪一方了。
English: Therefore, I would like to ask you to march again as soon as possible, recover Fenyang, occupy the grain of Kamakura, block the critical point of Chenghuan, block the important traffic routes of Taihang, strangle the Xinghu Pass, and guard the Baima Tsundue, so that the princes can see the actual situation today. Then the people of the world will know which side to submit to.

古文：方今燕、赵已定，唯齐未下。今田广据千里之齐，田间将二十万之众，军於历城，诸田宗彊，负海阻河济，南近楚，人多变诈，足下虽遣数十万师，未可以岁月破也。
现代文：如今燕国、赵国都已经平定，只有齐国还没有攻打下来，而田广占据着幅员千里的齐国，田间带领着二十万大军，屯兵于历城，各支田氏宗族都力量强大，他们背靠大海，凭借黄河、济水的阻隔，南面接近楚国，齐国人又多诈变无常，您即使是派遣数十万军队，也不可能在一年或几个月的时间里把它打下来。
English: At present, Yan and Zhao Provinces have been pacified. Only Qi Province has not yet been attacked. Tian Guan occupies Qi Province, which is thousands of miles wide. Tian Guan leads a 200,000-strong army in the field, with troops stationed in Licheng. The clans of the various Shida clans are powerful. They are backed by the sea, with the Yellow River and the Yangtze River as barriers, and are close to Chu Province in the south. The people of Qi are often deceptive and fickle. Even if you send hundreds of thousands of troops, you will not be able to defeat it in a year or a few months.

古文：臣请得奉明诏说齐王，使为汉而称东籓。 
现代文：我请求奉您的诏命去游说齐王，让他归汉而成为东方的属国。 
English: I request your imperial command to persuade King Qi to return to Han and become a vassal state of the East.

古文：上曰： 善。 
现代文：汉王回答说： 好，就这样吧！ 
English: Han Wang replied, "Okay, that's it!

古文：乃从其画，复守敖仓，而使郦生说齐王曰： 王知天下之所归乎？ 
现代文：汉王听从了郦生的计策，再次出兵据守敖仓，同时派遣郦生前往齐国。郦生对齐王说道： 大王知道天下人心的归向吗？ 
English: The Han king listened to his twin's plan and once again sent troops to defend Kamakura, at the same time sending his twin to Qi. The twin said to the king of Qi: Does the great king know the direction of the world's people's hearts?

古文：王曰： 不知也。 
现代文：齐王回答： 我不知道。 
English: Qi Wang replied: I don't know.

古文：曰： 王知天下之所归，则齐国可得而有也；若不知天下之所归，即齐国未可得保也。 
现代文：郦生说： 若是您知道天下人心的归向，那么齐国就可以保全下来，若是不知道天下人心归向的话，那么齐国便不可能保全了。 
English: He said: If you know the direction of the world's people's hearts, then Qi can be preserved. If you do not know the direction of the world's people's hearts, then Qi cannot be preserved.

古文：齐王曰： 天下何所归？ 
现代文：齐王问道： 天下人心究竟归向谁呢？ 
English: King Qi asked: To whom do the hearts of the people of the world ultimately turn?

古文：曰： 归汉。 
现代文：郦生说： 归向汉王。 
English: The student said: Let's go back to the Han Dynasty.

古文：曰： 先生何以言之？ 
现代文：齐王又问： 先生为什么这样说呢？ 
English: Qi Wang also asked: Why did the teacher say this?

古文：曰： 汉王与项王戮力西面击秦，约先入咸阳者王之。
现代文：郦生回答： 汉王和项王并为向西进军攻打秦朝，在义帝面前已经明白地约定好了，先攻入咸阳的人就在那里称王。
English: He replied, "It has been clearly agreed in front of the Emperor of Righteousness that the King of Han and the King of Xiang would march westward to attack the Qin Dynasty. The first to invade Xianyang would claim the throne there.

古文：汉王先入咸阳，项王负约不与而王之汉中。
现代文：汉王先攻入咸阳，但是项王却背弃了盟约，不让他在关中称王，而让他去汉中称王。
English: Han Wang invaded Xianyang first, but Xiang Wang reneged on the agreement and did not let him claim the throne in Guanzhong, but let him claim the throne in Hanzhong.

古文：项王迁杀义帝，汉王闻之，起蜀汉之兵击三秦，出关而责义帝之处，收天下之兵，立诸侯之後。
现代文：项王迁徙义帝并派人暗杀了他，汉王听到消息之后，立刻发起蜀汉的军队来攻打三秦，出函谷关而追问义帝迁徙的处所，收集天下的军队，拥立以前六国诸侯的后代。
English: After the Han king heard the news, he immediately launched the Shu-Han army to attack Sanqin, went to Hanzhong Pass to inquire about the location of the Yidai's migration, gathered the armies of the world, and supported the descendants of the former six countries.

古文：降城即以侯其将，得赂即以分其士，与天下同其利，豪英贤才皆乐为之用。
现代文：攻下城池立刻就给有功的将领封侯，缴获了财宝立刻就分赠给士兵，和天下同得其利，所以那些英雄豪杰、才能超群的人都愿意为他效劳。
English: After capturing a castle, he would immediately give a title of nobility to a meritorious general. If he captured a treasure, he would immediately give it to the soldiers. He would gain the same benefits as the rest of the world. Therefore, those heroes and outstanding talents were willing to serve him.

古文：诸侯之兵四面而至，蜀汉之粟方船而下。
现代文：诸侯的军队从四面八方来归附，蜀汉的粮食船挨着船源源不断地顺流送来。
English: The armies of the lords came from all directions to attach themselves, and the grain ships of Shuhan were sent along the river in a steady stream.

古文：项王有倍约之名，杀义帝之负；於人之功无所记，於人之罪无所忘；战胜而不得其赏，拔城而不得其封；非项氏莫得用事；为人刻印，刓而不能授；攻城得赂，积而不能赏：天下畔之，贤才怨之，而莫为之用。
现代文：而项王既有背弃盟约的坏名声，又有杀死义帝的不义行为；他对别人的功劳从来不记着，对别人的罪过却又从来不忘掉；将士们打了胜仗得不到奖赏，攻下城池也得不到封爵；不是他们项氏家族的没有谁得到重用；对有功人员刻下侯印，在手中反复把玩，不愿意授给；攻城得到财物，宁可堆积起来，也不肯赏赐给大家；所以天下人背叛他，才能超群的人怨恨他，没有人愿意为他效力。
English: However, King Xiang not only had the bad reputation of reneging on the covenant, but also the injustice of killing the Righteous Emperor; he never remembered the merits of others, but never forgot the sins of others; the generals won't be rewarded for winning the war, and they won't be knighted for capturing the city; no one from the Xiang family got a re-use; he engraved the marquis seal on the meritorious personnel, and repeatedly played with it in his hands, but he didn't want to give it to them; he got the property for attacking the city, and he preferred to pile it up rather than give it to everyone; so the whole world betrayed

古文：故天下之士归於汉王，可坐而策也。
现代文：因此天下之士才都投归汉王，汉王安坐就可以驱使他们。
English: As a result, the world's talented people all turned to the Han king, and the Han king could drive them away by sitting quietly.

古文：夫汉王发蜀汉，定三秦；涉西河之外，援上党之兵；下井陉，诛成安君；破北魏，举三十二城：此蚩尤之兵也，非人之力也，天之福也。
现代文：汉王带领蜀汉的军队，平定了三秦，占领了西河之外大片土地，率领投诚过来的上党精锐军队，攻下了井陉，杀死了成安君；击败了河北魏豹，占有了三十二座城池：这就如同所向无敌的蚩尤的军队一样，并不是靠人的力量，而是上天保佑的结果。
English: Han Wang led the Shu and Han armies, pacified the Three Qin Dynasties, occupied a large tract of land beyond the West River, led the elite troops of the Shang faction who had come over to the party, captured Jingyi, killed Cheng'an Jun; defeated the Wei Leopards of Hebei, and occupied thirty-two cities: this, like the invincible army of Chu You, did not rely on human strength, but was the result of God's blessing.

古文：今已据敖仓之粟，塞成皋之险，守白马之津，杜大行之阪，距蜚狐之口，天下後服者先亡矣。
现代文：现在汉王已经据有敖仓的粮食，阻塞成皋的险要，守住了白马渡口，堵塞了大行要道，扼守住蜚狐关口，天下诸侯若是想最后投降那就先被灭掉。
English: Now, the Han king has secured the grain in the grain silos, blocked the dangerous points in the rice paddies, guarded the Baima Ferry, blocked the major roads, and choked the Yunnan Fox Pass. If the princes of the world want to finally surrender, then they will be eliminated first.

古文：王疾先下汉王，齐国社稷可得而保也；不下汉王，危亡可立而待也。 
现代文：您若是赶快投降汉王，那么齐国的社稷还能够保全下来；倘若是不投降汉王的话，那么危亡的时刻立刻就会到来。 
English: If you quickly surrender to King Han, then the social order of Qi can still be preserved; if you do not surrender to King Han, then the moment of peril will come immediately.

古文：田广以为然，乃听郦生，罢历下兵守战备，与郦生日纵酒。
现代文：田广认为郦生的话是对的，就听从郦生，撤除了历下的兵守战备，天天和郦生一起纵酒做乐。
English: Tian Guang thought that Xinsheng's words were right, so he listened to Xinsheng, removed the soldiers' war preparations, and drank and made music with Xinsheng every day.

古文：淮阴侯闻郦生伏轼下齐七十馀城，乃夜度兵平原袭齐。
现代文：淮阴侯韩信听说郦生没费吹灰之力，坐在车上跑了一趟，凭三寸不烂之舌便取得了齐国七十余座城池，心中很不服气，就乘夜幕的掩护，带兵越过平原偷偷地袭击齐国。
English: Huaiyin Hou Hanxin heard that his son had no effort, sat in the car and ran once. With his three-inch incorruptible tongue, he obtained more than seventy cities in Qi. He was very unconvinced. He took advantage of the cover of night and led soldiers across the plain to secretly attack Qi.

古文：齐王田广闻汉兵至，以为郦生卖己，乃曰： 汝能止汉军，我活汝；不然，我将亨汝！ 
现代文：齐王田广听说汉兵已到，认为是郦生出卖了自己，便对郦生说： 如果你能阻止汉军进攻的话，我让你活着，若不然的话，我就要烹杀了你！ 
English: When King Tianguang of Qi heard that the Chinese soldiers had arrived, he thought that his son had betrayed him, so he said to his son: If you can stop the Chinese army from attacking, I will let you live, otherwise, I will cook and kill you!

古文：郦生曰： 举大事不细谨，盛德不辞让。
现代文：郦生说： 干大事业的人不拘小节，有大德的人也不怕别人责备。
English: Zeng Sheng said: Those who do great things are not fussy, and those who have great virtue are not afraid of being reproached by others.

古文：而公不为若更言！ 
现代文：你老子不会替你再去游说韩信！ 
English: Your father won't lobby Han Xin for you again!

古文：齐王遂亨郦生，引兵东走。
现代文：这样，齐王便烹杀了郦生，带兵向东逃跑。
English: In this way, King Qi killed his son and fled to the east with his soldiers.

古文：汉十二年，曲周侯郦商以丞相将兵击黥布有功。
现代文：汉高祖十二年，曲周侯郦商以丞相的身份带兵攻打黥布有功。
English: In the twelfth year of the founding of the Han Dynasty, Qu Zhou Hou Xiang, as the prime minister, led an army to attack Xibu and achieved great success.

古文：高祖举列侯功臣，思郦食其。
现代文：高祖在分封列侯攻臣时，很是思念郦食其。
English: When Gaozu was dividing the fiefs and subduing the vassals, he was very anxious to eat them.

古文：郦食其子疥数将兵，功未当侯，上以其父故，封疥为高梁侯。
现代文：郦食其的儿子郦疥多次带兵打仗，但立下的军功没有达到封侯的程度，皇帝因为他父亲的缘故，封郦疥为高梁侯。
English: Emperor Gaozong's son Gao repeatedly led troops into battle, but his military exploits did not reach the level of a title of nobility. Because of his father, the emperor gave Gao Liang the title of nobility.

古文：後更食武遂，嗣三世。
现代文：后来又改食邑在武遂，侯位传了三代。
English: Later, he changed his residence to Wusui, and the lordly title was passed down for three generations.

古文：元狩元年中，武遂侯平坐诈诏衡山王取百斤金，当弃市，病死，国除也。
现代文：在元狩元年的时候，武遂侯郦平因伪称皇帝的命令，骗取了衡山王一百斤黄金，犯下的罪过应该街头处死，但恰在此时，他因病去世，封邑也被撤消。
English: In the first year of the Yuan Dynasty, Wu Sui Hou Yu Ping, because of falsifying the emperor's order, defrauded Hengshan Wang of one hundred pounds of gold. The crime he committed should be executed in the street, but at this time, he died of illness, and the fief was also revoked.

古文：陆贾者，楚人也。以客从高祖定天下，名为有口辩士，居左右，常使诸侯。
现代文：陆贾是楚国人，以幕僚宾客的身份随从高祖平定天下，当时人们都称他是很有口才的说客，所以伴随在高祖的身边，常常出使各个诸侯国。
English: Lu Jia, a native of Chu, followed Gaozu as a guest of staff to pacify the world. At that time, people said that he was a very eloquent lobbyist, so he accompanied Gaozu and often sent envoys to various principalities.

古文：及高祖时，中国初定，尉他平南越，因王之。
现代文：在高祖刚把中原平定的时候，尉他也平定了南越，便在那里自立为王。
English: When Gaozhu had just conquered the Central Plains, he also conquered South Vietnam, where he established himself as king.

古文：高祖使陆贾赐尉他印为南越王。
现代文：高祖考虑天下初定，就没有诛杀尉他，还派遣陆贾带着赐给尉他的南越王之印前去任命。
English: Gaozu considered the world's initial decision, did not kill him, and sent Lu Jia with the seal of the king of South Vietnam given to him to appoint him.

古文：陆生至，尉他魋结箕倨见陆生。
现代文：陆生到了南越，尉他梳着当地流行的一撮锥子一样的发髻，像簸箕一样地伸开两腿坐着，接见陆生。
English: When Lu Sheng arrived in South Vietnam, he combed his hair in the local fashion of a bun shaped like a cone, and sat with his legs stretched out like a toad to meet Lu Sheng.

古文：陆生因进说他曰： 足下中国人，亲戚昆弟坟在真定。
现代文：陆生就此向尉他说道： 您本是中原人，亲戚、兄弟和祖先的坟墓都在真定。
English: The earthling then said to him, "You are originally from the Central Plains. The graves of your relatives, brothers, and ancestors are all in Zhending.

古文：今足下反天性，弃冠带，欲以区区之越与天子抗衡为敌国，祸且及身矣。
现代文：而现在您却一反中原人的习俗，丢弃衣冠巾带，想用只有弹丸之地的小小南越来和天子抗衡，成为敌国，那你的大祸也就要临头了。
English: Now, however, you have turned your back on the customs of the Central Plains people, thrown away your clothes, crowns, and scarves, and want to use tiny South Vietnam, which is just a land of marbles, to compete with the Son of Heaven and become an enemy country. Then your great calamity will be at hand.

古文：且夫秦失其政，诸侯豪桀并起，唯汉王先入关，据咸阳。
现代文：况且秦朝暴虐无道，诸侯豪杰都纷纷而起，只有汉王首先入关，占据咸阳。
English: Moreover, the Qin Dynasty was ruthless and tyrannical. Princes and heroes were rising one after another. Only the Han King was the first to enter the pass and occupy Xianyang.

古文：项羽倍约，自立为西楚霸王，诸侯皆属，可谓至彊。
现代文：项羽背叛盟约，自立为西楚霸王，诸侯们都归属他，可以称得上是强大无比。
English: Xiang Yu betrayed the covenant and established himself as the overlord of Western Chu. The princes all belonged to him, and he could be said to be extremely powerful.

古文：然汉王起巴蜀，鞭笞天下，劫略诸侯，遂诛项羽灭之。
现代文：但是汉王从巴蜀出兵之后，征服天下，平定诸侯，杀死项羽，灭掉楚国。
English: However, after the Han king sent troops from Bashu, he conquered the world, pacified the provinces, killed Xiang Yu, and destroyed the state of Chu.

古文：五年之间，海内平定，此非人力，天之所建也。
现代文：五年之间，天下平定。这不是人力所能办到的，而是上天辅佐的结果。
English: Within five years, the world was pacified. This is not something that man can do, but it is the result of God's assistance.

古文：天子闻君王王南越，不助天下诛暴逆，将相欲移兵而诛王，天子怜百姓新劳苦，故且休之，遣臣授君王印，剖符通使。
现代文：现在大汉天子听说您在南越称王，不愿意帮助天下人讨平暴逆，汉朝将相都想带兵来消灭您。但是天子爱惜百姓，想到他们刚刚经历了战争的劳苦乱离，因此才暂且罢兵，派遣我授予你南越王的金印，剖符为信，互通使臣。
English: Now the great man, the Son of Heaven, has heard that you are the king of South Vietnam, and that you are not willing to help the people of the world to quell the violent rebellion. The Han dynasty will all want to bring troops to destroy you. However, the Son of Heaven loves the people, and thinks that they have just experienced the hardships and turmoil of war. Therefore, he temporarily disengages the troops and sends me to award you the gold seal of the king of South Vietnam. The cut mark is a letter, and there will be an exchange of envoys.

古文：君王宜郊迎，北面称臣，乃欲以新造未集之越，屈彊於此。
现代文：您理应到郊外远迎，面向北方，拜倒称臣，但是您却想以刚刚建立，还没有把人众收拢起来的小小南越，在此桀傲不驯。
English: You are supposed to welcome them from the suburbs, face the north, bow down to them, but you want to be proud of the small South Vietnam that has just been established and has not yet gathered the people.

古文：汉诚闻之，掘烧王先人冢，夷灭宗族，使一偏将将十万众临越，则越杀王降汉，如反覆手耳。 
现代文：倘若让朝廷知道了此事，挖掘烧毁您祖先的坟墓，诛灭您的宗族，再派一名偏将带领十万人马来到越地，那么南越人杀死您投降汉朝，就如同翻一下手背那么容易。 
English: If you let the court know about this, dig up and burn the graves of your ancestors, annihilate your clan, and send a general to lead a hundred thousand horses to Vietnam, then the South Vietnamese will kill you and surrender to the Han Dynasty as easily as turning over the back of your hand.

古文：於是尉他乃蹶然起坐，谢陆生曰： 居蛮夷中久，殊失礼义。 
现代文：尉他听罢，立刻站起身来，向陆生道歉说： 我在蛮夷中居住得时间长了，所以太失礼了。 
English: After listening to him, he immediately stood up and apologized to the land-dweller, saying, "I have lived in the wilderness for a long time, so it is too impolite.

古文：因问陆生曰： 我孰与萧何、曹参、韩信贤？ 
现代文：接着，他又问陆生： 我和萧何、曹参、韩信相比，谁更有德有才呢？ 
English: Next, he asked Lu Sheng: Compared with Xiao He, Cao San and Han Xin, who is more virtuous and talented?

古文：陆生曰： 王似贤。 
现代文：陆生说道： 您似乎比他们强一点。 
English: Lu Sheng said: You seem to be a bit stronger than them.

古文：复曰： 我孰与皇帝贤？ 
现代文：尉他又问： 那我和皇帝相比呢？ 
English: Then he asked, "How do I compare to the emperor?"

古文：陆生曰： 皇帝起丰沛，讨暴秦，诛彊楚，为天下兴利除害，继五帝三王之业，统理中国。
现代文：郦生回答： 皇帝从丰沛起兵，讨伐暴虐的秦朝，扫平强大的楚国，为整个天下的人兴利除害，继承了五帝三皇的宏伟业绩，统理整个中原。
English: Twins answer: The emperor started from the abundance of soldiers, fought against the tyrannical Qin Dynasty, swept the powerful Chu Kingdom, and eliminated the harm for the whole world. He inherited the magnificent performance of the Five Emperors and the Three Emperors, and controlled the entire Central Plains.

古文：中国之人以亿计，地方万里，居天下之膏腴，人众车轝，万物殷富，政由一家，自天地剖泮未始有也。
现代文：而中原的人口以亿来计算，土地方圆万里，处于天下最富饶的地域，人多车众，物产丰富，政令出于一家，这种盛况是从开天辟地以来从未有过的。
English: The Central Plains, on the other hand, has a population of hundreds of millions. It is the most fertile region in the world, with many people, cars, and goods. The government is made up of a single family, which has never been the case since the beginning of time.

古文：今王众不过数十万，皆蛮夷，崎岖山海间，譬若汉一郡，王何乃比於汉！ 
现代文：而现在您的人众不过几十万，而且都是未开化的蛮夷，又居住在这局促狭小的山地海隅之间，只不过如同汉朝的一个郡罢了，您怎么竟同汉朝相比！ 
English: But now your people are only a few hundred thousand, and they are uncivilized barbarians, and they live in this narrow mountain corner, just like a county of the Han Dynasty. How can you compare with the Han Dynasty!

古文：尉他大笑曰： 吾不起中国，故王此。
现代文：尉他听了，哈哈大笑，说道： 我不能在中原发迹起家，所以才在此称王。
English: After listening to him, he laughed out loud and said, "I can't start a business in the Central Plains, so I'm calling myself a king here."

古文：使我居中国，何渠不若汉？ 
现代文：假使我占据中原，我又哪里比不上汉王呢？ 
English: If I were to occupy the Central Plains, where would I fall short of the Han king?

古文：乃大说陆生，留与饮数月。
现代文：通过交谈，尉他非常喜欢陆生，留下他和自己饮酒作乐好几个月。
English: By all accounts, he was very fond of the landlubber, leaving him to drink and carouse with himself for months.

古文：曰： 越中无足与语，至生来，令我日闻所不闻。 
现代文：尉他说： 南越人当中没有一个和我谈得来，等到你来到这里之后，才使我每天都能听到过去所未曾听到的事情。 
English: "None of the South Vietnamese could talk to me," he said, "and it wasn't until you came here that I heard things every day that I had never heard before."

古文：赐陆生橐中装直千金，他送亦千金。
现代文：尉他还送给陆生一个袋装包裹，价值千金，另外还送给他不少其它礼品，也价值千金。
English: He also gave Lu Shengwu a bagged package worth thousands of dollars, and also gave him many other gifts worth thousands of dollars.

古文：陆生卒拜尉他为南越王，令称臣奉汉约。
现代文：陆生终于完成拜尉他为南越王的使命，使他向汉称臣，服从汉朝的管制约束。
English: Lu Sheng finally completed his mission of serving as the king of South Vietnam, making him a vassal of the Han Dynasty and subject to the control and constraints of the Han Dynasty.

古文：归报，高祖大悦，拜贾为太中大夫。
现代文：陆贾还朝之后，把以上情况向高祖汇报，高祖非常高兴，任命陆贾为太中大夫。
English: After Lu Jia returned to the court, he reported the above situation to Gao Zu. Gao Zu was very pleased and appointed Lu Jia as the First Vice-Premier.

古文：陆生时时前说称诗书。高帝骂之曰： 乃公居马上而得之，安事诗书！ 
现代文：陆生在皇帝面前时常谈论《诗经》《尚书》等儒家经典，听到这些，高帝很不高兴，就对他大骂道： 你老子的天下是靠骑在马上南征北战打出来的，哪里用得着《诗》《书》！ 
English: In front of the emperor, Lu Sheng often talked about Confucian classics such as "Song of Songs" and "Book of Songs." Upon hearing this, Emperor Gao was very displeased and scolded him: "Your father's empire was built by riding a horse to invade the south and fight in the north, so what is the use of "Song" and "Book"!

古文：陆生曰； 居马上得之，宁可以马上治之乎？
现代文：陆生回答说： 您在马上可以取得天下，难道您也可以在马上治理天下吗？
English: Lu Sheng replied: You can immediately gain the world, can you also immediately govern the world?

古文：且汤武逆取而以顺守之，文武并用，长久之术也。
现代文：商汤和周武，都是以武力征服天下，然后顺应形势以文治守成，文治武功并用，这才是使国家长治久安的最好办法啊。
English: Shang Tang and Zhou Wu both used force to conquer the world, and then followed the situation with the rule of law, and the rule of law and the use of martial arts. This is the best way to make the country long-term peace and stability.

古文：昔者吴王夫差、智伯极武而亡；秦任刑法不变，卒灭赵氏。
现代文：从前吴王夫差、智伯都是因极力炫耀武功而致使国家灭亡；秦王朝也是一味使用严酷刑法而不知变更，最后导致自己的灭亡。
English: In the past, Wu Wangfuba and Zhibo both caused the country's demise by showing off their martial arts skills; the Qin Dynasty also used severe torture methods and did not know how to change, which eventually led to their own demise.

古文：乡使秦已并天下，行仁义，法先圣，陛下安得而有之？ 
现代文：假使秦朝统一天下之后，实行仁义之道，效法先圣，那么，陛下您又怎么能取得天下呢？ 
English: If, after the unification of the Qin Dynasty, you practice the way of benevolence and righteousness and follow the example of the first saint, then, Your Majesty, how can you gain the upper hand in the world?

古文：高帝不怿而有惭色，乃谓陆生曰： 试为我著秦所以失天下，吾所以得之者何，及古成败之国。 
现代文：高帝听完之后，心情不快，脸上露出惭愧的颜色，就对陆生说： 那就请您尝试着总结一下秦朝失去天下，我们得到天下的原因是什么，以及古代各王朝成功和失败的原因所在。 
English: After listening to Gao Di, he was not happy and his face showed the color of shame, so he said to Lu Sheng: Then please try to summarize the reasons why the Qin Dynasty lost the world and we gained the world, as well as the reasons for the success and failure of ancient dynasties.

古文：陆生乃粗述存亡之徵，凡著十二篇。
现代文：这样，陆生就奉旨大略地论述了国家兴衰存亡的征兆和原因，一共写了十二篇。
English: In this way, Lu Sheng, as instructed, outlined the signs and causes of the rise and fall of the country, and wrote a total of twelve articles.

古文：每奏一篇，高帝未尝不称善，左右呼万岁，号其书曰 新语 。
现代文：每写完一篇就上奏给皇帝，高帝没有不称赞的，左右群臣也是一齐山呼万岁，把他这部书称为 新语 。
English: Every time he finished writing a book, he presented it to the emperor. Emperor Gao did not fail to praise it, and the left and right ministers also shouted "long live the mountain" together, calling his book a new language.

古文：孝惠帝时，吕太后用事，欲王诸吕，畏大臣有口者，陆生自度不能争之，乃病免家居。
现代文：在孝惠帝时，吕太后掌权用事，想立吕氏诸人为王，害怕大臣中那些能言善辩的人，而陆生也深知自己强力争辩也无济于事，因此就称病辞职，在家中闲居。
English: During the reign of Emperor Xiao Hui, Empress Dowager Lv took control of affairs and wanted to make the Lv people kings. She was afraid of those ministers who were good at arguing, and Lu Sheng also knew that his forceful arguments would not help, so he called in sick and resigned, staying idle at home.

古文：以好畤田地善，可以家焉。有五男，乃出所使越得橐中装卖千金，分其子，子二百金，令为生产。
现代文：因为好畤一带土地肥沃，就在这里定居下来，陆生有五个儿子，他把出使南越所得的袋装包裹拿出来卖了千金，分给儿子们，每人二百金，让他们从事生产。
English: Because the land around Hoa Lo is fertile, he settled down here. He has five sons. He took out the bags and parcels of money he received from South Vietnam and sold them for thousands of dollars. He gave each of his sons two hundred dollars so that they could engage in production.

古文：陆生常安车驷马，从歌舞鼓琴瑟侍者十人，宝剑直百金，谓其子曰： 与汝约：过汝，汝给吾人马酒食，极欲，十日而更。
现代文：陆生自己则时常坐着四匹马拉的车子，带着歌舞和弹琴鼓瑟的侍从十个人，佩带着价值百金的宝剑到处游玩。他曾这样对儿子们说： 我和你们约定好，当我出游经过你们家时，要让我的人马吃饱喝足，尽量满足大家的要求。每十天换一家。
English: Lu Sheng himself would often travel around in a carriage drawn by four horses, accompanied by ten attendants who sang and danced and played the piano and drums, and wearing a sword worth a hundred gold pieces. He once said to his sons: "I have made an agreement with you that when I travel through your home, I will make sure that my horses and men have enough to eat and drink, and try to meet everyone's requirements. I will change families every ten days.

古文：所死家，得宝剑车骑侍从者。
现代文：我在谁家去世，就把宝剑车骑以及侍从人员都归谁所有。
English: If I die in someone's house, I will give the chariot and the attendants to that person.

古文：一岁中往来过他客，率不过再三过，数见不鲜，无久慁公为也。 
现代文：我还要到其他的朋友那里去，所以一年当中我到你们各家去大概不过两三次，总来见你们，就不新鲜了，用不着总厌烦你们老子这么做了。 
English: I still have to go to other friends, so I only go to each of your homes about two or three times a year. It's not new to see you all the time, so I don't have to get tired of you all the time.

古文：吕太后时，王诸吕，诸吕擅权，欲劫少主，危刘氏。
现代文：吕太后掌权时期，封诸吕为王。诸吕专揽大权想劫持幼主，夺取刘家天下。
English: During the reign of Empress Dowager Lv, Zhu Lv was crowned king. Zhu Lv wanted to seize power to kidnap the young lord and take over the Liu family.

古文：右丞相陈平患之，力不能争，恐祸及己，常燕居深念。
现代文：右丞相陈平对此很是担忧，但因自己力量有限，不能强争，害怕祸及自己，常常安居家中反复思索。
English: The Minister of the Right, Chen Ping, was very worried about this, but because of his limited strength, he could not fight forcibly, he was afraid of harming himself, and he often stayed at home and thought about it repeatedly.

古文：陆生往请，直入坐，而陈丞相方深念，不时见陆生。
现代文：有一次，陆生前去请安，径直到陈平身边坐下，在这时陈平正在深思，没有立刻发觉到陆生到了。
English: On one occasion, Lu Sheng went to ask for peace until he sat down next to Chen Ping. At this time, Chen Ping was deep in thought and did not immediately realize that Lu Sheng had arrived.

古文：陆生曰： 何念之深也？ 
现代文：陆生问道： 您的忧虑为什么如此深重呢？ 
English: Lu Sheng asked: Why are your worries so serious?

古文：陈平曰： 生揣我何念？ 
现代文：陈平说： 你猜猜看，我究竟忧虑什么？ 
English: Chen Ping said: Guess what I'm worried about?

古文：陆生曰： 足下位为上相，食三万户侯，可谓极富贵无欲矣。
现代文：陆生说： 您老先生位居右丞相之职，是有三万户食邑的列侯，可以说富贵荣华到了无以复加的地步，应该说是没有这方面的欲望了。
English: Lu Sheng said: Your old master is in the position of the Minister of the Right, and he is a feudal lord with thirty thousand households. It can be said that his wealth and glory have reached an unimaginable level. It should be said that he has no desire in this regard.

古文：然有忧念，不过患诸吕、少主耳。 
现代文：然而若是说您老有忧愁的话，那只不过是担忧诸吕和幼主而已。 
English: However, if you say that you are always sad, it is nothing more than worrying about Zhu Lu and the young master.

古文：陈平曰： 然。
现代文：陈平说： 你猜得很对，你看这事该怎么办呢？ 
English: Chen Ping said: You guessed right. What should you do?

古文：为之柰何？ 陆生曰： 天下安，注意相；天下危，注意将。
现代文：陆生说： 天下平安无事的时候，要注意丞相；天下动乱不安的时候，要注意大将。
English: Lu Sheng said: When the world is peaceful, pay attention to the prime minister; when the world is in turmoil, pay attention to the general.

古文：将相和调，则士务附；士务附，天下虽有变，即权不分。
现代文：如果大将和丞相配合默契，那么士人就会归附；士人归附，那么天下即使有意外的事情发生，国家的大权也不会分散。
English: If there is a tacit understanding between the general and the prime minister, then the nobles will accede; if the nobles accede, then even if something unexpected happens, the power of the country will not be dispersed.

古文：为社稷计，在两君掌握耳。
现代文：为国家大业考虑，这事情都在您和周勃两个人掌握之中了。
English: Considering the great cause of the country, this matter is in the hands of you and Zhou Bo.

古文：臣常欲谓太尉绛侯，绛侯与我戏，易吾言。
现代文：我常常想把这些话对太尉周勃讲明白，但是他和我总开玩笑，对我的话不太重视。
English: I often wanted to make these words clear to Lieutenant Zhou Bo, but he always joked with me and did not pay much attention to my words.

古文：君何不交驩太尉，深相结？ 
现代文：您为什么不和太尉交好，建立起亲密无间的联系？ 
English: Why don't you make friends with the captain and establish a close relationship?

古文：为陈平画吕氏数事。
现代文：接着，陆生又为陈平筹划出几种对付吕氏的办法。
English: Next, Lu Sheng planned several ways for Chen Ping to deal with Lv.

古文：陈平用其计，乃以五百金为绛侯寿，厚具乐饮；太尉亦报如之。
现代文：陈平就用他的计策，拿出五百金来给绛侯周勃祝寿，并且准备了盛大的歌舞宴会来招待他；而太尉周勃也以同样的方式来回报陈平。
English: Chen Ping used his cunning to come up with five hundred gold coins to celebrate the birthday of Zhou Bo, and prepared a grand song and dance banquet to invite him; and Taifeng Zhou Bo also reciprocated Chen Ping in the same way.

古文：此两人深相结，则吕氏谋益衰。
现代文：这样，陈平、周勃二人就建立起非常密切的联系，而吕氏篡权的阴谋也就更加难于实现了。
English: In this way, Chen Ping and Zhou Bo established a very close relationship, and Lu's plot to usurp power was even more difficult to achieve.

古文：陈平乃以奴婢百人，车马五十乘，钱五百万，遗陆生为饮食费。
现代文：陈平又把一百个奴婢、五十辆车马、五百万钱送给陆生作为饮食费用。
English: Chen Ping also gave one hundred male and female slaves, fifty chariots and horses, and five million money to the mainlanders as food expenses.

古文：陆生以此游汉廷公卿间，名声藉甚。
现代文：陆生就用这些费用在汉朝廷公卿大臣中游说，搞得名声很大。
English: Lu Sheng used these fees to lobby among the court nobles and ministers of the Han Dynasty, and gained a great reputation.

古文：及诛诸吕，立孝文帝，陆生颇有力焉。
现代文：等到杀死了诸吕，迎立孝文帝登上皇帝的宝座，陆生对此出了不少力。
English: By the time he killed Zhu Lu and ushered Emperor Xiaowen onto the throne of the emperor, Lu Sheng had exerted a lot of effort.

古文：孝文帝即位，欲使人之南越。
现代文：孝文帝即位之后，想派人出使南越。
English: After Emperor Xiaowen ascended the throne, he wanted to send an envoy to South Vietnam.

古文：陈丞相等乃言陆生为太中大夫，往使尉他，令尉他去黄屋称制，令比诸侯，皆如意旨。
现代文：陈平丞相等人就推荐陆生为太中大夫，派他出使南越，命令南越王尉他取消了黄屋称制等越礼行为，让他采用和其它诸侯一样的礼节仪式。
English: Premier Chen Pingzheng and others recommended Lu Sheng as the Grand Physician, sent him on a mission to South Vietnam, and ordered the South Vietnamese vassal to cancel the Huangya naming system and other ceremonial acts, and let him use the same etiquette ceremony as other princes.

古文：语在南越语中。陆生竟以寿终。
现代文：陆生出使之后，依此行事，皇帝的要求都达到了，所以文帝很满意。
English: After Lu Sheng sent an envoy, the emperor's requirements were met, so Emperor Wen was very satisfied.

古文：平原君硃建者，楚人也。
现代文：关于此事的具体情节，都记录在《南越列传》中。
English: The details of the incident are recorded in the "Southern Vietnam Chronicles."

古文：故尝为淮南王黥布相，有罪去，後复事黥布。
现代文：陆生最后以年老去世。平原侯朱建是楚国人。开始他曾经担任过淮南王黥布的国相，但因有罪而离去。
English: Lu Sheng finally died of old age. Zhu Jian, the Prince of the Plain, was a native of Chu. At the beginning, he had served as the Minister of State of Huainan Wang Yibo, but left because of guilt.

古文：布欲反时，问平原君，平原君非之，布不听而听梁父侯，遂反。
现代文：后来他又重新在黥布手下干事，黥布想造反的时候，问朱建怎样看此事，朱建极力反对。但黥布没有听从他的意见，而是按照梁父侯所说的去做，于是便起兵造反。
English: Later, when Zengbu wanted to rebel, he asked Zhu Jian how he saw the matter, and Zhu Jian strongly objected. However, Zengbu did not listen to his opinion, but did what Liang Fuhou said, and then rebelled.

古文：汉已诛布，闻平原君谏不与谋，得不诛。
现代文：等到汉朝平定叛乱，杀死黥布以后，听说平原君朱建曾经劝黥布不要造反，同时他又没有参与造反的阴谋活动，就没有诛杀朱建。
English: After the Han Dynasty had quelled the rebellion and killed Zibo, it was heard that Zhu Jian, the Prince of the Plain, had advised Zibo not to rebel, and at the same time he did not participate in the conspiracy of rebellion, so he did not kill Zhu Jian.

古文：语在黥布语中。
现代文：有关此事，在《黥布传》中有记载。
English: There is a record about this in "The Tale of Genbu."

古文：平原君为人辩有口，刻廉刚直，家於长安。
现代文：平原君朱建这个人能言善辩，口才很好，同时他又刚正不阿，恪守廉洁无私的节操。家安在长安。
English: Plain Jun Zhu Jian, this person can speak well, eloquence is very good, at the same time, he is upright, and adheres to the integrity and selflessness. Home security in Chang'an.

古文：行不苟合，义不取容。
现代文：他说话做事决不随便附和，坚持道义的原则而不肯曲从讨好，取悦于人。
English: He never casually agrees with what others say or do, and insists on the principle of morality rather than trying to please others.

古文：辟阳侯行不正，得幸吕太后。
现代文：辟阳侯审食其品行不端正，靠阿谀奉承深得吕太后的宠爱。
English: Biyang marquess judged his conduct to be improper, and won the favor of Empress Dowager Lv through flattery.

古文：时辟阳侯欲知平原君，平原君不肯见。
现代文：当时辟阳侯很想和平原君交好，但平原君就是不肯见他。
English: At that time, Biyang wanted to be friends with Pingyuan, but Pingyuan refused to see him.

古文：及平原君母死，陆生素与平原君善，过之。
现代文：在平原君母亲去世的时候，陆生和平原君一直很要好，所以就前去吊唁。
English: When Hirahara-kun's mother died, Rokusho and Hirahara-kun had always been very close, so they went to pay their respects.

古文：平原君家贫，未有以发丧，方假贷服具，陆生令平原君发丧。
现代文：平原君家境贫寒，连给母亲出殡送丧的钱都没有，正要去借钱来置办殡丧用品，陆生却让平原君只管发丧，不必去借钱。
English: Mr. Pingyuan's family was poor, and he didn't even have enough money to pay for his mother's funeral. He was going to borrow money to buy funeral supplies, but the mainlanders let Mr. Pingyuan just mourn without borrowing money.

古文：陆生往见辟阳侯，贺曰： 平原君母死。 
现代文：然后，陆生却到辟阳侯家中，向他祝贺说： 平原君的母亲去世了。 
English: Then, however, the earthling went to Biyang Hou's home and congratulated him, saying, "Plain's mother has passed away.

古文：辟阳侯曰： 平原君母死，何乃贺我乎？ 
现代文：辟阳侯不解地说： 平原君的母亲死了，你祝贺我干什么？ 
English: Biyang Hou said puzzledly, "Plain's mother is dead, why are you congratulating me?

古文：陆贾曰： 前日君侯欲知平原君，平原君义不知君，以其母故。
现代文：陆生说道： 以前你一直想和平原君交好，但是他讲究道义不和你往来，这是因为他母亲的缘故。
English: Lu Sheng said: In the past, you always wanted to be friends with He Pingyuan, but he was moralistic and did not associate with you. This was because of his mother.

古文：今其母死，君诚厚送丧，则彼为君死矣。 
现代文：现在他母亲已经去世，您若是赠送厚礼为他母亲送丧，那么他一定愿意为您拼死效劳。 
English: Now that his mother has passed away, if you give him a gift for his mother's funeral, then he will definitely be willing to work hard for you.

古文：辟阳侯乃奉百金往税。
现代文：于是辟阳侯就给平原君送去价值一百金的厚礼。
English: As a result, Biyangou sent a gift of a hundred gold coins to Plains.

古文：列侯贵人以辟阳侯故，往税凡五百金。
现代文：而当时的不少列侯贵人也因为辟阳侯送重礼的缘故，也送去了总值五百金的钱物。
English: At that time, many lords and nobles also sent a total of five hundred gold coins because they wanted to send a heavy gift.

古文：辟阳侯幸吕太后，人或毁辟阳侯於孝惠帝，孝惠帝大怒，下吏，欲诛之。
现代文：辟阳侯特别受吕太后的宠爱，有的人就在孝惠帝面前说他的坏话，孝惠帝大怒，就把他逮捕交给官吏审讯，并想借此机会杀掉他。
English: Biyang Hou was especially favored by Empress Dowager Lü. Some people spoke ill of him in front of Emperor Xiao Hui, and Emperor Xiao Hui was so angry that he arrested him and handed him over to officials for interrogation, and wanted to take this opportunity to kill him.

古文：吕太后惭，不可以言。
现代文：吕太后感到惭愧，又不能替他说情。
English: Empress Dowager Lv felt ashamed and could not intercede for him.

古文：大臣多害辟阳侯行，欲遂诛之。
现代文：而大臣们大都痛恨辟阳侯的丑行更想借此机会杀掉他。
English: However, most of the ministers abhorred the vile acts of Bibianghou and wanted to take this opportunity to kill him.

古文：辟阳侯急，因使人欲见平原君。
现代文：辟阳侯很着急，就派人给平原君传话，说自己想见见他。
English: Biyang was in a hurry, so he sent a message to Pingyuan, saying that he wanted to see him.

古文：平原君辞曰： 狱急，不敢见君。 
现代文：但平原君却推辞说： 您的案子现在正紧，我不敢会见您。 
English: But Mr. Hirahara declined, saying, "Your case is very urgent right now, so I don't dare to meet with you."

古文：乃求见孝惠幸臣闳籍孺，说之曰： 君所以得幸帝，天下莫不闻。
现代文：然后平原君请求会见孝惠帝的宠臣闳籍孺，说服他道： 皇帝宠爱您的原因，天下的人谁都知道。
English: Then, Plain Jun asked to meet with Emperor Xiao Hui's favorite vassal, Zong Jizheng, and convinced him: Everyone in the world knows why the emperor loves you.

古文：今辟阳侯幸太后而下吏，道路皆言君谗，欲杀之。
现代文：现在辟阳侯受宠于太后，却被逮捕入狱，满城的人都说您给说的坏话，想杀掉您。
English: Now, the Prince of Yang, who was favored by the Empress Dowager, has been arrested and imprisoned. People all over the city are saying bad things about you and want to kill you.

古文：今日辟阳侯诛，旦日太后含怒，亦诛君。
现代文：如果今天辟阳侯被皇上杀了，那么明天早上太后发了火，也会杀掉您。
English: If the Emperor kills the Duke of Yang today, the Empress Dowager will be angry tomorrow morning and will kill you too.

古文：何不肉袒为辟阳侯言於帝？
现代文：您为什么还不脱了上衣，光着膀子，替辟阳侯到皇帝那里求个情呢？
English: Why don't you take off your shirt and bare your arms and go to the emperor to beg for mercy?

古文：帝听君出辟阳侯，太后大驩。
现代文：如果皇帝听了您的话，放出辟阳侯，太后一定会非常高兴。
English: If the emperor listens to your words and releases Biyang Hou, the empress dowager will certainly be very happy.

古文：两主共幸君，君贵富益倍矣。 
现代文：而太后、皇帝两人都宠爱您，那么您也就会加倍富贵了。 
English: And if both the empress dowager and the emperor are fond of you, then you will be twice as rich.

古文：於是闳籍孺大恐，从其计，言帝，果出辟阳侯。
现代文：于是闳籍孺非常害怕，就听从了平原君的主意，向皇帝给辟阳侯说情，皇帝果然放出了辟阳侯。
English: Therefore, 籍 was very afraid, so he listened to the idea of the Plain Prince and pleaded with the emperor to release Biyang Hou. The emperor did indeed release Biyang Hou.

古文：辟阳侯之囚，欲见平原君，平原君不见辟阳侯，辟阳侯以为倍己，大怒。
现代文：辟阳侯在被囚禁的时候，很想会见平原君，但是平原君却不肯见辟阳侯，辟阳侯认为这是背叛自己，所以对他很是恼恨。
English: When Biyang Hou was imprisoned, he really wanted to meet with Pingyuan Jun, but Pingyuan Jun did not want to see Biyang Hou. Biyang Hou thought this was a betrayal of himself, so he was very angry with him.

古文：及其成功出之，乃大惊。
现代文：等到他被平原君成功地救出之后，才感到特别吃惊。
English: It was only after he was successfully rescued by Mr. Plains that he felt particularly surprised.

古文：吕太后崩，大臣诛诸吕，辟阳侯於诸吕至深，而卒不诛。
现代文：吕太后去世之后，大臣们杀死了诸吕。辟阳侯和诸吕关系极深，但最终没有被杀死。
English: After the death of Empress Dowager Lv, the ministers killed Zhu Lv. Biyang Hou and Zhu Lv had a very deep relationship, but they were not killed in the end.

古文：计画所以全者，皆陆生、平原君之力也。
现代文：保全辟阳侯生命计划之所以实现，都是陆生和平原君的力量。
English: It is thanks to the efforts of Lu Sheng and Pingyuan Jun that the Biyanghou Life Preservation Plan has been realized.

古文：孝文帝时，淮南厉王杀辟阳侯，以诸吕故。
现代文：在孝文帝时期，淮南厉王杀死了辟阳侯，这是因为他和诸吕关系至深的缘故。
English: During the reign of Emperor Xiaowen, King Huainan Li killed Prince Bi Yang, because of his close relationship with Zhu Lyu.

古文：文帝闻其客平原君为计策，使吏捕欲治。
现代文：文帝又听说辟阳侯的许多事情都是他的门客平原君出谋策划的，所以就派遣官吏去逮捕他，想治他的罪。
English: Emperor Wen also heard that many of Biyanghou's affairs were planned by his protégé, Pingyuanjun, so he sent officials to arrest him and punish him.

古文：闻吏至门，平原君欲自杀。诸子及吏皆曰： 事未可知，何早自杀为？ 
现代文：听到官吏已到自己家门口，平原君就想自杀，他的几个儿子和来负责逮捕他的官员都说： 事情的结果究竟如何，现在还不清楚，你为什么要这样老早地自杀呢？ 
English: Hearing that the officials had arrived at his doorstep, Plains Jun wanted to commit suicide. Several of his sons and the officials responsible for his arrest all said: It is still unclear what the outcome of the matter is, why did you commit suicide so early?

古文：平原君曰： 我死祸绝，不及而身矣。 
现代文：平原君对儿子们说： 我一个人死了之后，对我们一家人的灾祸也就没有了，也就不会使你们受到牵连。 
English: Mr. Hirahara said to his sons, "After I die, there will be no more disasters for our family, and you will not be implicated."

古文：遂自刭。
现代文：这样，他就拔剑自杀而死。
English: On the due date, she committed suicide and died.

古文：孝文帝闻而惜之，曰： 吾无意杀之。 
现代文：孝文帝听到此事非常惋惜，说： 我并没有杀他的意思。 
English: Emperor Xiaowen was very sorry to hear this and said, "I didn't mean to kill him."

古文：乃召其子，拜为中大夫。
现代文：为了表示对其家属的抚慰，文帝就把他的儿子召进朝廷，任命为太中大夫。
English: In order to express consolation to his family, Emperor Wen summoned his son to the imperial court and appointed him as the imperial physician.

古文：使匈奴，单于无礼，乃骂单于，遂死匈奴中。
现代文：后来出使匈奴，由于单于悖慢无礼，就大骂单于，死在了匈奴。
English: Later, the Xiongnu sent an envoy, and because of the insolence of the Xiongnu, he cursed the Xiongnu and died in the Xiongnu.

古文：初，沛公引兵过陈留，郦生踵军门上谒曰： 高阳贱民郦食其，窃闻沛公暴露，将兵助楚讨不义，敬劳从者，原得望见，口画天下便事。 
现代文：当初，沛公带兵经过陈留的时候，郦生到军门递上自己的名片说： 高阳的卑贱百姓郦食其，私下里我听说沛公奔波在外，露天而处，不辞劳苦，带领人马帮助楚军来征讨暴虐无道的秦朝，敬请劳驾诸位随从人员，进去通禀一声，说我想见到沛公，和他谈论天下大事。 
English: At the beginning, when Pei Gong and his soldiers passed through Chen Liu, he went to the military gate to hand in his business card and said: The lowly people of Gaoyang eat it. Privately, I heard that Pei Gong was running around outside, in the open air, working hard, leading men and women to help the Chu army to fight the tyrannical Qin Dynasty. Kindly, please work your way through the attendants, go in and say, I want to see Pei Gong, and talk to him about world events.

古文：使者入通，沛公方洗，问使者曰： 何如人也？ 
现代文：使者进去禀告，沛公一边洗脚一边问使者： 来者是什么样的人？ 
English: The messenger went in to report, and Pei Gong, while washing his feet, asked the messenger: What kind of person is this?

古文：使者对曰： 状貌类大儒，衣儒衣，冠侧注。 
现代文：使者回答说： 看他相貌好像一个有学问的大孺，身穿读书人的衣服，头戴巍峨的高山冠。 
English: The messenger replied, "He looks like a learned scholar, dressed in scholar's clothes and wearing a high mountain crown.

古文：沛公曰： 为我谢之，言我方以天下为事，未暇见儒人也。 
现代文：沛公说： 请替我谢绝他，说我正忙于讨平天下的大事，没有时间见儒生。 
English: Pei Gong said, "Please thank him for me, saying that I am busy with the great cause of world peace and do not have time to meet with Confucianists."

古文：使者出谢曰： 沛公敬谢先生，方以天下为事，未暇见儒人也。 
现代文：使者出来道歉说： 沛公敬谢先生，他正忙于讨平天下的大事，没有时间见儒生。 
English: The messenger came out and apologized, saying: Mr. Pei Gong Jing Xie, he is busy with the world's major affairs, and has no time to meet with Confucians.

古文：郦生瞋目案剑叱使者曰： 走！
现代文：郦生听罢，瞪圆了眼睛，手持宝剑，斥责使者说： 快点！
English: The prince listened, his eyes wide, sword in hand, and scolded the messenger: "Hurry up!

古文：复入言沛公，吾高阳酒徒也，非儒人也。 
现代文：再去告诉沛公一声，我是高阳酒徒，并不是一个儒生。 
English: Then go and tell Pei Gong that I am a Gaoyang drinker, not a Confucian.

古文：使者惧而失谒，跪拾谒，还走，复入报曰： 客，天下壮士也，叱臣，臣恐，至失谒。
现代文：使者见此，惊慌失措，竟吓得把名片掉在了地上，然后又跪下捡起，飞快地转身跑了进去，再次向沛公通报： 外边那个客人，真正是天下壮士，他大声斥责我，我很是害怕，吓得我把名片掉在了地上，他说： 你快滚回去，再次通报，你家老子是个高阳酒徒。  
English: Seeing this, the messenger panicked and was so scared that he dropped his business card on the ground. Then he knelt down to pick it up, quickly turned around and ran inside, informing Pei Gong once again: That guest outside, who is truly the world's strongest man, he scolded me loudly. I was very scared, so scared that I dropped my business card on the ground. He said: Go back quickly, inform me again, your father is a high-spirited alcoholic.

古文：曰 走！复入言，而公高阳酒徒也 。 
现代文：沛公立刻擦干了脚，手拄着长矛说道： 请客人进来！ 
English: Pei Gong immediately dried his feet and, holding a spear in his hand, said: "Please come in!

古文：沛公遽雪足杖矛曰： 延客入！ 郦生入，揖沛公曰： 足下甚苦，暴衣露冠，将兵助楚讨不义，足下何不自喜也？
现代文：郦生进去之后，以平等的礼节一一长揖一一来和沛公见面，并且说道： 沛公您长年累月暴衣露冠地在外奔波劳碌，很是辛苦，带领人马和楚军一起征讨暴虐无道的秦朝，但是沛公您为什么一点儿也不自重自爱呢？
English: After the twins went in, with equal courtesy, one by one, they came to meet Pei Gong and said: Pei Gong, you have been working hard for many years, leading people and horses and the Chu army to fight the tyrannical Qin Dynasty, but why do you not have any self-respect?

古文：臣原以事见，而曰 吾方以天下为事，未暇见儒人也 。
现代文：我想以讨论天下大事为由见到您，而您却说什么 我正忙于讨平天下，没有时间见儒生 。
English: I want to see you on the pretext of discussing world affairs, but what do you say? I'm too busy trying to pacify the world to see a Confucian.

古文：夫足下欲兴天下之大事而成天下之大功，而以目皮相，恐失天下之能士。
现代文：您想平定天下，成就天下最大的功业，但却从外貌来看人，这样恐怕就要失去天下那些有本事的人。
English: If you want to pacify the world and accomplish the world's greatest feats, but look at people from the outside, then I'm afraid you will lose those who have the ability.

古文：且吾度足下之智不如吾，勇又不如吾。若欲就天下而不相见，窃为足下失之。 
现代文：况且我想您的聪明才智不如我，勇敢坚强又不如我，您如果想成就平定天下的大业而不想见到我的话，我认为您就失去了一个人才。 
English: Moreover, I think your intelligence is not as good as mine, brave and strong is not as good as mine, if you want to achieve the great cause of pacifying the world and do not want to see me, I think you have lost a talent.

古文：沛公谢曰： 乡者闻先生之容，今见先生之意矣。 
现代文：沛公连忙向他道歉说： 刚才我只听说了您的外貌，现在我才真正了解了您的意图。 
English: Pei Gong quickly apologized to him and said, "Just now, I only heard about your appearance, but now I truly understand your intentions.

古文：乃延而坐之，问所以取天下者。
现代文：于是请他到位子上就座，问他平定天下的妙计良策。
English: So he invited him to take a seat in his place and asked him for a good plan to pacify the world.

古文：郦生曰： 夫足下欲成大功，不如止陈留。
现代文：郦生说： 沛公您若想成就统一天下的大业，不如先占据陈留。
English: He said: "Pei Gong, if you want to achieve the great cause of unifying the country, it is better to occupy Chen Rui first.

古文：陈留者，天下之据旻也，兵之会地也，积粟数千万石，城守甚坚。
现代文：陈留这个地方是一个可以据守的四通八达的交通要冲，同时也是兵家必争之地。在城里贮藏着几千万石粮食，城墙守卫工事非常牢固。
English: Chen Liu This place is a four-way transportation hub that can be defended, and it is also a must-win place for soldiers. Tens of millions of koku of grain are stored in the city, and the city wall guard construction is very strong.

古文：臣素善其令，原为足下说之。
现代文：而我和陈留的守令一向非常好，我想为您前去说服他，让他向您投降。
English: And my relationship with Chen Liu has always been very good. I want to persuade him to surrender to you.

古文：不听臣，臣请为足下杀之，而下陈留。
现代文：若是他不听我的，请允许我替您把他杀掉，然后拿下陈留。
English: If he does not listen to me, please allow me to kill him for you, and then take down Chen Zu.

古文：足下将陈留之众，据陈留之城，而食其积粟，招天下之从兵；从兵已成，足下横行天下，莫能有害足下者矣。 
现代文：沛公您率领陈留的兵将，占据坚固的陈留城，吃陈留的存粮，召集天下各地想投靠您的人马；等到兵力强大以后，您就可以所向无敌，横行天下，那也就没有任何人能对您构成威胁了。 
English: Pei Gong, you will lead the remaining soldiers, occupy the solid city of Chen Liu, eat the remaining stored grain, and gather people and horses from all over the world who want to rely on you. When the military strength is strong, you will be invincible and rampant in the world, and then no one can pose a threat to you.

古文：沛公曰： 敬闻命矣。 
现代文：沛公说： 我完全听从您的教诲。 
English: Pei Gong said: I completely obey your teachings.

古文：於是郦生乃夜见陈留令，说之曰： 夫秦为无道而天下畔之，今足下与天下从则可以成大功。今独为亡秦婴城而坚守，臣窃为足下危之。 
现代文：于是郦生就在这一天夜里去见陈留守令，向他游说道： 秦朝暴虐无道而天下的人都反对它，现如今您和天下人一起造反就能成大功，而您却独自一人为将要灭亡的秦朝拥城固守，我私下里为您的危险处境深深担忧。 
English: So he went to see Chen Ruzhu in the night and said to him, "The Qin Dynasty was ruthless and the whole world opposed it. Now you and the whole world can make great achievements by rebelling together, but you alone are holding the fort for the dying Qin Dynasty. I am deeply worried about your dangerous situation.

古文：陈留令曰： 秦法至重也，不可以妄言，妄言者无类，吾不可以应。
现代文：陈留守令说道： 秦朝的法令严酷无刑，不能够随便胡说，倘若这样的话，就要灭族，我不能按照你所说的去做。
English: Chen Ruzhu Ruling said: The Qin Dynasty's decrees are harsh and have no punishment. You can't just say anything. If that's the case, you have to exterminate the people. I can't do what you say.

古文：先生所以教臣者，非臣之意也，原勿复道。 
现代文：您老先生指教我的话，并不是我的意图，请您不要再说了。 
English: It was not my intention to say what your old master instructed me to say, so please stop saying it.

古文：郦生留宿卧，夜半时斩陈留令首，逾城而下报沛公。
现代文：这天夜里，郦生就在城中留下来休息，到了夜半时分，他悄悄地斩下陈留守令的头，越墙而下，报与沛公得知。
English: That night, Zeng Sheng stayed in the city to rest. At midnight, he quietly cut off the head of Chen Ruzhuling and went down the wall to report to Pei Gong.

古文：沛公引兵攻城，县令首於长竿以示城上人，曰： 趣下，而令头已断矣！
现代文：沛公带领人马，攻打城池，把县令的头挂在旗竿上给城上的人看说： 赶快投降吧，你们守令的脑袋被我们砍下来了！
English: Pei Gong led men and horses to attack the city, hung the county magistrate's head on a flagpole for the people on the city to see and said: Surrender quickly, we have cut off the heads of your guards!

古文：今後下者必先斩之！ 
现代文：谁后投降，就一定要先杀他！ 
English: Whoever surrenders later must be killed first!

古文：於是陈留人见令已死，遂相率而下沛公。
现代文：这时陈留人见守令已死，便相继投降了沛公。
English: At this time, when Chen's retainers saw that the governor was dead, they surrendered to Pei Gong one after another.

古文：沛公舍陈留南城门上，因其库兵，食积粟，留出入三月，从兵以万数，遂入破秦。
现代文：沛公进城之后，就住在陈留的南城城门楼上，用的是陈留武库里的兵器，吃的是城里的存粮，在这里进进出出地逗留了三个月，召募的军队已达几万人，然后就入关攻灭秦朝。
English: After Peigong entered the city, he lived on the top floor of the Nancheng Gate in Chenliu. He used the weapons from the Chenliu arsenal and ate the stored grain in the city. He stayed here for three months and recruited an army of tens of thousands. Then he entered the pass to attack and destroy the Qin Dynasty.

古文：太史公曰：世之传郦生书，多曰汉王已拔三秦，东击项籍而引军於巩洛之间，郦生被儒衣往说汉王。
现代文：太史公说：今天世上流传的写郦生的传记，大多这样说，汉王在平定了三秦之后，回军向东攻打项羽，带领军队活动在巩、洛之间时，郦生才身穿儒衣前去向汉王游说。
English: Tai Shikong said: Most of the biographies of the twins that are circulating in the world today say that after the Han king had pacified the Three Qin Dynasties, he returned to the east to attack Xiang Yu. When he led the army activities between Gong and Luo, the twins went to lobby the Han king while wearing Juche clothing.

古文：乃非也。
现代文：这种说法是错误的。
English: This assertion is false.

古文：自沛公未入关，与项羽别而至高阳，得郦生兄弟。
现代文：实际情况是在沛公攻入函谷关之前，与项羽分手，来到高阳，在这时得到了郦生兄弟二人。
English: The actual situation is that before Pei Gong entered Hantian Pass, he broke up with Xiang Yu and came to Gaoyang. At this time, he got two twin brothers.

古文：余读陆生新语书十二篇，固当世之辩士。
现代文：我读陆贾的《新语》十二篇，可以看出他真正是当代少有的大辩士。
English: When I read the twelve articles of Lu Jia's "Xinhua," I can see that he is truly a rare contemporary great debater.

古文：至平原君子与余善，是以得具论之。
现代文：而平原君的儿子和我关系很好，因此才能详细地把上述这一切都记录下来。
English: But Mr. Hirahara's son and I have a good relationship, so I was able to record all of the above in detail.

