古文：◎礼十二
现代文：礼十二
English: The Twelfth Rite

古文：次五曰凶礼。
现代文：第五是凶礼。
English: The fifth one is the rite of death.

古文：凡山陵、寝庙与丧葬、服纪及士庶丧制，皆以类编次。
现代文：所有山陵、寝庙与丧葬、丧事之祭以及士人和普通百姓的服丧等制度，都按类编排。
English: All the mausoleums, mausoleums and funerals, funerary rites, and mourning systems for nobles and common people are arranged by category.

古文：其谒陵、忌辰之礼，亦附载焉。
现代文：那些拜谒陵墓、禁忌日辰的礼仪，也附带记载在这里。
English: The etiquette of those who visit the tomb and the forbidden day are also recorded here.

古文：山陵
现代文：山陵
English: Mountain mausoleum

古文：太祖即位，追上四世帝号。
现代文：太祖即位，追加上溯四代皇帝尊号。
English: Emperor Taizu ascended the throne, and the names of four emperors were added retroactively.

古文：皇祖考熙祖，墓在凤阳府泗州蠙城北，荐号曰祖陵。
现代文：皇祖父熙祖，坟墓在凤阳府泗州嫔城北面，进号为祖陵。
English: The tomb of the emperor's grandfather, Xi Zu, is located in the north of Luzhou, Fengyang, and is known as the ancestral mausoleum.

古文：设祠祭署，置奉祀一员，陵户二百九十三。
现代文：设立祠祭署，设置奉祀一人，护陵人户二百九十三户。
English: An ancestral shrine and festival office was established, one person was appointed to serve as a mausoleum guardian, and 293 households of mausoleum guardians were established.

古文：皇考仁祖，墓在凤阳府太平乡。
现代文：皇父仁祖，坟墓在风阳府太平乡。
English: The tomb of the emperor's father, Emperor Renzo, is in Taiping Township, Fengyang Prefecture.

古文：太祖至濠，尝议改葬，不果。
现代文：太祖到濠，曾经提议改葬，没有结果。
English: When the great-grandfather arrived in Handan, he once proposed to change the burial place, but there was no result.

古文：因增土以培其封，令陵旁故人汪文、刘英等二十家守视。
现代文：于是增培泥土以堆高坟墓，命令陵墓旁边的故人汪文、刘英等二十户守护。
English: As a result, he increased the cultivation of soil to heap up the grave, and ordered the deceased Wang Wen, Liu Ying and other twenty households next to the mausoleum to guard it.

古文：洪武二年荐号曰英陵，后改称皇陵。
现代文：洪武二年，进尊号为英陵，后来改称皇陵。
English: In the second year of Hongwu, Jinsun's name was changed to Yingling, which was later renamed the Imperial Mausoleum.

古文：设皇陵卫并祠祭署，奉祀一员、祀丞三员，俱勋旧世袭。
现代文：设置皇陵卫和祠祭署，奉祀一人、祀丞三人，都由勋旧之臣世代承袭。
English: The Imperial Mausoleum Protection and Shrine Festival Office was set up, with one person to be enshrined and three people to be enshrined, all of which were inherited by the generations of former retainers.

古文：陵户三千三百四十二，直宿洒扫。
现代文：护陵人户三千三百四十二户，值班宿卫洒扫。
English: There are 3,342 households of mausoleum guardians, and the on-duty guards sweep the houses.

古文：礼生二十四人。
现代文：礼生二十四人。
English: Twenty-four students graduated.

古文：四年，建祖陵庙。
现代文：洪武四年，建立祖陵庙。
English: In the fourth year of Hongwu, the ancestral mausoleum was built.

古文：仿唐、宋同堂异室之制，前殿寝殿俱十五楹，东西旁各二，为夹室，如晋王肃所议。
现代文：仿照唐、塞同堂异室的规制，前殿、寝殿都是十五楹，东西厢各二间，成夹室，按照晋王肃所议礼仪办。
English: According to the regulations of the Tang Dynasty, the front hall and the sleeping hall are both fifteen cubits, the east and west compartments are two, and the rooms are sandwiched, in accordance with the etiquette of the Jin Dynasty.

古文：中三楹通为一室，奉德祖神位，以备袷祭。
现代文：中间三楹穿通作为一室，供奉德祖的神位，以供袷祭。
English: In the middle, the three naves are connected to form a single room, which is dedicated to the god of the virtuous ancestors, and is used for burnt offerings.

古文：东一楹奉懿祖，西一楹奉熙祖。
现代文：东边一楹供奉懿祖神位，西边一楹供奉熙祖。
English: On the east side, there is a pagoda dedicated to the ancestor of the god, and on the west side there is a pagoda dedicated to the ancestor of the god.

古文：十九年，命皇太子往泗州修缮祖陵，葬三祖帝后冠服。
现代文：洪武十九年，命令皇太子前往泗州修缮祖陵，埋葬三祖皇帝皇后的冠带服饰。
English: In the 19th year of Hongwu, he ordered the crown prince to go to Zhangzhou to repair the ancestral mausoleum and bury the crown and dress of the Empress of the Three Ancestors.

古文：三十一年，太祖崩。
现代文：洪武三十一年，太祖死。
English: In the 31st year of Hongwu, the great-grandfather died.

古文：礼部定议，京官闻丧次日，素服、乌纱帽、黑角带，赴内府听遗诏。
现代文：礼部决定，京官听到丧耗的第二天，穿素服，戴乌纱帽、黑角带，到内府听皇上的遗诏。
English: The Ministry of Ceremonies decided that on the second day after the Beijing officials heard of the death, they would wear plain clothes, wear a black cap and a black sash, and go to the Inner Palace to listen to the emperor's will.

古文：于本署斋宿，朝晡诣几筵哭。
现代文：在本官署斋戒留宿，朝时和晡时到灵座前哭丧。
English: At this government office, they fast and stay overnight. In the morning and at dusk, they go to the shrine to mourn.

古文：越三日成服，朝晡哭临，至葬乃止。
现代文：遇三天穿上丧服，朝时和晡时聚集聚官举哀号哭，到埋葬后纔停止。
English: In the case of three days, put on mourning clothes, gather in the morning and evening, gather officials to raise a wail and cry, and stop crying after the burial.

古文：自成服日始，二十七日除。
现代文：从穿上丧服之日起，二十七日除服。
English: From the day the mourning clothes are put on, they are removed on the 27th.

古文：命妇孝服，去首饰，由西华门入哭临。
现代文：受封号的妇女穿孝服，除去首饰，从西华门进入聚集举哀号哭。
English: The women who had their names sealed wore filial piety clothes, removed their jewelry, and entered the gathering from the West China Gate, wailing and crying.

古文：诸王、世子、王妃、郡主、内使、宫人俱斩衰三年，二十七月除。
现代文：诸王、世子、王妃、郡主、内使、宫人都服斩衰丧三年，二十七个月除服。
English: All kings, heirs, queens, princesses, courtiers, and courtiers are subject to a three-year mourning period and a twenty-seven-month hiatus.

古文：凡临朝视事，素服、乌纱帽、黑角带，退朝衰服。
现代文：凡是到朝廷处理政事，穿素服，戴乌纱帽、黑角带，退朝穿衰服。
English: Those who go to the imperial court to deal with political affairs, wear plain clothes, wear a black yarn cap, a black square belt, and wear faded clothes when they retire.

古文：群臣麻布员领衫麻布冠、麻绖、麻鞋。
现代文：群臣穿麻布圆领衫，戴麻布冠，系麻绖，穿麻鞋。
English: The ministers wear a linen shirt with a round collar, a linen crown, a linen sash, and linen shoes.

古文：命妇麻布大袖长衫，麻布盖头。
现代文：受封号的妇女穿麻布大袖长衫，用麻布盖头。
English: The woman who received the seal wore a long-sleeved linen shirt and covered her head with linen.

古文：明器如卤簿。
现代文：殉葬器物按仪仗队办理。
English: Funeral objects are handled by the honor guard.

古文：神主用栗，制度依家礼。
现代文：神位牌用栗木，制度依照家礼。
English: The shrine tablet is made of chestnut wood, and the system is based on the family ritual.

古文：行人颁遗诏于天下。
现代文：行人向天下人颁布遣诏。
English: Pedestrians issued a decree to the world.

古文：在外百官，诏书到日，素服、乌纱帽、黑角带，四拜。
现代文：在京城外的百官，诏书到达之日，穿素服，戴乌纱帽、黑角带，拜四拜。
English: On the day of the imperial edict's arrival, the hundreds of officials outside of the capital wore plain clothes, donned black hats and sashes, and bowed four times.

古文：听宣读讫，举哀，再四拜。
现代文：听到宣读遣诏完毕，高声号哭哀悼，又拜四拜。
English: When they heard that the imperial edict had been read out, they gave a loud cry of mourning and bowed four times.

古文：三日成服，每旦设香案哭临，三日除。
现代文：三日后穿上丧服，每天早上摆设香案聚集举哀号哭，三日后除丧。
English: After three days, put on the mourning clothes, every morning set up incense cases, gather together to raise a wailing cry, and remove the mourning after three days.

古文：各遣官赴京致祭，祭物礼部备。
现代文：各自派官员到京城进行吊祭，祭祀所用之物由礼部备办。
English: Each side sent officials to the capital to perform the hanging ceremony, and the ceremonial objects were prepared by the Ministry of Ceremonies.

古文：孝陵设神宫监并孝陵卫及祠祭署。建文帝诏行三年丧，事在《本纪》。以遭革除，丧葬之制皆不传。
现代文：孝陵设置神宫监和孝陵卫以及祠祭署建文帝下诏服三年丧，事情记载在《本纪》中，因遭到变故被废除，丧葬的制度都没有传下来。
English: Emperor Jianwen set up the Imperial Household Agency and the Imperial Mausoleum Protection Agency, as well as the Ancestral Hall and Festival Office, for the three-year funeral. The event is recorded in the "Historical Records," but it was abolished due to a change of circumstances, and the funeral system has not been passed down.

古文：文帝崩于榆木川，遗诏一遵太祖遗制。
现代文：文帝死在榆木川，遗诏交代全部遵从太祖遗留下来的制度辨丧事。
English: Emperor Wen died in Zhangmu River, and his will was handed down in accordance with the system left behind by his great-grandfather.

古文：京师闻讣，皇太子以下皆易服。
现代文：京城听到讣告，皇太子以下都改换服饰。
English: When the capital heard the obituary, everyone from the crown prince down changed their clothes.

古文：宫中设几筵，朝夕哭奠。
现代文：宫中设灵座，早晚哀哭祭奠。
English: A shrine is set up in the palace, and morning and evening mourners come to pay their respects.

古文：百官素服，朝夕哭临思善门外。
现代文：百官穿素服，早晨晚上在思善门外聚集举哀号哭。
English: Hundreds of officials, dressed in plain clothes, gathered outside Shishan Gate in the morning and evening, wailing and crying.

古文：礼部定丧礼，宫中自皇太子以下及诸王、公主，成服日为始，斩衰三年，二十七月除。
现代文：礼部制定丧礼，宫中自皇太子以下以及诸王、公主，从穿上丧服之日开始，服斩衰三年，二十七个月后除服。
English: The Ministry of Ceremonies sets out the funeral rites, and everyone in the palace from the crown prince on down, as well as the kings and princesses, wear the funeral dress for three years from the day they put it on, and take it off after 27 months.

古文：服内停音乐、嫁娶、祭礼，止停百日。
现代文：服丧期内停止音乐、嫁女娶妇、祭祀，只停止一百天。
English: During the period of mourning, music, wedding ceremonies, and sacrifices are suspended, but only for one hundred days.

古文：文武官闻丧之明日，诣思善门外哭，五拜三叩头，宿本署，不饮酒食肉。
现代文：文武官员听到丧耗的第二天，到思善门外哭悼，拜五拜叩三次头，住宿在本官署，不饮酒吃肉。
English: The next day, when the civil and military officials heard of the loss, they went to Shishan Gate to weep and mourn, bowed their heads three times, stayed at this government office, and did not drink alcohol or eat meat.

古文：四日衰服，朝夕哭临三日，又朝临十日。
现代文：四日服衰服，早晨晚上聚集举哀哭悼三天，又早晨聚集举哀哭悼十天。
English: For four days, they wear mourning clothes, gather in the morning and evening to mourn for three days, and gather again in the morning to mourn for ten days.

古文：衰服二十七日。
现代文：穿衰服二十七天。
English: Twenty-seven days in fatigues.

古文：凡入朝及视事，白布裹纱帽、垂带、素服、腰绖、麻鞋。
现代文：凡是入朝廷以及处理政事，用白布裹着纱帽、垂下衣带，穿素服，腰系绖带，穿麻鞋。
English: When entering the imperial court and dealing with political affairs, they wear a white cloth wrapped in a yarn cap, a hanging belt, a plain dress, a waist band, and hemp shoes.

古文：退朝衰服，二十七日外，素服、乌纱帽、黑角带，二十七月而除。
现代文：退朝穿衰服，二十七天以后，穿素服，戴乌纱帽、黑角带，二十七个月后除服。
English: Twenty-seven days after retiring, wear loose-fitting clothes, wear vegetarian clothes, wear a black yarn cap and a black-cornered belt. Twenty-seven months later, remove the clothes.

古文：听选办事等官衰服，监生吏典僧道素服，赴顺天府，朝夕哭临三日，又朝临十日。
现代文：听候选拔办事等官员穿衰服，监生、吏典、僧道穿素服，到顺天府，早晚聚集举哀号哭三天，又早晨聚集举哀号哭十天。
English: After listening to the candidates, officials such as officials wearing formal clothes, students, officials, and monks wearing plain clothes, went to Shuntianfu, gathered in the morning and evening to wail for three days, and gathered in the morning to wail for ten days.

古文：命妇第四日由西华门入，哭临三日，俱素服，二十七日除。
现代文：受封号的妇女第四天从西华门进入，聚集举哀号哭三天，都穿素服，二十七天除服。
English: On the fourth day, the women whose names were sealed entered from the West China Gate. They gathered and wailed and cried for three days. They all wore plain clothes and took off their clothes after 27 days.

古文：凡音乐祭祀，并辍百日。
现代文：凡是音乐、祭祀，一并停止一百天。
English: All music and religious services will be suspended for 100 days.

古文：婚嫁，官停百日，军民停一月。
现代文：嫁娶，官吏家停止一百天，军民家停止一个月。
English: For getting married, government officials will be suspended for 100 days, and the military and civilians will be suspended for one month.

古文：军民素服，妇人素服不妆饰，俱二十七日。
现代文：军民穿素服，妇人穿素服不化妆修饰，都是二十七天。
English: Military and civilians wear plain clothes, and women wear plain clothes without make-up or decoration, all for 27 days.

古文：在外以闻丧日为始，越三日成服，就本署哭临，余如京官。
现代文：在京外从听到丧耗之日开始，遏三天穿丧服，就地在本官署聚集举哀号哭，其余与京城官员相同。
English: Outside Beijing, starting from the day they heard of the death, they wore mourning clothes for three days and gathered at the local government office to wail and cry. The rest were the same as the Beijing officials.

古文：命妇素服举哀三日，二十七日除。
现代文：受封号的妇女穿素服号哭哀悼三天，二十七天除服。
English: The women whose names were sealed wore plain clothes, wept and mourned for three days, and took off their clothes for 27 days.

古文：军民男女皆素服十三日，余俱如京师。
现代文：军民男女都穿素服十三日，其余都如同京城的军民。
English: On the 13th, military and civilian men and women wear plain clothes, and the rest are like the military and civilian people in Beijing.

古文：凡京官服，给麻布一匹自制。
现代文：凡是京城官服丧，供给麻布一匹自己制丧服。
English: For all official mourning clothes in the capital, we will provide a pair of linen mourning clothes of our own making.

古文：四夷使臣，工部造与。
现代文：四方蛮夷的使臣，工部制成给与。
English: Envoys of the barbarians in the four directions, made by the Ministry of Works.

古文：诸王公主遣官及内外文武官诣几筵祭祀者，光禄寺备物，翰林院撰文，礼部引赴思善门外行礼。
现代文：诸王、公主、派遣的官员以及内外文武官员到灵座祭祀的，光禄寺准备祭物，翰林院撰写祭文，礼部引导到思善门外行礼。
English: When kings, princesses, dispatched officials, and domestic and foreign cultural and military officials came to offer sacrifices at the shrine, Koroku-ji Temple prepared the offerings, Kanrin-in wrote the sacrificial texts, and the Ministry of Ceremonies guided them to Shizen-mon Gate to perform the rituals.

古文：京城闻丧日为始，寺观各鸣钟三万杵，禁屠宰四十九日。
现代文：京城从听到丧耗之日开始，寺庙道观各敲响钟声三万杵，禁止屠宰牲口四十九天。
English: From the day the capital city heard of the disaster, the temples of Taoism rang their bells for thirty thousand days each, and the slaughter of livestock was prohibited for forty-nine days.

古文：丧将至，文武官衰服，军民素服赴居庸关哭迎。
现代文：丧柩将要到，文武官员穿衰服，军民穿素服到居庸关哀哭迎接。
English: The funeral is about to arrive, and the civil and military officials wear mourning clothes, and the soldiers and civilians wear plain clothes to the Juyongguan to mourn and greet.

古文：皇太子、亲王及群臣皆衰服哭迎于郊。
现代文：皇太子、亲王以及群臣都穿着衰服在郊外哀哭迎接。
English: The crown prince, the prince and the courtiers all wore mourning clothes and wept in the suburbs to welcome him.

古文：至大内，奉安于仁智殿，加敛，奉纳梓宫。
现代文：到内宫，供奉安置在仁智殿，加装殓，装入棺材。
English: To the Inner Court, the offering was placed in the Hall of Wisdom, the urn was added, and the coffin was loaded.

古文：遣中官奉大行皇帝遗衣冠。
现代文：派宦官捧持刚死皇帝遗下的衣冠。
English: An eunuch holds the crown left behind by the recently deceased emperor.

古文：作书赐汉王、赵王。
现代文：写书信赐给汉王、赵王。
English: He wrote letters to King Han and King Zhao.

古文：礼臣言： 丧服已逾二十七日，请如遗命，以日易月。 
现代文：礼官说： 丧服已经超过二十七天，请求按照皇帝遗留下来的仑令，把服月丧改焉服日丧。 
English: The etiquette officer said, "The mourning clothes have been worn for more than twenty-seven days. I request that the month of mourning be changed to the month of mourning and the day of mourning to the day of mourning in accordance with the imperial edict left behind by the emperor."

古文：帝以梓宫在殡，不忍易，素冠、麻衣、麻绖视朝，退仍衰服，群臣听其便。
现代文：皇帝因棺材停留等待安葬，不忍心改换，戴着素冠，穿着麻衣，系着麻绖上朝处理政事，退朝后仍然穿衰服，群臣听其自便。
English: Because of the coffin, the emperor stayed to wait for burial. He did not have the heart to change his clothes. He wore a plain crown, a linen robe, and a linen sash to deal with political affairs when he ascended to the throne. After his abdication, he still wore formal attire. The courtiers did as they pleased.

古文：十二月，礼部进葬祭仪：发引前三日，百官斋戒。
现代文：十二月，礼部进呈葬祭仪式。出殡前三天，百官斋戒。
English: In December, the ritual department held a funeral ceremony. Three days before the funeral, all officials fasted.

古文：遣官以葬期告天地宗社，皇帝衰服告几筵，皇太子以下皆衰服随班行礼。
现代文：派官员把安葬日期祭告天地宗庙社稷，皇帝穿衰服祭告灵座，皇太子以下都穿衰服随班行礼。
English: Officials were dispatched to announce the date of the funeral to the world, family, temples and shrines. The emperor was dressed in formal attire to announce the funeral, and the crown prince and below were dressed in formal attire to follow the procession.

古文：百官衰服朝一临，至发引止。
现代文：百官服衰服早晨聚集举哀号哭一次，到出殡之日停止。
English: In the morning, they gather to wail and cry once, and then stop until the day of the funeral.

古文：前一日，遣官祭金水桥、午门、端门、承天门、大明门、德胜门并所过河桥、京都应祀神祇及经过应祀神祠，仪用酒果肴馔。
现代文：前一天，派官员祭祀金水桥、午门、端门、承天门、大明门、德胜门和经过的河桥、京城应祭祀神灵和经过的地方应该祭祀的神灵祠庙，仪式用酒、水果、菜肴。
English: On the previous day, officials were dispatched to offer sacrifices at the Jinshui Bridge, the Midday Gate, the End Gate, the Jingtian Gate, the Daiming Gate, the Desheng Gate, and the river bridges that pass through them, as well as at the shrines of the gods that should be offered in the capital and the places that should be offered, and to offer wine, fruit, and dishes for the ceremony.

古文：是夕，设辞奠，帝后太子以下皆衰服，以序致祭。
现代文：这天晚上，陈设辞剔祭奠的祭品，皇帝、皇后、太子以下都穿衰服，按顺序进行祭奠。
English: On this evening, the sacrificial offerings for the dedication ceremony were set up, and the emperor, empress, and prince all wore ceremonial robes and performed the ceremony in order.

古文：司礼监、礼部、锦衣卫命执事者设大昇轝、陈葬仪于午门外并大明门外。
现代文：司礼监、礼部、锦衣卫命令执事者在午门外及大明门外摆设载灵柩的大升舆，陈设丧葬用品。
English: The chief etiquette inspector, etiquette department, and brocade-wearing guards ordered the deacons to set up a large casket with a casket outside the afternoon gate and outside the morning gate, and to set up funeral supplies.

古文：将发，设启奠。
现代文：将要出殡，陈设灵柩启迁前举行的祭奠礼。
English: There will be a funeral, a wreath-laying and a memorial service before the relocation.

古文：皇帝暨皇太子以下衰服四拜。
现代文：皇帝以及皇太子以下穿衰服，拜四拜。
English: The emperor and the crown prince and below wear long robes and bow four times.

古文：奠帛、献酒、读祝，四拜。
现代文：祭献帛、献酒、宣读祝辞，拜四拜。
English: There will be offerings of food and wine, the reading of greetings, and four rounds of prostrations.

古文：举哀，兴，哀止，望瘗。
现代文：高声号哭致哀，启行，哀哭停止，举行望痉仪式。
English: A high-pitched trumpet wailed in mourning, the procession set off, the wailing stopped, and a wailing ceremony was held.

古文：执事者升，彻帷幙，拂拭梓宫，进龙輴于几筵殿下。
现代文：执事官走上停柩的宫殿，撤除帷幕，擦拭干净天子的灵柩，进呈运载天子灵柩的灵车放在灵座殿下面。
English: The deacon walked up to the stagnant palace, removed the curtain, wiped the coffin of the Son of God clean, and brought in the hearse carrying the coffin of the Son of God and placed it under the chapel.

古文：设神亭、神帛舆、谥册宝舆于丹陛上，设祖奠如启奠仪。
现代文：在宫殿台阶陈设神亭、神帛舆、谧册宝舆，陈设出殡前的祭奠礼、仪节如同灵柩启迁前的祭奠礼。
English: On the steps of the palace, a shrine, a shrine shrine, a shrine, a shrine, a shrine, a shrine, a shrine, a shrine, a shrine, a shrine, a shrine, a shrine, a shrine, a shrine, a shrine, a shrine, a shrine, a shrine, a shrine, a shrine, a shrine.

古文：皇帝诣梓宫前，西向立。
现代文：皇帝到灵柩前面，面向西站立。
English: The emperor went to the front of the coffin and stood facing west.

古文：皇太子、亲王以次侍立。
现代文：皇太子、亲王依次站立陪侍。
English: The Crown Prince and the Crown Prince stood up in turn to accompany them.

古文：内侍于梓宫前奏，请灵驾进发，捧册宝、神帛置舆中；次铭旌出；执事官升梓宫，内执事持翣左右蔽。
现代文：内侍在灵柩前上奏，请灵柩出发前行，捧册宝、神帛放在车中；其次标志有死者身份地位和姓名的铭旌出行；执事官抬起灵柩，内执事拿着装饰棺材的饰物在棺的左右覆盖。
English: The chambermaid played in front of the coffin, and asked the coffin to set off and go forward, holding the book of treasures and the shrine in the car; secondly, the coffin was marked with the identity status and name of the deceased; the deacon lifted the coffin, and the deacon held the decoration of the coffin to cover the coffin on the left and right.

古文：降殿，内侍官请梓宫升龙輴，执事官以彩帷幕梓宫，内侍持伞扇侍卫如仪。
现代文：走下官殿，内侍官请灵柩升上灵车，执事官用彩色帷帐盖住灵柩，内侍拿着伞扇按仪节侍卫。
English: After stepping down from the hall, the steward invited the coffin to be lifted into the hearse, the deacon covered the coffin with a colorful curtain, and the chambermaid held an umbrella fan to guard the coffin according to the ritual.

古文：旧御仪仗居前，册宝、神帛、神亭、铭旌以次行。
现代文：以前御用的仪仗走在前面，册宝、神帛、神亭、铭旌依次行进。
English: The ceremonial battle used to be in the front, and the treasure, the shrine, the shrine, and the inscription were marching in turn.

古文：皇帝由殿左门出，后妃、皇太子、亲王及宫妃后随。
现代文：皇帝从官殿左门出宫，后妃、皇太子、亲王以及宫妃跟随在后面。
English: The emperor leaves the palace through the left door of the palace, followed by the empress dowager, the crown prince, the prince and the princess.

古文：至午门内，设遣奠，如祖奠仪。
现代文：来到午门内，陈设将葬时的祭奠礼，仪节如同出殡前的祭奠礼。
English: When you come to the gate, there will be a memorial service for the funeral, and the ceremony will be like a memorial service before the funeral.

古文：内侍请灵驾进发，皇帝以下哭尽哀，俱还宫。
现代文：内侍请灵车前进，皇帝以下号哭以尽哀思，都返回宫。
English: The chambermaid asked the hearse to move forward, and the emperor cried and mourned and returned to the palace.

古文：梓宫至午门外，礼官请梓宫升大升轝。
现代文：天子灵柩到达午门外，礼官请灵柩升上名叫大升舆的灵车。
English: When the coffin of the heavenly son arrived outside the noon gate, the etiquette official invited the coffin to climb onto the hearse called the Daxing Myo.

古文：执事官奉升轝讫，礼官请灵驾进发。
现代文：执事官捧灵柩升上大升舆之后，礼官请灵车出发前进。
English: After the deacon carried the coffin up the daisho-myo, the etiquette officer asked the hearse to move forward.

古文：皇太子、亲王以下哭送出端门外，行辞祖礼。
现代文：皇太子、亲王以下哭着送出端闩外面，举行辞别祖宗祭祀礼。
English: The crown prince, the prince and the others wept as they were sent out of the pavilion to hold a farewell ancestor ceremony.

古文：执事官设褥位于太庙帛香案前。
现代文：执事官在太庙香案前设置铺有锦褥的座位。
English: Deacons set up seats covered with brocade in front of the Imperial Incense Burner.

古文：皇太子易常服，捧神帛，由左门入，至褥位跪，置神帛于褥，兴，正立于神后跪。
现代文：皇太子改换平常服饰，捧着神帛，从左门进入，到达覆盖锦褥的位置跪下，放置神帛在锦褥上，起身，正面立于神帛的后面跪下。
English: The crown prince changed his usual attire, holding the shrine, entered from the left door, reached the place covered with brocade, knelt down, placed the shrine on the brocade, stood up, stood behind the shrine and knelt down.

古文：礼官跪于左，奏太宗体天弘道高明广运圣武神功纯仁至孝文皇帝谒辞。
现代文：礼官跪在左面，进奏太宗体天弘道高明广运圣武神功纯仁至孝文皇帝拜谒辞。
English: The etiquette officer kneeled on the left side, and played the Emperor's prayer for his abdication from the Great Patriarch Tianhongdao Gaoming Guangyun Shenwu Shengong Chunren to Emperor Xiaowen.

古文：皇太子俯伏，兴。赞五拜三叩头毕，皇太子捧神帛兴，以授礼官。
现代文：皇太子俯首伏地，起身，礼赞行拜五拜三叩头礼完毕，皇太子捧着神帛起身，把它交给礼官。
English: The crown prince bowed his head to the ground and stood up. After the bowing ceremony, the crown prince stood up with the shrine and handed it to the etiquette officer.

古文：礼官安舆中，请灵驾进发。
现代文：礼官安放在舆中，请灵车进发。
English: The etiquette officer is placed in the middle of the crowd, and the hearse is called in.

古文：皇太子仍丧服，亲王以下随行。
现代文：皇太子仍然穿丧服，亲王以下跟随前行。
English: The crown prince is still wearing his mourning clothes, and the prince and his entourage are following behind.

古文：梓宫由大明中门出，皇太子以下由左门出，步送至德胜门外，乘马至陵，在途朝夕哭奠临。
现代文：灵柩从大明中门出去，皇太子以下从左门出去，步行送到德胜门外，乘马到陵墓，在途中早晨晚上号哭祭奠聚众举哀。
English: The casket went out from the Daming Middle Gate, the crown prince and his entourage went out from the left gate, walked to the outside of the Desheng Gate, rode to the mausoleum, and in the morning and evening called for a wailing ceremony to gather everyone to mourn.

古文：诸王以下及百官、军民耆老、四品以上命妇，以序沿途设祭。
现代文：诸王以下和百官、军民中年高有德者、四品以上有封号的妇女，依次沿途设置祭品祭奠。
English: The kings and hundreds of officials, the middle-aged soldiers and civilians with high moral character, and the women with more than four awards and seals were set up along the way.

古文：文武官不系山陵执事者悉还。
现代文：文武官员中不属于山陵执事者全部返回。
English: All the civil and military officials who are not mausoleum deacons have returned.

古文：至陵，执事官先陈龙輴于献殿门外，俟大升轝至。
现代文：到达陵墓，执事官先在献殿门外陈设天子灵车，等侯大升舆到来。
English: Arriving at the mausoleum, the deacon first set up the heavenly son's hearse outside the dedication gate, and waited for the arrival of Hou Daxing.

古文：礼官请灵驾降轝，升龙輴诣献殿。
现代文：礼部官请天子灵柩从大升舆上放下来，升上灵车，到达献殿。
English: The etiquette official asked that the coffin of the heavenly son be lowered from the main altar, lifted onto the hearse, and brought to the dedication hall.

古文：执事官奉梓宫入，皇太子、亲王由左门入，安奉讫，行安神礼。
现代文：执事官捧着灵柩进入，皇太子、亲王从左门进入，安放完毕，举行安神礼。
English: The deacon enters holding the coffin, the crown prince and the prince enter from the left door, and after placing the coffin, they hold a funeral service.

古文：皇太子四拜，兴，奠酒，读祝。
现代文：皇太子拜四拜，起身，祭奠酒，宣读祝辞。
English: The crown prince bowed four times, stood up, offered a libation, and read out a congratulatory message.

古文：俯伏，兴，四拜，举哀。
现代文：俯首伏地，起身，拜四拜，号哭哀悼。
English: He bowed his head to the ground, got up, bowed four times, wailed and mourned.

古文：亲王以下陪拜，如常仪。
现代文：亲王以下陪伴拜祭，如同通常礼仪。
English: The prince and his entourage accompanied the procession, as is customary.

古文：遣官祀告后土并天寿山，设迁奠礼，如上仪。
现代文：派遣官员祭告地神和天寿山，陈设迁置祭奠礼，如同上面的礼仪。
English: Send officials to worship the earth god and Tianshou Mountain, and set up a relocation ceremony, as in the above etiquette.

古文：将掩玄宫，皇太子以下诣梓宫前跪。
现代文：将要掩盖坟墓，皇太子以下到灵柩前跪下。
English: The grave will be covered, and the crown prince will kneel in front of the coffin.

古文：内侍请灵驾赴玄宫，执事官奉梓宫入皇堂。
现代文：内侍请天子灵柩进入坟墓，执事官捧着灵柩进入天子墓室。
English: The chambermaid invited the coffin of the heavenly son into the grave, and the deacon carried the coffin into the tomb of the heavenly son.

古文：内侍捧册宝置于前，陈明器，行赠礼。
现代文：内侍捧册宝放置在前，陈设随葬器物，举行赠礼。
English: An attendant holding a book of treasures placed in front of the cortege, displaying funeral objects, and holding a gift-giving ceremony.

古文：皇太子四拜兴，奠酒，进赠。
现代文：皇太子拜四拜，起身，祭奠酒，进献赠物。
English: The crown prince bowed four times, stood up, offered a libation and a gift.

古文：执事官捧玉帛进于右，皇太子受献，以授内执事，捧入皇堂安置。
现代文：主管官捧玉帛从右面进入，皇太子接受献物，把它交给内执事，捧入天子墓室安放好。
English: The officer-in-charge enters from the right, holding a jade scepter. The crown prince accepts the offering, hands it to the inner deacon, and places it in the tomb of the heavenly son.

古文：俯伏，兴，四拜，举哀，遂掩玄宫。
现代文：俯首伏地，起身，拜四拜，号哭哀悼，于是掩蔽坟墓。
English: He bowed his head to the ground, got up, prostrated himself four times, wept and mourned, and then covered the grave.

古文：行飨礼，如迁奠仪。
现代文：举行饮醴酒礼，如同迁置祭奠礼仪。
English: The drinking ceremony was held, just like the relocation ceremony.

古文：遣官祀谢后土及天寿山。
现代文：派遣官员祭祀告谢地神以及天寿山。
English: Officials were dispatched to offer sacrifices to thank the gods of the earth and Mount Tenju.

古文：设香案玄宫门外，设题主案于前，西向。设皇太子拜位于前，北向。
现代文：陈设香案在坟墓墓门外面，在前面陈设放置写有死者身份名字的牌位的祭案，面向西。在案前设置皇太子的拜位，面向北。
English: The incense offering is displayed outside the tomb's entrance, and a memorial offering with a plaque bearing the name of the deceased is displayed in front of it, facing west. The crown prince's throne is set up in front of the offering, facing north.

古文：内侍盥手奉主置案上，题主官盥手西向题毕，内侍奉主安于神座，藏帛箱中。
现代文：内侍洗手后捧着牌位放在案上，题主官洗手后面向西题写完毕，内侍捧着牌位安放在神座上，藏在帛箱中。
English: After washing their hands, the inner attendant holds the card and places it on the case. After washing their hands, the person in charge writes the inscription facing west. The inner attendant holds the card and places it on the throne and hides it in a chest.

古文：内侍奏请太宗文皇帝神灵上神主。
现代文：内侍上奏请太宗文皇帝神灵升上神位牌。
English: The chambermaid asked Emperor Taizongwen's divine spirit to ascend to the throne.

古文：赞四拜，兴，献酒，读祝。
现代文：礼赞拜四拜，起身，献上酒醴，宣读祝辞。
English: After praising and bowing four times, he stood up, presented the wine goblets, and read out the greetings.

古文：俯伏，兴，四拜，举哀。
现代文：俯首伏地，起身，拜四拜，号哭哀悼。
English: He bowed his head to the ground, got up, bowed four times, wailed and mourned.

古文：内侍启椟受主讫，请神主降座升舆。
现代文：内侍开启木椟受纳神位牌完毕，请神位下座升舆。
English: The chambermaid opens the wooden coffin. After the reception of the divine tablet is complete, the priest is invited to rise from the lower seat of the throne.

古文：至献殿，奏请神主降舆升座，行初虞礼。
现代文：到达献殿，奏请神位下舆升上神座，举行葬后初次在嫔宫的祭礼。
English: After arriving at the dedication hall, a prayer was made for the deceased to be elevated to the divine throne, and the first post-funeral ceremony was held at the Imperial Palace.

古文：皇太子四拜，初献，奠帛酒，读祝，俯伏，兴。
现代文：皇太子拜四拜，初次奠爵，进献帛酒，宣读祝辞，俯首伏地，起身。
English: The crown prince bowed four times, knighted for the first time, presented wine, read out a congratulatory message, bowed his head and stood up.

古文：亚献、终献，四拜，举哀，望瘗。
现代文：第二次奠爵、最后奠爵，拜四拜，号哭哀悼，捧祝、帛到埋毛血处焚化。
English: The second consecration, the final consecration, four prostrations, weeping and mourning, offering congratulations, and then burning to the point of burying the hair and blood.

古文：内官捧神帛箱埋于殿前，焚凶器于野。
现代文：内官捧神帛箱埋在殿前，在野外焚烧丧葬所用的器物。
English: The privy councillor buried the coffin in front of the main hall, and the funeral objects were burned in the open.

古文：葬日初虞，柔日再虞，刚日三虞，后间日一虞，至九虞止。
现代文：埋葬之日举行初次还祭于殡宫的虞祭礼，逢偶日举行第二次还祭于殡宫的虞祭礼，逢单日举行第三次还祭于殡宫的虞祭礼，以后间隔一天举行一次还祭于殡宫的虞祭礼，一直到进行九次虞祭而停止。
English: On the day of burial, the first yakitori festival is held at the mortuary, the second yakitori festival is held at the mortuary on the even-numbered day, the third yakitori festival is held at the mortuary on the even-numbered day, the next yakitori festival is held at the mortuary every other day, and so on until the ninth yakitori festival is held.

古文：在途，皇太子行礼。
现代文：在途中，皇太子举行祭礼。
English: On the way, the crown prince held a ceremony.

古文：还京，皇帝行礼。
现代文：返回京城，皇帝举行祭礼。
English: Returning to the capital, the emperor held a festival.

古文：神主将还，内侍请神主降座升舆，仪仗侍卫如仪。
现代文：神位牌将要返还，内侍请神位牌下座升舆，仪仗侍卫按礼仪安排。
English: The divine tablet will be returned, the chambermaid will ask the divine tablet to be moved to the next seat, and the guard of honor will be arranged according to protocol.

古文：皇太子随，仍朝夕奠。
现代文：皇太子跟随，仍然早晚祭奠。
English: The Crown Prince followed, and the memorial service still takes place in the morning and evening.

古文：至京，先于城外置幄次，列仪卫，鼓吹备而不作。
现代文：到京城，先在城外设置帷幄驻扎下来，陈列仪仗与卫士，鼓乐具备但不吹奏。
English: When they arrived in the capital, they first set up a curtain outside the city and settled down, displaying ceremonial battles and guards. They had drum music, but they didn't play it.

古文：百官衰服候城外，主入幄次，百官序列，五拜三叩首。
现代文：百官穿衰服等候在城外，神位牌送入帷幄安放，百官依次拜五拜叩三个头。
English: Hundreds of officials waited outside the city in their formal attire. The shrine plaques were placed in the curtain, and the officials bowed their heads five times in succession.

古文：神主行，百官从。
现代文：神位牌前行，百官跟从。
English: Shintai go forward, followed by hundreds of officials.

古文：至午门外，皇帝衰服迎于午门内，举哀，步导主升几筵殿。
现代文：到达午门外，皇帝服衰服在午门内迎接，号哭哀悼，步行引导神位牌升上灵座殿。
English: After arriving outside the noon gate, the emperor was greeted inside the noon gate, wept and mourned, and walked to guide the divine tablet up to the throne hall.

古文：皇帝立殿上，内侍请神主降舆升座，行安神礼。
现代文：皇帝站在殿上，内侍请神位牌下舆升上灵座，举行安神礼。
English: The emperor stood in the hall, and the attendants invited him to come down from the throne and ascend to the sepulchre, and held a ceremony to welcome the god.

古文：皇帝四拜，兴，奠酒，读祝。
现代文：皇帝拜四拜，起身，进献醴酒，宣读祝辞。
English: The emperor bowed four times, stood up, presented wine and read out a congratulatory message.

古文：俯伏，兴，四拜，举哀。
现代文：俯首伏地，起身，拜四拜，号哭哀悼。
English: He bowed his head to the ground, got up, bowed four times, wailed and mourned.

古文：皇太子以下陪拜。
现代文：皇太子以下陪侍礼拜。
English: The Crown Prince and his entourage attend the service.

古文：百官于思善门外行礼如仪。
现代文：百官在思善门外按礼仪行礼。
English: The hundreds of officials outside the Shishan Gate bowed in accordance with the etiquette.

古文：明日，百官行奉慰礼。
现代文：第二天，百官进名举行拜慰天子、太后的奉慰礼。
English: The next day, hundreds of officials held a memorial service for the deceased emperor and empress.

古文：卒哭用虞祭后刚日，礼同虞祭，自是罢朝夕奠。
现代文：在虞祭后的单日，举行卒哭祭，自此之后，停止无定时的哀至则哭，改为早晨晚上定时哭祭，卒哭祭礼仪与虞祭礼仪相同，从此罢除早晨晚上祭奠。
English: On the first day after the Yu Festival, a wailing ceremony will be held. After that, the mourning without a fixed time will be stopped, and it will be changed to a regular wailing ceremony in the morning and evening. The ceremony of the wailing ceremony is the same as that of the Yu Festival, and the morning and evening memorial service will be abolished.

古文：祔飨用卒哭之明日，太常寺设醴馔于太庙，如时飨仪，乐设而不作。
现代文：在卒哭祭的第二天举行配飨宗庙的柑飨祭，太常寺在太庙设置酒醴肴僎，如同四时祭祀的礼仪，设置鼓乐但不吹奏。
English: On the second day of the wailing festival, the mandarin festival of the Taejong family temple is held, and the Taejong temple sets up a wine and food festival in the temple, just like the ritual of the four o'clock ritual, setting up drum music but not blowing.

古文：设仪卫伞扇于午门外，内侍进御辇于几筵殿前，皇帝衰服四拜，举哀。
现代文：在午门外设仪仗卫士伞扇，内侍进献辇车于灵座殿前，皇帝穿衰服，拜四拜，号哭哀悼。
English: Outside the noon gate, there is a guard of honor with an umbrella fan. The palace attendants enter the funeral carriage in front of the mausoleum. The emperor puts on mourning clothes, prays four times, cries and mourns.

古文：兴，哀止，立于拜位之东，西向。
现代文：起身，哀哭停止，站在拜位的东面，面向西。
English: Get up, stop weeping, stand on the east side of the altar, facing west.

古文：内侍请神主降座升辇，诣太庙祔飨。
现代文：内侍请神位牌降下灵座升上辇车，到太庙进行宗庙配飨。
English: The chambermaid asked the deacon to lower the altar plaque and raise the hearse to the carriage, and to go to the Imperial Temple for the ancestral temple ceremony.

古文：至思善门外，皇帝易祭服，升辂，随至午门外，诣御辇前跪。
现代文：到思善门外，皇帝换上祭服，登上辖车，随同到午门外面，到神位牌所在车的前面跪下。
English: Outside the Shishan Gate, the emperor put on the sacrificial vestments, boarded the chariot, went outside the noon gate, and knelt down in front of the chariot with the divine tablet.

古文：太常卿奏请神主降辇，皇帝俯伏，兴，捧主由左门入，至丹陛上。
现代文：太常卿上奏请神位牌下辇车，皇帝俯伏，起身，捧着神位牌从左门进入，到赤色台阶上。
English: The emperor bowed down, stood up, and entered through the left door, holding the divine tablet, onto the red steps.

古文：典仪唱 太宗文皇帝谒庙 。
现代文：典仪官导唱 太宗文皇帝谒见宗庙 。
English: The master of ceremonies leading the chanting, Emperor Taizongwen, visits the ancestral temple.

古文：至庙前，内侍捧主至褥位，皇帝于后行八拜礼。
现代文：到庙前，内侍捧着神位牌到铺有锦褥的位置。皇帝在后面行八拜礼。
English: At the front of the temple, the maid of honor holds the divine tablet to a place covered with brocade. The emperor performs eight prostrations in the back.

古文：每庙俱同。
现代文：拜见先代每位皇帝的神庙的仪式都相同。
English: The ritual of visiting the shrine of each previous emperor is the same.

古文：内侍捧主北向，太常卿立坛东，西向。
现代文：内侍捧着神位牌面向北，太常卿站在坛台柬面，面向西。
English: The Naishi, holding the shinitai, faces north, while the Taijokyo stands on the altar, facing west.

古文：唱 赐坐 ，皇帝搢圭，奉神主安于座，诣拜位行祭礼，如时飨仪。
现代文：宣唱 赐坐 ，皇帝把圭插在衣带上，捧着神位牌安放在座上，到拜礼的位置行祭礼，如同四时祭飨的礼仪。
English: After the chanting of "Grant him a seat," the emperor inserted the clavicle into his sash, placed it on the seat holding the tablet of the god, and went to the place of worship to perform the ritual, just like the ritual of the four o'clock service.

古文：太常卿奏请神主还几筵，皇帝捧主由庙左门出，安奉于御辇。
现代文：太常卿上奏请神位牌返回灵座，皇帝捧着神位牌从宗庙左门出，安放在御辇车上。
English: Emperor Taizong called for the divine tablet to be returned to the spiritual seat, and the emperor came out of the left door of the ancestral temple holding the divine tablet and placed it on the imperial carriage.

古文：皇帝升辂随，至思善门降辂，易衰服，随至几筵殿前。
现代文：皇帝登上辖车跟随，到思善门下辖车，改换衰服，随着到灵座殿前。
English: The emperor boarded the carriage and followed, to the carriage under Shishan Gate, changed his clothes, and followed to the front of the Holy Sepulchre.

古文：内侍请神主降辇，升座。
现代文：内侍奉请神位牌下辇车，升上灵座。
English: The chambermaid asked the deacon to lower the altar and ascend to the sepulchre.

古文：皇帝由殿左门入，行安神礼毕，释服还宫。
现代文：皇帝从殿的左门进入，举行安神礼结东，脱下衰服回宫。
English: The emperor entered from the left door of the hall, held the Anshinrei ceremony, took off his robe and returned to the palace.

古文：明日，百官素服行奉慰礼。
现代文：第二天，百官穿着素服举行进名安慰皇帝的奉慰礼。
English: The next day, hundreds of officials in plain clothes held a memorial service for the newly crowned emperor.

古文：大祥，奉安神主于太庙，礼详庙制。
现代文：丧后两周年举行祭礼，叫做大祥，供奉安放神位牌到太庙，礼仪详见庙制。
English: A festival is held on the second anniversary of the death, called "Daxiang" (大祥), in which a tablet of the god is placed in the Great Temple. For details of the etiquette, see "Temple system."

古文：皇帝祭告几筵殿，皇太后、皇后以下各祭一坛，王府遣官共祭一坛，在京文武官祭一坛。
现代文：皇帝祭祀告神于灵座殿，皇太后、皇后以下各自在一座坛台祭祀，王府派官员共同在一座坛台祭祀，在京城的文武官员共在一座坛台祭祀。
English: The emperor worshiped and made offerings to the gods in the hall of the spiritual seat, the empress dowager and the empress and their descendants worshiped at a separate altar, officials from the royal court worshiped together at a separate altar, and civil and military officials in the capital worshiped together at a separate altar.

古文：自神主出几筵殿，内侍即撤几筵、帷幄，焚于思善门外。
现代文：自从神位牌请出灵座殿，内侍便撤除灵座、帷幄，在思善门外焚毁。
English: Since the altar plaque was taken out of the shrine hall, the chambermaids removed the altar and the curtains and burned them outside the Shizan Gate.

古文：禫祭，遣亲王诣陵行礼。
现代文：除丧服的禅祭，派亲王到皇陵举行祭礼。
English: In addition to the Zen festival of mourning clothes, the prince was sent to the imperial mausoleum to hold a festival.

古文：洪熙元年，仁宗崩。
现代文：洪熙元年，仁宗死。
English: In the first year of Hongxi, Ninsong died.

古文：皇太子还自南京，至良乡，宫中始发丧，宣遗诏。
现代文：皇太子从南京返回，到良乡，宫中纔发丧，宣读遗诏。
English: The crown prince returned from Nanjing to Liangxiang. The imperial court held a funeral and read out his last will and testament.

古文：文武官常服于午门外四拜。
现代文：文武官员穿平常服饰在午门外拜四拜。
English: Civil and military officials wear ordinary clothes and bow four times outside the noon gate.

古文：宣毕，举哀，复四拜。
现代文：宣读完毕，号哭哀悼，又拜四拜。
English: After the reading, they cried and mourned, and bowed four times.

古文：易素服，迎皇太子于卢沟桥，桥南设幕次香案。
现代文：改换成素服，在卢沟桥迎候皇太子，桥南摆设临时幕帐和香案。
English: They changed into plain clothes and awaited the crown prince at Lugou Bridge. A temporary curtain and incense were set up on the south side of the bridge.

古文：皇太子至，常服，诣次四拜。
现代文：皇太子到，穿平常服饰，到帐幕驻地拜四拜。
English: When the crown prince arrived, he put on his usual clothes and bowed four times at the tabernacle.

古文：听宣遗诏，复四拜，哭尽哀。
现代文：听候宣读遗诏，又拜四拜，号哭竭尽哀思。
English: After listening to the reading of the last will and testament, he bowed four times and wept bitterly.

古文：易素服至长安右门下马，步哭至宫门外，释冠服，披发诣梓宫前，五拜三叩首，哭尽哀。
现代文：换上素服到长安右门下马，徒步哭着走到宫门外，除去帽子，披散头发到灵柩前，行五拜三叩首礼，号哭竭尽哀思。
English: He changed into plain clothes, dismounted at the right gate of Chang'an, and walked crying outside the palace gate on foot. He removed his hat, wore his hair loose before the casket, performed the five bowing and three prostrations, and cried his heart out.

古文：宫中自皇后以下皆披发哭。
现代文：宫中从皇后以下都披发号哭。
English: Everyone in the palace, from the queen down, was crying.

古文：皇太子就丧次东，见母后。
现代文：皇太子到灵柩停放处的东面，拜见母后。
English: The crown prince went to the east side of the casket parking lot to pay his respects to his mother.

古文：亲王以次见皇太子毕，各居丧次，行祭告礼。
现代文：亲王依次拜见皇太子完毕，各自在灵柩旁边行祭告礼。
English: After the princes visited the crown prince in turn, they each performed a ritual next to the coffin.

古文：丧仪俱如旧。
现代文：丧礼的仪式都如同旧礼。
English: The funeral rites are the same as the old rites.

古文：惟改在京朝夕哭临三日，后又朝临止七日，在外止朝夕哭临三日，无朝临礼。
现代文：只是改在京城朝夕哭临，众人聚集号哭哀悼三天，三天以后又改成朝临，即早晨聚集众人号哭哀悼七天而止，在京外只是朝夕哭临，即聚集众人定时号哭哀悼三天，没有朝临七天的礼仪。
English: However, it was changed to "morning and evening weeping and wailing" in Beijing, and people gathered to weep and mourn for three days. Three days later, it was changed to "morning and evening weeping and wailing," that is, people gathered in the morning to weep and mourn for seven days. Outside of Beijing, it was just "morning and evening weeping and wailing," that is, people gathered to weep and mourn for three days, and there was no seven-day morning ceremony.

古文：文武官一品至四品命妇入哭临。
现代文：文武官员一品至四品、受封号的妇女入内哭临，号哭哀悼。
English: From the first to the fourth grade of the civil and military officials, the women who received the title went into the house to cry and mourn.

古文：服除，礼臣请帝服浅淡色衣、乌纱翼善冠、黑角带，于奉天门视事。
现代文：除去丧服，礼官请皇帝穿浅淡色的衣服，戴乌纱翼善冠、黑角带，在奉天门处理政事。
English: In addition to the funeral attire, the etiquette official asked the emperor to wear light-colored clothes, wear a black crown and a black sash, and deal with political affairs at the Gate of Heaven.

古文：百官皆浅淡色衣、乌纱帽、黑角带，朝参如常仪。
现代文：巨官部穿浅淡色衣服，戴乌纱帽、黑角带，朝拜参见如同平常的礼仪。
English: Grand officials wear light-colored clothes, wear a black cap and a black sash, and bow to the emperor. See the usual etiquette.

古文：退朝，仍终太宗服制。
现代文：退朝，仍然按礼制服完太宗的丧服。
English: After the emperor's abdication, the funeral attire of Emperor Taizong was still ceremoniously worn.

古文：帝曰： 朕心何能忍，虽加一日愈于已。 
现代文：皇帝说： 朕心怎么能够忍受，即使增加一日都比停止好。 
English: The emperor said, "How can I bear it? Even if I add one day, it is better than stopping.

古文：仍素服坐西角门，不鸣钟鼓，令百日后再议。
现代文：仍然穿素服坐西角门，不敲击钟鼓，命令一百天以后再商议。
English: Still wearing plain clothes, he sat at the West Corner Gate, did not strike the bell and drum, and ordered that the matter be discussed again after one hundred days.

古文：已百日，礼臣复请御奉天门。
现代文：到一百天，礼官又请求驾临奉天门。
English: On the hundredth day, the etiquette officer asked him to come to the Gate of Heaven.

古文：帝命候山陵事毕。
现代文：皇帝命令等候陵墓事完毕后再定。
English: The emperor ordered to wait for the completion of the mausoleum before deciding.

古文：先是，诏营献陵，帝召尚书蹇义、夏原吉谕曰： 国家以四海之富葬亲，岂惜劳费。
现代文：在此之前，下诏营建献陵，皇帝召见尚书蹇义、夏原吉训论说： 国家用四海的富有埋葬亲人，哪里吝惜劳费。
English: Prior to this, when the imperial edict was issued to build and dedicate a mausoleum, the emperor summoned Shang Shuxunyi and Xia Yuan Jixun to discuss it and said: The country uses the wealth of the four seas to bury relatives, where is the stinginess of labor costs.

古文：然古圣帝明王皆从俭制。
现代文：然而古代的圣明帝王都依从节俭的制度。
English: However, the ancient Ming emperors all adhered to the frugal system.

古文：孝子思保其亲体魄于永久，亦不欲厚葬。
现代文：孝子想永久保持他的亲人的体魄，也不想丰厚埋葬。
English: The filial son wants to keep the body of his relative forever, and does not want a rich burial.

古文：况皇考遗诏，天下所共知，宜遵先志。 
现代文：何况皇考的遗诏，天下的人都知道，应该遵循先人的志向。 
English: What's more, everyone in the world knows that the imperial examination's last will and testament states that we should follow the aspirations of our predecessors.

古文：于是建寝殿五楹，左右庑神厨各五楹，门楼三楹。
现代文：于是建寝殿五楹，左右廊庶神厨各自五楹，门楼三楹。
English: As a result, five arches were built for the sleeping hall, five arches each for the left and right corridors and the kitchen, and three arches for the gatehouse.

古文：其制较长陵远杀，皆帝所规画也。
现代文：它的形制比长陵速远减省，都是由皇帝规定策划。
English: Its shape is much smaller than that of the Changling Mausoleum, and it was planned by the emperor.

古文：吏部尚书蹇义等请祔庙后，素服御西角门视事。
现代文：吏部尚书蹇义等请求柑祭于太庙之后，穿素服驾临西角门处理政事。
English: After requesting the mandarin festival to be held in the Great Temple, officials such as Shang Shuxuan Yi wore plain clothes and drove to the West Corner Gate to deal with political affairs.

古文：至孟冬岁暮，行时飨礼。
现代文：到初冬、年底，举行四时祭飨礼。
English: At the beginning of winter and at the end of the year, a four-hour festival is held.

古文：鸣钟鼓，黄袍御奉天门视朝。
现代文：呜钟鼓乐，穿黄袍驾临奉天门处理朝廷事务。
English: Wearing a yellow robe, he drove to the Gate of Heaven to handle the affairs of the imperial court.

古文：禫祭后，始释素服。
现代文：进行除去丧服的禅祭后，纔脱下素服。
English: After the zen ceremony to remove the mourning clothes, the urns are removed from the plain clothes.

古文：从之。
现代文：皇帝听从他的请求。
English: I followed his advice.

古文：宣宗崩，丧葬如献陵故事。
现代文：宣宗死，丧葬如同献陵的旧例。
English: When Xuan Zong died, his funeral was like the old custom of dedicating a mausoleum.

古文：惟改命妇哭临，自三品以上。
现代文：只是改变受封号的妇女哭临，从三品以上纔参加。
English: However, the woman who changed her seal number came crying, and she participated in more than three dishes.

古文：英宗崩，遗命东宫过百日成婚，不得以宫妃殉葬。
现代文：英宗死，留下诏命东宫太子过一百天成婚，不能用宫妃陪葬。
English: When Emperor Yingzong died, he left behind the edict that the Crown Prince of the Eastern Court must marry within one hundred days, and could not be buried with a concubine.

古文：宪宗即位，百日御奉天门视朝，礼仪悉用吉典。
现代文：宪宗即位，一百天驾临奉天门处理政事，典礼仪式全部用吉礼。
English: Emperor Kenzong ascended the throne, and for 100 days he went to the Gate of Heaven to deal with government affairs. All the ceremonies were held with auspicious greetings.

古文：宪宗崩，孝宗既除服，仍素翼善冠、麻衣、腰绖视朝，不鸣钟鼓，百官素服朝参，百日后如常。
现代文：宪宗死，孝宗除去丧服之后，仍戴素色翼善冠，穿麻衣，系腰绖处理朝廷事务，不敲击钟鼓，百官穿素色服朝见参拜，一百天以后恢复常规。
English: After the death of Emperor Xianzong and the removal of mourning clothes from Emperor Xiaozong, Emperor Xiaozong still wore a plain-colored winged crown, wore a hemp robe, wore a loincloth to deal with court affairs, did not strike the bell and drum, and the officials wore plain-colored clothes to visit and worship the emperor. After one hundred days, the routine was resumed.

古文：弘治元年正旦，时未及小祥，帝黄袍御殿受朝。
现代文：弘治元年正月旦日，当时还没有到周年祭日，未行小祥祭，皇帝穿黄袍驾临朝殿接受朝拜。
English: On the first day of the first month of the first year of the Hongzhi era, when the anniversary festival had not yet arrived and the Xiao Xiang festival had not been held, the emperor wore a yellow robe and drove to the imperial palace to receive worship.

古文：次日，仍黑翼善冠，浅淡服、犀带。
现代文：第二天，仍然戴黑翼善冠，穿浅淡服，系犀带。
English: The next day, he was still wearing a black winged crown, light clothing, and a rhinoceros headband.

古文：及大祥，神主奉安太庙及奉先殿。
现代文：到二周年祭日，行大祥祭后，神位牌供奉安放在太庙及奉先殿。
English: On the second anniversary of the festival, after the great auspicious festival, the shrine plaques were placed in the temple and the temple hall.

古文：至禫祭，免朝。
现代文：到除去丧服举行禅祭之后，免于朝拜。
English: After the removal of the mourning clothes and the holding of the Zen festival, they are exempt from the morning worship.

古文：择日遣官诣陵致祭。
现代文：选择日期派官员到陵墓进行祭奠。
English: Select a date to send officials to the mausoleum to pay tribute.

古文：孝宗崩，工部言： 大行遗诏，惓惓以节用爱民为本。
现代文：孝宗死，工部说： 大行皇帝遗诏说，念念不忘以节省用度爱护百姓作为根本。
English: After the death of Emperor Taizong, the Ministry of Industry and Trade said: "Emperor Taizong's last will and testament said that we should not forget to save money, spend less, and care for the people as the foundation.

古文：乞敕内府诸司，凡葬仪冥器并山陵殿宇，务从减省。 
现代文：敕命内府各司，凡是丧葬仪节随葬器物以及陵墓宫殿，务必节省办理。 
English: All departments of the prefectural government, all funerary objects and mausoleums accompanying the funeral ceremony must be handled sparingly.

古文：礼部言： 百日例应变服，但梓宫未入山陵，请仍素翼善冠、麻布袍服、腰绖，御西角门视事，不鸣钟鼓，百官仍素服朝参。 
现代文：礼部说： 丧期满一百天，按例应改变服饰，但是灵柩没有进入陵墓，请求仍然戴素翼善冠、穿麻布袍服、系腰绖，驾临西角门处理政事，不敲击钟鼓，百官仍然穿素服朝拜参见。 
English: The Ministry of Ceremonies said: After the hundred-day mourning period, it is customary to change the dress, but the coffin did not enter the mausoleum, requesting that it still wear a plain winged crown, wear a linen robe, and wear a loincloth, drive to the West Corner Gate to deal with political affairs, do not strike the bell and drum, and the officials still wear plain clothes to worship.

古文：从之。
现代文：听从他们的请求。
English: I followed his advice.

古文：自辞灵至虞祔，荣王俱在陪列。
现代文：从辞灵礼到虞祭礼到拊条礼，荣王都在陪祭之列。
English: From the funeral rite to the yuzu ceremony to the hani ceremony, Rongwang is on the list of accompanying rituals.

古文：既而王以疾奏免。
现代文：随后王因疾病上奏免除。
English: Wang was subsequently exempted from performing due to illness.

古文：礼部请以驸马等官捧帛朝祖，帝曰： 朝祖捧帛，朕自行。 
现代文：礼部请求用驸马等官员捧持帛朝拜祖先，皇帝说： 朝拜祖先捧持帛，朕自己做。 
English: The ceremonial department requested that officials such as horses and mules be used to hold the scepter to worship the ancestors, and the emperor said: I will do it myself.

古文：发引，亲王止送至大明门外。
现代文：出殡，亲王只送到大明门外面。
English: After the funeral, the prince was only taken outside the Great Gate.

古文：其在途及至陵临奠，俱护丧官行礼。
现代文：在途中以及到达陵墓聚集哭悼祭奠，都是护丧官施行祭礼。
English: On the way as well as when arriving at the mausoleum, mourners gathered to mourn and pay tribute, all of which were performed by the funeral attendants.

古文：后遂为例。
现代文：以后便成为规定。
English: It will become a rule in the future.

古文：世宗崩，令旨免命妇哭临。
现代文：世宗死，命令免去封赐诰命的妇女哭临。
English: The women who were ordered to be released from the shackles of the shogunate after the death of the shogun were in tears.

古文：隆庆元年正月，未及二十七日，帝衰服御宣治门，百官素服、腰绖奉慰。
现代文：隆庆元年正月，不到二十七天，皇帝穿衰服驾临宣治门，百官穿素服、系腰绖向皇帝行奉慰礼。
English: In the first month of the first year of Longqing, less than twenty-seven days later, the emperor arrived at the Xuanzhi Gate in his old clothes, and hundreds of officials in plain clothes and loincloths offered condolences to the emperor.

古文：发引，帝行遣奠礼。
现代文：出殡，皇帝举行遣发祭奠礼。
English: After the funeral, the emperor held the departure ceremony.

古文：至朝祖，则遣官捧帛行礼。
现代文：到朝祖时，便派官员捧持帛行礼。
English: When they arrived at the Imperial Palace, they sent an official to hold the scepter and perform a salute.

古文：梓宫至顺天府，皇亲命妇及三品以上命妇祭，余如旧制。
现代文：灵柩到达顺天府，皇亲中有封号的妇女以及三品以上的有封号的妇女祭祀，其余都如同旧有制度。
English: When the casket arrives at Suncheonbuk, the women in the imperial family with a seal number and the women with more than three products with a seal number are sacrificed, and the rest are the same as the old system.

古文：光宗即位，礼部言： 丧服列代皆有制度，而断自孝宗。
现代文：光宗即位，礼部说： 丧服各代都有制度，而现在的丧服都是在孝宗时决定的。
English: After the enthronement of Emperor Gwangjong, the Ministry of Ceremonies said, "All generations have a system for funeral attire, but the current funeral attire was decided when Emperor Gwangjong ascended the throne.

古文：盖孝宗笃于亲，丧礼详且备，故武、世、穆三庙皆宗之。
现代文：因为孝宗笃厚于亲人，丧礼详细而且完备，所以武宗、世宗、穆宗三庙都宗法它。
English: Because the filial piety of the Zhuangzong is very kind to relatives, and the funeral rites are detailed and complete, the three temples of the Zhuangzong, the Shizong, and the Muzong all follow it.

古文：今遵旧制，以衰服御文华门视事，百官素服朝参，候梓宫发引除。 
现代文：现在遵守旧有制度，穿衰服驾临文华门处理政事，百官穿素服朝拜参见，等到灵柩出殡便除服。 
English: Now, the old system is observed, wearing formal clothes to go to the Wenhua Gate to deal with government affairs, and officials wear plain clothes to worship, and they remove their clothes when the coffin is carried out.

古文：从之。
现代文：皇帝听从。
English: I followed his advice.

古文：明自仁宗献陵以后，规制俭约。
现代文：明代从仁宗献陵以后，规定制度俭省节约。
English: After the Ming Dynasty donated the mausoleum from the Rinzong Dynasty, the system stipulated frugality and economy.

古文：世宗葬永陵，其制始侈。
现代文：世宗葬在永陵，丧葬制度纔开始奢侈。
English: Sejong was buried in Yongling, and the funeral system began to be extravagant.

古文：及神宗葬定陵，给事中惠世扬、御史薛贞巡视陵工，费至八百余万云。
现代文：到神宗葬在定陵，给事中惠世扬、御史薛贞巡视建陵工程，费用达到八百多万。
English: At the time of Shinsong's burial in the Dingling Mausoleum, Hui Shiyang and Gu Shi Xue Zhen inspected the construction of the mausoleum, which cost more than eight million.

