古文：《传》曰： 言之不从，是谓不乂，厥咎僭，厥罚恆阳，厥极忧。
现代文：《传》说： 言之不顺，遣叫作不治，其罪责是僭越，其惩罚是久晴不雨，其有极大祸患。
English: "Biography" said: The words are unsatisfactory, the name-calling is fatal, the guilt is excessive, the punishment is long-lasting, and there is great disaster.

古文：时则有诗妖，时则有介虫之孽，时则有犬祸，时则有口舌之痾，时则有白眚白祥。
现代文：时或有象征祸乱的歌认，时或有甲虫的妖孽，时或有犬祸，时或有口舌怪病，时或有白灾白祥。
English: Sometimes there is a song that symbolizes evil, sometimes there is a beetle's witchcraft, sometimes there is a dog's misfortune, sometimes there is a strange disease of the tongue, sometimes there is a white plague.

古文：惟木沴金。 
现代文：是木克金。 
English: It is made of wood and gold.

古文：言之不从，从，顺也。
现代文：言之不从，从，是顺。
English: It's not what you say, but how you say it.

古文：是谓不乂，乂，治也。
现代文：这叫作不义，义，是治。
English: This is called injustice, righteousness, and justice.

古文：孔子曰： 君子居其室，出其言不善，则千里之外违之，况其迩者乎！ 《诗》曰： 如蜩如螗，如沸如羹。 
现代文：孔子说： 君子在其家中，出言不善，那么千里之外的人也会背弃他，何况他近旁的人呢 《诗》说： 就像蜩螗的呜叫，如同沸腾的汤羹。 
English: Confucius said, "If a gentleman in his home utters bad words, people thousands of miles away will turn their backs on him, not to mention those close to him." "Poetry" said, "Like the wail of a cricket, like boiling soup."

古文：言上号令不顺人心，虚譁愦乱，则不能治海内。
现代文：是说君主的号令不顺人心，虚华伪饰昏愤，就不能治理天下。
English: That is to say, if the monarch's orders are not popular and the hypocrisy and hypocrisy make people angry, it will not be possible to govern the world.

古文：失在过差，故其咎僭差也。
现代文：失在错谬差误，所以其罪责是僭误差谬。
English: Lost in error fallacy, so its culpability is abetting error fallacy.

古文：刑罚妄加，群阴不附，则阳气胜，故其罚常阳也。
现代文：刑罚肆意滥施，阴不能顺，阳气胜，所以其惩罚是久晴不雨。
English: The punishment is wanton and indiscriminate, the yin cannot be smooth, and the yang prevails, so the punishment is long and hard.

古文：旱伤百谷，则有寇难，上下俱忧，故其极忧也。
现代文：干旱伤害百谷，就会有贼寇祸患，上下都忧患，所以其祸患极大。
English: If drought harms a hundred valleys, there will be the scourge of thieves and robbers, and everyone will be worried, so the scourge will be great.

古文：君炕阳而暴虐，臣畏刑而箝口，则怨谤之气发于歌谣，故有诗妖。
现代文：君王阳气亢奋而凶暴酷虐，臣子畏惧刑罚而闭口不言，怨恨毁谤之气就会发泄在歌谣中，所以有象征祸患的歌谣。
English: Kings and emperors are violent and cruel, courtiers are afraid of punishment and keep silent, and resentment and slander are released in songs, so there are songs that symbolize evil.

古文：介虫孽者，谓小虫有甲飞扬之类，阳气所生也，于《春秋》为螽，今谓之蝗，皆其类也。
现代文：甲虫妖孽，是说小虫有甲飞扬之类，是阳气所生，在《春秋》中是螽，如今称之为蝗，都是同一类。
English: The witchcraft of beetles is to say that small insects such as flying beetles, which are born of yang qi, were maggots in Spring and Autumn, and are now called locusts, are all of the same kind.

古文：于《易》，《兑》为口，犬以吠守而不可信，言气毁，故有犬祸。
现代文：在《易》中，《兑》是口，犬以吠声守卫但不可信，言语之气损毁，所以有犬祸。
English: In Yi, Dui is the mouth, the dog guards with barking but cannot be trusted, and the spirit of speech is destroyed, so there is a dog accident.

古文：一曰，旱岁犬多狂死及为怪，亦是也。
现代文：一说，大旱之年犬多发狂而死并成为妖怪，也是对的。
English: It is also correct to say that in years of great drought, dogs often go mad and die and become monsters.

古文：及人，则多病口喉咳嗽者，故有口舌痾。
现代文：至于人，就是有喉咙咳嗽病，所以有口舌怪病。
English: As for people, they just have a throat coughing disease, so they have halitosis.

古文：金色白，故有白眚白祥。
现代文：金的颜色为白，所以有白灾白祥。
English: The color of gold is white, so there is white evil and white good.

古文：凡言伤者，病金气；金气病，则木沴之。
现代文：凡说伤的，是病于金气；金气病弱，木就克它。
English: He who speaks injuriously is ill with the gold-nature; the gold-nature is weak, but wood cures it.

古文：其极忧者，顺之，其福曰康宁。
现代文：忧患来临，调顺之，其福就叫康宁。
English: Sorrow comes, adjust it, and its blessing is called Kangning.

古文：刘歆《言传》曰时则有毛虫之孽。
现代文：刘歆《言传》说时或有毛虫的妖孽。
English: According to Liu Bei's "Legend," there is sometimes a witchcraft of caterpillars.

古文：说以为于天文西方参为兽星，故为毛虫。
现代文：解说认为在天文上西方的参星是兽星，所以是毛虫。
English: According to the commentary, the western star is a beast star in astronomy, so it is a caterpillar.

古文：魏齐王嘉平初，东郡有讹言，云白马河出妖马，夜过官牧边鸣呼，众马皆应，明日见其迹，大如斛，行数里，还入河。
现代文：魏齐王嘉平初年，东郡流传谣言，说一白马河出了妖马，夜间经过官府牧马场边呜叫，群马都呼应，第二天看到它的蹄迹，像斛一样大，行走数里，返回河裹。
English: In the first year of King Jiaping of Wei and Qi, a rumor spread in Dong County, saying that a white horse river came out of a demon horse. At night, it passed the edge of the government horse ranch and howled. The horses all echoed, and the next day they saw its hoofprints, as big as a dragonfly. They walked for several miles and returned to the river.

古文：楚王彪本封白马，兗州刺史令狐愚以彪有智勇，及闻此言，遂与王凌谋共立之。
现代文：楚王曹彪最初受封在白马，兖州刺史令狐愚认为曹彪有智谋勇武，听说这样的传言，就同王浚谋划共同拥戴他。
English: Cao Biao, the king of Chu, was originally sealed in Baima. The prince of Zhangzhou, Shizhi Ling, believed that Cao Biao was wise and brave. When he heard such a rumor, he supported him together with Wang Jun.

古文：事泄，凌、愚被诛，彪赐死。
现代文：事情败露，王酸、令狐愚被诛杀，曹彪被赐死。
English: The affair was exposed, Wang Yan and Ling Fugu were beaten to death, and Cao Biao was sentenced to death.

古文：此言不从之罚也。
现代文：这是言不顺的惩罚。
English: This is a punishment that does not go well with words.

古文：《诗》云： 人之讹言，宁莫之惩。 
现代文：《诗》说： 有人造了谣言，怎么没有人受惩罚。 
English: "Poem" said: Someone made a rumor, how come no one was punished.

古文：蜀刘禅嗣位，谯周曰： 先主讳备，其训具也，后主讳禅，其训授也。
现代文：蜀国刘禅继位，谯周说： 先主名备，其训解是具，后主名禅，其训解是授。
English: Sui Zhou, the successor of Liu Zhen of Shu, said: "The former lord's name is Bei, and his teaching is Zu; the latter lord's name is Zhen, and his teaching is Zhu."

古文：若言刘已具矣，当授与人，甚于晋穆侯、汉灵帝命子之祥也。 
现代文：像是说刘氏已完了，应当授予别人，这比晋穆侯、漠灵帝为儿子命名的预兆更为严重。 
English: Saying that the Liu clan is finished and should be given to someone else is a more serious omen than the naming of the son of Jin Mu Hou and the Emperor Mo Lingdi.

古文：蜀果亡，此言之不从也。
现代文：蜀国果然灭亡，这是言不顺。
English: Shu's downfall is not a good omen.

古文：刘备卒，刘禅即位，未葬，亦未逾月，而改元为建兴，此言之不从也。
现代文：刘备死，刘禅登基，没有下葬，也没有遇一个月就改年号为建兴，这是言不顺。
English: Liu Bei died, Liu Zhen ascended to the throne, was not buried, and did not change the name of the year to Jianxing for a month, which is unsatisfactory.

古文：礼，国君即位逾年而后改元者，缘臣子之心不忍一年而有二君。
现代文：依照礼，国君登基过一年然后改年号，遣是由于臣子心中不能容忍同一年中有两位君主。
English: According to the etiquette, the sovereign ascends to the throne after one year and then changes the year name. The reason for this is that the courtiers cannot tolerate having two monarchs in the same year.

古文：今可谓亟而不知礼义矣。
现代文：如今可以说是急迫而不知礼义了。
English: Now it can be said to be urgent and impolite.

古文：后遂降焉。
现代文：后来终于投降。
English: They eventually surrendered.

古文：魏明帝太和中，姜维归蜀，失其母。
现代文：魏明帝太和年间，姜维归降蜀国，丢失下他的母亲。
English: During the reign of Empress Dowager Wei and Emperor Ming, Jiang Wei returned to the State of Shu and lost his mother.

古文：魏人使其母手书呼维令反，并送当归以譬之。
现代文：魏国人让他母亲亲笔写信召唤姜维命他返回，同时送去当归来作譬喻。
English: The Wei people asked his mother to personally write a letter to Jiang Wei to summon him to return, and at the same time sent him back to serve as a parable.

古文：维报书曰： 良田百顷，不计一亩，但见远志，无有当归。 
现代文：姜维回信说： 有百顷良田，就不考虑一亩之地，逭裹衹能见到遗志，没有当归。 
English: Jiang Wei replied in a letter: If you have a hundred hectares of good farmland, you will not consider a mu of land. If you can see the will, there is no need to return.

古文：维卒不免。
现代文：姜维最终没能幸免于难。
English: In the end, Jiang Wei did not survive.

古文：景初元年，有司奏，帝为烈祖，与太祖、高祖并为不毁之庙，从之。
现代文：景初元年，有关官员奏请明帝为烈祖，同太祖、高祖一样建不毁之庙，明帝听从这一奏请。
English: At the beginning of the first year of the Jing era, the relevant officials requested the Ming Emperor to be the ancestor of the martyrs, and to build an indestructible temple like the great ancestor and the great ancestor. The Ming Emperor listened to this request.

古文：案宗庙之制，祖宗之号，皆身没名成乃正其礼。
现代文：宗庙制度，祖宗的名号，都是在去世之后立才合乎礼制。
English: The ancestral temple system and the names of ancestors were established only after death, in accordance with the ritual system.

古文：故虽功赫天壤，德迈前王，未有豫定之典。
现代文：所以即使功绩显赫光耀天地，德行超越前代君王，也没有预先就定出名号的旧制。
English: Therefore, the old system did not have a pre-determined name, even if the merits were brilliant and the virtues surpassed the previous generation of kings.

古文：此盖言之不从失之甚者也。
现代文：这就是言不顺错谬很严重的事例。
English: This is a very serious example of the fallacy of equivocation.

古文：后二年而宫车晏驾，于是统微政逸。
现代文：二年后明帝去世，由此皇统衰微政权散亡。
English: Two years later, Emperor Ming died, leading to the decline of imperial rule and the fall of the regime.

古文：吴孙休时，乌程人有得困病，及差，能以响言者，言于此而闻于彼。
现代文：吴孙休时，乌程有人得大病，病愈后，说话回声大，在此地说话能在另一处听到。
English: When Wu Sun was resting, someone in Wucheng fell seriously ill. After he recovered, his words echoed loudly, and his words could be heard in another place.

古文：自其所听之，不觉其声之大也。
现代文：从他所在的地方听来，不觉得他的声音很大。
English: From where he was standing, I didn't think his voice was very loud.

古文：自远听之，如人对言，不觉声之自远来也。
现代文：在远处听来，就像在对面交谈，不觉得声音是来自远方。
English: From a distance, it sounds like a conversation between two people, and it doesn't feel like the sound is coming from far away.

古文：声之所往，随其所向，远者所过十数里。
现代文：声音的传播，依他所面对的方向，远的可传送十几里。
English: The propagation of sound, according to the direction he faces, can be transmitted more than ten miles away.

古文：其邻人有责息于外，历年不还，乃假之使为责让，惧以祸福。负物者以为鬼神，即傎倒畀之，其人亦不自知所以然也。
现代文：他的邻居有人出外索债，过了一年没有返回，就托他来责问，以祸福来恐吓，背负货物的人以为是鬼神，当即仆倒丢弃了货物。他本人也不知道自己为何成了这样。
English: His neighbour had a man who went abroad to collect a debt, and after a year did not return, so he asked him to interrogate him and threaten him with misfortune and good fortune. The man who was carrying the goods thought it was a ghost and immediately fell down and abandoned the goods. He himself did not know why he had become like this.

古文：言不从之咎也。
现代文：这是言不顺的灾祸。
English: This is a calamity of unspeakable proportions.

古文：魏时起安世殿，武帝后居之。
现代文：魏时修建窒世殿，置!游后来住在其中。
English: During the Wei Dynasty, he built the Nitride Hall, and later lived in it.

古文：安世，武帝字也。
现代文：安世，是亘瞳的字。
English: "Ansei" is the character for "Watahito."

古文：武帝每延群臣，多说平生常事，未尝及经国远图。
现代文：亘堕每次接见群臣，多说的是自己普通的事情，不曾涉及治国大政长远谋略。
English: Whenever Watanabe met with ministers, he mostly talked about his own ordinary affairs, and never discussed long-term strategies for governing the country.

古文：此言之不从也。
现代文：这是言不顺。
English: That's not good enough.

古文：何曾谓子遵曰： 国家无贻厥之谋，及身而已，后嗣其殆乎！
现代文：鱼壁对儿子包遵说： 国家没有为子孙的谋划，仅仅考虑自身，后代将会有危险!
English: Fish wall said to his son Baozhong: The country has no plan for the future generations, only thinking about itself, the future generations will be in danger!

古文：此子孙之忧也。 
现代文：这是子孙的忧患。 
English: This is a problem for our children and grandchildren.

古文：自永熙后王室渐乱，永嘉中天下大坏，及何绥以非辜被杀，皆如曾言。
现代文：从丞盛以后王室逐渐混乱，丞台年间天下大乱，到何绥无辜遭杀，都像何曾所说的。
English: From the gradual confusion of the royal family after Zheng Sheng, the chaos in the world during Zheng Tai, to the killing of innocent people, they are all like what He Zengrong said.

古文：赵王伦废惠帝于金墉城，改号金墉城为永安宫。
现代文：赵王伦在金墉城废黜惠帝，改金墉城名为永安宫。
English: Zhao Wangren dethroned Emperor Hui in Jinqiao City and renamed Jinqiao City Yong'an Palace.

古文：帝寻复位而伦诛。
现代文：惠帝不久复位而旦屋俭被杀。
English: Emperor Hui was soon restored to the throne, but Emperor Tangya Jian was killed.

古文：惠帝永兴元年，诏废太子覃还为清河王，立成都王颍为皇太弟，犹加侍中、大都督，领丞相，备九锡，封二十郡，如魏王故事。
现代文：惠帝永兴元年，下韶废太子司马覃复为清回王，立成都王司马颖为皇太弟，加封侍中、大都督，领丞相，备九锡，分封二十个郡，就像魏王当年那样。
English: In the first year of Hui Emperor Yongxing, the deposed prince Sima Xuanfu became the king of Qinghai, and Chengdu King Sima Ying was established as the crown prince's younger brother. He was awarded the titles of vice-premier, grand governor, and minister, and was assigned to Jiuxi and divided into twenty counties, just like the Wei King.

古文：案周礼传国以胤不以勋，故虽公旦之圣不易成王之嗣，所以远绝觊觎，永一宗祧。
现代文：案屋伐礼制传承国家是按照承嗣关系而不是按照功勋，所以虽然周公旦圣贤也不能替代昼旦乙王继承王位，就是以此来断绝对王位的非分之想，长久地保持同一宗亲的继承权。
English: The succession system of the country is based on the relationship of inheritance rather than on merit, so although Zhou Gongdan Shengxian can not replace the succession of the second king, it is a way to break the absolute throne, and maintain the inheritance of the same relative for a long time.

古文：后代遵履，改之则乱。
现代文：后代遵循，改变就会乱。
English: Future generations will follow, and change will be chaotic.

古文：今拟非其实，僭差已甚。
现代文：如今效仿前人却名不副实，错谬差误已经很严重了。
English: Nowadays, emulating predecessors is not worthy of the name, and the fallacy of error has become very serious.

古文：且既为国嗣，则不应复开封土，兼领庶职。
现代文：而且既然是国家继承人，就不应再予以分封土地，兼领官职。
English: Moreover, since he is the heir to the state, he should no longer be given land and official posts.

古文：此言之不从，进退乖爽，故帝既播越，颖亦不终，是其咎僭也。
现代文：这是言不顺，进退错谬，所以不仅惠帝流落远方，司墨题也不得善终，这是其错失的灾祸。
English: This is an unsuitable saying, and it is a fallacy to advance or retreat. Therefore, not only Hui Di was exiled to a faraway place, but also Simo Qi was not allowed to have a happy ending. This is the calamity of his mistake.

古文：后犹不悟，又立怀帝为皇太弟。
现代文：后世仍然没有醒悟，又立坏童为皇太弟。
English: Later generations still have not woken up to the fact, and have re-instated the bad boy as the crown prince's younger brother.

古文：怀终流弑，不永厥祚，又其应也。
现代文：蛆最终流亡被杀，没能延续国运，又是应验。
English: He was eventually killed in exile and was not able to continue the national movement, which was also a fulfillment.

古文：语曰， 变古易常，不乱则亡 ，此之谓乎。
现代文：有这样的话 改易古制变更常礼，不是乱就是亡 ，说的就是这种情况。
English: In such a case, changing the ancient system and changing the ritual, is not chaos, but death. This is the case.

古文：元帝永昌二年，大将军王敦下据姑孰。
现代文：元帝永昌二年，大将军王敦占领姑孰。
English: In the second year of Emperor Yongchang, the general Wang Dun occupied Guzheng.

古文：百姓讹言行虫病，食人大孔，数日入腹，入腹则死；疗之有方，当得白犬胆以为药。
现代文：百姓谣传说流行虫病，在人身咬一大洞，几天进入腹中，入腹人就会死；治疗有方法，要用白犬胆作药。
English: Folk legend has it that the epidemic worm disease bites a large hole in the human body, and if it enters the abdomen for a few days, the person will die; there is a way to treat it, and it is necessary to use the white dog gall as a medicine.

古文：自淮泗遂及京都，数日之间，百姓惊扰，人人皆自云已得虫病。
现代文：从进回很快流行到京都，几天之间，百姓惊恐慌乱，人人都说自己已经得了虫病。
English: It quickly spread to Kyoto, and within a few days, people were panicking. Everyone was saying that they had contracted an insect disease.

古文：又云，始在外时，当烧铁以灼之。
现代文：又说，开始虫在外面时，可以烧铁来灼烧虫。
English: He also said that when the insects are outside for the first time, you can burn the insects with a hot iron.

古文：于是翕然，被烧灼者十七八矣。
现代文：于是此法风行，被烧伤的有十之七八。
English: As a result, this method became popular, and 7 out of 10 were burned.

古文：而白犬暴贵，至相请夺，其价十倍。
现代文：白犬骤然间很昂贵，竟至于相互恳求抢夺，价格涨了十倍。
English: The white dog was suddenly very expensive, so much so that when it came to begging for it, the price went up tenfold.

古文：或有自云能行烧铁灼者，赁灼百姓，日得五六万，惫而后已。
现代文：有人自称能施行烧铁灼，有偿给百姓灼烧，每天得五六万钱，直到疲惫不堪才作罢。
English: There are people who claim to be able to carry out the burning of the iron, paid to the people to burn, get five or six thousand dollars a day, until they are too tired to stop.

古文：四五日渐静。
现代文：四五天后逐渐平静。
English: After four or five days, it gradually calmed down.

古文：说曰： 夫裸虫人类，而人为之主。
现代文：评论说： 裸虫与人同类，而人是其主。
English: Comment: Nudibranchs are the same as humans, and humans are their masters.

古文：今云虫食人，言本同臭类而相残贼也。
现代文：现在说虫吃人，是说原本同类的，却相互残杀。
English: To say that insects eat people now is to say that they are originally the same species, but they kill each other.

古文：自下而上，明其逆也。
现代文：从下而上，说明是背逆的。
English: From the bottom up, the instructions are the opposite.

古文：必入腹者，言害由中不由外也。
现代文：必定进入腹中，是说危害来自内部不是来自外部。
English: It must enter the abdomen, which means that the harm comes from the inside, not from the outside.

古文：犬有守卫之性，白者金色，而胆，用武之主也。
现代文：狗有守卫的本性，白是银色，而胆，是掌管用武的。
English: Dogs have the nature of guards, white is silver, and gall is in charge of martial arts.

古文：帝王之运，王霸会于戌。
现代文：帝王的福运，帝王霸业相合在戌。
English: The emperor's good fortune and the emperor's tyranny coincide.

古文：戌主用兵，金者晋行，火烧铁以疗疾者，言必去其类而来火与金合德，共除虫害也。 
现代文：戌主用兵，金是晋行，火烧铁来治疗疾病，是说一定要除去其类而以火同金合德，共除虫害。 
English: The Lord uses soldiers, gold is promoted, and fire burns iron to cure diseases, which means that it is necessary to remove its kind and use fire with gold to eliminate pests.

古文：案中兴之际，大将军本以腹心受伊吕之任，而元帝末年，遂攻京邑，明帝谅闇，又有异谋，是以下逆上，腹心内烂也。
现代文：中兴之际，大将军本是作为君王心腹重臣受到像伊尹、吕尚那样的任用，而元帝末年，竟然攻打京都，明帝居丧，他又有异心阴谋，这是以下逆上，心腹内部腐烂了。
English: At the time of the rise of China, the general was originally appointed as the king's trusted vassal like Yi Yin and Lushan, but in the last years of the Yuan Dynasty, he actually attacked Kyoto, the Ming Dynasty was in mourning, and he had a foreign plot. This was the following reverse, and the trusted vassal was rotten inside.

古文：及钱凤、沈充等逆兵四合，而为王师所挫，逾月而不能济水，北中郎刘遐及淮陵内史苏峻率淮泗之众以救朝廷，故其谣言首作于淮泗也。
现代文：等到钱凤、沈充等叛军四面会合，却被朝廷军队挫败，过了一个月还不能过河，北中郎刘遐和淮陵内史苏峻率领淮泗地区的兵众援救朝廷，所以谣言最早是在淮泗地区兴起的。
English: When rebels such as Qian Feng and Shen Chong gathered in all directions, they were defeated by the imperial army, and after a month they could not cross the river. The soldiers in Huaiwu region were led by the Northern Middle Lord Liu Bei and the Inner Historian of Huai Ling Province Su Jun to rescue the imperial court, so the rumor first arose in Huaiwu region.

古文：朝廷卒以弱制强，罪人授首，是用白犬胆可救之效也。
现代文：朝廷最终以弱胜强，罪犯伏法，是用白犬胆可以救治的应验。
English: In the end, the imperial court chose the weak over the strong, and the criminals followed the law. This was the fulfillment that the white dog's gall bladder could be used for treatment.

古文：海西公时，庾晞四五年中喜为挽歌，自摇大铃为唱，使左右齐和。
现代文：海西公时，庾晞四五年中喜欢作挽歌，自己摇着大铃歌唱，让身边的人齐声应和。
English: When he was in his 40s and 50s, Haisi Gongshi liked to compose elegies. He would shake a large bell and sing, so that the people around him would respond in unison.

古文：又宴会辄令倡妓作新安人歌舞离别之辞，其声悲切。
现代文：又在宴会上往往命令倡优歌妓表演新安人歌舞离别的唱辞，声音悲切。
English: Also, at banquets, they often order the most talented singers and prostitutes to perform the farewell song and dance of Xin'an people, their voices are sad.

古文：时人怪之，后亦果败。
现代文：当时的人认为很怪异，后来也果然败亡。
English: People at the time thought it was very strange, and later it was defeated.

古文：太元中，小兒以两铁相打于土中，名曰斗族。
现代文：太元年间，小孩子们用两块铁在土中相击打，名叫斗族。
English: In the first year of the Taiyuan era, children used two pieces of iron to hit each other in the dirt, called Dou Zong.

古文：后王国宝、王孝伯一姓之中自相攻击。
现代文：后来王国宝、王孝伯同一族姓相互攻打。
English: Later, Wang Guobao and Wang Xiao Bo of the same family attacked each other.

古文：桓玄初改年为大亨，遐迩欢言曰 二月了 ，故义谋以仲春发也。
现代文：桓玄起初改年号为大亨，远近的人都喧哗说是 二月了 ，所以义谋是在仲春时节产生的。
English: At first, Kuan Xuan changed his name to Tycoon, and people near and far were clamoring to say that it was February, so Yimou was born in the middle of the spring season.

古文：玄篡立，又改年为建始，以与赵王伦同，又易为永始，永始复是王莽受封之年也。
现代文：桓玄篡位自立，又改年号为建始，因舆赵王司马伦年号相同，又变更为永始，永始又是王莽受封之年。
English: Huan Xuan usurped the throne and became independent, and changed the year name to Jianzhi, and because the year name of Zhao Wang Simarun was the same, it was changed to Yongshi, and Yongshi was the year Wang Mang received the title.

古文：始徙司马道子于安成。
现代文：起初遣送司马道子到安成。
English: At first, Sima Daozi was sent to Ancheng.

古文：安帝逊位，出永安宫，封为平固王，琅邪王德文为石阳公，并使住寻阳城。
现代文：安帝逊位，离开永安宫，封为平固王，琅邪王司马德文为石阳公，让他们同住在寻阳城。
English: Andi abdicated the throne, left Yongan Palace, and was named Pinggu Wang, and the evil king Sima Dewen was named Shiyang Gong, and they lived together in Xuanyang City.

古文：识者皆以为言不从之妖僭也。
现代文：有识之士都认为是言不顺的妖异。
English: People with insight all consider it to be an ill-advised monstrosity.

古文：武帝初，何曾薄太官御膳，自取私食，子劭又过之，而王恺又过劭。
现代文：武帝初年，何曾接近太官御膳，自己私自拿取来吃，他儿子何劭超过他，而王恺又超过何劭。
English: In the first year of Emperor Wu, He once approached the eunuch's meal and took it for himself to eat. His son He Yao surpassed him, and Wang Yao surpassed He Yao.

古文：王恺、羊琇之俦，盛致声色，穷珍极丽。
现代文：王恺、羊诱之辈，大肆追逐声色，竭力搜寻珍宝丽人。
English: Wang Yao, a member of the Sheep Lure generation, chased the sound and color, and tried his best to search for rare Polaroids.

古文：至元康中，夸恣成俗，转相高尚，石崇之侈，遂兼王、何，而俪人主矣。
现代文：到元康年间，夸耀纵意成为风气，转而相互攀比，石崇的奢华，就相当于王恺、何劭两人，而舆国君相同。
English: By the Yuan and Kang dynasties, boasting became a custom, and people began to compare themselves with each other. The luxury of Shishong was equivalent to that of Wang Xi and He Xi, and that of Ikuo was the same.

古文：崇既诛死，天下寻亦沦丧。
现代文：石崇被诛杀后，天下不久也就沦丧了。
English: After Shi Chong was assassinated, the country soon fell into ruin.

古文：僭逾之咎也。
现代文：这是僭越的灾祸。
English: This is the scourge of Xuan Yue.

古文：庶征恆阳，刘向以为《春秋》大旱也。
现代文：事情的征候是久晴不雨，刘向认为就是《春秋》中记载的大旱。
English: Liu Xiang believes that the symptom of the matter is that it has not rained for a long time, which is the drought recorded in "Spring and Autumn."

古文：其夏旱，雩，《礼》谓之大雩。
现代文：夏季干旱，举行祈雨的祭祀，《礼》称为大雩。
English: In the summer, when there is drought, a ritual is held to pray for rain, and the ritual is known as "Daisho."

古文：不伤二谷谓之不雨。
现代文：不伤害二谷称为不雨。
English: If it does not hurt the second valley, it is called no rain.

古文：京房《易传》曰： 欲德不用兹谓张，厥灾荒，旱也。
现代文：京房《易传》说： 有德行的不用这叫张，其灾祸是荒，是干旱。
English: Jing Fang's "I Chuan" said: If you have virtue, you don't need to call it Zhang. Its disaster is famine and drought.

古文：其旱阴云不雨，变而赤，因四际。
现代文：其干旱是阴云不降雨，变而为晴，遍及四方。
English: Its drought is cloudy without rain, changing to clear, pervading the four directions.

古文：师出过时兹谓广，其旱不生。
现代文：军队出征过了时机这叫作广，其干旱不生。
English: When the army goes to war, it's too late. It's called a drought. It's not a drought.

古文：上下皆蔽兹谓隔，其旱天赤三月，时有雹杀飞禽。
现代文：上下都蒙蔽这叫隔，其干旱是天晴三个月，时或有冰雹杀死飞禽。
English: Both up and down are blinded by this so-called gap. Its drought is three months of fine weather, and sometimes there are hailstones that kill birds.

古文：上缘求妃兹谓僭，其旱三月大温亡云。
现代文：君王多方找寻妃子这叫作僭，其早是三个月大热没有云。
English: The king searched far and wide for the concubine, known as the cormorant, who had been missing for three months.

古文：君高台府兹谓犯阴侵阳，其旱万物根死，数有火灾。
现代文：君王增高台府这叫作犯阴侵阳，其旱灾是万物根死，多次发生火灾。
English: King Zeng Gao of Taifu called this a crime against yin and yang. Its drought was the death of all things, and there were many fires.

古文：庶位逾节兹为僭，其旱泽物枯，为火所伤。 
现代文：地位普通的超越规定这叫作僭乱，其干旱是湖泽中的东西干枯，被火毁伤。 
English: This transcending of the ordinary is called sedimentation, and its aridity is like that of a lake in which things dry up and are destroyed by fire.

古文：魏明帝太和二年五月，大旱。
现代文：魏明帝太和二年五月，大旱。
English: In May of the second year of Emperor Wei Ming's reign, there was a severe drought.

古文：元年以来崇广宫府之应也。
现代文：是太和元年以来修建宫殿府第的应兆。
English: It is a response to the construction of the palace since the first year of the year.

古文：又，是春宣帝南擒孟达，置二郡，张郃西破诸葛亮，毙马谡。
现代文：又，这年春天宣帝南征擒获孟达，设置两个郡，张郃在西部打败诸葛亮，马谖死。
English: In addition, in the spring of this year, Emperor Xuanzong conquered Mengda, set up two counties, Zhang Ye defeated Zhuge Liang in the west, and Ma Xun died.

古文：亢阳自大，又其应也。
现代文：亢奋的阳气自然变大，又是其应验。
English: The yang of excitement naturally increases, and this is its fulfillment.

古文：太和五年三月，自去冬十月至此月不雨。
现代文：太和五年三月，从去年冬季十月到这个月没有下雨。
English: In March of this year, there was no rain from last winter's October to this month.

古文：辛已，大雩。
现代文：辛巳，举行求雨祭祀。
English: Soon after, a rain-worshipping ceremony was held.

古文：齐王正始元年二月，自去冬十二月至此月不雨。
现代文：齐王正始元年二月，从去年冬季十二月到这个月没有降雨。
English: King Qi was born in February of the first year of the year, and there was no rain from December of last winter to this month.

古文：去岁正月，明帝崩。
现代文：去年正月，明帝去世。
English: Last January, Emperor Ming died.

古文：二月，曹爽白嗣主，转宣帝为太傅，外示尊崇，内实欲令事先由已。
现代文：二月曹爽禀明继位的君王，改任宣帝为太傅，表面显示尊崇，实际上是想要政令由自己决断。
English: In February, Cao Shuangkun, the king who succeeded to the throne, changed his title to Emperor Xuan and became Taifu. On the surface, he showed respect, but in reality, he wanted to make his own decisions.

古文：是时宣帝功盖魏朝，欲德不用之应也。
现代文：这时宣帝在魏朝功勋卓著，这是要有德的人不受重用的应验。
English: At this time, Emperor Xuan made outstanding achievements in the Wei Dynasty, which is a test for those who want to be virtuous.

古文：高贵乡公甘露三年正月，自去秋至此月旱。
现代文：高贵乡公甘露三年正月，从上年秋到这个月大旱。
English: In the first month of the third year, there was a drought from last autumn to this month.

古文：是时文帝围诸葛诞，众出过时之应也。
现代文：这时文帝包围诸葛诞，兵众出动超过时间的应验。
English: At this time, Emperor Wen surrounded Zhuge, and the troops were dispatched to meet the deadline.

古文：初，寿春秋夏常雨淹城，而此旱逾年，城陷，乃大雨。
现代文：起初，寿春秋夏时节常常有大雨淹城，而这次干旱时间延续到第二年，寿春城陷落，才降大雨。
English: At first, there were often heavy rains in Shouchun during the autumn and summer, and this drought lasted until the second year, when Shouchun fell, and heavy rains fell.

古文：咸以诞为天亡。
现代文：都认为诸葛诞是被上天所灭亡的。
English: They all believe that Zhuge was killed by God.

古文：吴孙亮五凤二年，大旱，百姓饥。
现代文：吴孙亮五凤二年，大旱，百姓饥荒。
English: In the second year of Wu Sunliang's reign, there was a severe drought and the people were starving.

古文：是岁征役烦兴，军士怨叛。
现代文：逭年征赋徭役频繁，军队士兵怨愤叛乱。
English: In the year of the rooster, enlistment for military service was frequent, and soldiers in the army rebelled in anger.

古文：此亢阳自大，劳役失众之罚也。
现代文：这是亢奋的阳气大，劳役失去了民心的惩罚。
English: This is the punishment for being too masculine and losing the hearts of the people.

古文：其役弥岁，故旱亦竟年。
现代文：徭役一整年都有，所以旱灾也整年发生。
English: Droughts also occur throughout the year, as there is hail throughout the year.

古文：孙皓宝鼎元年，春夏旱。
现代文：孙皓宝鼎元年，春夏干旱。
English: In the first year of Sun Yat-sen's reign, the spring and summer were dry.

古文：时孙皓迁都武昌，劳役动众之应也。
现代文：当时孙皓迁都武昌，是劳役劳民的应验。
English: At that time, Sun Yat-sen moved the capital to Wuchang, which was the fulfillment of the laborers.

古文：武帝泰始七年五月闰月旱，大雩。
现代文：武帝泰始七年五月闰月干旱，举行求雨祭祀。
English: At the beginning of the seventh year of Emperor Wu's reign, there was a drought during the leap month of May, and a rain-seeking ritual was held.

古文：八年五月，旱。
现代文：八年五月，旱。
English: In May of the eighth year, drought.

古文：是时帝纳荀勖邪说，留贾充不复西镇，而任恺渐疏，上下皆蔽之应也。
现代文：遣时武帝听信荀勖的邪说，留住贾充不让他再去镇守西部地区，而任恺逐渐受到疏远，这是上下都受蒙蔽不明的应兆。
English: Emperor Wu at the time of the Emperor's dispatch listened to the heresy of Xinlu, kept Jia Chong and did not allow him to go to the western region of the town, while Renlu was gradually alienated, which was a sign that both the upper and lower levels were blinded and unclear.

古文：及李憙、鲁芝、李胤等并在散职，近厥德不用之谓也。
现代文：等到李憙、鲁芝、李胤等人都衹担任闲职，这近于所谓有德的人不予任用。
English: Wait until Li Qiye, Lu Zhi, Li Yin and others are appointed to vacant posts, which is close to the so-called virtuous people will not be appointed.

古文：九年，自正月旱，至于六月，祈宗庙社稷山川。
现代文：九年，从正月旱，直到六月，祭宗庙社稷山川求雨。
English: For nine years, from the first month of the dry season until June, the temple held a festival to pray for rain.

古文：癸未，雨。
现代文：癸未，降雨。
English: In the afternoon, it rained.

古文：十年四月，旱。
现代文：十年四月，干早。
English: April 10th, early morning.

古文：去年秋冬，采择卿校诸葛冲等女。
现代文：上年秋冬季，选取卿校诸葛冲等人的女儿。
English: In the autumn and winter of last year, the daughter of the schoolmaster Zhuge Chong and others was selected.

古文：是春，五十余人入殿简选。
现代文：逭年春季，有五十多人入殿受挑选。
English: In the spring of 2000, more than 50 people were selected to enter the hall.

古文：又取小将吏女数十人，母子号哭于宫中，声闻于外，行人悲酸。
现代文：又选取低级将领官吏的女儿几十人，母子在宫中痛哭，哭声传到宫外，行人悲哀心酸。
English: In addition, dozens of daughters of low-ranking generals and officials were selected. Mother and son cried bitterly in the palace, and their cries spread outside the palace, making pedestrians sad.

古文：是殆积阴生阳，上缘求妃之应也。
现代文：造就是阴气积而生阳气，主上多方求取妃子的应兆。
English: Creation is the accumulation of yin gas and the birth of yang gas, and the main purpose is to seek the response of the concubine.

古文：咸宁二年五月旱，大雩。
现代文：咸宁二年五月干旱，举行求雨祭祀。
English: In May of the second year of Xianning's drought, a rain-seeking ritual was held.

古文：至六月，乃澍雨。
现代文：到六月，才有及时雨。
English: By June, there is a timely rain.

古文：太康二年旱，自去冬旱至此春。
现代文：太康二年旱，从上年冬季旱到逭年春季。
English: Taikang suffered two years of drought, from last winter's drought to the spring of 2019.

古文：三年四月旱，乙酉诏司空齐王攸与尚书、廷尉、河南尹录讯系囚，事从蠲宥。
现代文：三年四月旱，乙酉，诏令司空齐王司马攸同尚书、廷尉、沤卢尹核查审讯在押囚犯，尽量减刑宽贷。
English: In April of the third year, the Emperor issued an edict ordering the Emperor's Secretaries Kuo Qi and Wang Sima You, as well as Shang Shu, Ting Yi, and Gong Lu Yin, to inspect the interrogation of prisoners in custody and try to reduce the sentence to leniency.

古文：五年六月，旱。
现代文：五年六月，旱。
English: In June 2005, there was a drought.

古文：此年正月天阴，解而复合。
现代文：这一年正月天阴，阴云散开又合拢。
English: In the first month of this year, the sky was overcast, and the clouds dispersed and closed again.

古文：刘毅上疏曰： 必有阿党之臣奸以事君者，当诛而不赦也。 
现代文：型塑上奏说： 必定有徇私枉法的奸臣事奉君主，应杀不赦。 
English: The sculptor said, "There must be a treacherous vassal who serves the monarch and should be killed.

古文：帝不答。
现代文：武帝没有回答。
English: Emperor Wu did not answer.

古文：是时荀勖、冯紞僭作威福，乱朝尤甚。
现代文：遣时荀鼬、遁丝以皇帝名义作威作福，使朝政严重混乱。
English: Yuan Shih-tao and Yao Si used the emperor's name to make themselves look good, which led to serious chaos in imperial politics.

古文：六年三月，青、梁、幽、冀郡国旱。
现代文：六年三月，青、梁、幽、冀郡国旱。
English: In March of the sixth year, Qing, Liang, Yu and Jie counties were affected by the national drought.

古文：六月，济阴、武陵旱，伤麦。
现代文：六月，济阴、武陵旱，伤害麦。
English: In June, droughts in Jilin and Wuling caused damage to wheat.

古文：七年夏，郡国十三大旱。
现代文：七年夏，十三个郡国大旱。
English: In the summer of 1978, thirteen counties in the country experienced a severe drought.

古文：八年四月，冀州旱。
现代文：八年四月，冀州旱。
English: In April of the eighth year, Jizhou drought.

古文：九年夏，郡国三十三旱，扶风、始平、京兆、安定旱，伤麦。
现代文：九年夏，三十三个郡国大旱。扶风、始平、京兆、安定旱，伤害麦。
English: In the summer of the ninth year, there was a severe drought in thirty-three counties. Fu Feng, Shi Ping, Jing Zhao, stable drought, and damage to wheat.

古文：十年二月，旱。
现代文：十年二月。干旱。
English: February of the tenth year. Drought.

古文：太熙元年二月，旱。
现代文：太熙元年二月，旱。
English: In February of the first year of the Tahei era, there was drought.

古文：自太康已后，虽正人满朝，不被亲仗，而贾充、荀勖、杨骏、冯紞等迭居要重，所以无年不旱者，欲德不用，上下皆蔽，庶位逾节之罚也。
现代文：自从太康以后，虽然正直的人士满朝，却不受亲信重用，而贾充、荀勖、杨骏、冯紞等人相继担任要职，所以没有一年不旱，是因为有德的人不受任用，上下都受蒙蔽，地位低微者超越任用的惩罚。
English: Since the time of Taikang, although there have been honest people throughout the dynasty, they have not been reused by their cronies, and Jia Chong, Zhai, Yang Xuan, Feng Xuan and others have successively held important positions. Therefore, there has not been a year without drought, because people with virtue are not appointed, and both the upper and lower levels are deceived, and those with low status are punished for exceeding the appointment.

古文：惠帝元康七年七月，秦、雍二州大旱，疾疫，关中饥，米斛万钱。
现代文：惠帝元康七年七月，秦、雍二州大旱，瘟疫流行，闱中地区饥荒，米一斛一万钱。
English: In July of the seventh year of Hui Di Yuan Kang, there was a drought in Qin and Yong two states, a plague epidemic, and a famine in the Central Yunnan region, and a basket of rice cost 10,000 yuan.

古文：因此氐羌反叛，雍州刺史解系败绩。
现代文：氐羌乘机反叛，壅州刺史蟹至战败。
English: Cormorants took advantage of the opportunity to rebel, and the crabs in Zhangzhou were defeated.

古文：而饥疫荐臻，戎晋并困，朝廷不能振，诏听相卖鬻。
现代文：饥荒瘟疫益严重，戎置之地也陷入困境，朝廷不能解决，韶令允许出卖官爵。
English: Famine and plague were becoming more and more serious, and the places where troops were stationed were also in trouble. The imperial court could not solve the problem, and the imperial edict permitted the sale of official titles.

古文：其九月，郡国五旱。
现代文：这年九月，五个郡国大旱。
English: In September of that year, five counties in the country experienced a severe drought.

古文：永宁元年，自夏及秋，青、徐、幽、并四州旱。
现代文：丞宁元年，从夏季到秋季，青、徐、幽、并四州旱。
English: In the first year of Zhening, from summer to autumn, Qing, Xu, Yu, and Shizhou drought.

古文：十二月，又郡国十二旱。
现代文：十二月，又有十二个郡国旱。
English: In December, another 12 counties were hit by drought.

古文：是年春，三王讨赵王伦，六旬之中数十战，死者十余万人。
现代文：逭年春季，三王讨伐趟王司马伦，两个月的时间裹有数十次战争，死十余万人。
English: In the spring of the year of the Rooster, the Three Kings went to fight against King Sima Lun. During the two months, there were dozens of wars, and more than 100,000 people died.

古文：怀帝永嘉三年五月，大旱，襄平县梁水淡池竭，河、洛、江、汉皆可涉。
现代文：怀帝永嘉三年五月，大旱，襄平县梁水淡池枯竭，黄河、洛河、长江、汉水都可以涉水而过。
English: In May of the third year of Huai Di Yongjia, due to the drought, Liangshui light pond in Yangping County was exhausted, and the Yellow River, Luo River, Yangtze River and Han River could be waded through.

古文：是年三月，司马越归京都，遣兵入宫，收中书令缪播等九人杀之，皆僭逾之罚也。
现代文：这年三月，司马越返回京都，派兵入宫，拘捕中书令缪播等九人杀了他们，这都是对僭越的惩罚。
English: In March of that year, Sima Yue returned to Kyoto, sent soldiers into the palace, and arrested nine people, including Shuling and Miao Han, and killed them, all of which were punishments for Yue Yue.

古文：又四方诸侯多怀无君之心，刘元海、石勒、王弥、李雄之徒贼害百姓，流血成泥，又其应也。
现代文：四方的诸侯多怀有叛逆之心，刘元海、石勒、王弥、李雄之徒残害百姓，流血在地成为泥浆，又是其应兆。
English: The lords of Shifang harbored a rebellious spirit. Liu Yuanhai, Shi Le, Wang Ya, and Li Xiong's followers murdered the people, and the bloodshed turned into mud on the ground, which was also a sign.

古文：五年，自去冬旱至此春。
现代文：五年，从上一年冬季到今年春旱。
English: In the past five years, there has been a drought from last winter to this spring.

古文：去岁十一月，司马越以行台自随，斥黜宫卫，无君臣之节。
现代文：上一年十一月，司马越带着皇室人员跟随着自己，撤换宫庭护卫，没有君臣的礼节。
English: In November of the previous year, Sima Yue, accompanied by members of the royal family, removed and replaced the palace guards, without the etiquette of a monarch.

古文：元帝建武元年六月，扬州旱。
现代文：元帝建武元年六月，握业旱。
English: In June of the first year of Emperor Jianwu of the Yuan Dynasty, there was a drought.

古文：去年十二月，淳于伯冤死，其年即旱，而太兴元年六月又旱。
现代文：上年十二月，连王侦含冤而死，当年就旱，而左兴元年六月又旱。
English: In December of last year, Lian Wang Jianhan died, and there was a drought that year, and in June of the first year of Zuo Xing, there was another drought.

古文：干宝曰 杀淳于伯之后旱三年 是也。
现代文：王直说 杀死淳于伯后旱三年 正是如此。
English: Wang Zhi said, "Three years have passed since the killing of Chunyu Bo.

古文：刑罚妄加，群阴不附，则阳气胜之罚也。
现代文：这是对滥施刑罚，众阴不顺服，阳气盛的惩罚。
English: This is the punishment for the indiscriminate imposition of punishment, the disobedience of the yin, and the strength of the yang.

古文：元帝太兴四年五月，旱。
现代文：元帝太兴四年五月，旱。
English: In May of the fourth year of the Yuan Emperor Taixing, there was a drought.

古文：是时王敦陵僭已著。
现代文：这时王墓僭越欺君已经很明显。
English: At this time, it was already clear that Wang Grab was cheating the king.

古文：永昌元年夏，大旱。
现代文：永昌元年夏，大旱。
English: In the summer of the first year of Yongchang, there was a big drought.

古文：是年三月，王敦有石头之变，二宫陵辱，大臣诛死，僭逾无上，故旱尤甚也。
现代文：这年三月，玉錾发动五玺球之乱，皇帝皇后受到凌辱，大臣被杀，僭越皇上，所以旱情尤为严重。
English: In March of that year, the Jade Emperor launched the Five Dynasties and Five Dynasties Revolt, in which the emperor and empress were humiliated, ministers were killed, and emperors were overthrown, so the drought was particularly severe.

古文：其闰十一月，京都大旱，川谷并竭。
现代文：逭年闰十一月，京都大旱，河川山谷都枯竭。
English: In November of leap year, there was a drought in Kyoto, and the rivers and valleys dried up.

古文：明帝太宁三年，自春不雨，至于六月。
现代文：明帝太宁三年，从春季不下雨，直到六月。
English: During the three years of the Ming Dynasty, there was no rain in Taining from spring until June.

古文：成帝咸和元年，夏秋旱。
现代文：成帝咸和元年，夏季秋季旱。
English: In the first year of Emperor Chengxian's reign, the summer and autumn were dry.

古文：是时庾太后临朝称制，言不从而僭逾之罚也。
现代文：这时厘去屋临朝听政，是对言不顺而僭越的惩罚。
English: At this time, to go to the Imperial Palace to listen to the government is a punishment for being insubordinate and overbearing.

古文：二年夏，旱。
现代文：二年夏季，旱。
English: In the summer of 2000, there was a drought.

古文：五年五月，大旱。
现代文：五年五月，大旱。
English: In May 2005, there was a severe drought.

古文：六年四月，大旱。
现代文：六年四月，大旱。
English: In April of the sixth year, there was a severe drought.

古文：八年秋七月，旱。
现代文：八年秋七月，旱。
English: In the autumn and July of the eighth year, drought.

古文：九年，自四月不雨，至于八月。
现代文：九年，从四月起不下雨，直到八月。
English: For nine years, there was no rain from April to August.

古文：咸康元年六月，旱。
现代文：咸康元年六月，旱。
English: In June of the first year of Hamkang, there was drought.

古文：是时成帝冲弱，未亲万机，内外之政，决之将相。
现代文：遣时成帝年纪幼小，不能亲自处理朝政，朝廷内外事务，由将相决定。
English: At the time of the Emperor's enthronement, he was very young and could not personally deal with the affairs of the imperial court and the internal and external affairs of the court, which were decided by the generals.

古文：此僭逾之罚，连岁旱也。
现代文：这是对僭越的惩罚，连年旱。
English: It's a punishment for over-spending, and it's been dry for years.

古文：至四年，王导固让太傅，复子明辟。
现代文：到四年，王导坚持辞让太傅，还政于君。
English: In four years, Wang Du insisted on resigning from the position of Taifu and returned to the throne.

古文：是后不旱，殆其应也。
现代文：这一年不旱，是其应兆。
English: The fact that there was no drought this year is a good sign.

古文：时天下普旱，会稽、余姚特甚，米斗直五百，人有相鬻者。
现代文：当时天下普遍干旱，会稽、余姚特别严重，稻米每斗值五百钱，有买卖人的。
English: At that time, there was a widespread drought in the world, especially in Huanqian and Yuyao. Rice was worth 500 yuan per bucket, and there were many traders.

古文：二年三月，旱。
现代文：二年三月，旱。
English: In March of the following year, the drought ended.

古文：三年六月，旱。
现代文：三年六月，旱。
English: In June of the third year, the drought ended.

古文：时王导以天下新定，务在遵养，不任刑罚，遂盗贼公行，频五年亢旱，亦舒绶之应也。
现代文：当时王导认为天下刚刚平定，应致力于休养生息，不重刑罚，于是盗贼公行，连续五年大旱，也是舒缓的应兆。
English: At that time, Wang Du believed that the world had just been pacified, and should be committed to recuperation and interest, not heavy punishment, so the thieves went public, and the five consecutive years of drought was also a sign of relief.

古文：康帝建元元年五月，旱。
现代文：康帝建元元年五月，旱。
English: In May of the first year of Kangdi Jianyuan, drought.

古文：穆帝永和元年五月，旱。
现代文：穆帝永和元年五月，旱。
English: In May of the first year of Mu Di Yonghe, drought.

古文：是时帝在衤强褓，褚太后临朝，如明穆太后故事。
现代文：这时壁壹在襁褓中，厘立后控制朝政，就像明穆太后当年的做法。
English: At this time, the wall is in the middle of the cocoon, and after the establishment of the control of the government, just like the practice of the Ming Mu Empress Dowager.

古文：五年七月不雨，至于十月。
现代文：五年七月不下雨，直到十月。
English: In July, there is no rain until October.

古文：六年夏，旱。
现代文：六年夏季，干旱。
English: Six years of dry summers.

古文：八年夏，旱。
现代文：八年夏季，干早。
English: Eight years of summer, dry early.

古文：九年春，旱。
现代文：九年春季，旱。
English: In the spring of 1997, there was a drought.

古文：升平三年冬，大旱。
现代文：升平三年冬季，大旱。
English: In the winter of the third year of the rise and fall, there was a severe drought.

古文：四年冬，大旱。
现代文：四年冬季，大旱。
English: In the winter of 2004, there was a severe drought.

古文：哀帝隆和元年夏，旱。
现代文：哀帝隆和元年夏季，旱。
English: The summer of the year 1 and the summer of the year 2 were dry.

古文：是时桓温强恣，权制朝廷，僭逾之罚也。
现代文：遣时桓温强悍胡作非为，手握权力控制朝廷，是僭越的惩罚。
English: It was a punishment for arrogance to send Kan'un to the imperial court when he had been acting recklessly and holding power to control the court.

古文：海西公太和元年夏，旱。
现代文：海西公太和元年夏季，旱。
English: Haixi Gongtai and the first year of the summer, drought.

古文：四年冬，旱。
现代文：四年冬季，旱。
English: Four years of winter and drought.

古文：凉州春旱至夏。
现代文：凉州春季干早直到夏季。
English: Liangzhou is dry from early spring to summer.

古文：简文帝咸安二年十月，大旱，饥。
现代文：简文帝咸安二年十月，大旱，饥荒。
English: In October of the second year of Emperor Jianwen's reign, there was a severe drought and famine.

古文：自永和至是，嗣主幼冲，桓温陵僭，用兵征伐，百姓怨苦。
现代文：从永塑年到逭时，继位的君主年幼，桓温欺君掌权，用兵征伐，百姓怨恨困苦。
English: From Yongshuo to Shun, the monarch who succeeded to the throne was young, Kanwen cheated the king to take power, used soldiers to conquer, and the people resented the hardships.

古文：孝武帝宁康元年三月，旱。
现代文：孝武帝宁康元年三月，旱。
English: Xiaowu Emperor Ningkang in March of the first year of the year, drought.

古文：是时桓温入觐高平陵，阖朝致拜，逾僭之应也。
现代文：造时里过前去拜高平陵，满朝官员进拜，这是僭越的应兆。
English: During the construction period, people went to worship Gaoping Mausoleum, and the officials of the Manchu Dynasty went to worship. This was a sign of the emperor's response.

古文：三年冬，旱。
现代文：三年冬季，旱。
English: Three years of winter and drought.

古文：太元四年夏，大旱。
现代文：太元四年夏季，大旱。
English: In the summer of the 4th year of the Taiyuan era, there was a severe drought.

古文：八年六月，旱。
现代文：八年六月，旱。
English: In June of the same year, the drought ended.

古文：十年七月，旱，饥。
现代文：十年七月，旱，饥荒。
English: In July of the tenth year, drought and famine began.

古文：初，八年破苻坚，九年诸将略地，有事徐豫，杨亮、赵统攻讨巴沔。
现代文：当初，八年时打败苻坚，九年时众将领攻占各地，进攻徐豫，杨亮、赵统攻讨旦迺地区。
English: At first, in the eighth year, they defeated Xuan Jian, and in the ninth year, the generals occupied various regions, attacking Xu Yu, Yang Liang, and Zhao Tong to attack the Danwei region.

古文：是年正月，谢安又出镇广陵，使子琰进次彭城，频有军役。
现代文：这年正月，谢安又外任镇守广陵，派儿子谢堑进军驻守堑球，屡有战争兵役。
English: In the first month of this year, Xie An was also appointed as the town guard of Guangling, and sent his son Xie Yao to march into the army and stationed in Yingqiu, and often had war military service.

古文：十三年六月，旱。
现代文：十三年六月，旱。
English: In June 13th, the drought ended.

古文：去岁北府遣戍胡陆，荆州经略河南。
现代文：前一年北府派军守卫胡陆，荆州管辖河南岸地区。
English: The year before, Beifu sent troops to guard Hulun, while Jingzhou governed the area on the south bank of the river.

古文：是年夏，郭铨置戍野王，又遣军破黄淮。
现代文：这年夏季，郭铨在野王设置守戍，又派军攻破黄淮。
English: In the summer of that year, Guo Gan set up a garrison in Yanwang and sent troops to break through Huanghuai.

古文：十五年七月，旱。
现代文：十五年七月，旱。
English: In July 1915, the drought ended.

古文：十七年，秋旱至冬。
现代文：十七年，秋季干旱直到冬季。
English: In the seventeenth year, there was a drought from autumn to winter.

古文：是时烈宗仁恕，信任会稽王道子，政事舒缓。
现代文：这时烈宗仁义宽厚，宠信任用会稽王司马道王，政务松散迟缓。
English: At this time, the Emperor was benevolent and generous, and favored King Sima Dao, who was a trusted court official. Government affairs were loose and sluggish.

古文：又茹千秋为骠骑谘议，窃弄主相威福。
现代文：又茹千秋任骠骑谘议，窃夺玩弄君主，作威作福。
English: In addition, Zhu Qianqiu was appointed to advise and advise, steal and play with the monarch, and make a show of wealth.

古文：又比丘尼乳母亲党及婢仆之子阶缘近习，临部领众。
现代文：又尼姑乳母亲党和婢女仆人的儿子都在周围，管领国事。
English: And the son of the maid-servant, and the son of the maid-servant, and the son of the maid-servant, and the son of the son of the maid-servant, and the son of the son of the maid-servant, and the son of the son of the maid-servant, and the son of the son of the maid-servant.

古文：又所在多上春竟囚，不以其辜，建康狱吏，枉暴既甚。
现代文：又到处都有很多正月的死囚，不依罪论罚，建康的狱吏，违法残暴很严重。
English: In addition, there are many prisoners on death row in the first month of the year everywhere, the punishment does not depend on the crime, the prison officers are healthy, and the illegal brutality is very serious.

古文：此又僭逾不从冤滥之罚。
现代文：逭又是僭越不顺断案人冤枉失实的惩罚。
English: In addition, it is a punishment that is unfair and untrue to the wrongdoer.

古文：安帝隆安二年冬，旱，寒甚。
现代文：安帝隆安二年冬季，旱，非常寒冷。
English: The winter of the second year of the Long An Dynasty was dry and very cold.

古文：四年五月，旱。
现代文：四年五月，旱。
English: In May 2004, there was a drought.

古文：五年，夏秋大旱。
现代文：五年，夏秋季大旱。
English: Five years of drought in summer and autumn.

古文：十二月，不雨。
现代文：十二月，不下雨。
English: December, no rain.

古文：时孙恩作乱，桓玄疑贰，迫杀殷仲堪，而朝廷即授以荆州之任，司马元显又讽百僚悉使敬己，内外骚动，兵革烦兴。
现代文：当时孙恩作乱，桓玄怀疑殷仲堪不同心，逼迫杀死了他，而朝廷随即授予桓玄统管荆州的重任，司马元颢又劝谕百官让他们自爱，朝廷内外混乱动荡，战事频繁发生。
English: At that time, Sun En caused a disturbance. Huan Xuan suspected that Yin Zhongkang was not of the same mind and forced him to kill him. The imperial court then immediately assigned Huan Xuan the important task of ruling Jingzhou. Sima Yuanzhang also advised the officials to let them love themselves. Chaos and turmoil inside and outside the imperial court, frequent wars occurred.

古文：此皆陵僭忧愁之应也。
现代文：遣都是僭越侵上忧患愁怨的兆应。
English: All of them are signs of the sorrow and bitterness that have invaded Yunnan.

古文：元兴元年七月，大饥。
现代文：元兴元年七月，大饥荒。
English: In July of the first year of the Genko era, the Great Famine began.

古文：九月、十月不雨，泉水涸。
现代文：九月、十月不下雨，泉水干涸。
English: In September and October, there is no rain and the springs dry up.

古文：二年六月，不雨。
现代文：二年六月，不下雨。
English: In June of 2002, there was no rain.

古文：冬，又旱。
现代文：冬季，又干旱。
English: Another winter, another drought.

古文：时桓玄奢僭，十二月遂篡位。
现代文：当时桓玄肆意僭越，十二月篡位。
English: At that time, Emperor Kuan Xuan arrogantly usurped the throne in December.

古文：三年八月，不雨。
现代文：三年八月，不下雨。
English: In August of 2003, there was no rain.

古文：义熙四年冬，不雨。
现代文：义熙四年冬季，不下雨。
English: In the winter of the fourth year of Yixi, there was no rain.

古文：六年九月，不雨。
现代文：六年九月，不下雨。
English: In September 2006, there was no rain.

古文：八年十月，不雨。
现代文：八年十月，不下雨。
English: It didn't rain in October of '08.

古文：九年，秋冬不雨。
现代文：九年，秋冬季不下雨。
English: Nine years, no rain in autumn and winter.

古文：十年九月，旱。
现代文：十年九月，旱。
English: In September 2010, the drought ended.

古文：十二月又旱，井渎多竭。
现代文：十二月又旱，井水河水大多枯竭。
English: In December, there was another drought, and most of the well water and river water dried up.

古文：是时军役烦兴。
现代文：逭时战事徭役频繁。
English: At that time, there were frequent battles.

古文：诗妖魏明帝太和中，京师歌《兜铃曹子》，其唱曰 其柰汝曹何 ，此诗妖也。其后曹爽见诛，曹氏遂废。
现代文：魏明帝太和年间，京城传唱《兜铃曹子》，唱 其奈汝曹何 ，这是诗妖。此后曹爽被杀，曹氏败落。
English: During the reign of Emperor Wei Ming and Empress Dowager Cixi, the capital city spread the chanting of "Dau Ling Cao Zi" and sang "Chi Nai Ru Cao He" (Chi Nai Ru Cao He), which is a poem demon. After that, Cao Shuang was killed and the Cao clan fell.

古文：景初初，童谣曰： 阿公阿公驾马车，不意阿公东渡河，阿公来还当柰何！ 
现代文：景初初年，童谣说： 阿公阿公驾马车，不意阿公束渡河，阿公返回当奈何! 
English: In the first year of the Jingchu era, the nursery rhyme said: Grandpa Grandpa drove a carriage, unexpectedly Grandpa Shu crossed the river, Grandpa returned to Dangnahe!

古文：及宣帝辽东归，至白屋，当还镇长安。
现代文：等到宣帝从辽东归来，到白屋，准备回军镇守长安。
English: When Emperor Xuan returned from Liaodong, he went to Baiya and prepared to return to the garrison town of Chang'an.

古文：会帝疾笃，急召之，乃乘追锋车东渡河，终如童谣之言。
现代文：恰逢明帝病重，急速召唤他，他就乘坐追锋车束渡黄河，最终就像童谣所说的。
English: When Emperor Ming was gravely ill and summoned him at short notice, he crossed the Yellow River in a caravan of chasers, just as the nursery rhyme says.

古文：齐王嘉平中，有谣曰： 白马素羁西南驰，其谁乘者硃虎骑。 
现代文：齐王嘉平年间，有歌认说： 白马素羁西南驰，谁是乘者朱虎骑。 
English: During the reign of King Jiaping of Qi, there was a song that said: "A white horse must ride south-west, and whoever rides it must ride like a tiger."

古文：硃虎者，楚王小字也。
现代文：朱虎，是楚王的小名。
English: Zhuhu is the nickname of King Chu.

古文：王凌、令狐愚闻此谣，谋立彪。
现代文：王浚、令狐愚听说逭歌谣，谋划拥立司马彪。
English: Wang Jun and Ling Fugu heard about the song and planned to support Ma Biao.

古文：事发，凌等伏诛，彪赐死。
现代文：事情败露，王浚等人被杀，司马彪被赐死。
English: The affair was exposed, Wang Jun and others were killed, and Sima Biao was sentenced to death.

古文：吴孙亮初，童谣曰； 吁汝恪，何若若，芦苇单衣篾钩络，于何相求常子阁。 
现代文：吴孙亮初年，童谣说： 吁汝恪，何若若，芦苇单衣篾钩络，何处相求常子阗。 
English: In the first year of Wu Sunliang, the nursery rhyme said: "Wow, what a surprise, the reed single coat hooks, where to seek the evergreens."

古文： 常子阁 者，反语石子堈也。钩络，钩带也。
现代文： 常子阁 ，是石子垌的反语。钩络，是钩带。
English: Tsunegakaku, is an antonym of Sekizocho. Hakuroo, is a hooked belt.

古文：及诸葛恪死，果以苇席裹身，篾束其要，投之石子堈。
现代文：等到诸葛恪死，果然是用苇席包裹身体，用篾扎腰，抛在石子垌。
English: After Zhuge Ke's death, his body was wrapped in a tablecloth, tied at the waist with ropes, and thrown into a pile of stones.

古文：后听恪故吏收敛，求之此堈云。
现代文：后来允许诸葛恪的旧属收殓，就是在这个垌上找到他的。
English: Later, Zhuge Ke's former family was allowed to adopt him, and it was on this raft that they found him.

古文：孙亮初，公安有白鼍鸣。
现代文：孙亮初年，公安县有白鼍呜叫。
English: In the first year of Sun Liang, there were egrets in the public security county.

古文：童谣曰： 白鼍鸣，龟背平。
现代文：童认说： 白鼍呜，龟背平。
English: The child recognized it and said, "It's white, and the turtle's back is flat."

古文：南郡城中可长生，守死不去义无成。 
现代文：南郡城中可长生，守死不去义无成。 
English: In the city of Minami-gun, you can live forever, but if you don't fight to the death, you won't be able to achieve righteousness.

古文： 南郡城中可长生 者，有急易以逃也。
现代文： 南郡城中可长生 ，是说有危急时容易逃生。
English: Minami-gun's citizens can live forever, which means that it is easy to escape in times of crisis.

古文：明年，诸葛恪败，弟融镇公安，亦见袭，融刮金印龟服之而死。
现代文：第二年，诸葛恪败亡，他的弟弟诸葛融镇守公安，也受到攻打，诸葛融刮金印龟吞服而死。
English: In the second year, Zhuge Jia was defeated and killed. His younger brother Zhuge Rong, who was defending the public security, was also attacked. Zhuge Rong swallowed the golden seal turtle and died.

古文：鼍有鳞介，甲兵之象。
现代文：鼍有鳞甲，是甲兵的象征。
English: The dragonfly has scales and armor, which is a symbol of armor.

古文：又曰，白祥也。
现代文：又说，是白祥。
English: He also said that it was Bai Xiang.

古文：孙休永安二年，将守质子群聚嬉戏，有异小兒忽来言曰： 三公锄，司马如。 
现代文：孙休永安二年，做人质的守将的儿子们聚在一起嬉笑玩耍，有个奇异的小儿忽然来到说： 三公锄，司马如。 
English: In the second year of Sun Xiu Yong'an, the sons of the guards who were hostages gathered together to laugh and play, and a strange child suddenly came and said: "Three brothers, Sima Ru."

古文：又曰： 我非人，荧惑星也。 
现代文：又说： 我非人，是荧惑星。 
English: He also said: "I'm not human, I'm a fluorescent planet."

古文：言毕上升，仰视若曳一匹练，有顷没。
现代文：说完向上升起，仰视他就像拖着一匹白色丝带，不一会儿消失。
English: After he finished speaking, he rose up, and looking up at him was like dragging a white ribbon, and soon disappeared.

古文：干宝曰： 后四年而蜀亡，六年而魏废，二十一年而吴平。 
现代文：干实说： 四年后蜀国灭亡，六年魏国被废，二十一年吴国被平定。 
English: Genshih said: Four years later, Shu State was destroyed, six years later, Wei State was abolished, and 21 years later, Wu State was pacified.

古文：于是九服归晋。
现代文：天下四方都归于晋国。
English: All four directions of the world belong to Jin.

古文：魏与吴蜀并战国， 三公锄，司马如 之谓也。
现代文：魏国同吴国、蜀国都是战国，说的就是 三公锄，司马如 。
English: Wei, Wu, and Shu were all warring states, and they were called the Three Kingdoms. Sima Ru was the first.

古文：孙皓遣使者祭石印山下妖祠，使者因以丹书岩曰： 楚九州渚，吴九州都。
现代文：孙皓派人祭祀石印山下的妖祠，那人用丹朱色在岩壁上书写道： 楚九州渚，吴九州都。
English: Sun Yat-sen sent someone to make a sacrifice at the shrine of a demon at the foot of Shi Ying Mountain. The person wrote on the rock wall in red ink: Chu Kyushu Nagisa, Wu Kyushu Miyako.

古文：扬州士，作天子。
现代文：扬州士，作天子。
English: Yangzhou, the son of heaven.

古文：四世治，太平矣。 
现代文：四世治，太平矣。 
English: The fourth generation will rule, and there will be peace.

古文：皓闻之，意益张，曰： 从大皇帝至朕四世，太平之主非朕复谁！ 
现代文：孙皓听说，心中更加意气洋洋，说： 从大皇帝到朕就是四世，太平君主不是朕又会是谁! 
English: Hearing this, Sun Yat-sen became even more enthusiastic and said, "From the Great Emperor to me is the fourth generation. If I am not the Taiping Emperor, who will be?

古文：恣虐逾甚，寻以降亡，近诗妖也。
现代文：肆意暴虐更为严重，不久投降灭亡，造近于诗妖。
English: The wanton brutality was even more serious. It soon surrendered and perished, and was made into something close to a poem demon.

古文：孙皓天纪中，童谣曰： 阿童复阿童，衔刀游渡江。
现代文：孙皓天纪年间，童谣说： 阿童复阿童，衔刀游渡江。
English: During the reign of Sun Yat-sen, a nursery rhyme said: "A child returns to a child, and swims across the river with a sword."

古文：不畏岸上兽，但畏水中龙。 
现代文：不畏岸上兽，衹畏水中龙。 
English: Fear not the beasts on the shore, but the dragons in the water.

古文：武帝闻之，加王浚龙骧将军。
现代文：武帝听说后，加封王浚龙骧将军。
English: After Emperor Wu heard about it, he appointed Wang Junlong as the new general.

古文：及征吴，江西众军无过者，而王浚先定秣陵。
现代文：等到征伐吴国时，江西众多部队没有能渡过江的，而王浚先平定了秣陵。
English: When it came to the conquest of Wu, many troops in Jiangxi could not cross the river, but Wang Jun first leveled Fuling.

古文：武帝太康三年平吴后，江南童谣曰： 局缩肉，数横目，中国当败吴当复。 
现代文：武帝太康三年平定吴国后，江南有童认说： 局缩肉，敷横目，中国当败吴当复。 
English: After Emperor Wu Taikang subdued Wu for three years, there was a child in the southern part of the Yangtze River who said: "It's too late, China should have defeated Wu Dangfu."

古文：又曰： 宫门柱，且当朽，吴当复，在三十年后。 
现代文：又说： 宫门柱，且当朽，吴当复，在三十年后。 
English: He also said, "The gateposts of the palace will be rotten, and Wu Dangfu will be gone in thirty years."

古文：又曰： 鸡鸣不拊翼，吴复不用力。 
现代文：又说： 鸡呜不拊翼，吴复不用力。 
English: He also said, "Chickens don't grow wings, and Wu Fu doesn't have to work hard."

古文：于时吴人皆谓在孙氏子孙，故窃发为乱者相继。案 横目 者四字，自吴亡至元帝兴几四十年，元帝兴于江东，皆如童谣之言焉。
现代文：在当时吴地的人都认为应验在孙氏子孙身上，所以密谋兴起作乱的接连不断。 横目 就是 四 字，从吴国灭亡到元帝兴起将近四十年，元帝兴起在江东，都像童谣所说的一样。
English: At that time, people in Wu believed that the fulfillment was in the Sun's descendants, so there was a continuous succession of conspiracies to rise up and create turmoil. 横目 is four characters, from the fall of the State of Wu to the rise of the Yuan Emperor, nearly forty years, the rise of the Yuan Emperor in the East of the Jiangsu River, all like the nursery rhyme said.

古文：元帝忄而而少断， 局缩肉 者，有所斥也。
现代文：元帝懦弱缺少决断， 局缩肉 ，是有所指的。
English: The former emperor's cowardice, lack of determination, and shrinking, are indicative.

古文：太康末，京洛为《折杨柳》之歌，其曲始有兵革苦辛之辞，终以擒获斩截之事。
现代文：太康末年，京洛地区有《折杨柳》歌谣，歌曲开始有兵革苦难的歌词，结尾是说擒获斩杀截击的事。
English: At the end of the Taikang era, there was a song in the Beijing-Laos region called "Folding Poplar Willows." The song began with lyrics about the hardships of the war, and ended with a story about the interception of a dragonfly.

古文：是时三杨贵盛而被族灭，太后废黜，幽死中宫， 折杨柳 之应也。
现代文：这时三杨权大至极而终被灭族，太后被废黜，幽禁死在宫中，这是 折杨柳 的应兆。
English: At this time, Sanyang Quan was at its peak and was finally exterminated. The empress dowager was dethroned and died in confinement in the palace. This was a response to the folding of the poplars.

古文：惠帝永熙中，河内温县有人如狂，造书曰： 光光文长，大戟为墙。
现代文：惠帝永熙年间，河内温县有人发狂，书写说： 光光文长，大戟为墙。
English: During Hui Di Yongxi's reign, someone in Hanoi's Vinh County went mad and wrote: "Light is light, long is long, big is big."

古文：毒药虽行，戟还自伤。 
现代文：毒药虽行，戟还自伤。 
English: Although poison is possible, the baboons still self-harmed.

古文：又曰： 两火没地，哀哉秋兰。
现代文：又说： 两火没地，哀哉秋兰。
English: He also said: "Two fires have destroyed the land, woe to Qiu Lan."

古文：归形街邮，终为人叹。 
现代文：归形街邮，终为人叹。 
English: Guifeng Street Post, finally a sigh of relief.

古文：及杨骏居内府，以戟为卫，死时又为戟所害伤。
现代文：等到杨骏居住内府，用戟守卫，死时又被戟所伤害。
English: When Yang Hui lived in Neifu, he guarded it with a crossbow, and was injured by a crossbow when he died.

古文：杨后被废，贾后绝其膳八日而崩，葬街邮亭北，百姓哀之也。
现代文：杨后被废黜，贾后断其膳食八天后死去，葬在街邮亭北，百姓为她哀伤。
English: Empress Yang was deposed, Empress Jia broke her diet and died eight days later. She was buried in the north of Jiepu Pavilion, and the people mourned for her.

古文：雨火，武帝讳，兰，杨后字也。
现代文：两火，是武帝的名炎字；兰，是杨后的字。
English: "Two fires" is the famous flame character of Emperor Wu; "Lan" is the character of Empress Yang.

古文：其时又有童谣曰： 二月末，三月初，荆笔杨板行诏书，宫中大马几作驴。 
现代文：当时又有童谣说： 二月末，三月初，荆笔杨板行韶书，宫中大马几作驴。 
English: At that time, there was also a nursery rhyme that said: At the end of February and the beginning of March, the cymbals of the cymbals of the cymbals of the cymbals of the cymbals of the cymbals of the cymbals of the cymbals of the cymbals of the cymbals of the cymbals.

古文：此时杨骏专权，楚王用事，故言 荆笔杨板 。
现代文：造时杨骏专擅朝政，楚王当权，所以说 荆笔杨板 。
English: At the time of construction, Yang Xuan specialized in imperial politics, and King Chu was in power, so it is said that Jing Pen Yang Board is the best.

古文：二人不诛，则君臣礼悖，故云 几作驴 也。
现代文：二人不诛，君臣的礼节就有背逆，所以说 几作驴 。
English: If two people don't get along, the etiquette of the monarch and the minister will be violated, so it is said that some people are asses.

古文：元康中，京洛童谣曰： 南风起，吹白沙，遥望鲁国何嵯峨，千岁髑髅生齿牙。 
现代文：元康年间，京洛有童谣说： 南风起，吹白沙，遥望鲁国何嵯峨，千岁髑髅生齿牙。 
English: During the Yuan and Kang dynasties, there was a nursery rhyme in Jinglu that said: When the south wind blows, white sands are blown; when one looks into the distance, how majestic Lu is; when one is a thousand years old, one's teeth will be born.

古文：又曰： 城东马子莫咙哅，此至来年缠女閤。 
现代文：又说： 城东马子莫咙啕，等到来年缠你鬃。 
English: He also said, "In the eastern part of the city, there is a horse stud, and next year, it will be wrapped around you."

古文：南风，贾后字也。
现代文：南风，是贾后的字。
English: Nanfeng, is the character of Jia Guo.

古文：白，晋行也。
现代文：白，是晋朝的五行行色。
English: White is the color of the five elements of the Jin Dynasty.

古文：沙门，太子小名也。
现代文：沙门，是太子的小名。
English: Shamen is a nickname for the crown prince.

古文：鲁，贾谧国也。
现代文：鲁，是贾谧的封国。
English: Lu, is Jia Wei's fiefdom.

古文：言贾后将与谧为乱，以危太子，而赵王因衅咀嚼豪贤，以成篡夺，不得其死之应也。
现代文：是说贾后将要同贾谧作乱，危害太子，而赵王利用仇隙杀害豪杰贤士，将篡位夺权，是不得善终的应兆。
English: It is said that Empress Jia will make trouble with Empress Jia and endanger the crown prince, while King Zhao will use the opportunity to kill heroes and sages and usurp power, which is a sign of an unhappy ending.

古文：元康中，天下商农通著大鄣日。
现代文：元康年间，天下的商人农民流行戴大遮日帽。
English: During the Yuan and Kang Dynasties, it was popular for merchants and farmers around the world to wear large sunshade hats.

古文：时童谣曰： 屠苏鄣日覆两耳，当见瞎兒作天子。 
现代文：当时的童谣说： 屠苏鄣覆两耳，将见瞎儿作天子。 
English: The nursery rhyme at the time said: "Tu-su covers both ears, and makes the blind the son of heaven."

古文：及赵王伦篡位，其目实眇焉。
现代文：等到赵王司马伦篡位，他的一只眼确实是瞎的。
English: By the time Zhao Wang Simaren usurped the throne, he was indeed blind in one eye.

古文：赵王伦既篡，洛中童谣曰： 兽从北来鼻头汗，龙从南来登城看，水从西来河灌灌。 
现代文：趟王司马伦篡位后，洛城中有童谣说： 兽从北来鼻头汗，龙从南来登城看，水从西来河灌灌。 
English: After Wang Sima Lun usurped the throne, there was a nursery rhyme in Los Angeles that said: The beast sweats from the north, the dragon comes from the south to see the city, and the water comes from the west.

古文：数月而齐王、成都、河间义兵同会诛伦。
现代文：几个月后齐王、成都王、河间王兴义兵会集一起诛杀司马伦。
English: A few months later, King Qi, King Chengdu, and King Heung of Kawama gathered together to fight and kill Sima Lun.

古文：案成都西籓而在鄴，故曰 兽从北来。 
现代文：成都王分封在西而居住邺城，所以说 兽从北来 。
English: The king of Chengdu was exiled to the west and lived in Lucheng, so the beast came from the north.

古文：齐东籓而在许，故曰 龙从南来。 
现代文：齐王分封在束而居住许，所以说 龙从南来 。
English: King Qi was allowed to live in Shou, so it is said that the dragon came from the south.

古文：河间水源而在关中，故曰 水从西来 。
现代文：河间水的源头在阎中，所以说 水从西来 。
English: The source of the water between the rivers is in Yanzhong, so the water comes from the west.

古文：齐留辅政，居于宫西，又有无君之心，故言 登城看 也。
现代文：齐王留下辅佐朝政，居住在皇宫西边，他又有欺君之心，所以说 登城看 。
English: King Qi remained an assistant to the imperial government and lived on the west side of the imperial palace. He also had the heart to deceive the emperor, so he said, "Let's go to the city."

古文：太安中，童谣曰： 五马游渡江，一马化为龙。 
现代文：太安年间，童谣说： 五马游渡江，一马化为龙。 
English: During the Taian era, the nursery rhyme said: Five horses swim across the river, one horse turns into a dragon.

古文：后中原大乱，宗籓多绝，唯琅邪、汝南、西阳、南顿、彭城同至江东，而元帝嗣统矣。
现代文：后来中原大乱，宗室藩王大多灭绝，衹有琅邪王、汝南王、西阳王、南顿王、彭城王一同到了江东，而元帝继承了皇统。
English: Later, after the Central Plains War, most of the kings of the ancestral domains died out, and some of them, such as King Gongye, King Runan, King Xiyang, King Nantong, and King Pengcheng, went to the east of the Yangtze River, and Emperor Yuan inherited the imperial line.

古文：司马越还洛，有童谣曰： 洛中大鼠长尺二，若不早去大狗至。 
现代文：司马越返回盗城，有童谣说： 盗中大鼠长尺二，若不早去大狗至。 
English: When Sima Yue returned to the robbed city, there was a nursery rhyme that said: The rat in the robbery is two feet long. If not, it will soon become a big dog.

古文：及苟晞将破汲桑，又谣曰： 元超兄弟大落度，上桑打椹为苟作。 
现代文：等到苟晞将要攻破汲圣，又有童谣说： 元超兄弟大落度，上桑打椹为苟作。 
English: When Gohan is about to defeat Kushan, there is a nursery rhyme that says, "Former super brothers have fallen far, but Gohan is the best."

古文：由是越恶晞，夺其兗州，隙难遂构焉。
现代文：因此司马越厌恶苟晞，夺了他的兖州，仇怨患难于是产生。
English: As a result, Sima became more and more disgusted with Gou Ye and took away his Zhangzhou, which led to resentment and hardship.

古文：愍帝初，有童谣曰： 天子何在豆田中。 
现代文：愍帝初年，有童谣说： 天子何在豆田中。 
English: In the first year of Emperor Xuan, there was a nursery rhyme that said, "What is the Son of Heaven doing in a bean field?"

古文：至建兴四年，帝降刘曜，在城东豆田壁中。
现代文：到建兴四年，愍帝投降刘曜，就在城东的豆田壁中。
English: Four years into the construction, Emperor Gong surrendered to Liu You, right in the middle of the bean field wall in the east of the city.

古文：建兴中，江南谣歌曰：訇如白坑破，合集持作。
现代文：建兴年间，江南有歌谣说： 訇如白坑破，合集持作甑。
English: During the period of Jianxing, there was a folk song in the south of the Yangtze River that said: "The earth is cracked like a white pit.

古文：扬州破换败，吴兴覆瓿甊。 
现代文：扬州破换败，吴兴覆瓿甑。 
English: Yangzhou defeated, Wu Xing defeated.

古文：案白者，晋行。
现代文：白，是晋朝所定的五行之色。
English: White is the color of the five elements set by the Jin Dynasty.

古文：坑器有口属甕，瓦甕质刚，亦金之类也。 訇如白坑破 者，言二都倾覆，王室大坏也。 合集持作 者，元帝鸠集遗余，以主社稷，未能克复中原，但偏王江南，故其喻也。
现代文：坑器有属瓮，瓦瓮质地坚硬，也是金一类。 訇如白坑破 ，是说二都覆灭，王室败亡。 合集持作甑 ，是指元帝纠集遣留的人，成为社稷之主，不能够光复中原，衹是偏安统治江南，所以是他的比喻。
English: The pit is made of earthenware, and the hardness of the corrugated iron is similar to that of gold. If the white pit is broken, it means that the two are destroyed and the royal family is defeated. The collective holding of earthenware, refers to the people who were repatriated by the Yuan Emperor, became the master of the social earthenware, and could not recover the Central Plains, and the earthenware is ruled by the south of the Yangtze River, so it is his metaphor.

古文：及石头之事，六军大溃，兵人抄掠京邑，爰及二宫。
现代文：等到石头城战事，六军大溃败，士兵抢劫掠夺京师地区，殃及皇宫。
English: Wait until the battle of Stone Town, the great defeat of the Six Armies, the soldiers robbing and plundering the Beijing Division area, and the Imperial Palace.

古文：其后三年，钱凤复攻京邑，阻水而守，相持月余日，焚烧城邑，井堙木刊矣。
现代文：此后三年，钱凤又攻打京师，凭据江水守卫，相持一个多月，焚烧城乡，水井被填塞树木被砍伐。
English: In the following three years, Qianfeng attacked the Beijing Division again. According to the river guards, they held each other for more than a month, burning cities and villages, filling wells, and cutting down trees.

古文：凤等败退，沈充将其党还吴兴，官军踵之，蹈藉郡县，充父子授首，党与诛者以百数。
现代文：钱凤等人失败退走，沈充率领他的党徒返回吴兴，官军追击他，践踏郡县，沈充父子被斩首，其党徒被杀的数以百计。
English: Qian Feng and others retreated in defeat. Shen Chong led his party members back to Wu Xing. The government army chased him and trampled on counties and counties. Shen Chong and his son were beheaded, and hundreds of his party members were killed.

古文：所谓 扬州破换败，吴兴覆瓿甊 ，瓿甊瓦器，又小于也。
现代文：就是童谣所说的 扬州破换败，吴兴覆瓿砖 ，瓿砖是瓦器，又比显小。
English: It is what the nursery rhyme says, "Yangzhou breaks and changes, Wu Xing overturns the bricks," the bricks are tiles, and they are relatively small.

古文：明帝太宁初，童谣曰： 恻恻力力，放马山侧。
现代文：明帝太宁初年，童谣说： 恻恻力力，放马山侧。
English: In the first year of Emperor Taining of the Ming Dynasty, a nursery rhyme said: "If you can't beat them, join them."

古文：大马死，小马饿。
现代文：大马死，小马饿。
English: Dead horse, hungry pony.

古文：高山崩，石自破。 
现代文：高山崩，石自破。 
English: High mountain landslide, rock self-breaking.

古文：及明帝崩，成帝幼，为苏峻所逼，迁于石头，御膳不足，此 大马死，小马饿 也。
现代文：等到明帝死，成帝年幼，被苏峻逼迫，迁到石头，御用膳食不足，造就是 大马死，小马饿 。
English: Wait until Emperor Ming dies, Emperor Cheng is young, persecuted by Su Jun, moved to a stone, insufficient royal meals, the result is that the big horse dies and the little horse is hungry.

古文：高山，峻也，又言峻寻死。
现代文：高山，指苏峻，又说苏峻不久就死。
English: Takayama, referring to Su Jun, also said that Su Jun would die soon.

古文：石，峻弟苏石也。
现代文：石，指苏峻的弟弟苏石。
English: Shi, refers to Su Jun's younger brother, Su Shi.

古文：峻死后，石据石头，寻为诸公所破，复是崩山石破之应也。
现代文：苏峻死后，苏石据守石头，不久被诸人攻破，又是崩山石破的应兆。
English: After the death of Su Jun, Su Shi stood guard over the stone, which was soon breached by various people. It was also a sign of the collapse of the mountain.

古文：成帝之末，又有童谣曰： 盖盖何隆隆，驾车入梓宫。 
现代文：成帝末年，又有童谣说： 碴碴何隆隆，驾车入梓宫。 
English: In the last years of Emperor Chengdu, there was also a nursery rhyme that said: 何隆隆,驾驶車入梓宮.

古文：少日而宫车晏驾。
现代文：没过几天旦适就死了。
English: He died a few days later.

古文：咸康二年十二月，河北谣云： 麦入土，杀石武。 
现代文：咸康二年十二月，河北歌谄说： 麦入土，杀石武。 
English: In December of the second year of Hamkang, Hebei Gouyu said: "Grain into the soil, kill stone.

古文：后如谣言。
现代文：后来就像歌谣所说的那样。
English: Later, as the song says.

古文：庾亮初镇武昌，出至石头，百姓于岸上歌曰： 庾公上武昌，翩翩如飞鸟。
现代文：庾亮起初镇守武昌，出到石头，百姓在岸上歌唱道： 庾公上武昌，翩翩如飞鸟。
English: At the beginning of the Ming Dynasty, Zhi Liang was in charge of Wuchang, and when he went out to the stone, the people sang on the shore: Zhi Gong went to Wuchang, dancing like a bird.

古文：庾公还扬州，白马牵旒旐。 
现代文：庾公还扬州，白马牵旒施。 
English: Shigong returned to Yangzhou, and a white horse led him to Shishi.

古文：又曰： 庾公初上时，翩翩如飞乌。
现代文：又说： 庾公初上时，翩翩如飞乌。
English: He also said: "At the beginning of his career, Zang Gong was as graceful as a feather.

古文：庾公还扬州，白马牵流苏。 
现代文：庾公还扬州，白马牵流苏。 
English: Shao Gong returned to Yangzhou, and the white horse pulled the tassel.

古文：后连征不入，及薨于镇，以丧还都葬，皆如谣言。
现代文：后来连续征召他都不入朝，直到在镇所去世，以丧殡送回京都安葬，都像歌谣所说的。
English: Later, he was continuously conscripted and did not enter the imperial court, until he died in the town hall and was sent back to Kyoto for burial, as the ballad says.

古文：穆帝升平中，童兒辈忽歌于道曰《阿子闻》，曲终辄云 阿子汝闻不 ？
现代文：穆帝升平年间，孩童们忽然在路上唱《阿子闻》，曲终全是 阿子你听到否 。
English: During the years of Mu Di's rise to the peerage, the children suddenly sang "A Zi Wen" on the road, and the end of the song was all about A Zi, do you hear it?

古文：无几而帝崩，太后哭之曰： 阿子汝闻不？ 
现代文：没多久秀睦崩，太后哭他说： 阿子你听到否? 
English: Not long after his death, the Empress Dowager cried and said to him, "Azi, did you hear?

古文：升平末，俗间忽作《廉歌》，有扈谦者闻之曰： 廉者，临也。
现代文：升平末年，民间忽然出现《廉歌》，有个叫扈谦的人听到此歌说： 廉，是临。
English: At the end of the Heian period, the folk song "Lian Ge" suddenly appeared. A man named Zou Qian heard this song and said: "Lian, is Rin."

古文：歌云 白门廉，宫庭廉 ，内外悉临，国家其大讳乎！ 
现代文：歌中说 白门廉，宫庭廉，内外都临，国家要有大忌的事了! 
English: In the song, it says, "Bai Men Liang, Gong Ting Liang, both inside and outside, the country must have a big taboo!"

古文：少时而穆帝晏驾。哀帝隆和初，童谣曰： 升平不满斗，隆和那得久！
现代文：不久穆帝死。哀帝隆和初年，童谣说： 升平不满斗，隆和那得久。
English: Not long after, Mu Di died. In mourning for the first year of Long Ho, the nursery rhyme says: "Shang Ping was dissatisfied with the fight, Long Ho took a long time."

古文：桓公入石头，陛下徒跣走。 
现代文：桓公入石头，陛下徒跣走。 
English: Prince Kan fell into the stone, and His Majesty walked away.

古文：朝廷闻而恶之，改年曰兴宁。
现代文：朝廷听说后很厌恶，改年号为兴宁。
English: The Imperial Court was disgusted after hearing about it, and changed the year name to Xingning.

古文：人复歌曰： 虽复改兴宁，亦复无聊生。 
现代文：人们又唱道： 虽复改兴宁，亦复无聊生。 
English: People also sang: Although the reform and opening-up has been resumed, it is also a boring life.

古文：哀旁寿崩。
现代文：哀帝不久死。
English: The emperor died soon after.

古文：升平五年而穆帝崩， 不满斗 ，升平不至十年也。
现代文：升平五年穆帝死， 不满斗 ，指升平不到十年。
English: After five years of leveling, Mu Di died, dissatisfied with the fight, referring to less than ten years of leveling.

古文：海西公太和中，百姓歌曰： 青青御路杨，白马紫游缰。
现代文：海西公太和年间，百姓歌唱说： 青青御路杨，白马紫游缰。
English: During the reign of Empress Dowager Haixi, the people sang: Qingqing Moji Yang, Bai Ma Ziyu Yao.

古文：汝非皇太子，那得甘露浆？ 
现代文：你非皇太子，那得甘露浆。 
English: If you're not a crown prince, you have to be a nectarine.

古文：识者曰： 白者，金行，马者，国族。
现代文：有识之士说： 白色，对五行中的金。马，指皇族。
English: Those with insight said: White, for the gold in the five elements. Horse, refers to the royal family.

古文：紫为夺正之色，明以紫间硃也。 
现代文：紫是侵夺正色的颜色，表明是用紫色混杂朱色。 
English: Purple is a color that invades the true color, indicating that it is a mixture of purple and vermilion.

古文：海西公寻废，其三子并非海西公之子，缢以马缰。
现代文：海西公很快被废黜，他的三个儿子都不是海西公的亲生儿子，被用马缰勒死。
English: Haishigong was soon deposed, and his three sons, who were not his real sons, were strangled with horse manure.

古文：死之明日，南方献甘露马。
现代文：死后第二天，南方进献甘露。
English: The day after his death, the South presented him with nectar.

古文：太和末，童谣曰： 犁牛耕御路，白门种小麦。 
现代文：太和末年，童谣说： 犁牛耕御路，白门种小麦。 
English: At the end of the Taiwa era, a nursery rhyme said: "The snail ploughs the road, the white gate grows wheat."

古文：及海西公被废，百姓耕其门以种小麦，遂如谣言。
现代文：等到海西公被废黜，百姓在他屋门处耕地种上小麦，就像童谣所说的。
English: Wait until Haisi Gong is dethroned, and the people will cultivate land and plant wheat at the door of his house, as the nursery rhyme says.

古文：海西公初生皇子，百姓歌云： 凤皇生一雏，天下莫不喜。
现代文：海西公刚生皇子，百姓歌唱说： 凤凰生一雏，天下莫不喜。
English: Haixi Gongang gave birth to a prince, and the people sang: "When a phoenix gives birth, the whole world rejoices."

古文：本言是马驹，今定成龙子。 
现代文：本言是马驹，今定成龙子。 
English: This is horse manure, now destined to become dragon eggs.

古文：其歌甚美，其旨甚微。
现代文：歌曲很美，但没有深意。
English: It's a beautiful song, but it's not deep.

古文：海西公不男，使左右向龙与内侍接，生子，以为己子。
现代文：海西公有男性疾病，让身边的向龙和后宫侍女同房，生儿子，作为自己的儿子。
English: Haixi Gong has a male disease, so that the dragon next to him and the harem maid live together and have a son, as his own son.

古文：桓石民为荆州，镇上明，百姓忽歌曰 黄昙子 。
现代文：桓石民统领荆州，镇守上明，百姓忽然唱歌谣 黄昙子 。
English: The people of Huanshi led Jingzhou, the town guard was Shangming, and the people suddenly sang the ballad Huang Zizi.

古文：曲中又曰： 黄昙英，扬州大佛来上明。 
现代文：曲子末尾又说： 黄昙英，扬州大佛来上明。 
English: At the end of the piece, it also says: Huang Xingying, the Great Buddha of Yangzhou has come to Shangming.

古文：顷之而桓石民死，王忱为荆州。
现代文：不久桓石民死，王忱统领荆州。
English: Soon after, Huan Shi Min died, and Wang Zhen took over the leadership of Jing Province.

古文：黄昙子乃是王忱字也。
现代文：黄昙子是王忱的字。
English: Huang Zizi is the character of Wang Zhen.

古文：忱小字佛大，是 大佛来上明 也。
现代文：王忱小字佛大，就是 大佛来上明。 
English: Wang Zhen's small character "佛大" means "Big Buddha" to clarify.

古文：孝武帝太元末，京口谣曰： 黄雌鸡，莫作雄父啼。
现代文：孝武帝太元末年，京有歌认说： 黄雌鶸，莫作雄父啼。
English: At the end of Emperor Xiaowu's reign in the first century, there was a song in Beijing that said, "If you can't be a male, you can't be a female."

古文：一旦去毛衣，衣被拉飒栖。 
现代文：一旦去毛衣，衣被拉飒栖。 
English: Once the sweater is removed, the clothes are pulled up and put away.

古文：寻而王恭起兵诛王国宝，旋为刘牢之所败，故言 拉飒栖 也。
现代文：不久王恭起兵杀王国宝，很快被刘牢之打败，所以说 拉飒栖 。
English: Wang Gong soon raised an army to kill the treasure of the kingdom, and was soon defeated by Liu Duzhi, so it is said that he was defeated.

古文：会稽王道子于东府造土山，名曰灵秀山。
现代文：会稽王司马道子在东府造土山，起名灵秀山。
English: Wang Sima Daozi, the Auditor-General of the CPC Central Committee, made a mountain of earth in Dongfu and named it Lingxiu Mountain.

古文：无几而孙恩作乱，再践会稽。
现代文：不久孙恩作乱，两次攻占会稽。
English: Soon after, Sun En started a riot and occupied the auditorium twice.

古文：会稽，道子所封；灵秀，孙恩之字也
现代文：会稽，是道王的封地；灵秀，是孙恩的字。
English: Cui Jing, is the fiefdom of Tao Wang; Ling Xiu, is the word of Sun En.

古文：庾楷镇历阳，百姓歌曰： 重罗黎，重罗黎，使君南上无还时。 
现代文：庾楷镇守历阳，百姓歌唱说： 重罗黎，重罗黎，使君南上无还时。 
English: The town of Shukai guarded Liyang, and the people sang: "Heavy Luo Li, heavy Luo Li, there is no turning back when you go south."

古文：后楷南奔桓玄，为玄所诛。
现代文：后来庾楷南去投奔桓玄，被桓玄所杀。
English: Later, Zou Kai Nan went to fight for Kuan Xuan and was killed by Kuan Xuan.

古文：殷仲堪在荆州，童谣曰： 芒笼目，绳缚腹。
现代文：殷仲堪在荆州，童谣说： 芒笼目，绳缚腹。
English: Yin Zhongkan in Jingzhou, the nursery rhyme says: "Mang cage eyes, tethered belly."

古文：殷当败，桓当复。 
现代文：殷当败，桓当复。 
English: If you fail, you must try again.

古文：未几而仲堪败，桓玄遂有荆州。
现代文：不久殷仲堪失败，桓玄占有了荆州。
English: Soon after, Yin Zhongkan failed, and Huan Xuan took possession of Jingzhou.

古文：王恭镇京口，举兵诛王国宝。
现代文：王恭镇守京口，起兵杀王国宝。
English: Wang Qiong Zhen guarded Jingkou and raised an army to kill the treasure of the kingdom.

古文：百姓谣云： 昔年食白饭，今年食麦麸。
现代文：百姓有歌谣说： 昔年食白饭，今年食麦麸。
English: There is a folk song that says: In the past, people ate plain rice, but this year they will eat wheat bran.

古文：天公诛谪汝，教汝捻咙喉。
现代文：天公诛谪汝，教汝捻咙喉。
English: For heaven's sake, wind your neck in.

古文：咙喉喝复喝，京口败复败。 
现代文：咙喉喝复喝，京口败复败。 
English: Throat-to-throat, back-and-forth, back-and-forth.

古文：识者曰： 昔年食白饭，言得志也。
现代文：有识之士说： 昔年食白饭，是说得志。
English: Those with insight said: It's true to say that eating white rice in the old days was a dream come true.

古文：今年食麦麸，麸粗秽，其精已去，明将败也，天公将加谴谪而诛之也。
现代文：今年食麦麸，麦麸粗劣，精华已经去掉，说明将要败，天公将降下责罚而诛杀。
English: This year, the wheat bran has been eaten, the wheat bran is coarse and inferior, and the essence has been removed, indicating that it will be defeated, and God will punish and kill it.

古文：捻咙喉，气不通，死之祥也。
现代文：捻咙喉，气不通，是死亡的象征。
English: Laryngospasm, shortness of breath, is a symbol of death.

古文：败复败，丁宁之辞也。 
现代文：败复败，是叮咛的话。 
English: Defeat and re-defeat is a mantra.

古文：恭寻死，京都又大行亥疾，而喉并喝焉。
现代文：王恭不久死去，京都又大规模流行咳病，喉咙都噎塞了。
English: Wang Gong died soon after, and there was another large-scale epidemic of coughing in Kyoto. People's throats were choked.

古文：王恭在京口，百姓间忽云； 黄头小兒欲作贼，阿公在城，下指缚得。 
现代文：王恭在京口，百姓中间忽然传唱： 黄头小儿欲作贼，阿公在城，下指缚得。 
English: Wang Qiong was in the capital, and suddenly a song spread among the people: Yellow-headed child wants to be a thief, grandpa is in the city, he is bound by his thumb.

古文：又云： 黄头小人欲作乱，赖得金刀作籓扞。 
现代文：又说： 黄头小人欲作乱，赖得金刀作藩捍。 
English: He also said: The yellow-headed villain wants to create turmoil and relies on the golden sword to defend the domain.

古文：黄字上恭字头也，小人恭字下也，寻如谣言者焉。
现代文： 黄 字上面是 恭 字的字头， 小人 是 恭 字的下部，不久后正像歌谒所说的那样。
English: Huangzhu above is the prefix of Gongzhu, and Xiaoren is the lower part of Gongzhu. Soon, it will be just like Guo Yao said.

古文：安帝隆安中，百姓忽作《懊憹》之歌，其曲曰： 草生可揽结，女兒可揽撷。 
现代文：安帝隆安中，百姓忽然流传《懊侬》歌，歌曲说： 草生可揽结，女儿可揽撷。 
English: In the middle of the Andean Longan, the people suddenly spread the "Chen Nong" song. The song said: Grass can be gathered, and daughters can be gathered.

古文：寻而桓玄篡位，义旗以三月二日扫定京都，诛之。
现代文：不久后桓玄篡位，义军在三月二日扫荡平定京都，杀桓玄。
English: Soon after Kuan Xuan usurped the throne, the rebel army swept in on March 2nd to pacify Kyoto and kill Kuan Xuan.

古文：玄之宫女及逆党之家子女妓妾悉为军赏，东及瓯越，北流淮泗，皆人有所获。
现代文：桓玄的宫女以及逆党家中的子女歌妓婢妾都赏赐军队，柬到瓯越，北至淮泗，都有所得。
English: Kuan Xuan's concubines, as well as the children, courtesans, maids, and concubines of the families of the rebels, were all rewarded by the army, and the Cambodians received income from as far away as Suiyue and as far north as Huai'an.

古文：故言时则草可结，事则女可撷也。
现代文：所以说草可以捆结，女子可以取得。
English: Therefore, it is said that grass can be tied up, and women can get it.

古文：桓玄既篡，童谣曰： 草生及马腹，乌啄桓玄目。 
现代文：桓玄篡位后，童谣说： 草生及马腹，乌啄但塞目。 
English: After Kuan Xuan usurped the throne, the nursery rhyme said: Grass grows and the horse's belly, and the blackbird does not see.

古文：及玄败，走至江陵，时正五月中，诛如其期焉。
现代文：等到盘失败，逃到江陵，时间正是五月中，被杀就是歌谣所说的日期。
English: He waited until the gamble failed and fled to Gangneung. The time was in mid-May, and he was killed on the date mentioned in the song.

古文：安帝义熙初，童谣曰： 官家养芦化成荻，芦生不止自成积。 
现代文：安帝义熙初年，童谣说： 官家养芦化成荻，芦生不止自成积。 
English: In the first year of Emperor Yixi's reign, a nursery rhyme said: "Officials raise reeds and turn them into reeds, but the reeds themselves are more than just reeds.

古文：其时官养卢龙，宠以金紫，奉以名州，养之极也。
现代文：遣时官府奉养卢龙，用金银紫帛宠爱他，敬献他有名的州，是奉养的极致了。
English: When he was sent to the government, he raised Lulong, pampered him with gold, silver and purple, and honored his famous state. This was the ultimate in fostering.

古文：而龙不能怀我好音，举兵内伐，遂成仇敌也。 芦生不止自成积 ，及卢龙之败，斩伐其党，犹如草木以成积也。
现代文：然而卢龙不能心念对他的恩惠，起兵攻伐内地，便成为仇敌。 芦生不止自成积 ，等到卢龙失败，诛灭他的同党，就像草木砍伐后积成堆一样。
English: However, Lulong couldn't think of doing him a favor, so he raised an army to invade the inland and became an enemy.

古文：卢龙据广州，人为之谣曰： 芦生漫漫竟天半。 
现代文：卢龙占据广州，人们作歌谣说： 芦生漫漫竟天半。 
English: Lulong occupies Guangzhou, and people make songs saying: Lousheng is the longest day in the world.

古文：后挤上流数州之地，内逼京辇，应 天半 之言。
现代文：后来他拥有上游几个州的地方，进逼京师，应了 天半 的话。
English: Later, he owned the upstream of several states, and entered the Beijing division, which was half a day's work.

古文：义熙二年，小兒相逢于道，辄举其两手曰 卢健健 ，次曰 斗叹斗叹 ，末曰 翁年老翁年老 。
现代文：义熙二年，小孩子在路上相遇，往往就举起两手说 卢健健 ，接着说 斗叹斗叹 ，最后说 翁年老翁年老 。
English: In the second year of Yixi, when children met on the road, they often held up their hands and said "Lu Jianjian," followed by "Dou sigh," and finally "Weng senile."

古文：当时莫知所谓。
现代文：当时没有人知道说的是什么。
English: At the time, no one knew what was said.

古文：其后卢龙内逼，舟舰盖川， 健健 之谓也。
现代文：此后卢龙进逼内地，舟舰覆盖江面，就是 健健 之意。
English: After that, Lu Long marched inland and covered the surface of the river with boats, which is the meaning of Jian Jian.

古文：既至查浦，屡克期欲与官斗， 斗叹 之应也。 翁年老 ，群公有期颐之庆，知妖逆之徒自然消殄也。
现代文：他到达查浦后，多次约定日期想要同官军决战，就是 斗叹 的应兆。 翁年老 ，是说众公卿有长命百岁的吉庆，知道妖贼叛逆之徒自然会消灭。
English: After he arrived in Zhapu, he repeatedly agreed on the date of the decisive battle with the government army, which was a sign of sighing. 翁老, is to say that the nobles have a long life of a hundred years, knowing that the traitors and traitors will naturally be eliminated.

古文：其时复有谣言曰； 卢橙橙，逐水流，东风忽如起，那得入石头！ 
现代文：这时又有歌谣说： 卢橙橙，逐水流，东风忽如起，那得入石头。 
English: At this time, there are also songs saying: Lu oranges oranges, the water flows, the east wind suddenly rises, that has to go into the stone.

古文：卢龙果败，不得入石头也。
现代文：卢龙果然失败，没能进入石头。
English: Lulong failed to enter the stone.

古文：昔温峤令郭景纯卜己与庾亮吉凶，景纯云： 元吉。 
现代文：当年温崤让郭景纯占卜自己和庾亮的吉凶，景纯说： 元吉。 
English: At that time, Wenqi asked Guo Jingshun to divine the fortunes of himself and Zhao Liang. Jingshun said: Yuanji.

古文：峤语亮曰： 景纯每筮是，不敢尽言。
现代文：温矫对庾亮说： 景纯常占筮很对，不敢全部说出来。
English: Wen Jiao said to Yao Liang: "Jing Junjang is right, I dare not say it all.

古文：吾等与国家同安危，而曰 元吉 ，是事有成也。 
现代文：我们舆国家共安危，而说 元吉，这是说事情会成功。 
English: Our two countries are safe and sound, and if we say that things are going well, it means that things will be successful.

古文：于是协同讨灭王敦。
现代文：于是共同讨伐灭了王敦。
English: As a result, they jointly defeated Wang Dun.

古文：苻坚初，童谣云： 阿坚连牵三十年，后若欲败时，当在江湖边。 
现代文：苻坚初年，童谣说： 阿坚连牵三十年，后若欲败时，当在江湖边。 
English: In the first year of Zou Jian, the nursery rhyme said: "A Jian has been held captive for thirty years. If you want to be defeated later, you should be at the edge of the lake."

古文：及坚在位凡三十年，败于淝水，是其应也。
现代文：等到苻坚在位总计三十年，在淝水战败，这是其应兆。
English: By the time Geng Jian had been on the throne for a total of thirty years, he was defeated in the Battle of Surabaya, which was a sign of things to come.

古文：又谣语云： 河水清复清，苻坚死新城。 
现代文：又有歌谣说： 河水清复清，苻坚死新城。 
English: There are also ballads that say: The river is clear and clear, and the new city is dying.

古文：及坚为姚苌所杀，死于新城。
现代文：苻坚被姚苌所杀，死在新城。
English: Yu Jian was killed by Yao Yao and died in Xincheng.

古文：复谣歌云： 鱼羊田升当灭秦。 
现代文：又有歌谣说： 鱼羊田升当灭秦。 
English: There is also a ballad that says: "Fish and sheep fields should be elevated to exterminate Qin."

古文：识者以为 鱼羊，鲜也；田升，卑也，坚自号秦，言灭之者鲜卑也。 
现代文：有识之士认为 鱼羊，是鲜；田升，是卑。苻坚自号秦，说的是消灭他的是鲜卑。 
English: Those with insight believe that fish and sheep are fresh; Tian Sheng is inferior. Zou Jian calls himself Qin, saying that to eliminate him is to be inferior.

古文：其群臣谏坚，令尽诛鲜卑，坚不从。
现代文：群臣劝谏苻坚，让他杀所有的鲜卑人，苻坚不听从。
English: The group of courtiers advised Gong Jian to kill all the commoners, but Gong Jian did not listen.

古文：及淮南败还，初为慕容冲所攻，又为姚苌所杀，身死国灭。
现代文：等到在淮南失败逃回，先是被慕容冲打败，又被姚苌所杀，身死而国灭。
English: When he failed to escape back to Huainan, he was first defeated by Murong Chong and then killed by Yao Qi, dying for his country.

古文：毛虫之孽武帝太康六年，南阳献两足猛兽，此毛虫之孽也。
现代文：武帝太康六年，南阳进献两足的猛兽，这是毛虫的妖孽。
English: In the sixth year of Emperor Wu Taikang, Nanyang presented a two-legged beast, which is the witchcraft of caterpillars.

古文：识者为其文曰： 武形有亏，金兽失仪，圣主应天，期异何为！ 
现代文：有识之士作文说： 武形有亏，金兽失仪，圣主应天，此异何为。 
English: A person of insight said in a composition: There is a disadvantage in the form of weapons, gold and beasts are immoral, and the Lord is heavenly. What is the difference?

古文：言兆乱也。
现代文：说预兆着战乱。
English: It's a harbinger of war.

古文：京房《易传》曰： 足少者，下不胜任也。 
现代文：京房《易传》说： 足部缺少，是指下面不能胜任。 
English: Sayaka "I Chuan" said: If you lack legs, you are not competent.

古文：干宝以为： 兽者阴精，居于阳，金兽也。
现代文：干宝认为： 兽是阴气之精，在阳气中，是金兽。
English: Gan Bao believed that: the beast is the essence of yin, and in the yang, it is a golden beast.

古文：南阳，火名也。
现代文：南阳，是火名。
English: Nanyang is a brand name.

古文：金精入火而失其形，王室乱之妖也。 
现代文：金精入火而失去其形，是王室动乱的妖异。 
English: The golden genie going into the fire and losing its shape is a sign of royal turmoil.

古文：六，水数，言水数既极，火慝得作，而金受其败也。
现代文：六，是水数，是说水数已经达到极点，火灾就会发作，而金就会受到损害。
English: Sixth, is the water quantity, that is to say, the water quantity has reached the extreme, the fire will occur, and the gold will be damaged.

古文：至元康九年，始杀太子，距此十四年。
现代文：到元康九年，杀死太子，距此时有十四年。
English: In the ninth year of the reign of Yuan Kang, the crown prince was killed, fourteen years have passed since then.

古文：二七十四，火始终相乘之数也。
现代文：二七十四，是火始终相乘的数。
English: 274 is the number of fire multiplied by itself.

古文：自帝受命，至愍怀之废，凡三十五年焉。
现代文：从武帝承受天命，到愍怀太子被废黜，总计三十五年。
English: From Emperor Wu receiving the Mandate of Heaven to the dethronement of Emperor Huai, a total of thirty-five years have passed.

古文：太康七年十一月丙辰，四角兽见于河间，河间王颙获以献。
现代文：太康七年十一月丙辰，四角兽出现在河间，河间王司马颐捕获进献朝廷。
English: In November of the 7th year of Taikang, the four-horned beast appeared in Hema. King Sima Yi of Hema captured it and presented it to the imperial court.

古文：天戒若曰，角，兵象也，四者，四方之象，当有兵乱起于四方。
现代文：天戒像是说，角，是兵的象征，四，是四方的象征，将会有军队战乱在四方兴起。
English: Heaven's ring is like saying, horn, is the symbol of soldiers, four, is the symbol of the four directions, there will be army turmoil arising in the four directions.

古文：后河间王遂连四方之兵，作为乱阶，殆其应也。
现代文：后来河间王终于联合四方的军队，开始了动乱，造就是应兆。
English: Later, King Kawama finally united the armies of the four sides and started the turmoil, which was a good omen.

古文：怀帝永嘉五年，蝘鼠出延陵。
现代文：怀帝永嘉五年，妪鼠出现在延陵。
English: In the fifth year of Emperor Wei's reign, a mole appeared in Yanling.

古文：郭景纯筮之曰： 此郡东之县，当有妖人欲称制者，亦寻自死矣。 
现代文：郭景纯卜筮说： 此郡东的县中，将会有妖人想要自立为王，也会很快自己死去。 
English: Guo Jingshun Bu said: In this county in the east of the county, there will be monsters who want to become kings, and they will soon die.

古文：其后吴兴徐馥作乱，杀太守袁琇，馥亦时灭，是其应也。
现代文：此后吴兴的徐馥作乱，杀死太守袁诱，徐馥也在当时灭亡，这是应兆。
English: After that, Wu Xing's Xu Yao made a disturbance and killed the governor Yuan Yu. Xu Yao also died at that time, which was a sign.

古文：成帝咸和六年正月丁巳，会州郡秀孝于乐贤堂，有麏见于前，获之。
现代文：成帝咸和六年正月丁巳，在乐贤堂会集州郡中的秀才孝廉，有磨在前面出现，捕获。
English: In the first month of the sixth year of the reign of Emperor Chengdi and Emperor Xianhe, in the middle of the meeting of the Le Xian Tang Association in Zhouzhou County, the brilliant scholar Xiaolian, appeared in front of the mill and was captured.

古文：孙盛以为吉祥。
现代文：孙盛认为是吉祥。
English: Sun Sheng believed it to be auspicious.

古文：夫秀孝，天下之彦士；乐贤堂，所以乐养贤也。
现代文：秀才孝廉，是天下的贤士；乐贤堂，是养贤士的地方。
English: The gifted and filial are the sages of the world; Le Xian Tang is the place to raise the sages.

古文：自丧乱以后，风教陵夷，秀孝策试，乏四科之实。
现代文：从丧乱以后，风俗教化遭到破坏，秀才孝廉的策对应试，缺乏四科之实。
English: After the turmoil, the education of customs was destroyed, the policy of "brilliance and filial piety" was put to the test, and the four disciplines were lacking.

古文：麏兴于前，或斯故乎？
现代文：麖在前面出现，或许是这个缘故?
English: Maybe that's why the dragonfly appears in the foreground?

古文：哀帝隆和元年十月甲申，有麈入东海第。
现代文：哀帝隆和元年十月甲申，有尘进入东海王府第。
English: In October of the first year of Emperor Yongle and Emperor Jiaxun, there was dust entering the East Sea King's Palace.

古文：百姓欢言曰： 麈入东海第 ，识者怪之。
现代文：百姓喧哗说 麈入束海府第 ，有识之士认为很怪。
English: The common people were clamoring to get into Sokhaifu, but people with insight thought it was strange.

古文：及海西废为东海王，乃入其第。
现代文：等到海西公被废为束海王，就进入此府第中。
English: He entered this prefectural junior high school when Haisigong was abolished as Sokkaio.

古文：孝武太元十三年四月癸巳，祠庙毕，有兔行庙堂上。
现代文：孝武帝太元十三年四月癸巳，祖庙祭祀结束，有兔子在庙堂上奔跑。
English: On the 13th day of the 4th month of the 13th year of the reign of Emperor Xiaowu, the ancestral temple ritual ended, and a rabbit ran across the temple.

古文：天戒若曰，兔，野物也，而集宗庙之堂，不祥莫之甚焉。
现代文：天戒像是说，兔，是野生动物，而会集在宗庙的厅堂上，没有比这更为不祥的了。
English: Heaven's ring is like saying that rabbits are wild animals, and nothing is more ominous than gathering in the hall of the ancestral temple.

古文：犬祸公孙文懿家有犬，冠帻绛衣上屋，此犬祸也。
现代文：公孙文懿家有条狗，头戴包巾穿着绛色衣服上到屋顶，这是犬祸。
English: Gongsun Wenjuan's family has a dog that wears a scarf on its head and goes up to the roof while wearing navy-colored clothes. This is a dog accident.

古文：屋上，亢阳高危之地。
现代文：屋上，是阳气高危的地方。
English: The rooftop is a place with a high risk of yang qi.

古文：天戒若曰，亢阳无上，偷自尊高，狗而冠者也。
现代文：天戒像是说，阳气不能上，偷自尊贵，就出现狗戴冠的。
English: Heaven's ring seems to say that yang qi cannot be ascended, stealing self-respect, there will be a dog wearing a crown.

古文：及文懿自立为燕王，果为魏所灭。
现代文：等到塞垄自立为夔王，果然被委蝈消灭。
English: Wait until the Selenga becomes the king of the dragonflies, and it will be destroyed by the dragonflies.

古文：京房《易传》曰： 君不正，臣欲篡，厥妖狗出朝门。 
现代文：塞庆《易传》说： 君王不正，臣子想要篡位，妖异的狗就会出朝廷之门。 
English: Sai Qing's "Easy Biography" said: The monarch is crooked, the vassal wants to usurp the throne, and a strange dog will appear at the gate of the imperial court.

古文：魏侍中应璩在直庐，欻见一白狗出门，问众人，无见者。
现代文：魏侍中应璩在值宿处所，忽然看见一只白狗出门，问众人，没有人看见。
English: Wei Waizhong, who was on duty at the lodging place, suddenly saw a white dog go out and asked everyone, but no one saw it.

古文：逾年卒，近犬祸也。
现代文：过了一年应璩死，这是近于犬祸。
English: After a year, Ying Ying died, which was close to a dog accident.

古文：吴诸葛恪征淮南归，将朝会，犬衔引其衣。
现代文：吴诸葛恪征讨淮南归来，将去上朝见君王，狗咬拽他的衣服。
English: Wu Zhuge will fight for the return of Huainan, will go to the Shang Dynasty to see the king, and the dog will bite and pull his clothes.

古文：恪曰： 犬不欲我行乎？ 
现代文：诸葛恪说： 狗不想让我走吗? 
English: Zhuge Ke said: Does the dog not want me to go?

古文：还坐。
现代文：返回坐下。
English: Go back and sit down.

古文：有顷复起，犬又衔衣，乃令逐犬，遂升车，入而被害。
现代文：稍后又起身，狗又咬着他的衣服，就命人赶走狗，登上车，入朝便遭到杀害。
English: When he got up later, the dog bit his clothes again, so he ordered someone to chase the dog away, boarded a car, and was killed in the morning.

古文：武帝太康九年，幽州有犬，鼻行地三百余步。
现代文：武帝太康九年，幽州有狗，用鼻子在地上走了三百多步。
English: In the ninth year of Emperor Wu Taikang, there was a dog in Yuzhou that walked more than three hundred steps on the ground with its nose.

古文：天戒若曰，是时帝不思和峤之言，卒立惠帝，以致衰乱，是言不从之罚也。
现代文：天戒像是说，这时武帝不考虑和堕的话，最终立了塞童，造成衰败战乱，这是对不听忠言的惩罚。
English: Heaven's ring seems to say that at this time, Emperor Wu did not consider and fell, and finally set up a child, causing decay and war, which is a punishment for not listening to advice.

古文：惠帝元康中，吴郡娄县人家闻地中有犬子声，掘之，得雌雄各一。
现代文：惠帝元康年间，吴郡娄县有人在家中听到地底下有狗崽的叫声，挖地，得到雌犬雄犬各一只。
English: During the reign of Hui Di Yuan Kang, someone in Jixian County, Wuxi County, heard the cries of dogs under the ground in his home, dug up the ground, and got a female dog and a male dog.

古文：还置窟中，覆以磨石，经宿失所在。
现代文：放回洞中，盖上磨石，过了一夜，找不到在何处。
English: Put it back in the hole, covered it with a grindstone, spent the night, and couldn't find it anywhere.

古文：天戒若曰，帝既衰弱，籓王相谮，故有犬祸。
现代文：天戒像是说，惠帝已很衰弱，分封各地诸侯王相互诋毁，所以有犬祸。
English: Heaven's ring seemed to say that Hui Di was already very weak, and the princes of the various provinces slandered each other, so there was a dog accident.

古文：永兴元年，丹阳内史硃逵家犬生三子，皆无头。
现代文：永兴元年，丹杨内史朱逵家犬生三崽，都没有头。
English: In the first year of Yongxing, there were three puppies born in the Danyang Neishi Zhuye family, all without heads.

古文：后逵为扬州刺史曹武所杀。
现代文：后来朱逵被扬州刺史曹武杀死。
English: Later, Zhu Xi was killed by Yangzhou assassin Cao Wu.

古文：孝怀帝永嘉五年，吴郡嘉兴张林家狗人言云： 天下人饿死。 
现代文：孝怀帝永嘉五年，吴郡嘉兴张林家狗说人话道： 天下人饿死。 
English: In the fifth year of Xiao Huai Di Yongjia, the dog of the Zhang Lin family in Jiaxing, Wuxi County, said: People are starving to death.

古文：于是果有二胡之乱，天下饥荒焉。
现代文：于是果然有二胡之乱，天下发生饥荒。
English: As a result, the Erhu War broke out, and a famine occurred throughout the world.

古文：愍帝建兴元年，狗与猪交。
现代文：愍帝建兴元年，狗同猪交合。
English: In the first year of Emperor Jianxing's reign, dogs mated with pigs.

古文：案《汉书》，景帝时有此，以为悖乱之气，亦犬豕祸也。
现代文：考查《汉书》，景帝时有这样的事，认为是荒谬惑乱的征象，也是犬猪灾祸。
English: According to the examination of the "Chinese Classics," there was such a thing in the time of Emperor Jing, which was considered to be a sign of absurdity and confusion, as well as a disaster for dogs and pigs.

古文：犬，兵革之占也。
现代文：犬，是兵甲的征候。
English: A dog is a sign of a warrior.

古文：豕，北方匈奴之象。
现代文：猪，是北方鱼趣的象征。
English: The pig is a symbol of northern fish culture.

古文：逆言失听，异类相交，必生害也。
现代文：忠言逆耳，不同的动物相交，必定发生祸患。
English: If the advice is not heeded, and different animals come into contact with each other, there is bound to be a disaster.

古文：饿而帝没于胡，是其应也。
现代文：不久愍帝被胡人掳去，就是它的应兆。
English: Soon after, Emperor Xuan was taken captive by the Hu people, which is a sign of its response.

古文：元帝太兴中，吴郡太守张懋闻斋内床下犬声，求而不得。
现代文：元帝太兴年间，吴郡太守张懋听到斋堂内床下有犬吠声，寻找却没有找到。
English: During the reign of Emperor Taheung of the Yuan Dynasty, Zhang Xuan, the governor of Wu County, heard a dog barking under the bed in the hall, but he did not find it.

古文：既而地自坼，见有二犬子，取而养之，皆死。
现代文：过后地面自行坍塌，看到有两只犬崽，取出来喂养，都没有活。
English: After that, the ground collapsed on its own, and I saw two dogfish, taken out and fed, but they were not alive.

古文：寻而懋为沈充所害。
现代文：不久后退銮被杀害。
English: He was killed soon after.

古文：京房《易传》曰： 谗臣在侧，则犬生妖。 
现代文：直良《易传》说： 谗佞的臣子在身边，狗就会生妖异。 
English: Naora "Ikuden" says: If a lazy vassal is around, the dog will be possessed by a demon.

古文：太兴四年，庐江灊县何旭家忽闻地中有犬子声，掘之得一母犬，青釐色，状甚羸瘦，走入草中，不知所在。
现代文：太兴四年，庐红逻题恒旭家忽然听到地底下有犬崽的声音，挖掘得到一只母犬，青厘色，样子非常瘦弱，跑进草丛中，不知到了何处。
English: In Taixing four years ago, the Hengxu family suddenly heard the sound of a dog howling under the ground, and dug up a female dog. It was blue and looked very thin. It ran into the grass and I don't know where it went.

古文：视其处有二犬子，一雄一雌，哺而养之，雌死雄活。
现代文：原来的地方有两只犬患，一雄一雌，喂养，雌崽死雄崽活。
English: In the original place, there were two dogs, a male and a female, feeding, the female died and the male survived.

古文：及长为犬，善噬兽。
现代文：等到长大，善于噬咬兽类。
English: When they grow up, they are good at eating and biting animals.

古文：其后旭里中为蛮所没。
现代文：后来何旭家乡被蛮人占领。
English: Later, He Xu's hometown was occupied by barbarians.

古文：安帝隆安初，吴郡治下狗恆夜吠，聚高桥上，人家狗有限而吠声甚众。
现代文：安帝隆安初年，吴郡治所狗整夜狂吠，聚集在高桥上，家狗数目有限但是吠声很多。
English: In the first year of An Di Long'an, the dogs of the Wu County Juvenile Detention Center barked all night and gathered on the high bridge. The number of domestic dogs was limited, but there was a lot of barking.

古文：或有夜觇视之云： 一狗假有两三头，皆前向乱吠。 
现代文：有入夜间窥视后说： 一只狗似乎有两三个头，都朝前方乱吠。 
English: After peering into the night, he said: A dog seems to have two or three heads, all of which are barking wildly in front.

古文：无几，孙恩乱于吴会焉。
现代文：没多久，孙恩在吴会作乱。
English: Before long, Sun En would start a riot in Wu.

古文：是时辅国将军孙无终家于既阳，地中闻犬子声，寻而地斥，有二犬子，皆白色，一雄一雌，取而养之，皆死。
现代文：遣时辅国将军孙无终居住在既阳，地底下听到有犬崽的叫声，不久地塌裂，有两只犬崽，都是白色，一雄一雌，取出喂养，都死了。
English: Sun Wuzhong, general of the Chinese Expeditionary Force, lived in Yaoyang for the rest of his life. Under the ground, he heard a dog howling, and soon it collapsed. Two dogs, both white, one male and one female, were taken out to be fed, and both died.

古文：后无终为桓玄所诛灭。
现代文：后来孙无终被桓玄诛杀。
English: Later, Sun Wuzhong was killed by Huan Xuan.

古文：案《尸子》曰： 地中有犬，名曰地狼。 
现代文：考查《尸子》说： 地中有犬，名叫地狼。 
English: An examination of "The Corpse" says: There is a dog in the earth, called the earth wolf.

古文：《夏鼎志》曰； 掘地得犬，名曰贾。 
现代文：《夏鼎志》说： 挖地得到犬，名叫贾。 
English: "Xia Ding Zhi" said: Dig the ground to get a dog, named Jia.

古文：此盖自然之物，不应出而出，为犬祸也。
现代文：这是自然之物，不应该出来而出来，是犬祸。
English: It's a natural thing, it shouldn't have come out, it's a dog accident.

古文：桓玄将拜楚王，已设拜席，群官陪位。
现代文：桓玄将要为楚王，已经设置好拜席，众官员陪立在位。
English: Kuan Xuan is going to be the king of Chu. A place of worship has been set up, and many officials are standing with him.

古文：玄未及出，有狗来便其席，莫不惊怪。
现代文：桓玄没有来得及出来，有狗前来在拜席上拉下粪便，没有人不感到惊奇怪异的。
English: Before Huan Xuan could get out, a dog came to pull the excrement off the altar. No one could help but be surprised and amazed.

古文：玄性猜暴，竟无言者，逐狗改席而已。
现代文：桓玄性情暴烈，竟然没有说话，衹是赶走狗撤换了拜席罢了。
English: Huan Xuan's temper was violent, and he didn't even speak. He just chased away the dogs and replaced the pews.

古文：天戒若曰，桓玄无德而叨窃大位，故犬便其席，示其妄据之甚也。
现代文：天戒像是说，桓玄没有德行却窃取高位，所以犬在席上拉粪便，表明非分占高位严重。
English: Heaven's ring seems to say that Huan Xuan has no virtue but steals the high position, so the dog pulls feces on the seat, indicating that the non-participation in the high position is serious.

古文：八十日玄败亡焉。
现代文：八十天后桓玄失败灭亡。
English: Eighty days later, Kuan Xuan failed and perished.

古文：白眚白祥魏明帝青龙三年正月乙亥，陨石于寿光。
现代文：魏明帝壹蓝三年正月乙亥，有陨石落在寿光。
English: In the first month of the third year of Emperor Wei Ming's reign, a meteorite fell on Shuguang.

古文：案《左氏传》 陨石，星也 ，刘歆说曰： 庶众惟星陨于宋者，象宋襄公将得诸侯而不终也。 
现代文：《左氏传》载 陨石，是星 ，刘歆解释说： 众国中衹有星陨落在宋，这象征宋襄公将得诸侯却不能善终。 
English: "The Biography of Zuo Shiwen" contains a meteorite, which is a star, Liu Wei explained: Among the many countries, there is a star that fell in Song, which symbolizes that Song Xiang Gongjun won the princes but could not end well.

古文：秦始皇时有陨石，班固以为： 石，阴类也。
现代文：秦始皇时有陨石，班固认为： 石，是阴类。
English: When Qin Shihuang had meteorites, Ban Gu thought: "Stone is yin."

古文：又白祥，臣将危君。 
现代文：又是白祥，臣子将危及君王。 
English: It's Bai Xiang again, the vassal will endanger the king.

古文：是后宣帝得政云。
现代文：此后宣帝执掌了朝政。
English: After that, Emperor Xuan took charge of the imperial government.

古文：武帝太康五年五月丁巳，陨石于温及河阳各二。
现代文：武帝太康五年五月丁巳，各有两块陨石落在湿墨和河阳县。
English: In May of the fifth year of Emperor Wu's reign, two meteorites fell in each of Shimohe and Heyang counties.

古文：六年正月，陨石于温，三。
现代文：六年正月，陨石落在鳄，有三块。
English: In the first month of the sixth year, the meteorite fell on the crocodile, there were three pieces.

古文：成帝咸和八年五月，星陨于肥乡，一。
现代文：成帝咸和八年五月，有流星陨落在旦眯，陨石一块。
English: In May of the eighth year of Emperor Chengdi's reign, a meteorite fell on Danyang, leaving a piece of meteorite.

古文：九年正月，陨石于凉州，二。
现代文：九年正月，陨石落在瘟业，有两块。
English: In the first month of the ninth year, two meteorites fell on Pest.

古文：吴孙亮五凤二年五月，阳羡县离里山大石自立。
现代文：吴孙亮五凤二年五月，阳羡县离里山大石头自己立起。
English: In May of the second year of Wu Sunliang Wufeng's reign, the Lirishan Mountain in Yangzi County rose up on its own.

古文：案京房《易传》曰 庶士为天子之祥也 ，其说曰： 石立于山同姓，平地异姓。 
现代文：塞庆《易传》说 是普通人成为天子的祥瑞 ，它的解释说： 石立在山上同姓，在平地是异姓。 
English: Sai Qing's "Easy Biography" says that it is ordinary people who become the sons of heaven, it explains: Shi Li has the same surname in the mountains, but a different surname in the plains.

古文：干宝以为 孙皓承废故之家得位，其应也。 
现代文：工宣认为是 珏壁承继发生废黜变故的家族得到皇位，是其应兆 。
English: Gongxuan believed that it was a sign that the family that succeeded the dethroned emperor after the fall of the wall succeeded to the throne.

古文：或曰孙休见立之祥也。
现代文：有人说是逐休被拥立的祥瑞。
English: Some people say that it is Xiang Rui, who has been supported from time to time.

古文：武帝太康十年，洛阳宫西宜秋里石生地中，始高三尺，如香鈩形，后如伛人，槃薄不可掘。
现代文：武帝太康十年，洛阳宫殿西宜秋里有石头从地中长出，起初有三尺高，像香炉的形状，后来像弯腰的人，盘踞在地上挖不出来。
English: In the 10th year of Emperor Wu Taikang's reign, the Luoyang Palace Xiyi Autumn Stone grew out of the ground. At first, it was three feet high and shaped like an incense burner. Later, it looked like a person bending over. It was stuck in the ground and could not be dug out.

古文：案刘向说，此白眚也。
现代文：刘向说，这是白眚。
English: Liu Xiang said that it was the egret.

古文：明年宫车晏驾，王室始骚，卒以乱亡。
现代文：第二年皇帝去世，王室开始骚动，最终因战乱灭亡。
English: The following year, the emperor died, and the royal family began to be in turmoil, eventually perishing in the turmoil of war.

古文：京房《易传》曰： 石立如人，庶士为天下雄。 
现代文：京房《易传》说： 石头像人一样站立，是庶士要成月天下雄杰。 
English: Kyobo's "I Chuan" said: "Stone stands like a person, and is a hero to the world."

古文：此近之矣。
现代文：此相近似。
English: This is a close approximation.

古文：惠帝元康五年十二月，有石生于宜年里。
现代文：惠帝元康五年十二月，有石头生长在宜年里。
English: In December of Hui Di Yuan Kang's fifth year, there was a stone growing in Yili.

古文：永康元年，襄阳郡上言，得鸣石，撞之，声闻七八里。
现代文：永康元年，襄阳郡上奏说，得到鸣响的石头，撞击，声音可传出七八里远。
English: In the first year of Yongkang, the Yangyang County Shangso said that the sound of the stone, the impact, and the sound can be heard seven or eight miles away.

古文：太安元年，丹阳湖熟县夏架湖有大石，浮二百步而登岸，民惊噪相告曰： 石来。 
现代文：太安元年，丹荡湖熟县夏架湖中有大石头，漂浮二百步后登上岸，民众惊奇噪动相告说： 石来。 
English: In the first year of the Taian era, there was a large stone in the lake of Xiajia Lake, Danlang Lake, Rong County. After floating for 200 steps, it landed on the shore. The people were surprised by the noise and announced to each other: "It's a stone."

古文：干宝曰： 寻有石冰入建鄴。 
现代文：干宝说： 不久有石冰进入建邺。 
English: Gan Bao said: Soon, stone ice entered Jianye.

古文：车骑大将军、东嬴王腾自并州迁镇鄴，行次真定。
现代文：车骑大将军、东羸王司马腾从并州迁移去镇守邺城，行军驻扎在真室。
English: The general of chariot and cavalry, the king of Eastern Gansu, Sima Teng, moved from Bianzhou to the town of Shoucheng, and the marching army was stationed in Mengshu.

古文：时久积雪，而当门前方数丈独消释，腾怪而掘之，得玉马，高尺许，口齿缺。
现代文：当时长时间积雪，而独有正对门前几丈的地方消融，司马腾感到奇怪进行挖掘，得到玉马，有一尺多高，口齿缺。
English: At that time, snow had been accumulating for a long time, and the only place to melt was a few feet in front of the door. Sima Teng felt strange to excavate, and got a horse, more than a foot high, with a missing mouth.

古文：腾以马者国姓，上送之，以为瑞。
现代文：司马腾认为马是国姓，呈送上去，认为是祥瑞。
English: Sima Teng thought that Ma was a national surname and submitted it, thinking it was Xiang Rui.

古文：然马无齿则不得食，妖祥之兆，衰亡之征。
现代文：但是马没有牙齿就不能吃食，是妖祥的预兆，衰亡的征候。
English: But a horse without teeth can't eat. It's a bad omen, a sign of decline.

古文：案占，此白祥也。
现代文：占卜，这是白祥。
English: Divination, this is Bai Xiang.

古文：是后腾为汲桑所杀，而天下遂乱。
现代文：此后司马腾被汲桑杀死，天下大乱。
English: After that, Sima Teng was killed by Kuisang, and the world was in turmoil.

古文：武帝泰始八年五月，蜀地雨白毛，此白祥也。
现代文：武帝泰始八年五月，蜀地天降白毛，这是白祥。
English: In May of the eighth year of Emperor Wu's reign, white feathers fell from the sky in Shu. This is Bai Xiang.

古文：时益州刺史皇甫晏伐汶山胡，从事何旅固谏，不从，牙门张弘等困众之怨，诬晏谋逆，害之。
现代文：当时益州刺史皇直垦讨伐这山塑人，从事何并极力劝谏，皇直星不听，牙门将迪厶等人凭藉部众的怨愤，诬谄皇甫晏阴谋叛逆，害死了他。
English: At that time, Emperor Zhanshi of Yizhou sent Emperor Zhanshi to fight against this mountain sculptor. He did not listen to Emperor Zhanshi's advice, and Emperor Zhanshi did not listen to Emperor Zhanshi's advice. However, Emperor Zhanshi's subordinates, including Dizhao, took advantage of the resentment of his subordinates, falsely accused Emperor Fuxi of plotting to rebel, and killed him.

古文：京房《易传》曰： 前乐后忧，厥妖天雨羽。 
现代文：塞屋《易传》说： 先乐后忧，其妖异是天降羽毛。 
English: Saiya's "I Chuan" said: First joy, then sorrow, the strange thing is the feathers falling from the sky.

古文：又曰： 邪人进，贤人逃，天雨毛。 
现代文：又说： 邪恶的人进升，贤能的人逃走，天降羽毛。 
English: He also said, "Evil men advance and good men retreat, but feathers fall from the sky."

古文：其《易妖》曰： 天雨毛羽，贵人出走。 
现代文：其《易妖》说： 天降毛羽，贵人出逃。 
English: Its "Easy Demon" said: The sky falls down fluff, and nobles flee.

古文：三占皆应。
现代文：三占都应验了。
English: All three predictions have come true.

古文：惠帝永宁元军，齐王冏举义军。
现代文：惠帝永宁元年，齐王司马同发义军。
English: In the first year of Emperor Hui's reign, King Sima of Qi also joined the rebels.

古文：军中有小兒，出于襄城繁昌县，年八岁，发体悉白，颇能卜，于《洪范》，白祥也。
现代文：军中有小孩，出自襄越繁昌县，年纪八岁，头发身体都是白色，很会占卜，在《洪范》上，这是白祥。
English: There is a child in the army, from Xiangyue Fanchang County, eight years old, his hair and body are white, and he is very good at divination. In "Hong Fan," this is Bai Xiang.

古文：成帝咸康初，地生毛，近白祥也。
现代文：成帝咸康初年，地上长出毛，近似白祥。
English: In the first year of Emperor Chengxiankang, there was hair on the ground, similar to Baixiang.

古文：孙盛以为人劳之异也。
现代文：瑟盛认为是人劳苦的异征。
English: Su Sheng believes that it is a symptom of human toil.

古文：是后石季龙灭而中原向化，将相皆甘心焉。
现代文：此后石季龙灭亡而中原归向教化，武将文臣都心悦诚服。
English: After that, Shijilong perished and Zhongyuan turned to enlightenment, and the military commander Wencheng was sincerely convinced.

古文：于是方镇屡革，边戍仍迁，皆拥带部曲，动有万数。
现代文：在这时地方势力多次兴兵，边防守备频繁变换，都仗恃率领各自的私人武装，动辄数以万计。
English: At this time, the local forces repeatedly raised troops, and the border defense preparedness frequently changed. All of them led their own private armed forces, and there were tens of thousands of them.

古文：其间征伐征赋，役无宁岁，天下劳扰，百姓疲怨。
现代文：其间征战讨伐征收赋税，劳役繁多没有安宁的日子，天下劳苦纷扰，百姓疲惫怨愤。
English: In the meantime, the war was waged, taxes were levied, there were many days of labor without peace, the world was in turmoil, and the people were tired and angry.

古文：咸康三年六月，地生毛。
现代文：咸康三年六月，地上长出毛。
English: In June of the third year of Xiankang, hair began to grow on the ground.

古文：孝武太元二年五月，京都地生毛，至四年而氐贼次襄国，围彭城，向广陵，征戍仍出，兵连年不解。
现代文：孝武帝太元二年五月，京都地面长出毛，到了四年，氐贼进驻襄国，围攻彭城，直指广陵，征伐戍守频繁发生，战事连年不断。
English: In May of the second year of Emperor Xiaowu's reign, hair began to grow on the ground in Kyoto. By the fourth year, bandits were stationed in Xiangguo, besieging Pengcheng and even Guangling. Conquests and sieges were frequent, and fighting continued year after year.

古文：太元十四年四月，京都地生毛。
现代文：太元十四年四月，京都地上长毛。
English: In April of the 14th year of the Taigen era, the ground in Kyoto became hairy.

古文：是时苻坚灭后，经略多事，人劳之应也。
现代文：遣时在苻坚灭亡后，天下多事，是人民劳苦的应验。
English: After the death of Yu Jian, there were many events in the world, which was the fulfillment of the people's hard work.

古文：十七年四月，地生毛。
现代文：十七年四月，地面长毛。
English: In April 17th, the ground began to grow hair.

古文：安帝隆安四年四月乙未，地生毛，或白或黑。
现代文：安帝隆安四年四月乙未，地面长毛，有的白有的黑。
English: The ground is covered with long hair, some white, some black.

古文：元兴三年五月，江陵地生毛。
现代文：元兴三年五月，江陵地面长毛。
English: In May of the third year of the Genxing era, the ground of Gangneung was covered with long hair.

古文：是后江陵见袭，交战者数矣。
现代文：此后江陵遭袭击，多次交战。
English: After that, Gangneung was attacked and fought many times.

古文：义熙三年三月，地生白毛。
现代文：义熙三年三月，地面长出白毛。
English: In March of the third year of the reign of Emperor Yixi, white hair sprouted on the ground.

古文：十年三月地生毛。
现代文：十年三月，地面长毛。
English: In March of the tenth year, the ground became hairy.

古文：明年，王旅西讨司马休之。
现代文：第二年，朝廷军队西去讨伐司马休之。
English: The following year, the imperial army went west to fight against Sima Xiu.

古文：又明年，北扫关洛。
现代文：再过一年，北上扫荡关洛地区。
English: A year later, they swept north to the Guanluo region.

古文：木沴金魏齐王正始末，河南尹李胜治听事，有小材激堕，楇受符吏石彪头，断之，此木沴金也。
现代文：魏齐王正始末年，河南尹李胜在官署理事，有小块木料急速坠落，击中接受符牌官吏互彪的头，头断了，这是木诊金。
English: At the end of Wei Qi Wang's first year, Henan Yin Lisheng was a director of the government office. A small piece of wood fell rapidly and hit the head of the official who received the badge. The head was broken. This was the wood diagnosis fee.

古文：胜后旬日而败。
现代文：奎胜在十曰后败亡。
English: Kuisho was defeated after ten days.

古文：惠帝元康八年五月，郊禖坛石中破为二，此木沴金也。
现代文：惠帝元康八年五月，求子神庙的祭坛石从中间破裂为两块，这是木克金。
English: In May of the eighth year of Emperor Hui's reign, the altar stone of the Temple of the Infant Jesus was split in two from the middle. This was made of gold.

古文：郊禖坛者，求子之神位，无故自毁，太子将危之象也。
现代文：求子神庙的坛，是求子的神位，无故自己毁坏，是太子将有危险的象征。
English: The altar of the Temple of the Infant Jesus is the throne of the Infant Jesus, and if it is destroyed without reason, it is a symbol that the prince will be in danger.

古文：明年愍怀废死。
现代文：第二年，愍怀太子被废黜死去。
English: The following year, Prince Gong Huai was deposed and died.

古文：孝武帝太元十年四月，谢安出镇广陵，始发石头，金鼓无故自破。
现代文：孝武帝太元十年四月，谢安出镇广陵，从石头出发，金鼓无故自行破裂。
English: In April of the tenth year of the reign of Emperor Xiaowu, Xie An went out of the town of Guangling, starting from the stone, and the golden drum broke without reason.

古文：此木沴金之异也，天意也。
现代文：此是木克金的异征，是天意。
English: This is a sign of Mokgukin, it is the will of heaven.

古文：天戒若曰，安徒扬经略之声，终无其实，钲鼓不用之象也。
现代文：天戒像是说，谢安仅仅有了安邦治国之名，而无其实，这是钮鼓不用的象征。
English: Heaven's ring seems to say that Xie An only has the name of Anbang governance, but no reality, which is a symbol of not using the drum.

古文：月余，以疾还而薨。
现代文：一个多月后，因疾病返回后死去。
English: More than a month later, he died after returning from illness.

古文：《传》曰： 视之不明，是谓不哲，厥咎舒，厥罚恆燠，厥极疾。
现代文：《传》说： 察看而不明，这叫做不哲，其咎责是舒缓，其惩罚是长期炎热，其极是疾病。
English: "Biography" said: "If you look and do not know, it is called ignorance, its blame is relief, its punishment is long-term heat, and its extremity is disease.

古文：时则有草妖，时则有蠃虫之孽，时则有羊祸，时则有目痾，时则有赤眚赤祥。
现代文：时或有草妖，时或有蠃虫的妖孽，时或有羊祸，时或有眼睛的重病，时或有赤眚赤祥。
English: Sometimes there is a grass demon, sometimes there is a maggot witch, sometimes there is a sheep plague, sometimes there is a serious eye disease, sometimes there is a red beak.

古文：惟水沴火。 
现代文：是水克火。 
English: It's water versus fire.

古文：视之不明，是谓不哲。
现代文：察看而不明，这叫做不哲。
English: To see and not to know is ignorance.

古文：哲，知也。
现代文：哲，是知。
English: Zhe, is to know.

古文：《诗》云： 尔德不明，以亡陪亡卿。
现代文：《诗》说： 你的德行不明，就无人相陪伴相辅助。
English: "Poetry" said: "If your virtue is not clear, you will not be accompanied and assisted by anyone."

古文：不明尔德，以亡背亡侧。 
现代文：你有不明的德行，就无人在身后在身旁。 
English: If you have unknown virtues, there is no one behind you or beside you.

古文：言上不明，暗昧蔽惑，则不能知善恶，亲近习，长同类，亡功者受赏，有罪者不杀，百官废乱，失在舒缓，故其咎舒也。
现代文：说的是主上不明，昏愤受蒙蔽迷惑，就不能分辨善恶，亲近身边的人，提拔重用同类的人，无功的人受奖赏，有罪者的人不惩处，百官废乱，失于松缓，所以其责是舒。
English: What is said is that the master is not clear, the drowsy indignation is confused, the good and evil cannot be distinguished, the people around him are close, the people of the same kind are promoted and reused, the unproductive people are rewarded, the guilty people are not punished, the officials are disorderly, and they are lost in the loose, so their responsibility is shu.

古文：盛夏日长，暑以养物，政弛缓，故其罚常燠也。
现代文：盛夏季节白天长，暑气养育万物，政治松缓，所以其惩罚是长时间炎热。
English: In the midsummer season, the days are long, the heat nurtures everything, and politics is loose, so its punishment is prolonged heat.

古文：燠则冬温，春夏不和，伤病疾人，其极疾也。
现代文：炎热就会造成冬季温暖，春夏不和，病患伤害人，其极端就是疾病。
English: The heat will cause the winter to be warm, the spring and summer to be discordant, the sick to harm people, and the extreme is the disease.

古文：诛不行则霜不杀草，繇臣下则杀不以时，故有草妖。
现代文：责罚不施行，霜就不杀灭野草，宽宥臣下，惩处就不能按时执行，所以就有草妖。
English: If the punishment is not carried out, the frost will not kill the weeds, and if the vassal is forgiven, the punishment cannot be carried out on time, so there is a grass demon.

古文：凡妖，貌则以服，言则以诗，听则以声。
现代文：凡是妖，外形就表现在服饰，言语表现在诗歌，听觉表现在声音。
English: For all demons, their appearance is manifested in clothing, their speech in poetry, and their hearing in sound.

古文：视不以色者，五色，物之大分也，在于眚祥，故圣人以为草妖，失物柄之明者也。
现代文：察看不辨色，五色是万物最大的区别，在于灾异征祥，所以圣人认为草妖，是丧失对事物根本的明辨。
English: The five colors are the biggest difference between all things, and it lies in the auspicious and inauspicious, so the sage believed that the grass demon was the loss of fundamental discrimination of things.

古文：温燠生虫，故有蠃虫之孽，谓螟螣之类当死不死，当生而不生，或多于故而为灾也。
现代文：温热生虫，所以有蠃虫之灾，是说螟塍之类应该死却不死，应当生却不生，或者多于以往而成骂灾害。
English: Warm and hot give rise to insects, so there is a plague of aphids, that is to say, aphids and the like should die but not die, should live but not live, or more than in the past and become a curse disaster.

古文：刘歆以为属思心不容。
现代文：刘歆认为属于思虑之心不宽容。
English: Liu Wei believes that intolerance belongs to the thinking heart.

古文：于《易》，刚而苞柔为《离》，《离》为火，为目。
现代文：在《易》中，刚而包含柔是《离》，《离》是火，是眼睛。
English: In "Yi" (易), rigid but containing softness is "li," "li" is fire, is the eye.

古文：羊上角下蹄，刚而苞柔，羊大目而不精明，视气毁，故有羊祸。
现代文：羊上有角下有蹄，刚而包含柔，羊有大眼睛却没有明亮的瞳仁，视觉之气毁坏，所以有羊祸。
English: Sheep have horns and hooves, but they are hard and soft. Sheep have large eyes, but they do not have bright pupils. Their eyesight is ruined, so there is a sheep plague.

古文：一日，暑岁羊多疫死，及为怪，亦是也。
现代文：一说，暑热的年份羊多病死，以致成为怪，也是对的。
English: It is also correct to say that sheep in hot years often die of disease, which makes them strange.

古文：及人，则多病目者，故有目痾。
现代文：至于人，多是眼睛有病，所以有眼病。
English: As for people, most of them have eye diseases, so they have eye diseases.

古文：火色赤，故有赤眚赤祥。
现代文：火的颜色为赤，所以有赤眚赤祥。
English: The color of fire is red, so there is a red dragonfly called Akasho.

古文：凡视伤者，病火气；火气伤，则水沴之。
现代文：凡是视觉有损伤的，是病在火气；因火气伤害，就要水来克。
English: Anyone who has a visual impairment is suffering from fire; due to fire damage, it is necessary to drink water.

古文：其极疾者顺之，其福曰寿。
现代文：其极为病重的顺之，其福叫寿。
English: He is extremely ill, so his good fortune is longevity.

古文：刘歆《视传》曰有羽虫之孽，鸡祸。
现代文：刘歆《视传》说有羽虫的之孽，鶸祸。
English: Liu Wei's "Visual Biography" says that there is the evil of the caterpillars and the evil of the cockroaches.

古文：说以为于天文南方硃张为鸟星，故为羽虫。
现代文：解说认为在天文上南方的朱张是鸟星，所以是羽虫。
English: The commentary believes that Zhu Zhang in the south is a bird star in astronomy, so it is a caterpillar.

古文：祸亦从羽，故为鸡。
现代文：祸患也是从羽，所以是鶸。
English: The scourge is also from the feather, so it is the cormorant.

古文：鸡于《易》自在《巽》，说非是。
现代文：鸡在《易》中对应《巽》，这说法不对。
English: The chicken in "易" corresponds to "," which is not true.

古文：庶征之恆燠，刘向以为《春秋》无冰也。
现代文：征候是持久炎热，刘向认为是《春秋》中的无冰。
English: The symptom is long-lasting heat, which Liu Xiang believes to be the ice-free in "Spring and Autumn."

古文：小燠不书，无冰然后书，举其大者也。
现代文：小热不记载，无冰然后记载下来，是举出其大的。
English: Small heat is not recorded, no ice and then recorded, is to bring out its big.

古文：京房《易传》曰： 禄不遂行兹谓欺，厮咎燠。
现代文：京房《易传》说： 俸禄不供给逭叫作欺，其咎责是炎热。
English: Jing Fang's "I Chuan" said: If the salary does not provide howling, it is cheating, and the blame is hot.

古文：其燠，雨云四至而温。
现代文：炎热，雨云从四面来到而温。
English: It's hot, and the rain clouds are coming from all directions, but it's still warm.

古文：臣安禄乐逸兹谓乱，燠而生虫。
现代文：臣子安于俸禄乐于安逸这叫作乱，热生虫。
English: If a vassal is content with his salary and is happy to live in comfort, this is called creating turmoil and breeding worms.

古文：知罪不诛兹谓舒，其燠，夏则暑杀人，冬则物华实。
现代文：知道罪责不予惩处这叫作舒，其热，在夏季就是暑热杀人，在冬季就是万物开花结果。
English: It is comforting to know that guilt will not be punished. Its heat, in the summer, is murderous heat, and in the winter, it is the blossoming of all things.

古文：重过不诛兹谓亡征，其咎当寒而燠尽六日也。 
现代文：有严重过失不惩罚这叫作灭亡的征兆，其咎责是应当寒冷却暖热整六天。 
English: There is a grave sin which is not punished, which is called the sign of perdition, and its punishment is to be cold, cold, cold for six days.

古文：吴孙亮建兴元年九月，桃李华，孙权世政烦赋重，人凋于役。
现代文：吴孙亮建兴元年九月，桃李开花。孙权时代政治繁乱，赋税沉重，人民疲于徭役。
English: In September of the first year of Wu Sun Liang's reign, the peach and plum trees were in bloom. The Sun Quan era was a time of political turmoil, heavy taxation, and the people were exhausted from their duties.

古文：是时诸葛恪始辅政，息校官，原逋责，除关梁，崇宽厚，此舒缓之应也。
现代文：遣时诸葛恪开始辅佐朝政，撤销了察探情事的官吏，恕免拖欠的赋债，撤除了关隘渡，崇尚宽厚，逭就是舒松宽缓的应兆。
English: At the time of the imperial edict, Zhuge Ke began to assist the government of the dynasty, removed the officials who investigated and investigated the situation, forgave the debts that were in arrears, removed the barriers, advocated clemency, and was a sign of relaxation.

古文：一说桃李寒华为草妖，或属华孽。
现代文：一说桃李在寒冷时节开花是草妖，或属于花孽。
English: Some say that the peach and plum blossom in the cold season is a grass demon, or belongs to the flower evil.

古文：魏少帝景元三年十月，桃李华。
现代文：魏少帝基五三年十月，桃李开花。
English: In October of the year of Wei Shao Di Ji's 53rd birthday, the peach and plum trees bloomed.

古文：时少帝深树恩德，事崇优缓，此其应也。
现代文：当时少童深树恩德，政事崇尚优厚宽缓，这是其应兆。
English: At that time, children were deeply endowed with benevolence, and political affairs were advocated to be gentle and lenient, which was its response.

古文：惠帝元康二年二月，巴西郡界草皆生华，结子如麦，可食。
现代文：惠帝元康二年二月，巴西郡境的草都开了花，结出像麦子一样的籽实，可以吃。
English: In February of the second year of Hui Di Yuan Kang, the grasses in the border of Brazil County all bloomed, producing seeds like wheat, which can be eaten.

古文：时帝初即位，楚王玮矫诏诛汝南王亮及太保卫瓘，帝不能察。
现代文：当时惠帝刚即位，楚王司马璋诈用皇帝诏书杀了汝南王司马亮和太保卫璀，皇帝不能明察。
English: At that time, Emperor Hui had just ascended to the throne. King Sima of Chu used the emperor's edict to kill King Sima Liang and King Taibowei of Yunnan. The emperor could not see it.

古文：今非时草结实，此恆燠宽舒之罚。
现代文：现在草不按时序结籽实，这是持久炎热宽缓舒松的惩罚。
English: Now the grass does not set seed and fruit in a timely manner, which is a punishment of long-lasting heat and mild relief.

古文：穆帝永和九年十二月，桃李华，是时简文辅政，事多驰略，舒缓之应也。
现代文：穆帝永和九年十二月，桃李开花。逭时简文辅佐朝政，政事多松懈疏略，是舒缓的应兆。
English: In December of the ninth year of Mu Di Yonghe, the peach and plum blossomed. At that time, Jianwen was an assistant to the government, and the government affairs were more lax and neglected, which was a sign of relief.

古文：草妖汉献帝建安二十五年春正月，魏武帝在洛阳起建始殿，伐濯龙树而血出，又掘徙梨，根伤亦血出。
现代文：汉献帝建安二十五年春正月，魏武帝在洛隧修建建筮毖，砍伐理邑垄树而有血流出，又挖掘迁移梨树，树根损伤也有血流出。
English: In the first month of spring of the 25th year of the Han Emperor Jian'an, Emperor Wu of Wei started to build a bridge in Luo Tunnel. There was blood flow from the felling of the Liwu ridge tree, and the excavation and relocation of the pear tree. There was also blood flow from the root damage of the tree.

古文：帝恶之，遂寝疾，是月崩。
现代文：武帝感到很厌恶，于是卧病，在逭月死去。
English: Emperor Wu was so disgusted that he became bedridden and died in the following month.

古文：盖草妖，又赤祥，是岁魏文帝黄初元年也。
现代文：是草妖，又是赤祥，这年是魏文帝黄初元年。
English: It was the year of the Grass Demon, and it was also the year of the Red Dragon. This year was the first year of Emperor Wei's reign.

古文：吴孙亮五凤元年六月，交止稗草化为稻。
现代文：吴孙亮五凤元年六月，奎皿有稗草变成稻子。
English: Wu Sunliang Wufeng In June of the first year of the year, the quince dish had alfalfa turn into rice.

古文：昔三苗将亡，五谷变种，此草妖也。
现代文：从前三茎快要灭亡，五谷有变种，这是草妖。
English: Once upon a time, the three stems were on the verge of extinction, and there was a mutation in the grain, which was the grass demon.

古文：其后亮废。
现代文：此后孙亮被废黜。
English: After that, Sun Liang was deposed.

古文：蜀刘禅景耀五年，宫中大树无故自折。
现代文：蜀刘禅景耀五年，宫中大树无故自己折断。
English: In the fifth year of Shu Liu Zenking's reign, a large tree in the palace broke off without reason.

古文：谯周忧之，无所与言，乃书柱曰： 众而大，其之会。
现代文：尽眉对此很忧虑，没有人可以诉说，就在柱子上写道： 众而大，其之会。
English: He was so worried that no one would be able to tell him about it, that he wrote on the pillar, "Many shall be gathered together, but it shall not be so.

古文：具而授，若何复。 
现代文：具而授，若何复。 
English: What goes around, comes around.

古文：言曹者众也，魏者大也，众而大，天下其当会也。具而授，如何复有立者乎？
现代文：是说曹是众，魏是大，众而大，天下将会合。完备并交授，怎么会再有独立的呢?
English: That is to say, Cao is the masses, Wei is the great, the masses are the great, the world will be united. Complete and handed over, how can there be independence again?

古文：蜀果亡，如周言，此草妖也。
现代文：蜀国果然灭亡，就像谯周所说的，这是草妖。
English: Shu really did perish. As Zou Zhou said, it was a grass demon.

古文：吴孙皓天玺元年，吴郡临平湖自汉末秽塞，是时一夕忽开除无草。
现代文：吴孙皓天玺元年，呈邓临平湖从莲丛末年起淤塞，这时一夜间忽然开通没有了杂草。
English: In the first year of the Wusun Dynasty, Deng Linping Lake was silted up from the end of the lotus bush, when it suddenly opened overnight without weeds.

古文：长老相传：此湖塞，天下乱；此湖开，天下平。
现代文：年长的人相传说：此湖塞，天下乱；此湖开，天下平。
English: According to an old folk tale, this lake is blocked and the world is in chaos; this lake is open and the world is flat.

古文：吴寻亡而九服为一。
现代文：吴国不久灭亡而全国统一。
English: The State of Wu soon collapsed and the whole country was unified.

古文：天纪三年八月，建鄴有鬼目菜于工黄狗家生，依缘枣树，长丈余，茎广四寸，厚二分。
现代文：天纪三年八月，建邺有鬼目菜在工匠董狍家生长，攀缘着枣树，有一丈多长，茎杆有四寸粗，二分厚。
English: In August of the third year of the heavenly calendar, Jianye's ghost-eyed vegetables grew in the home of the craftsman Dong Ye, climbing on the jujube tree. They were more than a foot long, and the stem was four inches thick and two minutes thick.

古文：又有荬菜生工吴平家，高四尺，如枇杷形，上圆，径一尺八寸，茎广五寸，两边生叶，绿色。
现代文：又有赀菜生长在工匠吴平家，四尺高，形状像枇杷，上部圆形，直径一尺八寸，茎杆有五寸粗，两边生叶，绿色。
English: There is also a leek grown at the home of the craftsman Wu Ping, four feet high, shaped like a beak, round at the top, one foot eight inches in diameter, stem five inches thick, leaves on both sides, green.

古文：东观案图，名鬼目作芝萆，荬菜作平虑，遂以狗为侍芝郎，平为平虑郎，皆银印青绶。
现代文：束观官员查图典，鬼目草名叫芝草，赀菜叫平虑，便任命黄狗为侍芝郎，吴平为平虑郎，都授予银印和青色绶带。
English: According to the Sokuan official's reference book, the demon grass is called shibaso, and the leek is called pingxian, so he appointed Huang Gou as the attendant shiro and Wu Ping as the pingxian rooster, and both were awarded the silver seal and the blue ribbon.

古文：干宝曰：明年平吴，王浚止船正得平渚，姓名显然，指事之征也。
现代文：干宝说：第二年平定吴国，王浚停船正在平坦的沙洲，姓名都很明显，是指事的征兆。
English: Gan Bao said: In the second year of the pacification of Wuzhong, Wang Jun's ship was anchored on a flat sandbank. The names were all obvious, a sign of trouble.

古文：黄狗者，吴以土运承汉，故初有黄龙之瑞。
现代文：黄狗。吴国以土运继承汉朝，所以起初有黄龙的祥瑞。
English: Yellow dog. The State of Wu succeeded the Han Dynasty with a local movement, so at first there was a yellow dragon, Xiang Rui.

古文：及其季年，而有鬼目之妖托黄狗之家。
现代文：到末年，却有鬼目草的妖异托附在黄狗家。
English: Towards the end of the year, however, a goblin-like monster attached itself to the Yellow Dog's house.

古文：黄称不改，而贵贱大殊，天道精微之应敢也。
现代文：黄的名称没有改变，但是贵贱大不相同，这是天道精微的应兆。
English: The name of Huang has not changed, but the nobility and lowliness are very different, which is a subtle sign of the heavenly way.

古文：惠帝元康二年春，巴西郡界竹生花，紫色，结实如麦，外皮青，中赤白，味甘。
现代文：惠帝元康二年春，巴西郡境竹子开花，紫色，结的果实像麦子一样，外皮青色，中间红色，味道甘甜。
English: In the spring of Hui Di Yuan Kang's second year, the Brazil County Bamboo shoot flowers, purple, the fruit is like wheat, the outer skin is blue, the middle is red, and the taste is sweet.

古文：元康九年六月庚子，有桑生东宫西厢，日长尺余，甲辰枯死。
现代文：元康九年六月庚子，有桑树生长在东宫西厢，每天长一尺多，甲辰曰枯死。
English: In June of the ninth year of the reign of Geng Zi, there was a mulberry tree growing in the west wing of the East Palace. It grew more than a foot a day, and it was said to have withered and died in the year of Jia Chen.

古文：此与殷太戊同妖，太子不能悟，故至废戮也。
现代文：这与殷朝太戊的妖异相同，太子不能领悟，以致被废黜杀死。
English: This is the same as the strange phenomenon of Taewu in the Yin Dynasty. The prince could not understand it, so he was dethroned and killed.

古文：班固称 野木生朝而暴长，小人将暴居大臣之位，危国亡家之象，朝将为墟也。 
现代文：班固说： 野木生在朝中而暴长，是小人将骤然官居大臣之位，危害国家和家庭的征兆，朝廷将成为废墟。 
English: Ban Gu said, "The wild growth of a wild tree in the middle of the court is a sign that a villain will suddenly occupy the position of a minister, endangering the country and the family, and the court will become a ruin."

古文：是后孙秀、张林用事，遂至大乱。
现代文：此后孙秀、张林掌权，于是大乱。
English: After that, Sun Xiu and Zhang Lin took power, and a great turmoil ensued.

古文：永康元年四月，立皇孙臧为皇太孙。
现代文：永康元年四月，立皇孙司马臧为皇太孙。
English: In April of the first year of Yongkang, the grandson of the emperor, Sima Qian, was appointed the grandson of the emperor.

古文：五月甲子，就东宫，桑又生于西厢。
现代文：五月甲子，移住东宫，桑树又生长在西厢。
English: In May, Kazi moved to the East Wing, and the mulberry tree grew in the West Wing.

古文：明年，赵王伦篡位，鸩杀臧，此与愍怀同妖也。
现代文：第二年，赵王司马伦篡位，用鸩酒毒死司马臧，这与愍怀太子的妖异相同。
English: The following year, Zhao Wang Sima Lun usurped the throne and poisoned Sima Yao to death with poisoned wine, which is the same as the strange case of Zhai Huai Taizi.

古文：是月，壮武国有桑化为柏，而张华遇害。
现代文：此月，壮武国有桑树变为柏树，而张华遇害。
English: This month, the mulberry tree in Zhuangwu turned into a cypress tree, and Zhang Hua was killed.

古文：壮武，华之封邑也。
现代文：壮武，是张华的封邑。
English: Zhuangwu is Zhang Hua's fief.

古文：孝怀帝永嘉二年冬，项县桑树有声如解材，人谓之桑树哭。
现代文：孝怀帝永嘉二年冬，项县桑树发出像木材开裂的声音，人们称说是桑树哭。
English: In the winter of the second year of Xiao Huai Di Yongjia, the mulberry trees in Xiang County emitted a sound like wood cracking. People said that it was the mulberry tree crying.

古文：案刘向说， 桑者丧也 ，又为哭声，不祥之甚。
现代文：刘向说， 桑就是丧 ，又发出哭声，不祥之极。
English: Liu Xiang said that the mulberry tree is mourning, and it cries, which is very ominous.

古文：是时京师虚弱，胡寇交侵，东海王越无卫国之心，四年冬季而南出，五年春薨于此城。
现代文：这时京师虚弱，胡寇交相入侵，束海王司马越没有保卫国家之心，四年冬放弃京师南逃，五年春死在项县城。
English: At this time, the Beijing division was weak, the Huko invasion, and the Sokha King Sima Yue did not defend the heart of the country. In the winter of the fourth year, he abandoned the Beijing division and fled south. In the spring of the fifth year, he died in Xiang County.

古文：石勒邀其众，围而射之，王公以下至众庶，死者十余万人。
现代文：石勒邀击其部众，包围并用弓箭射击，王公以下至平民百姓，死了十多万人。
English: Shi Le invited his subordinates to attack, surrounded and shot with bows and arrows, from princes to civilians, more than a hundred thousand people died.

古文：又剖越棺，焚其尸。
现代文：又剖开司马越棺木，焚烧了他的尸体。
English: They also cut open Ma Yue's coffin and burned his body.

古文：是败也，中原无所请命，洛京亦寻覆没，桑哭之应也。
现代文：这次战败，中原没有人挺身参战，洛京不久也覆灭，这是桑树哭的应兆。
English: This defeat, no one in the Central Plains stepped forward to fight, and the destruction of the capital city of Luojing soon followed. This was a sign that the mulberry tree was crying.

古文：六年五月，无锡县有四株茱萸树，相樛而生，状若连理。
现代文：六年五月，无锡县有四株茱萸树，相互缠绕生长，形状就像连理。
English: In May of 2006, there were four dogwood trees in Wuxi County. They grew around each other, and their shape resembled a joint.

古文：先是，郭景纯筮延陵蝘鼠，遇《临》之《益》，曰： 后当复有妖树生，若瑞而非，辛螫之木也，傥有此，东西数百里必有作逆者。 
现代文：此前，郭景纯占筮延陵蛔鼠，得到《临》之《益》，说： 以后将还有妖树生，像是祥瑞其实不是，是辛毒的树木。如出现此事，东西数百里内必定有叛逆作乱的人。 
English: Earlier, Guo Jingshun took possession of the mole in the Yanling Mausoleum, obtained the "benefit" of the "Pin," and said: "In the future, there will still be evil trees, such as Xiang Rui is actually not, it is a poisonous tree. If this happens, there must be rebellious people within hundreds of miles from east to west.

古文：及此木生，其后徐馥果作乱，亦草妖也。
现代文：等到此树生出后，徐馥果然作乱，也是草妖。
English: After waiting for this tree to grow, Xu Yao really made a mess, and he is also a grass demon.

古文：郭又以为 木不曲直 。
现代文：郭景钟又认为是 木不曲直 。
English: Guo Jingzhong also believes that wood is not straight.

古文：其七月，豫章郡有樟树久枯，是月忽更荣茂，与汉昌邑枯社复生同占。
现代文：这年七月，辽童锂有久已枯死的樟树，这月忽然重新繁茂，与汉朝旦垦枯死的社树再生占象相同。
English: In July of this year, the long-dead eucalyptus trees in Liaotong Liushi suddenly regrew, which is the same as the regeneration of the dead eucalyptus trees in Han Dynasty.

古文：是怀愍沦陷之征，元帝中兴之应也。
现代文：这是怀童、垦睦沦陷的征兆，也是亘查中兴的应兆。
English: This is a symptom of the fall of Kaidong and Minmu, as well as a symptom of the rise of Wucha ZTE.

古文：明帝太宁元年九月，会稽剡县木生如人面。
现代文：明帝太宁元年九月，会稽郡剡县有树长得像人脸。
English: In September of the first year of the Ming Dynasty in Taining, there was a tree that looked like a human face.

古文：是后王敦称兵作逆，祸败无成。
现代文：此后王敦起兵叛逆，失败没有成功。
English: After that, Wang Dun rebelled and failed.

古文：昔汉哀成之世并有此妖，而人貌备具，故春祸亦大。
现代文：从前汉朝哀帝、成帝时代都有这样的妖异，并且人的相貌完全具备，所以其祸难也很大。
English: In the past, during the Han Dynasty's era of mourning emperors and enthroned emperors, there were such monsters, and they were completely human in appearance, so they were a great calamity.

古文：今此但如人面而已，故其变也轻矣。
现代文：现今此树祇是像人脸罢了，所以其变故也较轻微。
English: Today, the tree only resembles a human face, so the changes are relatively minor.

古文：成帝咸和六年五月癸亥，曲阿有柳树枯倒六载，是日忽复起生，至九年五月甲戌，吴县吴雄家有死榆树，是日因风雨起生，与汉上林断柳起生同象。
现代文：成帝咸和六年五月癸亥，曲阿县有柳树干枯倒下已经六年，这天忽然又立起活了，到九年五月甲戌，吴县吴雄家有死榆树，这天因风雨而立起复活，与漠朝上林断柳立起复活有相同的征象。
English: In May of the sixth year of Emperor Chengxian and the sixth year of the Heian period, there was a willow tree in Qua County that had been withered and fallen for six years, and this day it suddenly rose to life again. In May of the ninth year of the Jiajing period, there was a dead willow tree in Wu Xiong's house in Wu County. This day it rose to life due to the wind and rain, and it had the same signs as the willow tree in the upper forest of the desert.

古文：初，康帝为吴王，于时虽改封琅邪，而犹食吴郡为邑，是帝越正体飨国之象也。
现代文：起初，康帝为吴王，这时虽然改封在琅邪，但是仍然将吴郡作为食邑，这是皇帝逾越正体享国的征象。
English: At first, Emperor Kangxi was the King of Wu. At that time, although he changed his title to the King of Evil, he still used Wu County as a food town. This was a sign that the emperor had overstepped the bounds of propriety.

古文：曲阿先亦吴地，象见吴邑雄之舍，又天意乎！
现代文：曲阿原先也是吴郡之地，征象出现在吴邑吴雄家中，又是天意。
English: Originally, Qu'ao was also the land of Wu County. The signs appeared in Wu Xiong's home in Wuyi, which was also the will of heaven.

古文：哀帝兴宁三年五月癸卯，庐陵西昌县修明家有僵栗树，是日忽复起生。
现代文：哀帝兴宁三年五月癸卯，庐陵西昌县修明家有棵僵死的栗树，遣天忽然复活。
English: In May of the third year of Emperor Xingning's reign, a chestnut tree in Xichang County, Fuling, Shumei's home, which had been dead, was suddenly revived.

古文：时孝武年始四岁，俄而哀帝崩，海西即位，未几而废，简文越自籓王，入纂大业，登阼享国，又不逾二年，而孝武嗣统。
现代文：当时孝武帝年纪刚四岁，不久哀帝死，海西公即帝位，不久被废黜，简文帝起自诸侯王，入朝继承大业，登上帝位享有国家，又没有过二年，孝武帝承袭皇统。
English: At that time, Emperor Xiaowu was just four years old. Soon after, Emperor Xiaowu died. Emperor Haisi ascended the throne and was soon dethroned. Emperor Jianwen inherited the great cause from the princes, entered the court, ascended the throne and enjoyed the country. Less than two years later, Emperor Xiaowu succeeded to the throne.

古文：帝讳昌明，识者窃谓西昌修明之祥，帝讳实应焉。
现代文：孝武帝名昌明，有识之士认为西昌修明的祥瑞，是孝武帝名讳的实际应验。
English: Emperor Xiaowu's name is Changming, and people of insight believe that Xichang Shuming's Xiangrui is the actual fulfillment of Emperor Xiaowu's name.

古文：是亦与汉宣帝同象也。
现代文：这也和漠宣帝有相同的征象。
English: This also has the same signs as Emperor Mu Xuan.

古文：海西太和元年，凉州杨树生松。
现代文：海西太和元年，凉州有杨树长出松树。
English: In the first year of the Taihe era, poplars grew into pine trees in Liangzhou.

古文：天戒若曰，松者不改柯易叶，杨者柔脆之木，今松生于杨，岂非永久之业将集危亡之地邪？
现代文：天戒这样说，松树枝茎不改变叶子不脱换，杨树是柔软脆弱的树木，如今松树生在杨树上，难道不是长久的大业将会集在危亡之地吗?
English: According to the heavenly precepts, the pine tree does not change its branches and leaves, and the poplar tree is a soft and fragile tree. Nowadays, the pine tree is born on the poplar tree. Isn't it a long-term great cause that will be concentrated in the land of peril?

古文：是时张天锡称雄于凉州，寻而降苻坚。
现代文：遣时张天锡在凉州称霸，不久投降了苻坚。
English: At the time of the expedition, Zhang Tianxi dominated in Liangzhou, but soon surrendered to Yu Jian.

古文：孝武太元十四年六月，建宁郡铜乐县枯树断折，忽然自立相属。
现代文：孝武帝左五十四年六月，建宁郡锢蹙墨枯树折断，忽然自己立起相互连接。
English: In June of the 54th year of Emperor Xiaowu's reign, a dead tree in Jianning County snapped and suddenly stood up on its own to connect with each other.

古文：京房《易传》曰： 弃正作淫，厥妖木断自属。
现代文：京房《易传》说： 背弃正道而行淫乱，其妖木折断自己相连。
English: Jing Fang's "I Chuan" said: "If one forsakes the righteous path and engages in sexual misconduct, his yōki will break and he will be chained."

古文：妃后有专，木仆反立。 
现代文：妃子皇后有专宠，树木仆倒而立起。 
English: The queen of concubines has a special pet, the trees fall down and stand up.

古文：是时正道多僻，其后张夫人专宠，及旁崩，兆庶归咎张氏焉。
现代文：适时正道有偏邪，此后张夫人受专宠，等到孝武帝去世，民众都归罪于张氏。
English: At the right time, there was a deviation from the right path, after which Mrs. Zhang was favored, and when Emperor Xiaowu died, the people blamed the Zhang clan.

古文：安帝元兴三年，荆、江二州界竹生实，如麦。
现代文：安帝元兴三年，荆、江二州境的竹子结出果实，像麦子。
English: In the third year of Emperor Andei's reign, the bamboo trees on the border of the two states of Jing and Jiang produced fruit like wheat.

古文：义熙二年九月，扬武将军营士陈盖家有苦荬菜，茎高四尺六寸，广三尺二寸，厚三寸，亦草妖也。
现代文：义熙二年九月，扬武将军军营士兵陈盖家有苦买菜，茎高四尺六寸，粗三尺二寸，厚三寸，也是草妖。
English: In September of the second year of Yixi, a soldier from the Yangwu general's camp, Chen Gaijia, had a hard time buying vegetables. The stem was four feet and six inches high, three feet and two inches thick, and three inches thick. It was also a grass demon.

古文：此殆与吴终同象。
现代文：这大概和吴国灭亡时的征象相同。
English: This is probably the same as the signs at the time of the fall of the State of Wu.

古文：识者以为苦荬者，买勤苦也。
现代文：有识之士认为苦赀，是买勤苦。
English: Those with insight believe that bitterness is the result of hard work.

古文：自后岁岁征讨，百姓劳苦，是买苦也。
现代文：从此以后年年征战讨伐，百姓辛劳困苦，造就是买苦。
English: From then on, the war was fought year after year, and the people worked hard and suffered hardships.

古文：十余年中，姚泓灭，兵始戢，是苦荬之应也。
现代文：十余年间，姚泓灭亡，战事才停息，这是苦贾的应兆。
English: It took more than ten years for Yao Jia to die and the war to end, which was a sign of bitterness.

古文：义熙中，宫城上及御道左右皆生蒺藜，亦草妖也。
现代文：义熙年间，宫城上和御道左右都长出了蒺藜，也是草妖。
English: During the reign of Emperor Yixi, grasshoppers, also known as grass devils, sprouted up all over Miyagi and around Mido.

古文：蒺藜有刺，不可践而行。
现代文：蒺藜有刺，不能踏着它走路。
English: A stork has thorns, you can't walk on it.

古文：生宫墙及驰道，天戒若曰，人君不听政，虽有宫室驰道，若空废也，故生蒺藜。
现代文：生长在宫墙和大道，天戒像是说，人君不亲理朝政，虽然有宫室驰道，就像空废的一样，所以长出蒺藜。
English: It grows on palace walls and avenues. Heaven's decree seems to say that people do not care about the government, although there is a palace, it is like a waste, so it grows.

古文：羽虫之孽魏文帝黄初四年五月，有鹈鹕鸟集灵芝池。案刘向说，此羽虫之孽，又青祥也。
现代文：魏文帝黄初四年五月，有鹃鹕乌聚集在灵芝池。刘向说，这是羽虫的妖孽，又是青祥。
English: In May of the first year of Emperor Wen of Wei and the first year of Emperor Huang, a swarm of caterpillars gathered at Lingzhi Pond. Liu Xiang said that this was the witchcraft of the caterpillars, and it was auspicious.

古文：诏曰： 此诗人所谓汙泽者也。
现代文：下韶书说： 这是诗人所说的污浊的水泽。
English: The lower margin says: This is the filthy mizusawa that the poet spoke of.

古文：《曹诗》 刺共公远君子近小人 ，今岂有贤智之士处于下位，否则斯鸟何为而至哉！
现代文：《曹诗》 讥讽共公疏远君子亲近小人 ，如今难道是有贤明士人处在下位，否则这乌为什么会来到呢!
English: "Cao Shi" ridicules the public and alienates the gentleman and approaches the villain. Nowadays, are there any wise men and women in the lower ranks, otherwise why would this evil come?

古文：其博举天下俊德茂才独行君子，以答曹人之刺。 
现代文：应广泛推举天下德行杰出才能卓越品行独特的君子，来回应曹地人的讽刺。 
English: It is necessary to respond to Cao Di's sarcasm by widely nominating the world's most virtuous, outstanding talents and unique gentlemen.

古文：于是杨彪、管宁之徒咸见荐举，些所谓睹妖知惧者也。
现代文：于是杨彪、管宁之辈都受到举荐，造就是所谓的看到妖异知道惧怕。
English: As a result, Yang Biao and Guanning's generation were all recommended, which is the so-called seeing monsters and knowing fear.

古文：然犹不能优容亮直而多溺偏私矣。
现代文：但是还是不能宽容忠直而沉迷于偏璃偏信。
English: However, they still cannot tolerate loyalty and are obsessed with partiality.

古文：京房《易传》曰 辟退有德，厥妖水鸟集于国中 。
现代文：塞廛《易传》说： 贬退有德的人，其妖异是水鸟聚集在国都中。 
English: "I Chuan" said: The abasement of virtuous people, the strange thing is that waterfowl gather in the capital.

古文：黄初元年，未央宫中又有燕生鹰，口爪俱赤，此与商纣、宋隐同象。
现代文：黄初元年，未央宫中又有燕子生下鹰，嘴和爪都是红色，这与商纣、宋隐有相同的征象。
English: In the first year of the Yellow Emperor's reign, a swallow gave birth to an eagle in the Weiyang Palace. Its beak and claws were red, which had the same signs as Shangguan and Songyin.

古文：景初元年，又有燕生巨鷇于卫国李盖家，形若鹰，吻似燕，此羽虫之孽，又赤眚也。
现代文：景初元年，又有燕子在卫国李盖家生下巨大的幼乌，外形像鹰，嘴像燕子，这是羽虫之孽，又是赤眚。
English: At the beginning of the first year of the Jing Dynasty, there was also a swallow that gave birth to a huge young owl in the Li Gai family of the Great Patriotic War. It was shaped like an eagle and had a mouth like a swallow. This was the evil of the caterpillars, and it was also the Red Kite.

古文：高堂隆曰： 此魏室之大异，宜防鹰扬之臣于萧墙之内。 
现代文：高堂隆说： 这是魏室的大异征，应提防有辅政的重臣造成萧墙之祸。 
English: Gaodong Long said: This is a big anomaly in Wei's room. We should beware of the disaster of the collapsed wall caused by the chief ministers who are ancillary to the government.

古文：其后宣帝起诛曹爽，遂有魏室。
现代文：此后宣帝杀了曹爽，占有了魏氏皇室。
English: After that, Emperor Xuan killed Cao Shuang and took over the Wei royal family.

古文：汉献帝建安二十三年，秃鹙鸟集鄴宫文昌殿后池。
现代文：汉献帝建安二十三年，秃骛鸟聚集在邺城宫殿文昌殿后的水池中。
English: In the 23rd year of Emperor Jian'an, the vultures gathered in the pond behind the Wenchang Hall of the Lucheng Palace.

古文：明年，魏武王薨。
现代文：第二年，魏武王。
English: In the second year, Wei Wu Wang.

古文：魏文帝黄初三年，又集雒阳芳林园池。
现代文：魏文帝黄初三年，又聚集在能量芳林园的池中。
English: In the first three years of Emperor Wei Wenhuang, they gathered again in the pond of the Energy Fang Forest Park.

古文：七年，又集。
现代文：七年，又聚集。
English: Seven years later, they gathered again.

古文：其夏，文帝崩。
现代文：当年夏，文帝死。
English: In the summer of that year, Emperor Wen died.

古文：景初末，又集芳林园池。
现代文：景初末年，又聚集在羞挞周池中。
English: At the end of the first half of the year, they gathered again in the middle of the pond.

古文：已前再至，辄有大丧，帝恶之。其年，明帝崩。
现代文：从前两次到来，就有大的丧事，明帝感到厌恶。遣年，明帝死。
English: After the previous two arrivals, there was a great funeral, and Emperor Ming was disgusted. At the turn of the year, Emperor Ming died.

古文：蜀刘禅建兴九年十月，江阳至江州有鸟从江南飞渡江北，不能达，堕水死者以千数。
现代文：蜀刘禅建兴九年十月，江阳至江州有鸟从长江南飞渡江北，不能飞到，坠落水中淹死的数以千计。
English: Shu Liu Zen Jianxing In October of the ninth year, there were birds flying from the south of the Yangtze River to the north of the Yangtze River from Jiangyang to Jiangzhou. Thousands of birds could not fly and fell into the water and drowned.

古文：是时诸葛亮连年动众，志吞中夏，而终死渭南，所图不遂。
现代文：此时诸葛亮连年出动军队，立志吞并中原，却最终死在渭水之南，他的大业没有成功。
English: At this time, Zhuge Liang sent troops year after year, determined to annex the Central Plains, but eventually died in the south of Surabaya, his great cause was not successful.

古文：又诸将分争，颇丧徒旅，鸟北飞不能达堕水死者，皆有其象也。
现代文：众将领分裂争斗，损失了很多军队，乌北飞不能抵达坠落水中而死，都有其征象。
English: The generals were divided and fought, many troops were lost, and Wu Beifei could not reach and fell into the water and died.

古文：亮竟不能过渭，又其应乎！
现代文：诸葛亮最终不能渡过渭水，又是应兆。
English: Zhuge Liang's eventual failure to cross the Surabaya River was another warning sign.

古文：此与汉时楚国乌斗堕泗水粗类矣。
现代文：这与汉朝时楚国有鸟争斗坠落泅水的情况大致相似。
English: This is roughly similar to the situation in the Han Dynasty, when the birds of the State of Chu fought and fell into the water.

古文：景初元年，陵霄阙始构，有鹊巢其上。
现代文：景初元年，陵霄阙开始建造，有喜鹊在它上面筑巢。
English: At the beginning of the first year of the scene, the construction of the mausoleum began, and magpies built nests on it.

古文：鹊体白黑杂色，此羽虫之孽，又白黑祥也。
现代文：喜鹊是白黑色混杂，这是羽虫的妖孽，又是白黑的征祥。
English: The magpie is a mixture of white and black, which is the witchcraft of the caterpillar and the blessing of white and black.

古文：帝以问高堂隆，对曰： 《诗》云 惟鹊有巢，惟鸠居之 ，今兴起宫室而鹊来巢，此宫室未成身不得居之象也。
现代文：魏明帝问高堂隆，他回答说： 《诗》说 鹊建巢穴，鸠鸟居住，如今兴建宫室而喜鹊来筑巢，这是宫室没有建成身不能居的征象。
English: Wei Mingdi asked Gao Donglong, he replied: "The poem says that the stork builds a nest, the ostrich lives, and now the palace is built, and the magpie comes to build a nest. This is a sign that the palace is not built and can not live.

古文：天戒若曰，宫室未成，将有他姓制御之，不可不深虑。 
现代文：天戒这样说，宫室没有建成，将有别的姓氏占用它，不可不深忧。 
English: According to the heavenly decree, the imperial palace has not been completed, and there will be other surnames occupying it. We must be deeply worried.

古文：于是帝改颜动色。
现代文：于是明帝害怕。
English: As a result, Emperor Ming was afraid.

古文：吴孙权赤乌十二年四月，有两乌衔鹊堕东馆，权使领丞相硃据燎鹊以祭。
现代文：吴孙权赤乌十二年四月，有两只乌鸦衔着喜鹊坠落在东馆，孙权让丞相朱据烧喜鹊来祭祀。
English: In April of the 12th year of Wu Sun Quan's reign, two crows carrying a magpie fell to the East Hall. Sun Quan asked the prime minister Zhu Rong to burn the magpie as a sacrifice.

古文：案刘歆说，此羽虫之孽，又黑祥也。
现代文：照刘歆所说，这是羽虫的妖孽，又是黑祥。
English: According to Liu Wei, this is the witchcraft of the caterpillars, and it is also a bad omen.

古文：视不明、听不聪之罚也。
现代文：是对视不明、听不聪的惩罚。
English: It is a punishment for not being able to see or hear.

古文：是时权意溢德衰，信谗好杀，二子将危，将相俱殆，睹妖不悟，加之以燎，昧道之甚者也。
现代文：这时孙权意气用事德行衰败，听信谗言喜爱杀戮，两个儿子将有危难，武将文臣都没有可用的人，看到妖异不能醒悟，又进行燎祭，不明道义如此。
English: At this time, Sun Quan was demoralized, he liked to kill, his two sons would be in danger, his generals and ministers were useless, he could not wake up when he saw the monster, and he made a burnt offering, which was immoral.

古文：明年，太子和废，鲁王霸赐死，硃据左迁，陆议忧卒，是其应也。
现代文：第二年，太子孙和被废黜，鲁王孙霸赐死，朱据降职，陆议忧虑而死，这是其应兆。
English: In the second year, the crown prince and his descendants were deposed, the king of Lu, Sun Ba, died, Zhu Jian was demoted, and Lu Wei died of anxiety. This was a sign.

古文：东馆，典教之府；鹊堕东馆，又天意乎？
现代文：东馆，是主管教化的官署；喜鹊坠落束馆，又是天意吗?
English: The East Hall is the government office in charge of indoctrination; the Magpie's fall to the Bundle Hall, is it the will of heaven?

古文：吴孙权太元二年正月，封前太子和为南阳王，遣之长沙，有鹊巢其帆樯。
现代文：吴孙权太元二年正月，封前太子孙和为南阳王，遣送他到长沙，有喜鹊巢居在他的船帆樯上。
English: In the first month of the second year of the reign of Emperor Wu Sun Quan, the former crown prince and Nanyang King sent him to Changsha. There was a magpie nest on the sail of his ship.

古文：和故宫僚闻之，皆忧惨，以为樯末倾危，非久安之象。
现代文：孙和从前宫中的属官听到此事，都忧虑伤心，认为樯的末端倾斜危险，不是长久平安之兆。
English: Hearing this, both Sun and the subordinate officials in the front palace were worried and sad, believing that the dangerous tilt of the end of the beak was not a sign of long-term peace.

古文：是后果不得其死。
现代文：此后果然不得好死。
English: The result was a tragic death.

古文：孙亮建兴二年十一月，有大鸟五见于春申，吴人以为凤皇。
现代文：孙亮建兴二年十一月，有大鸟五次出现在春申，吴人认为是凤凰。
English: In November of the second year of Sun Liang Jianxing, a large bird appeared five times in Chunshen, and the Wu people thought it was a phoenix.

古文：明年，改元为五凤。
现代文：第二年，改年号为五凰。
English: In the second year, the year name was changed to Wuhuang.

古文：汉桓帝时有五色大鸟，司马彪云： 政道衰缺，无以致凤，乃羽虫孽耳。 
现代文：濩担壶时有五色大鸟，司虽彪说： 政道衰败，不能够招来凤凰，衹是羽虫妖孽罢了。 
English: When the dragonfly was carrying the jug, there was a five-colored bird. Sijian Biao said, "The political system is in a state of decay, and it is not possible to summon a phoenix. The dragonfly is just a winged insect.

古文：孙亮未有德政，孙峻骄暴方甚，此与桓帝同事也。
现代文：孙亮没有德政，孙峻骄横暴虐之极，遣舆汉桓帝的情况相同。
English: Sun Liang did not have a virtuous government, Sun Jun was extremely arrogant and tyrannical, and the same was true of Emperor Han.

古文：案《瑞应图》，大鸟似凤而为孽者非一，宜皆是也。
现代文：依《瑞应圃》，大鸟似凤却是妖孽的不仅一次，应该都是。
English: According to "Rui Ying Po," the large bird-like phoenix is not only evil once, but should be evil all the time.

古文：孙皓建衡三年，西苑言凤皇集，以之改元，义同于亮。
现代文：孙皓建衡三年，西苑说有凤凰聚集，因此改年号，这与孙亮时的情况相同。
English: In the third year of Sun Xian Jianheng, Xi Yuan said that there was a phoenix gathering, so he changed the year number. This is the same situation as when Sun Liang died.

古文：武帝泰始四年八月，有翟雉飞上阊阖门。
现代文：武帝泰始四年八月，有长尾野鸡飞上阎闱盟。
English: In August of the fourth year of Emperor Wu's reign, a long-tailed pheasant flew into the sky.

古文：天戒若曰，阊阖门非雉所止，犹殷宗雉登鼎耳之戒也。
现代文：天戒这样说，迩玺旦不是长尾野鶸所停的地方，就像是殷宗时野鶸登上鼎耳的惩戒。
English: Thus says the heavenly decree, "If you do not stop where the Nagao wild donkey stops, it is like the punishment of the wild donkey when it landed on the ear of Yin Zong."

古文：惠帝永康元年，赵王伦既篡，京师得异鸟，莫能名。
现代文：惠帝永康元年，童迗司马伦篡位后，京师得到怪异的乌，没人能知道其名。
English: In the first year of Emperor Hui Yongkang's reign, after the usurpation of the throne by the boy emperor Sima Lun, the Beijing division received a strange Wu, no one can know its name.

古文：伦使人持出，周旋城邑市以问人。
现代文：司马伦派人带出去，在城邑四周游走询问众人。
English: And Simeon sent messengers to spy out the city and to spy out the men of the city.

古文：积日，宫西有小兒见之，遂自言曰： 服留鸟翳。 
现代文：遇了几天，宫西有个小孩看到，背着身自言自语说道： 服留乌翳。 
English: A few days later, a child in Miyanishi saw it and said to himself while carrying it on his back, "I'm going to stay here."

古文：持者即还白伦，伦使更求，又见之，乃将入宫，密笼鸟，并闭小兒户中，明日视之，悉不见。
现代文：带乌的人马上返回禀告司马伦，司马伦派人再去找，又看到他，就带他入宫，将鸟关进笼中，同时将小孩关在房屋中，第二天看时，都不见了。
English: The man with the owl immediately returned to tell Smalen about the owl. Smalen sent someone to look for it again, and when they saw it, they took it into the palace, put the bird in a cage, and at the same time locked the child in the house. When they looked the next day, it was gone.

古文：此羽虫之孽。
现代文：这是羽虫的妖孽。
English: This is the witchcraft of the caterpillar.

古文：时赵王伦有目瘤之疾，言服留者，谓伦留将服其罪也。
现代文：当时赵王司马伦有眼睛长瘤的疾病，称服留，是说司马伦将服其罪。
English: At that time, Zhao Wang Simalen had a disease of eye growth, and he said that he would serve his sentence. This meant that Simalen would serve his sentence.

古文：寻而伦诛。
现代文：不久后司马伦被诛。
English: Smalen was executed shortly afterwards.

古文：赵王伦篡位，有鹑入太极殿，雉集东堂。
现代文：赵王司马伦篡位，有鹌鹑进入太极殿，野鸡落在墓堂。
English: Zhao Wang Simarun usurped the throne, entered the Taiji Hall with a scepter, and a pheasant landed in the cemetery.

古文：天戒若曰，太极东堂皆朝享听政之所，而鹑雉同日集之者，赵王伦不当居此位也。
现代文：天戒这样说，立捶殿束堂都是朝廷听政的处所，而鹌鹑野鶸同一天落在其中，是童墅王司马伦不应当居于此位。
English: According to Heaven's Ring, all the halls of the Palace of the Standing Skull and Crossbones are the places where the imperial court listens to the government, and the Skull and Crossbones falls into one of them on the same day. It is the dungeon king Sima Lun who should not live in this place.

古文：《诗》云： 鹊之强强，鹑之奔奔，人之无良，我以为君。 
现代文：《诗》云： 喜鹊双双，鹌鹑对对，人并不好，却作君王。 
English: "Poem" cloud: The magpie is double-double, the dragonfly is double-double, the people are not good, but they are kings.

古文：其此之谓乎！
现代文：说的就是这种情况吧。
English: This is exactly the situation.

古文：寻而伦诛。
现代文：不久司马伦被处死。
English: Smalen was executed shortly afterwards.

古文：孝怀帝永嘉元年二月，洛阳东北步广里地陷，有苍白二色鹅出，苍者飞翔冲天，白者止焉。
现代文：孝怀帝永嘉元年二月，盗墨东北楚庐旦地面塌陷，有灰白两种颜色的鹅出来，灰色的飞翔冲上天空，白色的留下来。
English: In February of the first year of the Xiao Huai Emperor Yongjia, the ground in northeastern Chuyuan collapsed, and geese of two colors, gray and white, came out. The gray one flew into the sky, and the white one remained.

古文：此羽虫之孽，又黑白祥也。
现代文：这是羽虫的妖孽，又是黑白征祥。
English: This is the witchcraft of the caterpillar, and it is also the black and white victory.

古文：陈留董养曰： 步广，周之狄泉，盟会地也。
现代文：建鱼董萱说： ；缱，是旦伐的迭星，是举行盟会的地方。
English: Jianyu Dongyao said: "Yingyao is the epitome of fishing, the place where the league is held.

古文：白者，金色，国之行也。
现代文：白色，是金色，是国家的五行之色。
English: White is the color of gold, the national five elements.

古文：苍为胡象，其可尽言乎？ 
现代文：灰色是胡人的象征，遣能明说吗? 
English: Gray is the symbol of the beard, can you say it clearly?

古文：是后，刘元海、石勒相继乱华。
现代文：此后，刘五渔、互勤相继侵犯华夏。
English: After that, Liu Wufu and the other officials invaded Huaxia one after another.

古文：明帝太宁三年八月庚戌，有大鸟二，苍黑色，翼广一丈四尺，其一集司徒府，射而杀之，其一集市北家人舍，亦获焉。
现代文：明帝太宁三年八月庚戌，有两只大鸟，灰黑色，羽翼有一丈四尺宽，一只落在司徒府，被射杀，另一只落在市北人家的房屋上，被捕获。
English: In August of the third year of the Ming Emperor Taining, there were two large birds, gray-black, with wings four feet wide. One landed in Szetofu and was shot, and the other landed on a house in the north of the city and was captured.

古文：此羽虫之孽，又黑祥也。
现代文：这是羽虫妖孽，又是黑色征祥。
English: This is the witchcraft of the featherworm, and it is also the black exorcism.

古文：及闰月戊子而帝崩，后遂有苏峻、祖约之乱。
现代文：闰月戊子明帝死，后来有苏峻、祖约之乱。
English: In the leap month, Emperor Ming died, and later there were the Su Jun Rebellion and the Ancestor's War.

古文：成帝咸和二年正月，有五鸥鸟集殿庭，此又白祥也。
现代文：成帝咸和二年正月，有五只鸥鸟落在殿庭上，这又是白色征祥。
English: In the first month of the second year of Emperor Chengdi's reign, five ostriches landed in the palace courtyard, which is also a white auspicious sign.

古文：是时庾亮苟违众谋，将召苏峻，有言不从之咎，故白祥先见也。
现代文：这时庾亮轻率地违背众人的意见，准备召来蓝峻，有言不顺的祸殃，所以白祥先出现。
English: At this time, Yao Liang rashly went against the opinions of many people and prepared to summon the Blue and Red Dragon, which was a bad omen, so Bai Xiang appeared first.

古文：三年二月，峻果作乱，宫掖焚毁，化为汙莱，此其应也。
现代文：三年二月，麸哩果然作乱，皇宫房舍都烧毁，成了污水汇集草木丛生之地，这是其应兆。
English: In February of the third year, there was indeed a riot in Bali. The royal palace buildings were all burned down, and it became a place where sewage collected and overgrown with vegetation. This was a sign of its response.

古文：咸康八年七月，有白鹭集殿屋。
现代文：咸康八年七月，有白鹭落在宫殿屋顶。
English: In July of the eighth year of the reign of Emperor Xiankang, an egret landed on the roof of the palace.

古文：是时康帝初即位，不永之祥也。
现代文：逭时康帝刚即位，是不会长久的征兆。
English: At that time, Emperor Kangxi had just ascended to the throne, which was a sign that it would not last long.

古文：后涉再期而帝崩。
现代文：过了两年康帝崩。
English: Two years later, Kang Di passed away.

古文：案刘向曰： 野鸟入处，宫室将空。 
现代文：依刘向说： 野乌入处，宫室将空。 
English: According to Liu Xiang: The entrance of the wild boar, the palace will be empty.

古文：此其应也。
现代文：这是其应兆。
English: This is a good sign.

古文：海西初以兴守三年二月即位，有野雉集于相风。
现代文：海西起初在兴宁三年二月即位，有野鶸落在风向器上。
English: Haixi initially ascended to the throne in February of the third year of Xingning, and a wild dragonfly landed on the wind vane.

古文：此羽虫之孽也。
现代文：这是羽虫的妖孽。
English: This is the witchcraft of the caterpillar.

古文：寻为桓温所废也。
现代文：不久他被桓温废黜。
English: Soon after, he was deposed by Kan'en.

古文：孝武帝太元十六年六月，鹊巢太极东头鸱尾，又巢国子学堂西头。
现代文：孝武帝太元十六年六月，喜鹊在太极殿东部屋顶装饰物上巢居，又在国子学堂西部屋顶巢居。
English: In June of the 16th year of the reign of Emperor Xiaowu, magpies nested on the decorations on the east roof of the Taiji Hall and on the west roof of the Kuniko School.

古文：十八年东宫始成，十九年正月鹊又巢其西门。
现代文：十八年束宫落成，十九年正月喜鹊又在西门上筑巢。
English: In the 18th year, Soku-gu was completed, and in the first month of the 19th year, magpies built nests on the west gate.

古文：此殆与魏景初同占。
现代文：这与魏国景初时的占像相同。
English: This is the same as the situation at the beginning of the Wei Dynasty.

古文：学堂，风教所聚；西头，又金行之祥。
现代文：学堂，是风化教育的聚集处；西部顶头，又是五行的金行的征兆。
English: The school is the gathering place of moral education; the western tip is also a sign of the Five Elements.

古文：及帝崩后，安皇嗣位，桓玄遂篡，风教乃穨，金行不竞之象也。
现代文：孝武帝死后，安皇继位，桓玄就篡权，风化教育败坏，这是五行的金行不强的征象。
English: After the death of Emperor Xiaowu, Emperor An succeeded to the throne, and Emperor Huan Xuan usurped power and corrupted morals and education. This is a sign that the Five Elements are not strong.

古文：安帝义熙三年，龙骧将军硃猗戍寿阳。
现代文：安帝义熙三年，龙骧将军走猹驻守画盟。
English: In the third year of Emperor Andei Yixi's reign, General Long Kun was stationed at the Art League.

古文：婢炊饭，忽有群乌集灶，竞来啄敢，婢驱遂不去。
现代文：婢女烧火做饭，忽然有群乌落在灶上，争相来啄食，婢女驱赶不走。
English: The maid was cooking on the fire, when suddenly a flock of pigeons landed on the stove, scrambling for food. The maid couldn't drive the pigeons away.

古文：有猎狗咋杀两乌，余乌因共啄杀狗，又敢其肉，唯余骨存。
现代文：有只猎狗咬死两只乌，其余乌鸦就一起啄死这狗，又啄食其肉，衹剩下骨头。
English: A hound killed two owls, and the rest of the crows choked the dog to death, ate the meat, and ate the remaining bones.

古文：此亦羽虫之孽，又黑祥也。
现代文：这也是羽虫的妖孽，又是黑色征祥。
English: This is also the witchcraft of the caterpillar, and it is also the black victory.

古文：明年六月，猗死，此其应也。
现代文：第二年六月，朱猗死，这是其应兆。
English: In June of the following year, Zhu Xi died, which was a response to this.

古文：羊祸成帝咸和二年五月，司徒王导厩羊生无后足，此羊祸也。
现代文：成帝咸和二年五月，司徒工遵马厩中的羊生下没有后蹄的小羊，这是羊祸。
English: In May of the second year of Emperor Chengxian's reign, a lamb was born without a hind hoof in the stables of Stugong Zun, which was a calamity for the sheep.

古文：京房《易传》曰： 足少者，下不胜任也。 
现代文：塞崖《易传》说： 缺少脚，是下不能胜任。 
English: Sayaka "I Chuan" said: If you lack legs, you are not competent.

古文：明年，苏峻破京都，导与帝俱幽石头，仅乃得免，是其应也。
现代文：第二年，茎蝗攻破京都，王遵和旦适都被幽禁在亘玺，仅得免死，这是其应兆。
English: In the second year, the locusts invaded Kyoto, and Wang Zun and Danshi were both imprisoned in Watanabe, only to be spared death, which was a sign of their response.

古文：赤眚赤祥公孙文懿时，襄平北市生肉，长围各数尺，有头目口喙，无手足而动摇，此赤祥也。
现代文：公孙文懿时，襄垩北市长出肉，长宽各有几尺，有头眼嘴，没有手脚而动摇，这是赤祥。
English: During the reign of King Gongsun Wenyi, the mayor of the northern city of Xiangfan was made of meat, each several feet long and wide, with a head, eyes and mouth, but without hands and feet, which made him waver. This was akixiang.

古文：占曰： 有形不成，有体不声，其国灭亡。 
现代文：占卜说： 有外形却不完整，有形体却不出声，国家将会灭亡。 
English: The soothsayer said: There is a form, but it is incomplete; there is a body, but it does not speak; the country will perish.

古文：文懿寻为魏所诛。
现代文：塞整不久被毯厘所杀。
English: Soon after, Saigei was killed by Teppori.

古文：吴戍将邓喜杀猪祠神，治毕悬之，忽见一人头往食肉，喜引弓射中之，咋咋作声，绕屋三日，近赤祥也。
现代文：吴戍守将登直杀猪祭神，宰杀处理好以后悬挂起来，忽然看到有一人头前去吃肉，邓台拉弓射中，发出咋咋声响，环绕屋舍三天，逭近似赤祥。
English: The governor of Wuyi Province was about to kill a pig as a sacrifice to the gods. After the slaughtering was done, he hung it up. Suddenly, he saw a head of a man eating the meat. Dangdai drew his bow and shot it, and it made a loud noise. It surrounded the house for three days, and its beak looked like a red horse.

古文：后人白喜谋北叛，阖门被诛。
现代文：后来有人告发邓台阴谋叛变，全家被杀。
English: Later, someone accused Deng Tai of plotting a mutiny, and his entire family was killed.

古文：京房《易传》曰： 山见葆，江于邑，邑有兵，状如人头，赤色。 
现代文：塞良《易传》说： 高山长出野菜，城镇有了江水，城中有兵，形状像人头，赤色。 
English: Serian's "I Chuan" said: Mountains grow vegetables, towns have river water, there are soldiers in the city, shaped like human heads, red.

古文：武帝太康五年四月壬子，鲁国池水变赤如血。
现代文：武帝太康五年四月壬子，叠国池水变成赤色像血一样。
English: When Emperor Wu Taikang ascended to the throne in April of the fifth year of his reign, the water of the Jianguo Lake turned red like blood.

古文：七年十月，河阴有赤雪二顷。
现代文：七年十月，迥渣有二顷的赤雪。这是赤祥。
English: In October of the seventh year, there were two hectares of red snow in the dross. This was the beginning of Akasho.

古文：此赤祥也。
现代文：此后四年亘堕死，王室便内乱。
English: Four years later, he died, and the royal family fell into civil strife.

古文：是后四载而帝崩，王室遂乱。惠帝元康五年三月，吕县有流血，东西百余步，此赤祥也。
现代文：惠帝元康五年三月，吕县有流血，东西长一百多步，这是赤祥。
English: In March of the fifth year of Hui Di Yuan Kang, there was bloodshed in Lv County, and the east and west were more than a hundred paces long, which was a red flag.

古文：至元康末，穷凶极乱，僵尸流血之应也。
现代文：至元康末年，凶险战乱，这是有僵尸流血的应兆。
English: Towards the end of Yuan Kang's life, there was a dangerous war, which was a sign of zombie bloodshed.

古文：干宝以为 后八载而封云乱徐州，杀伤数万人 ，是其应也。
现代文：王宜认为 后八年而挝云侵扰涂业，死伤几万人 ，这是其应兆。
English: Wang Yi believed that in the last eight years, haze clouds have invaded the coating industry, causing tens of thousands of deaths and injuries, which is its response.

古文：永康元年三月，尉氏雨血。
现代文：永康元年三月，尉氏县天降血。
English: In March of the first year of Yongkang, blood began to fall from the sky in Jo County.

古文：夫政刑舒缓，则有常燠赤祥之妖。
现代文：政治刑罚松缓，就会有持久炎热赤祥的妖异。
English: If the political punishment is lax, there will be a long-lasting hot and red spell.

古文：此岁正月，送愍怀太子，幽于许宫。
现代文：这年正月，愍檀立王被幽禁在盖宫。
English: In the first month of this year, King Gongdanli was confined to the palace.

古文：天戒若曰，不宜缓恣奸人，将使太子冤死。
现代文：天戒这样说，不应宽宥放纵邪恶的人，将会使太子含冤而死。
English: Heaven's decree says that those who indulge in evil should not be pardoned, and will cause the crown prince to die unjustly.

古文：惠帝愚眊不寤，是月愍怀遂毙。
现代文：惠帝愚昧不明，这月愍怀太子终于毙命。
English: Hui Di's stupidity is unknown, and this month, the Crown Prince finally died.

古文：于是王室成衅，祸流天下。
现代文：于是王室出现仇怨，祸难遍及天下。
English: As a result, feuds arose in the royal family, and calamity spread throughout the world.

古文：淖齿杀齐湣王日，天雨血沾衣。
现代文：淖齿杀齐湣王那天，天上降血雨沾湿衣服。
English: On the day of the murder of King Qizhi, the sky rained blood and wet clothes.

古文：天以告也，此之谓乎？
现代文：这是上天的警告，说的就是这种情况吗?
English: Is this God's warning, is this what it says?

古文：京房、《易传》曰： 归狱不解，兹谓追非，厥咎天雨血。
现代文：京房《易传》说： 归罪不开释，这叫作追非，其责罚是天降血。
English: Jing Fang's "Easy Biography" said: "Confession does not release, this is called chasing wrongdoing, and its punishment is the sky falling blood.

古文：兹谓不亲，下有恶心，不出三年，无其宗。 
现代文：这叫作不亲，下有邪恶之心，不出三年，将会绝减宗族。 
English: This is called not being a relative, having an evil heart, and within three years, the clan will be reduced to nothing.

古文：又曰： 佞人禄，功臣戮，天雨血也。 
现代文：又说： 谗佞的人受到封赏，有功之臣受杀戮，上天会降血雨。 
English: He also said: "Violent people will be rewarded, meritorious ministers will be killed, and the heavens will rain down blood."

古文：愍帝建兴元年十二月，河东地震，雨肉。
现代文：愍帝建兴元年十二月，河东地震，天降肉雨。
English: In December of the first year of Emperor Jianxing's reign, there was an earthquake in Hedong, and the sky rained meat.

古文：四年十二月丙寅，丞相府斩督运令史淳于伯，血逆流上柱二丈三尺，此赤祥也。
现代文：四年十二月丙寅，丞相府斩杀督运令史淳于值，血倒流上柱子二丈三尺高，这是赤祥。
English: In December of the fourth year, Hsin-Yin, the chancellor's office killed the governor of the movement and ordered the history to be correct, and the blood flowed backwards on the pillar two feet high and three feet high, which is red.

古文：是时，后将军褚裒镇广陵，丞相扬声北伐，伯以督运稽留及役使赃罪，依军法戮之。
现代文：这时，后将军荡塞镇守卢壁，丞相扬言要北伐，蓬王伯因督办运输拖延和受劳役贿赂的罪，依照军法处死他。
English: At this time, after the general swung the town to guard Luqi, the prime minister threatened to march to the north, and Peng Wangbo was sentenced to death in accordance with military law for the crime of delaying transportation and accepting labor service bribes.

古文：其息诉称： 督运事讫，无所稽乏，受赇役使，罪不及死。
现代文：他的儿子上诉说： 督办运输的事完成，没有拖延和供给不上，接受役使的人的贿赂，罪不当死。
English: His son's appeal said: "The supervision of transportation was completed without delay and supply was not possible, and the bribe of the person who received the envoy was a crime of wrongful death.

古文：兵家之势，先声后实，实是屯戍，非为征军。
现代文：军队的行动，先造声势后是实际行动，实际是屯边守卫，不是征伐进军。
English: The action of the army is to build up the momentum first, and then the actual action. The actual action is to guard the garrison, not to march into the army.

古文：自四年已来，运漕稽停，皆不以军兴法论。 
现代文：自四年以来，漕运拖延停止，都不以军队出动的法律论处。 
English: Since four years ago, the delay of the railway has been stopped, and it has not been punished by the legal argument of the army.

古文：僚佐莫之理。
现代文：属吏们没有人理会他。
English: The officials paid no attention to him.

古文：及有变，司直弹劾众官，元帝不问，遂频旱三年。
现代文：等到有了变故，负责查实的官员弹劾众官，元帝不问，于是连续三年干旱。
English: When there was a change of circumstances, the official in charge of verification impeached all officials, and the former emperor did not ask, so there was a drought for three consecutive years.

古文：干宝以为冤气之应也。
现代文：王室认为是冤气的应验。
English: The royal family believes it is the result of a grudge.

古文：郭景纯曰： 血者水类，同属于《坎》。
现代文：郭景纯说： 血是水类，同属于《坎》。
English: Guo Jingjun said, "Blood is water, and it also belongs to "Can."

古文：《坎》为法象，水平润下，不宜逆流。
现代文：《坎》是法象，水是平润而下，不应倒流。
English: "Can" is a symbol. Water flows down smoothly and should not flow backwards.

古文：此政有咎失之征也。 
现代文：这是朝政有谬失的征兆。 
English: This is a sign of the fallacy of the imperial government.

古文：刘聪伪建元元年正月，平阳地震，其崇明观陷为池，水赤如血，赤气至天，有赤龙奋迅而去。
现代文：刘聪伪建元元年正月，垩盐地震，塞旦旦塑陷没成为池塘，池水红色像血一样，红色的气冲上天，有赤龙腾飞而去。
English: In the first month of the first year of Liu Cong's reign, there was a salt-rock earthquake, and the Sedandan cave-in did not become a pond. The pond water was red like blood, and red gas rushed up to the sky. A red dragon took off.

古文：流星起于牵牛，入紫微，龙形委蛇，其光照地，落于平阳北十里。
现代文：流星从牵牛星出现，进入紫微宿，像龙形一样蜿蜒，光亮照地，落在平阳北十里处。
English: The meteor appeared from the Cowherd star, entered the purple micro-lodge, meandered like a dragon, shined brightly, and landed ten miles north of Pingyang.

古文：视之则肉，臭闻于平阳。长三十步，广二十七步。
现代文：细看是肉，臭味传遍平阳，有三十步长，二十七步宽。
English: On closer inspection, it was meat, and the stench spread throughout Pingyang. It was thirty paces long and twenty-seven paces wide.

古文：肉旁常有哭声，昼夜不止。
现代文：肉旁常有哭声，日夜不停。
English: Next to the meat, there are often cries, day and night.

古文：数日，聪后刘氏产一蛇一兽，各害人而走。
现代文：几天后，刘聪的皇后刘氏生下一条蛇一只兽，各伤害人后逃走。
English: A few days later, Liu Cong's queen Liu gave birth to a snake and a beast, each of which injured a person and then fled.

古文：寻之不得，顷之见于陨肉之旁。
现代文：寻找没有找到，不久在天上陨落的肉旁见到蛇兽。
English: After searching and failing to find it, the snake and beast were soon seen next to the meat that had fallen from the sky.

古文：是时，刘聪纳刘殷三女，并为其后。
现代文：这时刘聪娶了刘殷的三个女儿，都立为皇后。
English: At this time, Liu Cong married Liu Yin's three daughters, all of whom became empresses.

古文：天戒若曰，聪既自称刘姓，三后又俱刘氏，逆骨肉之纲，成人伦之则。
现代文：天戒像是说，刘聪既然自称刘姓，三位皇后又都是刘氏，背逆了骨肉的纲常，扰乱了人伦的规矩。
English: Heaven's ring seems to say that since Liu Cong claims to be surnamed Liu, and the three queens are all Liu, he has defied the flesh and blood and disrupted the rules of human relations.

古文：陨肉诸妖，其眚亦大。
现代文：天降肉等众妖异，其灾异也很大。
English: There are many monsters such as meat falling from the sky, and their disasters are also very different.

古文：俄而刘氏死，哭声自绝矣。
现代文：不久刘氏死，哭声便自行消失。
English: Soon after Mr. Liu died, the crying stopped on its own.

