古文：阔阔不花者，按摊脱脱里氏，为人魁岸，有膂力，以善射知名。
现代文：阔阔不花，姓按摊脱脱里氏，体格魁伟，臂力过人，以善射闻名。
English: Broad-shouldered, his family name is derived from the name of the highest-ranking member of the Tottori clan, he has a great physique, and his arm strength is exceptional. He is known for his good shooting.

古文：岁庚寅，太祖命太师木华黎伐金，分探马赤为五部，各置将一人，阔阔不花为五部前锋都元帅，所向莫能支。然不嗜杀，惟欲以威信怀附，故所至无残破。
现代文：太祖十三年，太师木华黎伐金，所属蒙古探马赤军分为五部，阔阔不花为五部前锋都元帅，所向无敌。阔阔不花不滥杀人，而是以其威信使人归附，故他所领导的军队，攻城略地都无大破坏。
English: In the thirteenth year of the Great Patriarch, the Mongolian Red Army was divided into five divisions, with the Mongolian division commander Muhua Li Huajin leading the Mongolian Red Army. He was the commander of all five divisions and was invincible. He did not kill indiscriminately, but won people over with his prestige. Therefore, the army he led did not cause much damage when attacking the city.

古文：略定滨、棣诸州，俘获焦林诸处民四百余，但籍其姓名，遣归乡里。
现代文：在平定滨、棣诸州时，俘虏焦林诸处平民四百余，只登记其姓名，全部遣送还乡。
English: At the time of the pacification of Dingbin and Zhouzhou, more than four hundred civilians from various parts of Jiaolin were captured, only their names were registered, and all of them were repatriated.

古文：徇益都，守将降，得其财物马畜，悉以分赐士卒。
现代文：攻打益都，金守将降，阔阔不花将所获财物牲畜全分给士卒。
English: If you attack the capital city of Yicun, you will lose money. If you do not attack the capital city of Yicun, you will lose all your wealth and livestock.

古文：岁壬辰，从太宗渡河，攻汴梁、归德，分兵渡淮，攻寿州，守将无降意，射书城中谕之，城中人感泣，以彩舆奉金公主开门送款，阔阔不花下令军中，辄入城虏掠者死，城中帖然。
现代文：太宗四年，随太宗渡黄河进攻汴梁、归德，他分一支兵马渡过淮河攻打寿春。寿春守将不肯投降，阔阔不花射书城中，宣讲蒙古皇帝的恩德。城中居民感动，用彩车载金公主开门投诚。阔阔不花下令军中，有人入城敢掳掠者，处以死刑，所以大军入城，城中安然无乱事。
English: In the fourth year of Taizong's reign, when Taizong crossed the Yellow River to attack Suiliang and returned to Germany, he divided a troop of soldiers and horses to cross the Huai River to attack Shuchun. Shuchun's defenders would not surrender, and Gao Kuo-Fu shot into the city, proclaiming the Mongolian emperor's benevolence. The residents of the city were moved, and opened the door with a color car carrying a gold princess to make a sacrifice. Gao Kuo-Fu ordered the army to execute anyone who dared to enter the city to kidnap and plunder, so the army entered the city, and there was no

古文：公主，义宗之姑也。岁丙申，太宗命五部将分镇中原，阔阔不花镇益都、济南，按察儿镇平阳、太原，孛罗镇真定，肖乃台镇大名，怯烈台镇东平，括其民匠，得七十二万户，以三千户赐五部将。
现代文：太宗八年，探马赤军五部分别镇守中原，阔阔不花率部镇守益都、济南，按察儿部镇守平阳、太原，孛罗部镇守真定，肖乃台部镇守大名，怯烈台部镇守东平。蒙军搜括民间工匠七十二万户，其中三千户分赐五部探马赤军，阔阔不花得六百户。
English: In the eighth year of Taizong, the five parts of the Red Army's horse survey were divided into the town guards of Zhongyuan, the town guards of Yidu and Jinan, the town guards of Pingyang and Taiyuan, the town guards of Dairen, the town guards of Daimyo, and the town guards of Dongping. The Mongolian army collected 720,000 households of folk craftsmen, of which 3,000 households were given to the five Red Army's horse survey, and 600 households were not spent.

古文：阔阔不花得分户六百，立官治其赋，得荐置长吏，岁从官给其所得五户丝，以疾卒官。
现代文：他在所辖区域内，设立地方官署，制定赋税征收办法，以荐举贤能者为地方长官，每年给与五户丝为俸禄。
English: In the area under his jurisdiction, he set up local government offices, worked out tax collection methods, recommended capable people as local governors, and gave five households a salary every year.

古文：子黄头，代领探马赤为元帅，从丞相伯颜取宋，道死。
现代文：阔阔不花在任期间病卒。其子黄头继承父职为探马赤军元帅。黄头在随丞相伯颜征伐宋朝时，死于途中。
English: His son Huang Tou inherited his father's position as the Red Army's field marshal. Huang Tou died on the way to the Song Dynasty when he was accompanying Prime Minister Boyan to conquer the Song Dynasty.

古文：子东哥马袭其职，累迁右都威卫千户，卒。拜延八都鲁
现代文：黄头子东哥马袭承父职。拜延八都鲁，蒙古族人，姓扎剌台氏，自幼就侍奉太祖，太祖赐名八都鲁。
English: Huang's son, Dong Goma, inherited his father's position. Baiyan Badulu, a Mongolian, surnamed Zhaotai, served his grandfather from a young age, and was given the name Badulu by his grandfather.

古文：拜延八都鲁，蒙古紥剌台氏，幼事太祖，赐名八都鲁。岁乙未，太宗命领紥剌军一千六百人，与塔海甘卜同征关西，有功。
现代文：太宗七年，拜延八都鲁奉命领扎剌军一千六百人与塔海甘卜同征关西，有功于朝廷。
English: In the seventh year of Emperor Taizong's reign, Bai Yanbadu Lu was ordered to lead 1,600 men of the Zhaojun Army to conquer Kansai together with Tahai Gamp, which was a great service to the imperial court.

古文：癸丑，宪宗命与阿脱、总帅汪世显创立利州城。
现代文：宪宗三年，奉命与阿脱及总帅汪德臣建立利州城。
English: In the third year of the reign of Emperor Kenzong, he was ordered to build Lizhou City with Atta and Generalissimo Wang Dezhen.

古文：甲寅，领兵紫金山，破宋军鹿角寨，夺其军饷器械。
现代文：四年，领兵于紫金山，破宋军于鹿角寨，夺其军饷武器。
English: In four years, he led the army to the Purple Mountain, defeated the Song Army in Lugu Village, and seized their military weapons.

古文：丁巳，从都元帅纽邻城成都，及领兵围云顶山，下其城。
现代文：七年，随部元帅纽邻守成都，又领兵攻下云顶山。宪宗亲征西蜀，元帅纽邻领兵渡过马湖江，留拜延八都鲁镇守成都。
English: In the seventh year, the adjutant marshal New Neighbors defended Chengdu and led the troops to conquer Yundian Mountain. Gensong personally led the troops to conquer Xishu, and the marshal New Neighbors led the troops to cross the Mahu River and stay in Baiyan Badaru Town to defend Chengdu.

古文：帝亲征，元帅纽邻既进兵，涉马湖江，留拜延八都鲁镇成都，降属县诸城，得其民，悉抚安之，赐黄金五十两、衣九袭。诸王哈丹、朵欢、脱脱等征大理还，命拜延八都鲁领兵迎之。道过新津寨，与宋潘都统遇，战败之，杀获甚众。
现代文：拜延八都鲁平定成都府所属各城，人民归附，八都鲁善加安抚，朝廷赐他黄金五十两，衣九套。诸王哈丹、朵欢、脱脱等征讨大理后回军，拜延八都鲁奉命领兵去迎接。路过新津寨时，与宋军潘都统所部相遇，拜延八都鲁战败宋军，杀死和俘获士兵甚多。
English: Baiyan Batu Lu pinned down all the cities belonging to the Chengdu government, the people were attached, Baiyan Batu Lu was kind and pacified, and the court gave him fifty-two gold and nine sets of clothes. After the kings Hardan, Dou Huan, and Zhu De returned to the army, Baiyan Batu Lu was ordered to lead the soldiers to meet. When passing through Xinjin Village, he met the headquarters of the Song Army Pan Du Tong, and Baiyan Batu Lu defeated the Song Army, killing and capturing many soldiers.

古文：其后告老，诸王塔察儿命其子不花代领其军。
现代文：中统二年，元帅纽邻上报拜延八都鲁功劳，因而授他为蒙古奥鲁官。至元六年，拜延八都鲁告老辞官，其孙兀浑察继祖父职统领其军马。
English: In the second year of Central Unification, Marshal New Neighbors reported on the merits of Bayen Baturu, thus awarding him the Mongolian Oru Officer. In the sixth year of the Yuan Dynasty, Bayen Baturu retired as an officer, and his grandson, Yu Huncha, succeeded his grandfather as commander of his army.

古文：绍古儿绍古儿，麦里吉台氏。
现代文：兀浑察在世祖时屡立战功，于至元三十年病卒。
English: Gong Huncha, who repeatedly distinguished himself in battle during the time of the founder, died of illness in the thirtieth year of the Yuan Dynasty.

古文：事太祖，命同饮班朱尼河之水，扈从亲征。已而从破信安，略地河西，赐金虎符，授洺磁等路都达鲁花赤。
现代文：子孙相继承袭职位。绍古儿，姓麦里吉台氏，随太祖征讨，攻克信安，占领河西，太祖赐他金虎符，授氵名、磁等路都达鲁花赤。
English: Shao Gu'er, surnamed Meri Jitai, followed his great-grandfather to conquer Xin'an and occupy Hexi. The great-grandfather gave him a golden tiger charm, bestowed him with the title of "great-grandfather" and gave him the title of "great-grandfather."

古文：领军出征，复从伐金，破河南。
现代文：后领兵出征，再次伐金，攻下河南。
English: After that, he led an army to go to war, and again he mined gold and conquered Henan Province.

古文：子拜都袭。拜都卒，子忽都虎袭，移睢州。
现代文：太宗时，命他统领济南、大名、信安等处军马。后又随国王答石出征。宪宗元年卒。忽都虎为绍古儿之孙，拜都之子。
English: When Emperor Taizong was in power, he ordered him to lead Jinan, Daimyo, Shinan, and other provinces. Later, he went to war with King Atsushi. Emperor Gensong died in the first year of the year. All of a sudden, Tora was the grandson of Shogun and the son of Baidu.

古文：从世祖渡江，攻鄂，还镇恩州。
现代文：随世祖渡长江攻取鄂州，不久奉命去镇守恩州。
English: He followed his ancestor across the Yangtze River to conquer Ezhou, and was soon ordered to defend Enzhou.

古文：中统三年，从征李璮有功，寻命修立邳州城，领兵镇两淮。
现代文：中统三年，随军征讨叛将李王，战功卓著。不久，奉命修建邳州城，领兵镇守两淮。
English: Three years after the unification of China, he followed the army to recruit the traitor Li Wang, and achieved great success in the war. Soon, he was ordered to build Zhangzhou City, and led the soldiers to guard the town.

古文：十一年，从丞相伯颜渡江，有战功。
现代文：至元十一年，随丞相伯颜渡江征宋，有战功。
English: In the eleventh year of the Yuan Dynasty, he followed the prime minister Bo Yan to cross the Yangtze River and conquer the Song Dynasty.

古文：又从参政董文炳沿海出征，还，镇嘉兴，行安抚事。
现代文：又随参政董文炳出征沿海，还军后镇守嘉兴。十二年加昭勇大将军。
English: He also went to the coast with the politician Dong Wenyu, and after returning to the army, he became the town guard of Jiaxing. He was promoted to General Zhaoyong in 1912.

古文：十二年，加昭勇大将军，职如故。十四年，授嘉兴路总管府达鲁花赤，寻升镇国上将军、黄州路宣慰使，寻罢黄州宣慰司，复旧任。
现代文：十四年，授嘉兴路总管府达鲁花赤，不久，升为镇国上将军、黄州路宣慰使。
English: In the 14th year, he was awarded the title of Daruhana Red of the Jiaxing Road General Administration, and soon he was promoted to the general of the town and the consoler of the Huangzhou Road.

古文：十六年，改授浙西道宣慰使，加招讨使，仍镇国上将军。
现代文：随后仍为嘉兴路总管府达鲁花赤。十六年改任浙西道宣慰使，加授招讨使，仍为镇国上将军，奉诏征占城。
English: Subsequently, he was still the Jiaxing Road General Administration Office. In 1916, he was transferred to the West Zhejiang Provincial Propaganda and Consolation Envoy, and he was still the Zhenguo Shangzheng, and occupied the city by imperial edict.

古文：奉诏征占城，以其国降表、贡物入见，帝嘉之，厚加赏赉。
现代文：占城降，忽都虎将占城国降表及贡物奉献朝廷，世祖厚加奖赏。
English: Zhancheng fell, and all of a sudden, Zhancheng fell and offered tribute to the imperial court. The ancestor was richly rewarded.

古文：二十四年，从征交趾。明年还师，授邳州万户府万户。
现代文：二十四年，从蒙古大军征交趾，第二年班师还朝，授他为邳州万户府万户。
English: In 1924, he was conscripted from the Mongolian army, and in the following year, he was awarded the title of "the best of the best of the best of the best of the best of the best of the best of the best of the best."

古文：赵阿哥潘
现代文：至元三十年殁于军中。
English: He served in the army for 30 years.

古文：时兵兴，城无居人，至则招逃亡，立城垒，课耕桑以安辑之，年八十，卒于官。
现代文：赵阿哥潘，土波思乌思臧掇族人。其先祖归附于宋朝，因赐姓赵，世代居于临洮。
English: Zhao Agopan, a member of the Tubo Siwu Siwu ethnic group, whose ancestors were part of the Song Dynasty and were given the surname Zhao, has lived in Linyi for generations.

古文：阿哥潘事亲以孝闻，从伐蜀，与宋都统制曹友闻屡战，胜负略相当，以破大安功最，授同知临洮府事。
现代文：其祖父名巴命，为羌族之最富者。其父名阿哥昌，在金朝贞年间因有军功而官至熙河节度使，金亡后率其所部归附蒙古，任叠州安抚使，年八十而卒。阿哥潘以孝顺父母而闻名。在蒙军伐蜀战争中，阿哥潘因攻克大安功最大而授同知临洮府事。
English: His grandfather, Ba Min, was the wealthiest member of the Dong ethnic group. His father, Ago Chang, was a military officer who served as an envoy to the Heihe Festival during the reign of Kim Jong Il. After Kim Jong Il's death, he led his army to annex Mongolia and served as an envoy to pacify Liaozhou. He died at the age of 80. Agopan was known for his filial piety. In the Mongolian army's war against Shu, Agopan was awarded the post of Linyi prefect because he was the most successful in conquering the Great Peace.

古文：斩朝天关，乘嘉陵江至阆州，获蜀船三百艘。
现代文：其后夺取朝天关，沿嘉陵江而下至阆州，缴获蜀船三百艘。
English: After that, they captured Asatenguan and went down the Jialing River to Bozhou, seizing three hundred Shu ships.

古文：攻利州，生得其刘太尉，战败宋师于川。
现代文：攻利州，生擒宋守将刘太尉，在潼川大败宋军。
English: In the attack on Lishu, Liu Taiyi, the commander of the Song army, defeated the Song army in Luochuan.

古文：宋制置使刘雄飞进攻青居山，阿哥潘击之，宵溃，四川大震。
现代文：宋制置使刘雄飞进攻青居山，阿哥潘迎战，击溃宋军，四川大震。
English: The establishment of the Song Dynasty caused Liu Xiongfei to attack Qingju Mountain, Agopan to fight and defeat the Song Army, and the Sichuan Earthquake.

古文：进逼成都，略嘉定，平峨眉太平寨，擒其将陈侍郎、田太尉，余众悉降。
现代文：接着进逼成都，占领嘉定，平定峨眉之太平寨，擒守将陈侍郎、田太尉，其余均投降蒙古。
English: Next, they forced their way into Chengdu, occupied Jiading, and pacified Taipingzhai in Emei. The garrison commanders were Chen Zhilang and Tian Taiyi, and the rest surrendered to Mongolia.

古文：大小五十余战，皆先陷阵，皇子赐以金甲、银器。
现代文：在此期间大小五十余战，阿哥潘都是身先陷阵，皇子赐以金甲、银器。
English: During this period, in more than fifty battles, Agopan was always the first to fall into battle, and the prince gave him gold armor and silverware.

古文：岁壬子，世祖以皇弟南征大理，道出临洮，见而奇之，命摄元帅，城益昌。
现代文：宪宗二年，世祖以皇弟身分统军南征大理，途经临洮，见阿哥潘，甚为器重，任命他代理元帅职务，筑建益昌城。
English: In the second year of the reign of Emperor Xianzong, the founder of the dynasty, as the younger brother of the emperor, led an army south to conquer Dali. He passed through Linyi and met Agopan, who was very important to him. He appointed him as acting marshal to build Yichang City.

古文：时宋兵屯两川，堡栅相望，矢石交击，历五年而城始完。宪宗出蜀，以阿哥潘为选锋，攻西安，下之，赐金符，授临洮府元帅。
现代文：由于宋军的骚扰，该城历经五年才建成。宪宗征蜀，以阿哥潘为先锋，攻下西安，赐金符，授为临洮府元帅。
English: Due to the harassment of the Song army, the city was only built after five years. Gensong conquered Shu, with Agopan as the vanguard, captured Xi'an, gave gold certificates, and was awarded the title of Linfen Marshal.

古文：明日陛见，帝喜曰： 有臣如此，朕复何忧！ 赐黄金五十两，名曰拔都。
现代文：宪宗驻钓鱼山，宋合州守将王坚夜间偷袭大营，阿哥潘率壮士迎战，杀敌数十百人，坚退走，帝赐黄金五十两，命名拔都。
English: Emperor Xianzong stationed in Diaoyu Mountain, Song Hezhou governor Wang Jian secretly attacked the camp at night, Agopan led the strong men to fight, killed dozens of hundreds of enemies, firmly retreated, the emperor gave gold fifty-two, and named the capital.

古文：中统建元，诏还镇临洮。
现代文：中统元年，阿哥潘奉诏回军镇守临洮。
English: In the first year of the unified China, Agopan was ordered to return to the army to guard Linyi.

古文：岁饥，发私廪以赈贫乏。给民农种粟二千余石、芜菁子百石，人赖不饥。
现代文：这年发生灾荒，阿哥潘分发给农民种粟二千余石、芜菁子百石，人民赖以生存。
English: In the year of the famine, Agopan distributed more than 2,000 kilos of millet seeds and 100 kilos of cochineal seeds to farmers, on which the people depended for their survival.

古文：郡当孔道，传置旁午，有司敝于供给。
现代文：临洮当交通要道，驿站接待来往官府人员每日无数，当地政府难以供给食宿。
English: Linyi is an important transportation route, and the station receives countless government officials every day. It is difficult for the local government to provide food and accommodation.

古文：阿哥潘以私马百匹充驿骑，羊千口代民输。
现代文：阿哥潘用自己的马百匹充作驿站运送过往官府人员，以自己的羊代民输纳。
English: Agopan used a hundred of his own horses as stagecoaches to transport past government officials, and used his own sheep to collect donations from the people.

古文：帝闻而嘉之，诏京兆行省酬其直。
现代文：宪宗听说其事，大加褒奖，命京兆行省偿还，阿哥潘不肯接受。
English: When Emperor Xianzong heard about this, he gave him a large reward and ordered him to repay the money to the province of Jingzhaogang. Agopan refused to accept this.

古文：官卓斯结性靖退，辞官闲处二十余年。
现代文：因为军事的需要，阿哥潘奉命赴青居山，途中遭宋兵伏击而牺牲，谥曰 桓勇 。
English: Because of military needs, Agopan was ordered to go to Qingji Mountain. On the way, he was ambushed by Song soldiers and died.

古文：仁宗闻其名，召不起。
现代文：阿哥潘好养良马，常数达千匹，每年选择上等千里马二十匹贡于朝，子孙遵循此例。
English: Agopan was good at raising good horses, with a constant number of a thousand horses. Every year, he would select twenty of the best thousand-year-old horses as a tribute to the Emperor. His children and grandchildren followed his example.

古文：子德寿，云南左丞。
现代文：子重喜，曾随世祖征哈剌章，又随大军多次征讨数立战功，承袭父职为元帅，世祖赐金虎符，任命为临洮府达鲁花赤，后又升巩昌二十四处宣慰使，死后谥 桓襄 。
English: His son Chongxi, who had been awarded the Harbin Insignia with his ancestor, and with the great army several times, inherited his father's post as a marshal, was given the Golden Tiger Badge by his ancestor, and was appointed as the Daruhana Red of Linfen Prefecture, and later he was promoted to the 24th Consolation Envoy of Gongchang. After his death, he passed away.

古文：纯只海纯只海，散术台氏。弱冠宿卫太祖帐下，从征西域诸国有功。
现代文：纯只海，姓散术台氏，二十岁在太祖帐下近卫军中任职，在征西域诸国的战争中有功。
English: Chun Yatai, surnamed Sanjutai, was twenty years old when he served in the Imperial Guard under his great-great-grandfather. He served in the war to conquer the countries of the Western Regions.

古文：岁癸巳，太宗命佩金虎符，充益都行省军民达鲁花赤，从大帅太出破徐州，擒金帅国用安。
现代文：太宗五年，太宗命他佩戴金虎符，任命为益都行省军民达鲁花赤，随大帅太出攻破徐州，擒金帅国用安。
English: In the fifth year of Emperor Taizong's reign, Emperor Taizong ordered him to wear the golden tiger emblem, and he was appointed as the commander of the army and people of Yidu Province and the commander of the army and people of Dahua Red, and he went out to invade Xuzhou with the commander of the army and people of Yidu Province, and the commander of the army and people of Yidu Province.

古文：丁酉，以益都为皇太子分土，迁京兆行省都达鲁花赤。
现代文：九年，因把益都划为皇太子的分地，故调纯只海为京兆行省都达鲁花赤。
English: In the ninth year, due to the fact that Yidu was designated as the crown prince's land, it was only the sea that was changed to the provincial capital of Beijing-Shanghai.

古文：至怀，值大疫，士卒困惫，有旨以本部兵就镇怀孟。
现代文：行至怀庆路，遇当地瘟疫流行。士卒疲惫不堪，朝廷下令，命他以本部人马镇守怀孟。
English: He went to Huaiqing Road and encountered a local plague epidemic. The officer was exhausted, and the court ordered him to guard Huai Meng with his headquarters.

古文：未几，代察罕总军河南，寻复怀孟。
现代文：不久，曾一度代理察罕统军于河南，但很快又回到怀孟。
English: Not long after, he once acted as the representative of the Chahan United Army in Henan, but soon returned to Huai Meng.

古文：己亥，同僚王荣潜畜异志，欲杀纯只海，伏甲絷之，断其两足跟，以帛缄纯只海口，置佛祠中。
现代文：太宗十一年，同僚王荣图谋不轨，设伏兵逮捕了纯只海，砍断他两脚跟，用帛塞其口，关押佛堂里。
English: In the eleventh year of the reign of Emperor Taizong, his colleague Wang Rong plotted and set up an ambush to arrest Chunyadoha, cut off his heels, gagged him, and imprisoned him in a Buddhist temple.

古文：纯只海妻喜礼伯伦闻之，率其众攻荣家，夺出之。
现代文：纯只海的妻子喜礼伯伦闻知，率众攻击荣家，救出纯只海。
English: Junyaoka's wife, Kireiburen Wenshi, led the crowd to attack the Rong family and rescue Junyaoka.

古文：纯只海裹疮从二子驰旁郡，请兵讨荣，杀之。
现代文：纯只海脱险后，包扎好伤口，随其二子逃避到邻郡，请兵讨伐，杀了王荣。
English: After Chun Yatai escaped danger, he bandaged the wound, followed his two sons to escape to a neighboring county, invited soldiers to fight, and killed Wang Rong.

古文：朝廷遣使以荣妻孥赀产赐纯只海家，且尽驱怀民万余口郭外，将戮之。
现代文：朝廷遣使将王荣的妻子儿女及资产赐给纯只海，并将怀庆城中的百姓尽驱到城外，准备屠杀。
English: The imperial court sent an envoy to give Wang Rong's wife, children and assets to the Pure Sea, and drove all the people in the city of Huaiqing out of the city to prepare for the massacre.

古文：纯只海力争曰： 为恶者止荣一人耳，其民何罪。
现代文：纯只海力争不可，对使臣说： 为恶的只王荣一人，百姓何罪。
English: He said to the envoys: Only Wang Rong is evil, but what is the sin of the people?

古文：若果尽诛，徒守空城何为？
现代文：若把百姓杀尽，我守此空城有什么用。
English: If I kill all the people, what's the use of me guarding this empty city?

古文：苟朝廷罪使者以不杀，吾请以身当之。 
现代文：如果朝廷因使臣未杀百姓而治罪，其罪由我承当。 
English: If the imperial court punishes the envoys for not killing the common people, I will take the blame.

古文：使者还奏，帝是其言，民赖不死。
现代文：使臣回朝奏明，太宗认为纯只海言之有理，怀庆百姓免于一场杀身之灾。
English: The envoys reported back to the Emperor, and Emperor Taizong thought that the mere saying of the sea was reasonable, and the people of Huaiqing were spared a disaster.

古文：纯只海给荣妻孥券，放为民，遂以其宅为官廨，秋毫无所取。
现代文：纯只海还将王荣的妻子儿女释放为民，将王荣的住宅作为官府，自己丝毫不取，深受百姓称赞。
English: Chun Yatai also released Wang Rong's wife and children to the people, and used Wang Rong's residence as the government office. He did not take anything for himself and was highly praised by the people.

古文：郡人德之。既入觐，太宗以纯只海先朝旧臣，功绩昭著，赐第一区于和林，寻以疾卒。
现代文：纯只海回朝拜见太宗，太宗因为他是先朝老臣，功绩昭著，在和林赐住宅一区。不久病逝。
English: Chun Yatai returned to the imperial court to pay his respects to Emperor Taizong. Because Emperor Taizong was an old retainer of the previous imperial court, he was known for his outstanding achievements. He lived in the same area as Lin Qi's residence. He died of illness soon after.

古文：敕葬山陵之侧。皇庆初，赠推忠宣力功臣、金紫光禄大夫、上柱国、温国公，谥忠襄。
现代文：皇庆初年，追赠推忠宣力功臣、金紫光禄大夫、上柱国、温国公，谥 忠襄 。
English: In the first year of the celebration of the emperor, the honorary awards were presented to the heroes of loyalty and propaganda, Dr. Jin Ziguanglu, Shangzhu Guo, Wen Guo Guo, and Zou Zhongxiang.

古文：仍敕词臣刘敏中制文树碑于怀，以旌其功云。
现代文：又令长于文辞的刘敏中在怀孟树碑立传，以表彰其功。
English: He also ordered Liu Minzhong, who was good at rhetoric, to establish a monument in Huai Mengshu to commend his work.

古文：子昂阿剌嗣。
现代文：子昂阿剌承袭其父职。
English: His son, Aung Aye, succeeded to his father's post.

古文：苫彻拔都儿，钦察人。初事太宗，掌牧马。
现代文：苫彻拔都儿，钦察人，最初为太宗掌管牧马事宜。
English: Yan Che Badu'er, a native of Qincha, was initially in charge of horse-herding for Emperor Taizong.

古文：从攻凤翔，战潼关，皆有功。
现代文：在攻凤翔、战潼关时，均立有功勋。
English: In the attack on Fengxiang and the battle of Jiaxing Pass, they all made meritorious contributions.

古文：后从大将速不台攻汴京，金人列木栅于河南，苫彻拔都儿率死士往拔之，赐良马十匹。
现代文：后随大将速不台攻打汴京，率敢死队拔去金朝设于黄河南岸之木栅，因此赐他良马十匹。
English: Afterward, he followed the general to attack Beijing, leading a daredevil team to pull down the wooden fence set up by the Kim dynasty on the south bank of the Yellow River, so he was given ten good horses.

古文：师还，金将高都尉率众邀于中路，苫彻拔都儿迎击，斩其首以归，赐白金五十两、币四匹。
现代文：在回师途中，蒙军遭金将高都尉的狙击，苫彻拔都儿率众迎战，斩高都尉而还，赐白金五十两，丝帛四匹。
English: On the way back to the division, the Mongolian army was attacked by the sniper of the gold general Gao Duan, who led the crowd to fight, beheaded the captain Gao Duan, and returned, giving fifty-two pieces of platinum and four silk cocoons.

古文：从攻蔡州，前锋答答儿与金将战，金将捽其须，苫彻拔都儿进斫金将，乃得脱。
现代文：在攻打蔡州的战斗中，前锋答答儿与金将战斗，金将揪住了答答儿的胡须，苫彻拔都儿跃马向前砍死金将。
English: In the battle of attacking Caizhou, the forward Doutor fought with Kim Jong-nam, Kim Jong-nam grabbed Doutor's beard, and Doutor leaped forward and killed Kim Jong-nam.

古文：蔡州破，金守将佩虎符立城上，苫彻拔都儿以铁椎击杀之，取虎符以献。帝嘉其能，命从皇子攻枣阳。
现代文：攻克蔡州时，苫彻拔都儿击毙金军守将，取其虎符献给朝廷，受太宗嘉奖，命他随皇子攻打枣阳。
English: When he conquered Caizhou, he killed the Golden General, took his tiger emblem and presented it to the imperial court. He was commended by Emperor Taizong and ordered to attack Zaoyang with the prince.

古文：继从宗王口温不花攻光州，一日五战，光州下。赐黄金五十两、白金酒器一事、马三十匹。
现代文：随后又从宗王口温不花进攻光州。一日五战，攻克光州，赐黄金五十两、白金酒器一件，马三十匹。
English: Subsequently, from the mouth of Zongwang, Emperor Wen attacked Gwangju. Five battles a day, conquered Gwangju, gave fifty-two gold, one platinum wine vessel, and thirty horses.

古文：百户爱不怯赤自以临阵不勇，乞苫彻拔都儿自代，遂升百户。
现代文：百户爱不怯赤自认为临阵不勇，请求苫彻拔都儿代替其职务，于是苫彻拔都儿升为百户。
English: A hundred households felt that it was not brave to take the initiative, and asked Zou Che to take the capital instead of his duties, so Zou Che took the capital and became a hundred households.

古文：从攻滁州，与宋兵大战，至暮，宋兵败走西山，苫彻拔都儿与千户忽孙追杀之。
现代文：蒙军攻滁州，苫彻拔都儿与宋兵大战。至傍晚，宋兵败走西山，苫彻拔都儿与千户忽孙挥军追杀。
English: The Mongolian army attacked Bozhou, and fought with the Song soldiers. In the evening, the Song soldiers were defeated and fled to Xishan, where they were chased and killed by the thousands of troops led by Ku Sun.

古文：岁己未，世祖伐宋，募能先绝江者，苫彻拔都儿首应命，率众逼南岸。
现代文：宪宗九年，世祖伐宋，募能抢渡长江的勇士，苫彻拔都儿第一个报名，率众渡江至南岸。
English: In the ninth year of the reign of Emperor Xianzong, the founder of the Song Dynasty, recruited warriors who could cross the Yangtze River, and the first to sign up was the son of the capital, who led the crowd to cross the river to the south bank.

古文：诏苫彻拔都儿与脱欢领兵百人。同宋使谕鄂州使降。
现代文：朝廷诏令苫彻拔都儿与脱欢领兵百人，与宋使臣一同劝告鄂州守将投降。
English: The imperial court issued a decree to expel the capital and the leaders of the hundred soldiers, and together with the Song envoys advised the Ezhou defenders to surrender.

古文：抵城下，鄂守将杀使者以军来袭，苫彻拔都儿与之遇，奋击大破之。
现代文：他们到达鄂州城下，宋守将杀蒙军派来使臣，挥军袭击蒙军。苫彻拔都儿与宋军奋战，大败宋军。
English: They arrived at the outskirts of the city of Ezhou. Song Shou sent an envoy to kill the Mongolian army and attacked the Mongolian army with his army. He fought with the Song army and defeated the Song army.

古文：复赐黄金五十两。中统三年，授蔡州蒙古汉军万户。冬，宋人犯西平，苫彻拔都儿逐北逾淮，获其生口甚众。
现代文：中统三年，授苫彻拔都儿为蔡州蒙古汉军万户。是年冬，宋军进犯西平，苫彻拔都儿大败宋兵，追赶到淮河。
English: Three years after the unification of China and Korea, the Mongolian Han army in Caizhou was granted the right to occupy the capital city. In the winter of the year, the Song army invaded Xiping, and the Song soldiers were defeated and chased to the Huai River.

古文：至元二年秋，由安庆入庐州，闻宋兵至，亟设伏于竹林，击杀之。
现代文：至元二年秋，苫彻拔都儿率军由安庆入庐州，闻宋兵至，忙埋伏于竹林内，发起突然袭击，杀退宋军。
English: In the autumn of the second year of the Yuan Dynasty, Yan Chepabatul led the army from Anqing to Luzhou, heard the Song soldiers coming, busily ambushed in the bamboo grove, launched a surprise attack, and killed the Song army.

古文：四年秋九月，元帅阿术军襄阳安阳滩。
现代文：四年九月，蒙军元帅阿术屯兵襄阳安阳滩，宋兵占据了渡口。
English: In September of the fourth year, the Mongolian army's marshal, Ah Jiu, stationed soldiers in Yangyang's Anyang Beach, and the Song soldiers occupied the ferry.

古文：宋兵据渡口，苫彻拔都儿击破其众。
现代文：苫彻拔都儿击败宋军。
English: Yan Chebadu defeated the Song army.

古文：五年，从阿术围襄阳，击夺宋将夏贵米舟。
现代文：五年，随元帅阿术围攻襄阳，袭击宋将夏贵，夺其载米船只。
English: In the fifth year, he besieged Xiangyang with Marshal Ah Xiu, attacked Song general Xia Gui, and seized his rice-carrying ship.

古文：阿术入汉江，以其有战功，俾与紥剌儿引军南略，获八十人。
现代文：阿术因苫彻拔都儿屡立战功，命他与扎剌儿率军占领汉江以南地方。
English: As a result of his success in conquering the capital, Ah Shu ordered him and Zha Yu'er to lead an army to occupy the south of the Han River.

古文：十年八月，略地淮东。
现代文：十年八月占领淮东。
English: In August, Huadong was occupied.

古文：十一年，遣招鄂州。
现代文：十一年，遣使招降鄂州。
English: In the eleventh year, he was sent to recruit and demote Ezhou.

古文：十二年，遣招滁州，诛王安抚。改武略将军、管军千户。
现代文：十二年，遣使招降滁州，诛杀宋将王安抚，因有功而授武略将军、管军千户。
English: In the twelfth year, he sent an envoy to recruit and subjugate Bozhou, to pacify the Song general Wang, and to be awarded the Wuliao General for meritorious service and to be in charge of a thousand households.

古文：五月，伏兵大江北岸，击宋军，败走之。
现代文：同年五月在江北伏击宋军。
English: In May of the same year, he ambushed the Song army in northern Jiangsu.

古文：十三年，复略地淮东，获其总管二人以献。迁滁州总管府达鲁花赤。
现代文：十三年，再次攻占淮东，俘宋总管二人，因任命他为滁州总管府达鲁花赤。
English: In the thirteenth year, he conquered Huaidong again and captured two Song general managers, because he was appointed as the general manager of Zhangzhou.

古文：宋都统姜才率军取粮高邮，苫彻拔都儿从史万户夺其马及粮橐二万，淮东平，入朝。
现代文：宋都统姜才率军从高邮取粮，苫彻拔都儿与史万户夺其马匹及粮二万袋。淮东平定后，苫彻拔都儿回到朝廷。
English: Song Emperor Jiang Cai led the army to take grain from Gaoyou, and Yan Chepabatul and Shi Wanzhu took their horses and 20,000 bags of grain. After Huaidong was pacified, Yan Chepabatul returned to the imperial court.

古文：十四年，从讨叛人只里瓦歹于怀剌合都，改宣武将军、滁州路总管府达鲁花赤。
现代文：十四年，在怀剌合都讨平只里瓦歹叛乱，因功授宣武将军、滁州路总管府达鲁花赤。
English: In the 14th year, he was awarded the title of General Xuanwu and the title of General Manager of Zhangzhou Road in recognition of his efforts to quell the rebellion in Huaiyuan.

古文：十七年，率其子脱欢、孙麻兀入见。
现代文：十七年，率其子脱欢、孙麻兀觐见世祖，因年老请求退职。
English: In the seventeenth year, leading his son out of the party, Sun Ma-soo saw the patriarch, and asked to retire due to old age.

古文：奏曰： 臣老矣，幸主上怜之。 帝命以脱欢为宣武将军、管军总管，佩金符；麻兀为滁州路总管府达鲁花赤。
现代文：世祖命脱欢承袭父职为宣武将军、管军总管，佩金符；麻兀为滁州路总管府达鲁花赤。
English: The mission of the founder was to succeed to his father's position as the General of Xuanwu and the Chief of the General Administration of the Armed Forces, and he was awarded a gold medal; and the maple tree was made into a daisy red for the General Administration of Zhangzhou Road.

古文：其后脱欢以征倭功授明威将军、滁州万户府达鲁花赤，升昭勇大将军、征行军万户府达鲁花赤，佩三珠虎符。
现代文：后来脱欢因征倭有功，授明威将军、滁州万户府达鲁花赤，其后又升昭勇大将军、征行军万户府达鲁花赤，佩三珠虎符。
English: Later, because of his meritorious service in the conquest of Japan, he was awarded the Mingwei General and the Banzhou Wanyufu Daruhana Red, and then he was promoted to the Shouyong General and the marching army Wanyufu Daruhana Red, wearing the three-pearl tiger emblem.

古文：子相兀速袭父职，率本部兵从丞相阿术攻襄樊，又从塔出筑正阳堡。
现代文：子相兀速承袭父职，率本部兵马随丞相阿术进攻襄樊，又随塔出筑正阳堡。
English: His son quickly took over his father's position, leading the troops and horses of the headquarters to attack Xiangfan with the prime minister, and to build Zhengyang Fort with the tower.

古文：泸军乘舰来窥壁垒，相兀速率征骑逆之，夹淮水而军，射死者甚众。至元十一年，赐金符，授武略将军。
现代文：至元十一年，赐金符，授武略将军。
English: In the eleventh year of the Yuan Dynasty, he was given a gold medallion and promoted to general.

古文：明年，从御史大夫博罗罕平涟海。
现代文：十二年，随御史大夫博罗罕平定涟海。
English: In the twelfth year, he followed the imperial historian Borohan to pacify the Bohai Sea.

古文：秋九月，从丞相伯颜渡淮，率兵一千骑攻淮安南门，破之。又从元帅博罗罕筑湾头堡。
现代文：同年九月，从丞相伯颜渡过淮河，率兵一千骑攻淮安城，从南门攻破，又随元帅博罗罕构筑湾头堡。
English: In September of the same year, he crossed the Huai River from the Minister of War, Bo Yan, led a thousand cavalry to attack Huai'an City, broke through from the south gate, and built the Bay Head Fort with Marshal Borohan.

古文：万户纳儿卧疾，令相兀速权领蒙古、女直、汉人三万户。
现代文：万户纳儿因病卧床不起，令相兀速暂时统领蒙古、女直、汉人三万户。
English: 10,000 households were bedridden due to illness, and the order was quickly issued to temporarily control 30,000 households of Mongolians, Korean women, and Chinese.

古文：夏五月，宋扬州都统姜才引兵来侵，相兀速率本部兵逆战有功。
现代文：第二年五月，宋扬州都统姜才侵犯淮安，相兀速率本部兵马迎战有功。
English: In May of the following year, the Song and Yang Zhou Dynasties' ruler Jiang Cai invaded Huai'an, and the troops and horses of the General Headquarters of the Song and Yang Zhou Dynasties fought bravely and successfully.

古文：又从丞相阿术袭制置使李庭芝及姜才于泰州，皆杀之。
现代文：其后又随丞相阿术袭击宋制置使李庭芝及姜才于泰州。
English: After that, Li Tingzhi and Jiang Cai were sent to Taizhou following the attack on Song Dynasty by the chancellor Ah Shu.

古文：十四年，加宣武将军、管军总管。
现代文：十四年，加宣武将军、管军总管。
English: In the 14th year, he was promoted to General Xuanwu and became the commander-in-chief.

古文：延祐四年，升左翊蒙古侍卫亲军都指挥使，仍所佩符，进怀远大将军。塔不已儿
现代文：十八年任蒙古侍卫亲军副指挥使司事，易换金虎符，加显武将军。重喜，塔不已儿之孙，脱察剌之子。
English: In the 18th year, he served as the deputy commander and secretary of the Mongolian bodyguard, the deputy commander of the Mongolian bodyguard, the deputy commander of the Mongolian bodyguard, the deputy commander of the Mongolian bodyguard, the deputy commander of the Mongolian bodyguard, the deputy commander of the Mongolian bodyguard.

古文：重喜率先引弓，射中敌兵，又多杀获。
现代文：塔不已儿姓束吕纠氏，太宗时为招讨使，征信安、河南有功，授金虎符，宪宗四年卒。
English: His family name was Sok Lue Gu, and he was a recruiting envoy when he was the grand patriarch, solicited letters of commendation, received the Henan Medal of Merit, was awarded the Golden Tiger Badge, and was a four-year graduate of the Constitutionalist School.

古文：既而与敌兵战于洋隘口，夺战舰一，流矢中左足，勇气愈倍。时世祖驻跸洋隘口北，亲劳之曰： 汝年幼能宣力如是，深可嘉尚。然继今尤当勉之。 
现代文：脱察剌袭其父职位，宪宗九年率兵渡江攻宋，破十字寨。重喜在其父脱察剌渡江攻宋的战斗中，英勇杀敌，屡立战功，虽左脚为箭射伤，亦勇气倍增，世祖亲自慰劳嘉奖说： 你年幼，如此尽忠尽力，深堪嘉奖，今后当更加勉力。 
English: In the ninth year of his reign, he led his army across the Yangtze River to attack the Song Dynasty, and broke the cross fortification. He was very happy to see that in his father's battle to cross the Yangtze River to attack the Song Dynasty, he bravely killed the enemy and repeatedly made war exploits. Although his left foot was injured by an arrow, his courage was also doubled. The ancestor himself said in consolation and commendation: You are young, you are so loyal and do your best, you are worthy of commendation, you should work harder in the future.

古文：及脱察剌卒，以重喜袭职。中统三年，从征李璮有功。
现代文：父死后，重喜承袭职位。中统三年，在征讨李王叛乱中有功。
English: After his father's death, he inherited the position with great pleasure. He served in the Central Committee of the Communist Party of China for three years, and was instrumental in the suppression of the Rebellion of King Li.

古文：四年，以兵镇莒州。
现代文：四年，领兵镇守莒州。
English: For four years, he led the troops to defend Zhangzhou.

古文：至元二年，奉旨初筑十字路城，以备守御。
现代文：至元二年，奉旨修筑十字路城作为守御要塞。
English: In the 2nd year of the Yuan Dynasty, he was ordered to build the Crossroads City as a defensive fortress.

古文：重喜率兵南巡，为游击军。四年，从抄不花出征，至泗州北古城。
现代文：在此期间，常率兵南巡。至元四年，随抄不花出征，进军至泗州北之古城。
English: During this period, he often led soldiers on a southern tour. In the year of the four, he went to the ancient city in the north of Zhangzhou.

古文：时蔡千户为敌兵所围，重喜奋战，救而出之。
现代文：这时，蔡千户为宋军围困，重喜领兵奋战，救出蔡千户。
English: At this time, Cai Chihou was besieged by the Song Army, and he rejoiced in leading the soldiers to fight and rescue Cai Chihou.

古文：五年，入觐。帝嘉其功，赐白金、纳失失段及金鞍弓矢等。
现代文：五年，回朝觐见皇帝，世祖嘉奖其功，赐白金及金鞍弓矢等物。
English: Five years later, he returned to the Imperial Court to see the emperor. The patriarch praised his work and gave him platinum and a golden saddle bow and arrow.

古文：十年，修正阳城。
现代文：十年，修正阳城。
English: Ten years, corrected Yangcheng.

古文：明年，宋兵围正阳，从战败之。
现代文：十一年，宋兵围正阳，为重喜所败。
English: In the eleventh year, Song soldiers besieged Zhengyang and were defeated by Chongxi.

古文：十二年，从下涟海诸城。俄奉旨率五千人从出征，道过衡阳店，与宋将李提辖等战，大败之，杀掠几尽，遂驻兵瓜洲。
现代文：十二年，重喜随大军攻下涟海诸城，又奉旨率五千人随大军出征，在衡阳店大败宋将李提辖，进驻瓜洲。十三年六月，宋都统姜才围攻瓜洲，为重喜击退。
English: In the 12th year, Chongxi conquered the cities of the Bohai Sea with the great army, and dispatched 5,000 people with the great army according to the order, defeated Song general Li Ti in Hengyang and stationed in Guazhou. In June of the 13th year, Song general Jiang Cai besieged Guazhou and fought back for Chongxi.

古文：明年，改涿州路，以直脱儿为达鲁花赤。
现代文：七月，随大军袭击宋泰州守将李庭芝，有功。十四年，进升为昭勇大将军、婺州路总管府达鲁花赤，不久逝世。
English: In July, Li Tingzhi, the general of Song and Taizhou, was attacked by a large army, and he was promoted to the rank of General Zhaoyong in 14 years. He died soon after.

古文：卒。子哈兰术袭，佩虎符。
现代文：忽剌出，蒙古族人，其曾祖名阿察儿，祖父名直脱儿，伯父哈兰术。阿察儿侍奉太祖，为博儿赤。
English: He is a Mongolian. His great-grandfather's name was Achar, his grandfather's name was Zhaotul, and his uncle's name was Haran. Achar served his great-grandfather, and he was a Borek.

古文：李璮叛，世祖命领诸万户为监战达鲁花赤以讨之。
现代文：直脱儿随太宗征钦察、康里、回回等部有功，太宗九年为涿州路达鲁花赤。哈兰术承袭父直脱儿职位，佩虎符。
English: Zhaotul's son along with Taizong Zhengqincha, Kangli, Huihui and other departments have made great achievements. Taizong was the governor of Luzhou for nine years. Haran inherited his father's position as Zhaotul's son and wore the tiger emblem.

古文：有功，授解万户翼监战领军。迁益都路蒙古万户，监战密州，没于军。
现代文：在讨伐叛将李王的战争中立功，授解万户翼监战领军，后调为益都路蒙古万户，在密州阵亡。
English: In the war against the rebels, he made a great contribution to King Li's war, and was awarded the title of the leader of the 10,000-household wing war supervisor. Later, he was transferred to the Mongolian 10,000-household benefit capital, and died in battle in Mishu.

古文：从子忽剌出袭职，授昭勇大将军。至元十一年，攻宋六安军，有功。
现代文：忽剌出承袭其伯父哈兰术职位，授昭勇大将军，至元十一年，攻宋之六安军有功。
English: He inherited the position of his uncle, Haran, and was awarded the title of General Zhaoyong. In the eleventh year of the Yuan Dynasty, he made a great contribution to the attack on Song's Liuan Army.

古文：行中书省命领诸军战舰冲宋军，宋军败，有旨褒赏。
现代文：在这次战斗中，忽剌出奉行省命令，率领诸军战舰冲击，宋军大败，受朝廷褒赏。
English: In this battle, Hukou issued a provincial order, led the warships to attack, the Song Army was defeated, and was rewarded by the imperial court.

古文：九月，师次安庆。忽剌出及参政董文炳领山东诸军顺流东下，至丁家洲，遇宋臣夏贵、孙虎臣等，战江中，宋军大败，擒其将校三十七人、军五千余、船四十艘。
现代文：九月，蒙军进至安庆，忽剌出及参政董文炳率领山东诸军顺流东下，与宋将夏贵、孙虎臣等战于丁家洲，宋军大败，擒其将校三十七人，俘军卒五千余人，船四十艘。
English: In September, the Mongolian army marched into Anqing, and led the Shandong army eastward down the river, with the Song generals Xia Gui and Sun Huchen fighting in Dingjiazhou. The Song army was defeated, losing 37 officers, more than 5,000 prisoners of war, and 40 ships.

古文：十二年三月，与宋军战朱金沙，复有功。
现代文：十二年三月，忽剌出又大败宋军于朱金沙，再立战功。
English: In March of the 12th year, the Song Army was suddenly defeated and defeated in Zhu Jinsha, and made war achievements again.

古文：七月，复与宋军战焦山江中。时丞相阿术等督战，忽剌出与董文炳身冒矢石，沿流鏖战八十余里。
现代文：七月，复与宋军鏖战于焦山江中，丞相阿术督战，忽剌出与董文炳奋不顾身，沿江鏖战八十余里。
English: In July, he fought with the Song army in the middle of the Jiao Mountains and the Jiao River, fought with the prime minister and the military commander, and fought with Dong Wenzhong for more than 80 miles along the river.

古文：忽剌出身被数伤，裹创力战，遂胜之。
现代文：忽剌出身受数伤，仍裹创奋战，取得胜利。
English: He was born in Huping and suffered several injuries, but he still fought hard and achieved victory.

古文：九月，宋臣张殿帅攻夺吕城仓、丹阳县。
现代文：九月，宋臣张殿帅攻夺吕城仓、丹阳县。
English: In September, the general of the Song Dynasty, Zhang Dian, captured Lucheng and Danyang counties.

古文：忽剌出与万户怀都往救，生擒之。
现代文：忽剌出与万户怀都奉命救援，生擒张殿帅。
English: All of a sudden, they were ordered to rescue and rescue Zhang Dianshuai.

古文：十月，下常州，从丞相伯颜略苏、湖、秀州，至长桥，遇宋军，又败之。
现代文：十月，蒙军攻下常州，忽剌出随丞相伯颜攻取苏州、湖州、秀州，在长桥大败宋军。
English: In October, the Mongolian army conquered Changzhou, captured Suzhou, Huzhou and Xiuzhou, and defeated the Song army in Changqiao.

古文：十三年正月，师至杭州，丞相伯颜命忽剌出守浙江亭及宋北门。
现代文：至元十三年正月，蒙军进至杭州，丞相伯颜命忽剌出过浙江亭及宋北门。
English: In the first month of the 13th year of the Yuan Dynasty, the Mongolian army entered Hangzhou, and the Prime Minister Bo Yan suddenly came out of Zhejiang Pavilion and Songbei Gate.

古文：五月，扬州军劫扬子桥堡，败之。六月，败真州军。
现代文：五月，击败宋扬州军于扬子桥。六月，击败宋真州军。
English: In May, it defeated the Song Yangzhou Army at Yangzi Bridge. In June, it defeated the Song Zhenzhou Army.

古文：七月，追李庭芝至通海口，降扬州及高邮、宝应、真州、滁州等城，江南平。
现代文：七月，追击李庭芝至通海口。迫使扬州、高邮、宝应、真州、滁州等城相继投降，江南平定。
English: In July, they pursued Li Tingzhi to Tonghaigou. They forced Yangzhou, Gaoyou, Baoying, Zhenzhou, Zhangzhou and other cities to surrender one after another, and the south of the Yangtze River was pacified.

古文：加昭毅大将军，职如故。寻迁湖州路达鲁花赤。
现代文：忽剌出除原职外又加昭毅大将军，其后又调任湖州路达鲁花赤。
English: In addition to his original post, General Zhao Yi was also added to the post, and then he was transferred to the post of Huzhou Ludaruhana.

古文：十四年，进镇国上将军、淮东宣慰使。
现代文：十四年，进升镇国上将军、淮东宣慰使。
English: In the 14th year, he was promoted to the post of Zhenguo Shangzhen and Huadong Xuanjongshi.

古文：已而屯守上都。
现代文：不久又奉诏屯守上都。
English: Soon after, he was given the post of shogun of Shangdu.

古文：十五年，授嘉议大夫、行御史台中丞。
现代文：十五年，授嘉议大夫、行御史台中丞。
English: Fifteen years later, he was awarded the title of "Doctor of the Council of Elders" and promoted to "Junior Secretary of the Board of Historians."

古文：十九年，进资善大夫、福建行省左丞。黄华叛，平之。
现代文：十九年，进升资善大夫、福建行省左丞，平定黄华叛乱。
English: In 19th year, he was promoted to the post of doctor of medicine, and became the provincial commissar of Fujian Province to suppress the Huanghua Rebellion.

古文：二十年，授江淮行省左丞。
现代文：二十年，授江淮行省左丞。
English: Twenty years later, he was awarded the title of "Jianghuai Xingguo Zuoxing."

古文：二十三年，迁右丞。
现代文：二十三年，升为该省右丞。
English: Twenty-three years later, he was promoted to the province's right-hand man.

古文：三月，进荣禄大夫、江浙行省平章政事。
现代文：同年三月，晋升荣禄大夫、江浙行省平章政事。
English: In March of the same year, he was promoted to Ronglu Doctor, and went to Jiangsu and Zhejiang Province for Pingzhang government affairs.

古文：六月，卒。
现代文：同年六月病逝。
English: He died of illness in June of the same year.

古文：月里麻思，乃马氏。
现代文：月里麻思，姓乃马氏。
English: Tsukiri Masi, surname Naima.

古文：岁丁酉，太宗命与断事官忽都那颜同署。岁戊戌，又同阿术鲁拔都儿充达鲁花赤，破南宿州。
现代文：太宗九年，与忽都那颜同为断事官。十年，又与阿术鲁拔都儿同为达鲁花赤，曾率军攻克南宿州。
English: In the ninth year of Taizong, he was the adjudicator with Kudu Nanyan, and in the tenth year, he was the red-robed warrior with Ashurubaru, who led an army to conquer Nanjuku.

古文：岁辛丑，使宋议和。从行者七十余人，月里麻思语之曰： 吾与汝等奉命南下，楚人多诈，倘遇害，当死焉，毋辱君命。 
现代文：太宗十三年，月里麻思奉诏至宋国议和，随行者有七十余人，月里麻思对他们说 ：我与你们奉朝廷之命南下，楚人多诈，如有不测，我等誓死不屈，不要辜负皇上重托。 
English: In the thirteenth year of the reign of Emperor Taizong, Yue Li-Masi, accompanied by more than seventy people, went to Song to discuss peace. Yue Li-Masi said to them, "I am going south with you on the orders of the imperial court. The Chu people are deceitful. If anything happens, we will not give in, and we will not fail to live up to the emperor's heavy trust."

古文：已而驰抵淮上，宋将以兵胁之，曰： 尔命在我，生死顷刻间耳。
现代文：行至淮上，宋将以武力胁迫他们说： 你们的命捏在我手中，生死在顷刻之间。
English: When they reached Huaiyang, Song would use force to coerce them, saying, "Your lives are in my hands. Life and death happen in an instant."

古文：世祖命从不罗那颜使哈儿马某之地，以疾卒。
现代文：你们如果投降，可立即封官授爵，否则，必不饶命。 
English: If you surrender, you can be immediately knighted, otherwise, your lives will not be spared.

古文：子忽都帖木儿，武宗潜邸时从征海都，以功赏白金。
现代文：月里麻思正色道 ：我奉旨南来与贵国建立友好，你们反诱我行不义之举，我们宁死不屈。 
English: Tsukiri Masimasa: I came to the south to establish friendship with your country, and you lured me to commit an unjust act. We would rather die than give in.

古文：至大元年，授宣武将军、左卫阿速亲军副都指挥使。四年，卒。
现代文：言辞慷慨，宋将知道胁迫是行不通的，便把他们囚禁于长沙飞虎寨，时达三十六年，直至死亡。
English: Generous in his words, Song Zheng knew that coercion would not work, so he imprisoned them in Changsha Flying Tiger Village for thirty-six years until his death.

古文：哈八儿秃
现代文：世祖深为哀悼。
English: The patriarch is in deep mourning.

古文：哈八儿秃，薛亦氏。
现代文：察罕，哈八儿秃之子。
English: Chahan, the bald son of Khabar.

古文：宪宗时，从攻钓鱼山有功。
现代文：哈八儿秃姓薛亦氏，宪宗时曾随大军攻钓鱼山有功。
English: Habaer Bald, surnamed Xue Yi, once accompanied the large army to attack the Diaoyu Mountains and achieved great success.

古文：还，又从亲王塔察儿北征，充千户所都镇抚。
现代文：以后又随从亲王塔察儿北征，任千户所都镇抚。
English: Later, he followed Prince Tachara to the Northern Expedition and was appointed as the governor of all the thousand households.

古文：从千户脱伦伐宋，没于阵。
现代文：随千户脱伦伐宋，阵亡。
English: He died in battle along with thousands of families who escaped from the Mongol invasion of Song Dynasty.

古文：子察罕，从塔察儿攻樊城西门，领扬州等处游击军与宋兵战，有功。
现代文：察罕随塔察儿攻樊城西门，领扬州等处游击军与宋兵交战，有功。
English: Cahan followed Tachar to attack the west gate of the city, and led the guerrilla army in Yangzhou and other places to fight with the Song soldiers, and was meritorious.

古文：十二年，分隶脱脱总管，出广德游击军，与宋兵战，败之，赐以白金酒器。
现代文：至元十一年，随从忽都帖木儿攻江陵东南城堡。又随阿剌罕在阳逻堡之南大败宋军，阿剌罕选他任本万户府副镇抚。
English: In the eleventh year of the Yuan Dynasty, he attacked the southeastern castle of Jiangling with the disciple of Khudu Timur. He also defeated the Song Army with the disciple of Ajahn in the south of Yangluo Fort, and the disciple of Ajahn selected him as the vice-commander of Benwanyufu.

古文：又从攻独松、千秋、拨出等关及诸山寨，其降民悉绥抚之，赐白金一百两。十三年，中书省檄为瑞安县达鲁花赤。
现代文：至元十二年，隶属于脱脱，率领广德游击军战败宋军。以后又随大军攻克独松、千秋、拨出等关及诸山寨。至元十三年，中书省传令，任命他为瑞安县达鲁花赤。
English: In the 12th year of the Yuan Dynasty, he was subordinate to the detachment and led the Guangde guerrilla army to defeat the Song Army. Later, with the army, he conquered Doksong, Qianqiu, Zhuye County and other villages. In the 13th year of the Yuan Dynasty, he was appointed as the Daruhana of Ruian County by the order of the Ministry of Literature.

古文：始至，招集逃移民十万余户。
现代文：他一到任便招集逃移百姓十万余户。
English: As soon as he took office, he called together more than 100,000 households of people who had fled.

古文：十四年，升忠显校尉、管军总把，并领新附军五百人，从宣慰唐兀台战于司空山，有功，命以其职兼都镇抚。
现代文：十四年，升忠显校尉、管军总把，统领新归附军五百人，随宣慰唐兀台在司空山战败宋军，有功，命以原职兼都镇抚。
English: In the 14th year, Sheng Zhongxian, a lieutenant and commander-in-chief of the Guanjun, led the newly annexed army of 500 people. He accompanied the proclamation of Tang Xingtai's defeat of the Song Army in Shiguangshan. He was meritorious, and was ordered to take his original position as well as the capital town governor.

古文：俄选充侍卫亲军。
现代文：不久，选充侍卫亲军。
English: Soon after, the election of the bodyguards began.

古文：十六年，授银符、忠武校尉、管军总把。
现代文：十六年，授银符、忠武校尉、管军总把。
English: Sixteen years old, awarded the silver medal, the loyal lieutenant, and the commander-in-chief.

古文：二十四年，赐金符，授承信校尉、蒙古卫军屯田千户。
现代文：二十四年，赐金符，授承信校尉、蒙古卫军屯田千户。
English: In 1924, he was given a gold medal, awarded the title of lieutenant of the Mongolian Guard and a thousand households of the Mongolian Guard.

古文：二十五年，进武义将军、本所达鲁花赤。
现代文：二十五年，进升为武义将军、本所达鲁花赤。
English: Twenty-five years later, he was promoted to General Wuyi and became the head of the Daruhana Red Cross.

古文：二十七年，升左翼屯田万户府副万户。
现代文：二十七年，升左翼屯田万户府副万户。
English: In 1927, he was promoted to deputy governor of Tonden Wanyufu.

古文：大德五年卒。
现代文：大德五年卒。
English: Dade is a fifth-year graduate.

