古文：《程材》、《量知》，言儒生、文吏之材不能相过；以儒生修大道，以文吏晓簿书，道胜於事，故谓儒生颇愈文吏也。
现代文：《程材》、《量知》，讲到儒生和文吏的才能不相上下，因为儒生掌握了先王之道，文吏通晓公文，由于先王之道胜过具体事务，所以认为儒生稍稍胜过文吏。
English: "Cheng Zai" and "Quantity Knowledge" said that the talents of Confucian scholars and clerks were on a par, because Confucian scholars had mastered the way of the first king, and clerks were familiar with official documents. Since the way of the first king was better than specific affairs, Confucian scholars were considered to be slightly better than clerks.

古文：此职业外相程相量也，其内各有所以为短，未实谢也。
现代文：这是在不同职业之间来相互比较衡量，对他们职业范围内各自所具有的短处，没有如实论述。
English: This is to compare and measure between different occupations, and the shortcomings of their respective occupations are not truthfully discussed.

古文：夫儒生能说一经，自谓通大道，以骄文吏；文吏晓簿书，自谓文无害，以戏儒生。
现代文：儒生能解说一种经书，就自认为弄通先王之道来傲视文吏；文吏通晓公文，就自认为会处理公文不出差错来嘲弄儒生。
English: If a Confucian scholar is able to explain a scripture, he thinks that he can get through the way of the first king to look down on the clerk; if a clerk is familiar with official documents, he thinks that he can handle official documents without making mistakes to mock Confucian scholars.

古文：各持满而自，非彼而是我，不知所为短，不悟於己未足。
现代文：他们各怀自满，自以为高明，别人不对而自己对，不知道什么是短处，不明白自己还有不足的地方。
English: They are all self-satisfied, they think they are clever, others are wrong and they are right, they don't know what is a shortcoming, they don't understand that they still have shortcomings.

古文：《论衡》之，将使忄奭然各知所。
现代文：《论衡》解答这个问题，将使他们脸红各自知道自己的短处。
English: The answer to this question in "On Balance" will make them blush, and each of them will know their own shortcomings.

古文：训夫儒生所短，不徒以不晓簿书；文吏所劣，不徒以不通大道也，反以闭暗不览古今，不能各自知其所业之事未具足也。
现代文：儒生的短处，不仅仅因为不通晓公文，文吏的不足，不仅仅因为没有弄通先王之道，反而是因为闭塞不明，不通古今，不能各自知道自己所从事的事业不全面。
English: The shortcoming of Confucianism is not only that they are not familiar with official documents and the insufficiency of civil servants, not only that they have not figured out the way of the first king, but on the contrary, it is because they are not clear, they are not familiar with the past and the present, and they cannot know that the cause they are engaged in is not comprehensive.

古文：二家各短，不能自知也。世之论者，而亦不能训之，如何？
现代文：二家各有短处，自己不能了解，世上评论的人，也不能解答它，这怎么行呢？
English: Each of the two houses has its own shortcomings, and they cannot understand it, and the world's commentators cannot answer it. How can this be done?

古文：夫儒生之业，《五经》也，南面为师，旦夕讲授章句，滑习义理，究备於《五经》可也。
现代文：儒生的事业是五经。面朝南边作老师，早晚讲课，把经书的章节字句背得滚瓜烂熟，道理讲得十分完备，在通晓五经这点，是不错的。
English: The career of a Confucian scholar is the Five Classics. He faces south and works as a teacher, giving lectures in the morning and evening. He has memorized the chapters and verses of the sutras perfectly, and he has explained the principles very well. In terms of understanding the Five Classics, he is quite good.

古文：《五经》之後，秦、汉之事，不能知者，短也。
现代文：春秋战国之后，秦、汉的事情，不知道的，就是短处。
English: After the Spring and Autumn Period and the Warring States Period, what the Qin and Han dynasties did not know was a shortcoming.

古文：夫知古不知今，谓之陆沉，然则儒生，所谓陆沉者也。
现代文：了解古代不了解现在，称为愚昧无知，那么儒生就只能称作愚昧无知的人了。
English: Understanding ancient times without understanding the present is called ignorance, so Confucianism can only be called ignorance.

古文：《五经》之前，至於天地始开、帝王初立者，主名为谁，儒生又不知也。
现代文：春秋战国之前，到天地开辟，帝王开始设立，君主的名字是谁，儒生更不知道。
English: Before the Spring and Autumn Period and the Warring States Period, when the heavens and the earth were opened up and the emperor began to establish, who was the name of the monarch, the Confucians did not even know.

古文：夫知今不知古，谓之盲瞽。
现代文：了解现在不了解古代，称为瞎子。
English: Understanding now but not understanding in ancient times is called blindness.

古文：《五经》比於上古，犹为今也。
现代文：春秋战国时代跟上古相比，就像是今天跟春秋战国时代相比一样。
English: Comparing the Spring and Autumn Period and the Warring States Period with ancient times is like comparing today with the Spring and Autumn Period and the Warring States Period.

古文：徒能说经，不晓上古，然则儒生，所谓盲瞽者也。
现代文：只能说解经书，不通晓上古，那么儒生就是称作瞎子的人。
English: If one can only speak of exegesis and is not familiar with the ancients, then a Confucian is called a blind man.

古文：儒生犹曰： 上古久远，其事暗昧，故经不载而师不说也。 
现代文：儒生还可以说： 上古已很久远了，那时候的事情昏暗不明，所以经书上没有记载，老师也没有讲过。 
English: Confucians can also say: Ancient times are long gone, and the events of that time are dim and unclear, so there is no record in the scriptures, and the teacher has not spoken about it.

古文：夫三王之事虽近矣，经虽不载，义所连及，《五经》所当共知，儒生所当审说也。
现代文：夏禹、商汤和周文王、周武王的事情虽然很远，经书上即使没有记载，但道理是相通的，这是研究五经的人应该都了解的，儒生们应该清楚地加以解释。
English: Although the events of Xia Yu, Shang Tang and Zhou Wen Wang and Zhou Wu Wang are far away, even if they are not recorded in the scriptures, the truth is similar. This is something that people who study the Five Classics should all understand, and Confucians should explain it clearly.

古文：夏自禹向国，几载而至於殷？殷自汤几祀而至於周？周自文王几年而至於秦？
现代文：夏朝从禹统治国家经过多少年才到殷朝，殷朝从汤经过多少年才到周朝，周朝从文王经过多少年才到秦朝呢？
English: How many years did it take for the Xia Dynasty to go from the country ruled by Yu to the Yin Dynasty, how many years did it take for the Yin Dynasty to go from Tang to the Zhou Dynasty, and how many years did it take for the Zhou Dynasty to go from King Wen to the Qin Dynasty?

古文：桀亡夏而纣弃殷，灭周者何王也？
现代文：桀使夏朝亡，纣使殷朝灭，丧失了周朝天下的又是哪个王呢？
English: You caused the death of the Xia Dynasty, you caused the death of the Yin Dynasty, and you lost the Zhou Dynasty. Which king is it?

古文：周犹为远，秦则汉之所伐也。
现代文：要是周朝还算远，那么秦朝则是汉朝灭掉的。
English: If the Zhou Dynasty is still distant, then the Qin Dynasty was eliminated by the Han Dynasty.

古文：夏始於禹，殷本於汤，周祖后稷，秦初为人者谁？
现代文：夏朝从禹开始，殷朝从汤立国，周朝的起祖是后稷，那么秦朝的第一个君主又是谁呢？
English: The Xia Dynasty began with Yu, the Yin Dynasty with Tang, and the Zhou Dynasty with Houyi. So who was the first ruler of the Qin Dynasty?

古文：秦燔《五经》，坑杀儒士，《五经》之家所共闻也。
现代文：秦朝烧五经，坑杀儒士，这是研究五经的人都知道的事。
English: The Qin Dynasty burned the Five Classics and killed the Confucianists. This is a well-known fact to those who study the Five Classics.

古文：秦何起而燔《五经》，何感而坑儒生？
现代文：秦始皇是什么起因要烧五经，又是什么感触要坑杀儒士呢？
English: What was the reason for Qin Shihuang to burn the Five Classics, and what was the feeling to kill the Confucianists?

古文：秦则前代也。
现代文：要是秦朝还算前代，那么汉朝本是儒生生活的年代。
English: If the Qin Dynasty is still considered the previous generation, then the Han Dynasty was originally the age of Confucianism.

古文：汉国自儒生之家也，从高祖至今朝几世？历年讫今几载？
现代文：从高祖刘邦到现在是几代，又经过多少年才到现在呢？
English: How many generations have passed from Liu Bang, the great ancestor, to the present, and how many years have passed until now?

古文：初受何命？复获何瑞？
现代文：最初禀受了什么天命，又得到了什么祥瑞呢？
English: In the beginning, what kind of destiny did you receive, and what kind of auspicious fortune did you get?

古文：得天下难易孰与殷、周？
现代文：汉朝得天下与殷、周相比，哪个难，哪个容易呢？
English: Compared with Yin and Zhou, which is more difficult and which is easier for the Han Dynasty to rule the world?

古文：家人子弟学问历几岁，人问之曰： 居宅几年？
现代文：家里的孩子读书过了多少年，有人问他： 你住的房子有多少年？
English: How many years have the children in the family been studying? Someone asked him: How many years has the house you live in been there?

古文：祖先何为？ 
现代文：祖先是干什么的？ 
English: What did your ancestors do?

古文：不能知者，愚子弟也。
现代文：如果都不能知道，就是愚昧无知的孩子。
English: If you don't know, you are an ignorant child.

古文：然则儒生不能知汉事，世之愚蔽人也。 温故知新，可以为师。 
现代文：哪么儒生不知道汉朝的事情，就是世上愚昧无知的人。复习旧的了解新的，才可以做老师。
English: A Confucian scholar who does not know about the Han Dynasty is the most ignorant person in the world. Only by reviewing the old and understanding the new can he be a teacher.

古文：古今不知，称师如何？
现代文：古今都不知道，怎么能称老师呢？
English: I don't know whether it's ancient or modern, how can you call yourself a teacher?

古文：彼人问曰： 二尺四寸，圣人文语，朝夕讲习，义类所及，故可务知。
现代文：那些儒生会说： 经书是圣人精辟的话，早晚讲授学习，涉及的道义类似，所以能够经过努力弄懂。
English: Those Confucians would say: The scriptures are the incisive words of sages, they can be taught and studied sooner or later, and the moralities involved are similar, so they can be understood through hard work.

古文：汉事未载於经，名为尺籍短书，比於小道，其能知，非儒者之贵也。 
现代文：汉朝的事情在经书上没有记载，称作一般书籍，近于小道理，即使能懂得它，也不是儒者引以为贵的。
English: The events of the Han Dynasty are not recorded in the scriptures, they are called general books, which is close to a minor truth. Even if you can understand it, it is not considered valuable by Confucians.

古文：儒不能都晓古今，欲各别说其经；经事义类，乃以不知为贵也？事不晓，不以为短！
现代文：儒生不能对古今的事都了解，只想各自分别讲述他们擅长的经书，可是经书上的事情和道理是类似的，如果说可以不了解古今的事，这才是以无知为贵！
English: Confucians can't understand both ancient and modern things, they just want to tell each other about the scriptures they are good at, but the things and principles in the scriptures are similar. If you can't understand ancient and modern things, it's ignorance that's expensive!

古文：请复别问儒生，各以其经，旦夕之所讲说。
现代文：要是对古今的事不通晓，还不认为是短处，那么就请让我用他们各自早晚讲习的经书，再来分别问一问儒生吧。
English: If I don't understand ancient and modern affairs, and don't think it's a shortcoming, then please let me use the scriptures they study in the morning and evening, and then ask the Confucian separately.

古文：先问《易》家： 《易》本何所起？
现代文：先问研究解释《易》的儒生： 《周易》本来的起因是什么？
English: First, let's ask the Confucian scholars who have studied and explained "Zhou Yi": What is the original cause of "Zhou Yi"?

古文：造作之者为谁？ 
现代文：作者是谁？ 
English: Who is the author?

古文：彼将应曰： 伏羲作八卦，文王演为六十四，孔子作《彖》、《象》、《系辞》。
现代文：他们将会答应说： 伏羲作八卦，周文王推演成六十四卦，孔子作《彖辞》、《象辞》和《系辞》。
English: They will promise to say: Fuxi wrote the Eight Trigrams, Zhou Wenzhong deduced the Sixty-four Trigrams, and Confucius wrote the Analects, the Icons, and the Analects.

古文：三圣重业，《易》乃具足。 
现代文：伏羲、文王、孔子三圣沿袭作《易》，《易》才完备。 
English: Fuxi, King Wen, and Confucius are the three sages who wrote "Yi," and "Yi" is complete.

古文：问之曰： 《易》有三家，一曰《连山》，二曰《归藏》，三曰《周易》。
现代文：再问他们： 《易》有三家，一叫《连山》，二叫《归藏》，三叫《周易》。
English: Ask them again: "Yi" has three branches, one is called "Lianshan," the second is called "Guzhuo" and the third is called "Zhou Yi."

古文：伏羲所作，文王所造，《连山》乎？《归藏》、《周易》也？
现代文：伏羲，文王作的，究竟是《连山》呢，还是《归藏》、《周易》呢？
English: Fuxi, by King Wen, is it "Lianshan" or "Gathering" or "Zhou Yi"?

古文：秦燔《五经》，《易》何以得脱？
现代文：秦朝烧毁五经，《周易》为什么能逃脱呢？
English: The Qin Dynasty burned the Five Classics. How could "Zhou Yi" escape?

古文：汉兴几年而复立？
现代文：汉朝兴起经过多少年，才重新把《周易》立为经书呢？
English: How many years did it take for the rise of the Han Dynasty to re-establish "Zhou Yi" as a scripture?

古文：宣帝之时，河内女子坏老屋，得《易》一篇，名为何《易》？
现代文：汉宣帝的时候，河内郡有个妇女拆老屋，得《周易》一篇，名叫什么《易》呢？
English: At the time of Emperor Han Xuan, there was a woman in Hanoi County who tore down an old house and got an article in "Zhou Yi." What is the name of "Yi"?

古文：此时《易》具足未？ 
现代文：这时《周易》完备了没有呢？ 
English: At this time, is "Zhou Yi" complete?

古文：问《尚书》家曰： 今旦夕所授二十九篇，奇有百二篇，又有百篇。
现代文：问研究解释《尚书》的人： 如今早晚讲授的《尚书》是二十九篇，另外有一百零二篇的，还有一百篇的。
English: Ask the person who studies and explains the "Song of Songs": The "Song of Songs" taught in the morning and evening is twenty-nine, and there are one hundred and two, and one hundred.

古文：二十九篇何所起？
现代文：二十九篇《尚书》的起因是什么？
English: What is the origin of the twenty-nine chapters of the Shangshu?

古文：百二篇何所造？
现代文：一百零二篇的作者是哪个？
English: Who is the author of the 102 articles?

古文：秦焚诸书之时，《尚书》诸篇皆何在？
现代文：秦朝焚毁书籍的时候，《尚书》各篇都在什么地方？
English: When the Qin Dynasty burned books, where were all the "Shang Shu" articles?

古文：汉兴，始录《尚书》者何帝？
现代文：汉朝兴起，开始收录《尚书》的是哪个皇帝？
English: At the rise of the Han Dynasty, which emperor began to collect "Shang Shu"?

古文：初受学者何人？ 
现代文：最初向学生讲授的又是哪个人？ 
English: Who was the first person to teach the students?

古文：问《礼》家曰： 前孔子时，周已制礼，殷礼，夏礼，凡三王因时损益，篇有多少，文有增减。不知今《礼》，周乎？殷、夏也？ 
现代文：问研究解释《仪礼》的儒生： 在孔子以前，周朝已经制定了礼，还有殷礼，夏礼，共经历三代，礼都根据当时的情况有增减，篇数有多有少，文字有增有减，不知道现在的《仪礼》，是周朝的，还是殷朝、夏朝的？ 
English: Ask a Confucian scholar who has studied and explained the "Rite": Before Confucius, the Zhou Dynasty had already established the Rite, as well as the Yin Dynasty and the Xia Dynasty. A total of three generations have passed. The Rite has increased and decreased according to the situation at that time. The number of pages has increased and decreased. The text has increased and decreased. I don't know if the current "Rite" is from the Zhou Dynasty, or from the Yin Dynasty and the Xia Dynasty.

古文：彼必以汉承周，将曰： 周礼。 
现代文：他们必定认为汉制继承周制，将回答说： 周礼。 
English: They must think that the Han system succeeds the Zhou system, and will answer: Zhouli.

古文：夫周礼六典，又六转，六六三十六，三百六十，是以周官三百六十也。
现代文：其实，周朝的礼有六典，再用六相乘，六六三十六，三百六十，这是因为周朝的官职有三百六十个。
English: As a matter of fact, the Zhou dynasty had six rites, and then multiplied by six, 6636, 360, because there were 360 official positions in the Zhou dynasty.

古文：案今《礼》不见六典，无三百六十官，又不见天子。天子礼废何时？
现代文：考察现在的《礼》不见六典，没有三百六十个官职，又看不见关于天子礼仪的记载，天子的礼仪是什么时候废除的呢？
English: An examination of the current "Rite" shows that there are not six copies, there are not three hundred and sixty official positions, and there is no record of the Divine Son's etiquette. When was the Divine Son's etiquette abolished?

古文：岂秦灭之哉？
现代文：难道是秦朝烧掉的吗？
English: Was it really the Qin Dynasty that burned the cranes?

古文：宣帝时，河内女子坏老屋，得佚《礼》一篇，六十篇中，是何篇是者？
现代文：汉朝宣帝时，河内郡一个妇女拆老屋，得到失传的《礼》一篇，十六篇中，哪一篇是失传的《礼》呢？
English: When Emperor Xuan of the Han Dynasty was proclaimed, a woman in Hanoi County tore down an old house and obtained a lost copy of "Rite." Of the sixteen copies, which one is the lost copy of "Rite"?

古文：高祖诏叔孙通制作《仪品》，十篇何在？
现代文：汉高祖命令叔孙通制作《仪品》，那么当时《礼》十六篇在什么地方去了呢？
English: Henkel's great-great-grandfather ordered his great-uncle to produce "Rituals," so where did the 16 "Rites" go at that time?

古文：而复定《仪礼》，见在十六篇，秦火之余也。更秦之时，篇凡有几？
现代文：为什么还要重新制定礼仪呢？现在的《礼》十六篇，是秦始皇烧书剩下的，经历了秦朝，一共还有多少篇呢？
English: Why do we need to reformulate the etiquette? The current 16 articles of "Rite" were left over from the books burned by the First Emperor of Qin and went through the Qin Dynasty. How many articles are left in total?

古文：问《诗》家曰： 《诗》作何帝王时也？ 
现代文：问研究解释《诗经》的儒生： 《诗经》创作于哪个帝王的时代？ 
English: Ask a Confucian scholar who has studied and explained "The Book of Songs": "The Book of Songs" was created in which emperor's era?

古文：彼将曰： 周衰而《诗》作，盖康王时也。
现代文：他们将回答说： 周朝衰败的时候，《诗经》已创作出来了，那么大概作于周康王的时候。
English: They will answer: When the Zhou Dynasty was in decline, the "Book of Songs" had already been created, so it was probably written during the time of King Zhou Kang.

古文：康王德缺於房，大臣刺晏，故《诗》作。 
现代文：由于康王的品德在房事上有缺点，大臣们就讽刺他起得晚，因此创作了《诗经·关睢》。 
English: Since King Kang's moral character had a shortcoming in housekeeping, the ministers satirized him for getting up late, and thus created the "Shijing·Guanxuan."

古文：夫文、武之隆贵在成、康，康王未衰，《诗》安得作？
现代文：周文王、周武王的隆盛事业延续到了成王、康王的时代，康王时还没有衰败，《诗经》怎么能创作出来呢？
English: The flourishing career of King Zhou Wen and King Zhou Wu continued into the era of King Cheng and King Kang. King Kang had not yet fallen into decline, so how could the "Book of Songs" be created?

古文：周非一王，何知其康王也？
现代文：周朝不只一个帝王，怎么知道他就是康王呢？
English: There is more than one emperor in the Zhou Dynasty. How do we know that he is King Kang?

古文：二王之末皆衰，夏、殷衰时，《诗》何不作？
现代文：夏禹、商汤的未代都衰败，但是夏朝、殷朝衰败的时侯，《诗经》为什么没有创作出来呢？
English: Both the Xia Yu and Shang Tang dynasties were in decline, but why wasn't the "Book of Songs" created when the Xia and Yin dynasties were in decline?

古文：《尚书》曰 诗言志，歌咏言 ，此时已有诗也，断取周以来，而谓兴於周。古者采诗，诗有文也，今《诗》无书，何知非秦燔《五经》，《诗》独无余也？
现代文：从上古诗中截取周朝以来的诗编入《诗经》，就说《诗经》产生在周朝。古代帝王派人采集诗歌，每首诗都有文字记载，现在的《诗经》中没有关于古诗的文字记载，怎么知道不是秦始皇焚烧五经，独使周以前的诗一篇也没有留下来呢？
English: The ancient emperors sent people to collect poems, and each poem has a written record. There is no written record of ancient poems in the current "Book of Songs." How do we know that it was not the First Emperor of Qin who burned the Five Classics, but that none of the poems before Zhou remained?

古文：问《春秋》家曰： 孔子作《春秋》，周何王时也？
现代文：问研究解释《春秋》的儒生： 孔子作《春秋》，是周朝哪个君王的时候？
English: Ask a Confucian scholar who studies and explains "Spring and Autumn": When did Confucius write "Spring and Autumn" and when was he the king of which Zhou Dynasty?

古文：自卫反鲁，然後乐正，《春秋》作矣。
现代文：他从卫国回到鲁国，然后鲁国的音乐才得到审定和整理，之后写了《春秋》。
English: He returned to Russia from the Great Patriotic War, and it was only then that the music of Russia was approved and organized, after which he wrote "Spring and Autumn."

古文：自卫反鲁，哀公时也。
现代文：从卫国回到鲁国，是鲁哀公的时候。
English: When I returned to Lu from the old country, it was the time of Lu Aigong.

古文：自卫，何君也？
现代文：他从卫国动身，那里的君主是谁？
English: He sets out from the homeland. Who is the ruler there?

古文：俟孔子以何礼，而孔子反鲁作《春秋》乎？
现代文：用什么礼节对待他，而使他回到鲁国就要写《春秋》呢？
English: What kind of etiquette was used to treat him so that he returned to Russia to write "Spring and Autumn"?

古文：孔子录《史记》以作《春秋》，《史记》本名《春秋》乎？
现代文：孔子抄录鲁国史官的编年史用来写《春秋》，鲁国史官的编年史本名叫《春秋》呢？
English: Confucius copied the chronicle of the historian of the State of Lu and used it to write "Spring and Autumn." Is the chronicle of the historian of the State of Lu called "Spring and Autumn"?

古文：制作以为经，乃归《春秋》也？
现代文：还是写作成为经以后，才称为《春秋》的呢？ 
English: Or was it called "Spring and Autumn" only after the writing became scripture?

古文：法律之家，亦为儒生。
现代文：研究讲解法律的人，也是儒生。
English: People who study and teach law are also Confucianists.

古文：问曰： 《九章》，谁所作也？ 
现代文：问他们： 《九章》是谁制作的？ 
English: Ask them: Who produced "The Nine Chapters"?

古文：彼闻皋陶作狱，必将曰： 皋陶山。 
现代文：他们听说皋陶作过尧、舜时的司法官，一定要说： 皋陶。 
English: When they hear that the potter has made something, the judges must say, "This is from the potter."

古文：诘曰： 皋陶，唐、虞时，唐、虞之刑五刑，案今律无五刑之文。 
现代文：往下追问： 皋陶，在尧、舜时代，尧、舜时的刑法有五种：墨、劓、刖、宫、大辟，考察今天的法律没有五刑的条文。 
English: Follow-up question: According to Xing Tao, in the Ming and Qing dynasties, there were five kinds of criminal laws in the Ming and Qing dynasties: ink, ink, ink, ink, ink, ink, ink, ink, ink, ink, ink, ink, ink, ink, ink, ink, ink, ink, ink, ink, ink, ink, ink, ink, ink, ink, ink, ink, ink, ink, ink, ink, ink, ink, ink, ink, ink, ink, ink, ink, ink, ink, ink, ink.

古文：或曰： 萧何也。 
现代文：有人会说： 是箫何。 
English: Some people will say: so what.

古文：诘曰： 萧何，高祖时也，孝文之时，齐太仓令淳于有罪，征诣长安，其女缇萦为父上书，言肉刑壹施，不得改悔。
现代文：往下追问： 箫何是汉高祖时候的人。汉文帝时，齐国的太仓令淳于意有罪，押送到长安，他的女儿缇萦为解救父亲上书，说肉刑一施行，就不能悔改。
English: Follow-up question: What kind of person were you at the time of Emperor Gaozu of the Han Dynasty? At the time of Emperor Wen of the Han Dynasty, the Taicang Emperor of Qi ordered that Chun Yuyi be found guilty and sent to Chang'an. His daughter Yan wrote a letter to free her father, saying that she would not be able to repent once the corporal punishment was carried out.

古文：文帝痛其言，乃改肉刑。
现代文：文帝被她的话感动，于是废除了肉刑。
English: Emperor Wen was moved by her words and abolished corporal punishment.

古文：案今《九章》象刑，非肉刑也。
现代文：考察今天的《九章》是象刑，没有肉刑。
English: Today's "Nine Chapters" is an examination of elephant torture, not physical torture.

古文：文帝在萧何後，知时肉刑也。萧何所造，反具刑也？
现代文：文帝生活在箫何之后，我们知道文帝时还有肉刑，要是箫何制作的，怎么反而全是象刑呢？
English: Emperor Wen lived after Emperor Zhou, and we know that Emperor Wen still had corporal punishment. If Emperor Zhou made it, how come it's all elephant torture?

古文：而云《九章》萧何所造乎？ 
现代文：这能说今天的《九章》是箫何制作的吗？ 
English: Can we say what today's "Nine Chapters" is made of?

古文：古礼三百，威仪三千，刑亦正刑三百，科条三千。出於礼，入於刑，礼之所去，刑之所取，故其多少同一数也。
现代文：古代礼制条文有三百，具体礼节仪式规定有三千，刑法也是正刑纲目三百条，科条细目三千条，违反了礼，就要判刑，礼反对的，就是刑要惩罚的，所以礼和刑条文数目的多少是相同的。
English: The ancient etiquette system has three hundred articles, and the specific etiquette ritual has three thousand. The criminal law also has three hundred articles of formal punishment and three thousand articles of detail. If you violate etiquette, you will be sentenced, and if you oppose etiquette, you will be punished. Therefore, the number of etiquette and criminal provisions is more or less the same.

古文：今《礼经》十六，萧何律有九章，不相应，又何？
现代文：今天的《仪礼》是十六篇，箫何制作的法律只有九章，不互相吻合，又是为什么呢？
English: Today's "Rituals" is sixteen articles. Why are there only nine chapters of laws, which do not coincide with each other, and why?

古文：《五经》题篇，皆以事义别之，至礼与律独经也，题之，礼言昏礼，律言盗律何？
现代文：给五经各篇加题目，都是根据各篇的内容来区别的，至于礼与律同样应该是经，给它们定篇名，为什么礼叫《经礼》，律叫《盗律》呢？
English: The titles of the five sutras are given according to the contents of each sutra. As for the rites and precepts, they should be the same as the sutras, and their names should be fixed. Why are the rites called "rituals" and the precepts called "laws"?

古文：夫总问儒生以古今之义，儒生不能知，别以其经事问之，又不能晓，斯则坐守师法、不颇博览之咎也。
现代文：把古今的道理汇总起来问儒生，儒生知道，分别拿他们熟悉的一种经书内容去问他们，又不能通晓，这就是因为他们墨守相信老师对经书的解释，而不肯稍微多读点书的过错。
English: Ask Confucians to summarize the ancient and modern principles, Confucians know, separately take them familiar with the content of a scripture to ask them, but can not understand, this is because they persist in believing the teacher's interpretation of scripture, and are not willing to read a little more books fault.

古文：文吏自谓知官事，晓簿书。
现代文：文吏自认为懂得官家的事情，又通晓公文。
English: Civil servants think that they understand the affairs of the government and are well versed in official documents.

古文：问之曰： 晓知其事，当能究达其义，通见其意否？ 
现代文：要是问他们： 懂得这些事情，就应当能够通晓它们的道理，透彻了解它们的意义是不是？ 
English: If you ask them: If you understand these things, you should be able to understand their reason, and thoroughly understand their meaning, right?

古文：文吏必将罔然。
现代文：文吏听了一定会发呆。
English: The clerk must have been in a daze.

古文：问之曰： 古者封侯，各专国土，今置太守令长，何义？
现代文：再问他们： 古时候分封诸侯，都是各人独自统治国家，现在要设置郡太守、县令、县长，是什么道理呢？
English: Ask them again: In ancient times, when feudal lordships were divided, each person ruled the country alone. Now, what is the reason for setting up a county governor, county magistrate, and county governor?

古文：古人井田，民为公家耕，今量租刍，何意？
现代文：古人实行井田制，老百姓为公家耕种，现在是征收田赋和畜草，是什么用意呢？
English: The ancients practiced the well-field system, the common people cultivated for the public, now it is the collection of fields and livestock, what is the intention?

古文：一使民居更一月，何据？
现代文：一年让老百姓当一个月的更卒，根据是什么呢？
English: What is the basis for making ordinary people work one month longer a year?

古文：年二十三，十五赋，七岁头钱二十三，何缘？
现代文：二十三岁登记服役，十五岁开始交纳算赋，七岁开始交纳口赋二十三钱，是什么缘故呢？
English: At the age of twenty-three he registered for military service, at the age of fifteen he began to pay tax, and at the age of seven he began to pay tax of twenty-three dollars. Why?

古文：有臈，何帝王时？
现代文：腊祭，起于哪个帝王的时候？
English: The wax festival dates back to which emperor?

古文：门户井灶，何立？
现代文：门神、户神、井神、灶神，为什么要立他们呢？
English: The god of the door, the god of the house, the god of the well, the god of the kitchen, why do they have to be set up?

古文：社稷、先农、灵星，保祠？
现代文：社稷、先农、灵星，祭祀的是什么神呢？
English: What deities are worshipped in the shrines, ancestor farmers, and spirit stars?

古文：岁终逐疫，何驱？
现代文：年底驱赶瘟疫，驱逐的是什么鬼呢？
English: Drive out the plague at the end of the year, drive out what demon?

古文：使立桃象人於门户，何旨？
现代文：立桃梗假人在门前，是什么意思呢？
English: What does it mean to place a peach-stemmed dummy in front of the door?

古文：挂芦索於户上，画虎於门阑，何放？
现代文：挂芦索在门上，画虎在门框中，驱赶的是什么呢？
English: Hanging a reed on the door, drawing a tiger in the door frame, what is it that drives them away?

古文：除墙壁书画厌火丈夫，何见？
现代文：去掉墙壁的字画上厌火丈夫，是根据什么画的呢？
English: What is the basis for the depiction of a fire-weary husband in the graffiti removed from the walls?

古文：步之六尺，冠之六寸，何应？
现代文：一步六尺，帽高六寸，为什么要这样对应呢？
English: With a six-foot stride and a six-inch tall hat, why do they have to correspond like this?

古文：有尉史令史，无长史，何制？
现代文：一般的郡有尉史、令史，而没有丞长史，为什么要这样制定呢？
English: The average county has a lieutenant's history and a regimental history, but not a major's history. Why is it set up this way?

古文：两郡移书，曰： 敢告卒人 ，两县不言，何解？
现代文：两郡互致文书要说 敢告卒人 ，而两县间就不说这样的话，怎样解释呢？
English: How can it be explained that the document sent by the two counties to each other should say "Dare to sue someone," but such a thing is not said between the two counties?

古文：郡言事二府，曰 敢言之 ，司空曰 上 ，何状？
现代文：郡守上书报告事情对太尉、司徒要说 敢言之 ，对司空要说 上 ，为什么要这样陈述呢？
English: When the county magistrate reported the matter in writing, he had to say "I dare say" to the captain and Sito, and "I have to say" to Siku, but why make such a statement?

古文：赐民爵八级，何法？
现代文：赐给老百姓爵位八级，效法的是什么呢？
English: What is the imitation of the eight-level peerage given to the common people?

古文：名曰簪褭、上造，何谓？
现代文：爵位起名叫 簪 、 上造 ，说的是什么意思呢？
English: What does it mean to say that a title of nobility is named "," "上造"?

古文：吏上功曰伐阅，名籍墨，何指？
现代文：给官吏记功叫伐阅，把名字记入墨写的行状里，是什么用意呢？
English: What is the purpose of giving merit to officials and calling them "felling and reading" and writing their names in ink?

古文：七十赐王杖，何起？
现代文：赐王杖给七十岁的老头，起因是什么呢？
English: What is the reason for giving a scepter to a seventy-year-old man?

古文：著鸠於杖末，不著爵，何杖？
现代文：在王杖的顶端刻上斑鸠，而不刻麻雀，为什么要作这样的杖呢？
English: Why make the king's scepter with a turtledove at the top and not a sparrow?

古文：苟以鸠为善，不赐而赐鸠杖，而不爵，何说？
现代文：假如因为斑鸠是益鸟，不赐给斑鸠而赐给鸠杖，怎么解释呢？
English: If, because the peregrine falcon is a beneficial bird, it is not given to the peregrine falcon, but to the cormorant, how can this be explained?

古文：日分六十，漏之尽，鼓之致五，何故？
现代文：白天分为六十刻，漏水滴完一百刻，夜晚鼓要敲五次，为什么呢？
English: The day is divided into sixty hours, the drip drip drip drip drip drip drip drip drip drip drip drip drip drip drip drip drip drip drip drip drip drip drip drip drip drip.

古文：吏衣黑衣，宫阙赤单，何慎？
现代文：官吏穿黑色衣服，宫廷卫士却穿红色禅衣，是怎么考虑的呢？
English: How is it considered that officials wear black clothes, but palace guards wear red zen robes?

古文：服革於腰，佩刀於右，剑於左，何备？
现代文：皮带系在腰上，刀佩在右边，剑带在左边，为什么要这样装束呢？
English: The belt is tied around the waist, the sword is worn on the right, and the sword belt is worn on the left. Why do they dress like this?

古文：著钩於履，冠在於首，何象？
现代文：絇饰在鞋上，帽戴在头上，是象征什么呢？
English: What is the symbolism of the skull and crossbones on the shoes and the cap on the head?

古文：吏居城郭，出乘车马，坐治文书，起城郭，何王？
现代文：官吏住在城市，出入乘车马，坐着处理文书，那么筑城郭，开始是哪个君王呢？
English: Government officials live in the city, go in and out by horse and carriage, and handle paperwork while sitting. So which king was the first to build a castle?

古文：造车舆，何工？
现代文：造车子，最初是哪个工匠呢？
English: Which craftsman was the first to build a car?

古文：生马，何地？
现代文：产马，最早在什么地方呢？
English: What was the first place to breed horses?

古文：作书，何人？
现代文：创造文字，最先是谁呢？ 
English: Who was the first to create writing?

古文：造城郭及马所生，难知也，远也。
现代文：建造城郭和最早产马的地方，很难晓得，因为时间太久远了。
English: It is difficult to know when the castle was built and when the first horses were bred, because so much time has passed.

古文：造车作书，易晓也，必将应曰： 仓颉作书，奚仲作车。 
现代文：但是制造车子创作文字，容易知道，文吏一定会答应说： 是仓颉创作文字，奚仲创造马车。 
English: However, it is easy to know that the clerk will certainly promise to say: It is the barn that creates the words, and the stable that creates the carriage.

古文：诘曰： 仓颉何感而作书？奚仲何起而作车？ 
现代文：往下追问： 仓颉是感触什么创作文字，奚仲是受什么启发创造马车的呢？ 
English: Follow-up question: What creative words did Kura Shun feel, and what inspired Shun Zhong to create a carriage?

古文：又不知也。
现代文：还是不知道。
English: I still don't know.

古文：文吏所当知，然而不知，亦不博览之过也。
现代文：这些都是文吏应该知道的，然而却不知道，这也是不多读书的过错啊。
English: These are all things a clerk should know, yet he doesn't, which is also the fault of not reading enough.

古文：夫儒生不览古今，知不过守信经文，滑习章句，解剥互错，分明乖异。
现代文：儒生不通古今，知道的不过是墨守和相信经书，背熟章节和句子，分析互相错乱的文句，辨明矛盾与不同的地方。
English: Confucianism does not understand the past and the present. All it knows is to memorize and believe in scriptures, memorize chapters and sentences, analyze mutually confused phrases, and identify contradictions and differences.

古文：文吏不晓吏道，所能不过案狱考事，移书下记，对便给。
现代文：文吏不通晓做吏的道理，他们的能力不过是审判案件考察事务，递交文书下发公文，对答流利。
English: Clerks do not understand the principle of being a clerk, their ability is only to judge cases, investigate matters, submit documents, issue official documents, and are fluent in answering questions.

古文：准无一阅备，皆浅略不及，偏驳不纯，俱有阙遗，何以相言？
现代文：衡量文吏和儒生没有一个十全十美的，都学识浅陋达不到，片面杂乱不完善，都有缺点和不足，有什么理由相互指责呢？
English: Judging from the fact that no clerk or Confucian scholar is perfect, that their knowledge is too shallow and incomplete, and that they are one-sided, disorganized, and imperfect, they all have shortcomings and insufficiencies. What reason is there to blame each other?

