古文：◎宪宗宪宗桓肃皇帝，讳蒙哥，睿宗拖雷之长子也。
现代文：宪宗，谥号桓肃皇帝，名蒙哥，睿宗拖雷的长子。
English: The eldest son of Emperor Kansu, also known as Emperor Mengge and Emperor Ruizong.

古文：母曰庄圣太后，怯烈氏，讳唆鲁禾帖尼。
现代文：母亲庄圣太后，姓怯烈氏，名唆鲁禾帖尼。
English: His mother, Empress Dowager Zhuang Sheng, was surnamed Qiu Rong and went by the name Lu He Tian.

古文：岁戊辰，十二月三日生帝。
现代文：太祖三年十二月三日，生宪宗皇帝。
English: Emperor Taizu was born on December 3rd of the 3rd year of the 3rd month of the 3rd year of the 3rd year of the 3rd year of the 3rd year of the 3rd year of the 3rd year of the 3rd year of the 3rd year of the 3rd year of the 3rd year of the 3rd year of the 3rd year of the 3rd year of the 3rd year of the 3rd year of the 3rd year of the 3rd year of the 3rd year of the 3rd year of the 3rd year of the 3rd year of the 3rd year of the 3rd year of the 3rd year of the 3rd year of the 3rd

古文：时有黄忽答部知天象者，言帝后必大贵，故以蒙哥为名。
现代文：当时有一个懂得天象，名叫黄答忽部的人说，宪宗以后一定会大贵，因此取名叫蒙哥。蒙哥，汉语是长生的意思。
English: At that time, there was a man named Huangdahu, who understood the nature of the celestial bodies, and he said that Gensong would certainly be great in the future, so he was named Mungo. Mungo, in Chinese, means eternal life.

古文：太宗在潜邸，养以为子，属昂灰皇后抚育之。
现代文：太宗还在当藩王时把他收为养子，吩咐昂灰皇后抚育他。
English: When Emperor Taizong was still the king of the domain, he adopted him as his son and ordered Empress Anghu to raise him.

古文：既长，为娶火鲁剌部女火里差为妃，分之部民。
现代文：蒙哥长大以后，太宗为他娶火鲁剌部落的女子火里差为妃，并把部落中的百姓分拨给他。
English: After Mungo grew up, Emperor Taizong married him off to a woman from the Huluchan tribe, Hulicha, and allocated the people in the tribe to him.

古文：及睿宗薨，乃命归藩邸。
现代文：睿宗去世之后，太宗便命蒙哥回归藩王府邸。
English: After the death of Ruizong, Emperor Taizong ordered Mengo to return to the residence of the king of the domain.

古文：从征伐，屡立奇功。
现代文：他参加征讨敌人，多次建立奇功。
English: He took part in the conquest of the enemy and repeatedly achieved miraculous feats.

古文：尝攻钦察部，其酋八赤蛮逃于海岛。
现代文：有一次进攻钦察部落，该部落的酋长逃到海岛上。
English: During one attack by the Chincha tribe, the chief of the tribe fled to the island.

古文：帝闻，亟进师，至其地，适大风刮海水去，其浅可渡。
现代文：蒙哥知道后立即进军，到达那地方时正好大风把海水刮去了；水浅了，可以渡过去。
English: As soon as Mungo found out, he immediately set out. When he reached the place, a strong wind had just blown the sea away; the water was shallow and he could cross it.

古文：帝喜曰： 此天开道与我也。 
现代文：蒙哥高兴地说 ：这是老天爷为我开辟的道路啊。 
English: Mungo said happily, "This is the path that God has opened up for me."

古文：遂进屠其众，擒八赤蛮，命之跪，八赤蛮曰： 我为一国主，岂苟求生？且身非驼，何以跪人为？ 
现代文：于是进占海岛，屠杀敌人的士兵，捉住了八赤蛮，命他跪下。八赤蛮说： 我是一国之主，岂能够苟且偷生，再说我的身子又不是骆驼，为什么要向别人下跪呢？ 
English: So he went to the occupied island, slaughtered the enemy soldiers, caught the eight red barbarians and ordered him to kneel down. The eight red barbarians said: I am the lord of a country, can I steal my life, and my body is not a camel, why should I kneel down to others?

古文：乃命囚之。
现代文：蒙哥便命令把八赤蛮囚禁起来。
English: Mungo then ordered that Hachibanaru be imprisoned.

古文：八赤蛮谓守者曰： 我之窜入于海，与鱼何异，然终见擒，天也。
现代文：八赤蛮对看守他的人说： 我逃窜到了海里，和鱼还有什么区别。但终于被捉住了，这是天意啊。
English: The eight-eyed brute said to his guards: "I escaped to the sea, what's the difference between me and a fish? But I was finally caught, it was God's will."

古文：今水回期且至，军宜早还。 
现代文：现在海水倒流回来的时间快要到了，你们的军队应该早些回去。 
English: Now that the time for the sea to flow back is approaching, your troops should go back earlier.

古文：帝闻之，即班师，而水已至，后军有浮渡者。
现代文：蒙哥听到这话，立即班师回去，海水却已经到了，后军有的人是游水渡海回来的。
English: Mungo heard this and immediately went back to his squadron, but the sea had already arrived, and some of the men in the rearguard had swum back across the sea.

古文：复与诸王拔都征斡罗思部，至也烈赞城，躬自搏战，破之。
现代文：蒙哥又和诸侯王拔都征伐斡罗思部，到也烈赞城，蒙哥亲自上阵搏斗，攻破了也烈赞城。
English: Mengo and the prince Wang Badu both went to the city of Yalizan, and Mengo personally fought and defeated the city of Yalizan.

古文：岁戊申，定宗崩，朝廷久未立君，中外汹汹，咸属意于帝，而觊觎者众，议未决。
现代文：定宗三年，定宗去世，朝廷很久没有确定新的君王，朝廷内外议论纷纷，都认为蒙哥应当当皇帝，但窥伺皇位的人却很多，议而不能决。
English: Three years after the enthronement of Emperor Dingzong, Emperor Dingzong passed away. The imperial court had not decided on a new monarch for a long time. There was a lot of discussion both inside and outside the imperial court. Everyone thought that Mengo should be the emperor, but there were many people who were watching the throne, and they could not decide.

古文：诸王拔都木哥、阿里不哥、唆亦哥秃、塔察儿，大将兀良合台、速你带、帖木迭儿、也速不花，咸会于阿剌脱忽剌兀之地，拔都首建议推戴。
现代文：诸侯王拔都、木哥、阿里不哥、唆亦哥秃、塔察儿、大将兀良合台、速你带、帖木迭儿、也速不花都聚集在阿剌脱忽剌兀地方。拔都首先提出建议，推戴蒙哥为皇帝。
English: The princes Ba Du, Mu Ge, Alibang Ge, Sui Ying Ge, Zhao, Tachar, General Qiliangdai, Sui You Belt, Tie Mu Di'er, and Ya Sui Fu Hua all gathered at the place of Ah Tu Tu Quan. Ba Du was the first to make a proposal to promote Meng Guo as emperor.

古文：时定宗皇后海迷失所遣使者八剌在坐，曰： 昔太宗命以皇孙失烈门为嗣，诸王百官皆与闻之。
现代文：当时定宗的皇后海迷失所派的使臣八剌也在座，他说 ：从前太宗皇帝命令以皇孙失烈门为继承人，各位王爷和百官都听到了。
English: At that time, Emperor Taizong's envoy Hachijo, who belonged to the Empress Lost at Sea faction, was also present. He said, "Once upon a time, Emperor Taizong ordered the Emperor's grandson Lost at Sea to be the heir, and all the princes and officials heard it.

古文：今失烈门故在，而议欲他属，将置之何地耶？ 
现代文：现在失烈门还在，却倡议要把皇位归属于别人，那样将把失烈门放在什么位置上呢？ 
English: Now the gate is still there, but the initiative is to assign the throne to someone else. In that case, what position will the gate be placed in?

古文：木哥曰： 太宗有命，谁敢违之。
现代文：木哥说： 太宗有圣命，谁敢违抗他呢？
English: Mogo said: Taizong has a sacred life, who would dare to defy him?

古文：然前议立定宗，由皇后脱列忽乃与汝辈为之，是则违太宗之命者，汝等也，今尚谁咎耶？ 
现代文：但是先前议定立定宗为皇帝，是由皇后脱列忽乃和你们这些人决定的，那么，违抗太宗皇帝命令的正是你们，现在还想要指责谁呢？ 
English: But the previously agreed upon enthronement of Emperor Ritsunzong was decided by the Empress Dowager and you people, so it was you who disobeyed the Emperor Taizong's order. Who do you want to blame now?

古文：八剌语塞。
现代文：八剌无话可说。
English: Yao Yao had nothing to say.

古文：兀良合台曰： 蒙哥聪明睿知，人咸知之，拔都之议良是。 
现代文：兀良合台说： 蒙哥聪明有智慧，这是人人都知道的，拔都的意见非常正确。 
English: Hailiangdai said: Mungo is clever and wise, which is known to everyone. Badu's opinion is very correct.

古文：拔都即申令于众，众悉应之，议遂定。
现代文：拔都就向大家宣布这个决定，大家都同意他，立蒙哥为帝就这样决定下来了。
English: Badu announced this decision to everyone, everyone agreed with him, and the decision to make Mengge emperor was made.

古文：元年辛亥夏六月，西方诸王别儿哥、脱哈帖木儿，东方诸王也古、脱忽、亦孙哥、按只带、塔察儿、别里古带，西方诸大将班里赤等，东方诸大将也速不花等，复大会于阔帖兀阿阑之地，共推帝即皇帝位于斡难河。
现代文：宪宗元年六月，西方的诸侯王别儿哥、脱哈帖木儿，东方的诸侯王也古、脱忽、亦孙哥、按只带、塔察儿、别里古带，西方的各大将班里赤等，东方的各大将也速不花等，再次在阔帖兀阿阑地方举行重大会议，共同推戴蒙哥在斡难河登上皇帝位。
English: In June of the first year of the Jianzong Dynasty, the princes of the West, the princes of the East, the princes of the West, the princes of the West, the princes of the West, the princes of the West, the princes of the West, the princes of the West, the princes of the West, the princes of the West, the princes of the West, the princes of the West, the princes of the West, the princes of the West, the princes of the West, the princes of the West, the princes of the West, the princes of the West, the princes of the West, the princes of the West, the princes of the West, the princes of the West, the princes of

古文：失烈门及诸弟脑忽等心不能平，有后言。
现代文：失烈门和他的弟弟脑忽等人心里不服气，事后有很多牢骚话。
English: Ou Rongmen and his brother Nenghu were not convinced, and there was a lot of grumbling afterwards.

古文：帝遣诸王旭烈与忙可撒儿帅兵觇之。
现代文：皇帝就派诸侯王旭烈和忙可撒儿率军去监视他们。
English: The emperor then sent the vassal princes, King Hu Rong and Busha Kesar, to lead an army to monitor them.

古文：诸王也速忙可、不里、火者等后期不至，遣不怜吉率兵备之。
现代文：诸侯王也速忙可、不里、火者等没有按时到达，皇帝便派不怜吉率军防备他们。
English: Princes and lords were also in a hurry, but Bury, the firemen, etc. did not arrive on time, and the emperor sent the army led by Fu Rongji to guard them.

古文：遂改更庶政：命皇弟忽必烈领治蒙古、汉地民户；遣塔儿、斡鲁不、察乞剌、赛典赤、赵璧等诣燕京，抚谕军民；以忙哥撒儿为断事官；以孛鲁合掌宣发号令、朝觐贡献及内外闻奏诸事；以晃兀儿留守和林宫阙、帑藏，阿蓝答儿副之；以牙剌瓦赤、不只儿、斡鲁不、睹答儿等充燕京等处行尚书省事，赛典赤、匿昝马丁佐之；以讷怀、塔剌海、麻速忽等充别失八里等处行尚书省事，暗都剌兀尊、阿合马、也的沙佐之；以阿儿浑充阿毋河等处行尚书省事，法合鲁丁、匿只马丁佐之；以茶寒、叶了干统两淮等处蒙古、汉军，以带答儿统四川等处蒙古、汉军，以和里统土蕃等处蒙古、汉军，皆仍前征进；以僧海云掌释教事，以道士李真常掌道教事。
现代文：于是更改了各种事务的安排：命令皇弟忽必烈管辖、治理蒙古族、汉族地区的民户；派遣塔儿、斡鲁不、察乞剌、赛典赤、赵璧等人前往燕京安抚、晓谕军民；任命忙哥撒儿为断事官；任命孛鲁合执掌发布号令、朝见皇帝、贡献礼品以及朝内朝外上奏的各项事务；任命晃兀儿留在和林看守宫阙和钱财物资，由阿蓝答儿协助他；任命牙剌瓦赤、不只儿、斡鲁不、睹答儿等掌管燕京等地行尚书省的事务，由赛典赤、匿昝马丁协助他们；任命讷怀、塔剌海、麻速忽等人掌管别失八里等地行尚书省事务，由暗都剌兀尊、阿合马、也的沙协助他们；任命阿儿浑掌管阿母河等处行尚书省事务，由法合鲁丁、匿只马丁协助他们；任命茶寒、叶了干统辖两淮等处的蒙古军、汉军，任命带答儿统辖四川等地的蒙古军、汉军，任命和里统辖土蕃等处的蒙古军、汉军，他们都和先前一样的征讨，进军；任命僧人海云掌管佛教方面的事务，任命道士李真常掌管道教方面的事务。
English: As a result, the arrangement of various affairs was changed: the imperial brother Kublai Khan was ordered to govern and administer the households in the Mongolian and Han regions; Tael, Gyaltsap Lu, Chaggy, Saiten Chak, Zhao Bi and others were sent to Yanjing to pacify and instruct the soldiers and civilians; Busy Brother Sar was appointed as the adjudicator; Jang Lu He was appointed to be in charge of issuing orders, meeting the emperor, donating gifts and various affairs within the court and outside the court; Jang Chak was appointed to stay in He Lin to guard the palace and money and materials, and was assisted by Alang Taer;

古文：叶孙脱、按只、畅吉、爪难、合答曲怜、阿里出及刚疙疸、阿散、忽都鲁等，务持两端，坐诱诸王为乱，并伏诛。
现代文：叶孙脱、按只、畅吉、爪难、合答、曲怜、阿里出以及刚疙疸、阿散、忽都鲁等，专门骑墙居中，讨好两方，犯下引诱诸侯王作乱的罪行，全部予以处死。
English: Ye Suntu, Antao, Changji, Jawnan, Hetao, Qurei, Alide, as well as Gangchen, Asan, Khutlu, etc., all of them committed the crime of luring princes and princes into chaos by riding the wall to stay in the middle, pleasing both sides, and were all put to death.

古文：遂颁便益事宜于国中：凡朝廷及诸王滥发牌印、诏旨、宣命，尽收之；诸王驰驿，许乘三马，远行亦不过四；诸王不得擅招民户；诸官属不得以朝觐为名赋敛民财；民粮远输者，许于近仓输之。罢筑和林城役千五百人。
现代文：于是在国内颁行一些有利于国政的规定：凡属朝廷及诸侯王随意发放的牌印、诏书、圣旨、命令，全部予以收回；诸侯王乘车出行，只允许乘三匹马拉的车，远行也不能超过四匹；诸侯王不许擅自招纳民户；各下属官员不许借朝觐的名义征收、聚敛民财；百姓交纳粮食，从远处运输的，允许向其附近的官仓交纳；免除修筑和林城的一千五百名百姓的劳役。
English: Therefore, a number of regulations favorable to national politics were issued in the country: all the plaques, edicts, decrees, and orders issued at will by the imperial court and the princes were withdrawn; princes were allowed to travel by car, but only with a three-horse carriage, and no more than four horses were allowed to travel far; princes were not allowed to recruit private households without permission; subordinate officials were not allowed to collect and collect people's wealth in the name of the hajj; the people paid for grain, and those transported from afar were allowed to pay to the government warehouse near them; and 1500 people were exempted from labor service in construction and forestry.

古文：冬，以宴只吉带违命，遣合丹诛之，仍籍其家。
现代文：冬，因为宴只吉带违抗命令，派合丹将他处死，并抄没他的家产。
English: In winter, because Ban only defied the order with Yoshitake, Pahodan executed him and confiscated his family property.

古文：二年壬子春正月，幸失灰之地，遣乞都不花攻末来吉儿都怯寨。
现代文：宪宗二年春，正月，皇帝临幸失灰地方。派遣乞都不花进攻末来的吉儿都怯寨。
English: In the spring and the first month of the second year of the reign of Emperor Xianzong, the emperor was in a place where happiness was fading into ashes.

古文：皇太后崩。
现代文：皇太后去世。
English: The Empress Dowager passed away.

古文：夏，驻跸和林。
现代文：夏季，皇帝至和林。
English: In summer, the emperor goes to the forest.

古文：分迁诸王于各所：各丹于别石八里地，蔑里于叶儿的石河，海都于海押立地，别儿哥于曲儿只地，脱脱于叶密立地，蒙哥都及太宗皇后乞里吉忽帖尼于扩端所居地之西。
现代文：分别把诸侯王迁徙到各个地方：合丹到别石八里地方，蔑里到叶儿的石河地方，海都到海押立地方，别儿哥到曲儿只地方，脱脱到叶密立地方，蒙哥都和太宗的皇后乞里吉忽帖尼到扩端所住的地方以西。
English: They migrated the princes to various places: Hodan to Beishihachira, Shiri to Ye'er's Shikawa, Haidou to Haidori, Beierbro to Kujerdaku, Shoto to Ye'imiri, and Mengodu and Taizong's queen, Kairiji Khutheni, to the west of the place where Shiho lived.

古文：仍以太宗诸后妃家赀分赐亲王。
现代文：把太宗的各位后妃的家财分别赐予各个亲王。
English: The family wealth of the empresses of Emperor Taizong was given to each prince separately.

古文：定宗后及失烈门母以厌禳事觉，并赐死，谪失烈门、也速、孛里等于没脱赤之地，禁锢和只、纳忽、也孙脱等于军营。
现代文：定宗的皇后和失烈门的母亲用巫术诅咒禳灾的事情被发觉，都被赐死。贬谪失烈门、也速孛里等人到没脱赤地方。把和只、纳忽、也孙脱等人禁锢在军营。
English: The empress of the Dingzong sect and the mother of the Shouremen were discovered to have used sorcery to curse and bring about disaster, and were both put to death. They banished Shouremen and Yao Hao Li and others to the Nezuka region. They imprisoned Houdou, Nahou, and Yao Suntu and others in a military camp.

古文：秋七月，命忽必烈征大理，诸王秃儿花、撒立征身毒，怯的不花征没里奚，旭烈征西域素丹诸国。
现代文：秋季，七月，命令忽必烈征伐大理，诸侯王秃儿花、撒立征伐身毒，怯的不花征伐没里奚，旭烈征讨西域素丹等国。
English: In the autumn, in July, the order was given to Kublai Khan to invade Dali, to the princes of the kingdoms of Baldilocks and Sarai to invade Shiteng, to the cowards of the war to invade Muxili, and to the warriors of the war to invade the western region of Sudan and other countries.

古文：诏谕宋荆南、襄阳、樊城、均州诸守将，使求附。
现代文：下诏晓谕宋朝的荆南、襄阳、樊城、均州各地守将，令他们前来归顺。
English: The following edict was issued to the governors of Jingnan, Xiangyang, Shicheng and Junzhou of the Song Dynasty, ordering them to come and surrender.

古文：八月，忽必烈次临洮，命总帅汪田哥以城利州闻，欲为取蜀之计。
现代文：八月，忽必烈停驻在临洮，命令总帅汪田哥把在利州筑城的情况上报，想要制定攻占蜀州的计划。
English: In August, Kublai Khan stopped in Linyi and ordered the commander-in-chief, Wang Tian Ge, to report on the situation of the construction of the city in Lizhou and to formulate a plan to capture Shuzhou.

古文：冬十月，命诸王也古征高丽。
现代文：冬，十月，派诸侯王也右征伐高丽。
English: In winter and October, the princes also sent troops to attack Goryeo.

古文：帝驻跸月帖古忽阑之地。
现代文：皇帝驻跸在月帖古忽阑地方。
English: The emperor resided in Yuejie ancient Kuching.

古文：时帝因猎坠马伤臂，不视朝百余日。
现代文：当日皇帝因打猎从马上摔下来伤了手臂，一百多天没有上朝理事。
English: On that day, the emperor fell from his horse while hunting, injuring his arm. For more than a hundred days, no director came to the imperial court.

古文：十月戊午，大赦天下。
现代文：十二月初八，下诏大赦天下。
English: On the 8th day of the 12th month, the general amnesty was issued.

古文：以帖哥、阔阔术等掌帑藏；孛阑合剌孙掌斡脱；阿忽察掌祭祀、医巫、卜筮，阿剌不花副之。
现代文：任命帖哥纟由、阔阔术等执掌钱粮库藏；孛阑合剌孙执掌商务；阿忽察执掌祭祀、医巫、卜筮，以阿剌不花任他的副手。
English: He appointed Qigong Qiyu, Kuo Kuo Jiu, etc. to be in charge of the money granary; Zhao He's grandson to be in charge of commerce; and Ah Kucha to be in charge of sacrificial rites, witchcraft, and divination, with Ah Qian as his deputy.

古文：诸王合剌薨。
现代文：诸侯王合剌去世。
English: Princes Wang Hejun passed away.

古文：以只儿斡带掌传驿所需，孛鲁合掌必阇赤写发宣诏及诸色目官职。
现代文：任命只儿斡带掌管驿站，传送所需的物品。以孛鲁合为文书官，掌管抄写、宣布诏令以及各种名称的官职。
English: Appointed only a messenger to take charge of the post and deliver the required items, and appointed a clerk to take charge of the transcription and announcement of the edict, as well as various named official positions.

古文：徙诸匠五百户修行宫。
现代文：迁调各种工匠五百户去修建行宫。
English: Five hundred families of craftsmen of all kinds were transferred to build the palace.

古文：是岁，籍汉地民户。诸王旭烈薨。
现代文：这一年，把汉族地区的民户登记在册籍上，诸侯王旭烈去世。
English: In this year, the households in the Han region were registered in the register, and Prince Wang Xurong passed away.

古文：三年癸丑春正月，汪田哥修治利州，且屯田，蜀人莫敢侵轶。
现代文：宪宗三年春，正月，汪田哥修葺整治利州，而且派军队屯田，蜀州没有谁敢于侵犯袭击。
English: In the spring and the first month of the third year of the reign of Emperor Xianzong, Wang Tiange repaired and rectified Lizhou, and sent troops to occupy the city. No one in Shuzhou dared to invade and attack.

古文：帝猎于怯蹇义罕之地。
现代文：皇帝在怯蹇叉罕地方狩猎。
English: The emperor went hunting in a remote place.

古文：诸王也古以怨袭诸王塔剌儿营。
现代文：诸侯王也古因为旧怨而袭击诸侯王塔剌儿的军营。
English: The warlord attacked the camp of the warlord Takeru because of an old grudge.

古文：帝遂会诸王于斡难河北，赐予甚厚。
现代文：皇帝便在斡难河以北会见诸侯王，对他们的赏赐很丰厚。
English: The emperor then met with the princes north of the Yunan River and rewarded them generously.

古文：罢也古征高丽兵，以札剌儿带为征东元帅。
现代文：停止用也古的军队征伐高丽，任命札剌儿带为征东元帅。
English: He stopped using Yago's army to conquer Korea and appointed Zhaozhou Erbu as Marshal of the Eastern Expedition.

古文：遣必阇别儿哥括斡罗思户口。
现代文：派文书官别儿哥去调查统计斡罗思人的户口。
English: Send a clerk to investigate the household registration of the people of Luoshu.

古文：三月，大兵攻海州，戍将王国昌逆战于城下，败之，获都统一人。
现代文：三月，蒙古大军进攻海州，海州守将王国昌在城下迎战，蒙古军击败了他，俘获一名都统。
English: In March, the Mongolian army attacked Haizhou. The governor of Haizhou, Wang Guochang, fought under the city. The Mongolian army defeated him and captured a Tutong.

古文：夏六月，命诸王旭烈兀及兀良合台等帅师征西域哈里发八哈塔等国。又命塔塔儿带撒里、土鲁花等征欣都思、怯失迷儿等国。
现代文：夏，六月，派遣诸侯王旭烈兀及兀良合台等率军征伐西域哈里发、八哈塔等国，又命令塔塔儿带撒里、土鲁花等征伐欣都思、怯失迷儿等国。
English: In the summer, in June, he dispatched the armies led by the princes, including the kings of the Western Regions, the caliphs and the pagans, and ordered the pagans to take Sarri and the Turuks to invade the countries of the Sindus and the Dervishes.

古文：帝幸火儿忽纳要不儿之地。
现代文：皇帝临幸火儿忽纳要不儿。
English: The emperor should not be hasty in his acceptance.

古文：诸王拔都遣脱必察诣行在，乞买珠银万锭，以千锭授之，仍诏谕之曰： 太祖、太宗之财，若此费用，何以给诸王之赐！
现代文：诸侯王拔都派脱必察来到皇帝驻跸的所在，请求赐给买珠银一万锭，皇帝给了他一千锭，并下诏晓谕他说 ：太祖、太宗的钱财如果像这样花费，今后还用什么来作为对诸侯王的赏赐呢？
English: The king of the princes, Badu, sent a detachment to the place where the emperor resided, and asked for ten thousand baht to buy silver and jewels. The emperor gave him one thousand baht, and ordered him: "If the great-grandfather and great-grandfather's money is spent like this, what will be used as a reward for the princes in the future?

古文：王宜详审之。
现代文：王爷应该仔细考虑这件事。
English: The prince should consider this matter carefully.

古文：此银就充今后岁赐之数。 
现代文：这笔银子就抵充今后每年例行赏赐的数目。 
English: This sum of money is equivalent to the amount that will be awarded each year in the future.

古文：秋，幸军脑儿。
现代文：秋季，皇帝临幸军脑儿。
English: In the autumn, Emperor Lin Cong's army was decimated.

古文：以忙可撒儿为万户，哈丹为札鲁花赤。
现代文：任命忙可撒儿为万户，哈丹为大断事官。
English: He appointed Bushe Kesar as the head of 10,000 households and Hardan as the chief adjudicator.

古文：九月，忽必烈次忒剌地，分兵三道以进。
现代文：九月，忽必烈驻扎在忒剌地方，兵分三路进军。
English: In September, Kublai was stationed in Handan, and his troops marched in three directions.

古文：冬十二月，大理平。
现代文：冬季，十二月，大理被平定。
English: In winter, in December, Dali was subdued.

古文：帝驻跸汪吉地。
现代文：皇帝驻跸在汪吉地方。
English: The emperor resided in the Wangji area.

古文：命宗王耶虎与洪福源同领军征高丽，攻拔禾山、东州、春州、三角山、杨根、天龙等城。
现代文：命令宗王耶虎和洪福源一起领兵征伐高丽，攻占禾山、东州、春州、三角山、杨根、天龙等城市。
English: He ordered Zongwang Yehu and Hong Fuyuan to lead an army to conquer Goryeo and capture the cities of He Shan, Dongzhou, Chunzhou, Delongshan, Yanggen, and Tianlong.

古文：是岁，断事官忙哥撒儿卒。
现代文：这一年，断事官忙哥撒儿去世。
English: In the same year, the adjudicator Busy Brother Sar passed away.

古文：四年甲寅春，帝猎于怯蹇义罕。
现代文：宪宗四年春，皇帝在怯蹇叉罕行猎。
English: In the spring of the fourth year of the reign of Emperor Xianzong, the emperor went on a hunting trip.

古文：夏，幸月儿灭怯土之地。遣札剌亦儿部人火儿赤征高丽。
现代文：夏季，皇帝驾临月儿灭怯地方，派遣札剌亦儿部的人火儿赤征伐高丽。
English: In the summer, the emperor came to the place where the moon was extinguished, and dispatched the human fire of the Red Expedition to Koryo.

古文：秋七月，诏官吏之赴朝理算钱粮者，许自首不公，仍禁以后浮费。
现代文：秋季，七月，诏令前来朝廷清理核算钱粮的官吏，允许自首不法行为，并禁止以后虚费朝廷资财。
English: In the autumn, in July, the imperial edict came to the imperial court to clean up the officials who accounted for the money and grain, to allow them to surrender their illegal acts, and to prohibit them from spending the imperial court's money and wealth in the future.

古文：冬，大猎于也灭干哈里义海之地。
现代文：冬季，在也灭干哈里叉海地方进行大规模狩猎。
English: In winter, large-scale hunting is carried out in the Yazhuangganharifanghai area.

古文：忽必烈还自大理，留兀良合台攻诸夷之未附者，入觐于猎所。
现代文：忽必烈从大理返回，留下兀良合台进攻那些还没有归顺的部族，在狩猎的地方觐见皇帝。
English: Returning from Dali, Kublai Khan left Qilaogatai to attack those tribes that had not yet surrendered, and met the emperor at a hunting ground.

古文：是岁，会诸王于颗颗脑儿之西，乃祭天于日月山。
现代文：这一年，皇帝在颗颗脑儿的西面会见诸侯王，于是在日月山祭天。
English: This year, the emperor met with the princes in the west side of the brain, so he held a festival on Sun Moon Mountain.

古文：初籍新军。
现代文：首次将新军登记入册。
English: The new army was registered for the first time.

古文：帝谓大臣，求可以慎固封守、闲于将略者。
现代文：皇帝对大臣们说，要寻找可以牢守疆域，熟悉将帅谋略的人。
English: The emperor told his ministers that they should look for someone who could firmly defend the territory and was familiar with military strategy.

古文：擢史枢征行万户，配以真定、相、卫、怀、孟诸军，驻唐、邓。
现代文：提升史枢为征伐行军万户，并将真定、相州、卫州、怀州、孟州各军增补给他，屯驻于唐州、邓州。
English: He elevated the historical center to the conquest and march of the army of 10,000 households, and added the armies of Zhending, Xiangzhou, Weizhou, Huaizhou and Mengzhou to him, stationed in Tangzhou and Dengzhou.

古文：张柔移镇亳州。
现代文：调动张柔去镇守亳州。
English: Zhang Rong was transferred to the town of Bozhou.

古文：权万户史权屯邓州。
现代文：暂署万户史权屯驻于邓州。
English: For the time being, ten thousand households with historical rights are stationed in Dangzhou.

古文：张柔遣张信将八汉军戍颍州。
现代文：张柔派张信率领八营汉军戍守颍州。
English: Zhang Rong sent Zhang Xin to lead eight battalions of Han troops to defend Zhangzhou.

古文：王安国将四千户渡汉南，深入而还。
现代文：王安国率领四营千户所部军队渡河至汉南，深入该地区后返回。
English: Wang Anguo led four battalions of the Thousand Household Division to cross the river to Hannan, went deep into the region and then returned.

古文：张柔以连岁勤兵，两淮艰于粮运，奏据亳之利。
现代文：张柔因为连年勤于战事，感到两淮地区运送粮草很难，把占据亳州的好处奏明皇帝。
English: Zhang Rong, who had been diligent in the war for years, felt that it was difficult to transport grain and grass in the two Huai regions, and reported the benefits of occupying Zhangzhou to the emperor.

古文：诏柔率山前八军，城而戍之。
现代文：皇帝下诏，命令张柔率领山前八营军队，修筑城堡而据守。
English: The emperor issued an edict, ordering Zhang Rong to lead the eight battalions in front of the mountain, build a castle and defend it.

古文：柔又以涡水北隘浅不可舟，军既病涉，曹、濮、魏、博粟皆不至，乃筑甬路自亳抵汴，堤百二十里，流深而不能筑，复为桥十五，或广八十尺，横以二堡戍之。
现代文：张柔又因为涡水北段狭窄水浅不能行船，士兵难以涉水，曹州、濮州、魏州、博州的粮食都无法运到，便修筑从亳州到汴州的通道，并修筑河堤一百二十里，水深的地方不能修筑，又修建十五座桥梁，有的宽达八十尺，建两座横着的堡垒守卫桥梁。
English: Zhang Rong also built a passage from Luzhou to Luzhou, and built a river embankment of one hundred and twenty miles, which could not be built where the water depth was deep, and built fifteen bridges, some of which were eighty feet wide, and built two parallel fortress guard bridges.

古文：均州总管孙嗣遣人赍蜡书降，且乞援，史权以精甲备宋人之要，遂援嗣而来。
现代文：均州总管孙嗣派人带着蜡封的书信来投降，并且请求救援，史权派精锐部队防备宋人的要冲，便率军前来救援孙嗣。
English: Sun Ci, the governor-general of Gyeongju, sent a man with a wax-sealed letter to surrender, and requested rescue. The elite troops of the historical right faction prepared for the Song people's rush, and led the army to come to rescue Sun Ci.

古文：其后骁将钟显、王梅、杜柔、袁师信各帅所部来降。
现代文：在那以后，勇将钟显、王梅、杜柔、袁师信也分别率领各自的部队前来投降。
English: After that, the brave generals Zhong Xian, Wang Mei, Du Rong, and Yuan Shixin also led their respective troops to surrender.

古文：五年乙卯春，诏征逋欠钱谷。
现代文：宪宗五年春，皇帝下诏征收拖欠的钱粮。
English: In the spring of the fifth year of the reign of Emperor Xianzong, the emperor issued an edict to collect the arrears of grain.

古文：夏，帝幸月儿灭怯土。
现代文：夏季，皇帝临幸月儿灭怯土。
English: In the summer, the Emperor Lin Xingyue'er would go out to conquer the land.

古文：秋九月，张柔会大帅于符离。
现代文：秋季，九月，张柔在符离会见大帅。
English: In the autumn, in September, Zhang Rong met with the general in Fuye.

古文：以百丈口为宋往来之道，可容万艘，遂筑甬路，自亳而南六十余里，中为横江堡。
现代文：因为百丈口是宋军往来的通道，可以容纳上万艘船，便修筑道路，从亳州向南延伸六十多里，中间是横于江上的堡垒。
English: Because Baizhongkou was a channel for the Song army to come and go, and could accommodate tens of thousands of ships, they built a road, extending more than sixty miles south from Zhangzhou, with a fortress in the middle across the river.

古文：又以路东六十里皆水，可致宋舟，乃立栅水中，惟密置侦逻于所达之路，由是鹿邑、宁陵、考、柘、楚丘、南顿无宋患，陈、蔡、颍、息皆通矣。
现代文：又因为道路以东六十里都是水，宋军可以从这里到达，便在水中竖立栅栏，专门在宋军所能抵达的路上密集地安排侦察、巡逻的士兵。从此鹿邑、宁陵、考城、柘城、楚丘、南顿没有了宋军的兵患，陈州、蔡州、颍州、息州之间都通了。
English: Moreover, since there was water sixty miles to the east of the road and the Song army could reach it from here, fences were erected in the water, and reconnaissance and patrol soldiers were intensively arranged on the roads that the Song army could reach. From then on, there were no soldiers from the Song army in Ruyi, Ningling, Kaocheng, Fucheng, Chuqiu, and Nantong, and there was no communication between Chenzhou, Caizhou, Zhangzhou, and Xizhou.

古文：是岁，改命札剌与洪福源同征高丽。
现代文：这一年，改派答刂剌和洪福源一起征伐高丽。
English: That year, he was reassigned to conquer Korea together with Hong Fu Yuan.

古文：后此又连三岁，攻拔其光州、安城、忠州、玄风、珍原、甲向、玉果等城。
现代文：其后又连续三年征伐，攻破了高丽的光州、安城、忠州、玄风、珍原、甲向、玉果等城邑。
English: After that, three consecutive years of conquest broke through the Goryeo cities of Gwangju, Anseong, Chungju, Hyeonpyeong, Jinwon, Gaecheong, and Gyokgo.

古文：六年丙辰春，大风起北方，砂砾飞扬，白日晦冥。
现代文：宪宗六年春，北方刮起大风，砂砾飞扬，连白天的光线也阴晦。
English: In the spring of the sixth year of the Jianzong era, a strong wind blew in the north, the gravel flew, and even the light of the day was cloudy.

古文：帝会诸王、百官于欲儿陌哥都之地，设宴六十余日，赐金帛有差，仍定拟诸王岁赐钱谷。
现代文：皇帝在欲儿陌哥都地方会见诸侯王和百官，设宴招待六十多天，赐给他们钱帛，数目各不相同，并将每年准备赐给诸侯王的钱粮数目确定了下来。
English: The emperor met with princes and officials in the capital city of Xi'ermiao, held a banquet for more than 60 days, gave them money bags, the number of which varied, and determined the amount of money grain to be given to princes each year.

古文：忽必烈遣没儿合石诣行在所，奏请续签内郡汉军，从之。
现代文：忽必烈派遣没儿合石来到皇帝驻跸的地方，奏请继续在内地签发汉军士兵，皇帝允从。
English: Kublai sent his son, Mogaishi, to the place where the emperor was stationed, and requested him to continue to issue Han soldiers in the inland. The emperor complied.

古文：夏四月，驻跸于塔密儿。
现代文：夏，四月，皇帝驻跸在答密儿。
English: In the summer and in April, the emperor stayed in Daming.

古文：五月，幸昔剌兀鲁朵。
现代文：五月，皇上临幸昔临兀鲁朵。
English: In May, Emperor Linxing visited Ludo.

古文：六月，太白昼见。
现代文：六月，太白金星白昼出现。
English: In June, a too-white Venus appeared in the daytime.

古文：幸亦儿阿答。
现代文：皇帝临幸亦儿阿塔。
English: Emperor Lin Xingyir Ata.

古文：诸王亦孙哥、驸马也速儿等请伐宋。
现代文：诸侯王亦孙哥、驸马也速儿等请求征伐宋朝。
English: Princes such as Wang Yisungge and Xi Ma Yasuer requested to invade the Song Dynasty.

古文：帝亦以宋人违命囚使，会议伐之。
现代文：皇帝也因为宋人违抗圣命囚禁蒙古使臣，决定讨伐宋朝。
English: The emperor also imprisoned Mongolian envoys because the Song people disobeyed the sacred order, and decided to fight the Song Dynasty.

古文：秋七月，命诸王各还所部以居。
现代文：秋季，七月，命令各诸侯王各自返回自己的部落居住。
English: In the autumn, in July, each vassal king was ordered to return to his own tribe.

古文：诸王塔察儿、驸马帖里垓军过东平诸处，掠民羊豕，帝闻，遣使问罪，由是诸军无犯者。
现代文：诸侯王塔察儿、驸马帖里垓的军队经过东平府等地方时抢劫百姓的猪羊。皇帝知道之后，派使者前去问罪。从此以后，各军再也没有犯法抢劫的了。
English: When the armies of the feudal lords, King Tachara and Emperor Maeterlinck, passed through places such as Dongpingfu, they robbed the people's pigs and sheep. After the emperor learned of this, he sent an envoy to ask about the crime. From then on, the armies no longer committed illegal robberies.

古文：是岁，波丽国王细嵯甫、云南酋长摩合罗嵯及素丹诸国来觐。
现代文：这一年，波丽国国王细嵯甫、云南酋长摩合罗嵯以及素丹诸国前来朝觐。
English: In the same year, the king of Poland, Hsien Lo Fu, the chieftain of Yunnan, Mohamad Rohat, and the sultanate states came to the imperial court.

古文：兀良合台讨白蛮等，克之；遂自昔八儿地还至重庆府，败宋将张都统。
现代文：兀良合台讨伐白蛮等，将其地方攻占；于是从昔八儿地方回到重庆府，击败宋朝将领张都统。
English: Gong Liang Hetai fought against the White Barbarians and conquered their territories. He then returned to Chongqing from the Eight-child region to defeat the Song Dynasty general Zhang Du Tong.

古文：赐金缕织文衣一袭、银五十两、彩帛万二百匹，以赉军士。
现代文：皇帝赏赐给兀良合台金缕织纹衣一件、白银五十两、彩帛一万零二百匹，用来奖赏给士兵。
English: The emperor gave one piece of gold-woven cloth, fifty-two pieces of silver, and ten thousand two hundred colored horses to Ailiangdao, which were used to reward soldiers.

古文：冬，帝驻跸阿塔哈帖乞儿蛮。
现代文：冬季，皇帝驻跸在阿塔哈帖乞儿蛮地方。
English: During the winter, the emperor resided in Atahat, a desolate place.

古文：以阿木河回回降民分赐诸王百官。
现代文：把阿木河回回族投降的百姓分赐给诸侯王和百官。
English: The people who surrendered at the Amu River to the Hui tribe were given to the princes and officials.

古文：七年丁巳春，幸忽阑也儿吉。
现代文：宪宗七年春，皇帝临幸忽阑也儿吉。
English: In the spring of the seventh year of the reign of Emperor Gensong, Emperor Linxing suddenly died.

古文：诏诸王出师征宋。
现代文：下诏令诸侯王出兵征伐宋朝。
English: He issued a decree ordering the princes to send troops to invade the Song Dynasty.

古文：乞都不花等讨末来吉儿都怯寨，平之。
现代文：乞都不花等讨伐末来的吉儿都怯寨，平定了该地。
English: It didn't take long for the invaders to arrive, but they were too scared to fight, and the area was pacified.

古文：夏六月，谒太祖行宫，祭旗鼓，复会于怯鲁连之地，还幸月儿灭怯土。
现代文：夏，六月，拜谒太祖的行宫，祭祀旗鼓，再度在怯鲁连地方会见诸侯王，回到月儿灭怯土。
English: In the summer, in June, he paid homage to the ancestral palace of his great-grandfather, held a religious ceremony, met with the princes again in the area of Zhululian, and returned to the moon to destroy Zhulian soil.

古文：秋，驻跸于军脑儿，酾马乳祭天。
现代文：秋季，皇帝驻跸在军脑儿，斟马乳祭天。
English: In the autumn, the emperor would stay at Juncao in Juncao and worship the horse's udder.

古文：九月，出师南征。
现代文：九月，出兵征伐南方宋朝。
English: In September, troops were dispatched to invade the southern Song Dynasty.

古文：以驸马剌真之子乞为达鲁花赤，镇守斡罗思，仍赐马三百、羊五千。
现代文：任命驸马剌真的儿子乞为镇守官，镇守斡罗思，并赐马三百匹、羊五千头。
English: He appointed the son of Xing Ma Yanzhen to be the town's governor, and the town's governor was Luo Si, and gave him three hundred horses and five thousand sheep.

古文：回鹘献水精盆、珍珠伞等物，可直银三万余锭。
现代文：回鹘来献水精盆、珍珠伞等物品，可以值银钞三万多锭。
English: Items such as water jars, pearl umbrellas, etc. can be worth more than 30,000 silver banknotes.

古文：帝曰： 方今百姓疲弊，所急者钱尔，朕独有此何为？ 
现代文：皇帝说： 如今百姓们正很疲惫，急需的东西不过就是钱。
English: The emperor said, "Nowadays, the people are very tired, and what they urgently need is money.

古文：却之。
现代文：我一个人要这些干什么？ 
English: It was returned.

古文：赛典赤以为言，帝稍偿其直，且禁其勿复有所献。
现代文：退回去不接受。赛典赤认为言重，皇帝稍微补偿了物品的价值，禁止他们再献别的东西。
English: He did not accept to go back. Saitenaka thought that his words were serious, and the emperor compensated the value of the items slightly, forbidding them to offer anything else.

古文：宗王塔察儿率诸军南征，围樊城，霖雨连月，乃班师。
现代文：宗王塔察儿率领各军征伐南方，包围樊城，因为连续一个月天降大雨，就班师回来了。
English: Zongwang Tachar led the army to conquer the south and encircle the city of Handan. Because of the heavy rain for a month, the army returned.

古文：元帅卜邻吉军自邓州略地，遂渡汉江。
现代文：元帅卜邻吉的军队从邓州攻略土地，便渡过了汉江。
English: Marshal Bu Rongji's army crossed the Han River after conquering land from Dengzhou.

古文：冬十一月，兀良合台伐交趾，败之，入其国。
现代文：冬，十一月，兀良合台征伐交趾，击败了他们，进入了该国。
English: In winter, in November, the Qiliang Hetai defeated the invaders and entered the country.

古文：安南主陈日煚窜海岛，遂班师。遣阿蓝答儿、脱因、囊加台等诣陕西等处理算钱谷。
现代文：安南国王陈日逃窜到海岛上，兀良合台便班师回来，皇帝派遣阿蓝答儿、脱因、囊加台等前往陕西等处清算钱粮。
English: Annan's king Chen Rih fled to the island, and the emperor sent Alangdare, Deyin, Zangjia and others to Shaanxi and other places to settle money and grain.

古文：冬，帝度漠南，至于玉龙栈。
现代文：冬天，皇帝越过漠南，到达玉龙栈。
English: In winter, the emperor crossed the southern desert and arrived at the Jade Dragon Inn.

古文：忽必烈及诸王阿里不哥、八里土、出木哈儿、玉龙塔失、昔烈吉、公主脱灭干等来迎，大燕，既而各遣归所部。
现代文：忽必烈和诸侯王阿里不哥、八里土、出木哈儿、玉龙塔失、失烈吉、公主脱灭干等前来迎接，举行盛大宴会。
English: Kublai Khan and princes such as King Ali, Balid, Izumo Har, Yulong Pagoda Shou, Shourekichi, and Princess Dechi Gan came to welcome and hold a grand banquet.

古文：八年戊午春正月朔，幸也里本朵哈之地，受朝贺。
现代文：之后遣发他们各归自己的部落。宪宗八年春，正月初一，皇帝临幸也里本朵哈地方，接受朝贺。
English: In the spring of the eighth year of Emperor Gensong's reign, on the first day of the first month of the year, Emperor Lin was fortunate enough to be in the Bundoha area to receive the morning greetings.

古文：二月，陈日煚传国于长子光昺。
现代文：二月，安南国王陈日把国家传给长子陈光日丙。
English: In February, Annan's king, Chen Il, passed the country on to his eldest son, Chen Guangri.

古文：光昺遣婿与其国人以方物来见，兀良合台送诣行在所。
现代文：陈光日丙派他的女婿和国中人带着本地特产来朝见皇帝，兀良合台送他们到皇帝驻扎的地方。
English: Chen Guangbai sent his son-in-law and the people of Guozhong to bring local special products to meet the emperor, and Hailiang sent them to the place where the emperor was stationed.

古文：诸王旭烈兀讨回回哈里发，平之，禽其王，遣使来献捷。
现代文：诸侯王旭烈兀讨伐回回族哈里发，平定了他们，擒获了他们的国王，派使者献上捷报。
English: Prince Hu Lai fought against the Hui caliphs, pacified them, captured their king, and sent an envoy to present the successful report.

古文：帝猎于也里海牙之地。
现代文：皇帝在也里海牙地方狩猎。
English: The emperor went hunting in the Hague region.

古文：师南征，次于河。
现代文：蒙古军队征伐南方，驻扎在黄河边。
English: Mongolian troops invaded the south and were stationed along the Yellow River.

古文：适冰合，以土覆之而渡。
现代文：适逢河水结冰合拢，便用土盖在上面渡过了黄河。
English: When the river froze over, they crossed the Yellow River with an earthen cover.

古文：帝自将伐宋，由西蜀以入。
现代文：皇帝亲自领兵征伐宋朝，从西蜀进入宋朝控制的地区。
English: The emperor personally led the army to attack the Song Dynasty and entered the Song Dynasty-controlled areas from West Shu.

古文：命张柔从忽必烈征鄂，趋杭州。
现代文：皇帝命令张柔跟从忽必烈征伐鄂州，进军杭州。
English: The emperor ordered Zhang Rong and Kublai Khan to invade Ezhou and march on Hangzhou.

古文：命塔察攻荆山，分宋兵力。
现代文：命令塔察进攻荆山，以分散宋军的兵力。
English: He ordered Tacha to attack Jing Mountain to disperse the forces of the Song Army.

古文：宋四川制置使蒲泽之攻成都，纽邻率师与战，败之；进攻云顶山，守将姚某等以众相继来降。
现代文：宋朝四川制置使蒲泽之进攻成都。纽邻率军和他交战，击败了他；纽邻进攻云顶山，守将姚某等率领部下相继前来投降。
English: During the Song Dynasty, the Sichuan System was established, which caused Pu Ze to attack Chengdu. New Neighbors led an army to fight against him and defeated him; New Neighbors attacked Mount Genting, and his subordinates, led by General Yao and others, came one after another to surrender.

古文：诏以纽邻为都元帅。
现代文：皇帝任命纽邻为都元帅。
English: The emperor appointed New Neighbor as the Marshal of the Capital.

古文：帝由东胜渡河。遣参知政事刘太平括兴元户口。
现代文：皇帝由东胜渡过黄河，皇帝派参知政事刘太平调查、登记兴元府户口。
English: The emperor crossed the Yellow River from Dongsheng. The emperor sent Liu Taiping, a political advisor to the prefectural governor, to investigate and register the Xingyuan residence.

古文：三月，命洪茶丘率师从札剌同征高丽。
现代文：三月，皇帝命令洪茶丘率军跟随答刂剌共同征伐高丽。
English: In March, the emperor ordered Hong Cha-kuk and his army to follow Tae-soo and jointly conquer Goryeo.

古文：夏四月，驻跸六盘山，诸郡县守令来觐。
现代文：夏季，四月，皇帝驻跸在六盘山，各个郡县的守官前来觐见。
English: In the summer, in April, the emperor resided in Liupanshan, and the governors of various counties came to see him.

古文：丰州千户郭燧奏请续签军千人修治金州，从之。
现代文：丰州千户郭燧向皇上奏请继续签发士兵一千人修缮整治金州的城垣。
English: The thousand guilds of Fengzhou appeal to the emperor to continue to issue a thousand soldiers to repair and rectify the city walls of Jinzhou.

古文：是时，军四万，号十万，分三道而进：帝由陇州入散关，诸王莫哥由洋州入米仓关，孛里义万户由渔关入沔州。
现代文：皇上允从。这时，蒙古军队四万，号称十万，分成三路进军：皇帝经由陇州进入散关，诸侯王莫哥经由洋州进入米仓关，万户孛里叉经由渔关进入沔州。
English: The emperor complied. At this time, the Mongolian army of forty thousand, known as one hundred thousand, was divided into three marches: the emperor entered Sankuan through Bozhou, the prince Wang Mogo entered Yechanguan through Yangzhou, and the ten thousand families of Bozhuri Fork entered Bozhou through Yechanguan.

古文：以明安答儿为太傅，守京兆。
现代文：任命明安答儿为太傅，镇守京兆府。
English: Appointed Ming'an's son as Taifu, the town guard of Jingzhao Prefecture.

古文：诏征益都行省李璮兵，璮来言： 益都南北要冲，兵不可撤。 
现代文：皇帝下诏征召益都行省李王的军队，李王前来说道： 益都是南北的要冲之地，军队不能够撤走。 
English: The emperor issued an edict to conscript the troops of King Li of Yidu Province. King Li came forward and said: Yidu is a strategic place in the north and south, and the troops cannot be withdrawn.

古文：从之。
现代文：皇上允从。
English: I followed his advice.

古文：璮还，击海州、涟水等处。
现代文：李王返回，攻击海州、连水等地。
English: King Li returned and attacked Haizhou, Lianshui and other places.

古文：五月，皇子阿速带因猎独骑伤民稼，帝见让之，遂挞近侍数人。
现代文：五月，皇子阿速带因为狩猎，独自骑马伤害了百姓的庄稼，皇帝看见了，责备他，于是鞭打了他的几名近侍。
English: In May, Prince Ahok injured the people's crops when he was out hunting alone on horseback. The emperor saw this, scolded him, and then whipped several of his close attendants.

古文：士卒有拔民葱者，即斩以徇。
现代文：士兵中有拔老百姓葱的，立即依法将他们斩首。
English: If there are any soldiers who pick on civilians, they will be immediately beheaded according to the law.

古文：由是秋毫莫敢犯。
现代文：从此，士兵们对百姓秋毫无犯。
English: From then on, the soldiers committed no crimes against the common people.

古文：仍赐所经郡守各有差。
现代文：仍然按照旧例给所经地方的郡守不同数量的赏赐。
English: In accordance with the old practice, the county governors of the places visited are still given different amounts of rewards.

古文：秋七月，留辎重于六盘山，率兵由宝鸡攻重贵山，所至辄平。
现代文：秋，七月，皇帝把辎重留在六盘山，率军经由宝鸡进攻重贵山，所到之处都被平定了。
English: In the autumn and July, the emperor left Shouguang in Liupanshan and led his army to attack Shouguang via Baoji. Everywhere they went, they were defeated.

古文：八月辛丑，璮与宋人战，杀宋师殆尽。
现代文：八月二十四日，李王和宋朝的军队交战，几乎把宋军杀光了。
English: On August 24th, the armies of King Li and the Song Dynasty clashed, and the Song Army was almost wiped out.

古文：九月，驻跸汉中。
现代文：九月，皇上驻跸在汉中。
English: In September, the emperor arrived in Hanzhong.

古文：都元帅纽邻留密里火者、刘黑马等守成都，悉率余兵渡马湖，禽宋制置使张实，遂遣实招谕苦竹隘，实遁。
现代文：都元帅纽邻把密里火者、刘黑马等留下来镇守成都，率领其余的军队全部渡过马湖，擒获了宋朝的制置使张实。于是派张实去招降苦竹隘的宋军，张实逃跑了。
English: Grand Marshal New Neighbors kept Milihu, Liu Heima and others to defend Chengdu, led the rest of the army across Ma Lake, and captured the Song Dynasty's designated envoy Zhang Si. He then sent Zhang Si to recruit the Song Army, and Zhang Si fled.

古文：冬十月壬午，帝次宝峰。
现代文：冬，十月初七，皇帝在宝峰停留。
English: In winter, on the seventh day of the tenth month, the emperor stopped at Baofeng.

古文：癸未，如利州，观其城池并非深固，以汪田哥能守，蜀不敢犯，赐卮酒奖谕之。
现代文：初八，皇帝抵达利州，看到利州的城墙并不牢，护城河并不深，只因为汪田哥善于防守，蜀州的宋军才不敢来进犯，皇上赐卮酒并奖赏、鼓励他。
English: On the eighth day of the first month, the emperor arrived in Lizhou. He saw that the city wall of Lizhou was not strong and the moat was not deep. It was only because Wang Tiange was good at defense that the Song army of Shuzhou did not dare to attack. The emperor gave him wine and rewarded and encouraged him.

古文：帝渡嘉陵江，至白水江，命田哥造浮梁以济，梁成，赐田哥等金帛有差。
现代文：皇上渡过嘉陵江，到达白水江的时候，命汪田哥建造浮桥过河。浮桥建成了，皇帝赐给汪田哥等人数额各不相同的钱款绢帛。
English: When the emperor crossed the Jialing River and reached the Baishuijiang River, he ordered Wang Tiange to build a pontoon bridge to cross the river. The pontoon bridge was built, and the emperor gave Wang Tiange and others varying amounts of money.

古文：帝驻跸剑门。
现代文：皇帝驻跸在剑门。
English: The emperor resided at Jianmen.

古文：戊子，攻苦竹隘，裨将赵仲窃献东南门，师入，与其守将杨立战，败之，杀立，众皆奔溃。
现代文：十三日，蒙古军进攻苦竹隘，当地偏将赵仲偷偷献出东南面的城门。蒙古军入城，和苦竹隘的守将杨立交战，击败了他，将他杀死，他的部下都逃跑、溃散了。
English: On the 13th, the Mongolian army attacked Kuchiku Pass, and the local warlord Zhao Zhong secretly surrendered the southeast gate of the city. The Mongolian army entered the city and fought with Yang Li, the warlord of Kuchiku Pass, defeated him and killed him, and his subordinates all fled and scattered.

古文：诏毋犯赵仲家属，仍赐仲衣帽，徙于隆庆。
现代文：皇帝下诏不许侵犯赵仲的家属，并赐给赵仲衣帽，把他迁移到隆庆去。
English: The emperor issued an edict not to encroach on Zhao Zhong's family, and gave Zhao Zhong a cap and moved him to Longqing.

古文：己亥，获张实，支解之。
现代文：二十四日，抓获了张实，把他肢解了。
English: On the 24th, they captured Zhang Si and dismembered him.

古文：赐田哥玉带及犒赏士卒，留精兵五百守之。
现代文：皇帝赐给汪田哥玉带，并犒赏他的士卒，留下五百名精兵防守苦竹隘。
English: The emperor gave Wang Tian the Jade Belt and rewarded his soldiers, leaving behind five hundred elite soldiers to defend Qizhu Pass.

古文：遣使招谕龙州。
现代文：皇帝派使者前去招降龙州将军。
English: The emperor sent an envoy to summon the general of Longzhou.

古文：帝至高峰。
现代文：皇帝抵达高峰。
English: The emperor reached the peak.

古文：庚子，围长宁山，守将王佐、裨将徐昕等率兵出战，败之。
现代文：二十五日，蒙古军包围长宁山，守将王佐、偏将徐昕等率领士卒出营迎战，蒙古军击败了他们。
English: On the 25th, the Mongolian army encircled Changning Mountain, and the soldiers led by the guard general Wang Zuo and the partial general Xu Xi came out of the camp to fight, and the Mongolian army defeated them.

古文：十一月己酉，帝督军先攻鹅顶堡。
现代文：十一月初四，皇帝督率军队首先进攻鹅顶堡。
English: On the fourth day of the eleventh month, the emperor and his army first attacked Göztein Castle.

古文：壬子，力战于望喜门。
现代文：初七，蒙古军队在望喜门奋战。
English: On the 7th day of the 7th month, the Mongolian army fought hard at the Wanchi Gate.

古文：薄暮，宋知县王仲由鹅顶堡出降。
现代文：快天黑时，宋朝知县王仲从鹅顶堡出来投降。
English: When it was almost dark, Wang Zhong of Song Dynasty Zhixian County came out of the Goose Top Fortress to surrender.

古文：是夜破其城，王佐死焉。
现代文：当天夜间击破了鹅顶堡，王佐死在这里。
English: On the night of the same day, they broke through the goose top fort, and Wang Zuo died here.

古文：癸丑，诛佐之子及徐昕等四十余人。
现代文：初八，将王佐的儿子以及徐昕等四十多人处死。
English: On the eighth day of the first month, Wang Zuo's son and more than forty people, including Xu Xi, were executed.

古文：以彭天祥为达鲁花赤治其事，王仲副之。
现代文：任命彭天祥为镇守官处置鹅顶堡的事务，王仲担任他的副手。
English: Peng Tianxiang was appointed as the town warden to deal with the affairs of the Goose Castle, and Wang Zhong served as his deputy.

古文：丙辰，进攻大获山，守将杨大渊降，命大渊为四川侍郎，仍以其兵从。
现代文：十一日，蒙古军进攻大获山，守将杨大渊投降，任命杨大渊为四川侍郎，仍旧让他率领自己的军队。
English: On the 11th day, the Mongolian army attacked Dahu Mountain, and the commander Yang Dayuan surrendered, appointing Yang Dayuan as the Sichuan waiter, and still letting him lead his own army.

古文：庚午，次和溪口，遣骁骑略青居山。
现代文：二十五日，皇帝在和溪口停留，派遣骁骑进攻青居山。
English: On the twenty-fifth day, the emperor stopped at He Xikou and sent his horsemen to attack Qingji Mountain.

古文：是月，龙州王知府降。
现代文：当月，龙州王知府投降。
English: In the same month, Longzhou Wangchifu surrendered.

古文：诸王莫哥都攻礼义山不克，诸王塔察儿略地至江而还，并会于行在所。
现代文：诸侯王莫哥都进攻礼义山，未能攻下，诸侯王塔察儿攻占土地，直到长江而返回，两人在皇帝驻留的地方相会。
English: Prince Mogo attacked Liyi Mountain, but failed to capture it. Prince Tacha occupied the land until he returned to the Yangtze River. The two met at the place where the emperor was stationed.

古文：命忽必烈统诸路蒙古、汉军伐宋。
现代文：皇帝命令忽必烈统辖各路蒙古军、汉军征伐宋朝。
English: The emperor ordered Kublai to command all Mongolian and Han armies to conquer the Song Dynasty.

古文：十二月壬午，杨大渊率所部兵与汪田哥分击相如等县。
现代文：十二月初七，杨大渊率领所部军队和汪田哥分头进攻相如等县。
English: On the 7th day of the 12th month, Yang Dayuan led the headquarters army and Wang Tiange to attack Zhonhuatang County separately.

古文：都元帅纽邻攻简州，以宋降将张威率众为先锋。
现代文：都元帅纽邻进攻简州，命令宋朝的降将张威率领部下为先锋。
English: Marshal New Neighbors attacked Jianzhou, ordered the Song Dynasty to surrender, and Zhang Wei led his subordinates as the vanguard.

古文：乙酉，帝次于运山。
现代文：初十，皇帝在运山停留。
English: On the tenth day of the first month, the emperor stopped at Yunshan.

古文：大渊遣人招降其守将张大悦，仍以大悦为元帅。
现代文：杨大渊派人去招降了运山的守将张大悦，皇帝仍然命张大悦担任元帅。
English: Yang Dayuan sent someone to recruit and demote Zhang Dayue, the guard of Yunshan, but the emperor still appointed Zhang Dayue as marshal.

古文：师至青居山，裨将刘渊等杀都统段元鉴降。
现代文：蒙古军抵达青居山，宋军偏将刘渊等杀死都统段元鉴之后投降。
English: The Mongolian army arrived at Qingji Mountain, and the Song army surrendered after killing Liu Yuan and others.

古文：庚寅，遣使招谕未附。
现代文：十五日，皇帝派使者去招降那些还没有归顺的地方。
English: On the fifteenth day, the emperor sent an envoy to call for the surrender of those who had not yet surrendered.

古文：丁酉，隆州守县降。
现代文：二十二日，隆州城的守军投降。
English: On the 22nd, the defenders of Longzhou surrendered.

古文：己亥，大良山守将蒲元圭降。
现代文：二十四日，大良山的守将蒲元圭投降。
English: On the 24th, the commander of Mt. Daliang surrendered.

古文：诏诸军毋俘掠。
现代文：皇上下诏，各军均不许掳掠人口，抢劫财物。
English: The emperor decreed that all armies were not allowed to plunder the population and loot property.

古文：癸卯，攻雅州，拔之。
现代文：二十八日，蒙古军进攻雅州，攻占了该城。
English: On the 28th, the Mongolian army attacked Yazhou and captured the city.

古文：石泉守将赵顺降。
现代文：石泉的守将赵顺投降。
English: The keeper of Shiquan, Zhao Shun, surrendered.

古文：甲辰，遣宋人晋国宝招谕合州守将王坚，坚辞之，国宝遂归。
现代文：二十九日，派遣宋朝人晋国宝前去招降合州守将王坚，王坚拒绝投降，晋国宝便返回了。
English: On the 29th, the Song Dynasty sent a Jin national treasure to recruit the general Wang Jian, the governor of Hezhou. Wang Jian refused to surrender, and the Jin national treasure returned.

古文：是岁，皇子辨都薨于吉河之南。
现代文：这一年，皇子辨都在吉河的南面去世。
English: In the same year, Prince Bengu died on the south side of the Ji River.

古文：九年己未春正月乙巳朔，驻跸重贵山北，置酒大会，因问诸王、驸马、百官曰： 今在宋境，夏暑且至，汝等其谓可居否乎？ 
现代文：宪宗九年春，正月初一，皇帝驻跸在重贵山的北面，设置酒宴举行盛大宴会，于是对诸侯王、驸马和百官说： 现在我们在宋朝境内，夏季的暑热快要来了，你们认为可不可以住下去呢？ 
English: In the spring of the ninth year of the reign of Emperor Xianzong, on the first day of the first month of the year, Emperor Jianzhong held a grand banquet on the north side of Chongguishan Mountain. He then said to the princes, emperors and officials: Now we are in the territory of the Song Dynasty, the summer heat is about to come, do you think we can stay?

古文：札剌亦儿部人脱欢曰： 南土瘴疠，上宜北还，所获人民，委吏治之便。 
现代文：札剌亦儿部的脱欢说： 南方有瘴疠毒气，皇上应该回北方去。所占领地方的百姓，可以委派官吏治理他们。
English: "There is poisonous gas in the south, the emperor should go back to the north. The people in the occupied areas can appoint officials to govern them.

古文：阿儿剌部人八里赤曰： 脱欢怯，臣愿往居焉。 
现代文：这样有利一些。 阿儿剌部的八里赤说： 脱欢害怕了，我愿意继续呆下去。 
English: It's more advantageous this way.Aer Hubei's Hachiraka said, "I'm afraid to leave the party, so I'm willing to stay on.

古文：帝善之。
现代文：皇帝很赞许他。
English: Emperor Wu agreed wholeheartedly.

古文：戊申，晋国宝归次峡口，王坚追还杀之。
现代文：初四，晋国宝返回的路上停留在峡口，王坚把他追回来杀了。
English: On the fourth day of the first month of the year, the Jin national treasure stopped at the mouth of the gorge on his way back, and Wang Jian chased him back and killed him.

古文：诸王莫哥都复攻渠州礼义山，曳剌秃鲁雄攻巴州平梁山。
现代文：诸侯王莫哥都再次进攻渠州的礼义山，曳剌秃鲁雄进攻巴州的平梁山。
English: The princes Wang Mogo once again attacked Liyi Mountain in Quzhou, and Zhao Luxiong attacked Pingliang Mountain in Bazhou.

古文：丁卯，大渊请攻合州，俘男女八万余。
现代文：二十三日，杨大渊请求进攻合州，俘获男女人口八万多人。
English: On the 23rd, Yang Dayuan requested an attack on Hezhou, capturing more than 80,000 men and women.

古文：二月丙子，帝悉率诸兵渡鸡爪滩，至石子山。
现代文：二月初二，皇帝率领各军的全部人马渡过鸡爪滩，到达石子山。
English: On the second day of the second month of February, the emperor led all the men and horses of the army across the chicken claw beach to reach Shizi Mountain.

古文：丁丑，督诸军战城下。
现代文：初三，皇帝督率各军战于城下。
English: On the third day of the first month, the emperor led the army to fight under the castle.

古文：辛巳，攻一字城。
现代文：初七，蒙古军进攻一字城。
English: On the seventh day of the first month, the Mongolian army attacked Ichizecho.

古文：癸未，攻镇西门。
现代文：初九，进攻镇西门。
English: At the beginning of the ninth month, attack the west gate of the town.

古文：三月，攻东新门、奇胜门、镇西门小堡。
现代文：三月，进攻东新门、奇胜门、镇西门小堡。
English: In March, the small fortresses of Dongxinmen, Qi Shengmen and Zhenximen were attacked.

古文：夏四月丙子，大雷雨凡二十日。
现代文：夏，四月初三，天降大雷雨，共下了二十天。
English: In the summer, on the third day of April, there were heavy thunderstorms for a total of twenty days.

古文：乙未，攻护国门。
现代文：二十二日，蒙古军进攻护国门。
English: On the 22nd, the Mongolian army attacked the National Defense Gate.

古文：丁酉，夜登外城，杀宋兵甚众。
现代文：二十四日，乘夜间登上外城，杀死很多宋兵。
English: On the 24th, he took the night to go up to the outer city and killed many Song soldiers.

古文：五月，屡攻不克。
现代文：五月，蒙古军多次进攻合州城，未能攻下。
English: In May, the Mongolian army repeatedly attacked Hezhou City, but failed to capture it.

古文：六月丁巳，汪田哥复选兵夜登外城马军寨，杀寨主及守城者。
现代文：六月丁巳，汪田哥重新挑选士兵，夜间登上外城马军寨，杀死寨主和守城的人。
English: In June, Wang Tiange re-selected the soldiers and boarded the horse army camp outside the city at night, killing the owner of the camp and the person guarding the city.

古文：王坚率兵来战。
现代文：王坚率领士卒前来迎战。
English: Wang Jian led the soldiers to come to meet the battle.

古文：迟明，遇雨，梯折，后军不克进而止。
现代文：快天亮时，遇到下雨，云梯又断了，蒙古的后军不能够前进，便停止了进攻。
English: At dawn, when it rained and the ladder broke, the Mongolian rearguard was unable to advance and halted the attack.

古文：是月，帝不豫。
现代文：当月，皇帝身体不适。
English: That month, the emperor fell ill.

古文：秋七月辛亥，留精兵三千守之，余悉攻重庆。
现代文：秋，七月初九，留下三千名精锐的士卒守卫，其余的全部前去进攻重庆。
English: In the autumn, on the ninth day of the seventh month, he left three thousand elite soldiers to guard, and the rest all went to attack Chongqing.

古文：癸亥，帝崩于钓鱼山，寿五十有二，在位九年。追谥桓肃皇帝，庙号宪宗。
现代文：二十一日，皇帝在钓鱼山去世，享年五十二岁，在位九年，追加谥号为桓肃皇帝，庙号宪宗。
English: On the twenty-first day, the emperor died in Diaoyu Mountain, at the age of fifty-two, after nine years on the throne, with the additional posthumous title of Emperor of Hunan and the temple name of Emperor Xianzong.

古文：帝刚明雄毅，沉断而寡言，不乐燕饮，不好侈靡，虽后妃不许之过制。
现代文：宪宗皇帝刚强明哲，雄杰勇毅，沉着而有决断，言语不多，不喜欢宴饮作乐，不好奢侈靡费，即使是皇后王妃，享受也不许超过规定的制度。
English: Emperor Kenzong was strong and wise, heroic and courageous, calm and decisive, did not use many words, did not like feasting and entertainment, did not like extravagant spending, and even the empress was not allowed to enjoy more than the prescribed system.

古文：初，太宗朝，群臣擅权，政出多门。
现代文：当初，太宗在朝的时候，群臣擅自越权行动，政令出于多门。
English: At first, when Taizong was in power, many ministers acted beyond their authority, and there were many government decrees.

古文：至是，凡有诏旨，帝必亲起草，更易数四，然后行之。
现代文：到宪宗皇帝时，所有的诏令圣旨，皇帝必定亲自起草，修改达四次之多，然后才施行。
English: By the time of Emperor Gensong, the Emperor himself must have drafted and revised all the imperial decrees up to four times before they were implemented.

古文：御群臣甚严，尝谕旨曰： 尔辈若得朕奖谕之言，即志气骄逸，志气骄逸，而灾祸有不随至者乎？
现代文：宪宗皇帝要求群臣十分严格，他曾经下达谕令说 ：你们如果听到了我夸奖勉励你们的话，情绪就骄横放纵，一骄横放纵，灾祸还有不接着来到的么？
English: Emperor Gensong required his courtiers to be very strict. He once issued an edict saying: "If you hear my words of praise and encouragement, your emotions will be arrogant and indulgent. Once you are arrogant and indulgent, will disaster follow?

古文：尔辈其戒之。 
现代文：你们要警惕自己呀！ 
English: You have to be on your guard!

古文：性喜畋猎，自谓遵祖宗之法，不蹈袭他国所为。
现代文：宪宗皇帝生性喜欢狩猎，自己说这是遵照祖宗的规矩，不蹈袭别国的国君行事。
English: Emperor Gensong likes hunting by nature. He said that this was in accordance with the rules of his ancestors, and he did not behave like the sovereigns of other countries.

古文：然酷信巫觋卜筮之术，凡行事必谨叩之，殆无虚日，终不自厌也。
现代文：但是他极相信巫祝占卜的方法，凡是做什么事一定恭敬他们询问他们，几乎没有一天不这样，自己始终不觉得厌烦。
English: But he was a great believer in the methods of sorcery and divination, and in everything he did, he would always respect them and question them. He hardly missed a day without doing so, and he never got tired of it.

