古文：贞观二年，太宗谓侍臣曰： 人言作天子则得自尊崇，无所畏惧，朕则以为正合自守谦恭，常怀畏惧。
现代文：贞观二年，唐太宗对侍从的大臣们说： 人们说，是天子就可以自认为尊贵崇高，无所畏惧了，我认为恰恰相反，天子更应该谦逊恭谨，经常心怀畏惧。
English: In the second year of Zhenguan, Tang Taizong said to his attendant ministers: People say that if you are the son of heaven, you can think of yourself as noble and fearless. I think that, on the contrary, the son of heaven should be humble and respectful, and always be afraid.

古文：昔舜诫禹曰： 汝惟不矜，天下莫与汝争能；汝惟不伐，天下莫与汝争功。 
现代文：从前，舜告诫禹说： 你只要不骄傲，天下就没有人和你争能，你只要不自夸，天下就没有人和你争功。 
English: Once upon a time, Zou warned Yu: As long as you are not proud, there is no one in the world who can compete with you. As long as you do not boast, there is no one in the world who can compete with you.

古文：又《易》曰： 人道恶盈而好谦。 
现代文：《易经》上说： 君子的准则是厌恶自满而以谦逊为贵。 
English: "I Ching" says: The standard of a gentleman is to abhor complacency and value modesty.

古文：凡为天子，若惟自尊崇，不守谦恭者，在身倘有不是之事，谁肯犯颜谏奏？
现代文：做了天子，如果只认为自己尊贵崇高，不保持谦逊恭谨的态度，倘若自己有过失，谁还会冒犯尊颜向他提意见呢？
English: If, having become the Son of Heaven, one only thinks of himself as noble and lofty, and does not maintain a humble and respectful attitude, who will offend his dignity and give him advice if he is at fault?

古文：朕每思出一言，行一事，必上畏皇天，下惧群臣。
现代文：我常常在想，帝王每讲一句话，每做一件事，必定要上畏皇天、下惧群臣。
English: I often think that every time the emperor speaks a word, every time he does something, he must fear the emperor and his ministers.

古文：天高听卑，何得不畏？
现代文：天虽高，却能听到地上的议论，怎能不畏惧天呢？
English: Though the heavens are high and the earth is full of the noise of their tumult, how can you not be afraid of them?

古文：群公卿士，皆见瞻仰，何得不惧？
现代文：公卿百官，都在下面注视着我，这怎能不让人畏惧呢？
English: How could I not be intimidated by the hundreds of courtiers and officials watching me from below?

古文：以此思之，但知常谦常惧，犹恐不称天心及百姓意也。 
现代文：因此，帝王即使常怀谦逊恐惧之心，恐怕还是不能称上天之心和百姓之意啊。 
English: Therefore, even though emperors often have a humble and fearful heart, I'm afraid it can't be called the heart of heaven and the will of the people.

古文：魏征曰： 古人云： 靡不有初，鲜克有终。 
现代文：魏徵接着说： 古人讲： 做事情无不有个开始，但很少有人能够坚持到结束。 
English: Wei Zheng went on to say: The ancients said: There is always a beginning to doing things, but few people can stick to the end.

古文：愿陛下守此常谦常惧之道，日慎一日，则宗社永固，无倾覆矣。
现代文：希望陛下保持常谦常惧的准则，一天比一天更谨慎，那么国家就会永远巩固，不会倾覆。
English: I hope that His Majesty will maintain the principle of modesty and fear, and be more prudent every day, so that the country will always be consolidated and will not be overthrown.

古文：唐、虞所以太平，实用此法。 
现代文：唐尧、虞舜之世之所以天下太平，实际上就是用的这个方法。 
English: The reason why the world is peaceful in the Tang Dynasty and the Yu Dynasty is actually because of this method.

古文：贞观三年，太宗问给事中孔颖达曰： 《论语》云： 以能问于不能，以多问于寡，有若无，实若虚。 
现代文：贞观三年，唐太宗问给事中孔颖达： 《论语》里讲： 有才能的人向没才能的人请教，知识多的人向知识少的人请教，这样，有才能的人好像显得没有才能，知识渊博的人好像显得无知。 
English: In the third year of Zhenguan, Tang Taizong asked Kong Yingda about the matter: "The Analects" said: The talented person asks the untalented person for advice, and the person with more knowledge asks the person with less knowledge for advice. In this way, the talented person seems to have no talent, and the knowledgeable person seems to be ignorant.

古文：何谓也？ 
现代文：这句话是什么意思呢？ 
English: What does that mean?

古文：颖达对曰： 圣人设教，欲人谦光。己虽有能，不自矜大，仍就不能之人求访能事。
现代文：孔颖达回答说： 圣人实行教化，要求每个人都谦逊退让，有才能的人不骄傲自大，仍旧向没才能的人请教他不知道的事情。
English: Kong Yingda replied, "A saint carries out enlightenment and requires everyone to be humble and yield. A talented person is not arrogant, but still asks a talentless person to teach him what he does not know.

古文：己之才艺虽多，犹病以为少，仍就寡少之人更求所益。
现代文：自己虽然多才多艺，可还是害怕懂得太少，仍旧向才艺寡少的人讨教求得更多的知识。
English: Although they are multi-talented, they are still afraid of knowing too little, and still seek more knowledge from less talented people.

古文：己之虽有，其状若无，己之虽实，其容若虚。
现代文：自己虽然有知识，表面上却不表现出来，自己内心虽然已经很充实，表面上却好像空虚。
English: Although they have knowledge, they do not show it on the surface. Although their hearts are already full, they seem to be empty on the surface.

古文：非惟匹庶，帝王之德，亦当如此。
现代文：这句话不仅是对庶民百姓的要求，帝王的德行，也应当如此。
English: This sentence is not only a requirement for the common people, but also for the virtue of the emperor.

古文：夫帝王内蕴神明，外须玄默，使深不可知。
现代文：帝王内心蕴藏神明，外表必须沉默，使人感到高深莫测。
English: The emperor's heart contains the gods, and the exterior must be silent, making people feel unfathomable.

古文：故《易》称 以蒙养正；以明夷莅众 。
现代文：所以《周易》上讲 要表现得蒙昧无知来自养正道，不显露明智以盛气凌人 。
English: Therefore, it is said in "Zhou Yi" that it is necessary to show ignorance and ignorance to cultivate the right path, and not to show wisdom and arrogance.

古文：若其位居尊极，炫耀聪明，以才陵人，饰非拒谏，则上下情隔，君臣道乖。自古灭亡，莫不由此也。 
现代文：如果帝王身居至尊之位，就炫耀自己的聪明，凭借才能欺凌别人，掩饰过错，拒绝诤谏，那么上下之间的情感就会被隔断，君臣之间的原则就会被抛弃，自古以来国家灭亡，没有不是由此而造成的。 
English: If the emperor, in his supreme position, flaunts his cleverness, bullies others with his talent, conceals his faults, and refuses to be bullied, then the feelings between the upper and lower levels will be cut off, the principle between the monarch and the minister will be abandoned, and the country will perish since ancient times.

古文：太宗曰： 《易》云： 劳谦，君子有终，吉。 
现代文：唐太宗很赞同地说： 《周易》上讲： 勤劳谦逊的品质，君子如果能够保持到底，就会有好事降临。 
English: Tang Taizong said approvingly: "Zhou Yi" said: If a gentleman can maintain the qualities of diligence and modesty to the end, good things will come.

古文：诚如卿言。 
现代文：这句话的意思和你说的是一样的啊。 
English: The meaning of this sentence is the same as what you said.

古文：诏赐物二百段。
现代文：于是，下诏赏赐给孔颖达绢帛二百段。
English: As a result, the next imperial edict awarded two hundred dan to Kong Ying Dacron.

古文：河间王孝恭，武德初封为赵郡王，累授东南道行台尚书左仆射。
现代文：河间王李孝恭，在武德初年被封为赵郡王，后被加封为东南道行台尚书左仆射。
English: The king of Kawama, Li Xiaoqiong, was named the king of Zhao County in the first year of Wude, and later he was additionally named the right-hand man of Shangshu in Xingtai, Southeastern Province.

古文：孝恭既讨平萧铣、辅公祏，遂领江、淮及岭南、北，皆统摄之。
现代文：他平定了萧铣、辅公祏的势力，于是长江、淮河以及岭南、岭北地区都在他的统领之内。
English: He quelled the forces of Xiao Qi and Fu Gongyi, so the Yangtze River, the Huaihe River, and the southern and northern regions of Lingnan were all under his command.

古文：专制一方，威名甚著，累迁礼部尚书。
现代文：他控制一方，威名远扬，不久迁任礼部尚书。
English: He controlled one side, and his reputation spread far and wide. He was soon transferred to the Ministry of Ceremonies.

古文：孝恭性惟退让，无骄矜自伐之色。
现代文：可是，李孝恭性格谦逊忍让，没有一丝一毫骄傲自大的习气。
English: However, Li Xiaogang's character is humble and tolerant, without a trace of arrogance.

古文：时有特进江夏王道宗，尤以将略驰名，兼好学，敬慕贤士，动修礼让，太宗并加亲待。
现代文：当时，特进江夏王李道宗，以统兵打仗闻名，很有学问，并且礼贤下士，爱惜人才，唐太宗很器重他。
English: At that time, Li Daozong, King of the Tang Dynasty, was specially admitted to Jiangxia. Li Daozong was famous for leading soldiers into battle, was very learned, and was a virtuous corporal who cherished talent. Tang Taizong held him in high regard.

古文：诸宗室中，惟孝恭、道宗莫与为比，一代宗英云。
现代文：在大唐宗室中，只有李孝恭、李道宗二人德才无人可比，是一代英杰。
English: In the Great Tang Dynasty family, only Li Xiaogong and Li Daozong are incomparable in virtue, and they are a generation of heroes.

