古文：伤寒所致太阳，痉、湿、暍三种，宜应别论，以为与伤寒相似，故此见之。
现代文：外邪所致的痉、湿、暍这三种病，应该另外讨论。由于此三者与太阳病的表现相似，所以在本篇叙述。
English: The three diseases of itchiness, wetness, and itchiness caused by external evil should be discussed separately. Since these three are similar to the manifestations of sun disease, they are described in this article.

古文：太阳病，发热无汗，反恶寒者，名曰刚痉。
现代文：太阳病，有痉病的表现，而又见发热、无汗、怕冷的，名叫刚痉。
English: Sun disease, with the appearance of rickets, but also see fever, no sweat, afraid of cold, called gangrene.

古文：太阳病，发热汗出，不恶寒者，名曰柔痉，太阳病，发热，脉沉而细者，名曰痉。
现代文：太阳病，有痉病的表现，而又见发热、出汗、不怕冷的，名叫柔痉。太阳病，有颈项强急、口噤不开、角弓反张等痉病的表现，又见发热、脉象沉而细的，名叫痉，为邪实正虚之候，治疗十分困难。
English: Sun disease, which has the manifestations of rickets, and is characterized by fever, sweating, and is not afraid of cold, is called pliable rickets. Sun disease, which has the manifestations of rickets, such as a strong neck, a closed mouth, and a twisted arch, and is characterized by fever, and a pulse that is heavy and thin, is called spasm. It is a real and false condition, and it is very difficult to treat.

古文：太阳病，发汗太多，因致痉。
现代文：太阳病，因为发汗太过，汗出过多，津液损伤，筋脉失养，因而形成痉病。
English: Sun disease, due to excessive sweating, excessive perspiration, fluid damage, myofascial atrophy, resulting in the formation of rickets.

古文：病身热足寒，颈项强急，恶寒，时头热面赤，目脉赤，独头面摇，卒口噤，背反张者，痉病也。
现代文：病人身上发热足部发凉，颈项强急，畏寒，有时头部烘热，面部及眼睛发红，头部动摇不停，突然出现牙关咬紧不开、背部强直、角张反张的，这就是痉病。
English: The patient's body is hot, the feet are cold, the neck is strong, the cold is afraid, sometimes the head is hot, the face and eyes are red, the head is constantly shaking, the teeth suddenly appear tight, the back is strong, and the horns are twisted. This is rickets.

古文：太阳病，关节疼痛而烦，脉沉而细者，此名湿痹。
现代文：太阳病，关节疼痛厉害，脉象沉细的，这叫湿痹，湿痹的症候表现，多有小便不通畅，大便溏泄。
English: Sun disease, severe joint pain, thickened pulse, this is called dampness, symptoms of dampness, often urinary incontinence, defecation.

古文：湿痹之候，其人小便不利，大便反快，但当利其小便。湿家之为病，一身尽疼，发热，身色如似熏黄。湿家，其人但头汗出，背强，欲得被，覆向火，若下之早，则哕，胸满，小便不利，舌上如胎者，以丹田有热，胸中有寒，渴欲得水而不能饮，则口燥烦也。
现代文：久患湿病的人，出现周身疼痛、发热、肌肤发黄、色如烟熏的，这是湿邪久郁化热、湿热郁遏之候。久患湿病的人，出现头部出汗，背部强硬不舒，形寒怕冷，想要盖被或烤火取暖，这是寒湿郁于肌表，卫阳被遏之证，治当温阳化湿解表，不可攻下。如果误用攻下，势必损伤正气，导致阳气下陷、湿阻于中，出现呃逆、胸闷、小便不通畅、口渴不能饮、舌上生苔等证。
English: People who have been suffering from rheumatic diseases for a long time have pain, fever, yellow skin, and smoky color all over the body. This is the time when dampness turns into heat and dampness turns into heat. People who have been suffering from rheumatic diseases for a long time have sweating on the head, hard and uncomfortable back, cold and cold, want to cover the quilt or warm up on the fire. This is the evidence of cold and dampness on the skin surface and the suppression of the sun and wind. It is impossible to control the temperature and humidity. If it is misused, it is bound to damage the qi, causing the yang qi to sink, the humidity to

古文：湿家下之，额上汗出，微喘，小便利者，死。若下利不止者，亦死。
现代文：久患湿病的人，如果误用攻下，出现额上出汗、微微气喘、小便通利的，是阴竭于下、阳脱于上，病情险恶；如果出现腹泻不停止的，为脾阳衰竭，也属危候。
English: People who have been suffering from rheumatic diseases for a long time, if they are attacked by misuse, and there is sweating on the forehead, slight asthma, and beneficial urination, the yin is exhausted on the bottom and the yang is released on the top, and the condition is dangerous; if diarrhea does not stop, it is spleen and yang failure, which is also a critical illness.

古文：问曰：风湿相搏，一身尽疼痛，法当汗出而解，值天阴雨不止，医云：此可发汗，汗之病不愈者，何也？
现代文：问：风湿之邪相合，引起周身疼痛，依照治疗法则，应当发汗驱邪，汗出邪散则病可痊愈。但正遇到天阴下雨不止，医生说可以发汗，发了汗病却不愈，这是什么原因呢?
English: Q: Rheumatism causes pain all over the body. According to the rules of treatment, it is necessary to perspire to drive out the evil, and the disease can be cured by sweating out the evil. However, when it is cloudy and rainy, the doctor says that it is possible to sweat, but the sweating disease does not heal. What is the reason for this?

古文：答曰：发其汗，汗大出者，但风气去，湿气在，是故不愈也。
现代文：答：这是因为发汗太过，汗出很多，这样只驱除了风邪，而湿邪仍然存在，所以没有痊愈。
English: A: This is because sweating too much, sweating a lot, so it only expels the cold, but the dampness still exists, so it is not cured.

古文：若治风湿者，发其汗，但微微似欲汗出者，风湿俱去也。
现代文：倘若用发汗法治疗风湿病，只宜让病人微微出汗，这样风邪和湿邪才能同时解除。
English: If the sweating method is used to treat rheumatism, it is only appropriate to let the patient sweat slightly, so that the cold and dampness can be relieved at the same time.

古文：湿家病，身上疼痛，发热面黄而喘，头痛，鼻塞而烦，其脉大，自能饮食，腹中和无病，病在头中寒湿，故鼻塞，内药鼻中，则愈。
现代文：久患湿病的人，出现身体疼痛、发热、面色发黄、气喘、头痛、鼻塞、心烦不安，如果病人脉象大，饮食正常的，这是胃肠调和无病，湿热郁滞在上所致，所以鼻塞。在治疗上，可用药塞入鼻孔里，就可痊愈。
English: People who have suffered from rheumatic diseases for a long time have body pain, fever, yellowing of the face, asthma, headache, nasal congestion, and anxiety. If the patient's pulse is large and the diet is normal, this is caused by the gastrointestinal adjustment and disease-free, humid and hot stay, so the nose is blocked. In treatment, drugs can be inserted into the nostrils to recover.

古文：病者一身尽疼，发热，日晡所剧者，此名风湿。
现代文：病人周身疼痛，发热，午后增剧的，这叫风湿。
English: The patient has pain all over the body, fever, which is more acute in the afternoon, which is called rheumatism.

古文：此病伤于汗出当风，或久伤取冷所致也。
现代文：风湿的成因，是汗出后感受风邪，或长期贪凉取冷所致。
English: The cause of rheumatism is the feeling of cold after sweating, or the long-term craving for cold.

古文：太阳中热者，暍是也，其人汗出恶寒，身热而渴也。
现代文：感受暑热之邪而引起的太阳病症，就是暍。病人症候表现是身热、口渴、出汗、怕冷。
English: Sunstroke, which is caused by feeling the heat of the sun, is a type of paralysis. The patient's symptoms are body heat, thirst, sweating, and fear of the cold.

古文：太阳中暍者，身热疼重，而脉微弱，此亦夏月伤冷水，水行皮中所致也。
现代文：太阳中暑证，出现身体发热、沉重、疼痛，脉象微弱的，这是夏季被冷水所伤，水湿侵入肌表所致。
English: Sunstroke, body fever, heaviness, pain, weak pulse, this is caused by being injured by cold water in summer and moisture invading the skin surface.

古文：太阳中暍者，发热恶寒，身重而疼痛，其脉弦细芤迟，小便已，洒洒然毛耸，手足逆冷，小有劳，身即热，口开，前板齿燥。
现代文：太阳中暑证，出现发热，怕冷，身体沉重疼痛，脉象弦细芤迟，解了小便后，就毛骨悚然、怕冷更甚，手足冰凉，稍微劳动，身体就发热，口就张开呼吸，门齿干燥。
English: Heat stroke in the sun, fever, fear of cold, heavy pain in the body, the pulse is like a thin string, delayed, after peeing, it is creepy, fear of cold is worse, cold hands and feet, a little labor, the body is hot, the mouth is open to breathe, and the front teeth are dry.

古文：若发汗，则恶寒甚；加温针，则发热甚；数下之，则淋甚。
现代文：这是暑湿相兼而又气阴不足之证，治当清暑益气化湿，禁用发汗、攻下、温针。如果误用发汗法治疗，就会使怕冷更加严重；误用温针，就会使发热更剧；如果屡次攻下，就会出现小便淋涩不通。
English: This is a sign of the hot and humid phase and the lack of qi and yin. It is forbidden to use sweating, tapping, and warm needles. If you misuse the sweating method of treatment, it will make the fear of cold more serious; misuse of warm needles will make the fever more severe; if you repeatedly tapped, there will be leaking urine.

