古文：末帝，太祖第三子友贞也。
现代文：末帝朱友贞是梁太祖第三子。
English: The last emperor Zhu Youzhen was the third son of Liang Taizu.

古文：为人美容貌，沈厚寡言，雅好儒士。
现代文：容貌俊秀，为人淳厚而沉默寡言，喜欢结交儒士。
English: He is handsome, honest and taciturn, and likes to socialize with Confucians.

古文：太祖即位，封均王，为左天兴军使、东京马步军都指挥使。
现代文：太祖即位时封他为均王，为左天兴军使、东京马步军都指挥使。
English: When the great-grandfather ascended the throne, he was given the title of King Jun, and he was the envoy of the Left Tianxing Army and the commanding envoy of the Tokyo Horse Guards Army.

古文：乾化二年六月，太祖遇弑，友珪自立，杀博王友文，以弑帝之罪归之。
现代文：乾化二年六月，太祖被其二子朱友皀所弑，友皀自立为帝，杀博王朱友文，把弑帝之罪归之于他。
English: In June of the second year of Qianhua, the great-grandfather was killed by his second son Zhu Youyuan. Youyuan established himself as emperor and killed the Bo king Zhu Youwen, attributing the crime of overthrowing the emperor to him.

古文：以王为东京留守、开封尹，敬翔为中书侍郎、同中书门下平章事，户部尚书李振为崇政院使。
现代文：以均王朱友贞为东京留守、开封尹，敬翔为中书侍郎、同中书门下平章事，户部尚书李振为崇政院使。
English: Zhu Youzhen, the Prince of the House of Councillors, stayed in Tokyo and served as Kaifeng Yin; Keixiang, the Prince of the House of Councillors, served as the Secretary of the House of Councillors and the Subordinate Secretary of the House of Councillors; and Li Zhen, the Prince of the House of Councillors, served as the Secretary of the House of Councillors.

古文：明年，友珪改元曰凤历。
现代文：第二年，朱友皀改元为凤历。
English: In the second year, Zhu Youyao changed its name to Feng Li.

古文：二月，驸马都尉赵岩至东都，王私与之谋，遣马慎交之魏州，见杨师厚计事。师厚遣小校王舜贤至洛阳，告左龙虎统军袁象先使讨贼。
现代文：二月，驸马都尉赵岩到东都，均王私下与他谋划，派马慎交到魏州，与杨师厚商议，派小校王舜臣到洛阳，告知左龙虎统军袁象先讨贼。
English: In February, Zhao Yan, the commander of the horse cavalry, went to Dongdu. King Jun secretly plotted with him, sent Ma Shengfa to Weizhou to negotiate with Yang Shihou, and sent the schoolboy Wang Shuxin to Luoyang to inform Yuan Xiangxian, the leader of the United Front of the Left Dragon and the Tiger, to hunt down the thieves.

古文：是时怀州龙骧屯兵叛，方捕索之，王乃伪为友珪诏书，发左右龙骧在东都者皆还洛阳，因激怒之曰：诸将皆泣，莫知所为。
现代文：当时怀州龙骧屯兵反叛，正在到处搜捕他们，均王伪造朱友皀诏书，发动左右龙骧在东都者回洛阳，故意煽动激怒他们说 ：天子因为怀州屯兵叛变，想把你们都坑杀掉。 
English: At that time, the soldiers of the Longjing garrison in Huizhou rebelled and were being hunted down everywhere. King Jun forged the edict of Zhu Youyi and sent the soldiers of the Longjing garrison in Dongdu back to Luoyang. He deliberately incited and enraged them, saying, "The Son of Heaven wants to kill all of you because the soldiers of the Huizhou garrison rebelled."

古文：王曰：因出太祖画像示诸将而泣曰：军士皆呼万岁，请王为主，王乃遣人趣象先等。庚寅，象先等以禁兵讨贼，友珪死，杜晓见杀。象先遣赵岩持传国宝至东都，请王入洛阳，王报曰：是月，皇帝即位于东都，复称乾化三年，复博王友文官爵。
现代文：军士都高呼万岁，请求均王为主，均王就派他们赶上袁象先军。二月十七日，袁象先等人调动禁军讨伐并杀死朱友皀、杜晓。袁象先派赵岩带着传国宝到东都，请均王入洛阳，均王派人回报说： 夷门，是太祖兴王业的地方，北拒并、汾，东至淮、海，国家藩镇，多在东方，命将出师，利在近便。 当月，均王朱友贞即皇帝位于东都，恢复乾化三年年号，恢复博王朱友文的官爵。
English: On February 17th, Yuan Xiangxian and others mobilized the forbidden army to fight and kill Zhu Youyuan and Du Xiao. Yuan Xiangxian sent Zhao Yan to the eastern capital with the national treasure, and asked King Jun to enter Luoyang. King Jun sent a person to return and said: Yimen is the place where the great-grandfather started the royal career, and the north is Yunnan, Shanxi, and the east is Huaihai and Hai, and the national hanzhong towns are mostly in the east. The fate will be out of the division, and the benefit is near. That month, King Jun, Zhu Youzhen, that is, the

古文：三月丁未，更名锽。
现代文：三月四日，更名钅皇。
English: On March 4, he changed his name to Shoko.

古文：夏五月，杨师厚取沧州。
现代文：五月，杨师厚攻取沧州。
English: In May, Yang Shihou captured Cangzhou.

古文：秋九月甲辰，御史大夫姚洎为中书侍郎、同中书门下平章事。
现代文：九月五日，任命御史大夫姚洎为中书侍郎、同中书门下平章事。
English: On September 5th, Yao Jian, a doctor of history, was appointed as the secretary of the Chinese Academy of Letters, and Xia Ping Zhang, a member of the Chinese Academy of Letters.

古文：冬十二月，晋人取幽州。
现代文：十二月，晋军夺取幽州。
English: In December, the Jin army captured Yuzhou.

古文：四年夏四月丁丑，贬于兢为莱州司马。
现代文：第四年四月十日，贬于兢为莱州司马。
English: On April 10th of the fourth year, Yu Jing was demoted to Laizhou Sima.

古文：武宁军节度使蒋殷反，天平军节度使牛存节讨之。
现代文：武宁军节度使蒋殷反叛，令天平军节度使牛存节讨伐。
English: The Wu-Ning Army's festival made Chiang Yin rebel, and the Tianping Army's festival made the Cattle Preservation Festival crusade.

古文：贞明元年春正月，存节克徐州。
现代文：贞明元年一月，牛存节攻克徐州。
English: In January of the first year of the Zhenming Dynasty, the Cattle Festival conquered Xuzhou.

古文：三月丁卯，赵光逢罢。
现代文：三月七日，赵光逢罢相。
English: On March 7, Zhao Guangfeng retired.

古文：平卢军节度使贺德伦为天雄军节度使，分其相、澶、卫州为昭德军，宣徽使张筠为节度使。
现代文：任命平卢军节度使贺德伦为天雄军节度使，分其相、澶、卫三州为昭德军，任宣徽军使张筠为节度使。
English: He Delun was appointed as the festival envoy of the Pinglu Army and the Tianxiong Army for the Qing Dynasty, and he was appointed as the festival envoy of the Zhaode Army for the Three Provinces of Qi, He and Wei, and he was appointed as the festival envoy of the Xuanhui Army for the Zhangye Army.

古文：己丑，天雄军乱，贺德伦叛附于晋。
现代文：三月十九日，天雄军内乱，贺德伦叛梁归附于晋。
English: On March 19th, Tianxiong's army fell into civil strife, and Hedren rebelled and was annexed to Jin.

古文：邠州李保衡叛于岐，来附。
现代文：州李保衡叛岐来归附于梁。
English: The state of Li Boheng rebelled and was annexed to Liang.

古文：夏六月庚寅朔，晋王李存勖入于魏州，遂取德州。冬十月辛亥，康王友孜反，伏诛。
现代文：六月一日，晋王李存勖进入魏州，攻取德州。十月二十四日，康王朱友孜反，被杀。
English: On June 1st, the Jin king Li Cunxu entered Weizhou and conquered Texas. On October 24th, the Kang king Zhu Youzhe was killed.

古文：十一月乙丑，改元。
现代文：十一月九日，改元。
English: On November 9th, the era name was changed.

古文：耀州温昭图叛于岐，来附。
现代文：耀州温昭图叛岐来归梁。当年，改名調。
English: Yaozhou Wen Zhaotu rebelled and returned to Liang. That year, he changed his name.

古文：是岁，更名瑱。二年春二月丙申，杨涉罢。
现代文：第二年二月十一日杨涉罢相。
English: On February 11th of the following year, Yang Wanzhong went on strike.

古文：三月，镇南军节度使刘掞及晋人战于故元城，败绩，奔于滑州。
现代文：三月，镇南军节度使刘寻阝在故元城与晋军作战失败，逃奔到滑州。
English: In March, the Zhennan Army Festival caused Liu Xingyao to fail in the battle with the Jin Army in the former Yuancheng, and he fled to Luzhou.

古文：晋人取卫州、惠州。
现代文：晋军夺取卫州、惠州。
English: The Jin army captured Weizhou and Huizhou.

古文：捉生都将李霸反，伏诛。
现代文：捉生都将李霸反叛，被处死。
English: All his life, Li Ba rebelled and was executed.

古文：夏六月，捉生都将张温叛降于晋。
现代文：六月，捉生都将张温叛梁降晋。
English: In June, Zhang Wen, a traitor, was demoted to Jin.

古文：秋七月，晋人取相州，张筠奔于京师，安国军节度使阎宝叛附于晋。
现代文：七月，晋军夺取相州，张筠逃到京城，安国军节度使阎宝叛梁归晋。
English: In July, the Jin army captured Xiangzhou, Zhang Ye fled to Beijing, and the An Guo Army made Yan Bao turn traitor and return to Jin.

古文：八月丁酉，太子太保致仕赵光逢为司空兼门下侍郎、同中书门下平章事。
现代文：八月十五日，任命已告老还乡的太子太保赵光逢为司空兼门下侍郎，同中书门下平章事。
English: On August 15th, Zhao Guangfeng, the prince's father-in-law, who had returned to his hometown, was appointed as the secretary and attendant of the disciple, and the disciple of the disciple of the disciple.

古文：九月，晋人取沧州，横海军节度使戴思远奔于京师。
现代文：九月，晋军夺取沧州，横海军节度使戴思远逃奔到京城。
English: In September, the Jin army captured Cangzhou, and the naval festival made Dai Siyuan flee to Beijing.

古文：晋人克贝州，守将张源德死之。
现代文：晋军攻下贝州，守将张源德殉难。
English: The Jin army conquered Bozhou, and the guard Zhang Yuande was martyred.

古文：冬十月丁酉，中书侍郎郑珏同中书门下平章事。
现代文：十月九日，任命中书侍郎郑珏为同中书门下平章事。
English: On October 9th, Zheng Qi, a junior secretary of the Chinese Academy of Letters, was appointed to be the junior secretary of the Chinese Academy of Letters.

古文：三年夏四月辛卯，右千牛卫大将军刘璩使于契丹。
现代文：第三年四月十三日，派右千牛卫大将军刘璩出使契丹。
English: On April 13th of the third year, he sent the Right Qian Niu Wei General Liu Xuan as an envoy to Khitan.

古文：冬十二月，宣义军节度使贺瑰为北面行营招讨使。
现代文：十二月，任宣义军节度使贺瑰为北面行营招讨使。
English: In December, the proclamation of the Festival of the Volunteers made He Gui a recruiting envoy for the northern campaign.

古文：己巳，如西都卜郊。
现代文：十二月二十四日，末帝前往西都郊外占卜。
English: On December 24th, the last emperor went to the outskirts of Xidu to do divination.

古文：晋人取杨刘。
现代文：晋军攻取杨刘城。
English: The Jin army captured Yang Liu City.

古文：四年正月，不克郊，己卯，至自西都。
现代文：第四年正月，晋军无法攻下东都郊外的据点，一月五日，末帝从西都回到京城。
English: In the first month of the fourth year, the Jin army was unable to capture the strongholds on the outskirts of the eastern capital, and on January 5, the last emperor returned to Beijing from the western capital.

古文：夏四月己酉，尚书吏部侍郎萧顷为中书侍郎、同中书门下平章事。
现代文：四月七日，任命吏部侍郎萧顷为中书侍郎，同中书门下平章事。
English: On April 7th, Xiao He, the attendant of the cadre department, was appointed as the attendant of the middle school, and he was promoted to the second grade of the middle school.

古文：己巳，赵光逢罢。
现代文：二十七日，赵光逢罢相。
English: On the 27th, Zhao Guangfeng retired.

古文：冬十二月庚子朔，贺瑰杀其将谢彦章、孟审澄、侯温裕。
现代文：十二月一日，贺瑰杀部将谢彦章、孟审澄、侯温裕。
English: On December 1st, He Jizhi's assassination squad included Xie Yanzhang, Meng Jizheng, and Hou Wenyu.

古文：癸亥，瑰及晋人战于胡柳，败绩。
现代文：二十四日，贺瑰与晋军在胡柳交战失败。
English: On the 24th, He Gui and the Jin army were defeated in Hu Liu.

古文：是岁，泰宁军节度使张守进叛附于晋，亳州团练使刘鄩为兗州安抚制置使以讨之。
现代文：同年，泰宁军节度使张守进叛梁归附于晋，诏令亳州团练使刘寻阝为兖州安抚制置使去讨伐。
English: In the same year, the Taining Army Festival ordered Zhang Shoujin, a traitor, to be attached to Jin, and ordered the Bozhou Reunification Exercise to send Liu Xingyao as the Bozhou pacification envoy to fight.

古文：五年春正月，晋军于德胜。
现代文：第五年正月，晋屯军德胜。
English: In the first month of the fifth year, the Jin Tun Army won a great victory.

古文：秋八月乙未朔，开封尹王瓚为北面行营招讨使。
现代文：八月一日，开封尹王瓒被任命为北面行营招讨使。
English: On August 1st, Yin Wangtao was appointed as the envoy to the north.

古文：冬十月，刘鄩克兗州，张守进伏诛。
现代文：十月，刘寻阝攻下兖州，张守进被处死。
English: In October, Liu Huanqian conquered Zhangzhou, and Zhang Shoujin was executed.

古文：十二月，晋人取濮阳。天平军节度使霍彦威为北面行营招讨使。
现代文：十二月，晋军攻下濮阳，任命天平军节度使霍彦威为北面行营招讨使。
English: In December, the Jin army conquered Shenyang, and appointed the Tianping Army commander to invite Huo Yanwei to the northern camp.

古文：六年夏四月己亥，降死罪以下囚。
现代文：第六年四月七日，下诏对死罪以下犯人减刑。
English: On April 7th of the sixth year, the following edict was issued to commute the sentences of prisoners with less than capital crimes.

古文：乙巳，尚书左丞李琪为中书侍郎、同中书门下平章事。
现代文：十三日，任命尚书左丞李琪为中书侍郎、同中书门下平章事。
English: On the 13th, Li Qi, the left-hand man of Shang Shuxu, was appointed as the attendant of Zhong Shuxu and the subordinate disciple of Zhong Shuxu.

古文：河中节度使硃友谦袭同州，杀其节度使程全晖，叛附于晋，泰宁军节度使刘鄩讨之。
现代文：河中节度使朱友谦袭击同州，杀同州节度使程全晖后反叛梁附晋，诏令泰宁军节度使刘寻阝去讨伐。
English: Zhu Youqian was ordered by the Caozhong military governor to attack Tongzhou, Liang Fuxi Jin rebelled after killing the Tongzhou military governor Cheng Quanzhang, and the Taining military governor was ordered by the Taizhong military governor to send Liu Xingyao to fight.

古文：秋七月，陈州妖贼母乙自称天子。
现代文：七月，陈州农民毋乙创上承教起义，自称天子。
English: In July, farmers in Chenzhou launched the Shangchengyo Uprising, claiming to be the son of heaven.

古文：九月庚寅，供奉官郎公远为契丹欢好使。
现代文：九月二日，任命供奉官郎公远为契丹欢好使。
English: On September 2nd, he appointed Guzongyuan, the official in charge of dedications, as a special envoy of the Khitan Emperor.

古文：冬十月，母乙伏诛。
现代文：十月，毋乙被处死。
English: He was executed in October.

古文：龙德元年春，赵将张文礼杀其君镕来乞师，不许。
现代文：龙德元年春，赵将张文礼杀其君王来求援军，梁不答应。
English: In the spring of the first year of the Longde era, Zhao sent Zhang Wenli to kill his king to ask for reinforcements, but Liang did not agree.

古文：三月丁亥朔，禁私度僧尼。
现代文：三月一日，下令禁止私度僧尼。
English: On March 1st, he issued an order prohibiting the private lives of monks and nuns.

古文：陈州刺史惠王友能反。
现代文：陈州刺史惠王朱友能造反。
English: Chen Zhou stabbed Shi Hui Wang and Zhu Youneng rebelled.

古文：夏五月丙戌朔，德音改元，降流罪已下囚。
现代文：五月一日，下诏改元，对流放刑以下犯人减刑。
English: On May 1st, the following edict was issued, commuting the sentences of prisoners who had been sentenced to exile or less.

古文：秋，赦友能，降封房陵侯。
现代文：秋，赦朱友能罪，降级封为房陵侯。
English: In the autumn, Zhu Youneng was pardoned and demoted to the position of Fangling.

古文：天平军节度使戴思远为北面行营招讨使。
现代文：任命天平军节度使戴思远为北面行营招讨使。
English: The appointment of the festival of the Tianping Army made Dai Siyuan the envoy for the northern campaign.

古文：冬十月，思远及晋人战于戚城，败绩。
现代文：冬十月，戴思远在戚城与晋军交战失败。
English: In the winter of October, Dai Siyuan lost the battle with the Jin army in Qicheng.

古文：二年春正月，思远袭魏州，取成安。
现代文：第二年正月，戴思远袭击魏州，攻取成安。
English: In the first month of the second year, Dai Siyuan attacked Weizhou and captured Cheng'an.

古文：秋八月，滑州兵马留后段凝攻卫州，执其刺史李存儒。
现代文：八月，滑州兵马留后段凝攻卫州，捉住晋刺史李存儒。
English: In August, the rear section of the remaining troops and horses of the State of Slang attacked Weizhou and captured the Jin assassin, Li Cunru.

古文：戴思远克淇门、共城、新乡。
现代文：戴思远攻克淇门、共城、新乡。
English: Dai Siyuan conquered Keqimen, Gongcheng and Xinxiang.

古文：三年春三月，潞州李继韬叛于晋，来附。
现代文：第三年三月，潞州李继韬叛晋来归附梁。
English: In March of the third year, Zhangzhou Li Jizhen rebelled against Jin and was annexed by Liang.

古文：夏闰四月，唐人取郓州。
现代文：闰四月，后唐攻取郓州。
English: In leap April, the late Tang Dynasty conquered Ganzhou.

古文：五月庚申，宣义军节度使王彦章为北面行营招讨使，取德胜南城。
现代文：五月十七日，任命宣义军节度使王彦章为北面行营招讨使，攻占德胜南城。
English: On May 17th, Wang Yanzhang was appointed as the envoy to the north side of the proclamation of the pro-independence army to conquer the southern city of Desheng.

古文：秋八月，段凝为北面行营招讨使。
现代文：八月，任命段凝为北面行营招讨使。
English: In August, Duan Rong was appointed as the envoy to the north.

古文：先锋将康延孝叛降于唐。
现代文：先锋将康延孝叛梁降后唐。
English: The vanguard will be Kang Yanxiao, a traitor to Tang Dynasty.

古文：冬十月甲戌，宣义军节度使王彦章及唐人战于中都，败绩，死之。
现代文：十月四日，宣义军节度使王彦章在中都与后唐交战败死。后唐攻取曹州。
English: On October 4th, Wang Yanzhang was defeated and killed in a battle with the Later Tang Dynasty in Zhongdu by the Xuanwu Festival. The Later Tang Dynasty invaded Caozhou.

古文：唐人取曹州。盗窃传国宝奔于唐。
现代文：梁末帝近侍盗窃梁传国宝逃走归附后唐。
English: Emperor Liang's close attendants stole Liang Chuan's national treasure and fled to the Later Tang Dynasty.

古文：戊寅，皇帝崩。
现代文：十八日，梁末帝死。
English: On the second day, the emperor died.

古文：梁亡。
现代文：梁亡。
English: Liang died.

