古文：萧何，沛人也。
现代文：萧何，沛地人。
English: Xiao He, Pei Di Ren.

古文：以文毋害为沛主吏掾。
现代文：因能写文书没有疵病而为沛主吏掾。
English: Because he could write documents without any defects, he was promoted to the post of chief clerk.

古文：高祖为布衣时，数以吏事护高祖。
现代文：高祖还是平民的时候，萧何多次在吏事上袒护高祖。
English: When Gaozu was still a commoner, Xiao He repeatedly protected Gaozu in official matters.

古文：高祖为亭长，常佑之。
现代文：高祖当了亭长后，又帮助他。
English: After Gao Zu became the head of the pavilion, he helped him again.

古文：高祖以吏繇咸阳，吏皆送奉钱三，何独以五。
现代文：高祖以吏的身份到咸阳服役，小吏们都出钱三百为高祖送行，只有萧何出了五百。
English: Liu Bang went to serve in Xianyang as an official. The officials all gave him three hundred yuan, but Xiao He gave him five hundred yuan.

古文：秦御史监郡者，与从事辩之。何乃给泗水卒史事，第一。
现代文：秦御史监郡的人，和从事考察其职事，萧何于是被授予泗水郡卒吏一职，考课最优等。
English: As a member of the Qin History Supervisor County and engaged in the inspection of its duties, Xiao He was awarded the post of the graduate official of the Surabaya County, with the highest grade in the examination.

古文：秦御史欲入言征何，何固请，得毋行。
现代文：秦御史打算向朝廷上报，征用萧何，萧何推辞，才得以未去。
English: Qin Wushi planned to report to the imperial court, requisition Xiao He, and Xiao He refused, only to be prevented from leaving.

古文：及高祖起为沛公，何尝为丞督事。
现代文：等到高祖起事做了沛公，萧何曾经任丞督事。
English: By the time Gao Zu rose up and became Pei Gong, Xiao He had already been appointed as chancellor.

古文：乃遂就国，以何为丞相。
现代文：沛公到了咸阳，诸位将领都争相跑到储存金帛财物的府库去瓜分。
English: When Pei Gong arrived in Xianyang, all the generals rushed to the treasury to divide up the gold and valuables.

古文：何进韩信，汉王以为大将军，说汉王令引兵东定三秦。
现代文：只有萧何先进去收藏起秦丞相御史的律令图书。沛公之所以详细地知道天下要塞，户民多少，强弱分布，人民痛恨忧苦的事情，就是因为萧何收得了秦的图书。
English: Only Xiao He was the first to collect the books of laws and regulations from the Qin Dynasty. The reason why Pei Gong knew in detail the world's fortresses, the number of households, the distribution of strengths and weaknesses, and the things that the people hated was because Xiao He collected the books of Qin.

古文：语在《信传》。何以丞相留收巴、蜀，填抚谕告，使给军食。
现代文：萧何以丞相身份接管留守巴、蜀，镇抚、谕告境内百姓，让他们提供军队粮食。
English: Xiao He, in his capacity as chancellor, took over the remaining Ba and Shu, pacified and ordered the people in the territory to provide the army with grain.

古文：汉二年，汉王与诸侯击楚，何守关中，侍太子，治栎阳。
现代文：汉二年，汉王和诸侯攻打楚，萧何守在关中，侍卫太子，治理栎阳。
English: In the second year of the Han Dynasty, the king of Han and all the princes attacked the Chu army, Xiao He guarded Guanzhong, served the prince, and governed Fenyang.

古文：为令约束，立宗庙、社稷、宫室、县邑，辄奏，上可许以从事；即不及奏，辄以便宜施行，上来以闻。
现代文：制定法令规约，建立宗庙、社稷、宫室、县邑，经常上奏，皇上赞同的就去执行。如果来不及上奏，就按适宜的方式施行，等皇上回来后再告诉皇上。
English: Formulate laws and regulations, establish ancestral temples, shrines, imperial residences, and prefectural towns, and regularly perform the ceremony. If the emperor approves, the ceremony will be carried out. If it is too late to perform the ceremony, it will be carried out in an appropriate manner, and the emperor will be informed when he returns.

古文：计户转漕给军，汉王数失军遁去，何常兴关中卒，辄补缺。上以此剸属任何关中事。
现代文：计算户民数量转运粮饷以供给军需，汉王多次率军逃跑，萧何经常征发关中兵士，补充前线，皇上因此把关中事务专门交给了萧何。
English: Counting the number of households and transporting grain to supply military needs, Han Wang led the army to escape many times. Xiao He often conscripted soldiers from Guanzhong to supplement the front line. Therefore, the emperor specifically handed over the Guanzhong affairs to Xiao He.

古文：汉三年，与项羽相距京、索间，上数使使劳苦丞相。
现代文：汉三年，和项羽在京、索之间对峙，皇上多次派使者慰劳丞相。
English: In the third year of the Han Dynasty, there was a confrontation between Xiang Yu in Beijing and Suo, and the emperor repeatedly sent emissaries to console the labor minister.

古文：鲍生谓何曰： 今王暴衣露盖，数劳苦君者，有疑君心。
现代文：鲍生对萧何说： 现在大王日晒衣裳，露湿车盖，却多次慰劳你，这是对您有疑心。
English: Baosheng said to Xiao He, "Now the great king is drying his clothes in the sun and exposing the damp car cover, but he has consoled you many times. This is because he is suspicious of you.

古文：为君计，莫若遣君子孙昆弟能胜兵者悉诣军所，上益信君。 
现代文：为您着想，不如把您的子孙兄弟中能打仗的都派到军队中去，皇上就更信任您了。 
English: For your sake, it would be better to send all your sons and grandsons who can fight to the army, and the Emperor will trust you even more.

古文：于是何从其计，汉王大说。
现代文：于是萧何听从了他的计策，汉王非常高兴。
English: As a result, Xiao He followed his strategy, and the Han king was very pleased.

古文：汉五年，已杀项羽，即皇帝位，论功行封，群臣争功，岁余不决。上以何功最盛，先封为酂侯，食邑八千户。
现代文：汉五年，项羽已经去世，刘邦即了帝位，按功劳封赐，群臣争功，一年多难以决定，皇上认为萧何功劳最大，先封为酆侯，食邑八千户。
English: In the 5th year of the Han Dynasty, Xiang Yu had already passed away, and Liu Bang ascended the throne. According to his merits, he was awarded the title, and the courtiers competed for the title. For more than a year, it was difficult to decide. The emperor thought that Xiao He's merit was the greatest, and he was first awarded the title of prefect, and there were eight thousand households in the county.

古文：功臣皆曰： 臣等身被坚执兵，多者百余战，少者数十合，攻城略地，大小各有差。
现代文：功臣们都说： 我们亲自披着锁甲，拿着兵器，多的经历百余战，少的也有几十回合，攻城略地，多少不等。
English: The heroes all said: We personally wore locking armor and carried weapons, and many of us experienced more than a hundred battles, and a few had dozens of rounds.

古文：今萧何未有汗马之劳，徒持文墨议论，不战，顾居臣等上，何也？ 
现代文：现在萧何没有汗马功劳，只是舞文弄墨发表议论，不去打仗，地位却在我们之上，这是为什么？ 
English: Now, why is it that Xiao He does not have any great achievements, but only makes speeches, does not go to war, but his status is higher than ours? Why is that?

古文：上曰： 诸君知猎乎？ 曰： 知之。 
现代文：皇上说： 各位知道打猎的事吧？ 都说： 知道。 
English: The emperor said, "Do you know anything about hunting?" They all said, "Yes."

古文： 知猎狗乎？ 
现代文：又问： 知道猎狗吗？ 
English: He also asked: Do you know anything about hunting dogs?

古文：曰： 知之。 
现代文：回答说： 知道 。
English: Zhang Qing said: I really understand this.

古文：上曰： 夫猎，追杀兽者狗也，而发纵指示兽处者人也。
现代文：皇上说： 打猎，追杀野兽的是狗，而发纵指示野兽所处的是人。
English: The emperor said, "It is the dog that hunts and kills the beast, but it is the man who directs the beast.

古文：今诸君徒能走得曾耳，功狗也；至如萧何，发纵指示，功人也。
现代文：现在各位只能追逐获得野兽，功劳和猎狗类似；至于萧何，发布指示，功劳同猎人一样。
English: Now you can only chase and get the beast, the merit is similar to the hunting dog; as for Xiao He, issue instructions, the merit is the same as the hunter.

古文：且诸君独以身从我，多者三两人；萧何举宗数十人皆随我，功不可忘也！ 
现代文：而且各位只是以己身跟随我，多的三两个人，萧何全族几十人都跟随我，功劳不可忘记! 
English: Moreover, you are only following me with your own bodies, just three or two people, but the whole nation, dozens of people, are following me. Don't forget your merits!

古文：群臣后皆莫敢言。
现代文：以后群臣都不敢说了。
English: After that, the ministers didn't dare to say anything.

古文：列侯毕已受封，奏位次，皆曰： 平阳侯曹参身被七十创，攻城略地，功最多，宜第一。 
现代文：列侯受封完毕，上奏位次，都说： 平阳侯曹参受伤七十处，攻城略地，功劳最大，应列为第一。 
English: After the enumeration of lords was completed and the ranks were announced, they all said: Pingyang lord Cao San was injured in 70 places, he attacked the city and gained the most merit, so he should be ranked first.

古文：上已桡功臣多封何，至位次未有以复难之，然心欲何第一。
现代文：皇上已经使功臣屈从而多封了萧何，至于位次没有办法再为难他们，然而心里还是想让萧何位居第一。
English: The emperor had already made the meritorious vassals bow down and awarded Xiao He more titles. As for the rank, there was no way to make it difficult for them, but in his heart, he still wanted Xiao He to rank first.

古文：关内侯鄂秋时为谒者，进曰： 郡臣议皆误。
现代文：当时关内侯鄂秋为谒者，进言说： 群臣的议论都不对。
English: At that time, Guanai chief Eqiu, who was in charge of the imperial court, said, "The discussions of the courtiers are all wrong.

古文：夫曹参虽有野战略地之功，此特一时之事。
现代文：曹参虽然有野战略地的功劳，这只是一时的事。
English: Although Cao San had the merit of fighting everywhere and seizing territory, this was only a temporary matter.

古文：夫上与楚相距五岁，失军亡众，跳身遁者数矣，然萧何常从关中遣军补其处。
现代文：皇上与楚相持五年，损兵折将，多次轻身逃跑，然而萧何常从关中派军队来补充。
English: The emperor and Chu had been at loggerheads for five years, losing soldiers and retreating several times. However, Xiao He often sent troops from Guanzhong to supplement.

古文：非上所诏令召，而数万众会上乏绝者数矣。
现代文：不是皇上诏令召来士卒，却有数万人在皇上处境困难的时候赶到。
English: It was not the Emperor's edict that summoned the soldiers, but tens of thousands of people arrived when the Emperor was in a difficult situation.

古文：夫汉与楚相守荥阳数年，军无见粮，萧何转漕关中，给食不乏。
现代文：汉与楚在荣阳相守多年，军中没有现存的粮食，萧何从关中转运粮饷，供给不缺。
English: The Han army and the Chu army have been facing each other in Fenyang for several years. The army has no existing rations. Xiao He brought grain from Guanzhong by car and ship. The supply of military grain has never been scarce.

古文：陛下虽数亡山东，萧何常全关中待陛下，此万世功也。
现代文：陛下虽多次丢失山东，萧何却常常保全关中以等待陛下再次回去，这是万世的功劳。
English: Although His Majesty lost Shandong many times, Xiao He often preserved Guanzhong to wait for His Majesty to return again, which is a great achievement.

古文：今虽无曹参等百数，何缺于汉？
现代文：现在即使少了一百个曹参这样的人，汉又有什么损失呢？
English: Now, even if there are one hundred less people like Cao Zhen, what does Han have to lose?

古文：汉得之不必待以全。
现代文：汉的获得不一定非等待他们才能保全。
English: The Han family did not necessarily succeed in preserving these people.

古文：奈何欲以一旦之功加万世之功哉！
现代文：为什么要以一日之功加于万世之功之上呢！
English: Why should the merit of one day be added to the merit of all eternity!

古文：萧何当第一，曹参次之。 
现代文：萧何应当第一，曹参次之。 
English: Xiao He should be first, Cao San second.

古文：上曰： 善。 
现代文：皇上说： 好。 
English: Han Wang replied, "Okay, that's it!

古文：于是乃令何第一，赐带剑履上殿，入朝不趋。
现代文：于是令萧何为第一，恩赐佩剑穿履上殿，进朝廷不必小步急行。
English: As a result, Xiao He was the first to be given the gift of a sword to wear to enter the palace, and there was no need to rush into the court.

古文：上曰： 吾闻进贤受上赏，萧何功虽高，待鄂君乃得明。 
现代文：皇上说： 我听说进贤要受上赏，萧何功劳虽高，有了鄂君才得以彰明。 
English: The emperor said: I heard that Jinxian should be rewarded, Xiao He's merit is high, but only with Ejun can he be honored.

古文：于是因鄂秋故所食关内侯邑二千户，封为安平侯。
现代文：于是在鄂秋原来所食关内侯邑二千户之上，又加封为安平侯。
English: Therefore, in addition to the two thousand households in Guanzhong Hou, which was originally occupied by Eqiu, it was also sealed as Anping Hou.

古文：是日，悉封何父母兄弟十余人，皆食邑。
现代文：这天，全部封赏萧何的父母兄弟十几人，都有食邑。
English: On this day, all of Xiao He's parents and more than a dozen of his brothers were rewarded with food.

古文：乃益封何二千户， 以尝繇咸阳时何送我独赢钱二也 。
现代文：又加封萧何二千户， 用来报答在咸阳服役时惟独萧何多送我二百钱。 
English: He also sealed another two thousand households, which he used to repay his service in Xianyang, but he only gave me two hundred yuan.

古文：陈豨反，上自将，至邯郸。
现代文：陈豨反叛，皇上亲自率军，到了邯郸。
English: Chen Xi rebelled, and the emperor personally led the army to the capital.

古文：而韩信谋反关中，吕后用何计诛信。
现代文：韩信在关中谋反，吕后采用萧何的计策杀了韩信。
English: Han Xin plotted a rebellion in Guanzhong, and Lü Hou used Xiao He's strategy to kill Han Xin.

古文：语在《信传》。
现代文：在《信传》有记载。
English: It is recorded in the "Analects of Confucius."

古文：上已闻诛信，使使拜丞相为相国，益封五千户，令卒五百人一都尉为祖国卫。
现代文：皇上听说已杀了韩信，派使者拜丞相为相国，加封五千户，命令士卒五百人和一个都尉为相国护卫。
English: When the emperor heard that Han Xin had been killed, he sent an envoy to ask the prime minister to become the imperial consort, sealed off five thousand households, and ordered five hundred soldiers and one captain to escort the imperial consort.

古文：诸君皆贺，召平独吊。
现代文：诸君都庆贺，只有召平表示哀悼。
English: Many people came to congratulate him, but only Zhao Ping expressed his condolences.

古文：召平者，故秦东陵侯。
现代文：召平，是原来秦的束陵侯。
English: Zhao Pingyuan was the Dongling Hou of the Qin Dynasty.

古文：秦破，为布衣，贫，种瓜长安城东，瓜美，故世谓 东陵瓜 ，从召平始也。
现代文：秦灭亡后，成为平民，很穷，在长安城东种瓜，瓜非常甜美，所以世间所谓 束陵瓜 ，就是从召平开始的。
English: After the fall of the Qin Dynasty, he became a commoner and was very poor. He grew melons in the eastern part of Chang'an City. The melons were very sweet, so the world's so-called bunch of gourds began with Zhaoping.

古文：平谓何曰： 祸自此始矣。
现代文：召平对萧何说： 灾祸从此开始了。
English: Zhao Ping said to Xiao He, "The calamity has begun.

古文：上暴露于外，而君守于内，非被矢石之难，而益君封置卫者，以今者淮阴新反于中，有疑君心。
现代文：皇上露营在外，而您在朝中留守，没有遭受箭石之苦，而给您加封置卫，是因为现在淮阴侯刚在内部反叛，对您有疑心。
English: The emperor is camping outside, and you are staying in the middle of the country, and you have not suffered from the suffering of the arrow stone, but you have been sealed and guarded, because now Huaiyin Hou has just rebelled internally and is suspicious of you.

古文：夫置卫卫君，非以宠君也。
现代文：给您配置守卫护卫您，不是用来恩宠您的。
English: You are assigned a bodyguard to protect you, not to pamper you.

古文：愿君让封勿受，悉以家私财佐军。 
现代文：希望您辞谢封赏不受，以全部家产资助军队。 
English: I hope that you will not accept the resignation and award, and that you will support the army with all your family assets.

古文：何从其计，上说。
现代文：萧何听从了召平的计策，皇上很高兴。
English: Xiao He listened to Zhao Ping's strategy, and the emperor was very pleased.

古文：其秋，黥布反，上自将击之，数使使问相国何为。
现代文：这年秋天，黥布造反，皇上亲自率军攻打，多次派使者问相国在做什么。
English: In the autumn of that year, when Zengbu rebelled, the emperor personally led the army to attack and repeatedly sent envoys to inquire what the neighboring country was doing.

古文：曰： 为上在军，拊循勉百姓，悉所有佐军，如陈豨时。 
现代文：回答说： 因为皇上在军中，所以相国安抚勉励百姓，倾家所有资助军事，像陈稀造反时那样。 
English: He replied, "Because the emperor is in the army, our country is appeasing and encouraging the people, and we are devoting all our resources to supporting the military, just as Chen Rongru did when he rebelled.

古文：客又说何曰： 君灭族不久矣。
现代文：门客又劝说萧何道： 您不久就会被灭族了。
English: The doorkeeper also persuaded Xiao He: You will soon be exterminated.

古文：夫君位为相国，功第一，不可复加。
现代文：您位为相国，功劳第一，无以复加。
English: You are already a peer of the realm and an honored retainer. The emperor cannot promote you any further.

古文：然君初入关，本得百姓心，十余年矣。
现代文：然而您刚入关时，本来很得民心，已有十几年了。
English: However, when you first entered the customs, you were very popular, and have been for more than ten years.

古文：皆附君，尚复孳孳得民和。
现代文：都已亲附您了，您仍孜孜不倦以得民和。
English: You are still working tirelessly to win the hearts and minds of the people.

古文：上所谓数问君，畏君倾动关中。
现代文：皇上之所以多次问您，是怕您倾动关中。
English: The reason why the Emperor has asked you so many times is that he is afraid that you will tilt the balance.

古文：今君胡不多买田地，贱贳貣以自污？上心必安。 
现代文：现在您为什么不多买田地，低息借贷以自损声名，皇上一定会安心。 
English: Now why don't you buy more fields, low-interest loans with a reputation for self-defeating, the emperor will certainly be relieved.

古文：于是何从其计，上乃大说。
现代文：于是萧何听其计策，皇上于是很高兴。
English: So Xiao He listened to his plan, and the emperor was very pleased.

古文：上罢布军归，民道遮行，上书言相国强贱买民田宅数千人。
现代文：皇上平定黥布后归来，百姓在路上拦住皇上，上书说相国强行贱买百姓田宅数千人。
English: When the emperor returned after pacifying Zibo, the people stopped the emperor on the road and wrote a letter saying that the neighboring country had forcibly bought thousands of people's farmhouses.

古文：上至，何谒。
现代文：皇上回朝后，萧何去拜见。
English: After the Emperor's return, Xiao He went to pay his respects.

古文：上笑曰： 今相国乃利民！ 
现代文：皇上笑道： 现在相国竟向百姓取利！ 
English: The emperor laughed: Now our country is actually taking profit from the people!

古文：民所上书皆以与何，曰： 君自谢民。 
现代文：把百姓上的书都给了萧何，说： 您自己向百姓谢罪吧！ 
English: He gave all the books on the people to Xiao He and said, "You yourself should apologize to the people!"

古文：后何为民请曰： 长安地陿，上林中多空地，弃，愿令民得入田，毋收稿为兽食。 
现代文：之后萧何为百姓请求说： 长安地窄，上林中有很多空地，丢弃不用，希望能让百姓去耕种，不要收了藁秸做兽食。 
English: Afterwards, Xiao He made a request for the people, saying, "Chang'an is a narrow land, and there are many open spaces in the upper forest. There is no need to discard them. I hope that the people will be allowed to farm, and not collect straw to make animal food."

古文：上大怒曰： 相国多受贾人财物，为请吾苑！ 
现代文：皇上大怒道： 相国这是接受了他们的贿赂，替他们请要我的林苑！ 
English: The emperor flew into a rage and said, "The other country accepted their bribe and asked for my forest garden instead!

古文：乃下何廷尉，械系之。
现代文：于是把萧何下交给廷尉，带上刑具拘禁起来。
English: So Xiao Do was handed over to the imperial lieutenant and taken into custody with the instruments of torture.

古文：数日，王卫尉侍，前问曰： 相国胡大罪，陛下系之暴也？ 
现代文：数日后，王卫尉侍奉皇上，上前问道： 相国犯了什么大罪，陛下那么粗暴地拘禁他? 
English: A few days later, Lieutenant Wang Wei, who was serving the emperor, came forward and asked: What great crime did the other country commit, that His Majesty detained him so roughly?

古文：上曰： 吾闻李斯相秦皇帝，有善归主，有恶自予。
现代文：皇卜说： 我听说李斯为秦皇帝作丞相，有善行就归于主上，有错就归于自己。
English: The emperor said, "I heard that Li Si was the prime minister of Emperor Qin. If he did something good, he would attribute it to the Lord, and if he did something wrong, he would attribute it to himself.

古文：今相国多受贾竖金，为请吾苑，以自媚于民。故系治之。 
现代文：现在相国受了商人贿赂，为他们请求我的林苑，来自己讨好于百姓，所以拘捕治罪。 
English: Now, my country has been bribed by businessmen to request my forest garden for them, in order to curry favor with the people, so they have been arrested and prosecuted.

古文：王卫尉曰： 夫职事苟有便于民而请之，真宰相事也。
现代文：王卫尉说： 供职办事有利于民的就向上请求，是真正的宰相的责任。
English: Wang Wei said: It is the responsibility of a true prime minister to serve the people.

古文：陛下奈何乃疑相国受贾人钱乎！
现代文：陛下怎么能怀疑相国接受了商人的钱呢!
English: How can His Majesty doubt that his country accepted the merchant's money?

古文：且陛下距楚数岁，陈豨、黥布反时，陛下自将往，当是时相国守关中，关中摇足则关西非陛下有也。
现代文：况且陛下抗拒楚军数年，陈、黥布反叛时，陛下亲自率军前往，那时相国守在关中，关中稍有举动关西就不归陛下所有了。
English: Moreover, His Majesty resisted the Chu army for several years. When Chen and Zengbu rebelled, His Majesty personally led the army to go there. At that time, the neighboring country was guarded by Guanzhong. If Guanzhong made the slightest move, Kansai would not belong to His Majesty.

古文：相国不以此时为利，乃利贾人之金乎！
现代文：相国不在此时图利，难道会贪图商人的钱吗?
English: If the other country does not seek profit at this time, will it covet the merchant's money?

古文：且秦以不闻其过亡天下，夫李斯之分过，又何足法哉！
现代文：而且秦因为听不进说自己的过错而丢掉了天下，李斯的与君分过，又何足效法!
English: Moreover, Qin lost the world because he did not listen to his own fault, Li's and Jun's split, and what an example to follow!

古文：陛下何疑宰相之浅也！ 
现代文：陛下何至于把宰相看得此浅薄! 
English: Your Majesty, how can you have such a shallow view of the Prime Minister!

古文：上不怿。
现代文：皇上不高兴。
English: The Emperor is not happy.

古文：是日，使使持节赦出何。
现代文：这一天，派使者拿着符节赦免放出了萧何。
English: On this day, an envoy was sent to release Xiao He with the amnesty.

古文：何年老，素恭谨，徒跣入谢。
现代文：萧何年纪已老，一向恭谨，光着脚入朝谢罪。
English: Xiao He is an old man. He has always been respectful and has entered the morning thanksgiving with bare feet.

古文：上曰： 相国休矣！
现代文：皇上说： 相国不要这样!
English: The emperor said: My countrymen, don't do this!

古文：相国为民请吾苑不许，我不过为桀、纣主，而相国为贤相。
现代文：相国为百姓请求我的林苑未得允许，我不过是桀纣之主，而相国是贤相。
English: I am only the lord of the forest, but my country is a wise man.

古文：吾故系相国，欲令百姓闻吾过。 
现代文：我之所以拘捕相国，是想让百姓知道我的过错。 
English: The reason why I arrested my brother-in-law is to let the people know my fault.

古文：高祖崩，何事惠帝。
现代文：高祖崩，萧何事奉惠帝。
English: Gao Zu passed away, and Xiao He started to serve Emperor Hui.

古文：何病，上亲自临视何疾，因问曰： 君即百岁后，谁可代君？ 
现代文：萧何病重，皇上亲自去探望他，于是问道： 您百岁之后，谁可以代替您呢？ 
English: As Xiao He was seriously ill, the emperor went to visit him in person and asked: "After you are a hundred years old, who can take your place?

古文：对曰： 知臣莫如主。 帝曰： 曹参何如？ 
现代文：回答说： 没有比主上更了解臣下的了。 皇帝说： 曹参怎么样? 
English: He replied, "There is no one who knows his subjects better than the Lord." The emperor said, "How is Cao San?

古文：何顿首曰： 帝得之矣，何死不恨矣！ 
现代文：萧何顿首说： 皇上得到贤才了，我死而无憾了! 
English: Xiao He suddenly said, "The emperor has gained a sage, and I have no regrets about my death!"

古文：何买田宅必居穷辟处，为家不治垣屋。曰： 今后世贤，师吾俭；不贤，毋为势家所夺。 
现代文：萧何买田宅一定在贫穷偏僻之地，治家不修有院墙的房屋，说： 假使后代贤能，将学习我的俭朴；不贤，也不会被权势之家所侵夺。 
English: Xiao He bought a farmhouse, which must be in a poor and remote area. The head of the family did not build a house with courtyard walls. He said, "If future generations are wise, they will learn from my frugality; if they are not wise, they will not be usurped by the powerful family."

古文：孝惠二年，何薨，谥曰文终侯。
现代文：孝惠二年，萧何去世，谧号文终侯。
English: In the second year of Xiao Hui, Xiao He passed away, ending his reign.

古文：子禄嗣，薨，无子。
现代文：他的儿子萧禄继承他，萧禄去世，没有儿子。
English: His son, Xiaolu, succeeded him. Xiaolu died without a son.

古文：高后乃封何夫人同为酂侯，小子延为筑阳侯。
现代文：高后于是封萧何夫人同为酆侯，封萧延为筑阳侯。
English: After high school, Lady Feng Xiao He was also appointed as a magistrate, and Feng Xiao Yan was appointed as the magistrate of Chikuyang.

古文：孝文元年，罢同，更封延为酂侯。
现代文：孝文元年，罢免同，改封萧延为酆侯。
English: In the first year of Xiaowen, he was removed from his post, and Xiao Yan's title was changed to that of magistrate.

古文：薨，子遗嗣。
现代文：去世后，他的儿子萧遣继承他。
English: After his death, his son, Xiao Yuan, succeeded him.

古文：薨，无子。
现代文：萧遣薨，没有儿子。
English: Xiao Qianqian, no son.

古文：文帝复以遣弟则嗣，有罪免。
现代文：文帝又让萧遣的弟弟萧则继承，因为有罪而罢免。
English: Emperor Wen also allowed Xiao Yan's younger brother, Xiao Zeng, to succeed him, but he was removed from office because he was guilty.

古文：景帝二年，制诏御史： 故相国萧何，高皇帝大功臣，所与为天下也。
现代文：景帝二年，韶令御史： 已故相国萧何，是高祖皇帝的大功臣，参与遇争取天下的大事。
English: In the second year of the reign of Emperor Jing, the following was written in the imperial edict: The late Emperor Gaozu's close friend, Xiao He, was a great hero of the Emperor Gaozu and took part in the great event of conquering the world.

古文：今其祀绝，朕甚怜之。
现代文：现在他的后代绝灭，朕很怜惜他。
English: Now that his descendants are extinct, I feel very sorry for him.

古文：其以武阳县户二千封何孙嘉为列侯。 
现代文：可把武阳县二千户封给萧何孙萧嘉为列侯。 
English: Two thousand households in Wuyang County could be assigned to Xiao He Sun and Xiao Jia as vassals.

古文：嘉，则弟也。
现代文：萧嘉，是萧则的弟弟。
English: Xiao Jia is Xiao Ze's younger brother.

古文：薨，子胜嗣，后有罪免。
现代文：薨，他的儿子萧胜继承，后来因有罪被罢免。
English: He was succeeded by his son, Xiao Sheng, who was later impeached.

古文：武帝元狩中，复下诏御史： 以酂户二千四百封何曾孙庆为酂侯，布告天下，令明知朕报萧相国德也。 
现代文：武帝元狩中，又下诏御史： 把邓地两千四百户封萧何曾孙萧庆为邓侯，布告天下，使天下明知朕报答萧相国的恩惠。 
English: In the reign of Emperor Wu, Emperor Wu issued the following imperial edict: To proclaim to the world that the 2,400 households in Dangdi had been given to Xiao He's great-great-grandson Xiao Qing as the Prince of Dang, so that the world would know that I was repaying Xiao Xianguo's kindness.

古文：庆，则子也。
现代文：萧庆，是萧则的儿子。
English: Xiao Qing is the son of Xiao Ze.

古文：薨，子寿成嗣，坐为太常牺牲瘦免。
现代文：去世后，他的儿子寿成继承，因为献给太常的牺牲瘦瘠获罪被罢免。
English: After his death, his son, Shoucheng, succeeded him, but he was removed from office for the crime of sacrificing the thin gourd to the moon.

古文：宣帝时，诏丞相、御史求问萧相国后在者，得玄孙建世等十二人，复下诏以酂户二千封建世为酂侯。
现代文：宣帝时，诏令丞相御史查询萧相国后代尚存的人，找到玄孙建世等十二人，又下诏把郑二千户封建世为酆侯。
English: At the time of the proclamation of the emperor, the emperor issued an imperial edict to the prime minister to inquire into the surviving descendants of Xiao Xiang and found twelve people such as the great-great-grandson Jian Shih, and also issued an imperial edict to make Zheng Jian Shih the prince of two thousand households.

古文：传子至孙获，坐使奴杀人减死论。
现代文：传子至孙萧获，因指使奴仆杀人而以减死论罪。
English: His descendant, Sun Xiao, was found guilty of ordering a slave to commit murder and sentenced to death by commutation.

古文：成帝时，复封何玄孙之子南长喜为酂侯。
现代文：帝时，又封萧何玄孙之子南繦长萧喜为酆侯。
English: At the time of the emperor, Nanlu Chang Xiaoxi, the son of Xiao He's great-great-grandson, was also named the prince.

古文：传子至曾孙，王莽败乃绝。
现代文：传子至于曾孙。王莽失败后就灭绝了。
English: As for the great-grandchildren, they became extinct after Wang Mang failed.

古文：曹参，沛人也。
现代文：曹参，沛地人。
English: Cao San, Pei Di Ren.

古文：秦时为狱掾，而萧何为主吏，居县为豪吏矣。
现代文：秦时做狱掾，而萧何做主吏，在县裹都是吏之豪长。
English: Qin Shi was a prison warden, while Xiao He was the head official. In the county, both of them were the most powerful officials.

古文：高祖为沛公也，参以中涓从击胡陵、方与，攻秦监公军，大破之。
现代文：高祖做沛公的时候，曹参以中涓身份随从。进攻胡陵、方，攻打秦监公军，大胜。
English: When Gao Zu was the Pei Gong, Cao San followed him as a middle eunuch. He attacked Huling and Fang, and fought against the Qin Emperor's army, and won a great victory.

古文：东下薛，击泗水守军薛郭西。
现代文：向东到薛地，击破泗水守军于薛郭西。
English: He took Xue County to the east, and attacked the army of the county governor of Lishui County on the west side of the outer city of Xue County.

古文：复攻胡陵，取之。
现代文：又攻打胡陵，占领了它。
English: Then they attacked Huling again and successfully captured it.

古文：徙守方与。
现代文：转守方与。
English: Cao Shan led the army to move to the guard side.

古文：方与反为魏，击之。
现代文：方与反叛降魏，击破了它。
English: Fang You had already rebelled and surrendered to Wei Wang, so Cao San attacked Fang You.

古文：丰反为魏，攻之。
现代文：丰反叛降魏，攻打它。
English: Fengyi also rebelled and surrendered to the Wei king, and Cao San went to attack Fengyi.

古文：赐爵七大夫。
现代文：赐爵为七大夫。
English: Pei Gong gave Cao San the title of the seventh doctor.

古文：北击司马欣军砀东，取狐父、祁善置。
现代文：向北击破司马欣军于赐束，占领狐父、祁的善置。
English: To the north, they defeated Sima Xin's army at Jiezhu, and occupied the Fox Father's and the Dragonfly's Sanchi.

古文：又攻下邑以西，至虞，击秦将章邯车骑。
现代文：又攻打下邑以西，到虞，击秦将章邯车骑。
English: He also attacked the area west of the next town, Zuyu, and defeated the Qin general, Zhang Xuan.

古文：攻辕戚及亢父，先登。
现代文：攻辕戚及亢父，率先登城。
English: Attack your relatives and your father, and be the first to enter the city.

古文：迁为五大夫。
现代文：升为五大夫。
English: Cao Sangguan was promoted to be the fifth husband.

古文：北救东阿，击章邯军，陷陈，追至濮阳。
现代文：向北救援束阿，击破章邯军，冲锋陷阵，追至濮阳。
English: He went north to rescue Sokua, defeated Zhang Ye's army, stormed and chased them to Fenyang.

古文：攻定陶，取临济。
现代文：攻占定陶，占领临济。
English: He attacked Dingtao and captured Linji.

古文：南救雍丘，击李由军，破之，杀李由，虏秦候一人。
现代文：向南救援雍丘，攻打李由军，大胜，杀死李由，俘虏秦候一人。
English: He went south to rescue Yongqiu, attacked Li Yu's army, won a great victory, killed Li Yu, and captured Qin Huo.

古文：章邯破杀项梁也，沛公与项羽引兵而东。楚怀王以沛公为砀郡长，将砀郡兵。
现代文：章邯破杀项梁时，沛公与项羽率兵向东，楚怀王封沛公为彊邓长，率蛋郡兵。
English: When Zhang Ye defeated and killed Xiang Liang, Pei Gong and Xiang Yu led the troops to the east, while Chu Huai Wang Feng Pei Gong led the troops to the east.

古文：于是乃封参执帛，号曰建成君。
现代文：于是封萱参为执帛，号为建成君。
English: As a result, he was given the title of Fong Yanshan and the name Jianchengjun.

古文：迁为戚公，属砀郡。
现代文：升为戚公，隶属阳郡。
English: Later, Cao San was promoted to be the county magistrate of Qiji County, which was under Qiji County.

古文：其后，从攻东郡尉军，破之成武南。
现代文：之后随从攻打束郡尉军，在成武南打败它。
English: After that, he followed and attacked the Shaku-gun army, defeating it in the south of Chengwu.

古文：击王离军成阳南，又攻杠里，大破之。
现代文：在成阳南攻打王离军，又攻打杠里，大胜。
English: In the south of Chengyang, they attacked Wang Liyuan and Liuli, and won a great victory.

古文：追北，西至开封，击赵贲军，破之，围赵贲开封城中。
现代文：追击败军，西至开封，攻打赵贲军，得胜。把趟贲围在开封城中。
English: He chased and defeated the fleeing enemy army, went west to Kaifeng, attacked Zhao Yu's army, defeated it, and surrounded Zhao Yu in Kaifeng.

古文：西击秦将杨熊军于曲遇，破之，虏秦司马及御史各一人。
现代文：向西攻打秦将杨熊军于曲遇，得胜，俘虏秦司马和御史各一人。
English: He attacked the Qin general Yang Xiong's army in the west, and won, capturing Qin Sima and Mishi one each.

古文：迁为执珪。
现代文：升为执珪。
English: He was promoted to the post of chief magistrate.

古文：从西攻阳武，下轘辕、缑氏，绝河津。
现代文：随从向西攻打阳武，到辗辕、缑氏，阻绝黄河渡口。
English: Followed by the westward attack on Yangwu, to the Min and Min clans, to block the Yellow River ferry.

古文：击赵贲军尸北，破之。
现代文：攻打赵贲军于尸北，得胜。
English: He attacked Zhao Wei's army in Zhabei and won.

古文：从南攻犨，与南阳守齮战阳城郭东，陷陈，取宛，虏齮，定南阳郡。
现代文：随从向南攻打肇，和南阳守畸战于阳城郭东，冲锋陷阵，占领宛，俘获崎，平定南阳郡。
English: Accompanying the southward attack on Zhao, the Nanyang defenders fought a vicious battle in the east of Guodong, Yangcheng, stormed, occupied Wan, captured Qi, and pacified Nanyang County.

古文：从西攻武关、峣关，取之。
现代文：随从向西攻打武关、蛲关，占领了二地。
English: He followed Pei Gong to the west to attack Wuguan and Shaoguan, and captured these two gates.

古文：前攻秦军蓝田南，又夜击其北军，大破之，遂至咸阳，破秦。
现代文：前行攻打秦军于蓝田南，又在夜裹袭击其北军，大胜，于是到咸阳，击破秦。
English: He advanced to attack the Qin army in the south of Lantian, and attacked its northern army at night, and won a great victory, so he went to Xianyang and defeated the Qin.

古文：项羽至，以沛公为汉王。
现代文：项羽到，封沛公为汉王。
English: After Cao Yu arrived in Xianyang, he made Pei Gong the king of Han.

古文：汉王封参为建成侯。
现代文：汉王封曹参为建成侯。
English: The Han King appointed Cao San as a Jiancheng Hou.

古文：从至汉中，迁为将军。
现代文：跟随到了汉中，升为将军。
English: Cao San followed Han Wang to Guanzhong and was promoted to general.

古文：从还定三秦，攻下辨、故道、雍、斄。
现代文：又跟随回去平定三秦，攻打下辨、故道、雍、牦。
English: He also followed back to subdue Sanqin, attacking and defeating Deng, Guodu, Yong and Xing.

古文：击章平军于好畤南，破之，围好畸，取壤乡。
现代文：在好峙南攻打章平军，得胜，包围好峙，占领壤乡。
English: He attacked and defeated Zhang Ping's army in the south of Hezheng, won, surrounded Hezheng, and occupied Hezheng.

古文：击三秦军壤东及高栎，破之。复围章平，平出好畤走。
现代文：在壤束和高梁攻打三秦军，得胜。又包围章平，章平从好峙逃走。
English: He attacked the Sanqin army in Zhouzhuang and Gaoliang and won. He also encircled Zhang Ping, who fled from the confrontation.

古文：因击赵贲、内史保军，破之。
现代文：于是攻打赵贲、内史保军，得胜。
English: So Zhao Zhe and Neishi Bao's army attacked and defeated it.

古文：东取咸阳，更名曰新城。
现代文：向东攻取咸阳，改名为新城。
English: He captured Xianyang to the east and renamed it Xincheng.

古文：参将兵守景陵二十三日，三秦使章平等攻参，参出击，大破之。
现代文：曹参率兵守景陵二十三天，三秦派章平等攻打曹参，曹参出击，大胜。
English: Cao San led the troops to defend Jingling for 23 days. The three Qin armies attacked Cao San equally. Cao San launched an attack and won a great victory.

古文：赐食邑于宁秦。
现代文：把宁秦赐给他作为食邑。
English: Ning Qin was given to him as food.

古文：以将军引兵围章邯废丘；以中尉从汉王出临晋关。
现代文：以将军身份率军围困章邯于废丘；以中尉身份跟随汉王出临晋关。
English: As a general, he led the army to besiege Zhangye in the waste hill; as a lieutenant, he followed Han Wang out of Jinguan.

古文：至河内，下修武，度围津，东击龙且、项佗定陶，破之。
现代文：到河内，至脩武，渡过围津，向东攻打龙且、项佗于定陶，得胜。
English: They went to Hanoi, to Xiangwu, passed through Ouetsu, attacked Longji in the east, and Xiangwu in Dingtao, and won.

古文：东取砀、萧、彭城。
现代文：向东占领碣、萧、彭城。
English: To the east, they captured Wuchang County, Xiao County, and Pengcheng.

古文：击项籍军，汉军大败走。
现代文：攻打项籍军，汉军大败而逃。
English: Attacking the troops of Shan nationality, the Chinese army was defeated and fled.

古文：参以中尉围取雍丘。
现代文：曹参以中尉身份围取雍丘。
English: Cao San, as a lieutenant, besieged and captured Yongqiu.

古文：王武反于外黄，程处反于燕，往击，尽破之。
现代文：王武在外黄反叛，程处在燕反叛，曹参进击，全部获胜。
English: Wang Wu rebelled in Waigaoqiao, Cheng Zuo rebelled in Yan, Cao San attacked, and all of them won.

古文：柱天侯反于衍氏，进破取衍氏。
现代文：柱天侯在衍氏反叛，曹参进军破取了衍氏。
English: Zhu Tianhou rebelled against the Yan clan, and Cao San marched in and defeated the Yan clan.

古文：击羽婴于昆阳，追至叶。
现代文：在昆阳攻打羽婴，追到叶。
English: In Kunyang, they attacked Feather Infant and chased it to Ye.

古文：还攻武强，因至荥阳。
现代文：回去攻打武彊，于是到了荣阳。
English: He went back to attack Wuyi, and then came to Rongyang.

古文：参自汉中为将军中尉，从击诸侯及项王，败，还至荥阳。
现代文：曹参从漠中做将军中尉，跟随攻打诸侯，等到项王失败，又回到阳。
English: Cao San became a general's lieutenant in the middle of the desert, followed the attack of the princes, waited until Xiang Wang failed, and then returned to the sun.

古文：汉二年，拜为假左丞相，入屯兵关中。
现代文：汉二年，拜为假左丞相，进入关中屯兵。
English: In the 2nd year of the Han Dynasty, he was appointed as a pseudo left chancellor and entered the Guanzhong Garrison.

古文：月余，魏王豹反，以假左丞相别与韩信东攻魏将孙遬东张，大破之。
现代文：一个多月后，魏王豹反叛，以假丞相身份另外与韩信在束边攻打魏将孙邀驻守的束张，大胜。
English: A little more than a month later, Wei Wangbao rebelled and, as a false prime minister, together with Han Xin, attacked Sokcho, where Wei had invited Sun Quan to stay, and won a great victory.

古文：因攻安邑，得魏将王襄。
现代文：接着攻打安邑，俘虏魏将王襄。
English: Cao San took advantage of the situation to attack Anyi and captured the Wei general Wang Xiang alive.

古文：击魏王于曲阳，追至东垣，生获魏王豹。
现代文：在曲阳攻打魏王，追到束垣，生俘魏王豹。
English: They attacked Wei Wang in Quyang, chased him to Sokou, and captured Wei Wang Leopards alive.

古文：取平阳，得豹母妻子，尽定魏地，凡五十二县。
现代文：占领平阳，俘获豹母亲妻儿，全部平定魏地，共五十二县。
English: Occupied Pingyang, captured the wife and children of the leopard mother, and completely pacified Wei, a total of 52 counties.

古文：赐食邑平阳。
现代文：赐食邑平阳。
English: The Han king gave Pingyang to Cao San to make oysters.

古文：因从韩信击赵相国夏说军于邬东，大破之，斩夏说。
现代文：于是跟随韩信在邬东攻打趟相国夏说军，大胜，杀死夏说。
English: So he followed Han Xin to attack and fight against the Xia Say Army of the same country in the east of Shandong, and won a great victory, killing Xia Say.

古文：韩信与故常山王张耳引兵下井陉，击成安君陈馀，而令参还围赵别将戚公于邬城中。
现代文：韩信和以前的常山王张耳率兵下井陉，攻打成安君陈余，命令曹参回去把赵别将戚公围困于邬城中。
English: Han Xin and Zhang Er, the former King of Changshan, led their troops to attack Cheng Anjun Chen Yu, and ordered Cao San to go back and besiege Zhao Bei's relatives in the city.

古文：戚公出走，追斩之。
现代文：戚公逃跑，追杀了他。
English: His father-in-law ran away and he chased after him and killed him.

古文：乃引兵诣汉王在所。
现代文：于是率兵到汉王所在地。
English: So he led his soldiers to the location of the Han king.

古文：韩信已破赵，为相国，东击齐，参以左丞相属焉。
现代文：韩信已打败了趟，做了相国，向东攻打齐，曹参以左丞相身份跟随。
English: Han Xin has defeated the trip, made the sister country, and attacked the east, Cao San followed as the left prime minister.

古文：攻破齐历下军，遂取临淄。
现代文：攻破齐历下军，于是占领临淄。
English: After defeating the Qi army, they occupied Linyi.

古文：还定济北郡，收著、漯阴、平原、鬲、卢。
现代文：回去平定济北郡，收复着、漯阴、平原、鬲、卢。
English: He went back to pacify Jibei County and recovered Wenga, Jinyin, Pingyuan, Handan and Lu.

古文：已而从韩信击龙且军于上假密，大破之，斩龙且，虏亚将周兰。
现代文：然后随韩信在上假密攻打龙且军，大胜，杀龙且，俘亚将周兰。
English: Then, following Han Xin, he secretly attacked and defeated the dragon army, won a great victory, killed the dragon army, and captured the second general Zhou Lan.

古文：定齐郡，凡得七十县。
现代文：平定齐郡，共得七十县。
English: Pingding Qi County won a total of 70 counties.

古文：得故齐王田广相田光，其守相许章，及故将军田既。
现代文：俘获原齐王田广相田光，守相许章，以及原将军田既。
English: Captured the former Qi Wang Tian Guang Tian Guang, Shou Xiang Xu Zhang, as well as the former General Tian Ye.

古文：韩信立为齐王，引兵东诣陈，与汉王共破项羽，而参留平齐未服者。
现代文：韩信被立为齐王，率兵向东到陈，和汉王共破项羽，曹参留下平定齐还没有降服的地方。
English: Han Xin was established as the king of Qi and led his army eastward to Chen. He and the king of Han jointly defeated Xiang Yu, leaving Cao Zhan to pacify the areas where Qi had not yet surrendered.

古文：汉王即皇帝位，韩信徙为楚王。
现代文：汉王即皇帝位，整信改封为楚王。
English: The Han king is the emperor, and the rectification letter is changed to the King of Chu.

古文：参归相印焉。
现代文：茎参交回相印。
English: The stems are intertwined to form a groove.

古文：高祖以长子肥为齐王，而以参为相国。
现代文：直狙封长子窒巡为变王，任命萱参为相国。
English: The eldest son of the direct heir, Nitro Jun, became the king, and appointed Shinsengumi as a partner country.

古文：高祖六年，与诸侯剖符，赐参爵列侯，食邑平阳万六百三十户，世世勿绝。
现代文：直担六年，与诸侯剖符，赐萱皇爵为列侯，食邑芒堕一万零六百三十户，世代不绝。
English: Directly in charge for six years, with the princes and dukes, given the crown prince as a vassal, and 10,630 households, generation after generation.

古文：参以齐相国击陈豨将张春，破之，黥布反，参从悼惠王将车骑十二万，与高祖会击黥布军，大破之。
现代文：曹参以齐相国身份攻打陈豨将张春，得胜。黥布造反，曹参跟随悼惠王率车骑十二万，和高祖合击黥布军，大胜。
English: Cao San, as a member of the Qi Dynasty, fought against Zhang Chun, the general of the Chen Dynasty, and won. The Zibo Rebellion, Cao San followed Gui Hui Wang and led 120,000 cavalry, and fought with Gaozu against the Zibo Army, and won a great victory.

古文：南至蕲，还定竹邑、相、萧、留。
现代文：向南到蕲，回师平定竹邑、相、萧、留。
English: They marched south to Lixian County, and then returned to pacify Zhuyi, Xiang County, Xiao County, and Liusian County.

古文：参功：凡下二国，县百二十二；得王二人，相三人，将军六人，大莫嚣、郡守、司马、侯、御史各一人。
现代文：曹参的功绩：共攻取二国，一百二十二县；俘王二人，相三人，将军六人，大莫踯、郡守、司马、候、御史各一人。
English: Cao San's achievements: conquered two countries in total, one hundred and twenty-two counties; captured two kings, three statesmen, six generals, and one each of the grand marshal, county governor, magistrate, warden, and consul.

古文：孝惠元年，除诸侯相国法，更以参为齐丞相。
现代文：孝惠元年，废除诸侯相国之法，改以曹参为齐丞相。
English: In the first year of the reign of Xiao Hui, the Law of the Princes and Vassals of the State was abolished, and Cao San was appointed as the Prime Minister.

古文：参之相齐，齐七十城。
现代文：曹参相齐时，齐有七十座城。
English: When Cao San was the prime minister of Qi, there were 70 cities and towns in Qi.

古文：天下初定，悼惠王富于春秋，参尽召长老诸先生，向所以安集百姓。
现代文：天下刚平定，悼惠王年轻，曹参召集所有的长老诸先生，问安集百姓的办法。
English: The country had just been pacified, and to mourn the young King Hui, Cao San called together all the elders and asked them how to gather the people.

古文：而齐故诸儒以百数，言人人殊，参未知所定。
现代文：而齐老儒数以百计，每个人说得都不一样，曹参不知怎样确定。
English: But there are hundreds of Qi Laoju, and everyone says different things. Cao San doesn't know how to be sure.

古文：闻胶西有盖公，善治黄、老言，使人厚币请之。
现代文：听说胶西有个盖公，善于研究黄老之言，派人以厚礼请他。
English: Heard that Jiaoxi has a Gaigong, good at studying Huanglao's words, and sent someone to invite him with a heavy gift.

古文：既见盖公，盖公为言 治道贵清静而民自定 ，推此类具言之。
现代文：见了盖公，盖公对他说平安之道贵在清静而百姓自会安定，以此类推详细论述。
English: When he met Gai Gong, Gai Gong told him that the way to peace is to be calm and that the people will stabilize themselves, and elaborated in this way.

古文：参于是避正堂，舍盖公焉。
现代文：曹参于是避离正堂，让盖公住在那裹。
English: So Cao San avoided the main hall and let Gaigong live there.

古文：其治要用黄、老术，故相齐九年，齐国安集，大称贤相。
现代文：他的施政要领采用黄老之术，所以为齐相九年，齐国安集，人们大相称赞他为贤相。
English: His policy essentials adopted the Huanglao technique, so for the nine years of Qi Zi, Qi Guo Anji, people widely praised him as a wise man.

古文：萧何薨，参闻之，告舍人趣治行， 吾且入相。 
现代文：萧何薨，曹参听说后，告诉舍人赶快置办行装， 我将入朝为相。 
English: When Xiao Hejun and Cao San heard about it, they told the courier to quickly make the necessary arrangements. I would be the next to enter the imperial court.

古文：居无何，使者果召参。
现代文：过了不久，使者果然来召曹参。
English: Not long after, the person sent by the imperial court actually came to summon Cao San.

古文：参去，属其后相曰： 以齐狱市为寄，慎勿扰也。 
现代文：曹参要离开了，嘱咐接其相位的人说： 把齐的狱讼和市集贸易托付给你，千万不要侵扰它。 
English: When Cao San was about to leave, he told the person who had taken his place: "I entrust Qi's prison case and market trade to you. Don't disturb it."

古文：后相曰： 治无大于此者乎？ 参曰： 不然。
现代文：后相说： 治国难道没有比这更大的事吗? 曹参说： 不是的。
English: The latter said, "Isn't there anything more important than governing the country?" Cao San said, "No."

古文：夫狱市者，所以并容也，今君扰之，奸人安所容乎？
现代文：狱讼和市集贸易，是用来兼容并包的地方，如果您侵扰了它，奸人在哪裹容身呢?
English: The prison and the bazaar trade are meant to be compatible. If you encroach on it, where will the swindler hide?

古文：吾是以先之。 
现代文：所以我把这件事放在最先。 
English: That's why I'm telling you this.

古文：始参微时，与萧何善，及为宰相，有隙。
现代文：最初曹参微贱时，和萧何友善，等做了宰相，二人有矛盾。
English: At first, when Cao San was a minor, he was friendly with Xiao He, and later became the prime minister, but the two had conflicts.

古文：至何且死，所推贤唯参。
现代文：到萧何将死，推举的贤人只有曹参。
English: When Xiao He was on his deathbed, Cao San was the only sage recommended by Xiao He to Emperor Liu Ying.

古文：参代何为相国，举事无所变更，壹遵何之约束。
现代文：曹参代替萧何做相国，所有的事都无所变更，全部遵照萧何的约定。
English: Cao San took the place of Xiao He as a consort, and nothing was changed, everything was in accordance with Xiao He's agreement.

古文：择郡国吏长大，讷于文辞，谨厚长者，即召除为丞相史。
现代文：选择郡国小吏出身，不善文辞的忠厚长者，就召拜为丞相史。
English: If you choose a loyal elder who is not good at writing, but comes from a minor official of the county, he will be called to be the prime minister.

古文：吏言文刻深，欲务声名，辄斥去之。
现代文：小吏中解释法律条文深刻，想求得声名的，都排斥在外。
English: Petty officials who interpret the provisions of the law profoundly and want to gain fame are excluded.

古文：日夜饮酒。卿大夫以下吏及宾客见参不事事；来者皆欲有言。
现代文：日夜饮酒，卿大夫以下官员及宾客见曹参无所事事，来的人都想进言劝说。
English: Drinking alcohol day and night, officials and guests below the rank of doctor see Cao San doing nothing, and everyone who comes wants to persuade him.

古文：至者，参辄饮以醇酒，度之欲有言，复饮酒，醉而后去，终莫得开说，以为常。
现代文：人一到，曹参就用醇酒给他喝，揣测他要说话了，就再让他喝酒，喝醉了之后才回去，终于没人能开口说，便习以为常了。
English: As soon as people arrived, Cao San would give them alcohol to drink, and if he thought they wanted to talk, he would let them drink again, and only go back after they were drunk. Finally, no one could open their mouth to speak, so they got used to it.

古文：相舍后园近吏舍，吏舍日饮歌呼。从吏患之，无如何，乃请参游后园。
现代文：相府后园靠近小吏的住所，小吏在住所裹天天喝酒唱歌，从吏深以为患，拿他们没办法，便请曹参游后园。
English: The backyard of the sister-in-law's house is close to the minor official's residence. The minor official drinks and sings every day at the residence. The minor official deeply believes that there is nothing he can do to help them, so he asks Cao to visit the backyard.

古文：闻吏醉歌呼，从吏幸相国召按之。
现代文：听见小吏醉后唱歌，从吏希望相国召来审问。
English: Hearing the minor officials singing after getting drunk, the officials wanted to summon them from their home countries for interrogation.

古文：乃反取酒张坐饮，大歌呼与相和。
现代文：曹参却反而叫人取酒铺陈坐喝，大声唱着与其相和。
English: Cao San, on the other hand, had the bartender sit and drink with Chen, singing loudly in harmony with him.

古文：参见人之有细过，掩匿覆盖之，府中无事。
现代文：曹参见人有小过错，便为他遮掩，府中平安无事。
English: Cao saw that people make small mistakes, so he covered up for him, and there was no trouble in the government.

古文：参子窋为中大夫。
现代文：曹参的儿子曹窋为中大夫。
English: Cao San's son, Cao Wei, became a junior doctor.

古文：惠帝怪相国不治事，以为 岂少朕与？ 
现代文：惠帝怪相国不理政事，以为 难道是看我年轻吗? 
English: Hui Di blames his brother-in-law for not taking care of political affairs, thinking, "Is it because I'm young?"

古文：乃谓窋曰： 女归，试私从容问乃父曰： 高帝新弃群臣，帝富于春秋，君为相国，日饮，无所请事，何以忧天下？ 
现代文：于是对曹宙说： 你回去，试着私下平常随意地问你父亲： 高帝刚弃群臣而去，帝年富力强，您为相国，天天喝酒，无所事事，怎么能为天下分忧呢? 
English: So he said to Cao Cao: Go back and try to ask your father privately in your usual casual manner: Emperor Gao has just abandoned his ministers and left, the imperial age is rich and powerful, you are for your country, you drink every day, you have nothing to do, how can you share the world's worries?

古文：然无言吾告女也。 
现代文：但不要说是我告诉你的。 
English: But don't say I told you so.

古文：窋既洗沐归，时间，自从其所谏参。参怒而笞之二百，曰： 趣入侍，天下事非乃所当言也！ 
现代文：曹亩休假回家，有空的时候，自随其意劝谏曹参，曹参生气地责打他二百下，说： 快去入朝侍奉，天下事不是你应当说的。 
English: Cao Mu went home on leave. When he had free time, he persuaded Cao San to do as he wished. Cao San angrily beat him 200 times, saying, "Hurry up and enter the imperial service. You shouldn't talk about world affairs."

古文：至朝时，帝让参曰： 与窋胡治乎？
现代文：到上朝时，帝责备曹参说： 与曹宙有什么关系呢?
English: When he arrived at the Shang court, the emperor scolded Cao San and said, "What does this have to do with Cao Chao?

古文：乃者我使谏君也。 
现代文：那是我让他讽谏你的。 
English: Last time I asked him to advise you.

古文：参免冠谢曰： 陛下自察圣武孰与高皇帝？ 
现代文：曹参脱帽谢罪说： 陛下自己觉得圣明英武比高皇帝如何? 
English: Cao San took off his hat and said, "Your Majesty, what do you think of Shengming Yingwu as compared to Emperor Gao?

古文：上曰： 朕乃安敢望先帝！ 
现代文：皇上说： 我怎么敢与先帝比! 
English: The emperor said: How dare I compare myself to the former emperor!

古文：参曰： 陛下观参孰与萧何贤？ 
现代文：曹参说： 陛下看我和萧何谁贤能? 
English: Cao San said, "Your majesty, look at me and Xiao, who is more capable?"

古文：上曰： 君似不及也。 
现代文：皇上说： 您好像不如他。 
English: Cao San said, "Your Majesty's words are right.

古文：参曰： 陛下言之是也。
现代文：曹参说： 陛下说得很对。
English: Cao San said, "Your Majesty is quite right.

古文：且高皇帝与萧何定天下，法令既明具，陛下垂拱，参等守职，遵而勿失，不亦可乎？ 
现代文：高皇帝与萧何平定天下，法令已明白具备，陛下垂衣拱手，曹参等谨守职责，遵守而不丧失，不也可以吗? 
English: Emperor Gao and Xiao He pacified the world, the decree has been clearly established, His Majesty abdicated, Cao San, etc. abide by their duties, comply without losing, can not it be?

古文：惠帝曰： 善。
现代文：惠帝说： 好!
English: Hui Di said: Good!

古文：君休矣！ 
现代文：您去休息吧。 
English: You rest, rest!

古文：参为祖国三年，薨，谥曰懿侯。
现代文：曹参做相国三年，薨，谧号懿侯。
English: Cao San has been a consort for three years,, 号侯.

古文：百姓歌之曰： 萧何为法，讲若画一；曹参代之，守而勿失。
现代文：百姓歌颂他说： 萧何制法，和如画一；曹参代之，守而不失。
English: The people sang his praises: Xiao He made the law, and it is the same as painting; Cao San took the place of it, and kept it without losing.

古文：载其清靖，民以宁壹。 
现代文：乘此清平，民得安宁。 
English: Taking advantage of this peace and tranquility, the people gained tranquility.

古文：窋嗣侯，高后时至御史大夫。
现代文：曹窋继承侯位，高后时位至御史大夫。
English: Cao Jie succeeded to the position of marquess, and rose to the position of imperial historian after high school.

古文：传国至曾孙襄，武帝时为将军，击匈奴，薨。
现代文：传国到曾孙曹襄，武帝时为将军，攻打匈奴，薨。
English: The country was passed down to his great-grandson Cao Xiang, who was a general under Emperor Wu and fought against the Xiongnu.

古文：子宗嗣，有罪，完为城旦。
现代文：其子曹宗继承，犯罪，被罚作筑城劳役。
English: His son Cao Zong inherited the crime and was punished as a laborer in the construction of the city.

古文：至哀帝时，乃封参玄孙之孙本始为平阳侯，二千户，王莽时薨。
现代文：到哀帝时，才封曹参玄孙之孙曹本始为平阳侯，食邑二千户，王莽时薨。
English: At the time of the emperor's death, Cao Benxi, the grandson of Cao San's great-great-grandson, was appointed as the prince of Pingyang, with 2,000 households and Wang Mang Shijie as his vassal.

古文：子宏嗣，建成中先降河北，封平阳侯。
现代文：其子曹宏继承，建武中首先降服河北，封平阳侯。
English: His son Cao Hong succeeded him, and Jianwu was the first to surrender to Hebei, and was given the fief of Pingyang.

古文：至今八侯。
现代文：至今已有八侯。
English: So far, there have been eight.

古文：赞曰：萧何、曹参皆起秦刀笔吏，当时录录未有奇节。
现代文：赞日：萧何、曹参都出身于秦的刀笔小吏，当时平庸没有超群的作为。
English: Praise: Xiao He and Cao San were both born in the Qin dynasty as petty officials. At that time, they were mediocre and didn't do anything extraordinary.

古文：汉兴，依日月之末光，何以信谨守管龠，参与韩信俱征伐。
现代文：汉兴起，仰仗日月的余光，萧何因诚信谨慎守持管籥，曹参与韩信一起征伐。
English: Han rose, relying on the afterglow of the sun and the moon, Xiao He prudently kept the discipline because of his integrity, Cao participated in the conquest of Hanxin.

古文：天下既定，因民之疾秦法，顺流与之更始，二人同心，遂安海内。
现代文：天下平定后，顺应百姓痛恨秦法的心理，依民所向重新开始，二人同心，于是海内得以安定。
English: After the world was pacified, he followed the people's psychology of hating Qin Fa and started anew in accordance with the people's wishes. The two of them were of the same mind, so the sea was stabilized.

古文：淮阴、黥布等已灭，唯何、参擅功名，位冠群臣，声施后世，为一代之宗臣，庆流苗裔，盛矣哉！
现代文：淮阴、黥布等已绝灭，只有萧何、曹参拥有功名，位于群臣之上，声名流传后世，为一代受众人敬仰之臣，使后代得到恩荫，真盛大啊!
English: Huaiyin, Zibo, etc. have become extinct. Only Xiao He and Cao Zhan have distinguished service, are above the other retainers, and their fame has been passed down to future generations. They are a generation of respected retainers, so that future generations will be blessed. How grand it is!

