古文：王薛马韦
现代文：王珪别名叔玠。
English: Wang Yao is also known as Uncle Yao.

古文：王珪，字叔玠。祖僧辩，梁太尉、尚书令。父顗，北齐乐陵郡太守。
现代文：祖父名僧辩，南梁时官至太尉、尚书令。父亲名岂页，北齐时官至乐陵郡太守。
English: His grandfather's name was Sofen, and his father's name was Hanzhe, and his grandfather's name was Nanliang, and his father's name was Hanzhe, and his father's name was Hanzhe, and his grandfather's name was Beiqi.

古文：世居郿。
现代文：世代居住在县。
English: Generations have lived in the county.

古文：性沉澹，志量隐正，恬于所遇，交不苟合。
现代文：他性情稳重恬静，志向度量深邃纯正，对名利际遇看得淡薄，交朋结友绝不随便。
English: His temperament is steady and calm, his ambition is profound and pure, he is indifferent to fame and fortune, and he does not make friends casually.

古文：隋开皇十三年，召入秘书内省，雠定群书，为太常治礼郎。
现代文：隋文帝开皇十三年，招聘到秘书内省，校正审定各种图书资料，任太常治礼郎。
English: In the thirteenth year of the reign of Emperor Sui Wen, he was recruited as a secretary to introspect, proofread and validate various books and materials, and was appointed as Tai Changzhi Reiro.

古文：季父颇，通儒有鉴裁，尤所器许。
现代文：他的小叔父王颇，是位博古通今的学者，很有鉴别能力，特别器重赞扬他。
English: His little uncle, Wang Po, is a scholar of ancient times and modern times, with a great ability to discriminate, and he praises him with particular emphasis.

古文：颇坐汉王谅反，诛，珪亡命南山十余年。
现代文：王颇因汉王杨谅谋反获罪，株连被杀，王珪逃到终南山隐居了十多年。
English: Wang Po was found guilty of plotting against Han Wang Yang Yue, Zhu Lian was killed, and Wang Hui fled to Mount Nanshan and lived in seclusion for more than ten years.

古文：高祖入关，李纲荐署世子府谘议参军事。
现代文：高祖李渊进长安后，李纲推荐他任代理太子府咨议参军。
English: After Li Yuan, the great-great-grandfather, entered Chang'an, Li Gang recommended him to be appointed as the acting prince's adviser to join the army.

古文：建成为皇太子，授中舍人，迁中允，礼遇良厚。
现代文：李建成当皇太子时，任命他为中舍人，后改任中允，对他的待遇丰厚。
English: When Li Jiancheng was crown prince, he was appointed as the middle assistant, and later changed to the middle assistant, and he was treated well.

古文：太子与秦王有隙，帝责珪不能辅导，流巂州。
现代文：李建成和秦王李世民产生了矛盾，高祖责怪王珪引导失职，把他流放到隽州。
English: Li Jiancheng and Qin King Li Shimin had a conflict. Gao Zu blamed Wang Qi for leading him to fail in his duty and exiled him to Zhangzhou.

古文：太子已诛，太宗召为谏议大夫。
现代文：李建成被杀后，太宗李世民调他回京任谏议大夫。
English: After Li Jiancheng was killed, Emperor Taizong Li Shimin sent him back to Beijing to serve as a doctor.

古文：帝尝曰： 正主御邪臣，不可以致治；正臣事邪主，亦不可以致治。
现代文：太宗曾经说过： 纯正的君主任用奸邪的臣子，不能使天下太平；正直的臣子侍奉昏庸的君主，也不能使天下太平。
English: Emperor Taizong once said: A pure ruler cannot pacify the world with treacherous vassals; an honest vassal cannot serve a foolish ruler and pacify the world.

古文：唯君臣同德，则海内安。
现代文：只有君臣都纯正，天下才会安宁。
English: There will be peace in the world only if all princes and ministers are pure.

古文：朕虽不明，幸诸公数相谏正，庶致天下于平。 
现代文：我虽然不算圣明，幸亏您诸位多次劝阻纠正我的失误，才差不多使得天下平安。 
English: Although I am not a saint, thanks to your many times of dissuading me from correcting my mistakes, I have almost made the world a safer place.

古文：珪进曰： 古者，天子有争臣七人，谏不用，则相继以死。
现代文：王珪建议说： 古代，天子有七位直言劝谏的臣子，劝谏不被采纳，就一个接一个地用死劝谏。
English: Wang Yao suggested: In ancient times, the Son of Heaven had seven courtiers who were outspoken in their advice. If their advice was not accepted, they would use death to persuade one after another.

古文：今陛下开圣德，收采刍言，臣愿竭狂瞽，佐万分一。 
现代文：如果陛下光大至高无上的德行，广泛听取人们的意见，我愿竭尽微薄的心力，多少为您帮点小忙。 
English: If Your Majesty would display the supreme virtue of listening widely to the opinions of the people, I would like to do my best to help you in some small way.

古文：帝可，乃诏谏官随中书、门下及三品官入阁。
现代文：太宗同意，于是诏令谏官随同中书、门下二省以及三品以上朝臣进入内衙紫宸殿。
English: Emperor Taizong agreed, so he ordered the eunuchs to enter the Inner Court of the Empress Dowager Lady Shijie, along with the second secretary, two subordinate provinces, and three or more courtiers.

古文：珪推诚纳善，每存规益，帝益任之。
现代文：王珪诚恳地收集好的批评意见，往往提出有益的规劝，太宗更加信任他。
English: Wang Jun earnestly collected good criticisms and often made useful exhortations. Emperor Taizong trusted him more.

古文：封永宁县男、黄门侍郎，迁侍中。
现代文：封赐他永宁县男爵号、黄门侍郎官职，后升任侍中。
English: He was given the title of baron of Yongning County and the official post of Huangmen chamberlain, and later promoted to chamberlain.

古文：它日进见，有美人侍帝侧，本庐江王瑗姬也。
现代文：有一天进宫拜见太宗，见一个容貌美丽的女子在太宗身边伺候，她本来是庐江王李瑗的妾。
English: One day, he went to the palace to visit Emperor Taizong and saw a beautiful woman waiting by his side. She was originally the concubine of King Lirong of the Li River.

古文：帝指之曰： 庐江不道，贼其夫而纳其室，何有不亡乎？ 
现代文：太宗指着她说 ：庐江王残暴，杀死了她的丈夫把她收为妻妾，怎能不灭亡呢？ 
English: Taizong pointed at her and said, "The king of the Min River is cruel. He killed her husband and took her as his wife and concubine. How can he not perish?"

古文：珪避席曰： 陛下以庐江为是邪？
现代文：王珪离开座位说： 陛下认为庐江王杀人夺妻对不对呢？ 
English: Wang Yao left his seat and said, "Your Majesty thinks that the King of the Li River is a murderer and a wife-stealer, isn't that right?"

古文：非邪？ 帝曰： 杀人而取妻，乃问朕是非，何也？ 
现代文：太宗说 ：他杀了别人还夺了他的妻子，还问我他对不对，是什么意思？ 
English: Taizong said: He killed someone else and took his wife, and asked me if he was right, what do you mean?

古文：对曰： 臣闻齐桓公之郭，问父老曰： 郭何故亡？ 
现代文：王珪回答说： 我听说齐桓公到了虢国，问有声望的老人 ：虢国为什么灭亡？ 
English: Wang Yao replied, "I heard that Prince Qi Huan came to Shan State and asked a famous old man, 'Why did Shan State perish?'

古文：曰： 以其善善而恶恶也。 
现代文：老人回答 ：因为虢君喜爱善良讨厌邪恶。 
English: The old man replied, "Because he loves goodness and hates evil."

古文：公曰： 若子之言，乃贤君也，何至于亡？ 
现代文：齐桓公说 ：照您讲的，他是个圣明国君，怎么亡国了？ 
English: Qi Kuan Gong said, "According to you, he is a sacred sovereign. How did he lose his country?"

古文：父老曰： 不然，郭君善善不能用，恶恶不能去，所以亡。 
现代文：老人说 ：不是这样，虢君喜爱善良却不任用，讨厌邪恶却不清除，所以亡国。 
English: The old man said, "It's not like that. Shun loved goodness but didn't use it, hated evil but didn't purge it, and that's why he lost his country."

古文：今陛下知庐江之亡，其姬尚在，窃谓陛下以为是。
现代文：现在陛下知道庐江王灭亡的原因，而把他的妾留在身边，我暗想陛下实质上认为庐江王的做法是对的。
English: Now that Your Majesty knows the reason for the death of the King of the Li River and keeps his concubine by his side, I imagine that Your Majesty essentially believes that the King of the Li River did the right thing.

古文：审知其非，所谓知恶而不去也。 
现代文：明知他不对，这就是虢国老人所说的知道是邪恶却不消除。 
English: Knowing that he is not right, this is what the old man of Shandong said that knowing is evil but not eliminating it.

古文：帝嗟美其言。
现代文：太宗赞美王珪的话。
English: Taizong praises Wang Xi's words.

古文：帝使太常少卿祖孝孙以乐律授宫中音家，伎不进，数被让。
现代文：太宗叫太常少卿祖孝孙向宫中女乐手们传授音乐十二律吕知识，技艺没有长进，多次受到太宗斥责。
English: Emperor Taizong asked Emperor Taizong's younger brother, Emperor Taizong's grandson, Emperor Taizong's grandson, Emperor Taizong's grandson, Emperor Taizong's grandson, Emperor Taizong's grandson, Emperor Taizong's grandson, Emperor Taizong's grandson, Emperor Taizong's grandson, Emperor Taizong's grandson, Emperor Taizong's grandson, Emperor Taizong's grandson, Emperor Taizong's grandson, Emperor Taizong's grandson, Emperor Taizong's grandson, Emperor Taizong's grandson, Emperor Taizong's grandson, Emperor Taizong's

古文：珪与温彦博同进曰： 孝孙，修谨士，陛下使教女乐，又责谯之，天下其以士为轻乎！ 
现代文：王珪和温彦博一起进言说 ：祖孝孙是位纯洁严谨的文人，陛下叫他去教授女乐手，还斥责他，人们大概认为文人算不了什么吧？ 
English: Wang Yao and Wen Yanbo said together: "Zhu Xiaosun is a pure and rigorous literati. His Majesty asked him to teach female musicians, and also scolded him. People probably think that literati are nothing, right?

古文：帝怒曰： 卿皆我腹心，乃附下罔上，为人游说邪？ 
现代文：太宗生气地说： 你们都是我的亲信，却要顺从下属欺骗君主，替他当说客吗？ 
English: Too angry, he said, "You are all my close confidants, yet you want to obey a subordinate, deceive the sovereign, and act as a lobbyist for him?

古文：彦博惧，谢罪，珪不谢，曰： 臣本事前宫，罪当死，陛下矜其性命，引置枢密，责以忠效。今疑臣以私，是陛下负臣，臣不负陛下。 
现代文：温彦博害怕了，检讨错误，王珪不认错，说 ：我原来侍奉隐太子，按罪应当处死，陛下怜悯不杀，安排在谏议大夫这个重要位置上，让我尽忠竭力进行规谏，现在却怀疑我有私心，这是陛下亏待我，不是我辜负陛下。 
English: Wen Yanbo was afraid, and reviewed his mistake. Wang Yao did not admit his mistake, and said, "I used to serve the crown prince. According to the crime, I should be put to death. Your Majesty is merciful and does not kill. I was placed in the important position of the doctor of deliberation. Let me be loyal and do my best to carry out the regulation. But now I suspect that I have selfish motives. This is because Your Majesty mistreated me, not because I failed Your Majesty."

古文：帝默然惭，遂罢。
现代文：太宗默默无言感到惭愧，于是作罢。
English: Taizong silently felt ashamed, so he quit.

古文：明日，语房玄龄曰： 昔武王不用夷、齐，宣王杀杜伯，自古帝王纳谏固难矣。
现代文：第二天，告诉房玄龄说： 古时周武王不听伯夷叔齐的劝阻，周宣王杀掉了无辜的大夫杜伯，自古以来国君听取劝谏确实困难。
English: The next day, he told Fang Xuanling: In ancient times, King Zhou Wu did not listen to the dissuasion of Uncle Bai Qi. King Zhou Xuan killed the innocent doctor Du Bo. Since ancient times, it is really difficult for the king to listen to the advice.

古文：朕夙夜庶几于前圣，昨责珪等，痛自悔，公等勿惩是不进谏也！ 
现代文：我日夜努力学习前代圣明的国君，昨天指责王珪等人，自己很后悔，您诸位千万不要因此害怕而不愿进言劝谏呀！ 
English: I have been studying hard day and night about the former Emperor Shengming. Yesterday, I criticized Wang Qian and others. I regret it very much. You must not be afraid of this and not be willing to speak out.

古文：时珪与玄龄、李靖、温彦博、戴胄、魏征同辅政。
现代文：当时王珪和房玄龄、李靖、温彦博、戴胄、魏征共同辅佐朝政。
English: At that time, Wang Qian and Fang Xuanling, Li Jing, Wen Yanbo, Dai Qian and Wei Zheng jointly assisted the imperial government.

古文：帝以珪善人物，且知言，因谓曰： 卿标鉴通晤，为朕言玄龄等材，且自谓孰与诸子贤？ 
现代文：太宗认为王珪熟悉朝臣们的人品，又善于评价，所以对他说 ：你有透彻的鉴别能力，替我评品一下房玄龄等人的才干，并说说自己同他们比较谁更贤能？ 
English: Emperor Taizong thought that Wang Hui was familiar with the personalities of courtiers and was good at evaluating them, so he said to him: You have a thorough ability to discriminate, evaluate the talents of Fang Xuanling and others for me, and say who is more capable than them?

古文：对曰： 孜孜奉国，知无不为，臣不如玄龄；兼资文武，出将入相，臣不如靖；敷奏详明，出纳惟允，臣不如彦博；济繁治剧，众务必举，臣不如胄；以谏诤为心，耻君不及尧、舜，臣不如征。
现代文：王珪回答说： 孜孜不倦地报效国家，知道该做的就努力地做，我不如房玄龄；文武双全，出征可以当将，回朝可以当相，我不如李靖；陈事进言详尽明白，上传下达忠实公正，我不如温彦博；解决繁重的困难，妥善处理各种问题，我不如戴胄；全心全意地劝谏皇上，巴望皇上跟尧舜一样圣明，我不如魏征。
English: Wang Yao replied, "I am not as good as Fang Xuanling at tirelessly serving the country, knowing what to do and doing it diligently; I am not as good as Li Jing at being well-educated and well-armed, being able to go to war and returning to the imperial court as a dignitary; I am not as good as Wen Yanbo at giving detailed and clear advice, being loyal and fair; I am not as good as Dai Yao at solving heavy difficulties and properly dealing with various problems; I am not as good as Wei Zheng at wholeheartedly advising Emperor Zhao and hoping that the emperor is as holy as Emperor Zhao.

古文：至激浊扬清，疾恶好善，臣于数子有一日之长。 
现代文：说到澄清污浊倡导廉洁，痛恨邪恶珍惜善良，我和以上诸位都有这个优点。 
English: When it comes to clarifying filth and advocating integrity, abhorring evil and cherishing goodness, I and all of you above have this advantage.

古文：帝称善。
现代文：太宗赞扬说好。
English: Wen Di thought it was right.

古文：而玄龄等亦以为尽己所长，谓之确论。
现代文：房玄龄等人也认为说透了自己的特点，称这是精确的评论。
English: Fang Xuanling and others also believe that they have fully explained their own characteristics, saying that this is an accurate comment.

古文：进封郡公。
现代文：王珪进封为郡公。
English: Wang Xi Jinfeng became the county magistrate.

古文：坐漏禁近语，左除同州刺史。
现代文：因泄露翰林院秘密获罪，贬为同州刺史。
English: He was found guilty of leaking the secrets of the Hanlin Institute and was relegated to the annals of state history.

古文：帝念名臣，俄召拜礼部尚书兼魏王泰师。
现代文：太宗考虑他是名臣，很快调回朝廷任礼部尚书兼魏王李泰的老师。
English: Taizong considered him to be a distinguished minister, and he was soon transferred back to the imperial court to serve as the teacher of the ceremonial department and the Wei King Li Tai.

古文：王见之，为先拜，珪亦以师自居。
现代文：魏王召见王珪，先向王珪礼拜，王珪也就以老师的身份安然接受。
English: The Wei king summoned Wang Yao, and he first prayed to Wang Yao. Wang Yao accepted the invitation as a teacher.

古文：王问珪何以为忠孝，珪〗曰： 陛下，王之君，事思尽忠；陛下，王之父，事思尽孝。
现代文：魏王请教王珪怎样做才叫忠孝，王珪说： 皇上是您的国君，侍奉他就要竭尽忠诚；皇上又是您的父亲，侍奉他就要竭尽孝心。
English: The Wei king asked Wang Yao how to be loyal and filial. Wang Yao said: The emperor is your sovereign, and you must be loyal to him; the emperor is your father, and you must be filial to him.

古文：忠孝可以立身，可以成名。 
现代文：尽忠尽孝可以树立自己，可以成就美名。 
English: Loyalty and filial piety can establish oneself, can achieve a good reputation.

古文：王曰： 忠孝既闻命矣，愿闻所习。 
现代文：魏王说： 忠孝的道理我已懂了，希望知道从何做起。 
English: Wei Wang said: I have already understood the principle of loyalty and filial piety, and I hope to know where to start.

古文：珪曰： 汉东平王苍称 为善最乐 ，愿王志之。 
现代文：王珪说： 汉朝东平王刘苍说是 为善最乐 ，希望您记住这话。 
English: Wang Yao said, "Dongping King Liu Cang of the Han Dynasty said that doing good is the greatest happiness. I hope you remember this.

古文：帝闻，喜曰： 儿可以无过矣！ 
现代文：太宗知道这事，喜悦地说： 泰儿可以不犯过失了！ 
English: Taizong knew about this and said happily, "Thayer can no longer make mistakes!"

古文：子敬直，尚南平公主。
现代文：他的儿子王敬直，娶南平公主为妻。
English: His son, Wang Jing Zhi, married Princess Nanping.

古文：是时，诸主下嫁，以帝女贵，未尝行见舅姑礼。
现代文：当时，各位公主出嫁，因为是皇帝的女儿身份尊贵，还不曾举行拜见公公婆母的礼仪。
English: At that time, the princesses were getting married, and because they were the daughters of the emperor, they didn't have the courtesy of meeting their in-laws.

古文：珪曰： 主上循法度，吾当受公主谒见。岂为身荣，将以成国家之美。 
现代文：王珪说： 皇上是遵循礼仪制度的，我应当受到公主的拜见，正因为她身份尊贵，就用这来显示朝廷的美德。 
English: Wang Yao said: The emperor is the first to follow the etiquette system. I should be greeted by the princess. It is precisely because of her noble status that she uses this to show the virtue of the court.

古文：于是，与夫人坐堂上，主执盥馈乃退。
现代文：于是，他和夫人坐在正厅上，南平公主端来竹舦脸盆进献给公公婆母之后才离开。
English: As a result, he and his wife sat in the main hall, and Nanping Princess brought a bamboo basin to dedicate to her parents-in-law before leaving.

古文：其后公主降，有舅姑者，备妇礼，本于珪。
现代文：从此以后公主出嫁，凡是有公公婆母的都要举行全部礼仪，效法王珪。
English: From then on, when a princess got married, anyone with a father-in-law or a mother-in-law had to go through the entire ceremony, following Wang Yao's example.

古文：十三年，病。帝遣公主就第省视，复遣民部尚书唐俭增损药膳。
现代文：贞观十三年，王珪病重，太宗派南平公主回家探望，又派民部尚书唐俭调理药剂饮食。
English: In the thirteenth year of Zhenguan, Wang Hui fell seriously ill. The Emperor sent Princess Nanping to visit her at home, and he also sent Shangshu Tang Jian from the Ministry of the People to adjust the diet with medicine.

古文：卒，年六十九。
现代文：去世时，享年六十九岁。
English: He was 69 when he died.

古文：帝素服哭别次，诏魏王率百官临哭。赠吏部尚书，谥曰懿。
现代文：太宗穿上丧服在便殿哭泣悼念。诏令魏王带领众朝臣到王家吊唁，追认他为吏部尚书，谥号为 懿 。
English: Emperor Taizong put on mourning clothes to weep and mourn in the hall. Emperor Wei ordered the king to lead all the courtiers to the royal family to offer condolences, identifying him as the official Shangshu, with the posthumous name of.

古文：珪少孤且贫，人或馈遗，初无让。
现代文：王珪年幼父母双亡，家境贫寒，有人赠送财物，一点也不推辞。
English: Wang Yao's parents both died when he was young, his family was poor, and some people gave him gifts of money, which he did not refuse at all.

古文：及贵，厚报之，虽已亡，必酬赡其家。
现代文：他显贵后，给予丰厚的酬谢，即使他本人不在了，也一定要酬报赡养他的家属。
English: After his rise to prominence, he gave a rich reward, and even if he himself was no longer there, he must also reward his family members who supported him.

古文：性不苛察，临官务举纲维，去甚不可者，至仆妾亦不见喜愠。
现代文：他秉性不爱追究小节，当官致力于抓好大政方针，杜绝太不应该的事情，直到奴仆妻妾也没看见他嬉笑和生气。
English: By nature, he did not like to pursue the details, and the officials were committed to adhering to the major policies and eliminating the most inappropriate things, until the servants and concubines did not see him laugh and get angry.

古文：奉寡嫂，家事咨而后行。
现代文：他敬重守寡的嫂子，家里的事情取得她的同意才办理。
English: He respected his widowed sister-in-law, and only dealt with matters at home with her consent.

古文：教抚孤侄，虽其子不过也。
现代文：教育抚养已成孤儿的侄子，那种精心的程度即使是对自己的儿子也没有超过。
English: The education and upbringing of his orphaned nephew was no more elaborate than that of his own son.

古文：宗族匮乏，周恤之，薄于自奉。
现代文：家境贫寒的亲族，都给予接济，自己的生活却很清淡。
English: Relatives from poor families are given assistance, but their own lives are very poor.

古文：独不作家庙，四时祭于寝，为有司所劾，帝为立庙愧之，不罪也。
现代文：只是没有修建家族祠庙，逢年过节到坟墓上祭祀，被主管官吏弹劾，太宗替他修建了一幢祠庙来羞辱他，但是没有处罚他。
English: However, he did not build a family ancestral temple. Every year, he went to the grave to offer sacrifices. He was impeached by the competent officials. Taizong built an ancestral temple for him to humiliate him, but did not punish him.

古文：世以珪俭不中礼，少之。
现代文：人们认为他节俭到不合礼仪的程度，轻视他。
English: He was despised for his unseemly frugality.

古文：始，隐居时，与房玄龄、杜如晦善，母李尝曰： 而必贵，然未知所与游者何如人，而试与偕来。 
现代文：当初，隐居终南山时，同房玄龄、杜如晦结为朋友，母亲李氏有一次说： 你要显贵，但不知跟你交往的是什么样的人，你把他们约来看看。 
English: At the beginning, when he was living in seclusion in Nanshan, his roommates, Xuanling and Du Ruzhu, became his friends. His mother, Li, once said, "You want to be a dignitary, but you don't know what kind of people you are dealing with. You should make an appointment to see them."

古文：会玄龄等过其家，李窥大惊，敕具酒食，欢尽日，喜曰： 二客公辅才，汝贵不疑。 
现代文：恰好房玄龄等人路过他家，母亲暗中观察后大吃一惊，命令备办酒席，让他们高高兴兴玩了一天，她欣喜地说： 这两位客人是公卿宰相一类人才，你将来显贵没有问题。 
English: It just so happened that Fang Xuanling and others were passing by his house. His mother was taken aback after observing them secretly, and ordered a banquet to be prepared, so that they could have a day of joy and fun. She said with delight: These two guests are talents of the same level as noblemen and prime ministers, and there is no problem for you to be prominent in the future.

古文：敬直封南城县男，后坐交皇太子承乾，徙岭外。
现代文：儿子王敬直封南城县男爵号，后来因与皇太子李承乾交往牵连获罪，流放到岭南。
English: His son, Wang Jingzhi, was given the title of baron of Nancheng County. Later, he was convicted of involvement with Crown Prince Li Chengqian and exiled to Lingnan.

古文：珪孙焘、旭。
现代文：王珪有两个孙子王焘、王旭。
English: Wang Xi has two grandchildren, Wang Xi and Wang Xu.

古文：焘，性至孝，为徐州司马。
现代文：王焘，秉性最守孝道，任徐州司马。
English: Wang Yao, who was the most filial by nature, was appointed as the Sima of Xuzhou.

古文：母有疾，弥年不废带，视絮汤剂。
现代文：母亲生病，整整一年没有解衣安眠，看护调理汤药。
English: When my mother was ill, she didn't undress or sleep for a whole year, so I had to take care of her with tonics.

古文：数从高医游，遂穷其术，因以所学作书，号《外台秘要》，讨绎精明，世宝焉。
现代文：多次跟高明的医生交往，于是研究透了医术，就把研究成果撰写成书，书名《外台秘要》，研究阐发得精细透彻，人们很珍视它。
English: He had many dealings with clever doctors, and when he had thoroughly studied the art of medicine, he wrote down the results of his research in a book called "Off-site Secrets." The research was elaborately and thoroughly explained, and people treasured it very much.

古文：历给事中、鄴郡太守，治闻于时。
现代文：他历任给事中、邺郡太守，政绩在当时很有影响。
English: Among his successive posts, he was the governor of Ye County, and his political performance was very influential at that time.

古文：旭，见《酷吏传》。
现代文：王旭，事见本书《酷吏传》。
English: Wang Xu, see the book "Cool Official Biography."

