古文：世宗睿武孝文皇帝，讳荣，太祖之养子，盖圣穆皇后之侄也。
现代文：周世宗睿武孝文皇帝，讳名荣，是太祖的养子，圣穆皇后的侄子。
English: Emperor Zhou Shizong Rui and Emperor Wu Xiaowen, known as Meng Rong, was the adopted son of Emperor Taizu and the nephew of Empress Sheng Mu.

古文：世宗怒，厉声曰： 法者自古帝王之所制，本以防奸，朕立法杀赃吏，非酷刑也。 质曰： 陛下杀之则可，若付有司，臣不敢署敕。 
现代文：本姓柴，父亲柴守礼，以太子少保的官爵退休。世宗于唐朝天祐十八年九月二十四日，出生于邢州的别墅。尚未成年时，因为侍奉圣穆皇后，在周太祖身边，当时太祖没有儿子，家道沦落，因为世宗谨慎厚重，所以将众多事务交付与他。世宗尽心管理，资用不乏，得以度过艰难。
English: Originally surnamed Chai, his father, Chai Shouli, retired as an official peer of the Tai Zi Shao Bao. Shizong was born in a villa in Zhangzhou on September 24, 18 in the Tang Dynasty. When he was not yet an adult, because he served the Queen of Saint Mu, he was at the side of Zhou Taizu. At that time, the grandfather did not have a son, and the family road fell, because Shizong was cautious and heavy, so he entrusted many affairs to him. Shizong devoted himself to management, had no shortage of funds, and was able to overcome difficulties.

古文：遂贷其命。二年，太祖镇鄴，改天雄军牙内都指挥使，领贵州刺史、检校右仆射。
现代文：太祖因辅佐皇上的功劳而任枢密副使，世宗被授予左监门卫将军。后汉二年，周太祖镇守邺都，世宗改任天雄军牙内都指挥使，遥任贵州刺史、检校右仆射。
English: The great-grandfather was appointed as a privy vice-envoy for his services in assisting the emperor, and Shizong was awarded the rank of general of the left guard of the gate. In the second year of the Later Han Dynasty, when Zhou Taizu was in charge of the capital city of Shandong, Shizong was appointed as the commander of Tianxiong's army in Inner Mongolia, and was also appointed as the governor of Guizhou and the inspector of schools.

古文：三年冬，太祖入平内难，留帝守鄴城。
现代文：三年冬，周太祖进京平定汉室内乱，留下世宗镇守邺城。
English: In the winter of the third year, Zhou Taizu entered Beijing to quell the Han civil war, leaving Shizong to keep watch over Shicheng.

古文：《宋史·王赞传》：周世宗镇澶渊，每旬决囚，赞引律令，辨析中理。
现代文：后周广顺元年正月，太祖登上帝位，世宗恳请入京朝见，忽然做梦来到黄河边上不能渡过，旋即就被授予澶州节度使、检校太保，封为太原郡侯。世宗镇守澶州时，为政清廉整肃，盗贼不敢进入边境。
English: After Zhou Guangshun ascended to the throne in the first month of the first year of the year, Shizong earnestly invited him to Beijing to meet the emperor. Suddenly, he had a dream that he came to the edge of the Yellow River and could not cross it. Immediately, he was awarded the title of Shanzhou Festival Delegate, the title of school inspector, and the title of Taiyuan County Marquis. When Shizong was in charge of Shanzhou, he cleaned up for political integrity, and thieves did not dare to enter the border.

古文：问之，知其尝事学问，即署右职。
现代文：此前，澶州的街巷潮湿狭窄，官府的墙壁坍塌，世宗便扩大街巷，增修房宇，官民都亲近他。
English: Previously, the streets and lanes of Zhangzhou were damp and narrow, and the walls of the government office had collapsed. Shizong expanded the streets and lanes, added buildings, and the government and the people were close to him.

古文：二年正月，兗州慕容彦超反，帝累表请征行，太祖嘉之。
现代文：二年正月，兖州慕容彦超反叛，世宗屡次上表请求前往征讨，太祖褒扬他。
English: In the first month of the second year, Zhangzhou Murongyan was extremely rebellious, and Shizong repeatedly requested to go to the table to collect, and the great-grandfather praised him.

古文：及曹英等东讨，数月无功，太祖欲亲征，召群臣议其事，宰臣冯道奏以方当盛夏，车驾不宜冲冒。
现代文：当曹英等人东征后，几个月不见功效，太祖将亲征，召集群臣商议这事。宰臣冯道上奏说正当盛夏季节，御驾不宜妄动冒险。
English: When Cao Ying's and others' eastward march had not been effective for several months, the great-grandfather personally led the march and convened a group of courtiers to discuss the matter. His vassal Feng Daoxiang said that it was the height of the summer season, and it was not appropriate for him to take any risks.

古文：太祖曰： 寇不可玩。如朕不可行，当使澶州兒子击贼，方办吾事。 
现代文：太祖说 ：贼寇不可轻视，如果我不能出征，就当让我澶州的儿子前往讨贼，才能办成我的事。 
English: The great-grandfather said, "Thieves and robbers are not to be despised. If I cannot go to war, then let my son from Zhangzhou go to search for thieves, so that I can accomplish my mission."

古文：时枢密王峻意不欲帝将兵，故太祖亲征。
现代文：当时枢密使王峻不想让世宗统兵，所以还是太祖亲往征讨。
English: At that time, the imperial envoy Wang Jun did not want to let Shizong lead the troops, so the great-grandfather went to fight.

古文：六月，兗州平。
现代文：六月，兖州平定。
English: In June, Bozhou was pacified.

古文：十二月，加检校太傅、同平章事。
现代文：十二月，加封世宗为检校太傅、同平章事。
English: In December, Jafeng Shizong was awarded the title of proctor of the school and the title of Tongping.

古文：三年正月，帝入觐。
现代文：三年正月，世宗入京朝拜太祖。
English: In the first month of the third year, Sejong entered Kyoto to worship Taizu.

古文：三月，授开封尹兼功德使，封晋王。
现代文：三月，授世宗为开封尹兼功德使，封为晋王。
English: In March, Zhu Shizong was appointed as the crown prince of Jin.

古文：世宗悟，入侍禁中，以府事命翰总决。壬辰，太祖崩，秘不发丧。丙申，内出太祖遗制： 晋王荣可于柩前即位。 
现代文：显德元年正月五日，加封为开府仪同三司、检校太尉、兼侍中，依旧任开封尹兼功德使，掌管内外兵马事务。这时太祖卧病临终，官民忧虑沮丧，当听到由世宗总管内外兵马大权时，全都感到称心快意。十七日，太祖驾崩，隐秘不公布讣告。二十一日，内廷出示太祖遗诏说 ：晋王郭荣可在灵柩前即皇帝位。 
English: On the 5th day of the first month of the first year of the Xiande era, Jafeng was appointed as the third secretary of the Kaifu Rites and Ceremonies, the third lieutenant of the inspection of schools, and the second chamberlain. He was still appointed as the first secretary of Yin and Gongde, and was in charge of the internal and external military affairs. At this time, the great-grandfather was on his deathbed, and the officials and people were worried and depressed. When they heard that the great-grandfather was appointed as the general manager of the internal and external military affairs, they all felt happy. On the 17th day, the great-grandfather passed away,

古文：群臣奉帝即皇帝位。
现代文：群臣奉世宗即皇帝位。
English: A group of vassals follow the emperor.

古文：庚子，宰臣冯道率百僚上表请听政，凡三上。
现代文：二十五日，宰臣冯道率领百官上表请世宗临朝听政，共上表三次。
English: On the 25th, the vassal Feng Dao led a hundred officials to go to the table to invite Shizong Lin to listen to politics, a total of three times.

古文：壬寅，帝见群臣于万岁殿门之东庑下。
现代文：二十七日，世宗在万岁殿的东边廊庑下朝见群臣。
English: On the 27th, Sejong met with his ministers under the east gallery of the Hall of Long Life.

古文：二月庚戌，潞州奏，河东刘崇与契丹大将军杨衮，举兵南指。
现代文：二月五日，潞州上奏，河东刘崇与契丹大将军杨衮，领兵南下。
English: On February 5th, Zhangzhou went up, and Liu Chong from Hedong and Yang Hui, the general of Khitan, led the troops southward.

古文：河东贼将张晖率前锋自团柏谷入寇，帝召群臣议亲征。
现代文：二十二日，河东贼将张晖率领前锋从团柏谷入寇，世宗召集群臣商议亲征。
English: On the 22nd day of the year, the bandits from the east of the river, led by Zhang Xuan, invaded from the Kashiwagok Valley. Shizong called together a group of ministers to discuss the matter.

古文：宰臣冯道等奏，以刘崇自平阳奔遁之后，势弱气夺，未有复振之理，窃虑声言自来，以误于我，陛下纂嗣之初，先帝山陵有日，人心易摇，不宜轻举，命将御寇，深以为便。
现代文：宰臣冯道等上奏说，因为刘崇从平阳逃走之后，已经势力衰弱士气沮丧，没有重振势力的可能，我们私下认为他声称亲自南下，是欺骗我们。陛下刚即帝位，先帝灵柩入土在即，人心容易生变，不宜轻易动作，任命将领抵御贼寇，最为方便。
English: Because Liu Chong's power had weakened and his morale was depressed after he fled from Pingyang, and there was no possibility of reviving his power, we privately thought that he was deceiving us when he claimed to have personally gone to the south. His Majesty had just ascended the throne, and the former emperor's coffin was about to be buried. People's hearts are prone to change, and it is not appropriate to act lightly. It is most convenient to appoint generals to resist the bandits.

古文：帝曰： 刘崇幸我大丧，闻我新立，自谓良便，必发狂谋，谓天下可取，谓神器可图，此际必来，断无疑耳！ 
现代文：世宗说： 刘崇庆幸我遭逢大丧，听到我刚即位，自认为是好机会，必定心生妄想，以为天下可以夺取，社稷可以图谋，此时一定会来，断然无疑！ 
English: Said King Sejong: "Liu Chongqing is fortunate that I have suffered a great loss. When he heard that I had just ascended the throne, he thought it was a good opportunity. He must have been delusional. He must have thought that the world could be conquered and society could be plotted against. At this time, he would definitely come, without a doubt!

古文：冯道等以帝锐于亲征，因固诤之。
现代文：冯道等因为世宗锐意亲征，因而极力劝谏他。
English: Feng Dao and others tried their best to persuade Shizong to leave because he was determined to enlist himself.

古文：帝曰： 昔唐太宗之创业，靡不亲征，朕何惮焉！ 
现代文：世宗说 ：以前唐太宗创业时，无不亲自征伐，我又害怕什么。 
English: Sejong said, "Before, when Tang Taizong was starting a business, I had to do all the work myself. What was I afraid of?

古文：道曰： 陛下未可便学太宗。 
现代文：冯道说 ：陛下还不能效仿太宗。 
English: Feng Dao said, "Your Majesty cannot yet emulate Emperor Taizong.

古文：帝又曰： 刘崇乌合之众，苟遇王师，必如山压卵耳。 
现代文：世宗又说： 刘崇一伙乌合之众，如遇朝廷大军，一定就如泰山压卵。 
English: Sejong also said: Liu Chong and his band of rabble-rousers, if confronted by the imperial army, would surely be like Mount Tai crushing an egg.

古文：道曰： 不知陛下作得山否？ 
现代文：冯道说 ：不知陛下能否成为泰山？ 
English: Feng Dao said: I don't know if His Majesty can become a Tarzan.

古文：帝不悦而罢。
现代文：世宗不高兴而作罢。
English: Sejong was not happy and gave up.

古文：诏诸道募山林亡命之徒有勇力者送于阙下，仍目之为强人。
现代文：又诏令各道招募啸聚山林而有勇力的亡命之徒，送往京城，仍把他们当作强人。
English: He also ordered all provinces to recruit the courageous desperadoes from the mountains and forests and send them to the capital, still treating them as strongmen.

古文：帝以趫捷勇猛之士多出于群盗中，故令所在招纳，有应命者，即贷其罪，以禁卫处之。至有朝行杀夺，暮升军籍，雠人遇之不敢仰视。
现代文：世宗认为机智勇敢的人，多出自于盗群之中，所以令各地招纳，有应召的，即赦免他的罪，安置在禁卫军中，以致有早晨还在杀人抢劫，晚上就升为禁军的，仇人遇见他们，都不敢仰视。
English: The world believes that the wittiest and bravest people are mostly from the bandits, so they recruit from all over the country. Those who are called, that is, forgive his sins, are placed in the guards, so that in the morning they are still killing and robbing, and in the evening they are promoted to the forbidden army. Enemies do not dare to look up when they meet them.

古文：帝意亦患之，其后颇有不获宥者。
现代文：世宗也为之担忧，后来就有很多未被赦免罪行的。
English: Sejong was also worried about it, and later there were many crimes that were not pardoned.

古文：三月丁丑，潞州奏，河东刘崇入寇，兵马监押穆令均部下兵士为贼军所袭，官军不利。
现代文：三月三日，潞州上奏，河东刘崇入侵，兵马监押穆令均部下兵士被贼军袭击，官军失利。
English: On March 3rd, when Zhangzhou was invaded by Liu Chong of Hedong Province, soldiers under the command of Liu Chong were attacked by bandits, and the government army was defeated.

古文：诏天雄军节度使符彦卿领兵自磁州固镇路赴潞州，以澶州节度使郭崇副之。
现代文：世宗令天雄军节度使符彦卿领兵从磁州固镇奔赴潞州，以澶州节度使郭崇为副。
English: Shizong ordered the Tianxiong Army Festival to make Fu Yanqing lead the army from Guzhou Guzhen to Bozhou, with the Bozhou Festival to make Guo Chong as deputy.

古文：诏河中节度使王彦超领兵取晋州路东向邀击，以陕府节度使韩通为副。
现代文：令河中节度使王彦超领兵路经晋州向东拦击，以陕府节度使韩通为副。
English: The governor of Hezhong ordered Wang Yanchao to lead the army eastward through Jinzhou, and the governor of Shaanxi Province sent Han Tong as deputy.

古文：内外见任、前文武职官并与加恩，父母在者并与恩泽，亡没者与封赠，其母妻未叙者，特与叙封 云。前泾州节度使史匡懿卒。癸未，诏以刘崇入寇，车驾取今月十一日亲征。
现代文：令宣徽使向训、马军都指挥使樊爱能、步军都指挥使何徽、滑州节度使白重赞、郑州防御使史彦超、前耀州团练使符彦能等，领兵先赴泽州。七日，诏令大赦天下。九日，诏令因为刘崇入侵，世宗定于本月十一日亲征。
English: On the 7th, the imperial edict granted amnesty to the whole country. On the 9th, because of Liu Chong's invasion, Shizong was scheduled to march in person on the 11th of this month.

古文：甲申，以枢密使郑仁诲为东京留守。
现代文：十日，以枢密使郑仁诲为东京留守。
English: On the 10th, the envoy Zheng Renya left for Tokyo.

古文：乙酉，车驾发京师。
现代文：十一日，世宗从京师出发。
English: On the 11th day, Sejong departed from Kyoto.

古文：壬辰，至泽州。
现代文：十八日，到达泽州。
English: On the 18th, they arrived in Zezhou.

古文：癸巳，王师与河东刘崇、契丹杨衮大战于高平，贼军败绩。
现代文：十九日，朝廷军队与河东刘崇、契丹杨衮在高平大战，敌军战败。
English: On the 19th, the imperial army fought against Liu Chong of Hedong and Yang Jie of Khitan in the Battle of Gaoping, and the enemy army was defeated.

古文：初，车驾行次河阳，闻刘崇自潞而南，即倍程而进。
现代文：此前，世宗走到河阳时，听到刘崇从潞州向南去了，便兼程前行。
English: Previously, when Sejong walked to Hayao, he heard that Liu Chong had gone south from Luzhou, so he made a side trip.

古文：是月十八日至泽州，既晡，帝御戎服，观兵于东北郊，距州十五里，夜宿于村舍。
现代文：十八日，到达泽州，晚饭后，世宗身穿军服，在泽州东北郊外阅兵，离州城十五里，晚上住在乡村的屋舍里。
English: On the 18th, he arrived in Zezhou. After dinner, Sejong put on his military uniform and took part in a military parade in the northeastern suburbs of Zezhou, 15 miles from the city. At night, he lived in a rural house.

古文：十九日，先锋与贼军相遇，贼阵于高平县南之高原。
现代文：十九日，前锋与贼军相遇，贼军在高平县南边的高原上摆下战阵。
English: On the 19th, the vanguard met with the bandits, who set up a battle line on the plateau in the south of Gaoping County.

古文：有贼中来者，云： 刘崇自将骑三万，并契丹万余骑，严阵以待官军。 
现代文：有从贼军中来的人说 ：刘崇亲自率领三万骑兵，会同契丹一万多骑兵，正严阵以待官军。 
English: A person from the rebel army said, "Liu Chong personally led thirty thousand cavalry, and together with Khitan more than ten thousand cavalry, they are waiting for the official army.

古文：帝促兵以击之，崇东西列阵，颇亦严整。
现代文：世宗督军攻击他们。刘崇从东向西列成阵势，也很森严整肃。
English: Liu Chong lined up his troops from east to west in a very strict formation.

古文：《隆平集·马仁瑀传》：从世宗亲征刘崇，王师不利，仁瑀谓众曰： 主辱臣死！ 因跃马大呼，引弓连毙将卒数十，士气始振。今上驰骑于阵前，先犯其锋，战士皆奋命争先，贼军大败。
现代文：世宗于是令侍卫马步军都虞候李重进、滑州节度使白重赞统帅左军，居战阵之西，侍卫马军都指挥使樊爱能、步军都指挥使何徽统帅右军，居战阵之东；宣徽使向训、郑州防御使史彦超，领精锐骑兵居中；殿前都指挥使张永德领禁兵护驾。世宗给战马穿上铠甲观战。两军交锋，樊爱能、何徽望见贼军杀来就逃跑，东边骑兵纷乱，步军弃甲投降，世宗于是亲自率领亲信骑兵，临阵督战。今上赵匡胤跃马阵前，首先迎战敌军前锋，战士们都舍命争相冲锋，贼军大败。
English: Therefore, Shizong ordered the guards of the horse infantry to wait for Li Chongjin, and the Slanting Festival to make Bai Chongzhan the commander of the left army, which was in the west of the battle line; the guards of the horse army were commanded by the commander of the right army, which was in the east of the battle line; the guards of the horse army were commanded by the commander of the left army, which was in the west of the battle line; the guards of the horse army were commanded by the commander of the right army, which was in the east of the battle line; the guards of the horse army were commanded by the commander of the right army, which was in the east of

古文：日暮，贼万余人阻涧而阵，会刘词领兵至，与大军迫之，贼军又溃，临阵斩贼大将张晖及伪枢密使王延嗣。
现代文：傍晚，贼军一万多人以河涧为阻列阵。这时刘词领兵来到，会同大军进逼，贼军又溃败，临阵斩杀贼军大将张晖以及伪枢密使王延嗣。
English: In the evening, more than ten thousand soldiers of the Kleptocratic Army formed a blocking line at Hefei. At this time, Liu Zhi arrived to lead the soldiers and advanced with the large army. The Kleptocratic Army was defeated again, and the general of the Kleptocratic Army, Zhang Qian, and the pseudo-privy envoy, Wang Yan Ci, were killed in the front line.

古文：诸将分兵追袭，僵尸弃甲填满山谷。
现代文：各将分兵追击，倒毙的尸体和丢弃的兵甲，填满了山谷。
English: Each side chased the other into the valley, which was filled with fallen bodies and discarded armor.

古文：初夜，官军至高平，降贼军数千人，所获辎重、兵器、驼马、伪乘舆器服等不可胜纪。
现代文：初夜，朝廷军队到达高平，降服贼军几千人，所获得的辎重、兵器、驼马、车舆、服装等不可胜数。
English: On the first night, the imperial army arrived in Gaoping and subdued thousands of bandits, gaining countless treasures, weapons, camels, chariots, and clothing.

古文：诏赐河东降军二千余人各绢二匹，并给其衣装，乡兵各给绢一匹，放还本部。是日大雨。
现代文：那晚，杀死投降的士兵二千多人，朝廷军队中投降敌人的也都被杀死。这天，形势危急，顷刻之间就将不能自保，全靠世宗英武果敢，亲自面当劲敌，不然社稷几乎就变为附庸了。当晚，世宗就住在野外。二十日，到高平县。
English: That night, more than two thousand soldiers who had surrendered were killed, as were all those in the imperial army who had surrendered to the enemy. On this day, the situation was critical, and in an instant they would not be able to defend themselves. It all depended on Sejong's bravery and courage to face the fierce enemy in person, or else they would almost become vassals. That night, Sejong lived in the open. On the 20th, he went to Gaoping County.

古文：戊戌，车驾至潞州。诃南府上言，前青州节度使常思卒。
现代文：诏令河东降军二千多人每人赐给二匹绢布，并赐给他们衣服，乡兵每人赐给绢布一匹，放归本地。
English: The edict ordered the more than 2,000 soldiers of the retreating army in Hedong to each give two horses of cocoons and give them clothes, and the soldiers in the countryside to each give one horse of cocoons and let it return to the local area.

古文：己亥，侍卫马军都指挥使、夔州节度使樊爱能，侍卫步军都指挥使、寿州节度使何徽等并诸将校七十余人，并伏诛。
现代文：二十五日，侍卫马军都指挥使、夔州节度使樊爱能，侍卫步军都指挥使、寿州节度使何徽等连同各军将校七十多人，一并被诛。
English: On the 25th, the commander of the Horse Guards Army, the commander of the Foot Guards Army, the commander of the Shoushou Festival, He Hui, and more than 70 other officers from various armies were all arrested.

古文：高平之役，两军既成列，贼骑来挑战，爱能望风而退，何徽以徒兵阵于后，为奔骑所突，即时溃乱，二将南走。帝遣近臣宣谕止遏，莫肯从命，皆扬言曰： 官军大败，余众已解甲矣。 
现代文：高平之战中，两军已列阵，贼军骑兵挑战，樊爱能望风而退，何徽领步兵在后列阵，被奔跑的骑兵冲撞，立时溃乱，二将南逃，世宗派身边臣子传话制止逃奔，他们不肯听从，都扬言说 ：朝廷军队已经大败，其他兵士已放下武器了。 
English: In the Battle of Gaoping, the two armies were already lined up, the cavalry of the Kleptocratic Army challenged, Zou Ai Neng looked to the wind and retreated, He Hui led the infantry in the rear, was collided by the running cavalry, immediately broke out, the two generals fled south, and the courtiers around the Sectarian faction sent a message to stop the escape. They refused to obey, and all threatened to say: The imperial army has been defeated, and other soldiers have laid down their weapons.

古文：河中节度使王彦超奏，伪汾州防御使董希颜以城归顺。
现代文：到晚上，因朝廷军队获胜，才慢慢回来。世宗到达潞州后，记下那些逃兵败将，从军使以上及监押使臣都被杀死，从此骄横的将领、堕落的兵士，无人不知害怕。
English: In the evening, due to the victory of the imperial army, he slowly returned. After Shizong arrived in Zhangzhou, he wrote down those deserters who were defeated. The military envoys and above and the imprisoned envoys were all killed. From then on, no one was afraid of arrogant generals and fallen soldiers.

古文：《宋史·王彦超传》：彦超自阴地关与符彦卿会兵围汾州，诸将请急攻，彦超曰： 城已危矣，旦暮将降，我士卒精锐，驱以先登，必死伤者众，少待之。 
现代文：世宗因为何徽有守御平阳之功，想将功抵罪，终于不行，与樊爱能一起被杀死，都供给棺材丧车运回安葬。夏四月二日，太祖灵车从东京出发，十二日，下葬在嵩陵。
English: Because He Hui had the merit of protecting the Emperor Pingyang, Sejong wanted to atone for the merit, but in the end he couldn't, and he was killed together with Yao Ai Neng. Both of them were provided with a coffin and a hearse to be transported back for burial. On the 2nd of April in the summer, Taizu's hearse set off from Tokyo, and on the 12th, he was buried in Songling.

古文：翼日，州将董希颜果降。
现代文：河中节度使王彦超报告，伪汾州防御使董希颜献城归顺。
English: Wang Yanchao's report was made by the middle of the river, and Dong Xiyan's surrender was made by the pseudo-Changzhou defense.

古文：丙辰，伪辽州刺史张汉超以城归顺。
现代文：十三日，伪辽州刺史张汉超献城归顺。
English: On the 13th, Zhang Hanchao, the pseudo Liaozhou assassin, surrendered the city.

古文：丁巳，幸柏谷寺。遣右仆射、平章事、判三司李穀赴河东城下，计度军储。
现代文：十四日，派右仆射、平章事、判三司李谷前往河东城下，查点军需储备。
English: On the 14th, Li Gu, the Third Secretary of the Third Division of the Third Division of the Third Division of the Third Division of the Third Division of the Third Division of the Third Division of the Third Division of the Third Division of the Third Division of the Third Division of the Third Division of the Third Division of the Third Division of the Third Division of the Third Division of the Third Division of the Third Division of the Third Division of the Third Division of the Third Division of the Third Division of the Third Division of the Third Division of the Third Division of the Third Division of the Third Division of the Third Division of the Third Division of the Third Division of the Third Division of the Third Division of the Third Division of the Third Division of

古文：甲子，皇妹寿安公主张氏进封晋国长公主。乙丑，东京奏，太师、中书令冯道薨。
现代文：诏令河东城下各将，招抚民户，禁止侵犯掠夺，只向百姓征收当年租税，百姓能交纳五百斛粮食、五百捆草料的赐他进入仕途，能交纳一千斛粮食、一千捆草料的授予州县官职。十八日，符彦卿上奏，岚州、宪州归顺。十九日，王彦超上奏，攻下石州，捕获伪石州刺史安颜进。
English: The edict ordered the generals under the city of Hedong to appease the people's households, prohibit encroachment and plunder, and only collect the current year's tax from the people. The people could pay five hundred mu of grain and five hundred bundles of grass to grant him entry into the career, and could pay one thousand mu of grain and one thousand bundles of grass to grant the state and county official positions. On the 18th, Fu Yanqing played, and Zhangzhou and Genshou surrendered. On the 19th, Wang Yanchao played, captured Shishu, and captured the pseudo Shishu Anyanjin.

古文：丙寅，太祖皇帝神主祔于太庙。
现代文：二十日，伪沁州刺史李廷诲献城归顺。二十二日，东京报告，太师、中书令冯道去世。
English: On the 20th, Li Tingyun, the pseudo-governor of Zhangzhou, surrendered the city. On the 22nd, Tokyo reported that Feng Dao, the Grand Master and the General Secretary of the CPC Central Committee, passed away.

古文：庚午，曲赦潞州见禁罪人，除死罪外并释放。
现代文：二十七日，部分赦免潞州被囚犯人，除死罪外全予释放。
English: On the 27th, prisoners in Zhangzhou were partially pardoned and released except for those sentenced to death.

古文：是日，车驾发潞州，亲征刘崇。
现代文：这天，世宗从潞州出发，亲征刘崇。
English: On this day, Shizong set out from Zhangzhou to personally recruit Liu Chong.

古文：癸酉，忻州伪监军李勍杀其刺史赵皋及契丹所遣大将杨努瑚，以州城归顺。
现代文：三十日，忻州伪监军李京力杀死刺史赵皋以及契丹大将杨耨姑，献城归顺。
English: On the 30th, Li Jingli, the pseudo-supervisor of Zhangzhou, killed the assassin Zhao Wei and the Khitan general Yang Binggu, and surrendered the city.

古文：诏授李勍忻州刺史。
现代文：诏令授李京力为忻州刺史。
English: The imperial edict awarded Li Jingli as the history of Zhangzhou.

古文：辛丑，升府州为节镇，以永安军为军额，以本州防御使折德扆为节度使。
现代文：五月三日，御驾到达太原城下。这天，伪代州防御史郑处谦献城归顺。
English: On May 3, the car arrived at the foot of Taiyuan Castle. On this day, the pseudo-state defense historian Zheng Shide humbly surrendered the city.

古文：六月癸卯朔，诏班师，车驾发离太原。
现代文：六月一日，诏令班师，御驾离开太原。
English: On June 1st, the team leader left Taiyuan.

古文：时大集兵赋，及征山东、怀、孟、蒲、陕丁夫数万，急攻其城，旦夕之间，期于必取。
现代文：当时大量征集兵赋，又征调崤山以东怀、孟、蒲、陕等地丁壮民夫数万，急攻刘崇城池，想在早晚之间必得占领。
English: At that time, a large number of soldiers were conscripted, and tens of thousands of Ding Zhuang people were conscripted and transferred from Shaoshan to Donghuai, Meng, Pu, Shaanxi and other places to attack Liu Chongcheng Lake in a hurry, and they would have to occupy it in the morning and evening.

古文：会大雨时行，军士劳苦，复以忻口之师不振，帝遂决旋师之意。
现代文：恰逢大雨不时降下，军士劳苦，又因忻口的军队出师不利，世宗才决定回师。
English: It was only when heavy rain fell from time to time, the sergeants were hard at work, and the troops from Hekou were unfavorable, that Shizong decided to return to the division.

古文：指麾之间，颇伤匆遽，部伍纷乱，无复严整，不逞之徒讹言相恐，随军资用颇有遗失者，贼城之下，粮草数十万，悉焚弃之。
现代文：在指挥撤退时，又匆忙急促，部队纷乱，不再严整，一些不得志的人，造谣相惊，随军的资财设备，多有遗弃丢失，在贼城下面，数十万粮草，全被焚烧丢弃。
English: When the commander was retreating, he was in a hurry, the troops were in disarray and no longer disciplined, some people who had no ambition were surprised by rumours, and many of the army's assets and equipment were abandoned and lost. At the bottom of the thief city, hundreds of thousands of grain and grass were all burned and discarded.

古文：九月壬申朔，以东京旧宅为皇建禅院。甲戌，以武安军节度副使、知潭州军府事周行逢为鄂州节度使，知潭州军府事，加检校太尉。
现代文：秋七月一日，前河西节度使申师厚贬任右监门卫率府副率。申师厚在凉州一年多，因辖区内粮食艰难，蕃人反复无常，奏请入京朝见，就立即留下自己的儿子做留守，不等诏令准允就离任，所以责罚他。二十日，百官上表，请求将九月二十四世宗的诞生日定为天清节，世宗听从。八月八日，前泽州刺史李彦崇贬任右司御副率。
English: On the first day of the autumn in July, the former Hexi Festival made Shen Shihu appointed as the deputy head of the Right Supervisor of the Gate Guards. Shen Shihu had been in Liangzhou for more than a year. Due to the difficult food in the jurisdiction area and the capricious nature of the people, he was invited to Beijing to see the imperial court. He immediately left his son as a stay-behind, and did not wait for the approval of the imperial edict to leave the post, so he was punished. On the 20th, hundreds of officials were on the table, requesting that the September 24th birthday of Sejong be designated as the Tianqing Festival, and Sej

古文：丙戌，右屯卫将军薛训除名，流沙门岛，坐监雍兵仓，纵吏卒掊敛也。
现代文：在高平战役中，世宗与贼军相遇，就令李彦崇领兵守住江猪岭，以切断贼寇的退路。
English: In the Battle of Gaoping, when Shizong encountered the bandit army, he ordered Li Yan Chong to lead the army to defend Jiangziling, in order to cut off the retreat of the bandits.

古文：己亥，以右仆射致仕韩昭允、左仆射致仕杨凝式并为太子太保致仕，以太子太傅致仕李肃为太子太师致仕。
现代文：李彦崇开头看见朝廷军队受挫，马上退走，到刘崇兵败时，果然从江猪岭逃走。九月十五日，右屯卫将军薛训被除名，流放沙门岛，因犯监守雍州兵库时放纵官吏盘剥人民聚敛财富之罪。
English: At first, Li Yan Chong saw that the imperial army had suffered a setback and immediately retreated, and when Liu Chong was defeated, he actually fled from Jiangshiling. On September 15, General Xue Xun of the Right Tunbei was expelled and exiled to Shamen Island for committing the crime of allowing officials to rob the people and accumulate wealth while guarding the Yongzhou Hyogo.

古文：辛丑，斩宋州巡检供奉官、副都知竹奉璘于宁陵县，坐盗掠商船不捕获也。
现代文：三十日，在宁陵县诛杀宋州巡检供奉官、副都知竹奉王，因犯不能捕获劫掠商船的强盗之罪。
English: On the 30th, Songzhou patrol and inspection officer and deputy governor Zhu Fengwang was killed in Ningling County for the crime of failing to capture robbers who plundered merchant ships.

古文：戊午，监修国史李穀等上言曰： 窃以自古王者咸建史官，君臣献替之谋皆须备载，家国安危之道得以直书。
现代文：冬十月三日，左羽林大将军孟汉卿赐死，因犯监收赋税时多收耗余之罪。十七日，监修国史李谷等人上奏说： 自古以来的王者，全都设立史官。群臣所出的谋略，都要全面记载，国家安危的缘由，得以秉笔直书。
English: On the winter of October 3rd, General Meng Han, the commander of the left wing of the Imperial Guard, was sentenced to death for the crime of overcharging and wasting when collecting and taxing. On the 17th, Li Gu, the supervisor of the national history, and others made a report: All kings since ancient times have set up historians. The strategies of the ministers should be fully recorded, and the reasons for the country's safety and security can be written down.

古文：历代已来，其名不一。
现代文：历代以来，名称不一。
English: Since time immemorial, it has had different names.

古文：人君言动，则起居注创于累朝；辅相经纶，则时政记兴于前代。
现代文：记载人君的言语行动，则历代都有起居注；记载将相治理国家，则自古就有时政记。
English: Records of people's words and actions have been recorded throughout the ages; records of the governance of the country have been recorded since ancient times.

古文：然后采其事实，编作史书。
现代文：然后从中摘录事实，编成史书。
English: Then facts are extracted from them and compiled into a history book.

古文：盖缘闻见之间须有来处，记录之际得以审详。
现代文：这是因为史书的见闻，须有出处；编撰之时，要求详审。
English: This is because the information in history books must have a source; when compiled, it is required to be reviewed in detail.

古文：今之左右起居郎，即古之左右史也。
现代文：现在的左右起居郎，就是古代的左右史。
English: Today's left-right history is the left-right history of ancient times.

古文：唐文宗朝，命其官执笔，立于殿阶螭头之下，以纪政事。
现代文：唐文宗时，命史官拿着笔，站立在大殿台阶螭龙的头下，以记载政事。
English: During the reign of Emperor Wenzong of the Tang Dynasty, the historian of life held a pen and stood under the head of the dragon on the steps of the Great Hall to record political affairs.

古文：后则明宗朝，命端明殿及枢密直学士，皆轮修日历，旋送史官，以备纂修。
现代文：后到后唐明宗时，命端明殿以及枢密直学士，都轮流撰写日历，立即送给史官，以备纂修史书。
English: Later, when it came to the Ming Dynasty of the Later Tang Dynasty, the Master of the Ming Dynasty and the Privy Scholars took turns to write a calendar and immediately sent it to the historian to prepare for the compilation and revision of the history book.

古文：及近朝，此事皆废，史官惟凭百司报状，馆司但取两省制书，此外虽有访闻，例非端的。
现代文：到近朝，这事都废止了，史官仅凭各部门公文，史馆只取两省的制书，此外虽有采访询问，照例都不真实可靠。
English: By the time of the Ming Dynasty, this practice was abolished. Historians only relied on official documents from various departments, and the history museum only took books from two provinces. In addition, although there were interviews and inquiries, they were not true and reliable as usual.

古文：伏自先皇帝创开昌运，及皇帝陛下缵嗣丕基，其圣德武功、神谋睿略，而皆万几宥密，丹禁深严，非外臣之所知，岂庶僚之可访。
现代文：自从本朝先帝开创国家鸿运，以至皇帝陛下继承大业，那圣德武功，神谋智略，都是隐密不显，宫廷深奥森严，外臣不可得知，众官不能询访。
English: Ever since the last emperor of this dynasty ushered in the country's great fortune and His Majesty the Emperor inherited the great cause, the sacred virtue of martial arts and the divine strategy have been hidden, the court has been profound and strict, the foreign minister cannot know, and the officials cannot inquire.

古文：此后欲望以谘询之事、裁制之规，别命近臣旋具抄录，每当修撰日历，即令封付史臣，庶国事无漏略之文，职业免疏遗之咎。 
现代文：以后希望将咨询之事，裁制之规，另命身边臣子，立时详细抄录，每当修撰日历，就让封好交付史臣，以期国家大事没有遗漏地记载，职责部门免除疏忽的过错。 
English: In the future, it is hoped that the matter of consultation, the regulation of regulation, and the appointment of the surrounding ministers will be immediately copied in detail, and whenever the calendar is revised, it will be sealed and delivered to the historian, so that the national events are recorded without omission, and the responsible departments are exempted from negligence.

古文：从之。因命枢密直学士，起今后于枢密使处，逐月抄录事件，送付史馆。
现代文：世宗听从，因而命枢密直学士，今后在枢密使所在地，每月抄录国家大事，送付史馆。
English: Shizong obeyed, so he ordered the Privy Council to appoint a direct scholar, and in the future, at the location of the Privy Council, to transcribe national events every month and send them to the history museum.

古文：己未，供奉官郝光庭弃市，坐在叶县巡检日，挟私断杀平人也。
现代文：十八日，供奉官郝光庭被杀弃市，因犯在叶城巡察时，挟私愤妄杀平民之罪。
English: On the 18th, the sacrificial official, Yu Guangting, was killed and the city was abandoned, for the crime of killing civilians with malice aforethought during an inspection in Yecheng.

古文：是日大阅，帝亲临之。
现代文：这天大阅兵，世宗亲临。
English: On the day of the grand military parade, Sejong attended in person.

古文：帝自高平之役，睹诸军未甚严整，遂有退却，至是命今上一概简阅，选武艺超绝者，署为殿前诸班，因是有散员、散指挥使、内殿直、散都头、铁骑、控鹤之号。
现代文：世宗自高平战役之中，见各军不很威严整齐，以至于有败退之事。现在命令今后一律检阅，挑选武艺超群的士兵，充任殿前诸班，因此有散员、散指挥使、内殿直、散都头、铁骑、控鹤的名号。
English: Since the Battle of Gaoping, Sejong saw that the troops were not very dignified and orderly, so much so that there were cases of retreat. Now he ordered that in the future, all troops should be inspected, and soldiers with superior martial arts should be selected and assigned to various squads in front of the palace. Therefore, there are the names of Sanzhan, Sanzhan commander, Inner palace, Sanzhoutou, Iron rider, and Control crane.

古文：复命总戎者，自龙捷、虎捷以降，一一选之，老弱羸小者去之，诸军士伍，无不精当。
现代文：又命领兵之将，从龙捷、虎捷以下，一一精选，老弱瘦小的去掉，各军士卒行伍，无不精锐允当。
English: He also ordered the generals leading the troops, from Long Jie, Tiger Jie and below, to be carefully selected one by one, and the old, weak and skinny ones to be removed. Each sergeant marched in the ranks, and all of them were excellent.

古文：由是兵甲之盛，近代无比，且减冗食之费焉。
现代文：从此兵力的强盛，近代无比，而且减少了冗员的生活消费。
English: Since then, the strength of the armed forces has been unparalleled in modern times, and the living expenses of redundant personnel have been reduced.

