古文：凡战，若我众敌寡，不可战于险阻之间，须要平易宽广之地。闻鼓则进，闻金则止，无有不胜。
现代文：凡是作战，如果兵力对比我众敌寡，就不能跟敌人再险狭之地交战，一定要选择平坦开阔地势作战场，以便于军队听到鼓声就前进，听到锣音就停止。这样，对敌作战就没有不胜利的。
English: In any battle, if the number of troops is small compared to the number of enemies, it is impossible to fight the enemy in the most dangerous place, and it is necessary to choose a flat and open terrain battlefield, so that the army can advance when it hears the drumbeat and stop when it hears the cymbals. In this way, there is no victory in the battle against the enemy.

古文：法曰： 用众进止。 
现代文：诚如兵法所说： 指挥大部队作战，在于能前进能停止。 
English: As stated in the Art of War: To command a large force in battle, it is necessary to be able to advance and stop.

古文：东晋太元时，秦苻坚进屯寿阳，列阵淝水，与晋将谢玄相拒。
现代文：东晋孝武帝太元八年，前秦王苻坚率领大军进至寿阳，并临淝水一岸而摆好阵势，同晋将谢玄隔水对峙。
English: In the eighth year of Emperor Xiaowu of the Eastern Jin Dynasty, the former Qin King Jian Jian led a large army to Shouyang, and set up a position on the shore of the Linyi River, and confronted the Jin general Xie Xuan across the water.

古文：玄使谓苻坚曰： 君远涉吾境，而临水为阵，是不欲速战。
现代文：谢玄派人对苻坚说： 你率军长途跋涉深入我国境内，却临水列阵，这是不想速战的架势。
English: Xie Xuan sent a message to Yu Jian: You have led your army on a long trek deep into the territory of our country, but you are lined up facing the water. This is a posture of not wanting a quick war.

古文：请君稍却，令将士得周旋，仆与诸君缓辔而观之，不亦善乎！ 
现代文：你们要能稍向后退，让我军渡过淝水与你一战，使双方将士得以从容周旋交战，我与诸君骑马慢行而观战，不是一件乐事吗？ 
English: You should be able to step back a little, let our army cross the Surabaya River and fight with you, so that both sides can fight calmly, I and you ride slowly and watch the battle, is not it a pleasure?

古文：坚众皆曰： 宜阻淝水，莫令得上。
现代文：苻坚的部将都说： 应当凭据淝水阻截晋军，不让其渡河冲上岸来。
English: The commanders of Sui Jian all said: It is necessary to block the Jin army with the help of Sui Shui and prevent it from crossing the river and rushing ashore.

古文：我众彼寡，势必万全。 
现代文：我军兵多，对方兵少，只有这样，才是万全必胜之策。 
English: We have more soldiers, the other side has fewer soldiers. This is the only way to win.

古文：坚曰： 但却军，令得过，而我以铁骑数十万，向水逼而杀之。 
现代文：苻坚不以为然地说： 只管退军，让它渡河，不等他们渡完，我就以数万骑兵冲击消灭他。 苻融也赞成这样做。
English: Yu Jian said disapprovingly: Just withdraw the army and let it cross the river, and I will destroy it with tens of thousands of cavalry when they have finished crossing. Yu Rong also agreed to do this.

古文：融亦以为然。
现代文：于是，苻坚下令秦军后撤。
English: Therefore, Yu Jian ordered the Qin army to retreat.

古文：遂麾兵使却，众因乱而不能止。
现代文：不料部队因动而大乱，竟一退而不能停止。
English: Unexpectedly, the troops were thrown into chaos by the movement, and they actually retreated and could not stop.

古文：于是，玄与谢琰、桓伊等，以精锐八千渡淝水，右军拒张耗，小退。玄、琰仍进兵，大战淝水南，坚众大溃。
现代文：晋将谢玄与谢琰、桓伊等人率领精兵八千顺利渡过淝水。晋军都督谢石率部进攻秦军张蚝所部，不利稍退，而谢玄和谢琰依然挥军奋击，与敌激战于淝水之南，苻坚大军全线溃败。
English: Jin general Xie Xuan, together with Xie Yao, Huan Yi and others, led eight thousand elite soldiers across Surabaya. The Jin army, led by the governor Xie Shi, attacked the Qin army, led by Zhang Yuxiang, and retreated slightly, but Xie Xuan and Xie Yao still waged a fierce battle with the enemy in the south of Surabaya, and the great army of Shijian was defeated.

