古文：刘库仁字没根，独孤部人，刘武之宗也。
现代文：刘库仁字没根，独孤部人。刘武的同宗。
English: Liu Kuren's character has no roots, he is an isolated person. He is from the same clan as Liu Wu.

古文：少豪侠，有智略。母平文皇帝之女。
现代文：他从小就豪爽，讲义气，有智谋，母亲是平文皇帝的女儿。
English: He grew up to be brave, loyal, and resourceful. His mother was the daughter of Emperor Pingwen.

古文：昭成皇帝复以宗女妻之，为南部大人。
现代文：昭成皇帝又将宗室的女儿嫁给他，任命他为南部大人。
English: Emperor Akechi also married the daughter of his father's family to him and appointed him as Nanbu no Okimi.

古文：建国三十九年，照成暴崩，道武未立，苻坚以库仁为陵江将军、关内侯。
现代文：建国三十九年，昭成皇帝突然死去，道武皇帝未立，苻坚任命刘库仁为陵江将军、关内侯，让他和卫辰分别统率代国。
English: In the 39th year of the founding of the People's Republic of China, Emperor Zhaocheng died suddenly, Emperor Daowu was not yet established, and Yu Jian appointed Liu Kuren as the general of the Lingjiang River and the governor of Guanai Province, and let him and Wei Chen lead the country respectively.

古文：令与卫辰分国众统之，河西属卫辰，河东属库仁。
现代文：河西属卫辰，河东属刘库仁。
English: The west of the river belongs to Weichen, and the east of the river belongs to Liu Curen.

古文：于是献明皇后携道武及卫、秦二王自贺兰部来居焉。
现代文：于是，献明皇后带着道武帝跟卫王、秦王一起从贺兰部前来依附刘库仁。
English: As a result, Empress Kengmyeong brought Emperor Daowu, together with King Wei and King Qin, from the Helan Province to attach herself to Liu Curen.

古文：库仁尽忠奉事，不以兴废易节。
现代文：刘库仁尽忠侍奉道武帝，并不因国家的兴废而改变节操。
English: Liu Curen served Emperor Daowu loyally, and did not change his discipline due to the rise and fall of the country.

古文：苻坚处卫辰在库仁下，卫辰怒，叛，攻库仁。
现代文：苻坚让卫辰接受刘库仁的管辖，卫辰大怒，叛乱，攻打刘库仁。
English: Zou Jian asked Wei Chen to accept Liu Kuren's jurisdiction. Wei Chen became enraged, rebelled, and attacked Liu Kuren.

古文：库仁伐卫辰，破之。
现代文：刘库仁讨伐卫辰，打败了他。
English: Liu Kuren fought against Wei Chen and defeated him.

古文：苻坚赐库仁妻公孙氏，厚其资送。
现代文：苻坚赐给刘库仁妻子公孙氏，用丰厚的资财陪送。
English: Gong Jian was given to Liu Kuren's wife, Gong Sun, who accompanied him with a large sum of money.

古文：慕容垂围苻丕于鄴，又遣将平规攻坚幽州刺史王永于蓟。
现代文：慕容垂在邺城包围苻丕，又派部将平规攻打苻坚。幽州刺史王永驻守于蓟城。
English: Murongtang besieged Gan in Gancheng and sent troops to attack Gancheng. Yuzhou Sisi Wang Yong was stationed in Gancheng.

古文：库仁遣妻兄公孙希助永击规，大破之。
现代文：刘库仁派妻子的哥哥公孙希协助王永攻打平规，大败敌军。
English: Liu Kuren sent his wife's brother, Gong Sunxi, to assist Wang Yong in attacking Pinggu, and defeated the enemy.

古文：库仁复将大举以救丕。发雁门、上谷、代郡兵，次于繁畤。
现代文：刘库仁又准备大举出兵救援苻丕，召来雁门、上谷、代郡的军队，驻扎在繁。
English: Liu Kuren also prepared to send troops to the rescue, summoning troops from Yanmen, Shanggu, and Dai County, and stationed them in Tonglu.

古文：先是，慕容文等当徙长安，遁依库仁部，常思东归。
现代文：起初，慕容文等应当迁往长安，他不愿去，逃来投奔刘库仁部，并且常常想回到东部。
English: At first, Murongwen and the others were supposed to move to Chang'an, but he didn't want to go. He ran away to join Liu Cunren, and often wanted to return to the east.

古文：是役也，文等夜率三郡人，攻杀库仁，乘其骏马，奔慕容垂。
现代文：这次作战，慕容文等人在夜间领着三郡兵马，攻杀刘库仁，并骑着刘库仁的骏马，投奔慕容垂。
English: In this battle, Murongwen and others led the troops and horses of the three counties in the night to attack and kill Liu Kuren, and rode Liu Kuren's steed to Murongtie.

古文：公孙希闻乱走丁零。
现代文：公孙希听到内乱的消息便逃往丁零。
English: When Gongsun Xi heard the news of the civil unrest, he fled to Dingye.

古文：库仁弟眷，继摄国事。
现代文：刘库仁的弟弟刘眷，继承刘库仁掌管国事。
English: Liu Kuren's younger brother, Liu Zhen, succeeded Liu Kuren in charge of state affairs.

古文：眷第三子罗辰，机警有智谋，谓眷曰： 从兄显，忍人也，愿早图之。 
现代文：刘眷的第三位儿子罗辰，为人机警而有谋略，他对刘眷说： 堂兄刘显，是个残暴的人，希望早些除掉他。 
English: Liu Yan's third son, Luo Chen, who is a clever policeman and has a strategy, said to Liu Yan: Cousin Liu Xian is a cruel person, I hope to get rid of him sooner.

古文：眷不以为意。
现代文：刘眷却不放在心上。
English: Liu's relatives, however, did not care.

古文：后库仁子显果杀眷而代立。
现代文：后来刘库仁的儿子刘显果然杀了刘眷而代立。
English: Later, Liu Kuren's son Liu Xian actually killed Liu Zhen and took his place.

古文：显既杀眷，又谋逆。
现代文：刘显杀了刘眷以后，又想叛乱。
English: After Liu Xian killed Liu Yan, he wanted to rebel again.

古文：及道武即位，讨显于马邑，追至弥泽，大破之。
现代文：当道武帝即位后，在马邑讨伐刘显，直追到弥泽，大败刘显。
English: When Emperor Daowu ascended to the throne, he fought Liu Xian in Ma'i and pursued him all the way to Yazawa, where Liu Xian was soundly defeated.

古文：后奔慕容驎，驎徙之中山。
现代文：后来刘显投奔慕容，慕容将他迁到中山。
English: Later, Liu Xian went to Murong, and Murong moved him to Zhongshan.

古文：罗辰即宣穆皇后兄也。
现代文：罗辰也是宣穆皇后的哥哥。
English: Luo Chen was also the elder brother of Empress Xuan Mu.

古文：显既杀眷，罗辰遂奔道武。
现代文：刘显杀害刘眷，罗辰投靠道武帝。
English: Liu Xian killed Liu Yan, while Luo Chen sided with Emperor Daowu.

古文：显恃强，每谋逆，罗辰辄先闻奏。
现代文：刘显自恃势力强大，每当打算叛乱时，罗辰便事先奏明道武帝。
English: Liu Xian considered himself to be very powerful, and whenever he planned a rebellion, Luo Chen would inform Emperor Daowu in advance.

古文：拜南部大人。
现代文：被任命为南部大人。
English: He was named a Nanbu chōsen.

古文：从平中原，以功赐爵永安公。
现代文：他跟从道武帝讨平中原后，因功被赐爵为永安公。
English: After he followed Emperor Daowu to level the Central Plains, he was awarded the title of Lord Yongan for his services.

古文：覆，无状。还任，卒。
现代文：又因军功被任命为征东将军、定州刺史。死后，谥为敬。
English: He was also appointed as the General of the Expedition to the East and the Historian of Dingzhou for his military exploits. After his death, he was revered.

古文：穆崇，代人也，其先代效节于神元、桓、穆之时。
现代文：穆崇是代地人，他的祖先世代效忠于神元、桓、穆帝。
English: Mu Chong is a descendant of local people, and his ancestors were loyal to Shingen, Huan, and Mu Di.

古文：崇少以盗窃为事。
现代文：穆崇年青时专门喜欢偷盗。
English: When he was young, Mu Chong especially liked to steal.

古文：道武之居独孤部，崇往来奉给，时人无及者。
现代文：道武帝住在独孤部时，穆崇经常来往供给物品，当时没有人比得过他。
English: When Emperor Daowu lived in Solitary Confinement, Mu Chong often came and went to supply goods. At that time, no one could match him.

古文：后刘显之逆，平文皇帝外孙梁眷知之，密遣崇告道武。
现代文：后来刘显叛逆，平文皇帝的外孙梁眷知道了，便秘密地派穆崇去报告道武帝。
English: Later, when Liu Xian rebelled, Emperor Pingwen's grandson Liang Sheng learned about it and secretly sent Mu Chong to report to Emperor Daowu.

古文：眷谓崇曰： 显若知之，虽刀剑刳割勿泄也。 
现代文：梁眷对穆崇说： 刘显如果知道了，哪怕他用刀剑切割也不能泄露真情。 
English: Liang Xin said to Mu Chong: If Liu Xian knew, even if he cut it with a sword, he would not be able to reveal the truth.

古文：因以宠妻及所乘良马付崇曰： 事觉，吾当以此自明。 
现代文：于是，他将爱妻和所骑的良马交给穆崇，对他说 ：事情被发觉，我将以此来自我表明。 
English: So he gave his beloved wife and the good horse he was riding to Mu Chong and said to him, "The matter has been discovered, and I will use this to express myself."

古文：崇来告难，道武驰如贺兰部。
现代文：穆崇来向道武帝报告祸难，道武帝就奔往贺兰部。
English: Mu Chong came to report the calamity to Emperor Daowu, and Emperor Daowu rushed to Horanbe.

古文：显果疑眷泄，将囚之。
现代文：刘显果然怀疑是梁眷走漏消息，打算把他关起来。
English: Liu Xian indeed suspected that it was Liang Sheng who leaked the news and planned to lock him up.

古文：崇乃唱言： 梁眷不顾恩义，将显为逆。
现代文：穆崇就大声到处宣扬说： 梁眷一点不顾恩义，准备帮助刘显叛逆。
English: Mu Chong loudly proclaimed everywhere: "The Liang clan is ready to help Liu Xian rebel, regardless of their gratitude."

古文：今我掠得其妻、马，足以雪忿。 
现代文：现在我抓来他的妻子和良马，足以雪恨。 
English: Now I've caught his wife and a good horse, which is enough to make him hate me.

古文：显闻信之。
现代文：传到刘显耳朵以后，他果然相信了。
English: After it reached Liu Xian's ears, he really believed it.

古文：窟咄之难，崇外甥于植等与崇谋执道武以应之。崇夜告道武，道武诛植等。北逾阴山，复幸贺兰部。
现代文：窟咄发难时，穆崇的外甥于植等人找穆崇策划想抓住道武帝来接应，穆崇连夜告诉了道武帝，道武帝杀了于植等人，北越阴山，又到了贺兰部。
English: When the cave was in trouble, Mu Chong's nephew Yu Zhi and others asked Mu Chong to plan to catch Emperor Daowu to answer, Mu Chong told Emperor Daowu overnight, Emperor Daowu killed Yu Zhi and others, North Vietnam was gloomy, and they went to Helan.

古文：道武为魏王，崇从平中原，位侍中、豫州刺史、太尉、宜都公。
现代文：道武帝当了魏王以后，穆崇跟随他平定中原，任侍中、豫州刺史、太尉、宜都公。
English: After Emperor Daowu became the king of Wei, Mu Chong followed him to pacify the Central Plains, and served as a chamberlain, the governor of Yuzhou, a captain, and the governor of Yidu.

古文：天赐三年，薨。
现代文：天赐三年去世。
English: He died three years later.

古文：先是，卫王仪谋逆，崇预焉。
现代文：起先，卫王仪阴谋叛乱，穆崇也参与了这件事。
English: At first, Wei Wangyi plotted a rebellion, and Mu Chong was also involved in the matter.

古文：道武惜其功，秘之。
现代文：道武帝很惋惜他的功勋，就将这件事掩盖住不说。
English: Emperor Daowu was very sorry for his exploits, so he covered it up and did not talk about it.

古文：及有司奏谥，帝亲览谥法，述义不克曰丁，曰： 此当矣。 
现代文：当有关方面奏议谥号时，皇帝亲自观看谥法，里面讲到有义而不终称为丁，说： 这是很合适的。 
English: When the relevant parties discussed the issue, the emperor personally watched the speech and said, "This is very appropriate."

古文：乃谥丁公。
现代文：便给他谥为丁公。
English: He was given the title of Ding Gong.

古文：初，道武避窟咄难，遣崇还察人心。
现代文：当初，道武帝因窟咄之难而避走时，派穆崇回来体察民心。
English: In the beginning, when Emperor Daowu was forced to flee because of the difficult situation in the caves, he sent Mu Chong to come back and feel the hearts of the people.

古文：赠宜都王，谥曰文成。太武即位，每与群臣谈宴，未尝不叹息殷勤，以为自道武以来，佐命勋臣文武兼济无及之者。
现代文：穆崇把他的马匹和随从留在外面，自己穿着普通人的服装进入营地，正好里面有亮光，穆崇被舂米的妇女发现了，贼众都被惊醒起来。穆崇找不到自己的随从，就躲在一个坑里，后来便偷了马匹逃走。夜间，他在大泽中住宿，有只白狼向着他嚎叫，穆崇醒来以后，骑上马跟着白狼飞奔，这才免于灾难。道武帝觉得很惊奇，便让穆崇立庙祭祀，子孙世代奉祀。太和年间，追赠功臣，以穆崇配祭于太庙。
English: Mu Chong left his horses and followers outside. He entered the camp dressed as an ordinary person. There happened to be a bright light inside. Mu Chong was discovered by a woman in glutinous rice, and the thieves were all awakened. Mu Chong could not find his followers, so he hid in a pit, and later he stole horses and fled. At night, he stayed in Osawa, and a white wolf howled at him. After Mu Chong woke up, he got on his horse and ran after the white wolf, which saved him from disaster. Emperor Daowu was very surprised, so he had Mu Chong build a temple to worship, and his descendants were worshipped for generations. During the Taiga era,

古文：子寿袭爵，尚乐陵公主，拜驸马都尉。
现代文：穆观的儿子穆寿承袭父亲的爵位，娶乐陵公主为妻，被任命为驸马都尉。
English: Mu Guan's son, Mu Shou, inherited his father's title, married Princess Le Ling, and was appointed Lieutenant of the Horse.

古文：明敏有父风。
现代文：他办事明快机敏，有父亲的风范。
English: He is quick and agile and has a father's demeanor.

古文：太武爱重之，擢为下大夫。
现代文：太武帝很喜爱和器重他，提升为下大夫。
English: Emperor Taibu loved and valued him very much, and promoted him to junior doctor.

古文：敷奏机辩，有声内外。
现代文：他奏事有机智，善于应变，朝廷内外都有声名。
English: He was an intelligent and adaptable player, and was well-known both inside and outside the imperial court.

古文：迁侍中、中书监、领南部尚书，进爵宜都王，加征东大将军。
现代文：升任侍中、中书监、领南部尚书，晋爵为宜都王，加征东大将军。
English: He was promoted to attendant, middle school librarian, leader of the Southern Shangshu, knighted as King of Yidu, and promoted to General of the Eastern Expedition.

古文：寿辞曰： 臣祖崇，先皇之世，屡逢艰危。
现代文：穆寿辞谢，并说 ：我的祖父穆崇，在先皇时代，多次遇到危难。
English: Mu Shou thanked him and said, "My grandfather, Mu Chong, was in danger many times during the reign of the previous emperor.

古文：幸天赞梁眷，诚心先告，故得效功前朝，流福于后。
现代文：幸亏天助梁眷，诚心先来告知，所以效力于前朝，传福于后代。
English: Fortunately, God helped Liang and his family, and he was the first to sincerely inform them, so he was effective in the previous dynasty and passed on the blessing to future generations.

古文：昔陈平受赏，归功无知。
现代文：过去陈平受奖赏，归功于无知。
English: In the past, Chen Ping was rewarded for his ignorance.

古文：今眷元勋未录，臣独奕世受荣，岂惟仰愧古贤，抑亦有亏国典。 
现代文：如今梁眷的大功未赏，臣下惟独世世受荣幸，岂不是愧对古代贤人，也有损于国家大典？ 
English: Nowadays, the great merits of Liang's relatives have not been appreciated, and his vassals are the only ones who have been honored. Isn't this a disgrace to the ancient sages, and also a detriment to the national grand ceremony?

古文：太武嘉之，乃求眷孙，赐爵郡公。
现代文：太武帝大为赞美，便寻找梁眷的孙子，赐爵为郡公。
English: Emperor Taibu was greatly impressed and sought out Liang's grandson to give him the title of county magistrate.

古文：舆驾征凉州，命寿辅景穆，总录机要，内外听焉。
现代文：皇帝亲征凉州时，让穆寿辅佐景穆帝，总管机要大事，内外都听命于他。
English: When the emperor personally led the conquest of Liangzhou, he had Mu Shoufu assisted by Saqing Mu Di, the chief administrator of important matters, and both inside and outside the country obeyed his orders.

古文：次云中，将济河，帝别御静室，召寿及司徒崔浩、尚书李顺，谓寿曰： 蠕蠕吴提与牧犍连和，今闻朕征凉州，必来犯塞。
现代文：到达云中，准备渡河时，皇帝来到另外一间静室，召见穆寿和司徒崔浩、尚书李顺。并对穆寿说 ：蠕蠕的吴提跟牧犍联和结盟，如今听说我出征凉州，必定会来侵犯边塞。
English: When he arrived at Yunzhong and was preparing to cross the river, the emperor came to another quiet room, summoned Mu Shou and the scholars Cui Hao and Shangshu Li Shun, and said to Mu Shou, "Wu Ti, a coward, made an alliance with Mu Xuan, and now I hear that I will go to Liangzhou to invade the border fortress.

古文：若伏兵漠南，殄之为易。
现代文：如果埋伏军队在漠南，歼灭敌人是很容易的。
English: If the ambush army is in the desert south, it is easy to annihilate the enemy.

古文：牧田讫，可分伏要害，以待虏至；引使深入，然后击之。
现代文：田地收获之后，可以分兵埋伏在要害的地方，以等待敌人到达。引诱敌军深入，然后攻击他。
English: After a field is harvested, a detachment can lie in wait for the enemy to arrive, lure him in, and then attack him.

古文：若违朕指授，为虏侵害，朕还斩卿。
现代文：如果违背了我的部署，被敌人所侵害，我回京时就斩了你。
English: If you violate my deployment and are encroached upon by the enemy, I will behead you when I return to Beijing.

古文：崔浩、李顺为证，非虚言也。 
现代文：崔浩、李顺作证，我不是讲假话的。 
English: Cui Hao and Li Shun testify that I am not a liar.

古文：寿信卜筮言，谓贼不来，竟不设备。吴提果至，京邑大骇。
现代文：可是穆寿相信卜筮的人说的话，认为敌人不会来，竟然毫不防备，吴提果然前来，京城大惊。
English: However, Mu Shou believed the words of Bu Yao's men and thought that the enemy would not come. He was so unprepared that Wu Ti actually came and the capital was shocked.

古文：寿不知所为，欲筑西郭门，请景穆避保南山，惠保太后不听，乃止。
现代文：穆寿也不知怎么办好，想修建西郭门，请景穆帝退避到南山以保全，惠保太后不听他的主意，这才停止。
English: Mu Shou also did not know what to do. He wanted to build the West Guo Gate, and asked Jing Mu Di to retreat to Nanshan to protect it. However, Empress Dowager Hui Bao did not listen to his advice, and it was only stopped.

古文：遣司空长孙道生等击之。
现代文：派司空长孙道生等攻打敌人。
English: He sent Sun Dosheng, the head of the Air Force, and others to attack the enemy.

古文：太武还，以无大损伤，故不追咎。
现代文：太武帝回京以后，因为没有受到大的损伤，所以也没有追究他。
English: After Emperor Taibu returned to Beijing, because he did not suffer any major damage, he was not prosecuted.

古文：景穆监国，寿与崔浩等辅政。
现代文：景穆皇帝临国，穆寿和崔浩等辅佐朝政。
English: Jingmu Emperor Lin Guo, Mu Shou and Cui Hao and other aides to the government.

古文：人皆敬浩，寿独陵之。
现代文：人们都很敬重崔浩，穆寿却总是欺负他。
English: People respect Cui Hao, but Mu Shou always bullies him.

古文：累迁侍中、中书监。
现代文：他又自恃职务和地位，没有人能够比得上他。
English: He also arrogated to himself a position and status that no one else could match.

古文：穆泰之反，罢与潜通，赦后事发，削封为编户。
现代文：他对儿子穆师说 ：只要我儿子能像我这样，也就足以胜过别人了，不需要苦苦教他。 
English: He said to his son Mu Shi: "As long as my son can be like me, it will be enough to outperform others, there is no need to teach him hard.

古文：卒于家。宣武时，追赠镇北将军、恆州刺史。
现代文：他对待亲叔父伯父和兄弟们都像对待奴仆一样，夫妻并肩而坐吃饭，让叔父伯父吃剩下的饭菜，被当时人所鄙视和嘲笑。死后，赠为太尉，谥为 文宣 。
English: He treated his uncle and brothers as if they were his slaves. He and his wife would sit side by side at meals and let his uncle eat the rest of the food. He was despised and ridiculed by the people of the time. After his death, he was given the title of First Lieutenant and given the title of Wen Xuan.

古文：罴弟亮，字幼辅，早有风度。
现代文：穆罴的弟弟穆亮，字幼辅，早年就有风度。
English: Mu Rong's younger brother, Mu Liang, whose Chinese name means "young assistant," was very good-natured in his early years.

古文：献文时，起家侍御中散。
现代文：献文帝时，出任侍御中散。
English: When Emperor Tenmu was enthroned, he served as an attendant to the Emperor.

古文：尚中山长公主，拜驸马都尉，封赵郡王。
现代文：娶中山长公主，任驸马都尉，封赵郡王。
English: He married the eldest princess of Zhongshan, was appointed lieutenant of the Horse Guards, and was given the title of King of Zhao County.

古文：加侍中，徙封长乐王。
现代文：加侍中，改封长乐王。
English: He was promoted to attendant and given the title of Changle Wang.

古文：孝文时，除征南大将军、领护西戎校尉、仇池镇将。
现代文：孝文帝时，任征南大将军、兼领护西戎校尉、仇池镇将。
English: During the reign of Emperor Xiaowen, he was appointed as a general of the Southern Expeditionary Army, a lieutenant of the Western Expeditionary Army, and a general of Qiu Chi Town.

古文：宕昌王梁弥机死，子弥博立。为吐谷浑所逼，来奔仇池。
现代文：宕昌王梁弥机死后，他的儿子弥博继立，因被吐谷浑所逼，来投奔仇池。
English: After the death of the Tang Dynasty king, Liang Yicai, his son, Yibo Jili, was forced by the warlord, Tu Gu, to defect to the Qing Dynasty.

古文：亮以弥博凶悖，氐羌所弃；弥机兄子弥承，戎人归乐，表请纳之。
现代文：穆亮因为弥博这个人凶狠悖乱，被氐羌人所厌弃，而梁弥机哥哥的儿子弥承，受到戎人的拥戴和归附，便上表请求接纳弥承。
English: Mu Liang was rejected by the Xiang people because he was a violent and rebellious person, while the son of Liang's brother, Liang Yike, was embraced and attached by the soldiers, so he went to the table to ask for acceptance.

古文：孝文从焉。于是击走吐谷浑，立弥承而还。
现代文：孝文帝听从他的意见，于是穆亮击败吐谷浑，立弥承当宕昌王而后回兵。
English: Emperor Xiaowen listened to his advice, so Mu Liang defeated Tu Guhun, and Li Mya succeeded Tangochang Wang and then returned to the army.

古文：氐豪杨卜自延兴以来，从军二十一战，前来镇将，抑而不闻。
现代文：氐族头人杨卜自从延兴年间以来，随军作战二十一次，可是以前的镇将，都压下他的功劳不肯上报朝廷。
English: Yang Bu, the leader of the Yao people, fought with the army twenty-one times since the Yanxing years, but the former town marshal suppressed his achievements and refused to report them to the imperial court.

古文：亮表卜为广业太守，豪右咸悦，境内大安。
现代文：穆亮上表举荐杨卜任广业太守，那些豪强们都很高兴，境内大为安定。
English: Mu Liang recommended Yang Buren as the governor of Guangye on the table. Those powerful people were very happy, and the territory was very stable.

古文：征为侍中、尚书左仆射。
现代文：朝廷召回穆亮任侍中、尚书左仆射。
English: The imperial court recalled Mu Liang to serve as an attendant, and Shoshu left the palace.

古文：于时复置司州。孝文曰： 司州始立，未有寮吏，须立中正，以定选举。
现代文：当时又设立司州，孝文帝说： 司州刚刚建立，没有僚属吏人，应先立中正官，以确定推举选用人员。
English: At that time, Shizhou was also established, and Emperor Xiaowen said: Shizhou had just been established, and there were no subordinate officials, so it was necessary to first appoint a middle-ranking official to determine the personnel to be selected.

古文：然中正之任，必须德望兼资。
现代文：可是中正的职务，必须是德高望重的人担任。
English: However, the post of Zhongzheng must be held by a person of high moral standing.

古文：世祖时，崔浩为冀州中正，长孙嵩为司州中正，可谓得人。
现代文：世祖时，崔浩担任冀州中正，长孙嵩担任司州中正，可说是得到合适人选。
English: At the time of the founder, Cui Hao served as the Jizhou Vice-governor, and the eldest son Song served as the Sizhou Vice-governor, which can be said to be a suitable candidate.

古文：公卿等宜审推举。 
现代文：公卿们应当认真推举。 
English: The Lords should be carefully selected.

古文：尚书陆睿举亮为司州大中正。
现代文：尚书陆睿又举荐穆亮任司州中正。
English: Shangshu Lu Rui also recommended Mu Liang for the post of Sizhou Zhongzheng.

古文：后拜司空，参议律令。
现代文：后又任司空，参与议定法令。
English: Later, he served as the Secretary of the Air Force, and participated in the negotiation of laws and regulations.

古文：例降爵为公。
现代文：依例降为公爵。
English: As is customary, he was reduced to the rank of duke.

古文：时文明太后崩，已过期月，孝文毁瘠犹甚。
现代文：这时，文明太后去世已经一个月，孝文帝哀伤过度身体衰弱至极。
English: At this time, it had been a month since the death of Empress Dowager Wenming, and Emperor Xiaowen was extremely weak from excessive grief.

古文：亮表请上承金册遗训，下称亿兆之心。时袭轻服，数御常膳；修崇郊祠，垂惠咸秩。
现代文：穆亮上表请求让他上以遵循金册遗训，下以满足亿万民众的心愿，穿用轻服，恢复正常饮食，修明郊祠祭典，垂恩万物，恢复秩序。
English: Mu Liang made a request on the table for him to follow the last teachings of the golden book, satisfy the wishes of hundreds of millions of people, wear light clothes, resume normal diet, revise the suburb shrine festival, show mercy to all things, and restore order.

古文：诏曰： 苟孝悌之至，无所不通。
现代文：皇帝下诏说 ：如孝悌至极，就无所不通。
English: The emperor issued an edict saying, "If filial piety is supreme, everything will be understood."

古文：今飘风亢旱，时雨不降，实由诚慕未浓，幽显无感也。 
现代文：今大风干旱。时雨不降，实由诚意未到，幽明没有感应啊！ 
English: It's windy and dry right now. When the rain doesn't fall, it's really because the sincerity hasn't arrived, and the dim light hasn't been felt!

古文：寻领太子太傅。
现代文：不久，穆亮兼领太子太傅。
English: Soon, Mu Liang also became the crown prince.

古文：时将建太极殿，帝引见群臣于太华殿，曰： 将营殿宇，今欲徙居永乐，以避嚣埃。
现代文：当时准备修建太极殿，皇帝在太华殿召见群臣，对他们说： 准备营建殿堂，如今要移居永乐宫，以避开喧闹和灰尘。
English: At that time, preparations were being made to build the Taiji Hall. The emperor summoned his ministers to the Taihua Hall and said to them, "Prepare to build the hall. Now we will move to the Yongle Palace to avoid the noise and dust.

古文：土木虽复无心，毁之能不凄怆！
现代文：土木虽是无心之物，拆毁时能不感到心酸？
English: Although civil engineering is an unintentional thing, can we not feel sad when it is demolished?

古文：今故临对卿等，与之取别。
现代文：今天特地亲对众卿、和它告别。
English: Today, I'm singing a special farewell to it in front of everyone.

古文：此殿乃高宗所制，爰历显祖，逮朕冲年，受位于此。
现代文：这座宫殿是高宗所建，经过显祖时，到我幼年，在此继位。
English: This palace was built by Emperor Gaozong. When Emperor Xianzu passed away, he was succeeded to the throne here when I was a child.

古文：但事来夺情，将有改制。
现代文：但事因夺情，将有改建。
English: However, due to unforeseen circumstances, there will be alterations.

古文：仰惟畴昔，唯深悲感。 
现代文：回想往事，深为伤感！ 
English: Looking back on the past, I feel very sad!

古文：亮稽首请稽之卜筮。
现代文：穆亮叩首，请求先行卜筮。
English: Mu Liang bowed his head and asked Bu Yao to go first.

古文：又以去岁役作，为功甚多，太庙、明堂，一年便就。
现代文：又说去年用工，成就很大，太庙、明堂，都是一年建成。
English: He also said that last year's laborers made great achievements. The Great Temple and the Ming Hall were all built in one year.

古文：若仍岁频兴，恐人力雕弊。
现代文：如果连年兴建，只怕人力不足。
English: If construction continues year after year, there will be a shortage of manpower.

古文：且材干新伐，愿待余年。
现代文：况且木材新伐下来，希望等待些年。
English: Moreover, the wood is newly felled, so I hope to wait a few years.

古文：帝曰： 朕远览前王，无不兴造。
现代文：皇帝说： 我远查前王，无不兴建。
English: The emperor said, "I have searched far and wide for the former king and built everything.

古文：故有周创业，经建灵台；洪汉受命，未央是作。
现代文：所以周朝创业，建造灵台；大汉受命，修筑未央。
English: Therefore, Zhou Dynasty started a business to build a mortuary; the great man was ordered to build a mausoleum.

古文：草创之初，犹尚若此；况朕承累圣之运，属太平之基，欲及此时，以就大功。
现代文：草创初期，尚且如此；而我承继历代圣皇国运，已立太平基业。要在此时，成就大功。
English: This was still the case in the early days of the initiative; and I, inheriting the past generations of the Holy Emperor's National Movement, have established a foundation for peace. At this time, I want to achieve great success.

古文：人生定分，修短命也；蓍蔡虽智，其如命何！
现代文：人生有定，长短在命，龟卜虽智，怎能奈何命运？
English: Life is determined, the length is in life, although the turtle is wise, how can it not be fate?

古文：当委之分，岂假卜筮。 
现代文：当交由运数，何须假以卜筮。 
English: When it comes to the number of operations, there is no need to pretend.

古文：移御永乐宫。
现代文：便移居永乐宫。
English: He then moved to Yongle Palace.

古文：后帝临朝堂，尝谓亮曰： 三代之礼，日出视朝。
现代文：后来皇帝亲临朝堂时，对穆亮说： 三代以来规矩，是日出时临朝听政。
English: Later, when the emperor visited the imperial court in person, he said to Mu Liang, "Since three generations ago, it has been the rule to come to the imperial court at sunrise to listen to the government.

古文：自汉、魏以降，礼仪渐杀。
现代文：从汉魏以后，礼仪渐渐废弃。
English: After the Han and Wei Dynasties, the etiquette was gradually abandoned.

古文：《晋令》有朔望集公卿于朝堂而论政事，亦无天子亲临之文。
现代文：《晋令》中有规定，在朔望日集合公卿在朝堂议论政事，也没有皇帝亲临的记录。
English: There is a provision in the "Imperial edict" that the nobles should gather in the court to discuss political affairs on the day of the new moon, but there is no record of the emperor's presence.

古文：今因卿等日中之集，中前，卿等自论政事；中后，与卿等共议可否。 
现代文：如今由你们在中午时聚会，中午以前，由你们一起商议政事，午后，我和你们一起商议，行不行？ 
English: Now it is up to you to meet at noon. Before noon, you will discuss politics together. In the afternoon, I will discuss with you. Is that okay?

古文：遂命读奏案，帝亲决之。
现代文：于是，皇帝让穆亮宣读奏章，皇帝亲自决定。
English: As a result, the emperor asked Mu Liang to read the score, and the emperor personally decided.

古文：及迁都，加武卫大将军，以本官董摄中军事。
现代文：迁都之后，加封穆亮为武卫大将军，以本官代管中军事务。
English: After the relocation of the capital, Gafong Mu Liang became General Wu Wei and took charge of China's military affairs.

古文：帝南伐，以亮录尚书事，留镇洛阳。
现代文：皇帝南征时，任命穆亮为录尚书事，留守洛阳。
English: During the Emperor's Southern Expedition, Mu Liang was appointed to record the proceedings and stayed in Luoyang.

古文：后帝自小平津氵凡舟幸石济。
现代文：后来，皇帝从小平津乘船前往石济。
English: Later, the emperor took a boat from Kodairazu to Shiji.

古文：亮谏曰： 汉帝欲乘舟渡渭，广德将以首血污车轮，帝乃感而就桥。
现代文：穆亮进谏说 ：汉皇帝要乘船渡过渭水，广德准备用脑袋的鲜血来染红车轮，皇帝感悟而上了桥。
English: Mu Liang Jinjun said: The Han Emperor wanted to cross the Surabaya River by boat. Guang De was ready to use the blood from his head to dye the wheels red. The Emperor was impressed and went onto the bridge.

古文：渭之小水，犹尚若斯，况洪河有不测之虑。 
现代文：渭河是一条小河流，尚且如此，何况大河，有不可预测的忧虑。 
English: The Li River is a small river, but even so, a big river has unpredictable worries.

古文：帝曰： 司空言是也。 
现代文：皇帝说： 司空所说的极是！ 
English: The emperor said, "What Siku said is absolutely true!

古文：及罴预穆泰反事觉，亮上表自劾，帝优诏还令摄事。
现代文：当穆罴参与穆泰反叛的事情被发现以后，穆亮上表自责，皇帝下优诏让他仍继续管理政事。
English: When Mu Xun's participation in the Mutai rebellion was discovered, Mu Liang expressed his remorse, but the emperor gave him the go-ahead to continue to manage government affairs.

古文：亮固请，久乃许之。
现代文：穆亮坚决请求自贬，皇帝过了许久才表示同意。
English: Mu Liang firmly requested to abdicate, and it took a long time for the emperor to agree.

古文：后徙封顿丘郡公，以绍崇爵。
现代文：后改封为顿丘郡公，以继承穆崇的爵位。
English: Later, he was given the title of Dongqiu County Governor to succeed Mu Chong's title.

古文：宣武即位，拜尚书令、司空公。
现代文：宣武帝即位，任尚书令、司空公。
English: Emperor Xuanwu ascended the throne, and appointed Shang Shirei and Sikuo as regents.

古文：薨，宣武亲临小敛，赠太尉，谥曰匡。
现代文：去世后，宣武帝亲临小殓，赠为太尉，谥为 匡 。
English: After his death, Emperor Xuanwu personally visited Xiao Yao and presented him with the titles of Second Lieutenant and Major.

古文：子绍，字永业，尚琅邪长公主，拜驸马都尉。
现代文：穆亮的儿子穆绍，字永业，娶琅邪长公主，任驸马都尉。
English: Mu Liang's son, Mu Shao, alias Yongye, married the evil eldest princess, and was appointed captain of the horse.

古文：历位秘书监、侍中、卫将军、太常卿、中书令、七兵殿中二尚书。
现代文：历任秘书监、侍中、卫将军、太常卿、中书令、七兵殿中二尚书。
English: Successive Secretaries Supervisor, Junior Chamberlain, Captain of the Guards, Grand Steward, Chusho Rei, and two Shosho in Shichihidono.

古文：遭所生忧，免，居丧以孝闻。
现代文：因父母去世而离职。居丧期间，以纯孝而闻名。
English: He left his job due to the death of his parents. During the mourning period, he was known for his filial piety.

古文：又历卫大将军、中书监、侍中，领本邑中正。
现代文：又历任卫大将军、中书监、侍中，领本城中正。
English: He was also successively appointed as the General of the Guards, the middle school librarian, the chamberlain, and the leader of the city's middle school.

古文：绍无他才能，而资性方重，罕接宾客，稀造人门。
现代文：穆绍并无其他才能，而本性刚正稳重，很少接待宾客，也少上门拜访人家。
English: Mouchot had no other talents, but his nature was rigid and steady, and he rarely received guests or visited people's homes.

古文：领军元叉当权薰灼，曾往绍宅，绍迎送下阶而已。时人叹尚之。
现代文：领军元叉当权时，气焰嚣张，他曾经到穆绍家里，穆绍迎送他时，不过下台阶而已，当时的人都惊叹推崇他。
English: When the leader of the army, Yuan Xuan, was in power, he was full of arrogance. He once went to Musao's house. When Musao greeted him, he only came down the steps. People at the time were amazed and admired him.

古文：及灵太后欲黜叉，犹豫未决，绍赞成之。
现代文：当灵太后准备废黜元叉，却还犹豫不决时，穆绍大加赞成。
English: When the spiritual empress dowager was preparing to dethrone Yu Yuanfang, but still hesitated, Musho strongly approved.

古文：以功加特进、侍中。
现代文：因功加封特进、侍中。
English: He was awarded a special promotion for merit and promoted to the rank of chamberlain.

古文：元顺与绍同直，尝因醉入寝所。
现代文：元顺和穆绍同在宫中值班，元顺曾经因酒醉进入穆绍休息的地方。
English: Yuan Shun and Musao were both on duty in the palace. Yuan Shun once got drunk and went into Musao's resting place.

古文：绍拥被而起，正色让顺曰： 老身二十年侍中，与卿先君亟连职事，纵卿后进，何宜相排突也！ 
现代文：穆绍抱着被子坐起来，很严肃地指责元顺说： 我是当了二十年的侍中，和你的父亲一直是同事，你虽是后进官员，怎么能这样相排斥呢？ 
English: Holding the quilt, Musho sat up and seriously reproached Yuan Shun, saying: I have been a waiter for twenty years, and your father has always been a colleague. Although you are a junior official, how can you exclude each other like this?

古文：遂谢事还家，诏喻乃起。
现代文：于是便辞职回家，经朝廷下诏并说明情况后才同意出任职务。
English: As a result, he resigned and went home, and only agreed to take up the post after the Imperial Court issued an edict and explained the situation.

古文：除侍中，托疾未起，故免河阴之害。
现代文：任命他为侍中，他推托有病没有上任，所以幸免于河阴被杀害。
English: He was appointed as an attendant, but he did not take up the post because he was ill, so he was spared from being killed by the river.

古文：庄帝立，尔硃荣征之。
现代文：庄帝即位，尔朱荣征召他入朝。
English: Emperor Zhuang ascended to the throne, and Er Zhurong conscripted him into the imperial court.

古文：绍以为必死，哭辞家庙。
现代文：穆绍以为必死无疑，便哭泣着辞别家人和祖庙。
English: Thinking that his death was inevitable, Musho said goodbye to his family and ancestral temple, weeping.

古文：及见荣，捧手不拜。
现代文：当见到尔朱荣时，只是拱手而不下拜。
English: When he saw Le Zhu Rong, he just shook his hand without bowing.

古文：荣亦矫意礼之，顾谓人曰： 穆绍不虚作大家兒。 
现代文：尔朱荣也假意礼待他，望着他对别人说 ：穆绍没有白当大家之子！ 
English: Le Zhu Rong also pretended to treat him with courtesy, looking at him and saying to others: "Moussaou did not become everyone's son for nothing!

古文：车驾入宫，寻授尚书令、司空，进爵为王，给班剑四十人，仍加侍中。
现代文：皇帝进宫，不久便任命他为尚书令、司空，晋爵位为王爵。赐给班剑四十个人，仍加侍中。
English: When the emperor entered the palace, he soon appointed him as Shang Shuling and Sikuo, and promoted him to the rank of Wang Jie. He gave Pan Jian forty people, and still added attendants.

古文：时河南尹李奖往诣绍。
现代文：当时河南尹李奖前去见穆绍。
English: At that time, Henan Yin Li Award went to see Musao.

古文：奖以绍郡人，谓必致敬。
现代文：李奖因为穆绍是他郡里的人，以为一定会特别敬重他。
English: Lee Prize thought that because Musho was from his county, he would have a special respect for him.

古文：绍又恃封邑是奖国主，匡坐待之，不为动膝。
现代文：而穆绍自恃自己按封邑正是李奖的国君，所以危襟正坐着接待他，不挪动一下膝盖。
English: But Mouchot prided himself on being the sovereign who bestowed the Lee Prize, and so he was sitting there receiving him without moving a knee.

古文：奖惮其位望，致拜而还。
现代文：李奖有些惧怕他的地位和声望，向他拜礼之后回去。
English: Somewhat fearful of his status and prestige, Li Xuan went back after paying homage to him.

古文：议者两讥焉。
现代文：那些喜欢议论的人把两人都讥笑了一番。
English: Those who like to argue ridiculed both of them.

古文：未几，降王，复本爵。
现代文：不久，穆绍又被降免王爵，恢复本来爵位。
English: Soon afterwards, Mouchot was also stripped of his royal title and restored to his original title.

古文：普泰元年，除骠骑大将军、开府、青州刺史，加都督。
现代文：普泰元年，被任命为骠骑大将军、开府、青州刺史，加都督。
English: In the first year of Putai, he was appointed as the general of the cavalry, the governor of Kaifu, the governor of Qingzhou, and the governor of Qingdao.

古文：未行而薨，赠大将军、尚书令、太保，谥曰文献。
现代文：还未出征就去世，追赠大将军、尚书令、太保，谥为 文献 。
English: He died before going to the front, and was posthumously awarded the titles of General, Shang Shuling, and Taibao.

古文：奚斤，代人也，世典马牧。
现代文：他的儿子长嵩，字子岳，承袭封爵，任光禄少卿。奚斤是代地人，祖辈一直掌管马匹。
English: His son, Nagasaka, Zetsugatake, inherited the title of knight and became Ren Guanglu Shaoqing. He is a local representative, and his ancestors have always been in charge of horses.

古文：父箪。有宠于昭成皇帝。
现代文：父亲名箪，很受昭成皇帝的宠信。
English: His father was famous, and he was a favorite of Emperor Zhaocheng.

古文：时国有良马曰驺駠，一夜忽逸。
现代文：当时，国内有匹良马名 马呙马卯 ，一天晚上忽然失踪了。
English: At that time, there was a good horse in the country named Ma Ying Ma Wu, which suddenly disappeared one night.

古文：后知南部大人刘库仁所盗，养于窟室。
现代文：后来才知道是南部大人刘库仁盗走的，养在窟室里。
English: Only later did it become known that it was Nanbu adult Liu Kuren who stole it and kept it in the cave room.

古文：箪闻而驰往取马，库仁以国甥恃宠，惭而逆击箪，箪捽其发落，伤其一乳。
现代文：箪闻信立即奔驰前去取马。刘库仁因是皇帝外甥自恃受宠，恼羞成怒便在中途击箪，箪揪落了他的头发，打伤他的一只乳房。
English: The messenger immediately went to fetch the horse. Liu Curen, who was the emperor's nephew and had been favored by the emperor, was so annoyed that he struck the horse in mid-stride, knocking off his hair and injuring one of his breasts.

古文：及符坚使库仁与卫辰分领国部，箪惧，遂奔卫辰。
现代文：所以，当苻坚派遣刘库仁和卫辰分别统率大军时，箪很害怕，就投奔了卫辰。
English: Therefore, when Zou Jian sent Liu Kuren and Wei Chen to lead the army separately, Zou was very scared and joined Wei Chen.

古文：及道武灭卫辰，箪晚乃得归，故名位后于旧臣。
现代文：等道武帝灭卫辰后，箪已是晚回朝廷了，所以他的名位排在其他旧臣之后。
English: By the time Emperor Daowu killed Emperor Wei, it was too late for him to return to the imperial court, so he ranked behind other former ministers.

古文：斤机辩有识度。
现代文：奚斤为人机智善辩很有见识。
English: Hao Jin is a witty and argumentative person with a lot of insight.

古文：登国初，与长孙肥等俱统禁兵。
现代文：登国初年，跟长孙肥等一起统率禁兵。
English: In the first year of his ascension to the throne, he led the forbidden soldiers together with his eldest grandson Hii.

古文：后以为侍郎，亲近左右。从征慕容宝于参合。
现代文：后来又被任命为侍郎，成为皇帝的左右亲信，并跟随到参合征讨慕容宝。
English: Later, he was appointed as a chamberlain, became the emperor's right and left confidant, and followed to join the expedition to collect Murong Bao.

古文：皇始初，拜越骑校尉，典宿卫禁旅。
现代文：皇始初年，被任命为越骑校尉，掌管皇宫的宿卫禁旅。
English: In the first year of the reign of the emperor, he was appointed as the Viet Cavalry Lieutenant, in charge of the palace's ban brigade.

古文：车驾还京师，博陵、勃海、章武诸郡群盗并起，斤与略阳公元遵等讨平之。
现代文：皇帝车驾回京城后，博陵、渤海、章武等郡群盗四起，奚斤和略阳公元遵等领兵一一讨平。
English: After the emperor's carriage drove back to the capital, the bandits in Boling, Bohai, Zhangwu and other counties rose up four times, and the leaders of Shujin and Liaoyang and Zun were leveled one by one.

古文：从征，破高车诸部。
现代文：后又跟皇帝出征，击破高车诸部。
English: Later, he went to the front with the emperor and broke through the various parts of the chariot.

古文：又破库狄、宥连部，徙其别部诸落于塞南。
现代文：接着又破厍狄、宥连部，把其余各部落的人迁移到塞南。
English: Next, they destroyed the Xindi and Yulian tribes, and moved the remaining tribesmen to the south of Xian.

古文：又进击侯莫陈部，至大峨谷，置戍而还。
现代文：又进击侯莫陈部，直打到大峨谷，在那里设置了防守部队后才回兵。
English: They attacked Hou Mo Chen again and went straight to Dagaya Valley, where they set up a defensive force before returning.

古文：迁都水使者，出为晋兵将军、幽州刺史，赐爵山阳侯。
现代文：于是升为都水使者，派出当晋兵将军、幽州刺史，封爵为山阳侯。
English: As a result, he was promoted to the water messenger of the capital, dispatched the general of the Jin soldiers, the governor of Yuzhou, and was knighted as the prince of Sanyang.

古文：明元即位，为郑兵将军。
现代文：明元帝即位后，被任命为郑兵将军。
English: After Emperor Mingyuan ascended to the throne, he was named General Zhengbing.

古文：诏以斤世忠孝，赠其父箪长宁子。
现代文：皇帝下诏说奚斤一家世代忠孝，追赠他的父亲箪为长宁子。
English: The emperor issued an imperial edict stating that the Jangjin family had been loyal and filial for generations and bequeathed his father, Jang, to Naganishi.

古文：明元幸云中，斤留守京师。
现代文：明元帝巡幸云中时，奚斤留守京城。
English: When Emperor Mingyuan was in the middle of his imperial tour, Yao Jian stayed in Beijing.

古文：昌黎王慕容伯兒谋反，斤召入天安殿东庑下，诛之。
现代文：昌黎王慕容伯儿谋反，奚斤用计把他召到天安殿的东庑下杀掉。
English: Murong Bo'er, the king of Changli, plotted a rebellion, and he was summoned to the East Hall of the Tian'an Palace to be killed.

古文：诏与南平公长孙嵩等俱坐朝堂，录决囚徒。
现代文：明元帝下旨让奚斤和南平公长孙嵩等都坐镇朝堂，判决囚徒。
English: Emperor Mingyuan issued an order to let Yan Jin and Sun Song, the governor of Nanping, both sit in the town hall to sentence the prisoners.

古文：明元大阅于东郊。
现代文：明元皇帝去东郊大阅兵。
English: Emperor Mingyuan went to the eastern suburbs for a grand military parade.

古文：讲武，以斤行左丞相，大蒐于石会山。
现代文：讲习武艺，由奚斤兼左丞相职，在石会山进行大围猎。
English: Martial arts were taught, and the young men, who were both warriors and officers of the Left Division, went on a large-scale hunting expedition in Shikaiyama.

古文：车驾西巡，诏斤先驱，讨越勒部于鹿那山，大破之。
现代文：当皇帝西巡时，诏令奚斤为先锋，到鹿那山征讨越勒部，大败越勒部人。
English: When the emperor was on a tour of the West, he ordered Shujin to be the vanguard, and he went to Shikanashan to fight the Yuelet Department, and he defeated the Yuelet Department.

古文：又诏斤与长孙嵩等八人坐止车门左，听理万机。
现代文：皇帝又传诏让奚斤和长孙嵩等八人在止车门右侧办公，听理国家各种重要事务。
English: The emperor also issued an edict that eight people, including Gong Jin and Changsun Song, should work on the right side of the bus stop door and attend to various important affairs of the country.

古文：拜天部大人，进爵为公。
现代文：同时，任命他为天部大人，晋为公爵。
English: At the same time, he was appointed as the head of the Imperial Household and promoted to Duke.

古文：命斤出入乘轺轩，备威仪导从。
现代文：让奚斤出入时，乘坐轻车，前面有仪仗队开道。
English: When allowing the caddies to enter and leave, they will ride in a light car, with an honor guard leading the way.

古文：太武之为皇太子，临朝听政，以斤为左辅。
现代文：太武帝以皇太子的身份临朝听政时，以奚斤为左辅政大臣。
English: When Emperor Taivu, as crown prince, was attending the imperial court to listen to the government, he appointed Shujin as the left assistant minister of state.

古文：宋废主义符立，其国内离阻。
现代文：宋废帝义符继位时，其国内混乱。
English: When Emperor Yifu of the Song Dynasty succeeded to the throne, there was chaos in the country.

古文：乃遣斤收河南地，假斤节，都督前锋诸军事、司空、晋兵大将军、行扬州刺史。率吴兵将军公孙表等南征。
现代文：太武帝派遣奚斤攻打河南一带，并交给他节杖，任命他为都督前锋诸军事、司空、晋兵大将军兼扬州刺史，率领吴兵将军公孙表等南征。
English: Emperor Taiwu dispatched the imperial army to attack the Henan area, and handed him the scepter, appointing him as the vanguard of the military, the air force, the Jin general and the Yangzhou stabbing history, and led the Wu general Gongsun table and other southern expedition.

古文：用表计攻滑台，不拔，求济师。
现代文：他采用公孙表的计谋攻打滑台，可是未能攻下，便请求朝廷增派援兵。
English: He used the strategy of Gongsun Watch to attack the slide, but failed to capture it, so he asked the court to send reinforcements.

古文：帝怒其不先略地，切责之。
现代文：皇帝对奚斤没有先占领地盘而去进攻滑台的作法十分恼怒，便严厉斥责了他。
English: The emperor was very angry with Yao Jin for attacking the slide without first occupying the site, and severely reprimanded him.

古文：乃亲南巡，次中山，斤自滑台趣洛阳，长驱至武牢，遂平兗、豫诸郡。
现代文：于是，太武帝亲自领兵南征，来到中山。奚斤立即从滑台赶往洛阳，并长驱直到武牢关，终于平定了兖州和豫州诸郡。
English: As a result, Emperor Taowu personally led the Southern Expedition and came to Zhongshan. He immediately rushed from the slide to Luoyang, and drove all the way to Wudongguan, finally leveling the counties of Ganzhou and Yuzhou.

古文：还围武牢。
现代文：接着又回兵围困武牢关。
English: Next, the returning soldiers besieged Wudangguan.

古文：及武牢溃，斤置守宰以抚之。
现代文：攻破武牢关后，奚斤在这里设置了守关的官员。
English: After breaking through the Wudang Pass, Yan Jin set up officials to guard the pass.

古文：自魏初大将行兵，唯长孙嵩拒宋武，斤征河南，独给漏刻及十二牙旗。
现代文：从北魏初年以来，大将领兵出征，只有长孙嵩抵御宋武帝和奚斤征伐河南时，朝廷特别赐给了计时的漏刻和十二牙旗。
English: Since the first year of the Northern Wei Dynasty, generals have led troops into battle, and only the eldest grandson, Song Song, was able to resist the Song Emperor and the conquest of Henan. The imperial court specially granted the time lapse and the twelve-teeth flag.

古文：太武即位，进爵宜城王，仍为司空。
现代文：太武帝即位后，奚斤晋爵为宜城王，仍当司空。
English: After the enthronement of Emperor Taibu, Jian Jinjie became the king of Yicheng and still served as Siku.

古文：太武征赫连昌，遣斤率义兵将军封礼等袭蒲坂。
现代文：太武帝攻打赫连昌时，派奚斤率领义兵将军封礼等人袭击蒲坂。
English: When Emperor Taivu attacked Herenchang, he sent Shujin (斤) to lead the volunteers to attack Pusaka.

古文：斤又西据长城，秦、雍氐羌皆来归附。
现代文：奚斤接着又西出占领了长安，秦、雍一带的氐羌族人都来归顺。
English: Subsequently, the Qin and Qiang people went west to occupy Chang'an, and the Qin and Qiang people in the Qin and Yong regions all came to submit.

古文：斤与赫连定相持，累战破定。
现代文：奚斤和赫连定两军相持不下，奚斤多次打败赫连定。
English: The two armies of He Jian and He Lianding could not stand each other, and He Jian defeated He Lianding many times.

古文：定闻昌败，走上邽。斤追至雍，不及而还。
现代文：赫连定听到赫连昌兵败的消息后，退往上圭阝，奚斤一直追击到雍地，没能追上才领兵退回。
English: After hearing the news of the defeat of the Herlianchang soldiers, Herlian Ding retreated to Shangguiyu, and Shujin chased them all the way to Yongdi, but could not catch up before leading the soldiers back.

古文：诏斤班师，斤请因其危平之，乃进讨安定。
现代文：太武帝传旨让奚斤班师回朝，而奚斤却请求乘敌军兵败势危时一举扫平。于是，他又领兵进入安定。
English: Taiwu Emperor sent an order to let the Shujin squadron return to the North, but Shujin requested to take advantage of the enemy's defeat and sweep it at one fell swoop. Therefore, he led the troops into stability.

古文：昌退保平凉，斤屯军安定，以粮竭马死，深垒自固。
现代文：赫连昌被迫退保平凉，奚斤于是屯兵于安定，由于军粮断绝而且战马伤亡过多，奚斤便在安定筑深壕和高墙坚守。
English: He Lianchang was forced to retreat to Pingliang, so the Jurchen garrisoned in Pingliang. Due to the lack of military supplies and the excessive casualties of war horses, the Jurchen built deep trenches and high walls in Pingliang to hold out.

古文：监军侍御史安颉击昌，禽之。
现代文：这时，监军侍御史安颉攻打赫连昌，并抓住了他。
English: At this time, the inspector of the army, the attendant of Shi Antao, attacked Herenchang and caught him.

古文：昌众复立昌弟定为主，守平凉。
现代文：赫连昌的部众便拥立赫连昌的弟弟赫连定为主帅，坚守平凉。
English: Herenchang's subordinates then supported Herenchang's younger brother Herending as the head coach, sticking to Pingliang.

古文：斤耻以元帅而禽昌之功更不在己，乃舍辎重，追定于平凉。
现代文：奚斤觉得自己身为元帅但抓赫连昌的功劳却不在自己，深感耻辱。于是，便舍弃了辎重，前往平凉追击赫连定。
English: Yan Jin felt that he was a marshal, but the credit for catching Herenchang was not his, and he felt deeply humiliated. Therefore, he abandoned his burden and went to Pingliang to pursue Herenchang.

古文：定众将出，会一小将有罪，亡入贼，具告其实。
现代文：赫连定率领众将出阵对敌，这时，正好奚斤军中有个小将因犯罪而出逃，投奔贼兵，并将奚斤军情如实告诉了赫连定。
English: He Lianding led the people to go out to fight against the enemy. At this time, there happened to be a young general in the Qin army who fled because of a crime, joined the bandits, and truthfully told He Lianding about the military situation of Qin.

古文：定知斤军无粮乏水，乃邀斤前后。斤众大溃，斤及将娥清、刘拔为定所禽。
现代文：赫连定知道奚斤军中断粮，便不正面作战，而是在奚斤前后不停地骚扰拦击，奚斤的部众很快溃败，奚斤和部将娥清、刘拔一起被赫连定俘虏了。
English: Knowing that the Shujin army had cut off the grain, Herlian Ding did not fight face to face, but kept harassing and intercepting the Shujin. The Shujin's subordinates were quickly defeated, and the Shujin was captured by Herlian Ding together with the generals Ee Ching and Liu Ba.

古文：后太武克平凉，斤等得归。
现代文：后来太武帝攻下平凉，奚斤等人才得以回朝。
English: Later, the Taiwu Emperor conquered Pingliang, and the talents such as Xingjin were able to return to the imperial court.

古文：免为宰人，使负酒食从驾还京师以辱之。
现代文：他被免官并充当宰夫，让他背着酒和食品跟从皇帝车驾回到东都。以此来羞辱他。
English: He was dismissed from his post and humiliated by being made to carry wine and food back to the eastern capital in the emperor's carriage.

古文：寻拜安东将军，降爵为公。
现代文：不久，又封他为安东将军，降为公爵。
English: Soon, he was named General Anton and demoted to the rank of duke.

古文：太延初，为卫尉，改为恆农王。
现代文：太延初年，任卫尉，改封为恒农王。
English: In the first year of Taiyan, he was appointed as a guard lieutenant and changed his title to Heng Nong Wang.

古文：后为万骑大将军。
现代文：后来又任万骑大将军。
English: Later, he was appointed General of Manchukuo.

古文：太武议伐凉州，斤等三十余人议以为不可，帝不从。
现代文：太武帝提议讨伐凉州时，奚斤等三十多人一起商议认为不宜行动，可是太武帝不肯听从。
English: When Emperor Taowu proposed to attack Liangzhou, more than thirty people, including Xing Jin, considered it inappropriate to act, but Emperor Taowu refused to listen.

古文：凉州平，以战功赐僮隶七十户。
现代文：凉州平定时，奚斤因立战功而得到了赏赐的僮隶户七十家。
English: At the time of the Peasants' Revolt in Liangzhou, there were more than 70 families of Jurchens who were rewarded for their war exploits.

古文：又以斤元老，赐安车，平决狱讼，谘访朝政。
现代文：又考虑到奚斤年纪大了，皇帝赐给他安车，让他主持判决各种诉讼案件，同时访察朝政得失，提供处置意见。
English: Also, considering that He Jin was old, the emperor gave him a carriage, let him preside over the judgment of various litigation cases, and at the same time visit the gains and losses of the government and provide disposition opinions.

古文：斤聪辩强识，善于谈论，远说先朝故事，虽未皆是，时有所得，听者叹美之。
现代文：奚斤灵敏善辩，博闻多识，善于言谈，议论起先朝的各种事情，虽然未必完全正确，却往往有个人独到的见解，听到的人对此十分赞叹称誉。
English: He was a witty and eloquent man, well-informed and knowledgeable, and good at talking. He discussed all kinds of things from the previous dynasty. Although he may not have been completely correct, he often had his own unique opinions, which was highly praised by those who heard him.

古文：每议大政，多见从用，朝廷称焉。
现代文：每当议论朝廷的大政时，意见时常被采纳应用，朝廷上下都十分赞许。
English: Whenever the imperial government was discussed, the opinions were often adopted and applied, and the imperial court was very approving.

古文：真君九年，薨，时年八十九。
现代文：太平真君九年逝世，享年八十九岁。
English: Taiping Zhenjun died nine years ago at the age of eighty-nine.

古文：太武亲临哀恸，谥曰昭王。
现代文：太武皇帝亲临吊唁，悲痛万分，谥号 昭王 。
English: Emperor Taibu came to offer his condolences in person, and was so saddened that he was nicknamed King Sho.

古文：斤有数十妇，子男二十余人。
现代文：奚斤有几十位妻妾，二十多个儿子。
English: He had dozens of wives and concubines and more than 20 sons.

古文：长子他观袭爵。
现代文：长子他观承袭了奚斤的爵位。
English: His eldest son Takan inherited the title of Shujin.

古文：太武曰： 斤西征之败，国有常刑。
现代文：太武皇帝说 ：奚斤西征失败，国家自有正常的刑罚。
English: Emperor Taiwu said: "If the Western Expedition fails, the country has its own normal punishment.

古文：以其佐命先朝，故复其爵秩，将收孟明之效。
现代文：因为奚斤是先朝的辅政大臣，所以又恢复了他的爵位和俸禄，期望他像当年的孟明视一样继续为国建功。
English: Because Hao Jin was an assistant minister of state in the previous dynasty, his title and salary were restored, and it was expected that he would continue to make contributions to the country like Meng Mingxi did.

古文：今斤终其天年，君臣之分全矣。 
现代文：如今奚斤已终享天年，君臣的名分也就保全了。 
English: Now that He Jin has finally passed away, the title of monarch and minister has been preserved.

古文：于是降他观爵为公。
现代文：于是将他观降为公爵。
English: So he was demoted to Duke.

古文：传国至孙绪，无子，国除。
现代文：他观的封国一直传到孙子绪，由于绪没有儿子，朝廷收回了封地。
English: His view of fiefdoms was passed down to his grandson Shō, and since Shō had no son, the imperial court took back the fiefs.

古文：太和中，孝文追录先朝功臣，以斤配飨庙庭。
现代文：太和年间，孝文帝追记前朝的功臣，让奚斤配祭于帝庙之中。
English: During the Taihe era, Emperor Xiaowen commemorated the heroes and heroines of the previous dynasty by having the imperial jade jars placed in the imperial temple.

古文：宣武继绝世，以绪弟子监绍其后。
现代文：宣武帝继封绝禄的世家子弟时，封了绪的弟弟的儿子监来继承奚斤的爵位。
English: When Emperor Xuanwu succeeded to the title of the son of the family with the highest rank, the son of the younger brother who had the highest rank succeeded to the title of the peerage.

古文：叔孙建，代人也。
现代文：叔孙建，代郡人。
English: Uncle Sun Jian, representative of the county.

古文：父骨，为昭成母王太后所养，与皇子同列。
现代文：父亲叔孙骨，被昭成皇帝的母亲王太后抚养大，所以跟各皇子同列。
English: His father's uncles and grandsons were brought up by the empress dowager, the mother of the proclaimed emperor, so they are on the same level as the princes.

古文：建少以智通著称。
现代文：叔孙建从小以有智谋和勇敢著称。
English: Uncle Sun Jian has been famous for being resourceful and brave since childhood.

古文：道武之幸贺兰部，常从左右。
现代文：道武帝到贺兰部时，他常在皇帝身边。
English: He was often at the Emperor's side when the Emperor went to Horanbe.

古文：登国初，为外朝大人，与安同等十三人迭典庶事，参军国之谋。
现代文：登国初年，任外朝大人，和安同等十三人交相主持日常事务，参预军国大计。
English: In the first year after his ascension to the throne, he presided over the day-to-day affairs of thirteen foreign dignitaries of the same level as He An, and participated in the preparation of the grand military plan for the country.

古文：随秦王觚使慕容垂，历六载乃还。
现代文：他跟随秦王觚出使慕容垂，经过六年才回来。
English: He followed Emperor Qin in dispatching the envoy Mu Rongtui, only to return six years later.

古文：累迁中领军，赐爵安平公，出为并州刺史。
现代文：累迁任中领军，赐爵为安平公，出任并州刺史。
English: He was successively appointed as the leader of the army, given a knighthood for Anping, and served as the state chief historian.

古文：后以公事免，守鄴城园。
现代文：后来因为公事被免职，看守邺城园林。
English: Later, he was removed from his post because of his official duties, and he was put in charge of guarding the gardens of Lucheng.

古文：明元即位，念前功，以为正直将军、相州刺史。
现代文：明元帝即位，追念他过去的功勋，封为正直将军、相州刺史。
English: Emperor Mingyuan ascended to the throne, and in memory of his past achievements, he was named the Honest General and the Chief Historian of Xiangzhou.

古文：饥胡刘武等聚党叛。明元假建前号、安平公，督公孙表等以讨武。
现代文：受饥荒的胡人刘武等聚众叛乱，明元帝让叔孙建用以前的封号，为假安平公，率领公孙表等讨伐刘武。
English: Liu Wu, a Hu people who suffered from famine, and others rallied to rebel. Emperor Mingyuan had his uncle Sun Jian use the previous seal name, the fake Anping Gong, and led his uncle Sun Yibe and others to fight Liu Wu.

古文：斩首万余级，余众奔走，投沚水死，水为不流。
现代文：斩首一万多级，其余的人逃跑，跳入沁河而死，河水因而断流。
English: He beheaded more than ten thousand people. The rest of the people ran away, jumped into the Wei River and died. As a result, the river was cut off.

古文：晋将刘裕伐姚泓，令其部将王仲德为前锋，将逼滑台。
现代文：晋将刘裕北伐姚泓，派他的部将王仲德当先锋，准备进逼滑台。
English: Jin general Liu Yu sent his general Wang Zhongde as a vanguard to prepare to enter the forced slide.

古文：兗州刺史尉建率所部弃城济河。
现代文：兖州刺史尉建率领的部众弃城渡河。
English: The troops led by Zhangzhou Jishi Jian abandoned the city and crossed the river.

古文：仲德遂入滑台，乃宣言曰： 晋本意欲以布帛七万匹假道于魏，不谓魏之守将便尔弃城。 
现代文：王仲德因而占领滑台，并且大肆宣扬说： 晋国本来想用七万匹布帛向魏国借道，想不到魏国的守将就这样弃城而逃。 
English: As a result, Wang Zhongde occupied the slipway, and loudly proclaimed: Jin originally wanted to use seventy thousand mules to find a way to Wei. It was unthinkable that Wei's defenders would abandon the city and flee.

古文：明元闻之，诏建度河曜威，斩尉建，投其尸于河。
现代文：明元帝知道后，下诏让叔孙建渡过黄河显示军威，斩了尉建，将他的尸体扔进黄河。
English: After Emperor Mingyuan learned of this, he issued an edict to have Sunjian cross the Yellow River to show his military might, beheaded him, and threw his body into the Yellow River.

古文：呼仲德军人与语，诘其侵境之状。
现代文：同时，喊王仲德的兵士答话，责问入侵疆域的罪责。
English: At the same time, Wang Zhongde's soldiers were called out to answer, and they were asked about the guilt of invading the territory.

古文：寻迁广阿镇将，威名甚著。
现代文：不久改任广阿镇将，威名显耀。
English: He was soon appointed as the general of Guang'a Town, and his reputation shone brightly.

古文：久之，除使持节、都督前锋诸军事、楚兵将军、徐州刺史。
现代文：过了许久，任命他使持节、都督前锋诸军事、楚兵将军、徐州刺史。
English: After a long time, he was appointed as the envoy of Ji Jie, the vanguard of the military, the general of Chu soldiers, and the history of Xuzhou.

古文：率众自平原济河，徇下青、兗诸郡。
现代文：率领军队从平原渡河，攻下青、兖诸郡。
English: He led the army to cross the river from the plains and conquered Qing and Lushan counties.

古文：遂东入青州，围宋刺史竺夔于东阳城。
现代文：进而东进青州，包围宋国刺史竺夔于东阳城。
English: It then moved eastward to Qingzhou and encircled the Song Dynasty's capital city of Dongyang.

古文：宋遣将檀道济、王仲德救夔，建不克而还。
现代文：宋国派将军檀道济、王仲德援救竺夔，叔孙建未能攻克青州而回兵。
English: Song dispatched generals Dang Daoji and Wang Zhongde to rescue him, but Uncle Sun Jian failed to conquer Qingzhou and returned home.

古文：以功赐爵寿光公。
现代文：因为功勋而被赐为寿光公。
English: He was given the title of Shuko-ko (寿光公) for his distinguished service.

古文：与汝阴公长孙道生济河而南，仲德等自清入济，东走青州。
现代文：他又跟汝阴公长孙道生渡河南下，王仲德等从清河入济水，东走青州。
English: He also crossed the river to the south of Henan with Ru Yin Gong's eldest grandson Dousheng, and Wang Zhongde and others went from Qinghe to Jishui and east to Qingzhou.

古文：太武以建威名南震，为宋所惮，除平原镇大将，封丹杨王，加征南大将军。
现代文：太武帝因叔孙建威震南方，宋人害怕，便任命他当平原镇大将，封为丹杨王，加征南大将军。
English: Emperor Taivu was afraid of the Song people because his great-uncle Jian Weizhen was in the south, so he appointed him as the general of Pingyuan Town, named him King Danyang, and promoted him to the general of the south.

古文：先是，简幽、易以南戍兵集于河上，一道讨洛阳，一道攻滑台。
现代文：早些时候，魏国挑选幽州、易州以南地区的兵士聚集在黄河上，一路攻打洛阳，一路进攻滑台。
English: Earlier, Wei selected soldiers from Yuzhou and areas south of Yizhou to gather on the Yellow River, attacking Luoyang all the way, and attacking the slide all the way.

古文：宋将檀道济、王仲德救滑台。建与汝阴公道生拒击之。
现代文：宋将檀道济、王仲德救援滑台，由叔孙建和汝阴公长孙道生前往迎击。
English: Song Daozhi and Wang Zhongde rescue the slide, and Sun Daosheng, the eldest son of Sun Jian and Ru Yin, goes to meet the attack.

古文：建分军挟战，纵轻骑邀其前后，焚烧谷草以绝其粮道。
现代文：叔孙建分兵夹攻，派轻骑兵在宋兵前后拦击，烧毁敌军粮草，断绝敌人粮道。
English: Uncle Sun Jian sent light cavalry in front of and behind the Song soldiers to block the attack, burn the enemy's grain and grass, and cut off the enemy's grain route.

古文：道济兵饥，叛者相继。
现代文：檀道济军队饥饿难忍，叛逃者络绎不绝。
English: The army was starving, and defectors were coming in droves.

古文：由是安颉等得拔滑台。
现代文：于是，安颉等得以攻克滑台。
English: As a result, An Hao and others were able to conquer the slide.

古文：建沈敏多智，东西征伐，常为谋主，容貌清整，号曰严明。
现代文：叔孙建沉着机灵多智谋，东西征讨时，经常为主谋。他治军严格，号令严明。
English: Uncle Sun Jian was calm, witty and resourceful. He was often the chief strategist during the Eastern and Western campaigns. He governed the army strictly and issued strict orders.

古文：又雅尚人伦，礼贤爱士。
现代文：又注意处理好各种人际关系，礼贤下士。
English: Also, pay attention to handling various interpersonal relationships well, Corporal Li Xian.

古文：在平原十余年，绥怀内外，甚得边称。
现代文：在平原镇十多年间，安定感化内外民众，在边境上很有声誉。
English: For more than ten years in Pingyuan Town, stability has inspired people at home and abroad, and it has a good reputation on the border.

古文：魏初名将，鲜有及之。
现代文：魏初名将里，很少有人比得上他。
English: Among the first great generals of the Wei Dynasty, there are few who can match him.

古文：南方惮其威略，青、兗辍不为寇。
现代文：南朝也害怕他的军威和谋略，停止入侵青州和兖州。
English: The Southern Dynasty was also afraid of his military power and strategy, and stopped invading Qingzhou and Zhangzhou.

古文：太延三年，薨，时年七十三，谥曰襄，赐葬金陵。
现代文：太延三年去世，享年七十三岁。谥为 襄 ，赐葬于金陵。
English: Tai Yan died three years later, at the age of seventy-three. He was buried in Jinling.

古文：长子俊，字丑归，少聪敏。
现代文：叔孙建的长子叔孙俊，字丑归，从小聪明机敏。
English: Uncle Sun Jun, the eldest son of Uncle Sun Jian, is ugly, clever and quick-witted from an early age.

古文：年十五，内侍左右，性谨密，初无过行。
现代文：十五岁时，入朝侍奉皇帝，成为心腹。他办事细心严密，没有出现过错。
English: At the age of fifteen, he entered the imperial court to serve the emperor and became a confidant. He was meticulous in his work and did not make any mistakes.

古文：以便弓马，转为猎郎。
现代文：由于他擅长骑马射箭，转任为猎郎。
English: Since he was good at horseback riding and archery, he was transferred to be a hunter.

古文：道武崩，清河王绍闭宫门，明元在外。
现代文：道武帝去世时，清河王绍关闭宫门，明元帝在外面没有能进来。
English: When Emperor Daowu died, King Shao of Qinghe closed the palace gate, and Emperor Mingyuan was unable to enter.

古文：绍拘逼俊以为己援。
现代文：拓跋绍硬留住叔孙俊，强迫他成为自己的帮手。
English: Tuoba Shao kept Uncle Sun Jun and forced him to become his helper.

古文：外虽从绍，内实忠款，仍与元磨浑等说绍归明元。
现代文：叔孙俊表面上虽然听从拓跋绍的命令，内心仍然忠于明元帝，他跟元磨浑等人一起劝说拓跋绍让明元帝归来。
English: Although Uncle Sun Jun obeyed Tuoba Shao's orders on the surface, he was still loyal to Emperor Mingyuan in his heart. He, together with Yuanmahun and others, persuaded Tuoba Shao to let Emperor Mingyuan return.

古文：时明元左右唯车路头、王洛兒等，及得俊等，大悦，以为爪牙。
现代文：当时明元帝身边只有车路头、王洛儿等人，当得到叔孙俊以后，高兴极了，将他视为心腹。
English: At that time, Emperor Mingyuan was only surrounded by Che Lu Tou, Wang Lore and others. When he got Uncle Sun Jun, he was extremely happy and regarded him as a confidant.

古文：明元以俊前后功重，军国大计一以委之。
现代文：明元帝即位后，叔孙俊被晋升为卫将军，赐爵为安成公。
English: After Emperor Mingyuan ascended the throne, his uncle Sunjun was promoted to Wei general and given a peerage as An Chenggong.

古文：群官上事，先由俊铨校，然后奏闻。
现代文：当朱提王拓跋悦怀着利刃进入宫廷，准备谋逆时，叔孙俊察觉拓跋悦的举动诡异，便从他的怀中搜出了两刃的匕首。
English: When King Tuoba Yue of Juti entered the court with a sharp blade and was preparing to rebel, his uncle Sun Jun noticed that Tuoba Yue was acting strangely, and retrieved a double-edged dagger from his bosom.

古文：性平正柔和，未尝有喜怒色。
现代文：于是便抓住拓跋悦，将他杀掉了。
English: So he grabbed Tuoba Yue and killed him.

古文：忠笃爱厚，不谄上抑下。每奉诏宣外，必告示殷勤。是以上下嘉叹。
现代文：叔孙俊性情公正而温和，没有显露过大喜或大怒的神色，忠诚爱戴皇帝，不对上阿谀奉承，对下百般压制，每次到外面传送皇帝的诏书时，总是十分诚恳地慰问大家，所以上上下下，无不赞叹。
English: Uncle Sun Jun's disposition was just and gentle. He never showed any great joy or anger. He was loyal and loved the emperor. He did not flatter the emperor, but suppressed him in every possible way. Every time he went outside to deliver the emperor's edict, he always sincerely offered his condolences to everyone. Therefore, he was admired by all.

古文：泰常元年，卒，时年二十八。
现代文：泰常元年去世，当年二十八岁。
English: Tai Chang died in 1981, at the age of twenty-eight.

古文：明元亲临哀恸，朝野无不追惜。
现代文：明元帝亲临致哀痛哭，朝野无不为之惋惜。
English: Emperor Mingyuan came to mourn and weep in person, and the court was filled with regret.

古文：赠司空、安成王，谥孝元，赐温明秘器，载以巉辌车，卫士导从，陪葬金陵。
现代文：追赠为司空、安成王，谥为孝元。赐给皇帝所用的丧物棺材等，用鍂车京车载着，由卫士们当先导，陪葬于金陵。
English: The posthumous gifts were given to Siku and Ancheng Wang, and the wreath was given to Xiaoyuan. The funeral coffin, etc. given to the emperor, was carried by the imperial carriage, with the guards acting as guides, and was buried in the Jinling.

古文：子蒲袭爵。
现代文：他的儿子叔孙蒲承袭了父亲的封爵。
English: His son, his great-uncle, inherited his father's title.

古文：后有大功及宠幸贵臣薨，赗赙送终礼皆依俊故事，无得逾之者。
现代文：后来，凡是有大功勋或受宠幸的大臣们去世，赐赠财物和送葬礼仪都依照叔孙俊的规矩，没有超越的。
English: Later, when ministers with great merits or favors passed away, the gifts of property and funeral rites were in accordance with the rules of Sun Tzu, and nothing surpassed them.

古文：初，俊卒，明元命其妻桓氏曰： 夫生既共荣，没宜同穴，能殉葬者，可任意。 
现代文：起先，叔孙俊去世时，明元帝对他的妻子桓氏说 ：丈夫活着的时候共同享受荣华富贵，死后应当同穴共葬。能够殉葬的话，可以随意。 
English: First of all, when Uncle Sun Jun died, Emperor Mingyuan said to his wife, Lady Huan, "When your husband is alive, you should enjoy the glory and wealth together, and when he dies, you should be buried together in the same grave. If you can be buried together, feel free to do so."

古文：桓氏乃缢，遂合葬焉。
现代文：桓氏便上吊而死，于是夫妻合葬。
English: Mr. Kan died by hanging, and the couple was buried together.

古文：俊既为安城公，俊弟邻袭父爵，降为丹杨公，位尚书令、凉州镇大将。
现代文：叔孙俊被封为安城公以后，他的弟弟叔孙邻承袭了父亲的封爵，降为丹杨公，任尚书令、凉州镇大将。
English: After Uncle Sun Jun was given the title of Prince of Ancheng, his younger brother Uncle Sun Quan inherited his father's title and was demoted to the rank of Prince of Danyang, serving as the chief secretary and the general of Liangzhou Town.

古文：与镇副将奚牧，并以贵戚子弟，竞贪财货，遂相纠，坐诛。
现代文：他跟副将奚牧，都是贵戚人家的子弟，竞相贪取财物，于是发生纠纷，因罪而被杀。
English: He and the vice-commander, Hao Mu, both sons of noble families, competed with each other to obtain wealth. A dispute ensued, and he was killed for his crime.

古文：安同，辽东胡人也。
现代文：安同，辽东胡人。
English: Andong, Liaodong Hu people.

古文：其先祖曰世高，汉时以安息王侍子入洛。
现代文：他的先祖安世高，汉朝时以安息王侍子身份入洛阳。
English: His ancestor, An Shigao, entered Luoyang during the Han Dynasty as an attendant of the Sabbatical King.

古文：历魏至晋，避乱辽东，遂家焉。
现代文：从魏至晋，避乱而到辽东，因而以这里为家。
English: From the Wei Dynasty to the Jin Dynasty, they fled to Liaodong to escape the turmoil, and thus made this place their home.

古文：父屈，仕慕容。
现代文：父亲安屈，在慕容日韦那里当官。
English: His father, An Qu, was a high-ranking official in the Murong Province.

古文：为苻坚所灭，屈友人公孙眷妹没入苻氏宫，出赐刘库仁为妻，库仁贵宠之。
现代文：慕容日韦被苻坚灭后，安屈的朋友公孙眷的妹妹被送进苻坚宫中，后又出赐给刘库仁当妻子，刘库仁对她很宠爱。
English: After Murong Rihwei was killed by Jian Jian, the younger sister of An Qu's friend Gong Sun Quan was sent to Jian Jian's palace. Later, she was given to Liu Kuren as his wife. Liu Kuren was very fond of her.

古文：同随眷商贩，见道武有济世才，遂留奉侍。
现代文：安同跟公孙眷一起经商，见道武帝有兼济天下的才能，便留下来侍奉他。
English: Seeing Emperor Daowu's ability to provide for the country, Andong stayed behind to serve him.

古文：性端严明惠，好长者之言。
现代文：安同性情严正明察，喜欢听年长有见识的人说的话。
English: An likes to listen to older, more knowledgeable people.

古文：登国初，道武征兵于慕容垂，同频使称旨。为外朝大人，与和跋等出入禁中，迭典庶事。
现代文：登国初年，道武帝到慕容垂那里求兵，安同多次出使都很合皇帝的意愿，被任命为外朝大人，跟和跋等进出宫中，接连主持处理日常事务。
English: In the first year of his arrival in Japan, Emperor Daowu went to Murongtli to solicit soldiers. Andong, who had been dispatched many times, was very much in line with the emperor's wishes. He was appointed as the adult of the foreign court. He went in and out of the palace with Wotan, and successively presided over the handling of daily affairs.

古文：从征姚平于柴壁，姚兴悉众救平，同进计曰： 汾东有蒙坑，东西三百余里，径路不通。
现代文：安同跟随皇帝到柴壁征伐姚平，姚兴带领所有人马救援姚平。安同向皇帝建议说： 汾州东面有个蒙阝亢，东西长三百多里，无路可通。
English: Andong followed the emperor to Chibi to conquer Yao Ping, and Yao Xing led all the people to rescue Yao Ping. Andong suggested to the emperor: There is a mountain range in the east of Luzhou, more than three hundred miles long from east to west, and there is no road.

古文：姚兴来，必从汾西，乘高临下，直至柴壁，如此则寇内外势接。
现代文：姚兴兵来，必然从汾西方向，居高临下，直到柴壁，这样敌人内外合兵了。
English: When Yao Xing's soldiers came, they must have come from the west of Shaanxi Province, and they stood high and came down as far as Zhabei, so that the enemy inside and outside joined forces.

古文：宜截汾为南北浮桥，乘西岸筑围。
现代文：应当把汾河上的南北浮桥截断，在西岸上修筑城围。
English: The north-south floating bridge on the Min River should be cut off, and the city should be encircled on the west bank.

古文：西围既固，贼至无所施其智力矣。 
现代文：西面的城围坚固，敌人来后就没有办法施展智谋和兵力了。 
English: The siege in the west is solid, and after the enemy comes, there is no way to exert wisdom and strength.

古文：从之。
现代文：道武帝听从了。
English: I followed his advice.

古文：兴果视平屠灭而不能救。
现代文：姚兴果然眼睁睁地看着姚平被歼灭而无法救援。
English: Yao Xing watched helplessly as Yao Ping was annihilated and could not be rescued.

古文：以谋功，赐爵北新侯。
现代文：由于安同献计有功，被赐爵为北新侯。
English: He was given the title of Beixinhou (北新侯) for his contribution to the peace and reconciliation.

古文：明元即位，命同与南平公长孙嵩并理人讼。
现代文：明元帝即位，命令安同和南平公长孙嵩共同听理诉讼。
English: Emperor Mingyuan ascended to the throne and ordered An Tong and Sun Song, the Prince of Nanping, to jointly hear the lawsuit.

古文：又诏同与肥如侯贺护持节循察并、定二州及诸山居杂胡、丁零。
现代文：又令安同和肥如侯贺护持节视察并州、定州和各山居的杂种胡人、丁零人等。
English: He also ordered Andong and Huiyu to inspect the mixed-breed Hu people and Dingye people in Bianzhou, Dingzhou and various mountain villages on the Houhe Protection Day.

古文：宣诏抚慰，问其疾苦，纠举守宰不法，郡国肃然。
现代文：他们宣读皇帝诏书，慰问民间疾苦，纠察检举守令们的不法行为，郡国秩序井然。
English: They read out the emperor's edict, consoled the people's sufferings, picketed and reported the illegal acts of the order keepers, and the county was in good order.

古文：同东出井陉。至钜鹿，发众欲修大岭山，通天门关。
现代文：安同又东出井陉，到达巨鹿，征发民众准备修大岭山，通往天门关。
English: Andong also went to the east of the well, reached the huge deer, solicited and dispatched the people to prepare to repair the Daling Mountain, leading to the Tianmen Pass.

古文：又筑城于宋子，以镇静郡县。
现代文：又在宋子筑城，以安定郡县。
English: He also built a city in Song Zi and ruled the county with a stable government.

古文：护嫉同得众心，使人告同筑城聚众，欲图大事。
现代文：贺护嫉妒安同很得民心，派人上告说安同聚众筑城，准备叛变朝廷。
English: He Guo envied the fact that Andong had won the hearts of the people, and sent someone to report that Andong had gathered a large number of people to build a city and was preparing to rebel against the imperial court.

古文：太武监国，临朝听政，以同为左辅。
现代文：皇帝知道是诬告，不追查。太武帝监国，临朝听政，任命安同为左丞相。
English: The emperor knew that it was a false accusation and did not investigate. Emperor Taimu supervised the country, listened to politics in the imperial court, and appointed Andong as the Left Minister.

古文：及即位，进爵高阳公，冀青二州刺史。
现代文：即位后，又晋封爵位为高阳公，任冀、青两州刺史。
English: After the enthronement, he was also promoted to the rank of Gaoyang Gong, and was appointed as the governor of Hebei and Qing Provinces.

古文：同长子屈，明元时，典太仓事，盗官粳米数石，欲以养亲。
现代文：安同的长子安屈，在明元帝时，掌管太仓，偷盗官仓粳米几石，准备奉养父母亲。
English: The eldest son of Andong, An Qu, was in charge of Taicang during the reign of Emperor Mingyuan. He stole several stones of rice from the official storehouse and prepared to support his parents.

古文：同大怒，求戮屈，自劾不能训子。
现代文：安同大怒，请求朝廷杀掉安屈，并上表自述不能教训好儿子的罪责。
English: Enraged, An Tong asked the court to kill An Qu, and confessed that he could not teach his son's guilt.

古文：帝嘉而恕之，遂诏长给米。
现代文：皇帝赞扬安同的行为而宽恕了他的儿子，并因此而下诏让长期供给安同粳米。
English: The emperor commended the behavior of Andong and forgave his son, and therefore issued a decree to supply Andong glutinous rice for a long time.

古文：同在官明察，长于校阅，家法修整，为世所称。
现代文：安同为官明察秋毫，擅长检查督促，治家严整，被当时人所称赞。
English: Andong was praised by the people at that time for being an official who was able to see things clearly, was good at inspecting and urging, and was a strict ruler.

古文：原兄弟外节俭而内实积聚，及诛后，籍其财至数万。
现代文：当他到冀州以后，年纪大了，颇注重积蓄财物，大肆兴修寺院佛塔，百姓们感到劳苦。死后，赠高阳王，谥号为 恭惠 。
English: After he came to Jizhou, when he was old, he paid great attention to the accumulation of wealth and built a large number of temples and pagodas, which made the people feel laborious. After his death, he was given the name Gaoyang Wang, and his nickname was Gonghui.

古文：弟颉，辩慧多策略，最有父风。
现代文：安原的弟弟安颉，聪明善辩而多有谋略，很有父亲的风范。
English: An Yuan's younger brother, An Xun, was clever, eloquent, and had a lot of strategies. He had a very fatherly demeanor.

古文：明元初，为内侍长，令察举百寮，纠刺奸慝，无所回避。
现代文：明元帝初年，担任内侍长，皇帝让他考察和举荐百官，纠正和弹劾奸佞之徒，不要有什么避讳。
English: In the first year of Emperor Mingyuan, when he served as the chief of the inner chamber, the emperor asked him to inspect and recommend hundreds of officials, correct and impeach traitors, and not be shy.

古文：尝告其父阴事，帝以为忠，特亲宠之。
现代文：安颉曾经向皇帝报告父亲的私下不可告人的事情，皇帝认为他忠于国家，特别亲近和宠信他。
English: An Xun once reported his father's secret to the emperor, who considered him to be loyal to the country and especially close to him.

古文：宜城王奚斤自长安追赫连昌至安定，颉为监军侍御史。
现代文：宜城王奚斤从长安把赫连昌追赶到安定，安颉任监军侍御史。
English: Yicheng Wang Shujin chased Herenchang from Chang'an to Ding'an, and Shujin served as the inspector of the army and the governor of Ding'an.

古文：斤以马多疫死，士众乏粮，乃筑垒自固。遣太仆丘堆等督租于人间，为昌所败。
现代文：奚斤因马匹大多遇瘟疫而死，士卒又缺粮，便修建城垒坚守，并派太仆丘堆等到民间催租，被赫连昌打败了。
English: Because most of his horses died of the plague, and his soldiers were short of grain, he built a fortress to hold out, and sent his servants to the hills to wait for the people to collect the rent. He was defeated by Helianchang.

古文：昌遂骄矜，日来侵掠。
现代文：赫连昌于是十分骄傲自大，天天前来侵扰掳掠。
English: Therefore, He Lianchang was very proud and arrogant, and came to invade and plunder every day.

古文：颉曰： 等死，当战死！
现代文：安颉说： 都是死，应当战死！
English: And Amnon said, "They shall all be put to death; they shall surely be put to death."

古文：宁可坐受囚乎？ 
现代文：怎么能坐在这里像被囚禁的一样。 
English: How can I sit here like I'm a prisoner?

古文：斤犹以马死为辞。
现代文：可是奚斤仍然以马匹死亡为由不同意。
English: However, Hao Jin still disagreed, citing the death of horses as the reason.

古文：颉乃阴与尉眷等谋，选骑焉。
现代文：安颉就暗暗地和尉眷等合谋，挑选骑兵等待敌人。
English: An Xuan secretly conspired with his retainers to select cavalry and wait for the enemy.

古文：昌来攻垒，颉出应之，昌马蹶而坠。颉禽昌送京师，赐爵西平公，代堆统摄诸军。
现代文：当赫连昌来攻打城垒时，安颉出兵应战，赫连昌马失前蹄摔下来，安颉活捉了赫连昌，把他送到京城，被赐封为西平公，代替丘堆统管军事。
English: When He Lianchang came to attack the fortress, An Xun sent troops to challenge the battle. He Lianchang's horse lost its front hoof and fell down. An Xun captured He Lianchang alive and sent him to Beijing. He was given the title of Xiping Gong and took charge of military affairs in place of Qiu He.

古文：赫连定将复入长安，诏颉镇蒲坂以拒之。
现代文：赫连定准备再入侵长安，皇帝令安颉镇守蒲坂对敌。
English: He Lian was getting ready to invade Chang'an again, and the emperor ordered the town of Anhui to defend Busan against the enemy.

古文：宋将到彦之寇河南以援定，列守南岸，至于衡关。
现代文：宋将到彦之进犯河南声援赫连定，列兵守于黄河南岸，直至衡关。
English: Song will invade Henan to support He Lianding, and the soldiers will stay on the south bank of the Yellow River until Hengguan.

古文：太武西征定，以颉为冠军将军，督诸军击彦之。
现代文：太武帝西征赫连定，任命安颉为冠军将军，带领各军攻打到彦之。
English: Emperor Taibu conquered the west, defeated Lian Ding, appointed An Qi as the champion general, and led all the armies to attack Hikone.

古文：遂济河，攻洛阳，拔之。进攻武牢，武牢溃。
现代文：于是渡河，攻克洛阳。又进攻武牢关，武牢关也被攻克。
English: So they crossed the river and attacked Luoyang. They also attacked Wudongguan, and Wudongguan was also conquered.

古文：又与琅邪王司马楚之平滑台，禽宋将硃修之、李元德及东郡太守申谟。
现代文：又和琅邪王司马楚之平定了滑台，活捉了宋将朱修之、李元德及其东郡太守申谟。
English: He also leveled the slide with the evil king Sima Chu, and captured the Song generals Zhu Xiuzhi, Li Yuande and the East County Governor Shenmue alive.

古文：乃振旅还京师，进爵为王。卒，谥曰襄。
现代文：这才领兵回京城。晋封为王爵。死后，谥为 襄 。
English: Only then did he lead the troops back to the capital. He was promoted to the rank of prince. After his death, he was known as Jo.

古文：颉为将善绥士众，及卒，宋士卒降者无不叹惜。
现代文：安颉当主帅时善于安抚将士，当他去世时，连宋朝投降过来的兵士们都无不惋惜地长叹。
English: When An Xuan was the commander, he was good at pacifying his soldiers. When he died, even the soldiers who had surrendered to the Song Dynasty lamented with regret.

古文：庾业延，代人也，后赐名岳。
现代文：庾业延，代郡人，后皇帝赐名为岳。
English: Gong Ye Yan, deputy county man, was later given the name Yue by the emperor.

古文：其父及兄和辰世典畜牧，稍转中部大人。
现代文：他的父亲和哥哥和辰世代掌管畜牧，稍后转任中部大人。
English: His father, brother and son-in-law were in charge of animal husbandry for generations, and later became the heads of the Chubu region.

古文：昭成崩，苻氏内侮，事难之间，收敛畜产，富拟国君。
现代文：昭成帝去世后，苻坚内侵，在危险之际，他们大肆收藏各种畜产品，富裕得可以和国君相比。
English: After the death of Emperor Zhaocheng, the Jurchens invaded the country, and at the time of danger, they collected all kinds of livestock products, so rich that they could be compared to the sovereign.

古文：刘显谋逆，道武外幸，和辰奉献明太后归道武，又得其资用。以和辰为内侍长。
现代文：刘显谋反叛乱，道武帝外逃，和辰侍奉献明皇后并送归道武帝，又得到他所送来的资财，道武帝任命和辰当内侍长。
English: Liu Hsien planned a counter-rebellion, Emperor Daowu fled abroad, and Emperor Daowu appointed him as the head of the Imperial Household Agency. Emperor Daowu also received the wealth that Liu Hsien sent to him, and Emperor Daowu appointed Liu Hsien as the head of the Imperial Household Agency.

古文：和辰分别公私旧畜，颇不会旨，道武由是恨之。
现代文：和辰把公家和私人过去积蓄的东西分开来，很不能领会道武帝的意图，道武帝因此而恼恨他。
English: Watatsu separated the public and private savings in the past, and was unable to understand Emperor Daowu's intention, which made Emperor Daowu angry with him.

古文：岳独恭慎修谨，善处危难之间，道武嘉之。
现代文：庾岳却格外谦恭谨慎自重，善于处理危险之时发生的事情，道武帝十分赞赏他。
English: However, Hao Yue was exceptionally humble, prudent and self-respecting, and was good at dealing with dangerous situations. Emperor Daowu highly appreciated him.

古文：与王建等俱为外朝大人，参预军国。
现代文：他和王建等都担任外朝大人，参预军国大事。
English: He and Wang Jian and others all served as foreign dignitaries and participated in the pre-military national events.

古文：从平中原，拜安远将军。
现代文：跟从平定中原，被任命为安远将军。
English: Following the pacification of the Central Plains, he was named General Anyuan.

古文：官军之警于柏肆也，贺兰部帅附力眷、纥突邻部帅匿物尼、纥奚部帅叱奴根等闻之，反于阴馆。
现代文：当道武帝的军队在柏肆受惊扰时，贺兰部主帅附力眷、纥突邻部主帅匿物尼、纥奚部主帅叱奴根等得知以后，在阴馆反叛。
English: When Emperor Daowu's army was alarmed at Paju, the commander of the Horan Division, He Jigong, the commander of the Adjacent Division, Hanzhong, and the commander of the Hanzhong Division, Yan Nugen, rebelled at Yinggu.

古文：南安公元顺讨之，不克，诏岳。
现代文：南安公元顺进行讨伐，不能得胜，诏令庾岳前往。
English: Nan'an carried out the crusade in chronological order, but could not win, so he was ordered to go to Yingyue.

古文：讨破离石叛胡帅呼延铁、西河叛胡帅张崇等。以功赐爵西昌公，迁鄴行台。
现代文：庾岳打败了离石叛胡主帅呼延铁、西河叛胡主帅张崇等部，以功勋赐爵为西昌公，改任邺郡行台。
English: Zhaoyue defeated Huyan Iron, the head coach of the Shihu Rebellion, and Zhang Chong, the head coach of the West River Rebellion, and was awarded a knighthood for his services to Xichang and transferred to Xingdai County.

古文：岳为将有谋略，士众服其智勇，名冠诸将。
现代文：庾岳当将领有谋略，士兵们都佩服他的智谋和勇武，名冠众将之上。
English: When General Gongyue had a strategy, the soldiers all admired his wisdom and bravery. He was the best of all generals.

古文：及罢鄴行台，以所统六郡置相州，即拜岳为刺史。
现代文：当废除邺行台时，将原来统辖的六郡设置相州，并当即任命庾岳为刺史。
English: When Minhangdai was abolished, the six counties that were originally under its jurisdiction were set up as Sangshu, and Gongyue was immediately appointed as Sangshi.

古文：秉法平当，百姓称之。
现代文：他执法公正恰当，百姓们都颂扬他。
English: He administers justice justly and properly, and the people praise him.

古文：鄴旧有圆池，时果初熟，丞吏送之，岳不受，曰： 果未进御，吾何得先食！ 
现代文：邺郡有旧园池，当时水果初熟，丞吏们送来给他吃，庾岳不肯接受，并说： 果品还没有送给皇上，我怎么能够先食用！ 
English: There is an old park and pond in Handan County. At that time, the fruit was first ripe, and the officials brought it to him to eat. Handan Yue refused to accept it, and said: The fruit has not been given to the emperor, how can I eat it first!

古文：其谨如此。迁司空。
现代文：他就这样严谨。改任司空。
English: That's how strict he is. He's been reassigned to be a flight attendant.

古文：岳兄子路，有罪，诸父兄弟悉诛，特赦岳父子。
现代文：庾岳的哥哥的儿子庾路，犯了罪，他的父辈和兄弟都被杀，皇帝特别赦免庾岳父子。
English: Zou Yue's brother's son, Zou Lu, committed a crime. His parents and brothers were all killed. The emperor pardoned Zou Yue's father and son.

古文：候官告岳衣服鲜丽，行止风采拟仪人君。
现代文：纠察官员上告说庾岳衣服穿得很华丽，举止风度都模拟国君礼仪。
English: The picketing officials complained that Gong Yue's clothes were very ornate, and his demeanor imitated the etiquette of the sovereign.

古文：遇道武不豫，多所猜忌，遂诛之。时人咸冤惜焉。
现代文：这时正遇道武帝有病，特别喜欢猜疑和嫉妒别人，便杀了他。
English: At this time, he met Emperor Daowu, who was ill and especially suspicious and envious of others, and killed him.

古文：岳葬在代西善无界。
现代文：当时人觉得他冤枉并为之惋惜。
English: At the time, people felt he was wronged and regretted it.

古文：后太武征赫连氏，经其墓宅，怆然改容，遂下诏为立庙，令一川之人，四时致祭。
现代文：庾岳被埋葬在代郡西面的善无境内，后来太武帝征伐赫连氏，路过他的墓地，心酸地改变了脸色，便下诏给他立庙，让这个地方的人四时加以祭祀。
English: Gongyue was buried in Zhenwu territory on the west side of Dayu County. Later, Emperor Wu conquered the Khelian clan. Passing by his grave, he changed his face sadly, and then issued an edict to build a temple for him, and let the people of this place make a sacrifice at four o'clock.

古文：求其子孙任为帅者，得其子陵。
现代文：又找他的子孙能够担任将领的人，找到了他的儿子庾陵。
English: He also looked for his descendants who could serve as generals, and found his son Fuling.

古文：从征有功，听袭爵。
现代文：庾陵跟随皇帝出征立功，便让他承袭父亲的封爵。
English: Fuling followed the emperor to go to war and made meritorious service, so he inherited his father's knighthood.

古文：王建，广宁人也。
现代文：王建是广宁人。
English: Wang Jian is from Guangning.

古文：祖姑为平文后，生昭成皇帝。
现代文：他父亲的姑姑是平文帝的皇后，生下昭成皇帝。
English: His father's aunt was the empress of Emperor Pingwen, who gave birth to Emperor Shoucheng.

古文：伯祖丰，以帝舅贵重。
现代文：伯祖父丰，因为是皇帝的舅舅而显贵并受到敬重。
English: Uncle Feng, because he was the uncle of the emperor, was distinguished and respected.

古文：丰子支，尚昭成女，甚见亲待。
现代文：丰的儿子王支，娶昭成皇帝的女儿，很受信任。
English: Feng's son Wang Zhi, who married the daughter of Emperor Zhaocheng, was highly trusted.

古文：建少尚公主。
现代文：王建从小就娶了公主为妻。
English: Wang Jian has been married to a princess since he was a child.

古文：登国初，为外朝大人。与和跋等十三人迭典庶事，参与计谋。
现代文：登国初年，任外朝大人，跟和跋等十三人连续主管日常事务，参预国家大计。
English: In the first year after ascending to the country, he was in charge of the day-to-day affairs of the foreign court, and he and 13 other people were continuously in charge of the day-to-day affairs and participated in the preparation of the national general plan.

古文：道武遣使慕容垂，建辞色高亢，垂壮之。
现代文：道武帝派王建出使慕容垂，王建言辞声音洪亮高亢，慕容垂赞赏他气壮。
English: Emperor Daowu sent Wang Jian as an envoy to Murongdiao. Wang Jian's speech was loud and high-pitched, and Murongdiao appreciated his strength.

古文：还为左大夫。
现代文：回来后任左大夫。
English: After his return, he became a doctor of the left.

古文：建兄回，时为大夫，诸子多不慎法，建具以状闻，回父子伏诛。
现代文：王建的哥哥王，当时任大夫，几个儿子大多不守法令，王建把详细情况上奏，王父子都被杀。
English: Wang Jian's brother Wang, who was a doctor at the time, and several of his sons mostly disobeyed the law. Wang Jian reported the details. Both Wang and his son were killed.

古文：其讦直如此。
现代文：他就是这样刚直。
English: That's how tough he is.

古文：从征伐诸国，破二十余部。
现代文：他跟随皇帝攻打各国，打败了二十多部。
English: He followed the emperor to attack various countries and defeated more than twenty warships.

古文：又从征卫辰，破之。为中部大人。
现代文：又从征卫辰，击败了他，被任命为中部大人。
English: In addition, he defeated Wei Chen, who was from the Conquest, and was appointed as the central adult.

古文：破慕容宝于参合，帝乘胜将席卷南夏。于是简择俘众，有才能者留之；其余欲悉给衣粮遣归，令中州之人咸知恩德。
现代文：在参合打败慕容宝时，皇帝乘胜准备席卷中原，于是挑选俘虏，凡有才能的都留下，其余人准备都送给他们衣服粮食遣送回去，让中原民众感知恩德。
English: After defeating Murongbao in the Battle of Shenhe, the emperor took advantage of the victory and prepared to sweep across the Central Plains. Therefore, he selected captives, and those who had talent were kept, while the rest were prepared to be sent back with clothes and grain, so that the people of the Central Plains would feel blessed.

古文：建以为宝覆败于此，国内空虚，获而归之，纵敌生患，不如杀之。
现代文：可是王建认为慕容宝这次失败，国内已经空虚，这些人被俘虏了却又放回去，这是放走敌人再生后患，不如杀掉。
English: However, Wang Jian thought that Murongbao had failed this time, the country was already empty, these people had been captured but were released again, this was a problem after the enemy was released, it was better to kill them.

古文：帝曰： 若从建言，非伐罪吊人之义。 
现代文：皇帝说 ：听从王建的话，就不是讨伐有罪者以哀怜民众的本义了。 
English: The emperor said, "Listening to Wang Jian's words is not the true meaning of fighting the guilty and pitying the people.

古文：诸将咸以建言为然。建又固执，乃坑之。
现代文：可是众将都赞同王建的意见，王建又固执己见，于是便坑杀了他们。
English: However, the generals all agreed with Wang Jian's opinion, and Wang Jian was stubborn, so he killed them.

古文：帝既而悔焉。
现代文：皇帝后来感到很后悔。
English: The emperor later felt very regretful.

古文：并州既平，车驾出井陉，次常山。诸郡皆降，唯中山、鄴、信都三城不下。
现代文：并州平定以后，皇帝从井陉出兵，到达常山，各郡都归降，惟独中山、邺、信都三城没有攻克。
English: After the consolidation of the state, the emperor sent troops from Jingye to reach Changshan. All counties surrendered, but Zhongshan, Handan and Xindu were not conquered.

古文：乃遣卫王仪南攻鄴，建攻信都等城。
现代文：皇帝便派卫王仪南攻邺城，王建攻打信都等城。
English: The emperor then sent Wei Wang Yi south to attack the city of Handan, and Wang Jian attacked the city of Xindu and other cities.

古文：建等攻城六十余日，不能克，士卒多伤。
现代文：王建等攻城六十多天，还不能攻克，士卒们死伤众多。
English: Wang Jian and others besieged the city for more than sixty days, but were unable to conquer it. Many soldiers were killed and wounded.

古文：帝自中山幸信都，降之。
现代文：皇帝从中山前往信都，才招降了他们。
English: The emperor went from Zhongshan to Xindu to recruit them.

古文：车驾幸钜鹿，破宝众于柏肆坞，遂围中山。
现代文：皇帝又前往巨鹿，在柏肆坞打败了慕容宝的军队，进围中山。
English: The emperor also went to Deer, defeated Murong Bao's army in Baihu Dock, and encircled Zhongshan.

古文：宝弃城走和龙，城内无主，将夜入乘胜据守其门。
现代文：慕容宝弃城投奔和龙，城内没有主帅。皇帝准备连夜进城乘胜占领城门。
English: Murong Bao abandoned the city and ran to the dragon. There was no coach in the city. The emperor was preparing to enter the city overnight to take advantage of the victory and occupy the gate.

古文：建贪而无谋，意在虏获。恐士卒肆掠，盗乱府库，请候天明，帝乃止。
现代文：可是王建贪婪又少计谋，只想多缴获一些东西，担心士兵们进城后大肆掳掠偷盗，搞乱了府库，就请皇帝等天亮进城，皇帝便停止进军。
English: However, Wang Jian was greedy and unscrupulous, and only wanted to capture more things. Worried that the soldiers would plunder and steal after entering the city and mess up the treasury, he asked the emperor to wait until dawn to enter the city, and the emperor would stop marching.

古文：是夜，徒何人共立慕容普驎为主，遂闭门固守。
现代文：当天晚上，徒何人共同拥立慕容普马当主帅，又关闭城门坚守。
English: In the evening of the same day, some of the followers jointly supported Murong Puma as the head coach, and closed the gate.

古文：帝乃悉众攻之，使人登巢车临城，招其众。
现代文：皇帝便让所有部队进攻，又派人登上巢车靠近城墙，招降民众。
English: The emperor then ordered all his troops to attack, and he also sent men to board wagons near the city wall to invite the people to surrender.

古文：皆曰： 但恐如参合之众，故求全月日命耳。 
现代文：城里人都说 ：只怕又和参合的降人一样，所以但求多保全几天生命罢了！ 
English: The townspeople all said, "We're afraid we'll be like the people who surrendered at the Sanhe, so all we have to do is save a few more days of life!"

古文：帝闻之，顾视建而唾其面。
现代文：皇帝听说以后，回顾注视王建，向他脸上吐口水。
English: After hearing this, the emperor looked back at Wang Jian and spat in his face.

古文：中山平，赐建爵濮阳公。
现代文：中山平定后，赐王建爵位为濮阳公。
English: After Zhongshan was pacified, Wang Jian was given the title of Duke of Shenyang.

古文：薨，谥恭王。子真袭，降爵为公。
现代文：改任太仆，改封真定公，加散骑常侍，冀、青二州刺史。
English: He was reappointed as Taimu, his title was changed to Zhendinggong, and he was given the additional titles of Sanzhi, Jie and Qing Erzhou.

古文：真弟大拔，封钜鹿子。大拔孙宝，字道成，性淳朴，好读书。
现代文：死后陪葬于金陵。楼大拔的孙子楼宝，字道成，性情淳厚朴实，喜欢读书。
English: After his death, he was buried in Jinling. Lou Dabao's grandson, Lou Bao, was a wordsmith, with a simple and unpretentious nature, who loved to read.

古文：明帝时，仕至朔州刺史。
现代文：魏明帝时，官至朔州刺史。
English: During the reign of Emperor Wei Ming, officials from Shuozhou made history.

古文：时边事屡兴，人多流散。及宝至，稍安集之。
现代文：当时边境时常发生战争，民众大多流亡逃散，楼宝来到后，才稍微安定并回归。
English: At that time, there were frequent wars on the border, and most of the people fled and dispersed. It was only after the arrival of Lou Bao that the situation stabilized a bit and they returned.

古文：残坏旧宅，皆命葺构；人归继路，岁考为天下最。
现代文：凡是残破的旧屋，他都让人加以修建，回归的民众一路络绎不绝。朝廷岁考时，他的政绩为天下第一。
English: Any old house that was in ruins, he had people build it, and the people who returned were incessant. In the imperial examination, his political performance was the best in the world.

古文：后随大都督源子邕讨击葛荣。王师败绩。宝囚于荣军，变姓名，匿于戎伍，以免害。
现代文：后来他跟随大都督源子邕讨伐葛荣，朝廷兵败，楼宝被葛军队所囚禁，他改换姓名，藏于士兵队伍之中，因此免于受害。
English: Later, he followed the great viceroy, Yuan Zixu, to fight against Ge Rong. The imperial court was defeated, and Lou Bao was imprisoned by the Ge army. He changed his name and hid among the soldiers, so he was not harmed.

古文：久之。贼中有朔州人识宝者，谓宝曰： 使君宁自苦至此？ 
现代文：过了很久，贼兵中有朔州人认识楼宝的，对他说： 使君为什么这样甘心受苦？ 
English: After a long time, one of the bandits, a man from Shuozhou who knew Lou Bao, said to him, "Why are you so willing to suffer?

古文：遂将诣荣。
现代文：便领着他来见葛荣。
English: He then brought him to see Ge Rong.

古文：笑曰： 娄公，吾方图事，何相见之晚！ 
现代文：葛荣笑着说 ：楼公，我正图大事，怎么这么晚才来相见！ 
English: Ge Rong said with a smile: "Mr. Lou, I am planning an important event, why did I come to see you so late!

古文：因顾谓人曰： 此公行善，天道报之，得免乱兵，即其验也。 
现代文：便看着他对别人说 ：这位明公是做善事的人，天道报应，免受乱兵之苦，便是明证了。 
English: Then he looked at him and said to the others, "This man is clearly a doer of good deeds. Heaven's retribution, being spared the suffering of the soldiers, is clear evidence of this."

古文：宝遇逃者，密启贼形势，规为内应。
现代文：楼宝遇到出逃的人，秘密告知敌人内部情况，表示准备作为内应。
English: When Lou Bao encountered a fugitive, he secretly informed the enemy of the internal situation and expressed his readiness to act as an inside agent.

古文：天子感其壮志，召宝第二子景贤，授员外散骑常侍郎。
现代文：皇帝被他的雄心壮志所感动，召来楼宝的第二个儿子景贤，任命为员外散骑常侍郎。
English: The emperor was so moved by his ambition that he summoned the second son of Loubao, Jingxian, and appointed him as the non-commissioned officer's equerry.

古文：葛荣灭，宝始得还。
现代文：葛荣失败后，楼宝才得以回京。
English: After Ge Rong's defeat, Lou Bao was able to return to Beijing.

古文：永安中，除假员外散骑常侍，使蠕蠕。
现代文：永安年间，被任命为假员外散骑常侍，出使蠕蠕。
English: During the Yong'an era, he was appointed as a roving attendant outside the vacationer, and sent to Crum Crum.

古文：先是，蠕蠕称籓上表，后以中州不竞，书为敌国之仪。
现代文：以前，蠕蠕一直是以藩国的身份向魏国上表的，后来因中原实力减弱，上书时就以平等国家的礼节了。
English: Previously, Cm Cm had always presented itself to Wei as a feudal state. Later, due to the weakening of the Central Plains, it presented itself as an equal state.

古文：宝责之。蠕蠕主大惊，自知恶，谢曰： 此作书人误。 
现代文：楼宝责备他们，蠕蠕国君大惊，自知有错，便谢罪说： 这是写信的人写错了。 
English: Lou Bao scolded them, and the king was so shocked that he knew he had made a mistake and said, "The person who wrote the letter made a mistake."

古文：遂更称籓。
现代文：于是又恢复藩王的称礼。
English: As a result, the praise of the king of the domain was restored.

古文：孝武帝立，敕宝与行台长孙子彦镇恆农。
现代文：孝武帝即位，令楼宝和行台长孙子彦镇守恒农。
English: Emperor Xiaowu ascended to the throne, and made Luo Bao and Sun Tzu Yan, the governor of Yangtze River, the guardians of Heng Nong.

古文：后从入关，封广宁县伯。
现代文：后来他跟随孝武帝入关，被封为广宁县伯。
English: Later, he followed Emperor Xiaowu into the customs and was given the title of Guangning County magistrate.

古文：大统元年，诏领著作郎，监修国史事，别封平城县子。
现代文：大统元年，被任命为著作郎，监修国史事，被封为平城县子。
English: In the first year of the Great Reunification, he was appointed as a writer and supervisor of national history, and was named a Heijo prefect.

古文：后授国子祭酒、侍中，进仪同三司，兼太子太傅，摄东宫詹事。
现代文：后又任国子监祭酒、侍中，晋为仪同三司，兼太子太傅，负责东宫有关事务。
English: Later, he was also appointed as the state son supervisor of the ritual wine, a chamberlain, promoted to the third secretary of ceremonies, and also the prince's daifu, responsible for the East Palace-related affairs.

古文：兴以与国和通，恨之，有言于道武，道武戮之。和跋，代人也。
现代文：楼宝为人喜欢清静，少言寡语，比较熟悉过去的典故，曾任师傅之职，谦逊恭敬，因而受到人们的尊敬。
English: Lou Bao likes to be quiet, speaks little, is familiar with the allusions of the past, once served as a teacher, is humble and respectful, and is therefore respected by people.

古文：世领部落，为魏附臣。
现代文：后出任泾州刺史，死于泾州。和跋，代郡人。世代为部落首领，归附魏国称臣。
English: Later, he served as the chief historian of Bozhou, and died in Bozhou. He was the representative of the county. He was the leader of the tribe for generations, and became a vassal of Wei.

古文：至跋，以才辩知名。
现代文：到和跋时，他以有才识和善机变而著名。
English: By the time of the war, he was renowned for his intelligence and resourcefulness.

古文：道武擢为外朝大人，参军国大谋，雅有智算，赐爵日南公。
现代文：道武帝提拔他出任外朝大人，参预国家和军事上的重大谋略，很有智谋，赐封爵为日南公。
English: Emperor Daowu promoted him to be the adult of the foreign court, he participated in the preparation of the country and the military's major strategy, he was very clever, and he was given a knighthood as Nichinan.

古文：从平中原，以功进为尚书，镇鄴。
现代文：跟从皇帝平定中原，因功晋位尚书，镇守邺郡。
English: He followed the emperor to pacify the Central Plains, and was promoted to Shangshu for his achievements, and became the town guard of Jixian County.

古文：以破慕容德军，改封定陵公。
现代文：又因打败慕容德的军队，改封为定陵公。
English: Also, because he defeated Murongde's army, his title was changed to Dingling.

古文：与常山王遵讨贺兰部别帅木易千，破之。出为平原太守。
现代文：和常山王遵进攻贺兰部的别帅木易干，大破该军，出任平原太守。
English: He and Wang Zun of Changshan attacked the Horan section of the Bie Shuai Mu Yi Gan, defeated the army, and served as the governor of the plain.

古文：道武宠跋于诸将。
现代文：道武帝对和跋宠信过于众将。
English: Emperor Daowu had great faith in the general.

古文：群臣皆敦尚恭俭，而跋好修虚誉，炫曜于时。性尤奢淫，帝戒之不革。
现代文：群臣都注重谦恭俭朴，而和跋却喜欢沽名钓誉，炫耀自己，性情尤其讲求奢侈，过分淫乱，皇帝多次告诫而不改。
English: The group of courtiers all paid attention to modesty and frugality, but Hotaru liked to make a name for himself and flaunt himself. His temperament was particularly extravagant and excessively licentious. The emperor repeatedly admonished him but did not change his ways.

古文：后车驾北狩豺山，收跋，刑之路侧。妻刘氏自杀以从。
现代文：后来皇帝的车驾北巡至豺山时，拘留了和跋，在路旁处死刑，他的妻子刘氏自杀以殉夫。
English: Later, when the emperor's car drove north to Lushan, he detained Hetan and sentenced him to death on the side of the road. His wife, Liu, committed suicide to end her husband's life.

古文：初将刑跋，道武命其诸弟毗等视诀。
现代文：起初准备处刑时，道武帝让他的弟弟和毗前去看望并诀别。
English: At first, when preparing for the execution, Emperor Daowu asked his younger brother to visit and say goodbye.

古文：跋谓毗曰： 氵垒北地瘠，可居水南，就耕良田，广为产业，各相劝励。 
现代文：和跋对毗说 ：飈北土地贫瘠，可以移居南面有水的地方，耕种良田，广置产业，你们各自努力，相互勉励。 
English: Waba said to Pi, "The land in the north of the country is barren. You can move to the south where there is water, cultivate good fields, and widely establish industries. You should work hard and encourage each other.

古文：令之背己，曰： 汝曹何忍视吾之死！ 
现代文：他让和毗等人离开自己，对他们说 ：你们怎么忍心看着我死去？ 
English: He asked the others to leave him and said to them, "How can you bear to see me die?

古文：毗等解其微意，诈称使者，奔长安。
现代文：和毗等懂得他话中的隐意，便诈称是朝廷派出的使者，投奔长安。
English: Knowing the hidden meaning of his words, Hovi and others falsely claimed to be emissaries sent by the imperial court and fled to Chang'an.

古文：道武诛其家。
现代文：道武帝杀了他们全家人。
English: Emperor Daowu killed their entire family.

古文：后太武幸豺山校猎，忽暴雾四塞，怪问之。
现代文：后来，太武帝前往豺山打猎时，突然大雾弥漫，他很奇怪地询问是什么原因。
English: Later, when Emperor Taivu went to Lushan Mountain to go hunting, the fog suddenly filled the air, and he asked very strangely what the reason was.

古文：群下佥言跋世居此，祠冢犹存，或者能致斯变。
现代文：所有百官都说和跋世代居住在这里，他的祠庙和坟墓也都还在，说不定是他的变幻引起的。
English: All the authorities say that he lived here for generations, and his temple and tomb are still there, perhaps caused by his metamorphosis.

古文：帝遣建兴公古弼祭以三牲，雾即除。
现代文：太武帝派建兴公古弼以三牲之礼加以祭祀，雾气立即散失了。
English: Emperor Taibu sent Jianxinggongguo to be sacrificed with the ritual of the three sacrificial animals, and the fog immediately dispersed.

古文：后太武蒐狩之日，每先遣祭之。
现代文：后来，太武帝每当到这里狩猎时，总是先派人祭祀。
English: Later, whenever Emperor Taibu came here to hunt, he always sent people to offer sacrifices first.

