古文：宋牼将之楚，孟子遇于石丘。曰： 先生将何之？ 
现代文：宋牼准备到楚国去，孟子在石丘遇见了他，就问： 先生要到哪里去？ 
English: Song Tao was preparing to go to Chu. Meng Zi met him at the stone mound and asked: Where is he going?

古文：曰： 轲也请无问其详，愿闻其指。说之将何如？ 曰： 我将言其不利也。 
现代文：宋牼说： 我听说秦、楚两国要交战，我准备去见楚王劝说他罢兵休战；如果楚王不高兴，我就准备去见秦王劝说他罢兵休战。这两个君王中我将会遇见意见相合的。 孟子说： 我不想问你详细的情况，我只想请问你的宗旨，您打算怎么劝说呢？ 
English: Song Tao said, "I have heard that Qin and Chu are going to fight, and I am ready to go to King Chu to persuade him to call a truce; if King Chu is not happy, I am ready to go to King Qin to persuade him to call a truce. I will find someone who agrees with me." Mencius said, "I don't want to ask you about the details, I just want to ask you about your purpose. How do you plan to persuade him?"

古文：曰： 先生之志则大矣，先生之号则不可。
现代文：宋牼说： 我将劝说战争的危害。 孟子说： 先生的志向很大，但先生这样号召是不行的。
English: Song Tao said: I will persuade the harm of war. Mencius said: Sir's ambition is great, but it is not possible for him to make such a call.

古文：先生以利说秦楚之王，秦楚之王悦于利，以罢三军之师，是三军之士乐罢而悦于利也。
现代文：先生以利害关系劝说秦楚两王，秦楚两国君王因对利感兴趣而罢兵，这就使三军官兵乐于罢兵而喜欢利。
English: The teacher persuaded the two kings of Qin and Chu with interests, and the kings of the two countries of Qin and Chu were interested in profit and disbanded, which made the three officers and soldiers happy to strike and like profit.

古文：为人臣者怀利以事其君，为人子者怀利以事其父，为人弟者怀利以事其兄。是君臣、父子、兄弟终去仁义，怀利以相接，然而不亡者，未之有也。
现代文：当臣子的怀着利以侍奉国君，作为儿女心怀着利以侍奉父母，作为弟弟心怀着利以侍奉兄长，是君臣、父子、兄弟之间最终会舍弃相互亲爱的关系和最佳行为方式，怀着利的目的来交往，这样的交往最后不消亡，是没有的事。
English: When a vassal serves the sovereign with profit in mind, when a child serves his parents with profit in mind, and when a younger brother serves his elder brother with profit in mind, it is inevitable that the ruler, the vassal, the father, the son, and the brother will eventually abandon the mutually dear relationship and the best way of behavior, and come into contact with the purpose of profit. Such contacts will not die out in the end, there is no such thing.

古文：先生以仁义说秦楚之王，秦楚之王悦于仁义，而罢三军之师，是三军之士乐罢而悦于仁义也。
现代文：先生如果以建立相互亲爱的关系和选择最佳行为方式来劝说秦楚两王，秦楚两王就会高兴于建立相互亲爱的关系和选择最佳行为方式，而停止三军的军事行动，就会使三军官兵们乐于停止而高兴于建立相互亲爱的关系和选择最佳行为方式。
English: Sir, if you persuade the two kings of Qin Chu by establishing a mutually dear relationship and choosing the best way of behavior, the two kings of Qin Chu will be happy to establish a mutually dear relationship and choose the best way of behavior, and stop the military operations of the three armies, it will make the three officers and soldiers happy to stop and happy to establish a mutually dear relationship and choose the best way of behavior.

古文：为人臣者怀仁义以事其君，为人子者怀仁义以事其父，为人弟者怀仁义以事其兄，是君臣、父子、兄弟去利，怀仁义以相接也。然而不王者，未之有也。何必曰利？ 
现代文：作为臣子者心怀相互亲爱的关系和选择最佳行为方式以侍奉国君，作为儿女者心怀相互亲爱的关系和选择最佳行为方式以侍奉父母，作为弟弟者心怀相互亲爱的关系和选择最佳行为方式以侍奉兄长，就会使君臣、父子、兄弟之间抛弃利害关系，心怀相互亲爱的关系和选择最佳行为方式以相交往，如此还不兴旺，是没有的事。何必讲利呢？ 
English: As a vassal who cherishes the relationship of mutual love and chooses the best way of behavior to serve the sovereign, as a child who cherishes the relationship of mutual love and chooses the best way of behavior to serve the parents, as a younger brother who cherishes the relationship of mutual love and chooses the best way of behavior to serve the elder brother, it will make the vassal, father, son and brother abandon the interest relationship, cherish the relationship of mutual love and choose the best way of behavior to interact with each other, so it is not prosperous, it is nothing. Why talk about profit?

