古文：蛮东南夷蛮，种类繁多，言语不一，咸依山谷，布荆、湘、雍、郢、司等五州界。
现代文：蛮人，种族繁多，语言不统一，都依靠山谷，分布在荆、湘、雍、郢、司等五州境内。
English: The barbarians, of many races and different languages, all rely on the valley and are distributed in the five states of Jing, Hunan, Yong, Handan and Si.

古文：宋世封西阳蛮梅虫生为高山侯，田治生为威山侯，梅加羊为扞山侯。太祖即位，有司奏蛮封应在解例，参议以 戎夷疏爵，理章列代；酋豪世袭，事炳前叶。
现代文：宋世封西阳蛮梅虫生为高山侯，田治生为威山侯，梅加羊为扦山侯太祖登位，有关官员上奏蛮人的封爵应在解除之列，公卿合议以为： 对戎夷授予爵位，道理彰显于各代；酋帅世代继承，事迹彪炳于前朝。
English: During the Song Dynasty, Xiyang barbarian Meizhuxiong was the prince of Gaoshan, Tian Zhixiong was the prince of Weishan, and Meijiayang was the prince of Shaoshan. The relevant officials should revoke the baronships of the barbarians. The nobles collectively agreed that: the reason for conferring a peerage on the barbarians is evident in all generations; the chieftainship is inherited from generation to generation, and the deeds are outstanding in the previous dynasty.

古文：今宸历改物，旧册杓降，而梅生等保落奉政，事须绳总，恩命升赞，有异常品。
现代文：现在天命改变，旧日册封都降低，而梅生等人都保全部落奉行政令，事情需有总揽，恩典任命的上升，自应不同于平常品级。
English: Now that the Mandate of Heaven has changed, the old daily seals have all been lowered, and Mei Sheng and others have all obeyed the executive order, things need to be comprehensively addressed, and the rise of grace appointment is different from the usual grade.

古文：谓宜存名以训殊俗 。诏特留。
现代文：以为应该保存名号来训导不同风俗的人。 诏令： 特为保留。 
English: People who think that names should be preserved to teach different customs.

古文：以治生为辅国将军、虎贲中郎，转建宁郡太守，将军、侯如故。
现代文：任命治生为辅国将军、虎贲中郎，改任建宁郡太守，将军、侯爵的职街照旧。
English: Chisei was appointed as Vice-Governor General and Vice-Governor of Koganei Province, and was reappointed as the Governor of Jianning County. The career of generals and marquesses continued as before.

古文：建元二年，虏侵豫、司，蛮中传虏已近，又闻官尽发民丁，南襄城蛮秦远以郡县无备，寇潼阳，县令焦文度战死。
现代文：建元二年，魏军侵犯豫州、司州，蛮人中传言魏军已临近，又听说官府征发全部民丁，南襄城蛮秦远因郡县没有戒备，侵犯潼阳，县令焦文度战死。
English: In the second year of the first century, the Wei army invaded Yuzhou and Shizhou. The barbarians rumored that the Wei army was approaching. They also heard that the government had requisitioned and dispatched all the civilians. The barbarians from Qinyuan, Nanxiang City, invaded Fenyang because the county was not prepared. The county magistrate Jiao Wendu was killed in the battle.

古文：司州蛮引虏攻平昌戍，戍主苟元宾击破之。
现代文：司州蛮勾引魏军攻打平昌戍，戍守头领苟元宾打败他们。
English: Sizhou brutally lured the Wei army to attack Pyeongchang, and the garrison leader, Gou Yuanbin, defeated them.

古文：秦远又出破临沮百方砦，杀略百余人。
现代文：秦远又出兵攻下临沮百方寨，杀死一百多人。
English: Qin Yuan also sent troops to conquer the Linshui Ba Fangzhai, killing more than a hundred people.

古文：北上黄蛮文勉德寇汶阳，太守戴元孙孤城力弱，虑不自保，弃戍归江陵。
现代文：北上黄蛮文勉德侵犯汶阳，太守戴元孙因城池孤单力量弱小，担心不能保住，放弃据点回到江陵。
English: In the north, Huang, Wanzhong, Wenquan and De invaded Wenyang, and Dai Yansun, the governor, was worried that he would not be able to hold on to the city due to his weak strength, so he gave up his stronghold and returned to Gangneung.

古文：荆州刺史豫章王遣中兵参军刘伾绪领千人讨勉德，至当阳，勉德请降，收其部落，使戍汶阳所治城子，令保持商旅，付其清通，远遂逃窜。
现代文：荆州刺史豫章王派遣中兵参军刘任绪率领一千人讨伐勉德，到达当阳，勉德请求投降，接收他的部落，使他戍守注阳所修城池，命他保护商人旅客，负责道路清静通畅，秦远于是逃窜。
English: Liu Renxu led a thousand soldiers to fight against Mende, arriving in Dangyang. Mende requested to surrender, received his tribe, made him guard the castle built by Jiuyang, ordered him to protect merchants and travelers, and be responsible for the road being clear and smooth. Qin Yuan then fled.

古文：汶阳本临沮西界，二百里中，水陆迂狭，鱼贯而行，有数处不通骑，而水白田甚肥腴。
现代文：汶阳本在临沮以西地界，二百里之中，水陆通道狭窄，衹能前后相接而行走，有几个地方不能通过马匹，而水田旱地十分肥沃。
English: Originally, Bunyang was on the land boundary between the east and the west, two hundred miles away. The water and land passages were narrow, and people could only walk side by side. In some places, horses could not pass, while the paddy fields and dry land were very fertile.

古文：桓温时割以为郡。
现代文：桓温时，分出成为郡。
English: At the time of Kanematsu, it was split off to become a county.

古文：西北接梁州新城，东北接南襄城，南接巴、巫二边，并山蛮凶盛，据险为寇贼。
现代文：西北靠近梁州的新城，东北靠近南襄城，南方靠近巴山、巫山二山边界，都有山蛮凶恶强盛，占据险阻成为寇贼。
English: Xincheng in the northwest near Liangzhou, Nanxiang in the northeast near Nanxiang, and Bashan and Wushan in the south near the border of the two mountains, all have fierce and powerful mountains, occupying dangerous obstacles and becoming bandits.

古文：宋泰始以来，巴建蛮向宗头反，刺史沈攸之断其盐米，连讨不克。
现代文：宋朝泰始年间以来，巴建蛮向宗头反叛，刺史沈攸之断绝他的盐米，接连征讨不能攻克。
English: From the beginning of the Song Dynasty to the beginning of the Tai Dynasty, Ba Jianran rebelled against the head of the family, stabbed Shen You, cut off his salt rice, and could not be conquered.

古文：晋太兴三年，建平夷王向弘、向等诣台求拜除，尚书郎张亮议 夷貊不可假以军号 ，元帝诏特以弘为折冲将军、当平乡侯，并亲晋王，赐以朝服。
现代文：晋朝太兴三年，建平夷王向弘、向瑶等人前往朝廷请求授任，尚善郎张亮建议： 对夷貊不能赐给军号。 元帝下韶特地任命向弘为折冲将军、当乎乡侯，并封亲晋王，赐给朝见的礼服。
English: In the third year of the reign of Emperor Taheung of the Jin Dynasty, Jianping Yi Wang, Xiang Hong, Xiang Yu and others went to the imperial court to request the appointment. Shang Shan Lang, Zhang Liang, suggested that the military code should not be given to the Yi Yu. Emperor Gao specially appointed Xiang Hong as the general of Orichong and the governor of the township, and gave him the title of Prince Jin Wang and the ceremonial dress for the imperial visit.

古文：宗头其后也。太祖置巴州以威静之。
现代文：宗头就是他的后代太祖设置巴州来威慑安定他们。
English: The head of the family is his descendant, the great-grandfather, who set up Baju to deter and stabilize them.

古文：其武陵酉溪蛮田思飘寇抄，内史王文和讨之，引军深入，蛮自后断其粮。
现代文：武陵酉溪蛮田思飘入侵抄掠，内史王文和讨伐他，率军深入，蛮人从后面断绝文和的运粮道路。
English: Wuling Qixi barbarians invaded and pillaged Wuling, and Wang Wenhe of Inner Mongolia led an army to fight against them. The barbarians cut off the grain transportation route of Wang Wenhe from behind.

古文：豫章王遣中兵参军庄明五百人将湘州镇兵合千人救之，思飘与文和拒战，中弩矢死，蛮众以城降。
现代文：豫章王派遣中兵参军庄明五百人率领湘州镇守兵士共一千人救援义和，思飘同文和交战，中箭而死，蛮人兵士献出城池投降。
English: Yu Zhang Wang dispatched 500 soldiers to join Zhuo Ming's army and led a total of 1,000 Hunan town guard soldiers to rescue Yiwu, think and fight, die from arrows, and the barbarian soldiers surrendered the city.

古文：永明初，向宗头与黔阳蛮田豆渠等五千人为寇，巴东太守王图南遣府司马刘僧寿等斩山开道，攻其砦，宗头夜烧砦退走。
现代文：永明初年，向宗头和黔阳蛮田豆渠等五千人进犯，巴束太守王图南派遣府司马刘僧寿等人砍伐树木开通道路，攻打他们的营垒，宗头夜晚烧毁营垒撤退逃跑
English: In the first year of Yongming, five thousand people attacked Zongtou and Shiyang Man Tian Dou Qu, etc. The governor of Bac Gou, Wang Tunan, sent the prefectural governor, Ma Liu Son Shou, and others to cut down trees, open roads, and attack their camp. Zongtou burned the camp at night and retreated to escape.

古文：三年，湘川蛮陈双、李答寇掠郡县，刺史吕安国讨之不克。
现代文：三年，湘川蛮陈双、李答侵犯抄掠郡县，刺史吕安国征讨不能取胜。
English: In the third year, Chen Shuang and Li Da of Xiangchuan invaded and plundered counties and counties, but they could not win the conquest of Lu'an.

古文：四年，刺史柳世隆督众征讨，乃平。
现代文：四年，刺史柳世隆统领部众征讨，才平定。
English: It took four years for the head of the imperial court, Liu Shilong, to lead the troops to quell the rebellion.

古文：五年，雍、司州蛮与虏通，助荒人桓天生为乱。
现代文：五年，雍、司州蛮和魏人勾结，援助荒远地区的人桓天生作乱。
English: In the fifth year, Yong, Sizhou Man and Wei people colluded to help people in remote areas.

古文：六年，除督护北遂安左郡太守田驷路为试守北遂安左郡太守，前宁朔将军田驴王为试守新平左郡太守，皆郢州蛮也。
现代文：六年，授任督护北遂安左郡太守田驷路为试用北遂安左郡太守，前宁朔将军田驴王为试守新平左郡太守，这几人都是郢州蛮人。
English: In the sixth year, the governor of North Sui'an Zuo County, the governor of North Sui'an Zuo County, Tian Huanlu, was appointed as the probationary governor of North Sui'an Zuo County, and the former Ningshuo general, Tian Jiao Wang, was appointed as the probationary governor of Xinping Zuo County. All of these people were barbarians from Zhangzhou.

古文：九年，安隆内史王僧旭发民丁，遣宽城戍主万民和助八百丁村蛮伐千二百丁村蛮，为蛮所败，民和被伤，失马及器仗，有司奏免官。
现代文：九年，安隆内史王僧旭调发民丁，派遣宣城戍守头领万民和援助八百丁村蛮讨伐千二百丁村蛮，被蛮人打败，民和受伤，失去马匹和兵器，有关官员上奏罢免他的官职。
English: In the ninth year of Anlong's reign, the king of history, the monk Xu, dispatched Min Ding, sent Xuancheng, the leader of the defense of the city and the leader of all the people, and assisted the 800 village barbarians to fight the 1200 village barbarians. He was defeated by the barbarians, the people and wounded, lost horses and weapons, and the relevant officials appealed to remove him from his official position.

古文：西阳蛮田益宗，沈攸之时以功劳得将领，遂为临川王防阁，叛投虏，虏以为东豫州刺史。
现代文：西阳蛮田益宗，在沈攸之时，因功劳成为将领，于是做临川王防合，叛变投降魏国，魏人委任他为束豫州刺史。
English: At the time of Shen You, Xiyang Man Tian Masong became a general due to his merits, so he became the King of Linchuan, rebelled and surrendered to Wei, and the Wei people appointed him as the governor of Yuzhou.

古文：建武三年，虏遣益宗攻司州龙城戍，为戍主朱僧起所破。
现代文：建武三年，魏人派遣益宗攻打司州龙城戍，被戍守头领朱僧起打败。
English: In the third year of Jianwu, the Wei people sent Yizong to attack Sizhou Longcheng, and was defeated by the leader of the garrison, Zhu Sengqi.

古文：蛮俗衣布徒跣，或椎髻，或剪发。
现代文：蛮人习俗穿布衣打赤脚，有的头上一撮之髻形状如椎，有的剪去头发。
English: It is a barbarian custom to wear cloth and go barefoot. Some wear a bunch of hoops on their heads shaped like vertebrae, while others cut off their hair.

古文：兵器以金银为饰，虎皮衣盾，便弩射，皆暴悍好寇贼焉。
现代文：兵器用金银装饰，将虎皮套在盾牌上，善于射箭，都凶暴强悍好作乱。
English: They decorate their weapons with gold and silver, put tiger skins on their shields, and are good at archery. They are fierce and strong, and like to make trouble.

古文：东夷高丽国，西与魏虏接界。宋末，高丽王乐浪公高琏为使持节、散骑常侍、都督营平二州诸军事、车骑大将军、开府仪同三司。太祖建元元年，进号骠骑大将军。
现代文：东夷高丽国，西和魏卢接壤宋朝末年，高丽王乐浪公高琏担任使持节、散骑常侍、都督营乎二州诸军事、车骑大将军、开府仪同三司太祖建元元年，高琏升军号为骠骑大将军。
English: At the end of the Song Dynasty, in the Eastern Koryo Kingdom, bordered by the Western Koryo Kingdom and the Western Wei Lu Kingdom, Gao Kun, the King of Goryeo, served as the envoy of the festival, the rider of the cavalry, the military governor of the two states, the cavalry general, the Kaifu ceremony and the three great ancestors in the first year of the founding of the Republic of China, and Gao Kun's military title was the cavalry general.

古文：三年，遣使贡献，乘舶泛海，使驿常通，亦使魏虏，然强盛不受制。
现代文：三年，派遣使者贡奉，乘船渡海，使者及信函时常来往，也十使魏虏，然而强盛不受制约。
English: For three years, he sent envoys to pay tribute and crossed the sea by boat. Envoys and letters often came and went. He also sent ten envoys to Wei, but his power was not restricted.

古文：虏置诸国使邸，齐使第一，高丽次之。永明七年，平南参军颜幼明、冗从仆射刘思敩使虏。
现代文：魏虏设置各国使者住处，齐国使者位居第一，高丽在其后永明七年，平南参军颜幼明、冗从仆射刘思敩出使魏国。
English: Wei Krup set up residences for the emissaries of various countries, the emissaries of Qi ranked first, Goryeo was followed by Yongming for seven years, Pingnan joined the army, Yan Yueming, and Liu Siyu, a long-serving subordinate, were sent to Wei.

古文：虏元会，与高丽使相次。幼明谓伪主客郎裴叔令曰： 我等衔命上华，来造卿国。所为抗敌，在乎一魏。
现代文：魏人元旦朝会，幼明、思敩和高丽使者座位相连幼明对魏国主客郎裴叔令说： 我们从华夏上国奉命，来到你的国家，所能对等的，衹有一个魏国。
English: The Wei people held a New Year's Day imperial meeting, and the seats of the emissaries of Youming, Sima and Goryeo were connected. Youming said to the guest of the Wei state, Pei Shuling: We were ordered to go to your country from China, and we came to your country. As far as possible, there is only one Wei state.

古文：自余外夷，理不得望我镳尘。
现代文：其余的外族夷人，按道理不能望我后尘。
English: The rest of the non-Japanese barbarians cannot reasonably be expected to follow in my footsteps.

古文：况东夷小貊，臣属朝廷，今日乃敢与我蹑踵。 思籞谓伪南部尚书李思冲曰： 我圣朝处魏使，未尝与小国列，卿亦应知。 思冲曰： 实如此。但主副不得升殿耳。此间坐起甚高，足以相报。 
现代文：何况东夷小貊，臣属于齐朝廷，今日却竟敢与我国接踵平列 思敩对魏国南部尚书李思冲说： 我圣朝安置魏国使者，不曾和小国并列，你也应该知道 思冲说： 的确如此一衹是主使副使不能升殿而已这里座位很高，足以相报答。 
English: What's more, Dongyi Xiaojun, whose vassal belonged to the Qi imperial court, dared to stand next to our country today. Sijun said to Li Sichong, the ambassador of southern Wei, "I did not place the emissary of Wei in the Holy Dynasty alongside the small countries. You should also know that Sichong said, "It is true that the chief envoy and deputy envoy cannot be elevated to the palace, but the seats here are high enough to reward each other."

古文：思敩曰： 李道固昔使，正以衣冠致隔耳。
现代文：思敩说： 李道固从前出使，祇是因门第而被阻隔而已。
English: Sima said: Li Daogu has sent envoys before, but he was blocked because of his lineage.

古文：魏国必缨冕而至，岂容见黜。 
现代文：魏国如派大族人士前往，岂会受到冷遇? 
English: If the State of Wei were to send members of large ethnic groups, would they receive a cold reception?

古文：幼明又谓虏主曰： 二国相亚，唯齐与魏。
现代文：幼明又对魏国君主说： ：二国相当，惟有齐和魏。
English: Zuo Ming also said to the Emperor of Wei: "The two countries are equal, but Qi and Wei are superior."

古文：边境小狄，敢蹑臣踪！ 
现代文：边境小狄族，竟敢跟在我的后面。 
English: How dare the small Di people on the border follow me.

古文：高丽俗服穷袴，冠折风一梁，谓之帻。知读《五经》。
现代文：高丽习俗穿裆裤，帕上折风为一梁，称为帧知道阅读《五经》。
English: It is a Goryeo custom to wear trousers with pleated cuffs, and the folds on the cape form a beam, which is known as a frame for reading the "Five Classics."

古文：使人在京师，中书郎王融戏之曰： 服之不衷，身之灾也。
现代文：使者在京城，中书郎王融同他开玩笑说： 穿戴不适中，是身体的灾难。
English: When the envoy was in the capital, the Chinese scholar Wang Rongjian joked with him, "Wearing ill-fitting clothes is a physical disaster.

古文：头上定是何物？ 
现代文：你头上到底是什么东西? 
English: What the hell is that thing on your head?

古文：答曰： 此即古弁之遗像也。 
现代文：使者回答说： 这是古代帽广的遗风。 
English: The envoy replied: This is a relic of the ancient cap and gown.

古文：高琏年百余岁卒。隆昌元年，以高丽王乐浪公高云为使持节、散骑常侍、都督营平二州诸军事、征东大将军、高丽王、乐浪公。
现代文：高琏一百多岁去世隆昌元年，任命高丽王乐浪公直昼为使持节、散骑常侍、都督营平二州诸军事、征束大将军、高丽王、乐浪公。
English: In the first year of the Longchang era, when Gao Zheng died at the age of more than one hundred, he appointed the King of Goryeo, Le Lang Gong, as the envoy of the day, the horseman, the governor, the military of the two states, the conscript general, the King of Goryeo, and Le Lang Gong.

古文：建武三年，此下缺文报功劳勤，实存名烈。假行宁朔将军臣姐瑾等四人，振竭忠效，攘除国难，志勇果毅，等威名将，可谓扞城，固蕃社稷，论功料勤，宜在甄显。
现代文：建武三年，报答功勋酬谢勤劳，留下名声业绩、代行宁朔将军臣姐瑾等四人，竭尽忠心效力，解除国家患难，勇敢坚毅，威风等同名将，称得上保卫疆土的人，巩固国家，评定功绩勤劳，应在选拔奖赏之列。
English: In the three years since the establishment of the People's Liberation Army, four people, including the Ningshuo general, his vassal and his sister-in-law, who have been rewarded for their meritorious service, left behind a reputation for performance and acting on behalf of the country, exerted their loyalty and effectiveness, relieved the country's difficulties, were brave and courageous, and had a dignified demeanor, and are known as the people who defended the territory, consolidated the country, and evaluated their meritorious service and hard work, should be included in the selection awards.

古文：今依例辄假行职。
现代文：现在依照条例暂授代理职务。
English: Now, according to the regulations, he is temporarily assigned to the acting position.

古文：伏愿恩愍，听除所假。
现代文：伏愿施恩怜爱，准予所授代理职务。
English: I hope that you will be kind and merciful to me, and allow me to assume the acting position that I have been assigned.

古文：宁朔将军、面中王姐瑾，历赞时务，武功并列，今假行冠军将军、都将军、都汉王。
现代文：宁朔将军、面中王姐瑾，多年协助处理政务，武功显著，现暂授代理冠军将军、都将军、都汉王。
English: Ningshuo General, Mianzhong Wang Jie, has assisted in handling government affairs for many years, with significant military exploits, and is now temporarily awarded the acting champion of the General, the General Army, and the Duhan King.

古文：建威将军、八中侯余古，弱冠辅佐，忠效夙著，今假行宁朔将军、阿错王。
现代文：建威将军、八中侯余古，自成年后辅佐政事，忠心早已昭著，现暂授代理宁朔将军、阿错王。
English: General Jian Wei, the 8th Middle Margrave Yu Gu, has assisted in government affairs since he became an adult, and his loyalty has long been known. He is now temporarily teaching the acting Ningshuo General, Ah Guo Wang.

古文：建威将军余历，忠款有素，文武烈显，今假行龙骧将军、迈卢王。
现代文：建威将军余历，忠心效力，文武功勋突出，现暂授代理龙骧将军、迈卢王。
English: General Jian Wei, with his long service record, loyalty and effectiveness, and outstanding achievements in literature and martial arts, is now temporarily awarded the title of Acting General Longyu and King Meilu.

古文：广武将军余固，忠效时务，光宣国政，今假行建威将军、弗斯侯。
现代文：广武将军余固，忠心效力当代事务，光大国家政令，现暂授代理建威将军、弗斯侯。 
English: General Guangwu Yu Guo, loyal and effective in contemporary affairs, the great national decree, is now temporarily assigned to the acting General Jianwei, Fushou.

古文：牟大又表曰： 臣所遣行建威将军、广阳太守、兼长史臣高达，行建威将军、朝鲜太守、兼司马臣杨茂，行宣威将军、兼参军臣会迈等三人，志行清亮，忠款夙著。
现代文：牟大又上奏表说： 臣下所派遣的代理建威将军、广阳太守、兼长史臣高达，代理建威将军、朝鲜太守、兼司马臣杨茂，代理宣威将军、兼参军臣会遭等三人，志向品行有清风亮节，忠心早巳昭著。
English: Muda also submitted a report saying: The three envoys sent by the vassals, acting General Jian Wei, Guanyang Daju, and concurrently Shichang Shisen Gao, acting General Jian Wei, Korean Daju, concurrently Sima Shisen Yangmao, acting General Xuan Wei, and concurrently the military envoy, had a clear-cut and bright spirit, and their loyalty had already been proven.

古文：往泰始中，比使宋朝，今任臣使，冒涉波险，寻其至效，宜在进爵，谨依先例，各假行职。
现代文：以往泰始年间，数次出使宋朝，现任臣下的使者，经历风波险阻，推寻至诚的报效，应在升爵之列，恭谨依照先前的条例，各暂授代理职务。
English: In the past Taizhi years, several emissaries were sent to the Song Dynasty, and the emissaries of the current vassals, experiencing ups and downs, and seeking sincere rewards, should be among the knighthoods. Respectfully, in accordance with the previous regulations, each is temporarily assigned to the acting position.

古文：且玄泽灵休，万里所企，况亲趾天庭，乃不蒙赖。
现代文：恩泽荣耀美好，是万里外所企盼的，何况亲自踏上天子朝廷，竟不受恩赐。
English: Grace, glory, and beauty are things that are longed for from far and wide. What's more, even if you set foot in the court of the Son of Heaven, you won't receive any gifts.

古文：伏愿天监特愍除正。
现代文：伏愿天子特地同情正式授任。
English: May God have mercy on him and grant him an official appointment.

古文：达边效夙著，勤劳公务，今假行龙骧将军、带方太守。
现代文：高达在边地效命早已昭着，公务勤劳，现暂授代理龙骧将军、带方太守。
English: Gaoda's service in the border areas has long been known, and he is diligent in his official duties. He is currently acting as the acting Longjing general and the leader of the party.

古文：茂志行清壹，公务不废，今假行建威将军、广陵太守。
现代文：杨茂志向品行清高专一，公务不荒废，现暂授代理建威将军、广陵太守。
English: Yang Maozhi was the first to conduct himself with high moral standards and not waste his official duties. He is now acting as acting General Jianwei and acting Governor of Guangling.

古文：迈执志周密，屡致勤效，今假行广武将军、清河太守。 
现代文：会遵坚守志向不动摇，多次显示勤劳忠诚，现暂授代理广武将军、清河太守。 
English: He will unswervingly adhere to his ambition and repeatedly show diligence and loyalty. He is currently acting as acting Guangwu general and Qinghe governor.

古文：诏可，并赐军号，除太守。
现代文：诏令同意，都赐予军号，授任太守。
English: The Emperor's edict agreed, and they were all given military ranks and appointed as governors-general.

古文：为使持节、都督百济诸军事、镇东大将军。
现代文：授任牟大为使持节、都督百济诸军事、镇东大将军。
English: He was awarded the title of "Mudai" for his contribution to the festival, the title of "governor of Baekje" for his military service, and the title of "commander-in-chief of the town of Dongdong."

古文：使兼竭者仆射孙副策命大袭亡祖父牟都为百济王。
现代文：派遣兼谒者仆射孙副策命牟大继承已故祖父垒都为百济王。
English: He dispatched his servant and executioner, Shot Son, and his deputy, Choe Myung-da, to succeed his deceased grandfather, King Baekje.

古文：曰： 於戏！
现代文：说： 呜呼!
English: Saying: Alas!

古文：惟尔世袭忠勤，诚著遐表，沧路肃澄，要贡无替。
现代文：你世代承袭忠诚勤奋，诚意昭著于远方，水路艰险，贡奉不断。
English: Your generation inherits loyalty and diligence, sincerity is evident in the distance, waterways are difficult and dangerous, and tributes continue.

古文：式循彝典，用纂显命。
现代文：现遵循法典，命你继承显赫的册命。
English: Now, in accordance with the code, I command you to succeed to the illustrious title.

古文：往钦哉！
现代文：努力啊!
English: Go, and treat your office with respect!

古文：其敬膺休业，可不慎欤！
现代文：恭敬接受美好的事业，能不谨慎吗!
English: Can we not be prudent in respectfully accepting a good cause?

古文：制诏行都督百济诸军事、镇东大将军百济王牟大今以大袭祖父牟都为百济王，即位章绶等玉铜虎竹符四。
现代文：诏令代理都督百渣诸军事、镇东大将军百济王牟大，现以牟大继承祖父牟都为百济王，即位赐印章丝带等，玉铜虎竹符四枚。
English: According to the imperial edict, Baekje King Mu Da, acting as the military governor of Baekje and the general of the town of Dongdae, succeeded his grandfather Mu Da as the king of Baekje. He was given the imperial seal, ribbons, and four jade, bronze, tiger, and bamboo charms.

古文：王其拜受，不亦休乎！ 
现代文：王叩拜接受，不也是美好的吗! 
English: Isn't it wonderful that the king bows down and accepts!

古文：是岁，魏虏又发骑数十万攻百济，入其界，牟大遣将沙法名、赞首流、解礼昆、木干那率众袭击虏军，大破之。
现代文：这一年，垫虏又调发骑兵几十万攻打亘擅，进入百济境内，牟大派遣将领沙法名、赘首流、解礼昆、木干那率领部众袭击魏军，大败他们。
English: In the same year, the marshall also dispatched hundreds of thousands of cavalry to attack Wanshan and entered the territory of Baekje. Muda dispatched generals Shafang, Danzhou, Xiele Kun and Mughanna to attack the Wei army and defeated them.

古文：建武二年，牟大遣使上表曰： 臣自昔受封，世被朝荣，忝荷节钺，克攘列辟。
现代文：建武二年，牟大派遣使者上奏表说： 臣下自从先前受封爵，世代可得到朝廷荣耀，愧获节钹，开拓疆域。
English: In the second year of the Jianwu era, Muda sent an envoy to make a report saying: Since the vassal was previously knighted, the generation can receive the glory of the imperial court, earn the title of knight, and open up the territory.

古文：往姐瑾等并蒙光除，臣庶咸泰。
现代文：往姐瑾等都受到荣光授任，臣僚百姓都安宁。
English: The former sister-in-laws and so on have all received honor and glory, and the ministers and the people are in peace.

古文：去庚午年，猃狁弗悛，举兵深逼。
现代文：庚午年，殓狁不改过，发兵进逼。
English: In the Year of the Rooster, the imperial edict remained unchanged, and troops were sent in to enforce it.

古文：臣遣沙法名等领军逆讨，宵袭霆击，匈梨张惶，崩若海荡。
现代文：臣下派遣沙法名等人率兵迎击征讨，夜晚突袭如雷霆般地攻打，匈奴单于慌张恐惧，如海水激荡般地崩溃。
English: His vassals sent Sha Famen and others to lead the troops to meet the attack, the night raid was like a thunderous attack, and the Xiongnu collapsed in panic and fear, like the sea.

古文：乘奔追斩，僵尸丹野。
现代文：乘胜追击斩杀贼寇，倒毙的尸体使原野鲜红。
English: Taking advantage of the victory, they chased and killed the bandits, and the fallen bodies made the field bright red.

古文：由是摧其锐气，鲸暴韬凶。
现代文：因此摧败了他们的锐气，残暴的敌人收敛凶气。
English: Thus their spirit was broken, and the ferocity of the enemy abated.

古文：今邦宇谧静，实名等之略；寻其功勋，宜在褒显。
现代文：现在境内安宁，实在是法名等人的谋略，推寻他们的功勋，应在褒奖封授之列。
English: At present, domestic tranquility is actually a strategy of people such as Legal Name, and the recognition of their merits should be included in the list of awards.

古文：今假沙法名行征虏将军、迈罗王，赞首流为行安国将军、辟中王，解礼昆为行武威将军、弗中侯，木干那前有军功，又拔台舫，为行广威将军、面中侯。
现代文：现在暂授沙法名为代理征虏将军、迈罗王，费首流为代理安国将军、辟中王，解礼昆为代理武威将军、弗中侯，木干那先前有军功，又攻下台舫，担任代理广威将军、面中侯。
English: At present, Sha Fa is temporarily appointed as the acting conscript general and king of Mylo, Fei Shuguang as the acting general of An Guo and the king of Binzhong, Xie Li Kun as the acting general of Wu Wei and the middle lord of Fu, and Mugang Na, who previously had military achievements and seized the throne, as the acting general of Guang Wei and the middle lord of Mian.

古文：伏愿天恩特愍听除。 
现代文：伏愿天子施恩特地同情准许任命。 
English: May God have mercy on him and grant him the appointment.

古文：又表曰： 臣所遣行龙骧将军、乐浪太守兼长史臣慕遗，行建武将军、城阳太守兼司马臣王茂，兼参军、行振武将军、朝鲜太守臣张塞，行扬武将军陈明，在官忘私，唯公是务，见危授命，蹈难弗顾。
现代文：又上奏表说： 臣下所派遣的代理龙骧将军、乐浪太守兼长史臣慕遣，代理建武将军、城阳太守兼司马臣王茂，兼参军、代理振武将军、朝鲜太守臣张塞，代理扬武将军陈明，在任时公而忘私，一心处理公务，在国家危难时勇于献出生命，赴难奋不顾身。
English: The report also said: The acting generals sent by the vassals, including the acting general Longyu, the vice-governor of Lelang and the vice-governor of Shi, the vice-governor of Mu, the acting general Jianwu, the vice-governor of Chengyang and the vice-governor of Sima, the vice-governor of Wang, the vice-governor of Zhenwu, the vice-governor of Korea, the vice-governor of Jangsei, and the acting general of Yangwu, the vice-governor of Korea, the vice-governor of Sima

古文：今任臣使，冒涉波险，尽其至诚。
现代文：现在担任臣下的使者，冒着风波艰险，表现最大的忠诚。
English: Now serving as an emissary to his subjects, he braved the storm and danger to show the utmost loyalty.

古文：实宜进爵，各假行署。
现代文：实在应该升其爵位，各赐所代理的职务。
English: They really ought to be knighted and given the positions they represent.

古文：伏愿圣朝特赐除正。 
现代文：伏颠圣朝特地恩赐正式授任。 
English: He was officially appointed to the post with a special gift from the Fubitsushima Shodo.

古文：诏可，并赐军号。
现代文：诏令同意，都赐予军号。
English: The imperial edict agreed, and they were all given military ranks.

古文：加罗国，三韩种也。
现代文：加罗国，是三韩种族。
English: Garo is one of the three Korean races.

古文：建元元年，国王荷知使来献。
现代文：元年，国王荷知派使者前来献纳。
English: In the first year of the new year, King Ho Chi Minh sent an envoy to offer tribute.

古文：诏曰： 量广始登，远夷洽化。
现代文：诏令说： 刚登上皇位，远方夷人普及教化。
English: The imperial edict said: "Having just ascended the throne, the faraway barbarians are spreading enlightenment.

古文：加罗王荷知款关海外，奉贽东遐。
现代文：加罗王荷知从海外来通好，由遥远的东方贡奉礼品。
English: Garo King Hori is well received overseas, and gifts are brought from the far east.

古文：可授辅国将军、本国王。 
现代文：可授任为辅蛔将军、本国王。 
English: He can be appointed as an assistant general, the king himself.

古文：倭国，在带方东南大海岛中，汉末以来，立女王。
现代文：倭国，在带方东南的大海岛中，出末年以来，拥立女王。
English: Since the end of the 19th century, Wakoku, an island in the southeastern part of the country, has had a queen.

古文：土俗已见前史。
现代文：风土习俗已见从前史书记载。
English: The customs of the region have been recorded in ancient history.

古文：建元元年，进新除使持节、都督倭·新罗·任那·加罗·秦韩·慕韩六国诸军事、安东大将军、倭王武号为镇东大将军。
现代文：建五元年，升新任使持节、都督倭&;;新罗&;;任那&;;加罗&;;秦韩&;;慕韩六国诸军事、安东大将军、倭王武的军号为镇东大将军。
English: In the 5th year of Jianwen, he was appointed as the new envoy of the Jizhi Festival, the governor of Wa, Silla, Renna, Garo, Qin and Han, and the military of the six countries of Korea, General Anton, and the military title of the king of Wa was General Zhendong.

古文：南夷林邑国，在交州南，海行三千里，北连九德，秦时故林邑县也。
现代文：南夷林邑国，在交州的南方，海路行走三千里，北面连接九德，是秦时的林邑县。
English: Nanyi Linyi County, in the south of Jiaozhou, has a sea route of three thousand miles, and is connected to Jiude to the north. It is the Linyi County of Qin Dynasty.

古文：汉末称王。
现代文：还未自称为王。
English: He has not yet declared himself king.

古文：晋太康五年始贡献。
现代文：晋太康五年，开始贡奉特产。
English: In the fifth year of Jin Taikang, he began to donate special products.

古文：宋永初元年，林邑王范杨迈初产，母梦人以金席藉之，光色奇丽。
现代文：宋朝永初元年，林邑王范杨迈刚出生，他的母亲梦见有人用金席垫着他，光彩奇特美丽。
English: In the first year of the Song Dynasty, Lin Yi Wang Fan Yang Mai was just born. His mother dreamed that someone had padded him with a golden cushion. The brilliance was strangely beautiful.

古文：中国谓紫磨金，夷人谓之 杨迈 ，故以为名。
现代文：中国称作紫磨金，夷人称为 杨迈 ，所以用来取名。
English: China is called Zi Mujin, and the barbarians are called Yangmai, so it is used to take names.

古文：杨迈死，子咄立，慕其父，复改名杨迈。
现代文：杨迈死去，儿子范咄登位。羡慕他的父亲，又改名为杨迈。
English: Yang Mai died, and his son Fan Yi ascended to the throne. Envious of his father, he changed his name to Yang Mai.

古文：林邑有金山，金汁流出于浦。
现代文：林邑有金山，金汁流出于水滨。
English: There are gold mines in Lin'eup, and the gold juice flows from the waterfront.

古文：事尼乾道，铸金银人像，大十围。
现代文：敬奉尼干道，铸造金银人像，腰粗十围。
English: In honor of Nikkan-do, a gold and silver statue was cast, with a waist ten times as thick.

古文：元嘉二十二年，交州刺史檀和之伐林邑，杨迈欲输金万斤，银十万斤，铜三十万斤，还日南地。
现代文：元嘉二十二年，交州刺史檀和之讨伐林邑，杨迈想输纳金子一万斤，银十万斤，铜三十万斤，归还日南旧地。
English: In the 22nd year of the Yuan Jia, when Jiaozhou assassinated Shi Danhe and led a crusade against Linyi, Yang Mai wanted to collect 10,000 catties of gold, 100,000 catties of silver, and 300,000 catties of copper, and return Nichinan to the old land.

古文：大臣昪僧达谏，不听。
现代文：大臣毒僧达规劝，不听从。
English: The minister did not listen to the poisonous monk's exhortation.

古文：和之进兵破其北界犬戎区栗城，获金宝无算，毁其金人，得黄金数万斤，余物称是。
现代文：和之进军攻下他们北部边界的犬戎区栗城，获得金银财宝不计其数，毁坏他们的金人，得到黄金几万斤，其余财物与之相应。
English: They marched into and captured the northern border of Inujima, Kurichō, Ebisubo District, gaining countless gold, silver, and treasures, destroying their gold men, gaining tens of thousands of pounds of gold, and the rest of the property corresponding to it.

古文：和之后病死，见胡神为祟。
现代文：扭之后来病死，见到塑神作祟。
English: Later, when Tanazu saw the ghost of Hujin haunting him, he fell ill and died.

古文：孝建二年，始以林邑长史范龙跋为扬武将军。
现代文：垄壁二年，开始委任垫旦长史范垄毖为扬武将军。
English: In the second year of the Rengbi era, he began to appoint Matdan's chief historian Fan Rengqi as Yangwu's general.

古文：杨迈子孙相传为王，未有位号。
现代文：杨迈的子孙相继为王，没有官位名号。
English: Yang Mai's descendants successively became kings, without official titles.

古文：夷人范当根纯攻夺其国，篡立为王。
现代文：夷人范当根纯攻占他们的国家，篡位自立为王。
English: When the barbarians conquered their country, they usurped the throne and made themselves king.

古文：永明九年，遣使贡献金簟等物。
现代文：永明九年，派遣使者贡奉金子簟竹等物品。
English: In the ninth year of the Yongming era, an envoy was sent to pay tribute with gold, bamboo and other items.

古文：诏曰： 林邑虽介在遐外，世服王化。
现代文：诏令说： 林邑虽然地处遥远的境外，世代服从国家教化。
English: The edict said: "Although Lin'eup is located far away from the country, generations have been subjected to the state's indoctrination.

古文：当根纯乃诚恳款到，率其僚职，远绩克宣，良有可嘉。
现代文：当根纯诚意恳切，履行臣属职责，远方业绩显着，实在值得嘉奖。
English: Danggen is sincere and earnest, performs the duties of a subordinate, and has a remarkable performance in a distant place, which is really worthy of commendation.

古文：宜沾爵号，以弘休泽。
现代文：应该赐予爵号，来弘扬恩泽。
English: He should be given a knighthood to carry on his legacy.

古文：可持节、都督缘海诸军事、安南将军、林邑王。 
现代文：当根纯可授予持节、都督缘海诸军事、安南将军、林邑王。 
English: Dangne Chun can be awarded to Ji Jie, the military governor of Danghai, General Annan, and King Lin Yi.

古文：范杨迈子孙范诸农率种人攻当根纯，复得本国。
现代文：范杨迩的子孙范厘农率领同族的人攻打当根纯，又得到自己的国家。
English: Fan Linuo, a descendant of Fan Yangtao, led his compatriots to attack Dang Zhenren and won back his country.

古文：十年，以诸农为持节、都督缘海诸军事、安南将军、林邑王。
现代文：十年，朝廷委任诸农为持节、都督缘海诸军事、安南将军、并旦王。
English: Ten years later, the imperial court appointed the peasants to hold festivals, the military to govern the country, General Annan, and the king of Bhutan.

古文：建武二年，进号镇南将军。
现代文：建武二年，升军号为镇南将军。
English: In the second year of Jianwu, he was promoted to General Zhenan.

古文：永泰元年，诸农入朝，海中遭风溺死，以其子文款为假节、都督缘海军事、安南将军、林邑王。
现代文：丞台元年，诸农入朝，在大海中遭遇风暴被淹死，朝廷委任他的儿子文款为假节、都督缘海军事、安南将军、林邑王。
English: In the first year of the Joseon Dynasty, when the peasants entered the imperial court and were drowned in a storm in the sea, the imperial court appointed his son Wenzai as a false festival, the governor of the sea military, General Annan, and Lin Yi Wang.

古文：晋建兴中，日南夷帅范稚奴文数商贾，见上国制度，教林邑王范逸起城池楼殿。
现代文：晋建兴年间，日南夷人头领范稚的奴仆多次经商，见到中原国家的制度，开导挞邑王范逸修建城池楼阁殿堂。
English: During the period of the Jin and Jianxing dynasties, the slaves of the leader of the Nichinan barbarians, Fan Ju, went into business many times, saw the system of the Central Plains countries, and guided Wang Fan Yi to build the palace of the castle tower.

古文：王服天冠如佛冠，身被香缨络。
现代文：国王戴的天冠如同佛冠，身上披着带香料的珠玉饰物。
English: The crown worn by the king is like a Buddha's crown, and his body is covered with spiced pearls.

古文：国人凶悍，习山川，善斗。
现代文：国中民众凶狠强悍，习惯山生活，擅长武斗。
English: The people of the country are fierce and strong, accustomed to mountain life, and good at martial arts.

古文：吹海蠡为角。
现代文：吹海螺为号角。
English: Blow conch for the horn.

古文：人皆裸露。
现代文：人们都赤身露体。
English: People are walking around naked.

古文：四时暄暖，无霜雪。
现代文：四季温暖，没有霜雪。
English: The four seasons are warm and there is no frost or snow.

古文：贵女贱男，谓师君为婆罗门。
现代文：贵女贱男，称巫师为婆罗门。
English: A commoner calling a sorcerer a brahmin.

古文：群从相姻通，妇先遣娉求婿。
现代文：堂兄妹间相通婚，妇家先派人送聘礼求取女婿。
English: The cousins intermarried, and the woman's family first sent someone to send a gift of employment to solicit a son-in-law.

古文：女嫁者，迦蓝衣横幅合缝如井阑，首戴花宝。
现代文：女子出嫁，迦蓝衣用横幅缝在一起如同井的围栏，头上戴鲜花宝器。
English: When a woman marries, she wears a Garan dress sewn together with a banner like a well's fence, and a flower vase on her head.

古文：婆罗门牵婿与妇握手相付，咒愿吉利。
现代文：婆罗门牵着女婿和媳妇的手握在一起相交付，念咒祝愿吉祥。
English: The brahmin took his son-in-law and daughter-in-law by the hand and held them together as he handed them over, reciting a mantra and wishing them good luck.

古文：居丧剪发，谓之孝。
现代文：服丧期间剪去头发，称为孝。
English: During the period of mourning, the hair is cut off, which is called "waku" (孝).

古文：燔尸中野以为葬。
现代文：在原野焚烧尸体作为安葬。
English: The bodies were burned in a field for burial.

古文：远界有灵鹫鸟，知人将死，集其家食死人肉尽，飞去，乃取骨烧灰投海中水葬。
现代文：远方有一种灵鸶鸟，知道有人将死，集合到那家把死人的肉吃光，飞走，家中的人才收取骨头烧成灰投入海中水葬。
English: There is a kind of crane bird in the distance. When it knows that someone is about to die, it gathers at that house to eat up the dead person's flesh and fly away. Only the people at home can collect the bones, burn them to ashes, and bury them in the sea.

古文：人色以黑为美，南方诸国皆然。
现代文：人的肤色以黑为美，南方各国都是这样。
English: People's skin color is black for beauty, all countries in the south are like this.

古文：区栗城建八尺表。日影度南八寸。
现代文：区栗城树立八尺的测曰标竿，日影在度南八寸。
English: The borough of Kurisho has set up an eight-foot measuring pole, with the sun's shadow eight inches south of the pole.

古文：自林邑西南三千余里，至扶南。
现代文：从林邑向西南行走三千多里，到达扶南。
English: I walked more than three thousand miles from Lin'eup to the southwest and arrived in Funan.

古文：扶南国，在日南之南大海西蛮湾中，广袤三千余里，有大江水西流入海。
现代文：扶南国，在曰南郡南方大海西面的半岛中，纵横三千多里，有大江水向西流入海洋。
English: In Funan Province, in the peninsula on the western side of the Southern Ocean, more than three thousand miles long and wide, there is a large river flowing westward into the ocean.

古文：其先有女人为王，名柳叶。
现代文：他们的先辈有女人做国王，名叫柳叶。
English: Their ancestors had a female king named Willow Leaf.

古文：又有激国人混填，梦神赐弓一张，教乘舶入海。
现代文：又有激国人混填，梦见神赐给他一张弓，教他乘船入海。
English: Another dreamt that God had given him a bow and told him to sail out to sea.

古文：混填晨起于神庙树下得弓，即乘舶向扶南。
现代文：混填早晨起床在神庙的树下得到弓，就乘船开向扶南。
English: He got up in the morning, got a bow under the tree of the temple, and took a boat to Funan.

古文：柳叶见舶，率众欲御之。
现代文：柳叶见到船，率领兵士准备抵御。
English: When Yanagiba saw the ship, he led his soldiers to prepare to defend themselves.

古文：混填举弓遥射，贯船一面通中人。
现代文：混填举弓远射，射穿船的一边贯穿船中的人。
English: A long shot with a bow, shot through the side of the boat and through the people in the boat.

古文：柳叶怖，遂降。混填娶以为妻。
现代文：柳叶恐惧，于是投降混填娶柳叶为妻。
English: Liu Ye is afraid, so he surrenders and marries Liu Ye.

古文：恶其裸露形体，乃叠布贯其首。
现代文：他厌恶人们裸露形体，于是让人们穿上棉布做的套头衫裙。
English: He hated the idea of people being naked, so he made them wear a jumper dress made of cotton.

古文：遂治其国，子孙相传。
现代文：因此治理这个国家。子孙相承袭。
English: That's why we govern this country. Our children will inherit it.

古文：至王盘况死，国人立其大将范师蔓。
现代文：到国王槃况死去，国中大臣拥立他们的大将范师蔓。
English: When the king died, the ministers of state supported their commander-in-chief, Fan Shimen.

古文：蔓病，姊子旃篡立，杀蔓子金生。
现代文：范师蔓患病，姐姐的儿子旃篡位，杀死蔓子的儿子金生。
English: Fan Shimen fell ill, his sister's son Zou usurped the throne and killed Fan Shimen's son Jin Sheng.

古文：十余年，蔓少子长袭杀旃，以刃镵旃腹曰： 汝昔杀我兄，今为父兄报汝。 
现代文：十多年后，儿子越呈突袭杀死旃，用刀刺面的腹部说： 你从前杀我的兄长，现在我要为父兄杀死你。 
English: More than ten years later, the son killed the baboon in a surprise attack, stabbing the abdomen of the face with a knife and saying: You used to kill my brother, now I will kill you for my father and brother.

古文：旃大将范寻又杀长，国人立以为王，是吴、晋时也。
现代文：旃的大将范寻又杀死长，国中大臣立为王，这是县吴、晋时的事。
English: Fan Huan's general Fan Huan also killed the chief, and the middle minister of the country was made king. This was the case in the counties of Wu and Jinshi.

古文：晋、宋世通职贡。
现代文：晋、宋时迭窟都前来贡奉。
English: Jin and Song Dynasty caves all came to pay tribute.

古文：宋末，扶南王姓侨陈如，名朅耶跋摩，遣商货至广州。
现代文：宋末，扶南王姓侨陈如，名叫阁耶跋尘，派遣商人到广州交易。
English: At the end of the Song Dynasty, the King of Funan, surnamed Qiao Chen Ru and named Guo Ye Baofeng, sent merchants to trade in Guangzhou.

古文：天竺道人那伽仙附载欲归国，遭风至林邑，掠其财物皆尽。
现代文：天竺僧人那伽仙搭乘商人的船打算回国，遭遇风暴到了林邑，财物都被掳掠光了。
English: The monk Nagasena, who was planning to return to his country on a merchant's ship, encountered a storm and arrived in Lim Eup, where all his belongings were stolen.

古文：那伽仙间道得达扶南，具说中国有圣主受命。
现代文：塑翅仙从小路得以到达麸瘤，陈说中原有圣明的君主接受天命。
English: The Wing-Forming Immortal was able to reach the cocoon from a small road, and it is said that the monarch of the Central Plains received a heavenly mandate.

古文：永明二年，朅耶跋摩遣天竺道人释那伽仙上表称扶南国王臣侨陈如朅耶跋摩叩头启曰： 天化抚育，感动灵祇，四气调适。
现代文：永明二年，阁耶跋摩派遣天竺僧人释那伽仙上奏表，称扶南国王臣子侨陈如阖耶跋摩叩头启奏，说： 天朝教化抚育，感动神衹，四季之气协调适中。
English: In the second year of the Yongming era, Guye Bama dispatched the monks of Tianyu Monastery to interpret the Nanga Sen's ascension to the throne, saying that the vassal of the King of Funan, Chen Ruzhe Yebuma, was the first to perform the ceremony, saying: "The Heavenly Dynasty has educated and nurtured, moved the gods, and the four seasons are moderately coordinated."

古文：伏愿圣主尊体起居康豫，皇太子万福，六宫清休，诸王妃主、内外朝臣普同和睦，邻境士庶万国归心，五谷丰熟，灾害不生，土清民泰，一切安稳。
现代文：伏愿圣明的君主身体起居安康顺畅，皇太子万福金安，六宫清静美好，各王爵嫔妃公主内外朝臣普天和睦，邻国官吏百姓万国归附，五谷丰登，灾害不生，地方安宁民众太平，一切安稳。
English: May the body of the enlightened monarch be healthy and smooth, the crown prince be blessed and safe, the six palaces be quiet and beautiful, all princes and princesses and courtiers inside and outside the country be in harmony, neighboring officials and people of all countries be attached, grain be abundant, disasters not arise, local peace and tranquility, and all people be peaceful and stable.

古文：臣及人民，国土丰乐，四气调和，道俗济济，并蒙陛下光化所被，咸荷安泰。 
现代文：臣下和人民，国土丰盛安乐，温热冷寒之气协调和顺，僧人民众众多，都受陛下普遍教化的恩泽，全都获得安定太平。 
English: His subjects and people, the country is prosperous and happy, the hot and cold weather is harmonious and orderly, and the monks are numerous. All of them have received the grace of His Majesty's universal enlightenment, and all of them have achieved stability and peace.

古文：又曰： 臣前遣使赍杂物行广州货易，天竺道人释那伽仙于广州因附臣舶欲来扶南，海中风漂到林邑，国王夺臣货易，并那伽仙私财。具陈其从中国来此，仰序陛下圣德仁冶，详议风化。佛法兴显，从僧殷集，法事日盛，王威严整，朝望国轨，慈愍苍生，八方六合，莫不归伏。
现代文：又说： 臣下从前派遣使者带着各种货物前往广州交易，天竺僧人释那伽仙在广州便搭臣的船舶想来扶南，海上遇风暴漂到林邑，国王夺走臣下的货物，以及那伽仙的私人财物那伽仙详细陈述他从中原来到这裹，恭敬叙述陛下圣明仁德的治理，详细议论风尚教化，佛法兴盛，众僧会集，法事不断兴盛，君王威风严明整肃，朝廷声望国家法度，慈爱怜悯百姓，天下各地，无不归顺信服。
English: He also said: In the past, the vassals sent emissaries to Guangzhou to trade with various goods. The celestial pagoda monks released Nagasena. In Guangzhou, he took the vassal's ship and wanted to come to Funan. When the sea encountered a storm, it drifted to Lin'eup. The king took away the vassal's goods, as well as Nagasena's personal belongings. Nagasena detailedly stated that he came here from the Central Plains, respectfully described the governance of His Majesty Saint Mingrende, discussed in detail the style of enlightenment, the prosperity of Buddhism, the gathering of monks, and the continuous prosperity of

古文：如听其所说，则化邻诸天，非可为喻。
现代文：如听从他所说，则教化接近天上神衹，不能比喻。
English: If you listen to what he says, then enlightenment is close to the gods in the sky, and cannot be compared.

古文：臣闻之，下情踊悦，若暂奉见尊足，仰慕慈恩，泽流小国，天垂所感，率土之民，并得皆蒙恩祐。
现代文：臣下听说后，心情激荡欢悦，如能暂时叩见陛下，仰慕仁慈，恩泽普及小国，天朝垂恩所感受，所有地区的民众，都得受到恩典佑护。
English: Upon hearing this, his subjects were filled with joy. If they were able to see His Majesty for a while, they would admire His kindness, and the grace would spread to small countries, and the people in all regions would be protected by His grace.

古文：是以臣今遣此道人释那伽仙为使，上表问讯奉贡，微献呈臣等赤心，并别陈下情。
现代文：所以臣下现在派遣这个僧人释那伽仙为使者，上奏表问候贡奉，略微呈献臣等的真心，并另夕陈述下国情形。
English: Therefore, the vassal is now sending this monk as an emissary to liberate Nagasena, to write a greeting and tribute, to slightly show the sincerity of the vassal, and to report the situation of the country in the evening.

古文：但所献轻陋，愧惧唯深。
现代文：衹是所献纳的物品轻微粗陋，深为惭愧畏惧。
English: is the donated items slightly crude, deeply ashamed and afraid.

古文：伏愿天慈曲照，鉴其丹款，赐不垂责。 
现代文：伏愿陛下慈悲普照，考察我们的诚心，恩赐不予责备。 
English: May His Majesty's mercy shine upon us, examine our sincerity, and bestow no reproach.

古文：又曰： 臣有奴名鸠酬罗，委臣逸走，别在余处，构结凶逆，遂破林邑，仍自立为王。
现代文：又说： 臣下有个奴仆叫鸠酬罗，抛弃臣下逃跑，另到其他地方，勾结凶恶的人，竟攻下林邑，随之自立为王。
English: And he said, There was a bondman of my lord's, whose name was Genshuro, who forsook his lord, and fled, and went into another country, and joined himself with the wicked, and took the city of the forest, and reigned.

古文：永不恭从，违恩负义，叛主之愆，天不容载。
现代文：长久不恭敬顺从，违背恩德辜负道义，背叛主子的罪遇，天地不能容纳。
English: Heaven and earth cannot accommodate the crime of not respecting and obeying for a long time, violating grace, betraying morality, and betraying the master.

古文：伏寻林邑昔为檀和之所破，久已归化。
现代文：推寻林邑从前为檀和之所攻下，早已归附教化。
English: Pushing forward, Lin'eup, which was once conquered by Danghe, has already been assimilated.

古文：天威所被，四海弥伏，而今鸠酬罗守执奴凶，自专很强。
现代文：天朝威风所及，四海敬服，而今鸠酬罗坚持奴仆的凶暴，自大蛮横。
English: As far as the might of heaven and earth can reach, the four seas bow down in reverence, but now he insists on the ferocity of a slave, arrogantly and arrogantly.

古文：且林邑、扶南邻界相接，亲又是臣奴，犹尚逆去，朝廷遥远，岂复遵奉。
现代文：况且林邑和扶南边界相连，论亲缘鸠酬罗又是臣下的奴仆，尚且叛离，朝廷遥远，他哪能再遵奉?
English: Moreover, Lin'eup is connected to the southern border of Funan Province. In terms of kinship, he is a slave of a vassal. Even if he is a renegade and the imperial court is far away, how can he still obey?

古文：此国属陛下，故谨具上启。
现代文：这个国家属于陛下，所以恭谨陈述上奏。
English: This country belongs to His Majesty, so I would like to make a respectful introduction.

古文：伏闻林邑顷年表献简绝，便欲永隔朝廷。岂有师子坐而安大鼠。
现代文：听说林邑近年奏表贡奉断绝，便想永远隔阻朝廷，哪有狮子座位上而让大鼠安坐的?
English: It is said that Linyi has cut off the payment of tribute in recent years, and wants to block the imperial court forever. Who would let a rat sit on the lion's seat?

古文：伏愿遣军将伐凶逆，臣亦自效微诚，助朝廷剪扑，使边海诸国，一时归伏。
现代文：伏愿派遣军队将领讨伐凶恶作乱的人，臣下也自愿报效微薄的诚心，协助朝廷扑灭，使沿海各国，顷刻归顺服从。
English: He was willing to send army generals to fight the evil troublemakers, and his subjects also volunteered to repay the meager sincerity, to assist the imperial court to extinguish, and to make the coastal countries submit to obedience in an instant.

古文：陛下若欲别立余人为彼王者，伏听敕旨。
现代文：陛下如想另立其他的人为那国国王，恭听旨意。
English: If your majesty wishes to set up someone else as king of that country, please do so.

古文：脱未欲灼然兴兵伐林邑者，伏愿特赐敕在所，随宜以少军助臣，乘天之威，殄灭小贼，伐恶从善。
现代文：如果不想大举兴兵讨伐林邑，伏愿特为下令有关地区，根据情况用少量军队协助臣下，利用天朝的威力，消灭小贼寇，讨伐恶人顺从正道。
English: If you do not want to make a large number of soldiers to fight against the forest villages, you should order the relevant regions to use a small number of troops to assist the vassals according to the situation, use the power of the Heavenly Court to eliminate the petty thieves and bandits, and fight the evildoers to follow the right path.

古文：平荡之日，上表献金五婆罗。
现代文：平定的时候，将上奏表献上五尊金质婆罗。
English: At the end of the recital, five golden brahmanas will be presented.

古文：今轻此使送臣丹诚，表所陈启，不尽下情。
现代文：现经由这个使者送上臣下的诚心，奏表所陈述，不能完全表达臣下心情。
English: The sincerity of the vassals sent by this messenger, as stated in the report, cannot fully express the feelings of the vassals.

古文：谨附那伽仙并其伴口具启闻。
现代文：谨附上那伽仙以及陪伴者详细启奏。
English: Please find attached a detailed introduction to the fairy godmother and her attendants.

古文：伏愿愍所启。
现代文：伏愿依准所奏。
English: The vows are performed in accordance with the music.

古文：并献金镂龙王坐像一躯，白檀像一躯，牙塔二躯，古具二双，璢璃苏鉝二口，瑇瑁槟榔柈一枚。 
现代文：并贡奉金镂龙王的坐像一尊，白檀像一尊，牙塔二尊，古贝二对，琉璃苏缸二口，玳瑁槟榔盘一枚。 
English: and paid tribute to a seated statue of the Dragon King, a white sandalwood statue, two tooth towers, two pairs of ancient pebbles, two glass jars, and a betel nut dish.

古文：那伽仙诣京师，言其国俗事摩肸首罗天神，神常降于摩耽山。
现代文：那伽仙前往京城，说到他的国家习俗侍奉摩酦首罗天神，神常降临在摩耽山。
English: Naga Sen went to the capital and spoke of his country's custom of serving the god of the sea, which often descends on Mt. Motan.

古文：土气恒暖，草木不落。
现代文：气候长久温暖，草木不凋落。
English: The climate is warm for a long time, and the plants do not wither.

古文：其上书曰： 吉祥利世间，感摄于群生。
现代文：他所上奏疏说： 吉祥利于世间，感化吸引众生。
English: He said in his sermon: Good fortune is beneficial to the world, and inspiration attracts all beings.

古文：所以其然者，天感化缘明。
现代文：之所以如此，上天感化因缘明。
English: The reason why this is so is clear.

古文：仙山名摩柷，吉树敷嘉荣。
现代文：仙山取名为摩鱿，吉树布化受嘉荣。
English: Xianshan was named Mafang, and Jishu cloth was renamed Jia Rong.

古文：摩寔首罗天，依此降尊灵。
现代文：摩酚首罗天。依此降尊灵。
English: Gossan Shuro Roten. According to this, the spirit of reverence descends.

古文：国土悉蒙祐，人民皆安宁。
现代文：国土都获佑护，人民都得安宁。
English: The country has been blessed and protected, and the people have enjoyed peace.

古文：由斯恩被故，是以臣归情。
现代文：由于此恩普及之故，所以臣属归附。
English: Due to the popularity of this favor, the vassalage was attached.

古文：菩萨行忍慈，本迹起凡基。
现代文：菩萨施行容忍慈悲，本来起白平凡根基。
English: Bodhisattvas practice tolerance and compassion, which are originally based on white common sense.

古文：一发菩提心，二乘非所期，历生积功业，六度行大悲。
现代文：一当产生佛的最高智慧，声闻乘与缘觉乘不在期待中。经历多代积功业，以六种德目施行大悲。
English: When the supreme wisdom of the Buddha was born, there was no expectation of hearing and sensing, nor was there any expectation of attaining enlightenment. After experiencing many generations of accumulated merits, he practiced the Great Compassion with the six kinds of virtues.

古文：勇猛超劫数，财命舍无遗。
现代文：勇猛超越劫难，财产性命施舍没有剩余。
English: Brave beyond calamity, there is no surplus of property, life and alms.

古文：生死不为厌，六道化有缘。
现代文：生死不为满足，六道轮回感化有缘的人。
English: There is no satisfaction in life and death. The six realms of reincarnation influence people who have predestined relationships.

古文：具修于十地，遗果度人天。
现代文：具备菩萨之位，遣下佛果教化众人天神。
English: Having the position of a bodhisattva, he sent down the Buddha's fruit to enlighten and transform all people into gods.

古文：功业既已定，行满登正觉。
现代文：功业已奠定，德行圆满成正果。
English: The work has been laid, and the virtuous conduct has been successfully achieved.

古文：万善智圆备，惠日照尘俗。
现代文：各种善行智慧周备，慧业之光照耀凡俗。
English: All kinds of good deeds and wisdom are prepared, and the light of wisdom shines on the mundane.

古文：众生感缘应，随机授法药。
现代文：众生因缘由感化而相应，随机缘授予佛法的悦乐。
English: Sentient beings respond to the influence of causes, and random causes bestow the joy of Buddhism.

古文：佛化遍十方，无不蒙济擢。
现代文：佛化遍及十方，无不蒙受济渡拔擢。
English: Buddhism spread all over the country and was promoted everywhere.

古文：皇帝圣弘道，兴隆于三宝。
现代文：皇帝圣明弘扬大道，使三宝兴盛。
English: Emperor Shengming promoted the avenue and made the Three Treasures flourish.

古文：垂心览万机，威恩振八表。
现代文：留心处理各项事务，声威恩德震撼八方以外。
English: Deal with various matters attentively, and the sound of virtue will shake the world.

古文：国土及城邑，仁风化清皎。
现代文：国土和城池，仁爱风尚清明。
English: In the country and the city, benevolence has a clear style.

古文：亦如释提洹，众天中最超。
现代文：也如择帝，在天神中地位最高。
English: It is also the highest rank among the gods, just like the emperor.

古文：陛下临万民，四海共归心。
现代文：陛下毓领万民，四海全部归向。
English: His Majesty leads all the people, and all the four seas turn to him.

古文：圣慈流无疆，被臣小国深。 
现代文：圣明仁慈流传无止境，遍及臣属小国真深厚。 
English: The benevolence and benevolence spread endlessly throughout the small vassal states.

古文：诏报曰： 具摩肸降灵，流施彼土，虽殊俗异化，遥深欣赞。
现代文：诏书回答说： 你详述摩醋降下尊灵，普施那方土地，虽然是不同的风俗别样的教化，遥远地为之欢欣赞赏。
English: The edict replied: "You recount in detail the spirit of the holy spirit that descended from Moza, and the land of Persia, although it is a different custom and a different kind of enlightenment, far away rejoices and appreciates it.

古文：知鸠酬罗于彼背叛，窃据林邑，聚凶肆掠，殊宜剪讨。
现代文：知道鸠酬罗在南方背叛，窃据拯旦，聚集凶暴的人肆意掳掠，实应剪除讨伐。
English: Knowing that Qian Heuro betrayed in the south, stole the territory of Zhengdan, and gathered violent people to loot and plunder at will, he should really cut off the crusade.

古文：彼虽介遐陬，旧修蕃贡，自宋季多难，海译致壅，皇化惟新，习迷未革。
现代文：挞邑虽在遥远边境，旧日履行番邦贡奉，自从宋末多难，海外的音信被阻隔，皇朝革新，而拯旦习于迷惑不改正。
English: Although Ganymede is on a distant border, it used to be a tributary state in the old days. Since the end of the Song Dynasty, it has been difficult, overseas messages have been blocked, the imperial dynasty has innovated, and the Qing dynasty has been accustomed to confusing and not correcting.

古文：朕方以文德来远人，未欲便兴干戈。
现代文：我正以文德招徕远方的人，不想大动干戈。
English: I'm trying to use literature to attract people from far away, I don't want to make a big fuss.

古文：王既敔列忠到，远请军威，今诏交部随宜应接。
现代文：国王既然恳切表示忠心，遥远地请求出兵，现在韶令交州根据情形接应。
English: Since the king has earnestly expressed his loyalty and has requested the dispatch of troops from afar, the emperor now orders the state to respond according to the situation.

古文：伐叛柔服，实惟国典，勉立殊效，以副所期。
现代文：讨伐叛臣怀柔远方之人，实为阔家政典，应勉力建立特殊功劳，以符合我的期望。
English: A person who fights against traitor Huairou from afar is indeed a great statesman and should try to establish special merits to meet my expectations.

古文：那伽仙屡衔边译，颇悉中土阔狭，令其具宣。 
现代文：那伽仙屡次奉命担任边境翻译，很熟悉中原情况，特命他宣布旨意。 
English: Naga Sen was repeatedly ordered to serve as a border interpreter, he was very familiar with the situation in the Central Plains, and he was specially ordered to announce his will.

古文：上报以绛紫地黄碧绿纹绫各五匹。
现代文：皇帝用绛紫地黄碧绿纹绫各五匹作为回赠。
English: The emperor gave each of the five horses with the crest of the crest of the crest as a gift.

古文：扶南人黠惠知巧，攻略傍邑不宾之民为奴婢，货易金银彩帛。
现代文：扶南人聪慧灵巧，攻取周围不顺从地区的民众为奴婢，去换取金银绢帛。
English: The people of Funan were clever and dexterous, capturing the people of the surrounding non-compliant areas as slaves to exchange for gold and silver ingots.

古文：大家男子截锦为横幅，女为贯头，贫者以布自蔽，锻金环鏆银食器。
现代文：大家族的男子截断彩色丝织品做横幅围裙，妇女用来做套头式的衣裙，贫穷的人用布来遮身。冶炼金镶躀银做食具。
English: Men of large families cut off colored silk fabric to make banner aprons, women used to make cape-style dresses, the poor used cloth to cover themselves, and smelted gold-encrusted silver and silver to make tableware.

古文：伐木起屋，国王居重阁，以木栅为城。
现代文：砍伐树木修建房屋，国王住在楼阁上，用木栅做城墙。
English: They cut down trees to build houses, the king lived in a loft, and the city walls were made of wooden grates.

古文：海边生大箬叶，长八九尺，编其叶以覆屋。
现代文：海边生长大箬叶，长八九尺，编织这种叶子来盖屋。
English: On the seashore grows a large reed leaf, eighty-nine feet long, and we weave this leaf to cover the house.

古文：人民亦为阁居。
现代文：人民也造楼阁居住。
English: People also built pavilions to live in.

古文：为船八九丈，广裁六七尺，头尾似鱼。
现代文：造船八九丈长，宽才六七尺，头尾像鱼。
English: The ship is 89 feet long and 67 feet wide, and looks like a fish from head to tail.

古文：国王行乘象，妇人亦能乘象。
现代文：国王出行骑象，妇人也能够骑象。
English: The king travels on an elephant, a woman can also ride an elephant.

古文：斗鸡及犭希为乐。无牢狱，有讼者，则以金指环若鸡子投沸汤中，令探之，又烧锁令赤，著手上捧行七步，有罪者手皆燋烂，无罪者不伤。
现代文：以斗鸡及猪取乐没有监狱，有诉讼的人，就把如鸡蛋大的金指环投到沸腾的水中，使诉讼的人去探取，又烧铁镇到红色，让诉讼的人拿在手上捧着走七步，有罪的人手都烧焦烫烂，没有罪的人不受伤。
English: There is no prison for those who take pleasure in cock-fighting and pig-fighting. If there is a litigant, they should throw a gold ring as big as an egg into the boiling water, so that the litigant can search for it. They should also burn the iron to red, so that the litigant can hold it in his hand and walk seven steps. Guilty people's hands will be scorched and burned, and innocent people will not be injured.

古文：又令没水，直者入即不沈，不直者即沈也。
现代文：又命令头没到水中，有理的人入水而不沉，没理的人当即沉下去。
English: And he commanded that the head should not go into the water, and that the reasonable man should go into the water and not sink, and the unreasonable man should immediately sink.

古文：有甘蔗、诸蔗、安石榴及橘，多槟榔，鸟兽如中国。
现代文：有甘蔗、诸蔗、安石榴和橘子，槟榔多，乌兽同中原一样。
English: There are sugar cane, sugar cane, pomegranates and oranges, more betel nuts, and the same black beasts as in the Central Plains.

古文：人性善，不便战，常为林邑所侵击，不得与交州通，故其使罕至。
现代文：人们性情善良，不善于作战，常被林邑侵略攻打，不能和交州交往，所以使者很少到来。
English: People are good-natured, not good at fighting, often attacked by Linyi aggression, and cannot interact with Jiaozhou, so envoys rarely come.

古文：交州斗绝海岛，控带外国，故恃险数不宾。
现代文：交州孤悬陡峭的海岛，控制外国，所以仗恃险阻多次不顺从。
English: Jiaozhou is a lonely steep island, controlled by a foreign country, so it has been repeatedly disobeyed.

古文：宋泰始初，刺史张牧卒，交趾人李长仁杀牧北来部曲，据交州叛。数年病死。
现代文：宋朝泰始初年，刺史张牧去世，交趾人李长仁杀害张牧从北方带来的部众，占据交州反叛，几年后病死。
English: In the first year of the Song Dynasty, Zhang Mu passed away, and his confidant Li Changren killed Zhang Mu's subordinates brought from the north, occupied Jiaozhou, and died of illness a few years later.

古文：从弟叔献嗣事，号令未行，遣使求刺史。
现代文：堂弟叔献接位，号令不能施行，派遣使者请求派刺史。
English: Cousin uncle offer to take over, order cannot be carried out, send an envoy to request to send a probe.

古文：宋朝以南海太守沈焕为交州刺史，以叔献为焕宁远司马、武平新昌二郡太守。
现代文：宋朝委任南海太守沈焕为交处刺史，委任叔献为焕宁远司马、武平新昌二郡太守。
English: The Song Dynasty appointed the Nankai governor Shen Huan as the meeting place, and appointed Huan Ningyuan Sima and Wuping Xinchang as the two county governors.

古文：叔献得朝命，人情服从，遂发兵守险不纳焕，焕停郁林病卒。
现代文：叔献得到朝廷任命，人心服从，于是发兵守卫险阻不接纳沈焕，沈焕停留在郁挞病死。
English: Uncle Xian was appointed by the imperial court, and people obeyed him. As a result, the soldiers sent to guard him refused to accept Shen Huan. Shen Huan stayed in Yucheng and died of illness.

古文：太祖建元元年，仍以叔献为交州刺史，就安慰之。
现代文：太祖建元元年，随之委任叔压为交业刺史，以安抚他。
English: In the first year of the Jianyuan era, the great-grandfather appointed the uncle to be the secretary of the commerce and industry to appease him.

古文：叔献受命，既而断割外国，贡献寡少。
现代文：抠压接受任命，不久截断外国同中原的联系，贡奉很少。
English: He accepted the appointment under pressure and soon cut off foreign ties with the Central Plains. He received few tributes.

古文：世祖欲讨之，永明三年，以司农刘楷为交州刺史，发南康、庐陵、始兴郡兵征交州。
现代文：世祖打算讨伐他，永明三年，任命司农刘揩为交州刺史，调发南康、庐陵、始兴郡兵士征讨交州。
English: The patriarch planned to fight against him, and in the third year of Yongming, he appointed the chief farmer Liu Wei as the chief historian of Jiaozhou, and dispatched soldiers from Nankang, Fuling and Shixing counties to fight against Jiaozhou.

古文：叔献闻之，遣使愿更申数年，献十二队纯银兜鍪及孔雀毦，世祖不许。
现代文：叔献听说后，派遣使者希望再延期几年，贡奉十二队纯银头盔和孔雀羽毛，世祖不准许。
English: After Uncle Xian heard about it, he sent an envoy hoping to postpone it for a few more years. However, he was not allowed to send twelve teams of sterling silver helmets and peacock feathers.

古文：叔献惧为楷所袭，间道自湘川还朝。
现代文：叔献畏惧遭刘楷袭击，走小路从湘川回到官府。
English: Li Shuxian was deeply afraid that he would be attacked by Liu Kai, so he took a back road from Hunan to return to Jiankang.

古文：六年，以始兴太守房法乘代楷。
现代文：六年，任命始兴太守房法乘接替刘楷。
English: Six years later, Shi Xing was appointed to succeed Liu Kai.

古文：法乘至镇，属疾不理事，专好读书。
现代文：法乘到达镇所，遇上疾病不处理事务。专爱读书。
English: He arrived at the town hall by the law, and did not deal with affairs when he was ill. He loved to read.

古文：长史伏登之因此擅权，改易将吏，不令法乘知。
现代文：长史伏登之因此独揽大权，改换将领官吏，不使法乘知道。
English: As a result, the Chief of the General Staff, Fudeng Zhi, monopolized great power and changed generals and officials without letting the legal authorities know about it.

古文：录事房季文白之，法乘大怒，系登之于狱。
现代文：录事房季文报告这件事，法乘大怒，把登之关在监狱中。
English: When the recorder, Jiwen, reported the incident, the law was outraged and put Deng Zhi in prison.

古文：十余日，登之厚赂法乘妹夫崔景叔得出，将部曲袭州执法乘，谓之曰： 使君既有疾，不宜劳。 
现代文：十多天后，登之厚重地贿赂法乘的妹夫崔景叔得以出狱，带领兵士袭击州府捉住法乘，对他说： 使君既然有病，不宜辛劳。 
English: More than ten days later, Deng Zhi's brother-in-law Cui Jing, who had heavily bribed Fa Yue, was able to get out of prison. He led soldiers to attack the state capital to capture Fa Yue and said to him: "Since you are sick, you should not work hard.

古文：囚之别室。
现代文：把他囚禁在另外的房舍中。
English: and imprisoned him in another house.

古文：法乘无事，复就登之求书读，登之曰： 使君静处犹恐动疾，岂可看书。 
现代文：法乘没有事，又向登之求取书来阅读，登之说： 使君安静休养还恐怕引起疾病，哪能看书。 
English: There was nothing wrong with the Dharma, so he asked Deng Zhi to fetch a book for him to read. Deng Zi said, "If I let you rest and recuperate quietly, I'm afraid it will cause illness. How can I read a book?"

古文：遂不与。
现代文：于是不给他。
English: As a result, the book was not given to Fong.

古文：乃启法乘心疾动，不任视事，世祖仍以登之为交州刺史。
现代文：随之启奏法乘心病发作，不能处理政事，世祖随之任命登之为交州刺史。
English: As a result, Kaishoho suffered a heart attack and was unable to deal with political affairs. The founder then appointed him as the governor of Gyeongju.

古文：法乘还至岭而卒。
现代文：法乘回到五岭而去世。
English: He died after returning to Wuling.

古文：法乘，清河人。
现代文：法乘，是清河人。
English: He is a practitioner of the Dharma and a native of Qinghe.

古文：升明中为太祖骠骑中兵，至左中郎将。
现代文：升明年间，任太祖骠骑中兵，官至左中郎将。
English: After promotion, he was appointed as the grand ancestor of the cavalry, and rose to the rank of left middle officer.

古文：性方简，身长八尺三寸，行出人上，常自俯屈。
现代文：性格正直简易，身高八尺三寸，行为高出众人之上，时常自己低头弯曲。
English: Honest and simple in character, he is eight feet three inches tall, his behavior is above the crowd, and he often bows his head.

古文：青州刺史明庆符亦长与法乘等，朝廷唯此二人。
现代文：青州刺史明庆符的身高也和法乘相等，朝廷中衹有这两人最高
English: The height of Qingzhou Shishi Mingqingpu is also equal to that of Fa Rongcheng. Both of them are the tallest in the imperial court.

古文：史臣曰：书称蛮夷猾夏，盖总而为言矣。
现代文：史臣曰：《尚书》说 蛮夷扰乱华夏 ，大概是就总体而言。
English: Shichen said: "Shangshu" said that the barbarians disturbed Huaxia, probably on the whole.

古文：至于南夷杂种，分屿建国，四方珍怪，莫此为先。藏山隐海，环宝溢目。
现代文：至于南夷各种族，分据岛屿建立国家，四方的奇珍异宾，没有哪个地方比此地更多，隐藏在山谷海中，瑰丽的宝物充斥眼前。
English: As for the various ethnic groups in Nanyi, the country was established according to the islands, and there are more rare and unusual guests in the four directions. There is no place more than here, hidden in the valley and sea, with magnificent treasures abounding in front of our eyes.

古文：商舶远届，委输南州，故交、广富实，牜刃积王府。
现代文：商船远来，运输到南方各州，所以交州、广州富饶殷实，财物堆集于官府。
English: Merchant ships came from far away and transported goods to the southern states, so Jiaozhou and Guangzhou were rich and affluent, and goods were piled up in government offices.

古文：充斥之事差微，声教之道可被。
现代文：盗贼之事比较少，教化的道理可以普及。
English: There are relatively few cases of theft, and the principle of enlightenment can be popularized.

古文：若夫用德以怀远，其在此乎？
现代文：至于用德行怀柔远方的人，大概就在这裹吧!
English: As for those who go far away with virtue and tenderness, they are probably right here!

古文：赞曰：司、雍分疆，荆及衡阳。
现代文：赞曰：司州、雍州划分疆界，其外有荆州和衡阳。
English: Zang said: Sizhou and Yongzhou demarcate the border, and there are Jingzhou and Hengyang outside it.

古文：参错州部，地有蛮方。
现代文：各州交错，有蛮人之地。
English: A patchwork of states, a land of savages.

古文：东夷海外，碣石、扶桑。
现代文：柬夷海外，有碣石、扶桑。
English: Cambodia and overseas, there are oolite, fusang.

古文：南域憬远，极泛溟沧。
现代文：南方疆域憧憬着更远处，直到沧海尽头。
English: The southern region looks further afield, to the end of the sea.

古文：非要乃贡，并亦来王。
现代文：不邀约而贡奉，都来中原称臣。
English: Uninvited and paid tribute, they all came to Nakahara to show their allegiance.

