古文：张丞相苍者，阳武人也。好书律历。
现代文：丞相张苍是阳武人，他非常喜欢图书、乐津及历法。
English: The prime minister, Zhang Cang, is a Yangwu person. He is very fond of books, music and calendars.

古文：秦时为御史，主柱下方书。
现代文：在秦朝时，他曾担任过御史，掌管宫中的各种文书档案。
English: During the Qin Dynasty, he served as imperial historian and was in charge of various documents and archives in the palace.

古文：有罪，亡归。
现代文：后来因为犯罪，便逃跑回家了。
English: He later fled home because of the crime.

古文：及沛公略地过阳武，苍以客从攻南阳。
现代文：等到沛公攻城略地经过阳武的时候，张苍就以宾客的身份跟随沛公攻打南阳。
English: When Pei Gong attacked the city and bypassed Yangwu, Zhang Cang followed Pei Gong to attack Nanyang as a guest.

古文：苍坐法当斩，解衣伏质，身长大，肥白如瓠，时王陵见而怪其美士，乃言沛公，赦勿斩。
现代文：后来张苍因为犯法应该斩首，脱下衣服，伏在刑具上时，身体又高又大，同时还有一身如同葫芦籽一样肥硕白皙的皮肤，凑巧被王陵看见，惊叹张苍长得好。因此，王陵就向沛公说情，赦免了他的死罪。
English: Later, when Zhang Cang was to be beheaded for breaking the law, he took off his clothes and lay down on the torture device. His body was tall and large, and at the same time he had a fat and white skin like a gourd seed. Wang Ling happened to see Zhang Cang and marveled at how good-looking he was. Therefore, Wang Ling pleaded with Pei Gong and pardoned his capital crime.

古文：遂从西入武关，至咸阳。
现代文：这样，张苍便跟随沛公向西进入武关，到达咸阳。
English: In this way, Zhang Cang followed Pei Gong westward into Wuguan and arrived in Xianyang.

古文：沛公立为汉王，入汉中，还定三秦。
现代文：沛公被立为汉王，进入汉中，不久又还师平定三秦。
English: Pei Gong was crowned King of Han, entered Han Middle, and soon subdued San Qin.

古文：陈馀击走常山王张耳，耳归汉，汉乃以张苍为常山守。
现代文：陈余打跑常山王张耳，张耳投归汉王，汉王就任命张苍为常山的郡守。
English: Chen Yu defeated Zhang Er, the king of Changshan, and Zhang Er returned to the Han king. The Han king appointed Zhang Cang as the county governor of Changshan.

古文：从淮阴侯击赵，苍得陈馀。
现代文：又跟随韩信攻打赵国，张苍擒获陈余。
English: He also followed Han Xin to attack Zhao, and Zhang Cangyao captured Chen Yu.

古文：赵地已平，汉王以苍为代相，备边寇。
现代文：赵地被平定之后，王任命张苍为代国相国，防备边境敌寇。
English: After Zhao Di was subdued, the king appointed Zhang Cang as the deputy of the State Council, to guard the border against enemy raiders.

古文：已而徙为赵相，相赵王耳。
现代文：不久，又被调任赵国相国，辅佑赵王张耳。
English: Soon after, he was transferred to the post of Zhao Guozhongguo, assisted by Zhao Wang Zhang Er.

古文：耳卒，相赵王敖。
现代文：张耳死后，辅佐赵王张敖。
English: After Zhang Er's death, Zhao Wang assisted Zhang Ye.

古文：复徙相代王。
现代文：然后又调任代国相国，辅佑代王。
English: Then, he was transferred to the position of acting state minister, assisting the acting king.

古文：燕王臧荼反，高祖往击之。苍以代相从攻臧荼有功，以六年中封为北平侯，食邑千二百户。
现代文：燕王臧荼谋反时，高祖带兵前去攻打，张苍以代国相国的身份跟随高祖攻打臧荼有功，在高祖六年中被封为北平侯，食邑一千二百户。
English: When Yan Wangzhu plotted a rebellion, Gao Zu led the troops to attack. Zhang Cang, as the representative of the country, followed Gao Zu to attack and achieved great success. In Gao Zu's six years, he was named Beiping Hou, with 1,200 households.

古文：迁为计相，一月，更以列侯为主计四岁。
现代文：后来，张苍被升任为管理财政的计相。改为以列侯的身份担任主计，他担任这个职务达四年之久。
English: Later, Zhang Cang was promoted to the position of finance manager, and changed to the position of chief accountant as a vassal, which he held for four years.

古文：是时萧何为相国，而张苍乃自秦时为柱下史，明习天下图书计籍。苍又善用算律历，故令苍以列侯居相府，领主郡国上计者。
现代文：此时萧何担任相国，而张苍是从秦时就担任柱下史，非常熟悉天下的图书和各种簿籍，再加上他很精通计算、乐律和历法，因此就命令他以列侯的身份留在相府里，负责管理各郡国交上来的会计帐簿。
English: At this time, Xiao He served as the imperial secretary, while Zhang Cang had served as the chief historian since the Qin Dynasty. He was very familiar with the world's books and various books, and he was also very proficient in calculation, music and calendar. Therefore, he was ordered to stay in the imperial secretary's residence as a vassal, and was responsible for managing the accounting books submitted by the counties and states.

古文：黥布反亡，汉立皇子长为淮南王，而张苍相之。
现代文：黥布谋反未成而逃跑，汉高祖就立他的儿子刘长作淮南王，命令张苍为相国来辅佐他。
English: When Zibo's plot failed and he fled, Emperor Gaozhu appointed his son Liu Chang as the King of Huainan and ordered Zhang Cang to come to his aid.

古文：十四年，迁为御史大夫。
现代文：十四年之后，张苍升为御史大夫。
English: Fourteen years later, Zhang Cangsheng became the chief historian.

古文：周昌者，沛人也。其从兄曰周苛，秦时皆为泗水卒史。
现代文：周昌是沛县人，他和堂兄周苛都在秦时担任泗水卒史。
English: Zhou Chang is a native of Peixian County. He and his cousin Zhou Cao both served as scholars of Surabaya during the Qin Dynasty.

古文：及高祖起沛，击破泗水守监，於是周昌、周苛自卒史从沛公，沛公以周昌为职志，周苛为客。
现代文：等到汉高祖在沛县起兵的时候，打败了泗水郡的郡守、郡监，这样，周昌、周苛两兄弟便以卒史的资历追随沛公，沛公命周昌担任一名管旗帜的职志，周苛暂时在帐下当宾客。
English: When Han Gaozu raised an army in Pei County, he defeated the county governor and the county supervisor of Surabaya County. In this way, Zhou Chang and Zhou Kao, two brothers, followed Pei Gong with the qualifications of history graduates. Pei Gong ordered Zhou Chang to serve as a flag officer, and Zhou Kao temporarily served as a guest.

古文：从入关，破秦。
现代文：后来他们都跟从沛公入关，推翻强秦的统治。
English: Later, they all followed Pei Gong and overthrew Qiang Qin's rule.

古文：沛公立为汉王，以周苛为御史大夫，周昌为中尉。
现代文：沛公被封为汉王，汉王任命周苛为御史大夫，周昌为中尉。
English: Pei Gong was named the King of Han, the King of Han appointed Zhou Cao as the Imperial Historian, and Zhou Chang as the Lieutenant.

古文：汉王四年，楚围汉王荥阳急，汉王遁出去，而使周苛守荥阳城。
现代文：汉王四年，楚军在荥阳把汉王团团围住，情况紧急，汉王悄悄逃跑出围，命令周苛留守荥阳城。
English: In the fourth year of the Han dynasty, the Chu army surrounded the Han king in Poyang. The situation was urgent, and the Han king quietly fled out of the encirclement and ordered Zhou Cao to stay in Poyang.

古文：楚破荥阳城，欲令周苛将。苛骂曰： 若趣降汉王！不然，今为虏矣！ 
现代文：楚军攻破了荥阳，想任命他为将领，周苛痛斥道： 你们这些人应该赶快投降汉王，不然的话，很快地就要做俘虏了！ 
English: The Chu army broke through Poyang and wanted to appoint him as a general. Zhou Cao scolded: You people should quickly surrender to the Han king, otherwise, you will soon become prisoners!

古文：项羽怒，亨周苛。
现代文：项羽听罢大怒，立刻就烹杀了周苛。
English: Xiang Yu was furious and killed Zhou Cao immediately.

古文：於是乃拜周昌为御史大夫。
现代文：于是，汉王就拜周昌为御史大夫。
English: As a result, the Han king appointed Zhou Chang as imperial historian.

古文：常从击破项籍。
现代文：周昌经常跟随汉王，并且多次击败项羽军。
English: Zhou Chang often followed Han Wang and defeated Xiang Yu's army many times.

古文：以六年中与萧、曹等俱封：封周昌为汾阴侯；周苛子周成以父死事，封为高景侯。
现代文：因此，在高祖六年时，周昌和萧何、曹参一起受封，周昌被封为汾阴侯，周苛的儿子周成因父亲为国捐躯的原因，也被封为高景侯。
English: Therefore, when Gaozu was six years old, Zhou Chang and Xiao He and Cao San were jointly awarded the title. Zhou Chang was awarded the title of Jinyin Hou, and Zhou Cao's son, Zhou Cheng, was also awarded the title of Gao Jing Hou because his father died for the country.

古文：昌为人彊力，敢直言，自萧、曹等皆卑下之。
现代文：周昌为人坚忍刚强，敢于直言不讳。像萧何、曹参等人对周昌都是非常敬畏。
English: Zhou Chang is a strong and tenacious person who dares to be outspoken. People like Xiao He and Cao San are very much in awe of Zhou Chang.

古文：昌尝燕时入奏事，高帝方拥戚姬，昌还走，高帝逐得，骑周昌项，问曰： 我何如主也？ 
现代文：周昌曾经有一次在高帝休息时进宫奏事，高帝正搂抱着戚姬，周昌见此情景，回头便跑，高帝连忙上前追赶，追上之后，骑在周昌的脖子上问道： 你看我是什么样的皇帝？ 
English: Once upon a time, Zhou Chang entered the palace to perform a ceremony while Gao Di was resting. Gao Di was holding Zhengyi in his arms. Zhou Chang saw this scene and ran back. Gao Di hurried forward to catch up. After catching up, he rode on Zhou Chang's neck and asked: What kind of emperor am I?

古文：昌仰曰： 陛下即桀纣之主也。 
现代文：周昌挺直脖子，昂起头说： 陛下您就是夏桀、商纣一样的皇帝。 
English: Zhou Chang straightened his neck, raised his head and said: Your Majesty, you are the same emperor as Xia Yao and Shang Yao.

古文：於是上笑之，然尤惮周昌。
现代文：高帝听了哈哈大笑，但是却由此最敬畏周昌。
English: Gao Di laughed out loud when he heard this, but this made him fear Zhou Chang the most.

古文：及帝欲废太子，而立戚姬子如意为太子，大臣固争之，莫能得；上以留侯策即止。
现代文：等到高帝想废掉太子，立戚姬之子如意为太子时，许多大臣都坚决反对，但是都未奏效。
English: When Emperor Gao wanted to abolish the position of crown prince and install his daughter's son as crown prince, many ministers were adamantly opposed, but to no avail.

古文：而周昌廷争之彊，上问其说，昌为人吃，又盛怒，曰： 臣口不能言，然臣期期知其不可。
现代文：后来，幸好张良为吕后定下计策，使高帝暂时打消了这个主意。而周昌在朝上谏诤时，态度强硬。高帝问他理由何在，因为周昌本来就有口吃的毛病，再加上是在非常气愤的时候，也就口吃得更加厉害了，他说： 我的口才虽然不太好，但是我期期知道这样做是不行的。
English: Later, fortunately, Zhang Liang set a strategy for Lü Hou, so that Gao Di temporarily canceled this idea. And Zhou Chang had a tough attitude when he went to the imperial court. Gao Di asked him what the reason was, because Zhou Chang originally had a stuttering problem, and when he was very angry, he stuttered even more severely. He said: Although my eloquence is not very good, I knew that this would not work.

古文：陛下虽欲废太子，臣期期不奉诏。 
现代文：陛下您虽然想废掉太子，但是我期期坚决不能接受您的诏令。 
English: Your Majesty, although you want to abolish the crown prince, I absolutely cannot accept your edict.

古文：上欣然而笑。
现代文：高帝听罢，高兴得笑了起来。
English: Gao Di listened and laughed with joy.

古文：既罢，吕后侧耳於东箱听，见周昌，为跪谢曰： 微君，太子几废。 
现代文：事过之后，吕后因为在东厢侧耳听到上述对话，她见到周昌时，就跪谢说： 若不是您据理力争的话，太子几乎就被废掉了。 
English: After the event, because Lu Hou was listening to the above-mentioned dialogue in the east wing, when she saw Zhou Chang, she knelt down and said: If it were not for your reasonable efforts, the prince would almost have been abolished.

古文：是後戚姬子如意为赵王，年十岁，高祖忧即万岁之後不全也。
现代文：此后，戚姬的儿子如意立为赵王，年纪十岁，高祖担心如果自己死后，赵王会被人杀掉。
English: After that, his cousin's son, Ruyi, became Zhao Wang, aged ten. Gaozu feared that if he died, Zhao Wang would be killed.

古文：赵尧年少，为符玺御史。赵人方与公谓御史大夫周昌曰： 君之史赵尧，年虽少，然奇才也，君必异之，是且代君之位。 
现代文：当时有一个名叫赵尧的人，年纪轻轻，他的官职是掌管符玺的御史，赵国人方与公对御史大夫周昌说： 您的御史赵尧，年纪虽轻，但他却是一个奇才，您对他一定要另眼相待，他将来要代替您的职位。 
English: At that time, there was a young man named Zhao Wei, whose official position was to be in charge of the imperial history of Fuxi. Zhao Guofeng and his father-in-law said to the imperial historian Dr. Zhou Chang: Your imperial historian Zhao Wei, although he is young, he is a prodigy, you must treat him differently, he will replace your position in the future.

古文：周昌笑曰； 尧年少，刀笔吏耳，何能至是乎！ 
现代文：周昌笑着说： 赵尧年轻，只不过是一个刀笔小吏罢了，哪里会到这种地步！ 
English: Zhou Chang said with a smile: Zhao Wei is young, he is just a petty official, how could he get to this point!

古文：居顷之，赵尧侍高祖。
现代文：过了不久，赵尧去侍奉高祖。
English: Soon after, Zhao Yao went to serve Gao Zu.

古文：高祖独心不乐，悲歌，群臣不知上之所以然。
现代文：有一天，高祖独自闷闷不乐，悲伤地唱起歌来，满朝文武不知道皇帝为什么会这样。
English: One day, Gao Zu was alone, sullen and unhappy. He began to sing a sad song. The whole court did not know why the emperor was like this.

古文：赵尧进请问曰： 陛下所为不乐，非为赵王年少而戚夫人与吕后有卻邪？
现代文：赵尧上前请问道： 陛下您闷闷不乐的原因，莫非是为赵王年轻，而戚夫人和吕后二人又不和睦吗？
English: Zhao Yao, please come forward and ask: Your Majesty, is the reason for your sullen mood not because King Zhao is young, but because your relative and Empress Lu are not getting along?

古文：备万岁之後而赵王不能自全乎？ 
现代文：是担心在您万岁之后，赵王不能保全自己吗？ 
English: Are you worried that Zhao Wang will not be able to protect himself after you pass away?

古文：高祖曰： 然。
现代文：高祖说： 对。
English: Gaozu said, "That's right."

古文：吾私忧之，不知所出。 
现代文：我私下里非常担心这些，不知道怎么办。 
English: Secretly, I'm very worried about this and I don't know what to do.

古文：尧曰： 陛下独宜为赵王置贵彊相，及吕后、太子、群臣素所敬惮乃可。 高祖曰： 然。
现代文：赵尧说： 您最好为赵王派去一个地位高贵而又坚强有力的相国，这个人还得是吕后、太子和群臣平素都敬畏的人才行。 高祖说道： 对。
English: Zhao Yao said, "You'd better send a high-ranking and powerful consort for King Zhao. This person must also be a person whom Empress Dowager Lyu, the crown prince, and the courtiers all revere." Gaozu said, "That's right."

古文：吾念之欲如是，而群臣谁可者？ 
现代文：我考虑此事是想这样，但是满朝群臣谁能担此重任呢？ 
English: I'm thinking about it this way, but with all the courtiers, who can take on this responsibility?

古文：於是乃召周昌，谓曰： 吾欲固烦公，公彊为我相赵王。 
现代文：赵尧说道： 御史大夫周昌，这个人坚强耿直，况且从吕后、太子到满朝文武，人人对他都一直敬畏，因此，只有他才能够担此重任。 高祖说： 好。 
English: Zhao Yao said, "Master historian Zhou Chang, this man is strong and upright, moreover, everyone has always been in awe of him, from Queen Lyu, the Prince to the Manchu Emperor Wenwu, so he is the only one who can take on this responsibility." Gaozu said, "Good."

古文：周昌泣曰： 臣初起从陛下，陛下独柰何中道而弃之於诸侯乎？ 
现代文：于是高祖就召见了周昌，对他说： 我想一定得麻烦您，您无论如何也要为我去辅佐赵王，您去担任他的相国。 周昌哭着回答： 我从一开始就跟随陛下，您为什么单单要在半路上把我扔给了诸侯王呢？ 
English: Gaozu then summoned Zhou Chang and said to him, "I think I must trouble you, you should in any case assist King Zhao for me, you should go and serve as his consort." Zhou Chang replied in tears, "I have followed Your Majesty from the very beginning, why did you just throw me to the prince on the half-way?

古文：高祖曰： 吾极知其左迁，然吾私忧赵王，念非公无可者。公不得已彊行！ 
现代文：高祖说： 我深知这是降职，但是我私下里又实在为赵王担心，再三考虑，除去您之外，其他人谁也不行。
English: Gao Zu said: I am well aware that this is a demotion, but I am really worried about Zhao Wang in private. Think about it again and again. Apart from you, no one else can do it.

古文：於是徙御史大夫周昌为赵相。
现代文：真是迫不得已，您就为我勉强走一遭吧！ 于是御史大夫周昌就被调任赵国相国。
English: It's really a last resort, so you'll have to go out of your way for me! As a result, Chief Historian Zhou Chang was transferred to the post of Zhao Guoxiang.

古文：既行久之，高祖持御史大夫印弄之，曰： 谁可以为御史大夫者？ 
现代文：周昌走了以后，过了很长一段时间，高祖手拿着御史大夫的官印，轻轻地抚弄着说： 谁才是御史大夫最合适的人选呢？ 
English: After Zhou Chang left, after a long period of time, Gao Zu held the official seal of the Imperial Historian in his hand, gently caressing it and saying: Who is the most suitable candidate for the Imperial Historian?

古文：孰视赵尧，曰： 无以易尧。 
现代文：然后仔细地看了看赵尧，说道： 没有人比赵尧更合适了。 
English: Then he looked closely at Zhao Wei and said, "There is no one more suitable than Zhao Wei."

古文：遂拜赵尧为御史大夫。
现代文：这样，就任命赵尧为御史大夫。
English: In this way, Zhao Wei was appointed as the imperial historian.

古文：尧亦前有军功食邑，及以御史大夫从击陈豨有功，封为江邑侯。
现代文：赵尧在以前也有军功和食邑，等到他以御史大夫之职跟随攻打陈豨立了功，被封为江邑侯。
English: In the past, Zhao Wei also had military achievements and food villages, until he followed the attack on Chen Yu with the post of imperial historian, and was awarded the title of Jiangyuan.

古文：高祖崩，吕太后使使召赵王，其相周昌令王称疾不行。
现代文：高祖去世之后，吕太后派使臣召赵王入朝，相国周昌让赵王推说身体不好，不能前往。
English: After Gao Zu's death, Empress Dowager Lv sent an envoy to summon Zhao Wang to the imperial court. Zhou Chang, Zhao Wang's father-in-law, told Zhao Wang that he was not in good health and could not go.

古文：使者三反，周昌固为不遣赵王。
现代文：使者往返去了三次，周昌都一直坚持不送赵王进京。
English: The envoy went back and forth three times, but Zhou Chang always insisted on not sending Zhao Wang to Beijing.

古文：於是高后患之，乃使使召周昌。
现代文：于是吕后很是忧虑，就派使者召周昌进京。
English: As a result, Lv Guo was very worried and sent an envoy to summon Zhou Chang to Beijing.

古文：周昌至，谒高后，高后怒而骂周昌曰： 尔不知我之怨戚氏乎？
现代文：周昌进京之后，拜见吕后，吕后非常生气地骂他： 难道你还不知道我非常恨戚夫人吗？
English: After Zhou Chang entered Beijing, he met Lv Guo. Lv Guo scolded him very angrily: Don't you know that I hate my cousin Mrs. Guo very much?

古文：而不遣赵王，何？ 
现代文：而你却不让赵王进京，为什么？ 
English: But you didn't let Zhao Wang enter Beijing. Why?

古文：昌既徵，高后使使召赵王，赵王果来。
现代文：周昌被召进京城之后，吕后又派使者召赵王，不久，赵王果然来到了京城。
English: After Zhou Chang was summoned to Beijing, Queen Lyu sent an envoy to summon King Zhao. Soon, King Zhao arrived in Beijing.

古文：至长安月馀，饮药而死。
现代文：他到长安一个多月，就被迫喝下毒药死去了。
English: More than a month after he arrived in Chang'an, he was forced to drink poison and died.

古文：周昌因谢病不朝见，三岁而死。
现代文：周昌因此也就称病引退，不再上朝拜见太后。三年之后，他也去世了。
English: As a result, Zhou Chang announced that he was retiring due to illness and would no longer visit the Empress Dowager. Three years later, he also passed away.

古文：後五岁，高后闻御史大夫江邑侯赵尧高祖时定赵王如意之画，乃抵尧罪，以广阿侯任敖为御史大夫。
现代文：五年之后，高后听说御史大夫江邑侯赵尧在高祖时定下了保全赵王如意的计策，于是就除去他江邑侯爵位以抵其罪，并让广阿侯任敖担任了御史大夫。
English: Five years later, Gao Guo heard that the imperial historian Jiangyi marquis Zhao Jun had set up a plan to protect King Zhao when he was Gao Zu, so he removed his marquisate of Jiangyi to atone for his crime, and let Guang Ah Marquis Renjun serve as imperial historian.

古文：任敖者，故沛狱吏。
现代文：任敖这个人，原来是沛县的一名狱吏。
English: The man, Ren Qi, turned out to be a prison guard from Pei County.

古文：高祖尝辟吏，吏系吕后，遇之不谨。
现代文：高祖还是一名普通百姓时，曾躲避官司，狱吏找不到高祖本人，便抓走了吕后，并对她不尊重。
English: When Gaozu was still an ordinary citizen, he had evaded legal proceedings. When the prison guards couldn't find Gaozu himself, they arrested Lyu Hou and treated her with disrespect.

古文：任敖素善高祖，怒，击伤主吕后吏。
现代文：而任敖一直和高祖很要好，见此情景非常生气，就打伤了拘管吕后的那位狱吏。
English: But Ren Xuan had always been very close to Gao Zu. Seeing this scene, he was very angry and wounded the prison guard who was in charge of Lyu Guo.

古文：及高祖初起，敖以客从为御史，守丰二岁，高祖立为汉王，东击项籍，敖迁为上党守。
现代文：等到高祖开始起兵的时候，任敖就以宾客的身份跟随，后来担任御史，驻守丰邑两年。高祖立为汉王，向东进击项羽，任敖升为上党郡守。
English: When Gaozu began to raise an army, Ren Rong followed as a guest, and later served as imperial historian, stationed in Fengyi for two years. Gaozu became Han king, marched east to Xiangyu, and Ren Rong was promoted to Shangdang county governor.

古文：陈豨反时，敖坚守，封为广阿侯，食千八百户。
现代文：在陈豨造反的时候，任敖坚守城池，未被叛军攻陷，因功被封为广阿侯，食邑一千八百户。
English: At the time of Chen Xuan's rebellion, Ren Xuan firmly defended the city, and was not captured by the rebels. For his service, he was awarded the title of Guang A Hou, with 1,800 households.

古文：高后时为御史大夫。
现代文：高后时，担任御史大夫。
English: After graduating from high school, he worked as a doctor of history.

古文：三岁免，以平阳侯曹窋为御史大夫。
现代文：三年后被免职，任命平阳侯曹窋为御史大夫。
English: Three years later, he was relieved of his duties and appointed Pingyang Hou Cao Pi as the chief historian.

古文：高后崩，与大臣共诛吕禄等。免，以淮南相张苍为御史大夫。
现代文：高后去世之后，曹窋和大臣们共同诛杀吕禄等人，后被免去官职，又任用淮南王的相国张苍担任御史大夫。
English: After Gao Guo's death, Cao Pi and his ministers worked together to kill Lu Lu and others. Later, Cao Pi was removed from his official post and appointed Zhang Cang, the consort of King Huainan, to serve as imperial secretary.

古文：苍与绛侯等尊立代王为孝文皇帝。
现代文：张苍和绛侯周勃等人共同尊立代王为孝文皇帝。
English: Zhang Cang and Zhou Bo, the second-in-command, and others jointly revered the newly-installed king as Emperor Xiaowen.

古文：四年，丞相灌婴卒，张苍为丞相。
现代文：文帝四年，丞相灌婴去世，张苍继任为丞相。
English: In the fourth year of Emperor Wen's reign, the chancellor died in infancy, and Zhang Cang succeeded him as chancellor.

古文：自汉兴至孝文二十馀年，会天下初定，将相公卿皆军吏。张苍为计相时，绪正律历。
现代文：从汉朝建立到孝文帝已有二十多年时间，当时正处在天下刚刚平定的时候，朝廷中的文武百官都是军人出身，而唯独张苍从担任计相时起，就致力于探讨、订正音律和历法的工作。
English: It has been more than twenty years since the establishment of the Han Dynasty to the time of Emperor Xiaowen. At that time, when the world was just pacified, all the civil and military officials in the imperial court were from the military, but Zhang Cang has been dedicated to the work of exploring and revising the musical rhythm and calendar since he was a photographer.

古文：以高祖十月始至霸上，因故秦时本以十月为岁首，弗革。
现代文：因为高祖是在十月里入关，灭秦到达霸上的，所以原来秦代以十月为一年开端的旧历法依然沿袭。
English: Because Gao Zu entered the customs in October, the destruction of Qin reached the top, so the old calendar, which originally began in October during the Qin Dynasty, is still followed.

古文：推五德之运，以为汉当水德之时，尚黑如故。
现代文：他又推求金、木、水、火、土五德运转的情形，认为汉朝正值水德旺盛的时期，所以仍然像秦朝那样崇尚黑色。
English: He also deduced that the five virtues of gold, wood, water, fire and earth were in operation, and believed that the Han Dynasty was in a period of vigorous water virtue, so it still advocated black like the Qin Dynasty.

古文：吹律调乐，入之音声，及以比定律令。
现代文：张苍还吹奏律管，调整乐调，使其合于五声八音，以此推类其它，来制定律令。
English: Zhang Cang also played the melody pipe, adjusted the melody to make it fit into five voices and eight tones, and deduced others from this to formulate the melody.

古文：若百工，天下作程品。
现代文：并且由此制定出各种器物的度量标准，以作为天下百工的规范。
English: And from this, the measurement standards for various utensils were developed to serve as the standard for all craftsmen in the world.

古文：至於为丞相，卒就之，故汉家言律历者，本之张苍。
现代文：在他担任丞相一职时期，终于把这一切都完成了。所以整个汉代研究音律历法的学者，都师承张苍。
English: During his tenure as chancellor, he finally completed all of this. Therefore, the entire Han Dynasty scholars who study the musical rhythm calendar are all disciples of Zhang Cang.

古文：苍本好书，无所不观，无所不通，而尤善律历。
现代文：而张苍这个人又本来就喜欢图书，再加上他什么书都读，什么学问都精通，而尤其擅长音律和历法。
English: Zhang Cang, on the other hand, is a person who likes books from the very beginning. In addition, he reads all kinds of books and is well-versed in all kinds of learning. He is especially good at music and calendars.

古文：张苍德王陵。
现代文：张苍对于曾经救过自己性命的王陵感恩戴德。
English: Zhang Cang is grateful for the royal tomb that once saved his life.

古文：王陵者，安国侯也。
现代文：王陵就是安国侯。
English: The royal mausoleum is that of An Guohou.

古文：及苍贵，常父事王陵。
现代文：等到张苍显贵之后，经常把王陵当作父亲一般侍奉。
English: After Zhang Cang became prominent, he often served the royal mausoleum as if it were his father.

古文：陵死後，苍为丞相，洗沐，常先朝陵夫人上食，然后敢归家。
现代文：王陵死后，张苍当了丞相，但是每逢五天一休假的时候，总是先拜见王陵夫人，献上美食之后，然后才回家。
English: After Wang Ling's death, Zhang Cang became the prime minister, but every time he took a five-day vacation, he always went to see Wang Ling's wife first, presented her with delicious food, and then went home.

古文：苍为丞相十馀年，鲁人公孙臣上书言汉土德时，其符有黄龙当见。
现代文：张苍担任丞相十几年之后，鲁国有个人叫公孙臣，他上书给皇帝，说汉朝属于土德旺盛时期，其征兆是不久将要有黄龙出现。
English: After Zhang Cang had served as chancellor for more than ten years, an individual named Gong Sun Chen from the State of Lu wrote a letter to the emperor, saying that the Han Dynasty belonged to a period of vigorous nationalism, and that a yellow dragon would soon appear as a sign of this.

古文：诏下其议张苍，张苍以为非是，罢之。
现代文：皇帝下诏把此议交给张苍审鉴，张苍认为并非这样，把这件事扔在了一边。
English: The emperor issued an edict to submit this proposal to Zhang Cang for examination. Zhang Cang thought that this was not the case and threw the matter aside.

古文：其後黄龙见成纪，於是文帝召公孙臣以为博士，草土德之历制度，更元年。
现代文：但是后来黄龙果然出现在天水郡的成纪县于是文帝就把公孙臣召到了朝廷，并任命他为博士，让他负责草拟顺应土德的历法制度。同时，改定元年。
English: Later, however, the Yellow Dragon did appear in Chengji County of Tianshui County, and Emperor Wen summoned Gongsun Chen to the imperial court and appointed him as a doctor, making him responsible for drafting a calendar system that conformed to the local customs. At the same time, the first year was revised.

古文：张丞相由此自绌，谢病称老。
现代文：丞相张苍也就因此自行引退，推说年过多病，不再上朝。
English: The prime minister, Zhang Cang, therefore retired of his own accord, saying that he had been ill for too many years and would no longer go to the imperial court.

古文：苍任人为中候，大为奸利，上以让苍，苍遂病免。
现代文：张苍曾保举某人作中侯官，但这个人利用职权大干贪赃枉法之事，皇帝以此责备张苍，张苍就告病退职了。
English: Zhang Cang had sponsored someone to be a middle-ranking magistrate, but this person took advantage of his position to commit acts of corruption. The emperor reproached Zhang Cang with this, and Zhang Cang became ill and resigned.

古文：苍为丞相十五岁而免。
现代文：前后算起来，张苍总共做了十五年的丞相才去职。
English: All things considered, Zhang Cang served as chancellor for a total of 15 years before leaving the post.

古文：孝景前五年，苍卒，谥为文侯。子康侯代，八年卒。
现代文：张苍在孝景帝前元五年时去世，谥号为文侯，儿子康侯继承侯位，八年之后去世。
English: Zhang Cang died in the fifth year of the reign of Emperor Xiaojing in the first century B.C. His posthumous name was Wen Hou, and his son Kang Hou succeeded to the position of Hou, and died eight years later.

古文：子类代为侯，八年，坐临诸侯丧後就位不敬，国除。
现代文：康侯的儿子张类继承侯位，又过了八年，因为犯下了参加诸侯的丧礼后就位不敬的罪名，爵位封邑都被撤消。
English: The son of Kang Hou, Zhang Rui, succeeded to the throne, and eight years later, because he committed the crime of disrespecting the position after attending the funeral of the princes, the titles and fiefs were all revoked.

古文：初，张苍父长不满五尺，及生苍，苍长八尺馀，为侯、丞相。
现代文：从前，张苍的父亲身高不足五尺，等到生下张苍，张苍却身高八尺，被封为侯，又做了丞相。
English: Once upon a time, Zhang Cang's father was less than five feet tall, but when he gave birth to Zhang Cang, Zhang Cang was eight feet tall, was made a marquess, and also became chancellor.

古文：苍子复长。及孙类，长六尺馀，坐法失侯。
现代文：张苍的儿子也很高大，到了孙子张类却又身高六尺多一点，因为犯法而失去爵位。
English: Zhang Cang's son is also very tall, but his grandson Zhang Rui is a little over six feet tall. He lost his title for breaking the law.

古文：苍之免相後，老，口中无齿，食乳，女子为乳母。
现代文：张苍在免去丞相职务以后，年岁已经很大了，嘴里没有牙齿，只能靠吸食乳汁度日，用青年妇女当他的乳母。
English: After Zhang Cang was relieved of his duties as chancellor, he was already very old and had no teeth in his mouth. He could only get by by drinking milk and using young women as his nannies.

古文：妻妾以百数，尝孕者不复幸。
现代文：他的妻妾众多，达百人左右，凡是曾经怀孕生育过的就不再被宠幸。
English: His wives and concubines are numerous, numbering around a hundred, and anyone who has been pregnant and given birth is no longer favored.

古文：苍年百有馀岁而卒。
现代文：张苍最后活到一百零几岁时才去世。
English: Zhang Cang finally lived to be a hundred years old before he passed away.

古文：申屠丞相嘉者，梁人，以材官蹶张从高帝击项籍，迁为队率。
现代文：丞相申屠嘉是梁地人。他以一个能拉强弓硬弩的武士的身份，跟随高帝，攻打项羽，因军功升任一个叫做队率的小官。
English: The prime minister, Shen Tu Jia, was a native of Liang. He followed Emperor Gao as a samurai who could draw a strong bow and a hard sword, fought Xiang Yu, and was promoted to a minor official called a squad leader due to his military service.

古文：从击黥布军，为都尉。
现代文：跟随高帝攻打黥布叛军时，升任都尉。
English: He was promoted to captain when he followed Emperor Gao to attack the rebels in Zibo.

古文：孝惠时，为淮阳守。
现代文：在孝惠帝时，升任淮阳郡守。
English: During the reign of Emperor Xiao Hui, he was promoted to Huaiyang County Governor.

古文：孝文帝元年，举故吏士二千石从高皇帝者，悉以为关内侯，食邑二十四人，而申屠嘉食邑五百户。
现代文：孝文帝元年，选拔那些曾经跟随高帝南征北战，现年俸在二千石的官员，一律都封为关内侯的爵位，得封此爵的共二十四人，而申屠嘉得到五百户的食邑。
English: In the first year of Emperor Xiaowen, those officials who had followed Emperor Gao in the Southern Expedition and the Northern War, and who were currently paid an annual salary of two thousand koku, were all awarded the title of Guanai Marquis. A total of twenty-four people were awarded this title, and Shen Tu Jia received five hundred households.

古文：张苍已为丞相，嘉迁为御史大夫。
现代文：张苍任丞相之后，申屠嘉升任为御史大夫。
English: After Zhang Cang was appointed chancellor, Shen Tu Jia was promoted to the post of imperial historian.

古文：张苍免相，孝文帝欲用皇后弟窦广国为丞相，曰： 恐天下以吾私广国。 
现代文：张苍免去丞相之后，孝文皇帝想任命皇后的弟弟窦广国为丞相，但是又说： 我很害怕这样做会使天下人认为我偏爱广国。 
English: After Zhang Cang was dismissed as chancellor, Emperor Xiaowen wanted to appoint the empress's brother Dou Guangguo as chancellor, but he said: I am afraid that doing so will make the world think that I prefer Guangguo.

古文：广国贤有行，故欲相之，念久之不可，而高帝时大臣又皆多死，馀见无可者，乃以御史大夫嘉为丞相，因故邑封为故安侯。
现代文：窦广国这个人很有才能，而且品德也好，因此皇上才想任命他为丞相。但是孝文帝经过长时间考虑之后，还是认为他不合适。而高帝时候的大臣又多已死去，活着的人当中看来也没有合适的人选，所以就任命申屠嘉为丞相，就以原来的食邑封他为故安侯。
English: Dou Guangguo was a man of great talent and good moral character, which is why the emperor only wanted to appoint him as chancellor. However, Emperor Xiaowen, after long consideration, still considered him unsuitable. And many of the ministers at the time of Emperor Gao had died, and it seemed that there was no suitable candidate among the living, so he appointed Shen Tu Jia as chancellor, and he was given the former title of food prefect.

古文：嘉为人廉直，门不受私谒。
现代文：申屠嘉为人廉洁正直，在家里不接受私事拜访。
English: Shen Tu Jia is a person of integrity and honesty, and does not accept personal visits at home.

古文：是时太中大夫邓通方隆爱幸，赏赐累巨万。
现代文：当时太中大夫邓通正是最受宠幸的时候，皇帝赏赐给他的钱财已达万万。
English: At that time, Taizhong Doctor Duntong was the most favored, and the emperor had already given him tens of thousands of dollars.

古文：文帝尝燕饮通家，其宠如是。
现代文：汉文帝曾经到他家饮酒作乐，由此可见皇帝对他宠爱的程度。
English: Emperor Hanwen once went to his home to drink and make merry, which shows how much the emperor loved him.

古文：是时丞相入朝，而通居上傍，有怠慢之礼。
现代文：当时丞相申屠嘉入朝拜见皇帝，而邓通站在皇帝的身边，礼数上有所怠慢。
English: At that time, the prime minister, Shen Tu Jia, entered the imperial court to pay homage to the emperor, while Dantong stood at the emperor's side, neglecting the number of courtesies.

古文：丞相奏事毕，因言曰： 陛下爱幸臣，则富贵之；至於朝廷之礼，不可以不肃！ 
现代文：申屠嘉奏事完毕，接着说道： 皇上您喜爱您的宠臣，可以让他富贵，至于朝廷上的礼节，却是不能不严肃对待的。 
English: After the recital, Shen Tu Jia continued, "Emperor, you love your favorite, you can make him rich, but as far as court etiquette is concerned, you must take it seriously.

古文：上曰： 君勿言，吾私之。 
现代文：皇帝说道： 请您不要再说了，我对邓通就是偏爱。 
English: The emperor said, "Please don't say any more, I just prefer Deng Tong."

古文：罢朝坐府中，嘉为檄召邓通诣丞相府，不来，且斩通。
现代文：申屠嘉上朝回来坐在相府中，下了一道手令，让邓通到相府来，如果不来，就要把邓通斩首。
English: Shen Tu Jia came back in the morning and sat in the government office. He issued an order to Dantong to come to the government office. If Dantong did not come, he would be beheaded.

古文：通恐，入言文帝。
现代文：邓通非常害怕，进宫告诉了文帝。
English: Duntong was very scared and went to the palace to tell Emperor Wen.

古文：文帝曰： 汝第往，吾今使人召若。 
现代文：文帝说： 你尽管前去无妨，我立刻就派人召你进宫。 
English: Emperor Wen said, "You are welcome to go ahead. I will immediately send someone to summon you to the palace."

古文：通至丞相府，免冠，徒跣，顿首谢。
现代文：邓通来到了丞相府，摘下帽子，脱下鞋子，给申屠嘉叩头请罪。
English: Deng Tong came to the prime minister's office, took off his hat and shoes, and apologized to Shen Tu Jia.

古文：嘉坐自如，故不为礼，责曰： 夫朝廷者，高皇帝之朝廷也。
现代文：申屠嘉很随便地坐在那里，故意不以礼节对待他，同时还斥责他说： 朝廷嘛，是高祖皇帝的朝廷。
English: Shen Tu Jia sat there very casually, deliberately not treating him with courtesy, and at the same time scolded him: "The imperial court is the imperial court of Emperor Gaozhu.

古文：通小臣，戏殿上，大不敬，当斩。
现代文：你邓通只不过是一个小臣，却胆敢在大殿之上嬉戏，犯有大不敬之罪，应该杀头。
English: You, Duntong, are no more than a junior minister, yet you dare to play on the main hall. You are guilty of great disrespect and should be beheaded.

古文：吏今行斩之！ 
现代文：来人哪，现在就执行，把他斩了！ 
English: Come on, do it now, chop him up!

古文：通顿首，首尽出血，不解。
现代文：邓通磕头，头上碰得鲜血直流，但申屠嘉仍然没有说饶了他。
English: Dang Tong bowed his head, blood streamed from his head, but Shen Tu Jia still did not say that he would spare him.

古文：文帝度丞相已困通，使使者持节召通，而谢丞相曰： 此吾弄臣，君释之。 
现代文：文帝估计丞相已经让邓通吃尽了苦头，就派使者拿着皇帝的节旄召邓通进宫，并且向丞相表示歉意说： 这是我亲狎的臣子，您就饶了他吧！ 
English: Emperor Wen estimated that the prime minister had let Duntong suffer all the hardships, so he sent an envoy with the emperor's seal to summon Duntong to the palace, and apologized to the prime minister, saying: This is my close vassal, so please spare him!

古文：邓通既至，为文帝泣曰： 丞相几杀臣。 
现代文：邓通回到宫中之后，哭着对文帝说： 丞相差点杀了我！ 
English: After Duntong returned to the palace, he cried and said to Emperor Wen: "The prime minister almost killed me!

古文：嘉为丞相五岁，孝文帝崩，孝景帝即位。
现代文：申屠嘉担任丞相五年之后，孝文帝去世了，孝景帝即位。
English: Five years after Shen Tuo Jia served as chancellor, Emperor Xiaowen died and Emperor Xiao Jing ascended to the throne.

古文：二年，晁错为内史，贵幸用事，诸法令多所请变更，议以谪罚侵削诸侯。
现代文：景帝二年，晁错担任内史，因为受皇帝宠爱，地位很高，权利很大，许多法令制度他都奏请皇帝变更。同时还讨论如何用贬谪处罚的方式来削弱诸侯的权力。
English: In the second year of the reign of Emperor Jing, he was mistakenly put in charge of internal history. Because he was favored by the emperor, he had a high status and great power. He asked the emperor to change many laws and regulations. At the same time, he also discussed how to weaken the power of the princes by means of demeaning punishment.

古文：而丞相嘉自绌所言不用，疾错。
现代文：而丞相申屠嘉也有感于自己所说的话不被采用，因此忌恨晁错。
English: However, Prime Minister Shin-Tuja also felt that what he said would not be adopted, so he avoided making a mistake.

古文：错为内史，门东出，不便，更穿一门南出。
现代文：晁错担任内史，内史府个大门本来是由东边通出宫外的，使他进出多有不便，他就自作主张改凿一道墙门向南通出。
English: He mistakenly assumed the post of Inner Historian. Originally, the first gate of the Inner Historian's Office led from the east to the outside of the palace. It was rather inconvenient for him to enter and exit, so he decided on his own to dig a wall gate leading to the south.

古文：南出者，太上皇庙堧垣。嘉闻之，欲因此以法错擅穿宗庙垣为门，奏请诛错。
现代文：而向南出的门所凿开的墙，正是太上皇宗庙的外墙，申屠嘉听说之后，就想借晁错擅自凿开宗庙围墙为门这一理由，把他治罪法办，奏请皇上杀掉他。
English: However, the wall hewn open by the south-facing door was the outer wall of the Emperor's ancestral temple. After hearing this, Shen Tu Jia wanted to use the reason that he had mistakenly cut open the temple's enclosure wall without permission as a reason to punish him and ask the Emperor to kill him.

古文：错客有语错，错恐，夜入宫上谒，自归景帝。
现代文：但是晁错门客当中有人把这件事告诉了他。晁错非常害怕，连夜跑到宫中，拜见皇上，向景帝自首，说明情况。
English: However, one of his guests told him about the incident. He was very scared and ran to the palace overnight to meet the emperor and explain the situation to Emperor Jing.

古文：至朝，丞相奏请诛内史错。
现代文：到了第二天早朝的时候，丞相申屠嘉奏请诛杀内史晁错。
English: In the early morning of the next day, the prime minister, Shen Tu Jiaxo, asked the general secretary of the Communist Party of China to correct the mistake.

古文：景帝曰： 错所穿非真庙垣，乃外堧垣，故他官居其中，且又我使为之，错无罪。 
现代文：景帝说道： 晁错所凿的墙并不是真正的宗庙墙，而是宗庙的外围短墙，所以才有其他官员住在里面，况且这又是我让他这样做的，晁错并没有什么罪过。 
English: Jingdi said, "The wall that Zou Er made was not the real wall of the ancestral temple, but the outer short wall of the ancestral temple, which is why other officials lived in it. Moreover, I asked him to do so. Zou Er did not commit any crime.

古文：罢朝，嘉谓长史曰： 吾悔不先斩错，乃先请之，为错所卖。 
现代文：退朝之后，申屠嘉对长史说： 我非常后悔没有先杀了晁错，却先报告皇帝，结果反被晁错给欺骗了。 
English: After retiring from the imperial court, Shen Tu Jia said to Changshi, "I very much regret that I did not kill Zou Er first, but reported to the emperor first. As a result, I was deceived by Zou Er.

古文：至舍，因欧血而死。谥为节侯。
现代文：回到相府之后，因气愤吐血而死，谥号为节侯。
English: After returning to the prefectural governor's residence, he vomited blood out of anger and died. His posthumous name was Maru.

古文：子共侯蔑代，三年卒。
现代文：儿子共侯申屠蔑继承侯位，三年之后去世。
English: His son, also called Hou Shen Tu Zhi, succeeded to the throne, but died three years later.

古文：子侯去病代，三十一年卒。
现代文：共侯之子申屠去病继承侯位，三十一年之后去世。
English: Shen Tu, the son of the co-emperor, became ill and succeeded to the imperial title, and died 31 years later.

古文：子侯臾代，六岁，坐为九江太守受故官送有罪，国除。
现代文：申屠去病的儿子申屠臾继承侯位，六年之后，由于身为九江太守接受原任官员送礼而犯了罪，封国被撤消。
English: Shen Tuo's son Shen Tuoqi, who had been ill, succeeded to the throne. Six years later, he committed a crime because he was the governor of Jiujiang receiving gifts from the former officials, and the state seal was revoked.

古文：自申屠嘉死之後，景帝时开封侯陶青、桃侯刘舍为丞相。
现代文：自从申屠嘉死去之后，景帝时开封侯陶青，桃侯刘舍先后担任丞相之职。
English: After the death of Shen Tuo Jia, Emperor Jing opened the fief of Hou Tao Qing, and Touhou Liu She successively held the post of chancellor.

古文：及今上时，柏至侯许昌、平棘侯薛泽、武彊侯庄青翟、高陵侯赵周等为丞相。
现代文：到当今皇室时，柏至侯许昌，平棘侯薛泽，武强侯庄青翟、高陵侯赵周等人相继为丞相，他们都是世袭的列侯，平庸无能，谨小慎微，当丞相只不过是滥竽充数而已。
English: In today's imperial family, Baoji marquess Xu Chang, Pingxian marquess Xue Ze, Wuqiang marquess Zhuang Qingyao, Gaoling marquess Zhao Zhou and others successively served as prime ministers. They were all hereditary feudal lords, mediocre and incompetent, cautious and cautious, and when they were prime ministers, they were nothing more than unscrupulous.

古文：皆以列侯继嗣，娖娖廉谨，为丞相备员而已，无所能发明功名有著於当世者。太史公曰： 张苍文学律历，为汉名相，而绌贾生、公孙臣等言正朔服色事而不遵，明用秦之颛顼历，何哉？
现代文：没有一个人是以贡献杰出、功名显赫而著称于世的。太史公说：张苍的文章学问、音乐历法都很精通，是汉朝的一代名相。但是他却把贾生、公孙臣等人提出的采用正朔、改变服色的主张抛在了一边，而不加以实行，却偏偏采用秦朝所实行的颛顼历，这是为什么呢？
English: There is no one in the world who is famous for his outstanding contribution and distinguished service. Taishi Gong said: Zhang Cang's articles, learning, and musical calendar are very proficient, and he is a famous person of the Han Dynasty. However, he put aside the idea of adopting Zhengshuo and changing the color of the dress proposed by Jia Sheng, Gong Sun Chen and others, and instead of implementing it, he chose to adopt the lunar calendar implemented by the Qin Dynasty. Why is this?

古文：周昌，木彊人也。
现代文：周昌这个人质朴、刚强、正直，是个像木石一般倔强的人。
English: Zhou Chang is a simple, strong and honest person. He is as stubborn as wood and stone.

古文：任敖以旧德用。
现代文：而任敖则是靠旧日他对吕后有恩德才被重用。
English: However, his appointment was made possible by the fact that he had been kind to Lü Guo in the past.

古文：申屠嘉可谓刚毅守节矣，然无术学，殆与萧、曹、陈平异矣。
现代文：申屠嘉可以说是刚正坚毅、品德高尚的人，但是他却既不懂权术又没有学问，和萧何、曹参、陈平这些前辈丞相相比，恐怕就要逊色一些啦。
English: Shen Tu Jia can be said to be a man of uprightness, fortitude, and high moral character, but he does not understand the art of power and has no knowledge. Compared with Xiao He, Cao San, and Chen Ping, these predecessors of the prime minister, I am afraid he is inferior.

古文：孝武时丞相多甚，不记，莫录其行起居状略，且纪征和以来。
现代文：汉武帝时丞相很多，就不一一记名了，也不记录他们的出身、籍贯、生卒年以及品行、事迹等等，暂且记下武帝征和年间以来的丞相。
English: Since there were many chancellors-general at the time of Emperor Wu, their names are not recorded one by one, nor are their origins, places of origin, years of birth and death, as well as their conduct and deeds, etc. For the time being, the chancellors-general since the time of Emperor Wu's Conquest are recorded.

古文：有车丞相，长陵人也。卒而有韦丞相代。
现代文：车千秋丞相是长陵人，他去世之后由韦丞相接替。
English: Minister Che Qianqiu was from Changling. After his death, he was succeeded by Minister Wei.

古文：韦丞相贤者，鲁人也。
现代文：韦丞相名贤，是鲁国人。
English: Wei Chengxiang is a famous scholar and a native of Lu.

古文：以读书术为吏，至大鸿胪。
现代文：他因为谙于读书而担任小吏，然后逐渐升官到大鸿胪之职。
English: He worked as a minor official because he was too busy studying, and then gradually rose to the position of Da Hongzhu.

古文：有相工相之，当至丞相。
现代文：曾经有相面的人给他相面，说他可以官至丞相。
English: Someone once gave him a face to face, saying that he could rise to the post of prime minister.

古文：有男四人，使相工相之，至第二子，其名玄成。相工曰： 此子贵，当封。 
现代文：他有四个儿子，也让相面的人给他们相面，相到第二个名叫韦玄成的儿子时，相面的人说： 这个孩子有贵相，日后可以封侯。 
English: He had four sons, and he also had a matchmaker make a match for them. When he met the second son, named Wei Xuancheng, the matchmaker said, "This child has a noble face, and in the future he can be given a title of nobility."

古文：韦丞相言曰： 我即为丞相，有长子，是安从得之？ 
现代文：韦丞相说道： 即使我当了丞相，被封为侯，继承侯位的是大儿子，这二儿子怎么会封侯呢？ 
English: Wei Zheng said: Even if I became Zheng Zheng and was given the title of marquess, and my eldest son inherited the title of marquess, how could these two sons be given the title of marquess?

古文：後竟为丞相，病死，而长子有罪论，不得嗣，而立玄成。
现代文：后来，韦玄果然当了丞相，因病逝失，而他的大儿子因为犯罪，按照当时的法律，是不能继承侯位的，因此立韦玄成。
English: Later, Wei Xuan did indeed become chancellor, but he passed away due to illness, and his eldest son was unable to inherit the post due to a crime, according to the law at the time, so Wei Xuancheng was appointed.

古文：玄成时佯狂，不肯立，竟立之，有让国之名。
现代文：韦玄成当时假装精神失常，不肯为继承人，但是最终朝廷还是让他继承了侯位，还赢得了封侯将临而让给别人的好名声。
English: At that time, Wei Xuancheng pretended to be insane and refused to be the heir, but in the end, the court still let him inherit the throne, and he also won the good reputation of being crowned the next in line to the throne and giving it to others.

古文：後坐骑至庙，不敬，有诏夺爵一级，为关内侯，失列侯，得食其故国邑。
现代文：后来因为骑着马径直闯进宗庙，被判为不敬之罪，皇帝下诏，降爵一级，成为关内侯，失去了列侯的爵位，但以前的封邑依然享有。
English: Later, because he rode a horse straight into the ancestral temple, he was convicted of the crime of disrespect, the emperor issued an edict, downgraded to the first level, became the Guanai Marquis, lost the title of Marquis, but still enjoyed the previous fief.

古文：韦丞相卒，有魏丞相代。
现代文：在韦丞相去世之后，由魏丞相接替他的职位。
English: After the death of Wei Cheng, he was succeeded by Wei Cheng.

古文：魏丞相相者，济阴人也。
现代文：魏丞相名字叫魏相，是阴济人。
English: Wei Chengxiang's name is Wei Xiang, and he is from Yinji.

古文：以文吏至丞相。其人好武，皆令诸吏带剑，带剑前奏事。
现代文：由文职小吏升到丞相之职，但是他这人喜好，他要求自己的部下都要佩带宝剑，并且规定只有佩带着宝剑才能上前奏事。
English: He was promoted from a minor civil servant to the position of chancellor, but he liked to be in the lead. He required his subordinates to wear swords, and stipulated that only those who wore swords could speak.

古文：或有不带剑者，当入奏事，至乃借剑而敢入奏事。
现代文：若是有没带宝剑的下属官吏，有事需要入内汇报，以至于要向他人借一把宝剑带上，才敢进府。
English: If there is a subordinate official who does not have a sword, there is something that needs to be reported inside, so that you have to borrow a sword from others before you dare to enter the government.

古文：其时京兆尹赵君，丞相奏以免罪，使人执魏丞相，欲求脱罪而不听。
现代文：当时的京兆尹是赵君广汉，魏丞相上奏皇帝，说赵广汉犯了应该撤职的罪过，赵广汉派人挟制魏丞相，想得到免罪的许诺，但是魏丞相坚决不答应。
English: At that time, the Beijing Zhaoyun was Zhao Junguanghan, and the Wei chancellor appealed to the emperor, saying that Zhao Guanghan had committed a crime that should be removed from office. Zhao Guanghan sent someone to blackmail Wei chancellor, and wanted to get the promise of exoneration, but Wei chancellor resolutely refused.

古文：复使人胁恐魏丞相，以夫人贼杀待婢事而私独奏请验之，发吏卒至丞相舍，捕奴婢笞击问之，实不以兵刃杀也。
现代文：这样，丞相的司直繁先生就上奏皇帝，说京兆尹赵广汉威胁丞相，诬告丞相夫人残杀婢女，派遣官吏士卒包围搜查丞相住宅，逮捕丞相家人，犯下了残害无辜的不道之罪。
English: In this way, the prime minister's Mr. Si Zhizhong appealed to the emperor, saying that Jing Zhaoyun Zhao Guanghan threatened the prime minister, falsely accused the prime minister's wife of killing her maid, sent officials to surround and search the prime minister's house, arrested the prime minister's family, and committed the crime of killing innocent people.

古文：而丞相司直繁君奏京兆尹赵君迫胁丞相，诬以夫人贼杀婢，发吏卒围捕丞相舍，不道；又得擅屏骑士事，赵京兆坐要斩。
现代文：同时又查出赵广汉擅自逐遣骑士的情事。
English: At the same time, it was discovered that Zhao Guanghan had expelled the knights without authorization.

古文：又有使掾陈平等劾中尚书，疑以独擅劫事而坐之，大不敬，长史以下皆坐死，或下蚕室。
现代文：因罪行重大，赵广汉被判处腰斩的死刑。其后又有掾使陈平等人揭发检举中尚书，涉嫌擅自劫持、威胁当事人，被判为不敬之罪，致使长史以下数名官员都被处死，还有一些人被处以宫刑，下蚕室。
English: For serious crimes, Zhao Guanghan was sentenced to death by beheading. Later, several officials, including Changshi, were sentenced to death for lèse-majesté after they were suspected of abducting and threatening a person without authorization, and some of them were sentenced to palace punishment.

古文：而魏丞相竟以丞相病死。子嗣。後坐骑至庙，不敬，有诏夺爵一级，为关内侯，失列侯，得食其故国邑。
现代文：而魏丞相最后在丞相的职位上因病去，他的儿子继承了爵位，后来也是因为骑马闯进宗庙，犯下了不敬之罪，皇帝下诏，降爵一级，成为关内侯，失去了列侯的爵位，但依然享有以前的故地封邑。
English: In the end, Emperor Wei's prime minister died of illness in his position as prime minister, and his son Cun inherited the title of nobility. Later, because he rode into the ancestral temple and committed the crime of disrespect, the emperor issued an edict, downgraded to the first level, became the Guanai marquis, lost the title of prince, but still enjoyed the former hometown fief.

古文：魏丞相卒，以御史大夫邴吉代。
现代文：魏丞相死去之后，御史大夫邴吉接替了他的职位。
English: After the death of Wei Zhengxian, the chief secretary of the Ministry of Civil Affairs, Guan Ji, took over his post.

古文：邴丞相吉者，鲁国人也。
现代文：邴丞相的名字叫邴吉，是鲁国人。
English: The name of the prime minister is Gongji, a native of Lu.

古文：以读书好法令至御史大夫。
现代文：因为喜欢读书和好法令而官至御史大夫。
English: He became a doctor of history because of his love of reading and the law.

古文：孝宣帝时，以有旧故，封为列侯，而因为丞相。
现代文：在孝宣帝时，因为和皇帝有故旧的情谊，被封为列侯，接着又做了丞相。
English: At the time of Emperor Xiaoxuan, because he had an old friendship with the emperor, he was made a vassal, and then he became the prime minister.

古文：明於事，有大智，後世称之。
现代文：他明事理，而且有超乎常人的聪明和智慧，被后世所称颂。
English: He was clear-headed and rational, and was praised by later generations for his extraordinary intelligence and wisdom.

古文：以丞相病死。子显嗣。
现代文：他在担任丞相期间因病去世，儿子邴显继承了爵位。
English: He died of illness while serving as chancellor, and his son, Zou Xian, inherited the title.

古文：後坐骑至庙，不敬，有诏夺爵一级，失列侯，得食故国邑。
现代文：后来邴显也是因为骑马闯进宗庙，犯下了不敬之罪，皇帝下诏，降爵一级，成为关内侯，失去列侯的爵位，但依然享有以前的故地封邑。
English: Later, Zou Xian also broke into the ancestral temple on horseback and committed the crime of disrespect. The emperor issued an edict to demote him to a first-class knight, and he became the lord of Guanai and lost the title of prince, but he still enjoyed the former hometown fief.

古文：显为吏至太仆，坐官毛乱，身及子男有奸赃，免为庶人。
现代文：邴显做官一直到太仆之职，因为为官昏乱不明，自己和儿子都有营私舞弊、贪赃不法的行为，被免官，降为平民。
English: Gong Xian worked as an official up to the position of eunuch. Because it was unclear whether he was an official, he and his son were involved in illegal acts of self-dealing and corruption, and were removed from office and reduced to civilians.

古文：邴丞相卒，黄丞相代。
现代文：邴吉丞相去世以后，由黄丞相接替他的职务。
English: After the death of Minister Gong Jicheng, he was succeeded by Minister Huang Jicheng.

古文：长安中有善相工田文者，与韦丞相、魏丞相、邴丞相微贱时会於客家，田文言曰： 今此三君者，皆丞相也。 
现代文：从前长安城中有个善于看面相的人，名字叫田文，他和当时都未做高官的韦丞相、魏丞相、邴丞相在一家作客时见了面，田文说道： 现在这里的三位先生，将来都能做丞相。 
English: Once upon a time, there was a man in the former Chang'an City who was good at reading faces. His name was Tian Wen. He and Wei, Wei, and Zou, who were not high-ranking officials at the time, met while staying at a guest house. Tian Wen said: The three gentlemen here now can all be prime ministers in the future.

古文：其後三人竟更相代为丞相，何见之明也。
现代文：后来，这三个人果然相继为丞相。这人怎会有如此先见之明啊！
English: Later, these three men did indeed succeed one another as prime ministers. How could this man have been so prescient?

古文：黄丞相霸者，淮阳人也。
现代文：黄丞相名字叫黄霸，是淮阴人。
English: The name of Minister Huang Zheng is Huang Ba. He is from Huaiyin.

古文：以读书为吏，至颍川太守。
现代文：因为喜欢读书做了官，官至颍川太守。
English: Because he liked to read, he became a government official, and eventually became the governor of Ayukawa Province.

古文：治颍川，以礼义条教喻告化之。
现代文：治理颍川时，用礼义条例和教令来教喻感化百姓。
English: When governing the Minchuan River, he used etiquette regulations and edicts to teach and influence the people.

古文：犯法者，风晓令自杀。
现代文：若是犯有重罪应当斩首的，晓之以理让他自杀。
English: If a felon should be beheaded, it is reasonable to let him commit suicide.

古文：化大行，名声闻。
现代文：教化大行于世，名声远近皆知。
English: Indoctrination is rampant in the world, and its reputation is known far and wide.

古文：孝宣帝下制曰： 颍川太守霸，以宣布诏令治民，道不拾遗，男女异路，狱中无重囚。
现代文：孝宣帝特意为此下了一道制书，称： 颍川太守黄霸，用宣传法令治理百姓，因而路上遗物无人拾取，男女各行其道，在监狱之中没有犯重罪的囚犯这种地步。
English: Xiao Xuandi deliberately wrote a book for this purpose, saying: "Because the Shichuan Taishou Huangba used propaganda decrees to govern the people, no one picked up the relics on the road, men and women went their separate ways, and there were no prisoners who committed serious crimes in the prison.

古文：赐爵关内侯，黄金百斤。 
现代文：特赐给关内侯的爵位，黄金一百斤。 
English: A special title of nobility was bestowed on the Marquis of Kwanai, and he received 100 kilos of gold.

古文：徵为京兆尹而至丞相，复以礼义为治。以丞相病死。
现代文：这样，他就被皇帝征调到京城任京兆尹，后来官至丞相。在担任丞相期间，还是以礼义治理国家，最后病死在丞相任上。
English: In this way, he was conscripted by the emperor to the capital to serve as Jing Zhaoyun, and later became the prime minister. During his tenure as prime minister, he governed the country with courtesy, and finally died of illness while serving as prime minister.

古文：子嗣，後为列侯。
现代文：死后，他的儿子继承了爵位，后来被封为列侯。
English: After his death, his son inherited the title and was later made a vassal lord.

古文：黄丞相卒，以御史大夫于定国代。
现代文：黄丞相去世之后，皇帝任命御史大夫于定国接替了他的职位。
English: After the death of Minister Huang Rong, the emperor appointed Dr. Yu Dingguo to succeed him.

古文：于丞相已有廷尉传，在张廷尉语中。
现代文：于定国丞相已经有廷尉传，在《张廷尉》一传的叙述之中。
English: Yu Ding Guozheng has already been described as a courtier, in the narrative of "Zhang Tingfu" (Zhang Tingfu).

古文：于丞相去，御史大夫韦玄成代。
现代文：于丞相去职以后，御史大夫韦玄成接替了他的职位。
English: After the chancellor left his post, Dr. Wei Xuancheng succeeded him.

古文：韦丞相玄成者，即前韦丞相子也。
现代文：韦玄成丞相，就是前边所说的那个韦贤丞相的儿子。
English: Wei Xuancheng is the son of the aforementioned Wei Xiancheng.

古文：代父，後失列侯。
现代文：他继承了父亲的封爵，后来因犯法失去了列侯的爵位。
English: He inherited his father's knighthood, but later lost his marquessate for breaking the law.

古文：其人少时好读书，明於诗、论语。
现代文：韦玄成从小就喜欢读书，对于《经》和《论语》都很精熟。
English: Wei Xuancheng has loved reading since he was a child, and he is very familiar with the "Ching" and "Analects."

古文：为吏至卫尉，徙为太子太傅。
现代文：做官到卫尉之职时，升任为太子太傅。
English: When he was promoted to the rank of Lieutenant of the Guards, he was promoted to Crown Prince Taifu.

古文：御史大夫薛君免，为御史大夫。
现代文：御史大夫薛先生被免职之后，韦玄成担任了御史大夫。
English: After Mr. Xue, the chief historian, was removed from his post, Wei Xuancheng became the chief historian.

古文：于丞相乞骸骨免，而为丞相，因封故邑为扶阳侯。
现代文：在于丞相请求告老还乡，皇帝答应他离职之后，韦玄成又成为丞相。皇帝以他旧日的封邑扶阳为名，封他为扶阳侯。
English: After Yu Xuancheng requested to return to his hometown and the emperor agreed to his resignation, Wei Xuancheng became the prime minister again. The emperor named his old fief Fuyang and made him the lord of Fuyang.

古文：数年，病死。孝元帝亲临丧，赐赏甚厚。
现代文：数年之后，因病去世，孝元帝亲自参加他的丧礼，给与的赏赐特别丰厚。
English: A few years later, he died of illness, and Emperor Xiaoyuan personally attended his funeral and gave him a particularly rich reward.

古文：子嗣後。其治容容随世俗浮沈，而见谓谄巧。
现代文：韦玄成治理国家和同不立异，能够随从世俗、上下浮沉，但是有人称他是阿谀奉承，投机取巧。
English: Wei Xuancheng governs the country and is not innovative, he can follow the world, rise and fall, but some people call him a flatterer and opportunist.

古文：而相工本谓之当为侯代父，而後失之；复自游宦而起，至丞相。
现代文：相面的人很早就说他应当代替其父，继承侯位，但是他得到侯位之后又失去了。接着，他又再次游宦，东山再起，官至丞相。
English: The person he met said very early on that he should take his father's place and inherit the post, but after he got the post, he lost it again. Then, he traveled around the world again, made a comeback, and became prime minister.

古文：父子俱为丞相，世间美之，岂不命哉！
现代文：同时，他们父子两个人都做丞相。他们父子都为丞相，当时人们都传为美谈，这难道不是命运的安排吗？
English: At the same time, both of them, father and son, became prime ministers. Both of them, father and son, were prime ministers. At that time, people said it was a fairy tale. Wasn't it fate's arrangement?

古文：相工其先知之。
现代文：相面的人事先就知道会有这样的事情。
English: The people on the other side knew in advance that something like this would happen.

古文：韦丞相卒，御史大夫匡衡代。
现代文：韦丞相去世之后，御史大夫匡衡接替了他的职位。
English: After the death of Wei Chengxian, Goshi doctor Kuang Heng took over his position.

古文：丞相匡衡者，东海人也。
现代文：丞相匡衡是东海人。
English: The chancellor, Kuangheng, was from the East China Sea.

古文：好读书，从博士受诗。
现代文：他爱好读书，曾经跟随博士学习《诗经》。
English: He likes to read, and once studied the "Book of Songs" with a doctor.

古文：家贫，衡佣作以给食饮。
现代文：因家境贫寒，需要靠给人做工来糊口。
English: Due to his poor family background, he needed to earn a living by working for others.

古文：才下，数射策不中，至九，乃中丙科。
现代文：他才能低下，多次参加朝廷选拔人才的考试，但是都没考中，等考到第九次时才凑合着考中了丙科。
English: His talent was low, and he repeatedly took part in the examination for the selection of talents by the imperial court, but he did not pass the examination. He only managed to pass the examination when he took the examination for the ninth time.

古文：其经以不中科故明习。
现代文：对于经书，由于他多次应考不中的缘故，所以非常谙熟。
English: As for the scriptures, he is very proficient because he has failed the examination many times.

古文：补平原文学卒史。
现代文：后来，他做了候补平原郡文学卒史。
English: Later, he did a post-graduate history of Plains County literature.

古文：数年，郡不尊敬。
现代文：又过了好几年，郡里的人都对他不尊敬。
English: Years passed, and the people of the county had no respect for him.

古文：御史徵之，以补百石属荐为郎，而补博士，拜为太子少傅，而事孝元帝。
现代文：这时，御史征调他进京，以候补百石官属的身份被荐举做郎官，补做博士，拜为太子少傅，侍奉孝元帝。
English: At this time, he was transferred to Beijing by the Imperial Historian, and was recommended to be a vassal as an alternate official of 100 koku, to be a doctor as a supplement, to be a prince's apprentice, and to serve Emperor Xiaoyuan.

古文：孝元好诗，而迁为光禄勋，居殿中为师，授教左右，而县官坐其旁听，甚善之，日以尊贵。
现代文：孝元帝喜欢《诗经》，就升任匡衡为光禄勋，让他在宫中担任老师，教授皇帝的侍臣，而皇帝也坐在他的身边听讲，非常赞赏他，因此，他的地位也就一天比一天高贵起来。
English: Emperor Xiaoyuan liked the "Book of Songs" and promoted Kuangheng to the rank of Guanglu Hon. He made him a teacher in the palace to teach the emperor's attendants. The emperor also sat by his side to listen to the lecture and highly appreciated him. As a result, his status became more and more noble day by day.

古文：御史大夫郑弘坐事免，而匡君为御史大夫。
现代文：御史大夫郑弘因为犯法被免官，匡衡先生就继任为御史大夫。
English: Mr. Zheng Hong, the chief historian, was removed from office for violating the law, and Mr. Kuang Heng succeeded him as chief historian.

古文：岁馀，韦丞相死，匡君代为丞相，封乐安侯。
现代文：一年多之后，韦玄成丞相逝世，匡先生又继任为丞相，被封为乐安侯。
English: More than a year later, Wei Xuancheng passed away, and Mr. Kuang succeeded him as chancellor and was given the title of Le An Hou.

古文：以十年之间，不出长安城门而至丞相，岂非遇时而命也哉！
现代文：在十年之间，他不出长安城门而官至丞相，这难道不是遇到好机会和命中注定吗？
English: In ten years, he did not leave the city gate of Chang'an and became the prime minister. Isn't this a good opportunity and fate?

古文：太史公曰：深惟士之游宦所以至封侯者，微甚。
现代文：太史公说：我曾经反复地思索，读书人四海游宦，以求取高官厚禄，但是能够得到封侯的人实在太少了！
English: Taishigong said, "I have thought over and over again that readers travel far and wide in search of high-ranking officials and rich rewards, but there are too few people who can get a title of nobility!

古文：然多至御史大夫即去者。
现代文：大多数人做到了御史大夫这个职位也就下台了事。
English: Most people who have achieved the position of chief historian have also stepped down.

古文：诸为大夫而丞相次也，其心冀幸丞相物故也。
现代文：这些人已经做了御史大夫，离丞相的位置就还有一步之遥了，他们心里希望丞相立刻死去，自己好取而代之。
English: These people have already been appointed to the post of Imperial Historian, and are only one step away from the position of Prime Minister. In their hearts, they hope that the Prime Minister will die immediately so that they can take his place.

古文：或乃阴私相毁害，欲代之。
现代文：还有些人大搞阴谋诡计，暗中诋毁中伤，想以此来登上相位。
English: There are also some people who are scheming and plotting, secretly slandering and slandering, and want to use this to get on the stage.

古文：然守之日久不得，或为之日少而得之，至於封侯，真命也夫！
现代文：但有的人等了好久，却得不到它；而有的人没等多久就登上相位，被封为列侯：这也许真是命运的安排吧！
English: But some people wait a long time and don't get it, while others don't have to wait long to get on the throne and be made a vassal: perhaps it really is fate!

古文：御史大夫郑君守之数年不得，匡君居之未满岁，而韦丞相死，即代之矣，岂可以智巧得哉！
现代文：御史大夫郑先生等了许多年没有登上相位，而匡先生却担任御史大夫未满一年，韦丞相就去世了，立刻他就取而代之，难道这个位置是可以用智巧得到的吗？
English: Mr. Zheng, the chief historian, waited for many years without ascending to the top position, while Mr. Kuang served as chief historian for less than a year. Wei, the prime minister, died, and he immediately replaced him. Can this position be obtained with cleverness?

古文：多有贤圣之才，困戹不得者众甚也。
现代文：而那些有圣贤一般才能的人，穷困潦倒多年而不受用，这实在是太多了！
English: And those who have the talents of saints and sages have been impoverished for many years and are not used, which is really too much!

