古文：关播，字务元，卫州汲人也。
现代文：关播的字叫务元，是卫州汲县人。
English: The broadcaster's character is called "Wu Yuan" and is from Kuching County, Weizhou Province.

古文：天宝末，举进士。
现代文：天宝末年，考中了进士。
English: At the end of the Tenpo era, he passed the entrance examination.

古文：邓景山为淮南节度使，辟为从事，累授卫佐评事，迁右补阙。
现代文：邓景山任淮南节度使时，任命他为从事，多次升官后任卫佐评事，又升任右补阙。
English: When Deng Jingshan was appointed as the envoy of Huainan Festival, he was appointed to be engaged in, after several promotions, he was appointed as the commentator of the guards, and then he was promoted to the right supplement.

古文：善言物理，尤精释氏之学。
现代文：他善于分析事物的原理，尤其精通佛教学说。
English: He is good at analyzing the principles of things, especially proficient in Buddhist teachings.

古文：大历中，神策军使王驾鹤妻关氏以播与同宗，深遇之。
现代文：大历年间，神策军使王驾鹤的妻子关氏因关播和她同姓，对他很好。
English: During the Tai Lian years, the Shen Zhe Army made Wang Kui He's wife, Guan Shi, be nice to him because she had the same surname as Guan Bao.

古文：元载恶其交往，出为河南府兵曹，摄职数县，皆有政能。
现代文：元载厌恶他们互相往来，把他调出京城任河南府兵曹，代理过几个县的政务，都有政绩。
English: He detested their dealings with each other. He was transferred out of Beijing to serve as a Henan prefectural petty officer, and was in charge of government affairs in several counties, all of which brought him political achievements.

古文：陈少游领浙东、淮南，又辟为判官，历检校金部员外，摄滁州刺史。李灵曜阻兵，跋扈于梁汴。
现代文：陈少游主管浙东淮南道，又任命他为判官，后又当过检校金部员外，代理滁州刺史，李灵曜反叛，在汴州一带横行。
English: Chen Shaoyou, the head of the South Huainan Road of East Zhejiang Province, also appointed him as a judge, and later he was a member of the school inspection department, acting as an agent of the Bozhou stabbing history, Li Linyou rebellion, rampant in the Bozhou area.

古文：少游自总兵镇淮上，所在盗贼峰起。播调阅州兵，令其守备。
现代文：陈少游亲自率军镇守淮河，各地出现了盗匪，关播调集检阅了各州的留守军队，命他们保卫地方。
English: Chen Shaoyou personally led the troops to guard the Huaihe River, and bandits appeared in various regions. Guan Bao called up and inspected the remaining troops in each state and ordered them to defend the localities.

古文：又为政清净简惠，既无盗贼，人甚安之。
现代文：他执政简朴实惠，又没有盗匪，人们都安心了。
English: His administration was simple and practical, there were no bandits, and people were at ease.

古文：杨绾、常衮知政事，荐播为都官员外郎。
现代文：杨绾、常衮当宰相掌权，推荐他任都官员外郎。
English: When Yang Pi and Chang Pi took power as prime ministers, they recommended that he be appointed as the official of the capital.

古文：德宗登极，湖南山洞中有王国良者，聚众为盗，令播往宣抚之。
现代文：唐德宗即位，湖南地区山区洞穴中有个叫王国良的，纠集人马为匪，皇帝命关播去招降他们。
English: When Emperor Dezong of Tang Dynasty ascended to the throne, there was a man named Wang Guoliang in a cave in the mountainous area of Hunan Province. He gathered people and horses as bandits, and it was the emperor's mission to recruit them.

古文：临行，召对于别殿，上问政理之要，播奏云： 为政之本，须求有道贤人，乃可得理。 
现代文：临行前，皇帝在别殿里召见他，问他治国的关键。他回答说： 治国的关键，应是访求得道的良才，这样才能治理好。 
English: Before his departure, the emperor summoned him to his villa and asked him about the key to governing the country. He replied, "The key to governing the country is to seek and find talented people, so that we can govern well."

古文：上谓播云： 朕下诏求贤良，当躬新阅试，亦遣使臣黜陟，广加搜访闻荐，擢其能者用之，冀以傅理。 
现代文：皇上对关播说： 我曾颁布诏令求贤才，将亲自考核，也命黜陟使，广泛访求推荐，提拔任命其中有才能的人，以期能辅助治理。 
English: The emperor said to Guan Bao: I have issued a decree to solicit talents, and I will personally examine them and also order them to make extensive visits to solicit recommendations, promote and appoint those who are talented, with a view to assisting governance.

古文：播奏曰： 下诏求贤黜陟举荐，唯得求名词之士，安有有道贤人肯随牒举选乎？ 
现代文：关播又说道： 下诏令求贤才，黜陟使推荐，只能得到有名的会写文章的人，哪有得道贤才愿按规定参加考试呢？ 
English: Mr. Guan also said, "The lower edict calls for talents, and the higher edict calls for recommendation. Only famous people who can write articles can be recommended, and there are no talents who are willing to take the exam according to the regulations."

古文：上悦其言，谓播曰： 卿且使去，回日当与卿论政事。 
现代文：皇帝赏识他的话，对他说： 你先去出使，回来后再和你谈论治国的事。 
English: The emperor appreciated his words and said to him, "You should go on a mission first, and when you come back, we will talk to you about governing the country."

古文：播又奏曰： 臣今奏诏招抚，国良不受命，臣请便宣恩命，语邻境速出兵翦除。 
现代文：关播又报告说： 我现奉命去招降，王国良如不服从命令，我请求相机行事，叫附近官府迅速出兵消灭他。 
English: The censor also reported: I have now been ordered to invite surrender. If Wang Guoliang does not obey the order, I will ask the camera to act and tell the nearby government to quickly dispatch troops to eliminate him.

古文：上曰： 卿言深合朕意。 
现代文：皇帝说： 你的话正合我的心意。 
English: The emperor said, "Your words are in line with my heart.

古文：使回，改兵部员外，迁河中少尹。
现代文：他出使回来后，被调任兵部员外，又升任河中府少尹。
English: After he returned from his mission, he was transferred to be a non-commissioned officer in the military, and was promoted to the position of Shao Yin of the Central Prefecture of Hebei Province.

古文：建中初，张镒为河中少尹。
现代文：建中初年，张镒任河中府少尹。
English: In the first year of middle school, Zhang Xuan was appointed as a minor official of the Central Government of Hebei Province.

古文：镒寻入相，二年七月，迁播给事中。
现代文：张镒不久到京城任宰相，建中二年七月，提升关播任给事中。
English: Zhang Ye soon arrived in Beijing to take up the post of prime minister, and in July of the second year of the middle school, he was promoted to the post of supervisor.

古文：旧例，诸司甲库，皆是胥吏掌知，为弊颇久，播始建议并以士人知之，至今称当。
现代文：按过去惯例，各部门文书档案库都由小官吏掌管，长期存在弊端，关播首先提议任用科举出身的官员共同管理，到现在被认为恰当。
English: According to the past practice, the document archives of all departments were managed by minor officials, which was a long-term drawback. Guan Bao first proposed to appoint officials from the imperial examination to jointly manage the archives, which is now considered appropriate.

古文：转刑部侍郎、奉迎皇太后副使。
现代文：后被调任刑部侍郎、奉迎皇太后副使。
English: Later, he was transferred to the position of an attendant of the Criminal Investigation Department and a deputy envoy of the Empress Dowager.

古文：卢杞以播柔缓，冀其易制，骤称荐之。
现代文：卢杞因为关播温和耐心，认为他容易被控制，极力称赞推荐他。
English: Lu Yao praised and recommended Guan Bao because he was gentle and patient, and thought he was easy to control.

古文：寻迁吏部侍郎，转刑部尚书、知删定。
现代文：不久他升任吏部侍郎，后又任刑部尚书、知删定。
English: Soon after, he was promoted to the position of an attendant of the Criminal Investigation Department, and later he was assigned to the Criminal Investigation Department of the Ministry of Justice.

古文：奏上元中，诏择古今名将十人于武成王庙配享，如文宣王庙之仪。
现代文：他上奏说上元年间，皇帝曾下诏挑选古今十位名将送进姜太公庙中接受祭祀，像孔夫子庙中一样。
English: He said that in the first year of the 21st century, the emperor had issued an edict to select ten famous generals from the past and present to be sent to Jiang Taigong Temple to receive sacrifices, just like in the Temple of Confucius.

古文：播以 太公古称大贤，今其下称亚圣，于义不安。
现代文：他认为： 姜太公古代只被认为是大贤人，现却称在他之下的为亚圣，这不合道理。
English: He thought: Jiang Taigong was only considered a great sage in ancient times, but now he is called a sub-saint under him, which is unreasonable.

古文：又孔子十哲，皆是当时弟子，今所择名将，年代不同，于义既乖，于事又失。
现代文：再说孔门的十位哲人，都是他当时的弟子，现选择的名将，朝代不同，既不合礼仪，事例又不相合。
English: Furthermore, the ten philosophers of Confucius, all of whom were his disciples at the time, are now the chosen leaders, different dynasties, which is not in line with etiquette, and the examples do not match.

古文：臣请删去名将配享之仪及十哲之称。 
现代文：我请求除去选名将入庙接受祭祀的礼仪和他们十人的哲人称号。 
English: I request the removal of the ritual of selecting names to enter the temple for sacrifice and the title of philosopher for the ten of them.

古文：从之。
现代文：皇帝下诏同意了。
English: I followed his advice.

古文：建中三年十月，拜银青光禄大夫、中书侍郎、同中书门下平章事、集贤殿崇文馆大学士、修国史。
现代文：建中三年十月，他被任命为银青光禄大夫、中书侍郎、同中书门下平章事、集贤殿崇文馆大学士，修国史。
English: In October of the third year of middle school, he was appointed as the doctor of silver Qing Guanglu, the waiter of middle school, the secretary of the lower level of middle school, and the scholar of the Jixian Hall of the Chongwen Museum, and studied national history.

古文：时政事决在卢杞，播但敛衽取容而已。
现代文：当时政务由卢杞决定，关播只是顺从讨他的欢心。
English: At that time, the government affairs were decided by Lu Wei, and the broadcasters only obeyed to please him.

古文：乏于知人之鉴，好大言虚诞者，播必悦而亲信之。
现代文：关播缺乏知人之明，喜欢说大话瞎吹的人，他必定欣赏并亲近信任。
English: He will certainly appreciate and trust someone who is not familiar with broadcasting and who likes to talk big.

古文：有李元平、陶公达、张愻、刘承诫，皆言谈诡妄，讠夸大可立功名，亦有微材薄艺。
现代文：李元平、陶公达、张訹、刘承诫，都喜欢说大话，吹嘘可以立大功，实际也有点才能。
English: Li Yuanping, Tao Gongda, Zhang Xuan, Liu Chengcheng, all like to talk big, boasting can make great achievements, and actually have some talent.

古文：播累奏云元平等皆可将相也，请阅试用之，上以为然，以元平为补阙。
现代文：关播多次上奏说李元平等人都可任将相，请求考查任用他们，皇帝认为他说得对，任命李元平为补阙。
English: Guan Bo repeatedly said that people like Li Yuanping could be appointed as generals, and asked for an examination to appoint them. The emperor thought that he was right and appointed Li Yuanping as the second in command.

古文：会淮西节度李希烈叛乱，上以汝州要镇，令选择刺史。
现代文：遇上淮西节度李希烈反叛，皇帝认为汝州是重要城镇，命选派刺史。
English: When Huaxi Jiedu and Li Xilai rebelled, the emperor thought that Ruzhou was an important town, and the fate-chosen faction attacked history.

古文：播荐元平为汝州刺史，寻加检校吏部郎中、汝州别驾，知州事。
现代文：关播推荐李元平任汝州刺史，不久提升李元平任检校吏部郎中、汝州别驾，知州事。
English: Guan Bao recommended Li Yuanping to be appointed as the governor of Ruzhou, and soon promoted Li Yuanping to be the vice-governor of the school inspection department.

古文：元平至州旬日，为希烈所擒，汝州陷贼，中外哂之。
现代文：李元平到汝州只十天，被李希烈俘虏，汝州被叛军占领，朝廷内外都嘲笑关播。
English: Li Yuanping came to Ruzhou for only ten days, was captured by Li Xilai, Ruzhou was occupied by rebel forces, and was ridiculed both inside and outside the imperial court.

古文：由是公达等未克任用。
现代文：因此陶公达等人没能被重用。
English: Therefore, Tao Gongda and others could not be reused.

古文：播与卢杞等从驾幸奉天，既而杞、白志贞等并贬黜，播尚知政事，中外嚣然，以为不可，遂罢相，改刑部尚书。
现代文：关播和卢杞等随皇帝逃到奉天，后来卢杞、白志贞等人都被贬官，关播还掌管朝政，朝廷内外议论纷纷，认为不应该，于是被罢相，改任刑部尚书。
English: Guan Bao and Lu Yao and others fled to Mukden with the emperor. Later, Lu Yao, Bai Zhizhen and others were demoted. Guan Bao was also in charge of the imperial government. There was a lot of discussion inside and outside the imperial court as to whether this was appropriate. Therefore, he was dismissed from the position of minister and was reassigned to the Department of Criminal Law.

古文：大臣韦伦等泣于朝曰： 宰相不能谋猷翊赞，以至今日，而尚为尚书，可痛心也！ 
现代文：重臣韦伦等人在朝中哭着说： 当宰相不能谋划辅佐皇上，到了今天这地步，还官任尚书，我们觉得痛心！ 
English: Chief Minister Waylon and others cried in the court and said: When the prime minister cannot plan to assist the emperor, to this day, he is still a bureaucrat, we feel sad!

古文：贞元四年，回纥请和亲，以咸安公主出降可汗，令播以本官加检校右仆射、兼御史大夫，持节充送咸安公主及册可汗使，奉使往来，皆清俭谨慎，蕃人悦之。
现代文：贞元四年，回纥请求和亲，皇帝将咸安公主下嫁回纥可汗，在关播原官职外加封检校右仆射、兼御史大夫，命持符节任送咸安公主和册封回纥可汗的使臣，他担任使臣去来，都清廉俭朴小心谨慎，异族人敬重他。
English: In the fourth year of the Zhengyuan era, at the request of Emperor Huizong and his relatives, Emperor Huizong married Princess Xian'an to Emperor Huikang. In addition to Guan Bo's original official position, Emperor Huizong also appointed him as the right-hand man of the inspection of schools, and also as the imperial historian. He sent Princess Xian'an and the envoys of Emperor Huizong to Emperor Huikang. He came as an envoy. They were all clean, frugal, simple and careful. Foreigners respected him.

古文：使回，迁兵部尚书，固辞疾，请罢官，改太子少师致仕。
现代文：他出使归来，被提升任兵部尚书，但他称病坚决推辞，请求免官，后改任太子少师退休。
English: When he returned from his mission, he was promoted to the post of military secretary, but he said that he was ill and firmly refused to resign, requesting to be relieved of his duties. Later, he was transferred to the post of prince junior division and retired.

古文：播致仕之后，减去僮仆车骑，闭关守静，不萦外事，士君子重之。
现代文：关播退休后，裁减仆人车马，闭门静养，不干预外边的事务，当时士人都称赞他。
English: After he retired from broadcasting, he reduced the number of servants and horses, retired behind closed doors, and did not interfere in external affairs. At that time, the scholars all praised him.

古文：贞元十三年正月卒，时年七十九，废朝一日，赠太子太保。
现代文：贞元十三年正月，他去世了，当时七十九岁，皇帝停止上朝一天致哀，赠官为太子太保。
English: In the first month of the 13th year of the Zhengyuan era, he passed away. At that time, he was 79 years old. The emperor paused his reign for a day to mourn, and bestowed the title of crown prince and grand tutor.

