古文：◎成祖一
现代文：成祖一
English: Cheng Zu I

古文：成祖启天弘道高明肇运圣武神功纯仁至孝文皇帝讳棣，太祖第四子也。
现代文：成祖启天弘道高明肇运圣武神功纯仁至孝文皇帝，名朱棣，太祖第四子。
English: The fourth son of Emperor Zhu Xi, the fourth son of Emperor Zhu Xi, the fourth son of Emperor Zhu Xi, the fourth son of Emperor Zhu Xi, the fourth son of Emperor Zhu Xi, the fourth son of Emperor Zhu Xi, the fourth son of Emperor Zhu Xi.

古文：母孝慈高皇后。
现代文：其母孝慈高皇后。
English: His mother was the Empress Takachidaka.

古文：洪武三年，封燕王。
现代文：洪武三年，封为燕王。
English: In the third year of Hongwu's reign, he was crowned the King of Swallows.

古文：十三年，之藩北平。
现代文：洪武十三年，就藩北平镇守。
English: In the thirteenth year of Hongwu, he became the keeper of Beiping Town.

古文：王貌奇伟，美髭髯。
现代文：朱棣相貌奇伟，髭髯美丽。
English: Zhu Xi's appearance is marvelous, and his beard is beautiful.

古文：智勇有大略，能推诚任人。
现代文：有雄才大略，能知人善任。
English: He is a man of great talent and knows how to delegate.

古文：二十三年，同晋王讨乃儿不花。
现代文：二十三年，同晋王讨伐乃儿不花。
English: Twenty-three years later, it is not difficult to fight with Jin Wang.

古文：晋王怯不敢进，王倍道趋迤都山，获其全部而还，太祖大喜，是后屡帅诸将出征，并令王节制沿边士马，王威名大振。
现代文：晋王因害怕他们而不敢进攻，朱棣火速进至迤都山，大获全胜而回，明太祖十分高兴。此后，朱棣经常率军出征，并受令节制诸王及沿边兵马，使他威名大振。
English: The King of Jin was afraid of them and did not dare to attack. Zhu Xi made a rapid advance to Shudu Mountain, won a complete victory and returned. Ming Taizu was very happy. After that, Zhu Xi often led the army to go to war, and was ordered to restrain the kings and soldiers along the border, making him famous.

古文：三十一年闰五月，太祖崩，皇太孙即位，遗诏诸王临国中，毋得至京师。王自北平入奔丧，闻诏乃止。
现代文：三十一年闰五月，明太祖死，皇太孙即位，遗诏各藩王都留在各封国中，不要来京师，燕王朱棣从北平赶往南京奔丧，听到诏书后就不再前进了。
English: In the leap month of May in the 31st year, Emperor Ming's great-grandfather died and his great-great-grandson ascended to the throne. He issued an edict that the lords of the domains should stay in their fiefdoms and not come to Beijing. Emperor Yan's father, Zhu Xi, rushed from Peking to Nanjing to pay his respects. After hearing the edict, he did not advance any further.

古文：时谙王以尊属拥重兵，多不法。
现代文：当时，诸王多因是皇亲国戚而拥有重兵，大多数都目无王法。
English: At that time, most of the kings had heavy troops because they were relatives of the emperor, and most of them were lawless.

古文：帝纳齐泰、黄子澄谋，欲因事以次削除之。
现代文：建文帝采纳齐泰、黄子澄的建议，想因此由大量削藩。
English: Emperor Jianwen adopted the suggestions of Qitai and Huang Zicheng, and therefore wanted to reduce the number of domains.

古文：惮燕王强，未发，乃先废周王橚，欲以牵引燕。
现代文：因害怕燕王强大，没敢动手，于是先废除周王朱木肃，想以此牵制燕王。
English: For fear of the powerful Yan Wang, he did not dare to do anything, so he first abolished Zhou Wang Zhu Muxu, hoping to restrain Yan Wang.

古文：于是告讦四起，湘、代、齐、岷皆以罪废。
现代文：于是，告讦四起，湘王、代王、齐王、岷王都先后因罪废除。
English: As a result, four cases were reported, and Hunan Wang, Dai Wang, Qi Wang, and Zou Wang were all abolished for their crimes.

古文：王内自危，佯狂称疾。
现代文：燕王内部也感到危险，便假装得病。
English: Yan Wang also felt danger inside and pretended to be ill.

古文：泰、子澄密劝帝除王，帝未决。
现代文：齐泰、黄子澄密劝建文帝趁此除掉燕王，建文帝没有下决心。
English: Qitai and Huang Zicheng advised Emperor Jianwen to use this opportunity to get rid of Yan Wang, but Emperor Jianwen did not make up his mind.

古文：建文元年夏六月，燕山百户倪谅告变，逮官校于谅、周铎等伏诛。
现代文：建文元年夏六月，燕山百户倪谅告发燕王谋反，逮捕官校於谅、周铎等人并斩杀。
English: In the summer of the first year of the Jianwen era, in June, the hundred households of Yanshan Ni谅 denounced the rebellion of Yan Wang, arrested the official school Yu谅, Zhou Qi and others and killed them.

古文：下诏让王，并遣中官逮王府傣，王遂称疾笃。
现代文：建文帝下诏斥责燕王，并派官员逮捕燕王府属僚，燕王遂称病重。
English: Emperor Jianwen issued an imperial edict to reprimand Yan Wang, and sent officials to arrest Yan Wang's cabinet colleagues. Yan Wang then announced that he was seriously ill.

古文：都指挥使谢贵、布政使张昺以兵守王宫。
现代文：当时，都指挥使谢贵、布政使张籨以重兵把守着燕王府。
English: At that time, Du Du's commanding envoy Xie Gui and Bu's political envoy Zhang Jun guarded Yan Wangfu with heavy troops.

古文：王密与僧道衍谋，令指挥张玉、朱能潜纳勇士八百人入府守卫。
现代文：燕王秘密与僧道衍谋划，命令张玉、朱能等八百勇士潜入府内守备。
English: Yan Wang secretly plotted with the monk Do Yan and ordered Zhang Yu, Zhu Neng and other eight hundred warriors to sneak into the capital to defend it.

古文：秋七月癸酉，匿壮士端礼门，绐贵，昺入，杀之，遂夺九门。
现代文：七月五日，在端礼门隐藏的将士诱杀谢贵、张籨，夺得九门。
English: On July 5th, the hidden soldiers at the Dunlian Gate lured Xie Gui and Zhang Ye and captured the Nine Gates.

古文：上书天子指泰、子澄为奸臣，并援《祖训》 朝无正臣，内有奸恶，则亲王训兵待命，天子密诏诸王统领镇兵讨平之 。书既发，遂举兵。自署官属，称其师曰 靖难 。拔居庸关，破怀来，执宋忠，取密云，克遵化，降永平。二旬众至数万。
现代文：半月内拥兵数万人。
English: Within half a month, tens of thousands of supporters had gathered.

古文：八月，天子以耿炳文为大将军，帅师致讨。
现代文：八月，建文帝以耿炳文为大将军，率军征讨朱棣。
English: In August, Emperor Jianwen made Geng Bingwen a general and led the army to recruit Zhu Xi.

古文：己酉，师至真定，前锋抵雄县。
现代文：十二日，到真定，前锋抵达雄县。
English: On the 12th, the striker arrived in Xiong County after arriving in Zhending.

古文：壬子，王夜渡白沟河，围雄，拔其城，屠之。
现代文：十五日，燕王星夜渡过白沟河，围攻雄县，攻克后杀戮一空。
English: On the fifteenth day of the month, Yanpu crossed the Baigou River at night, besieged Xiong County, conquered it, and killed everyone.

古文：甲寅，都指挥潘忠、杨松自鄚州来援，伏兵擒之，遂据鄚州，还驻白沟。
现代文：十七日，都指挥使潘忠、杨松从莫阝州赶来增援，被燕王伏兵擒获，占据莫阝州，后又还住白沟。
English: On the 17th, Du Du commanded Pan Zhong and Yang Song to come from Mogi Province to reinforce. They were ambushed and captured by Yan Wang, occupied Mogi Province, and later resided in Baigou.

古文：大将军部校张保来降，言大将军军三十万，先至者十三万，半营滹沱河南，半营河北。
现代文：大将军部校张保投降，说大将军有兵三十万，先到十三万，一半在滹沱河以南，一半在滹沱河以北。
English: Zhang Bao, the commander of the general staff, surrendered, saying that the general had 300,000 soldiers, first to 130,000, half south of the Wei River, and half north of the Wei River.

古文：王惧与北军战，南军且乘之也，乃纵保归，俾扬言王帅兵且至，诱其军尽北渡河。
现代文：燕王害怕与河北岸军队作战时南面军队趁虚而入，便放张保逃归，让他扬言燕王即将率兵而至，以引诱朝军向北渡滹沱河。
English: Yan Wang was afraid that when fighting with the army on the north bank of the Hebei River, the southern army would take advantage of the situation and enter, so he let Zhang Bao escape and let him threaten that Yan Wang would lead the army to lure the North Korean army to cross the Minhe River to the north.

古文：壬戌，王至真定，与张玉、谭渊等夹击炳文军，大破之，获其副将李坚、甯忠及都督顾成等，斩首三万级。
现代文：二十五日，燕王到真定，与张玉、谭渊等夹击耿炳文，大败耿军。并擒获其副将李坚、宁忠及都督顾成等，斩杀三万余人。
English: On the 25th, Yan Wang arrived in Zhending, clashed with Zhang Yu, Tan Yuan and others against Geng Xianwen, and defeated Geng's army. He also captured his vice generals Li Jian, Ning Zhong and the governor Gu Cheng, and killed more than 30,000 people.

古文：进围真定，二日不下，乃引去。
现代文：进而围攻真定，二日不克，便退去。
English: Then they laid siege to Zhending, but after two days they withdrew.

古文：天子闻炳文败，遣曹国公李景隆代领其军。
现代文：建文帝听说耿炳文大败，又派曹国公李景隆代领其军。
English: Emperor Jianwen heard that Geng Shouwen was defeated and sent the Duke of Cao, Li Jinglong, to lead his army.

古文：九月戊辰，江阴侯吴高以辽东兵围永平。
现代文：九月一日，江阴侯吴高以辽东兵围永平。
English: On September 1, Wu Gao, a vassal of Jiangyin, encircled Yongping in Liaodong.

古文：戊寅，景隆合兵五十万，进营河间。
现代文：十一日，李景隆合兵五十万进驻河间。
English: On the 11th day of the month, Li Jinglong and half a million soldiers marched into Hema.

古文：王语诸将曰： 景隆色厉而中馁，闻我在必不敢遽来，不若往援永平以致其师。
现代文：燕王对其将帅说： 李景隆声色严厉，军中混乱，听说我在一定不敢立即进攻，我们不如先增援永平以牵制其军。
English: Yan Wang said to his commander: Li Jinglong's voice is harsh, the army is in chaos, I heard that I must not dare to attack immediately, we should first reinforce Yongping to contain his army.

古文：吴高怯不任战，我至必走，然后还击景隆。
现代文：吴高胆小不懂战事，我一到他必定退走，然后回来进攻李景隆。
English: Wu Gaoqian didn't understand warfare. As soon as I arrived, he would retreat and then come back to attack Li Jinglong.

古文：坚城在前，大军在后，必成擒矣。 
现代文：有坚城在前，大军在后，一定打败他。 
English: With a strong city in front and a large army behind, he is sure to be defeated.

古文：丙戌，燕师援永平。
现代文：九日，燕王率兵援永平。
English: On the 9th, Yan Wang led the troops to support Yongping.

古文：壬辰，吴高闻王至，果走，追击败之。
现代文：十五日，吴高听说燕王已到，果然闻风而逃，燕王趁势追击，大败吴高。
English: On the fifteenth day, Wu Gao heard that Yan Wang had arrived, and indeed he heard the wind and fled. Yan Wang took advantage of the situation to pursue and defeated Wu Gao.

古文：遂北趋大宁。
现代文：于是率军向大宁挺进。
English: As a result, he led the army to advance to Daming.

古文：冬十月壬寅，以计入其城。居七日，挟宁王权，拔大宁之众及朵颜三卫卒俱南。
现代文：冬十月六日，用计谋进入大宁城，住了七天，挟大宁王朱权，得大宁之地及朵颜三卫全部投降。
English: On the 6th day of October in winter, he entered the city of Daning by stratagem and stayed there for seven days. He held Zhu Quan, the king of Daning, hostage, and won the surrender of the land of Daning and Doyan Sanwei.

古文：乙卯，至会州。
现代文：九日，至会州。
English: On the 9th, I arrived in Hoishu.

古文：始立五军，张玉将中军，郑亨、何寿副之，朱能将左军，朱荣、李浚副之，李彬将右军，徐理、孟善副之；徐忠将前军，陈文、吴达副之；房宽将后军，和允中、毛整副之。
现代文：设立五军：张玉领中军，郑亨、何寿任副将；朱能领左军，朱荣、李任副将；李彬率右军，徐理、孟善任副将；徐忠率前军，陈文、吴达任副将；房宽率后军，和允中、毛整任副将。
English: Five armies were established: Zhang Yu led the Central Army, with Zheng Heng and He Shou as vice-generals; Zhu Neng led the Left Army, with Zhu Rong and Li as vice-generals; Li Bin led the Right Army, with Xu Li and Meng Shan as vice-generals; Xu Zhong led the Front Army, with Chen Wen and Wu Da as vice-generals; Fang Guang led the Rear Army, with He Yunzhong and Mao Zhe as vice-generals.

古文：丁巳，入松亭关。
现代文：十一日，军队进入松亭关。
English: On the 11th, the army entered Songting Pass.

古文：景隆闻王征大宁，果引军围北平，筑垒九门，世子坚守不战。
现代文：李景隆听说燕王出征大宁，果然出兵围攻北平，他在九门外筑垒，燕王世子，坚守不战。
English: Li Jinglong heard that Yan Wang had set out for Danying, and he actually sent troops to besiege Beiping. He built a fort outside the Nine Gates. As the descendant of Yan Wang, he insisted on not fighting.

古文：十一月庚午，王次孤山。逻骑还报曰白河流澌不可渡。
现代文：十一月四日，燕王临时驻扎孤山，巡逻骑兵回来报告说白河流急不能渡。
English: On November 4th, Yan Wang was temporarily stationed in Lone Mountain. When the cavalry patrol returned, they reported that the White River was too dangerous to cross.

古文：王祷于神，至则冰合，乃济师。
现代文：燕王祈祷于神，说兵到则冰合，于是调配军士。
English: Yan Wang prayed to God, and said that when the soldiers arrived, the ice would melt, so he dispatched the sergeants.

古文：景隆遣都督陈晖侦敌，道左，出王军后。
现代文：李景隆暗中派都督陈晖侦察朱棣的布军情况，从左边绕道朱棣军后。
English: Li Jinglong secretly sent the governor Chen Qi to investigate the situation of Zhu Qi's cloth army, and went around Zhu Qi's army from the left.

古文：王分军还击之，晖众争渡河，冰忽解，溺死无算。
现代文：朱棣分军还击，陈晖军士争先渡河而逃，此时河中冰块突然融解，溺死者不计其数。
English: Zhu Rong's detachment returned fire, and Sergeant Chen Rong scrambled to cross the river and escape. At this time, the ice in the river suddenly melted, and there were countless drowning victims.

古文：辛未，与景隆战于郑村坝。
现代文：十五日，又与李景隆大战郑村坝。
English: On the 15th, Zheng Cunba fought with Li Jinglong again.

古文：王以精骑先破其七营，诸将继至，景隆大败，奔还。
现代文：朱棣用精选的骑兵先攻破李景隆七营，其他诸将相继来战，景隆大败而还。
English: Zhu Xi used selected cavalry to first break through Li Jinglong's seven battalions. Other generals came to fight one after another, but Jinglong was defeated and returned.

古文：乙亥，复上书自诉。十二月，景隆调兵德州，期以明年春大举。
现代文：十九日，又上书请求出征，十二月，李景隆调兵于德州，准备明年大举进攻。
English: On the 19th, he sent another letter requesting to go to war, and in December, Li Jinglong transferred troops to Texas to prepare for a large-scale attack next year.

古文：王乃谋侵大同，曰： 攻大同，彼必赴救，大同苦寒，南军脆弱，且不战疲矣。 
现代文：朱棣又计划攻打大同，说： 进攻大同，李景隆必定要赶来救援，大同天气寒冷，南军脆弱，不战也病疲了。 
English: Zhu Xi also planned to attack Datong, saying, "If we attack Datong, Li Jinglong will certainly come to the rescue. Datong is cold, the Southern Army is weak, and they are exhausted without fighting.

古文：二年春正月丙寅，克蔚州。
现代文：建文二年春一月一日，攻克蔚州。
English: On the first day of January in the spring of the second year of Jianwen, he conquered Ulshu.

古文：二月癸丑，至大同。
现代文：二月十一日，到大同。
English: February 11th, to Datong.

古文：景隆果由紫荆关来援。
现代文：李景隆果然由荆金关前来增援。
English: Li Jinglong came from Jing Jinguan to reinforce.

古文：王已旋军居庸，景隆兵多冻馁死者，不见敌而还。
现代文：朱棣亲率将士立即调兵居庸，李景隆部属大多被冻死饿死，不见敌人而还。
English: Zhu Xi's relatives and generals immediately transferred troops to Juyong, and most of Li Jinglong's subordinates froze to death and starved to death, but returned without seeing the enemy.

古文：夏四月，景隆进兵河间，与郭英、吴杰、平安期会白沟河。
现代文：夏四月，李景隆进兵河间，与郭英、吴杰、平安约定白沟河相会。
English: In the summer of April, Li Jinglong marched into the middle of the river, and met with Guo Ying, Wu Jie, and Ping'an to meet at the Baigou River.

古文：乙卯，王营苏家桥。
现代文：二十日，朱棣扎营苏家桥。
English: On the 20th, Zhu Xi encamped at Sujiabashi.

古文：己未，遇平安兵河侧。
现代文：二十四日，在白沟河侧与平安相遇。
English: On the 24th, he met Ping An on the side of the Baigou River.

古文：王以百骑前，佯却，诱安阵动，乘之，安败走。
现代文：朱棣以百余骑在前，假装退却，引诱平安军阵地骚动，然后趁机攻击，平安败走。
English: Zhu Xi rode ahead with more than a hundred horsemen, pretended to retreat, lured the Heian army to riot, and then took advantage of the opportunity to attack and leave safely.

古文：遂薄景隆军，战不利。
现代文：于是迫近李景隆，初战不利。
English: As a result, Li Jinglong was approaching, and the first battle was unfavorable.

古文：暝收军，王以三骑殿，夜迷失道，下马伏地视河流，乃辨东西，渡河去。
现代文：天黑收兵，朱棣以三骑殿后，夜晚迷失了方向，亲自下马伏地察看河流才辨明东西，渡河而去。
English: It was dark when the troops were mustered, and Zhu Xi lost his way in the night after riding with three cavalrymen. He dismounted and inspected the river to find out what was going on, and then crossed the river.

古文：庚申，复战。
现代文：二十五日，又战。
English: On the 25th, there was another battle.

古文：景隆横阵数十里，破燕后军。
现代文：李景隆横阵数十里，破燕后军。
English: Li Jinglong was tens of miles away from the enemy and defeated Yan Hou's army.

古文：王自帅精骑横击之，斩瞿能父子。
现代文：朱棣亲率精骑迎战，斩杀瞿能父子。
English: Zhu Xi's relatives eagerly rode into battle and killed Yan Neng's father and son.

古文：令丘福冲中坚，不得入。
现代文：又令丘福冲击景隆主力部队，不得入。
English: He also ordered Qufu to attack the main force of Jinglong and not to enter.

古文：王荡其左，景隆兵乃绕出王后，大战良久，飞矢雨注。
现代文：朱棣动摇景隆左军，景隆遂绕至朱棣后边，大战良久，飞箭如雨注一般。
English: Zhu Xi shook Jinglong's left army, Jinglong then went around to the back of Zhu Xi, the battle lasted for a long time, and the arrows rained down.

古文：王三易马，矢尽挥剑，剑折走登堤，佯引鞭若招后继者。
现代文：朱棣三换其马，矢尽剑断，挥剑折走登堤，佯装引鞭招后继援军状。
English: Zhu Xinsan changed his horse, broke his sword with an arrow, waved his sword and walked up the embankment, pretending to draw a whip to recruit a follow-up army.

古文：景隆疑有伏，不敢前，高煦救至，乃解。
现代文：李景隆怕有埋伏，不敢前进，援军高煦赶到，才解围。
English: Fearing an ambush, Li Jinglong did not dare to advance, and reinforcements from Gaozhou arrived to relieve the siege.

古文：时南军益集，燕将士皆失色。
现代文：当时南军也聚集，燕军将士都大失声色。
English: At that time, the Southern Army was also gathered, and the soldiers of the Yan Army were very upset.

古文：王奋然曰： 吾不进，敌不退，有战耳。 
现代文：朱棣气愤地说： 我不进攻，敌人就不会退却，必须战斗。 
English: Zhu Xi said angrily, "If I do not attack, the enemy will not retreat and we must fight."

古文：乃复以劲卒突出其背，夹攻之。会旋风起，折景隆旗，王乘风纵火奋击，斩首数万溺死者十余万人。
现代文：又以劲卒突袭景隆背后，前后夹击，正好旋风四起，李景隆军旗被折，朱棣趁风放火奋起反击，斩杀数万，溺死者十余万人。
English: He also raided Jinglong's back with vigor, pinching back and forth, just as a whirlwind arose, Li Jinglong's military flag was broken, Zhu Xi took advantage of the wind to set fire and fought back, killing tens of thousands and drowning more than 100,000 people.

古文：郭英溃而西，景隆溃而南，尽丧其所赐玺书斧钺，走德州。
现代文：郭英溃败西逃，景隆向南逃，朝廷赐给他们的玺书兵器也全部丧失，败走德州。
English: Guo Ying fled to the west, Jing Long fled to the south, and the imperial court gave them all lost their weapons, defeated and fled to Texas.

古文：五月癸酉，王入德州，景隆走济南。
现代文：五月九日，朱棣攻入德州，李景隆败走济南。
English: On May 9, Zhu Xi invaded Texas, and Li Jinglong was defeated and went to Jinan.

古文：庚辰，攻济南，败景隆军城下。
现代文：十六日，攻济南，大败李景隆于济南城下。
English: On the 16th, he attacked Jinan and defeated Li Jinglong at the foot of Jinan Castle.

古文：铁铉、盛庸坚守，不克。
现代文：铁铉、盛庸坚守，久攻不下。
English: Anvil, Shengyong hold fast, and cannot be defeated for a long time.

古文：秋八月戊申，解围还北平。
现代文：秋八月十六日，朱棣解围回北平。
English: On the 16th day of the 8th month of autumn, Zhu Xi returned to Beiping.

古文：九月，盛庸代李景隆将，复取德州，与吴杰、平安、徐凯相掎角，以困北平。
现代文：同月，盛庸代替李景隆，复取德州，与吴杰、平安、徐凯互为掎角，围困北平。
English: In the same month, Sheng Yong replaced Li Jinglong, recaptured Texas, and together with Wu Jie, Ping'an, and Xu Kai, besieged Beiping.

古文：时徐凯方城沧州，王佯出兵攻辽东，至通州，循河而南，渡直沽，昼夜兼行。
现代文：当时徐凯刚到沧州，朱棣佯装出兵攻辽东，到通州后沿河向南，渡过直沽，昼夜兼程。
English: At that time, Xu Kai had just arrived in Cangzhou, Zhu Xi sent troops to attack Liaodong, and after arriving in Tongzhou, he went south along the river, crossed the Zhiyao, and traveled both day and night.

古文：冬十月戊午，袭执徐凯，破其城，夜坑降卒三千人。
现代文：冬十月二十七日，奇袭并捉拿徐凯，攻陷沧州城，夜里坑埋降兵三千人。
English: On the 27th day of October in winter, they made a surprise attack and captured Xu Kai, and captured Cangzhou City, burying three thousand soldiers in the night.

古文：遂渡河过德州。
现代文：于是又渡过黄河经过德州。
English: So they crossed the Yellow River again, passing through Texas.

古文：盛庸遣兵来袭，击败之。
现代文：盛庸派兵来援，被击败。
English: Sheng Yong sent troops to help and was defeated.

古文：十一月壬申，至临清。
现代文：十一月十二日，到临清。
English: On November 12th, he arrived in Linqing.

古文：十二月丁酉，袭破盛庸将孙霖于滑口。
现代文：十二月七日，打败盛庸大将孙霖于滑口。
English: On December 7th, he defeated Sheng Yong's general Sun Lin in Slidkou.

古文：乙卯，及庸战于东昌，庸以火器劲弩歼王兵。
现代文：二十五日，又与盛庸大战东昌，盛庸用火器劲弩尽歼燕军。
English: On the 25th, Shengyong fought against Dongchang again, and Shengyong used firearms to annihilate Yan's army.

古文：会平安军至，合围数重，王大败，溃围以免，亡数万人，张玉战死。
现代文：恰好平安军赶到，合围数重，朱棣大败，破重围免得一死，死者数万人，张玉战死。
English: Just as the Heian army arrived, several encirclements were formed, Zhu Xi was defeated, the encirclement was broken to avoid one death, tens of thousands of people died, and Zhang Yu died in battle.

古文：三年春正月辛酉，败吴杰、平安于威县，又败之于深州，遂还北平。
现代文：建文三年一月一日，在威县、深州大败吴杰和平安军。遂兵还北平。
English: On January 1st, the third year of Jianwen, Wu Jie and the Ping'an Army were defeated in Weixian County and Shenzhou. The victorious soldiers returned to Peiping.

古文：二月乙巳，复帅师南下。
现代文：二月十六日，又率师南下。
English: On February 16th, he led his division south again.

古文：三月辛巳，与盛庸遇于夹河，谭渊战死。
现代文：三月二十二日，与盛庸遇于夹河，谭渊战死。
English: On March 22nd, he and Shengyong met in a river, and Tan Yuan died in battle.

古文：朱能、张武殊死斗，庸军少却。
现代文：朱能、张武殊死战斗，盛庸军退却。
English: Zhu Neng and Zhang Wushu fought to the death, while Sheng Yong's army retreated.

古文：会日暮，各敛兵入营。
现代文：时天色已晚，各自敛兵入营。
English: It was late in the day, and each man gathered his soldiers and entered the camp.

古文：王以十余骑逼庸营野宿，及明起视，已在围中。
现代文：朱棣以十余骑兵逼盛庸宿营野外，到天明一看，已在燕军包围中。
English: Zhu Xi with more than ten horsemen forced Sheng Yong to camp in the open. At first glance, he was already surrounded by Yan's army.

古文：乃从容引马，鸣角穿营而去。
现代文：乃从容引马，鸣角穿营而去。
English: Instead, he led his horse with ease and rode away through the camp.

古文：诸将以天子有诏，毋使负杀叔父名，仓卒相顾愕贻，不敢发一矢。
现代文：诸将因天子有诏，不得杀害叔父为名，仓卒相视，不敢乱发一箭。
English: The generals, in the name of the emperor's edict that they must not kill their uncles, looked at each other in haste and dared not fire a single arrow indiscriminately.

古文：是日复战，自辰至未，两军相胜负，东北风忽起，尘埃蔽天，燕兵大呼，乘风纵击，庸大败。
现代文：当天又战，从早七时战到下午三时，两军各有胜负，突然刮起东北风，尘埃遮住天空，燕兵大声呼喊，乘风杀敌，盛庸大败。
English: On the same day, there was another battle. From seven o'clock in the morning to three o'clock in the afternoon, the two armies had their own victories and defeats. Suddenly, the northeast wind blew, dust covered the sky, Yan soldiers shouted loudly, took advantage of the wind to kill the enemy, and suffered a great defeat.

古文：走德州。
现代文：败走德州。
English: Lost to Texas.

古文：吴杰、平安自真定引军与庸会，未至八十里，闻败引还。
现代文：吴杰、平安从真定率军与盛庸会合，没走到八十里，听说盛庸兵败的消息，引兵而还。
English: Wu Jie and Ping An led the army from Zhending to meet with Shengyong, but they did not reach eighty miles. When they heard the news of Shengyong's defeat, they led the army and returned.

古文：王以计诱之，杰、安出兵袭王。
现代文：朱棣用计引诱吴杰、平安出兵袭击。
English: Zhu Xi used a strategy to lure Wu Jie, and Ping'an sent troops to attack.

古文：闰月戊戌，遇于藁城。
现代文：闰三月九日，相遇于蒿木城。
English: On the 9th of March, they met in Shingle Town.

古文：己亥，与战，大风拔木，杰、安败走，追至真定城下。
现代文：十日，两军相战，大风大得拔起树木，吴杰、平安败走，燕军追至真定城下。
English: On the tenth day, the two armies fought. The wind was so strong that trees were uprooted. Wu Jie and Ping An were defeated, and Yan's army chased them to the foot of the city of Zhending.

古文：癸丑，至大名，闻齐泰、黄子澄已罢，上书请召还吴杰、平安、盛庸兵。
现代文：二十四日，到大名，听说齐泰、黄子澄已罢免，上书请求停止吴杰、平安、盛庸军队。
English: On the 24th, he went to Daimyo and heard that Chitai and Huang Zicheng had been removed from their posts. He wrote to them to request that the Wu Jie, Heian and Shengyong armies be stopped.

古文：天子使大理少卿薛岩来报，谕王释甲，王不奉诏。
现代文：惠帝派大理少卿薛山品前来报告，要朱棣解甲归藩，赦免无罪，朱棣不奉诏。
English: Emperor Hui sent Dali Shaoqing Xue Shanpin to report that Zhu Xi should return to the domain, be pardoned and acquitted, and Zhu Xi would not obey the edict.

古文：夏五月，杰、安、庸分兵断燕饷道，王遣指挥武胜上书，诘其故。天子怒，下胜狱。
现代文：夏五月，吴杰、平安、盛庸分兵切断燕军粮饷道路，朱棣派指挥武胜上书，追问缘由，惠帝大怒，将武胜下狱中。
English: In the summer of May, Wu Jie, Ping'an and Shengyong detachments cut off the food supply route of Yan's army. Zhu Xi sent a letter to the commander Wu Sheng to inquire about the reason. Emperor Hui was furious and sent Wu Sheng to prison.

古文：王遂遣李远略沛县，焚粮舟万计。
现代文：燕王派李远袭沛县，焚烧官军粮舟数以万计。
English: Yan Wang sent Li Yuan to attack Pei County, burning tens of thousands of official and military grain boats.

古文：秋七月己丑，掠彰德。
现代文：七月二日，夺取彰德。
English: On July 2, Zhangde was captured.

古文：丙申，降林县。
现代文：九日，降林县。
English: On the 9th, in Fulin County.

古文：平安乘虚捣北平，王遣刘江迎战，安败走。
现代文：平安乘虚直捣北平，燕王派刘江迎战，平安兵败而逃。
English: Ping'an took advantage of the situation to attack Beiping. Yan Wang sent Liu Jiang to fight, but Ping'an was defeated and fled.

古文：房昭屯易州西水寨，攻保定，王引兵围之。
现代文：房昭屯兵易州西水寨，攻保定，被燕王军包围。
English: Fong Zhao's troops besieged Yizhou West Water Town, attacked Baoding, and were encircled by Yan Wang's army.

古文：冬十月丁巳，都指挥花英援昭，败之峨眉山下，斩首万级，昭弃寨走。
现代文：冬十月二日，都指挥花英增援房昭，被燕军败于峨眉山下，斩杀数万人，房昭弃寨逃走。
English: On October 2 in winter, Du directed Hua Ying to reinforce Fang Zhao, who was defeated by Yan's army at the foot of Mount Emei, slaughtering tens of thousands of people. Fang Zhao abandoned the village and fled.

古文：己卯，还北平。
现代文：二十四日，燕军退还北平。
English: On the 24th, Yan's army returned to Beiping.

古文：十一月乙巳，王自为文祭南北阵亡将士。
现代文：十一月二十一日，朱棣亲自作文祭祀南北阵亡将士。
English: On November 21st, Zhu Xi personally wrote a dedication to the fallen soldiers of the North and South.

古文：当是时，王称兵三年矣。
现代文：当时，燕王举兵已三年。
English: At that time, it had been three years since Yan Wang raised an army.

古文：亲战阵，冒矢石，以身先士卒，常乘胜逐北，然亦屡濒于危。
现代文：他亲历战阵，冒矢石风雨，身先士卒，常乘胜追击，但也多次处于危险之中。
English: He personally experienced the battle, braved the storm, led the way, and often pursued victory, but he was also in danger many times.

古文：所克城邑，兵去旋复为朝廷守，仅据有北平、保定、永平三府而已。
现代文：所攻克城邑，兵一走又被朝廷官军占领，仅据有北平、保定、永平三府而已。
English: The conquered cities and towns were occupied by the imperial army as soon as the soldiers left, except for the three prefectures of Beiping, Baoding and Yongping.

古文：无何，中官被黜者来奔，具言京师空虚可取状。
现代文：无可奈何，朝中官员被罢免的纷纷投奔朱棣，尽言京师空虚可取。
English: Reluctantly, the deposed officials of the DPRK and China rushed to Zhu Xi, saying that the emptiness of the capital was desirable.

古文：王乃慨然曰： 频年用兵，何时已平？
现代文：朱棣慷慨地说 ：年年用兵，何时结束？
English: Zhu Rong said generously: the annual use of soldiers, when will it end?

古文：要当临江一决，不复返顾矣。 
现代文：要么临江决一死战，不再返顾北面。 
English: Either Linjiang will fight to the death and no longer look back to the north.

古文：十二月丙寅，复出师。
现代文：十二月十二日，又出师。
English: On December 12th, I started teaching again.

古文：四年春正月乙未，由馆陶渡河。
现代文：建文四年春正月十二日，从馆陶渡过黄河。
English: On the twelfth day of the first month of the fourth year of the Jianwen Spring, he crossed the Yellow River from the Pavilion of Tao.

古文：癸丑，徇徐州。
现代文：三十日，巡行徐州。
English: On the 30th, the parade went through Xuzhou.

古文：三月壬辰，平安以四万骑蹑王军，王设伏淝河，大败之。
现代文：三月九日，平安以四万骑兵追随燕王军，朱棣设埋伏于淝河，大败平安军。
English: On March 9th, Heian followed Yan Wang's army with forty thousand cavalrymen, and Zhu Rong set an ambush at the Wei River, defeating the Heian army.

古文：丙午，遣谭清断徐州饷道，还至大店，为铁铉军所围。
现代文：二十三日，派谭清断绝徐州粮道，还至大店时，被铁铉军包围。
English: On the 23rd, Pai Tanqing cut off the Xuzhou grain road, and when he arrived at the general store, he was surrounded by the Tiefen Army.

古文：王引兵驰援，清突围出，合击败之。
现代文：燕王引兵来援，谭清突围而出，合击打败铁铉。
English: Yan Wang brought in reinforcements, Tan Qing broke out of the encirclement, and together they defeated the Anvil.

古文：夏四月丙寅，王营小河，为桥以济，平安趋争桥，陈文战死。
现代文：夏四月十四日，朱棣宿营小河，凭小桥而守，平安前来与之争桥，陈文战死。
English: On the 14th day of the 4th month of the summer, Zhu Xi stayed in Xiaohe, protected by a small bridge, and came to fight for the bridge. Chen Wen died in the battle.

古文：平安军桥南，王军桥北，相持数日。
现代文：平安军在桥南，燕军在桥北，相持数天。
English: The Ping'an Army was in the south of the bridge, and the Yan Army was in the north of the bridge, and they held each other for several days.

古文：平安转战，遇王于北坂，王几为安槊所及。
现代文：平安转战，与燕王军遇于北坂，朱棣差点被平安长矛刺中。
English: Heian turned to war and met with Yan Wang's army in Kita-zaka. Zhu Xi was almost stabbed by Heian's lance.

古文：番骑王骐跃入阵，掖王逸去。
现代文：番骑王骐跃入杀阵，拉住朱棣胳膊慌忙逃去。
English: The guard rider Wang Yao jumped into the battle, grabbed Zhu Yao's arm and fled in a hurry.

古文：王曰： 南军饥，更一二日饷至，猝未易破。 
现代文：朱棣说 ：南军饥饿，每隔一二天粮草才送到，突然袭击很容易攻破。 
English: Zhu Rong said: The Southern Army is starving, and grain and grass are only delivered every one or two days. It is easy to break through with a sudden attack.

古文：乃令千余人守桥，夜半渡河而南，绕出安军后。
现代文：遂命千余人守桥，半夜渡到小河以南，绕到平安军后。
English: As a result, more than a thousand people died guarding the bridge, and in the middle of the night they crossed to the south of the small river and went around to the rear of the Heian army.

古文：比旦，安始觉，适徐辉祖来会。
现代文：等到天明时平安军才发觉，恰好徐辉祖也赶来。
English: It was not until dawn that the Heian army discovered that Xu Huizu had also arrived.

古文：甲戌，大战齐眉山下。
现代文：二十二日，大战齐眉山下。
English: On the 22nd, the big battle came down the mountain.

古文：时燕连失大将，淮士盛暑蒸湿，诸将请休军小河东，就麦观衅。
现代文：当时，燕军连失大将，且淮土在盛暑蒸热难忍，诸将请求休军小河东边，就麦地观察敌军行动。
English: At that time, Yan's army lost several generals in a row, and the Huai soil was unbearably hot and humid. The generals requested a truce on the east side of the small river to observe the enemy's actions in the wheat field.

古文：王曰： 今敌持久饥疲，遮其饷道，可以坐困，奈何北渡懈将士心。 
现代文：朱棣说 ：现在敌人长时间饥饿疲劳，断其饷道，可使敌军坐以待毙，不能北渡小河以懈将士士气。 
English: Zhu Rong said: Now the enemy has been starving and fatigued for a long time, and breaking its path can make the enemy army wait for death, and not being able to cross the small river to the north will weaken morale.

古文：乃下令欲渡河者左，诸将争趋左。
现代文：下令想渡河的往左，诸将士争着往左。
English: He ordered those who wanted to cross the river to go to the left, and the generals scrambled to the left.

古文：王怒曰： 任公等所之。 
现代文：朱棣气怒大吼说 ：任你们去吧。 
English: Zhu Xi shouted angrily, "Let them go."

古文：乃无敢复言。
现代文：将士都不敢说话。
English: The generals don't dare to speak.

古文：丁丑，何福等营灵璧，燕遮其饷道，平安分兵六万人护之。
现代文：二十五日，何福等宿营灵壁，燕军阻拦其饷道，迫使平安分兵六万人保护。
English: On the 25th, He Fu and others camped at Lingbi, and Yan's army blocked their way, forcing 60,000 soldiers from Ping'an Division to protect them.

古文：己卯，王帅精锐横击。断其军为二。
现代文：二十七日，朱棣精锐将士从中间进攻，将平安军一分为二。
English: On the 27th, Zhu Xi's elite soldiers attacked from the middle, splitting the Heian army in two.

古文：何福空壁来援，王军少却，高煦伏兵起，福败走。
现代文：何福丢下灵壁来援，燕军退却，高煦伏兵大起，何福败逃。
English: He Fook threw down the spirit wall to come to the rescue, Yan's army retreated, Gao Yao's ambush army rose up, and He Fook fled in defeat.

古文：辛巳，进薄其垒，破之，生擒平安、陈晖等三十七人，何福走免。
现代文：二十九日，逼近敌军营垒，攻破后，擒获平安、陈晖等三十七人，何福因逃走幸免于擒。
English: On the 29th, he approached the enemy camp, and after breaking through, he captured thirty-seven people, including Ping An and Chen Yao. He Fu was spared because he fled.

古文：五月己丑，下泗州，谒祖陵，赐父老牛酒。
现代文：五月七日，下泗州，拜谒祖陵，赐父老乡亲牛酒。
English: On May 7th, the Lower Luzhou paid homage to the ancestral mausoleum, and gave his father's hometown cow's milk wine.

古文：辛卯，盛庸扼淮南岸，朱能、丘福潜济袭走之，遂克盱贻。
现代文：九日，盛庸扼守淮河南岸，朱能、丘福潜过淮河袭击，赶走盛庸，于是攻克盱眙。
English: On the 9th, Shengyong guarded the south bank of the Huaihe River, Zhu Neng and Qufu dived across the Huaihe River to attack and drive away Shengyong, and then conquered Yunnan.

古文：癸巳，王集诸将议所向，或言宜取凤阳，或言先取淮安。
现代文：十一日，朱棣召集诸位将士，讨论行动去向，有的说宜取凤阳，有的说先取淮安。
English: On the 11th day, Zhu Xi called all the soldiers to discuss the direction of action. Some said that it was appropriate to take Fengyang, while others said that Huai'an should be taken first.

古文：王曰： 凤阳楼橹完，淮安多积粟，攻之未易下。
现代文：朱棣说： 凤阳楼橹完好，淮安积粟较多，不容易攻下。
English: Zhu Rong said: Fengyang Tower is in good condition, Huai'an Tower has more mildew, so it is not easy to attack.

古文：不若乘胜直趋扬州，指仪真，则淮、凤自震。
现代文：不如乘胜直趋扬州，指向仪真，使淮安、凤阳自受震慑。
English: It would be better to take advantage of the victory and go straight to Yangzhou, pointing to Yizhen, so that Huai'an and Fengyang would be deterred.

古文：我耀兵江上，京师孤危，必有内变。 
现代文：我耀兵长江上，京师感到孤立无援，必定会发生内变。 
English: If I send troops to the Yangtze River, the Beijing division will feel isolated and helpless, and internal changes will surely occur.

古文：诸将皆曰善。
现代文：诸将士都说此法妙。
English: All the generals said that this was a clever trick.

古文：己亥，徇扬州，驻军江北。
现代文：十七日，兵巡扬州，驻军长江以北。
English: On the 17th, the soldiers toured Yangzhou and garrisoned north of the Yangtze River.

古文：天子遣庆成郡主至军中，许割地以和，不听。
现代文：惠帝派庆成郡主到军中，许诺割地求和，朱棣不听。
English: Emperor Hui sent Princess Qingcheng to the army, promising to sue for peace, but Zhu Xi did not listen.

古文：六月癸丑，江防都督佥事陈瑄以舟师叛，附于王。
现代文：六月一日，防御长江的都督佥事陈蠧率舟师叛变，依附于燕王。
English: On June 1st, the governor of the defense of the Yangtze River, Chen Bing, led the boat division to mutiny and attached himself to Yan Wang.

古文：甲寅，祭大江。
现代文：二日，祭大江。
English: On the second day, the festival in Oe ended.

古文：乙卯，自瓜州渡，盛庸以海艘迎战，败绩。
现代文：三日，从瓜洲渡江，盛庸以海艘迎战，失败。
English: On the third day, after crossing the Yangtze River from Guazhou, Shengyong countered with a sea vessel, but failed.

古文：戊午，下镇江。
现代文：六日，下镇江。
English: On the 6th, I went down to Zhenjiang.

古文：庚申，次龙潭。
现代文：八日，临时住龙潭。
English: On the 8th, he temporarily lived in Longtan.

古文：辛酉，天子复遣大臣议割地，诸王继至，皆不听。
现代文：九日，惠帝又派大臣商议割地求和，诸王相继到来，都不听。
English: On the 9th, Emperor Hui sent his ministers to negotiate a peace treaty, but the kings came one after another and did not listen.

古文：乙丑，至金川门，谷王橞、李景隆等开门纳王，都城遂陷。
现代文：十三日，到金川门，谷王朱木惠、李景隆等打开城门迎接朱棣，都城陷落。
English: On the 13th, at the Jinchuan Gate, Gu Wang, Zhu Muhui, Li Jinglong and others opened the gate to welcome Zhu Xi, and the capital fell.

古文：是日，王分命诸将守城及皇城，还驻龙江，下令抚安军民。
现代文：当天，燕王分命诸将把守京城及皇城，还驻龙江。下令抚安军民。
English: On the same day, Yan Wang ordered the generals to guard the capital and the imperial city, and also stationed in Longjiang. He ordered to pacify the military and the people.

古文：大索齐泰、黄子澄、方孝孺等五十余人，榜其姓名曰奸臣。
现代文：大肆搜索齐泰、黄子澄、方孝孺等五十余人，并张榜其姓名称是奸臣。
English: More than 50 people, including Qitai, Huang Zicheng, and Fang Xiaojun, were extensively searched, and their surnames and names were listed as treacherous vassals.

古文：丙寅，诸王群臣上表劝进。
现代文：十四日，诸王群臣纷纷上书劝燕王朱棣登基。
English: On the 14th, all the kings and their courtiers sent letters to persuade Yan Wang Zhu Rong to ascend to the throne.

古文：己巳，王谒孝陵。
现代文：十七日，燕王拜谒孝陵。
English: On the 17th, Yan Wang paid homage to Yan Xiaoling.

古文：群臣备法驾，奉宝玺，迎呼万岁。
现代文：群臣为其准备好法架，奉宝玺，迎呼燕王朱棣万岁。
English: The courtiers prepared a legal framework for it, worshiped Baodi, and hailed the long life of Yan Wang Zhu Xi.

古文：王升辇，诣奉天殿即皇帝位。
现代文：燕王登上皇帝宝座，在奉天殿即皇帝位。
English: Yan Wang ascended the throne of the emperor, and became the emperor in the Hall of Heaven.

古文：复周王橚、齐王榑爵。
现代文：恢复周王朱木肃，齐王朱爵位。
English: Zhou Wang Zhu Muxu and Qi Wang Zhu Shiao were reinstated.

古文：壬申，葬建文皇帝。
现代文：二十日，葬建文皇帝。
English: On the 20th, Emperor Jianwen was buried.

古文：丁丑，杀齐泰、黄子澄、方孝孺，并夷其族。
现代文：二十五日，杀齐泰、黄子澄、方孝孺，并铲除其家族。
English: On the 25th, he killed Qitai, Huang Zicheng, Fang Xiaojun, and wiped out their families.

古文：坐奸党死者甚众。
现代文：因连坐结党之罪而死的很多。
English: Many have died for the crime of being a member of the party.

古文：戊寅，迁兴宗孝康皇帝主于陵园，仍称懿文太子。
现代文：二十六日，迁兴宗孝康皇帝主于陵园，仍称懿文太子。
English: On the 26th, Emperor Xingzong of the Xiaokang Dynasty was moved to the cemetery. He was still known as Prince Gongwen.

古文：秋七月壬午朔，大祀天地于南郊，奉太祖配。
现代文：秋七月初一，大祭天地于南郊，顺便祭奉明太祖。
English: On the first day of autumn in July, a grand festival is held in the southern suburb of Tianchi. In addition, there is a festival honoring Ming Taizu.

古文：诏： 今年以洪武三十五年为纪，明年为永乐元年。
现代文：下诏曰 ：今年以洪武三十五年为纪年，明年为永乐元年。
English: The following edict reads: This year marks the 35th anniversary of Hongwu, and next year is the first year of Yongle.

古文：建文中更改成法，一复旧制。
现代文：建文帝时更改的成文法制，一复旧制。
English: The statutory legal system, which was changed during the reign of Emperor Jianwen, was restored to the old system.

古文：山东、北平、河南被兵州县，复徭役三年，未被兵者与凤阳、淮安、徐、滁、扬三州蠲租一年，馀天下州县悉蠲今年田租之半。 
现代文：山东、北平、河南遭兵祸州县，免除徭役三年，没遭兵祸州县与凤阳、淮安、徐、滁、扬三州减免租税一年，余下的全国其他州县全部减免今年田租的一半。 
English: The counties in Shandong, Beiping and Henan that suffered from military disasters will be exempted from forced labor for three years, the counties in Shandong that did not suffer from military disasters and the three states of Fengyang, Huai'an, Xu, Handan and Yang will be exempted from tax for one year, and the remaining counties in the rest of the country will be exempted from half of this year's field rent.

古文：癸未，召前北平按察使陈瑛为左副都御史，尽复建文朝废斥者官。
现代文：二日，下诏任前北平按察使陈瑛为左副都御使，全部恢复建文朝废弃的官员。
English: On the second day, Chen Ying, the former Beijing inspector general, was appointed as the left vice-governor, and all the officials who had been abandoned in the Jianwen Dynasty were restored.

古文：甲申，复官制。
现代文：三日，恢复官制。
English: On the third day, the official system was restored.

古文：癸巳，改封吴王允熥广泽王，衡主允熞怀恩王，徐王允熙敷惠王，随母妃吕氏居懿文太子陵园。
现代文：二日，改封吴王允火通广泽王、衡王允火坚怀恩王、徐王允火熙敷惠王，随母妃吕氏居懿文太子陵园。
English: On the second day, he was renamed as Wu Wang Yunhuatong Guangze Wang, Heng Wang Yunhuatong Jianhuai Wang, and Xu King Yunhuatong Xishiki Hui Wang, and followed his mother, Princess Lu, to live in the Prince Wengwen Mausoleum.

古文：癸卯，江阴侯吴高督河南、陕西兵备，抚安军民。
现代文：二十二日，江阴侯吴高总督河南、陕西兵备，安抚军民。
English: On the 22nd, Jiangyin marquis Wu Gao, the governor of Henan and Shaanxi, sent troops to pacify the military and the people.

古文：甲辰，尚书严震直、王钝，府尹薛正言等巡视山西、山东、河南、陕西。
现代文：二十三日，尚书严震直、王纯、府尹薛正言等巡视山西、山东、河南、陕西。
English: On the 23rd, Shangshu Jianzhong, Wang Chun, Fu Yin Xue Zhengyan and others inspected Shanxi, Shandong, Henan and Shaanxi.

古文：八月壬子，侍读解缙、编修黄淮入直文渊阁。
现代文：八月一日，侍读解缙、编修黄淮入文渊阁供职。
English: On August 1st, Huang Huai, who had served as a reader, editor and compiler, entered Wenyu Pavilion.

古文：寻命侍读胡广，修撰杨荣，编修杨士奇，检讨金幼孜、胡俨同入直，并预机务。
现代文：不久命侍读胡广、修撰杨荣、编修杨士奇、检讨金幼孜、胡俨一同入朝供职，并参与军国大事。
English: Soon after his death, Hu Guang, Yang Rong, Yang Shiqui, Jin Yuzi, and Hu Yao, who served as readers, reviewers, and editors, went to the DPRK to serve, and participated in military affairs.

古文：执兵部尚书铁铉至，不屈，杀之。
现代文：押送兵部尚书铁铉至京，不认罪，被杀。
English: He was escorted to the capital by the commander of the military department, Shang Shuxu Tieyuan. He pleaded not guilty and was killed.

古文：左军都督刘真镇辽东。
现代文：左军都督刘真镇守辽东。
English: Liu Zhen, the left-wing military governor, guarded Liaodong.

古文：丁巳，分遣御史察天下利弊。
现代文：六日，分遣御使察看天下利弊。
English: On the 6th, the envoys were dispatched to inspect the advantages and disadvantages of the world.

古文：戊午，都督何福为征虏将军，镇宁夏，节制陕西行都司。
现代文：七日，都督何福为征虏将军，镇守宁夏，节制陕西行都司。
English: On the seventh day, the governor of the capital, He Fu, became the general of the conquest, the town guard of Ningxia, and the governor of Shaanxi.

古文：都督同知韩观练兵江西，节制广东、福建。
现代文：都督同知韩观练兵江西，节制广东、福建。
English: The governor and his friend Han Guan trained soldiers in Jiangxi, and controlled Guangdong and Fujian.

古文：甲子，西平侯沐晟镇云南。
现代文：十三日，西平侯沐晟守云南。
English: On the 13th, Xiping marched to Yunnan.

古文：九月甲申，论靖难功，封丘福淇国公，朱能成国公，张武等侯者十三人，徐祥等伯者十一人。
现代文：九月四日，论靖难之功，封丘福淇国公、朱能成国公、张武等十三人为侯、徐祥等十一人为伯。
English: On September 4th, on the merits of Jingnan, thirteen people including Fengqiu Fu Guogong, Zhu Neng Cheng Guogong, Zhang Wu, and eleven people including Xu Xiang were honored.

古文：论欸附功，封驸马都尉王宁为侯，茹瑺、陈瑄及都督同知王佐皆为伯。
现代文：论诚恳依附之功，封驸马都尉王宁为侯。茹王常、陈王宣、都督同知王佐皆封为伯。
English: On the merit of sincerely adhering, Ma Du Fu Wang Ning was awarded the title of marquis. Ru Wang Chang, Chen Wang Xuan, and Tudou Tongzhi Wang Zu were all awarded the title of count.

古文：甲午，定功臣死罪减禄例。
现代文：十四日，规定功臣犯死罪减俸禄条例。
English: On the 14th, a regulation was issued to reduce the salary of meritorious soldiers who committed the crime of homicide.

古文：乙未，徙山西民无田者实北平，赐之钞，复五年，韩观为征南将军，镇广西。
现代文：十五日，将山西无田贫民迁往北平，赐给钱钞，免除赋税五年。韩观为征南将军，镇守广西。
English: On the 15th, he moved the Shanxi landless poor to Beiping, gave them money and exempted them from taxes for five years. Han Guan was the general of the Southern Expedition and the town guard of Guangxi.

古文：冬十月丁巳，命北平州县弃官避靖难兵者朱宁等二百一十九人入粟免死，戍兴州。
现代文：冬十月七日，命北平州县弃官逃避靖难之役的朱宁等二百一十九人入粟免死，戍边兴州。
English: On October 7th, two hundred and nineteen people, including Zhu Ning, who was ordered to leave his post in Beipingzhou County to escape the Battle of Jingnan, were sent to Xingzhou.

古文：己未，脩《太祖实录》。
现代文：十九日，撰修《太祖实录》。
English: On the 19th, he began to write "Grandfather's Record."

古文：丙寅，镇远侯顾成镇贵州。
现代文：十六日，镇远侯顾成镇守贵州。
English: On the 16th, Zhenyuan Hou Gu Cheng became the town guard of Guizhou.

古文：壬申，徙封谷王橞于长沙。
现代文：十二日，迁封谷王朱木惠于长沙。
English: On the 12th, Zhu Mu Hui, the King of Qianfeng Valley, arrived in Changsha.

古文：甲戌，诏从征将士掠民间子女者还其家。
现代文：十九日，下诏徙迁征战将士有掠民家之女的送还其家。
English: On the 19th day of the month, the daughter of a family that had been plundered by soldiers during the War of Emigration and Emigration was sent back to her family.

古文：十一月壬辰，立妃徐氏为皇后。
现代文：十一月十三日，立后妃徐氏为皇后。
English: On November 13th, Empress Dowager Xu was enthroned.

古文：废广泽王允熥、怀恩王允熞为庶人。
现代文：废广泽王允火通、怀恩王允火坚为庶人。
English: Former Guangze Wang Yunhuatong and Wine King Yunhuatong were commoners.

古文：十二月癸丑，蠲被兵州县明年夏税。
现代文：十二月四日，蠲免遭受兵祸州县夏税。
English: On December 4, he was exempted from the summer tax of Zhoushu County.

