古文：楚围雍氏五月。
现代文：楚军包围了韩国雍氏城长达五个月。
English: The Chu army besieged the South Korean Yongshicheng for five months.

古文：韩令使者求救于秦，冠盖相望也，秦师不下殽。
现代文：韩襄王派众多使者向秦国求救，使者车辆来往不断、冠盖相望于道，秦国的军队还是不派出军队来援救韩国。
English: King Han Xiang sent numerous envoys to Qin for help. The envoys' vehicles kept coming and going, and the crowned heads looked at each other. The Qin army still did not send troops to rescue South Korea.

古文：韩又令尚靳使秦，谓秦王曰： 韩之于秦也，居为隐蔽，出为雁行。
现代文：韩国又派尚靳出使秦国，对秦昭襄王说： 韩国对于秦国来说，平时就是个屏障，有战事时就是先锋。
English: South Korea also sent an envoy to Qin, Shang Xuan, who said to Qin Zhaoxiang Wang: For Qin, South Korea is a barrier in peacetime and a vanguard in times of war.

古文：今韩已病矣，秦师不下殽。
现代文：现在韩国已经离亡国不远了，秦国仍不派兵救援。
English: Now, South Korea is not far from the country's demise, and Qin is still not sending troops to help.

古文：臣闻之，唇揭者其齿寒，愿大王之熟计之。 
现代文：我听说过这样的话， 唇亡齿寒 ，希望大王您仔细考虑这个问题。 
English: I have heard such words, cold lips, cold teeth, I hope you will carefully consider this issue.

古文：宣太后曰： 使者来者众矣，独尚子之言是。 
现代文：秦宣太后说： 韩国的使者来了那么多，只有尚先生的话说得有道理。 
English: Empress Dowager Qin Xuan said, "There were so many Korean envoys, only Mr. Shang's words made sense.

古文：召尚子入。
现代文：于是召尚靳进见。
English: So he summoned Shang Hao to see him.

古文：宣太后谓尚子曰： 妾事先王也，先王以其髀加妾之身，妾困不疲也；尽置其身妾之上，而妾弗重也，何也?
现代文：宣太后对尚靳说： 我服侍惠王时，秦惠文王把大腿压在我的身上，我感到不舒服，无法支撑，他把整个身子都压在我身上时，而我却不感觉很重，这是为什么呢？
English: Empress Dowager Xuan said to Shang Juan: When I was serving King Hui, King Qin Huiwen pressed his thigh on my body. I felt uncomfortable and unable to support myself. When he pressed his entire body on me, I didn't feel very heavy. Why is that?

古文：以其少有利焉。
现代文：因为这样对我来说稍微有些好处。
English: Because it's a little bit of an advantage for me.

古文：今佐韩，兵不众，粮不多，则不足以救韩。
现代文：秦国帮助韩国，如果兵力不足，粮食不多，就无法解救韩国。
English: If Qin helps South Korea, it will not be able to save South Korea if it is short of troops and food.

古文：夫救韩之危，日费千金，独不可使妾少有利焉。 
现代文：解救韩国的危难，每天要耗费数以千计的银两，难道不能让我稍微得到一点好处吗？ 
English: Couldn't I benefit a little from the rescue of South Korea, which costs thousands of silver coins every day?

古文：尚靳归书报韩王，韩王遣张翠。
现代文：尚靳回国后把宣太后的话告诉了韩襄王，韩襄王又派张翠出使秦国。
English: After returning to China, Shang Kui told King Han Xiang about Empress Dowager Xuan's words. King Han Xiang also sent Zhang Cui as an envoy to Qin.

古文：张翠称病，日行一县。
现代文：张翠假称自己有病，每天只走一个县。
English: Zhang Cui pretended to be ill and only went to one county a day.

古文：张翠至，甘茂曰： 韩急矣，先生病而来。 
现代文：张翠到了秦国，甘茂说： 韩国已经很危急了，您还抱病前来。 
English: When Zhang Cui arrived in Qin, Gan Mao said, "South Korea is already in a critical situation, and you have come here with an illness.

古文：张翠曰： 韩未急也，且急矣。 
现代文：张翠说： 韩国还没有到危急的时刻，只是快要危急了而已。 
English: Zhang Cui said: South Korea has not yet reached a critical moment, but it is about to be critical.

古文：甘茂曰： 秦重国知王也，韩之急缓莫不知。
现代文：甘茂说： 秦国堂堂大国，秦王智慧圣明，韩国危急秦国不是不知道。
English: Ganmao said, "Qin is a great country, Qin King is a wise man, and South Korea is in a critical situation.

古文：今先生言不急，可乎? 
现代文：现在先生却说韩国并不危急，这样真的行吗？ 
English: But now you are saying that South Korea is not in danger. Is that really acceptable?

古文：张翠曰： 韩急则折而入与楚矣，臣安敢来? 
现代文：张翠说： 韩国一旦危急就转向归顺楚国了，我怎么还敢来秦国？ 
English: Zhang Cui said: Once the critical situation in South Korea turned to the country of Shunchu, how could I dare to come to Qin?

古文：甘茂曰： 先生毋复言也。 
现代文：甘茂说： 先生不要再说了。 。
English: Kammao said, "Don't say anything more, sir."

古文：甘茂人言秦王曰： 公仲柄得秦师，故敢捍楚。
现代文：甘茂进宫对秦昭王说： 公仲以为能够得到秦国的援助，所以才敢抵御楚国。
English: When Kamo entered the palace, he said to Qin Zhao Wang, "Kongzhong thought he could get assistance from Qin, so he dared to resist Chu.

古文：今雍氏围，而秦师不下殽，是无韩也。
现代文：现在雍氏被围攻，而秦军不肯去援救，这就会失去韩国。
English: Now that Yong is besieged and Qin refuses to come to his rescue, Korea will be lost.

古文：公仲且抑首而不朝，公叔且以国南合于楚。
现代文：公仲因为得不到秦国的援救而忧郁不上朝，公叔就会趁机让韩国向南去跟楚国讲和。
English: If Gongzhong didn't go to the North because he was depressed because he couldn't get help from Qin, Gongzong would take the opportunity to let South Korea go south to make peace with Chu.

古文：楚、韩为一，魏氏不敢不听，是楚以一国谋秦也。
现代文：楚国和韩国联合，魏国就不敢不听从，这样一来楚国就可以凭借这三个国家的力量来图谋秦国。
English: Chu and Korea united, and Wei did not dare to disobey, so that Chu could rely on the strength of these three countries to plot against Qin.

古文：如此，则伐秦之形成矣。
现代文：这样，它们共同进攻秦国的形势就形成了。
English: In this way, the situation of them jointly attacking Qin was formed.

古文：不识坐而待伐，孰与伐人之利? 秦王曰： 善。 
现代文：我不知坐等别人来进攻有利，还是主动进攻别国的军队有利？ 秦昭王说： 很好。 
English: I don't know if it's better to wait for someone else to attack, or if it's better to attack another country's army on one's own initiative. Qin Zhao Wang said, "Very good.

古文：果下师于殽以救韩。
现代文：秦军终于从崤山出兵去解救韩国。
English: The Qin army finally sent troops from Lushan to rescue South Korea.

