古文：州郡一○扬州南徐州徐州南兗州兗州
现代文：○扬州南徐州徐州南兗州兗州
English: ○Yangzhou South Xuzhou Xuzhou South Luzhou Luzhou

古文：唐尧之世，置十有二牧，及禹平水土，更制九州，冀州尧都，土界广远，济、河为兗州，海、岱为青州，海、岱及淮为徐州，淮、海为扬州，荆及衡阳为荆州，荆、河为豫州，华阳、黑水为梁州，黑水、西河为雍州。
现代文：唐尧之世，在全国设置十二牧，等到大禹平服了水患，又将十二牧改为九州。冀州是尧的首都所在地，范围辽阔，济水、黄河一带为兖州，大海、泰山一带为青州，大海、泰山及淮河一带为徐州，淮河、大海一带为扬州，荆地及衡山以南一带为荆州，荆地与黄河一带为豫州，华山以南及黑水一带为梁州，黑水、西河一带为雍州。
English: In the Tang Dynasty, twelve pastures were set up throughout the country, and when Dayuping was flooded, the twelve pastures were changed to Kyushu. Jizhou is the capital of Jizhou, with a vast area. Jishui and the Yellow River area are Luzhou, the sea and Mount Tai area are Qingzhou, the sea, Mount Tai and the Huai River area are Xuzhou, the Huai River and the sea area are Yangzhou, Jingdi and the area south of Hengshan are Jingzhou, Jingdi and the Yellow River area are Huzhou, the area south of Huashan and the Black Water area is Liangzhou, and the Black Water area and

古文：自虞至殷，无所改变。
现代文：从虞舜时代到殷商时期都没有什么改变。
English: Nothing has changed from the era of Yuxuan to that of Yin Shang.

古文：周氏既有天下，以徐并青，以梁并雍，分冀州之地以为幽、并。
现代文：周氏得到天下之后，将徐州并入青州，将梁州并入雍州，又分出冀州的部分地区设置了幽州与并州。
English: After the Zhou Dynasty gained control of the world, it merged Xuzhou into Qingzhou, merged Liangzhou into Yongzhou, and separated parts of Jizhou into Yuzhou and Mianzhou.

古文：汉初又立徐、梁二州。
现代文：西汉初年又恢复徐、梁二州。
English: In the first year of the Western Han Dynasty, the two states of Xu and Liang were restored.

古文：武帝攘却胡、越，开地斥境，南置交趾，北置朔方，改雍曰凉，改梁曰益，凡为十三州，而司隶部三辅、三河诸郡。
现代文：汉武帝击退了胡、越，开拓边境，在南方设置了交趾，北方设置了朔方，改雍州为凉州，改梁州为益州，全国一共有十三州，而由司隶校尉掌管三辅、三河诸郡。
English: Emperor Hanwu repulsed Hu and Yue, opened up the border, set up a crossing point in the south, and set up a new square in the north, changed Yongzhou to Liangzhou, and changed Liangzhou to Yizhou. There are a total of 13 states in the country, and Lieutenant Sili is in charge of Sanfu and Sanhe counties.

古文：东京无复朔方，改交趾曰交州，凡十二州；司隶所部如故。
现代文：东汉没有设朔方，改交趾为交州，一共十二州；司隶校尉所管辖的地区照旧。
English: The Eastern Han Dynasty did not set up the Shuo side, and changed the Jiaozuo side to the Jiaozhou side, a total of twelve states; the area under the jurisdiction of Lieutenant Sili remained the same.

古文：及三国鼎歭，吴得扬、荆、交三州，蜀得益州，魏氏犹得九焉。
现代文：等到三国鼎立，吴国占得扬、荆、交三州，蜀国占得益州，魏国仍占九州。
English: By the time the Three Kingdoms were established, the three states of Yang, Jing, and Jiaotong were occupied by the State of Wu, the State of Shou was occupied by the State of Tuyi, and the State of Wei still occupied Kyushu.

古文：吴又分交为广。
现代文：吴国又分出交州的部分地区设立广州。
English: In addition, Wuzhong was divided into parts of Jiaozhou and Guangzhou was established.

古文：魏末平蜀，又分益为梁。
现代文：魏国末年平定蜀汉，又分益州的部分地区为梁州。
English: At the end of the Wei Dynasty, Shu Han was conquered, and part of Yixing Prefecture became Liang Prefecture.

古文：晋武帝太康元年，天下一统，凡十有六州。
现代文：晋武帝太康元年，天下统一，全国共有十六州。
English: In the first year of the reign of Emperor Taikang, the whole country was unified, and a total of sixteen states were created.

古文：后又分凉、雍为秦，分荆、扬为江，分益为宁，分幽为平，而为二十矣。
现代文：后来又分割凉州、雍州的部分地区设立秦州，分荆州、扬州的部分地区设立江州，分益州的部分地区设置宁州，分幽州的部分地区设平州，全国就共有二十州了。
English: Later, it divided parts of Liangzhou and Yongzhou to establish Qinzhou, divided parts of Jingzhou and Yangzhou to establish Jiangzhou, divided parts of Yixingzhou to establish Ningzhou, and divided parts of Yuzhou to establish Pingzhou, making a total of 20 states.

古文：自夷狄乱华，司、冀、雍、凉、青、并、兗、豫、幽、平诸州一时沦没，遗民南渡，并侨置牧司，非旧土也。
现代文：自从夷狄扰乱中原，司、冀、雍、凉、青、并、兗、豫、幽、平诸州都沦陷了，百姓逃难到南方，朝廷仍旧保留沦陷各州的建置，但管理的地区都已经不是旧有的土地了。
English: Since Yidi disturbed the Central Plains, the provinces of Si, Hebei, Yong, Liang, Qing, Bin, Min, Yu, You and Ping have all fallen, and the people have fled to the south. The imperial court still retains the establishment of the fallen states, but the areas under management are no longer the old land.

古文：江左又分荆为湘，或离或合，凡有扬、荆、湘、江、梁、益、交、广，其徐州则有过半，豫州唯得谯城而已。
现代文：束晋又分割荆州的部分地区设置湘州，有时分出，有时合并，一共领有扬、荆、湘、江、梁、益、交、广诸州，徐州则剩有大半，豫州仅仅剩下谯城了。
English: Sokjin also divided a part of Jingzhou to set up Hunan Province, sometimes separating and sometimes merging, with Yang, Jing, Hunan, Jiangsu, Liang, Yixing, Jiaozuo and Guangzhou in total, Xuzhou remaining with a majority, and only Fucheng remaining in Yuzhou.

古文：及至宋世，分扬州为南徐，徐州为南兗，扬州之江西悉属豫州；分荆为雍，分荆、湘为郢，分荆为司，分广为越，分青为冀，分梁为南北秦。
现代文：到了宋朝，又分出扬州的部分地区建立南徐州，分出徐州为南兖州，扬州所属长江以西的地区都划归豫州，又分出荆州的一些地区为雍州，分割荆州、迩业的一些地区建旦幽，分割回业的部分地区建司州，分割广州的一些地区置越州，分割青州的一些地区置冀州，分出梁州的一些地区设置南秦州、北秦州。
English: During the Song Dynasty, some areas of Yangzhou were separated to form South Xuzhou, some areas of Xuzhou were separated to form South Luzhou, all areas west of the Yangtze River that belonged to Yangzhou were divided to form Yuzhou, some areas of Jingzhou were separated to form Yongzhou, some areas of Jingzhou and Handan were separated to form Jiangdanyu, some areas of Handan were separated to form Jiangsu, some areas of Guangzhou were separated to form Yuezhou, some areas of Qingzhou were separated to form Jizhou, and some areas of Liangzhou were separated to form South Qinzhou and North Qinzhou.

古文：太宗初，索虏南侵，青、冀、徐、兗及豫州淮西，并皆不守；自淮以北，化成虏庭。
现代文：太宗初年，索虏南侵，青、冀、徐、兖及豫州淮西等地都不能保守，淮河以北都被索虏占据。
English: In the first year of Emperor Taizong, the Sorbs invaded the south, and the areas of Qing, Hebei, Xu, Min and Huaixi in Yuzhou could not be protected. The north of the Huaihe River was occupied by the Sorbs.

古文：于是于钟离置徐州，淮阴为北兗，而青、冀二州治赣榆之县。
现代文：于是在钟离设置徐州，淮阴置北兗，而青、冀二州的治所都在赣榆。
English: So Xuzhou was set up in Zhongli, and Beibei was set up in Huaiyin, while the administrative centers of Qing and Hebei were both in Handan.

古文：今志大较以大明八年为正，其后分派，随事记列。
现代文：现在的适部《地理志》的记载以大明八年时的状况为准，以后的分合情况，随事记载。
English: The current record of the appropriate part of the "Geography" is based on the situation in the eighth year of the Ming Dynasty, and the subsequent division and merger situation is recorded incidentally.

古文：内史、侯、相，则以升明末为定焉。
现代文：内史、侯、相，则以升明末年为准。
English: For internal history, marquesses, and consorts, the year at the end of the Ming Dynasty is taken as the standard.

古文：地理参差，其详难举，实由名号骤易，境土屡分，或一郡一县，割成四五；四五之中，亟有离合，千回百改，巧历不算，寻校推求，未易精悉。
现代文：地理区划的变化，它的详情已难于遍举，实在是由于名称突然改变，管辖的境土经常分割，常常是一郡或一县分割成四五郡、四五县，而分割出的四五郡县中又常常有分有合，千百次的改动使精于算法的人也算不清楚，寻求推究它的实际情况，是不易考究得精确周到的。
English: Changes in geographical divisions, the details of which have become difficult to enumerate, are really due to sudden changes in names, the territory under jurisdiction is often divided, often a county or a county is divided into forty-five counties and forty-five counties, and the forty-five counties and counties that are divided are often divided and merged. Thousands of changes make it difficult for people who are good at algorithms to calculate, and it is not easy to investigate the actual situation.

古文：今以班固马彪二志、太康元康定户、王隐《地道》、晋世《起居》、《永初郡国》、何徐《州郡》及地理杂书，互相考覆。
现代文：现在以班固《汉书》、司马彪《续汉书》两部地志、太康与元尘年间核定的户口数、王隐的《地道》、晋代的《起居注》、《永初郡国志》、何、徐二人的《州郡志》及地理方面的杂书，互相考证覆核。
English: Now, the two geographical histories of Ban Gu's "Hanshu" and Sima Biao's "Continuation of the Book of Han," the number of households approved during the years of Taikang and Yuancheng, Wang Yin's "Jinduo," Jin Dynasty's "Living Notes," "Yongchu County History," He and Xu's "Zhou County History" and miscellaneous books on geography will be cross-examined and reviewed.

古文：且三国无志，事出帝纪，虽立郡时见，而置县不书。
现代文：而且三国时候无《州郡志》，州郡设置变动的情况，记在帝纪中，虽然常有关于立郡的记载，却不记录置县的情况。
English: Moreover, at the time of the Three Kingdoms, there was no "State-County History," and the changes in the establishment of state-counties were recorded in the Imperial Chronicle. Although there were often records of county establishment, there was no record of the establishment of counties.

古文：今唯以《续汉郡国》校《太康地志》，参伍异同，用相征验。
现代文：现在衹能用《续漠书郡国志》校《太康地志》，错综比较它们的同异，用来互相验证白龇至型塞，郡县设置没有改变过的，则注日 选旧 。
English: Now you can use the "Continuation of the History of the County" school of "Taikang History" to compare their similarities and differences in an intricate way, and use them to verify each other. If the county setting has not changed, the annotation date is selected as old.

古文：自汉至宋，郡县无移改者，则注云 汉旧 ，其有回徙，随源甄别。若唯云 某无 者，则此前皆有也。若不注置立，史阙也。
现代文：那些有迁徙变动的，则根据它的源头加以甄别。若衹说 某无 的，则是在此时之前都有设置。若不注设立情况和时间的，就是史书上没有记载。
English: Those that have migratory movements are screened according to its source. If you say something is nothing, it was set up before this time. If you do not note the establishment situation and time, it is not recorded in the history book.

古文：扬州刺史，前汉刺史未有所治，后汉治历阳，魏、晋治寿春，晋平吴治建业。
现代文：扬州刺史，并望时前汉刺史没有固定的治所，其他各州与握业同。后汉时治所在历阳，魏、晋治寿春，晋平东吴以后治建业。
English: Yangzhou had no fixed seat of administration in the pre-Han period, and other prefectures had the same. In the later Han period, the seat of administration was Liyang, Wei, Jin and Shuchun, and in the Eastern Wu period, Jin and Ping.

古文：成帝咸康四年，侨立魏郡，肥乡、元城二县，后省元城。
现代文：成帝咸康四年，暂借地重置魏郡、领肥乡、元城汉代的旧县，晋时膈阳平。二县，后来省并元城。
English: In the fourth year of Emperor Chengxiankang, the old counties of Wei County, Lianfu Township, and Yuancheng in the Han Dynasty were temporarily relocated to the newly leased land. During the Jin Dynasty, the two counties, and later the province, were merged into Yuancheng.

古文：又侨立广川郡，领广川一县，宋初省为县，隶魏郡。
现代文：又暂借地重置广川郡。领广川一县，宋初撤郡为县，隶属于魏郡。
English: Guangchuan County was also temporarily re-established on the leased land. Guangchuan County and Songchu County were made into counties, and were subordinated to Wei County.

古文：江左又立高阳、堂邑二郡，高阳领北新城、博陆二县。堂邑，领堂邑一县，后省堂邑并高阳，又省高阳并魏郡，并隶扬州，寄治京邑。
现代文：束晋时又设置高阳、堂邑二郡，高阳领北新城、博陆二县，堂邑郡，领堂邑一县，后来撤消堂邑，并入高阳，又撤高阳并入魏郡，都隶属于扬州，治所寄设在京城。
English: At the time of Sok Jin, two counties of Goyang and Dongyi were established, and two counties of Goyang including Beixincheng, two counties of Bolu, Dongyi County, and one county of Lintongyi. Later, Dongyi was abolished, merged into Goyang, and Goyang was withdrawn and merged into Wei County. All of them are subordinate to Yangzhou, and the administrative center is located in Beijing.

古文：文帝元嘉十一年省，以其民并建康。
现代文：文帝元嘉十一年撤魏郡，魏郡的百姓由建康管辖。
English: Emperor Wen Yuanjia withdrew from Wei County in the eleventh year, and the people of Wei County came under the jurisdiction of Jiankang.

古文：孝建元年，分扬州之会稽、东阳、新安、永嘉、临海五郡为东扬州。
现代文：孝建元年，又分出扬州的会稽、东阳、新安、永嘉、临海五郡设束扬州。
English: In the first year of Xiao Jian, Yangzhou was divided into five counties: Hefei, Dongyang, Xin'an, Yongjia and Linhai.

古文：大明三年罢州，以其地为王畿，以南台侍御史部诸郡，如从事之部传焉，而东扬州直云扬州。八年，罢王畿，复立扬州，扬州还为东扬州。
现代文：大明三年撤消扬州，将扬州地区作为首都直辖区，以南台侍御史管理原扬州所属各郡，就像原先州从事史巡察各郡一样，而将束扬州直接称为扬州大明八年，撤消王畿的建置，恢复扬州，而将原先束扬州改称的扬州恢复为束扬州。
English: In the third year of Daming, Yangzhou was abolished and the Yangzhou region was made the capital region. The counties of the former Yangzhou were placed under the administration of the Southern Taiwan History Office, just as the counties of the former Yangzhou were under the supervision of the State History Office. Yangzhou was directly called Yangzhou in the eighth year of Daming. The construction of Wangji was abolished and Yangzhou was restored. Yangzhou, which had been renamed as Yangzhou, was restored as Yangzhou.

古文：前废帝永光元年，省东扬州并扬州。
现代文：前废帝永光元年，撤消束扬州，将它并入扬州。
English: In the first year of the former emperor Yongguang, Yangzhou's shackles were removed and it was merged into Yangzhou.

古文：顺帝升明三年，改扬州刺史曰牧。
现代文：顺帝升明三年，改称扬州刺史为扬州牧。
English: Three years after Emperor Shun ascended to the throne, he renamed Yangzhou Jishi to Yangzhou Maki.

古文：领郡十，领县八十。
现代文：管领十郡，八十县。
English: He was in charge of ten counties and eighty counties.

古文：户一十四万三千二百九十六，口一百四十五万五千六百八十五。
现代文：户十四万三千二百九十六，人口一百四十五万五千六百八十五。
English: The number of households was 143,296, and the population was 1,455,685.

古文：丹阳尹，秦鄣郡，治今吴兴之故鄣县。
现代文：丹阳尹，秦代为鄣郡，治所在今吴兴的故鄣题。
English: Danyang and Yin, the Qin Dynasty for the county, the administration is now in Wuxing.

古文：汉初属吴国，吴王濞反败，属江都国。
现代文：选初属是国，主玉刘边谋反失败，县改属江都国。
English: The election initially belonged to the country, the main player Liu Bian failed to counterattack, and the county was transferred to Jiangdu Province.

古文：武帝元封二年，为丹阳郡，治今宣城之宛陵县。
现代文：武帝元封二年，称为丹阳郡，治所在现在宣城的宛陵县。
English: In the second year of Emperor Wu's Yuan Dynasty, it was called Danyang County and was governed by Wanling County, which is now Xuancheng.

古文：晋武帝太康二年，分丹阳为宣城郡，治宛陵，而丹阳移治建业。
现代文：晋武帝人康二年，分割丹千的一部分为宣球郡，治所在洼堕，而将且垦幽的治所移到建业。
English: In the second year of Emperor Jinwu's reign, a part of Dancheng was divided into Xuanqiu County. The administrative center was moved to Wadu, while the more remote administrative center was moved to Jianye.

古文：元帝太兴元年，改为尹。
现代文：元帝太兴元年，改为丹阳尹。
English: In the first year of the Yuan Emperor Taixing, it was changed to Danyang Yin.

古文：领县八，户四万一千一十，口二十三万七千三百四十一。
现代文：管领八县。户四万一千零一十，人口二十三万七千三百四十一。
English: In charge of eight counties, with 41,010 households and a population of 237,341.

古文：建康令，本秣陵县。
现代文：建康令，本为秣陵县。
English: Jiankang Order, originally from Fuling County.

古文：汉献帝建安十六年置县，孙权改秣陵为建业。
现代文：汉献帝建安十六年设置，孙权当政时将秣陵改为建业。
English: It was set up in the 16th year of Emperor Jianan's reign, and Sun Quan changed it to Jianye when he was in power.

古文：晋武帝平吴，还为秣陵。
现代文：晋武帝平吴国后，恢复为秣陵。
English: After Emperor Jinwu of the State of Pingwu, it was restored as a imperial mausoleum.

古文：太康三年，分秣陵之水北为建业。
现代文：太康三年，分割秣陵的水域以北为建业。
English: After three years of Taikang, the waters north of Fuling were divided for construction.

古文：愍帝即位，避帝讳，改为建康。
现代文：愍帝即位后为了避愍帝的名讳，改称建康。
English: After Emperor Shun ascended the throne, in order to avoid the reputation of Emperor Shun, he changed his name to Jiankang.

古文：秣陵令，其地本名金陵，秦始皇改。
现代文：秣陵令，该地本名金陵，秦始皇改。
English: The original name of the place, Jinling, was changed by Qin Shi Huang.

古文：本治去京邑六十里，今故治村是也。
现代文：治所离京城六十里，就是今天的故治邮。
English: Jisho is sixty miles from Kyoto, which is today's former Jipo.

古文：晋安帝义熙九年，移治京邑，在斗场。
现代文：晋安帝羞毖九年，将治所移到京城，在斗场那个地方。
English: In the ninth year of the reign of Emperor Jian of An, the government office was moved to the capital, in the place of the arena.

古文：恭帝元熙元年，省扬州府禁防参军，县移治其处。
现代文：恭帝元熙元年，精简扬州府禁防参军，又将秣陵县的治所移到那裹。
English: In the first year of Emperor Qianlong's reign, Yangzhou's ban on joining the military was simplified, and the government office of Fuling County was moved there.

古文：丹杨令，汉旧县。
现代文：丹杨令，是汉代的旧县。
English: Danyangling was an old county in the Han Dynasty.

古文：江宁令，晋武帝太康元年，分秣陵立临江县。
现代文：江宁令，晋武帝太康元年，分割秣陵设立临江县。
English: In the first year of the reign of Emperor Taikang, Jangning issued an order to divide Gongling and establish Linjiang County.

古文：二年，更名。
现代文：二年，改称江宁。
English: Two years later, it was renamed Jiangning.

古文：永世令，吴分溧阳为永平县，晋武帝太康元年更名。
现代文：永世令，吴国分割溧阳设置永平县，晋武帝太康元年改称永世。
English: According to the Yongsei Decree, the State of Wuxi divided Fenyang and set up Yongping County, which was renamed Yongsei in the first year of the reign of Emperor Taikang.

古文：惠帝世，度属义兴，寻复旧。
现代文：惠帝时，一度归属义兴，不久又复旧。
English: At the time of Hui Di, it once belonged to Yixing, and was soon restored.

古文：义兴又有平陵县，董览《吴地志》云： 晋分永世。 
现代文：义兴又有平陵县，董览的《吴地志》说： 晋分永世。 
English: Yixing also has Pingling County, and the "Wu Di Zhi" of Dongshan said: "Promotion is eternal."

古文：《太康》、《永宁地志》并无，疑是江左立。
现代文：《太康志》和《永宁地志》都没有这种记载，可能是东晋时设立的。
English: "Tai Kangshi" and "Yongning Di Zhi" do not have such a record, which may have been established in the Eastern Jin Dynasty.

古文：文帝元嘉九年，以并永世、溧阳二县。
现代文：文帝元嘉九年，将永世、溧阳二县合并。
English: In the ninth year of Emperor Wen of the Yuan Dynasty, the two counties of Yongxing and Shenyang were merged.

古文：溧阳令，汉旧县。
现代文：溧阳令，汉代的旧县。
English: Shenyangling, an old county in the Han Dynasty.

古文：吴省为屯田。
现代文：吴国撤县改在那裹屯田。
English: Wu Guotu County was changed to Wai Tun Tian.

古文：晋武帝太康元年复立。
现代文：晋武帝太康元年恢复设置溧阳县。
English: In the first year of the Jin Dynasty, Emperor Taikang restored Jiangren County.

古文：湖熟令，汉旧县。
现代文：湖熟令，汉代的旧县。
English: Hu Rongling, an old county in the Han Dynasty.

古文：吴省为典农都尉。
现代文：吴国撤县制改为典农都尉。
English: The county system of Wu Guotiao was changed to Denyong Duifeng.

古文：晋武帝太康元年复立。
现代文：晋武帝太康元年恢复湖熟县。
English: In the first year of the Jin Dynasty, Emperor Taikang restored Jiangren County.

古文：句容令，汉旧县。
现代文：句容令，汉代的旧县。
English: The old counties of the Han Dynasty.

古文：会稽太守，秦立，治吴。
现代文：会稽太守，秦时设立，管理星地。
English: Censor-in-chief, established in the Qin Dynasty, administered Xingdu.

古文：汉顺帝永建四年，分会稽为吴郡，会稽移治山阴。
现代文：汉顺帝永建四年，分割会稽为吴郡，会稽的治所移到山阴。
English: In the fourth year of Emperor Han Shun's reign, the Divisional Auditor was moved to Wu County, and the Administrative Office of the Auditor was moved to Shanyin.

古文：领县十，户五万二千二百二十八，口三十四万八千一十四。
现代文：领十县。户五万二千二百二十八，人口三十四万八千零一十四。
English: The leader of ten counties, with 52,228 households and a population of 348,014.

古文：去京都水一千三百五十五，陆同。
现代文：距离京都按水道算有一千三百五十五里，陆路的距离相同。
English: The distance from Kyoto by water is 1,355 miles, and the distance by land is the same.

古文：山阴令，汉旧县。
现代文：山阴令，汉代的旧县。
English: Shanyinling, an old county in the Han Dynasty.

古文：永兴令，汉旧余暨县，吴更名。
现代文：永兴令，汉代的旧县余暨县，吴国时改称永兴。
English: According to the Yongxing Regulation, the old counties of the Han Dynasty, Yuji County and Wuguo County, were renamed Yongxing.

古文：上虞令，汉旧县。
现代文：上虞令，汉代的旧县。
English: Shangyu County, the largest county in the Han Dynasty.

古文：余姚令，汉旧县。
现代文：余姚令，汉代的旧县。
English: Yuyaoling, an old county in the Han Dynasty.

古文：剡令，汉旧县。
现代文：剡令，汉代的旧县。
English: 令, the old county in the Han Dynasty.

古文：诸暨令，汉旧县。
现代文：诸暨令，汉代的旧县。
English: Zhuji County, an old county in the Han Dynasty.

古文：始宁令，何承天志，汉末分上虞立。
现代文：始宁令，何丞玉《地志》说是汉末分上虞地设立的。
English: According to the Shining Order, He Zhengyu's "Geography" said that it was established in Shangyu at the end of the Han Dynasty.

古文：贺《续会稽记》云： 顺帝永建四年，分上虞南乡立。 
现代文：画返的《续会稽记》云： 顺帝永建四年，分割上虞的南乡设立。 
English: The reprinted "Continuation Audit" shows: Shunde was built for four years, and Nanxiang, which was divided into Shangyu, was established.

古文：《续汉志》无。
现代文：《续汉志》上没有这种记载。
English: There is no such record in the "Continuation of Hanshi."

古文：《晋太康三年地志》有。
现代文：《晋太康三年地志》上有这种记载。
English: There is such a record in the "History of the Third Year of Jintai Kang."

古文：句章令，汉旧县。
现代文：句章令，汉代的旧县。
English: The old counties of the Han Dynasty.

古文：鄮令，汉旧县。
现代文：鄮令，汉代的旧县。
English: 令, the old county in the Han Dynasty.

古文：鄞令，汉旧县。
现代文：鄞令，汉代的旧县。
English: 令, the old county in the Han Dynasty.

古文：吴郡太守，分会稽立。
现代文：吴郡太守，分割会稽而设置。
English: Wu County Governor, the division of the association was set up.

古文：孝武大明七年，度属南徐。八年，复旧。
现代文：孝武大明七年，一度属南徐州，八年，恢复旧建制。
English: In the seventh year of Xiaowu Daming, it once belonged to South Xuzhou, and in the eighth year, the old system was restored.

古文：领县十二，户五万四百八十八，口四十二万四千八百一十二。
现代文：领十二县。户五万零四百八十八，人四十二万四千八百一十二。
English: There are 12 counties. The number of households is 50,488 and the number of people is 424,812.

古文：去京都水六百七十，陆五百二十。
现代文：距京都按水路计有六百七十里，陆路有五百二十里。
English: It is 670 miles from Kyoto by water and 520 miles by land.

古文：吴令，汉旧县。
现代文：吴令，汉代的旧县。
English: Wu Ling, an old county in the Han Dynasty.

古文：娄令，汉旧县。
现代文：娄令，汉代的旧县。
English: 令, the old county in the Han Dynasty.

古文：嘉兴令，此地本名长水，秦改曰由拳。
现代文：嘉兴令，该地本名长水，秦改称由拳。
English: According to the Jiaxing edict, the original name of the place was Changshui, but it was renamed Yucheng by the Qin.

古文：吴孙权黄龙四年，由拳县生嘉禾，改曰禾兴。
现代文：吴孙权黄龙四年，由拳县产生嘉禾，改称禾兴。
English: In the fourth year of the reign of Wu Sun Quan Huanglong, Jiahuo was born in Jian County and renamed He Xing.

古文：孙皓父名和，又改名曰嘉兴。
现代文：孙皓的父亲名和，又改称嘉兴。
English: Sun Yat-sen's father, Nawa, was also renamed Jiaxing.

古文：海虞令，晋武帝太康四年，分吴县之虞乡立。
现代文：海虞令，晋武帝太康四年，分吴县的虞乡设立。
English: In the fourth year of the reign of Emperor Taikang of the Jin Dynasty, the Haiyu Order was issued to establish Yu Township in Wuxian County.

古文：海盐令，汉旧县。
现代文：海盐令，汉代的旧县。
English: Haiyan County, the oldest county in the Han Dynasty.

古文：《吴记》云： 本名武原乡，秦以为海盐县。 
现代文：《吴记》上说： 本名武原乡，秦代以该地置海盐县。 
English: "Wu Ji" said: The real name is Wuyuan Township, and it was named Haiyan County in the Qin Dynasty.

古文：盐官令，汉旧县。
现代文：盐官令，汉代的旧县。
English: The salt official order, the old county in the Han Dynasty.

古文：《吴记》云： 盐官本属嘉兴，吴立为海昌都尉治，此后改为县。 
现代文：《吴记》上说： 盐官本来归属于嘉兴，束吴立为海昌都尉的治所，此后改马县。 
English: "Wu Ji" said: "Yanquan originally belonged to Jiaxing, and Shu Wuling was the capital of Haichang, and later it was changed to Ma County.

古文：非也。
现代文：这种说法是错误的。
English: At midnight, it started to rain.

古文：钱唐令，汉旧县。
现代文：钱唐令，汉代的旧县。
English: Qian Tangling, the old county of the Han Dynasty.

古文：富阳令，汉旧县。
现代文：富阳令，汉代的旧县。
English: Fuyang County, an old county in the Han Dynasty.

古文：本曰富春。
现代文：本名富春。
English: Her real name is Fuchun.

古文：孙权黄武四年，以为东安郡；七年，省。
现代文：孙权黄武四年，以该地为东安郡，七年，撤销。
English: In the fourth year of Sun Quan Huangwu's reign, the county was renamed Dong'an County, and in the seventh year, it was abolished.

古文：晋简文郑太后讳 春 ，孝武改曰富阳。
现代文：晋简文帝郑太后名讳为 春 ，孝武适时改称富阳。
English: The name of Empress Dowager Zheng of the Jin and Jianwen Emperors was Spring, and the name of Xiaowu was changed to Fuyang at the right time.

古文：新城令，浙江西南名为桐溪，吴立为新城县，后并桐庐。
现代文：新城令，浙江的西南名桐溪，吴国立为新城县，后来并入桐庐。
English: Xincheng County, the southwestern part of Zhejiang is called Tongxi, and Wuzhong is Xincheng County, which was later merged into Tonglu.

古文：《晋太康地志》无。
现代文：《晋太康地志》没有记载。
English: There is no record of this in the "History of Jintai Kangxi."

古文：张勃云： 晋末立。 
现代文：强垒说： 晋末设立。 
English: Qiang Rong said: It was established at the end of the Jin Dynasty.

古文：疑是太康末立，寻复省也。
现代文：疑为太康末设立，不久又撤销了。
English: Suspected of being set up by Tai Kangmai, it was soon revoked.

古文：晋成帝咸和九年又立。
现代文：晋成帝咸和九年又立。
English: He was promoted to emperor nine years later.

古文：建德令，吴分富春立。
现代文：建德令，东吴分割富春县而设立。
English: Fuchun County was established as a result of the East-West Division of Fuchun County by the Jiande Decree.

古文：桐庐令，吴分富春立。
现代文：桐庐令，东吴分割富春县而设立。
English: Tonglu County was established as a result of the East-West Division of Fuchun County.

古文：寿昌令，吴分富春立。新昌县，晋武帝太康元年更名。
现代文：寿昌令，东吴分割富春县而设置新昌县，晋武帝太康元年改为寿昌。
English: According to the Shuchang Decree, Eastern Wu divided Fuchun County and set up Xinchang County. In the first year of the Jin Dynasty, Emperor Taikang changed it to Shuchang.

古文：吴兴太守，孙皓宝鼎元年，分吴、丹阳立。
现代文：吴兴太守，孙皓宝鼎元年，分割吴郡、丹阳郡而设置。
English: In the first year of the reign of Emperor Wu Xing and Emperor Sun Yat-sen, the county was divided into Wu County and Danyang County.

古文：领县十，户四万九千六百九，口三十一万六千一百七十三。
现代文：领十县。户四万九干六百零九，人口三十一万六千一百七十三。
English: He led ten counties. The number of households rose from forty-nine thousand to six hundred and nine, with a population of three hundred and sixteen thousand one hundred and seventy-three.

古文：去京都水九百五十，陆五百七十。
现代文：距京都按水道计有九百五十里，陆路有五百七十里。
English: It is 950 miles from Kyoto by water and 570 miles by land.

古文：乌程令，汉旧县，先属吴。
现代文：乌程令，汉代的旧县，原先属吴郡。
English: Wuchengling, an old county in the Han Dynasty, was originally part of Wu County.

古文：东迁令，晋武帝太康三年，分乌程立。
现代文：东迁令，晋武帝太康三年，分割乌程而设置。
English: The order to move east was issued by Emperor Taikang in the third year of the Jin Dynasty, and Ucheng was divided and set up.

古文：后废帝元徽四年，更名东安。
现代文：后废帝元徽四年，改名东安。
English: Four years after the abolition of Emperor Yuanhui, it was renamed Dong'an.

古文：顺帝升明元年复旧。
现代文：顺帝升明元年恢复旧称。
English: The former name was restored in the first year of Emperor Shun's ascension to the throne.

古文：武康令，吴分乌程、余杭立永安县，晋武帝太康元年更名。
现代文：武康令，东吴分割乌程、余杭设置永安县，晋武帝太康元年改为武康。
English: Wu Kang order, East Wu divided Wucheng, Yuhang set up Yongan County, Emperor Wu Taikang changed it to Wu Kang in the first year.

古文：长城令，晋武帝太康三年，分乌程立。
现代文：长城令，晋武帝太康三年，分割乌程而设置。
English: According to the Great Wall Decree, Emperor Taikang of the Jin Dynasty set up the division of Wucheng for three years.

古文：原乡令，汉灵帝中平二年，分故鄣立。
现代文：原乡令，汉灵帝中干二年，分割故鄣而设置。
English: The original township was established in the middle of the Han Dynasty, two years after it was divided.

古文：故鄣令，汉旧县，先属丹阳。
现代文：故鄣令，汉代旧县，原先属丹阳郡。
English: The former Shire, an old county in the Han Dynasty, originally belonged to Danyang County.

古文：安吉令，汉灵帝中平二年，分故鄣立。
现代文：安吉令，汉灵帝中平二年，分割故鄣而设置。
English: It was established by the Anji Decree in the second year of the middle of the Heian period, after the division of Hanling.

古文：余杭令，汉旧县，先属吴。
现代文：余杭令，汉代旧县，原先属吴郡。
English: Yuhangling, an old county in the Han Dynasty, was originally part of Wu County.

古文：临安令，吴分余杭为临水县，晋武帝太康元年更名。
现代文：临安令，东吴分割余杭设置临水县，晋武帝太康元年改名临安。
English: According to the Lin'an Decree, Yuhang was divided into East and West and set up as Linshui County. In the first year of the Jin Dynasty, Emperor Taikang changed the name to Lin'an.

古文：于潜令，汉旧县，先属丹阳。
现代文：于潜令，漠代旧县，原先属丹阳郡。
English: Yu Quling, the former county of Moudai, formerly part of Danyang County.

古文：淮南太守，秦立为九江郡，兼得庐江豫章。
现代文：淮南太守，秦代设置九江郡，包括庐江、豫章。
English: Huainan governor, the Qin Dynasty set up Jiujiang County, including Lijiang River and Yuzhang.

古文：汉高帝四年，更名淮南国，分立豫章郡，文帝又分为庐江郡。
现代文：汉高帝四年，改名淮南国，从中分出豫章郡，文帝又从中分出庐江郡。
English: In the fourth year of Emperor Han Gao, it was renamed Huainan Province, from which Yuanzhang County was separated, and from which Emperor Wenzhong separated Minjiang County.

古文：武帝元狩元年，复为九江郡，治寿春县。
现代文：武帝元狩元年。恢复为九江郡，治所在寿春县。
English: In the first year of Emperor Wu's reign, it was reinstated as Jiujiang County, with the seat of government in Shuchun County.

古文：后汉徙治阴陵县。
现代文：后汉将治所移到阴陵县。
English: Later, the Han Dynasty moved the seat of government to Chongming, Yiling County.

古文：魏复曰淮南，徙治寿春。
现代文：魏恢复称淮南，治所又移到寿春。
English: Wei restored Huainan and moved the seat of government to Shuchun.

古文：晋武帝太康元年，复立历阳、当涂、逡道诸县，二年，复立钟离县，并二汉旧县也。
现代文：晋武壶主尘元年，又设置历厘、另见。当涂、逡道诸县，二年，又设置钟离县，另见。都是两汉时的旧县。
English: In the first year of the reign of Emperor Jinwu, the counties of Lili and Dangtu and Shantou were established, and in the second year, the counties of Zhongli and Shantou were established. Both were old counties during the Han Dynasty.

古文：三国时，江淮为战争之地，其间不居者各数百里，此诸县并在江北淮南，虚其地，无复民户。
现代文：三国时，江淮是战争之地，之间无人居住的地方各有数百里，上述各县都在江北淮南，那些地方都没有民户居住。
English: At the time of the Three Kingdoms, the Jianghuai River was a place of war, and there were hundreds of miles of uninhabited places between them. The above-mentioned counties are all in the north and south of the Jianghuai River, and there are no private households living in those places.

古文：吴平，民各还本，故复立焉。
现代文：东吴被平定后。百姓各自返回原先居住的地方，所以又恢复上述诸县的建制。
English: After the East and West were subdued, the people returned to their original places of residence, so the establishment of the above counties was restored.

古文：其后中原乱，胡寇屡南侵，淮南民多南度。
现代文：后来中原地区大乱，胡寇屡次南侵，淮南的百姓多南渡。
English: Later, the Central Plains region was in turmoil, the Huko repeatedly invaded the south, and many people from Huainan went to the south.

古文：成帝初，苏峻、祖约为乱于江淮，胡寇又大至，民南度江者转多，乃于江南侨立淮南郡及诸县。晋末，遂割丹阳之于湖县为淮南境。
现代文：盛童初，麸些、巡在辽进作乱，胡寇又大举南来，百姓南渡长江的更多，于是在辽亩暂借地重置进直塑及诸县，置末于是割旦厘的于湖县作为陋的辖境。
English: At the beginning of Sheng Tong, some soldiers and patrols made trouble in Liao Jin, and the Huko came to the south in a big way. More people crossed the Yangtze River to the south. Therefore, Liao Mu was temporarily leased and resettled in Zhishu and counties, and finally it was placed in Huxian, which was cut off.

古文：宋孝武大明六年，以淮南郡并宣城，宣城郡徙治于湖。
现代文：宋孝武帝去塱六年，以淮南郡并入宣越，宣继邓的治所迁到王塑。
English: Six years after Emperor Song Xiaowu died, Huainan County was merged into Xuan Yue, and Xuan Zhi Deng's administrative center was moved to Wangsuo.

古文：八年，复立淮南郡，属南豫州。
现代文：八年，恢复淮南郡，属于直鱼出。
English: Eight years later, Huainan County was restored, belonging to Zhouguang.

古文：明帝泰始三年，还属扬州。
现代文：旦眯壶始三年，又仍旧属扬州。
English: It's been three years since Danzhong Jug was founded, and it still belongs to Yangzhou.

古文：领县六，户五千三百六十二，口二万五千八百四十。
现代文：领六县。户五千三百六十二，人口二万五千八百四十。
English: There are 5,362 households in the six counties, with a population of 25,840.

古文：去京都水一百七十，陆一百四十。
现代文：距京都按水路计有一百七十里，陆路有一百四十里。
English: It is 170 miles from Kyoto by water and 140 miles by land.

古文：于湖令，晋武帝太康二年，分丹杨县立，本吴督农校尉治。
现代文：于湖令，晋武帝太康二年，分割丹杨县而设置，本来是东吴的督农校尉治所。
English: In the second year of the reign of Emperor Taikang of the Jin Dynasty, Danyang County was divided and set up in Huling. It was originally the administrative center of Dongwu.

古文：当涂令，晋成帝世，与逡道俱立为侨县，晋末分于湖为境。
现代文：当涂令，晋成帝时，与逡道一起作为借地设置的侨县设置，晋末分割王溯的一部分作为辖境。
English: When Tu Rong, the emperor of Jin Dynasty, set up the overseas Chinese county as a leased land together with the Shandong Province, and divided Wangchuan as part of the jurisdiction at the end of Jin Dynasty.

古文：繁昌令，汉旧名，本属颍川。
现代文：繁昌令，汉代旧名，原先属颖川。
English: Hanchangling, the old name during the Han Dynasty, originally belonged to Yingchuan.

古文：魏分颍川为襄城，又属焉。
现代文：魏分割颖川设置襄城，仍属颖川。
English: Wei divided Yingchuan and set up Xiangcheng, which still belongs to Yingchuan.

古文：晋乱，省襄城郡，以此县属淮南，割于湖为境。
现代文：晋混乱时撤销襄城郡，以繁昌县属淮南，分割于湖作为辖境。
English: When the Jin Dynasty was in disarray, Xiangcheng County was revoked and replaced with Hanchang County, which belonged to Huainan and was divided into the lake as its jurisdiction.

古文：襄垣令，其地本芜湖。芜湖县，汉旧县。
现代文：襄垣令，该地本为芜湖，芜湖县，漠代旧县。
English: According to the Yanggaki Decree, this place is originally Wuhu, Wuhu County, and the old county of the desert era.

古文：至于晋末，立襄垣县，属上党。
现代文：到了晋末设置襄垣县，属于上党。
English: At the end of the Jin Dynasty, Yangaki County was set up, belonging to the upper party.

古文：上党民南过江，立侨郡县，寄治芜湖，后省上党郡为县，属淮南。
现代文：上党百姓南渡过江，借地设置郡县，以旧芜湖地作治所，后来将上党郡改为县，属于淮南。
English: Shangdang people crossed the Yangtze River to the south and leased land to set up counties, using the former Wuhu area as the administrative center. Later, Shangdang county was changed to county, belonging to Huainan.

古文：文帝元嘉九年，省上党县并襄垣。
现代文：文帝元嘉九年，撤上党县，将它并入襄垣。
English: In the ninth year of Emperor Wen of the Yuan Dynasty, he withdrew to the Party County and merged it into Xiangyuan.

古文：定陵令，汉旧名，本属襄城，后割芜湖为境。
现代文：定陵令，汉代旧名，本来属于襄城，后来分割芜湖为辖境。
English: Dinglingling, the old name of the Han Dynasty, originally belonged to Xiangcheng, and later divided Wuhu as its jurisdiction.

古文：逡道令，汉作逡遒，晋作逡道，后分芜湖为境。
现代文：逡道令，选伐称作逡遒，晋住称作逡道，后来分割芜湖为辖境。
English: Shandong Province issued the Shandong Province Ordinance, and the Shandong Province was called the Shandong Province, and the Shandong Province was called the Shandong Province. Later, the Shandong Province divided Shandong Lake as its jurisdiction.

古文：宣城太守，晋武帝太康元年，分丹阳立。
现代文：宣城太守，晋武帝太康元年，分割丹阳而设置。
English: In the first year of the reign of Emperor Taikang, the governor of Xuancheng, Danyang was divided and set up.

古文：领县十，户一万一百二十，口四万七千九百九十二。
现代文：领十县。户一万零一百二十，人口四万七千九百九十二。
English: There were 10,120 households, with a population of 47,992.

古文：去京都水五百八十，陆五百。
现代文：距京都按水路计有五百八十里。陆路有五百里
English: It is 580 miles from Kyoto by water and 500 miles by land.

古文：宛陵令，汉旧县。
现代文：宛陵令，汉代的旧县。
English: Wanlingling, an old county in the Han Dynasty.

古文：广德令，何志云： 汉旧县。 
现代文：广德令，何志《地志》说： 汉代的旧县。 
English: Guang De Ling, He Zhi, "Geography" said: The old counties of the Han Dynasty.

古文：《二汉志》并无，疑是吴所立。
现代文：《前后汉志》都未记载，疑是东吴所设置。
English: There is no record of the "Anterior and Posterior Han History" and it is suspected that it was set up by the Eastern Wu Dynasty.

古文：怀安令，吴立。
现代文：怀安令，东吴设置。
English: Huai'an order, Dongwu set up.

古文：宁国令，吴立。
现代文：宁国令，东吴设置。
English: Ning Guorong, Dongwu set up.

古文：宣城令，汉旧县。
现代文：宣城令，漠代旧县。
English: Xuancheng Ruling, the old county in the desert era.

古文：安吴令，吴立。
现代文：安吴令，东吴设置。
English: An Wu-Ling, Dong Wu-Cheng.

古文：泾令，汉旧县。
现代文：泾令，汉代旧县。
English: 令, Han Dynasty old county.

古文：临城令，吴立。
现代文：临城令，东吴设置。
English: Lincheng order, Dongwu set up.

古文：广阳令，汉旧县曰陵阳，子明得仙于此县山，故以为名。
现代文：广阳令，汉代的旧县称陵阳，子明成仙于该县山中，所以用作县名。
English: According to the Guangyang Ruling, the old county in the Han Dynasty was called Lingyang, and Ziming Chengxian was in the mountains of the county, so it was used as the county name.

古文：晋成帝杜皇后讳 陵 ，咸康四年更名。
现代文：晋成帝杜皇后名讳中有 陵 字，咸康四年改名广阳县。
English: Emperor Jincheng and Empress Du had the word "Mausoleum" in their names, and Hamkang changed its name to Guangyang County four years later.

古文：石城令，汉旧县。
现代文：石城令，汉代的旧县。
English: Shicheng County, an old county during the Han Dynasty.

古文：东阳太守，本会稽西部都尉，吴孙皓宝鼎元年立。
现代文：东阳太守，原先是会稽丙部都尉，东吴孙皓宝鼎元年设置。
English: Dongyang Dazhu, was originally the captain of the C.C.C.C.C.C.C.C.C.C.C.C.C.C.C.C.C.C.C.C.C.

古文：领县九，户一万六千二十二，口一十万七千九百六十五。
现代文：领九县。户一万六千零二十二，人口十万七干九百六十五。
English: It controls nine counties, with 16,022 households and a population of 107,965 people.

古文：去京都水一千七百，陆同。
现代文：距京都按水路计有一千七百里，陆路距离相同。
English: It is 1,700 miles from Kyoto by water and the same distance by land.

古文：长山令，汉献帝初平二年，分乌伤立。
现代文：长山令，汉献帝初平二年，分割乌伤而设置。
English: According to the Changshan edict, in the second year of the Han Dynasty, it was divided and set up.

古文：太末令，汉旧县。
现代文：太末令，汉代的旧县。
English: Taemuling, an old county in the Han Dynasty.

古文：乌伤令。
现代文：乌伤令。
English: It's a black mark.

古文：永康令，赤乌八年，分乌伤上浦立。
现代文：永康令，赤乌八年分割乌伤、上浦设置。
English: Yongkang order, Chao Wu eight years of division of Wuxia, Shangpu set up.

古文：信安令，汉献帝初平三年，分太末立曰新安。
现代文：信安令，汉献帝初平三年，分割太末设置新安。
English: According to the Xin'an Decree, the Han Dynasty was divided into three years of peace at the beginning and three years of peace at the end.

古文：晋武帝太康元年更名。
现代文：晋武帝太康元年改称信安。
English: In the first year of the Jin Dynasty, Emperor Taikang changed his name to Suichang.

古文：吴宁令，汉献帝兴平二年，孙氏分诸暨立。
现代文：吴宁令，汉献帝兴平二年，孙氏分割诸暨而设置。
English: It was established in the second year of the reign of Emperor Xingping of the Han Dynasty by the order of Emperor Wu Ning, after the Sun Dynasty was divided into several dynasties.

古文：丰安令，汉献帝兴平二年，孙氏分诸暨立。
现代文：丰安令，汉献帝兴平二年，孙氏分割诸暨而设置。
English: According to the Feng'an edict, it was set up in the second year of Emperor Xingping's reign, when the Sun Dynasty was divided into several dynasties.

古文：定阳令，汉献帝建安二十三年，孙氏分信安立。
现代文：定阳令，汉献帝建安二十三年，孙氏分割信安而设置。
English: It was set up by the order of Dingyang, the Han Emperor Jianan in 23 years, and the Sun Dynasty divided Xin'an.

古文：遂昌令，孙权赤乌二年，分太末立曰平昌。
现代文：遂昌令，孙权赤乌二年，分割太末设置平昌。
English: Sui Chang ordered Sun Quan to set up PyeongChang in the second year of Chao Wu.

古文：晋武帝太康元年更名。
现代文：晋武帝太康元年改称遂昌。
English: In the first year of the Jin Dynasty, Emperor Taikang changed his name to Suichang.

古文：临海太守，本会稽东部都尉。
现代文：临海太守，原本是会擅束部都尉。
English: Linhai Taishou was originally a lieutenant of the Imperial Garrison.

古文：前汉都尉治鄞，后汉分会稽为吴郡，疑是都尉徙治章安也。
现代文：并汉时都尉治所在鄞，后漠时分割会稽设置吴郡，都尉的治所可能移到童室了。
English: And in Han Dynasty, the governor's office was located in Xing, and in the Later Han Dynasty, the division of Wu County was set up. The governor's office may have been moved to the nursery.

古文：孙亮太平二年立。
现代文：孙亮太平二年时设置。
English: It was set up when Sun Liang was two years old.

古文：领县五，户三千九百六十一，口二万四千二百二十六。
现代文：领五县。户三千九百六十一，人二万四千二百二十六。
English: He was in charge of five counties, with 3,961 households and 24,226 people.

古文：去京都水二千一十九，陆同。
现代文：距京都水路有二千零一十九里，陆路距离相同。
English: It is 2,019 miles from Kyoto by water and the same distance by land.

古文：章安令，《续汉志》： 故治，闽中地，光武更名。 
现代文：章安令，《续汉志》说： 旧冶县，地处闽生，光武帝时改名章安。 
English: Zhang An's decree, "Continuation of Han Zhi" said: Former Ye County, located in Zhousheng, changed its name to Zhang An when Emperor Guangwu.

古文：《晋太康记》： 本鄞县南之回浦乡，汉章帝章和中立。 
现代文：《晋太康记》则说： 原本是鄞县南部的浦乡县，汉章帝章和年间设置。 
English: "Jin Taikang Ji" said: Originally, it was set up in Puxiang County in the south of Handan County, during the reign of Emperor Zhang of Han.

古文：未详孰是。
现代文：不知道谁说的对。
English: I don't know who's right.

古文：临海令，吴分章安立。
现代文：临海令，东吴分割章安而设置。
English: It was set up in accordance with the Linhai Decree and the East-West Division of Zhang'an.

古文：始丰令，吴立曰始平，晋武帝太康元年更名。
现代文：始丰令，东吴设置时曰始平，晋武帝太康元年改称始丰。
English: According to the Shifeng Decree, Dongwu was called Shihping when it was set up, and it was renamed Shifeng in the first year of the reign of Emperor Taikang.

古文：宁海令，何志，汉旧县。
现代文：宁海令，何承天《地志》说是汉代旧县。
English: Ninghai County was said to be an old county during the Han Dynasty in "Geography" by He Chengten.

古文：按《二汉志》、《晋太康地志》无。
现代文：按《前后汉志》、《晋太康地志》都无记载。
English: According to the "Anterior and Posterior Han History" and the "History of the Jin and Taikang Dynasties," there is no record.

古文：乐安令，晋康帝分始丰立。
现代文：乐安令，晋康帝分割始丰而设置。
English: According to the Le An Ruling, Emperor Jinkang divided Shifeng and set it up.

古文：永嘉太守，晋明帝太宁元年，分临海立。
现代文：永嘉太守，晋明帝太宁元年，分割临海而设置。
English: Yongjia Taishu, the first year of the reign of Emperor Taining of the Jin and Ming dynasties, was divided and set up along the coast.

古文：领县五，户六千二百五十，口三万六千六百八十。
现代文：领五县。户六千二百五十，人口三万六千六百八十。
English: He was in charge of five counties, with 6,250 households and a population of 36,680.

古文：去京都水二千八百，陆二千六百四十。
现代文：距京都水路有二干八百里，陆路有二千六百四十里。
English: It is 2,800 miles by water and 2,640 miles by land from Kyoto.

古文：永宁令，汉顺帝永建四年，分章安东瓯乡立，或云顺帝永和三年立。
现代文：永宁令，汉顺帝永建四年，分章安的东瓯乡而设置，又有人说是顺帝永和三年设置的。
English: According to Yongning's order, Han Shundi Yongjian was built in four years, and it was set up in Donglu Township of Zhang'an, and some people said that it was set up by Shundi Yonghe in three years.

古文：安固令，吴立曰罗阳，孙皓改曰安阳；晋武帝太康元年更名。
现代文：安固令，东吴设置时名罗阳，孙皓时改名安阳。晋武帝太康元年改称安固。
English: According to the Angur edict, Dongwu was named Luoyang when it was established, and changed its name to Anyang when it was ruled by Sun Yat-sen. It was renamed Angur in the first year of the reign of Emperor Taikang.

古文：松阳令，吴立。
现代文：松阳令，东吴设置。
English: Songyang order, Dongwu set up.

古文：乐成令，晋孝武宁康三年，分永宁立。
现代文：乐成令，晋孝武宁康三年，分割永宁而设置。
English: According to the order of Le Cheng, Jin Xiao Wu Ning Kang three years, Yongning was divided and set up.

古文：横阳令，晋武帝太康四年，以横藇船屯为始阳，仍复更名。
现代文：横阳令，晋武帝太康四年，以横黄船屯设置始阳县，后来又改名横阳县。
English: In the 4th year of Emperor Taikang's reign, the county was set up as Xiyang County with the name of Xiyang Huangfuntun. Later, it was renamed as Xiyang County.

古文：新安太守，汉献帝建安十三年，孙权分丹阳立曰新都，晋武帝太康元年更名。
现代文：新安太守。汉献帝建安十三年，孙权时分割丹阳而设置新都，晋武帝太康元年改称新安。
English: It was renamed Xin'an in the first year of the reign of Emperor Taikang of the Jin Dynasty.

古文：领县五，户一万二千五十八，口三万六千六百五十一。
现代文：领五县。户一万二千零五十八，人口三万六千六百五十一。
English: The leader of five counties, with 12,058 households and a population of 36,651.

古文：去京都水一千八百六十，陆一千八百。
现代文：距京都水路计有一千八百六十里，陆路一千八百里。
English: It is 1,860 miles from Kyoto by water and 1,800 miles by land.

古文：始新令，孙权分歙立。
现代文：始新令，孙权时分割歙地而设置。
English: At the beginning of the new era, the grandson's right was set up by dividing the land.

古文：遂安令，孙权分歙为新定县，晋武帝太康元年更名。
现代文：遂安令，孙权时分割歙地置新定县，晋武帝太康元年改称遂安。
English: Sui'an was renamed Sui'an in the first year of the reign of Emperor Taikang of the Jin Dynasty.

古文：歙令，汉旧县。
现代文：歙令，汉代旧县。
English: 令, Han Dynasty old county.

古文：海宁令，孙权分歙为休阳县，晋武帝太康元年更名。
现代文：海宁令，孙权时分割歙地置休阳县，晋武帝太康元年改称海宁。
English: According to the order of Haining, when Sun Quan was divided, it was placed in Xuyang County. In the first year of the Jin Dynasty, Emperor Taikang changed the name to Haining.

古文：分歙置诸县之始，又分置黎阳，大明八年，省并海宁。
现代文：开始分割歙地设置诸县时，又曾分置黎阳县，大明八年，并入海宁。
English: When the division of Shandong into counties began, Liyang County was also divided and merged into Haining eight years later.

古文：黟令，汉旧县。
现代文：黟令，汉代旧县。
English: 令, Han Dynasty old county.

古文：南徐州刺史，晋永嘉大乱，幽、冀、青、并、兗州及徐州之淮北流民，相率过淮，亦有过江在晋陵郡界者。
现代文：南徐州刺史，晋代永嘉大乱的时候，幽州、冀州、青州、并州、兖州以及徐州的淮北流民，都相率渡过淮河，也有渡过长江停留在晋陵郡境内的。
English: According to the history of southern Xuzhou, during the Yongjia Rebellion of the Jin Dynasty, the Huaibei refugees from Yuzhou, Jizhou, Qingzhou, Binzhou, Zhangzhou and Xuzhou all crossed the Huai River, and some also crossed the Yangtze River to stay in the territory of Jinling County.

古文：晋成帝咸和四年，司空郗鉴又徙流民之在淮南者于晋陵诸县，其徙过江南及留在江北者，并立侨郡县以司牧之。徐、兗二州或治江北，江北又侨立幽、冀、青、并四州。
现代文：晋成帝咸和四年，司空郗鉴又将滞留在淮南的流民迁徙到江南晋陵郡各县，并替那些迁到江南和留在江北的人暂借地建立侨郡侨县来加以管理徐、兖二州本来治理江北，在江北又暂借地置幽、冀、青、并四州。
English: In the fourth year of Emperor Jincheng's reign of Haman and He, the Empress Dowager Jiaojian also moved the exiles stranded in Huainan to Jinling County in the south of the Yangtze River, and established the overseas Chinese counties for those who moved to the south of the Yangtze River and those who stayed in the north of the Yangtze River to manage them. The two states of Xu and He originally governed the north of the Yangtze River, and in the north of the Yangtze River, the temporarily borrowed land was placed in You, Jie, Qing, and Shizhou.

古文：安帝义熙七年，始分淮北为北徐，淮南犹为徐州。
现代文：安帝义熙七年，才开始将徐州在淮北的部分称为北徐州，淮南的部分仍然称徐州。
English: It was only in the seventh year of An Di's reign that he began to call the part of Xuzhou in Huaibei as North Xuzhou, while the part in South Huaibei was still called Xuzhou.

古文：后又以幽、冀合徐，青、并合兗。
现代文：后来又将幽州、冀州合并到徐州，将青州、并州合并到兖州。
English: Later, Yuzhou and Jizhou were merged into Xuzhou, and Qingzhou and Wenzhou were merged into Ganzhou.

古文：武帝永初二年，加徐州曰南徐，而淮北但曰徐。
现代文：武帝永初二年，将徐州称为南徐州，而将在淮北的北徐州衹称为徐州。
English: In the second year of Emperor Wu Yongzheng, Xuzhou was called South Xuzhou, while North Xuzhou in Huaibei was called Xuzhou.

古文：文帝元嘉八年，更以江北为南兗州，江南为南徐州，治京口，割扬州之晋陵、兗州之九郡侨在江南者属焉，故南徐州备有徐、兗、幽、冀、青、并、扬七州郡邑。
现代文：文帝元嘉八年，又以江北地区称南兖州，江南地区称南徐州，治所在京口，分割扬州的晋陵、兖州的九个借地设置的郡中在江南的部分归属于南徐州，所以南徐州兼有徐、兖、幽、冀、青、并、扬七州的郡县。
English: In the eighth year of Emperor Wen of the Yuan Dynasty, the area north of the Yangtze River was called Nanluozhou, and the area south of the Yangtze River was called Nanxuzhou. The administrative center of Nanluozhou was located in Jingkou, and the part of the county in the south of the Yangtze River that was divided into nine leased lands of Jinling and Zhangzhou in Yangzhou belonged to Nanxuzhou. Therefore, Nanxuzhou had counties and counties in seven states including Xu, Min, Yu, Jie, Qing, and Yang.

古文：《永初二年郡国志》又有南沛、南下邳、广平、广陵、盱眙、钟离、海陵、山阳八郡。
现代文：《永初二年郡国志》又载有南沛、南下邳、广乎、广陵、盱眙、钟离、海陵、山阳八郡。
English: The "County History of the First Two Years of Yongzheng" also contains eight counties of Nanpei, Nanxiaojing, Guanghu, Guangling, Handan, Zhongrui, Hailing and Sanyang.

古文：南沛、广陵、海陵、山阳、盱眙、钟离割属南兗，南下邳并南彭城，广平并南泰山。
现代文：南沛、广陵、海陵、山阳、盱眙、钟离割属于南兖州，南下邳合并于南彭城，广乎并入南泰山。
English: Nanpei, Guangling, Hailing, Sanyang, Handan and Zhongli all belong to Nancheng Prefecture. Nancheng and Handan were merged into Nanpeng City, and Nancheng was merged into Nantaishan.

古文：今领郡十七，县六十三，户七万二千四百七十二，口四十二万六百四十。
现代文：现在南徐州领有十七郡，六十三县。户七万二千四百七十二，人口四十二万零六百四十。
English: At present, South Xuzhou has 17 counties and 63 counties, with 72,472 households and a population of 4,206,440.

古文：去京都水二百四十，陆二百。
现代文：距京都水路有二百四十里，陆路有二百里。
English: It is 240 miles by water and 200 miles by land from Kyoto.

古文：南东海太守，晋元帝初，割吴郡海虞县之北境为东海郡，立郯、朐、利城三县，而祝其、襄贲等县寄治曲阿。
现代文：南东海太守，东海郡另见。晋元帝初年，分割吴郡海虞县的北部地区设置束海郡，设立郯、朐、利城三县，而将祝其、襄贲等县的治所设在曲阿县。
English: In the first year of Emperor Jin Yuan, he divided the northern region of Haiyu County, Wu County, and set up Sokhai County, and established three counties, namely, Handan, Handan and Licheng, while the administrative center of Zhuqi County, Xiangfan County and other counties was set up in Qu'a County.

古文：穆帝永和中，郡移出京口，郯等三县亦寄治于京。
现代文：穆帝永和年间，东海郡移出京口，郯、朐、利城三县的治所也都设在京口。
English: During the reign of Emperor Mu Di Yonghe, Donghai County was moved out of Beijing, and the government offices of the three counties of Handan, Handan and Licheng were also set up in Beijing.

古文：文帝元嘉八年立南徐，以东海为治下郡，以丹徒属焉。
现代文：文帝元嘉八年设置南徐州，以束海作为南徐州管理下的郡，以丹徒作为束海郡的属县。
English: In the eighth year of Emperor Wen of the Yuan Dynasty, Southern Xuzhou was established, with Sokhai as a county under the administration of Southern Xuzhou, and Dantu as a subordinate county of Sokhai County.

古文：郯、利城并为实土。
现代文：郯县和利城都有了管辖的实际领土。
English: Both Lixian County and Licheng have the actual territory under their jurisdiction.

古文：《永初郡国》有襄贲、祝其、厚丘、西隰四县，文帝元嘉十二年，省厚丘并襄贲。
现代文：《永初郡国志》有襄贲、另见。祝其、厚丘、都是汉代旧名。西隰何氏《志》说是东晋所置。四县，文帝元嘉十二年，撤厚丘将它并入襄贲县。
English: "Yongchu County National History" has Xiangyu, see also. Zhuqi and Houqiu are both old names in the Han Dynasty. Xishuo He's "History" says that it was located in the Eastern Jin Dynasty. Four counties, in the twelfth year of Emperor Wen, Wu Houqiu merged it into Xiangyu County.

古文：何、徐无厚丘，余与《永初郡国》同。
现代文：何氏《志》、徐氏《志》都不载厚丘，其余都与《永初郡国志》相同。
English: Ho's "Zhi" and Xu's "Zhi" do not contain thick hills, and the rest are the same as "Yongchu County National History."

古文：其襄贲、祝其、西隰，是徐志后所省也。
现代文：襄贲、祝其、西隰，都是徐氏《志》写成后所撤销的。
English: Xiangqi, Zhuqi and Xidi were all revoked after Xu's "Dream" was written.

古文：领县六，户五千三百四十二，口三万三千六百五十八。
现代文：东海郡领有六县。户五千三百四十二，人口三万三千六百五十八。
English: There are six counties in Tokaigun, with 53,422 households and a population of 33,658.

古文：郯令，汉旧名。
现代文：郯令，漠代旧名。
English: Shirei, an old name from the desert era.

古文：文帝元嘉八年，分丹徒之岘西为境。
现代文：文帝元嘉八年，分割丹徒的岘西作为郯县的辖境。
English: In the eighth year of Emperor Wen's reign, the western part of Shaanxi Province was divided off from Dantu Province and became the jurisdiction of Shixian County.

古文：丹徒令，本属晋陵，古名硃方，后名谷阳，秦改曰丹徒。
现代文：丹徒令，原本属于晋陵，古代名朱方，后来又名谷阳，秦改称丹徒。
English: Dantuling, originally belonging to Jinling, the ancient name of Zhu Fang, later also known as Guyang, Qin renamed Dantuling.

古文：孙权嘉禾三年，改曰武进。
现代文：孙权嘉禾三年，改名武进。
English: After three years, Sun Quan Jiahe changed his name to Wu Jin.

古文：晋武帝太康三年，复曰丹徒。
现代文：晋武帝太康三年，恢复称丹徒。
English: In the third year of Emperor Jinwu's reign, Taikang was reinstated as Dantu.

古文：武进令，晋武帝太康二年，分丹徒、曲阿立。
现代文：武进令，晋武帝太康二年，分割丹徒、曲阿而设置。
English: In the second year of the reign of Emperor Wu Jin and Emperor Taikang of the Jin Dynasty, Dantu and Qua were divided and set up separately.

古文：毗陵令，宋孝武大明末，度属此。
现代文：毗陵令，宋孝武帝大明末年，一度属于东迤郡。
English: According to the Funeral Regulations, in the late Ming Dynasty of Emperor Song Xiaowu, it once belonged to Donglu County.

古文：朐令，汉旧名。
现代文：朐令，漠代旧名。
English: Shirei, an old name from the desert era.

古文：晋江左侨立。
现代文：东晋时借地重置。
English: Jinjiang Zuoqiao Station.

古文：宋孝武世，分郯西界为土。
现代文：宋孝武帝时，分割郯县西界为它的辖土。
English: During the reign of Emperor Song Xiaowu, the western part of Jixian County was divided and became its territory.

古文：利城令，汉旧名。
现代文：利城令，漠代旧名。
English: Risongling, the old name of the Desert Dynasty.

古文：晋江左侨立。
现代文：东晋时借地重置。
English: Jinjiang Zuoqiao Station.

古文：宋文帝世，与郡俱为实土。
现代文：宋文帝时，县与束海郡都有实际属土。
English: At the time of Emperor Songwen, both the county and Sokhaigun were actually part of the motherland.

古文：南琅邪太守，晋乱，琅邪国人随元帝过江千余户，太兴三年，立怀德县。
现代文：南琅邪太守，琅邪郡另见。晋混乱时，琅邪国人跟随置元童过辽的人有一千多户，左兴三年设置怀擅昼。
English: When the Jin Dynasty was in disarray, there were more than a thousand households of the people of Yiyang who followed the people who followed the people who followed the people who followed the people who followed the people who followed the people who followed the people who followed the people who followed the people who followed the people who followed the people who followed the people who followed the people who followed the people who followed the people who followed the people.

古文：丹杨虽有琅邪相而无此地。
现代文：旦阳虽然有退邪国相但并无王国实际领有的土地。
English: Although Tanyang has the appearance of returning evil to the country, there is no land actually owned by the kingdom.

古文：成帝咸康元年，桓温领郡，镇江乘之蒲洲金城上，求割丹阳之江乘县境立郡，又分江乘地立临沂县。
现代文：成帝咸康元年，桓温领琅邪郡，镇守在江乘县的渣洲金继，请求割及鳗的逊设置琅邪郡，又分割丝垂壁的部分土地设立临。
English: In the first year of Emperor Xiankang's reign, when Guanwen was in charge of the county, the town's governor, Jiezhou Jinji, who was in Jiangren County at the time, requested that the county be divided into two parts, and a part of the land along the silk curtain wall be set aside for the new county.

古文：《永初郡国》有阳都、费、即丘三县，并割临沂及建康为土。
现代文：《永初郡国志》有阳都、前汉属城阳，后汉、《晋太康地志》属琅邪费、即丘都另见。三县，并且分割临沂及建康作为三县的土地。
English: "Yongchu County National History" has Yangdu, the former Han belongs to Chengyang, the latter Han, "Jin Taikang Local History" belongs to Xizhe, that is, Qiudu, see also. Three counties, and divide Linyi and Jiankang as the land of the three counties.

古文：费县治宫城之北。
现代文：费县治理宫城的北部。
English: Fei County governs the northern part of Miyagi.

古文：元嘉八年，省即丘并阳都。
现代文：元嘉八年，撤销即丘县，将它并入阳都。
English: In the eighth year of Yuan Jia, Jiuqiu County was abolished and merged into Yangdu.

古文：十五年，省费并建康、临沂。
现代文：十五年，撤费县。将它并入建康与临沂。
English: Fifteen years later, it was merged into Jiankang and Linyi.

古文：孝武大明五年，省阳都并临沂。
现代文：孝武帝大明五年，撤销阳都，将它并入临沂。
English: In the fifth year of Emperor Xiaowu's reign, Yangdu was abolished and merged into Linyi.

古文：今领县二，户二千七百八十九，口一万八千六百九十七。
现代文：现在领二县。产二千七百八十九，人口一万八千六百九十七。
English: It now leads two counties, with an output of 2,789, and a population of 18,697.

古文：去州水二百，陆一百；去京都水一百六十。
现代文：距南徐州水路有二百里，陆路一百里。距京都水路有一百六十里。
English: It is 200 miles from the South Xuzhou Waterway, 100 miles from the land route, and 160 miles from the Kyoto Waterway.

古文：临沂令，汉旧名。
现代文：临沂令，汉代旧名。
English: Linyi order, the old name of the Han Dynasty.

古文：前汉属东海，后汉、晋属琅邪。
现代文：前汉时属于束海，后汉和晋代属琅邪。
English: The former Han Dynasty belonged to Sokha, and the later Han and Jin Dynasties belonged to Shao.

古文：江乘令，汉旧县。
现代文：江乘令，汉代旧县。
English: Jiang Rongling, Han Dynasty old county.

古文：本属丹阳，吴省为典农都尉。
现代文：本来属于丹阳，东吴时撤县为典农都尉。
English: Originally, it belonged to Danyang, and Dongwu Shiyu County was the capital of Fenyong.

古文：晋武帝太康元年复立。
现代文：晋武帝太康元年恢复江乘县。
English: In the first year of the Jin Dynasty, Emperor Taikang restored Jiangren County.

古文：晋陵太守，吴时分吴郡无锡以西为毗陵典农校尉。
现代文：晋陵太守，东吴时分吴郡无锡以西为毗陵典农校尉。
English: He was the governor-general of Jinling and the lieutenant-colonel of Feiling-Tiannong to the west of Wuxi, Wu County, in the Eastern Wu Dynasty.

古文：晋武帝太康二年，省校尉，立以为毗陵郡，治丹徒，后复还毗陵。
现代文：晋武帝太康二年，撤典农校尉，设置毗陵郡，治所在丹徒，后来又将治所迁回毗陵。
English: In the second year of the reign of Emperor Taikang of the Jin Dynasty, the agricultural lieutenant of Dian was removed, and Feiling County was set up, with its capital in Dantu. Later, the capital was moved back to Feiling.

古文：东海王越世子名毗，而东海国故食毗陵。永嘉五年，帝改为晋陵。
现代文：东海王刘越的世子名毗，而束海国从前的食邑就在毗陵，永嘉五年，元帝将毗陵改为晋陵。
English: The descendant of the East Sea King Liu Yue was named Fili, and the former food village of the Sokha Kingdom was in Fili. In the fifth year of Yongjia, Emperor Yuan changed Fili to Jinling.

古文：始自毗陵徙治丹徒。
现代文：才将治所从毗陵迁移到丹徒。
English: It was only then that the clinic was moved from Viling to Dantu.

古文：太兴初，郡及丹徒县悉治京口，郗鉴复徙还丹徒。安帝义熙九年，复还晋陵。
现代文：太兴初年，晋匿郡和丹徒县的治所都在京口，郗鉴又将治所迁回丹徒，安帝义熙九年，又迁回晋陵。
English: In the first year of Taixing, the government offices of Jinan County and Dantu County were both located in Jingkou. The government office was moved back to Dantu by Xuan Jian, and moved back to Jinling in the ninth year of Andi Yixi.

古文：本属扬州，文帝元嘉八年，度属南徐。
现代文：原本属扬州，文帝元嘉八年一度改属南徐。
English: Originally belonging to Yangzhou, Wendi Yuanjia was transferred to Nanxu once every eight years.

古文：领县六，户一万五千三百八十二，口八万一百一十三。
现代文：领六县。户一万五千三百八十二，人口八万零一百一十三。
English: It is divided into six counties, with 15,382 households and a population of 80,113.

古文：去州水一百七十五，陆同；去京都水四百，陆同。
现代文：距南徐州水路有一百七十五里，陆路同。距京都水路有四百里，陆路同。
English: It is 175 miles away from the South Xuzhou Waterway and the same distance by land. It is 400 miles away from the Kyoto Waterway and the same distance by land.

古文：晋陵令，本名延陵，汉改曰毗陵，后与郡俱改。
现代文：晋陵令，原名延陵，汉代改名毗陵，后来县与郡都改为晋陵。
English: Jinlingling, originally named Yanling, changed its name to Binling in the Han Dynasty, and later the county and county were changed to Jinling.

古文：延陵令，晋武帝太康二年，分曲阿之延陵乡立。
现代文：延陵令，晋武帝太康二年，分割曲阿的延陵而设置延陵乡。
English: In the second year of Emperor Taikang of the Jin Dynasty, Yanling Township was established by dividing Qu's Yanling Mausoleum.

古文：无锡令，汉旧县。
现代文：无锡令，汉代旧县。
English: Wuxi, the old county in the Han Dynasty.

古文：吴省，晋武帝太康元年复立。
现代文：东吴时撤销，晋武帝太康元年恢复设置。
English: It was revoked in the Eastern Wu Dynasty and reinstated by Emperor Taikang in the first year of the Jin Dynasty.

古文：南沙令，本吴县司盐都尉署。
现代文：南沙令，原本是东吴的司盐都尉公署所在地。
English: Nansha Ling, which was originally the location of Dongwu's Shi Yatong Public Security Bureau.

古文：吴时名沙中。
现代文：东吴时名沙中。
English: Dongwu was once famous for its sand.

古文：吴平后，立暨阳县割属之。
现代文：东吴被平定后，设置暨阳县时将主蝗割属暨屡。
English: After Dongwu was pacified, the main locusts were divided into several groups when Jiang County was established.

古文：晋成帝咸康七年，罢盐署，立以为南沙县。
现代文：晋成帝咸康七年，撤销盐署，设置南沙县。
English: In the seventh year of Emperor Xiankang's reign, the Salt Administration was abolished and Nansha County was established.

古文：曲阿令，本名云阳，秦始皇改曰曲阿。
现代文：曲阿令，原名云阳，秦始皇时改为曲阿。
English: Qu'aling, originally named Yunyang, was changed to Qu'ao during the reign of Qin Shihuang.

古文：吴嘉禾三年，复曰云阳。
现代文：东吴嘉禾三年，恢复称云阳。
English: After three years, Dongwu Jiahe was reinstated as Yunyang.

古文：晋武帝太康二年，复曰曲阿。
现代文：晋武帝太康二年又改称曲阿。
English: In the second year of the reign of Emperor Jinwu Taikang, the name was changed to Qu'ao.

古文：暨阳令，晋武帝太康二年，分无锡、毗陵立。
现代文：暨腿令，晋武帝太康二年，分割无锡、毗陵而设置。
English: In the second year of Emperor Taikang's reign, the leg order was issued to divide Wuxi and Feiling.

古文：义兴太守，晋惠帝永兴元年，分吴兴之阳羡、丹阳之永世立。
现代文：义兴太守，晋惠帝永兴元年，分割吴兴的阳羡、丹阳的永世而设置。
English: In the first year of the reign of Emperor Yixing, Emperor Yongxing of the Jin Dynasty divided the kingdom into the Kingdom of Wuxing and the Kingdom of Danyang.

古文：永世寻还丹阳。
现代文：永世不久还又划归丹阳。
English: Soon after, it was transferred to Danyang again.

古文：本扬州，明帝泰始四年，度南徐。
现代文：本来属于扬州，明帝泰始四年，一度属南徐州。
English: Originally it belonged to Yangzhou, but in the first four years of the Ming Dynasty, it once belonged to South Xuzhou.

古文：领县五，户一万三千四百九十六，口八万九千五百二十五。
现代文：领有五县。产一万三千四百九十六，人口八万九千五百二十五。
English: It is divided into five counties, with an output of 13,496 and a population of 89,525.

古文：去州水四百，陆同；去京都水四百九十，陆同。
现代文：距南徐州水路有四百里，陆路相同。距京都水路有四百九十里，陆路相同。
English: It is four hundred miles from the South Xuzhou Waterway and the same distance by land. It is four hundred and ninety miles from the Kyoto Waterway and the same distance by land.

古文：阳羡令，汉旧县。
现代文：阳羡令，漠代旧县。
English: Yang Zhenling, the leader of the old county in the desert era.

古文：临津令，故属阳羡，立郡分立。
现代文：临津令，从前属阳羡，设立义兴郡时独立成县。
English: Linjin County, formerly part of Yangzi County, became an independent county when Yixing County was established.

古文：义乡令，故属长城、阳羡，立郡分立。
现代文：义乡令，从前属长城、阳羡，设置义兴郡时分出独立成县。
English: According to the Yixing Township Ordinance, Yixing County, formerly part of the Great Wall and Yangzi, was set up and became an independent county.

古文：国山令，故属阳羡，立郡分立。
现代文：国山令，从前属阳羡，设置义兴郡时分出独立成县。
English: The Guoshan Decree, which used to be the envy of the world, set up Yixing County when it became an independent county.

古文：南兰陵太守，领县二，户一千五百九十三，口一万六百三十四。兰陵令。
现代文：绥安令，武帝永初三年，划分宣城的广德、吴兴的故鄣、长城及阳羡、义乡五县的部分土地而设置。南兰陵太守，兰陵郡另见。领有二县。户一千五百九十三，人口一万零六百三十四。兰陵令。
English: It was established in the third year of Emperor Wu's reign, in accordance with the Edict of Jian'an, to divide a portion of the land of the five counties of Xuancheng, Guangde, Wu Xing's Old Town, the Great Wall and Yangcheng, and Yixiang. See also Nan Lanling Taishu, Lanling County. There are two counties. Households: 1,593, population: 10,634. Lanling Ruling.

古文：承令，文帝元嘉十二年，以合乡县并承。
现代文：承令，文帝元嘉十二年，以合乡县并入承县。
English: In the twelfth year of Emperor Wen's reign, Hexiang County was merged into Chengxiang County.

古文：南东莞太守，《永初郡国》又有盖县。
现代文：南东莞太守，东莞郡另见。《永初郡国志》又有盖县。另见。
English: Nan Dongguan Taishu, Dongguan County, see also. "Yongchu County National History" also has Gai County. See also.

古文：领县三，户一千四百二十四，口九千八百五十四。
现代文：领三县。户一千四百二十四，人口九千八百五十四。
English: He was in charge of three counties, with 1,424 households and a population of 9,854.

古文：莒令。
现代文：莒令。
English: That's an order.

古文：东莞令，文帝元嘉十二年，以盖县并此。
现代文：东莞令，文帝元嘉十二年，以盖县并入东莞县。
English: According to the Dongguan Decree, in the 12th year of Emperor Wen's reign, Yigai County was merged into Dongguan County.

古文：姑幕令，汉旧名。
现代文：姑幕令，汉代旧名。
English: 姑幕令, the old name during the Han Dynasty.

古文：临淮太守，汉武帝元狩六年立，光武以并东海。
现代文：临淮太守，汉武帝元狩六年设置。光武帝将它并入东海。
English: Emperor Guangwu annexed it to the East Sea.

古文：明帝永平十五年，复分临淮之故地为下邳郡。
现代文：明帝永平十五年，又分割临淮的旧地设下邳郡。
English: In the 15th year of Yongping of the Ming Dynasty, the former area of Linyu and Huai was divided and set up as Xiamen County.

古文：晋武帝太康元年，复分下邳之淮南为临淮郡，治盱眙。
现代文：晋武帝太康元年，又分出下邳的淮南置临淮郡，治所在盱眙。
English: In the first year of the reign of Emperor Taikang of the Jin Dynasty, Huainan, which was part of the Lower Yangtze, was placed in Linhuai County, and the administrative center was in Yancheng.

古文：江左侨立。
现代文：江东时借地设侨郡。
English: At that time, the leased land in the east of the Yangtze River was set up in Qiao County.

古文：《永初郡国》又有盱眙县，何、徐无。
现代文：《永初郡国志》又有盱眙县，何氏《志》、徐氏《志》无盱眙。
English: The "Yongchu County National History" also has the county of Zou, and the "Zhi" of He and the "Zhi" of Xu are well known.

古文：领县七，户三千七百一十一，口二万二千八百八十六。
现代文：领有七县。户三千七百一十一，人口二万二千八百八十六。
English: It is divided into seven counties, with 3,711 households and a population of 22,886.

古文：海西令，前汉属东海，后汉、晋属广陵。
现代文：海西令，前汉时属东海，后汉时晋伐时属于广陵。
English: During the Western Han Dynasty, it belonged to the East Sea, and during the Later Han Dynasty, it belonged to Guangling.

古文：射阳令，前汉属临淮，后汉属广陵，三国时废，晋武帝太康元年复立。
现代文：射阳令，前汉时属临淮，后汉时属广陵，三国时废，晋武帝太康元年恢复建制。
English: Shayang order, the former Han Dynasty was Linhuai, the later Han Dynasty was Guangling, the Three Kingdoms was abolished, and Emperor Taikang of the Jin Dynasty restored the system in the first year.

古文：凌令，前汉属泗水，后汉属广陵，三国时废，晋武帝太康二年又立，属广陵。
现代文：凌令，前汉时属泗水，后汉时属广陵，三国时废，晋武帝太康二年又恢复设置，仍属广陵。
English: Ling Ling, the former Han Dynasty was Surabaya, the later Han Dynasty was Guangling, the Three Kingdoms was abolished, and Emperor Taikang of the Jin Dynasty restored it two years later, still belonging to Guangling.

古文：淮浦令，前汉属临淮，后汉属下邳，《晋太康地志》属广陵。
现代文：淮浦令，前汉时属临淮，后汉时属下邳，《晋太康地志》记载属广陵。
English: According to the records of Huai Pu Ling, it belonged to Linhuai in the former Han Dynasty and to Jiaojing in the later Han Dynasty. According to the records of Jin Taikang Di Zhi, it belonged to Guangling.

古文：淮阴令，前汉属临淮，后汉属下邳，《晋太康地志》属广陵。
现代文：淮阴令，前汉时属临淮，后汉时属下邳，《晋太康地志》记载属广陵。
English: According to the Huaiyin Emperor's edict, it belonged to Linhuai in the former Han Dynasty and to Jiaojing in the later Han Dynasty. According to the "History of Jin Taikang," it belonged to Guangling.

古文：今领县三，户一千九百五，口一万六百三十。
现代文：二县。现在领有三县。户一千九百零五，人口一万零六百三十。
English: Two counties. Now there are three counties. The number of households is 1905, and the population is 10,630.

古文：司吾令，前汉属东海，后汉属下邳，《晋太康地志》属临淮。
现代文：司吾令，前汉时属东海，后汉时属下邳，《晋太康地志》记载属临淮。
English: Shigouring, in the former Han Dynasty, belonged to the East Sea, in the later Han Dynasty, it belonged to the Lower Yangtze River, and the record in the "History of Jin Taikang" belongs to Linhuai.

古文：后废帝元徽五年五月，改名桐梧，顺帝升明元年复旧。
现代文：后废帝元徽五年五月，改名为梱捂，顺帝升明元年恢复旧名。
English: After the abolition of the imperial emblem in May of the fifth year of the Yuan Dynasty, it was renamed Baoding, and the old name was restored in the first year of the Shun Dynasty.

古文：徐令，前汉属临淮，后汉属下邳，《晋太康地志》属临淮。
现代文：徐令，前汉时属临淮，后汉时属工邳，《晋太康地志》中属临淮。
English: Xu Ling, in the former Han Dynasty, belonged to Linhuai, in the later Han Dynasty, he belonged to Gongye, and in the "History of Jin Taikang," he belonged to Linhuai.

古文：阳乐令，汉旧名，本属辽西。
现代文：阳乐令，汉代旧名，本来属辽西。
English: Yangle-ling, the old name of the Han Dynasty, originally belonged to West Liao.

古文：文帝元嘉十三年，以下相并阳乐。
现代文：文帝元嘉十三年，将工扭并入阳乐。
English: In the thirteenth year of Wen Di Yuan Jia, he merged the work twist into the yangle.

古文：南彭城太守，江左侨立。
现代文：南彭城太守，江左时借地重置。
English: Nan Pengcheng Daju, Jiang Zuo when the lease is reset.

古文：晋明帝又立南下邳郡，成帝又立南沛郡。
现代文：晋明帝又设置南下邳郡，成帝又设南沛郡。
English: Emperor Jinming also set up Nanjie County, and Emperor Chengdu also set up Nanpei County.

古文：文帝元嘉中，分南沛为北沛，属南兗，而南沛犹属南徐。
现代文：文帝元嘉年间，划分出南沛郡部分地区置北沛郡，归属于南兖州，而南沛郡仍属南徐州。
English: During the reign of Emperor Wen of the Yuan Dynasty, part of Nanpei County was divided into Beibei County, which belonged to Nanluozhou, while Nanpei County was still part of Nanxuzhou.

古文：孝武大明四年，以二郡并并南彭城。
现代文：孝武帝大明四年，将南沛郡、北沛郡一起合并到南彭城。
English: In the fourth year of Emperor Xiaowu, Nanpei County and Beibei County were merged into Nanpeng City.

古文：领县十二，户一万一千七百五十八，口六万八千一百六十三。
现代文：领有十二县。户一万一千七百五十八，人口六万八千一百六十三。
English: There are 12 counties, with 11,758 households and a population of 68,163.

古文：吕令。
现代文：吕令。
English: Luling.

古文：武原令，汉旧名。
现代文：另见。武原令，汉代旧名。
English: See also: Buehara Ryo, the old name during the Han Dynasty.

古文：傅阳令，汉旧名。
现代文：傅阳令，汉代旧名。
English: Fuyangling, the old name of the Han Dynasty.

古文：蕃令，义旗初，免军户立遂诚县。武帝永初元年，改从旧名。
现代文：蕃令，另见。刘宋起兵之初，撤销军户设置遂诚县，武帝永初元年，恢复蕃县旧称。
English: At the beginning of Liu Song's military uprising, Suicheng County was revoked from military households, and in the first year of Emperor Wu Yong, the old name of Suicheng County was restored.

古文：薛令，义旗初，免军户为建熙县。永初元年，改从旧名。
现代文：薛令，另见。刘宋起兵之初，撤销军户而置建熙县，永初元年，恢复薛县旧名。
English: At the beginning of Liu Song's military uprising, military households were abolished and Jianxi County was established, and the old name of Xue County was restored in the first year of the Yongle Emperor.

古文：开阳令，前汉属东海，章帝建初五年属琅邪。
现代文：开阳令，前汉时属束海，章帝建初五年归属琅邪。
English: According to the Kaiyang Ruling, the former Han Dynasty belonged to Sokhai, and the first five years of the reign of Emperor Zhang Jian belonged to Shiji.

古文：晋侨立，犹属琅邪，安帝度属彭城。
现代文：晋代借地重置，仍归属琅邪，安帝时一度属彭城。
English: During the Jin Dynasty, the leased land was resettled, but it still belonged to Shiyan. During the Andean Dynasty, it once belonged to Pengcheng.

古文：杼秋令，汉旧名。
现代文：杼秋令，汉代旧名。
English: 秋令, old name in Han Dynasty.

古文：洨令，前汉属梁，后汉、晋属沛。
现代文：汶令，前汉时属于梁，后漠、晋时属沛。
English: Wenling, in the former Han Dynasty, belonged to Liang, in the Later Han and Jin Dynasties, it belonged to Wu.

古文：下邳令，本属南下邳。
现代文：下邳令，另见。原先属南下邳。
English: See also the Order of Lowering the Sash. Originally, it belonged to the Southern Lower Sash.

古文：北凌令，本属南下邳，二汉无，《晋太康地志》属下邳。
现代文：北浚令，原先属南下邳，两汉时无此县，《晋太康地志》记载属下邳，原先名浚县。
English: Beijunling, originally belonged to Nanjie County, there was no such county during the Han Dynasty, and the "History of Jin Taikang" recorded that it belonged to Nanjie County.

古文：本名凌，而广陵郡旧有凌县，晋武帝太康二年，以下邳之凌县非旧土而同名，改为北凌。
现代文：但广陵郡旧有浚县，晋武帝太康二年，因下邳的凌县并非旧地却同名，便将下邳的浚县改为北凌县。
English: However, Guangling County used to have Jian County. In the second year of the reign of Emperor Taikang of the Jin Dynasty, because Ling County of the Lower Yangtze River was not the old place but had the same name, Jian County of the Lower Yangtze River was changed to Beiling County.

古文：僮令，本属南下邳。
现代文：僮令，原本属南下邳。
English: 令, originally belonged to 南下.

古文：南下邳有良城县，文帝元嘉十二年并僮。
现代文：南下邳原有良城县，另见。文帝元嘉十二年并入僮县。
English: To the south is the former Yuliangcheng County, see also. It was merged into Handan County in the 12th year of Emperor Wen's reign.

古文：南清河太守，领县四，户一千八百四十九，口七千四百四。
现代文：南清河太守，领四县。户一千八百四十九，人口七千四百零四。
English: Nan Qinghe Taishou, leader of four counties. Households 1,849, population 7,404.

古文：清河令。
现代文：清河令。
English: Order of the Clear River.

古文：东武城令。
现代文：东武城令。
English: Order of Tobu Castle.

古文：绎幕令。
现代文：绎幕令。
English: The curtain call is over.

古文：贝丘令。
现代文：贝丘令。
English: Becciu's order.

古文：南高平太守，《永初郡国》又有钜野、昌邑二县。
现代文：南高平太守，《永初郡国志》又载有钜野、昌邑二县。
English: Nan Gaoping Taishu, "Yongchu County National History" also contains the two counties of Gongye and Changyi.

古文：今领县三，户一千七百一十八，口九千七百三十一。
现代文：现在领有三县。户一千七百一十八，人口九千七百三十一。
English: It is now divided into three counties, with a total of 1,718 households and a population of 9,731.

古文：金乡令。
现代文：金乡令。
English: The Jinxiang Decree.

古文：湖陆令，前汉曰湖陵，汉章帝更名。
现代文：湖陆令，前漠时称为湖陵，汉章帝时改为如今的县名。
English: Hululing County, formerly known as Huling County, changed to its current name during the Han Dynasty.

古文：高平令。文帝元嘉十八年，以钜野并高平。
现代文：高平令，文帝元嘉十八年，将钜野县并入高平。
English: In the 18th year of Emperor Wen's reign, Gongye County was merged into Gaoping.

古文：南平昌太守，领县四，户二千一百七十八，口一万一千七百四十一。
现代文：南平昌太守，领四县。户二千一百七十八，人口一万一千七百四十一。
English: The governor of Nanping Chang, leading four counties, with 2,178 households and a population of 11,741.

古文：安丘令。
现代文：安丘令。
English: Anchoring order.

古文：新乐令，二汉无，魏分平原为乐陵郡，属冀州，而新乐县属焉。
现代文：新乐令，两汉时无此县，魏国分割平原为乐陵郡，属冀州，而新乐县属于该郡。
English: Xinle County, when there was no such county between the two Han dynasties, the Wei State divided the plain into Le Ling County, which belongs to Jizhou, and Xinle County belongs to the county.

古文：晋江左立乐陵郡及诸县，后省，以新乐县属此。
现代文：柬晋时曾设立乐陵郡及诸县，后来撤销，将新乐县划归南平旦。
English: Le Ling County and other counties were established during the reign of King Jintao of Cambodia, but were later revoked, and New Le County was assigned to South Pyongan Province.

古文：东武令。
现代文：东武令。
English: The Eastern Military Command is formed.

古文：高密令，江左立高密国，后为南高密郡。
现代文：另见。高密令，另见。东晋立高密国，后来成为南高密郡。
English: See also: Gaomi Order; see also: Dongjin established Gaomi Province, which later became South Gaomi County.

古文：文帝元嘉十八年，省为高密县，属此。
现代文：《永初郡国志》又载有句阳、定陶二县。都是汉代的旧名。
English: "Yongchu County National History" also contains Guyang County and Dingtao County, both of which are old names from the Han Dynasty.

古文：南济阴太守，二汉、晋属兗州，前汉初属梁国，景帝中六年，别为济阴国，宣帝甘露二年，更名定陶国，后还曰济阴。《永初郡国》又有句阳、定陶二县今领县四，户一千六百五十五，口八千一百九十三。
现代文：现在领四县。户一千六百五十五，人口八干一百九十三。
English: He now leads four counties, with 1,655 households and a population of 83,193.

古文：城武令。
现代文：越达令。
English: Yue Darling.

古文：冤句令，汉旧名。
现代文：另见。冤句令，汉代旧名。
English: See also "Unjust Sentence" (冤句令), old name during the Han Dynasty.

古文：单父令，前汉属山阳。
现代文：单父令，前汉时属于山阳。
English: Single father's order, the former Han Dynasty belongs to Sanyang.

古文：城阳令，汉旧名。
现代文：城阳令，汉代旧名。
English: Chengyangling, the old name of the Han Dynasty.

古文：南濮阳太守，本东郡，属兗州。晋武帝咸宁二年，以封子允，以东不可为国名，东郡有濮阳县，故曰濮阳国。
现代文：南濮阳太守，原本是东郡，属于兗州，晋武帝咸宁二年，将它封给皇子司马允，因为东 不可以用作国名，而东郡有濮阳县，所以称濮阳国。
English: Nan Poyang Dazhu, originally Dong County, belonged to Zhangzhou. In the second year of the reign of Emperor Xianning of the Jin Dynasty, it was given to the prince Sima Yun, because Dong could not be used as a country name, and Dong County had Poyang County, so it was called Poyang Country.

古文：濮阳，汉旧名也，允改封淮南，还曰东郡。
现代文：濮阳，是汉代的旧名。改封到淮南后，濮阳国又恢复称东郡。
English: Poyang is the old name of the Han Dynasty. After the change to Huainan, Poyang Province resumed to be called Dong County.

古文：赵王伦篡位，废太孙臧为濮阳王，王寻废，郡名遂不改。
现代文：赵王伦抡篡位后，废皇太孙司马臧为濮阳王，不久，濮阳王又被废，而郡名却不再改变。
English: After the usurpation of the throne by Zhao Wang Lenyi, the deposed emperor's grandson Sima Qian became the King of Shenyang. Soon after, the King of Shenyang was deposed again, but the county name did not change.

古文：《永初郡国》又有鄄城县。
现代文：《永初郡国志》又有鄄城。
English: "Yongchu County National History" has another castle.

古文：今领县二，户二千二十六，口八千二百三十九。
现代文：二汉时属于济阴，《晋太康地志》中属于濮阳。现在领有二县。户二千零二十六，人口八千二百三十九。
English: It belonged to Jiyin in the Second Han Dynasty, and it belonged to Fenyang in the "History of Jin Taikang." Now it has two counties, 2,026 households, and a population of 8,239.

古文：廪丘令，前汉及《晋太康地志》有廪丘县，后汉无。
现代文：廪丘令，并选及《晋太康地志》有廪丘县，后汉无。
English: According to the Mengqiu edict, and according to the "History of Jin Taikang," there are Mengqiu counties, but there is no Han dynasty.

古文：文帝元嘉十二年，以鄄城并廪丘。
现代文：文帝元嘉十二年，将鄄城并入廪丘。
English: In the twelfth year of Emperor Wen of the Yuan Dynasty, Lucheng was merged into Lucheng Hill.

古文：文帝元嘉十八年，省广平郡为广平县，属南泰山。
现代文：后汉时属钜鹿。《晋太康地志》记载属广平，称为曲梁。三县。文帝元嘉十八年，撤广干郡为广平县，归属于南泰山。
English: In the late Han Dynasty, it belonged to Menglu. "Jin Taikang Geography" records that it belonged to Guangping, known as Quliang. Three counties. In the 18th year of Emperor Wen, Guanggan County was withdrawn to Guangping County, belonging to Nan Tai Mountain.

古文：今领县三，户二千四百九十九，口一万三千六百。
现代文：现领有三县。户二千四百九十九，人口一万三千六百。
English: There are currently three counties, with a total of 2,499 households and a population of 13,600.

古文：南城令。
现代文：南城令。
English: Namseong-Ryo.

古文：武阳令。
现代文：另见。武阳令。
English: See also: Wuyang Order.

古文：广平令，前汉属广平，后汉属钜鹿，《太康地志》属广平。
现代文：另见。广平令，前汉时属于广平，后汉时属于钜鹿，《晋太康地志》记载属广平。
English: See also: Guangping Order, belonged to Guangping during the former Han Dynasty, belonged to Menglu during the later Han Dynasty, and was recorded as Guangping in the "History of Jin Taikang."

古文：济阳太守，晋惠分陈留为济阳国。
现代文：济阳太守，晋惠帝分割陈留设济阳国。
English: Jiyang Daju, Jin Hui divided and set up Jiyang Province.

古文：领县二，户一千二百三十二，口八千一百九十二。
现代文：领有二县。户一千二百三十二，人口八千一百九十二。
English: There are two counties, with a total of 1,232 households and a population of 8,192.

古文：考城令，前汉曰甾，属梁国，章帝更名，属陈留。
现代文：考城令，前汉时称为甾，属于梁国，章帝时改名为考城，属于陈留。
English: Kaocheng, known as Jie in the former Han Dynasty, belonged to Liang Province, and changed its name to Kaocheng in the Zhang Dynasty, and belonged to Chen Liu.

古文：《太康地志》无。
现代文：《晋太康地志》未记载。
English: It is not recorded in the "History of Jin Tai Kang."

古文：鄄城令。
现代文：鄄城令。
English: The order to capture the city was issued.

古文：南鲁郡太守，又有樊县。
现代文：另见。南鲁郡太守，鲁郡另见。又有樊县。
English: See also: Taishu of Nanlu County, Lu County, and Gansu County.

古文：今领县二，户一千二百一十一，口六千八百一十八。
现代文：前汉时属东平，后汉《晋太康地志》均属于任城。现领有二县。户一千二百一十一，人口六千八百一十八。
English: Dongping belonged to the former Han Dynasty, and Rencheng belonged to the later Han Dynasty. It is now divided into two counties, with 1,211 households and a population of 6,818.

古文：鲁令。
现代文：鲁令。
English: Luling said.

古文：西安令，汉旧名，本属齐郡。
现代文：另见。西安令，汉代旧名，原本属于齐郡。
English: See also: Xi'anling, the old name during the Han Dynasty, originally belonged to Qi County.

古文：齐郡过江侨立，后省，以西安配此。
现代文：齐郡在江侨南渡后借地重立为侨郡，后来撤销，设立西安。
English: Qi County was leased and re-established as an overseas Chinese county after the overseas Chinese migrated to the south of Jiangsu Province. Later, it was revoked and Xi'an was re-established.

古文：文帝元嘉十八年，以樊并西安。
现代文：文帝元嘉十八年，将樊并入西安。
English: In the 18th year of Emperor Wen of the Yuan Dynasty, Handan was merged into Xi'an.

古文：《永初郡国》无西安县。
现代文：《永初郡国志》无西安县。
English: "Yongchu County National History" does not include Xi'an County.

古文：徐州刺史，后汉治东海郯县，魏、晋、宋治彭城。
现代文：徐州刺史，后汉时治所在东海郯县，魏、晋、宋时期治所在彭城。
English: Xuzhou is steeped in history. In the late Han Dynasty, it was governed by Donghai County, and in the Wei, Jin and Song Dynasties, it was governed by Pengcheng.

古文：明帝世，淮北没寇，侨立徐州，治钟离。
现代文：明帝时，淮北被敌寇占领，于是暂借地重立徐州，治所在钟离。
English: During the Ming Dynasty, Huaibei was occupied by foreign invaders, so Xuzhou was re-established on a temporary basis, with its capital at Zhongli.

古文：泰豫元年，移治东海朐。
现代文：泰豫元年，治所移到东海跑历。
English: In the first year of the Taiyuan era, the administration moved to the East China Sea.

古文：后废帝元徽元年，分南兗州之钟离、豫州之马头，又分秦郡之顿丘、梁郡之谷熟、历阳之酂，立新昌郡，置徐州，还治钟离。
现代文：后废帝元徽元年，分割南兖州的钟离、豫州的马头，又分割秦郡的顿丘、梁郡的谷熟、历阳的郑，设立新昌郡，又设置徐州，治所仍迁回钟离。
English: After the fall of the Yuan Dynasty, in the first year of the Heian period, Zhongli and Ma Tou in Nanluozhou and Dongqiu in Qin County, Gu Rong in Liang County, and Zheng in Liyang were divided, Xinchang County was established, and Xuzhou was established, but the administrative center was still moved back to Zhongli.

古文：今先列徐州旧郡于前，以新割系。
现代文：现在先列出徐州旧领有的各郡在前，将新分割的各郡附在后面。
English: Now, the counties formerly owned by Xuzhou are listed first, and the newly divided counties are attached at the end.

古文：旧领郡十二，县三十四。
现代文：原先领有十二郡，三十四县。
English: Originally, there were 12 counties and 34 counties.

古文：户二万三千四百八十五，口十七万五千九百六十七。
现代文：户二万三千四百八十五，人口十七万五千九百六十七。
English: Households: 23,485, population: 175,967.

古文：今领郡三，县九。
现代文：现在领有三郡，九县。
English: He now leads three counties and nine counties.

古文：彭城去京都水一千三百六十，陆一千。
现代文：彭城距京都水路有一千三百六十里，陆路有一千里。
English: Pengcheng is 1360 miles from Kyoto by water and 1000 miles by land.

古文：彭城太守，汉高立为楚国，宣帝地节元年，改为彭城郡；黄龙元年，又为楚国；章帝还为彭城。
现代文：彭城太守，汉高帝时立为楚国，宣帝地节元年，改为彭城郡，黄龙元年，又改为楚国，章帝时又改回为彭城郡。
English: In the first year of the Emperor's reign, it was changed to Pengcheng County. In the first year of the Yellow Dragon, it was changed to Chu County. In the reign of Emperor Zhang, it was changed back to Pengcheng County.

古文：领县五，户八千六百二十七，口四万一千二百三十一。
现代文：领有五县。户八千六百二十七，人口四万一千二百三十一。
English: It is divided into five counties, with a total of 8,627 households and a population of 41,231.

古文：彭城令，汉县。
现代文：彭城令，汉代的旧县。
English: Pengcheng County, an old county in the Han Dynasty.

古文：吕令，汉旧县。
现代文：吕令，汉代的旧县。
English: Luling, an old county in the Han Dynasty.

古文：蕃令，汉旧县，属鲁。
现代文：蕃令，汉代的旧县，属于鲁。
English: Xiling, an old county in the Han Dynasty, belonged to the Lu Dynasty.

古文：晋惠帝元康中度。
现代文：晋惠帝元康时期改隶彭城。
English: It was transferred to Pengcheng during the reign of Emperor Jingu.

古文：蕃音皮；汉末太傅陈蕃子逸为鲁相，改音。
现代文：蕃读音为皮。因汉末太傅陈蕃之子陈逸曾任鲁相，故改读音。
English: Because Chen Yat, the son of the late Han Dynasty Grand Master Chen Yao, had once served as Lu Xiang, the pronunciation was changed.

古文：薛令，汉旧县，属鲁。
现代文：薛令，汉代的旧县，属于鲁。
English: Xueling, an old county in the Han Dynasty, belongs to Lu.

古文：晋惠帝元康中度。
现代文：晋惠帝元康时期改属彭城。
English: It was transferred to Pengcheng during the reign of Emperor Jingu.

古文：留令，汉旧县。
现代文：留令，汉代的旧县。
English: Remaining, the old counties of the Han Dynasty.

古文：沛郡太守，秦泗水郡，汉高更名。
现代文：沛郡太守，秦时为泗水郡，汉高租时改名。
English: He was the governor of Pei County, but changed his name to Lishui County when he was in Qin, and changed his name again when he was in Henkel.

古文：旧属豫州，江左改配。
现代文：原属豫州，江左时改划配鱼出。
English: Originally from Yuzhou, Jiang Zuo was reclassified as a fishery.

古文：领县三，户五千二百九，口二万五千一百七十。
现代文：领有三县。户五千二百零九，人口二万五千一百七十。
English: It is divided into three counties, with 52,090 households and a population of 25,170.

古文：去州陆六十；去京都一千。
现代文：距徐州陆路有六十里。距京都有一千里。
English: It is sixty miles away from Xuzhou by land and a thousand miles away from Kyoto.

古文：萧令，汉旧县。
现代文：萧令，漠代的旧县。
English: Xiaoling, the old county of the desert era.

古文：相令，汉旧县。
现代文：相令，汉代的旧县。
English: The old counties of the Han Dynasty.

古文：沛令，汉旧县。
现代文：沛令，汉代的旧县。
English: Peiling, an old county in the Han Dynasty.

古文：下邳太守，前汉本临淮郡，武帝立，明帝改为下邳。
现代文：下邳太守，前汉时本为临淮郡，武帝设立，明帝时改为下邳。
English: The governor-general of Jiaozuo, formerly Linhuai County during the Han Dynasty, was established by Emperor Wu, but was changed to Jiaozuo during the Ming Dynasty.

古文：晋武帝分下邳之淮南为临淮，而下邳如故。
现代文：晋武帝分割下邳的淮南为临淮，而下邳的建制仍同以前一样。
English: Emperor Jinwu divided the southern part of Huai into Linyu and Huai, while the organization of the lower part remained the same as before.

古文：领县三；户三千九十九，口一万六千八十八。
现代文：领有三县。户三千零九十九，人口一万六千零八十八。
English: It is divided into three counties, with a total of 3,099 households and a population of 16,088.

古文：去州水二百，陆一百八十；去京都水一千一百六十，陆八百。
现代文：距徐州水路有二百里，陆路有一百八十里。距京都水路有一千一百六十里，陆路八百里。
English: It is 200 miles away from Xuzhou by water and 180 miles away by land. It is 1160 miles away from Kyoto by water and 800 miles away by land.

古文：下邳令，前汉属东海，后汉、《晋太康地志》属下邳。
现代文：下邳令令，前汉时属东海郡，后汉时、《晋太康地志》记载均属于下邳郡。
English: According to the decrees of the Lower Han Dynasty, Donghai County belonged to the former Han Dynasty, and the records of the Later Han Dynasty and the "History of Jin Taikang" all belong to the Lower Han Dynasty.

古文：良成令，前汉属东海，后汉、《晋太康地志》属下邳。
现代文：良成令，前汉时属于东海郡，后汉时、《晋太康地志》记载均属下邳郡。
English: According to the decree of Liangcheng, it belonged to Donghai County during the former Han Dynasty, and during the latter Han Dynasty, the records of the "History of Jin Taikang" all belonged to Jiaozuo County.

古文：僮令，前汉属临淮，后汉、《晋太康地志》属下邳。
现代文：僮令，前汉时属于临淮，后汉时、《晋太康地志》记载均属下邳。
English: According to the imperial edict, the former Han Dynasty belonged to Linhuai, and the later Han Dynasty and the "History of Jin Taikang" all belonged to the Lower Han Dynasty.

古文：兰陵太守，晋惠帝元康元年，分东海立。
现代文：兰陵太守，晋惠帝元康元年，分割东海郡的一部分而设置。
English: Lanling Taishu, Jin Hui Emperor, was established in the first year of the Kang Dynasty by dividing a part of Donghai County.

古文：领县三，户三千一百六十四，口一万四千五百九十七。
现代文：领有三县。户三千一百六十四，人口一万四千五百九十七。
English: It is divided into three counties, with 3,164 households and a population of 14,597.

古文：去州陆二百；去京都水一千六百，陆一千三百。
现代文：距徐州陆路有二百里。距京都水路有一千六百里，陆路有一千三百里。
English: It is 200 miles away from Xuzhou by land, 1,600 miles away from Kyoto by water, and 1,300 miles away by land.

古文：昌虑令，汉旧县。
现代文：昌虑令，为汉代的旧县。
English: Changxianling, an old county in the Han Dynasty.

古文：承令，汉旧县。
现代文：承令，汉代的旧县。
English: It was an old county in the Han Dynasty.

古文：合乡令，汉旧县。
现代文：合乡令，含代的旧县。
English: He Township, including the old county.

古文：东海太守，秦郯郡，汉高更名。
现代文：东海太守，秦代为郯郡，汉高帝时改为东海。
English: The governor of the East China Sea, the Qin Dynasty was the first county, and it was changed to the East China Sea during the reign of Emperor Han.

古文：明帝失淮北，侨立青州于赣榆县。
现代文：宋明帝失去淮北后，在赣榆县借地侨立青州。
English: After Emperor Song Ming lost Huaibei, he established Qingzhou on the leased land in Jixian County.

古文：泰始七年，又立东海县属东海郡，又割赣检置郁县，立西海郡，并隶侨青州。
现代文：泰始七年，又设置束海县，隶属于束海郡，又分割赣榆县设置郁县，建立了西海郡，让它们都隶属于侨立的青州。
English: In the seventh year of Taizhi, Sokhai County was also set up, which was subordinate to Sokhai County, and Iku County was set up by dividing Min County, and Xihai County was established, so that they were all subordinate to Qiaozhou.

古文：领县二，户二千四百一十一，口一万三千九百四十一。
现代文：现领有二县。户二千四百一十一，人口一万三千九百四十一。
English: There are two counties in the current territory, with 2,411 households and a population of 13,941.

古文：去州水一千，陆八百；去京都水一千，陆六百七十。
现代文：距州治水路有一千里，陆路八百里。距京都水路有一千里，陆路有六百七十里。
English: It is a thousand miles from the prefectural waterway and eight hundred miles by land. It is a thousand miles from the Kyoto waterway and six hundred and seventy miles by land.

古文：襄贲令，汉旧县。
现代文：襄贲令，汉代的旧县。
English: Xiangyu County, an old county in the Han Dynasty.

古文：赣榆令，前汉属琅邪，后汉属东海。
现代文：赣榆令，前汉时属于琅邪，后汉时隶属东海。
English: During the Han Dynasty, it belonged to the Southern Han Dynasty, and during the Later Han Dynasty, it belonged to the Eastern Han Dynasty.

古文：魏省，晋武帝太康元年复立。
现代文：魏时撤销，晋武帝太康元年恢复设置。
English: It was revoked in the Wei Dynasty and reinstated in the first year of the Jin Dynasty by Emperor Taikang.

古文：东莞太守，晋武帝泰始元年，分琅邪立。
现代文：东莞太守，晋武帝泰始元年，分割琅邪而设置。
English: In the first year of the reign of Emperor Jinwu, the governor of Dongguan was divided into two parts.

古文：咸宁三年，复以合琅邪，太康十年复立。
现代文：咸宁三年，又合并到琅邪郡，太康十年又恢复设置。
English: After three years, Xianning was merged into Yuya County, and Taikang was reinstated ten years later.

古文：领县三，户八百八十七；口七千三百二十。
现代文：领有三县。户八百八十七，人口七干三百二十。
English: It is divided into three counties, with 887 households and a population of 7,320.

古文：去州陆七百。
现代文：距州治陆路有七百里。
English: It is seven hundred miles away from Zhouzhi by land.

古文：去京都水二千，陆一千四百。
现代文：距京都水路有二千里，陆路有一千四百里。
English: It is 2,000 miles from Kyoto by water and 1,400 miles by land.

古文：莒令，前汉属城阳，后汉属琅邪。
现代文：莒令，前汉时属于城阳，后汉时隶属琅邪。
English: According to the imperial edict, the former Han Dynasty belonged to Chengyang, and the latter Han Dynasty was subordinate to Shiyan.

古文：孝武大明五年改为长。
现代文：孝武帝大明五年将县令改为县长。
English: Emperor Xiaowu changed the county in the fifth year of the Ming Dynasty and became the county governor.

古文：诸令，前汉属城阳，后汉属琅邪，《晋太康地志》属城阳。
现代文：诸令，前汉时隶属于城阳，后汉时隶属琅邪，《晋太康地志》载属城阳。
English: According to the records, the former Han Dynasty was subordinate to Chengyang, the later Han Dynasty was subordinate to Shiyan, and the "History of Jin Taikang" was subordinate to Chengyang.

古文：东莞令，汉旧县。
现代文：东莞令，汉代旧县。
English: Dongguan, an old county during the Han Dynasty.

古文：东安太守，东安故县名，前汉属城阳，后汉属琅邪，《晋太康地志》属东莞，晋惠帝分东莞立。
现代文：东安太守，东安是旧县名，前汉时隶属城阳，后汉时隶属琅邪，《晋太康地志》记载隶属东莞，晋惠帝时分割塞差而设立。
English: The governor of Dong'an, Dong'an is the old name of the county. In the former Han Dynasty, it was subordinated to Chengyang. In the later Han Dynasty, it was subordinated to Shiyan. According to the "History of Jin Taikang," it was subordinated to Dongguan. During the reign of Emperor Jin Hui, it was divided and divided.

古文：领县三，户一千二百八十五，口一万七百五十五。
现代文：领有三县。户一千二百八十五，人口一万零七百五十五。
English: It is divided into three counties, with 1,285 households and a population of 10,755.

古文：去州陆七百；去京都陆一千三百。
现代文：距州治陆路有七百里。距京都陆路有一千三百里。
English: It is seven hundred miles from Shuzhi by road, and thirteen hundred miles from Kyoto by road.

古文：盖令，前汉属琅邪，后汉属太山，《晋太康地志》属乐安。
现代文：盖令，前汉时隶属琅邪，后汉时隶属太山，《晋太康地志》记载隶属乐安。
English: Gairei, in the former Han Dynasty, was subordinate to Shiji, in the later Han Dynasty, to Taishan, and in the "History of Jin Taikang," to Le'an.

古文：孝武大明五年改为长。
现代文：孝武大明五年改县令为县长。
English: Emperor Xiaowu changed the county in the fifth year of the Ming Dynasty and became the county governor.

古文：新泰令，魏立，属泰山。
现代文：新泰令，魏国时设立，隶属于泰山。
English: Xin Tai Ling, established in the Wei Dynasty, subordinate to Mount Tai.

古文：发干令，汉旧名，属东郡。《太康地志》无，江左来配。
现代文：发干令，汉代旧名，隶属东郡，《晋太康地志》上无记载。
English: Issued dry order, old name in Han Dynasty, subordinate to Dong County, no record in the "History of Jin Taikang."

古文：琅邪太守，秦立。
现代文：东晋时配属束安郡。琅邪太守，秦代设置。
English: During the Eastern Jin Dynasty, it was assigned to Sokan County. It was set up in the Qin Dynasty.

古文：领县二，户一千八百一十八，口八千二百四十三。
现代文：领有二县。户一千八百一十八，人口八千二百四十三。
English: It is divided into two counties, with 1,818 households and a population of 8,243.

古文：去州陆四百；去京都水一千五百，陆一千一百。
现代文：距州治陆路有四百里。距京都水路有一千五百里。陆路有一千一百里。
English: It is four hundred miles from Shuzhi by land, fifteen hundred miles from Kyoto by water, and eleven hundred miles by land.

古文：费令，前汉属东海，后汉属泰山，《晋太康地志》属琅邪。
现代文：费令，前汉时隶属东海，后汉时隶属泰山，《晋太康地志》记载隶属琅邪。
English: Feiling, before the Han Dynasty, belonged to the East Sea, after the Han Dynasty, it belonged to Mount Taishan, and according to the "History of Jin Taikang," it belonged to Shiyan.

古文：即丘令，前汉属东海，后汉、《晋太康地志》属琅邪。
现代文：即丘令，前汉时隶属东海，后汉及《晋太康地志》记载均隶属琅邪。
English: That is to say, the former Han Dynasty belonged to the East Sea, and the later Han Dynasty and the "History of Jin Taikang" all belonged to the East Sea.

古文：淮阳太守，晋安帝义熙中土断立。
现代文：淮阳太守，晋安帝义熙年问将流寓侨郡的士民并入当地时设立。
English: It was established when Emperor Huaiyang and Emperor Jian of the Jin Dynasty Yixin of the Heian period asked to incorporate the scholars and commoners of the county into the local area.

古文：领县四，户二千八百五十五，口一万五千三百六十三。
现代文：领有四县。户二干八百五十五，人口一万五千三百六十三。
English: It is divided into four counties, with a total of 855 households and a population of 15,363.

古文：去州水六百，陆五百；去京都水七百，陆五百五十。
现代文：距州治水路有六百里，陆路五百里。距京都水路有七百里，陆路有五百五十里。
English: It is 600 miles from the prefectural waterway and 500 miles by land. It is 700 miles from the Kyoto waterway and 550 miles by land.

古文：角城令，晋安帝义熙中土断立。
现代文：角城令，晋安帝义熙年间将流寓侨郡县的士民并入当地时设立。
English: It was established by the Jiancheng Ruling, during the reign of Emperor Yixi of the Jin and An Dynasties, when the scholars and commoners from the overseas counties and counties were merged into the local area.

古文：晋宁令，故属济岷，流寓来配。
现代文：晋宁令，原先隶属济岷，渡江流亡侨居百姓聚集而配属淮阳。
English: Jin Ningling, originally subordinated to Jizhong, was assigned to Huaiyang after the exiled overseas Chinese gathered in Wujiang.

古文：宿预令，晋安帝立。
现代文：宿预令，晋安帝时设立。
English: The inn was reserved and established at the time of Emperor Jian of An.

古文：上党令，本流寓郡，并省来配。
现代文：上党令，原先是为流亡寄居百姓在当地设立的侨郡，撤销后配属淮阳。
English: Shangdi County, which was originally established for the expatriate people living in exile, was assigned to Huaiyang after it was revoked.

古文：阳平太守，阳平本县名，属东郡。
现代文：阳平太守，阳平原本是县名，隶属东郡。
English: Yangping Dazhu, Yangping was originally the name of the county, subordinate to Dong County.

古文：魏分东郡及魏郡为阳平郡。
现代文：魏国分东郡与魏郡为阳平郡。
English: Fengdong County and Wei County of Wei Province are Yangping County.

古文：故属司州，流寓来配。
现代文：原先隶属司州，为流寓百姓设郡后配属。
English: Originally subordinated to Shizhou, it was assigned after the county was set up for the people living in exile.

古文：《永初郡国》又有廪丘县。
现代文：《永初郡国志》又记载有廪丘县。
English: "Yongchu County National History" also recorded Mengqiu County.

古文：今领县三，户一千七百二十五，口一万三千三百三十。
现代文：另置。现在领有三县。户一千七百二十五，人口一万三千三百三十。
English: Now there are three counties, with a total of 1,725 households and 13,330 people.

古文：馆陶令，汉旧名。
现代文：馆陶令，汉代旧名。
English: Guan Tao Ling, the old name during the Han Dynasty.

古文：阳平令，汉旧名。
现代文：阳平令，汉代旧名。
English: Yangpingling, the old name of the Han Dynasty.

古文：濮阳令，本流寓郡，并省来配。
现代文：濮阳令，原先是为流寓百姓设立的侨郡，撤销后配属阳平郡。
English: Fenyang County, which was originally set up for the expatriate people, was assigned to Yangping County after it was revoked.

古文：济阴太守，汉景帝立，属兗州。
现代文：济阴太守，汉景帝时设立，隶属兖州。
English: Jiyin Daju, established during the reign of Emperor Han Jing, belongs to Zhangzhou.

古文：流寓徐土，因割地为境。
现代文：束晋时该郡百姓流亡寄居徐州，因而分割徐州地侨立辽渣郡。
English: At the time of Sok Jin, the county's people lived in exile in Xuzhou, thus splitting the Xuzhou Overseas Chinese Liao Jia County.

古文：领县三，户二千三百五，口一万一千九百二十八。
现代文：领三县。户二千三百零五，人口一万一千九百二十八。
English: It leads three counties, with 2,305 households and a population of 11,928.

古文：睢陵令，前汉属临淮，后汉属下邳。
现代文：睢陵令，前汉时属临淮，后汉时属下邳。
English: The former Han Dynasty belonged to Linhuai, and the later Han Dynasty belonged to Jiaozuo.

古文：孝武大明元年度。
现代文：孝武大明元年改属。
English: It was transferred to Takatake Daming in 1981.

古文：定陶令，汉旧名。
现代文：定陶令，汉代旧名。
English: Ding Tao Ling, an old name from the Han Dynasty.

古文：孝武大明五年改为长。
现代文：孝武帝大明五年改县令为县长。
English: Emperor Xiaowu changed the county in the fifth year of the Ming Dynasty and became the county governor.

古文：顿丘令，属顿丘，流寓割配。
现代文：顿丘令，隶属顿丘，东晋时割配济阴。
English: Dongqiu County, subordinate to Dongqiu, assigned to Jiyin during the Eastern Jin Dynasty.

古文：北济阴太守，孝武孝建元年升立。
现代文：北济阴太守，孝武帝孝建元年升立。
English: He was the governor-general of North Jilin, and was elevated to the position of Emperor Xiaowu in the first year of the reign of Emperor Xiaojian.

古文：领县三，户九百二十七，口三千八百十。
现代文：领有三县。户九百二十七，人口三千八百一十。
English: It is divided into three counties, with 927 households and a population of 3,810.

古文：城武令，前汉属山阳，后汉、《晋太康地志》属济阴。
现代文：城武令，前漠时隶属山阳，后汉及《晋太康地志》记载隶属济阴。
English: According to the military ordinance of the city, it belonged to Sanyang in the former desert, and to Jiyin in the Later Han Dynasty and the "History of Jintai Kangxi."

古文：丰令，汉旧名，属沛。
现代文：丰令，汉代旧名，隶属沛郡。
English: Fengling, the old name during the Han Dynasty, belongs to Pei County.

古文：孝武大明元年复立。
现代文：孝武帝大明元年恢复设置。
English: Emperor Xiaowu restored it in the first year of the Ming Dynasty.

古文：离狐令，前汉属东郡，后汉、《晋太康地志》属济阴。
现代文：离狐令，前汉时隶属束郡，后汉及《晋太康地志》记载隶属济阴。
English: It was subordinated to Sok County during the Former Han Dynasty, and to Jiyin during the Later Han Dynasty, as recorded in the "History of Jin Taikang."

古文：钟离太守，本属南兗州，晋安帝分立。
现代文：钟离太守，原本隶属南兖州，晋安帝时从南兖州分出而设置。
English: Zhongli Dazhu, originally subordinated to Nanluozhou, was separated from Nanluozhou during the reign of Emperor Jinan.

古文：案汉九江郡、晋淮南郡有钟离县，即此地也。
现代文：案卷记载汉代的九江郡、晋代的淮南郡有钟离县，就是该地。
English: The case record records that Zhongli County was located in Jiujiang County during the Han Dynasty and Huainan County during the Jin Dynasty.

古文：领县三，户三千二百七十二，口一万七千八百三十二。
现代文：领有三县。户三千二百七十二，人口一万七千八百三十二。
English: It is divided into three counties, with 3,272 households and a population of 17,832.

古文：去京都陆六百二十，水一千三十。
现代文：距京都陆路有六百二十里，水路有一千零三十里。
English: It is 620 miles from Kyoto by land and 1,030 miles by water.

古文：燕县令，故属东燕。
现代文：燕县令，另见。原先隶属东燕。
English: Yan County Government, see also. Originally subordinated to Dongyan.

古文：流寓因配。
现代文：东晋设侨县安置流亡寄居的士民时配属钟离。
English: It was assigned to Ma Tou when the exiles were resettled here.

古文：朝歌令，本属河内，晋武帝分河内为汲，又属焉。
现代文：朝歌令，原本隶属河内郡，晋武帝分割河内设置汲郡，朝歌又隶属汲郡。
English: Originally under the jurisdiction of Hanoi County, Emperor Jinwu divided Hanoi and set up Gumi County, and Choka was also under Gumi County.

古文：流寓因配。
现代文：东晋设侨县时配属钟墼。
English: It was assigned to Ma Tou when the exiles were resettled here.

古文：乐平令，前汉曰清，属东郡，章帝更名，《晋太康地志》无。
现代文：乐平令，前汉时名清，隶属东郡，章帝时改称乐平，《晋太康地志》无记载。
English: Leping County, formerly known as Ming and Qing during the Han Dynasty, belonged to Dong County, and was renamed Leping during the reign of Zhang Di. There is no record of it in the "History of Jin Taikang."

古文：流寓因配。
现代文：束晋设侨县时配属钟离。
English: It was assigned to Ma Tou when the exiles were resettled here.

古文：马头太守，属南豫州，故淮南当涂县地，晋安帝立，因山形立名。
现代文：马头太守，隶属南豫州，是原先淮南当涂题的地方，晋安帝时设立，因山体形似马头而得名。
English: Ma Tou Ta Shou, belonging to Nan Yuzhou, was originally a place in Huainan when it was named. It was established during the reign of Emperor Jin of An, and got its name from the shape of the mountain, which resembles a horse's head.

古文：领县三，户一千三百三十二，口一万二千三百一十。
现代文：领三县。户一千三百三十二，人口一万二千三百一十。
English: He was in charge of three counties, with 1,332 households and a population of 12,310.

古文：去京都水一千七百五十，陆六百七十。
现代文：距京都水路有一千七百五十里，陆路有六百七十里。
English: It is 1,750 miles from Kyoto by water and 670 miles by land.

古文：虞县令，汉旧名，属梁郡。
现代文：虞县令，汉代旧名，隶属梁郡。
English: Yu County, the old name of the Han Dynasty, belongs to Liang County.

古文：流寓因配。
现代文：安置流亡寄居在此的士民时配属马头。
English: It was assigned to Ma Tou when the exiles were resettled here.

古文：零县令，晋安帝立。
现代文：零县令，晋安帝时设立。
English: It was established at the time of Emperor Jian of An.

古文：济阳令，故属济阳。
现代文：济阳令，原先隶属济阳。
English: Jiyang County, formerly part of Jiyang.

古文：流寓因配。
现代文：安置流亡寄居在此的士民时配属马头。
English: It was assigned to Ma Tou when the exiles were resettled here.

古文：新昌太守，后废帝元徽元年立。
现代文：新昌太守，后废帝元徽元年设立。
English: He was the first governor of Xinchang, and was established in the first year of the Yuan Dynasty.

古文：顿丘令，二汉属东郡，魏属阳平；晋武帝泰始二年，分淮阳置顿丘郡，顿丘县又属焉。
现代文：顿丘令，二汉时隶属东郡，魏国时隶属阳平，晋武帝泰始二年，分割淮阳设置顿丘郡，顿丘逊又隶属于焉。
English: Dongqiu County was subordinated to Dong County during the Second Han Dynasty, to Yangping County during the Wei Dynasty, and to Dongqiu County during the first two years of the reign of Emperor Jinwu. Dongqiu County was also subordinated to Dongqiu Son.

古文：江左流寓立，属秦。
现代文：江左时安置流亡寄居于此的士民时又设立，隶属秦郡。
English: It was established when Jiang Zuo resettled the exiles who lived here, and belongs to Qin County.

古文：先有沛县，元嘉八年并顿丘，后废帝元徽元年度属此。
现代文：原先有沛县，元台八年时并入顿丘，后废帝元徽元年改属。
English: Originally Yupei County, it was merged into Dongqiu in the eighth year of the Yuan Dynasty, and then it was transferred to the first year of the Yuan Dynasty.

古文：谷熟令，前汉无，后汉、晋属梁。
现代文：谷熟令，前汉时无此县，后汉、晋代隶属于梁。
English: According to Gu Rongling, there was no such county during the former Han Dynasty, but it belonged to Liang during the Later Han and Jin Dynasties.

古文：《永初郡国》、何、徐志并属南梁。
现代文：《永初郡国志》及何氏《志》、徐氏《志》都记载隶属南梁。
English: "Yongchu County National History" and He's "History" and Xu's "History" are all recorded as belonging to Nanliang.

古文：后废帝元徽元年度。
现代文：后废帝元徽元年改属新昌。
English: After the abolition of Emperor Yuan He, it was transferred to Xinchang in the first year of the year.

古文：酂令，汉属沛，晋属谯。
现代文：酂令，汉代隶属沛，晋优隶属谯。
English: In the Han Dynasty, it was subordinated to Pei, and in the Jin Dynasty, it was subordinated to Qu.

古文：文帝元嘉八年，自南谯度属历阳，后废帝元徽元年度属此。
现代文：文帝元嘉八年，自南谯改属历阳，后废帝元徽元年改属新昌。
English: In the eighth year of Emperor Wen Yuanjia, it was changed from Nanxun to Liyang, and then to Xinchang in the first year of the deposed Emperor Yuanhui.

古文：南兗州刺史，中原乱，北州流民多南渡，晋成帝立南兗州，寄治京口。
现代文：南兖州刺史，中原战乱时，北方州郡流民多南渡，晋成帝设立亩蛮业，治所附设在塞旦。
English: In the history of southern Luzhou, when the Central Plains War broke out, many exiles from counties in northern Luzhou went to Nandu. Emperor Jincheng set up mu barbarian industry, and the government office was attached to Sedan.

古文：时又立南青州及并州，武帝永初元年，省并并南兗。
现代文：当时又设置南青州和并州，武帝永初元年，省并南兖州。
English: At that time, South Qingzhou was also set up and annexed to the state, and in the first year of Emperor Wu, the province was annexed to South Luzhou.

古文：文帝元嘉八年，始割江淮间为境，治广陵。
现代文：文帝元嘉八年，才分割江淮间的土地作为南兖州的辖境，治所在广陵。
English: It was only in the eighth year of Emperor Wen Yuanjia that the land between the Yangtze River and the Huai River was divided as the jurisdiction of Nanluozhou, governed by Guangling.

古文：《永初郡国》领十四郡。
现代文：《永初郡国志》中记载南兖州领有十四郡。
English: According to the "Yongchu County National History," there are 14 counties in Nanluozhou.

古文：南高平、南平昌、南济阴、南濮阳、南泰山、济阳、南鲁山郡，今并属徐州。
现代文：其中南高平、南平旦、南济阴、南濮阳、南泰山、济阳、南鲁山郡，如今都隶属徐州。
English: Among them, South Gaoping, South Pingdan, South Jiyin, South Fenyang, South Taishan, Jiyang, and South Lushan counties are now part of Xuzhou.

古文：又有东燕郡，江左分濮阳所立也，领燕县、白马、平昌、考城凡四县。
现代文：又有东燕郡，江左时分割选屋而设立的，领有燕县、前汉时称南燕，后汉称恋，都隶属东郡。
English: There is also Dongyan County, which was established by dividing the polling stations at the time of Jiang Zuo. It is subordinate to Dongyan County, which was called Nanyan County in the former Han Dynasty and Koi County in the later Han Dynasty.

古文：文帝元嘉十八年，省考城并燕。
现代文：《太康地志》载属濮阳。白马、平昌、考城共四县。文帝元嘉十八年，撤销考城将它并入游瑟。
English: "Taikang History" belongs to Fenyang. Baima, Pyeongchang and Kaocheng are four counties. In the 18th year of Emperor Wen, Kaocheng was revoked and merged into Yuseh.

古文：十九年，省东燕郡为东燕县，属南濮阳，后又省东燕郡。
现代文：十九年，又撤销东燕郡将它改为东燕县，隶属南濮阳，后来又撤销东燕县。
English: Nineteen years later, Dongyan County was revoked and changed to Dongyan County, which belonged to Nan Poyang. Later, Dongyan County was revoked again.

古文：南东平郡领范、蛇丘、历城凡三县。
现代文：南东平郡领范、蛇丘、历城共三县。
English: South Dongping County has three counties, including Lianfan, Shekou and Licheng.

古文：高密郡领淳于、黔陬、营陵、夷安凡四县。
现代文：高密郡领有淳于、黔陬、营陵、夷安共四县。
English: Gaomi County is divided into four counties: Junyu, Handan, Yingling and Yian.

古文：南齐郡领安西、临菑凡二县。
现代文：南齐郡领有安西、临菑共二县。
English: Nanqi County has two counties, Anxi and Linyi.

古文：南平原郡领平原、高唐、茌平凡三县。
现代文：南平原郡领有平原、高唐、茌平都另见。
English: Nanpingyuan County is divided into Pingyuan, Gaotang and Fenping.

古文：济岷郡，领营城、晋宁凡二县。
现代文：阴馆前汉作 观 ，后汉、晋作 馆 。
English: The former Han, Later Han, and Jin dynasties built their pavilions in front of the Yin Pavilion.

古文：雁门郡领楼烦、阴馆、广武、崞、马邑凡五县。
现代文：广武前汉隶属太原，后汉及《晋太康地志》记载隶属雁门。崞、马邑都是汉代旧名。共五县。
English: The Guangwu Former Han belonged to Taiyuan, and the Later Han and the "History of Jin Taikang" recorded that it belonged to Ganmen. Luoyang and Ma'yun were both old names in the Han Dynasty. A total of five counties.

古文：凡七郡，二十三县，并省属南徐州。
现代文：以上七郡二十三县，都撤并到南徐州。
English: The above seven counties and 23 counties have all been withdrawn and merged into South Xuzhou.

古文：诸侨郡县何志又有钟离、雁门、平原、东平、北沛五郡。
现代文：何压《志》所记载的各侨郡侨县又有钟离、雁门、平原、东平、北沛五郡。
English: The five counties of overseas Chinese recorded in "Zhi" are Zhongli, Ganmen, Pingyuan, Dongping and Beibei.

古文：钟离今属徐州。
现代文：钟离郡现在隶属徐州。
English: Zhongli County is now part of Xuzhou.

古文：雁门领楼烦、阴馆、广武三县。
现代文：雁门郡领有楼烦、阴馆、广武三县。
English: Yanmen County is bordered by three counties, including Loubui, Yinyuan and Guangwu.

古文：平原领茌平、临菑、营城、平原四县。
现代文：平原有茌平、临菑、营城、平原四县。
English: There are four counties in the plain, namely, Suiping, Linyi, Yingcheng and Plains.

古文：东平领范、朝阳、历城三县。
现代文：东平领范、朝阳、历城三县。
English: Dongping Lianfan, Chaoyang and Licheng are the three counties.

古文：北沛领符离、萧、相、沛四县。凡十四县。《起居注》，元嘉十一年，以南兗州东平之平陆并范，寿张并朝阳，平原之济岷、晋宁并营城，高唐并茌平。
现代文：共十四县。《起居注》记载，元嘉十一年，将南兖州束平郡的干陆并入范，寿张并朝阳，平原的济岷、晋宁并入营城，在此之前已降边岖登为县。高唐并入茌平。
English: There are a total of 14 counties. According to the "Resident's Notes," in the eleventh year of Yuan Jia, Ganlu of Southern Luzhou Sokping County was merged into Fan, Shou Zhang was merged into Chaoyang, and the plains of Jizhou and Jining were merged into Yingcheng. Prior to this, they had been merged into counties. Gaotang was merged into Suiping.

古文：按此五县，元嘉十一年所省，则平陆、寿张疑在《永初郡国志》，而无此二县，未详。
现代文：按以上五县都是五台十一年所撤并，那么平陆、寿张应在《永初郡国志》上有记载，但《永初郡国志》上却无此二县，不知什么缘故。
English: According to the above-mentioned five counties, all of them were annexed by Taiwan in 1951, so Pinglu and Shuzhang should have been recorded in the "Yongchu County National History," but these two counties were not recorded in the "Yongchu County National History," I don't know why.

古文：徐志有南东平郡，领范、朝阳、历城、楼烦、阴观、广武、茌平、营城、临菑、平原十县，则是雁门、平原并东平也。
现代文：徐氏《志》有南东平郡，领有范、朝阳、历城、楼烦、阴观、广武、茌乎、营城、临苗、平原十县，那就是雁门郡和平原郡都已经并入束平郡了。
English: In Xu's "Zhi," there are ten counties in the south-east of Ping County, including Fan, Chaoyang, Licheng, Loudui, Yinan, Guangwu, Zhouhu, Yingcheng, Linmiao, and Pingyuan, that is, Yanmen County and Pingyuan County have been merged into Shuoping County.

古文：孝武大明五年，以东平并广陵。
现代文：孝武帝大明五年，将束平郡并入广陵。
English: In the fifth year of Emperor Xiaowu, Sokping County was merged into Guangling.

古文：宋又侨立新平、北淮阳、北济阴、北下邳、东莞五郡。
现代文：宋代又暂借地重置新平、北淮阳、北济阴、北下邳、东莞五郡。
English: During the Song Dynasty, the five counties of Xinping, North Huaiyang, North Jiyin, North Jiaozuo, and Dongguan were temporarily resettled.

古文：元嘉二十八年，南兗州徙治盱眙。
现代文：元嘉二十八年，南兖州治所迁到盱眙。
English: In the 28th year of Yuan Jia, the Southern Luzhou Administrative Office moved to Zeng.

古文：三十年，省南兗州并南徐，其后复立，还治广陵。
现代文：三十年，撤南兖州将它并入南徐州，后来又恢复南兖蛆建制，治所也迁回卢堕。
English: Thirty years later, it was merged into Nanxuzhou after the withdrawal of Nanxuzhou. Later, the Nanxuzhou system was restored, and the provincial capital was also moved back to Lopu.

古文：徐志领郡九，县三十九，户三万一千一百一十五，口十五万九千三百六十二。
现代文：巡《志》记载直室州领有九郡三十九县。户三万一千一百一十五，人口十五万九千三百六十二。
English: According to the "Chi" (History), there are 39 counties and 9 counties in Zhimuro Prefecture, with 31,115 households and a population of 159,362.

古文：宋末领郡十一，县四十四。
现代文：宋末南兖州领有十一郡四十四县。
English: At the end of the Song Dynasty, Nanluozhou had eleven counties and forty-four counties.

古文：去京都水二百五十，陆一百八十。
现代文：距京都水路有二百五十里，陆路有一百八十里。
English: It is 250 miles from Kyoto by water and 180 miles by land.

古文：广陵太守，汉高六年立，属荆国，十一年，更属吴；景帝四年，更名江都国；武帝元狩三年，更名广陵。
现代文：广陵太守，汉高帝六年设立，隶属荆国，十一年，改隶吴国，景帝四年，改名江都国，武帝元狩三年，改名为广陵。
English: Guangling Dazhu, established by Emperor Han Gao in the sixth year, belonged to Jing Province, changed its affiliation to Wu Province in the eleventh year, changed its name to Jiangdu Province in the fourth year of the reign of Emperor Jing, and changed its name to Guangling in the third year of the reign of Emperor Wudi.

古文：旧属徐州。
现代文：原先隶属徐州。
English: It was originally part of Xuzhou.

古文：晋武帝太康三年，治淮阴故城，后又治射阳。
现代文：晋尽《志》有肥如、新市，徐《志》的记载和今天的建制相同。
English: The record of the "Zhi" of the Jin Dynasty is as rich as that of the Xin Shi Dynasty, and the record of the "Zhi" of the Xu Dynasty is the same as that of today.

古文：江左治广陵。
现代文：现在领有四县。
English: It now controls four prefectures.

古文：《永初郡国》又有舆、肥如、潞、真定、新市五县。今领县四，户七千七百四十四，口四万五千六百一十三。
现代文：户七千七百四十四。人口四万五千六百一十三。
English: Households: 7,744. Population: 45,613.

古文：广陵令，汉旧县。
现代文：广陵令，汉代旧县。
English: Guanglingling, the largest county in the Han Dynasty.

古文：海陵令，前汉属临淮，后汉、晋属广陵，三国时废，晋武帝太康元年复立。
现代文：海陵令，前汉时隶临淮，后汉和晋隶属广陵，三国时废置，晋武帝太康元年恢复设置。
English: Hailing order, in the former Han Dynasty, it was subordinated to Linhuai, in the later Han Dynasty and Jin Dynasty, it was subordinated to Guangling, it was abolished in the Three Kingdoms period, and it was restored by Emperor Taikang in the first year of the Jin Dynasty.

古文：高邮令，汉旧县。
现代文：高邮令，汉代旧县。
English: High postal code, Han Dynasty old county.

古文：三国时废，晋武帝太康元年复立。
现代文：三国时废置，晋武帝太康元年恢复设置。
English: It was abolished during the Three Kingdoms period, and reinstated by Emperor Taikang in the first year of the Jin Dynasty.

古文：江都令，汉旧县。
现代文：江都令，汉代旧县。
English: Jiangdu, the capital of Jiangxi Province, was an old county in Han Dynasty.

古文：三国时废，晋武帝太康六年复立。
现代文：三国时废置，晋武帝太康六年复设。
English: It was abolished during the Three Kingdoms period, and reinstated six years later by Emperor Taikang of the Jin Dynasty.

古文：江左又省并舆县，元嘉十三年复立，以并江都。
现代文：东晋时又撤销建制并入舆，元嘉十三年恢复建制并入江都。
English: At the time of the Eastern Jin Dynasty, the establishment was revoked and merged into the Yiwu Province, and in the 13th year of the Yuan Jia Dynasty, the establishment was restored and merged into the Jiangdu Province.

古文：海陵太守，晋安帝分广陵立。
现代文：海陵太守，晋安帝时分割广陵郡而设置。
English: The governor of Hailing, it was established when Guangling County was divided during the reign of Emperor Jinan.

古文：《永初郡国》属徐州。
现代文：《永初郡国志》记载隶属徐州。
English: "Yongchu County National History" records that it belongs to Xuzhou.

古文：领县六，户三千六百二十六，口二万一千六百六十。
现代文：领六县。户三千六百二十六，人口二万一千六百六十。
English: It is divided into six counties, with 3,626 households and a population of 21,660.

古文：去州水一百三十，陆同；去京都水三百九十，陆同。
现代文：距州治水路有一百三十里，陆路相同。距京都水路有三百九十里，陆路相同。
English: It is one hundred and thirty miles from the prefectural waterway and the same distance by land. It is three hundred and ninety miles from the Kyoto waterway and the same distance by land.

古文：建陵令，晋安帝立。
现代文：建陵令，晋安帝时设置。
English: The order to build the mausoleum was issued during the reign of Emperor Jinan.

古文：临江令，晋安帝立。
现代文：临江令，晋安帝时设置。
English: It was established during the Jin and An dynasties.

古文：如皋令，晋安帝立。
现代文：如皋令，晋安帝时设置。
English: According to the imperial edict, it was set up at the time of Emperor Jian of An.

古文：宁海令，晋安帝立。
现代文：宁海令，晋安帝时设置。
English: Ninghai Dynasty, set up during the reign of Emperor Jin of An.

古文：蒲涛令，晋安帝立。
现代文：蒲涛令，晋安帝时设置。
English: It was set up during the reign of Emperor Putao and Emperor Jian of An.

古文：临泽令，明帝泰豫元年立。
现代文：临泽令，明帝泰豫元年设置。
English: It was established in the first year of the Linze era by the Ming emperor Taiyuan.

古文：案汉景帝分梁为山阳，非此郡也。《永初郡国》属徐州。
现代文：海陵太守，晋安帝年间将流亡寄居在当地的士民改为合并管理时分割广陵而设置。《永初郡国志》记载隶属徐州。
English: During the reign of Emperor Jian of An, the governor of Hailing changed the status of the local scholars and citizens living in exile to that of consolidated administration, and Guangling was divided and set up. "Yongchu County National History" recorded that it belonged to Xuzhou.

古文：领县四，户二千八百一十四，口二万二千四百七十。
现代文：领有四县。户二千八百一十四，人口二万二千四百七十。
English: It is divided into four counties, with 2,814 households and a population of 22,470.

古文：去州水三百，陆同；去京都水五百，陆同。
现代文：距州治水路有三百里，陆路相同。距京都水路有五百里，陆路相同。
English: It is three hundred miles from the prefectural waterway and the same distance by land. It is five hundred miles from the Kyoto waterway and the same distance by land.

古文：山阳令，射阳县境，地名山阳，与郡俱立。
现代文：山阳令，在射阳县境内，地名山屋，同区郡一起设置。
English: According to the Sanyang Regulation, in the territory of Shayang County, the place name mountain house is set up together with the same district and county.

古文：盐城令，旧曰盐渎，前汉属临淮，后汉、晋属广陵；三国时废，晋武帝太康二年复立。
现代文：盐城令，原先叫盐渎，前汉时属临淮，后汉、晋垡隶属广陵，三国时废置，晋武帝太康二年恢复设立。
English: Yancheng Ruling, originally known as Yanchang, was subordinated to Linhuai in the former Han Dynasty, and to Guangling in the later Han Dynasty and Jin Dynasty. It was abolished during the Three Kingdoms period, and reinstated by Emperor Taikang in the second year of the Jin Dynasty.

古文：晋安帝更名。
现代文：晋安帝时改称盐城。
English: It was renamed Yancheng during the reign of Emperor Jinan.

古文：东城令，晋安帝立。
现代文：东城令，晋安帝时设置。
English: Dongcheng Ruling, set up at the time of Emperor Jian of An.

古文：左乡令，晋安帝立。
现代文：左乡令，晋安帝时设置。
English: It was set up during the reign of Emperor An of Jin.

古文：盱眙太守，盱眙本县名，前汉属临淮，后汉属下邳，晋属临淮，晋安帝分立。
现代文：盱眙太守，盱眙原本是县名，前汉时隶属临淮，后汉时隶下邳，晋隶属临淮，晋安帝时分割而设置盱眙郡。
English: Taizhou,  was originally the name of the county. In the former Han Dynasty,  was subordinated to Linhuai, in the later Han Dynasty, it was subordinated to the lower, in the Jin Dynasty, it was subordinated to Linhuai, and in the Jin and An Dynasty, it was divided and set up as  County.

古文：领县五，户一千五百一十八，口六千八百二十五。
现代文：领有五县。户一千五百一十八，人口六千八百二十五。
English: It is divided into five counties, with a total of 1,518 households and a population of 6,825.

古文：去州水四百九十，陆二百九；去京都水七百，陆五百。
现代文：距州治水路有四百九十里，陆路二百零九里。距京都水路有七百里，陆路有五百里。
English: It is 490 miles away from the prefectural waterway and 209 miles away by land. It is 700 miles away from the Kyoto waterway and 500 miles away by land.

古文：考城令。
现代文：考城令。
English: The examination of the city ordinance.

古文：阳城令，晋安帝立。
现代文：另见。阳城令，晋安帝时设置。
English: See also: Yangcheng Ruling, issued during the reign of Emperor Jinan.

古文：直渎令，晋安帝立。
现代文：直渎令，晋安帝时设置。
English: A direct defamation order, established at the time of Emperor Jian'an.

古文：信都令，信都虽汉旧名，其地非也。
现代文：信都令，信都虽然是汉代旧名，此地却不是是非之地。
English: Although Xindu is the old name of the Han Dynasty, this place is not a place of right and wrong.

古文：地在河北，宋末立。
现代文：地在河北。此为宋末设置。
English: It is located in Hebei Province and is set in the late Song Dynasty.

古文：睢陵令，前汉属临淮，后汉属下邳，《晋太康地志》无。
现代文：睢陵令，前汉时隶属临淮，后汉时隶属下邳，《晋太康地志》无记载。
English: According to the Burying Order, it was subordinate to Linhuai during the former Han Dynasty, and subordinate to Jiaozuo during the later Han Dynasty. There is no record of it in the "History of Jin Taikang."

古文：宋末立。
现代文：宋末设置。
English: Set in the late Song Dynasty.

古文：秦郡太守，晋武帝分扶风为秦国，中原乱，其民南流，寄居堂邑。
现代文：秦郡太守，晋武帝分割扶风设置秦国，中原大乱，百姓南迁，寄居于堂邑。
English: The governor of Qin County, Emperor Jinwu divided Fufeng and set up the State of Qin, the Central Plains War, the people moved south and settled in Dongyue.

古文：堂邑本为县，前汉属临淮，后汉属广陵，晋又属临淮。晋惠帝永兴元年，分临淮淮陵立堂邑郡，安帝改堂邑为秦郡。《永初郡国》属豫州，元嘉八年度南兗。《永初郡国》又领临涂、平丘、外黄、沛、雍丘、浚仪、顿丘凡七县。
现代文：沛、雍丘、浚仪、顿丘另见。
English: See also the stories of Pei, Yongqiu, Dongyi and Dongqiu.

古文：何无雍丘、外黄、平丘、沛，徐又无浚仪。
现代文：共七县。何氏《志》无雍丘、外黄、平丘、沛四县，徐氏《志》又不载浚仪。
English: A total of seven counties. Ho's "Zhi" does not have Yongqiu, Waigang, Pingqiu and Pei four counties, and Xu's "Zhi" does not carry dredging equipment.

古文：元嘉八年，以沛并顿丘。
现代文：元嘉八年，将沛县并入顿丘。
English: In the eighth year of Yuan Jia, Pei County was merged into Dongqiu.

古文：后废帝元徽元年，割顿丘属新昌。
现代文：后废帝元徽元年，分割顿丘隶属于新昌。
English: In the first year after the abolition of the Yuan Dynasty, Dongqiu was divided and became part of Xinchang.

古文：领县四，户三千三百三十三，口一万五千二百九十六。
现代文：秦郡领有四县。户三千三百三十三，人口一万五千二百九十六。
English: Qin County is divided into four counties, with 33,333 households and a population of 15,296.

古文：去州水二百四十一，陆一百八十；去京都水一百五十，陆一百四十。
现代文：距州治水路有二百四十一里，陆路一百八十里。距京都水路一百五十里，陆路一百四十里。
English: It is 241 miles from the prefectural waterway and 180 miles by land. It is 150 miles from the Kyoto waterway and 140 miles by land.

古文：秦令，本属秦国，流寓立。
现代文：秦令，本来隶属秦国，安置流亡寄居的百姓时设立。
English: Qinling, originally subordinate to Qin, was established to resettle the exiled people.

古文：文帝元嘉八年，以临涂并秦，以外黄并浚仪。
现代文：文帝元嘉八年，将临涂并入秦，将处茎并入逡堡。
English: In the eighth year of Emperor Wen's reign, Lin Tuo was incorporated into Qin, and Jizheng was incorporated into the fortress.

古文：孝武孝建元年，以浚仪并秦。
现代文：孝武孝建元年，将浚仪并入豢县。
English: In the first year of Xiao Wu Xiao Jian, Jianyi was merged into Handan County.

古文：义成令，江左立。
现代文：义成令，江左时设立。
English: Yicheng Ordinance, established at the time of Jiang Zuo.

古文：尉氏令，汉旧名，属陈留。
现代文：尉氏令，汉代旧名，属于陈留。
English: 尉氏令, the old name in the Han Dynasty, belongs to Chen Liu.

古文：文帝元嘉八年，以平丘并尉氏。
现代文：文帝元嘉八年，将平丘并入尉氏。
English: In the eighth year of Emperor Wen's reign, Pingyao was incorporated into the Yi clan.

古文：怀德令，孝武大明五年立。
现代文：怀德令，孝武大明五年设立。
English: It was established in the fifth year of Xiaowu Daming's reign.

古文：又以历阳之乌江，并此为二县，立临江郡。
现代文：又将历阳的乌江和并此共二县，设立临江郡。
English: In addition, Linjiang County was established by combining Wujiang and Liyang into two counties.

古文：前废帝永光元年，省临江郡。
现代文：前废帝永光元年，撤销临江郡。
English: In the first year of the former emperor Yongguang, Linjiang County was abolished.

古文：怀德即住郡治，乌江还本也。
现代文：怀德就在原郡治所在地，乌江还本也。
English: Huai De is located in the former county seat, and Wujiang is also the capital.

古文：南沛太守，何志云，北沛新立；徐云南沛。
现代文：南沛太守，沛郡另见。何一区《志》上说，北沛新设立。徐《志》说是南沛。
English: Nanpei Daju, see also Pei County. According to the "Zhi" of any district, Beibei was newly established. Xu "Zhi" said that Nanpei was the best.

古文：《永初郡国》又有符离、洨、竹邑杼秋四县。
现代文：《永初郡国志》上又载符离、洨、竹邑前汉时名竹。
English: The "Yongchu County National History" also contains the characters 离,, and 竹, which were used in the former Han Dynasty.

古文：杼秋治无锡，余并治广陵。
现代文：杼秋治所在无锡，其余各县治所在广陵。
English: Wuxi is the seat of the prefectural government, and Guangling is the seat of the county government.

古文：文帝元嘉十二年，以北沛郡竹邑并杼秋，何、徐并无此二县，不详。
现代文：文帝元嘉墓十二年，将北沛郡的竹邑并入杼秋，何《志》、徐《志》都未记载此二县，原因不详。
English: In the 12th year of Emperor Wen's reign, Emperor Yuan's tomb was moved from Beibei County to Jiuqiu County. However, both He Zhi and Xu Zhi did not record these two counties, and the reason is unknown.

古文：《起居注》，孝武大明五年，分广陵为沛郡，治肥如县。
现代文：《起居注》载，孝武大明五年，分割广陵立沛郡，治所在肥如县噬。
English: According to the "Resident's Notes," in the fifth year of Xiaowu Daming, Guangling Lipei County was divided and governed by Fuzhou County.

古文：时无复肥如县，当是肥如故县处也。
现代文：但当时并无肥如县，可能是肥如旧县所在地。
English: However, there was no Feiyu County at that time, and it may have been the location of Feiyu County.

古文：二汉、《晋太康地志》并无肥如县。
现代文：两汉、《晋太康地志》都没有肥如县。
English: Both Han Dynasty and "History of the Jin and Taikang Dynasties" are not dominated by Hiyu County.

古文：沛郡宜是大明五年以前省，其时又立也。
现代文：沛郡应当是大明五年以前撤销的，到大明五年又设立起来。
English: Pei County should have been abolished five years before Daming, and then re-established five years after Daming.

古文：今领县三，户一千一百九，口一万二千九百七十。
现代文：现在领三县。户一千一百零九，人口一万二千九百七十。
English: He now leads three counties, with 1,109 households and a population of 12,970.

古文：萧县令。
现代文：萧县令。
English: Xiao County Order.

古文：相县令。
现代文：另见。相县令。
English: See also: Sangaku-Ryo.

古文：沛县令。
现代文：另见。沛县令。
English: See also: Pei County Ordinance.

古文：新平太守，明帝泰始七年立。
现代文：另见。新平太守，明帝泰始七年设立。
English: See also: Xinping Dazhou, established in the first seven years of the Ming Dynasty.

古文：江阳令。郡同立。
现代文：江阳令，与新平郡同时设立。
English: Jiangyang County was established at the same time as Xinping County.

古文：海安令。郡同立。
现代文：海安令，与新平郡同时设立。
English: Maritime Safety Ordinance, established at the same time as Xinping County.

古文：北淮阳太守，宋末侨立。
现代文：北淮阳太守，宋末设立的侨郡。
English: North Huaiyang governor, established at the end of the Song Dynasty.

古文：晋宁令。
现代文：晋宁令。
English: Order of promotion.

古文：宿预令。
现代文：另见。宿预令。
English: See also: Accommodation reservation.

古文：角城令。
现代文：另见。角城令。
English: See also: Cape Town Ordinance.

古文：北济阴太守，宋失淮北侨立。
现代文：另见。北济阴太守，济阴郡别见。宋丢失淮北桥后设立的侨郡。
English: See also: North Jiyin Daju, Jiyin County. Qiao County, established after the Song Dynasty lost the Huaibei Bridge.

古文：广平令，前汉临淮有广平县，后汉以后无。
现代文：广平令，前汉时临淮有广平县，后汉以后未设立。
English: According to the Guangping Ruling, Guangping County existed in the Former Han Dynasty, but it was not established after the Later Han Dynasty.

古文：定陶令。
现代文：定陶令。
English: Ding Tao ordered.

古文：阳平令。
现代文：另见。阳平令。
English: See also: Yangping Ruling.

古文：上党令。
现代文：另见。上党令。
English: See also: The order to join the Party.

古文：冤句令。
现代文：另见。冤句令。
English: See also the Unjust Sentence Decree.

古文：馆陶令。
现代文：另见。馆陶令。
English: See also: Museum Order.

古文：北下邳太守，宋失淮北侨立。
现代文：另见。北下邳太守，脚另见。塞丢失眦后设立的侨郡。
English: See also: Kitashitajima Shogunate, see also the footnote. Kyo-gun established after the loss of Shogunate.

古文：僮县令。
现代文：僮县令。
English: This is the county ordinance.

古文：下邳令。
现代文：另见。下邳令。
English: See also: Imperial edict issued.

古文：宁城令。
现代文：另见。宁城令。
English: See also: Ningcheng Decree.

古文：东莞太守，宋失淮北侨立。
现代文：另见。东莞太守，东莞郡另见。宋丢失淮北后设立的侨县。
English: See also: Governor of Dongguan and Dongguan County. See also: Overseas Chinese counties established after Song Dynasty lost Huaibei.

古文：莒县令。
现代文：莒县令。
English: This is the county ordinance.

古文：诸县令。
现代文：另见。诸县令。
English: See also: Order of Prefectures.

古文：东莞令。
现代文：另见。东莞令。
English: See also: Dongguan Decree.

古文：柏人令，汉旧名，属赵国。
现代文：另见。柏人令，汉代旧名，隶属赵国。
English: See also: Bai Renling, old name during the Han Dynasty, subordinate to Zhao.

古文：宋失淮北侨立。
现代文：宋丢失淮北后设立的侨县。
English: Qiao County was established after Song Dynasty lost Huaibei.

古文：兗州刺史，后汉治山阳昌邑，魏、晋治廪丘；武帝平河南，治滑台；文帝元嘉十三年，治邹山，又寄治彭城。
现代文：兗州刺史，后汉时治所在山阳郡昌邑县，魏、晋时期治所在廪丘，武帝平定河南，治所改在滑台，文帝元嘉十三年，治所在邹山，后又借治彭城。
English: In the history of Luzhou, the post-Han period was governed by Changyi County, Shanyang County, the Wei and Jin period was governed by Mengqiu, Emperor Wu conquered Henan, and the seat of government was changed to Slidai, in the 13th year of Emperor Wen, the seat of government was in Lushan, and later it was borrowed to govern Pengcheng.

古文：二十年，省兗州，分郡属徐、冀州。
现代文：二十年，撤销兖州，将兖州各郡分属徐州、冀州。
English: Twenty years ago, Ganzhou was abolished, and the counties of Ganzhou were divided into Xuzhou and Jizhou.

古文：三十年六月复立，治瑕丘。
现代文：三十年六月又恢复兖州，治所在瑕丘。
English: In June of the thirtieth year, Zhangzhou was restored, and the seat of government was in Kexiu.

古文：《永初郡国》有东郡、陈留、濮阳三郡，而无阳平。
现代文：两汉时山阳郡有瑕丘县。《永初郡国志》载有束郡、陈留、濮阳三郡，而没有阳干郡。
English: At the time of the Han Dynasty, Sanyang County included Keqiu County. "Yongchu County National History" contains three counties, Saku County, Chenliu County, and Fenyang County, but no Yanggan County.

古文：东郡领白马、凉城、东燕三县。
现代文：束郡领有白马、另见。凉城、两汉时束郡有聊城县，《晋太康地志》无记载，可能就是凉城。东燕另见。三县。
English: There is a white horse in Sok County, see also. Liangcheng, two Han dynasties Sok County has Liaocheng County, "Jin Taikang Geography" has no record, it may be Liangcheng. Dongyan, see also. Three counties.

古文：陈留郡领酸枣、小黄、雍丘、白马、襄邑、尉氏六县。
现代文：陈留郡领有酸枣、汉代旧县。小黄、雍丘、白马、襄邑、尉氏六县。
English: Chenliu County is a former county in the Han Dynasty. Xiaowang County, Yongqiu County, Baima County, Xiangyip County and Youji County are also included.

古文：濮阳郡领濮阳、廪丘二县。
现代文：郡、县都另见。濮阳郡领有濮阳、廪丘都另见。二县。
English: Counties and county capitals are listed separately. Poyang County includes Poyang, and Mengqiu is listed separately. Two counties.

古文：宋末失淮北，侨立兗州，寄治淮阴。
现代文：宋末丢失淮北，暂借地重置兖州，治所借设在淮阴。
English: At the end of the Song Dynasty, Huaibei was lost, and Bozhou was temporarily relocated to a borrowed site, and the government office was temporarily located in Huaiyin.

古文：兗州领郡六，县三十一，户二万九千三百四十，口一十四万五千五百八十一。
现代文：淮阴另见。兖州领有六郡，三十一县。户二万九千三百四十。人口十四万五千五百八十一。
English: See also Huaiyin. Zhangzhou has six counties and 31 counties, with 29,340 households and a population of 145,581.

古文：泰山太守，汉高立。
现代文：泰山太守，汉高帝时设立。
English: Taishan Taishu, established during the reign of Emperor Han.

古文：《永初郡国》又有山茌、莱芜、太原三县，而无钜平县。
现代文：《永初郡国志》又有山茌、莱芜、太原三县，而无钜平县。
English: "Yongchu County National History" has three counties, namely, Shanxi, Laiwu and Taiyuan, but no Ping County.

古文：今领县八，户八千一百七十七，口四万五千五百八十一。
现代文：现领有八县。户八干一百七十七，人口四万五千五百八十一。
English: There are eight counties in the current territory. There are 177 households in the eight counties, with a population of 45,581.

古文：去州陆八百；去京都陆一千八百。
现代文：距州治陆路有八百里。距京都陆路有一千八百里。
English: It is 800 miles from Shuzhi by road, and 1,800 miles from Kyoto by road.

古文：奉高令，汉旧县。
现代文：奉高令，汉代旧县。
English: Feng Gaoling, the leader of an old county during the Han Dynasty.

古文：钜平令，汉旧县。
现代文：钜平令，汉代旧县。
English: 平令, Han Dynasty old counties.

古文：嬴令，汉旧县。
现代文：赢令，汉代旧县。
English: Zhengring, an old county in the Han Dynasty.

古文：牟令，汉旧县。
现代文：牟令，汉代旧县。
English: Muling, an old county in the Han Dynasty.

古文：南城令，前汉属东海，后汉、晋属泰山。
现代文：南城令，前汉时隶属东海，后汉、晋伐隶属泰山。
English: According to the Nancheng Ruling, it belonged to the East Sea during the Former Han Dynasty, and to Mount Tai during the Later Han Dynasty and the Jin Dynasty.

古文：武阳令，汉旧县。
现代文：武阳令，汉代旧县。
English: Wuyang, an old county in the Han Dynasty.

古文：梁父令，汉旧县。
现代文：梁父令，汉代旧县。
English: Liang Chiling, an old county in the Han Dynasty.

古文：今领县六，户六千三百五十八，口二万一千一百一十二。
现代文：现在领有六县。产六千三百五十八，人口二万一千一百一十二。
English: At present, there are six counties, with an output of 6,358 and a population of 21,112.

古文：去州陆二百二十；去京都陆一千三百三十。
现代文：距州治陆路有二百二十里。距京都陆路有一千三百三十里。
English: It is 220 miles from Shuzhi by road and 1,330 miles from Kyoto by road.

古文：宋明帝泰始五年，侨立于淮南当涂县界，领高平、金乡二县。
现代文：宋明帝泰始五年，在淮南当涂县境内设立高平侨郡，领有高平、金乡二县。
English: In the first five years of Emperor Taizong of the Song Dynasty, Gaoping Overseas Chinese County was established in Dangtu County of Huainan Province, which included Gaoping and Jinxiang counties.

古文：其年，又立睢陵县。
现代文：当年又设睢陵县。
English: In the same year, Fuling County was also established.

古文：高平令，前汉名稿，章帝更名。
现代文：高平令，前汉时名稿县，章帝时改名。
English: Gaoping County, Mingshu County in the former Han Dynasty, changed its name to Zhangdi County.

古文：方与令，汉旧县。
现代文：方与令，汉代旧县。
English: Fang and Ling, old counties in the Han Dynasty.

古文：金乡令，前汉无，后汉、晋有。
现代文：金乡令，前汉时无，后汉、晋有。
English: Jinxiangling, the former Han Dynasty did not have it, but the later Han Dynasty and Jin Dynasty had it.

古文：钜野令，汉旧县。
现代文：钜野令，汉代旧县。
English: Konno-Ryo, an old prefecture during the Han Dynasty.

古文：平阳令，汉旧县。曰南平阳。
现代文：平阳令，汉代旧县称做南平阳。
English: According to the Pingyang edict, the old county in the Han Dynasty was called Nanpingyang.

古文：亢父令，汉旧县。
现代文：亢父令，汉代旧县。
English: 父令, Han Dynasty old county.

古文：旧属任城。
现代文：原隶属任城。
English: Formerly affiliated to Rencheng.

古文：鲁郡太守，秦薛郡，汉高后更名。
现代文：鲁郡太守，秦代名薛郡，汉高后时改名。
English: Lu County Governor, Qin Dynasty named Xue County, changed its name after the Han Dynasty.

古文：本属徐州，光武改属豫州，江左属兗州。
现代文：原本隶属涂丛，光亘游时改属鱼出，塞置时隶属兖州。
English: Originally, it belonged to Tu Cong, but it changed to Fude when it was in Guangwu, and it belonged to Shengzhou when it was in Jie.

古文：领县六，户四千六百三十一，口二万八千三百七。
现代文：领有六县。户四千六百三十一，人二万八千三百零七。
English: There are six counties under its jurisdiction, with a total of 4,631 households and 28,307 people.

古文：去州陆三百五十；去京都陆一千一百。
现代文：距州治陆路有三百五十里。距京都陆路有一千一百里。
English: It is 350 miles by road from Shuzhu and 1100 miles by road from Kyoto.

古文：邹令，汉旧县。
现代文：邹令，汉代旧县。
English: 令, Han Dynasty old county.

古文：汶阳令，汉旧县。
现代文：汶阳令，汉代旧县。
English: Benyangling, an old county during the Han Dynasty.

古文：鲁令，汉旧县。
现代文：鲁令，汉代旧县。
English: Luling, an old county in the Han Dynasty.

古文：阳平令，孝武大明元年立。
现代文：阳平令，孝武大明元年设立。
English: Yangping County, established in the first year of Xiaowu Daming.

古文：新阳令，孝武大明中立。
现代文：新阳令，孝武大明年问设立。
English: Xiaowu University will be established next year, according to Xinyang.

古文：卞令，明帝泰始二年立。
现代文：卞令，明帝泰始二年设立。
English: According to the imperial edict, the Ming Dynasty Taiji Temple was established two years ago.

古文：东平太守，汉景帝分梁为济东国，宣帝更名。
现代文：东平太守，汉景帝分割梁国设济东国，宣帝时改为东平郡。
English: Dongping Daju, Hanqing Emperor divided Liang Province to establish Zhidong Province, and changed it to Dongping County when he proclaimed himself emperor.

古文：领县五，户四千一百五十九，口一万七千二百九十五。
现代文：领有五县。户四千一百五十九，人口一万七千二百九十五。
English: It is divided into five counties, with a total of 4,159 households and a population of 17,295.

古文：去州水五百，陆同；去京都水二千，陆一千四百。
现代文：距州治水路有五百里，陆路同。距京都水路有二千里，陆路一千四百里。
English: It is five hundred miles from the prefectural waterway and the same distance by land. It is two thousand miles from the Kyoto waterway and fourteen hundred miles by land.

古文：宋末又侨立于淮阴。
现代文：宋末又在淮阴设束平侨郡。
English: At the end of the Song Dynasty, Shu-Ping Overseas Chinese County was set up in Huaiyin.

古文：无盐令，汉旧县。
现代文：无盐令，汉代旧县。
English: Salt-free ordinance, Han Dynasty old counties.

古文：平陆令，汉旧县。
现代文：平陆令，汉代旧县。
English: Pinglu County, an old county during the Han Dynasty.

古文：须昌令，前汉属东郡，后汉、《晋太康地志》属东平。
现代文：须昌令，前汉时隶属东郡，后汉、《晋太康地志》隶属东平。
English: Su Changling, in the former Han Dynasty, was affiliated with Dong County, in the latter Han Dynasty, "Jin Taikang History" was affiliated with Dongping.

古文：寿昌令，春秋时曰良，前汉曰寿良，属东郡；光武改曰寿张，属东平。
现代文：寿昌令，春秋时称作曰良，前汉时名寿良，隶属东郡，光武帝时改称寿张，隶属东平。
English: Shuchangling, known as Zheliang during the Spring and Autumn Periods, and Shuliang during the Former Han Dynasty, belonged to Dong County, and was renamed Shuzhang during the reign of Emperor Guangwu, and belonged to Dongping.

古文：范令，汉旧县。
现代文：范令，汉代旧县。
English: Fanling, an old county in the Han Dynasty.

古文：四县并治郡下。
现代文：四县都治于郡下。
English: Four counties are under the county.

古文：阳平太守，魏分魏郡立。
现代文：阳平太守，魏时分割魏郡而设立。
English: Yangping Daju, established by dividing Wei County during the Wei Dynasty.

古文：文帝元嘉中，流寓来属，后省，孝武大明元年复立。
现代文：文帝元嘉年间，流亡的难民来此寓居，后来撤销，孝武大明元年恢复设立。
English: During the reign of Emperor Wen of the Yuan Dynasty, exiled refugees came to live here. Later, it was revoked, but it was reinstated in the first year of Xiaowu Daming.

古文：领县五，户二千八百五十七，口一万一千二百七十一。
现代文：领有五县。户二千八百五十七，人口一万一千二百七十一。
English: It is divided into five counties, with 2,857 households and a population of 11,271.

古文：馆陶令，汉旧名，寄治无盐。
现代文：馆陶令，汉代旧县。治所寄设在无盐。
English: Former county of the Han Dynasty. The government office was located in Wuxi.

古文：乐平令，魏立，属阳平。
现代文：乐平令，魏立，隶属阳平。
English: Led by Leping, Wei Li, subordinate to Yangping.

古文：后汉东郡有乐平，非也。
现代文：后汉东郡时曲有乐平县，不是这个地方。
English: After Hantong County, there is Leping County, which is not this place.

古文：寄治下平陆。
现代文：治所寄设在下平陆。
English: The clinic is located in Shimohira-riku.

古文：元城令，汉旧。
现代文：元城令，漠代旧名。
English: Yuanchengling, the former name of the Desert Dynasty.

古文：寄治无盐。
现代文：治所借设在无盐。
English: The clinic is located in Unsalted.

古文：平原令，孝武大明中立。
现代文：乎原令，另见。孝武帝大明年间设置。
English: According to the original order, see also. It will be set up during the coming year of Emperor Xiaowu.

古文：顿丘令，孝武大明中立。
现代文：顿丘令，另见。孝武帝大明年间设置。
English: See also the Dongqiu Edict. It was established during the reign of Emperor Xiaowu.

古文：济北太守，汉和帝永元二年，分泰山立。
现代文：济北太守，汉和帝永元二年，分割泰山郡而设置。
English: Jibei governor, Han Dynasty Yongyuan 2nd year, divided Taishan County and set up.

古文：《永初郡国》有临邑、东阿二县，孝武大明元年省，应在何志而无，未详。
现代文：《永初郡国志》载有临邑、两汉时隶属东璺，《晋太康地志》记载属济北。
English: The "Yongchu County National History" contains Lin'eup, which belonged to Donglu during the Han Dynasty, and the "Jin Taikang Local History" records it as belonging to Jibei.

古文：领县三，户三千一百五十八，口一万七千三。
现代文：束阿两汉时隶属束型，晋伐未设置。二县，耋武帝大明元年撤销，应在巫《志》上有记载而却没有记载，不知是什么原因领有三县。户三千一百五十八。
English: Two counties, abolished by Emperor Wu in the first year of the Ming Dynasty, should have been recorded in Wu's "History" but were not. For some reason, there were three counties. There were 3,158 households.

古文：去州陆七百；去京都水二千，陆一千五百。
现代文：人口一万七千零三。距州治陆路有七百里。距京都水路有二千里，陆路一千五百里。
English: It has a population of 17,003. It is seven hundred miles away from the prefecture by land, two thousand miles from Kyoto by water, and fifteen hundred miles by land.

古文：宋末又侨立于淮阳。
现代文：宋末又在淮阳设立济北侨郡。
English: At the end of the Song Dynasty, Jibei Overseas Chinese County was established in Huaiyang.

古文：蛇丘令，前汉属泰山，后汉、《晋太康地志》属济北。
现代文：蛇丘令，前汉时隶属泰山，后汉、《晋太康地志》隶属济北郡。
English: It was subordinated to Taishan during the Former Han Dynasty, and subordinated to Jibei County during the Later Han Dynasty.

古文：卢令，前汉属泰山，后汉、《晋太康地志》属济北。
现代文：卢令，前汉时隶属泰山，后汉、《晋太康地志》隶属济北郡。
English: Lu Ling, in the former Han Dynasty, belonged to Taishan, in the latter Han Dynasty, "Jin Taikang History" belonged to Jibei County.

古文：谷城令，前汉无，后汉属东郡，《晋太康地志》属济北。
现代文：谷城令，前汉时未设立，后汉时隶属东郡，《晋太康地志》记载隶属济北郡。
English: According to the Gu Cheng Ruling, it was not established in the pre-Han period, but it belonged to Dong County in the post-Han period. According to the Jin Taikang Geography, it belonged to Jibei County.

