古文：张延赏，中书令嘉贞之子。
现代文：张延赏是中书令张嘉贞的儿子。
English: Zhang Yanbo is the son of Zhang Jiazhen, the General Secretary of the Communist Party of China.

古文：幼孤，本名宝符，开元末，玄宗召见，赐名延赏，取 赏延于世 之义，特授左司御率府兵曹参军。博涉经史，达于政事，侍中、韩国公苗晋卿见而奇之，以女妻焉。
现代文：他从小失去了父母，本来名叫张宝符，开元末年，唐玄宗召见他，赐给他名字叫张延赏，取义为 赏赐延续到后代 。又特地任命他为左司御率府兵曹参军，他博览儒经史籍，通晓政务，侍中、韩国公苗晋卿见到后认为他是奇才，把女儿嫁给了他。
English: He lost his parents when he was a child. His original name was Zhang Baofu. At the end of the first century, Tang Xuanzong summoned him and gave him the name Zhang Yanbo, which was given to him as a reward to be passed down to future generations. He also specially appointed him as the governor of the Left Division to lead the soldiers in the army. He was well-versed in Confucian classics and was familiar with government affairs. When his chambermaid, Korean Prince Miao Jinqing, saw him, he thought he was a genius and married his daughter to him.

古文：肃宗在凤翔，擢拜监察御史，赐绯鱼袋，转殿中侍御史。
现代文：唐肃宗在凤翔时，提升他为监察御史，赐给他绯鱼袋，后调任殿中侍御史。
English: When Emperor Suzong of Tang was in Fengxiang, he promoted him to the position of inspector of history, gave him an eel bag, and later transferred him to the position of attendant of history in the palace.

古文：关内节度使王思礼请为从事，思礼领河东，又为太原少尹，兼行军司马、北都副留守。
现代文：关内节度使王思礼请他去担任从事，王思礼镇守河东，又请他担任太原少尹，兼任行军司马、北都副留守。
English: The Guanai Festival made Wang Sili ask him to serve as the commander, Wang Sili was the commander of the east of the river, and he was also asked to serve as the Taiyuan Shao Yin, and also served as the marching steward and the deputy commander of the northern capital.

古文：代宗幸陕，除给事中，转御史中丞、中书舍人。
现代文：唐代宗出逃陕州，任命他为给事中，后调任御史中丞、中书舍人。
English: During the Tang Dynasty, Emperor Zong fled to Shaanxi Province, where he was appointed to be in-charge of affairs, and later he was transferred to the post of Vice-Minister of History and Vice-Minister of Education.

古文：大历二年，拜河南尹，充诸道营田副使。
现代文：大历二年，官任河南尹，并任各道营田副使。
English: In the second year of the great calendar, he was appointed as Henan Yin, and served as the vice-envoy of Yingtian in each province.

古文：河洛久当兵冲，闾井丘墟，延赏勤身率下，政尚简约，疏导河渠，修筑宫庙，数年间流庸归附，邦畿复完，诏书褒美焉。
现代文：黄河洛水一带长期遭受战乱，村镇成了废墟，张延赏带头率领部下勤奋努力，政务崇尚精简朴素，疏通河流渠道，修筑宫殿祠堂，几年之间流民归附，城镇都恢复了，皇帝下诏书褒奖他。
English: The Luoshui area of the Yellow River suffered from war for a long time, and the villages and towns became ruins. Zhang Yanbo took the lead in leading his subordinates to make diligent efforts. He advocated streamlining and simplicity in government affairs, clearing river channels, and building palaces and ancestral halls. Within a few years, the displaced people were reunited, and the towns were restored. The emperor praised him in an imperial edict.

古文：时罢河南、淮西、山南副元帅，以其兵镇东都，延赏权知东都留守以领之，理行第一，入朝拜御史大夫。
现代文：当时撤销了河南、淮西、山南副元帅职务，用这些军队镇守东都，张延赏代理知东都留守统率他们，政绩数第一，因此调进朝廷任御史大夫。
English: At that time, the posts of vice-marshals of Henan, Huaixi and Shannan were revoked, and these troops were used to guard the eastern capital. Zhang Yanbo, the deputy of Zhidong, stayed behind to lead them. He had the highest number of achievements, so he was transferred to the imperial court to serve as chief historian.

古文：初，上封人李少良潜以元载阴事闻，载党知之，奏少良狂妄，下御史台讯鞫，欲有所属。
现代文：先前，上封县人李少良秘密报告元载的没被人知道的坏事，元载的党羽知道了，参奏李少良疯癫胡说，把他押送到御史台审讯，想给他加个罪名。
English: Previously, Li Shao Liang, a Shangfeng County resident, secretly reported the bad things that were not known to the original report, and the original party members knew that Li Shao Liang was crazy, and they wanted to add a crime to him by sending him to the History Channel for interrogation.

古文：延赏不承其意，寻出为扬州刺史、淮南节度观察等使。属岁旱歉，人有亡去他境者，吏或拘之。
现代文：张延赏不按他们的意图办，不久被调出京城任扬州刺史、淮南道节度观察等使职务，那年天旱歉收，有人逃到外地，被官员们抓住了。
English: Zhang Yanbo did not do as they intended, and was soon transferred out of Beijing to serve as Yangzhou chief historian, Huainan Province festival observer and other posts. That year, the drought failed, and some people fled to other places and were caught by officials.

古文：延赏曰： 夫食，人之所恃而生也，此居而坐毙，适彼而可生，得存吾人，又何限于彼也。 
现代文：张延赏说： 粮食，是人们赖以活命的东西，呆在这里会饿死，到那里就可以活下去，能够保住我治下人民的生命，何必不让他们去。 
English: Zhang Yanbo said: "Grain is what people depend on for their lives. If you stay here, you will starve to death. If you go there, you can live. If it can save the lives of the people under my rule, why not let them go.

古文：乃具舟楫而遣之，俾吏修其庐室，已其逋债，而归者增于其旧。
现代文：就派船送走了他们，又派官员为他们修好房屋，偿还欠债，结果回来的人比逃走的还多。
English: They sent boats to take them away, and officials to repair their houses and pay their debts. As a result, more people returned than fled.

古文：边江之瓜洲，舟航凑会，而县属江南，延赏奏请以江为界，人甚为便。
现代文：江边的瓜洲，是繁忙的码头，却属于隔江的江南道，张延赏上奏请求将长江作为两道的边界，人们认为非常便利。
English: Guazhou on the river is a busy wharf, but it belongs to South Jiangsu Province across the river. Zhang Yanbo appreciated the request to make the Yangtze River the border between the two provinces, which was considered very convenient.

古文：寻以母忧去职，终制授授检校礼部尚书、江陵尹、兼御史大夫、荆南节度观察使。
现代文：不久因母亲去世守丧离职，守丧期满被任命为检校礼部尚书、江陵尹，兼任御史大夫、荆南节度观察使。
English: Soon after his mother's death, he left the post of mourner, and after the period of mourning, he was appointed as the head of the school inspection department, Shangshu and Jiangling Yin, and also served as the chief historian and Jingnan Festival observation envoy.

古文：数年，改检校兵部尚书、成都尹、剑南西川节度观察使，依前兼御史大夫，寻就加吏部尚书。
现代文：几年后，调任检校兵部尚书、成都尹、剑南西川节度观察使，仍兼任旧职御史大夫，不久就任加职吏部尚书。
English: A few years later, he was transferred to be the inspector of the school inspection, the inspector of the military department, Chengdu Yin, and the inspector of the Nishikawa festival in Jianan. He still concurrently served as the former superintendent of history, and soon he was appointed as the superintendent of the military department.

古文：建中四年十一月，部将西山兵马使张朏以兵入成都为乱，延赏奔汉州鹿头，戍将叱干遂等讨之。其月，斩朏及同恶者，复归成都。
现代文：建中四年十一月，他部下的将领西山兵马使张月出派兵进成都举行叛乱，张延赏逃到汉州鹿头关，守将叱干遂等人讨伐叛军，当月，杀死了张月出及其同伙，他又回到了成都。
English: In November of the 4th year of Jianzhong, the general of his subordinates, Xishan Terracotta Warriors and Horses, ordered Zhang Yuesu to send troops to Chengdu to hold a rebellion. Zhang Yanbo fled to Shantou Pass, Hanzhou, and the commander scolded the rebels. That month, he killed Zhang Yuesu and his associates, and he returned to Chengdu.

古文：先是兵革屡扰，自天宝末杨国忠用事南蛮，三蜀疲弊，属车驾迁幸；其后郭英乂淫崔宁之室，遂纵崔宁、杨琳交乱；及崔宁得志，复极侈靡，故蜀土残弊，荡然无制度。
现代文：在这以前当地多次发生战争，天宝末年杨国忠征讨南诏，蜀地人力物力消耗很大，接着唐玄宗逃来此地；后来郭英奸淫崔宁的妻室，使得崔宁、杨琳相继叛乱；到崔宁得势，又非常奢侈，所以蜀地破败凋敝，制度荡然无存。
English: Before this, there were many wars in the region. At the end of the Heian period, Yang Guozhong led a campaign against the Southern Zhao Dynasty, and Shu had a great expenditure of manpower and material resources. Then, Tang Xuanzong fled to this region. Later, Guo Ying raped the wife of Cui Ning, causing Cui Ning and Yang Lin to rebel one after another. When Cui Ning gained power, he was also very extravagant, so Shu was ruined and the system was destroyed.

古文：延赏薄赋约事，动遵法度，仅至庶富焉。
现代文：张延赏减轻赋税减少劳役，按法纪办事，使蜀地渐渐人多富裕了起来。
English: Zhang Yanbo reduced taxes, reduced labor, and acted in accordance with laws and regulations, so that Shu gradually became more affluent.

古文：建中末，驾在山南，延赏贡奉供亿，颇竭忠力焉。
现代文：建中末年，皇帝逃到梁州，张延赏进贡供给，非常尽心竭力。
English: At the end of the middle of the Jian Dynasty, the emperor fled to Liangzhou, and Zhang Yan rewarded and supplied tribute. He did his best.

古文：驾在梁州，倚剑南蜀川为根本。
现代文：皇帝在梁州时，将蜀地作为后方基地。
English: When the emperor was in Liangzhou, he used Shu as a rear base.

古文：贞元元年，以宰相刘从一有疾，诏征延赏为中书侍郎、同中书门下平章事。
现代文：贞元元年，因宰相刘从一生病，皇帝下诏书征调张延赏任中书侍郎、同中书门下平章事。
English: In the first year of the Zhengyuan era, due to the illness of Prime Minister Liu Zengrui, the emperor issued an edict to promote Zhang Yanbo to the position of the secretary of the Central Committee of the Communist Party of China and to the position of the deputy secretary of the Central Committee of the Communist Party of China.

古文：与凤翔节度使李晟不协，晟表论延赏过恶，德宗重违晟意，延赏至兴元，改授左仆射。
现代文：他跟凤翔节度使李晟的关系不好，李晟上奏指责张延赏的过错，唐德宗不愿违拗李晟的意见，兴元年间，张延赏改任左仆射。
English: He and Fengxiang Jiedu did not have a good relationship with Li Xuan. Li Xuan blamed Zhang Yanbo for the fault in the report. Tang Dezong did not want to go against Li Xuan's opinion. During the reign of Emperor Xingyuan, Zhang Yanbo was replaced by Zuo Shu.

古文：初，大历末，吐蕃寇剑南，李晟领神策军戍之，及旋师，以成都官妓高氏归。
现代文：先前，大历末年，吐蕃进犯剑南，李晟率领神策军去抵御，到班师回朝时，把成都官府乐妓高氏带着走。
English: Previously, in the last year of the lunar calendar, when Tubo invaded Jiannan, Li Gan led the army to defend against it. When he returned to the North, he took Gao Shi, a prostitute from the Chengdu government office, with him.

古文：延赏闻而大怒，即使将吏令追还焉。
现代文：张延赏听说后很生气，立即派将领和官员追去要了回来。
English: Zhang Yanbo was very angry when he heard about it. He immediately sent generals and officials to chase the horse and demand its return.

古文：晟颇衔之，形于词色。
现代文：李晟为此很恼火，面露怒容口出恶言。
English: Li Yao was very angry about this, his face was angry and his mouth was full of bad words.

古文：三年正月，晟入朝，诏晟与延赏释憾，德宗注意于延赏，将用之。
现代文：贞元三年正月，李晟进京朝拜，唐德宗下诏书要李晟和张延赏和解，皇帝有心要重用张延赏。
English: In the first month of the third year of the Zhengyuan era, Li Yan entered Beijing to pay homage, and Tang Dezong issued an edict to reconcile Li Yan and Zhang Yanbo. The emperor had the intention to reuse Zhang Yanbo.

古文：会浙西观察使韩滉来朝，尝有德于晟，因会宴说晟使释憾，遂同饮极欢，且请晟表荐为相，晟然之，于是复加同中书门下平章事。
现代文：遇到浙西观察使韩来京朝拜，韩曾对李晟有恩，因此皇帝派他摆酒劝李晟和张延赏和解，于是他们非常高兴地一起喝酒，韩又请求李晟上表推荐张延赏任宰相，李晟答应了这事，这样张延赏又加职同中书门下平章事。
English: Han had been kind to Li Qiye, so the emperor sent him to serve wine to persuade Li Qiye and Zhang Yanbo to reconcile, so they were very happy to drink together. Han also asked Li Qiye to recommend Zhang Yanbo as prime minister. Li Qiye agreed to this, and Zhang Yanbo was promoted to the post of the vice-premier.

古文：及延赏当国用事，晟请一子聘其女，固情好焉，延赏拒而不许。
现代文：到张延赏掌权执政，李晟为一个儿子请求娶他的女儿，来加强两人的友谊，张延赏拒绝了没有答应。
English: When Zhang Yanbo was in power, Li Gan asked for a son to marry his daughter to strengthen the friendship between the two. Zhang Yanbo refused and did not agree.

古文：晟谓人曰： 武人性快，若释旧恶于杯酒之间，终欢可解。
现代文：李晟对别人说： 武将性格爽快，如果在酒宴上调解过去的怨仇，酒宴完了就和解了。
English: Li Yao said to others: A military commander has a refreshing personality. If you mediate past grudges at a banquet, you will be reconciled after the banquet is over.

古文：文士难犯，虽修睦于外，而蓄怒于内，今不许婚，衅未忘也，得无惧焉！ 
现代文：文人不好惹，虽表面表示友好，但仇恨藏在心里，现在不答应婚事，是还在记仇，能不叫人害怕吗！ 
English: The literati are not easily provoked. Although they appear friendly on the surface, they harbor hatred in their hearts. If they don't agree to marry now, it's because they are still holding a grudge. Can't they make people afraid?

古文：无几，延赏果谋罢晟兵权。
现代文：不久，张延赏果然想剥夺李晟的兵权。
English: Soon, Zhang Yanbo really wanted to deprive Li Yao of his military powers.

古文：初，吐蕃尚结赞兴兵入陇州，抵凤翔，无所虏掠，且曰： 召我来，何不持牛酒劳军？ 
现代文：先前，吐蕃尚结赞带兵从陇州入侵，抵达了凤翔，但没有掳掠，还说： 请我们来，为什么不送酒肉犒劳？ 
English: Previously, the invading troops from Zhangzhou, led by Tuyun Shangjizan, arrived in Fengxiang, but did not loot and plunder. They also said: "Please come, why don't you send us meat and wine as a reward?

古文：徐乃引去，持是以间晟。
现代文：慢慢才退兵，用这来离间李晟。
English: Only slowly did he leave the army, and he used this to drive a wedge between Li Yao.

古文：晟令牙将王佖选锐兵三千设伏汧阳，大败吐蕃，结赞仅免，自是数遣使乞和。
现代文：李晟命衙将王亻必挑选三千精兵在阳埋伏，把吐蕃军打得大败，尚结赞只身逃脱，从此吐蕃多次派使者求和。
English: According to Li Yu's will, Wang Yu must choose three thousand elite soldiers to ambush in the sun, defeat the Tubo army, and Shang Jizan escaped alone. Since then, Tubo has repeatedly sent envoys to sue for peace.

古文：晟朝于京师，奏曰： 戎狄无信，不可许。 
现代文：李晟到京城去朝拜，上奏说： 吐蕃不讲信用，不能答应。 
English: Li Qiye went to Beijing to pay homage to the emperor, and said at the beginning of the performance: "Tu Xi is not trustworthy, and cannot agree."

古文：宰相韩滉又扶晟议，请调军食以继之，上意将帅生事邀功。
现代文：宰相韩也赞成李晟的意见，请求调士兵粮草补充李晟的军队，皇帝担心将领惹事想立功。
English: Han, the prime minister, also agreed with Li Qiye's opinion and requested that soldiers be sent to replenish Li Qiye's army with grain and grass. The emperor was worried that the generals would stir up trouble and try to claim credit.

古文：会滉卒，延赏揣上意，遂行其志，奏令给事中郑云逵代之。
现代文：遇到韩去世了，张延赏察觉了皇帝的心思，就开始实现自己的目的，上奏命给事中郑云逵取代李晟。
English: When Han passed away, Zhang Yanbo, aware of the emperor's thoughts, began to realize his goal, and ordered Zheng Yunqi to replace Li Xi in the matter.

古文：上不许，且曰： 晟有社稷之功，令自举代己者。 
现代文：皇帝不答应，并说： 李晟为国家立有大功，让他推举接替自己的人。 
English: The emperor did not agree, and said: Li Xi has made great contributions to the country, let him choose his successor.

古文：于是始用邢君牙焉。
现代文：这样才开始任用邢君牙。
English: This is how the appointment of Gong Junya began.

古文：拜晟太尉、兼中书令，奉朝请而已。
现代文：于是封李晟为太尉、兼中书令，只是上朝请安。
English: As a result, Li Yao was appointed to the rank of lieutenant and also to the post of chancellor, but he only went to the imperial court to ask for peace.

古文：是年五月，吐蕃果背约以劫浑瑊。
现代文：这年五月，吐蕃果然违背和约想劫持浑王咸。
English: In May of that year, Tu Youyou violated the agreement and attempted to kidnap Hun Wangxian.

古文：及册晟太尉，故事，临轩册拜三公，中书令读册，侍中奉礼，如阙，即以宰相摄之。
现代文：任命李晟为太尉时，按照惯例，皇帝到殿前任命三公，应由中书令宣读册命，侍中奉行礼仪。如有缺位，就由宰相代理。
English: According to the usual practice, when Li Qiye was appointed as the first lieutenant, the emperor went to the front of the palace to appoint the three princes. The order of the book should be read by the order of the book, and the attendants should follow the etiquette. If there is a vacancy, the prime minister should act as the representative.

古文：延赏欲轻其礼，始令兵部尚书崔汉衡摄中书令读册，时议非之。
现代文：张延赏想减轻礼遇，首创命兵部尚书崔汉衡代替中书令宣读册命，当时的人都指责这事。
English: Zhang Yanhong wanted to lighten the courtesy, and the first to do so was Cui Hanheng, the commander of the Ministry of Military Affairs, who read out the imperial edict instead of the Chinese imperial edict. People at the time criticized this.

古文：延赏奏议请省官员，曰： 为政之本，必先命官。
现代文：张延赏上奏请求裁减官员，说： 治理国家的根本，必定首先任命官员。
English: Zhang Yan appreciated the request to reduce the number of officials, saying: The foundation of governing the country must first appoint officials.

古文：旧制官员繁而且费，州县残破，职此之由。
现代文：过去的制度官员太多开销大，州县凋敝，原因就在这里。
English: The reason for this is that the system officials of the past were too expensive, and the states and counties withered away.

古文：臣在荆南、剑南，所管州县阙官员者，少不下十数年，吏部未尝补授，但令一官假摄，公事亦理。
现代文：我在荆南、剑南时，管辖的州县有官员缺额的，不下十多年，吏部没有补派，只命一个官员代理，政事也处理好了。
English: When I was in Jingnan and Jiannan, the counties and prefectures under my jurisdiction had a shortage of officials for more than ten years. The cadre department did not send replacements, only one official was appointed as a deputy, and the political affairs were handled well.

古文：以此言之，员可减无疑也。
现代文：从这看来，官员可以减少是没有疑问的。
English: From this point of view, there is no doubt that officials can be reduced.

古文：请减官员，收其禄俸，资幕职战士，俾刘玄佐复河湟，军用不乏矣。 
现代文：请求裁减官员，收回俸禄补给军队兵将，派刘玄佐去收复河州湟水一带，军队费用就不缺了。 
English: Request the reduction of officials, recover the salary to replenish the army generals, send Liu Xuanzuo to recover the area around Surabaya in Hezhou, and there will be no shortage of military expenses.

古文：上然之。
现代文：皇帝同意了。
English: She wrote a very elegant and beautiful piece of music, and the emperor gladly accepted her suggestion.

古文：初，韩滉入朝，至汴州，厚结刘玄佐，将荐其可委边任，玄佐亦欲自效，初禀命，及滉卒，玄佐以疾辞，上遣中官劳问，卧以受命。
现代文：先前，韩调进京城时，到了汴州，送厚礼结交了刘玄佐，将要推荐他去承担边境重任，刘玄佐也想建功立业，开始接受了任命，到韩去世，刘玄佐以生病为由推辞了任命，皇帝派宦官去慰问，刘玄佐躺在床上接受诏命。
English: Previously, when Han Zheng entered Beijing, when he arrived in Zhangzhou, he made friends with Liu Xuanzu with a generous gift and was going to recommend him to take on the border heavy duty. Liu Xuanzu also wanted to make a contribution and began to accept the appointment. When he died in Han, Liu Xuanzu declined the appointment on the grounds of illness. The emperor sent eunuchs to offer condolences, and Liu Xuanzu lay in bed to accept the imperial command.

古文：延赏知不可用，奏用李抱真，抱真亦辞不行。
现代文：张延赏知道他不能任用了，上奏起用李抱真，李抱真也推辞不去。
English: Zhang Yanbo knew that he could not be appointed, so he started to use Li Baozhen, and Li Baozhen also refused to go.

古文：时抱真判官陈昙奏事京师，延赏俾昙劝抱真，竟拒绝之。
现代文：当时李抱真的判官陈昙到京城奏报事情，张延赏让陈昙去劝李抱真，李抱真竟然不答应。
English: At that time, Li Bozhen's judge Chen Yu went to Beijing to report the matter. Zhang Yanbo asked Chen Yu to persuade Li Bozhen, but Li Bozhen did not agree.

古文：盖以延赏挟怨罢李晟兵柄，由是武臣不附。
现代文：这是因为张延赏记旧仇剥夺了李晟的兵权，所以武将不拥护他。
English: This was because Zhang Yanbo had deprived Li Qiye of his military power, so the warlord did not support him.

古文：自建议减员之后，物议不平。延赏惧，量留其官，下诏曰： 诸州府停减及所留官，并合厘务。其中有先考满及充职掌，遇停减或恐公务有阙，宜委长吏于合停官中取考浅人清白干举者，留填阙官，差摄讫闻奏。
现代文：自从上奏裁减官员以后，舆论反对裁减，张延赏害怕了，想少量保留一些应裁减的官员，就请皇上下诏书说： 各州府裁减和留用的官员，职责合并，其中有以前考察满负荷和任实际职责的，遇到裁减怕公务无人处理，应委托主管官在裁减的官员中挑选资历浅但廉洁能干的，留下填补空缺的官职，任命后奏报。
English: Since the report on the reduction of officials, public opinion has been opposed to the reduction. Zhang Yanbo was afraid, and wanted to retain a small number of officials who should be reduced, so he asked the emperor to issue an imperial edict saying: the officials who were reduced and retained by the state governments, and whose duties were merged, including those who had previously examined the full load and assumed actual duties, encountered the fear of reduction and had no one to handle the official duties, should entrust the competent official to select the less senior but honest and capable officials among the reduced officials, leave the vacant official positions to be filled, and report the appointment.

古文：但取才堪，不限资序。
现代文：只看才能，不论资历顺序。
English: Merely on ability, regardless of seniority.

古文：如当州官少，任以邻州官充。其州县诸色部送，准旧例以当州官及本土寄客有资产干了者差遣。 
现代文：如果本州官员缺乏，可以用邻近州的官员担任，各州县各种押运任务，按旧例委派本州官员和在本地居住有家财能干的人。 
English: If there is a shortage of local officials, officials from neighboring states can be used, and various escort tasks can be assigned to each state and county. According to the old practice, local officials and people with financial ability living in the local area can be appointed.

古文：及减员人众，道路怨叹，日闻于上。
现代文：因裁减官员太多，全国到处都埋怨，每天都有人向皇帝奏报。
English: There were complaints all over the country that too many officials had been made redundant, and reports were sent to the emperor every day.

古文：侍中马燧奏减员太甚，恐不可行；太子少保韦伦及常参官等各抗疏以减员招怨，并请复之；浙西观察使白志贞亦以疏论。
现代文：侍中马燧上奏说裁减官员太多，恐怕行不通；太子少保韦伦和常参官等分别奏本认为裁减官员招人埋怨，请求全部恢复；浙西观察使白志贞也上奏章反对。
English: Ma Yan, the Vice-Chamberlain, made a report saying that the reduction of officials was too much, and I am afraid that it would not work; Wei Ren, the Prince's Junior Bodyguard, and the regular officers separately made a report that the reduction of officials was a cause for complaint, and requested that they all be restored; West Zhejiang Observation made Bai Zhizhen also oppose the report.

古文：时廷赏疾甚，在私第；李泌初为相，采于群情，由是官员悉复。
现代文：当时张延赏病重了，在自己家里；李泌刚任宰相，听取了大家的意见，因此裁减的官员都恢复了。
English: At that time, Zhang Yanbo was seriously ill and at home; Li Xulong was the prime minister and listened to everyone's opinions, so the reduced officials were restored.

古文：贞元三年七月薨，年六十一，废朝三日，赠太保，赙礼加等，谥曰成肃。
现代文：贞元三年七月，张延赏去世了，享年六十一岁，皇帝命停止上朝三天致哀，赠官太保，助丧礼物增加一等，赐谥号为成肃。
English: In July of the third year of the Zhengyuan era, Zhang Yanbo passed away at the age of sixty-one. The emperor ordered to stop the Shang Dynasty for three days to mourn, to give official protection, to increase the first class of funeral gifts, and to give the posthumous name to Cheng Su.

