古文：縣各告都官在其縣者，寫其官之用律。
现代文：各县应分别通知设在该县的都官，抄写该官府所通用的法律。
English: Each prefecture shall separately notify the Tokyo Metropolitan Government, which is located in that prefecture, and copy the laws commonly used by that government.

古文：都官歲上出器求補者數，上會九月內史。
现代文：都官每年上报已注销而要求补充的器物数量，在九月把帐报内史。
English: City officials annually report the number of items that have been canceled and require supplementation, and report the account to the internal history in September.

古文：有事請，必以書，毋口請，毋請。
现代文：有事请示，必须用书面请示，不要口头请示，也不要托人为请示。
English: If you have a request for instructions, you must use a written request, not a verbal request, and do not ask someone to request instructions.

古文：官嗇夫免，□□□□□□□其官亟置嗇夫。過二月弗置嗇夫，令、丞為不從令。
现代文：官府的啬夫免职，该官府赶快任命啬夫。如超过两个月仍未任命啬夫，令、丞就是违反法令。
English: If the miser of the government office is dismissed, the government office will quickly appoint a miser. If the miser has not been appointed for more than two months, the order or order is a violation of the law.

古文：除佐必當壯以上，毋除士五新傅。
现代文：任命佐必须用壮年以上的人，不要任用刚傅籍的没有爵的人。
English: The appointment of a deputy must be made by a person who is more than 10 years old, and should not be made by a person without a peerage.

古文：苑嗇夫不存，縣為置守，如廄律。
现代文：苑囿的啬夫不在，由县安排代理其职务的人员，依《廄律》行事。
English: In the absence of the court bailiff, the county shall arrange a person to act on his behalf, and act in accordance with the "Law."

古文：令史毋從事官府。
现代文：犯过罪而经赦免的史不能再在官府供职。
English: A person who has committed a crime and has been pardoned can no longer serve in the government.

古文：非史子，毋敢學學室，犯令者有罪。
现代文：不是史的儿子，不准在学室学习，违反这一法令的有罪。
English: If you are not Shi's son, you are not allowed to study in the classroom, and you are guilty of violating this law.

古文：下吏能書者，毋敢從史之事。
现代文：下吏即使能够书写，也不准作史的事务。
English: Even if subordinates can write, they are not allowed to do historical affairs.

古文：侯、司寇及下吏毋敢為官府佐、史及禁苑憲。
现代文：侯、司寇以及众下吏，都不准作官府的佐、史和禁苑的害盗。
English: Court nobles, governors, and subordinate officials are not allowed to steal from the government, history, and the Forbidden City.

古文：有實官縣料者，各有衡石羸、斗甬，期。
现代文：贮藏谷物的官府需要进行称量的，都应备有衡石的权、斗桶，以足用为度。
English: If the government needs to weigh the stored grain, it should have the right to weigh the stone and the bucket, with the foot used as the measure.

古文：計其官，毋百姓。
现代文：这些器具应在官府中量用，不要借给百姓。
English: These devices should be used sparingly in government offices, and should not be lent to the people.

古文：不用者，正之如用者。
现代文：当时不使用的器具，也要和使用的一样校正准备。
English: Instruments not in use at the time should be prepared for calibration as if they were in use.

古文：有實官高其垣墻。
现代文：贮藏谷物的官府要加高墙垣。
English: Government offices that store grain will have to build higher walls.

古文：它垣屬焉者，獨高其置芻廥及倉茅蓋者。
现代文：有其他墙垣和它连接的，可单独加高贮芻草的仓和用茅草覆盖的粮仓。
English: There are other walls connected to it, which can be individually raised to store eucalyptus and thatch-covered grain silos.

古文：令人勿舍。
现代文：令人不得靠近居住。
English: It's a terrible place to live.

古文：非其官人，毋敢舍焉。
现代文：不是本官府人员，不准在其中居住。
English: If they are not government officials, they are not allowed to live there.

古文：善宿衛，閉門輒靡其旁火，慎守唯敬。
现代文：夜间应严加守卫，开门时即应灭掉附近的火，谨慎警戒。
English: Night should be strictly guarded, when opening the door should be extinguished nearby fire, caution.

古文：有不從令而亡、有敗、失火，官吏有重罪，大嗇夫、丞任之。
现代文：有违反法令而遗失、损坏或失火的，其官吏有重罪，大啬夫、丞也须承担罪责。
English: If, in violation of laws and regulations, there is a lost, damaged or misfiring bicycle, the officials shall be guilty of a felony, and the miser and the thief shall also bear criminal responsibility.

古文：毋敢以火入臧府、書府中。
现代文：不准把火带进收藏器物或文书的府库。
English: It is not allowed to bring fire into the prefectural treasury where collection items or documents are kept.

古文：吏已收臧，官嗇夫及吏夜更行官。
现代文：吏将物品收好后，由官府的啬夫和吏轮翻值夜看守。
English: After the officials have collected the items, they are guarded at night by the misers and officials of the government.

古文：毋火，乃閉門戶。
现代文：经检查没有火，才可开闭门户。
English: After checking that there is no fire, the portal can be opened and closed.

古文：令令史循其廷府。
现代文：叫令史巡察其衙署的府库。
English: He asked Ling Shi to inspect the prefectural treasury of his department.

古文：節新為吏舍，毋依臧府、書府。
现代文：如果新建吏的居舍，不要靠近收藏品物、文书的府库。
English: If you build a new official's residence, do not go near the prefectural treasury for collectibles and documents.

