古文：齐本纪下废帝郁林王讳昭业，字元尚，小字法身，文惠太子长子也。
现代文：废帝郁林王名叫昭业，字叫元尚，小字叫法身，是文惠太子的长子。
English: The name of the deposed Emperor Yulin Wang was Zhao Ye, his Chinese name was Yuan Shang, and his Chinese name was Faxin. He was the eldest son of Prince Wen Hui.

古文：高帝爲相王，镇东府，时年五岁，床前戏。
现代文：高帝过去做相王，镇守东府，当时他五岁，在床前玩耍。
English: When Gao Di was five years old, he was playing in front of his bed.

古文：高帝方令左右拔白发，问之曰： 儿言我谁耶？ 答曰： 太翁。 
现代文：高帝正让左右侍从给拔白头发，就问他说： 孩子你说我是谁？ 回答说： 太爷。 
English: Emperor Gao was letting the attendants on his right and left pluck his white hair, so he asked him, "Child, who do you say I am?" He replied, "Grandpa."

古文：高帝笑谓左右曰： 岂有爲人作曾祖而拔白发者乎。 
现代文：高帝笑着对左右说： 难道有做别人曾祖却要拔掉白头发的么？ 
English: Gao Di smiled and said to the right and left: Is there really someone who wants to pull out the white hair of someone else's great-grandfather?

古文：即掷镜、镊。
现代文：随即扔掉了镜子和镊子。
English: He then threw away the mirror and the pliers.

古文：其后问讯，高帝指示宾客曰： 我基于此四世矣。 
现代文：后来有客人到府上通问，高帝指着他对客人说： 我有了他就够四代了。 
English: Later, a guest came to inquire about the house, and Gao Di pointed to him and said to the guest, "If I had him, four generations would be enough."

古文：及武帝即位，封爲南郡王，时年十岁。
现代文：到了武帝即位，封他为南郡王，当时年龄十岁。
English: When Emperor Wu ascended the throne, he was named the King of Nan County, at the age of ten.

古文：永明五年十一月戊子，冠于东宫崇正殿。
现代文：永明五年十一月初七，在东宫崇正殿举行了加冠礼。
English: On the 7th day of the 11th month of the 5th year of the Yongming era, the crowning ceremony was held in the East Palace of the Chongzheng Palace.

古文：其日小会，赐王公以下帛各有差，给南郡王扶二人。
现代文：当天举行了小型宴会，赏赐王公以下大臣的丝绢数量各有差别，给南郡王选派师傅二人。
English: On the same day, a small banquet was held. The number of silk cocoons given to ministers below the rank of prince varied, and two masters were sent to Nan County.

古文：七年，有司奏给班剑二十人，鼓吹一部。
现代文：七年，有关部门奏请给他配备仪仗二十人、乐队一支。
English: Seven years later, the relevant departments requested that he be equipped with a ceremonial march of 20 people and an orchestra.

古文：高选友、学，礼绝群王。
现代文：选拔优异的朋友、同学，礼遇超过其他各王。
English: Excellent friends and classmates are selected, and they are treated with more courtesy than other kings.

古文：十一年，给皁轮三望车。
现代文：十一年，配备了皂轮三望车。
English: Eleven years later, it was equipped with a soap wheel.

古文：文惠太子薨，立南郡王爲皇太孙，居东宫。
现代文：文惠太子去世，立南郡王为皇太孙，住在东宫。
English: After the death of Prince Wenhui, the King of Linnan County, the great-grandson of the emperor, lived in the East Palace.

古文：其年七月戊寅，武帝崩，皇太孙即帝位，大赦。
现代文：这年七月三十日，武帝逝世，皇太孙继承帝位，实行大赦。
English: On July 30 of that year, Emperor Wu died, and the imperial grandson succeeded to the throne, and a general amnesty was implemented.

古文：八月壬午，诏称遗诏，以护军将军武陵王晔爲卫将军，征南大将军陈显达即本号，并开府仪同三司。
现代文：八月十一日，下诏书说根据武帝的遗诏，任命护军将军武陵王萧晔为卫将军，征南大将军陈显达保留本来官号，加封开府仪同三司。
English: On August 11, the next imperial edict said that according to the imperial edict of Emperor Wu, the escort general Wuling Wang Xiaohui was appointed as the general of the guards, the general of the Southern Expedition Chen Xianda retained his original official title, and he was given the title of Kaifu Yi and the three departments.

古文：以尚书左仆射西昌侯鸾爲尚书令，右仆射王晏爲左仆射，吏部尚书徐孝嗣爲右仆射。
现代文：任命尚书左仆射西昌侯萧鸾为尚书令、右仆射王晏为左仆射、吏部尚书徐孝嗣为右仆射。
English: He appointed Shangshu's left-hand servant, Sha Xichang Hou Xiao Jie, as Shangshu's second-in-command, his right-hand servant, Sha Wang Jie, as his left-hand man, and his right-hand man, Shangshu Xu Xiaozhi, as his right-hand man.

古文：癸未，加司徒竟陵王子良位太傅，增班剑三十人。
现代文：十二日，加封司徒竟陵王萧子良兼任太傅，扩增仪仗到三十人。
English: On the 12th day of the month, Xiao Ziliang, the king of the Ling Dynasty, was appointed as the chief priest, and the number of priests was increased to thirty.

古文：蠲除三调及衆逋在今年七月三十日以前者。
现代文：免除在今年七月初三以前的 三调 和各种拖欠。
English: waive the three transfers and all kinds of arrears before the beginning of July this year.

古文：省御府及无用池田邸冶，减关市徵税。
现代文：压缩政府机关和无用的池田林园，减少关、市征税。
English: Shrink government agencies and the useless Ikeda Forest Park, and reduce customs and city taxes.

古文：先是，每有蠲原之诏，多无事实，督责如故。
现代文：在此以前，常常有关于宽免的诏书，但大多并不落实，仍与以前一样督促催逼。
English: Prior to this, there were often decrees on clemency, but most of them were not implemented, and they were still urged as before.

古文：是时西昌侯鸾任知朝政，天下咸望风来苏，至此恩信两行，海内莫不欣然。
现代文：现在西昌侯萧鸾主持朝政，天下都因而在疾苦中获得新生，如今恩泽、信用两者并行，全国无不欢悦。
English: Now Xichang lord Xiao Wei is presiding over the imperial court, and the whole country has been reborn in suffering. Now, both grace and credit are in parallel, and the whole country is delighted.

古文：九月辛酉，追尊文惠皇太子爲世宗文皇帝。
现代文：九月二十日，追尊文惠皇太子为世宗文皇帝。
English: On September 20th, the crown prince, His Imperial Highness the Crown Prince Wen Hui, was crowned Emperor Zongwen.

古文：冬十月壬寅，尊皇太孙太妃爲皇太后，立皇后何氏。
现代文：冬季的十月壬寅日，尊尚皇太孙太妃为皇太后，立何氏为皇后。
English: In the winter of October, Ren Yin Day, the great-great-grandson of the empress dowager was crowned empress dowager, and Ms. Li He was crowned empress.

古文：十一月庚戌，魏人来聘。
现代文：十一月初十，魏朝的使者前来聘问。
English: On the 10th day of the 11th month, an envoy from the Wei Dynasty came to inquire.

古文：辛亥，立临汝公昭文爲新安王、曲江公昭秀爲临海王，皇弟昭粲爲永嘉王。
现代文：十一日，封临汝公萧昭文为新安王、曲江公萧昭秀为海王、皇弟萧昭粲为永嘉王。
English: On the 11th day of the month, Xiao Zhaowen, the King of Xin'an, Xiao Zhaoxiu, the King of Qujiang, and Xiao Zhaojun, the King of Yongjia, were enthroned.

古文：隆昌元年春正月丁未，大赦，改元。
现代文：隆昌元年，春季的正月初一，实行大赦，改换年号。
English: In the first year of Longchang, on the first day of the first month of spring, an amnesty was implemented and the year name was changed.

古文：加太傅竟陵王子良殊礼。镇军将军西昌侯鸾即本号爲大将军，给鼓吹一部，亲兵五百人。
现代文：加封太傅竟陵王萧子良享受特殊礼仪，镇西将军西昌侯萧鸾依凭本来官号为大将军，配备乐队一支、亲兵五百人。
English: King Xiao Ziliang of Jafeng Taifu enjoyed a special etiquette, while the Western Zhenxi general Xichang Hou Xiao Rongyi was given the official title of general and was equipped with an orchestra and 500 soldiers.

古文：以领军鄱阳王锵爲尚书右仆射。
现代文：任命领军鄱阳王萧锵为尚书右仆射。
English: He appointed the leader of the Shenyang army, King Xiao Jie, as his right-hand man.

古文：诏百僚极陈得失。
现代文：下诏书让各级官员尽力畅谈朝政得失。
English: The following edict allows officials at all levels to talk freely about the gains and losses of the DPRK government.

古文：又诏王公以下各举所知。
现代文：又下诏让王公以下的官员各自荐举所了解的人物。
English: He also issued an edict that officials below the rank of crown prince should each recommend a person they knew.

古文：辛亥，祀南郊，宥隆昌元年以来流人。
现代文：初五，到南郊祭祀，宽恕了隆昌元年以来的流放者。
English: On the fifth day of the first month of the year, he went to the southern suburbs to offer sacrifices, and forgave the exiles since the first year of Longchang.

古文：戊午，拜崇安陵。
现代文：十二日，拜祭崇安陵。
English: On the 12th, the worship of the Chong An Mausoleum began.

古文：甲戌，使司徒参军刘瓒聘于魏。
现代文：二十八日，派遣司徒参军刘到魏朝聘问。
English: On the 28th, Liu sent Sito to join the army and travel to the Wei Dynasty for an interview.

古文：二月辛卯，祀明堂。
现代文：二月十六日，到明堂祭祀。
English: On February 16th, they went to Myodo to hold a religious service.

古文：夏四月辛巳，卫将军、开府仪同三司武陵王晔薨。
现代文：夏季的四月初七，卫将军、开府仪同三司武陵王萧晔逝世。
English: On the 7th day of the 4th month of the summer, General Wei, Kaifu Yi and the three Wuling kings Xiao Qi passed away.

古文：戊子，太傅竟陵王子良薨。
现代文：十四日，太傅竟陵王萧子良逝世。
English: On the 14th, Emperor Taifu passed away.

古文：丁酉，以骠骑将军庐陵王子卿爲卫将军，尚书右仆射鄱阳王锵爲骠骑将军，并开府仪同三司。
现代文：二十三日，任命骠骑将军庐陵王萧子卿为卫将军、尚书右仆射鄱阳王萧锵为骠骑将军，并加开府仪同三司。
English: On the 23rd, he appointed the cavalry general Gongling Wang Xiao Zicheng as the general of the guard, and Shang Shuxu's right-hand man Shaoyang Wang Xiao Wei as the cavalry general, and added the prefectural ceremony and the three departments.

古文：闰月丁卯，以镇军大将军西昌侯鸾即本号开府仪同三司。
现代文：闰四月二十二日，封镇军大将军西昌侯萧鸾依凭本封号开府仪同三司。
English: On leap April 22nd, the general of the fief town army, Xichang Hou Xiao Jie, used this fief number to open the fief ceremony with the three divisions.

古文：五月甲戌朔，日有蚀之。秋七月癸巳，皇太后令废帝爲郁林王。
现代文：五月初一，发生日食。秋季的七月二十一日，皇太后任命废帝为郁林王。
English: On the first day of May, a solar eclipse occurred, and on the 21st day of July in autumn, the Empress Dowager appointed the deposed Emperor as the King of Yulin.

古文：帝少美容止，好隶书，武帝特所锺爱，敕皇孙手书不得妄出以贵之。
现代文：废帝少年时容貌举止美好，喜爱隶书，武帝特别钟爱，下令皇孙的手书不准随便传出，以此抬高其价值。
English: When he was a young boy, the former emperor had a beautiful appearance and good manners. He was fond of handwritten letters. Emperor Wu was particularly fond of handwritten letters and ordered that the handwritten letters of the emperor's grandchildren should not be casually passed on, in order to increase their value.

古文：进退音吐，甚有令誉。
现代文：他的行动谈吐，有很好的声誉。
English: His actions speak for themselves and he has a very good reputation.

古文：生而爲竟陵文宣王所摄养，常在袁妃间。
现代文：他出生以后，即被竟陵文宣王所收养，常常在袁妃那里。
English: After he was born, he was adopted by King Lingwen Xuanqiao and often stayed with Yuanfei.

古文：竟陵王移住西州，帝亦随住焉。
现代文：竟陵王移住西州，废帝也随同前往住在那里。
English: In fact, King Ling moved to Xizhou, and Emperor Wu also went to live there.

古文：性甚辩慧，哀乐过人。
现代文：性格十分聪慧善辩，哀乐之情超过常人。
English: His personality is very intelligent and eloquent, and his feelings of sadness and joy surpass those of ordinary people.

古文：接对宾客，皆款曲周至。
现代文：接待应对宾客，都很殷勤周到。
English: The reception of the guests was very courteous.

古文：矫情饰诈，阴怀鄙慝。
现代文：乔装感情，掩饰欺诈，而内心深处卑鄙邪恶。
English: Feigning emotion, concealing deceit, while deep inside he is vile and evil.

古文：与左右无赖群小二十许人共衣食，同卧起。
现代文：他与身边的无赖小子二十余人共同穿衣吃饭，一道睡觉起床。
English: He and the more than 20 ruffian boys around him dress and eat together, and go to bed and wake up together.

古文：妃何氏择其中美貌者，皆与交欢。
现代文：他的妃子何氏挑选其中长相漂亮的，都和他们通情交欢。
English: His concubine, Ms. He, selects the prettiest among them and has sexual intercourse with all of them.

古文：密就富市人求钱，无敢不与。
现代文：他暗地里向街上的富人要钱，没有人敢不给。
English: He secretly asked the rich people on the street for money, and no one dared to refuse.

古文：及竟陵王移西邸，帝独住西州，每夜辄开后堂合，与诸不逞小人，至诸营署中淫宴。
现代文：到后来竟陵王移居西邸，废帝独自住在西州，一到夜里就打开后堂的小门，和那些失意的小人一块到各军营的官署中去淫乐欢宴。
English: Later, King Ling moved to the West Mansion, and Emperor Wutu lived alone in Xizhou. At night, he would open the small door of the back hall, and go to the offices of each military camp with those disappointed villains to feast on sexual pleasures.

古文：凡诸小人，并逆加爵位，皆疏官名号于黄纸，使各囊盛以带之，许南面之日，即便施行。
现代文：他对每个小人，全都非法地加封爵位，都把他们的官职名号写在黄纸上，让他们各自装在口袋里带着，许诺将来登基临朝的时候，就兑现落实。
English: He illegitimately bestowed knighthoods on all the villains, wrote their official titles on yellow paper, let them carry them in their pockets, and promised to implement them when he ascended the throne in the future.

古文：又别作钥鈎，兼善效人书，每私出还，辄扃钥，封题如故，故人无知者。
现代文：又另外特地制作了钥匙和武器，加上又善于模仿别人的字体，每次秘密行动返回时，就仍然关好门、上好锁，贴上写好的封条，和原来一模一样，所以没有人知道。
English: In addition, they specially made keys and weapons, and they were also good at imitating other people's fonts. Every time the secret operation returned, they still closed the door, locked it, and affixed a written seal, exactly the same as the original, so no one knew.

古文：师史仁祖、侍书胡天翼闻之，相与谋曰： 若言之二宫，则其事未易，若于营署爲异人所殴打，及犬物所伤，岂直罪止一身，亦当尽室及祸。
现代文：他的师傅史仁祖、侍书胡天翼听说了这件事，互相商议道： 如果传到两宫里面，那么这事就麻烦了，如果他在军营机关被人殴打，或者被狗咬伤，哪怕只是我们一人有罪，也一定要全家遭祸。
English: His master Shi Renzo and his aide-de-camp Hu Tianyi heard about the incident and discussed it with each other, saying, "If it spreads to the two palaces, it will be troublesome. If he is beaten in the military camp or bitten by a dog, even if only one of us is guilty, the whole family will be in trouble."

古文：年各已七十，馀生宁足吝邪。 
现代文：我们的年龄都已经七十，余生还值得吝惜吗？ 
English: We are both in our seventies. Is the rest of our lives worth regretting?

古文：数日中，二人相系自杀，二宫不知也。
现代文：几天之内，两人相继自杀，两宫并不知道。
English: Within days, the two committed suicide, unbeknownst to the imperial couple.

古文：武帝以暨阳县寒人给事中綦母珍之代仁祖，剡县寒人马澄代天翼。
现代文：武帝让暨阳县平民给事中綦母珍之代替史仁祖，剡县平民马澄代替胡天翼。
English: Emperor Wu asked the civilians of Jiyang County to replace Shi Renzo with Zou Muzhen, and Zou County civilian Ma Cheng replaced Hu Tianyi.

古文：文惠太子每禁其起居，节其用度。
现代文：文惠太子经常禁止他的行动，节制他的开支。
English: Prince Wen Hui often forbade his actions and restrained his spending.

古文：帝谓豫章王妃庾氏曰： 阿婆，佛法言有福生帝王家，今见作天王，便是大罪，左右主帅，动见拘执，不如市边屠酤富儿百倍。 
现代文：废帝对豫章王妃庾氏说： 阿婆，佛法上说有福生在帝王家，现在看来作了天王，便是大罪，身边的主帅，常常会把他们抓起来，这和街上杀猪卖酒的富儿比起来要相差百倍。 
English: The deposed emperor said to Yu Zhang Wangfei: "Grandma, according to Buddhism, it is a great sin to be born into the imperial family, and now it seems to be a heavenly king. The superiors around them often arrest them. This is a hundred times different from the rich people who kill pigs and sell liquor on the street.

古文：文惠太子自疾及薨，帝侍疾及居丧，哀容号毁，旁人见者，莫不呜咽。
现代文：文惠太子从生病到去世，废帝侍候治病和守丧，悲哀痛哭，旁人见了，没有不呜咽感动的。
English: From the time of Prince Wenhui's illness until his death, the deposed emperor was attended by doctors and mourners, and wept with grief. When others saw him, they were moved to tears.

古文：裁还私室，即欢笑酣饮，备食甘滋。
现代文：但他刚回自己的房间，就欢笑畅饮，吃各种美味。
English: But as soon as he got back to his room, he was laughing, drinking and eating all kinds of delicious food.

古文：葬毕，立爲皇太孙。
现代文：埋葬完毕，被立为皇太孙。
English: After the burial, he was appointed the Emperor's grandson.

古文：问讯太妃，截壁爲合，于太妃房内往何氏间，每入辄弥时不出。
现代文：他去慰问太妃，截开墙壁成为一个小门，从太妃房内前往他的妃子何氏的房间，常常一进去就很久不出来。
English: He would go to console Tohei, cut the wall to make a small door, and go from Tohei's room to his concubine Ho's room. Often, once he entered, he would not come out for a long time.

古文：武帝往东宫，帝迎拜号恸，绝而复苏，武帝自下舆抱持之，宠爱日隆。
现代文：武帝前往东宫，废帝迎拜痛哭，气绝而又复苏，武帝亲自走下车来将他抱住，宠爱一天比一天加深。
English: Emperor Wu went to the East Palace, the former emperor greeted him with tears, breathless and revived, Emperor Wu personally got out of the car to hug him, and his love deepened day by day.

古文：又在西州令女巫杨氏祷祀，速求天位。
现代文：他又在西州让女巫杨氏祭祀祈祷，赶快求得皇位。
English: He also had the witch Yang worship and pray in Xizhou to quickly claim the throne.

古文：及文惠薨，谓由杨氏之力，倍加敬信，呼杨婆。
现代文：文惠王去世，他认为是由于杨氏巫术的力量，倍加崇敬信赖，称她为 杨婆 。
English: Wen Hui Wang passed away, he believed that it was due to the power of Yang's witchcraft, and he revered and trusted her, calling her Yang Bao.

古文：宋氏以来，人间有杨婆儿哥，盖此征也。
现代文：自从宋氏以来，社会上流传有《杨婆儿哥》，大概就是这种征兆。
English: Since the Song Dynasty, there has been "Yangbabergro" circulating in society, which is probably a sign of this.

古文：武帝有疾，又令杨氏日夜祷祈，令宫车早晏驾。
现代文：武帝有病时，他又让杨氏日夜祈祷，好让武帝早早死去。
English: When Emperor Wu was ill, he also asked Mr. Yang to pray day and night so that Emperor Wu would die early.

古文：时何妃在西州，武帝未崩数日，疾稍危，与何氏书，纸中央作一大 喜 字，而作三十六小 喜 字绕之。
现代文：当时何妃住在西州，武帝在没死前的几天里，病情越来越重，他给何氏写信，纸的中央是一个大 喜 字，又有三十六个小 喜 字环绕着它。
English: At that time, Hefei was living in Xizhou, and Emperor Wu was getting sicker and sicker in the days before his death. He wrote a letter to He, the center of the paper was a large "happy" character, and there were thirty-six small "happy" characters surrounding it.

古文：侍武帝疾，忧容惨戚，言发泪下。
现代文：侍候武帝治病，忧愁的面容惨痛悲伤，说着话眼泪就掉下来。
English: Waiting for Emperor Wu to cure his illness, his sorrowful face was wracked with grief. As he spoke, tears fell down his face.

古文：武帝每言及存亡，帝辄哽咽不自胜。
现代文：武帝每次说到国家存亡，废帝便哽咽得不能控制。
English: Whenever Emperor Wu talked about the country's survival, the former emperors choked uncontrollably.

古文：武帝以此谓爲必能负荷大业，谓曰： 五年中一委宰相，汝勿厝意。五年以后，勿复委人。
现代文：武帝因此认为他必能担当大业，对他说： 五年当中一切事情交给宰相，你不用操心，五年以后，不要再委托别人。
English: Emperor Wu therefore believed that he would be able to take charge of the great cause, and said to him: In the middle of the five years, leave everything to the prime minister. You don't have to worry. After five years, don't entrust anyone else.

古文：若自作无成，无所多恨。 
现代文：如果自己没有干出大的成就，也没有更多的怨恨。 
English: If you don't achieve great success, there is no more resentment.

古文：临崩，执帝手曰： 阿奴，若忆翁，当好作。 
现代文：临死的时候，他拉着废帝的手说： 孩子，你如果怀念爷爷，就要好好干事业。 
English: When he was dying, he took the hand of the deposed emperor and said: My child, if you miss your grandfather, you must do a good job.

古文：如此再而崩。
现代文：这样一连说了两遍，就死去了。
English: After saying this twice in a row, he died.

古文：大敛始毕，乃悉呼武帝诸伎，备奏衆乐，诸伎虽畏威从事，莫不哽咽流涕。
现代文：大殓刚刚完毕，他就把武帝的众多乐伎全部叫来，把各种乐曲全都演奏一遍，众乐伎虽然害怕他的威势而被迫演奏，但没有人不哽咽流泪。
English: As soon as the grand banquet was over, he summoned all of Emperor Wu's numerous warriors and played all of the various pieces of music. Although the warriors were afraid of his might and were forced to play, no one could help but choke back tears.

古文：素好狗马，即位未逾旬，便毁武帝所起招婉殿，以材赐阉人徐龙驹，于其处爲马埒。
现代文：平时他爱好狗马，即位没超过十天，就拆毁了武帝所建的招婉殿，把那些器材都赐给太监徐龙驹，而在原处建起马埒。
English: In ordinary times, he was fond of dogs and horses. When he had been on the throne for no more than ten days, he demolished the Zhaowan Hall built by Emperor Wu, gave all the equipment to the eunuch Xu Longyu, and built a stable in its place.

古文：驰骑坠马，面额并伤，称疾不出者数日。
现代文：有一次骑马奔驰从马上摔下来，面颊和额头都被摔伤，称病不出有好几天。
English: Once, riding a horse, Benzi fell from the horse, his cheek and forehead were injured, and he said that he had been ill for several days.

古文：多聚名鹰快犬，以粱肉奉之。
现代文：他聚集了很多名鹰快犬，用米肉供养它们。
English: He gathered a lot of famous eagle fast dogs and provided them with rice.

古文：及武帝梓宫下渚，帝于端门内奉辞，轀輬车未出端门，便称疾还内。
现代文：到武帝的棺材出殡的时候，废帝只在端门以内送别，丧车还没出端门，他便称病回宫了。
English: When Emperor Wu's coffin was brought out for the funeral, Emperor Wu only said goodbye inside the front door. The funeral carriage had not yet left the front door when he returned to the palace, claiming to be ill.

古文：裁入合，即于内奏胡伎，鞞铎之声，震响内外。
现代文：刚进门，便在宫内让胡人乐队奏起胡乐，鼙鼓、铃铛的声音，震响宫廷内外。
English: As soon as he entered the palace, he had a goose orchestra play goose music in the palace. The sound of gongs, drums and bells reverberated inside and outside the palace.

古文：时司空王敬则问新除射声校尉萧坦之曰： 便如此，不当匆匆邪？ 
现代文：当时司空王敬则问新上任的射声校尉萧坦之说： 马上就这么做，不是太匆忙了么？ 
English: At that time, the head of the air force, Wang Jing, asked the newly appointed captain Xiao Tanzhi: "Do it right away, aren't you in a hurry?"

古文：坦之曰： 此政是内人哭响彻耳。 
现代文：萧坦之说： 这正是宫内人们的哭声在震响呵！ 
English: Xiao Tianzhi said: This is exactly the cries of the people in the palace are ringing!

古文：自山陵之后，便于合内乘内人车问讯，往皇后所生母宋氏间，因微服游走市里。
现代文：自从武帝死后，他便在门内乘宫人的车子慰问，在到了皇后的生母的房间以后，便趁机化装为平民到大街小巷去游逛。
English: Since the death of Emperor Wu, he has been commiserating with courtiers in a carriage at the gate, and after arriving at the room of the queen's birth mother, he took the opportunity to wander the streets disguised as a commoner.

古文：又多往文帝崇安陵隧中，与群小共作诸鄙亵掷涂赌跳、放鹰走狗杂狡狯。
现代文：又常去文帝的崇安陵隧道中，与一伙小人们共同做各种低贱、猥亵的投土块、赛跑跳、放鹰赛狗等游戏。
English: He also often went to the tunnel of Emperor Wen's Chong'an Mausoleum, where he and a group of children played all kinds of low-class, obscene games, such as throwing dirt, running and jumping, and releasing eagles and greyhounds.

古文：帝既失道，朝事大小，皆决之西昌侯鸾，鸾有谏，多不见从。
现代文：废帝无道，朝中的大小事情，都由西昌侯萧鸾决定，萧鸾有什么规劝，大多不被采纳。
English: The deposed emperor had no choice, and all major and minor matters in the court were decided by Xichang Hou Xiaoqi. Xiaoqi's advice was mostly ignored.

古文：极意赏赐左右，动至百数十万。
现代文：废帝恣意赏赐身边的近臣，常常达到一百几十万。
English: The deposed emperor would arbitrarily reward his closest vassals, often to the tune of hundreds of thousands of rupees.

古文：每见钱曰： 我昔思汝一个不得，今日得用汝未？ 
现代文：他常在见到钱后说： 我过去想你却一个也得不到，今天能够用你了没有？ 
English: After seeing the money, he would often say: I used to miss you, but I couldn't get any. Can I use you today?

古文：武帝聚钱上库五亿万，斋库亦出三亿万，金银布帛不可称计。
现代文：武帝聚钱存入上库五亿万，收藏祭品的斋库也超过三亿万，金银布疋无法计算。
English: Emperor Wu collected money and deposited 500 million yuan in the upper vault, and the collection of sacrificial offerings also exceeded 300 million yuan, and the amount of gold and silver cloth was incalculable.

古文：即位未期岁，所用已过半，皆赐与诸不逞群小。
现代文：废帝即位不到一年，所花用的已经超过一半，都赐给了那些失意的小人。
English: Less than a year after the deposed emperor ascended the throne, more than half of the money spent has been given to those frustrated villains.

古文：取诸宝器以相击剖破碎之，以爲笑乐。
现代文：他拿那些宝器互相撞击使它们破碎，以此作为笑乐。
English: He took the treasures and smashed them together as a joke.

古文：及至废黜，府库悉空。
现代文：等到他被废黜的时候，仓库已经全部空虚。
English: By the time he was deposed, the warehouse was empty.

古文：其在内，常裸袒，着红紫锦绣新衣、锦帽、红縠褌，杂采衵服。
现代文：他在宫内，常脱光身子，穿上红紫锦绣的新衣、锦帽、红纱裤，各种颜色的妇女内衣。
English: In the palace, he often stripped naked and put on a new dress with red and purple brocade embroidery, a brocade hat, red trousers, and women's underwear of various colors.

古文：好斗鸡，密买鸡至数千价。
现代文：喜欢斗鸡，秘密买鸡价值达到几千。
English: Likes cockfighting, secretly buys chickens worth thousands.

古文：武帝御物甘草杖，宫人寸断用之。
现代文：武帝的用品甘草杖，宫人给截成一段一段去使用。
English: Emperor Wu's supplies were licorice canes, which the courtiers cut into pieces to use.

古文：徐龙驹爲后合舍人，日夜在六宫房内。
现代文：徐龙驹的职务是后阁舍人，但却日夜呆在六宫的房内。
English: Xu Longyao's job was to look after the palace, but he stayed in his room in the Sixth Palace day and night.

古文：帝与文帝幸姬霍氏淫通，改姓徐氏，龙驹劝长留宫内，声云度霍氏爲尼，以馀人代之。
现代文：废帝与文帝所宠幸的美女霍氏淫乱私通，她改姓为徐氏，徐龙驹劝她长留在宫内，声言要度霍氏为尼姑，结果却拿别人代替了她。
English: The deposed emperor and Emperor Wen's favorite beauty, Huo Shi, had an adulterous affair. She changed her surname to Xu Shi. Xu Longyu advised her to stay in the palace for a long time, claiming that she wanted to make Huo Shi a nun, but she ended up replacing her with someone else.

古文：皇后亦淫乱，斋合通夜洞开，内外淆杂，无复分别。
现代文：皇后也很淫乱，斋房的门通夜大开，后宫内外的人混杂在一起，不加分别。
English: The queen was also promiscuous. The door of the dining room was wide open all night, and people from inside and outside the harem mingled together, without distinction.

古文：中书舍人綦母珍之、朱隆之，直合将军曹道刚、周奉叔并爲之羽翼。
现代文：中书舍人綦母珍之、朱隆之、直阁将军曹道刚、周奉叔一齐给她做羽翼。
English: Chinese calligraphers such as Mother Zhenzhi, Zhu Longzhi, General Cao Daogang, and Uncle Zhou Bongzhi all made wings for her.

古文：西昌侯鸾屡谏不纳；既而尼媪外入，颇传异语，乃疑鸾有异志。
现代文：西昌侯萧鸾屡次进谏都不被采纳。随后有个老尼姑从外面进宫，传播了不少奇异的流言，废帝便怀疑萧鸾有异图。
English: Xiao Yao, the lord of Xichang, repeatedly failed to be accepted into the imperial court. Later, an old nun entered the palace from outside and spread many strange rumors. The emperor suspected Xiao Yao of having an ulterior motive.

古文：中书令何胤以皇后从叔见亲，使直殿省。
现代文：中书令何胤以皇后堂叔的身份受到亲近，让他在宫中和中枢机关值勤。
English: According to the Chinese imperial edict, He Yin was approached as the Empress Dowager's uncle, and he was put on duty in the palace and central organs.

古文：常随后呼胤爲三父。
现代文：废帝常随皇后叫何胤为三父。
English: The deposed emperor often followed the empress in naming Ho Tan as the third father.

古文：与胤谋诛鸾，令胤受事，胤不敢当，依违杜谏，乃止。
现代文：他和何胤共谋要杀死萧鸾，让何胤去具体办理，何胤不敢承担，犹豫谏阻，才停了下来。
English: He and He Ying conspired to kill Xiao Yao, and asked He Ying to handle it specifically. He Ying did not dare to take on the task, but hesitated and resisted, and then stopped.

古文：又谋出鸾于西州，中敕用事，不复关谘。
现代文：后来又谋划把萧鸾调出朝廷派往西州，皇帝办事直接发布诏令，不再和他商量。
English: Later, they plotted to transfer Xiao Yao from the imperial court to Xizhou, and the emperor issued a direct edict, and no longer consulted with him.

古文：鸾虑变，先使萧谌、坦之等于省诛曹道刚、朱隆之等，率兵自尚书省入云龙门，戎服加朱衣于上。
现代文：萧鸾害怕发生变故，就抢先派萧谌、萧坦之等在内阁衙门杀死了曹道刚、朱隆之等，接着就率兵从尚书省冲入云龙门，军装上面加了一领红衣。
English: Fearing a change of fortune, Xiao Yao first sent Xiao Yao, Xiao Tan and others to kill Cao Daogang, Zhu Long and others at the cabinet gate, and then led the soldiers from Shangshu Province to storm the Yunlong Gate, adding a red collar to the military uniform.

古文：比入门，三失履，王晏、徐孝嗣、萧坦之、陈显达、王广之、沈文季系进。
现代文：等进门以后，三次丢了鞋子，王晏、徐孝嗣、萧坦之、陈显达、王广之、沈文季陆续进入。
English: After entering the door, they lost their shoes three times. Wang Qian, Xu Xiaozhi, Xiao Tan Zhi, Chen Xian Da, Wang Guang Zhi, and Shen Wencai entered one after another.

古文：帝在寿昌殿，裸身与霍氏相对，闻外有变，使闭内殿诸房合，令阉人登兴光楼望，还报云： 见一人戎服，从数百人,急装，在西钟楼下。 
现代文：废帝在寿昌殿，正光着身子与霍氏相对站着，听到外面有变动，便命令关上内殿的各个房门，让太监登上兴光楼望，回来报告说： 看到有一个人穿着军服，后面跟着几百人，全副武装，聚集在西钟楼下。 
English: The deposed emperor stood naked in front of Ho in Shuchang Hall. When he heard movement outside, he ordered all the doors of the inner hall to be closed and the eunuch to go up to look at the Xingguang Tower. When he returned, he reported: I saw a man wearing a military uniform, followed by several hundred people, fully armed, gathered under the West Bell Tower.

古文：须臾，萧谌领兵先入宫，帝走向爱姬徐氏房，拔剑自刺不入，以帛缠颈，舆接出延德殿。
现代文：不大一会儿，萧谌领兵最先冲入宫中，废帝逃往爱姬徐氏的房间，拔剑自刺而没有刺进，又用丝帛把头缠住，由车子接出了延德殿。
English: Not long after, Xiao Yao, the leader of the soldiers, was the first to rush into the palace. The deposed emperor fled to Aiki Xu's room. He drew his sword and stabbed himself without piercing it. He also wrapped his head with a silk scarf. He was taken out of the Yende Palace by car.

古文：谌初入殿，宿卫将士皆执弓楯欲战，谌曰： 所取自有人，卿等不须动。 
现代文：萧谌刚进入殿中时，宫中的警卫将士都拿着弓盾正要战斗，萧谌说： 要捉的自然有人，各位不用动手。 
English: When Xiao Yao had just entered the palace, the guards and soldiers in the palace were all holding bows and shields and were about to fight. Xiao Yao said, "Naturally, there are people to catch. You don't have to do anything.

古文：宿卫信之。
现代文：卫兵都听从了。
English: The guards obeyed.

古文：及帝出，各欲自奋，帝竟无一言。
现代文：等废帝出来，各人都准备冲上，废帝竟然没有一句话。
English: When the emperor came out, everyone was ready to rush to him, but the emperor did not say a word.

古文：出西弄，遇弑，年二十二。
现代文：走出西面的巷子，被杀死，年龄二十二岁。
English: He walked out of the alley on the west side and was killed. He was 22 years old.

古文：舁尸出徐龙驹宅，殡葬以王礼。
现代文：尸体从徐龙驹的院子里抬出，以亲王的礼仪加以殡葬。
English: The body was carried out of Xu Longyao's courtyard and buried with the etiquette of a prince.

古文：霍氏及广昌君宋并赐死，馀党亦见诛。
现代文：霍氏和广昌君萧宋都被赐命自杀，其余党徒也被处死。
English: Huo and Guangchang Prince Xiao Song were both ordered to commit suicide, and the rest of the party members were also executed.

古文：先是文惠太子立楼馆于锺山下，号曰 东田 ，太子屡游幸之， 东田 反语爲 颠童 也。
现代文：以前文惠太子曾在钟山下面建立楼馆，取名叫 东田 ，太子屡次去那里游玩， 东田 的反语就是 颠童 。
English: In the past, Prince Munehide built a mansion at the foot of the bell tower and named it Higashida. Prince Munehide often went there to play. The irony of Higashida is "topsy-turvy."

古文：武帝又于青溪立宫，号曰 旧宫 ，反之 穷厩 也。
现代文：武帝又在青溪建立宫殿，取名叫 旧宫 ，反过来念就是 穷厩 。
English: Emperor Wu also built a palace in Qingxi, called the Old Palace, which in turn was called the Poor Mews.

古文：果以轻狷而至于穷。
现代文：果然由于颠狂而走到穷途。
English: As it turned out, the upheaval led to a dead end.

古文：又武帝时有小史姓皇名太子，武帝曰： 皇太子非名之谓 ，于是移点于外，易名爲犬子。
现代文：又武帝的时候有一个小侍童姓皇名叫太子，武帝说： 皇太子不是可以当名字叫的。 于是就把他调到宫外去了，改名为犬子。
English: In the time of Emperor Wu, there was a little page boy whose family name was "Crown Prince," and Emperor Wu said, "Crown Prince can't be called by his name," so he transferred him outside the palace and changed his name to "Dog Son."

古文：处士何点曰： 太子者，天地之所悬，三才之所系，今化而爲犬，不得立矣。 
现代文：处士何点说： 太子，天地悬在这里，三才系在这里，现在却变化为犬，立不住了！ 
English: The clerk said, "Prince, heaven and earth are hanging here, it's only been here for three years, but now it's turned into a dog, I can't stand it!"

古文：巫觋云 后湖水头经过宫内，致帝有疾 。
现代文：不久文惠太子就死了，郁林王、海陵王相继废黜，这就是它的验证。
English: Soon after, Prince Wenhui died, and King Yulin and King Hailing were deposed one after another. This is the proof of it.

古文：帝乃自至太官行水沟，左右啓 太官无此水则不立 。
现代文：永明年间，百姓忽然都戴起了后面破开的帽子，是从建业开始的，流传到四方很远的地方，贵贱人家一概都戴，这种服饰是一种灾象。
English: Once in a while, the common people would suddenly put on a hat that was open at the back. It started in Jianye and spread to far-flung places, and was worn by everyone from noble families to commoners. This kind of clothing was a disaster.

古文：决意塞之，欲南引淮流，会崩，事寝。废帝东昏侯讳宝卷，字智藏，明帝第二子也。
现代文：这帽子出自萧谌家，后来流传得越来越远，天意好像在说：这是武穆、文昭都应当灭亡，而萧谌也被杀死的一种效验。废帝东昏侯名叫萧宝卷，字智藏，是明帝的第二个儿子。
English: This hat came from Xiao Yao's family, and was later passed down further and further. It was as if Providence was saying, "This is a test that Wu Mu and Wenzhao should both perish, and Xiao Yao should also be killed." The former emperor Dongdimou was named Xiao Baozhuan, literally "Wisdom of Tibet," and was the second son of Emperor Ming.

古文：本名明贤，明帝辅政后改焉。
现代文：本来名叫明贤，明帝辅政以后把名改了。
English: Originally named Myoken, he changed his name after the Ming Dynasty.

古文：建武元年，立爲皇太子。
现代文：建武元年，立为皇太子。
English: In the first year of the Kenmu era, he became crown prince.

古文：永泰元年七月己酉，明帝崩，太子即皇帝位。
现代文：永泰元年七月三十日，明帝逝世，太子即皇帝位。
English: On July 30, Yongtai I, Emperor Ming died, and the crown prince became emperor.

古文：八月庚申，镇北将军晋安王宝义进号征北大将军、开府仪同三司。
现代文：八月十一日，镇北将军晋安王萧宝义晋升称号为征北大将军、开府仪同三司。
English: On August 11th, Zhenbei General Jinan Wang Xiao Baoyi was promoted to the title of General of the Northern Expedition, the ceremony of opening the capital and the three divisions.

古文：冬十月己未，诏删省律科。
现代文：冬季的十月十一日，诏令删简法律条文。
English: On October 11th, in the middle of winter, the legal provisions were deleted by imperial edict.

古文：癸亥，诏萧坦之、江祏更直殿省，总监宿卫。
现代文：十五日，诏令萧坦之、江礻石轮流在宫中值勤，总监警卫部队。
English: On the fifteenth day of the month, Xiao Tanzhi and Jiang Shuxi were ordered to take turns on duty in the palace, and they became the supervisors of the guard force.

古文：辛未，诏刘暄、江祏更直延明殿省。
现代文：二十三日，诏令刘暄、江礻石轮流在延明殿值勤。
English: On the 23rd, it was decreed that Liu Xuan and Jiang Shuxi would take turns to be on duty at Yanming Palace.

古文：十一月戊子，立皇后褚氏。
现代文：十一月十一日，立皇后褚氏。
English: On November 11th, the Empress Gong clan was established.

古文：庚寅，尚书令徐孝嗣议： 王侯贵人昏，连卺以真银杯，盖出近俗；又牢烛侈缋，亦亏曩制。
现代文：十三日，尚书令徐孝嗣建议： 王侯贵人结婚，饮交杯酒用真银杯，大概是出于近世的风俗；又花烛侈丽，也有损于旧时规章。
English: On the 13th, Shang Shuling ordered Xu Xiaozhi to suggest: When princes and noblemen get married, they should drink wine from a real silver cup, which is probably a modern custom; and the flowers and candles are luxurious, which is also detrimental to the old regulations.

古文：今除金银连锁,自馀新器，悉用埏陶，牢烛华侈，亦宜停之。 
现代文：现在除了金银连锁，其余的新器具，都要用陶器，奢侈的花烛，也应该停止使用。 
English: Now, in addition to gold and silver chains, the rest of the new appliances should use pottery, luxury flower candles, and should also stop using.

古文：奏可。
现代文：奏书被批准。
English: The Emperor assents.

古文：永元元年春正月戊寅朔，大赦，改元。
现代文：永元元年春季的正月初一，实行大赦，改换年号。
English: On the first day of the first month of the spring of the first year of Yongyuan, an amnesty was implemented and the year name was changed.

古文：辛卯，祀南郊。
现代文：十四日，在南郊祭天。
English: On the 14th, the Southern Suburbs Festival will be held.

古文：丁酉，改封随王宝融爲南康王，安陆王宝晊爲湘东王，竟陵王昭胄爲巴陵王。
现代文：二十日，改封随王萧宝融为南康王，安陆王萧宝日至为湘东王，竟陵王萧昭胄为巴陵王。
English: On the 20th, the titles were changed from Wang Xiao Ba Rong to Nankang Wang, from Anlu Wang Xiao Ba Rong to Hunan Dong Wang, and from Ling Wang Xiao Zhaojun to Baling Wang.

古文：二月，太尉陈显达败绩于马圈。
现代文：二月，太尉陈显达在马圈兵败。
English: In February, Lieutenant Chen Xianda was defeated in the horse ring.

古文：夏四月丙午朔，魏孝文皇帝崩。
现代文：夏季的四月初一，魏国的孝文帝逝世。
English: On the first day of April in the summer, Emperor Xiaowen of Wei died.

古文：己巳，立皇子诵爲皇太子，大赦，赐爲父后者爵一级。
现代文：二十四日，立皇子萧诵为皇太子，实行大赦，赐给做父亲晚的人爵位一级。
English: On the 24th, Prince Xiao Qiao was appointed crown prince, an amnesty was implemented, and the late father was given a first-class knighthood.

古文：五月癸亥，加抚军大将军始安王遥光开府仪同三司。
现代文：五月癸亥日，加封抚军大将军始安王萧遥光为开府仪同三司。
English: On the day of the Chinese New Year in May, the great general of the Jiafengfu army, Shi'an Wang Xiao Yaoguang, was appointed as the third secretary of the Kaifu ceremony.

古文：六月甲子，诏原雍州今年三调。
现代文：六月二十日，诏令免除雍州今年的三种征调。
English: On June 20, the imperial edict exempted Yongzhou from this year's three types of conscription.

古文：秋七月辛未，淮水变赤如血。
现代文：秋季的七月初七，淮水变成赤色像血一样。
English: On the seventh day of the seventh month in autumn, the water turns red like blood.

古文：丙戌，杀尚书右仆射江祏、侍中江祀。
现代文：十二日，杀死尚书右仆射江礻石、侍中江祀。
English: On the 12th, he killed Shangshu's right-hand man, Shao Jiang, and his attendant, Zhongjiang Shi.

古文：地震自此至来岁，昼夜不止，小屋多坏。
现代文：地震从此直到来年，昼夜不止，小屋子大多损坏。
English: Earthquakes continued day and night from then until the following year, and most of the huts were damaged.

古文：丁亥，都下大水，死者甚衆。
现代文：十三日，京城发生大水，死的人非常多。
English: On the 13th, there was a big flood in the capital, and many people died.

古文：赐死者材器，并加振恤。
现代文：赐给死者棺木，并且加以赈济。
English: Give coffins to the dead, and give alms.

古文：八月乙巳，蠲遇水资财漂荡者今年调税。
现代文：八月初二，免除遇到水灾资财漂没者今年的捐税。
English: On August 2, this year's tax will be exempted for those who have lost money in floods.

古文：又诏爲马圈战亡将士举哀。
现代文：又诏令为马圈阵亡将士举行哀悼。
English: He also issued a decree to mourn for the fallen soldiers of the Horse Circle.

古文：丙辰，扬州刺史始安王遥光据东府反。
现代文：十三日，扬州刺史始安王萧遥光在东府反叛。
English: On the 13th, Yangzhou's King of the First Ann Dynasty, Xiao Yaoguang, rebelled in Dongfu.

古文：诏曲赦都下，中外戒严，遣领军将军萧坦之致讨。
现代文：诏令因特殊情况赦免京城囚犯，内外戒严，派遣领军将军萧坦之前往征讨。
English: The imperial edict pardoned prisoners in the capital due to special circumstances, imposed martial law at home and abroad, and sent the leading general Xiaotan to the front to fight.

古文：戊午，斩遥光，传首。
现代文：十五日，杀死萧遥光，把人头传送京城。
English: On the 15th, he killed Xiao Yaoguang and sent his head to Beijing.

古文：己巳，以尚书令徐孝嗣爲司空，以领军萧坦之爲尚书左仆射。
现代文：二十六日，任命尚书令徐孝嗣为司空，任命领军萧坦之为尚书左仆射。
English: On the 26th, Shang Shuling appointed Xu Xiaozhi as the second-in-command, and appointed the leader Xiao Tan as Shang Shuling's right-hand man.

古文：闰月丙子，以江陵公宝览爲始安王。
现代文：闰八月初三，任命江陵公萧宝览为始安王。
English: On the 3rd day of the 8th lunar month, Jiangling Gong Xiao Baozhang was appointed as the King of Shi'an.

古文：九月甲辰，杀尚书左仆射萧坦之，右卫将军曹武。
现代文：九月初二，杀死尚书左仆射萧坦之、右卫将军曹武。
English: On the second day of September, Cao Wu, Shangshu's left-hand man, shot Xiao Tan, the right guard general.

古文：戊午，杀领军将军刘暄。
现代文：十六日，杀死领军将军刘暄。
English: On the 16th, he killed the leading general Liu Xuan.

古文：壬戌，以频杀大臣，大赦。
现代文：二十日，因为频繁地杀死大臣，而实行大赦。
English: On the 20th, an amnesty was granted for the frequent killing of ministers.

古文：冬十月乙未，诛尚书令新除司空徐孝嗣、右仆射新除镇军将军沈文季。
现代文：冬季的十月二十三日，处死了尚书令新任司空徐孝嗣、右仆射新任镇军将军沈文季。
English: In the winter of October 23rd, the new secretary of Shang Shuling, Xu Xiaozhi, and his right-hand man, the new general of the town army, Shen Wenzhi, were executed.

古文：庚子，以吴兴太守萧惠休爲尚书右仆射。
现代文：二十八日，任命吴兴太守萧惠休为尚书右仆射。
English: On the 28th, Xiao Huixiu, Wu Xing's eunuch, was appointed as Shang Shuxu's right-hand man.

古文：辛丑，以侍中王亮爲左仆射。
现代文：二十九日，任命侍中王亮为左仆射。
English: On the 29th, he appointed Wang Liang, a chamberlain, as his left-hand man.

古文：十一月丙辰，太尉、江州刺史陈显达举兵反于寻阳。
现代文：十一月十五日，太尉、江州刺史陈显达在寻阳起兵反叛。
English: On November 15th, Chen Xianda, the first lieutenant and governor of Jiangzhou, rebelled in Huanyang.

古文：乙丑，加护军将军崔慧景平南将军，督衆军南讨。
现代文：二十四日，任命护军将军崔惠景为平南将军，督率各路军队南讨。
English: On the 24th, the general of the escort army, Cui Huijing, was appointed as the general of Pingnan, and he supervised and led the troops from all directions to the south.

古文：十二月甲申，陈显达至都，宫城严警。
现代文：十二月十三日，陈显达到达京城，宫城实行戒严。
English: On December 13, Chen Xian arrived in Beijing, and martial law was imposed in Miyagi.

古文：乙酉，斩显达，传其首。
现代文：十四日，杀死陈显达，人头传往朝廷。
English: On the 14th, Chen Xianda was killed, and his head was sent to the imperial court.

古文：馀党尽平。
现代文：他的余党也全被铲平。
English: The rest of his party was also wiped out.

古文：二年春正月庚午，诏讨豫州刺史裴叔业。
现代文：二年春季的正月三十日，诏令讨伐豫州刺史裴叔业。
English: On the 30th day of the first month of the spring of the second year, the imperial edict was issued to crack down on the Yuzhou scholar Pei Shiye.

古文：二月己丑，叔业病死，兄子植以寿春降魏。
现代文：二月十九日，裴叔业病死，他的侄子裴植以寿春县投降魏国。
English: On February 19, Pei Shuye died of illness, and his nephew, Pei Zhi, surrendered to Wei in Shuchun County.

古文：三月乙卯，命平西将军崔慧景攻寿春。
现代文：三月十五日，命令平西将军崔景惠攻打寿春。
English: On March 15, he ordered the Pingxi general Cui Jinghui to attack Shuchun.

古文：丙午，尚书右仆射萧惠休卒。
现代文：初六，尚书右仆射萧惠休去世。
English: On the sixth day of the first month of the new year, Shang Shuxu's right-hand man Sha Xiao Huixiu passed away.

古文：丁未，崔慧景于广陵反，举兵内向。
现代文：初七，崔惠景在广陵反叛，率兵攻向内地。
English: On the seventh day of his junior year, Cui Huijing rebelled in Guangling and led his troops to invade the inland.

古文：壬子，命右卫将军左兴盛督都下水步衆军御之。
现代文：十二日，命令右卫将军左兴盛督率京城的水、步众军进行抵抗。
English: On the 12th, he ordered the right guard general Zuo Xing Sheng to lead the water and infantry troops of the capital to resist.

古文：南徐州刺史江夏王宝玄以京城纳慧景。
现代文：南徐州刺史江夏王萧宝玄把京城贡献给崔惠景。
English: Xiao Baoxuan, the king of southern Xuzhou and Jiangxia, donated the capital to Cui Huijing.

古文：乙卯，遣中领军王莹率衆军屯北篱门。
现代文：十五日，派遣中领军王莹率领众军屯驻在北篱门。
English: On the 15th, Wang Ying, the leader of the dispatched troops, led the troops stationed in Beihimen.

古文：壬戌，慧景至，莹等败绩。
现代文：二十二日，崔惠景到达，王莹溃败。
English: On the 22nd, Cui Huijing arrived, and Wang Ying was defeated.

古文：甲子，慧景入建邺，台城内闭门拒守。
现代文：二十四日，崔惠景进入建邺，台城内闭门拒守。
English: On the 24th, Cui Huijing entered Jianye, and closed the door in Taicheng.

古文：豫州刺史萧懿兴兵入援。
现代文：豫州刺史萧懿率兵入京增援。
English: Xiao Jian, the governor of Yuzhou, led an army to Beijing to reinforce.

古文：己巳，以懿爲尚书右仆射。
现代文：二十九日，任命萧懿为尚书右仆射。
English: On the 29th, Xiao Jun was appointed as Shang Shuxu's right-hand man.

古文：夏四月癸酉，慧景弃衆走，斩之。
现代文：夏季的四月初四，崔惠景抛弃军众逃走，被杀。
English: On the fourth day of the fourth month of the summer, Cui Huijing abandoned the army and fled, and was killed.

古文：诏曲赦都下及南徐、南兖二州。
现代文：诏令因特殊情况而赦免京城以及南徐、南兖二州。
English: The imperial edict pardoned Beijing and the two provinces of Nanxu and Nanxun due to special circumstances.

古文：乙亥，以新除尚书右仆射萧懿爲尚书令。
现代文：初六，任命新上任的尚书右仆射萧懿为尚书令。
English: On the 6th day of the first month of the year, he appointed the newly-appointed Shang Shuxu's right-hand man, Jie Xiaoqi, as Shang Shuling.

古文：丙子，以中领军王莹爲尚书右仆射。
现代文：初七，任命中领军王莹为尚书右仆射。
English: On the seventh day of the first month, the middle leader Wang Ying was appointed as Shang Shuxu's right-hand man.

古文：五月己酉，江夏王宝玄伏诛。
现代文：五月初十，江夏王萧宝玄被处死。
English: On the tenth day of the fifth month, Xiao Baoxuan, the king of Jiangxia, was executed.

古文：壬子，赦。
现代文：十三日，实行赦免。
English: On the 13th, the amnesty went into effect.

古文：乙丑，曲赦都下及南徐、兖二州。
现代文：二十六日，因特殊情况而赦免京城以及南徐、兖二州。
English: On the 26th, due to special circumstances, he pardoned the capital as well as the two provinces of Nanxu and Handan.

古文：六月庚寅，车驾于乐游苑内会，如三元，都下放女人观。
现代文：六月二十二日，车驾在乐游苑内会合，如同是元旦一样，京城允许女性去观赏。
English: On June 22nd, car drivers gathered in Le Youyuan. Just like New Year's Day, women were allowed to watch the parade in Beijing.

古文：秋七月甲辰夜，宫内火，唯东合内明帝旧殿数区及太极以南得存，馀皆荡尽。
现代文：秋季的七月初六夜间，宫内起火，只有东门内明帝旧殿的几片地方以及太极殿以南的建筑得以幸存，其余的全部烧尽。
English: On the night of the 6th day of the 7th month of the autumn, a fire broke out in the palace. Only a few areas of the old hall of Emperor Ming inside the east gate and the buildings south of the Taiji Hall survived, and all the rest were burned down.

古文：冬十月己卯，杀尚书令萧懿。
现代文：冬季的十月十三日，杀死了尚书令萧懿。
English: On the 13th day of October in winter, he killed Shang Shuling Xiao Jun.

古文：十一月甲寅，西中郎长史萧颖胄起兵于荆州。
现代文：十一月十八日，西中郎长史萧颖在荆州起兵。
English: On November 18th, Xiao Ying, the head of the West Middle School, raised an army in Jingzhou.

古文：十二月，雍州刺史萧衍起兵于襄阳。
现代文：十二月，雍州刺史萧衍在襄阳起兵。
English: In December, Xiao Yan, the Yangzhou assassin, raised an army in Yangyang.

古文：是岁，魏宣武皇帝景明元年。
现代文：这一年，是魏国宣武皇帝的景明元年。
English: This year was the first year of the reign of Emperor Xuanwu of Wei.

古文：三年春正月丙申朔，日有蚀之。
现代文：三年春天的正月初一，发生日蚀。
English: On the first day of the first month of the spring of the third year, a solar eclipse occurred.

古文：帝与宫人于阅武堂元会，皇后正位，阉人行仪，帝戎服临视。
现代文：废帝和宫人在阅武堂朝见群臣，皇后坐在正位，太监主持仪式，废帝穿着军服临视。
English: The deposed emperor and his courtiers met with the courtiers in the parade hall, the empress sat in the front row, the eunuch presided over the ceremony, and the deposed emperor looked on in his military uniform.

古文：丁酉，以骠骑大将军晋安王宝义爲司徒，以新除抚军将军建安王宝寅爲车骑将军、开府仪同三司。
现代文：初二，任命骠骑大将军晋安王萧宝义为司徒，任命新上任的抚军将军建安王萧宝寅为车骑将军、开府仪同三司。
English: On the second day of the junior high school year, Jinan Wang Xiao Baoyi, the general of cavalry, was appointed as the leader, and Jianan Wang Xiao Baoying, the newly appointed general of the army, was appointed as the general of chariots and cavalry, and the three divisions of the Kaifu ceremony.

古文：乙巳，长星见，竟天。
现代文：初十，彗星出现，占满天空。
English: On the tenth day of the first month, a comet appeared and filled the sky.

古文：辛亥，祀南郊，大赦，诏百官陈谠言。
现代文：十六日，在南郊祭天，实行大赦，诏令百官上奏正直言论。
English: On the 16th, at the Southern Suburbs Festival, an amnesty was implemented, and all officials were ordered to speak honestly.

古文：二月丙寅，干和殿西厢火。
现代文：二月初二，乾和殿西厢起火。
English: On the second day of February, a fire broke out in the west wing of the Inui Hall.

古文：壬午，诏遣羽林兵征雍州，中外纂严。
现代文：十八日，诏令派遣羽林军出征雍州，京城内外戒严。
English: On the 18th, the imperial edict dispatched the Ulin Army to march to Yongzhou, and martial law was imposed inside and outside the capital.

古文：始内横吹五部于殿内，昼夜奏之。
现代文：首次招引横吹五部乐队到大殿以内，昼夜演奏。
English: For the first time, five bands were invited to play inside the main hall, day and night.

古文：壬戌，蚩尤旗见。
现代文：壬戌日，蚩尤旗出现。
English: On the first day of the New Year, the Yuyu flag appeared.

古文：三月乙巳，南康王宝融即皇帝位于江陵。
现代文：三月十一日，南康王萧宝融在江陵即皇帝位。
English: On March 11, Xiao Baorong, King of Nankang, ascended to the throne in Gangneung.

古文：癸丑，遣平西将军陈伯之西征。
现代文：十九日，派遣平西将军陈伯之西征。
English: On the 19th, Pingxi General Chen Bozhi was dispatched to the Western Expedition.

古文：六月，萧颖胄弟颖孚起兵庐陵。
现代文：六月，萧颖胄的弟弟萧颖孚在庐陵起兵。
English: In June, Xiao Yingkun's younger brother Xiao Yingfu raised an army in Fuling.

古文：戊子，赦江州安成、庐陵二郡。
现代文：二十六日，赦免江州安成、庐陵二郡的囚犯。
English: On the 26th, prisoners from Ancheng and Fuling counties in Jiangsu Province were pardoned.

古文：秋七月癸巳，曲赦荆、雍二州。
现代文：秋季的七月初一，因为特殊情况赦免荆、雍二州的犯人。
English: On the first day of July in autumn, the prisoners in Jing and Yong Erzhou were pardoned due to special circumstances.

古文：雍州刺史张欣泰、前南谯太守王灵秀率石头文武奉建安王宝寅向台，至杜姥宅，宫门闭，乃散走。
现代文：雍州刺史张泰、前南谯太守王灵秀率领石头城的文武官员拥戴着建安王萧宝寅开向宫城，到了杜老宅，宫门关闭着，于是奔散逃走。
English: The civil and military officials of Stone Town, led by Zhang Tai, the Yangzhou chief historian, and Wang Lingxiu, the former South Yunnan Grand Empress Dowager, carried Xiao Baoying, the King of Jian'an, and drove to Miyagi. When they arrived at the Du Lao's residence, the palace gate was closed, so they scattered and fled.

古文：丙辰，龙斗于建康淮，激水五里。
现代文：二十四日，有龙在建康的淮水中相斗，激水五里。
English: On the 24th, dragons fought each other in Jiankang's Huai Shui, and the water surged for five miles.

古文：八月辛卯，以太子左率李居士总督西讨诸军事，屯新亭。
现代文：八月二十九日，任命太子左率李居士总督西讨诸军事，屯驻在新亭。
English: On August 29th, he appointed the prince's left-hand man, Li Jushi, the governor of the West, to lead the military and stationed in Xinting.

古文：九月甲辰，萧衍至南豫州，辅国将军、监南豫州事申胄军二万人于姑孰奔归。
现代文：九月十三日，萧衍到达南豫州，辅国将军、监南豫州事申胄的军队二万人从姑熟逃归。
English: On September 13th, Xiao Yan arrived in South Yuzhou, and the general of the Auxiliary Army and the overseer of the South Yuzhou Provincial Government's army of twenty thousand fled from Guju.

古文：丙辰，李居士与衍军战于新亭，见败。
现代文：二十五日，李居士和萧衍的军队在新亭交战，被打败。
English: On the 25th, the armies of Li Jushi and Xiao Yan fought in Xingting and were defeated.

古文：冬十月甲戌，王珍国又战败于朱雀航。
现代文：冬季的十月十三日，王珍国又在朱雀航战败。
English: On the 13th day of October in winter, Wang Zhenguo was defeated again in Suzakehang.

古文：戊寅，甯朔将军徐元瑜以东府城降。
现代文：十七日，宁朔将军徐元瑜以东城府投降。
English: On the 17th, Ningshuo General Xu Yuanyu surrendered Dongcheng Prefecture.

古文：青、冀二州刺史桓和入卫，屯东宫，寻亦降衍，于是闭宫城门自守。
现代文：青、冀二州刺史桓和入京保卫，屯驻在东营，很快也投降了萧衍，于是关闭了宫城门自守。
English: Shih Huan and his troops from the two prefectures of Qing and Hebei entered the capital to defend it, and were stationed in the East Camp. They soon surrendered to Xiao Yan, and closed the Miyagi Gate to defend themselves.

古文：十二月丙寅，新除雍州刺史王珍国、侍中张稷率兵入殿杀帝，时年十九。
现代文：十二月初六，新任命的雍州刺史王珍国、侍中张稷率兵入殿杀死废帝，当时年龄是十九岁。
English: On the 6th day of the 12th month, Wang Zhenguo, the newly-appointed prince of Yongzhou, and Zhang Ye, his chamberlain, led soldiers into the temple to kill the deposed emperor. He was 19 years old at the time.

古文：帝在东宫，便好弄，不喜书学，明帝亦不以爲非，但勖以家人之行，令太子求一日再入朝，发诏不许，使三日一朝。
现代文：废帝在东宫的时候，就爱好玩乐，不喜欢读书学习，明帝也不认为有什么不对，只是用家人的行为勉励他。他让太子请求每天入朝两次，又下诏不给予批准，让他三天入朝一次。
English: When the former emperor was in the East Palace, he was fond of playing games and did not like reading and studying. Emperor Ming did not think there was anything wrong, but encouraged him with the behavior of his family. He asked the prince to request to enter the imperial court twice a day, and then issued a decree not to grant approval, and let him enter the imperial court once every three days.

古文：在宫尝夜捕鼠达旦，以爲笑乐。
现代文：在宫中他曾经夜里捉老鼠直到天亮，感到十分快活。
English: In the palace, he used to catch mice at night until dawn and felt very happy.

古文：明帝临崩，属后事，以隆昌爲戒，曰： 作事不可在人后。 
现代文：明帝临死的时候，嘱咐后事，以萧隆昌为戒，说： 做事不可落在别人的后面。 
English: When Emperor Ming was on his deathbed, he told Xiao Longchang not to fall behind others.

古文：故委任群小，诛诸宰臣，无不如意。
现代文：所以他委任一群小人，杀戮诸位宰相大臣，无不称心如意。
English: Therefore, he appointed a group of villains to kill all the prime ministers, and they succeeded.

古文：性讷涩少言，不与朝士接。
现代文：他性格迟钝少言，不与朝士交接。
English: His character is slow and taciturn, and he does not get along with Asashi.

古文：欲速葬，恶灵在太极殿，徐孝嗣固争，得踰月。
现代文：他想把明帝赶快埋葬，讨厌灵柩放在太极殿，徐孝嗣坚持力争，才得以呆过一个月。
English: He wanted to bury Emperor Ming as soon as possible, and hated having the coffin placed in the Taiji Hall. Xu Xiaozhi persevered, and was only able to stay for a month.

古文：每当哭，辄云喉痛。
现代文：每到该哭的时候，他就说喉咙痛。
English: Whenever it's time to cry, he says he has a sore throat.

古文：太中大夫羊阐入临，无发，号恸俯仰，帻遂脱地，帝辍哭大笑，谓宦者王宝孙曰： 此谓秃鶖啼来乎。 
现代文：太中大夫羊阐进来哭吊，没有头发，俯仰痛哭，头巾于是脱落在地上，废帝停下哭声大笑起来，对太监王宝孙说： 这可以叫作秃鹫啼叫吧！ 
English: The midwife came in, crying, with no hair, leaning over and crying bitterly. The headscarf then fell off onto the ground. The deposed emperor stopped crying and burst into laughter, saying to the eunuch Wang Baosun: "This can be called the cry of a vulture!"

古文：自江祏、始安王遥光等诛后，无所忌惮，日夜于后堂戏马，鼓噪爲乐。
现代文：自从江礻石、始安王萧遥光被处死以后，他无所忌惮，日夜在后堂玩马、吆喝为乐。
English: Ever since Xiao Yaoguang, the king of Jiangxi and Shian, was executed, he has had no qualms about spending his days and nights in the back hall, playing with horses and shouting for fun.

古文：合夕，便击金鼓吹角，令左右数百人叫，杂以羌胡横吹诸伎。
现代文：一到晚上，便击鼓吹角，让身边的几百人喊叫，和羌胡的横吹等乐伎的奏乐相掺杂。
English: In the evening, he would beat the drum and blow the horn, making the hundreds of people around him shout, mixed with the music of the bagpipes such as the blowing of the beard.

古文：常以五更就卧，至晡乃起，王侯以下节朔朝见，晡后方前，或际暗遣出。
现代文：常常到五更睡下，到下午半晌才起来，王侯以下的官员节、朔日前来朝见，下午半晌后才能前去，有时则因为临近天黑不予接见而让出来。
English: He often falls asleep at 5:00 a.m. and wakes up at 12:30 p.m. Officials below the rank of prince come to see him before the New Year's Eve and New Year's Day, and can only go after 12:30 p.m. Sometimes, because it is getting dark, they are not allowed to see him.

古文：台阁案奏，月数十日乃报，或不知所在。
现代文：台阁的上奏案卷，一个月或几十天才报，有的已经不知弄到哪里去了。
English: The case files of the cabinet were not reported for a month or dozens of days, and some of them have been lost.

古文：阉竖以纸包裹鱼肉还家，并是五省黄案。
现代文：太监用纸包裹鱼肉回家，都是用五个中枢机关的黄纸案卷。
English: The eunuchs wrapped the fish and meat in paper and went home with yellow paper case files from five central agencies.

古文：二年元会，食后方出，朝贺裁竟，便还殿西序寝，自巳至申，百僚陪位，皆僵仆菜色。
现代文：永元二年元旦朝见群臣，吃过饭才出来，朝贺刚结束，便回到殿内的西夹室内去睡了，从巳时到申时，百官陪坐，全都僵直困乏，面如菜色。
English: On New Year's Day of the second year of the Yong Yuan, he met with his ministers in the morning, and only came out after eating. As soon as the morning ceremony was over, he went back to the west wing of the palace to sleep. From noon to dusk, hundreds of officials sat with him, all of them stiff and sleepy, their faces as pale as vegetables.

古文：比起就会，匆遽而罢。
现代文：等他起床来到会上，忽然又很快结束。
English: When he got up and came to the meeting, it suddenly ended very quickly.

古文：太子所生母黄贵嫔早亡，令潘妃母养之。
现代文：太子的生母黄贵嫔死得早，就让潘妃做义母抚养他。
English: Prince Huang's birth mother, Huang Guizhen, died early, so he let Pan Fei raise him as his mother-in-law.

古文：拜潘氏爲贵妃，乘卧舆，帝骑马从后，着织成裤褶，金薄帽，执七宝缚矟。
现代文：封潘氏为贵妃，乘着卧舆，皇帝骑马跟在后面，穿着织成的裤褶，金箔帽，手拿七宝缚槊。
English: Feng Pan is a noblewoman, riding on a horse, the emperor riding behind, wearing woven trousers, a gold foil hat, holding a cloak.

古文：又有金银校具，锦绣诸帽数十种，各有名字。
现代文：又有各种金银器具，不同的锦绣帽子几十种，各有名字。
English: There are also various gold and silver utensils, dozens of different brocade hats, each with a name.

古文：戎服急装缚裤，上着绛衫，以爲常服，不变寒暑。
现代文：军服紧装缚裤，上穿绛色衣衫，作为常用服装，不因寒暑而变化。
English: The military uniform of tight-fitting trousers, with a navy-coloured shirt on top, is the most commonly used clothing and does not change with the weather.

古文：陵冒雨雪，不避坑阱。
现代文：冒着雨雪，不避洼坑陷阱。
English: Braving the rain and snow, do not avoid the sinkhole trap.

古文：驰骋渴乏，辄下马解取腰边蠡器，酌水饮之，复上驰去。
现代文：骑马驰骋困乏口渴，就下马解取腰间的瓠瓢，舀水来喝，然后上马驰去。
English: Riding on horseback, tired and thirsty, he dismounted to loosen the shackles around his waist, scooped up water to drink, and then mounted his horse and rode away.

古文：马乘具用锦绣处，患爲雨所湿，织杂采珠爲覆蒙，备诸雕巧。
现代文：马的乘具使用锦绣的地方，怕被雨淋湿，编织杂彩细珠蒙在上面，雕饰精巧。
English: Where the horse's harness is embroidered with brocade, for fear of getting wet by the rain, fine beads of braided variegated colors are draped over the top, and the carving is exquisite.

古文：教黄门五六十人爲骑客，又选营署无赖小人善走者爲逐马鹰犬，左右数百人，常以自随，奔走往来，略不暇息。
现代文：叫来太监五六十人做为骑客，又挑选军营中善于奔跑的无赖小人作为追马的鹰犬，左右几百人，常常让他们跟随着自己，奔走往来，无暇休息。
English: He would call in fifty or sixty eunuchs to act as riders, and he would also select a ruffian in the camp who was good at running to act as an eagle dog to chase the horses. He would have several hundred people around him, and he would often have them follow him, running back and forth, with no time to rest.

古文：置射雉场二百九十六处，翳中帷帐及步障，皆袷以绿红锦，金银镂弩牙，毒瑁帖箭。
现代文：设立了射野鸡的场地二百九十六处，遮蔽物中的帷帐和屏幕，全都用绿红锦缎做成夹层，用金做弩上的发矢机，用玳瑁贴箭。
English: Two hundred and ninety-six pheasant shooting sites were set up, and the curtains and screens in the shelters were all made of green and red brocade, with gold as the arrowhead on the crossbow, and the crossbow as the arrow.

古文：每出，辄与鹰犬队主徐令孙、媒翳队主俞灵韵齐马而走，左右争逐之。
现代文：每次外出，就与鹰犬队长徐令孙、媒翳队长俞灵韵并马前进，左右的随从争着追赶。
English: Every time they go out, they advance together with the eagle dog captain Xu Lingsun and the matchmaker captain Gong Lingyun, and the followers on both sides compete to catch up.

古文：又甚有筋力，牵弓至三斛五斗。
现代文：他又非常有臂力，拉弓的力量可以达到三斛五斗。
English: He is also very strong with his arms, and can pull a bow with a force of up to three hundred and fifty fathoms.

古文：能担幢，初学担幢，每倾倒在幢杪者，必致踠伤。
现代文：能担幢，开初学担幢，常常摔倒在幢的末端，必定要折伤。
English: If you can carry a heavy load and carry a heavy load for the first time, but often fall at the end of the load, you are sure to be injured.

古文：其后，白虎幢七丈五尺，齿上担之，折齿不倦。
现代文：后来，白虎幢高七丈五尺，放在牙齿上担着，折了牙齿也不疲倦。
English: Later, the white tiger was seven feet tall, and it was carried on the teeth. When the teeth were broken, it did not get tired.

古文：担幢诸校具服饰，皆自制之，缀以金华玉镜衆宝。
现代文：担幢用的各种器具服饰，都是自制的，点缀上金华玉镜等各种宝物。
English: All kinds of utensils and clothing used for supporting the building are homemade, decorated with various treasures such as gold and jade mirrors.

古文：舍人、主书及至左右主帅，并皆侍侧，逞诸变态，曾无愧顔。
现代文：舍人、主书以及左右的主帅，都在身边侍候，表演各种变态，毫无愧色。
English: The assistant referee, the referee's supervisor, and the referees on both sides are all waiting around, performing all kinds of perversions, without any shame.

古文：始欲骑马，未习其事，俞灵韵爲作木马，人在其中，行动进退，随意所适，其后遂爲善骑。
现代文：开始想骑马，还没有练习过，俞灵韵就替他做了一个木马，有人在里面，行动进退，随心所欲，后来终于成为一个善于骑马的人。
English: At first, he wanted to ride a horse, but he hadn't practiced yet, so Gong Ling Rhyme made a wooden horse for him. Someone was inside, and he could move in and out as he pleased. Later, he finally became a good rider.

古文：陈显达平，渐出游走，不欲令人见之，驱斥百姓，唯置空宅而已。
现代文：陈显达平定以后，渐渐出来游览走动，他不想叫人看见，就把百姓赶走，只留下一座座空宅。
English: After Chen Xianda was subdued, he gradually came out to walk around. He did not want to be seen, so he drove the people away, leaving only empty houses.

古文：是时率一月二十馀出，既往无定处，尉司常虑得罪，东行驱西，南行驱北，应旦出，夜便驱逐，吏司奔驱，叫呼盈路。
现代文：这期间都是一个月出去二十来次，外出没有固定地点，吏司们常常害怕获罪，东行就要往西驱赶，西行则要往东驱赶，应该天明时外出，夜间就要驱赶，吏卒奔走驱斥，呼叫满路。
English: During this period, they all went out twenty times a month. There was no fixed place for them to go out. Officials were often afraid of being punished. If they wanted to go east, they had to go west, and if they wanted to go west, they had to go east. If they wanted to go out at dawn, they had to go at night. Officials rushed to drive them away, shouting all the way.

古文：打鼓蹋围，鼓声所闻，便应奔走，临时驱迫，衣不暇披，乃至徒跣走出，犯禁者应手格杀。
现代文：打鼓蹋围，听到鼓声，就要奔走，有时突然驱迫，衣服也来不及披上，甚至光着脚跑出去，犯禁者随手就被杀死。
English: They beat drums, and when they hear the sound of the drums, they have to run. Sometimes they are suddenly forced to do so, and they have no time to put on their clothes, or even run out barefoot. Violators of the ban are killed at the drop of a hat.

古文：百姓无复作业，终日路隅。
现代文：百姓们无法再进行生产，整天呆在路边。
English: People can no longer produce, and they stay on the side of the road all day.

古文：从万春门由东宫以东至郊外，数十里，皆空家尽室。
现代文：从万春门经过东宫往东直到郊外，几十里，全都是家家尽空。
English: From the Wanchun Gate through the East Palace eastward to the suburbs, dozens of miles, all are empty.

古文：巷陌县幔爲高障，置人防守，谓之 屏除 。
现代文：街巷悬上幔子变成高高的屏障，派人防守，称为 屏除 。
English: Streets and alleys are transformed into high barriers by hanging rafters, and people are sent to defend them, known as "screening."

古文：高障之内，设部伍羽仪，复有数部，皆奏鼓吹羌胡伎，鼓角横吹。
现代文：高障以内，设置部队羽仪，又有几个部分，都演奏羌胡伎军乐，鼓角横吹。
English: Within the high barrier, the troop feather ceremony is set up, and there are several parts, all of which play the war music, and the drum is blown sideways.

古文：夜反火光照天。
现代文：夜间返回，火光照天。
English: Returning at night, the fire lit up the sky.

古文：每三四更中，鼓声四出，幡戟横路，百姓喧走，士庶莫辨。
现代文：常常是三四更天时，鼓声四起，旗幡剑戟横在路中，百姓叫喊奔逃，士子和平民无法辨别。
English: When the sun rises, which is often on the 3rd or 4th, the sound of drums is heard everywhere, flags, banners and swords lie in the middle of the road, people shout and run, and it is impossible to distinguish between the priests and the common people.

古文：或于市肆左侧过亲幸家，环绕宛转，周遍都下，老小震惊，啼号塞道。
现代文：有时从街市的左侧去亲幸人的家中看望，环绕宛转，走遍京城，老小震惊，满路哭叫。
English: Sometimes from the left side of the street market to visit the home of a lucky relative, go around and around, walk all over the capital, the old and the small are shocked and cry all the way.

古文：处处禁断，不知所过。
现代文：处处禁止通行，不知如何走过。
English: Everywhere is closed to traffic, I don't know how to get past.

古文：疾患困笃者，悉扛移之。
现代文：患病难以行动的，都背着转移走了。
English: Those who were too ill to move were carried away on the backs of others.

古文：无人扛者，扶匐道侧，吏司又加捶打，绝命者相系。
现代文：无人背移的，就趴在路边，吏卒又加以捶打，绝命的接连不断。
English: If no one backs away, they lie on the roadside, and the officers beat them again and again, one after the other.

古文：从骑及左右因之入富家取物，无不荡尽。
现代文：随从的骑兵和其他人于是走进富人家中去拿东西，无不扫荡净尽。
English: The accompanying cavalry and others then went into the rich man's house to get things, sweeping everything clean.

古文：工商莫不废业，樵苏由之路断。
现代文：工、商人士全都废弃了业务，打柴割草的路因此阻断。
English: Industrialists and businessmen have all abandoned their businesses, and the road for cutting grass and collecting firewood is therefore blocked.

古文：至于乳妇昏姻之家，移産寄室，或舆病弃尸，不得殡葬。
现代文：甚至于乳妇和结了婚的家庭，转移家产寄居别处，有的在车上生病，丢弃尸体，无法殡葬。
English: Even for nursing mothers and married families, they transferred their family assets to live elsewhere, and some got sick in the car, discarded their bodies, and could not be buried.

古文：有弃病人于青溪边者，吏惧爲监司所问，推置水中，泥覆其面，须臾便死，遂失骸骨。
现代文：有一个被扔在青溪岸边的病人，官吏怕被监管的人查问，就把他推到水中，用泥覆盖了他的面容，一会便死了，于是便丢失了尸骨。
English: In one case, a patient was dumped on the bank of the Qingxi River. The officials were afraid of being questioned by the supervisors, so they pushed him into the water, covered his face with mud, and he died soon after. As a result, the bones were lost.

古文：前魏兴太守王敬宾新死未敛，家人被驱，不得留视，及家人还，鼠食两眼都尽。
现代文：前魏兴太守王敬宾刚死了还没有装殓，家里的人就被驱逐，不许留下，等到家里的人回来，老鼠把两只眼睛都吃完了。
English: The former Wei Xing governor Wang Jingbin had just died and had not yet been decorated, the family was expelled and not allowed to stay. When the family returned, the mice had eaten both eyes.

古文：如此非一。
现代文：像这样的不是一家。
English: This happened more than once.

古文：又尝至沈公城，有一妇人当産不去，帝入其家，问： 何独在？ 
现代文：又曾到沈公城，有一个妇女即将临产不能外出，废帝进入她的家中，问道： 你为什么单独在家？ 
English: He also went to Shengongcheng. There was a woman who was about to give birth and could not go out. He entered her home and asked: Why are you home alone?

古文：答曰： 临産不得去。 
现代文：回答说： 临产无法离开。 
English: She replied, "I can't leave because I'm about to give birth."

古文：因剖腹看男女。
现代文：于是就剖开她的肚子看是男是女。
English: So they cut open her stomach to see if she was a man or a woman.

古文：又长秋卿王儇病笃，不听停家，死于路边。
现代文：又有长秋卿王儇病重，不让停在家里，死在了路边。
English: Another elder, Wang Xi, who was seriously ill, was not allowed to stay at home and died on the side of the road.

古文：丹阳尹王志被驱急，狼狈步走，惟将二门生自随，藏朱雀航南酒垆中，夜方得羽仪而归。
现代文：丹阳尹王志被驱赶得很急，狼狈逃走，只带了两个学生跟着自己，躲藏在朱雀航南面的酒店中，等到夜里才见皇帝的仪仗回去。
English: Danyang Yin Wangzhi was driven away in a hurry and fled in disarray. He only took two students with him and hid in a hotel on the south side of Suzak Hang. He did not see the emperor's ceremonial return until night.

古文：喜游猎，不避危险。
现代文：废帝喜欢游猎，不避危险。
English: The former emperor liked to go hunting and did not shy away from danger.

古文：至蒋山定林寺，一沙门病不能去，藏于草间，爲军人所得，应时杀之。
现代文：他曾到蒋山定林寺，有一个和尚生病不能离开，藏在了草间，被军人抓到，当即就杀掉了。
English: He once went to the Jiangshan Dinglin Temple. There was a monk who was too sick to leave, so he hid in the grass. The soldiers caught him and killed him immediately.

古文：左右韩晖光曰： 老道人可念。 
现代文：废帝身边的韩晖光说： 老道人可以顾念。 
English: Han Jiguang, who was close to the former emperor, said, "Old people can be considerate.

古文：帝曰： 汝见獐鹿亦不射邪？ 
现代文：废帝说： 你见了獐子也不射吗？ 
English: The emperor said, "If you see a louse, don't you shoot it?"

古文：仍百箭俱发。
现代文：仍然百箭齐发。
English: The arrows are still flying.

古文：故贵人富室者,皆数处立宅,以爲避围之舍。
现代文：所以家里富裕的贵人，都在几个地方建造宅院，作为躲避蹋围的处所。
English: Therefore, the rich nobles in the family built courtyards in several places as a place to escape the siege.

古文：每还宫，常至三更，百姓然后得反。
现代文：每次回宫，常常要到三更，百姓然后才能返回。
English: Every time they returned to the palace, they often had to wait until the third night before the common people could return.

古文：禁断又不即通，处处屯咽，或泥涂灌注，或冰冻严结，老幼啼号，不可闻见。
现代文：设立的禁卡又不可以立即通行，处处阻隔，有时泥泞满地，有时冰冻严寒，老幼号哭，令人眼不忍看，耳不忍听。
English: The prohibition cards set up are not allowed to pass immediately, they are blocked everywhere, sometimes muddy, sometimes freezing cold, old and young crying, it is unbearable to see and hear.

古文：时人以其所围处号爲 长围 。
现代文：当时的人们把他所围的地方称为 长围 。
English: The people at that time called the area he was surrounded by the Long Circuit.

古文：及建康城见围，亦名长围，识者以爲谶焉。
现代文：后来建康城被包围，也称作长围，有见识的人认为那便是谶语。
English: Later, Jiankang City was besieged, also known as encirclement, and people with insight believed that it was slang.

古文：三年，殿内火，合夕便发，其时帝犹未还，宫内诸房合已闭，内人不得出，外人又不敢辄开，比及开，死者相枕。
现代文：永元三年，殿内失火，刚到晚上就烧起来了，当时废帝还没有回来，宫内的各个房门已经关闭了，里面的人不能出来，外面的人又不敢开门，等到门开以后，死的人已经互相枕藉。
English: In the third year of the Yongyuan era, a fire broke out in the palace, and it burned up in the evening. At that time, the deposed emperor had not yet returned, and all the doors in the palace had been closed. People inside could not get out, and people outside did not dare to open the door. By the time the door was opened, the dead people were already sleeping next to each other.

古文：领军将军王莹率衆救火，太极殿得全。
现代文：领军将军王莹率领众人救火，太极殿得以保全。
English: The leading general Wang Ying led the crowd to fight the fire, and the Taiji Hall was preserved.

古文：内外叫唤，声动天地。
现代文：内外叫喊，声音震动天地。
English: Shouting inside and outside, the sound shook heaven and earth.

古文：帝三更中方还，先至东宫，虑有乱，不敢便入，参觇审无异，乃归。
现代文：废帝三更当中才回来，先到了东宫，担心会有变乱，不敢直接进去，窥伺一阵没见有什么异常，才回来。
English: He did not return until the middle of the Third Emperor's Reign. He went to the East Palace first, fearing that there would be turmoil, and did not dare to go directly inside. He peered around for a while and did not see anything unusual before returning.

古文：其后出游，火又烧璿仪、曜灵等十余殿及柏寝，北至华林，西至秘阁，三千馀间皆尽。
现代文：他后来出游，大火又烧了璇仪、曜灵等十余座大殿和柏寝台，北到华林，西到秘阁，三千多间都烧尽了。
English: Later, he went on a trip, and the fire burned more than ten large halls and dormitories such as Puyi and Yau Ling, from north to Hualin and west to Hikou, and more than three thousand rooms were burned down.

古文：左右赵鬼能读西京赋，云 柏梁既灾，建章是营 。
现代文：身边的侍从赵鬼能读《西京赋》，说 柏梁台受灾以后，建章宫开始营建 。
English: The attendant Zhao Guinneng read "Sai Jing Fu" and said that after the disaster of Bai Liangtai, the construction of Jianzhang Palace began.

古文：于是大起诸殿,芳乐、芳德、仙华、大兴、含德、清曜、安寿等殿，又别爲潘妃起神仙、永寿、玉寿三殿，皆匝饰以金璧。
现代文：于是大起各处殿堂，有芳乐、芳德、仙华、大兴、含德、清曜、安寿等殿，又另外为潘妃建起了神仙、永寿、玉寿三殿，都在周围用金壁加以装饰。
English: As a result, temples were built everywhere, such as Fangle, Fangde, Xianhua, Daxing, Hande, Qingyou, and Anshou, and in addition, three temples were built for Panfei: Shenxian, Yongshou, and Yulshou, all of which were decorated with gold walls.

古文：其玉寿中作飞仙帐，四面绣绮，窗间尽画神仙。
现代文：其中玉寿宫中作了飞仙帐，四面都是绮绣，窗户间都画着神仙。
English: Among them, the Jade Palace has made a flying fairy tent, embroidered on all four sides, with immortals painted between the windows.

古文：又作七贤，皆以美女侍侧。
现代文：又作了七贤，全部以美女侍候在旁边。
English: He also made seven wise men, all of whom were attended by beautiful women.

古文：凿金银爲书字，灵兽、神禽、风云、华炬，爲之玩饰。
现代文：用金银凿成题字，灵兽、神鸟、风云、火炬，作为玩物装饰。
English: With gold and silver chisel into inscriptions, spirit beasts, sacred birds, wind clouds, torch, as a toy decoration.

古文：椽桷之端，悉垂铃佩。
现代文：椽子的外端，都挂着风铃。
English: The outer ends of the rafters are hung with wind chimes.

古文：江左旧物，有古玉律数枚，悉裁以钿笛。
现代文：江东的旧物，有古玉律数枚，都拆开用以装饰笛子。
English: There are several pieces of ancient rhythms from the old things in the East River, all of which are taken apart to decorate the flute.

古文：庄严寺有玉九子铃，外国寺佛面有光相，禅灵寺塔诸宝珥，皆剥取以施潘妃殿饰。
现代文：庄严寺有玉制的九子铃，外国寺中的佛面上有光相，禅灵寺塔上的各种宝物耳环，都剥取下来用作潘妃殿中的装饰。
English: The nine son bells of the solemn temple are made of jewels, the Buddha's face in the foreign temple has a halo, and the earrings of various treasures on the tower of the Zenling Temple are stripped off and used as decorations in the Panfei Hall.

古文：性急暴，所作便欲速成，造殿未施梁桷，便于地画之，唯须宏丽，不知精密。
现代文：废帝性情急躁，所要干的事就想着迅速干成，建造宫殿没有安放梁和椽子，就在地上进行规划，惟求宏丽，不懂得精密。
English: The deposed emperor was impatient. He wanted everything to be done quickly. The palace was built without beams and rafters, and plans were made on the ground. He wanted grandeur, but did not understand precision.

古文：酷不别画，但取绚曜而已，故诸匠赖此得不用情。
现代文：坚决不肯另作规划，只要绚丽就行了，所以各位工匠因此可以不用费心。
English: He was adamant that he would not make any other plans, as long as it was gorgeous, so the craftsmen did not have to worry about it.

古文：又凿金爲莲华以帖地，令潘妃行其上，曰： 此步步生莲华也。 
现代文：又凿金制为莲花贴在地上，让潘妃在上面行走，说： 这叫做步步生莲花。 
English: He also chiseled a gold lotus flower and put it on the ground for Pan Fei to walk on, saying, "This is called the step-by-step lotus flower."

古文：涂壁皆以麝香，锦幔珠帘，穷极绮丽。
现代文：涂壁都是用麝香，锦幔珠帘，极端绮丽。
English: The walls are painted with musk, brocade beaded curtains, extremely beautiful.

古文：絷役工匠，自夜达晓，犹不副速，乃剔取诸寺佛刹殿藻井、仙人、骑兽以充足之。
现代文：拘系役使工匠，从夜间一直干到早晨，还是不能达到要求的速度，于是便剔取各个寺院中佛殿里的藻井、仙人、骑兽移来使用。
English: Forensic officers made craftsmen work from night until morning, but they still could not reach the required speed, so they removed the algae wells, hermits, and riding animals in the Buddhist halls of various temples and moved them for use.

古文：武帝兴光楼上施青漆，世人谓之 青楼 ，帝曰： 武帝不巧，何不纯用琉璃。 
现代文：武帝的兴光楼上涂的是青漆，世人把它叫做 青楼 ，废帝说： 武帝不够灵巧，为什么不纯粹用琉璃！ 
English: Emperor Wu's Xingguang Building was painted with blue lacquer on the upper floor, the world called it the Blue Building, and the emperor said: Emperor Wu is not dexterous enough, why not use pure glaze!

古文：潘氏服御，极选珍宝，主衣库旧物，不复周用，贵市人间金银宝物，价皆数倍，虎珀钏一只，直百七十万。
现代文：潘氏的穿用，都极力挑选珍宝，主衣库中的旧物，不再够使用，便用高价购买社会上的金银宝物，价格都是普通市价的几倍，琥珀钏一只，值一百七十万。
English: Mr. Pan's clothes are all carefully selected treasures. The old things in the main wardrobe are no longer suitable for use, so he buys the gold and silver treasures of society at high prices. The prices are several times the ordinary market price. An amber bracelet is worth 1.7 million.

古文：都下酒租，皆折输金，以供杂用。犹不能足，下扬、南徐二州桥桁塘埭丁计功爲直，敛取见钱，供太乐主衣杂费。
现代文：京城的酒税，都折合成金银收缴，以供各种杂用，还是不能满足，就令扬、南徐二州的桥梁塘坝丁役折计工程价值，敛取现钱，供应太乐和主衣库的日杂费用。
English: Beijing's liquor tax is converted into gold and silver collection for various miscellaneous uses, but it is still not enough, so Yang and Nan Xue Erzhou's bridge Tangba Ding will be used to calculate the project value, collect cash, and supply daily and miscellaneous expenses for Taile and the main wardrobe.

古文：由是所在塘渎，悉皆隳废。
现代文：因此各处的水塘沟渠，全都废毁。
English: As a result, ponds and ditches everywhere were completely destroyed.

古文：又订出雄雉头、鹤氅、白鹭縗，百品千条，无复穷已。
现代文：又订出了雄雉头、鹤氅、白鹭鄀，名目成百上千，无穷无尽。
English: In addition, male buns, cranes, and egrets have been set out, with hundreds of names, endless.

古文：亲幸小人，因缘爲奸，科一输十。
现代文：他所亲近宠幸的小人，借此为奸，一份捐税十倍收取。
English: The favored villain, to whom he was close, used this as a ruse to collect ten times the tax.

古文：又各就州县求爲人输，准取见直，不爲输送。
现代文：又各自下到州县替人收缴，取走现钱，却不交上。
English: They also went to the county to collect money on behalf of others and took away cash, but did not hand it over.

古文：守宰惧威，口不得道，须物之处，以复重求。
现代文：地方官员畏惧他们的威势，口不敢言，上司索要物品的时候，只好重新征收。
English: Local officials are afraid of their power and dare not speak out. When their superiors demand goods, they have no choice but to collect them again.

古文：如此相仍，前后不息，百姓困尽，号泣道路。
现代文：就这样频繁搜求，前后不止，百姓穷困到极点，在路上痛哭。
English: In this way, there are frequent searches, back and forth, and the people are extremely poor and cry bitterly on the road.

古文：少府太官，凡诸市买，事皆急速，催求相系。
现代文：少府太官，凡是购买各种东西，事情都很紧急，接连催促索求。
English: The young prefectural governor, whenever he buys various things, things are very urgent, and he urges and demands one after another.

古文：吏司宾士，遇便虏夺，市廛离散，商旅靡依。
现代文：官吏奔走往来，遇到了便强行夺取，集市离散，商人没有保障。
English: Government officials run to and fro, and when they meet, they forcibly seize, markets are scattered, and merchants have no protection.

古文：又以阅武堂爲芳乐苑，穷奇极丽。
现代文：又以阅武堂作为芳乐苑，穷奇极丽。
English: Also, the Choiwu-do Hall is used as a music hall, which is extremely beautiful.

古文：当暑种树，朝种夕死，死而复种，率无一生。
现代文：正当暑天种树，早晨种晚上死，死了再种，全无一棵成活。
English: Plant trees in the heat of the day, plant in the morning and die in the evening, plant again when dead, and none of them will survive.

古文：于是徵求人家，望树便取，毁彻墙屋，以移置之。
现代文：于是到老百姓家里去征收，看见树就取走，毁坏房屋，以便移植。
English: So they went to people's homes to collect money. When they saw the trees, they took them away and destroyed the houses so that they could be replanted.

古文：大树合抱，亦皆移掘，插叶系华，取玩俄顷。
现代文：大树合抱，也都移走，插上叶子系上花，玩耍一阵子。
English: The big trees hugged each other, and they also moved away. They put in leaves, tied flowers, and played for a while.

古文：划取细草，来植阶庭，烈日之日，至便焦燥。
现代文：还铲除细草，拿来栽在台阶和庭院，烈日下面，都被晒焦。
English: They also uprooted the fine grass and planted it on the steps and in the courtyard, where it was scorched under the scorching sun.

古文：纷纭往还，无复已极。
现代文：颠倒往来，无以复加。
English: There's nothing to be gained by reversing the process.

古文：山石皆涂以采色，跨池水立紫阁诸楼，壁上画男女私亵之像。
现代文：山石都涂上彩色，横跨池水建了紫阁等楼，墙壁上都画上男女猥亵的图像。
English: Mountains and rocks have been painted in bright colors, buildings such as the Purple Pavilion have been built across the pond, and lewd images of men and women have been painted on the walls.

古文：明帝时多聚金宝，至是金以爲泥，不足周用，令富室卖金，不问多少，限以贱价，又不还直。
现代文：明帝的时候聚集了许多金银珠宝，到现在以金为泥，不够使用，就命令富家出卖金银，不问多少，限制低价，又不兑现价值。
English: When Emperor Ming gathered a lot of gold and silver jewelry, until now with gold as mud, not enough to use, ordered the rich to sell gold and silver, no matter how much, limit the low price, and do not honor the value.

古文：张欣泰尝谓舍人裴长穆曰： 宫殿何事顿尔！
现代文：张欣泰曾经对舍人裴长穆说： 宫殿为什么要一下子建成这样！
English: Zhang Xintai once said to his brother-in-law, Pei Changmu, "Why did the palace have to be built like this all of a sudden!

古文：夫以秦之富，起一阿房而灭，今不及秦一郡，而顿起数十阿房，其危殆矣。 
现代文：秦朝那么富足，建起了一个阿房宫而灭亡，现在还不及秦朝的一个郡，而一下子建起了几十个阿房宫，太危险了。 
English: The Qin Dynasty was so rich that it built only one Afang Palace and perished. Now it is less than a county of the Qin Dynasty, but dozens of Afang Palaces have been built at once. It is too dangerous.

古文：答曰： 非不悦子之道，顾言不用耳。 
现代文：回答说： 我并不是不喜欢您的道理，但是您的话却不能被上面采用啊。 
English: He replied: "I don't dislike your reasoning, but your words are not acceptable.

古文：潘妃放恣，威行远近。
现代文：潘妃放纵恣肆，威风横行远近。
English: Panfei indulges in wanton behavior, and arrogance runs rampant.

古文：父宝庆与诸小共逞奸毒，富人悉诬爲罪，田宅赀财，莫不啓乞。
现代文：她的父亲潘宝庆和一群小人共同施展毒计，把富人都诬告为有罪，田宅资财，无不开口索要。
English: Her father, Pan Baoqing, and a group of villains jointly carried out a poisonous scheme, falsely accusing the rich of being guilty, stealing their homes and wealth, and demanding everything.

古文：或云寄附隐藏，复加收没，计一家见陷，祸及亲邻。
现代文：有时又说他们寄存隐藏，要再加没收，从而一家被害，祸及亲友邻居。
English: Sometimes they are told that they are storing or hiding drugs and that they will be confiscated, which will harm their family, friends and neighbors.

古文：又虑后患，男口必杀。
现代文：他们又怕留下后患，对男子必定要杀掉。
English: They are also afraid of being left behind, and they are bound to kill the men.

古文：明帝之崩，竟不一日蔬食，居处衣服，无改平常。
现代文：明帝死后，他竟然一天素食也不吃，居住穿戴，和平常毫无改变。
English: After the death of Emperor Ming, he actually did not eat vegetarian food for a day, and lived and dressed as usual.

古文：潘妃生女，百日而亡，制斩衰絰杖，衣悉粗布。
现代文：潘妃生了一个女孩，三天就死了，他则制做了麻衣麻带哭丧棒，衣服都是粗布做成。
English: Pan Fei gave birth to a girl, who died three days later, and he made her a sackcloth and sackcloth, and her clothes were all made of coarse cloth.

古文：群小来吊，盘旋地坐，举手受执蔬膳，积旬不听音伎。
现代文：那群小人前来吊唁，盘坐在地上，举手接过素餐，一连十天不听乐伎奏乐。
English: The group of villains came to offer condolences, sat down on the floor, raised their hands to receive a vegetarian meal, and did not listen to the music for ten days.

古文：左右直长阉竖王宝孙诸人，共营肴羞，云爲天子解菜。
现代文：身边的值班官长太监王宝孙等人，共同制作美味佳肴，说是为天子解除素食。
English: The chief officer on duty, eunuch Wang Baosun, and others around him worked together to make delicious dishes, saying that it was for the heavenly son to lift vegetarian food.

古文：又于苑中立店肆，模大市，日游市中，杂所货物，与宫人阉竖共爲裨贩。
现代文：又在禁苑中建立了店铺，模仿大市场，每天在市场上游逛，混在中间卖东西，和宫人太监共同做小贩。
English: He also set up a shop in the middle of the Forbidden Garden, imitating the big market, wandering around the market every day, selling things in the middle, and working as a hawker with the palace eunuchs.

古文：以潘妃爲市令，自爲市吏录事，将斗者就潘妃罚之。
现代文：以潘妃为市令，自任市吏录事，捉住闹事者押到潘妃那里受罚。
English: With Panfei as the city magistrate, the self-appointed city official recorded the incident, and the person who caught the troublemaker was sent to Panfei for punishment.

古文：帝小有得失，潘则与杖，乃敕虎贲威仪不得进大荆子，合内不得进实中荻。
现代文：废帝小有得失，潘妃就打他的棍子，于是他命令武士们不能送大荆棍，房门内不能送实心的芦荻。
English: The deposed emperor had small gains and losses, so Panfei beat him with a stick, so he ordered the samurai not to send big sticks, and not to send solid reeds inside the door.

古文：虽畏潘氏，而窃与诸姊妹淫通。
现代文：他虽然畏惧潘氏，却暗地里和她的各个姊妹淫通。
English: Although he was afraid of Pan, he secretly slept with each of her sisters.

古文：每游走，潘氏乘小舆，宫人皆露褌，着绿丝屩，帝自戎服骑马从后。
现代文：每次出游，潘氏乘着小车，宫人都露出裤子，穿绿丝鞋，废帝自己穿着军服骑马跟在后面。
English: Every time he went on a trip, Mr. Pan rode in a carriage, the courtiers showed their trousers and wore green silk shoes, and the deposed emperor himself rode behind in a military uniform.

古文：又开渠立埭，躬自引船，埭上设店，坐而屠肉。
现代文：又开渠立坝，亲自拉船，坝上开店，他就坐在那里卖肉。
English: He also opened a canal, built a dam, pulled a boat himself, and opened a shop on the dam, where he sat and sold meat.

古文：于时百姓歌云： 阅武堂，种杨柳，至尊屠肉，潘妃酤酒。 
现代文：当时百姓有歌谣说： 阅武堂，种杨柳，皇上卖肉，潘妃卖酒。 
English: At that time, the common people had ballads saying: Reading martial arts, planting willow trees, the emperor selling meat, and Panfei selling wine.

古文：又偏信蒋侯神，迎来入宫，昼夜祈祷。
现代文：废帝又偏信蒋侯神，把他迎进宫中，昼夜祈祷。
English: The deposed emperor was partial to believing in Jiang Houjin, welcoming him into the palace and praying day and night.

古文：左右朱光尚诈云见神，动辄谘啓，并云降福。
现代文：身边侍从朱尚光诈称见到了神，动不动就咨询上奏，并说就要降福。
English: Zhu Shangguang, an attendant at his side, falsely claimed to have seen the god, consulted on the ascension at every turn, and said that it was necessary to be blessed.

古文：始安之平，遂加位相国，末又号爲 灵帝 ，车服羽仪，一依王者。
现代文：始安王被平定后，遂任命他为相国，最后又号为 灵帝 ，车服仪仗，全部依照皇帝。
English: After King Shi'an was subdued, he was appointed as a consort of the emperor. Finally, he was also called the "Lingdi" and was given a ceremonial chariot, all in accordance with the emperor.

古文：又曲信小祠，日有十数，师巫魔媪，迎送纷纭。
现代文：他又迷信小祠，每天有十来次，巫师魔媪，迎来送去。
English: He is also superstitious about small shrines, and every day he is visited by the sorcerer Moku ten times.

古文：光尚辄托云神意。
现代文：朱光尚则假托是神意。
English: Zhu Guang Shang, on the other hand, assumed that it was God's will.

古文：范云谓光尚曰： 君是天子要人，当思百全计。 
现代文：范云对朱光尚说： 您是天子的要人，应当考虑最安全的办法。 
English: Fan Yun said to Zhu Guangshan: You are an important person of the Son of Heaven, you should consider the safest way.

古文：光尚曰： 至尊不可谏正，当托鬼神以达意耳。 
现代文：朱光尚说： 皇上不可以劝谏，应当托鬼神来传达心意罢了。 
English: Zhu Guangshan said, "The emperor can't be persuaded, he should just ask ghosts and gods to convey his will."

古文：后东入乐游，人马忽惊，以问光尚，光尚曰： 向见先帝大瞋，不许数出。 
现代文：后来东到乐游苑，人马忽然受惊，询问朱光尚，朱说： 先前见到先帝生气，不许屡次出去。 
English: Later, when Dong went to Le Youyuan, people were suddenly frightened and asked Zhu Guangshan. Zhu said, "I saw the former emperor angry before, and I'm not allowed to go out repeatedly."

古文：帝大怒，拔刀与光向等寻觅，既不见处，乃缚菰爲明帝形，北向斩之，县首苑门。
现代文：废帝大怒，拔刀和朱光尚等人寻找，结果没有找见，于是就拿了一些茭白捆绑成明帝的形状，面向北方杀掉，把头悬挂在苑门上。
English: The deposed emperor was furious. He drew his sword and searched for Zhu Guangzhang and the others, but did not find them. So he took some white bandages and tied them into the shape of Emperor Ming. He killed him facing the north, and hung his head on the garden gate.

古文：上自永元以后，魏每来伐，继以内难，扬、南徐二州人丁，三人取两，以此爲率。
现代文：自从永元以后，魏国常常前来攻打，加上有内部的患难相继，扬、南徐二州的人丁，三人中抽取两人，以此作为准则。
English: Since Yongyuan, Wei often came to attack, and there were internal difficulties one after another. Yang and Nanxu, the people of the two states, selected two people out of the three as a guideline.

古文：远郡悉令上米准行，一人五十斛，输米既毕，就役如故。
现代文：远处的郡都命令交米代替兵役，每人五十斛，交米以后，却照旧要让服役。
English: Distant counties were ordered to pay rice in lieu of military service, fifty baht per person. However, after paying the rice, they were still required to serve.

古文：又先是诸郡役人，多依人士爲附隶，谓之 属名 。
现代文：在这以前，各郡应服兵役的人，大多依靠有名望的人为附隶，叫做 属名 。
English: Prior to this, military conscripts in each county mostly depended on a famous person to serve as a subordinate, known as a subordinate.

古文：又东境役苦，百姓多注籍诈病,遣外医巫，在所检占诸属名，并取病身。
现代文：又东部的兵役很苦，百姓往往注册诈称有病，于是就派遣外地医生，在当地检查各个属名的情况，并且要验证病人本身。
English: In addition, military service in the east is very hard, and people often register fraudulently claiming to be ill. Therefore, doctors from other regions are dispatched to check the conditions of various genera in the local area, and to verify the patients themselves.

古文：凡属名多不合役，止避小小假，并是役荫之家。
现代文：凡是属名，大多不应负担兵役，只要稍微做假，便都是役荫之家。
English: Those who belong to the name, most of them should not bear the burden of military service. As long as they are a little fake, they are the shadow of military service.

古文：凡注病者，或已积年，皆摄充将役。
现代文：凡是注册有病的，有的已经多年，全部整顿充作将要服役的。
English: Those who are registered as ill, and some who have been ill for many years, are all rectified as those who will serve in the army.

古文：又追责病者租布，随其年岁多少。
现代文：又追收病者的粮租和绢布，按他的年数来决定多少。
English: And they shall take the hire of him that is sick, and his necessary food, and his clothing, according to the number of years of his life.

古文：衔命之人，皆给货赂，随意纵舍。
现代文：接到命令的人，都进行贿赂，随意减免。
English: Those who received the order all engaged in bribery, giving and taking away at will.

古文：又横调徵求，皆出百姓。
现代文：又横调乱征，都是出自百姓。
English: They were all from the common people.

古文：群小以陈显达下数日便败，崔慧景围城正得十日，及萧衍师至，亦谓爲然。
现代文：那群小人看到陈显达下来不几天便失败，崔慧景围城刚刚十天，等萧衍的军队到了，也认为不过如此。
English: The group of villains saw that Chen Xianda failed after only a few days, Cui Huijing besieged the city for just ten days, and when Xiao Yan's army arrived, they also thought it was nothing more than that.

古文：裹粮食、樵刍，凡所须物，爲百日备。
现代文：携带粮食、柴火，一切所需的物资，只作一百天的准备。
English: Carrying grain, firewood, and all the necessary supplies, they prepared for only a hundred days.

古文：帝谓茹法珍曰： 须来至白门前，当一决。 
现代文：废帝对茹法珍说： 等他们来到白门前，要一决胜负。 
English: The deposed emperor said to Zhu Fazhen: When they come to the front of the White Gate, they will have a showdown.

古文：及至近郊，乃聚兵爲固守计，召王侯分置尚书都坐及殿省。
现代文：等对方到达近郊，却又聚集兵力作固守的打算，召集王侯分置尚书都坐在殿省。
English: When the other side reached the suburbs, they gathered their forces to defend themselves, called together the princes and sat in the palace.

古文：尚书旧事，悉充纸铠。
现代文：尚书省原来的部署，都成了纸作的铠甲。
English: The original deployment of Shangshu Province has become a paper armor.

古文：使冠军将军王珍国领三万人据大桁，莫有斗志，遣王宝孙督战，呼爲王伥子。
现代文：派冠军将军王珍国率领三万人占据大桁，都没有斗志，又派王宝孙督战，称他为王伥子。
English: He sent the champion general Wang Zhenguo to lead 30,000 people to occupy a large space, but they had no fighting spirit. He also sent Wang Baosun to lead the battle, calling him Wang Xunzi.

古文：宝孙切骂诸将帅，直合将军席豪发愤突阵死。
现代文：王宝孙臭骂各个将帅，直阁将军席豪发愤突击敌方阵地而死。
English: Wang Baosun cursed all the generals, and General Zhogu was so angry that he stormed the enemy's position and died.

古文：豪，骁将也，既毙，衆军于是土崩。
现代文：席豪，本是一员骁勇的将领，他死以后，众军士于是崩溃。
English: Shi Hao was originally a brave general, and after his death, all the sergeants collapsed.

古文：军人从朱雀观上自投及赴淮水死者无数。
现代文：军人从朱雀观上跳下去和投淮水而死的无数。
English: Countless soldiers have died from jumping off the Suzakugan and falling into the water.

古文：于是闭城自守，城内军事委王珍国。
现代文：于是闭城自守，城内的军事委派给王珍国。
English: As a result, the city was closed for self-defense, and the military commission in the city was assigned to Wang Zhenguo.

古文：兖州刺史张稷入卫，以稷爲副，实甲犹七万人。
现代文：兖州刺史张稷入京守卫，便派张稷为副官，实际战士仍有七万人。
English: Zhang Ye, the governor of Zhangzhou, sent Zhang Ye as an aide-de-camp when he entered the capital as a guard. The actual number of soldiers was still 70,000.

古文：帝着乌帽裤褶，备羽仪，登南掖门临望。
现代文：废帝穿戴着乌帽裤褶，备好仪仗，登上南掖门观望。
English: The deposed emperor wore a black cap and breeches, prepared for a ceremonial battle, and climbed onto the South Gate to watch.

古文：又虚设铠马斋仗千人，皆张弓拔白，出东掖门，称蒋王出荡。
现代文：又虚设了铠马武士一千人，都张弓拔剑，出了东掖门，称言是蒋王出兵扫荡。
English: It also falsely claimed that a thousand horse-riding warriors, all with bows and swords drawn, came out of the East Gate of the Forbidden City, claiming that Chiang Kai-shek had sent troops to sweep the area.

古文：又受刀敕等教着五音儿衣，登城望战。
现代文：又授予刀和敕令叫他们穿上五音儿衣，登上城头观战。
English: They were also given swords and orders to put on pentatonic children's clothes and climb to the top of the castle to watch the battle.

古文：还与御刀左右及六宫于华光殿立军垒，以金玉爲铠仗，亲自临阵，诈被创势，以板扛将去，以此厌胜。
现代文：回头又与身边带仪仗刀剑的卫士和六宫宫人在华光殿设立军垒，用金玉做为铠仗，亲自临阵，又假装受伤，用木板抬了下去，他要用这种方法诅咒制胜敌军。
English: He turned around and, together with the guards with ceremonial swords and swords and the people of the Sixth Imperial Palace, set up a military fortification at the Hua Guang Palace, using gold and jade as a shield, personally went into battle, pretended to be injured, and carried it down with a wooden board. He wanted to use this method to curse and defeat the enemy army.

古文：又于阅武堂设牙门军顿，每夜严警。
现代文：又在阅武堂设立了牙门军，每天夜里严密警戒。
English: In addition, a dental army was set up in the reading hall, with a strict vigil every night.

古文：帝于殿内骑马，从凤庄门入徽明门，马被银莲叶具装铠，杂羽孔翠寄生，逐马左右卫从，昼眠夜起如平常。
现代文：废帝在殿内骑马，从凤庄门进入徽明门，马披着银莲叶做的东西作为铠甲，杂用孔雀、翠鸟、寄生作为装饰，左右人等跟在马后保卫侍从，仍像平常一样昼眠夜起。
English: The deposed emperor rode a horse in the hall, and entered Huiming Gate from Fengzhuang Gate. The horse wore something made of silver lotus leaves as armor, and peacocks, kingfishers, and parasites were used as decorations. The left and right people followed behind the horse to protect the attendants, and still slept during the day and at night as usual.

古文：闻外鼓吹叫声，被大红袍，登景阳楼望，弩几中之。
现代文：听到外面的鼓号声和叫喊声，披上大红袍，登上景阳楼观望，弩箭险些将他射中。
English: Hearing the sound of drums and shouts outside, he put on a red robe and went up to the Jingyang Building to watch. The crossbow almost hit him.

古文：衆皆怠怨，不爲致力，募兵出战，至城门数十步，皆坐甲而归。
现代文：众人都怠倦埋怨，不肯卖力，募兵出战，才到门前几十步，都坐下等待敌人，然后返回。
English: All the people were too lazy to complain, unwilling to exert themselves, and only when they had marched a few dozen paces to the front door, did they sit down and wait for the enemy, and then return.

古文：虑城外有伏兵，乃烧城傍诸府署，六门之内皆尽。
现代文：他担心城外有伏兵，便烧掉了城旁边的那些府署，六门以内都被烧尽。
English: He was worried about an ambush outside the city, so he burned down all the government offices next to the city, and they were all burned to the ground within six gates.

古文：城中阁道、西掖门内，相聚爲市，贩死牛马肉。
现代文：城中阁道、西掖门内，人们相聚而成为市场，贩卖死牛马肉。
English: In the city's Zhongxiao Road and West Gate, people gather and become a market, selling dead beef and horse meat.

古文：萧衍长围既立，堑栅严固，然后出荡，屡战不捷。
现代文：萧衍的长围立好以后，濠沟栅栏严密坚固，然后废帝才让出战，结果屡战不捷。
English: After Xiao Yan's long enclosure was built, the fence of the ditch was tight and strong, and then the emperor was forced to go to war. As a result, the war was not successful.

古文：帝尤惜金钱，不肯赏赐，茹法珍叩头请之，帝曰： 贼来独取我邪，何爲就我求物？ 
现代文：废帝尤其吝惜金钱，不肯赏赐，茹法珍叩头请求，废帝说： 贼兵来了难道只取我一个人的财物吗？
English: Emperor Wutu was particularly stingy with money, refusing to reward anyone, and bowing down to Zhu Fazhen's request. Emperor Wutu said, "Did the bandits come to take only my personal belongings?

古文：后堂储数百具榜，啓爲城防，帝曰： 拟作殿。 
现代文：为什么还要来跟我要东西？ 后堂储存着几百具木匾，请求用于城防，废帝说： 还要用它造宫殿呢！ 
English: Why do you still come to ask me for things? There are hundreds of wooden rafts stored in the back hall, asking to be used for city defense, the emperor said: Do you still want to use it to build a palace!

古文：竟不与。
现代文：到底不给。
English: So he ignored it.

古文：城防巧手，而悉令作殿，昼夜不休。
现代文：城防的巧手，都让去建造宫殿，昼夜不停。
English: The skilled hands of the city's defenders were put to work building the palace, day and night.

古文：又催御府细作三百人精仗，须围解以拟屏除。
现代文：又催促御府制作三百人的精美仪仗，等围困解除以后用以摈除杂人。
English: He also urged the imperial court to create a fine ceremonial army of three hundred men, which would be used after the siege was lifted to remove the commoners.

古文：金银雕镂杂物，倍急于常。
现代文：金银雕刻等杂事，比平时加倍赶制。
English: Gold and silver carving and other miscellaneous tasks are twice as urgent as usual.

古文：法珍、虫儿又说帝曰： 大臣不留意，使围不解，宜悉诛之。 
现代文：茹法珍、梅虫儿又劝废帝说： 大臣不用心，使围困不能解除，应该全部杀掉。 
English: Ru Fa Zhen and Mei Zhi Er also advised Emperor Wuta, saying, "Minister, don't worry, the siege can't be lifted, you should kill them all."

古文：珍国、张稷惧祸，乃谋应萧衍，以计告后合舍人钱强。
现代文：王珍国、张稷害怕遭祸，于是谋划接应萧衍，就把这个打算告诉了后阁舍人钱强。
English: Wang Zhenguo and Zhang Xuan were afraid of disaster, so they planned to take over Ying Xiaoyan, and told this plan to Qian Qiang.

古文：强许之，密令游荡主崔叔智夜开云龙门，稷及珍国勒兵入殿，分军又从西上合入后宫，御刀丰勇之爲内应。
现代文：钱强答应了他们，秘密地让游荡主崔叔智在夜间打开了云龙门，张稷和王珍国领兵入殿，分出兵士又从西上门进入后宫，宫中卫士丰勇之为内应。
English: Qian Qiang agreed to them, and secretly let the wandering master Cui Shuzhi open the Cloud Dragon Gate at night, Zhang Ye and Wang Zhenguo led the soldiers into the palace, separated the soldiers and entered the harem from the west door, and the palace guard Feng Yong was the inner response.

古文：是夜，帝在含德殿。吹笙歌作女儿子，卧未熟，闻兵入，趋出北户，欲还后宫。
现代文：这天夜里，废帝呆在含德殿，吹笙演唱《女儿子》，躺下还没睡熟，听到有兵进来，跑出北门，想跑回后宫。
English: On this night, Emperor Wu stayed in the Hande Hall, boasting and singing "The Female Son." He was not yet asleep when he heard soldiers coming in, ran out of the north gate, and wanted to run back to the harem.

古文：清曜合已闭，阉人禁防黄泰平刀伤其膝，仆地，顾曰： 奴反邪！ 
现代文：但是清曜阁已经关闭，太监禁防黄泰平用刀砍伤了他的膝盖，倒在地上，他回过头来说道： 你这奴才反了！ 
English: But the Qingyang Pavilion was already closed, and Huang Taiping, the prison guard, slashed his knee with a knife and fell to the ground. He turned around and said, "You bastard, you've gone backwards!"

古文：直后张齐斩首，送萧衍。
现代文：直后张齐把他斩首，送给了萧衍。
English: Immediately after, Zhang Qi beheaded him and gave him to Xiao Yan.

古文：宣德太后令依汉海昏侯故事，追封东昏侯。
现代文：宣德太后命令依照汉代海昏侯的先例，追封他为东昏侯。
English: Empress Dowager Xuande ordered that he be given the title of Dongdimou in accordance with the precedent of Haidimou in the Han Dynasty.

