古文：朱纨，字子纯，长洲人。
现代文：朱纨，字子纯，长洲人。
English: Zhu Xi, pure character, Changzhou people.

古文：正德十六年进士。
现代文：正德十六年进士。
English: Zhengde entered the priesthood in the 16th year.

古文：除景州知州，调开州。
现代文：封官景州知州，调到开州。
English: He was transferred from Jingzhou to Chizhou and then to Kaizhou.

古文：嘉靖初，迁南京刑部员外郎。
现代文：嘉靖年初期，迁南京刑部员外郎。
English: At the beginning of the year of the Jiajing Emperor, Gairo, a member of the Criminal Investigation Department, moved to Nanjing.

古文：历四川兵备副使。
现代文：历四川兵备副使。
English: He was the Deputy Envoy of Sichuan Military Preparedness.

古文：与副总兵何卿共平深沟诸砦番。
现代文：与副总兵何卿共同平定深沟诸砦番。
English: He and Vice-Commander-in-Chief Ho Ching jointly pacified the forts in the deep ditch.

古文：五迁至广东左布政使。
现代文：五迁到广东左布政使。
English: On the 5th, the political envoy moved to Zuo Bu, Guangdong.

古文：二十五年擢右副都御史，巡抚南、赣。
现代文：二十五年提升为右副都御史，巡抚南、赣。
English: In 2005, he was promoted to the position of Right Vice-Governor of the Capital, with the posts of Southern District Governor and Second Vice-Governor.

古文：明年七月，倭寇起，改提督浙、闽海防军务，巡抚浙江。
现代文：第二年七月，倭寇出现，改任提督浙、闽海防军务之职，巡抚浙江。
English: In July of the following year, the wokou appeared, and he was reassigned to the post of Admiral of Zhejiang and Bohai Sea Defense Military Affairs, and became the governor of Zhejiang.

古文：初，明祖定制，片板不许入海。
现代文：起初，明祖定下制度，不许片板入海。
English: At first, the founder of the Ming Dynasty set up a system to prevent the plates from entering the sea.

古文：承平久，奸民阑出入，勾倭人及佛郎机诸国入互市。
现代文：承平日久，奸民擅自出入，勾结倭人和佛郎机诸国的人到中国互相做买卖。
English: For a long time, unscrupulous people entered and left the country without permission, and people from all over the world colluded with the Japanese to do business with each other in China.

古文：闽人李光头、歙人许栋踞宁波之双屿为之主，司其质契。
现代文：闽人李光头、歙人许栋占据宁波的双屿，做该地的统治者，掌管它的质契。
English: Li Guangtou and Xu Dong occupied the Shuangyu Island in Ningbo, became the rulers of the place, and took charge of its pledge.

古文：势家护持之，漳、泉为多，或与通婚姻。
现代文：有势的人家维护支持他们，漳、泉的这种家庭比较多，或者与他们通婚姻。
English: Powerful families maintain and support them, and there are more such families in Handan and Quan, or intermarry with them.

古文：假济渡为名，造双桅大船，运载违禁物，将吏不敢诘也。
现代文：假借济渡的名义，制造双桅大船，运载禁运物资，将吏对此不敢诘问。
English: The generals did not dare to ask questions about the use of the name of Jidu to manufacture large two-masted ships to carry embargoed goods.

古文：或负其直，栋等即诱之攻剽。
现代文：有的人欠他们的债，许栋等人就引诱他们攻打抢劫。
English: Some people owed them debts, and Xu Dong and others lured them to attack and rob.

古文：负直者胁将吏捕逐之，泄师期令去，期他日偿。
现代文：欠债的人威胁说将吏要逮捕驱逐他们，泄露出征时间让他们离去，期望他日偿还。
English: The debtors threatened to arrest and expel the officials, to reveal the departure time for them to leave, expecting him to repay them one day.

古文：他日至，负如初。
现代文：到期后，仍然像以前一样欠债。
English: After the due date, the debt is still owed as before.

古文：倭大怨恨，益与栋等合。
现代文：倭寇大怨恨，更加与许栋等人合作。
English: The wokou held a great grudge and cooperated even more with Xu Dong and others.

古文：而浙、闽海防久坠，战船、哨船十存一二，漳、泉巡检司弓兵旧额二千五百余，仅存千人。
现代文：而浙、闽海防长久毁坏，战船、哨船十艘只剩下一两艘，漳、泉巡检司弓箭兵旧额二千五百多人，现在只有千人。
English: However, the Zhejiang and Bohai coast defences have been destroyed for a long time. Only one or two of the ten warships and sentry boats remain, and the number of archers and archers of the Bohai and Quan inspection stations, which used to be more than 2,500, is now only 1,000.

古文：剽掠辄得志，益无所忌，来者接踵。
现代文：倭人抢劫掠夺总是得志，更加无所顾忌，来进行抢掠的接踵不断。
English: The Japanese are always eager to rob and plunder, and they are even more reckless, and they continue to plunder one after another.

古文：纨巡海道，采佥事项高及士民言，谓不革渡船则海道不可清，不严保甲则海防不可复，上疏具列其状。
现代文：朱纨巡视海道，采用佥事项高和士民的话，说不革除渡船，那么海道就不能清理，不严保甲则海防不可能得到恢复，上疏皇帝列举具体情况。
English: Zhu Xi inspected the seaway, using the words of the high-ranking officials and scholars, saying that if the ferry was not removed, then the seaway could not be cleaned up, and if the coastal defense was not strictly maintained, it could not be restored, and the Shang Dynasty Emperor enumerated the specific situation.

古文：于是革渡船，严保甲，搜捕奸民。
现代文：从此革渡船，严保甲、搜捕奸民。
English: Since then, the ferries have been protected, and the traitors have been tracked down.

古文：闽人资衣食于海，骤失重利，虽士大夫家亦不便也，欲沮坏之。
现代文：闽人衣食靠海来维持，突然丧失重利，即使是士大夫之家，也觉不便，想阻止破坏这种制度。
English: People depend on the sea for their food and clothing, and the sudden loss of heavy profits, even the house of the shidafu, felt inconvenient and wanted to prevent the destruction of this system.

古文：纨讨平覆鼎山贼。
现代文：朱纨讨伐平定覆鼎山的叛贼。
English: Zhu Xi fought and defeated the traitors of Dinghuiding Mountain.

古文：明年将进攻双屿，使副使柯乔、都指挥黎秀分驻漳、泉、福宁，遏贼奔逸，使都司卢镗将福清兵由海门进。
现代文：第二年将进攻双屿，让副使柯乔、都指挥黎秀分别驻扎漳、泉、福宁，遏止敌贼奔逸，让都司卢镗率领福清的兵士从海门进入。
English: The second year will be the attack on Shuangyu, let the deputy envoy Ke Qiao and the commander of the capital Li Xiu respectively stationed in Fen, Quan and Funing, to stop the enemy thieves from rushing, and let the commander of the capital Lu Wei lead the soldiers of Fu Qing to enter from the sea gate.

古文：而日本贡使周良违旧约，以六百人先期至。
现代文：而日本的贡使周良违背旧约，以六百人先期到达。
English: Contrary to the Old Testament, the Japanese envoy Zhou Liang arrived ahead of schedule with six hundred people.

古文：纨奉诏便宜处分。
现代文：朱纨奉诏对此进行灵活处理。
English: Zhu Rongfeng handled this flexibly.

古文：度不可却，乃要良自请，后不为例。
现代文：估计不可能推却，于是要周良自我表明，并且下不为例。
English: It is estimated that it is impossible to push back, so Zhou Liang should show himself and set an example.

古文：录其船，延良入宁波宾馆。
现代文：命人登记他们的船，将周良引进宁波宾馆。
English: They ordered someone to register their boat and take Zhou Liang to a hotel in Ningbo.

古文：奸民投书激变，纨防范密，计不得行。
现代文：奸民投书激变，朱纨防范甚密，使他们的诡计不能得逞。
English: The treacherous people voted for drastic changes, and Zhu Xi was very careful to prevent their tricks from succeeding.

古文：夏四月，镗遇贼于九山洋，俘日本国人稽天，许栋亦就擒。
现代文：夏天四月，卢镗在九山洋遇到敌贼，俘虏日本国人天稽，许栋也被擒。
English: In the summer of April, Lu Yao encountered an enemy thief in Jiu Shan Yang, captured the Japanese citizen Tian Qi, and Xu Dong was also captured.

古文：栋党汪直等收余众遁，镗筑塞双屿而还。
现代文：许栋的同党汪直等人收集余众逃遁，卢镗筑塞双屿后回来。
English: Xu Dong's fellow party member Wang Zhi and others gathered the rest of the crowd to flee, and Lu Yao returned after building a fort on Shuangyu.

古文：番舶后至者不得入，分泊南麂、礁门、青山、下八诸岛。
现代文：番船后到的不能进入双屿，分别停泊在南麂、礁门、青山、下八诸岛。
English: Boats arriving after the watch cannot enter Shuangyu, and are moored at Nanlu, Jiaomen, Aoyama, and the lower eight islands.

古文：势家既失利，则宣言被擒者皆良民，非贼党，用摇惑人心。
现代文：势豪之家既然失利，就公开扬言被擒的人都是良民，不是贼党，以此来蛊惑人心。
English: Since the house of the powerful has lost, it openly threatens that the people who were arrested are good people, not thieves, in order to demagogue the people.

古文：又挟制有司，以胁从被掳予轻比，重者引强盗拒捕律。
现代文：又挟制有司，轻的按胁从被掳的罪名加以处理，严重犯罪的则按强盗拒捕的法律处理。
English: In addition, there are magistrates to deal with minor crimes such as abduction under duress, while serious crimes are dealt with according to the law of robbery and resisting arrest.

古文：纨上疏曰： 今海禁分明，不知何由被掳，何由协从？
现代文：朱纨上疏说 ：现在海禁分明，不知由什么原因被掳，由什么原因胁从。
English: Zhu Xiangso said: Now the maritime ban is clear, I don't know for what reason I was abducted, and for what reason I was coerced.

古文：若以入番导寇为强盗，海洋敌对为拒捕，臣之愚暗，实所未解。 
现代文：如果以引进番导来寇为强盗，海洋敌对为拒捕，我很愚昧，实在不能理解。 
English: If I regard the introduction of the Mongol invaders as banditry and the maritime hostility as resisting arrest, I am very ignorant and really cannot understand it.

古文：遂以便宜行戮。
现代文：于是朝廷让他不须请示灵活处置、杀戮。
English: As a result, the court did not require him to ask for flexible disposal or killing.

古文：纨执法既坚，势家皆惧。
现代文：朱纨执法非常坚决，势豪之家都感到恐惧。
English: Zhu Xi's enforcement of the law is very resolute, and the powerful families are afraid.

古文：贡使周良安插已定，闽人林懋和为主客司，宣言宜发回其使。
现代文：贡使周良安插已定，闽人林懋和为主客司，宣言应当放他回去。
English: Tribute envoy Zhou Liang has already been installed, and Lin Qihe is the main guest, the declaration should let him go back.

古文：纨以中国制驭诸番，宜守大信，疏争之强。
现代文：朱纨因为中国制驭诸番，应当遵守大信，谏争得很强烈。
English: Zhu Rong, because China controls many countries, should abide by the Great Faith, and the competition is very strong.

古文：且曰： 去外国盗易，去中国盗难。
现代文：就说： 除去外国强盗容易，除中国强盗困难。
English: He said, "It is easy to get rid of foreign bandits, but it is difficult to get rid of Chinese bandits."

古文：去中国濒海之盗犹易，去中国衣寇之盗尤难。 
现代文：除去中国濒海的强盗还容易，除去中国衣寇的强盗特别困难。 
English: It is easy to get rid of the robbers on the coast of China, but it is particularly difficult to get rid of the robbers of the Chinese clothing industry.

古文：闽、浙人益恨之，竟勒周良还泊海屿，以俟贡期。
现代文：闽、浙的人更加恨他，竟勒令周良还泊海屿，以等候贡期。
English: The people of Shandong and Zhejiang hated him even more, and ordered Zhou Liang to stay on the island to wait for the tribute period.

古文：吏部用御史闽人周亮及给事中叶镗言，奏改纨巡视，以杀其权。
现代文：吏部采用御史闽人周亮和给事中叶镗的话，上奏改朱纨为巡视，以减少他的权力。
English: The cadre department adopted the words of Zhou Liang, who was the official inspector, and Ye Jun, who was in charge of the inspection, and changed Zhu Jun as the inspector in order to reduce his power.

古文：纨愤，又明年春上疏言： 臣整顿海防，稍有次第，亮欲侵削臣权，致属吏不肯用命。 
现代文：朱纨愤怒，第二年春天上疏说： 我整顿海防，稍有次第，周亮想侵削我的权力，致使我管的官吏不肯听我的命令。 
English: Zhu Xi was furious, and in the spring of the following year, he said to Shang Zuo: "I am reorganizing the coastal defense, a little bit at a time, Zhou Liang wants to encroach on my power, so that the officials in my charge are not willing to listen to my orders.

古文：既又陈明国是、正宪体、定纪纲、扼要害、除祸本、重断决六事，语多愤激。
现代文：既而又陈述明国事、正宪体、定纪纲、扼要害、除祸本、重决断六事，语言多有愤激。
English: In addition to stating six things, namely, clarifying the state affairs, correcting the constitution, establishing the discipline, summarizing the harm, eliminating the cause of the harm, and re-deciding, the language is often angry.

古文：中朝士大夫先入浙、闽人言，亦有不悦纨者矣。
现代文：中朝士大夫先听进浙、闽人的话，也有不喜欢朱纨的人。
English: Dr. Asashi listened to the people of Zhejiang and Shandong first, and there are also people who do not like Zhu Xi.

古文：纨前讨温、盘、南麂诸贼，连战三月，大破之，还平处州矿盗。
现代文：朱纨前往讨伐温、盘、南麂诸贼，连战三月，大破敌军，还平息处州矿盗。
English: Zhu Xi went to fight against the thieves of Wen, Pan and Nanxi, and in March, after a series of battles, he defeated the enemy army and also pacified the miners in Zhouzhou.

古文：其年三月，佛郎机国人行劫至诏安。
现代文：这一年的三月，佛郎机国人到诏安进行抢劫。
English: In March of the same year, the citizens of Furochi went to Zaoan to carry out a robbery.

古文：纨击擒其渠李光头等九十六人，复以便宜戮之。
现代文：朱纨攻击擒获他们的头领李光头等九十六人，又用相机处理之法将他们杀戮。
English: Zhu Xi attacked and captured their leader, Li Guangtu, and ninety-six others, and killed them with the method of camera processing.

古文：具状闻，语复侵诸势家。
现代文：并将情况报告给皇帝，语言中又侵犯了诸势豪之家。
English: And reported the situation to the emperor, the language also violated the home of the powerful.

古文：御史陈九德遂劾纨擅杀。
现代文：御史陈九德于是弹劾朱纨擅自杀戮。
English: Chen Jide, the chief historian, then impeached Zhu Xi for killing without authorization.

古文：落纨职，命兵科都给事杜汝祯按问。
现代文：于是免去朱纨的官职，命令兵科都给事中杜汝祯考察审问。
English: As a result, Zhu Rong was relieved of his official position and ordered the military departments to investigate and interrogate Du Rong.

古文：纨闻之，慷慨流涕曰： 吾贫且病，又负气，不任对簿。
现代文：朱纨听说后，慷慨流涕说： 我贫穷而且有病，又意气自负，不能对簿公堂。
English: After hearing this, Zhu Xi said generously, "I am poor and sick, and I am conceited. I cannot go to court.

古文：纵天子不欲死我，闽、浙人必杀我。
现代文：纵使皇帝不想杀我，闽、浙人一定会杀我。
English: Even if the emperor does not want to kill me, the people of Shandong and Zhejiang will definitely kill me.

古文：吾死，自决之，不须人也。 
现代文：我死，自己解决，不须他人。 
English: If I die, I'll solve it myself, I don't need anyone else.

古文：制圹志，作绝命词，仰药死。
现代文：写墓志，作绝命词，饮药而死。
English: Write your epitaph, say your last words, drink the potion and die.

古文：二十九年，给事汝祯、巡按御史陈宗夔还，称奸民鬻贩拒捕，无僣号流劫事，坐纨擅杀。
现代文：二十九年，给事中杜汝祯、巡按御史陈宗夔回来，说是奸民鬻贩拒捕，没有僭号流劫之事，问朱纨擅杀之罪。
English: In 1929, during the investigation, Du Ruyi and Chen Zongyao, the inspector-general of police, came back and said that there was no case of banditry, and asked Zhu Xi about the crime of killing without permission.

古文：诏逮纨，纨已前死。
现代文：皇帝下诏令逮捕朱纨，朱纨在这以前已经死了。
English: The emperor issued a decree to arrest Zhu Xi, but Zhu Xi had already died.

古文：柯乔、卢镗等并论重辟。
现代文：柯乔、卢镗等人一并被处死刑。
English: Guo Qiao, Lu Wei and others were all sentenced to death.

古文：纨清强峭直，勇于任事。
现代文：朱纨清强峭直，勇于任事。
English: Zhu Xiqing is strong and upright, and has the courage to take on responsibilities.

古文：欲为国家杜乱源，乃为势家构陷，朝野太息。
现代文：想为国家杜绝祸乱的根源，才被势豪之家陷害，朝野人士都为他叹息。
English: He only wanted to eliminate the root cause of the country's woes when he was framed by a powerful family, and people in both the government and the opposition are sighing for him.

古文：自纨死，罢巡视大臣不设，中外摇手不敢言海禁事。
现代文：自从朱纨死后，罢去巡视大臣官职不设，朝廷内外都摇手不敢说海禁方面的事。
English: Since the death of Zhu Xi, there has been no official position of inspecting minister, and both inside and outside the imperial court are afraid to say anything about the maritime ban.

古文：浙中卫所四十一，战船四百三十九，尺籍尽耗。
现代文：浙中卫所四十一个，战船四百三十九艘，军籍尽为耗散。
English: There are 41 military academies in Zhejiang, 439 warships, and the military ranks are dispersed.

古文：纨招福清捕盗船四十余，分布海道，在台州海门卫者十有四，为黄岩外障，副使丁湛尽散遣之，撤备驰禁。
现代文：朱纨将福清捕获的盗船四十多艘，分布在海道，在台州海门卫的有十四艘，作为黄岩的外部屏障。副使丁湛全部将它们遣散，撤消防备放开海禁。
English: Zhu Xi distributed the more than forty stolen ships captured by Fu Qing along the sea route, and there were fourteen ships of the Taizhou coast guard as an external barrier of Huangyan. Deputy envoy Ding Zhan disbanded all of them and prepared to lift the sea blockade.

古文：未几，海寇大作，毒东南者十余年。
现代文：不久，海寇大作，荼毒东南有十多年。
English: Soon, the sea rover became a masterpiece, and has been poisoning Southeast Asia for more than ten years.

古文：张经，字廷彝，侯官人。
现代文：张经，字廷彝，侯官人。
English: Zhang Jing, Zi Ting, Hou Guanzhong.

古文：初冒蔡姓，久之乃复。
现代文：起初冒用蔡姓，很久之后才复用张姓。
English: At first, she assumed the surname Cai, and only after a long time did she use the surname Zhang.

古文：正德十二年进士。
现代文：正德十二年进士。
English: Zhengde joined the army at the age of twelve.

古文：除嘉兴知县。
现代文：授职嘉兴知县。
English: The award ceremony was held in Jiaxing County.

古文：嘉靖四年召为吏科给事中，历户科都给事中，数有论劾。
现代文：嘉靖四年召到朝廷封为吏科给事中，历官户科都给事中，多次论说弹劾他人的言行。
English: In the fourth year of Jiajing, he was summoned to the imperial court to be appointed as an official, and he repeatedly talked about impeaching the words and deeds of others.

古文：言官指为张、桂党，吏部言经行修，不问。
现代文：言官指责他是张璁、桂萼同党，吏部说张经行为端正，不问他的罪。
English: The speech officer accused him of being a member of the same party as Zhang Ye and Gui Cai, while the personnel department said that Zhang Jing had behaved properly and did not question his guilt.

古文：擢太仆少卿，历右副都御史，协理院事。
现代文：后被提升为太仆少卿，历右副都御史，协助处理院事。
English: Later, he was promoted to the position of Taichu Shokei, and Retsu Utsubo Miyoshi, assisting in dealing with the affairs of the Imperial Household Agency.

古文：十六年进兵部右侍郎，总督两广军务。
现代文：十六年进官兵部右侍郎，总督两广军务。
English: Sixteen years later, he was promoted to the position of the right-hand man of the Ministry of Military Affairs, and became the governor of the Second Military Region.

古文：断藤峡贼侯公丁据弩滩为乱。
现代文：断藤峡贼侯公丁占据弩滩搞叛乱。
English: At the end of the ridge, the thief Hou Gongding occupied the reed beach and led a rebellion.

古文：经与御史邹尧臣等定计，以军事属副使翁万达，诱执公丁。
现代文：张经和御史邹尧臣等人定计，以军事托付副使翁万达，诱捕侯公丁。
English: Zhang Jing and his subordinates planned to use the military entrusted deputy envoy, Weng Wanda, to trap Hou Gongding.

古文：参议田汝成请乘势进讨。
现代文：参议田汝成提议乘势进行讨伐。
English: Councilor Tian Rucheng proposed to take advantage of the situation and carry out a crusade.

古文：命副总兵张经将三万五千人为左军，万达监之，指挥王良辅等六将分六道会南宁；都指挥高乾将万六千人为右军，副使梁廷振监之，指挥马文杰等四将分四道会宾州，抵贼巢夹击。
现代文：命令副总兵张经带领三万人作为左军，由翁万达做监军，指挥王良辅等六将分六道会集南宁，都指挥高乾带领六千人为右军，由副使梁廷振为监军，指挥马文杰等四将分四道会集宾州，抵达贼巢进行夹击。
English: He ordered Zhang Jing, deputy commander-in-chief, to lead 30,000 men as the left army, Ong Wanda to supervise the army, Wang Liangyu, commander, and other six generals to divide the six provinces of Nanning, Gao Qian, commander, to lead 6,000 men as the right army, Liang Ting Zhen, deputy commander, to supervise the army, and Ma Wenjie, commander, and other four generals to divide the four provinces of Pennsylvania, and arrived at the thief's nest to make a pincer attack.

古文：贼奔林峒而东。良辅等邀之，贼中断，复西奔，斩首千二百级。
现代文：敌贼从林峒向东跑，王良辅等半路拦击，敌贼中断，又向西跑，斩敌首一千二百级。
English: The enemy bandits ran eastward from Linyi, Wang Liangyu waited for them to stop halfway, the enemy bandits broke off, ran westward again, and cut off the enemy's head by 1200 steps.

古文：其东者遁入罗运山，万达等移师攻之。
现代文：向东跑的那部分逃遁进入罗运山，翁万达等人挥师攻击他们。
English: The part that ran eastward fled into Luoyun Mountain, and Onwanda and others attacked them.

古文：檄右军沿江而东，绕出其背。
现代文：檄令右军沿江向东，绕到敌人背后。
English: He ordered the right army to march eastward along the river and go around behind the enemy.

古文：贼刊巨木塞隘口，布蒺藜菰签，伏机弩毒镖，悬石树杪，急则撼其树，石皆坠，官军并以计破之。
现代文：敌贼砍巨木阻塞隘口，布下蒺藜竹签，埋伏机弩毒镖，悬石树杪，遇急就撼动其树，石头都掉下来，官军又用计破敌。
English: The enemy cut down huge trees to block the pass, planted bamboo sticks under the cloth, planted poison darts under the ambush machine, and planted hanging trees. In case of emergency, they shook their trees, the stones all fell down, and the government army used the plan to break the enemy.

古文：右军愆期，田州土酋卢受乃纵贼去。
现代文：右军错过时机，田州土酋卢受便放敌贼离去。
English: The right-wing army missed the opportunity, and Tianzhou Tu Hui Lu accepted it and let the enemy leave.

古文：俘其众四百五十，招降者二千九百有奇。
现代文：此役俘虏敌众四百五十人，招降二千九百多人。
English: During this campaign, 450 enemy soldiers were captured, and more than 2,900 were called up for surrender.

古文：土人言，祖父居罗运八世矣，未闻官军涉兹土也。
现代文：土人说，祖辈居住罗运有八世了，没有听说官军到过该地。
English: The local people said that their ancestors had lived in Luoyang for eight generations, and they had never heard of government troops visiting the area.

古文：捷闻，进经左侍郎，加秩一级。
现代文：向皇帝奏闻捷报，晋升张经为左侍郎，加俸禄一级。
English: He reported his success to the emperor, and Zhang Jing was promoted to the Left Attendant, and his salary was raised to the first level.

古文：寻与毛伯温定计，抚定安南，再进右都御史。
现代文：不久与毛伯温定计，抚定安南，再晋升为右都御史。
English: Soon after, he and Mao Bowen made a settlement, and Fuding Annan was promoted to Utsunomiya Imperial Historian.

古文：平思恩九土司及琼州黎，进兵部尚书。
现代文：平定思恩土司和琼州黎部，升为兵部尚书。
English: He and Qiong Zhou were promoted to the rank of general in the military.

古文：副使张瑶等讨马平瑶屡败，帝罪瑶等而宥经。
现代文：副使张瑶等人讨伐马平瑶屡次战败，皇帝将张瑶等人问罪而宽免张经。
English: Vice-envoy Zhang Qian and others repeatedly defeated Ma Pingyao, and the emperor punished Zhang Qian and others and pardoned Zhang Jing.

古文：给事中周怡劾经，经乞罢，不允。
现代文：给事中周怡弹劾张经，张经乞求罢官，皇帝不同意。
English: In the middle of the matter, Zhou Yi impeached Zhang Jing, Zhang Jing begged for dismissal, the emperor did not agree.

古文：以忧归。
现代文：后因丧父而回家乡。
English: He came back to his hometown because of his father's death.

古文：服阕，起三边总督。
现代文：服丧期满后，起用为三边总督。
English: After the expiration of the mourning period, he was appointed as the governor of the three sides.

古文：给事中刘起宗言经在两广克饷银，寝前命。
现代文：给事中刘起宗说张经在两广克扣饷银，才取消前项任命。
English: In the case, Liu Qizong said that Zhang Jing only cancelled the previous appointment after he had received two large sums of money.

古文：三十二年起南京户部尚书，就改兵部。
现代文：三十二年起用为南京户部尚书，就改兵部。
English: Since 1932 it has been used as the Nanjing Household Department, and then it was changed to the Military Department.

古文：明年五月，朝议以倭寇猖獗，设总督大臣。
现代文：第二年五月，朝议因倭寇猖獗，设立总督大臣。
English: In May of the following year, due to the rampant wako, the imperial court decided to establish a governor-general.

古文：命经解部务，总督江南、江北、浙江、山东、福建、湖广诸军，便宜行事。
现代文：命令张经不解除兵部职务，总督江南、江北、浙江、山东、福建、湖广诸军，相机处置方便行事。
English: Zhang Jing was ordered not to be relieved of his post in the military department, and the governors of Jiangnan, Jiangbei, Zhejiang, Shandong, Fujian, and Huguang were ordered to dispose of the camera conveniently.

古文：经征两广狼土兵听用。
现代文：张经征两广狼土兵听用。
English: Zhang Jingzheng ordered two wolf soldiers to listen.

古文：其年十一月，用兵科言改经右都御史兼兵部右侍郎，专办讨贼。
现代文：这一年十一月，皇帝采用兵科的话，改任张经为右都御史兼兵部右侍郎，专门办理讨贼这件事。
English: In November of the same year, the emperor changed Zhang Jing's post to that of the Right Metropolitan Historian and the Right Attendant of the Military Department, specifically to deal with the matter of trapping thieves.

古文：倭二万馀据柘林川沙洼，其党方踵至。
现代文：倭贼二万多人占据柘林川沙洼，他们的同党正接踵而来。
English: More than 20,000 wafang occupy the sand dunes of Yulin River, and their fellow party members are coming one after another.

古文：经日选将练兵，为捣巢计。
现代文：张经每日选将练兵，计划捣毁敌巢。
English: Zhang Jing selects soldiers for training every day and plans to destroy the enemy's nest.

古文：以江、浙、山东兵屡败，欲俟狼土兵至用之。
现代文：因江、浙、山东的兵战斗屡次失败，想等狼土兵到达后用他们出战。
English: Because the soldiers of Jiangsu, Zhejiang and Shandong repeatedly failed in battle, they wanted to wait for the wolf soldiers to arrive and use them to fight.

古文：明年三月，田州瓦氏兵先至，欲速战，经不可。
现代文：第二年三月，田州瓦氏兵先到达，想速战，张经不准出战。
English: In March of the following year, when Tianzhou Wa's soldiers arrived first and wanted to fight quickly, Zhang Jing was not allowed to fight.

古文：东兰诸兵继至。
现代文：东兰诸兵相继到达。
English: Donglan's soldiers arrived one after another.

古文：经以瓦氏兵隶总兵官俞大猷，以东兰、那地、南丹兵隶游击邹继芳，以归顺及思恩、东莞兵隶参将汤克宽，分屯金山卫、闵港、乍浦，掎贼三面，以待永顺、保靖兵之集。
现代文：张经将瓦氏兵隶属总兵官俞大猷，将东兰、那地、南丹兵隶属游击邹继芳，将归顺及思恩、东莞兵隶属参将汤克宽，分屯在金山卫、闵港、乍浦，牵制敌贼三面，以等待永顺、保靖兵来聚集。
English: Zhang Jing subordinated the Wa soldiers to the commander-in-chief 大, subordinated the Donglan, Nandi and Nandan soldiers to the guerrilla 继芳, subordinated the Zhe Shun and Shun, and the Dongguan soldiers to the general officer Tong Kek Kuan, and divided them in Jinshanwei, Da Nang and Zhapu to hold off the enemy on three sides and wait for the Yongshun and Baojing soldiers to gather.

古文：会侍郎赵文华以祭海至，与浙江巡按胡宗宪比，屡趋经进兵。
现代文：正巧侍郎赵文华因祭海到达这里，与浙江巡按胡宗宪一起，多次催促张经进兵。
English: It just so happened that Zhao Wenhua, the steward, arrived here because of the festival, and together with the Zhejiang patrol Hu Zongxian, repeatedly urged Zhang Jing to enter the army.

古文：经曰： 贼狡且众，待永、保兵至夹攻，庶万全。 
现代文：张经说 ：敌贼狡猾而且人多，待到永、保之兵到达后夹攻，才是万全之策。 
English: Zhang Jing said, "The enemy bandits are cunning and there are many of them. The best strategy is to wait until Yong Bao's soldiers arrive and then attack.

古文：文华再三言，经守便宜不听。
现代文：赵文华再三说服，张经执守灵活处事之权而不听他的。
English: Zhao Wenhua repeatedly persuaded Zhang Jing not to listen to him, insisting that he had the right to be flexible.

古文：文华密疏经糜饷殃民，畏贼失机，欲俟倭饱飏，剿余寇报功，宜亟治，以纾东南大祸。
现代文：赵文华密疏皇帝说张经糜饷殃民，害怕敌贼而失去军机，想等敌人抢足东西逃跑后，剿敌余寇报功，应当立即整治他，以解除东南的大祸。
English: Emperor Zhao Wenhua said that Zhang Jing had plundered the people, was afraid of the enemy thieves and lost the military aircraft, and wanted to wait for the enemy to grab the things and escape, and should immediately rectify him in order to relieve the great disaster in Southeast.

古文：帝问严嵩，嵩对如文华指，且谓苏、松人怨经。
现代文：皇帝问严嵩，严嵩的回答像赵文华所说的一样，并且说苏、松人怨恨张经。
English: The emperor asked Yan Song, and Yan Song's answer was the same as that of Zhao Wenhua, and said that the Su and Song people resented Zhang Jing.

古文：帝怒，即下诏逮经。
现代文：皇帝怒，当即下诏逮捕张经。
English: The emperor was enraged and immediately issued an edict to arrest Zhang Jing.

古文：三十四年五月也。
现代文：这时是三十四年五月。
English: It was May of '34.

古文：方文华拜疏，永、保兵已至，其日即有石塘湾之捷。
现代文：正在赵文华拜疏的时候，永、保兵已到达目的地，这一天就有石塘湾的胜利。
English: At the time when Zhao Wenhua was absent, Yong and Bao soldiers had already arrived at their destination. This day was the victory of Shitang Bay.

古文：至五月朔，倭突嘉兴，经遣参将卢镗督保靖兵援，以大猷督永顺兵由泖湖趋平望，以克宽引舟师由中路击之，合战于王江泾，斩贼首一千九百余级，焚溺死者甚众。
现代文：到五月初一，倭寇突入嘉兴，张经派遣参将卢镗督保靖兵增援，让俞大猷督永顺兵从氵卯湖趋向平望，让汤克宽带领船兵从中路攻击，在王江泾合战，歼敌一千九百多人，烧死溺死的人很多。
English: By the first day of May, the Japanese invaders had stormed into Jiaxing. Zhang Jing dispatched the general-in-charge of the General Lu Baojing to reinforce the soldiers. He ordered the general-in-charge of the General Lu Yongshun to attack from the middle of the lake, and the general-in-charge of the General Lu Yongshun to attack from the middle of the lake. The general-in-charge of the General Lu Yongshun attacked from the middle of the lake, and the general-in-charge of the General Lu Yongshun attacked from the middle of the lake, and the general-in-charge of the General

古文：自军兴来称战功第一。
现代文：张经从兵事兴起以来可称是战功第一。
English: Zhang Jing can be said to have made the greatest contribution to the war since the rise of the military.

古文：给事中李用敬、阎望云等言： 王师大捷，倭夺气，不宜易帅。 
现代文：给事中李用敬、阎望云等人说： 王师大捷，倭军的勇气被夺，不宜易换将帅。 
English: Li Yijing, Yan Wangyun and others said: Wang Shida Jie, the courage of the Wa army has been taken away, it is not appropriate to change the commander easily.

古文：帝大怒曰： 经欺诞不忠，闻文华劾，方一战。
现代文：皇帝大怒说： 张经对朝廷欺诞不忠，听到赵文华弹劾，才进行一战。
English: The emperor said angrily, "Zhang Jing cheated and betrayed the imperial court. It was only after he heard Zhao Wenhua's impeachment that he started World War I."

古文：用敬等党奸。
现代文：李用敬等人是他的奸党。 
English: Li Yingjing and others are his gangsters.

古文：杖于廷，人五十，斥为民。 
现代文：将李用敬等在朝廷上用杖拷打，每人五十杖，并被贬斥为民。
English: Li Yingjing and others were beaten with canes in the imperial court, fifty canes each, and were denounced as commoners.

古文：已而帝疑之，以问嵩。
现代文：之后皇帝感到怀疑，就询问严嵩。
English: Afterwards, the emperor became suspicious and questioned Yan Song.

古文：嵩言： 徐阶、李本江、浙人，皆言经养寇不战。
现代文：严嵩说： 徐阶、李本江是浙江人，都说张经养寇不战。
English: Yan Song said: Xu Jia and Li Benjiang are from Zhejiang, and they both said that Zhang Jing would not fight.

古文：文华、宗宪合谋进剿，经冒以为功。 
现代文：赵文华、胡宗宪合谋进剿敌寇，张经是冒他们的功。 
English: Zhao Wenhua and Hu Zongxian conspired to defeat the enemy invaders, and Zhang Jing took the credit.

古文：因极言二人忠。
现代文：并极力说赵文华、胡宗宪二人忠诚。
English: He also insisted that Zhao Wenhua and Hu Zongxian were both loyal.

古文：帝深入其言。
现代文：皇帝深信他的话。
English: The emperor was convinced of his words.

古文：经既至，备言进兵始末，且言： 任总督半载，前后俘斩五千，乞赐原宥。 
现代文：张经到达朝廷后，详细地说出进兵的始末，并且说 ：我任总督半年，前后俘歼敌人五千，请求据情减罪。 
English: After Zhang Jing arrived at the imperial court, he recounted in detail the beginning and end of the march into the army, and said: I have been the governor for half a year, I have captured and destroyed five thousand enemies, and I request that the crime be reduced according to the circumstances.

古文：当大立时，倭患已息，而坐恶少年鼓噪为乱，竟罢职。
现代文：皇帝最终不采纳他的话，将他判处死罪拘囚狱中，这一年十月，与巡抚李天宠一起被斩首。
English: In the end, the emperor did not accept his words and sentenced him to death. In October of that year, he was beheaded together with the inspector Li Tianqiao.

古文：无一不得罪去者。胡宗宪，字汝贞，绩溪人。
现代文：天下的人都知道他是冤屈的。胡宗宪，字汝贞，绩溪人。
English: Everyone in the world knows that he is a wrongdoer. Hu Zongxian, Zha Ruzhen, Jixi people.

古文：嘉靖十七年进士。
现代文：考中嘉靖十七年进士。
English: He passed the middle school entrance examination in the 17th year of Jiajing.

古文：历知益都、余姚二县。
现代文：历任益都、余姚二县知县。
English: Successive governors of Yiwu, Yuyao and two counties of Zhixian.

古文：擢御史，巡按宣、大。
现代文：升御史职，巡视宣府、大同。
English: He was promoted to the post of imperial historian, and went on inspection tours of Senshu and Datong.

古文：诏徙大同左卫军于阳和、独石，卒聚而哗。宗宪单骑慰谕，许勿徙，乃定。
现代文：皇帝诏令迁徙大同左卫军到阳和、独石，士卒聚众喧哗抗拒，宗宪单人独马前往安抚解释，同意不再迁徙，士卒这才安定下来。
English: The emperor issued a decree to relocate the Datong Left Guard Army to Yanghe and Dokse, and the officers and men rallied to loudly resist. Zong Xian went alone to pacify and explain, and agreed not to relocate again. Only then did the officers and men settle down.

古文：三十三年，出按浙江。
现代文：嘉靖三十三年，胡宗宪出使巡按浙江。
English: In the 33rd year of Jiajing, Hu Zongxian sent an envoy to patrol Zhejiang.

古文：时歙人汪直据五岛煽诸倭入寇，而徐海、陈东、麻叶等巢柘林、乍浦、川沙洼，日扰郡邑。
现代文：当时歙县人汪直盘踞五岛煽动倭人入侵，而徐海、陈东、麻叶等以柘林、乍浦、川沙洼为巢穴，经常骚扰郡县。
English: At that time, Wang Zhichan, a resident of Yunnan County, instigated the invasion of the Japanese on the five islands of Yunnan, while Xu Hai, Chen Dong, and Ma Ye used Yulin, Zhaopu, and Chuan Shaha as their lairs, frequently harassing the county.

古文：帝命张经为总督，李天宠抚浙江，又命侍郎赵文华督察军务。
现代文：嘉靖皇帝任命张经为总督，李天宠为浙江巡抚，又命侍郎赵文华督察军务。
English: Emperor Jiajing appointed Zhang Jing as the governor, Li Tianzhu as the governor of Zhejiang, and also appointed Zhao Wenhua as the inspector of military affairs.

古文：文华恃严嵩内援，恣甚。
现代文：赵文华依恃严嵩为后台，异常骄恣。
English: Zhao Wenhua, leaning on his massive stature in the background, is unusually arrogant.

古文：经、天宠不附也，独宗宪附之。
现代文：但张经、李天宠并不依附于他，独有胡宗宪委身依附。
English: However, Zhang Jing and Li Tianchi did not attach themselves to him, but only Hu Zongxin attached himself.

古文：文华大悦，因相与力排二人。
现代文：赵文华大为高兴，于是合力排挤张、李二人。
English: Zhao Wenhua was very happy, so he joined forces to push out Zhang and Li.

古文：倭寇嘉兴，守宪中以毒酒，死数百人。
现代文：倭寇进犯嘉兴，胡宗宪以毒酒杀死数百人。
English: Wokou attacked Jiaxing, and Hu Zongxian killed hundreds of people with poisoned wine.

古文：及经破王江泾，宗宪与有力。
现代文：及至张经破敌于王江泾，胡宗宪亦为有力的参加者。
English: By the time Zhang Jing defeated the enemy at Wangjiangyu, Hu Zongxian was also a powerful participant.

古文：文华尽掩经功归宗宪，经遂得罪。
现代文：赵文华将战功归于胡宗宪，而尽数抹杀张经的功绩，张经因此获罪。
English: Zhao Wenhua attributed the war exploits to Hu Zongxian, and tried his best to obliterate Zhang Jing's achievements. Zhang Jing was therefore found guilty.

古文：寻又陷天宠，即超擢宗宪右佥都御史代之。
现代文：不久又诬陷李天宠，并立即提升胡宗宪为右佥都御史，取代李天宠巡抚浙江。
English: Soon after, he framed Li Tianchi, and immediately promoted Hu Zongxian to the post of Right Hand of the Central Government, replacing Li Tianchi as the governor of Zhejiang.

古文：时柘林诸倭移屯陶宅，势稍杀。会苏、松巡抚曹邦辅歼倭浒墅，文华欲攘功不得，大恨，遂进剿陶宅残寇。
现代文：此时柘林倭寇移驻陶宅，兵势渐弱，正值苏、松巡抚曹邦辅歼灭倭寇于浒墅，赵文华意欲居功未能如意，大为遗憾，于是率兵进剿陶宅残余倭寇。
English: At this time, the Yulin Wokou moved to the Tao House, and the troops were getting weaker and weaker. It was the time when the Su and Song governor Cao Bangfu was annihilating the Wokou in the Wei Villa. Zhao Wenhua wanted to do his best, but it was not possible. It was a great pity, so he led the troops into the Tao House of the remaining Wokou.

古文：宗宪与共，将锐卒四千，营砖桥，约邦辅夹击。倭殊死战，宗宪兵死者千余。
现代文：胡宗宪与其一道行动，带精锐士卒四千人，扎营于砖桥，约同曹邦辅夹击倭寇，倭寇拼死反击，胡宗宪的部下伤亡千余人。
English: Hu Zongxian acted together with him, bringing 4,000 elite soldiers and setting up camp at the brick bridge. He and Cao Bang assisted in clamping down on the wokou. The wokou fought back to the death, and Hu Zongxian's men suffered more than a thousand casualties.

古文：文华令副使刘焘攻之，复大败。
现代文：赵文华命令副使刘焘继续攻击，又遭惨败。
English: Zhao Wenhua ordered the deputy envoy Liu Wei to continue the attack, and suffered another crushing defeat.

古文：而倭犯浙东诸州县，杀文武吏甚众。
现代文：倭寇趁机进犯浙东诸州县，杀害政府文武官吏甚众。
English: The wokou took advantage of the opportunity to invade Zhouzhou County in eastern Zhejiang, killing a large number of civil and military officials.

古文：宗宪乃与文华定招抚计。
现代文：胡宗宪于是与赵文华商定施用招抚的计谋。
English: Hu Zongxian then agreed with Zhao Wenhua to use the tactic of enticement.

古文：文华还朝，盛毁总督杨宜，而荐宗宪，遂以为兵部右侍郎代宜。
现代文：赵文华回朝廷后，大肆诋毁总督杨宜，并向朝廷推荐胡宗宪，于是命胡宗宪以兵部右侍郎职取代杨宜为总督。
English: After Zhao Wenhua returned to the imperial court, he defamed Yang Yi, the governor, and recommended Hu Zongxian to the imperial court. Therefore, he ordered Hu Zongxian to replace Yang Yi as the governor with the post of the right hand man of the military department.

古文：初，宗宪令客蒋洲、陈可愿谕日本国王，遇汪直养子滶于五岛，邀使见直。
现代文：首先，胡宗宪派幕客蒋洲、陈可愿出使日本，宣谕朝廷诏书，在航行到王岛附近时遇上了汪直养子汪誢，汪誢邀请两位使者去见汪直。
English: First of all, Jiang Zhou and Chen Ke, who were guests of the shogunate sent by Hu Zongzhen, were willing to send envoys to Japan to proclaim the imperial edict. When sailing to the vicinity of Wang Dao, they met Wang Zhi's foster son, Wang Qian. Wang Qian invited the two envoys to see Wang Zhi.

古文：直初诱倭入犯，倭大获利，各岛由此日至。
现代文：此前汪直诱使倭寇入侵沿海州县，倭人掠夺了不少财富，因此倭寇常裹挟各岛的居民一起洗劫地方。
English: Previously, Wang Zhi lured the wako to invade the coastal prefectures and counties. The wako plundered a lot of wealth, so the wako often dragged the residents of each island together to loot the place.

古文：既而多杀伤，有全岛无一归者，死者家怨直。
现代文：在与官军作战中，死伤不少，有的甚至整座岛屿都没有一个人活着回来，死者家属多归怨汪直。
English: In the battle with the government army, there were many deaths and injuries, and some even did not return alive from the entire island. The families of the dead mostly hold a grudge against Wang Zhi.

古文：直乃与滶及叶碧川、王清溪、谢和等据五岛自保。岛人呼为老船主。
现代文：于是汪直与汪誢、叶碧川、王清溪、谢和等据五岛自保，岛上的人称汪直为老船主。
English: As a result, Wang Zhi and Wang Qian, Ye Bichuan, Wang Qingxi, Xie He and so on are self-insured according to the five islands. The people on the island call Wang Zhi an old shipowner.

古文：宗宪与直同乡里，欲招致之，释直母妻于金华狱，资给甚厚。
现代文：胡宗宪与汪直同乡，他想招抚汪直，从金华监狱中释放了汪直的母亲和妻子，并给了优厚待遇。
English: Hu Zongxian was a fellow villager of Wang Zhi, and he wanted to woo Wang Zhi, so he released Wang Zhi's mother and wife from Jinhua Prison and gave them favorable treatment.

古文：洲等谕宗宪指。直心动，又知母妻无恙，大喜曰： 俞大猷绝我归路，故至此。
现代文：蒋洲等人这次见到了汪直，就将胡宗宪的意思告诉了汪直，汪直动心了，又得知老母娇妻安然无恙，非常高兴地说： 俞大猷逼得我无路可退，所以落到今天这一步。
English: When Jiang Zhou and others saw Wang Zhi this time, they told Wang Zhi the meaning of Hu Zongxian. Wang Zhi was moved, and when he learned that his wife was safe and sound, he was very happy to say: "I have no way to retreat, so I have come to this step today."

古文：若贷罪许市，吾亦欲归耳。
现代文：如果允许我赎罪通市贸易，我愿意归降。
English: If I am allowed to trade through the atonement market, I am willing to surrender.

古文：但日本国王已死，各岛不相摄，须次第谕之。 
现代文：但日本国王已经死了，各岛无统一之权，须待逐个地劝说解决！ 
English: But the king of Japan is dead, and the islands have no right to unification, and must be persuaded one by one!

古文：因留洲而遣滶等护可愿归。
现代文：于是留下蒋洲，派遣汪誢等人护从陈可愿返回。
English: So he left Jiangzhou and sent Wang Qian and others to protect Chen Ke from returning.

古文：宗宪厚遇滶，令立功。
现代文：胡宗宪以厚礼接待了汪誢，并给他以立功的机会。
English: Hu Zongxian received Wang Qian with great courtesy and gave him the opportunity to perform meritorious deeds.

古文：滶遂破倭舟山，再破之列表。宗宪请于朝，赐滶等金币，纵之归。
现代文：汪誢先后在舟山、列表击败倭寇，胡宗宪为汪誢向朝廷请功，朝廷因此赐汪誢等人金币，让汪誢等人回岛。
English: Wang Qian defeated the wokou in Zhoushan and Lishui successively, and Hu Zongxian asked the imperial court to give credit to Wang Qian. As a result, the imperial court gave Wang Qian and others gold coins and let Wang Qian and others return to the island.

古文：滶大喜，以徐海入犯来告。
现代文：汪誢大为欢喜，并告之徐海意欲内犯的消息。
English: Wang Qian was greatly pleased and told Xu Hai that he wanted to be an insider.

古文：亡何，海果引大隅、萨摩二岛倭分掠瓜洲、上海、慈溪，自引万余人攻乍浦，陈东、麻叶与俱。
现代文：不久，徐海果然招引大隅、萨摩两岛的倭寇分路侵掠瓜洲、上海、慈奚谷，并自带万余人攻击乍浦，陈东、麻叶与其一道行动。
English: Soon, Xu Hai did indeed invite the wokou from Osumi and Satsuma to invade and plunder Guazhou, Shanghai, and Cisang Valley, and brought more than 10,000 people with him to attack Zhaopu. Chen Dong and Ma Ye acted together with him.

古文：宗宪壁塘栖，与巡抚阮鹗相犄角。
现代文：胡宗宪固守塘栖，与巡抚阮鹗相为犄角。
English: Hu Zongxian was a staunch defender of Tongsui and was on bad terms with the inspector Nguyen Xuan.

古文：练卒三千连破倭，至是败殁。赠都督同知，谥忠壮，赐祠皂林。鹗既入桐乡，贼乘胜围之。宗宪计曰： 与鹗俱陷无益也。 
现代文：正逢徐海进窥皂林，阮鹗派遣游击宗礼邀击徐海于崇德三里桥，三战三捷，此后不久宗礼竟兵败身死，阮鹗逃至桐乡。阮鄂部驻扎桐乡，徐海部众乘胜将其围困。胡宗宪私下计议说 ：与阮鹗同困于此，于战事无补。 
English: At the time when Xu Hai was looking into the soap forest, Nguyn Ánh sent the guerrilla Zong Li to invite and attack Xu Hai at the Three-Mile Bridge in Chongde, resulting in three battles and three victories. Shortly after that, Zong Li was defeated and died, and Nguyn Ánh fled to Tongxiang. Nguyn Hp stationed in Tongxiang, and the people of Xu Hai besieged him. Hu Zong Hn privately considered: "Being trapped here with Nguyn Hi is of no help in the war."

古文：遂还杭州，遣指挥夏正等持滶书要海降。
现代文：于是回到杭州，派指挥夏正等带着汪誢的书信劝降徐海。
English: So he returned to Hangzhou and sent conductor Xia Zheng and others to persuade Xu Hai to abdicate with a letter from Wang Qi.

古文：海惊曰： 老船主亦降乎？ 
现代文：徐海大惊说 ：老船主也归降吗？ 
English: Xu Hai was shocked and said, "Is the old ship owner also going to surrender?"

古文：时海病创，意颇动，因曰： 兵三路进，不由我一人也。 
现代文：这时徐海有伤在身，为此颇为心动，就说 ：兵分三路行动，由不得我一人呀。 
English: At this time, Xu Hai was wounded in the body, and was quite moved by this, so he said: "The soldiers are divided into three ways of action, I can't do it alone."

古文：正曰： 陈东已他有约，所虑独公耳。 
现代文：夏正回答说 ：陈东已另有约定，所担心只有你徐公了。 
English: Xia Zheng replied, "Chen Dong has already made another appointment. You, Xu Gong, are the only one I am worried about."

古文：海遂疑东。
现代文：徐海于是对陈东有了猜疑。
English: Xu Hai then became suspicious of Chen Dong.

古文：而东知海营有宗宪使者，大惊，由是有隙。
现代文：而陈东知道徐海营中有胡宗宪的使者时，大为吃惊，由此与徐海有了隔阂。
English: When Chen Dong learned that there was an emissary of Hu Zongxian in Xu Hai's camp, he was very surprised, and thus had a rift with Xu Hai.

古文：正乘间说下海。海遣使来谢，索财物，宗宪报如其请。
现代文：夏正乘机说服徐海，徐海派遣使者前来联系，并索要财物，胡宗宪尽数满足他们的要求。
English: Xia took the opportunity to persuade Xu Hai, Xu Hai sent an emissary to contact and request property, Hu Zongxian did his best to meet their requirements.

古文：海乃归俘二百人，解桐乡围。
现代文：徐海于是放归官军俘虏二百人，放弃桐乡之围。
English: Xu Hai then released 200 prisoners of the government army and gave up the siege of Tongxiang.

古文：东留攻一日，亦去，复巢乍浦。
现代文：陈东坚持围攻一天之后也撤走，回到乍浦。
English: Chen Dong persisted in the siege and withdrew after a day, returning to Zhapu.

古文：鹗知不能当海，乃东渡钱塘御他贼。
现代文：阮鹗知道自己不是徐海的对手，也就东渡钱塘江以抵御其他海寇。
English: Knowing that he was no match for Xu Hai, Nguyn Th also crossed the Qiantang River to fend off other pirates.

古文：初，海入犯，焚其舟，示士卒无还心。
现代文：起初，徐海入侵，上岸后焚毁了自己的舟船，以向士卒表明其有进无退的决心。
English: At first, Xu Hai invaded and burned his own boat after coming ashore to show his soldiers that he had the determination to advance and not retreat.

古文：至是，宗宪使人语海曰： 若已内附，而吴淞江方有贼，何不击之以立功？
现代文：至此，胡宗宪派人跟徐海说： 你已归附官府，吴淞江那儿有贼人活动，何不出击贼人而立功呢？
English: At this point, Hu Zongxian sent a person to say to Xu Hai: You have been attached to the government, there are bandits operating in Wuxi River, why not make a contribution by attacking the bandits?

古文：且掠其舸，为缓急计。 
现代文：再说，可以掠夺其舟船，为自己进退之用。 
English: Moreover, you can plunder their boats and use them for your own advancement and retreat.

古文：海以为然，逆击之朱泾，斩三十余级。
现代文：徐海觉得此言不差，就迎击海盗于朱泾，杀死海盗三十多名。
English: Xu Hai thought this was not a bad idea, so he attacked the pirates in Zhu Xi, killing more than thirty pirates.

古文：宗宪令大猷潜焚其舟。
现代文：胡宗宪又密令俞大猷偷偷地焚毁徐海新近掠夺的舟船。
English: Hu Zongxian also secretly ordered Zou Daqi to secretly burn the ships that were recently plundered by Xu Hai.

古文：海心怖，以弟洪来质，献所戴飞鱼冠、坚甲、名剑及他玩好。
现代文：徐海心中恐惧，将弟弟徐洪作为人质，并献上自己平日佩戴的飞鱼冠、坚甲、名剑及其他珍奇玩物。
English: Terrified, Xu Hai took his younger brother Xu Hong as a hostage and presented him with the flying fish crown, armor, famous sword and other rare toys that he usually wears.

古文：宗宪因厚遇洪，谕海缚陈东、麻叶，许以世爵。
现代文：胡宗宪因此厚待徐洪，谕告徐海如能将陈东、麻叶绑来，将给他世袭的军功爵位。
English: Therefore, Hu Zongxian treated Xu Hong kindly and told Xu Hai that if he could bind Chen Dong and Ma Ye, he would give him the hereditary military merit title.

古文：海果缚叶以献。
现代文：不久，徐海果然将麻叶绑到。
English: Soon, Xu Hai tied the hemp leaf to the rope.

古文：宗宪解其缚，令以书致东图海，而阴泄其书于海。
现代文：胡宗宪亲手解掉绳索，并令麻叶写信陈东，要他除掉徐海，胡宗宪又设法将此信内容泄露给徐海。
English: Hu Zongxian personally untied the ropes and ordered Ma Ye to write a letter to Chen Dong, asking him to eliminate Xu Hai. Hu Zongxian also tried to leak the contents of this letter to Xu Hai.

古文：海怒。海妾受宗宪赂，亦说海。
现代文：徐海动怒，徐海之妾也受到胡宗宪的贿赂，劝徐海先除陈东。
English: Xu Hai became angry. Xu Hai's concubine was also bribed by Hu Zongxian to persuade Xu Hai to remove Chen Dong first.

古文：于是海复以计缚东来献，帅其众五百人去乍浦，别营梁庄。
现代文：于是徐海又设计捕捉陈东，献之于胡宗宪，并率其部众五百人离开乍浦，驻扎梁庄。
English: As a result, Xu Hai also designed to capture Chen Dong, dedicated it to Hu Zongxian, and led the 500 people of his department to leave Zhaopu and stationed in Liangzhuang.

古文：官军焚乍浦巢，斩首三百余级，焚溺死称是。
现代文：官军焚毁乍浦贼人营地，斩首三百余级，烧死、淹死的也不少。
English: The government army burned down the thieves' camp in Zhapu, beheaded more than 300 people, and burned and drowned many others.

古文：海遂刻日请降，先期猝至，留甲士平湖城外，率酋长百余，胄而入。文华等惧，欲勿许，宗宪强许之。
现代文：徐海于是确定了请降日期，不料徐海又提前猝然而来，将全副武装的壮士留在平湖城外，自带酋长一百余人，披甲前来，赵文华等很害怕，意欲拒绝徐海等人的晋见，胡宗宪执意接见。
English: Xu Hai then set a date for the surrender, but unexpectedly, Xu Hai suddenly came ahead of schedule, leaving the fully armed soldiers outside Pinghu City, bringing more than a hundred chiefs with him, and wearing armor. Zhao Wenhua and others were very afraid and wanted to refuse Xu Hai's and others' meeting, and Hu Zongxian insisted on meeting.

古文：海叩首伏罪，宗宪摩海顶，慰谕之。
现代文：徐海叩头请恕其罪，胡宗宪抚摸着徐海的脑袋，以好言安慰。
English: Xu Hai bowed his head and asked for forgiveness. Hu Zongxian stroked Xu Hai's head and consoled him with kind words.

古文：海自择沈庄屯其众。
现代文：徐海自己选择沈庄屯聚部众。
English: Xu Hai himself chose to gather his followers in Shenzhuang.

古文：沈庄者东西各一，以河为堑。
现代文：沈庄分为东西两庄，中间以河为界。
English: Shenzhuang is divided into two parts, east and west, with the river in the middle.

古文：宗宪居海东庄，以西庄处东党。
现代文：胡宗宪让徐海居东庄，西庄安排给陈东部众。
English: Hu Zongxian let Xu Hai live in the east village, and the west village was arranged for Chen Dongfang.

古文：令东致书其党曰： 督府檄海，夕擒若属矣。 
现代文：胡宗宪叫陈东致信余部说： 督府檄文徐海，要他晚上来捕捉你们。 
English: Hu Zongxian asked Chen Dong to send a letter to the rest of the government, saying: "Governor-General Xu Hai, tell him to come and capture you in the evening.

古文：东党惧，乘夜将攻海。海挟两妾走，间道中槊。
现代文：陈东余部大为恐惧，于是乘夜攻击徐海，徐海带着两个小妾逃走，在小路上为兵器所伤。
English: The rest of Chen Dong was very afraid, so he attacked Xu Hai at night. Xu Hai fled with two concubines and was wounded by a weapon on the path.

古文：明日，官军围之，海投水死。
现代文：第二天，官军包围了徐海，徐海投水而死。
English: The next day, the government army surrounded Xu Hai, and Xu Hai drowned.

古文：会卢镗亦擒辛五郎至。辛五郎者，大隅岛主弟也。
现代文：这时卢镗也擒获了辛五郎，辛五郎是大隅岛海盗头子的弟弟。
English: At this time, Lu Wei also captured Xin Goro, the younger brother of the leader of the pirates on Osumi Island.

古文：遂俘洪、东、叶、五郎及海首献京师。
现代文：于是胡宗宪将俘获的徐洪、陈东、麻叶、辛五郎及徐海首级进献京师。
English: As a result, Hu Zongxian presented the captured Xu Hong, Chen Dong, Ma Ye, Xin Goro and Xu Hai to the capital.

古文：帝大悦，行告庙礼，加宗宪右都御史，赐金币加等。
现代文：皇帝大悦，举行告庙大礼，胡宗宪加官为右都御史，加级赐赠金币。
English: Emperor Daye held a grand ceremony to announce the construction of the temple. Hu Zongxian was promoted to the post of Uto Imperial Historian and awarded gold coins.

古文：海余党奔舟山。宗宪令俞大猷雪夜焚其栅，尽死。
现代文：徐海余部逃往舟山，胡宗宪命俞大猷雪夜焚烧其营地，海盗尽数死于烈火之中。
English: The rest of Xu Hai fled to Zhoushan. Hu Zongxian ordered his camp to be burned on a snowy night. As many pirates as possible died in the fire.

古文：两浙倭渐平。
现代文：两浙的倭患渐次平息。
English: The yam diseases in Zhejiang and Zhejiang have gradually subsided.

古文：三十六年正月，阮鹗改抚福建，即命宗宪兼浙江巡抚事。
现代文：嘉靖三十六年正月，阮鹗改任福建巡抚，朝廷命胡宗宪兼任浙江巡抚之职。
English: In the first month of the 36th year of Jiajing, Nguyn Xuân was appointed as the governor of Fujian Province, and the imperial court ordered Hu Zongxian to also serve as the governor of Zhejiang Province.

古文：蒋洲在倭中，谕山口、丰后二岛主源义长、源义镇还被掠人口，具方物入贡。
现代文：蒋洲在倭人中，谕令山口、丰后二岛头目源义长、源义镇归还所掠大陆人口，并备办乡物入贡朝廷。
English: Among the Japanese, Chiang Chau ordered Yamaguchi, the leader of the two islands of Fengou, Minamoto no Yoshinaga, and Minamoto no Yoshinaga Town to return the plundered mainland population, and to prepare the countryside to pay tribute to the imperial court.

古文：宗宪以闻。诏厚赉其使，遣还。
现代文：宗宪以此事上报，嘉靖帝诏令厚赏来使，将其放还。
English: Zong Xian reported the matter, and Emperor Jiajing rewarded him with a fat reward and released him.

古文：至十月，复遣夷目善妙等随汪直来市，至岑港泊焉。
现代文：十月，又派夷人头目善妙等，随汪直前来贸易，停泊在岑港。
English: In October, he also sent the barbarian leader Zhenmiao and others to follow Wang Zhi to trade and anchor in Da Nang.

古文：浙人闻直以倭船至，大惊。
现代文：浙江人听说汪直乘倭人船只而来，大为惊异。
English: The people of Zhejiang were surprised to hear that Wang had come directly on a Japanese ship.

古文：巡按御史王本固亦言不便，朝臣谓宗宪且酿东南大祸。
现代文：巡按御史王本固也上言不宜，朝臣说胡宗宪将酿东南大祸。
English: It was also inappropriate for the chief of the Imperial Household Agency, Prince Motogure, to make such a statement. The courtier said that Hu Zongxian would bring great disaster to Southeast Asia.

古文：直遣滶诣宗宪曰： 我等奉诏来，将息兵安境。谓宜使者远迎，宴犒交至。
现代文：汪直遣汪誢前来晋见胡宗宪说 ：我们奉诏而来，为的是止息兵戈，安定边境，应该有使者远道迎接，设宴犒赏。
English: Wang Zhizhong sent Wang Qian to Jin to meet Hu Zongxian and said, "We have come by imperial edict in order to stop the fighting and stabilize the border. An envoy should come from afar to welcome us and give us a banquet as a reward."

古文：今盛陈军容，禁舟楫往来，公绐我耶？ 
现代文：现今却戒备森严，禁止舟船往来，胡公是不是在欺骗我？ 
English: Now, however, they are on high alert, and boat traffic is prohibited. Is Hu Gong deceiving me?

古文：宗宪解谕至再，直不信。
现代文：胡宗宪再三解释，汪直不肯相信。
English: Hu Zongxian repeatedly explained, but Wang Zhi refused to believe.

古文：乃令其子以书招之，直曰： 儿何愚也。汝父在，厚汝。父来，阖门死矣。 
现代文：宗宪又令汪直的儿子写信招请汪直，汪直说： 儿子你多蠢，你父亲在，就厚待你，父亲来了，全家同归于尽。 
English: Zong Xian also ordered Wang Zhi's son to write a letter to invite Wang Zhi. Wang Zhi said: "How stupid you are, son. When your father is here, he treats you well. When your father comes, the whole family will be destroyed."

古文：因要一贵官为质。
现代文：因而要求有一朝廷命官做人质。
English: He therefore demanded that a court-appointed official be taken hostage.

古文：宗宪立遣夏正偕滶往。
现代文：胡宗宪立即派夏正与汪誢一同前往。
English: Hu Zongxian immediately sent Xia Zheng and Wang Qi to accompany him.

古文：宗宪尝预为赦直疏，引滶入卧内，阴窥之。
现代文：胡宗宪曾预先撰写了请赦汪直罪疏，并将汪誢引入卧室内，偷看了奏疏内容。
English: Hu Zongxian had previously written a petition to pardon Wang Zhizhong, and brought Wang Qian into the bedroom to peek at the contents of the petition.

古文：滶语直，疑稍解，乃偕碧川、清溪入谒。宗宪慰藉之甚至，令至杭见本固。
现代文：汪誢告诉了汪直，汪直的疑心逐渐解除，于是偕同叶碧川、王清溪进谒胡宗宪，胡宗宪尽心抚慰，并令汪直等去杭州见王本固。
English: Wang Zeng told Wang Zhi, and Wang Zhi's suspicions were gradually lifted, so he went with Ye Bichuan and Wang Qingxi to visit Hu Zongxian. Hu Zongxian consoled Wang Zongxian with all his heart, and ordered Wang Zhi to go to Hangzhou to see Wang Bengu.

古文：本固下直等于狱。
现代文：王本固将汪直等人关进监狱。
English: Wang Bengu put Wang Zhi and others in prison.

古文：宗宪疏请曲贷直死，俾戍海上，系番夷心。
现代文：宗宪上疏请为汪直赎死罪，让汪直戍守海疆，以笼络番夷之心。
English: On the patriarchal constitution, Wang Zhi was asked to atone for the death penalty, let Wang Zhi guard the sea, and win the hearts of the barbarians.

古文：本固争之强，而外议疑宗宪纳贼赂。
现代文：王本固上书强烈反对，而社会舆论说宗宪受了汪直等人的贿赂。
English: Wang Bengu strongly opposed the petition, while public opinion said that Zong Xian had been bribed by Wang Zhi and others.

古文：宗宪惧，易词以闻。
现代文：胡宗宪很害怕，就改变了主意。
English: Hu Zongxian was scared and changed his mind.

古文：直论死，碧川、清溪戍边。
现代文：汪直论以死罪，叶碧川、王清溪充军边塞。
English: Wang Zhi argued that capital punishment should be used, and Ye Bichuan and Wang Qingxi were used as border fortresses.

古文：滶与谢和遂支解夏正，栅舟山，阻岑港而守。
现代文：汪誢与谢和于是肢解了夏正，驻扎舟山，守驻岑港。
English: Wang Qian and Xie He then dismembered Xia Zheng, stationed in Zhoushan, and garrisoned in Da Nang.

古文：官军四面围之，贼死斗，多陷殁者。
现代文：官军四面合围，贼人殊死搏斗，伤亡甚多。
English: The government army was surrounded on all sides, the thieves fought to the death, and there were many casualties.

古文：至明年春，新倭复大至，严旨责宗宪。
现代文：到了第二年春天，大批新的倭寇增援而来，朝廷严旨斥责宗宪。
English: In the spring of the following year, a large number of new wako reinforcements arrived, and the Imperial Court severely reprimanded Soken.

古文：宗宪惧得罪，上疏陈战功，谓贼可指日灭。
现代文：胡宗宪害怕朝廷降罪，上疏陈述战功，说贼人指日可灭。
English: Hu Zongxian was afraid of the imperial court's downgrading of the crime, so he presented his war exploits and said that the thief could be eliminated in a day.

古文：所司论其欺诞。
现代文：有关部门指斥其为荒谬之言。
English: Relevant departments denounced it as absurd.

古文：帝怒，尽夺诸将大猷等职，切让宗宪，令克期平贼。
现代文：嘉靖帝大怒，尽数剥夺俞大猷等将官之职，严厉地斥责胡宗宪，命令他在指定期限平定倭患。
English: Emperor Jiajing was furious, deprived the general officers such as Zou Daqian of their positions as much as possible, severely reprimanded Hu Zongxian, and ordered him to quell the Japanese invasion within a specified period.

古文：时赵文华已得罪死，宗宪失内援，见寇患未已，思自媚于上，会得白鹿于舟山，献之。帝大悦，行告庙礼，厚赉银币。
现代文：这时赵文华已获罪处死，胡宗宪失去内援，他见倭患来了，想讨好皇上，恰好在舟山得到一只白鹿，胡宗宪将白鹿献于皇上，嘉靖帝大为高兴，行告庙祭礼，厚赏银币。
English: At this time, Zhao Wenhua had been sentenced to death, Hu Zongxian had lost his internal support, he saw the Japanese invasion coming and wanted to please the emperor. He happened to get a white deer in Zhoushan. Hu Zongxian offered the white deer to the emperor. Emperor Jiajing was very pleased, held a temple festival and rewarded him with a large amount of silver coins.

古文：未几，复以白鹿献。帝益大喜，告谢玄极宝殿及太庙，百官称贺，加宗宪秩。
现代文：不久，胡宗宪又上一只白鹿，嘉靖帝愈发高兴，在玄极宝殿及太庙行祭礼酬谢，朝廷百官也前来祝贺，赐加胡宗宪俸禄。
English: Soon, Hu Zongxian had another white stag, and Emperor Jiajing became more and more happy. A ritual was held at the Xuanji Treasure Hall and the Imperial Temple to thank him. Hundreds of officials from the imperial court also came to congratulate and give Hu Zongxian a reward.

古文：既而岑港之贼徙巢柯梅，官军屡攻不能克。
现代文：不久之后，岑港海寇移驻柯梅，官军多次进攻而不能得手。
English: Soon after, the Da Nang sea pirates moved to Ke Mei, and the government army attacked several times without success.

古文：御史李瑚劾宗宪诱汪直启衅。
现代文：御史李瑚弹劾胡宗宪，说他诱捕汪直，挑起衅端。
English: The imperial historian Li Hu impeached Hu Zongxian, saying that he had entrapped Wang Zhi and provoked a provocation.

古文：本固及给事中刘尧诲亦劾其老师纵寇，请追夺功赏。
现代文：王本固和给事中刘尧诲也上疏弹劾老师放纵海寇，请剥夺胡宗宪的各项奖赏。
English: Wang Ben Guhe gave the matter to Liu Zhenren and also impeached the teacher for indulging in sea pirates. Please deprive Hu Zongxian of all rewards.

古文：帝命廷议之，咸言宗宪功多，宜勿罢。
现代文：嘉靖帝命群臣讨论，大家都说胡宗宪功劳多，不宜罢免。
English: When Emperor Jiajing's order was discussed by his ministers, they all said that Hu Zongxian had done a lot of work and should not be dismissed.

古文：帝嘉其擒直功，令居职如故。
现代文：嘉靖念其擒获汪直之功，命令胡宗宪仍官居原职。
English: Jiajing ordered Hu Zongxian to remain in his post in memory of his achievement in capturing Wang Zhi.

古文：贼之徙柯梅也，造巨舰为遁计。
现代文：海寇移驻柯梅后，制造巨大的舰船作为逃走的运载工具。
English: After relocating to Keme, the pirates built huge ships to use as escape vehicles.

古文：及舰成，宗宪利其去，不击。
现代文：大船竣工后，胡宗宪认为海寇走有利于自己，因此，并不攻击敌人。
English: After the completion of the big ship, Hu Zongxian thought that it would be beneficial for the pirates to go, so he did not attack the enemy.

古文：贼扬帆泊浯屿，纵掠闽海州县。
现代文：海寇将大船驾驶到浯屿，大肆攻掠福建沿海州县。
English: The pirates steered the big ship to Lantau Island and plundered Fujian's coastal prefectures.

古文：闽人大噪，谓宗宪嫁祸。
现代文：福建人大噪，说胡宗宪嫁祸闽人。
English: Fujian people make a lot of noise, saying that Hu Zongxian's daughter-in-law is a bad person.

古文：御史瑚再劾宗宪三大罪。
现代文：御史李瑚又疏劾胡宗宪三大罪。
English: Shi Lihu also impeached Hu Zongxian for three major crimes.

古文：瑚与大猷皆闽人，宗宪疑大猷漏言，劾大猷不力击，大猷遂被逮。
现代文：李瑚与俞大猷都是福建籍人，胡宗宪怀疑俞大猷说了什么，于是上疏弹劾俞大猷消极作战，因此俞大猷被捕入狱。
English: Li Hu and Zou Daqi were both from Fujian. Hu Zongxian doubted what Zou Daqi had said, so Shang Su impeached Zou Daqi for passive fighting, and Zou Daqi was arrested and imprisoned.

古文：当是时，江北、福建、广东皆中倭。
现代文：此时，江北、福建、广东皆为倭寇所害。
English: At this time, Jiangbei, Fujian, and Guangdong were all victimized by wako.

古文：宗宪虽尽督东南数十府，道远，但遥领而已，不能遍经画。
现代文：胡宗宪虽然尽督东南数十府，但道路迢迢，只是遥控而已，不能详加筹划。
English: Although Hu Zongxian did his best to govern dozens of prefectures in the southeast, the road network was only remotely controlled and could not be planned in detail.

古文：然小胜，辄论功受赉无虚月。即败衄，不与其罪。
现代文：然而一有小胜就论功奖赏，这样的事无月不有，如果战败了，却不追究责任。
English: However, if there is a small victory, there will be a reward for merit, such a thing never happens. If there is a defeat, there will be no accountability.

古文：三十八年，贼大掠温、台，别部复寇滨海诸县。
现代文：嘉靖三十八年，海寇大举攻掠温州、台州，并有另外一支海寇侵扰沿海诸县。
English: In the 38th year of the Jiajing Dynasty, the sea pirates attacked and plundered Wenzhou and Taizhou on a large scale, and another sea pirate invaded the coastal counties.

古文：给事中罗嘉宾、御史庞尚鹏奉诏勘之。言宗宪养寇，当置重典，帝不问。
现代文：给事中罗嘉宾、御史庞尚鹏奉诏调查此事，说胡宗宪纵养海寇，当置重刑。嘉靖帝并不追究。
English: Luo Jiabin and the imperial historian Pang Shangpeng ordered an investigation into the matter, saying that Hu Zongxian had raised sea eagles and should be given a heavy sentence. Emperor Jiajing did not investigate.

古文：明年，论平汪直功，加太子太保。
现代文：第二年，论平汪直之功，加胡宗宪为太子太保。
English: In the second year, on the merits of Ping Wang Zhi, Hu Zongxian was appointed as the Crown Prince.

古文：宗宪多权术，喜功名，因文华结严嵩父子，岁遗金帛子女珍奇淫巧无数。
现代文：胡宗宪善用权术，喜取功名。通过赵文华结纳严嵩父子，每年进献金币、玉帛、奴婢及珍奇淫巧无数。
English: Hu Zongxian was good at the use of power and liked to gain fame. Through Zhao Wenhua, he paid tribute to his father and son, and donated countless gold coins, jade ingots, slaves and rare and wonderful things every year.

古文：文华死，宗宪结嵩益厚，威权震东南。
现代文：赵文华死后，胡宗宪更加巴结严嵩，威权震于东南。
English: After the death of Zhao Wenhua, Hu Zongxian became even more arrogant, and authoritarianism spread to the southeast.

古文：性善宾客，招致东南士大夫预谋议，名用是起。
现代文：胡宗宪善待宾客，常招请东南士大夫参预军事谋议，名利双收。
English: Hu Zongxian treated his guests well, often invited Southeastern scholars and doctors to participate in pre-military deliberation, and received both fame and fortune.

古文：至技术杂流，豢养皆有恩，能得其力。
现代文：至于身怀各种技艺的各色人等，都予蓄养，施之于恩赏，也就能得其死力。
English: As for the colorful people with various skills, they are all nurtured, and if they are rewarded, they can also get their death.

古文：然创编提均徭之法，加赋额外，民为困敝，而所侵官帑、敛富人财物亦不赀。
现代文：然而胡宗宪创制均徭的征纳法，额外加征田赋，人民为此困敝不堪。而且他还侵吞国库，聚敛富人财物无数。
English: However, Hu Zongxin created the uniform land tax collection method, and the additional land tax collection was increased, so the people were in dire straits. In addition, he also embezzled the national treasury and collected countless wealth from the rich.

古文：嘉宾、尚鹏还，上宗宪侵帑状，计三万三千，他册籍沉灭。
现代文：罗嘉宾、庞尚鹏还朝，上疏申诉胡宗宪侵吞国库，计银三万三千两，其他则无典册可寻。
English: Luo Jiabin and Pang Shangpeng also went to Shangxo to appeal against Hu Zongxian's embezzlement of the national treasury, which amounted to 33,000 taels of silver. No other documents can be found.

古文：宗宪自辩，言： 臣为国除贼，用间用饵，非小惠不成大谋。 
现代文：胡宗宪上疏自辩，说 ：臣为国除贼，下诱饵，施用反间计，没有小恩小惠，是难成大事的。 
English: Hu Zongxian defended himself, saying: "It is difficult to achieve great things if the vassal is the country's thief, bait, and countermeasures are applied, and there are no small favors.

古文：帝以为然，更慰谕之。
现代文：嘉靖帝对宗宪的做法表示理解，抚慰再三。
English: Emperor Jiajing expressed his understanding of the practice of the patriarchal constitution and repeatedly consoled him.

古文：寻上疏，请得节制巡抚及操江都御史，如三边故事。
现代文：不久，胡宗宪上疏，请节制巡抚及掌管江都御史之权，如三边旧例。
English: Soon after, Hu Zongxian issued an edict, asking the governor to exercise restraint and take control of the power of the imperial history of the Yangtze River, as in the old case of the three sides.

古文：帝即晋兵部尚书，如其请。
现代文：嘉靖帝即晋胡宗宪为兵部尚书，一如所请。
English: Emperor Jiajing promoted Hu Zongxian to the post of military commander, as requested.

古文：复献白龟二、五色芝五。
现代文：胡宗宪又献白龟二只、五色芝五株。
English: Hu Zongxian also donated two white turtles and five plants of five-coloured grass.

古文：帝为谢玄告庙如前，赉宗宪加等。
现代文：皇帝为此又到玄宝殿的太庙祭告酬谢，并加倍赏赐宗宪。
English: For this, the emperor also went to the temple festival of the Gem Palace to express his gratitude, and doubled the reward to the patriarch.

古文：明年，江西盗起，又兼制江西。
现代文：第二年，江西发生农民起义，胡宗宪兼职节制江西。
English: In the following year, a peasant uprising occurred in Jiangxi, and Hu Zongxian became the ruler of Jiangxi.

古文：未至，总兵官戚继光已平贼。
现代文：宗宪未到，总兵官戚继光已剿平地方。
English: Before Zong Xian arrived, the general's officer relative Jiguang had already leveled the place.

古文：九月奏言： 贼屡犯宁、台、温，我师前后俘斩一千四百有奇，贼悉荡平。 
现代文：九月胡宗宪奏称 ：盗贼屡次侵犯宁、台、温诸地，我部前后俘虏斩首一千四百多级，贼众全部剿灭。 
English: In September, Hu Zongxian wrote: "Thieves have repeatedly invaded Ning, Tai, and Wen provinces. More than 1,400 of our prisoners were beheaded, and all the thieves were annihilated."

古文：帝悦，加少保。
现代文：皇帝高兴，加胡宗宪少保衔。
English: The emperor was pleased, adding that Hu Zongxian would retain his title.

古文：两广平巨盗张琏，亦论宗宪功。
现代文：两广平定巨盗张琏，也归功于宗宪。
English: Zong Xian is also credited with the pacification of the two provinces and the defeat of the great robber Zhang Xuan.

古文：时嵩已败，大学士徐阶曰： 两广平贼，浙何与焉？ 
现代文：这时严嵩已倒台，大学士徐阶说： 两广讨平贼众，这跟浙江有什么关系呢？ 
English: At this time, Yan Song had already fallen from power, and the university scholar Xu Ji said: "Two broadsides to level the thieves, what does this have to do with Zhejiang?

古文：仅赐银币。
现代文：于是皇帝仅赐给银币。
English: So the emperor gave him only silver coins.

古文：未几，南京给事中陆凤仪劾其党严嵩及奸欺贪淫十大罪，得旨逮问。
现代文：不久，南京给事中陆凤仪疏劾胡宗宪党附严嵩以及奸欺贪淫十大罪状，朝廷乃下旨逮捕拿问。
English: Not long after, Lu Fengyi was impeached by the Nanjing Municipal People's Procuratorate of the People's Republic of China for being a member of Hu Zong's Constitutionalist Party, as well as ten counts of adultery, bullying, and corruption. The imperial court ordered the arrest and interrogation.

古文：及宗宪至，帝曰： 宗宪非嵩党。朕拔用八九年，人无言者。
现代文：等宗宪押到时，嘉靖帝说 ：宗宪不是严嵩之党羽，我选拔任用他八九年，人们对他并无微词。
English: When Zong Xian arrived, Emperor Jiajing said: "Zong Xian is not a partisan of Yan Song. I selected and appointed him in 1989, and people have nothing bad to say about him.

古文：自累献祥瑞，为群邪所疾。
现代文：自从屡献祥瑞之物后，被群邪嫉妒。
English: After repeatedly donating auspicious and auspicious things, he was envied by evil spirits.

古文：且初议获直予五等封，今若加罪，后谁为我任事者？
现代文：并且开始讨论捕获汪直功劳时答应给他五等封爵，现在如果加罪于他，以后谁还为我做事呢。
English: And when he began to discuss the merits of capturing Wang Zhi, he promised to give him a fifth-class knighthood. Now, if he is punished, who will do things for me in the future?

古文：其释令闲住。 
现代文：放他回去闲住吧。 
English: Let him go back and stay there.

古文：久之，以万寿节献秘术十四。帝大悦，将复用矣。
现代文：事情过了很久，胡宗宪在万寿节进献秘术十四条，嘉靖帝大为喜悦，又考虑起用他。
English: After a long time had passed, Emperor Jiajing was greatly pleased when Emperor Hu Zongxian presented him with the Fourteen Articles of Consecration on the Day of Longevity, and he also considered appointing him.

古文：会御史汪汝正籍罗龙文家，上宗宪手书，乃被劾时自拟旨授龙文以达世蕃者，遂逮下狱。
现代文：此时正逢御史汪汝正抄没罗龙文家，得到一件胡宗宪手写的文书，原来是胡宗宪被弹劾时自拟圣旨让罗龙文转给严世蕃的，于是将胡宗宪逮捕下狱。
English: At this time, Wang Ru, the imperial historian, was in the process of copying Luo Long's literary works, and obtained a document handwritten by Hu Zongxian. It turned out that when Hu Zongxian was impeached, he made up a will to have Luo Long's literary works transferred to Yan Shiyan. Therefore, he arrested Hu Zongxian and sent him to prison.

古文：御史宋仪望等交章劾，逮下刑部。
现代文：胡宗宪上疏自叙讨平倭患之功，说自己因献祥瑞得罪言官，且告汪汝正接受赃物之事。
English: Hu Zongxian went on to extol his own contribution to alleviating the suffering of the Japanese people, saying that he was the first to be punished for offering Xiang Rui, and accused Wang Rui of receiving stolen goods.

古文：严嵩为属法司，仅黜为民。所侵饷数，浮于宗宪，追还之官。曹邦辅，字子忠，定陶人。
现代文：嘉靖帝对胡宗宪还是有所眷恋，并将汪汝正捕入狱中。胡宗宪最终病死狱中，汪汝正获释。万历初年，恢复胡宗宪官职，追谥襄懋。曹邦辅，字子忠，定陶人。
English: Emperor Jiajing was still attached to Hu Zongxian, and Wang Ruzheng was arrested and imprisoned. Hu Zongxian eventually died of illness in prison, and Wang Ruzheng was released. In the first year of the Wanli era, Hu Zongxian was reinstated as an official, and Xiang Yu was pursued. Cao Bangyu, Zizi Zhong, Ding Tao Ren.

古文：嘉靖十一年进士。
现代文：嘉靖十一年进士。
English: He entered the priesthood in the 11th year of Jiajing.

古文：历知元城、南和，以廉干称。
现代文：历任元城、南和知县，以廉洁干练著称。
English: Successively held positions in Yuancheng and Nanhe County, and is known for his integrity and ability.

古文：擢御史，巡视河东盐政。
现代文：提升为御史，巡视河东盐政。
English: Promoted to the position of Imperial Historian, he supervised the administration of salt in the eastern part of the province.

古文：巡按陕西，劾总督张珩等冒功，皆谪戍。
现代文：巡按陕西，弹劾总督张珩等人冒功，他们都谪戍边关。
English: They have been patrolling Shaanxi, impeaching Governor Zhang Ye and others for taking credit, and they are all on the border.

古文：出为湖广副使，补河南。
现代文：调任湖广副使，补职河南。
English: He was transferred to the post of deputy envoy to Hubei and Henan.

古文：柘城贼师尚诏反，陷归德。
现代文：柘城叛贼师尚诏造反，攻陷归德。
English: The traitors in Lucheng rebelled and returned to Germany.

古文：检校董纶率民兵巷战，手刃数贼，与其妻贾氏俱死之。
现代文：检校董纶率民兵巷战，手刃数贼，与他的妻子贾氏都战死。
English: School inspector Dong Ye led the militia in a street battle, and he and his wife Jia Shi both died in the battle.

古文：又陷柘城，劫举人陈闻诗为帅。
现代文：敌贼又攻陷柘城，劫获举人陈闻诗做主帅。
English: The enemy attacked and captured the city of Handan, and made Zhuo the head coach.

古文：不听，斩从者胁之。
现代文：陈闻诗不听，斩其随从来要挟他。
English: Chen Wen did not listen to the poem and threatened him.

古文：闻诗绐曰： 必欲我行，毋杀人，毋纵火。 
现代文：陈闻诗哄骗他们说： 一定要我同行，就不要杀人，不要放火。 
English: Chen Wenshi cajoled them, saying, "If you want me to go with you, don't kill anyone and don't set fire to anything."

古文：贼许诺，拥上马。
现代文：敌贼许诺，将他拥上马。
English: The ruffian promised to take him up on his horse.

古文：不食三日，至鹿邑自缢。
现代文：他三天绝食，到鹿邑自缢而死。
English: He went on a three-day hunger strike and hanged himself in Ruyi.

古文：贼围太康，都指挥尚允绍与战鄢陵，败绩。
现代文：敌贼包围太康，都指挥尚允绍与他们在鄢陵交战，被敌贼打败。
English: The enemy surrounded Taikang, and the commander Shang Yunshao fought with them in Fuling, and was defeated by the enemy.

古文：允绍复击贼于霍山，贼围之，兵无敢进。
现代文：尚允绍又在霍山攻击敌贼，被敌贼包围，官兵没有敢前进的。
English: Shang Yunshao attacked the enemy in Huoshan again. Surrounded by the enemy, the officers and soldiers did not dare to advance.

古文：邦辅斩最后者，士卒竞进。
现代文：曹邦辅将走在最后的士卒斩首，士卒就竞相前进。
English: Cao Bangyu will behead the last soldier to walk, and the soldiers will race forward.

古文：贼大溃，擒斩六百余人。
现代文：敌贼大溃，被擒斩的敌人有六百多人。
English: The enemy was routed, and more than six hundred of the enemy were beheaded.

古文：尚诏走莘县，被擒。
现代文：师尚诏跑到莘县，被擒。
English: His teacher, Shang Zhao, ran to Lixian County and was arrested.

古文：贼起四十余日，破府一，县八，杀戳十余万。
现代文：敌贼起兵四十多天，攻破一府、八县，杀戮十多万人。
English: The enemy bandits raised an army for more than forty days, invaded one prefecture and eight counties, and killed more than one hundred thousand people.

古文：邦辅亟战，歼之。
现代文：曹邦辅与敌人急战，将他们歼灭。
English: Cao Bangyu fought a quick battle with the enemy and annihilated them.

古文：诏赉银币，擢山西右参政，迁浙江按察使。
现代文：皇帝下诏令赏赐银币，升曹邦辅为山西右参政，迁浙江按察使。
English: The emperor issued a decree to award silver coins, promoted Cao Bangfu to the right to participate in politics in Shanxi, and transferred Zhejiang to the inspector.

古文：三十四年拜右佥都御史，巡抚应天。
现代文：三十四年拜封为右佥都御史，巡抚应天。
English: In the 34th year of Baifang, he was appointed as the right-hand magistrate of the capital and the governor of Yingtian.

古文：倭聚柘林。
现代文：倭寇聚集柘林。
English: The wako are gathering in Yulin.

古文：其党自绍兴窜，转掠杭、严、徽、宁、太平，遂犯南京，破溧水，抵宜兴。
现代文：他们的党徒从绍兴逃窜转掠杭、严、徽、宁、太平，接着侵犯南京，攻破溧水，抵达宜兴。
English: Their party members fled from Shaoxing to pillage Hang, Yan, Hui, Ning, and Taiping, then invaded Nanjing, broke through Surabaya, and arrived in Yixing.

古文：为官军所迫，奔浒墅。
现代文：被官军追逼，逃奔浒墅。
English: He was chased by government troops and fled to his villa.

古文：副总兵俞大猷、副使任环数邀击之，而柘林余贼已进据陶宅。
现代文：副总兵俞大猷、副使任环多次在半路上攻击他们，但柘林的余贼已经进据陶宅。
English: The vice-commander-in-chief of the soldiers, Dazhao, and the vice-commander, Renhuan, attacked them many times on the way, but the remaining thieves in Yulin had already entered the pottery house.

古文：邦辅督副使王崇古围之，佥事董邦政、把总娄宇协剿。
现代文：曹邦辅督副使王崇古包围他们，佥事董邦政、把总娄宇协助剿敌。
English: Cao Bang assistant governor and deputy envoy Wang Chonggu encircled them, dispatched Dong Bangzheng, and sent the general Yu Yu to assist in defeating the enemy.

古文：贼走太湖，追及之，尽歼其众。
现代文：敌贼逃跑到太湖，被官军追上，并被全部歼灭。
English: The traitors fled to Taihu Lake, where they were caught by the government troops and completely annihilated.

古文：副将何卿师溃，邦辅援之。
现代文：副将何卿的军队被敌人打败，曹邦辅援助他们。
English: Vice Admiral He Xie's army was defeated by the enemy, and Cao Bangfu assisted them.

古文：以火器破贼舟，前后俘斩六百余人。
现代文：用火器攻破敌贼战船，前后俘歼六百多人。
English: They used firearms to break through the enemy's warships and captured and killed more than six hundred people.

古文：侍郎赵文华欲攘其功，邦辅捷书先奏，文华大恨。
现代文：侍郎赵文华想窃取他们的功劳。曹邦辅的报捷之书先奏上皇帝，赵文华非常厌恨。
English: The attendant, Zhao Wenhua, wanted to steal the credit from them. Cao Bangsuo's report on the success of the book went to the emperor first. Zhao Wenhua was very disgusted.

古文：既而与浙江巡按御史胡宗宪会邦辅攻陶宅贼，诸营皆溃。
现代文：既而赵文华与浙江巡按御史胡宗宪会同曹邦辅进攻陶宅的敌贼，诸路营军都被敌人击败。
English: As soon as Zhao Wenhua and Hu Zong Xianhui, the inspector-general of Zhejiang Province, together with Cao Bangfu, attacked the enemy thieves in the pottery house, all the battalions were defeated by the enemy.

古文：贼退，邦辅进攻之，复败，坐夺俸。
现代文：敌贼撤退时，曹邦辅进攻他们，又被打败，被剥夺俸禄。
English: When the invaders retreated, Cao Bangfu attacked them and was defeated and deprived of his salary.

古文：文华奏邦辅避难击易，致师后期，总督杨宜亦奏邦辅故违节制。
现代文：赵文华上奏告曹邦辅避难击易，致使战败，总督杨宜也奏曹邦辅故意违抗节制。
English: Zhao Wenhua sent a report accusing Cao Bangfu of taking refuge and defecting, which led to defeat. Governor Yang Yi also accused Cao Bangfu of deliberately defying restraint.

古文：给事中夏栻、孙浚争之，得无罪。
现代文：给事中夏木式、孙为曹邦辅抗争，曹邦辅没有获罪。
English: Cao Bangfu was not found guilty in the case, in which Xia Muxi and Sun fought for Cao Bangfu.

古文：文华还京，奏余贼且尽，而巡按御史周如斗又奏失事状，帝颇疑文华。
现代文：赵文华回到京城，上奏余贼已扫尽，而巡按御史周如斗又奏失败的情况，皇帝很怀疑赵文华。
English: When Zhao Wenhua returned to the capital, he was very suspicious of Zhao Wenhua, since he had already wiped out the remaining bandits, and the inspector-general of history, Zhou Ru Ru Dui, had also failed.

古文：文华因言： 贼易灭，督抚非人，致败。
现代文：赵文华因而说 ：敌贼容易歼灭，督抚的人员不当，致使战败。
English: As a result, Zhao Wenhua said: the enemy was easy to annihilate, and the supervisors were improper, resulting in defeat.

古文：臣昔论邦辅，栻、浚遂媒孽臣。
现代文：我过去论告曹邦辅，夏木式、孙却生事诬蔑我。
English: In the past, I sued Cao Bangfu, but Natsuki and Sun slandered me.

古文：东南涂炭何时解？ 
现代文：东南涂炭何时能解除啊。 
English: When will the southeastern charcoal coating be lifted?

古文：乃逮系邦辅，谪戍朔州。
现代文：于是逮捕拘囚曹邦辅，将他谪戍朔州。
English: So they arrested the prisoner Cao Bangwei and took him to Shuozhou.

古文：隆庆元年，杨博为吏部，起邦辅左副都御史，协理院事。
现代文：隆庆元年，杨博治理吏部，起用曹邦辅为左副都御史，协助处理院事。
English: In the first year of the Longqing era, the Yangbo Administration Staff Department appointed Cao Bangfu as the left deputy of the Metropolitan Historian to assist in dealing with the affairs of the Academy.

古文：进兵部右侍郎，理戎政。
现代文：晋官兵部右侍郎，管理军政。
English: He was the right hand man of the Jin officer Hyobu, and managed military affairs.

古文：寻以左侍郎兼右佥都御史，总督蓟、辽、保定军务。
现代文：不久以左侍郎兼右佥都御史，总督蓟、辽、保定军务。
English: He was soon appointed as the left-hand steward and the right-hand steward of the capital, and the military affairs of the governors Shun, Liao, and Baoding.

古文：言修治边墙非上策，宜急练兵；兵练而后边事可议。
现代文：他说修治边墙并非上策，应当紧急练兵；兵练成之后才能谋议边事。
English: He said that repairing the border wall was not the best policy, and that soldiers should be trained urgently. Only after soldiers have been trained can they discuss border affairs.

古文：以给事中张卤言，召为右都御史，掌院事。
现代文：用给事中张卤的话，召曹邦辅为右都御史，掌管院务。
English: In the words of Zhang Huan, who was present at the event, Cao Bangfu was summoned to be the governor of the right capital, in charge of the affairs of the palace.

古文：帝以京营事重，更协理为阅视，令付大臣知兵者，遂以左都御史召还，任之。
现代文：皇帝因京营事重，改协理为阅视，将京营交给懂得军事的大臣，遂以左都御史召还任职。
English: Due to the seriousness of the Beijing campaign, the emperor changed the co-chairman to a reading, handed over the Beijing campaign to a minister who understood military affairs, and then called him back to his post as the Left Capital Imperial Historian.

古文：已，从恭顺侯吴继爵言，复改阅视为提督。
现代文：之后，听从恭顺侯吴继爵的话，又改阅视为提督。
English: After that, he listened to the words of Gongshun marquis Wu Jizhe and re-read it as an admiral.

古文：未几，转南京户部尚书。
现代文：不久，转为南京户部尚书。
English: Soon, he was transferred to the Nanjing Household Department of Shangshu.

古文：奏督仓主事张振选不奉约束。
现代文：上奏督仓主事张振选不听管束。
English: Zhang Zhenxuan, the person in charge of the superintendent's office, did not listen to the rules.

古文：吏部因言： 往昔执政喜人悦己，属吏恃为奥援。
现代文：吏部因而说： 过去执政喜欢别人取悦自己，属下的官吏依靠它来作为奥援。
English: Therefore, the Ministry of Public Administration said: In the past, the government liked others to please itself, and the officials under it relied on it as a source of aid to Austria.

古文：构陷堂上官，至屈体降意，倒置名分。
现代文：构陷朝堂上官员，以至于屈身降意，倒置名份。
English: He framed officials in the Imperial Court, to the extent that they caved in and reversed their names.

古文：在外巡按御史亦曲庇进士推知，监司贤不肖出其口吻。
现代文：在外的巡按御史也曲庇进士推为知己，监司贤与不肖出自他的口吻。
English: Outside the patrol, the inspector was also a confidant of Qu Bi Jin Shi, and the supervisors Xian and Xiaoxiao came from his mouth.

古文：害政无甚于此。 
现代文：祸害政治没有比这更厉害的。 
English: The scourge of politics does not get much worse than this.

古文：穆宗深然其言，为黜振选，饬内外诸司，然迄不能变。
现代文：穆宗深深感到这些话是对的，于是贬黜张振选，整治内外诸司，但终不能改变。
English: Mu Zong deeply felt that these words were right, so he belittled Zhang Zhenxing and rectified the internal and external departments, but ultimately could not change.

古文：邦辅累乞骸骨，不听。
现代文：曹邦辅多次乞求退休，皇帝不听。
English: Cao Bangyu begged to retire many times, but the emperor would not listen.

古文：万历元年给由赴阙，复以病求去，且言辛爱有窥觎志，宜慎防之。
现代文：万历元年获准去京师，又因病请求离去，并且说辛爱有非分的企图，应当谨慎防备他。
English: In the first year of the Wanli era, he was allowed to go to Beijing to study, but he requested to leave due to illness, and said that Xin Ai had a bad intention, and he should be carefully guarded against.

古文：遂致仕去。
现代文：于是引退离去。
English: So he retired and left.

古文：居三年，卒。
现代文：过了三年，死去。
English: He died three years later.

古文：赠太子少保。
现代文：赠太子少保。
English: After his death, he was posthumously awarded the title of Crown Prince Junior Protector.

古文：邦辅廉峻。
现代文：曹邦辅廉洁刚直。
English: Cao Bangfu is honest and upright.

古文：成器与贼大小数十战皆捷。
现代文：在吴中被逮时，有司送上所储俸钱，被挥之出去。做官四十年，家里没有余钱。
English: When he was arrested in Wuxi, an official gave him the salary money he had saved and was waved out. After forty years of working as an official, the family had no spare money.

古文：身先士卒，进止有方略，所部无秋毫犯。士民率于其战处立祠祀之。李遂，字邦良，丰城人。弱冠，从欧阳德学。
现代文：巡抚、巡按向皇帝报告这个情况，皇帝下令派遣右评事刘叔龙为他营造坟墓。李遂，字邦良，丰城人。弱冠之年，跟从欧阳德学习。
English: The procurator and procuratorate reported the situation to the emperor, and the emperor ordered Liu Shulong, a right-wing commentator, to be dispatched to build a tomb for him. Li Sui, surnamed Bangliang, was from Fengcheng. In the year of weak crown, he studied under Ouyang De.

古文：登嘉靖五年进士，授行人。
现代文：考中嘉靖五年进士，授官行人。
English: In the fifth year of the Jiajing Middle School Entrance Examination, he was promoted to an officer.

古文：历刑部郎中。
现代文：升任刑部郎中。
English: He was promoted to vice-minister of the Ministry of Justice.

古文：锦衣卫送盗十三人，遂惟抵一人罪，余皆辨释。
现代文：锦衣卫送强盗十三人，李遂只用一人抵罪，其他的都被他分辨释放。
English: Jin Yi Wei sent thirteen robbers, Li Sui only used one to confess, and the others were all released by him.

古文：东宫建，赦天下。
现代文：确立太子时，大赦天下。
English: When the crown prince is established, there will be a general amnesty.

古文：遂请列 大礼 大狱诸臣于赦令中，尚书聂贤惧不敢，乃与同官卢蕙请于都御史王廷相，廷相从之。事虽报罢，议者嘉焉。
现代文：李遂请求将 大礼 大案诸臣都列在赦令中，尚书聂贤恐惧不敢，于是和同官一起向都御史王廷相求问，王廷相听凭他们这样做，事情虽然没有成功，但议者赞美他。
English: Li Sui requested that all the courtiers involved in the grand gift and grand case be listed in the pardon order. Shang Shuxuan did not dare to be afraid, so he and his colleagues asked the governor of the capital, Wang Tingzong, to ask questions. Wang Tingzong allowed them to do so. Although the matter did not succeed, the legislator praised him.

古文：俄调礼部，忤尚书夏言。
现代文：不久调他到礼部，忤逆尚书夏言。
English: He was soon transferred to the Ministry of Ceremonies, where he remained for the rest of his life.

古文：因事劾之，下诏狱，谪湖州同知。
现代文：因事遭弹劾下诏狱，贬任湖州同知。
English: He was impeached, sentenced to prison, and demoted to the post of Huzhou Tongzhi.

古文：三迁衢州知府，擢苏、松兵备副使。
现代文：三迁衢州知府，提升为苏、松兵备副使。
English: He was transferred to the governor's office of Bozhou for the third time, and was promoted to deputy envoy of the Soviet Union and Songbei.

古文：屡迁广东按察使。释囚八百余人。
现代文：逐渐升职为广东按察使，在位期间释放囚徒八百多人。
English: He was gradually promoted to the post of Guangdong inspector, and released more than 800 prisoners during his reign.

古文：进山东右布政使。
现代文：进官山东右布政使。
English: Entered the post of Shandong Ubu political envoy.

古文：江洋多盗，遂迁右佥都御史提督操江。
现代文：江洋多盗贼，于是迁右佥都御史提督操江。
English: Jiang Yang was a thief, so he moved to the right and became an admiral to control the river.

古文：军政明，盗不敢发。
现代文：军政严明，盗不敢发。
English: The military government is strict, and thieves do not dare to steal.

古文：俺答犯京师，召遂督苏州军饷。
现代文：俺答侵犯京师，召李遂督苏州军饷。
English: We responded by invading the Beijing Division and summoning Li Suidu to the Suzhou Garrison.

古文：未谢恩，请关防符验用新衔。
现代文：他没有向皇上谢恩，就请求关防验符用新的官衔。
English: Instead of thanking the emperor, he asked to be given a new official title.

古文：帝怒，削其籍。
现代文：皇帝恼怒，削去他的官籍。
English: The emperor was furious and stripped him of his title.

古文：三十六年，倭扰江北。
现代文：三十六年，倭寇侵扰江北。
English: In 36 A.D., the Japanese invaders invaded the northern part of the Yangtze River.

古文：廷议以督漕都御史兼理巡抚不暇办寇，请特设巡抚，乃命遂以故官抚凤阳四府。
现代文：朝廷讨论说因督漕都御史兼理巡抚，没有时间对付敌寇，请求特别设置巡抚，于是命李遂用原官身份巡抚凤阳四府。
English: The imperial court discussed that due to the fact that the governor of the capital was also the governor of the four provinces of Fengyang, there was no time to deal with the enemy, and requested that a special governor be set up. Therefore, Li Sui was appointed as the governor of the four provinces of Fengyang.

古文：时淮、扬三中倭，岁复大水，且日役民輓大木输京师。
现代文：当时淮、扬三次遭受倭寇侵掠，这一年又发大水，而且天天役使人民拉大木运送到京师。
English: At that time, Huai and Yang were invaded and plundered three times by Japanese invaders. This year, there was also a big flood, and the people were forced to haul large trees to the capital every day.

古文：遂请饷增兵，恤民节用，次第画战守计。
现代文：李遂请求增加粮饷增加兵士，抚恤黎民节省开支，这些措施都是为了战、守作打算。
English: Li Sui requested an increase in grain rations, an increase in soldiers, and a pension for the people of Li to save expenses. These measures were all for the purpose of war and defense.

古文：三十八年四月，倭数百艘寇海门。
现代文：三十八年四月，倭寇数百艘船侵犯海门。
English: In April of the 38th year, hundreds of wako ships invaded the sea gate.

古文：遂语诸将曰： 贼趋如皋，其众必合。
现代文：李遂对诸将说 ：敌贼跑到如皋，其众一定会集合在一起。
English: Li Sui said to the generals, "If the enemy bandits come to Rugao, their troops will definitely gather together."

古文：合则侵犯之路有三：由泰州逼天长、凤、泗，陵寝惊矣；由黄桥逼瓜、仪，以摇南都，运道梗矣；若从富安沿海东至庙湾，则绝地也。 
现代文：合则侵犯之路有三条：从泰州逼近天长、凤、泗，则陵寝将受到惊动；从黄桥逼近瓜、仪，以动摇南都，则运输要道将被梗塞；如果从富安沿海向东都庙湾，则是绝地。 
English: There are three ways to invade the junction: from Taizhou approaching Tianchang, Feng and Handan, the mausoleum will be alarmed; from the Yellow Bridge approaching Gua and Yi, in order to shake the southern capital, the transportation road will be blocked; if from the coast of Fu'an to Dongdu Temple Bay, it is the Jedi.

古文：乃命副使刘景韶、游击丘升扼如皋，而身驰泰州当其冲。
现代文：于是命令副使刘景韶、游击丘陛扼守如皋，而自己亲驰泰州首当其冲。
English: Therefore, he ordered the vice-envoy Liu Jingyao and the guerrilla commander Qiu Shi to keep a tight grip on Taizhou, while he himself was the first to bear the brunt.

古文：时贼势甚盛，副将邓城之败绩，指挥张谷死焉。
现代文：当时敌贼声势非常强盛，副将邓城抵御敌人被打败，指挥张谷战死。
English: At that time, the enemy was very strong. Vice Admiral Deng Cheng was defeated against the enemy, and Commander Zhang Gu was killed.

古文：贼知如皋有备，将犯泰州，遂急檄景韶、升遏贼。
现代文：敌贼知道如皋有准备，准备侵犯泰州，李遂急檄令刘景韶、丘陛遏止敌贼。
English: The enemy knew that he was preparing to invade Taizhou. Li Suiqiu ordered Liu Jingyao and Qiu Shi to stop the enemy.

古文：连战丁堰、海安、通州，皆捷。
现代文：连战于丁堰、海安、通州，都打了胜仗。
English: He won consecutive battles in Dingyan, Hai'an and Tongzhou.

古文：贼沿海东掠，遂喜曰： 贼无能为矣。 
现代文：敌贼沿海向东掠去，李遂高兴地说 ：敌贼没有能力打了。 
English: As the invaders swept eastward along the coast, Li Sui said happily: "The invaders are no longer able to fight.

古文：令景韶、升尾之，而致贼于庙湾。
现代文：下令刘景韶、丘陛尾随其后，而在庙湾招引敌贼。
English: He ordered Liu Jingyao and Emperor Qiu to follow him and lure the enemy into the Temple Bay.

古文：复虑贼突淮安，乃夜半驰入城。
现代文：又顾虑到敌贼突向淮安，于是夜半奔驰入城。
English: He was also concerned that the enemy would rush to Huai'an, so he entered the city in the middle of the night.

古文：贼寻至，遂督参将曹克新等御之姚家荡。
现代文：敌贼不久就到达，李遂督参将曹克新等人在姚家荡抵御他们。
English: The invaders soon arrived, and Lt. Col. Li Sui, Lt. Gen. Cao Kexin and others went to Yao's house to resist them.

古文：通政唐顺之、副总兵刘显来援，贼大败走，以余众保庙湾。
现代文：通政唐顺之、副总兵刘显前来支援，敌贼大败逃走，用余众保庙湾。
English: Tongzheng Tang Shunzhi and Vice-Commander Liu Xian came to support, the enemy bandits were defeated and fled, and the rest of the people were used to protect the temple bay.

古文：景韶亦败贼印庄，追奔至新河口，焚斩甚众。
现代文：刘景韶也在印庄打败敌贼，追赶到新河口，焚杀敌人甚众。
English: Liu Jingyao also defeated the enemy thieves in Yinjang, chased them to Xinhekou, and burned many of the enemies.

古文：庙湾贼据险不出，攻之月余不克。
现代文：庙湾敌贼占据险要不出，进攻了一个多月，还不能攻克。
English: It was almost impossible for the enemy to occupy the temple bay. They attacked for more than a month, but still could not conquer it.

古文：遂令景韶塞堑、夷木压垒陈，火焚其舟，贼乘夜雨潜遁。
现代文：李遂命令刘景韶堵塞堑要、砍树木压平垒阵，用火焚敌舟，敌贼乘夜雨潜逃。
English: Li Sui ordered Liu Jingyao to block the anchorage, cut down trees to flatten the bastion, set fire to the enemy boat, and the enemy thief fled by night rain.

古文：官军据其巢，追奔至虾子港，江北倭悉平。
现代文：官军占据敌人的巢穴，追赶敌人到虾子港，江北的倭寇全部被平息。
English: The government army occupied the enemy's lair and chased the enemy to the shrimp port. All the wako in the north of the Yangtze River were subdued.

古文：帝大喜，玺书奖励。
现代文：皇帝大喜，用玺书奖励官兵。
English: The emperor was overjoyed, and rewarded the officers and soldiers with an imperial edict.

古文：贼驻崇明三沙者，将犯扬州。
现代文：驻扎在崇明三沙的敌人，准备侵犯扬州。
English: The enemy stationed in Chongming Sansha is preparing to invade Yangzhou.

古文：景韶战连胜，围之刘庄。
现代文：刘景韶与他们交战，连连取得胜利，将他们围困在刘庄。
English: Liu Jingyao fought with them, won successively, and besieged them in Liuzhuang.

古文：会刘显来援，遂檄诸军尽属显。
现代文：等待刘显来支援，李遂下檄令诸军都归刘显指挥。
English: Waiting for Liu Xian to come to his aid, Li Sui issued an edict ordering all the troops to be under Liu Xian's command.

古文：攻破其巢，追奔白驹场，贼尽殄。
现代文：攻破敌人巢穴，将敌贼追赶到白驹场，敌贼全部被歼。
English: They broke through the enemy's lair and chased the enemy thieves to the chalk field. All the enemy thieves were annihilated.

古文：时遂已迁南京兵部侍郎。
现代文：这时李遂已迁南京兵部侍郎。
English: At this time, Li Sui was transferred to the Nanjing Military Department as a chamberlain.

古文：论功，予一子官，赉银币。
现代文：评定功劳，赐予他一个儿子官职，赏赐银币。
English: He gave him a son in office and silver coins as a reward.

古文：御史陈志勘上遂平倭功，前后二十余战，斩获三千八百有奇。
现代文：御史陈志核实奏上李遂平定倭寇的功劳，前后二十余次战斗，斩获三千八百多人。
English: The historian Chen Zhi verified the merit of Li Sui in suppressing the wokou, and he fought more than 20 battles, winning more than 3,800 people.

古文：再予一子世千户，增俸二级。
现代文：再次赠予一子世袭千户，增加俸禄二级。
English: Once again, a hereditary thousand households will be given to one child, and the second-level salary will be increased.

古文：莅南京甫数月，振武营军变。
现代文：他莅临南京刚刚数月，振武营发生军变。
English: He had only been in Nanjing for a few months when the military coup took place in Zhenwuying.

古文：振武营者，尚书张鏊募健儿以御倭。素骄悍。
现代文：振武营是尚书张鏊招募健儿来抵御倭寇的，向来骄悍。
English: Zhenwu camp is Shangshu Zhangye's recruitment of able-bodied men to resist the Japanese invaders, and has always been proud.

古文：旧制，南军有妻者，月粮米一石；无者，减其四；春秋二仲月，米石折银五钱。
现代文：旧制，南军有妻子的，月粮米一石；无妻子的，减少十分之四；春季和秋季的第二个月，米一石折银五钱。
English: According to the old system, the monthly grain of the Southern Army with a wife was one stone of rice; without a wife, it was reduced by four-tenths; in the second month of spring and autumn, one stone of rice was worth five coins.

古文：马坤掌南户部，奏减折色之一，督储侍郎黄懋官又奏革募补者妻粮，诸军大怨。
现代文：马坤掌管南京户部，上奏减折色之一，督储侍郎黄懋官又上奏革除新募补额之人的妻粮，诸军非常怨恨。
English: Ma Kun, who was in charge of the Nanjing Household Department, was one of the first to be dismissed, and the governor's retainer, Huang Xuan, was also dismissed, except for the newly recruited supplement of the wife's grain, the troops were very resentful.

古文：代坤者蔡克廉方病，诸军以岁饥求复折色故额于懋官。
现代文：替代马坤的人蔡克廉正在病中，诸军因这一年发生饥荒向黄懋官请求恢复折色到原来的定额。
English: The man who replaced Ma Kun, Cai Keliang, was ill, and due to the famine that year, the armies asked the Yellow Turban officer to restore the color to the original quota.

古文：懋官不可，给饷又逾期。
现代文：黄懋官不许可，发放粮饷又超过期限。
English: The magistrate did not give permission, and the time limit for the distribution of food stamps was again exceeded.

古文：三十九年二月都肄日，振武卒鼓噪懋官署。
现代文：三十九年二月检阅演习那天，振武营士兵在黄懋官公署鼓噪。
English: On the day of the inspection exercise in February, 1939, soldiers from the Zhenwu Battalion made a lot of noise at the Huangyan Public Security Bureau.

古文：懋官急招鏊及守备太监何绶、魏国公徐鹏举、临淮侯李庭竹及遂至，诸营军已甲而入。予之银，争攫之。
现代文：黄懋官紧急招张鏊和守备太监何绶、魏国公徐鹏举、临淮侯李庭竹及李遂到来，这时诸营军已经武装进入里面来，给他们银子，他们争相抢夺银子。
English: Huang Xuan officials urgently summoned Zhang Xuan and guarding eunuchs He Xuan, Wei Guogong Xu Pengju, Linhuai Hou Li Tingzhu and Li Sui arrived. At this time, the battalions had already armed themselves and came inside to give them silver. They scrambled to snatch the silver.

古文：懋官见势汹汹，越垣投吏舍，乱卒随及。
现代文：黄懋官见士兵其势汹汹，翻越墙壁投到吏舍，乱兵跟着追赶。
English: Seeing that the soldiers were threatening him, the Yellow Turban officer climbed over the wall and threw himself into the officers' quarters. The soldiers then chased after him.

古文：鹏举、鏊慰解不听，竟戕懋官，裸其尸于市。
现代文：徐鹏举、张鏊对乱兵进行慰问调解，他们不听。竟将黄懋官残杀，剥光衣服将死尸放在闹市。
English: Xu Pengju and Zhang Qian offered condolences and mediation to the rioting soldiers, but they did not listen. They actually killed Huang Qian, stripped him naked and placed the dead body in the busy city.

古文：绶、鹏举遣吏持黄纸，许给赏万金，卒辄碎之。
现代文：何绶、徐鹏举派遣官吏手持文书，许诺给赏万金，士兵立即将它撕碎。
English: He Yu and Xu Pengju dispatched officials with documents in hand, promising a reward of ten thousand gold, and the soldiers immediately tore it up.

古文：至许犒十万金，乃稍定。
现代文：一直到许诺犒赏十万金，才渐渐平定。
English: It wasn't until he promised a reward of 100,000 gold that the situation gradually calmed down.

古文：明日，诸大臣集守备厅，乱卒亦集。
现代文：第二天，诸位大臣聚集在守备厅，乱卒也聚集在一起。
English: The next day, the ministers gathered in the garrison hall, and the rioters also gathered together.

古文：遂大言曰： 黄侍郎自越墙死，诸军特不当残辱之。
现代文：李遂大声说 ：黄侍郎自己越墙致死，诸位士兵特不应该残害侮辱他。
English: Li Sui said in a loud voice, "Huang Zhi Lang himself jumped over the wall to his death. You soldiers especially should not torture and insult him."

古文：吾据实奏朝廷，不以叛相诬也。 
现代文：我据实向朝廷奏说，不用反叛来诬蔑你们。 
English: I told the imperial court that there was no need to rebel in order to slander you.

古文：因麾众退，许复妻粮及故额，人畀之一金补折价，始散。
现代文：因而指挥众人退去，许诺恢复士兵的妻粮和原来的定额。给予每人银一两补折价，乱兵才散去。
English: Therefore, he ordered everyone to retreat, promising to restore the soldiers' food rations and the original quota. He gave each person one or two additional silver coins as a discount, and the soldiers dispersed.

古文：遂乃托病闭阁，给免死券以慰安之，而密谕营将掩捕首恶二十五人，系狱。
现代文：李遂于是托病闭阁，给免死券来安慰他们，而密令营将抓捕首恶二十五人，拘囚入狱。
English: Li then feigned illness and gave them death-free tickets to comfort them, while the secret camp arrested the top 25 villains and took them to prison.

古文：诏追褫懋官及克廉职，罢绶、庭竹、鏊，任鹏举如故，遂以功议擢。
现代文：皇帝下诏令追革黄懋官和蔡克廉的官职，罢去何缓、李庭竹、张鏊的官职，任用徐鹏举如前，李遂因有功而被提升。
English: The emperor issued a decree to promote Huang Xuan and Cai Keliang to higher posts, and removed He Xiao, Li Tingzhu and Zhang Jun from their posts. Xu Peng was still appointed, and Li Sui was promoted for his merits.

古文：止诛叛卒三人，余戍边卫，而三人已前死。
现代文：只诛叛卒三人，其余的戍守边卫，而这三人已经先死了。
English: There were only three renegade soldiers, the rest were border guards, and these three had died first.

古文：遂叹曰： 兵自此益骄矣。 
现代文：李遂感叹地说 ：士兵从此更加骄横了。 
English: Li Sui sighed and said, "The soldiers have become more arrogant since then."

古文：未几，江东代鏊为尚书。
现代文：不久，江东代替张鏊任尚书。
English: Soon, Jiangdong replaced Zhang Yiren with Shang Shu.

古文：江北池河营卒以千户吴钦革其帮丁，殴而缚之竿。
现代文：江北池河营的士兵因为千户吴钦革除他们的帮丁，就殴打吴钦并将他缚在竿子上。
English: The soldiers at the Chihe Camp in Jiangbei Province beat Wu Qin and tied him to a pole because thousands of Wu Qin's families had expelled their henchmen.

古文：帮丁者，操守卒给一丁，资往来费也。
现代文：帮丁是操练防守士兵的每人给一丁兵饷，以资往来费用。
English: The aid is to give one soldier to each of the trained defensive soldiers to fund the transaction costs.

古文：遂已召拜兵部左侍郎，以言官荐擢南京参赞尚书，镇抚之。
现代文：李遂已被召封为兵部左侍郎，因言官推荐而提升为南京参赞尚书，由他来镇压安抚。
English: Li Sui had been appointed as the left-hand man of the military department, and was promoted to Nanjing Counsellor Shang Shu due to the recommendation of the speech officer, and he was appointed to suppress and pacify.

古文：营卒惑妖僧绣头，复倡讹言。
现代文：营卒被妖僧绣头所惑，又散布流言。
English: The camp followers were bewitched by the head-dress of a demonic monk and spread rumours.

古文：遂捕斩绣头，申严什伍，书其名籍、年貌，系牌腰间，军乃戢。
现代文：李遂将绣头捕住杀掉，再三向队伍申严纪律，书写军士的姓名籍贯，年龄相貌，系牌腰间，军士才止息。
English: Li Sui caught and killed the embroidered head, repeatedly imposed strict discipline on the team, and wrote the sergeant's name, origin, age, appearance, and badge waist, and the sergeant stopped.

古文：既又奏调镇武军护陵寝，一日散千人，留都自是无患。
现代文：既而又上奏调镇武军保护陵寝，一日解散千人，留都自此没有祸患。
English: At the same time, the town's armed forces were dispatched to protect the tomb, and a thousand people were dismissed in one day. Since then, there has been no calamity.

古文：越四年，以老致仕。
现代文：过了四年，因年老辞官引退。
English: After four years, he retired from the dictionary due to old age.

古文：遂博学多智，长于用兵，然亦善逢迎。
现代文：李遂博学多智，长于用兵，但也善于逢迎。
English: Li Sui was well-educated and intelligent. He was good at using soldiers, but he was also good at dealing with others.

古文：帝将重建三殿，遂奏五河县泗水中涌大杉一，此川泽效灵，为圣主鼎新助，帝大喜。
现代文：皇帝准备重新建造三殿，李遂奏说五河县泗水中涌现大杉一棵，这是川泽效灵，为助圣主鼎新革故，皇帝大喜。
English: The emperor was preparing to rebuild the three halls. Li Suisuo said that a big cedar tree had appeared in Wuhe County. This was due to the influence of Kawazawa. The emperor was overjoyed to help the saint lead the new revolution.

古文：又进白兔，帝为遣官告庙。
现代文：李遂又进献白兔，皇帝为此派遣官员告于宗庙。
English: Li Sui also offered a white rabbit, for which the emperor sent officials to report to the ancestral temple.

古文：遂子材，自有传。
现代文：从此皇帝更加宠爱李遂。死后，赠太子太保，谥号襄敏。
English: From then on, Li Sui became the emperor's favorite. After his death, he was given the title of Crown Prince and given the posthumous title of Yang Min.

古文：唐顺之，字应德，武进人。
现代文：唐顺之，字应德，江苏武进人。
English: Tang Shun Zhi, Zi Ying De, Jiangsu Wujin Ren.

古文：祖贵，户科给事中。
现代文：祖父唐贵曾任户科给事中。
English: Tang Gui's grandfather once served as a household science inspector.

古文：父宝，永州知府。
现代文：父亲唐宝做过永州知府。
English: His father, Tang Bao, was once the governor of Yongzhou.

古文：顺之生有异廪。稍长，洽贯群籍。
现代文：唐顺之颇有天赋，从小聪明异常，随着年龄的增长，他博览了众多的文献典籍。
English: Tang Shunzhi was quite gifted. He was unusually intelligent from an early age. As he grew older, he read a lot of literature and classics.

古文：年三十二，举嘉靖八年会试第一，改庶吉士。
现代文：在二十三岁时，他参加了嘉靖八年的会试，荣登榜首，以进士资格入翰林院为庶吉士。
English: At the age of twenty-three, he took part in the eight-year examination of Jiajing, won the first place, and entered the Hanlin Academy as an associate member.

古文：座主张璁疾翰林，出诸吉士为他曹，独欲留顺之。
现代文：曾为会试主考官的张璁，与翰林学士们过不去，将诸位翰林学士调任其他部门，只想留唐顺之继续供职于翰林院。
English: Zhang Qian, who had been the chief examiner of the examination, could not get along with the scholars of Hanlin, and transferred the scholars of Hanlin to other departments, but wanted to keep Tang Shun to continue to serve in Hanlin Academy.

古文：固辞，乃调兵部主事。
现代文：唐顺之坚决地辞却这一特别恩惠，于是调任兵部主事。
English: Tang Shunzhi resolutely refused this special favor, and was transferred to be in charge of the military department.

古文：引疾归。
现代文：为此唐顺之称病归家休养。
English: He returned to his hometown saying he was ill.

古文：久之，除吏部。
现代文：过了一段时间，唐顺之被任命为吏部官员。
English: After some time, Tang Shunzhi was appointed as an official of the Personnel Department.

古文：十二年秋，诏选朝官为翰林，乃改顺之编修，校累朝实录。
现代文：嘉靖十二年秋天，皇帝下诏从朝臣中选拔翰林学士，唐顺之改任翰林院编修，校订各朝实录。
English: In the autumn of the 12th year of Jiajing, the emperor issued an edict to select Hanlin scholars from among the courtiers, and Tang Shun was appointed as the editor of Hanlin Academy and revised the records of each dynasty.

古文：事将竣，复以疾告，璁持其疏不下。
现代文：实录校订工作将告结束时，他又上疏请病假，张璁将唐顺之的奏疏扣住不予发还。
English: At the end of the editing work of the record, he went on sick leave again, and Zhang Ye detained Tang Shunzhi's transcript and would not return it.

古文：有言顺之欲远璁者，璁发怒，拟旨以吏部主事罢归，永不复叙。
现代文：有人进言说唐顺之是为了回避张璁，张璁听说大为恼火，为皇帝拟出一道圣旨，将唐顺之从吏部主事任上罢免放归，并永不起用。
English: Some people suggested that Tang Shun did this in order to avoid Zhang Xuan. Zhang Xuan was reportedly so annoyed that he drafted a sacred edict for the emperor to remove Tang Shun from his post as the head of the personnel department and banish him forever.

古文：至十八年选宫僚，乃起故官兼春坊右司谏。
现代文：直到十八年，朝廷选拔宫廷官员，才以以前的官职起用兼任春坊右司谏。
English: It was not until 18 that the Imperial Court selected a palace official to assume the former official position and concurrently serve as the Shunbo Ujisho.

古文：与罗洪先、赵时春请朝太子，复削籍归。
现代文：后来唐顺之与罗洪先、赵时春请求朝见皇太子，惹恼了嘉靖皇帝，又被削职归田。
English: Later, Tang Shunzhi, together with Luo Hongxian and Zhao Shichun, petitioned the court to see the crown prince, which angered Emperor Jiajing, and he was removed from his post and sent back to the fields.

古文：卜筑阳羡山中，读书十余年。
现代文：从此，唐顺之在阳羡山中隐居读书十多年。
English: Since then, Tang Shunzhi has been studying in seclusion in the mountains for more than ten years.

古文：中外论荐，并报寝。
现代文：虽然朝廷内外不停地有人推荐唐顺之，但皇帝一概不予理会。
English: Although there were people inside and outside the imperial court who kept recommending Tang Shun to him, the emperor ignored them all.

古文：倭躏江南北。赵文华出视师，疏荐顺之。
现代文：当倭寇蹂躏大江南北时，在浙江督察剿倭战事的赵文华，上疏推荐了唐顺之。
English: When the wokou ravaged the north and south of the Yangtze River, Zhao Wenhua, who was an inspector in Zhejiang, recommended Tang Shunli to Shangxu.

古文：起南京兵部主事。
现代文：唐顺之被起用为南京兵部主事。
English: Tang Shunzhi was appointed as the head of the Nanjing Military Department.

古文：父忧未终，不果出。
现代文：由于父丧期限未满，唐顺之并未立即出山。
English: As the deadline for his father's funeral had not expired, Tang Shunzhi did not immediately leave the mountain.

古文：免丧，召为职方员外郎，进郎中。
现代文：丧期结束后，朝廷召用为职方员外郎，并晋职为兵部郎中。
English: After the period of mourning was over, the Imperial Court called him to be a member of the staff, and he was promoted to be a junior member of the staff.

古文：出核蓟镇兵籍，还奏缺伍三万有奇，见兵亦不任战，因条上便宜九事。
现代文：兵部派唐顺之到蓟州镇查核军籍情况。回京后，唐顺之上奏报告说该镇缺额三万多员，在籍兵员也没有什么战斗力。为此，他上书提出了九条解决办法。
English: After returning to Beijing, Tang Shun reported that there was a shortage of more than 30,000 soldiers in the town, and the enlisted soldiers had little fighting power. To this end, he submitted a letter proposing nine solutions.

古文：总督王忬以下俱贬秩。
现代文：由于唐顺之的报告，蓟州镇总督王忄予以下诸将都受到降级处罚。
English: As a result of Tang Shunzhi's report, Zhangzhou Town Governor Wang Xiyu and the following generals were all punished by demotion.

古文：寻命往南畿、浙江视师，与胡宗宪协谋讨贼。
现代文：不久又派唐顺之到南京、浙江督察军务，与胡宗宪一道商议剿除海盗诸事。
English: Soon after, Tang Shunzhi was sent to Nanjing and Zhejiang to inspect military affairs, and together with Hu Zongxian, they discussed the elimination of piracy.

古文：顺之以御贼上策，当截之海外，纵使登陆，则内地咸受祸。
现代文：唐顺之认为抵御海盗的上策是将海盗阻截在海岸线外，如果让其登上陆地，内地就都受到祸害。
English: Tang Shunzhi believed that the best way to resist piracy was to intercept pirates outside the coastline. If they were allowed to land, the inland would be plagued.

古文：乃躬泛海，自江阴抵蛟门大洋，一昼夜行六七百里。从者咸惊呕，顺之意气自如。
现代文：于是唐顺之亲自巡视海上，从江阴抵达蛟门，一昼夜行驶六、七百里，随从人员都惊恐呕吐，唐顺之依然精神抖擞。
English: As a result, Tang Shunzhi personally inspected the sea, arrived at the gate from Jiangyin, and traveled six or seven hundred miles in one day and night. The attendants were terrified and vomited, and Tang Shunzhi was still in high spirits.

古文：倭泊崇明三沙，督舟师邀之海外。斩馘一百二十，沉其舟十三。
现代文：倭寇屯集在崇明三沙岛，唐顺之亲自督水军邀截攻击，斩敌一百二十人，沉敌船十三艘。
English: The wokotons gathered at Sansha Island in Chongming, and Tang Shunzhi personally commanded the navy to intercept the attack, killing one hundred and twenty enemies and sinking thirteen enemy ships.

古文：擢太仆少卿。
现代文：因战功唐顺之升为太仆少卿。
English: Due to his war exploits, Tang Shunzhi was promoted to Taigu Shaoqing.

古文：宗宪言顺之权轻，乃加右通政。
现代文：胡宗宪说唐顺之权力小，不宜于指挥战事，又加职为右通政。
English: Hu Zongxian said that Tang Shun's power was small, and it was not suitable for commanding the war, and he was promoted to the post of right channel.

古文：顺之闻贼犯江北，急令总兵官卢镗拒三沙，自率副总兵刘显驰援，与凤阳巡抚李遂大破之姚家荡。
现代文：唐顺之听说海寇将进犯江北，于是急令总兵官卢镗在三沙岛阻击，自己率副总兵刘显迅速增援，与凤阳巡抚李遂合力大败海寇于姚家荡。
English: Tang Shunzhi heard that the sea pirates would invade the northern part of the Yangtze River, so he urgently ordered the commander-in-chief Lu Wei to block them on Sansha Island. He led the vice-commander-in-chief Liu Xian to quickly reinforce, and together with the Fengyang patrol leader Li Sui, they defeated the sea pirates in Yaojialang.

古文：贼窘，退巢庙湾。
现代文：海寇困窘，退驻庙湾。
English: Embarrassed, the sea pirates withdrew to Miao Bay.

古文：顺之薄之，杀伤相当。
现代文：唐顺之乘势进击，杀伤部分敌人。
English: Tang Shun took advantage of the situation and attacked, killing some of the enemy.

古文：遂欲列围困贼，顺之以为非计，麾兵薄其营，以火炮攻之，不能克。
现代文：李遂意欲将敌人围困起来，唐顺之觉得这不是办法，于是指挥进攻敌人营寨，用火炮攻击，但没有攻克。
English: Li Sui wanted to encircle the enemy, but Tang Shunzhi felt that this was not the way, so he ordered an attack on the enemy camp, attacked with artillery, but did not conquer.

古文：三沙又屡告急，顺之乃复援三沙，督镗、显进击，再失利。
现代文：三沙岛的官军又频频告急，唐顺之于是又率兵增援三沙，督率卢镗、刘显进攻，却先后两次失利。
English: The government army of Sansha Island was also frequently in a hurry, so Tang Shun led troops to reinforce Sansha, and Lu Wei and Liu Xian led the attack, but they lost twice.

古文：顺之愤，亲跃马布阵。贼构高楼望官军，见顺之军整，坚壁不出。
现代文：唐顺之十分愤恨，亲自跃马布阵，海寇构筑了高高的望楼，在楼上看见唐顺之军伍整齐，因而坚守阵地而不出战。
English: Tang Shunzhi was so angry that he personally leapt over the horse and buggy formation, and the sea pirates built a high watchtower. They saw Tang Shun's army neatly lined up on the upper floor, so they held their ground and did not go to war.

古文：显请退师，顺之不可，持刀直前，去贼营百余步。镗、显惧失利，固要顺之还。
现代文：见此情形，刘显请求退兵，唐顺之不同意，他手提战刀，冲到距敌人营地百多米处，卢镗、刘显担心出事，坚决要唐顺之退回。
English: Seeing this situation, Liu Xian requested to withdraw, but Tang Shun did not agree. He took his sword and rushed to a place more than a hundred meters away from the enemy camp. Lu Wei and Liu Xian were worried about an accident and resolutely wanted Tang Shun to return.

古文：时盛暑，居海舟两月，遂得疾，返太仓。
现代文：这时正值酷暑，唐顺之在海船中居留两月之久，染上了疾病，于是返回太仓。
English: At this time, it was very hot. Tang Shunzhi stayed in the ship for two months and contracted an illness, so he returned to Taicang.

古文：李遂改官南京，即擢顺之右佥都御史，代遂巡抚。
现代文：李遂调任南京，唐顺之即升为右佥都御史，并代李遂为凤阳巡抚。
English: Li Sui was transferred to Nanjing, and Tang Shun was immediately promoted to the right-hand capital governor, and became the Fengyang inspector on behalf of Li Sui.

古文：顺之疾甚，以兵事棘，不敢辞。
现代文：唐顺之病日益沉重，由于战事棘手，他不便辞职归养。
English: Tang Shun's illness became more and more serious. Due to the difficult war situation, it was not convenient for him to resign and return home.

古文：渡江，贼已为遂等所灭。
现代文：唐顺之到达江北时，海盗已被李遂等人剿灭。
English: When Tang Shunzhi arrived at the north of the Yangtze River, the pirates had been annihilated by Li Sui and others.

古文：淮、扬适大饥，条上海防善后九事。
现代文：这时淮、扬二州发生了大饥荒，唐顺之因而上疏提出了加强海防、处理善后事宜等九条措施。
English: At this time, a great famine occurred in Huai and Yang states. As a result, Shangsu proposed nine measures, including strengthening coastal defense and dealing with the aftermath.

古文：三十九年春，汛期至。力疾泛海，度焦山，至通州卒，年五十四。
现代文：嘉靖三十九年春天，汛期到了，唐顺之带病巡视海上，过焦山，至通州病逝，时年五十四岁。
English: In the spring of the thirty-ninth year of Jiajing, the rainy season arrived, Tang Shunzhi was sick and patrolled the sea, passed through Jiaoshan, and died of illness in Tongzhou, at the age of fifty-four.

古文：讣闻，予祭葬。
现代文：讣告传到京师，皇帝令公祭安葬。
English: The obituary reached the capital, and the emperor ordered a public funeral and burial.

古文：故事：四品但赐祭。顺之以劳得赐葬云。
现代文：按常规，四品官只赐祭，而不赐葬，唐顺之因为国辛劳而死，所以得到皇帝赐葬的礼遇。
English: According to the usual practice, the four-ranked officials only gave sacrifices, but did not give funerals. Tang Shun died because of the country's hard work, so he received the courtesy of the emperor's funeral.

古文：顺之于学无所不窥。自天文、乐律、地理、兵法、弧矢、勾股、壬奇、禽乙，莫不究极原委。
现代文：唐顺之学识渊博，天文、乐律、地理、兵法、弧矢、勾股、壬奇、禽乙诸学，无不探究原委。
English: Tang Shun's knowledge was profound. He studied astronomy, music theory, geography, military tactics, archery, hooks, conjuring, and birds, all of which were related to the original commission.

古文：尽取古今载籍，剖裂补缀，区分部居，为《左》、《右》、《文》、《武》、《儒》、《稗》六《编》传于世，学者不能测其奥也。
现代文：他还从古今文献中摘录有关资料，按类别分为左、右、文、武、儒、稗六编，传播于世，因其内容深奥读书人也不能理解其奥妙。
English: He also extracted relevant materials from ancient and modern literature and divided them into six parts according to categories: left, right, literary, military, Confucian, and Taoist, and disseminated them to the world. Because of its profound content, readers cannot understand its mystery.

古文：为古文，洸洋纡折有大家风。
现代文：唐顺之作古文辞，汪洋恣肆有大家风范。
English: Tang Shun's work of ancient literature, Wang Yang arbitrarily has everyone's style.

古文：生平苦节自厉，辍扉为床，不饰裀褥。
现代文：平生节俭勤苦，以破旧的门板拼成床榻，铺盖也简朴得很。
English: He was frugal and hard-working all his life. He used old door panels to make beds, and the bed covers were also very simple.

古文：又闻良知说于王畿，闭户兀坐，匝月忘寝，多所自得。
现代文：他曾师从王畿习良知之学，闭门独坐，整月都忘掉睡觉，在静坐中颇有所得。
English: He had learned the study of conscience from Wang Qi, sitting alone behind closed doors, forgetting to sleep for a whole month, and gained a lot in meditation.

古文：晚由文华荐，商出处于罗洪先。
现代文：晚年由赵文华推荐出山，他曾就此事商议于罗洪先。
English: In his later years, Zhao Wenhua recommended him to go into the mountains. He had discussed the matter with Luo Hongxian.

古文：洪先曰： 向已隶名仕籍，此身非我有，安得侔处士？ 
现代文：罗洪先说 ：你从前已隶属官籍，你的身子并非你自己所有，怎么能和一般隐士相比？ 
English: Luo Hong first said: You have been a government official before, your body is not your own, how can you be compared to an ordinary hermit?

古文：顺之遂出，然闻望颇由此损。
现代文：唐顺之于是出任，然而他的声名亦因此颇受损害。
English: Tang Shunzhi then took office, but his reputation suffered as a result.

古文：崇祯中，追谥襄文。
现代文：崇祯中年，追赠唐顺之 襄文 谥号。
English: When he was middle-aged, he was posthumously given the posthumous name "Xiangwen" by Tang Shun.

