古文：范镇范镇，字景仁，成都华阳人。
现代文：范镇字景仁，成都华阳人。
English: Fan Zhen, also known as Jingren, is from Huayang, Chengdu.

古文：薛奎守蜀，一见爱之，馆于府舍，俾与子弟讲学。
现代文：薛奎为蜀守，一见到范镇就很喜欢他，把他召到府舍中，使他给子弟讲学。
English: Xue Kui was the governor of Shu. As soon as he saw Fan Zhen, he liked him very much. He called him to the mansion so that he could give a lecture to his son.

古文：镇益自谦退，每步行趋府门，逾年，人不知其为帅客也。
现代文：范镇更加自谦恭退，每每步行到官府门口，一年以后，人们还不知道他是守帅的客人。
English: Fan Zhen was more self-effacing and retreated. Every time he walked to the entrance of the government office, a year later, people still did not know that he was a guest of the guard.

古文：及还朝，载以俱。
现代文：等到薛奎回到朝廷，就带着范镇一起到京城。
English: When Xue Kui returned to the imperial court, he took Fan Zhen to the capital.

古文：有问奎入蜀何所得，曰： 得一伟人，当以文学名世。 宋庠兄弟见其文，自谓弗及，与为布衣交。
现代文：有人问薛奎入蜀有什么收获，他回答说 ：最大的收获是得到一个不平常的人，当会以文学闻名于世。 宋庠兄弟看到范镇的文章后，自谓不如，与范镇成为布衣交。
English: When someone asked Xue Kui what he gained from joining Shu, he replied, "The biggest gain is to get an unusual person, who will be famous for literature in the world."After the Song brothers saw Fan Zhen's article, they said they were not as good as him and became friends with Fan Zhen.

古文：举进士，礼部奏名第一。
现代文：赴试进士，礼部奏名为第一。
English: Went to the entrance examination, and won the first place in the ceremony.

古文：故事，殿廷唱第过三人，则首礼部选者，必越次抗声自陈，率得置上列。
现代文：按成例，殿廷皇帝唱名过三人后，礼部试第一名，就可越次大声自己陈述，通常得以置于上等之列。
English: According to the established practice, after the Emperor of the Imperial Court has sung the names of three people, the first place in the etiquette test can make his own statement more and more loudly, and usually can be placed in the superior category.

古文：吴育、欧阳修号称耿介，亦从众。
现代文：吴育、欧阳修号称耿直清介，也顺从众俗。
English: Wu Yu and Ouyang Xiu, known as Geng Zhi Qing Sui, also obeyed all customs.

古文：镇独不然，同列屡趣之，不为动。
现代文：范镇唯独不然，同伴们多次劝他自陈，不为所动。
English: Fan Zhen was the only one who did not. His companions repeatedly urged him to confess, but he was unmoved.

古文：至第七十九人，乃从呼出应，退就列，无一言，廷中皆异之。
现代文：直到第七十九人，这才随呼出应，退而归列，没有一句怨言，朝廷中的人都感到惊异。
English: It was not until the seventy-ninth that they responded to the call and fell back into line, without a word of complaint. Everyone in the court was surprised.

古文：自是旧风遂革。
现代文：从这以后陈旧之风于是被革除。
English: Since then, the old ways have been swept away.

古文：调新安主簿，西京留守宋绶延置国子监，荐为东监直讲。
现代文：调任新安主薄，京西留守宋绶把范镇延请到国子监，推荐他为东监直讲。
English: After he was transferred to Xin'an, Song Xi, the governor of the western part of Beijing, invited Fan Zhen to be the provincial overseer and recommended him to be the direct overseer of the eastern part.

古文：召试学士院，当得馆阁校理，主司妄以为失韵，补校勘。
现代文：召试学士院，应该得馆阁校理之职，主考部门错误认为他的诗文失之韵律，补为校勘。
English: He was summoned to the Academy of Sciences, and was supposed to take the post of the chief examiner. The examination department mistakenly thought that his poem was out of rhyme, and added it as a proof.

古文：人为忿郁，而镇处之晏如。
现代文：人们为他愤忿不平，但范镇处之安然。
English: People are angry with him, but Fan Zhen is at peace.

古文：经四年，当迁，宰相庞籍言： 镇有异材，不汲汲于进取。 超授直秘阁，判吏部南曹、开封府推官。
现代文：经过四年，按常规应当升迁，宰相庞籍说 ：范镇具有特殊才能，而不汲汲于官职的升迁。 于是越级授官直秘阁，判吏部南曹、开封府推官。
English: After four years, he should be promoted according to the rules, and Prime Minister Pang Quan said: Fan Zhen has a special talent, and does not rely on the promotion of the official post. Therefore, he was promoted to the direct secretary cabinet, the judge department Nancao, and the Kaifeng prefectural government.

古文：擢起居舍人、知谏院。
现代文：提拔为起居舍人、知谏院。
English: He was promoted to the position of resident priest, Chihaya-in.

古文：上疏论： 民力困敝，请约祖宗以来官吏兵数，酌取其中为定制，以今赋入之数什七为经费，储其三以备水旱非常。 又言： 周以冢宰制国用，唐以宰相判盐铁、度支。
现代文：范镇上疏建议： 民力窘迫困乏，请减少祖宗以来的官吏军队人数，酌取其折中数额作为永久制度，用现在赋税收入数额的十分之七作为各种费用开支，储备其中的三成用以防备水旱灾害非常之急。 又说 ：周朝以冢宰管理国家财政，唐代以宰相兼判盐铁、度支。
English: Fan Zhen Shangsu suggested: Since the people's strength is in dire straits, please reduce the number of officials and troops since the ancestors, take the compromise amount as a permanent system, use seven-tenths of the current tax revenue as various expenses, and reserve 30% of it to prevent floods and droughts as a matter of urgency. He also said: The Zhou Dynasty managed the national finance with Zongzai, and the Tang Dynasty used Zongzai as both the prime minister and the minister of salt and iron.

古文：今中书主民，枢密主兵，三司主财，各不相知。
现代文：今中书省主管政务，枢密院主管军事，三司主管财政，各自互不相知。
English: Currently, the Ministry of Education and Culture is in charge of government affairs, the Privy Council is in charge of military affairs, and the three departments are in charge of finance, but they do not know each other.

古文：财已匮，枢密益兵无穷；民已困，三司取财不已。
现代文：财政已经匮乏，枢密院仍无限制增加兵员；老百姓已经贫困，三司仍支取资财不休。
English: Finances have been depleted, the Privy Council still has no limit to increase the number of soldiers; the people have been impoverished, and the three departments are still spending money and resources.

古文：请使二府通知兵民大计，与三司同制国用。 
现代文：请求让二府互相通报共同主持军政大计，与三司一起共同管理国家财政。 
English: Request that the two governments inform each other and jointly preside over the military and political plan, and jointly manage the national finance with the three departments.

古文：契丹使至，虚声示强，大臣益募兵以塞责，岁费百千万。
现代文：契丹派使者来，为虚张声势显示国力强大，于是执政大臣增募军队以敷衍塞责，一年耗费钱财百千万。
English: The Khitan sent an envoy to show the country's strength as a bluff, so the ruling minister recruited more troops to shirk responsibility, costing millions of dollars a year.

古文：镇言： 备契丹莫若宽三晋之民，备灵夏莫若宽秦民，备西南莫若宽越、蜀之民，备天下莫若宽天下之民。
现代文：范镇说： 防备契丹不如宽待三晋百姓，防备灵夏不如宽待秦地百姓，防备西南夷不如宽待越、蜀之地的百姓，防备天下不如宽待天下百姓。
English: Fan Zhen said: "Preventing Khitan is not as good as being lenient to the people of Sanjin, preventing Lingxia is not as good as being lenient to the people of Qin, preventing Southwest Yi is not as good as being lenient to the people of Yue and Shu, and preventing the world is not as good as being lenient to the people of the world."

古文：夫兵所以卫民而反残民，臣恐异日之忧不在四夷，而在冗兵与穷民也。 
现代文：军队是用来保卫百姓的，反而残害百姓，我担心他日的忧患不在四夷，而在冗兵与穷困的百姓。 
English: The army is used to defend the people, but instead it is destroying the people. I fear that the troubles of the future will not be in Shiyi, but in the overstretched and impoverished people.

古文：商人输粟河北，取偿京师，而榷货不即予钞，久而鬻之，十才得其六。
现代文：商人把粟米输往河北，到京师领取报酬，但榷货务不马上给予现钞，久而卖之，十成中只能得到六成。
English: Merchants transport the corn to Hebei and collect the payment in Beijing. However, since the cargo department does not give cash immediately, they have to sell it for a long time, and they can only get 60% of the 10%.

古文：或建议出内帑钱，稍增价与市，岁可得羡息五十万。
现代文：有人建议拿出内库钱，稍稍增价给商人贸易，一年可得盈余息钱五十万。
English: Some people suggested that the treasury money should be taken out, and the merchants should be given a slight increase in price. The surplus interest could be 500,000 yuan a year.

古文：镇谓： 外府内帑，均为有司。
现代文：范镇认为 ：外府内库，都是政府部门。
English: Fan Zhen believes that: outside the prefectural treasury, all are government departments.

古文：今使外府滞商人，而内帑乘急以牟利，至伤国体。 仁宗遽止之。
现代文：现在使外府阻滞商人，而内库乘人之急以牟取巨利，最有伤国家大体。 仁宗马上制止了这种做法。
English: At present, the outer prefectures are obstructing merchants, while the inner treasury is taking advantage of people's haste to make huge profits, which is the most harmful to the country as a whole.

古文：葬温成后，太常议礼，前谓之园，后谓之陵，宰相刘沆前为监护使，后为园陵使。
现代文：安葬温成后，太常礼院讨论礼仪，墓地前面叫园，后面叫陵，宰相刘沆以前为监护使，后为园陵使。
English: After the burial of Wencheng, the Taichang Rite Academy discussed the etiquette. The front of the cemetery was called the garden, and the back was called the mausoleum. The prime minister Liu Wei was the guardian before, and then the garden mausoleum.

古文：镇曰： 尝闻法吏舞法矣，未闻礼官舞礼也。
现代文：范镇说： 曾听说执法官吏舞弄法令，没有听说礼官舞弄礼仪的。
English: Fan Zhen said: I have heard of law enforcement officials playing with laws, but I have not heard of etiquette officials playing with etiquette.

古文：请诘前后议礼异同状。 集贤样理刁约论圹中物侈丽，吴充、鞠真卿争论礼，并补外，皆上章留之。
现代文：请诘问前后仪礼异同的情况。 集贤校理刁约论墓中陪葬物大多奢侈华丽，吴充、鞠真卿争论礼仪，一同补任地方官，范镇都上章请求一一挽留。
English: Please inquire about the differences and similarities in the rituals and etiquette between the past and the present.The collection of sages and scholars discussed the funeral rites.Most of the funeral objects in the tomb were extravagant and gorgeous.Wu Chong and Jizhenqing argued about the etiquette.They were both appointed as local officials.Fan Zhen all requested to stay one by one on the top chapter.

古文：石全斌护葬，转观察使，他吏悉优迁两官。
现代文：石全斌护葬，转任观察使，其他护葬官吏全部优先升迁两官。
English: Shi Quanbin will be promoted to the post of funeral escort and observation envoy, and all other funeral escort officials will be promoted to the two posts as a priority.

古文：镇言： 章献、章懿、章惠三后之葬，推恩皆无此比。
现代文：范镇说 ：章献、章懿、章惠三个皇后的安葬，推恩都不能与此相比。
English: Fan Zhen said, "The funerals of three empresses, Zhang Xian, Zhang Ye and Zhang Hui, cannot be compared to this.

古文：乞追还全斌等告敕。 副都知任守忠、邓保吉同日除官，内臣无故改官者又五六人。
现代文：请求追还石全斌等人任命书。 副都知任守忠、邓保吉同日拜官授职，内臣无故改官的又有五六人。
English: We request the return of the appointment letters of Shi Quanbin and others. Deputy governors Ren Shou Zhong and Deng Baoji were appointed to their posts on the same day, and there were another five or six inner councilors who changed their posts without reason.

古文：时有敕，凡内降非准律令者，并许执奏。
现代文：当时有制度规定，凡是内降敕令不是以律令为标准的，都准许上奏。
English: At that time, there was a system stipulating that any rite that was not based on the ritsuryo code was allowed to be played.

古文：曾未一月，大臣辄废不行。
现代文：还不到一个月，大臣即废而不行。
English: Less than a month later, the minister was ousted.

古文：镇乞正中书、枢密之罪，以示天下。
现代文：范镇请求治中书省、枢密院有关官员之罪，以示天下。
English: Fan Zhen requested that the relevant officials of the Ministry of Education and the Privy Council be punished for the crime, so as to show the world.

古文：帝天性宽仁，言事者竞为激讦，至污人以帷箔不可明之事。
现代文：仁宗生性宽厚仁爱，言事的人竞相激烈攻讦，以至于用没有根据的男女私情来污辱他人。
English: The benevolent and benevolent nature of the benevolent and benevolent, the speakers compete fiercely to attack, so that they use unfounded personal feelings of men and women to insult others.

古文：镇独务引大体，非关朝廷安危，生民利疚，则阔略不言。
现代文：唯独范镇务必援引国家大体，不是有关朝廷安危，有关百姓利益忧虑的事，就疏略不说。
English: However, Fan Zhen must always refer to the country as a whole, and not to matters concerning the safety of the imperial court and concerns about the interests of the people.

古文：陈执中为相，镇论其无学术，非宰相器。
现代文：陈执中为宰相，范镇论他没有学问，不是宰相之才。
English: Chen Xizhong is the prime minister, Fan Zhen said that he has no learning, not the prime minister's talent.

古文：及嬖妾笞杀婢，御史劾奏，欲逐去之。
现代文：等到陈执中的宠妾鞭笞杀死奴婢，御史弹劾上奏，想要驱逐陈执中离去相位。
English: Wait until the favorite concubine of Chen Xizhong lashes and kills the slave, the impeachment of the imperial history will be played, and Chen Xizhong will leave the phase.

古文：镇言： 今阴阳不和，财匮民困，盗贼滋炽，狱犴充斥，执中当任其咎。御史舍大责细，暴扬燕私，若用此为进退，是因一婢逐宰相，非所以明等级，辨堂陛。 识者韪之。
现代文：范镇说 ：现在阴阳不和，财匮民困，盗贼滋生势盛，监狱充斥，陈执中应当负责任，但御史舍大责细，发泄私恨，如果用这作为进官退职的标准，这只是因为一个奴婢的事而驱逐宰相，就不足以表明等级，区分该立于殿堂和台阶下的。 
English: Fan Zhen said, "Nowadays, the yin and yang are at odds with each other, the poor and the rich are in trouble, thieves are flourishing, prisons are overcrowded, and responsibility should be exercised in the execution of duties. However, the emperor abdicates great responsibility and vents personal hatred. If this is used as the criterion for promotion and retirement, it is only because of a slave matter that the prime minister is expelled. It is not enough to indicate the rank, the distinction should be established in the hall of fame and under the steps.

古文：文彦博、富弼入相，诏百官郊迎。
现代文：有识之人认为这是正确的。文彦博、富弼入为宰相，诏命百官群僚在郊外迎接。
English: People with insight thought this was right. Fumihiko Fumihiko and Fushinori became prime ministers, and the emperor ordered a group of officials to meet them in the suburbs.

古文：镇曰： 隆之以虚礼，不若推之以至诚。
现代文：范镇说 ：与其以虚礼隆遇他们，不如以至诚对待他们。
English: Fan Zhen said: "Instead of treating them with false courtesy, it is better to treat them with sincerity."

古文：陛下用两人为相，举朝皆谓得人。
现代文：陛下任用他们两人为宰相，整个朝廷都认为得到人才。
English: His Majesty appointed the two of them as prime ministers, and the entire court believed that they were talented.

古文：然近制，两制不得诣宰相居第，百官不得间见，是不推之以诚也。
现代文：然而近代制度，两制不得造访宰相住宅，百官不得私下拜见，这不是以诚相待。
English: However, in the modern system, the two systems are not allowed to visit the prime minister's residence, and officials are not allowed to meet privately. This is not a sincere treatment.

古文：愿罢郊迎，除谒禁，则于御臣之术为两得矣。 议减任子及每岁取士，皆自镇发之。
现代文：希望废除郊迎，废除拜访的禁令，那么对驾御臣下来说是一举两得了。 建议减少任子及每年取士的数额，都是从范镇开始。
English: Hoping to abolish the ban on out-of-town visits and visits, it is a double whammy for the driving vassals. The proposal to reduce the number of appointments and the amount of the annual fee are all starting from Fan Town.

古文：又乞令宗室疏属补外官，帝曰： 卿言是也。
现代文：范镇又请求命令宗室及远亲补任地方官，仁宗说： 你说的是对的。
English: Fan Zhen also requested that his father-in-law and distant relatives be ordered to fill in as local officials. Renzong said, "What you said is right.

古文：顾恐天下谓朕不能睦族耳。 镇曰： 陛下甄别其贤者用之，不没其能，乃所以睦族也。 虽不行，至熙宁初，卒如其言。
现代文：只是担心天下说我不能和睦亲族而已。 范镇说 ：陛下甄别其中的贤能者加以任用，不埋没他的才能，这就是和睦亲族。 虽然暂时没有实行，到熙宁初年，终于果真像他说的那样做了。
English: He was just worried that the world would say I couldn't reconcile the relatives. Fan Zhen said, "Your Majesty should screen the wise among them and appoint them without burying their talents. This is the reconciliation of relatives." Although it was not implemented for the time being, by the first year of Xi Ning, it was finally done as he said.

古文：帝在位三十五年，未有继嗣。
现代文：仁宗在位三十五年，没有继承皇位的后代。
English: Ninsong reigned for thirty-five years, and there were no descendants to succeed to the throne.

古文：嘉祐初，暴得疾，中外大小之臣，无不寒心，莫敢先言者。
现代文：嘉初年，仁宗忽然得病，中外大小官员，无不寒心担扰，但谁也不敢带头说此事。
English: In the first year of Jia, Rinzong suddenly fell ill. Chinese and foreign officials, big and small, were worried, but no one dared to take the lead in talking about the matter.

古文：镇独奋曰： 天下事尚有大于此者乎？ 即拜疏曰： 置谏官者，为宗庙社稷计。
现代文：惟独范镇奋起而言 ：天下还有比这更重大的事情吗？ 他立即跪拜上疏说 ：设置谏官，是为了替国家谋划计议。
English: But Fan Zhen stood up and said: Is there anything more important in the world than this? He immediately bowed down and said: The establishment of eunuchs is to plan for the country.

古文：谏官而不以宗庙社稷计事陛下，是爱死嗜利之人，臣不为也。
现代文：谏官如果不以国家大计事奉陛下，这是怕死嗜利的人，我不做这种事。
English: If a eunuch does not serve his majesty with the country's best interests in mind, he is a person who is afraid of death and greedy for profit. I will not do such a thing.

古文：方陛下不豫，海内皇皇莫知所为，陛下独以祖宗后裔为念，是为宗庙之虑，至深且明也。
现代文：目前陛下有病，海内恐慌忧虑不知该怎么办，陛下独自以祖宗后裔为念，这是为国家考虑，至深而又明智的举措。
English: At present, His Majesty is ill, and he does not know what to do due to panic and anxiety at home. His Majesty alone is thinking about his ancestors and descendants. This is a profound and wise measure for the country.

古文：昔太祖舍其子而立太宗，天下之大公也。
现代文：过去太祖舍开儿子而策立太宗，这是天下最大公无私的做法。
English: In the past, great-grandfathers sacrificed their sons to establish Taizong, which is the most selfless practice in the world.

古文：真宗以周王薨，养宗子于宫中，天下之大虑也。
现代文：真宗因周王去世，抚养宗子于宫中，这是天下最远大的考虑。
English: Since King Zhou passed away, it was the world's highest consideration for the True Sect to raise the grandchild in the palace.

古文：愿以太祖之心，行真宗故事，拔近属之尤贤者，优其礼秩，置之左右，与图天下事，以系亿兆人心。 疏奏，文彦博使客问何所言，以实告，客曰： 如是，何不与执政谋？ 镇曰： 自分必死，故敢言。
现代文：希望陛下以太祖的胸怀，行真宗故事，选拔近亲中最贤能的人，优待其礼仪官秩，置于左右，参与图划天下大事，以维系亿万人的心。 议疏上奏后，文彦博派宾客问范镇说了些什么，范镇以实言相告，客人说： 像这样，怎么不与执政大臣一起商量呢？ 范镇说： 我自己料想必死无疑，所以敢于直言。
English: It is hoped that His Majesty will have the heart of the ancestor, carry out the story of the True Religion, select the most virtuous person among his close relatives, give preferential treatment to his etiquette and official rank, place him on the right and left, and participate in the world's major events to maintain the hearts of hundreds of millions of people. After the speech was played, Fenyangbo sent a guest to ask Fan Zhen what he said, Fan Zhen told the truth, and the guest said: Like this, why not discuss it with the ruling minister? Fan Zhen said: I myself expected to die without a doubt, so I dared to speak frankly.

古文：若谋于执政，或以为不可，岂得中辍乎？ 章累上，不报。
现代文：如果与执政商量，或许认为不可以，难道就中途停止吗？ 奏章累上，没有得到朝廷的答复。
English: If you consult with the government, and perhaps you think it is not possible, will you stop in the middle? You have written many letters, but you have not received a reply from the imperial court.

古文：执政谕之曰： 奈何效希名干进之人。 镇贻以书曰： 比天象见变，当有急兵，镇义当死职，不可死乱兵之下。
现代文：执政大臣谕示他说 ：你何必效法希图名声营谋官职地位的人呢？ 范镇致信执政说 ：近来天象有变，猜想会有紧急军事情况，我义当尽职而死，不能死于乱兵手中。
English: The ruling minister instructed him: "Why should you follow the example of someone who seeks fame and seeks official position?" Fan Zhen sent a letter to the ruling saying: "Recently, the weather has changed, I suspect that there will be an emergency military situation, I should do my duty and die, I can't die at the hands of soldiers."

古文：此乃镇择死之时，尚何顾希名干进之嫌哉？ 又言： 陛下得臣疏，不以留中而付中书，是欲使大臣奉行也。
现代文：这就是我选择死的时候，还怎么会顾及希望图名声营谋官职地位的嫌疑呢？ 又说 ：陛下收到我的奏疏，不把它留在禁中而交付给中书，是想让大臣奉而行之。
English: That is, when I chose to die, how could I take into account the suspicion that I hoped to make a name for myself and seek an official position? He also said: His Majesty received my report and did not leave it in the Forbidden City, but handed it to the Chinese government, in order to let the minister follow it.

古文：臣两至中书，大臣皆设辞拒臣，是陛下欲为宗庙社稷计，而大臣不欲也。
现代文：但我两次到中书，大臣都设辞拒绝了我，这是陛下想为国家计议，但大臣不想这样做。
English: But both times I went to the Chinese embassy, the minister declined to meet with me. This is what His Majesty wanted to do for the country, but the minister didn't want to do it.

古文：臣窃原大臣畏避之意，恐行之而陛下中变耳。
现代文：我私下推究大臣害怕躲避的用意，是恐怕实行这一办法后而陛下中途变卦而已。
English: I have privately deduced that the Minister is afraid to evade the intention, because I am afraid that after implementing this measure, His Majesty will change his mind.

古文：中变之祸，不过一死。
现代文：中途变卦的祸害，不过是一死。
English: The scourge of changing one's mind midway is nothing but death.

古文：国本不立，万一有如天象所告急兵之变，死且有罪，其为计亦已疏矣。
现代文：但国家的根本不立，万一有如天象所告诉的急兵之变，即使死了也还有罪过，这样他们的打算也就已经很疏粗了。
English: But the country is not stable at all, and in the unlikely event that there is a change of the guard, as told by the angels, even if they die, they will still be guilty, so their plan is already very crude.

古文：愿以臣章示大臣，使其自择死所。 闻者股栗。
现代文：希望陛下把我的奏章示给大臣，让他们自己选择死处。 听说这话的人两腿发抖。
English: I hope His Majesty will show my report to the ministers and let them choose their own place of death. People tremble when they hear this.

古文：除兼侍御史知杂事，镇以言不从，固辞。
现代文：被任命为兼侍御史知杂事，范镇因所上言没被采纳，坚决辞谢。
English: He was appointed concurrently as an attendant to the master of history, Fan Zhen was not accepted because of his last words, and he resolutely resigned.

古文：执政谕镇曰： 今间言已入，为之甚难。 镇复书执政曰： 事当论其是非，不当问其难易。
现代文：执政谕示范镇说 ：现在你的言论已经上报了，但要实行你所说的很困难。 范镇再写信给执政说 ：事情应当论其是正确的还是错误的，不应当问其是困难还是容易。
English: Fan Zhen again wrote to the government, saying, "Things should be judged by whether they are right or wrong, and should not be asked whether they are difficult or easy.

古文：诸公谓今日难于前日，安知异日不难于今日乎？ 凡见上面陈者三，言益恳切。
现代文：诸公认为今天比以前困难，如何知道他日不比今天更困难呢？ 范镇进见皇上共面陈三次，言词更加恳切。
English: Everyone agrees that today is more difficult than before, but how do we know that tomorrow will not be more difficult than today? Fan Zhen went to see the emperor and met with him three times, and his words were more earnest.

古文：镇泣，帝亦泣，曰： 朕知卿忠，卿言是也，当更俟三二年。 章十九上，待命百余日，须发为白。
现代文：范镇流泪，仁宗也流泪，仁宗说： 我知道你忠厚，你所说的是正确的，当再等三二年再说。 范镇十九次上奏章，等待复命一百多天，头发胡子都变白了。
English: Fan Zhen shed tears, Ren Zong also shed tears, Ren Zong said: I know you are loyal, what you said is correct, you should wait another thirty-two years. Fan Zhen played the chapter nineteen times, waiting for his life to be restored for more than a hundred days, his hair and beard turned white.

古文：朝廷知不能夺，乃罢知谏院，改集贤殿修撰，纠察在京刑狱，同修起居注，遂知制诰。
现代文：朝廷知道不能夺其志，于是罢去他的知谏院，改任集贤殿修撰、纠察在京刑狱、同修起居注，于是任知制诰。
English: The imperial court knew that they could not win his heart, so they removed him from Zhishan Academy and appointed him to the post of Shixian Temple, picketing in the Beijing Penal Prison, and living with a fellow practitioner. He was then appointed to the post of Zhishan Prefect.

古文：镇虽解言职，无岁不申前议。
现代文：范镇虽然解除了谏官职务，但没有一年不重申前议。
English: Although Fan Zhen dismissed the eunuch's duties, there was not a year that he did not reiterate the previous proposal.

古文：见帝春秋益高，每因事及之，冀以感动帝意。
现代文：见仁宗年岁越来越高，每每因事说及此事，希望以此感动仁宗的心意。
English: Seeing that Rinzong was getting older and older, he mentioned the matter every now and then, hoping to move Rinzong's heart.

古文：至是，因入谢，首言： 陛下许臣，今复三年矣，愿早定大计。 又因祫享，献赋以讽。
现代文：到这时，因入殿谢恩，他首先说 ：陛下给我许愿，到现在又三年了，希望陛下早定策立大计。 又乘合祭祖先的机会，献赋讽谏。
English: At this time, he first said, "Your Majesty has made a wish for me, and now it's been three years, I hope Your Majesty has already decided to make a grand plan.

古文：其后韩琦遂定策立英宗。
现代文：此后韩琦主谋策立英宗为皇位继承人。
English: After that, Han Xuan masterminded the plot to install Yingzong as the heir to the throne.

古文：迁翰林学士。
现代文：范镇迁任翰林学士。
English: Fan Zhen was transferred to the post of Hanlin Scholar.

古文：中书议追尊濮王，两制、台谏与之异，诏礼官检详典礼。
现代文：中书建议追尊濮王，两制、台谏与中书意见不同，诏命礼官检详制度和礼仪。
English: The two systems, Taiwan and Hong Kong are different from the opinions of the Chinese book, and the official examination system and etiquette are different from the Chinese book.

古文：镇判太常寺，率其属言： 汉宣帝于昭帝为孙，光武于平帝为祖，其父容可称皇考，议者犹非之，谓其以小宗合大宗之统也。
现代文：范镇判太常，率领其属下说： 汉宣帝于汉昭帝为孙子，汉光武帝于汉平帝为祖父，他们的父亲容或可以称皇考，议者尚加以非议，认为这是以小宗附合大宗的绪统。
English: Fan Zhen judged too often and led his subordinates to say: Han Xuan Di is the grandson of Han Zhao Di, Han Guangwu Di is the grandfather of Han Ping Di, their father's appearance may be called the imperial examination, the proponents still criticized, believing that this is a small group attached to a large group.

古文：今陛下既以仁宗为考，又加于濮王，则其失非特汉二帝比。
现代文：现在陛下既然以仁宗为皇考，又后尊濮王为皇考，那么这种过失不是汉代二帝可比的。 
English: Now that His Majesty is taking Emperor Renzong as the imperial examination, and later Emperor Zongxuan as the imperial examination, then this mistake is not comparable to the two emperors of the Han Dynasty.

古文：凡称帝若考，若寝庙，皆非是。 执政怒，召镇责曰： 方令检详，何遽列上！ 镇曰： 有司得诏，不敢稽留，即以闻，乃其职也。
现代文：执政大怒，召范镇责斥说： 刚令检详典章礼仪，你为什么立即条列上陈？ 范镇说： 官吏得到诏命，不敢稽留，立即上陈以闻，乃是他的职责所在。
English: The government was furious and summoned Fan Zhen to reprimand him, saying, "You have just ordered a detailed examination of the rules and etiquette, why did you immediately list them?" Fan Zhen said, "When a government official receives an imperial edict, he does not dare to delay, he immediately lists them and listens to them. This is his duty.

古文：奈何更以为罪乎？ 会草制，误迁宰相官，改侍读学士。
现代文：如何变成罪状了呢？ 恰逢起草制书，误迁宰相官，改任侍读学士。
English: How did it become a crime? It coincided with the drafting of a book, the wrongful removal of the prime minister, and the appointment of an attendant bachelor.

古文：明年，还翰林，出知陈州。
现代文：次年，范镇回到翰林院，出任陈州知州。
English: The following year, Fan Zhen returned to the Hanlin Academy and took up the post of Chenzhou Zhizhou.

古文：陈方饥，视事三日，擅发钱粟以贷。
现代文：陈州正闹饥荒，范镇治事三天，擅自散发钱粟来借贷给百姓。
English: There was a famine in Chenzhou. Fan Zhen took charge of the situation for three days and distributed money to the people to lend them money.

古文：监司绳之急，即自劾，诏原之。
现代文：监司追究很急，范镇马上自己弹劾，诏令赦免他。
English: The investigation by the supervisor was very urgent. Fan Zhen immediately impeached himself and issued a decree to pardon him.

古文：是岁大熟，所贷悉还。
现代文：这年陈州获得大丰收，百姓所借贷的钱粟全部偿还。
English: This year, Chenzhou received a bumper harvest, and all the money borrowed by the people was repaid.

古文：神宗即位，复为翰林学士兼侍读、知通进银台司。
现代文：神宗即位，范镇再任翰林学士兼侍读、知通进银台司。
English: Shenzong ascended to the throne, and Fan Zhen was reappointed as Hanlin Baccalaureate and Attendant, and Zhitong entered the Bank of Taiwan.

古文：故事，门下封驳制旨，省审章奏，纠擿违滞，皆著所授敕，后乃刊去。
现代文：按照旧的典章制度，门下省封驳制书圣旨，察看审查奏章奏疏，纠正违法行为，都写在所授的敕书上，后来才删削去。
English: According to the old award system, the sacred will of the subordinate province to block and refute the writing of the book, inspect the review of the record of the record of the record of the record of the record, and correct the illegal acts were all written on the award certificate, and later they were deleted.

古文：镇始请复之，使知所守。
现代文：范镇开始请求恢复这一制度，使门下知道他的职守所在。
English: Fan Zhen began to request the reinstatement of this system, so that his subordinates knew where his duties lay.

古文：王安石改常平为青苗，镇言： 常平之法，起于汉盛时，视谷贵贱发敛，以便农末，最为近古，不可改。
现代文：王安石改常平法为青苗法，范镇说： 常平之法，开始于汉朝盛世，它视谷价高低散发和收集，以便于农业和工商业，最为接近古代制度，不能改变。
English: Wang Anshi changed the Changping Law to the Young Seedlings Law. Fan Zhen said: The Changping Law, which began in the Han Dynasty's golden age, distributes and collects grain according to the grain price, so as to facilitate agriculture and industry and commerce, is the closest to the ancient system and cannot be changed.

古文：而青苗行于唐之衰世，不足法。
现代文：而青苗法实行于唐朝衰世，不足以效法。
English: However, the young seedling method was implemented in the Tang Dynasty, and it was not enough to follow the example.

古文：且陛下疾富民之多取而少取之，此正百步、五十步之间耳。
现代文：而且陛下厌恶富民之攫取财富太多，于是稍稍收取一些，这正是五十步笑一百步而已。
English: Moreover, His Majesty disliked the rich people's grabbing too much wealth, so he collected a little more, which is just fifty paces or a hundred paces.

古文：今有两人坐市贸易，一人故下其直以相倾，则人皆知恶之，可以朝廷而行市道之所恶乎？ 吕惠卿在迩英言： 今预买绢，亦青苗之比。 镇曰： 预买，亦敝法也。
现代文：如果现在有两人坐市贸易，一人故意压低价格全部卖出去倾轧另一人，那么人们都知道厌恶他，朝廷怎么可以做街市所厌恶的事呢？ 吕惠卿在迩英殿说 ：今预买绸、绢，也可比照青苗法。 范镇说： 预买，也是不好的制度。
English: If there are two people trading in the market now, and one of them deliberately lowers the price and sells everything to the other person, then everyone knows that they hate him, so how can the court do something that the street market hates? Lu Huixing said in the Yuying Hall: "To pre-purchase silk and satin now can also be compared to the seedling method." Fan Zhen said: "Pre-purchase is also a bad system."

古文：若府库有余，当并去之，岂应援以为比。 韩琦极论新法之害，送条例司疏驳，李常乞罢青苗钱，诏命分析，镇皆封还。
现代文：如果国库有余，应当一并废除掉，怎能拿两者来作比较。 韩琦极论新法的危害，送到制置三司条例司疏驳，李常乞求废除青苗钱，诏令分析，范镇都予封还。
English: If there is a surplus in the national treasury, it should be abolished at the same time, how can the two be compared. Han Bingji discussed the harm of the new law and sent it to the three departments for the establishment of regulations to refute, Li Chang begged for the abolition of Qingmiao money, analyzed the imperial edict, and Fan Zhen was all sealed back.

古文：诏五下，镇执如初。
现代文：诏令五下，范镇执著如初。
English: After the fifth imperial edict, Fan Zhen persisted as before.

古文：司马光辞枢密副使，诏许之，镇再封还。
现代文：司马光辞去枢密副使，诏令准许，范镇又封还诏令。
English: Sima Guang resigned as Privy Vice-Envoy, which was permitted by the imperial edict, and Fan Zhen returned the imperial edict.

古文：帝以诏直付光，不由门下。
现代文：神宗把诏令径直交付司马光，不经门下省。
English: Shenzong delivered the edict directly to Sima Guang, without passing it down to the provincial government.

古文：镇奏曰： 由臣不才，使陛下废法，有司失职，乞解银台司。 
现代文：范镇上奏说： 由于我没有才能，使陛下废弃法令制度，这是官吏失职，请求解除我的知通进银台司职务。 
English: Fan Zhen said in his report: Because I have no talent, I caused His Majesty to abandon the legal system, which is the official's dereliction of duty, and requested that I be relieved of my duties as the Secretary of the Department of Intellectual Property.

古文：举苏轼谏官，御史谢景温奏罢之；举孔文仲制科，文仲对策，论新法不便，罢归故官。
现代文：荐举苏轼为谏官，因御史谢景温上奏而罢免；举荐孔文仲为制科，孔文仲应对问策，论新法不便，结果罢归旧官。
English: Su Shi was recommended to be promoted to eunuch, but he was removed from the post due to the ascension of the imperial historian Xie Jingwen; Kong Wenzhong was recommended to be promoted to the position of the system expert, and Kong Wenzhong responded to questions and discussed the inconvenience of the new law. As a result, he was demoted to the old position.

古文：镇皆力争之，不报。
现代文：范镇都大力为之争辩，没有得到朝廷的答复。
English: Fan Zhen vigorously argued for it, but did not receive a reply from the imperial court.

古文：即上疏曰： 臣言不行，无颜复立于朝，请谢事。
现代文：便上疏说： 我的建议不实行，无脸再立于朝中，请求谢事退职。
English: Then Shang Zuo said: If my suggestion is not carried out, I will stand in the center of the court without a face and ask for a resignation.

古文：臣言青苗不见听，一宜去；荐苏轼、孔文仲不见用，二宜去。
现代文：我说青苗之事不被采纳，这是第一个应当离去的原因；推荐苏轼、孔文仲不被任用，这是第二个应当离去的原因。
English: I said that the matter of young seedlings was not adopted, which is the first reason to leave; the recommendation that Su Shi and Kong Wenzhong were not appointed is the second reason to leave.

古文：李定避持服，遂不认母，坏人伦，逆天理，而欲以为御史，御史台为之罢陈荐，舍人院为之罢宋敏求、吕大临、苏颂，谏院为之罢胡宗愈。
现代文：李定逃避居丧守孝，于是不认母亲，破坏人伦，逆忤天理，而朝廷打算以他为御史，御史台因为他罢去陈荐，舍人院因为他罢去宋敏求、吕大临、苏颂，谏院因为他罢去胡宗愈。
English: Li Ding evaded the residence of mourning and filial piety, so he disowned his mother, destroyed human relations, and defied divine principles, and the imperial court planned to make him the imperial historian, the imperial historian because he dismissed Chen Wei, the imperial scholar because he dismissed Song Minqiu, Lyu Da Lin, and Su Song, and the imperial scholar because he dismissed Hu Zongyao.

古文：王韶上书肆意欺罔，以兴造边事，事败，则置而不问，反为之罪帅臣李师中。
现代文：王韶上书肆意欺骗蒙蔽，以便兴造边事，边事失败后，则置而不问，反而治罪帅臣李师中。
English: Wang Qian wrote the book to deliberately deceive and mislead in order to create a side issue, and after the side issue failed, he did not ask, but instead punished the handsome minister Li Shizhong.

古文：及御史一言苏轼，则下七路掎摭其过；孔文仲则遣之归任。
现代文：等到御史一说苏轼，就下书七路指摘他的过失；孔文仲则遣回归任原职。
English: As soon as Mishi said Su Shi, he wrote down seven ways to point out his fault; Kong Wenzhong was sent back to his original post.

古文：以此二人况彼二人，事理孰是孰非，孰得孰失，其能逃圣鉴乎？
现代文：用这二人与那二人相比，事情的理由谁对谁错，谁成谁败，难道能逃得出圣上的明鉴吗？
English: By comparing these two people with those two people, who is right and who is wrong, and who succeeds and who fails, can we escape the clear guidance of the Holy Spirit?

古文：言青苗有见效者，不过岁得什百万缗钱，缗钱什百万，非出于天，非出于地，非出于建议者之家，盖一出于民耳。
现代文：说青苗法有见效的，不过是每年得到千万缗钱，而缗钱千万，不是出自天，不是出自地，不是出自建议者家，大概一律出自于百姓。
English: To say that the Young Seedlings Law is effective is just to get tens of millions of money every year, and tens of millions of money does not come from heaven, does not come from the earth, does not come from the family of the person who suggested it, and almost all of it comes from the people.

古文：民犹鱼也，财犹水也，养民而尽其财，譬犹养鱼而竭其水也。 
现代文：百姓如同鱼，钱财如同水，养民而尽其财，就像养鱼而竭其水一样。 
English: People are like fish, and money is like water. If you nurture people and make the most of your money, it's just like if you nurture fish and run out of water.

古文：疏五上，其后指安石用喜怒为赏罚，曰： 陛下有纳谏之资，大臣进拒谏之计；陛下有爱民之性，大臣用残民之术。
现代文：范镇五次上呈奏疏，其后又指责王安石用自己的喜怒哀乐作为奖赏惩罚的标准，他说： 陛下具有纳谏的资质，而大臣进献拒谏的计谋；陛下具有爱护百姓的天性，大臣却使用残害百姓的办法。
English: Five times, Fan Zhen made a poor performance, and then accused Wang Anshi of using his own emotions as the standard for reward and punishment. He said: His Majesty has the ability to accept gifts, while the minister has the ability to reject gifts; His Majesty has the nature to love and protect the people, but the minister uses methods to harm the people.

古文：臣知言入触大臣之怒，罪且不测。
现代文：我知道这话入内会触犯大臣之怒，罪责且不可揣度。
English: I knew that saying this would incur the minister's wrath, and the blame was incalculable.

古文：然臣职献替而无一言，则负陛下矣。 疏入，安石大怒，持其疏至手颤，自草制极诋之。
现代文：然而我职守是劝善规过，论议兴革，如果不说一句话，那么就辜负陛下了。 奏疏入内，王安石大为恼怒，拿着范镇的奏疏以至于手颤抖，他亲自起草制书极力诋毁范镇。
English: However, my duty is to advise on good regulations and discuss the promotion of the revolution, and if I do not say a word, then I will fail His Majesty. When Sozo entered, Wang Anshi was very angry, holding Fan Zhen's Sozo so that his hands trembled, and he personally drafted a book to discredit Fan Zhen.

古文：以户部侍郎致仕，凡所得恩典，悉不与。
现代文：于是范镇以户部侍郎退休，凡是他所应得到的恩典，全部没有给予。
English: As a result, Fan Zhen retired as an attendant of the household department, and all the grace he should have received was not given.

古文：镇表谢，略曰： 愿陛下集群议为耳目，以除壅蔽之奸，任老成为腹心，以养和平之福。 天下闻而壮之。
现代文：范镇上表辞谢，大略说： 希望陛下集中大家的意见作为耳目，以便消除蒙蔽之奸；任用老成持重的人为腹心近臣，以便养得和平和顺之福。 天下人听到范镇这番话后都称赞他。
English: Fan Zhen made a speech of thanks, saying roughly: I hope that His Majesty will concentrate everyone's opinions as ears and eyes, so as to eliminate the blinded treachery; appoint someone with long-standing experience as a trusted vassal, so as to maintain peace and prosperity. After hearing Fan Zhen's words, the world praised him.

古文：安石虽诋之深切，人更以为荣。
现代文：虽然王安石对范镇甚加诋毁，但人们更加以此为荣。
English: Although Wang Anshi has slandered Fan Zhen, people are more proud of it.

古文：既退，苏轼往贺曰： 公虽退，而名益重矣！ 镇愀然曰： 君子言听计从，消患于未萌，使天下阴受其赐，无智名，无勇功；吾独不得为此，使天下受其害而吾享其名，吾何心哉！ 日与宾客赋诗饮酒，或劝使称疾杜门，镇曰： 死生祸福，天也，吾其如天何！ 同天节乞随班上寿，许之，遂为令。
现代文：范镇退职后，苏轼前往祝贺说： 您虽然退位，但名声更重了！ 范镇悲伤地说 ：君子是言听计从，消除后患于未然，使天下人暗中受到他的恩赐，而没有智慧之名，没有勇敢之功；我唯独不能这样做，使天下受到伤害而我却享其名，我于心何忍！ 范镇每天与客人赋诗饮酒，有人劝他称病闭门不出，范镇说： 死与生，祸与福，是上天安排的，我奈何不了天！ 同天节，范镇请求随班行祝寿，得到准许，于是成为制度。
English: After Fan Zhen retired from his post, Su Yao went to congratulate him and said: Although you have abdicated, your reputation is even heavier! Fan Zhen said sadly: A gentleman is a man who listens to words and eliminates later problems before they occur, so that the people of the world secretly receive his gifts, but without the name of wisdom, without the deed of bravery; I alone can not do this, so that the world is harmed, but I enjoy its name, how can I bear it! Fan Zhen drank wine with his guests every day, and someone advised him not to go out because of illness. Fan Zhen said: Death and life, misfortune and fortune, are arranged

古文：轼得罪，下台狱，索与镇往来书文甚急，犹上书论救。
现代文：苏轼获罪，投入御史台狱，官府急于向他索要与范镇的来往书信文章，范镇还是上书辩论救助苏轼。
English: Su Shi was found guilty and sent to Goshidai Prison. The government was eager to ask him for the correspondence between him and Fan Zhen. Fan Zhen sent a letter to argue for the rescue of Su Shi.

古文：久之，徙居许。
现代文：久而久之，范镇被迁移到许州居住。
English: Over time, Fan Zhen was moved to Xuzhou to live.

古文：哲宗立，韩维言： 镇在仁宗时，首启建储之议，未尝以语人，人亦莫为言者。 具以十九疏上之。
现代文：哲宗即位，韩维说： 范镇在仁宗时，首先陈述立太子之议，他从不对人说起，人们也不敢讲这件事。 开列起草十九疏上呈。
English: Han Wei said of the enthronement of Zhezong: When Fan Zhen was enthroned, he first presented the proposal to install the crown prince. He never mentioned it to anyone, and people did not dare to talk about it. A list of the nineteen drafts is submitted.

古文：拜端明殿学士，起提举中太一宫兼侍读，且欲以为门下侍郎。
现代文：范镇被任命为端明殿学士，起用提举中太一宫兼侍读，而且朝廷打算以他为门下侍郎。
English: Fan Zhen was appointed as an academician of the Duanming Palace, and he was also appointed as an attendant of the Grand Empress Dowager Cixi, and the imperial court planned to make him a subordinate attendant.

古文：镇雅不欲起，从孙祖禹亦劝止之，遂固辞，改提举崇福宫。
现代文：范镇向来不打算再起做官，他的从孙范祖禹也劝告阻止他，于是范镇坚决辞谢，改任提举崇福宫。
English: Fan Zhen never intended to become an official again, and his disciple Sun Fan Zuyu also advised him to stop, so Fan Zhen resolutely resigned and was transferred to Chongfu Palace.

古文：祖禹谒告归省，诏赐以龙茶，存劳甚渥。
现代文：范祖禹告假回家省亲，皇帝诏赐龙茶给范镇，慰劳很优厚。
English: Fan Zuyu went home on leave to visit relatives, and the emperor gave long tea to Fan Zhen. The consolation was very generous.

古文：复告老，以银青光禄大夫再致仕，累封蜀郡公。
现代文：范镇再次告老，以银青光禄大夫又一次退休，累封蜀郡公。
English: Fan Zhen is old again, and the doctor retired again with silver Qing Guanglu, and became the crown prince of Shu County.

古文：镇于乐尤注意，自谓得古法，独主房庶以律生尺之说。
现代文：范镇对乐特别注意，自己认为得到古代之法，独自主张房庶以律生尺的说法。
English: Fan Zhen paid special attention to music. He believed that he had obtained the ancient method, and independently advocated the theory that the householder should use the rhythmic ruler.

古文：司马光谓不然，往复论难，凡数万言。
现代文：司马光认为不是这样，于是多次辩论诘难，共数万言。
English: Sima Guang thought that this was not the case, so he repeatedly debated and struggled, a total of tens of thousands of words.

古文：初，仁宗命李照改定大乐，下王朴乐三律。
现代文：起初，仁宗命李照改定大乐，下调王朴乐三律。
English: At first, Rinzong ordered Li Zhao to revise the Great Music and downgraded the Three Laws of Wang Pu Le.

古文：皇祐中，又诏胡瑗等考正。
现代文：皇年中，又诏命胡瑗等人考证。
English: In the middle of the reign of the emperor, the emperor also ordered Hu Yao and others to examine the evidence.

古文：神宗时诏镇与刘几定之。
现代文：神宗时诏命范镇同刘几定乐。
English: Shenzong ordered Fan Zhen and Liu Ji Dingle.

古文：镇曰： 定乐当先正律。 神宗曰： 然，虽有师旷之聪，不以六律不能正五音。 镇作律尺、龠合、升斗、豆区、鬴斛，欲图上之，又乞访求真黍，以定黄钟。
现代文：范镇说 ：定乐应当先订正律吕。 神宗说： 对，即使有师旷的聪慧，不用六律也不能订正五音。 范镇制作律尺、龠合、升斗、豆区、斛，打算把它们绘成图呈上，又请求访求真黍，以定黄钟。
English: Fan Zhen said: The Dingle should first revise the Ru Ru. Shen Zong said: Yes, even if you have the wisdom of a teacher, you can't revise the five tones without the six laws. Fan Zhen made the ruler, meshing, lifting bucket, bean area, and bowl, planned to draw them on the map, and asked to visit the real bowl to determine the yellow bell.

古文：而刘几即用李照乐，加用四清声而奏乐成。
现代文：而刘几就沿用李照乐，加用四清声而上奏说乐已制成。
English: But Liu Qian continued to use Li Zhao Music, and added four clear voices to play the music.

古文：诏罢局，赐赍有加。
现代文：诏令停止乐局，给以丰厚的赏赐。
English: The emperor ordered to stop the game and give a rich reward.

古文：镇曰： 此刘几乐也，臣何与焉。 至是，乃请太府铜为之，逾年而成，比李照乐下一律有奇。
现代文：范镇说： 这是刘几的乐，与我没有什么关系。 到这时，范镇便请求太府给铜制造，一年后制成，比李照乐降一律有奇。
English: Fan Zhen said: This is Liu Qian's music, it has nothing to do with me. At this time, Fan Zhen asked the Taifu to make copper, and it was made a year later. Compared to Li Zhaole, the reduction is always surprising.

古文：帝及太皇太后御延和殿，召执政同阅视，赐诏嘉奖。
现代文：神宗及太皇太后御驾延和殿，召令执政大臣一同阅看视察，赐诏嘉奖范镇。
English: Emperor Shenzong and the Grand Empress Dowager drove to the Great Hall of the People, summoned the ruling minister to read the inspection together, and gave the award to Fan Zhen.

古文：下之太常，诏三省、侍从、台阁之臣，皆往观焉。
现代文：置放太常礼院，诏命三省、侍从、台阁官员，都前往参观。
English: The imperial edict ordered the three provinces, the attendants, and the cabinet officials to visit the Taizhong Academy.

古文：镇时已属疾，乐奏三日而薨，年八十一。
现代文：范镇当时患病，乐奏三天而去世，终年八十一岁。
English: Fan Zhen was ill at the time, played music for three days and died at the age of 81.

古文：赠金紫光禄大夫，谥曰忠文。
现代文：赠金紫光禄大夫，谥号为 忠文 。
English: He was awarded the gold medal of Doctor of the Purple and Gold Rays, and his posthumous name was Zhongwen.

古文：镇平生与司马光相得甚欢，议论如出一口，且约生则互为传，死则作铭。
现代文：范镇平生与司马光相得甚欢，意见如出一口，而且相约生前则互相写传，死后则撰墓铭。
English: Fan Zhen and Sima Guang were very fond of each other in their lifetime, and their opinions were like a mouthful, and they agreed to write biographies of each other during their lifetime, and to write an epitaph after their death.

古文：光生为《镇传》，服其勇决；镇复铭光墓云： 熙宁奸朋淫纵，险诐憸猾，赖神宗洞察于中。 其辞峭峻。
现代文：司马光生前写了《范镇传》，佩服范镇果敢断决；范镇又为司马光写墓志铭说 ：熙宁时奸人朋党浸淫恣纵，邪恶不正，奸佞狡猾，幸赖神宗洞察其中。 言辞严厉峻刻。
English: Sima Guang wrote "The Biography of Fan Zhen" during his lifetime, admiring Fan Zhen's bold decision; Fan Zhen also wrote an epitaph for Sima Guang, saying: When Xi Ning was in power, the treacherous party members were immoral and wanton, evil and dishonest, treacherous and cunning, and Shenzong Shengli was one of them.

古文：光子康属苏轼书之，轼曰： 轼不辞书，惧非三家福。 乃易他铭。
现代文：司马光之子司马康嘱托苏轼书写，苏轼说： 我不辞谢，但恐怕这不是我们三家的福运。 于是改书其他墓铭。
English: Sima Guang's son, Sima Kang, asked Su Shi to write the epitaph. Su Shi said, "I will not refuse to thank you, but I'm afraid this is not the good fortune of our three families." So he changed the book to include other epitaphs.

古文：镇清白坦夷，遇人必以诚，恭俭慎默，口不言人过。
现代文：范镇清白坦荡，遇人必以诚相待，恭敬俭朴谨慎静默，不说他人的过错。
English: Fan Zhen is innocent and frank. When encountering people, he must treat each other with sincerity, be respectful, frugal, prudent and silent, and not talk about other people's faults.

古文：临大节，决大议，色和而语壮，常欲继之以死，虽在万乘前，无所屈。
现代文：面对国家大体，决断国家大义，心平气和而语言雄壮，常常打算随后而死，即使是在皇帝面前，也无可屈服。
English: Facing the country as a whole, deciding the great cause of the country, calm and strong in speech, often intending to die afterwards, even in front of the emperor, can not be subdued.

古文：笃于行义，奏补先族人而后子孙，乡人有不克婚葬者，辄为主之。
现代文：笃行大义，奏补子孙时先族人而后子孙，同乡人有不能够结婚、下葬的，就替他们主持。
English: He is a man of great righteousness, and when he needs to make amends with his descendants, he first consults his ancestors and then his descendants. If his fellow villagers are unable to get married or have a funeral, he will preside over it for them.

古文：兄鎡，卒于陇城，无子，闻其有遗腹子在外，镇时未仕，徒步求之两蜀间，二年乃得之，曰： 吾兄异于人，体有四乳，则儿亦必然。 已而果然，名曰百常。
现代文：兄长范钅兹，死在陇城，没有子嗣，范镇听说他有遗腹子在外地，范镇当时没有做官，步行求访于两蜀之间，二年才找到，他说 ：我的兄长不同于常人，身上有四个乳房，这个小孩也必然如此。 不久果真如此，小孩名叫百常。
English: His elder brother, Fan Rongzi, died in Lucheng and had no children. Fan Zhen heard that he had a stillborn son in another place. At that time, Fan Zhen was not an official. He walked between the two Shuxiu Mountains to visit him. It took him two years to find him. He said, "My elder brother is different from ordinary people. He has four breasts on his body, and this child is bound to be the same. It soon turned out to be true. The child's name is Baizhang.

古文：少受学于乡先生庞直温，直温子昉卒于京师，镇娶其女为孙妇，养其妻子终身。
现代文：范镇从小随乡先生庞直温读书，直温的儿子庞日方死在京师，范镇让孙子娶庞日方之妇为妻，并抚养庞日方的妻子终身。
English: Fan Zhen has been studying with his hometown teacher Pang Zhiwen since childhood. Pang's son Pang Yifang died in Beijing. Fan Zhen let his grandson marry Pang Yifang's wife and raise Pang Yifang's wife for life.

古文：其学本《六经》，口不道佛、老、申、韩之说。
现代文：范镇的学问本于《六经》，不讲佛教、老子、申不害、韩非的学说。
English: Fan Zhen's textbook is the "Six Classics," which does not mention the teachings of Buddhism, Laozi, Shen Nuxiang, and Han Fei.

古文：契丹、高丽皆传诵其文。
现代文：契丹、高丽都传诵他的文章。
English: Khitan and Goryeo both recited his articles.

古文：祖禹字淳甫，一字梦得。
现代文：范祖禹字淳甫，一字梦得，成都华阳人。
English: Fan Zu Yu's character, Jun Fu, is a dream come true. He is from Huayang, Chengdu.

古文：其生也，母梦一伟丈夫被金甲入寝室，曰： 吾汉将军邓禹。 既寤，犹见之，遂以为名。
现代文：他出生时，母亲梦见一伟岸男子身披金甲进入寝室，说： 我是汉代将军邓禹。 既而醒来，好像还看见此人，于是取名祖禹。
English: When he was born, his mother dreamed that a great man in a golden armor entered the bedroom and said, "I am the Han Dynasty general Deng Yu." When she woke up, she seemed to still see this man, so she took the name Zu Yu.

古文：幼孤，叔祖镇抚育如己子。
现代文：从小成为孤儿，叔祖父范镇抚育他像自己的儿子。
English: Orphaned at an early age, he was raised by his great-uncle Fan Zhen like his own son.

古文：祖禹自以既孤，每岁时亲宾庆集，惨怛若无所容，闭门读书，未尝预人事。
现代文：祖禹自己认为幼失怙恃，身世孤单，每过年时亲戚宾客庆集，他却忧伤好像无所容身，闭门读书，从没有参预应酬请托。
English: ZuYu himself thought that he was a lost child and was alone in the world. Every New Year's Eve, relatives and guests would gather to celebrate. However, he was sad and seemed to have nowhere to hide. He studied behind closed doors and never attended parties.

古文：既至京师，所与交游，皆一时闻人。
现代文：不久以后到达京城，所有与他交游的，都是一时著名人物。
English: Soon after, he arrived in the capital, and all his acquaintances were temporarily famous people.

古文：镇器之曰： 此儿，天下士也。 
现代文：范镇器重他说： 这个孩子，是天下士人。 
English: Fan Zhen said with a heavy heart, "This child is a world-class scholar.

古文：进士甲科。
现代文：中进士甲科。
English: Junior high school entrance examination, Division A.

古文：从司马光编修《资治通鉴》，在洛十五年，不事进取。
现代文：跟随司马光编修《资治通鉴》，在洛阳十五年，不事职位的升迁。
English: He followed Sima Guang in compiling "Zizhi Tongjian" and worked in Luoyang for 15 years, without any promotion.

古文：书成，光荐为秘书省正字。
现代文：书修成，司马光推荐他任秘书省正字。
English: After the book was revised, Sima Guang recommended him to be the secretary of the provincial government.

古文：时王安石当国，尤爱重之。
现代文：当时王安石当权，尤其爱重他。
English: Wang Anshi was in power at the time, and he was held in particularly high regard.

古文：王安国与祖禹友善，尝谕安石意，竟不往谒。
现代文：王安国与祖禹友善，曾告诉王安石看重他的意思，祖禹终没有前去拜见。
English: Wang An Guo was friendly with Zu Yu. He once told Wang Anshi that he valued his opinion. However, Zu Yu did not go to meet him.

古文：富弼致仕居洛，素严毅，杜门罕与人接，待祖禹独厚；疾笃，召授以密疏，大抵论安石误国及新法之害，言极愤切。
现代文：富弼致仕后居住在洛阳，向来严肃刚毅，杜门很少与人交接，惟独厚待祖禹；病情加重，召见祖禹授以密疏，大致是议论王安石误国以及新法的危害，言辞极为愤慨中肯。
English: After his retirement, Fuxi lived in Luoyang. He was always serious and strong-willed. Doumen rarely interacted with people, but he was kind to Zuyu. When his condition worsened, he summoned Zuyu to meet him. It was basically a discussion about Wang Anshi's misrule of the country and the harm of the new law. His words were extremely indignant and pertinent.

古文：弼薨，人皆以为不可奏，祖禹卒上之。
现代文：富弼去世，人们都认为不可以上奏，祖禹最终上奏了此事。
English: After the death of Fuxi, people thought that it was not allowed to play it, and Zu Yu finally played it.

古文：神宗崩，祖禹上疏论丧服之制曰： 先王制礼，君服同于父，皆斩衰三年，盖恐为人臣者不以父事其君。
现代文：神宗去世，祖禹上疏论丧服之制说： 先王制作礼仪，君服与父服相同，都是穿斩衰朝服，服期三年，大概是担心为人臣者不以父事其君。
English: After the death of Shenzong, ZuYu said about the mourning dress system: The previous king made the etiquette, the king's robe was the same as the father's robe, both wore the imperial robe, and the service period was three years, probably because he was worried that those who were subjects would not take their father as their king.

古文：自汉以来，不惟人臣无服，人君遂不为三年之丧。
现代文：自从汉代以来，不只是人臣不按丧礼规定穿戴丧服，人君也不守三年之丧。
English: Since the Han Dynasty, it is not only that courtiers do not wear mourning clothes according to the funeral regulations, but also that people do not observe the three-year mourning period.

古文：国朝自祖宗以来，外廷虽用易月之制，宫中实行三年服。
现代文：国朝自祖宗以来，外廷虽然采用易月的制度，宫中实行三年丧服制。
English: Since the founding of the Kuomintang, although the outer court has adopted the e-month system, the three-year mourning dress system has been implemented in the palace.

古文：君服如古典，而臣下犹依汉制，故十二日而小祥，期而又小祥，二十四日而大祥，再期而又大祥。
现代文：君主丧服如古代，但臣下还是依照汉代制度，所以十二天而为周年祭，一个月而又为周年祭，二十四天而为三年满，二个月又为三年满。
English: Monarchs wore mourning clothes as in ancient times, but their subjects still followed the Han Dynasty system, so the anniversary festival was held on the 12th day, the anniversary festival was held on the 1st month, the three-year anniversary was held on the 24th day, and the three-year anniversary was held on the 2nd month.

古文：既以日为之，又以月为之，此礼之无据者也。
现代文：既以日为之，又以月为之，这于礼制无所依据。
English: Both the day and the month are used, which has no basis in the etiquette.

古文：古者再期而大祥，中月而禫。
现代文：古代二年而三年满，隔月而脱下孝服。
English: In ancient times, it took two years to complete three years, and the next month to take off the filial piety.

古文：禫，祭之名，非服之色。
现代文：礻覃，是除丧服的祭名，不是丧服的种类。
English: , is the name of the festival for removing mourning clothes, not the type of mourning clothes.

古文：今乃为之惨服三日然后禫，此礼之不经者也。
现代文：现在却为之穿浅色丧服三天后脱下，这是不遵守成规定法的礼制。
English: Now, they wear light-colored mourning clothes for three days and then take them off, which is a form of etiquette that does not comply with established laws.

古文：服既除，至葬又服之，祔庙后即吉，才八月而遽纯吉，无所不佩，此又礼之无渐者也。
现代文：丧服既除，到葬礼时又穿上，附祭于先庙后即是吉祥，仅仅八个月而就纯粹吉祥，无所不佩带，这又是礼制之没有浸润。
English: It is auspicious to remove the mourning clothes and put them on again at the time of the funeral, and it is auspicious to make an offering at the first temple, and it is purely auspicious to wear it for only eight months, and it is worn everywhere. This is also a sign that the etiquette has not been infiltrated.

古文：朔望，群臣朝服以造殡宫，是以吉服临丧；人主衰服在上，是以先帝之服为人主之私丧，此二者皆礼之所不安也。 
现代文：每月的初一、十五，大臣们穿着上朝的衣服来到殡宫，这是以吉服临丧；人主穿丧服在上，这是以先帝的丧服作为人主的私丧，这二者都是礼制所不安的。 
English: On the first day and the fifteenth day of each month, the ministers come to the funeral hall wearing the clothes of the previous emperor. This is a good luck dress for the funeral; the host wears a funeral dress. This is a private funeral with the former emperor's funeral dress as the host. Both of these are disturbed by the etiquette.

古文：哲宗立，擢右正言。
现代文：哲宗即皇帝位，提拔祖禹为右正言。
English: Zhezong, that is, the emperor, promoted Zuyu to Yuanzhang.

古文：吕公著执政，祖禹以婿嫌辞，改祠部员外郎，又辞。
现代文：吕公著执政，祖禹因女婿的嫌疑辞谢，改为祠部员外郎，再次辞谢。
English: When Lü Gong was in power, Zu Yu resigned because of his son-in-law's suspicions, changed his name to Wairo, a member of the ancestral hall, and resigned again.

古文：除著作佐郎、修《神宗实录》检讨，迁著作郎兼侍讲。
现代文：被任命为著作佐郎，修《神宗实录》检讨，升任著作郎兼侍讲。
English: He was appointed as a Shosho-saro, a reviewer of "Shinzō Jitsuroku," and was promoted to Shosho-saro and assistant lecturer.

古文：神宗既祥，祖禹上疏宣仁后曰： 今即吉方始，服御一新，奢俭之端，皆由此起。
现代文：神宗已经二周年祭，祖禹向宣仁太后上疏说 ：现在吉祥才开始，服御一新，奢侈节俭的端倪，都是由此开始。
English: It was the second anniversary of the Shinshu sect, and Zuyu said to Empress Dowager Xuanren: "Now is the time for auspiciousness, the beginning of a new era of obedience, and the beginning of luxury and frugality.

古文：凡可以荡心悦目者，不宜有加于旧。
现代文：凡是可以荡心悦目的，不应该比以前更厉害。
English: Anything that's pleasurable shouldn't be harder than it used to be.

古文：皇帝圣性未定，睹俭则俭，睹奢则奢，所以训导成德者，动宜有法。
现代文：皇帝圣性未定，见节俭则节俭，见奢侈则奢侈，所以训导成德，举止应该有制可依。
English: The emperor's sanctity is undecided. If you see frugality, you see frugality. If you see extravagance, you see extravagance. Therefore, if you want to be virtuous, you should have a system to follow.

古文：今闻奉宸库取珠，户部用金，其数至多，恐增加无已，愿止于未然。
现代文：现在听说奉宸库取珠宝，户部使用黄金，其数量很多，恐怕无限度增加，希望在没有发生之前予以制止。
English: Now we hear that the treasury is being robbed of jewels, and the head of the household is using gold, the quantity of which is huge, and I am afraid it will increase without limit. I hope this will be stopped before it happens.

古文：崇俭敦朴，辅养圣性，使目不视靡曼之色，耳不听淫哇之声，非礼勿言，非礼勿动，则学问日益，圣德日隆，此宗社无疆之福。 故事，服除当开乐置宴，祖禹以为因除服而开乐设宴，则似除服而庆贺，非君子不得已而除之之意，不可。
现代文：崇俭敦朴，辅养圣性，使目不视美色，耳不听淫声，不符合礼仪的不说，不符合礼仪的不动，那么学问日增，圣德日隆，这是国家无疆的福运。 按照过去的旧例，孝服脱下后应开乐置宴，祖禹认为因脱下孝服而开乐置宴，就像脱下孝服而庆贺，不是君子不得已而脱下孝服的意思，这不可以。
English: To be frugal and simple-minded, and to cultivate holiness, so that the eyes do not see beauty, the ears do not hear obscene sounds, do not say things that do not conform to etiquette, and do not act in a way that does not conform to etiquette, then learning will increase day by day, and sacred virtue will increase day by day. This is the boundless good fortune of the country. According to the old example in the past, after taking off the filial piety, one should have fun and have a banquet. Zu Yu thought that having fun and having a banquet because of taking off the filial piety was like taking off the filial piety

古文：夏暑权罢讲，祖禹言： 陛下今日之学与不学，系他日治乱。
现代文：夏天暑热暂时废除讲读，祖禹说： 陛下今天学与不学，关系到今后国家的治乱兴衰。
English: Summer heat temporarily abolished lectures, ZuYu said: Your majesty, whether you study today or not is related to the rise and fall of the country's governance in the future.

古文：如好学，则天下君子欣慕，愿立于朝，以直道事陛下，辅佐德业，而致太平；不学，则小人皆动其心，务为邪谄，以窃富贵。
现代文：如果好学，那么天下君子称慕，希望立在朝廷，以正直之道事奉陛下，辅佐德业，而致于太平；如不学，那么小人都动心，致力于为邪说谄媚，用以窃取富贵。
English: If you are eager to learn, then all the gentlemen in the world will admire you and hope that you will be able to stand in the imperial court, serve your majesty with honesty, support virtue, and achieve peace; if you do not learn, then all the little people will be motivated and dedicated to flattering the heresy and using it to steal wealth.

古文：且凡人之进学，莫不于少时，今圣质日长，数年之后，恐不得如今日之专，窃为陛下惜也。 迁起居郎，又召试中书舍人，皆不拜。
现代文：而且大凡人之增长学问，没有不是在年少之时，现圣质日长，几年之后，恐怕会没有像今天这样专心，私下替陛下可惜。 升任起居郎，又诏试中书舍人，都没有接受。
English: Moreover, the growth of learning of great mortals is not at the time of youth, now the quality of the day is long, a few years later, I am afraid there will be no such concentration as today, I personally feel sorry for His Majesty.

古文：吕公著薨，召拜右谏议大夫。
现代文：吕公著去世，召拜右谏议大夫。
English: After the death of Lyu Gongzhu, he summoned the doctor of the Right Division of the Chinese Academy of Sciences.

古文：首上疏论人主正心修身之要，乞太皇太后日以天下之勤劳、万民之疾苦、群臣之邪正、政事之得失，开导上心，晓然存之于中，使异日众说不能惑，小人不能进。
现代文：首先上疏论人主正心修身的要旨，请太皇太后每天以天下之勤劳、百姓之疾苦、大臣们的邪恶正直、政事的得失，开导皇帝之心，把这些明明白白存于心中，使今后众说不能迷惑他，小人不能进用。
English: First of all, I would like to explain the essence of rectifying one's mind and body. I would like to ask the Empress Dowager to enlighten the emperor's heart every day with the hard work of the world, the suffering of the people, the wickedness and honesty of the ministers, and the gains and losses of the government affairs. I would like to keep these things clearly in my heart, so that in the future, the public can not confuse him, and the villain can not use them.

古文：蔡确既得罪，祖禹言： 自乾兴以来，不窜逐大臣六十余年，一旦行之，流传四方，无不震耸。
现代文：蔡确已经获罪，祖禹说： 自从乾兴年以来，不窜逐大臣六十多年，一旦实行，流传四方，无不震惊耸动。
English: Cai Jizhi has been convicted, Zu Yu said: Since the year of Qian Xing, it has been more than 60 years that ministers have been persecuted. Once it is implemented, it will spread in all directions, which will be shocking and sensational.

古文：确去相已久，朝廷多非其党，间有偏见异论者，若一切以为党确去之，惧刑罚失中，而人情不安也。 
现代文：蔡确离开相位已很久，朝廷中大多不是他的党羽，间或有偏见异议的，如果一切都认为是依附蔡确而将他们除去，恐怕刑罚失中，而且人情不安。 
English: Cai Zhengyi has been out of the limelight for a long time. Most of the people in the imperial court are not his followers, and occasionally there are prejudiced dissenters. If everything is considered to be dependent on Cai Zhengyi and they are removed, I am afraid that the punishment will be wrong, and people will be uneasy.

古文：蔡京镇蜀，祖禹言： 京小有才，非端良之士。
现代文：蔡京镇守蜀州，祖禹说： 蔡京小有才能，不是正直之士。
English: Zou Yu said of Cai Jing, the town guard of Shuzhou: Cai Jing is a little talented, but he is not an honest person.

古文：如使守成都，其还，当使执政，不宜崇长。 时大臣欲于新旧法中有所创立。
现代文：如果使他镇守成都，他回来，当会让他执掌朝政，不应推重助长。 当时执政大臣打算在新法旧法中有所创立。
English: If he is allowed to stay in Chengdu and return, he will be allowed to take charge of the government, and should not be promoted. At that time, the ruling minister planned to create something in the new law and the old law.

古文：祖禹以为： 朝廷既察王安石之法为非，但当复祖宗之旧，若出于新旧之间，两用而兼存之，纪纲坏矣。 迁给事中。
现代文：祖禹认为朝廷既然已察觉王安石新法是不对，只应恢复祖宗旧制，如果出于新旧之间，两用而兼存之，那么纪纲会败坏。升任给事中。
English: ZuYu believed that since the imperial court had already noticed that Wang Anshi's new law was wrong, it should only restore the old ancestral system. If it existed for both new and old purposes, then the disciplinary system would be corrupted. He was promoted.

古文：吴中大水，诏出米百万斛、缗钱二十万振救。
现代文：吴地发大水，诏令拿出百万斛米、二十万缗钱赈济救灾。
English: When the flood occurred in Wudi, it was ordered to provide one million mu of rice and two hundred thousand mu of money for disaster relief.

古文：谏官谓诉灾者为妄，乞加验考。
现代文：谏官认为报告灾情的人是妄言，请求加以验证考实。
English: The eunuch thought that the person who reported the disaster was talking nonsense and asked for verification.

古文：祖禹封还其章，云： 国家根本，仰给东南。
现代文：祖禹封回其奏章，说： 国家根本，仰给于东南。
English: ZuYuFeng replied to his report, saying: The country is fundamental, and it is up to the southeast.

古文：今一方赤子，呼天赴诉，开口仰哺，以脱朝夕之急。
现代文：现在一方赤子，呼天赴诉，开口向上要吃，以解脱朝夕之急。
English: Now, on the other hand, the baby cries out to the heavens to sue, and opens its mouth upward to eat, in order to relieve the urgency of morning and evening.

古文：奏灾虽小过实，正当略而不问。
现代文：上奏灾情即使稍有夸大，正当略而不问。
English: Even if the disaster situation is slightly exaggerated, it is right to omit it without question.

古文：若稍施惩谴，恐后无复敢言者矣。 
现代文：如果稍加惩责，恐怕今后没有人敢说话了。 
English: If you add a little punishment, I'm afraid no one will dare to speak in the future.

古文：兼国史院修撰，为礼部侍郎。
现代文：兼任国史院修撰，为礼部侍郎。
English: He also served as a reviewer for the National Academy of History and was a chamberlain of the Ceremonial Department.

古文：论择监司守令曰： 祖宗分天下为十八路，置转运使、提点刑狱，收乡长、镇将之权悉归于县，收县之权归于州，州之权归于监司，监司之权归于朝廷。
现代文：论选择监司守令说 ：祖宗划分天下为十八路，设置转运使、提点刑狱，收乡长、镇将的权力全归于县，收县的权力归于州，州的权力归于监司，监司的权力归于朝廷。
English: On the selection of supervisors, he said: "The ancestors divided the world into eighteen roads, set up transit posts, raised penal prisons, and the power to collect township chiefs and townspeople all belonged to the county. The power to collect counties belonged to the state, the power of the state belonged to the supervisors, and the power of the supervisors belonged to the court.

古文：上下相维，轻重相制，建置之道，最为合宜。
现代文：上下相维，轻重互相制约，建置的方法，最为适宜。
English: Up and down phase dimension, weight and weight restrict each other, and the method of construction is the most appropriate.

古文：监司付以一路，守臣付以一州，令宰付以一县，皆与天子分土而治，其可不择乎？
现代文：付给监司一路，付给守臣一州，付给令宰一县，都是与天子分土而治，这难道不可以选择吗？
English: Paying to the supervisor all the way, paying to the guardian one state, paying to the governor one county, are all dividing the land and ruling with the Son of Heaven, is it not possible to choose?

古文：祖宗尝有考课之法，专察诸路监司，置簿于中书，以稽其要。
现代文：祖宗曾有考课制度，专门察访各路监司，置簿书在中书，以稽考其大要。
English: Ancestors once had an examination system, specifically visiting each road superintendent, placing the book in the book, to review its essentials.

古文：今宜委吏部尚书，取当为州者，条别功状以上三省，三省召而察之，苟其人可任，则以次表用之。
现代文：现应委托吏部尚书，取应为知州的，分条别列功绩情况上报三省，三省召见考察，如果其人可以任用，就按次序列表任用。
English: Now, it is necessary to entrust the Personnel Department to write a letter, and if the candidate is from Zhizhou, it shall be reported to the three provinces according to the performance of the three provinces, and the three provinces shall be summoned for inspection. If the candidate can be appointed, he shall be appointed according to the order list.

古文：至官，则令监司考其课绩，终岁之后，可以校优劣而施黜陟焉。
现代文：到任，就令监司考核他的课绩，一年之后，可以比较优劣而进行进退升降。
English: Upon taking office, he ordered the superintendent to evaluate his academic performance, and after one year, he could compare the merits and conduct promotion and demotion.

古文：如此则得人必多，监司、郡守得人，县令不才，非所患也。 
现代文：这样就得人必多，监司、郡守得人，县令没有才能，不是所要担心的。 
English: In this way, there will be more people, supervisors and county guards will be more people, and county magistrates will have no talent, which is not something to worry about.

古文：闻禁中觅乳媪，祖禹以帝年十四，非近女色之时，上疏劝进德爱身，又乞宣仁后保护上躬，言甚切至。
现代文：听说宫中寻找奶妈，祖禹认为皇帝已十四岁，不是近女色的时候，上疏规劝进德爱身，又请求宣仁太后保护皇帝的身体，言辞极为恳切。
English: Hearing that the palace was looking for a wet nurse, Zu Yu thought that the emperor was already fourteen years old, and when he was not close to a woman, he was advised by Shang Shao to enter the body of virtue and love, and he also asked the Empress Dowager Xuanren to protect the emperor's body, and his words were extremely earnest.

古文：既而宣仁谕祖禹，以外议皆虚传，祖禹复上疏曰： 臣言皇帝进德爱身，宜常以为戒。
现代文：不久宣仁太后谕示祖禹，认为外面的议论都是虚传，祖禹又上疏说： 我说皇帝进德爱身，应常常以此为戒。
English: Soon after, Empress Dowager Xuanren issued an edict to Zou Yu, saying that the outside discussions were all false rumors. Zou Yu also said, "When I say that the emperor should be virtuous and loving, you should always take this as a warning.

古文：太皇太后保护上躬，亦愿因而勿忘。
现代文：太后保护皇帝的身体，也希望因此不要忘记。
English: The empress dowager protects the emperor's body, and hopes that it will not be forgotten.

古文：今外议虽虚，亦足为先事之戒。
现代文：现外面议论虽然是虚传，也足以为预先之戒。
English: Although the current outside discussion is false, it is enough to be a warning in advance.

古文：臣侍经左右，有闻于道路，实怀私忧，是以不敢避妄言之罪。
现代文：我侍奉于左右，有道听途说，实在怀着个人忧虑，因此不敢避妄言之罪。
English: I have served on both sides, I have hearsay, I really have personal concerns, so I do not dare to avoid the sin of telling lies.

古文：凡事言于未然，则诚为过；及其已然，则又无所及，言之何益？
现代文：凡是事情在没发生之前说出来，则诚然为过失，等到事情发生后，则又来不及，言之有什么益处？
English: To say something before it happens is a mistake; to say it after it happens is too late. What is the use of saying it?

古文：陛下宁受未然之言，勿使臣等有无及之悔。 拜翰林学士，以叔百禄在中书，改侍讲学士。
现代文：陛下宁可接受事情没有发生之前的进言，不要使我们有来不及的后悔。 被授予翰林学士，因叔父范百禄在中书省，改任侍讲学士。
English: His Majesty would rather accept the suggestion before the event did not happen, do not let us have too late to regret. was awarded the Hanlin Baccalaureate, because Uncle Fan Bailu in the Ministry of Chinese Literature, was changed to the assistant lecturer Baccalaureate.

古文：百禄去，复为之。
现代文：范百禄离开中书省，祖禹重新任翰林学士。
English: Fan Bailu left the Ministry of Education and Culture, and Zu Yu was reappointed as Hanlin Scholar.

古文：范氏自镇至祖禹，比三世居禁林，士论荣慕。
现代文：范氏从范镇到祖禹，连续三世位居禁林，士论认为荣耀羡慕。
English: The Fan clan lived in the Forbidden Forest for three consecutive generations from Fan Town to ZuYu, and the judges said that they were envious of the glory.

古文：宣仁太后崩，中外议论汹汹，人怀顾望，在位者畏惧，莫敢发言。
现代文：宣仁太后去世，中外议论纷纷，人人怀着观望的心情，在职位的人害怕恐惧，没人敢说话。
English: After the death of Empress Dowager Xuanren, there were many discussions between China and foreign countries. Everyone was in a wait-and-see mood. People in positions were afraid of fear, and no one dared to speak.

古文：祖禹虑小人乘间害政，乃奏曰： 陛下方揽庶政，延见群臣，此国家隆替之本，社稷安危之机，生民休戚之端，君子小人进退消长之际，天命人心去就离合之时也，可不畏哉？
现代文：祖禹担心小人乘机危害政治，于是上奏说： 陛下刚总持各种政务，邀请会见大臣们，这是国家兴替的根本，社稷安危的时机，百姓休戚的端倪，君子小人进退消长的时候，天命人心去就离合的时候，能不害怕吗？
English: ZuYu was worried that the villain would take advantage of the opportunity to harm politics, so he said: His Majesty has just held various government affairs and invited to meet with ministers. This is the foundation of the country's prosperity, the opportunity for social stability and security, the beginning of the people's solidarity, when the gentleman villain advances and retreats, when the fate of the people is at stake, can you not be afraid?

古文：先后有大功于宗社，有大德于生灵，九年之间，始终如一。
现代文：太后对宗庙社稷有大功，对百姓有大德，九年之间，始终如一。
English: The empress dowager has made great contributions to the family temple and shrine, and has great virtues for the people, and has been consistent over the past nine years.

古文：然群小怨恨，亦为不少，必将以改先帝之政、逐先帝之臣为言，以事离间，不可不察也。
现代文：然而小人们怨恨，也为数不少，必定将以太后改变先帝的政治、逐斥先帝的大臣为言，以从事挑拨离间，这不可以不觉察。
English: However, the resentment of the little people, who are also quite numerous, will certainly take the empress dowager to change the politics of the former emperor and expel the minister of the former emperor as a speech, to engage in sowing discord, which can not be unnoticed.

古文：先后因天下人心，变而更化。
现代文：太后顺应天下人心，变而更化。
English: The empress dowager changed and reformed herself in accordance with the will of the people.

古文：既改其法，则作法之人有罪当退，亦顺众言而逐之。
现代文：既然改变熙宁新法，那么制定制度的人有罪当予退斥，至于将他们贬逐，那也是顺应众言。
English: Now that Xi's new law has been amended, the culprits who created the system should be dismissed. As for their dismissal, it is also in accordance with the opinions of the public.

古文：是皆上负先帝，下负万民，天下之所仇疾而欲去之者也，岂有憎恶于其间哉？
现代文：他们都是上辜负先帝，下辜负百姓，天下所仇恨而想要除去的人，太后贬逐他们，岂是单纯因感情上的厌恶憎恨呢！
English: They were all people who had failed the former emperor and the people, who were hated by the world and wanted to be eliminated. Was the empress dowager's disparagement of them simply due to emotional dislike and hatred?

古文：惟辨析是非，深拒邪说，有以奸言惑听者，付之典刑，痛惩一人，以警群慝，则贴然无事矣。
现代文：只有辨别分析是非，深拒邪说，有以奸言迷惑众人听觉的，付之典刑，痛罚一人，以警告那些众多的邪恶之徒，那么就安定无事了。
English: Only by distinguishing and analyzing what is right and wrong, thoroughly rejecting evil theories, and punishing those who confuse people's ears with false words, and severely punishing one person to warn those many evil doers, then everything will be stable.

古文：此等既误先帝，又欲误陛下，天下之事，岂堪小人再破坏邪？ 初，苏轼约俱上章论列，谏草已具，见祖禹疏，遂附名同奏，曰： 公之文，经世之文也。 竟不复出其稿。
现代文：这些人既误了先帝，又想要贻误陛下，天下大事，哪里还经得住小人再破坏呢？ 起初，苏轼约祖禹一同上奏章论列，谏书已经写好，见到祖禹的奏疏，就附名同奏，说 ：您的文章，是经世之文。 终不再拿出他的稿子。
English: These people not only misjudged the former emperor, but also wanted to misjudge his majesty, the world's great events, where can they withstand the villain's further destruction? At first, Su Qian and Zhu Yu went to the play chapter discussion together, the handwritten book had been written, and when he saw Zhu Yu's poor performance, he added his name to the play and said: Your article is the text of the world. Finally, he would no longer take out his manuscript.

古文：祖禹又言： 陛下承六世之遗烈，当思天下者祖宗之天下，人民者祖宗之人民，百官者祖宗之百官，府库者祖宗之府库。
现代文：祖禹又说 ：陛下继承六世遗留下来的功业，应该思考天下是祖宗的天下，人民是祖宗的人民，百官是祖宗的百官，公府仓库是祖宗的公府仓库。
English: ZuYu also said: His Majesty, inheriting the legacy of the sixth generation, should think that the world is the world of the ancestors, the people are the people of the ancestors, the officials are the officials of the ancestors, and the government warehouse is the government warehouse of the ancestors.

古文：一言一动，如临之在上，质之在傍，则可以长享天下之奉。
现代文：一言一动，就如同祖宗临驾在上，质问在旁，那么可以长久享有天下人的拥护。
English: Every word and every move, just as the ancestors are present, questioning on the side, then you can enjoy the support of the world for a long time.

古文：先后以大公至正为心，罢安石、惠卿所造新法，而行祖宗旧政。
现代文：太后以大公至正为心，废除王安石、吕惠卿所制造的新法，而实行祖宗旧有的政治。
English: The Empress Dowager, with the grand duke's sincerity in mind, abolished the new law made by Wang Anshi and Lü Huiqing, and implemented the old politics of the ancestors.

古文：故社稷危而复安，人心离而复合，乃至辽主亦戒其臣勿生事曰： 南朝专行仁宗之政矣。
现代文：因此社稷危急而恢复安定，人心离散而恢复合聚，乃至辽主也告诫他的臣下不要惹起事端说 ：南朝专门实行仁宗的政治了。 
English: As a result, the society was in a critical situation and stability was restored, the hearts of the people were dispersed and reunited, and even the Liao Lord warned his vassals not to stir up trouble, saying: The Southern Dynasty has specially implemented the politics of the Rinzong.

古文：外夷之情如此，中国之人心可知。
现代文：外夷的情况是这样，中国的人心则可见一斑。
English: This is the case for foreigners, but the human heart of China is evident.

古文：先后日夜苦心劳力，为陛下立太平之基。
现代文：太后日夜苦心劳力，替陛下立下了太平的基础。
English: The Empress Dowager worked hard day and night to lay the foundation of peace for His Majesty.

古文：愿守之以静，恭己以临之，虚心以处之，则群臣邪正，万事是非，皆了然于圣心矣。
现代文：希望陛下以静守之，恭己以临之，虚心以处之，那么大臣们的邪恶正直，万事的对与错，都在圣心中一目了然。
English: I hope that Your Majesty will keep silence, be humble, and be modest, so that the wickedness and honesty of ministers, and the rightness and wrongness of all things, will be clear at a glance in Your Sacred Heart.

古文：小人之情专为私，故不便于公；专为邪，故不便于正；专好动，故不便于静。
现代文：小人之情专门为了私人自己，所以对公不利；专门为邪说，所以对正直不利；专门好动，所以对静不利。
English: Small-mindedness is exclusively for the private self, so it is unfavorable to the public; it is exclusively for heresy, so it is unfavorable to honesty; it is exclusively active, so it is unfavorable to tranquility.

古文：惟陛下痛心疾首，以为刻骨之戒。 章累上，不报。
现代文：希望陛下痛心疾首，作为刻骨铭心的教训。 奏章多次呈上，没有得到答复。
English: I hope that Your Majesty will learn a bitter lesson from this. The petition has been submitted several times, but no response has been received.

古文：忽有旨召内臣十余人，祖禹言： 陛下亲政以来，四海倾耳，未闻访一贤臣，而所召者乃先内侍，必谓陛下私于近习，望即赐追改。 因请对，曰： 熙宁之初，王安石、吕惠卿造立新法，悉变祖宗之政，多引小人以误国，勋旧之臣屏弃不用，忠正之士相继远引。
现代文：忽然有圣旨召见十多个内臣，祖禹说 ：陛下亲自处理政务以来，四海侧耳细心静听，没听说陛下访一贤臣，而所召见的乃先是内侍，天下人一定认为陛下宠爱近臣亲信，希望陛下马上赐令追回改正。 因而请求召对，说： 熙宁初年，王安石、吕惠卿制造新法，全变祖宗的政治，多引用小人以致误国，功勋旧臣被排斥不用，忠心正直之士相继被引用去远地。
English: Suddenly, more than ten courtiers were summoned by the emperor. Zu Yu said, "Since your majesty has been handling government affairs personally, the four seas have been listening attentively. I have not heard of your majesty visiting a wise minister, but the first person summoned was a courtier. The people of the world must think that your majesty favors close ministers and relatives, and hope that your majesty will immediately issue an order to recover and correct. Therefore, I requested to be summoned, saying, "In the first year of Xi'an, Wang Anshi and Lu Hui created a new law, completely changed the politics of the ancestors, quoted more villains so as to mislead the country,

古文：又用兵开边，结怨外夷，天下愁苦，百姓流徙。
现代文：又用兵开边，结怨外夷，天下愁困贫苦，百姓流离迁徙。
English: They also used soldiers to open the border, causing resentment of the foreign settlers, the world was in distress and poverty, and the people were displaced and migrated.

古文：赖先帝觉悟，罢逐两人，而所引群小，已布满中外，不可复去。
现代文：好在先帝觉悟，把他们两人解职放逐，但所引用的众多小人，已经布满中外，不可以再除去。
English: Fortunately, the former emperor came to his senses and dismissed and exiled both of them, but the numerous villains cited have spread all over the world and can no longer be removed.

古文：蔡确连起大狱，王韶创取熙河，章惇开五溪，沈起扰交管，沈括、徐禧、俞充、种谔兴造西事，兵民死伤皆不下二十万。
现代文：蔡确连续兴起大狱，王韶开创攻占熙河，章开拓五溪，沈起扰乱交管，沈括、徐禧、俞充、种谔兴起制造西部战事，军民死伤人数都不下二十万。
English: Cai Jizhen continuously raised the Great Inferno, Wang Xi pioneered the capture of the Heihe River, Zhang explored the Five Streams, Shen Xi disrupted the traffic control, and Shen Kuo, Xu Xiyi, Xuchong, and Zeng Yao arose to create the western war, and the number of military and civilian deaths and injuries was no less than 200,000.

古文：先帝临朝悼悔，以谓朝廷不得不任其咎。
现代文：先帝临朝哀悼后悔，认为朝廷不得不承担这个罪责。
English: The late Emperor Lintong lamented and regretted that the imperial court had to bear this guilt.

古文：以至吴居厚行铁冶之法于京东，王子京行茶法于福建，蹇周辅行盐法于江西，李稷、陆师闵行茶法、市易于西川，刘定教保甲于河北，民皆愁痛嗟怨，比屋思乱。
现代文：及至吴居厚在东京实行铁冶法，王子京在福建实行茶法，蹇周辅在江西实行盐法，李稷、陆师闵在西川实行茶法、市易法，刘定在河北教保甲，百姓都愁痛哀怨，家家思乱。
English: As far as Wu Ju Hou implemented the iron metallurgy method in Tokyo, Oji Jing implemented the tea method in Fujian, Zou Zhou Fu implemented the salt method in Jiangxi, Li Qian and Lu Shijian implemented the tea method and the market exchange method in Xichuan, and Liu Ding taught Bao Jia in Hebei, the people were sad and sorrowful, and their families were confused.

古文：赖陛下与先后起而救之，天下之民，如解倒县。
现代文：依赖陛下与太后起而挽救，天下百姓，好像解除了被人倒挂着的痛苦。
English: Relying on His Majesty and the Empress Dowager for salvation, the people of the world seem to have been relieved of the pain of being hung upside down.

古文：惟是向来所斥逐之人，窥伺事变，妄意陛下不以修改法度为是，如得至左右，必进奸言。
现代文：只是向来所被斥退放逐的人，窥探等候事变，妄想陛下不认为修改法令制度是对的，如果这些人得以到陛下身边，必定进呈奸言。
English: It is only those who have always been banished and exiled, who are spying and waiting for things to change, who are deluding themselves into thinking that His Majesty does not think it is right to amend the legal system. If these people are able to get close to His Majesty, they will certainly present false words.

古文：万一过听而复用之，臣恐国家自此陵迟，不复振矣。 又论： 汉、唐之亡，皆由宦官。
现代文：万一偏听致信而又任用他们，我担心国家从此衰颓，不再振兴了。 又议论 ：汉、唐灭亡，都是由于宦官。
English: In the unlikely event that I were to listen to the letter and appoint them, I fear that the country would decline from then on and would no longer be revitalized.Another argument: The Han and Tang dynasties were destroyed by eunuchs.

古文：自熙宁、元丰间，李宪、王中正、宋用臣辈用事总兵，权势震灼。
现代文：从熙宁、元丰年间，李宪、王中正、宋用臣等人当权总持兵权，权势震灼。
English: From the years of Xi Ning and Yuan Feng, Li Xian, Wang Zhongzheng, Song Youshen and others gained the power to hold the military, and their power was overwhelming.

古文：中正兼干四路，口敕募兵，州郡不敢违，师徒冻馁，死亡最多；宪陈再举之策，致永乐摧陷；用臣兴土木之工，无时休息，罔市井之微利，为国敛怨。
现代文：王中正兼任四路干办官，口头命令招募军队，州郡不敢违背，师徒受冻挨饿，死亡最多；李宪陈述再举之策，导致永乐被击破陷落；宋用臣兴起土木工役，没有时间休息，与商人争微薄利润，为国家聚集怨恨。
English: Wang Zhongzheng concurrently served as the four-way agent, verbally ordered the recruitment of troops, the state and county did not dare to disobey, the teachers and students suffered from cold and hunger, and most died; Li Xian stated another measure, which led to the defeat and fall of Yongle; Song Yongshen rose as a civil engineer, had no time to rest, competed with merchants for meager profits, and gathered resentment for the country.

古文：此三人者，虽加诛戮，未足以谢百姓。
现代文：这三人，即使是加以杀戮，不足以谢百姓。
English: These three, even if they are killed, are not enough to thank the people.

古文：宪虽已亡，而中正、用臣尚在，今召内臣十人，而宪、中正之子皆在其中。
现代文：李宪虽已死去，但王中正、宋用臣还在，现召见内臣十人，而李宪、王中正的儿子都在其中。
English: Although Li Xian has died, Wang Zhongzheng and Song Yuzhen are still alive. Ten vassals have been summoned, and Li Xian and Wang Zhongzheng's sons are among them.

古文：二人既入，则中正、用臣必将复用，愿陛下念之。 
现代文：二人既然入朝，那么王中正、宋用臣必将又被任用，希望陛下考虑。 
English: Since the two have entered the imperial court, Wang Zhongzheng and Song Yousen will surely be appointed again, and I hope His Majesty will consider it.

古文：时绍述之论已兴，有相章惇意。
现代文：当时继承神宗所实行的新法的议论已兴起，有以章为宰相的意思。
English: At that time, the discussion of inheriting the new law implemented by the Shin sect had already arisen, with the intention of having Zhang as prime minister.

古文：祖禹力言惇不可用，不见从，遂请外。
现代文：祖禹极力说章不可以任用，没被同意，于是请求外任。
English: Zu Yu insisted that Zhang could not be appointed and was not approved, so he asked for an external appointment.

古文：上且欲大用，而内外梗之者甚众，乃以龙图阁学士知陕州。
现代文：哲宗且打算大加任用祖禹，但内外阻止的人很多，就以他为龙图阁学士知陕州。
English: Zhezong also planned to appoint Zou Yu, but many people inside and outside the country tried to stop him, so he was named Longtuge Scholar of Shaanxi Province.

古文：言者论祖禹修《实录》诋诬，又摭其谏禁中雇乳媪事，连贬武安军节度副使、昭州别驾，安置永州、贺州，又徙宾、化而卒，年五十八
现代文：言官论祖禹修《神宗实录》诋毁诬陷，又摘取他劝谏禁中雇请奶妈的事，连续贬逐为武安军节度副使、昭州别驾，指定在永州、贺州居住，又移居宾州、化州而去世，终年五十八岁。
English: The speech officer slandered and slandered Zu Yu Xiu's "True Record of the Shenzong" and extracted his advice to hire a wet nurse during his ban. He was successively relegated to the vice-minister of the Wu'an Army and the deputy governor of Zhaozhou. He was designated to live in Yongzhou and Hezhou, and then moved to Pennsylvania and Huazhou. He died at the age of 58.

古文：祖禹平居恂恂，口不言人过。
现代文：祖禹平常谦恭谨慎，不讲别人的过错。
English: Zou Yu is usually modest and cautious, and does not talk about other people's faults.

古文：至遇事，则别白是非，不少借隐。
现代文：到遇到事情，则辨别是非，一点不隐瞒。
English: When things come up, you distinguish between right and wrong, and you don't hide anything.

古文：在迩英守经据正，献纳尤多。
现代文：在迩英殿守经据正，献纳尤多。
English: There are a lot of offerings to the guardian deity of the Sutra at the Shuei Hall.

古文：尝讲《尚书》至 内作色荒，外作禽荒 六语，拱手再诵，却立云： 愿陛下留听。 帝首肯再三，乃退。
现代文：曾讲《尚书》至 内作色荒，外作禽荒 六句话，拱手再次朗读，站着说 ：希望陛下留意听讲。 皇帝再三点头，才退下。
English: He once recited "Shang Shu" to the tune of "Inside is barren, outside is barren" in six sentences, read it aloud again with folded hands, and stood up and said, "I hope your majesty will pay attention to what I am saying." The emperor nodded repeatedly before stepping back.

古文：每当讲前夕，必正衣冠，俨如在上侧，命子弟侍，先按讲其说。
现代文：每次当要侍讲的前天晚上，必定端正衣服帽子，好像在皇帝的侧边，命子弟侍读，预先研求讲解的学说。
English: Whenever he had to attend a lecture the night before, he always straightened his clothes and hat, as if he were at the emperor's side, attending the lecture and studying the theory of the lecture in advance.

古文：开列古义，参之时事，言简而当，无一长语，义理明白，粲然成文。
现代文：开列古义，参考时事，语言简练而且适当，没有一句长话，义理明白，文采鲜艳成文。
English: The ancient meaning is listed, with reference to current affairs, the language is concise and appropriate, there is no long sentence, the meaning is clear, and the writing is vivid.

古文：苏轼称为讲官第一。
现代文：苏轼称他是讲官第一。
English: Su Shi said that he was the first lecturer.

古文：祖禹尝进《唐鉴》十二卷，《帝学》八卷，《仁宗政典》六卷。
现代文：祖禹曾进呈《唐鉴》十二卷，《帝学》八卷，《仁皇政典》六卷。
English: Zu Yu had submitted 12 volumes of "Tang Jian," 8 volumes of "Teigaku" and 6 volumes of "Nincho Seisetsu."

古文：而《唐鉴》深明唐三百年治乱，学者尊之，目为 唐鉴公 云。
现代文：而且《唐鉴》深明唐代三百年治乱，学者尊重他，目为 唐鉴公 。
English: Moreover, "Tang Jian" is well aware of the three hundred years of chaos in the Tang Dynasty, and scholars respect him, and the aim is Tang Jian Gong.

古文：建炎二年，追复龙图阁学士。
现代文：建炎二年，追复为龙图阁学士。
English: Two years later, he was reinstated as a Longtu Ge bachelor.

古文：子冲，绍兴中仕至翰林侍读学士，《儒林》有传。
现代文：儿子范冲，绍兴年中官至翰林侍读学士，《儒林》有传。
English: Fan Chong's son, Shaoxing liaison officer to Hanlin attendant bachelor, "Julin" has been passed down.

