古文：江敩何昌宇谢抃王思远
现代文：江敩字叔文，是济阳考城人。
English: Jiang Yu, surnamed Shuwen, is a native of Jiyang Kaocheng.

古文：江籞，字叔文，济阳考城人也。祖湛，宋左光禄大夫、仪同三司。
现代文：祖父江湛，是刘宋的左光禄大夫、仪同三司。
English: His grandfather, Jiang Zhan, was the doctor of Zuoguanglu and the third secretary of Yi Tong of Liu Song.

古文：父恁，著作郎，为太子劭所杀。
现代文：父亲江恁，宫至著作郎，是被太初刘劭杀掉的。
English: His father, Jiang Qi, the author's brother, was killed by Liu Bei at the beginning of the dynasty.

古文：敩母，文帝女淮阳公主。
现代文：江敩的母亲是宋文帝的女儿淮阳公主。
English: Jiang Chen's mother was Princess Huaiyang, the daughter of Emperor Song.

古文：幼以戚属召见，孝武谓谢庄曰： 此小儿方当为名器。 
现代文：小时候因为是外戚被皇上召见，孝武帝对谢庄说： 这个小孩子将来会是个大人物。 
English: When he was a child, he was summoned by the emperor because he was a maternal relative. Emperor Xiaowu said to Xie Zhuang: "This child will be a great man in the future."

古文：少有美誉。
现代文：少年时就很受赞誉。
English: He was admired as a young boy.

古文：桂阳王休范临州，辟迎主簿，不就。
现代文：桂阳王刘休范驾临当地，任命他做主簿，没有赴任。
English: Liu Xiufan, the king of Guiyang, visited the place and appointed him as the chief secretary, but he did not take up the post.

古文：尚孝武女临汝公主，拜驸马都尉。
现代文：娶了孝武帝的女儿临汝公主，拜为驸马都尉。
English: He married the daughter of Emperor Xiaowu, Princess Lin Ru, and was given the title of Lieutenant of the Horse.

古文：除著作郎，太子舍人，丹阳丞。
现代文：授著作郎，太子舍人，丹阳丞。
English: He was the son of a scholar and the son of a prince, Danyang.

古文：时袁粲为尹，见敩叹曰： 风流不坠，政在江郎。 
现代文：当时袁粲是丹阳尹，看见江敩感叹道： 风流没有消逝，正体现在江郎身上。 
English: At that time, Yuan Xuan was Danyang Yin. When he saw Jiang Xuan, he lamented: The love affair did not disappear, it was embodied in Jiang Lang.

古文：数与宴赏，留连日夜。
现代文：屡次和他宴饮赏玩，日夜相伴。
English: I have dined with him many times, enjoyed his company day and night.

古文：迁安成王抚军记室，秘书丞，中书郎。
现代文：迁为安成王抚军记室，秘书丞，中书郎。
English: He was transferred to the Ancheng Wangfuzi Military Record Office, secretary, and junior secretary.

古文：敩庶祖母王氏老疾，敩视膳尝药，七十余日不解衣。
现代文：江籞的庶祖母王氏年老有病，他亲自安排饮食替她尝药，七十多天都没有脱衣睡觉。
English: Jiang Chen's grandmother-in-law Wang Shizhuang is old and ill. He personally arranged the diet and tried the medicine for her, and did not sleep undressed for more than seventy days.

古文：及累居内官，每以侍养陈请，朝廷优其朝直。
现代文：等到累居内官，每每请求侍候奉养之职，朝廷也因为他值宿出色而加以褒奖。
English: By the time he became a full-time courtier, he was often asked to serve as an attendant, and the imperial court also praised him for his outstanding performance on duty.

古文：寻转安成王骠骑从事中郎。
现代文：不久转安成王骠骑从事中郎。
English: Soon after, he became a middle-ranked horseman of the Ancheng King's cavalry.

古文：初，湛娶褚秀之女，被遣，褚渊为卫军，重敩为人，先通音意，引为长史。
现代文：当初，萧湛娶了褚秀之的女儿。被派遣离去，褚渊做卫军，看重江敩的为人，先和他交换意见，引荐为长史。
English: At first, Xiao Zhan married the daughter of Zou Xiu Zhi. He was dispatched to leave, Zou Yuan became a guard, and he valued Jiang Chen as a person. He first exchanged views with him, and the introduction was a long history.

古文：加宁朔将军。
现代文：加宁朔将军。
English: He appointed Shen Xian as Ningshuo general.

古文：顺帝立，随府转司空长史，领临淮太守，将军如故。
现代文：顺帝即位，跟随安成王府转司空长史，领临淮太守，将军如故。
English: Emperor Shun ascended to the throne, followed by Ancheng Wangfu, transferred to the position of Secretary Kuang Changshi, led by Huai Taishu, and remained a general.

古文：转太尉从事中郎。
现代文：转太尉从事中郎。
English: He was transferred to the rank of captain and became a middle-ranking officer.

古文：齐台建，为吏部郎。
现代文：齐王朝建立台阁，为吏部郎。
English: The Qi Dynasty established the Taigaku, and he was the head of the Ministry of Civil Affairs.

古文：太祖即位，敩以祖母久疾连年，台阁之职，永废温清，启乞自解。
现代文：太祖即位，江敩因为祖母连年疾病缠身，而台阁的职位，使其不能尽侍奉孝敬之情，就上疏请求解职。
English: When the great-grandfather ascended to the throne, Jiang Wei requested to be relieved of his duties because his grandmother had been suffering from illness for many years, and the position of the cabinet made it impossible for him to serve with filial piety.

古文：初，宋明帝敕敩出继从叔愻，为从祖淳后。
现代文：当初，宋明帝命令江敩过继给族叔江悉，是族祖江淳的后代。
English: At first, Emperor Song Ming ordered Jiang Chen to pass the succession to his uncle Jiang Xie, who was a descendant of his ancestor Jiang Jun.

古文：于是仆射王俭启： 礼无后小宗之文，近世缘情，皆由父祖之命，未有既孤之后，出继宗族也。
现代文：适时仆射王俭启奏说： 按礼法没有使小宗居后的条律，近世推缘情义，都是从父祖之命出发，没有已经丧父势孤以后，又过继给族人的。
English: Wang Jianqi said at the right time: According to the etiquette, there is no rule for small families to live together, and in modern times, the meaning of kinship is based on the orders of the ancestors, and it is not passed on to the tribe after the father has passed away.

古文：虽复臣子一揆，而义非天属。江忠简胤嗣所寄，唯籞一人，傍无眷属，籞宜还本。
现代文：虽然作为臣子是一样的准则，而从道义上讲却有违天理江忠简的后裔，祇有江敩一人，没有别的亲属。江敩应该归还本支。
English: Although it is the same principle as a vassal, morally speaking, there are descendants of Jiang Zhongjian who are against the laws of heaven. There is only one Jiang Jie and no other relatives. Jiang Jie should return to this branch.

古文：若不欲江愻绝后，可以籞小儿继愻为孙。 
现代文：如果不想让江悬绝嗣，可以把江敩的小儿子过继给江悉为孙子。 
English: If you don't want Jiang Xuan to die without an heir, you can give Jiang Xuan's youngest son to Jiang Siyu as his grandson.

古文：尚书参议，谓 间世立后，礼无其文。
现代文：尚书省议论此事，说 越辈立后，礼法上没有这样的条律。
English: Shang Shushu discussed this matter, saying that after the establishment of the higher generation, there is no such rule in etiquette.

古文：荀顗无子立孙，坠礼之始；何琦又立此论，义无所据。 
现代文：荀颉没有儿子立孙，是使礼法坠落的开始。何琦又提出这种说法，在道义上没有根据 。
English: "Having no son and no grandson is the beginning of the fall of the etiquette." This kind of argument put forward by He Yao has no basis in morality.

古文：于是籞还本家，诏使自量立后者。
现代文：于是江敩回到本族，诏令使他自己筹划立后的事。
English: As a result, Jiang Chen returned to his own people, and the imperial edict forced him to make his own plans for the future.

古文：出为宁朔将军、豫章内史，还，除太子中庶子，领骁骑将军。
现代文：出任宁朔将军、豫章内史，回朝后授太子中庶子，领骁骑将军。
English: He was appointed as the general of Ningshuo, the internal history of Yuzhang, the middle child of the crown prince after returning to the imperial court, and the general leading the cavalry.

古文：未拜，门客通赃利，世祖遣信捡核，籞藏此客而躬自引咎，上甚有怪色。
现代文：还没有任命，他的门客私自藏匿非法得来的财物，世祖派遣使者去检查核对，江敩把这个门客藏起来却把责任引到自己身上，皇上很是表现出责怪的神色。
English: He had not yet been appointed, his protégé was hiding illegally obtained property, the patriarch sent an envoy to check the verification, Jiang Chen hid this protégé but brought the responsibility to himself, the emperor showed a very reproachful look.

古文：王俭从容启上曰： 江籞若能治郡，此便是具美耳。 
现代文：王俭从容地启奏皇上说： 江敩如果能治理郡县，造就是他的长处。 
English: Wang Jian calmly told the emperor: If Jiang Chen can govern counties and counties, it is his strength.

古文：上意乃释。
现代文：皇上心裹才消除了不快。
English: This made the Emperor feel at ease.

古文：永明初，仍为豫章王太尉谘议，领录事，迁南郡王友，竟陵王司徒司马。
现代文：永明初，仍然做豫章王太尉谘议，领录事，迁南郡王友，竟陵王司徒司马。
English: At the beginning of the Ming Dynasty, he was still consulting and leading the record of Lieutenant Yu Zhang Wang, and Wang You of Nan County was transferred to Wang Sima.

古文：籞好文辞，围棋第五品，为朝贵中最。
现代文：江敩喜好文辞，围棋达到第五品，是朝廷官员中最出色的。
English: Jiang Rong was fond of literature, and was the most outstanding of the imperial officials, reaching the fifth grade in Go.

古文：迁侍中，领本州中正。
现代文：迁为侍中，领本州中正。
English: He was transferred to the position of Samurai Junior High School, leading the Honshu Junior High School.

古文：司徒左长史，中正如故。
现代文：司徒左长史，中正如故。
English: Siddhartha left a long history, in the same way as before.

古文：五年，迁五兵尚书。
现代文：五年。迁为五兵尚书。
English: Five years later, it was moved to Gubeishosho.

古文：明年，出为辅国将军、东海太守，加秩中二千古，行南徐州事。
现代文：第二年，出任为辅国将军、束海太守，加秩中二千石，管理南徐州事务。
English: In the second year, he was appointed as an assistant provincial general and the governor of Sokha, added 2,000 koku to his rank, and managed the affairs of South Xuzhou.

古文：七年，徙为侍中，领骁骑将军，寻转都官尚书，领骁骑将军。
现代文：永明七年，徙为侍中，领骁骑将军，不久转为都官尚书，领骁骑将军。
English: In the seventh year of Yongming, he was transferred to the position of a chamberlain, leading the eunuch cavalry general, and soon he was transferred to the position of the capital official, leading the eunuch cavalry general.

古文：王晏启世祖曰： 江敩今重登礼阁，兼掌六军，慈渥所覃，实有优忝。
现代文：王晏向世祖启奏说： 江敩现在重新进入礼部，又兼掌管六军，享受这么优厚的待遇，实在是不太寻常。
English: Wang Yao said to Shizuo: It is really unusual for Jiang Yao to re-enter the ceremonial department and also be in charge of the six armies and enjoy such a generous treatment.

古文：但语其事任，殆同闲辈。
现代文：但谈到他的职务，大概同平常之辈差不多。
English: But when it comes to his job, he's probably just like the rest of us.

古文：天旨既欲升其名位，愚谓以侍中领骁骑，望实清显，有殊纳言。 
现代文：您的旨意既是想提升他的名位，愚臣以为兼侍中领骁骑，名望实在太清要尊显了，和纳言的身份不符。 
English: Your intention is not only to elevate his reputation, but the foolish minister thinks that being an attendant and leading the cavalcade, the reputation is too clear to be dignified, and it does not match the status of Naganobu.

古文：上曰： 敩常启吾，为其鼻中恶。
现代文：皇上说： 江敩常常向我诉说，是为了他鼻子裹的恶疾。
English: The emperor said, "Jiang Chen often told me that it was because of the malady in his nose.

古文：今既以何胤、王莹还门下，故有此回换耳。 
现代文：现在既然已经让何胤、王莹回到门下省，所以把江敩换了回来。 
English: Now that He Yin and Wang Ying have been allowed to return to their home provinces, Jiang Wei has been replaced.

古文：郁林即位，迁掌吏部。
现代文：郁林王即位，迁为掌管吏部。
English: King Yulin ascended to the throne and was transferred to be in charge of the cadre department.

古文：隆昌元年，为侍中，领国子祭酒。
现代文：隆昌元年，为侍中，领国子祭酒。
English: In the first year of the Longchang era, he was a chamberlain and served as the head of the imperial family.

古文：郁林废，朝臣皆被召入宫，敩至云龙门，托药醉吐车中而去。
现代文：郁林王被废，朝廷大臣都被召入宫中，江战走到霎龙门时，藉药力假称是喝醉了酒在车裹呕吐得以回身。
English: King Yulin was dethroned, and the ministers of the imperial court were all summoned to the palace. When Jiang Zhan walked to the Dragon Gate, he was able to recover by pretending to be drunk and vomiting in the car.

古文：明帝即位，改领秘书监，又改领晋安王师。
现代文：明帝即位，改领秘书监，又改领晋安王师。
English: When Emperor Ming ascended the throne, he changed his title to Secretary Supervisor, and also changed his title to Jinan Wang Shi.

古文：建武二年，卒，年四十四。
现代文：建武二年，去世，时年四十四岁。
English: He died in the second year of Jianwu, at the age of forty-four.

古文：遗令俭约葬，不受赙赠。
现代文：留下遣嘱让人简朴安葬，不接受赠礼助丧。
English: Leave instructions for a simple and peaceful burial, and do not accept gifts to help with the funeral.

古文：诏赙钱三万，布百匹。
现代文：韶令赐给助丧钱三万，布一百匹。
English: The imperial edict gave the mourners 30,000 yuan and 100 pieces of cloth.

古文：子蒨启遵敩令，让不受。
现代文：他的儿子江蒨遵照他的遣命，推辞不受。
English: His son, Jiang Chen, obeyed his order and did not accept his resignation.

古文：诏曰： 敩贻厥之训，送终以俭，立言归善，益有嘉伤，可从所请。 
现代文：诏令说： 对子孙的训诫，要求丧事从简，立言是出于善德，更是美好值得追怀，可以听从他的请求。 
English: The edict said: "As for the exhortation to one's children and grandchildren to be modest in requesting funerals, the advice is out of virtue, and it is even more beautiful and worth pursuing. You can listen to his request.

古文：赠散骑常侍、太常，谥曰敬子。
现代文：追赠散骑常侍、太常，谧曰茔旺。
English: Afterward, they gave away free rides to the regular attendants and the superintendents, saying that they were prosperous.

古文：何昌宇，字俨望，庐江灊人也。
现代文：何昌宇字俨望，是庐江潜入。
English: He Changyu's character, Longwang, sneaks into the Li River.

古文：祖叔度，吴郡太守。
现代文：祖父何叔度做过吴郡太守。
English: Uncle He's grandfather was once the governor of Wu County.

古文：父佟之，太常。
现代文：父亲何攸之官至太常。
English: His father was a high-ranking official.

古文：昌宇少而淹厚，为伯父司空尚之所遇。
现代文：何昌寓少年时就学问渊博为人诚厚，被伯父司空何尚之所赏识。
English: When He Changye was a young boy, he was a man of profound learning and sincerity, which was appreciated by his uncle, Sikuo He Shangzhi.

古文：宋建安王休仁为扬州，辟昌宇州主簿。
现代文：宋建安王刘休仁做扬州太守时，召聘何昌寓为州主簿。
English: When Song Jianan King Liu Xuren was the Yangzhou governor, he appointed He Changye as the state's chief accountant.

古文：迁司徒行参军，太傅五官，司徒东阁祭酒，尚书仪曹郎。
现代文：迁司徒行参军，太傅五官，司徒东合祭酒，尚书仪曹郎。
English: The relocation of the scholars to join the army, the five officials of the Taifu, the scholars of the Donghe Festival, and the scholars of the Shang Shouyi.

古文：建平王景素为征北南徐州，昌宇又为府主簿，以风素见重。
现代文：建平王刘景素做征北将军镇守南徐州，他又做了府主簿，因风采素养很被看重。
English: Jianping Wang Liu Jingsu was a general of the Northern Expedition who guarded Southern Xuzhou, and he was also the chief accountant of the government. He was highly valued for his style and accomplishment.

古文：母老求禄，出为湘东太守，加秩千石。
现代文：因母亲年老请求俸禄，出任为湘束太守，增加俸禄一千石。
English: Due to his elderly mother's request for a salary, he was appointed as the governor of Honshoku, and his salary was increased by one thousand koku.

古文：为太祖骠骑功曹。
现代文：做了太祖骠骑功曹。
English: He has made a great contribution to the development of equestrianism.

古文：昌宇在郡，景素被诛，昌宇痛之。
现代文：何昌寓在湘东郡，刘景素被杀，他感到很悲痛。
English: He Chang lives in Xiangdong County, Liu Jingsu was killed, he felt very sad.

古文：至是启太祖曰：
现代文：到这时便向太祖启奏说：
English: At this time, he said to his great-grandfather:

古文：伏寻故建平王，因心自远，忠孝基性。徽和之誉，早布国言；胜素之情，夙洽民听。
现代文：我想从前的建平王，心地高远，天性忠诚淳孝，和善的名誉，早就在国家中流传，美好纯朴的情义，向来合于百姓之美德。
English: I think that the former King Jianping had a lofty heart, was loyal and filial by nature, and had a reputation for kindness, which had long been passed down in the country. His beautiful and simple sentiments have always been in line with the virtues of the people.

古文：世祖绸缪，太宗眷异，朝中贵人，野外贱士，虽闻见有殊，谁不悉斯事者？
现代文：和世祖感情深厚，同太宗也互相投合蒙受优待，不论朝廷上的显贵士人，还是村野之地无名小辈，尽管见识不相同，又有谁不知道这事呢?
English: They had deep feelings for their forefathers, and they also got along well with Emperor Taizong and received preferential treatment. Regardless of whether they were dignitaries at the imperial court or unknown juniors in the countryside, even though they had different views, who didn't know this?

古文：元徽之间，政关群小，构扇异端，共令倾覆。
现代文：元徽年间，政坛上小人群起，阴谋策划，共同推翻了售王朝。
English: During the Yuan Dynasty, a small group of people in the political arena plotted and conspired to overthrow the Xie dynasty.

古文：殷勤之非，古人所悼，况苍梧将季，能无衒惑？
现代文：变乱叠出，是古人所感叹哀悼之事，何况圣朝即将完结，怎能不感到迷惑。
English: For the ancients, it was a matter of lamentation to see things piled up haphazardly. What's more, with the end of the Holy Year fast approaching, how could they not feel confused?

古文：一年之中，藉者再三，有必巅之危，无暂立之安，行路寒心，往来跼蹐。
现代文：一年之内，有三次废立，情势危急似必颠覆，没有片刻的安定，走在路上胆颤心惊，来来往往小心戒惧。
English: Within a year, there were three times of abandonment, the situation was critical and seemed to have to be overturned, there was no moment of stability, walking on the road was timid and frightened, coming and going was often cautious and fearful.

古文：而王夷虑坦然，委之天命，惟谦惟敬，专诚奉国；闺无执戟之卫，门阙衣介之夫，此五尺童子所见，不假阔曲言也。
现代文：而建平王坦然没有任何忧虑，将一切都归于天命，祇是谦恭敬上，一意诚心敬奉国事，内室没有手执刀戟的卫士，门外没有穿着盔甲的兵丁，这是连五尺高的小孩子都看见的，没有一点夸张的话。
English: King Jianping, on the other hand, did not have any worries. He attributed everything to the fate of heaven. He was only humble and respectful, and sincerely served the country. There was no guard holding a sword and shield in the inner room, and there was no soldier wearing armor outside the door. This was something that even a five-foot-tall child could see, without exaggeration.

古文：一沦疑似，身名顿灭，冤结渊泉，酷贯穹昊。
现代文：一旦遭到疑忌。身家名誉顿时都消灭无踪，冤愁结在九泉之下，酷情上达九天。
English: Once he was suspected, his family's reputation was wiped out without a trace, he was plagued by grief, and his feelings of remorse lasted for nine days.

古文：时经隆替，岁改三元，旷荡之惠亟申，被枉之泽未流。
现代文：时光流逝岁月更替，已经更改了三次年号，屡次发布浩荡的恩惠，而被冤枉的案情却没有得到申诉。
English: Time has passed, years have changed, the year has been changed three times, lavish favors have been repeatedly issued, and the case that was wronged has not been appealed.

古文：俱沐温光，独酸霜露。
现代文：众民都沐浴在皇恩之中，衹有他独自承担着寒霜冷露。
English: All the people are bathed in the royal grace, but he alone bears the cold frost.

古文：明公铺天地之施，散云雨之润，物无巨细，咸被庆渥。
现代文：知道您遍施天地的赐物，散布雨露般的恩泽，无论大小之人物，都感受到皇恩的优厚。
English: Knowing that you have bestowed gifts from heaven and earth, spreading grace like rain and dew, no matter how big or small the person is, they all feel the grace of the emperor.

古文：若今日不蒙照涤，则为万代冤魂。
现代文：如果今天不能被给予洗刷，那他的冤情就要永远蒙受。
English: If he is not purged today, his grievances will last forever.

古文：昌宇非敢慕慷慨之士，激扬当世；实义切于心，痛入骨髓。
现代文：何昌寓不敢学习那些慷慨壮士，激辞评论当世之事，实在是大义关切于心，痛入骨髓。
English: He Changye did not dare to learn from those generous and strong men, and commented on the current affairs with fiery words. He was truly concerned about the cause of righteousness in his heart and felt it deeply in his bones.

古文：沥肠纾愤，仰希神照。辩明枉直，亮王素行，使还名帝籍，归灵旧茔，死而不泯，岂忘德于黄垆！
现代文：所以披肝沥胆抒出心中积愤，希望皇上神光照察，辨明是非曲直，揭示建平王素洁的品行，使他的名字回归帝王名籍，灵魂安归旧时坟茔，死后名声不至泯灭，怎么能让他的德行埋没于地下呢。
English: Therefore, he tried his best to express the pent-up anger in his heart, hoping that the emperor would be enlightened by the divine light, identify the rights and wrongs, reveal the virtuous behavior of Jianping Wang, return his name to the imperial family, return his soul to the old tomb, and his reputation would not be extinguished after death. How could he let his virtue be buried underground?

古文：分躯碎首，不足上谢。
现代文：粉身碎骨，都不足以回报皇上的大恩德。
English: It is not enough to grind one's bones to repay the emperor's great kindness.

古文：又与司空褚渊书曰：
现代文：又给司空褚渊写信说：
English: He also wrote to Siku Shanyuan, saying:

古文：天下之可哀者有数，而埋冤于黄泉者为甚焉。
现代文：天下值得悲哀的人不多，而含冤埋葬于九泉的人是最可悲哀的。为什么呢?
English: There are not many people in the world who deserve to be sad, but those who are unjustly buried in Jiuzhen are the saddest. Why?

古文：何者？百年之寿，同于朝露，挥忽去留，宁足道哉！
现代文：一百年的生命，好像朝露一样短暂，转眼之间或去或留，又有什么好说的呢!
English: A hundred years of life is as brief as the morning dew. In the blink of an eye, you can go or stay, and what is there to say!

古文：政欲阖棺之日，不陨令名，竹帛传芳烈，钟石纪清英。
现代文：正是想要在盖棺的那天，不让他的美名被污损。史书上能够传布他的功业和名声，钟石上刻下清白英拔的气节。
English: It is precisely to prevent his good name from being tarnished on the day of the coffin cover. The history books can spread his achievements and reputation, and the bell stone can be engraved with the air of innocence.

古文：是以昔贤甘心于死所者也。
现代文：所以过去的贤人都心甘情愿衹求死得其所。
English: That's why the wise men of the past were willing to die to get where they are.

古文：若怀忠抱义而负枉冥冥之下，时主未之矜，卿相不为言，良史濡翰，将被以恶名，岂不痛哉！
现代文：如果怀抱着忠诚仁义之心，而背负冤情死于冥界，君主不对他加以褒扬，卿相大臣不为他说句好话，优秀的史臣不加褒辞，衹能身遭误解承担恶名，难道不使人悲痛吗!
English: If a man dies in the underworld with a heart of loyalty, benevolence and righteousness, but with grievances on his back, if the monarch does not praise him, if the prime minister does not say a kind word for him, if an outstanding statesman does not praise him, and if he can be misunderstood and bear a bad name, won't it make people sad?

古文：岂不痛哉！
现代文：难道不使人悲痛吗!
English: How can I not be heartbroken!

古文：窃寻故建平王，地属亲贤，德居宗望，道心惟冲，睿性天峻。
现代文：我私下寻思过去的建平王，身居亲王贤臣，德行可增宗族名望，得道之心平和淡泊，智慧的天性严肃可观。
English: Privately, I have been thinking about the past King Jianping, who lived as a prince and a wise man. Virtue can increase the fame of the clan, the heart of the path is peaceful and light, and the nature of wisdom is serious.

古文：散情风云，不以尘务婴衿；明发怀古，惟以琴书娱志。
现代文：情思飘逸犹如风云，不因尘俗之务牵扯胸襟，孝思淳厚心怀古风，衹是弹琴读书以自娱。
English: His thoughts flow like the wind and clouds. He does not concern himself with mundane affairs. He is a filial son and cherishes the ancient customs. He plays the piano and reads books to amuse himself.

古文：言忠孝，行惇慎，二公之所深鉴也。
现代文：言辞合于忠孝之道，举止谨慎合乎礼仪，是二公非常明白的。
English: The words are in line with the way of loyalty and filial piety, and the behavior is cautious and in line with etiquette, which is very clear to the two princes.

古文：前者阮、杨连党，构此纷纭，虽被明于朝贵，愈结怨于群丑。
现代文：从前阮、杨纠合为党，造成了这种纷乱局面，虽然由朝廷显贵加以明察，但是还是同一群小人结下了冤仇。
English: Once upon a time, Ruan and Yang were entangled as a party, which caused this chaotic situation. Although it was noticed by the dignitaries of the court, they still had a grudge against the same group of villains.

古文：觇察继踪，疑防重著，小人在朝，诗史所叹，少一句清识饮涕。
现代文：又重新对他监视查询，进而又生疑忌防备，小人在朝廷为乱，是诗史所感叹过的事，少一句有清醒识见的人衹能忍痛挥泪。
English: He was once again under surveillance and investigation, which in turn gave rise to suspicions and precautions. A villain causing chaos in the imperial court is something that has been lamented in the history of poetry. It is rare to find a person with a clear understanding who can endure the pain and shed tears.

古文：王每永言终日，气泪交横。
现代文：建平王每每一说就是一天，眼泪纵横交流。
English: King Jianping said that every day is a day, and tears flowed everywhere.

古文：既推信以期物，故日去其备卫，朱门萧条，示存典刑而已。
现代文：既然要争取信任以破除非议，所以曰渐减少守卫之人，朱门萧条，衹是稍示国家礼法罢了。
English: Since it is necessary to win the trust of the people in order to break the deadlock, saying that the number of guards will be gradually reduced and Zhu Men will be depressed is just a hint of the national etiquette.

古文：求解徐州，以避北门要任；苦乞会稽，贪处东瓯闲务。
现代文：请求解任徐州，以避免担任北部边防的要职，苦苦请求出任会稽，贪图处在束瓯可以务闲，这都是很显著的事。
English: Requesting to be dismissed from Xuzhou in order to avoid holding an important position in the northern border defense, struggling to apply for the post of auditor, and coveting a position in Sokcho for leisure are all very conspicuous things.

古文：此并彰于事迹。与公道味相求，期心有素，方共经营家国，劬劳王室，何图时不我与，契阔屯昏，忠诚弗亮，罹此百殃！
现代文：和您有共同的志趣，心思向来相通，正要共同担当国事，为皇族效劳，怎会料到时机使之不能如愿，离散动乱晦暗不明，忠诚之心未能彰明，遭受到这样多的灾祸。
English: You and I have a common aspiration, our hearts have always been in common, we are about to jointly take charge of national affairs and serve the royal family, how could we expect the opportunity to make it impossible to fulfill our wishes, the scattered turmoil is obscure, the loyalty is not clear, and we have suffered so many disasters.

古文：岁朔亟流，已经四载。
现代文：岁月飞快地流逝，已经过去了四年。
English: The years have flown by, and four years have already passed.

古文：皇命惟新，人沾天泽，而幽然深酷，未蒙照明。
现代文：皇命建立新朝，人人都分享上天的恩泽，但是处于幽暗中的酷情，还没有得到昭雪。
English: The emperor's order to establish a new dynasty, everyone shares the blessing of heaven, but the cruel feelings in the dark have not yet been clarified.

古文：封殡卑杂，穷魂莫寄，昭穆不序，松柏无行。
现代文：死后葬事卑琐杂乱，亡魂无处存身，失去了昭穆的秩序，松柏都没有行次。
English: After death, funerals are trivial and chaotic, the souls of the dead have nowhere to live, the order of the dead has been lost, and the pine and cypress trees have no order.

古文：事伤行路，痛结幽显。
现代文：事情足以使路人感伤，沉痛郁结在死者和今人的心头。
English: The event is enough to make passers-by feel sad, and the pain is deeply rooted in the hearts of both the deceased and the living.

古文：吾等叩心泣血，实有望于圣时。
现代文：我们心中泣血，实在希望圣明之时能洗去冤情。
English: We weep blood in our hearts, and truly hope that when the time comes, we will be able to wash away our grievances.

古文：公以德佐世，欲物得其所，岂可令建平王枉直不分邪？
现代文：您因德行卓异辅佐天下，想要使万物各自得其所在，怎么能让建平王的是非曲直都不分清呢?
English: You are helping the world because of your outstanding virtue. If you want to make everything have its own place, how can you make the rights and wrongs of King Jianping unclear?

古文：田叔不言梁事，袁丝谏止淮南，以两国衅祸，尚回帝意，岂非亲亲之义，宁从敦厚？
现代文：田叔不谈论梁国的事，袁丝的谏言衹包括淮南，用这两国争端之祸。回转皇上的心意，难道不是使他亲近亲族，使德义敦厚吗?
English: Uncle Tian did not talk about the affairs of Liang Guo, and Yuan Si's slander included Huainan, using the misfortune of the dispute between the two countries. Wasn't it the emperor's intention to bring him closer to his relatives and make him virtuous?

古文：而今疑以未辨，为世大戮。
现代文：而现在疑虑没能辨明，被世间加以大戮之名。
English: But now doubts have not been identified, and the world is calling it a massacre.

古文：若使王心迹得申，亦示海内理冤枉，明是非。
现代文：如果能使建平王的心意得到申明，也可以显示海内整理冤情，明辨是非。
English: If the intention of King Jianping can be affirmed, it can also show that the grievances at home can be sorted out and right and wrong can be distinguished.

古文：夫存亡国，继绝世，周汉之通典，有国之所急也。
现代文：使亡国存续下去，使近于灭绝的世系接继下来，是周、汉共通的典则，是国家最急迫的事情。
English: It is the common standard of Zhou and Han to ensure the survival of the dead country and the succession of the near-extinct lineage, which is the most urgent matter for the country.

古文：昔叔向之理，恃祁大夫而获亮；戾太子之冤，资车丞相而见察。
现代文：从前叔向的道理，依靠祁大夫得以申明，戾太子的冤情，依靠车丞相而得以察明。
English: In the past, the truth of Uncle Xiang could be affirmed by relying on Dr. Zou, and the grievances of Prince Zou could be detected by relying on Minister Chejo.

古文：幽灵有知，岂不眷眷于明顾？
现代文：死去的亡灵如果有知，难道不会眷顾感恩吗?
English: If the souls of the dead knew, would they not be grateful?

古文：碎首抽胁，自谓不殒。
现代文：我打碎头颅，抽出肋骨，也不能偿付您的大恩。
English: I can't repay your kindness by cracking my skull and pulling out my ribs.

古文：渊答曰： 追风古人，良以嘉叹。
现代文：褚渊回信说： 风节直追古人，实在令人赞叹。
English: Shanyuan replied: It is truly amazing that the wind festival follows the ancients.

古文：但事既昭晦，理有逆从。
现代文：但是事情既然没有查明，理当有顺逆之分。
English: But since the matter has not been clarified, it stands to reason that the opposite is true.

古文：建平初阻，元徽未悖，专欲委咎阮、杨，弥所致疑。
现代文：建芒玉当初拥兵讨伐，褚渊还不算悖情，一味想把过错推给阮、杨两个人，更是使人怀疑。
English: Jian Mangyu initially supported the soldiers' crusade, and Gongyuan did not consider it to be insubordination, but he wanted to blame Ruan and Yang, which was even more suspicious.

古文：于时正亦谬参此机，若审如高论，其愧特深。 
现代文：现在也正在议论这件事，像这样的高论，使人越发惭愧。 
English: Now they are talking about it, too, and such lofty talk makes one feel more and more ashamed.

古文：太祖嘉其义，转为记室，迁司徒左西、太尉户曹属，中书郎，王俭卫军长史。
现代文：太祖嘉奖他的义行，转为记室，迁司徒左西、太尉户曹属，中书郎，王俭卫军长史。
English: The great-great-grandfather commended him for his good deed, and he was transferred to the office of record, and the offices of the secretary Zu Xi, the captain Cao Zhi, the middle school teacher, and the chief historian of Wang Jianwei's army were moved.

古文：俭谓昌宇曰： 后任朝事者，非卿而谁？ 
现代文：王俭对何昌寓说： 今后担当朝廷大事的，不是你还会足谁呢? 
English: Wang Jian said to He Changye: In the future, who will be in charge of the important affairs of the imperial court?

古文：永明元年，竟陵王子良表置文、学官，以昌宇为竟陵王文学，以清信相得，意好甚厚。
现代文：永明元年，竞陵王子良设置友、文学官，让何昌寓做了竞陵王文学，因为清明可信很是相投，情意相当深厚。
English: In the first year of the Yongming era, Prince Jingling Liang set up a friend, a literary official, and let He Changye do the King Jingling Literature, because the clarity and credibility are very compatible, and the sentiment is quite profound.

古文：转扬州别驾，豫章王又善之。
现代文：转扬州别驾，豫章王又对他很好。
English: Yanzhang Wang was very kind to him when he came to Yangzhou.

古文：迁太子中庶子，出为临川内史。
现代文：迁太子中庶子，出任临川内史。
English: He was an illegitimate child of the crown prince and served as the governor of Imkawa Province.

古文：除庐陵王中军长史，未拜，复为太子中庶子，领屯骑校尉。
现代文：除庐陵王中军长史，没有任命，后来又做太子中庶子，领屯骑校尉。
English: In addition to the commander of the army of the king of Fuling, he was not appointed, and later he became the prince's illegitimate son, leading the cavalry captain.

古文：迁吏部郎，转侍中。
现代文：迁吏部郎，转侍中。
English: He was a member of the relocation department and was in the process of being transferred.

古文：临海王昭秀为荆州，以昌宇为西中郎长史、辅国将军、南郡太守，行荆州事。
现代文：临海王萧昭秀管领荆州，用何昌寓做西中郎长史、辅国将军、南郡太守，掌管荆州政事。
English: Linhai King Xiao Zhaoxiu was in charge of Jingzhou, and used He Changye to be the West Middle Lord Changshi, the General of the Auxiliary State, the Governor of Nan County, and in charge of Jingzhou's government affairs.

古文：明帝遣徐玄庆西上害蕃镇诸王，玄庆至荆州，欲以便宜从事。
现代文：明帝派遣徐玄庆西去谋害镇守藩镇的诸王，徐玄庆到荆州，想见机行事。
English: Emperor Ming dispatched Xu Xuanqing to the west to plot the murder of the kings of the garrison towns. Xu Xuanqing went to Jingzhou to see what he could do.

古文：昌宇曰： 仆受朝廷意寄，翼辅外蕃，何容以殿下付君一介之使！
现代文：何昌寓说： 我受朝廷的旨意，辅佐外任的诸王，怎么能允许把王爷交给你这么一个使臣。
English: He Changyu said, "I am at the behest of the imperial court, and I assist the kings in their external duties. How can I allow you to hand over the prince to such an envoy?"

古文：若朝廷必须殿下还，当更听后旨。 
现代文：如果朝廷一定要殿下回去，应另降圣旨。 
English: If the Imperial Court wants His Imperial Highness to return, it should issue another imperial edict.

古文：昭秀以此得还京师。
现代文：萧昭秀因此得以回到京城。
English: As a result, Xiao Zhaoxiu was able to return to Beijing.

古文：建武二年，为侍中，领长水校尉，转吏部尚书。
现代文：建武二年，为侍中，领长水校尉，转吏部尚书。
English: In the second year of the Jianwu era, he was a chamberlain, a captain and a lieutenant, and a transfer officer.

古文：复为侍中，领骁骑将军。
现代文：后又为侍中，领骁骑将军。
English: Later, he became a chamberlain and a general leading the cavalry.

古文：四年，卒。年五十一。
现代文：四年，去世时年五十一岁。
English: Four years later, he died at the age of fifty-one.

古文：赠太常，谥简子。
现代文：追赠太常，谧简子。
English: It's not unusual for gifts to be given posthumously, says Jane Zou.

古文：昌宇不杂交游，通和泛爱，历郡皆清白。士君子多称之。
现代文：何昌寓交游不繁杂，通达仁爱。历官诸郡都很清白正直，多受到士人君子的称赏。
English: He Chang's residence is not complicated, and is conducive to benevolence. All officials and counties are very clean and honest, and are mostly praised by scholars and gentlemen.

古文：谢，字义洁，陈郡阳夏人也。
现代文：谢满字义洁，是陈郡阳夏人。
English: Xie Man Zi Yi Jie is a native of Yangxia, Chen County.

古文：祖弘微，宋太常。
现代文：祖父谢弘微是宋朝的太常。
English: Grandfather Xie Hongwei was a Song Dynasty official.

古文：父庄，金紫光禄大夫。
现代文：父亲谢庄官至金紫光禄大夫。
English: His father, Xie Zhuang, was an official and later became a doctor of Jin Zi Guanglu.

古文：抃四兄扬、朏、颢、軿，世谓谢庄名儿为风、月、景、山、水。
现代文：谢满有四位兄长谢飏、谢肶、谢颢、谢褪，世间称谢庄是用风、月、景、山、水来给儿子取名的。
English: Xie Man has four older brothers, Xie Jun, Xie Jun, Xie Jun and Xie Fen. The world says that Xie Zhuang named his son after the wind, moon, scenery, mountain and water.

古文：颢字仁悠，少简静。
现代文：谢颢字仁悠，少时就简约沉静。
English: Xie Xuan Zi Ren Yu, when he was young, he was simple and quiet.

古文：解褐秘书郎，累至太祖骠骑从事中郎。
现代文：入仕任秘书郎，屡经升迁官至太祖骠骑从事中郎。
English: He entered the service as a secretary, and was promoted several times to the position of grand ancestor, serving as a middle steward.

古文：建元初，为吏部郎，至太尉从事中郎。
现代文：建元初年，为吏部郎，官至太尉从事中郎。
English: In the first year of the Jianyuan era, he was a cadre sergeant, and officers up to second lieutenants were engaged as junior sergeants.

古文：永明初，高选友、学，以颢为竟陵王友。
现代文：永明初年，选拔友、文学，任用谢颢为竞陵王友。
English: In the first year of the Yongming era, friends and literature were selected, and Xie Yao was appointed as the friend of Wang Jingling.

古文：至北中郎长史。
现代文：官至北中郎长史。
English: He was promoted to Kita chūro chōshi.

古文：卒。
现代文：后去世。
English: To die.

古文：抃年七岁，王彧见而异之，言于宋孝武。孝武召见于稠人广众之中，抃举动闲详，应对合旨，帝甚悦，诏尚公主，值景和败，事寝。
现代文：谢迩七岁时，王盛见到他觉得他很不一般，对宋孝武帝谈到他，耋亘墟就在大庭广众之中召见他，谢逊举止悠闲态度安详，应对的话很合皇上意，皇上非常高兴。诏令匹配给公主，碰上事败，没有做成。
English: When Xie Xuan was seven years old, Wang Sheng saw him and thought he was very unusual. When Emperor Song Xiaowu talked about him, Zou Wan Rui summoned him in the middle of the large audience. Xie Xun's demeanor was relaxed and calm. His response was very much in line with the emperor's wishes, and the emperor was very happy. The imperial decree was matched to the princess, but it was unsuccessful.

古文：仆射褚渊闻抃年少，清正不恶，以女结婚，厚为资送。
现代文：仆射褚渊听说谢满年纪轻轻就清明正直没有恶俗之气，就把女儿嫁给他，陪赠了很多财物。
English: After hearing that Xie Man was young, clean and honest, and had no vulgarity, he married his daughter to him and gave him a lot of property.

古文：解褐车骑行参军，迁秘书郎，司徒祭酒，丹阳丞，抚军功曹。
现代文：出仕为车骑行参军，迁秘书郎，司徒祭酒，丹阳丞，抚军功曹。
English: The attendants ride to join the army, the secretary of the relocation, the priest of the festival of wine, Danyang, and the army.

古文：世祖为中军，引为记室。
现代文：世祖为中军，引荐他为记室。
English: The founder was a member of the Chinese army, who recommended him to the registration office.

古文：齐台建，迁太子中舍人。
现代文：齐朝建置台合，迁为太子中舍人。
English: Qi Dynasty built Tahe, and moved to the Prince's residence.

古文：建元初，转桂阳王友。
现代文：建元初年，转桂阳王友。
English: In the first year after the founding of the People's Republic of China, he changed his name to Guiyang Wangyou.

古文：以母老须养，出为安成内史。
现代文：因为母亲年老需要奉养，出任安成内史。
English: Because his mother needed to be cared for in her old age, he became Ancheng's secretary.

古文：还为中书郎。
现代文：迁为中书郎。
English: Moved to Chushiro.

古文：卫军王俭引为长史，雅相礼遇。
现代文：卫军王俭引为长史，对他厚加礼遇。
English: Wang Jian, a member of the Imperial Guard, was given a long history and was treated with great courtesy.

古文：除黄门郎，兼掌吏部。
现代文：授黄门郎，兼掌吏部。
English: He was awarded the title of Huangmenro, and also served as the head of the administrative department.

古文：寻转太子中庶子，领骁骑将军，转长史兼侍中。
现代文：不久转太子中庶子，领骁骑将军，转长兼侍中。
English: He soon became the prince's illegitimate son, the general leading the imperial cavalry, and the vice-captain and chamberlain.

古文：抃以晨昏有废，固辞不受。
现代文：谢满因为早晚不能任职，坚决推辞不肯领受。
English: Xie Man refused to accept the resignation because sooner or later he would not be able to hold the post.

古文：世祖敕令速拜，别停朝直。
现代文：世祖诏令他赶紧拜任，特地免去他宿值朝廷的任务。
English: The patriarch ordered him to quickly take up his duties, specifically exempting him from the task of being on duty at the imperial court.

古文：迁司徒左长史，出为吴兴太守。
现代文：迁司徒左长史，出任吴兴太守。
English: The relocation of the chief priest left a long history, and Wu Xing became the governor-general.

古文：长城县民卢道优家遭劫，诬同县殷孝悌等四人为劫，抃收付县狱考正。
现代文：长城县的百姓卢道优家裹遭到抢劫，诬告同县的殷孝悌等四人是抢劫犯，谢满把他们逮捕收归县城监狱调查此事。
English: Lu Daoyu's home in Great Wall County was robbed, and he falsely accused four people, including Yin Xiaojuan from the same county, of being the robbers. Xie Man arrested them and sent them to the county prison to investigate the matter.

古文：孝悌母骆诣登闻诉称孝悌为道优所诽谤，横劾为劫，一百七十三人连名保征，在所不为申理。
现代文：殷孝悌的母亲骆氏上告声称殷孝悌是被卢道优诬告的，胡说他是抢劫犯，有一百七十三个人联名为他担保，而当地官府不为其申冤。
English: Mr. Luo, the mother of Yin Xiaojuan, appealed, claiming that Mr. Yin Xiaojuan was falsely accused by Lu Daoyu, saying that he was a robber and that one hundred and seventy-three people jointly vouched for him, while the local government did not redress his grievances.

古文：闻孝悌母诉，乃启建康狱覆，道优理穷款首，依法斩刑。
现代文：谢满听说了他母亲的申诉，就请求建康监狱复查此案，卢道优理屈词穷伏首认罪，被依法斩首。
English: When Xie Man heard about his mother's complaint, he asked Jiankang Prison to review the case. Lu Dao Youli confessed to the crime and was beheaded according to the law.

古文：有司奏免抃官。
现代文：有关部门奏请免去谢满的官职。
English: Relevant departments have requested that Xie Man be removed from his post.

古文：抃又使典药吏煮汤，失火，烧郡外斋南厢屋五间。
现代文：谢满又让掌管药的小吏煮汤，不慎失火，烧掉了郡外的斋室南厢房五问。
English: Xie Man also asked the minor official in charge of medicine to cook soup, which accidentally caught fire and burned down the southern wing of the county's fasting room.

古文：又辄鞭除身，为有司所奏，诏并赎论，在郡称为美绩。
现代文：又动辄鞭打开除其下属，也被有关部门上奏朝廷，诏令让他一并用财物赎遇。在郡上任官颇受称赞。
English: In addition to his subordinates, he was also scolded by the relevant departments and reported to the imperial court, which ordered him to use his property to redeem himself. The newly appointed official was highly praised in the county.

古文：母丧去官。
现代文：因母亲去世免官。
English: He was relieved of his duties due to the death of his mother.

古文：服阕，为吏部尚书。
现代文：服丧期满，任吏部尚书。
English: After the period of mourning, he was appointed as an official of the Ministry of Civil Affairs.

古文：高宗废郁林，领兵入殿，左右惊走报抃。
现代文：高宗废掉郁林王，领着兵士进入殿中，左右侍卫惊慌地跑去报告谢洒。
English: Gao Zong dethroned King Yulin and led the soldiers into the palace. The guards on both sides panicked and ran to report Xie Ran.

古文：抃与客围棋，每下子，辄云 其当有意 。
现代文：谢满正在同客人下围棋，每下一子，都说 他应该有所企图 。
English: Xie Man is playing a game of Go with his guests, and every single one of them says that he should try something.

古文：竟局，乃还斋卧，竟不问外事也。
现代文：一局终了，就回到屋裹躺下，竟然不问外面的事情。
English: At the end of a game, he would go back to his room and lie down, not even bothering to ask about what was going on outside.

古文：明帝即位，抃又属疾不视事。
现代文：明帝即位，谢潇又藉口有病不处理政事。
English: Emperor Ming ascended to the throne, and Xie Xiao used his illness as an excuse not to deal with political affairs.

古文：后上宴会，功臣上酒，尚书令王晏等兴席，抃独不起，曰： 陛下受命，应天顺民，王晏妄叨天功以为己力。 
现代文：后来皇上设宴。功臣向皇帝敬酒，尚书令王晏等人在酒席间站起来，衹有谢潇一个人不起身，说： 皇上领受上天之命，应合天意顺服民心，王晏等人妄自想把天之功劳归为自己的力量。 
English: Later, the emperor held a banquet. The meritorious vassals made a toast to the emperor. Shang Shuxu ordered Wang Xi and others to stand up in the banquet hall. At the beginning, there was Xie Xiao, who did not stand up and said: "The emperor received the mandate of heaven and should obey the will of heaven and the people. Wang Xi and others thought they could take the merit of heaven as their own strength."

古文：上大笑解之。
现代文：皇上大笑，中释镶。
English: The emperor laughed loudly, and the play was called off.

古文：座罢，晏呼抃共载还令省，欲相抚悦，抃又正色曰： 君巢窟在何处？ 
现代文：酒宴完毕，王曼叫邀逊和他同坐一辆车回尚书省，想要和他搞好关系。谢满很严肃地说： 您的窝在什么地方? 
English: After the wine banquet, Wang Man asked Xiang Xun to take a car with him back to Shangshu Province, hoping to establish a good relationship with him. Xie Man said very seriously: Where is your home?

古文：晏初得班剑，抃谓之曰： 身家太傅裁得六人。君亦何事一朝至此。 
现代文：王曼开始得到班剑仪仗时，谢满对他说： 身为太傅才得到六人的仪仗，你干了什么一下子有这么多。 
English: When Wang Man began to receive the ceremonial sword, Xie Man said to him: "As a grandmaster, you only get the six-person ceremonial sword. What have you done to have so many at once?"

古文：晏甚惮之。
现代文：王晏很畏惧他。
English: From then on, Wang Yao was particularly afraid of Xie Yao.

古文：加领右军将军。
现代文：加领右军将军。
English: He was accompanied by the general of the right army.

古文：兄朏在吴兴，论启公事稽晚，辄代为启，上见非其手迹，被问，见原。
现代文：他的兄长谢肶在吴兴郡，因为处置公事有所延误，谢满就代他撰写奏疏，皇上看到字迹不对，查问这事，得到了谅解。
English: His brother, Xie Jun, was in Wuxing County, and because there was a delay in the handling of official business, Xie Man wrote a report on his behalf. The emperor saw that the handwriting was incorrect, investigated the matter, and was forgiven.

古文：转侍中，领太子中庶子，豫州中正。
现代文：调任侍中，领太子中庶子，豫州中正。
English: He was transferred to be a chamberlain, an illegitimate child of the crown prince, and a middle-ranking official in Yuzhou.

古文：永泰元年，转散骑常侍，太子詹事。
现代文：永泰元年，转散骑常侍，太子詹事。
English: In the first year of the Yongtai Dynasty, Prince Zhan Zhi, the prince's equerry, was exiled.

古文：其年卒，年四十五。
现代文：这一年去世。时年四十五岁。
English: He died that year, aged 45.

古文：赠金紫光禄大夫。
现代文：追赠金紫光禄大夫。
English: The official street presented to Dr. Jin Zi Guanglu.

古文：谥简子。
现代文：谧号简子。
English: His nickname is Jane Wang.

古文：初，兄朏为吴兴，抃于征虏渚送别，朏指抃口曰： 此中唯宜饮酒。 
现代文：当初，他的兄长谢肶赴任吴兴，谢满在征虏渚跟他送别，谢肶指着谢潇的嘴说： 这儿衹适合用来喝酒。 
English: At first, his older brother Xie Jun went to Wu Xing, and Xie Man said goodbye to him at the recruiting station. Xie Jun pointed to Xie Xiao's mouth and said, "Here, the gourd is suitable for drinking.

古文：抃建武之初专以长酣为事，与刘瑱、沈昭略以觞酌交饮，各至数斗。
现代文：谢潇在建武之初，一味醉在酒中，和刘琐、沈昭略用觞酌酒对饮，各自都喝到数斗酒。
English: At the beginning of the Jianwu period, Xie Xiao was completely drunk on wine, and Liu Zuo and Shen Zhao used gourds to drink wine, and each of them drank several bottles of wine.

古文：世祖尝问王俭，当今谁能为五言诗？
现代文：世祖曾经问王俭，现在谁能作五言诗?
English: The Ancestor once asked Wang Jian, who can write a five-character poem now?

古文：俭对曰： 谢朏得父膏腴，江淹有意。 
现代文：王俭回答说： 谢肶继承了他父亲文字的丰腴情致；江淹意尚深远。 
English: Wang Jian replied: Xie Yao inherited the richness of his father's writing; the meaning of Jiang Duan is still far-reaching.

古文：上起禅灵寺，敕抃撰碑文。
现代文：皇上建造了禅灵寺，诏令谢满撰写碑文。
English: The emperor built the Zenling Temple and ordered Xie Man to write the inscription.

古文：王思远，琅邪临沂人。
现代文：王思远，是琅邪临沂人。
English: Wang Siyuan is a person who hates evil.

古文：尚书令晏从弟也。
现代文：是尚书令王晏的堂弟。
English: He is the cousin of Shang Shuling Wang Yao.

古文：父罗云，平西长史。
现代文：父亲王罗云，任平西长史。
English: His father, Wang Luoyun, was appointed to Pingxi Long History.

古文：思远八岁，父卒，祖弘之及外祖新安太守羊敬元，并栖退高尚，故思远少无仕心。
现代文：王思远八岁的时候，父亲死了，祖父王弘之和外祖父新安太守羊敬元都退官闲居，所以王思远小时没有出仕的愿望。
English: When Wang Siyuan was eight years old, his father died. Both his grandfather, Wang Hongzhi, and his maternal grandfather, Xin'an's grand marshal, Yang Jingyuan, had retired from their posts and were living in idleness. As a result, Wang Siyuan had no desire to serve when he was young.

古文：宋建平王景素辟为南徐州主簿，深见礼遇。
现代文：宋建平王景素征召他做亩俭妙主簿，很受礼遇。
English: Song Jianping Wang Jingsu recruited him to be the chief accountant of Mu Jianmei, and he was treated with great courtesy.

古文：景素被诛，左右离散，思远亲视殡葬，手种松柏。
现代文：景素被杀，左右臣属都分散离去，王思远却亲自安排殡葬的事宜，亲手在坟上种植松柏。
English: When Jing Su was killed, his left and right subordinates dispersed and left, but Wang Siyuan personally arranged the funeral and planted conifers on the grave.

古文：与庐江何昌宇、沛郡刘璡上表理之，事感朝廷。
现代文：和庐丝何昌宇、沛郡刘璡上表奏明此事，使朝廷上下都很感动。
English: He Changyu and Liu Ye of Pei County made this matter known to the Imperial Court, which was deeply moved.

古文：景素女废为庶人，思远分衣食以相资赡，年长，为备笄总，访求素对，倾家送遣。
现代文：景素的女儿被废为庶人，王思远把自己家的衣服食物分赠给她接济她的生活，等她长大，又替她举办成年笄礼，访求堪相匹配的人家，尽自己的财力给她出嫁的陪赠。
English: When Jing Su's daughter was reduced to a commoner, Wang Siyuan gave her some of his family's clothing and food to support her life. When she grew up, he held a coming-of-age ceremony for her, visited the family of a suitable match, and gave her a wedding gift with his own financial resources.

古文：除晋熙王抚军行参军，安成王车骑参军。
现代文：授晋熙王抚军行参军，安成王车骑参军。
English: Emperor Jinxi sent Wang Fuzhi to march to join the army, and Emperor Ancheng rode to join the army.

古文：建元初，为长沙王后军主簿，尚书殿中郎，出补竟陵王征北记室参军，府迁司徒，仍为录事参军。
现代文：建元初，做过长沙王后军主簿，尚书殿中郎，出朝补直盐工征北记室参军，竟陵王迁为司徒，仍然是录事参军。
English: At the beginning of the 19th century, he served as the main bookkeeper of the Queen of Changsha's army and the middle clerk of the Shangshu palace. He went to the Northern Records Office to join the army, but was transferred to the King of Mausoleums as an assistant. He still joined the army as a record keeper.

古文：迁太子中舍人。文惠太子与竟陵王子良素好士，并蒙赏接。
现代文：迁太子中舍人，文惠太子和竟陵王子良向来喜好士人，他受到两人的赏识和礼遇。
English: Among the relocated princes, Prince Wen Hui and Prince Gong Ling have always been fond of scholars, and he has been appreciated and treated with courtesy by both of them.

古文：思远求出为远郡，除建安内史。
现代文：王思远请求出任边远的郡地，授建安内史。
English: Wang Siyuan requested to be assigned to a remote county, and was assigned to build an internal history.

古文：长兄思玄卒，思远友于甚至，表乞自解，不许。
现代文：他的长兄王思玄去世，王思远因为同兄长感情非常好，上表请求解去官职，没有得到准许。
English: His eldest brother, Wang Sixuan, passed away. Wang Siyuan, because he had a very good relationship with his elder brother, requested to be relieved of his official duties, but was not allowed.

古文：及详日，又固陈，世祖乃许之。
现代文：等到祭，又坚决请求，世祖才答应了他。
English: He waited until the festival and made a firm request before the patriarch agreed.

古文：除中书郎，大司马谘议。
现代文：官拜中书郎，大司马谘议。
English: The officials worshipped Chushiro, and the chief secretary consulted with him.

古文：世祖诏举士，竟陵王子良荐思远及吴郡顾暠之、陈郡殷叡。
现代文：世祖诏令举荐士人，竟陵王子良推荐了干思远和吴郡的顾嵩之、陈郡的殷散。
English: According to the Emperor's edict to recommend scholars, Prince Ling Liang recommended Gan Siyuan, Gu Songzhi of Wu County, and Yin San of Chen County.

古文：邵陵王子贞为吴郡，世祖除思远为吴郡丞，以本官行郡事，论者以为得人。
现代文：邵陵王子贞执掌吴郡，世祖任命王思远做吴郡丞，以本官掌管郡中事务，议论的人都认为用人很适当。
English: Shaoling Prince Zhen presided over Wu County, and the founder of the dynasty appointed Wang Siyuan as the county magistrate of Wu County. He was in charge of the affairs of the county. The people who discussed the matter thought that the appointment was very appropriate.

古文：以疾解职，还为司徒谘议参军，领录事，转黄门郎。
现代文：因病免去了官职，回朝做司徒谘议参军，领录事，转黄门郎。
English: Due to illness, he was relieved of his official position and returned to the imperial court as a scholar to advise on joining the army, to lead the record, and to become Huangmenlang.

古文：出为使持节、都督广交越三州诸军事、宁朔将军、平越中郎将、广州刺史。
现代文：出任为使持节、都督广交越三州诸军事、宁朔将军、平越中郎将、广州刺史。
English: Appointed for the Envoy's Day, the military of the three states of Guangzhou, Ningshuo, Pingyue, and Guangzhou.

古文：高宗辅政，不之任，仍迁御史中丞。
现代文：高宗辅佐政事，没有去赴任，仍然迁为御史中丞。
English: Gao Zongfu, a political aide, did not take up the post, but was still transferred to the position of goshi chujo.

古文：临海太守沈昭略赃私，思远依事劾奏，高宗及思远从兄晏、昭略叔父文季请止之，思远不从，案事如故。
现代文：临海太守沈昭略贪污营私，王思远根据事实弹劾他，高宗和王思远的堂兄王晏、沈昭略的叔父沈文季都请他停止此事，他没有听从他们，仍然这样做了。
English: Linhai governor Shen Zhaoyu engaged in corruption, Wang Siyuan impeached him on the basis of facts. Gaozong, Wang Siyuan's cousin Wang Qi, and Shen Zhaoyu's uncle Shen Wenzhi all asked him to stop the matter. He did not listen to them and still did it.

古文：建武中，迁吏部郎。
现代文：建武年间，调任吏部郎。
English: During the Kenmu era, he was transferred to the post of secretary.

古文：思远以从兄晏为尚书令，不欲并居内台权要之职，上表固让。
现代文：王思远因为他的堂兄王晏是尚书令，不想同在尚书省执掌大权，上表坚决辞职。
English: Wang Siyuan, who did not want to share power with Shang Shuling because his cousin Wang Hui was Shang Shuling, resolutely resigned from the cabinet.

古文：曰： 近频烦归启，实有微概。
现代文：他说： 最近频繁地向皇上启奏，实在是心裹有所感想。
English: He said, "Recently, I have frequently performed for the Emperor, and I really feel something.

古文：陛下矜遇之厚，古今罕俦。
现代文：陛下待遇的深厚，是古今少有的。
English: The depth of His Majesty's treatment is unprecedented.

古文：臣若孤恩，谁当戮力！
现代文：臣下如果辜负了皇上的圣恩，简直就没有人会效力了。
English: If a vassal fails to live up to the emperor's grace, no one will work for him.

古文：既自誓轻躯命，不复以尘点为疑，正以臣与晏地惟密亲，必不宜俱居显要。
现代文：既已自己准备誓死酬恩，不再由于害怕名声的小污点而有所犹豫，正因为我和王晏关系亲近，绝不应该一同高居显要的职位。
English: Since I have already prepared myself to swear allegiance to death, I will no longer hesitate for fear of a small stain on my reputation. Precisely because I am close to Wang Yao, we should never occupy high and prominent positions together.

古文：慺慺丹赤，守之以死。
现代文：勤恳恭敬的赤诚之心，一直到死都会坚守。
English: A diligent and respectful red-hearted heart will persist until death.

古文：臣实庸鄙，无足奖进。
现代文：我实在平庸没有见识，没什么值得奖励的长处。
English: I'm really mediocre, I don't have any insight, I don't have any strengths worth rewarding.

古文：陛下甄拔之旨，要是许其一节。
现代文：陛卜选拔人才的宗旨，大概是称许其一方面的嘉行。
English: The purpose of His Majesty's selection of talents is probably to commend his one-sided praise.

古文：臣果不能以理自固，有乖则哲之明。
现代文：我竞不能用道理来坚持自己的决定，就违背了圣哲的明智。
English: If I can't use reason to stick to my decision, I'm going against the wisdom of the sages.

古文：犯冒之尤，诛责在己，谬赏之私，惟尘圣鉴。
现代文：冒犯皇上的过错，责备和论罪都由自己承担，而错误地领受恩惠，却要使皇上的明智蒙上污尘。
English: The fault of offending the emperor, the blame and the accusation are borne by oneself, and the grace wrongly received, but the wisdom of the emperor should be covered with dust.

古文：权其轻重，宁守褊心。
现代文：权衡这两者的轻重，我宁可偏向自己承担。
English: Weighing up the two, I'd rather shoulder the burden myself.

古文：且亦缘陛下以德御下，故臣可得以礼进退。
现代文：况且也是因为陛下是以盛德统率群臣，所以我得以依照礼法有进有退。
English: Moreover, it was also because His Majesty led his ministers with dignity and virtue that I was able to enter and leave in accordance with etiquette.

古文：伏愿思垂拯宥，不使零坠。
现代文：惟愿皇上顾念我的忠心答应我的要求，不要让我冒罪飘零。
English: I only wish that the Emperor would consider my loyalty and grant my request, and not let me go unpunished.

古文：今若祗膺所忝，三公不足为泰，犯忤之后，九泉未足为剧。
现代文：今天如果勉强接受此职，即使位公也不足使人安泰，一旦有违圣意，就是黄泉赴死也不足为甚。
English: Today, if you reluctantly accept this position, even the title of prince is not enough to keep you safe, and if you violate the sacred will, it is not enough to go to hell.

古文：而臣苟求刑戮，自弃富荣，愚夫不为，臣亦庶免。
现代文：而我这样苟且行事衹是为了将来的遭受刑罚，自己抛弃富贵荣华，这是连愚蠢的人都不会做的事，我也不愿如此。
English: But I'm doing this so that I can be punished in the future. I'm giving up my wealth and glory. This is something that even a stupid person wouldn't do, and I don't want to do it.

古文：此心此志，可怜可矜。
现代文：我的心情和想法，值得怜惜和谅解。
English: My feelings and thoughts are worthy of pity and understanding.

古文：如其上命必行，请罪非理，圣恩方置之通涂，而臣固求摈压，自愍自悼，不觉涕流。
现代文：如果皇上的命令一定要执行，请求按非理之罪处置我，圣上的恩典正广布在通街大道上。而我却固执地请求排除和压制，自己为自己悲愍伤悼，不觉流下泪来。
English: If the emperor's order must be carried out, requesting that I be dealt with according to the crime of unreason, the grace of the saint is spreading widely on the thoroughfare. But I stubbornly asked to be excluded and suppressed, and I grieved for myself and shed tears unconsciously.

古文：谨冒鈇钺，悉心以请。
现代文：谨此冒着斧敛加身的死罪，把心裹的想法全部向陛下呈奏。
English: It is with great honor that I take the risk of committing the capital crime of aiding and abetting, and present to His Majesty all the thoughts in my heart.

古文：穷则呼天，仰祈一照。 
现代文：困窘没有办法衹好呼唤上天，希望皇上明察。 
English: Embarrassed, there was no way to cry out to heaven, hoping that the emperor would see it.

古文：上知其意，乃改授司徒左长史。
现代文：皇上知道了他的意思，就改授司徒左长史。
English: When the emperor learned of his intention, he changed the course to Stutthof's History of the Left.

古文：初，高宗废立之际，思远与晏闲言，谓晏曰： 兄荷世祖厚恩，今一旦赞人如此事，彼或可以权计相须，未知兄将来何以自立。
现代文：当初，高宗废旧帝立新帝的时候，王思远和王晏闲聊，对王晏说： 兄长你承受了世祖很厚的恩情，现在朝夕之间又帮助别人干这种事，他现在或者还因为计谋事情需要你，就不知道将来你怎么立足。
English: At the beginning, when Gaozong overthrew the old emperor and installed a new one, Wang Siyuan chatted with Wang Yao and said to Wang Yao: "Brother, you have received the great favor of your ancestor. Now, between morning and evening, you help others to do such things. He may need you now or because he is plotting something, so he doesn't know where you will stand in the future.

古文：若及此引决，犹可不失后名。 
现代文：如果从现在就和他们断绝来往，还可以不失掉晚节。 
English: If you cut off all contact with them from now on, you can still enjoy the evening festival.

古文：晏不纳。
现代文：王晏不听他的话。
English: Wang Yao did not listen to his words.

古文：及拜骠骑，集会子弟，谓思远兄思微曰： 隆昌之末，阿戎劝吾自裁。若从其语，岂有今日？ 
现代文：等拜任骠骑，会集族中子弟，他对王思远的哥哥思微说： 隆昌末年，阿戎劝我自杀，如果听了他的话，我还有今天吗。 
English: He said to Wang Si Yuan's brother Si Wei: In the last years of Longchang, Ah Rong advised me to commit suicide. If I had listened to him, would I still be alive today?

古文：思远遽应曰： 如阿戎所见，犹未晚也。 
现代文：王思远急忙答道： 就像阿戎所看到的，现在自杀也还不晚。 
English: Wang Siyuan hastily replied: As A Rong saw, it's not too late to commit suicide.

古文：及晏败，故得无他。
现代文：等到王晏势败，所以没有受牵连。
English: Waited until Wang Xuan was defeated, so he was not implicated.

古文：思远清修，立身简洁。
现代文：王思远清明善修，立身之道惟求简洁。
English: Wang Siyuan is clear-minded, clear-sighted and virtuous. The way to success is to be concise.

古文：衣服床筵，穷治素净。宾客来通，辄使人先密觇视，衣服垢秽，方便不前，形仪新楚，乃与促膝。虽然，既去之后，犹令二人交帚拂其坐处。
现代文：衣服饰物床榻筵席，都极力要求置办得干净素雅，有宾客来拜访，就让人先偷偷地察看，衣服脏污的，就随意地招待不同他接近，形貌整洁漂亮的，才同他促膝相谈即使这样，等客人离开之后，还要让两个人用笤帚拂扫他们坐过的地方。
English: Clothes, ornaments, beds, and tables are all required to be kept clean and elegant. If guests come to visit, they will be secretly inspected first. If the clothes are dirty, they will be invited to approach him at will. If the shape is neat and beautiful, they will be forced to talk to him. Even so, after the guests leave, two people will be asked to sweep the place where they sat with a broom.

古文：上从祖弟季敞性甚豪纵，上心非之，谓季敞曰： 卿可数诣王思远。 
现代文：皇上的族祖弟季敞性情非常豪迈，皇上心裹不喜欢他，对他说： 你叮以常去拜访王思远。 
English: The emperor's ancestor and younger brother Ji Bi was very proud. The emperor did not like him at all and told him, "You should visit Wang Siyuan more often."

古文：上既诛晏，迁之侍中，掌优策及起居注。
现代文：皇上杀掉了王晏，王思远迁为侍中，掌管策令和起居注。
English: The emperor killed Wang Yao, and Wang Siyuan was moved to the position of chamberlain, in charge of planning and living.

古文：永元二年，迁度支尚书。
现代文：永元二年，迁度支尚书。
English: In the second year of the Yongyuan era, the relocation schedule was revised.

古文：未拜，卒，年四十九。
现代文：没有拜任，就死了。时年四十九岁。
English: He died without taking up the post, at the age of 49.

古文：赠太常，谥贞子。
现代文：追赠太常，谧号贞王。
English: The posthumous gift is too common, the nickname Zhenwang.

古文：思远与顾暠之友善。
现代文：王思远跟顾嵩之很好。
English: Wang Siyuan and Gu Song get along very well.

古文：暠之卒后家贫，思远迎其儿子，经恤甚至。
现代文：颅昼迄死后家裹很穷，王思远把他的妻子孩子接来，照顾得很周到。
English: His family was very poor after his death. Wang Siyuan brought his wife and children to live with him and took very good care of them.

古文：暠之，字士明，少孤，好学有义行。
现代文：顾嵩之字士明。从小死了父亲，好学求知有仁义的举动。
English: His father died when he was a child, and his eagerness to learn and seek knowledge is a benevolent act.

古文：初举秀才，历官府阁。
现代文：开始被举为秀才，在各府合中任官。
English: At first, he was praised as an outstanding talent, and was appointed to various posts in the prefectural governments.

古文：永明末，为太子中舍人，兼尚书左丞。
现代文：永明末年，任太子中舍人，兼尚书左丞。
English: At the end of Yongming's life, he was appointed the middle son of the crown prince, and concurrently the senior secretary.

古文：隆昌初，为安西谘议，兼著作，与思远并属文章。
现代文：隆员初年，任安西谘议，兼著作，跟王思远一起撰写文章。
English: In the first year of Longyan, he was appointed as a consultant to Anxi, and also wrote a book, and wrote an article with Wang Siyuan.

古文：建武初，以疾归家，高宗手诏与思远曰： 此人殊可惜。 
现代文：建武初，因为生病回家，高宗手写诏令给王墨远说： 这个人很是可惜。 
English: At the beginning of the Jianwu period, Gaozong went home because he was ill, and he wrote a handwritten edict to Wang Moyuan, saying, "It is a pity about this person.

古文：就拜中散大夫。
现代文：就拜为中散大夫。
English: He is known as Dr. Nakasanso.

古文：卒，年四十九。
现代文：去世，时年四十九岁。
English: He died at the age of forty-nine.

古文：思微，永元中为江州长史，为陈伯之所杀。
现代文：王思微，丞五年间做过红州长史，被蛙值之杀了。
English: Wang Siwei, who had been a Red Governor for five years, was killed by Frog Value.

古文：史臣曰：德成为上，艺成为下。
现代文：史臣曰：成就德行是最高尚的，成就艺业衹在其次。
English: Shichen said: Achievement of virtue is the most noble, achievement of art is the second.

古文：观夫二三子之治身，岂直清体雅业，取隆基构，行礼蹈义，可以勉物风规云。
现代文：看这几个人对自身的修养，哪裹仅仅是使身心清健艺业高雅，而是把福业的隆厚建立在道德的基础上，行动依从礼义，可以勉励外物感化世俗了。
English: Looking at the self-cultivation of these few people, which is just to make the body and mind clean and healthy, and the arts elegant, but to establish the magnificence of blessing on the basis of morality, and to act according to etiquette, it is possible to encourage the influence of external things to secularize.

古文：君子之居世，所谓美矣！
现代文：君子处在世上，它的美德正在于此。
English: A gentleman's place is in the world, and that is where his virtue lies.

古文：赞曰：江纂世业，有闻时陂。
现代文：赞曰：江敩继承了世代的大业，使当时的邪佞之人有所警醒。
English: Zang said: Jiang Chen inherited the great cause of the generation, so that the wicked people at that time were alerted.

古文：何申旧主，辞出乎义。
现代文：何昌寓为故主请诉申冤，言辞出于大义。
English: He Changye sued for redress for the deceased, and his words were out of justice.

古文：谢献寿觞，载色载刺。
现代文：谢满献上祝寿的酒杯，半是承欢半是讽刺。
English: Xie Man presented a congratulatory wine glass, half of which was joy and half of which was irony.

古文：思远退食，冲心笃寄。
现代文：王思远退位不求厚禄，完全是出于谦敬的心。
English: Wang Siyuan's abdication did not seek a reward, but was entirely out of a humble heart.

