古文：父群，字正夫，通经术，善属文。
现代文：他父亲路群的字叫正夫，精通经学，善于写文章。
English: His father Lu Qun's character is called Zhengfu, he is proficient in the study of classics and good at writing articles.

古文：性志纯洁，亲殁，终身不肉食。
现代文：生性忠贞廉洁，父母去世后，他一生都不吃荤菜。
English: By nature, he is loyal and incorruptible. After the death of his parents, he refused to eat leeks for the rest of his life.

古文：累官中书舍人、翰林学士承旨，文宗优遇之。
现代文：多次升官后任中书舍人、翰林学士承旨，唐文宗很宠信他。
English: After being promoted several times, he served as the Chinese scholar and scholar of Hanlin, and Tang Wenzong was very fond of him.

古文：居循循谦饬，若不在势位者。所与交，虽褐衣之贱，待以礼，始终一节。
现代文：他平时谦恭谨慎，不像有权势的人，和他交往的，即使是平民，他也以礼相待，始终如一。
English: He was usually modest and discreet, unlike powerful people, and he treated everyone he interacted with, even civilians, with courtesy, consistently.

古文：岩幼惠敏过人，及进士第，父时故人在方镇者交辟之，久乃答。
现代文：路岩小时候聪明、反应快超过一般人，他考中了进士。他父亲在世时的友人任藩镇的争着任命他，很长时间后他才答应了。
English: When Lu Yan was a child, he was clever and his reaction time was faster than the average person. He passed the entrance examination. His father's living friend, Ren Han Zhen, fought to appoint him, and it was a long time before he agreed.

古文：懿宗咸通初，自屯田员外郎入翰林为学士，以兵部侍郎同中书门下平章事，年三十六。
现代文：唐懿宗咸通初年，他从屯田员外郎进入翰林院任学士，后以兵部侍郎身份任同中书门下平章事，才二十六岁。
English: In the first year of Tang Xizong's reign in Hamdang, he entered Hanlin Academy as a bachelor after being promoted from tonden cadet, and later he was appointed to the position of the secretary of the military department, and was only 26 years old when he was appointed to the position of the junior secretary of the middle school.

古文：居位八岁，进至尚书左仆射。
现代文：任宰相八年，升任尚书左仆射。
English: He served as prime minister for eight years and was promoted to the post of Shoshuzuke.

古文：于是王政秕僻，宰相得用事。
现代文：当时皇帝不好好管事，宰相得以专权。
English: At that time, the emperor did not manage his affairs well, and the prime minister was able to wield absolute power.

古文：岩顾天子荒暗，且以政委己，乃通赂遗，奢肆不法。俄与韦保衡同当国，二人势动天下，时目其党为 牛头阿旁 ，言如鬼阴恶可畏也。
现代文：他看到皇帝糊涂，并把政务交给自己，就接受贿赂，奢侈放肆不遵法度，不久和韦保衡一起掌权，两个人的权力使全国人害怕，当时称他们的党羽为 牛头马面 ，这是说他们像鬼怪一样凶恶可怕。
English: He saw that the emperor was confused and handed over the government to himself, he accepted bribes, extravagance and lawlessness, and soon took power together with Wei Baoheng. The power of the two people made the whole country afraid. At that time, they called their party feathers "Cow's head and horse's face," which means that they are as fierce and terrible as ghosts.

古文：既权侔则争，故与保衡还相恶。
现代文：两人权力相当就争雄，因此他和韦保衡又闹翻了。
English: The two were competing for supremacy, so he and Wei Baoheng fell out again.

古文：俄罢岩为剑南西川节度使，承蛮盗边后，岩力拊循，置定边军于邛州，扼大度，治故关，取坛丁子弟教击刺，使补屯籍，由是西山八国来朝。
现代文：不久他被罢相任剑南西川节度使。当时正值南诏入侵之后，他努力抚慰人民，在邛州设定边军，扼守大度，以旧关口做治所，将坛庙卫士的后辈召来训练作战，派他们去补充边防军，因此西山八个国家来朝拜。
English: At that time, after the invasion of Nanzhao, he tried to appease the people, set up a border army in Zhangzhou, kept a generous attitude, used the old pass as a detention center, called the younger generation of temple guards to train for battle, and sent them to supplement the border guards, so eight countries in the West Mountain came to worship.

古文：以劳迁兼中书令，封魏国公。
现代文：他因功升官兼任中书令，被封为魏国公。
English: For his merits, he was promoted to the post of middle secretary and was named the prince of Wei.

古文：始，为相时，委事亲吏边咸。
现代文：当初，他当宰相时，将政务交给亲信官吏边咸。
English: At first, when he was prime minister, he handed over government affairs to his close confidant, the bureaucrat Bian Xian.

古文：会至德令陈蟠叟奏书愿请间言财利，帝召见，则曰： 臣愿破边咸家，可佐军兴。 
现代文：至德县令陈蟠叟上奏请求单独召见谈财政问题。皇帝召见了他，他说 ：我希望没收边咸的家财，来补充战争开支。 
English: The emperor summoned him, and he said, "I wish to confiscate the family wealth of Benham to supplement the war expenses."

古文：帝问： 咸何人？ 
现代文：皇帝问道 ：边咸是谁？ 
English: The emperor asked, "Who is Bentham?"

古文：对曰： 宰相岩亲吏也。 
现代文：他回答说 ：是宰相路岩的亲信官吏。 
English: He replied that he was a close confidant of Prime Minister Dwaya.

古文：帝怒，斥蟠叟，自是人无敢言。
现代文：皇帝发怒了，训斥他，从此没人敢说话了。
English: The emperor was furious and reprimanded him, and from then on no one dared to speak.

古文：咸乃与郭筹者相依倚为奸，岩不甚制，军中惟边将军、郭司马尔，妄给与以结士心。
现代文：边咸就和郭筹相勾结干坏事，路岩不怎么管他们，军中兵将只听边将军、郭司马的，他们两人随意赏赐来收买军心。
English: Bian Xian and Guo Qiaoxiang colluded to do bad things. Lu Yan did not care much about them. The soldiers would only listen to General Bian and Guo Sima. Both of them would give rewards at will to win the hearts of the soldiers.

古文：尝阅武都场，咸、筹莅之，其议事以书相示则焚之，军中惊，以有异图，恟恟，遂闻京师。
现代文：有次在广场检阅军队，他们两人去了，他们商量事情互相写信，看后就烧掉，军队受惊了，认为他们有阴谋，人心惶惶，就在京城传开了。
English: Once there was a review of the troops in the square. The two of them went there. They discussed the matter and wrote letters to each other. After reading them, they burned them. The troops were alarmed and thought they had a plot. People were panicked, and the news spread all over the capital.

古文：岩坐是徙荆南节度使，道贬新州刺史，至江陵，免官，流儋州，籍入其家。
现代文：路岩因这被判贬官荆南节度使。走到半路又被贬为新州刺史，到了江陵，又被免职，流放到儋州，没收了他的家产。
English: Because of this, Lu Yan was sentenced to demotion from official to Jingnan sectional envoy. Halfway through, he was demoted to Xinzhou sectional envoy, and when he got to Jiangling, he was removed from his post, exiled to Zhangzhou, and his family property was confiscated.

古文：岩体貌伟丽，美须髯，至江陵两昔皆白。
现代文：他身高貌美，胡须很好看，到江陵过了两天都变白了。
English: He is tall and handsome, with a nice beard. Two days after arriving in Gangneung, his hair turned white.

古文：捕诛咸、筹等。
现代文：皇帝把边咸、郭筹等人抓住杀了。
English: The emperor caught and killed Bian Xian, Guo Qiao and others.

古文：岩至新州，诏赐死，剔取喉，上有司。
现代文：路岩到了新州，有诏命处死他。将喉管割下来，上交有关部门。
English: When Lu Yan arrived in Xinzhou, he was ordered to be put to death. His throat was cut and handed over to the relevant authorities.

古文：或言岩尝密请 三品以上得罪诛殛，剔取喉验其已死 。
现代文：有人说他曾秘密请求 三品以上官犯罪被处死，要割下喉管证明已经死了 。
English: Some people said that he had secretly requested that officials above the third rank be executed for crimes, and that he wanted to cut his throat to prove that he was dead.

古文：俄而自及。
现代文：不久落到了自己头上。
English: He soon fell on his own head.

古文：保衡者，京兆人，字蕴用。
现代文：韦保衡是京兆人，他的字叫蕴用。
English: Wei Baoheng is from Beijing, and his Chinese name is Yu Yu.

古文：父悫，宣宗时，终武昌军节度使。
现代文：他父亲韦悫，在唐宣宗时，官当到武昌军节度使。
English: His father, Wei Wei, was an official envoy to the Wuchang Army Festival during the reign of Emperor Xuanzong of Tang.

古文：保衡，咸通中，以右拾遗尚同昌公主，迁起居郎、驸马都尉。
现代文：韦保衡在咸通年间，任右拾遗时娶了同昌公主，升任起居郎、驸马都尉。
English: Wei Baoheng married Princess Tongchang when he was in charge of collecting relics during the reign of Emperor Xiantong, and was promoted to the position of kijiro (chief steward) and the captain of the imperial horse.

古文：主，郭淑妃所生，懿宗所爱，而妃有宠，故恩礼最异，悉宫中珍玩资予之。
现代文：同昌公主是郭淑妃生的，唐懿宗很喜欢她，郭淑妃又受宠，所以对她最好，把皇宫中的各种珍宝、玩物都给她陪嫁。
English: Princess Tongchang was born to Guo Shufei. Tang Yizong liked her very much, and Guo Shufei was also favored. Therefore, it was best for her to be accompanied by all kinds of treasures and toys in the imperial palace.

古文：俄历翰林学士承旨，以兵部侍郎同中书门下平章事，自尚主至是裁再期。
现代文：他不久当了翰林学士承旨，后以兵部侍郎身份任同中书门平章事，离娶公主才两年。
English: He soon became the Hanlin Scholar, and later he was appointed as the Warlord of the War Department, and married the princess only two years later.

古文：又进门下侍郎、尚书右仆射。
现代文：后又升任门下侍郎、尚书右仆射。
English: Later, he was promoted to the position of junior attendant of his disciple, Shoshu Umenosuke.

古文：性浮浅，既恃恩据权，以嫌爱自肆，所悦即擢，不悦挤之。
现代文：他生性浅薄，受宠掌权后，全按自己的好恶来，喜欢的就提拔，不喜欢的就排挤。
English: He is shallow by nature. After he was favored to take power, he did everything according to his own likes and dislikes. If he liked something, he promoted it, and if he didn't like something, he pushed it aside.

古文：保衡举进士王鐸第，于籍、萧遘与同升，以尝薄于己，皆见斥。
现代文：他在王铎主考时中的进士，于藉、萧遘和他同年考中，因为他们曾瞧不起他，都被贬了官。
English: He was promoted during Wang Xi's main examination, and Yu Jie, Xiao Xi and he were demoted during the same examination, because they had looked down on him.

古文：逐杨收，倾路岩，人益畏之。
现代文：他赶走了杨收，整垮了路岩，人们更怕他了。
English: He drove away Yang Jie, completely broke the road rock, and people are even more afraid of him.

古文：主薨，而宠遇不衰。
现代文：公主去世了，但他受宠没有衰减。
English: The princess died, but his popularity did not wane.

古文：僖宗立，进司徒。
现代文：唐僖宗即位，他升任司徒。
English: When Emperor Tang Xizong ascended to the throne, he was promoted to the position of disciple.

古文：俄为怨家白发阴罪，贬贺州刺史，再贬澄迈令，遂赐死。
现代文：不久被仇人揭发隐秘的罪状，贬为贺州刺史，又贬为澄迈县令，后干脆被处死了。
English: Soon after, he was exposed by his enemies for his secret crimes, and was demoted to Hezhou Zhi Shi, and then to Chengmai County magistrate, and then he was simply executed.

古文：弟保乂，自兵部侍郎贬宾州司户参军。
现代文：他弟弟韦保义被从兵部侍郎贬为宾州司户参军。
English: His younger brother, Wei Bo-Yi, was demoted from the position of attendant of the military department to the position of Pennsylvania steward and joined the army.

古文：而刘瞻等坐主薨见贬者，偕复起。
现代文：而刘瞻等因公主去世被贬官的，都又提升了。
English: But Liu Zhan and others who were demoted because of the princess's death have been promoted.

