古文：王将军姜略贺悦李寿方山开王遵李知礼陆孝政果毅刘摩儿店妇屠人刘知元季全闻当涂民张纵
现代文：王将军姜略贺悦李寿方山开王遵李知礼陆孝政果毅刘摩儿店妇屠人刘知元季全闻当涂民张纵
English: General Wang, Jiang Li, He Yue, Li Shou, Fang Shan, Kao Wang, Zun Li, Zhili, Lu Xiaozheng, Guo Yi, Liu Moretian, the butcher Liu Zhiyuan, Quan Wen, the painter Zhang Zheng

古文：王将军
现代文：王将军
English: General Wang resigns

古文：骁骑将军王某者，代郡人，隋开皇末年，出镇蒲州，性好畋猎，所杀无数。
现代文：有个姓王的骁骑将军，代郡人。隋文帝开皇末年，出任蒲州镇守。这个人生性好打猎，被他所杀的禽兽无法计算。
English: There was a horse-riding general surnamed Wang, a representative of the county. In the last years of the Sui Dynasty, he served as the governor of the town of Puzhou. This man was good at hunting, and the animals he killed were incalculable.

古文：有五男，无女。
现代文：他有五个儿子，没有女儿。
English: He has five sons and no daughters.

古文：后生一女，端美，见者皆爱怜之，父母犹钟爱。
现代文：后来竟生了一个女儿，端庄美丽，见着的人都很怜爱她。父母更加钟爱。
English: Later, she gave birth to a daughter, dignified and beautiful, who was pitied by all who saw her. Her parents loved her even more.

古文：既还乡里，女年七岁，一旦忽失所在，皆疑邻里戏藏匿之，访问不见。
现代文：王将军解甲归田，回到乡里，这个女儿有七岁了。有一天早晨忽然不知女儿的去向，都认为是邻居开玩笑藏起来了，等到各家去问，都说没看见。
English: The daughter was seven years old. One morning, she suddenly didn't know where her daughter had gone. Everyone thought it was a neighbour playing a joke and had hidden her. When they went to ask, they all said they hadn't seen her.

古文：诸兄骑马远寻，去家三十余里，得于荒野中，冥然已无所识，口中唯作兔鸣，足上得荆棘盈掬。
现代文：于是，她的几个哥哥骑着马到处找，离家三十多里，在一片荒野中找到了，但已闭着眼睛不认人了，口里发出兔叫的声音，脚上扎的荆刺有一小把，经过一个多月，什么也不吃就死了。
English: As a result, several of her brothers rode around looking for her, more than thirty miles away from home, and found her in a wilderness, but she closed her eyes and did not recognize anyone, her mouth emitted the sound of a rabbit's cry, and there was a small thorn on her foot. After more than a month, she did not eat anything and died.

古文：经月余，不食而死，父母悲痛甚，以为畋猎杀害之报也。后合家持斋，不复食肉。
现代文：她的父母特别悲痛，认为这是以前打猎杀生的报应，后来全家吃斋，再不吃肉食。
English: Her parents are particularly saddened, believing that this is the retribution of hunting and killing in the past, and later the whole family fasted and no longer ate meat.

古文：大理寺丞蔡宣明，曾为代府法曹，亲说之。
现代文：大理寺寺丞蔡宣明，曾作代郡法官，是他亲自说的这件事。
English: Dairi-ji Temple Choi Seung-myung, who once served as acting county judge, said this in person.

古文：姜略
现代文：姜略
English: Jiang Luo

古文：隋鹰扬郎将天水姜略，少好畋猎，善放鹰犬。
现代文：隋朝鹰扬郎将军姜略，天水人。少年好打猎，善于放鹰犬。
English: The Sui Dynasty eagle Yang Lang general Jiang Li, Tianshui people. The boy is good at hunting, good at releasing eagle dogs.

古文：后遇病，见群鸟千数，皆无头，围绕略床，叫鸣曰： 急还我头来！ 
现代文：后来得了病。昏迷中只见有一千多只鸟都没有头。围绕着姜略的床边叫： 赶快还我的头来！ 
English: Later, he fell ill. In his coma, he saw more than a thousand birds without heads. They gathered around Jiang Liu's bedside and called out: "Quickly return my head!"

古文：略辄头痛气绝。
现代文：姜略立刻觉得头痛，断了气，过了很长时间才苏醒。
English: Jiang Luo immediately felt a headache and lost his breath. It took him a long time to wake up.

古文：久而后苏，因请众僧，急为诸鸟追福，许之皆去，既而得愈。
现代文：因此他就请了很多和尚，急忙为鸟祈祷祝福，许了愿，好些鸟才飞走。
English: Therefore, he invited many monks and hurried to pray for the birds and made a wish. Only then did many of the birds fly away.

古文：终身绝酒肉，不杀生命。
现代文：病也立刻就全好了。从此以后再也没喝过酒也不吃肉，不杀生命。
English: And immediately she was made whole; neither did she drink wine, nor eat meat, nor kill any thing.

古文：姜略尝自说其事。
现代文：姜略曾自己说起这件事。
English: Jiang Luo once talked about it himself.

古文：贺悦
现代文：贺悦
English: He Yue

古文：唐武德中，隰州大宁人贺悦，为邻人牛犯其稼，乃以绳勒牛舌断。
现代文：唐高祖武德年间，隰州大宁有个人叫贺悦，因为邻居的牛损坏了他的庄稼，就用绳子把牛的舌头勒断了。
English: During the reign of Emperor Gao of Tang, there was a man named He Yue in Danyang, Zhangzhou. Because his neighbor's cow had damaged his crops, he cut off the cow's tongue with a rope.

古文：后生三子，并皆喑哑，不能言。
现代文：后来他生了三个儿子，都是哑巴不能说话。
English: Later he had three sons, all mute and unable to speak.

古文：李寿
现代文：李寿
English: Li Shou

古文：唐交州都督遂安公李寿，贞观初，罢职归京第，性好畋猎，常笼鹰数联，杀邻狗喂鹰。
现代文：唐朝交州都督遂安公李寿，贞观初年，罢职回到京城的府第。
English: In the first year of Zhengu, Li Shou, the governor of Jiaozhou in the Tang Dynasty, resigned from his post and returned to the capital.

古文：既而公疾，见五犬来责命，公谓之曰： 杀汝者奴通达之过，非我罪也。 
现代文：病中看到五只狗来要求偿命。遂安公对它们说： 杀你们的是奴仆通达，他有罪，并不是我的罪过呀。 
English: During his illness, he saw five dogs come to ask for their lives. So Angong said to them: "It was the slave Tongda who killed you. He is guilty, but it is not my fault."

古文：犬曰： 通达岂得自任耶？
现代文：狗说： 通达怎么能自己作主呢？
English: The dog said, "How can Tongda have his own way?

古文：且我等既不盗汝食，自于门首过，而枉杀我等，要当相报，终不休也。 
现代文：况且我们也没有偷你的东西吃，仅从你门前经过，就随便杀了我们。如果不偿命，最终不放过你。 
English: Besides, we didn't steal your food, we just passed by your door and you killed us. If you don't pay for our lives, you will eventually be punished.

古文：公谢罪，请为追福，四犬许之。
现代文：遂安公拜谢请罪，并说一定为它们追福，其中四只狗同意了，有一只白狗不答应。
English: Sui An pleaded guilty and said that he would definitely seek blessings for them. Four of the dogs agreed, but one white dog did not.

古文：一白犬不许，曰： 既无罪杀我，我未死间，汝又生割我肉，脔脔苦痛，我思此毒，何有放汝耶？ 
现代文：那只白狗才同意了。过了一会儿，遂安公苏醒了，但已患了中风偏瘫的病，四肢不灵，于是为狗追福。
English: Only then did the white dog agree. After a while, Angong woke up, but he had suffered a stroke and hemiplegia, and his limbs were paralyzed, so he sought blessings for the dog.

古文：俄见一人，为之请于犬曰： 杀彼于汝无益，放令为汝追福，不亦善乎！ 报记》
现代文：然而，遂安公的病最终也没有好。
English: However, So Angong's illness did not turn out well.

古文：方山开
现代文：方山开
English: Fangshan Kai

古文：唐曹州武城人方山开，少善弓矢，尤好游猎，以之为业，所杀无数。
现代文：唐朝曹州武城有个人叫方山开。少年时就善使弓箭，特别喜欢游猎，就以打猎为职业，所杀的禽兽不计其数。
English: In the Tang Dynasty, there was a man named Fang Shankai in Wucheng, Caozhou. When he was a boy, he was good at using a bow and arrow, and especially liked hunting. He took hunting as his profession, and the animals he killed were countless.

古文：贞观十一年死，经一宿苏，云，初死时，被二十人引去，行可十余里，即上一山。三鬼共引山开，登梯而进，上欲至顶。忽有一大白鹰，铁为觜爪，飞来，攫山开左颊而去。
现代文：贞观十一年那年突然死了，但经过一宿又苏醒了。他说： 刚死的时候，被二十多人拉去，走了十多里，上了一座山，有三个鬼牵着山开，登着梯子往上走，要到山顶的时候，忽然飞来一只大白鹰，铁爪铁嘴，抓了山开的左脸颊飞走了。
English: In the eleventh year of Zhenguan's reign, he suddenly died, but after one night he woke up. He said: When he had just died, he was pulled by more than twenty people, walked more than ten miles, climbed a mountain, led by three ghosts, climbed up the ladder, and when he was about to reach the top of the mountain, a great white eagle suddenly flew in, with iron claws and beak, grabbed his left cheek and flew away.

古文：又有一黑鹰，亦铁觜爪，攫其右肩而去。
现代文：又有一只黑鹰，也是铁爪铁嘴，抓了山开的右肩也飞走了。
English: Another black eagle, also with iron claws and beak, grabbed Yamakai's right shoulder and flew away.

古文：及至山顶，引至厅事，见一官人，被服绯衣，首冠黑帻，谓开山曰： 生平有何功德？可具言之。 
现代文：等到了山顶，被带到一个厅堂，看见一个当官的人，披着红色的衣服，头上戴着黑头巾，对我说： 你这一生有什么功德，可以全部说出来。 
English: When I got to the top of the mountain, I was taken to a hall and saw a government official, dressed in red and with a black hood over his head, who said to me: "You can tell me all about the merits of your life.

古文：对曰： 立身已来，不修功德。 
现代文：我回答说： 自从生下来，也没有什么功德。 
English: I replied, "Since I was born, I have no merits."

古文：官曰： 可宜引向南院观望。 
现代文：官人说： 最好带他到南院去参观一下。 
English: The official said, "It would be best to take him to the Southern Court for a visit."

古文：二人即引南行，至一城，非常险峻。
现代文：有两个人就带领我到南边去，到一城边，此城非常险峻。
English: Two of them led me to the south, to the edge of a city, a very steep city.

古文：二人扣城北门数下，门遂开，见其城中赫然，总是猛火。门侧有数毒蛇，皆长十余丈，头大如五斗斛，口中吐火，如欲射人。
现代文：那两个人敲了几下城北门，门立刻就开了，只见城里赫然全是大火，门边有几条毒蛇，都有十多丈长，蛇头也有五个斛那么大，口中往外吐火，象要吃人。
English: The two men knocked several times on the north gate of the city, and the gate immediately opened. They saw that the city was completely engulfed in flames. There were several venomous snakes by the gate, each more than ten feet long, with heads as large as five ploughshares. They spat fire out of their mouths, as if they wanted to eat people.

古文：山开恐惧，不知所出，唯知叩头念佛而已。
现代文：我非常害怕，吓得不知往哪儿走，来时那个门也关闭了，只知道磕头念佛就是了。
English: I was so scared that I didn't know where to go. When I arrived, the door was closed. All I knew was that I had to chant the Buddha's name.

古文：门即自开，乃还见官人，欲遣受罪。
现代文：这时门却开了，我又回去见那官人，他要把我送到地狱去受罪。
English: Then the door opened, and I went back to the official, who was going to send me to hell to suffer.

古文：侍者谏曰： 山开未合即死，但恐一入此城，不可得出，未若且放，令修功德。 官人曰： 善 。
现代文：这时旁边的侍者说： 山开寿数还没尽，但恐怕他进入这城，就不可能出去了，不如暂且放了他，让他积累功德。 官人说： 也好 。
English: At this time, the waiter next to him said, "He hasn't reached the maximum number of years of service, but I'm afraid if he enters this city, he won't be able to leave. It's better to let him go for the time being and let him accumulate merits." The official said, "That's fine."

古文：令前二人送之，依旧道而下，复有鹰欲攫之，赖此二人援护得免。及下山，见一大坑，极秽恶，忽被二人推入，须臾即苏。
现代文：就命前二人送我，照旧从原道下山，又有鹰想抓我，全仗那两个人卫护我才免被抓，等下了山，看见一个大坑，腥臊恶臭，突然被那两个人推到坑里，一会儿功夫我就醒了。 
English: So the first two sent me on my way, and I went down the mountain the same way as before. Another eagle tried to catch me, and the two men protected me from being caught the whole time. When I got down the mountain, I saw a big pit with a foul smell. Suddenly, I was pushed into the pit by the two men, and I woke up after a while.

古文：面及右膊之上，爪迹宛然，终身不灭。
现代文：山开说完看自己的脸和右胳膊上边，被鹰抓的痕迹还很清楚，以至终身没有消失。
English: After Yamaka finished speaking, he looked at his face and the upper side of his right arm. The marks of being caught by the eagle were still very clear, so much so that they did not disappear for life.

古文：遂舍妻子，以宅为佛院，恒以诵经为业。
现代文：山开于是舍弃了妻子儿女。把住宅当佛院，整天以诵经为事业。
English: Yamakai then abandoned his wife and children. He turned his house into a Buddhist temple and spent all day chanting sutras.

古文：王遵
现代文：王遵
English: Wang Zun

古文：唐王遵者，河内人也。
现代文：唐朝的王遵，河内人。
English: Wang Zun of the Tang Dynasty, a native of Hanoi.

古文：兄弟三人，并时疾甚。
现代文：兄弟三人，同时得病很重。
English: Three brothers, at the same time very ill.

古文：宅有鹊巢，旦夕翔鸣，忿其喧噪，兄弟共恶之。及病瘥，因张鹊，断舌而放之。
现代文：宅院里有个喜鹊窝，从早到晚飞翔鸣叫，兄弟三个觉得太喧哗很生气，都讨厌它们，等病好以后，把喜鹊捉住并将它的舌头弄断放了。
English: There was a nest of magpies in the courtyard. They flew and chirped from morning till night. The three brothers were annoyed by the noise and hated them. When they were well, they caught the magpie and cut off its tongue.

古文：既而兄弟皆患口齿之疾，家渐贫，以至行乞。
现代文：很快，兄弟三个都得了口腔和牙齿的疾病，家庭也一天天贫穷，到后来只好讨饭度日。
English: Soon, all three brothers developed oral and dental diseases, and the family became increasingly poor, eventually having to beg for food to survive.

古文：李知礼
现代文：李知礼
English: Li Zhili

古文：唐陇西李知礼，少矫捷，善弓射，能骑乘，兼攻放弹，所杀甚多，有时捕鱼，不可胜数。
现代文：唐朝陇西人李知礼，少年便矫健敏捷，善使弓箭，又能骑马，还能打弹子。因此他杀死的禽兽很多，有时去捕鱼，抓到的鱼不计其数。
English: Li Zhili, a Westerner from Shanxi in the Tang Dynasty, was a vigorous and agile young man, good at using bows and arrows, able to ride a horse and play marbles. As a result, he killed many animals. Sometimes he went fishing and caught countless fish.

古文：贞观十九年，病数日即死。
现代文：贞观十九年那年，他得病几天就死了。
English: In the 19th year of Zhenguan, he fell ill and died a few days later.

古文：乃见一鬼，并牵马一匹，大于俗间所乘之马，谓知礼曰： 阎罗王追公。 
现代文：死后见到一个鬼，牵着一匹马，这匹马比人间的马大些。那鬼对知礼说： 闫罗王让你去。 
English: After his death, he saw a ghost leading a horse, which was bigger than a human horse. The ghost said to Zhi Li: "King Zhao let you go.

古文：乃令知礼乘马，须臾之间，忽至王前。王约束云： 遣汝讨贼，必不得败，败即杀汝。 
现代文：说着就让知礼骑上马，不一会儿，就到了闫罗王面前，闫罗王对他命令道： 让你去讨伐贼寇，一定不能失败。如果失败就杀了你。 
English: Saying this, he let Zhili mount his horse, and in a short while, he arrived in front of King Miro. King Miro ordered him, "If you go to fight the bandits, you must not fail. If you fail, I will kill you."

古文：有同侣二十四人，向东北望，贼不见边际，天地尽昏，埃下如雨。
现代文：与知礼一同去的有二十四个同伴，知礼向东北望去，只见贼寇多得不见边际，天昏地暗，被踏起的尘土象雨一样。
English: There were twenty-four companions who went with Zhili. Zhili looked to the northeast, only to see that there were too many thieves to see the edge, the sky was dark, and the dust that was stepped on was like rain.

古文：知礼等败，知礼语同行曰： 王教严重，宁向前死，不可败归。 
现代文：知礼等寡不敌众败下阵来。这时知礼对同去的人说： 王法森严，宁可向前拼杀而死，不可失败而回。 
English: At this time, Zhili said to the people who went with him: Wang Faxen is strict, and he would rather die fighting forward than return in defeat.

古文：知礼回马，射三箭以后，诸贼已稍退却。箭五发，贼遂败散。
现代文：说着，知礼回马冲杀，向贼人射了三箭以后，贼人稍有退却，知礼又射五箭，贼人于是溃败，四散奔逃。
English: Saying that, Zhi Li rushed back to the horse and shot three arrows at the thief, after which the thief retreated slightly, Zhi Li shot five more arrows, and the thief was defeated and fled in all directions.

古文：事毕谒王，王责知礼曰： 敌虽退，何为初战之时？
现代文：打胜之后知礼参拜闫罗王。闫罗王责问知礼： 贼寇虽然败退，为什么开始时你们败退？ 
English: After the victory, Zhili paid a visit to King Jairo. King Jairo asked Zhili: Although the bandits were defeated, why did you lose at the beginning?

古文：即便以麻辫发，并缚手足，卧在石上，以大石镇而磨之。前后四人，体并溃烂。次列知礼，厉声叫曰： 向者贼退，并知礼之力，还被王杀，无以励后。 
现代文：令人以麻绳绑了头发和手足，让知礼他们躺在一块大石头上，上面又用一块大石压着辗磨他们，前后磨了四个人，身体全都溃烂，等到了知礼，知礼大叫说： 我毕竟把敌人打退了，尽到我的能力，现在还是被杀，这样怎么激励后人？ 
English: The man tied his hair and hands and feet with twine, and made Zhili take them out and lay them on a large rock. He pressed a large rock on top of them to grind them. He grinded four people back and forth, and their bodies all festered. When he got to Zhili, Zhili shouted, "After all, I have beaten back the enemy to the best of my ability, and now I am still being killed, so how can I inspire future generations?"

古文：王遂释放不管束。
现代文：闫罗王听他这么一说，就把他放了，还由他自由活动。
English: As soon as King Mino heard him say this, he released him and allowed him to move about freely.

古文：凡经三日，忽向西北出行，入一墙院。见飞禽走兽，可满三四亩，总来索命，渐相逼近。
现代文：过了三天，他自己往西北方向走，进入一有墙的院子，只看满院的飞禽走兽，能覆盖三四亩地那么多，都来向知礼索命，渐渐向他逼进。
English: After three days, he walked northwest on his own and entered a walled courtyard, only to see the yard full of birds and beasts, as many as could cover three or four acres of land. They all came to ask for Zhili's life and gradually forced their way into him.

古文：曾射杀一雌犬，此犬直向前啮其面，次及身体，无不被伤。
现代文：知礼曾射死一只母狗，这时看见这只狗直奔他来啃咬他的脸，然后又咬他的身体，满身没有一处不被伤的。
English: Zhili had shot and killed a female dog when he saw the dog coming straight for him, biting his face and then his body, leaving no part of his body unharmed.

古文：复见三大鬼，各长丈余，其剥知礼皮肉，须臾总尽，面及目白骨，并五脏等得存。乃以此肉分乞禽兽，其肉剥而复生，生而复剥，如此三日，苦毒之甚，不可胜记。
现代文：又来了三个大鬼，每个都有一丈多高，都来剥知礼的皮肉，不一会儿就剥净了。只有脸、眼睛，骨头和五脏还剩下了，这几个鬼把皮肉分给那些禽兽吃，奇怪的是那皮肉剥完又生，生完再剥，这样过了三天，知礼真是痛苦难忍，难以用文字表达。
English: Then came three great ghosts, each as tall as a man, and they all came to peel off the flesh of Zhili, and in a short time they had stripped it clean. Only the face, eyes, bones, and internal organs were left. These ghosts divided the flesh to be eaten by the beasts. Strangely, after the flesh had been peeled off, it was born again, and after it was born again, it was peeled off again. After three days of this, Zhili was really in excruciating pain, which is hard to express in words.

古文：事毕，大鬼及禽兽等，忽然总失。
现代文：总算结束了，大鬼和禽兽们忽然不见踪影。
English: Finally it was over, and the ghosts and beasts suddenly disappeared.

古文：知礼回顾，不见一物，遂窬墙南走，莫知所之。
现代文：知礼四下看了看，什么也没有，于是就跳墙跑了，他只顾往南跑，也不知到什么地方，就觉得身体很轻，好象一跳就能走千里似地。
English: Zhi Li looked around and saw nothing, so he jumped off the wall and ran. He only ran south, and he didn't know where to go. He felt very light, as if he could walk thousands of miles with just one jump.

古文：意中似如一跳千里，复有一鬼逐及知礼，乃以铁笼罩之。有无数鱼竞来唼食，食毕，鬼遂倒回，鱼亦不见。
现代文：这时又有一个鬼从后面追上他，拿一个铁笼子把他罩上，知礼被罩在笼子里后，只见无数条鱼都来咬他、吃他，吃完了，鬼就回去了，这时那些鱼也不见了。
English: At this time, another ghost caught up with him from behind and took an iron cage to cover him. After Zhili was covered in the cage, he saw countless fish come to bite him and eat him. After eating, the ghost went back. At this time, those fish were gone.

古文：其家旧供养一僧，其僧先死，来与知礼去笼，语知礼曰： 檀越大饥。 
现代文：知礼家以前曾供养一个和尚。这个和尚比知礼早死，和尚来给知礼去掉了笼子，对知礼说： 施主一定很饿了。 
English: Chiri's family had previously supported a monk. This monk died earlier than Chiri. The monk came to remove Chiri's cage and said to Chiri: "The donor must be very hungry."

古文：授以白物三丸，如枣，令知礼噉之，应时而饱，乃云： 檀越宜还家。 
现代文：然后拿出三丸白色药丸，象枣，让知礼吃下去，知礼吃后马上就饱了。那和尚又说： 施主应该回家了。
English: Then he took out three white pills, like jujubes, and told the mendicant to eat them. The mendicant was immediately full after eating the jujubes. The monk then said, "The benefactor should go home."

古文：僧亦别去。
现代文：我也该走了。 
English: I should go too.

古文：知礼所居宅北，见一大坑，其中有诸枪矟攒植，不可得过。见其兄女并婢赍箱，箱内有钱绢，及别置一器饮食，在坑东北。
现代文：知礼回来后看见自家的北面有一个大坑，坑里有矛枪立在那里，过不去，又看见侄女和奴婢们抬着一个箱子，箱子里都是用绢丝串的钱，另外放了一些饮食，在坑的东北面。
English: After Zhi Li came back, he saw a big pit on the north side of his house. There were spears and guns in the pit, and it was impossible to pass. He also saw his niece and servants carrying a box, in which there was money made of yakitori strings, and some food, on the northeast side of the pit.

古文：知礼心中，谓此婢及侄女游戏，意甚怪之。
现代文：知礼心里想：婢女和侄女怎么作这样的游戏，太怪了。
English: Zhi Li thought to herself: How can a maid and her niece play such a game, it's so strange.

古文：回首北望，即见一鬼，挺剑直进。
现代文：知礼回头向北望去，只见一鬼挺剑直奔他而来。
English: Zhi Li looked back to the north and saw a ghost coming straight at him with a sword.

古文：知礼恐惧，委身投坑，即得苏也。
现代文：知礼惊慌失措，只好跳到坑里。这一下知礼苏醒了。
English: Chiri panicked and had to jump into the pit. This time Chiri woke up.

古文：自从初死，至于重生，凡经六日。
现代文：从死到苏醒一共过了六天。
English: In total, six days passed from the time of death to the time of awakening.

古文：后问家中，乃是侄女持纸钱绢及饭馔为奠礼，当时所视，乃是铜钱丝绢也。
现代文：后来问家里的人，才知道那是侄女拿着纸钱和饭食为知礼祭奠，当时看却是绢和铜钱。陆孝政
English: Later, when I asked the people at home, I learned that it was my niece who was holding paper money and food for the ceremony, but at the time it looked like it was money and copper money.

古文：陆孝政唐雍州陆孝政，贞观中为右卫隰川府左果毅。
现代文：唐朝雍州的陆孝政，贞观年间任右卫隰州府左果毅。
English: Lu Xiaozheng of Yongzhou in the Tang Dynasty, and Zuo Guoyi of Bozhoufu, who served as the right guard during the Zhenguan era.

古文：孝政为性躁急，多为残害。
现代文：孝政性情急躁，作了很多残害生灵的事。
English: Xiaozheng had a quick temper and did a lot of things that harmed people.

古文：府内先有蜜蜂一龛，分飞聚于宅南树上，孝政遣人移就别龛。蜂未去之间，孝政大怒，遂以汤就树沃死，殆无孑遗。
现代文：他的府内以前有一龛蜜蜂，纷飞聚集在宅院南边的树上。孝政派人把蜂窝移到别的地方，但那群蜜蜂不去，孝政就很生气，马上用开水在树上把蜜蜂全浇死了，连一个也不剩。
English: There used to be a swarm of bees in his residence, which gathered on a tree on the south side of the courtyard. Takamasa sent someone to move the hive to another place, but the bees did not go. Takamasa was very angry and immediately doused all the bees with boiling water on the tree. Not even one remained.

古文：至明年五月，孝政于厅昼寝，忽有一蜂螫其舌上，遂即红肿塞口，数日而死。
现代文：到了第二年五月，有一天白天，孝政在厅堂上睡觉，忽然飞来一只蜜蜂在孝政的舌头上螫了一下，马上那舌头就发红肿胀起来，把嘴都堵上了，几天后孝政就死了。
English: In May of the following year, one day during the day, when Xiao Zheng was sleeping in the hall, a bee suddenly flew and stung Xiao Zheng on the tongue. Immediately, the tongue became red and swollen, blocking the mouth. A few days later, Xiao Zheng died.

古文：果毅
现代文：果毅
English: Gou Yi

古文：唐贞观永徽间，周至鄠县界有果毅。
现代文：唐贞观永徽年间，在周至鄠县内有个叫果毅的人。
English: During the reign of Emperor Zhenguan of Tang and Yonghui Dynasties, there was a man named Guo Yi in Zhouzi County.

古文：每客来，恒买豚设馔，卫士家生十豚，总买尽。其最后买者，煮尚未熟，果毅对客坐，遂闻妇人哭声。意疑其妻，向家看之，不哭。
现代文：每次有客人来，他都买猪做菜宴请客人。卫士家的母猪生了十只猪，都被他买光了，最后买那只猪，还没有煮熟的时候，果毅和客人对面坐着，这时叫到有妇人的哭声，起初他怀疑是他的妻子哭，跑到屋里看，妻子并没哭。
English: Every time a guest came, he would buy a pig to make a dish for the guest. The guard's sow gave birth to ten pigs, all of which were bought by him. When he finally bought the pig, it was not yet cooked, and he was sitting opposite the guest. At that time, he heard a woman crying. At first, he suspected that it was his wife crying. He ran into the house to see, but his wife was not crying.

古文：至厅，又闻哭声，看妻还不哭，如此数回。
现代文：到了客厅，又听到哭声，再回去看妻子，还是没哭。
English: When I got to the living room, I heard crying again, and when I went back to see my wife, she still wasn't crying.

古文：后更向家，即闻哭声在门外；若门外，即闻哭声在家中。
现代文：如此几回，后来改在家里待客，又听门外有哭声，跑到门外又听那哭声在家里。
English: I did this several times, and then I changed to wait for guests at home, and then I heard crying outside the door, and then I ran outside the door and heard the crying at home.

古文：其客大惊，不安席，似闻哭声云： 男女生十个，总被果毅吃尽。 
现代文：那个客人也很吃惊坐不住了，好象听那哭声边哭边说： 男的女的一共生了十个，都被果毅吃光了。 
English: The guest was also stunned and could not sit still, as if listening to the crying and crying and saying: A man and a woman together have given birth to ten children, all of whom have been devoured by Koji.

古文：其客数遍听之，了了闻此，客恻之即去。果毅惊，因此得病，数旬而终。
现代文：那客人听了几遍都听得很清楚。客人害怕就告辞走了。果毅也非常害怕，后来因此而得病，几十天后死去。
English: The guest listened to it several times and heard it very clearly. The guest was afraid and left. Guo Yi was also very afraid, and later became ill as a result, and died dozens of days later.

古文：长安共传此事焉。
现代文：长安的人都传说这件事。
English: The people of Chang'an have a legend about this.

古文：刘摩儿
现代文：刘摩儿
English: Liu Mo'er

古文：唐汾州孝义县泉村人刘摩儿，显庆四年八月，遇病而终。
现代文：唐朝汾州孝义县泉村人刘摩儿，在高宗显庆四年八月得病而死。
English: Liu Mo'er, a resident of Quancun Village, Xiaoyi County, Bozhou of the Tang Dynasty, fell ill and died in August of the fourth year of the reign of Emperor Gao Zongxian.

古文：男师保，明日又死。
现代文：他的儿子叫师保，在他死的第二天也死了。
English: His son, Shi Bao, also died the day after his death.

古文：父子平生，行皆险诐。
现代文：父子二人这一生，行为阴险邪恶。
English: Both father and son have acted in a sinister and evil manner throughout their lives.

古文：比邻有祁陇威，因采樵，被车碾死，经数日而苏。
现代文：他的邻居有一个人叫祁陇威，因为上山砍柴，被车压死，过了几天又苏醒了。
English: One of his neighbours, a man named Haowei, was crushed to death by a car as he was going up the mountain to cut firewood. He woke up a few days later.

古文：乃见摩儿男师保，在镬汤中，须臾之间，皮肉俱尽，无复人形，唯见白骨。
现代文：当他死的那时候，看见刘摩儿的儿子师保在一个装满开水的大锅里，片刻之间皮肉都被煮化了，一点儿人样也没有，只见白骨一具。
English: When he died, he saw Liu Moore's son, Shi Bao, in a cauldron full of boiling water. Within a few moments, his flesh and skin had been boiled away. There was no sign of him, only bones.

古文：如此良久，还复本形。
现代文：这样过了很长时间才还复原形。
English: It took a long time to get back to normal.

古文：陇威问其故，对曰： 我为射猎，故受此罪。 
现代文：陇威就问他这是怎么回事。师保回答说： 因为我经常狩猎，所以让我受这个罪。 
English: Haowei asked him what was the matter, and the tutor replied, "Because I often hunt, I was made to suffer this crime."

古文：又谓保曰： 卿父何在？ 
现代文：陇威又问师保： 你父亲在哪里？ 
English: Hao Wei also asked the security guard: Where is your father?

古文：对曰： 我父罪重，不可卒见。
现代文：师保回答： 我父亲罪太重了，一时见不到他，你还可以回去。
English: The guarantor replied: My father's crime is too serious, you can still go back if you don't see him for a while.

古文：卿既即还，请白家中，为修斋福。 
现代文：回去后告诉我们家里的人，赶快吃斋，为来世造福。 
English: After returning home, we told our family members that they should fast to benefit the next life.

古文：言讫，被使催促，前至府舍，见馆宇崇峻，执杖者二十余人。
现代文：师保刚说完，陇威被地府的人催促，只好走了。到了一座府第，只见楼院高深，很是崇峻。正堂两边有二十多人拿着刑杖。
English: As soon as Shi Bao had finished speaking, He Wei was urged by the people of the palace, and had no choice but to leave. When he arrived at a palace, he saw that the courtyard was very high, very lofty. On both sides of the main hall, there were more than twenty people holding canes.

古文：一官人问曰： 汝比有何福业？ 
现代文：一个官员问陇威： 你说一下你都做了什么好事？ 
English: An official asked Hao Wei: Tell me, what good things have you done?

古文：对曰： 陇威去年正月，在独村看诵一切经，脱衫一领布施，兼受五戒，至今不犯。 
现代文：陇威回答说： 我去年正月，在独村几乎诵读了各种经文，也曾脱下一件衣衫施舍，并接受五戒，到现在也没犯戒。 
English: Haowei replied, "In the first month of last year, I recited almost all kinds of scriptures in Dokmura. I also took off a piece of clothing to give alms, and accepted the Five Precepts. I have not broken any precepts so far.

古文：官人乃云： 若如所云，无量功德，何须来此！ 
现代文：那官员就说： 真象你说的那样，你的功德无量，怎么会到这里来？ 
English: The official said, "As you said, your merits are immeasurable. How did you come here?"

古文：遂索簿勘，及见簿，乃曰： 其人合死不虚。侧注云：受戒布施福助，更合延寿。 
现代文：于是拿生死簿查看，看完后，才说： 你这人该死不假，但在旁边注着：受戒布施福助，应该延寿。 
English: So he took the book of life and death and looked at it. After reading it, he said: "This person deserves to die, but next to it is written: be warned, give blessings and help, and you should live longer."

古文：乃遣人送还，当时苏活。
现代文：于是派人把陇威送了回来。陇威当时就活了。
English: So they sent someone to bring Hao Wei back. Hao Wei was still alive at that time.

古文：店妇
现代文：店妇
English: Shop assistant

古文：唐显庆中，长安城西路侧有店家新妇诞一小男。
现代文：唐朝显庆年间，长安城西路边上有一个店家，新媳妇生了一个小男孩。
English: During the celebration of the Tang Dynasty, there was a store on the west road of Chang'an City. The new daughter-in-law gave birth to a little boy.

古文：月满日，亲族庆会，欲杀羊，羊数向屠人跪拜。
现代文：满月这天，亲戚朋友都来庆贺，店主人让屠夫杀一只羊。那羊多次向屠夫跪拜。
English: On the day of the full moon, relatives and friends came to celebrate. The shop owner asked the butcher to kill a sheep. The sheep repeatedly bowed to the butcher.

古文：屠人报家内，家内大小不以为征，遂即杀之，将肉就釜煮。
现代文：屠夫把这事向店家的人报告了，店家的大人小孩都不认为这里有什么迹象，就让屠夫杀了这只羊，把羊肉放到锅里煮。
English: The butcher reported the matter to the store's staff, but the store's children and adults didn't think there was any sign of it, so they let the butcher kill the sheep and cook the lamb in a pot.

古文：余人贪料理葱蒜饼食，令产妇抱儿看煮肉。抱儿火前。
现代文：因为别人都忙着料理葱蒜饭菜，就让新媳妇抱着小孩看着锅里的肉，那新媳妇抱着孩子来到锅前。
English: Since everyone else was busy cooking the onion and garlic dish, he asked the new daughter-in-law to hold the child and look at the meat in the pot. The new daughter-in-law held the child and came to the pot.

古文：釜忽然自破，汤冲灰火，直射母子，母子俱亡。
现代文：锅突然间自己破了，汤水冲犯灰火直扑母子，母子全被烫死。
English: All of a sudden, the pot broke on its own. The boiling water hit the mother and child, and they were both burned to death.

古文：店人见闻之者，多断杀生焉。
现代文：当时在店里看到听到这件事的人，多数都不再杀生了。
English: Most of the people who saw and heard about it in the shop at the time have stopped killing animals.

古文：屠人
现代文：屠人
English: Butcher

古文：唐总章、咸亨中，京师有屠人，积代相传为业。
现代文：唐朝总章、咸亨年间，京城内有个屠夫，世代相传以此为职业。
English: There was a butcher in the capital during the reign of Emperor Xianheng, the head of the Tang Dynasty, and this profession has been passed down from generation to generation.

古文：因病遂死，乃被众羊悬之，一如杀羊法，两羊捉手，诸羊捉脚，一羊持刀刺颈，出血数斗，乃死。
现代文：有一天突然病死，死时觉得是被很多羊悬吊起来，象他平时杀羊一样，两只羊抓手，另外的羊抓脚，其中一只羊拿着刀刺他的脖子，出了几斗血死了。
English: One day, he suddenly fell ill and died. At the time of his death, he felt that he had been hung up by many sheep. As he usually killed sheep, two sheep grabbed his hands, another sheep grabbed his feet, and one of the sheep stabbed him in the neck with a knife. He bled several times and died.

古文：少顷还苏。此人未活之前，家人见绕颈有鲜血，惊共看之，颈有被刺处，还似刺羊，一边刀孔小，一边刀孔大。
现代文：不多一会这人又活了，在他没活的时候，家中的人看见他脖子周围有鲜血，很为惊奇，都来看。只见他脖子上有被刀刺的地方，象他平时杀羊那样，一边的刀孔小，另一边的刀孔大。
English: In a little while the man came to life again, but while he was still dead, the members of his household were surprised to see blood around his neck, and they all came to look. They saw that he had been stabbed in the neck with a knife, as he usually killed sheep, with a small knife hole on one side and a large knife hole on the other.

古文：数年疮始合。
现代文：几年以后疮口才愈合。
English: It took several years for the sores to heal.

古文：刘知元
现代文：刘知元
English: Liu Zhiyuan

古文：唐虔州司士刘知元摄判司仓。
现代文：唐朝虔州司士刘知元掌管判司仓。
English: During the Tang Dynasty, Liu Zhiyuan, the chief magistrate of Qianzhou, was in charge of the judge's office.

古文：大酺时，司马杨舜臣谓之曰： 买肉必须含胎，肥脆可食，余瘦不堪。 
现代文：有一次聚会饮酒时，司马杨舜臣对他说： 买肉一定要买带崽的，这种肉肥脆好吃，其余的瘦肉不好吃。 
English: During a drinking session at a party, Sima Yang Xiancheng said to him, "When buying meat, be sure to buy meat with maggots. This kind of meat is crispy and delicious, while the rest of the lean meat is not tasty."

古文：知元乃拣取怀孕牛犊及猪羊驴等杀之，其胎仍动，良久乃绝。
现代文：知元以后就挑选怀孕的牛犊和猪羊驴等杀吃。它们被杀死后，怀的胎还动，很长时间才能死。
English: After Zhiyuan, pregnant cattle, pigs, sheep and donkeys were selected to be killed and eaten. After they were killed, the fetus in the womb moved, and it took a long time to die.

古文：无何，舜臣一奴，无病而死，心上仍暖。
现代文：不久，舜臣的一个家奴无病而死，但心口还是热的，七天以后又活了。
English: Soon after, one of his vassals died without any illness, but his heart was still warm. Seven days later, he was alive again.

古文：七日而苏，云： 见一水犊白额，并子随之，见王诉云： 怀胎五个月，枉杀母子。 
现代文：那家奴说： 在阴间见到一个水牛，白色额头，有个小牛犊跟随它，见到闫王告状说： 我怀胎五个月，那刘知元无缘无故杀了我们母子。 
English: The slave said, "I saw a buffalo with a white forehead and a calf following it in the underworld. I saw the king of the Yao tribe complain, "I am five months pregnant, but Liu Zhiyuan killed our mother and son for no reason."

古文：须臾，又见猪羊驴等，皆领子来诉。
现代文：不一会儿，又见猪、羊、驴等都领子来告状，诉说冤枉。
English: A short while later, pigs, sheep, donkeys, and other animals all came with their collars up to complain that they had been wronged.

古文：见刘司士答款，引杨司马处分如此。 
现代文：只见刘知元招供，说是杨司马要我这样做的。 
English: I only saw Liu Zhiyuan confess, saying that Yang Sima had asked me to do so.

古文：居三日而知元卒亡，又五日而舜臣死。
现代文：过了三天刘知元死去。又过了五天，杨舜臣也死了。
English: Three days later, Liu Zhimuan died. Another five days later, Yang Yuxin also died.

古文：季全闻
现代文：季全闻
English: Quarterly reports

古文：唐则天初，京兆人季全闻家富于财，性好杀戮。猪羊驴犊，皆烹宰于前。
现代文：唐朝武则天当政初年，京兆人季全闻家巨富，财产无数，但此人好杀生，无论猪羊驴牛，尽烹宰，经常养鹰几十对。
English: In the first year of Wu Zetian's reign of the Tang Dynasty, Jing Zhao's son, Ji Quanwen, was a very rich man with countless assets. However, this man was fond of killing animals, whether it was pigs, sheep, donkeys, or cattle, and he cooked everything thoroughly. He often kept dozens of pairs of eagles.

古文：常养鹰鹞数十联，春夏采鱼鳖，秋冬猎狐兔。
现代文：春夏捕鱼鳖，秋冬猎狐兔，又常和诸家弟子抓鸟雀。
English: In spring and summer, he catches fish, in autumn and winter, he hunts foxes and rabbits, and he often catches birds and sparrows with his disciples.

古文：常与诸子取鸟雀，以刀齐刈其头，即放飞，看其飞得远，远者为胜，近者为负，以此戏乐。
现代文：用刀把鸟头切下，然后放飞，看谁的飞得远，飞得远的为胜者，飞得近的为负者，这样比赛游戏。
English: Cut off the bird's head with a knife, and then let it fly to see who can fly far. The winner is the one who can fly far, and the loser is the one who can fly close. This is a game of competition.

古文：在家极严残，婢妾及奴客，有小事，或悬开其心，或剜去其眼。
现代文：季全闻治家也极残忍毒辣。他的婢妾家奴，只要稍有点错误，或者挖心，或者剜眼，残酷到极点。
English: Ji Quan's steward was also extremely cruel and venomous. As long as there was the slightest mistake on the part of his concubine, she would either gouge out his heart or gouge out his eyes, which was extremely cruel.

古文：其妻初生一子，自眼上睒，有皮垂下，至于鼻。从额已后，又有一片皮，垂至于项，有似人着帽焉。
现代文：他的妻子生第一个儿子，有一块皮从上眼皮一直垂到鼻子，还有一块皮从额后直垂到脖颈，好象人戴着帽子似的。
English: When his wife gave birth to their first son, there was a piece of skin from his upper eyelid to his nose, and another piece of skin from the back of his forehead to his neck, as if he were wearing a hat.

古文：后生一子，牙爪如虎，口似鹰吻。
现代文：生第二个儿子，其牙爪如虎、嘴象鹰嘴。
English: gave birth to a second son with claws like a tiger and a beak like an eagle's.

古文：又生一子，从项至腰有缝，拨看，见其心肺五脏，生而俱死。
现代文：第三个儿子更奇怪，从脖颈到腰有缝，拨开看，可以看到里面的心肺五脏。这三个儿子全是生下来就死了。
English: The third son is even stranger, with a slit from his neck to his waist. If you look at it from the side, you can see his heart, lungs and five internal organs. All three sons were born and died.

古文：其人有兄，亦好鹰犬弋猎，性又残忍酷毒。其妻生男，项上有肉枷，或如鸟兽鱼鳖形，或无眼鼻者数矣。
现代文：季全闻有个哥哥，也好养鹰游猎，性格也残忍酷毒，他的妻子所生男孩，脖子上有枷一样的肉，有的象鸟兽鱼鳖，有的无眼无鼻。当涂民
English: Ji Quan heard that he had an older brother who raised eagles for hunting and had a cruel and poisonous personality. The boy his wife gave birth to had flesh around his neck that looked like a yoke, some of it resembled the fins of birds and animals, and some of it had no eyes and no nose.

古文：当涂民吴俗，取鲜鱼皆生之，欲食则投之沸汤，偃转移时乃死。
现代文：吴地的习惯，捕到鳝鱼都养起来。想要吃鱼的时候，把鱼放到开水里，等到停止游动时才死。
English: The custom in Wudi is to raise eels until they are caught. When you want to eat fish, put the fish in boiling water and wait until it stops swimming before it dies.

古文：天宝八载，当涂有业人取鳝鱼，是春得三头鳝，其子去鳝皮，断其头，燃火将羹之。
现代文：天宝八年，当涂有一打鱼人，当年春天捕到三头鳝鱼，他的儿子剥掉鱼皮，割掉鱼头，点着火要做鱼羹。
English: In the eighth year of Tianbao, when there were a dozen fisherman, three eels were caught in the spring of that year. His son skinned the fish, cut off the fish head, and lit a fire to make fish soup.

古文：其鳝则化为蛇，赤文斑斓，长数尺，行趋门外，其子走反顾，余二鳝亦已半为蛇，须臾化毕，皆去。
现代文：但那条鳝鱼立刻就变成了一条蛇，红色的花纹斑斓夺目，有几尺长，爬到门外。他的儿子吓得逃开，又回头看的时候，余下那二条鳝鱼也已经半化为蛇，一会儿全都变成蛇，都走了。
English: But the eel immediately turned into a snake, a red-veined snake, several feet long, crawling out of the door. His son ran away in fright, and when he looked back, the remaining two eels had also been half-turned into snakes, and in a moment they all turned into snakes and left.

古文：其子遂病，明日死。
现代文：他的儿子立刻就得了病，第二天就死了。
English: His son immediately fell ill and died the next day.

古文：于是一家七人，皆相继死，十余日且尽。
现代文：以后一家七口都相继死去，仅十多天全家死净。
English: After that, all seven members of the family died one after another, and the whole family died in just over ten days.

古文：当涂令王休愔，以其无人也，命葬之。
现代文：当涂县县令王休愔，因为看他家已没有别人，命人把他们家的人埋葬了。
English: Dangtu County Governor Wang Xiuyao, because there was no one else to look after his family, ordered someone to bury the members of his family.

古文：张纵
现代文：张纵
English: Zhang Zheng

古文：唐泉州晋江县尉张纵者，好啖鲙。忽被病死，心上犹暖，后七日苏。
现代文：唐朝泉州晋江县县尉张纵，好吃鱼，有一天突然病死，但心口还是热的。
English: Zhang Zong, a county official of Jinjiang County, Quanzhou, Tang Dynasty, who was fond of eating fish, died suddenly one day, but his heart was still warm.

古文：云：初有黄衫吏告云： 王追。 
现代文：过了七天以后又苏醒了。活了以后他自己说，当初有个穿黄布衫的衙吏告诉张纵： 闫罗王拘你去。 
English: After seven days, he woke up again. After he came back to life, he said that at the beginning, a bailiff wearing a yellow shirt told Zhang Zheng: "You should go to King Jiro's court."

古文：纵随行，寻见王。王问吏： 我追张纵，何故将张纵来，宜速遣去。 
现代文：张纵只好跟着他走，不一会儿见到闫王，闫王问那黄衫吏： 我让拘的张纵，不是这个张纵，你怎么错拘了他来？赶快让他走。 
English: Zhang Zheng had no choice but to follow him. Soon after, he saw Gong Wang. Gong Wang asked the yellow-shirted official: I detained Zhang Zheng, not this Zhang Zheng. How did you detain him by mistake? Let him go immediately.

古文：旁有一吏白王曰： 此人好啖脍，暂可罚为鱼。 
现代文：闫王身旁有个官吏对闫王说： 这个人好吃鱼，暂时可以惩罚他当鱼。 
English: An official standing next to the king said to the king, "This man likes to eat fish. You can punish him by making him a fish for a while."

古文：王令纵去作鱼。
现代文：于是闫王就命令张纵作鱼。
English: So the king ordered Zhang Zheng to fish.

古文：又曰： 当还本身。 
现代文：还说：以后能恢复本身。
English: He also said that he would be able to recover later.

古文：便被所白之吏引至河边，推纵入水，化成小鱼，长一才许，日夕增长，至七日，长二尺余。
现代文：张纵就被那个闫王身旁的官吏带到河边，推张纵下水。张纵就变成小鱼，仅一寸多长，每一天都见长，到第七天，已长到二尺多长。
English: Zhang Zheng was taken to the river by the official next to the king of the eels, who pushed Zhang Zheng into the water. Zhang Zheng turned into a small fish, just over an inch long, growing longer every day, and by the seventh day, it had grown to more than two feet long.

古文：忽见罟师至河所下网，意中甚惧，不觉已入网中，为罟师所得，置之船中草下。
现代文：这时忽然看见一个打鱼的到河里下网，张纵心里很害怕，但不知不觉已进入网中，被打鱼人捕获。放到船仓里的乱草下面。
English: At this time, he suddenly saw a fisherman casting a net into the river. Zhang Zheng was very scared, but he had unknowingly entered the net and was caught by the fisherman. He was placed under the weeds in the ship's hold.

古文：须臾闻晋江王丞使人求鱼为鲙，罟师初以小鱼与之，还被杖。复至网所搜索，乃于草下得鲤，持还王家。至前堂，见丞夫人对镜理妆，偏袒一膊。
现代文：不一会听到晋江县王丞派人找打鱼人要鱼。打鱼人开始只给他小鱼，被打了一顿，又到放网的地方搜索，便在乱草下得到鲤鱼，拿着回到王家，那鱼到了堂前，看见王丞的夫人对着镜子梳妆，还露着一只胳膊。
English: Soon after, he heard that Wang Rong of Jinjiang County had sent someone to look for a fisherman to ask for fish. The fisherman began to give him only small fish, was beaten for a meal, and then went to the place where the net was placed to search, he got eel under the weeds, took it back to the Wang family, and when the fish arrived in front of the hall, he saw Wang Rong's wife combing her hair in front of the mirror, with one arm still exposed.

古文：至厨中，被脍人将刀削鳞，初不觉痛，但觉铁冷泓然。寻被剪头，本身遂活。
现代文：又被拿到厨房里，被厨师用刀刮了鳞，并不觉得痛，只觉得那刀很冷，不一会又被剪掉头，张纵的原身就活了。
English: He was taken to the kitchen again, and the chef scraped his scales with a knife. He didn't feel any pain, only that the knife was very cold. Soon his head was cut off again, and Zhang Zheng's original body came to life.

古文：时殿下侍御史李萼左迁晋江尉，正在王家餐鲙，闻纵活，遽往视之。既入，纵迎接其手，谓萼曰： 餐脍饱耶？ 
现代文：当时唐朝殿下侍御史李萼被降职作晋江县尉，正在王家吃鱼。听说张纵活了，就赶来看他，李萼刚到，张纵就起身迎接并拉着他的手对李萼说： 吃鱼吃饱了吗？ 
English: At that time, Li Cale, the courtier of the Tang Dynasty, was demoted to the rank of Jinjiang County Lieutenant, and was eating fish at the royal family. When he heard that Zhang Xuan was alive, he came to see him. Li Cale had just arrived, and Zhang Xuan got up to greet him and took his hand and said to Li Cale: Are you full of eating fish?

古文：萼因问何以得知，纵具言始末，方知所餐之鳞，是纵本身焉。
现代文：李萼觉得奇怪，问他怎么知道这件事，张纵就详细地告诉了他的全部经过。才知道他吃的鱼是张纵变的。
English: Li Caly felt strange, asked him how he knew about this, Zhang Zheng told him all the details. Only then did he know that the fish he ate was Zhang Zheng's.

