古文：淮南厉王长，高帝少子也，其母故赵王张敖美人。
现代文：淮南厉王，名长，汉高帝最小的儿子，他的母亲过去是赵王张敖的美人。
English: Huainan Li Wang, the eldest, the youngest son of Emperor Han Gao, his mother used to be the beauty of King Zhao Zhangye.

古文：高帝八年，从东垣过赵，赵王献美人，厉王母也，幸，有身。
现代文：高帝八年，高帝从东垣经过赵国，趟王向高帝进献美女，这就是厉王的母亲，她受宠幸后怀孕。
English: In the eighth year of Emperor Gao, Emperor Gao passed through the State of Zhao from Dongyuan, and the king presented a beautiful woman to Emperor Gao. This was the mother of King Li. She was favored and became pregnant.

古文：赵王不敢内宫，为筑外宫舍之。
现代文：赵王不敢再让她回宫，就为她建筑外宫居住。
English: Zhao Wang did not dare to let her return to the palace, so he built an outer palace for her to live in.

古文：及贯高等谋反事觉，并逮治王，尽捕王母兄弟美人，系之河内。
现代文：等到贯高等人谋反的事情被发觉，牵连到赵王，趟王的母亲、兄弟及美人都被逮捕，关在河内。
English: By the time the rebellion was discovered and Zhao Wang was implicated, Wang's mother, brother and wife had all been arrested and locked up in Hanoi.

古文：厉王母亦系，告吏曰： 日得幸上，有子。 
现代文：厉王的母亲也被关，她告诉官吏说： 我曾经受皇上宠幸并有了儿子。 
English: Li Wang's mother, who was also detained, told officials: "I was once favored by the emperor and had a son.

古文：吏以闻，上方怒赵，未及理厉王母。
现代文：官吏听后告诉皇上，皇上正对赵王很愤怒，不理睬厉王的母亲。
English: After listening, the official told the emperor that the emperor was very angry with Zhao Wang and ignored Li Wang's mother.

古文：厉王母弟赵兼因辟阳侯言吕后，吕后妒，不肯白，辟阳侯不强争。
现代文：厉王的舅舅趟兼通过辟阳侯告诉了吕后，吕后嫉妒，不肯为他们辩白，辟阳侯也不为他力争。
English: King Liguo's uncle Wai Jian told Queen Lv that he was jealous of Queen Lv, who was not willing to defend them. Queen Lv also did not fight for him.

古文：厉王母已生厉生，恚，即自杀。
现代文：厉王母亲生了厉王后，因怨恨愤怒而自杀。
English: Li Wang's mother, who gave birth to Queen Li, committed suicide out of resentment and anger.

古文：吏奉厉王诣上，上悔，令吕后母之，而葬其母真定。
现代文：官吏将厉王送去给皇上，皇上很后悔，便让吕后抚养厉王，而在厉王母亲所居的县城真定埋葬了她。
English: The officials sent Li Wang to the emperor, and the emperor regretted very much, so he let Lv Hou raise Li Wang, and buried her in the county seat where Li Wang's mother lived.

古文：真定，厉王母家县也。十一年，淮南王布反，上自将击灭布，即立子长为淮南子。
现代文：汉十一年，淮南王黥布谋反，皇上亲自率兵去消灭黥布，于是立儿子刘长为淮南王。
English: In the eleventh year of the Han Dynasty, the king of Huainan, Zibo, plotted a rebellion. The emperor personally led an army to eliminate Zibo, and then appointed his son Liu Chang as the king of Huainan.

古文：王早失母，常附吕后，孝惠、吕后时以故得幸无患，然常心怨辟阳侯，不敢发。
现代文：淮南王幼年失去母亲，经常依附吕后，在孝惠帝和吕后统治时他因为这个原因得到宠幸而没有麻烦，然而内心裹却常常怨恨辟阳侯，但是不敢表露出来。
English: King Huainan lost his mother at a young age and often clung to Empress Lyu. During the reigns of Emperor Xiao Hui and Empress Lyu, he was favored for this reason and had no problems. However, his heart was often filled with resentment against Emperor Yang, but he did not dare to show it.

古文：及孝文初即位，自以为最亲，骄蹇，数不奉法。
现代文：当孝文帝继位的初期，他自以为是皇族最亲近的人而骄傲放纵，好几次触犯律法。
English: When Emperor Xiaowen ascended the throne in the early days, he thought he was the closest person to the imperial family and was proud and indulgent, breaking the law several times.

古文：上宽赦之。
现代文：皇上都宽恕了他。
English: The emperor pardoned him.

古文：三年，入朝，甚横。
现代文：文帝三年，他上朝时表现很蛮横。
English: In the third year of Emperor Wen's reign, he behaved very arrogantly when he ascended to the throne.

古文：从上入苑猎，与上同辇，常谓上 大兄 。
现代文：他跟随皇上去皇家园林打猎，和皇上同坐一辆车，常叫皇上 大哥 。
English: He followed the emperor to go hunting in the royal gardens, and rode in the same car as the emperor. He was often called the emperor's elder brother.

古文：厉王有材力，力扛鼎，乃往请辟阳侯。
现代文：厉王有力量，力大能够举鼎，于是他去拜见辟阳侯。
English: King Li had the strength to lift the throne, so he went to see Prince Paiyang.

古文：辟阳侯出见之，即自袖金椎椎之，命从者刑之。
现代文：辟阳侯出来接待他时，厉王取出袖子中藏的铁椎子击打辟阳侯，并命令随从砍断了他的头。
English: When Biyanghou came out to receive him, King Li took out the iron spike hidden in his sleeve to hit Biyanghou and ordered his attendant to cut off his head.

古文：驰诣阙下，肉袒而谢曰： 臣母不当坐赵时事，辟阳侯力能得之吕后，不争，罪一也。
现代文：然后驱马疾奔皇上的宫殿，脱去上衣袒露着臂膀向皇上谢罪说： 我的母亲不应当因为趟王的事而犯罪入狱，辟阳侯有能力劝说吕后拯救但却不尽力争取，这是第一桩罪。
English: Then he drove his horse to the emperor's palace, took off his coat and rode bare-armed to thank the emperor, saying: My mother should not be imprisoned for the crime of going to the king. The prince had the ability to persuade Lu to save her, but he did not do his best. This is the first crime.

古文：赵王如意子母无罪，吕后杀之，辟阳侯不争，罪二也。
现代文：赵王如意和他母亲都无罪，吕后杀害了他们，辟阳侯不尽力劝阻，这是第二桩罪。
English: Zhao Wang Ruyi and his mother were not guilty. Lv Hou killed them, and Biyang Hou did not do his best to dissuade them. This is the second crime.

古文：吕后王诸吕，欲以危刘氏，辟阳侯不争，罪三也。
现代文：吕后给吕氏封王，想以此来危害我们刘氏，辟阳侯不努力劝阻，这是第三桩罪。
English: The third crime is that Empress Dowager Lyu wanted to harm our Liu Clan by making the Lyu Clan the king, and the Yang Clan did not try to dissuade her.

古文：臣谨为天下诛贼，报母之仇，伏阙下请罪。 
现代文：我祇是为天下人杀死了坏人，为母报仇，我愿向陛下伏罪。 
English: I only killed a bad man for the sake of the world, to avenge my mother, and I would like to confess my sins to Your Majesty.

古文：文帝伤其志，为亲故不治，赦之。
现代文：文帝可怜他是为亲报仇，赦免了他的罪。
English: Emperor Wen pitied him for taking revenge for his relatives and pardoned his sin.

古文：当是时，自薄太后及太子诸大臣皆惮厉王，厉王以此归国益恣，不用汉法，出入警跸，称制，自作法令，数上书不逊顺。
现代文：在那个时候，从薄太后到太子及各个大臣都害怕厉王。厉王因此回到封国更加蛮横放纵，不服从汉的法令，出入时像皇上一样有左右警卫和清道，自己制定法令，数次在给皇上奏书时表现得不敬重。
English: At that time, Li Wang was feared by everyone from the Empress Dowager Bo to the Crown Prince and various ministers. As a result, Li Wang returned to his fiefdom even more arrogant and indulgent, disobeying Han laws and regulations, entering and leaving the country with guards and a clear path just like the emperor, making his own laws and regulations, and several times showing disrespect when delivering a letter to the emperor.

古文：文帝重自切责之。
现代文：文帝难以亲自责备他。
English: It is difficult for Emperor Wen to blame him personally.

古文：时帝舅薄昭为将军，尊重，上令昭予厉王书谏数之，曰：
现代文：当时皇上的舅舅薄昭作将军，文帝尊重他，便命薄昭给厉王写信，多次劝谏他说：
English: At that time, the emperor's uncle, Bo Zhao, was a general, and Emperor Wen respected him. He ordered Bo Zhao to write to King Li, and repeatedly urged him to say:

古文：窃闻大王刚直而勇，慈惠而厚，贞信多断，是天以圣人之资奉大王也甚盛，不可不察。
现代文：我听说大王性格刚直勇敢，慈善而恩惠广大，忠信而果断，这是上苍用圣人的天资来极大地赏赐大王，你不可以不了解这些。
English: I have heard that the character of the great king is upright and brave, charitable and generous, faithful and decisive. This is God's gift of saints to greatly reward the great king. You should not fail to understand this.

古文：今大王所行，不称天资。
现代文：如今大王的行为不符合这种天赐的智慧。
English: The actions of the present monarch do not accord with this God-given wisdom.

古文：皇帝初即位，易侯邑在淮南者，大王不肯。
现代文：皇帝刚刚即位，想把在淮南境内的侯邑改封在他处，大王表示不必要。
English: The emperor had just ascended to the throne, and he wanted to change the territory of Huainan Province to another place. The great king said that it was unnecessary.

古文：皇帝卒易之，使大王得三县之实，甚厚。
现代文：皇帝最终改封了，而使大王得到三个县的好处，这很丰厚呀。
English: The emperor eventually changed his title, and the great king received the benefits of three counties, which is very rich.

古文：大王以未尝与皇帝相见，求入朝见，未毕昆弟之欢，而杀列侯以自为名。
现代文：大王以未见过皇帝，请求入朝见皇帝，但还没有叙完同胞兄弟之情，就杀了列侯。
English: On the pretext that he had not seen the emperor, the great king asked to enter the court to see the emperor, but before he had finished describing the feelings of his fellow countrymen and brothers, he killed the vassal.

古文：皇帝不使吏与其间，赦大王，甚厚。
现代文：皇帝也没有派官吏查治此事，赦免了大王，这对大王很宽厚呀。
English: The emperor did not send officials to investigate the matter and pardoned the great king, which was very generous to the great king.

古文：汉法，二千石缺，辄言汉补，大王逐汉所置，而请自置相、二千石。
现代文：汉法令规定，如果缺少二千石的官吏，要报告朝廷派人补充，大王却逐走朝廷设置的官吏，请求自己设立丞相、二千石官。
English: According to the Han law, if there is a shortage of officials with 2,000 koku, the imperial court should be notified to send someone to fill the vacancy. However, the great king drove away the officials appointed by the imperial court and asked to appoint his own chancellor and officials with 2,000 koku.

古文：皇帝骫天下正法而许大王，甚厚。
现代文：皇帝委曲天下的严正法令而允许大王这样做，这对大王很宽厚呀!
English: It is very generous of the emperor to bend the strict laws of the world to allow the great king to do so!

古文：大王欲属国为布衣，守冢真定。
现代文：大王想委弃封国当平民百姓，守真定的祖坟。
English: The great king wanted to abandon the country and become a commoner, guarding the ancestral tomb of Zhending.

古文：皇帝不许，使大王毋失南面之尊，甚厚。
现代文：皇帝不同意，而让大王不要失去淮南王的地位，这对大王很仁爱呀!
English: The emperor did not agree, but let the king not lose the status of the king of Huainan, which was very kind to the king!

古文：大王宜日夜奉法度，修贡职，以称皇帝之厚德，今乃轻言恣行，以负谤于天下，甚非计也。
现代文：大王应该日夜遵从法令，忠于职守，以不负皇帝对你的厚爱，而你现在却口出狂言，为所欲为，受到天下人的毁谤，遣可不是明智之举啊。
English: A great king should obey the law day and night, be loyal to his duties, so as not to fail the emperor's great love for you, but you are now speaking nonsense, doing whatever you want, and being slandered by the world. It is not a wise move.

古文：夫大王以千里为宅居，以万民为臣妾，此高皇帝之厚德也。
现代文：大王封地千里，统治着万民，这都是高帝对你的恩德呀。
English: The great king has thousands of fiefs and rules over all the people. This is all the grace that Gao Di has bestowed on you.

古文：高帝蒙霜露，沫风雨，赴矢石，野战攻城，身被创痍，以为子孙成万世之业，艰难危苦甚矣，大王不思先帝之艰苦，日夜怵惕，修身正行，养牺牲，丰洁粢盛，奉祭祀，以无忘先帝之功德，而欲属国为布衣，甚过。
现代文：高帝风餐露宿，风雨无阻，冒着雨箭飞石，野战攻城，身受重伤，为子孙后代开创了千秋大业，极为艰难危险啊。大王不想想祖先的创业艰难，经常反省警惕，修身正行，养牲畜、收谷米，多备祭品以祭祀祖先，以不忘记先辈的大恩大德，大王却要委弃封国当平民百姓，这是大错特错的。
English: Emperor Gao lived and dined in the open, weather permitting, braved the rain, arrows and flying rocks, attacked the city in the field, was seriously injured, and created a great cause for future generations. It was extremely difficult and dangerous. The great king did not want to think about the difficult business of his ancestors, he was always vigilant, cultivated himself, raised livestock, harvested rice, and prepared many offerings to worship ancestors, so as not to forget the great kindness of his ancestors. However, the great king wanted to abandon the country and become a commoner. This was a big mistake.

古文：且夫贪让国土之名，轻废先帝之业，不可以言孝。
现代文：况且贪图有让国土的美名，废弃了先帝的大业，这是不孝。
English: Moreover, it is unfilial to covet the good name of the country and abandon the great cause of the former emperor.

古文：父为之基，而不能守，不贤。
现代文：父辈打下江山。子辈不能坚守，这是不贤。
English: It is not virtuous for the fathers to conquer the country and for the sons not to hold fast to it.

古文：不求守长陵，而求之真定，先母后父，不谊。
现代文：不去守长陵，而要去真定，把母亲摆在父亲之前，这是不义的。
English: It is unjust not to guard Changling Mausoleum, but to go to Zhending, to put one's mother before one's father.

古文：数逆天子之令，不顺。
现代文：多次违抗皇上的命令，这是不顺。
English: Repeatedly disobeying the emperor's orders is not a good thing.

古文：言节行以高兄，无礼。
现代文：为名节守母坟以示高于兄长一筹，这是无礼。
English: It is impolite to guard one's mother's grave for the festival to show that one is superior to one's elder brother.

古文：幸臣有罪，大者立断，小者肉刑，不仁。
现代文：宠臣有罪，重则问斩，轻则肉刑，这是不仁。
English: If one's favorite vassal is guilty, it is better to ask for execution than to inflict corporal punishment. This is not benevolent.

古文：贵布衣一剑之任，贱王侯之位，不知。
现代文：把当一名百姓看得很重，而视王侯之位低下，这是不智。
English: It is unwise to place a high value on being a commoner and a low value on being a prince.

古文：不好学问大道，触情忘行，不祥。
现代文：不努力学习钻研大道，而凭感情冲动恣意妄为，这是不祥。
English: It is ominous not to study diligently, but to act arbitrarily based on emotional impulses.

古文：此八者，危亡之路也，而大王行之，弃南面之位，奋诸、贲之勇，常出入危亡之路，臣之所见，高皇帝之神必不庙食于大王之手，明白。
现代文：以上八点，都是危亡之路，而大王您都实行了。抛弃国王之位，展露专诸、孟贲的匹夫之勇，常常出入于危亡之路，依我看来，高祖皇帝的香火就在你这裹继承不下去了，请大王想清楚。
English: The above eight points are all the way of peril, and you, the great king, have implemented them all. Abandoning the throne of the king, showing the courage of Zhen Zhu and Meng Xuan, often entering and leaving the way of peril, in my opinion, the incense of Emperor Gaozhu cannot be inherited by you. Please, great king, think clearly.

古文：昔者，周公诛管叔，放蔡叔，以安周；齐桓杀其弟，以反国；秦始皇杀两弟，迁其母，以安秦；顷王亡代，高帝夺之国，以便事；济北举兵，皇帝诛之，以安汉。
现代文：过去周王杀死管叔，流放蔡叔，来安定周朝；齐桓公杀死兄弟纠回到齐国。秦始皇杀死两个弟弟，把母亲迁到咸阳宫，安定秦国；顷王刘仲在匈奴攻代地时逃离，高帝剥夺了他的封国，以便执行国法；济北王兴居举兵反叛，皇帝杀了他，以稳定汉江山。
English: In the past, King Zhou killed Uncle Guan and exiled Uncle Cai to stabilize the Zhou Dynasty; King Qi Huan killed his brother and returned to Qi. Emperor Qin Shihuang killed his two younger brothers and moved his mother to Xianyang Palace to stabilize Qin; King Liu Zhong fled when the Huns invaded the country, and Emperor Gao deprived him of his fief in order to enforce the state law; King Xingju of Jibei raised an army to rebel, and the emperor killed him in order to stabilize the Han mountains.

古文：故周、齐行之于古，秦、汉用之于今，大王不察古今之所以安国便事，而欲以亲戚之意望于太上，不可得也。
现代文：所以在古代有周王、齐侯这样做，在当今有秦王、汉帝仍然采用这个做法，大王都不明白古往今来的治国平天下的方法，反而想因为是亲戚关系指望皇上宽大无边，这是不可能的。
English: Therefore, in ancient times, Zhou Wang and Qi Hou did this, and in the present day, Qin Wang and Han Emperor still use this practice. The great kings do not understand the methods of governing the country and the world from ancient times to the present, but instead want to expect the emperor to be generous because they are relatives. This is impossible.

古文：亡之诸侯，游宦事人，及舍匿者，论皆有法。
现代文：逃到诸侯国的，窝藏罪犯的，都有法律的治罪。
English: Anyone who fled to a vassal state or harbored a criminal was punishable by law.

古文：其在王所，吏主者坐。
现代文：就是在大王之处的，各主管官吏要承担罪责。
English: In the case of the grand duke, the responsible officials will be held responsible.

古文：今诸侯子为吏者，御史主；为军吏者，中尉主；客出入殿门者，卫尉大行主；诸从蛮夷来归谊及以亡名数自占者，内史县令主。
现代文：现在诸侯国的人为官吏的，归御史管；为军吏的，归中尉管；客人出入宫殿的，归卫尉、大行主管；从少数民族地区来降及户口簿上无名而报户口的人归内史、县令管。
English: At present, people from the vassal states who are government officials fall under the jurisdiction of the imperial historian; those who are military officials fall under the jurisdiction of the lieutenant; those who are guests entering or leaving the palace fall under the jurisdiction of the guard lieutenant and the head of the general staff; and those who come from ethnic minority areas and are not named in the household registration book, but report their household registration, fall under the jurisdiction of the internal historian and the county magistrate.

古文：相欲委下吏，无与其祸，不可得也。
现代文：王国丞相想把责任推给下宫，自己没有责任，是不可能的。
English: It is impossible for the Minister of the Crown Prince to shift the responsibility to the Lower Court, as he has no responsibility himself.

古文：王若不改，汉系大王邸，论相以下，为之奈何？
现代文：大王若不改正错误，漠廷将大王押在府中，对丞相以下的人问罪时，您又怎么办?
English: If the great king does not correct his mistake, what will you do when the court detains the great king in the palace and brings charges against people below the prime minister?

古文：夫堕父大业，退为布衣所哀，幸臣皆伏法而诛，为天下笑，以羞先帝之德，甚为大王不取也。
现代文：毁掉父亲的大业，沦为平民都可怜的人，宠臣都被正法，为天下人嗤笑，有辱先皇功德，我认为大王不该这样。
English: To ruin his father's great career, to be reduced to a pitiful commoner, to have his favorite vassals all become righteous, to be ridiculed by the whole world, and to dishonor the Emperor's merits, I don't think a great king should do that.

古文：宜急改操易行，上书谢罪，曰： 臣不幸早失先帝，少孤，吕氏之世，未尝忘死。
现代文：您应该立即痛改前非，向皇上上书谢罪，告诉他说： 臣不幸早失父皇，从小孤单，在吕氏当权时，常常受死亡威胁。
English: You should immediately make amends for the past, write to the emperor to thank him for his sin, and tell him: My vassal unfortunately lost his father the emperor at an early age, has been lonely since childhood, and was often threatened with death when the Lü family was in power.

古文：陛下即位，臣怙恩德骄盈，行多不轨。
现代文：皇上您即位后，我仗着您的恩德骄奢淫逸，做了很多不轨之事。
English: Emperor, after you ascended the throne, I took advantage of your grace to indulge in luxury and debauchery, and did many improper things.

古文：追念罪过，恐惧，伏地待诛不敢起。 
现代文：想想自己犯下的错误，心中诚惶诚恐，现在我伏地等待正法，不敢起身。 
English: Thinking about the mistakes I've made, I'm terrified. Now I'm lying face down waiting for the Fa to be rectified, and I don't dare to get up.

古文：皇帝闻之必喜。
现代文：皇上听后一定会高兴的。
English: I'm sure the Emperor will be pleased to hear that.

古文：大王昆弟欢欣于上，群臣皆得延寿于上；上下得宜，海内常安。
现代文：大王您的兄弟们在上高兴，群臣们在下也能多长寿，上下和睦，天下就会太平。
English: Great King, your brothers in the upper echelons will be happy, and your ministers in the lower echelons will live longer, and there will be harmony between the upper and lower echelons, and the world will be peaceful.

古文：愿孰计而疾行之。
现代文：愿大王接受我的建议立即实施。
English: May the Great King accept my suggestion and implement it immediately.

古文：行之有疑，祸如发矢，不可追已。
现代文：如您犹犹豫豫不肯实行，灾祸如同离弦之箭，射出后就没法收回了。
English: If you hesitate to implement it, the calamity will be like an arrow shot out of the bow, and you will not be able to take it back.

古文：王得书不说。
现代文：厉王拿到这份谏书后很不高兴。
English: Li Wang was very unhappy when he received the letter.

古文：六年，令男子但等七十人与棘蒲侯柴武太子奇谋，以辇车四十乘反谷口，令人使闽越、匈奴。
现代文：六年，派但等七十名男子与棘蒲侯柴武的太子柴奇密谋，派兵车四十驾回到谷，派人去闽越、匈奴。
English: In the sixth year, he sent seventy men, including Dantan, to conspire with the prince of Thornpoh Chaiwu, Chaiqi, and sent forty chariots back to the valley, and sent people to Yunnan and Hun.

古文：事觉，治之，乃使使召淮南王。
现代文：此事被发现后，皇上要治罪，就派人召淮南王进京。
English: After this matter was discovered, the emperor wanted to punish the crime, so he sent someone to summon Huainan Wang to Beijing.

古文：王至长安，丞相张苍，典客冯敬行御史大夫事，与宗正、廷尉杂奏： 长废先帝法，不听天子诏，居处无度，为黄屋盖拟天子，擅为法令，不用法令。
现代文：淮南王到长安后，丞相张苍、典客冯敬代理御史大夫，与宗正、廷尉审讯后上奏说： 刘长废弃先皇法令，不听皇上韶令，生活挥霍无度，做的车马伞盖可以和皇上的相比，擅自制定法律而不实施汉朝的法令。
English: After King Huainan arrived in Chang'an, the chancellor Zhang Cang and the steward Feng Jing acted as the imperial historian, and after the interrogation with Zong Zheng and the courtier, the report said: Liu Chang abandoned the emperor's decree, did not listen to the emperor's edict, lived extravagantly, made the umbrella cover of the chariot and horse can be compared with the emperor's, arbitrarily formulated laws without implementing the Han Dynasty's decree.

古文：及所置吏，以其郎中春为丞相，收聚汉诸侯人及有罪亡者，匿为居，为治家室，赐与财物、爵禄、田宅，爵或至关内侯，奉以二千石所当得。
现代文：他自行任用官吏，让郎中春作丞相，收拢那些漠的诸侯王中有罪逃亡的人，让他们躲藏起来并给他们安排住处，为他们治办家室，赐给他们钱财物品，封爵位，赏田宅作俸禄，有的爵位高达关内侯，赐给二千石的俸禄。
English: He appointed officials on his own, made his son-in-law Chun Chun the chancellor, rounded up those guilty fugitives among the desert princes, let them hide and arranged accommodation for them, ran their households for them, gave them money, goods, knighthoods, and land grants, some of which were as high as the Lord of Guanai, and gave them a stipend of two thousand koku.

古文：大夫但、士伍开章等七十人与棘蒲侯太子奇谋反，欲以危宗庙社稷，谋使闽越及匈奴发其兵。
现代文：大夫但、有罪失去官爵的开章等七十人和棘蒲侯太子柴奇一起阴谋反叛，危及汉的国家政权，策划让闽越人和匈奴人派兵。
English: Seventy people, including the doctor, Dan, who was found guilty and lost the title of nobility, and the prince of Thorns, Chaichi, conspired to rebel, endangering the national power of Han, and plotting to send soldiers from the Xiong Yue people and the Huns.

古文：事觉，长安尉奇等往捕开章，长匿不予，与故中尉蕳忌谋，杀以闭口，为棺椁衣衾，葬之肥陵，谩吏曰 不知安在 。又阳聚土，树表其上曰 开章死，葬此下 。
现代文：事情败露后，长安尉奇等前往逮捕开章，刘长藏匿他而不交给官吏，并和原中尉蔺忌密谋将开章杀死以灭，为他制备了棺材和衣物，把他埋在肥陵，欺骗朝廷派来的官吏说： 我不知道他在哪裹，又为他造坟，立柱并写上： 开章死，葬此下。 
English: After the affair was exposed, Chang'an's lieutenant Qi went to arrest Kaizhang. Liu Chang hid him and did not hand him over to the officials. He conspired with the former lieutenant Zou Gui to kill Kaizhang, prepared a coffin and clothes for him, buried him in a mausoleum, and deceived the officials sent by the imperial court by saying, "I don't know where he is wrapped." He also built a grave for him and erected a pillar and wrote: "Kaizhang died and was buried here."

古文：及长身自贼杀无罪者一人；令吏论杀无罪者六人；为亡命弃市诈捕命者以除罪；擅罪人，无告劾系治城旦以上十四人；赦免罪人死罪十八人，城旦春以下五十八人；赐人爵关内侯以下九十四人。
现代文：此外刘长还私自杀了一个无罪者；又命令官吏斩杀了六个无罪者；对有罪应当当众正法的人却让他们躲藏起来；欺骗来拘捕的官吏以便为他们免除罪行；擅自给人治罪，没有报告而私下判刑治城旦罪以上的有十四人；赦免本应判死罪的有十八人，应判城旦舂以下罪而赦免的有五十八人；赐给关内侯以下爵位的有九十四人。
English: In addition, Liu Chang also committed suicide of an innocent person; he also ordered the officials to kill six innocent people; he allowed the guilty to hide when they should have been punished according to the law; he deceived the officials who came to arrest them in order to absolve them of their crimes; he punished people without authorization, and there were fourteen people who were secretly sentenced to more than the punishment of the city without reporting; he pardoned eighteen people who should have been sentenced to death, and there were fifty-eight people who should have been sentenced to less than the punishment of the city and were pardoned; there were ninety-four people who were given peerages below the Marquis of Guanai.

古文：前日长病，陛下心忧之，使使者赐枣脯，长不肯见拜使者。
现代文：前几天刘长生病，陛下很担心，派使者送来枣脯，刘长却不肯出去拜见皇上派来的使者。
English: A few days ago, Liu Chang fell ill. His Majesty was very worried and sent an emissary to deliver dates. However, Liu Chang refused to go out to meet the emissary sent by the Emperor.

古文：南海民处庐江界中者反，淮南吏卒击之。陛下遣使者赍帛五千匹，以赐吏卒劳苦者。
现代文：南海一带位于庐江边界的百姓造，淮南王派兵攻打叛乱的人，陛下派使者送来丝帛五十匹，赏赐给官兵中的那些劳苦的人。
English: King Huainan sent troops to attack the rebels. His Majesty sent an envoy to bring fifty silk reeds to reward those who worked hard among the officers and soldiers.

古文：长不欲受赐，谩曰 无劳苦者 。
现代文：刘长却不想接受赏赐，而轻蔑地说： 没有劳苦的人。 
English: Liu Chang, however, did not want to accept the reward, but scornfully said: "There are no hard-working people."

古文：南海王织上书献璧帛皇帝，忌擅燔其书，不以闻。
现代文：南海王织写信给皇上要进献璧玉和丝帛，曲忌擅自烧毁了书信不报告皇帝。
English: Nanhai Wang Wei wrote a letter to the emperor to donate jade and silk brocade. Qu Mei burned the letter without permission and did not report it to the emperor.

古文：吏请召治忌，长不遣，谩曰 忌病 。
现代文：官吏要求召曲忌到长安，刘长不让蔺忌来，说 荫忌病了 。
English: The officials asked Liu Chang to summon Qigui to Chang'an, but Liu Chang refused to let Qigui come, saying that Qigui was ill.

古文：长所犯不轨，当弃市，臣请论如法 。
现代文：刘长所犯的罪应当在街市上斩首，我们请求依法判处。 
English: The crime committed by Liu Chang should be beheaded on the street, we request that he be sentenced according to law.

古文：制曰： 朕不忍置法于王，其与列侯、吏二千石议。 
现代文：皇上下诏书说： 我不忍心治厉王的罪，和诸侯及二千石官吏商议一下吧。 
English: The imperial edict said: I can't bear to deal with the sin of King Li, so let's discuss it with the lords and officials of 2,000 koku.

古文：列侯、吏二千石臣婴等四十三人议，皆曰： 宜论如法。 
现代文：诸侯及二千石官吏婴等四十三人商议后都说： 应该依法论处。 
English: After deliberation, forty-three people, including lords and officials of 2,000 koku, all said: It should be dealt with according to the law.

古文：制曰： 其赦长死罪，废勿王。 
现代文：皇上下令说： 那么赦免刘长死罪，废除他的王位。 
English: The Emperor's order said: Then pardon Liu Chang's capital crime and abolish his throne.

古文：有司奏： 请处蜀严道邛邮，遣其子、子母从居，县为筑盖家室，皆日三食，给薪菜盐炊食器席蓐。 
现代文：官吏上奏说： 请求皂上流放他到蜀郡的严道县邛地，命令他的孩子及孩子的母亲跟从居住，严道县令可为他们筑盖房屋，每供餐，供给柴薪、菜盐、炊食器及席褥。 
English: The official's report said: Ask Sojo to banish him to Yandao County, Shu County, and order his children and the children's mother to live with him. Yandao County can build a house for them, and provide firewood, salt, a cooker and a mat for every meal.

古文：制曰： 食长，给肉日五斤，酒二斗。
现代文：皇上下令说： 供给刘长食物，赐给他每肉五斤，酒二斗。
English: The emperor's order said: Provide Liu Chang with food, give him five catties of meat and two barrels of wine.

古文：令故美人、材人得幸者十人从居。 
现代文：命令他过去的姬妾受宠幸的十个人一起跟从他居住。 
English: ordered ten of his former concubines to live with him.

古文：于是尽诛所与谋者。
现代文：于是斩尽了和刘长阴谋策划的人。
English: As a result, the person who plotted with Liu Chang was eliminated.

古文：乃遣长，载以辎车，令县次传。
现代文：遣送刘长，派载重车马送他们，所经各县都配车将他们依次传送。
English: Liu Chang was sent away. Heavy trucks were dispatched to transport them, and all the counties they passed through were equipped with vehicles to transport them in turn.

古文：爰盎谏曰： 上素骄淮南王，不为置严相傅，以故至此。
现代文：爰盎向皇上劝谏说： 皇上一向纵容淮南王，不为设严格的丞相、太傅，以至于到今天这个地步。
English: He told the emperor: "The emperor has always indulged King Huainan, and has not set up a strict prime minister or chief minister, to the extent that it has come to this.

古文：且淮南王为人刚，今暴摧折之，臣恐其逢雾露病死，陛下有杀弟之名，奈何！ 
现代文：而淮南王性格刚直，如今皇上忽然给他追么大的打击，我恐怕他在路上经不起雾寒露侵而病死，那么陛下就有杀死兄弟的名声，逭该怎么办呀! 
English: But King Huainan has a straightforward personality, and now the emperor has suddenly given him such a big blow. I'm afraid he can't withstand the fog and cold on the road and died of illness. Then his majesty has the reputation of killing his brother. What should I do?

古文：上曰： 吾特苦之耳，令复之。 
现代文：皇上说： 我也因此而苦恼呀，我衹是让他自悔，就召回他。 
English: The emperor said, "I am also troubled by this. If I want him to repent, I will call him back."

古文：淮南王谓侍者曰： 谁谓乃公勇者？
现代文：淮南王问侍者说： 谁说你老子我勇敢?
English: Huainan Wang asked the waiter, "Who told you that I am brave?

古文：吾以骄不闻过，故至此。 
现代文：我因为骄纵不知自己的过错，结果落得这个下场。 
English: I ended up like this because I was arrogant and didn't know what I was doing.

古文：乃不食而死。
现代文：于是不吃饭，饿死了。
English: So he skipped meals and starved to death.

古文：县传者不敢发车封。
现代文：县裹护送的人不敢打开囚车。
English: The people escorted by the county did not dare to open the van.

古文：至雍，雍令发之，以死闻。
现代文：到了雍县，雍县县令打开囚车，将淮南王已死之事报告皇上。
English: When he arrived in Yongxian, the Yongxian County ordered him to open the cart and report to the emperor that King Huainan had died.

古文：上悲哭，谓爰盎曰： 吾不从公言，卒亡淮南王。 
现代文：皇上听说后悲伤哭泣，对袁盎说： 我没听从你的话，结果让淮南王死了 。
English: Upon hearing this, the emperor wept with grief and said to Yuan Ang, "I did not listen to your words, and as a result, King Huainan died."

古文：盎曰： 淮南王不可奈何，愿陛下自宽。 
现代文：袁盎说： 淮南王已经如此，没有办法了，请皇上要宽心。 
English: Yuan Ang said: The King of Huainan is already like this, there is no way out, please let the Emperor be relieved.

古文：上曰： 为之奈何？ 
现代文：皇上问： 该怎么办呢? 
English: Gaozu said anxiously, "What should we do?

古文：曰： 独斩丞相、御史以谢天下乃可。 
现代文：回答说： 衹有斩杀丞相、御史才能向天下谢罪。 
English: He replied, "Only by killing the prime minister can you atone to the world."

古文：上即令丞相、御史逮诸县传淮南王不发封馈侍者，皆弃市，乃以列侯葬淮南王于雍，置守冢三十家。
现代文：皇上随即命令丞相、御史逮捕各县遣送淮南王时不开囚车封条送饭吃的人，都在街上斩首。于是在雍地按照列侯的待遇下葬了淮南王，给他安排三十户守坟的人家。
English: The emperor immediately ordered the chancellor and the imperial historian to arrest the people in each county who did not open the prisoner's car seal to send meals when Huainan Wang was deported, and they were all beheaded in the street. Therefore, he buried Huainan Wang in Yongdi in accordance with the treatment of the feudal lord, and arranged for him thirty families to guard the grave.

古文：孝文八年，怜淮南王，王有子四人，年皆七八岁，乃封子安为阜陵侯，子勃为安阳侯，子赐为阳周侯，子良为东城侯。
现代文：孝文帝八年，皇上可怜淮南王，他还有四个儿子，都有七、八岁，于是封儿子刘安为阜陵侯，刘勃为安阳侯，刘赐为阳周侯，刘良为束城侯。
English: In the eighth year of Emperor Xiaowen, the emperor felt sorry for King Huainan. He had four sons, all seven or eight years old, so he appointed his sons Liu An as Fuling Marquis, Liu Bo as Anyang Marquis, Liu Jie as Yang Zhou Marquis, and Liu Liang as Suceng Marquis.

古文：十二年，民有作歌歌淮南王曰： 一尺布，尚可缝；一斗粟，尚可春。
现代文：十二年，民间有人作歌唱淮南王说： 一尺布，尚可缝；一斗粟，尚可舂。
English: In the twelfth year, there was a folk song in which Huainan Wang said: "One foot of cloth can still be sewn; one bucket of millet can still be threshed."

古文：兄弟二人，不相容！ 
现代文：兄弟二人不相容! 
English: The two brothers are incompatible!

古文：上闻之曰，昔尧、舜放逐骨肉，周公杀管、蔡，天下称圣，不以私害公。
现代文：皇上听见后说： 过去尧、舜放逐他们的亲生骨肉，周公杀死管叔、蔡叔，天下都将他们称为圣人，不因私而损害国家利益。
English: After hearing this, the emperor said: In the past, Zhou and Zou banished their own flesh and blood, Zhou Gong killed Uncle Guan and Uncle Cai, and the whole world called them saints. Don't harm the interests of the country because of me.

古文：天下岂以为我贪淮南地邪！ 
现代文：天下人怎么能够认为我是贪图淮南王的土地呢? 
English: How can the world think that I covet the land of King Huainan?

古文：乃徙城阳王王淮南故地，而追尊谥淮南王为厉王，置园如诸侯仪。
现代文：于是迁徙城阳王到淮南旧地当王，而追加淮南王谧号为厉王，按照诸侯的礼仪设置他的陵园。
English: As a result, King Chengyang migrated to the old land of Huainan to become king, and added the title of King Li of Huainan, and set up his cemetery in accordance with the etiquette of princes.

古文：十六年，上怜淮南王废法不轨，自使失国早夭，乃徙淮南王喜复王故城阳，而立厉王三子王淮南故地，三分之：阜陵侯安为淮南王，安阳侯勃为衡山王，阳周侯赐为庐江王，东城侯良前薨，无后。
现代文：十六年，皇上可怜淮南王因擅自废除汉法，行为放纵而使自己丧失封国，早年夭折，于是迁淮南王刘喜回城阳为王，而立厉王的三个儿子在淮南故土为王，三人分别是：阜陵侯刘安为淮南王，安阳侯刘勃为衡山王，阳周侯刘赐为庐江王。束城侯刘良早年夭折，没有后代。
English: In the 16th year, the emperor took pity on the king of Huainan, who had lost his fief due to his unauthorized abolition of Han law and indulgent behavior, and died young. Therefore, the king of Huainan, Liu Xi, was transferred back to Chengyang to be the king, and the three sons of the king of Li Li were the kings in the native land of Huainan. The three were: Liu An, the lord of Fuling, was the king of Huainan, Liu Bo, the lord of Anyang, was the king of Hengshan, and Liu Zhou, the lord of Yangzhou, was the king of the Li River. Liu Liang, the lord

古文：孝景三年，吴、楚七国反，吴使者至淮南，王欲发兵应之。
现代文：孝景三年，吴、楚七国叛乱，吴国的使者到淮南王处，淮南王想派兵接应吴王。
English: In the third year of Xiao Jing, the seven kingdoms of Wu and Chu rebelled. The emissary of the kingdom of Wu went to the king of Huainan. The king of Huainan wanted to send troops to meet the king of Wu.

古文：其相曰： 王必欲应吴，臣愿为将。 
现代文：他的丞相说： 大王如果一定要和吴王一起起兵，我愿当将军。 
English: His chancellor said, "If the Great King must raise an army with King Wu, I am willing to be the general."

古文：王乃属之。
现代文：淮南王于是将军队交给丞相统率。
English: King Huainan then put the army under the command of the prime minister.

古文：相已将兵，因城守，不听王而为汉。
现代文：丞相已率军后，就坚守城池，不听从王命而向汉。
English: After the prime minister had led the army, he held fast to the castle and did not obey the king's order to march to Han.

古文：汉亦使曲城侯将兵救淮南，淮南以故得完。
现代文：汉也派曲城侯率兵营救淮南国，淮南国因此得以保存下来。
English: Han also sent Qu Chenghou and his soldiers to rescue Huainan, and thus Huainan was preserved.

古文：吴使者至庐江，庐江王不应，而往来使越；至衡山，衡山王坚守无二心。
现代文：吴王使者到庐江，庐江王不响应，使者又来到越；到衡山，衡山王坚守封国，对汉无反叛之心。
English: The emissary of the king of Wu went to the Li River, the king of the Li River did not respond, and the emissary came to Yue again; to Hengshan, the king of Hengshan insisted on sealing the country, and had no rebellious heart towards Han.

古文：孝景四年，吴、楚已破，衡山王朝，上以为卢信，乃劳苦之曰： 南方卑湿。 
现代文：孝景四年，吴、楚七国被消灭，衡山王来朝见皇上，皇上认为他忠贞可信，慰劳他说： 南方低下而潮湿。 
English: In the fourth year of Xiao Jing, the seven kingdoms of Wu and Chu were annihilated. Hengshan Wang came to the imperial court to see the emperor. The emperor thought he was loyal and trustworthy, and consoled him by saying: Nanfang is low and damp.

古文：徙王王于济北以褒之。
现代文：于是迁衡山王在济北为王以褒奖他。
English: As a result, the king of Qianheng Mountain rewarded him with the title of king in Jibei.

古文：及薨，遂赐谥为贞王。
现代文：到死时，又赐给他谧号贞王。
English: After his death, he was given the title of Zhenwang.

古文：庐江王以边越，数使使相交，徙为衡山王，王江北。
现代文：庐江王地处与越相交接的边界处，多次派使者和越交往，后来改为衡山王，在江北地区称王。
English: The king of the Li River is located at the border where it meets the Yue River. He sent envoys to interact with the Yue River many times. Later, he changed his name to the King of Hengshan and became known as the king in the northern part of the river.

古文：淮南王安为人好书，鼓琴，不喜戈猎狗马驰骋，亦欲以行阴德拊循百姓，流名誉。
现代文：淮南王刘安爱好读书弹琴，不喜欢打猎、骑马驰骋，打算靠施行恩德来安抚百姓，留下好的名声。
English: Liu An, the king of Huainan, loved to read and play the piano, but disliked hunting and horse riding. He planned to appease the people and leave a good reputation by granting favors.

古文：招致宾客方术之士数千人，作为《内书》二十一篇，《外书》甚众，又有《中篇》八卷，言神仙黄白之术，亦二十余万言。
现代文：他招聚天下的宾客和游士数千人，编写《内书》二十一篇，《外书》更多，还有八卷《中篇》，谈论神仙炼丹技术的书也有二十多万字。
English: He gathered thousands of guests and wanderers from all over the world, compiled twenty-one "inner books," more "outer books," and eight volumes of "middle books," and there are more than two hundred thousand words in books that talk about the technology of Shenshen Refining.

古文：时武帝方好艺文，以安属为诸父，辩博善为文辞，甚尊重之。
现代文：当时武帝也爱好文学，因为刘安等人作为叔父，能言善辩，擅长文辞，皇上很尊重他。
English: At that time, Emperor Wu was also fond of literature, because Liu An and others, as his uncle, could speak well and were good at rhetoric. The emperor respected him very much.

古文：每为报书及赐，常召司马相如等视草乃遣。
现代文：每次给他写书信或有所赏赐，皇上常命司马相如等人先看草稿再誊写送去。
English: Every time he wrote a letter or received a reward, the emperor's eldest son, Sima Xiangru, and others first read the draft and then copied it and sent it.

古文：初，安入朝，献所作《内篇》，新出，上爱秘之。
现代文：起初，刘安入朝时，向皇上进献所著的《内篇》，因书为新作，皇上秘藏起来。
English: At first, when Liu An entered the imperial court, he presented to the emperor the "inner chapter" of his book. Since the book was a new work, the emperor kept it secret.

古文：使为《离骚传》，旦受诏，日食时上。
现代文：让他作《离骚传》，早上接到诏令，中午吃饭时就呈上交给皇上。
English: Let him make "The Tale of the Departed," receive the imperial decree in the morning, and present it to the emperor at lunchtime.

古文：又献《颂德》及《长安都国颂》。
现代文：又向皇上进献了《颂德》和《长安都国颂》。
English: He also presented "Ode to Virtue" and "Ode to the Capital of Chang'an" to the emperor.

古文：每宴见，谈说得失及方技赋颂，昏莫然后罢。
现代文：每次宴会拜见皇上，都谈论古今得失和方技、赋颂，一直谈到晚上才停止。
English: At every banquet where they met the emperor, they talked about the past, present, and future, and about techniques and eulogies, and only stopped talking about it in the evening.

古文：安初入朝，雅善太尉武安侯，武安侯迎之霸上，与语曰： 方今上无太子，王亲高皇帝孙，行仁义，天下莫不闻。
现代文：刘安刚进入朝廷，对太尉武安侯很友善，武安侯在霸上迎接他时对他说： 如今皇上没有太子，大王是高帝的亲孙子，行仁义，天下人没有不知道的。
English: As soon as Liu An entered the imperial court, he was very friendly to the captain Wu An Hou. When Wu An Hou greeted him at the top, he said to him: Today, the emperor has no prince, the great king is the grandchild of Emperor Gao, and there is no one in the world who does not know how to be benevolent and righteous.

古文：宫车一日晏驾，非王尚谁立者！ 
现代文：皇上一旦死了，除了你能立谁! 
English: Once the Emperor is dead, who will be left but you?

古文：淮南王大喜，厚遗武安侯宝赂。
现代文：淮南王心中大喜，于是赠给武安侯珠宝等物。
English: King Huainan was overjoyed, so he presented Wu'an with jewelry and other items.

古文：其群臣宾客，江淮间多轻薄，以厉王迁死感激安。
现代文：他的群臣宾客多是江淮一带轻浮刻薄之人，因为厉王迁徙而死，遂对刘安感激不已。
English: His group of guests were mostly frivolous and mean people from the Jianghuai region. As Li Wang died after migrating, he was very grateful to Liu An.

古文：建元六年，彗星见，淮南王心怪之。
现代文：建元六年，出现彗星，淮南王心裹觉得奇怪。
English: In the sixth year of Jianyuan, a comet appeared, and the king of Huainan had a strange feeling.

古文：或说王曰： 先吴军时，彗星出，长数尺，然尚流血千里。
现代文：有人对淮南王说： 早先吴王发兵时，出现彗星，长好几尺，于是发动征战，血流千里。
English: Someone said to King Huainan, "Earlier, when King Wu sent troops, a comet appeared, several feet long, so he launched a war, and blood flowed for thousands of miles.

古文：今彗星竟天，天下兵当大起。 
现代文：如今彗星长可竟天，天下要发生大的兵事。 
English: Now that the comet is so long, the world is going to have a big war.

古文：王心以为上无太子，天下有变，诸侯并争，愈益治攻战具，积金钱赂遗郡国。游士妄作妖言阿谀王，王喜，多赐予之。
现代文：淮南王认为皇上没有太子，天下一旦发生变乱，诸侯纷纷争夺，于是想增加军队装备，积累钱财贿赂其他郡国，游士胡言乱语奉承淮南王，使他心中高兴，便给他们许多赏赐。
English: King Huainan believed that the emperor did not have a prince, and once there was a turmoil in the world, the princes fought one after another, so he wanted to increase the military equipment, accumulate money and bribe other counties. The wanderers flattered King Huainan with nonsense, which made him happy, and he gave them many rewards.

古文：王有女陵，彗有口。
现代文：淮南王有女儿叫刘陵，性情聪慧而有口才。
English: King Huainan had a daughter named Liu Ling, who was intelligent and eloquent.

古文：王爱陵，多予金钱，为中诇长安，约结上左右。
现代文：淮南王很钟爱刘陵，给她许多钱，让她在长安暗中侦探，结识皇上的左右大臣。
English: King Huainan loved Liu Ling very much. He gave her a lot of money and let her be a secret detective in Chang'an and get to know the emperor's left and right ministers.

古文：元朔二年，上赐淮南王几杖，不朝。
现代文：元朔二年，皇上赐给淮南王几案与手杖，让他不用朝拜皇帝。
English: In the second year of the Yuan Shuo, the emperor gave King Huainan several cases and a cane, so that he did not have to bow to the emperor.

古文：后荼爱幸，生子迁为太子，取皇太后外孙修成君女为太子妃。
现代文：王后荼受宠幸，生儿子刘迁，立为王太子，娶皇太后的外孙修成君的女儿为太子妃。
English: The empress dowager was favored, and her son Liu Qian became the crown prince, while the daughter of the empress dowager's grandson, Xucheng Jun, became the crown princess.

古文：王谋为反具，畏太子妃知而内泄事，乃与太子谋，令诈不爱，三月不同席。
现代文：淮南王密谋反叛，害怕太子妃知道内情而泄露反叛之事，于是和太子策划，让他假装不爱她，三个月不同桌吃饭。
English: King Huainan plotted to rebel, fearing that the princess knew the inside story and would reveal the rebellion, so he plotted with the prince to pretend that he did not love her and eat at different tables for three months.

古文：王阳怒太子，闭使与妃同内，终不近妃。
现代文：淮南王假装对太子生气，把他和太子妃关在一起，但太子仍不接近太子妃。
English: King Huainan pretended to be angry with the prince and locked him up with the princess, but the prince still did not approach the princess.

古文：妃求去，王乃上书谢归之。
现代文：太子妃请求离开，淮南王于是上书向皇上谢罪并请求让她回去。
English: The crown princess asked to leave, and King Huainan wrote to the emperor to apologize and ask her to return.

古文：后荼、太子迁及女陵擅国权，夺民田宅，妄致系人。
现代文：王后荼、太子刘迁和女儿刘陵在国内独揽大权，夺取百姓田地、住宅，随意逮捕人。
English: Queen Dowager, Prince Liu Qian and his daughter Liu Ling monopolized power in the country, seized people's fields and houses, and arrested people at will.

古文：太子学用剑，自以为人莫及，闻郎中雷被巧，召与戏，被壹再辞让，误中太子。太子怒，被恐。
现代文：太子学习舞剑，自己认为没有人能超过他，听说郎中雷被善于舞剑，召来与自己比试。雷被一再退让，后误击中太子，太子大怒，雷被恐惧。
English: The prince was learning sword dancing, and he thought that no one could surpass him. He heard that his brother-in-law, Lei, was good at sword dancing and summoned him to compete with himself. Lei was repeatedly defeated, and then he hit the prince by mistake. The prince was furious, and Lei was afraid.

古文：此时有欲从军者辄诣长安，被即愿奋击匈奴。
现代文：这时恰巧有人愿意从军的可到长安，雷被随即要求去击匈奴。
English: At this time, someone who was willing to join the army happened to arrive in Chang'an, and Lei was immediately asked to fight the Xiongnu.

古文：太子数恶被，王使郎中令斥免，欲以禁后。
现代文：太子多次诋毁雷被，淮南王派郎中下令不准他去，以令后人不敢仿效他的样子。
English: The prince repeatedly slandered the thunder quilt, and Huainan Wangpailang ordered that he not be allowed to go, so that future generations would not dare to imitate his appearance.

古文：元朔五年，被遂亡之长安，上书自明。
现代文：元朔五年，雷被逃往长安，向皇上上书说明此事。
English: In the fifth year of the Yuan Shuo, Lei fled to Chang'an and sent a letter to the emperor to explain the matter.

古文：事下廷尉、河南。
现代文：事情由廷尉、河南县查办。
English: The case will be investigated by Henan County's imperial court magistrate.

古文：河南治，逮淮南太子，王、王后计欲毋遣太子，遂发兵。
现代文：河南令要逮捕淮南王的太子。淮南王、王后商量不使太子到河南，于是起兵反叛。
English: Henan ordered to arrest the prince of the king of Huainan. The king and queen of Huainan discussed not to send the prince to Henan, so they rebelled.

古文：计未定，犹与十余日。
现代文：计划还没制定好，犹豫了十多天。
English: The plan hasn't been worked out yet, and we've been hesitating for more than ten days.

古文：会有诏即讯太子。淮南相怒寿春丞留太子逮不遣，劾不敬。
现代文：这时皇上下诏在淮南审讯太子，淮南王的丞相对寿春丞顺了淮南王的意图对太子衹逮捕而未遣走，感到愤怒，于是弹劾寿春丞对皇上不敬。
English: At this time, the emperor issued an imperial edict to interrogate the prince in Huainan, and the emperor of Huainan obeyed the edict of the king of Huainan against Shuchun. The emperor was angered by the intention of the king of Huainan to arrest the prince but not to send him away, so he impeached Shuchun for disrespecting the emperor.

古文：王请相，相不听。
现代文：淮南王请求丞相相助，丞相不听。
English: King Huainan asked the prime minister for help, but the prime minister did not listen.

古文：王使人上书告相，事下廷尉治。
现代文：淮南王便派人向皇上上书告丞相，事情由廷尉查办。
English: King Huainan then sent someone to lodge a complaint against the minister of state, and the emperor handed the matter over to a courtier for trial.

古文：从迹连王，王使人候司。
现代文：审查时事情牵连到淮南王，淮南王派人入京师密切打听此事。
English: During the examination, the matter involved Huainan Wang. Huainan Wang sent someone to Beijing to investigate the matter closely.

古文：汉公卿请逮捕治王，王恐，欲发兵。
现代文：漠的公卿们请求皇上逮捕并惩治淮南王，淮南王恐惧，想发兵反叛。
English: The nobles in the desert asked the emperor to arrest and punish King Huainan. King Huainan was afraid and wanted to rebel.

古文：太子迁谋曰： 汉使即逮王，令人衣卫士衣，持戟居王旁，有非是者，即刺杀之，臣亦使人刺杀淮南中尉，乃举兵，未晚也。 
现代文：太子刘迁策划说： 汉派使者逮捕大王，我们可令人穿上卫士的衣服，持武器站在你身旁，发现坏人，就刺杀他。我也派人刺杀淮南中尉，再发兵也不晚呀。 
English: Prince Liu Qian planned to say: "If the Han Dynasty sends an envoy to arrest the great king, we can have someone dress up in the clothes of a guard, stand next to you with a weapon, and if we find a bad person, we will assassinate him. I also sent someone to assassinate Lieutenant Huainan, and it's not too late to send troops again."

古文：是时上不许公卿，而遣汉中尉宏即讯验王。王视汉中尉颜色和，问斥雷被事耳，自度无何，不发。
现代文：这时皇上没同意公卿的请求，而派遣汉的中尉宏就地审讯淮南王，淮南王见审讯者面色和缓，衹询问斥免雷被的事，自己推测没有什么危险，所以没有发兵。
English: At this time, the emperor did not agree to the nobleman's request, but sent Han's lieutenant Hong to interrogate King Huainan on the spot. When King Huainan saw the interrogator's face soften, he inquired about the banishment of the thunder quilt. He guessed that there was no danger, so he did not send troops.

古文：中尉还，以闻。
现代文：中尉回去后，报告皇上。
English: The lieutenant returned in the morning to report on the status of the inquiry.

古文：公卿治者曰： 淮南王安雍阏求奋击匈奴者雷被等，格明诏，当弃市。 
现代文：公卿们说： 淮南王刘安阻止要求去攻打匈奴的雷被，耽误诏令，应当斩首。 
English: The nobles said: Liu An, the king of Huainan, should be beheaded for delaying the imperial edict and blocking the request to attack the Xiongnu.

古文：诏不许。
现代文：皇上下诏不许。
English: The edict does not allow it.

古文：请废勿王，上不许。
现代文：公卿们又请求废除淮南王，皇上也不同意。
English: The court nobles also requested the abolition of King Huainan, but the emperor did not agree.

古文：请削五县，可二县。
现代文：请求削减封国的五个县，皇上许可削减二个县。
English: The request was to reduce the number of counties subject to imperial protection by five, and the emperor gave permission to reduce the number by two.

古文：使中尉宏赦其罪，罚以削地。
现代文：派中尉宏赦免他的罪，处以削减封地。
English: He sent Lieutenant Hong to pardon him and punish him by reducing his fief.

古文：中尉入淮南界，宣言赦王。
现代文：中尉进入淮南境内，宣布皇上赦免淮南王。
English: The lieutenant entered the Huainan border and announced the pardon of Huainan Wang.

古文：王初闻公卿请诛之，未知得削地，闻汉使来，恐其捕之，乃与太子谋如前计。
现代文：他起初听说公卿请求诛杀他，却不知衹削减封地，所以听到汉使者来到，害怕是来拘捕他的，于是和太子策划照以前的谋反之计行事。
English: At first, he heard that the nobles had requested to kill him, but he did not know that the fiefs had been reduced, so when he heard the Han envoys coming, he was afraid that they were coming to arrest him, so he and the prince planned to act according to the previous conspiracy.

古文：中尉至，即贺王，王以故不发。
现代文：中尉，就祝贺淮南王，淮南王因此而没发兵。
English: Lieutenant, just congratulate King Huainan, King Huainan did not send troops because of this.

古文：其后自伤曰： 吉行仁义见削地，寡人甚耻之。 
现代文：后来他伤心地说： 我实行仁义却被削减了封地，我感到很耻辱。 
English: Later, he said sadly, "I was humiliated when my fief was reduced for practicing benevolence and righteousness.

古文：为反谋益甚。
现代文：想造的欲望更加强烈。
English: The desire to create is even stronger.

古文：诸使者道长安来，为妄言，言上无男，即喜：言汉廷治，有男，即怒，以为妄言，非也。
现代文：各位使者从长安来，如轻狂地议论，说皇上没有儿子，他便很高兴。说朝廷得到治理，皇上有了儿子，他便发怒，认为是胡说，是不真实的。
English: The emissaries came from Chang'an and talked frivolously. They said that the emperor had no son, which made him happy. They said that the court had been reigned in and that the emperor had a son, which made him angry. He thought it was nonsense and untrue.

古文：日夜与左吴等按舆地图，部署兵所从入。
现代文：淮南王日夜和左吴等按照地形图，部署军队进攻路线。
English: Huainan Wang and Zuo Wu, day and night, deployed troops along the offensive route according to the topographical map.

古文：王曰： 上无太子，宫车即晏驾，大臣必征胶东王，不即常山王，诸侯并争，吾可以无备乎！
现代文：淮南王说： 皇上没有太子，皇上一旦死了，大臣必定会召胶柬王，或是常山王，诸侯纷纷争夺，我岂可以没有准备吗!
English: King Huainan said: The emperor has no crown prince. Once the emperor dies, the minister will certainly summon the King of Cambodia, or the King of Changshan. The princes will compete with each other. How can I not be prepared?

古文：且吾高帝孙，亲行仁义，陛下遇我厚，吾能忍之；万世之后，吾宁能北面事竖子乎！ 
现代文：而且我是高帝的孙子，实行仁义，陛下对我宽厚，我还可以忍受；皇上死后，我哪里能向北称臣呢! 
English: Moreover, I am the grandson of Emperor Gao, I practice benevolence and righteousness, His Majesty is generous to me, I can still endure; after the Emperor's death, where can I go to the north to be a minister!

古文：王有孽子不害，最长，王不爱，后、太子皆不以为子兄数。不害子建，材高有气，常怨望太子不省其父。
现代文：淮南王有庶子名叫不害，年龄最大，淮南王不喜欢他，王后不把他当作儿子，太子不把他当兄长，不害的儿子名建，有才能，有志气，经常埋怨太子不探望父亲。
English: King Huainan had an illegitimate son named Do Harm, who was the oldest. King Huainan did not like him. The queen did not consider him as a son. The prince did not consider him as an elder brother. Do Harm's son was famous, talented and ambitious. He often complained that the prince did not visit his father.

古文：时，诸侯皆得分子弟为侯，淮南王有两子，一子为太子，而建父不得为侯。
现代文：当时诸侯都已得到允许分封自己的子弟为侯，淮南王有两个儿子，一个儿子立为太子，而刘建的父亲不得立为侯。
English: At that time, all princes were allowed to appoint their sons as princes. King Huainan had two sons, one of whom was appointed as prince, while Liu Jian's father was not allowed to be appointed as prince.

古文：阴结交，欲害太子，以其父代之。
现代文：于是刘建暗自结交一些人，想谋害太子，而让他父亲代替为太子。
English: As a result, Liu Jianmen made friends with some people, wanted to assassinate the prince, and let his father replace him as the prince.

古文：太子知之，数捕系笞建。
现代文：太子知道后，多次逮捕并鞭打刘建。
English: After learning of this, the prince arrested and whipped Liu Jian several times.

古文：建具知太子之欲谋杀汉中尉，即使所善寿春严正上书天子曰： 毒药苦口利病，忠言逆耳利行。
现代文：刘建知道太子要杀害漠中尉的阴谋，便派好友寿春严正上书皇上说： 良药苦利于病，忠言逆耳利于行。
English: Liu Jian knew that the prince was plotting to kill Lieutenant Mo, so he sent his friend Shuchun Yan Zheng to write to the emperor, saying: "Good medicine is beneficial to the disease, and honest advice is beneficial to the practice."

古文：今淮南王孙建材能高，淮南王后荼、荼子迁常疾害建。
现代文：如今淮南王孙子刘建才能高，淮南王王后荼及荼的儿子刘迁便常常陷害他。
English: Nowadays, Liu Jian, the grandson of the King of Huainan, is highly talented. The Queen of Huainan and Liu Jian's son, Liu Qian, often set him up.

古文：建父不害无罪，擅数系，欲杀之。
现代文：刘建父亲不害无罪却多次擅遭关押，他们要杀他。
English: Liu Jian's father is innocent but has been arbitrarily detained many times. They want to kill him.

古文：今建在，可征问，具知淮南王阴事。 
现代文：如今刘建人在，陛下可亲自讯问，就知道淮南王的阴谋了。 
English: Now that Liu Jianren is here, His Majesty can personally interrogate him, and he will know about King Huainan's plot.

古文：书既闻，上以其事下廷尉、河南治。
现代文：皇上接到奏本后，把此事交给廷尉、河南令处理。
English: After the Emperor received the report, he handed the matter over to the Imperial Lieutenant and Henan Commander to deal with.

古文：是岁元朔六年也。
现代文：这是元朔六年的事。
English: This happened in the sixth year of Emperor Hanwu's reign.

古文：故辟阳侯孙审卿善丞相公孙弘，怨淮南厉王杀其大父，阴求淮南事而扌冓之于弘。
现代文：已故辟阳侯孙子审卿与丞相公孙弘要好，恨淮南厉王杀了他祖父，便暗中要求将淮南王案子交给公孙弘处理。
English: The late Gui Yang Hou, Sun Tzu's procurator and the prime minister, Sun Hong, hated Huainan Li Wang for killing his grandfather, and secretly demanded that the case of Huainan Wang be handed over to Sun Hong.

古文：弘乃疑淮南有畔逆计，深探其狱。
现代文：公孙弘怀疑淮南王有谋反阴谋，便深加追究此案。
English: Gongsun Hong suspected Huainan Wang of plotting a counter-plot and investigated the case further.

古文：河南治建，辞引太子及党与。
现代文：河南令讯问刘建后，刘建供出了太子及其党羽。
English: After Henan ordered to interrogate Liu Jian, Liu Jian provided the crown prince and his party members.

古文：初，王数以举兵谋问伍被，被常谏之，以吴、楚七国为效。
现代文：起初，淮南王曾将起兵的事与伍被商量，伍被常劝他，以吴、楚七国之乱为戒。
English: At first, King Huainan had discussed the matter of raising an army with Emperor Wu, who often advised him to take the Seven Kingdoms of Wu and Chu as a warning.

古文：王引陈胜、吴广，被复言形势不同，必败亡。
现代文：淮南王则引证陈胜、吴广起兵成功的事例反驳。伍被回答说形势不同了，现在起兵必然会失败。
English: Huainan Wang countered by citing Chen Sheng and Wu Guang's successful cases of raising an army. Wu was answered that the situation was different, and now raising an army would inevitably fail.

古文：及建见治，王恐国阴事泄，欲发，复问被，被为言发兵权变。语在《被传》。
现代文：等到刘建被问罪时，淮南王怕阴谋败露，就想起兵，又征询伍被的意见。伍被说可发兵，但要看形势，这话记在《伍被传》中。
English: When Liu Jian was asked about the crime, King Huainan was afraid that the conspiracy would be exposed, so he thought of the soldiers and asked the opinion of Wu Xuan. Wu Xuan said that he could send troops, but it would depend on the situation, this is recorded in "Wu Xuan Biography."

古文：于是王锐欲发，乃令官奴入宫中，作皇帝玺，丞相、御史大夫、将军、吏中二千石、都官令、丞印，及旁近郡太守、都尉印，汉使节法冠。
现代文：于是淮南王锐意待发，令官奴到宫中刻皇帝玉玺，并刻丞相、御史大夫、将军、吏中二千石、都官令、丞大印，及邻近郡太守，都尉大印，又做汉朝使节用的官帽。
English: As a result, King Rui of Huainan was ready to go, and ordered his servants to go to the palace to engrave the emperor's jade seal, and to engrave the chancellor, the chief historian, the general, the officials of 2,000 koku, the governor of the capital, the chancellor's seal, and the governor of the neighboring county, the governor's seal, and to make the official cap for the envoys of the Han Dynasty.

古文：欲如伍被计，使人为得罪而西，事大将军、丞相；一日发兵，即刺大将军卫青，而说丞相弘下之，如发蒙耳。
现代文：按照伍被的计策，淮南王打算派人假装畏罪潜逃到长安，侍奉大将军和丞相；一旦起兵时，就先刺杀大将军卫青，然后说服丞相公孙弘，当易如反掌。
English: According to Wubing's strategy, King Huainan planned to send someone to pretend to be afraid of crime and abscond to Chang'an to serve the general and the prime minister; once the army was raised, he would first assassinate the general Wei Qing, and then convince the prime minister Sun Hong.

古文：欲发国中兵，恐相、二千石不听，王乃与伍被谋，为失火宫中，相、二千石救火，因杀之。
现代文：淮南王打算调动国中的士兵，怕丞相？二千石不听，就和伍被密谋，在宫中放火假装失火，等丞相、二千石去救火，就杀掉他们。
English: King Huainan planned to mobilize the soldiers of the country, afraid of the chancellor? Two thousand koku did not listen, so he and Wu were conspired to set fire in the palace to pretend a fire, and wait for the chancellor and two thousand koku to fight the fire, then kill them.

古文：又欲令人衣求盗衣，持羽檄从南方来，呼言曰 南越兵入 ，欲因以发兵。
现代文：淮南王还打算派人假装捕人的差役，拿着紧急军事文书从南方奔来，大喊 南越发兵来攻了 ，然后顺势起兵。
English: King Huainan also planned to send someone pretending to be a police officer to capture people, rushing from the south with urgent military documents, shouting that South Vietnam had sent troops to attack, and then taking up arms.

古文：乃使人之庐江、会稽为求盗，未决。
现代文：于是派人去庐江、会稽当捕人的差役，但没最后定下来。
English: So they sent someone to the Lijiang River to act as an arresting officer, but nothing was finalized.

古文：廷尉以建辞连太子迁闻，上遣廷尉监与淮南中尉逮捕太子。
现代文：廷尉把刘建供及太子刘迁的事上奏，皇上派廷尉监与淮南中尉去逮捕太子。
English: The imperial lieutenant reported the matter of Liu Jianfu and Prince Liu Qian, and the emperor sent the imperial lieutenant and Lieutenant Huainan to arrest the prince.

古文：至，淮南王闻，与太子谋召相、二千石，欲杀而发兵。
现代文：他们到淮南时，淮南王听说了，就与太子密谋，召来丞相、二千石，想杀了他们后就起兵。
English: When they arrived in Huainan, the king of Huainan heard about it and conspired with the crown prince. He summoned the prime minister and 2,000 soldiers, and wanted to kill them, and then raised an army.

古文：召相，相至；内史以出为解。
现代文：召丞相，丞相来了，内史却推辞未来。
English: Invited to the imperial court, the imperial court official came; Naishi was able to escape because he went out.

古文：中尉曰： 臣受诏使，不得见王。 
现代文：中尉说： 我有皇上差遣。不能来见大王。 
English: The lieutenant said: "The vassal is receiving an envoy sent by the emperor and cannot come to see the king.

古文：王念独杀相而内史、中尉不来，无益也，即罢相。
现代文：淮南王想衹杀丞相而内史、中尉未来，没什么意义，就命丞相回去了。
English: Huainan Wang wanted to kill the prime minister, but the internal history and the future of the lieutenant were meaningless, so he ordered the prime minister to go back.

古文：计犹与未决。太子念所坐者谋杀汉中尉，所与谋杀者已死，以为口绝，及谓王曰： 群臣可用者皆前系，今无足与举事者。
现代文：正在犹豫不决的时候，太子认为他们所犯的罪不过是谋杀汉朝中尉，而参与谋杀的人都已死了，没有人证，于是就对淮南王说： 群臣中有用的都给抓了，现在能帮助起事的都没了。
English: While hesitating, the prince thought that the crime they had committed was nothing more than the murder of a lieutenant of the Han Dynasty, and the people involved in the murder were dead and had no identification, so he said to King Huainan: All the useful ones among the ministers have been arrested, and now there is no one who can help start the trouble.

古文：王以非时发，恐无功，臣愿会逮。 
现代文：大王在此不适当时机起兵，恐怕难以成功，不如让他们将我逮捕。 
English: If the king does not take the opportunity to raise an army here, I am afraid it will be difficult to succeed, it is better to let them arrest me.

古文：王亦愈欲休，即许太子。
现代文：淮南王也越来越不想动手了，就同意了太子的要求。
English: Huainan Wang also increasingly did not want to do anything, so he agreed to the prince's request.

古文：太子自刑，不殊。
现代文：太子自杀，但没死。
English: The prince committed suicide, but he didn't die.

古文：伍被自诣吏，具告与淮南王谋反。
现代文：伍被前去自首，供出与淮南王谋反事宜。
English: Wu was forced to turn himself in and confessed to conspiring with Huainan Wang.

古文：吏因捕太子、王后，围王宫，尽捕王宾客在国中者，索得反具以闻。
现代文：汉朝官吏于是逮捕了太子、王后，围住了王宫，把淮南王的宾客全部抓走，抄出了谋反所用的器物，上奏皇上。
English: The officials of the Han Dynasty then arrested the prince and the queen, surrounded the royal palace, seized all the guests of King Huainan, copied out the utensils used for plotting rebellion, and presented them to the emperor.

古文：上下公卿治，所连引与淮南王谋反列侯、二千石、豪桀数千人，皆以罪轻重受诛。
现代文：皇上派公卿查办，与淮南王谋反有牵连的列侯、二干石、豪杰有数千人，都根据罪行轻重受到了制裁。
English: The emperor sent court nobles to investigate the case, and thousands of lords, noblemen, and heroes who were implicated in conspiring with Huainan Wang were sanctioned according to the severity of the crime.

古文：衡山王赐，淮南王弟，当坐收。
现代文：衡山王型盟，淮南王型宣的弟弟，应当被逮捕。
English: Hengshan Wang Jia Meng, the younger brother of Huainan Wang Jia Xuan, should be arrested.

古文：有司请逮捕衡山王，上曰： 诸侯各以其国为本，不当相坐。
现代文：有司要求逮捕衡山王，皇上说： 诸侯各自分封治国，不应株连。
English: Some officials demanded the arrest of King Hengshan, and the emperor said, "Lords should rule the country independently, and should not form a company."

古文：与诸侯王列侯议。 
现代文：请与诸侯王、列侯讨论商议。 
English: Please discuss and negotiate with the princes and vassals.

古文：赵王彭祖、列侯让等四十三人皆曰： 淮南王安大逆无道，谋反明白，当伏诛。 
现代文：叠丝堑担、列侯让等四十三人都说： 进南王刘安大逆不道，谋反之事罪证确凿，理当问斩。 
English: The forty-three people, including the superintendent of silk and the vassal, said: Liu An, the king of the south, committed high treason, and the evidence of the crime of plotting treason was conclusive, and it was reasonable to ask him to be beheaded.

古文：胶西王端议曰： 安废法度，行邪辟，有诈伪心，以乱天下，营惑百姓，背畔宗庙，妄作妖言。《春秋》曰 臣毋将，将而诛 。
现代文：胶西王刘端说： 刘安无法无天，不走正道，心怀叵测，准备扰乱天下，惑乱百姓，背叛祖宗，妖言惑众。《春秋》云： 臣毋将，将而诛。 
English: King Liu Duan of Jiaoxi said: Liu An is lawless, does not follow the right path, has illusions in his heart, is ready to disrupt the world, confuse the people, betray the ancestors, and seduce the masses with magic.

古文：安罪重于将，谋反形已定。
现代文：刘安罪行不是刚刚萌发，谋反已是事实。
English: Liu An's crime did not just sprout, the conspiracy is already a fact.

古文：臣端所见其书印图及它逆亡道事验明白，当伏法。
现代文：据我看来，将他的反叛用具验明之后，即可将之正法。
English: As far as I'm concerned, once we've identified his tools of rebellion, we can set them right.

古文：论国吏二百石以上及比者，宗室近幸臣不在法中者，不能相教，皆当免，削爵为士伍，毋得官为吏。
现代文：淮南国二百石以上官吏及与此俸禄相当者，以及王家宠臣，虽没有反叛事实，但没有辅助好淮南王，都应免职，可削其爵位为平民，不让他们再做官吏。
English: The officials of more than 200 koku of Huainan Province and those who are equivalent to this salary, as well as the royal favorites, although there is no fact of rebellion, but did not assist the king of Huainan, should be dismissed, and their titles can be reduced to civilians, and they should not be allowed to be officials again.

古文：其非吏，它赎死金二斤八两，以章安之罪，使天下明知臣子之道，毋敢复有邪僻背畔之意。 
现代文：其他不是官吏的人每人交赎死罪黄金二斤八两，这样就可以公布刘安罪行，使天下人都明白为臣之道，不敢再有坏心，反叛朝廷。 
English: Other people who were not government officials each had to pay two jin and eight taels of gold to atone for the crime of death, so that Liu An's crime could be made public, so that everyone in the world would understand how to be a vassal and would no longer dare to have a bad heart and rebel against the imperial court.

古文：丞相弘、廷尉汤等以闻，上使宗正以符节治王。
现代文：丞相公孙弘、廷尉汤等将诸王意见上奏，皇上派宗正奉旨去治罪于刘安。
English: The imperial minister Sun Hong and the courtier Tang reported the opinion of the kings, and the emperor sent Zong Zheng to punish Liu An.

古文：未至，安自刑杀。
现代文：宗正还未到达，刘安就自杀了。
English: Before Zong Zheng arrived, Liu An committed suicide.

古文：后、太子诸所与谋皆收夷。
现代文：王后、太子等涉及谋反的人都被正法。
English: The queen, the prince and others involved in plotting the rebellion were all punished.

古文：国除为九江郡。
现代文：淮南国被废除，改为九江郡。
English: Huainan Province was abolished and became Jiujiang County.

古文：衡山王赐后乘舒生子三人，长男爽为太子，次女无采，少男孝。
现代文：衡山王刘赐的王后乘舒生了三个儿女：长子刘爽是太子，次女刘无采，少子刘孝。
English: Hengshan King Liu Zi's queen, Rong Shu, gave birth to three children: the eldest son, Liu Shuang, was crown prince, the second daughter, Liu Muzhe, and the youngest son, Liu Xiao.

古文：姬徐来生子男女四人，美人厥姬生子二人。
现代文：宠姬徐来生了四个儿女，美人厥姬生子女两个。
English: The favorite princess Xu Lai gave birth to four children, and the beauty Jue Ji gave birth to two children.

古文：淮南、衡山相责望礼节，间不相能。
现代文：淮南王、衡山王相互指责抱怨，一直矛盾不断。
English: Huainan Wang and Hengshan Wang have been accusing and complaining against each other, and have been in constant conflict.

古文：衡山王闻淮南王作为畔逆具，亦心结宾客以应之，恐为所并。元光六年入朝，谒者卫庆有方术，欲上书事天子，王怒，故劾庆死罪，强榜服之。
现代文：衡山王风闻淮南王准备谋反所用的器物，也暗中招贤准备对付之，以防为他所吞并元光六年衡山王入京朝拜，谒者卫庆懂法术，想上书去为天子服务。衡山王发怒了，就弹劾卫庆犯有死罪，并刑讯逼供，让他承认有死罪。
English: The King of Hengshan heard about the wares used by the King of Huainan who was preparing to rebel, and secretly recruited sages to prepare to deal with it, in order to prevent him from annexing Yuan Guang. In the sixth year of Hengshan's reign, the King of Hengshan went to Beijing to worship, and the eunuch Wei Qing understood magic and wanted to write a book to serve the Son of Heaven. The King of Hengshan was angry, and he impeached Wei Qing for committing a capital crime, and forced him to confess by torture.

古文：内史以为非是，却其狱。
现代文：内史认为此案不实，就退了下来。
English: Internal history considered the case to be untrue and withdrew.

古文：王使人上书告内史，内史治，言王不直。又数侵夺人田，坏人冢以为田。
现代文：衡山王便派人上书告内史，内史被讯问时，指出衡山王不正直，又多次侵夺别人的田地，把别人的坟地平作田地。
English: King Hengshan then sent someone to report to the Inner History. When the Inner History was interrogated, it was pointed out that King Hengshan was not honest, and that he had repeatedly seized other people's fields and turned other people's graves into fields.

古文：有司请逮治衡山王，上不许，为置吏二百石以上。
现代文：有司要求逮捕衡山王治罪，皇上不允许，衹把衡山王二百石以上的官吏任用权剥夺。
English: A magistrate demanded the arrest of Hengshan Wang to punish the crime, but the emperor did not allow it, and deprived Hengshan Wang of the right to appoint officials with more than 200 koku.

古文：衡山王以此恚，与奚慈、张广昌谋，求能为兵法候星气者，日夜纵臾王谋反事。
现代文：衡山王因此很不满，与奚慈、张广昌密谋，寻找会用兵占星的人，日夜策划谋反之事。
English: King Hengshan was very dissatisfied with this, and he plotted with Gong Ci and Zhang Guangchang to find someone who could use soldiers to tell the stars, and he plotted the rebellion day and night.

古文：后乘舒死，立徐来为后，厥姬俱幸。
现代文：王后乘舒死后，衡山王立徐来为王后，厥姬也受到宠幸。
English: After the death of Queen Jingshu, Hengshan King appointed Xu Lai as queen, and Jue Ji was also favored.

古文：两人相妒。厥姬乃恶徐来于太子，曰： 徐来使婢蛊杀太子母。 
现代文：徐来与厥姬相互妒忌，厥姬在太子面前诽谤徐来说： 徐来派奴婢用巫蛊的方法杀了太子母亲。 
English: Xu Lai and Jue Ji were jealous of each other. Jue Ji slandered Xu in front of the prince, saying: Xu Lai sent slaves to kill the prince's mother by witchcraft.

古文：太子心怨徐来。
现代文：太子怨恨徐来。
English: From then on, resentment slowly grew in the prince's heart.

古文：徐来兄至衡山，太子与饮，以刃刑伤之。
现代文：徐来的哥哥来衡山，太子与他一起喝酒，用刀砍伤了他。
English: Xu Lai's brother came to Hengshan, the prince drank with him and slashed him with a knife.

古文：后以此怨太子，数恶之于王。
现代文：王后因此恨太子，就在衡山王面前诋毁太子。
English: As a result, the queen hated the prince and slandered him in front of King Hengshan.

古文：女弟无采嫁，弃归，与客奸。
现代文：太子妹妹无采嫁出后，被丈夫休回，就与客人通奸。
English: After the prince's unmarried sister was divorced by her husband, she committed adultery with a guest.

古文：太子数以数让之，无采怒，不与太子通。
现代文：太子多次责备她，她不高兴，就不与太子来往了。
English: The prince rebuked her many times, and when she was displeased, she stopped seeing him.

古文：后闻之，即善遇无采及孝。
现代文：王后听说后，就笼络无采与刘孝。
English: When the queen heard of this, she became infatuated with Liu Xiao.

古文：孝少失母，附后，后以计爱之，与共毁太子，王以故数系笞太子。
现代文：刘孝从小失去母亲，跟王后长大，王后因有图谋而宠爱他。刘孝与王后一起到衡山王面前诋毁太子，衡山王因此多次鞭打太子。
English: Liu Xiao lost his mother at a young age and grew up with the queen, who loved him for his scheming. Liu Xiao and the queen went to Hengshan to defame the prince in front of the king, who whipped the prince several times.

古文：元朔四年中，人有贼伤后假母者，王疑太子使人伤之，笞太子。
现代文：元朔四年期间，有人打伤了王后的继母，衡山王怀疑是太子派人干的，就鞭打他。
English: During the first four years of the Yuan Dynasty, someone injured the queen's stepmother. King Hengshan suspected that the prince had sent someone to do it, so he whipped him.

古文：后王病，太子时称病不侍。
现代文：后来衡山王卧病时，太子就说自己也有病而不去伺候。
English: Later, when Hengshan Wang was ill, the prince said that he was also ill and did not attend.

古文：孝、无采恶太子： 实不病，自言，有喜色。 王于是大怒，欲废太子而立弟孝。
现代文：刘孝、刘无采一起诋毁太子说： 他其实没病，这是他自己说的，说的时候还很高兴。 衡山王因此大怒，想废除太子而立他弟弟刘孝。
English: Liu Xiao and Liu Muzhei together slandered the prince, saying, "He is actually not ill, he said this himself, and he was still happy when he said it." King Hengshan was so angry that he wanted to abolish the prince and set up his brother Liu Xiao.

古文：后知王决废太子，又欲并废孝。
现代文：王后了解到衡山王决心废除太子后，又想让他一块儿废掉刘孝。
English: After the queen learned that Hengshan Wang was determined to abolish the prince, she also wanted him to abolish Liu Xiao together.

古文：后有侍者善舞，王幸之，后欲令与孝乱以污之，欲并废二子而以己子广代之。
现代文：王后有一个侍者擅长跳舞，衡山王宠幸过她。王后想派该侍者去和刘孝淫乱，让刘孝担此罪名后，同时废了他兄弟俩，以便让自己的儿子刘广取而代之。
English: The queen had a waiter who was good at dancing, and Hengshan Wang's favorite was her. The queen wanted to send the waiter to have an affair with Liu Xiao, and after making Liu Xiao take the blame, she dismissed both of his brothers at the same time so that her son Liu Guang could take his place.

古文：太子知之，念后数恶己无已时，欲与乱以止其口。
现代文：太子知道后，恨王后多次害自己，且无止境，就也想以淫乱罪名堵她的嘴。
English: After the prince found out, he hated the queen for repeatedly harming herself, and wanted to gag her with the charge of adultery.

古文：后饮太子，太子前为寿，因据后股求与卧。
现代文：王后请太子喝酒，太子上前祝寿时，抱住她的大腿而请求与她睡觉。
English: The queen invited the prince to drink, and when the prince came forward to wish her a happy birthday, he hugged her thigh and asked to sleep with her.

古文：后怒，以告王。
现代文：王后大怒，就告诉了衡山王。
English: The queen was furious and told King Hengshan.

古文：王乃召，欲缚笞之。
现代文：衡山王把太子召来，想绑上鞭打一顿。
English: Hengshan Wang summoned the prince and wanted to tie him up and whip him.

古文：太子知王常欲废己而立孝，乃谓王曰： 孝与王御者奸，无采与奴奸，王强食，请上书。 
现代文：太子知道大王常想废自己而立刘孝为太子，就告诉衡山王说： 刘孝与大王的侍者奸淫，无采与奴仆奸淫，大王请注意饮食，我要去告皇上。 
English: The prince knew that the great king often wanted to abolish himself and make Liu Xiao the prince, so he told Hengshan Wang: Liu Xiao and the great king's waiter committed adultery, Wu Zhe and the servant committed adultery, the great king please pay attention to the diet, I want to report to the emperor.

古文：即背王去。王使人止之，莫能禁，王乃自追捕太子。
现代文：随即转身离去，衡山王派人拦也拦不住，就自己追上去抓住他。
English: Then he turned around and left. Hengshan Wang couldn't even send someone to stop him, so he chased after him and caught him.

古文：太子妄恶言，王械系宫中。
现代文：太子胡言乱语，衡山王因此把他关在宫中。
English: The prince spoke gibberish, so King Hengshan locked him up in the palace.

古文：孝日益以亲幸。
现代文：刘孝越来越讨衡山王喜欢。
English: Liu Xiao likes Hengshan Wang more and more.

古文：王奇孝材能，乃佩之王印，号曰将军，令居外家，多给金钱；招致宾客。
现代文：衡山王看重他的才能，就给他戴上王印，封为将军，让他住到外祖父家，给他很多钱，以招贤纳士。
English: King Hengshan valued his talent, so he put the royal seal on him, made him a general, let him live at his grandfather's house, and gave him a lot of money to recruit scholars.

古文：宾客来者，微知淮南、衡山有逆计，皆将养劝之。
现代文：投奔来的宾客中有人稍微知道一点淮南王、衡山王谋反之意，就顺势劝说起来。
English: Among the guests who rushed in, some people knew a little about the countermeasures of King Huainan and King Hengshan, and persuaded them accordingly.

古文：王乃使孝客江都人枚赫、陈喜作輣车锻矢，刻天子玺，将、相、军吏印。
现代文：衡山王于是派刘孝的客人江都人枚赫、陈喜作战车弓矢，刻天子玉玺及将军、丞相、军官大印。
English: King Hengshan then sent Liu Xiao's guests, the Jiangdu people Mihai He and Chen Xi, a war chariot with a bow and arrow, and engraved the Heavenly Child's Jade Urn and the general, prime minister, and officer's seal.

古文：王日夜求壮士如周丘等，数称引吴、楚反时计画约束。
现代文：衡山王夜招募像周丘等人一样的壮士，多次谈到吴、楚反叛时所用的计策。
English: Hengshan Wangye recruited strong men like Zhou Qiu and others, and repeatedly talked about the tactics used by Wu and Chu when they rebelled.

古文：衡山王非敢效淮南王求即天子位，畏淮南起并其国，以为淮南已西，发兵定江淮间而有之，望如是。
现代文：衡山王不敢像淮南王那样想登上皇帝位子，衹是怕淮南王起兵后吞并自己的王国，认为淮南王发兵西进后，自己就可能发兵占领江淮一带，衹指望如此。
English: King Hengshan did not dare to want to ascend to the emperor's throne like King Huainan. He was afraid that King Huainan would annex his kingdom after raising an army. He thought that after King Huainan sent an army to the west, he could send an army to occupy the Jianghuai area. He hoped so.

古文：元朔五年秋，当朝，六年，过淮南。
现代文：元朔五年秋天，衡山王应当进京朝拜。元朔六年，衡山王路过淮南。
English: In the autumn of the fifth year of the Yuan Shao, Hengshan Wang should enter Beijing to worship. In the sixth year of the Yuan Shao, Hengshan Wang passed Huainan.

古文：淮南王乃昆弟语，除前隙，约束反具。
现代文：淮南王就叙起兄弟深情，双方摒弃前隙，相约共同谋反。
English: King Huainan described the brothers as affectionate, and the two sides abandoned the gap and agreed to conspire together.

古文：衡山王即上书谢病，上赐不朝。
现代文：衡山王随即上书称自己有病，皇上同意他不来朝拜。
English: King Hengshan immediately sent a letter saying that he was ill, and the emperor agreed that he would not come to pay homage.

古文：乃使人上书请废太子爽，立孝为太子。
现代文：衡山王又派人上书要求废除太子刘爽，立刘孝为太广。
English: King Hengshan also sent people to submit a letter demanding the abolition of Prince Liu Shuang and the establishment of Liu Xiao as a too broad.

古文：爽闻，即使所善白嬴之长安上书，言衡山王与子谋逆，言孝作兵车锻矢，与王御者奸。
现代文：刘爽听说后，马上派好友白赢到长安上书，说衡山王与儿子一起要谋反，刘孝已造兵车弓矢，刘孝还和衡山王的侍者通奸。
English: After hearing this, Liu Shuang immediately sent his friend Bai Win to Chang'an to write a letter, saying that Hengshan Wang and his son were planning to rebel together, Liu Xiao had built a chariot and bow and arrow, and Liu Xiao had also committed adultery with Hengshan Wang's waiter.

古文：至长安未及上书，即吏捕赢，以淮南事系。
现代文：白赢到长安还没来得及上书就被捕了，因他涉嫌淮南王案子。
English: Bai Win was arrested in Chang'an before he could submit his report, because he was suspected of being involved in the Huainan Wang case.

古文：王闻之，恐其言国阴事，即上书告太子，以为不道。
现代文：衡王听说后，怕他泄露其秘密，便上书告太子大逆不道。
English: After hearing this, Heng Wang, fearing that he would reveal his secret, wrote a letter to the crown prince accusing him of high treason.

古文：事下沛郡治。
现代文：此案交由沛郡审理。
English: The case was referred to Pei County for trial.

古文：元狩元年冬，有司求捕与淮南王谋反者，得陈喜于孝家。
现代文：元狩元年冬天，有司请求逮捕与淮南王谋反有关的人，在刘孝家抓到了陈喜。
English: In the winter of the first year of the Yuan Dynasty, Chen Xi was arrested at Liu Xiao's home after a division requested the arrest of a person related to Huainan Wang's rebellion.

古文：吏劾孝首匿喜。
现代文：官吏弹劾刘孝窝藏陈喜。
English: Officials accused Liu Xiao of leading the effort to hide Chen Xi.

古文：孝以为陈喜雅数与王计反，恐其发之，闻律先自告除其罪，又疑太子使白嬴上书发其事，即先自告所与谋反者枚赫、陈喜等。
现代文：刘孝认为陈喜过去多次与衡山王讨论谋反事宜，怕他揭发，听说法律规定首先自首的人可以免于罪刑，又怀疑太子派白赢上书揭发了他的事情，便抢先自首交待出参与谋反的枚赫、陈喜等人。
English: Liu Xiao thought that Chen Xi had discussed the plot with Hengshan Wang many times in the past, and was afraid that he would expose it. He had heard that the law stipulated that the first person to turn himself in would be exempt from criminal punishment. He also suspected that the prince had sent Bai Ying to write a letter to expose his affair, so he preemptively turned himself in and handed over to Hebei, Chen Xi and others who had participated in the plot.

古文：廷尉治，事验，请逮捕衡山王治。
现代文：廷尉审讯后发现证据确凿，便要求逮捕衡山王治罪。
English: After the interrogation, the court official found that the evidence was conclusive and demanded the arrest of Hengshan Wang to punish the crime.

古文：上曰： 勿捕。 
现代文：皇卜说： 不要抓。 
English: The emperor said, "Don't catch it."

古文：遣中尉安、大行息即问王，王具以情实对。
现代文：派中尉安、大行息去审问衡山王，衡山王如实招供了。
English: He dispatched Lieutenant Sima An and Grand Marshal Li Xi to Hengshan Province to inquire about Hengshan Wang on the spot, and Hengshan Wang answered truthfully.

古文：吏皆围王宫守之。
现代文：官吏围住了王宫并守在那里。
English: The officials surrounded the royal palace and guarded it.

古文：中尉、大行还，以闻。
现代文：中尉、大行回京奏明皇上。
English: Lieutenant, Daigyo returns to Kyoto to report to Emperor Ming.

古文：公卿请遣宗正、大行与沛郡杂治王。
现代文：公卿要求派宗正、大行与沛郡郡守一起查办衡山王。
English: The court noble requested that Muneyoshi and Daigyo be sent to investigate Hengshan Wang together with the governor of Pei County.

古文：王闻，即自杀。
现代文：衡山王听说后，就自杀了。
English: When Hengshan Wang heard about this, he committed suicide.

古文：孝先自告反，告除其罪。
现代文：刘孝因为自首谋反之事，免除了反叛罪。
English: Liu Xiao was exempted from the crime of rebellion because he turned himself in.

古文：孝坐与王御婢奸，乃后徐来坐蛊前后乘舒，及太子爽坐告王父不孝，皆弃市。
现代文：刘孝因与衡山王婢女通奸，王后徐来因害死前王后乘舒，太子刘爽因告王父为不孝，都被斩首示众。
English: Liu Xiao was beheaded for adultery with the maidservant of King Hengshan, Queen Xu Lai was beheaded for killing the former Queen Jingshu, and Prince Liu Shuang was beheaded for accusing his father of being unfilial.

古文：诸坐与王谋反者皆诛。
现代文：其他与衡山王一起谋反的人都被正法。
English: The others who plotted the rebellion with Hengshan Wang were all punished.

古文：国除为郡。
现代文：该王国被废为郡。
English: The kingdom was abolished as a county.

古文：济北贞王勃者，景帝四年徙。
现代文：济北贞王刘勃，在景帝四年时迁徙。
English: Liu Bo, the King of North Jeju Province, migrated when King Gyeonggi was four years old.

古文：徙二年，因前王衡山，凡十四年薨。
现代文：迁徙后两年，加上以前作衡山王的时间，他在位十四年后去世。
English: Two years after the migration, plus the time he spent as Hengshan King, he died after fourteen years on the throne.

古文：子式王胡嗣，五十四年薨。
现代文：他儿子式王刘胡继位，五十四年后去世。
English: He was succeeded by his son Shih Wang Liu Hu, who died 54 years later.

古文：子宽嗣。
现代文：刘胡儿子刘宽继位。
English: Liu Hu's son Liu Guang succeeded him.

古文：十二年，宽坐与父式王后光、姬孝儿奸，悖人伦，又祠祭祝诅上，有司请诛。
现代文：刘宽在位十二年时。因为与其父式王的王后光及妃子孝儿通奸，有悖人伦，又在祭祀中咒骂皇上，有司要求将他正法。
English: In the twelfth year of Liu Kuan's reign, because he had committed adultery with his father, Emperor Shihong's Empress Dowager and Prince Consort, which was against human morality, and had also cursed the emperor during a religious service, a priest demanded that he be corrected.

古文：上遣大鸿胪利召王，王以刃自刭死。
现代文：皇上派大鸿胪利召刘宽进京，刘宽用刀自到而死。
English: The emperor sent the Great Magus to summon Liu Guang to Beijing. Liu Guang used a sword to kill himself.

古文：国除为北安县，属泰山郡。
现代文：王国被废为北安县，归属泰山郡。
English: The kingdom was abolished as Beian County and became part of Taishan County.

古文：赞曰：《诗》云 戎狄是膺，荆舒是惩 ，信哉是言也！
现代文：赞曰：《诗》云： 毖达是膺，荆舒是惩， 此言千真万确!
English: Praise: "Poetry" cloud: 达 is, 荆舒 is惩, this saying is very true!

古文：淮南、衡山亲为骨肉，疆土千里，列在诸侯，不务遵蕃臣职，以丞辅天子，而剸怀邪辟之计，谋为畔逆，仍父子再亡国，各不终其身。
现代文：进直王、衡山王都是皇上亲骨肉，疆土千里，列为诸侯，却不守藩臣之道，辅佐皇上，而专门心怀叵测，蓄意谋反，父子两辈都亡国，部未得好死。
English: Both King Jinzhi and King Hengshan were close relatives of the emperor, with thousands of miles of territory, and were ranked as princes, but they did not follow the way of the vassals of the domain and assisted the emperor, but they were dedicated to miscalculation and deliberately plotted rebellion. Both generations of father and son lost their country, and died prematurely.

古文：此非独王也，亦其俗薄，臣下渐靡使然。
现代文：这不但是他们为王品质不佳，也是他们王国风气粗俗，他们的臣子随波逐流，才导致这种；腺剧。
English: It's not just the poor quality of their kings, it's also the vulgarity of their kingdoms, their courtiers drifting with the tide, that has led to this; glandular drama.

古文：夫荆楚剽轻，好作乱，乃自古记之矣。
现代文：荆楚地方的人一向膏欢犯上作乱，这自古就有记载了。
English: It has been recorded since ancient times that the people of Jingchu have always instigated disturbances to celebrate crimes.

