古文：凡物之精，此则为生。
现代文：物的精气，结合起来就有生机。
English: The essence of things, when combined, gives rise to life.

古文：下生五谷，上为列星。
现代文：在下就产生地上的五谷，在上就是天体的群星。
English: Below, the grain of the earth is produced, and above, the stars of the heavens.

古文：流于天地之间，谓之鬼神；藏于胸中，谓之圣人。
现代文：流动在大地之间的叫作鬼神，藏在人的心里就成为圣人。
English: Flowing between the earth are called ghosts and gods, and hidden in the human heart they become saints.

古文：是故民气，杲乎如登于天，杳乎如入于渊，淖乎如在于海，卒乎如在于己。
现代文：因此，这种气有时光亮得好象升在天上，有时幽暗得好象藏入深渊，有时柔润得好象浸在海里，有时高峻得好象立在山上。
English: Therefore, this air is sometimes so bright that it seems to rise into the sky, sometimes so dark that it seems to hide in the abyss, sometimes so soft that it seems to be immersed in the sea, and sometimes so high that it seems to stand on a mountain.

古文：是故此气也，不可止以力，而可安以德；不可呼以声，而可迎以音。
现代文：这种气，不可以用强力留住它，却可以用德性来安顿它；不可以用声音去呼唤它，却可以用心意去迎接它。
English: This kind of qi can not be retained by force, but it can be settled by virtue; it can not be called by voice, but it can be greeted by mind.

古文：敬守勿失，是谓成德，德成而智出，万物果得。
现代文：恭敬地守住它而不失掉，这就叫作 成德 。德有成就就会产生出智慧，对万事万物全都能掌握理解了。
English: To hold it reverently without losing it is called attainment, and the attainment of virtue produces wisdom, the ability to grasp and understand everything.

古文：凡心之刑，自充自盈，自生自成。
现代文：心的形体，它本身就能自然充实，自然生成。
English: The form of the mind can be naturally enriched and naturally generated.

古文：其所以失之，必以忧乐喜怒欲利。
现代文：它之所以有所损伤，必然是由于忧、乐、喜、怒、嗜欲和贪利。
English: If it is damaged, it must be due to sorrow, joy, happiness, anger, greed and avarice.

古文：能去忧乐喜怒欲利，心乃反济。
现代文：能除掉忧、乐、喜、怒、嗜欲和贪利，心又可以回到完满的状态。
English: It can eliminate sorrow, joy, happiness, anger, lust and greed, and the mind can return to a state of perfection.

古文：彼心之情，利安以宁，勿烦勿乱，和乃自成。
现代文：心的特性，最需要安定和宁静，保持不烦不乱，心的和谐就可以自然形成。
English: The characteristics of the heart are most in need of stability and tranquility, to remain undisturbed, and the harmony of the heart can be naturally formed.

古文：折折乎如在于侧，忽忽乎如将不得，渺渺乎如穷无极。此稽不远，日用其德。
现代文：这些道理，有时清楚地好象就在身边，有时恍惚地好象寻找不到，又有时好象渺茫地追寻不到尽头，实际上考察它并不很远，因为人们天天都在享用着它的德惠。
English: These principles, sometimes clearly as if they were around, sometimes vaguely as if they could not be found, and sometimes as if they could not be traced to the end, are actually not very far away, because people are enjoying its benefits every day.

古文：夫道者，所以充形也，而人不能固。
现代文：道，是用来充实心的形体的，但人们往往不能固守。
English: The Tao is a form used to enrich the mind, but people often fail to adhere to it.

古文：其往不复，其来不舍。
现代文：它走开就不再来，来了又不肯安家常住。
English: When it goes away, it doesn't come back, and when it comes back, it doesn't want to settle down.

古文：谋乎莫闻其音，卒乎乃在于心；冥冥乎不见其形，淫淫乎与我俱生。
现代文：模糊得没有人听出它的声音，却又高大地显现在人的心里；昏暗得看不到它的形状，却又滋滋润润地与我们共同生长。
English: Its voice is so faint that no one can hear it, yet it looms large in the human heart; its shape is so dim that we cannot see it, yet it grows with us, moist and moist.

古文：不见其形；不闻其声，而序其成，谓之道。
现代文：看不到形体，听不到声音，却是有步骤地使万物成长着，它就是道。
English: You can't see the form, you can't hear the sound, but all things are growing in a step-by-step manner. This is the Way.

古文：凡道无所，善心安爱。
现代文：凡是道都没有固定的停留场所，碰到善心就藏居下来。
English: All roads have no fixed stopping place, and when good intentions are encountered, they hide.

古文：心静气理，道乃可止。
现代文：心静而气不乱，道就可以留住在这里。
English: With a calm mind and unperturbed spirit, the Tao can stay here.

古文：彼道不远，民得以产；彼道不离，民因以知。
现代文：道并不在远方，人们就是靠它生长的；道并不离开人们，人们就是靠它得到知识的。
English: The Way is not far away, and people grow by it; the Way does not leave people, and people gain knowledge by it.

古文：是故卒乎其如可与索，眇眇乎其如穷无所。
现代文：所以道是高大的，似乎可以寻找得到；又是细微的，似乎追寻不出它一定的所在。
English: Therefore, the Tao is lofty, and it seems that it can be found; it is also subtle, and it seems that it cannot be traced to a certain place.

古文：彼道之情，恶音与声，修心静音，道乃可得。
现代文：道的本性，讨厌声音语言，只有修心静意，才能得道。
English: It is the nature of the Tao to hate sound and language. Only by cultivating mindfulness can one attain the Tao.

古文：道也者，口之所不能言也，目之所不能视也，耳之所不能听也，所以修心而正形也；人之所失以死，所得以生也；事之所失以败，所得以成也。
现代文：道这个东西，是口不能言传，目不能察看，耳朵也听不到的；它是用来修养内心和端正形貌的；人们失掉了它就会死亡，得到了它就能生长；事业失掉了它就将失败，得到了它就能成功。
English: Tao is something that the mouth cannot speak, the eyes cannot see, and the ears cannot hear; it is used to cultivate the heart and correct the appearance; if people lose it, they will die, and if they get it, they can grow; if they lose it, they will fail, and if they get it, they can succeed.

古文：凡道无根无茎，无叶无荣。
现代文：凡是道，没有根也没有茎，没有叶子也没有花朵。
English: All paths have no roots and no stems, no leaves and no flowers.

古文：万物以生，万物以成，命之曰道。
现代文：但万物由于得到它才产生，由于得到它才成长，所以把它叫作 道 。
English: But all things come into being by virtue of having received it, and grow by virtue of having received it, so it is called the Tao.

古文：天主正，地主平，人主安静。
现代文：天在于正，地在于平，人在于安静。
English: Heaven lies in being upright, earth lies in being flat, man lies in being quiet.

古文：春秋冬夏，天之时也；山陵川谷，地之枝也；喜怒取予，人之谋也。
现代文：春秋冬夏是天的时令，山陵川谷是地的物材，喜怒取予是人的谋虑。
English: Spring, autumn, winter, and summer are the seasons of heaven, mountains, hills, valleys, and rivers are the materials of the earth, and the giving and taking of happiness and anger are the concerns of man.

古文：是故圣人与时变而不化，从物而不移。
现代文：所以圣人总是允许时世变化而自己却不变化，听任事物变迁而自己却不转移。
English: That is why sages always allow the times and the world to change, but they do not change. They allow things to change, but they do not change.

古文：能正能静，然后能定。
现代文：能正能静，然后才能够安定。
English: It can only be stable when it is stable.

古文：定心在中，耳目聪明，四肢坚固，可以为精舍。
现代文：有一个安定的心在里面，那就能耳目聪明，四肢坚固，就可以作为 精 的留住场所。
English: If there is a stable heart inside, then the ears and eyes can be smart, the limbs can be strong, and it can be used as a place to keep the elves.

古文：精也者，气之精者也。
现代文：所谓 精 ，就是气中最精的东西。
English: The so-called essence is the essence of qi.

古文：气，道乃生，生乃思，思乃知，知乃止矣。
现代文：气，通达开来就产生生命，有生命就有思想，有了思想就有知识，有知识就应及时停止了。
English: When the qi is open, life arises. When there is life, there is thought. When there is thought, there is knowledge. When there is knowledge, it should be stopped in time.

古文：凡心之形，过知失生。
现代文：凡心的形体，求知过多，则失其生机。
English: The body of an ordinary mind, if it seeks to know too much, loses its vitality.

古文：一物能化谓之神，一事能变谓之智。
现代文：一概听任于物而能掌握物的变化叫 神 ，一概听任于事而能掌握事的变化叫 智 。
English: One who is resigned to things and can grasp the changes in things is called God, one who is resigned to things and can grasp the changes in things is called wisdom.

古文：化不易气，变不易智，唯执一之君子能为此乎！
现代文：物变化而自己的气不变，事变化而自己的智不变，这只有坚持专一的君子才能做到吧！
English: Things change but one's spirit remains the same, things change but one's wisdom remains the same, this can only be done by a gentleman who insists on being single-minded!

古文：执一不失，能君万物。
现代文：专一而不失，就能够统率万物了。
English: If you are single-minded, you can control everything.

古文：君子使物，不为物使，得一之理。
现代文：君子使用万物，不受外物支配，就是因为掌握了专一的原则。
English: The reason why a gentleman uses all things and is not dominated by external things is because he has mastered the principle of single-mindedness.

古文：治心在于中，治言出于口，治事加于人，然则天下治矣。
现代文：内里有一个治理好的心，口里说的就会是治理好的话，加于民众的就将是治理好的事，这样，天下也就会治理好了。
English: There is a good governance in the heart, and what is said in the mouth will be good governance, and what is added to the people will be good governance. In this way, the world will be governed well.

古文：一言得而天下服，一言定而天下听，公之谓也。
现代文：所谓 一言得而天下服，一言定而天下听 ，就是这个道理。
English: This is the reason why it is said that one's words are accepted by the world, and one's words are listened to by the world.

古文：形不正，德不来；中不静，心不治。
现代文：外形不端正的人，是因为德没有养成；内里不虚静的人，是因为心没有治好。
English: A person with an improper appearance is because virtue has not been cultivated; a person who is not empty inside is because the heart has not been healed.

古文：正形摄德，天仁地义，则淫然而自至神明之极，照乎知万物。
现代文：端正外形，修伤内德，如天之仁，如地之义，那就将渐渐到达神明的最高境界，明彻地认识万物。
English: Correct the appearance, mend the defects, be like the benevolence of heaven, be like the righteousness of the earth, then you will gradually reach the highest realm of the gods, and clearly understand all things.

古文：中义守不忒，不以物乱官，不以官乱心，是谓中得。
现代文：内心守静而不生差错，不让外物扰乱五官，不让五官扰乱内心，这就叫作 中有所得 。
English: Keeping the mind calm and not making mistakes, not letting external things disturb the five senses, not letting the five senses disturb the mind, this is called having something in the middle.

古文：有神自在身，一往一来，奠之能思。
现代文：本来有 神 存在心内，不过一往一来，难得猜测。
English: Originally, God existed in the heart, but it is difficult to guess.

古文：失之必乱，得之必治。
现代文：但心内失去了神就纷乱，得到了神就安定。
English: But in the heart, if God is lost, there will be chaos, but if God is gained, there will be stability.

古文：敬除其舍，精将自来。
现代文：严肃地把心里的杂念打扫干净， 精 就会自然到来。
English: Seriously clean up the thoughts in your mind, and the essence will come naturally.

古文：精想思之，宁念治之，严容畏敬，精将至定。
现代文：纯洁思想记住它，宁息杂念疏理它，抱着严肃而畏敬的态度， 精 就会极为安定。
English: Remember it with a pure mind, purify it with a tranquil mind, hold it in a serious and reverent attitude, and it will be extremely stable.

古文：得之而勿舍，耳目不淫。
现代文：得到 精 而不舍弃，耳目等器官就不会迷惑了。
English: If you get the essence and don't give it up, your ears, eyes and other organs won't be bothered.

古文：心无他图，正心在中，万物得度。
现代文：心别无所图，只一个平正的心在里面，对待万物就会有正确标准。
English: The mind has nothing else in mind, only a level mind is inside, and there will be a correct standard for treating all things.

古文：道满天下，普在民所，民不能知也。
现代文：道布满在天下，并且普遍地存在人们的身边，人们自己却不能认识。
English: Tao is spread all over the world, and exists universally around people, but people themselves cannot recognize it.

古文：一言之解，上察于天，下极于地，蟠满九州。
现代文：只要有一个字的了解，就能够上通于天，下至于地，而且布满在九州。
English: As long as you understand just one word, you can travel up to the sky, down to the ground, and all over Kyushu.

古文：何谓解之？
现代文：怎样才能了解呢？
English: How can we understand it?

古文：在于心安。
现代文：在于心能平定。
English: It's about calming the mind.

古文：我心治，官乃治，我心安，官乃安。
现代文：我的心能平定，五官就会平定；我的心能安静，五官就会安静。
English: If my mind can be calm, my five senses will be calm; if my mind can be calm, my five senses will be calm.

古文：治之者心也，安之者心也。
现代文：平定要由心，安静也要由心。
English: Calmness should come from the heart, and quietness should also come from the heart.

古文：心以藏心，心之中又有心焉。
现代文：心中包藏着心，心里面又有个心。
English: There is a heart in the heart, and a heart in the heart.

古文：彼心之心，音以先言。
现代文：那个心里面的心。先生意识，再说出话来。
English: That heart within the heart. Be conscious, then speak.

古文：音然后形，形然后言，言然后使，使然后治。
现代文：有了意识，然后理解具体形象，理解形象。然后有话可说。有了话，然后有着使唤调遣的作用；有了使唤调遣作用，然后可以管理事物。
English: With awareness, then understanding the specific image, understanding the image. Then there is something to say. With words, then there is the role of calling and dispatching; with the role of calling and dispatching, then things can be managed.

古文：不治必乱，乱乃死。
现代文：不能管理，就会造成纷乱；纷乱了，就会造成灭亡。
English: If it cannot be managed, it will cause chaos; if it is chaotic, it will lead to ruin.

古文：精存自生，其外安荣，内藏以为泉原，浩然和平，以为气渊。
现代文：精存在心，人就自然牛长，表现在人体外面就仪态安闲而颜色光鲜，藏在内部则是一个不竭的泉源，浩大而和平，形成气的渊源。
English: In the essence of existence, people are naturally long-lived. It is manifested on the outside of the human body with a relaxed attitude and bright color. Hidden inside is an inexhaustible source, vast and peaceful, forming a source of qi.

古文：渊之不涸，四体乃固；泉之不竭，九窍遂通。
现代文：渊源没有枯竭，四肢才能坚强；泉源没有淤塞，九窍才能通达。
English: The source is not exhausted, the limbs can be strong; the spring is not blocked, and the nine points can be reached.

古文：乃能穷天地，破四海。
现代文：这样就能全面认识天地，普察四海。
English: In this way, you will be able to fully understand heaven and earth, and observe the four seas.

古文：中无惑意，外无邪灾，心全于中，形全于外，不逢天灾，不遇人窖，谓之圣人。
现代文：心中没有迷惑不明的东西，体外就没有邪恶的灾祸。心在内部保持健全，形体在外部保持健全，不逢天灾，不遇人害，这样的人就叫作圣人。
English: A person is called a saint when there is no perplexity in his heart and no evil scourge outside his body, when his heart is sound inside and his body is sound outside, when there is no natural calamity or man-made disaster.

古文：人能正静，皮肤裕宽，耳目聪明，筋信而骨强。
现代文：人如能达到正和静的境界，形体上就表现为皮肤丰满，耳目聪明，筋骨舒展而强健。
English: If a person can achieve the state of positive harmony and tranquility, the body will show plump skin, intelligent eyes and ears, and strong and stretched muscles and bones.

古文：乃能戴大圜，而履大方，鉴于大清，视干大明。
现代文：他进而能够顶天立地，目视如同清水，观察如同日月。
English: He can then stand on the top of the sky, his eyesight is like clear water, and his observation is like the sun and the moon.

古文：敬慎无忒，日新其德，遍知天下，穷于四极。
现代文：严肃谨慎地保持正静而没有差失，德行将与日俱新，并且遍知天下事物，以至四方极远的地域。
English: By seriously and prudently maintaining the right stillness without error, virtue will be renewed day by day, and it will know everything in the world, even in areas far away from the four directions.

古文：敬发其充，是谓内得。
现代文：这样恭敬地发展其内部的精气，就叫作内心有得。
English: To respectfully develop one's inner spirit in this way is called inner gain.

古文：然而不反，此生之忒。
现代文：然而有些人不能返回到这样的境界，那是生活上的差失造成的。
English: However, some people can't get back to that level because of life's mistakes.

古文：凡道，必周必密，必宽必舒，必坚必固，守善勿舍，逐淫泽薄，既知其极，反于道德。
现代文：道，一定是周到而细密、宽大而舒放、坚实而且强固的。能作到守善而不舍，驱逐淫邪，去掉浮薄，充分领会守善的最高准则，就可以返回到道德上来了。
English: The path must be thoughtful and meticulous, broad and relaxed, solid and strong. If you can persevere in doing good, expel lasciviousness, eliminate superficiality, and fully understand the highest principle of doing good, you can return to morality.

古文：全心在中，不可蔽匿，和于形容，见于肤色。
现代文：健全的心在内部，外面是不能隐蔽的，自然表现在形体容貌上面，也表现在肌肤颜色上面。
English: A sound mind is within, and cannot be concealed from the outside. It naturally manifests itself in the form and appearance of the body, and also in the color of the skin.

古文：善气迎人，亲于弟兄；恶气迎人，害于戎兵。
现代文：善气迎人，相亲如同兄弟；恶气迎人，相害如同刀兵。
English: Good-natured people greet each other like brothers; bad-natured people greet each other like swordsmen.

古文：不言之声，疾于雷鼓；心气之形，明于日月，察于父母。
现代文：这种不说出来的声音，比打雷击鼓还传得快。这心和气的形体，比太阳和月亮还更光明，体察事情比父母了解子女还更透彻。
English: This unspoken voice travels faster than the thunder of drums; this form of mind and breath is brighter than the sun and moon, and perceives things more thoroughly than parents understand their children.

古文：赏不足以劝善，刑不足以惩过，气意得而天下服，心意定而天下听。
现代文：赏赐不一定能够劝善，刑罚不一定能够惩过。而气的意向对头，天下就可以顺服；心的意向安定，天下就可以听从。
English: Reward may not be able to persuade good, punishment may not be able to punish. And if the intention of the qi is opposite, the world can obey; if the intention of the heart is stable, the world can obey.

