古文：何文辉，字德明，滁人。
现代文：何文辉，字德明，滁州人。
English: He Wenhui, alias Deming, is from Zhangzhou.

古文：太祖下滁州，得文辉，年十四，抚为己子，赐姓朱氏。
现代文：太祖攻下滁州，得到了年仅十四岁的文辉，太祖像抚养儿子一样抚养他，赐姓朱氏。
English: The great-grandfather conquered Zhangzhou and obtained the only fourteen-year-old Wen Hui. The great-grandfather raised him like a son and gave him the surname Zhu.

古文：太祖初起，多蓄义子。
现代文：太祖起事之初，抚养了许多义子。
English: At the beginning of the uprising, the great-grandfather raised many godchildren.

古文：及长，命偕诸将分守诸路。
现代文：何文辉长大后，太祖命他协同诸将分守诸路。
English: After He Wenhui grew up, the great-grandfather ordered him to cooperate with the generals to guard the roads.

古文：周舍守镇江，道舍守宁国，马儿守婺州，柴舍、真童守处州，金刚奴守衢州，皆义子也。
现代文：周舍镇守镇江，道舍镇守宁国，马儿镇守婺州，柴舍、真童镇守处州，金刚奴镇守衢州，这些都是太祖的义子。
English: Zhou Shezhen guarded Zhenjiang, Daoshezhen guarded Ningguo, Maerzhen guarded Bozhou, Chai Shezhen, Zhengdongzhen guarded Zhuozhou, and Kongongnu guarded Bozhou. These were all the godchildren of the great-grandfather.

古文：金刚奴后无考。
现代文：金刚奴后来无据可考。
English: King Kong later disappeared without a trace.

古文：周舍即沐英，军中又呼沐舍。
现代文：周舍就是沐英，军中又称呼沐舍。
English: Zhou She is Mu Ying, also known as Mu She in the military.

古文：柴舍者，朱文刚，与耿再成死处州难。
现代文：柴舍是朱文刚，与耿再成死于处州之难。
English: The woodcutter was Zhu Wengang. He and Geng Zaicheng died in the battle of Zhanzhou.

古文：又有朱文逊，史不传其小字，亦以义子死太平。
现代文：又有朱文逊，史籍没有记载其乳名，也是养子，战死于太平。
English: There was also Zhu Wensong, whose surname is not recorded in the historical records. He was also an adopted son and died in the Taiping War.

古文：自沐英外，最著者唯道舍、马儿，马儿即徐司马，而道舍即文辉也。
现代文：除沐英外，最著名的就是道舍、马儿，马儿就是徐司马，道舍就是何文辉。
English: In addition to Mu Ying, the most famous are Tao She, Maer, Maer is Xu Sima, Tao She is He Wenhuang.

古文：文辉以天宁翼元帅守宁国，进江西行省参政。
现代文：文辉任天宁翼元帅镇守宁国，提升为江西行省参政。
English: Wen Hui was appointed as the Marshal of Tianningyi to guard Ningguo, and was promoted to participate in the politics of Jiangxi Province.

古文：数攻江西，未下州县。讨新淦邓仲廉，斩之。
现代文：多次攻打江西境内尚未攻取的州县，征讨新氵金的邓仲廉，并斩首了他。
English: They repeatedly attacked the counties and prefectures that had not yet been conquered in Jiangxi, solicited new money from Deng Zhonglian, and beheaded him.

古文：援安福，走饶鼎臣，平山尖寨。
现代文：援助安福，赶走饶鼎臣，平定山尖寨。
English: Aid Anfu, drive away Rao Dingchen, and pacify Dingshan Jianzhai.

古文：从徐达取淮东，复从下平江。
现代文：跟从徐达攻取淮东，攻下平江。
English: He followed Xu Da in conquering Huadong and capturing Pingjiang.

古文：赐文绮，进行省左丞，复其姓。
现代文：太祖赐给文绮，晋升为行省左丞，恢复了他的原姓。
English: His great-grandfather gave him the title of Wen Xuan, promoted him to the position of Xing Shou Zu Rong, and restored his original surname.

古文：以征南副将军与平章胡美由江西取福建，度杉关，入光泽，徇邵武、建阳，直趋建宁。
现代文：任征南副将军，与平章胡美一起，从江西进攻福建，度过杉关，进入光泽，攻战于邵武、建阳，直趋建宁。
English: Appointed as the vice-general of the Southern Expeditionary Force, together with Pingzhang Humi, he attacked Fujian from Jiangxi, passed through Sugiguan, entered Shining, fought in Shaowu, Jianyang, and headed straight for Jianning.

古文：元同佥达里麻、参政陈子琦闭门拒守。
现代文：元同佥达里麻、参政陈子琦闭门拒守。
English: Former comrade Zou Darima and political activist Chen Zihao are now behind closed doors.

古文：文辉与美环攻之。
现代文：文辉和胡美环城攻打。
English: Wen Hui and Hu Mei attack the ring city.

古文：逾十日，达里麻不能支，夜潜至文辉营，乞降。
现代文：过了十天，达里麻支撑不住，夜晚潜入文辉军营乞降。
English: After ten days, Darima could no longer hold out, and sneaked into the Wenhui military camp at night to beg for surrender.

古文：诘旦，总管翟也先不花亦以众降于文辉。
现代文：第二天早晨，总管翟也先不花也率部向文辉投降。
English: In the morning of the next day, the general manager Zou also surrendered to Wen Hui.

古文：美怒两人不诣己，欲屠其城。
现代文：胡美对他们两人不听他的话十分恼火，准备屠城。
English: Hu Mei was very angry with the two of them for not listening to his words and prepared to slaughter them.

古文：文辉驰告美曰： 与公同受命至此，为安百姓耳。
现代文：文辉飞马提醒胡美： 我和你一同受命到此，只是为了安定百姓。
English: Wenhui Pegasus reminded Humi: I was ordered to come here with you, just to stabilize the people.

古文：今既降，奈何以私忿杀人。 
现代文：现元将既然已经投降，又何必因私忿而杀人。 
English: Since Geng Yuan had already surrendered, why kill him out of personal grudge?

古文：美乃止。
现代文：胡美于是停止了此举。
English: Hu Mei then stopped the move.

古文：师入城，秋毫无所犯。
现代文：军队入城，秋毫无犯。
English: When the army entered the city, there was no crime.

古文：汀、泉诸州县闻之，皆相次归附。
现代文：汀、泉诸州听说此事，都相继前来归附。
English: When the states of Ting and Quan heard about this, they all came one after another to join.

古文：会车驾幸汴梁，召文辉扈从，因命为河南卫指挥使，定汝州余寇。
现代文：太祖亲临汴梁，召文辉随从，任命为河南卫指挥使，平定汝州余寇。
English: The great-grandfather personally went to Qilian, summoned Wenhui to follow him, and appointed him as the Henan Provincial Commander to quell the Ruzhou invasion.

古文：从大将军取陕西，留守潼关。
现代文：跟从大将军攻取陕西，留守潼关。
English: He followed the general to conquer Shaanxi and stayed in Shaoguan.

古文：洪武三年，授大都督府都督佥事，予世袭指挥使。
现代文：洪武三年，授予大都督府都督佥事，授予世袭指挥使。
English: In the third year of Hongwu, he was awarded the title of grand governor of the prefectural capital and the title of hereditary commander.

古文：复以参将从傅友德等平蜀，赐金币，留守成都。
现代文：又以参将身份跟从傅友德平定蜀地，赐予金币，留守成都。
English: He also followed Fu Youde to subdue Shu as a general, was given gold coins, and stayed in Chengdu.

古文：文辉号令明肃，军民皆德之。
现代文：文辉号令严明，军民都称颂他的功德。
English: Wen Hui's orders were clear, and the military and the people praised his merits.

古文：帝尝称其谋略威望。
现代文：太祖曾称赞他的谋略威望。
English: His great-grandfather had praised his strategy and prestige.

古文：迁大都督府同知。
现代文：晋升为大都督府同知。
English: He was promoted to the post of Grand Governor.

古文：五年命帅山东兵从李文忠出应昌。
现代文：五年，命率山东兵跟从李文忠出师应昌。
English: In the fifth year, the commander of Shandong soldiers followed Li Wenzhong to Yingchang.

古文：明年移镇北平。
现代文：第二年移镇北平。
English: The following year, it moved to Beiping.

古文：文忠北征，文辉督兵巡居庸关，以疾召还。
现代文：文忠北征，文辉督兵巡视居庸关，因病被召回。
English: Wen Zhong was sent to the North, Wen Hui inspected Juyongguan and was recalled due to illness.

古文：九年六月卒，年三十六。
现代文：九年六月去世，年仅三十六岁。
English: He died in June 1997, aged just 36.

古文：遣官营葬滁州东沙河上，恤赉甚厚。
现代文：派官营葬于滁州东沙河上，抚恤赐赏甚多。
English: He was buried on the Dongsha River in Zhangzhou, and was given a lot of benefits.

古文：子环，成都护卫指挥使，征迤北阵殁。
现代文：儿子何环，任成都护卫指挥使，征迤北阵亡。
English: His son, He Huan, appointed as the commander of the Chengdu escort, died in the Northern Expedition.

古文：徐司马，字从政，扬州人。
现代文：徐司马，字从政，扬州人。
English: Xu Sima is a politician from Yangzhou.

古文：元末兵乱年九岁，无所依。太祖得之，养为子，亦赐姓。
现代文：元末兵乱，年仅九岁，无依无靠，太祖得到他，收为养子，并赐姓。
English: At the end of the Yuan Dynasty, when he was only nine years old and had no one to rely on, his great-grandfather adopted him and gave him his surname.

古文：即长，出入侍左右。
现代文：长大后，出入侍从左右。
English: After growing up, attendants came and went.

古文：及取婺州，除总制，命助元帅常遇春守婺。
现代文：到了攻占婺州，任命为总制，命他协助元帅常遇春镇守婺州。
English: When it came to conquering Bozhou, he was appointed as the commander-in-chief, and he was ordered to assist the marshal Changyu Chunzhen in defending Bozhou.

古文：吴元年，授金华卫指挥同知。
现代文：吴元年授予金华卫指挥同知。
English: In the first year of the Wu Dynasty, Jin Huawei was awarded the title of "Conductor Tongzhi."

古文：洪武元年从副将军李文忠北征，擒元宗王庆生。
现代文：洪武元年，跟从副将军李文忠北征，活捉了元宗王庆生。
English: In the first year of Hongwu, he followed the deputy general Li Wenzhong to the Northern Expedition and captured the former King Qing Sheng alive.

古文：擢杭州卫指挥使，寻进都指挥使。
现代文：提升为杭州卫指挥使，不久又升为都督指挥使。
English: He was promoted to the post of Hangzhou sanitary inspector, and soon he was promoted to the post of governor inspector.

古文：诏复姓。
现代文：诏令恢复本姓。
English: The imperial edict restored his original surname.

古文：九年迁镇河南。
现代文：九年，迁镇河南。
English: Nine years later, he moved to Henan Province.

古文：时新建北京于汴梁，号重地。帝素贤司马，特委任之。
现代文：当时在汴梁新建北京，实为重地，太祖素来认为司马贤良，特委以重任。
English: At that time, Beijing was newly built in Qilian, which was indeed a key area. Taizu had always believed that Sima was a virtuous man, and the special committee had a heavy responsibility.

古文：宋国公冯胜方练兵河南。会有星变，占在大梁。
现代文：宋国公冯胜在河南练兵，遇上星变，在大梁占卦。
English: Song Guogong Feng Sheng was training soldiers in Henan Province. When he encountered a star change, he cast a spell on Daliang.

古文：帝使使密敕胜，且曰： 并以此语马儿知之。 
现代文：太祖派使者秘密指示冯胜，说： 并把此话告诉马儿。 
English: Grandfather sent an envoy to secretly instruct Feng Sheng, saying: And tell this to Maer.

古文：既复敕二人曰： 天象屡见，大梁军民错处，尤宜慎防。
现代文：又指示二人说： 天象常见，大梁军民杂处，尤其要谨慎防范。
English: He also instructed the two men, saying, "Astronomical phenomena are common, and large beams, military and civilian debris are everywhere. In particular, we must be careful to prevent them.

古文：今秦、晋二王还京，当严兵宿卫。
现代文：现秦、晋二王已回到京城，应当严兵宿卫。
English: Now that the Qin and Jin kings have returned to the capital, they should strictly guard the inn.

古文：王抵汴时，若宋国公出迓，则都指挥居守；都指挥出迓，则宋国公亦然。 
现代文：王抵达汴梁时，如果宋国公出来迎接，则都指挥居守；都指挥出来迎接，则宋国公居守。 
English: When the king arrived at Qilian, if Song Guo Gong came out to greet him, then both commanders would stay behind; if both commanders came out to greet him, then Song Guo Gong would stay behind.

古文：敕书官而不名，倚重与宋公等。
现代文：敕书书其官职而不书其姓名，与宋国公等人一样倚重。
English: It is as important as Song Guogong and others to write one's official position without writing one's name.

古文：十九年入觐，遂擢中军都督府佥事。
现代文：十九年，朝拜太祖，提升为中军都督府佥事。
English: In the 19th year, he worshiped Taizu and was promoted to the post of the Chinese military governor.

古文：二十五年，以左副总兵从蓝玉征建昌，讨越巂。
现代文：二十五年，任左副总兵跟从蓝玉征讨建昌，讨伐越辒。
English: Twenty-five years later, he was appointed as the left deputy commander-in-chief and followed the Blue Jade Campaign to fight against Jianchang and Yueyuan.

古文：明年正月还至成都，卒。
现代文：第二年正月回到成都后去世。
English: He died after returning to Chengdu in the first month of the second year.

古文：追坐蓝玉党，二子皆获罪。
现代文：追究蓝玉党案而受株连，两个儿子获罪。
English: The Blue Jade Party case was prosecuted, and two sons were convicted.

古文：司马好文学，性谦厚，所至抚循士卒，甚得众心。
现代文：司马喜好文学，性格谦厚，所到之处安抚士兵，很得民心。
English: Sima is fond of literature, has a humble personality, and placates soldiers wherever he goes. He is very popular.

古文：在河南久，尤有惠政。
现代文：在河南的时间较长，尤为有惠政。
English: He has been in Henan for a long time, especially with Huizheng.

古文：公暇退居，一室萧然如寒素。
现代文：公暇退居，一室萧然如寒素。
English: He retreated from public life, and his one-room apartment was as cold as ice.

古文：虽战功不及文辉，而雅量过之，并称贤将云。
现代文：虽然战功不及文辉，但雅量却超过了他。二人并称为贤将。
English: Although his war exploits were not as great as those of Wen Hui, his elegance surpassed his. Both men were called "brilliant generals."

古文：叶旺，六安人。与合肥人马云同隶长枪军谢再兴，为千户。
现代文：叶旺，六安人，和合肥人马云同隶属长枪军谢再兴，担任千户。
English: Ye Wang, a resident of Lu'an, and Ma Yun, a resident of Hefei, both belonged to the Changgun Army of Xie Zaixing and served as thousand households.

古文：再兴叛，二人自拔归。
现代文：再兴叛敌，他们两人自拔前来归附。
English: Rebels were revived, and both of them volunteered to join them.

古文：数从征，积功并授指挥佥事。
现代文：多次从征，累积功劳一并授予指挥佥事。
English: He served in the military several times, and was awarded a commanding anecdote for his accumulated merits.

古文：洪武四年，偕镇辽东。
现代文：洪武四年，偕同镇守辽东。
English: In the fourth year of Hongwu, he became the town guard of Liaodong.

古文：初，元主北走，其辽阳行省参政刘益屯盖州，与平章高家奴相为声援，保金、复等州。
现代文：当初，元主北逃，辽阳行省参政刘益屯居盖州，与平章高家奴互为声援，保卫金、复等州。
English: At first, the founder fled to the north, Liu Yitun, who was a member of the Liaoyang Provincial Party Committee, lived in Gai Prefecture, and he and Ping Zhang Gao Jiaozuo supported each other, defending Jin, Fu and other prefectures.

古文：帝遣断事黄俦赍诏谕益。
现代文：太祖派断事黄俦诏谕刘益。
English: The great-great-grandfather dispatched Huang Qi's edict to Liu Yi.

古文：益籍所部兵马、钱粮、舆地之数来归。
现代文：刘益带领他所属的兵马、钱粮和地盘前来归附。
English: Liu Yi led his soldiers, horses, money, grain and land to the annexation.

古文：乃立辽阳指挥使司，以益为指挥同知。
现代文：于是设立辽阳指挥使司，任命刘益为指挥同知。
English: As a result, the Liaoyang conductor envoy department was established, and Liu Yi was appointed as the conductor's comrade.

古文：未几，元平章洪保保、马彦翚合谋杀益。
现代文：不久，元平章洪保保、马彦合计谋杀刘益。
English: Soon after, Yuanping Zhang, Hong Bao Bao and Ma Yan jointly murdered Liu Yi.

古文：右丞张良佐、左丞商暠擒彦翚杀之，保保挟俦走纳哈出营。
现代文：右丞张良佐、左丞商詗捉拿了马彦并杀了他，洪保保挟持着黄俦逃到纳哈出军营。
English: Zhang Liang Su, the right-hand man, and Shang Qi, the left-hand man, captured Ma Yan and killed him. Hong Bao Bao, holding Huang Qi hostage, fled to Naha and left the military camp.

古文：良佐因权卫事，以状闻。
现代文：良佐因负责卫事，书写状子上报。
English: Since Ryosa was in charge of security, a written complaint was filed.

古文：且言： 辽东僻，处海隅，肘腋皆敌境。
现代文：说 ：辽东僻远，地处大海一隅，左右四周都是敌人的地盘。
English: He said: "Liaodong is far away, located in a corner of the sea, surrounded on all sides by enemy territory.

古文：平章高家奴守辽阳山寨，知院哈剌章屯沈阳古城，开元则右丞也先不花，金山则太尉纳哈出。彼此相依，时谋入犯。
现代文：平章高家奴镇守辽阳山寨，知院哈剌章屯驻沈阳古城，开元则有右丞也先不花，金山则是太尉纳哈出，彼此相互依存，时常共谋入侵。
English: Pingzhang Gao Jia Nu was the town guard of Liaoyang Villages, Zhiyin Haru Zhang Tun was stationed in Shenyang Ancient City, and in the founding of the Yuan Dynasty, there was Ujo, who did not spend much, and Jinshan, who did not spend much. They depended on each other and often conspired to invade.

古文：今保保逃往，衅必起。乞留断事吴立镇抚军民，而以所擒平章八丹、知院僧孺等械送京师。 
现代文：现洪保保已逃往他们那里，他们必定会乘机进攻，请求留下断事吴立镇抚军民，而把俘虏的平章八丹、知院僧孺等人押送到京师。 
English: Now that Hong Bao Bao has fled to them, they will surely take advantage of the opportunity to attack, and ask him to leave Wu Li to pacify the soldiers and civilians, and to escort the captives, such as Ping Zhang Bataan and the monks of Zhiyin, to the capital.

古文：帝命立、良佐、暠俱为盖州卫指挥佥事。
现代文：太祖任命吴立、张良佐、商詗为盖州卫指挥佥事。
English: Emperor Taizu appointed Wu Li, Zhang Liang Zuo, and Shang Qi as the commanders of the Gezhou Garrison.

古文：既念辽阳重地，复设都指挥使司统辖诸卫，以旺及云并为都指挥使往镇之。
现代文：念及辽阳是重地，又设立都指挥使司统辖诸卫，任命叶旺、马云为都指挥使，前去镇守。
English: Remembering that Liaoyang is an important place, he also set up the Capital Command and Control Division to supervise the guards, and appointed Ye Wang and Ma Yun as capital command and control envoys to go to the town.

古文：已，知俦被杀，纳哈出将内犯，敕旺等预为备。
现代文：太祖得知黄俦被杀，纳哈出将要进犯，命令叶旺等人准备防御。
English: When the great-grandfather learned that Huang Qi had been killed and that Naha was about to attack, he ordered Ye Wang and others to prepare a defense.

古文：未几，纳哈出果以众至，见备御严，不敢攻，越盖至金州。
现代文：不久，纳哈出果然带领大军来到，见防御十分严密，不敢攻打，绕过盖州到达金州。
English: Not long after, Naha indeed led a large army to come, saw that the defense was very tight, did not dare to attack, bypassed Geizhou and reached Jinzhou.

古文：金州城未完，指挥韦富、王胜等督士卒分守诸门。
现代文：金州城的防御设施还没完工，指挥韦富、王胜等人督促士兵分守诸门。
English: The defensive facilities of Jinzhou City had not yet been completed, and commanders Wei Fu and Wang Sheng urged soldiers to guard the gates separately.

古文：乃剌吾者，敌骁将也，率精骑数百挑战城下，中伏弩仆，为我兵所获。敌大沮。
现代文：乃剌吾是敌人的骁将，他率精骑数百在城下挑战，身中伏弩倒地，被抓俘，敌人大为沮丧。
English: He led hundreds of horsemen to challenge the enemy at the foot of the castle, fell to the ground, and was captured, much to the dismay of the enemy.

古文：富等纵兵击，敌引退，不敢由故道，从盖城南十里沿柞河遁。
现代文：韦富等人纵兵攻打，敌人败退，不敢沿着来的道路退走，从盖城南十里沿着柞河逃走。
English: Weifu and others attacked in a column, the enemy retreated, did not dare to retreat along the road, and fled ten miles south of Gaicheng along the Li River.

古文：旺先以兵扼柞河。
现代文：叶旺早就派兵扼守柞河。
English: Ye Wang had already sent troops to guard the Fenhe River.

古文：自连云岛至窟驼寨，十余里缘河垒冰为墙，沃以水，经宿凝沍如城。
现代文：自连云岛到窟驼寨十余里，沿河垒起冰块为墙，浇上水，晚上冻结，像城墙一样坚固。
English: It is more than ten miles from Lianyungang Island to Grotto Camel Village. Ice blocks are built as walls along the riverbanks, poured with water, frozen at night, and as strong as city walls.

古文：布钉板沙中，旁设坑阱，伏兵以伺。
现代文：在沙中布下钉板，旁边设下陷阱，埋伏军队等候敌人。
English: In the sand, spread a nail board, set a trap next to it, and wait for the enemy to ambush the army.

古文：云及指挥周鹗、吴立等建大旗城中，严兵不动，寂若无人。
现代文：马云和指挥周鹗、吴立等人在城中树起了大旗，按兵不动，安静得像没人一般。
English: Ma Yun and commanders Zhou Qian, Wu Li and others raised a large flag in the city, and the soldiers did not move, and it was quiet like no one else.

古文：已，寇至城南。伏四起，两山旌旗蔽空，矢石雨下。
现代文：待敌人到达城南，伏兵四起，两山旌旗蔽空，矢石如雨点般地射下。
English: While waiting for the enemy to reach the south of the city, the ambush troops set out in all directions, covering the two mountains with flags, and shooting down the arrows like raindrops.

古文：纳哈出仓皇趋连云岛，遇冰城，旁走，悉陷于阱，遂大溃。
现代文：纳哈出仓惶逃往连云岛，遇上冰城，从旁边走，全部掉入陷阱，于是溃败。
English: Naha fled in a panic to Lianyungang Island, encountered the Ice City, walked from the side, all fell into the trap, and then routed.

古文：云自城中出，合兵追击至将军山、毕栗河，斩获及冻死者无算，乘胜追至猪儿峪。
现代文：马云从城中出击，联合部队追击至将军山、毕栗河，敌军被斩、被俘和冻死的不计其数，乘胜追击至猪儿峪。
English: Ma Yun attacked from the middle of the city, the joint forces pursued to the General's Mountain and the Biquli River, and the enemy troops were killed, captured and froze to death in countless numbers, and took advantage of the victory to pursue to the Pig's Throat.

古文：纳哈出仅以身免。
现代文：纳哈出仅仅是自身免于一死。
English: Naha emerged only to save himself from certain death.

古文：第功，进旺、云俱都督佥事。
现代文：评定战功，叶旺、马云都晋升为都督佥事。
English: Ye Wang and Ma Yun were both promoted to the rank of prefectural governors.

古文：时洪武八年也。
现代文：当时是洪武八年。
English: It was the eighth year of Hongwu.

古文：十二年命云征大宁。
现代文：十二年，命令马云征讨大宁。
English: In 2012, he ordered Ma Yun to conquer Tanin.

古文：捷闻，受赏，召还京。
现代文：捷报频传，受到奖赏，被召回京。
English: He received frequent reports of success, received awards, and was recalled to Kyoto.

古文：后数年卒。
现代文：数年后去世。
English: He died several years later.

古文：旺留镇如故。
现代文：叶旺仍然留守。
English: Ye Wang is still absent.

古文：会高丽遣使致书及礼物，而龙州郑白等请内附。
现代文：高丽派遣使者带上书信和礼物，而龙州郑白等人请求内附。
English: Goryeo sent envoys with letters and gifts, and Yongzhou Zheng Bai and others requested to be included.

古文：旺以闻。
现代文：叶旺把这些上奏太祖。
English: Ye Wang played these for his grandfather.

古文：帝谓：人臣无外交。此间谍之渐，勿轻信。彼特示弱于我，以窥边衅。
现代文：太祖说他们作为人臣没有外交权，这是间谍的欺诈行为，不要轻信，他方特向我示弱，以窥探边情。
English: The great-grandfather said that they, as ministers, did not have diplomatic rights. This was a fraudulent act of espionage. Don't be gullible. The other side showed weakness to me in order to spy on the situation.

古文：还之，使无所藉口。
现代文：遣送他们回去，使他们没有什么借口。
English: Send them back so they have no excuse.

古文：明年，旺复送高丽使者周谊入京。
现代文：第二年，叶旺又送高丽使者周谊入京城。
English: The following year, Ye Wang also sent the Korean envoy Zhou Yi to Beijing.

古文：帝以其国中弑逆，又诡杀朝使，反覆不可信，切责旺等绝之，而留谊不遣。
现代文：太祖以他们国中弑逆，又诡杀朝使，反复不可信为由，责备叶旺等人，要求断绝和他们的来往，但留下了周谊。
English: The great-grandfather rebuked Ye Wang and others on the grounds that they could not be trusted because of their treachery in their own country and the assassination of the imperial envoy, and asked to cut off contact with them, but they remained friends.

古文：十九年召旺为后军都督府佥事。
现代文：十九年，召叶旺为后军都督府佥事。
English: In nineteen years, Ye Wang was summoned to the post-war military governor's office.

古文：居三月，辽东有警，复命还镇。
现代文：居留三个月，辽东有敌情，又受命前去镇守。
English: After staying for three months, Liaodong was in a hostile situation, and he was ordered to go to the town guard.

古文：二十一年三月卒。
现代文：二十一年三月去世。
English: He died in March 2011.

古文：旺与云之镇辽也，翦荆棘，立军府，抚辑军民，垦田万余顷，遂为永利。
现代文：叶旺和马云镇守辽东，披荆斩棘，建立军府，抚济军民，开垦田地万余顷，成为永久之利。
English: Ye Wang and Ma Yun guarded Liaodong, surmounted difficulties, established a military base, supported the military and the people, and reclaimed more than 10,000 hectares of fields, which became a permanent advantage.

古文：旺尤久，先后凡十七年。
现代文：叶旺镇守的时间更长，前后长达十七年。
English: Yewang has been a town for even longer, for seventeen years.

古文：辽人德之。
现代文：辽东的百姓称颂他的功德。
English: The people of Liaodong praise his merits.

古文：嘉靖初，以二人有功于辽，命有司立祠，春秋祀之。
现代文：嘉靖初年，因二人在辽东有功，命令有关部门设立祠庙，春秋祭祀。
English: In the first year of Jiajing, because the two had made great contributions in Liaodong, he ordered the relevant departments to set up an ancestral temple to hold spring and autumn rituals.

古文：缪大亨，定远人。
现代文：缪大亨，定远人。
English: Miao tycoon, Dingyuan people.

古文：初纠义兵，为元攻濠，不克，元兵溃。大亨独以众二万人与张知院屯横涧山，固守月余。
现代文：最初纠集义兵为元攻打濠州，没有攻克，元兵溃败，大亨独自带领二万人和张知院屯驻横涧山，固守了一个多月。
English: At first, he gathered volunteers to fight for the Yuan Dynasty against Bozhou, but failed to conquer it. The Yuan Dynasty soldiers were defeated, and the tycoon alone led twenty thousand people and Zhang Zhiyin to stay in Hengyaoshan, holding out for more than a month.

古文：太祖以计夜袭其营，破之，大亨与子走免。
现代文：太祖用计夜袭了他的营地，被攻破，大亨和他的儿子没有逃走。
English: The great-grandfather attacked his camp with a night watch, was defeated, and the tycoon and his son did not escape.

古文：比明，复收散卒，列阵以待。
现代文：第二天天亮，他又收集散兵，列阵以待。
English: At dawn the next day, he gathered his skirmishers and waited in line.

古文：太祖遣其叔贞谕降之，命将所部从征，数有功，擢元帅。
现代文：太祖派他的叔叔缪贞前去谕降，并命令他带领所属部队从征。自此，他为太祖多次立功，提升为元帅。
English: The great-grandfather sent his uncle Miao Zhen forward to order him to surrender, and ordered him to lead the troops he belonged to. Since then, he has made many contributions to the great-grandfather and was promoted to marshal.

古文：总兵取扬州，克之。降青军元帅张明鉴。
现代文：大亨领兵攻占了扬州，降服了青军元帅张明鉴。
English: The tycoon led the troops to conquer Yangzhou and defeated the young army marshal Zhang Mingjian.

古文：初，明鉴聚众淮西，以青布为号，称 青军 ；又以善长枪，称 长枪军 。
现代文：最初，明鉴在淮西聚众，以青布作为旗号，称为 青军 ，又因善于使用长枪，称为 长枪军 。
English: At first, Mingjian gathered people in Huaxi, using blue cloth as a banner, called the Blue Army, and because he was good at using long guns, he was called the Long Rifle Army.

古文：由含山转掠扬州，元镇南王孛罗普化招降之，以为濠、泗义兵元帅。
现代文：由含山转而掠夺扬州，元镇南王孛罗普化招降了他，任命为濠、泗义兵元帅。
English: He moved from the mountains to plunder Yangzhou. He was recruited by the Yuan Zhen Nan Wang Qilopuhua and appointed as the marshal of the Yi Yi soldiers.

古文：逾年，食尽，谋拥王作乱。
现代文：过了一年，粮尽弹绝，企图拥戴镇南王作乱。
English: After a year, when the grain supply was exhausted, they attempted to instigate a riot in the southern part of the town.

古文：王走，死淮安。明鉴遂据城，屠居民以食。
现代文：镇南王在追逃中，死于淮安，于是明鉴占据淮安城，屠食居民。
English: Zhenan Wang was on the run and died in Huai'an, so Ming Jian occupied Huai'an City and slaughtered the residents.

古文：大亨言于太祖，贼饥困，若掠食四出则难制矣，且骁鸷可用，无为他人得。
现代文：大亨告诉太祖，敌人又饥又困，如果让他们四出掠夺食物则难以制服，且明鉴骁悍可以为我所用，不要被他人得到。
English: The tycoon told the great-grandfather that the enemy was hungry and tired, and it would be difficult to subdue them if they were allowed to go out and plunder food, and that it was clear that they could be used for me, and should not be obtained by others.

古文：太祖命大亨亟攻，明鉴降，得众数万、马二千余匹。悉送其将校妻子至应天。
现代文：太祖命大亨加紧攻打，明鉴投降，得降兵数万，马匹二千，于是把降军将校的妻子全部送到应天。
English: The great-grandfather ordered the tycoon to step up the attack and surrender, resulting in the surrender of tens of thousands of soldiers and two thousand horses, so he sent all the wives of the officers of the retreating army to Yingtian.

古文：改淮海翼元帅府为江南分枢密院，以大亨为同佥枢密院事，总制扬州、镇江。
现代文：淮海翼元帅府改为江南分枢密院，任命大亨为同佥枢密院事，总制扬州、镇江。
English: The Huaihai Wing Marshal's Office was changed to the Jiangnan Branch of the Privy Council, and the tycoon was appointed as a peer of the Privy Council, with the general system reaching Yangzhou and Zhenjiang.

古文：大亨有治略，宽厚不扰，而治军严肃，禁暴除残，民甚悦之。
现代文：大亨统军颇有方略，宽厚不扰民，治军严肃，禁暴除残，百姓十分高兴。
English: The tycoon's unified army is quite strategic, generous and does not disturb the people, the army is governed seriously, violence is prohibited and the remnants are eliminated, and the people are very happy.

古文：未几卒。
现代文：但不久去世。
English: He died soon after.

古文：太祖过镇江，叹曰： 缪将军生平端直，未尝有过，惜不见矣。 
现代文：太祖路过镇江，叹息道： 缪将军生平端直，未尝有过错，没有见到他十分可惜啊。 
English: The great-grandfather passed by Zhenjiang and sighed, "General Miao lived a simple and straightforward life. He did not make any mistakes. It was a pity not to see him."

古文：遣使祭其墓。
现代文：于是派使者代奠。
English: So they sent an emissary to pay their respects.

古文：武德，安丰人。
现代文：武德，安丰人。
English: Wu De, An Feng Ren.

古文：元至正中为义兵千户。
现代文：元至正年中为义兵千户。
English: From the Yuan Dynasty to the middle of the first year, a thousand households became volunteers.

古文：知元将亡，言于其帅张鉴曰： 吾辈才雄万夫。今东衄西挫，事势可知。不如早择所依。 
现代文：知道元将要灭亡，就对其帅张鉴说 ：我辈才雄万夫，现东败西挫，形势已可预料，不如早选择可依靠的主子。 
English: Knowing that Yuan was about to perish, he said to his commander Zhang Jian: Our generation was the best in the world, but now we are defeated, the situation is predictable, it is better to choose a reliable master as soon as possible.

古文：鉴然其言，相率归太祖。隶李文忠，从赴池州，力战，流矢中右股，拔去，战自若。
现代文：张鉴认为他说得有理，就率兵归附了太祖，隶属李文忠，随赴池州，奋力战斗，右股中流矢，用手拔去，继续战斗。
English: Zhang Jian thought that he was right, so he led the troops to join his great-grandfather, subordinate to Li Wenzhong, and went to Chizhou to fight hard. He plucked the arrow with his right hand and continued to fight.

古文：取于潜、昌化，克严州，皆预，进万户。
现代文：先后占领于潜、昌化，攻克严州，晋升为万户。
English: It successively occupied Jiuquan and Changhua, conquered Yanzhou, and was promoted to 10,000 households.

古文：苗帅杨完者军乌龙岭，德请曰： 此可袭而取也。 
现代文：苗帅杨完者驻扎在乌龙岭，武德请战，说： 可以袭取。 
English: Miao commander Yang Guanzhong was stationed in Wulongling. Wu De invited him to fight and said, "You can attack and take it."

古文：文忠问故。对曰： 乘高觇之，其部曲徙举不安而声嚣。 
现代文：李文忠问其原因，回答说： 登高观敌，其部曲浮躁不安，吵吵闹闹。 
English: When Li Wenzhong asked the reason, he replied, "To watch the enemy from a high vantage point, its members are impetuous, restless, and noisy.

古文：文忠曰： 善。 
现代文：文忠点头称好。
English: Wenzhong nodded approvingly.

古文：即袭完者，覆其营。
现代文：随即袭击杨完者，歼灭了敌军。
English: He then attacked Yang Guanzhe and annihilated the enemy army.

古文：取兰溪，克诸暨，攻绍兴，皆先登陷阵，伤右臂不顾。
现代文：随后占领兰溪，攻克诸暨，攻打绍兴，在这些战役中，武德都冲锋陷阵在前，置右臂受伤而不顾。
English: Subsequently, he occupied Lanxi, conquered Zhuji, and attacked Shaoxing. In these battles, Wu De was always at the forefront, despite the fact that his right arm was injured.

古文：文忠叹曰： 将士人人如此，何战不捷哉。 
现代文：文忠叹道： 将士如果人人如此，又何难战无不胜呢？ 
English: Wen Zhong sighed, "If every general is like this, why is it so difficult to be invincible?"

古文：蒋英、贺仁德之叛，浙东大震。
现代文：蒋英、贺仁德叛乱，浙东大为震动。
English: Jiang Ying and He Rende rebelled, and East Zhejiang was shaken.

古文：从文忠定金华，又从攻处州。遇仁德于刘山，戈中右股，德引刀断戈，追击之。
现代文：武德跟随文忠平定金华，又转攻处州，在刘山和仁德相遇，右股中戈，武德拔刀断戈，继续追击敌人。
English: Wude followed Wenzhong to pacify Jinhua, and then attacked Zhouzhou. He met Rende on Mount Liu. Wude drew his sword and continued to pursue the enemy.

古文：仁德再战，再败走，遂为其下所杀。
现代文：仁德被武德的部下所杀。
English: Yan De was killed by Wu De's subordinates.

古文：德还师守严。
现代文：武德回师镇守严州。
English: Wu De Hui's division garrisoned Yanzhou.

古文：后二年，定官制，改管军百户。
现代文：过了二年，制定官制，改任管军百户。
English: Two years later, an official system was established, and he was appointed as the governor of 100 households.

古文：从文忠破张士诚兵于诸暨，与诸将援浦城，所过山寨皆下。
现代文：跟从文忠在诸暨打败了张士诚的部队，与诸将援助浦城，所经过的山寨都被攻下。
English: The followers of Wenzhong defeated Zhang Shicheng's troops in Zhuji, and with Zhu's assistance, Pucheng and the surrounding villages were captured.

古文：复从文忠下建、延、汀三州，悉定闽溪诸寨。进管军千户，移守衢，予世袭。
现代文：又跟从文忠攻下建、延、汀三州，全部平定了闽溪诸寨，晋升为管军千户，移镇衢州，给予世袭的凭证。
English: He also conquered Jian, Yan and Ting three prefectures from Wenzhong, all of which leveled the villages of Qixi, was promoted to be in charge of a thousand households, moved to Zhangzhou, and was given a hereditary certificate.

古文：最后从靖海侯吴祯巡海上。
现代文：最后跟从靖海侯吴祯巡视海上。
English: Finally, he inspected the sea with Wu Yao, the governor of Jinghai.

古文：祯以德可任，令守平阳。
现代文：吴祯认为武德可以胜任，令他镇守平阳。
English: Wu Gan thought that Wu De could do the job, and ordered him to guard Pingyang.

古文：在任八年，致仕。
现代文：在任八年，辞官。
English: After eight years in office, he resigned.

古文：及征云南，帝以德宿将，命与诸大帅偕行。
现代文：征讨云南，太祖任武德为宿将，命令和诸大帅同行。
English: For the conquest of Yunnan, the great-grandfather appointed Wu De as the commander-in-chief, and ordered him to accompany the generals.

古文：张鉴，又名明鉴，淮西人。
现代文：张鉴，又名明鉴，淮西人。
English: Zhang Jian, also known as Ming Jian, is from Huaxi.

古文：既归太祖，每攻伐必与德俱，先德卒。
现代文：归附太祖后，每次战斗都与武德在一起，死在武德之前。
English: After returning to his grandfather, he fought with Wu De in every battle and died before Wu De did.

古文：官至江淮行枢密院副使。
现代文：官至江淮行枢密院副使。
English: He was the vice-envoy of the Privy Council to Jianghuai District.

古文：蔡迁，不详其乡里，元末从芝麻李据徐州。
现代文：蔡迁，籍贯不详，元末随芝麻李驻守徐州。
English: Cai Qian, origin unknown, stationed in Xuzhou with Zhima Li at the end of the Yuan Dynasty.

古文：李败，归太祖，为先锋。
现代文：芝麻李战败后，归附太祖，担任先锋。
English: After the defeat of Zhima Li, it was attached to Taizu and served as a vanguard.

古文：从渡江，下采石，克太平，取溧水，破蛮子海牙水寨及陈埜先，皆有功。定集庆，授千户。
现代文：随大军渡江，攻下采石，攻克太平，占领溧水，攻破蛮子海牙水寨和陈聎先，屡立战功，平定集庆，授予千户。
English: He crossed the Yangtze River with a large army, conquered the quarry, conquered Taiping, occupied Surabaya, defeated the barbarians Hague Water Village and Chen Yuxian, repeatedly made war exploits, pacified the gathering, and awarded thousands of households.

古文：从徐达取广德、宁国，迁万户。
现代文：跟从徐达攻取广德、宁国，晋升为万户。
English: He followed Xu Da in conquering Guangde and Ningguo, and was promoted to the top ten thousand households.

古文：进攻常州，获黄元帅，遂为都先锋。
现代文：进攻常州，俘虏了黄元帅，于是担任都先锋。
English: He attacked Changzhou, captured Marshal Huang, and then served as the vanguard.

古文：从征马驮沙，克池州，攻枞阳，从征衢、婺二州，授帐前左翼元帅。
现代文：从征马驮沙，攻克池州，攻打枞阳，从征衢、婺二州，授予帐前左翼元帅。
English: From the conquest of Ma'ansha, the conquest of Chizhou, and the attack on Poyang, from the conquest of Yunnan and Shandong, he was awarded the title of the former left wing marshal.

古文：败陈友谅于龙江，进复太平，取安庆水寨，收九江，败友谅八阵指挥于瑞昌，遂克南昌。
现代文：在龙江打败了陈友谅，进而收复太平，占领安庆水寨，收复九江，在瑞昌打败了陈友谅八阵指挥，攻克南昌。
English: In Longjiang, he defeated Chen Youyong, and then recovered Taiping, occupied Anqing Water Town, and recovered Jiujiang. In Ruichang, he defeated Chen Youyong, the commander of the eight armies, and conquered Nanchang.

古文：从援安丰，攻合肥，战鄱阳。从征武昌，进指挥同知。
现代文：从援安丰，攻打合肥，激战鄱阳，从征武昌，晋升为指挥同知。
English: From supporting Anfeng, attacking Hefei, fighting fiercely in Poyang, from conquering Wuchang, he was promoted to commanding officer.

古文：从常遇春讨平邓克明余党，进攻赣州。取南安、南雄诸郡，还兵追饶鼎臣于茶陵，迁龙骧卫同知。
现代文：随常遇春讨平邓克明余党，进攻赣州，占领南安、南雄诸郡，还兵追击饶鼎臣于茶陵，晋升为龙骧卫同知。
English: In the spring of the following year, he defeated Deng Keming Yu's party, attacked Zhangzhou, occupied Nan'an and Nanxiong counties, and pursued Rao Dingchen to Chaling. He was promoted to Long Jianwei Tongzhi.

古文：从徐达克高邮，破马港，授武德卫指挥使，守淮安，移守黄州。
现代文：跟从徐达攻克高邮，攻破马港，授予武德卫指挥使，镇守淮安，移守黄州。
English: He followed Xu Da in conquering Gaoyou, breaking through Ma Gang, awarding Wu Dewei as commander, guarding Huai'an, and moving to Huangzhou.

古文：从下湘潭、辰、全、道、永诸州，转荆州卫指挥。
现代文：随大军下湘潭、辰、全、道、永诸州，任荆州卫指挥。
English: He accompanied the army to Xiangtan, Chen, Quanzhou, Zhuzhou and Yongzhou, and was appointed commander of the Jingzhou Guards.

古文：进克广西，迁广西行省参政，兼靖江王相，讨平诸叛蛮。
现代文：进而攻克广西，晋升为广西行省参政，兼任靖江王相，讨平诸叛蛮。
English: He then conquered Guangxi, was promoted to participate in the politics of Guangxi Province, and concurrently served as the prime minister of the Jingjiang Province, fighting against rebels and barbarians.

古文：洪武三年九月卒，诏归葬京师，赠安远侯，谥武襄。
现代文：洪武三年九月去世，诏令归葬京师，赠予安远侯，谥号武襄。
English: Hongwu passed away in September of the 3rd year of the 9th year of the 9th year of the 9th year of the 9th year of the 9th year of the 9th year of the 9th year of the 9th year of the 9th year of the 9th year of the 9th year of the 9th year of the 9th year of the 9th year of the 9th year of the 9th year of the 9th year of the 9th year of the 9th year of the 9th year of the 9th year of the 9th year of the 9th year of the 9th year of the 9th year of the 9th year of the 9th year of

古文：文少孤，奉母至孝，元季挈家归太祖，积官都督佥事。卒，追封东海侯，谥孝勇。明臣得谥孝者，文一人而已。
现代文：蔡迁担任将领十五年，未曾独立作战，多半跟从诸将征讨。身经数十战，奋勇当先，横刀立马左右杀敌，敌人不敢近身，遍体伤痕，不堪视之，而蔡迁却不在意，深为太祖器重。
English: Cai Qian served as a general for fifteen years. He had never fought independently, and mostly followed the generals to fight. After dozens of battles, he bravely took the lead, killed the enemy with his sword, the enemy did not dare to get close, and his body was covered with scars. It was unbearable, but Cai Qian did not care, he was too heavy.

古文：王铭，字子敬，和州人。
现代文：去世后，太祖十分痛惜，亲自制文祭奠。王铭，字子敬，和州人。
English: After his death, the great-grandfather was very regretful and personally composed a memorial service. Wang Ming, Zizi Kei, and the people of Wuzhou.

古文：初隶元帅俞通海麾下，从攻蛮子海牙于采石。
现代文：最初隶属俞通海，随军攻蛮子海牙于采石。
English: Originally subordinated to Shantonghai, he followed the army to attack the barbarian Hague in the quarry.

古文：以铭骁勇，选充奇兵。
现代文：因王铭骁勇，挑选为奇兵。
English: Because of Wang Ming's bravery, he was selected as a special soldier.

古文：战方合，帅敢死士大噪突之，拔其水寨。自是数有功。
现代文：交战伊始，他就率敢死队突击敌人，攻占了敌人的水寨，从此多次立功。
English: At the beginning of the war, he led a death squad to attack the enemy, captured the enemy's water fort, and has made many contributions since then.

古文：与吴军战太湖，流矢中右臂，引佩刀出其镞，复战。
现代文：在太湖和吴军交战，右臂中流矢，拔出佩刀割出箭镞，又投入战斗。
English: At Taihu Lake, he fought against the Wu army. With an arrow in his right arm, he pulled out his sword, cut out the arrowhead, and went back into battle.

古文：通海劳之。
现代文：得到了俞通海的嘉奖。
English: Received an award from Shantonghai.

古文：复拔通州之黄桥、鹅项诸寨。
现代文：又随军攻占通州的黄桥、鹅项诸寨。
English: He also accompanied the army to occupy the Yellow Bridge and the villages of Gexiang in Tongzhou.

古文：赐白金文绮。
现代文：赐给白金文绮。
English: Awarded the Platinum Medal.

古文：从取江州，战康郎山及泾江口，复克英山诸寨，擢管军百户。
现代文：龙湾之战，追赶敌人北至采石，王铭独自突入敌阵。敌兵操槊刺伤他的脸。王铭三进三出，杀敌颇多。赐给文绮银碗，挑选为宿卫。随军攻取江州，激战康郎山和泾江口，又攻克英山诸寨，提升为管军百户。
English: In the Battle of Longwan, after chasing the enemy north to the quarry, Wang Ming entered the enemy lines alone. The enemy soldiers stabbed him in the face. Wang Ming went in and out three times, killing a lot of enemies. He gave a silver bowl to Wenyi and selected him as a night watchman. He followed the army to capture Jiangzhou, fought hard against Kanglang Mountain and the mouth of the Minjiang River, and conquered Yingshan villages, and was promoted to be in charge of a hundred households.

古文：从副将军常遇春战湖州之升山。再战旧馆，已，又战乌镇。
现代文：跟从副将军常遇春征战湖州的升山，再征战旧馆，随后又征战乌镇。
English: Following the vice-general, he often encountered the Spring Campaign, the Battle of Shishan in Huzhou, and then the Battle of the Old Pavilion, and then the Battle of Wuzhen.

古文：前后数十战，功多，命守松江。
现代文：前后十几战，功劳甚大，受命镇守松江。
English: He fought in more than a dozen battles, and was ordered to guard the city of Matsue, for which he received great credit.

古文：移太仓，捕斩倭寇千余人，再赐金币。
现代文：移守太仓，捕斩倭寇千余人，再赐给金币。
English: He moved to Taicang, captured and killed more than a thousand wako, and then gave them gold coins.

古文：洪武四年，都试百户诸善用枪者，率莫能与铭抗。
现代文：洪武四年，考察百户中各善用枪者，没有谁能与王铭抗衡。
English: In the fourth year of Hongwu, no one could compete with Wang Ming in the examination of the hundred households who were good at using guns.

古文：累官至长淮卫指挥佥事，移守温州。
现代文：累官至长淮卫指挥佥事，移守温州。
English: General-in-Chief Huai Wei took command of Anji and moved to Wenzhou.

古文：上疏曰： 臣所领镇，外控岛夷，城池楼橹仍陋袭简，非独不足壮国威，猝有风潮之变，捍御无所，势须改为。 
现代文：上奏说： 臣所领镇之地，对外控制海盗，城池楼橹仍然十分简陋，不但不能壮国威，如突遇大风潮水，便毫无抵御能力，势必要进行改造。 
English: Shang Zuo said: In a place where the vassal leads the town and controls the pirates from the outside, the castle tower is still very simple, not only can it not strengthen national prestige, but if there is a sudden wind and tide, it has no resistance and it is imperative to carry out transformation.

古文：帝报可。
现代文：太祖批示同意。
English: The great-grandfather consented to the instruction.

古文：于是缮城浚濠，悉倍于旧。加筑外垣，起海神山属郭公山，首尾二千余丈，宏敞壮丽，屹然东浙巨镇。
现代文：于是修缮城池和濠沟，加筑外垣，从海神山到郭公山，首尾二千余丈，宏伟壮丽，屹立东浙巨镇之中。
English: As a result, the castle moat and the moat ditch were repaired, and the outer wall was added, from Haishenshan to Guo Gongshan, more than two thousand meters high, magnificent and magnificent, standing in the middle of the huge town of East Zhejiang.

古文：帝甚嘉之，予世袭。
现代文：太祖十分赞赏，给予世袭。
English: The great-grandfather was very appreciative and gave it to the family.

古文：铭尝请告暂还和州。
现代文：王铭曾请求暂时回到和州。
English: Wang Ming had requested to temporarily return to Hezhou.

古文：温士女遮道送迎。
现代文：温州的百姓夹道迎送。
English: The people of Wenzhou lined up to welcome him.

古文：长吏皆相顾叹曰： 吾属为天子牧民，民视吾属去来漠然，愧王指挥多矣。 
现代文：长吏相顾叹息道 ：我等为天子统治百姓，但百姓对我辈的去来十分漠然，比起王指挥逊色多了。 
English: The chiefs looked at each other and sighed, "We wait for the Son of Heaven to rule the people, but the people are very indifferent to our generation, much inferior to the king and commander."

古文：历右军都督佥事，二十六年坐蓝玉党死。
现代文：历任右军都督佥事，二十六年，受蓝玉党案株连而死。
English: Anecdote of successive right-wing military governors, twenty-six years old, by the Blue and White Party case, died.

古文：宁正，字正卿，寿州人。
现代文：宁正，字正卿，寿州人。
English: Ning Zheng, also known as Zhengqing, was a native of Shoushou.

古文：幼为韦德成养子，冒韦姓。
现代文：幼年为韦德成养子，冒姓韦。
English: In his childhood, Wade became an adopted son and assumed the surname Wei.

古文：元末随德成来归，从渡江。
现代文：元末随德成归附朱元璋，随大军渡江。
English: At the end of the Yuan Dynasty, Zhu Yuanzhang was attached to Desheng, and he crossed the river with a large army.

古文：德成战殁宣州，以正领其众。
现代文：德成战死宣州，太祖命宁正统领其部队。
English: After the death of Emperor Dezong in the Battle of Xuanzhou, Emperor Taizu appointed Emperor Ning Zheng to lead his troops.

古文：积功授凤翔卫指挥副使。
现代文：累功被授予凤翔卫指挥副使。
English: Feng Xiangwei was awarded the title of deputy envoy.

古文：从定中原，入元都，招降元将士八千余人。
现代文：随大军平定中原，进入元都，招降元将士八千余人。
English: With the great army, the Central Plains were pacified, the capital of Yuan was entered, and more than eight thousand Yuan soldiers were recruited.

古文：傅友德自真定略平定州，以正守真定。
现代文：傅友德自真定平定定州，命宁正镇守真定。
English: Fu Youde is from Zhending, Pingding, Dingzhou, and his life is devoted to Zhending.

古文：已，从大军取陕西。
现代文：随后跟从大军攻取陕西。
English: Subsequently, he followed the large army to conquer Shaanxi Province.

古文：冯胜克临洮，留正守之。
现代文：冯胜攻克临洮，留下宁正镇守。
English: Feng Sheng conquered Linyi, leaving Ningzheng to defend the town.

古文：大军围庆阳，正驻邠州，绝敌声援。
现代文：大军围攻庆阳，宁正驻守在州，断绝敌人的援军。
English: A large army besieged Qingyang, and Ning was stationed in the prefecture to cut off the enemy's reinforcements.

古文：庆阳下，还守临洮。
现代文：庆阳攻克后，宁正还是镇守临洮。
English: After Qingyang was conquered, Ningzheng was still the town guard of Linyi.

古文：从邓愈破定西，克河州。
现代文：又随邓愈攻破定西，攻克河州。
English: He also followed Deng Yu to break through Dingxi and conquer Hezhou.

古文：洪武三年，授河州卫指挥使。
现代文：洪武三年，被授予河州卫指挥使。
English: In the third year of Hongwu, he was awarded the post of commander of the Hezhou Garrison.

古文：上言： 西民转粟饷军甚劳，而茶布可易粟。
现代文：上奏说 ：西北的百姓转运军饷十分辛劳，而茶布又可以交换粮食。
English: The prelude said: The people of the northwest are working very hard to transport military supplies, but tea cloth can be exchanged for grain.

古文：请以茶布给军，令自相贸易，省挽运之苦。 
现代文：请求用茶布供给军队，让他们去换取粮食，以减省运输之苦。 
English: The request was to supply the troops with tea cloth and let them go in exchange for grain to save the trouble of transportation.

古文：诏从之。
现代文：太祖诏令许可。
English: He complied.

古文：正初至卫，城邑空虚，勤于劳徕。
现代文：宁正刚到河州卫时，城邑空虚，他勤于招徕劳力。
English: When Ning Zheng had just arrived in Hezhou, the city was empty and he was busy recruiting labor.

古文：不数年，河州遂为乐土。
现代文：不过几年，河州就成了富裕之区。
English: Within a few years, however, Hezhou became a wealthy area.

古文：玺书嘉劳，始复甯姓。
现代文：太祖致信嘉奖，恢复了他的宁姓。
English: The great-grandfather sent a letter of commendation and restored his Ning surname.

古文：兼领宁夏卫事。修筑汉、唐旧渠，引河水溉田，开屯数万顷，兵食饶足。
现代文：兼领宁夏卫事，修筑汉、唐时的旧渠，引来黄河水灌溉田地，开垦田地数万顷，军粮十分丰足。
English: He also took charge of Ningxia's defense, built the old canals that were used during the Han and Tang Dynasties, brought in Yellow River water to irrigate fields, reclaimed tens of thousands of hectares of fields, and had plenty of grain for the army.

古文：十三年从沐英北征，擒元平章脱火赤、知院爱足，取全宁四部。
现代文：十三年，宁正跟从沐英北征，活捉了元平章脱火赤、知院爱足，占领了全宁四部。
English: In the thirteenth year, Ning Zheng followed Mu Ying on the Northern Expedition, captured Yuan Pingzhang, De Hui Chia, and Zhiyin Ai Fu alive, and occupied all four parts of Ning.

古文：十五年迁四川都指挥使，讨平松、茂诸州。
现代文：十五年，晋升为四川都指挥，平定了松、茂诸州。
English: Fifteen years later, he was promoted to the commander of Sichuan Province, and pacified Song and Maozhou Provinces.

古文：云南初定，命正与冯诚共守之。
现代文：云南平定不久，命令宁正和冯胜共同镇守。
English: Soon after Yunnan was pacified, Ning Zheng and Feng Sheng were ordered to jointly defend the town.

古文：思伦发作乱，正破之于摩沙勒寨，斩首千五百。
现代文：思伦发作乱，宁正于摩沙勒寨打败敌人，杀敌一千五百人。
English: In Siren, a riot broke out, and Ning Zheng defeated the enemy in Moshale Village, killing fifteen hundred of the enemy.

古文：已，敌众大集，围定边。
现代文：不久敌人集中大部队，围攻定边。
English: Soon the enemy concentrated a large force and besieged the settlement.

古文：沐英分兵三队，正将左军，鏖战，大败之。语在《英传》。
现代文：沐英兵分三路，宁正带领左路军，双方鏖战，大败敌人，详情见《沐英传》。
English: Mu Ying's soldiers were divided into three groups, with Ning Zheng leading the left group. The two sides fought and defeated the enemy. For details, see "The Legend of Mu Ying."

古文：土酋阿资叛，复从英讨降之。
现代文：土酋阿资叛乱，又跟从沐英讨伐降服。
English: Tu Hui and Azi rebelled, and followed Mu Ying to fight and surrender.

古文：英卒，诏授正左都督代镇。
现代文：沐英去世后，授予宁正左都督替代。
English: After Mu Ying's death, Ning Zhengzao was appointed as the new governor.

古文：已，复命为平羌将军，总川、陕兵讨平阶、文叛寇张者。
现代文：随即又任命为平羌将军，总领川、陕的部队讨伐平定了阶、文叛寇张者。
English: He was immediately appointed as the general of Pingyao, the general leader of the troops of Sichuan and Shaanxi to fight and level the ranks, and the traitor Zhang.

古文：二十八年从秦王讨平洮州番，还京。
现代文：二十八年，跟从秦王讨平洮州番，回到京城。
English: In the 28th year, he followed the Qin King to settle the Zhangzhou Ban and returned to Beijing.

古文：明年卒。
现代文：第二年去世。
English: He died the following year.

古文：又袁义，庐江人，本张姓，德胜族弟也。
现代文：袁义，庐江人，本姓张，是德胜的族弟。
English: Yuan Yi, a native of the Minjiang River, whose real surname was Zhang, was Desheng's younger brother.

古文：初为双刀赵总管，守安庆，败赵同佥、丁普郎于沙子港。
现代文：最初为双刀赵的总管，镇守安庆，在沙子港打败赵同佥、丁普郎。
English: At first, he was the head of the double-sword Zhao, the town guard Anqing, and defeated Zhao Tongyao and Ding Puro in Shazi Port.

古文：左君弼招之，弗从。
现代文：左君弼招抚他，未从。
English: Zuo Junjun caresses him, but he does not follow.

古文：德胜战死，始来附。为帐前亲军元帅，赐姓名。
现代文：德胜战死，才来归附太祖，任命为帐前亲军元帅，赐给姓名。
English: It was only after his death in battle that he came to be attached to his great-grandfather. He was appointed as the marshal of his family's army and given his name.

古文：数从征伐，积功为兴武卫指挥佥事。
现代文：多次从征讨伐，累功升为兴武卫指挥佥事。
English: He fought in the crusade many times, and was promoted to commander of Xingwuwei.

古文：从大将军北征，败元平章俺普达等于通州，走贺宗哲、詹同于泽、潞，功最。
现代文：跟从大将军北征，在通州打败了元平章俺普达等人，在泽、潞州赶跑了贺宗哲、詹同，功劳最大。
English: He followed the general to the Northern Expedition, defeated Yuan Pingzhang and Pu Da and others in Tongzhou, and chased away He Zongzhe and Zhan Tong in Ze and Zhangzhou, with the greatest merit.

古文：复从定陕西，败元豫王兵。
现代文：又从定陕西，打败了元豫王的部队。
English: He also defeated the troops of Yuan Yu Wang from Ding Shaanxi.

古文：与诸将合攻庆阳。
现代文：与诸将联合攻打庆阳。
English: and other generals to jointly attack Qingyang.

古文：张良臣兵骤薄义营，义坚壁不为动，俟其懈，力击破之。
现代文：张良臣的部队突然攻击袁义的兵营，袁义坚壁不动，待敌懈怠，奋力攻击，大败敌人。
English: Zhang Liangchen's troops suddenly attacked Yuan Yi's barracks. Yuan Yi stood firm, waited for the enemy to slacken, fought hard, and defeated the enemy.

古文：走扩廓军于定西，南取兴元。进本卫同知，调羽林卫，移镇辽东。
现代文：在定西赶跑了扩廓的军队，南取兴元，晋升为本卫同知，调至羽林卫，移镇辽东。
English: In Dingxi, he chased away the expanding army, took Xingyuan from the south, was promoted to the same rank as Hongwei, transferred to Ulinwei, and moved to Liaodong.

古文：已，从沐英征云南，克普定诸城，留镇楚雄。
现代文：随后跟从沐英征讨云南，攻克普定诸城，留守楚雄。
English: Subsequently, he followed Mu Ying to invade Yunnan, conquered the cities of Puding, and stayed in Chuxiong.

古文：蛮人屡叛。义积粮高垒，且守且战，以功迁楚雄卫指挥使。
现代文：蛮人屡次叛乱，袁义储积粮食高筑堡垒，且守且战，因功晋升为楚雄卫指挥使。
English: The barbarians repeatedly rebelled, Yuan Yi stored grain and built high fortresses, and defended and fought, and was promoted to commander of Chu Xiong Wei for his merits.

古文：尝入朝，帝厚加慰劳。
现代文：曾入朝，太祖倍加慰劳。
English: Once he entered the imperial court, his great-grandfather had to work twice as hard.

古文：以其老，命医为染须鬓，俾还任以威远人，且特赐银印宠异之。
现代文：因年老，命令医生为他染须鬓，使他回到岗位上威显远方，且特赐银印以示宠幸他。
English: Because of his old age, he ordered the doctor to dye his beard for him, so that he could return to his post and look far away, and gave him a special silver seal to show his favor.

古文：历二十年，垦田筑堰，治城郭桥梁，规画甚备。
现代文：历任二十年，垦田筑堰，修建城郭桥梁，规划十分完备。
English: For the past twenty years, Putian has been building weirs and bridges, and the planning is very complete.

古文：军民德之。
现代文：军民赞颂他的功德。
English: The military and the people praised his merits.

古文：建文元年征还，为右军都督府佥事，进同知，卒官。
现代文：建文元年应召返回，任命为右军督府佥事，晋升同知，死于任上。
English: In the first year of the Jianwen era, he was called back, appointed to the Right Army Governor's Office, promoted to the same rank, and died in office.

古文：金兴旺，不详所始。
现代文：金兴旺，早年事迹不详。
English: Jin Xingwang, his early years are unknown.

古文：为威武卫指挥佥事，进同知。
现代文：担任威武卫指挥佥事，晋升同知。
English: He served as the commanding officer of Weiwuwei Anecdote and was promoted to the same rank.

古文：洪武元年，大将军徐达自河南至陕西，请益兵守潼关。以兴旺副郭兴守之，进指挥使。
现代文：洪武元年，大将军徐达自河南至陕西，请求增加部队守卫潼关，命兴旺协助郭兴镇守，晋升为指挥使。
English: In the first year of Hongwu, General Xu Da traveled from Henan to Shaanxi to request more troops to guard Shaoguan. He was promoted to commander and assisted Guo Xing to guard the town.

古文：明年攻临洮，移兴旺守凤翔，转军饷。
现代文：第二年攻打临洮，兴旺移师镇守凤翔，转运军饷。
English: In the second year of attacking Linyi, Xingwang transferred his division to the garrison of Fengxiang, and the troops were transported.

古文：未几，贺宗哲攻凤翔，兴旺与知府周焕婴城守。
现代文：不久，贺宗哲攻打凤翔，兴旺和知府周焕守城。
English: Soon after, He Zongzhe attacked Fengxiang, and Xingwang and Zhou Huan defended the city.

古文：敌编荆为大箕，形如半舫。每箕五人，负之攻城，矢石不能入。
现代文：敌人用荆条编成大箕，形状似半舫，背负着大箕攻城，矢石不能进入。
English: The enemy made a large yakitori, shaped like a half yakitori, from strips of wicker. They attacked the city with the large yakitori on their backs, and Yaseishi was unable to enter.

古文：投藁焚之，辄扬起。
现代文：兴旺投稻草焚烧，但稻草遇风扬起。
English: He threw the straw into the fire, but the straw was blown away by the wind.

古文：乃置钩藁中，掷着其隙，火遂炽，敌弃箕走。
现代文：于是把铁钩置于稻草中，再把稻草掷入敌人的空隙中，火着了，敌人弃箕而逃。
English: So he put the iron hook in the straw, and then threw the straw into the enemy's gap. It caught fire, and the enemy abandoned the plow and fled.

古文：复为地道薄城。城中以矛迎刺，敌死甚众，而攻不已。
现代文：敌人又改从地道攻城，城中士卒用长矛迎刺，敌人死伤很多，但仍进攻不止。
English: The enemy changed to attacking the city from the tunnel, and the city sergeant met the stab with a spear. The enemy suffered many deaths and injuries, but still continued to attack.

古文：兴旺与焕谋曰： 彼谓我援师不至，必不敢出。
现代文：兴旺和周焕商量说 ：敌人认为我们援军不至，必不敢出城。
English: Xingwang and Zhou Huan discussed and said, "The enemy thinks that if we don't get reinforcements, they won't dare to leave the city."

古文：乘其不意击之，可败也。 
现代文：我们出其不意，主动攻击，可以败敌。 
English: We can surprise, attack, and defeat the enemy.

古文：潜出西北门，奋战，敌少却。
现代文：于是率兵潜出西北门，奋力攻战，敌人稍有退却。
English: As a result, he led his soldiers to sneak out of the northwest gate, fought hard, and the enemy retreated slightly.

古文：会百户王辂自临洮收李思齐降卒东还，即以其众入城共守。
现代文：这时正遇上百户王辂自临洮收编了李思齐的部队返回，进城共同守卫。
English: At this time, Wang Yao, who had collected Li Sizi's troops from Linyi, was returning to the city to jointly guard it.

古文：敌拔营去。众欲追之，辂曰： 未败而退，诱我也。 
现代文：敌人撤走，众将都想追击，王辂说 ：敌人没败而退，是诱惑我们追击。 
English: When the enemy retreated, the generals all wanted to pursue them. Wang Yao said, "The enemy retreating without defeat is a temptation for us to pursue them."

古文：遣骑侦之。至五里坡，伏果发。
现代文：于是派骑兵侦察，到五里坡，果然发现敌兵设伏。
English: So he sent his cavalry to reconnoitre, and when they got to Wuli Po, they found the enemy in a crouch.

古文：还师复围城。
现代文：敌人设计不成，又回师攻城。
English: The enemy's plan failed, and the division attacked the city again.

古文：众议欲走。兴旺叱曰： 天子以城畀我，宁可去耶！ 
现代文：众人商量准备逃走，兴旺叱责说： 这座城既然交给了我们，我们就应坚守到底，怎么能逃走呢？ 
English: The people discussed and prepared to flee, but Xing Rong scolded them, saying, "Since this city has been handed over to us, we should hold fast to the end. How can we escape?

古文：以辂所将皆新附，虑生变，乃括城中赀畜积庭中，令曰： 敌少缓，当大犒新兵。 
现代文：因王辂的部队都是新附的，担心他们叛变，于是收集城中的钱财和牲畜，放于庭中，下令道 ：敌人攻击稍缓时，当大大地犒劳新兵。 
English: As Wang Xuan's troops were all new recruits, he feared that they would mutiny, so he collected the city's money and livestock, placed them in the courtyard, and ordered: When the enemy's attack is a little slow, reward the recruits greatly.

古文：新兵喜，协力固守。相持十五日，敌闻庆阳下，乃引去。
现代文：新兵十分高兴，齐心协力固守城池，和敌人相持十五天，敌人听说庆阳被攻下，匆忙撤走。
English: The new soldiers were very happy. They made a concerted effort to defend the city and held out against the enemy for fifteen days. When the enemy heard that Qingyang had been captured, they hastily withdrew.

古文：帝遣使以金绮劳兴旺等。
现代文：太祖派使者用金绮犒劳兴旺等人。
English: The great-grandfather sent an emissary with gold ingots to encourage the people to work hard.

古文：明年，达入沔州，遣兴旺与张龙由凤翔入连云栈，合攻兴元。
现代文：第二年，徐达进入沔州，派兴旺和张龙由凤翔进入连云栈，联合攻打兴元。
English: In the second year, Xu Da entered Zhangzhou, sent Xingwang and Zhang Long from Fengxiang into Lianyungang, and jointly attacked Xingyuan.

古文：守将降，以兴旺守之，擢大都督府佥事。
现代文：敌守将投降，命兴旺镇守，兴旺被提升为大都督府佥事。
English: The enemy defenders will surrender, the life of Xingwang will be preserved, and Xingwang will be promoted to the grand governor's office.

古文：蜀将吴友仁帅众三万寇兴元，兴旺悉城中兵三千御敌。
现代文：蜀将吴友仁率兵三万进攻兴元，兴旺率领城中的全部兵力共计三千人御敌。
English: Shu sent Wu Youren and 30,000 soldiers to attack Xingyuan, while Xingwang led all the troops in the city, a total of 3,000 against the enemy.

古文：面中流矢，拔矢复战，斩数百人。
现代文：他脸中流矢，拔出后又投入战斗，杀敌数百人。
English: He had an arrow in the middle of his face, pulled out and then went into battle, killing hundreds of enemies.

古文：敌益众，乃敛兵入城。
现代文：敌人越来越多，于是收兵进城。
English: As the number of enemies increased, the army was called into the city.

古文：友仁决濠填堑，为必克计。
现代文：友仁决濠填堑，誓要攻破此城。
English: Tomohito decided to fill the moat and vowed to break through the city.

古文：达闻之，令傅友德夜袭木槽关，攻斗山寨。人持十炬，连亘山上。
现代文：徐达得知，命令傅友德夜袭木槽关，攻打斗山寨，每人拿十个火炬，相互连接在山上。
English: Xu Da learned that Fu Youde was ordered to attack the groove gate at night, attack the fighting cottage, each person take ten torches, and connect them to each other on the mountain.

古文：友仁惊遁。
现代文：友仁十分害怕，逃跑了。
English: Tomohito was very scared and ran away.

古文：兴旺出兵蹑之，坠崖石死者无算。友仁自是气夺。
现代文：兴旺出兵攻打，敌人坠入悬崖而死的不计其数，友仁从此元气大伤。
English: Xingwang sent troops to attack, the enemy fell into the cliff and died countless times, and Tomohito was severely injured.

古文：取福建，克元都、定西，俱有功，授大都督府佥事，世指挥使。花茂，巢县人。
现代文：此时兴旺威震陇、蜀。而建国初诸都督中，守城功劳最大的，除兴旺外，首推费子贤。花茂，巢县人。
English: At this time, Xingwang dominated Shandong and Shandong. Among the governors at the beginning of the founding of the People's Republic of China, Feizi Xian, a native of Chaoxian, made the greatest contribution to the defense of the city.

古文：初从陈埜先，已而来归。
现代文：最初跟从陈聎先，不久归附太祖。
English: At first, he followed Chen Xuan, but soon became attached to his great-grandfather.

古文：从定江左，灭陈友谅。平中原、山西、陕西。积功授武昌卫副千户。
现代文：随大军平定江左，消灭陈友谅，平定中原、山西、陕西，累积功劳授予武昌卫副千户。
English: With the great army, he pacified the Yangtze River, eliminated Chen Youxuan, and pacified the Central Plains, Shanxi, and Shaanxi. Accumulated merits were awarded to Wuchang Weizhou and thousands of households.

古文：征西蜀。克瞿唐关，入重庆。下左、右两江及田州。进神策卫指挥佥事。调广州左卫。平阳春、清远、英德、翁源、博罗诸山寨叛蛮及东莞、龙川诸县乱民，进指挥同知。平电白、归善贼，再迁都指挥同知，世袭指挥使。
现代文：征讨西蜀，攻克瞿塘关，进入重庆，攻下左、右两江和田州，晋升为神策卫指挥佥事，调任广州左卫，平定阳春、靖远、英德、翁源诸山寨的叛蛮以及东莞、龙川诸县的乱民，晋升为指挥同知；平定电白、归善的乱贼，又晋升为都指挥同知，世袭指挥使。
English: He was promoted to the commander of the Divine Defense Corps, transferred to the left guard of Guangzhou, and promoted to the commander of Tongzhi to suppress the rebellions of Yangchun, Jingyuan, Yingde, and Wengyuan, as well as the disorderly people in Dongguan and Longchuan counties. He was also promoted to the commander of Tongzhi to suppress the bandits of Dibai and Guishan, and promoted to the commander of Tongzhi and hereditary commander of Tongzhi.

古文：数剿连州、广西湖广诸瑶贼。
现代文：多次围剿连州、广西、湖广诸瑶贼。
English: The bandits repeatedly besieged Lianzhou, Guangxi, and Huguang.

古文：上言： 广东南边大海，奸宄出没。东莞、笋冈诸县逋逃蜒户，附居海岛。遇官军则诡称捕鱼；遇番贼则同为寇盗。飘忽不常，难于讯诘。
现代文：曾上奏说 ：广东南临大海，犯法作乱之徒出没，东莞、笋冈诸县逋逃譙户，附居于海岛，遇上官军则诡称捕鱼，遇番贼则同为寇盗，飘忽不定，难于讯诘。
English: Zeng Shangsuo said: "Guangdong is south of the sea, and lawbreakers haunt it. Dongguan and Shougang counties have fled their homes and live on islands. When they encounter government troops, they call it fishing, and when they encounter bandits, they call it robbery. They are erratic and difficult to detect.

古文：不若籍以为兵，庶便约束。 
现代文：不如把他们征籍为兵，这样可望约束他们。 
English: It would be better to conscript them as soldiers, which would hopefully restrain them.

古文：次子英，果毅有父风，亦以军功为广东都指挥使，有声永乐中。
现代文：又请求设置依山傍海的广海、碣石、神电等二十四卫所，修筑城池，召集海岛隐居躲避清查科派的无籍人士据守，并在山海要害地设立城堡屯军，以防备不测，都得认可。晋升为都指挥使。很久以后去世，赐葬安德门。
English: He also requested the establishment of twenty-four garrisons, such as Guanghai, Shishi, and Shinden, along the mountains and the sea, the construction of a castle pond, the convocation of stateless persons to live in seclusion on the island to avoid the Qing Chaco faction, and the establishment of a castle garrison in the mountains and the sea to prevent accidents, all of which had to be approved. He was promoted to the capital commanding envoy. He died a long time later, and was buried in Andemun.

古文：丁玉，初名国珍，河中人。
现代文：丁玉，初名国珍，河中人。
English: Ding Yu, originally named Guozhen, was born in the middle of the river.

古文：仕韩林儿为御史，才辨有时誉。
现代文：曾在韩林儿帐下担任御史，时人对他的才辩颇为赞赏。
English: He once served as an imperial historian under Han Lin Er, and people at the time appreciated his talent for debate.

古文：吕珍破安丰，玉来归。
现代文：吕珍攻占安丰，丁玉前来归附太祖。
English: Lü Zhen conquered Anfeng, and Ding Yu came to annex it to his great-grandfather.

古文：随征彭蠡，为九江知府。
现代文：接着随征彭蠡，担任九江知府。
English: Next, he served as governor of Jiujiang together with Zheng Peng Rong.

古文：大兵还建康，彭泽山民叛，玉聚乡兵讨平之。
现代文：大兵回到建康，彭泽山民叛乱，丁玉召集乡兵平定。
English: The soldiers returned to Jiankang, the residents of Pengze Mountain rebelled, and Ding Yu gathered the villagers to quell the rebellion.

古文：太祖嘉其武略，命兼指挥，更名玉。
现代文：太祖嘉奖他的武略，命兼任指挥，改名为玉。
English: The great-grandfather commended his bravery, ordered him to serve as a conductor, and changed his name to Jade.

古文：从傅友德克衡州，以指挥同知镇其地。复调守永州。
现代文：跟随傅友德攻克衡州，任指挥同知镇守该地，又调守永州。
English: He followed Fu Youde to conquer Hengzhou, commanded Tongzhi Town to guard the place, and was transferred to guard Yongzhou.

古文：玉有文武才，抚辑新附，威望甚著。
现代文：丁玉文武双全，安抚新归附的兵民，威望很高。
English: Dingyu's culture and military prowess are both complete, appeasing the newly annexed soldiers and civilians, and his prestige is very high.

古文：洪武元年，进都指挥使，寻兼行省参政，镇广西。
现代文：洪武元年，晋升为都指挥使，不久兼任行省参政，镇守广西。
English: In the first year of Hongwu, he was promoted to the capital commander, and soon he also served as a provincial politician and the town guard of Guangxi.

古文：十年召为右御史大夫。
现代文：十年，召为右御史大夫。
English: Ten years later, he was called to the position of U-goshi-taifu.

古文：四川威茂土酋董贴里叛，以玉为平羌将军讨之。
现代文：四川威茂土酋董贴里叛乱，任命丁玉为平羌将军率兵征讨。
English: Sichuan Weimao chief Dong Duili rebelled and appointed Ding Yu to lead the army under the command of General Pingyao.

古文：至威州，贴里降。承制设威州千户所。
现代文：到威州，贴里投降，承制设立了威州千户所。
English: Went to Weizhou, capitulated at Teli, and undertook the establishment of Weizhou Thousand Households.

古文：十二年平松州，玉遣指挥高显等城之，请立军卫。
现代文：十二年，平定松州，丁玉派指挥高显等人筑城，请求设立军卫。
English: In the twelfth year, Pingding Songzhou, Ding Yu sent the commander Gao Xian and others to build the city and requested the establishment of the military guard.

古文：帝谓松州山多田少，耕种不能赡军，守之非策。
现代文：太祖说松州山多田少，耕种不能赡养军队，驻守不是上策。
English: The great-grandfather said that there were too few fields in Songzhou Mountain, farming could not support the army, and garrisoning was not the best strategy.

古文：玉言：松州为西羌要地，军卫不可罢。遂设官筑戍如玉议。
现代文：丁玉说松州是西羌的要地，军卫不可撤消，于是采纳了丁玉的建议，设置官署戍守。
English: Ding Yu said that Songzhou is an important place in Xidi, and the military guard cannot be revoked, so he adopted Ding Yu's suggestion to set up a government office to guard it.

古文：会四川妖人彭普贵为乱，焚掠十四州县。指挥普亮等不能克，命玉移军讨灭之。
现代文：正遇上四川彭普贵作乱，焚掠十四州县，指挥普亮等人没能平定，朝廷命令丁玉移军讨灭。
English: When Peng Pu Gui of Sichuan made a riot, burned and plundered fourteen counties, and the commander Pu Liang and others failed to quell it, the imperial court ordered Ding Yu to move his army to put an end to it.

古文：帝手敕褒美，转左御史大夫。
现代文：太祖手谕褒奖，转任左御史大夫。
English: The great-great-grandfather received a commendation and was transferred to the post of Left Imperial Historian.

古文：师还，拜大都督府左都督。
现代文：回师后，任命为大都督府左都督。
English: After returning to his teacher, he was appointed as the left governor of the prefectural government.

古文：十三年坐胡惟庸姻诛。
现代文：十三年，因是胡惟庸的姻亲而被杀。
English: Thirteen years later, he was killed for being Hu Wei Yong's in-law.

古文：郭云，南阳人。
现代文：郭云，南阳人。
English: Guo Yun, from Nanyang.

古文：长八尺余，状貌魁伟。
现代文：身长八尺多，相貌伟岸。
English: He is more than eight feet tall, and his appearance is magnificent.

古文：元季聚义兵保裕州泉白寨，累官湖广行省平章政事。
现代文：元末召集义兵保卫裕州泉白寨，累官至湖广行省平章政事。
English: At the end of the Yuan Dynasty, volunteers were called up to defend Yuzhou Quanbaizhai, and officials were sent to Huguang to carry out the political affairs of Pingzhang Province.

古文：元主北奔，河南郡县皆下，云独坚守。
现代文：元主北逃，河南郡县都被明军攻下，唯郭云独自坚守。
English: The former lord fled to the north, and all the counties in Henan were captured by the Ming army, but Guoyun held out alone.

古文：大将军徐达遣指挥曹谅围之，云出战，被执。
现代文：大将军徐达派指挥曹谅围攻，郭云出城迎战，被俘。
English: The great general Xu Da sent the commander Cao Yuanzhong to besiege, Guo Yun went out of the city to fight, and was captured.

古文：大将军呵之跪。
现代文：大将军呵斥他下跪。
English: The general yelled at him to kneel.

古文：云植立，嫚骂求死。
现代文：郭云却立而不拜，大骂求死。
English: Guo Yun, however, did not bow, but swore loudly and begged for death.

古文：胁以刃，不动。
现代文：兵卒用刀刺他加以恐吓，他不为所动。
English: A soldier threatened him with a knife, but he was unmoved.

古文：大将军壮之，系送京师。
现代文：大将军十分欣赏他的勇敢，把他押送京师。
English: The general greatly appreciated his bravery and sent him to the capital.

古文：太祖奇其状貌，释之。
现代文：太祖对他的印象也很好，释放了他。
English: His great-grandfather also had a good impression of him and released him.

古文：时帝方阅《汉书》，问识字否，对曰： 识。 
现代文：当时太祖正在阅读《汉书》，问他是否识字，他回答说识字。
English: At that time, the great-grandfather was reading "Chinese Classics" and asked him if he was literate. He replied that he was literate.

古文：因以书授之。
现代文：太祖就把书交给了他。
English: The great-grandfather handed him the book.

古文：云诵其书甚习。
现代文：郭云很熟练地朗读了《汉书》。
English: Guo Yun read out the "Chinese Book" very skillfully.

古文：帝大喜，厚加赏赐，用为溧水知县，有政声。
现代文：太祖十分高兴，赏赐十分丰厚，任用他为溧水知县，政绩和声望颇佳。
English: The great-grandfather was very happy, the reward was very rich, he was appointed as the governor of Shishuizhixian, and his political achievements and reputation were quite good.

古文：帝益以为贤，特擢南阳卫指挥佥事，使还乡收故部曲，就戍其地，凡数年卒。
现代文：太祖越发认为他贤良，特晋升为南阳卫指挥佥事，要他还乡收集旧部，戍守当地。数年后去世。
English: The great-grandfather thought him more and more virtuous, and he was specially promoted to Nanyang Wei commander. He asked him to go back to his hometown to collect old troops and guard the local area. He died a few years later.

古文：长子洪，年甫十三。
现代文：长子郭洪，年仅十三岁。
English: The eldest son, Guo Hong, is only 13 years old.

古文：帝为下制曰： 云出田间，倡义旗，保乡曲，崎岖累年，竭心所事。
现代文：太祖下谕道 ：郭云出自乡间，倡义旗保卫乡里，生平坎坷，竭尽全力。
English: The great-grandfather said: Guo Yun came from the countryside, advocated the banner to defend the countryside, had a bumpy life, and did his best.

古文：王师北伐，人神响应。而云数战不屈，势穷援绝，终无异志。
现代文：王师北伐，人人响应，但郭云数战不屈服，势穷援绝，最终仍无异心。
English: Wang Shi's Northern Expedition, everyone responded, but Guo Yun did not give in to several battles, the situation was desperate, and in the end there was still no objection.

古文：朕嘉其节概。试之有司，则闾阎颂德；俾镇故乡，则军民乐业。
现代文：我赞赏他的气节，在有关地方试用，百姓都歌颂他的恩德，让他镇守故乡，则军民安居乐业。
English: I appreciate his gusto, try it in the relevant places, the people all praise his benevolence, let him guard his hometown, then the military and the people can live and work in peace.

古文：虽无汗马之勋，倒戈之效，治绩克著，忠义凛然。
现代文：他虽没有汗马功劳，倒戈之功，但政绩显著，忠义凛然。
English: Although he did not have any outstanding achievements, but he had remarkable political achievements and was loyal.

古文：子洪可入开国功臣列，授宣武将军、飞熊卫亲军指挥使司佥事，世袭。 
现代文：他儿子郭洪可列入开国功臣行列，授予宣武将军、飞熊卫亲军指挥使司佥事，并予以世袭。 
English: His son Guo Hong can be included in the ranks of the founding heroes, awarded to General Xuanwu, Feixiong Weixin's army commander, and be hereditary.

古文：其同时以降将予世职者有王溥。
现代文：同时对降将予以世袭职位的还有王溥。
English: At the same time, Wang Yao, who will be given a hereditary position, will also be demoted.

古文：溥，安仁人。
现代文：王溥，安仁人。
English: Wang Yao, a native of Anren.

古文：仕陈友谅为平章，守建昌。
现代文：在陈友谅部下任平章，镇守建昌。
English: In Chen Youzhen's subordinates, he was assigned to Pingzhang, and the town guard was Jianchang.

古文：太祖命将攻之，不克。
现代文：太祖命令将领前往攻打，没有攻下。
English: Taizu ordered his generals to attack, but they did not succeed.

古文：朱亮祖击于饶之安仁港，亦失利。
现代文：朱亮祖在饶州安仁港攻打，也失利。
English: Zhu Liangzu's attack on Anren Port in Raozhou also failed.

古文：友谅将李明道之寇信州也，溥弟汉二在军，俱为胡大海擒，归于行省李文忠，文忠命二人招溥。
现代文：陈友谅的将领李明道进攻信州，王溥的弟弟汉二在军中，都被胡大海俘虏，归附行省李文忠，文忠命令他们两人招降王溥。
English: Chen Youzhen's general Li Mingdao attacked Shinshu, and Wang Yao's younger brother Han Er was in the army. Both were captured by Hu Hai and turned over to Governor Li Wenzhong. Wenzhong ordered both of them to recruit and surrender Wang Yao.

古文：是岁，太祖拔江州，友谅走武昌，溥乃遣使降，命仍守建昌。
现代文：这一年太祖占领了江州，陈友谅逃至武昌，王溥才派使者请降，仍受命镇守建昌。
English: In the same year, Emperor Taizu occupied Jiangzhou, Chen Youxian fled to Wuchang, and Wang Xi only sent an envoy to ask for surrender, but he was still ordered to defend Jianchang.

古文：明年，太祖次龙兴，帅其众来见，数慰劳。从归建康，赐第聚宝门外，号其街曰 宰相街 ，以宠异之。
现代文：第二年，太祖到龙兴，他率领部下朝见，受到慰劳，并随太祖归建康，赐给官邸于聚宝门外，把他的街命名为 宰相街 ，以示特别宠幸。
English: In the second year, the great-grandfather went to Longxing, he led his subordinates to the court, received consolation, and with the great-grandfather returned to Jiankang, gave the official residence outside the Jubao Gate, and named his street "Prime Minister Street" to show his special favor.

古文：寻遣取抚州及江西未附郡县。
现代文：不久，命他攻取抚州和江西未归附的郡县。
English: Soon, he ordered him to capture Fuzhou and the unattached counties in Jiangxi.

古文：从克武昌，进中书右丞。
现代文：又随克武昌，晋升为中书右丞。
English: He also followed Ke Wuchang and was promoted to the post of Chushu Rojo.

古文：洪武元年，命兼詹事府副詹事。
现代文：洪武元年受命兼任詹事府副詹事。
English: In the first year of Hongwu's reign, he was also appointed to the post of Deputy Zhanji of Zhanji Prefecture.

古文：从大将军北征，屡有功。
现代文：跟从大将军北征，多次立功。
English: He followed the general to the Northern Expedition and made meritorious contributions many times.

古文：赐文币，擢河南行省平章，不署事。
现代文：赏赐文币，提升为河南行省平章，不掌管具体事务。
English: Rewarded with coins, promoted to Henan Province Pingzhang, not in charge of specific affairs.

古文：岁禄视李伯升、潘元明。
现代文：年食禄和李伯升、潘元明相等。
English: The annual stipend is equal to that of Li Bosheng and Pan Yuanming.

古文：初，溥未仕时，奉母叶氏避兵贵溪。遇乱，与母相失，凡十八年。
现代文：最初，王溥没当官时，侍奉母亲叶氏躲避战乱于贵溪，战乱中与母亲失散，一离就是十八年，他曾梦见母亲仿佛间告诉他身在何处。
English: At first, when Wang Yao was no longer an official, he served his mother, Ye Shi Rong, and hid from the war in Guixi. During the war, he was separated from his mother for eighteen years. He once dreamed that his mother seemed to tell him where he was.

古文：尝梦母若告以所在，至是从容言于帝，请归省坟墓。许之，且命礼官具祭物。
现代文：至此他告诉了太祖，请求回归故乡为母亲填坟。太祖准允，并命令礼官准备了祭物。
English: At this point, he told the great-grandfather and asked to return to his hometown to fill his mother's grave. The great-grandfather agreed and ordered the etiquette officer to prepare a sacrifice.

古文：溥率士卒之贵溪，求不得，昼夜号泣。
现代文：王溥带领士兵回到贵溪，找不到母亲的坟墓，昼夜哭泣。
English: Wang Yao led the soldiers back to Guixi. He could not find his mother's grave and cried day and night.

古文：居人吴海言： 夫人为贼逼，投井中死矣。 
现代文：当地居民吴海说夫人被贼所逼，投井自尽了。
English: Local resident Wu Hai said his wife was forced by thieves to commit suicide by throwing herself into a well.

古文：溥求得井，有鼠自井出，投溥怀中，旋复入井。
现代文：王溥找到那口井，有只老鼠从井里出来，投入他的怀中，又立即跳入井里。
English: Wang Yao found the well. A mouse came out of the well, fell into his arms, and immediately jumped back into the well.

古文：哀呼不自胜，乃具棺敛，即其地以葬。
现代文：王溥排干井水寻找，见母亲的尸体在井中，悲痛不已。于是准备棺木殓葬，就地安葬。
English: Wang Yao drained the dry well to look for water, saw his mother's body in the well, and was heartbroken. So he prepared a coffin for burial and buried her there.

古文：溥卒，子孙世袭指挥同知。
现代文：王溥去世，子孙世袭指挥同知。
English: Wang Yao passed away, and the descendants of the hereditary conductor are the same.

