古文：二十二日晨起，宿雾净尽，宝藏先以点饷余，与余周历峰前。
现代文：二十二日早晨起床，夜雾散尽。宝藏先拿出点心款待我，与我遍游峰前。
English: On the morning of the 22nd, I woke up and the night fog had dissipated. Treasure first brought out some snacks to entertain me and walked around the peak with me.

古文：凭临而南为南甸，其外有横山前列，则龙川后之界也；近嵌麓西为鬼甸，其外有重峰西拥，则古勇前南下之支也；下伏而东度，为笔峰，其外有高岭东穹，则高黎贡后耸之脉也，惟北向则本山后屏焉。
现代文：登高凭眺，南面是南甸，那以外有横亘的山排列在前方，是龙川江后的地界；近处嵌在山麓西边的是鬼甸，那以外有重重山峰拥立在西方，是古勇关前面往南下延的支脉；下方低伏往东延伸的，是笔峰，那以外有高大的山岭隆起在东方，是高黎贡山后面耸起的山脉；唯有北面是本山在后面成为屏障。
English: According to the view from the top, Nandian is to the south, and beyond that, there are long mountains in front, which is the land boundary behind the Longchuan River; nearby, embedded in the western side of the foothills, is Gideon, and beyond that, there are many peaks standing in the west, which is the branch extending southward in front of Guyongguan; below, extending eastward, is Pen Peak, and beyond that, there are high mountain ridges rising in the east, which are the mountains rising behind Gaoligong Mountain; only in the north is the mountain behind the barrier.

古文：然昨已登岭北眺，知东北之豁处，为龙川所合；西北之丛处，为尖山所悬；而直北明光六厂之外，皆野人之栖矣。
现代文：不过昨天已登上岭往北眺望，知道东北开阔之处，是龙川江会合之处；西北山峰成丛之处，是尖山高悬之处；而正北明光六厂之外，都是野人居住的地区了。
English: However, yesterday I climbed the ridge to look northward, and I knew that the open area in the northeast is the meeting place of the Longchuan River; the place where the northwest peaks are clustered is the place where the sharp mountains are high; and the area just north of the Mingguang Six Plants is inhabited by wild people.

古文：久之，乃饭而别。
现代文：很久后，才吃了饭告别。
English: It was a long time before we had a meal to say goodbye.

古文：宝藏命其徒径空前导，从东北行，皆未开之径也。
现代文：宝藏命令他徒弟径空在前领路，从东北方走，都是未开辟的小径。
English: The treasure ordered his apprentice to follow the empty path in front of the leading path, from the northeast, are unexplored trails.

古文：始逾东环之臂，即东北下，虽无径而颇坦。
现代文：开始时越过向东环抱的手臂，立即向东北下山，虽然无路但很平坦。
English: At the beginning, I crossed the arm that encircles the mountain to the east and immediately descended to the northeast. Although there was no path, it was very flat.

古文：三里余，有路循岭北西去，往鬼甸道，盖是山前后皆向鬼甸道也。
现代文：三里多，有路沿岭北往西去，是通往鬼甸的路，原来此山前后都有通向鬼甸的路。
English: For more than three miles, there is a road along the north of the ridge to the west, which is the road to the ghostland. Originally, there was a road leading to the ghostland before and after this mountain.

古文：于是交之，仍东下，甚峻。
现代文：于是与道路相交，仍向东下走，十分陡峻。
English: As a result, it intersected with the road, still going eastwards, and was very steep.

古文：一里，又有路自东南来，西北逾岭去，此即州中趋冠子坪道。
现代文：一里，又有路自东南延来，向西北越岭而去，这就是州里通往冠子坪的路。
English: For one mile, there is another road that extends from the southeast and crosses the ridge to the northwest. This is the road that leads to Guanziping in the prefecture.

古文：盖冠子坪从北南度，穹起打鹰之顶，自北望之，不见双峰如鞍，只觉层起如冠。逾脊西下，是为坪村所托，有龙潭西涌，乃鬼甸上流，经鹅笼而南下者也。
现代文：原来冠子坪从北往南延伸，隆起打鹰山的山顶，从北边望它，不见双峰如像马鞍，只觉得层层耸起如像帽子•越过山脊往西下去，那是坪村依托之处，有龙潭向西涌流，是鬼甸的上游，流经鹅笼往南下流。
English: Originally, Guanziping extended from the north to the south, uplifting the peak of Dahuak Mountain. Looking at it from the north, I did not see the twin peaks like a saddle, but felt that they were rising like a hat. • Cross the ridge to the west, that is where Pingcun is supported, there is Longtan flowing westward, it is the upper reaches of Ghostland, flowing southward through the goose cage.

古文：余交其路，仍东北下，行莽棘中。
现代文：我穿过此路，仍往东北下走，前行在丛莽荆棘中。
English: I crossed this road and still went down to the northeast, moving forward in a thicket of thorns.

古文：一里余，北向下，傍西小峡渐有微径，径右峡中亦有丛竹深藤。
现代文：一里多，向北下走，依傍着西面的小峡谷渐渐有小径，小径右边的峡中也有丛竹深藤。
English: After more than a kilometer, walking northwards, there is gradually a path alongside the small canyon on the west, and there is also a clump of bamboo and deep rattan in the gorge on the right side of the path.

古文：东转，再逾一峡，一里，乃北行环冈上。
现代文：向东转，再越过一条峡谷，一里，就向北前行在环形的山冈上。
English: Turn east, then cross a canyon, one mile, then go north on a ring-shaped hill.

古文：冈之西，大山始有峡中盘在山中盘绕廷伸；冈之东，始随坡东下。
现代文：山冈的西面，大山开始有峡谷盘绕在山中；山冈的东面，开始顺山坡往东下行。
English: On the west side of the mountain, the large mountain begins to have a canyon coiled in the mountain; on the east side of the mountain, it begins to go down the mountain slope to the east.

古文：共二里，抵坡麓，则响水沟之峡在其东矣。
现代文：共二里，到达坡脚，就见响水沟的峡谷在它东边了。
English: After a total of two miles, when you reach the foot of the slope, you will see the canyon of the sounding ditch on its eastern side.

古文：有溪自西峡出，北涉之，随西山北行。
现代文：有溪水自西边峡中流出，向北涉过溪水，顺西山往北行。
English: A stream flows out of the middle of the West Side Gorge, wading through the stream to the north and heading north along the West Mountain.

古文：西山至是稍开，有路西入之。
现代文：西山到这里稍微开阔了些，有路往西通入西山。
English: The West Mountain is slightly wider here, and there is a road to the west leading into the West Mountain.

古文：交其路而北，一里余，稍下，又有小水从西坞出，是为王家坝。
现代文：与这条路相交往北走，一里多，略下走，又有小河从西面山坞中流出，这是王家坝。
English: Interact with this road to the north, walk more than a mile, walk slightly down, and there is a small river flowing out of the west dock, this is Wangjiaba.

古文：又北半里，遂与南来大路合。
现代文：又向北半里，便与南来的大路会合。
English: Half a mile further north, it meets the main road coming from the south.

古文：又北一里，有村在西山下，至是中坞始开。
现代文：又往北一里，有村庄在西山下，到此地中间的山坞这才开阔起来。
English: Another mile to the north, there is a village at the foot of the west mountain. It is only when you reach the dock in the middle of this area that it opens up.

古文：其坞南从酒店脊来，北至此东西乃辟再分为东西走向，溪沿东麓北下，村倚西山东向，而路出其中。
现代文：这个山坞从南面酒店所在的山脊伸展而来，往北到此地后东西两面才开阔起来，溪水沿东麓往北下流，村庄背靠西山面向东方，而道路经过其中。
English: This dock extends from the ridge where the hotel is located in the south. After reaching this place to the north, the east and west sides are opened up. The stream flows northward along the eastern foot. The village backs the west mountain facing the east, and the road passes through it.

古文：又北里许，有岐东北往界头。
现代文：又往北走一里左右，有岔道向东北通往界头。
English: Walk north for another mile or so, and there is a fork to the northeast leading to the border.

古文：余循西山西北下，渡一小峡，半里，西转，其南谷为湾腰树，盖王家坝之后山也；其北坞为左所屯，乃巃嵸北又起一峰，其余支西北而环者。
现代文：我沿西山往西北下走，渡过一条小峡谷，半里，转向西，此地南面的山谷是湾腰树，大概是王家坝的后山了；它北面的山坞是左所屯，是宠岌山北面又耸起的一座山峰，它的余支往西北环绕。
English: I walked down the West Mountain to the northwest, crossed a small canyon, and turned west for half a mile. The valley to the south of this place is the Gulf Humpback, probably the back mountain of the Wangjiaba; the dock to the north of it is Zuoshotun, a mountain peak that rises again on the north side of the Petrichan Mountain, and its remaining branches surround it to the northwest.

古文：坞中始有田畴下辟，响水沟之流亦西北贯之，而路从南山西向行。
现代文：山坞中下边开始有开垦的田地，响水沟的水流也从西北流贯过山坞，而路从南山向西行。
English: There are cultivated fields in the middle and lower side of the dock, and the water flow of the ring ditch also runs through the dock from the northwest, while the road runs westward from Nanshan.

古文：一里余，有小水北流。
现代文：一里多，有小河向北流淌。
English: For more than a mile, there is a small river flowing north.

古文：又西一里余，有结茅卖浆在南山下，于是巨松错立，高影深阴，午日俱碧。
现代文：又向西走一里多，有人在南山下盖了茅屋卖酒，在这里巨松杂错林立，高大的树影，深浓的树荫，中午的阳光都成了绿色的。
English: Another mile to the west, someone has built a thatched cottage at the foot of the South Mountain to sell wine. Here, giant pines stand in a jumble, tall shadows, deep shade, and the midday sun has turned green.

古文：又西二里为马站，其北坡下颇有隔林之庐，而当路左者止一家，州来者皆饭焉都在此吃饭；其西始田塍环坡。
现代文：又往西行二里是马站，它北边山坡下隔着树林有许多房屋，可在路左边只有一家人，州里来的人都在此吃饭，它西面开始有田地环绕着山坡。
English: Another two miles to the west is the horse station. There are many houses on the north side of the hillside, separated by woods. However, there is only one family on the left side of the road. People from the state eat here. To the west, there are fields surrounding the hillside.

古文：从田中西北行一里余，抵北山下。
现代文：从田中往西北行一里多，抵达北山下。
English: From Tanaka, travel northwest for more than a mile and arrive at Kitayamashita.

古文：稍西复北，一里，逾其坳，有墟场即场镇，为马站街房。
现代文：稍向西再向北走，一里，越过山坳，有处好场，是马站的街房。
English: A little to the west and then to the north, one mile, over the mountains, there is a good place, it is the horse station.

古文：其北山坡杂沓，石齿高下，东冈与西山，遂夹溪北注。
现代文：它北面山坡杂沓，齿状的岩石高低不一，东冈与西山，就夹住往北流注的溪水。
English: Its northern face is a jumble of hillsides, with jagged rock varying in height. The east and west hills are sandwiched between the streams flowing north.

古文：共三里，有山横于前，乃西随之，半里，北透其坳，其北则山开而下盘环壑，溪从西山透峡南来，绕壑北去，固知透坳之山，乃自南而西转，坳西一峰，即西尽于溪者也。
现代文：共三里，有山横在前方，就往西顺着它走，半里，向北穿过山坳，山坳北边就见山势开阔而下方盘绕成环状的壑谷，溪水从西山穿过峡谷往南流来，绕过壑谷往北流去，因此知道山坳穿透的山，是自南往西转，山坳西面的一座山峰，就是往西在溪边到头的山了。
English: For a total of three miles, there was a mountain in front of him, so he followed it to the west. Half a mile to the north, he passed through the mountains. On the north side of the mountains, he saw the mountains open and the valley below coiled into a ring. The stream water flowed from the west mountain through the canyon to the south and around the valley to the north. Therefore, he knew that the mountain penetrated by the mountains turned from the south to the west. A mountain peak on the west side of the mountains was the mountain that reached the end of the stream to the west.

古文：盘壑而西北一里余，遂循溪东岸行，其西冈松桧稠密，有大寺基在焉。
现代文：绕着壑谷往西北走一里多，就沿溪流东岸行，溪西的山冈上松柏稠密，有大寺庙的废基在上面。
English: Walking northwest for more than a mile around Shibuya, I followed the east bank of the stream. The hills to the west of the stream were densely covered with conifers, with the foundations of a large temple on top.

古文：乃饭于溪旁。
现代文：于是在溪边吃饭。
English: So we ate by the stream.

古文：又北半里为邱坡，有两三家倚西山下。
现代文：又向北走半里是邱坡，有两三家靠在西山下。
English: Half a mile further north is Qiupo, with two or three houses at the foot of the West Mountain.

古文：其西则群山中进为峡，有岐西入之，为古勇道，其东则谷口横拓，南北之水俱由之出焉。
现代文：村西就见群山从中央迸裂成峡，有岔路向西入峡，是去古勇关的路；村东是山谷口横向拓开，南北的流水都经由这里流出去。
English: To the west of the village, you can see the mountains split from the central valley into a gorge. There is a narrow road leading west into the gorge, which is the road to Guyongguan. To the east of the village, the valley mouth opens out horizontally, and the flowing water from the north and south flows out through here.

古文：于是北行田塍间，二里，屡逾其分流之水。
现代文：从这里往北行走在田野间，二里，多次越过田间分流的溪水。
English: From here, walk north for two miles through the fields, repeatedly crossing the streams that branch off the fields.

古文：又北一里余。为顺江村，古之顺江州治也。
现代文：又往北一里多，是顺江村，是古代顺江州的州治。
English: A mile further north is Shunjiang village, the ancient Shunjiang prefecture.

古文：西山至是中断复起，其特耸颇厉，是为三清山。
现代文：西山到此处中间断开重又耸起，那独耸的山势相当高险，这是三清山。
English: To this point, the West Mountain is disconnected from the middle and rises again. The unique mountain is quite high risk. This is Sanqing Mountain.

古文：村多环石为垣，连竹成阴者。
现代文：村中多半是用石块环垒成墙的房屋，竹丛连片成荫。
English: Most of the houses in the village are made of stone blocks, and bamboo groves stretch out in the shade.

古文：又北半里，有水自西峡来，东向而注，是为顺江，有木梁跨其上。
现代文：又往北半里，有河水自西面峡中流来，向东流注，这是顺江，有木桥横跨在江上。
English: Half a mile to the north, there is a river flowing from the middle of the Westmen Gorge and flowing eastward. This is the Shun River, with a wooden bridge across the river.

古文：顺江村之东，山坞东辟。
现代文：顺江村之东，山坞向东扩开。
English: To the east of Shunjiang Village, the dock extends to the east.

古文：过桥，复北上坡，行竹径中。
现代文：过桥后，又向北上坡，行走在竹林小径中。
English: After crossing the bridge, walk north uphill again, walking in the bamboo forest path.

古文：半里，北下，过乾海子。
现代文：半里，往北下行，经过乾海子。
English: Half a mile north, downhill, past the dry lake.

古文：一里余，北上坡，有虚茅赶街之草棚在坡北，是为顺江街子。复西北行坡坂间。
现代文：一里多，向北上坡，有茅屋集市在坡北，这是顺江街子。再往西北前行在山坡间。
English: More than a kilometer, uphill to the north, there is a thatched cottage market in the north of the slope, this is the street of Shunjiang. Then go northwest between the hillsides.

古文：其坂西倚三清山，东临夹壑，壑之东，则江东山南下而横止焉。
现代文：此处山坡西边紧靠三清山，东边面临相夹的壑谷，壑谷的东面，就是江东山往南下延后横着止住的地方。
English: Here, the west side of the hillside is close to Sanqing Mountain, and the east side faces the clamped Shibuya Valley. The east side of Shibuya Valley is the place where Jiangdong Mountain stops after being extended to the south.

古文：从此三清西亘，江东东屏，又成南北之坞。
现代文：从此起三清山向西延亘，江东山成为东面的屏障，又形成南北向的山坞。
English: Since then, Sanqing Mountain has extended to the west, and Jiangdong Mountain has become a barrier to the east, forming a north-south dock.

古文：行坂间三里，北向稍下，忽闻水声，则路东有溪反自南而北，至是乃东转去，想估计是顺江之分流而至者。
现代文：在山坡间行三里，向北稍下走，忽然听见水声，就见路东有溪水反而自南流向北，到此就向东转去，猜想是顺江分出的支流流到此处的。
English: After walking three miles between the hillsides and going slightly north, I suddenly heard the sound of water. I saw a stream on the east side of the road, but it flowed north from the south. At this point, I turned to the east, guessing that it was a tributary of the Shun River.

古文：盖江东山之西，已有两江自北而来，此流何以反北耶？
现代文：原来江东山的西面，已有两条江自北方流来，此条溪流为何反而往北流呢？
English: Originally, there were already two rivers flowing from the north to the west of Jiangdong Mountain. Why did this stream flow north instead?

古文：流既东，路遂北盘东垂之坡，二里，是为鸡茨坪。
现代文：溪流向东流后，路于是绕过东垂的山坡，二里，这是鸡茨坪。
English: After the stream flows eastward, the road then goes around the east-sloping hillside for two miles, which is Jizping.

古文：逾坪北下一里余，复得平畴，有卖浆者当路右。
现代文：越过鸡茨坪往北下行一里多，又遇上平旷的田野，在路右边有卖酒的人。
English: After crossing Jizping and traveling northward for more than a mile, I came across a flat field. There were people selling alcohol on the right side of the road.

古文：于是东北行田塍间，一里余，有江自西北往东南，长木桥横跨之，是为西江；其东又有一江自东北注东南，沿东山与西江并南行坞中，是为东江。
现代文：于是往东北行走在田野间，一里多，有江水自西北注往东南，有座长木桥横跨江上，这是西江；它东面又有一条江自东北注向东南，沿东山与西江并排往南奔流在坞中，那是东江。
English: So I walked to the northeast, between fields, for more than a mile. There was river water flowing from the northwest to the southeast, and there was a long wooden bridge spanning the river, which was the West River. To the east of it, there was another river flowing from the northeast to the southeast, running along Dongshan and the West River side by side to the south in the dock, that was the East River.

古文：既度西江桥，遂北行江夹中，一里而至固栋，宿于新街。
现代文：越过西江桥后，就往北前行在两江相夹之中，一里后走到固栋，住宿在新街。
English: After crossing the Xijiang River Bridge, he walked northward between the two rivers. After one mile, he walked to Gudong and stayed in Xinjie.

古文：固栋一名谷栋，聚落当大坞中，东、西二江夹之。
现代文：固栋又叫谷栋，聚居的村落正当大山坞中央，东、西二江夹住它。
English: Gu Dong is also known as Gu Dong. The village is located in the middle of the large mountain dock, and is sandwiched between the East and West Erjiang Rivers.

古文：其北则雅乌山南垂，横亘两山间，至此而止；其南则两江交合于三里外，合流东南去，至曲石入龙川江；东则江东山，北自石洞东，南向而下；西则三清山北又起一峰，南与三清雁行即整齐排列而峙，其中有峡如门，而小甸之路从之。
现代文：它北边就是雅乌山的南垂，横亘在两山之间，到此地便止住了；它南边两江在三里之外相交合流，合流后往东南流去，到曲石流入龙川江；东面是江东山在北方自石洞东边，向南下延；西面是三清山北边又耸起的一座山峰，与南边的三清山如雁阵一样对峙，两山中有如门一样的峡谷，去小甸的路就从那里走。
English: To the north of it is the southern slope of Yaw Mountain, stretching between the two mountains, and it stopped here; to the south of it, the two rivers intersect and merge three miles away, and after the confluence, they flow to the southeast, flowing into the Longchuan River to the Curve Rock; to the east is the East River Mountain in the north from the east of the Stone Cave, extending southward; to the west is another mountain peak on the north side of Sanqing Mountain, confronting the south side of Sanqing Mountain like a geese array. There is a canyon like a gate in the two mountains, and the road to Xiaodian is from there.

古文：是峰即云峰尖山东下北转之脉，云峰正在其西，为彼所掩，故固栋止西见此山而不见云峰也。
现代文：此峰就是云峰尖山往东下延向北转的山脉，云峰正在它的西边，被它遮拦住了，所以固栋向西只见此山却看不见云峰。
English: This peak is the mountain range of Yunfeng Jianshan stretching eastward and turning northward. Yunfeng is on its west side and is blocked by it, so Guodong can only see this mountain to the west but cannot see Yunfeng.

古文：其地直东与瓦甸对，直西与云峰对，直北与热水塘对，直南与马站对。
现代文：此地正东与瓦甸遥对，正西与云峰相对，正北与热水塘相对，正南与马站相对。
English: Here, due east is opposite to Vadian, due west is opposite to Yunfeng, due north is opposite to the hot water pond, and due south is opposite to the horse station.

古文：有新、旧二街，南为新，北为旧。
现代文：有新旧两个街子，南面的是新街，北边的是旧街。
English: There are two streets, the old and the new, with the new street to the south and the old street to the north.

古文：二十三日命请求而非命令主人取园笋为晨供，味与吾乡同。
现代文：二十三日命令房主人取来园中的竹笋作早餐，味道与我家乡的相同。
English: On the 23rd, the owner of the house ordered me to get bamboo shoots from the garden for breakfast. The taste was the same as in my hometown.

古文：八九月间有香笋，薰干瓶贮，味有香气。北一里，过旧街。
现代文：向北一里，经过旧街。
English: One mile north, past the old town.

古文：买飞松一梆于刘姓者家。 飞松 者，一名狐实，亦作梧实，正如梧桐子而大倍之，色味亦如梧桐，而壳薄易剥；生密树中，一见辄伐树乃可得，迟则树即存而子俱飞去成空株矣，故曰 飞松 ，惟巅塘关外野人即指当时景颇族，此称为鄙称境有之。
现代文：在姓刘的人家中买了一竹筒飞松。 飞松 这东西，另一个名字叫狐实，也叫梧实，正如梧桐子一样但有梧桐子的一倍大，颜色味道也像梧桐子，但外壳薄容易剥开；生长在密树之中：一看见就伐树才可得到，迟了就只有树而子却全都飞走成空树了，所以叫做 飞松 ，唯有巅塘关外野人境内有这种东西。
English: In the family of a man surnamed Liu, he bought a bamboo tube of flying pine. Flying pine This thing, another name is foxtree, also called wu solid, just like the plane tree but twice the size of the plane tree, the color and taste are also like the plane tree, but the shell is thin and easy to peel off; it grows in the middle of a dense tree: it can only be obtained by cutting the tree as soon as it is seen, but when it is too late, there is only the tree and the seeds have all flown away into empty trees, so it is called flying pine, only in the territory of the wild people of Pingtangguan there is such a

古文：野人时以茶、蜡、黑鱼、飞松四种入关易盐、布。
现代文：野人时常拿茶叶、黄蜡、黑鱼、飞松四种东西人关来交换食盐、布匹。
English: Wild people often take tea leaves, yellow wax, black fish and flying pine to exchange salt and cloth.

古文：其人无衣与裳，惟以布一幅束其阴，上体以被一方帏而裹之，不复知有衿袖之属也。
现代文：那些人无衣裤，仅用一幅布束在阴部，上身用一方形布慢披着裹住身子，不再知道有衣襟袖子之类了。
English: Those people had no trousers, only a piece of cloth tied around their nether regions, and the upper body was slowly wrapped in a one-sided piece of cloth. They no longer knew what a collar and sleeves were.

古文：此野人即茶山之彝，昔亦内属，今非王化所及矣；然谓之 红毛 ，则不然也。
现代文：此野人就是茶山长官司的少数民族，从前也曾归属内地，今天已不是君王的德化所能到达的地方了；然而把他们称为 红毛 ，却是不对的。
English: This wild man is the ethnic minority of the Chashan chief magistrate, who once belonged to the inland, and today is no longer a place where the king's virtue can reach; however, it is not right to call them red hair.

古文：又北二里余。横冈后亘。望之若东西交属于两界崇山，不复知其内有两江之嵌于两旁也。
现代文：又往北行二里多，后面有山冈横亘，远望它好似与东西两面的高山互相连接，不再知道山内有两条江深嵌在两旁了。
English: Two miles further north, there is a mountain range in the back, and from a distance it looks as if it is connected to the mountains on both sides of the east and west. I no longer know that there are two rivers deeply embedded in the mountains on both sides.

古文：此冈即雅乌山南垂尽处，东、西二江皆从其两腋南出，疑即挨河，而土人讹为 雅乌 耳。
现代文：此冈就是雅乌山南垂的尽头处，东、西二江都是从它的两侧往南流出，怀疑就是挨河，不过是当地人错读为 雅乌 罢了。
English: This hill is the end of the southern slope of Yau Mountain. Both the East and West Rivers flow south from its two sides. It is suspected that it is a river, but the locals misread it as Yau.

古文：陟冈而北，又二里，冈左渐突而成峰，冈右渐嵌而为坑，路渐逾坑傍峰而上，于是坑两旁皆峰，复渐成峡。
现代文：上肉往北行，又走二里，冈左渐渐突起变成山峰，冈右渐渐下嵌为坑谷，路渐渐越过坑谷傍着山峰上走，在这里坑谷两旁都是山峰，又渐次成为峡谷。
English: The upper body went north, walked another two miles, the left hill gradually rose into a peak, the right hill gradually sank into a valley, the road gradually crossed the valley and walked up the mountain, where the valley was flanked by peaks, and gradually became a canyon.

古文：循峡西峰行二里，陟其北坳，遂挟西峰之北而西向下。
现代文：顺峡谷的西峰行二里，登上它北面的山坳，于是傍着西峰的北面向西下行。
English: Walk two miles along the west peak of the valley, climb the ridge to the north of it, and then walk down to the west along the north of the west peak.

古文：二里，路右有大栗树一株，颇巨而火空其中；路左则西江自西壑盘曲东来，破峡而东南去，于是出固栋西山之西北矣。
现代文：二里，路右边有一棵大栗树，相当巨大但火烧空了树干；路左边就是西江自西面的壑谷中弯弯曲曲往东流来，冲破峡谷向东南流去，到这里已走出固栋西山的西北方了。
English: Two miles away, on the right side of the road, there is a large chestnut tree, quite huge but the fire has burned out the trunk; on the left side of the road is the West River, which flows from the middle of the valley in the west to the east, and breaks through the canyon to the southeast. Here it has already gone out of the northwest of the West Mountain.

古文：始下见盘壑西升，江盘壑底，而尖山兀然立其西南矣。
现代文：这才见到下方盘绕的壑谷在西面敞开，江流环绕在壑底，而尖山突兀耸立在壑谷西南方了。
English: It was only then that I saw the valley below me open up in the west, the river flowing around the bottom of the valley, and the jagged mountains towering in the southwest of the valley.

古文：又西下一里，随江北岸西行二里，始有村庐倚冈头，是为乌索。
现代文：又往西下行一里，顺江北岸往西行二里，开始有村庄房屋依傍在冈头，这是乌索。
English: Another mile to the west, two miles to the west along the north bank of the Shun River, there are village houses next to the hilltop, which is Uso.

古文：其江反北向折而来，路乃南下冈就之，半里，则长木桥横架江上，反自西而东度之。
现代文：那江水反而折向北流来，路就往南下冈走近江流，半里，有座长木桥横架在江上，反而自西往东越过江。
English: Instead, the water of the river flowed north, and the road went south down the hill to the Omi River. Half a mile away, there was a long wooden bridge on the river, but it crossed the river from west to east.

古文：桥东复有竹有庐，从其侧转而西南，则固栋西山与尖峰后大山围环其南，而江曲其北者也。
现代文：桥东头又有竹丛有房屋，从它侧边转向西南，就见固栋西山与尖峰后面的大山围抱在它的南面，而江流弯曲流过它的北面。
English: At the east end of the bridge, there are bamboo groves and houses. If you turn to the southwest from the side of the bridge, you will see the Gudong West Mountain and the mountain range behind the peak hugging the south side of the bridge, while the river bends and flows through the north side.

古文：又西半里，有村连竹甚盛。
现代文：又向西半里，有村庄竹林连片十分兴盛。
English: Half a mile to the west, there is a thriving village of bamboo groves.

古文：半里，从其村南西转，复行冈坂者二里，冈头巨松错落，居庐倚之。
现代文：半里，从此村南头往西转，再在山冈山坡间前行二里，冈头巨松错落，居屋背靠山冈。
English: Half a mile, from the south end of this village, turn west, and then walk two miles between the mountains and hills. The giant pines at the top of the hill are staggered, and the houses are backed up against the hill.

古文：半里，西向下，涉一坑。
现代文：半里，向西下走，跋涉过一处坑谷。
English: Half a mile to the west, we trudged through a valley.

古文：又西南一里余，连过两村，又西向下，涉一坑，始及山麓。
现代文：又向西南走一里多，一连走过两个村庄，又向西下走，涉过一个坑谷，这才到达山麓。
English: I walked more than a mile to the southwest, passing two villages in a row, and then went west, wading through a valley, before reaching the foot of the mountain.

古文：遂西向上，半里，有小水注坡坂间，就而涤体洗澡。
现代文：于是向西上山，半里，有小河流注在山坡间，走过去洗身体。
English: So he walked half a mile up the mountain to the west, where small rivers flowed between the mountain slopes. He went there to wash his body.

古文：时日色亭午即正午，解衣浣濯洗涤久之，乃西南循小径上。
现代文：此时天色是正午，脱衣洗灌了很久，这才往西南沿小径上走。
English: At this time, it was midday, and it took a long time to undress, wash, and rinse before we could walk along the trail to the southwest.

古文：一里，转而西，始与东来路合。
现代文：一里，转向西，开始与东来的路会合。
English: One mile, turn west and begin to meet the road coming from the east.

古文：时雷雨大至，行草径间，一里，稍西下，涉一峡底，于是巨木参霄，纬藤蒙坞，遂极幽峭之势。
现代文：此时雷雨暴降，行走在草丛小径间，一里，略向西下走，涉过一条峡谷底部，在这里巨树参天，横爬的藤条蒙住山坞，竟然极尽幽深陡峭的气势。
English: At this time, a thunderstorm fell, walking between the grass paths, one mile, slightly down to the west, waded through the bottom of a canyon, where the giant trees soared into the sky, the climbing rattan covered the dock, and it was extremely deep and steep.

古文：盘绕行峡嘴而西，一里，又涉一峡底。
现代文：绕过峡嘴往西走，一里，又涉过一处峡底。
English: I walked westward around the mouth of the gorge for one mile, and then waded through the bottom of the gorge.

古文：二峡皆在深木中，有小水淙淙自北而南，下注西来之溪，合而东行北出者也。
现代文：两处峡谷都在深树之中，有小溪涂涂自北流向南，往下注入西来的溪中，合流后向东流往北流出去。
English: Both canyons are in the middle of deep trees. There are small streams flowing from the north to the south, flowing down into the stream coming from the west, and flowing east to the north after the confluence.

古文：涉峡之西崖，有巨石突立崖右。
现代文：涉到峡谷的西崖，有巨石突立在山崖右侧。
English: On the west cliff, which is involved in the canyon, there is a boulder protruding on the right side of the cliff.

古文：路由巨石之东，北向上，曲折跻树荫中，高崖滴翠，深水筛金，始知雨霁日来，阴暗弄影，不碍凌空之屐也。
现代文：路由巨石之东，向北上山，曲折上登在树荫之中，高高的山崖上翠色欲滴，深树丛中筛下黄金，这才知道已雨晴日出，阴晴弄影，不妨碍凌空上登。
English: The road runs east of the boulders, northward up the mountain, winding up in the shade of the trees, the high cliffs are bright green, and gold is sifted in the deep trees. Only then do you know that it is raining, sunny, cloudy and shadowy, and does not interfere with the flight up.

古文：上三里，遂陟冈脊。
现代文：上爬三里，终于登上冈脊。
English: After climbing three miles, we finally reached the ridge.

古文：脊两崖皆坠深涵碧，闻水声潺潺在其底，而不辨看不清其底也。
现代文：冈脊两侧的山崖都坠入深渊沉浸在碧色之中，听见崖底下水声潺潺，但辩不出峡底。
English: The cliffs on both sides of the ridge have fallen into the abyss, immersed in the azure, hearing the sound of water under the cliff, but unable to identify the bottom of the canyon.

古文：脊狭不及七尺，而当其中复有辅木以度者，盖脊两旁皆削，中复有窞下陷，故以木填之。
现代文：冈脊狭窄不到七尺，但在冈脊中段又铺有木头越过去，原来冈脊两旁都很陡削，中间又有深坑下陷，所以用木头来填补空处。
English: The ridge is narrow, less than seven feet, but in the middle of the ridge, there is also wood. Originally, both sides of the ridge were very steep, and there was a deep pit in the middle, so wood was used to fill the space.

古文：行脊上一里，北复稍下，又涉一南坠之峡，半里，乃西北上，其上甚峻。
现代文：在脊上行一里，再向北稍下走，又涉过一处往南卞坠的峡谷，半里，就向西北上山，那上去的路非常陡峻。
English: One mile up the ridge, then a little further north, and then through a canyon that drops down to the south, half a mile, and then up the mountain to the northwest, where the road is very steep.

古文：一里余而饭。
现代文：一里多后吃饭。
English: After more than a kilometer, it's time for dinner.

古文：稍夷平坦，转西南盘而北，半里，复曲折上，峻愈甚。
现代文：稍微平坦些，转向西南绕向北，半里，再曲折上登，越加陡峻得厉害。
English: Slightly flatter, turn southwest around to the north, half a mile, then zigzag uphill, getting steeper and steeper.

古文：一里，又稍夷，循峰崖而转其腰，始望见尖峰在隔箐陇树间，而不知所循者亦一尖峰也。
现代文：一里，又稍平坦些，沿峰上的山崖转到山腰，这才望见尖峰在山警相隔的土陇树丛之间，但却不知顺着走的也是一座尖峰。
English: One mile, and a little flatter, along the cliff on the peak to the mountainside, only then can the spikes be seen between the mound bushes separated by the mountain guard, but I do not know if it is also a spike.

古文：北半里，抵其峰西腋，稍西下度一脊，遂西上，上皆悬崖削磴。
现代文：往北半里，抵达那尖峰的西侧，稍向西下走越过一处山脊，于是往西上走，上面全是悬崖和陡削的石瞪。
English: Half a mile to the north, you reach the western side of the peak, walk a little westward over a ridge, and then walk westward, all of which are cliffs and sheer rock faces.

古文：回顾前所盘脊东峰，亦一峰复耸，山头尖削，亦堪与尖山伯仲，但尖山纯石中悬，而彼乃土峰前出耳。
现代文：回头看前边绕过的山脊的东峰，也有一座山峰又耸起，山头尖削，也能与尖山比高低，不过尖山是纯石悬在中央，而那座尖峰是土峰往前突出罢了。
English: Looking back at the eastern peak of the ridge that I passed in front of me, there is also a mountain peak that rises again, the mountain head is pointed, and it can also be compared with the pointed mountain, but the pointed mountain is a pure stone hanging in the center, and that spike is a dirt peak protruding forward.

古文：两峰之北，复与西大山夹成深壑，支条盘突，箐树蒙蔽，如翠涛沉雾，深深在下，而莫穷端倪看不清头绪和眉目，惟闻猿声千百，唱和其间，而人莫至也。
现代文：两座山峰之北，又与西面的大山夹成深壑，条形的支脉盘绕前突，山著中树丛蒙密荫蔽，如翠绿的波涛沉浮的浓雾，深深向下，而无法穷究它的边际，只听到千百声的猿啼，唱和在其间，但人无法能到。
English: To the north of the two peaks, and sandwiched between the large mountains to the west, there is a deep valley, with strip-shaped tributaries winding around the protrusion. The mountains are covered with dense shade from the bushes, like emerald green waves of thick fog, deep down, but it is impossible to fully explore its edge. One can only hear the thousands of voices of the apes, singing and chanting in the midst of it, but one cannot get there.

古文：峰头就竖石将就竖立的石壁凿级为梯，似太华之苍龙脊。
现代文：峰头就着竖立的岩石凿成石梯，似太华山的苍龙脊。
English: At the top of the peak, there are standing rocks that have been hewn into stone ladders, resembling the Soryu Ridge of Mount Taihua.

古文：两旁皆危崖，而石脊中垂，阔仅尺许，若龙之垂尾以度，而级随之，仰望但见层累不尽，而亦不能竟其端倪也。
现代文：两旁都是危崖，而石脊垂在中间，宽处仅一尺左右，好似龙尾下垂前伸，石阶顺着山脊走，仰面望去只见层层叠叠延绵不尽，而且也不能看到它的边际。
English: Both sides are cliffs, and the ridge hangs in the middle, only about a foot wide, like a dragon's tail hanging forward. The stone steps follow the ridge, and when you look up, you can only see the endless layers, and you can't see its edge.

古文：梯凡三转，一里而至其顶。
现代文：梯子共转了三个弯，一里后来到山顶。
English: The ladder made a total of three turns and came to the top of the mountain after one mile.

古文：顶东西长五丈，南北阔半之，中盖玉皇阁，前三楹奉白衣大士，后三楹奉三教圣人，顶平者如是而止，其向皆东临前峰之尖。
现代文：山顶东西长五丈，南北宽处有一半，中间建盖了玉皇阁，前边三开间中供奉着白衣观音，后面三开间供奉着儒、释、道三教的圣人，山顶平坦之处如此便完了，它们的朝向都是向东面临前方山峰的峰尖。
English: The top of the mountain is five stories long from east to west, and half as wide from north to south, with the Jade Emperor's Pavilion built in the middle. In the three open spaces at the front, the white-robed Goddess of Mercy is worshipped, and in the three open spaces at the back, the saints of the three religions of Confucius, Buddha, and Taoism are worshipped. The flat area at the top of the mountain is completed in this way, and they all face the peak of the mountain facing east.

古文：南北夹阁为侧楼，半悬空中，北祠真武，下临北峡，而两头悬榻以待客；南祠山神，下临南峡，而中敞为斋堂。
现代文：南北相夹的楼阁是侧楼，悬在半空中，北楼祭祀真武大帝，下临北面的峡谷，在两头悬架了卧床招待客人；南楼祭祀山神，下临南边的峡谷，在中间敞开作为斋堂。
English: The pavilion between the north and south is a side building, suspended in mid-air. The north building is dedicated to Emperor Zhenwu, next to the canyon in the north, with beds suspended at both ends to entertain guests. The south building is dedicated to mountain gods, next to the canyon in the south, and open in the middle as a temple.

古文：皆川僧法界所营构，盖其上向虽有道，而未开辟，莫可栖托。
现代文：都是四川僧人法界所营建的，原来山上从前虽然有路，但未开辟，无处可栖身。
English: They were all built by the monks of Sichuan. Originally, although there was a road on the mountain, it was not opened, and there was nowhere to live.

古文：法界成之，不及五年，今复欲辟山麓为下殿，故往州未返。
现代文：法界建成了它，不到五年，今天又打算开辟山麓作为下殿，所以前往州城未返回来。
English: It took less than five years to build it, and today they plan to open up the foot of the mountain as the lower hall, so they went to the state capital and never came back.

古文：余爱其幽峻，遂止东侧楼。
现代文：我爱这里幽静险峻，便停留在东侧楼。
English: I love the seclusion and precipitousness here, so I stayed in the east wing.

古文：守寺二僧，一下山负米，一供樵炊而已。
现代文：守寺的两个僧人，一个下山去背米，一个供烧柴煮饭而已。
English: The two monks who guard the temple, one goes down the mountain to carry rice, and the other burns firewood to cook rice.

古文：二十四日晨起，天色上霁，四山咸露其翠微，而山下甸中，则平白氤氲，如铺絮，又如潏涌起波，无分远近，皆若浮翠无根，嵌银连叠，不知其下复有坡渊村塍之异也。
现代文：二十四日早晨起床，天色晴开，四周群山都露出翠微的山色，但山下的甸子中，只见平铺着白色氰氯的云气，如铺开的棉絮，又如翻涌的波浪，不分远近，全似无根漂浮的翠玉，如连片重叠镶嵌的白银，不知它下面还有山坡深渊村庄田野的异境了。
English: On the morning of the 24th, I got up, the sky was clear, and the mountains all around me showed a greenish mountain color, but in the valley below the mountain, I could only see the clouds of white cyanogen chloride, like a spreading lint, and like a surging wave. No matter how far or near, it all resembled a rootless floating emerald, like a series of overlapping inlaid silver, and I did not know that there was a strange landscape of the hillside abyss village field below it.

古文：至如山外之山，甸外之甸山间平地，稍远辄为岚翠掩映，无能拈出，独此时层层衬白，一片内，一片外，搜根剔奥，虽掩其下而愈疏其上。
现代文：至于山外之山，甸子外的甸子，稍远处就被山雾遮蔽翠色映衬，不能分辨出来，独有此时衬托着层层白云，一片在内，一片在外，搜根剔隐，虽然遮住了它的下面但它的上边愈加疏朗。
English: As for the mountain outside the mountain, the diaozi outside the diaozi, it was obscured by the mountain mist at a slight distance, with a verdant contrast, and could not be distinguished. Only at this time, it was set off by layers of white clouds, one inside, one outside, searching for roots, and although it covered its bottom, its top became more sparse.

古文：乃呼山僧与之指质问明白，或对质远近诸山，一一表出，因与悬南崖而下。
现代文：于是唤来山中的僧人与他一同指点询问远近诸山，一一指示出来，于是与他悬下南面的山崖。
English: So he summoned the monks in the mountains to point out and inquire about the mountains near and far with him, and they pointed them out one by one, so he hung down from the southern cliff with them.

古文：有崖前临绝壑，后倚峭壁，袆横罅，下平上覆，恰如匡床，虽小而可憩可卧，是名仙床。
现代文：有石崖前临绝壑，后靠峭壁，中间挖成横向的裂缝，下边平整上面下覆，恰似方正的卧床，虽小些但可以歇息可以躺卧，这名叫仙床。
English: There is a rock cliff in front of the cliff, behind the cliff, the middle is dug into a transverse crack, the bottom is flat and the top is covered, just like a square bed, although it is smaller, it can rest and lie down. This is called a fairy bed.

古文：俯层峭之下，巉覆累累，无可攀循，僧指其下有仙洞，须从梯级下至第二层，转崖下坠，乃可得之，遂导而行。
现代文：俯视层层峭壁之下，竣岩累累下覆，无可顺着攀登之处，僧人指点山下有个仙洞，必须从梯级上下到第二层，转过山崖下坠，才可走到那里，于是领路前去。
English: Looking down below the layers of cliffs, the rocks are piled up and there is nowhere to climb. The monk points out that there is a fairy cave at the bottom of the mountain. You have to go up and down from the rungs to the second level, turn around and fall down the cliff before you can get there, so he leads the way.

古文：其洞乃大石叠缀所成，乱崖颠磴，欲坠未坠，迸处为罅，覆处为洞，穿处为门，门不一窍，洞不一层，中欠宽平，外支幽险，若叠级架板，亦可幽栖处也。
现代文：此洞是大石块堆叠连缀而成的，乱石崖中倒斜的石瞪，想要坠落又未坠落，进裂处成为缝隙，下覆之处成为山洞，穿通之处成为洞口，洞口的石窍不止一处，洞不止一层，中间缺少宽平之处，外边支撑着幽深的险石，如果垒起石阶架起木板，也可作为隐居之处了。
English: This cave is made up of large stone blocks stacked and connected. It is an oblique rock face in a jumbled rock cliff. If you want to fall, you have not fallen. The crack becomes a crevice, the underlay becomes a cave, the through place becomes a cave mouth, the cave mouth has more than one stone hole, the cave has more than one layer, the middle lacks a wide flat place, and the outside supports a deep dangerous stone. If you set up a stone staircase and a wooden board, it can also be used as a secluded place.

古文：洞门东向腋中者为大，入而南穿，一峡排空而下，南出峡门。
现代文：洞口朝向东方山侧之中的为大，进去后往南穿行，一个峡谷排列在高空下延，往南走出峡口。
English: The mouth of the cave facing the east side of the mountain is the largest, and after entering it, it travels south. A canyon extends at high altitude and goes south out of the canyon.

古文：其门南临绝壑，上夹重崖，有二木球倒悬其前。
现代文：峡口南边面临绝壑，上方夹着重重山崖，有两个木球倒悬在前方。
English: The south side of the mouth of the gorge faces a precipice, with a heavy mountain cliff above, and two wooden balls hanging upside down in front of it.

古文：仰睇之，其上垂藤，自崖端悬空下丈余，即结为瘿，如瓠匏之缀于蔓者。
现代文：仰面斜视它，它上边垂下藤枝，自石崖顶端悬下空中一丈多，马上结为瘤状的囊体，如葫芦连缀在藤蔓上。
English: You look at it sideways from the back, wisteria branches hang down from above it, it hangs more than a foot in the air from the top of the cliff, and immediately forms into a knobbly sac, like a gourd attached to a vine.

古文：瘿之端，缀旁芽细枝，上迎雨露，茸茁夭矫，花叶不一状，亦有结细子圆缀枝间者，即山僧亦不能名之，但曰寄生，或曰木胆而已。
现代文：囊体的顶端，旁边连缀着嫩芽细枝，向上迎着雨露，绿茸茸的茁壮生长，极有气势，花叶形状不一致，也有结出圆圆的细子连缀在枝条间的，即便是山中的和尚也不能说出它的名称，只是叫做寄生，或者称为木胆而已。
English: The top of the capsule, next to it, is dotted with shoots and twigs, facing the rain and dew, the green mushroom thrives, it is very powerful, the shape of the flowers and leaves is inconsistent, and there are also round knots that are dotted between the branches. Even the monks in the mountains can't say its name, it's just called parasitic, or it's called wood gall.

古文：一丝下垂，结体空中，驭风吸露，形似胆悬，命随空寄，其取意亦不诬也。
现代文：一丝下垂，结出的囊体中间是空心的，驾驭着山风，吮吸着雨露，形状似悬挂的胆囊，随意寄生在高空，取其意为名也不枉。
English: A drooping thread, the middle of the follicle is hollow, driving the mountain wind, sucking the rain and dew, shaped like a hanging gallbladder, parasitizing at will in the sky, it is not unreasonable to take its meaning as a name.

古文：余心识其异，欲取之，而高悬数丈，前即崩崖直坠，计无可得。
现代文：我心知它的奇特，想摘取下来，可悬在数丈高之处，前边就是迸裂的山崖笔直下坠，估计不可得到。
English: I know in my heart its strangeness. If I want to pluck it off, I can hang it in a place several feet high. In front of it is a cleft mountain cliff plunging straight down. It is impossible to get an estimate.

古文：但其前有高树自崖隙上耸，若得梯横度树间，缘柯即树技而上，以长竹为殳，可钩藤而截取之。
现代文：但是它前边有高树从山崖的缝隙中向上耸立，如果找到梯子横越到树上，沿树枝上爬，用长竹竿作受，可钩住藤条截取到它。
English: But in front of it, there are tall trees rising up from the crevices of the cliff. If you find a ladder, cross over to the tree, climb along the branches, and use a long bamboo pole to support it, you can hook the rattan to intercept it.

古文：余乃识而行，复随导僧由梯级北下悬空之台。
现代文：我于是记住此地才走开，又跟随领路的僧人由梯级往北走下悬空的石台。
English: I then remembered this place and walked away, and followed the monk leading the way from the steps to the north down the overhanging stone platform.

古文：乃石脊一枝，下瞰北壑，三面盘空，矫若龙首，条冈回壑，纡郁其下，与仙洞各缀梯级之旁，若左右垂珥。
现代文：石台是一支石脊，下瞰北面的壑谷，三面盘绕在高空，屈曲好似龙头，条形的山冈回绕的壑谷，曲折盘结在山下，与仙洞各自点缀在梯级的两旁，似垂在左右的耳环一样。
English: The stone platform is a stone ridge, overlooking the valley to the north, three sides coiled in the sky, bending like a dragon's head, the valley of the bar-shaped mountain range, twists and turns at the bottom of the mountain, and the fairy cave are each dotted on both sides of the steps, like earrings hanging to the right and left.

古文：洞倚南崖，以幽峭见奇；台踞北壑，以凭临为胜！
现代文：仙洞紧靠南面的山崖，以幽深陡峭见奇；石台盘踞在北面的壑谷上，以凭高临险为胜！
English: Xiandong is close to the cliff in the south, with a deep and steep cliff; Shitai is located in the valley in the north, with a high risk of danger!

古文：此峰前两概即风貌也。
现代文：这是峰前的两处景象。
English: These are the two scenes in front of the peak.

古文：由峰后西南越脊而下，更多幽境。
现代文：由峰后往西南越过山脊下走，幽境更多。
English: Walking from behind the peak to the southwest over the ridge, there are more secluded areas.

古文：近法界新开小路，下十里至小甸，乃固栋西向入峡，经此而趋古勇之道。
现代文：近来法界新开修了小路，下行十里到小甸，是固栋向西入峡，经过此地通往古勇关的通道。
English: Recently, a new path has been built in Hokei. The path descends ten miles to Xiaodian. It is the westward entrance of Gudong into the gorge, passing through this place to Guyongguan.

古文：其坡有热水塘，亦法界新开者，由此东可出固栋，西可穷古勇，而余时有北探滇滩、阿幸之兴，遂不及兼收云。
现代文：此处山坡上有个热水塘，也是法界新开辟的，由此向东可出到固栋，往西可到达古勇关，但此时我有往北去探滇滩关、阿幸厂的兴致，便顾不及兼游了。
English: There is a hot-water pond on the hillside here, which was also newly opened in the legal area. From here, you can go east to Gudong and west to Guyongguan. However, at this time, I was interested in going north to explore Tangguan and Ako Factory, so I couldn't do both.

古文：是午返寺，同顾仆取斧缚竿负梯而往，得以前法升木取瘿。
现代文：这天中午返回寺中，同顾仆拿来斧子绑在竹竿上扛着梯子前去，得以用前述的方法爬上树取来囊体。
English: Returning to the temple at noon that day, his fellow servant took an axe, tied it to a bamboo pole, and carried a ladder forward. He was able to climb up the tree using the aforementioned method to retrieve the body.

古文：而崖高峡坠，木杪难于著力，久而后得之。
现代文：可山崖太高峡谷深坠，树梢难于着力，很久后才取到囊体。
English: However, the cliff is too high, the canyon is too deep, and the treetops are difficult to focus on. It takes a long time to remove the cyst.

古文：一瘿圆若葫芦倒垂，上大下小，中环的颈ｄì即白色颈子；一瘿环若巨玦一种环形玉佩，两端圆凑而中空：皆藤悬于上而枝发于下。如玦者轻而松，如葫芦者坚而重，余不能兼收，后行时置轻负坚者而走。
现代文：一个囊体圆如倒垂的葫芦，上大下小，中间环绕白色的颈；一个囊体呈环状如巨大的玉块，两端圆圆地凑在一起而中间是空的，都是藤条悬在上方而枝芽发于下方，如玉块样的又轻又松，似葫芦的又硬又重，我不能兼而有之，后来走时放弃了轻的背走了坚硬的。
English: A capsule is round like an upside-down gourd, the top is large and the bottom is small, the middle is surrounded by a white neck; a capsule is ring-shaped like a huge ball, the two ends are rounded together and the middle is empty, the rattan is hanging above and the sprouts are below, like a ball, it is light and loose, like a gourd, it is hard and heavy, I can't have both. Later, when I left, I gave up the light and took away the hard.

古文：二十五日余留二诗于山，负木胆于肩，从东大道下梯级。
现代文：二十五日我留下两首诗在山上，把木胆扛在肩上，从东边的大道走下梯级。
English: On the twenty-fifth day, I left two poems on the mountain, carried the woodpile on my shoulder, and walked down the steps from the eastern avenue.

古文：一里余，东度过坳，遂东南循前峰之腰。
现代文：一里多，往东越过山坳，就向东南沿前峰的山腰走。
English: After more than a kilometer, I crossed the ridge to the east and walked along the mountainside of Qianfeng to the southeast.

古文：又半里，东度脊项，于是俱深木夹道。
现代文：又行半里，向东越过山脊的颈部，在这里全是深树夹住道路。
English: Another half-mile to the east, over the neck of the ridge, where the road is blocked by deep trees.

古文：由折峻下者二里，涉一南盘峡，复东北上。
现代文：曲折陡峻地下走二里，涉过一条向南弯曲的峡谷，再向东北上山。
English: After two miles of twists and turns in the steep underground, we waded through a canyon that curved to the south, and then climbed up the mountain to the northeast.

古文：半里凌脊，乃东行脊间，左右皆夹壑甚深，而重木翳之。
现代文：半里登上山脊，无是往东行走在脊上，左右都是相夹的壑谷，非常深，但重重林木遮住了它。
English: Half a mile up the ridge, there is nothing to walk eastward on the ridge, and both sides are sandwiched in the valley, very deep, but covered with trees.

古文：又半里，度脊间铺木。
现代文：又行半里，越过脊上铺着的木头。
English: Another half-mile, over a ridge of wood.

古文：脊两旁甚狭，而中复空坠，故以木填而度之。
现代文：山脊两旁十分狭窄，而中间重又从空中下坠，所以用木头填塞缺口走过去。
English: The two sides of the ridge are very narrow, and the middle of the ridge drops down from the sky, so they fill the gap with wood and walk over.

古文：又东南半里，复盘壑东北下。
现代文：又往东南半里，再绕着壑谷往东北下行。
English: Another half-mile to the southeast, then around Shibuya and down to the northeast.

古文：二里，至前巨石之左，遂涉南下之溪。
现代文：二里，走到前方巨石的左边，就涉过往南下流的溪水。
English: After walking two miles to the left of the huge rock in front of me, I waded through a stream flowing south.

古文：半里，复东逾一冈。
现代文：半里，再向东越过一座山冈。
English: Half a mile further east, we crossed a mountain ridge.

古文：又半里，再涉一南下之溪，东向稍上，遂出箐东北行。
现代文：又走半里，再涉过一条往南下流的溪水，向东稍上走，终于走出山著往东北行。
English: I walked another half-mile, then waded through a stream that flowed down to the south, walked a little to the east, and finally walked out of the mountains to the northeast.

古文：一里，至下院分岐之路，仍从向来之小路，一里余，至前浴流之所。
现代文：一里，到了下院分岔的路口，仍从先前来的小路走，一里多，走到先前在溪流中洗澡的地方。
English: A mile, to the fork in the road to the House of Commons, still walking from the previous path, more than a mile, to the place where he had previously bathed in the stream.

古文：又半里，越坞而得一村，入问热水塘道。
现代文：又走半里，越过山坞后遇见一个村庄，进村打听去热水塘的路。
English: He walked another half-mile, crossed the dock, and encountered a village. He entered the village to find out the way to the hot-water pond.

古文：仍东北三里，过乌索桥，从桥西逾冈而北，一里，与大道合。
现代文：仍向东北三里，过了乌索桥，从桥西越过山冈往北行，一里，与大道会合。
English: Still three miles to the northeast, past the Uso Bridge, from the west of the bridge over the mountains and hills to the north, one mile, meeting with the main road.

古文：随之西北，循东山之麓行。
现代文：顺大道往西北，沿东山的山麓行。
English: Take Shun Avenue to the northwest and go along the foot of Dongshan Mountain.

古文：六里，有冈自东山直对西峰而下，驱江流漱西峰之麓，而路亦因之与江遇。
现代文：六里，有山冈自东山正对着西峰下延，顺延江流冲刷着西峰的山麓，而路也顺着山冈与江相遇。
English: For six miles, there is a mountain ridge stretching down from the East Mountain facing the West Peak, and the flow of the Yangtze River washes the foot of the West Peak, and the road also meets the river along the mountain ridge.

古文：已复逾冈北下，北坞稍开。
现代文：不久又越过山冈往北下山，北面的山坞稍许开阔起来。
English: Soon I crossed the mountains and went downhill to the north, and the dock on the north side opened up a little.

古文：有小水交流西注，蒸气杂沓而起，即热水塘也。
现代文：有小溪交相往西流注，蒸气杂乱升起，这就是热水塘了。
English: There are streams intersecting and flowing to the west, and the steam rises chaotically. This is a hot water pond.

古文：半里，抵塘上，有池而无屋，雨霏霏扑人。
现代文：半里，走到塘上，有池子但无房屋，雨雾霏霏扑人。
English: Half a mile away, walk to the pond, there is a pond but no houses, rain and fog beat people.

古文：乃令顾仆守行囊于塘侧，北半里上坡，观其街子，已散而无他物。
现代文：于是命令顾仆在塘侧守行李，我往北上坡半里，观览这里的街子，集市已散无其他东西。
English: So I ordered my valet to guard my luggage on the side of the pond. I walked half a mile uphill to the north to take a look at the town. There was nothing left of the market.

古文：望南冈有村庐在坳脊间，街子人指其上有川人李翁家可歇。
现代文：望见南面山冈上有村庄房屋在坳脊之间，街子上的人指点冈上有个四川人李翁的家中可以住宿。
English: Looking to the south, there are village houses on the hill between the ridges. The people on the street point out that there is a Sichuanese Li Weng's home on the hill where they can stay.

古文：复南半里回觅之。
现代文：再往南半里回头去找他。
English: Then head back half a mile south to find him.

古文：有闽人洪姓者，向曾寓余乡，为导入同寓。
现代文：有个姓洪的福建人，从前曾寓居我家乡，为我领路进入同乡寓所中。
English: A Fujianese man surnamed Hong, who once lived in my hometown, led the way for me to enter the hometown apartment.

古文：余乃出就塘畔招顾仆入，出携餐啖之。
现代文：我于是出门走近塘畔招呼顾仆进来，拿出带着的饭吃。
English: So I went out and approached the bank of the pond to invite Gu Min to come in and take out the meal I had brought with me.

古文：问阿幸路，须仍从此出。
现代文：但是，往北探游滇滩、阿幸的兴致，自己也不能控制。
English: However, I can't control my interest in exploring the northern beaches and A's luck.

古文：此中东至明光，虽止隔一山，险峻不可行也。
现代文：打听去阿幸厂的路，必须仍从此地出去。此地往东到明光，虽只隔着一座山，但险峻不可行。
English: If you want to find out the way to the Ako factory, you still have to go out from here. Going east from here to Myoko, although only separated by a mountain, is too steep.

古文：见日色尚早而雨止，乃留热水待出时浴，并木胆寄李翁家菜园中，遂仍西北行。
现代文：见天色还早而雨停了，就暂离热水塘等回来时再沐浴，连同木胆寄放在李翁家的菜园中丁仍向西北行。
English: Seeing that it was still early and the rain had stopped, he left the hot water pond for a while and waited to take a bath when he returned. Together with the gallbladder deposited in the vegetable garden of Li Weng's house, Zhongding still went to the northwest.

古文：五里，北上坡，为左所，盖其分屯处也。
现代文：五里，往北上坡，是左所，大概是分兵屯垦之处。
English: Five li uphill to the north is the left place, probably the place where the soldiers were quartered.

古文：其处启庐甚盛，行者俱劝余宿此，谓前皆僰彝即今傣族家，不可栖，且多茶山彝出入，不可晚行。
现代文：此处居民房屋十分兴盛，走路的人都劝我住在此地，说是前边都是焚彝人家，不能住，而且多有茶山彝出入，不可在晚上走路。
English: Inhabitants' houses are very prosperous here, and people who walk around persuade me to live here. They say that all the houses in front of me are haunted, so I can't live there, and that there are many tea gardens, so I can't walk around at night.

古文：余不顾。
现代文：我不理会。
English: I ignored it.

古文：又北二里，逾一坡，又三里，过后所屯。
现代文：又向北二里，越过一道山坡，又走三里，走过后所屯。
English: Another two miles to the north, over a hillside, another three miles, and past Hou Sok Tun.

古文：渐折而从西北，三里，直追西大山东北垂，复与江遇。
现代文：渐渐转弯从西北走，三里，直逼西大山的东北垂，再次与江相遇。
English: Gradually turn from the northwest, walk three miles, straight to the northeast slope of the West Dashan, and meet the river again.

古文：回顾尖山与前峰并峙，中坳如马鞍，而左所之南，复有峰一支自西山突出，横亘其北，故路必东北从乌索桥抵热水塘，又西北至此也。
现代文：回头看去，尖山与前峰并峙，中间下凹如马鞍，而左所的南边，又有一山支脉自西山突出来，横亘在它北面，所以路必须向东北从乌索桥到达热水塘，又向西北来到此地。
English: Looking back, the cusp and the front peak stand side by side, the middle is concave like a saddle, and on the south side of the left, there is another mountain branch protruding from the west mountain and extending north of it, so the road must go northeast from Uso Bridge to the hot water pond, and then northwest to this place.

古文：此地正当尖山之北，其北则西大山渐伏，中逊而西，为巅滩过脉处；东大山直亘而南，分坠西窜，下突小山，横界于北，为松山坡，坡之北，即阿幸北进之峡。
现代文：此地正当尖山之北，它北面是西大山，渐渐低伏下去，中部往西后退，是滇滩关的山脉延伸而过之处；东大山一直往南绵亘，分支下坠向西窜，下冲为小山，横列在北方，那是松山坡，坡的北面，就是阿幸厂向北进去的峡谷。
English: This place is just north of the Jianshan. To the north of it is the West Dashan, gradually falling down, the central part retreating to the west, is the place where the mountains of Shantangguan extend and pass; the East Dashan stretches all the way to the south, branches down to the West Fen, rushes down as a hill, and lines up in the north. That is the Songshan slope. The north side of the slope is the canyon into which the Aucheng factory enters to the north.

古文：其西北，高峰浮出于横坡之上，则阿幸、巅滩之间，又中界之一峰，所谓土瓜山也。
现代文：它的西北，高峰浮出于横向的山坡之上，就是阿幸厂、滇滩关之间，其间又隔着一座山峰，那是所谓的土瓜山了。
English: Its northwest, with the peak floating above the horizontal slope, is between the Ako Factory and the Kuantan Pass, and there is a mountain peak in between, which is the so-called Cucumber Mountain.

古文：行江东岸一里，复折而东北一里，抵东山腋下。
现代文：在江东岸行一里，再折向东北一里，抵达东山侧旁之下。
English: Go one mile along the east bank of the river, then turn one mile northeast and arrive at the foot of the east mountain side.

古文：山峰丛立处，有两三家倚东坡而栖，是为松山。
现代文：山峰成丛矗立之处，有两三家人紧靠东面的山坡居住，这是松山。
English: Where the peaks stand in a cluster, there are two or three families living close to the eastern slope. This is Matsuyama.

古文：从其前又北一里，上北山西亘之坡，一里蹑坡脊。
现代文：从村前又往北一里，走上北山向西绵亘的山坡，一里登上坡脊。
English: From the front of the village, go one mile north, walk up the hillside of the north mountain to the west, and climb one mile up the ridge.

古文：其脊正西与崩塘相对，有坞西盘，而江水自北横界脊下，脊若堵墙。
现代文：此脊正西与滇塘相对，有山坞往西盘绕，而江水流自北面横隔的山脊下，山脊好似一堵墙。
English: This ridge is directly west of Qutang, with a dock coiled to the west, and the river water flows from the north across the ridge, the ridge is like a wall.

古文：溯水北上，从脊间行二里，乃西北下。
现代文：溯江水往北上行，从脊上行二里，于是往西北下走。
English: The backwaters flowed northward, two miles up the ridge, and then northwestward.

古文：半里，有石屏西向立峰头，是为土主碑，乃神之所托也。
现代文：半里，有岩石屏风样向西立在峰头，这是土主碑，是神灵依托之处。
English: Half a mile to the west, a rock screen-like structure stands at the top of the peak. This is a local monument, a place for the gods to lean on.

古文：从石西随坡下，涉江西上，乃滇滩关道，已茅塞不通。
现代文：从岩石西边顺山坡下走，涉过江水往西上山，是去滇滩关的路，已被茅草阻塞不通。
English: Walking down the mountain slope from the west side of the rock, wading through the river water to the west up the mountain, is the road to Shantang Pass, which has been blocked by thatch.

古文：惟茶山野人间从此出入，负茶、蜡、红藤、飞松、黑鱼，与松山、固栋诸土人交易盐布。
现代文：唯有茶山的野人间或从此处出入，背负茶叶、黄蜡、红藤、飞松、黑鱼，与松山、固栋各地的人交换食盐布匹。
English: Only the wild people of Matsuyama may enter and leave from here, carrying tea leaves, yellow wax, red wisteria, flying pines, and black fish, and exchange salt cloth with people from Matsuyama and Gudong.

古文：中国指与边塞相对的中原地区亦间有出者，以多为所掠，不甚往也。其关昔有守者，以不能安居，多遁去不处，今关废而田芜，寂为狐兔之穴矣。
现代文：中国也间或有出去的人，因为多被抢劫，不怎么愿去。这里的关口从前有人守卫，因为不能安居，大多逃走不愿居住，如今关口废弃田园荒芜，荒寂得成为狐狸野兔的巢穴了。
English: In China, there are also people who go out from time to time, but they don't really want to go because they are often robbed. The pass here used to be guarded by people, but because they couldn't live safely, most people fled and didn't want to live there. Nowadays, the pass is abandoned and the countryside is desolate, so desolate that it has become a nest for foxes and hares.

古文：其隘亦纤坦，不甚崇险，去此三里，已望而知之，遂北下坡。
现代文：此处的隘口也曲折平坦，不十分高险，距此地三里，望一望就知道它的形势了，就往北下坡。
English: The pass here is also flat with twists and turns, and is not very high-risk. Three miles from here, you can see the situation at a glance, and go downhill to the north.

古文：一道从坞间溯江东岸北行，为度桥捷径；一道沿东坡北上，为托宿之所。
现代文：一条道从山坞间溯江东岸往北行，是过桥的捷径；一条道沿东面的山坡往北上坡，是投宿的地方。
English: One road from the dock to the east bank of the river to the north is a shortcut to cross the bridge; one road along the eastern slope to the north is a place to stay.

古文：乃下半里，渡东来小涧，复上东坡，北随之行。
现代文：于是下坡半里，渡过东来的小涧，再走上东面的山坡，往北顺山坡行。
English: So I walked downhill for half a mile, crossed the small stream coming from the east, then walked up the hillside to the east, and walked north along the hillside.

古文：二里，有四五家倚东山而居，即托宿之所也。
现代文：二里，有四五家人背靠东山居住，就是投宿的地方。
English: Two miles away, there are four or five families living with their backs to Dongshan, which is the place to stay.

古文：其主人王姓者，夫妇俱伐木山中未归。
现代文：姓王的房主人，夫妇都到山中伐树未归。
English: The owner of the house, surnamed Wang, and his wife both went to the mountains to cut down trees but never returned.

古文：余将西度桥，望西山下投栖；闻其地江岸西庐，乃土舍所托，皆不纳客，纳客者惟东岸王店。
现代文：我将向西过桥，望着西山下去投宿；听说此地江岸西边的房屋，是土舍居住的场所，都不接纳客人，接纳客人的只有东岸的王家客店。
English: I will cross the bridge to the west, look down at the West Mountain, and stay there. I heard that the houses on the west bank of the river here are homestead dwellings, and do not accept guests. Only the Wangjia Inn on the east bank accepts guests.

古文：方踌躇间，一锄于田者，乃王之邻，谓其妇亦入山未归，不识可徐待接待之否。
现代文：正犹豫间，一个在田中锄地的人，是王家的邻居，说他妻子也进山未归，不知可不可以慢慢等她。
English: While hesitating, a man who was ploughing fields in Tanaka, a neighbour of the Wang family, said that his wife had also gone into the mountains and was yet to return, and he wondered whether he should wait for her.

古文：余乃还待于其门。
现代文：我于是回来在他门口等待。
English: So I came back and waited at his door.

古文：久之妇归，为汲水而炊。
现代文：很久后妇人归来，为我汲水煮饭。
English: After a long time, the woman came back to draw water and cook rice for me.

古文：此地名土瓜山，西乃滇滩东北高峰南下之支，东乃雅乌直北崇亘之岭，中夹成坞，江流贯其间；南则土主碑之横冈自东而西突，北则土瓜山之东岭自西而东突，中界此坞，南别松山坡，北别阿幸厂，而自成函盖于中。
现代文：此地名叫土瓜山，西面是滇滩关东北的高峰往南下延的支脉，东面是雅乌山正北高大横亘的山岭，中间夹成山坞，江水流贯其间；南面是土主碑所在横列的山冈自东往西前突，北面是土瓜山的东岭自西向东前突，中央隔成此处山坞，南边与松山坡隔开，北边与阿幸厂隔开，而在中央自成一处盒盖样的地形。
English: This place is called Mount Togua. To the west is the southward-extending branch of the peak of the northeastern part of Shantangguan. To the east is the high and broad mountain range of Yaw Mountain, which is just north of Yaw Mountain. In the middle is a dock, and the river flows through it. To the south is the horizontal mountain range where the main monument is located, which protrudes from east to west. To the north is the east ridge of Mount Togua, which protrudes from west to east. The center is separated into a dock here. The south side is separated from Matsuyama slope, the north side is separated from

古文：盖滇滩土巡检昔为某姓，已绝，今为土居之雄者，日龙氏，与此隔江相向，虽末授职，而俨然以土舍自居矣。
现代文：原来滇滩关的土巡检从前是某姓人，已经绝嗣，今天是土著居民中称雄的，称做龙氏，与此地隔江相望，虽未授与职位，但俨然以土舍自居了。
English: Originally, the land surveyor of Shantangguan used to be a person with a certain surname, who had already died out. Today, he is a hero among the indigenous people, known as the Long clan. He lives across the river from this place. Although he has not been awarded a position, he suddenly lives in a house.

古文：二十六日凌晨起饭，西下行田间，半里，抵江岸。
现代文：二十六日凌晨起床吃饭，向下行走在田间，半里，抵达江岸。
English: On the morning of the 26th, I got up to eat, walked down the fields for half a mile, and arrived at the riverbank.

古文：溯江北行，有木桥跨江而西，度之。
现代文：溯江往北行，有木桥跨到江西岸，过桥。
English: Following the river to the north, there is a wooden bridge across to the west bank of the river, cross the bridge.

古文：复溯江西岸北行，一里，北上坡。
现代文：再溯江西岸往北行，一里，向北上坡。
English: Then trace the west bank of the river northward, one mile, northward uphill.

古文：半里，折而东，盘其东突之嘴。
现代文：半里，折向东，绕过那向东突的山嘴。
English: Half a mile, turn east, and go around the promontory that juts out to the east.

古文：半里，复转而北，从坡上行。
现代文：半里，又转向北，从坡上行。
English: After half a mile, turn north again and go up the slope.

古文：西循峰腰，东瞰江流，坞底至此，遂束而为峡。
现代文：往西沿山腰走，往东俯瞰江流，坞底到了此地，便束拢成为峡谷。
English: Walk along the mountainside to the west, overlook the river to the east, and when the dock bottom reaches this place, it will become a canyon.

古文：隔峡瞻东山之崖，崩石凌空，岩岩累石重重之状上拥，峡中之水，北自阿幸厂北姊妹山发源南下，南趋乌索而为固栋西江者也。
现代文：隔着峡谷远望东山的石崖，崩裂的岩石凌空，高峻地向上拥立，峡中之水，自北边的阿幸厂北面的姊妹山发源往南下流，向南流向乌索后成为固栋的西江。
English: Across the canyon, the stone cliff of Dongshan can be seen in the distance. The cracked rock soars into the sky and rises up steeply. The water in the canyon flows southward from the source of the sister mountain north of the Ako Factory in the north, flows southward to Uso, and then becomes the West River of Gudong.

古文：东西两界山，自姊妹山分支：西下穹为滇滩东北峰，而下为土瓜山；东下穹为阿幸东山，而南接雅乌。
现代文：东西两列山，从姊妹山分支：往西下延隆起成为滇滩关东北的山峰，而后下延为土瓜山；向东下延隆起成为阿幸厂的东山，而后往南连接到雅乌山。
English: Two mountains, east and west, branching from a sister mountain: extending westward, it rises to become the northeastern peak of Shantangguan, and then extends downward to become Toogua Mountain; extending eastward, it rises to become the eastern mountain of Ako Factory, and then connects to Yaw Mountain to the south.

古文：东山之东，北为明光，南为南香甸，第此山峻隔，路仄难逾，故行者避之。
现代文：东山之东，北边是明光，南边是南香甸，但只是此山险峻隔绝，道路狭窄，难以翻越，故而走路的人避开它。
English: To the east of Dongshan, Mingguang is to the north, and Nanxiangdian is to the south. However, this mountain is steep and isolated, and the road is narrow and difficult to cross, so people who walk avoid it.

古文：北行西坡五里，稍下，有小涧自西而东，涉之北上，于是屡陟东突之坡，再渡东流之涧。
现代文：从西坡往北行五里，略下走，有小涧自西流向东，涉过小涧往北上走，从这里起屡次上登东突的山坡，两次渡过东流的山涧。
English: From the west slope to the north for five miles, slightly downhill, there is a small stream flowing from west to east, wading through the small stream to the north, from here repeatedly uphill to the east slope, twice crossing the east stream of the mountains.

古文：八里，西坪稍开，然北瞻姊妹，反茫不可见。
现代文：八里，西面的平地稍变开阔，然而向北望姊妹山，反而茫然不可见。
English: Eight miles away, the flat land to the west becomes a little more open, but when you look north at the sister mountain, you can't see it.

古文：又北二里，盘西山之嘴，始复见姊妹山北倚，而前壑之下，炉烟氤氲，厂庐在焉。
现代文：又向北二里，绕过西山的山嘴，这才重新见到姊妹山斜靠在北方，而前方壑谷之下，炉烟氮氯，厂房就在那里了。
English: Another two miles to the north, around the mouth of the West Mountain, only to see the sister mountain leaning to the north again, and in front of the valley, smoke, nitrogen and chlorine, the factory is there.

古文：遂五里而至厂。
现代文：于是五里后走到厂区。
English: So I walked the five miles to the factory.

古文：厂皆茅舍，有大炉、小炉。
现代文：厂区皆是茅屋，有大炉、小炉。
English: The factory areas are all thatched cottages, with large and small furnaces.

古文：其矿为紫色巨块，如辰砂之状。
现代文：所炼的矿石是紫色的巨块，如朱砂的形状。
English: The ore that is refined is a huge purple lump, the shape of cinnabar.

古文：有一某姓者，方将开炉，见余而留饭于龛中。
现代文：有一个某姓的人，正将开炉，见到我就留我在他屋中吃饭。
English: There was a man of a certain name, who was about to open the oven, and when he saw me, he invited me to eat in his house.

古文：言其北姊妹山后，即为野人出没之地，荒漠无人居，而此中时为野人所扰，每凌晨逾箐至，虽不满四五十人，而药箭甚毒，中之无不毙者。
现代文：谈起此地北面的姊妹山后面，就是野人出没之地，荒漠无人居住，而且这一带时常被野人骚扰，每到凌晨越过山警来到，虽不满四五十人，可毒箭非常毒，中箭的人没有不死的。
English: Talking about the back of the sister mountain to the north of this place, it is the wild man's haunt, the desert is uninhabited, and this area is often harassed by wild men. Every morning, the mountain police come over, although there are less than forty or fifty people, but the poison arrow is very poisonous, and the person hit by the arrow is not immortal.

古文：其妻与子，俱没于此，现葬山前。
现代文：他的妻子与儿子，全死在此地，现葬在山前。
English: His wife and son, who both died here, are buried in front of the mountain.

古文：姊妹山出斑竹，北去此三十里，可望而尽，不必登。
现代文：姊妹山出产斑竹，在北边距此地三十里，可以一眼望尽，不必登。
English: Sister Mountain produces variegated bamboo. It is 30 miles away from here in the north, and can be seen at a glance without having to climb up.

古文：明光逾峻而过，东去此四十里，然径仄无行者，恐箐深蔓翳，亦不可行。
现代文：明光越过峻岭，在东面离此地四十里，但小径狭窄无人行走，担心山警幽深藤蔓密蔽，也不可行。
English: Bright light over the steep ridge, forty miles east of here, but no one walks the narrow paths, fearing that the mountain police are covered with deep vines, and it is not feasible.

古文：乃遂出，仍二十里下土瓜山。
现代文：于是只好出来，仍旧二十里走下土瓜山。
English: So I had no choice but to go out and walk twenty miles down the mountain.

古文：又一里，过江桥而东，乃沿江南随坞中捷径，二里，抵西南坡下。
现代文：又走一里，过了江上的桥往东，于是沿江流往南顺山坞中的捷径走，二里，抵达西南山坡下。
English: I walked another mile, crossed the bridge on the river to the east, and then walked along the river to the shortcut in the Nanshun dock, two miles, and arrived at the southwestern slope.

古文：江漱坡而南，路稍东，逾东峡来小涧。
现代文：江水冲刷着山坡往南流，路稍偏东，越过东面峡中流来的小涧。
English: The river water washes the mountain slope to the south, the road is slightly eastward, and the small stream flowing over the middle of the east gorge.

古文：其涧西注于江，即前涉土主碑坡北之流。
现代文：此涧往西注入江中，就是先前涉过的土主碑坡北的水流。
English: This river flows west into the middle of the river, which is the water flow north of the aboriginal monument.

古文：江之西亦有小涧自滇滩南来，东注于江，其处乃正流即江之主流之会也。
现代文：江的西岸也有小涧自滇滩关往南流来，向东注入江中，此处正是诸水会流之处。
English: On the west bank of the river, there is also a small stream that flows southward from Shantangguan and flows eastward into the river. This is where all the waters meet.

古文：复东南上坡半里，至石屏土主碑下，与前来之道合。
现代文：再向东南上坡半里，到石屏风土主碑下，与前边来的道路会合。
English: Then half a mile uphill to the southeast, to the foot of the Stone Screen Monument, and meet the road ahead.

古文：又南越冈而下，过松山及诸所，二十里而入热水塘李老家。
现代文：又向南越过山冈下走，经过松山及诸处哨所，二十里后进入热水塘李老的家中。
English: He also walked southward over the mountains and hills, passed Matsuyama and various posts, and twenty miles later entered the home of the hot water pond Li Lao.

古文：时犹下午，遍观热水所泄，其出甚异。
现代文：此时还是下午，遍观热水流泄之处，水流出的样子十分奇异。
English: At this time, still in the afternoon, I looked around the place where the hot water was leaking, and the appearance of the water flowing out was very strange.

古文：盖坞中有小水自东峡中注而西者，冷泉也。
现代文：坞中有小溪自东面峡中往西流注的，是冷泉。
English: In the dock there is a stream that flows from the middle of the East Face Gorge to the west. It is a cold spring.

古文：小水之左右，泉孔随地而出，其大如管，喷窍而上，作鼓沸状，滔滔有声，跃起水面者二三寸，其热如沸，有数孔突出一处者，有从石窞中斜喷者，其热尤甚。
现代文：小溪的左右，泉孔随地而出，孔大处如竹管，泉水从窍中喷上来，作出凸起沸腾的形状，滔滔作声，跃出水面有二三寸，水热得如沸水，有数孔在一处突出来的，有从石坑中斜喷出来的，那水尤其热得厉害。
English: On the right and left sides of the stream, the spring holes come out from everywhere, the holes are like bamboo pipes in large places, the spring water sprays up from the nozzle, making a raised boiling shape, gushing, jumping out of the water two or three inches, the water is as hot as boiling water, there are several holes protruding in one place, and there are oblique spraying from the stone pit, the water is particularly hot.

古文：土人就其下流，作一圆池而露浴之。
现代文：当地人就在泉水的下游，修了一个圆池在露天沐浴。
English: Locals just downstream from the spring have built a round pool for bathing in the open air.

古文：余畏其热，不能下体，仅踞池中石上拂拭之而已。
现代文：我害怕水太热，不能浸下身体，仅蹲在池中的岩石上轻轻搅水而已。
English: I was afraid that the water would be too hot to immerse myself, so I just squatted on a rock in the pool and gently stirred the water.

古文：外即冷泉交流，若导入侵之即可浴。此冷泉南坡之热水也。其北倚东坡之下，复有数处，或出于砂孔，或出于石窞，其前亦作圆池，而热亦如之。
现代文：这是冷泉南面山坡的热水。它北边紧靠东面山坡之下，又有几处泉孔，有的从砂孔中流出，有的从石坑中流出，泉孔前边也修了圆池，而且水也很热。
English: This is the hot water of the southern slope of the cold spring. Its northern side is close to the eastern slope. There are several spring holes, some of which flow out of sand holes, some of which flow out of stone pits. A round pool has also been built in front of the spring hole, and the water is also very hot.

古文：两池相望，而溢孔不啻百也。
现代文：两个圆池相望，而溢水的泉孔不下一百个左右。
English: Two round pools face each other, and there are no less than a hundred or so overflowing spring holes.

