古文：魏相字弱翁，济阴定陶人也，徙平陵。
现代文：魏相，字弱翁，济阴定陶人，后来迁徙到平陵。
English: Wei Xiang, character weak Weng, Ji Yin Ding potter, later migrated to Pingling.

古文：少学《易》，为郡卒史，举贤良，以对策高第，为茂陵令。
现代文：魏相年轻时学习《易》，做郡裹的卒史，被举为贤良，因为对答策问名次在前，做了茂陵县令。
English: When he was young, Wei Xiang studied "Yi" and graduated as a county official. He was praised as a virtuous person because he was the best at answering questions, and he became the governor of Maoling County.

古文：顷之，御史大夫桑弘羊客诈称御史止传，丞不以时谒，客怒缚丞。
现代文：不久，御史大大桑弘羊的宾客来到茂陵，诈称桑弘羊要到客舍来了。
English: Not long after, the guests of the Grand Historian Kuang Hongyang came to Moliang, falsely claiming that Kuang Hongyang was coming to the guest house.

古文：相疑其有奸，收捕，案致其罪，论弃客市，茂陵大治。
现代文：县丞没有按时去谒见这个宾客，他就把县丞绑了起来。魏相怀疑是这宾客捣鬼，把他抓了起来，拷问他了解到了他的罪行，判决这个宾客在街头处死。因此茂陵治理得非常好。
English: The county magistrate did not go to see the guest on time, so he tied him up. Wei Xiang suspected that the guest was a trickster, arrested him, tortured him to find out his crime, and sentenced the guest to death in the street. Therefore, the Maolin governance was very good.

古文：后迁河南太守，禁止奸邪，豪强畏服。
现代文：后来魏相迁升为河南太守，禁止坏人恶事，地方豪强十分畏服。
English: Later, Wei Xiang was promoted to the governor of Henan Province, forbade bad people to do bad things, and was very afraid of local strongmen.

古文：会丞相车千秋死，先是千秋子为雒阳武库令，自见失父，而相治郡严，恐久获罪，乃自免去。
现代文：正巧遣时丞相车千秋死了，此前车千秋的儿子做雒阳兵器库的长官，他自己看到父亲死了，而魏相治理郡事十分严峻，恐怕时间长了会受罪责，于是就自己辞了官。
English: It just so happened that the Minister of War, Cha Chi Qiu, died. Previously, Cha Chi Qiu's son, Ran, was the commander of the Shenyang Arsenal. He himself saw his father die, and Wei Xiang's governance of the county was very serious. I'm afraid that he would be held responsible if it took too long, so he resigned.

古文：相使掾追呼之，遂不肯还。
现代文：魏相派佐助自己的掾属追去喊他回来，终于没有回来。
English: The Wei minister sent Sasuke to chase his nephew to call him back, but he did not come back.

古文：相独恨曰： 大将军闻此令去官，必以为我用丞相死不能遇其子。
现代文：魏相自己遗憾地叹道： 大将军听到这个武库令辞了官，一定会以为我是因为丞相死了而不礼遇他的儿子。
English: Wei Xiang himself lamented regretfully: "When the general heard that this arsenal commander had resigned, he must have thought that I had treated his son disrespectfully because the prime minister had died.

古文：使当世贵人非我，殆矣！ 
现代文：也会使那些当世的权贵责备我，危险啊！ 
English: It will also make those who are powerful in this world blame me. Danger!

古文：武库令西至长安，大将军霍光果以责过相曰： 幼主新立，以为函谷京师之固，武库精兵所聚，故以丞相弟为关都尉，子为武库令。
现代文：车千秋这个做武库令的儿子到了长安，大将军霍光果然因此责备魏相说： 年幼的新皇帝刚刚即位，认为函谷关是保卫京城最坚固之处，武器库是精良的兵器聚藏的地方，所以让丞相的弟弟做函谷关的都尉，丞相的儿子做武器库的长官。
English: Che Qianqiu, the son of the commander of the arsenal, arrived in Chang'an. General Huo Guang Tuan blamed Wei Xiang for this, saying: The young new emperor had just ascended the throne, and he thought that the Hangu Pass was the strongest place to defend the capital, and the arsenal was a place for collecting fine weapons. Therefore, let the younger brother of the minister be the captain of the Hangu Pass, and the son of the minister be the chief of the arsenal.

古文：今河南太守不深惟国家大策，苟见丞相不在而斥逐其子，何浅薄也！ 
现代文：现在河南太守魏相不深切思考国家的大计，衹是看到丞相死了就斥逐他的儿子，这是多么浅薄啊！ 
English: Now, Henan's supreme governor Wei Xiang does not think deeply about the country's grand plan, but when he sees that the prime minister is dead, he expels his son. How shallow is this!

古文：后人有告相贼杀不辜，事下有司。
现代文：后来又有人状告魏相杀戮无罪的人，这事下到了主管的官署。
English: Later, another person accused Wei Xiang of killing an innocent person, and the matter came to the competent government office.

古文：河南卒戍中都官者二三千人，遮大将军，自言愿复留作一年以赎太守罪。
现代文：河南戍卒中的都官共二三千人，阻拦大将军霍光，自己说愿意再留守一年来赎太守魏相的罪。
English: A total of 23,000 officials in the capital of Henan Province blocked the general Huo Guang and said that they were willing to stay for another year to atone for the crime of Wei Xiang.

古文：河南老弱万余人守关欲入上书，关吏以闻。
现代文：河南的老弱百姓一万多人守着函谷关要求入关向皇帝上书，守关的官吏把这事上报。
English: More than ten thousand old and weak people in Henan guarded the Hantang Pass and demanded entry to the emperor. The officials guarding the pass reported this to the emperor.

古文：大将军用武库令事，遂下相廷尉狱。
现代文：大将军霍光因为武库令的事，于是就把魏相交给廷尉治罪。
English: Because of the matter of the Arsenal Order, General Huo Guang handed Wei Xiang over to the courtier to be punished.

古文：久系逾冬，会赦出。
现代文：魏相被关在监狱里很久，过了冬天，正巧碰上朝廷赦免犯人。
English: Wei Xiang was kept in prison for a long time. After the winter, he happened to meet the court to pardon the prisoner.

古文：复有诏守茂陵令，迁杨州刺史。
现代文：又有诏书命令魏相再做茂陵县令，将其升迁为杨州刺史。
English: There was also an imperial edict ordering Wei Xiang to be re-appointed as the governor of Maolin County and promoted to the position of Yangzhou chief historian.

古文：考案郡国守相，多所贬退。
现代文：后来朝廷考查郡国的国相们，许多人被贬退。
English: Later, the imperial court examined the county's ministers of state, and many were demoted.

古文：相与丙吉相善，时吉为光禄大夫，与相书曰： 朝廷已深知弱翁治行，方且大用矣。
现代文：魏相与丙吉要好，当时丙吉的官职是光禄大夫，写信给魏相说： 朝廷已深切了解了你的成绩与行为，就要起用你了。
English: Wei Xiang and Bongji were on good terms. At that time, Bongji's official title was Guanglu Doctor, and he wrote to Wei Xiang saying: The imperial court has deeply understood your achievements and behavior, and will employ you.

古文：愿少慎事自重，臧器于身。 
现代文：希望你处事谨慎自重，修炼自身的才能。 
English: I hope you will be prudent and self-respecting in your dealings and cultivate your own talents.

古文：相心善其言，为霁威严。
现代文：魏相认为丙吉的话说得很对，因而把自己的威严收敛起来。
English: Wei Xiang thought that Bingji's words were right, so he restrained his majesty.

古文：居部二岁，征为谏大夫，复为河南太守。
现代文：任刺史二年后，被征召为谏大夫，又转为河南太守。
English: Two years after his appointment, he was conscripted as a doctor of the imperial army and became the governor of Henan Province.

古文：数年，宣帝即位，征相入为大司农，迁御史大夫。
现代文：几年后，宣帝即位，征召魏相进入朝廷做大司农，后来又升迁为御史大夫。
English: A few years later, Emperor Xuan was enthroned, and Wei Xiang was summoned to the imperial court to be the chief farmer, and later he was promoted to the position of imperial historian.

古文：四岁，大将军霍光薨，上思其功德，以其子禹为右将军，兄子乐平侯山复领尚书事。
现代文：四年后，大将军霍光死了，皇帝思念他的功劳与德行，让他的儿子霍禹做右将军，让霍光的侄子乐平侯霍山又掌领尚书省事务。
English: Four years later, the great general Huo Guang died, and the emperor thought about his merits and virtues, let his son Huo Yu be the right general, and let Huo Guang's nephew Leping Hou Huoshan be in charge of Shangshu affairs.

古文：相因平恩侯许伯奏封事，言： 《春秋》讥世卿，恶宋三世为大夫，及鲁季孙之专权，皆危乱国家。
现代文：魏相通过平恩侯许伯向皇帝上书，说： 《春秋》讥讽世世为卿相的人，憎恶宋三代人都做大夫，到鲁季孙的专权当道，都曾使国家处于危难祸乱。
English: Wei Xiang sent a letter to the emperor through Ping'en Prince Xu Bo, saying: "Spring and Autumn" ridicules the people who have been Xiang Xiang for generations, abhors the three generations of Song as doctors, and to the autocratic power of Rudisun, the country has been in danger and disaster.

古文：自后元以来，禄去王室，政繇冢宰。
现代文：从武帝后元年间以来，王室子弟能得到俸禄，国家的政事却要由冢宰来决定。
English: Since Emperor Wu's reign in the first year of the 21st century, the children of the royal family have been able to receive a stipend, but the political affairs of the country have to be decided by the regent.

古文：今光死，子复为大将军，兄子秉枢机，昆弟诸婿据权势，在兵官。
现代文：现在霍光死了，他的儿子又做了大将军，他哥哥的儿子做尚书掌握政要，他家的兄弟女婿们掌有兵权，很有权势。
English: Now that Huo Guang is dead, his son has become a great general, his brother's son is a senior official in charge of political affairs, and his brothers and sons-in-law hold military power and are very powerful.

古文：光夫人显及诸女皆通籍长信宫，或夜诏门出入，骄奢放纵，恐浸不制。
现代文：霍光的夫人显和他们家的女眷都在长信宫有名籍，可以自由出入，有的夜裹从禁门出入，骄横奢侈，放纵不羁，恐怕将来会慢慢的无法驾驭控制了。
English: Huo Guang's wife Xian and the female members of their family are all famous in Changxin Palace. They can freely enter and exit, and some nights they can enter and exit from the forbidden door. They are arrogant, extravagant, and indulgent. I am afraid that in the future they will slowly lose control.

古文：宜有以损夺其权，破散阴谋，以固万世之基，全功臣之世。 
现代文：应该想法削弱他们的权势，打消他们的阴谋，来强固大汉万世的基业，也使功臣霍光的声名得以保全。 
English: It was necessary to weaken their power and defeat their plots in order to consolidate the great Han Dynasty's heritage and preserve the reputation of the hero Huo Guang.

古文：又故事诸上书者皆为二封，署其一曰副，领尚书者先发副封，所言不善，屏去不奏。
现代文：另外按过去的规定凡上书给皇帝的人都要把奏书写成二份，其中一份为副本，掌领尚书省事务的官员先开阅副本，如果奏书的内容不当，就搁置起来不上报皇帝。
English: In addition, according to the previous regulations, anyone who submitted a letter to the emperor had to write the report in two copies, one of which was a copy. The official in charge of the affairs of Shangshu Province first read the copy. If the content of the report was improper, it would be shelved and not reported to the emperor.

古文：相复因许伯白，去副封以防雍蔽。
现代文：魏相又通过许伯，抽去了副本，以避免被霍氏的人阻挡下来。
English: Wei Xiang also went through Hu Bo and took out a copy to avoid being blocked by Huo's people.

古文：宣帝善之，诏相给事中，皆从其议。
现代文：宣帝看丁魏相的奏书认为很好，诏令封魏相为给事中，完全采纳了魏相的奏议。
English: After reading the confidential letter, Emperor Xuan highly praised it, and separately issued an edict to the ministers who could participate in the discussion between the Inner Court and the Northern Court to let them know that everything would be handled in accordance with what Wei Xiang said.

古文：霍氏杀许后之谋始得上闻。
现代文：霍氏谋杀许太后的事才被皇帝知道了。
English: In this way, the fact that Huo had someone poison Empress Xu only became known to Emperor Xuan.

古文：乃罢其三侯，令就第，亲属皆出补吏。
现代文：于是就罢免了霍禹、霍云、霍山三人的侯的封号，命令他们回到宅第，他们的亲属被迁出补为官吏。
English: As a result, the marquis title of the son of Huo Guang and the two grandsons of Huo Guang's brother Huo who was ill were removed from the Huo family, and they were sent home to idle. Other relatives of the Huo family also went to the county to work as officials.

古文：于是韦贤以老病免，相遂代为丞相，封高平侯，食邑八百户。
现代文：在这个时候韦贤因为年老有病免去丞相职务，魏相于是代替韦贤做了丞相，并被封为高平侯，赐食邑八百户。
English: At this time, Wei Xian was removed from the post of chancellor due to old age and illness. Wei Xian then replaced Wei Xian as chancellor, and was named Gaoping, giving food to 800 households.

古文：及霍氏怨相，又惮之，谋矫太后诏，先召斩丞相，然后废天子。
现代文：到后来霍氏的人怨恨魏相，又畏惧他，打算假称太后有诏令，先把丞相魏相召来杀了，然后废黜天子。
English: Later, the people of the Huo clan resented Wei Xiang and feared him. They planned to pretend that the empress dowager had issued a decree, first summoning and killing Wei Xiang, the prime minister, and then dethroning the emperor.

古文：事发觉，伏诛。
现代文：事情被发觉，霍氏的人被杀了。
English: The affair was discovered and Ho's men were killed.

古文：宜帝始亲万机，厉精为治，练群臣，核名实，而相总领众职，甚称上意。
现代文：宣帝才开始亲自处理朝廷政事，励精图治，选择贤臣，考核名实，魏相作为丞相，总管各官署的事务，很得皇上的欢心。
English: Emperor Xuan only began to personally deal with the affairs of the imperial court. He worked hard to govern, select wise ministers, and assess the reputation and reality. Wei Xiang, as chancellor, was in charge of the affairs of all government departments. He was very popular with the emperor.

古文：元康中，匈奴遣兵击汉屯田车师者，不能下。
现代文：宣帝元康年间，匈奴派兵攻击汉朝在车师屯田的军队，没有攻下来。
English: During the reign of Emperor Yuan Kang, the Xiongnu sent troops to attack the Han Dynasty's army in Tonden, but failed to capture it.

古文：上与后将军赵充国等议，欲因匈奴衰弱，出兵击其右地，使不敢复扰西域。
现代文：宣帝和后将军趟充国等人商议，打算趁匈奴衰弱的时候，派兵攻打他们右边地域，使匈奴不敢再骚扰西域。
English: Emperor Xuan and the later general Wuchong and others discussed and planned to take advantage of the weakness of the Xiongnu by sending troops to attack their right side, so that the Xiongnu would no longer dare to harass the west.

古文：相上书谏曰：臣闻之，救乱诛暴，谓之义兵，兵义者王；敌加于己，不得已而起者，谓之应兵，兵应者胜；争恨小故，不忍愤怒者，谓之忿兵，兵忿者败；利人土地货宝者，谓之贪兵，兵贪者破；恃国家之大，矜民人之众，欲见威于敌者，谓之骄兵，兵骄者灭：此五者，非但人事，乃天道也。
现代文：魏相向皇帝上谏书说： 臣听说，拯救危乱，诛除凶暴，称之为义兵，仁义之师所向无敌；敌人来攻击你，不得已起来抗击，称之为应兵，抗击侵略的军队定能战胜；在小事上争胜斗恨，不能克制一时愤怒的，称之为忿兵，争气斗忿的军队会失败；认为别人的土地货宝有利可图的，称之为贪兵，贪婪的军队一定会被击败；凭藉国家面积大，以人口众多相夸耀，因而想在敌人那裹表现自己的威风的，称之为骄兵，骄傲的军队会被消灭：这五个方面，不仅是由人事决定的，也是天道决定的。
English: Wei Xiang said to the emperor in his imperial edict: "Courtiers have heard that, to save a crisis, to eliminate violence, call it a good soldier, a teacher of benevolence and righteousness is invincible; the enemy attacks you, you have to fight back, call it a response, the army that resists aggression will be able to win; in small matters, fight and hate, can not restrain a moment of anger, call it an angry soldier, an angry army will fail; think that other people's land and treasure are profitable, call it a greedy soldier, a greedy army will be defeated; with a large country, boast of a large population, and therefore want

古文：间者匈奴尝有善意，所得汉民辄奉归之，未有犯于边境，虽争屯田车师，不足致意中。
现代文：不久前匈奴曾经向我们表示了善意，抓到汉族的人总是好好地送回来，没有侵犯我们的边境，虽然这次他们争夺我们屯田的车师城，也不必太放在心上。
English: Not long ago, the Huns had expressed their goodwill to us. When they caught Han people, they always sent them back safely, without violating our borders. Although this time they are competing for our Tonden's Coachman's Town, they don't need to worry too much.

古文：今闻诸将军欲兴兵入其地，臣愚不知此兵何名者也。
现代文：现在我听说各位将军想起兵攻入匈奴境内，愚臣不知道这样的军队该叫什么名称。
English: Now I hear that your generals are thinking of invading the territory of the Huns, and the fools don't know what to call such an army.

古文：今边郡困乏，父子共犬羊之裘，食草莱之实，常恐不能自存，难以动兵。 军旅之后，必有凶年 ，言民以其愁苦之气，伤阴阳之和也。
现代文：现在边境上的州郡十分贫穷，父亲与儿子共同穿用一件羊皮袄，吃蓬草的果实，经常担心会活不下去，再也经不起战事的扰攘。 战事过后，一定会有灾年 说的就是人民会有愁苦怨气，会破坏阴阳之间的平和。
English: At present, the counties and prefectures along the border are very poor. Both father and son wear a sheepskin coat and eat grass. They often worry that they will not be able to survive and will no longer be able to withstand the turmoil of the war. After the war, there will definitely be a disaster year. It is said that the people will have bitterness and resentment, which will destroy the peace between yin and yang.

古文：出兵虽胜，犹有后忧，恐灾害之变因此以生。今郡国守、相多不实选，风俗尤薄，水旱不时。
现代文：即使出兵得胜，也还有后患，恐怕灾难变故会因此而产生，现在州郡的太守、封国的国相大多不得其人，风俗浅薄，风雨不调。
English: Even if the troops are dispatched and win, there will still be after-effects. I am afraid that disasters will occur as a result. Nowadays, most of the governors of prefectures and counties and the heads of states are not good people. Their customs are shallow, and they do not adapt to the wind and rain.

古文：案今年计，子弟杀父兄、妻杀夫者，凡二百二十二人，臣愚以为此非小变也。
现代文：考查今年的统计，子杀父、弟杀兄、妻杀夫的，共有二百二十二人，愚臣认为这决不是小变故。
English: Examining this year's statistics, there were a total of 222 cases of sons killing fathers, brothers killing brothers, and wives killing husbands. Minister Yushi believed that this was by no means a small change.

古文：今左右不忧此，乃欲发兵报纤介之忿于远夷，殆孔子所谓 吾恐季孙之忧不在颛臾而在萧墙之内 也。
现代文：现在您身边的大臣不以此为忧，却想派兵攻打边远的少数民族来报纤介小仇，逭大概就是孔子说的 我恐怕季孙氏的忧患不在于颛臾而在宫墙内部 啊。
English: Now the ministers around you are not worried about this, but want to send troops to attack the outlying ethnic minorities to report petty feuds, which is probably what Confucius said. I'm afraid the worries of the Ji Sun clan are not in the palace, but inside the palace walls.

古文：愿陛下与平昌侯、乐昌侯、平恩侯及有识者详议乃可。 
现代文：希望陛下您和平昌侯、乐昌侯、平恩侯以及有远见的大臣仔细商议才行啊。 
English: I hope that Your Majesty and the Prince of PyeongChang, the Prince of LeChang, the Prince of PyeongNam, and the far-sighted ministers can have a careful discussion.

古文：上从相言而止。
现代文：宣帝听从了魏相的建议，没有发兵。
English: Emperor Xuan listened to Wei Xiang's suggestion and did not send troops.

古文：相明《易经》，有师法，好观汉故事及便宜章奏，以为古今异制，方今务在奉行故事而已。
现代文：魏相通晓《易经》，有正宗的师法，喜欢观看汉朝旧事和大臣对答机宜的奏章，认为现在与过去制度不同，现在衹是要奉行过去的方法制度罢了。
English: Wei Xiang is familiar with the "I Ching" and has authentic teaching methods. He likes to watch the old affairs of the Han Dynasty and the minister's response to the opportune report. He believes that the current system is different from the past, and now he just wants to pursue the past method system.

古文：数条汉兴已来国家便宜行事，及贤臣贾谊、朝错、董仲舒等所言，奏请施行之，曰： 臣闻明主在上，贤辅在下，则君安虞而民和睦。
现代文：因此他多次条陈汉朝建国以来处理事情的妥善方法，以及贤臣贾谊、晁错、董仲舒等人的言论，奏请皇帝予以施行，说： 臣听说上有圣明的君主，下有贤臣辅弼，那样君主才会安乐无忧而百姓和睦欢畅。
English: Therefore, he repeatedly pointed out the proper way of handling things since the founding of the Chen and Han dynasties, as well as the words of the wise ministers Jiayou, Zou Zhe, Dong Zhongshu and others, and asked the emperor to implement them, saying: The minister heard that there is a saintly monarch and a wise minister to assist him, so that the monarch will be happy and the people will be happy.

古文：臣相幸得备位，不能奉明法，广教化，理四方，以宣圣德。
现代文：臣有幸在朝中做了丞相，却不能遵从祖先圣明的制度，广泛地教化人民，治理好天下，来昭示皇帝的圣明与仁德。
English: Although he had the honor of serving as chancellor of the imperial court, he was unable to follow the system of his ancestor Shen Ming, extensively educate the people, govern the world well, and show the emperor's Shen Ming and benevolence.

古文：民多背本趋末，或有饥寒之色，为陛下之忧，臣相罪当万死。臣相知能浅薄，不明国家大体，明用之宜，惟民终始，未得所由。
现代文：致使百姓中许多人背弃农耕之本，去从事商贾末事，有些百姓面有饥寒之色，使陛下担忧，臣魏相我罪该万死，臣我智慧能力不高，不能明察国家大政，提出当前适宜的方法，思考人们做事的动机与目的，没能完全想明白。
English: As a result, many of the people have abandoned the principles of farming to engage in business. Some of the people are hungry and cold, which worries His Majesty. His Majesty should be ashamed of himself. His Majesty's wisdom and ability are not high, and he is unable to scrutinize the country's major policies, put forward the current appropriate methods, and think about the motives and purposes of people's work. He has not fully understood.

古文：窃伏观先帝圣德仁恩之厚，勤劳天下，垂意黎庶，忧水旱之灾，为民贫穷发仓廪，赈乏餧；遣谏大夫博士巡行天下，察风俗，举贤良，平冤狱，冠盖交道；省诸用，宽租赋，弛山泽波池，禁秣马酤酒贮积，所以周急继困，慰安元元，便利百姓之道甚备。
现代文：我私下裹怀着尊敬的心情观看以前的记载，了解到先皇帝是多么圣明仁义，恩德深厚。先皇帝为治理好天下辛勤劳苦，关心百姓，为水旱灾祸而忧虑，对贫穷、饥饿的百姓开仓发放赈济粮；派遣任谏职的大夫、博士巡行天下，观察风俗的好坏，选择举荐贤良人士，平反冤案，办这些事的官员来来往往，不绝于路途。节省诸项用度，减轻租赋，开放山林湖泽让百姓渔猎，禁止用粮食喂马、用粮食酿酒和私人屯积居奇：所有这些都是为了周济困乏的人，安抚百姓，便利百姓的方法十分完备。
English: Privately, with a feeling of respect, I watched the previous records and learned how holy, benevolent and generous the former emperor was. The former emperor worked hard and diligently to govern the world well, cared about the people, worried about floods and droughts, opened warehouses to distribute food grains to the poor and hungry people; sent doctors and doctors to patrol the world, observe the good and bad customs, select and recommend virtuous people, and redress grievances. The officials in charge of these matters came and went, never stopping on the road. Save various expenses, reduce rents, open mountains and lakes for the people to fish and hunt, prohibit feeding horses with grain, brewing wine with grain and private

古文：臣相不能悉陈，昧死奏故事诏书凡二十三事。
现代文：臣魏相不能一一表述出来，冒死罪把先帝处理旧事的诏书共二十三件事项上奏给您。
English: Emperor Wei could not express it all, so he risked his life to report to you a total of 23 items of the Emperor's edict dealing with old matters.

古文：臣谨案王法必本于农而务积聚，量入制用以备凶灾，亡六年之畜，尚谓之急。
现代文：臣我考查先王之法的结果是一定要以农业为本，重视积聚粮食，量入为出以备凶灾之年，国家没有六年的积聚。就叫做危急状况。
English: The result of my examination of the former king's law is that we must take agriculture as the basis, attach importance to the accumulation of grain, and use the amount to prepare for the year of disaster. The country does not have six years of accumulation. It is called a critical situation.

古文：元鼎三年，平原、勃海、太山、东郡溥被灾害，民饿死于道路。
现代文：武帝元鼎二年，平原郡、渤海郡、太山郡、束郡都遭了灾，老百姓饿死在逃荒的路途上。
English: In the second year of Emperor Wu's reign, Pingyuan County, Bohai County, Taishan County, and Shu County all suffered disasters, and the common people starved to death on their way to escape the famine.

古文：二千石不豫虑其难，使至于此，赖明诏振救，乃得蒙更生。
现代文：二千石等大臣不能提前考虑到会发生这样的灾难，才到了这种境地，幸亏皇帝发布诏书，命令予以救济，老百姓才得了活路。
English: It was not possible for a minister of 2,000 koku and so on to consider in advance that such a disaster would occur, which led to this situation. Fortunately, the emperor issued an edict ordering relief, and the common people were able to survive.

古文：今岁不登，谷暴腾踊，临秋收敛犹有乏者，至春恐甚，亡以相恤。
现代文：今年年景不好，谷价猛涨，到了秋天收获的季节还确缺衣少食的人，到了春天的时候，恐怕更加厉害，没有多少可以用来做救济的粮食。
English: This year's economic situation is not good, grain prices have soared, and by the autumn harvest season, people who still lack clothing and food will probably be even worse in the spring, and there is not much grain that can be used for relief.

古文：西羌未平，师旅在外，兵革相乘，臣窃寒心，宜早图其备。
现代文：西羌也还没有平定，军队还在外征伐，战乱频仍，臣我十分担心，希望皇帝早些考虑应急的措施。
English: Xidi has not yet been pacified, the army is still fighting abroad, and wars are still frequent. I am very worried and hope that the emperor will consider emergency measures at an early date.

古文：唯陛下留神元元，帅繇先帝盛德以抚海内。 
现代文：望陛下爱护百姓，遵从先帝仁德的故事，来安抚百姓。 
English: He hoped that His Majesty would love and care for the people, and follow the story of the benevolence of the former emperor to appease the people.

古文：上施行其策。
现代文：皇帝听从了魏相的建议，并予以施行。
English: The emperor listened to Wei Xiang's suggestion and implemented it.

古文：又数表采《易阴阳》及《明堂月令》奏之，曰：
现代文：魏相又多次选取《易阴阳》和《明堂月令》裹的章节上奏给皇帝，说：
English: Wei Xiang also repeatedly selected the chapters of "Yi Yin Yang" and "Ming Tang Lunar Calendar" to report to the emperor, saying:

古文：臣相幸得备员，奉职不修，不能宣广教化。
现代文： 臣魏相侥幸在朝为官，没有很好地尽到自己的职责，没能广泛地教化人民。
English: It was a fluke that the minister Wei Xiang became an official in the DPRK. He did not fulfill his duties well and failed to educate the people extensively.

古文：阴阳未和，灾害未息，咎在臣等。
现代文：阴阳之气没能调和，灾难祸害不断，罪过在我们这些大臣。
English: The spirit of yin and yang could not be reconciled, disasters and scourges continue, and the fault lies with us, the ministers.

古文：臣闻《易》曰： 天地以顺动，故日月不过，四时不忒；圣王以顺动，故刑罚清而民服。 天地变化，必繇阴阳，阴阳之分，以日为纪。
现代文：我听《易》上说： 天地按自然规律运动，所以太阳与月亮不互相经过，四季没有差错；圣明的君主按事物规律行事，所以赏罚分明，百姓敬服，天地间万物的变化，是由阴、阳交互作用而产生的；阴阳之分别，是以太阳为起始。
English: I heard "Yi" say: Heaven and earth move according to the laws of nature, so the sun and moon do not pass each other, and there is no error in the four seasons; the sovereign of the holy light acts according to the laws of things, so the reward and punishment are clear, the people respect and obey, and the changes of all things between heaven and earth are caused by the interaction of yin and yang; the distinction between yin and yang is based on the sun.

古文：日冬夏至，则八风之序立，万物之性成，各有常职，不得相干。
现代文：有了冬夏四季，便有了八方之风的次序，万物的特性得以形成，各自有各自固定的职守，不能互相侵犯。
English: With the four seasons of winter and summer, there is an order of the winds of the eight directions, the characteristics of all things can be formed, each has its own fixed duties, and they cannot encroach on each other.

古文：东方之神太昊，乘 震 执规司春；南方之神炎帝，乘 离 执衡司夏；西方之神少昊，乘 兑 ，执矩司秋；北方之神颛顼，乘 坎 执权司冬；中央之神黄帝，乘 坤 、 艮 执绳司下土。
现代文：东方的神叫太吴，驾驭着《震》拿着规掌管春天；南方的神叫炎帝，驾驭着《离》拿着衡掌管夏天；西方的神叫少吴，驾驭着《兑》拿着矩掌管秋天；北方的神叫颛顼，驾驭着《坎》拿着权掌管冬天；中央的神叫黄帝，驾驭着《坤》、《艮》拿着绳子掌管大地。
English: The god in the east is called Tai Wu, who controls the "shock" and controls the spring; the god in the south is called Yan Di, who controls the "separation" and controls the summer; the god in the west is called Shao Wu, who controls the "matching" and controls the autumn; the god in the north is called Yao, who controls the "can" and controls the winter; the god in the center is called Huang Di, who controls the "Kun" and the "rope" and controls the earth.

古文：兹五帝所司，各有时也。
现代文：这五个神所掌管的，都有各自的时令。
English: Each of the five deities has its own season.

古文：东方之卦不可以治西方，南方之卦不可以治北方。
现代文：坐在东方卦位上的神不能统治西方，南方卦位上的神不可以治理北方。
English: The god who sits on the East Gua throne cannot rule the West, and the god who sits on the South Gua throne cannot rule the North.

古文：春兴 兑 治则饥，秋兴 震 治则华，冬兴 离 治则泄，夏兴 坎 治则雹。
现代文：春天到了，《兑》位上的司秋之神去统治就会闸饥荒，秋天到了《震》位上的司春之神去治理就会华而不实；冬天到了，《离》位上的司夏之神去管理天地之气就会泄露；夏天到了《坎》位上的司冬之神去管理就会下雹子。
English: When spring comes, if the god of autumn on the throne of "Tui" governs, there will be famine; when autumn comes, if the god of spring on the throne of "Shock" governs, there will be extravagance; when winter comes, if the god of summer on the throne of "Leave" governs, the breath of heaven and earth will be leaked; when summer comes, if the god of winter on the throne of "Kan" governs, there will be hail.

古文：明王谨于尊天，慎于养人，故立羲和之官以乘四时，节授民事。
现代文：圣明的君主谨慎地遵从上天的旨意，慎重地爱护百姓，所以才让禀性平和仁义的官员去执掌四时节令之事，按节气告诉人们该做什么事。
English: The saintly monarch cautiously obeyed the will of heaven and carefully cared for the people, so he let the officials of peace and benevolence take charge of the four seasons and tell people what to do according to the solar terms.

古文：君动静以道，奉顺阴阳，则日月光明，风雨时节，寒暑调和。
现代文：君主按天道规律行动止息，顺从阴阳和调之道，那样才会日光月明，刮风下雨都按时令节气，冷热均匀适度。
English: Monarchs stop and rest according to the laws of heaven, and follow the path of yin and yang and harmony. Only then will the sun shine, the wind blow and the rain fall according to the seasons, and the heat and cold are evenly moderate.

古文：三者得叙，则灾害不生，五谷熟，丝麻遂，草木茂，鸟兽蕃，民不夭疾，衣食有余。
现代文：造三方面顺当了，才能免除自然灾害，五谷丰登，丝麻成熟，草木茂盛，鸟兽繁衍；百姓才能免除灾病，衣食丰足。
English: Only when the three aspects of construction are in order, can we be exempt from natural disasters, the grain is abundant, the flax is mature, the plants are lush, and the birds and animals are proliferating; only then can the people be exempt from disasters and diseases, and have enough food and clothing.

古文：若是，则君尊民说，上下亡怨，政教不违，礼让可兴。
现代文：如果能够这样，才会国君尊严，人民喜悦，上下不互相埋怨，政治教化顺利，礼让仁义可以兴盛。
English: If this can be done, only then will the dignity of the sovereign, the joy of the people, the absence of mutual complaints from above and below, the smooth political enlightenment, and the prosperity of courtesy, benevolence and righteousness.

古文：夫风雨不时，则伤农桑；农桑伤，则民饥寒；饥寒在身，则亡廉耻，寇贼奸宄所繇生也。
现代文：刮风下雨不按时令，就会毁坏庄稼；农业毁坏了，人民就会饥寒交迫；人民忍饥挨饿，就会不顾廉耻，这是强盗小偷祸乱产生的根源。
English: If the wind blows and the rain does not fall at the right time, crops will be destroyed; if agriculture is destroyed, the people will suffer from cold and hunger; if the people suffer from hunger, they will be shameless. This is the root cause of the scourge of robbers and thieves.

古文：臣愚以为阴阳者，王事之本，群生之命，自古贤圣未有不繇者也。
现代文：愚臣认为阴阳之道是国家大事的根本，是百姓命脉所系，从古以来贤人君子没有不遵从它的。
English: The follower believes that the Yin and Yang principle is the foundation of national affairs and the lifeblood of the people. Since ancient times, wise men and gentlemen have never disobeyed it.

古文：天子之义，必纯取法天地，而观于先圣。
现代文：皇帝治理天下，最重要的是认真遵从自然天地法则，并借鉴先贤先圣的经验。
English: For the emperor to govern the world, the most important thing is to conscientiously follow the laws of nature, and learn from the experience of the sages and saints.

古文：高皇帝所述书《天子所服第八》曰： 大谒者臣章受诏长乐宫，曰： 令群臣议天子所服，以安治天下。 
现代文：记载高皇帝言行的《天子所服第八》上面说： 大谒者臣襄章在长乐宫接受诏书，高皇帝说： 命令大臣们讨论皇帝该穿什么样的衣服，来安定治理天下。 
English: "The Eighth of Heaven's Servants," which records Emperor Gao's words and deeds, says above: Emperor Gao ordered his ministers to discuss what kind of clothes the emperor should wear in order to govern the world in a stable manner.

古文：相国臣何、御史大夫臣昌谨与将军臣陵、太子太傅臣通等议： 春夏秋冬天子所服，当法天地之数，中得人和。
现代文：丞相萧何、御史大夫周昌和将军王陵、太子太傅叔孙通等大臣商议说： 春夏秋冬皇帝该穿的衣服，应当效法天地的礼数，其中体现出入和。
English: Consul General Xiao He, Imperial Historian Zhou Chang, General Wang Ling, Prince Taifu, Uncle Sun Tong and other ministers discussed and said: The clothes that the emperor should wear in spring, summer, autumn and winter should follow the number of etiquette of heaven and earth, which reflects comings and goings.

古文：故自天子王侯有土之君，下及兆民，能法天地，顺四时，以治国家，身亡祸殃，年寿永究，是奉宗庙安天下之大礼也。臣请法之。
现代文：所以上从天子王侯和有封地的国君，下到亿万百姓，如果能效法天地，顺应四季的变化，来治理国家，才会避免祸殃，得终天年，这是奉养宗庙安定天下的重大礼制，臣请求皇帝效法它。
English: Therefore, from the sons of heaven, princes and kings with fiefdoms, down to hundreds of millions of people, if they can follow the laws of heaven and earth and conform to the changes of the four seasons to govern the country, they will be able to avoid calamity and live happily ever after. This is a major etiquette for maintaining ancestral temples and stabilizing the world. The minister asked the emperor to follow it.

古文：中谒者赵尧举春，李舜举夏，皃汤举秋，贡禹举冬，四人各职一时。 
现代文：中谒者赵尧掌管皇帝春天的活动，李舜掌管夏天的，儿汤掌管秋天的，贡禹掌管冬天的，四个人分别掌管一个季节。 
English: Zhao Yu, the middle-ranking official, was in charge of the emperor's spring activities, Li Yu was in charge of the summer activities, Er Tang was in charge of the autumn activities, and Gong Yu was in charge of the winter activities. Four people were in charge of one season each.

古文：大谒者襄章奏，制曰： 可。  
现代文：大谒者襄章奏请皇帝，高皇帝下诏说： 可以。 
English: Emperor Gao issued an edict saying, "It's all right."

古文：孝文皇帝时，以二月施恩惠于天下，赐孝弟力田及罢军卒，祠死事者，颇非时节。
现代文：孝文皇帝的时候，在二月份向天下布施恩惠，赏赐孝顺的人、努力耕田的人以及疲病的士兵，祭祀为国事死难的人，做这些事的时间十分不合时令节气。
English: During the reign of Emperor Xiaowen, the month of February was the time to bestow favors on the world, to reward those who were dutiful, those who worked hard to cultivate the fields, and soldiers who were sick, and to offer sacrifices to those who died for the country. The time to do these things was very out of sync with the solar terms.

古文：御史大夫朝错时为太子家令，奏言其状。
现代文：御史大夫晁错当时做太子家令，向孝文皇帝上书说明这些。
English: At that time, Dr. Goshi mistakenly served as the prince's household order, and sent a letter to Emperor Xiaowen to explain this.

古文：臣相伏念陛下恩泽甚厚，然而灾气未息，窃恐诏令有未合当时者也。
现代文：臣魏相我恭敬地思考陛下您对百姓臣下恩泽十分深厚，灾难却不停止，我私下认为恐怕是您的诏令有不合时令节气的。
English: Emperor Wei, I respectfully think that Your Majesty's grace to the people and your subjects is very profound, but the disaster does not stop. I privately think that I am afraid that your edict is out of season.

古文：愿陛下选明经通知阴阳者四人，各主一时，时至明言所职，以和阴阳，天下幸甚！
现代文：希望陛下您挑选明了经义、熟知阴阳之道的大臣四个人，分别掌管一个季节的事情，时令到了就明确上报自己掌管的皇帝应该做的政务，来顺应阴阳之道，那可是天下人的大幸啊！ 
English: I hope that Your Majesty will select four ministers who understand the meaning of the sutras and are familiar with the ways of yin and yang. They will each be in charge of a season, and when the time comes, they will clearly report the government affairs that the emperor they are in charge of should do to comply with the ways of yin and yang. That would be a great blessing for the world!

古文：相数陈便宜，上纳用焉。
现代文：魏相多次上书，陈说该做的事情，皇帝采纳施行了他的建议。
English: Wei Xiang repeatedly wrote to Chen saying what should be done, and the emperor accepted and implemented his suggestion.

古文：相敕掾史案事郡国及休告从家还至府，辄白四方异闻，或有逆贼风雨灾变，郡不上，相辄奏言之。
现代文：魏相命令掾史查访各郡国的事务以及从家裹休沐回到官府，就禀报各处的异闻奇事，有时有反叛的贼寇和自然灾害变故，郡守不上报，魏相总是向皇帝上奏说明情况。
English: Wei Xiang ordered Yan Shi to inspect the affairs of each county and state, and to return to the government office from home, and to report the strange and wonderful things everywhere, sometimes there were rebellious thieves and natural disasters. The county did not report, and Wei Xiang always reported to the emperor to explain the situation.

古文：时，丙吉为御史大夫，同心辅政，上皆重之。
现代文：当时丙吉是御史大夫，与魏相同心辅佐皇帝，皇帝十分看重他们。
English: At that time, Bingji was an imperial historian, and he supported the emperor with the same heart as Wei. The emperor attached great importance to them.

古文：相为人严毅，不如吉宽。
现代文：魏相性情严峻刚毅，不如丙吉宽和。
English: Wei Xiang's temperament is severe and tough, not as good as that of Bingji and Guangwu.

古文：视事九岁，神爵三年薨，谥曰宪侯。
现代文：魏相执政九年，神爵三年死去，谧号为宪侯。
English: Wei Xiang was in power for nine years, and Jingu died three years later. His posthumous name was Jianguo.

古文：子弘嗣，甘露中有罪削爵为关内侯。
现代文：魏相的儿子魏弘承袭了爵位，甘露年中因犯罪被削爵为关内侯。
English: Wei Hong, the son of Wei Xiang, inherited the title of nobility. He was stripped of his title due to a crime in the middle of the year and became the Lord of Guanai.

古文：丙吉字少卿，鲁国人也。
现代文：丙吉，字少卿，鲁国地方的人。
English: Bingji, the character of Shaoqing, the people of Lu Province.

古文：治律令，为鲁狱史。
现代文：研修律令，做了鲁国的狱史。
English: The training regulation has made the prison history of the country.

古文：积功劳，稍迁至廷尉右监。
现代文：丙吉积累功劳，慢慢升迁到廷尉右监。
English: Accumulating merit, Bongji was slowly promoted to the rank of court lieutenant and right supervisor.

古文：坐法失官，归为州从事。
现代文：后来因犯法丢失了官职，回去做了州从事。
English: Later, he lost his post for violating the law and returned to the state to work.

古文：武帝末，巫蛊事起，吉以故廷尉监征，诏治巫蛊郡邸狱。
现代文：武帝末年，发生巫蛊之事，丙吉以原来廷尉监的身份被征召到京城，武帝诏令丙吉到郡邸监狱追查巫蛊的事。
English: At the end of Emperor Wu's reign, there was a witchcraft incident, and Boji was summoned to the capital as a former imperial court official. Emperor Wu ordered Boji to go to the county seat prison to investigate the witchcraft incident.

古文：时，宣帝生数月，以皇曾孙坐卫太子事系，吉见而怜之。
现代文：当时宣帝刘询刚生下几个月，也因为是卫太子的孙子而被收监，丙吉看到后感到可怜。
English: At that time, Xuan Di Liu En just gave birth to a few months, and he was also imprisoned because he was the grandson of the Prince of Wei. He Jie felt pitiful after seeing this.

古文：又心知太子无事实，重哀曾孙无辜，吉择谨厚女徒，令保养曾孙，置闲燥处。
现代文：心裹知道卫太子的罪过并无真正事实，于是更为皇曾孙无辜被监难过，于是丙吉挑选了几个谨慎厚道的女犯人，命令她们保护养育皇曾孙，并让她们带皇曾孙住在宽敞干燥之处。
English: He knew in his heart that there was no real truth to the guilt of Prince Wei, so he felt even more guilty that the great-grandson of the emperor had been imprisoned. Therefore, he selected several prudent and kind female prisoners, ordered them to protect and raise the great-grandson of the emperor, and let them live with the great-grandson of the emperor in a spacious and dry place.

古文：吉治巫蛊事，连岁不决。
现代文：丙吉追查巫蛊之事，几年也没判决。
English: He Jie did not make a decision for several years after investigating the witch doctor.

古文：后元二年，武帝疾，往来长杨、五柞宫，望气者言长安狱中有天子气，于是上遣使者分条中都官诏狱系者，亡轻重一切皆杀之。
现代文：后元二年，武帝病了，往来于长杨、五柞二宫之间，望气者说长安监狱中有天子之气，于是漠武帝就派使者把中都官韶狱的犯人一一抄录清楚，不分罪过轻重一律杀掉。
English: In the second year of the Yuan Dynasty, Emperor Wu fell ill and traveled between Changyang and Wuzhen Second Palace. Those who hoped for good fortune said that there was the spirit of the Son of Heaven in Chang'an Prison. Therefore, Emperor Wu sent an emissary to make a clear copy of the prisoners in Zhongdu Guanzhang Prison one by one and kill them all, regardless of the severity of the crime.

古文：内谒者令郭穰夜到郡邸狱，吉闭门拒使者不纳，曰： 皇曾孙在。
现代文：内谒者令郭穣连夜赶到郡邸监狱，丙吉却把大门紧闭，不让使者进来，并说道： 皇曾孙在这裹。
English: The infighting caused Guo Gan to rush to the county seat prison overnight, but Bijie closed the gate tightly, not allowing the messenger to enter, and said: The great-grandson of the emperor is here.

古文：他人亡辜死者犹不可，况亲曾孙乎！ 
现代文：别的人无罪被杀都不允许，况且他是皇帝的亲曾孙！ 
English: No one else is allowed to be killed without guilt, and he is the emperor's great-great-grandson!

古文：相守至天明不得入，穰还以闻，因劾奏吉。武帝亦寤，曰： 天使之也。 
现代文：一直守到天亮也不许进入，郭穣祇好回去报告漠武帝，并趁机弹劾丙吉。
English: He kept watch until dawn and was not allowed to enter. Guo Bingji wanted to go back to report to Emperor Mo and take advantage of the opportunity to impeach Bongji.

古文：因赦天下。郡邸狱系者独赖吉得生，恩及四海矣。
现代文：这时武帝也明白这样做不对，于是说： 这是上天让这样做的吧。 
English: At this time, Emperor Wu also understood that it was wrong to do so, so he said: This is God's will.

古文：曾孙病，几不全者数焉，吉数敕保养乳母加致医药，视遇甚有恩惠，以私财物给其衣食。
现代文：于是大赦天下。关在郡邸狱的犯人衹是因为丙吉才得以活命，流恩四海。后来皇曾孙病了，多次面临死亡，丙吉多次命令保养皇孙的乳母请医用药，对待皇孙十分恩厚，并把自己的财物拿给他，供给他衣食。
English: As a result, there was a general amnesty. The prisoners in the county residence prison were able to live because of Bongji, who was very kind to them. Later, when the emperor's great-grandson fell ill and faced death many times, Bongji repeatedly ordered the nanny who cared for the emperor's grandson to seek medical treatment. He was very kind to the emperor's grandson, and gave him his own belongings and provided him with food and clothing.

古文：后吉为车骑将军军市令，迁大将军长史，霍光甚重之，入为光禄大夫给事中。
现代文：后来丙吉做了车骑将军军市令，升为大将军长史，霍光十分看重他，入朝做了光禄大夫给事中。
English: Later, Bingji became the commander of the cavalry and cavalry general army, and was promoted to the general of the general staff. Huo Guang attached great importance to him, and became the doctor of Guanglu when he entered the court.

古文：昭帝崩，无嗣，大将军光遣吉迎昌邑王贺。
现代文：昭帝驾崩后，没有继承人，大将军霍光派丙吉去迎请昌邑王刘贺。
English: After the death of Emperor Zhao, there was no successor. General Huo Guang sent Bingji to welcome Liu He, the King of Changyi.

古文：贺即位，以行淫乱废，光与车骑将军张安世诸大臣议所立，未定。
现代文：刘贺做皇帝后，因为做淫乱之事被废黜，霍光与车骑将军张安世等大臣商议该立谁做皇帝，还没有定下来。
English: After Liu He became emperor, he was deposed for committing adultery. Huo Guang and ministers such as the cavalry general Zhang Anshi discussed who should be made emperor. It has not yet been decided.

古文：吉奏记光曰： 将军事孝武皇帝，受襁褓之属，任天下之寄，孝昭皇帝早崩亡嗣，海内忧惧，欲亟闻嗣主，发丧之日以大谊立后，所立非其人，复以大谊废之，天下莫不服焉。
现代文：丙吉写信给霍光说： 将军您侍奉孝武皇帝，受托孤之重，担当着天下人的希望，孝昭皇帝死得早，没有继承人，天下人都担忧害怕，都想快点知道谁是后继的皇帝。发丧的那天为顾汉室宗庙有奉侍之人的大谊立刘贺为嗣主，被立为皇帝的人不争气，又为顾大谊而废黜了他，天下人没有不称服的。
English: He Jie wrote to Huo Guang, "General, you served the Emperor Xiaowu, entrusted with the weight of loneliness, responsible for the hopes of the people of the world. Emperor Xiaozhao died early, without an heir, the people of the world are worried and afraid, and want to quickly know who is the successor emperor. On the day of the funeral, Liu He was appointed as the heir for the friendship of the people who served in the Han family temple. The person who was appointed as the emperor did not compete, and deposed him for the sake of friendship. The people of the world were not dissatisfied.

古文：方今社稷宗庙群生之命在将军之一举。
现代文：现在国家命运、百姓安危都系于将军之手。
English: Now the fate of the country and the safety of the people are in the hands of the generals.

古文：窃伏听于众庶，察其所言，诸侯宗室在位列者，未有所闻于民间也。
现代文：我私下裹访听老百姓的议论，辨察他们说的事情，了解到现在为官的那些宗室诸侯，在民间没有什么名声。
English: I secretly interviewed and listened to the discussions of the common people, discerned what they said, and learned that those family heads who are now officials have little reputation among the people.

古文：而遗诏所养武帝曾孙名病已在掖庭外家者，吉前使居郡邸时见其幼少，至今十八九矣，通经术，有美材，行安而节和。
现代文：而遵奉遣诏所供养的名叫病已的武帝的曾孙，现在仍在宫庭外的百姓家中，我以前让他居住在郡官邸时见到他还很年少，到现在他已十八九岁了，精通经术，有很高的才能，行止安闲而气节操守平和。
English: However, the great-grandson of the ailing Emperor Wu, known as Zunbongzhuang, is still in the people's home outside the palace. When I used to let him live in the county official residence, I saw that he was still very young. Now he is eighteen or nineteen years old. He is proficient in reading and writing, has high talent, and behaves leisurely and peacefully.

古文：愿将军详大议，参以蓍龟，岂宜褒显，先使入侍，令天下昭然知之，然后决定大策，天下幸甚！ 
现代文：希望将军仔细认真地商议此事，并参考占卜的结果，如不便一下使他显贵，可以先让他入宫服侍皇太后，使天下人明白地知晓他的好处，然后再决定重大的决策，天下人将很幸运感激！ 
English: It is hoped that the general will carefully and seriously discuss this matter, and refer to the results of divination. If it is inconvenient to make him prominent, he can first let him enter the palace to serve the empress dowager, so that the world will clearly know his benefits, and then decide on major decisions. The world will be very lucky and grateful!

古文：光览其议，遂尊立皇曾孙，遣宗正刘德与吉迎曾孙于掖庭。
现代文：霍光看过丙吉的奏书，于是便尊立皇曾孙刘询，派宗正刘德与丙吉在妃嫔居住的掖庭迎请刘询。
English: Huo Guang read Bongji's report, so he sent Zongzheng Liu De and Bongji to meet Liu Zhen, the emperor's great-grandson, at the court where Bongji lived.

古文：宣帝初即位，赐吉爵关内侯。
现代文：刘询刚做皇帝，就封丙吉为关内侯。
English: As soon as Liu Encheng became emperor, he made Bongji the governor of Guanai.

古文：吉为人深厚，不伐善。
现代文：丙吉为人宽厚，不爱炫耀自己做的好事。
English: He Jie is a generous person and does not like to show off the good things he has done.

古文：自曾孙遭遇，吉绝口不道前恩，故朝廷莫能明其功也。
现代文：自从刘询做了皇帝，丙吉绝口不提起以前自己曾救助过刘询，有恩于他，所以朝廷上没人知道他的功劳。
English: Since Liu Zhen became the emperor, Bijie never mentioned that he had helped Liu Zhen before and was grateful to him, so no one in the court knew about his merits.

古文：地节三年，立皇太子，吉为太子太傅，数月，迁御史大夫。
现代文：地节三年，宣帝刘询立了太子，丙吉做太子太傅，几个月后，升迁为御史大夫。
English: In the third year of the festival, Emperor Liu Enquirer was crowned the crown prince, and Bijie was made the crown prince and daifu. A few months later, he was promoted to goshi daifu.

古文：及霍氏诛，上躬亲政，省尚书事。
现代文：等到霍氏犯罪被诛杀，皇帝亲自处理政务，省去尚书先看奏书一事。
English: When Huo's criminal was killed, the emperor personally dealt with government affairs, omitting the matter of reading the record book first.

古文：是时，掖庭宫婢则令民夫上书，自陈尝有阿保之功。
现代文：逭时，掖庭服侍妃子们的一个名叫则的婢女让自己以前的做平民的丈夫上书皇帝，自己声称对刘询有保育之功。
English: At that time, a maidservant named Zetsu, who served the concubines in the imperial court, made her former husband, who was a commoner, write a letter to the emperor, claiming that she had done a good job of taking care of Liu Ying.

古文：章下掖庭令考问，则辞引使者丙吉知状。
现代文：皇帝把奏章发给掖庭令，让他考查询问此事，这个名叫则的宫婢的供词中说以前的使者丙吉知道是怎么回事。
English: The emperor sent the report to the chief of the imperial court and asked him to investigate and inquire into the matter. The concubine named Ze confessed that the former envoy He Jie knew what was going on.

古文：掖庭令将则诣御史府以视吉。
现代文：掖庭令于是带着那个宫婢到御史大夫府让丙吉看看是否属实。
English: So, the court ordered him to take the maidservant to the Imperial Historian's Office to let him see if it was true.

古文：吉识，谓则曰： 汝尝坐养皇曾孙不谨督笞，汝安得有功？
现代文：丙吉认识那个婢女，对她说： 你曾经因为犯了养育皇曾孙不谨慎的罪遇而被罚鞭打，怎么能说你有功劳？
English: He Jie knew the servant girl and said to her: You were once punished and whipped for committing the crime of raising the emperor's great-grandson imprudently, how can you say that you have merit?

古文：独渭城胡组、淮阳郭徵卿有恩耳。 
现代文：衹有渭城的胡组、淮阳的郭征卿有功劳。 
English: Hu Jiu of Handan City and Guo Zhengqing of Huaiyang have made great contributions.

古文：分别奏组等共养劳苦状。
现代文：丙吉于是分别上书皇帝述说胡组等人以前供养皇帝是多么劳苦。
English: Bingji then separately sent a letter to the emperor, describing how hard the Hu group and others had worked to support the emperor.

古文：诏吉求组、征卿，已死，有子孙，皆受厚赏。
现代文：皇帝韶令丙吉寻找胡组、郭征卿，二人都已死去，衹有子孙还在，都受到重赏。
English: Emperor Gong ordered Bingji to search for Hu Gui and Guo Zhengqing. Both of them had died, but their descendants were still alive, and both of them were highly rewarded.

古文：诏免则为庶人，赐钱十万。
现代文：诏令赦免名叫则的婢女为平民，赏给她钱十万。
English: The imperial edict pardoned a servant girl named Zeng, who was a commoner, and awarded her 100,000 yuan.

古文：上亲见问，然后知吉有旧恩，而终不言。
现代文：皇帝亲自查问此事，然后才知道丙吉过去曾有恩于己，而一直不说。
English: The emperor personally inquired into the matter, only to learn that Bongji had been self-indulgent in the past and had kept silent.

古文：上大贤之，制诏丞相： 朕微眇时，御史大夫吉与朕有旧恩，厥德茂焉。
现代文：皇帝十分感激，认为丙吉真是一个大贤人，给丞相魏相诏书说： 朕没有显贵以前，御史大夫丙吉对朕有恩，他的德行真美啊。
English: The emperor was very grateful, and thought that Bijie was really a great sage. He said to the prime minister, Wei Xiang, in the imperial rescript: "Before I was distinguished, the chief historian, Bijie, was kind to me, and his virtue was truly beautiful.

古文：《诗》不云乎？ 亡德不报 。
现代文：《诗经》上不是说过吗？ 没有什么对我有德的人不受到报答的。 
English: Isn't it said in the Book of Songs that there is nothing for which a virtuous person is not rewarded?

古文：其封吉为博阳侯，邑千三百户。 
现代文：朕封丙吉为博阳侯，食邑一千三百户。 
English: I am the mayor of Boyang, and there are 1,300 households in the food village.

古文：临当封，吉疾病，上将使人加绅而封之，及其生存也。上忧吉疾不起，太子太傅夏侯胜曰： 此未死也。
现代文：临到受封时，西宣病了，皇帝怕西立死去无法加封，想赶到西吉活着的时候，派人拿着侯印去封侯。皇帝担心丙吉的病好不了，太子太傅夏侯胜对皇帝说： 他是不会死的。
English: At the time of the investiture, Xixuan was ill, and the emperor was afraid that Xilimang would die and could not be enthroned. In order to arrive at the time when Xiji was still alive, he sent someone to seal Xiji with the seal of the prince. The emperor was worried that Xiji's illness would not get better, and the prince said to the emperor: "He will not die."

古文：臣闻有阴德者，必飨其乐以及子孙。
现代文：臣听说积阴德的人，一定会享受到那阴德带来的欢乐，还会延及子孙。
English: The minister heard that those who accumulate yin and virtue will certainly enjoy the joy brought by that yin and virtue, and will also extend to their descendants.

古文：今吉未获报而疾甚，非其死疾也。 
现代文：现在丙室的阴德还没有获得报答，就病得这么厉害，造不是要命的病。 
English: Now that C's chastity hasn't been repaid, she's so sick that it's not a life-threatening illness.

古文：后病果愈。
现代文：后来丙吉的病果然好了。
English: Later, Bingji's illness was cured.

古文：吉上书固辞，自陈不宜以空名受赏。
现代文：丙古上书皇帝，坚决推辞，述说自己不应该靠这空名受赏封。
English: Hingu wrote to the emperor, firmly refusing, saying that he should not rely on this empty name to receive the award.

古文：上报曰： 朕之封君，非空名也，而君上书归侯印，是显朕不德也。
现代文：皇帝回书说： 朕封你为侯，不是空名，而你上书送回侯印，却是会彰显我无德无义，知恩不报。
English: The emperor wrote back and said: I made you a marquess, it is not an empty name, and you sent back the marquess seal, but it will show that I have no virtue or righteousness, and I will not repay your kindness.

古文：方今天下少事，君其专精神，省思虑，近医药，以自持。 
现代文：现在天下没什么乱事，希望你集中精神，少思虑事情，多注意医药，好好将养自保。 
English: Now there is nothing chaotic in the world. I hope you can concentrate, think less about things, pay more attention to medicine, and take good care of yourself.

古文：后五岁，代魏相为丞相。
现代文：五年之后，丙吉代替魏相做了丞相。
English: Five years later, Heung-Gil became chancellor instead of Wei.

古文：吉本起狱法小吏，后学《诗》、《礼》，皆通大义。
现代文：丙吉出身于治理监狱案件的小官吏，后来学习《诗经》、《礼》，明了其中大义。
English: Born as a minor official in charge of prison cases, Bingji later studied the "Book of Songs" and "Rites" and understood the great meaning behind them.

古文：及居相位，上宽大，好礼让。
现代文：到他做了丞相之后，崇尚宽怀大度，好礼让他人。
English: After he became chancellor, he advocated magnanimity and deference to others.

古文：掾史有罪臧，不称职，辄予长休告，终无所案验。
现代文：掾史有了罪遇，或有不称职的，丙吉总是给他们放长假，让他们自动去职，一直没有查办过。
English: If there is a crime or incompetence, BJ always gives them a long vacation, let them go to work automatically, and has not been investigated.

古文：客或谓吉曰： 君侯为汉相，奸吏成其私，然无所惩艾。 
现代文：有的宾客对西童说： 您做了莲朝丞相，十分宽厚，而奸诈的官吏却乘机谋私利，做坏事，然而您却对他们没有惩办。 
English: Some guests said to Xido, "You have been a very lenient prime minister, while treacherous officials have taken the opportunity to seek personal gain and do bad things, yet you have not punished them.

古文：吉曰： 夫以三公之府有案吏之名，吾窃陋焉。 
现代文：丙吉说： 凭我公侯大府，却去追究查办小吏，我感到太丢面子。 
English: He Jie said, "I feel it is too shameful for me to go after a minor functionary of the Investigation Office, even though I hold the title of prince.

古文：后人代吉，因以为故事，公府不案吏，自吉始。
现代文：后来代替丙吉的人，便把这当成惯例，公侯之府不查办小吏，便从丙吉开始。
English: Later, the person who replaced Bingji took this as a common practice. The prince's palace did not investigate minor officials, but started with Bingji.

古文：于官属掾史，务掩过扬善。
现代文：对待自己的属官掾史，丙吉总是替他们掩过扬善。
English: When dealing with his subordinate officials, he always covered up for them.

古文：吉驭吏耆酒，数逋荡，尝从吉出，醉呕丞相车上。
现代文：西宣有一个驾车小吏爱喝酒，多次失职。曾有一次跟从丙吉出外，因酒醉吐在丞相车上。
English: Xixuan had a minor driver who liked to drink and repeatedly failed to perform his duties. Once, when he went out with Bongji, he vomited on the prime minister's car because he was drunk.

古文：西曹主吏白欲斥之，吉曰： 以醉饱之失去士，使此人将复何所容？
现代文：西曹主吏对丙吉说想赶走这个驭吏，丙吉说： 仅因为酒醉饭饱呕在丞相车上的过失就赶走他，让这个人以后如何容身处世？
English: The chief officer of the Western Cao told Bongji that he wanted to drive away this driver, and Bongji said: Just because he was drunk and full of food, he was driven away because of his fault on the prime minister's car, so how should this person live in the future?

古文：西曹地忍之，此不过污丞相车茵耳。 
现代文：你就忍一忍，放过他吧，这也不过是弄脏了我车上的垫子。 
English: Just bear with it and let him be, it's just dirt on the cushion of my car.

古文：遂不去也。
现代文：终于没有赶走他。
English: Finally, they didn't chase him away.

古文：此驭吏边郡人，习知边塞发奔命警备事，尝出，适见驿骑持赤白囊，边郡发奔命书驰来至。
现代文：这个驭吏是边郡的人，熟知边塞报警警备等事。曾有一次出去，刚巧看见驿骑拿着赤白相间的信囊，是边郡报告敌人入侵的书信来了。
English: This bailiff was from Bian County, and was familiar with matters such as the alarm and alerting of frontier posts. Once when he went out, he happened to see a rider holding a red-and-white envelope. It was a letter from Bian County reporting an enemy invasion.

古文：驭吏因随驿骑至公车刺取，知虏入云中、代郡，遽归府见吉白状，因曰： 恐虏所入边郡，二千石长吏有老病不任兵马者，宜可豫视。 
现代文：驭吏便跟随着驿骑到公车打听消息，了解到敌人入侵了云中郡、代郡，立即赶回丞相府向丙吉报告情况，并建议： 恐怕胡虏所入侵的边郡，二千石的官吏中有老病经不起战乱的，应该预先探察。 
English: The driver followed him to the bus to inquire about the news, learned that the enemy had invaded Yunzhong County and Dai County, and immediately rushed back to the prime minister's office to report the situation to Bingji, and suggested: I'm afraid that the border county invaded by Huru, there are officials with two thousand stones who are old and sick and can't withstand the war, and they should be investigated in advance.

古文：吉善其言，召东曹案边长吏，琐科条其人。
现代文：丙吉认为他说得很有道理，于是便让束曹访察边郡的长吏，详细记录他们的身世经历等情况。
English: Bingji thought that what he said made a lot of sense, so he asked Zou Cao to visit the governors of Bian County to record in detail their life experiences and other circumstances.

古文：未已，诏召丞相、御史，问以虏所入郡吏，吉具对。
现代文：这件事还没做完，皇帝下韶召见丞相、御史，询问胡虏所入侵的边郡的官吏，丙吉详细地予以回答。
English: Before the matter was over, the emperor summoned the prime minister and the imperial historian to inquire about the officials of the border counties invaded by the Huns, and He Jie answered them in detail.

古文：御史大夫卒遽不能详知，以得谴让。
现代文：御史大夫仓促之间却不能迅速地回答，被皇帝责备了一顿。
English: The Imperial Historian was in a hurry, but could not answer quickly enough, and was scolded by the emperor.

古文：而吉见谓忧边思职，驭吏力也。
现代文：因此丙吉被皇帝看作是担忧边防，克尽职守的好丞相，管理下属官吏十分得力。
English: Therefore, Bingji was regarded by the emperor as a good prime minister who worried about border defense and fulfilled his duties, and was very effective in managing subordinate officials.

古文：吉乃叹曰： 士亡不可容，能各有所长。
现代文：丙吉于是叹道： 士没有不可容忍的人，他们的才能各有所长。
English: Bingji then sighed: There are no intolerable people among the scholars, and their talents are all different.

古文：向使丞相不先闻驭吏言，何见劳勉之有？ 
现代文：假如我不是先听到驭吏的劝告，怎么会被称赞为勤劳尽力呢？ 
English: How could I be praised for my diligence if I had not first listened to the conductor's advice?

古文：掾史繇是益贤吉。
现代文：而掾史们听到这话，也更加佩服丙吉。
English: But when the historians heard this, they admired Bingji even more.

古文：吉又尝出，逢清道群斗者，死伤横道，吉过之不问，掾史独怪之。
现代文：丙吉有一次外出，碰上清理道路的人打群架，路上躺着许多死伤者，丙吉经过旁边却不闻不问，身边的掾史感到很奇怪。
English: Once, when he was out, he came across a group of people cleaning up the road. There were many dead and injured people lying on the road. He passed by but didn't pay any attention. The people around him felt very strange.

古文：吉前行，逢人逐牛，牛喘吐舌，吉止驻，使骑吏问： 逐牛行几里矣？ 
现代文：丙吉等又往前走，碰上有人正在赶牛，牛喘着气吐着舌头。丙吉让停下车子，让骑吏去问道： 赶牛走了几里了？ 
English: He Ji waited and walked forward again. He met someone who was driving a cow. The cow was panting and spitting out its tongue. He Ji stopped the car and asked the rider to ask: How many miles have you driven the cow?

古文：掾史独谓丞相前后失问，或以讥吉，吉曰： 民斗相杀伤，长安令、京兆尹职所当禁备逐捕，岁竟丞相课其殿最，奏行赏罚而已。
现代文：掾史很怪丞相该问的不问，不该问的却问，甚至有的还讥讽丙吉，丙吉解释说： 百姓互相争斗，死伤了人，这是该由长安令、京兆尹去禁止追捕的事，岁末时我做丞相的考察他们的政绩功过，向皇上奏明情况，予以赏罚罢了。
English: Zou Shi was very surprised that the prime minister did not ask the right questions, but asked the wrong ones. Some even mocked Bo Ji. Bo Ji explained: The people fought with each other, and people were killed and injured. This was a matter that should have been banned by the Chang'an edict and Jing Zhaoyun. At the end of the year, when I was the prime minister, I examined their political achievements and merits, reported the situation to the emperor, and rewarded and punished them.

古文：宰相不亲小事，非所当于道路问也。
现代文：宰相不亲自处理小事，在道路上是不该询问的。
English: The prime minister does not personally handle minor matters, and should not be questioned on the road.

古文：方春少阳用事，未可大热，恐牛近行，用暑故喘，此时气失节，恐有所伤害也。
现代文：正当春天季节，少阳秉持天地气候，不应该出现很热的天气，我恐怕被追赶的那头牛走得路不远，是因为天太热才喘气吐舌，造就是时令节气失调了，恐怕会有很大的灾害。
English: During the spring season, Shaoyang adheres to the heaven and earth climate, and there should not be very hot weather. I am afraid that the cow that was chased did not go far, because it was too hot to breathe. This is because the seasonal solar terms are out of kilter, and I am afraid that there will be great disasters.

古文：三公典调和阴阳，职当忧，是以问之。 
现代文：作为三公的丞相要掌管调和阴阳的大事，是我应该忧虑的，所以我才询问牛喘的事。 
English: As the prime minister of the three kingdoms, I should be concerned about the important matter of reconciling yin and yang, so I inquired about the cow asthma.

古文：掾史乃服，以吉知大体。
现代文：掾史们都感到很佩服，认为丙吉是个知大体的人。
English: The historians were all very impressed and thought that Bingji was a person with a general knowledge.

古文：五凤三年春，吉病笃。
现代文：五凤三年的春天，丙吉的病严重了。
English: In the spring of the third year of Wufeng, Bingji's illness became serious.

古文：上自临问吉，曰： 君即有不讳，谁可以自代者？ 
现代文：皇帝亲自到病榻前问候丙吉，说： 假如您不幸死了，谁可以代替您呢？ 
English: The emperor himself came to the sickbed to greet Bong Ji-woo and said: If you unfortunately die, who can replace you?

古文：吉辞谢曰： 群臣行能，明主所知，愚臣无所能识。 
现代文：丙吉辞谢道： 大臣们的行为才能，圣明的君主您最清楚，愚臣我不太了解。 
English: He Jijie said with thanks, "Ministers have the ability to act. You, the enlightened monarch, know best. Foolish ministers, I don't quite understand.

古文：上固问，吉顿首曰： 西河太守杜延年明于法度，晓国家故事，前为九卿十余年，今在郡治有能名。
现代文：皇帝坚持要问，丙吉只好顿首说道： 西河太守杜延年明晓法律，知道国家的旧事惯例，以前曾做遇十多年的九卿官，现在在西河郡很有政绩，名声很好。
English: The emperor insisted on asking, and Bingjie had no choice but to immediately say: Du Yannian, the governor of the West River, knows the law and the old practices of the country. He had previously served as a nine-kings official for more than ten years, and now he has great achievements and a good reputation in the West River County.

古文：廷尉于定国执宪详平，天下自以不冤。
现代文：廷尉于定国执法公道，天下经他判决的人都感到不冤枉。
English: The imperial lieutenant Yu Dingguo enforced justice, and people all over the world who were sentenced by him felt that they were not wronged.

古文：太仆陈万年事后母孝，惇厚备于行止。
现代文：太仆陈万年侍奉继母十分孝顺，做任何事都十分公正厚道。
English: The maid servant Chen Mannian served her stepmother very dutifully, and did everything fairly and kindly.

古文：此三人能皆在臣右，唯上察之。 
现代文：这三个人的才能都比我强，希望皇帝留心察访一下。 
English: All three of them are more talented than I am. I hope the emperor will pay attention and pay a visit.

古文：上以吉言皆是而许焉。
现代文：皇帝认为丙吉的话都很正确而答应了。
English: The emperor thought that the words of Bingji were all correct and agreed.

古文：及吉薨，御史大夫黄霸为丞相，征西河太守杜延年为御史大夫，会其年老，乞骸骨。病免。
现代文：等到丙吉死后，御史大夫黄霸做了丞相，征召西河郡太守杜延年入朝为御史大夫，正巧这时杜延年因年老辞官，又因病而免去了官职。
English: After the death of Bingji, the Grand Historian Huang Ba became the Prime Minister and summoned Du Yan Nian, the governor of Xihe County, to the court as the Grand Historian. It was just at this time that Du Yan Nian resigned due to old age and was relieved of his official duties due to illness.

古文：以廷尉于定国代为御史大夫。
现代文：起用廷尉于定国代替杜延年做御史大夫。
English: He appointed the courtier Yu Dingguo to replace Du Yanren as the imperial historian.

古文：黄霸薨，而定国为丞相，太仆陈万年代定国为御史大夫，居位皆称职，上称吉为知人。
现代文：后来黄霸死了，于定国做了丞相，起用太仆陈万年代替于定国做御史大夫，这几个人都很称职，皇帝认为丙吉有知入之明。
English: Later, when Huang Ba died, Yu Dingguo became chancellor of the imperial court, and his servant Chen Wanzhong was appointed to replace him as imperial secretary of state. All of these people were very competent, and the emperor thought that Bingji was very intelligent.

古文：吉薨，谥曰定侯。
现代文：丙吉死后，赐谧号为定侯。
English: After the death of Heung-Gil, his posthumous name was changed to Dinghou.

古文：子显嗣，甘露中有罪削爵为关内侯，官至卫尉、太仆。
现代文：他的儿子丙显承袭了爵位，甘露年间，因为犯罪被削爵为关内侯，官位至卫尉太仆。
English: His son, Cixian, inherited the title of nobility. During the Kamloops period, he was stripped of his title because of a crime and became the Lord of Guanai, with the official rank of Lieutenant of the Guard.

古文：始显少为诸曹，尝从祠高庙，至夕牲日，乃使出取斋衣。
现代文：当初丙显年少时曾经做府曹小吏，曾经跟随着皇帝去高庙祭祀，到了做牺牲这一天，才派人出去取斋戒的衣服。
English: At first, when he was young, Bixian used to be a minor official of the prefectural government, and he used to follow the emperor to the high temple for sacrifice. It was only on the day of the sacrifice that he sent someone out to get the clothes for fasting.

古文：丞相吉大怒，谓其夫人曰： 宗庙至重，而显不敬慎，亡吾爵者必显也。 
现代文：丞相丙吉大怒，对他的夫人说： 宗庙是国家最庄重的地方，而丙显却表现出不恭敬不谨慎，将来丢失我爵位的一定会是丙显。 
English: The prime minister, Binkichi, was furious and said to his wife: "The ancestral temple is the most solemn place in the country, but Binkichi has shown disrespect and imprudence. In the future, it will be Binkichi who will lose his title."

古文：夫人为言，然后乃已。
现代文：丙吉夫人替儿子说了不少好话，然后才饶了丙显。
English: Mrs. Bijie said a lot of good words for her son, and then she spared Bixian.

古文：吉中子禹为水衡都尉，少子高为中垒校尉。
现代文：丙吉的二儿子丙禹做水衡都尉，小儿子丙高做中垒校尉。
English: Bongji's second son, Bong Yu, became the captain of the water balance, and the youngest son, Bong Gao, became the captain of the middle school.

古文：元帝时，长安士伍尊上书言： 臣少时为郡邸小吏，窃见孝宣皇帝以皇曾孙在郡邸狱。
现代文：元帝时，长安的一个名叫尊的士卒上书皇帝，说： 臣子我年少时曾做郡邸的小官吏，曾见到孝宣皇帝以皇曾孙的身份关在郡邸狱中。
English: At the time of the Yuan Dynasty, a soldier from Chang'an named His Eminence wrote a letter to the emperor, saying: Minister, when I was young, I was a minor official at the county seat, and I once saw Emperor Xiaoxuan locked up in the county seat prison as the great-grandson of the emperor.

古文：是时，治狱使者丙吉见皇曾孙遭离无辜，吉仁心感动，涕泣凄恻，选择复作胡组养视皇孙，吉常从。
现代文：当时替皇帝查办案件的使者丙吉见皇曾孙无辜受难，自己的仁义之心不仅大为感动，十分伤心。于是便挑选女犯人胡组养育皇孙，丙吉也常一起看护。
English: At that time, the emissary of the emperor to investigate the case, Bo Ji, saw the innocent suffering of the great-grandson of the emperor, and his benevolence was not only greatly moved, but also very sad. So he chose the female prisoner Hu Ji to raise the grandson of the emperor, and Bo Ji often took care of him.

古文：臣尊日再侍卧庭上。
现代文：臣子我当日曾多次在郡邸庭中侍奉皇孙。
English: As a courtier, I had served the grandson of the emperor many times in the courtyard of the county residence.

古文：后遭条狱之召，吉扞拒大难，不避严刑峻法。
现代文：后来遭遇到登录监狱犯人全部杀死的诏命，丙吉不开门，抗拒了大难，不避严刑峻法终于保全了皇孙。
English: Later, when faced with the imperial edict to kill all prisoners registered in the prison, he did not open the door, resisted the hardships, and finally saved the grandson of the emperor without avoiding the severe punishment.

古文：既遭大赦，吉谓守丞谁知，皇孙不当在官，使谁如移书京兆尹，遣与胡组俱送京兆尹，不受，复还。
现代文：后来遇到大赦，丙吉对守丞令谁如说，皇孙不应当再在官狱裹了，让谁如以官府文书形式写信给京兆尹，同时把皇孙和胡组一起送到京兆尹那裹，京兆尹不接受，又送了回来。
English: Later, when there was a general amnesty, Heki told Shoucheng to tell who should say that the emperor's grandson should no longer be imprisoned in the official prison, and who should write to Jing Zhaoyun in the form of an official document, and at the same time send the emperor's grandson and Hu group together to Jing Zhaoyun, but Jing Zhaoyun did not accept it and sent it back.

古文：及组日满当去，皇孙思慕，吉以私钱顾组，令留与郭徽卿并养数月，乃遣组去。
现代文：到了胡组雇已满，该回家了，皇孙因长期和她在一起，恋恋不舍，丙吉于是便用自己的钱雇了胡组，让她留下来和郭征卿一起抚养了皇孙几个月，才让她回家了。
English: When it was time to go home, the Hu group's employment was over. As the emperor's grandson had been with her for a long time and was in love with her, Bingji used his own money to hire the Hu group and let her stay with Guo Zhengqing to raise the emperor's grandson for a few months before letting her go home.

古文：后少内啬夫白吉曰： 食皇孙亡诏令 。
现代文：后来掌管掖庭府藏的官吏少内啬夫对丙吉说： 想给皇孙上等供给，但没有诏令，汐办法。 
English: Later, Shao Neizheifu, the official in charge of the collection of the Sui court, said to Bongji: I want to provide supplies to the emperor's great-grandchildren, but there is no imperial decree, there is no way.

古文：时，吉得食米肉，月月以给皇孙。
现代文：当时丙吉能够吃到米和肉，便每月拿了自己的俸禄供给皇孙。
English: At that time, he was able to eat rice and meat, so he took his monthly salary to provide for his grandson.

古文：吉即时病，辄使臣尊朝夕请问皇孙，视省席蓐燥湿。
现代文：丙吉有时病了，总是让我不分早晚地去问候皇孙的情况，看看被褥的干湿厚薄。
English: He Jie was sometimes ill, and he always asked me to visit him sooner or later to see how his grandson was doing, and to look at the thickness of his bedding.

古文：候伺组、徽卿，不得令晨夜去皇孙敖荡，数奏甘毳食物。
现代文：还常告诫胡组、郭征卿，不许她们或早或晚地离开皇孙去游玩，并多次向皇孙进奉好吃甘脆的食物。
English: He also often admonished Hu Jie and Guo Zhengqing not to let them leave the grandson to play sooner or later, and repeatedly presented the grandson with delicious sweet and crunchy food.

古文：所以拥全神灵，成育圣躬，功德已无量矣。
现代文：所以保证了孝宣皇帝精神愉快，健康成长，可谓功德无量。
English: Therefore, it ensured the happy spirit and healthy growth of Emperor Xiaoxuan, which can be described as immeasurable merit.

古文：时岂豫知天下之福，而徼其报哉！
现代文：当时丙吉哪裹会预料到皇孙会做皇帝？
English: At that time, who would have predicted that the grandson would become emperor?

古文：诚其仁恩内结于心也。
现代文：哪裹会想到将来徼功求报！
English: Who would have thought that in the future it would pay off!

古文：虽介之推割肌以存君，不足以比。
现代文：实在是他心地淳厚、仁义、善良的自然表现。
English: In fact, it is a natural expression of his pure-heartedness, benevolence and kindness.

古文：教宣皇帝时，臣上书言状，幸得下吉，吉谦让不敢自伐，删去臣辞，专归美于组、徽卿。组、徽卿皆以受田宅赐钱，吉封为博阳侯，臣尊不得比组、徽卿。
现代文：即使是介之推那样的割自己的肉给君主吃，以使君主存活的行为，也不能与之相比。孝宣皇帝在时，我曾上书说明当时的情状，奏书有幸到了丙吉那裹，丙吉十分谦虚，不自我炫耀，删去了我奏书中关于他的那些话，而把好处全归功于胡组和郭征卿，胡组、郭征卿都因此被赏赐给了田宅、金钱，丙吉被封为博阳侯。臣尊我不能和胡组、郭征卿相比。
English: Even the act of cutting one's own flesh and giving it to the monarch to eat in order to keep the monarch alive cannot be compared to the act of cutting one's own flesh and giving it to the monarch to eat in order to keep the monarch alive. When Emperor Xiaoxuan was alive, I wrote a letter explaining the situation at that time. I was fortunate enough to receive the letter from Bongji. Bongji was very modest and did not show off. He deleted the words about him in my letter and attributed all the benefits to Hu Jie and Guo Zhengqing. For this, Hu Jie and Guo Zhengqing were rewarded with rice fields and money, and Bongji was

古文：臣年老居贫，死在旦暮，欲终不言，恐使有功不著。
现代文：臣我年纪已老，生活贫困，不知哪时就会死去，想要一直不说出来，又恐怕埋没有功劳的人。
English: My lord, I am an old man, I live in poverty, I do not know when I will die, I want to keep silent, and I am afraid to bury those who have no merit.

古文：吉子显坐微文夺爵为关内侯，臣愚以为宜复其爵邑，以报先入功德。 
现代文：丙吉的儿子丙显因犯小罪被削爵位，做关内侯。臣愚昧地认为应该恢复他原来的爵位和封邑，以报答他先父的功德。 
English: Binkichi's son, Bixian, was stripped of his peerage for a petty crime and became the lord of Kwanai. The vassal foolishly thought that he should restore his original peerage and fiefdom to repay his father's merits.

古文：先是，显为太仆十余年，与官属大为奸利，臧千余万，司隶校尉昌案劾，罪至不道，奏请逮捕。
现代文：在这以前，丙显做了十多年的太仆，和他的属官大作坏事，盘剥金银，家中藏钱千余万，司隶校尉昌审理弹劾丙显，罪行至于大逆不道，奏请皇帝予以逮捕。
English: Prior to this, Hsin Hsien had been a great retainer for more than ten years. He and his subordinate officials had done a lot of bad things, plundered gold and silver, and hid more than ten million yuan of money in their homes. Lieutenant Colonel Chang tried to impeach Hsin Hsien. As for the crime of high treason, he asked the emperor to arrest him.

古文：上曰： 故丞相吉有旧恩，朕不忍绝。 
现代文：元帝说： 已故丞相丙吉对孝宣皇帝有旧恩，朕不忍杀他的儿子。 
English: Emperor Yuan said, "The late Prime Minister He Jiji had a long-standing favor for Emperor Xiaoxuan, and I cannot bear to kill his son.

古文：免显官，夺邑四百户。
现代文：于是衹免去丙显的官位，削去食邑四百户。
English: As a result, he removed Bixian from his official position and cut 400 households from food villages.

古文：后复以为城门校尉。
现代文：后来又让他做了城门校尉。
English: Later he made him captain of the castle gate.

古文：显卒，子昌嗣爵关内侯。
现代文：丙显死后，他的儿子丙昌袭爵为关内侯。
English: After the death of Bixian, his son Bichang succeeded him as the Lord of Guanai.

古文：成帝时，修废功，以吉旧恩尤重，鸿嘉元年制诏丞相御史： 盖闻褒功德，继绝统，所以重宗庙，广贤圣之路也。
现代文：汉成帝时，重修废弃的功业，因为丙吉过去对汉室恩义尤其深厚，于是在成帝鸿嘉元年下韶给丞相和御史大夫，说： 朕听说褒扬有功有德的人，使绝后代的功臣复有继承人，是尊崇宗庙国家，广开圣贤之路的好方法。
English: At the time of Emperor Hancheng, he revived the abandoned work, because Bongji had been particularly grateful to the Han family in the past. Therefore, in the first year of Emperor Hanjia, he issued an imperial edict to the prime minister and the minister of history, saying: I heard that praising people with merits and virtues, so that the descendants of heroes have successors, is a good way to respect the ancestral temple country and open up the path of sages.

古文：故博阳侯吉以旧恩有功而封，今其祀绝，朕甚怜之。
现代文：已故博阳侯丙吉因为有恩义于先帝而被封为侯，现今他的后代已绝灭，朕感到十分可怜。
English: The late Boyang Hou Bingji was given the title of Hou because of his gratitude to the former emperor. Now that his descendants have died out, I feel very sorry.

古文：夫善善及子孙，古今之通谊也，其封吉孙中郎将、关内侯昌为博阳侯，奉吉后。 
现代文：至善至美的行为会延及子孙，这是古代相通的道理，朕封丙吉的孙子中郎将关内侯丙昌为博阳侯，供奉丙吉后代。 
English: The most virtuous and beautiful behavior will be passed on to their children and grandchildren. This is an ancient principle of communication. The grandson of Heung-Gil named Guan Nai Hou Heung-Chang as Boyang Hou and offered him to Heung-Gil's descendants.

古文：国绝三十二岁复续云。
现代文：丙吉的封国削去三十二年后又得以继续。
English: Thirty-two years after the removal of Bongji's feudal state, it was able to continue.

古文：昌传子至孙，王莽时乃绝。
现代文：丙昌把爵位传给儿子直到孙子，到王莽篡汉时才绝灭。
English: Burchang passed the title on to his son until his grandson, and only died out when Wang Mang usurped Han.

古文：赞曰：古之制名，必繇象类，远取诸物，近取诸身。
现代文：赞曰：古人制定名字，一定要从象征同类事物出发，远的从事物寻取，近的从自身寻取。
English: Zang said: The ancients must start from the symbol of the same kind of thing when formulating a name, looking for things far away and looking for themselves when they are near.

古文：故经谓君为元首，臣为股肱，明其一体，相待而成也。
现代文：所以经书上说君好比是人的头脑，而臣好比是人的腿臂，表明君和臣好比是人的整个身体，是相辅相成的。
English: That is why the scriptures say that the ruler is like a person's head and the vassal is like a person's leg and arm, indicating that the ruler and the vassal are like a person's entire body and complement each other.

古文：是故君臣相配，古今常道，自然之势也。
现代文：所以君主与臣子互相协助，是古往今来的常道恒理，是自然而然，势必如此。
English: Therefore, the mutual assistance between monarch and vassal has been a common practice from ancient times to the present. It is natural and inevitable.

古文：近观汉相，高祖开基，萧、曹为冠，孝宣中兴，丙、魏有声。
现代文：就近来看汉代的丞相，汉高祖开创基业，萧何、曹参为众臣之冠，孝宣帝为中兴之主，丙吉、魏相也颇有美声。
English: Let's take a closer look at the chancellors of the Han Dynasty. Han Gao Zu started the foundation, Xiao He and Cao San were the crown of the vassals, Xiao Xuan Di was the lord of ZTE, and He Jie and Wei Xiang also had a good reputation.

古文：是时，黜陟有序，众职修理，公卿多称其位，海内兴于礼让。
现代文：那时对官员升降合理，职守明确，公卿大臣大多称职能干，海内人士以礼让相尚。
English: At that time, the promotion and demotion of officials was reasonable, the duties were clear, the noblemen and ministers were mostly functional, and the people at home were polite and courteous.

古文：览其行事，岂虚乎哉！
现代文：观察他们的行为事迹，难道衹是虚名吗！
English: Observe their actions and deeds, is it a false name!

