古文：鄢之役，晋伐郑，荆救之。
现代文：在鄢陵战役中，晋国讨伐郑国，楚国发兵来救。
English: During the Battle of Fuling, Jin attacked Zheng, and Chu sent troops to rescue Zheng.

古文：栾武子将上军，范文子将下军。
现代文：栾武子统帅上军，范文子统帅下军。
English: General Zhai Wuzi joins the army, General Fan Wenzi leaves the army.

古文：栾武子欲战，范文子不欲，曰： 吾闻之，唯厚德者能受多福，无德而服者众，必自伤也。
现代文：栾武子想出战，范文子不同意，说： 我听说，只有德行纯厚的人能够享受大福，没有德行而归服的人众多，肯定会对自己造成伤害。
English: Zhai Wuzi wanted to go to war, but Fan Wenzi disagreed, saying: I heard that only people with pure virtues can enjoy great blessings, and many people who surrender without virtue will certainly cause harm to themselves.

古文：称晋之德，诸侯皆叛，国可以少安。
现代文：衡量晋国的德行，如果诸侯都背叛了，国内才可以稍微获得安宁。
English: Judging by the moral conduct of Jin, if all the lords betray, the country can only gain a little peace.

古文：唯有诸侯，故扰扰焉，凡诸侯，难之本也。
现代文：正因为有些诸侯归附我们，所以搞得纷纷扰扰，这些诸侯，是祸乱的根源。
English: It is precisely because some lords have attached themselves to us that they have caused so much disturbance. These lords are the root of all evil.

古文：且唯圣人能无外患又无内忧，讵非圣人，不有外患，必有内忧，盍姑释荆与郑以为外患乎！
现代文：况且只有圣人才能做到既无外患，又无内忧，如果不是圣人，没有外患，必有内忧，我们何不姑且撇开楚国和郑国，把它们作为外患呢！
English: Moreover, only a saint can be free from both external and internal troubles. If not a saint, if there are no external troubles, there must be internal troubles. Why don't we set aside the states of Chu and Zheng and treat them as external troubles?

古文：诸臣之内相与，必将辑睦。
现代文：大臣之间相处，肯定会和睦。
English: If ministers get along with each other, there will definitely be harmony.

古文：今我战又胜荆与郑，吾君将伐智而多力，怠教而重敛，大其私昵而益妇人田，不夺诸大夫田，则焉取以益此？
现代文：如今我们攻打并且战胜了楚国和郑国，那么我们的国君就将会夸耀自己的智慧和武功，疏忽教化而加重赋税，增加宠臣俸禄，多赐爱妾田地，那么不夺取诸大夫的田地，又能从哪里获取而赏赐给宠臣、爱妾们呢？
English: Now that we have attacked and defeated the states of Chu and Zheng, our sovereigns will boast of their wisdom and military prowess, increase taxes by neglecting education, increase the salaries of their favorite vassals, and give more land to their favorite concubines. If they do not seize the fields of the doctors, where will they get it from to reward their favorite vassals and concubines?

古文：诸臣之委室而徒退者，将与几人？
现代文：大臣们肯交出田地而白白引退的人，能有几个呢？
English: How many ministers are willing to hand over their fields and retire for free?

古文：战若不胜，则晋国之福也；战若胜，乱地之秩者也，其产将害大，盍姑无战乎！ 
现代文：如果仗没打胜，那是晋国的福气；如果打胜了，那么分配土地的常规就要被打乱了，这将产生变乱危害大臣，何不姑且别打呢。 
English: If the battle is not won, it will be a blessing for Jin Province; if it is won, then the land distribution routine will be disrupted, which will cause turmoil and harm the minister. Why not let it be?

古文：栾武子曰： 昔韩之役，惠公不复舍；邲之役，三军不振旅；箕之役，先轸不复命：晋国固有大耻三。
现代文：栾武子回答道： 以前在韩原之战时，惠公被俘不能回国；在邲之战中，三军溃不成军；在箕之战时，先轸不能生还复命。这是晋国原先的三大耻辱。
English: Zhai Wuzi replied: In the past, in the Battle of Han Yuan, Huigong was captured and could not return to the country; in the Battle of Zhai, the three armies were defeated and could not form an army; in the Battle of Zhai, Xian Zhai could not return to life. These were the three major humiliations of Jin.

古文：今我任晋国之政，不毁晋耻，又以违蛮、夷重之，虽有后患，非吾所知也。 
现代文：现在我主持晋国的大政，不能为晋国洗雪耻辱，反倒再避开蛮夷楚国来加重耻辱，即使有后患，我也顾不了那么远了。 
English: Now that I am presiding over the great state of Jin, I cannot wash away the shame of Jin. On the contrary, I will avoid the barbaric country of Chu to increase the shame. Even if there are consequences, I can't go that far.

古文：范文子曰： 择福莫若重，择祸莫若轻，福无所用轻，祸无所用重，晋国故有大耻，与其君臣不相听以为诸侯笑也，盍姑以违蛮、夷为耻乎。 
现代文：范文子说： 选择福没有不拣重的，选择祸没有不拣轻的，福不能要轻的，祸不能要重的，晋国本来有奇耻大辱，与其君臣不相一致而失败被诸侯们耻笑，何不姑且选择躲避蛮夷楚国这个耻辱呢。 
English: Fan Wenzi said: "There is nothing unlucky about choosing good, and there is nothing unlucky about choosing bad, and there is nothing unlucky about good, and there is nothing unlucky about bad, and there is nothing unlucky about bad, and there is nothing unlucky about good, and there is nothing unlucky about bad, and there is nothing unlucky about bad, and there is nothing unlucky about bad, and there is nothing unlucky about bad, and there is nothing unlucky about bad, and there is nothing unlucky about bad, and there is nothing unlucky about bad, and there is nothing unlucky about bad,

古文：栾武子不听，遂与荆人战于鄢陵，大胜之。
现代文：栾武子不听范文子的意见，就与楚国在鄢陵交战，大获全胜。
English: Zhai Wuzi did not listen to Fan Wenzi's advice and fought against the State of Chu in Fuling, winning a complete victory.

古文：于是乎君伐智而多力，怠教而重敛，大其私昵，杀三郤而尸诸朝，纳其室以分妇人，于是乎国人不蠲，遂弑诸翼，葬于翼东门之外，以车一乘。
现代文：于是这样一来，国君夸耀自己的智慧和武功，疏忽教化而加重赋税，增加宠臣的俸禄，杀了三郤并陈尸于朝，收取了他们的妻妾，将财宝分给爱妻。这样国人都不满他的所作所为，于是在翼城杀了他，埋葬在翼城的东门外，只用一车四马陪葬。
English: As a result, the sovereign boasted of his wisdom and military prowess, increased taxes while neglecting education, increased the salary of his favorite vassals, killed three eunuchs and had their bodies brought to the imperial court, collected their wives and concubines, and distributed the treasure to his beloved wife. The people of the country were not happy with his actions, so they killed him in the Winged City and buried him outside the East Gate of the Winged City, accompanied by only one cart and four horses.

古文：厉公之所以死者，唯无德而功烈多，服者众也。
现代文：晋厉公之所以死，就是因为他没有德行而战功多，归服的诸侯众多的缘故。
English: The reason why Jin Li Gong died was because he did not have virtue and had many war exploits, and there were many lords who surrendered to him.

