古文：维二十三祀，庚子朔，九州之侯，咸格于周，王在酆，昧爽，立于少庭。
现代文：文王受命的十三年庚子朔日，各地诸侯都来到周地。武王在丰邑，黎明时候，立在后庭。
English: On the thirteenth year of King Wen's reign, at the dawn of the new year, princes from all over the country came to Zhou. King Wu was in Fengyi, standing in the backyard at dawn.

古文：王告周公旦曰： 呜呼，诸侯咸格来庆，辛苦役周，吾何保守，何用行？ 
现代文：武王求问周公旦说： 唉呀!诸侯都来庆贺， 大家都苦受商王的役使，我们当怎样保国守土，用什么办法呢? 
English: King Wu asked Zhou Gongdan: "Alas! The princes have all come to celebrate, and everyone is suffering at the merchant king's bidding. How should we protect the country and defend the land, and by what means?

古文：旦拜手稽首曰： 商无无道，弃德刑范，欺侮群臣，辛苦百姓，忍辱诸侯，莫大之纲，福其亡，亡人惟庸。
现代文：周公旦行叩拜之礼，说道： 商王无道，抛弃道德，违背法度，欺侮群臣，辛苦百姓，残忍并侮辱诸侯，只任用逃犯，让莫大的福份亡失。
English: Zhou Gongdan bowed and said, "The merchant king is without principle, abandoned morality, violated laws, bullied his vassals, worked hard for the people, was cruel and insulted the princes, only appointed fugitives, and lost a great fortune.

古文：王其祀德纯礼，明允无二，卑位柔色，金声以合之。 
现代文：大王要重祭祀，使道德纯正礼仪周到，诚信不二，以谦恭的心意、柔和的容貌、严肃的态度，团结上下内外之人。 
English: The great king should emphasize sacrifice, make morality pure, etiquette thoughtful, and sincerity consistent, and unite people at home and abroad with a humble heart, soft face, and serious attitude.

古文：王乃命三公九卿及百姓之人，曰： 恭敬齐洁，咸格而祀于上帝。 
现代文：武王就命令三公、九卿及众贵族，说： 你们要恭敬整洁，都来祭祀上天。 
English: King Wu then ordered the three princes, nine nobles and all the nobles, saying: "Be respectful and tidy, and all of you come to offer sacrifices to the heavens.

古文：商馈始于王，因飨诸侯。
现代文：祭祀完毕，分赏祭物从武王开始。
English: After the ritual is over, the distribution of the offerings begins with King Wu.

古文：重礼生存吏，出送于郊，树昏于崇，内备五祥、六卫、七厉、十败、四葛，外用四蠹、五落、六冗、七恶。
现代文：接着武王宴飨诸侯，隆重招待随从，送他们到丰邑郊外，并在崇墟立了一块石碑。碑内面刻有五祥、七厉、十败、四葛，外面刻的是四蠹、五落、六容、七恶。
English: King Wu then held a grand banquet for the princes, invited his attendants, sent them to the outskirts of Fengyi, and erected a stone monument in Chonghu. The inside of the monument is engraved with the five auspicious, seven strong, ten defeated, and four geodes, and the outside is engraved with the four auspicious, five fallen, six strong, and seven evil.

古文：五祥：一君选择，二官得度，三务不舍，四不行赂，五察民困。
现代文：五祥是：一，君王选用贤能；二，官吏得其法度；三，农事不废；四，不行贿赂；五，体察民众疾苦。
English: The five virtues are: First, the king should choose a virtuous person; second, the officials should have their own legal system; third, the agricultural work should not be wasted; fourth, bribery should not be allowed; fifth, the people should be aware of the hardships.

古文：六卫：一明仁怀恕，二明照设谋，三明戒摄勇，四明才摄士，五明德摄官，六明命摄政。
现代文：六卫是：一，表彰仁人使众人各怀恕心；二，表彰智者以掌握谋士；三，表彰武士以控制有勇力之人；四，表彰有才有能以掌握普通士人；五，表彰道德高尚者以控制百官；六，表彰维护教令者以掌握国政。
English: The six guards are as follows: First, to commend the benevolent, so that everyone will have a forgiving heart; second, to commend the wise, so that they can control the advisers; third, to commend the warriors, so that they can control the brave; fourth, to commend the talented, so that they can control the commoners; fifth, to commend the moral, so that they can control the officials; sixth, to commend the upholders of the edicts, so that they can control the state affairs.

古文：七厉，一翼勤厉务，二动正厉民，三静兆厉武，四翼艺厉物，五翼言厉复，六翼敬厉众，七翼厉道。
现代文：七厉是：一，辅助勤劳者以勉励劳作；二，减少赋税以劝励民众；三，安定百姓以劝励武事；四，辅助有艺技者以激励百工；五，赞赏誓言以激励实践；六，赞赏恭敬有礼以劝励众人仿效；七，赞赏智谋以激励行动。
English: The seven good deeds are: First, help the hard-working people to encourage them to work; Second, reduce taxes to encourage the people; Third, stabilize the people to encourage martial arts; Fourth, help the skilled people to encourage the hundred workers; Fifth, praise the oath to encourage the practice; Sixth, appreciate the respectful and polite to encourage everyone to follow suit; Seventh, appreciate the wisdom to encourage action.

古文：十败：一佞人败朴，二谄言毁积，三阴资自举，四女货速祸，五比党不拣，六佞说鬻狱，七神龟败卜，八宾祭推谷，九忿言自辱，十异姓乱族。
现代文：十败是；一，佞人败坏淳朴；二，谄媚之言毁坏好行为；三，诮以自荐；四，美色召来祸患；五，朋比结党不知所择；六，乱了刑狱；七，迷信龟卜反败坏占卜；八，临事求善反有、祭祀；九，说气话必自辱；十，亲异姓必乱本族。
English: The ten defeats are: 1. Deceiving people corrupts simplicity; 2. Flattering words destroy good deeds; 3. Flattering self-recommendation; 4. Beauty brings disaster; 5. Friends and foes do not know what to choose; 6. Prison is out of order; 7. Superstition and divination are out of order; 8. Seeking good in every situation is out of order; 9. Sacrifices; 9. Speaking ill of others will bring disgrace to oneself; 10. Having a different family name will ruin one's own family.

古文：四葛：一葛其农时不移，二费其土虑不化，三正赏罚、狱无矜奇，四葛其戎谋，族乃不罚。
现代文：四葛是：一，敬重农事，不改易农时；二，耗费地力，担心稼；三，赏罚公正，狱讼没有奸邪；四，认真保守武事机密，氏族才不遭受损失。
English: The four cardinal points are: First, respect farming, do not change when it is easy to become a farmer; second, consume land and worry about making money; third, reward and punishment are fair, and there is no malice in prison proceedings; fourth, conscientiously keep martial secrets, so that the clan does not suffer losses.

古文：四蠹：一美好怪奇以治之，三淫言流说以服之，三群巧仍兴以力之，四神巫灵宠以惑之。
现代文：四蠹是：一，用美男好女、异宝奇珍去诱惑他；二，造出巧语流言让他相信；三，利用工匠不断修造以劳累他；四，让巫师神灵去蛊惑他。
English: The four stratagems are: First, tempt him with beautiful men and women, rare treasures and curiosities; second, make up clever sayings and rumors to make him believe; third, use craftsmen to constantly build to exhaust him; fourth, let wizards and gods seduce him.

古文：五落：一示吾贞以移其名，二微降霜雪以取松柏，三信蟜萌莫能安宅，四厚其祷巫，其谋乃获，五流德飘枉，以明其恶。
现代文：五落是：一，显示我的忠正，以改变原有的称谓；二，略施威猛以显出君子的德行；四，信任小人，没有人能够安居；四，厚赂巫师，就能获取他们的计谋；五，正直者流失遭贬，邪曲者扶摇而上，以表明他们的邪恶。
English: The five falls are: first, to show my loyalty, to change the original title; second, to show the gentleman's virtue with a little violence; fourth, to trust the villains, no one can live in peace; fourth, to bribe the wizards, to be able to obtain their tricks; fifth, the honest ones are lost and degraded, and the crooked ones are shaken up to show their evil.

古文：六容：一游言，二行商工，三军旅之庸，四外风之所扬，五困失而亡，作事应时，时乃丧，六厚使以往来其所藏。
现代文：六容是：一容游说之言，二容来往的商旅工匠，三容军旅所用之物，四容从外地传入的谣言，五容因犯过失而出逃的人，六容带出重礼而换回珍藏。
English: The six pieces are: one piece of words of lobbying, two pieces of traveling merchants and craftsmen, three pieces of things used in military travel, four pieces of rumors coming from abroad, five pieces of people who fled because of mistakes, six pieces of heavy gifts and returned to the collection.

古文：七恶：一以物角兵，二令美其前而厚其伤，三闲于大国，安得吉凶，四交其所亲，静之以物，则以流其身，五率诸侯以朝贤人，而己犹不往，六令之有求遂以生尤，七见亲所亲，勿与深谋，命友人疑。 
现代文：七恶是：一，借小事而交兵打仗；二，表面谦恭而后重加伤譬；三，夹在大国之间，祸福决于大国；四，结交他的亲近，谋取他处事的法则，使他沉溺于声色；五，劝诸侯朝拜贤人，自己则不前往；六，让他们有求于我，于是生出过失；七，看到亲近那些应当亲近的人，不与他们深谈，使友邦之君生疑。
English: The seven evils are: (1) taking advantage of trifles to go to war; (2) being outwardly modest and then seriously injuring others; (3) being sandwiched between great nations, the fate of which depends on the great nation; (4) befriending him, seeking his rules of conduct, and making him indulge in gossip; (5) persuading princes to worship sages, but not going himself; (6) making them ask for me, and then making mistakes; and (7) seeing those who should be close to them, not talking to them, and making the princes of friendly countries suspicious.

古文：旦拜曰： 呜呼，王孙其尊天下，适无见过，过适无好，自益以明而迹。
现代文：周公旦拜手道： 啊呀！王孙要受天下人敬重了！不要遭人指责，不要喜好夸耀自己以显明你的行迹。
English: Zhou Gongdan bowed his head and said: Ah! Wang Sun will be respected by the people of the world! Don't be accused by others, don't like to boast of yourself to show your deeds.

古文：呜呼，敬哉！
现代文：啊呀，慎重啊!
English: Whoa, be careful!

古文：视无祥、六卫、七厉、十败、四葛，不修国乃不固，务周四蠹、五落、六容、七恶，不使不允，不率不缓，反以自薄。
现代文：看那五祥、六卫、七厉、十败、四葛不修治的，国家就不稳固。务必要遍行四蠹、五落、六容、七恶。作事要顺应时机，不顺应或顺应不当，时机就会丧失。
English: Look at the five virtues, six virtues, seven virtues, ten vices, four virtues and four vices, if they are not cultivated, the country will not be stable. It is imperative to practice the four virtues, five vices, six virtues and seven vices. Work should be done according to the opportunity, if it is not done or done improperly, the opportunity will be lost.

古文：呜呼，深念之哉！
现代文：不遵循四蠹五落六容七恶，就不能安定，反而会削弱自己。啊呀!
English: If you don't follow the principles of the Four Noble Truths, Five Harmonies, Six Tolerances, and Seven Evils, you won't be able to maintain stability, but will instead weaken yourself.

古文：重维之哉！
现代文：要深深思念啊，要反复考虑啊。
English: You have to think about it deeply, you have to consider it over and over again.

古文：不深乃权不重，从权乃微，不从乃溃，溃不可复，戒后人其用汝谋。 
现代文：不深思就权力不重。顺从权势能得到安慰，不顺从权势则民众溃散。一旦溃散就不能恢复。 武王说： 善哉!就采用你的谋略。 
English: Without deep reflection, power is not heavy. Obedience to power can be comforted, but without obedience to power, the people are scattered. Once scattered, they cannot be restored. King Wu said: Good! Let's use your strategy.

