古文：楼啎约秦、魏，魏太子为质，纷疆欲败之。
现代文：楼梧使秦、魏两国结成联盟，魏王打算让魏太子到秦国去做人质，纷强想破坏这件事情。
English: Louw made Qin and Wei form an alliance. The Wei king planned to let the Wei prince go to Qin as a hostage, and they all tried to sabotage this.

古文：谓太后曰： 国与还者也，败秦而利魏，魏必负之。
现代文：就去对魏太后说： 国家之间的关系反复无常，如果一件事对秦国有害而对魏国有利，魏国自然要背弃秦国。
English: He went to the Empress Dowager of Wei and said: The relationship between countries is capricious. If one thing is harmful to Qin and beneficial to Wei, Wei will naturally turn its back on Qin.

古文：负秦之日，太子为粪矣。 
现代文：背离秦国的那一天，太子的身价必定卑贱如同粪土了。 
English: On the day of his defection from the Qin state, the prince's status must have been as low as muck.

古文：太后坐王而泣。
现代文：太后让魏王坐下，自己便哭泣起来。
English: The Empress Dowager asked the Wei King to sit down, and she began to cry.

古文：王因疑于太子，令之留于酸枣。
现代文：于是魏王对太子为人貭的事产生了疑虑。
English: As a result, the Wei king had doubts about the crown prince's claim to the throne.

古文：楼子患之。昭衍为周之梁，楼子告之。
现代文：这时，昭衍为周室的事正好来到犬梁，楼梧把魏王不肯让太子做人质的事告诉了他。
English: At this time, the matter of Zhaoyan being Zhou's concubine happened to come to Xiong Liang. Lou Wu told him about Wei Wang's refusal to allow the prince to be a hostage.

古文：昭衍见梁王，梁王曰： 何闻? 
现代文：昭衍来见魏王，魏王说： 听到什么消息了？ 
English: When Zhao Yan came to see Wei Wang, Wei Wang said, "What news have you heard?

古文：曰： 闻秦且伐魏。 
现代文：昭衍说： 听说秦国打算进攻魏国。 
English: Zhao Yan said: I heard that Qin is planning to attack Wei.

古文：王曰： 为期与我约矣。 
现代文：魏王说： 送太子做人质的事已经定好截期了，秦玉与我有约在先。 
English: Wei Wang said: The deadline for sending the crown prince as a hostage has already been set. Qin Yu and I have an appointment.

古文：曰： 秦疑于王之约，以太子留酸枣而不之秦。
现代文：昭衍说： 秦国怀疑大王的信约，因为您把太子留在酸枣不肯让他到秦园去。
English: Zhao Yan said: Qin suspected the king's letter, because you left the prince on the sour jujube and refused to let him go to the Qin Garden.

古文：秦王之计曰： 魏不与我约，必攻我；我与其处而待之见攻，不如先伐之。 
现代文：秦玉曾核讨说： 魏国不与我践约，必定要进攻我；我与其在这里等他们来进攻，不如先去进攻他们。 
English: Qin Yu once said, "If Wei does not honor its treaty with me, it will certainly attack me. Instead of waiting for them to attack here, I should attack them first."

古文：以秦强折节而下与国，臣恐其害于东周。 
现代文：以泰国的强大，改变主意而去联合盟国，我唯恐他们将先取道东周。 
English: With Thailand so powerful, if they change their minds and go with the Allies, I'm afraid they'll go East first.

