古文：○华温琪华温琪，字德润，宋州下邑人也。世本农家。
现代文：华温琪字德润，是宋州下邑人。世世代代本为农家。
English: Hua Wenqi, also known as Derun, is a native of Lower Songzhou. He has been a farmer for generations.

古文：温琪身长七尺。
现代文：华温琪身高七尺。
English: Hua Wenqi is seven feet tall.

古文：少从黄巢为盗，巢陷长安，以温琪为供奉官都知。
现代文：年轻时跟随黄巢做盗贼，黄巢攻陷长安，任命华温琪为供奉官都知。
English: When he was young, he followed Huang Chao as a thief. Huang Chao conquered Chang'an, and appointed Hua Wenqi as the chief of all the officials.

古文：巢败，温琪走滑州，顾其状貌魁伟，惧不自容，乃投白马河，流数十里，不死，河上人援而出之。
现代文：黄巢失败，华温琪逃到滑州，眼看自己相貌魁伟，害怕不能容身，于是自投白马河，漂流了几十里，没有死，河边的人把他从河中救出。
English: The yellow nest failed, and Hua Wenqi fled to Leshou. Seeing his great appearance, he was afraid that he could not contain himself, so he threw himself into the Baima River, drifted for dozens of miles, and did not die. The riverside people rescued him from the river.

古文：又自经于桑林，桑辄枝折。
现代文：又在桑树林中上吊自杀，桑枝折断。
English: He also hanged himself in a mulberry grove, breaking a mulberry branch.

古文：乃之胙县，有田父见之曰： 子状貌堂堂，非常人也！ 
现代文：于是前往胙县，有农夫见到他说： 你相貌堂堂，不是寻常人！ 
English: So he went to Jixian County. A farmer saw him and said, "You're very handsome. You're not an ordinary person!"

古文：乃匿于家。
现代文：于是把他藏在家中。
English: So she hid him in her house.

古文：后岁馀，闻濮州刺史硃裕募士为兵，乃往依之。
现代文：后来过了一年多，听说濮州刺史朱裕招募士兵，于是前去依附他。
English: Later, after more than a year, he heard that Zhu Yu, the governor of Zhangzhou, was recruiting soldiers, so he went to join him.

古文：后事梁，为开道指挥使，累以战功为绛、棣二州刺史。
现代文：后来在梁效力，任开道指挥使，积累战功任绛、棣二州刺史。
English: Later, he served in Liang, was appointed as the commander of the opening of the road, and accumulated military exploits in the history of the two states.

古文：棣州苦河水为患，温琪徙于新州以避之，民赖其利。
现代文：棣州苦于黄河成灾，华温琪迁到新的州以避水患，老百姓靠他得利。
English: Zhangzhou suffered from the Yellow River disaster, Hua Wenqi moved to a new state to avoid floods, and the common people benefited from him.

古文：历齐、晋二州。
现代文：历任齐、晋二州刺史。
English: He has held the same position in succession, and is the longest-serving governor in the history of Jinji Province.

古文：庄宗攻晋州，逾月不能破，梁末帝嘉温琪善守，升晋州为定昌军，以温琪为节度使。
现代文：唐庄宗攻晋州，一个月不能攻破，梁末帝嘉奖华温琪善于坚守，升晋州为定昌军，任命华温琪为节度使。
English: Tang Zhuangzong attacked Jinzhou, but could not break through for a month. Emperor Liang Mudu commended Hua Wenqi for being good at holding out, promoted Jinzhou to the Dingchang Army, and appointed Hua Wenqi as a ceremonial envoy.

古文：坐掠部民妻，为其夫所讼，罢为金吾卫大将军、左龙武统军。
现代文：因为抢占所在地百姓的妻子，被她丈夫告了一状，罢为金吾卫大将军、左龙武统军。
English: Because the wife of the people who occupied the location was sued by her husband, she was dismissed as the general of King Wuwei and the United Army of the Left Dragon.

古文：硃友谦以河中叛附于晋，末帝拜温琪汝州防御使、河中行营排阵使。
现代文：朱友谦据有河中反叛归附晋，梁末帝拜华温琪为汝州防御使、河中行营排阵使。
English: According to Zhu Youqian, the rebels in the middle of the river were annexed to Jin, and Liang Mudi Baihua Wenqi was the defense envoy of Ruzhou and the battalion in the middle of the river.

古文：迁耀州观察留后。
现代文：迁耀州观察留后。
English: After moving to Yaozhou, he stayed for observation.

古文：庄宗灭梁，见温琪，曰： 此为梁守平阳者也。 
现代文：唐庄宗消灭梁，见到华温琪，说： 这就是为梁守平阳的人！ 
English: Tang Zhuangzong annihilated Liang, saw Hua Wenqi, and said: This is the person who guarded Pingyang for Liang!

古文：嘉之，因以耀州为顺义军，拜温琪节度使，徙镇雄武。
现代文：赞赏他，于是以耀州为顺义军，拜华温琪为节度使，移任雄武节度使。
English: Appreciating him, he appointed Yaozhou as the Shunyi army, Baihua Wenqi as the festival envoy, and transferred to the Xiongwu festival envoy.

古文：明宗时来朝，愿留阙下，以为左骁卫上将军。
现代文：唐明宗时来朝见，希望留在京城，任命为左骁卫上将军。
English: When Tang Mingzong came to see the emperor, he hoped to stay in Beijing and was appointed General of the Left Division of Inner Palace Guards.

古文：逾年，明宗谓枢密使安重诲曰： 温琪旧人，宜与一重镇。 
现代文：遇了一年，唐明宗对枢密使安重诲说： 华温琪是老朋友了，该给他一个重镇。 
English: One year passed, Tang Mingzong said to the Privy Councilor An Chong: Hua Wenqi is an old friend, it is time to give him an important town.

古文：重诲意不欲与，对以无员阙。
现代文：安重诲不愿给他，回答说没有缺员。
English: Reluctant to give him any reassurance, he replied that there was no vacancy.

古文：佗日，明宗语又及之，重诲曰： 可代者惟枢密使耳。 明宗曰： 可。 
现代文：有一天，唐明宗又谈到这事，安重诲说： 能替代的职官只有枢密使了。 唐明宗说： 行。 
English: One day, Tang Mingzong talked about the matter again, and An Chong said, "The only officials that can be replaced are the envoys." Tang Mingzong said, "Okay."

古文：重诲不能答。
现代文：安重诲不能作答。
English: I can't answer that.

古文：温琪闻之惧，称疾不出者累月。已而以为镇国军节度使。
现代文：华温琪听说后害怕，有几个月称病不出。不久任命为镇国军节度使。
English: After hearing this, Hua Wenqi was afraid and said that she would not be able to get well for a few months. Soon, she was appointed as the festival envoy of the town's national army.

古文：废帝时，以太子太保致仕。
现代文：唐废帝时，以太子太保辞官退休。
English: When the Tang Dynasty was overthrown, Etsuko Taibo retired from her position as a diplomat.

古文：天福元年卒，赠太子太傅。
现代文：天福元年死，赠太子太傅。
English: Tenpuku died in the first year of the year and was given the title of Prince Taifu.

古文：○苌从简
现代文：苌从简是陈州人。
English: Zou Congjian is a native of Chenzhou.

古文：从简去事晋为军校，力敌数人，善用槊。
现代文：世代以宰羊为生。苌从简离家在晋做军校，力敌数人，擅长使用长矛。
English: For generations, he has made a living from slaughtering sheep. He left home at a young age to attend military school in Jin. He has fought several opponents and is good at using a spear.

古文：庄宗用兵攻城，从简多为梯头，庄宗爱其勇，以功累迁步军都指挥使。
现代文：唐庄宗用兵攻城，苌从简大多为梯头，唐庄宗喜爱他的勇武，因功屡迁至步军都指挥使。
English: Tangzhuangzong besieged the city with his troops, and most of his subordinates were the leaders. Tangzhuangzong loved his bravery, and because of his achievements, he was often transferred to command the infantry.

古文：庄宗与梁军对阵，梁军有执大旗出入阵间者，庄宗登高丘望见之，叹曰： 彼猛士，谁能为我取之者？ 
现代文：唐庄宗和梁军对阵，梁军中有拿着大旗在阵地中出入的人，唐庄宗登上高丘望见那人，感叹说： 那是个猛士，谁能替我夺取他的旗帜呢？ 
English: Tang Zhuozong confronted Liang's army. Among Liang's army, there was a man who marched in and out of his position holding a large flag. Tang Zhuozong climbed the hill to see the man and sighed, "That man is a warrior. Who can capture his flag for me?"

古文：从简因前请往，庄宗惜之，不许。
现代文：苌从简于是上前请求前往，唐庄宗舍不得他，不同意。
English: Zou Congjian then came forward to request to go, Tangzhuangzong could not resist him and did not agree.

古文：从简潜率数骑，驰入梁军，夺其旗而还，军中皆鼓噪，庄宗壮之，赐与甚厚。
现代文：苌从简暗中率领几个骑兵，飞驰奔入梁军阵地，夺下那人的旗子返回，军中都击鼓喧呼，唐庄宗认为他很勇敢，赏赐十分丰厚。
English: He led several cavalrymen from the shadows, galloped into Liang's army position, captured the man's flag and returned. The army was beating drums and shouting. Tang Zhuangzong thought he was very brave and rewarded him very richly.

古文：从简尝中流矢，镞入髀骨，命工取之。
现代文：苌从简曾中飞箭，箭头射入股骨中，令医师取出箭头。
English: The dragonfly shot an arrow from the middle of Jane Zeng, and the arrowhead shot into the femur, causing the doctor to remove the arrowhead.

古文：工无良药，欲凿其骨，人皆以为不可。从简遽使凿之，工迟疑不忍下，从简叱其亟凿，左右视者，皆若不胜其毒，而从简言笑自若。
现代文：医师没有好药，打算凿他的骨头，人们都认为不行苌从简就让他凿骨，医师迟疑不忍下手，苌从简叱令他快凿，手下人见了，都好像受不了这样狠毒的疗法，而苌从筒谈笑自如。
English: The doctor had no good medicine, and planned to chisel his bones. People all thought it was impossible. The doctor hesitated and could not bear to do it, but Jane scolded him and told him to chisel quickly. When his subordinates saw it, they all seemed to be unable to bear such a cruel treatment, but Jane was able to talk and laugh freely.

古文：然其为人刚暴难制，庄宗每屈法优容之。
现代文：但他为人刚烈暴躁难以控制，唐庄宗每每枉法宽容他。
English: However, he was a stubborn and irascible person who was difficult to control. Tangzhuangzong tolerated him in every possible way.

古文：累迁蔡州防御使。
现代文：多次升迁到蔡州防御使。
English: He was promoted to the post of defense attaché of Caizhou several times.

古文：明宗时，历麟、汝、汾、金四州防御使。
现代文：唐明宗时，历任麟、汝、汾、金四州防御使。
English: During the Tang and Ming dynasties, Lin, Ru, Zou and Jin successively served as envoys for the defense of the four states.

古文：明宗尝戒之曰： 富贵可惜，然汝不能守也。
现代文：唐明宗曾告诚他说： 富贵当爱惜，但你却不能保持。
English: Tang Mingzong once said sincerely: "Riches should be cherished, but you can't keep them."

古文：先帝能贷尔，吾恐不能。 
现代文：先帝能宽恕你，我恐怕不能。 
English: If the late emperor could forgive you, I'm afraid I can't.

古文：从简性不可悛，明宗亦不之责。
现代文：苌从简本性难改，唐明宗也不责求他。
English: It is difficult to change one's nature, and Tang Mingzong did not ask him to do so.

古文：废帝举兵于凤翔，从简与诸镇兵围之，已而兵溃，从简东走，被执。
现代文：唐废帝在凤翔举兵，苌从简和各镇军队包围他，不久军队溃散，苌从简柬逃，被抓获。
English: Emperor Gaozong raised an army in Fengxiang, and troops from Jian and other towns surrounded him. The army soon dispersed, and Gaozong fled from Jian and Kham and was captured.

古文：废帝责其不降，从简曰： 事主不敢二心。 
现代文：唐废帝斥责他不投降，苌从简说： 事奉君主不敢有二心。 
English: Emperor Gaozong rebuked him for not surrendering, and Gaozong Jian said, "You dare not be double-minded when serving the sovereign.

古文：废帝释之，拜颍州团练使。
现代文：唐废帝放了他，拜为颖州团练使。
English: Emperor Tang let him go, and he became a drill sergeant for the Yingzhou Regiment.

古文：晋高祖起兵太原，废帝将亲征，召为招讨副使，从至河阳，拜河阳三城节度使。
现代文：晋高祖在太原起兵，唐废帝将亲征，召他为招讨副使，他跟随到河阳，废帝拜授他为河阳三城节度使。
English: Emperor Jin Gao Zu raised an army in Taiyuan. Emperor Taobao personally conscripted him and called him to be a vice envoy for recruitment. He followed Emperor Jin Gao Zu to Kheyang, and Emperor Taobao appointed him as the festival envoy for the three cities of Kheyang.

古文：废帝还洛阳，从简即降晋。历镇忠武、武宁，入为左金吾卫上将军。
现代文：唐废帝返回洛阳，苌从简就向晋投降历任忠武、武宁节镇，入朝为左金吾卫上将军。
English: The deposed emperor of Tang returned to Luoyang, and the successive generals of Zhongwu and Wuning Jie surrendered to Jin from Jian to Jin, and entered the imperial court as General Zuo Jinwu.

古文：卒年六十五，赠太师。
现代文：死时六十五岁，赠太师。
English: He was sixty-five years old at the time of his death.

古文：从简好食人肉，所至多潜捕民间小兒以食。
现代文：苌从简喜好吃人肉，所到之地常暗中收捕民间小孩来吃。
English: Since Jane likes to eat human flesh, she often secretly captures folk children to eat in the places she visits.

古文：许州富人有玉带，欲之而不可得，遣二卒夜入其家，杀而取之。
现代文：许州一富人家有玉带，想得到它却不能，派两个兵晚上去富人家中杀人取玉带。
English: A rich man in Huzhou had a jade belt, but he couldn't get it. He sent two soldiers to the rich man's house at night to kill him and take the jade belt.

古文：因跃出而告之，使其速以带献，遂逾垣而去，不知其所之。
现代文：士兵晚上跳过墙头，隐藏在树丛中，看见那夫妇俩相敬如宾，那两个士兵感叹说： 我公想夺他们的珍宝，而杀这样的人，我们必定逃不脱。 
English: When the soldiers jumped over the wall at night and hid in the bushes and saw the couple, who respected each other as friends, the two soldiers lamented: I really wanted to take their treasures, but killing such a person, we must not escape.

古文：○张筠弟抃张筠，海州人也。
现代文：因而跳出来告诉夫妇俩，让他们赶快献上玉带，接着越墙离去，不知他们去了哪里。张筠是海州人。
English: Therefore, he jumped out and told the couple that they should quickly present the jade belt, and then leave the wall, not knowing where they had gone. Zhang Ye is a native of Haizhou.

古文：世以赀为商贾。
现代文：世代以家资经商。
English: Generations of the family have been involved in business.

古文：筠事节度使时溥为宿州刺史。
现代文：张筠事奉节度使时溥为宿州刺史。
English: Zhang Ye served the festival to make Zhisheng a history of Suzhou.

古文：梁兵攻溥取宿州，得筠，爱其辩惠，以为四镇客将、长直军使，累拜宣徽使。
现代文：梁兵攻打时溥夺取宿州，俘获张筠，喜欢他善辩聪慧，任为四镇客将、长直军使，屡经升迁为宣徽使。
English: When Liang's soldiers attacked, Zou captured Shuzhou and captured Zhang Xuan. He liked Zhang Xuan's eloquence and cleverness. He was appointed as the guest general of four towns, the envoy of Chang Zhi, and the envoy of Xuan Hui.

古文：末帝分相、澶、卫三州为昭德军，以筠为节度使，由是魏博军叛附于晋。
现代文：梁末帝分相、澶、卫三州为昭德军，任命张筠为节度使，由于这个原因魏博军反叛归附于晋。
English: Emperor Liangmuei divided the Three Provinces of Zhao, Zhou, and Wei into the Zhao German Army and appointed Zhang Ye as the commander of the army. For this reason, the Wei Bo Army rebelled and attached itself to Jin.

古文：晋王攻相州，筠弃城走。
现代文：晋王攻取相州，张筠弃城逃跑。
English: Jin Wang captured Xiangzhou, Zhang Ye abandoned the city and fled.

古文：后以为永平军节度使。
现代文：后来被任命为永平军节度使。
English: Later, he was appointed as the Yongping Army's envoy to the Qing Dynasty.

古文：梁亡事唐，仍为京兆尹。
现代文：梁灭亡后事奉唐，仍然仟京兆尹。
English: After Liang's death, he served the Tang Dynasty and continued to support Jing Zhaoyun.

古文：从郭崇韬伐蜀，为剑南两川安抚使。
现代文：随郭崇韬伐蜀，为剑南两川安抚使。
English: He followed Guo Chongyi to Shu and became the pacifying envoy for the two rivers in southern Jian.

古文：蜀平，拜河南尹，徙镇兴元。
现代文：蜀平定后，拜为河南尹，移任兴元节度使。
English: After Shu was pacified, Bai became Henan Yin and was transferred to the Xingyuan Festival envoy.

古文：筠尝有疾，不见将吏，副使符彦琳入问疾，筠又辞不见。
现代文：张筠曾患病，不见将吏，副使符彦琳进来探病，张筠又推辞不见。
English: Zhang Xuan had been ill, but there were no officers to be seen. Deputy envoy Fu Yanlin came to investigate the illness, but Zhang Xuan did not reply.

古文：彦琳疑筠已死，即请出牌印。
现代文：符彦琳怀疑张筠已死，就请求交出牌印。
English: Fuhianlin suspected that Zhang Yao was dead and asked him to hand over his license.

古文：筠怒，命左右收彦琳下狱，以其反闻。
现代文：张筠发怒，令手下人收捕符彦琳投入狱中，以反叛的罪名上报。
English: Zhang Ye became angry and ordered his subordinates to arrest Fu Yanlin and put her in prison, charging her with rebellion.

古文：明宗知彦琳无反状，召彦琳释之，阳徙筠为西京留守，戒守者不内，筠至长安不得入，乃朝京师，以为左骁卫上将军。
现代文：唐明宗知道符彦琳没有反叛，召符彦淋并放了他，假装调任张筠任西京留守，诫令守城门的人不让进城，张筠到长安不能进去，于是朝拜京师，被任命为左骁卫上将军。
English: Tang Mingzong knew that Fuhianlin did not rebel, summoned Fuhianlin and released him, pretended to transfer Zhang Xuan to stay in West Beijing, ordered the gatekeepers not to enter the city, and Zhang Xuan could not enter Chang'an, so he paid homage to the Beijing division and was appointed General of the Left Division of the Imperial Guard.

古文：筠弟抃，当筠为京兆尹时，以为牙内指挥使、三白渠营田制置使。
现代文：张筠的弟弟张钟，当张筠任京兆尹时，被任命为牙内指挥使、三白渠营田制置使。
English: Zhang Rong's younger brother, Zhang Zhong, when Zhang Rong was appointed as the Jing Zhaoyun, was appointed as the commander of the inner canal and the commander of the Sanbai Canal.

古文：筠西伐蜀，留抃守京兆。
现代文：张筠西伐蜀，留张铸守京兆。
English: Zhang Jixi felled Shu, leaving Zhang Jizhong to keep the capital.

古文：蜀平，魏王继岌班师，至兴平，而明宗自魏起，京师大乱，抃乃断咸阳浮桥以拒继岌，继岌乃自杀。
现代文：蜀平定后，魏王李继岌回师，到达兴平，而唐明宗从魏州起兵，京师大乱，张签就截断咸阳浮桥抗拒李继岌，李继岌于是自杀。
English: After Shu was pacified, the Wei king Li Jizhong returned to the division and arrived in Xingping, while the Tang Mingzong raised an army from Weizhou, the Beijing division rioted, Zhang Jian cut off the Xianyang floating bridge to resist Li Jizhong, Li Jizhong then committed suicide.

古文：初，筠代康怀英为永平军节度使，而怀英死，筠即掠其家赀。
现代文：当初，张筠代康怀英任永平军节度使，而康怀英一死，张筠就掠夺他的家产。
English: At the beginning, Zhang Ye was appointed as the military governor of Yongping Army on behalf of Kang Huaiying, but as soon as Kang Huaiying died, Zhang Ye plundered his family property.

古文：又于唐故宫掘地，多得金玉。
现代文：又在唐的旧宫挖掘，得到很多金玉。
English: He also excavated in the old palace of Tang and obtained a lot of gold and jade.

古文：有偏将侯莫陈威者，尝与温韬发唐诸陵，分得宝货，筠因以事杀威而取之。
现代文：有个偏将侯莫陈威，曾和温韬发掘唐的各座陵墓，分得财宝，张筠因而藉事杀掉侯莫陈威而夺取财宝。
English: There was a partial general Hou Mo Chenwei, who had excavated all the mausoleums of the Tang Dynasty with Wen Xuan, and had divided the treasure, so Zhang Xuan killed Hou Mo Chenwei and seized the treasure.

古文：魏王继岌死渭南，抃悉取其行橐。
现代文：魏王李继岌死在渭南，张箩夺取他的全部行李。
English: When the Wei king Li Jie died in southern Fujian, Zhang Ye seized all of his luggage.

古文：而王衍自蜀行至秦川，庄宗遣宦者向延嗣杀之，延嗣因尽得衍蜀中珍宝。
现代文：而王衍从蜀到达秦川，唐庄宗派宦官向延嗣杀掉他，向延嗣乘机得到王衍在蜀中的全部珍宝。
English: However, when Wang Yan arrived in Qinchuan from Shu, the eunuchs of the Tangzhuang sect killed him and took advantage of the opportunity to get all of Wang Yan's treasures in Shu.

古文：明宗即位，即遣人捕诛宦者，延嗣亡命，而蜀之珍宝抃又取之。
现代文：唐明宗登位，随即派人捕捉诛杀宦官，向延嗣逃命，而蜀地珍宝又被张锾夺取。
English: Tang Mingzong ascended to the throne, and immediately sent people to capture the eunuch who killed the eunuch, fled to Yan Zi, and the treasure of Shu was seized by Zhang Ye.

古文：由是兄弟赀皆巨万。
现代文：因此兄弟两人的家资都上万数。
English: As a result, the family assets of both brothers are in the tens of thousands.

古文：然筠为人好施予，以其富，故所至不为聚敛，民赖以安。
现代文：但张筠为人喜好施舍，因他很富有，因此所到之地不聚敛财富，百姓靠此安定。
English: However, Zhang Ye liked to give alms to people, because he was very rich. Therefore, he did not accumulate wealth in the places he visited, and the people relied on this for stability.

古文：而抃嗜酒贪鄙，历沂、密二州刺史。
现代文：而张镂嗜酒贪婪鄙陋，历任沂、密二州刺史。
English: Zhang Ye, on the other hand, was an alcoholic, greedy and despicable, and his successors, Zou and Mi Erzhou, are history.

古文：晋出帝时，以将军市马于回鹘，坐马不中式，有司理其价直，抃性鄙，因郁郁而卒。
现代文：晋出帝时，带领军队到回鹳买马，因为马不合要求，官府审查马的价钱，张钱性格贪鄙，因此郁郁而死。
English: When he was promoted to emperor, he led the army to buy a horse from Huizhou, because the horse did not meet the requirements, the government reviewed the price of the horse, Zhang Qian's character was greedy, so he died depressed.

古文：筠居洛阳，拥其赀，以酒色声妓自娱足者十馀年，人谓之 地仙。 
现代文：张筠住在洛阳，拥有巨额家资，以酒色声妓自娱自乐多年，人们称他为 地仙 。
English: Zhang Rong lives in Luoyang, has a huge family fortune, and has been entertaining himself with wine-colored so-called prostitutes for many years. People call him the Earth Immortal.

古文：天福二年，徙居长安。
现代文：天福二年，移居长安。
English: Two years after Tianfu, he moved to Chang'an.

古文：是岁，张从宾作乱，入洛阳，筠遂以免。
现代文：这年，张从宾作乱，进入洛阳，张筠因而幸免。
English: In this year, Zhang Zengpin caused a riot and entered Luoyang, but Zhang Ye was spared.

古文：卒，赠太子太师。
现代文：死后，赠太子少师。
English: After his death, he was given the title of crown prince.

古文：呜呼，五代反者多矣，吾于明宗独难其辞。
现代文：唉，五代反叛的人很多了，我对于唐明宗惟独难以评价！
English: Alas, there are many people who have rebelled for five generations, and I find it difficult to evaluate the Tang and Ming dynasties.

古文：至于魏王继岌薨，然后终其事也。
现代文：直至魏王李继岌死，然后唐明宗纔完成自己的帝业。
English: Until the Wei King Li Ji died suddenly, and then Tang Ming Zongqi completed his imperial career.

古文：庄宗遇弑，继岌以元子握重兵，死于外而不得立，此大事也，而前史不书其所以然。
现代文：唐庄宗被杀，李继岌以嫡长子身份手握重兵，死在外面而没能登位，这是件大事，而以前的史书不记载为什么会这样。
English: Tang Zhuangzong was killed, and Li Jizhe, as the eldest son, took the lead in leading the troops, and died outside and failed to ascend to the throne. This was a major event, and previous history books did not record why this was so.

古文：夫继岌之存亡，于张抃无所利害，抃何为而拒之不使之东乎？
现代文：李继岌的死活，对张签没有什么利害关系，张钟为什么要抗拒他不让他束进呢？
English: Li Jizhe's life and death, he has no interest in Zhang Jie, why would Zhang Zhong resist him and not let him enter?

古文：岂其有所使而为之乎？
现代文：难道他受到指使纔这样做吗？
English: Had he been ordered to do so?

古文：然明宗于符彦超深以为德，而待抃无所厚，此其又可疑也。
现代文：然而唐明宗对符彦超深深感激，而对张镂没有什么优待，这又是可疑的事。
English: However, it is doubtful that Tang Mingzong is deeply grateful to Fuhiko Chao and does not give any preferential treatment to Zhang Ye.

古文：不然，好乱之臣，望风而飨应乎？
现代文：要不然，是軎好作乱的臣子，观望风声而响应吗？
English: Otherwise, is it the courtiers who are eager to make trouble, wait for the wind and respond?

古文：使抃不断浮桥，而继岌得以兵东，明宗未必能自立。
现代文：假使张笺不截断浮桥，而李继岌得以率兵束进，唐明宗就未必能够登位。
English: If Zhang Ye did not cut off the pontoon bridge, and Li Jizhe was able to march in with his troops, Tang Mingzong would not necessarily be able to ascend to the throne.

古文：则继岌之死，由抃之拒，其所系者岂小哉！
现代文：那么李继岌的死，出于张钱的抗拒，他所关联的事难道还小吗！
English: So Li Jizhe's death, due to Zhang Qian's resistance, is he related to a small matter?

古文：○杨彦询杨彦询，字成章，河中宝鼎人也。
现代文：杨彦询字成章，是河中宝鼎人。
English: Yang Yanyan's inquiry is complete, and he is the most valuable person in the river.

古文：少事青州王师范，师范好学，聚书万卷，使彦询掌之。
现代文：年轻时事奉青州王师范，王师范好学，藏书万卷，让杨彦询管理。
English: When he was young, he served Wang Shifan of Qingzhou. Wang Shifan was eager to learn and had a large collection of books, which Yang Yancheng managed.

古文：彦询为人聪悟，遂见亲信。
现代文：杨彦询为人聪颖通达，于是受到亲近信任。
English: Yang Yancheng is an intelligent and well-informed person, so he is trusted by his relatives.

古文：师范降梁，后见杀，彦询无所归，乃之魏，事杨师厚为客将。
现代文：王师范向梁投降，后来被杀，杨彦询无所归依，于是到魏州，事奉杨师厚任客将。
English: Wang Shifan surrendered to Liang and was later killed. Yang Yancheng had nowhere to turn, so he went to Weizhou to serve Yang Shihou as a guest general.

古文：魏博叛梁入于晋，彦询因留事晋。
现代文：魏博背叛梁归入晋，杨彦询因而留下事奉晋。
English: Wei Bo betrayed Liang to join the Jin, and Yang Yancheng stayed behind to serve the Jin.

古文：庄宗灭梁，以彦询为引进副使，奉使吴、蜀，常称旨。
现代文：唐庄宗灭梁，任命杨彦询为引进副使，杨彦询奉命出使昊、蜀，常常符合旨意。
English: Tangzhuangzong Zhaoliang appointed Yang Yancheng as the vice-envoy of introduction, and Yang Yancheng was ordered to dispatch Hao and Shu, which often met the intention.

古文：历德州刺史、羽林将军晋高祖镇太原，废帝疑其有贰志，择诸将之谨厚者佐之，乃以彦询为太原节度副使。
现代文：历任德州刺史、羽林将军。晋高祖镇守太原，唐废帝怀疑他有二心，挑选恭谨忠厚的将领辅佐他，于是任杨彦询为太原节度副使。
English: Successively serving as the general of Dezhou, Ulin, and Jin Gao, Zhu Zhen guarded Taiyuan. Emperor Tang suspected that he was double-minded and selected respectful and loyal generals to assist him, so he appointed Yang Yanxun as the deputy envoy of the Taiyuan Festival.

古文：其后晋高祖以疑见徙，欲拒命不行，以问彦询，彦询不敢正言，因曰： 太原之力，能与唐敌否？
现代文：后来晋高祖因受到怀疑被调任，想要拒命不去，拿这事询问杨彦询，杨彦询不敢正面回答，就说： 太原的实力，能和唐抗衡吗？
English: Later, Shingozu was transferred due to suspicion, and he wanted to refuse the order not to go, so he asked Yang Yancheng about this. Yang Yancheng did not dare to answer positively, so he said: Can Taiyuan's strength compete with Tang?

古文：公其审计之！ 
现代文：您自己考虑吧！ 
English: Think about it yourself!

古文：高祖反意已决，彦询亦不复敢言。
现代文：晋高祖反叛的主意已打定，杨彦询也不敢再说。
English: The idea of Jinko rebels has been set, and Yang Yancheng does not dare to say it again.

古文：高祖左右以彦询异议，欲杀之，高祖遽止之，曰： 惟副使一人，我自保之。 
现代文：晋高祖手下人因杨彦询有不同意见，想杀掉他，晋高祖急忙制止他们，说： 只有副使一人，我自愿担保他。 
English: As a result of Yang Yanyan's inquiry, Jinguo Zu's subordinates had different opinions and wanted to kill him. Jinguo Zu hurriedly stopped them, saying, "There is only one vice-envoy, and I am willing to vouch for him."

古文：乃免。
现代文：纔幸免。
English: I was spared.

古文：是时，高祖乞兵于契丹，契丹耶律德光立高祖于太原，以兵送至河上。
现代文：这时，晋高祖向契丹求兵，契丹耶律德光在太原册立晋高祖，率兵送到黄河边。
English: At this time, Jin Gaozu appealed to Khitan for soldiers. Khitan Yerutdeguang set up Jin Gaozu in Taiyuan and led the soldiers to the Yellow River.

古文：彦询为宣徽使，数往来虏帐中，德光亦爱其为人。
现代文：杨彦询任宣徽使，多次在敲帐中出入，耶律德光也喜欢他的为人。
English: Yang Yan enquired to be appointed as the heraldic envoy, and went in and out of knocking accounts many times. Yelu Deguang also liked him as a person.

古文：明年，拜威德军节度使，复入为宣徽使，又拜安国军节度使。
现代文：第二年，拜为感德军节度使，又入朝为宣徽使，又拜安国军节度使。
English: In the second year, he was sent to the German Army Festival as an envoy, to the Imperial Court as an envoy for the proclamation of the Imperial Emblem, and to the Korean People's Army Festival as an envoy.

古文：天福七年，徙镇镇国，遭岁大饥，为政有惠爱。
现代文：天福七年，改镇国节度使，碰上大饥荒年，为政对百姓有恩惠。
English: In the seventh year of Tianfu, the town and country festivals were changed, and in the year of the great famine, the people were favored by the government.

古文：以病风罢为右金吾卫上将军。
现代文：因患风湿病罢为右金吾街上将军。
English: Due to suffering from rheumatism, he retired as the general of the Right Kingu Street.

古文：卒年七十四，赠太子太师。
现代文：死时年七十四岁，赠太子太师。
English: He was seventy-four years old at the time of his death, and was given the title of Crown Prince and Grand Master.

古文：○李周李周，字通理，邢州内丘人，唐昭义军节度使抱真之后也。
现代文：李周字通理，是邢州内丘人，唐昭童泾节度使李抱真的后代。
English: Li Zhou Zi Tong Li is a descendant of Li Bozhong, a native of Neizhou, who was a descendant of Tang Zhaotong.

古文：父矩，遭世乱不仕，尝谓周曰： 邯鄣用武之地，今世道未平，汝当从军旅以兴吾门。 
现代文：父亲李矩，遭逢乱世不做官，曾对李周说： 邯郫是用兵打仗的地方，如今世道不平，你应从军以振兴我们家族。 
English: His father, Li Rui, who was forced to retire from the government due to the turmoil of the times, once said to Li Zhou: "We are a place where soldiers fight wars. Today, the world is unequal. You should join the army to revitalize our family.

古文：周年十六，为内丘捕贼将，以勇闻。
现代文：李周十六岁时为内丘捕贼将，以勇敢闻名。
English: At the age of sixteen, Li Zhou was a thief-catcher in the Inner Hill and was famous for his bravery.

古文：是时，梁、晋兵争山东，群盗充斥道路，行者必以兵卫。
现代文：这时，梁、晋军队争夺山东，盗贼们充斥道路，出行的人必须以兵器自卫。
English: At this time, the Liang and Jin armies were fighting for Shandong, thieves were flooding the roads, and travelers had to defend themselves with weapons.

古文：内丘人卢岳将徙家太原，舍逆旅，傍徨不敢进，周意怜之，为送至西山。
现代文：内丘入卢岳将要迁家到太原，住在旅舍中，彷徨不敢前行，李周可怜他，把他送到西山。
English: Neiqiu into Luyue will move to Taiyuan, live in a hostel, and hesitate to move forward. Li Zhou took pity on him and sent him to Xishan.

古文：有盗从林中射岳，中其马，周大呼曰： 吾在此，孰敢尔邪？ 
现代文：有个盗贼从树林中用箭射卢岳，射中了他的马，李周大叫道： 我在这里，谁敢这样？ 
English: A thief shot Lu Yue with an arrow from the woods and hit his horse. Li Zhouda shouted: I'm here, who would dare to do this?

古文：盗闻其声，曰： 此李周也。 
现代文：盗贼听见他的声音，说： 这是李周。 
English: The thief heard his voice and said, "This is Li Zhou."

古文：因各溃去。
现代文：于是各自散去。
English: So they went their separate ways.

古文：周送岳至太原，岳谓之曰： 吾少学星历，且工相人。
现代文：李周送卢岳到太原，卢岳对他说： 我年轻时学星象历法，而且擅长相面。
English: Li Zhou sent Lu Yue to Taiyuan. Lu Yue said to him: When I was young, I learned the astrological calendar, and I am good at the phase.

古文：子方颐隆准，眉目疏彻，身长七尺，真将相也。
现代文：你的长相方脸形高鼻梁，眉目疏朗，身高七尺，确实是将相的面相。
English: Your square-shaped face with a high nose bridge, sparse eyes and height of seven feet is indeed the face of a pharaoh.

古文：吾占天象，晋必有天下，子宜留事晋，以图富贵。 
现代文：我占卜天象，晋必定据有天下，你应留下事奉晋，以求富贵。 
English: I divined from the celestial elephant that you will certainly rule the world, and you should stay and serve the emperor in order to seek wealth.

古文：周以母老辞归。
现代文：李周以母亲年老辞别回去。
English: Li Zhou took her mother's old age as an excuse not to return.

古文：是时，梁遣葛从周攻下邢、洺，晋王栅兵青山口，周未知所归，乃思岳言，至青山归晋，晋王以周为万胜黄头军使。
现代文：这时，梁派葛从周攻克邢、沼二州，晋王在青山口筑栅寨驻兵，李周不知该去哪里，纔想起卢岳的话，到青山归附晋，晋王任命李周为万胜黄头军使。
English: At this time, Liang sent Ge from Zhou to conquer Kunlun and Numa Erzhou, and the King of Jin built a fence and stationed troops at the mouth of Qingshan Mountain. Li Zhou did not know where to go, but when he thought of Lu Yue, he went to Qingshan to join Jin. The King of Jin appointed Li Zhou as the victorious Huangdu military envoy.

古文：后从征伐常有功。
现代文：后来跟随征伐常常立功。
English: Later, following the conquest, they often made meritorious contributions.

古文：从战柏乡，先登，迁匡霸指挥使，守杨刘。
现代文：跟随在柏乡作战，首先登城，升为匡霸指挥使，驻守杨刘。
English: Following the battle in Baoxiang, he first went to the city and was promoted to the commanding officer of Kuangba, stationed in Yang Liu.

古文：周为将甚勇，其于用兵，善守，能与士卒同甘苦。
现代文：李周作为将领很勇敢，他对于用兵，善于防守，能和士兵同甘共苦。
English: As a general, Li Zhou was very brave. He was good at using soldiers, good at defense, and able to share the joys and sorrows with soldiers.

古文：梁兵攻周，周坚守。
现代文：梁兵进攻李周，李周坚守。
English: Liang soldiers attacked Li Zhou, and Li Zhou held firm.

古文：久之，周闻母丧奔归，庄宗遣佗将代周守，几为梁兵所破，庄宗遽追周还守之，乃得不破。
现代文：过了很久，李周获知母亲去世，回家奔丧，唐庄宗派别的将领代替李周把守，几乎为梁兵攻破，唐庄宗于是追李周回来坚守，纔得以不被攻破。
English: After a long time, Li Zhou learned of his mother's death and went home to mourn. The generals of the Tangzhuang sect faction took the place of Li Zhou and almost defeated Liang's soldiers. Tangzhuangzong then chased Li Zhou back and held on, so that he could not be defeated.

古文：其后梁人已破德胜，因东击杨刘，以巨舰绝河，断晋饷援。
现代文：后来梁人攻破德胜后，趁机束攻杨刘，用巨舰隔绝黄河，截断晋的军饷供应。
English: Later, after Liang people defeated Desheng, they took advantage of the opportunity to attack Yang Liu, cut off the Yellow River with a huge ship, and cut off the supply of military supplies from Jin.

古文：周遣人驰趋庄宗求救，请日行百里以赴急，庄宗笑曰： 周为我守，何忧！ 
现代文：李周派人驰马奔赴唐庄宗求救，请求每天行军一百里奔赴急难，唐庄宗笑着说： 李周替我坚守，担忧什么！ 
English: Li Zhou sent someone to gallop to Tangzhuangzong to ask for help, requesting that the army march a hundred miles every day to rush to the emergency. Tangzhuangzong smiled and said: Li Zhou will stick to me, what are you worried about!

古文：日行六十里，且行且猎，曰： 周非梁将可敌也。 
现代文：每天行军六十里，一面走一面打猎，说： 李周不是梁将能对付的。 
English: He marched sixty miles every day, hunting as he went, and said, "Li Zhou is no match for Liang Zheng."

古文：比至，周已绝粮三日。
现代文：等赶到时，李周已断粮三天。
English: By the time they arrived, Li Zhou had been without food for three days.

古文：庄宗以巨筏积薪沃油，顺流纵火焚梁舰，梁兵解去。
现代文：唐庄宗用大木筏堆上柴草浇上油，顺流而下放火焚烧梁舰，梁兵解围散去。
English: Tang Zhuangzong poured oil on the pile of firewood and grass with a large wooden spade, set fire to the beam ship downstream, and the beam soldiers dispersed.

古文：庄宗见周劳曰： 微公，诸将为梁擒矣！ 
现代文：唐庄宗见到李周慰劳说： 要不是你，将领们就被梁军擒去了！ 
English: Tang Zhuangzong saw Li Zhou's consolation and said: If it were not for you, the generals would have been captured by Liang Jun!

古文：历相、蔡二州刺史。
现代文：李周历任相、蔡二州刺史。
English: Li Zhou served as prime minister, and Cai Erzhou became prime minister.

古文：明宗时，拜武信军节度使，徙镇静难，历武宁、安远、永兴、宣武四镇，所至多善政。
现代文：唐明宗时，拜为武信军节度使，改任静难节度使，历任武宁、安逮、永兴、宣武四镇，所到之地多善政。
English: During the Tang and Ming Dynasties, he served as the festival envoy of the Wuxin Army, and was appointed as the festival envoy of the Jingnan Army. He successively served in the four towns of Wu Ning, An Fang, Yongxing, and Xuanwu. The places he visited were mostly good governance.

古文：晋高祖时，复镇静难，罢还。
现代文：晋高祖时，又镇静难，罢官回家。
English: When he was promoted to Gaozu, it was difficult for him to calm down, and he was dismissed and went home.

古文：出帝幸澶渊，以周留守东京，还，拜开封尹。
现代文：晋出帝到达澶渊，派李周臼守束京，返回，拜为开封尹。
English: The emperor of Jin Dynasty arrived at Qianyuan, sent Li Zhouwu to guard Sokjing, and returned to pay homage to Kaifeng Yin.

古文：卒年七十四，赠太师。
现代文：死时七十四岁，赠太师。
English: He was seventy-four years old at the time of his death.

古文：○刘处让刘处让，字德谦，沧州人也。
现代文：刘处让字德谦，是沧州人。
English: Liu, who goes by the name of Deqian, is from Cangzhou.

古文：少为张万进亲吏，万进入梁，为泰宁军节度使，以处让为牙将。万进叛梁附晋，梁遣刘鄩讨之。万进遣处让求救于晋，晋王方与梁相拒，未能出兵，处让乃于军门截耳而诉曰： 万进所以见围者，以附晋故也，奈何不顾其急？
现代文：年轻时是张万进亲近的官吏，张万进入梁，任泰宁军节度使，以刘处让为牙将张万进背叛梁归附晋，梁派刘郡讨伐他张万进派刘处让向晋求救，晋王正和梁军相对抗，役能出兵，刘处让于是在车门前割下耳朵陈诉说： 张万进之所以被围，是因为归附普，怎么不管他的危急呢？
English: When he was young, he was an official close to Zhang Wanjin. Zhang Wan entered Liang, appointed as the commander of the Taining Army, and used Liu Duan to betray Zhang Wanjin to Liang to join Jin. Liang sent Liu County to fight him. Zhang Wanjin sent Liu Duan to Jin for help. Jin Wang was fighting against Liang's army and was able to send troops. Liu Duan then cut off Zhang Wanjin's ear in front of the car door and said: Zhang Wanjin was surrounded because he joined Pu. How could he not care about his critical situation?

古文：苟不出兵，愿请死！ 
现代文：如果不出兵，希望求得一死。 
English: If you don't join the army, I hope you die.

古文：晋王壮之，曰： 义士也！ 
现代文：晋王认为他很豪壮，说： 义士啊！ 
English: Jin Wang thought he was very brave and said, "What a righteous man!

古文：为之发兵。未渡河，而万进为梁兵所败，处让因留事晋。
现代文：为他出兵，还没渡过黄河，而张万进已被梁兵打败，刘处让于是留下为晋效力。
English: Zhang Wanjin had not yet crossed the Yellow River when soldiers were sent to fight for him, but Zhang Wanjin had already been defeated by Liang soldiers. Liu Shide then left to serve Jin.

古文：庄宗即位，为客省使，常使四方，多称旨。
现代文：唐庄宗登位，刘处让任客省使，常常出使四方，大多符合旨意。
English: Tangzhuangzong ascended to the throne, Liu Chengde appointed guest provincial envoys, and often sent envoys to the four directions, most of which were in line with the will.

古文：天成中，迁引进使，累迁左骁卫大将军。
现代文：天成中，升任引进使，屡次升迁左骁卫大将军。
English: At Tiancheng Middle School, he was promoted to the post of envoy of introduction, and was repeatedly promoted to General Zuo Wei.

古文：废帝时，魏州军乱，逐其帅刘延皓，遣范延光招讨，以处让为河北都转运使。
现代文：唐废帝时，魏州军作乱，驱逐将帅刘延皓，派范延光招讨，以刘处让为黄河北都转运使。
English: When the Tang Dynasty was overthrown, the Weizhou army made a riot, expelled the general Liu Yanqi, sent Fan Yanguang to appeal, and made Liu the transfer envoy for the northern part of the Yellow River.

古文：晋高祖立，历宣徽南院使。
现代文：晋高祖登位，刘处让历任宣徽南院使。
English: Emperor Gaozong ascended to the throne, and Liu sent successive envoys to the Southern Yuan Dynasty.

古文：范延光反，高祖命杨光远为招讨使，以处让参其军事。
现代文：范延光反叛，晋高祖命杨光速任招讨使，任刘处让参谋军事。
English: Fan Yanguang rebelled and was promoted to high priest. Yang Guanghui was quickly appointed as envoy, and Liu Shide was appointed as military staff officer.

古文：已而副招讨使张从宾叛于河阳，处让分兵击破从宾。
现代文：不久副招讨使张从宣在周阳反叛，刘处让分兵攻破张从宾。
English: Zhang Congxuan soon rebelled in Zhouyang, and Liu sent a detachment of soldiers to defeat Zhang Congbin.

古文：还，与光远攻鄴，逾年不能下。
现代文：回军，和杨光速攻打邺都，一年多不能攻克。
English: Returning to the army, he and Yang Guang quickly attacked and defeated Shidu, but could not conquer it for more than a year.

古文：其后延光有降意而迟疑，处让入城，譬以祸福，延光乃出降。
现代文：后来范延光有投降的想法而又迟疑不决，刘处让进城，用祸福利害开导他，范延光于是出来投降。
English: Later, Fan Yanguang had the idea of surrendering but hesitated. Liu Duzhen let him enter the city and enlightened him with the benefits and harms. Fan Yanguang then came out to surrender.

古文：唐制，枢密使常以宦者为之，自梁用敬翔、李振，至庄宗始用武臣，而权重将相，高祖时，以宰相桑维翰、李崧兼枢密使，处让与诸宦者心不平之。
现代文：唐的制度，枢密使常常以宦官担任，自从梁用敬翔、李振，到唐庄宗纔开始以武臣担任，权势超过将相。晋高祖时，以宰相桑维翰、李崧兼任枢密使，刘处让和宦官们对此心怀不满。
English: In the Tang Dynasty system, envoys often served as eunuchs. From Liang Ying Jianxiang and Li Zhen to Tang Zhuang Zongyi, envoys served as vassals, with more power than generals. When Emperor Gaozhu was promoted to the throne, the prime minister, Sun Weihan, and Li Jie also served as envoys. Liu Chengzhan and the eunuchs were dissatisfied with this.

古文：光远之讨延光也，以晋重兵在己掌握，举动多骄恣，其所求请，高祖颇裁抑之。
现代文：杨光速讨伐范延光，因为晋的重兵掌握在自己手中，举动十分骄横放肆，他请求的事，晋高祖颇有删减压制。
English: Yang Guanghong quickly defeated Fan Yanguang, because Jin's heavy army was in his own hands, his actions were very arrogant and presumptuous, and what he asked for, Jin Gaozu had a lot of suppression and suppression.

古文：处让为光远言： 此非上意，皆维翰、崧等嫉公耳！ 
现代文：刘处让对杨光速说： 这不是皇上的意思，都是因为桑维翰、李崧等人妒忌你而已！ 
English: Liu Shanzhang said to Yang Guanghui, "This is not the emperor's intention, it's all because San Weihan, Li Xuan and others are jealous of you!"

古文：光远大怒。
现代文：杨光远大怒。
English: Yang Guangyuan was furious.

古文：及兵罢，光远见高祖，诉以维翰等沮己，高祖不得已，罢维瀚等，以处让为枢密使。
现代文：罢兵后，杨光远见晋高祖，申诉桑维翰等人败坏自己，晋高祖迫不得已，罢免桑维瀚等人，任刘处让为枢密使。
English: After the military strike, Yang Guang foresaw the promotion of Gaozhu, complained that San Weihan and others had corrupted themselves, and the promotion of Gaozhu had no choice but to dismiss San Weihan and others, and appointed Liu Shide as a confidential envoy.

古文：处让在职，凡所陈述，多不称旨。
现代文：刘处让在职，大凡陈述的事情，多不符合旨意。
English: Liu Jingzhang is still in office, and the things that are commonly reported are mostly not in line with the will.

古文：处让丁母忧，高祖遂不复拜枢密使，以其印付中书而废其职。
现代文：刘处让为母亲服丧，晋高祖就不再授他任枢密使，把枢密使的官印交给中书，废除了枢密使的职位。
English: When Liu sent his mother into mourning, Emperor Gaozong no longer appointed him as a Privy Counsellor, and gave the official seal of the Privy Counsellor to the Chinese government, abolishing the post of the Privy Counsellor.

古文：处让居丧期年，起复为彰德军节度使、右金吾卫上将军。
现代文：刘处让居丧一年，复官，又任彰德军节度使、右金吾卫上将军。
English: Liu resigned his post after a year of mourning and was reinstated. He was also appointed as the military attaché to the German army and the right-hand king of Wei.

古文：以疾卒，年六十三，累赠太师。
现代文：因病而死，六十三岁，累赠太师。
English: He died of illness at the age of 63 and was posthumously awarded the title of Grand Master.

古文：○李承约李承约，字德俭，蓟门人也。
现代文：李承约字德俭，蓟闩人。
English: Li Chengyo is known as a man of thrift and frugality.

古文：少事刘仁恭，为山后八军巡检使，将骑兵二千人。
现代文：年轻时事奉刘仁恭，任山后八军巡检使，统领骑兵二干人。
English: When he was young, he served Liu Rengong, and was appointed as the patrol inspector of the eight armies behind the mountain, commanding two cavalrymen.

古文：仁恭为其子守光所囚，承约以其骑兵奔晋，晋王以为匡霸指挥使。
现代文：刘仁恭被他的儿子刘守光拘囚。李承约率领他的骑兵逃奔到晋，晋王任命他为匡霸指挥使。
English: Liu Rengong was taken prisoner by his son Liu Shuguang. Li Chengyu led his cavalry to flee to Jin, and the King of Jin appointed him as the commanding officer of the Kuangba.

古文：从破夹寨，战临清，以功累迁洺汾二州刺史、颍州团练使。
现代文：跟随晋王攻破夹寨，在临清打仗，因功多次升任沼、汾二州刺史、绩州团练使。
English: He followed Jin Wang to break through the encirclement, fought in Linqing, and was promoted to the post of Numa, Jian Erzhou Sashishi, and Zhezhou Rehearsal Envoy many times for his merits.

古文：天成中，邠州节度使毛璋有异志，明宗拜承约泾州节度副使，使往伺璋动静。
现代文：天成年问，郇州节度使毛璋有二心，唐明宗拜授李承约为泾州节度副使，派他前去窥伺毛璋的动静。
English: When asked by Tian Rongcheng, the Bozhou Festival made Mao Yao have two hearts, Tang Mingzong asked Li Chengyong to be the deputy envoy of the Bozhou Festival and sent him to spy on the movement of Mao Yao.

古文：承约见璋，谕以祸福。
现代文：李承约见到毛璋，用祸福利害开导他。
English: Li Chengyu met Mao Yao, and enlightened him with woe, benefit and harm.

古文：后明宗遣人代璋，璋即时受代。
现代文：后来唐明宗派人代替毛璋，毛璋实时接受了。
English: Later, the Tang and Ming Dynasties sent someone to replace Mao Kun, and Mao Kun accepted in real time.

古文：明宗大喜，即拜承约黔南节度使。
现代文：唐明宗十分高兴，于是拜李承约为黔南节度使。
English: Tang Mingzong was very happy, so he asked Li Chengyong to be the envoy of the Southern Song Festival.

古文：承约以恩信抚诸夷落，劝民农桑，兴起学校。
现代文：李承约用恩情信义安抚各蕃夷部落，鼓励百姓种田栽桑，兴办学校。
English: Li Chengyo used his kindness, trustworthiness and righteousness to pacify the various Qianyi tribes, encourage the people to plant mulberry trees and build schools.

古文：居数年，当代，黔南人诣京师乞留，为许留一年。
现代文：过了几年，应当替换，黔南人到京师请求留下他，为此准许再留一年。
English: A few years later, when it was time to replace him, the Minamis arrived in Beijing to ask him to stay, for which he was allowed to stay for another year.

古文：召为左卫上将军，改左龙武统军，拜昭义军节度使，复为左龙武统军。
现代文：后召入朝为左卫上将军，改任左龙武统军，拜为昭义军节度使，又任左龙武统军。
English: Afterward, he was called to the imperial court as the General of the Left Division, and was appointed as the Commander of the United Left Armies, and was also appointed as the Deputy Commander of the Shouyi Army and the Commander of the United Left Armies.

古文：天福二年，迁左骁卫上将军。
现代文：天福二年，升任左骁卫上将军。
English: In the second year of Tianfu, he was promoted to General of the Left Division of Inner Palace Guards.

古文：数请老，不许。
现代文：多次告老，不准许。
English: Repeatedly retired, not allowed to work.

古文：卒年七十五，赠太子太师。
现代文：死时七十五岁，赠太子太师。
English: He was seventy-five years old at the time of his death and was given the title of Crown Prince and Grand Master.

古文：○张希崇张希崇，字德峰，幽州蓟人也。少好学，通《左氏春秋》。
现代文：张希崇字德峰，幽州蓟县人。从小好学，精通《左氏春秋》。
English: Zhang Xizong, also known as Defeng, was born in Yuzhou County. He was eager to learn from an early age and was well versed in "The Spring and Autumn of Zuo Shi."

古文：刘守光不喜儒士，希崇因事军中为偏将，将兵戍平州。
现代文：刘守光不喜欢儒生，张希崇于是在军中效力任副将，率兵戍守平州。
English: Liu Shuguang did not like Confucianism, so Zhang Xizong served as a vice-general in the army and led troops to defend Pingzhou.

古文：其后契丹攻陷平州，得希崇，知其儒者也，以为卢龙军行军司马。
现代文：后来契丹攻陷平州，俘获张希崇，知道他是儒生，任命他为卢龙军行军司马。
English: Later, the Khitan invaded Pingzhou, captured Zhang Xizong, knew that he was a Confucian, and appointed him as the marching Sima of the Lulong Army.

古文：明宗时，卢文进自平州亡归，契丹因以希崇代文进为平州节度使，遣其亲将以三百骑监之。
现代文：唐明宗时，卢文进从平州逃回，契丹于是以张希崇代替卢文进任平州节度使，派亲将率三百骑监视他。
English: When Tang Mingzong, Lu Wenjin fled back from Pingzhou, the Khitan then sent Zhang Xitong to replace Lu Wenjin as the envoy of the Pingzhou Festival, and sent his relatives to lead three hundred horsemen to monitor him.

古文：居岁馀，虏将喜其为人，监兵稍怠，希崇因与其麾下谋走南归。
现代文：过了一年多，契丹将领喜欢他的为人，监视的士兵逐渐松懈，张希崇趁机和他的部下策谋逃回南方。
English: After more than a year, the Khitan general liked him as a person, the soldiers under surveillance gradually slackened, Zhang Xizong took the opportunity and his subordinates plotted to escape back to the south.

古文：其麾下皆言兵我，不可俱亡，惧不得脱，因劝希崇独去。
现代文：他的部下都说兵太多，不能都逃，怕不能脱身，于是劝张希崇独自逃离。
English: His subordinates all said that there were too many soldiers and that they could not all escape, fearing that they would not be able to escape, so they advised Zhang Xitong to flee alone.

古文：希崇曰： 虏兵守我者三百骑尔，烹其将，其兵必散走。
现代文：张希崇说： 监守我们的契丹兵不过三百骑兵罢了，杀掉他们的将领，他的士兵必定逃散。
English: Zhang Xitong said: The Khitan soldiers guarding us are no more than three hundred cavalrymen. If we kill their general, his soldiers will surely scatter.

古文：且平州去虏帐千馀里，使其闻乱而呼兵，则吾与汝等在汉界矣！ 
现代文：何况平州距离契丹大营一千多里，即使他们获知作乱而呼援兵，我和你们也都在汉人领土上了！ 
English: What's more, Pingzhou is more than a thousand miles away from the Khitan camp. Even if they were informed of the disturbance and called for reinforcements, you and I would still be on Chinese territory!

古文：众皆曰善。
现代文：众人都说好。
English: Everyone said yes.

古文：乃先为阱，置以石灰。
现代文：于是先挖了个陷阱，填上石灰。
English: So they first dug a trap and filled it with lime.

古文：明日，虏将谒希崇，希崇饮之以酒，杀之阱中，兵皆溃去，希崇率其麾下，得生口二万南归。
现代文：第二天，契丹将领拜见张希崇，张希崇拿酒给他喝，把他杀死扔在陷阱中，他的骑兵都溃逃而去，张希崇率领他的部下，得马二万匹南归。
English: The next day, the Khitan general paid his respects to Zhang Xizong. Zhang Xizong gave him wine to drink, killed him and threw him into a trap. His cavalry all fled. Zhang Xizong led his men and took 20,000 horses back south.

古文：明宗嘉之，拜汝州防御使。
现代文：唐明宗嘉奖他，拜为汝州防御便。
English: Tang Mingzong praised him and prayed for the defense of Ruzhou.

古文：迁灵武节度使。
现代文：升任灵武节度使。
English: Promoted to the post of Lingwu Xingduo Envoy.

古文：灵州地接戎狄，戍兵饷道，常苦抄掠，希崇乃开屯田，教士耕种，军以足食，而省转馈，明宗下诏褒美。
现代文：灵州地界和蕃夷相连，供应戍守士兵军饷的通道，常苦于受蕃夷劫掠，张希崇于是开垦土地，教士兵耕种，军队因此粮食自足，而节省运送的花费，唐明宗下诏赞赏他。
English: The land boundary of Lingshou was connected to the Jurchens, providing a passage for the soldiers of the garrison to carry their pay. Zhang Xizong often suffered from the plunder of the Jurchens. Zhang Xizong then reclaimed land and taught soldiers to cultivate. The army was self-sufficient in grain and saved the cost of transportation. Tang Mingzong praised him in his edict.

古文：希崇抚养士卒，招辑夷落，自回鹘、瓜、沙皆遣使入贡。
现代文：张希崇抚养士兵，招抚蕃夷部落，回鹊、瓜、沙各国都派使臣入朝上贡。
English: Zhang Xizong raised soldiers and encouraged the Yi tribes, and the states of Hui, Gua and Sha all sent envoys to pay tribute to the imperial court.

古文：居四岁，上书求还内地，徙镇邠宁。
现代文：过了四年，上书请求回内地，改任郇宁节度使。
English: After four years, he sent a letter to request to return to the mainland and be appointed as the Suining Festival envoy.

古文：晋高祖入立，复拜灵武节度使，希崇叹曰： 吾当老死边徼，岂非命邪！ 
现代文：晋高祖登位，又拜为灵武节度使，张希崇叹息说： 我当老死在边疆，难道不是天命吗！ 
English: Zhang Xitong sighed and said, "I should have died on the frontier, isn't it fate!"

古文：希崇事母至孝，朝夕母食，必侍立左右，彻馔乃敢退。
现代文：张希崇事奉母亲很孝敬，早晚母亲进食，必定站在一旁侍候，撤下饮食后纔敢退下。
English: Zhang Xizong served his mother with great filial piety. In the morning and evening, when his mother was eating, he would stand by and wait for her. When she had finished eating, he dared to step back.

古文：为将不喜声色。
现代文：为大将不喜欢音乐女色。
English: Women who don't like music sing for the general.

古文：好读书，颇知星历。
现代文：喜好读书，很懂星象历法。
English: He likes to read and knows the astrological calendar very well.

古文：天福三年，月掩毕口大星，希崇叹曰： 毕口大星，边将也，我其当之乎！ 
现代文：天福三年，月亮遮蔽毕宿上端的大星，张希崇感叹说： 毕宿上端的大星主边将，大概要应在我身上吧！ 
English: In the third year of Heaven's blessing, the moon shaded the great star at the upper end of the world, Zhang Xitong sighed and said: The great star at the upper end of the world should be on me!

古文：明年正月卒，赠太师。
现代文：第二年正月死，追赠太师。
English: He died in the first month of the following year and was posthumously awarded the title of Grand Master.

古文：有子仁谦。
现代文：有儿子张仁谦。
English: They have a son, Zhang Renqian.

古文：○相里金相里金，字奉金，并州人也。
现代文：相里金字奉金，并州人。
English: He was a member of the Shoushu clan.

古文：为人勇悍，而能折节下士。
现代文：为人勇猛强悍，而又能屈己礼待士人。
English: He is a brave and strong man, but he can also bend down and treat people with courtesy.

古文：事晋王，为五院军队长。
现代文：事奉晋王，任五院军队长。
English: He served the King of Jin and was appointed commander of the Fifth Army.

古文：梁、晋战柏乡、胡柳，皆有功，迁黄甲指挥使。
现代文：梁、晋在柏乡、胡柳交战，他都有战功，迁黄甲指挥使。
English: Liang and Jin fought in Baixiang and Huliu, and both of them had military exploits, and were transferred to the command of Huang Jia.

古文：同光中，拜忻州刺史。
现代文：同光年间，拜忻州刺史。
English: In the same year, the history of Baizhou was written.

古文：是时诸州皆用武人，多以部曲主场务，渔蠹公私，以利自入，金独禁部曲不与事，厚其给养，使掌家事而已。
现代文：这时，各州州守都任用武人，多用自己家仆主管仓场事务，侵吞公私财物，利益落入私人，相里金独自禁止家仆参与这事，供给他们丰厚的给养，只让他们管理家事罢了。
English: At this time, all the prefectural governors of the prefectures appointed warriors, mostly using their own servants to be in charge of warehouse affairs, embezzling public and private property, and the profits falling into private hands. Sorikin alone forbade his servants to participate in this matter, provided them with rich provisions, and only let them manage household affairs.

古文：迁陇州防御使。
现代文：升任陇州防御使。
English: Promoted to Zhangzhou Defense Envoy.

古文：废帝起兵凤翔，驰檄四邻，四邻未有应者，独金首遣判官薛文遇见废帝，往来计事。
现代文：唐废帝在凤翔起兵，驰马传送檄书给四邻，四方没有响应，只有相里金第一个派判官薛文遇去见唐废帝，往来商议事情。
English: Emperor Gaozong raised an army in Fengxiang and sent imperial edicts to his four neighbors on horseback. There was no response from the four sides. Only Sori Jin was the first to send the judge Xue Wen to meet Emperor Gaozong and discuss the matter.

古文：废帝即位，德之，拜保义军节度使。
现代文：唐废帝登位，感激他，拜为保义军节度使。
English: Emperor Tang attains the throne, thanks him, and prays for the protection of the rebel army.

古文：晋高祖起太原，废帝以金为太原四面步军都指挥使。
现代文：晋高祖在太原起兵，唐废帝任相里金焉太原四面步军都指挥使。
English: Jin Gaozu raised an army in Taiyuan, and the Tang Dynasty's deposed emperor appointed Jin Yan as the minister to command Taiyuan's four-sided infantry.

古文：高祖入立，徙镇建雄，罢为上将军。
现代文：晋高祖登位，改任建雄节度使，罢为上将军。
English: Jang Gaozu ascended the throne, was appointed as Jianxiong's regent, and was promoted to Shangzheng.

古文：天福五年卒，赠太师。
现代文：天福五年死，赠太师。
English: Tianfu died five years later and was given the title of Grand Master.

古文：○张廷蕴张廷蕴，开封襄邑人也。
现代文：张廷蕴是开封襄邑人。
English: Zhang Tingyun is from Xiangyup, Kaifeng.

古文：少为宣武军卒，去事晋，稍迁军校。
现代文：年轻时在宣武军当兵，离去后事奉晋，逐渐迁任军校。
English: When he was young, he was a soldier in the Xuanwu Army. After he left, he served in the Jin Dynasty and was gradually transferred to a military school.

古文：常从庄宗征伐，先登力战，金疮满体，庄宗壮之，以为帐前黄甲二十指挥步军都虞候、魏博三城巡检使。
现代文：常随唐庄宗征伐，勇往直前，奋力作战，满身伤痕，唐庄宗认为他很勇敢，任为帐前黄甲二十指挥步军都虞候、魏博三城巡检使。
English: He often followed Tang Zhuangzong's conquests, marched forward bravely, fought hard, and was covered with scars. Tang Zhuangzong thought he was very brave, and appointed him as the prefect of Huang Jia, the commander of the 20th marching army, and the inspector of the three cities of Weibo.

古文：是时，庄宗在魏，以刘皇后从行，刘氏多纵其下扰人为不法，人无敢言者，廷蕴辄收而斩之。
现代文：这时，唐庄宗在魏州，带刘皇后随行，刘氏常放任她手下的入侵扰百姓无法无天，没有人敢说什么，张廷蕴则把他们抓来杀掉。
English: At this time, Tang Zhuangzong was in Weizhou, accompanied by Empress Liu. The Liu clan often allowed her men to invade and disturb the lawless people. No one dared to say anything, but Zhang Tingyun caught them and killed them.

古文：李继韬叛于潞州，庄宗遣明宗为招讨使，元行钦为都部署，廷蕴为马步军都指挥使，将兵为前锋。
现代文：杨立在潞州反频，唐庄宗派唐明宗任招讨使，元行钦任都部署，张廷蕴任马步军都指挥使，率兵为前锋。
English: Yang Li was counter-frequency in Zhangzhou, Tangzhuang sectarian Tang Mingzong was appointed as recruiting envoy, Yuan Xingqin was appointed as deployment, Zhang Tingyun was appointed as commanding envoy of Ma Bu army, and led the troops as a forward.

古文：廷蕴至潞，日已暮，即率兵百馀逾濠登城，城守者不能御，遂破潞州。
现代文：张廷蕴到达潞州，天色已晚，就率领一百多士兵越过城濠登上城墙，守城的人不能抵抗，于是攻破潞州。
English: Zhang Tingyun arrived in Ganzhou when it was already late in the day. He led more than a hundred soldiers across the battlements and onto the city wall. The defenders were unable to resist, so they broke through Ganzhou.

古文：明旦，明宗与行钦后至，明宗心颇慊之。
现代文：第二天天亮，唐明宗和元行钦后到，唐明宗心里对他很不满。
English: At dawn the next day, Tang Mingzong and Yuan Xingqin arrived, and Tang Mingzong was very dissatisfied with him.

古文：廷蕴以功迁羽林都指挥使、申怀沂三州刺史、金颍陇绛四州防御团练使、左监门卫上将军。
现代文：张廷蕴因功迁羽林都指挥使、申怀沂三州刺史、金颖陇绛四州防御团练使、左监门卫上将军。
English: Zhang Tingyun was transferred to the post of commander of Yulin due to his merits, Shen Huaiyun to the post of commander of the three states, Jin Yingyun to the post of commander of the four-state defense regiments, and Zuoying to the post of general of the gate guards.

古文：开运中，以疾卒。
现代文：开运年问，因病而死。
English: At the beginning of the Chinese New Year, he died of illness.

古文：廷蕴武人，所识不过数字，而平生重文士。
现代文：张廷蕴是个武人，认得的不过几个字，而平生看重文人。
English: Zhang Tingyun was a warrior, he only knew a few words, but he always valued the literati.

古文：尝从明宗破梁郓州，获判官赵凤，廷蕴谓曰： 吾视汝貌必儒人，可无隐也。 
现代文：曾随唐明宗攻破梁的郫州，抓获判官赵凤，张廷蕴对他说： 我看你的样子必定是个儒生，不必隐瞒了。 
English: Zhang Tingyun said to the judge Zhao Feng, who had been arrested in Zhangzhou, where the Tang and Ming dynasties had broken through, "I think you must be a Confucian, you don't have to hide it."

古文：凤以实对，廷蕴亟荐于明宗。
现代文：趟凤如实回答，张廷蕴急忙把他推荐给唐明宗。
English: When Wafeng answered truthfully, Zhang Tingyun hurriedly recommended him to Tang Mingzong.

古文：后凤贵为相，数荐廷蕴于安重诲，重诲屡言之，明宗以廷蕴破潞之隙，终恨之，故终不秉髦节。
现代文：后来赵凤贵为宰相，多次向安重诲推荐张廷蕴，安重诲也多次为他说话，唐明宗因对张廷蕴攻破潞州不满，始终忌恨他，因此最终没有让他执掌节镇大权。
English: Later, when Zhao Fenggui was the prime minister, he repeatedly recommended Zhang Tingyun to An Chongyun, and An Chongyun also spoke for him many times. Tang Mingzong was dissatisfied with Zhang Tingyun's attack on Zhangzhou, and always hated him, so he eventually did not let him hold the power of the festival town.

古文：廷蕴素廉，历七州，卒之日，家无余赀。
现代文：张廷蕴素来清廉，历任七州，死的时候，家中没有留下多余财产。
English: Zhang Tingyun has always been clean and honest. He has served seven states in succession. When he died, there was no extra property left in his family.

古文：○马全节马全节，字大雅，大名元城人也。
现代文：马全节字大雅，大名元城人。
English: Ma Quan Jie is a man of great elegance and a famous former city resident.

古文：唐同光中，全节为捉生指挥使。
现代文：唐同光年间，马全节任捉生指挥使。
English: During the Tang Dynasty, Ma Quan Rong served as the conductor of the orchestra.

古文：赵在礼反鄴都，以全节为马步军指挥使。
现代文：赵在礼在邺都反叛，任马全节为马步军指挥使。
English: Zhao Zaili rebelled in Shandong and appointed Ma Quanzhong as the commander of the Horse Infantry Corps.

古文：明宗即位，历博单郢沂四州刺史、金州防御使。
现代文：唐明宗登位，历任博单郢沂四州刺史、金州防御使。
English: Emperor Mingzong of Tang ascended to the throne. Successive heads of the Hozan and Shishu Dynasties and Jinzhou Defense Envoys.

古文：废帝时，蜀人攻金州，州兵才数百，全节散家财，与士卒坚守，蜀人去，废帝召全节，以为沧州留后。
现代文：唐废帝时，蜀军攻打金州，州兵纔几百人，马全节疏散家财，和士兵一道坚守，蜀人离去后，唐废帝召马全节，任命为沧州留后。
English: When the Tang Dynasty was overthrown, the Shu army attacked Jinzhou, and several hundred soldiers from the state were killed. Ma Quan Jie evacuated his family's wealth and stood firm with the soldiers. After the Shu people left, the Tang Dynasty summoned Ma Quan Jie and appointed him to stay behind in Cangzhou.

古文：晋高祖入立，即拜全节横海军节度使，徙镇安远，代李金全。
现代文：晋高祖登位，就拜授马全节为横海军节度使，改任安远节度使，接替李金全。
English: When Emperor Gaozong ascended to the throne, he appointed Ma Quanzhang as the envoy to the Cross-Strait Naval Festival, and changed his title to the envoy to the Anduan Festival, succeeding Li Jinquan.

古文：金全叛附于李昪，高祖发兵三万，使全节与安审晖讨之，金全南奔。
现代文：李金全反叛归附李升，晋高祖出兵三万人，派马全节和安审晖讨伐他，李金全南逃。
English: Li Jinquan rebelled and was annexed by Li Sheng. Shinko Zu dispatched 30,000 soldiers, sent horses and troops to fight him, and Li Jinquan fled to the south.

古文：昪将李承裕守安州，全节与承裕战州南，大败承裕，斩首三千级，生擒千馀人。
现代文：李升的将领李承裕守安州，马全节与李承裕在州南作战，大败李承裕，杀敌三千人，活捉一千多人。
English: Li Sheng's general Li Chengyu guarded Anzhou, Ma Quanzhong fought with Li Chengyu in the south of the state, defeated Li Chengyu, killed three thousand enemies, and captured more than one thousand people alive.

古文：承裕弃城去，审晖追至云梦，执承裕及其兵二千人，全节斩千五百人，以其馀兵并承裕献于京师。
现代文：李承裕弃城而逃，安审晖追到云梦，抓获李承裕和他的士兵二干人，马全节杀掉一千五百人，把其余的士兵和李承裕献到京师。
English: Li Chengyu abandoned the city and fled, An Ziqi chased him to Yunmeng, captured Li Chengyu and two of his soldiers, Ma Quanzhi killed fifteen hundred people, and presented the remaining soldiers and Li Chengyu to the Beijing Division.

古文：承裕谓全节曰： 吾掠城中，所得百万计，将军皆取之矣。
现代文：李承裕对马全节说： 我在城中掠夺，得到敷纵百万计的财物，将军你都拿去了。
English: Li Chengyu said to Ma Quanzhang: I plundered in the city, got millions of wealth, and you took the general.

古文：吾见天子，必诉此而后就刑。 
现代文：我见到天子，必定这样申诉然后就刑。 
English: If I saw the Son of God, I would definitely make such a complaint and then go to prison.

古文：全节惧，因杀承裕，高祖置而不问，徙全节镇昭义。
现代文：马全节害怕，于是杀了李承裕，晋高祖置之不理，改任马全节为昭义节度使。
English: Ma Quan Jie was afraid, so he killed Li Chengyu, and Jinguo Zu ignored him and appointed Ma Quan Jie as the envoy of Shao Yi.

古文：又徙安国。
现代文：又改任安国节度使。
English: He was also reassigned to the post of An Guo Jiedu Envoy.

古文：从杜重威讨安重荣，以功徙镇义武。
现代文：跟随杜重威讨伐安重荣，因功移任义武节镇。
English: He followed Du Chongwei to fight against An Chong Rong and was transferred to Yiwu Festival Town for his service.

古文：自出帝与契丹交恶，全节未尝不在兵间。
现代文：自从晋出帝和契丹关系恶化，马全节一直在军中。
English: Since the deterioration of relations between Emperor Jin and Khitan, Ma Quanzhie has been in the army.

古文：开运元年，为行营都虞候，契丹与晋大军相距澶、魏之间，全节别攻白团城，破之，虏七百人。
现代文：开运元年，任行营都虞候，契丹和晋的大军在澶、魏问相抗衡，马全节另外攻白团城，攻破了，俘虏七百人。
English: At the beginning of the first year of the campaign, the capital of Renxing was Yu, the great armies of Khitan and Jin were competing with each other in Wei and Wei, and Ma Quanzhong also attacked Baidu City, broke through, and captured seven hundred people.

古文：克泰州，虏二千人，降其守将晋廷谦。
现代文：攻克泰州，俘虏二千人，收降守将晋廷谦。
English: Conquered Taizhou, captured two thousand prisoners, surrendered to Jin Ting Qian.

古文：四月，契丹败于戚城，引兵分道而北，全节败之于定丰，执其将安晖。
现代文：四月，契丹在戚城被打败，引兵分道北逃，马全节在定丰打败他们，抓获他们的将领安晖。
English: In April, the Khitan were defeated at Cicheng and fled north, while Ma Quanzi defeated them at Dingfeng and captured their general, An Qi.

古文：七月，徙广晋尹，留守鄴都。
现代文：七月，调任广晋尹，留守邺都。
English: In July, he was transferred to Guang Jin Yin and stayed in Shidu.

古文：十月，杜重威为招讨使，以全节为副，大败契丹于卫村。
现代文：十月，杜重威任招讨使，任马全节为副使，在卫村大败契丹。
English: In October, Du Chongwei was appointed as the recruiting envoy, and Ma Quan Jie was appointed as the deputy envoy. They defeated the Khitan in Weimun.

古文：全节为人谦谨，事母至孝，其临政决事，必问法如何。
现代文：马全节为人谦虚谨慎，侍奉母亲很孝顺，他当政决断事情，必依法而行。
English: Ma Quanzhong is a modest and prudent person. He serves his mother very dutifully. When he is in power, he decides things and must act in accordance with the law.

古文：初，徙广晋，过元城，衣白襕谒其县令，州里以为荣。
现代文：当初，调任到广晋，经过元城，穿着白色长衫拜见当地县令，州里引以为荣。
English: At first, he was transferred to Guangjin, passed through Yuancheng, and wore a white shirt to meet the local county magistrate. The county was proud of him.

古文：开运二年，徙镇顺国，未至而卒，年五十五，赠中书令。
现代文：开运二年，改任顺圃节度使，没到任而死，时年五十五岁，赠中书令。
English: Two years after the start of the operation, he was appointed as the Shunpu festival envoy, but died before taking office. He was 55 years old at the time, and was presented with a middle-ranking letter.

古文：○皇甫遇皇甫遇，常山真定人也。
现代文：皇甫遇是常山真定人。
English: Emperor Fu En was a descendant of Changshan Zhending.

古文：为人有勇力，虬髯善射。
现代文：为人勇猛有力，胡须蜷曲，擅长射箭。
English: He is a brave and powerful man, with a curly beard, and is good at archery.

古文：少从唐明宗征伐，事唐为武胜军节度使，所至苛暴，以诛敛为务，宾佐多解官逃去，以避其祸。
现代文：年轻时随唐明宗征伐，在唐效力任武胜军节度使，所到之地苛刻残暴，以搜刮为能事，宾客僚佐大多弃官逃离，以躲避他的祸害。
English: When he was young, he followed the Tang and Ming Dynasty conquest, and served as the commander of the victorious army in the Tang Dynasty. The places he visited were harsh and cruel, and he was good at scavenging. Most of his guests and colleagues abandoned their posts and fled to avoid his scourge.

古文：晋高祖时，历义武、昭义、建雄、河阳四镇，罢为神武统军。
现代文：晋高祖时，历任义武、昭义、建雄、河阳四镇节度使，罢为神武统军。
English: When he was promoted to Gaozu, he successively held the posts of Yoshitake, Shoui, Jianxiong, and Heyang four-town festival envoy, and became the Jinmu unified army.

古文：契丹入寇，陷贝州，出帝以高行周为北面行营都部署，遇为马军右厢排阵使。
现代文：契丹进犯，攻陷贝州，晋出帝任命高行周为北面行营都部署，皇甫遇任马军右厢排阵使。
English: The Khitan invaded and occupied Bechu, and the newly crowned emperor appointed Gao Xingzhou as the commander of the northern camp, and the emperor was appointed as the right flank platoon commander of the horse army.

古文：是时，青州杨光远据城反，出帝乃遣李守贞及遇分兵守郓州。
现代文：适时，青州杨光速据城反叛，晋出帝于是派李守贞和皇甫遇分兵把守郫州。
English: At the right time, Yang Guanghai of Qingzhou rebelled against the city, and sent Li Shuzhen and the emperor's troops to guard Zhangzhou.

古文：遇等至马家渡，契丹方将渡河助光远，遇等击败之，以功拜义成军节度使、马军都指挥使。
现代文：皇甫遇等人到达马家渡，契丹正要渡黄河援助杨光速，皇甫遇等人打败他们，因功拜为义成军节度使、马军都指挥使。
English: Wang Fu Rong and others arrived at Majiadu. The Khitan army was about to cross the Yellow River to aid Yang Guanghui. Wang Fu Rong and others defeated them. Because of their exploits, they became the festival envoys of the Yicheng Army and the commanding envoys of the Ma Army.

古文：开运二年，契丹寇西山，遣先锋赵延寿围镇州，杜重威不敢出战。
现代文：开运二年，契丹侵犯西山，派先锋趟延寿包围镇州，杜重威不敢出战。
English: Two years after the start of the campaign, the Khitan invaded Xishan and sent the vanguard to Yanshou to encircle Zhenzhou. Du Chongwei did not dare to go to war.

古文：延寿分兵大掠，攻破栾城、柏乡等九县，南至邢州。
现代文：趟延寿分兵大肆劫掠，攻破乐城、柏乡等九个县，南到邢州。
English: The soldiers of the Yanju detachment carried out extensive looting and defeated nine counties, including Lecheng and Baixiang, and went as far south as Luzhou.

古文：是时岁除，出帝与近臣饮酒过量，得疾，不能出征，乃遣北面行营都监张从恩会马全节、安审琦及遇等御之。
现代文：这年年终，晋出帝和近臣饮酒过量，患病，不能出征，于是派北面行营都监张从恩会同骂全节、安审琦以及皇甫遇等人抵御契丹军。
English: At the end of the year, Emperor Jinzhi and his vassals drank too much alcohol, fell ill, and were unable to go to war. Therefore, Emperor Jinzhi sent Zhang Congenhui, the governor of the Northern Camp, to fight against the Khitan army.

古文：从恩等至相州，阵安阳河南，遣遇与慕容彦超率数千骑前视虏。
现代文：张从恩等人到达相州，在安阳河南面摆开战阵，派皇甫遇和慕容彦超率几千骑兵前去探视敌情。
English: Zhang Cong'en and others arrived in Xiangzhou and set up battle positions in the south of the Anyang River. They sent Emperor Hoh Rong and Murong to visit the enemy situation with several thousand cavalry.

古文：遇渡漳河，逢虏数万，转战十馀里，至榆林，为虏所围，遇马中箭而踣，得其仆杜知敏马，乘之以战。
现代文：皇甫遇渡过漳河，遇上契丹兵几万人，转战十多里，到达榆林，被契丹军包围，皇甫遇的战马中箭倒地，得到他的仆从杜知敏的战马，骑上再战。
English: The emperor crossed the Li River, met tens of thousands of Khitan soldiers, fought for more than ten miles, reached Yulin, and was surrounded by the Khitan army. The emperor's horse fell to the ground during the battle, and he got his servant Du Zhimin's horse and rode on to fight again.

古文：知敏为虏所擒，遇谓彦超曰： 知敏，义士也，岂可失之！ 
现代文：杜知敏被契丹兵抓获，皇甫遇对慕容彦超说： 杜知敏是个义士，怎能失去他！ 
English: Du Zhimin was captured by Khitan soldiers, and the emperor said to Murong Yanchao: Du Zhimin is a righteous man, how can I lose him!

古文：即与彦超跃马入虏，取之而还。
现代文：随即和慕容彦超跃马冲入契丹阵，夺得杜知敏而返回。
English: He then rushed into the Khitan camp with Murong Yan, captured Du Zhimin and returned.

古文：虏兵与遇战，自午至未，解而复合，益出生兵，势甚盛。
现代文：契丹军和皇甫遇作战，从午时到未时，晋军解围后又被包围，敌军不断增添精兵，气势很盛。
English: The Khitan army and the emperor were engaged in battle. From noon to dusk, the Jin army was besieged again after the siege was lifted. The enemy army continued to increase its number of elite soldiers and was very powerful.

古文：遇戒彦超曰： 今日之势，战与走尔，战尚或生，走则死也。
现代文：皇甫遇告诫慕容彦超说： 今天的形势，只有决战和逃跑两种选择而已，决战或许还能活命，逃跑就死定了。
English: When the crown prince was admonished, Murong Yancha said: In today's situation, there are only two choices, decisive battle and escape. Decisive battle may still be alive, but escape is dead.

古文：等死，死战，犹足以报国。 
现代文：同样是死，誓死决战，还足以报效国家。 
English: In the same way, death, the ultimate battle, is also enough to repay the country.

古文：张从恩与诸将怪遇视虏无报，皆谓遇已陷虏矣。
现代文：张从恩和将领们奇怪皇甫遇探视军情没有回音，都说皇甫遇已陷入契丹军中了。
English: Zhang Cong'en and the generals were surprised that there was no response to the emperor's visit to the military situation. They all said that the emperor had fallen into the trap of the Khitan army.

古文：已而有驰骑报遇被围，安审琦率兵将赴之，从恩疑报者诈，不欲往，审琦曰： 成败天也，当与公共之，虽虏不南来，吾属失皇甫遇，复何面目见天子！ 
现代文：不久有人飞马报告皇甫遇被围，安审琦率兵准备前往，张从恩怀疑报信的人有诈，不想去，安审琦说： 成败在天，应当和你共同承担责任，即使契丹军不南来，我们如果失去皇甫遇，又有什么脸面见天子！ 
English: Not long after, someone reported to Pegasus that the Imperial Palace had been besieged, and An Zi Yan and his soldiers were preparing to go. Zhang Cong En suspected that the person who reported the news was deceitful and did not want to go. An Zi Yan said, "Success or failure is in the hands of heaven, and we should shoulder the responsibility together with you. Even if the Khitan army does not come south, if we lose the Imperial Palace, what face will we have to face God!

古文：即引骑渡河，诸军皆从而北，拒虏十馀里，虏望见救兵来，即解去。
现代文：于是率骑兵渡河，各军都跟随北进，距离契丹军兵十多里时，契丹军望见救兵赶来，就解围离去。
English: As a result, he led the cavalry across the river, and all the armies followed the northward march. When they were more than ten miles away from the Khitan army, the Khitan army saw the rescuers coming and broke the siege and left.

古文：遇与审琦等收军而南，契丹亦皆北去。
现代文：皇甫遇和安审琦等人收兵南回，契丹也都北去。
English: Empress Dowager Fu You and An Cunxu and others withdrew their troops to the south, and the Khitan also went north.

古文：是时，契丹兵已深入，人马俱乏，其还也，诸将不能追，而从恩率遇等退保黎阳，虏因得解去。
现代文：这时，契丹兵已深入内地，人马都很困乏，他们返回时，将领们不能追击，而张从恩率皇甫遇等人退保黎阳，契丹军因而得以逃离。
English: At this time, the Khitan soldiers had penetrated deep into the hinterland, and the men and horses were exhausted. When they returned, the generals could not pursue them, and Zhang Congen led the emperor and others to retreat to Liyang, and the Khitan army was able to escape.

古文：三年冬，以杜重威为都招讨使，遇为马军右厢都指挥使，屯于中渡。
现代文：三年冬，任命杜重威为都招讨使，皇甫遇任马军右厢都指挥使，屯驻在中渡。
English: In the winter of the third year, Du Chongwei was appointed as the envoy to summon the capital, and Wang Fu was appointed as the envoy to command the right wing of the horse army, stationed in Zhongdu.

古文：重威已阴送款契丹，伏兵幕中，悉召诸将列坐，告以降虏，遇与诸将愕然不能对。
现代文：杜重威已暗中向契丹投诚，在帐幕后埋下伏兵，召全部将领就座，告诉说向契丹军投降，皇甫遇和将领们惊愕不能回答。
English: Du Chongwei had secretly surrendered to the Khitans, planted an ambush behind the tent, called all the generals to sit down, and told them to surrender to the Khitan army. The emperor was surprised and the generals could not answer.

古文：重威出降表，遇等俯首以次自画其名，即麾兵解甲出降。
现代文：杜重威拿出降表，皇甫遇等人低头依次写上自己的名字，随即命令士兵放下武器出来投降。
English: Du Chongwei took out the surrender form, and the emperor and others bowed their heads and wrote their names in turn, and then ordered the soldiers to lay down their weapons and surrender.

古文：契丹遣遇与张彦泽先入京师，遇行至平棘，绝吭而死。
现代文：契丹派皇甫遇和张彦泽先到京师，皇甫遇走到平棘，断喉而死。
English: Khitan sent Empress Dowager Empress Dowager Empress Dowager Empress Dowager Empress Dowager Empress Dowager Empress Dowager Empress Dowager Empress Dowager Empress Dowager Empress Dowager Empress Dowager Empress Dowager

古文：呜呼，梁亡而敬翔死，不得为死节；晋亡而皇甫遇死，不得为死事，吾岂无意哉！
现代文：唉，梁灭亡而敬翔死去，不能列为为节义而死之士；晋灭亡而皇甫遇死去，不能列为为国丽死之士，我难道没有用意吗！
English: Alas, if Liang perished and Guixiang died, he could not be listed as a person who died for righteousness; if Jin perished and Huangpu died, he could not be listed as a person who died for beauty. Was it not my intention?

古文：梁之篡唐，用翔之谋为多，由子佐其父而弑其祖，可乎？
现代文：梁篡夺唐，用敬翔的计谋最多，由儿子帮助父亲杀掉他的祖父，行吗？
English: Liang usurped Tang, using most of Jingxiang's stratagems, and the son helped his father kill his grandfather, okay?

古文：其不戮于斧钺，为幸免矣。
现代文：他不受斧铁之诛，就是幸免了。
English: He was spared the axe.

古文：方晋兵之降虏也，士卒初不知，及使解甲，哭声震天，即降岂其欲哉！
现代文：当晋兵向契丹军投降时，士兵们原本不知道，到命令他们放下武器时，哭声震天，那么投降难道是他们的愿望吗！
English: When the Jin soldiers surrendered to the Khitan army, the soldiers did not know it, and when they were ordered to lay down their weapons, the cries were deafening, so was it their wish to surrender?

古文：使遇奋然攘臂而起，杀重威于坐中，虽不幸不免而见害，犹为得其死矣，其义烈岂不凛然哉！
现代文：假使皇甫遇奋力伸臂而起，在座中杀掉杜重威，即使不幸不免被害，那还算得上死得其所，他的节义功业难道不令人凛然起敬吗！
English: If the empress dowager were to stretch out his arm and kill Du Chongwei in the audience, even if he were to be killed, it would still be a worthy death. His heroic deeds are awe-inspiring!

古文：既俯首听命，相与亡人之国矣，虽死不能赎也，岂足贵哉！
现代文：既然俯首从命，使君主的国家一道灭亡，即使死了也不能够赎罪，哪里值得珍视呢！
English: Since bowing one's head to one's fate and bringing the monarch's country to ruin together, even death cannot atone for one's sins, what is there worth treasuring?

古文：君子之于人，或推以恕，或责以备。
现代文：君子对艇人，或者推己及人予以宽恕，或求全责备。
English: A gentleman either forgives the boatman, or blames him, or blames him entirely.

古文：恕，故迁善自新之路广；备则难得，难得，故可贵焉。
现代文：宽恕，因而向善自新的道路宽广；求全责备就很难得了，因为难得，因此纔可贵。
English: Forgive, and the road to recovery is broad; seek to correct, and it is difficult, and because it is difficult, it is precious.

古文：然知其所可恕，与其所可贵，岂不又难哉！
现代文：然而要懂得哪些是可以宽恕的，和哪些是可贵的，难道不又是一件难事吗！
English: But isn't it also difficult to know what is forgivable and what is precious!

古文：○安彦威安彦威，字国俊，代州崞县人也。
现代文：安彦威字国俊，是代州崞县人。
English: Yasuhiko Wai, alias Kunitoshi, is a native of Mino County, Daizhou.

古文：少以军卒隶唐明宗麾下。
现代文：年轻时在唐明宗的手下当兵。
English: When he was young, he served as a soldier under Tang Mingzong.

古文：彦威善射，颇知兵法。
现代文：安彦威擅长射箭，很懂兵法。
English: Yasuhiko is good at archery and knows a lot about military tactics.

古文：明宗镇天平、宣武、成德，以彦威常为牙将，以谨厚见信。
现代文：唐明宗为天平、宣武、成德节度使，常任安彦威为牙将，因恭谨忠厚受到信任。
English: Tang Mingzong was the envoy of Tianping, Xuanwu and Chengde festivals, and the permanent An Yanwei was the commander of Fang. He was trusted for his courtesy and loyalty.

古文：明宗入立，皇子从荣镇鄴，彦威为护圣指挥使。
现代文：唐明宗登位，皇子李从荣镇守邺都，安彦威任护圣指挥使。
English: Tang Mingzong ascended to the throne, the prince Li Rongzhen guarded the capital, and An Yanwei was appointed as the commander of the holy guard.

古文：以从荣判六军，彦威迁捧圣指挥使，领宁国军节度使。
现代文：任命李从荣判六军，安彦威升任捧圣指挥使，兼任宁国军节度使。
English: Li Congrong was appointed as the commander of the Sixth Army, and An Yanwei was promoted to the commander of the Holy Spirit, and also served as the commander of the Ningguo Army.

古文：晋高祖入立，拜彦威北京留守，徙镇归德。
现代文：晋高祖登位，拜安彦威为北京留守，改任归德节度使。
English: When Emperor Gaozu ascended to the throne, Bai Anyanwei stayed in Beijing and was appointed as the envoy to the Qing Dynasty.

古文：是时，河决滑州，命彦威塞之，彦威出私钱募民治堤。
现代文：这时，滑州河水决堤，命令安彦威堵塞，安彦威拿出自己的钱招募百姓修堤。
English: At this time, the waters of the Laozhou River broke through the dike, and An Yanwei was ordered to block it. An Yanwei took out his own money to recruit people to repair the dike.

古文：迁西京留守，遭岁大饥，彦威赈抚饥民，民有犯法，皆宽贷之，饥民爱之，不忍流去。
现代文：升任西京留守，碰上大饥荒年，安彦威救济安抚饥民，有犯法的百姓，都受到宽大，饥民很爱戴他，不愿流亡。
English: He was promoted to stay in West Beijing, and in the year of the great famine, An Yan Wei provided relief to appease the starving people. People who broke the law were treated leniently. The starving people loved him and did not want to go into exile.

古文：丁母忧，哀毁过制。
现代文：他为母亲服丧，悲戚哀痛超过礼制要求。
English: He was mourning for his mother, and his grief exceeded the requirements of etiquette.

古文：出帝与契丹隳盟，拜彦威北面行营副都统，彦威悉以家财佐军用。
现代文：晋出帝与契丹毁约，拜安彦威为北面行营副都统，安彦威拿出全部家财佐助军需。
English: Emperor Jinzhi and Khitan broke the treaty, Bai Anyanwei became the deputy governor of the northern camp, and Anyanwei took out all his family's money to support the military.

古文：以疾卒于京师。
现代文：因病死在京师。
English: He died of illness in Kyoto.

古文：彦威与安太妃同宗，出帝事以为舅，彦威未尝以为言。
现代文：安彦威和安太妃是同一宗族，晋出帝把他当国舅对待，安彦威不曾以此炫耀。
English: Yasuhiko and Antaifei were from the same family, and Emperor Jin treated him like an uncle. Yasuhiko never flaunted this.

古文：及卒，太妃临哭，人始知同宗也，当时益称其慎重。
现代文：到他死时，太妃临丧哭泣，人们纔知道他们同宗，当时人更加称赞他的谨慎持重。
English: By the time of his death, when she wept in mourning, it was known that they were cousins, and his prudence was even more praised.

古文：○李琼李琼，沧州饶安人也。
现代文：李琼是沧州饶安人。
English: Li Qiong is from Rao'an, Cangzhou.

古文：少为骑将，与晋高祖隶唐明宗麾下。
现代文：年轻时任骑将，和晋高祖隶属于唐明宗军中。
English: When he was young, he was a cavalry commander, and he and Jingao Zu belonged to the Tang and Ming dynasties.

古文：同光二年，契丹犯塞，明宗出涿州，遇契丹，与战不胜，诸将各稍引去，而晋高祖独战不已，契丹渐合而围之。
现代文：同光二年，契丹侵犯边塞，唐明宗出军涿州，遇上契丹军队，和他们交战不能取胜，将领们各自逐渐退去，而晋高祖孤罩作战不停，契丹军逐渐合拢包围他。
English: In the same year, the Khitan invaded the border fortress, Tang Mingzong marched out of Bozhou, met the Khitan army, and could not win the battle with them. The generals gradually retreated, while Jingao Zu continued to fight alone. The Khitan army gradually closed in and surrounded him.

古文：琼引高祖衣与俱遁，至刘李河而追兵且及，琼浮水先至南岸，高祖至河中流，马踣，琼以长矛援出之，又以所乘马与高祖，而步护之，走十馀里，乃得免。
现代文：李琼拉着晋高祖的衣服和他一起逃跑，到达刘李河追兵快赶上，李琼浮水先到南岸，晋高祖走到河水中流，马跌倒，李琼用长矛拉出他，又把自己骑的马让给晋高祖，而步行保护他，跑了十多里，纔得以逃脱。
English: Li Qiong took Jin Gaozu's clothes and ran away with him. When he reached the Liu Li River, he chased the soldiers to catch up. Li Qiong's raft reached the south bank first. Jin Gaozu walked into the river and the horse fell. Li Qiong pulled him out with a spear. He gave the horse he was riding to Jin Gaozu and protected him on foot. He ran more than ten miles, and the donkey was able to escape.

古文：明宗兵变于魏而南，琼从高祖以三百骑先趋汴州。
现代文：唐明宗在魏州兵变而南进，李琼随晋高祖率三百骑兵先赴汴州。
English: Tang Mingzong marched south in the Wei State mutiny, and Li Qiong followed Jingao Zu and led three hundred cavalrymen to Luzhou.

古文：高祖为保义军节度使，以为牙队指挥使。
现代文：晋高祖任保义军节度使，任命李琼焉牙队指挥使。
English: Jingao Zu was appointed as the envoy of the Guoying Rebellion, and appointed Li Qiong Ya as the commanding envoy of the Guoying Rebellion.

古文：高祖建国，以为护圣都虞候，赐与金帛甚厚，而不与之官爵，琼亦郁郁。
现代文：晋高祖建国，任命他为护圣都虞候，赐给他很多的金银绸帛，而不封给他官爵，李琼郁郁不乐。
English: When Emperor Gaozong founded the country, he appointed him as the protector of the sacred capital, and gave him a lot of gold, silver and silk, but did not give him a peerage. Li Qiong was not happy.

古文：久之，拜相、中二州刺史。
现代文：过了很久，拜为相、申二州刺史。
English: After a long time, it was time to pay homage to the two states.

古文：出帝时，为棣州刺史。
现代文：晋出帝时，任棣州刺史。
English: When he was promoted to emperor, he was appointed as the governor of Bozhou.

古文：杨光远反，以书招琼，琼拒而不纳。
现代文：杨光速反叛，写信招李琼，李琼拒不接受。
English: Yang Guanghui rebelled and wrote a letter to recruit Li Qiong, but Li Qiong refused to accept it.

古文：迁洺州团练使，又为护圣右厢都指挥使。
现代文：升任沼州团练使，又任护圣右厢都指挥使。
English: Promoted to the post of Numazu regimental drill sergeant, he was also appointed to the post of constable.

古文：晋亡，契丹入京师，以琼为威州刺史，行至郑州，遇盗见杀。
现代文：晋灭亡，契丹攻入京师，任李琼为威州刺史，到达郑州，遇上盗贼被杀。
English: Jin perished, Khitan invaded Beijing, Li Qiong was appointed to write the history of Weizhou, and arrived in Zhengzhou, where he was killed by a thief.

古文：○刘景岩
现代文：刘景岩是延州人。
English: Liu Jingyan is a native of Yanzhou.

古文：刘景岩，延州人也。
现代文：他家历来富有，能以家财和豪杰贤俊交游。
English: His family has always been rich, and he can use his family's wealth to make friends with heroes and sages.

古文：其家素富，能以赀交游豪俊。事高万金，为部曲，其后为丹州刺史。
现代文：在高万金手下当兵，后来任丹州刺史。
English: He served as a soldier under Gao Wankin, and later served as Danzhou magistrate.

古文：晋高祖起兵太原，唐废帝调民七户出一卒为义兵。
现代文：晋高祖在太原起兵，唐废帝征调百姓七家出一个人当义兵。
English: Jin Gaozu raised an army in Taiyuan, and the Tang Emperor conscripted and transferred people from seven families, one of whom became a volunteer.

古文：延州节度使杨汉章发乡民赴京师，将行，景岩遣人激怒之，义兵乱，杀汉章，迎景岩为留后。
现代文：延州节度使杨汉章发乡民赴京师，快出发时，刘景岩派人激怒他，义兵作乱，杀掉杨漠章，迎接刘景岩为留后。
English: The Yenzhou Festival made Yang Hanzhang send the villagers to Beijing. When he was about to leave, Liu Jingyan sent people to provoke him, the volunteers made a riot, killed Yang Mozhang, and welcomed Liu Jingyan as a latecomer.

古文：晋高祖即位，即拜景岩节度使。
现代文：晋高祖登位，就拜刘景岩任节度使。
English: When Emperor Gaozong ascended to the throne, he appointed Liu Jingyan as the regent.

古文：景岩从事熊皦，为人多智，阴察景岩跋扈难制，惧其有异心，欲以利愚之，因语景岩，以谓边地不可以久安，为陈保名享利之策，言邠、泾多善田，其利百倍，宜多市田射利以自厚。
现代文：刘景岩的从事熊暾，为人多智多谋，暗中察觉刘景岩蛮横跋扈难以控制，怕他有二心，想使他利令智昏，于是告诉刘景岩，认为边地不能长久安身，替他陈述保护声名享受利益的计策，说郇、泾二州有很多好田，将获利百倍，应当多买田追求财利使自己富有。
English: Liu Jingyan was engaged in bear hunting, he was a man of great wisdom and resourcefulness. He secretly noticed that Liu Jingyan's wild rampage was difficult to control. He was afraid that he was double-minded and wanted to make him stupid. So he told Liu Jingyan that he thought that the borderland could not be settled for a long time, and he explained the strategy of protecting reputation and enjoying benefits for him. He said that there were many good fields in the two states of Yunnan and Shandong, which would make a hundred times profit, and he should buy more fields to pursue financial gain and make himself rich.

古文：景岩信之，岁馀，其获甚多。
现代文：刘景岩相信了他，一年多，获利很多。
English: Liu Jingyan believed him, and after more than a year, he made a lot of profit.

古文：景岩使皦朝京师，皦乃言： 景岩不宜在边，可徙之内地。 
现代文：刘景岩派熊嗷去京师朝拜，熊暾于是说： 刘景岩不宜留在边地，可调他到内地。 
English: Liu Jingyan sent Xiong Yao to Beijing to pay homage. Xiong Yao then said: "Liu Jingyan should not stay in the outlying areas, he can be transferred to the mainland."

古文：乃移景岩邠州，皦入拜补阙，而景岩又徙镇保义，居未几，又徙武胜。
现代文：于是调刘景岩到合州，熊暾入朝拜为补阙，而刘景岩又改任保义节度使，没过多久，又移镇武胜。
English: As a result, Liu Jingyan was transferred to Hezhou, and Xiong Rong entered the imperial court to make amends. Liu Jingyan was also reassigned as the envoy of the Guoying Festival. Not long after, he moved to the town of Wusheng.

古文：景岩乃悟皦为卖己，遂诬奏皦隐己玉带，皦坐贬商州上津令。
现代文：刘景岩纔明白熊嗷出卖了自己，于是诬告熊暾隐藏了自己的玉带，熊暾因此被贬焉商州上津令。
English: Liu Jingyan knew that Xiong Yao had betrayed him, so he falsely accused Xiong Yao of hiding his jade belt. As a result, Xiong Yao was demoted to Shangzhou Shangjinling.

古文：皦惧景岩邀害之，道亡，匿山中。
现代文：熊嗷怕刘景岩拦截谋害他途中逃跑，躲进山中。
English: Xiong Yao was afraid that Liu Jingyan would intercept and kill him, so he ran away and hid in the mountains.

古文：开运三年，景岩罢武胜，以太子太师致仕，居华州。
现代文：开运三年，刘景岩罢去武胜节度使，以太子太师辞官，住在华州。
English: Three years after the start of the campaign, Liu Jingyan was appointed as the envoy of the Wu Sheng Festival, and he lived in Huazhou.

古文：契丹犯京师，以周密镇延州，景岩乃还故里。
现代文：契丹侵犯京师，以周密镇守延州，刘景岩纔返回故乡。
English: The Khitan invaded Beijing and guarded Yanzhou with meticulousness. Liu Jingyan returned to his hometown.

古文：而州人逐密，立高允权，允权妻刘氏，景岩孙女子也。
现代文：而州中人驱逐周密，拥立高允权，高允权的妻子刘氏，是刘景岩的孙女。
English: However, the people in Zhouzhou carefully expelled and supported Gao Yunquan, and Gao Yunquan's wife, Liu, is Liu Jingyan's granddaughter.

古文：景岩良田甲第、僮仆甚盛，党项司家族畜牧近郊，尤富强，景岩与之往来，允权颇患之。
现代文：刘景岩有良田、上等宅第、僮仆很多，党项人司家族在近郊畜牧，尤其富强，刘景岩和他们来往，高允权对此很担心。
English: Liu Jingyan has a lot of good fields, high-class homesteads, and servants. The family of the party secretary is particularly rich and powerful in the suburbs, and Liu Jingyan comes and goes with them. Gao Yunquan is very worried about this.

古文：允权妻岁时归省，景岩谓曰： 高郎一县令，而有此州，其可保乎？ 
现代文：高允权的妻子逢年节时回家探望，刘景岩对她说： 高郎是一县令，而拥有这个州，他能保住吗？ 
English: Gao Yunquan's wife came home to visit during the New Year's holiday, and Liu Jingyan said to her: Gao is a county magistrate, but he owns this state, can he keep it?

古文：允权益恶之，而心又利其田宅，乃诬其反而杀之，年八十馀。
现代文：高允权更加讨厌他，而心中又贪图他的田产宅第，于是诬陷他谋反而杀掉他，死时八十多岁。
English: Gao Yunquan hated him even more, and coveted his farm and home in his heart, so he framed him and plotted to kill him instead. He was in his eighties when he died.

古文：长子行琮，德州刺史，罢，留京师，亦被诛。
现代文：畏子刘行琮，任德州刺史，罢官，留在京师，也被诛杀。
English: The dreaded Liu Xingyao, who was appointed to the post of Texas chief historian, was dismissed and remained in Beijing, where he was also beaten to death.

古文：次子行谦，允权妇翁也，为奏言非刘氏子，遂免不诛。
现代文：次子刘行谦，是高允权妻子的父亲，替他上奏说他不是刘氏的儿子，遂免于被诛杀。
English: The second son, Liu Xingqian, who was the father of Gao Yunquan's wife, testified on his behalf that he was not Liu's son, and was thus spared from being beaten to death.

