古文：刘遂清，字得一，青州北海人，梁开封尹鄩之犹子也。
现代文：刘遂清，字得一，青州北海人，后梁开封尹刘寻阝的侄子。
English: Liu Suiqing, one character, Qingzhou Beihai people, the nephew of Houliang Kaifeng Yin Liu Xunyu.

古文：父琪，以鸿胪卿致仕。
现代文：父亲刘琪，以鸿胪卿身份退休。
English: Liu Qi, his father, retired with the title of Hongyuqing.

古文：遂清少敏惠，初仕梁为保銮军使，历内诸司使，庄宗入汴，不改其职。
现代文：刘遂清小时聪颖仁惠，开始时，事奉后梁担任保銮军使，历任内廷各司使，唐庄宗进入汴州，没有改任他的职务。
English: At the beginning of Liu Suiqing's time, Cong Ying Ren Hui served Hou Liang as a military envoy of the Imperial Guard, and successive emissaries of the Inner Court, Tang Zhuozong entered Zhangzhou, but did not change his position.

古文：高祖即位之二年，授凤州防御使，加检校司徒，会丁母忧，起复，授内客省使、右监门卫大将军。
现代文：明宗继承皇位，加封检校尚书仆射，任为西都监守。过了一年，因中山王都有谋反的迹象，任命刘遂清为易州刺史，使他阻扼敌人攻击的要道，到了州郡之后，很有抵御侵犯的谋略，境内百姓依赖他。平定王都叛乱，加封检校司空，调任棣州刺史。天成、长光年间，历次主管淄、兴、登三个州郡，都有好的政绩。
English: After inheriting the imperial throne, Emperor Mingzong appointed Zhang Shufu as the inspector of the Western Capital, and appointed Liu Suiqing as the inspector of Yizhou to block the enemy's attack. After arriving at Zhouzhu County, Liu Suiqing had a good strategy to resist the invasion, and the people in the territory depended on him. He put down the rebellion of Wangdu, appointed Zhang Shufu as the inspector of the Western Capital, and transferred to the inspector of the Western Capital. During the years of Tiancheng and Changguang, Liu Suiqing was appointed as the director of the three counties of Zhouzhu, Xing and Deng,

古文：六年，驾幸鄴都，转宣徽北院使兼判三司，加检校太保。
现代文：晋高祖即位的第二年，任命他为凤州防御史，加封检校司徒，碰上母亲去世守丧，丧期满后起用，任内客省使、右监门卫大将军。天福六年，高祖幸临邺都，调任宣徽北院使兼判三司，加封检校太保。
English: In the second year of Jingu Gaozu's accession to the throne, he was appointed as the defense historian of Fengzhou, as well as the inspector of the sealing school. When his mother died, he attended the funeral. After the expiration of the mourning period, he was appointed as the provincial envoy and the right supervisor of the gatekeeper general. In the sixth year of Tianfu, Gaozu was fortunate enough to be transferred to Lintu, and was appointed as the envoy of the Northern Court of Xuanhui and the third judge, as well as the inspector of the sealing school.

古文：七年，少帝嗣位，加右领军卫上将军，仍赐竭诚翊戴保节功臣。
现代文：七年，少帝即位，任右领军卫上将军，赐与竭诚翊戴保节功臣名号。
English: In the seventh year, the young emperor ascended to the throne and was appointed the right leader of the army, General Wei Shang, and was given the title of the meritorious subject of the Day of the Dead.

古文：八年，出领郑州，加检校太傅。
现代文：八年，出镇郑州，加检校太傅。
English: In the eighth year, he went to Zhengzhou, and became the superintendent of the inspection school.

古文：开运二年，迁安州防御使。
现代文：开运二年，调任安州防御使。
English: Two years after the start of operations, he was transferred to the post of Anzhou defense envoy.

古文：未几，上表称疾，诏许就便，回至上蔡，终于邮舍，时三年四月也。
现代文：不久，上表称说有病，下诏准允随其自便，他回到上蔡，在驿馆去世，当时是开运三年四月。
English: Not long after, the upper table said that he was ill, and the lower table allowed him to do as he pleased. He returned to Shangcai and died in Shuguang. At that time, it was April of the third year of operation.

古文：遂清性至孝，牧淄川日，自北海迎其母赴郡，母既及境，遂清奔驰路侧，控辔行数十里，父老观者如堵，当时荣之。
现代文：刘遂清生性特别孝顺，任淄川郡守时，从北海迎接他的母亲到淄川来，他母亲到了郡境之后，刘遂清驰马上前，拉着马缰陪着母亲走了几十里，乡亲父老观看的人像墙一样站立两旁，当时的人为有这样的儿子感到荣耀。
English: Liu Suiqing was born with a particularly filial nature. He was appointed as a time-keeping official of Beichuan County and came to Beichuan from the North Sea to meet his mother. After his mother arrived at the county border, Liu Suiqing rode straight ahead, pulled his horse and accompanied his mother for dozens of miles. People in the village who watched him stood on both sides like a wall. People at that time felt honored to have such a son.

古文：遂清素不知书，但多计画，判三司日，每给百官俸料，与判官议曰： 斯辈非尽有才能，多世禄之家，宜澄其污而留其清者。 
现代文：刘遂清一向不曾读过诗书，但多计策谋略，主管三司时，每次发给百官俸禄，都与判官说 ：这些人不一定都有才能，很多是世袭俸禄的人家，应该汰除那些没用的废物，留下那些有能力的人才。 
English: Liu Suiqing had never read a book of poetry, but he made a lot of plans and strategies. When he was in charge of the three departments, he said to the judge every time he paid a salary to a hundred officials, "These people do not necessarily have talent. Many of them are hereditary salary families. We should get rid of the useless waste and keep the talented people."

古文：及使回，遭风水而溺焉。
现代文：有人回答说 ：从前唐朝浑、郭、颜、段四家，每一次赦免令下来，都以一个儿子任官，已成为常制；并且继续奖赏施与恩泽，成为国人的美谈，没有因按月领取俸禄而想淘汰他们的，这恐怕不妥当。 
English: Someone replied: In the past, the four families of the Tang Dynasty, Hun, Guo, Yan and Duan, each time a pardon was issued, one son was appointed as an official, which has become a regular practice; and they continued to reward giving and grace, becoming the talk of the countrymen, and did not want to eliminate them because they received a monthly salary, which is probably not appropriate.

古文：李郁，字文纬，唐之宗属也。
现代文：舆论因此责怪他。李郁，字文纬，是后唐王室的同姓宗族。
English: Public opinion blamed him for this. Li Yu, whose family name was Wenwei, belonged to the same clan as the post-Tang royal family.

古文：少历宗寺官，天成、长兴中，累迁为宗正卿。
现代文：年轻时任过宗寺官，天成、长兴年间，接连迁为宗正卿。
English: When he was young, he served as the head priest of the temple, and during the years of Tiancheng and Changxing, he was successively moved to become the head priest of the temple.

古文：性平允，所历无爱憎毁誉。
现代文：性情平和诚实，所经历的事情，没有因偏爱憎恶而诽谤赞誉的。
English: Those who are peaceful and honest in nature, and who have not slandered praise by preferring hate over what they have experienced.

古文：高祖登极，授光禄卿。
现代文：高祖即位称帝，授予光禄卿。
English: Gaozhu was enthroned as emperor and given the title of Guangluqing.

古文：一日昼寝，梦食巨枣，觉而有疾，谓其亲友曰： 尝闻 枣 字重 来 ，呼魂之象也。
现代文：一天白日睡觉，做梦吃巨大的枣子，醒来后得了病。李郁对他的亲戚朋友说 ：曾经听说 枣 字是 来 字的重叠，是呼唤魂魄的象征。
English: One day, he slept during the day, ate a huge jujube in his dream, and got sick after waking up. Li Yu said to his relatives and friends: I once heard that the word "jujube" is an overlap of words, and is a symbol of calling the soul.

古文：余神气逼抑，将不免乎！ 
现代文：我被神灵鬼气逼迫抑制，将不免一死啊！ 
English: I am oppressed by the spirit of the gods, and will inevitably die!

古文：天福五年夏卒。
现代文：天福五年夏天去世。
English: Tianfu died in the summer of 1955.

古文：赠太子太保。
现代文：追赐太子太保。
English: He was posthumously given the title of Crown Prince Taibo.

古文：马重绩，字洞微。少学数术，明太一、五纪、八象、三统大历，居于太原。
现代文：马重绩，字洞微，年轻时学习了天文、历法、占卜等知识，明白了太一、五纪，八象、三统正历，住在太原。
English: Ma heavy performance, the word hole faint, when he was young, he learned astronomy, calendar, divination and other knowledge, and understood Taichi, five years, eight elephants, three orthodox calendars, and lived in Taiyuan.

古文：仕晋，拜太子右赞善大夫，迁司天监。
现代文：在晋朝任官时，担任太子右赞善大夫，后又迁任司天监。
English: When he was appointed to an official post during the Jin Dynasty, he served as the prince Uzanzen doctor, and later he was transferred to the position of the chief overseer of heaven.

古文：天福三年，重绩上言： 历象，王者所以正一气之元，宣万邦之命，而古今所记，考审多差。
现代文：天福三年，马重绩上书说 ：历法天象，是称帝的人用来调正统一节气的大事，宣谕各国的根本，而古今所记载的，又多有差异。
English: In the third year of Tianfu, Ma Chong Rong wrote: "The celestial calendar is a great event used by those who worship the emperor to adjust and unify the solar terms and proclaim the fundamentals of various countries. However, there are many differences between the ancient and modern records.

古文：《宣明》气朔正而星度不验，《崇元》五星得而岁差一日。
现代文：《宣明》节气建朔正确而不能与星度应验，《崇玄》金、木、水、火、土五星算对了而每年差一天。
English: "Xuanming" calculated the solar terms correctly, but could not match the stars. "Chongxuan" calculated the five stars of gold, wood, water, fire, and earth correctly, but was off by one day every year.

古文：以《宣明》之气朔，合《崇元》之五星，二历相参，然后符合。
现代文：用《宣明》的气朔，再配合《崇玄》的五星，两种历法相互参照，然后才与实际符合一致。
English: With the inspiration of "Xuanming" and the five stars of "Chongxuan," the two calendars are cross-referenced before they are consistent with reality.

古文：自前世诸历，皆起天正十一月为岁首，用太古甲子为上元，积岁愈多，差阔愈甚。
现代文：从前代各种历法看，都以周代历法的十一月为一年的开始，用上古的第一个甲子为上元，积累的岁月越多，差误就越大，我便综合二历，创制了新的历法。
English: From the perspective of various calendars of the previous generation, they all took November of the Zhou Dynasty calendar as the beginning of the year, and used the first Jiazi of the ancients as the Shangyuan. The more years accumulated, the greater the error. I integrated the two calendars and created a new calendar.

古文：臣辄合二历，创为新法，以唐天宝十四载乙未为上元，雨水正月中气为气首。 
现代文：以唐天宝十四年为开始的第一个甲子为上元，以正月中的雨水节气为二十四节气的开始。 
English: Shangyuan is the first Jiazi, which began in the 14th year of Tang Tianbao, and the rain solstice in the middle of the first month is the beginning of the 24 solar terms.

古文：诏下司天监赵仁琦、张文皓等考核得失，仁琦等言： 明年庚子正月朔，用重绩历考之，皆合无舛。 
现代文：高祖下令司天监赵仁琦、张文皓等考察审核其得失优劣。赵仁琦等说： 明年正月初一，用马重绩历法考查它，都吻合没有舛误。 
English: Gao Zu ordered the superintendent of celestial affairs Zhao Renyu, Zhang Wenyu and others to inspect and review its merits and demerits. Zhao Renyu and others said: On the first day of the first month of the next year, using the horse-weighted performance calendar to examine it, there is no mistake.

古文：乃下诏班行之，号《调元历》。行之数岁辄差，遂不用。
现代文：于是下令颁布实行，称作《调元历》，采用了几年之后，则有了差误，便不用了。
English: So he issued an order to promulgate and implement it, called the "Chang Yuan Calendar." After a few years of use, there were errors, and it was no longer needed.

古文：重绩又言： 漏刻之法，以中星考昼夜为一百刻，八刻六十分刻之二十为一时，时以四刻十分为正，此自古所用也。
现代文：马重绩又说 ：漏刻记时的方法，是以二十八宿中星的标准考订白天、黑夜为一百刻，八刻二十分为一个时辰，一个时辰以四刻十分为正。这是从古代一直沿用的方法。
English: Ma Chong Rong also said: The method of missing the mark of time is to use the standard of the star in the 28th house to determine the day and night as one hundred minutes, eight minutes and twenty minutes as one hour, and one hour as four minutes and ten minutes. This is a method that has been used since ancient times.

古文：今失其传，以午正为时始，下侵未四刻十分而为午，由是昼夜昏晓，皆失其正，请依古改正。 
现代文：现在已经失去传统，把午时的正作为一天时间的开始，向后顺延至未时四刻十分定为午时，因此，白天黑夜黄昏拂晓，都丧失了它们的正当时间，请按照古制加以改正。 
English: Now the tradition has been lost, the noon hour is regarded as the beginning of a day's time, and it is set as noon by extending backwards until the last quarter of the hour. Therefore, day, night, dusk and dawn have all lost their proper time, please correct it according to the ancient system.

古文：从之。
现代文：高祖采纳了他的建议。
English: I followed his advice.

古文：重绩卒年六十四。
现代文：马重绩去世时年六十四岁。
English: Ma Chong Rong was 64 years old when he died.

古文：陈元，京兆人也。
现代文：陈元，京兆人，家里世代从医。
English: Chen Yuan, a resident of Beijing, has been a doctor in his family for generations.

古文：家世为医，初事河中王重荣。乾符中，后唐武皇自太原率师攻王行瑜，路出于蒲中，时元侍汤药，武皇甚重之。及还太原，日侍左右。
现代文：起初，侍奉河中王重荣，乾符年间，后唐武皇从太原带领军队攻打王行瑜，沿路经过蒲中，当时，陈玄服侍武皇汤药，武皇非常敬重他，等到返回太原，整天在左右服侍。
English: At first, he served King Chung Rong of Hechuan. During the Qianfu era, Emperor Wu of the Later Tang Dynasty led an army from Taiyuan to attack Wang Xingyu, passing through Puzhong along the way. At that time, Chen Xuan served the Emperor Wu Tang medicine. The Emperor Wu respected him very much. When he returned to Taiyuan, he served all day around.

古文：武皇性刚暴，乐杀人，无敢言者。元深测其情，每有暴怒，则从容启谏，免祸者不一，以是晋人深德之，勋贵赂遗盈门。
现代文：武皇性格刚愎残暴，喜欢杀人，没有谁敢去进谏，陈玄深知他的性情，每当武皇暴躁发怒，就慢慢启发劝谏，不止一人因此而免除灾祸。因此，晋人很是敬重他，馈送礼品的功臣显贵充满门廷。
English: Emperor Wu's character was fierce and cruel, and he liked to kill people. No one dared to go to prison. Chen Xuan was well aware of his temperament. Whenever Emperor Wu was irritable and angry, he would slowly inspire and persuade others. As a result, more than one person was spared from disaster. Therefore, the Jin people respected him very much, and the courtiers were full of heroes and dignitaries who gave gifts.

古文：性好酒乐施，随得而无私积。
现代文：他生性喜欢喝酒乐于施舍，随意获取却没有私人积蓄。
English: By nature, he likes to drink and is happy to give alms, but he does not have any private savings.

古文：明宗朝，为太原少尹，入为太府卿。
现代文：明宗时，担任太原少尹，入宫担任太府卿。
English: During the reign of Emperor Mingzong, he served as Taiyuan Shao Yin, and after entering the imperial court, he served as Taifu Kyo.

古文：长兴中，集平生所验方七十五首，并修合药法百件，号曰《要术》，刊石置于太原府衙门之左，以示于众，病者赖焉。
现代文：长兴年间，集中他一生所使用过的药方七十五副，并且撰写配药方法一百种，称《要术》，刊刻在石碑上，放在太原府衙门的左边，以此展示给大家看，生病的人依赖于它。
English: During the Changxing years, he collected seventy-five recipes that he had used in his life, and wrote one hundred methods of dispensing medicine, called "Important Art," which was engraved on a stone tablet and placed on the left side of the gate of Taiyuan Prefecture, in order to show everyone that sick people depend on it.

古文：天福中，以耄期上表求退，以光禄卿致仕，卒于晋阳，年八十余。
现代文：天福年间，以年老上表请求退职，以光禄卿身份辞官退隐，在晋阳去世，享年八十多岁。
English: During the Tenpu era, he requested retirement on the grounds of old age, resigned his post as Guangluqing and retired into seclusion. He died in Jinyang at the age of over eighty.

