古文：江乙说于安陵君曰： 君无咫尺之地，骨肉之亲，处尊位，受厚禄，一国之众，见君莫不敛衽而拜，抚委而服，何以也? 
现代文：江乙劝导安陵君，说： 您没有为楚国立下过丝毫的功劳，也没有骨肉之亲可以依靠，但是您却身居高位，享受厚禄，百姓见到您，没有不整饰衣服，理好帽子，毕恭毕敬向您行礼的，这是凭什么呢？ 
English: Jiang Yi advised Anlingjun, saying: You have not done the slightest merit for the state of Chu, and there is no flesh-and-blood relative to rely on, but you are in a high position, enjoy a rich reward, the people see you, there is no unadorned clothes, straighten the hat, respectfully bow to you, what is this based on?

古文：曰： 王过举而已。不然，无以至此。 
现代文：安陵君回答说： 这不过是因为楚王抬举我罢了；如果不这样，我不可能得到这种地位。 
English: Anling replied, "It's just because King Chu promoted me; if it wasn't for that, I wouldn't have gotten this position."

古文：江乙曰： 以财交者，财尽而交绝；以色交者，华落而爱渝。
现代文：江乙说： 拿钱财来和他人交往，当金钱用完了，和人的交情也就断绝了；用美色与别人交往，当美色衰退了，爱情也就没有了。
English: Jiang Yi said: Take money and wealth to socialize with others, when the money runs out, the friendship with people will be cut off; use beauty to socialize with others, when the beauty fades, there will be no love.

古文：是以嬖女不敝席，宠臣不避轩。今君擅楚国之势，而无以深自结于王，窃为君危之。 安陵君曰： 然则奈何? 
现代文：所以，爱妾床上的席子还没有睡破，就被遗弃了；宠臣的马车还没有用坏，就被罢黜了；如今您在楚国独揽权势，可自己并没有能与楚王结成深交的资本，我为您非常担忧。 安陵君说： 那该怎么办呢？ 
English: Therefore, the mat on the bed of the concubine has not yet been broken, and it has been abandoned; the carriage of the favorite has not yet been used, and it has been dismissed; now you are monopolizing power in Chu, but you have not been able to make a deep friendship with King Chu, I am very worried about you.

古文： 愿君必请从死，以身为殉，如是必长得重于楚国。 
现代文：江乙说： 希望您一定向楚王请求随他而死，亲自为他殉葬，这样，您在楚国必能长期受到尊重。 安陵君说： 敬遵您的教导。 
English: Jiang Yi said, "I hope that you will definitely ask King Chu to die with him and personally die for him, so that you will be respected for a long time in the State of Chu." Anling Jun said, "I will respectfully follow your instruction."

古文：曰： 谨受令。 
现代文：过了三年，安陵君仍然没有对楚王表明什么。
English: After three years, Anlingjun still hadn't said anything to King Chu.

古文：三年而弗言。江乙复见曰： 臣所为君道，至今未效。君不用臣之计，臣请不敢复见矣。 
现代文：江乙又拜见，说： 我给您说的，到现在您也没有实行，您既然不采纳我的意见，我要求从此不再会见您了。 
English: Jiang Yi also paid him a visit and said, "What I told you, you have not implemented until now. Since you do not accept my opinion, I request not to see you anymore.

古文：安陵君曰： 不敢忘先生之言，未得间也。 
现代文：安陵君说： 我实在不敢忘记先生给我的教导，只因没有遇到好机会啊！ 
English: Anlingjun said: I really dare not forget what my teacher taught me, simply because I didn't have a good opportunity!

古文：于是，楚王游于云梦，结驷千乘，旌旗蔽日，野火之起也若云霓，兕虎嗥之声若雷霆，有狂兕车依轮而至，王亲引弓而射，壹发而殪。
现代文：就在这个时候，楚王要到云、楚地区去游猎，车马成群结队，络绎不绝，五色旌旗遮蔽天日，野火烧起来，好像彩虹，老虎咆哮之声，好像雷霆。忽然一头犀牛像发了狂似的朝车轮横冲直撞过来，楚王拉弓搭箭，一箭便射死了犀牛。
English: Just at this time, King Chu wanted to go hunting in the Yun and Chu regions. Chariots and horses came in droves, never ending. The five-colored banner obscured the sun. Wildfires burned like rainbows. The roar of tigers sounded like thunder. Suddenly, a rhinoceros came charging at the wheels like a madman. King Chu drew a bow and arrow and shot the rhinoceros with one arrow.

古文：王抽旃旄而抑兕首，仰天而笑曰： 乐矣，今日之游也!
现代文：楚王随手拔起一根旗杆，接住犀牛的头，仰天大笑，说： 今天的游览，实在太高兴了！
English: King Chu immediately pulled up a flagpole, caught the rhino's head, laughed uproariously, and said, "I'm so happy about today's tour!

古文：寡人万岁千秋之后，谁与乐此矣? 
现代文：我要是百年之后，又和谁能一道享受这种快乐呢？ 
English: If I am a hundred years later, with whom can I enjoy this happiness?

古文：安陵君泣数行而进曰： 臣入则编席，出则陪乘。大王万岁千秋之后，愿得以身试黄泉，蓐蝼蚁，又何如得此乐而乐之。 
现代文：安陵君泪流满面，上前对楚王说： 我在宫内和大王挨席而坐，出外和大王同车而乘，大王百年之后，我愿随从而死，在黄泉之下也做大王的席垫，以免蝼蚁来侵扰您，又有什么比这更快乐的呢！ 
English: With tears streaming down his face, Anlingjun stepped forward and said to King Chu: "I have sat next to the great king in the palace, and I have ridden in the same carriage as the great king when he went out. After a hundred years of the great king, I would like to die like him, and I would also like to be the great king's seat cushion under the hellfire, so that the ants would not bother you. What could be happier than this?

古文：王大说，乃封坛为安陵君。
现代文：楚王听了大为高兴，就正式封他为安陵君。
English: King Chu was very pleased to hear this and officially named him Anlingjun.

古文：君子闻之曰： 江乙可谓善谋，安陵君可谓知时矣。 
现代文：君子听说了这件事情，就说： 江乙真可以说是善于出谋划策，安陵君也真算是善于利用时机啊。 
English: When the gentleman heard about this, he said: Jiang Yizhen can be said to be good at making plans, and Anlingjun is really good at taking advantage of opportunities.

