古文：宇文韦杨王宇文融，京兆万年人，隋平昌公弼裔孙。
现代文：宇文融是京兆府万年县人，是隋朝平昌县公宇文耺的第四代孙子。
English: Uwen Rong is a native of Wannian County, Beijing Prefecture, and is the fourth-generation grandson of Gong Uwen Rong of Pyeongchang County during the Sui Dynasty.

古文：祖节，明法令，贞观中，为尚书右丞，谨干自将。
现代文：他祖父宇文节，精通法制命令，贞观年间任尚书右丞，谨慎干练能保持节操。
English: His grandfather, Uwenjie, was well versed in the legal system and orders, and was appointed to the post of secretary-general during the Zhenguan era. He was prudent and able to maintain discipline.

古文：江夏王道宗以事请节，节以闻，太宗喜，赉绢二百，劳之曰： 朕比不置左右仆射，正以公在省耳。
现代文：江夏王李道宗因私事找他帮忙，他奏报了，唐太宗很高兴，赐给他绸缎两百匹，犒劳他说： 我现不任命左、右仆射，正因为您在官署里。 
English: The King of Jiangxia, Li Daozong, asked him for help with a private matter. He reported the matter to the emperor. Emperor Tang was very pleased and gave him two hundred yakitori. To reward him, he said, "I am not appointing my right and left henchmen right now, because you are in the government office."

古文：永徽初，迁黄门侍郎、同中书门下三品，代于志宁为侍中。坐房遗爱友善，贬桂州，卒。
现代文：永徽初年，升任黄门侍郎、同中书门下三品，接替于志宁任侍中，因与房遗爱关系好受牵连，贬到桂州，后去世了。
English: In the first year of Yonghui, he was promoted to Huangmen waiter, Tongzhong Shumen Shimo Sanpon, and succeeded Shining as waiter, but because of his relationship with Fang Youai, he was involved, demoted to Guizhou, and then died.

古文：融明辩，长于吏治。
现代文：宇文融明察善辩，有官吏才干。
English: Uwen Rong is clearly a good debater and has the ability of a government official.

古文：开元初，调富平主簿。
现代文：开元初年，调任富平县主簿官。
English: In the first year of the founding of the People's Republic of China, he was transferred to the post of chief bookkeeper of Fuping County.

古文：源乾曜、孟温继为京兆，贤其人，厚为礼。
现代文：源乾曜、孟温相继担任京兆尹，认为他是贤才，都重礼相待。
English: Yuan Qianyou and Meng Wen successively served as Jing Zhaoyun, considered him to be a genius, and treated each other with great courtesy.

古文：时天下户版刓隐，人多去本籍，浮食闾里，诡脱繇赋，豪弱相并，州县莫能制。
现代文：当时全国户籍不全，人们多离开本籍，到其他地方生活，来逃避赋税。豪强兼并弱者，州县官无法制止。
English: At that time, the national household registration was incomplete, and many people left their original residence to live in other places to evade taxation. State and county officials could not stop the strong and weak from annexing.

古文：融由监察御史陈便宜，请校天下籍，收匿户羡田佐用度。
现代文：宇文融以监察御史身份奏报解决办法，请求清查全国户口，征收逃亡人家的赋税和多余的田地来增加国家收入。
English: Uwen Rong proposed the solution of monitoring the status of historical records, requesting a nationwide household registration, collecting taxes from fugitives and surplus fields to increase state income.

古文：玄宗以融为覆田劝农使，钩检帐符，得伪勋亡丁甚众。
现代文：唐玄宗任命宇文融为复田劝农使，检查账目和封爵的符节，查获了很多假封爵和逃亡户。
English: Emperor Xuanzong of Tang appointed Uwen Rong as an agrarian envoy to restore the fields and advise the peasants. He checked the accounts and knighthood certificates, and found many fake knighthoods and fugitive households.

古文：擢兵部员外郎，兼侍御史。
现代文：后升任兵部员外郎，兼任侍御史。
English: He was later promoted to Hyobusho (Minister of the Imperial Household) Geiro, and concurrently served as Samurai Goshi.

古文：融乃奏慕容琦、韦洽、裴宽、班景倩、库狄履温、贾晋等二十九人为劝农判官，假御史，分按州县，括正丘亩，招徠户口而分业之。
现代文：宇文融就任命慕容琦、韦洽、裴宽、班景倩、库狄履温、贾晋等二十九人为劝农判官、代理御史，分别巡查各州县，复核田地，招民入籍并让他们各自从业。
English: Uwen Rong appointed 29 people, including Murong Qian, Wei Cai, Pei Kuan, Ban Jingqian, Ku Di Luyuan, and Jia Jin, as agricultural judges and acting historians, respectively, to inspect each state and county, review fields, recruit people for naturalization, and let them work independently.

古文：又兼租地安辑户口使。
现代文：他又兼任租地安辑户口使。
English: In addition, he also served as a landlord of the rented land of Anzhi.

古文：于是诸道收没户八十万，田亦称是。
现代文：这时各地查出无户籍的人家八十万户，无主田地也和这差不多。
English: At this time, 800,000 households of people without household registration were found in various regions, and the number of ownerless fields was similar.

古文：岁终，羡钱数百万缗。
现代文：这年年终，国家收入了几百万贯钱。
English: By the end of the year, the state had earned several million yuan.

古文：帝悦，引拜御史中丞。
现代文：皇帝高兴了，提升他为御史中丞。
English: The emperor was pleased and promoted him to goshi chujo.

古文：然吏下希望融旨，不能无扰，张空最，务多其获，而流客颇脱不止。
现代文：但下属官吏想讨好宇文融，不能不侵扰百姓，报假数字，只想多查出，而流民很多又逃亡了。
English: However, subordinate officials wanted to please Uwen Rong and could not help but harass the people, report false numbers, and only wanted to find out more, and many displaced people fled.

古文：初，议者以生事，沮诘百端，而帝意向之，宰相源乾曜等佐其举。
现代文：起初，议论的人认为多此一举，多方批评，但皇帝倾向他，宰相源乾曜等人也赞同他的办法。
English: At first, commentators thought it was too much of a move, and there was criticism from many sides, but the emperor preferred him, and Prime Minister Yuan Qianyou and others also approved of his approach.

古文：又集群臣大议，公卿雷同不敢异，唯户部侍郎杨瑒以为籍外取税，百姓困弊，得不酬失。
现代文：后来又召集百官都来讨论，大臣们都附和不敢持异议，只有户部侍郎杨认为征收籍外田的赋税，会使老百姓贫困，得不偿失。
English: Later, a hundred officials were summoned to discuss the matter, and the ministers all agreed and did not dare to dissent. Only the head of the household, Yang, thought that the levying of taxes on fields owned by foreigners would impoverish the common people and would be a waste of money.

古文：瑒坐左迁。
现代文：不久，杨被判罪贬官。
English: Soon after, Yang was convicted and demoted.

古文：融乃自请驰传行天下，事无巨细，先上劝农使，而后上台省，台省须其意，乃行下。
现代文：宇文融又自己请求坐传车巡视全国，不论大事小事，要求先报告劝农使，然后再报告中书省，中书省也要听他的意见再做决断。
English: Uwen Rong also requested to inspect the whole country by car, no matter how big or small, and asked to report to the Minister of Agriculture first, and then report to the Ministry of Education. The Ministry of Education should also listen to his opinion before making a decision.

古文：融所过，见高年，宣天子恩旨，百姓至有感涕者。使还言状，帝乃下诏： 以客赋所在，并建常平仓，益贮九谷，权发敛；官司劝作农社，使贫富相恤。
现代文：宇文融所到之处，召见年长的人，宣布皇帝的诏命，老百姓有的感动得流泪，他派使者回京报告了这情况，皇帝就下诏书说： 增收流户赋税的地方，都建立常平仓、增加粮食储备，根据情况发放和征收，官府提倡成立农社，让穷人和富人互相帮助。
English: Everywhere Uwen Rong went, he summoned the elders and announced the emperor's edict. Some of the common people were moved to tears. He sent an envoy back to Beijing to report the situation. The emperor issued an edict saying: In places where taxes are to be collected from the emigrants, warehouses are to be built, grain reserves are to be increased, and they are to be distributed and collected according to the situation. The government is to promote the establishment of agricultural cooperatives so that the poor and the rich can help each other.

古文：凡农月，州县常务一切罢省，使趋刈获。
现代文：凡是农忙时节，州县日常劳役全部停止，让他们去收割。
English: During the agricultural busy season, all the daily laborers in the prefectures and counties stop, and let them go to harvest.

古文：流亡新归，十道各分官属存抚，使遂厥功。
现代文：流户才入籍的，十个道各派官员安抚，让他们能安居乐业。
English: Officials from all ten provinces are trying to placate the migrant families who have just been naturalized, so that they can live and work in peace.

古文：复业已定，州县季一申牒，不须挟名。 
现代文：恢复旧业以后，各州县每季度申报一次，不要再立名目。 
English: After the restoration of the old industry, each state and county should declare once a quarter, and do not set up a name.

古文：中书令张说素恶融，融每建白，说辄引大体廷争。
现代文：中书令张说一贯讨厌宇文融，宇文融每次提出计划，张说就从全局角度来和他在朝廷上争论。
English: Zhang said that he always hated Uwen Rong. Every time Uwen Rong proposed a plan, Zhang said that he would argue with him in the imperial court from a global perspective.

古文：融揣说不善，欲先事中伤之。
现代文：宇文融察觉张说对他不怀好意，想抢先利用机会中伤他。
English: Yu Wenyong noticed that Zhang said that he did not have good intentions towards him and wanted to take advantage of the opportunity to slander him.

古文：张九龄谓说曰： 融新用事，辩给多诈，公不可以忽。 
现代文：张九龄对张说说： 宇文融刚当权，善诡辩、多诈谋，您不要轻视他。 
English: Zhang Jiuling said to Zhang: "Uwen Rong is just in power, good at sophistry, more deception, you should not despise him.

古文：说曰： 狗鼠何能为！ 
现代文：张说说 ：这鼠辈能怎么样？ 
English: Zhang said, "What can this rat do?"

古文：会帝封太山还，融以选限薄冬，请分吏部为十铨。
现代文：遇上皇帝封泰山回来，宇文融因科举时间接近冬季，请求将吏部分为十批人主持考试。
English: When Emperor Fongtaishan returned, Uwen Rong requested that ten groups of officials preside over the examination because the examination time was close to winter.

古文：有诏融与礼部尚书苏颋、刑部尚书韦抗、工部尚书卢从愿、右散骑常侍徐坚、薄州刺史崔琳、魏州刺史崔沔、荆州长史韦虚心、郑州刺史贾曾、怀州刺史王丘分总，而不得参事，一决于上。
现代文：皇帝下诏命宇文融和礼部尚书苏耮、刑部尚书韦抗、工部尚书卢从愿、右散骑常侍徐坚、蒲州刺史崔琳、魏州刺史崔沔、荆州长史韦虚心、郑州刺史贾曾、怀州刺史王丘分管。但不让互相干预，都由皇帝决定。
English: The emperor decreed that Yu Wen Rong should be in charge of the Ministry of Ceremonies, the Ministry of Justice, the Ministry of Industry, the Right Cavalryman Xu Jian, the Governor of Bozhou, the Governor of Wei, the Governor of Jing, the Governor of Zhengzhou, and the Governor of Waizhou. However, it was decided by the emperor not to interfere with each other.

古文：融奏选事，说屡却之，融怒，乃与御史大夫崔隐甫等廷劾说引术士解祷及受赇，说由是罢宰相。
现代文：宇文融奏报科举的事情，张说多次打了回去，宇文融发怒了，就和御史大夫崔隐甫等人在朝廷上弹劾张说招术士占星和接受贿赂，张说因此被罢免了宰相。
English: Uwen Rong reported the matter of the imperial examination, Zhang said that he repeatedly hit back, Uwen Rong was angry, and he and the imperial historian Cui Yinfu and others impeached Zhang in the court for recruiting astrologers and accepting bribes. Zhang said that he was dismissed as prime minister for this reason.

古文：融畏说且复用，訾诋不已。
现代文：宇文融担心张说还会被任用，不断诋毁他。
English: Uwen Rong was worried that Zhang Xuan would still be appointed, and constantly slandered him.

古文：帝疾其党，诏说致仕，放隐甫于家，出融为魏州刺史。
现代文：皇帝讨厌他们结党争斗，下诏将张说、崔隐甫免官，把宇文融贬出京城任魏州刺史。
English: The emperor disliked their factional fighting, and issued an edict to Zhang saying that Cui Yingfu was to be removed from office, and that Uwen Rong was to be banished from Beijing and appointed as the governor of Weizhou.

古文：方河北大水，即诏领宣抚使，俄兼检校汴州刺史、河南北沟渠堤堰决九河使。
现代文：当时河北道发大水，很快有诏命他任河北道宣抚使。不久兼任检校汴州刺史，河南、河北道沟渠、堤堰、决九河使。
English: At that time, Hebei Province was flooded, and he was soon ordered by imperial edict to serve as the envoy of Hebei Province. Soon, he also served as the envoy of Guanzhou, and the envoy of Henan Province, and the envoy of Hebei Province for ditches, dykes, and dams.

古文：又建请垦九河故地为稻田，权陆运本钱，收其子入官。
现代文：他又上奏请求开垦九河故道作为稻田，加上买卖和陆运做本钱，把利润收归官府。
English: He also petitioned for the reclamation of the old Jiuhe Road as a rice field, with trading and land transportation as the capital, and the profits to be returned to the government.

古文：兴役纷然，而卒无成功。
现代文：虽然发起了很多劳役，但终于没有成果。
English: Although a lot of labor service was initiated, there was no result in the end.

古文：入为鸿胪卿，兼户部侍郎。
现代文：后调进京城任鸿胪卿，兼任户部侍郎。
English: Later, he was transferred to the capital to serve as Hongyuqing and concurrently served as a household attendant.

古文：明年，进黄门侍郎、同中书门下平章事。
现代文：第二年，升任黄门侍郎、同中书门下平章事。
English: In the second year, he was promoted to the position of Huangmen waiter, and the same year, he was promoted to the position of Zhongzhong Shumen Shimohei Shoji.

古文：融曰： 使吾执政得数月久，天下定矣。 
现代文：宇文融说 ：假如让我当权几个月，全国就没有问题了。 
English: Uwen Rong said, "If I am allowed to stay in power for a few months, there will be no problems in the whole country."

古文：乃荐宋璟为右丞相，裴耀卿为户部侍郎，许景先为工部侍郎，当时长其知人。
现代文：他又推荐宋瞡任右丞相，裴耀卿任户部侍郎，许景先为工部侍郎，当时的人都称赞他知人善任。
English: He also recommended Song Xi as the Minister of the Right, Pei Yaoqing as the Chamberlain of the Household, and Xu Jingsen as the Chamberlain of the Ministry of Industry. People at the time praised his acquaintance and good appointment.

古文：而性卞急，少所推下。
现代文：但他性格急躁，很少归功部下。
English: But he has a quick temper and rarely gives credit to his subordinates.

古文：既居位，日引宾客故人与酣饮。
现代文：当宰相后，每天和宾客旧友等畅饮。
English: After becoming prime minister, he enjoyed drinking with guests such as old friends every day.

古文：然而神用警敏，应对如响，虽天子不能屈。
现代文：但他精明敏捷论辩反应快，即使是皇帝也不能难倒他。
English: But he is a shrewd and quick debater, and not even the emperor can stump him.

古文：信安王祎节度朔方，融畏其权，讽侍御史李宙劾奏之。
现代文：信安王李任朔方节度使，宇文融害怕他的权力，指使侍御史李宙弹劾他。
English: Li Renxiao, the king of Xinyan, was the party's commander-in-chief, but Wu Wenyong was afraid of his power and ordered his attendant, Li Xiao, to impeach him.

古文：祎密知，因玉真公主、高力士自归。
现代文：李探听到了，通过玉真公主、高力士自己奏报了。
English: When Inspector Li heard about this, he reported it himself through Princess Tamazhen and Goryeo.

古文：翌日，宙通奏，帝怒，罢融为汝州刺史。
现代文：第二天，李宙上奏，皇帝发怒了，把宇文融罢相贬为汝州刺史。
English: The next day, when Li Chao came to play, the emperor got angry and denigrated Uwen Rong as the history of Ruzhou.

古文：居宰相凡百日去，而钱谷亦自此不治。
现代文：他当宰相共一百天就去职了，但钱粮收入从此也就减少了。
English: He left office after a total of 100 days as prime minister, but the income from grain and money has also decreased since then.

古文：帝思之，让宰相曰： 公等暴融恶，朕既罪之矣，国用不足，将奈何？ 
现代文：皇帝又想念他，责备宰相们说： 你们宣扬宇文融的坏处，我已把他治罪了，但国家用度不够，怎么办呢？ 
English: The emperor missed him again and reproached the chancellors, saying: "You are propagating the evils of Yuwen Rong. I have already punished him, but the state expenditure is not enough. What should we do?

古文：裴光庭等不能对，即使有司劾融交不逞，作威福，其息受赃馈狼藉，乃贬融平乐尉。
现代文：裴光庭等人无话可答，就指使有关部门弹劾宇文融结交不法之徒，滥用权势，他的儿子接受贿赂、行为不检点，于是把宇文融贬为平乐县尉。
English: Pei Guangting and others had nothing to say, so they ordered the relevant departments to impeach Uwen Rong for associating with criminals, abuse of power, his son accepting bribes, and misconduct, and then demoted Uwen Rong to Pingle County Lieutenant.

古文：岁余，司农发融在汴州绐隐官息钱巨万，给事中冯绍烈深文推证，诏流于严州。
现代文：一年多以后，司农少卿揭发宇文融在汴州贪污官府利息钱无数，给事中冯绍烈援引法律条文罗织证实了罪状，皇帝下诏将他流放到岩州。
English: More than a year later, the Minor Secretary of the Ministry of Agriculture and Rural Affairs revealed that Uwen Rong had embezzled countless interest money from the government in Zhangzhou. In the process, Feng Shao Lie cited legal provisions to prove his guilt, and the emperor ordered him to be exiled to Iwashu.

古文：道广州。迁延不行，为都督耿仁忠所让，惶恐上道，卒。
现代文：他路过广州，拖延着不上路，被都督狄仁忠责备，惶恐不安地上了路。
English: He passed through Guangzhou, delayed going on the road, was scolded by the governor Di Renzhong, and set off on the road with trepidation.

古文：杨国忠颛政，杀岭南流人，以中使传口敕行刑，畏议者嫉其酷，乃以审为岭南监决处置等使，活者甚众。
现代文：在路上去世了。当初，宇文融设置很多使臣来满足皇上奢侈的愿望，老百姓都忧愁害怕。有关部门逐渐丧失职权，是从宇文融开始的。
English: He died on the way. At the beginning, Uwen Rong set up many envoys to satisfy the emperor's extravagant wishes, and the common people were worried and afraid. The relevant departments gradually lost their powers, starting with Uwen Rong.

古文：后终和、永二州刺史。
现代文：皇帝还怀念他过去的功劳，赠官为台州刺史。
English: The emperor also fondly remembered his past achievements, bestowing him with the title of Taizhou's chief historian.

古文：韦坚，字子全，京兆万年人。
现代文：后来靠理财被重用的人接连不断，人们说都是继承宇文融的。韦坚的字叫子全，是京兆府万年县人。
English: Later, there was a succession of people who relied on financial management to be reused, and people said that they were all successors to Uwen Rong. Wei Jian's character is called Zi Quan, and he is a resident of Wannian County, Beijing Shi Prefecture.

古文：姊为惠宣太子妃，妹为皇太子妃，中表贵盛，故仕最早。
现代文：他姐姐是惠宣太子妃，妹妹是皇太子妃，亲戚都是宠贵，所以很早就当官了。
English: His sister is Princess Huixuan, his younger sister is the Crown Princess, and his relatives are all precious, so he became an official very early.

古文：由秘书丞历奉先、长安令，有干名。
现代文：从秘书丞升任奉先、长安县县令，有能干的名声。
English: He was promoted from secretary to minister and county magistrate of Chang'an County, and gained a reputation for his ability.

古文：见宇文融、杨慎矜父子以聚敛进，乃运江、淮租赋，所在置吏督察，以佐国禀，岁终增钜万。
现代文：他看到宇文融、杨慎矜父子靠搜刮民财升官，就转运江淮赋税，在各地派官吏监督察看，来补充国家收入，每年增加收入无数。
English: He saw that Uwen Rong and Yang Sheng Yao, father and son, were promoted to high-ranking officials by means of robbing the people's money, transferred taxes to Jianghuai, sent officials to supervise and inspect in various regions to supplement the national income, and increased income countless times every year.

古文：玄宗咨其才，擢为陕郡太守、水陆运使。
现代文：唐玄宗赞赏他的才干，提升他为陕郡太守、水陆转运使。
English: Tang Xuan Zong appreciated his talent and promoted him to the governor of Shaanxi and the water and land transportation envoy.

古文：汉有运渠，起关门，西抵长安，引山东租赋，汔隋常治之。
现代文：汉代有运渠，东从潼关城门，西到长安，运送关东的赋税，直到隋朝一直都保持着。
English: During the Han Dynasty, there was a canal that transported taxes from Shouguan City Gate in the east to Chang'an in the west, and this was maintained until the Sui Dynasty.

古文：坚为使，乃占咸阳，壅渭为堰，绝灞、浐而东，注永丰仓下，复与渭合。
现代文：韦坚担任水陆转运使，就在咸阳测量，筑坝分渭水修运渠，沟通灞水、水向东流，流到永丰仓下面，又和渭水会合。
English: Wei Jian served as the water-land transfer agent, and in Xianyang, he measured, built a dam to divide the floodwater and repaired the transport channel, communicating the floodwater, the water flowed eastward, flowed to the bottom of Yongfeng Cang, and then joined with the floodwater.

古文：初，浐水衔苑左，有望春楼，坚于下凿为潭以通漕，二年而成。
现代文：原先，水流经宫苑的左边，修有望春楼，韦坚在楼下挖潭来沟通漕运，用两年修成了。
English: Originally, the water flowed through the left side of the palace garden, and Wei Jian dug a pool downstairs to communicate with the rowing. It took two years to complete the construction.

古文：帝为升楼，诏群臣临观。
现代文：皇帝为此登上望春楼，并下诏命百官到楼上去观看。
English: To this end, the emperor ascended the Wangchun Tower and issued an edict ordering hundreds of officials to go upstairs to watch.

古文：坚豫取洛、汴、宋山东小斛舟三百并贮之潭，篙工柁师皆大笠、侈袖、芒屦，为吴、楚服。
现代文：韦坚事先调来洛阳、汴州、宋州的关东小斛底船三百艘停在潭里，船工舵手都头戴大斗笠、身穿宽袖衣、脚穿草鞋，像吴、楚一带的服装样式一样。
English: Wei Jian had previously transferred three hundred Guandong small gillnet boats from Luoyang, Luzhou, and Songzhou to stop in the lake. The boatmen and helmsmen all wore large hats, wide sleeves, and straw sandals, just like the clothing style in the Wu and Chu regions.

古文：每舟署某郡，以所产暴陈其上。
现代文：每艘船都写有州郡的名称，将州、郡的特产陈列在船上。
English: Each boat has the name of the state and county written on it, and the special products of the state and county are displayed on the boat.

古文：若广陵则锦、铜器、官端绫绣；会稽则罗、吴绫、绛纱；南海玳瑁、象齿、珠琲、沉香；豫章力士瓷饮器、茗铛、釜；宣城空青、石绿；始安蕉葛、蚺胆、翠羽；吴郡方文绫。
现代文：如广陵郡就是绵、铜器具、官制的绫绣；会稽郡就是罗、吴绫、绛纱；南海郡就是玳瑁、象牙、珍珠串、沉香；洪州是特制瓷饮具、温茶器、茶锅；宣城郡是空青矿石、孔雀石；始安郡是蕉葛布、蟒蛇胆、翠色鸟羽；苏州是方文绫。
English: For example, Guangling County is cotton, copper utensils, and government-made embroidery; Kaiqi County is Luo, Wuxi, and embroidery; Nanhai County is embroidery, ivory, string of pearls, and agarwood; Hongzhou is special porcelain drinking utensils, warm teapots, and teapots; Xuancheng County is azure ore and malachite; Shi'an County is cochineal cloth, python gall bladder, and emerald bird feathers; Suzhou is Fangwen cocoon.

古文：船皆尾相衔进，数十里不绝。
现代文：船都首尾相连，连绵几十里。
English: The ships are connected end-to-end, stretching for dozens of miles.

古文：关中不识连樯挟橹，观者骇异。
现代文：关中人没见过这多帆船和摇橹，看到的人都很惊奇。
English: People in Guanzhong have never seen so many sailboats and paddle boats, and everyone who saw them was surprised.

古文：先是，人间唱《得体纥那歌》，有 扬州铜器 语。
现代文：此前，民间流传《得体纥那歌》，歌中有 扬州铜器 的歌词。
English: Previously, there was a folk legend about "The Song of Proper Manners," which contained lyrics by Yangzhou Copperware.

古文：开元末，得宝符于桃林，而陕尉崔成甫以坚大输南方物与歌语叶，更变为《得宝歌》，自造曲十馀解，召吏唱习。
现代文：开元末年，在桃林找到了宝符，因而陕县县尉崔成甫认为韦坚运来大批南方货物与歌中的话相应，就改歌名叫《得宝歌》，自编曲十多种，命官吏学唱。
English: At the end of the first year of the year, a treasure was found in Taolin. As a result, Cui Chengfu, a county official of Shaanxi County, thought that Wei Jian's transportation of a large number of goods from the south corresponded to the words in the song, so he changed the song's name to "Treasure Song." He composed more than 10 kinds of songs and ordered the officials to learn to sing.

古文：至是，衣缺胯衫、锦半臂、绛冒额，立舻前，倡人数百，皆巾軿鲜冶，齐声应和，鼓吹合作。
现代文：到这时，他自己穿着缺襟衫，短袖锦衣，绛色束额巾，站在船头领唱，几百名歌伎，都穿戴打扮得鲜艳夺目，一齐应和，鼓乐齐奏。
English: By this time, he was wearing a short-sleeved collared shirt, a short-sleeved brocade shirt, and an indigo-colored head scarf. He stood at the bow of the ship and led the singing. Hundreds of Kabuki actors, all dressed in bright and eye-catching outfits, responded in unison, and the drums played in unison.

古文：船次楼下，坚跪取诸郡轻货上于帝，以给贵戚、近臣。
现代文：船走到望春楼下，韦坚跪着拿来船上各郡的小货物呈给皇帝，来赐给皇帝亲戚和侍臣。
English: When the ship came to the lower deck of the Wangchun, Wei Jian knelt down and brought the small goods from each county on the ship to present to the emperor, to give to the emperor's relatives and courtiers.

古文：上百牙盘食，府县教坊音乐迭进，惠宣妃亦出宝物供具。
现代文：又呈上上百种盘装食品，府县和教坊的乐队一起合奏，惠宣妃也拿出各种宝物供楼上陈设。
English: In addition, hundreds of kinds of food on trays were presented, prefectural and school bands played together, and Hui Xuanfei also brought out various treasures for display upstairs.

古文：帝大悦，擢坚左散骑常侍，官属赏有差，蠲役人一年赋，舟工赐钱二百万，名潭曰广运。
现代文：皇帝很高兴，提升韦坚任左散骑常侍，他的部属也有不同的奖赏，又免去服劳役者一年的赋税，船工共赏钱两百万贯、将潭赐名为广运潭。
English: The emperor was very pleased. He promoted Wei Jian to the position of the left horseback rider's attendant. His subordinates also received different rewards, and they were exempted from paying taxes for one year. The ship workers were awarded a total of two million yuan, and the lake was given the name Guangyun Lake.

古文：坚进兼江淮南租庸、转运、处置等使，又兼御史中丞，封韦城县男。
现代文：韦坚又被提升兼任江南、淮南租庸、转运、处置等使职，又兼任御史中丞，封为韦城县男爵。
English: Wei Jian was also promoted and concurrently held the posts of Jiangnan, Huainan rent, transshipment and disposal, and concurrently served as the vice-president of history, and was made a baron of Weicheng County.

古文：坚妻，姜皎女，李林甫舅子也。初甚昵比，既见其宠，恶之。
现代文：韦坚的妻子是姜皎的女儿，是李林甫舅舅的孩子，李林甫开始和韦坚很亲热，看到他得宠了，就讨厌他。
English: Wei Jian's wife was the daughter of Jiang Chen, the child of Li Linfu's uncle. Li Linfu started to be very intimate with Wei Jian, and when he saw that he was favored, he hated him.

古文：坚亦自以得天子意，锐于进，又与左相李适之善，故林甫授坚刑部尚书，夺诸使，以杨慎矜代之。
现代文：韦坚又自以为得到皇帝的宠信，急着想升官，又和左相李适之交好，因此李林甫任命韦坚为刑部尚书，罢免了他的各种使职，用杨慎矜接替他。
English: Wei Jian also thought that he was favored by the emperor, he was anxious to be promoted, and he was also friendly with the left consort Li Shih. Therefore, Li Linfu appointed Wei Jian as the chief of the Criminal Investigation Department, dismissed him from various duties, and replaced him with Yang Shennong.

古文：坚失职，稍怨望。
现代文：韦坚失去了原任职务，开始不满了。
English: Wei Jian lost his original position and became dissatisfied.

古文：河西、陇右节度使皇甫惟明数于帝前短林甫，称坚才，林甫知之。
现代文：河西、陇右节度使皇甫惟明多次在皇帝面前贬低李林甫，称赞韦坚的才干，李林甫知道了这事。
English: The Hexi and Zouyou festivals made the emperor humiliate Li Linfu and praise Wei Jian's talent in front of the emperor many times. Li Linfu knew this.

古文：惟明故为忠王友，王时为皇太子矣。
现代文：皇甫惟明曾为忠王友，忠王当时已是皇太子了。
English: Empress Dowager Wo Ming was once a friend of Prince Chung, who was already the crown prince at the time.

古文：正月望夜，惟明与坚宴集，林甫奏坚外戚与边将私，且谋立太子。
现代文：正月十五的夜晚，皇甫惟明和韦坚举行宴会，李林甫上奏说韦坚身为外戚却和边将交好，是计划立太子当皇帝篡位。
English: On the evening of the fifteenth day of the first month, the Empress Dowager Weiming and Wei Jian held a banquet. Li Linfu said that Wei Jian, who was a relative, was friendly with the general, and was planning to usurp the throne as the crown prince.

古文：有诏讯鞫，林甫使杨慎矜、杨国忠、王鉷、吉温等文致其狱，帝惑之，贬坚缙云太守，惟明播川太守，籍其家。
现代文：皇帝下诏审讯他们，李林甫指使杨慎矜、杨国忠、王钅共、吉温等人罗织他们的罪名，皇帝被他们迷惑了，贬韦坚为缙云郡太守、皇甫惟明为播川郡太守，查抄没收了他们的家财。
English: The emperor issued an edict to interrogate them, and Li Linfu instructed Yang Shengkun, Yang Guozhong, Wang Qigong, Ji Wen and others to fabricate their crimes. The emperor was confused by them, demoted Wei Jian to the governor of Jinyun County, and Wang Fu Weiming to the governor of Banchuan County, and confiscated their family wealth.

古文：坚诸弟诉枉，帝大怒。
现代文：韦坚的弟弟们上诉说冤枉，皇帝大怒。
English: Wei Jian's brothers appealed that they had been wronged, and the emperor was furious.

古文：太子惧，表与妃绝。
现代文：太子害怕了，上表和妃子断绝了关系。
English: The prince got scared and broke off relations with his concubine.

古文：复贬坚江夏别驾。
现代文：韦坚又被贬为鄂州别驾。
English: Wei Jian was also relegated to the status of an Ezhou special driver.

古文：未几，长流临封郡。
现代文：不久，贬临封郡参军。
English: Soon after, he joined the army in Linfu County.

古文：弟兰，为将作少匠，冰鄠令，芝，兵部员外郎，子谅，河南府户曹，皆谪去。
现代文：他的弟弟韦兰原任将作少匠、韦冰原任雩阝县县令，韦芝原任兵部员外郎，他的儿子韦谅原任河南府户曹，都被免职。
English: His brother, Wei Lan, who was originally appointed as a junior craftsman, Wei Bing, who was originally appointed as a county magistrate of Jixian County, Wei Zhi, who was originally appointed as a military officer, and his son, Wei Yue, who was originally appointed as a Henan prefectural household sergeant, were all dismissed.

古文：岁中，遣监察御史罗希奭就杀之，杀惟明于黔中，惟坚妻得原。
现代文：这年年中，皇帝派监察御史罗希去把他们都杀死了，又到黔中道去杀死了皇甫惟明，只有韦坚的妻子被赦免了。
English: In the middle of the year, the emperor sent the inspector, Shuroshi, to kill them all, and he also went to the middle of the Yunnan Road to kill the emperor's father, Wei Ming. Only Wei Jian's wife was pardoned.

古文：从坐十余人，仓部员外郎郑章、右补阙内供奉郑钦说、监察御史豆卢友杨惠、嗣薛王肙皆免官被窜。
现代文：受牵连的有十几人，仓部员外郎郑章，右补阙内供奉郑钦说，监察御史豆卢友、杨惠，嗣薛王李都被贬官到外地。
English: More than a dozen people have been implicated, including Zheng Zhang, the warehouse clerk's younger brother, and Zheng Qin, the right-hand man, said the inspector, Zhu Luyou, Yang Hui, and the heir, Xue Wang Li, have all been demoted to other places.

古文：坚始凿潭，多坏民冢墓，起江、淮，至长安，公私骚然。
现代文：韦坚当初挖广运潭，挖坏了很多老百姓的坟墓，从江南、淮南，到长安，官吏和老百姓不得安宁。
English: At the beginning, Wei Jian dug the Guangyuntan and damaged the graves of many common people. From the south of the Yangtze River, Huainan, to Chang'an, officials and common people could not find peace.

古文：及得罪，林甫遣使江、淮，钩索坚罪，捕治舟夫漕史，所在狱皆满。
现代文：到他被治罪，李林甫派使者到江南、淮南去，调查韦坚的罪状，逮捕审讯船工和漕运官吏，所到之处监牢都装满了。
English: After he was convicted, Li Linfu sent emissaries to the south of the Yangtze River and Huainan Province to investigate Wei Jian's crimes, arrest and interrogate boatmen and rowing officials. Wherever he went, the jails were full.

古文：郡县剥敛偿输，责及邻伍，多裸死牢户。
现代文：郡县官员盘剥逃亡者应交纳的费用，连邻居也受处罚，多数人都光着身子死在狱中。
English: County officials collected fees owed by the escapees, even their neighbors were punished, and most of them died naked in prison.

古文：林甫死，乃止。
现代文：李林甫死了，才停止了。
English: It only stopped when Li Linfu died.

古文：杨慎矜，隋齐王暕曾孙。
现代文：杨慎矜是隋朝齐王杨暕的曾孙。
English: Yang Shennong is the great-grandson of the Sui and Qi King Yang Zhen.

古文：祖正道，从萧后入突厥，及破颉利可汗，乃得归，为尚衣奉御。
现代文：他祖父杨正道，跟随萧后到了突阙，到唐军打败了颉利可汗，才回来了，被任命为尚衣奉御。
English: His grandfather, Yang Zhengdao, followed Xiao to Turpan, and only returned after the Tang army defeated the Qili Khan, and was appointed Shangyi Bongyo.

古文：父隆礼，历州刺史，善检督吏，以严辩自名。
现代文：他的父亲杨隆礼，历任渚州刺史，善于督察官吏，以严格明察出名。
English: His father, Yang Longli, successively the governor of Nagasu Province, was good at inspecting officials and was famous for his strict observation.

古文：开元初，为太府卿，封弘农郡公。
现代文：开元初年，任太府卿，被封为弘农郡公。
English: In the first year of the founding of the Republic of China, he was appointed Dafu-kyo (Grand Prefect) and given the title of Honnong-gun.

古文：时御府财物羡积如丘山，隆礼性详密，出纳虽寻尺皆自按省，凡物经杨卿者，号无不精丽，岁常爱省数百万。
现代文：当时太府钱财货物堆得像山一样，他禀性周详严密，出进库即使很少数目也都亲自检查，凡是经过他手的物品，当时认为都会精细美丽，每年都节省几百万贯钱。
English: At that time, Taifu's money and goods were piled up like a mountain. He was meticulous and meticulous, and he personally checked even the fewest items entering and exiting the warehouse. All items that passed through his hands were considered to be fine and beautiful at that time, saving millions of yuan every year.

古文：任职二十年，年九十馀，以户部尚书致仕，卒。
现代文：当官二十年，享年九十多岁，在户部尚书任上退职，后去世了。
English: After twenty years as an official, he died at the age of over ninety years old. He retired from the post of household secretary and later passed away.

古文：慎矜沉毅任气，健而才。
现代文：杨慎矜沉稳坚毅任性，体健而有才干。
English: Yang Shengkun is calm, steady, resolute, headstrong, physically fit and talented.

古文：初为汝阳令，有治称。
现代文：起初任汝阳县令，以治理得好出名。
English: At first, he served as the Ryuyang County Governor and was famous for his good governance.

古文：隆礼罢太府，玄宗访其子可代父任者，宰相以慎馀、慎矜、慎名皆得父清白。
现代文：他父亲从太府卿离任后，唐玄宗问他的几个儿子中谁能代替他，宰相认为杨慎余、杨慎矜、杨慎名兄弟都像父亲那样清廉。
English: After his father left the post of Taifu-kyo, Tang Xuanzong asked him which of his sons could replace him. The prime minister thought that Yang Shenyu, Yang Shengyao, and Yang Shengnai were all as clean as his father.

古文：帝喜，擢慎矜监察御史，知太府出纳，慎馀太子舍人，主长安仓，慎名大理评事，为含嘉仓出纳使，被眷尤渥。
现代文：皇帝高兴了，提升杨慎矜为监察御史、知太府出纳；杨慎余为太子舍人、主管长安仓；杨慎名为大理评事、含嘉仓出纳使。
English: The emperor was pleased, and promoted Yang Shanyu to the position of inspector of imperial history and treasurer of the Chida Prefecture; Yang Shanyu to the position of prince's chamberlain and supervisor of the Chang'an storehouse; and Yang Shanyu to the position of Dali critic and treasurer of the Chang'an storehouse.

古文：慎矜迁侍御史，知杂事，高置风格。
现代文：都受到特别的恩宠。杨慎矜又升任侍御史、知杂事，道德情操很高尚。
English: All of them received special favors. Yang Shengyao was also promoted to the position of attendant of history, knowledgeable about miscellaneous matters, and his moral sentiments were very noble.

古文：始议输物有污伤，责州县偿所直，转轻齐入京师，自是天下调发始烦。
现代文：他开始提议凡上交物品中有污迹和损伤的，各州县按价值赔偿，买方便将货物送到京城，从此全国调运开始纷繁了。
English: He began to propose that all states and counties should pay compensation according to the value of the smudges and damage in the delivered goods, and buy convenience to send the goods to Beijing. From then on, the national transportation began to be complicated.

古文：天宝二年，权判御史中丞、京畿采访使，太府出纳如故。
现代文：天宝二年，他被任命为代理御史中丞、京畿采访使，仍旧任太府出纳。
English: In the second year of the Tenpo era, he was appointed acting goshi chujo and Gyeonggi envoy, while still serving as taifu cashier.

古文：于时李林甫用事，慎矜进非其意，固让不敢拜，乃授谏议大夫、兼侍御史，更以萧谅为中丞。
现代文：当时李林甫当权，杨慎矜提升不合他的心意，因此杨慎矜坚持推辞不敢任职，于是被任命为谏议大夫，兼任侍御史，换萧谅任御史中丞。
English: At that time, Li Linfu was in power, and Yang Shengkun's promotion was not to his liking. Therefore, Yang Shengkun insisted on resigning and did not dare to hold the post, so he was appointed as the chairman of the discussion, concurrently served as the secretary of the history, and was replaced by Xiaofeng as the secretary of the history.

古文：谅争轻重不平，罢为陕郡太守。
现代文：萧谅急论事情与李林甫不合，被贬为陕郡太守。
English: Xiao Yuanzhong disagreed with Li Linfu on the matter and was demoted to the governor of Shaanxi.

古文：林甫知慎矜为己屈，卒授御史中丞，兼诸道铸钱使。
现代文：李林甫知道杨慎矜被自己制服了，就任命他为御史中丞，兼任各道铸钱使。
English: Li Linfu knew that Yang Shengyao had been subdued by himself, so he appointed him as the Vice-Minister of History, and also served as the money-making envoy of each province.

古文：韦坚之狱，王鉷等方文致，而慎矜依违不甚力，鉷恨之，虽林甫亦不悦。
现代文：韦坚被审讯，王钅共等人想罗织罪名，但杨慎矜犹豫不肯出力，王钅共恨他，李林甫也不高兴。
English: Wei Jian was put on trial, Wang Bingzong and others wanted to frame him, but Yang Shengyao hesitated and refused to help, Wang Bingzong hated him, and Li Linfu was not happy.

古文：鉷父与慎矜外兄弟也，故与鉷狎。
现代文：王钅共的父亲和杨慎矜是表兄弟，因此杨慎矜和王钅共亲近。
English: Wang Bingcong's father and Yang Shengkun are cousins, so Yang Shengkun and Wang Bingcong are close.

古文：及为侍御史，繇慎矜所引，后迁中丞，同列，慎矜犹以子姓畜之，鉷负林甫势，滋不平。会慎矜擢户部侍郎，仍兼中丞，林甫疾其得君，且逼己，乃与鉷谋陷之。
现代文：他当侍御史，又是杨慎矜引荐的，后升任御史中丞，两人同职。杨慎矜还像对晚辈一样对待他，他仗着李林甫的权势，逐渐不满意了，遇上杨慎矜升任户部侍郎，又兼任御史中丞，李林甫忌妒他受皇帝宠信，将威胁自己，就和王钅共密谋陷害他。
English: He worked as an attendant to the imperial historian and was recommended by Yang Shengkun. Later, he was promoted to the vice-chairman of the imperial historian, and the two held the same position. Yang Shengkun also treated him like a younger generation. He relied on Li Linfu's power and gradually became dissatisfied. When he met Yang Shengkun, he was promoted to the household attendant and also served as the vice-chairman of the imperial historian. Li Linfu was jealous of his being favored by the emperor and would threaten himself, so he and Wang Xi conspired to frame him.

古文：明年，慎矜父冢草木皆流血，惧，以问所善胡人史敬忠。
现代文：第二年，杨慎矜父亲坟墓处的草和树木都流出血来，他害怕了，就问相好的异族人史敬忠。
English: The following year, the grass and trees at his father's grave were bleeding. He was afraid, so he asked his friend Shi Jingzhong.

古文：敬忠使身桎梏，裸而坐林中厌之。又言天下且乱，劝慎矜居临汝，置田为后计。
现代文：史敬忠叫他戴镣铐，光着身子坐在树林中消灾；史敬忠又说国家将有动乱，劝他住到临汝去买田地做退路。
English: Shi Jingzhong told him to wear shackles and sit naked in the woods to extinguish the disaster; Shi Jingzhong also said that the country would be in turmoil, and advised him to live in Lin Ryu and buy a field as a retreat.

古文：会婢春草有罪，将杀之，敬忠曰： 勿杀，卖之可市十牛，岁耕田十顷。 
现代文：遇上婢女春草有过错，他想杀她，史敬忠说 ：不要杀，卖了她可买十头牛，每年可耕种十顷地。 
English: When confronted with the fact that his maid, Chun Cao, was at fault and he wanted to kill her, Shi Jingzhong said, "Don't kill her. If you sell her, you can buy ten cows and farm ten hectares of land each year."

古文：慎矜从之。
现代文：杨慎矜依了他。
English: Yang Shin Rong followed him.

古文：婢入贵妃姊家，因得见帝。
现代文：春草到了贵妃姐姐的家里，因此见到了皇帝。
English: When Chunca arrived at the home of Guifei's sister, he met the emperor.

古文：帝爱其辩惠，留宫中，浸侍左右。
现代文：皇帝喜欢她善辩聪明，把她留在皇宫里，睡觉时在身边侍奉。
English: The emperor liked her eloquence and cleverness, kept her in the palace, and served her while she slept.

古文：帝常问所从来，婢奏为慎矜家所卖。帝曰： 彼乏钱邪？ 
现代文：皇帝曾问她从哪里出来的，婢女说是杨慎矜卖的。皇帝说 ：他缺钱吗？ 
English: The emperor once asked her where she came from, and the maid said that she was sold by Yang Shengkun. The emperor said, "Is he short of money?"

古文：对曰： 固将死，赖史敬忠以免。 
现代文：她答道 ：本来要杀死我，因史敬忠劝才卖了。 
English: She replied, "I was going to kill myself, but I sold it because of Shi Jingzhong's advice."

古文：帝素闻敬忠挟术，间质其然。
现代文：皇帝常听说史敬忠有法术，又问他是否这样。
English: The emperor had often heard that Shi Jingzhong had magic, and asked him if this was true.

古文：婢具言敬忠夜过慎矜，坐廷中，步星变，夜分乃去；又白厌胜事。
现代文：婢女详细说了史敬忠夜里到杨慎矜家，坐在堂上，测量星位的变化，夜半才离去了；又说了消灾的事。
English: The maid said in detail that Shi Jingzhong came to Yang Shengyao's house at night, sat in the hall, measured the change in the position of the stars, and only left at midnight; he also talked about disaster relief.

古文：帝怒。
现代文：皇帝发怒了。
English: The emperor was furious.

古文：而婢漏言于杨国忠，国忠、鉷方睦，阴相语。
现代文：这婢女又把这事告诉了杨国忠，杨国忠和王钅共正要好，又偷偷告诉了他。
English: The maid also told Yang Guozhong about this. Yang Guozhong and Wang Yao were on friendly terms and secretly told him.

古文：始，慎矜夺鉷职田，辱诟其母，又尝私语谶书，鉷衔之，未有发也。
现代文：先前，杨慎矜强占了王钅共按官职分得的田，辱骂过他母亲，还曾私下谈过谶纬书，他忌恨杨慎矜，但没发作。
English: Previously, Yang Shengkun had occupied the land allocated to Wang Xi by virtue of his official position, had insulted his mother, and had also spoken privately about Zou Wei Shu. He hated Yang Shengkun, but did not attack.

古文：至闻国忠语，乃喜，且欲尝帝以取验。
现代文：到听杨国忠谈到这事，就高兴了，还想试试皇帝来验证一下。
English: When I heard Yang Guozhong talk about this, I was happy and wanted to try the emperor to verify it.

古文：异时奏事，数称引慎矜，帝悖然曰： 尔亲邪，毋相往来！ 
现代文：有次奏报事情，多次称赞和提到杨慎矜，皇帝果然发怒说 ：是你的亲戚吧！不要和这人来往！ 
English: There was a report on the matter, praising and mentioning Yang Shengkun many times, and the emperor was really angry and said, "It's your relative! Don't associate with this person!"

古文：鉷知帝恶甚，后见慎矜，辄慢侮不为礼，慎矜怒。
现代文：他知道皇帝非常讨厌杨慎矜，就傲慢轻侮而不行礼，杨慎矜很生气。
English: He knew that the emperor disliked Yang Sheng Yao very much, so he arrogantly insulted Yang Sheng Yao without courtesy. Yang Sheng Yao was very angry.

古文：鉷乃与林甫作飞牒，告慎矜本隋后，蓄谶纬妖言，与妄人交，规复隋室。
现代文：王钅共就和李林甫写没头状子，告杨慎矜本是隋朝的后代，私藏谶纬书，和不法分子来往，想恢复隋朝。
English: Wang Shaoqin wrote to Li Linfu that he did not have a first-born son, and accused Yang Shaoqin of being a descendant of the Sui Dynasty, hiding books, and associating with outlaws, and wanting to restore the Sui Dynasty.

古文：帝方在华清宫，闻之震怒，收慎矜尚书省，诏刑部尚书萧炅、大理卿李道邃、殿中侍御史卢铉、杨国忠杂讯。
现代文：皇帝正在华清宫，听说这后大怒，在尚书省逮捕了杨慎矜，下诏命刑部尚书萧炅，大理卿李道邃，殿中侍御史卢铉、杨国忠一起审讯。
English: The emperor was at the Huaqing Palace, and after hearing of this, he flew into a rage and arrested Yang Shengkun in Shangshu Province. He issued an edict ordering the criminal department to interrogate Shangshu Xiaojun, Daliqing Li Daojun, and the palace attendants Shuluo and Yang Guozhong.

古文：驰遣京兆士曹参军吉温系慎馀、慎名于洛阳狱考治。
现代文：派京兆府士曹参军吉温把杨慎余、杨慎名抓到洛阳狱中拷问。
English: The Jingzhao prefectural magistrate Cao Sangjun Ji Wen sent Yang Shenyu and Yang Shenna to Luoyang Prison for interrogation.

古文：捕太府少卿张瑄致会昌传舍，劾瑄与慎矜共解图谶，搒掠不服。
现代文：又把太府少卿张蠧抓到会昌传舍，弹劾他和杨慎矜一起占验谶讳，拷打他，但他不服罪。
English: He also arrested Zhang Ye, the Taifu Shaoqing, to the Huichang Convent, impeached him and Yang Shengyi together, and tortured him, but he did not plead guilty.

古文：铉遣御史崔器索谶书，于慎矜小妻卧内得之，诟曰： 逆贼所寘固密，今得矣！ 
现代文：卢铉派御史崔器去搜查谶纬书，在杨慎矜小妾的卧房里找到了，卢铉骂道： 叛贼藏得虽然隐蔽，现已找到了！ 
English: Lu Yao sent his minstrel to search for the book and found it in the bedroom of Yang Sheng Yao's concubine. Lu Yao scolded: Although the traitor was hidden, it has been found!

古文：以示慎矜，慎矜曰： 它日无是，今得之，吾死，命矣夫！ 
现代文：拿给杨慎矜看，杨慎矜说 ：过去没有这书，现却搜到了，我的死是命运哪！ 
English: He showed it to Yang Shengkun, and Yang Shengkun said, "I didn't have this book before, but now I've found it. My death is fate!"

古文：温又诱敬忠首服诘言，慎矜不能对。
现代文：吉温又引诱史敬忠自首招供，杨慎矜无法对质。
English: Ji Wen also lured Shi Jingzhong into confessing, and Yang Shengyao was unable to confront him.

古文：有诏杖敬忠，赐慎矜、瑄死，籍其家，子女悉置岭南。
现代文：皇帝下诏对史敬忠施杖刑，杀死了杨慎矜和张蠧，没收了他们的家产，孩子们都流放岭南。
English: The emperor decreed that Shi Jingzhong be punished with the cane, killed Yang Shengkun and Zhang Ye, confiscated their family property, and the children were exiled to Lingnan.

古文：姻党通事舍人辛景凑、天马副监万俟承晖、闲厩使殿中监韦衢等坐窜徙者十馀族，所在部送，近亲不得仕京师。
现代文：姻亲通事舍人辛景凑、天马副监万俟承晖、闲厩使殿中监韦衢等被牵连流放的有十几个家族。又命各地押送，近亲不准在京城任官。
English: There were more than a dozen families that were implicated and exiled, such as the in-laws' secretary, Xin Jingpiao, the vice-supervisor of the Heavenly Horse, Wan Rongcheng, and the middle supervisor of the palace, Wei Wei. They were also ordered to be escorted around the country, and close relatives were not allowed to hold office in the capital.

古文：遣御史颜真卿驰洛阳决狱。
现代文：又派御史颜真卿赶赴洛阳去行刑。
English: He also sent the imperial secretary Yan Zhenqing to Luoyang to carry out the execution.

古文：慎馀、慎名闻兄死，皆哭，既读诏，辍哭。
现代文：杨慎余、杨慎名听说哥哥死了，都哭了，读完诏书后，他们就不哭了。
English: When Yang Shenyu and Yang Shenmei heard that their brother had died, they both cried. After reading the edict, they stopped crying.

古文：慎名曰： 奉诏不敢稽死，但寡姊垂白，作数行书与别。 
现代文：杨慎名说： 接诏后不敢拖延死期，但我守寡的姐姐年老了，想写几行字和她道别。 
English: "After receiving the edict, I didn't dare to delay my death, but my widowed sister is getting old, and I wanted to write a few lines to say goodbye to her," Yang Shennai said.

古文：真卿许之。
现代文：颜真卿答应了他。
English: Yan Zhenqing agreed.

古文：索笔，曰： 拙于谋己，兄弟并命，姊老孤茕，何以堪此！ 
现代文：他要了一枝笔，写道： 不会为自己考虑，兄弟一起送了命，姐姐年老受孤单，真是让人不忍心！ 
English: He asked for a pen and wrote: "She doesn't think about herself, her brother died together, and her sister is suffering from loneliness in her old age. It's unbearable!"

古文：遂缢，手指天而绝。
现代文：写完就上吊自杀，手指着天断气了。
English: After he finished writing, he hanged himself and died with his finger pointing at the sky.

古文：慎矜兄弟友爱，事姊如母，仪干皆秀伟，爱宾客，标置不凡，著称于时。
现代文：杨慎矜弟兄们很友爱，侍奉姐姐像对母亲一样，又都容貌俊秀身材高大，喜欢客人，气质高雅，在当时有名望。
English: Yang Shengyao's brothers were very friendly, and they served his sister as if she were their mother. They were all handsome and tall, liked guests, and had an elegant temperament. They were famous at the time.

古文：慎名尝视鉴叹曰： 兄弟皆六尺馀，此貌此才，欲见容当世，难矣！
现代文：杨慎名曾经照镜子后叹气说 ：我们弟兄都身长六尺多，这种仪表和才华，想被现代容纳，难哪！
English: Yang Shennai once looked in the mirror and sighed: "Our brothers are more than six feet tall, this kind of appearance and talent, if you want to be accepted by modern times, it's hard!

古文：胡不使我少体弱邪？ 
现代文：怎么不让我身体稍微弱一点呢？ 
English: Why don't you let me get a little weaker?

古文：世哀其言。
现代文：当时的人都同情他这句话。
English: People at the time felt sorry for him.

古文：宝应初，慎矜、王琚、韦坚皆复官爵。
现代文：宝应初年，杨慎矜、王王居、韦坚都恢复了官职爵位。
English: In the first year of Baoying, Yang Shengkun, Wang Wangju and Wei Jian all resumed their official titles.

