古文：弓人为弓，取六材必以其时，六材既聚，巧者和之。
现代文：弓人制作弓，取用六材必须依照季节。六材都具备后，心灵手巧的工匠将它们加工组合而成为弓。
English: When a bowman makes a bow, six materials must be used according to the season. Once all six materials are available, a skilled craftsman processes and combines them to make a bow.

古文：干也者，以为远也；角也者，以为疾也；筋也者，以为深也；胶也者，以为和也；丝也者，以为固也；漆也者，以为受霜露也。
现代文：干，以求射得远；角，以求箭速快；筋，以求箭射得深；胶，以求弓身结合紧密；丝，以求弓身牢固；漆，以求弓身能经受霜露。
English: Dry, to shoot far; horn, to make the arrow faster; sinew, to make the arrow deeper; glue, to make the bow tight; silk, to make the bow strong; lacquer, to make the bow able to withstand frost.

古文：凡取干之道七：柘为上，檍次之，□桑次之，橘次之，木瓜次之，荆次之，竹为下。
现代文：采取干材的质量标准分七等：柘木为上等，檀木次一等，屎桑又次一等，橘木又次一等，木瓜又次一等，荆木又次一等，竹子最次。
English: The quality standard of the dry wood used is divided into seven grades: birch is the highest grade, sandalwood is the second highest grade, shit mulberry is the second highest grade, orange tree is the second highest grade, papaya is the second highest grade, wattle is the second highest grade, and bamboo is the lowest grade.

古文：凡相干，欲赤黑而阳声，赤黑则乡心，阳声则远根。
现代文：凡选择干材，要颜色赤黑而敲击的声音清扬的：颜色赤黑就木质坚韧，声音清扬就木理条顺。
English: If you choose dry wood, you want the color to be reddish-black and the sound of hammering to be clear: reddish-black color means the wood is tough, and clear sound means the wood is straight.

古文：凡析干，射远者用埶，射深者用直。
现代文：凡剖制弓干，为求远射的要反向利用干材的曲势，为求射得深就要用直材。
English: Where the bow is made in sections, in order to make a long shot, it is necessary to reverse the curvature of the dry material, and in order to make a deep shot, it is necessary to use straight material.

古文：居干之道，菑□不迆，则弓不发。
现代文：处理干材的方法，剖析干材时锯不邪，制作的弓就不会扭曲。
English: The method of handling the dry material, when the dry material is dissected, it will not be sawed, and the bow will not be distorted.

古文：凡相角，秋閷者厚，春閷薄，稚牛之角直而泽，老牛之角紾而昔。疢疾险中，瘠牛之角无泽。
现代文：凡选择角，秋季宰杀的牛角质厚，春季宰杀的牛角质薄；小牛的角直而润泽，老牛的角不直而干燥；久病的牛角里就会受伤而洼陷不平，瘦瘠的牛角不润泽。
English: For those who choose horns, the horns of cattle slaughtered in autumn are thick and the horns of cattle slaughtered in spring are thin; the horns of calves are straight and moist, the horns of old cattle are not straight and dry; the horns of cows that have been ill for a long time will be injured and saggy, and the thin horns are not moist.

古文：角欲青白而丰末，夫角之本，蹙于脑而休于气，是故柔。柔故欲其埶也；白也者，埶之征也。
现代文：角要颜色青白而末端粗大的。角的根本处近于牛脑而受脑气的蒸润，因此比较柔韧，柔韧因此要它具有自然弯曲之势，颜色发白，就是弯曲之势的征验。
English: The horn should be pale in color with a thick end. The base of the horn is close to the cow's brain and is steamed by the brain gas, so it is more pliable. The pliability therefore requires it to have a natural bending potential. The white color is the test of the bending potential.

古文：夫角之中，恒当弓之畏，畏也者必桡。桡，故欲其坚也；青也者，坚之征也。
现代文：角的中段常附在弓隈处，弓隈处必然弯曲，弯曲因此要所附的牛角坚韧，颜色发青，就是坚韧的征验。
English: The middle section of the horn is often attached to the girth of the bow, and the girth of the bow is inevitably bent. Therefore, the bending requires the horn to be tough, and the color is blue, which is the test of toughness.

古文：夫角之末；远于脑而不休于气，是故色。色故欲其柔也；丰末也者，柔之征也。
现代文：角的末端远于牛脑而不受脑气的蒸润，因此比较脆，脆因此要它柔韧，角的末端粗大，就是柔韧的征验。
English: The end of the horn is farther than the bull's brain and is not affected by the evaporation of brain gas, so it is more brittle. Brittle therefore requires it to be flexible. The end of the horn is coarse, which is the test of flexibility.

古文：角长二尺有五寸，三色不失理，谓之牛戴牛。
现代文：角长二尺五寸，兼有三色而纹理无瑕疵，叫做牛头上又戴着一牛。
English: The horn is two feet and five inches long, and has three colors and a flawless texture. It is called a bull head and wears a bull.

古文：凡相胶，欲朱色而昔，昔也深，深瑕而泽，紾而抟廉。
现代文：凡选择胶，要红色而干燥的。干燥的胶，裂痕深而有光泽，裂成的纹理呈圆形而有廉棱。
English: If you choose glue, it should be red and dry. Dry glue, the cracks are deep and shiny, and the cracked texture is round and has edges.

古文：鹿胶青白，马胶赤白，牛胶火赤，鼠胶黑，鱼胶饵，犀胶黄。
现代文：鹿胶青白色，马胶赤白色，牛胶火赤色，鼠胶黑色，鱼胶白而微黄，犀胶黄色。
English: Deer glue is blue-white, horse glue is red-white, cow glue is red, rat glue is black, fish glue is white and slightly yellow, and rhinoceros glue is yellow.

古文：凡昵之类不能方。
现代文：凡黏附类的东西都不能同胶的黏合力相比。
English: Nothing adhesive can compare to the sticking power of rubber.

古文：凡相筋，欲小简而长，大结而泽，小简而长。
现代文：凡选择筋，要小筋成条而长，筋端的结要大而润泽。
English: When selecting the sinew, the small sinew should be long, and the knot at the end of the sinew should be large and moist.

古文：大结而泽，则其为兽必剽，以为弓，则岂异于其兽，筋欲敝之敝，漆欲测，丝欲沈，得此主材之全，然后可以为良。
现代文：小筋成条而长，筋端的结大而润泽，有这种筋的野兽一定行动迅疾，用它的筋制作弓，射出的箭难道会同兽的迅疾不同吗?筋要捶打得熟之又熟，漆要清，丝要像在水里煮练时的颜色。得此六种弓材都完好无瑕，然后可以制作优良的弓。
English: The small sinews are long, and the knots at the ends of the sinews are large and glossy. A beast with such sinews must move quickly. Using its sinews to make a bow, will the arrows it shoots be different from the speed of the beast? The sinews must be beaten well and well, the paint must be clear, and the threads must be the same color as when they are cooked in water. The six types of bow materials are all intact and flawless, and then you can make an excellent bow.

古文：凡为弓，冬析干而春液角，夏治筋，秋合三材，寒奠体，冰析灂。
现代文：凡制作弓，冬季剖析干材而春季用水煮治角，夏季治理筋，瞅季再用胶、漆、丝三种材料将干、角、筋组合在一起，冬寒季节固定弓体，隆冬冰冻时检验漆纹是否剥落。
English: When making a bow, the dry material is analyzed in winter, the horns are treated with boiled water in spring, the sinews are treated in summer, and the three materials of glue, lacquer, and silk are used to combine the dry, horns, and sinews in the wet season. The bow is fixed in the winter season, and the lacquer is checked for peeling when it freezes in midwinter.

古文：冬析干则易，春液角则合，夏治筋则不烦，秋合三材则合，寒奠体则张不流，冰析灂则审环，春被弦则一年之事。
现代文：冬季剖析干材就比较容易治理好，春季煮治角就较易使角柔韧，夏季治理筋就不会紊乱，秋季再用胶、漆、丝组合干、角、筋三种材料就坚固而严密，冬寒季节固定弓体张弦时就不再变形，隆冬冰冻时检验。漆纹就皲易确定环形的漆纹是否符合要求，到下一年春季再安上弦，就是整整一年的事情了。
English: In the winter, it is relatively easy to treat the dry material, in the spring, it is relatively easy to make the angle pliable, in the summer, the treatment of the sinew will not be disordered, in the autumn, the combination of glue, lacquer and silk will make the dry, angle and sinew three materials strong and tight, in the winter cold season, when the bow is fixed, it will no longer be deformed, and in the middle of winter, it will be frozen. The lacquered pattern is easy to determine whether the ring-shaped lacquered pattern meets the requirements, and it will be a whole year before the next spring.

古文：析干必伦，析角无邪，斫目必荼。
现代文：剖析干材必须顺着木的纹理，剖析角也要顺着纹理不要斜，砍斫干材上的节疤必须徐缓。
English: The analysis of the dry material must follow the texture of the wood, the analysis angle should also follow the texture and not be oblique, and the knots on the dry material must be cut slowly.

古文：斫目不荼，则及其大修也，筋代之受病。
现代文：砍斫节疤不徐缓，等到弓使用长久了，缠在弓干外的筋就会代干受到损坏。
English: When the bow is used for a long time, the sinews that are entangled in the outside of the bow stem will be damaged.

古文：夫目也者必强，强者在内而摩其筋，夫筋之所由幨，恒由此作，故角三液而干再液。
现代文：木节必然是坚硬的，坚硬的东西在里面磨它外面的筋，筋之所以鼓起而不附干，常常就是由于这个原因造成的，因此角要煮治三次而干要煮治两次。
English: The knot must be hard, and the hardness inside grinds the sinew on the outside. The reason why the sinew swells and does not dry is often caused by this reason. Therefore, the horn should be boiled three times and the stem should be boiled twice.

古文：厚其帤，则木坚；薄其帤，则需，是故厚其液而节其帤，约之。
现代文：弓干中部的衬木过厚干木就过于坚硬，衬木过薄就过于软弱，因此弓干要多煮治而适当地加衬木。
English: If the wood lining in the middle of the stem is too thick, the wood will be too hard, and if the wood lining is too thin, it will be too soft. Therefore, the stem should be cooked more and the wood lining should be added appropriately.

古文：不皆约，疏数必侔，斫挚必中，胶之必均。
现代文：弓干上要缠束丝绳而不遍缠，缠束的疏密必须均匀。弓干的砍斫要十分精致而且厚薄必须调匀，施胶必须均匀。
English: On the stem of the bow, a bunch of silk cords should be wrapped, but not all over, and the density of the wrapping must be uniform. The cutting of the stem of the bow should be very delicate and the thickness must be uniform, and the gluing must be uniform.

古文：斫挚不中，胶之不均，则及其大修也，角代之受病，夫怀胶于内而摩其角，夫角之所由挫，恒由此作。
现代文：砍斫弓干不精致不调匀，施胶不均匀，等到弓使用长久了，角就会代干受到损坏。胶在里面而磨损角，角之所以折断，常常就是由于这个原因造成的。
English: When the bow is used for a long time, the angle will be damaged. The glue inside will wear the angle, and the angle will break, which is often caused by this reason.

古文：凡居角，长者以次需，恒角而短，是谓逆桡，引之则纵，释之则不校。恒角而达，譬如终绁，非弓之利也。
现代文：凡处置角，角长的安置在弓隈而短的安置在弓箫。隈角过短，就会受箫角的影响而向相反方向弯曲，这就叫做逆曲，这样拉弓就无力，射出的箭就不能疾行。隈角过长，那就譬如弓始终系在铋上一样，影响拉弓射箭，并非对弓有利。
English: When dealing with angles, the longest angle is placed on the rim of the bow, while the shorter one is placed on the top of the crossbow. If the rim angle is too short, it will be affected by the beak angle and bend in the opposite direction, which is called inversion, so the bow will be weak and the arrow will not be able to travel. If the rim angle is too long, then, for example, the bow is always tied to the beak, affecting the drawing of the bow and archery, and is not beneficial to the bow.

古文：今夫茭解中有变焉，故挍；于挺臂中有柎焉，故剽。
现代文：弓的隈角与箫角交接处用力方向不同，因此射出的箭能迅疾；在弓把处两侧贴附有骨，因此射出的箭能迅疾。
English: At the intersection of the taper angle and the beak angle of the bow, the direction of force is different, so the arrow can be shot quickly; there are bones attached to both sides of the handle of the bow, so the arrow can be shot quickly.

古文：恒角而达，引如终绁，非弓之利也。
现代文：隈角过长，拉弓时就如同弓始终缚系在秘上一样，并非对弓有利。
English: If the circumference is too long, it will be like the bow is always tied to the handle when the bow is drawn, which is not good for the bow.

古文：挢干欲孰于火而无赢，挢角欲孰于火而无燂，引筋欲尽绝无伤其力，鬻胶欲孰而水火相得，然则居旱亦不动，居湿亦不动。
现代文：用火煤制弓干要熟而不要过熟，用火煤制角要熟而不要烤烂，拉筋要尽量伸展而又不要拉断纹理损伤它的力度，煮胶要熟而所用水火恰到好处，这样制成的弓放在干燥的地方不变形，放在潮湿的地方也不变形。
English: To make a bow with fire coal, the stem should be ripe but not overripe, the horn should be ripe but not roasted, the string should be stretched as much as possible without breaking the texture and damaging its strength, the glue should be ripe and the fire should be just right. The bow made in this way will not deform when placed in a dry place and will not deform when placed in a wet place.

古文：苟有贱工，必因角干之湿以为之柔，善者在外，动者在内。虽善于外，必动于内，虽善亦弗可以为良矣。
现代文：假如有低能的工匠，必然会趁角、干潮湿易燥时进行煤制，只图外表好看，而变化的因素隐藏在内，即使能做到外表好看，内部必然发生变化，外表再好也不可以成为良弓。
English: If there are low-energy craftsmen, they will inevitably take advantage of the angle, dry, wet and easy to dry when making coal, only the appearance is good-looking, and the factors of change are hidden inside. Even if you can make the appearance good-looking, the inside will inevitably change, and the appearance can not be a good bow.

古文：凡为弓，方其峻，而高其柎，长其畏，而薄其敝，宛之无已。应下柎之弓，末应将兴。
现代文：凡制作弓，峻要方而拊要高，隈角要长而蔽角要薄，即使拉弓不停，也都能与弦的缓急相应而不疲软。
English: When making a bow, the steepness should be square and the beak should be high, the circumference should be long and the covering angle should be thin. Even if the bow is pulled continuously, it can correspond to the string's priority without being weak.

古文：为柎而发，必动于閷，弓而羽閷，末应将发。
现代文：拊低的弓，箫一应弦承受拉力拊就将变形。
English: If the bow is too low, it will be deformed as soon as the string is subjected to tension.

古文：弓有六材焉，维干强之。
现代文：作为拊而变形，必然会使驸角与隈角相接处变动。
English: Deformation as a beak will inevitably cause the beak angle to change at the junction with the rim angle.

古文：张如流水。维体防之，引之中参。维角常之，欲宛而无负弦，引之如环，释之无失体。如环。
现代文：要使干强有力，而拉弓时顺如流水；要使弓体固定而防止变形，拉满弓时弦与弓臂之间符合三尺的距离；角要能撑住弓干以增加强度，拉弦时不发生邪曲而不能正对弦；拉弓时弓体弯曲如环，松手放箭时弓体不变形，仍弯曲如环。
English: It is necessary to make the stem strong and powerful, while the bow is drawn smoothly like flowing water; the bow body should be fixed to prevent deformation, and the distance between the bow string and the bow arm should be three feet when the bow is pulled full; the angle should be able to support the bow stem to increase the strength, and when the string is pulled, the bow body should not be bent like a ring; when the bow is pulled, the bow body is bent like a ring, and when the arrow is released, the bow body is not deformed, but still bent like a ring.

古文：材美，工巧，为之时，谓之参均。角不胜干，干不胜筋，谓之参均。量其力，有三均，均者三，谓之九和。
现代文：材料优良，工艺精巧，制作适时，叫做三均；角与干相应，干与筋相应，叫做三均；衡量弓的拉力又符合三均：三个三均，叫做九和。
English: Excellent materials, exquisite craftsmanship, and timely production are called three evens; the angle corresponds to the stem, and the stem corresponds to the sinew, which is called three evens; and the pulling force of the bow is measured according to three evens: three three evens is called nine evens.

古文：九和之弓，角与干权，筋三侔，胶三锊，丝三邸，漆三斞。上工以有馀，下工以不足。
现代文：符合九和标准的弓，角与干相称。筋三侔，胶三锊，丝三邸，漆三蚪，上等工匠用之有余，下等工匠用之不足。
English: A bow that meets the standards of Jiuhe, with a horn that is commensurate with the stem, and with three kinds of strings, three kinds of glue, three kinds of silk, and three kinds of lacquer, is more than enough for high-level craftsmen, but not enough for low-level craftsmen.

古文：为天子之弓，合九而成规。为诸侯之弓，合七而成规。大夫之弓，合五而成规。士之弓，合三而成规。
现代文：制作天子的弓，合九弓而成圆；制作诸侯的弓，合七弓而成圆；大夫的弓，合五弓而成圆；士的弓，合三弓而成圆。
English: Make the bows of the sons of heaven into nine bows and make them round; make the bows of the princes into seven bows and make them round; make the bows of the doctors into five bows and make them round; make the bows of the magistrates into three bows and make them round.

古文：弓长六尺有六寸，谓之上制，上士服之；弓长六尺有三寸，谓之中制，中士服之；弓长六尺，谓之下制，下士服之。
现代文：弓长六尺六寸，称为上制，高个子的人使用；弓长六尺三寸，称为中制，中等身材的人使用；弓长六尺，称为下制，低个子的人使用。
English: A bow with a length of six feet and six inches, called the upper bow, is used by tall people; a bow with a length of six feet and three inches, called the middle bow, is used by people of medium stature; a bow with a length of six feet, called the lower bow, is used by people of short stature.

古文：凡为弓，各因其君之躬，志卢血气，丰肉而短，宽缓以荼。
现代文：凡制作弓，各因使用者的形貌性情而定。胖而矮，性情宽舒而举动徐缓，这样的人要为他制作劲疾的弓，劲疾的弓配以柔缓的箭。
English: Whosoever makes a bow, let him make it according to the shape and nature of the one who is to use it: stout and short, gentle and slow, let him make for himself a strong bow, and a strong bow with soft arrows.

古文：若是者为之危弓，危弓为之安矢，骨直以立，忿埶以奔。
现代文：刚毅而敏捷，暴躁而迅疾，这样的人要为他制作柔缓的弓，柔缓的弓配以劲疾的箭。
English: He that is slow to anger is better than the mighty; and he that is slow to anger than the mighty; and he that is slow to anger than the mighty; and he that is slow to anger than the mighty.

古文：若是者为之安弓，安弓为之危矢，其人安，其弓安，其矢安，则莫能以速中，且不深。
现代文：如果人的性情柔缓，他的弓也柔缓，箭也柔缓，射出的箭就不能迅速中的，而且不能深入。
English: If a man's nature be soft, his bow will be soft, and his arrows will be soft; and the arrow that he shoots out of the bow will not go short, nor will it go deep.

古文：其人危，其弓危，其矢危，则莫能以愿中。
现代文：如果人的性情急躁，他的弓也劲疾，箭也劲疾，射出的箭就不能谨慎命中。
English: If a man's nature is hasty, his bow will be forced, his arrows will be forced, and his arrows will not be carefully shot.

古文：往体多，来体寡，谓之夹臾之属，利射侯与弋。
现代文：弓体向外弯曲的弧度大，向内弯曲的弧度小，称为夹、臾之类的弓，利于射犴侯和弋射飞鸟。
English: A bow with a large outward curvature and a small inward curvature is called a clip or crossbow, and is good for shooting birds.

古文：往体寡，来体多，谓之王弓之属，利射革与质。
现代文：向外弯曲的弧度小，向内弯曲的弧度大，称为王弓之类的弓，利于射革甲和椹板。
English: A bow with a small outward curvature and a large inward curvature, known as a king's bow, is good for shooting leather armor and cutting boards.

古文：往体来体若一，谓之唐弓之属，利射深。
现代文：向外和向呙弯曲的弧度相同，称为唐弓之类的弓，利于深射。
English: A bow with the same curvature outward and inward is called a "Tang bow" and is good for deep archery.

古文：大和无灂，其次筋角皆有灂而深，其次有灂而疏，其次角无灂。
现代文：九和的弓没有漆纹，其次筋、角都有漆纹而深藏在内侧，又其次筋、角的表面都有漆纹而较稀疏，又其次仅角当隈里的地方没有漆纹。
English: Kyowa's bow does not have a lacquer pattern, secondly, the string and the corner have a lacquer pattern and are deeply hidden on the inside, and secondly, the surface of the string and the corner have a lacquer pattern and are sparse, and secondly, there is no lacquer pattern only in the corner.

古文：合灂若背手文。
现代文：弓侧表里漆纹相合处就像人两手背相合一样纹理相应。
English: The place where the lacquer lines meet on the inside of the side of the bow is just like the back of a person's hand. The texture is corresponding.

古文：角环灂，牛筋贲灂，麋筋斥蠖灂。
现代文：角上的漆纹如环状，牛筋上的漆纹如麻子纹，麋筋上的漆纹形似尺蠖。
English: The lacquer stripe on the horns is ring-shaped, the lacquer stripe on the beef tendon is pockmarked, and the lacquer stripe on the loin tendon is shaped like a ruler.

