古文：张仪为秦连横，说魏王曰： 魏地方不至千里，卒不过三十万人。
现代文：张仪为秦国推行连横之事，去游说魏襄王说： 魏国的领土方圆不到一千里，士兵不超过三十万人。
English: Zhang Yi lobbied the King of Wei and Xiang for Qin to carry out the annexation, saying: The territory of Wei is less than a thousand miles in circumference, with no more than 300,000 soldiers.

古文：地四平，诸侯四通，条达辐凑，无有名山大川之阻。
现代文：四周地势平坦，和四方诸侯交通便利，犹如车轮辐条都集聚在车轴上一般，叶没有高山深川的阻隔。
English: The surrounding terrain is flat, and it is convenient for transportation with the four provinces. It is as if the spokes of the wheel are all concentrated on the axle, and there is no barrier of mountains and deep rivers.

古文：从郑至梁，不过百里；从陈至梁，二百余里。
现代文：从郑国到魏国，不过百来里；从陈国到魏国，也只有二百余里。
English: From Zheng to Wei, it is only a hundred miles; from Chen to Wei, it is only more than two hundred miles.

古文：马驰人趋，不待倦而至梁。
现代文：人奔马跑，还没疲惫就到了魏国。
English: People ran and ran, and arrived in Wei before they were tired.

古文：南与楚境，西与韩境，北与赵境，东与齐境，卒戍四方。
现代文：南边与楚国接壤，西边是韩国，北边是赵国，东边与齐国相邻，魏国士兵要守卫四方边界。
English: The southern border is with Chu, the western border is with Korea, the northern border is with Zhao, and the eastern border is with Qi. The soldiers of Wei have to guard the four borders.

古文：守亭障者参列。
现代文：守境的小亭和屏障接连排列。
English: Border guard booths and barriers are lined up one after another.

古文：粟粮漕庾，不下十万。
现代文：运粮的河道和储米的粮仓，不少于十万。
English: There are no less than one hundred thousand rivers for transporting grain and silos for storing rice.

古文：魏之地势，故战场也。
现代文：魏国的地势，原本就是适合作战的地方。
English: The topography of the state of Wei was originally a place suitable for war.

古文：魏南与楚而不与齐，则齐攻其东；东与齐而不与赵，则赵攻其北；不合于韩，则韩攻其西；不亲于楚，则楚攻其南。
现代文：如果魏国向南亲近楚国而不亲近齐国，那齐国就会进攻你们的东面；向东亲附齐国而不亲附赵国，那赵国就会由北面来进攻你们；不和韩国联合，那么韩国就会攻打你们西面；不和楚国亲善，那南面就会危险了。
English: If Wei approaches Chu to the south but not Qi, Qi will attack you to the east; if Qi approaches Qi to the east but not Zhao, Zhao will attack you from the north; if you do not unite with Korea, Korea will attack you to the west; if you are not friendly with Chu, the south will be in danger.

古文：此所谓四分五裂之道也。
现代文：这就是所说的四分五裂的地势。
English: This is the so-called fragmented landscape.

古文： 且夫诸侯之为从者，以安社稷、尊主、强兵、显名也。
现代文：再说诸侯组织合纵阵线，说是为了使社稷安定，君主尊贵，兵力强大，名声显赫。
English: Furthermore, the princes organized the united front, saying that it was to make the society stable, the monarch was noble, the army was strong, and the reputation was prominent.

古文：合从者，一天下，约为兄弟，刑白马以盟于洹水之上，以相坚也。
现代文：现在合纵的国家想要联合诸侯，结为兄弟，在洹水之滨宰杀白马，歃血为盟，以示坚守信约。
English: Now the allied countries want to unite their princes, become brothers, slaughter a white horse on the shores of Surabaya, and shed blood as allies, in order to demonstrate their adherence to the treaty.

古文：夫亲昆弟，同父母，尚有争钱财。
现代文：然而同一父母所生的亲兄弟，尚且还有为争夺钱财而打斗的。
English: However, brothers and sisters born to the same parents still fight over money.

古文：而欲恃诈伪反覆苏秦之余谋，其不可以成亦明矣。
现代文：而您却想依靠欺诈虚伪、反复无常的苏秦所残留下来的计策，这不可能成功是很明显的了。
English: And you want to rely on the deceitful, hypocritical, capricious strategy left by Su Qin. It is obvious that this cannot succeed.

古文：大王不事秦，秦下兵攻河外，拔卷、衍、燕、酸枣，劫卫取晋阳，则赵不南；赵不南则魏不北，魏不北，则从道绝。
现代文：如果大王不侍奉秦国，秦国就要派出军队来进攻河外，攻占卷、衍、燕、酸枣等地，胁迫卫国夺取晋阳，那么赵国无法南下支援魏国；赵国不能南下，那么魏国也就不能北上联合赵国；魏国不能联络赵国，那么合纵的盟约就中断了。
English: If the great king did not serve Qin, Qin would have to send troops to attack outside the river, seize Wuling, Yan, Yan, and Zhouzhuang, and coerce Wei to seize Jinyang. Zhao could not go south to support Wei; Zhao could not go south, so Wei could not go north to unite with Zhao; Wei could not contact Zhao, so the alliance was broken.

古文：从道绝，则大王之国欲求无危，不可得也。
现代文：合纵盟约一中断，那么大王想要自己的国家不危险，那就不可能了。
English: Once the alliance is broken, it will be impossible for the emperor to keep his country out of danger.

古文：秦挟韩而攻魏，韩劫于秦，不敢不听。
现代文：秦国如果挟制韩国来攻打魏国，韩国迫于秦国的压力，一定也不敢不听从。
English: If Qin forces South Korea to attack Wei, South Korea, under pressure from Qin, will not dare to disobey.

古文：秦、韩为一国，魏之亡可立而须也，此臣之所以为大王患也。
现代文：秦、韩两国联合，那魏国离灭亡就不远了，这就是我为大王担心的原因。
English: If Qin and Han unite, then Wei is not far from extinction. That's why I'm worried about the king.

古文：为大王计，莫如事秦，事秦则楚、韩必不敢动；无楚、韩之患，则大王高枕而卧，国必无忧矣。
现代文：我为大王考虑，您不如侍奉秦国，那么楚、韩两国一定不敢轻举妄动；没了楚、韩两国的扰乱，大王就可以高枕无忧了，国家也一定不会有忧患了。
English: I think for the great king, you might as well serve the Qin State, then the two countries of Chu and Han will certainly not dare to act rashly; without the disturbance of Chu and Han, the great king can rest easy, and the country will certainly not have any worries.

古文：且夫秦之所欲弱莫如楚，而能弱楚者莫若魏。
现代文：再说，秦国想要削弱的就是楚国，而能抑制楚国的就是魏国。
English: Moreover, it was the State of Chu that Qin wanted to weaken, while the State of Wei could restrain the State of Chu.

古文：楚虽有富大之名，其实空虚；其卒虽众，多言而轻走，易北，不敢坚战。魏之兵南面而伐，胜楚必矣。
现代文：楚国虽然有富足强大的名声，但实际上很空虚；它的士兵虽然多，但大部分容易逃跑败退，不敢打硬仗；如果出动魏国军队向南讨伐，必定能战胜楚国。
English: Although Chu has the reputation of being rich and powerful, it is actually very empty; although there are many soldiers, most of them are easy to run away and retreat, and dare not fight a hard battle; if the Wei army is sent to the south, it will certainly be able to defeat Chu.

古文：夫亏楚而益魏，攻楚而适秦，内嫁祸安国，此善事也。
现代文：这样看来，让楚国吃亏而魏国得到好处，攻打楚国取悦秦国，把灾祸转嫁给背的国家，安定自己的国家，这可是很好的事。
English: From this perspective, it is a good thing to make Chu suffer while Wei benefits, to attack Chu to please Qin, to transfer the disaster to the back country, and to stabilize one's own country.

古文：大王不听臣，秦甲出而东，虽欲事秦而不可得也。
现代文：大王如果不听我的意见，秦兵出动，即使想归顺也不可能了。
English: If the great king does not listen to my advice and the Qin soldiers are dispatched, even if they want to submit, it will be impossible.

古文：且夫从人多奋辞而寡可信，说一诸侯之王，出而乘其车；约一国而反，成而封侯之基。
现代文：而且主张合纵的人大都夸大其辞、不可信赖，他们游说一个君主，出来就乘坐那个君主赏赐给他的车子，联合一个诸侯成功返回故国，他就有了封侯的资本。
English: Moreover, most of those who advocate the merger are exaggerated and unreliable. They lobbied a monarch, went out and rode in a car given to him by that monarch, and successfully returned to their home country with a lord, and he had the capital of a feudal lord.

古文：是故天下之游士，莫不日夜搤腕瞋目切齿以言从之便，以说人主。
现代文：所以天下游说之士，没有不每天都捏着手腕，瞪着眼睛，咬牙切齿地高谈阔论合纵的好处，以博得君王的欢心。
English: That is why the world's lobbyists, every day with clenched wrists, staring eyes, and gritted teeth, talk about the benefits of concubinage, in order to win the favor of the king.

古文：人主览其辞，牵其说，恶得无眩哉？
现代文：君王们接受他们的巧辩，被他们的空话牵动，怎能不头昏目眩呢?
English: How can kings receive their eloquence, and be led by their vanities, and not be confounded?

古文：臣闻积羽沉舟，群轻折轴，众口铄金，故愿大王之熟计之也。 
现代文：我听说羽毛多了也可以压沉船只，轻的东西装多了也可以压断车轴，众口一词足以熔化金属，所以请大王仔细考虑这个问题。 
English: I have heard that too many feathers can sink a ship, too many light things can break an axle, and too many words can melt metal, so please consider this matter carefully.

古文：魏王曰： 寡人蠢愚，前计失之。
现代文：魏王说： 我太愚蠢，以前采取的策略是错误的。
English: Wei Wang said: I am too stupid, the strategy I adopted before is wrong.

古文：请称东藩，筑帝宫，受冠带，祠春秋，效河外。 
现代文：我愿意做秦国东方的藩臣，给秦王修建行宫，接受秦国的封赏，春秋两季贡献祭品，并献上河外的土地。 
English: I am willing to be a vassal of the eastern part of Qin, to build a palace for King Qin, to receive rewards from Qin, to offer sacrifices in spring and autumn, and to offer land outside the river.

