古文：灵应传泾州之东二十里，有故薛举城，城之隅有善女湫，广袤数里，蒹葭丛翠，古木萧疏，其水湛然而碧，莫有测其浅深者，水族灵怪，往往见焉，乡人立祠于旁，曰 九娘子神 ，岁之水旱祓禳，皆得祈请焉，又州之西二百余里，朝那镇之北，有湫神因地而名，曰 朝那神 。
现代文：泾州的东面二十里的地方，有个从前的薛举城，城角有个善女潭，宽广有好几里，一丛丛苍翠色的芦苇，古老的大树稀稀落落地生长着，潭水清彻碧绿，没有人能测量出潭水的深浅。水中生物的神灵怪物，常常在潭里出现。乡里人在潭水边建立祠庙，庙里供奉的是 九娘子神 。每年发大水，出现旱灾时，都举行消灾的仪式，全都到这里向神灵祈祷。还有在泾州西面二百里的地方，朝那镇的北面，有个潭水神，因地起名，叫朝那神。
English: Twenty miles east of Luzhou, there is a former Xueju City. At the corner of the city, there is a good woman's pool, several miles wide, a cluster of green reeds. Ancient trees grow sparsely on the ground. The water of the pool is clear and green, and no one can measure the depth of the water. Divine monsters of aquatic creatures often appear in the pool. The villagers built a temple on the edge of the pool, and the temple is dedicated to the Nine Maidens. Every year, when there is heavy water and drought, a disaster relief ceremony is held, and everyone comes here to pray to the gods. There is also a pool water god in the west

古文：其肸蚃灵应，则居善女之右矣，乾符五年，节度使周宝在镇日，自仲夏之初。
现代文：朝那神的神灵感应的应验，还排在善女的前面。乾符五年，节度使周宝镇守这里的时候，从仲夏的初期开始，多次出现云气，样子形状有象奇异山峰的，有象美女的，有象老鼠象老虎的，从两个潭水中升起。
English: The fulfillment of the divine inspiration of the god of morning is also in front of the good woman. In the five dry years, when the festival kept Zhou Baozhen here, from the beginning of midsummer, clouds appeared many times, looking like strange peaks, like beautiful women, like mice and tigers, rising from two pools of water.

古文：数数有云气，状如奇峰者，如美女者，如鼠如虎者，由二湫而兴，至于激迅风，震雷电，发屋拔树，数刻而止。伤人害稼，其数甚多。
现代文：后来发展到激起猛烈的风，打雷闪电，掀起房盖，拔起大树，几刻的时间就停止了，使人受伤，使庄稼受害，受害的人和物很多。
English: Later, it developed to provoke violent winds, thunder and lightning, lift house covers, pull up large trees, and stop a few moments of time, injuring people, damaging crops, and harming many people and things.

古文：宝责躬励己，谓为政之未敷，致阴灵之所谴也。
现代文：周宝责备并勉励自己，说是由于自己在这地方治理得不妥善，才遭受神灵的谴责。
English: Zhou Bao reproached and exhorted himself, saying that it was because he did not govern this place properly that he was condemned by the gods.

古文：至六月五日，府中视事之暇，昏然思寐，因解巾就枕。寝犹未熟，见一武士冠鍪被铠，持钺而立于阶下，曰： 有女客在门，欲申参谒，故先听命。 
现代文：到六月五日这一天，在官府里办完事情休息时，昏沉沉地想睡觉，因而解下头巾靠在枕头上，还没睡熟，看见一个武士戴着头盔穿着铠甲，拿着钺站在台阶下面，说： 有个女客人在门外，想来参见你，所以先来问问你。 
English: On the day of June 5th, when he was resting after finishing his work in the government office, he felt drowsy and wanted to sleep, so he took off his headscarf and leaned on the pillow. Before he was fully asleep, he saw a samurai wearing a helmet and armor and holding a scepter standing at the bottom of the steps, saying: There is a female guest outside the door who wants to see you, so I'll ask you first.

古文：宝曰： 尔为谁乎？ 
现代文：周宝说： 你是什么人呢？ 
English: Zhou Bao said: Who are you?

古文：曰： 某即君之阍者，效役有年矣。 
现代文：回答说： 我就是你的看门人，效力、办事有好几年了 。
English: And he answered, I have been thy steward, and have been for many years.

古文：宝将诘其由，已见二青衣历阶而升，长跪于前曰： 九娘子自郊墅特来告谒，故先使下执事致命于明公。 
现代文：周宝想询问原因，已经看见两个穿青衣的人踏着台阶走上来，跪在周宝面前说： 九娘子从郊外的别墅专程来到这里会见你，所以先派手下管事的人向明公传达一下。 
English: Zhou Bao wanted to inquire about the reason. He had already seen two people in blue clothes walk up the steps, kneel in front of Zhou Bao and say: "Nine girls came here from a villa in the suburbs to meet you, so I sent the person in charge to Ming Gong first.

古文：宝曰： 九娘子非吾通家亲戚，安敢造次相面乎？ 
现代文：周宝说： 九娘子也不是我的亲属，怎敢随便地就见面呢？ 
English: Zhou Bao said: The nine daughters are not my relatives, how dare they meet casually?

古文：言犹未终，而见祥云细雨，异香袭人。俄有一妇人，年可十七八，衣裙素淡，容质窈窕，凭空而下，立庭庑之间。容仪绰约，有绝世之貌。侍者十余辈，皆服饰鲜洁，有如妃主之仪。
现代文：话还没说完，就看见祥云细雨，奇异的香味迎面扑来，不久有一个妇女，年龄大约十七八岁，衣服裙子洁白淡雅，身材苗条，从天上下来，站在庭院走廊之间，面貌姿态很轻柔美丽，有超绝人世的美貌，侍奉她的有十多个人，衣服装饰都很新鲜干净，有点象是妃主的仪态。
English: Before he had finished speaking, he saw a cloud and drizzle, and a strange fragrance came rushing towards him. Soon, a woman, about seventeen or eighteen years old, her dress was white and elegant, and her figure was slim. She came down from the sky and stood between the corridors of the courtyard. Her face and posture were very soft and beautiful, she had an extraordinary beauty, and there were more than ten people serving her. Her clothes were all freshly decorated and clean, a bit like the posture of a princess.

古文：顾步徊翔，渐及卧所。宝将少避之，以候期意。
现代文：顾盼走路轻盈灵活，慢慢地走到周宝的卧室，周室准备稍微避开一下，来听听她的来意。
English: Gu Ran walked lightly and flexibly and slowly walked to Zhou Bao's bedroom. Zhou Shuxiao was ready to avoid her for a while to listen to what she had to say.

古文：侍者趋进而言曰： 贵主以君之高义，可申诚信之托，故将冤抑之怀，诉诸明公。明公忍不救其急难乎？ 
现代文：侍奉的人走进屋去说： 我们的贵主因为你是个有高尚道义的人，可以向你申诉真诚的托咐，所以才想把受冤屈而压抑的心怀，向你诉说，你能忍心不去解救她的急难吗？ 
English: The servant went into the room and said, "Our lord, because you are a man of high morals, and can make a sincere appeal to you, that is why I want to tell you about the wronged and oppressed heart. Can you bear not to relieve her distress?

古文：宝遂命升阶相见，宾主之礼，颇甚肃恭。登榻而坐，祥烟四合，紫气充庭，敛态低鬟，若有忧戚之貌。
现代文：周宝于是让她们走上台阶见面。宾主之间互相行礼，很严肃恭敬，走到榻前坐下，周围是吉祥的烟气，紫气充塞着庭院，她收敛起笑容低垂着头，象是心中十分忧愁悲伤的样子。
English: Zhou Bao then asked them to meet on the steps. The guests bowed to each other, very serious and respectful, walked to the bed and sat down, surrounded by auspicious smoke, violet gas filled the courtyard, she restrained her smile and hung her head low, as if she was very sad and sad.

古文：宝命酌醴设馔，厚礼以待之。俄而敛袂离席，逡巡而言曰： 妾以寓止郊园，绵历多祀，醉酒饱德，蒙惠诚深。
现代文：周宝让人倒酒上菜，用优厚的礼节来接待她，不一会，她收敛起衣袖离开宴席，来回地走着说： 我因为住在郊外的别墅里，多年来享受祭祀，供给酒食的恩德，使我承受了很深的恩惠。
English: Zhou Bao had wine poured and food served, and she was received with great courtesy. After a while, she tightened her sleeves and left the banquet, walking back and forth, saying: Because I live in a villa in the suburbs, for many years I have enjoyed the grace of sacrifice and the provision of food and wine, which has brought me great blessings.

古文：虽以孤枕寒床，甘心没齿，茕嫠有托，负荷逾多。
现代文：虽然我心甘情愿孤独地生活到死去，你们的祭祀使我这个孤独的人有了依靠，而我身上的责任也更大。
English: Although I am willing to live alone until I die, your sacrifice has made me a lonely person with dependence, and I have a greater responsibility.

古文：但以显晦殊途，行止乖互。今乃迫于情礼，岂暇缄藏？
现代文：只因阳间和阴间是根本不同的，行为举止也互相地不和谐，今天是被情理所逼迫，怎么还能隐藏自己的心思？
English: Just because the world of the sun and the world of the dead are fundamentally different, and their behaviors are not in harmony with each other, today they are persecuted by reason. How can they still hide their thoughts?

古文：倘鉴幽情，当敢披露。 
现代文：如果你能够理解我的难以诉说的心情，我才敢向你说说。 
English: If you can understand my feelings, which are hard to express, then I dare to tell you.

古文：宝曰： 愿闻其说。所冀识其宗系，苟可展分，安敢以幽显为辞？
现代文：周宝说： 我愿意听听你的诉说，我希望能知道你的宗族系统，如果能够帮助你，怎么敢以阳间和阴间之不同做为托辞呢？
English: Zhou Bao said: I am willing to listen to what you have to say. I hope to know your clan system. If I can help you, how dare you use the difference between the sun and the underworld as an excuse?

古文：君子杀身以成仁，狥其毅烈；蹈赴汤火，旁雪不平，乃宝之志也。 
现代文：君子为了实现仁，可以舍去自己的生命，为了刚毅贞烈的事而献身，赴汤蹈火，帮助洗刷不公正的冤情，是我的志愿。 
English: In order to realize benevolence, a gentleman can give up his life, dedicate himself to the cause of fortitude and chastity, and go through fire and water to help wash away unjust grievances. This is my will.

古文：对曰： 妾家世会稽之鄮县，卜筑于东海之潭，桑榆坟陇，百有余代。
现代文：她回答说： 我家世代居住在会稽郡的鄮县，选择在东海的一个深潭里居住，世代繁衍，已经一百多代。
English: She replied: My family has lived in Jixian County of Hui County for generations. They chose to live in a deep pool in the East China Sea, and have been breeding for more than a hundred generations.

古文：其后遭世不造，瞰室贻灾，五百人皆遭庾氏焚炙之祸。纂绍几绝，不忍戴天，潜遁幽岩，沈冤莫雪。
现代文：后来遭遇世变，流离失所，眼看着家室遭受灾难，一家五百人全都被庾氏的一把火烧得几乎死光了，我忍受不了这不共戴天的仇恨，就偷偷地逃到幽深的山里，久未伸雪的冤屈不能洗刷干净。
English: Later, I suffered a generational change, was displaced, and watched my family suffer a disaster. All five hundred members of the family were almost burned to death by a fire set by Mr. Zou. I could not bear this unholy hatred, so I secretly fled to the depths of the mountains. The grievances that had not snowed for a long time could not be washed away.

古文：至梁天监中，武帝好奇，召人通龙宫，入枯桑岛，以烧燕奇味，结好于洞庭君宝藏主第七女，以求异宝。
现代文：到了梁朝天监年间的中期，梁武帝好奇，找人沟通了龙宫，进入枯桑岛，用火烤燕子的奇异香味，和洞庭君的宝藏主的第七个女儿结成友好，想求得奇异的宝物。
English: In the middle of the years when Liang Chao was the overseer of heaven, Emperor Liang Wudi was curious, communicated with the Dragon Palace, entered the dry mulberry island, roasted swallows with fire, made friends with the seventh daughter of the treasure owner of Dongting, and wanted to get strange treasures.

古文：寻闻家仇庾毗罗，自鄮县白水郎，弃官解印，欲承命请行，阴怀不道。
现代文：接着又听说我家的仇人庾毗罗，在鄮县的白水郎的位置上，丢掉了官位和官印，想接受武帝的命令请求让自己前去，暗中却心怀鬼胎，假如派他去龙宫，假借寻求宝物，想消灭我们的家族。
English: Next, I heard that my family's enemy, Zou Viro, had lost his official rank and official seal in the position of the White Water Mariner in Handan County, and wanted to accept Emperor Wu's order to request that he go forward, but secretly harbored evil intentions. If he was sent to the Dragon Palace, under the guise of seeking treasure, he wanted to destroy our family.

古文：因使得入龙宫，假以求货，覆吾宗嗣，赖杰公敏鉴，知渠挟私请行，欲肆无辜之害，虑其反贻伊戚，辱君之命。言于武帝，武帝遂止，乃令合浦郡落黎县欧越罗子春代行。
现代文：幸亏杰公明察，知道他是挟带着私心来请求出使的，想要肆无忌惮地伤害无辜的人，担心他会反而带来麻烦，给国君的使命带来耻辱，就把这事说给武帝听，武帝就制止了他，就派合浦郡落黎县欧越地方的人罗子春代替他去出使。
English: Fortunately, Jie Gong saw clearly and knew that he had come to request the dispatch of the envoy with selfish motives and wanted to harm innocent people unscrupulously. Fearing that he would instead bring trouble and bring shame to the mission of the sovereign, he told this to Emperor Wu. Emperor Wu stopped him and sent Luo Zichun from Europe and Vietnam in Loli County, Hapu County, to send the envoy in his place.

古文：妾之先宗，羞共戴天，虑其后患，乃率其族，韬光灭迹，易姓变名，避仇于新平真宁县安村。披榛凿穴，筑室于兹，先人弊庐，殆成胡越。
现代文：我的祖先，羞于和庾氏一起活在天地之间，担心他会带来后患，就率领全族的人，藏起锋芒，不暴露行踪，改变了姓名，到新平真宁县安村去躲避仇人，砍去榛丛，挖掘地基，在那里建筑房屋居住，祖先的居住地和这里就成了一南一北互不相干了。
English: My ancestors, ashamed of living between heaven and earth with the Xing clan, and fearing that he would bring misfortune, led the whole family, hid their sharp edges, did not reveal their whereabouts, changed their names, went to Ancun, Janning County, Xinping to evade the enemy, cut down the reed bushes, excavated the foundation, built houses and lived there, and the ancestor's place of residence and here became one south and one north.

古文：今三世卜居，先为灵应君，寻受封应圣侯；后以阴灵普济，功德及民，又封普济王，威德临人，为世所重。
现代文：我们到现在已经在这里住三代了，开始时人称灵应君，接着封为应圣侯，后来因为以阴间精灵的身份而普遍地帮助世人，功德普及到百姓的身上，又被封为普济王，威信和德行被人民所了解，世人很重视。
English: We have been living here for three generations. At the beginning, we were called Ling Ying Jun, then we were given the title of Ying Sheng Hou. Later, because of our status as spirits of the underworld, we generally helped the world. Our merits spread to the people, and we were given the title of King Pu Zi. Our prestige and virtues were understood by the people, and the world attached great importance to them.

古文：妾即王之第九女也，笄年配于象郡石龙之少子。良人以世袭猛烈，血气方刚，宪法不拘，严父不禁，残虐视事，礼教蔑闻。未及期年，果贻天谴，覆宗绝嗣，削迹除名。
现代文：我就是普济王的第九个女儿，成年后嫁给了象郡石龙的小儿子，我的丈夫因为世代遗传的暴躁刚烈的性格，血气方刚，不遵守法规，严父也管不了他，处理事情残忍暴虐，蔑视礼教，不到一年的时间，果然受到了上天的惩罚，宗族灭亡，儿女也死光了，削去了爵位，除去了姓名。
English: I am the ninth daughter of King Pu Zi. When I became an adult, I married the youngest son of Xiang Gu Shilong. My husband, because of the irascible and stubborn character inherited from generation to generation, was not able to abide by the laws and regulations, and his strict father could not control him. He handled things with cruelty and tyranny, and disdained etiquette. In less than a year, he was punished by heaven, the clan was destroyed, and his children died, and his title and name were removed.

古文：唯妾一身，仅以获免，父母抑遣再行，妾终违命。
现代文：只有我一个人，活了下来，父母打算让我改嫁，我没有答应。
English: I was the only one who survived. My parents wanted me to remarry, but I didn't agree.

古文：王侯致聘，接轸交辕，诚愿既坚，遂欲自劓。
现代文：王侯之家前来说媒的，车子连着车子。
English: The prince's family came to mediate, car after car.

古文：父母怒其刚烈，遂遣屏居于兹土之别邑，音问不通，于今三纪。
现代文：我的想法是真诚的坚定的，于是打算自杀，父母因我的性格刚烈而生气，就打发我居住到那个地方的另一个城里去，不通音信，到现在已经三十六年了。
English: My thoughts were sincere and firm, so I planned to commit suicide, and my parents, angered by my strong character, sent me to live in another city in that area. I haven't heard from them in 36 years.

古文：虽慈颜未复，温清久违，离群索居，甚为得志。
现代文：虽然不能再看见父母，母女之间的温情也早就没有了，离开人群孤独地生活，却正符合我的心意。
English: Although I can no longer see my parents, and the warmth between mother and daughter is long gone, living alone away from the crowds is exactly what I want.

古文：近年为朝那小龙，以季弟未婚，潜行礼聘，甘言厚币，峻阻复来。灭性毁形，殆将不可。
现代文：近年来有个朝那小龙，因他的小弟弟没有结婚，偷偷地送来聘礼，说着甜言蜜语，被严厉拒绝后还来，他就是消灭我的本性，毁去我的形体，我也不答应。
English: In recent years, there has been a small dragon in the morning, because his little brother did not marry, secretly sent a betrothal gift, said sweet words, was severely rejected and returned, he is to destroy my nature, destroy my body, I do not agree.

古文：朝那遂通好于家君，欲成其事，遂使其季弟权徙居于王畿之西，将质于我王，以成姻好。
现代文：朝那就和我的父母结交通好，想成就他的好事，于是让他的小弟弟暂时搬到我父亲的领地西面去住，准备让他留在我父亲的身边作人质，好成就婚姻。
English: In the morning, he made friends with my parents and wanted to accomplish his good deed, so he asked his little brother to temporarily move to the west of my father's territory to live, preparing for him to stay with my father as a hostage, so as to achieve marriage.

古文：家君知妾之不可夺，乃令朝那纵兵相逼。妾亦率其家僮五十余人，付以兵仗，逆战郊原，众寡不敌，三战三北，师徒倦弊，掎角无怙。
现代文：父亲知道我的志向不能动摇，就指使朝那用武力逼迫我，我也率领家中五十多个仆人，用武力来反抗，在郊外的原野上交战起来。因为敌众我寡，打不过他们，打了三次仗，失败了三次，兵士们疲乏劳累，不能互相依靠，互相帮助。
English: My father knew that my ambition could not be shaken, so he ordered the government to use force to persecute me. I also led more than fifty servants in my family to use force to resist and fight in the fields in the suburbs. Because I had few enemies, I could not beat them. I fought three times and failed three times. The soldiers were tired and exhausted and could not rely on each other and help each other.

古文：将欲收拾余烬，背城借一，而虑晋阳水急，台城火炎。一旦攻下，为顽童所辱，纵没于泉下，无面石氏之子。故《诗》云： 泛彼柏舟，在彼中河。髡彼两髦，实维我仪。之死矢靡他。母也天只！不谅人只！ 
现代文：准备集中起剩余的力量，与敌人进行最后的决战。但是又考虑到敌人来势汹汹，一旦失败，被那顽劣的小子侮辱，即使是死后到了阴间去，有什么脸去和丈夫见面？《诗经》中说： 荡着小小柏木船，浮在河中间，那人刘海两边垂，实在是我的好侣伴，爱他到死心不变，我的娘啊我的天，怎不体谅我的心愿。
English: Prepared to concentrate the remaining strength and fight the final decisive battle with the enemy, but also considering that the enemy is threatening, once defeated, insulted by the naughty boy, even if he dies and goes to the underworld, what face to meet her husband? "The Book of Songs" says: "A small cypress boat, floating in the middle of the river, the man bangs on both sides of the sea, is really my good partner, love him to death, my daughter, oh my god, how can I not understand my wish."

古文：此卫世子孀妇自誓之词。
现代文：这首诗是卫国世子的寡妻自己发誓愿的话。
English: This poem is a vow made by the widowed wife of the heir to the throne herself.

古文：又云： 谁谓鼠无牙，何以穿我墉？
现代文：又说： 谁说老鼠没有牙？怎么打通我家墙？
English: He also said: Who says mice don't have teeth? How can I get through the walls of my house?

古文：谁谓女无家，何以速我讼？
现代文：谁人说你没成家？凭啥逼我来诉讼！
English: Who says you don't have a family? Why force me to sue?

古文：虽速我讼，亦不女从。
现代文：虽然逼我来诉讼，我也坚决不顺从！ 
English: Although they forced me to sue, I resolutely refused to comply!

古文：此邵伯听讼，衰乱之俗微。
现代文：这是邵伯听了诉讼而作的诗。
English: This is a poem composed by Shao Bo after he heard about the lawsuit.

古文：贞信之教兴，强暴之男，不能侵凌贞女也。
现代文：颓废混乱的风俗衰败下去，忠贞诚实的教化兴起，那么，强暴的男人，就不能侵犯忠贞的女子。
English: If the decadent and chaotic customs decline, and the education of loyalty and honesty rise, then a violent man cannot violate a loyal woman.

古文：今则公之教，可以精通显晦，贻范古今。贞信之教，故不为姬奭之下者。
现代文：现在，你的教化，能够沟通阴阳两界，给现在和将来留下范本，你的忠贞诚实的教化，本来就超过了姬奭的成就。
English: Now, your enlightenment can communicate the yin and yang of the two worlds, leaving a model for the present and the future. Your loyal and honest enlightenment has already surpassed the achievements of Ji Xuan.

古文：幸以君之余力，少假兵锋，挫彼凶狂，存其鳏寡。成贱妾终天之誓，彰明公赴难之心。
现代文：希望能凭借你的一点力量，稍微借给一点兵器，使那个凶恶狂妄的小子受到挫折，使鳏夫寡妇能够活下去，完成我这一生的誓言，传播你帮助危难者的心意。
English: I hope that with a little of your strength, with a little of your weaponry, I can frustrate the evil and arrogant boy, so that the widower can live, fulfill my life's vow, and spread your heart to help the victims.

古文：辄具志诚，幸无见阻。 
现代文：我说的完全是真诚的想法，请你不要拒绝我。 
English: What I'm saying is completely sincere. Please don't reject me.

古文：宝心虽许之，讶其辨博，欲拒以他事，以观其词，乃曰： 边徼事繁，烟尘在望，朝廷以西郵陷虏，芜没者三十余州。
现代文：周宝在心里虽然应许了她，因为惊讶她的辩才和博学，所以想用别的事拒绝她，来琢磨研究她说的话，于是说： 边界的战事太多，战争的烟尘就在眼前，朝廷因为西部边疆被敌人占领，三十多个州变得一片荒芜，准备起兵收复国土。
English: Although Zhou Bao promised her in his heart, because he was surprised by her eloquence and erudition, he wanted to use other things to reject her, to ponder and study what she said, so he said: There are too many wars on the border, the smoke and dust of war are right in front of us, the imperial court because the western border is occupied by the enemy, more than thirty states have become desolate, ready to raise troops to recover the land.

古文：将议举戈，复其土壤，晓夕恭命，不敢自安。匪夕伊朝，前茅即举。空多愤悱，未暇承命。 对曰： 昔者楚昭王以方城为城，汉水为池，尽有荆蛮之地。籍父兄之资，强国外连，三良内助。
现代文：我一早一晚都在恭候命令，自己也不敢说安全，不知哪天晚上或早晨，前锋就要出发，我白白地有一腔义愤都说不出来，没有时间接受你的要求。 她回答说： 从前楚昭王以方城为城墙，以汉水为护城河，完全占有楚国的土地，凭借着父兄留下来的基业，对外联合强国，三个贤良的人做内助。
English: I've been waiting for orders all morning and night, and I don't dare to say that I'm safe, I don't know which evening or morning, the vanguard will set off, I can't say a word of righteous indignation in vain, I don't have time to accept your request.She replied: Once upon a time, King Chu Zhao used Fangcheng as a city wall, and Hanshui as a moat, to fully occupy the land of Chu, and with the inheritance left by his father and brother, to unite powerful countries to the outside world, and three wise men to help him inside.

古文：而吴兵一举，鸟迸云奔，不暇婴城，迫于走兔，宝玉迁徙，宗社凌夷，万乘之灵，不能庇先王之朽骨。
现代文：可是吴国的军队一起兵，楚国就象鸟儿在乌云中翻滚一样地垮台了，连据城自守的时间都没有，被逼得象一只逃命的兔子。宝玉被抢走了，宗庙社稷受到破坏，万乘之尊的国王，却不能保护先王的朽骨。
English: However, the armies of the State of Wu fought together, and the State of Chu collapsed like a bird tumbling in a dark cloud. It did not even have time to defend itself, and was forced to flee like a rabbit. The precious jewels were stolen, the ancestral temple and shrine were destroyed, but the King of Manjusri could not protect the dead bones of the former king.

古文：至申胥乞师于嬴氏，血泪污于秦庭，七日长号，昼夜靡息。
现代文：等到申包胥向秦国乞求出兵的时候，他的血水和泪水弄脏了秦国的朝堂，一连七天长声哭叫，白天黑夜地哭，也不休息。
English: By the time Shen Baojun begged Qin to send troops, his blood and tears had stained the Qin imperial court. He cried for seven days straight, day and night, without rest.

古文：秦伯悯其祸败，竟为出师，复楚退吴，仅存亡国。况芊氏为春秋之强国，申胥乃衰楚之大夫，而以矢尽兵穷，委身折节，肝脑涂地，感动于强秦。
现代文：秦伯可怜他的国家的灾祸和失败，竟然为他出了兵，恢复楚国，打退了吴国，使灭亡了的国家存活下来，况芊氏是春秋时代的强者，申包胥是衰败了的楚国的大夫，却在弓箭用光，兵力穷尽的时候，委屈自己放弃平日的志气节操，竭尽忠诚，牺牲一切，感动了强大的秦国。
English: Qin Bo pitied the disaster and failure of his country, and even went to war for him to restore the state of Chu, beat back the state of Wu, and make the ruined country survive. In addition, the Qin clan was a strong man in the Spring and Autumn Period, and Shen Baoju was a doctor in the decayed state of Chu. However, when he ran out of bows and arrows and exhausted his forces, he wronged himself by giving up his usual spirit of self-restraint, exhausted his loyalty, and sacrificed everything, which moved the powerful state of Qin.

古文：矧妾一女子，父母斥其孤贞，狂童凌其寡弱，缀旒之急，安得不少动仁人之心乎？ 宝曰： 九娘子灵宗异派，呼吸风云，蠢尔黎元，固在掌握。又焉得示弱于世俗之人，而自困如是者哉？ 
现代文：何况我只是一个弱女子，父母责备我孤傲忠贞，狂妄的小子欺凌我孤寡力弱，我被人挟制，处境危急，怎能不稍稍打动仁爱之人的心呢？ 周宝说： 九娘子是神灵一类人物，一呼一吸之间就风云变幻，那些愚昧的老百姓，本来在你的掌握之中，你怎么会向世俗之人示弱，自己又觉得困苦到这种程度呢？ 
English: What's more, I am just a weak woman. My parents blame me for being proud and loyal. Arrogant boys bully me for being weak and helpless. I am being held hostage and in a critical situation. How can I not move the hearts of people of benevolence a little? Zhou Bao said: The Nine Daughters are the same as gods. The wind changes from one breath to the next. How can you show weakness to ordinary people and feel so distressed?

古文：对曰： 妾家族望，海内咸知。只如彭蠡洞庭，皆外祖也；陵水罗水，皆中表也。内外昆季，百有余人，散居吴越之间，各分地土。
现代文：她回答说： 我的家族的名望，天下人全都知道，象彭蠡湖和洞庭湖，住的全是外祖父的宗族；陵水和罗水，全是中表亲属；堂兄弟和表兄弟，有一百多人，零散地居住在吴越一带，各有各的领地。
English: She replied, "My family's fame is known to everyone in the world. Like Penghu Lake and Dongting Lake, all the members of my grandfather's family live there; Lingshui and Luoshui are all second cousins; there are more than a hundred cousins scattered around Wuyue, each with their own territory.

古文：咸京八水，半是宗亲。
现代文：主管咸京八水的，一半是我的宗亲。
English: The person in charge of Hamkyo Hachisui is half my great-uncle.

古文：若以遣一介之使，飞咫尺之书，告彭蠡洞庭，召陵水罗水，率维扬之轻锐，征八水之鹰扬。然后檄冯夷，说巨灵，鼓子胥之波涛，混阳侯之鬼怪，鞭驱列缺，指挥丰隆，扇疾风，翻暴浪，百道俱进，六师鼓行，一战而成功。
现代文：如果派遣一名使者，快速送去一封信，告诉彭蠡湖和洞庭湖的亲属，召集起陵水和罗水的中表亲戚，率领着扬州一带的轻锐部队，聚集起八水的威武的勇士，然后传檄文给天神冯夷，游说巨灵神，鼓动起伍子胥的复仇波涛，再派遣波涛之神手下的鬼怪，驱赶着闪电，指挥着雷神，扇动起狂风，翻腾起巨浪，一百路人马一起前进，王者之师按令而行，一战就能成功。
English: If you send an envoy, quickly send a letter, tell the relatives of Penghu Lake and Dongting Lake, gather the mid-table relatives of Lingshui and Luoshui, lead the light troops around Yangzhou, gather the mighty warriors of the eight waters, and then pass the letter to the sky god Fengyi, lobby the giant spirit god, encourage the revenge wave of Wu Zixuan, and then send the ghosts of the wave god, drive the lightning, command the thunder god, fan the fierce wind, churn up the huge waves, and advance together with a hundred people and horses, the king's teacher will follow the order, and the battle will be successful.

古文：则朝那一鳞，立为齑粉；泾城千里，坐变污潴。
现代文：这样的话，朝那这个鳞虫，立刻会变成齑粉，泾州城千里之内，就变成了污秽的水塘。
English: In this case, the scale insect will immediately turn into maggot powder, and within a thousand miles of Zhangzhou City, it will turn into a dirty pond.

古文：言下可观，安敢谬矣。
现代文：我说的都是可以想象到的，怎么敢瞎说呢？
English: What I'm saying is all imaginable, how dare you talk nonsense?

古文：顷者泾阳君与洞庭外祖，世为姻戚。后以琴瑟不调，弃掷少妇，遭钱塘之一怒，伤生害稼，怀山襄陵，泾水穷鳞。
现代文：从前，泾阳君和我的洞庭湖外祖父，世代结为婚姻，后来因为夫妻不和谐，抛弃了年轻妻子，钱塘君一怒之下，杀伤了生灵，危害了庄稼，大水环绕着高山，淹没了丘陵，泾水中的鱼类死光，接着又杀死了我外祖父的手下人马。
English: Once upon a time, Zhaoyang Jun and my Dongting Lake grandfather were married for generations. Later, because of the disharmony between husband and wife, he abandoned his young wife. Qiantang Jun, in a fit of rage, killed and injured living beings and endangered crops. The high water surrounded the mountains and flooded the hills. The fish in the muddy water died, and then he killed my grandfather's men.

古文：寻毙外祖之牙齿，今泾上车轮马迹犹在，史传具存，固非谬也。
现代文：现在泾水边上车轮和马蹄的印迹还在，史书记载依然可查，本来就不是瞎说的。
English: Now the imprint of the wheel and horseshoe on the edge of Surabaya is still there, and the historical record can still be checked. It was not nonsense.

古文：妾又以夫族得罪于天，未蒙上帝昭雪，所以销声避影，而自困如是。
现代文：我又因为丈夫家庭的罪孽而得罪了上天，还未受到上天的赦免，所以才隐藏起来不公开露面，因而才象这样的困苦自己。
English: I have also sinned against heaven because of the sins of my husband's family, and I have not yet received heaven's forgiveness, so I hide myself and do not appear in public, and this is why I am suffering like this.

古文：君若不悉诚款，终以多事为词，则向者之言，不敢避上帝之责也。 
现代文：你如果不能出自真诚的心愿，始终以事情多当作托辞，那么刚才说的话，就躲避不了上天的责罚了。 
English: If you can't come from a sincere desire and always use things as an excuse, then what you just said can't escape God's punishment.

古文：宝遂许诺，卒爵撤馔，再拜而去。
现代文：周宝于是答应了她，喝完酒撤去宴席，拜了又拜才离开。
English: Zhou Bao then agreed with her, drank the wine and left the banquet, bowing and bowing before leaving.

古文：宝及晡方寤，耳闻目览，恍然如在。
现代文：周宝到了黄昏时才清醒过来，耳朵里听到的，眼睛看见的，恍恍惚惚地象是就在眼前。
English: Zhou Bao did not wake up until dusk. What he heard with his ears and saw with his eyes seemed to be right in front of him.

古文：翼日，遂遣兵士一千五百人，戍于湫庙之侧。
现代文：第二天，就派了一千五百个士兵，守护在湫庙的附近。
English: The next day, he sent fifteen hundred soldiers to guard the vicinity of the Temple of Heaven.

古文：是月七日，鸡初鸣，宝将晨兴，疏牖尚暗。忽于帐前有一人，经行于帷幌之间，有若侍巾栉者。
现代文：这个月的第七天，鸡刚叫，周宝刚要起床，窗户上还挺暗的时候，忽然在帐前有一个人，行走在布幔之间，就象是侍奉洗涮梳头的仆人。
English: On the seventh day of this month, the rooster had just crowed, Zhou Bao was just about to get up, and it was still quite dark on the window, when suddenly there was a man in front of the register, walking between the cloths, just like a servant washing and combing his hair.

古文：呼之命烛，竟无酬对，遂厉而叱之。乃言曰： 幽明有隔，幸不以灯烛见迫也。 
现代文：他招呼点上蜡烛，那人竟然不回答，于是厉声地喝斥，他才说： 阴阳之间是有隔阂的，希望你不要用灯光来逼迫我。 
English: He beckoned for a candle to be lit, but the man didn't answer, so he shouted at him. He finally said, "There is a gap between the yin and yang. I hope you don't use the light to persecute me."

古文：宝潜知异，乃屏气息音，徐谓之曰： 得非九娘子乎？ 
现代文：周宝才知道事情异常，就屏住气息，慢慢试探地对他说： 难道你是九娘子吗？ 
English: It was only when Zhou Bao realized that something was out of the ordinary that he held his breath and slowly asked him tentatively: "Are you the ninth daughter?"

古文：对曰： 某即九娘子之执事者也。昨日蒙君假以师徒，救其危患，但以幽显事别，不能驱策。苟能存其始约，幸再思之。 
现代文：他回答说： 我是九娘子的管家，昨天承蒙你借给我们士兵，挽救了我们的一场灾难，但是因为阴阳有别，我们不能指挥他们，如果能够保持我们开始时的约定，请你再想想这件事。 
English: He replied, "I am the steward of the Nine Maidens. Yesterday, thanks to your kindness, you lent us soldiers and saved us from a disaster, but because of the yin and yang, we cannot command them. If we can keep the agreement we made at the beginning, please reconsider this matter."

古文：俄而纱窗渐白，注目视之，悄无所见。宝良久思之，方达其义。
现代文：不一会纱窗渐渐发白，集中眼神看，静悄悄地什么也看不见，周宝思考了很久，才明白他说的意思。
English: After a while, the screen window gradually turned white. He looked with concentrated eyes and quietly could not see anything. Zhou Bao thought for a long time before he understood what he meant.

古文：遂呼吏，命按兵籍，选亡没者名，得马军五百人，步卒一千五百人。数内选押衙孟远，充行营都虞候。牒送善女湫神。
现代文：于是叫来官吏，命令他按照兵士的名册，选出死亡者的名字，得到骑兵五百人，步兵一千五百人，在名单之中选出押衙官孟远，担任行营都虞侯，写成公文送到善女湫神。
English: So they called in an official and ordered him to choose the names of the dead according to the soldiers' roster, to get five hundred cavalrymen and fifteen hundred infantrymen, to choose the eunuch Meng Yuan from the list, to serve as the commander of the camp, and to write a public document and send it to the virtuous goddess.

古文：是月十一日，抽回戍庙之卒。见于厅事之前，转旋之际，有一甲士仆地，口动目瞬，问无所应，亦不似暴卒者。遂置于廊庑之间，天明方悟。
现代文：这个月的十一日这天，调回了护卫神庙的士兵，站在厅堂前，转瞬之间，有一个穿甲衣的士兵跌倒在地，口能张，眼也能动，问他话却不能回答，也不象是突然死亡的样子，就把他放在走廊之间，天亮时才苏醒过来。
English: On the eleventh day of this month, the soldiers who were sent back to guard the temple stood in front of the hall. In an instant, a soldier in armor fell to the ground, his mouth could open, his eyes could move, but he could not answer his question, nor did he look like a sudden death. He was placed between the corridors and woke up at dawn.

古文：遂使人诘之，对曰： 某初见一人，衣青袍，自东而来，相见甚有礼。谓某曰： 贵主蒙相公莫大之恩，拯其焚溺，然亦未尽诚款。假尔明敏，再通幽情，幸无辞免也。
现代文：于是派人询问他，他回答说： 我开始时看见一个人，穿着青袍，从东面走来，看见我时，很有礼貌，对我说： 我家主人蒙受了相公的最大的恩情，把我们从水火之中拯救出来，可是也没有完全尽到诚意，这才借助于你的聪明机敏，再一次沟通隐秘难言的感情，请你不要推辞。
English: So they sent someone to question him, and he answered: I first saw a man, dressed in a blue robe, coming from the east. When he saw me, he was very polite and said to me: My master has received the greatest kindness of the father-in-law, saving us from fire and water, but he did not fully fulfill his sincerity. It is only with the help of your cleverness and ingenuity that you can once again communicate secret feelings that are difficult to express. Please do not refuse.

古文：某急以他词拒之，遂以袂相牵，懵然颠仆。但觉与青衣者继踵偕行，俄至其庙，促呼连步，至于帷薄之前。见贵主谓某云： 昨蒙相公悯念孤危，俾尔戍于弊邑。往返途路，得无劳止。
现代文：我急忙用别的理由拒绝他，他就牵着我的衣袖，我迷迷糊糊地跌倒了，只觉得与青衣人一块行走，不一会走到一座庙里，他催促我小步快走，走到帐幕跟前，看见了贵主人，对我说： 昨天蒙相公可怜我孤弱危急，派你们坚守在我的领地，来来往往走在路上，怎能不劳累？
English: I hastily used other reasons to refuse him, and he took me by the sleeve. I stumbled and fell, and only felt that I was walking with the man in blue. Soon I reached a temple. He urged me to walk quickly. I walked to the front of the tent, saw my dear master, and said to me: "Yesterday, Meng Xianggong took pity on me, who was alone and in danger. He sent you to stick to my territory, to come and go on the road. How can you not be tired?"

古文：余近蒙相公再借兵师，深惬诚愿。
现代文：我最近承蒙相公又借给我士兵，心里深感相公的诚意。
English: I recently received a loan of soldiers from my father-in-law, and I deeply feel his sincerity in my heart.

古文：观其士马精强，衣甲铦利，然都虞候孟远，才轻位下，甚无机略。
现代文：看那些士兵和战马精明强干，甲衣和武器都很锋利，可是都虞侯孟远，才能很小，地位低下，一点也没有机变谋略。
English: Look at those soldiers and horses, they are shrewd and strong, their armor and weapons are very sharp, but Mengyuan, the prefect of the capital, has little talent, low status, and no chance to change strategy.

古文：今月九日，有游军三千余，来掠我近郊。
现代文：这个月的九日，有三千多个散兵，来掠夺我的近郊，就让孟远率领新到的将士，约定在平原上战斗。
English: On the ninth day of this month, more than three thousand skirmishers came to plunder my suburbs, so I let Mengyuan lead the newly arrived soldiers and agreed to fight on the plain.

古文：遂令孟远领新到将士，邀击于平原之上，设伏不密，反为彼军所败。甚思一权谋之将，俾尔速归，达我情素。
现代文：由于预设的埋伏不机密，反而被敌人的军队打败。我很想得到一位精通权变和谋略的将军，请你赶快回去，传达我的想法。
English: Since the prearranged ambush was not secret, but was defeated by the enemy's army, I would like to get a general who is proficient in coups and strategies. Please hurry back and convey my thoughts.

古文：言讫，拜辞而出，昏然似醉，余无所知矣。 
现代文：说完，我行了礼，告别出来，昏沉沉的象醉了一样，其余的就不知道了。 
English: Having said that, I bowed my head and said goodbye, and walked out, as groggy as if I were drunk. I don't know what happened next.

古文：宝验其说，与梦相符。意欲质前事，遂差制胜关使郑承符以代孟远。
现代文：周宝验证他的说法，竟与自己的梦符合，于是派遣制胜关使郑承符来代替孟远。
English: Zhou Bao verified that his statement was in line with his dream, so he sent the winning bidder Zheng Chengfu to replace Meng Yuan.

古文：是月三日晚，衙于后球场，沥酒焚香，牒请九娘子神收管。
现代文：这个月的十三日晚上，在衙后的球场上，洒酒烧香，发公文请九娘子神接收管理。
English: On the evening of the thirteenth day of this month, on the pitch behind the pavilion, they sprinkled wine and burned incense, and sent a letter to the Nine Maidens to accept management.

古文：至十六日，制胜关申云： 今月十三日夜，三更已来，关使暴卒。 
现代文：到了十六日这一天，制胜关报告说： 这个月的十三日夜间，三更天的时候，关使突然死亡。 
English: On the 16th day of the month, Guan Zheng reported: On the night of the 13th day of this month, Guan Zheng suddenly died.

古文：宝惊叹息，使人驰视之，至则果卒，唯心背不冷。暑月停尸，亦不败坏。
现代文：周宝惊奇叹息，派人骑马去看望他，去了一看果然死了，只是心窝和后背不冷，大夏天停放尸体，也没有腐坏。
English: Zhou Bao sighed in surprise and sent a man on horseback to visit him. He went to have a look and found that he was indeed dead, but his heart and back were not cold, the corpse had been parked in the summer, and it had not rotted.

古文：其家甚异之。
现代文：他的家人很奇怪。
English: His family is weird.

古文：忽一夜，阴风惨冽，吹砂走石，发屋拔树，禾苗尽偃，及晓而止。云雾四布，连夕不解。
现代文：忽然有一天晚上，阴冷凄惨的风，吹走了砂石，掀开屋顶拔出大树，庄稼苗全都伏在地上，到天明才停止，云雾在四周密布，一连几天也不散开。
English: All of a sudden, one night, a cold, gloomy wind blew away the sand and stone, lifted the roof and pulled out the big trees, the crop seedlings all lay on the ground, and did not stop until dawn, the clouds were thick all around, and did not disperse for several days.

古文：至暮，有迅雷一声，划如天裂。
现代文：到了晚上，有一声迅猛的雷声，就象把天划开一样，郑承符忽然几次呻吟呼吸。
English: In the evening, there was a rapid thunder, as if the sky had been torn apart, and Zheng Chengfu suddenly groaned and breathed several times.

古文：承符忽呻吟数息，其家剖棺视之，良久复苏。是夕，亲邻咸聚，悲喜相仍。
现代文：他的家里人打开棺材看视他，很久后才苏醒过来，这天晚上，亲属邻居全聚在一起，又悲又喜。连续两天晚上都是这样。
English: His family members opened the coffin to see him, and he woke up a long time later. That night, relatives and neighbors all gathered together, sad and happy. It was like this for two consecutive nights.

古文：信宿如故，家人诘其由，乃曰： 余初见一人，衣紫绶，乘骊驹，从者十余人，至门下马，命吾相见。
现代文：家里的人询问原因，他才说： 我开始时看见一个人，穿着紫色衣服，骑着黑马，跟从着十多个人，到了门前下马，让我去见他。
English: When people at home asked why, he said: At the beginning I saw a man, dressed in purple, riding a black horse, followed by more than ten people, get off his horse in front of the door and ask me to meet him.

古文：揖让周旋，手捧一牒授吾云： 贵主得吹尘之梦，知君负命世之才，欲遵南阳故事，思殄邦仇。使下臣持兹礼币，聊展敬于君子。
现代文：彼此作揖谦让应酬了一会儿，他手里捧着一个公文交给我说： 我们的主人做了一个得良相的梦，知道你有闻名于世的才能，准备遵照南阳诸葛亮的故事，想要消灭邦国的仇敌，派我带着这些礼物钱财，略微表示一下敬意。
English: He held a document in his hand and handed it to me, saying, "Our master had a dream that turned out to be true. He knew that you have a talent that is famous all over the world, and that you are going to follow the story of Nanyang Zhuge Liang and want to destroy the enemies of the state. He sent me with these gifts of money and wealth to show a little respect.

古文：而冀再康国步，幸不以三顾为劳也。
现代文：希望你出山之前，请不要以三顾的劳累要求我的贵主 。
English: I hope that before you go out of the mountain, please don't ask my lord to go with the fatigue of looking around three times.

古文：余不暇他辞，唯称不敢。
现代文：我来不及说别的话，只是连说不敢。
English: I didn't have time to say anything else, but I didn't dare.

古文：酬酢之际，已见聘币罗于阶下，鞍马器甲锦彩服玩橐鞬之属，咸布列于庭。
现代文：正在互相应酬的时候，有人已经把聘礼并排放在台阶之下；带鞍的马，武器和铠甲，锦缎彩帛，服装古玩，以及盛弓和箭的器具。
English: At the time of the reception, the betrothal gifts had been placed side by side at the foot of the steps: a saddled horse, weapons and armor, brocade, costume antiques, and bow and arrow cases.

古文：吾辞不获免，遂再拜受之。
现代文：我推辞，他们执意不肯，就拜了又拜接受了。
English: I declined, but they were adamant that they wouldn't, so they bowed and accepted.

古文：即相促登车，所乘马异常骏伟，装饰鲜洁，仆御整肃。
现代文：他督促我上车。他们骑的马非常神骏高大，装饰得鲜艳洁净，仆人骑的马也很整齐利索。
English: He urged me to get into the car. The horses they rode were very tall, bright and cleanly decorated, and the horses ridden by the servants were also very neat.

古文：倏忽行百余里，有甲马三百骑已来，迎候驱殿。有大将军之行李，余亦颇以为得志。
现代文：一瞬间走了一百多里，这时有三百个骑兵前来迎接，我被引到一个高大的堂屋，里面准备了大将军使用的行李，我也觉得很得志。
English: I walked more than a hundred miles in an instant, when three hundred cavalrymen came to meet me. I was led to a tall hall, where the luggage used by the general was prepared. I also felt very honored.

古文：指顾间，望见一大城，其雉堞穹崇，沟洫深浚，余惚恍不知所自。
现代文：指指点点顾盼之间，看见一个大城，城上的齿状矮墙十分高大，护城河极深，我恍恍惚惚地不知道从哪里来。
English: While looking around, I saw a large city. The crenellated low wall on the city was very tall, and the moat was very deep. I was in a trance and didn't know where I came from.

古文：俄于郊外，备帐乐，设享。
现代文：不久，在郊外准备了帐幕和舞乐，安排酒宴。
English: Soon, tents and dance music were prepared in the suburbs, and wine feasts were arranged.

古文：宴罢入城，观者如堵，传呼小吏，交错其间，所经之门，不记重数。
现代文：宴会结束后，进入城里。观看我们的人形成人墙，传递消息的小官吏，交错地出现在人群里。经过的门，记不住有多少重。
English: After the banquet, we entered the city. Watching our people form a human wall, petty officials delivering messages appeared in the crowd in a staggered manner. I can't remember how many doors passed by.

古文：及至一处，如有公署，左右使余下马易衣，趋见贵主。
现代文：等到了一个地方，象是公署的样子，左右的人让我下马更换衣服，快些去见贵主。
English: When I got to a place that looked like a government office, the people around me told me to get off the horse, change my clothes, and hurry to see the lord.

古文：贵主使人传命，请以宾主之礼见。
现代文：贵主派人传出命令，我们以宾主的身份会见。
English: Your lordship has sent word that we are to meet as guests.

古文：余自谓既受公文器甲临戎之具，即是臣也，遂坚辞，具戎服入见。
现代文：我说自己既然接受了公文、武器、铠甲和临敌用之器具，就是臣子，坚决不同意。
English: I say that since I have accepted official documents, weapons, armor and equipment for use against the enemy, I am a vassal, and I strongly disagree.

古文：贵主使人复命，请去橐鞬，宾主之间，降杀可也。
现代文：身穿军服进去参见，贵主派人传达命令，除去盛放弓和箭的器具，宾主之间，降低一下礼节的等级。
English: See, your lord has sent someone to convey the order to remove the bow and arrow equipment and lower the level of etiquette among the guests.

古文：余遂舍器仗而趋入，见贵主坐于厅上，余拜谒，一如君臣之礼。
现代文：我就舍去器杖然后快步进去，看见贵主坐在厅上，我上前拜见，像君臣之礼一样。
English: I put down my cane and hurried inside. I saw the lord sitting in the hall, and I went forward to greet him, like a courtier.

古文：拜讫，连呼登阶，余乃再拜，升自西阶。
现代文：行礼完毕，就听连连招呼我登上台阶，我就又行了礼，从西面登上登阶。
English: When the salute was over, I heard the sergeant-major call me up the steps, and I saluted again, ascending the steps from the west.

古文：见红妆翠眉，蟠龙髻凤而侍立者，数十余辈；弹弦握管，花异服而执役者，又数十辈；腰金拖紫，曳组攒簪而趋隅者，又非止一人也；轻裘大带，白玉横腰，而森罗于阶下者，其数甚多。次命女客五六人，各有侍者十数辈，差肩接迹，累累而进。
现代文：只见几十个穿红衣服，描着翠色的眉毛，梳着龙凤髻的女子侍立两旁。弹着琴弦，握着管乐器，头上插着盛开的花朵，穿着奇异服装准备执行指令的人，又有几十个人。腰里带着金印，垂着紫色印带，头上插着簪子快步走上屋角的人，又不止一个。穿着轻软的皮衣和宽大的带子，白玉横在腰里，排列着站在台阶下面的人，那数目就更多了。接着又让五六个女客，各自带着十几个侍奉的仆人，肩并肩，脚跟脚，一伙一伙地进到堂屋。
English: Dozens of women in red dresses, with emerald eyebrows and long braided hair, stood on both sides, playing strings, holding wind instruments, with flowers in full bloom on their heads, and dozens of people in strange clothes ready to carry out orders. There was more than one person with a gold stamp on their waist, a purple stamp, and a braid on their head walking briskly to the corner of the roof. There were even more people in light leather jackets and wide belts, with white beads across their waists, standing at the bottom of the steps. Then there were five or six female guests, each with a dozen servants, shoulder to shoulder, foot to foot.

古文：余亦低视长揖，不敢施拜。
现代文：我也低着头作揖，不敢一一拜见。
English: I also keep my head down and do nothing, not daring to meet anyone.

古文：坐定，有大校数人，皆令预坐，举酒进乐。
现代文：坐下来之后，有几个大校，全让他们参预坐下。
English: After sitting down, there are a few big schools, all let them pre-sit down.

古文：酒至贵主，敛袂举觞，将欲兴词，叙向来征聘之意。俄闻烽燧四起，叫噪喧呼云： 朝那贼步骑数万人，今日平明，攻破堡寨，寻已入界。数道齐进，烟火不绝，请发兵救应。
现代文：举杯喝酒，进献歌舞，酒轮到贵主喝的时候，她收起衣袖举起酒杯，正要讲几句话，说明一下征聘我的理由，突然战火四起，有人叫喊说： 朝那贼人的步兵和骑兵几万人，今天天刚亮，就攻破了外围的堡寨，现已经进入边界，几路兵马一齐进军，战火连绵不绝，请发兵去挽救接应。
English: Raising a glass of wine, singing and dancing. When it was your lord's turn to drink, she rolled up her sleeves and raised her glass. She was about to say a few words to explain the reason for my recruitment. Suddenly, there was fighting all around. Someone shouted: "Tens of thousands of infantry and cavalry against the thief. Today, at first light, they broke through the outer fortification. Now they have entered the border. Soldiers and horses are marching together in several directions. The fighting is incessant. Please send soldiers to rescue and receive them."

古文：侍坐者相顾失色，诸女不及叙别，狼狈而散。
现代文：陪坐的人互相看着，脸上变了颜色，女子们来不及道别，乱纷纷地走散了。
English: The people sitting with them looked at each other, their faces changed color, and the women couldn't say goodbye in time and scattered in confusion.

古文：及诸校降阶拜谢，伫立听命。贵主临轩谓余曰： 吾受相公非常之急，悯其孤茕，继发师徒，拯其患难。
现代文：等到各位将官走下台阶行礼道谢，站在阶下听候命令时，贵主走到栏杆边对我说： 我受到相公不同寻常的恩惠，他可怜我孤独没有依靠，接连地派来士兵，拯救我的危难。
English: When the generals had come down the steps to salute and thank me, and I was standing at the foot of the steps waiting for orders, Your Excellency came to the railing and said to me: "I have received an unusual favor from my father-in-law. He pitied me for being alone and without support, and successively sent soldiers to save me from danger.

古文：然以车甲不利，权略是思。
现代文：可是由于战车和兵士力量不充足，这才想到机变和谋略。
English: However, due to the insufficient number of chariots and soldiers, they had to come up with a plan.

古文：今不弃弊陋，所以命将军者，正为此危急也。
现代文：你不嫌弃我们领地的残破简陋来到了这里。
English: You're not averse to abandoning our territory, so you've come here in your shabby state.

古文：幸不以幽僻为辞，少匡不迨。
现代文：我请将军到来的原因，是为了让你帮助我们摆脱危难。希望你不要以偏僻的阴间为借口，尽心尽力吧。
English: The reason why I asked the general to come here is so that you can help us get out of danger. I hope you don't use the remote hell as an excuse and do your best.

古文：遂别赐战马二疋，黄金甲一副，旌旗旄钺，珍宝器用，充庭溢目，不可胜计。
现代文：于是又另外赏赐给我两匹战马，一副黄金甲，战旗和兵器、珍宝和各种用具，摆满了庭院。
English: I was also given two horses, a coat of gold, a banner, weapons, precious stones, and all kinds of utensils, which filled the courtyard.

古文：彩女二人，给以兵符，锡赉甚丰。
现代文：有两个彩衣女子，把兵符交给我，赏赐给我很多东西。
English: There were two women in colorful clothes who gave me the military insignia and gave me a lot of things.

古文：余拜捧而出，传呼诸将，指挥部伍，内外响应。
现代文：我行了礼捧着兵符出击，传令各位将领，指挥士兵出去，从内到外一致响应。
English: I saluted, held the military emblem, and sent out a signal to the generals, commanding the soldiers to go out and respond in unison from the inside out.

古文：是夜出城，相次探报，皆云，贼势渐雄。
现代文：这天夜里我们出城去，一连几次探子来报告，都说，敌人的气势渐渐地大起来。
English: That night we went out of the city, and several times in succession spies came to report that the enemy was gradually gaining strength.

古文：余素谙其山川地里，形势孤虚，遂引军夜出。去城百余里，分布要害，明悬赏罚，号令三军，设三伏以待之。
现代文：我平时就很熟悉那里的山河地理形势，就领着军队夜间出发，在离城一百多里的地方，把军队分散安排在要害处，明确地公布赏罚标准，用来号令三军。又安设了三道埋伏来等待敌人。
English: I was very familiar with the geographical situation of the mountains and rivers there in normal times, so I led the army to set out at night, more than a hundred miles away from the city, dispersed the army at the critical point, clearly announced the reward and punishment standards, used to order the three armies, and set up three ambushes to wait for the enemy.

古文：迟明，排布已毕。
现代文：黎明时分，安排布置已经完毕。
English: By dawn, the arrangements were complete.

古文：贼汰其前功，颇甚轻进，犹谓孟远之统众也。
现代文：敌人觉得先前总打胜仗，又轻率地进军，以为还是孟远在指挥军队呢。
English: The enemy thought that Meng Yuan was still in command of the army, as he had always won battles before and marched into battle rashly.

古文：余自引轻骑，登高视之，见烟尘四合，行阵整肃。
现代文：我自己率领着装备轻便、行动迅速的骑兵，登上高处观察敌人的动向。只见到处烟尘飞扬，敌军行列阵势整齐而且严谨。
English: I myself, leading a lightly armed and swift cavalry, ascended to a high place to observe the enemy's movement. I only saw smoke and dust flying everywhere, and the enemy's ranks were neat and strict.

古文：余先使轻兵搦战，示弱以诱之。
现代文：我先派行动迅速的士兵去挑战，以 示弱 来引诱他们。
English: First, I sent my fast-moving soldiers to challenge them, luring them with a show of weakness.

古文：接以短兵，且战且行。金革之声，天裂地坼。
现代文：短兵相接，一边打一边撤，金革互相撞击的声音，象是天和地要分裂开似的。
English: The skirmishers were in close contact, fighting and retreating at the same time, and the sound of gold and leather colliding with each other was as if heaven and earth were about to split apart.

古文：余引兵诈北，彼亦尽锐前趋，鼓噪一声，伏兵尽起，千里转战，四面夹攻。
现代文：我领着部队装成失败的样子，敌人便尽全力向前追赶。突然，敲鼓声、呐喊声一起爆发，埋伏的军队全部都冲出去，在千里之内辗转战斗，四面夹攻，敌人的军队被打败了，死伤无数。
English: I led the troops to pretend to be defeated, and the enemy tried their best to catch up. Suddenly, the beating of drums and shouts broke out at the same time, and all the ambushed troops rushed out, fought within a thousand miles, and attacked on all sides. The enemy's army was defeated, and there were countless deaths and injuries.

古文：彼军败绩，死者如麻，再战再奔，朝那狡童，漏刃而去，从亡之卒，不过十余人。
现代文：第二次交锋，敌人又失败逃跑。朝那这个狡滑的人，从刀下脱逃了，跟着他逃跑的士兵，只不过十多个人。
English: In the second encounter, the enemy again failed to escape. This cunning man escaped from the sword, and there were only a dozen or so soldiers who followed him.

古文：余选健马三十骑追之，果生置于麾下。
现代文：我挑选出健壮的三十名骑兵去追赶他：终于把他活捉回来带到主帅的大旗之下。
English: I picked out thirty sturdy horsemen to chase him: finally he was captured alive and brought under the banner of the commander.

古文：由是血肉染草木，脂膏润原野，腥秽荡空，戈甲山积。
现代文：由于这场激战，血肉染红了草树，人的脂膏滋润了原野，腥秽的气味飘荡在空中，武器和铠甲堆积如山。
English: As a result of this fierce battle, flesh and blood stained the grass and trees, human grease moistened the field, the smell of filth wafted in the air, and weapons and armor piled up.

古文：贼帅以轻车驰送于贵主，贵主登平朔楼受之。
现代文：把敌人的主帅用轻便的车子快速地送到贵主面前，贵主登上平朔楼收降了他。
English: He quickly sent the enemy's head coach to your lord in a light car, and your lord ascended the Pingshuo Building to take him down.

古文：举国士民，咸来会集，引于楼前，以礼责问，唯称死罪，竟绝他词。
现代文：全国的百姓举行集会，把朝那领到楼前，按礼节责问他，朝那只是口里说我有死罪，竟然再也没有别的可说。
English: The people of the whole country held a meeting, led the emperor to the front of the building, and reprimanded him according to etiquette. The emperor only said that I had committed a capital crime, but there was nothing else to say.

古文：遂令押赴都市腰斩。
现代文：贵主命令把他押到都市执行腰斩。
English: Your lordship ordered him to be taken to the city to be beheaded.

古文：临刑，有一使乘传，来自王所，持急诏，令促赦之。
现代文：快要行刑的时候，有一个使者坐着一辆驿站专用的马车从国王那里来，带着紧急的诏书，让她赶快放了朝那。
English: When the execution was about to be carried out, a messenger came from the king in a stagecoach with an urgent edict to release her immediately.

古文：曰： 朝那之罪，吾之罪也，汝可赦之，以轻吾过。
现代文：诏书说： 朝那的罪过，是我的罪过，你要赦免他，来减轻我的过错。
English: The edict said: "The crime of the emperor is my crime. You should pardon him to lessen my guilt."

古文：贵主以父母再通音问，喜不自胜，谓诸将曰： 朝那妄动，即父之命也；今使赦之，亦父之命也。
现代文：贵主因为父母又和他沟通了音讯，高兴得了不得，对各位将军说： 朝那狂妄的行动，就是我父母主使的，现在让我放了他，也是父母的意思。
English: Your Excellency was overjoyed that his parents had communicated with him again, and he said to the generals: "In the face of that outrageous action, which was instigated by my parents, now let me release him, also on behalf of my parents."

古文：昔吾违命，乃贞节也；今若又违，是不祥也。
现代文：从前我违背父母之意，是为了保持贞节；现在如果再违背父母，恐怕要有不吉祥的事情发生。
English: In the past, I disobeyed my parents in order to preserve my chastity; now, if I disobey my parents again, I'm afraid something bad will happen.

古文：遂命解转，使单骑送归，未及朝那，已羞而卒于路。
现代文：他让人解开捆绑，派一个骑士送朝那回去，还未等到朝那回去，他已经羞愧地死在路上。
English: He had them untie him and sent a knight to take him back there, but before he could get there, he died of shame on the road.

古文：余以克敌之功，大被宠锡，寻备礼拜平难大将军，食朔方一万三千户。
现代文：我因为打败敌人有功劳，受到很大的宠信和恩赐，接着又准备礼仪任命我担任平难大将军的职务，封地是朔方的一万三千户。
English: Because I had the merit of defeating the enemy, I received a lot of favors and gifts, and then I prepared a ceremony to appoint me to the post of General Pingnan, with a fief of 13,000 households in the Shuo side.

古文：别赐第宅，舆马宝器，衣服婢仆，园林邸第，旌旜铠甲。
现代文：另外赐给我住处、车马宝器、衣服和奴仆、园林和官邸、仪仗旗和铠甲。
English: In addition, I was given a residence, chariots and horses, clothing and servants, gardens and official residences, flags of honor and armor.

古文：次及诸将，赏赉有差。
现代文：其次是各位将军，按等级奖赏。
English: Next are the generals, who will be awarded according to their rank.

古文：明日大宴，预坐者不过五六人，前者六七女皆来侍坐，风姿艳态，愈更动人。
现代文：第二天大摆宴席，预先坐到席位上的不过五六个人。先前宴会上的六七个女子全来陪坐，一个个风情万种，更加迷人。
English: The next day there was a large banquet, but only five or six people were seated in advance. The six or seven women at the previous banquet all came to sit with us, each with a myriad of styles, all the more charming.

古文：竟夕酣饮，甚欢。
现代文：痛饮到晚上，喝得很高兴。
English: We drank until late in the evening and were very happy.

古文：酒至贵主，捧觞而言曰： 妾之不幸，少处空闺，天赋孤贞。不从严父之命，屏居于此三纪矣。
现代文：轮到贵主喝酒，她捧着酒杯说： 我很不幸，年轻轻地就守寡，天性孤独贞烈，不顺从严父的命令，隐居在这里已经三十六年了。
English: When it was your master's turn to drink, she took up her glass and said: "I am very unfortunate, I was widowed young, I am lonely and chaste by nature, I do not obey my strict father's orders, and I have been living here in seclusion for thirty-six years.

古文：蓬首灰心，未得其死。
现代文：我整天散着头发，心如死灰，只是没死罢了。
English: My hair's been falling out all day, my heart's like ashes, but I'm not dead.

古文：邻童迫胁，几至颠危。若非相公之殊恩，将军之雄武，则息国不言之妇，及为朝那之囚耳。
现代文：朝那小子胁迫我，几乎达到了倾覆的急险地步，如果不是相公的鼎力相助，以及将军你的杰出才能，那么我这个亡国的女人，又会成为朝那小贼的囚徒。
English: If it wasn't for my partner's great help and your outstanding talent as a general, then I, a woman in exile, would have become a prisoner of that petty thief.

古文：永言斯惠，终天不忘。
现代文：我将永远记住这个恩惠，终生不会忘记。
English: I will always remember this favour, I will never forget it.

古文：遂以七宝钟酌酒，使人持送郑将军。
现代文：于是用七宝钟盛着酒，派人拿着送给我。
English: So they sent someone with a cloche containing wine to bring it to me.

古文：余因避席，再拜而饮。
现代文：我因而离开坐位，拜了又拜把酒喝了。
English: I therefore left my seat, bowed and drank the wine.

古文：余自是颇动归心，词理恳切，遂许给假一月，宴罢出。
现代文：我从此就动了回家的心思，言词道理说得十分恳切，她就答应给我一个月的假。
English: Since then, I've been thinking about going home. She was very sincere in what she said, and she promised to give me a month off.

古文：明日，辞谢讫，拥其麾下三十余人返于来路，所经之处，闻鸡犬，颇甚酸辛。
现代文：第二天，我去感谢辞别之后，就带着手下的三十多个人返回。一路之上，就听到鸡和狗的叫声，心里觉得酸溜溜的。
English: The next day, after I went to thank and say goodbye, I returned with more than thirty of my men. Along the way, I heard the cries of chickens and dogs, and I felt sour in my heart.

古文：俄顷到家，见家人聚泣，灵帐俨然。
现代文：不一会就到了家，看见家里人在哭泣，灵帐安设得象是真的一样。
English: Not long after, I arrived home and saw my family members crying, and the coffin was set up as if it were real.

古文：麾下一人，令余促入棺缝之中，余欲前，而为左右所耸。俄闻震雷一声，醒然而悟。 
现代文：我的一个手下让我赶快从棺材缝中钻进去。我正欲动作，却被左右的人一推，接着听到一声震耳的雷鸣，就醒了过来。 
English: One of my men told me to quickly get into the coffin. I was about to move, but I was pushed by people on both sides, and then I heard a deafening thunder and woke up.

古文：承符自此不事家产，唯以后事付妻孥。
现代文：郑承符从此不再管理家产，只是把自己的后事交给妻子和孩子。
English: Since then, Zheng Chengfu no longer manages the family property, but only hands over his affairs to his wife and children.

古文：果经一月，无疾而终。
现代文：果然过了一个月，他无病而亡。
English: Sure enough, a month later, he died without any illness.

古文：其初欲暴卒时，告其所亲曰： 余本机钤入用，效节戎行。虽奇功蔑闻，而薄效粗立。
现代文：他在快要死的时候，告诉他的亲属说： 我本来是靠机智谋略而被任用，在军队中表现我的节操，虽然没有立下奇异的功勋，可是也大略地表现出了我的才能。
English: As he lay dying, he told his relatives: I had been appointed by a clever stratagem, and had shown my temperance in the army, and, though I had done no extraordinary service, I had given a rough indication of my talents.

古文：洎遭衅累，谴谪于兹，平生志气，郁而未申。
现代文：但因受到个人冲动性格的牵累，被贬谪到这个地方，我平生的志向和豪气，被压抑着不能表现出来。
English: However, due to the drag of my impulsive personality, I was relegated to this place, and my lifelong ambition and courage were suppressed and could not be expressed.

古文：丈夫终当扇长风，摧巨浪，摧太山以压卵，决东海以沃萤。奋其鹰犬之心，为人雪不平之事。
现代文：大丈夫本来就应当卷起狂风，掀起巨浪，抱起泰山压在鸡蛋上，引来东海的水浇熄萤火的光亮，勃发起他的雄鹰和猎犬那样的雄心，为人间扫除不平。
English: A good husband should have been able to stir up the wind, stir up the waves, hold up Mount Tai on the egg, attract the water of the East Sea to extinguish the glow of the firefly, arouse his eagle and hound-like ambition, and sweep away the inequalities between people.

古文：吾朝夕当有所受，与子分襟，固不久矣。 
现代文：我一早一晚就能接受使命，与你们永别的时刻，指日可待。 
English: I can accept a mission in the morning or in the evening, and the moment of my eternal farewell to you is just around the corner.

古文：其月十三日，有人自薛举城，晨发十余里，天初平晓，忽见前有车尘竞起，旌旗焕赫，甲马数百人，中拥一人，气概洋洋然。逼而视之，郑承符也。
现代文：那个月的十三日，有个人早晨从薛举城出发走了十多里，天刚刚亮的时候，忽然看见前面有车马掀起纷纷扬扬的灰尘，战旗鲜艳耀目，穿甲衣的骑兵有好几百名。当中有一个人，颇为洋洋得意，走近一看，竟是郑承符。
English: On the thirteenth day of that month, a man set out from Xueju City in the morning and walked more than ten miles. When it was just dawn, he suddenly saw the dust raised by the horses and chariots in front of him. The battle flags were bright and dazzling, and there were several hundred cavalrymen in armor. One of them, quite proud, approached and saw that it was Zhengchengpu.

古文：此人惊讶移时，因伫于路左，见瞥如风云，抵善女湫。俄顷，悄无所见。
现代文：这个人惊讶了很长时间，呆呆地站在路的左面。一瞥之间，郑承符他们就象风云一样，走到了善女潭，不一会儿，静悄悄地什么也看不见了。
English: The man was surprised for a long time, standing motionless on the left side of the road. At a glance, Zheng Chengfu and they walked like a storm to Zhengyetan, and after a while, quietly, nothing could be seen.

