古文：顾琛字弘玮，吴郡吴人，晋司空和之曾孙也。
现代文：顾琛字弘玮，吴郡吴县人，是晋代司空顾和的曾孙。
English: Gu Xizhong, a native of Wu County, Wuxian County, is the great-grandson of the Jin Dynasty's Siku Guhe.

古文：祖履之，父惔，并爲司徒左西曹掾。
现代文：祖父顾履之，父亲顾胟，都做司徒左西曹掾。
English: His grandfather, Gu Lushi, and his father, Gu Yao, were both scholars of the Western Zhao Dynasty.

古文：琛谨确不尚浮华，起家州从事、驸马都尉，累迁尚书库部郎。
现代文：顾琛性格谨严，不追求浮华，最初做官担任州从事、驸马都尉，逐步升为尚书库部郎。
English: Gu Xi's character is prudent and does not pursue flashy. At first, he served as a state official, a lieutenant of the imperial horse, and gradually rose to the top of the Shang Library Department.

古文：元嘉七年，文帝遣到彦之经略河南，大败，悉委弃兵甲，武库爲之空虚。
现代文：元嘉七年，文帝派到彦之经营河南，大败，丢弃了全部兵甲，武库因此空虚。
English: In the seventh year of the Yuan Jia Dynasty, Emperor Wen sent Yan to administer Henan, but he was defeated and abandoned all his armor, leaving his arsenal empty.

古文：文帝宴会，有归化人在座，上问琛库中仗犹有几许？琛诡辞答有十万人仗。
现代文：文帝举行宴会，有从外部归降的人在座，皇上问顾琛仓库中的兵甲还有多少，顾琛假称还有十万人的甲仗。
English: Emperor Wen held a banquet, and people who had surrendered from the outside were present. The emperor asked Gu Yao how many pieces of armor were left in the warehouse, and Gu Yao pretended that there were still 100,000 pieces of armor.

古文：旧库仗秘不言多少，上既发问，追悔失言。
现代文：过去武库中的兵甲要保密，不能说有多少，皇上发问以后，就追悔失言。
English: In the past, the armour in the arsenal had to be kept secret, and it was not possible to say how many there were. After the emperor asked questions, he regretted his slip of the tongue.

古文：及琛诡对，上甚善之。
现代文：等顾琛假言作了对答，皇上非常满意。
English: The emperor was very satisfied with Gu's reply.

古文：尚书寺门有制，八坐以下门生随入者各有差，不得杂以人士。
现代文：尚书寺门有规定，八座以下官员跟随进入的侍从人数各有不同，不能混杂其他人士。
English: There is a rule at the gate of Shoshu-ji Temple that the number of attendants who enter with officials from eight seats and below is different, and they cannot mix with other people.

古文：琛以宗人顾硕寄尚书张茂度门名，而与顾硕同席坐。
现代文：顾琛因为同族的顾硕是寄名在尚书张茂度门下，而与顾硕同席就坐。
English: Gu Yao sat at the same table with Gu Shuo because Gu Shuo, a member of the same ethnic group, was a disciple of Shangshu Zhang Maodu.

古文：明年坐谴出，免中正。
现代文：第二年因此获罪被贬官出去，免去了中正职务。
English: The following year, he was found guilty, demoted and removed from his position as vice-premier.

古文：凡尚书官大罪则免，小罪谴出，谴出者百日无代人，听还本职。
现代文：凡是尚书省的官员，犯了大罪就免去官职，犯了小罪就贬官调出，调出去的一百天以内无人代替，允许回返本职。
English: All officials of the Ministry of Education and Culture who have committed serious crimes will be removed from office, and those who have committed minor crimes will be demoted and transferred out. No one will replace them within 100 days, and they will be allowed to return to their duties.

古文：琛仍爲彭城王义康所请，再补司徒录事参军。
现代文：顾琛则被彭城王刘义康所邀请，第二次补为司徒录事参军。
English: Gu Yao was invited by Liu Yikang, the king of Pengcheng, to join the army for the second time.

古文：十五年，出爲义兴太守。
现代文：元嘉十五年，调出担任义兴太守。
English: In the fifteenth year of Yuan Jia, he was transferred to serve as the governor of Yixing.

古文：初，义康请琛入府，欲委以腹心，琛不能承事刘湛，故寻见斥外。
现代文：起初，刘义康邀请顾琛进入幕府，打算委任担当心腹职务，顾琛不能侍奉刘湛，所以不久就被排斥到外面。
English: At first, Liu Yikang invited Gu Yao to enter the shogunate, intending to appoint him as a confidant. Gu Yao could not serve Liu Zhan, so he was soon ousted.

古文：十九年，徙东阳太守，欲使琛防守彭城王义康，固辞忤旨，废黜还家积年。
现代文：十九年，调为东阳太守，想用顾琛防备彭城王刘义康，顾琛坚持推辞，违背了旨意，被黜免回家多年。
English: In 19th year, he was transferred to be the governor of Dongyang, and he wanted to use Gu Xuan to protect Liu Yikang, the king of Pengcheng. Gu Xuan persisted in his refusal, violated his will, and was banished to his home for many years.

古文：及元凶弑立，分会稽五郡置州，以随王诞爲刺史，即以琛爲会稽太守。
现代文：后来元凶劭杀死皇上，自立为帝，分出会稽五郡设置了一个州，以随王刘诞为刺史，便以顾琛为会稽太守。
English: Later, the murderer Gu Yao killed the emperor and established himself as emperor. He divided the five counties into counties and set up a prefecture. With the birth of King Liu as the history, Gu Yao became the grand steward of the county.

古文：诞起义，加冠军将军。
现代文：刘诞起义，加封为冠军将军。
English: Liu Xing rebelled and was awarded the title of champion general.

古文：事平，迁吴兴太守。
现代文：事情平定后，调为吴兴太守。
English: After the matter was settled, he was transferred to Wu Xing Taishou.

古文：孝建元年，爲吴郡太守，以起义功，封永新县五等侯。
现代文：孝建元年，任吴郡太守，因为起义的功劳，封为永新县五等侯。
English: In the first year of Xiao Jian, he was appointed as the governor of Wu County. Because of his contribution to the uprising, he was given the title of Yongxin County's fifth-ranked marquis.

古文：大明元年，吴县令张闓坐居母丧无礼，下廷尉，钱唐令沈文秀判劾违谬，应坐被弹。
现代文：大明元年吴县令张閏由于为母亲居丧违背礼教，交给了廷尉进行处罚。钱塘令沈文秀被弹劾违谬，应该连坐。
English: In the first year of the Ming Dynasty, Wuxian warden Zhang Jie was punished by a courtier for violating the etiquette of his mother's funeral. Qiantang warden Shen Wenshu was impeached for absurdity and should be imprisoned.

古文：琛宣言于衆， 闓被劾之始，屡相申明 。又云 当啓文秀留县 。
现代文：顾琛向众人宣称， 张閏被弹劾的事一开始，我就屡次申明情况 ，又说 要上奏皇上，让沈文秀留在县里 。
English: Gu Yao declared to everyone, "From the very beginning of Zhang Ye's impeachment, I have repeatedly stated the situation, and also said that we should appeal to the emperor and let Shen Wenshu stay in the county."

古文：孝武闻之大怒，谓琛卖恶归上,免官。
现代文：孝武帝大怒，说顾琛是把恶名推给皇上，免了他的官职。
English: Emperor Xiaowu was furious, saying that Gu Yao was giving the emperor a bad name and relieved him of his official post.

古文：琛母老仍停家。
现代文：顾琛的母亲年老了，于是他便呆在家里。
English: Gu Yao's mother is old, so he stays at home.

古文：琛及前西阳太守张牧并事司空竟陵王诞，诞反，遣客陆延稔齎书板琛及子弟官。
现代文：顾琛和前西阳太守张牧，一块在司空竟陵王刘诞手下任职，刘诞反叛，派门客陆延稔送信授予顾琛及其子弟官职。
English: Gu Yao and Zhang Mu, the former Xiyang daimyō, both served under Liu Xizhao, the King of Jingling. Liu Xizhao rebelled and sent a messenger to Lu Yanjun to confer official positions on Gu Yao and his sons.

古文：时孝武以琛素结事诞，或有异志，遣信就吴郡太守王昙生诛琛父子。
现代文：当时孝武帝因为顾琛平素结交侍奉刘诞，或许会有异志，便写信让吴郡太守王昙生杀死顾琛父子。
English: At that time, Emperor Xiaowu wrote to the governor of Wu County, Wang Xinsheng, asking him to kill Gu Xuan and his son, because Gu Xuan had a close friendship with Liu Xuan, who served Liu Xuan.

古文：会延稔先至，琛等即执斩之，遣二子送延稔首啓闻。
现代文：正好陆延稔先到，顾琛等人便抓起来把他杀掉，派两个儿子送陆延稔的头上报。
English: Just as Lu Yanqi arrived first, Gu Wei and others seized him and killed him, and sent his two sons to take Lu Yanqi to the capital to report.

古文：孝武所遣诛琛使其日亦至而获免。
现代文：孝武帝所派的诛杀顾琛的使者也到了，从而被免罪。
English: The emissary sent by Emperor Xiaowu to assassinate Gu Xi also arrived, and was thus exonerated.

古文：琛母孔氏时年百余岁，晋安帝隆安初，琅邪王廞于吴中作乱，以女爲贞烈将军，悉以女人爲官属，以孔氏爲司马。
现代文：顾琛的母亲孔氏年龄已经一百多岁，晋安帝隆安元年，琅笽人王貵在吴中作乱，以他的女儿为贞烈将军，全部以女人为属官，以孔氏为司马。
English: Gu Yao's mother, Kong, was more than a hundred years old. In the first year of the reign of Emperor Yongan of the Jin Dynasty, the warlord Wang Yao wreaked havoc in Wuzhong, using his daughter as a chaste general, all women as subordinate officers, and Mr. Kong as his steward.

古文：及孙恩乱后，东土饥荒，人相食，孔氏散家粮以振邑里，得活者甚衆，生子皆以孔爲名焉。
现代文：孙恩作乱以后，东方发生饥荒，人吃人，孔氏放出家中的粮食来救济乡人，救活的人很多，他们生的子女许多都是以孔为名字。
English: After Sun En's rebellion, there was a famine in the East, and people were eating each other. The Kong family released grain from their home to help the villagers. Many people were saved, and many of their children were named after Kong.

古文：琛仍爲吴兴太守，明年坐郡人多翦钱及盗铸免官。
现代文：顾琛仍然担任吴兴太守，第二年因为郡里有很多人抢钱和盗铸钱币而被免官。
English: Gu Yao still served as Wu Xing's governor, but was dismissed the following year because there were many people in the county who robbed money and stole coins.

古文：历位都官尚书。
现代文：曾做过都官尚书。
English: He once worked as a magistrate.

古文：废帝即位，爲吴郡太守。
现代文：废帝即位，他任吴郡太守。
English: The deposed emperor ascended to the throne, and he became the governor of Wu County.

古文：初，琛景平中爲朝请，假还东，日晚至方山。
现代文：起初，顾琛在景平时期担任朝请，告假回到东方，天晚时走到方山。
English: At first, during the Jingping period, Gu Yao served as the guest of honor, took leave and returned to the East, and walked to Fangshan at night.

古文：于时商旅数十船，悉泊岸侧，有一人玄衣介帻，执鞭屏诸船云： 顾吴郡部伍寻至，应泊此岸。 
现代文：当时商旅有几十只船，都停泊在岸边，有一个人黑衣服、高头巾，拿着鞭子赶开其他船说： 顾吴郡的人马很快就要到了，应该停泊在这里。 
English: At that time, there were dozens of boats of merchants and travelers, all of which were anchored on the shore. One man, dressed in black and wearing a tall turban, drove away the other boats with a whip and said, "The men and horses of Guwu County will be arriving soon, and they should anchor here."

古文：于是诸船各东西。
现代文：于是众船只各向东西让开。
English: So all the ships moved away, one to the east and one to the west.

古文：俄有一假装至，事力甚寡，仍泊向处，人问： 顾吴郡早晚至？ 
现代文：不一会，有一个穿着便装的人到了，力量很少，仍然停在原来的地方，人们问： 顾吴郡什么时候到？ 
English: After a while, a man in civilian clothes arrived, with little power, still parked in the same place. People asked: When will Guwu County arrive?

古文：船人答： 无顾吴郡。 
现代文：船上的人答道： 此处没有顾吴郡。 
English: The person on board replied: There is no Guwu County here.

古文：又问： 何船？ 
现代文：又问： 这是谁的船？ 
English: He also asked: Whose ship is this?

古文：曰： 顾朝请耳。 
现代文：回答说： 顾朝请罢了。 
English: He replied, "Just get rid of Gu Chao, please."

古文：莫不惊怪。
现代文：大家无不惊奇。
English: Everyone was surprised.

古文：琛意窃知爲善征，因誓之曰： 若得郡，当于此立庙。 
现代文：顾琛心里暗自知道这是一个好的征兆，于是发誓说： 如果得了吴郡，一定要在这里立一座庙。 
English: Gu Yao secretly knew in his heart that this was a good omen, so he swore: If I win Wu County, I will definitely build a temple here.

古文：至是果爲吴郡，乃立庙方山，号白马庙云。
现代文：现在他果然掌管了吴郡，于是就立庙于方山，号称白马庙。
English: Now that he was in charge of Wu County, he built a temple in Fangshan, known as the White Horse Temple.

古文：深之字思玄，吴兴乌程人，位侍中、都官尚书，卒于太常。顾觊之字伟仁，吴郡吴人也。
现代文：明帝泰始初年，他与四方众人一同造反。兵败，带着母亲逃往会稽，台军到了以后，归降，后来担任员外常侍、中散大夫。去世。顾觊之字伟仁，是吴郡吴县人。
English: In the first year of the reign of Emperor Taizong of the Ming Dynasty, he rebelled together with people from all four directions. Defeated, he fled with his mother to Hefei. After the arrival of the Taiwanese army, he surrendered. Later, he served as a non-commissioned officer and doctor of Chinese medicine. He passed away. Gu Xizhi Weiren was from Wuxian, Wuxian County.

古文：高祖谦字公让，晋平原内史陆机姊夫。
现代文：他的高祖顾谦字公让，是晋朝的平原内史陆机的姐夫。
English: His great-great-grandfather, Gu Qian Zi Gong Jang, was the brother-in-law of the Jin dynasty's Plains Inner History land machine.

古文：祖崇，大司农。
现代文：祖父顾崇，是大司农。
English: His grandfather, Gu Chong, was the chief minister of agriculture.

古文：父黄老，司徒左西曹掾。
现代文：父亲顾黄老，是司徒左西曹掾。
English: His father, Gu Huanglao, was a disciple of St. West Cao Pi.

古文：觊之爲谢晦卫军参军，晦爱其雅素，深相知待。
现代文：顾觊之担任谢晦的卫军参军，谢晦喜欢他文雅素净，深深地相知相待。
English: Gu Yanzhi served as Xie Yao's bodyguard when he joined the army. Xie Yao liked him because he was refined and clean, and they got to know each other well.

古文：历位尚书都官郎。
现代文：他历任尚书都官郎。
English: He is the longest-serving cabinet minister in history.

古文：殷、刘隙着，觊之不欲与殷景仁久接，乃辞脚疾免归。
现代文：殷景文、刘义康之间的矛盾已经很显著，顾觊之不愿意与殷景仁长久地接触，于是就以脚病为理由辞官回家。
English: The contradiction between Yin Jingwen and Liu Yikang was already very obvious. Gu Yizhi was unwilling to have long-term contact with Yin Jingren, so he resigned from his post on the grounds of a foot ailment.

古文：每夜常于床上行脚，家人窃异之而莫晓其意。
现代文：每天夜里常常在床上行走，家里人暗中诧异而不晓得他的用意。
English: Every night he would often walk on the bed, and his family was secretly surprised, not knowing what he was up to.

古文：及义康徙废，朝廷多受祸。觊之竟免。
现代文：等刘义康免官流放，朝廷中的人有很多都遭了祸，顾觊之终于免遭不幸。
English: By the time Liu Yikang was exiled, many people in the imperial court had suffered misfortune. Gu Xizhi was finally spared from misfortune.

古文：后爲山阴令。
现代文：后来做了山阴令。
English: It was later renamed the Sangin Ryo.

古文：山阴剧邑三万户，前后官长昼夜不得休，事犹不举。
现代文：山阴是个难以治理的地方，共三万户，前后任职的长官昼夜不得休息，事情还是办不好。
English: Sanyin is a place that is difficult to govern, with a total of 30,000 households. The prefects who have served before and after are not allowed to rest day and night, and things are still difficult to manage.

古文：觊之御繁以约，县用无事。
现代文：顾觊之用简约的方法来统御复杂的情况，县里因而没有事情。
English: Gu Yanzhi used a simple method to control a complex situation, and there was no trouble in the county.

古文：昼日垂帘，门阶闲寂，自宋世爲山阴，务简而事理，莫能尚也。
现代文：白天垂着帘子，门庭清闲，自从宋朝以来治理山阴，事务简约而局面良好的，没有人能超过他。
English: The curtain hangs during the day, the courtyard is idle, the mountains and valleys have been governed since the Song Dynasty, the affairs are simple and the situation is good, no one can surpass him.

古文：后爲尚书吏部郎。
现代文：后来做尚书吏部郎。
English: He later became a member of the Shoshriiburo.

古文：尝于文帝坐论江东人物，言及顾荣，袁淑谓觊之曰： 卿南人怯懦，岂办作贼。 
现代文：曾经在文帝的座位前论说江东人物，说到了顾荣，袁淑对顾觊之说： 你们南方人怯懦，怎么能办作贼的人？ 
English: Once, in front of Emperor Wen's seat, discussing the characters of Jiangdong, when Gu Rong was mentioned, Yuan Shu said to Gu Xizhi: You southerners are cowardly, how can you be thieves?

古文：觊之正色曰： 卿乃复以忠义笑人。 
现代文：顾觊之严肃地说： 您这是把忠义作为取笑人的理由。 
English: Gu Yanzhi said seriously: You are using loyalty as a reason to make fun of people.

古文：淑有愧色。
现代文：袁淑面有愧色。
English: Yuan Shuk has a guilty look on her face.

古文：孝建中，爲湘州刺史，以政绩称。
现代文：孝建年间，担任湘州刺史，以政绩而著称。
English: During the reign of Xiao Jian, he served as Hunan Provincial Historian and was known for his political achievements.

古文：大明元年，征守度支尚书，转吏部尚书。
现代文：大明元年，征调他为度支尚书，转任吏部尚书。
English: In the first year of the Daming era, he was transferred from the position of Doushi Shangshu to the position of Liibu Shangshu.

古文：时沛郡相县唐赐往比村彭家饮酒还，因得病，吐蛊二十馀物。
现代文：当时沛郡相县的唐赐前往邻村彭家饮酒回家，就此得了病，吐出毒虫二十多条。
English: At that time, Tang Zi of Pei County and Xiang County went to the neighboring village of Peng Jia to drink alcohol and return home. As a result, he fell ill and vomited more than 20 poisonous worms.

古文：赐妻张从赐临终言，死后亲刳腹，五藏悉糜碎。
现代文：唐赐的妻子张氏依照唐赐临终的遗言，死后亲自剖开他的肚子，五脏都糜烂破碎了。
English: According to Tang Zi's dying words, his wife, Zhang, personally opened his stomach after his death, and his five internal organs were completely destroyed.

古文：郡县以张忍行刳剖，赐子副又不禁止。论妻伤夫，五岁刑，子不孝父母，子弃市。
现代文：郡县官方因为张氏残忍地进行解剖，唐赐的儿子唐副又不禁止，判她为妻子伤害丈夫，服五年徒刑，儿子不孝顺父母，斩首示众。
English: Because Ms. Zhang cruelly performed the autopsy and did not forbid Mr. Tang's son, Mr. Tang's deputy, the county official sentenced her to serve five years in prison for injuring her husband as a wife, and the son was not filial to his parents and beheaded in public.

古文：并非科例。
现代文：这些都不是法律条文。
English: These are not legal provisions.

古文：三公郎刘勰议： 赐妻痛遵往言，儿识谢及理，考事原心，非在忍害，谓宜哀矜。 
现代文：三公郎刘勰认为： 唐赐的妻子痛心地遵从遗言，儿子明白人死是自然现象，根据事实推究他们的心情，并不在于忍心残害，应该予以同情。 
English: Liu Wei, the third prince, thought: Tang Zi's wife painfully obeyed his last words, and his son understood that human death is a natural phenomenon. According to the facts, their feelings were not to endure the cruelty, and they should be sympathized with.

古文：觊之议： 以妻子而行忍酷，不宜曲通小情，谓副爲不孝，张同不道。 
现代文：顾觊之认为： 以妻子和儿子的身份而做出残忍苛苦的事情，不应该无原则地疏通小的感情，我认为唐副是不孝，张氏和他一样很不仁道。 
English: Gu Yanzhi believed that: as a wife and son, it is best to do cruel and harsh things, and it is not right to dredge up petty feelings without principle. I think Vice Tang is unfilial, and Mr. Zhang is as uncharitable as he is.

古文：诏如觊之议。
现代文：诏令按照顾觊之的议论执行。
English: The edict was carried out in accordance with Gu's argument.

古文：后爲吴郡太守，幸臣戴法兴权倾人主，而觊之未尝低意。
现代文：后来顾觊之担任吴郡太守，得宠大臣戴法兴权力压过皇上，而顾觊之不曾向他低过头。
English: Later, Gu Yanzhi served as the governor of Wu County. The favored minister Dai Faxing had more power than the emperor, but Gu Yanzhi never bowed to him.

古文：左光禄大夫蔡兴宗与觊之善，嫌其风节过峻。
现代文：左光禄大夫蔡兴宗与顾觊之友好，嫌他风节过于严峻。
English: Zuo Guanglu's doctor Cai Xingzong is friendly with Gu Yao, but he is thought to be too severe.

古文：觊之曰： 辛毗有云，孙、刘不过使吾不爲三公耳。 
现代文：顾觊之道： 辛毗说过，孙、刘不过让我不做三公罢了。 
English: Gu Gan's way: Xin Pi said that Sun and Liu would not let me become the three princes.

古文：后卒于湘州刺史，諡曰简子。
现代文：他后来死于湘州刺史任上，谥号为简子。
English: He later died in the post of Hunan governor, and his nickname was Janzi.

古文：觊之家门雍穆，爲州郡所重。
现代文：顾觊之家门和睦，被同州郡的人们所尊重。
English: The Gu Yao family is well-received and respected by the people of Tongzhou County.

古文：子绰私财甚丰，乡里士庶多负责，觊之禁不能止。
现代文：儿子顾绰私人财产十分丰富，同乡的士人和平民有很多人欠他的债，顾觊之禁止他不能奏效。
English: Gu Zhe's son Gu Zhe is very rich in private property, and many of his fellow scholars and commoners owe him debts. Gu Zhe's ban on him cannot work.

古文：及后爲吴郡，诱出文券一大厨，悉令焚之。
现代文：等后来掌管吴郡，诱骗他拿出了文契一大厨，全部让人烧掉。
English: Later, when he was in charge of Wu County, he tricked him into taking out the Wenchi Grand Chef and had everyone burn it.

古文：宣语远近，皆不须还。绰懊叹弥日。
现代文：宣告给远近各地的人们，都不需要再来偿还，顾绰懊悔叹息了整整一天。
English: He announced to people from far and near that there was no need to repay again, and he sighed with remorse for a whole day.

古文：觊之常执命有定分，非智力所移，唯应恭己守道，信天任运。
现代文：顾觊之常常认定命运都有固定的职分，不是智力所能转移的，只应该恭守自己的本分，信凭天命。
English: Gu Xizhi often believes that fate has a fixed position, which cannot be transferred by intelligence, and that one should only respect one's duty and believe in one's destiny.

古文：而闇者不达，妄意徼幸，徒亏雅道，无关得丧。
现代文：而昏昧的人不明达，妄求侥幸，徒然损坏了雅道，与得失无关。
English: However, a dim-witted person does not know what to do, and seeks for a fluke, damaging the noble path in vain, regardless of the gains and losses.

古文：乃以其意，命弟子愿作定命论。
现代文：于是便以他的这种意思，让他的侄子顾愿作了一篇《命定论》。
English: With this in mind, he asked his nephew Gu Sheng to write "Theory of Destiny."

古文：愿字子恭，父深之，散骑侍郎。
现代文：顾愿字子恭，父亲是顾深之，为散骑侍郎。
English: His father, Gu Shengzhi, was a horseback riding attendant.

古文：愿好学，有才辞，卒于太子舍人。
现代文：顾愿喜爱学习，有才学和词采，死在太子舍人任上。
English: Gu Xian loved to study, had talent and eloquence, and died in the position of crown prince.

