古文：晋饥，乞籴于秦。
现代文：晋国发生饥荒，向秦国请求购买粮食。
English: When famine occurred in Jin, he asked Qin to buy grain.

古文：丕豹曰： 晋君无礼于君，众莫不知。
现代文：丕豹对穆公说： 晋君无礼于您，大家没有不知道的。
English: The panther said to Mu Gong: Jinjun is rude to you, everyone knows it.

古文：往年有难，今又荐饥。
现代文：往年晋君有祸难，如今又连续闹饥荒。
English: In previous years, Jinjun was plagued by calamities, and now there is a continuous famine.

古文：已失人，又失天，其有殃也多矣。
现代文：已经失去人心，又失去天意，他的灾殃可真多啊。
English: He has already lost the hearts of the people and lost the will of heaven. He has really suffered a lot.

古文：君其伐之，勿予籴！ 
现代文：国君应该讨伐他，不要卖给他粮食！ 
English: The sovereign should fight him, not sell him grain!

古文：公曰： 寡人其君是恶，其民何罪？
现代文：秦穆公说： 我是憎恶晋君，但他的百姓有何罪？
English: Qin Mu Gong said: I hate Jin Jun, but what is the crime of his people?

古文：天殃流行，国家代有。
现代文：天灾流行，各国都会轮流出现。
English: Natural disasters are prevalent, and countries will take turns to appear.

古文：补乏荐饥，道也，不可以废道于天下。 谓公孙枝曰： 予之乎？ 
现代文：救济饥荒，这是正道，不可在天下废弃正道。 说完问公孙枝： 给晋国粮食吗？ 
English: Alleviating famine is the right path, and the right path must not be abandoned in the world. Having said that, I asked Gongsun Zhi: Do you want to give grain to Jin Province?

古文：公孙枝曰： 君有施于晋君，晋君无施于其众。
现代文：公孙枝说： 您对晋君有过帮助，晋君却对他的百姓不施恩德。
English: Gongsun Zhi said: You have been helpful to Jinjun, but Jinjun has not been kind to his people.

古文：今旱而听于君，其天道也。
现代文：现在因旱灾而求援于您，大概是天意吧。
English: It is probably God's will that I turn to you for help now because of the drought.

古文：君若弗予，而天予之。
现代文：您若不给他粮食，而上天也许会援助他。
English: Heaven help him if you don't give him food.

古文：苟众不说其君之不报也，则有辞矣。
现代文：这样，如果晋国民众对他们国君忘恩负义不满的话，晋君就会有托辞了。
English: In this way, if the people of Jin are dissatisfied with the ingratitude of their sovereign, Jin will have an excuse.

古文：不若予之，以说其众。
现代文：不如卖给他们粮食，让晋国民众欢喜。
English: It would be better to sell them grain and make the people of Jin happy.

古文：众说，必咎于其君。
现代文：民众欢喜我们，就必定会责怪他们的国君。
English: If the people are pleased with us, they are bound to blame their sovereign.

古文：其君不听，然后诛焉。
现代文：晋君如不听命的话，我们就可讨伐他了。
English: If Jinjun doesn't do as he's told, we can fight him.

古文：虽欲御我，谁与？ 
现代文：那时他虽想抵抗我们，民众谁会帮助他？ 
English: At that time, although he wanted to resist us, the people, who would help him?

古文：是故氾舟于河，归籴于晋。
现代文：所以就在黄河上排列船只，把粮食运往晋国。
English: Therefore, ships were lined up on the Yellow River to transport grain to Jin.

古文：秦饥，公令河上输之粟。
现代文：秦国后来也发生饥荒。晋惠公命令黄河以西五个城市给秦国运去粮食。
English: Jin Huigong ordered five cities west of the Yellow River to send grain to Qin.

古文：虢射曰： 弗予赂地而予之籴，无损于怨而厚于寇，不若勿予。 公曰： 然。 
现代文：虢射说： 不给秦国这河西五城之地，却卖给它这五城之地所产的粮食，并不会减轻他们的怨恨，反而会加强他们的力量，不如不给。 惠公说： 对。 
English: Lei Ya said, "If we don't give Qin the land of the five cities west of the river, but sell it the grain produced by these five cities, it will not alleviate their resentment, but will strengthen their strength. It's better not to give it." Huigong said, "That's right."

古文：庆郑曰： 不可。
现代文：庆郑劝谏说： 不能这样。
English: Qing Zheng advised Gong and said, "This can't be allowed.

古文：已赖其地，而又爱其实，忘善而背德，虽我必击之。
现代文：已经赖下秦国的土地，又吝惜那些粮食，忘记了秦国的善意，又背弃了对我们的恩德，如果我处在秦国的地位必定会来进攻的。
English: If I were in the position of the Qin State, I would certainly attack. I have already relied on the land of the Qin State, and have been stingy with the grain. I have forgotten the goodwill of the Qin State, and have betrayed the kindness to us.

古文：弗予，必击我。 
现代文：不给粮食，秦国一定要打我们。 
English: If we don't give grain, Qin will definitely beat us.

古文：公曰： 非郑之所知也。 
现代文：惠公说： 这不是你所能知道的。 
English: Huigong said: This is not something you can know.

古文：遂不予。
现代文：于是没有卖给秦国粮食。
English: As a result, no grain was sold to Qin.

