古文：鲁君谓子墨子曰： 吾恐齐之攻我也，可救乎？ 
现代文：译文鲁国国君对墨子说： 我害怕齐国攻打我国，可以解救吗？ 
English: Lu Guo Guo Jun said to Mozi: I am afraid of Qi attacking our country, can you save me?

古文：子墨子曰： 可。
现代文：墨子说： 可以。
English: Mozo said, "Yes."

古文：昔者，三代之圣王禹、汤、文、武，百里之诸侯也，说忠行义，取天下；三代之暴王桀、纣、幽、厉，雠怨行暴，失天下。
现代文：从前三代的圣王禹、汤、文、武，只不过是百里见方土地的首领，喜欢忠诚，实行仁义，终于取得了天下；三代的暴王桀、纣、幽、厉，把怨者当作仇人，实行暴政，最终失去了天下。
English: The previous three generations of holy kings, Yu, Tang, Wen, and Wu, were merely the leaders of a hundred square miles of land. They liked loyalty and practiced benevolence and righteousness, and finally gained the world. The three generations of tyrants, Zou, Zou, Yu, and Li, treated their enemies as enemies, practiced tyranny, and eventually lost the world.

古文：吾愿主君之上者，尊天事鬼，下者爱利百姓，厚为皮币，卑辞令，亟遍礼四邻诸候，驱国而以事齐，患可救也。
现代文：我希望君主您对上尊重上天、敬事鬼神，对下爱护、有利于百姓，准备丰厚的皮毛、钱币，辞令要谦恭，赶快礼交遍四邻的诸侯，驱使一国的人民，抵御齐国的侵略，这样，祸患就可以解救。
English: I hope that you, the sovereign, will respect the heavens above, honor the gods and spirits, love the people below, and benefit the people, prepare rich furs and coins, be courteous in your words, and quickly send gifts to the princes of the four neighbors, drive the people of a country to resist the aggression of Qi, so that the disaster can be relieved.

古文：非此，顾无可为者。 
现代文：不这样，看来就毫无其他办法了。 
English: Otherwise, there seems to be no other way.

古文：齐将伐鲁，子墨子谓项子牛曰： 伐鲁，齐之大过也。
现代文：齐国将要攻打鲁国，墨子对项子牛说： 攻伐鲁国，是齐国的大错。
English: Qi was about to attack Lu. Mo Zi said to Xiang Zi Niu, "It is a big mistake for Qi to attack Lu.

古文：昔者，吴王东伐越，栖诸会稽；西伐楚，葆昭王于随；北伐齐，取国子以归于吴。
现代文：从前吴王夫差向东攻打越国，越王勾践困居在会稽；向西攻打楚国，楚国人在随地保卫楚昭王；向北攻打齐国，俘虏齐将押回吴国。
English: In the past, Wu Wangfu sent his army to attack Yue to the east, but Yue Wang Gochun was trapped in Hefei; he attacked Chu to the west, and the people of Chu defended King Chu Zhao everywhere; he attacked Qi to the north, and the prisoners of Qi were taken back to Wu.

古文：诸候报其雠，百姓苦其劳，而弗为用。是以国为虚戾，身为刑戮也。
现代文：后来诸侯来报仇，百姓苦于疲惫，不肯为吴王效力，因此国家灭亡了，吴王自身也成为刑戮之人。
English: Later, the princes came to take revenge, and the people, suffering from exhaustion, refused to work for King Wu. As a result, the country was destroyed, and King Wu himself became the executioner.

古文：昔者智伯伐范氏与中行氏，兼三晋之地。
现代文：从前智伯攻伐范氏与中行氏的封地，兼有三晋卿的土地。
English: Once upon a time, Zhibo invaded the fiefs of the Fan and Zhongxing clans, as well as the lands of the Three Kings.

古文：诸侯报其雠，百姓苦其劳，而弗为用。是以国为虚戾，身为刑戮，用是也。
现代文：诸侯来报仇，百姓苦于疲惫而不肯效力，国家灭亡了，他自己也成为刑戮之人，也由于这个缘故。
English: Princes came to take revenge, the people suffered from exhaustion and did not want to work, the country perished, and he himself became a torturer, also because of this.

古文：故大国之攻小国也，是交相贼也，过必反于国。 
现代文：所以大国攻打小国，是互相残害，灾祸必定反及于本国。 
English: Therefore, when a big country attacks a small country, it is mutual destruction, and the disaster will inevitably affect the home country.

古文：子墨子见齐大王曰： 今有刀于此，试之人头，猝然断之，可谓利乎？ 大王曰： 利。 
现代文：墨子对齐太公说： 现在这里有一把刀，试着用它来砍人头，一下子就砍断了，可以说是锋利吧？ 太公说： 锋利。 
English: Mo Zi aligned with Ta Kung and said: Now here is a knife, try to use it to cut off a person's head, it will be cut off at once, can it be said to be sharp? Ta Kung said: Sharp.

古文：子墨子曰： 多试之人头，猝然断之，可谓利乎？ 大王曰： 利。 
现代文：墨子又说： 试着用它砍好多个人的头，一下子就砍断了，可以说是锋利吧？ 太公说： 锋利。 
English: Mozi also said, "Try to use it to cut off the heads of several people, and it will cut them off at once. Can it be said to be sharp?" Taiko said, "Sharp."

古文：子墨子曰： 刀则利矣，孰将受其不祥？ 
现代文：墨子说： 刀确实锋利，谁将遭受那种不幸呢？ 
English: Mozi said, "The sword is really sharp. Who will suffer that kind of misfortune?

古文：大王曰： 刀受其利，试者受其不祥。 
现代文：太公说： 刀承受它的锋利，试验的人遭受他的不幸。 
English: The father-in-law said, "The knife bears its sharpness, but the man who tries it suffers his misfortune."

古文：子墨子曰： 并国覆军，贼杀百姓，孰将受其不祥？ 
现代文：墨子说： 兼并别国领土，覆灭它的军队，残杀它的百姓，谁将会遭受不幸呢？ 
English: Mozi said: annexing another country's territory, destroying its army, killing its people, who will suffer misfortune?

古文：大王俯仰而思之曰： 我受其不祥。 
现代文：太公头低下又抬起，思索了一会儿，答道： 我将遭受不幸。 
English: Ta Kung lowered and raised his head, thought for a moment, and replied: I will suffer misfortune.

古文：鲁阳文君将攻郑，子墨子闻而止之，谓阳文君曰： 今使鲁四境之内，大都攻其小都，大家伐其小家，杀其人民，取其牛、马、狗豕、布帛、米粟、货财，则何若？ 
现代文：鲁阳文君将要攻打郑国，墨子听到了就阻止他，对鲁阳文君说： 现在让鲁四境之内的大都攻打小都，大家族攻打小家族，杀害人民，掠取牛、马、狗、猪、布、帛、米、粟、货、财，那怎么办？ 
English: Lu Yangwenjun was about to attack Zheng Guo, when Mo Zi heard this, he stopped him and said to Lu Yangwenjun, "Now, let the major cities in the four regions of Lu attack the minor cities, let the big families attack the small families, kill the people, and plunder the cattle, horses, dogs, pigs, cloth, straw, rice, corn, goods, and wealth, then what should we do?"

古文：鲁阳文君曰： 鲁四境之内，皆寡人之臣也。
现代文：鲁阳文君说： 鲁四境之内都是我的臣民。
English: Lu Yangwen said: All the people in the four provinces of Lu are my subjects.

古文：今大都攻其小都，大家伐其小家，夺之货财，则寡人必将厚罚之。 
现代文：现在大都攻打小都，大家族攻打小家族，掠夺他们的货、财，那么我将重重惩罚攻打的人。 
English: Now most of them attack small towns, and large families attack small families, plundering their goods and wealth. Then I will severely punish those who attack.

古文：子墨子曰： 夫天之兼有天下也，亦犹君之有四境之内也。
现代文：墨子说： 上天兼有天下，也就象您具有鲁四境之内一样。
English: Mozi said, "Heaven has the whole world, just as you have the four regions of Lu.

古文：今举兵将以攻郑，天诛其不至乎？ 
现代文：现在您举兵将要攻打郑国，上天的诛伐难道就不会到来吗？ 
English: Now that you are about to raise an army to attack Zheng Guo, won't God's retribution come?

古文：鲁阳文君曰： 先生何止我攻邻也？
现代文：鲁阳文君说： 先生为什么阻止我进攻郑国呢？
English: Lu Yangwen said, "Why did you stop me from attacking Zheng Guo?

古文：我攻郑，顺于天之志。
现代文：我进攻郑国，是顺应了上天的意志。
English: When I attacked Zheng Guo, it was in accordance with the will of Heaven.

古文：郑人三世杀其父，天加诛焉，使三年不全，我将助天诛也。 
现代文：郑国人数代残杀他们的君主，上天降给他们惩罚，使三年不顺利。我将要帮助上天加以诛伐。 
English: The Zheng people have been killing their monarchs for generations, and Heaven has punished them, making the past three years difficult. I will help Heaven to defeat them.

古文：子墨子曰： 郑人三世杀其父，而天加诛焉，使三年不全，天诛足矣。
现代文：墨子说： 郑国人数代残杀他们的君主，上天已经给了惩罚，使它三年不顺利，上天的诛伐已经够了！
English: Mozi said: Zheng Guo killed their monarchs for generations. Heaven has already given punishment, making it three years of bad luck. Heaven's punishment is enough!

古文：今又举兵，将以攻郑，曰吾攻郑也，顺于天之志。
现代文：现在您又举兵将要攻打郑国，说： 我进攻郑国，是顺应上天的意志。 
English: Now you are raising an army to attack Zheng, saying: I am attacking Zheng in accordance with God's will.

古文：譬有人于此，其子强粱不材，故其父笞之，其邻家之父，举木而击之，曰吾击之也，顺于其父之志。
现代文：好比这里有一个人，他的儿子凶暴、强横，不成器，所以他父亲鞭打他。邻居家的父亲，也举起木棒击打他，说： 我打他，是顺应了他父亲的意志。 
English: It is like a man who had a violent and rebellious son who was not a good son, so his father beat him, and the father of his neighbor picked up a stick and beat him, saying, "I beat him because it was his father's will."

古文：则岂不悖哉！ 
现代文：这难道还不荒谬吗！ 是！
English: Isn't that ridiculous? Yes!

古文：子墨子谓鲁阳文君曰： 攻其邻国，杀其民人，取其牛马、粟米、货财，则书之于竹帛，镂之于金石，以为铭于钟鼎，傅遗后世子孙曰： 莫若我多！ 
现代文：墨子对鲁阳文君说： 进攻邻国，杀害它的人民，掠取它的牛、马、粟、米、货、财，把这些事书写在竹、帛上，镂刻在金、石上，铭记在钟、鼎上，传给后世子孙，说： 战果没有人比我多！ 
English: Mozi said to Lu Yangwenjun, "Attack a neighboring country, kill its people, plunder its cattle, horses, corn, rice, goods, and wealth, write these things on bamboo and rattan, engrave them on gold and stone, memorize them on bells and tripods, and pass them down to future generations, saying, 'No one has more military achievements than me!'"

古文：今贱人也，亦攻其邻家，杀其人民，取其狗豕、食粮、衣裘，亦书之竹帛，以为铭于席豆，以遗后世子孙，曰： 莫若我多！ 
现代文：现在下贱的人，也进攻他的邻家，杀害邻家的人口，掠取邻家的狗、猪、食、粮、衣服、被子，也书写在竹、帛上，铭记在席子、食器上，传给后世子孙，说： 战果没有人比我多！ 
English: Now the lowly man also attacks his neighbor, kills his neighbor's cattle, and plunders his neighbor's dogs, pigs, food, grain, clothing, and bedding. He also writes on bamboo and straw, memorizes it on mats and tableware, and passes it on to future generations, saying: "No one has achieved more in battle than I have!

古文：其可乎？ 
现代文：难道可以吗？ 
English: Is it possible?

古文：鲁阳文君曰： 然吾以子之言观之，则天下之所谓可者，未必然也。 
现代文：鲁阳文君说： 对。我用您的言论观察，那么天下人所说的可以的事，就不一定正确了。 
English: Lu Yangwen said, "Yes. I have observed from your remarks that what the world says is acceptable is not necessarily correct.

古文：子墨子谓鲁阳文君曰： 世俗之君子，皆知小物，而不知大物。
现代文：墨子对鲁阳文君说： 世俗的君子，知道小事却不知道大事。
English: Mozi said to Lu Yangwenjun: A worldly gentleman knows small things but does not know big things.

古文：今有人于此，窃一犬一彘，则谓之不仁，窃一国一都，则以为义。
现代文：现在这里有一个人，假如偷了人家的一只狗一只猪，就被称作不仁；如果窃取了一个国家一个都城，就被称作义。
English: Now here is a man who, if he steals a dog or a pig from someone's house, is called uncharitable; if he steals a country or a capital city, he is called righteous.

古文：譬犹小视白谓之白，大视白则谓之黑。
现代文：这就如同看一小点白说是白，看一大片白则说是黑。
English: It's like looking at a little bit of white and saying it's white, or looking at a big patch of white and saying it's black.

古文：是故世俗之君子，知小物而不知大物者，此若言之谓也。 
现代文：因此，世俗的君子只知道小事却不知道大事的情况，如同这句话所讲的。 
English: Therefore, the worldly gentleman only knows the small things and does not know the big things, as this sentence says.

古文：鲁阳文君语子墨子曰： 楚之南，有啖人之国者桥，其国之长子生，则鲜而食之，谓之宜弟。
现代文：鲁阳文君告诉墨子说： 楚国的南面有一个吃人的国家，名叫 桥 ，在这个国家里，长子出生了，就被杀死吃掉，叫做 宜弟 。
English: Lu Yangwen told Mo Zi: In the south of Chu, there is a cannibalistic country called Qiao. In this country, when the firstborn son is born, he is killed and eaten. He is called Yi Di.

古文：美则以遗其君，君喜则赏其父。
现代文：味美就献给国君，国君喜欢了就奖赏他的父亲。
English: Aimi is dedicated to the sovereign, and when the sovereign likes it, he rewards his father.

古文：岂不恶俗哉？ 
现代文：这难道不是恶俗吗？ 
English: Isn't that vulgar?

古文：子墨子曰： 虽中国之俗，亦犹是也。杀其父而赏其子，何以异食其子而赏其父者哉？
现代文：墨子说： 即使中国的风俗也象这样，父亲因攻战而死，就奖赏他的儿子，这与吃儿子奖赏他的父亲有何不同呢？
English: Mozi said, "Even if the Chinese custom is like this, where a father who dies in battle rewards his son, how is this different from eating a son to reward his father?"

古文：苟不用仁义，何以非夷人食其子也？ 
现代文：如果不实行仁义，凭什么去指责夷人吃他们的儿子呢？ 
English: If they do not practice righteousness, how can they accuse the barbarians of eating their sons?

古文：鲁君之嬖人死，鲁君为之诔，鲁人因说而用之。
现代文：鲁国国君的爱妾死了，鲁国人阿谀国君，为她写了诔文，鲁国国君看了很高兴，就采用了。
English: Lu Guo Guojun's beloved concubine died. Lu Guo Guojun's aunt wrote an obituary for her. Lu Guo Guojun was very happy to read it and adopted it.

古文：子墨子闻之曰： 诔者，道死人之志也。
现代文：墨子听到这件事，说： 诔文，说明死人的心志。
English: When Mozi heard about this, he said, "This is a dead man's will.

古文：今因说而用之，是犹以来首从服也。 
现代文：现在因为高兴采用了它，这就象用牦牛的头来做衣服一样。 
English: Now that I've adopted it for pleasure, it's like using a snail's head to make a dress.

古文：鲁阳文君谓子墨子曰： 有语我以忠臣者，令之俯则俯，令之仰则仰，处则静，呼则应，可谓忠臣乎？ 
现代文：鲁阳文君对墨子说： 有人把 忠臣 的样子告诉我：叫他低下头就低下头，叫他抬起来就抬起来；日常居住很平静，呼叫他才答应，这可以叫做忠臣吗？ 
English: Lu Yangwen said to Mozi, "Someone told me the appearance of a loyal subject: if you ask him to lower his head, he will lower his head; if you ask him to raise his head, he will raise it; his daily life is very calm, and he only agrees when you call him. Can this be called a loyal subject?

古文：子墨子曰： 令之俯则俯，令之仰则仰，是似景也；处则静，呼则应，是似响也。君将何得于景与响哉？
现代文：墨子答道： 叫他低下头就低下头，叫他抬起来就抬起来，这好象影子；日常居住很平常，呼叫他才答应，这就好象回声，你将从象影子和回声那样的臣子那里得到什么呢？
English: Mozi replied, "If you ask him to lower his head, he will lower his head, and if you ask him to raise his head, he will raise his head. It is like a shadow. Daily life is very ordinary. If you call him and he does not answer, it is like an echo. What will you get from a courtier like the shadow and the echo?

古文：若以翟之所谓忠臣者，上有过，则微之以谏；己有善，则访之上，而无敢以告。
现代文：我所说的忠臣却象这样：国君有过错，则伺察机会加以劝谏；自己有好的见解，则上告国君，不敢告诉别人。
English: The loyal vassals I am talking about are like this: if the sovereign is at fault, they will look for an opportunity to persuade him; if they have a good opinion, they will appeal to the sovereign, but they dare not tell others.

古文：外匡其邪，而入其善。
现代文：匡正国君的偏邪，使他纳入正道，崇尚同一，不在下面结党营私。
English: The deviation of Kuanzheng Guojun made him enter the right path, advocate the same, and not form a party below.

古文：尚同而无下比，是以美善在上，而怨雠在下；安乐在上，而忧戚在臣。
现代文：因此，美善存在于上级，怨仇存在于下面，安乐归于国君，忧戚归于臣下。
English: Therefore, beauty and goodness exist at the higher level, and hatred exists at the lower level. Happiness belongs to the sovereign, and sorrow belongs to the subject.

古文：此翟之谓忠臣者也。 
现代文：这才是我所说的忠臣。 
English: That's what I mean by loyal.

古文：鲁君谓子墨子曰： 我有二子，一人者好学，一人者好分人财，孰以为太子而可？ 
现代文：鲁国国君对墨子说： 我有两个儿子，一个爱好学习，一个喜欢将财物分给人家，谁可以作为太子？ 
English: Lu Guo Guojun said to Mozi: I have two sons, one likes to study and the other likes to distribute wealth to others. Who can be crown prince?

古文：子墨子曰： 未可知也。
现代文：墨子答道： 这还不能知道。
English: Mozi replied, "We don't know yet.

古文：或所为赏与为是也。
现代文：二子也许是为着赏赐和名誉而这样做的。
English: The two sons may have done this for reward and prestige.

古文：钓者之恭，非为鱼赐也；饵鼠以虫，非爱之也。
现代文：钓鱼人躬着身子，并不是对鱼表示恭敬；用虫子作为捕鼠的诱饵，并不是喜爱老鼠。
English: An angler does not bow to show respect to the fish; using worms as bait to catch mice is not a love of mice.

古文：吾愿主君之合其志功而观焉。 
现代文：我希望主君把他们的动机和效果结合起来进行观察。 
English: I hope the Lord will look at their motives and effects together.

古文：鲁人有因子墨子而学其子者，其子战而死，其父让子墨子。
现代文：鲁国有一人因与墨子有关系，而使墨子教学他的儿子。他儿子战死了，父亲就责备墨子。
English: There was a man in Lu who had a relationship with Mozi and had him teach his son. His son died in the war, and his father blamed Mozi.

古文：子墨子曰： 子欲学子之子，今学成矣。战而死，而子愠，而犹欲粜籴，雠则愠也。岂不费哉？ 
现代文：墨子说： 你要让我教你的儿子，现在学成了，因战而死，你却怨恨我；这就象卖出买进粮食，粮食卖出去了却怨恨一样，难道不荒谬吗！ 
English: Mozi said, "You want me to teach your son, and now he has finished his studies, and died in the war, and yet you resent me. Isn't this just as absurd as selling grain to buy grain, and then resenting the grain once it is sold?"

古文：鲁之南鄙人有吴虑者，冬陶夏耕，自比于舜。
现代文：鲁国的南郊有一个叫吴虑的人，冬天制陶夏天耕作，拿自己与舜相比。
English: There is a man named Wu Xian in the southern suburbs of Lu, who makes pottery in winter and farms in summer, and compares himself to a grasshopper.

古文：子墨子闻而见之。
现代文：墨子听说了就去见他。
English: When Mozi heard about it, she went to see him.

古文：吴虑谓子墨子： 义耳义耳，焉用言之哉？ 
现代文：吴虑对墨子说： 义啊义啊，责在切实之行，何必空言！ 
English: Wu Xian said to Mozi, "Righteousness, righteousness, it is the duty to practice, why not empty talk!

古文：子墨子曰： 子之所谓义者，亦有力以劳人，有财以分人乎？ 
现代文：墨子说： 你所谓的义，也有以力量给人效劳，以财物分配给人的方面吗？ 
English: Mozi said, "Does your so-called righteousness also include the aspect of using one's strength to serve others and distributing wealth to others?

古文：吴虑曰： 有。 
现代文：吴虑回答说： 有。 
English: Wu Xian replied: Yes.

古文：子墨子曰： 翟尝计之矣。翟虑耕而食天下之人矣。盛，然后当一农之耕，分诸天下，不能人得一升粟。
现代文：墨子说： 我曾经思考过：我想自己耕作给天下人饭吃，十分努力，这才相当于一个农民的耕作，把收获分配给天下人，每一个人得不到一升粟。
English: Mozi said: I once thought: I want to grow my own food to feed the world, and I will work very hard. This is equivalent to a farmer's farming, distributing the harvest to the world, and each person does not get a liter of millet.

古文：籍而以为得一升粟，其不能饱天下之饥者，既可睹矣。
现代文：假设一个人能得一升粟，这不足以喂饱天下饥饿的人，是显而易见的。
English: Assuming that a person can get a liter of millet, it is not enough to feed the world's hungry people, it is obvious.

古文：翟虑织而衣天下之人矣，盛，然后当一妇人之织，分诸天下，不能人得尺布。
现代文：我想自己纺织给天下的人衣服穿，十分努力，这才相当于一名妇人的纺织，把布匹分配给天下人，每一个人得不到一尺布。
English: I want to weave clothes for people all over the world, and I will work very hard. This is equivalent to a woman's weaving. I will distribute the cloth to people all over the world, and each person will not get a foot of cloth.

古文：籍而以为得尺布，其不能暖天下之寒者，既可睹矣。
现代文：假设一个人能得一尺布，这不足以温暖天下寒冷的人，是显而易见的。
English: Assuming that a person can get a foot of cloth, this is not enough to warm the cold people in the world, it is obvious.

古文：翟虑被坚执锐，救诸侯之患，盛，然后当一夫之战，一夫之战，其不御三军，既可睹矣。
现代文：我想身披坚固的铠甲，手执锐利的武器，解救诸侯的患难，十分努力，这才相当于一位战士作战。一位战士的作战，不能抵挡三军的进攻，是显而易见的。
English: I think that wearing sturdy armor, holding sharp weapons, relieving the hardships of the princes, and working very hard, this is equivalent to a warrior's battle. It is obvious that a warrior's battle cannot resist the attack of the three armies.

古文：翟以为不若诵先王之道，而求其说，通圣人之言，而察其辞，上说王公大人，次匹夫徒步之士。
现代文：我认为不如诵读与研究先王的学说，通晓与考察圣人的言辞，在上劝说王公大人，在下劝说平民百姓。
English: I think it is better to recite and study the teachings of the former king, to be familiar with and study the words of the saints, to persuade the princes above and the common people below.

古文：王公大人用吾言，国必治，匹夫徒步之士用吾言，行必修。
现代文：王公大人采用了我的学说，国家一定能得到治理；平民百姓采用了我的学说，品行必有修养。
English: Wang Gong and others have adopted my doctrine, and the country will surely be governed; the common people have adopted my doctrine, and they must cultivate their behavior.

古文：故翟以为虽不耕而食饥，不织而衣寒，功贤于耕而食之，织而衣之者也。
现代文：所以我认为即使不耕作，这样也可以给饥饿的人饭吃，不纺织也可以给寒冷的人衣服穿，功劳胜过耕作了才给人饭吃、纺织了才给人衣穿的人。
English: So I think that even if you don't farm, you can feed the hungry, and if you don't weave, you can clothe the cold, and you deserve more credit than if you farm and then feed people, or if you weave and then clothe people.

古文：故翟以为虽不耕织乎，而功贤于耕致也。 
现代文：所以，我认为即使不耕作、不纺织，而功劳胜过耕作与纺织。 
English: Therefore, I think that even if you don't farm or weave, the merit is better than farming and weaving.

古文：吴虑谓子墨子曰： 义耳义耳，焉用言之哉？ 
现代文：吴虑对墨子说： 义啊义啊，贵在切实之行，何必空言！ 
English: Wu Xian said to Mozi, "Righteousness, righteousness, you are so good at practical actions, why don't you say something!

古文：子墨子曰： 籍设而天下不知耕，教人耕，与不教人耕而独耕者，其功孰多？ 
现代文：墨子问道： 假设天下的人不知道耕作，教人耕作的人与不教人耕作却独自耕作的人，他们功劳谁的多？ 
English: Mozi asked, "Suppose that people all over the world do not know how to farm, and there are people who teach others how to farm and people who do not teach others how to farm but farm on their own, who do they credit more?

古文：吴虑曰： 教人耕者，其功多。 
现代文：吴虑答道： 教人耕作的人功劳多。 
English: Wu Xian replied: The person who teaches people to farm has more merit.

古文：子墨子曰： 籍设而攻不义之国，鼓而使众进战，与不鼓而使众进战而独进战者，其功孰多？ 
现代文：墨子又问： 假设进攻不义的国家，击鼓使大家作战的人与不击鼓使大家作战、却独自作战的人。他们的功劳谁的多？ 
English: Mozi also asked: Assuming that an unjust country is attacked, who is more deserving of credit, the man who beats the drum to make everyone fight, or the man who does not beat the drum to make everyone fight, but fights alone?

古文：吴虑曰： 鼓而进者，其功多。 
现代文：吴虑答道： 击鼓使大家作战的人功劳多。 
English: Wu Xian replied, "Those who played the drums and made us fight deserve more credit."

古文：子墨子曰： 天下匹夫徒步之士少知义，而教天下以义者，功亦多，何故弗言也？
现代文：墨子说： 天下平民百姓少有人知道仁义，用仁义教天下人的人功劳也多，为什么不劝说呢？
English: Mozi said: Few common people in the world know about benevolence and righteousness, and those who use benevolence and righteousness to teach the people of the world have more merit. Why not persuade them?

古文：若得鼓而进于义，则吾义岂不益进哉！ 
现代文：假若我能鼓动大家达到仁义的要求，那么，我的仁义岂不是更加发扬光大了吗！ 
English: If I could encourage everyone to meet the requirements of righteousness, then wouldn't my righteousness be even more magnified?

古文：子墨子游公尚过于越。
现代文：墨子使公尚过前往越国出仕做官。
English: Mozi sent Gongzang to Yue to serve as an official.

古文：公尚过说越王，越王大说，谓公尚过曰： 先生苟能使子墨子于越而教寡人，请裂故吴之地，方五百里，以封子墨子。 
现代文：公尚过劝说越王。越王非常高兴，对公尚过说： 先生假如能让墨子到越国教导我，我愿意分出过去吴国的地方五百里封给墨子。 
English: King Yue was very pleased, and said to King Gongzang, "Sir, if you can let Mozi come to Yue to teach me, I am willing to allocate five hundred li of land that used to belong to Wu to Mozi."

古文：公尚过许诺，遂为公尚过束车五十乘，以迎子墨子于鲁，曰： 吾以夫子之道说越王，越王大说，谓过曰： 苟能使子墨子至于越，而教寡人，请裂故吴之地，方五百里，以封子。  
现代文：公尚过答应了。于是给公尚过套了五十辆车，到鲁国迎取墨子。公尚过对墨子说： 我用老师的学说劝说越王，越王非常高兴，对我说： 假如你能让墨子到越国教导我，我愿意分出来过去吴国的地方五百里封给墨子。  
English: Guo Shang agreed. So he arranged for 50 cars for Guo Shang to go to Lu to meet Mozi. Guo Shang said to Mozi, "I used my teacher's teachings to persuade King Yue. King Yue was very pleased and said to me, "If you can let Mozi come to Yue to teach me, I am willing to allocate 500 li of land in Wuxi to give to Mozi."

古文：子墨子谓公尚过曰： 子观越王之志何若？
现代文：墨子对公尚过说： 你观察越王的心志怎么样？
English: Mozi said to Gongzang: How do you feel about observing King Yue's will?

古文：抑越不听吾言，不用吾道，而吾往焉，则是我以义粜也。
现代文：假如越王将听我的言论，采纳我的学说，那么我将前往。或者越国不听我的言论，不采纳我的学说，如果我去了，那是我把 义 出卖了。
English: If the king of Yue will listen to my speech and accept my doctrine, then I will go. Or if the country of Yue will not listen to my speech and accept my doctrine, if I go, then I have sold my righteousness.

古文：钧之粜，亦于中国耳，何必于越哉！ 
现代文：同样是出卖 义 ，在中原国家好了，何必跑到越国呢！ 
English: It's the same as betraying righteousness, it's fine in the Central Plains countries, why do you have to go to Vietnam!

古文：子墨子游，魏越曰： 既得见四方之君，子则将先语？ 
现代文：墨子出外游历，魏越问他： 如果能见各地的诸侯，您将说什么呢？ 
English: When Mozi was traveling abroad, Wei Yue asked him: If you could meet the princes of various regions, what would you say?

古文：子墨子曰： 凡入国，必择务而从事焉。国家昏乱，则语之尚贤、尚同；国家贫，则语之节用、节葬，国家喜音湛湎，则语之非乐、非命；国家淫辟无礼，则语之尊天事鬼；国家务夺侵凌，则语之兼爱、非攻，故曰择务而从事焉。 
现代文：墨子说： 到了一个国家，必须要选择一个职务从事：假如一个国家昏乱，就告诉他们尚贤尚同的道理；假如一个国家贫穷，就告诉他们节用节葬；假如一个国家喜好声乐、沉迷于酒，就告诉他们非乐非命的好处；假如一个国家荒淫、怪僻、不讲究礼节，就告诉他们尊天事鬼；假如一个国家以欺侮、掠夺、侵略、凌辱别国为事，就告诉他们兼爱、非攻的益处。所以说 选择最重要的事情进行劝导。  
English: Mozi said, "When you arrive in a country, you must choose a position to engage in. If a country is chaotic, tell them the principle of being virtuous and remaining the same; if a country is poor, tell them to use funeral rites sparingly; if a country likes vocal music and is addicted to alcohol, tell them the benefits of not enjoying life; if a country is wild, eccentric, and does not pay attention to etiquette, tell them to respect heaven and earth; if a country is engaged in bullying, plundering, invading, and humiliating other countries, tell them the benefits of both love and non-aggression. Therefore, choose the most important

古文：子墨子出曹公子而于宋。三年而反，睹子墨子曰： 始吾游于子之门，短褐之衣，藜藿之羹，朝得之，则夕弗得祭祀鬼神。
现代文：墨子让曹公子到宋国做国，三年后返了回来，见了墨子说： 开始我在您门下学习的时候，穿着粗布短衣，吃着野菜一类粗劣的食物，早晨吃了，晚上可能就没有了，不能够祭祀鬼神。
English: Mozi asked Cao Gongzi to go to the Song Dynasty to serve the country. He returned three years later and said to Mozi, "When I first studied under you, I wore a coarse cloth short coat and ate vegetables and other coarse food. I ate it in the morning, but it may be gone by the evening. I can't sacrifice to ghosts and gods.

古文：今而以夫子之教，家厚于始也。
现代文：现在因为你的教育培养，家比当初富多了。
English: Now, because of your education and training, my family is much richer than before.

古文：有家厚，谨祭祀鬼神。
现代文：家富有了，就谨慎祭祀鬼神。
English: Once a family is rich, it is prudent to offer sacrifices to ghosts and gods.

古文：然而人徒多死，六畜不蕃，身湛于病，吾未知夫子之道之可用也。 子墨子曰： 不然。
现代文：象这样反而家里人多死亡，六畜不繁盛众多，自身困于病患之中。我还不知道老师的学说是不是可以用。 墨子说： 不对。
English: On the contrary, many of my family members have died, many of my animals have not thrived, and I have been caught in the midst of illness. I still don't know if my teacher's teachings can be applied. Mozi said, "That's not right."

古文：夫鬼神之所欲于人者多：欲人之处高爵禄，则以让贤也；多财则以分贫也。
现代文：鬼神希望人的东西很多：希望人处高官厚禄时可以让贤，财物多了可以分给穷人。
English: Ghosts and gods want a lot of things from people: they want people to be able to be virtuous when they are high-ranking and rich, and to have more wealth to give to the poor.

古文：夫鬼神，岂唯擢季钳肺之为欲哉？
现代文：鬼神难道仅仅是想取食祭品吗？
English: Do ghosts and gods just want to take food offerings?

古文：今子处高爵禄而不以让贤，一不祥也；多财而不以分贫，二不祥也。
现代文：现在你处在高官厚禄的位置上却不让贤，这是第一种不吉祥；财物多不分给穷人，这是第二种不吉祥。
English: Now you are in the position of a high-ranking official with a generous salary, but you don't let the virtuous succeed. This is the first type of bad luck. If you don't distribute your wealth to the poor, this is the second type of bad luck.

古文：今子事鬼神，唯祭而已矣，而曰： 病何自至哉 ，是犹百门而闭一门焉，曰： 盗何从入 。
现代文：现在你侍奉鬼神，只有祭祀罢了，却说：病从那里来？这就象百门只闭了一门一样，却问：盗贼从哪里进来？
English: But now you serve a god of the dead, and sacrifice to him; and you say, Where does this sickness come from? You are like a door that is shut on all sides, and you say, Where does the thief come from?

古文：若是而求福于有怪之鬼，岂可哉？ 
现代文：象这样向对你有责怪的鬼神求福，难道可以吗？ 
English: Is it possible to ask for blessings like this from the ghosts and gods who blame you?

古文：鲁祝以一豚祭，而求百福于鬼神。
现代文：鲁国的司祭人用一头小猪祭祀，向鬼神求百福。墨子听到了说： 这不行。
English: Priests in the country of Lu used a piglet as a sacrificial animal to pray for good fortune from ghosts and gods. Mozi heard this and said, "This is not acceptable."

古文：子墨子闻之曰： 是不可。今施人薄而望人厚，则人唯恐其有赐于己也。
现代文：现在施给人的少，希望人的多，那么，别人就只怕你有东西赐给他们了。
English: If you give little and expect much, people will be afraid that you have given them something.

古文：今以一豚祭，而求百福于鬼神，唯恐其以牛羊祀也。
现代文：现在用一头小猪祭祀，向鬼神求百福，鬼神就只怕你用牛羊祭祀了。
English: Now, if you use a piglet as a sacrifice and pray for a hundred blessings from ghosts and gods, the ghosts and gods will only be afraid that you will use a cow or a sheep as a sacrifice.

古文：古者圣王事鬼神，祭而已矣。
现代文：从前圣王侍奉鬼神，祭祀罢了。
English: Once upon a time, holy kings served ghosts and gods, it was just a ritual.

古文：今以豚祭而求百福，则其富不如其贫也。 
现代文：现在用小猪祭祀向鬼神求百福，与其祭品丰富，还不如贫乏的好。 
English: Nowadays, piglet sacrifices are used to pray for good fortune from ghosts and gods. It is better to be poor than to be rich in offerings.

古文：彭轻生子曰： 往者可知，来者不可知。 
现代文：彭轻生子说： 过去的事情可以知道，未来的事情不可以知道。 
English: Peng Qianren said: You can know things in the past, but you cannot know things in the future.

古文：子墨子曰： 籍设而亲在百里之外，则遇难焉，期以一日也，及之则生，不及则死。
现代文：墨子说： 假设你的父母亲在百里之外的地方，即将遇到灾难，以一日的期限，到达那里他们就活下来了，不到就死了。
English: Mozi said, "Suppose your parents are a hundred miles away and are about to encounter a disaster. If they arrive there within a day, they will survive, but if they don't, they will die.

古文：今有固车良马于此，又有奴马四隅之轮于此，使子择焉，子将何乘？ 
现代文：现在有坚固的车子和骏马在这里，同时这里又有驽马和四方形轮子的车，使你选择，你将选择哪一种呢？ 
English: And now, behold, here is a chariot with a great and strong horse, and here also a chariot with a great and strong horse, and here also a chariot with square wheels: which will you choose?

古文：对曰： 乘良马固车，可以速至。 
现代文：彭轻生子回答说： 乘坐骏马拉的坚固的车子，可以很快到达。 
English: Peng Qian's son replied, "You can get there quickly by riding a sturdy horse-drawn carriage.

古文：子墨子曰： 焉在矣来。 
现代文：墨子说： 怎能断言未来的事不可知呢？ 
English: Mozi said, "How can you assert that the future is unknowable?

古文：孟山誉王子闾曰： 昔白公之祸，执王子闾，斧钺钩要，直兵当心，谓之曰： 为王则生，不为王则死！ 
现代文：孟山赞扬王子闾说： 从前白公在楚国作乱，抓住了王子闾，用斧钺钩着他的腰，用直兵器对着他的心窝，对他说： 做楚王就让你活，不做楚王就让你死。 
English: "Once upon a time, Baigong wreaked havoc in the state of Chu. He caught Prince Yu, hooked him around the waist with an axe handle, and pointed the weapon at his heart. He said to him, 'If you become the King of Chu, you will live, but if you do not become the King of Chu, you will die.'

古文：王子闾曰： 何其侮我也！
现代文：王子闾回答道： 怎么这样侮辱我呢！
English: The prince replied, "How dare you insult me like this!

古文：杀我亲，而喜我以楚国。
现代文：杀害我的亲人，却用给予楚国来作弄我。
English: They killed my relatives, but gave me the state of Chu as a joke.

古文：我得天下而不义，不为也，又况于楚国乎？ 
现代文：用不义得到天下，我都不做；又何况一个楚国呢？ 
English: I wouldn't use injustice to gain the world. And what about the state of Chu?

古文：遂而不为。
现代文：他终究不做楚王。
English: After all, he is not the king of Chu.

古文：王子闾岂不仁哉？ 
现代文：王子闾难道还不仁吗？ 
English: Isn't it true that Prince Gong is still not benevolent?

古文：子墨子曰： 难则难矣，然而未仁也。
现代文：墨子说： 王子闾守节不屈，难是够难的了，但还没有达到仁。
English: Mozi said, "It is difficult enough for the prince to keep the festival, but he has not yet achieved benevolence.

古文：若以王为无道，则何故不受而治也？
现代文：如果他认为楚王昏聩无道，那么为什么不接受王位治理国家呢？
English: If he thought that King Chu was clueless, then why not accept the throne to govern the country?

古文：若以白公为不义，何故不受王，诛白公然而反王？
现代文：如果他认为白公不义，为什么不接受王位，诛杀了白公再把王位交还惠王呢？
English: If he thought Bai Gong was unjust, why didn't he accept the throne, kill Bai Gong and return the throne to King Hui?

古文：故曰：难则难矣，然而未仁也。 
现代文：所以说：难是够难的了，但还没有达到仁。 
English: Therefore, he said: "Difficult is difficult enough, but it has not yet reached benevolence."

古文：子墨子使胜绰事项子牛。
现代文：墨子让弟子胜绰去项子牛那里做官。
English: Mozi asked his disciple Shengchao to go to Xiangzi to work as an official.

古文：项子牛三侵鲁地，而胜绰三从。
现代文：项子牛三次入侵鲁国的领土，胜绰三次都跟从了。
English: The Xiangzi cattle invaded the territory of Lu three times, and more than three times followed.

古文：子墨子闻之，使高孙子请而退之，曰： 我使绰也，将以济骄而正嬖也。
现代文：墨子听到了这件事，派高孙子请项子牛辞退胜绰，高孙子转告墨子的话说： 我派胜绰，将以他阻止骄气，纠正邪僻。
English: When Mozi heard about this, he sent his great-grandson to ask the young bull to withdraw from Shengpo. His great-grandson relayed Mozi's words, saying, "I sent Shengpo, and with him I will stop the arrogance and correct the deviants."

古文：今绰也禄厚而谲夫子，夫子三侵鲁而绰三从，是鼓鞭于马靳也。
现代文：现在胜绰得了厚禄，却欺骗您，您三次入侵鲁国，胜绰三次跟从，这是在战马的当胸鼓鞭。
English: Now that you have won a great reward, you have deceived yourself. You have invaded Russia three times, and you have followed Napoleon three times. This is a beating in the heart of a war horse.

古文：翟闻之，言义而弗行，是犯明也。
现代文：我听说： 口称仁义却不实行，这是明知故犯。 
English: I have heard it said that it is a deliberate crime to pay lip service to benevolence but fail to practice it.

古文：绰非弗之知也，禄胜义也。 
现代文：胜绰不是不知道，他把俸禄看得比仁义还重罢了。 
English: It's not that Shengpu doesn't know, he just regards his salary as more important than benevolence.

古文：昔者楚人与越人舟战于江，楚人顺流而进，迎流而退，见利而进，见不利则其退难。
现代文：从前楚国人与越国人在长江上进行船战，楚国人顺流而进，逆流而退；见有利就进攻，见不利想要退却，这就难了。
English: Once upon a time, the Chu people and the Yue people fought a boat battle on the Yangtze River. The Chu people advanced along the river and retreated against the current. If they saw an advantage, they would attack, but if they saw a disadvantage, they would retreat. This was difficult.

古文：越人迎流而进，顺流而退，见利而进，见不利则其退速。
现代文：越国人逆流而进，顺流而退；见有利就进攻，见不利想要退却，就能很快退却。
English: The Yue people advance against the current and retreat with the current; if they see an advantage, they will attack, and if they see a disadvantage, they will retreat quickly.

古文：越人因此若势，亟败楚人。
现代文：越国人凭着这种水势，屡次打败楚国人。
English: The people of Yue have repeatedly defeated the people of Chu with this kind of water potential.

古文：公输子自鲁南游楚，焉始为舟战之器，作为钩强之备，退者钩之，进者强之，量其钩强之长，而制为之兵。
现代文：公输盘从鲁国南游到了楚国，于是开始制造船战用的武器，他造了钩、镶的设备，敌船后退就用钩钩住它，敌船进攻就用镶推拒它。计算钩与镶的长度，制造了合适的兵器。
English: The public transport plate swam from the south of the country of Lu to the country of Chu, so he began to make weapons for ship warfare. He made hooks and inlaid equipment. When the enemy ship retreated, he hooked it with a hook, and when the enemy ship attacked, he used the inlay to push it away. Calculating the length of the hook and the inlay, he made a suitable weapon.

古文：楚之兵节，越之兵不节，楚人因此若势，亟败越人。
现代文：楚国人的兵器适用，越国人的兵器不适用。楚国人凭着这种优势，又屡次打败了越国人。
English: The weapons of the Chu people are suitable, but the weapons of the Yue people are not. With this advantage, the Chu people have repeatedly defeated the Yue people.

古文：公输子善其巧，以语子墨子曰： 我舟战钩强，不知子之义亦有钩强乎？ 
现代文：公输盘夸赞他制造的钩、镶的灵巧，告诉墨子说： 我船战有自己制造的钩、镶，不知道您的义是不是也有钩、镶？ 
English: The public address system praised the dexterity of the hooks and rings he made, and told Mo Zi: I have my own hooks and rings, I don't know if yours also has hooks and rings?

古文：子墨子曰： 我义之钩强，贤于子舟战之钩强。
现代文：墨子回答说： 我义的钩、镶，胜过你船战的钩、镶。
English: Mozi replied, "My righteous hooks and anchors are better than the hooks and anchors of your warships."

古文：我钩强我，钩之以爱，揣之以恭。
现代文：我以 义 为钩、镶，以爱钩，以恭敬推拒。
English: I use righteousness as my hook and bait, love as my hook, and respect as my rejection.

古文：弗钩以爱则不亲，弗揣以恭则速狎，狎而不亲则速离。
现代文：不用爱钩就不会亲，不用恭敬推拒就容易轻慢，轻慢不亲近就会很快离散。
English: If you don't have a love hook, you won't be able to kiss. If you don't respectfully push back, it's easy to be disrespectful. If you're disrespectful and don't get close, you'll quickly drift apart.

古文：故交相爱，交相恭，犹若相利也。
现代文：所以，互相爱，互相恭敬，如此互相利。
English: Therefore, love each other, respect each other, and benefit each other.

古文：今子钩而止人，人亦钩而止子，子强而距人，人亦强而距子，交相钩，交相强，犹若相害也。
现代文：现在你用钩来阻止别人，别人也会用钩来阻止你；你用镶来推拒人，人也会用镶来推拒你。互相钩，互相推拒，如此互相残害。
English: Now you use hooks to stop others, others will also use hooks to stop you; you use inserts to push people away, people will also use inserts to push you away. Hook each other, push each other away, and thus harm each other.

古文：故我义之钩强，贤子舟战之钩强。 
现代文：所以，我义的钩、镶，胜过你船战的钩、镶。 
English: Therefore, the hooks and anchors of my righteousness are better than the hooks and anchors of your warships.

古文：公输子削竹木以为鹊，成而飞之，三日不下。
现代文：公输盘削竹、木做成鹊，做成了就让它飞起来，三天不从天上落下来。
English: Bamboo and wood are whittled into a kite by a public transportation wheel. Once it is made, it is allowed to fly and does not fall from the sky for three days.

古文：公输子自以为至巧。
现代文：公输盘自己认为很精巧。
English: He considers the public transmission plate to be very delicate.

古文：子墨子谓公输子曰： 子之为鹊也，不如匠之为车辖。须臾刘三寸之木，而任五十石之重。
现代文：墨子对公输盘说： 你做的鹊，不如匠人做的车轴上的销子，一会儿削成一块三寸的木头，可以担当五十石重的东西。
English: Mozi said to the official: "The yoke you made is not as good as the pin on the axle made by the craftsman. It can be whittled into a three-inch piece of wood in a short time, and it can bear a weight of fifty stone.

古文：故所为功，利于人谓之巧，不利于人，谓之拙。 
现代文：所以，平常所做的事，有利于人，可称作精巧；不利于人，就叫作拙劣了。 
English: Therefore, things that are usually done to benefit people can be called ingenious; things that are not beneficial to people can be called clumsy.

古文：公输子谓子墨子曰： 吾未得见之时，我欲得宋。
现代文：公输盘对墨子说： 我没有见到你的时候，我想得到宋国。
English: The official said to Mozi: When I didn't see you, I wanted to get to Song.

古文：自我得见之后，予我宋而不义，我不为。 
现代文：自从我见了你之后，给我宋国，假如是不义的，我不会接受。 
English: Since I saw you, give me Song Guo. If it is not fair, I will not accept it.

古文：子墨子曰： 翟之未得见之时也，子欲得宋，自翟得见子之后，予子宋而不义，子弗为，是我予子宋也。
现代文：墨子说： 我没有见你的时候，你想得到宋国。自从我见了你之后，给你宋国，假如是不义的，你不会接受，这是我把宋国送给你了。
English: Mozi said, "When I didn't see you, you wanted Song Province. Since I saw you, I've given you Song Province. If it's not fair, you won't accept it. I've given you Song Province."

古文：子务为义，翟又将予子天下。 
现代文：你努力维护义，我又将送给你天下。 
English: If you work hard to uphold righteousness, I will give you the kingdom.

