古文：夫文爻象列而结绳移，鸟迹明而书契作，斯乃言语之体貌，而文章之宅宇也。
现代文：象形文字改变了上古结绳记事的办法，仓颉受到鸟兽足迹的启发而发明了文字。这些都是语言的符号，构成文章的基础。
English: The hieroglyphs changed the way the ancients knotted cords to record events, and the barn owl was inspired by the footprints of birds and beasts to invent writing. These are the symbols of language, which form the basis of the article.

古文：苍颉造之，鬼哭粟飞；黄帝用之，官治民察。
现代文：相传仓颉创造了文字，使得鬼惊夜哭，谷飞如雨；黄帝使用了文字，百官得以治理、万民得以明察。
English: According to legend, Cang Rong created writing, which made the ghosts cry in the night and the valleys fly like rain; the Yellow Emperor used writing, which allowed the government to govern and the people to see.

古文：先王声教，书必同文，輶轩之使，纪言殊俗，所以一字体，总异音。
现代文：前代君王为了传布声威教化，要求书写必须采用统一的文字；君王派出使者，到各地搜集习俗不同的语言，就是为了统一字形和字音。
English: The previous monarch, in order to spread the teaching of phonetics, required that writing must use a unified script; the monarch sent emissaries to various regions to collect languages with different customs, in order to unify the glyphs and phonemes.

古文：《周礼》保氏，掌教六书。
现代文：《周礼·地官》中记载，周代有保氏官，负责掌管教授文字。
English: It is recorded in "Zhouli · Local Officials" that in the Zhou Dynasty, there were Baoji officials who were in charge of teaching writing.

古文：秦灭旧章，以吏为师。及李斯删籀而秦篆兴，程邈造隶而古文废。
现代文：秦始皇统一六国烧毁古代典籍之后，便以官吏为老师；于是经李斯整理籀书而产生了秦代的小篆，后来程邈又将小篆改为隶书并废弃了古文字。
English: After the First Emperor of Qin unified the six countries and burned the ancient classics, he took officials as teachers. Therefore, Li Si sorted out the books and produced the Qin Dynasty Xiaojun. Later, Cheng Yu changed Xiaojun to Li Shu and abandoned the ancient characters.

古文：汉初草律，明著厥法。太史学童，教试八体。又吏民上书，字谬辄劾。
现代文：汉代初年，萧何起草法律，明确规定了文字的法令条文：太史官对幼年学生，要考试六种字体；官吏和百姓向皇帝上书，写错了字要弹劾检举。
English: In the first year of the Han Dynasty, Xiao He drafted a law, which clearly stipulated the text of the law: for young students, six fonts should be tested; officials and people should write to the emperor, and if they write the wrong word, they should be impeached and prosecuted.

古文：是以马字缺画，而石建惧死，虽云性慎，亦时重文也。
现代文：所以，西汉石建的上书中， 马 字写漏一笔，便害怕将获得死罪；虽说石建的性情比较谨慎，但也说明了当时注重文字的情况。
English: Therefore, Shi Jian of the Western Han Dynasty was afraid that he would be sentenced to death if he failed to write the word "Ma" in his petition. Although Shi Jian's temperament was more cautious, it also explained the emphasis on writing at that time.

古文：至孝武之世，则相如撰篇。
现代文：在汉武帝时期，司马相如编写了《凡将篇》。
English: During the reign of Emperor Hanwu, Sima Xiangru wrote "The General."

古文：及宣平二帝，征集小学，张敞以正读传业，扬雄以奇字纂训，并贯练《雅》、《颂颉》，总阅音义。
现代文：到宣帝和平帝时期，曾征召精通文字的人材：张敞因能正定古字而传授文字学，扬雄用采集的奇怪文字写了《训纂篇》。他们都精通《尔雅》、《仓颉》，全面掌握了文字的音义。
English: By the time of Emperor Xuan and Emperor Heping, people who were proficient in writing were enlisted: Zhang Biao taught philology because he could correctly identify ancient characters, and Yang Xiong wrote the "Analects" with strange characters collected. They were all proficient in "Lya" and "Canglu" and fully mastered the phonetic meaning of the characters.

古文：鸿笔之徒，莫不洞晓。
现代文：当时的辞赋大家，没有不通晓文字的。
English: At that time, there was no one who did not know the words.

古文：且多赋京苑，假借形声，是以前汉小学，率多玮字，非独制异，乃共晓难也。
现代文：加之他们的作品大都是描写京都苑囿，常用假借字来状貌形声。因此，西汉时期擅长文字学的作家，大多都喜欢生僻字。
English: In addition, most of their works were descriptions of Kyoto-style gardens, and they often borrowed words to create the sounds of shapes. Therefore, most of the writers who excelled in philology during the Western Han Dynasty liked unfamiliar words.

古文：暨乎后汉，小学转疏，复文隐训，臧否亦半。
现代文：这并非他们特意要标新立异，而是因为当时的作家都通晓难识的文字。到了东汉，人们开始疏忽对文字的研究，因此很难将复杂深奥的字解读清楚，对错各占一半。
English: This was not because they deliberately wanted to be innovative, but because the writers of the time were familiar with difficult characters. In the Eastern Han Dynasty, people began to neglect the study of characters, so it was difficult to interpret complex and esoteric characters clearly, with right and wrong each accounting for half.

古文：及魏代缀藻，则字有常检，追观汉作，翻成阻奥。
现代文：及至曹魏时期的创作，用字有了一定的法度，回头再看汉人作品，反而有了障碍，难以读懂。
English: As far as the creation of the Cao Wei period, the use of words has a certain degree of legality. Looking back at Chinese works, there are obstacles, and it is difficult to read.

古文：故陈思称∶ 扬马之作，趣幽旨深，读者非师传不能析其辞，非博学不能综其理。 
现代文：所以，陈思王曹植说： 扬雄、司马相如的作品，意义幽深，读者未经老师传授就不能解释其辞句，没有广博的学识就难以理解它的内容。 
English: Therefore, Chen Si Wang Cao Zhi said: The works of Yang Xiong and Sima Xianglu are profound in meaning. Readers cannot explain their words without being taught by a teacher. Without extensive knowledge, it is difficult to understand its content.

古文：岂直才悬，抑亦字隐。
现代文：这岂止是读者的才力不足，也由于它的文字实在深奥。
English: This is not only due to the lack of talent of the reader, but also because its text is really profound.

古文：自晋来用字，率从简易，时并习易，人谁取难？
现代文：自从晋代以后，用字大都讲求简明易懂，当时都习惯于简易，谁还采用难字？
English: Since the Jin Dynasty, most of the characters have been simple and easy to understand. At that time, everyone was accustomed to simplicity. Who still uses difficult characters?

古文：今一字诡异，则群句震惊，三人弗识，则将成字妖矣。
现代文：现在的作品，有一个怪异的字，很多句子都要受到影响；如果有三个人都不认识，那就将会成为字妖了。
English: In the current work, there is a strange word that affects many sentences; if three people do not know it, it will become a word demon.

古文：后世所同晓者，虽难斯易，时所共废，虽易斯难，趣舍之间，不可不察。
现代文：后代读者大部认识的字，虽是难字也不难了；大家已共同废弃不用的字，虽然不难也成为难字了。创作中或取或舍，这是不可不注意的。
English: The characters that will be familiar to the majority of future generations of readers are not difficult, even though they are difficult; everyone has abandoned unused characters, and although they are not difficult, they have also become difficult. It is important to pay attention to this when creating.

古文：夫《尔雅》者，孔徒之所纂，而《诗》、《书》之襟带也；《仓颉》者，李斯之所辑，而史籀之遗体也。
现代文：《尔雅》这部书，是孔子的门徒所编纂的，它和《诗经》、《尚书》有着密切的联系；《仓颉》这部书是秦朝丞相李斯编辑的，保留了大量原始文字与籀书遗传下来的字体。
English: The book "Rya" was compiled by a disciple of Confucius, and it is closely related to the "Book of Songs" and the "Book of Songs"; the book "Canglu" was edited by Li Si, the prime minister of the Qin Dynasty, and retains a large number of original characters and the fonts inherited from the Zizhu.

古文：《雅》以渊源诂训，《颉》以苑囿奇文，异体相资，如左右肩股，该旧而知新，亦可以属文。
现代文：《尔雅》用以解释古字古义，《仓颉》汇集了生僻字。两种书的作用相辅相成，就如人体左右肩或左右腿的相互配合。一个作者兼通古字而又知新义，这样就可以开始写文章了。
English: "Lya" is used to explain the ancient meaning of ancient characters, and "Cangzhu" brings together unfamiliar characters. The functions of the two books complement each other, just like the mutual cooperation of the left and right shoulders or the left and right legs of the human body. An author is familiar with ancient characters and knows the new meaning, so he can start writing articles.

古文：若夫义训古今，兴废殊用，字形单复，妍媸异体。
现代文：至于字义的古今有别，后世普遍运用或废弃不用，以及字形繁简的配合等，都会形成优劣不同的作品。
English: As for the difference between the ancient and modern meanings of the characters, the common use or disuse in later generations, as well as the combination of complex and simple glyphs, will all form superior and inferior works.

古文：心既托声于言，言亦寄形于字，讽诵则绩在宫商，临文则能归字形矣。
现代文：作者的思想既然寄托于有声的语言，语言又借助于有形的文字来表达，讽吟诵读是否动听，就看音节是否协调，观其文，就看文字是否运用得当了。
English: Since the author's thoughts are based on spoken language, and language is expressed with the help of tangible words, whether the irony chanting and reading is pleasant depends on whether the syllables are coordinated, and whether the words are used properly.

古文：是以缀字属篇，必须拣择∶一避诡异，二省联边，三权重出，四调单复。
现代文：因此，在写作的过程中必须对文字加以选择组合：第一要避免诡异，第二要减少联边，第三要权衡重出，第四要调节单复。
English: Therefore, in the process of writing, it is necessary to select and combine the characters: the first is to avoid strangeness, the second is to reduce the margins, the third is to re-weigh, and the fourth is to adjust the single-compound.

古文：诡异者，字体瑰怪者也。
现代文：所谓 诡异 ，就是奇形怪状的生僻字。
English: The so-called "weird" is a strangely shaped, out-of-the-way word.

古文：曹摅诗称： 岂不愿斯游，褊心恶哅呶。 
现代文：如曹摅的诗中说： 岂是不愿意这次行游，只是我狭小的心胸憎恶那吵吵嚷嚷的訩呶。 
English: As Cao Yu's poem says, "I really don't want to go on this trip, but my small heart hates the noisy cormorants."

古文：两字诡异，大疵美篇。况乃过此，其可观乎！联边者，半字同文者也。
现代文： 訩呶 两个怪字，就使美好的诗篇大受污损，何况经常有超过两个字的生僻字出现，那么这样的文章还能成为优秀的作品吗？所谓 联边 ，就是偏旁相同的字。
English: Two strange words, so that a beautiful poem is greatly tarnished, not to mention the fact that there are often more than two strange words, so can such an article still be an excellent work? The so-called joint edge, is the same word on the side.

古文：状貌山川，古今咸用，施于常文，则龃龉为瑕，如不获免，可至三接，三接之外，其字林乎！
现代文：描绘山川的形貌，自然古今作品都用联边字，但用于其他文章，就很不相称而成了瑕病；如果无法避免，可以连用三字，但三字以上，那就像编字典了。
English: In describing the shape of mountains and rivers, it is natural for ancient and modern works to use conjunctions, but for other articles, it is very disproportionate and has become a flaw; if it cannot be avoided, three words can be used together, but more than three words, it is like making a dictionary.

古文：重出者，同字相犯者也。
现代文：所谓 重出 ，就是相同的字重复出现。
English: A recurrence is when the same word appears repeatedly.

古文：《诗》、《骚》适会，而近世忌同，若两字俱要，则宁在相犯。
现代文：《诗经》和《楚辞》都能恰当地重复一些字句，近代创作却忌讳同字的重复；但如果两个字都很必要，就宁可犯忌也要运用。
English: Both the "Book of Poetry" and the "Analects of Confucius" can appropriately repeat some words, but modern creation is taboo for the repetition of the same word; but if both words are necessary, it is better not to use them.

古文：故善为文者，富于万篇，贫于一字，一字非少，相避为难也。单复者，字形肥瘠者也。
现代文：所以，善于写文章的人，虽可写到万篇之多，有时却感到一字之缺；并不是没有这个字，而是避免重复有困难。所谓 单复 ，就是字形的繁简。
English: Therefore, people who are good at writing articles, although they can write as many as ten thousand, sometimes feel the lack of a word; it is not that there is no word, but it is difficult to avoid repetition.

古文：瘠字累句，则纤疏而行劣；肥字积文，则黯黕而篇暗。
现代文：字形简略的字积累成句，就显得稀稀拉拉，行列单薄；笔画繁多的字积聚成文，就显得一片漆黑，篇体无光。
English: When words with abbreviated glyphs accumulate into sentences, they appear sparse and thin; when words with many strokes accumulate into sentences, they appear pitch black and lack light.

古文：善酌字者，参伍单复，磊落如珠矣。
现代文：善于用字的作者，繁简字体交错配合，就能圆转如珠了。
English: An author who is good at using words, and interlaced with traditional and simplified fonts, will be able to make a perfect circle.

古文：凡此四条，虽文不必有，而体例不无。若值而莫悟，则非精解。
现代文：以上四条，虽然不一定每篇文章都有，但总的体例是不能没有的；如果遇到这些情形而不明白，就算不得精通练字了。
English: The above four points, although not necessarily in every article, but the general style is indispensable; if you encounter these situations and do not understand, even if you are not proficient in practicing words.

古文：至于经典隐暧，方册纷纶，简蠹帛裂，三写易字，或以音讹，或以文变。
现代文：至于说经典书籍的内容深刻隐晦，各种著述浩瀚繁富，加以简帛的被蛀或破裂，经多次抄写而改变原字，有的因字音相近而误，有的因字形相似而错。
English: As for the profound obscurity of the contents of classic books, all kinds of writings are vast and rich, with simple covers or cracks, and the original characters are changed after being copied many times. Some are mistaken because the characters sound similar, and some are mistaken because the characters are similar.

古文：子思弟子， 于穆不似 ，音讹之异也。晋之史记， 三豕渡河 ，文变之谬也。
现代文：如子思的弟子孟仲子，把《诗经》中的 於穆不已 说成 於穆不似 ，这就是字音相近造成的错误；晋国历史所记载的 己亥渡河 ，被卫人读为 三豕渡河 ，这就是字形相似造成的错误。
English: For example, Meng Zhongzi, a disciple of Zisi, said that the word in the "Song of Songs" was similar to the word in the "Song of Songs," which was a mistake caused by the similarity of the syllables; the Ji Hai River Crossing, recorded in the history of Jin, was read by the guards as the Three-Fold River Crossing, which was a mistake caused by the similarity of the glyphs.

古文：《尚书大传》有 别风淮雨 ，《帝王世纪》云 列风淫雨 。 别 、 列 、 淮 、 淫 ，字似潜移。 淫 、 列 义当而不奇， 淮 、 别 理乖而新异。
现代文：《尚书大传》中有 别风淮雨 的说法，《帝王世纪》则说 列风淫雨 。 别 与 列 、 淮 与 淫 ，就是文字相似而于不知不觉中改变的。 淫 和 列 的字义妥当但不奇特， 淮 、 别 二字于理不合却很新奇。
English: "Shang Shu Da Zhen" has the saying "Beijing style" and "Emperor's Century" says "Column style." "Beijing style" and "Beijing style" and "Beijing style" and "Beijing style" and "Beijing style" and "Beijing style" and "Beijing style" and "Beijing style" and "Beijing style" and "Beijing style" and "Beijing style" and "Beijing style" and "Beijing style" and "Beijing style" and "Beijing style" and "Beijing style" and "Beijing style" and "Beijing style" and "Beijing style" and "Beijing style

古文：傅毅制诔，已用 淮雨 ；元长作序，亦用 别风 ，固知爱奇之心，古今一也。
现代文：东汉傅毅在《北海王诔》中已用过 淮雨 二字，南齐王融在《三月三日曲水诗序》中，又用到 别风 二字。由此可见，爱好奇特的心情，古今都是一样的。
English: Fu Yi of the Eastern Han Dynasty had already used the word "Huaiyu" in "The North Sea King" and Wang Rong of the Southern Qi Dynasty had used the word "Beifeng" in "The March 3rd Water Melody." It can be seen that the mood of curiosity is the same from ancient times to the present.

古文：史之阙文，圣人所慎，若依义弃奇，则可与正文字矣。
现代文：但对待历史上缺疑的字，圣人是很慎重的；若能本于正确意义而抛弃好奇的念头，就可以定正文字了。
English: However, the sage is very careful with the word of doubt in history; if you can abandon the idea of curiosity in the right sense, you can fix the word.

古文：赞曰∶
现代文：总结：
English: What is this word? Summary:

古文：篆隶相熔，苍雅品训。
现代文：篆书和隶书依次熔炼，《仓颉》和《尔雅》对文字做了全面的解释。
English: Zang Shu and Li Shu were melted in turn, and "Cang Shu" and "Er Ya" gave a comprehensive explanation of the characters.

古文：古今殊迹，妍媸异分。字靡易流，文阻难运。
现代文：从古到今的作者，由于运用文字的不同，其效果就美丑各异。用字为世所同晓便容易流传，为时所共废便难以运行。
English: The authors from ancient times to the present, due to the difference in the use of words, have different effects on beauty and ugliness. If the word is known to the world, it is easy to spread, but if it is common waste, it is difficult to run.

古文：声画昭精，墨采腾奋。
现代文：文字把思想表达得明白而精确，就能文采飞扬而突出。
English: Words can express thoughts clearly and precisely, and can be eloquent and prominent.

