古文：胡元礼诬刘如璿恶党宋昱韦儇萧颖士李希烈卢杞襄样节度史牟李绅
现代文：自办起经五十里地便到了罗州的招义郡，招义临海，海边有三个煮盐场。然而百姓都私下煮盐，也不能禁止。这里还盛产蜂蜜，洁白如雪。
English: After 50 miles of self-organization, they arrived in Zhaoyi County, Luzhou. Zhaoyi is adjacent to the sea, and there are three boiled salt farms on the beach. However, the people all boil salt privately, and it cannot be prohibited. Honey is also abundant here, and it is as white as snow.

古文：胡淛韦公干陈延美赵思绾安道进
现代文：韦公干陈延美赵思绾安道进胡元礼
English: Wei Gonggan, Chen Yanmei, Zhao Siyuan, An Dao, and Hu Yuanli

古文：胡元礼唐胡元礼，定城人也。进士擢第，累授洛阳尉。
现代文：唐朝的胡元礼，是定城人，进士出身，几个任期都只授予他洛阳县尉。
English: Hu Yuanli of the Tang Dynasty was a native of Dingcheng and a scholar by birth. He was only awarded the title of Luoyang County Lieutenant for several terms.

古文：则天朝，右台员外监察，寻即真，加朝请大夫。
现代文：到武则天时，授予他员外监察御史，不久便授予他正员御史，并加朝请大夫衔。
English: When he arrived in Wuzetian, he was awarded the title of outside inspector of history, and soon he was awarded the title of official member of history, and he was given the title of doctor.

古文：丁忧免，起复，寻检校秋官郎中。
现代文：丁忧免除后，重新起用，不久便任检校秋官郎中。
English: After Ding Zhen was exempted, he was reappointed, and soon he was appointed as a junior official of the autumn inspection.

古文：累迁司刑少卿、滑州刺史、广州都督。
现代文：后历任司刑少卿、滑州刺史、广州都督等职。
English: Later, he held the posts of Sentencing Magistrate, Secretary of State, Governor of Guangzhou, and so on.

古文：性残忍深刻，不可以情祈。
现代文：他的性情极为残忍刻薄，不可以情相求。
English: His nature is extremely cruel and mean, and it is not permissible for him to seek love.

古文：时李日知任司刑丞，每按狱，务从宽。
现代文：当时李日知任司刑丞，每次审查案子，他都从宽处理，因而被胡元礼屡屡驳回。
English: At that time, Li Rizhi was the chief magistrate, and every time he reviewed a case, he dealt with it leniently, so it was repeatedly rejected by Hu Yuanli.

古文：元礼屡折之，日知终不易。尝出一死囚，元礼异，判杀之。
现代文：而李日知也始终不改判。李日知曾免除一个囚犯的死刑，胡元礼不同意。
English: However, Li Rizhi has never changed the sentence. Li Rizhi once exempted a prisoner from the death penalty, but Hu Yuanli did not agree.

古文：与日知往复，至于再三。元礼怒，命府吏谓曰：元礼不离刑曹，此囚无活法。
现代文：判该杀，案子在两人之间往来复去，双方坚持再三，胡元礼怒，命令府史长告诉李日知说：元礼只要不离开刑曹，此犯就没有活刑！
English: Sentenced to death, the case went back and forth between the two men. Both sides insisted repeatedly. Hu Yuanli was angry and ordered the prefectural chief historian to tell Li Rizhi: "As long as Yuanli does not leave the executioner, there will be no life sentence for this criminal!"

古文：日知命报曰：日知不离刑曹，此囚无死法。
现代文：李日知也命人去回报他说：日知只要不离开刑曹，此犯就不会判死刑！
English: Li Ritchie also ordered someone to reply to him: "As long as Ritchie does not leave the executioner, this criminal will not be sentenced to death!"

古文：竟以两状申，日知果直。
现代文：终于将两份判决书一起上报，李日知果然正确。
English: Finally, the two verdicts were reported together, and Li Rizhi knew that it was indeed correct.

古文：时人忌元礼之苛刻，尝于宣仁门外，为冤家罗辱于泥中，幸金吾救助。敕榜仇者百。台中罚元礼五千，以其辱台也。
现代文：在胡元礼任御史时，人们都很憎恨他的苛刻，有一次在宣仁门外，胡元礼遭到仇人的侮辱而被推进泥坑中，幸亏得到禁卫军的救助，皇帝下令杖罚那个仇人一百，而御史台向胡元礼罚款五千，因为他败坏了御史台的声誉。
English: When Hu Yuanli held the post of imperial historian, people hated his harshness. Once, outside Xuanren Gate, Hu Yuanli was insulted by an enemy and pushed into a mud pit. Fortunately, he was rescued by the imperial guard. The emperor ordered that the enemy be punished with a hundred, and the imperial historian fined Hu Yuanli five thousand, because he had damaged the reputation of the imperial historian.

古文：诬刘如璿恶党
现代文：诬刘如璿恶党
English: Fake Liu Ruzhen Evil Party

古文：刘如璿事亲以孝闻。
现代文：刘如璿事奉双亲一向以孝顺闻名。
English: Liu Ruxuan served his parents and was always known for his filial piety.

古文：解褐唐昌尉累迁乾封封尉，为侍御史，转吏部员外。
现代文：入仕便当了唐昌县尉，任满再转任乾封县尉。后任侍御史，转任史部员外。
English: Upon entering the service, he became the Tangchang County Lieutenant, and upon completion of his service, he was transferred to the Qianfeng County Lieutenant. Later, he was appointed as the Chamberlain of History, and then as a member of the History Department.

古文：则天朝，自夏官郎中，左授都城令，转南郑令，迁司仆司农少卿秋官侍郎。
现代文：到了武则天朝，由夏官郎中降职为都城县令，转任南郑县令，后升任为司仆、司农少卿及秋官侍部。
English: In the reign of Emperor Wuzetian, he was demoted from the middle-ranking official of the Xia Dynasty to the county magistrate of the Capital, and then to the county magistrate of the Southern Zheng Dynasty. Later, he was promoted to the position of the secretary's servant, the vice-minister of agriculture, and the attendant of the autumn official.

古文：时来俊臣党人，与司刑府史姓樊者不协，诬以反诛之。
现代文：当时来俊臣的一个党羽，与司刑府史一个姓樊的人不和，便诬陷他要谋反而杀了他。
English: At that time, a faction of Junshin's faction had a disagreement with a person with the surname of Hao in the history of the Sentencing Department, so they framed him for plotting and killed him instead.

古文：其子讼冤于朝堂，无敢理者，乃援刀自刳其腹。
现代文：他的儿子到朝堂诉冤，没有敢理会的，于是便从别人身上拽了把刀剖腹自尽。
English: His son went to the court to complain about the injustice, but he did not dare to ignore it, so he pulled a knife from someone else and cut his abdomen to commit suicide.

古文：朝士莫不目而悚惕，璿不觉唧唧而泪下。
现代文：朝官们的无不望而恐惧的，刘如璿却不禁唧唧而泪下。
English: The imperial officials were desperate and fearful, but Liu Ruxuan couldn't help but cry.

古文：俊臣奏云：党恶，下诏狱。
现代文：来俊臣群奏道：他是同党，也是个邪恶分子，应该下诏捕他入狱。
English: A group of courtiers said, "He is a member of the same party and an evil person. He should be arrested and sent to prison."

古文：璿诉曰：年老，因遇秋风而泪下。
现代文：刘如璿申诉说：我年纪大了，是因为遇上风才落泪的。
English: Liu Ruxuan complained, "I'm too old. I only shed tears because of the wind.

古文：俊臣劾之曰：目下涓涓之泪，作可因风。
现代文：来俊臣又揭发道：眼睛流泪涓涓不止，怎么可以说是因为风吹的呢？
English: Lai Junchen also revealed, "My eyes are streaming with tears, how can I say it's because of the wind?

古文：口称唧唧之声，如何取雪。
现代文：口中还发出唧唧之声，这又如何洗刷掉？
English: There is also a gurgling sound in the mouth, how can this be washed away?

古文：处以绞刑。
现代文：就当处以绞刑。
English: He should have been hanged.

古文：则天特流于瀼州。
现代文：武则天仅仅把他流放于瀼州。
English: Wu Zetian merely exiled him to Zhangzhou.

古文：子景宪讼冤，得征还，复秋官侍郎。
现代文：后来刘知璿的儿子刘景宪上诉申冤，才得到征召而还朝，并恢复了他的秋官侍郎之职。
English: Later, Liu Zhisheng's son, Liu Jingxian, appealed for redress of grievances, only to be conscripted and returned to the imperial court, and resumed his post as an aide-de-camp to the emperor.

古文：辞疾，授兖州都督。
现代文：刘如璿坚辞不受，又授予他兖州都督。
English: Liu Ruzhen refused to accept the resignation and awarded him the title of the governor of Zhangzhou.

古文：好著述，文集四十卷行于代。
现代文：刘如璿喜欢写作，有文集四十卷流行于世。
English: Liu Ruxuan likes to write, and his forty-volume anthology is popular around the world.

古文：俊臣但苛虐，无文，其劾乃郑愔之词也。
现代文：而来俊臣只是严酷暴虐，没有文采，他在揭发别人的时候，也只能说出像郑愔之流说的那种词语而已。
English: On the other hand, the young minister is just harsh and brutal, and has no literary flair. When he exposes others, he can only say the kind of words like those said by Zheng Bingzhuang.

古文：宋昱韦儇
现代文：宋昱韦儇
English: Song Xiwei Jun

古文：李林甫是姜皎外甥，杨国忠是张易之外甥。
现代文：李林甫是姜皎的外甥，杨国忠是张易之的外甥。
English: Li Linfu is the nephew of Jiang Chen, and Yang Guozhong is the nephew of Zhang Yizhi.

古文：杨国忠为剑南，召募使远赴泸南，粮少路险，常无回者。
现代文：杨国忠下令剑南官府，要从当地召募役夫远赴泸南服役。由于粮少而又道路险恶，常常是有去无回。
English: Yang Guozhong ordered the Jian'nan government to recruit conscripts from the local area to serve in southern Anhui. Due to the lack of food and dangerous roads, there was often no going back.

古文：其剑南行人，每岁，令宋昱、韦儇为御史，迫促郡县征之。
现代文：而要去剑南的役夫，每年，都要令宋显、韦儇为御史，去督促各郡县征募。
English: On the other hand, every year, Song Xian and Wei Wei, who were enlisted to go to Jian'nan, had to go to the counties to urge them to enlist.

古文：人知必死，郡县无以应命。
现代文：人们知道一去必死，各郡县都无法接受这个命令。
English: People knew that they would die if they went, and every county could not accept this order.

古文：乃设诡计。诈令僧设斋，或于要路转变，其众中有单贫者即缚之。
现代文：宋、韦二人便设下诡计，假令僧人设斋，然后在要路或转弯之处，选择众人之中那些孤单的穷困者，立即绑走。
English: Song and Wei then set up a ruse, pretending to order the monks to set up a fast, and then, on a major road or at a turning point, they would select those poor people who were alone among the crowd and immediately kidnap them.

古文：置密室中，授以絮衣，连枷作队，急递赴役。
现代文：然后把他们安置在秘密的屋子里，发给他们棉衣，再给他们带上枷并把枷串联起来站成队，立即驱赶他们去赴役。
English: Then they put them in a secret room, issued them with cotton clothes, shackled them with chains and made them stand in a line, and immediately drove them off to war.

古文：萧颖士
现代文：萧颖士
English: Xiao Yingshi

古文：萧颖士性异常严酷。
现代文：萧颖士的性情十分残酷。
English: Xiao Yingshi's temperament is very cruel.

古文：昔有一仆，事之十余载，颖士每一棰楚百余，不堪其苦。人或激之择木，其仆曰：我非不能他从，迟留者，乃爱其才耳。
现代文：他从前有一个仆人，侍候了他十几年，每次发怒他都要用棍棒抽打他一百多下，使他痛苦得难以忍受，有人鼓动他再换一个主人，那个仆人说：我不是不可以到别处去，所以要长期地留在这里，是我很爱他的才能。
English: He once had a servant who had served him for more than ten years. Every time he was angry, he would beat him with a club more than a hundred times, causing him unbearable pain. Someone encouraged him to change his master. The servant said: "I am not forbidden to go elsewhere, so I want to stay here for a long time. I love his talent very much."

古文：李希烈
现代文：李希烈
English: Li Xile

古文：建中中□李希烈攻汴州，城未陷。驱百姓妇女及辎重，以实壕堑，谓之湿梢。
现代文：唐朝建中年间，李希烈攻打汴州，城未攻克，便驱赶百姓妇女连同军用物资一起，用来充填城壕。
English: During the middle of the construction of the Tang Dynasty, Li Xili attacked Zhangzhou, and when the city was not conquered, he drove out the common people and women, together with military supplies, to fill the trenches.

古文：卢杞
现代文：卢杞
English: Lu Wei

古文：殿中侍御史郑詹与张镒厚善。每伺卢杞昼寝，辄诣镒。
现代文：殿中侍御史郑詹与张镒十分要好，每次探察到卢杞在白天睡觉的时候，就到张镒的官署去。
English: Zheng Zhan, the palace attendant, was very close to Zhang Ye. Whenever he found Lu Ye sleeping during the day, he would go to Zhang Ye's government office.

古文：杞知之。他日。杞假寐佯熟，伺詹果来。知与镒偶语。杞遽至镒閭中，詹趋避。
现代文：卢杞发现了此事，有一天，他又假装睡熟，侦察到郑詹果然又来，知道他们俩正在私语，他便突然来到张镒的官署中，郑詹急忙躲避起来。
English: Lu Yao found out about this. One day, he pretended to be fast asleep, and discovered that Zheng Zhan had indeed come again. Knowing that the two of them were whispering, he suddenly came to Zhang Ye's government office, and Zheng Zhan hurried to hide.

古文：杞遂言密事。镒曰：殿中郑侍御在此。
现代文：卢杞于是要谈一件机密之事，张镒道：殿中郑侍御在这里。
English: Lu Ye then wanted to talk about a confidential matter. Zhang Ye said, "The palace attendant Zheng is here."

古文：杞佯愕曰：向者所言，非他人所宜闻也。
现代文：卢杞装作惊愕地说：如果像你说的，那么这事是不应该让别人听到的。
English: Lulu feigned surprise and said, "If it's like you say, then it's not something anyone should hear about."

古文：后深劾詹之罪，以排严郢。
现代文：后来他极力地揭发郑詹的罪错，目的是排挤严郢的势力。
English: Later, he tried his best to expose Zheng Zhan's crimes, with the aim of ousting the forces of austerity.

古文：三司使方按二人，狱犹未具，而杞已奏杀詹黜郢。
现代文：三司使刚刚审讯郑詹和严郢，还没定案判刑，卢杞就已经奏请皇帝杀了郑詹罢免了严郢。
English: The three commissioners had just interrogated Zheng Zhan and Yan Qi, but before the case was decided and the sentence was passed, Lu Wei had already petitioned the emperor to kill Zheng Zhan and dismiss Yan Qi.

古文：中外侧目。
现代文：朝廷内外对他十分怒恨。
English: There was a lot of anger towards him both inside and outside the court.

古文：襄样节度
现代文：襄样节度
English: So much for moderation.

古文：襄阳人善为漆器，天下取法，谓之襄样。
现代文：襄阳人很善于油漆家具，天下各地都学习他们的样子，人们都称为襄样。
English: The people of Xiangyang are very good at painting furniture. People all over the world study their appearance, and they are called Xiangyang people.

古文：及于司空为师，多暴；郑元镇河中，亦暴，远近呼为襄样节度。
现代文：等到襄阳人做了主管牢狱的长官，多数人都很残暴。当时郑元镇守河中，也很残暴，远近都称他为襄样节度使。
English: By the time the people of Xiangyang became the warden in charge of the prison, most of them were very cruel. At that time, Zheng Yuanzhen guarded the middle of the river, and he was also very cruel. People near and far called him the warden of Xiangyang.

古文：史牟
现代文：史牟
English: Shmoo

古文：史牟榷盐于解县，初变榷法，以中朝廷。
现代文：史牟在解县管理盐业生产，刚刚对盐的经营管理制度进行了变法，这是为了中意于朝廷。
English: Shumo was in charge of salt production in Gexian County, and he had just made changes to the salt management system in order to please the imperial court.

古文：有外甥十余岁，从牟检畦，拾盐一颗以归。牟知，立杖杀之。
现代文：他有一个十几岁的外甥，跟着他去检查盐田，回来时拾了一颗盐粒，史牟知道了，便立刻将外甥杖杀。
English: He had a teenage nephew who followed him to inspect the salt pans, and when he came back he picked up a grain of salt. When Shmu found out, he immediately killed his nephew.

古文：共姊哭而出救，已不及矣。
现代文：当他姐姐哭着跑来相救时，已经来不及了。
English: By the time his sister ran crying for help, it was too late.

古文：李绅
现代文：李绅
English: Li Sheng

古文：李绅以旧宰相镇一方，恣威权。
现代文：李绅因以前是宰相而镇守一方，因而恣意逞权威。
English: Li Sheng, because he was the prime minister before, kept to one side, and thus arbitrarily assumed authority.

古文：凡戳有罪，犹待秋分，永宁吴尉弟湘，无辜盛夏被杀。
现代文：凡斩杀罪犯，都要等到秋分的时候，而永宁县吴县尉的弟弟吴湘，却正当盛夏之时便被无罪斩杀。
English: Whoever beheads a criminal must wait until the autumnal equinox, but Wu Xiang, the younger brother of Yongning County's Wu County Lieutenant, was beheaded without charge at the height of summer.

古文：崔元藻衔德裕斥己，即翻其辞，因言御史覆狱还，皆对天子，别白是非。权轧天下，使不得对，具狱不付有司，但用绅奏而置湘死。
现代文：崔元藻因怀恨德裕对他的斥责，就推翻了原来的口供，因而便说，御史核实完案子回来，都应向皇帝禀告，以分辨清楚案子中的是非，可是有的人权势威慑天下，使御史不能回禀皇帝，案卷也不给主管刑狱的官员，只是由李绅上奏便将吴湘处死了。
English: Cui Yuanmao, out of hatred for Deyu's reprimand of him, overturned the original confession. Therefore, he said that when Gu Shi returned after verifying the case, he should report to the emperor to distinguish the rights and wrongs of the case. However, there was a human rights threat around the world, so that Gu Shi could not report to the emperor, and the case file was not given to the officials in charge of the prison. However, he was reported by Li Sheng and Wu Xiang was executed.

古文：是时德裕已失权，而宗闵故党令狐绹、崔铉、白敏中，皆当路，因是逞憾。以利诱动元藻等，使三司结绅，杖钺作藩，虐杀良平，准神龙诏书。
现代文：这时德裕已失去权势，而宗闵原来的党羽令狐绹、崔铉、白敏中等，都充任了要职，因此对德裕很怨恨，他们以利来引诱打动元藻等，并让三司具结李绅，依仗权威、武力坐镇一方，虐杀良民百姓。
English: At this time, Deyu had already lost power, and Zonglu's original party members, including Zonglu, Cui Jun, and Bai Min, all held important positions. Therefore, they were very resentful of Deyu. They used interest to lure and impress Yuanmao and others, and let the three generals, relying on authority and force, sit on one side of the town and brutally kill good people.

古文：酷吏殁者，官爵皆夺。子孙不得进宦。
现代文：以神龙年间皇帝诏书为准，酷吏已死了的，爵位也要剥夺，子孙不得做官。
English: According to the Emperor's edict during the reign of the divine dragon, if a cruel official has died, he or she shall be deprived of the title of nobility, and his or her descendants shall not be allowed to become officials.

古文：绅虽亡，请从春秋戮死之比。
现代文：李绅虽然已死，也请求与过去被处死的人同样处理。
English: Although Li Sheng is dead, he also requests the same treatment as those who were executed in the past.

古文：诏削绅三官，子孙不得仕，贬德裕等。
现代文：结果皇帝下令，削去李绅身上的三官，子孙不得做官，给德裕等人降职处分。
English: As a result, the emperor ordered that the three official posts of Li Sheng be removed, that his descendants not be allowed to hold official posts, and that Deyu and others be demoted.

古文：擢汝纳左拾遗，元藻武功令。
现代文：提拔汝纳为左拾遗，崔元藻为武功县令。
English: Rune was promoted to Zuozhuye, and Cui Yuanmao was promoted to WuGong County.

古文：始绅以文艺、节操见用，然所至务为威烈，或陷暴刻，故卒坐湘冤云。
现代文：最初李绅是以文学和节操受到人们的尊重，然而他对所有来访的人都必然要大耍权威，或者对人很粗暴很刻薄，因而才仓促地促成了吴湘冤案。
English: At first, Li Sheng was respected by people for his literature and discipline, but he inevitably had to exert authority over all visitors, or he was very rude and mean to people, which hastily led to the Wu Xiang injustice case.

古文：唐李绅既治淮南，决吴湘狱。
现代文：唐朝时，李绅去治理淮南，先判决了吴湘的死刑。
English: During the Tang Dynasty, when Li Sheng went to govern Huainan, he first sentenced Wu Xiang to death.

古文：持法峻，犯者无宥。
现代文：执法极为严厉，对于犯了罪的人绝不宽恕。
English: Law enforcement is extremely strict, and there is no mercy for those who commit crimes.

古文：狡吏奸豪潜形叠迹。
现代文：因而那些狡猾的官吏和奸诈的绅士都隐藏起自己的行迹。
English: So the cunning officials and the treacherous gentlemen all hid their tracks.

古文：然出于独见，僚佑莫敢言。
现代文：然而慑于他的暴烈，幕僚们没有敢告诉他这些情况的。
English: However, his aides did not dare to tell him these things because of his violent temper.

古文：评事李元将弟仲将侨寓江都，李公羁旅时，每馆于元将而叔呼焉。荣达后，元将称弟称侄皆不悦，及为孙，方似相容。
现代文：评事李元将的弟弟李仲将寄居于江都，当李绅长期寄居于那里并去他家作客时，每次见到元将都称呼为叔，而当他荣华显达后，李元将称自己是兄弟是侄儿他都不高兴，等到称自己为孙子，他好像才勉强接受。
English: Commentator Li Yuanjun's brother Li Zhongjun lived in Jiangdu for a long time. When Li Sheng lived there for a long time and visited his home as a guest, he called him uncle every time he saw him. When Li Yuanjun became prosperous, he was not happy to call himself a brother or a nephew. It was only when he called himself a grandson that he seemed to reluctantly accept.

古文：又有崔巡官居郑圃，与绅同年之旧，特来谒。才及旅次，家仆与市人竞。
现代文：有一个崔巡官住在郑圃，他与李绅有同科进士之谊，特地来拜访他，刚刚到了旅馆，家仆与一个市民争斗起来。
English: There was an inspector Cui who lived in Zhengpu. He had a friendship with Li Sheng, a fellow scholar, and came specially to visit him. He had just arrived at the hotel when the servant started to fight with a citizen.

古文：诘其所以，仆曰：宣州馆驿崔巡官下。
现代文：李绅追问那个家仆是干什么的，那奴仆说：是宣州馆驿崔巡官的仆人。
English: Li Sheng asked the manservant what he was doing. The manservant said, "I am the servant of the inspector of the Xuanzhou Pavilion."

古文：仆与市人皆抵极法，令捕崔至，曰：昔常识君，到此何不相见。
现代文：他把那仆人和市民都处以极刑，并下令把崔巡官捕来，说：过去我曾认识你，既然来到这里，为何不来相见？
English: He sentenced the servant and the citizen to death, and ordered the arrest of Inspector Cui, saying, "I knew you in the past. Since I came here, why don't you come to see me?"

古文：崔叩头谢曰：适憩旅舍，日已迟晚，相公尊重，非时不敢具陈毕礼，伏希哀怜，获归乡里。
现代文：崔叩头道谢说：刚刚来到旅馆歇下，天色已经晚了，相公是尊贵的人，不适当的时候是不敢来倾述尽礼的，希望能给予怜悯，放我回家乡去。
English: "I just came to the hotel to rest. It's getting late. My husband is an honorable man. He wouldn't dare to come to pay his respects at an inappropriate time. I hope he will have mercy and let me go back to my hometown."

古文：遂縻之，具罪笞二十，送过秣陵，貌若死灰，莫敢恸哭。
现代文：李绅还是把他绑起来，定罪杖打二十。把崔巡官送过了秣陵，他已面如死灰，也不敢大哭一声。
English: However, Li Sheng still tied him up, sentenced him to 20 strokes of the cane, and sent Inspector Cui to the tomb. His face was like ashes, and he did not dare to cry out.

古文：时人相谓曰：李公宗叔翻为孙子，故人忽作流囚。
现代文：当时人们相互说道：李绅的族叔反过来做了他的孙子，李绅的友人忽然作了被他流放的囚犯。
English: At that time, people said to each other: Lishen's uncle in turn became his grandson, Lishen's friend suddenly became a prisoner exiled by him.

古文：于是邑客黎人，惧罹不测，渡江淮者众矣。
现代文：于是市民百姓，都害怕遭遇不测的苦难，便有很多人渡过长江淮河而离去。
English: As a result, the citizens and common people were afraid of encountering unforeseen hardships, so many people crossed the Yangtze River and the Huaihe River to leave.

古文：主吏启曰：户口逃亡不少。
现代文：他的属官告诉他说：住户百姓逃走的已不少了。
English: His officials told him: "Many residents have already fled.

古文：绅曰：汝不见掬麦乎？
现代文：李绅道：你见过用手捧麦子吗？
English: Li Sheng said: Have you ever seen a hand holding wheat?

古文：秀者在下，粃粏随流者不必报来。
现代文：饱满颗粒总是下面，那些秕糠随风而去不必报来。
English: The full grain is always at the bottom, and those ripples that go with the wind don't have to be reported.

古文：忽有少年，势似疏简，自云辛氏子，谒绅。
现代文：忽然有一个少年，那行为似乎很狂放，自称叫辛氏子，来拜访李绅。
English: Suddenly, a boy, who seemed to be acting wildly and called himself Xin Shi Zi, came to visit Li Sheng.

古文：晤对间未甚周至。先是白尚书寄元相公诗曰：闷劝迂辛酒，闲吟短李诗。
现代文：因在见面对话时对他不够周到，便吟白居易寄给元稹的诗道：闷劝迂辛酒，闲吟短李诗。
English: Because he was not considerate enough when meeting and talking with him, he recited the poems that Bai Juyi sent to Yuan Xuan: he advised him not to drink too much wine, but to recite short poems.

古文：盖谓辛丘度性迂嗜酒，李绅短而能诗。
现代文：这当然是说辛丘度性子迂腐而嗜酒，李绅个子矮而会写诗，辛丘子就是辛丘度的儿子。
English: This, of course, is to say that Xinqiu Duoduo is a pedantic and alcoholic, while Li Sheng is short and can write poetry. Xinqiu Duoduo is the son of Xinqiu Duoduo.

古文：辛氏即丘度子也，谓李曰：小子每忆白二十二丈诗：闷劝畴昔酒，闲吟二十丈诗。
现代文：他又对李绅说：我每次能记住白居易二十二丈诗，闷了就互相劝饮昔日的陈酒，闲了就吟咏二十丈诗。
English: He also said to Li Sheng: Every time I can remember Bai Juyi's poem of 22 meters, when I am bored, I will advise each other to drink the old wine of the past, and when I am idle, I will sing a poem of 20 meters.

古文：李笑曰：辛大有此狂儿，吾敢不存旧矣。
现代文：李绅笑道：辛长兄有这样一个狂儿，我敢不与他保持老交情吗？
English: Li Shen laughed, "Elder Brother Xin has such a madman, do I dare not maintain an old friendship with him?

古文：凡是官族，相抉辛氏子之能忤诞。
现代文：凡是官宦之家，都挑剔氏子放荡不羁。
English: All the families of officials and eunuchs are picky about their clergymen and indulge in debauchery.

古文：丞相之受侮，刚肠暂屈乎。
现代文：丞相这次受辱，也只好使自己刚烈的性子暂时委屈一下了。
English: The chancellor was humiliated this time, and he had no choice but to make his strong-willed son temporarily feel aggrieved.

古文：自办五十里至罗州为招义郡。郡旁海，海有煮海场三。然郡民盗煮，亦不能禁。郡多蜜，洁白如雪。
现代文：胡淛
English: Hu Yao

古文：韦公干
现代文：韦公干
English: Wei Gonggan

古文：崔州东南四十里至琼山郡，太守统兵五百人，兼儋、崖、振、万、安五郡招讨使。
现代文：崔州东南四十里便是琼山郡，郡太守手下有五百士兵，太守还兼儋、崖、振、万、安五郡招讨史。
English: Forty miles southeast of Cui Prefecture is Qiongshan County. The county's grand marshal has five hundred soldiers under his command, and the grand marshal is also responsible for the history of the five counties of Yunnan, Jia, Zhen, Wan and An.

古文：凡五郡租赋，一供于招讨使。
现代文：凡五州收上来的田租赋税，都一起交给招讨使。
English: All the land rent and tax collected from the five prefectures were handed over to the recruiting officer.

古文：四郡之隶于琼，琼隶广海中。
现代文：其他四郡隶属于琼州，琼州则附属于广海中。
English: The other four counties belong to Qiongzhou, while Qiongzhou is attached to Guanghai.

古文：五州岁赋，廉使不得有一缗，悉以给琼。
现代文：五州每年收上来的赋税，廉使不能得一缗，全部交给琼州。
English: The taxes collected by the five prefectures every year are all handed over to Qiongzhou.

古文：军用军食，仍仰给于海北诸郡。
现代文：而军队给养，仍要依赖于海北各郡供给。
English: However, the supply of the army still depends on the supply of counties in northern China.

古文：每广州易帅，仍赐钱五十万以犒秩。
现代文：每当广州更换主帅，还要赏赐五十万钱用以犒劳军队。
English: Every time Guangzhou changes its manager, it also awards half a million yuan to reward the army.

古文：琼守虽海渚，岁得金钱，南边经略使不能及。
现代文：琼州郡守虽然只是管理着海岛中的一块地域，然而他每年得到的金钱，是南方的经略使也比不上的。
English: Although the county governor of Qiongzhou only administers one area of the island, the money he receives every year is incomparable to that of the southern economic envoy.

古文：郡守韦公干者，贪而且酷，掠良家子为臧获，如驱犬豕。
现代文：这个郡守就是韦公干。此人贪婪而残酷，抢掠良家子女作他的奴婢，对他们如同驱使猪狗一样。
English: This county magistrate is Wei Gonggan. This man is greedy and cruel, robbing the children of good families to be his slaves, and driving them like pigs and dogs.

古文：有女奴四百人，执业者太半，有织花缣文纱者、有伸角为器者、有镕锻金银者、有攻珍木为什具者。
现代文：他共有女奴四百人，其中大多数是为他做工，有织花缣文纱的，有把兽角拉直做成容器的，有冶炼锻造金银的，有把珍贵的木材加工成器具的，他的家简直像商贸集市一样。
English: He had a total of four hundred female slaves, most of whom worked for him. They wove flowers and embroidered yarns, straightened animal horns to make containers, smelted and forged gold and silver, and processed precious wood into utensils. His home was like a trade fair.

古文：其家如市，日考月课，唯恐不程。公干前为爱州刺史，境有马援铜柱，公干推镕，货与贾胡。土人不知伏波所铸，且谓神物，哭曰：使君果坏是，吾属为海神所杀矣。
现代文：对于这些做工的女奴们，每天每月都要考核，唯恐质量不合格，韦公干在这之前曾任爱州刺史，州属境内有一尊马拉铜柱的塑像，他想要把它推倒熔炼，卖给经商的城外胡人，当地人不知道这是汉朝时的一个伏波将军铸造的，认为它是神物，哭着求道：假如你真的要把它毁坏了，我的家族将都要被海神杀死啊！
English: For these female slaves who do the work, they have to be assessed every day and every month, lest the quality is not up to standard. Wei Gonggan had previously been the governor of Aizhou. There is a statue of a horse-drawn copper pillar in the state's territory. He wants to tear it down, melt it down, and sell it to Hu people outside the city who are in business. The locals do not know that this was cast by a Fubo general during the Han Dynasty. They think it is a god, crying and begging: If you really want to destroy it, my family will all be killed by the sea god!

古文：公干不听，百姓奔诉于都护韩约。约遗书责辱之，乃止。
现代文：韦公干不听，百姓便急忙去向都护韩约申诉，韩约写信斥责了他，才算停止。
English: Wei Gong did not listen, so the people hurried to complain to the capital's guardian Han You. Han You wrote a letter to reprimand him, and only then did he stop.

古文：既牧琼，多乌文呿陀，皆奇木也。公干驱木工沿海探伐，至有不中程以斤自刃者。
现代文：当了琼州刺史后，见这里生长着很多乌文和呿陀，这都是珍奇木种，韦公干便驱赶木工沿海去寻找砍伐，以至有的完不成任务或没伐到合格的木头而用斧子自杀的。
English: When the history of Qiongzhou was written, there were a lot of cedar and ginger trees growing here, which were all rare wood species. Wei Gong then drove the carpenters along the coast to look for felling, so that some could not complete the task or did not cut the qualified wood and committed suicide with an axe.

古文：前一岁，公干以韩约婿受代，命二大舟，一实乌文器杂以银，一实呿陀器杂为金，浮海东去。
现代文：前一年，韦公干的官职被韩约的女婿替代，他便命令两只大船，一只装满呿陀木做成的器具并混装着金子，漂海东去。
English: The previous year, when Wei Gonggan's official position was replaced by Han You's son-in-law, he ordered two large ships, one filled with equipment made of acacia wood and mixed with gold, to float east.

古文：且令健卒护行。
现代文：并命令强壮的士兵为他护航。
English: and ordered strong soldiers to escort him.

古文：将抵广，木既坚实，金且重，未数百里，二舟俱覆，不知几万万也。
现代文：将要到达广州时，大概是船上的器具木质坚硬细密，而且金子也很重，驶行不到几百里，两只船就全覆没了，损失的价值不知有几万万。
English: When they were about to arrive in Guangzhou, it was probably because the ship's equipment was made of hard, fine wood, and the gold was very heavy. Within a few hundred miles of sailing, the two ships were completely covered, and the value of the loss was unknown.

古文：书曰：货勃而入，亦勃而出。
现代文：有人写道：钱财不合情理地进来，也会不合情理地出去。
English: One wrote: "Money comes in irrationally and goes out irrationally.

古文：公干不道，残人以得货，竭夷獠之膏血以自厚，徒秽其名，曾不得少有其利。
现代文：韦公干不人道，是残害了别人而得到的钱财，是榨尽了当地土著人的膏血而养肥了自己，只能是白白地脏污了自己的名声，不能得到一点利益。
English: Wei Gong did inhumane things. He got money by killing others, and made himself rich by squeezing out the blood of the local aborigines. He can only tarnish his reputation in vain and cannot get any benefit.

古文：阴祸阴匿，苟脱人诛，将鬼得诛也。赵思绾
现代文：隐祸必然是隐藏的，即使他逃脱被人杀死，也将会被鬼杀死。赵思绾
English: The hidden evil is necessarily hidden, even if he escapes being killed by someone, he will also be killed by the ghost.

古文：贼臣赵思绾自倡乱至败，凡食人肝六十六。无非面剖而脍之，至食欲尽，犹宛转叫呼。
现代文：乱臣赵思绾从叛乱到失败，共吃人肝六十六个，而且没有不是当面把人肝剖出来切成小块，直到快吃干尽了，人还在凄厉地呼叫。
English: The ruffian minister Zhao Sijian ate a total of sixty-six human livers from rebellion to defeat, and he never dissected a human liver in front of his face and cut it into small pieces until it was almost dry, and people were still crying out desperately.

古文：而戮者人亦一二万。
现代文：而被他杀戮的人也有一两万。
English: And the people he killed numbered between one and twenty thousand.

古文：嗟呼！
现代文：啊！
English: Ah!

古文：倘非名所仗皇威而剿之，则孰能剪灭黔黎之猰狳？
现代文：假如不是名义上依仗皇威而将他剿除，那么有谁能够消灭这个平民百姓的猰狳呢？
English: If he is not removed by nominally relying on the authority of the emperor, then who can eliminate this tyranny of the common people?

古文：安道进
现代文：安道进
English: Ando Jin

古文：有安道进者，即故云州帅重霸季弟，阿东人也，性凶险。
现代文：安道进，是原云州主帅安重霸的最小的弟弟。河东人，性情十分凶险。
English: Ando Jin is the youngest brother of the former Yunnan coach An Chongba. He is from Hedong and has a very dangerous temper.

古文：庄宗潜龙时，为小校，常佩剑列于翊卫。
现代文：后唐庄宗没有登位时，他只是一名小校，常常佩剑排列于侍卫官中。
English: After the Tang Dynasty, when Zhuangzong did not ascend to the throne, he was only a minor official, and he was often in the ranks of the bodyguards with a sword.

古文：忽一日拔而玩之，谓人曰：此剑也，可以刜钟切玉，孰敢当吾锋芒。
现代文：有一天忽然拔出剑来玩弄。并对人说：这把剑，可以砍开钬钟切碎玉石，谁敢当场试它的锋利？
English: One day, he suddenly pulled out a sword to play with, and said to the people, "This sword can cut through a cuckoo clock and shatter jade. Who would dare to test its sharpness on the spot?"

古文：旁有一人曰：此又是何利器，妄此夸谭。
现代文：旁边有一个人道：你这是什么锋利的武器，竟然狂妄地说此大话？
English: Next to him is a human being: What kind of sharp weapon are you that you dare to say such a thing?

古文：假使吾引颈承之，安能快断乎？
现代文：假如我把脖子伸过来承接着，难道能一下子砍断吗？
English: If I stick my neck out and take it on, can it be cut off all at once?

古文：道进曰：真能引颈乎？
现代文：安道进道：你真能把脖子伸过来吗？
English: Ando Shindo: Can you really stick your neck out?

古文：此人以为戏言，乃引颈而前，遂一挥而断。旁人皆惊散。
现代文：这个人以为他只是说笑话，就把脖子伸到他跟前，于是他一挥剑把那人的脖子砍断，旁边的人全都惊慌失散。
English: Thinking he was joking, the man craned his neck toward him, and he swung his sword to sever the man's neck, sending everyone around him scattering in panic.

古文：道进携剑，日夜南驰，投于梁主。
现代文：安道进带上剑，日夜兼程地向南奔驰，投向了后梁的君主。
English: Ando Jin took up his sword and galloped southward day and night, throwing himself into the arms of the monarch.

古文：梁主壮之，俾隶淮之镇戍。
现代文：梁主见他很健壮，便让他去淮河一带戍守边界。
English: Master Liang saw that he was very strong, so he let him go to the Huaihe River area to guard the border.

古文：有掌庾吏，进谓曰：古人谓洞其七札为能，吾之铦镞，可彻其十札矣。
现代文：有一个掌管粮仓的官吏，安道进对他说：古人说能穿透七层札的箭头为上品，我的锋利的箭头，可以穿透十层札。
English: There was an official in charge of a granary. Ando Jin said to him, "The ancients said that an arrow that can pierce through seven layers of paper is superior. My sharp arrow can pierce through ten layers of paper."

古文：尔辈安知之？
现代文：你哪里懂得这些啊。
English: How do you know all this?

古文：吏轻之曰：使我开襟俟之，能彻吾腹乎？
现代文：那个官吏很轻蔑地说：假使我要敞开衣襟等在这里，你能用它穿过我的肚子吗？
English: The official said scornfully, "If I were to wait here with my collar open, could you pass it through my stomach?"

古文：安曰：试敢开襟否？
现代文：安道进说：你敢敞开衣襟试试吗？
English: Ando Jin said: Do you dare to try it with your shirt open?

古文：吏即开其襟，道进一发而殪之，利镟迳过，植于墙上。
现代文：那官吏真就敞开了怀，安道进一箭把他射死，锋利的箭头穿过他的肚子，插在墙上。
English: The official really opened his arms, and Ando Jin shot him dead with an arrow. The sharp arrow went through his stomach and stuck in the wall.

古文：安蓄一犬一婢，遂掣而南奔。
现代文：安道进平时蓄养着一只狗和一个婢女，于是又牵引着他们向南奔去。
English: Ando Jin usually kept a dog and a maid, so he dragged them to the south.

古文：昼则从于卢获中，夜则望星斗而窜。
现代文：白天纵横于芦苇中，夜晚就望着星斗辨别着方向而逃窜。
English: During the day, they lie vertically in the reeds, and at night, they look at the stars to discern the direction and escape.

古文：又时看眼中神光，光多处为利方，光少处为不利，既能伏气，遂绝粒。
现代文：同时又时常察看眼中的光亮，光色强的一边为有利方向，光色暗的一边为不利方向，这时就要抑制自己向这边行动。
English: At the same time, always look at the light in your eyes. The side with a strong light color is the favorable direction, and the side with a dark light color is the unfavorable direction. At this time, you must restrain yourself from moving in this direction.

古文：经时抵江湖间，左挈婢，右携犬，而辙浮渡，殊无所损。
现代文：他们终于断绝了粮食。不久便来到江湖之间，他左手提着婢女，右手牵着狗，顺着车辙渡水，竟无一丧生。
English: They finally ran out of food. Soon they came to a river valley. He carried his maid in his left hand and his dog in his right hand, and they followed the ruts across the water. None of them died.

古文：淮帅得之，擢为裨将。赐与甚丰。
现代文：淮南的主帅得到他，提升他为副将，对他赏赐也十分丰厚。
English: The coach of Huainan got him, promoted him to vice-captain, and rewarded him very richly.

古文：时兄重霸事蜀，亦为列校，闻弟在吴，乃告王。
现代文：当时他的哥哥安重霸正服务于蜀国已经是高级将领，听说他弟弟在吴地，便告诉了蜀王。
English: At that time, his brother An Chongba was serving in Shu and was already a high-ranking general. When he heard that his brother was in Wudi, he told the King of Shu.

古文：蜀主王嘉其意，发一介以请之。迨至蜀，亦为主将，后领兵戍于天水营长道县。
现代文：蜀王很赞成他的意思，派了一个人去请他，等安道进来到蜀国，也做了主将，后来率兵戍军于天水营长道县。
English: The king of Shu was very much in favor of his idea and sent a man to invite him. When Ando entered Shu, he also became the commander-in-chief. Later, he led the troops in Tianshui Battalion in Changdao County.

古文：重霸为招讨马步使，驻于秦亭县。
现代文：此时安重霸做了招讨马步使，驻守于秦亭县。
English: At this time, An Chongba invited Ma Buxu and stationed him in Qinting County.

古文：民有爱子，托之于安，命之曰厅子。
现代文：有一个百姓，将爱子托付给安道进，他给取名叫厅子。
English: There was a commoner who entrusted his beloved son to Ando Jin, and he named him Hall.

古文：道进适往户外，厅子偶经行于寝之前。安疑之，大怒，遂腰斩而投于井。
现代文：有一天安道进正好到屋外去。厅子偶然经过了他的卧室前面，他便对厅子生产了怀疑，于是大怒，竟然把厅子拦腰斩断并把尸首投到井里。
English: One day, Ando Jin happened to go outside. The hall happened to pass in front of his bedroom. He became suspicious of the hall, and in a rage, he cut the hall down and threw the body into the well.

古文：其家号诉于霸，传送招讨使王公。至于南梁，王公不忍加害，表救活之。
现代文：厅子家将此事哭诉于安重霸，安重霸把安道进转送给招讨使王公，王公又把他送到了后梁，王公不忍加害他，向梁王上表救了他一条活命。
English: The hall's son complained about this to An Chongba. An Chongba sent Ando Jin to the recruiting officer Wang Gong. Wang Gong sent him to Houliang. Wang Gong could not bear to harm him, and saved his life at the request of Liang Wang.

古文：及憾其元昆，又欲害其家族。兄家闲卜户防之。
现代文：后来他十分怨恨他的长兄，又想要杀害他大哥的全家，他大哥只好又以占卜的方式重新选择了住处并围了栅栏而防备他。
English: Later, he hated his elder brother so much that he wanted to kill his elder brother's entire family. His elder brother had to resort to divination to choose a new place to live and put up a fence to keep him out.

古文：蜀破，道进东归。明宗补为诸州马步军都指挥使。
现代文：后蜀灭亡后，安道进又东归后唐，后唐明宗任命他为诸州马步军都指挥使。
English: After the death of Shu, Ando Jin returned to the East and returned to the Tang Dynasty. After the Tang Dynasty, Emperor Mingzong appointed him as the commander and envoy of the Zhouzhou Horse Cavalry Army.

古文：后有过，鞭背卒。
现代文：后来又犯下罪过，被鞭打其背而死。
English: Later, he committed another crime and was whipped on his back and died.

