古文：窦婴字王孙，孝文皇后从兄子也。
现代文：窦婴，字王孙，是孝文皇后堂兄的儿子。
English: Dou Ying, also known as Wang Sun, was the son of a cousin of Empress Xiaowen.

古文：父世观津人也。喜宾客。
现代文：从他的父亲以上追溯，世代都居住在观津，喜欢宴请宾客。
English: From his father onward, generations of his family have lived in Guanzin, and he enjoys entertaining guests.

古文：孝文时为吴相，病免。
现代文：孝文皇帝的那时候，宝婴曾在吴国为相，后因病免官。
English: At the time of Emperor Xiaowen, Baojing had been the crown prince of the State of Wu, but was later dismissed due to illness.

古文：孝景即位，为詹事。
现代文：孝景皇帝即位，起用窦婴为詹事。
English: Emperor Xiao Jing ascended to the throne, and the appointment of Dou Yu was a major event.

古文：帝弟梁孝王，母窦太后爱之。
现代文：孝景皇帝的弟弟梁孝王，被他的母亲窦太后所宠爱。
English: Emperor Xiaojing's younger brother, Liang Xiaowang, was favored by his mother, Empress Dowager Dou.

古文：孝王朝，因燕昆弟饮。
现代文：有一次，梁孝王入朝，孝景皇帝和兄弟们一起饮酒。
English: Once, when Emperor Liang Xiao Wang was enthroned, Emperor Xiao Jing and his brothers were drinking together.

古文：是时，上未立太子，酒酣，上从容曰： 千秋万岁后传王。 
现代文：这个时候还没有立太子，当大家酒喝得差不多时，孝景帝从容地说： 我死之后把帝位传给梁王。 
English: At this time, there was no crown prince yet. When everyone had drunk about the same amount of wine, Emperor Xiaojing calmly said, "After my death, I will pass the imperial throne to King Liang."

古文：太后欢。
现代文：窦太后听了很高兴。
English: Empress Dowager Dou was very pleased to hear this.

古文：婴引卮酒进上曰： 天下者，高祖天下，父子相传，汉之约也，上何以得传梁王！ 
现代文：这时窦婴端了一杯酒献给皇上，说： 天下是高祖的天下，帝位应该父子相传，这本是汉代的法定约束，皇上怎么能传给梁王呢？ 
English: At this time, Dou Ying brought a glass of wine to the emperor and said: The world is the world of Gao Zu. The imperial throne should be passed down from father to son. This is a legal constraint of the Han Dynasty. How can the emperor pass it on to Liang Wang?

古文：太后由此憎婴。婴亦薄其官，因病免。
现代文：太后因此讨厌宝婴，窦婴也嫌詹事的官太小，后托病辞职。
English: As a result, the empress dowager disliked the precious baby, and the infant Dou also disliked that the official in charge was too young, and resigned after being taken ill.

古文：太后除婴门籍，不得朝请。
现代文：太后于是把准许窦婴出入宫禁的名籍除掉了，每逢节日，不准他进宫朝见。
English: The empress dowager then removed the name list that allowed Dou Ying to enter and leave the palace, and every festival, he was not allowed to enter the palace to see the morning.

古文：孝景三年，吴、楚反、上察宗室诸窦无如婴贤，召入见，固让谢，称病不足任。
现代文：孝景皇帝三年，吴国和楚国起兵叛乱，这时皇帝考察了一下，发现无论是刘姓宗室或窦姓诸人都没有像窦婴贤明，于是就征召窦婴，窦婴入见以后，坚决推辞，借口身体有病，不能担此重任。
English: In the third year of Emperor Xiaojing's reign, the armies of Wu and Chu revolted. At this time, the emperor inspected and found that no one, whether surnamed Liu or surnamed Dou, was as wise as Dou Ying, so he conscripted Dou Ying. After seeing Dou Ying, he resolutely refused to do so on the pretext that he was ill and could not take on such a heavy responsibility.

古文：太后亦惭。
现代文：太后至此也感到惭愧。
English: Empress Dowager Dou also felt ashamed.

古文：于是上曰： 天下方有急，王孙宁可以让邪？ 
现代文：皇上就说： 现在天下正有急难，王孙怎么可以推辞呢？ 
English: The emperor said, "Nowadays, the whole world is in dire straits. How can Wang Sun refuse?

古文：乃拜婴为大将军，赐金千斤。
现代文：于是拜窦婴为大将军，赏赐他千金。
English: As a result, he appointed Dou Ying as a general and rewarded him with a gold coin.

古文：婴言爰盎、栾布诸名将贤士在家者进之。
现代文：这时袁盎、乐布等名将贤士都退职在家，窦婴就向景帝推荐，起用他们。
English: At this time, Yuan Ang, Lo Bu and other famous sages were retired at home, and Dou Ying recommended them to Emperor Jing and appointed them.

古文：所赐金，陈廊庑下，军吏过，辄令财取为用，金无入家者。
现代文：窦婴把皇帝赐给他的金子都摆在廊下穿堂中，每当属下的军吏来谒见，他就叫他们酌量开销将金子拿去用，自己从没有把皇帝所赐的金子拿到私宅里去。
English: Dou Ying placed all the gold given to him by the emperor in the corridor leading through the hall. Whenever his subordinate military officials came to see him, he told them to take the gold and use it as they saw fit. He never took the gold given by the emperor to his private residence.

古文：婴守荥阳，监齐、赵兵。
现代文：窦婴坐镇荣阳，监护齐、赵两国的军队。
English: Dou Ying sits in the town of Rongyang, supervising the troops of the two countries.

古文：七国破，封为魏其侯。
现代文：等到七国的叛乱被平定后，就封窦婴为魏其侯。
English: After the rebellion in the Seven Kingdoms was quelled, Dou Jiao was crowned the Prince of Wei.

古文：游士宾客争归之。
现代文：这时许多游士和宾客都争相投奔魏其侯门下。
English: At this time, many wanderers and guests were rushing to join Wei Qihou.

古文：每朝议大事，条侯、魏其，列侯莫敢与亢礼。
现代文：每当孝景皇帝上朝和群臣商议大事，所有列侯都不敢同条侯、魏其侯平礼相待。
English: Whenever Emperor Xiaojing went to court and discussed important matters with his vassals, all vassals would not dare to treat him with the same courtesy.

古文：四年，立栗太子，以婴为傅。
现代文：孝景皇帝四年，立栗太子，命魏其侯做太子的老师。
English: In the fourth year of the reign of Emperor Xiao Jing, the crown prince of Guizhou was appointed, and Wei Qihong was ordered to be the prince's teacher.

古文：七年，栗太子废，婴争弗能得，谢病，屏居蓝田南山下数月，诸窦宾客辩士说，莫能来。
现代文：孝景皇帝七年，栗太子被废，魏其侯屡次为栗太子争辩，都无结果。魏其侯就称病不朝，在蓝田南山下闲居了好几个月，窦姓诸人和许多宾客、辩士请他出山，他都不愿意出来。
English: In the seventh year of Emperor Xiaojing, the crown prince was abolished, and Wei Qihong repeatedly argued for the crown prince, with no result. Wei Qihong said that he was ill and idled for several months under the South Mountain of Lantian. Many people with the surname Dou and many guests and debaters invited him to go out of the mountain, but he did not want to come out.

古文：梁人高遂乃说婴曰： 能富贵将军者，上也；能亲将军者，太后也。
现代文：梁国人直遂就对宾婴说： 能使您富贵的是皇上，能使您成为朝廷亲信的是太后。
English: Liang Guozhong immediately said to the guest: It is the emperor who can make you rich, and it is the empress dowager who can make you a close friend of the imperial court.

古文：今将军傅太子，太子废，争不能拔，又不能死，自引谢病，拥赵女屏闲处而不朝，只加怼自明，扬主之过。
现代文：现在将军作太子的师傅，太子被废不能力争，力争不得又不能死，自己托病引退，拥着歌姬美女，闲居在南山而不肯入京朝见。
English: Now the general is the prince's master, the prince is dethroned and unable to fight, he has no choice but to fight and cannot die, he resigns himself to illness, embraces the beautiful singer, lives idly in Nanshan and refuses to go to the imperial court in Beijing.

古文：有如两宫奭将军，则妻子无类矣。 
现代文：这些情况比照起来看，显然是您在暴露皇帝的过失。
English: In the light of these circumstances, it is clear that you are exposing the emperor's fault.

古文：婴然之，乃起，朝请如故。
现代文：万一皇上和太后都对您不满而要加害于您，那您连妻子儿女就都会被杀戮，全家一个不剩。 
English: In the unlikely event that both the emperor and the empress dowager are dissatisfied with you and want to harm you, then your wife and children will be killed, and your entire family will be gone.

古文：桃侯免相，窦太后数言魏其。
现代文：窦婴认为他说的很对，便复行上任，上朝觐见皇帝如故。
English: Dou Ying thought that what he said was right, so he resumed his duties and went to the imperial court to see the emperor.

古文：景帝曰： 太后岂以臣有爱相魏其者？
现代文：当桃侯中途被免去相位时，窦太后屡次推荐魏其侯当丞相。孝景皇帝说： 太后难道以为我有所吝惜，不让魏其侯做丞相？
English: When Tao Hou was relieved of his position, Empress Dowager Dou repeatedly recommended Wei Qihou to be the prime minister. Emperor Xiao Jing said: Did the Empress Dowager think I was being stingy by not allowing Wei Qihou to be the prime minister?

古文：魏其沾沾自喜耳，多易，难以为相持重。 
现代文：魏其侯这个人骄傲自满，做事往往轻率随便，很难让他作丞相，担当重任。 
English: Wei Qihong was a proud and self-satisfied man, who often did things carelessly. It was difficult for him to serve as chancellor and take on important responsibilities.

古文：遂不用，用建陵侯卫绾为丞相。
现代文：最终没有任用他，而用建陵侯卫绾做丞相。
English: In the end, he was not appointed, but Jianling Hou Weimin was appointed as chancellor.

古文：田蚡，孝景王皇后同母弟也，生长陵。
现代文：田蚡是孝景皇帝王皇后的同母弟，生在长陵。
English: Tian Yao was the younger brother of Emperor Xiao Jing's mother, the Empress Dowager Wang, and was born in Changling.

古文：窦婴已为大将军，方盛，蚡为诸曹郎，未贵，往来侍酒婴所，跪起如子姓。
现代文：窦婴当大将军以后，正当盛时，田蚡这时是个郎官，还没有显贵，往来于窦婴的家中，陪侍宜婴饮酒，时跪时起，好像是窦家的晚辈一样。
English: After Dou Ying served as general, when he was in his prime, Tian Xuan, who was a vassal and not yet a dignitary, went back and forth to Dou Ying's home, drinking alcohol with Dou Ying and kneeling down from time to time, as if he were the younger generation of the Dou family.

古文：及孝景晚节，蚡益贵幸，为中大夫。
现代文：到了孝景皇帝的晚年，旦验愈来愈贵幸，作了中大夫。
English: In the later years of Emperor Xiaojing, Dangxuan became more and more honored and became a middle doctor.

古文：辩有口，学《盘盂》诸书，王皇后贤之。
现代文：田蚡文才很好，学过《盘盂》之类的一些古书，王皇后认为他很有才。
English: Tian Qianwen is a very good writer. He has studied some ancient books such as "Pan Xuan" and Queen Wang thinks he is very talented.

古文：孝景崩，武帝初即位，蚡以舅封为武安侯，弟胜为周阳侯。
现代文：孝景皇帝驾崩，武帝刘彻刚刚即位，田蚡以舅父的身份被封为武安侯，田蚡的弟弟田胜被封为周阳侯。
English: Emperor Xiao Jing passed away, Emperor Wu Liu Che had just ascended to the throne, Tian Yao was named Wu An Hou as his uncle, and Tian Yao's brother Tian Sheng was named Zhou Yang Hou.

古文：蚡新用事，卑下宾客，进名士家居者贵之，欲以倾诸将相。
现代文：田蚡刚掌握大权，对他的门客非常谦卑，并且引进门客中未出仕的那些人过去，使他们出来作官，想因此而压倒朝廷中将相们的势力。
English: Tian Yinggang, who had just seized power, was very humble to his concubines, and brought in those of his concubines who had not served to make them officials, hoping to thereby overwhelm the power of the imperial generals.

古文：上所填抚，多蚡宾客计策。
现代文：皇上对当时政局有所镇抚的事，大多由田蚡的宾客所筹划。
English: Most of the Emperor's attempts to calm the political situation at the time were planned by the guests at Tianyu.

古文：会丞相绾病免，上议置丞相、太尉。
现代文：适逢丞相卫绾因病免职，皇上商量着要设丞相和太尉。
English: The Emperor was considering appointing a chancellor and a second lieutenant when the chancellor, Morihiro Moriyama, was removed from office due to illness.

古文：藉福说蚡曰： 魏其侯贵久矣，素天下士归之。
现代文：藉福游说田蚡说： 魏其侯显贵已经很久了，天下的人才一向归附他；将军您刚刚贵盛，不能和魏其侯相比。
English: With the help of fortune lobbying, Tian Qi said: Wei Qihou has been distinguished for a long time, and people all over the world have always been attached to him; General, you have just been distinguished, and cannot be compared with Wei Qihou.

古文：今将军初兴，未如，即上以将军为相，必让魏其。
现代文：即使皇上有意用将军为丞相，将军一定要把相位让给魏其侯。
English: Even if the emperor intended to use the general as chancellor, the general must give the position to Wei Qihong.

古文：魏其为相，将军必为太尉。
现代文：魏其侯当了丞相，将军一定会做太尉。
English: Wei Qihou became the prime minister, and the general will definitely become the first lieutenant.

古文：太尉、相尊等耳，有让贤名。 
现代文：太尉和丞相的尊贵地位程度是一样的，将军既得了太尉，又有了让相位给贤者的好名声。 
English: The captain and the prime minister have the same degree of honorific status, and the general has both the captain and the good reputation of giving way to the wise.

古文：蚡乃微言太后风上，于是乃以婴为丞相，蚡为太尉。
现代文：田蚡便私自向太后透露心事，请太后向皇上暗示，于是以窦婴为丞相，田蚡作太尉。
English: Tanabe revealed his thoughts to the empress dowager and asked the empress dowager to hint to the emperor, so Dou Ying served as chancellor and Tanabe as second lieutenant.

古文：藉福贺婴，因吊曰： 君侯资性喜善疾恶，方今善人誉君侯，故至丞相；然恶人众，亦且毁君侯。
现代文：藉福向窦婴道贺，顺便规劝他说： 君侯的本性是喜善而嫉恶，如今善人称道君侯，所以君侯能做到丞相。但是恶人很多，他们也会毁谤君侯的。
English: Taking advantage of the blessing, he congratulated Dou Ying and, by the way, advised him: The nature of princes is good and evil. Nowadays, good people are called princes, so princes can become prime ministers. However, there are many evil people, and they will also slander princes.

古文：君侯能兼容，则幸久；不能，今以毁去矣。 
现代文：如果君侯对善人和恶人都能宽容些，那么君侯的相位就可望维持长久；不然的话，马上就会受到毁谤而离职。 
English: If you can accommodate both the good and the bad, then your position as prime minister can be maintained for a long time; if you can't do that, you will immediately be slandered and leave office.

古文：婴不听。
现代文：窦婴不听从他的话。
English: Dou Ying did not listen to him.

古文：婴、蚡俱好儒术，推毂赵绾为御史大夫，王臧为郎中令。
现代文：窦婴和田蚡都喜好儒术，因此推举赵绾为御史大夫，王臧为郎中令。
English: Dou Ying and Tian Yao were both fond of Confucianism, so Zhao Yao was elected as the imperial historian, and Wang Yao as the second-in-command.

古文：迎鲁申公，欲设明堂，令列侯就国，除关，以礼为服制，以兴太平。
现代文：把鲁国的申公迎到京师来，准备设立明堂。让诸侯回到他们各自的封地去，取消关禁，按照古礼规定制服，用以表明太平气象。
English: He welcomed the Lu people to Beijing, prepared to set up a Ming hall, ordered the feudal lords to return to their fiefs, abolished the ban, and in accordance with the etiquette to stipulate the clothing and system of auspicious and inauspicious, in order to show the peaceful weather.

古文：举谪诸窦宗室无行者，除其属籍。
现代文：并且检举诸窦和宗室的子孙，凡是品行不端的，一律从宗谱上除籍。
English: Moreover, the descendants of Zhu Dou and his family were reported to the authorities. Anyone who misbehaved would be removed from the genealogy.

古文：诸外家为列侯，列侯多尚公主，皆不欲就国，以故毁日至窦太后。
现代文：这时诸外戚的列侯，多娶公主为妻，都不愿意回到他们的封地去，因此诽谤窦婴等人的言语天天传到窦太后的耳中。
English: At this time, most of the foreign princes who had married princesses did not want to return to their fiefs, so the words slandering Dou Ying and others reached the ears of Dowager Dou every day.

古文：太后好黄、老言，而婴、蚡、赵绾等务隆推儒术，贬道家言，是以窦太后滋不说。
现代文：太后爱好的是黄老学术，可是窦婴、田蚡、赵绾等人却一意地推尊儒术，贬低道家学说，因此窦太后就对窦婴等人愈来愈不满意。
English: The empress dowager was fond of Huanglao scholarship, but Dou Ying, Tian Xuan, Zhao Xuan and others consistently promoted Confucianism and disparaged Taoism, so the empress dowager was increasingly dissatisfied with Dou Ying and others.

古文：二年，御史大夫赵绾请毋奏事东宫。
现代文：建元二年，御史大夫赵绾不想让太后继续干预政事，所以请求皇上今后不必对太后奏事。
English: In the second year of the first century, the imperial historian Zhao Wei did not want the empress dowager to continue to interfere in political affairs, so he asked the emperor not to report to the empress dowager in the future.

古文：窦太后大怒，曰： 此欲复为新垣平邪！ 
现代文：窦太后知道后大怒，说： 这是想重演新垣平的伎俩吗！ 
English: Empress Dowager Dou was furious when she found out and said, "Is this an attempt to repeat Arakakidaira's trick?

古文：乃罢逐赵绾、王臧，而免丞相婴、太尉蚡，以柏至侯许昌为丞相，武强侯庄青翟为御史大夫。
现代文：于是就将赵绾、王臧等人罢免驱逐，并且免去窦婴的相职和田蚡的太尉职务。另外任用柏至侯许昌为丞相，武彊侯庄青翟为御史大夫。
English: As a result, he dismissed and expelled Zhao Qi, Wang Qi and others, and removed Dou Ying from the position of chief adviser and Tian Qi from the position of captain. In addition, he appointed Baoji Hou Xuchang as chancellor, and Wuyi Hou Zhuang Qingqi as chief historian.

古文：婴、蚡以侯家居。
现代文：从此以后，窦婴和田蚡只以侯的身份在家闲居。
English: Since then, Dou Ying and Tian Yao have only been idling at home as marital partners.

古文：蚡虽不任职，以王太后故亲幸，数言事，多效，士吏趋势利者皆去婴而归蚡。
现代文：武安侯田蚡虽然不担任官职，但因为王太后的关系，仍然受到皇上的宠幸，屡次议论政事，大多数被采纳而生效，那些趋炎附势的官吏和士人，都离开了魏其侯窦婴，而归附田蚡。
English: Although he did not hold an official position, Wuan Hou Tien Ho was still favored by the emperor because of his relationship with the empress dowager. He discussed political affairs many times, and most of them were adopted and came into effect. Those officials and nobles who became powerful left Wei Hou Dou Yu and joined Tien Ho.

古文：蚡日益横。
现代文：于是武安侯一天比一天骄横。
English: As a result, Buan Hou became more and more arrogant day by day.

古文：六年，窦太后崩，丞相昌、御史大夫青翟坐丧事不办，免。
现代文：建元六年，窦太后去世，丞相许昌、御史大夫庄青翟因为没把丧事办好，被免去官职。
English: In the sixth year of Jianyuan, Empress Dowager Dou passed away, and the chancellor Xu Chang and the imperial historian Zhuang Qingyao were removed from their official posts for not handling the funeral well.

古文：上以蚡为丞相，大司农韩安国为御史大夫。
现代文：皇上于是任用田蚡为丞相，任命大司农韩安国为御史大夫。
English: The emperor then appointed Tanabe as chancellor, and appointed the grand secretary of agriculture, Hanankoku, as goshi taifu.

古文：天下士郡诸侯愈益附蚡。
现代文：于是天下的士人，郡国的官吏和诸侯王，更加依附武安侯田蚡了。
English: As a result, the nobles of the world, the officials of the county and the princes, became more dependent on Wu'an.

古文：蚡为人貌侵，生贵甚。
现代文：田蚡相貌丑陋，生性自视甚为尊贵。
English: Tian Xuan looks ugly, but by nature he considers himself to be very noble.

古文：又以为诸侯王多长，上初即位，富于春秋，蚡以肺附为相，非痛折节以礼屈之，天下不肃。
现代文：他认为当时的诸侯王都比较年长，皇帝刚刚即位，年纪很轻，田蚡自己以皇帝的至亲身为丞相，如果不彻底地整顿一番，用礼法来约束他们，天下人是不会服贴的。
English: He thought that the princes and kings at that time were relatively older, the emperor had just ascended the throne and was very young, and Tian Xuan himself took the emperor himself as the prime minister. If they did not thoroughly rectify and use etiquette to restrain them, the people of the world would not submit.

古文：当是时，丞相入奏事，语移日，所言皆听。
现代文：在那个时候，丞相入内奏事，往往一坐就是大半天，他所提的意见皇上一概接受。
English: At that time, when the prime minister entered the palace to deliver a report, he often spent half a day in one sitting, and the emperor accepted all the opinions he proposed.

古文：荐人或起家至二千石，权移主上。
现代文：他所推荐的人，有的一起家就到二千石的职位，权力几乎超过了皇上。
English: Some of the people he recommended rose to positions of up to 2,000 koku, and their power almost exceeded that of the emperor.

古文：上乃曰： 君除吏尽未？
现代文：皇上于是说： 你要任用的人任用完了没有？
English: The emperor then said: Have you already appointed all the people you want to appoint?

古文：吾亦欲除吏。 
现代文：我也想任用几个人呢！ 
English: I would also like to appoint a few officials.

古文：尝请考工地益宅，上怒曰： 遂取武库！ 
现代文：有一回，他向皇上请求拨划考工室的官地供他扩建私宅之用，皇上大怒，对他说： 你何不把我的武库也一齐取走呢？ 
English: On one occasion, he asked the emperor to allocate the official site of the examination workshop for him to expand his private home. The emperor was furious and said to him: Why don't you take away my arsenal as well?

古文：是后乃退。
现代文：这次以后，他才收敛了一些。
English: After this, he calmed down a bit.

古文：召客饮，坐其兄盖侯北乡，自坐东乡，以为汉相尊，不可以兄故私桡。
现代文：有一回，他请客人宴饮，让他的兄长盖侯面向北坐，他自己却向东坐，认为汉朝的丞相尊贵，不能因为是自己的兄长就私下委屈自己。
English: On one occasion, he invited guests to a banquet and asked his brother Gaehong to sit facing north, while he himself sat facing east. He believed that the prime ministers of the Han Dynasty were honorable, and that he could not secretly wrong himself because he was his brother.

古文：由此滋骄，治宅甲诸第，田园极膏腴，市买郡县器物相属于道。
现代文：从此以后，武安侯田蚡更加骄矜，他所修建的住宅极尽华丽雄壮，超过了所有贵族的宅第。他的田地庄园都是极其肥沃的，他派到郡县去收买名贵器物的人，在道路上络绎不绝。
English: From then on, Wu'an Hou Tianyao became more and more arrogant. The residences he built were extremely gorgeous and majestic, surpassing the residences of all aristocrats. His fields and estates were extremely fertile. The people he sent to counties and counties to buy precious objects were incessantly on the road.

古文：前堂罗钟鼓，立曲旃；后房妇女以百数。
现代文：前堂摆设着钟鼓，树立着曲旃，后房的妇女多至百数。
English: The vestibule is decorated with bells and drums, and there are musical cymbals. There are as many as a hundred women in the back room.

古文：诸奏珍物狗马玩好，不可胜数。
现代文：诸侯奉送给他的珍宝、狗马及古玩陈设等，数都数不清。
English: Countless treasures, dogs, horses and antique furnishings were given to him by the lords.

古文：而婴失窦太后，益疏不用，无势，诸公稍自引而怠骜，唯灌夫独否。
现代文：与田蚡相反，魏其侯窦婴自从窦太后去世以后，更加被疏远，不受重用，没有权势，诸宾客渐渐自引而退，甚至对窦婴态度傲慢，惟独灌夫对他还是老样子。
English: Contrary to Tian Qi, since the death of Empress Dowager Dou, Wei Qihou Dou Yu has been further alienated, not reused, and has no power. The guests have gradually withdrawn, and even have a haughty attitude towards Dou Yu, but Guanfu is still the same to him.

古文：故婴墨墨不得意，而厚遇夫也。灌夫字仲孺，颍阴人也。
现代文：窦婴每天心中闷闷不乐，惟独对于灌夫感情特别好。灌夫，字仲孺，颖阴人。
English: Dou Yu's heart is gloomy and unhappy every day, but his feelings for Gan Fu are particularly good. Gan Fu, Zhaozhong Yao, Ying Yin Ren.

古文：父张孟，尝为颍阴侯灌婴舍人，得幸，因进之，至二千石，故蒙灌氏姓为灌孟。
现代文：他的父亲是张孟，曾经当过颍阴侯灌婴的舍人，很受宠幸，因此推举他，官至二千石，所以冒了灌氏的姓，改名灌孟。
English: His father was Zhang Meng, who had once been the son-in-law of Gongyin Hou Guan Meng, and was very favored, so he was promoted to the position of two thousand, so he took the surname of Guan and changed his name to Guan Meng.

古文：吴、楚反时，颍阴侯灌婴为将军，属太尉，请孟为校尉。
现代文：吴、楚两国造时，颖阴侯灌婴为将军，隶属于太尉周亚夫的部下，向太尉举荐灌孟为校尉。
English: When the two countries of Wu and Chu were founded, Yingyin Hou Guanzhong was a general, subordinate to the subordinates of Captain Zhou Yafu, and recommended Captain Guan Meng as a lieutenant to the captain.

古文：夫以千人与父俱。
现代文：灌夫也带了一千人跟他父亲在一起。
English: Kanfu led a thousand people to join the army with his father.

古文：孟年老，颍阴侯强请之，郁郁不得意，故战常陷坚，遂死吴军中。
现代文：当时灌孟已经年纪很大，太尉本来不想用他，由于颖阴侯坚决推举，才答应让灌孟作校尉，因此灌孟郁郁不得志，每逢作战时，常冲陷敌军的坚强之处，因而战死在吴国军中。
English: At that time, Guan Meng was already very old. The captain originally did not want to use him, but because Ying Yin Hou firmly recommended him, he only agreed to let Guan Meng be a captain. Therefore, Guan Meng was discouraged. Whenever there was a battle, he often rushed into the strong points of the enemy army, so he died in the Wu Army.

古文：汉法，父子俱，有死事，得与丧归，夫不肯随丧归。
现代文：按照当时汉朝的军法规定：凡是父子都从军的，如有因战事牺牲的人，未死者可以护送遣骸还乡。
English: According to the provisions of the military law of the Han Dynasty at that time: if both father and son are in the army, if there are people who died in the war, the undead can escort the remains back to their hometown.

古文：奋曰： 愿取吴王若将军头以报父仇！ 
现代文：但是灌夫不肯这样做，他慷慨激昂地说： 我愿意斩取吴王或吴国将军的头，以替我父亲报仇。 
English: But Ganfu refused to do so. He said passionately, "I am willing to cut off the head of King Wu or General Wu to avenge my father."

古文：于是夫被甲持戟，募军中壮士所善愿从数十人。及出壁门，莫敢前。独两人及从奴十余骑驰入吴军，至戏下，所杀伤数十人。
现代文：于是灌夫披着战甲，持着戈戟，招募军中同他友好愿意跟他同去的壮士几十人，等到走出了军营的门户，没有人敢再前进，衹有两人和灌夫腊下的奴隶十余骑迅速地冲入了吴军，一直攻到吴军的将旗之下，所杀伤的有几十人之多。
English: So Guanfu, wearing battle armor and holding a palanquin, recruited dozens of soldiers from the army who were friendly with him and willing to go with him. When they walked out of the gate of the military camp, no one dared to advance any further. Only two people and more than ten slaves under Guanfu's command quickly rushed into the Wu army and attacked all the way to the flag of the Wu army. Dozens of people were killed and injured.

古文：不得前，复还走汉壁，亡其奴，独与一骑归。
现代文：因为再无法向前进攻，便奔回到汉军的营地，他所带出去的从奴都战死了，衹有他和一个骑士归来。
English: As he could not advance any further, he ran back to the Chinese camp. All the vassals he had taken with him died in the battle, and only he and one knight returned.

古文：夫身中大创十余，适有万金良药，故得无死。
现代文：灌夫身上所受的重伤有十多处，恰好有贵重的良药把创伤治好，所以才能不死。
English: There are more than ten serious injuries on the body of the man, and it just so happens that there is a valuable good medicine to cure the trauma, so he can not die.

古文：创少瘳，又复请将军曰： 吾益知吴壁曲折，请复往。 
现代文：灌夫身上的伤稍稍痊愈，又向将军请求说： 我现在更加了解吴国营垒中的路径曲折，请准许我再前往。 
English: After his wounds had healed a little, he pleaded with the general, "I now have a better understanding of the twists and turns of the path in the Wuzhong camp, please allow me to go there again."

古文：将军壮而义之，恐亡夫，乃言太尉，太尉召固止之。
现代文：将军对灌夫的勇气很钦佩，对他的行为也很同情，深恐灌夫再去性命有危险，就向太尉报告，太尉于是坚决地阻止他，不让他去。
English: The general admired Guanfu's courage and sympathized with his actions. Fearing that Guanfu's life would be in danger if he went any further, he reported to the captain. The captain then resolutely stopped him from going.

古文：吴军破，夫以此名闻天下。
现代文：等到吴军破灭，灌夫也闻名天下。
English: By the time the Wu army was destroyed, Ganfu was famous all over the world.

古文：颍阴侯言夫，夫为郎中将。
现代文：颖阴侯把灌夫的情形向皇上报告了，皇上就任灌夫为郎中将。
English: Ying Yin Hou reported the situation of Ganfu to the emperor, and the emperor appointed Ganfu as his lieutenant general.

古文：数岁，坐法去，家居长安中，诸公莫不称，由是复为代相。
现代文：过了几年，因为犯法丢官。灌夫家在长安，京师裹的许多显贵没有不称赞他的，因此后来又官至代相。
English: A few years later, because of breaking the law, he lost his position. The Kanfu family was in Chang'an, and many dignitaries in Beijing did not fail to praise him, so he later became a minister.

古文：武帝即位，以为淮阳天下郊，劲兵处，故徙夫为淮阳太守。
现代文：汉武帝即位，认为淮阳郡是天下交通辐射之处，必须驻扎强大的兵力加以防守，因此调任灌夫为淮阳太守。
English: When Emperor Hanwu ascended to the throne, he thought that Huaiyang County was a place where the world's traffic radiated, and it was necessary to station a strong military force to defend it. Therefore, he transferred Guanfu to Huaiyang.

古文：人为太仆。
现代文：建元元年内调为太仆。
English: He was promoted to Taibu in the first year of the Kengen era.

古文：二年，夫与长乐卫尉窦甫饮，轻重不得，夫醉，搏甫。
现代文：建元二年，灌夫与长乐卫尉窦甫一同吃酒，发生争执，当时灌夫已经酒醉，就出手打窦甫。
English: In the second year, Ganfu had a drink with Changle Guardsman Dou Fu. Ganfu got drunk and hit Dou Fu.

古文：甫，窦太后昆弟。上恐太后诛夫，徙夫为燕相。
现代文：窦甫本是窦太后的兄弟，皇上恐怕太后杀灌夫，把他调为燕相。
English: Dou Fu was originally the brother of the Dowager Dou, but the Emperor feared that the Dowager would kill Guan Fu and change him to Yan Xuan.

古文：数岁，坐法免，家居长安。
现代文：几年以后，又因犯法丢官，闲居在长安家中。
English: A few years later, he was dismissed from his post for violating the law, and lived idly at home in Chang'an.

古文：夫为人刚直，使酒，不好面谀。
现代文：灌夫为人刚直，好藉酒使气，不喜欢当面阿谀他人。
English: Kanfu is a straightforward person, easily angered by alcohol, and doesn't like to scold others in person.

古文：贵戚诸势在己之右，欲必陵之；士在己左，愈贫贱，尤益礼敬，与钧。
现代文：凡是贵戚或一般有势力人士地位在灌夫之上的，他不但不肯向他们表示敬礼，并且要想办法侮辱他们；一般士人在他之下的，愈是贫贱，灌夫愈是对他们恭敬，以平等的礼节对待他们。
English: If any nobles, or persons of influence in general, were above him, he would not only refuse to salute them, but would try to insult them; if any common people were below him, the poorer they were, the more respectfully he would treat them, and treat them with equal courtesy.

古文：稠人广众，荐宠下辈。士亦以此多之。
现代文：在人多的场合，灌夫对于地位低下的后进总是推荐夸奖，因此，一般人都很称赞他。
English: On crowded occasions, the potter always recommends praise for the low-ranking backward, so the general public praises him very much.

古文：夫不好文学，喜任侠，已然诺。
现代文：灌夫不喜欢学问，却爱好侠义，答应人家的事一定做到。
English: Ganfu does not like learning, but he loves chivalry and promises to do things for others.

古文：诸所与交通，无非豪桀大猾。
现代文：那些和他相交往的人，无非是豪杰、侠客或大奸巨猾。
English: All those with whom he associated were men of distinction or great cunning.

古文：家累数千万，食客日数十百人。
现代文：他家中的资产有几千万，每天的食客少则数十，多则近百。
English: His family has accumulated tens of millions in assets, with daily diners ranging from a few dozen to nearly a hundred.

古文：波池田园，宗族宾客为权利，横颍川。
现代文：他在田园中筑陂蓄水，以兴灌溉之利，为了垄断水利田地，灌夫的宗族宾客往往争权夺利，在颖川一带横行无忌。
English: In order to monopolize the water conservancy fields, the family guests of the irrigation man often compete for power and profit, and they are rampant in the Yingchuan area.

古文：颍川儿歌之曰： 颍水清，灌氏宁；颍水浊，灌氏族。 
现代文：所以颍川的小孩子便作歌道： 颖水澄清，灌氏安宁；颖水污浊，灌氏灭族。 
English: Therefore, the children of Lugu River made a song: Yingshui clarifies, Guanxi tranquilizes; Yingshui pollutes, Guanxi exterminates.

古文：夫家居，卿相侍中宾客益衰。
现代文：灌夫家中虽然富有，但是失去权势，于是卿相、侍中及那些一向为灌夫宾客的人，都逐渐同他疏远了。
English: Although Kanfu's family was wealthy, it had lost its power, and the chief minister, chamberlains, and those who had always been Kanfu's guests gradually distanced themselves from him.

古文：及窦婴失势，亦欲倚夫引绳排根生平慕之后弃者。夫亦得婴通列侯宗室为名高。
现代文：等到窦婴失势，也想倚靠灌夫去同那些趋炎附势的人算账，而灌夫也想利用窦婴的关系交结那些列侯和宗室们，以提高身价。
English: When Dou Ying lost power, he also wanted to rely on Guan Fu to settle accounts with those who had become powerful, and Guan Fu also wanted to use Dou Ying's relationship to make contact with those vassals and family members in order to raise his status.

古文：两人相为引重，其游如父子然，相得欢甚，无厌，恨相知之晚。
现代文：所以两人互相推重援引，过从亲密得如父子一般。两人极为投契，毫不嫌忌，只恨相知太晚了。
English: That's why the two of them pushed and pulled each other, and became as close as father and son. The two of them were extremely committed, without any misgivings, they just hated getting to know each other too late.

古文：夫尝有服，过丞相蚡。
现代文：灌夫的姐姐去世，灌夫在服丧期内去拜访丞相田蚡。
English: Kanfu's sister passed away, and during the period of mourning, Kanfu went to visit the prime minister, Tanaka.

古文：蚡从容曰： 吾欲与仲孺过魏其侯，会仲孺有服。 
现代文：丞相从容地说： 我想和你一同去拜访魏其侯，恰值你在服丧期间，不方便前往。 
English: The prime minister said calmly, "I want to visit Wei Qihou with you. It is convenient for you to visit during the mourning period.

古文：夫曰： 将军乃肯幸临况魏其侯，夫安敢以服为解！
现代文：灌夫说： 将军居然肯屈驾光临魏其侯的家，我怎敢因服丧推辞呢？
English: Guan Fu said, "The general was actually willing to visit Wei Ji Hou's home. How dare I refuse to accept his resignation?

古文：请语魏其具，将军旦日蚤临。 
现代文：让我去通知魏其侯，让他准备酒食，请您明日早点光临。 
English: Let me go and tell Wei Qihong to prepare the food and drink. Please come early tomorrow.

古文：蚡许诺。
现代文：田蚡于是就答应了。
English: Tanabe then agreed.

古文：夫以语婴。婴与夫人益市牛酒，夜洒扫张具至旦。
现代文：灌夫就把与丞相相约的详情告诉了魏其侯宝婴。窦婴和他的夫人便特地多买了肉和酒，夜里就起来打扫，准备酒食，一直忙到天明。
English: Kanfu told Wei Qihou Baoying the details of the appointment with the prime minister. Dou Ying and his wife bought more meat and wine, got up at night to clean and prepare food and wine, and were busy until dawn.

古文：平明，令门下侯司。
现代文：天刚亮，就叫门下的人在宅前伺候。
English: As soon as it was light, he called his servants to wait in front of the house.

古文：至日中，蚡不来。
现代文：但是到了中午，丞相田蚡还是没来。
English: But by midday, the prime minister, Tanaka, still had not arrived.

古文：婴谓夫曰： 丞相岂忘之哉？ 
现代文：窦婴就对灌夫说： 丞相难道忘记了吗？ 
English: Dou Ying said to Guan Fu, "Has the prime minister forgotten?"

古文：夫不怿，曰： 夫以服请，不宜。 
现代文：灌夫很不高兴，说： 我不嫌在服丧期间请他践约，他自己应该前来才对，不当忘记。 
English: The widower was very unhappy and said, "I don't like to ask him to fulfill the contract during the mourning period. He should have come himself. It's not right to forget."

古文：乃驾，自往迎蚡。
现代文：于是灌夫就驾了车，亲自前往迎接丞相。
English: So Kanfu drove his car and went to meet the prime minister in person.

古文：蚡特前戏许夫，殊无意往。
现代文：丞相田蚡前一天不过是顺口答应了灌夫，实在没有打算真去赴宴。
English: The day before, the Minister of Justice, Tanaka, had only casually agreed to the banquet, but had no intention of actually going to the banquet.

古文：夫至门，蚡尚卧也。
现代文：等到灌夫前来，丞相还在高卧。
English: By the time the bailiff arrived, the prime minister was still lying on his back.

古文：于是夫见，曰： 将军昨日幸许过魏其，魏其夫妻治县，至今未敢尝食。 
现代文：于是灌夫进去见他，说： 将军昨天幸蒙答应去拜访魏其侯。魏其侯夫妻办了酒食，从一早到现在，都没有敢吃一点呢！ 
English: So the bailiff went in to see him and said, "Yesterday, the general fortunately agreed to visit Wei Qihou. Wei Qihou and his wife prepared food and drink, but from the morning until now, they haven't dared to eat a bit of it!"

古文：蚡悟，谢曰： 吾醉，忘与仲孺言。 
现代文：武安侯装做愕然发愣的样子，向灌夫道歉说： 我昨天喝醉了，忘记了与你说的话。 
English: Wu An Hou, pretending to be stunned, apologized to the bartender and said, "I got drunk yesterday and forgot what I said to you.

古文：乃驾往。往又徐行，夫愈益怒。
现代文：于是命驾前往，但又走得很慢，灌夫更加生气。
English: So he drove to the scene, but he went very slowly, which made Ganfu even more angry.

古文：及饮酒酣，夫起舞属蚡，蚡不起。夫徙坐，语侵之。
现代文：等到酒吃得差不多时，灌夫起舞，舞毕邀请丞相，丞相竟不起身，灌夫便在酒宴上用话冒犯丞相。
English: When the wine was almost consumed, Kanfu danced and invited the prime minister to dance. The prime minister did not get up, and then Kanfu insulted the prime minister with words at the wine banquet.

古文：婴乃扶夫去，谢蚡。
现代文：窦婴便扶灌夫离去，亲自向丞相致歉。
English: Dou Ying then helped Guan Fu leave and personally apologized to the prime minister.

古文：蚡卒饮至夜，极欢而去。
现代文：丞相田蚡一直吃酒至天黑，才尽欢告辞。
English: The prime minister, Tanabe, drank until dark before saying his goodbyes.

古文：后蚡使藉福请婴城南田，婴大望曰： 老仆虽弃，将军虽贵，宁可以势相夺乎！ 
现代文：后来，丞相田蚡派藉福向窦婴要求把城南的田地让出给他，窦婴很不高兴地说： 我这个老头子虽然被朝廷废弃不用，将军尽管显贵，难道就可以仗势硬夺我的田产吗？ 
English: Later, with the help of a blessing, the chancellor of the court, Tian Xuanpai, asked Dou Ying to give him the fields in the south of the city. Dou Ying was very unhappy and said: Even though I am an old man who has been abandoned by the court, and even though I am a distinguished general, is it possible to take my farmland by force?

古文：不许。
现代文：不肯答应。
English: The Emperor does not allow it.

古文：夫闻，怒骂福。
现代文：夫听说了这事，大骂藉福。
English: When my husband heard about this, he swore at me.

古文：福恶两人有隙，乃谩好谢蚡曰： 魏其老且死，易忍，且待之。 
现代文：藉福不愿窦、田两家交恶，就自己编造了好话向丞相说： 魏其侯年事已高，就要死了，再忍一些日子也不难，姑且等一等吧。 
English: Taking advantage of the fact that he did not want the two families of Dou and Tian to have a bad relationship, he made up a good story to tell the prime minister: Wei Qihou is old and is about to die, it is not difficult to endure a few more days, just wait.

古文：已而蚡闻婴、夫实怒不予，亦怒曰： 魏其子尝杀人，蚡活之。
现代文：不久，田蚡听说窦婴和灌夫其实是愤怒而不肯把田给他，也生气说： 魏其侯的儿子曾犯了杀人的大罪，是我救他的。
English: Not long after, Tian Qi heard that Dou Ying and Guan Fu were actually angry and refused to give him the field. He also said angrily: Wei Ji Hou's son had committed a serious crime of killing people, and I saved him.

古文：蚡事魏其无所不可，爱数顷田？
现代文：我服侍魏其侯，没有什么事不肯依他，为什么他竟然舍不得这几顷田地？
English: I serve Wei, his lord, and there is nothing I would not do for him. Why would he be willing to give up these several hectares of fields?

古文：且灌夫何与也？
现代文：况且这跟灌夫有什么相干！
English: Besides, why should the irrigator intervene?

古文：吾不敢复求田！ 
现代文：我不敢再要这块地了。 
English: I don't dare to ask for this land anymore.

古文：由此大怒。
现代文：从此以后，田蚡对窦婴和灌夫两人大为怨恨。
English: Since then, Tian Yao has held a grudge against Dou Yu and Guan Fu.

古文：元光四年春，蚡言灌夫家在颍川，横甚，民苦之。
现代文：元光四年的春天，丞相奏言灌夫家在颖川极为骄横，百姓都受其苦，请求皇帝查办灌夫。
English: In the spring of the fourth year of the reign of Yuan Guang, the chancellor of the court, Songyan, said that the Ganfu family in Yingchuan was extremely arrogant, and the people were suffering from it, and asked the emperor to investigate Ganfu.

古文：请案之。上曰： 此丞相事，何请？ 
现代文：皇上说： 这是丞相职分内的事，何必请示！ 
English: The emperor said, "This is a matter within the scope of the duties of a chancellor, why do you need to ask for instructions?

古文：夫亦持蚡阴事，为奸利，受淮南王金与语言。
现代文：灌夫也抓住了丞相的短处作为要挟，这包括丞相以不合法的手段去图个人私利，及收受淮南王的财物，并说了不该说的话等。
English: Kanfu also seized the shortcomings of the prime minister as a threat, including the prime minister's illegal means to seek personal gain, and receiving the property of King Huainan, and saying what he should not say.

古文：宾客居间，遂已，俱解。
现代文：后来由于两家的宾客在中间调停劝解，双方才停止互相攻击，彼此和解。
English: Later, due to the mediation and persuasion between the two guests, the two sides stopped attacking each other and reconciled with each other.

古文：夏，蚡取燕王女为夫人，太后诏召列侯宗室皆往贺。
现代文：那年的夏天，丞相田蚡娶燕王的女儿为夫人，太后下了诏令，要列侯及宗室都前往道贺。
English: In the summer of that year, the minister of justice, Tanabe, married the daughter of King Yan, and the empress dowager issued an imperial decree, ordering the princes and their families to travel to congratulate her.

古文：婴过夫，欲与俱。
现代文：窦婴就去拜访灌夫，想邀他一道去。
English: Dou Ying went to visit Guan Fu and wanted to invite him to go with him.

古文：夫谢曰： 夫数以酒失过丞相，丞相今者又与夫有隙。 
现代文：灌夫推辞说： 我屡次因为酒醉失礼得罪了丞相，并且丞相近来跟我有怨。 
English: "I have offended the prime minister many times because of drunken misconduct, and the prime minister has recently had a grudge against me," Kanfu said.

古文：婴曰： 事已解。 
现代文：窦婴说： 这事已经和解了。 
English: Dou Ying said: This matter has been settled.

古文：强与俱。
现代文：于是勉强拉灌夫一道去。
English: So she reluctantly went with her husband.

古文：酒酣，蚡起为寿，坐皆避席伏。
现代文：酒吃到差不多时，丞相起身向大家敬酒，所有的座上宾客都离开座位，伏在地上，表示不敢当。
English: When the wine was almost finished, the prime minister stood up to toast everyone, and all the guests left their seats and prostrated themselves on the ground, saying that they did not dare.

古文：已婴为寿，独故人避席，余半膝席。
现代文：过了一会儿，魏其侯窦婴起身敬酒，衹有那些与他有旧交的人离开席位，其余半数的人衹是照样坐在那裹，连膝都没有离席。
English: After a while, Wei Qihong Dou Ying got up to make a toast. Some of those who had old friends with him left the seat, but the remaining half of the people still sat there, not even leaving the seat.

古文：夫行酒，至蚡，蚡膝席曰： 不能满觞。 
现代文：灌夫起身离位，依次敬酒，敬到田蚡时，田蚡照样坐在那裹，说： 不能再饮满杯了。 
English: The cupbearer got up and left the table, and they toasted in turn. When the toast reached Tian Yao, Tian Yao was still sitting there, saying, "I can't drink another full cup."

古文：夫怒，因嘻笑曰： 将军贵人也，毕之！ 
现代文：灌夫很生气，就嘻笑着说： 您是个贵人，但还是饮满一杯吧！ 
English: The irrigator was very angry, so he smiled and said: You are a noble person, but drink a full glass!

古文：时蚡不肯。
现代文：但是田蚡不肯干杯。
English: But Tabuchi refused to drink a toast.

古文：行酒次至临汝侯灌贤，贤方与程不识耳语，又不避席。
现代文：敬酒敬到临汝侯灌贤，灌贤正在跟程不识悄悄地附耳讲话，又不避离席位。
English: A toast is made to Lin Ryou Hou Kan Xian, who is following the procession and quietly listening to the speeches, without leaving his seat.

古文：夫无所发怒，乃骂贤曰： 平生毁程不识不直一钱，今日长者为寿，乃效女曹儿呫嗫耳语！ 
现代文：灌夫一肚子怒气无处发泄，于是骂灌贤说： 平时诋毁程不识不值一钱，现在长辈向你敬酒，你却效法女孩子一样在那儿同程不识咬耳朵说话。 
English: With nowhere to vent his anger, Guan Fu scolded Guan Xian, saying, "In normal times, it's not worth a penny to slander someone you don't know. Now, the elders are toasting you, but you're acting like a girl who doesn't know how to talk to them.

古文：蚡谓夫曰： 程、李俱东西宫卫尉，今众辱程将军，仲孺独不为李将军地乎？ 
现代文：田蚡对灌夫说： 程、李都是东西宫的卫尉，现在你当众侮辱程不识，就不替你所敬爱的李将军留地步吗？ 
English: Tian Yao said to Guan Fu, "Cheng and Li are both guards of the East and West Palaces. Now that you have publicly insulted Cheng without knowing him, won't you step aside for your beloved General Li?"

古文：夫曰： 今曰斩头穴匈，何知程、李！ 
现代文：灌夫说： 今日杀我的头，穿我的胸，我都不在乎，我还管什么程，什么李？ 
English: Guan Fu said, "Today, kill my head, pierce my chest, I don't care, what do I care about, what's the point?

古文：坐乃起更衣，稍稍去。
现代文：座上的客人见势不妙，便起身托言上厕所，渐渐地散去了。
English: The guests then got up to go to the toilet and gradually left.

古文：婴去，戏夫。
现代文：实婴也起身离去，并挥手叫灌夫赶快走。
English: The real baby also got up and left, and waved his hand to the irrigator to hurry up and leave.

古文：夫出，蚡遂怒曰： 此吾骄灌夫罪也。 
现代文：等到灌夫刚刚离开，田蚡于是生气地说： 这是我的错，因为我宠惯了他，才使他这样放肆。 
English: When Kanfu had just left, Tian Yao said angrily, "It's my fault, because I spoiled him and made him so reckless."

古文：乃令骑留夫，夫不得出。
现代文：就命令手下的骑士把灌夫扣押，这样灌夫就没能够离去。
English: He ordered the knights under his command to detain Ganfu, so that Ganfu could not leave.

古文：藉福起为谢，案夫项令谢。
现代文：藉福赶紧起身为灌夫向丞相赔礼，并用手按着灌夫的脖子，要他低头谢罪。
English: Taking advantage of the blessing, he hurriedly got up to make amends to the prime minister for being the culprit, and pressed his hand on the culprit's neck, asking him to bow his head in thanks.

古文：夫愈怒，不肯顺。
现代文：灌夫更加发怒，不肯谢罪。
English: The man became even angrier and refused to apologize.

古文：蚡乃戏骑缚夫置传舍，召长史曰： 今日召宗室，有诏。 
现代文：田蚧就指挥骑士把灌夫捆起，看管在传舍中，并把长史找来，对他说： 今天请宗室宾客们在此会宴，是奉了太后的韶令的。 
English: Tian Xuan then ordered the knights to tie up Guan Fu and guard him in the mission house. He also found Chang Shi and said to him, "Today, I have invited the guests of the ancestral room to a banquet here. It was ordered by the Empress Dowager.

古文：劾灌夫骂坐不敬，系居室。
现代文：于是弹劾灌夫，说他在宴席上辱骂宾客，侮辱韶令，犯了不敬的罪，把他囚禁在居室狱中。
English: Impeached Ganfu, saying that he abused guests at the banquet, insulted the imperial edict, committed the crime of disrespect, and imprisoned him in a special prison.

古文：遂其前事，遣吏分曹逐捕诸灌氏支属，皆得弃市罪。
现代文：同时彻底查清灌夫在颖川的种种不法行为，派遣差吏分头捉拿灌家各支的亲属，都判决为杀头示众的极刑。
English: At the same time, the various illegal acts of Ganfu in Yingchuan were thoroughly investigated, and the relatives of each branch of the Ganfu family were separately arrested by dispatching officers. All of them were sentenced to the capital punishment of beheading.

古文：婴愧，为资使宾客请，莫能解。
现代文：窦婴感到非常惭愧，出钱财派宾客向丞相求情，终究不能使灌夫获释。
English: Dou Ying felt very ashamed. He sent guests to the prime minister to plead for his release, but in the end he was unable to secure his release.

古文：蚡吏皆为耳目，诸灌氏皆仁匿，夫系，遂不得告言蚡阴事。
现代文：田蚡的属吏既都是丞相的耳目，灌家漏网的人都分头逃窜和躲藏，灌夫本身又被拘押着，于是无法告发田蚡暗中所做的种种坏事。
English: Not only were Tian Xuan's subordinates the eyes and ears of the prime minister, but the leakers of the Guan family fled and hid separately, and the Guan itself was detained, so it was impossible to report all kinds of bad things that Tian Xuan had done in the dark.

古文：婴锐为救夫，婴夫人谏曰： 灌将军得罪丞相，与太后家迕，宁可救邪？ 
现代文：窦婴奋不顾身，竭力想营救灌夫，他的夫人劝他说： 灌将军得罪了丞相，和太后家的人作对，难道能救得了吗？ 
English: Dou Ying desperately tried to save Guan Fu, but his wife persuaded him: "General Guan has offended the prime minister and opposed the empress dowager's family. Can he be saved?

古文：婴曰： 侯自我得之，自我捐之，无所恨。
现代文：窦婴说： 侯爵是我自己挣来的，现在我把它丢掉，根本没有什么遗憾的。
English: Dou Ying said: "I earned the marquis myself, and now that I have lost it, I have no regrets at all.

古文：且终不令灌仲孺独死，婴独生。 
现代文：况且我总不能让灌仲孺独自去牺牲，而我窦婴倒独自活着。 
English: Besides, I can't let Gan Zhongyu die on his own, while I live on my own.

古文：乃匿其家，窃出上书。
现代文：于是瞒着他的家人，私自出来上书给皇帝。
English: So, without telling his family, he went out to deliver the letter to the emperor.

古文：立召人，具告言灌夫醉饱事，不足诛。上然之，赐婴食，曰： 东朝廷辩之。 
现代文：皇帝看了魏其侯窦婴的奏书，立即把他召进宫去，窦婴就把灌夫因为在席上喝醉了酒而失言的情况详细说了一遍，认为这衹是饮酒过度的小事，不值得用极刑。皇帝同意他的看法，便赐窦婴一同吃饭，对他说： 你到东朝太后那裹当廷申辩吧。 
English: The emperor read Weiqihou Douying's report and immediately summoned him to the palace. Douying recounted in detail the circumstances of Ganfu's slip of the tongue due to the fact that he was drunk at the banquet, and considered this to be a minor matter of excessive drinking, not worthy of capital punishment. The emperor agreed with his opinion, and gave Douying a meal together. He said to him: You should go to the Eastern Empress Dowager and plead your case at the court.

古文：婴东朝，盛推夫善，言其醉饱得过，乃丞相以它事诬罪之。
现代文：窦婴到了东朝，极力夸赞灌夫的长处，说他这回是酒后失言，而丞相却用别的罪来陷害灌夫。
English: When Dou Ying arrived in the Eastern Dynasty, he praised Guan Fu's strengths, saying that this time he had made a slip of the tongue after drinking, but the prime minister framed Guan Fu with other crimes.

古文：蚡盛毁夫所为横恣，罪逆不道。
现代文：田蚡又接着极力诋毁灌夫所做的事骄横放纵，犯了大逆不道的罪。
English: Tian Yao then went on to denigrate what Gan Fu had done as arrogant and self-indulgent, committing the crime of high treason.

古文：婴度无可奈何，因言蚡短。
现代文：宝婴自度没有其他的办法，就攻击丞相的短处。
English: Since he had no other way to defend himself, he attacked the shortcomings of the prime minister.

古文：蚡曰： 天下幸而安乐无事，蚡得为肺附，所好音乐、狗马、田宅，所爱倡优、巧匠之属，不如魏其、灌夫日夜招聚天下豪杰壮士与论议，腹诽而心谤，卬视天，俯画地，辟睨两官间，幸天下有变，而欲有大功。臣乃不如魏其等所为。 
现代文：田蚜说： 天下幸而安乐无事，蛉能够做朝廷的重臣，爱好音乐、狗、马和田宅。我所喜欢的不过是倡优、巧匠这一类的人，不像魏其侯和灌夫他们，招呼天下的豪杰壮士，日夜不停地同他们商量讨论，满怀对朝廷的不满之意，不是抬头用眼看天，就是低头用手画地，斜眼看着两宫，希望天下有一些意外的变故，好让他们成大事，立大功，我却不知道魏其侯他们要做些什么呢！ 
English: Tian Xuan said: The world is happy and peaceful, and I can be the chief minister of the imperial court. I like music, dogs, horses, and farmhouses. I only like people who are outstanding and skillful. Unlike Wei Qihou and Guanfu, I welcome the world's heroes and great men, discuss with them day and night, and am full of dissatisfaction with the imperial court. I either look up at the sky with my eyes, or look down at the hand-painted ground with my head down, and look at the two palaces with my eyes averted. I hope that there are some unexpected changes in the world, so that they can achieve great things and make great contributions.

古文：上问朝臣： 两人孰是？ 
现代文：于是皇上向在朝的大臣们问道： 他们两人说的话谁对呢？ 
English: Then the Emperor asked the ministers in the court: Who was right in what the two of them said?

古文：御史大夫韩安国曰： 魏其言灌夫父死事，身荷戟驰不测之吴军，身被数十创，名冠三军，此天下壮士，非有大恶，争杯酒，不足引它过以诛也。
现代文：御史大夫韩安国说： 魏其侯说灌夫当他的父亲为国捐躯时，手持着戈戟冲入强大的吴国军中，身上受到了几十处伤，勇敢的名声冠于三军。他是天下少见的壮士，如果不是有特别严重的罪行，衹为了酒后引起口舌争端，是不值得攀引其他的罪状来处死刑的。
English: Chief historian Han An Guo said: Wei Qihou said that when his father died for the country, he rushed into the powerful Wu army with a palanquin in his hand and received dozens of injuries. His reputation for bravery was crowned by the three armies. He is a rare hero in the world. If he does not have a particularly serious crime, such as causing a verbal dispute after drinking, it is not worth bringing other charges to impose the death penalty.

古文：魏其言是。
现代文：魏其侯的话是对的。
English: Wei Qihou's words are right.

古文：丞相亦言灌夫通奸猾，侵细民，家累巨万，横恣颍川，輘轹宗室，侵犯骨肉，此所谓 支大于干，胫大于股，不折必披 。丞相信亦是。
现代文：丞相说灌夫同大奸巨猾交结，欺压小民百姓，家产有数万万金之多，横行颖川，凌辱宗室，侵犯骨肉，这是所谓 枝杈大于根本，腿胆大于腿股，不是断折必定分裂，丞相的话也不错。
English: The prime minister said that Kanfu had a great deal of cunning with the great traitor, bullied and oppressed the common people, had a family fortune of tens of thousands of gold, ran rampant in the Yingchuan River, insulted the family, and violated the flesh and blood. This is the so-called "branch is greater than the root," "legs are bigger than the thighs," and it is not a fracture but a certain split. The prime minister's words are also good.

古文：唯明主裁之。 
现代文：衹有请英明的主上自己裁决两家的是非了。 
English: Let the good Lord sort it out.

古文：主爵都尉汲黯是魏其。
现代文：主爵都尉汲黯认为魏其侯所说的为是。
English: The lord of the manor, Captain Kuching, thought that Wei was right.

古文：内史郑当时是魏其，后不坚。余皆莫敢对。
现代文：内史郑当时也以魏其侯所说的为是，但是后来却又不敢坚持他自己的意见去对答皇帝。
English: At that time, Inner Historian Zheng also believed what Wei Qihong said, but later he did not dare to insist on his own opinion to answer the emperor.

古文：上怒内史曰： 公平生数言魏其、武安长短，今日廷论，局趣效辕下驹，吾并斩若属矣！ 
现代文：其余的人都不敢答对。皇帝对内史发怒说： 你平屡次议论魏其侯和武安侯两人的长短优劣，今天廷辩，你却畏缩的像那驾在车辕下面的马一般，不敢明白地表示自己的意见。
English: The others did not dare to answer correctly. The emperor said angrily to Naishi, "You have often discussed the merits and demerits of Wei Ji Hou and Wu An Hou. Today, when you are debating at court, you are cowering like a horse under the wheel, afraid to express your own opinion clearly.

古文：即罢起入，上食太后。
现代文：我要把这一班人一并杀了。 
English: He immediately got up and went into the palace to have dinner with the empress dowager.

古文：太后亦已使人候司，具以语太后。太后怒，不食，曰： 我在也，而人皆藉吾弟，令我百岁后，皆鱼肉之乎！
现代文：于是皇帝罢朝起身，入内侍奉太后进餐，太后也已经派人上朝探听消息，这时，那些探听的人便把廷辩的经过详细向太后报告。太后生了气，不进饮食，说： 现在我还活着，别人已经在作践我的兄弟；假若找死了之后，另人就一定都来宰割我的兄弟了。
English: Then the Emperor rose and went into the palace to serve the Empress Dowager a meal. The Empress Dowager had also sent people to the palace to inquire about the news. At this time, those who were inquiring reported the details of the court debate to the Empress Dowager. The Empress Dowager was angry and refused to eat. She said, "Now that I am still alive, others are already practicing on my brother. If I were to find him dead, others would certainly come to slaughter my brother."

古文：且帝宁能为石人邪！
现代文：况且皇帝怎能像石人一样自己不作主张呢？
English: Besides, how could the emperor, like the man of stone, not assert himself!

古文：此特帝在，即录录，设百岁后，是属宁有可信者乎？ 
现代文：现在幸亏皇帝还在，这般大臣就衹知随声附和；假设皇帝死了之后，这班人还靠得住吗？ 
English: Now, fortunately, the emperor is still alive, and this kind of minister is willing to go along with him; assuming that the emperor is dead, can this group of people still be trusted?

古文：上谢曰： 俱外家，故廷辨之。不然，此一狱吏所决耳。 
现代文：皇帝表示歉意说： 魏其侯和武安侯两家都是外戚，所以在朝廷上进行辩论；要不然的话，衹要一个狱吏就可以解决了。 
English: The emperor apologized and said, "The two families of Wei Ji Hou and Wu An Hou are relatives, so they will have a debate in the imperial court; otherwise, it can be resolved by asking for a prison guard.

古文：是时，郎中令石建为上分别言两人。
现代文：那时，郎中令石建私下把魏其侯和武安侯两家失和的经过向皇帝说了。
English: At that time, his brother-in-law, Shi Jian, privately told the emperor about the history of the conflict between Wei and Wu.

古文：蚡已罢朝，出止车门，召御史大夫安国载，怒曰： 与长孺共一秃翁，何为首鼠两端？ 
现代文：田蚡退朝以后，出了止车门，招呼御史大夫韩安国同坐一车，生气地说： 我和你共同对付一个老秃翁，有什么难办的，你为何总是游移不定的呢？ 
English: After Tian Xuan retired, he went out of the door of the bus and invited the chief historian Han An Guo to sit in the same bus. He said angrily, "I'm dealing with an old bald man together with you. What's so difficult to deal with? Why are you always so restless?"

古文：安国良久谓蚡曰： 君何不自喜！
现代文：过了很久，韩安国对田蚡说： 您怎么这样不自爱重呢？
English: After a long time, Han An Guo said to Tian Yao: Why don't you value yourself like this?

古文：夫魏其毁君，君当免冠解印绶归，曰 臣以肺附幸得待罪，固非其任，魏其言皆是。 如此，上必多君有让，不废君。
现代文：刚才魏其侯既然诋毁您，您也就应该向皇帝免冠谢罪，把丞相的印绶解下来，归还给天子，说： 臣以皇帝的肺腑之亲，幸能作到丞相，本来是不能胜任的，魏其侯对我的批评是对的，这样一来，皇帝一定会赞美您有谦让的美德，不致把您废免。
English: Since Wei Qihong has just slandered you, you should also apologize to the emperor, remove the seal of the prime minister and return it to the heavenly son, saying: Minister, with the emperor's heart and soul, fortunately made it to the prime minister, originally it was not competent, Wei Qihong's criticism of me is correct, in this way, the emperor will certainly praise your virtue of modesty, and will not abolish you.

古文：魏其必愧，杜门齿齰舌自杀。
现代文：魏其侯见您如此谦让，皇帝又同情您，一定会闭门咬舌自杀。
English: Wei Qihong sees you so humble, and the emperor sympathizes with you, he will definitely bite his tongue and commit suicide behind closed doors.

古文：今人毁君，君亦毁之，譬如要竖女子争言，何其无大体也！ 
现代文：现在别人骂您，您也同样骂别人，这样彼此互相辱骂，好像商人或女子吵嘴一般，怎么这样不识大体呢？ 
English: Now when others abuse you, you abuse others in the same way. You abuse each other in this way, as if you were a businessman or a quarrelsome woman. How can you be so ignorant?

古文：蚡谢曰： 争时争，不知出此。 
现代文：田蚡谢罪说： 我在朝廷争辩时太着急了，没有想到这样做。 
English: Tian Rong Xie Sin said, "I was in too much of a hurry when I was arguing with the imperial court, so I didn't think of doing this.

古文：于是上使御史簿责婴所言灌夫颇不雠，劾系都司空。
现代文：后来皇帝又派御史查究灌夫的案卷，核对出窦婴所说的话很有不符合事实的地方，因而窦婴受到御史的纠弹，被拘禁在都司空衙门的狱中。
English: Later, the emperor also sent Mishi to investigate Kanfu's case file and check out the fact that Dou Ying's words were very inconsistent with the facts. As a result, Dou Ying was punished by Mishi and was detained in the prison of Doushigongmen.

古文：孝景时，婴尝受遗诏，曰 事有不便，以便宜论上 。
现代文：当孝景皇帝临终的时候，窦婴曾经接受遣诏，那韶书上说： 假如有什么不方便的事情，可以相机条陈上奏。 
English: When Emperor Xiaojing was on his deathbed, Dou Ying once received an imperial edict, which said: If there is anything inconvenient, you can play the camera strip.

古文：及系，灌夫罪至族，事日急，诸公莫敢复明言于上。
现代文：等到窦婴被拘禁，灌夫又可能被判处灭族的大罪，情况是一天比一天紧迫了，大臣们谁也不敢再向皇帝提起造件事。
English: By the time Dou Ying was detained, Gan Fu might have been sentenced to the crime of extermination. The situation was getting more and more urgent every day, and none of the ministers dared to bring up the matter with the emperor.

古文：婴乃使昆弟子上书言之，幸得召见。
现代文：窦婴只好叫他的侄子上书皇帝报告受遣诏的事，希望能得到再被召见的机会。
English: Dou Ying had no choice but to ask his nephew to write to the emperor to report that he had received the imperial edict, hoping to get the chance to be summoned again.

古文：书奏，案尚书，大行无遗诏。
现代文：奏书呈上去了，但是核查内廷的档案，却没有景帝临终的这份遣韶。
English: The report was submitted, but when the archives of the Inner Court were checked, there was no such letter from Emperor Jing on his deathbed.

古文：诏书独臧婴家，婴家丞封。
现代文：这道诏书衹藏在宝婴家中，是由他的家丞盖印加封的。
English: This imperial edict was hidden in the treasure baby's home and sealed with his family seal.

古文：乃劾婴矫先帝诏害，罪当弃市。
现代文：于是窦婴又被弹劾，说他伪造先帝的遣诏，应该判处斩首示众的极刑。
English: As a result, Dou Ying was impeached again, saying that he had forged the former emperor's dispatch and should be sentenced to the extreme penalty of beheading.

古文：五年十月，悉论灌夫支属。
现代文：元光五年十月，灌夫和他的家属全被定罪，窦婴过了许久才听到了这个消息。
English: In October of the fifth year of Yuanguang, Ganfu and his family members were all convicted. It took Dou Yinglong a long time to hear the news.

古文：婴良久乃闻有劾，即阳病痱，不食欲死。
现代文：他一听到，心里就万分悲愤，发了中风的大病。他不想进食衹想寻死。
English: When he heard this, he was so sad and angry that he had a stroke. He didn't want to eat and wanted to die.

古文：或闻上无意杀婴，复食，治病，议定不死矣。
现代文：后来，不知道从那里听说皇帝没有杀他的意图，这才恢复了饮食，医治好病体。
English: Later, I do not know where he heard that the emperor did not intend to kill him, so he resumed his diet and cured his illness.

古文：乃有飞语为恶言闻上，故以十二月晦论弃市渭城。
现代文：朝廷已经决定不把窦婴处死了，但是，这时竟然又有流言传播，说了许多窦婴的坏话，故意地让皇上听到，因此就在当年十二月的三十日，将窦婴在渭城的大街上斩首示众。
English: The imperial court had already decided not to put Dou Yu to death, but at this time, rumors were once again spread, and many bad things were said about Dou Yu, deliberately letting the emperor hear, so on the 30th day of December of that year, Dou Yu was beheaded in the streets of Licheng.

古文：春，蚡疾，一身尽痛，若有击者，呼服谢罪。上使视鬼者瞻之，曰： 魏其侯与灌夫共守，笞欲杀之。 
现代文：元光六年春天，田蚡病了，浑身疼痛，好像有人在打他，他不停地大声呼叫，承认自己有罪，谢罪不止，皇上请了能看见鬼的巫师来诊视他的病，巫师说： 魏其侯与灌夫两个鬼共同守着武安侯，用鞭子抽打想要杀他。 
English: In the spring of the sixth year of Yuan Guang's reign, Tian Qi fell ill and was in pain all over his body, as if someone was beating him. He kept shouting loudly, admitting his guilt and thanking for his sins. The emperor invited a sorcerer who could see ghosts to diagnose his illness. The sorcerer said: Wei Qihou and Guanfu, two ghosts, jointly guarded Wu'an Hou and beat him with a whip to try to kill him.

古文：竟死。
现代文：终于还是死了。
English: He finally died.

古文：子恬嗣，元朔中有罪免。
现代文：由他的儿子田恬嗣其父爵，元朔年间，因为犯有罪过被撤除封爵。
English: His son, Tian Yanzhi, inherited his father's title, which was revoked in the Yuan and Shuo dynasties because of criminal offenses.

古文：后淮南王安谋反，觉。
现代文：后来淮南王刘安谋反的事被发觉了。
English: Later, it was discovered that Liu An, King of Huainan, was plotting a rebellion.

古文：始安入朝时，蚡为太尉，迎安霸上，谓安曰： 上未有太子，大王最贤，高祖孙，即宫车晏驾，非大王立，尚谁立哉？ 
现代文：前些年淮南王刘安曾进京朝见，当时田蚡为太尉，到霸上迎接淮南王，对刘安说： 皇帝现在还没有太子，大王您最英明，又是高祖的孙儿，一旦皇帝去世，不是由您淮南王来继承帝位，还应当是谁呢！ 
English: A few years ago, Liu An, the king of Huainan, came to Beijing to meet with the imperial court. At that time, Tian Yu was a lieutenant, and he went to meet the king of Huainan. He said to Liu An: The emperor does not have a crown prince yet. Your great king is the wisest, and he is also the grandchild of Gao Zu. Once the emperor dies, if it is not you, the king of Huainan, who will inherit the imperial throne, who else should it be?

古文：淮南王大喜，厚遗金钱财物。
现代文：淮南王听了大为高兴，送给田蚜许多金银财物。
English: King Huainan was very pleased to hear this and gave Tian Xuan a lot of gold, silver and other valuables.

古文：上自婴、夫事时不直蚡，特为太后故。
现代文：皇帝自从窦婴、灌夫的事发生以后，就不以田蚡的举动为然，衹是碍着太后的缘故，容忍了下来。
English: The emperor did not take Tian Yao's behavior for granted after the Dou Ying and Guan Fu incident. He tolerated Tian Yao because he was disturbing the empress dowager.

古文：及闻淮南事，上曰： 使武安侯在者，族矣。 
现代文：等到皇帝听到了田蚡和淮南王勾结以及接受淮南王钱财的事件，就说： 假使武安侯还在的话，也该灭族了。 
English: When the emperor heard of the collusion between Tian Xuan and King Huainan and the incident of accepting money from King Huainan, he said: If Wu'an Hou is still alive, it is time to exterminate the tribe.

古文：韩安国字长孺，梁成安人也，后徒睢阳。
现代文：韩安国，字长孺，是梁国成安县人，后来移居睢阳。
English: Han'an Guo, also known as Chang'an, was from Liang Guo's Cheng'an County and later moved to Fenyang.

古文：尝受《韩子》、杂说邹田生所。事梁孝王，为中大夫。
现代文：曾经在邹县田生之处学习《韩非子》和杂家的学说。侍奉梁孝王，做中大夫。
English: He used to study "Hanfeizi" and the teachings of miscellaneous families at the field school in Handan County. He served King Liang Xiao Wang as a junior doctor.

古文：吴、楚反时，孝王使安国及张羽为将，扞吴兵于东界。
现代文：吴楚叛乱的时候，孝王派遣安国及张羽为将军，在束境抵御吴军。
English: When Wu Chu rebelled, King Xiao sent An Guo and Zhang Yu as generals to resist the Wu army in Sokou.

古文：张羽力战，安国持重，以故吴不能过梁。
现代文：因为张羽奋力作战，安国老成持重，所以吴军不能越过梁国的防线。
English: Because Zhang Yu fought hard and Han'an defended firmly, the Wu army could not cross the defense line of Liang Guo.

古文：吴、楚破、安国、张羽名由此显梁。
现代文：吴楚叛乱被子息后，韩安国、张羽的名声也从此在梁国境内显赫起来。
English: After the Wu Chu Rebellion was put to rest, the fame of Han'an and Zhangye became prominent in Liang Province.

古文：梁王以至亲故，得自置相、二千石，出入游戏，僣于天子。
现代文：梁王由于是皇家的至亲，因此获得了自行推举梁相及二千石官吏的人选的权力，他进出、游乐的排场，已经逾越了人臣的位分而比拟于天子。
English: Since King Liang was a close relative of the royal family, he gained the power to nominate Liang Xiang and the 2,000-peak official candidates on his own. When he went in and out of the parade, he had already surpassed the position of a vassal and was compared to the Son of Heaven.

古文：天子闻之，心不善。
现代文：当时天子汉景帝听了以后，心裹很不高兴。
English: At that time, Emperor Han Jing was very unhappy after listening to it.

古文：太后知帝弗善，乃怒梁使者，弗见，案责王所为。
现代文：窦太后知道皇帝不满，于是迁怒梁王派来的使者，不接见他们，而向他们案验责难梁王的所作所为。
English: Empress Dowager Dou knew that the emperor was dissatisfied, so she became angry with the envoys sent by King Liang and did not receive them, but tried to blame them for what King Liang had done.

古文：安国为梁使，见大长公主而泣曰： 何梁王为人子之孝，为人臣之忠，而太后曾不省也？
现代文：当时韩安国是梁使，便去谒见大长公主，哭泣着说： 为什么太后对于梁王做儿子的孝心及做臣子的忠心竟然不予明察呢？
English: At that time, Han An Guo was the envoy of Liang, so he went to see the eldest princess, weeping and saying: Why did the empress dowager ignore the filial piety of Liang Wang as a son and his loyalty as a vassal?

古文：夫前日吴、楚、齐、赵七国反，自关以东皆合从而西向，唯梁最亲，为限难。
现代文：昔日吴、楚、齐、趟等七国造的时候，自关以束的诸侯，都联合起来向西进军，衹有梁国与皇上最亲，成为叛军的阻限。
English: In the old days, when Wu, Chu, Qi, Wati and other seven provinces were formed, the lords of Guanzhou and Shandong all joined forces to march westward. Liang Province, which was closest to the emperor, became a barrier for the rebel army.

古文：梁王念太后、帝在中，而诸侯扰乱，壹言泣数行而下，跪送臣等六人将兵击却吴、楚、吴、楚以故兵不敢西，而卒破亡，梁之力也。
现代文：梁王常想到太后及皇上居于关中，而诸侯起来作乱，每次提起，都泪下数行，跪着送臣等六人，带兵去击退吴楚叛军，因此吴楚的军队不敢西越雷池半步，而终告败亡，这都是梁王的功劳啊！
English: Liang Wang often thought of the empress dowager and the emperor living in Guanzhong, while the princes rose up to make a disturbance. Every time he mentioned it, he shed a few tears. He knelt down and sent six courtiers and other soldiers to repel the Wuchu rebels. As a result, Wuchu's army did not dare to cross half a step to the west, and eventually lost. This is all the merit of Liang Wang!

古文：今太后以小苛礼责望梁王。
现代文：现在太后却为了一些细的礼节怨责梁王。
English: Now the empress dowager is blaming King Liang for some minor etiquette.

古文：梁王父兄皆帝王，而所见者大，故出称跸，入言警，车旗皆帝所赐，即以嫮鄙小县，驱驰国中，欲夸诸侯，令天下知太后、帝爱之也。
现代文：梁王的父兄都是皇帝，平曰见惯了盛大的排场，所以进出游乐，都像皇帝一样清道警戒，车子、旌旗都是皇帝所赐，他就是想在边邑向其子民矜夸，在国中来回驰骋以向诸侯炫耀，让全天下的人都知道太后和皇帝对他很宠爱。
English: Liang Wang's father and brother were both emperors. He was used to seeing grand parades on a daily basis, so he entered and exited the amusement with the same vigilance as the emperor. The car and the banner were given by the emperor. He just wanted to boast to his people in the border towns and ride back and forth in the country to show off to the princes, so that everyone in the world would know that the empress dowager and the emperor were very fond of him.

古文：今梁使来，辄案责之，梁王恐，日夜滋泣思慕，不知所为。
现代文：现在梁使到来，却遭到查问责难。梁王十分恐惧，日夜流泪思量，不知如何是好。
English: Now Liang Zhi has arrived, but it is difficult for him to be investigated and held accountable. Liang Wang is very afraid, day and night he sheds tears thinking about it, he doesn't know what to do.

古文：何梁王之忠孝而太后不恤也？ 
现代文：为什么梁王做儿子很孝顺，作臣子最忠心，而太后竟不怜顾呢？ 
English: Why was King Liang very filial as a son and most loyal as a courtier, but the empress dowager did not show any mercy?

古文：长公主具以告太后，太后喜曰： 为帝言之。 
现代文：长公主把这些全都告诉了太后。
English: The eldest princess told the empress everything.

古文：言之，帝心乃解，而免冠谢太后曰： 兄弟不能相教，乃为太后遗忧。 
现代文：太后高兴地说： 我要替他向皇上解说， 解释以后，皇上的心才开解，而且摘下帽子向太后谢罪说： 我兄弟间不能互相劝教，竟让太后您操心了。 
English: It was only after he had relayed the message that the knot in Emperor Jing's heart was loosened, and he took off his hat to confess his mistake to the Empress Dowager, saying, "We brothers cannot persuade each other, and you have added sorrow to the Empress Dowager.

古文：悉见梁使，厚赐之。
现代文：于是接见了所有梁王派来的使者，并且重重地赏赐了他们。
English: So he received all the emissaries sent by King Liang and rewarded them generously.

古文：其后，梁王益亲欢。
现代文：此后梁王更受宠爱。
English: Since then, Liang Wang has become even more popular.

古文：太后、长公主更赐安国直千余金。
现代文：太后、长公主再赏赐韩安国价值约千余金的财物。
English: The empress dowager and the eldest princess then rewarded Han An Guo with property worth more than 1,000 gold.

古文：由此显，结于汉。
现代文：韩安国的名声因此更加显赫，而且跟汉朝廷建立了关系。
English: As a result, Han's reputation became more prominent, and he established relations with the Han court.

古文：其后，安国坐法抵罪，蒙狱吏田申辱安国。安国曰： 死灰独不复然乎？ 
现代文：后来韩安国犯法被判刑，蒙县的狱吏田甲羞辱他，他说： 难道熄了火的灰就不会再燃烧起来吗？ 
English: Later, Han An Guo was sentenced for breaking the law. The warden of Meng County, Tian Jia, humiliated him. He said, "Isn't it true that if the ashes of a fire are extinguished, they won't burn again?"

古文：甲曰： 然即溺之。 
现代文：田甲说： 要是再烧起来，我就溺尿来浇熄它。 
English: Tian Jia said: If it burns again, I will drown myself in urine to put it out.

古文：居无几，梁内史缺，汉使使者拜安国为梁内史，起徒中为二千石。
现代文：过了不久，梁国内史的职位空缺，汉廷派使者任命韩安国为梁内史，从徒隶中提拔他出来做二千石的官。
English: Soon after, the position of Liang Guozhongshi became vacant, and the Han Dynasty sent an envoy to appoint Han An Guo as Liang Guozhongshi, and promoted him from a vassal to an official of 2,000 koku.

古文：田甲亡。
现代文：田甲弃官逃走。
English: Tago deserted his post and fled.

古文：安国曰： 甲不就官，我灭而宗。 
现代文：韩安国说： 田甲不回来就任，我就夷灭了你的宗族。 
English: Han An Guo said: If Tian Jia does not return to take office, I will exterminate your clan.

古文：甲肉袒谢，安国笑曰： 公等足与治乎？ 
现代文：田甲于是袒衣谢罪。安国笑着说： 像你这种人值得我惩治吗？ 
English: An Guo smiled and said: Is a person like you worthy of my punishment?

古文：卒善遇之。
现代文：终于善待田甲。
English: Finally, treat him kindly.

古文：内史之缺也，王新得齐人公孙诡，说之，欲请为内史。
现代文：梁内史空缺之际，孝王刚刚延揽了齐人公孙诡，很喜欢他，想要请求任命他为内史。
English: When Liang Neishi was vacant, Xiao Wang had just recruited Qi Ren Gongsun Qi, liked him very much, and wanted to request the appointment of him as Neishi.

古文：窦太后闻，乃诏王以安国为内史。
现代文：窦太后听说后，于是下诏命令梁王任用韩安国为内史。
English: Empress Dowager Dou heard this and ordered Liang Xiaowang to appoint Han'an as the internal historian.

古文：公孙诡、羊胜说王求为帝太子及益地事，恐汉大臣不听，乃阴使人刺汉用事谋臣。
现代文：公孙诡、羊胜游说孝王，教他请求做帝位继承人及增益封地的事，恐怕汉廷大臣不肯答应，于是暗中派人行刺漠廷当权的谋臣。
English: Gongsun Qi and Yang Sheng lobbied Prince Xiao Wang to ask him to be the heir to the imperial throne and increase the fief. I'm afraid that the minister of Hanting would not agree, so he secretly sent someone to assassinate the advisor to the power of the desert court.

古文：及杀故吴相爰盎，景帝遂闻诡、胜等计划，乃遣使捕诡、胜，必得。
现代文：及至杀害了前任吴相的袁盎，景帝便闻知公孙诡、羊胜等人的计划，于是派人务必捉拿公孙诡、羊胜。
English: When Yuan Ang, Wu Xiang's predecessor, was killed, Emperor Jing learned of the plans of Gongsun Zi and Yang Sheng, so he sent someone to capture Gongsun Zi and Yang Sheng.

古文：汉使十辈至梁，相以下举国大索，月余弗得。
现代文：汉廷派了许多使者先后到梁，自梁相以下全国大举搜索，经过一个多月还没有捉到。
English: Hanting sent many emissaries to Liang successively, and conducted a large-scale search across the country from Liang Xiang down. After more than a month, they still hadn't caught him.

古文：安国闻诡、胜匿王所，乃入见王而泣曰： 主辱者臣死。
现代文：内史韩安国听说公孙诡、羊胜等人藏匿在孝王宫中，便入宫见王，哭着说： 若君主受辱，臣子就应该死。
English: Internal history Han'an heard that Gongsun Zi, Yosheng and others were hiding in the palace of King Xiao, so they went to the palace to see the king, crying: If the monarch is insulted, the vassal should die.

古文：大王无良臣，故纷纷至此。
现代文：大王没有好臣子，所以事才蚡乱到这种地步。
English: The great king has no good vassals, that's why things are in such a mess.

古文：今胜、诡不得，请辞赐死。 
现代文：现在既然捉不到公孙诡、羊胜，请让臣向您辞别，并赐臣死。 
English: Now that I can't catch Gongsun Zi and Yang Sheng, please let me say goodbye to you and let me die.

古文：王曰： 何至此？ 
现代文：梁王说： 你何必这样呢？ 
English: Liang Xiaowang said, "Why do you have to do this?

古文：安国泣数行下，曰： 大王自度于皇帝，孰与太上皇之与高帝及皇帝与临江王亲？ 
现代文：韩安国泪下数行，说： 大王自己忖度您跟皇上的关系，比起太上皇与高皇帝及皇上与临江王来，谁比较亲近呢？ 
English: Han An Guo shed a few tears and said, "Great King, you yourself have nurtured the relationship between you and the Emperor. Compared to the Emperor Taejong and Emperor Gao, and the Emperor and the King of Linjiang, who is closer?

古文：王曰： 弗如也。 
现代文：孝王说： 比不上他们。 
English: Takao said, "I can't compete with them.

古文：安国曰： 夫太上皇、临江亲父子间，然高帝曰 提三尺取天下者朕也 ，故太上终不得制事，居于栎阳。
现代文：安国说： 太上皇、临江王之与高皇帝、皇上都是父子的关系，但是高帝说 拿着三尺宝剑夺得天下的人是我，所以太上皇始终无权过问政事，衹居住在梁阳宫中。
English: An Guo said: The Retired Emperor and the King of Linjiang have a father-son relationship with Emperor Gao and the Emperor Gao, but Emperor Gao said, "I am the one who won the world with a three-feet sword," so the Retired Emperor has never had the right to ask questions about politics, and he lives in Liangyang Palace.

古文：临江，適长太子，以一言过，废王临江；用宫垣事，卒自杀中尉府。
现代文：临江王，是嫡长太子，却因其母一言出错，被废除了临江王的爵位；又因宫垣之事，终于自杀于中尉府。
English: Prince Linjiang, the eldest son of the crown prince, had his title of Prince Linjiang revoked because of a mistake made by his mother; he also committed suicide at the lieutenant's residence because of the Miyagaki incident.

古文：何者？
现代文：为什么会这样呢？
English: Why is that?

古文：治天下终不用私乱公。
现代文：因为治理天下总不能因私而害公。
English: Because the governance of the world must not harm the public because of me.

古文：语曰： 虽有亲父，安知不为虎？
现代文：俗语有云： 虽然有亲父，岂知他不会是虎呢？
English: There is a saying: "Even if you have a father, how do you know he is not a tiger?"

古文：虽有亲兄，安知不为狼？ 
现代文：虽然有亲兄，岂知他不会变成狼呢？
English: Even though he has a brother, does he not know that he will not turn into a wolf?

古文：今大王列在诸侯，訹邪臣浮说，犯上禁，桡明法。
现代文：现在大王位列诸侯，却听信一个邪臣虚妄的言论，干犯了君主的禁令，枉曲了严明的法律。
English: Now the great thrones are filled with princes, but they have listened to the false speech of an evil minister, violated the monarch's ban, and perverted the strict law.

古文：天子以太后故，不忍致法于大王。
现代文：皇上因为太后的缘故，不忍心用法令来对付您。
English: The Emperor, for the sake of the Empress Dowager, cannot bear to use the law against you.

古文：太后日夜涕泣，幸大王自改，大王终不觉寤。
现代文：太后夜哀泣，希望大王能自知改过，可是大王却始终不能觉悟。
English: The empress dowager cried bitterly at night, hoping that the great king would change his ways, but the great king was never able to come to his senses.

古文：有如太后宫车即晏驾，大王尚谁攀乎？ 
现代文：万一太后驾崩，大王您还能攀附谁呢？ 
English: If the empress dowager were to die suddenly, whom would you be able to rely on?

古文：语未卒，王泣数行而下，谢安国曰： 吾今出之。 
现代文：话尚未说完，孝王痛哭流涕，对着韩安国自责说： 我立刻交出公孙诡、羊胜。 
English: Before he had finished speaking, Xiao Wang burst into tears and said to Han An Guo, reproaching himself: I will immediately hand over Gongsun Zi and Yang Sheng.

古文：即日诡、胜自杀。
现代文：当天，公孙诡、羊胜两人自杀。
English: On the same day, Gongsun Qi and Yang Sheng both committed suicide.

古文：汉使还报，梁事皆得释，安国力也。
现代文：汉使回去覆命，梁国的祸事得以完全消解，这都是安国的功劳。
English: The Han envoys returned and died, and the calamity of Liang Province was completely resolved. All of this is the credit of An Province.

古文：景帝、太后益重安国。
现代文：于是景帝、窦太后更加看重韩安国。
English: As a result, Emperor Jing and Empress Dowager Dou placed more importance on Korea.

古文：孝王薨，共王即位，安国坐法失官，家居。
现代文：孝王去世后，共王即位，韩安国因为犯法丢了官，闲居在家裹。
English: After the death of King Xiaowang, the co-king ascended to the throne. Han'an lost his official position because of breaking the law, and idled at home.

古文：武帝即位，武安侯田蚡为太尉，亲贵用事。
现代文：汉武帝刘彻即位后，武安侯田蚡为太尉，受宠信而掌大权。
English: After the enthronement of Emperor Liu Che of the Han Dynasty, Wu'an Hou Tianjun was promoted to the rank of lieutenant, and was favored to take power.

古文：安国以五百金遗蚡，蚡言安国太后，上素闻安国贤，即召以为北地都尉，迁为大司农。
现代文：韩安国把五百金送给田蚡，田蚡向太后提起韩安国，皇上平日也常听说安国的贤能，便召他为北地都尉，后来升为大司农。
English: Han An Guo gave five hundred gold coins to Tian Xuan. Tian Xuan mentioned Han An Guo to the empress dowager. The emperor often heard about An Guo's virtues and called him the captain of the North, and later he was promoted to the chief farmer.

古文：闽、东越相攻，遣安国、大行王恢将兵。
现代文：闽越、束越互相攻伐，皇上就派遣韩安国和大行王恢领兵赴越。
English: As Hanyue and Sokue attacked each other, the emperor sent Han'an and Da Xing Wang Wei to lead the troops to Yue.

古文：未至越，越杀其王降，汉兵亦罢。
现代文：还没有抵达越地，越人就杀了他们的王来投降，汉朝廷也就收兵了。
English: Before reaching Yueji, the Yue people killed their king and surrendered to the Han Dynasty, and the Han Army withdrew.

古文：其年，田蚡为丞相，安国为御史大夫。
现代文：当年，田蚡当了丞相，韩安国为御史大夫。
English: In that year, Tian Xuan became chancellor, and Han An Guo became minister of history.

古文：匈奴来请和亲，上下其议。
现代文：匈奴派人来请求和亲，皇上交由朝巨商议。
English: The Xiongnu sent someone to ask for peace, and the emperor left it to the court to discuss.

古文：大行王恢，燕人，数为边吏，习故事，议曰： 汉与匈奴和亲，率不过数岁即背约。
现代文：大行王拯，是个艺人，屡任边郡的官吏，对匈奴的情况非常熟悉。他发表议论说： 汉兵与匈奴和亲，大都过不了几年，匈奴便再度背约。
English: Da Xing Wang Zheng, an entertainer who has repeatedly served as an official of the border county, is very familiar with the situation of the Xiongnu. He made a speech saying: The Han soldiers and the Xiongnu are friendly, and most of them are not more than a few years old, and the Xiongnu will renege on the agreement again.

古文：不如勿许，举兵击之。 
现代文：不如不答应而发兵攻击他们。 
English: It would be better to refuse and send troops to attack them.

古文：安国曰： 千里而战，即兵不获利。
现代文：韩安国说： 派军队到千里之外去作战，不会有好的战果。
English: Han An Guo said: Sending troops to fight thousands of miles away will not bring good results.

古文：今匈奴负戎马足，怀鸟兽心，迁徙鸟集，难得而制。
现代文：如果是匈奴仗恃戎马之疾足，怀着禽兽般的心肠，如飞鸟般的迁徙，就很难克制他们。
English: If the Xiongnu are warlike and swift-footed, with the heart of a beast and the migration of a bird, it is difficult to restrain them.

古文：得其地不足为广，有其众不足为强，自上古弗属。
现代文：取得了他们的土地也不算开疆拓土，统治了他们的人民也不算富强，他们从上古以来就不是我们的子民。
English: The acquisition of their land does not count as expansion, the people who ruled them are not rich and powerful, and they have not been our people since ancient times.

古文：汉数千里争利，则人马罢，虏以全制其敝，势必危殆。
现代文：汉兵行数千里以求取战利，则人马疲惫，匈奴则可以逸待劳，这样做必然是很危险的。
English: If the Han soldiers travel thousands of miles in search of war profits, the men and horses will be exhausted, while the Xiongnu can wait for labor. Doing so is necessarily very dangerous.

古文：臣故以为不如和亲。 
现代文：我认为不如跟他们和亲。 
English: I think it's better to be friends with them.

古文：群臣议多附安国，于是上许和亲。
现代文：群臣议论此事的大多附和安国，于是皇上同意与匈奴和亲。
English: Most of the courtiers who discussed the matter sided with the Han, so the emperor agreed to make peace with the Xiongnu.

古文：明年，雁门马邑豪聂壹因大行王恢言： 匈奴初和亲，亲信边，可诱以利致之，伏兵袭击，必破之道也。 
现代文：第二年，雁门郡马邑城的豪杰聂壹，通过大行王拯向皇上表示： 鱼抠刚与选和亲，亲信边地之民，可以用利来诱他们过来，而我们在道路上埋设伏兵，一定会消灭他们。 
English: In the second year, the hero of Ma'i City, Yanmen County, Gao Jieyi, expressed to the emperor through Da Xingwang Zheng: "Fishermen who are close to the people of the borderland can use profit to lure them over, but if we lay an ambush on the road, we will surely destroy them.

古文：上乃召问公卿曰： 朕饰子女以配单于，币帛文锦，赂之甚厚。
现代文：皇上于是召见询问众位公卿说： 朕选派子女，梳妆打蚡许配给单于，给他钱财、绢帛、文锦也很丰厚。
English: The emperor then summoned all the nobles for questioning and said, "I have chosen my children, and I have given them only the allowance for dressing and grooming, and I have also given them a great deal of money, moneybags, and brocades.

古文：单于待命加嫚，侵盗无已，边竟数惊，朕甚闵之。
现代文：单于对朕的命令甚为轻慢，侵掠没有止境，边郡人民多次受到骚扰，朕十分同情他们。
English: Just because the order to me is very careless, the invasion and plunder has no end, the people of the border county have been harassed many times, I sympathize with them very much.

古文：今欲举兵攻之，何如？ 
现代文：现在想派大军进攻匈奴，你们各位以为如何？ 
English: Now you want to send troops to attack, what do you think?

古文：大行恢对曰： 陛下虽未言，臣固愿效之。
现代文：大行王恢回答说： 陛下即使不说，臣下本来也主张使用这种策略。
English: Dai Xing Wang Wei replied, "Your Majesty, even if you don't say it, your subjects have always advocated the use of this tactic.

古文：臣闻全代之时，北有强胡之敌，内连中国之兵，然尚得养老长幼，种树以时，仓廪常实，匈奴不轻侵也。
现代文：臣听说战国天下未统一的时候，虽然北方有强大的胡人威胁内地，而中原内地又战乱不已，然而各国尚能抚养其人民，根据时节来耕种，公私仓廪常能充实，匈奴因而不敢轻易侵犯。
English: The vassal heard that when the Warring States were not unified, although there were powerful Hu people in the north threatening the inland, and the Central Plains inland was in turmoil, the countries were still able to raise their people, cultivate according to the season, and the public and private granaries could often be enriched, so the Xiongnu did not dare to easily encroach.

古文：今以陛下之威，海内为一，天下同任，又遣子弟乘边守塞，转粟挽输，以为之备，然匈奴侵盗不已者，无它，以不恐之故耳。
现代文：现在凭藉着陛下您的威严，天下统一，同事汉朝廷，又派遣子弟去登上边城，把守要塞，粮食的转运，车马的运输，都很齐备。可是包抠却侵犯掠劫不已，没有别的原因，就是因为没有畏惧心理的缘故。
English: Now, with the help of Your Majesty's majesty, the unification of the world, the Han Dynasty as a colleague, and the dispatch of sons to ascend the border city to guard the fortress, the transfer of grain, and the transportation of horses and carts are all ready. However, Bautzen has invaded and plundered endlessly, for no other reason than because there is no fear of psychology.

古文：臣窃以为击之便。 
现代文：臣私下认为进攻有利。 
English: Privately, the vassal considered the attack to be advantageous.

古文：御史大夫安国曰： 不然。
现代文：御史大夫韩安国反驳说： 不是这样。
English: Chief Historian Han An Guo replied, "That's not true.

古文：臣闻高皇帝尝围于平城，匈奴至者投鞍高如城者数所。
现代文：臣听说汉高祖曾被匈奴围困在平城，匈奴大军解下马鞍堆积成营垒，高过平城的有好几个地方。
English: The minister heard that Han Gaozu was once besieged by the Xiongnu in Pingcheng. The Xiongnu army dismounted their saddles and piled up into camps, several of which were higher than Pingcheng.

古文：平城之饥，七日不食，天下歌之，及解围反位，而无忿怒之心。
现代文：平城内高皇帝忍着饥饿，七未进食，天下人都歌颂此事。等到围困被解除，返回京师后，却没有急恨愤怒的心情。
English: Emperor Gao of Pingcheng endured hunger and did not eat for seven days, and the whole world sang about it. When the siege was lifted and he returned to Beijing, he did not have the mood of hatred and anger.

古文：夫圣人以天下为度者也，不以己私怒伤天下之功，故乃遣刘敬奉金千斤，以结和亲，至今为五世利。
现代文：圣人应当以天下为重，宽宏大度，而不因自己的个人私怒而有害天下的事情。因此高皇帝就派遣刘敬奉黄金千斤，用来和匈奴和亲，到现在历更五帝都从中得到好处。
English: Therefore, Emperor Gao sent Liu Jingfeng a thousand catties of gold to make peace with the Xiongnu, and all five emperors have benefited from it to this day.

古文：孝文皇帝又尝壹拥天下之精兵聚之广武常溪，然终无尺寸之功，而天下黔首无不忧者。
现代文：孝文皇帝又曾经统一率领天下的精兵强将在广武常溪集结，然而到头来毫无建树，可是天下的老百姓没有不忧虑的。
English: Emperor Xiaowen once unified and led the world's elite soldiers to assemble in Guangwu Changxi. However, in the end, nothing was built, but the people of the world were worried.

古文：孝文寤于兵之不可宿，故复合和亲之约。
现代文：孝文皇帝懂得战事不可久拖不决，因此再次和匈奴订立和亲之约。
English: Emperor Xiaowen knew that the war could not be delayed for long, so he once again concluded a peace treaty with the Xiongnu.

古文：此二圣之迹，足以为效矣。
现代文：这两个开明皇帝的事迹，是足以能够效法的。
English: The deeds of these two enlightened emperors are enough to be emulated.

古文：臣窃以为勿击便。 
现代文：臣私下认为不进攻方为上策。 
English: Privately, the vassal thought that the best policy was not to attack.

古文：恢曰： 不然。
现代文：王恢又说： 韩安国所言差矣。
English: Wang Hui also said that what Hanan Guo said was not good enough.

古文：臣闻五帝不相袭礼，三王不相复乐，非故相反也，各因世宜也。
现代文：我听说五帝的礼仪互不因袭，三王的礼乐也不重复，这并不是故意违反前世之法，各代都按照当时的实际隋况制定法令礼仪，才能适宜。
English: I heard that the etiquette of the Five Emperors does not follow each other, and the music of the Three Kings is not repeated. This is not a deliberate violation of the law of the previous generation. Each generation has formulated laws and etiquette according to the actual situation of the Sui Dynasty at that time, in order to be appropriate.

古文：且高帝身被坚执锐，蒙雾露，沐霜雪，行几十年，所以不报平城之怨者，非力不能，所以休天下之心也。
现代文：况且汉高祖身披坚甲，手执锐器，冒着晨雾朝露，顶着严寒霜雪，行程近十年，他之所以不去报复干城之难的怨恨，并不是力量不足，是为了让天下的老百姓休息，使他们心裹安宁。
English: Moreover, Henkel's ancestor, clad in armor and armed with a sharp weapon, braved the morning mist and dew, braved the cold frost and snow, and traveled for nearly ten years. The reason why he did not retaliate against the resentment of Kanchenjunga is not a lack of strength, but in order to let the people of the world rest and make their hearts peaceful.

古文：今边竟数惊，士卒伤死，中国槥车相望，此仁人之所隐也。臣故曰 击之便 。 安国曰： 不然。
现代文：现在边境数次遭到侵袭，士兵死伤，中国境内灵车相望。这是仁人志士所痛心疾首的情况，臣下我坚决认为进攻反击才是对国家有利。 韩安国接着说： 不是这样。
English: Now that the border has been attacked several times, soldiers have been killed and wounded, and hearses are passing each other in China, this is a situation that is heartbreaking for people of benevolence. My vassal, I firmly believe that attacking and counterattacking is good for the country. Han An Guo went on to say: This is not so.

古文：臣闻利不十者不易业，功不百者不变常，是以古之人君谋事必就祖，发政占古语，重作事也。
现代文：我听说利益达不到十倍时，绝不改变原来的职业，功利达不到百倍时绝不更改固定的事业，因此古代的人君谋划事情时必以祖宗成法为例，施政也要查问典，这是因为做事难的缘故。
English: I heard that when the profit is less than ten times, it will never change the original occupation, and when the utility is less than a hundred times, it will never change the fixed cause. Therefore, the ancient people must take the ancestral law as an example when planning things, and the government must also check the encyclopedia. This is because it is difficult to do things.

古文：且自三代之盛，夷狄不与正朔服色，非威不能制，强弗能服也，以为远方绝地不牧之民，不足烦中国也。
现代文：况且白三代强盛以来，夷狄并没有跟随中国改正朔易服色，这并不是因为威严不能足以制服他们，强大不足以使他们顺从，而是因为远方绝地不可牧养的民众，用不着烦劳中国去做。
English: Moreover, since the three powerful generations of Bai, the Yidi have not followed China in correcting the Shuo Yi dress. This is not because the majesty is not enough to subdue them, the powerful is not enough to make them obey, but because the people who are far away and can not be shepherded need not bother China to do it.

古文：且匈奴，轻疾悍亟之兵也，至如猋风，去如收电，畜牧为业，弧弓射猎，逐兽随草，居处无常，难得而制。
现代文：况且，匈奴的军队兵马剽悍迅速，来如疾风，去像闪电一样快。他们以畜牧为业，使用弓箭打猎，追逐禽兽，跟随水草，居住的地方不固定，很难制服。
English: Moreover, the Xiongnu's army of soldiers and horses are fierce and swift, coming like a gale and going as fast as lightning. They are engaged in animal husbandry, use bows and arrows to hunt, chase animals, follow aquatic plants, live in an unstable place, and are difficult to subdue.

古文：今使边郡久废耕织，以支胡之常事，其势不相权也。
现代文：现在让边郡之民长久地放弃耕织，而来支持匈奴习以为常的事，这样做得不偿失。
English: Now let the people of Bian County give up farming and weaving for a long time and come to support the things that the Xiongnu take for granted. It's not worth it.

古文：臣故曰 勿击便 。 恢曰： 不然。
现代文：我因此认为不进攻有利。 王恢说： 不是这样。
English: Therefore, I still advocate the advantage of not using soldiers.Wang Huai said: what Hanan Guo said is not right.

古文：臣闻凤鸟乘于风，圣人因于时。
现代文：我听说凤乌乘风而飞，圣人因时而制。
English: I have heard that phoenixes and blackbirds fly with the wind, and that sages are made by time.

古文：昔秦缪公都雍，地方三百里，知时宜之变，攻取西戎，辟地千里，并国十四，陇西、北地是也。
现代文：过去秦穆公定都雍城，地方圆三百里，知道时气机缘的变化，攻取西戎，开辟疆土千余里，吞并十四国，陇西、北地从此成为秦的领地。
English: In the past, Qin Mu Gongding set the capital at Yongcheng, a place with a circumference of three hundred miles. Knowing the changes of time, climate and opportunity, he captured Xi Rong, opened up more than a thousand miles of territory, and annexed fourteen countries. Shaanxi and Hebei have since become the territory of Qin.

古文：及后蒙恬为秦侵胡，辟数千里，以河为竟，累石为城，树榆为塞，匈奴不敢饮马于河，置烽燧然后敢牧马。
现代文：到后来蒙恬率领军队为秦国进攻匈奴。开辟领土数千里，把黄河南北全部划归秦国境内，用泥土、石块垒砌长城，种植榆树作为屏障，匈奴人以致不敢到黄河边饮马，置烽燧然后才敢放牧马群。
English: Later, Meng Jun led the army to attack the Xiongnu for Qin. He opened up thousands of miles of territory, divided the north and south of the Yellow River into the territory of Qin, built the Great Wall with mud and stone blocks, planted eucalyptus trees as a barrier, so that the Xiongnu people dared not go to the edge of the Yellow River to drink horses, and only then did they dare to graze horses.

古文：夫匈奴独可以威服，不可以仁畜也。
现代文：对匈奴人衹能以威严制服，而不能够用仁义教养。
English: For the Huns, they can only be subdued with majesty, but cannot be educated with benevolence and righteousness.

古文：今以中国之盛，万倍之资，遣百分之一以攻匈奴，譬犹以强弩射且溃之痈也，必不留行矣。
现代文：现在凭藉漠的强盛，有万倍于匈奴的资财，分出其中的百分之一用来进攻匈奴，就好像是用强劲的弩机来射穿溃烂的毒疮，必定不会遇到什么阻碍。
English: Now, with the strength of the desert, with ten thousand times the wealth of the Xiongnu, to allocate one percent of it to attack the Xiongnu is like using a powerful hammer to shoot through a festering sore, and will certainly not encounter any obstacles.

古文：若是，则北发月氏可得而臣也。
现代文：如果这样征服了匈奴，那么向北征召月氏来，可使他们臣服。
English: If the Xiongnu were conquered in this way, then the recruitment of the Yue clan to the north could make them submit.

古文：臣故曰 击之便 。 
现代文：臣因此说用兵征伐有利。 
English: The vassal therefore said that it would be advantageous to use troops for the campaign.

古文：安国曰： 不然。
现代文：韩安国继续辩驳，说： 王恢所说不对。
English: Han An Guo continued to argue, saying: What Wang Huai said is not right.

古文：臣闻用兵者以饱待饥，正治以待其乱，定舍以待其劳。
现代文：我听说凡用兵打仗，一定要用饱待饥、整顿治理自己而待敌人？昆乱，安定休息而待敌人劳累。
English: I heard that anyone who uses soldiers to fight a war must use satiety to wait for hunger, rectification to govern oneself and wait for the enemy? Kunlun, stable rest and wait for the enemy to be tired.

古文：故接兵覆众，伐国堕城，常坐而役敌国，此圣人之兵也。
现代文：这样两兵相接，打败敌人，征伐敌国，摧毁他们的城池，经常轻而易举地就可以奴役敌国，这是圣人用兵之法。
English: In this way, two soldiers meet, defeat the enemy, conquer the enemy country, destroy their city, and often easily enslave the enemy country. This is the sage's method of warfare.

古文：且臣闻之，冲风之衰，不能起毛羽；强弩之末，力不能入鲁缟。
现代文：况且我听说，两股疾风相冲突则威力变弱，甚至不能吹动起羽毛；强弩之末，力量不能穿过鲁缟。
English: Moreover, I have heard that when two strong winds collide, the strength of the crane is weakened, and it can not even blow up feathers; after a strong gust, the power can not pass through the rope.

古文：夫盛之有衰，犹朝之必莫也。
现代文：因此，强盛极则必衰，正像早晨一定会转入晚上。
English: For this reason, the strongest rise and fall, just as the morning must turn into evening.

古文：今将卷甲轻举，深入长驱，难以为功；从行则迫胁，衡行则中绝，疾则粮乏，徐则后利，不至千里，人马乏食。
现代文：现在将要披挂锷甲轻率出去，深入敌人的纵深，一定很难取得成就，建立功业。纵向深入则两翼受到威胁；横向深入则中路容易被击破，军行迅速，则粮食匮乏，供应不上；行动慢了，则不能获得胜利，未等到深入千里之地，人马就会缺乏粮食。
English: Now it will be rash to put on armor and go deep into the enemy's depth, it will be difficult to achieve achievements and build achievements. If you go deep vertically, the two wings will be threatened; if you go deep horizontally, the middle road will be easily broken; if you go quickly, there will be a shortage of grain and it will not be supplied; if you move slowly, you will not be able to win; if you do not go deep into the land of thousands of miles, you will lack grain.

古文：兵法曰： 遗人获也。 
现代文：造诚如兵法上说： 把军队送给敌人，让他们俘获。 
English: As it is said in the Art of War: Send the army to the enemy and let them capture it.

古文：意者有它缪巧可以禽之，则臣不知也；不然，则未见深入之利也。
现代文：如果主张用兵的人有其他的技巧和办法可以擒拿敌人，那我就不得而知了；如果不是这样，那么我看不到深入敌人纵深进攻会有什么好处。
English: If the advocates of the use of arms have other arts and means of capturing the enemy, I do not know; if not, I do not see what advantage there is in penetrating the enemy.

古文：臣故曰 勿击便 。 恢曰： 不然。
现代文：我因此仍然主张不用兵有利。 王恢说： 韩安国所说不对。
English: Therefore, I still advocate the advantage of not using soldiers.Wang Huai said: what Hanan Guo said is not right.

古文：夫草木遭霜者，不可以风过；清水明镜，不可以形逃；通方之士，不可以文乱。
现代文：草木如遭霜打就经不起风吹，很快凋零；清水像明镜一样，在它裹面美与丑都可以显现出来；精通大道、学问渊博的人，不可能用话打乱他的心思。
English: Grass and trees, when frosted, cannot stand the wind and soon wither away; clear water is like a mirror, in which beauty and ugliness can be seen; a person who is well-versed in the road and well-learned cannot be distracted by words.

古文：今臣言击之者，固非发而深入也，将顺因单于之欲，诱而致之边，吾选枭骑壮士阴伏而处以为之备，审遮险阻以为其戒。
现代文：现在下我所说进攻的办法，本来就不是一定要发兵深入匈奴腹地作战，而是将顺从单于的欲望，用利引诱他前来到达边境，我们选择精明、强干、勇敢、迅猛的骑兵部队偷偷埋伏而作为准备，审视考察有遮拦险阻的地方来加强警戒。
English: Now, the method of attack I am talking about is not necessarily to send troops to fight deep into the Hun hinterland, but to obey the desires of the one and lure him to the border with interest. We choose a shrewd, strong, brave and swift cavalry force to secretly ambush and prepare, and examine and inspect the place where there are obstacles to strengthen vigilance.

古文：吾势已定，或营其左，或营其右，或当其前，或绝其后，单于可禽，百全必取。 上曰： 善。 
现代文：我们的大势确定下来后，在单于前来路上的前后左右都安营扎寨，进可以抵挡，退可以断绝其后路，这样单于可以擒拿，一定会大获全胜。 皇上说： 很好。 
English: After our general situation was determined, we set up camp in front of, behind, and to the right and left of the enemy on the road ahead, so that we could resist the enemy's advance and cut off the enemy's retreat, so that we could capture the enemy and win a complete victory. The emperor said, "Very good."

古文：乃从恢议，阴使聂壹为间，亡入匈奴，谓单于曰： 吾能斩马邑令丞，以城降，财物可尽得。 
现代文：于是采纳了王恢的建议。暗中派遣聂壹为间谍，逃到匈奴那裹，对单于说： 我能够杀掉马邑的县令、县丞，以马邑城向您投降，这样财物便可尽得。 
English: So he accepted Wang Hui's suggestion. He secretly sent Xing Yi as a spy and fled to the Huns, telling Xian Yu: "I can kill the county magistrate and the county magistrate of Ma'i and surrender Ma'i City to you, so you can have all the property."

古文：单于爱信，以为然而许之。
现代文：单于很亲信他，觉得他说得有理，便答应了他。
English: I just trusted him and thought he was right, so I agreed.

古文：聂壹乃诈斩死罪囚，县其头马邑城下，视单于使者为信，曰： 马邑长吏已死，可急来。 
现代文：聂壹便回来，斩了死囚的头，悬挂在马邑城下，假称是马邑城的官吏，以取信于单子的使者。说： 马邑城的高级长官都已死了，你们可以赶快来。 
English: He came back, cut off the heads of the condemned, and hung them at the foot of the city of Mayi, pretending to be an official of the city of Mayi, in order to gain the trust of the envoy, saying: The senior officials of the city of Mayi are dead, you can come quickly.

古文：于是单于穿塞，将十万骑入武州塞。
现代文：于是单于穿过边塞，率领十余万骑兵进入武州塞。
English: So he marched through the border fortress alone, leading more than a hundred thousand cavalry into the Wuzhou fortress.

古文：当是时，汉伏兵车骑材官三十余万，匿马邑旁谷中。
现代文：这个时候，汉埋伏了车骑、材官三十余万，隐藏在马邑城旁边的山谷裹。
English: At this time, the Han ambushed more than 300,000 cavalry and cavalry, hiding in the valley near the city of Maiyi.

古文：卫尉李广为骁骑将军，太仆公孙贺为轻车将军，大行王恢为将屯将军，太中大夫李息为材官将军。御史大夫安国为护军将军，诸将皆属。
现代文：卫尉李广为骁骑将军，太仆公孙贺为轻车将军，大行王恢为将屯将军，太中大夫李息为材官将军，御史大夫韩安国为护军将军，诸将皆由护军将军统领。
English: Guardsman Li Guang is the cavalry general, the eunuch Gong Sun He is the light vehicle general, Da Xing Wang Wei is the general of the garrison, the middle-ranking doctor Li Xi is the general of the personnel officer, and the chief historian Han An Guo is the general of the garrison. All generals are led by the general of the garrison.

古文：约单于入马邑纵兵。王恢、李息别从代主击辎重。
现代文：众将领约定，单于一进入马邑城，汉的伏兵就奔驰出击，王恢、李息另外从代郡专门攻击匈奴的辎重。
English: The generals agreed that as soon as they entered the city of Mayi, the Han ambush troops would attack, and Wang Hui and Li Xixi would specifically attack the Hun troops from Dai County.

古文：于是单于入塞，未至马邑百余里，觉之，还去。
现代文：当时单于进入长城武州塞，距离马邑尚有一百多里，发觉其中有诈，因此引兵撤回。
English: At that time, just entering the Great Wall of Wuzhou, there were still more than a hundred miles away from Maye, and it was found that there was fraud, so the introduction of troops was withdrawn.

古文：语在《匈奴传》。
现代文：有关情况在《匈奴传》中。
English: The incident is recorded in the "History of the Huns."

古文：塞下传言单于已去，汉兵追至塞，度弗及，王恢等皆罢兵。
现代文：塞下传说单于已经退兵离去，汉兵追至边塞，估计追不上了，王恢等将领于是就都撤兵而还。
English: According to the legend, the Chinese soldiers chased the Han soldiers to the border fortress, but they couldn't catch them, so Wang Hui and other generals withdrew and returned.

古文：上怒恢不出击单于辎重也，恢曰： 始约为入马邑城，兵与单于接，而臣击其辎重，可得利。今单于不至而还，臣以三万人众不敌，祗取辱。
现代文：皇帝对王恢不出击匈奴的辎重而非常生气，王恢说： 当初约定匈奴一进入马邑城，马邑的军队与单于交战以后，臣攻击他的辎重，这样才有利可图，现在单于不入马邑而退兵，臣以三万人不能与之对抗，衹会自取败辱而已。
English: The emperor was very angry with Wang Hui for not attacking the Hun's army. Wang Hui said: At first, it was agreed that once the Hun entered the city of Mayi, after the army of Mayi and Shan had engaged in battle, the vassal would attack his army, so that it would be profitable. Now, it is only because the vassal did not enter Mayi and withdrew, and the vassal could not fight against it with thirty thousand people. The warlord would only be humiliated.

古文：固知还而斩，然完陛下士三万人。 
现代文：臣固然知道回来必会问斩，但这样却可以保全陛下的三万军士。 
English: Of course, the vassal knew that he would be killed when he returned, but in this way, he could protect His Majesty's thirty thousand soldiers.

古文：于是下恢廷尉，廷尉当恢逗桡，当斩。
现代文：于是把王恢交给廷尉治罪，廷尉判他怯阵避敌，应当问斩。
English: Therefore, Wang Kaili was handed over to the imperial lieutenant to be punished. The imperial lieutenant judged him to have shied away from the enemy and should be beheaded.

古文：恢行千金丞相蚡，蚡不敢言上，而言于太后曰： 王恢首为马邑事，今不成而朱恢，是为匈奴报仇也。 
现代文：王恢暗中送了千金给丞相田蚡。田蚡不敢向皇上求情，而对太后说道： 王恢最先倡议马邑诱敌之计，现在不成功而杀掉他，这是替匈奴报仇啊！ 
English: Wang Huai secretly sent a large sum of money to the chancellor of the imperial court, Tian Xuan. Tian Xuan did not dare to plead with the emperor, but said to the empress dowager: Wang Hui first proposed Ma Yu's plan to lure the enemy, and now unsuccessfully killed him. This is revenge for the Xiongnu!

古文：上朝太后，太后以蚡言告上。
现代文：皇帝朝见太后时，太后就把田蚜的话告诉皇上。
English: When the emperor met the empress dowager for the first time, the empress dowager told the emperor about Tian Xuan's words.

古文：上曰： 首为马邑事者恢，故发天下兵数十万，从其言，为此。
现代文：皇上说： 最初，倡议马邑计划的是王恢，所以发动天下士兵数十万人，听从他的计划而出击匈奴。
English: The emperor said, "In the beginning, it was Wang Wei who proposed the Ma'i plan, so he mobilized hundreds of thousands of soldiers from all over the world to follow his plan and attack the Xiongnu.

古文：且纵单于不可得，恢所部击，犹颇可得，以尉士大夫心。
现代文：况且，纵使这次擒不到单于，如果王恢率领的部队突击匈奴的辎重，也许颇能有些战果，以安抚将士之心。
English: Moreover, even if this battle is not the only one, if the troops led by Wang Wei attack the heavy burden of the Xiongnu, they may be able to achieve some results to appease the hearts of the soldiers.

古文：今不诛恢，无以谢天下。 
现代文：现在如果不杀王恢，就无法向天下人谢罪。 
English: If you don't kill Wang Wei now, you won't be able to apologize to the world.

古文：于是恢闻，乃自杀。
现代文：王恢听说了，于是自杀。
English: Wang Hui heard about this and committed suicide.

古文：安国为人多大略，知足以当世取舍，而出于忠厚。
现代文：安国这个人有很深的谋略，其智谋皆合于世俗取舍的标准，但都出于忠厚之心。
English: An Guo has a deep strategy. His strategies are all in line with the standards of worldly choice, but they are all out of a loyal heart.

古文：贪耆财利，然所推举皆廉士贤于己者。
现代文：虽贪嗜钱财，但他所推举的，都是比他自己贤能的廉洁之士。
English: Although he is greedy for money, the people he chooses are all more virtuous and honest than himself.

古文：于梁举壶遂、臧固，至它，皆天下名士，士亦以此称慕之，唯天子以为国器。
现代文：在銮时推举壹崖？呓周，其他的也都是天下的名士，士人因此对他很称赞和仰慕。即使天子也认为他是治国之才。
English: In ancient times, a cliff was chosen, and the others were all famous people in the world, so the scholars praised and admired him very much. Even the Son of Heaven thought that he was a talent for governing the country.

古文：安国为御史大夫五年，丞相蚡薨。
现代文：韩安国当了御史大夫五年，丞相旦蚣去世。
English: Han An Guo served as the imperial secretary for five years, and the imperial secretary died.

古文：安国行丞相事，引堕车，蹇。
现代文：垄宣厘兼代丞相的职务，替天子前导时坠下车，跌跛了腿。
English: Reng Xuan Li, who also held the post of acting prime minister, fell off the bus while leading the parade and broke his leg.

古文：上欲用安国为丞相，使使视，蹇甚，乃更以平棘侯薛泽为丞相。安国病免，数月，愈，复为中尉。
现代文：天子想任用韩安国为丞相，派人去探望他，发现他跛得很厉害，于是改用平棘侯蓝崖为丞相，垄翅因病免职数月，腿伤痊愈了，皇上再任他为中尉。
English: The emperor wanted to appoint Han An Guo as the prime minister, so he sent someone to visit him and found that he was very ill, so he changed the prime minister to Ping Thorn, Hou Lan Yai, Ren Ying was relieved of his duties for several months due to illness, his leg wound was healed, and the emperor reappointed him as a lieutenant.

古文：岁余，徒为卫尉。
现代文：过了一年多，改任为卫尉。
English: After more than a year, he was reassigned to the rank of lieutenant.

古文：而将军卫青等击匈奴，破龙城。
现代文：这时将军卫青等攻击包躯，大破垄嘘。
English: At this time, General Wei Qing and others attacked the whole body, and it was torn to shreds.

古文：明年，匈奴大入边。
现代文：第二年，包抠又大举入侵边境。
English: The following year, Bautzen again invaded the border on a large scale.

古文：语在《青传》。
现代文：有关情况在《卫青传》中。
English: The relevant information is in "Weixing Biography."

古文：安国为材官将军，屯渔阳，捕生口虏，言匈奴远去。
现代文：韩安国为材官将军，屯驻在渔阳，安国捕掠得敌人活口，说匈奴已经远远退去。
English: Han An Guo was a general officer, stationed in Yuyang. An Guo captured the enemy alive, saying that the Xiongnu had retreated far away.

古文：即上言方佃作时，请且罢屯。
现代文：便上书说，现在正当农忙时节，请求暂时停止屯军。
English: He then wrote a letter saying that now is the time of the agricultural busy season, requesting the temporary suspension of the garrison.

古文：罢屯月余，匈奴大入上谷、渔阳。
现代文：停止屯驻才一个月，匈壑又大举进攻上查、涩昙。
English: It was only a month after the stationing was stopped that Hungary launched a large-scale offensive against Shangcha and Shibuya.

古文：安国壁乃有七百余人，出与战，安国伤，入壁。
现代文：岂国营中仅有七百多人，出营与匈奴交战，韩安国受伤，退回营地中。
English: There were only more than seven hundred people in the camp, who went out to fight the Huns, and Han An Guo was injured and returned to the camp.

古文：匈奴虏略千余人及畜产去。
现代文：包塑俘虏掠夺了干余人及牲畜财物而去。
English: The plastic-wrapped captives plundered the remaining people and livestock and property and left.

古文：上怒，使使责让安国。
现代文：天子大怒，派使者责备韩安国。
English: Enraged, the emperor sent an envoy to reprimand Hanan.

古文：徙益东，屯右北平。
现代文：更令他往东迁移，屯驻在右北平。
English: Moreover, he was forced to move to the east and settled in Right Beiping.

古文：是时，虏言当入东方。
现代文：因为当时的俘虏说匈奴将从东方入侵。
English: Because the prisoners at that time said that the Huns would invade from the east.

古文：安国始为御史大夫及护军，后稍下迁。新壮将军卫青等有功，益贵。
现代文：韩安国当初任职御史大夫及护军将军，后来稍微被疏远而降职，而新得宠且年轻的将军卫青等又有军功，更受到皇上的重用。
English: At the beginning, Han An Guo served as Imperial Historian and General of the Imperial Guard. Later, he was slightly alienated and demoted, while the newly favored and young General Wei Qing and others had military merits, and were even more heavily used by the emperor.

古文：安国既斥疏，将屯又失亡多，甚自愧，幸得罢归，乃益东徙，意忽忽不乐，数月，病呕血死。
现代文：韩安国既被排斥疏远，在边境领军驻防伤亡又甚多，内心觉得十分惭愧。希望有幸能够回到朝廷，却更被调往东边屯驻，心中觉得很失意而闷闷不乐。过了几个月，生病呕血而死去。
English: In addition to being ostracized and alienated, there were many casualties among the leading troops stationed at the border, and I felt very ashamed. I hoped to be fortunate enough to return to the imperial court, but I was transferred to the east side, and I felt very frustrated and unhappy. After a few months, I got sick and vomited blood and died.

古文：壶遂与太史迁等定汉律历，官至詹事，其人深中笃行君子。
现代文：壶遂与太史司马迁等一起修订汉代律历，作官到詹事，这个人廉正忠厚、言行一致，是德行高尚的人。
English: Jug then revised the Han Dynasty legal calendar together with Taishi Sima Qian and others, and became an official to Zhanji. This person is honest and loyal, consistent in words and deeds, and is a virtuous and noble person.

古文：上方倚欲以为相，会其病卒。
现代文：皇上正要倚仗他来做汉丞相，适逢他得病去世了。
English: The emperor was about to rely on him to become the prime minister of Han, when he fell ill and died.

古文：赞曰： 窦婴、田蚡皆以外戚重，灌夫用一时决策，而各名显，并位卿相，大业定矣。
现代文：赞曰：窦婴、田蚡都是因为外戚的关系而身居显要的职位，灌夫则是因一次下定决心有所表现而显名于当时。他们都位于卿相的行列中，千秋大业已经确定。
English: Zang said: Dou Ying and Tian Yao were both in prominent positions because of their foreign relatives, and Gan Fu was famous at the time because of his determination to make a difference. They are both in the ranks of the noblemen, and the great cause has been determined.

古文：然婴不知时变，夫亡术而不逊，蚡负贵而骄溢。
现代文：然而宝婴未免太不识时务，灌夫又不学无术而不谦逊，田蚡仗恃着自己显贵的地位而曰益骄横跋扈。
English: However, the treasure baby is too ignorant of the current affairs, the leader is not learned and skillful but not humble, and the field is proud of its prominent position.

古文：凶德参会，待时而发，藉福区区其间，恶能救斯败哉！
现代文：彼此之间凶恶的德行互相碰撞，一遇到合适的时机就显露发作，虽然藉福很诚恳地在他们中间斡旋，可怎么能够挽救他们的衰败呢？
English: Between them the evil virtues collide, and at the right moment they burst forth, but how can they be saved from decay, even if Fortune were to mediate between them with sincerity?

古文：以韩安国之见器，临其挚而颠坠，陵夷以忧死，遇合有命，悲夫！
现代文：就凭韩安国的见识器量，在将要高登相位之时却遭病患而没有成功，最后慢慢地忧虑而死，人的遭遇真是命中注定，可悲啊！
English: Just by relying on the amount of insight of Hanan, when he was about to climb to the top, he was ill and did not succeed, and finally he slowly died of worry. What happened to him was really predestined, sad!

古文：若王恢为兵首而受其咎，岂命也乎？
现代文：像王恢首先倡议对匈奴用兵却反遭因此而带来的祸患，遣难道是天命所定吗？
English: Like Wang Wei, who first advocated the use of troops against the Huns, but suffered the disaster brought about by this, is the expulsion determined by fate?

