古文：万章问曰： 宋，小国也。今将行王政，齐楚恶而伐之，则如之何？ 
现代文：万章问： 宋国是个小国，现在想要推行王政，齐国、楚国却讨厌它而讨伐它，应该怎么做呢？ 
English: Wan Zhang asked: Song is a small country, and now it wants to implement royal rule, but Qi and Chu hate it and fight it. What should be done?

古文：孟子曰： 汤居亳，与葛为邻，葛伯放而不祀。
现代文：孟子说： 成汤居住在亳地，与葛国相邻，葛伯放纵无道，不祭祀先祖神灵。
English: Mencius said: Cheng Tang lived in Shantian, which was adjacent to Ge Province. Ge Bo was indulgent and did not worship the ancestral deities.

古文：汤使人问之曰： 何为不祀？ 
现代文：汤派人询问他： 为什么不祭祀？ 
English: Tang sent someone to ask him: Why don't you offer sacrifices?

古文：曰： 无以供牺牲也。 
现代文：葛伯说： 没有做祭祀用的牲畜。 
English: Gerber said: "There are no sacrificial animals.

古文：汤使遗之牛羊。葛伯食之，又不以祀。
现代文：汤派人送给他们牛羊，葛伯把牛羊吃了，还是不祭祀。
English: Tang sent someone to give them cattle and sheep, but Ge Bo ate the cattle and sheep and still did not sacrifice them.

古文：汤又使人问之曰： 何为不祀？ 
现代文：汤又派人询问他： 为什么不祭祀？ 
English: Tang also sent someone to ask him: Why don't you offer sacrifices?

古文：曰： 无以供粢盛也。 
现代文：葛伯说： 没有谷物来做祭品。 
English: "There is no grain for the offering," Gerber said.

古文：汤使亳众往为之耕，老弱馈食。
现代文：汤派毫地的民众去为他们耕田，让老年人和小孩给耕田的人送饭。
English: Tang sent villagers to farm the land for them, and asked the elderly and children to bring food to the farmers.

古文：葛伯率其民，要其有酒食黍稻者夺之，不授者杀之。
现代文：葛伯带领着他的民众拦住那些带着酒食米饭的人抢夺，不给就杀掉。
English: Gerber led his people to stop those with alcohol and rice from robbing and killing them.

古文：有童子以黍肉饷，杀而夺之。书曰： 葛伯仇饷。 
现代文：有个小孩带着米饭和肉，他们抢走了食物还把他杀掉了。《尚书》上说： 葛伯与送饭者为仇。 
English: There was a child with rice and meat, they robbed the food and killed him. "Shangshuo" said: Ge Bo was angry with the person who brought the food.

古文：此之谓也。
现代文：就是指这件事。
English: This is exactly what is happening.

古文：为其杀是童子而征之，四海之内皆曰： 非富天下也，为匹夫匹妇复雠也。 
现代文：成汤因为葛伯杀死了这个小孩子而去征讨葛国，天下的老百姓都说： 这不是贪图天下的财富，这是为平民百姓复仇。 
English: Cheng Tang went to fight Ge Bo because he had killed the little boy, and the common people all over the world said: This is not coveting the wealth of the world, this is revenge for the common people.

古文： 汤始征，自葛载 ，十一征而无敌于天下。
现代文：成汤的征讨，从葛国开始，先后征伐十一次而无敌于天下。
English: Chengtang's conquest, starting from Ge, has been conquered eleven times and is invincible in the world.

古文：东面而征，西夷怨；南面而征，北狄怨，曰： 奚为后我？ 
现代文：当他东向征讨，西面的夷人就埋怨，当他南向征讨，北面的狄人也埋怨，都说： 为什么把我们放在后面呢？ 
English: When he went to conquer in the east, the barbarians in the west complained. When he went to conquer in the south, the barbarians in the north also complained. They all said, "Why did you leave us behind?"

古文：民之望之，若大旱之望雨也。
现代文：百姓盼望他，就像大旱时候盼望下雨一样。
English: The people hope for him, just as they hope for rain in times of drought.

古文：归市者弗止，芸者不变，诛其君，吊其民，如时雨降。
现代文：所到之处，赶集的不停止买卖，种田的不停止耕耘，商汤讨伐暴君，慰问他们的老百姓，就像及时雨一样，老百姓非常喜欢。《尚书》上说： 等待我们的君王，君王来了我们就不用受罪了。 
English: Wherever they go, they do not stop trading and collecting, they do not stop cultivating, they fight tyrants and comfort their people, just like timely rain, the people like it very much. "Shang Shu" said: Wait for our king, when the king comes we will not have to suffer.

古文：民大悦。书曰： 徯我后，后来其无罚。  有攸不惟臣，东征，绥厥士女，匪厥玄黄，绍我周王见休，惟臣附于大邑周。 
现代文： 有攸国助纣为虐不臣服，周王向东征讨，安抚那里的男女民众，他们用筐装着黑色和黄色的丝帛，以事奉周王为荣，最后他们臣服于大周国。 
English: With the help of You Guo, who refused to submit to the tyranny, King Zhou marched to the east to pacify the men and women there. They carried baskets of black and yellow silk scarves and were proud to serve King Zhou. In the end, they submitted to the Great Zhou.

古文：其君子实玄黄于匪以迎其君子，其小人箪食壶浆以迎其小人，救民于水火之中，取其残而已矣。太誓曰： 我武惟扬，侵于之疆，则取于残，杀伐用张，于汤有光。 
现代文：那儿的官吏带着用筐装着的丝绸来迎接周的官吏，那儿的老百姓用筐装着饭食，用壶盛着饮水来迎接周的士兵。可见武王出师为的只是从水火中解救百姓，除掉残酷暴君。《泰誓》上说： 我们的武力要发扬，攻入他们的国土，除掉那残暴的君主，用杀伐来彰明正义，比成汤的功业更辉煌。 
English: The officials there brought silk baskets to meet Zhou's officials, and the common people there welcomed Zhou's soldiers with food in baskets and drinking water in jars. It can be seen that King Wu's mission was only to save the people from fire and water and to get rid of the cruel tyrant. "The Pledge" said: "Our armed forces must advance, invade their land, get rid of the cruel monarch, and use killing to demonstrate justice, which is more brilliant than the achievements of Chengtang."

古文：不行王政云尔，苟行王政，四海之内皆举首而望之，欲以为君。齐楚虽大，何畏焉？ 
现代文：只怕宋君不推行王政，如果真能推行王政，普天之下民众都会抬头盼望，要拥护这样的人来做君主；齐国、楚国尽管强大，又有什么可怕的呢？ 
English: It is only to be feared that Song Jun will not carry out royal rule. If he can really carry out royal rule, the people all over the world will look up and hope to support such a person to be a monarch. Even though Qi and Chu are powerful, what is there to fear?

