古文：唐世盐铁转运使在扬州，尽斡利权，判官多至数十人，商贾如织。
现代文：唐代盐铁转运使住在扬州，全面掌管着财政大权，判官多到几十人，商人往来如穿梭。
English: During the Tang Dynasty, the salt and iron transporter lived in Yangzhou and was in overall control of financial power. There were dozens of judges, and merchants shuttled back and forth.

古文：故谚称 扬一益二 ，谓天下之盛，扬为一而蜀次之也。
现代文：所以民谚说： 扬一益二 ，讲的是天下最繁盛的，扬州为第一，而四川的益州次于它。
English: Therefore, the folk proverb says: "Yang, Yizhou, Yi Cang," referring to the most prosperous in the world, Yangzhou is the first, and Yizhou in Sichuan is second.

古文：杜牧之有 春风十里珠帘 之句，张祜诗云： 十里长街市井连，月明桥上看神仙。
现代文：杜牧之有 春风十里珠帘 的诗句，张祜的诗说： 十里长街市井连，月明桥上看神仙。
English: Du Mu Zhi You has a poem about the spring breeze and the ten-mile bead curtain, and Zhang Ye's poem says: Ten-mile long street, the city of Jinglian, the moonlight bridge to see the immortals.

古文：人生只合扬州死，禅智山光好墓田。 
现代文：人生只合扬州死，禅智山光好墓田。 
English: Life only fits Yangzhou death, Zen wisdom mountain light good graveyard.

古文：王建诗云： 夜市千灯照碧云，高楼红袖客纷纷。
现代文：王建的诗道： 夜市千灯照碧云，高楼红袖客纷纷。
English: Wang Jian's poem: The night market's thousand lights shine brightly, and the high-rise red-sleeved customers come one after another.

古文：如今不似时平日，犹自笙歌彻晓闻。 
现代文：如今不似时平日，狄自笙歌彻晓闻。 
English: Now, unlike ordinary days, Di has heard the song from the beginning.

古文：徐凝诗云： 天下三分明月夜，二分无赖是扬州。 
现代文：徐凝的诗道： 天下三分明月夜，二分无赖是扬州。 
English: Xu Rong's poem: The world is divided into three parts: the bright moon, the night, and Yangzhou.

古文：其盛可知矣。
现代文：当时的盛况就可想而知了。
English: The pomp of that time can be imagined.

古文：自毕师铎、孙儒之乱，荡为丘墟。
现代文：自从毕师铎、孙儒的战乱，扬州被扫荡成为废墟。
English: Since the wars of Bi Shizhen and Sun Ru, Yangzhou has been swept into ruins.

古文：杨行密复茸之，稍成壮藩，又毁于显德。
现代文：杨行密重新修复扬州，渐渐成为宏伟的藩镇，却又在后周显德年间被烧毁。
English: Yang Xingmi restored Yangzhou again and it gradually became a magnificent han town, but it was burned down again during the reign of Zhou Xiande.

古文：本朝承平百七十年，尚不能及唐之什一，今日真可酸鼻也！
现代文：我们宋朝太平了一百七十年，还不能赶上唐朝的十分之一，现在真令人鼻子发酸哪！
English: We, the Song Dynasty, have been peaceful for one hundred and seventy years, but we still can't catch up with one tenth of the Tang Dynasty. Now it really makes our noses turn sour!

