古文：耶律屋质耶律吼耶律安抟耶律洼耶律颓昱耶律挞烈
现代文：耶律屋质，字敌辇，世系上出自孟父房。资质简约沉静，富有器局与见识，看重对别人的承诺。
English: The quality of the Yeluda roof, the word "enemy," comes from the Meng family. The quality is simple and quiet, rich in structure and insight, and values commitment to others.

古文：遇事造次，处之从容，人莫能测。
现代文：遇到仓猝间发生的突然事变，能够从容处置，他人无法想象。
English: When encountering a sudden event that occurs in a hurry, they can handle it calmly, which others cannot imagine.

古文：博学，知天文。
现代文：博学多识，通晓天文。
English: Erudite and knowledgeable, well versed in astronomy.

古文：会同间，为惕隐。
现代文：会同年间，任惕隐。
English: In the same year, Ren Tiyin was born.

古文：太宗崩，诸大臣立世宗，太后闻之，怒甚，遣皇子李胡以兵逆击，遇安端、刘哥等于泰德泉，败归。
现代文：太宗崩逝，诸大臣立世宗，太后听说，十分恼怒，派皇子李胡派兵迎击，与安端、刘哥等人相遇于泰德泉，兵败而回。
English: Emperor Taizong passed away, the ministers established Shizong, and the empress dowager heard that she was very angry and sent the prince Li Hu to send troops to meet the attack. She met with Anduan, Liu Ge and others in Taidequan, but they were defeated and returned.

古文：李胡尽执世宗臣僚家属，谓守者曰： 我战不克，先殪此曹！ 
现代文：李胡将世宗之臣僚家属全部抓住，对看守的人说： 我要是没有获胜，先杀了这伙人！ 
English: Li Hu seized all the family members of Sejong's ministers and said to the guards: "If I don't win, kill this group first!"

古文：人皆恟涣相谓曰： 若果战，则是父子兄弟相夷矣！ 
现代文：人们都惊骇无比地互相传言说： 如果真的打起来，那就是父子兄弟互相残杀了！ 
English: People were so shocked that they were whispering to each other: "If there really is a fight, it's because the father and son killed each other!"

古文：军次潢河横渡，隔岸相拒。
现代文：大军驻扎于潢河两岸，双方隔着河岸互相拒战。
English: Large armies were stationed on both sides of the Wei River, and the two sides refused to fight each other across the riverbank.

古文：时屋质从太后，世宗以屋质善筹，欲行间，乃设事奉书，以试太后。
现代文：当时耶律屋质跟随太后左右，世宗因为屋质善于筹划，想离间他与太后的关系，便写了想侍奉太后的书信，来试探太后。
English: At that time, Yerutaka followed the empress dowager around. Since Yerutaka was good at planning, Sejong wanted to sever the relationship between him and the empress dowager, so he wrote a letter to test the empress dowager by wanting to serve her.

古文：太后得书，以示屋质。
现代文：太后得到书信，拿给屋质看。
English: The empress dowager received the letter and showed it to the roofer.

古文：屋质读竟，言曰： 太后佐太祖定天下，故臣愿竭死力。
现代文：屋质读完信，说道： 太后辅佐太祖平定天下，所以我愿意竭尽死力来辅助。
English: After reading the letter, Yakushi said, "The Empress Dowager assisted the Grandfather in pacifying the world, so I'm willing to do my best to help."

古文：若太后见疑，臣虽欲尽忠，得乎？
现代文：如果太后对我有疑心，我就是想要尽忠，能行吗？
English: If the Empress has doubts about me, I just want to be loyal. Is that possible?

古文：为今之计，莫若以言和解，事必有成；否即宜速战，以决胜负。
现代文：现下可行的办法，不如通过言语沟通来和解，事情一定能成；要不然就该赶紧交战，以决定胜负。
English: The current feasible method is not as good as through verbal communication to reconcile, things must be able to be done; otherwise, it is time to fight to decide the outcome.

古文：然人心一摇，国祸不浅，惟太后裁察。 
现代文：然而人心一旦动摇，给国家酿出的祸患一定不浅，还请太后明察决断。 
English: However, once the people's hearts are shaken, the disaster brought to the country must be serious. I also asked the Empress Dowager to make a clear decision.

古文：太后曰： 我若疑卿，安肯以书示汝？ 
现代文：太后说 ：我如果对你有疑心，怎么会把书信给你看呢？ 
English: The Empress Dowager said, "If I have doubts about you, how can I show you the letter?"

古文：屋质对曰： 李胡、永康王皆太祖子孙，神器非移他族，何不可之有？
现代文：屋质回答说 ：李胡、永康王都是太祖的子孙，帝位又不是转移到了外族，有什么不可以的呢？
English: The eavesdropper replied, "Li Hu and King Yongkang are both descendants of the great-grandfather, and the imperial throne was not transferred to a foreign ethnic group. What's wrong with that?"

古文：太后宜思长策，与永康王和议。 
现代文：太后就应该考虑个长远之策，与永康王和谈。 
English: The empress dowager should consider a long-term strategy and have a peace talk with King Yongkang.

古文：太后曰： 谁可遣者？ 
现代文：太后说 ：谁可以出使呢？ 
English: The Empress Dowager said, "Who can send an envoy?"

古文：对曰： 太后不疑臣，臣请往。
现代文：回答说 ：太后如果不疑心我，就请让我去。
English: He replied, "If the Empress has no doubts about me, please let me go."

古文：万一永康王见听，庙社之福。 
现代文：万一永康王听从劝解，就是祖宗国家之福祉了。 
English: In the unlikely event that King Yongkang listens to the persuasion, the welfare of the ancestral country will be lost.

古文：太后乃遣屋质授书于帝。
现代文：太后便派屋质将信送给世宗。
English: The empress dowager then sent a messenger to deliver the letter to Shizong.

古文：帝遣宣徽使耶律海思复书，辞多不逊。
现代文：世宗派宣徽使耶律海思回信，很多言辞不客气。
English: The world sect's proclamation of the emblem made Yeruhai Si reply to the letter, and many words were not welcome.

古文：屋质谏曰： 书意如此，国家之忧未艾也。
现代文：屋质劝谏说 ：书信口气如此，只怕国家的忧患还没有止息。
English: "The tone of the letter is such that I'm afraid the country's troubles have not yet come to an end," he said.

古文：能释怨以安社稷，则臣以为莫若和好。 
现代文：如果愿意消除怨恨以安定社稷，那么我认为最好的办法只有和好。 
English: If we are willing to eliminate resentment in order to stabilize society, then I think the best way is reconciliation.

古文：帝曰： 彼众乌合，安能敌我？ 
现代文：世宗说 ：他们不过是一群乌合之众，怎么能抵挡我？ 
English: Sejong said: They are just a bunch of rabble, how can they resist me?

古文：屋质曰： 即不敌，奈骨肉何！
现代文：屋质说 ：即使他们抵挡不住，你又能把骨肉兄弟做何处置呢？
English: The housemate said, "Even if they can't resist, what can you do with your brothers and sisters?"

古文：况未知孰胜。借曰幸胜，诸臣之族执于李胡者，无噍类矣。
现代文：何况还不知谁取胜，假如您很幸运地获胜了，那么各位大臣之家属族亲中为李胡所拘执的人就将没有活路了。
English: What's more, we don't know who will win. If you are lucky enough to win, then the ministers' families and relatives who have been detained by Li Hu will have no way to survive.

古文：以此计之，惟和为善。 
现代文：照这么看来，只有和为上策。 
English: From this point of view, only reconciliation is the best policy.

古文：左右闻者失色。
现代文：左右听到此语的人都为他捏了一把汗。
English: Everyone around him who heard the words broke out in a sweat.

古文：帝良久，问曰： 若何而和？ 
现代文：隔了很久，世宗问他： 要怎么样才能和解？ 
English: After a long time, Sejong asked him: How can we reconcile?

古文：屋质对曰： 与太后相见，各纾忿恚，和之不难；不然，决战非晚。 
现代文：屋质回答说： 与太后见面，彼此解除怨恨，要和解就不难了；否则，要决战还不晚。 
English: The eunuch replied, "It is not difficult to meet the empress dowager, to get rid of mutual grudges, and to reconcile; otherwise, it is not too late to fight a decisive battle."

古文：帝然之，遂遣海思诣太后约和。
现代文：世宗觉得他言之有理，便派海思到太后处约定和好。
English: Sejong thought his words were reasonable, so he sent Haisi to the Empress Dowager to make peace.

古文：往返数日，议乃定。
现代文：来来往往几天，和议才算定下来。
English: People come and go for a few days, and then the peace talks are settled.

古文：始相见，怨言交让，殊无和意。
现代文：双方刚开始见面时，互相埋怨指责对方，毫无和解之心。
English: When the two sides first met, they complained and accused each other, with no intention of reconciliation.

古文：太后谓屋质曰： 汝当为我画之。 
现代文：太后对屋质说： 你应当为我想个办法。 
English: The empress dowager said to the householder: You should find a solution for me.

古文：屋质进曰： 太后与大王若能释怨，臣乃敢进说。 
现代文：屋质进言说： 太后与大王如果能够消除怨恨，我才能说出我的想法。 
English: "If the empress dowager and the king can get rid of their grudges, then I will be able to say what I think," he said.

古文：太后曰： 汝第言之。 
现代文：太后说 ：你只管说。 
English: The Empress Dowager said, "Just say it."

古文：屋质借谒者筹执之，谓太后曰： 昔人皇王在，何故立嗣圣？ 
现代文：屋质借用谒者之签筹捏在手中，对太后说： 当初人皇王在，为什么要立嗣圣皇帝？ 
English: Holding in his hands the signature of the borrower, he said to the empress dowager: In the beginning, there was the human emperor, so why set up the holy emperor?

古文：太后曰： 立嗣圣者，太祖遗旨。 
现代文：太后说： 立嗣圣，乃是太祖遗旨。 
English: The empress dowager said, "It is my great-grandfather's last will and testament.

古文：又曰： 大王何故擅立，不禀尊亲？ 
现代文：屋质又对世宗说： 大王您为什么擅自自立，不禀告一下祖母大人？ 
English: The roofer also said to the sejong, "Great king, why don't you stand up for yourself and sue your grandmother?"

古文：帝曰： 人皇王当立而不立，所以去之。 
现代文：世宗说 ：人皇王当立而没有被立，所以我舍弃祖母之亲不加禀告。 
English: King Sejong said, "A human king was crowned, but he was not installed, so I abandoned my grandmother's relatives without notice."

古文：屋质正色曰： 人皇王舍父母之国而奔唐，子道当如是耶？
现代文：屋质变了脸色，说： 人皇王舍弃父母之国而逃到唐国，为子之道应当是这样的吗？
English: The roofer frowned and said, "The human king abandoned the country of his parents and fled to Tang. Is this how it should be for a son?

古文：大王见太后，不少逊谢，惟怨是寻。
现代文：大王见到太后，没有丝毫的谦逊自责之心，只是一个劲地重申旧怨。
English: When the great king saw the empress dowager, he did not have the slightest sense of humility or self-reproach, but only vigorously reiterated his old grudge.

古文：太后牵于偏爱，托先帝遗命，妄授神器。
现代文：太后为偏爱之心所牵累，假托先帝遗命，妄自传授帝位。
English: The empress dowager, lured by her heart of favoritism, pretended to carry out the last emperor's behest and arrogantly conferred the imperial throne on herself.

古文：如此何敢望和，当速交战！ 
现代文：像这么做又怎么想望和解呢？你们还是赶紧开战吧。 
English: How can you hope for reconciliation when you act like this? You should go to war immediately.

古文：掷筹而退。
现代文：掷下筹签退了下去。
English: He threw down his chips and retreated.

古文：太后泣曰： 向太祖遭诸弟乱，天下荼毒，疮痍未复，庸可再乎！ 
现代文：太后哭着说 ：从前太祖遭逢诸弟之乱，天下百姓饱受残害，至今战争创伤未能平复，悲剧怎么能重演呢！ 
English: The Empress Dowager cried and said, "Once upon a time, our great-great-grandfather suffered from the War of the Brothers, and the people of the world were devastated. To this day, the wounds of war have not been healed. How can this tragedy be repeated?"

古文：乃索筹一。
现代文：于是要了一根筹签。
English: So I had to get a countersign.

古文：帝曰： 父不为而子为，又谁咎也！ 
现代文：世宗说 ：父亲没有做的由儿子来做，又有谁会怪罪呢？ 
English: Sejong said, "What the father did not do, the son did, and who is to blame?

古文：亦取筹而执。
现代文：也取了一根筹签握在手中。
English: He also took a chip and held it in his hands.

古文：左右感激，大恸。
现代文：左右之人触景伤情，大放悲声。
English: The people on both sides of the scene are hurt and mourn loudly.

古文：太后复谓屋质曰： 议既定，神器竟谁归？ 
现代文：太后又对屋质说： 和议既已确定，帝位究竟归谁呢？ 
English: The empress dowager also said to the conciliator, "Now that peace has been established, to whom does the imperial throne belong?

古文：屋质曰： 太后若授永康王，顺天合人，复何疑？ 
现代文：屋质说 ：太后如果将帝位给予永康王，顺乎天意，合乎人心，又有什么好迟疑的呢？ 
English: Roof quality said: If the empress dowager gives the throne to King Yongkang, in accordance with the will of heaven and the will of the people, what is there to hesitate about?

古文：李胡厉声曰： 我在，兀欲安得立！ 
现代文：李胡厉声说道： 有我在，兀欲怎么能够继立！ 
English: Li Hu said with a strong voice, "With me, how can you continue to exist?"

古文：屋质曰： 礼有世嫡，不传诸弟。
现代文：屋质说： 按礼制应传位给嫡长子，不传位给弟弟。
English: The roofer said: According to the etiquette, the position should be passed on to the eldest son, not the younger brother.

古文：昔嗣圣之立，尚以为非，况公暴戾残忍，人多怨讟。
现代文：当年嗣圣皇帝之即位，人们还认为不对，何况您暴虐残忍，人们大多对您怀有怨望之心。
English: The enthronement of the Heir Apparent Emperor that year was also considered to be wrong, not to mention that you were tyrannical and cruel, and most people harbored a grudge against you.

古文：万口一辞，愿立永康王，不可夺也。 
现代文：众口一辞，都愿立永康王，人心不可强夺。 
English: Everyone is willing to establish Yongkang King, and the hearts of the people should not be taken by force.

古文：太后顾李胡曰： 汝亦闻此言乎？
现代文：太后回头对李胡说 ：你也听到这句话了吗？
English: The Empress Dowager turned back to Li Hu and said, "Did you also hear this sentence?"

古文：汝实自为之！ 
现代文：事实上是你自己造成的啊！ 
English: In fact, you brought it on yourself!

古文：乃许立永康。
现代文：于是答应立永康王。
English: So he agreed to establish Yongkang.

古文：帝谓屋质曰： 汝与朕属尤近，何反助太后？ 
现代文：世宗对屋质说 ：你与朕的属下更亲近些，何以反而去帮助太后？ 
English: Sejong said to Yakushi, "You are closer to my subordinates, so why do you help the Empress Dowager?

古文：屋质对曰： 臣以社稷至重，不可轻付，故如是耳。 
现代文：屋质回答说 ：臣以为社稷最为重要，帝位不可轻易授受，所以这么做。 
English: The courtier replied, "The courtier thought that the social status was the most important, and the imperial throne should not be given or taken lightly, so he did this."

古文：上喜其忠。
现代文：皇上喜欢他的忠心。
English: The Emperor liked his loyalty.

古文：天禄二年，耶律天德、萧翰谋反下狱，惕隐刘哥及其弟盆都结天德等为乱。
现代文：天禄二年，耶律天德、萧翰因为谋反入狱，惕隐刘哥及其弟盆都勾结天德等人作乱。
English: In the second year of Tianlu, Yerutian De and Xiao Han were jailed for plotting rebellion, and Liu Ge and his younger brother Bin all colluded with Tiande and others to create turmoil.

古文：耶律石剌潜告屋质，屋质遽引入见，白其事。
现代文：耶律石剌暗中将情况告知屋质，屋质赶紧领他进宫见皇上，揭露此事。
English: Ye Lu Shijie secretly informed the roofer of the situation, and the roofer hurriedly took him to the palace to see the emperor and expose the matter.

古文：刘哥等不服，事遂寝。
现代文：刘哥等人不服，事情也就作罢。
English: Liu Ge and others were not satisfied, and the matter was dropped.

古文：未几，刘哥邀驾观樗蒲，捧觞上寿，袖刃而进。
现代文：不久，刘哥邀请皇上观看樗蒲，举杯祝寿，袖藏短刀给皇上进酒。
English: Soon after, Liu Ge invited the emperor to watch the irises, raised a glass to celebrate his birthday, and hid a short sword in his sleeve to give the emperor wine.

古文：帝觉，命执之，亲诘其事。
现代文：皇上发现了，下令拘捕他，亲自审问此事。
English: The Emperor found out, ordered his arrest, and personally investigated the matter.

古文：刘哥自誓，帝复不问。
现代文：刘哥发誓没有谋害皇上之意，于是皇上又不再继续察问此事。
English: Liu Ge swore that he did not intend to kill the emperor, so the emperor did not continue to investigate the matter.

古文：屋质奏曰： 当使刘哥与石剌对状，不可辄恕。 
现代文：屋质上奏说 ：应当让刘哥与石剌对质，不能随便就宽恕了。 
English: In his speech on the roof, he said: Liu Ge should be confronted with Shijie, and he should not be allowed to pardon him.

古文：帝曰： 卿为朕鞫之。 
现代文：皇上说 ：你替朕审讯吧。 
English: The emperor said, "You will stand trial for me."

古文：屋质率剑士往讯之，天德等伏罪。诛天德，杖翰，迁刘哥，以盆都使辖戛斯国。
现代文：屋质率领善于击剑的勇士前往讯问，天德等人伏罪，便将天德斩首，杖击萧翰，将刘哥贬职，派盆都出使辖戛斯国。
English: He led the warriors who were good at fencing to the interrogation. When Tian De and others committed the crime, he beheaded Tian De, beat Xiao Han with a cane, demoted Liu Ge, and sent Bondu to govern Gansu Province.

古文：三年，表列泰宁王察割阴谋事，上不听。
现代文：三年，屋质上表列举泰宁王察割阴谋谋反之事，皇上不听。
English: Three years later, the Emperor did not listen to Taining Wang's enumeration of the plot to overthrow the Emperor.

古文：五年，为右皮室详稳。
现代文：五年，任右皮室详稳。
English: Five years later, the right ventricle is stable.

古文：秋，上祭让国皇帝于行宫，与群臣皆醉，察割弑帝。
现代文：这年秋天，皇上祭祀让国皇帝于行宫，与群臣都喝醉了，察割杀害了皇上。
English: In the autumn of that year, the emperor held a sacrifice for the emperor of the country in the palace, and he and his courtiers were all drunk, and Tsakure killed the emperor.

古文：屋质闻有言 衣紫者不可失 ，乃易衣而出，亟遣人召诸王，乃喻禁卫长皮室等同力讨贼。
现代文：屋质听得有人说 穿紫衣的人不可放走 ，便换了衣服出门，赶紧派人召集诸王，又号召禁卫长皮室等同力讨伐反贼。
English: The roofer heard someone say that the person wearing purple should not be allowed to leave, so he changed his clothes and went out. He quickly sent someone to gather the kings, and also called for the chief of the palace guards and others to fight against the thieves.

古文：时寿安王归帐，屋质遣弟冲迎之。
现代文：适逢寿安王回帐中，屋质派弟弟耶律冲前去迎接他。
English: At the time of King Shouan's reply, Yao sent his younger brother Ye Lu to rush forward to meet him.

古文：王至，尚犹豫。
现代文：寿安王到来之后，还有些犹豫不定。
English: After the arrival of Shouan Wang, there was still some hesitation.

古文：屋质曰： 大王嗣圣子，贼若得之，必不容。
现代文：屋质说： 大王乃是嗣圣皇帝之子，贼人如果抓住您，必定不会让您活。
English: The eunuch said, "The great king is the son of the holy emperor. If a thief catches you, he will not let you live.

古文：群臣将谁事，社稷将谁赖？
现代文：那样，群臣将奉谁为主上？社稷将仰赖谁人来维持？
English: In that case, who will the ministers serve? Who will the society rely on to sustain it?

古文：万一落贼手，悔将何及？ 
现代文：万一帝位落入贼人之手，到那时后悔何及？ 
English: In the unlikely event that the throne falls into the hands of a thief, how much regret will there be by then?

古文：王始悟。
现代文：寿安王这才明白大局。
English: This is when Shouan Wang understands the big picture.

古文：诸将闻屋质出，相继而至。
现代文：诸将听说屋质出面，相继赶来。
English: When the generals heard that the roofer had come forward, they arrived one after another.

古文：迟明整兵，出贼不意，围之，遂诛察割。
现代文：黎明时分便整顿好了队伍，完全出乎贼人的意料，迅速地包围了他们，于是诛杀了察割。
English: At dawn, the team was put together and, completely unexpected by the thieves, quickly surrounded them and killed the inspector.

古文：乱既平，穆宗即位，谓屋质曰： 朕之性命，实出卿手。 
现代文：叛乱平定以后，穆宗即位，对屋质说 ：朕的性命，实在是由你保全下来的。 
English: After the rebellion was quelled, Mu Zong ascended to the throne, and said to Ya Zi: My life was really saved by you.

古文：命知国事，以逆党财产尽赐之，屋质固辞。
现代文：于是命他总管国事，将逆党的财产全部赐给屋质，屋质坚决推辞。
English: He then ordered him to be in charge of state affairs and to give all the property of the rebel party to Yakushi, but Yakushi firmly refused.

古文：应历五年，为北院大王，总山西事。
现代文：应历五年，任北院大王，总管山西事务。
English: After five years of service, he was appointed the Grand Prince of the Northern Yuan Dynasty, and was in charge of Shanxi affairs.

古文：保宁初，宋围太原，以屋质率兵往援，至白马岭，遣劲卒夜出间道，疾驰驻太原西，鸣鼓举火。
现代文：保宁初年，宋包围了太原，屋质率军前往救援，兵至白马岭，屋质派精兵连夜从小道风驰电掣般赶赴太原西面驻扎，并擂响战鼓，高举火炬。
English: In the first year of Boryeong, Song encircled Taiyuan, and Yakujo led his army to the rescue, the soldiers went to Baima-ling, and Yakujo sent his elite soldiers to the west side of Taiyuan overnight from the path of the wind rushing like an electric eel, and stationed, and war drums were sounded, and the torch was held high.

古文：宋兵以为大军至，惧而宵遁。
现代文：宋兵以为我大军已到，害怕起来，乘夜逃遁。
English: Song Bing thought that my army had already arrived, got scared, and fled by night.

古文：以功加于越。
现代文：因功加号于越。
English: He received a merit bonus in Vietnam.

古文：四年，汉刘继元遣使来贡，致币于屋质，屋质以闻，帝命受之。
现代文：四年，汉刘继元派使者前来进贡，送给屋质一些钱，屋质如实奏闻，皇上命他收下。
English: In the fourth year, Han Liu Ji Yuan sent an envoy to pay tribute and give some money to the roofer. The roofer told the truth, and the emperor ordered him to accept it.

古文：五年五月薨，年五十七。
现代文：五年五月逝世，终年五十七岁。
English: He passed away in May 2005, at the age of fifty-seven.

古文：帝痛悼，辍朝三日。
现代文：皇上沉恸哀悼，为之停止上朝三天。
English: The emperor was in deep mourning, and the imperial procession was suspended for three days.

古文：后道宗诏上京立祠祭享，树碑以纪其功云。
现代文：后来道宗诏令在上京为他建祠堂祭祀，立碑以记录其功业。
English: Later, the Daoist Emperor issued an order to build a shrine for him in Beijing and erect a monument to record his achievements.

古文：耶律吼，字曷鲁，六院部夷离堇蒲古只之后。
现代文：耶律吼，字曷鲁，六院部夷离堇蒲古只之后代。
English: The descendants of Ye Lu, Zi Lu, and the six departments of the imperial court were all descendants of Shobu Gu.

古文：端悫好施，不事生产。
现代文：正直诚谨，乐善好施，不事治理产业。
English: Honesty, sincerity, benevolence, and benevolence are conducive to the governance of the industry.

古文：太宗特加倚任。
现代文：太宗对他给以特别的倚重和任用。
English: Emperor Taizong gave him special trust and appointment.

古文：会同六年，为南院大王，莅事清简，人不敢以年少易之。
现代文：会同六年，任南院大王，处事清正而不苛细，人们都不敢因他年少而小看他。
English: He served as the king of the Southern Court for six years. He was straightforward and not demanding. People did not dare to look down on him because he was young.

古文：时晋主石重贵表不称臣，辞多踞慢，吼言晋罪不可不伐。
现代文：时逢晋主石重贵上表不称臣，言辞之间颇多倨傲轻慢之处，耶律吼认为晋之罪不能不加以讨伐。
English: At a time when the dignity of Jin's main stone did not commend his subordinates on the surface, and there were quite a few arrogant and frivolous places between the words, Ye Luo believed that Jin's crime could not be fought.

古文：及帝亲征，以所部兵从。
现代文：待到皇上亲征，耶律吼率所部兵从行。
English: When the emperor himself was conscripted, Ye Luu led the soldiers of the headquarters to follow.

古文：既入汴，诸将皆取内帑珍异，吼独取马铠，帝嘉之。
现代文：入汴京之后，诸将均搜取内府之钱财珍奇宝物，耶律吼只取马匹铠甲，皇上称赞了他。
English: After entering Beijing, all the generals searched for the wealth and treasures of the Inner Prefectures. Jeruchow only took horses and armor, and the emperor praised him.

古文：及帝崩于栾城，无遗诏，军中忧惧不知所为。
现代文：及至皇上崩逝于栾城，没有留下遗诏，军中忧虑恐惧不知如何是好。
English: When the emperor died in Shicheng without leaving a will, the soldiers were worried and fearful.

古文：吼诣北院大王耶律洼议曰： 天位不可一日旷。
现代文：耶律吼到北院大王耶律洼处商议说 ：帝位不能有一日虚设。
English: Yerutogoro went to consult with King Yerutowa of the Northern Court and said, "The imperial throne cannot be left vacant for even one day.

古文：若请于太后，则必属李胡。
现代文：如果去向太后请示，那就肯定归属于李胡了。
English: If you go to the empress dowager for instructions, it will definitely belong to Li Hu.

古文：李胡暴戾残忍，讵能子民。
现代文：李胡暴虐残忍，怎么能统治百姓。
English: Li Hu is violent and cruel, how can he rule the people?

古文：必欲厌人望。则当立永康王。 
现代文：如果要满足人心，就该立永康王。 
English: If you want to satisfy people's hearts, you should establish Yongkang Wang.

古文：洼然之。
现代文：耶律洼觉得有理。
English: Yeruda feels justified.

古文：会耶律安抟来，意与吼合，遂定议立永康王，是为世宗。
现代文：适逢耶律安抟前来，其想法与耶律吼相合，于是议定立永康王，这便是世宗。
English: When Yerudhoyono came, his thoughts coincided with Yerudhoyono's, and they agreed to establish King Yongkang, which was the beginning of Sejong.

古文：顷之，以功加采访使，赐以宝货。
现代文：不久，因功升任采访使，被赐给宝器财物。
English: Not long after, he was promoted to the post of crown envoy for his merits, and was given treasures and property.

古文：吼辞曰： 臣位已高，敢复求富！
现代文：耶律吼推辞说： 臣官位已高，怎敢再求富裕！
English: Ye Luwu retorted: "Your official rank is already high, how dare you seek wealth again!

古文：时黄龙府军将燕颇杀守臣以叛，何鲁不讨之，破于鸭渌江。
现代文：我的族弟耶律的王录的儿子们因犯事遭籍没入官，陛下如能怜惜他们而放他们出来，那么就算是赐给我最多的东西了！ 皇上说： 耶律吼舍弃重赏，为族人之事求请，其贤明远过众人。 
English: The sons of my kinsman Jerod, the sons of King Rehoboth, who were condemned for their crimes and did not enter the king's service, if your majesty would have mercy on them and release them, it would be the greatest gift you could give me! The emperor said, "Jerod, who refused a great reward and pleaded for the people, is wiser than all men.

古文：坐不亲追击，以至失贼，杖之。
现代文：答应了他的请求，并赐给他宫户五十。当时有人择取当世名流做《七贤传》，耶律吼列入七贤之一。
English: He agreed to his request and gave him fifty miyako. At that time, someone chose contemporary celebrities to make "The Tale of the Seven Sages," and Jeruchim was included as one of the seven sages.

古文：乾亨间卒。
现代文：天禄三年去世，年三十九岁，子何鲁不。
English: Tenroku died three years later, at the age of thirty-nine.

古文：耶律安抟，曾祖岩木，玄祖之长子。祖楚不鲁，为本部夷离堇。
现代文：耶律安抟，曾祖父岩木，玄祖之长子；祖父楚不鲁，为本部夷离堇。
English: Jeru Anjun, great-grandfather Iwaki, the eldest son of the ancestor; grandfather Chuburu, the head of the Iwaki clan.

古文：父迭里，幼多疾，时太祖为挞马狘沙里，常加抚育。
现代文：父迭里，幼年时多病，当时太祖任挞马犭戊沙里，常常加以抚养照料。
English: His father, Diiri, was often ill when he was young. At that time, the great-grandfather served as the guardian of the horse, and often raised and cared for him.

古文：神册六年，为惕隐，从太祖将龙军讨阻卜、党项有功。
现代文：神册六年，迭里任惕隐，随从太祖率领龙军讨伐阻卜、党项立有战功。
English: In the sixth year of the divine record, he was allowed to retire, and led the dragon army to fight and obstruct the enemy, and won the battle.

古文：天赞三年，为南院夷离堇，征渤海，攻忽汗城，俘斩甚众。
现代文：天赞三年，任南院夷离堇，征讨渤海，进攻忽汗城，俘虏斩首甚众。
English: In the auspicious third year of his reign, he was appointed to the Southern Court, and he raided the Bohai Sea, attacked the city of Khukhan, and beheaded many captives.

古文：太祖崩，淳钦皇后称制，欲以大元帅嗣位。
现代文：太祖崩逝，淳钦皇后称制摄政，想让大元帅继立。
English: When the great-grandfather passed away, Empress Junqin declared herself regent and wanted the grand marshal to succeed her.

古文：迭里建言，帝位宣先嫡长；今东丹王赴朝，当立。
现代文：迭里上言说 ：帝位应该优先由嫡长子继承；现在东丹王到朝里了，应当立他。 
English: Diri said: The imperial throne should be inherited by the eldest son first; now that King Dongdan has come to the imperial court, he should be enthroned.

古文：由是忤旨。
现代文：因此忤逆了皇后旨意。
English: In doing so, he defied the emperor's will.

古文：以党附东丹王，诏下狱，讯鞫，加以炮烙。
现代文：因为偏袒依附东丹王，诏令将他下狱，审讯，并且加以炮烙之刑。
English: Because of his partial adherence to King Dongdan, the Emperor ordered him to be imprisoned, tried, and branded with a cannon.

古文：不伏，杀之，籍其家。
现代文：他拒不伏罪，被杀，籍没全家。
English: He refused to surrender and was killed, taking his entire family with him.

古文：安抟自幼若成人，居父丧，哀毁过礼，见者伤之。
现代文：安抟从幼年起就显得像个成人，居服父亲之丧，悲恸哀绝，伤毁身体，超过了常礼，见到的人都哀怜他。
English: From a young age, An Xun looked like an adult. He was mourning the death of his father, grieving and mourning, injuring his body, exceeding the common courtesy, and everyone who saw him pitied him.

古文：太宗屡加慰谕，尝曰： 此儿必为令器。 
现代文：太宗多次给以慰抚晓谕，曾经说： 这孩子必定会成大器。 
English: Taizong repeatedly consoled him, saying, "This child will surely become a great man."

古文：既长，寡言笑，重然诺，动遵绳矩，事母至孝。
现代文：成年之后，很少言笑，看重对他人的承诺，行为举止遵守规范，事奉母亲极其孝顺。
English: After reaching adulthood, they rarely laugh, value commitment to others, behave according to norms, and are extremely filial to their mothers.

古文：以父死非罪，未葬，不预宴乐。
现代文：因为父亲死于强加之罪，一直不能下葬，所以对于宴饮逐欢之事一概不参与。
English: Because my father died of the crime of imposition, he has not been able to be buried, so he does not participate in the banquet.

古文：世宗在藩邸，尤加怜恤，安抟密自结纳。
现代文：世宗在藩国时，对他给以特别的怜悯存恤，安抟暗地里也与世祖相交好。
English: When Sejong was in the domain, he had a special compassion for him, and secretly had a good relationship with Sejong.

古文：太宗伐晋还，至栾城崩，诸将欲立世宗，以李胡及寿安王在朝，犹豫未决。
现代文：太宗讨伐晋国归来，到栾城而崩逝，诸将想要扶立世宗，因李胡及寿安王在朝中，犹豫不决。
English: When Emperor Taizong returned from his crusade in Jin, he died in Lucheng. The generals were hesitant to support Emperor Taizong because Li Hu and King Shouan were in the middle of the imperial court.

古文：时安抟直宿卫，世宗密召问计。
现代文：当时安抟掌宿卫，世宗暗里召见他请问计之所出。
English: At that time, Sejong secretly summoned Anhyeon, who was in charge of the palace guards, to ask him what he should do.

古文：安抟曰： 大王聪安宽恕，人皇王之嫡长；先帝虽有寿安，天下属意多在大王。
现代文：安抟说 ：大王您聪智娴雅宽大仁恕，又是人皇王的嫡长子；先帝尽管有寿安王为嗣，然而天下人心多归于大王。
English: Antao said, "Your Majesty, you are intelligent, gracious, and forgiving, and you are the eldest son of a human king. Although the former emperor had Shouan Wang as his heir, the world's hearts belong to the great king.

古文：今若不断，后悔无及。 
现代文：现下如不能当机立断，将后悔莫及。 
English: If we do not make a quick decision now, we will regret it.

古文：会有自京师来者，安抟诈以李胡死传报军中，皆以为信。
现代文：适逢有人从京师前来，安抟便诈称李胡已死并传报于军中，大家都信以为真。
English: Whenever someone came from Beijing Division, An Xuan would falsely claim that Li Hu had died and report it to the army, which everyone believed to be true.

古文：于是安抟诣北、南二大王计之。
现代文：于是安抟到北、南院二大王处计议。
English: Therefore, An Xuan went to the Northern and Southern Courts to discuss the matter.

古文：北院大王洼闻而遽起曰： 吾二人方议此事。
现代文：北院大王耶律洼听说，便赶紧站起来说道： 我二人正商议此事。
English: Upon hearing of this, the Great King of the Northern Court, Ye Lu Wa, quickly stood up and said, "The two of us are discussing this matter.

古文：先帝尝欲以永康王为储贰，今日之事，有我辈在，孰敢不从！
现代文：先帝曾想将永康王立为太子，今日之事有我辈在，谁敢不听从！
English: The previous emperor once wanted to make King Yongkang the crown prince. Today, with our generation here, who would dare disobey?

古文：但恐不白太后而立，为国家启衅。 
现代文：只是担心不报告太后而立新皇，可能为国家挑起争端。 
English: They are just worried that if they don't inform the empress dowager that a new emperor has been installed, it may provoke a dispute for the country.

古文：安抟对曰： 大王既知先帝欲以永康王为储副，况永康王贤明，人心乐附。
现代文：安抟回答说 ：大王既然知道先帝想以永康王为太子，况且永康王贤明，人心乐于归附。
English: Antao replied, "Since the great king knew that the former emperor wanted Prince Yongkang to be the crown prince, and since King Yongkang was a wise man, the people were willing to follow him.

古文：今天下甫定，稍缓则大事去矣。
现代文：现在天下刚刚平定，稍稍滞缓一下，则大事去矣。
English: Right now, the world has just been pacified. If we slow down a bit, the big things will happen.

古文：若白太后，必立李胡。
现代文：如果告知太后，必定是立李胡。
English: If you tell the empress dowager, it must be Li Hu.

古文：且李胡残暴，行路共知，果嗣位，如社稷何？ 
现代文：何况李胡残酷暴虐，路人尽知，如果真的继承帝位，将置社稷于何地？ 
English: What's more, Li Hu was brutally tyrannical, and passers-by knew all about it. If he really did succeed to the throne, where would he place his shrine?

古文：南院大王吼曰： 此言是也。
现代文：南院大王耶律吼说： 这话太对了。
English: Nanin Daowang Yerutsu said, "This is so true.

古文：吾计决矣！ 
现代文：我计议定矣！ 
English: I've made up my mind!

古文：乃整军，召诸将奉世宗即位于太宗柩前。
现代文：于是整顿队伍，召集诸将拥立世宗即帝位于太宗灵柩前。
English: As a result, the rectification team gathered the generals who supported the establishment of Sejong, that is, the emperor, and placed them in front of Taizong's coffin.

古文：帝立，以安抟为腹心，总知宿卫。
现代文：世宗即位，以安抟为心腹，总管宿卫。
English: Sejong ascended the throne, with Anhyeon as his confidant, and became the head of the palace guards.

古文：是岁，约和于潢河横渡。
现代文：同年，与太后、李胡相约和解于潢河横渡。
English: In the same year, he made an appointment with the Empress Dowager and Li Hu and reconciled with them at the crossroads of the Wei River.

古文：太后问安抟曰： 吾与汝有何隙？ 
现代文：太后问安抟说 ：我与你有什么过节？ 
English: The empress dowager asked Anya, "What have I to do with you?"

古文：安抟以父死为对，太后默然。
现代文：安抟答以父亲之死，太后无言以对。
English: The Empress Dowager was speechless when An Ying replied that her father had died.

古文：及置北院枢密使，上命安抟为之，赐奴婢百口，宠任无比，事皆取决焉。
现代文：及至设置北院枢密使，皇上下令由安抟担任，赐给奴婢百人，宠信任用无以复加。大事都由他参与决断。
English: As far as the establishment of the Northern Court's Privy Council, the Emperor's orders were made by An Qi, and he was given one hundred slaves and maidservants. His favor and trust could not be overstated. He participated in the decision-making of all major events.

古文：然性太宽，事循苟简，豪猾纵恣不能制。
现代文：然而性情过于宽和，处理事务按照草率疏简的原则，对于强横狡猾之辈不守法纪，恣意妄为的举动不能辖制禁止。
English: However, his disposition is too broad and he deals with affairs according to the principle of hasty simplification. He does not abide by the law when dealing with strong and cunning people, and he cannot control and prohibit arbitrary actions.

古文：天禄末，察割兵犯御幄，又不能讨，由是中外短之。
现代文：天禄末年，察割率兵进犯御帐，又不能讨伐他，因此内外官员都责备他。
English: In the last year of the Tenroku era, the soldiers led by the inspector attacked the imperial account, but could not fight him, so officials at home and abroad blamed him.

古文：穆宗即位，以立世宗之故，不复委用。
现代文：穆宗即位，因为倡立世宗之故，不再得到任用。
English: When Mu Zong ascended to the throne, he was no longer appointed because he advocated the rise of sejong.

古文：应历三年，或诬安抟与齐王罨撒葛谋乱，系狱死。
现代文：应历三年，有人诬陷安抟与齐王罨撒葛阴谋叛乱，下狱死去。
English: After three years, he was falsely accused of plotting a rebellion with Qi Wangqizagol, and died in prison.

古文：侄撒给，左皮室详稳。
现代文：侄儿撒给，为左皮室详稳。
English: My nephew gave it to me. It's stable for the left ventricle.

古文：耶律洼，字敌辇，隋国王释鲁孙，南院夷离堇绾思子。
现代文：耶律洼，字敌辇，隋国王释鲁之孙，南院夷离堇绾思之子。
English: Ye Lu Wa, the son of the Sui King Shilu, the son of the Southern Court Empress Dowager, the son of the Southern Court Empress Dowager.

古文：少有器识，人以公辅期之。
现代文：少时富于器局和才识，众人寄之以三公宰辅之期望。
English: At a young age, he was full of energy and talent, and everyone pinned their hopes on him.

古文：太祖时，虽未官，常任以事。
现代文：太祖时，尽管未任官，太祖还是经常让他承办事务。
English: At the time of the great-grandfather, even though he was not an official, the great-grandfather often asked him to undertake affairs.

古文：太宗即位，为惕隐。
现代文：太宗即位，被任命为惕隐。
English: Emperor Taizong ascended to the throne and was appointed as the first abbot.

古文：天显末，帝援河东，洼为先锋，败张敬达军于太原北。
现代文：天显末年，皇上救援河北，耶律洼任先锋，败张敬达军于太原北面。
English: In the last years of Tian Xian, the emperor came to the rescue of Hebei, with Yelu Wa as the vanguard, defeating Zhang Jingda's army in the north of Taiyuan.

古文：会同中，迁北院大王。
现代文：会同年间，迁任北院大王。
English: In the same year, he was transferred to the position of Northern Court Grand Crown Prince.

古文：及伐晋，复为先锋，与梁汉璋战于瀛州，败之。
现代文：及至讨伐晋国，又任先锋，与梁汉璋交战于瀛州，击败之。
English: As far as the crusade against Jin, he was also the vanguard, and fought with Liang Hanqi in Bozhou, defeating him.

古文：后将葬世宗，颓昱恳言于帝曰： 臣蒙先帝厚恩，未能报；幸及大葬，臣请陪位。 帝由是不悦，寝其议。
现代文：太宗崩逝于栾城，南方州郡大多反叛，人马困顿疲乏，军中不知如何是好。耶律洼与耶律吼等定策扶立世宗，于是号令诸将说： 大行皇帝升天去了，国家神位无人主持，永康王乃人皇王嫡长子，是天意人心所在，应该即位；如有不服从者，以军法从事。 诸将都说： 好。 
English: Emperor Taizong died in Shicheng, most of the southern prefectures and counties rebelled, the people were exhausted and exhausted, and the army did not know what to do. Yeruda and Yerudao made a determined effort to establish Shizong, so the generals shouted: Emperor Da Xing ascended to heaven, the national throne was not presided over by anyone, King Yongkang was the eldest son of the emperor, and it was the will of heaven that he should ascend to the throne; if there was any disobedience, it would be dealt with by military law. The generals all said: Good.

古文：薨。耶律挞烈，字涅鲁衮，六院部郎君甗古直之后。
现代文：世宗即位，赐给耶律洼宫户五十，拜为于越，不久去世，终年五十四岁。耶律挞烈，字涅鲁衮，六院部郎君袅古直之后。
English: When King Sejong ascended the throne, he gave the fifty-year-old palace to Ye Ruwa, who was worshipped as Yu Yue. He died soon after, at the age of fifty-four. Ye Ru was a fierce warrior, nicknamed "Neruharu," and the sixth retainer of Emperor Gojong.

古文：沉厚多智，有任重才。
现代文：朴实稳重，足智多谋，有担负重任之才。
English: He is simple and steady, resourceful and resourceful, and has the ability to shoulder heavy responsibilities.

古文：年四十未仕。
现代文：四十岁还未出来做官。
English: At the age of forty, he has yet to become an official.

古文：会同间，为边部令稳。
现代文：会同年间，任边部令稳。
English: In the same year of the meeting, he was appointed to the position of Minister of Foreign Affairs.

古文：应历初，升南院大王，均赋役，劝耕稼，部人化之，户口丰殖。
现代文：应历初年，升任南院大王，平均赋税徭役，劝导百姓耕织，部人得到化育，户口大量增殖。
English: In the first year of the calendar, he was promoted to the king of the Southern Court, the average tax collector, persuaded the people to cultivate and weave, the subordinates were educated, and the number of households increased.

古文：时周人侵汉，以挞烈都统西南道军援之。
现代文：时逢周人侵犯汉国，由挞烈总率西南道军马前往援救。
English: Whenever the Zhou people invaded China, the army horses of Southwest Province led by General Gong Liang went to the rescue.

古文：周已下太原数城，汉人不敢战。
现代文：周已攻下太原等数城，汉人不敢交战。
English: Zhou had already captured several cities such as Taiyuan, and the Chinese did not dare to fight.

古文：及闻挞烈兵至，周主遣郭从义、尚钧等率精骑拒于忻口。
现代文：及至得悉挞烈兵马前来，周主派郭从义、尚钧等率精骑拒战于忻口。
English: When he learned that fierce soldiers and horses were coming, Lord Zhou sent Guo Zongyi, Shang Qi and others to mount horses and refuse to fight at the gate.

古文：挞烈击败之，获其将史彦超，周军遁归，复所陷城邑，汉主诣挞烈谢。
现代文：挞烈击败之，擒获其将史彦超，周军逃回，挞烈收复了失陷的城池，汉主到挞烈处致谢。
English: He defeated it fiercely, captured its commander Shi Yanchao, Zhou's army fled back, fiercely recovered the fallen city, and the Han lord went to the fierce place to express his gratitude.

古文：及汉主殂，宋师来伐，上命挞烈为行军都统，发诸道兵救之。
现代文：及至汉主崩驾，宋军前来攻讨，皇上命挞烈担任行军都统，派出诸道兵马前往援救。
English: When the Han emperor passed away, the Song army came to attack, and the emperor ordered the marching troops to march to the capital and sent soldiers and horses from various provinces to the rescue.

古文：既出雁门，宋谍知而退。
现代文：大军出雁门关后，宋人谍报得知消息，宋军退兵。
English: After the large army went out of the Wild Goose Gate, the Song People's Intelligence Service learned the news that the Song Army withdrew.

古文：保宁元年，加兼政事令，致政。
现代文：保宁元年，升任兼政事令，辞官。
English: In the first year of the Boryeong era, he was promoted to the post of vice-governor and resigned.

古文：乾亨初，召之。
现代文：乾亨初年，皇上召见他。
English: In the first year of Emperor Qianheng's reign, the emperor summoned him.

古文：上见须发皓然，精力犹健，问以政事，厚礼之。
现代文：见他须发俱白，精力却仍然强健，向他请问政事，对他深加礼遇。
English: Seeing that his hair was white but his energy was still strong, he asked him about politics and treated him with deep courtesy.

古文：以疾薨，年七十九。
现代文：后因病去世，年七十九岁。
English: He later died of illness at the age of 79.

古文：挞烈凡用兵，赏罚信明，得士卒心。
现代文：挞烈用兵之时，赏罚严明，言出必信，深得士卒欢心。
English: When using soldiers in a fierce way, the rewards and punishments are clear, the words are trustworthy, and the soldiers are deeply pleased.

古文：河东单弱，不为周、宋所并者，挞烈有力焉。
现代文：河东势力单弱，之所以长时间内未被周、宋并吞，与挞烈的援助不无关系。
English: The reason why Hedong was not annexed by Zhou and Song for a long time is not unrelated to the fierce assistance.

古文：在治所不修边幅，百姓无称，年谷屡稔。
现代文：他在治所内不大兴土木，百姓无不称道其惠政，粮食也屡屡丰收。
English: He did not build much in the way of civil engineering in his administration, and the people are all in praise of his benevolent policies. There have also been many bumper harvests of grain.

古文：时耶律屋质居北院，挞烈居南院，俱有政迹，朝议以为 富民大王 云。
现代文：当时耶律屋质在北院，挞烈统领南院，均政绩赫赫，朝议称他们为 富民大王 。
English: At that time, Yerut Yagye was in the Northern Court, and the Southern Court was led by a fierce general. Both of them made great achievements in politics, and the imperial court called them the great kings of the rich people.

