古文：绍兴中，王浚明以右奉直大夫直秘阁，乞磨勘，吏部拟朝议大夫。
现代文：宋高宗绍兴年间，一个叫王浚明的人以右奉直大夫的身份在收藏珍贵图书的秘阁中任直秘阁，掌管图书管理工作。
English: During Song Gaozong's reign in Shaoxing, a man named Wang Junming, in his capacity as the right-hand doctor, was in charge of book management in the cabinet of the collection of precious books.

古文：时相以为既带职，则朝议、奉直为一等，遂超转中奉。
现代文：当时他向审官院请求考核他的政绩，予以升迁，吏部打算授以四品的朝议大夫。当时的宰相以为既然是带着职务迁升为官的，朝议和奉直属于同一级别，于是就超越了朝议转为中奉。
English: At that time, he asked the Supreme People's Procuratorate to evaluate his political performance and promote him. The cadre department planned to award him the title of four-star court adviser. The prime minister at the time thought that since he was promoted to an official position with his position, court adviser and minister directly belonged to the same level, so he surpassed court adviser to become a middle-ranking minister.

古文：其后曾慥踵之。
现代文：之后，曾慥也按此办法给转了官。
English: Later, Zeng Yao also transferred officials according to this method.

古文：绍兴末，向伯奋亦用此，继而续觱复然。
现代文：宋高宗绍兴末年，向伯奋也按这一办法转了官，紧接着，续觱也给予了同样的办理。
English: In the last years of Song Gaozong's reign in Shaoxing, Xiang Baofeng was also transferred to an official position according to this method, immediately followed by Cui Rong.

古文：后省有言，不应蓦三级，自是但得朝议。
现代文：后来中书省里却有人说，不应该跳越三级，只能得到吏部原议的朝议大夫之职。
English: Later, however, someone in the Ministry of Education said that one should not jump over the third level, and that one could only obtain the post of doctor of the Imperial Court Council, which was originally proposed by the Ministry of Personnel.

古文：予按故事，官制未行时，前行郎中迁少卿，有出身，得太常；无出身，司农；继转光禄，即今奉直、朝议也。
现代文：经过认真考察，我了解到，过去的惯例是：前行郎中升为少卿时，过去有做官的经历的，得太常；没有做官的经历的，得司农；然后再转而为光禄大夫，就是现在的奉直和朝议一级。
English: After careful examination, I learned that the practice in the past was as follows: when a former middle-ranking official was promoted to Shaoqing, it was not uncommon for him to have experience as an official in the past; if he did not have experience as an official, he was assigned to be a farmer; and then he was turned into a doctor of Guanglu, which is now the first level of Feng Zhi and court discussion.

古文：自少卿迁大卿、监，有出身，得光禄卿；无出身，历司农卿、少府监、卫尉卿，然后至光禄。
现代文：从少卿升为大卿和监的人，有做官经历的得光禄卿；没有做官经历的，经过司农卿、少府监、卫尉卿，然后再至光禄大夫。
English: Those who were promoted from Shokei to Daikyo and Keeper of the Privy Purse received the title of Tokoroku-kyo if they had experience as an official; if they did not have experience as an official, they went through the ranks of Shino-kyo, Shofu-kyo, Keifu-kyo, and then to Tokoroku-dafu.

古文：若带职，则自少农以上径得光禄，不涉余级，至有超五资者。
现代文：如果是带着职务升迁的，自少农以上可以直接得到光禄大夫的品级，不必经过别的级别，以至于有一次超越五级的。
English: If you are promoted with a position, you can directly get the grade of Guanglu Doctor from the minor farmers and above, without having to go through other levels, so that once you exceed the fifth level.

古文：然则浚明等不为过，盖昔日职名不轻与人，故恩典亦异。
现代文：由此可知，王竣明等人的越级并不过分，这是因为从前的职务名分不轻易给人，因而得到的待遇自然也不同。
English: From this, it can be seen that Wang Zhunming and others did not exceed their ranks excessively. This is because the former job titles were not easily given to people, so the treatment they received was naturally different.

古文：又自承务郎至奉议词人，但三转，而带职者乃与余人同作六阶不小异，乃有司之失也。
现代文：有人从承务郎升到奉议词人，经三次转升，可是带职务的人与别人一样，这是掌管升迁的机关人员工作中的失误。
English: Some people were promoted from jongyulang to honghexiang after being promoted three times, but people with positions are the same as others. This is a mistake in the work of the officials in charge of promotion.

