古文：桓公问于管子曰： 吾欲藉于台雉何如？ 
现代文：桓公问管仲说： 我想要征收房屋税，你看如何？ 
English: Huan Gong asked Guanzhong: I want to levy a housing tax, what do you think?

古文：管子对曰： 此毁成也。 
现代文：管仲回答说： 这等于叫人们拆毁房子。 
English: Guanzhong replied, "It's like telling people to tear down their houses."

古文： 吾欲藉于树木？ 
现代文： 我要征收树木税呢？ 
English: Will I have to pay a tree tax?

古文：管子对曰： 此伐生也。 
现代文：管仲回答说： 这等于叫人们砍伐幼树。 
English: Guanzhong replied, "This is the same as telling people to cut down young trees."

古文： 吾欲藉于六畜？ 
现代文： 我要征收牲畜税呢？ 
English: Do I have to pay livestock tax?

古文：管子对曰： 此杀生也。 
现代文：管仲回答说： 这等于叫人们杀死幼畜。 
English: Guanzhong replied, "It's like telling people to kill baby animals.

古文：管子对曰： 此隐情也。 
现代文： 我要对人口征收赋税，又怎么样？ 
English: I want to impose a tax on the population, so what?

古文：桓公曰： 然则吾何以为国？ 
现代文：管仲回答说； 这等于叫人们收闭情欲。 桓公说： 那么，什么来管理国家呢？ 
English: Guanzhong replied, "This is tantamount to telling people to restrain their sexual desires." Huan Gong said, "Then, what is there to govern the country?

古文：管子对曰： 唯官山海为可耳。 
现代文：管仲回答说： 只有专营山海资源才是可行的。 
English: Guanzhong replied: It is only feasible to specialize in mountain and sea resources.

古文：桓公曰： 何谓官山海？ 
现代文：桓公说： 什么叫作专营山海资源？ 
English: Huan Gong said: What is called the exclusive mountain and sea resources?

古文：管子对曰： 海王之国，谨正盐策。 
现代文：管仲回答说： 靠大海资源成王业的国家，要注意征税于盐的政策。 
English: Guanzhong replied: "Countries that rely on sea resources to become kingly should pay attention to the policy of taxing salt.

古文：桓公曰： 何谓正盐策？ 
现代文：桓公说： 什么叫作征税于盐的政策？ 
English: Kanko said: What is the policy of taxing salt?

古文：管子对曰： 十口之家十人食盐，百口之家百人食盐。
现代文：管仲回答说： 十口之家就是十人吃盐，百口之家就是百人吃盐。
English: Guanzhong replied, "A family of ten people is ten people eating salt, and a family of a hundred people is a hundred people eating salt.

古文：终月，大男食盐五升少半，大女食盐三升少半，吾子食盐二升少半，此其大历也。
现代文：一个月，成年男子吃盐近五升半，成年女子近三升半，小男小女近二升半。这是大概数字。
English: In a month, an adult man consumes almost five and a half litres of salt, an adult woman almost three and a half litres, and a small boy or girl almost two and a half litres. These are approximate figures.

古文：盐百升而釜。
现代文：盐一百升为一釜。
English: One hundred liters of salt is one caldron.

古文：令盐之重升加分强，釜五十也；升加一强，釜百也；升加二强，釜二百也。
现代文：使盐的价格每升增加半钱，一釜可收入五十钱。每升增加一钱，一釜可收入百钱。每升增加二钱，一釜可收入二百钱。
English: If the price of salt increases by half a penny per litre, a kettle can earn fifty dollars. If it increases by a penny per litre, a kettle can earn one hundred dollars. If it increases by two dollars per litre, a kettle can earn two hundred dollars.

古文：钟二千，十钟二万，百钟二十万，千钟二百万。
现代文：一钟就是二千，十钟就是二万，百钟二十万，千钟就是二百万钱。
English: One hour is two thousand, ten hours is twenty thousand, one hundred hours is two hundred thousand, and one thousand hours is two million.

古文：万乘之国，人数开口千万也，禺策之，商日二百万，十日二千万，一月六千万。
现代文：一个万乘的大国，人口总数千万人。
English: A great country, with a total population of tens of millions.

古文：万乘之国，正九百万也。月人三十钱之籍，为钱三千万。
现代文：合而算之。约计每日可行二百万，十日二千万，一月可行六千万钱。一个万乘的大国，征人口税的当征为数为一百万人，每月每人征税三十钱，总数才不过三千万。
English: All things considered, approximately 2 million can be spent daily, 20 million on the 10th, and 60 million can be spent in January. In a large country, the number of people subject to the population tax is 1 million, and each person is taxed 30 yuan per month. The total is only 30 million.

古文：今吾非籍之诸君吾子，而有二国之籍者六千万。
现代文：现在我们没有向任何大人小孩直接征税，就有相当于两个大国的六千万钱的税收。
English: Now that we do not directly tax any adult or child, there is a tax equivalent to two large countries of sixty million dollars.

古文：使君施令曰：吾将籍于诸君吾子，则必嚣号。
现代文：假设君上发令说：我就要对全国大人小孩直接征税了，那就一定会引起全国大喊大叫地反对。
English: Suppose that the emperor issued an order saying: I am going to impose a direct tax on all the adults and children in the country, then it will certainly cause the whole country to shout against it.

古文：今夫给之盐策，则百倍归于上，人无以避此者，数也。 
现代文：现在取给于盐的政策，即使百倍归于君主，人们也是无法规避的，这就是理财之法。 
English: The policy of taking what is now given with a pinch of salt cannot be evaded, even if it is returned a hundredfold to the sovereign. This is the law of financial management.

古文： 今铁官之数曰：一女必有一针一刀，若其事立；耕者必有一耒一耜一铫，若其事立；行服连轺輂者必有一斤一锯一锥一凿，若其事立。
现代文： 现在铁官的理财方法是这样的：每一妇女必须有一根针和一把剪刀，然后才能够做她的事；每一耕者必须有一把犁、一个铧和一把大锄，然后才能够做他的事；每一个修造各类车辆的，必须有一斧、一锯、一锥、一凿，然后才能够做他的事。
English: Now the financial management of the iron officials is as follows: every woman must have a needle and a pair of scissors before she can do her work; every cultivator must have a plough, a hoe and a large hoe before he can do his work; everyone who builds all kinds of vehicles must have an axe, a saw, a cone and a chisel before he can do his work.

古文：不尔而成事者天下无有。
现代文：不具备上述工具而能做成上述事情的人，天下无有。
English: There is no one in the world who can do the above things without the above tools.

古文：令针之重加一也，三十针一人之籍；刀之重加六，五六三十，五刀一人之籍也；耜铁之重加七，三耜铁一人之籍也。
现代文：使针的价格每根增加一钱，三十根针的加价收入就等于一个人所纳的人口税。使剪刀每把加价六钱，五六三十，五把剪刀的加价收入就等于一个人所纳的人口税。使铁铧每个加价十钱，三个铁铧的加价收入就等于一个人所纳的人口税。
English: If the price of needles is increased by one dollar each, the additional income of thirty needles is equal to the population tax paid by one person; if the price of scissors is increased by six dollars each, the additional income of five scissors is equal to the population tax paid by one person; if the price of shovels is increased by ten dollars each, the additional income of three shovels is equal to the population tax paid by one person.

古文：其余轻重皆准此而行。
现代文：其他铁器的价格高低，均可准此而行。
English: The price of other ironware may be higher or lower.

古文：然则举臂胜事，无不服籍者。 
现代文：那么，只要人们动手干活，就没有不负担这种税收的。 
English: Well, as long as people go to work, there is no way they won't be burdened with this tax.

古文：桓公曰： 然则国无山海不王乎？ 
现代文：桓公说： 那么，没有山海资源的国家就不能成王业了么？ 
English: Kanko said: So, a country without mountain and sea resources cannot become a king?

古文：管子曰： 因人之山海假之。
现代文：管仲说： 可以依靠别国的山海资源加以借用。
English: Guanzhong said: We can rely on the mountain and sea resources of other countries to borrow.

古文：名有海之国雠盐于吾国，釜十五，吾受而官出之以百。
现代文：让有海的国家，把盐卖给本国，以每釜十五钱的价格买进，而官府专卖的价格为一百。
English: Let the country with a sea sell salt to its own country, and buy it at a price of fifteen yuan per kettle, while the price of the government monopoly is one hundred.

古文：我未与其本事也，受人之事，以重相推。
现代文：本国虽不参与制盐，但可以接受别人的生产，用加价推算盈利。
English: Although the country does not participate in salt production, it can accept the production of others and use the mark-up to calculate the profit.

古文：此人用之数也。 
现代文：这就是利用他人条件的理财方法。 
English: This is a way of managing money by taking advantage of other people's conditions.

