古文：杜审言，字必简，襄州襄阳人，晋征南将军预远裔。
现代文：杜审言字必简，襄州襄阳人，是晋朝征南将军杜预的后裔。
English: Du Xunyan Zi Bijian, a native of Xiangyang, Xiangzhou, is a descendant of the Jin Dynasty general Du Yuanshu.

古文：擢进士，为隰城尉。恃才高，以傲世见疾。
现代文：考中进士，任隰城县尉，自恃才高，处世高傲而被人妒忌。
English: He was promoted to the rank of middle school entrance examination, and was appointed as the lieutenant of Lucheng County. He was proud of his talent and was envied by others.

古文：苏味道为天官侍郎，审言集判，出谓人曰： 味道必死。 
现代文：苏味道为天官侍郎，杜审言参加考判，出来对别人说： 味道必死。 
English: Su tasted like a high-ranking official, while Du, the judge, took part in the examination and came out to say to others: "The taste is to die for."

古文：人惊问故，答曰： 彼见吾判，且羞死。 
现代文：人们惊问原因，审言答说： 他见了我的判文，将要羞死。 
English: People were shocked and asked why, and the judge replied: "He will die of shame when he sees my sentence."

古文：又尝语人曰： 吾文章当得屈、宋作衙官，吾笔当得王羲之北面。 
现代文：又曾经对人说 ：比起我的文章来，屈原、宋玉只能做衙官，比起我的书法来，王羲之只能做学生。 
English: He also once said to someone, "Compared to my writing, Qu Yuan and Song Yu can only be eunuchs, and compared to my calligraphy, Wang Xizhi can only be a student."

古文：其矜诞类此。
现代文：他的高傲狂妄可见一斑。
English: He was so arrogant.

古文：累迁洛阳丞，坐事贬吉州司户参军。
现代文：调任洛阳县丞，因事获罪降为吉州司户参军。
English: He was transferred to the post of Luoyang County magistrate, and was demoted to the post of Jizhou governor after being convicted of a crime.

古文：司马周季重、司户郭若讷构其罪，系狱，将杀之。
现代文：司马周季重、司户郭若讷陷以罪名，将他囚禁于狱，将要杀掉他。
English: Sima Zhou Ji Chong and Sifu Guo Rongna have framed him, imprisoned him, and are about to kill him.

古文：季重等酒酣，审言子并年十三，袖刃刺季重于坐，左右杀并。
现代文：周季重等饮酒作乐，杜审言的儿子杜并年十三岁，藏刀于袖刺杀周季重于席上，左右的人杀死了杜并。
English: Zhou Ji concentrated on drinking and having fun. Du Xuan's son Du Yan, who was 13 years old, stabbed Zhou Ji in the sleeve with a Tibetan sword. Zhou Ji concentrated on the table. People around him killed Du Yan.

古文：季重将死，曰： 审言有孝子，吾不知，若讷故误我。 
现代文：周季重临死时说： 我不知道杜审言有这样的孝子，若讷有意害我。 
English: When Zhou Ji was on the verge of death, he said, "I didn't know that Du Xuanyan had such a filial son, if not, he intended to harm me."

古文：审言免官，还东都。
现代文：杜审言被罢官，回洛阳。
English: Du Xunyan was dismissed and returned to Luoyang.

古文：苏颋伤并孝烈，志其墓，刘允济祭以文。
现代文：苏廷页哀伤杜并的孝烈，为他做墓志，刘允济写祭文。
English: Su Ting-pai mourned Du Xian's filial piety, made a epitaph for him, and Liu Yunji wrote a dedication.

古文：后武后召审言，将用之，问曰： 卿喜否？ 
现代文：后来，武后召见杜审言，将要任用他，问他说： 你高兴吗？ 
English: Later, Wu Hou summoned Du Jinan and asked him, "Are you happy?

古文：审言蹈舞谢，后令赋《欢喜诗》，叹重其文，授著作佐郎，迁膳部员外郎。
现代文：杜审言拜舞谢恩，武后令他赋《欢喜诗》，赞叹推重他的文才，任命为著作佐郎，又升任膳部员外郎。
English: Du Xuan said thanks for the dance, Wu Hou ordered him to write a "happy poem," praised and promoted his literary talent, appointed him as the author of the book, and promoted him to the member of the catering department.

古文：神龙初，坐交通张易之，流峰州。
现代文：神龙初年，因与张易之勾结获罪，流放峰州。
English: In the first year of Shenlong, he was convicted of collusion with Zhang Yi and exiled to Fengzhou.

古文：入为国子监主簿、修文馆直学士，卒。
现代文：后入朝为国子监主簿、修文馆直学士，不久去世。
English: After entering the imperial court, he became the chief librarian of the Imperial Household Agency and a direct graduate of the Shubun Museum. He died soon after.

古文：大学士李峤等奏请加赠，诏赠著作郎。
现代文：大学士李峤等奏请加赠，追封为著作郎。
English: University scholar Li Yan and others will receive additional gifts, and will be posthumously awarded the title of "Writer."

古文：初，审言病甚，宋之问、武平一等省候何如，答曰 甚为造化小儿相苦，尚何言？
现代文：当初，杜审言病重，宋之问、武平一等探病，杜审言答说： 很为命运小儿捉弄而受苦，还有什么好说的呢？
English: At first, Du Xuanyan was seriously ill. Song Zhiqiu and Wuping made a first-class investigation of his illness. Du Xuanyan replied, "I have suffered a lot from fate's childish tricks. What else is there to say?"

古文：然吾在，久压公等，今且死，固大慰，但恨不见替人 云。
现代文：不过有我在，使各位久受压抑，现在快死了，固然大可慰藉，只是遗憾没见到能接替我的人。 
English: But it is a great consolation that I, who have kept you down for so long, am now dying, but I regret that I have not seen anyone who could succeed me.

古文：少与李峤、崔融、苏味道为文章四友，世号 崔、李、苏、杜 。
现代文：青年时与李峤、崔融、苏味道为文章四友，世人称为： 崔、李、苏、杜。 
English: When he was young, he was best friends with Li Qiye, Cui Rong and Su Qi, known as Cui, Li, Su and Du.

古文：融之亡，审言为服缌云。
现代文：崔融去世时，杜审言为他服丧三月。
English: When Cui Rong died, Du Xunyan mourned for him for three months.

古文：从祖兄易简，九岁能属文，长博学，为岑文本所器。
现代文：堂兄杜易简，九岁能写文章，长大后博学，为岑文本所器重。
English: His cousin Du Yizhen, who was able to write articles at the age of nine, grew up to be an erudite person who valued the written word.

古文：擢进士，补渭南尉。
现代文：考中进士，任渭南县尉。
English: Passed the junior high school entrance examination, and was appointed as the lieutenant of Yinan County.

古文：咸亨初，历殿中侍御史。
现代文：咸亨初年，任殿中侍御史。
English: In the first year of Xianheng, he was appointed as the palace's chamberlain.

古文：尝道遇吏部尚书李敬玄，不避，敬玄恨，召为考功员外郎屈之。
现代文：曾在路上遇见吏部尚书李敬玄，不让道，敬玄恨他，召他担任考功员外郎以屈辱他。
English: Once on the road, he met Li Jingxuan, an official of the Ministry of Education and Culture, who did not let him go. Jingxuan hated him and humiliated him by calling him to serve as an examiner.

古文：而侍郎裴行俭与敬玄不平，故易简上书言敬玄罪，敬玄曰： 襄阳儿轻薄乃尔。 
现代文：而侍郎裴行俭对敬玄不满，所以杜易简向皇上上书说敬玄之罪，李敬玄说： 襄阳小儿如此轻薄。 
English: However, the chamberlain, Pei Xingjian, was dissatisfied with Jing Xuan, so Du Yi Jian sent a letter to the emperor saying that Jing Xuan was guilty. Li Jing Xuan said: "Xiang Yang Xiaoer is so frivolous.

古文：因奏易简险躁，高宗怒，贬开州司马。
现代文：因而向皇上报告易简邪恶狡猾，高宗怒，贬杜易简为开州司马。
English: Therefore, he reported to the emperor that Yi Jian was evil, cunning, and had a high degree of anger, and denigrated Du Yi Jian as the Keizhou Sima.

古文：审言生子闲，闲生甫。
现代文：杜审言生子杜闲，杜闲生子杜甫。
English: Du Zhengyin's son is Du Xizhi, Du Xizhi's son is Du Fu.

