古文：崔休裴延俊袁翻崔休，字惠盛，清河人，御史中丞逞之玄孙也。
现代文：崔休，字惠盛，清河人，御史中丞崔逞的玄孙。
English: Cui Xiu, surnamed Hui Sheng, a native of Qinghe, was the great-great-grandson of the imperial historian Cui Gang.

古文：祖灵和，仕刘义隆为员外散骑侍郎。
现代文：祖崔灵和，在刘义隆政权任员外散骑侍郎。
English: Zu Cui Linghe was a non-commissioned officer in Liu Yilong's regime.

古文：父宗伯，世宗初，追赠清河太守。
现代文：父崔宗伯，魏世宗初年，被朝廷追赠为清河太守。
English: His father Cui Zongbo, in the first year of the reign of Emperor Wei, was posthumously awarded the title of the governor of Qinghe by the imperial court.

古文：休少孤贫，矫然自立。
现代文：崔休少小孤贫，矫然自立。
English: Cui Xiu is a small, poor, and self-reliant person.

古文：举秀才，入京师，与中书郎宋弁、通直郎邢峦雅相知友。
现代文：被荐举为秀才，进入京师，与中书郎宋弁、通直郎邢峦交情很好。
English: He was recommended as an outstanding talent, entered the Beijing division, and had a good relationship with Zhongshuro Song Ben and Tong Naorong.

古文：尚书王嶷钦其人望，为长子娉休姊，赡以货财，由是少振。
现代文：尚书王嶷钦佩他的人格，为他的长子娶崔休的姐姐，提供给他一些财物，由此经济情况稍微好转。
English: Shangshu Wang Yao admired his personality, married Cui Xiu's sister for his eldest son, and provided him with some property. As a result, the economic situation improved slightly.

古文：高祖纳休妹为嫔，以为尚书主客郎。
现代文：高祖娶崔休的妹妹为嫔，任崔休为尚书主客郎。
English: Gaozu married Cui Xiu's younger sister as his concubine, and appointed Cui Xiu as Shang Shushi's concubine.

古文：转通直正员郎，兼给事黄门侍郎。
现代文：转任通直正员郎，兼任给事黄门侍郎。
English: He was transferred to the post of Tsuchinao no seikanro and concurrently served as Katsura no kimono no samurairo.

古文：休好学，涉历书史，公事军旅之隙，手不释卷；崇尚先达，爱接后来，常参高祖侍席，礼遇次于宋、郭之辈。
现代文：崔休好学，涉猎书史，在公事军旅的间隙，手不释卷，崇敬先达，爱接后来之士，经常参谒高祖于座席旁，受到的礼遇仅次于宋弁、郭祚二人。
English: Cui Xiu was eager to learn, dabbled in book history, and kept his hands on the scroll when he was not on a business trip. He revered those who came before him and loved those who came after him. He often visited Gao Zu at his seat, and was treated with courtesy second only to Song Ben and Guo Yu.

古文：高祖南伐，以北海王为尚书仆射，统留台事，以休为尚书左丞。
现代文：高祖南伐，任命北海王为尚书仆射，统摄国家日常事务，任命崔休为尚书左丞。
English: Gao Zu led the Southern Expedition, appointed Beihai Wang as Shangshu's aide-de-camp, oversaw the country's daily affairs, and appointed Cui Xiu as Shangshu's left-hand man.

古文：高祖诏休曰： 北海年少，未闲政绩，百揆之务，便以相委。 
现代文：高祖诏示崔休说： 北海王年纪轻，不熟政务，百般事务，便都托付给你了。 
English: Gaozhu Zhao said to Cui Xiu, "The King of the North Sea is young and inexperienced in government affairs, so he has entrusted all kinds of affairs to you.

古文：转长史，兼给事黄门侍郎。
现代文：转任长史，兼给事黄门侍郎。
English: He was transferred to the post of choshi, and was also given the post of yellow gate attendant.

古文：后从驾南行。
现代文：后来跟从皇驾南行。
English: Later, he followed the emperor to the south.

古文：及车驾还，幸彭城，泛舟泗水，诏在侍筵，观者荣之。
现代文：及帝驾还归，途中帝幸临彭城，泛舟泗水，帝诏崔休侍宴，观看的人都认为他很荣耀。
English: And the emperor drove back, and on the way, the emperor went to Pengcheng, went boating, and had a banquet with the emperor Cui Xiu. The people watching thought he was very honored.

古文：世祖初，休以弟亡，祖父未葬，固求渤海，于是除之。
现代文：魏世宗初年，崔休因弟亡逝，祖父又未下葬，固求任渤海郡官职，于是皇帝除授。
English: In the first year of Wei Shizong, Cui Xiu died because of his younger brother, and his grandfather was not buried, and he insisted on being appointed to the official post of Bohai County, so the emperor dismissed him.

古文：性严明，雅长治体。下车先戮豪猾数人，广布耳目，所在奸盗，莫不擒剪，百姓畏之，寇盗止息，清身率下，渤海大治。
现代文：崔休性格严明，擅长治体，下车临治时先杀几名豪强猾吏，广泛布置耳目，州中奸盗，无不被擒捉剪除，百姓都很害怕，寇盗止息之后，他便清廉己身表率治下，渤海郡由此治安秩序大为好转。
English: Cui Xiu had a stern personality and was good at dealing with people. When he got off the train, he first killed several brave, strong and cunning officials. He had a wide range of ears and eyes. There was no thief in the county who could not be caught and eliminated. The people were very afraid. After the robbery stopped, he was clean and behaved himself. The security order of Bohai County was greatly improved.

古文：时大儒张吾贵有盛名于山东，四方学士咸相宗慕，弟子自远而至者恆千余人。
现代文：当时大儒张吾贵在太行山东有盛名，四方学士都十分仰慕他，由远方前来问学的经常达到数千人。
English: At that time, the great Confucian scholar Zhang Wugui was famous in Taihang and Shandong. He was greatly admired by scholars from all over the country, and thousands of people often came from far away to inquire about him.

古文：生徒既众，所在多不见容。
现代文：学生既多，大家多有没见其容貌长样的。
English: Since there are many students, many people have not seen their appearance.

古文：休乃为设俎豆，招延礼接，使肄业而还，儒者称为口实。
现代文：崔休于是为他们设学而教，招延礼接，使他们学成而还，儒者都觉得他做了件好事。
English: Cui Xiu then set up a school for them to teach, invite and receive, so that they could learn and return. Confucians all felt that he had done a good thing.

古文：入为吏部郎中，迁散骑常侍，权兼选任。
现代文：入廷任吏部郎中，迁任散骑常侍，权兼选举官员的职务。
English: He entered the court as a junior official of the Ministry of Justice, and was transferred to the position of equestrian aide-de-camp, with the right to serve as an election official.

古文：休爱才好士，多所拔擢。
现代文：崔休爱才好士，经常拔擢人才。
English: Cui Xiu'ai is a talented person and often promotes talented people.

古文：广平王怀数引谈宴，世宗责其与诸王交游，免官。
现代文：广平王元怀经常邀他参与交谈和宴会，魏世宗怪他与诸王交游，免去他的官职。
English: Guangping Wang Yuanhuai often invited him to participate in conversations and banquets, Wei Shizong suspected him of traveling with kings and removed him from his official position.

古文：后除龙骧将军、洛州刺史。
现代文：后来，除授他为龙骧将军、洛州刺史。
English: Later, he was awarded the title of Longjing General and the title of Lozhou Sashihong.

古文：在州数年，以母老辞州，许之。
现代文：在州数年，因母亲年迈辞官，皇帝答应了。
English: After several years in the state, the emperor consented to his mother's retirement due to her advanced age.

古文：寻行幽州事，征拜司徒右长史。
现代文：不久行幽州事务，被征拜为司徒右长史。
English: He was soon involved in Yuzhou affairs, and was recruited as the successor of Stou Yu Changshi.

古文：休聪明强济，雅善断决，幕府多事，辞讼盈几，剖判若流，殊无疑滞，加之公平清洁，甚得时谈。
现代文：崔休聪明强干，尤其善于断决，幕府中事务很多，诉讼盈案，而他剖断如流，毫不疑滞，加上他公平廉洁，常被人们引为美谈。
English: Cui Xiu was clever and strong-willed, especially good at making decisions. There were many affairs in the shogunate, and many lawsuits, but he made decisions smoothly and without hesitation. In addition to his fairness and integrity, he was often referred to as a beautiful story.

古文：复除吏部郎中，加征虏将军、冀州大中正。
现代文：又除授吏部郎中、加授征虏将军、冀州大中正。
English: In addition, he was awarded the title of Junior Vice-Minister of the Ministry of Civil Affairs, as well as the title of General of Conscription and the title of Senior Vice-Minister of Jizhou University.

古文：迁光禄大夫，行河南尹。
现代文：迁任光禄大夫，行河南尹。
English: He was transferred to the post of Guanglu doctor and went to Henan Yin.

古文：肃宗初，即真，加平东将军。
现代文：肃宗初年，即真，加平东将军。
English: In the first year of Su Zong, that is, Gen. Ga Pingdong.

古文：寻除平北将军、幽州刺史，进号安北将军。
现代文：不久除授平北将军、幽州刺史，进号安北将军。
English: He was soon given the titles of General Pingbei, Yuzhou Zhishi, and General Anbei.

古文：迁安东将军、青州刺史。
现代文：迁任安东将军、青州刺史。
English: He was transferred to the post of General Anton, and became the official historian of Qingzhou.

古文：青州九郡民单扌剽、李伯徽、刘通等一千人，上书讼休德政，灵太后善之。
现代文：青州九郡民单，李伯徽、刘通等一千人，上书赞颂崔休德政，灵太后表彰了他。
English: Qingzhou nine-county people's list, Li Bohui, Liu Tong and other one thousand people sent a letter to praise Cui Xudezheng, and the Empress Dowager praised him.

古文：休在幽青州五六年，皆清白爱民，甚著声绩，二州怀其德泽，百姓追思之。
现代文：崔休在幽、青州任上五、六年，始终清白爱民，治绩十分突出。二州怀念其德泽，百姓追思其政绩。
English: During the five or six years that Cui Xiu served in Yu and Qingzhou, he always loved the people with a clean conscience, and his performance was very outstanding. The two states miss his virtues, and the people reflect on his political achievements.

古文：征为安南将军、度支尚书，寻进号抚军将军、七兵尚书，又转殿中尚书。
现代文：朝廷征拜他为安南将军、度支尚书，不久进号为抚军将军、七兵尚书，又转任殿中尚书。
English: The imperial court enlisted him as General Annan, Duzhi Shangshu, and soon he was promoted to General Fozun, Shichibei Shangshu, and then transferred to Shangshu in the palace.

古文：休久在台阁，明习典礼，每朝廷疑议，咸取正焉。
现代文：崔休久在台阁，熟谙典礼，每当朝廷有了疑难之议，都取正于他。
English: Cui Xiujiu has been in the cabinet for a long time, he is familiar with the ceremony, and whenever the court has a difficult question, it is taken from him.

古文：诸公咸相谓曰： 崔尚书下意处，我不能异也。 
现代文：官员们都说： 崔尚书说了的，我们都无异议。 
English: The officials all said, "We have no objection to what Cui Shangshu said."

古文：正光四年卒，年五十二。
现代文：正光四年去世，享年五十二岁。
English: Masamitsu died four years later, at the age of 52.

古文：赗帛五百匹，赠车骑将军、尚书仆射、冀州刺史，谥文贞侯。
现代文：朝廷赐帛五百匹，赠官车骑将军、尚书仆射、冀州刺史，谥称文贞侯。
English: The imperial court gave him five hundred horses, and presented him with an official carriage, a cavalry general, a scholar, a footman, and a historian from Jizhou Province. He was nicknamed Wenzheng.

古文：休少而谦退，事母孝谨。
现代文：崔休少年时即很谦逊，侍奉母亲孝顺谨细。
English: As a young boy, Cui Xiu was very humble and served his mother with filial piety.

古文：及为尚书，子仲文纳丞相雍第二女，女妻领军元义长庶子秘书郎稚舒。挟恃二家，志气微改；内有自得之心，外则陵藉同列。
现代文：等到做了尚书，子仲文娶丞相元雍的第二个姑娘，女儿嫁给了领军元叉庶出长子秘书郎元稚舒，崔休挟持二家之势，容色都有迁改，内有洋洋自得之心。
English: By the time he had made Shangshu, his son Zhongwen had married the second daughter of the prime minister Yuan Yong, his daughter had married the leader of the army Yuan Zhaodong's son-in-law, the eldest son of the secretary Lang Yuan Zhishu, and Cui Xiu held the power of the two families. They both had the appearance of having moved and changed, and they both had the heart of self-satisfaction.

古文：始休母房氏欲以休女妻其外孙邢氏，休不欲，乃违其母情，以妻义子，议者非之。
现代文：开始崔休母亲房氏也想要崔休的女儿嫁给她的外孙邢氏，崔休不同意，违背了母亲的意愿，把女儿嫁给了元叉的儿子，人们都批评这种举动。
English: At first, Cui Xiu's mother, Ms. Fang, also wanted Cui Xiu's daughter to marry her grandchild, Mr. Zou. Cui Xiu disagreed and married her daughter to Yuan Xuan's son against her mother's wishes. People criticized this action.

古文：休有九子。
现代文：崔休有九个儿子。
English: Cui Xiu has nine sons.

