古文：起屠维大渊献二月，尽重光赤奋若六月，凡二年在奇。
现代文：起屠维大渊献二月，尽重光赤奋若六月，凡二年在奇。
English: From Tuwei to the Great Abyss in February, and as far as possible to the Red Sea in June, every two years is a surprise.

古文：宪宗昭文章武大圣至神孝皇帝下
现代文：宪宗昭文章武大圣至神孝皇帝下
English: An article by Jianzong Zhao under the reign of Emperor Wu Da-sheng

古文：元和十四年己亥，公元八一九年二月，李听袭海州，克东海、朐山、怀仁等县。李愬败平卢兵于沂州，拔丞县。
现代文：唐宪宗元和十四年二月，李听出兵袭击海州，攻克东海、朐山、怀仁等县。李率军在沂州击败平卢兵，攻克丞县。
English: Tang Xian Zongyuan and in February 14th, Li Heard sent soldiers to attack Haizhou and conquered Donghai, Lushan, Huairin and other counties. Li led the army to defeat Pinglu soldiers in Luzhou and conquered Chengxiao County.

古文：李师道闻官军侵逼，发民治郓州城堑，修守备，役及妇人，民益惧且怨。
现代文：淄青节度使李师道听说唐官军日益逼近，于是征发民夫修治郓州城池，加强防守。又征发妇女，百姓更加恐惧怨恨。
English: At the Qing Dynasty festival, Li Shidao heard that the Tang government army was getting closer and closer, so he sent out men to repair and govern the city of Zhangzhou and strengthen the defense. He also sent out women, and the people were even more afraid and resentful.

古文：都知兵马使刘悟，正臣之孙也，师道使之将兵万馀人屯阳谷以拒官军。
现代文：都知兵马使刘悟，即唐肃宗朝平卢节度使刘正臣的孙子。李师道命悟率兵万余人屯驻阳，以拒抗官军。
English: Liu Wugu, the grandson of Liu Zhengshen, the military commander of the Tang Dynasty Su Zong Dynasty, was known throughout the country. More than ten thousand soldiers led by Li Shidao Wugu stayed in Yang to resist the government army.

古文：悟务为宽惠，使士卒人人自便，军中号曰刘父。
现代文：刘悟治军宽厚，使士卒人人自便，不加约束，军中称誉他为 刘父 。
English: Liu Wuguo was generous in governing the army. Envoys were sent at anyone's convenience without restraint. The army praised him as Liu Furu.

古文：及田弘正渡河，悟军无备，战又数败。
现代文：及至魏博节度使田弘正率军南渡黄河，进攻淄青，刘悟军无准备，出战屡败。
English: By the time of the Wei Bo Festival, Tian Hongzheng led his army south across the Yellow River and attacked Aoxing. Liu Wou's army was unprepared and repeatedly defeated.

古文：或谓师道曰： 刘悟不修军法，专收众心，恐有他志，宜早图之。 
现代文：有人对李师道说： 刘悟不修军法，专意收买人心，恐有异志，应早有防备。 
English: Someone said to Li Shidao, "Liu Wuguo does not practice military law, he only wants to buy people's hearts. If you are afraid of having a different opinion, you should be prepared in advance."

古文：师道召悟计事，欲杀之。
现代文：于是，李师道托言商议军事，召刘悟来郓州，想借机把刘悟杀死。
English: As a result, Li Shidao asked for military consultation and summoned Liu Wou to Zhangzhou, hoping to take the opportunity to kill Liu Wou.

古文：或谏曰： 今官军四合，悟无逆状，用一人言杀之，诸将谁肯为用！
现代文：有人劝李师道说： 今官军四面围攻淄青，刘悟尚未有谋反的迹象，听信一人之言就把他杀死，诸将中谁肯为您效力！
English: Someone advised Li Shidao, saying: Now the government army is besieging Biting on all sides. Liu Wugu has not yet shown any signs of plotting a rebellion. If you listen to one person, you will kill him. Who among the generals is willing to serve you?

古文：是自脱其爪牙也。 
现代文：这是自除爪牙。 
English: It's a self-removing claw.

古文：师道留悟旬日，复遣之，厚赠金帛以安其意。
现代文：李师道认为言之有理，留刘悟在郓州十日后，命他仍回阳谷，并赠送大批金帛加以安抚。
English: Li Shidao thought his words were reasonable. Ten days after leaving Liu Gou in Zhangzhou, he ordered him to return to Yanggu and gave him a large amount of gold ingots to appease him.

古文：悟知之，还营，阴为之备。
现代文：刘悟知李师道已怀疑自己，返回军营后，秘密做防守准备。
English: Liu Wuxi knew that Li Shidao had already doubted himself. After returning to the military camp, he secretly made defensive preparations.

古文：师道以悟将兵在外，署悟子从谏门下别奏。
现代文：李师道因刘悟率兵在外，任命他的儿子刘从谏为门下别奏，留在郓州。
English: Due to Liu Wuguo's absence leading the troops, Li Shidao appointed his son Liu Conglu as his pupil and left him in Zhangzhou.

古文：从谏与师道诸奴日游戏，颇得其阴谋，密疏以白父。
现代文：刘从谏每天与李师道家奴游玩，获悉李师道阴谋，写密信转告父亲。
English: Liu Conglu played with Li Shidao's servant every day, learned of Li Shidao's plot, and wrote a secret letter to his father.

古文：又有谓师道者曰： 刘悟终为患，不如早除之。 
现代文：部下又有人对李师道说： 刘悟终必谋反，不如早日除掉他。 
English: Some of his subordinates said to Li Shidao, "Liu Wou will eventually rebel, so it's better to get rid of him as soon as possible."

古文：丙辰，师道潜遣二使赍帖授行营兵马副使张暹，令斩悟首献之，勒暹权领行营。
现代文：丙辰，李师道密派亲信二人带手令前往阳谷，命行营兵马副使张暹杀掉刘悟，割下他的头送郓州查验，然后由张暹代领行营兵马。
English: Bing Chen and Li Shi Daomi sent two of their close confidants to Yanggu with a warrant. They ordered Zhang Sie, the deputy commander of the battalion, to kill Liu Wugu, cut off his head and send it to Zhangzhou for inspection. Zhang Sie then led the battalion.

古文：时悟方据高丘张幕置酒，去营二三里。
现代文：这时，刘悟正在一块高地上树立帐幕，设置酒宴，离开军营二三里。
English: At this time, Liu Weng was setting up a tent on a highland, setting up a wine banquet, and leaving the military camp two or three miles away.

古文：二使至营，密以贴授暹。
现代文：二使到阳谷军营后，密将李师道手令授予张暹。
English: After the second envoy arrived at the Yanggu military camp, he secretly gave the order of Li Shidao to Zhang Siew.

古文：暹素与悟善，阳与使者谋曰： 悟自使府还，颇为备，不可匆匆，暹请先往白之，云： 司空遣使存问将士，兼有赐物，请都头速归，同受传语。 
现代文：张暹向来和刘悟相好，便假装与使者商议说： 刘悟从郓州节度使府回来后，已有防备，此事不可匆忙。请先让我去报告刘悟，假称 李师道派人来尉问将士，带来大批赏赐物品，请都头速归军营，一同接受指令 。
English: Zhang Sie, who had always been friendly with Liu Wugu, pretended to consult with the messenger and said, "After Liu Wugu returned from the Bozhou Festival, he was already prepared, and this matter should not be rushed. Please let me go to report to Liu Wugu first. Suppose that Li Shidao sent a lieutenant to inquire about the soldiers and brought a large number of reward items, please return to the military camp at once and receive instructions together.

古文：如此，则彼不疑，乃可图也。 
现代文：这样，刘悟必然不疑，然后可乘机下手。 
English: In this way, Liu Wuxu is bound to have no doubt, and then he can take advantage of the opportunity.

古文：使者然之。
现代文：二使同意张暹的意见。
English: The second envoy agreed with Zhang Siew's opinion.

古文：暹怀帖走诣悟，屏人示之。
现代文：于是，张暹把李师道手令揣在怀中，到刘悟饮宴处，命随从退下，交刘悟观看。
English: As a result, Zhang Sie carried Master Li's Daoist order in her arms and went to Liu Wou's banquet hall. She was ordered to withdraw and let Liu Wou watch.

古文：悟潜遣人先执二使，杀之。
现代文：刘悟得知李师道阴谋后，秘密派人擒杀二使。
English: After Liu Gou learned of Li Shidao's plot, he secretly sent someone to kill the two envoys.

古文：时已向暮，悟按辔徐行还营，坐帐下，严兵自卫。
现代文：这时，天已傍晚，刘悟乘马缓行回营，坐于帐中，重兵把守，严加防备。
English: At this time, it was late in the evening, Liu Wou rode slowly back to the camp, sitting in his tent, heavily guarded and heavily guarded.

古文：召诸将，厉色谓之曰： 悟与公等不顾死亡以抗官军，诚无负于司空。
现代文：随后，召集众位将领，声色严厉地说： 我和你们不顾死活抗击官军，确实对得起李师道。
English: Afterwards, he called together a number of generals and said sternly, "You and I, who are fighting the government army to the death, are truly worthy of the path of Li Shimu.

古文：今司空信谗言，来取悟首。
现代文：今李师道听信谗言，派人来杀我。
English: Now Li Shidao has listened to my advice and sent someone to kill me.

古文：悟死，诸公其次矣。
现代文：如果我死，你们随后也会被杀。
English: If I die, you will be killed later.

古文：且天子所欲诛者独司空一人。
现代文：当朝天子发兵围攻淄青，声明只杀李师道一人。
English: When Emperor Tianzi sent troops to besiege Jiaqing, he announced that only one person, Li Shidao, had been killed.

古文：今军势日蹙，吾曹何为随之族灭！
现代文：如今我军形势日渐窘迫，我等为什么要随他一同被灭族！
English: Now that the situation of our army is getting more and more difficult, why should I be exterminated together with him!

古文：欲与诸公卷旗束甲，还入郓州，奉行天子之命，岂徒免危亡，富贵可图也。
现代文：现在，我和大家商议，打算卷旗束甲袭击郓州，奉行天子之命，杀李师道，不仅可免我等危亡，而且可图富贵。
English: Now, I have discussed with you that if we plan to attack Zhangzhou with the banner and armor, follow the order of the Son of Heaven, and kill Li Shidao, we will not only be spared from peril, but will also be rich.

古文：诸公以为何如？ 
现代文：大家认为如何？ 
English: What do you think?

古文：兵马使赵垂棘立于众首，良久，对曰： 如此，事果济否？ 
现代文：兵马使赵垂棘站在诸将前头，沉默很久，说： 不知此事能否成功？ 
English: The soldiers and horses made Zhao Tiexuan stand in front of the generals, and he was silent for a long time, saying, "I don't know if this can succeed.

古文：悟应声骂曰： 汝与司空合谋邪！ 
现代文：刘悟应声骂道： 难道你要与李师道同谋吗？ 
English: Liu Wugu scolded: Do you want to be a co-conspirator with Li Shidao?

古文：立斩之。
现代文：即命斩首。
English: The man was immediately beheaded.

古文：遍问其次，有迟疑未言者，悉斩之，并斩军中素为众所恶者，凡三十馀，尸于帐前。
现代文：接着，挨个询问，诸将凡迟疑不言者，一律斩首，并斩杀军中向来为众所憎恶者，共三十余人，尸首列于帐前。
English: Then, after questioning them one by one, they beheaded all those who hesitated or did not speak, and killed those who had always been hated by the people in the army, a total of more than thirty people, and the corpses were listed in front of the account.

古文：馀皆股粟，曰： 惟都头命，愿尽死！ 
现代文：其余诸将都两腿发抖，说： 愿听都头命令，尽死效力！
English: The rest of the generals trembled on their feet and said, "Let's listen to the commander's orders and do our best!"

古文：乃令士卒曰： 入郓，人赏钱百缗，惟不得近军帑。
现代文：于是，刘悟下达出兵命令，对士卒说： 攻入郓州，每人赏钱一百缗。
English: As a result, Liu Gou issued an order to send troops and said to the soldiers: "If you invade Zhangzhou, each of you will receive a reward of one hundred baht.

古文：其使宅及逆党家财，任自掠取，有仇者报之。 
现代文：除军库外，凡节度使住宅及其他叛党家财，允许你们任意掠取，有仇者许可报仇。 
English: With the exception of the armory, you are allowed to plunder the houses and other treasuries of the rebels at any time, and enemies are allowed to take revenge.

古文：使士卒皆饱食执兵，夜半听鼓三声绝即行，人衔枚，马缚口，遇行人，执留之，人无知者。
现代文：接着，命士卒饱食一顿，每人携带兵器，半夜时分，听鼓声三响后出发。将士口衔枚，军马缚口，防止喧哗；凡遇行人，都执留军中，以防走漏消息。
English: Next, the soldiers were given a full meal, each carrying a weapon, and at midnight, after listening to the three sounds of the drum, they set off. The soldiers were ordered to be silent, the horses were tied to prevent noise, and if there were any pedestrians, they were kept in the army to prevent information from leaking out.

古文：距城数里，天未明，悟驻军，使听城上柝声绝，使十人前行，宣言 刘都头奉帖追入城。 
现代文：军行所至，人都不知。距郓州数里时，天还未亮，刘悟命将士就地待命，听城上巡逻的木邦声停止后，派十人先行抵城下，言称 刘都头奉节度使手令入城 。
English: When they arrived at the military camp, no one knew. When they were several miles away from Zhangzhou, the sky was not yet bright, Liu Wugu ordered his men to be on standby. After listening to the sound of the wooden clogs patrolling the city, he sent ten men to arrive at the city first, saying that Liu Dudou had received the order to enter the city.

古文：门者请俟写简白使，十人拔刃拟之，皆窜匿。
现代文：守门人请大家稍候，正想写书简秉告李师道时，十人突然拔刀欲斩，守门人一哄而逃。
English: The gatekeeper asked everyone to wait a moment. When he was about to write a letter to Li Shidao, ten people suddenly pulled out their swords and wanted to behead him. The gatekeeper fled in panic.

古文：悟引大军继至，城中噪哗动地。
现代文：刘悟率大军随后赶到。城中听说有兵马袭击，喧哗动地，一片混乱。
English: Liu Wugu and his army arrived later. The city heard that there was an attack by soldiers and horses, and it was noisy and chaotic.

古文：比至，子城已洞开，惟牙城拒守，寻纵火，斧其门而入。
现代文：等到刘悟入城时，内城已被攻开。只有李师道所住的牙城还在抗拒坚守。刘悟下令纵火焚烧，用大斧辟开城门，将士一齐涌入。
English: By the time Liu Gou entered the city, the inner city had already been attacked. Only the stronghold where Li Shidao lived was still holding out. Liu Gou ordered it to be set on fire, opened the gate with a large axe, and the soldiers all rushed in.

古文：牙中兵不过数百，始犹有发弓矢者，俄知力不支，皆投于地。
现代文：城中亲兵不过数百人，开始还有人发箭抵抗，后知寡不敌众，都投弓箭于地而降。
English: There were only a few hundred soldiers in the city, and at first there were people who resisted with arrows, but they were outnumbered and all threw their bows and arrows to the ground and fell.

古文：悟勒兵升听事，使捕索师道。
现代文：刘悟率将士入淄青节度使府，命搜捕李师道。
English: Liu Wugu led the soldiers into the government of the Qing Dynasty and ordered them to arrest Li Shidao.

古文：师道与二子伏厕床下，索得之，悟命置牙门外隙地，使人谓曰： 悟奉密诏送司空归阙，然司空亦何颜复见天子！ 
现代文：李师道和他的两个儿子藏在侧面的床下，被士卒搜出。刘悟命把李师道父子押到节度使府门外的空地上，派人对他说： 刘都头奉天子密诏，打算将您送到京城面见皇上，但是您还有什么脸面再见皇上呢！ 
English: Li Shidao and his two sons were hidden under a bed on the side and were found by the soldiers. Liu Wumen pushed Li Shidao and his son to the open space outside the gate of the Emperor's residence, and sent someone to say to him: "Liu Duodu, according to God's secret decree, intends to send you to Beijing to see the emperor, but what face do you have to see the emperor again!

古文：师道犹有幸生之意，其子弘方仰曰： 事已至此，速死为幸！ 
现代文：这时，李师道仍想能幸免一死，他的儿子李弘方仰面叹道： 事已至此，盼求快死为幸！ 
English: At this time, Li Shidao still wanted to be spared from death, and his son Li Hongfang looked up and sighed: Things have come to this, I hope to die soon!

古文：寻皆斩之。
现代文：随后，父子三人都被斩首。
English: Both father and son were then beheaded.

古文：自卯至午，悟乃命两都虞候巡坊市，禁掠者，即时皆定。
现代文：从清晨到中午，刘悟命令左、右都虞候巡行街坊和集市，禁止将士焚掠，到了下午，城内很快安定。
English: From early morning to noon, Liu Wuxu ordered the left and right magistrates to parade through the neighborhoods and markets, prohibiting soldiers from burning and looting. In the afternoon, the city was quickly stabilized.

古文：大集兵民于球场，亲乘马巡绕，慰安之。
现代文：于是，刘悟命将士和百姓到鞠场集中，亲自乘马绕场一周，安抚慰劳众人。
English: As a result, Liu Wugu gathered the warriors and common people at the jujube field and personally rode around the field on a horse to comfort the laboring people.

古文：斩赞师道逆谋者二十馀家，文武将吏且惧且喜，皆入贺。
现代文：然后，下令处斩与李师道一起叛乱者，共二十余家，文武将吏目睹叛乱者被杀，又怕又喜。
English: Then, he ordered the execution of more than 20 families who had rebelled with Li Shidao. The generals were both afraid and happy to see the rebels killed.

古文：悟见李公度，执手歔欷；出贾直言于狱，置之幕府。
现代文：刘悟与李公度相见，二人握手哭泣。又命把贾直言从狱中放出，置于幕府参议军事。
English: Liu Wugu and Li Gongdu saw each other, the two shook hands and cried. He also ordered to release Jia Zhengyan from prison and place him in the Shogunate's military council.

古文：悟之自阳谷还兵趋郓也，潜使人以其谋告田弘正曰： 事成，当举烽相白。万一城中有备不能入，愿公引兵为助。
现代文：在刘悟率军从阳出发袭击郓州前，曾暗中派人把行动计划转告魏博节度使田弘正，约定： 如果事成，就举烽火相告；万一城中有防备不能攻入，请率兵相助。
English: Before Liu Wugu and his army set out from Yang to attack Zhangzhou, he secretly sent someone to convey the action plan to Wei Bo's regent, Tian Hongzheng, and agreed: If the matter is successful, they will hold a bonfire to announce it to each other; in case there is a defense in the city that cannot be penetrated, please lead the soldiers to help.

古文：功成之日，皆归于公，悟何敢有之！ 
现代文：事成之后，全部归功于您，我不敢据功为己有。 
English: After everything is done, I owe it all to you. I don't dare to take credit for myself.

古文：且使弘正进据己营。
现代文：同时，请求田弘正率军进据阳谷营地。
English: At the same time, he asked Tian Hongzheng to lead the army into the Yanggu camp.

古文：弘正见烽，知得城，遣使往贺。
现代文：这时，田弘正看到烽火，知道郓州已被刘悟攻克，便派使者前往祝贺。
English: At this time, Tian Hongzheng saw the bonfire and knew that Luzhou had been conquered by Liu Wuxu, so he sent an envoy to congratulate him.

古文：悟函师道父子三首遣使送弘正营，弘正大喜，露布以闻。
现代文：刘悟把李师道父子三人的首级放入盒中，派人送到田弘正军营，弘正大喜，写文告上报朝廷。
English: Liu Wugu put the three heads of Li Shidao and his son into a box and sent someone to Tian Hongzheng's military camp. Hongzheng was overjoyed and wrote a message to the imperial court.

古文：淄、青等十二州皆平。
现代文：至此，淄、青等十二州全部平定。
English: At this point, the twelve prefectures including Handan and Qing were all pacified.

古文：弘正初得师道首，疑其非真，召夏侯澄使识之。
现代文：起初，田弘正得李师道首级，怀疑是否真实，于是，命夏侯澄前来辨识。
English: At first, Tian Hongzheng was at the head of Li Shidao, doubting whether it was true, so he ordered Xia Houcheng to come and identify it.

古文：澄熟视其面，长号陨绝者久之，乃抱其首，舐其目中尘垢，复恸哭。
现代文：夏侯澄仔细看后，大声痛哭了很久，悲痛欲绝，接着，将李师道首级捧起，用舌尖舐净眼睛中的灰尘，然后又大声哭泣。
English: After Xia Houchen took a closer look, he cried loudly and bitterly for a long time, grief-stricken. Next, he held up the head of Li Shidao, licked the dust in his eyes with the tip of his tongue, and then cried loudly again.

古文：弘正为之改容，义而不责。
现代文：田弘正见此情景，不免受到感染，认为夏侯澄忠心重义，也不责备。
English: Seeing this scene, Tian Hongzheng was inevitably infected and thought that Xia Houcheng's loyalty was important, and he did not blame him.

古文：壬戌，田弘正捷奏至。
现代文：壬戌，田弘正奏捷文告送到京城。
English: At the same time, Tian Hongzheng delivered a proclamation to the capital.

古文：乙丑，命户部侍郎杨于陵为淄青宣抚使。
现代文：乙丑，唐宪任命户部侍郎杨於陵为淄青宣抚使。
English: Second, Tang Xian appointed Yang Yuling, the steward of the household, as the imperial envoy of the Qing Dynasty.

古文：己巳，李师道首函至。
现代文：已巳，装着李师道首级的盒子送至京城。
English: Already, a box containing the first grade of Li Shidao has been sent to Beijing.

古文：自广德以来，垂六十年，籓镇跋扈河南、北三十馀州，自除官吏，不供贡赋，至是尽遵朝廷约束。
现代文：自从唐代宗广德元年以来，蕃镇在河南、河北三十余州割据跋扈，自命官吏，不向朝廷上供赋税，将近六十余年，至此全部重新遵守朝廷法令。
English: Since the first year of Zongguangde in the Tang Dynasty, Shanzhen has been divided into more than 30 states in Henan and Hebei, and self-appointed officials have not paid taxes to the imperial court for nearly more than 60 years. So far, they have all complied with the imperial decree again.

古文：上命杨于陵分李师道地，于陵按图籍，视土地远迩，计士马众寡，校仓库虚实，分为三道，使之适均：以郓、曹、濮为一道，淄、清、齐、登、莱为一道，兗、海、沂、密为一道，上从之。
现代文：唐宪宗命杨於陵分割李师道淄青十二州。於陵阅视淄青地图和户籍后，根据各州土地的远近，士卒和军马的多少，以及仓库虚实，拟分为三道，使各方面情况比较平均：以郓州、曹州、濮州为一道；淄州、青州、齐州、登州、莱州为一道；兖州、海州、沂州、密州为一道。宪宗准奏。
English: Tang Xianzong ordered Yang Yu Ling to divide the Li Shidao and Jiaqing into 12 states. After reading the map of Jiaqing and the household registration in the mausoleum, according to the distance and proximity of the land of each state, the number of soldiers and horses, and the actual warehouse, it is proposed to be divided into three, so that the situation in all aspects is relatively average: Jiazhou, Caozhou and Jiazhou together; Jiazhou, Qingzhou, Qizhou, Dengzhou, and Laizhou together; Jiazhou, Haizhou, Jiazhou, and Myizhou together.

古文：刘悟以初讨李师道诏云： 部将有能杀师道以众降者，师道官爵悉以与之。 
现代文：刘悟根据当初发布的讨伐李师道诏书所说 如果部将有人能杀李师道，率军投降朝廷，即以师道官爵授予此人 ，认为自己应该为淄青节度使，尽得淄青十二州。
English: According to the edict issued at the beginning of the crusade against Li Shidao, Liu Wuguo said that if anyone could kill Li Shidao and lead the army to surrender to the imperial court, he would award the person with the title of Shidao official, and believed that he should be the leader of the Qing Dynasty and win the twelve states of the Qing Dynasty.

古文：意谓尽得十二州之地，遂补署文武将佐，更易州县长吏；谓其下曰： 军府之政，一切循旧。
现代文：于是，开始擅自任命文武将吏，更换州县官吏。他对部下说： 军府政事，一切遵循旧制。
English: As a result, he began to arbitrarily appoint civil and military officials and replace state and county officials. He said to his subordinates: In military and political affairs, everything follows the old system.

古文：自今但与诸公抱子弄孙，夫复何忧！ 
现代文：今后，我和大家抱子弄孙，长享富贵，还有什么可以忧愁的呢！ 
English: In the future, I and all of you will have children and grandchildren, enjoy wealth for a long time, what else is there to worry about!

古文：上欲移悟他镇，恐悟不受代，复须用兵，密诏田弘正察之。
现代文：唐宪宗拟把刘悟调离淄青，但恐怕刘悟拒不从命，而不得不再次用兵。于是，下密诏给田弘正，命他观察刘悟的言行，看他是否可能拒诏。
English: Tang Xianzong intended to transfer Liu Wugu away from Jiaqing, but I am afraid that Liu Wugu refused to obey his order and had to use soldiers again. Therefore, he sent a secret order to Tian Hongzheng, ordering him to observe Liu Wugu's words and deeds to see if he could refuse the order.

古文：弘正日遣使者诣悟，托言修好，实观其所为。
现代文：田弘正接到宪宗的密诏后，每天派人前往郓州，借口与刘悟交好，实际上是观察他的言行。
English: After receiving the secret edict from Xianzong, Tian Hongzheng sent people to Bozhou every day, under the pretext of making friends with Liu Gou, but actually to observe his words and deeds.

古文：悟多力，好手搏，得郓州三日，则教军中壮士手搏，与魏博使者庭观之，自摇肩攘臂，离坐以助其势。
现代文：刘悟力大无比，喜欢摔跤，攻克郓州三天后，就教军中壮士练习摔跤，他和魏博的使者在庭院中观看。刘悟一边观看，一边挽袖捋臂，有时还离座呐喊助威。
English: Three days after conquering Zhangzhou, he taught the soldiers to practice wrestling. He and Wei Bo's emissary watched in the courtyard. While watching, Liu Wou rolled up his sleeves and raised his arms, and sometimes shouted encouragement from his seat.

古文：弘正闻之，笑曰： 是闻除改，登即行矣，何能为哉！ 
现代文：田弘正听说后，哑然失笑，说： 像他这个样子，如果调动的诏书下达，肯定会立即成行，不可能有什么作为。 
English: When Tian Hongzheng heard about this, he lost his composure and said, "Like him, if a decree of mobilization is issued, it will certainly be carried out immediately, and it is impossible to do anything.

古文：庚午，以悟为义成节度使。悟闻制下，手足失坠。
现代文：庚午，唐宪宗诏命刘悟为义成节度使，刘悟接诏后，惊慌失措。
English: In the afternoon of the 7th day of the 7th month, the Tang Emperor issued an edict ordering Liu Wugu to be the envoy for the Yicheng Festival. After receiving the edict, Liu Wugu panicked.

古文：明日，遂行。
现代文：第二天，就上路赴任了。
English: The next day, he was on his way to work.

古文：弘正已将数道兵，比至城西二里，与悟相见于客亭，即受旌节，驰诣滑州，辟李公度、李存、郭昈、贾直言以自随。
现代文：这天，田弘正率众将为刘悟送行，到郓州城西二里时，在驿站与刘悟相见，刘悟接受义成节度使旌节，征召李公度、李存、郭、贾直言为幕僚，赶赴滑州上任。
English: On this day, Tian Hongzheng led the crowd to see Liu Wugu off. When he was two miles west of Zhangzhou City, he met Liu Wugu at the railway station. Liu Wugu accepted the Yicheng Festival and the Envoy Festival, conscripted Li Gongdu, Li Cun, Guo and Jia Zhigang as staff members, and rushed to Slanting to take office.

古文：悟素与李文会善，既得郓州，使召之，未至。
现代文：刘悟向来和李文会相好，当初攻克郓州后，曾派人到登州去请李文会。
English: Liu Wou has always been friendly with the Li Wenhui. After conquering Ganzhou, he once sent someone to Dengzhou to invite the Li Wenhui.

古文：闻将移镇，昈、存谋曰： 文会佞人，败乱淄青一道，灭李司空之族，万人所共仇也！
现代文：李文会尚未到郓州，郭、李存听说刘悟即将调往他地，二人商议说： 文会是奸佞小人，由于他的缘故，致使淄青败乱，李师道遭灭族之灾，众人无不以他为仇人！
English: Before Li Wenhui arrived in Zhangzhou, Guo and Li Cun heard that Liu Wuzhong was about to be transferred to another place. The two discussed and said: "Wenhui is a traitorous villain. Because of him, the Qing Dynasty was defeated, and Li Shidao suffered the disaster of ethnic extermination. Everyone regards him as an enemy!"

古文：不乘此际诛之，田相公至，务施宽大，将何以雪三齐之愤怨乎！ 
现代文：如果不乘此良机把他杀掉，等田弘正来后，肯定以宽大为怀，那时，将怎样来报大家的这个仇恨呢！
English: If we don't take advantage of this good opportunity to kill him, when Tian Hongzheng comes, he will definitely be lenient, then how will we report this hatred to everyone!

古文：乃诈为悟帖，遣使即文会所至，取其首以来。
现代文：于是，二人伪作刘悟手令，派人出使登州，命杀李文会，割下他的头回来报告。
English: As a result, the two of them forged Liu Satoru's order, sent an envoy to Danzhou, killed Li Wenhui, cut off his head and came back to report.

古文：使者遇文会于丰齐驿，斩之。
现代文：使者在齐州东南方向的丰齐驿碰到李文会，将他杀死后，回到郓州。
English: The envoy ran into Li Wenhui in Fengqian, southeast of Qizhou, killed him, and then returned to Zhangzhou.

古文：比还，悟及昈、存已去，无所复命矣。
现代文：这时，刘悟已经和郭、李存等人离开郓州前往滑州，使者无法再报告了。
English: At this time, Liu Wuguo had already left Zhangzhou with Guo, Li Cun and others to go to Slanting, and the messenger could no longer report.

古文：文会二子，一亡去，一死于狱，家赀悉为人所掠，田宅没官。
现代文：李文会有两个儿子，一个逃亡，一个死在狱中，他的家产全都被人掠去，田地和庄宅被朝廷没收。
English: Li Wenxiu had two sons, one fled and one died in prison. His entire family property was plundered, and his fields and manor house were confiscated by the imperial court.

古文：诏以淄青行营副使张暹为戎州刺史。
现代文：唐宪宗下诏，命淄青行营副使张暹为戎州刺史。
English: Emperor Gensong of the Tang Dynasty issued an edict ordering Zhang Sie, the deputy envoy of the Qing Dynasty, to write the history of Wonshu.

古文：癸酉，加田弘正检校司徒、同平章事。
现代文：癸酉，唐宪宗加封田弘正为检校司徒、同平章事。
English: At that time, Tang Xian Zong and Fong Tian Hongzheng were the inspectors of the school and the same rank.

古文：先是，李师道将败数月，闻风动鸟飞，皆疑有变，禁郓人亲识宴聚及道路偶语，犯者有刑。
现代文：当初，李师道在败亡前的几个月，紧张多疑，听到风吹鸟飞，就怀疑有什么变故，于是下令禁止郓州人在一起饮宴相聚，以及行人悄声私语，如有违犯，就严刑惩处。
English: At first, in the months before his defeat and death, Li Shidao was nervous and suspicious. When he heard the wind blowing and the birds flying, he suspected that something had changed. So he ordered that the people of Zhangzhou should not gather together to eat and drink, and pedestrians should not whisper. If there is any violation, it will be severely punished.

古文：弘正既入郓，悉除苛禁，纵人游乐，寒食七昼夜不禁行人。
现代文：田弘正来到郓州后，下令除去这些严苛的禁令，放纵百姓们游乐，寒食节七昼夜不禁行人往来。
English: After Tian Hongzheng came to Zhangzhou, he ordered to remove these strict prohibitions, indulge the people in amusement, and the cold food festival lasted for seven days and nights.

古文：或谏曰： 郓人久为寇敌，今虽平，人心未安，不可不备。 
现代文：有人劝田弘正说： 郓州人随同李师道数年，与朝廷为敌，现虽已平定，人心尚未安定，不可不防。 
English: Someone advised Tian Hongzheng: "The people of Zhangzhou have followed the path of Li Shidao for several years, and have been enemies of the imperial court. Although they have been pacified, their hearts are not yet stable, and they must be guarded against.

古文：弘正曰： 今为暴者既除，宜施以宽惠，若复为严察，是以桀易桀也，庸何愈焉！ 
现代文：田弘正说： 如今淄青暴乱为首者已经诛除，应当施行惠政，如果仍以严刑为政，那就好比是以夏桀来代替夏桀，又有什么改善呢？ 
English: Tian Hongzheng said: Now that the ringleaders of the Indigo Rebellion have been eliminated, we should implement a policy of favoritism. If we still use severe punishment as a policy, it would be like replacing Xia Yao with Xia Yao, and what would be the improvement?

古文：先是，贼数遣人入关，截陵戟，焚仓场，流矢飞书，以震骇京师，沮挠官军。
现代文：起初，在元和十年时，朝廷数万官军围攻淮西吴元济，叛贼多次派人潜入潼关，截断皇陵门戟，焚烧官仓粮储，甚至用箭把恐吓信射入京城，制造混乱，吓唬朝廷和百姓，以便阻挠官军的进攻。
English: At first, during the Yuan and Ten Years' War, tens of thousands of imperial troops besieged Wu Yuanji in Huaxi. The traitors repeatedly sent people to infiltrate Shaoguan, cut off the gates of the imperial tombs, burned the official storehouses and granaries, and even used arrows to shoot threatening letters into Beijing, creating chaos and scaring the imperial court and the people in order to thwart the attack of the official army.

古文：有司督察甚严，潼关吏至发人囊箧以索之，然终不能绝。
现代文：朝廷严令有关部门搜查，潼关官吏甚至把来往行人的背包和箱子都打开查看，但始终未能禁绝这类不测事件的发生。
English: The imperial court strictly ordered the relevant departments to search, and customs officials even opened the backpacks and boxes of pedestrians to check, but they were never able to prevent such incidents from happening.

古文：及田弘正入郓，阅李师道簿书，有赏杀武元衡人王士元等及赏潼关、蒲津吏卒案，乃知向者皆吏卒赂于贼，容其奸也。
现代文：等到田弘正进入郓州后，翻阅李师道的文书，发现其中有赏赐杀宰相武元衡的刺客王士元等人的记载，以及赏赐潼关、蒲津官吏、士卒的案卷，这才知道以往种种不测事件，都是由于官吏、士卒受敌贿赂，容纳叛贼作乱。
English: It was not until Tian Hongzheng entered Zhangzhou that he looked through the documents of Li Shiduo and found that there was a record of rewarding the assassin Wang Shiyuan and others who killed the prime minister Wu Yuanhe, as well as a case file of rewarding officials and soldiers in Shaoguan and Putuo. It was only then that he knew that all kinds of unforeseen events in the past were due to officials and soldiers being bribed by the enemy to accommodate traitors to make trouble.

古文：裴度纂述蔡、郓用兵以来上之忧勤机略，因侍宴献之，请内印出付史官。
现代文：裴度把朝廷对淮西、淄青用兵以来，唐宪宗勤勉为政、日理万机的情形编纂成册，在陪伴宪宗饮宴时，乘机献上，奏请宪宗盖印，然后交付史官。
English: Pei Du compiled a record of the situation of the Tang Xianzong's diligence in politics and the day-to-day management since the imperial court's use of troops against Huaxi and Jiaqing. When accompanying Xianzong at a banquet, he took the opportunity to present it, asked Xianzong to seal it, and then delivered it to the historian.

古文：上曰： 如此，似出朕志，非所欲也。 
现代文：宪宗说： 如果这样做，就会使史官产生错觉，以为是我指派你编纂的，其实，这并非我的本意。 
English: Gensong said, "If you do this, it will give the historian the illusion that I have assigned you to compile it. In fact, this is not my intention.

古文：弗许。
现代文：于是没有准许。
English: Yan Le still did not agree.

古文：三月，戊子，以华州刺史马总为郓、曹、濮等州节度使。
现代文：三月，戊子，唐宪宗命华州刺史马总为郓、曹、濮等州节度使。
English: In March, Wu Zi, Tang Xianzong ordered Huazhou Zhishima to be the chief envoy to the state festivals such as the Spring Festival, the Mid-Autumn Festival and the Mid-Autumn Festival.

古文：己丑，以义成节度使薛平为平卢节度、淄、青、齐、登、莱等州观察使。
现代文：己丑，命义成节度使薛平为平卢节度使和淄、青、齐、登、莱等州观察使。
English: In his own eyes, it is imperative to become a festival, so that Xue Ping is the festival envoy of Pinglu and the state observation envoys of Min, Qing, Qi, Deng and Lai.

古文：以淄青四面行营供军使王遂为沂、海、兗、密等州观察使。
现代文：命淄青四面行营供军使王遂为沂、海、兖、密等州观察使。
English: Wang, who was ordered to march across the country to supply the army, became the observation envoy for the provinces of Anhui, Hebei, Fujian and Miyang.

古文：横海节度使乌重胤奏： 河朔籓镇所以能旅拒朝命六十馀年者，由诸州县各置镇将领事，收刺史、县令之权，自作威福。
现代文：横海节度使乌重胤上奏： 河朔藩镇所以能够长期抗拒朝廷诏令，割据六十余年，原因是他们在各州设置镇将主持军政，夺刺史和县令的权力，自作威福。
English: The Henghai Festival made Wu Chung-yin recite: The reason why the Heshuo Clan Town was able to resist the imperial edict for a long time and remained independent for more than sixty years was that they set up towns in each state to preside over military affairs, seize the power of the imperial history and county government, and make their own fortunes.

古文：向使刺史各得行其职，则虽有奸雄如安、史，必不能以一州独反也。
现代文：如果能让刺史行使自己的职权，那么，就是出现像安禄山、史思明这样的奸雄，也必然不可能以一州的兵力叛乱。
English: If we can let Zhang Shi exercise his authority, then even if there are villains like An Lushan and Shi Siming, it will be impossible to rebel with the military strength of one state.

古文：臣所领德、棣、景三州，已举牒各还刺史职事，应在州兵并令刺史领之。 
现代文：现在，我所管辖的德、棣、景三州，已下令各州镇将把军权归还刺史，各州的州兵都由刺史统辖。 
English: Now, the three prefectures of De, Handan and Jing, which I govern, have ordered all prefectures and towns to return military power to Jishi, and the National Guard of each prefecture will be controlled by Jishi.

古文：夏，四月，丙寅，诏诸道节度、都团练、都防御、经略等使所统支郡兵马，并令刺史领之。
现代文：夏季，四月，丙寅，唐宪宗下诏，命各道节度使、都团练使、都防御使、经略使等所统辖的支郡兵马，一律归各州刺史统辖。
English: In the summer, in April, Emperor Xizong of the Tang Dynasty issued an edict ordering that the troops and horses of the counties under the jurisdiction of the festival envoys, regimental training envoys, defense envoys, and economic envoys of each province should all be under the jurisdiction of the states.

古文：自至德以来，节度使权重，所统诸州各置镇兵，以大将主之，暴横为患，故重胤论之。
现代文：自从至德元年以来，节度使权势日重，他们在各自管辖的州郡设置镇兵，派大将主持军务，专横跋扈，所以，乌重胤上奏论及此事。
English: Since the first year of the year, the Qing Dynasty has become more and more powerful. They set up town guards in the states and counties under their jurisdiction, sent generals to preside over military affairs, and acted arbitrarily. Therefore, Wu Chongyin reported on this matter.

古文：其后河北诸镇，惟横海最为顺命，由重胤外之得宜故也。
现代文：从此以后，河北藩镇中，只有横海最为顺从朝廷，都是由于乌重胤处置适宜的缘故。
English: From then on, among the towns of Hebei, only Henghai was the most obedient to the imperial court, all due to the fact that Wu Jieyin's disposition was appropriate.

古文：辛未，工部侍郎、同平章事程异薨。
现代文：辛未，工部侍郎、同平章事程异去世。
English: Soon after, the foreman of the engineering department, Tongping Zhang, passed away.

古文：裴度在相位，知无不言，皇甫镈之党阴挤之。
现代文：宰相裴度知无不言，皇甫的党羽在暗地里不断排挤他。
English: The Prime Minister, Pei Du, knew all about it, and the imperial father's party secretly pushed him out.

古文：丙子，诏度以门下侍郎、同平章事，充河东节度使。
现代文：丙子，唐宪宗下诏，命裴度带门下侍郎、同平章事的荣誉官衔，充任河东节度使。
English: He was the second son of Emperor Xianzong of the Tang Dynasty. He was appointed by Emperor Xianzong of the Tang Dynasty to be the attendant of Emperor Baidu, and was given the honorary title of Tongping Shanzhi, and served as the Hedong Festival envoy.

古文：皇甫镈专以掊克取媚，人无敢言者，独谏议大夫武儒衡上疏言之。
现代文：皇甫专以聚敛取媚宪宗，朝臣都不敢言，只有谏议大夫武儒衡上奏，指斥皇甫罪行。
English: Courtier did not dare to say anything about the Emperor's decision to adopt the Meixian sect of Confucianism. Only the doctor, Wu Rongheng, spoke up and denounced the Emperor's crime.

古文：镈自诉于上，上曰： 卿以儒衡上疏，将报怨邪！ 
现代文：皇甫向宪宗上诉，表示自己清白无辜。宪宗说： 你是由于武儒衡上奏，难道想要报复他吗？ 
English: The crown prince appealed to Kenzong, saying that he was innocent. Kenzong said: Are you trying to take revenge on him because of Wu Ruge?

古文：镈乃不敢言。
现代文：皇甫这才不敢再说了。
English: The Emperor did not dare to say any more.

古文：儒衡，元衡之从父弟也。
现代文：武儒衡是前宰相武元衡的叔伯兄弟。
English: Wu Rongheng is the uncle of former Prime Minister Wu Rongheng.

古文：史馆修撰李翱上言，以为： 定祸乱者，武功也；兴太平者，文德也。
现代文：史馆修撰李翱上奏，认为： 平定祸乱依靠武力，开创太平大业则依靠文治和贤德。
English: The History Museum's compiler, Li Xuan Shangso, believed that: the pacification of calamity relies on force, and the creation of peace and tranquility relies on literature and virtue.

古文：今陛下既以武功定海内，若遂革弊事，复高祖、太宗旧制；用忠正而不疑，屏邪佞而不迩；改税法，不督钱而纳布帛；绝进献，宽百姓租赋；厚边兵，以制戎狄侵盗；数访问待制官，以通塞蔽；此六者，政之根本，太平所以兴也。
现代文：现在，皇上既然已经用武力平定天下，不如接着革除弊政，恢复高祖、太宗创立的传统制度，任用忠心正直的人士而不随便怀疑，摒斥奸邪佞幸的小人而不再亲近他们；改革赋税制度，将以往收钱币改为交纳实物；禁绝地方官吏向朝廷奉献钱物，减免百姓的租税；加强边防，抵抗边境戎狄的侵犯；经常访求待制官员，倾听他们的意见，以使下情上达。以上六条，是朝廷大政的根本之道，也是达到太平盛世的主要途径。
English: Now that the emperor has pacified the world by force, it is better to continue to eliminate bad politics, restore the traditional system created by Gaozu and Taizong, appoint loyal and honest people without any suspicion, reject villains and criminals and no longer be close to them; reform the tax system, change the previous collection of coins to payment in kind; prohibit local officials from donating money and goods to the imperial court, and reduce and exempt people's taxes; strengthen border defense and resist the encroachment of border troops; frequently visit officials on standby, listen to their opinions, and make suggestions. The above six are the fundamental way of the imperial government and the main way to achieve peace and prosperity.

古文：陛下既已能行其难，若何不为其易乎！
现代文：现在，皇上既已经把那些常人难以做到的事都完成了，为什么不接着实行这些容易做到的事呢？
English: Now that the emperor has accomplished all those things that are difficult for ordinary people to do, why not continue to do these things that are easy to do?

古文：以陛下天资上圣，如不惑近习容悦之辞，任骨鲠正直之士，与之兴大化，可不劳而成也。
现代文：按照皇上的天资和圣明，如果不受身边小人的巧言诱惑，信用耿直忠正的臣僚，那么，天下太平大治，可不劳皇上躬亲辛劳而自然形成。
English: According to the emperor's talent and wisdom, if he is not tempted by the clever words of the villains around him, and trusts the straightforward and loyal ministers, then the world will be peaceful and orderly, and the emperor will not have to work hard to form it naturally.

古文：若不有此为事，臣恐大功之后，逸欲易生。进言者必曰： 天下既平矣，陛下可以高枕自安逸。 
现代文：但如果皇上不注意这些方面，我担心在以武功平定天下之后，贪图安逸的欲望容易滋生，臣下左右阿谀迎奉，这时，就有人向皇上进言，他们必定会这样说： 天下已经太平了，皇上可以高枕无忧，自图安逸。 
English: But if the emperor does not pay attention to these aspects, I am afraid that after the world has been pacified by martial arts, the desire to seek comfort will easily breed, and the vassals will be welcomed by the flatterers. At this time, someone will advise the emperor, and they will certainly say this: The world has become peaceful, and the emperor can sleep well and feel at ease.

古文：如是，则太平未可期矣！ 
现代文：如果皇上按照他们说的那样去贪图享乐的话，太平盛世也就遥远无期了！ 
English: If the emperor were to pursue pleasure as they say, the Taiping era would be a long time coming!

古文：秋，七月，丁丑朔，田弘正送杀武元衡贼王士元等十六人，诏使内京兆府、御史台遍鞫之，皆款服。
现代文：秋季七月，丁丑朔，田弘正把暗杀武元衡的刺客王士元等十六人押送京城。唐宪宗下诏，命将王士元等人交付京兆府、御史台逐个详加审问，王士元等人都招供认罪。
English: In the autumn of July, at the dawn of the new year, Tian Hongzhen escorted 16 assassins, including Wang Shiyuan, who had assassinated Wu Yuanhe, to Beijing. Emperor Qianzong of Tang issued an edict, ordering Wang Shiyuan and the other assassins to be handed over to Jingzhao Prefecture and the Imperial Historian's Office for detailed interrogation one by one. Wang Shiyuan and the others all confessed and pleaded guilty.

古文：京兆尹崔元略以元衡物色询之，则多异同。
现代文：但当京兆尹崔元略问武元衡遇难时穿的衣服是什么颜色时，王士元等人就说法不一了，崔元略追问是何缘故？
English: However, when Jing Zhao Yin Cui Yuan slightly asked Wu Yuan Heng what color of clothes he was wearing when he was killed, Wang Shiyuan and others had different opinions. Cui Yuan slightly asked why?

古文：元略问其故，对曰： 恒、郓同谋遣客刺元衡，而士元等后期，闻恒人事成，遂窃以为己功，还报受赏耳。
现代文：王士元等人答称： 成德王承宗和淄青李师道同谋策划派遣刺客暗杀武元衡，我们受李师道的指派赶赴京城，不料来晚，误了约定的日期。听说成德人已经把武元德杀害，于是，我们就把功劳据为己有，为的是回去报功领赏。
English: Wang Shiyuan and others replied: Chengde Wang Chengzong and Gongqing Li Shidao conspired to send assassins to assassinate Wu Yuanhe. We were assigned by Li Shidao to rush to Beijing, but we arrived late and missed the agreed date. We heard that Chengde people had killed Wu Yuande, so we took the credit as our own, in order to return and receive the reward.

古文：今自度为罪均，终不免死，故承之。 
现代文：现在，我们自认为罪责和暗杀者相等，最终难免于一死，所以，也就招供认罪了。 
English: Now, we consider our guilt to be equal to that of the assassins, and since we will eventually die, we have confessed and pleaded guilty.

古文：上亦不欲复辨正，悉杀之。
现代文：唐宪宗也不愿再辨别王士元等人是否凶手，下令把他们全部斩首。
English: Tang Xianzong was also unwilling to distinguish whether Wang Shiyuan and others were the murderers, and ordered that they all be beheaded.

古文：戊寅，宣武节度使韩弘始入朝，上待之甚厚。
现代文：戊寅，宣武节度使韩弘首次来京朝拜，唐宪宗以隆重的礼节接待韩弘。
English: In Wuyin, the Xuanwu Festival made Han Hong come to Beijing for the first time to worship, and Tang Xianzong received Han Hong with grand etiquette.

古文：弘献马三千，绢五千，杂缯三万，金银器千，而汴之库厩尚有钱百馀万缗，绢百馀万匹，马七千匹，粮三百万斛。
现代文：韩弘向朝廷奉献战马三千匹，丝绢五千匹，杂色丝织品三万匹，金银器皿一千件。除此之外，宣武库房还有钱百余缗，丝绢百余万匹，战马七千匹，粮食三百万斛。
English: Han Hong presented the imperial court with 3,000 war horses, 5,000 silk cocoons, 30,000 pieces of mixed-colored silk fabric, and 1,000 pieces of gold and silverware. In addition, the Xuanwu storehouse also had more than 100 tons of money, more than 1 million silk cocoons, 7,000 war horses, and 3 million tons of grain.

古文：己丑，群臣上尊号曰元和圣文神武法天应道皇帝，赦天下。
现代文：己丑，朝廷百官唐宪宗上尊号，称为元和圣文神武法天应道皇帝。然后，宪宗下诏大赦天下。
English: He was called Yuan and Shenwen, Shenwu, Faten, Yingdao Emperor. Then, Emperor Xianzong granted amnesty to the whole world.

古文：沂、海、兗、密观察使王遂，本钱谷吏，性狷急，无远识。
现代文：沂、海、兗、密观察使王遂出身于掌管钱谷的官吏，性情急躁，气量狭小，缺乏远见卓识。
English: Wang Sui was born to a government official who was in charge of the Qian Valley. He was impatient, narrow-minded, and lacked foresight.

古文：时军府草创，人情未安，遂专以严酷为治，所用杖绝大于常行者，每詈将卒，辄曰 反虏 ；又盛夏役士卒营府舍，督责峻急。
现代文：这时，观察使府刚刚创建，人心尚未安定，王遂却专门以严刑酷法进行治理，他所用的刑杖比一般常用的大得多。每次责骂将士时，动不动就侮辱他们为 反虏 。
English: At this time, it was observed that the Envoy Office had just been established, and people's minds were not yet stable, but Wang Sui specifically used harsh punishment to govern. The cane he used was much larger than the one commonly used. Every time he scolded the soldiers, he insulted them as rebels.

古文：将卒愤怨。辛卯，役卒王弁与其徒四人浴于沂水，密谋作乱，曰： 今服役触罪亦死，奋命立事亦死，死于立事，不犹愈乎！明日，常侍与监军、副使有宴，军将皆在告，直兵多休息，吾属乘此际出其不意取之，可以万全。 
现代文：他还在盛夏的季节里，命令干兵冒着炎热酷暑为自己建造观察使府的房舍，并且严加监督催促。将士无不愤怒怨恨。辛卯，参加建造房舍的士兵王弁和同伙四人在沂水中洗澡，五人密谋作乱，王弁说： 现在，我们服役犯罪不免一死，拼死奋力而建功立业也不过一死，如果死于建功立业，岂不比服役犯罪而死更胜一筹！明天，听说王常侍和监军、副使要举行宴会，而部将都在休假，卫兵也大多休息，如果我们趁此机会出其不意袭杀他们，可以说是万全之策。 
English: At the height of the summer season, he also ordered the cadres to brave the scorching heat to build a building for themselves to observe the legation, and he strictly supervised and urged them. The soldiers were all angry and resentful. Xinwu, the soldier Wang Ben and his four companions who participated in the construction of the building took a bath in the brackish water, and the five of them plotted to make a disturbance. Wang Ben said: Now, we cannot avoid a death for the crime of service, and we can only die if we work hard to build a career. If we die for building a career, is it not better than dying for the crime of service? Tomorrow, I heard that

古文：四人皆以为然，约事成推弁为留后。
现代文：四人都认为王弁的主意不错，约定事成后共推王弁为观察留后，代行王遂的职务。
English: All four of them thought that Wang Ben's idea was a good one. After the agreement was reached, they all recommended Wang Ben to stay as an observer and perform the duties of Wang Sui.

古文：壬辰，遂方宴饮，日过中，弁等五人突入，于直房前取弓刀，径前射副使张敦实，杀之。
现代文：壬辰，王遂等人正在饮宴，中午刚过，王弁等五人突然冲入，直奔卫兵值班房中夺取弓箭和刀枪，然后，向前对准观察副使张敦实射去，张敦实当即被杀死。
English: Im Chen, Wang Sui and others were having a banquet, just after noon, Wang Ben and five others suddenly rushed in, went straight to the guard duty room to seize the bow and arrow and the knife and gun, and then, forward to the observation deputy envoy Zhang Dunshi shot, Zhang Dunshi was killed immediately.

古文：遂与监军狼狈起走，弁执遂，数之以盛暑兴役，用刑刻暴，立斩之。
现代文：王遂和监军仓遑站起逃窜，被王弁擒获，他历数王遂上任以来在盛夏征发劳役，以及对士兵和百姓用刑残暴的罪行，然后，将王遂斩首。
English: Wang Sui and the supervisor of the army, Cang Qi, fled from the station and were captured by Wang Ben, who recounted Wang Sui's labor service in the midsummer since he took office, as well as the crimes of brutality against soldiers and civilians, and then beheaded Wang Sui.

古文：传声勿惊监军，弁即自称留后，升厅号令，与监军抗礼，召集将吏参贺，众莫敢不从。
现代文：王弁传令不得惊吓和冒犯监军，随即自称留后，升堂发布号令，与监军在礼仪上平起平坐。他又召集诸将和下属官吏前来参拜祝贺，众人不敢不从。
English: Wang Ben issued an order not to frighten and offend the supervising army, and then he said that he would stay behind and go up to the hall to issue an order to sit on an equal footing with the supervising army in terms of etiquette. He also summoned generals and subordinate officials to come to worship and congratulate, and everyone dared not disobey.

古文：监军具以状闻。
现代文：监军把以上情况写成表状，上报朝廷。
English: The inspectors wrote down the above information in a form and reported it to the imperial court.

古文：甲午，韩弘又献绢二十五万匹，絁三万匹，银器二百七十。
现代文：甲午，韩弘又向朝廷奉献丝绢二十五万匹，粗丝绸三万匹，银器二百七十件。
English: In the afternoon of the first day, Han Hong also donated 250,000 silk cocoons, 30,000 coarse silks, and 270 pieces of silverware to the imperial court.

古文：左右军中尉各献钱万缗。
现代文：左、右神策军护军中尉各向朝廷奉献钱一万缗。
English: The left and right lieutenants of the Divine Providence Army each donated 10,000 mon to the imperial court.

古文：自淮西用兵以来，度支、盐铁及四方争进奉，谓之 助军 ；贼平又进奉，谓之 贺礼 ；后又进奉，谓之 助赏 ；上加尊号又进奉，亦，谓之 贺礼 。
现代文：自从元和九年朝廷对淮西用兵以来，度支使、盐铁使以及各地藩镇争相向朝廷进奉钱物，称为 助军 ；平定淮西等地以后又进奉，称为 贺礼 ；接着，又进奉，称为 助赏 ；宪宗加尊号时又进奉，也称为 贺礼 。
English: Since the imperial court sent troops to Huaixi in the 9th year of the Yuan Dynasty, the envoys of the State Council, the Envoys of the Salt and Iron and the various provinces and towns have been competing to send money to the imperial court, which is called "supporting the army"; after the pacification of Huaixi and other places, it was sent again, which is called "congratulation"; then, it was sent again, which is called "supporting the reward"; and when the emperor was canonized, it was sent again, which is also called "congratulation."

古文：丁酉，以河阳节度使令狐楚为中书侍郎，同平章事。
现代文：丁酉，唐宪宗任命河阳节度使令狐楚为中书侍郎、同平章事。
English: Ding Xi, Tang Xian Zong appointed Heyang Jiedu to make Ling Xuchu the attendant of the middle book and Tongping Zhangji.

古文：楚与皇甫镈同年进士，引以为相。
现代文：令狐楚与皇甫是同一年考中的进士，所以，皇甫引荐令狐楚担任宰相。
English: Ling Fuchu and Wang Fu were admitted to the middle school exam in the same year. Therefore, Wang Fu recommended Ling Fuchu to serve as prime minister.

古文：朝廷闻沂州军乱，甲辰，以棣州刺史曹华为沂、海、兗、密观察使。
现代文：朝廷听说沂州发生军乱，甲辰，任命棣州刺史曹华为沂、海、兖、密观察使。
English: The imperial court heard that there was a military conflict in Luzhou, Jia Chen, appointed the observation envoy of Luzhou's statesman Cao Huai, Hai, Zou and Mi.

古文：韩弘累表请留京师。
现代文：韩弘多次上奏朝廷，请求批准自己留居京城。
English: Han Hong repeatedly appealed to the imperial court, requesting permission to stay in the capital.

古文：八月，己酉，以弘守司徒，兼中书令。
现代文：八月，己酉，唐宪宗任命韩弘代理司徒，兼中书令。
English: In August, Emperor Jizong of Tang Dynasty appointed Han Hong as the acting scribe and the second-in-command.

古文：癸丑，以吏部尚书张弘靖同平章事，充宣武节度使。
现代文：癸丑，任命吏部尚书张弘靖带同平章事的官衔，充任宣武节度使。
English: At the same time, he appointed Zhang Hongjing with the official title of Tongping Shanzhong, and served as the Xuanwu Jiedu envoy.

古文：弘靖，宰相子，少有令闻，立朝简默。
现代文：张弘靖是唐德宗时的宰相张延赏的儿子，从小就美名在外，在朝做官清简练达、静默通识。
English: Zhang Hongjing was the son of Zhang Yanbo, the prime minister at the time of Emperor Dezong of Tang. From an early age, he was well-known outside of China. In the Tang Dynasty, he was an official who was clear and concise, and quietly knowledgeable.

古文：河东、宣武阙帅，朝廷以其位望素重，使镇之。
现代文：河东、宣武两镇缺任节度使，朝廷认为他向来威望和地位崇重，相继任命他前往镇守。
English: After the two towns of Hedong and Xuanwu were left without a festival envoy, the imperial court believed that he had always been prestigious and respected, and successively appointed him to the town guard.

古文：弘靖承王锷聚敛之馀，韩弘严猛之后，两镇喜其廉谨宽大，故上下安之。
现代文：河东前节度使王锷贪财聚敛，宣武前节度使韩弘严刑苛政，张弘靖赴任后，两镇的将吏和百姓喜爱他为官廉洁谨厚、宽容大度，因此，军心和民心由此安定下来。
English: The pre-announcement of martial law made Han Hong severely punish and harshly administer the government. After Zhang Hongjing took office, the officers and people of the two towns loved him for his integrity, prudence, and tolerance. Therefore, the military and the people's hearts were stabilized.

古文：己未，田弘正入朝，上待之尤厚。
现代文：已未，田弘正来京朝拜，唐宪宗以最为隆重的礼节接待他。
English: Not long ago, Tian Hongzheng came to Beijing to worship, and Tang Xianzong received him with the most solemn etiquette.

古文：戊辰，陈许节度使郗士美薨，以库部员外郎李渤为吊祭使。
现代文：戊辰，陈许节度使郗士美去世，唐宪宗任命库部员外李渤为吊祭使。
English: In Boshen, Chen Xu Jiedu caused the death of Gong Shimei, and Tang Xianzong appointed a member of the treasury department, Li Jun, to be the messenger of the hanging.

古文：渤上言： 臣过渭南，闻长源乡旧四百户，今才百馀户，閺乡县旧三千户，今才千户，其它州县大率相似。
现代文：李渤完成吊丧任务后，回到京城，上奏朝廷说： 我这次出使路过渭南，听说长源乡过去有四百户，现在仅存百余户，乡县过去有三千户，现在仅存一千户，其它州县户口耗减情况与此大体相似。
English: After Li Yan completed the funeral task, he returned to Beijing and reported to the imperial court: I passed through southern Fujian on this mission. I heard that in the past, there were 400 households in Changyuan Township, but now there are only 100 households left. In the past, there were 3,000 households in townships and counties, but now there are only 1,000 households left. The situation of household consumption in other prefectures and counties is roughly similar to this.

古文：迹其所以然，皆由以逃户税摊于比邻，致驱迫俱逃，此皆聚敛之臣剥下媚上，惟思竭泽，不虑无鱼。
现代文：户口耗减这样严重，究其原因，都是由于州县官吏把逃户所欠的税款摊派给他们的邻居，邻居不堪负担，以致被迫和逃户一样逃亡。这都是那些贪官污吏剥夺百姓而向他们的上司献媚，因此只想到竭泽而渔，不考虑以后还有没有鱼可捕捞的缘故。
English: The reason why the loss of hukou is so serious is that the state and county officials apportioned the tax owed by the fugitive households to their neighbors, and the neighbors were unbearable, so they were forced to flee like the fugitive households. These are all those corrupt officials who deprive the people and flatter their bosses, so they only think of exhausting fishing, regardless of the reason why there is no fish to catch in the future.

古文：乞降诏书，绝摊逃之弊。尽逃户之产偿税，不足者乞免之。
现代文：请求皇上颁下诏书，禁绝摊逃的弊政，同时建议把逃户的全部财产用来抵税，如果还不足以抵偿的话，就请求予以免除。
English: He asked the emperor to issue an edict prohibiting the evasion of evasion. At the same time, he suggested that the entire property of the evader be used to offset the tax, and if it was not enough to offset the tax, he would request to be exempted.

古文：计不数年，人皆复于农矣。 
现代文：这样，用不了几年，逃户就会逐渐回乡重新开始农业生产。 
English: In this way, within a few years, fugitive households will gradually return to their hometowns to restart agricultural production.

古文：执政见而恶之，渤遂谢病，归东都。
现代文：宰相皇甫看到李渤的奏章，憎恨他诋毁朝政，置之不理。于是李渤假托身体有病，辞官回到东都洛阳。
English: When the prime minister, the Empress Dowager, saw Li Qiye's report, he hated him for slandering the imperial government and ignored him. Therefore, Li Qiye pretended to be ill, and the official returned to Luoyang, the eastern capital.

古文：癸酉，吐蕃寇庆州，营于方渠。
现代文：癸酉，吐蕃出兵侵犯庆州，在方渠扎寨安营。
English: At that time, Tubo sent troops to invade Gyeongju and set up camp in Fangqiao.

古文：朝廷议兴兵讨王弁，恐青、郓相扇继变，乃除弁开州刺史，遣中使赐以告身。
现代文：朝廷商议发兵讨伐王弁，但又恐怕青州和郓州相互煽动，继而也发生兵变。于是，任命王弁为开州刺史，派宦官把任命书授予王弁。
English: The imperial court discussed sending troops to fight Wang Ben, but feared that Qingzhou and Zhangzhou would instigate each other, which would lead to a mutiny. Therefore, Wang Ben was appointed as the governor of Kaizhou, and eunuchs were sent to confer the letter of appointment on Wang Ben.

古文：中使绐之曰： 开州计已有人迎候道路，留后宜速发。 
现代文：宦官到沂州后，哄骗王弁说： 开州已经预先派人在路旁迎接您，您接到任命书后，应当尽快出发上任。 
English: After the eunuch arrived in Zhangzhou, he tricked Wang Ben and said: Kaizhou has already sent someone to meet you on the roadside in advance. After receiving the appointment letter, you should leave for work as soon as possible.

古文：弁即日发沂州，导从尚百馀人，入徐州境，所在减之，其众亦稍逃散，遂加以杻械，乘驴入关。
现代文：王弁当天就从沂州出发，这时，他的前导和随从人员还有一百多人。进入徐州境内后，当地官吏命他减少随从人员，跟随他的人也逐渐逃散。于是，宦官命人将王弁上了枷锁，乘驴进关。
English: Wang Ben set out from Ganzhou on the same day. At that time, there were more than a hundred people in his vanguard and entourage. After entering the territory of Xuzhou, local officials ordered him to reduce his entourage, and his followers gradually fled. Therefore, the eunuch ordered the person to put Wang Ben in chains and enter the customs by donkey.

古文：九月，戊寅，腰斩东市。
现代文：九月，戊寅，王弁在东市被拦腰斩杀。
English: In September, Wu Yin and Wang Ben were arrested and beheaded in Dongshi.

古文：先是，三分郓兵以隶三镇，及王遂死，朝廷以为师道馀党凶态未除，命曹华引棣州兵赴镇以讨之。
现代文：当初，朝廷平定淄青后，把淄青分为三镇，李师道在郓州的兵士被分配到郓、青、沂、三个藩镇。等到沂州观察使王遂被王弁杀害后，朝廷认为李师道的余党仍然反叛，凶悍骄横的本性没有丝毫改变。于是，命令棣州刺吏曹华为沂州观察使，率领棣州的军队奔赴沂州，将李师道配属沂州的兵全部斩除。
English: At first, after the imperial court had subdued Aoxing, Aoxing was divided into three towns. Li Shidao's soldiers in Zhangzhou were assigned to Zhangzhou, Qingdao and Zhangzhou, three townships. After Wang Ben killed Wang, the imperial court believed that Li Shidao's remaining party was still rebellious and his fierce and arrogant nature had not changed in the slightest. Therefore, he ordered the Zhangzhou assassin Cao Hua, the Zhangzhou observer, to lead the troops of Zhangzhou to Zhangzhou and cut off all the soldiers of Li Shidao assigned to Zhangzhou.

古文：沂州将士迎候者，华皆以好言抚之，使先入城，慰安其馀，众皆不疑。
现代文：曹华率兵抵达沂州城下，对沂州欢迎他的将士，都用好言好语加以安抚，让他们先回城去，然后，入城安抚其余将士，这样，众人对曹华的来意都不加怀疑。
English: Cao Hua and his soldiers arrived at the foot of the city of Zhangzhou. He spoke kindly to the soldiers of Zhangzhou who welcomed him, and told them to go back to the city first, and then enter the city to appease the remaining soldiers. In this way, everyone did not doubt Cao Hua's intentions.

古文：华视事三日，大飨将士，伏甲士千人于幕下，乃集众而谕之曰： 天子以郓人有迁徙之劳，特加优给，宜令郓人处右，沂人处左。 
现代文：曹华上任三天后，举行盛大宴会，招待沂州的将士，事先在帐幕的背后埋伏披甲持枪的兵士一千人。将士到齐后，曹华召集大家说： 皇上考虑到郓州的兵士迁徒到沂州，十分辛苦，特此让我加给赏赐，所以，现在我命令郓州的将士站在左边，沂州的将士站到右边。 
English: Three days after Cao Hua took office, he held a grand banquet to invite the soldiers from Zhangzhou. In advance, a thousand soldiers with armor and guns were lying in ambush behind the tent. After the soldiers arrived, Cao Hua called everyone together and said: The emperor considered that the soldiers from Zhangzhou migrated to Zhangzhou, which was very hard, so let me reward them, so now I order the soldiers from Zhangzhou to stand on the left, and the soldiers from Zhangzhou to stand on the right.

古文：既定，令沂人皆出，因阖门，谓郓人曰： 王常侍以天子之命为帅于此，将士何得辄害之！ 
现代文：将士分别站定后，曹华命沂州的将士一律出去，随即下令关闭大门，对留在里面的郓州将士说： 王常侍奉皇上的命令到这里做观察使，你们都是他的部下，怎敢犯上作乱，肆意把他杀害！ 
English: After the soldiers stood separately, Cao Hua ordered all the soldiers of Zhangzhou to go out, then ordered the gate to be closed, and said to the soldiers of Zhangzhou who remained inside: Wang Chang served the emperor's order to make an observation mission here, you are all his subordinates, how dare you commit disorder and wantonly kill him!

古文：语未毕，伏者出，围而杀之，死者千二百人，无一得脱者。门屏间赤雾高丈馀，久之方散。
现代文：话音未落，伏兵一齐冲出，把郓州的将士团团包围，乱刀斩杀，一千二百人全部死亡，无一人逃脱，地上的流血蒸发成红色的雾气，在大门和墙壁间萦绕飘浮，达一丈多高，很久才逐渐消散。
English: Before the words were out, the ambushers rushed out together, surrounded the soldiers of Zhangzhou, and killed them indiscriminately. All twelve hundred people died, and no one escaped. The bloodshed on the ground evaporated into a red mist, hovering between the gate and the wall. It was as high as a mountain, and it took a long time to gradually dissipate.

古文：臣光曰：《春秋》书楚子虔诱蔡侯般杀之于申。彼列国也。孔子犹深贬之，恶其诱讨也，况为天子而诱匹夫乎！
现代文：王遂施政苛刑暴虐，以致激发兵变。王弁不过是个见识浅陋的兵卒，他乘将士对王遂不满，才得以发动兵变。
English: Wang Sui administered harsh punishment and brutality, which provoked a mutiny. Wang Ben was just a soldier with a shallow understanding. He took advantage of the soldiers' dissatisfaction with Wang Sui and was able to launch a mutiny.

古文：王遂以聚敛之才，殿新造之邦，用苛虐致乱。王弁庸夫，乘衅窃发，苟沂帅得人，戮之易于犬豕耳，何必以天子诏书为诱人之饵乎！
现代文：如果唐朝对沂州的观察使任用称职的话，那么，平息王弁的兵变，就如同杀一头狗和猪一样的容易，又何必以天子诏书作诱人的食饵，来诛杀王弁呢？
English: If the Tang Dynasty's observation of Zhangzhou made the appointment worthy, then it would be as easy to quell Wang Ben's mutiny as it would be to kill a dog and a pig, and why would it be necessary to use the imperial edict as a tempting bait to kill Wang Ben?

古文：且作乱者五人耳，乃使曹华设诈，屠千馀人，不亦滥乎！
现代文：何况作乱者仅王弁等五个人，而唐宪宗却指派曹华设下圈套，屠杀了一千多个不相干的士兵，难道这不是太滥杀无辜了吗！
English: What's more, only Wang Ben and five others were the instigators of the disturbance, while Tang Xianzong assigned Cao Hua to set a trap and slaughter more than a thousand unrelated soldiers. Isn't this too indiscriminate killing of innocents?

古文：然则自今士卒孰不猜其将帅，将帅何以令其士卒！
现代文：这样一来，以后士卒怎能不猜疑他们的将帅，将帅又怎样才能统帅他们的兵士呢？
English: In this way, how can soldiers not suspect their generals in the future, and how can generals command their soldiers?

古文：上下盻盻，如寇仇聚处，得间则更相鱼肉，惟先发者为雄耳，祸乱何时而弭哉！惜夫！
现代文：将帅和士卒之间相互敌视，像仇敌一样相处在一起，一有机会就相互残杀，成败胜负，就看谁先动手罢了。这样下去，战祸动乱什么时候才能平息呢？可惜啊！
English: Generals and soldiers are hostile to each other, get along with each other like enemies, kill each other at every opportunity, and success or defeat depends on who starts first. If this continues, when will the war calamity and turmoil be able to subside? What a pity!

古文：宪宗削平僭乱，几致治平，其美业所以不终，由苟徇近功，不敦大信故也。
现代文：唐宪宗依靠武力平定藩镇叛乱，几乎已经使天下达到太平，但他所孜孜追求不息的美好事业之所以有始无终，都是由于只求眼前小利，而不讲求大的诚信的缘故。
English: Tang Xianzong relied on force to quell the rebellion of the provinces and towns, and has almost brought the world to peace. However, the reason why his tireless pursuit of the good cause has no end is due to the fact that he only seeks small profits in the short term, and does not talk about seeking greater integrity.

古文：甲辰，以田弘正兼侍中，魏博节度使如故。
现代文：甲辰，唐宪宗任命田弘正兼待中，仍为魏博节度使。
English: At that time, Emperor Xianzong of Tang Dynasty appointed Tian Hongzheng, who was still Wei Bo's regent.

古文：弘正三表请留，上不许。
现代文：田弘正三次上奏，请求留居京城，唐宪宗不准。
English: Tian Hongzheng appealed three times, requesting to stay in Beijing, but Tang Xianzong refused.

古文：弘正常恐一旦物故，魏人犹以故事继袭，故兄弟子侄皆仕诸朝，上皆擢居显列，硃紫盈庭，时人荣之。
现代文：田弘正常常担心自己一旦去世之后，魏博的将吏仍然按照以往的惯例，拥戴自己的亲人，所以，他让自己的兄弟、儿子和侄子都到朝廷做官。唐宪宗也都把他们提拔到显要的官位上，以致在他的家里，身着红色和紫色官服的人布满院庭，当时的人认为他们很荣耀。
English: Tian Hong often worried that once he died, Wei Bo's officials would still follow the previous practice of favoring their relatives, so he had his brothers, sons and nephews serve in the imperial court. Tang Xianzong also promoted them to prominent positions, so that in his home, people wearing red and purple official uniforms filled the courtyard, and people at that time thought they were very glorious.

古文：乙巳，上问宰相： 玄宗之政，先理而后乱，何也？ 
现代文：乙巳唐宪宗询问宰相： 玄宗朝政治，先治而后乱，是什么原因？ 
English: Once Tang Xianzong asked the prime minister: What is the reason for the politics of the Xuanzong dynasty, first rule and then chaos?

古文：崔群对曰： 玄宗用姚崇、宋璟、卢怀慎、苏颋、韩休、张九龄则理，用宇文融、李林甫、杨国忠则乱。
现代文：崔群回答说： 玄宗任用姚崇、宋、卢怀慎、苏、韩休、张九龄为宰相，则天下大治；但用宇文融、李林甫、杨国忠为宰相，则朝政紊乱。
English: Cui Qun replied: If Emperor Xuanzong appointed Yao Chong, Song, Lu Huaixin, Su, Han Xiu, and Zhang Jiuling as prime ministers, the country would be ruled by a strongman; but if he appointed Yu Wenyong, Li Linfu, and Yang Guozhong as prime ministers, the government would be disordered.

古文：故用人得失，所系非轻。
现代文：所以，用人得失，关系重大。
English: Therefore, the gain or loss of employing people is of great importance.

古文：人皆以天宝十四年安禄山反为乱之始，臣独以为开元二十四年罢张九龄相，专任李林甫，此理乱之所分也。
现代文：人们都认为天宝十四年安禄山叛乱是天下大乱的开端，我则认为开元二十四年罢除张九龄相位，信用李林甫主持朝政是治乱的分界线。
English: People all think that the An Lushan Rebellion in the 14th year of Tianbao was the beginning of the world's great turmoil. I think that the ousting of Zhang Julin in the 24th year of the founding of the People's Republic of China and the appointment of Li Linfu to preside over the government is the dividing line of the turmoil.

古文：愿陛下以开元初为法，以天宝末为戒，乃社稷无疆之福！ 
现代文：但愿陛下效法玄宗开元初年，以天宝末年为鉴戒，如果陛下能这样做，那就是国家长治久安的福分啊！ 
English: I hope that His Majesty will follow the example of Emperor Xuanzong in the first year of the first century and use the last year of the Heavenly Treasure as a warning. If His Majesty can do this, it will be a blessing for the country's long-term peace and stability!

古文：皇甫镈深恨之。冬，十月，壬戊，容管奏安南贼杨清陷都护府，杀都护李象古及妻子、官属、部曲千馀人。
现代文：皇甫知道自己是靠谄媚皇上的手段才被提拔为宰相的，所以，对崔群十分痛恨。冬季十月，壬戌，容管经略使奏称，安南叛贼杨清起兵，攻陷都护府所在地交州城，杀死都护李象古和他的妻子，以及下属官吏、随从士卒一千多人。
English: Emperor Fu knew that he had been promoted to prime minister by means of flattering the emperor, so he hated Cui Qun very much. In the winter of October, according to the report of the official in charge of economic affairs, Yang Qing, the traitor of Annan, raised an army and attacked Jiaozhou City, the location of the capital city, and killed the governor Li Xiangu and his wife, as well as more than one thousand subordinate officials and attendants.

古文：象古，道古之兄也，以贪纵苛刻失众心。
现代文：李象古，即前鄂岳观察使李道古的哥哥，由于贪图钱财，对部下苛刻而失去众心。
English: Li Xianggu, that is, the brother of Li Daogu, lost everyone's hearts because he was greedy for money and harsh to his subordinates.

古文：清世为蛮酋，象古召为牙将，清郁郁不得志。
现代文：杨清世代为蛮人酋长，李象古召见杨清，任命他为牙将，杨清郁郁不得志。
English: Yang Qing's generation were barbarian chiefs. Li Xianggu summoned Yang Qing and appointed him as chief of the Fang. Yang Qing was depressed.

古文：象古命清将兵三千讨黄洞蛮，清因人心怨怒，引兵夜还，袭府城，陷之。
现代文：李象古命杨清率兵三千讨伐黄洞蛮，杨清乘士卒不满李象古的机会，率兵在半夜擅自返回，袭击交州城，结果把州城攻陷。
English: Li Xianggu ordered Yang Qing to lead three thousand soldiers to fight against Huangdong. Yang Qing took the opportunity that the soldiers were dissatisfied with Li Xianggu, and led the soldiers to return without permission in the middle of the night to attack Jiaozhou City, resulting in the fall of Jiaozhou City.

古文：初，蛮贼黄少卿，自贞元以来数反覆，桂管观察使裴行立、容管经略使阳旻欲徼幸立功，争请讨之，上从之。
现代文：当初，蛮贼酋长黄少卿，从贞元年间以来反复无常，时而归顺，时而叛变。桂管观察使裴行立、容管经略使阳二人，抱着侥幸立功的心理，争相上奏朝廷，请求出兵讨伐。
English: At first, the bandit chief, Huang Shaoqing, had been capricious since the Zhenyuan era, sometimes surrendering, sometimes rebelling. Gui Guan observation made Pei Xingli and Rong Guan Jingli made Yang two people, with the mentality of making a contribution by chance, competing with each other to report to the court and request the dispatch of troops to fight.

古文：岭南节度使孔戣屡谏曰： 此禽兽耳，但可自计利害，不足与论是非。 
现代文：唐宪宗批准了他们的请求。岭南节度使孔多次上奏劝阻说： 这些人都是禽兽，不讲礼义廉耻，我们只应当考虑朝廷的利害得失，不必和他们争论是非曲直。 
English: Emperor Xianzong of Tang approved their request. The Lingnan Festival made Kong repeatedly appeal to dissuade them, saying: These people are beasts, disrespectful and shameless, we should only consider the interests of the imperial court, and there is no need to argue with them.

古文：上不听，大发江、湖兵会容、桂二管入讨，士卒被瘴疠，死者不可胜计。
现代文：唐宪宗不听孔的意见，大肆征发江淮、荆湖的兵力，命令他们会同容管、桂管的军队，共同讨伐黄洞蛮。结果，士卒在南方的深山密林里作战，都被瘴气染上疾病，死亡不计其数。
English: Tang Xianzong did not listen to the opinion of Kong, and enlisted the troops from Jianghuai and Jinghu in large numbers, ordering them to fight against Huangdong together with the troops from Rongguan and Guizhou. As a result, the soldiers fought in the deep mountains and dense forests in the south, and they were all infected with radon and died in large numbers.

古文：安南乘之，遂杀都护。
现代文：安南牙将杨清趁此机会，率兵叛乱，杀死都护李象古。
English: Ann Nanga ordered Yang Qing to take advantage of this opportunity to lead his soldiers in a rebellion and kill the tutelary, Li Xianggu.

古文：行立、旻竟无功，二管凋弊，惟戣所部晏然。
现代文：裴行立、阳二人也最终未能立功。桂管、容管由于长期出兵打仗，民力耗竭，田野荒芜，只有孔所管辖的岭南道安然无恙。
English: In the end, Pei Xingli and Yang were also unable to make a contribution. Gui Guan and Rong Guan, due to the long-term dispatch of troops to fight, exhausted the people's strength, the fields were deserted, and only Lingnan Road under the jurisdiction of Kong was safe and sound.

古文：丙寅，以唐州刺史桂仲武为安南都护，赦杨清，以为琼州刺史。
现代文：丙寅，唐宪宗任命唐州刺史桂仲武为安南都护，宣诏赦免杨清叛乱的罪行，任命他为琼州刺史。
English: Cui Yin, Tang Xianzong appointed Tang Zhou Zhi Shi Gui Zhongwu as Annan tutelary, issued a decree to pardon Yang Qing's rebellion, and appointed him as Qiong Zhou Zhi Shi.

古文：是月，吐蕃节度论三摩等将十五万众围盐州，党项亦发兵助之。
现代文：这一年，吐蕃节度论三摩等人率十五万大军围攻唐朝的盐州，党项也派兵援助吐蕃，参予攻城。
English: In the same year, Samo and others led a 150,000-strong army to besiege the Tang Dynasty's Yanzhou, and the party also sent soldiers to assist Tubo and participate in the siege of the city.

古文：刺史李文悦竭力拒守，凡二十七日，吐蕃不能克。
现代文：盐州刺史李文悦竭力坚守城池二十七天，吐蕃未能攻克。
English: Li Wenyue, the historian of Yanzhou, tried his best to hold on to the city for 27 days, but failed to conquer Tubo.

古文：灵武牙将史奉敬言于朔方节度使杜叔良，请兵三千，赍三十日粮，深入吐蕃以解盐州之围。
现代文：灵武牙将史敬奉请求朔方节度使杜叔良拨给自己兵力三千人，带三十天的干粮，深入吐蕃境内，攻击敌后，以便迫使吐蕃大军解除对盐州的围攻。
English: At the request of Shuo Fang, Lingwuga ordered Du Shuliang to send 3,000 troops with 30 days of dry rations deep into the territory of Tubo to attack the enemy's rear in order to force Tubo's army to lift the siege of Yanzhou.

古文：叔良以二千五百人与之。
现代文：杜叔良批准史奉敬的请求，拨给他二千五百兵力。
English: Du Shuliang approved Shi Bongqian's request and assigned him 2,500 troops.

古文：奉敬行旬馀，无声问，朔方人以为俱没矣。
现代文：史奉敬出兵后十多天，没有音信，朔方人都认为他已经全军覆没，盐州也已失守。
English: More than ten days after Shi Fengjing sent troops, there was no news, and the Shuo people all thought that he had lost his entire army, and Yanzhou had also been lost.

古文：无何，奉敬自它道出吐蕃背，吐蕃大惊，溃去。
现代文：不料没过多久，史奉敬率兵从意想不到的小路绕到吐蕃军队的背后，吐蕃得知腹背受敌，大为惊慌，急忙溃退。
English: Unexpectedly, it didn't take long for Shi Bongjing to lead his soldiers from an unexpected path around to the back of the Tubo army. When Tubo learned that they had been defeated, they panicked and hastily retreated.

古文：奉敬奋击，大破，不可胜计。
现代文：史奉敬率军奋力追击，大败吐蕃军队，杀伤不计其数。
English: Shi Bongjing led the army to pursue hard, defeated the Tuoba army, and killed and injured countless people.

古文：奉敬与凤翔将野诗良浦、泾原将郝玼以勇著名于边，吐蕃惮之。
现代文：史敬奉和凤翔节度使部将野诗良辅、泾原节度使部将郝都是以英勇善战闻名于边陲，吐蕃将士特别害怕他们三人。
English: Shi Jingbong and Fengxiang, the commander of the festival envoys, Noshi Ryosuke, and the commander of the festival envoys, Xingyuan, are famous for their bravery and good warfare in the borderlands, and the Tuoba soldiers are particularly afraid of them three.

古文：柳泌至台州，驱吏民采药，岁馀，无所得而惧，举家逃入山中。
现代文：柳泌抵达台州后，逼迫当地的官吏率领百姓上天台山，为唐宪宗采摘草药，经过一年多的时间，毫无所获，柳泌害怕担当欺君的罪名，携带全家老小逃到山里。
English: After Liu Xuan arrived in Taizhou, he forced the local officials to lead the people to Tiantai Mountain to pick herbs for Tang Xianzong. After more than a year, nothing was gained. Liu Xuan was afraid of being accused of cheating the emperor and fled to the mountains with his whole family.

古文：浙东观察使捕送京师。
现代文：浙江东道观察使派人逮捕柳泌，把他押送到京城。
English: The Zhejiang Host Observation Mission sent someone to arrest Liu Xuan and escort him to Beijing.

古文：皇甫镈、李道古保护之，上复使待诏翰林；服其药，日加躁渴。
现代文：皇甫、李道古百般为柳泌辩解，开脱他的罪名。唐宪宗听信二人的话，命柳泌仍旧待诏翰林院，服用柳泌的药后，越来越躁渴。
English: Emperor Fu and Li Daogu made all kinds of excuses for Liu Xiu and acquitted him of the crime. Tang Xianzong listened to the words of the two people and ordered Liu Xiu to remain in Hanlin Hospital. After taking the medicine of Liu Xiu, he became more and more thirsty.

古文：起居舍人裴潾上言，以为： 除天下之害者受天下之利，同天下之乐者飨天下之福，自黄帝至于文、武，享国寿考，皆用此道也。
现代文：起居舍人裴上书朝廷，认为： 能够除去天下祸害的人，就能够享受天下的利益；能够和天下人同享欢乐的人，就能够享受天下的福分。从黄帝开始，一直到周文王、武王，他们的寿命和在帝位的时间之所以很长，都是由于遵循这种道理的缘故。
English: Pei, a renunciant, wrote a letter to the imperial court, arguing that: Those who can remove the scourge of the world can enjoy the benefits of the world; those who can share the joy with the people of the world can enjoy the blessings of the world. From the Yellow Emperor, all the way to King Zhou Wen and King Wu, their longevity and time on the throne were long because they followed this principle.

古文：自去岁以来，所在多荐方士，转相汲引，其数浸繁。
现代文：但是，从去年以来，不少地方官吏向朝廷推荐方士，方士之间也相互举荐，以致推荐到朝廷来的方士越来越多。
English: However, since last year, many local officials have been recommending magicians to the imperial court, and magicians have been recommending each other, so that more and more magicians have been recommended to the imperial court.

古文：借令天下真有神仙，彼必深潜岩壑，惟畏人知。
现代文：如果天下真的有神仙存在，他们必定躲藏在深山密林中，惟恐被人发现。
English: If there really are immortals in the world, they must be hiding in the deep mountains and dense forests, for fear of being discovered.

古文：凡候伺权贵之门，以大言自衒奇技惊众者，皆不轨徇利之人，岂可信其说而饵其药邪！
现代文：因此，凡是想和当朝权贵交结，说大话自夸，用奇技巧术哗众取宠的人，肯定都是急功好利的不法之徒，怎么能轻易相信他们的大话，从而服用他们的药呢？
English: Therefore, all those who want to make friends with the dignitaries of the time, boast of their big talk, and use strange techniques to get the admiration of the public must be lawless people who are eager to make a profit. How can you easily believe their big talk and take their medicine?

古文：夫药以愈疾，非朝夕常饵之物。况金石酷烈有毒，又益以火气，殆非人五藏之所能胜也。
现代文：药材是用来治病的东西，不是早晚经常吃的食品，况且金石浓烈而有毒性，又加上用火炼，恐怕不是人的五脏所能承受得了的。
English: Medicinal herbs are used to treat illnesses, not food that is eaten regularly in the morning and evening. What's more, diamond is strong and poisonous, and if it's tempered with fire, it's probably not something that the human body can tolerate.

古文：古者君饮药，臣先尝之，乞令献药者先自饵一年，则真伪自可辨矣。 
现代文：古代的时候，凡是君主要饮用的药物，都由臣下先尝，确信没有问题，然后才吃。因此，请求皇上下令，让献药的那些方士自己先吃一年，然后，他们所献的药是真是假，自然就可以辨别了。 
English: In ancient times, all the medicines drunk by the sovereign were first tasted by his subjects, who were convinced that there was nothing wrong, and then ate them. Therefore, he asked the emperor to issue an order that the magicians who donated the medicines should first eat them for a year, and then they would be able to tell whether the medicines they donated were real or fake.

古文：上怒，十一月，己亥，贬潾江陵令。
现代文：唐宪宗看到裴上书后大怒。十一月，己亥，命令把裴贬为江陵令。
English: Tang Xianzong was furious when he saw Pei's letter. In November, he ordered that Pei be demoted to Gangneung.

古文：初，群臣议上尊号，皇甫镈欲增 孝德 字，中书侍郎、同平章事崔群曰： 言圣则孝在其中矣。 
现代文：当初，百官商议唐宪宗的尊号时，皇甫认为应当增加 孝德 两个字。中书侍郎、同平章事崔群说： 尊号中有 圣 字，那么， 孝 的意义已经包含在其中了。 
English: At first, when hundreds of officials were discussing the honorific title of Tang Xianzong, the empress Dowager thought that two words, "filial piety," should be added. Cui Qun, the secretary of the Central Committee of the CPC, said, "The honorific title contains the word "sacred," so the meaning of "filial piety" is already included.

古文：镈谮群于上曰： 群于陛下惜 孝德 二字。 
现代文：皇甫在唐宪宗的面前说崔群的坏话： 崔群对于陛下的尊号，竟然舍不得用 孝德 两个字。 
English: The crown prince spoke ill of Cui Qun in front of Tang Xianzong: Cui Qun could not bear to use the two words "filial piety" for His Majesty's honorific title.

古文：上怒。
现代文：宪宗大怒。
English: The Emperor was furious.

古文：时镈给边军赐与，多不时得，又所给多陈败，不可服用，军士怒怒，流言欲为乱。
现代文：这时，由于皇甫对于边军的衣粮和赏赐物品，经常不按时发放，凡是供给的衣粮物品，又大多是陈旧腐败的东西，无法使用，兵士埋怨愤怒，流言要发动兵变。
English: At this time, since the emperor often did not distribute the rations and rewards of the frontier army on time, and all the rations and rewards supplied were mostly old and corrupt and could not be used, the soldiers complained angrily and there were rumors of a mutiny.

古文：李光颜忧惧，欲自杀。遣人诉于上，上不信。
现代文：宁节度使李光颜忧心如焚，十分恐惧，甚至一度打算自杀，他派人将此情况向唐宪宗汇报，宪宗不信。
English: Ning Jiedu made Li Guangyan anxious, very afraid, and even once planned to commit suicide. He sent someone to report this situation to Tang Xianzong. Xianzong did not believe him.

古文：京师恟惧，群具以中外人情上闻。
现代文：这时，京城上下听说边兵要发动兵变的消息，也都惊恐不安，崔群把京城内外人们惊恐不安的情况向唐宪宗报告。
English: At this time, people in and around the capital were also alarmed and uneasy when they heard the news that the border soldiers were about to launch a mutiny. Cui Qun reported the situation of people's alarm and unease inside and outside the capital to Tang Xianzong.

古文：镈密言于上曰： 边赐皆如旧制，而人情忽如此者，由群鼓扇，将以卖直，归怨于上也。 
现代文：皇甫秘密地对唐宪宗说： 朝廷供给边军的衣粮赏赐物品，都是按照过去的制度发放的。可是，人们的情绪却突然发生变化，我看都是由于崔群在那里鼓吹煽动，以此来猎取名声，而把人们的怨怒推给皇上。 
English: The crown prince secretly said to Tang Xianzong, "The clothes, grain, and gifts that the imperial court provided to the frontier troops were all distributed according to the previous system. However, the mood of the people suddenly changed. I think it was all due to Cui Qun's propaganda and incitement there, which was used to gain fame and push people's anger onto the emperor.

古文：上以为然。
现代文：宪宗听信了皇甫的谗言。
English: Tenshi thinks it makes sense.

古文：十二月，乙卯，以群为湖南观察使，于是中外切齿于镈矣。
现代文：十二月，乙卯，贬崔群为湖南观察使。于是，朝廷内外都咬牙切齿般地憎恨皇甫。
English: In December, Emperor Wu demoted Cui Qun to Hunan Observation Envoy. As a result, both inside and outside the imperial court hated the emperor with gritted teeth.

古文：中书舍人武儒衡，有气节，好直言，上器之，顾待甚渥，人皆言其且入相。
现代文：中书舍人武儒衡做官有节操，喜好直言不讳，因此得到唐宪宗的器重，待遇甚为优厚，人们都认为他即将被宪宗拜为宰相。
English: Wu Rongheng, the person who wrote the book, was a disciplined official with a penchant for outspokenness. As a result, he was held in high esteem by Emperor Xianzong of Tang, and his treatment was very generous. People believed that he was about to be worshipped by Emperor Xianzong as the prime minister.

古文：令狐楚忌之，思有以沮之者，乃荐山南东道节度推官狄兼谟才行。
现代文：令狐楚忌妒武儒衡，想找人来阻止武儒衡被拜为宰相。于是，他向宪宗推荐山南东道节度推官狄兼德才兼备。
English: Fox Chu was jealous of Wu Rucheng and wanted to find someone to stop Wu Rucheng from being worshiped as the prime minister. Therefore, he recommended Shannan host and festival promoter Di Jian, who was both virtuous and talented.

古文：癸亥，擢兼谟左拾遗内供奉。
现代文：癸亥，唐宪宗任命狄兼为左拾遗内供奉。
English: In the year of the Rooster, Tang Xianzong appointed Di Jian as Zuo Zhiwei's internal offering.

古文：兼谟，仁杰之族曾孙也。
现代文：狄兼，即武则天朝宰相狄仁杰的同族曾孙。
English: Dickian, the great-grandson of Dickian Jie, the prime minister of the Wu Zetian Dynasty.

古文：楚自草制辞，盛言 天后窃位，奸臣擅权，赖仁杰保佑中宗，克复明辟。 
现代文：令狐楚亲自动手起草任命狄兼的制书措辞，制书夸张地说： 天后武则天窃取帝位，奸臣专权，幸赖狄仁杰保护中宗皇帝，以致最终得以恢复李唐王朝。 
English: Let the fox Chu himself draft the wording of the book for the appointment of Diqian. The book exaggeratedly said: Tianhou Wu Zetian stole the imperial throne, betrayed the exclusive power of his vassals, and fortunately Di Renjie protected the Emperor Zhongzong, so that the Li Tang Dynasty could finally be restored.

古文：儒衡泣诉于上，且言： 臣曾祖平一，在天后朝，辞荣终老。 
现代文：武儒衡向唐宪宗哭泣上诉，认为令狐楚这番话是影射自己的祖先，他说： 我的曾祖武平一，在天后武则天朝时，辞官住在嵩山，信奉佛教，以至于死。 
English: Wu Ruhan appealed to Tang Xianzong in tears, believing that Ling Xuchu's words were an allusion to his own ancestors. He said: My great-grandfather Wu Pingyi, during the reign of Queen Wu Zetian, lived in Songshan and believed in Buddhism until his death.

古文：上由是薄楚之为人。
现代文：宪宗由此而鄙薄令狐楚的为人。
English: As a result, Kenzong became a despised and despised person.

古文：元和十五年庚子，公元八二零年
现代文：元和十五年
English: Yuan and fifteen years later

古文：春，正月，沂、海、兗、密观察使曹华请徙理兗州，许之。
现代文：春季正月，沂、海、兖、密观察使曹华奏请朝廷，将观察使所在地由沂州迁往兖州，唐宪宗准奏。
English: In the first month of spring, Cao Hua requested the imperial court to move the location of the observation post from Zhangzhou to Zhangzhou, and Tang Xianzong complied.

古文：义成节度使刘悟入朝。
现代文：义成节度使刘悟来京朝拜。
English: The Yicheng Festival made Liu Gou come to Beijing to pay homage.

古文：初，左军中尉吐突承璀谋立澧王恽为太子，上不许。
现代文：当初，左神策军护军中尉吐突承璀密谋拥立澧王李恽为皇太子，唐宪宗不许。
English: At first, Zuoshinsha's military escort lieutenant, Tu Tu Chengyu, plotted to make King Li Jie the crown prince, but Tang Xianzong would not allow it.

古文：及上寝疾，承璀谋尚未息。
现代文：待到唐宪宗卧病时，吐突承璀的阴谋仍未止息。
English: By the time Tang Xianzong was bedridden, Tucu Chengyu's plot had not yet ceased.

古文：太子闻而忧之，密遣人问计于司农卿郭钊。钊曰： 殿下但尽孝谨以俟之，勿恤其他。 
现代文：太子听说这个消息后，十分忧愁，密派人向司农卿郭钊询问应付此事的计策，郭钊说： 殿下只要对皇上竭尽孝顺，等待事情发展的结果，而不要忧虑其他事情。 
English: After the prince heard the news, he was very sad. He secretly sent a person to the Secretary of Agriculture Guo Wei to inquire about the strategy to deal with this matter. Guo Wei said: Your highness, as long as you are filial to the emperor, wait for the outcome of the development of the matter, and do not worry about other things.

古文：钊，太子之舅也。
现代文：郭钊是皇太子的舅舅。
English: Guo Wei is the uncle of the crown prince.

古文：上服金丹，多躁怒，左右宦官往往获罪，有死者，人人自危。
现代文：唐宪宗服用金丹后，常常暴躁发怒，左右随从宦官往往被怪罪责骂挨打，甚至有人被打死。由此人人自危。
English: After Tang Xianzong took gold dust, he was often irritable and angry. The eunuchs on his right and left were often blamed, scolded and beaten, and some were even beaten to death. Everyone was at risk.

古文：庚子，暴崩于中和殿。
现代文：庚子，唐宪宗在中和殿突然死亡，当时人都说是被内常侍陈弘志杀死的。
English: Geng Zi, Tang Xianzong died suddenly in Zhonghe Hall. At that time, it was said that he was killed by Chen Hongzhi, the chief chamberlain.

古文：时人皆言内常侍陈弘志弑逆，其党类讳之，不敢讨贼，但云药发，外人莫能明也。
现代文：陈弘志的同党内宫官员，为了隐瞒真相，不敢追究凶手，只是说宪宗吃金丹后药性发作而死，外人都无法辨明事情真假。
English: In order to conceal the truth, Chen Hongzhi's fellow party officials in the Inner Palace did not dare to investigate the murderer. They only said that Xianzong died of a drug-induced seizure after eating aconite. Outsiders could not tell whether it was true or not.

古文：中尉梁守廉与诸宦官马进潭、刘承偕、韦元素、王守澄等共立太子，杀吐突承璀及澧王恽，赐左、右神策军士钱人五十缗，六军、威远人三十缗，左、右金吾人十五缗。
现代文：神策军护军中尉梁守谦和诸位宦官马进潭、刘承偕、韦元素、王守澄等人，共同拥立太子继皇帝位，杀吐突承璀和澧王李恽，赏赐左、右神策军士每人钱五十缗，左右羽林、左右龙武、左右神武六军、威远营军士每人钱三十缗，左右金吾军士每人钱十五缗。
English: Liang Shouqian, lieutenant of the Shenshe Army and Guards, and the eunuchs Ma Jintan, Liu Chengtao, Wei Ye, Wang Shoucheng, and others jointly supported the crown prince to succeed the emperor, killed Tu Tu Chengtao and Shenshe Wang Lijuan, and rewarded the left and right Shenshe Army sergeants with 50 yuan per person, the left and right Hulin, the left and right Longwu, the left and right Shenshe Six Army, and the Weiyuan Ying Army sergeants with 30 yuan per person, and the left and right Kingu Army sergeants with 15 yuan per person.

古文：闰月，丙午，穆宗即位于太极殿东序。
现代文：闰月，丙午，唐穆宗在太极殿东厢即皇帝位。
English: During the leap month, at noon on the 3rd day of the 4th month, Tang Mu Zong ascended to the throne in the east wing of the Taiji Hall.

古文：是日，召翰林学士段文昌等及兵部郎中薛放、驾部员外郎丁公著对于思政殿。
现代文：当天，在思政殿召见翰林学士段文昌等人，以及兵部郎中薛放、驾部员外郎丁公著。
English: On the same day, Hanlin Baccalaureate Duan Wenchang and others were summoned to the Sisi Hall, as well as the Hyobusho (Ministry of War) Vice-Minister Xue Fang and the Chauffeur Vice-Minister Ding Gong.

古文：放，戎之弟；公著，苏州人；皆太子侍读也。
现代文：薛放，即德宗朝福建观察使幕僚薛戎的弟弟；丁公著是苏州人。二人都是穆宗即位前的太子侍读。
English: Xue Fang, that is, the younger brother of Xue Rong, the staff member of the German-Zong Dynasty's Fujian Observer; Ding Gongzhu is from Suzhou. Both of them were the prince's attendants before the enthronement of Mu Zong.

古文：上未听政，放、公著常侍禁中，参预机密，上欲以为相，二人固辞。
现代文：穆宗这时正为宪宗服丧，尚未亲政。薛放和丁公著常常在宫中陪伴穆宗，参预朝廷的机密工作。穆宗打算任命这两个人为宰相，二人坚决推辞。
English: At that time, Mu Zong was in mourning for Kenzong and had not yet taken office. Xue Fang and Ding Gongzhu often accompanied Mu Zong in the palace and participated in the confidential work of the imperial court. Mu Zong planned to appoint these two people as prime ministers, but they firmly refused.

古文：丁未，辍西宫朝临，集群臣于月华门外。
现代文：丁未，唐穆宗在西宫早晚哭丧，在月华门外召见百官。
English: Ding Wei, Tang Mu Zong mourned in the morning and evening in the West Palace, and summoned hundreds of officials outside the Yuehua Gate.

古文：贬皇甫镈为崖州司户，市井皆相贺。
现代文：随后下诏，贬皇甫为崖州司户。市民百姓都拍手叫好，庆贺除去一大祸害。
English: Subsequently, the imperial edict was issued to demote the emperor to the position of the governor of Yazhou. The citizens and commoners all clapped their hands and cheered, celebrating the removal of a great disaster.

古文：上议命相，令狐楚荐御史中丞萧俛。
现代文：唐穆宗与百官商议任命宰相，令狐楚推荐御史中丞萧。
English: Tang Mu Zong discussed the appointment of the prime minister with hundreds of officials, and let the fox recommend the historian Zhong Rong Xiao.

古文：辛亥，以俛及段文昌皆为中书侍郎、同平章事。
现代文：辛亥，唐穆宗任命萧和段文昌二人均为中书侍郎、同平章事。
English: Xinhai, Tang Mu Zong appointed Xiao and Duan Wenchang, both of whom were the secretary and the same rank.

古文：楚、俛与皇甫镈皆同年进士，上欲诛镈，俛及宦官救之，故得免。
现代文：令狐楚、萧和皇甫都是同一年考中的进士，穆宗恨皇甫和吐突承璀阴谋拥立澧王李恽，因此，打算诛杀他，萧和宦官劝阻穆宗，皇甫才得以免死。
English: Ling Xuchu, Xiao, and the emperor were all candidates for the same year's middle school examination. Mu Zong hated the emperor and Tutu for plotting to support the emperor Li Zi. Therefore, he planned to kill him. Xiao and the eunuch dissuaded Mu Zong, and the emperor was able to avoid death.

古文：壬子，杖杀柳泌及僧大通，自馀方士皆流岭表，贬左金吾将军李道古循州司马。
现代文：壬子，唐穆宗下令杖杀柳泌和僧人大通，其余方士一律流放到五岭以外的荒远之地，同时下令贬左金吾将李道古为循州司马。
English: According to Jinzi, Tang Mu Zong ordered the staff to kill Liu Xiu and the monk Datong, and the rest of the Fang people were all exiled to a remote place outside Wuling. At the same time, he ordered the left Kingu to demote Li Daogu to the state secretary.

古文：癸丑，以薛放为工部侍郎，丁公著为给事中。
现代文：癸丑，唐穆宗任命薛放为工部侍郎，丁公著为给事中。
English: Ugly, Tang Mu Zong appointed Xue Fang to be the attendant of the work department, and Ding Gongzhu to be in charge.

古文：二月丁丑，乙卯，尊郭贵妃为皇太后上御丹凤门楼，赦天下。
现代文：乙卯，唐穆宗尊奉郭贵妃为皇太后，丁卯，唐穆宗和群臣百官服丧期满，脱去丧服，穿上日常服装。二月，丁丑，唐穆宗御临丹凤门楼，大赦天下。
English: In the second month, Tang Mu Zong honored Guo Guifei as the empress dowager. In the third month, Tang Mu Zong and his retainers took off their mourning clothes and put on their everyday clothes. In February, in the fourth month, Tang Mu Zong visited the Danfeng Gate Tower and granted amnesty to the world.

古文：事毕，盛陈倡优杂戏于门内而观之。
现代文：随后，在城楼上大摆乐舞和杂戏，穆宗在门里观看。
English: Afterwards, music, dance and miscellaneous plays were performed on the castle tower, while Mu Zong watched from inside the gate.

古文：丁亥，上幸左神策军观手搏杂戏。
现代文：丁亥，穆宗亲临左神策军，观看摔跤和杂戏表演。
English: Dinghai and Mu Zong personally visited Zuoshensha and watched wrestling and vaudeville performances.

古文：庚寅，监察御史杨虞卿上疏，以为： 陛下宜延对群臣，周遍顾问，惠以气色，使进忠若趋利，论政若诉冤，如此而不致升平者，未之有也。 
现代文：庚寅，监察御史杨虞卿上奏，认为： 陛下应当接见群臣百官，逐个征求他们对朝政的意见，态度要和蔼可亲，以便使对陛下尽忠的人感觉到他们是在求取功名，议论朝政的人感觉是在诉说冤曲。如果这样去做，而天下还不太平，那是没有的事。 
English: "His Majesty should receive a group of ministers and officials and solicit their opinions on the government of the dynasty one by one, and his attitude should be amiable, so that those who are loyal to His Majesty will feel that they are seeking fame, and those who discuss the government of the dynasty will feel that they are telling lies. If you do this, and the world is not peaceful, it is nothing.

古文：衡山人赵知微亦上疏谏上游畋无节。
现代文：衡山人赵知微也上奏，劝阻穆宗不要没有限度地游乐和外出打猎。
English: Zhao Zhiwei, a native of Hengshan, also spoke up to dissuade Mu Zong from having unlimited fun and going out hunting.

古文：上虽不能用，亦不罪也。
现代文：穆宗虽然不能按照他们说的那样去做，但也不怪罪他们。
English: Although he can't do what they say, he doesn't blame them.

古文：壬辰，废邕管，命容管经略使阳旻兼领之。
现代文：壬辰，唐穆宗下令废除邕管经略使，命容管经略使阳兼领。
English: In Imjin, Tang Mu Zong issued an order to abolish the post of the secretary of the imperial court, and the post of the secretary of the imperial court was concurrently held by Yang.

古文：安南都护桂仲武至安南，杨清拒境不纳。
现代文：安南都护桂仲武赴任抵安南，杨清抗拒朝廷命令，不让他入境。
English: Yang Qing resisted the imperial order and did not allow him to enter the country.

古文：清用刑惨虐，其党离心。
现代文：杨清对部下用荆残酷，他的同党都离心离德。
English: Yang Qing was cruel to his subordinates with the use of thorns, and his fellow party members were all alienated from Germany.

古文：仲武遣人说其酋豪，数月间，降者相继，得兵七千馀人。
现代文：桂仲武派人劝说蛮人的酋长豪强归顺朝廷，数月之间，归降的蛮人一批接着一批，总计得兵力七千多人。
English: Gui Zhongwu sent people to persuade the barbarian chieftain Hao Qiang to surrender to the imperial court. Within a few months, the barbarians surrendered one after another, with a total of more than seven thousand soldiers.

古文：朝廷以仲武为逗遛，甲午，以桂管观察使裴行立为安南都护。
现代文：朝廷得知桂仲武仍然没有上任，认为他停留观望不前。甲午，任命桂管观察使裴行立为安南都护。
English: The imperial court learned that Gui Zhongwu still had not taken office, and believed that he was waiting and watching. In the afternoon of the first day of the second month, he appointed Gui Guan to observe and set up Pei Xing as the guardian of the capital of Annan.

古文：乙未，以太仆卿杜式方为桂管观察使。
现代文：乙未，任命太仆卿杜式方为桂管观察使。
English: B Wei appointed Du Shikifang, the Great Footman of Guizhou, as the Guizhou Observer.

古文：丙申，贬仲武为安州刺史。
现代文：丙申，贬桂仲武为安州刺史。
English: Bishen, Gui Zhongwu is the history of Anzhou.

古文：丹王逾薨。
现代文：丹王李逾去世。
English: The King of Denmark, King Lee, has passed away.

古文：吐蕃寇灵武。
现代文：吐蕃国出兵侵犯灵武。
English: Tubo sent troops to invade Lingwu.

古文：宪宗之末，回鹘遣合达干来求婚尤切，宪宗许之。
现代文：唐宪宗末年时，回鹘国派大臣合达干来唐朝求婚，要求十分迫切。
English: At the end of the Tang Dynasty, the Minister of the State of Yunnan, Heda Gan, came to the Tang Dynasty to propose marriage. The request was very urgent.

古文：三月，癸卯朔，遣合达干归国。
现代文：宪宗同意回鹘国的请求。三月，癸卯朔，穆宗命合达干回国。
English: Kenzong agreed to the request to return to China. In March, Mu Zong was ordered to return to China.

古文：上见夏州观察判官柳公权书迹，爱之。
现代文：唐穆宗看到夏州观察判官柳公权的书法墨迹，十分喜爱。
English: Tang Mu Zong saw the calligraphy ink of Xia Zhou observing the judge Liu Gongquan, and was very fond of it.

古文：辛酉，以公权为右拾遗、翰林侍书学士。
现代文：辛酉，任命柳公权为右拾遗、翰林侍书学士。
English: Xin Yao appointed Liu Gongquan as the Right Reverend, and Han Lin as the Attending Scholar.

古文：上问公权： 卿书何能如是之善？ 
现代文：穆宗问柳公权： 你的书法为什么写得这么好？ 
English: Mu Zong asked Liu Gongquan: Why is your calligraphy so good?

古文：对曰： 用笔在心，心正则笔正。 
现代文：柳公权回答说： 写字运笔关键在于用心，心正则笔正。 
English: Liu Gongquan replied, "The key to writing is to write with your heart.

古文：上默然改容，知其以笔谏也。
现代文：穆宗听后默然不语，神色改变，知道柳公权是以用笔作譬来规劝自己。
English: Mu Zong was silent after listening, his expression changed, knowing that Liu Gongquan was using a pen as an example to persuade himself.

古文：公权，公绰之弟也。
现代文：柳公权是鄂岳观察使柳公绰的弟弟。
English: Liu Gongquan is the younger brother of Liu Gongquan, who was inspired by the observation of Mt. E.

古文：辛未，安南将士开城纳桂仲武，执杨清，斩之。
现代文：辛未，安南的将士打开城门，迎接桂仲武入城。然后，逮捕杨清，把他斩首。
English: Soon after, Annan's soldiers opened the gate to welcome Gui Zhongwu into the city, then arrested Yang Qing and beheaded him.

古文：裴行立至海门而卒。
现代文：新任安南都护裴行立赴任到海门镇时故去。
English: The new head of the South Korean capital, Annan, has died while on duty in Haimen Town.

古文：复以仲武为安南都护。
现代文：朝廷仍任命桂仲武为安南都护。
English: The imperial court still appointed Gui Zhongwu as Annan tutelary.

古文：吐蕃寇盐州。
现代文：吐蕃国出兵侵犯盐州。
English: Tubo sent troops to invade Yanzhou.

古文：初，膳部员外郎元稹为江陵士曹，与监军崔潭峻善。
现代文：当初，膳部员外郎元稹任江陵士曹时，和监军崔潭峻关系亲密。
English: At the beginning, when Wei Lang Yuan Rong, a member of the catering department, was appointed as the Gangneung Shizhao, he had a close relationship with the supervisor, Cui Tanjun.

古文：上在东宫，闻宫人诵稹歌诗而善之。
现代文：当时，唐穆宗还在东宫做太子，听到宫中有人朗诵元稹的诗歌，十分喜爱。
English: At that time, Tang Mu Zong was still a prince in the East Palace. He was very fond of hearing someone in the palace recite the poems of Yuan Zang.

古文：及即位，潭峻归朝，献稹歌诗百馀篇。
现代文：待到他继位做了皇帝以后，崔潭峻回到京城，向穆宗献上元稹的诗歌一百多篇。
English: After he succeeded to the throne and became emperor, Cui Tanjun returned to Beijing and presented more than one hundred poems of Yuan Shao to Mu Zong.

古文：上问： 稹安在？ 
现代文：穆宗问道： 元稹现在在哪里？ 
English: Mu Zong asked: Where is Yuan Xuan now?

古文：对曰： 今为散郎。 
现代文：潭峻回答说： 他现在任职为散郎。 
English: Tanjun replied, "He is now working as a scatterer."

古文：夏，五月，庚戌，以稹为祠部郎中、知制诰。
现代文：夏季，五月，庚戌，穆宗任命元稹为祠部郎中、知制诰。
English: In the summer, in May, Geng Zong and Mu Zong appointed Yuan Zong as the head of the ancestral hall.

古文：朝论鄙之。会同傣食瓜于阁下，有蝇集其上，中书舍人武儒衡以扇挥之曰： 适从何来，遽集于此！ 
现代文：百官知道元稹是由于得到宦官推荐而被提拔的，都鄙视他的为人。这一天，正好中书省的官员们在一起吃瓜，一群苍蝇落在瓜上，中书舍人武儒衡用扇子一边扇一边说道： 这些苍蝇是从哪里来的，都聚集在这里！ 
English: The officials knew that Yuan Xuan was promoted because he was recommended by a eunuch, and they all despised him as a person. On this day, it just so happened that the officials of the Chinese Ministry of Education and Culture were eating melons together. A group of flies landed on the melon. Wu Rongheng, a scholar at the Chinese Ministry of Education and Culture, fanned them with a fan and said, "Where did these flies come from? They all gathered here!"

古文：同僚皆失色，儒衡意气自若。
现代文：同僚们听他用苍蝇来讥讽元稹，都大惊失色，武儒衡却面不改色，神态自若。
English: When his colleagues heard him use a fly to ridicule Yuan Qi, they were shocked and lost their composure. However, Wu Rongheng did not change his expression and looked confident.

古文：庚申，葬神圣章武孝皇帝于景陵，庙号宪宗。
现代文：庚申，朝廷在同州奉先县的景陵埋葬神圣章武孝皇帝，庙号为宪宗。
English: According to Goshun, the imperial court buried the sacred chapter of Emperor Wu Xiao in the Jingling Mausoleum in Fengxian County of the same state, and the temple name was Jinsong.

古文：六月，以湖南观察使崔群为吏部侍郎，召对别殿。
现代文：六月，唐穆宗任命湖南观察使崔群为吏部侍郎。
English: In June, Tang Mu Zong appointed Cui Qun, the inspector of Hunan Province, as the attendant of the personnel department.

古文：上曰： 朕升储副，知卿为羽翼。 
现代文：穆宗在便殿召见崔群，说； 朕当年被立为皇太子，知道你曾有赞助的功劳。 
English: Mu Zong summoned Cui Qun in the Ben Hall and said, "I was appointed crown prince that year, and I know that you once had the merit of patronage.

古文：对曰： 先帝之意，久属圣明，臣何力之有！ 
现代文：崔群说： 先帝立皇太子，一直是以陛下作为人选，我又有什么功劳呢？ 
English: Cui Qun said: The previous emperor appointed the crown prince, always with His Majesty as the candidate. What merit do I have?

古文：太后居兴庆宫，每朔望，上帅百官诣宫上寿。
现代文：皇太后居住在兴庆宫，每月初一和十五，唐穆宗率领百官到兴庆宫，为皇太后敬酒祝寿。
English: The Empress Dowager lives in the Xingqing Palace. On the first day of the month and the 15th day of the month, Tang Mu Zong led hundreds of officials to the Xingqing Palace to toast the Empress Dowager.

古文：上性侈，所以奉养太后尤为华靡。
现代文：穆宗本性奢侈，所以，奉养皇太后尤为排场浪费。
English: Mu Zong was extravagant by nature, so it was particularly wasteful to support the empress dowager.

古文：秋，七月，乙巳，以郓、曹、濮节度为天平军。
现代文：秋季七月，乙巳，唐穆宗命郓、曹、濮节度号为 天平军 。
English: In the autumn of July, Tang Mu Zong Shimei, Cao, and Zou were renamed as the Tianping Army.

古文：门下侍郎、同平章事令狐楚坐为山陵使，部吏盗官物，又不给工人佣直，收其钱十五万缗为羡馀献之，怨诉盈路。
现代文：门下侍郎、同平章事令狐楚任职山陵使时，他的部下官吏偷盗国家财物，而且，他又不支付工匠的工钱，搜刮了十五万缗作为陵墓工程的节余，奉献朝廷。
English: When his subordinate, Tong Pingzhang, ordered his servant, Fuchu, to serve as a mausoleum envoy, his subordinate officials stole state property. In addition, he did not pay the craftsmen's wages and scraped 150,000 baht as a surplus of the mausoleum project and dedicated it to the imperial court.

古文：丁卯，罢为宣、歙、池观察使。
现代文：工匠愤怒异常，不断向官府上诉。丁卯，穆宗贬令狐楚为宣、歙、池观察使。
English: The craftsmen were extremely angry and kept appealing to the government. Ding Yu and Mu Zong decreed that the foxes should be the observers of Xuan, Yao and the pond.

古文：八月，癸已，发神策兵二千浚鱼藻池。
现代文：八月，癸巳，唐穆宗征发神策军兵士二千人疏浚鱼藻也。
English: In August, 2,000 soldiers of the Tangmuzong Zhengfa Shenze Army were also dredged for fish algae.

古文：戊戌，以御史中丞崔植为中书侍郎、同平章事。
现代文：戊戌，唐穆宗任命御史中丞崔植为中书侍郎、同平章事。
English: At the same time, the Tang Mu Zong appointed Goshi Chujo Cui Zhe as Chushushijiro and Tongpei Shoji.

古文：己亥，再贬令狐楚衡州刺史。
现代文：己亥，唐穆宗下令再贬令狐楚为衡州刺史。
English: At the same time, Tang Mu Zong ordered to re-delegate Foxtu to Hengzhou.

古文：上甫过公除，即事游畋声色，赐与无节。
现代文：唐穆宗刚刚为宪宗服丧期满，就开始游乐打猎，喜好歌舞和女色，对臣下赏赐毫无节制。
English: Tang Mu Zong had just completed his mourning period for Emperor Xianzong when he began to enjoy hunting, singing, dancing, and womanizing. He had no restraint when it came to rewarding his vassals.

古文：九月，欲以重阳大宴。
现代文：九月，穆宗计划在重阳节举行盛大宴会。
English: In September, Mu Zong plans to hold a grand banquet on the Double Ninth Festival.

古文：拾遗李珏帅其同僚上疏曰： 伏以元朔未改，园陵尚新，虽陛下就易月之期，俯从人欲；而《礼经》著三年之制，犹服心丧。
现代文：拾遗李珏率领同僚上奏说： 陛下继位不到一年，年号尚未更改，先帝的陵墓也还是新的。虽然陛下采取以日易月的丧期，俯从人们的愿望，但是根据《礼经》服丧三年的制度，还应当在内心继续哀悼。
English: His Majesty's enthronement is less than a year old, the year has not been changed, and the mausoleum of the former emperor is still new. Although His Majesty has adopted a mourning period of days and months, bowing to people's wishes, according to the three-year mourning system of the "Book of Rites," he should continue to mourn in his heart.

古文：遵同轨之会始离京，告远夷之使未复命。
现代文：现在，邻国前来吊丧的使者才刚刚离开京城，朝廷赴各国告丧的使者还没有回来秉告。
English: Now, the envoys from neighboring countries who came to pay their respects have just left Beijing, and the envoys from the imperial court who went to various countries to pay their respects have not yet returned.

古文：遏密弛禁，盖为齐人。合谋后庭，事将未可。 上不听。
现代文：解除丧期的各种禁令，都是为了百姓；在后宫举行宴乐，恐怕不妥。 穆宗不听。
English: The lifting of various bans during the mourning period is for the sake of the people; I am afraid that it is not appropriate to hold banquets in the harem. Mu Zong did not listen.

古文：戊午，加邠宁节度使李光颜、武宁节度使李愬并同平章事。
现代文：戊午，穆宗授予宁节度使李光颜、武宁节度使李同平章事的荣誉官衔。
English: At noon, Mu Zong awarded the honorary titles of Ning Festival to Li Guangyan and Wu Ning Festival to Li Tongping.

古文：冬，十月，王承宗薨，其下秘不发丧，子知感、知信皆在朝，诸将欲取帅于属内诸州。
现代文：冬季十月，成德节度使王承宗死亡，他的部下隐瞒此事，没有公开举丧。王承宗的儿子王知感、王知信都在朝廷作人质，部将们想从成德管辖的诸州选取一人作节度使。
English: In the winter of October, the Chengde Festival caused the death of Wang Chengzong. His subordinates concealed the matter and did not publicly mourn. Wang Chengzong's sons, Wang Zhixuan and Wang Zhixin, were both held hostage at the imperial court. The ministers wanted to select a person from the states under Chengde's jurisdiction to be the festival's envoy.

古文：参谋崔燧以承宗祖母凉国夫人命，告谕诸将及亲兵，立承宗之弟观察支使承元。
现代文：参谋崔燧根据王承宗祖母凉国夫人的命令，通报诸将和亲兵，立王承宗的弟弟、观察支使王承元继承节度使的职位。
English: According to the order of Wang Chengzong's grandmother, Mrs. Liang Guo, the staff officer Cui Wei informed the generals and soldiers to appoint Wang Chengzong's younger brother, the observation envoy Wang Chengyuan, to succeed the position of the festival envoy.

古文：承元时年二十，将士拜之，承元不受，泣且拜，诸将固请不已。
现代文：这一年，王承元年满二十岁，成德的将士向他行礼，他推辞不愿接受，一边哭泣，一边还礼。
English: This year, when Wang Chengyuan turned twenty, soldiers from Chengde saluted him. He refused to accept the salute, weeping as he did so.

古文：承元曰： 天子遣中使监军，有事当与之议。 
现代文：将士一再请求王承元继任节度使，王承元说： 皇上派宦官来监军，如有大事，应当与监军商议。 
English: The soldiers repeatedly asked Wang Chengyuan to succeed him as the festival envoy. Wang Chengyuan said: The emperor sent eunuchs to supervise the troops. If there is a big event, they should discuss it with the supervisors.

古文：及监军至，亦劝之。
现代文：等到监军来到以后，也劝王承元继任。
English: After the supervising troops arrived, Wang Chengyuan was also persuaded to succeed.

古文：承元曰： 诸公未忘先德，不以承元年少，欲使之摄军务，承元请尽节天子以遵忠烈王之志，诸公肯从之乎！ 
现代文：王承元说： 大家没有忘记我的祖辈在成德做节度使时的恩德，不认为我年少无知，想让我暂时管理军务，我请求大家允许我首先向朝廷尽忠，以便能够遵循我的祖父忠于朝廷的遗志。大家愿意听我的话吗？ 诸将都表示同意。
English: Wang Chengyuan said, "People have not forgotten the kindness of my ancestors when they served as festival envoys in Chengde. They do not think I am young and ignorant, and want me to temporarily manage military affairs. I ask everyone to allow me to be loyal to the imperial court first, so that I can follow my grandfather's will to be loyal to the imperial court. Are you willing to listen to me? All generals agree.

古文：众许诺。承元乃视事于都将听事，令左右不得谓己为留后，委事于参佐，密表请朝廷除帅。
现代文：于是，王承元开始到都将厅堂办公，他下令左右随从不许称自己为留后，然后，把军政事务委托部下副职处理，自己向朝廷秘密上奏，请求由朝廷任命节度使。
English: As a result, Wang Chengyuan began to go to the palace to work. He ordered his left and right followers not to call him a retainer. Then, he entrusted the military and political affairs to his subordinates to deal with, and he secretly reported to the court and requested the court to appoint a festival envoy.

古文：庚辰，监军奏承宗疾亟，弟承元权知留后，并以承元表闻。
现代文：庚辰，成德监军上奏朝廷，称王承宗病重，由他的弟弟王承元暂时代理留后。同时，把王承元请求任命节度使的表奏上报朝廷。
English: Geng Chen, the military governor of Chengde, reported to the imperial court that Wang Chengzong was seriously ill and that his brother, Wang Chengyuan, had temporarily taken over. At the same time, he reported to the imperial court that Wang Chengyuan had requested the appointment of a festival envoy.

古文：党项复引吐蕃寇泾州，连营五十里。
现代文：党项再次勾引吐蕃侵犯泾州，军营首尾相连，达五十里。
English: The Party once again lured Tujia to invade Ganzhou, and the military camps were connected end-to-end, reaching fifty miles.

古文：辛已，遣起居舍人拍耆诣镇州宣慰。
现代文：辛巳，穆宗派遣起居舍人柏耆前往成德安抚将士。
English: Soon after, Mu Zong dispatched his retainer, Baojun, to Chengde to pacify the soldiers.

古文：壬午，群臣入阁。谏议大夫郑覃、崔郾等五人进言： 陛下宴乐过多，畋游无度。
现代文：壬午，群臣入殿，谏议大夫郑覃、崔郾等五人向唐穆宗进言： 陛下游乐和宴会的次数过多，外出打猎没有节制。
English: In the morning of the third day of the third month, a group of courtiers entered the hall, and five people, including the doctors Zheng Jun and Cui Jun, gave advice to Tang Mu Zong: His Majesty has too many parties and banquets, and he goes out hunting without restraint.

古文：今胡寇压境，忽有急奏，不知乘舆所在。
现代文：现在，吐蕃大军侵犯边境，如果边防忽然有紧急情况上奏，不知陛下在何处。
English: Now that the Tubo army is invading the border, if the border guards suddenly have an emergency, I don't know where His Majesty is.

古文：又晨夕与近习倡优狎暱，赐与过厚。
现代文：另外，陛下日夜与乐舞唱戏的优人在一起亲近游玩，对他们赏赐太多。
English: In addition, His Majesty day and night with the music, dance, singing and drama of the good people to play close together, to reward them too much.

古文：大金帛皆百姓膏血，非有功不可与。
现代文：凡金银布帛，都是百姓的血汗，如果没有战功，不可随便赏赐。
English: All the gold, silver and cloth are the people's blood and sweat. If there is no war merit, it should not be rewarded.

古文：虽内藏有馀，愿陛下爱之，万一四方有事，不复使有司重敛百姓。 
现代文：现在，虽然国库的财物尚有结余，但愿陛下爱惜，万一天下发生不测事件，就可动用国库，而不致使官吏再重税搜刮百姓。 
English: Now, although there is still a surplus in the treasury's assets, I hope Your Majesty will be kind enough to use the treasury in the event of an unforeseen event, so that government officials will not be able to raid the people with heavy taxes.

古文：时久无阁中论事者，上始甚讶之，谓宰相曰： 此辈何人？ 对曰： 谏官。 
现代文：谏官很久无人在内殿奏论朝政，穆宗听到郑覃等人的进言后，觉得十分惊讶，他对宰相说： 这几个都是什么人？ 宰相回答说： 是谏官。 
English: For a long time, there was no eunuch in the inner hall to speak about the politics of the dynasty. After Mu Zong heard the input from Zheng Qi and others, he felt very surprised. He said to the prime minister: Who are these people? The prime minister replied: They are eunuchs.

古文：上乃使人慰劳之，曰： 当依卿言。 
现代文：于是，穆宗派人慰劳郑覃等人，说： 我打算按照你们说的去做。 
English: Therefore, Mu Zong sent people to comfort Zheng Yao and others, saying, "I intend to do as you say.

古文：宰相皆贺，然实不能用也。
现代文：宰相都对穆宗虚心纳谏表示祝贺。
English: The prime ministers all expressed their congratulations to Mu Zong for accepting the invitation.

古文：覃，珣瑜之子也。
现代文：然而，穆宗其实并没有接受郑覃等人的规劝。
English: However, Mu Zong did not actually accept the persuasion of Zheng Yu and others.

古文：上尝谓给事中丁公著曰： 闻外间人多宴乐，此乃时和人安，足用为慰。 
现代文：郑覃是唐顺宗时宰相郑瑜的儿子。唐穆宗曾对给事中丁公著说： 听说朝外士大夫经常饮宴游乐，这真是国泰民安，令人欣慰。 
English: Zheng Yao was the son of Zheng Yu, the prime minister at the time of Tang Shunzong. Tang Mu Zong once said to Ding Gong, the person in charge of the matter: I heard that the Foreign Minister often had banquets and amusements, which is really a matter of national security and is gratifying.

古文：公著对曰： 此非佳事，恐渐劳圣虑。 
现代文：丁公著说： 这种现象并非好事，恐怕以后有劳陛下圣虑。 
English: Ding Gong wrote: This phenomenon is not a good thing, I'm afraid there will be worries in the future.

古文：上曰： 何故？ 
现代文：穆宗问： 你这样说是什么缘故？ 
English: Dezong said, "Why do you say that?

古文：对曰： 自天宝以来，公卿大夫竞为游宴，沉酣昼夜，优杂子女，不愧左右。
现代文：丁公著回答说： 自天宝以来，公卿士大夫争相游乐饮宴，沉缅于酒色，男女混杂在一起游戏跳舞，不以为耻。
English: Ding Gong replied, "Since Tianbao, nobles, scholars and doctors have been competing to enjoy banquets, indulge in wine, and men and women have mixed together to play and dance. They are not ashamed.

古文：如此不已，则百职皆废，陛下能无独忧劳乎！
现代文：如此下去，必然导致朝政废弛，陛下能不忧虑吗？
English: If this continues, it will inevitably lead to the collapse of the imperial government. Should His Majesty not be worried?

古文：愿少加禁止，乃天下之福也。 
现代文：但愿陛下对这种现象稍加禁止，也就是天下的福分了。 
English: I hope His Majesty will impose a ban on this phenomenon, which would be a blessing for the world.

古文：癸未，泾州奏吐蕃进营距州三十里，告急求救。
现代文：癸未，泾州上奏：吐蕃国进犯，军营离州城仅三十里。军书告急，请求朝廷出兵救援。
English: In the morning of the same day, the report from Bozhou read: The invasion of Tubo Province, the military camp is only 30 miles from the city of Bozhou. The military report was urgent and requested the imperial court to send troops for rescue.

古文：以右军中尉梁守谦为左、右神策京西、北行营都监，将兵四千人，并发八镇全军救之。赐将士装钱二万缗。
现代文：穆宗任命右神策军护军中尉梁守谦为左、右神策京西、北行营都监，率兵四千人，同时征发神策京畿八镇全军前往救援，赏赐将士行装钱二万缗。
English: Mu Zong appointed Liang Shou Qian, a lieutenant of the Right Divine Defense Army, as the left one, and Right Divine Defense Army, the west of Beijing and the north-bound battalion, as the central overseer, leading 4,000 soldiers. At the same time, he conscripted the entire army of the Eight Towns of Divine Defense Army to go to the rescue, and rewarded the soldiers with 20,000 baht.

古文：以郯王府长史邵同为太府少卿兼御史中丞，充答吐蕃请和好使。
现代文：穆宗又任命郯王府长史邵同为太府少卿兼御史中丞，充任答吐蕃请和好使。
English: Mu Zong also appointed Shi Shao Tong, the governor of Wangfu, as Taifu Shaoqing (太府少卿) and Goshi Zhongzheng (御史中丞), and appointed him as a messenger of reconciliation.

古文：初，秘书少监田洎入吐蕃为吊祭使，吐蕃请与唐盟于长武城下，洎恐吐蕃留之不得还，唯阿而已。
现代文：当初，秘书少监田洎奉命赴吐蕃为吊祭使，吐蕃请求和唐朝在长武城下缔结会盟条约，田洎恐怕吐蕃把自己拘留，所以满口答应。
English: At first, the secretary, Junior Warden Tian Qi, was ordered to go to Tubo to serve as a messenger for the hanging ceremony. Tubo requested to conclude an alliance treaty with the Tang Dynasty under the Changwu Castle. Tian Qi was afraid that Tubo would detain him, so he readily agreed.

古文：既而吐蕃为党项所引入寇，因以为辞曰： 田洎许我将兵赴盟。 
现代文：不久，吐蕃由党项勾引入侵，以田洎曾答应会盟为借口说： 田洎许可我国带兵来参加会盟。 
English: Not long after, Tubo was invaded with the collusion of the party, using the excuse that Tian Xuan had promised to join the alliance, saying: Tian Xuan allowed our country to bring soldiers to join the alliance.

古文：于是贬洎郴州司户。
现代文：于是，贬田洎为郴州司户。
English: As a result, Karita Shiori became the governor of Bishu Province.

古文：成德军始奏王承宗薨。
现代文：这时，成德镇方上奏，报告王承宗的死讯。
English: At this time, Chengde Town played the bugle to announce Wang Chengzong's death.

古文：乙酉，徙田弘正为成德节度使，以王承元为义成节度使，刘悟为昭义节度使，李愬为魏博节度使。
现代文：乙酉，唐穆宗任命魏博节度使田弘正为成德节度使，任命王承元为义成节度使，刘悟为昭义节度使，李为魏博节度使。
English: Tang Mu Zong appointed Tian Hongzheng as Chengde Festival Envoy, Wang Chengyuan as Yicheng Festival Envoy, Liu Gou as Zhaoyi Festival Envoy, and Li as Wei Bo Festival Envoy.

古文：又以左金吾将军田布为河阳节度使。
现代文：又任命左金吾将军田布为河阳节度使。
English: He also appointed Zuo Kingo's general, Tian Bu, as Kawayo's envoy to the festival.

古文：渭州刺史郝玼出兵袭吐蕃营，所杀甚众。
现代文：渭州刺史郝多次出兵袭击吐蕃军营，杀伤很多敌军。
English: Zhangzhou Zhisheng repeatedly sent troops to attack the Tubo military camp, killing and wounding many enemy troops.

古文：李光颜发邠宁兵救泾州。邠宁兵以神策受赏厚，皆愠曰： 人给五十缗而不识战斗者，彼何人邪！
现代文：宁节度使李光颜征发部兵马救援泾州，宁兵士认为神策军已得优厚赏赐，自己却一无所得，都愤怒地说： 有的军人给了五十缗钱而不参战，他们是什么人？
English: The Ning Festival made Li Guangyan of the Recruiting and Dispatching Department of the People's Liberation Army and the People's Liberation Army rescue Zhangzhou. The Ning soldiers thought that the Shenchao Army had received a generous reward, but they had nothing, and they all said angrily: Some soldiers gave fifty mu of money and did not participate in the war. Who are they?

古文：常额衣资不得而前冒白刃者，此何人邪！ 
现代文：有的军人连应当得到的衣服和粮食都未发给，却要冒死向前冲锋陷阵，这又是什么人呢？ 
English: Who were these soldiers who were not even given the clothing and food they should have received, but were willing to risk their lives to charge forward into battle?

古文：汹汹不可止。
现代文：兵士喧扰不息，难以制止。
English: The soldiers were making a lot of noise and it was hard to stop them.

古文：光颜亲为开陈大义以谕之，言与涕俱，然后军士感悦而行。
现代文：李光颜亲自出面，对兵士们晓以大义，一边说，一边流泪。士兵受到感染，愤怒的情绪才平息下来，出发上路了。
English: Li Guangyan personally came forward and told the soldiers to be righteous, while crying. The soldiers were infected, the angry mood calmed down, and they set off on the road.

古文：将至泾州，吐蕃惧而退。
现代文：快到泾州时，吐蕃畏惧宁军，于是退去。
English: When approaching Zhangzhou, Tubo was afraid of Ning's army, so he withdrew.

古文：丙戌，罢神策行营。
现代文：丙戈，穆宗下令，罢梁守谦所率领的神策行营。
English: In spite of this, Mu Zong gave the order to dispatch Liang Shouqian, who was leading the Shen Zhe camp.

古文：西川奏吐蕃寇雅州。
现代文：西川上奏：吐蕃国侵雅州。
English: Nishikawa Shoso: Tubo invaded Yashu.

古文：辛卯，盐州奏吐蕃营于乌、白池，寻亦皆退。
现代文：辛卯，盐州上奏：吐蕃国在乌池、白池附近驻扎军队。
English: Xinwu, Yanzhou inscribed: Tubo Province stationed troops near Wuchi and Baichi.

古文：十一月，癸卯，遣谏议大夫郑覃诣镇州宣慰，赐钱一百万缗以赏将士。
现代文：不久，都撤退了。十一月，癸卯，唐穆宗派遣谏议大夫郑覃赴镇州安抚军民，赏赐将士钱一百万缗。
English: Soon, they all retreated. In November, Emperor Muzong of Tang dispatched Zheng Qi, a military doctor, to Zhenzhou to pacify the soldiers and civilians, and rewarded the soldiers with one million baht.

古文：王承元既请朝命，诸将及邻道争以故事劝之，承元皆不听。
现代文：王承元在请求朝廷任命成德节度使以后，他的部将和邻近的藩镇争相以过去成德世袭的惯例劝说他，王承元一概不听。
English: After Wang Chengyuan asked the imperial court to appoint Chengde as the festival's envoy, his ministers and neighboring towns tried to use Chengde's hereditary tradition to persuade him, but Wang Chengyuan would not listen.

古文：及移镇义成，将士喧哗不受命，承元与柏耆召诸将以诏旨谕之，诸将号哭不从。
现代文：等到朝廷任命他为义成节度使，将士仍然喧哗不已，拒不接受朝廷任命。王承元和柏耆召集诸将，以朝廷下达的任命诏书开导大家，诸将却大声痛哭起来，仍不从命。
English: When the imperial court appointed him as the envoy of the Yicheng Festival, the soldiers still clamored and refused to accept the imperial court's appointment. Wang Chengyuan and Baodi gathered the generals and enlightened everyone with the imperial court's appointment edict, but the generals cried loudly and still did not obey their orders.

古文：承元出家财以散之，择其有劳者擢之，谓曰： 诸公以先代之故，不欲承元去，此意甚厚。
现代文：王承元不得已。拿出自己家里的财产，散发给将士，并且把那些曾有军功的将士提拔迁升，然后对他们说： 诸位以我先辈在成德世代做节度使的缘故，不愿让我离开这里，你们的深情厚意我领了。
English: Wang Chengyuan had no choice but to take out his family's property, distribute it to the soldiers, and promote those soldiers who had military merit, and then said to them: You are unwilling to let me leave here for the sake of my forefathers who were sent to Chengde. I have accepted your deep kindness.

古文：然使承元违天子之诏，其罪大矣。
现代文：但是，要让我违抗皇上的招令，这个罪名就太大了。
English: However, this crime is too great for me to disobey the Emperor's summons.

古文：昔李师道之未败也，朝廷尝赦其罪，师道欲行，诸将固留之。
现代文：过去，李师道叛乱尚未失败时，朝廷曾赦免他的罪行，李师道本打算入朝，他的部将却执意挽留，不让他走。
English: In the past, when Li Shidao's rebellion had not yet failed, the imperial court had pardoned his crimes. Li Shidao had planned to enter the imperial court, but his ministers insisted on retaining him and would not let him go.

古文：其后杀师道者亦诸将也。
现代文：结果，后来杀李师道的人也是他的部将。
English: As a result, the person who later killed Li Shidao was also his subordinate.

古文：诸将勿使承元为师道，则幸矣。 
现代文：因此，诸位不要再让我成为李师道第二，我也就算是幸运了。 
English: Therefore, please don't let me be second to Li Shidao, even if I am lucky.

古文：因涕泣不自胜，且拜之。
现代文：王承元说完后，已哭是不能自制，他又向将士拜礼，请求让自己成行。
English: After Wang Chengyuan finished speaking, he could not restrain himself from crying, and he bowed to the generals and asked to be allowed to march.

古文：十将李寂等十馀人固留承元，承元斩以徇，军中乃定。
现代文：牙将李寂等十几人再次强留，王承元下令斩首，以儆效尤，军中这才安定下来。
English: Once again, more than a dozen people, including the commander, Li Jak, were forcibly detained, and Wang Chengyuan ordered that they be beheaded as an example. Only then did the situation in the army settle down.

古文：丁未，承元赴滑州。将吏或以镇州器用财货行，承元悉命留之。
现代文：丁未，王承元出发到滑州上任，将吏有人想让他把成德的公用器物和财产带走，王承元命令一律留下。
English: On the eve of Ding Wei, Wang Chengyuan set off to take office in Slanting. Some officials wanted him to take away Chengde's public utensils and property, but Wang Chengyuan ordered them all to stay.

古文：上将幸华清宫，戊午，宰相率两省供奉官诣延英门，三上表世谏，且言： 如此，臣辈当扈从。 
现代文：唐穆宗想到华清宫去游玩。戊午，宰相率领中书、门下两省的供奉官到延英门，三次上奏劝阻，并且说： 如果皇上一定要去华清宫，我们做臣下的就应当随行护送。 
English: Tang Mu Zong thought of visiting the Huaqing Palace. In the afternoon, the prime minister led Zhongshu and the officials of the two provinces under his command to Yan Ying Gate, three times to dissuade them, and said: If the emperor must go to the Huaqing Palace, we should accompany him as subjects.

古文：求面对，皆不听。
现代文：宰相请求面见穆宗，穆宗不听。
English: The prime minister asked to meet Mu Zong, but Mu Zong did not listen.

古文：谏官伏门下，至暮，乃退。
现代文：谏官都拜伏在延英门下，一直到傍晚才退回。
English: The eunuchs all prostrated themselves at Yan Ying's door, and did not return until the evening.

古文：己未，未明，上自复道出城，幸华清宫，独公主、驸马、中尉、神策六军使帅禁兵千馀人扈从，晡时还宫。
现代文：己未，天尚未明，穆宗从复道出城，到华清宫去游玩，只有公主、驸马、神策军护军中尉、神策军以及羽林、龙武、神威六军军使率禁军一千多人随从护卫，到黄昏时才回宫。
English: It was not yet clear when Mu Zong would leave the city from Fudao to visit the Huaqing Palace. Only the princess, her horse, the lieutenant of the Shen Zhao army escort, the Shen Zhao army, and more than a thousand people of the forbidden army led by the envoys of the six armies of Hulin, Longwu and Shen Wei followed the escort, and only returned to the palace at dusk.

古文：十二月，己已朔，盐州奏：吐蕃千馀人围乌、白池。
现代文：十二月，己巳朔，盐州上奏：吐蕃国出动一千多人围攻乌池、白池。
English: In December, it was already the new year, and Yanzhou was in the ascendant: more than a thousand people from Tubo Province set out to besiege Wuchi and Baichi.

古文：庚辰，西川奏南诏二万人入界，请讨吐蕃。
现代文：庚辰，西川上奏：南诏国两万人进入唐朝境内，请求讨伐吐蕃。
English: Geng Chen, Nishikawa Shoso: Twenty thousand people from Nanzhao entered the territory of the Tang Dynasty, requesting a crusade against Tu Wei.

古文：癸未，容管奏破黄少卿万馀众，拔营栅三十六。
现代文：癸未，容管上奏：出兵击破蛮人黄少卿一万多人，攻拔营栅三十六个。
English: At the end of the war, the following was announced: more than ten thousand soldiers were dispatched to defeat the barbarian Huang Shaoqing, and thirty-six barracks were attacked.

古文：时少卿久未平，国子祭酒韩愈上言： 臣去年贬岭外，熟知黄家贼事。
现代文：这时，由于唐朝军队很久未能平定黄少卿，国子祭酒韩愈上言说： 我于去年贬官到岭南，对黄家贼的情况很熟悉。
English: At this time, because the Tang Dynasty army had not been able to subdue Huang Shaoqing for a long time, Han Yu said: I was demoted to Lingnan last year, and I am very familiar with the situation of the Huang family thieves.

古文：其贼无城郭可居，依山傍险，自称洞主，寻常亦各营生，急则屯聚相保。
现代文：这些人没有城池可以居住，都是依山傍险，自称洞主。平日各自谋生，发生紧急情况则屯聚在一起防守。
English: These people don't have a castle to live in. They all live by the side of the mountain, claiming to be cave owners. On weekdays, they earn their own living, but in an emergency, they gather together to defend themselves.

古文：比缘邕管经略使多不得人，德既不能绥怀，威又不能临制，侵欺虏缚，以致怨恨。
现代文：以往由于邕管经略使大多不称职，他们既不能施行德政安抚蛮人，又没有足够的威望使蛮人畏服，因而经常侵犯、欺骗甚至俘掠蛮人，致使蛮人产生仇恨，于是，起兵攻打劫掠州县，躏辱百姓。
English: In the past, because most of them were incompetent due to maladministration, they were neither able to implement German politics to appease the barbarians, nor did they have enough prestige to make the barbarians afraid, so they often invaded, cheated and even captured the barbarians, causing the barbarians to hate. Therefore, they set out to attack and loot Zhouzhou County and humiliate the people.

古文：遂攻劫州县，侵暴平人，或复私仇，或贪小利，或聚或散，终亦不能为事。
现代文：他们有时是为了报私仇，有时是贪求财物或临时聚集在一起，事后，又各自散去，还不足以造成大的危害。
English: Sometimes they are out for personal revenge, sometimes they are greedy for wealth, or they come together temporarily, and then they disperse, but not enough to cause great harm.

古文：近者征讨本起裴行立、阳旻，此两人者本无远虑深谋，意在邀功求赏。
现代文：近来征讨蛮人，始于裴行立、阳二人，这两个人本来就没有深谋远虑，征讨蛮人的目的是为了邀功求赏。
English: Recently, the recruitment of barbarians began with two people, Pei Xingli and Yang. These two people did not have foresight, and the purpose of recruiting barbarians was to seek rewards.

古文：亦缘见贼未屯聚之时，将谓单弱，争献谋计。
现代文：他们只看到蛮人尚未聚屯在一起的时候，认为蛮人势单力弱，因而争相向朝廷献计，请求讨伐。
English: They only saw the barbarians when they had not yet gathered together, and thought that the barbarians were weak, so they vied with each other to present their plans to the imperial court and request a crusade.

古文：自用兵以来，已经二年，前后所奏杀获计不下二万馀人，倘皆非虚，贼已寻尽。
现代文：自从用兵以来，已经两年，他们奏报杀死和俘虏的人数，总计已不下两万多人。如果不是虚报，那么，蛮人已经灭绝。
English: Two years have passed since the soldiers were used, and they have reported a total of more than twenty thousand killed and captured. If this is not a false report, then the barbarians have been exterminated.

古文：至今贼犹依旧，足明欺罔朝廷。
现代文：但至今蛮人仍然如旧，可见他们是在欺骗朝廷。
English: But so far the barbarians are still the same as before, which shows that they are deceiving the imperial court.

古文：邕、容两管，经此凋弊，杀伤疾疫，十室九空，如此不已，臣恐岭南一道未有宁息之时。
现代文：邕管、容管两地，经过这次战争后，百姓又遭受杀伤和疾病，已经十室九空。如果长此以往，我担心岭南一道不会再有安宁休息的时候。
English: After this war, the people of both Jiangsu and Yunnan have suffered from injuries and diseases, and have been devastated. If this continues, I am afraid that there will be no time for peace and rest in Lingnan.

古文：自南讨已来，贼徒亦甚伤损，察其情理，厌苦必深。
现代文：自从南征以来，黄家贼也已遭受重大伤亡，从情理上说，蛮人也必定十分厌战。
English: Since the Southern Expedition, the Yellow Thieves have also suffered heavy casualties. It is reasonable to say that the barbarians must also be very war-weary.

古文：贼所处荒僻，假如尽杀其人，尽得其地，在于国计不为有益。
现代文：况且蛮人都住在荒远偏僻的地方，假如把蛮人杀光，全部占领这些地区，对于国家也没有什么好处。
English: Moreover, the barbarians all live in remote and desolate places. If the barbarians were all killed and these areas were all occupied, it would be of no benefit to the country.

古文：若因改元大庆，赦其罪戾，遣使宣谕，必望风降伏。
现代文：因此，不如借国家改年号大庆的机会，赦免蛮人的罪行，派使者前往安抚，蛮人必定会望风而降。
English: Therefore, it is better to take the opportunity of the national New Year's Day celebration to pardon the crimes of the barbarians and send an envoy to appease them. The barbarians will surely surrender to the wind.

古文：上不能用。长庆元年辛丑，公元八二一年
现代文：然后，选择一位有威望的大臣为经略使，如果对蛮人处置得宜的话，那么，以后自然永远不会再发生叛乱的事情。 穆宗未采纳韩愈的建议。
English: Then, choose a prestigious minister as the economic envoy, and if the barbarians are dealt with appropriately, then, of course, there will never be a rebellion again.Mu Zong did not accept Han Yu's suggestion.

古文：春，正月，辛丑，上祀圆丘。赦天下，改元。
现代文：唐穆宗长庆元年春季，正月，辛丑，唐穆宗到圜丘祭天，大赦天下，改年号为长庆。
English: In the spring of the first year of Tang Mu Zong's reign, the first month of the new year, Tang Mu Zong went to Shengqiu to celebrate the New Year, and changed the name of the year to Changqing.

古文：河北诸道各令均定两税。
现代文：下令河北各藩镇勘定两税税额。
English: It was ordered that all the towns in Hebei Province should calculate the amount of the two taxes.

古文：门下侍郎、同平章事萧俛，介洁疾恶，为相，重惜官职，少所引拔。
现代文：门下侍郎、同平章事萧性情耿直，疾恶如仇，他当宰相以后，珍惜官职，很少向朝廷引荐拔擢官吏。
English: After he became prime minister, he valued his official position and rarely recommended and promoted officials to the imperial court.

古文：西川节度使王播大修贡奉，且以赂结宦官，求为相，段文昌复左右之。
现代文：西川节度使王播大肆向朝廷贡献财物，同时贿赂交结宦官，请求为宰相，段文昌也在朝中为他活动。
English: The Nishikawa festival made Wang Han lavishly contribute wealth to the imperial court, and at the same time bribe and cajole eunuchs to request to be the prime minister. Duan Wenchang also worked for him in the imperial court.

古文：诏征播诣京师。
现代文：穆宗下诏，命王播进京。
English: Mu Zong issued an edict ordering the king to enter the capital.

古文：俛屡于延英力争，言： 播纤邪，物论沸腾，不可以污台司。 
现代文：萧多次在延英殿极力论争，他说： 王播卑鄙邪恶，陛下命他进京后，朝廷议论沸腾，不可以让这种人来玷污朝廷的官职。 
English: Xiao argued strenuously many times at Yan Ying Dian. He said: Wang Bo is despicable and evil. After His Majesty ordered him to go to Beijing, the discussion in the imperial court boiled over. Such a person should not be allowed to tarnish the official position of the imperial court.

古文：上不听，俛遂辞位。
现代文：穆宗不听。于是，萧请求辞职。
English: Mu Zong did not listen, so Xiao asked him to resign.

古文：己未，播至京师。
现代文：己未，王播进抵京城。
English: Before he knew it, Wang Huanjin arrived in Beijing.

古文：壬戌，俛罢为右仆射。
现代文：壬戌，萧被罢为右仆射。
English: In the end, Xiao was ousted as the right-hand man.

古文：俛固辞仆射，二月，癸酉，改吏部尚书。
现代文：他又坚决请辞仆射，二月，癸酉，改为吏部尚书。
English: He also resolutely asked to resign, and in February, at the stroke of midnight, he was transferred to the Personnel Department.

古文：卢龙节度使刘总既杀其父兄，心常自疑，数见父兄为崇。
现代文：卢龙节度使刘总自从杀死他的父亲和兄弟后，心中常常自疑不安，多次梦见父亲和兄弟变为鬼祟，危害自己。
English: Ever since the Lulong Festival, when Liu Zong killed his father and brother, he often had doubts and uneasiness in his heart. He dreamed many times that his father and brother had become spies and were harming him.

古文：常于府舍饭僧数百，使昼夜为佛事，每视事退则处其中；或处他室，则惊悸不能寐。
现代文：于是，经常在节度使府的一个房间招待几百名僧人就餐，让他们昼夜为自己念佛，以便避免灾祸。他每次办公后就住在这里，如果偶然住在别处，就会惊吓得睡不着觉。
English: As a result, he often invited hundreds of monks to dine in a room in the residence during festivals, and had them chant Buddha's name to themselves day and night in order to avoid disaster. He lived here after every office, and if he happened to live somewhere else, he would be too scared to sleep.

古文：晚年，恐惧尤甚。
现代文：到了晚年，他更加恐惧。
English: In his later years, he was even more fearful.

古文：亦见河南、北皆从化，己卯，奏乞弃官为僧。仍乞赐钱百万缗以赏将士。
现代文：同时，看到河南、河北的藩镇都已归顺朝廷，己卯，上奏朝廷，乞请弃官为僧，并请求朝廷赐钱一百万缗，用来赏赐将士。
English: At the same time, seeing that all the towns in Henan and Hebei provinces had surrendered to the imperial court, he appealed to the imperial court, begged to resign his post and become a monk, and asked the imperial court to give him one million baht to reward the soldiers.

古文：上面谕西川节度使王播令归镇，播累表乞留京师。
现代文：唐穆宗当面告诉西川节度使王播，命令他归还本镇。王播多次上表，乞请留居京城。
English: Tang Muzong told Wang Biao, the governor of the West River Festival, in person and ordered him to return to the town. Wang Biao repeatedly petitioned to stay in the capital.

古文：会中书侍郎、同平章事段文昌请退，壬申，以文昌同平章事；充西州节度使；以翰如学士社杜元颖为户部侍郎、同平章事。以播为刑部尚书，充盐铁转运使。
现代文：这时，正好中书侍郎、同平章事段文昌请求辞职，壬申，穆宗任命段文昌带同平章事的官衔，充任西川节度使；任命翰林学士杜元颖为户部侍郎、同平章事；任命王播为刑部尚书，充任盐铁转运使。
English: At this time, it just so happened that Duan Wenchang, the chief secretary of the General Office of the General Office of the General Office of the General Office of the General Office of the General Office of the General Office of the General Office of the General Office of the General Office of the General Office of the General Office of the General Office of the General Office of the General Office of the General Office of the General Office of the General Office of the General Office of the General Office of the General Office of the General Office of the General Office of the General Office of the General Office of the General Office of the General Office of the General Office

古文：元颖，淹之六世孙也。
现代文：杜元颖是唐太宗时宰相杜淹的第六代孙。
English: Du Yuanying is the sixth generation grandchild of Du Ruan, the prime minister during the reign of Emperor Taizong of Tang.

古文：回鹘保义可汗卒。
现代文：回鹘国保义可汗去世。
English: Uighur country's Hoyi Khan passed away.

古文：三月，癸丑，以刘总兼侍中，充天平节度使。以宣武节度使张弘靖为卢龙节度使。
现代文：三月，癸丑，唐穆宗任命刘总兼侍中，充任天平节度使；任命宣武节度使张弘靖为卢龙节度使。
English: In March, at the end of the year, Tang Mu Zong appointed Liu Zong and Jizhong to serve as the Tianping Festival envoy; and appointed Zhang Hongjing as the Lulong Festival envoy to the Xuanwu Festival envoy.

古文：乙卯，以权知京兆尹卢士玫为瀛莫观察使。
现代文：乙卯，任命代理京兆尹卢士玫为瀛莫观察使。
English: Second, the appointment of acting Beijing Zhao Yin Lusi Mei as the observation envoy of Xiamen.

古文：丁已，诏刘总兄弟子侄皆除官，大将僚佐亦宜超擢，百姓给复一年，军士赐钱一百万缗。
现代文：丁巳，唐穆宗下诏：刘总的兄弟子侄全都授官，大将和僚佐也都应予以越级提拔，百姓免除一年赋税，兵士赏赐钱一百万缗。
English: Ding Si, Tang Mu Zong issued an edict: Liu Zong's brothers, sons and nephews should all be promoted to higher ranks, the general and his assistant should also be promoted to higher ranks, the people should be exempted from paying taxes for one year, and the soldiers should be rewarded with one million baht.

古文：戊午，立皇弟憬为鄜王，悦为琼王，惸为沔王，怿为婺王，愔为茂王，怡为光王，协为淄王，憺为衢王，惋为澶王；皇子湛为景王，涵为江王，凑为漳王，溶为安王，瀍为颍王。
现代文：戊午，唐穆宗立自己的弟弟李憬为王，李悦为琼王，李为沔王，李怿为婺王，李为茂王，李怡为光王，李协为淄王，李为衢王，李惋为澶王。立儿子李湛为景王，李涵为江王，李凑为漳王，李溶为安王，李为颍王。
English: In the afternoon, Tang Mu Zong appointed his younger brother Li Jing as king, Li Yue as king of Qiong, Li Wei as king of Qiong, Li Qian as king of Qiong, Li Mao as king of Mao, Li Yi as king of Guang, Li Xie as king of Qiong, Li Wei as king of Qiong, Li Yan as king of Qiong, and appointed his son Li Zhan as king of Jing, Li Han as king of Jiang, Li Bin as king of Qiong, Li Rong as king of An, and Li Yao as king of Qiong.

古文：刘总奏恳乞为僧，且以其私第为佛寺。
现代文：刘总上奏，恳求穆宗批准自己为僧，同时请求批准以自己的私人住宅为佛寺。
English: At the beginning of the performance, Liu Zong implored Mu Zong to approve him as a monk, and at the same time requested approval to use his private residence as a Buddhist temple.

古文：诏赐总名大觉，寺名报恩，遣中使以紫僧服及天平节钺、侍中告身并赐之，惟其所择。
现代文：穆宗下诏，赐刘总的名字叫大觉，佛寺的名字叫报恩寺，派遣宦官带着紫色的僧服以及天平节度使的符节和侍中的任命书授予刘总，由他选择。
English: Mu Zong decreed that the name given to Liu Chong was Da Jue, the name of the Buddhist temple was Baon Temple, and sent eunuchs with purple robes, as well as the symbols of the scales and the appointment letter of the attendants to Liu Chong, to be chosen by him.

古文：诏未至，总已削发为僧，将士欲遮留之，总杀其唱帅者十馀人，夜，以印节授留后张，遁去。
现代文：诏书尚未到达幽州，刘总已经剃发做了和尚。将士想遮拦强留刘总，刘总杀死将士中为首者十几个人。当夜，他把节度使的大印和符节授予留后张，然后逃走。
English: The imperial edict had not yet reached Yuzhou, but Liu Zong had already shaved his head and become a monk. The generals wanted to block Liu Zong and force him to stay, but Liu Zong killed more than a dozen of the generals. That night, he gave the seal and symbols of the festival to Zhang Zuo, and then fled.

古文：及明，军中始知之。
现代文：等到天明，军中才知道他已逃亡的消息。
English: It was not until dawn that the army learned that he had escaped.

古文：奏总不知所在。
现代文：张上奏，称刘总去向不明。
English: Zhang went on to say that Liu's whereabouts were unknown.

古文：癸亥，卒于定州之境。
现代文：癸亥，刘总死于定州境内。
English: In the meantime, Liu Zong died in Dingzhou.

古文：翰林学士李德裕，吉甫之子也，以中书舍人李宗闵尝对策讥切其父，恨之。
现代文：翰林学士李德裕是李吉甫的儿子，鉴于中书舍人李宗闵曾经在元和三年科举考试的对策中讽刺他的父亲，十分痛恨。
English: Li Deyu, a scholar of Hanlin, is the son of Li Jifu. In view of the fact that Li Zongyao, a Chinese scholar, had satirized his father in the countermeasures of the Yuan and Three-Year Examinations, he hated him very much.

古文：宗闵又与翰林学士元稹争进取有隙。
现代文：李宗闵又与翰林学士元稹争官，二人产生矛盾。
English: Li Zongyao also quarreled with Hanlin Baozhongyuan, and the two had conflicts.

古文：右补阙杨汝士与礼部侍郎钱徽掌贡举，西川节度使段文昌、翰林学士李绅各以书属所善进士于徽；及榜出，文昌、绅所属皆不预焉，及第者，郑朗，覃之弟；裴譔，度之子；苏巢，宗闵之婿；杨殷士，汝士之弟也。
现代文：这一年，右补阙杨汝士和礼部侍郎钱徽二人主持进士考试。西川节度使段文昌、翰林学士李绅分别给钱徽写信，推荐自己所亲近的考生。等到放榜后，文昌和李绅所推荐的考生都落选了，中榜的进士当中：郑朗中郑覃的弟弟；裴撰是裴度的儿子；苏巢是李宗闵的女婿；杨殷士是杨汝士的弟弟。
English: In this year, Yang Ruxi, the right assistant and Qian Hui, the attendant of the ceremonial department, presided over the entrance examination. Xichuan Jiedu sent Duan Wenchang and Hanlin Scholar Li Sheng to write to Qian Hui to recommend candidates close to him. After the list was released, the candidates recommended by Wenchang and Li Sheng were not selected. Among the candidates in the middle of the list: Zheng Lang, the younger brother of Zheng Xi; Pei Sheng is the son of Pei Duo; Su Xing is the son-in-law of Li Zongyao; Yang Yin Shi is the younger brother of Yang

古文：文昌言于上曰： 今岁礼部殊不公，所取进士皆子弟无艺，以关节得之。 
现代文：段文昌对唐穆宗说： 今年，礼部考试很不公正，所录取的进士都是朝廷公卿大臣的子弟，没有才能，靠行贿和托人情才考中的。 
English: Duan Wenchang said to Tang Muzong, "This year, the examination of the etiquette department is very unfair. The students who have been admitted are all the sons of court nobles and ministers. They have no talent, and they only passed the examination by paying bribes and asking for favors.

古文：上以问诸学士，德裕、稹、绅皆曰： 诚如文昌言。 
现代文：穆宗将段文昌所说的情况问翰林诸位学士，李德裕、元稹、李绅都异口同说： 确实像文昌说的那样。 
English: When Mu Zong asked Hanlin and other scholars about what Duan Wenchang had said, Li Deyu, Yuan Qi, and Li Sheng all said the same thing: It is indeed as Wenchang said.

古文：上乃命中书舍人王起等覆试。
现代文：于是，穆宗命中书舍人王起等人复试。
English: As a result, Mu Zong ordered Wang Qi, a scholar, to retake the exam.

古文：夏，四月，丁丑，诏黜朗等十人，贬徽江州刺史，宗闵剑州刺史，汝士开江令。
现代文：夏季，四月，丁丑，下诏废除郑朗等十个进士，贬钱徽为江州刺史；李宗闵为剑州刺史，杨汝士为开江令。
English: In the summer, in April, in Dingwuxi, Zheng Lang and other ten Jin soldiers were abolished by the next edict, and the Qianhui was designated as the history of Jiangzhou; Li Zongyao was designated as the history of Jianzhou, and Yang Rushi was designated as the order to open the river.

古文：或劝徽奏文昌、绅属书，上必悟。
现代文：有人劝钱徽向朝廷揭发段文昌、李绅曾写信为自己的亲友请托，认为这样的话，皇上必定会明白是非曲直，收回诏书。
English: Some people advised Qian Hui to reveal to the imperial court that Duan Wenchang and Li Sheng had written a letter to ask for their relatives and friends, believing that in this case, the emperor would certainly understand the rights and wrongs and withdraw the imperial rescript.

古文：徽曰： 苟元愧心，得丧一致，奈何奏人私书，岂士君子所为邪！ 
现代文：钱徽说： 如果我问心无愧，无论升官还是贬官，都无所谓，为什么要去揭发人家的私人信件？这难道是士大夫和君子所应当干的事吗？ 
English: Qian Hui said: If I have a clear conscience, it does not matter whether I am promoted or demoted, why should I expose other people's private letters? Is this what a scholar and a gentleman should do?

古文：取而焚之，时人多之。
现代文：说完，就把段文昌和李绅的信拿出来烧了，当时的人都称赞他有君子的风度。
English: When he had finished, he took out the letters from Duan Wenchang and Li Sheng and burned them. People at the time praised him for his gentlemanly demeanor.

古文：绅，敬玄之曾孙；起，播之弟也。
现代文：李绅是唐高宗时宰相李敬玄的曾孙；王起是王播的弟弟。
English: Li Sheng was the great-grandson of Li Jingxuan, the prime minister of Tang Gaozong; Wang Qi was the younger brother of Wang Bi.

古文：自是德裕、宗闵各分朋党，更相倾轧，垂四十年。
现代文：从此以后，李德裕和李宗闵二人各分为朋党，相互倾轧，近四十年。
English: From then on, the two men, Li Deyu and Li Zongtao, were divided into cronies and fought with each other for nearly forty years.

古文：丙戌，册回鹘嗣君为登啰羽录没密施句主毘伽崇德可汗。
现代文：丙戌，唐穆宗册命回鹘国的新任君主为登羽录没密施句主毗伽崇德可汗。
English: According to the Tang and Mu dynasties, the new monarch of Huizhou was Vijay Chongde Khan.

古文：五月，丙申朔，回鹘遣都督、宰相等五百馀人来逆公主。
现代文：五月，丙申朔，回鹘国派遣都督、宰相五百人来唐迎接公主。
English: In May, Bishenshuo, Hubei Province sent 500 people, including the governor and prime minister, to Tang to welcome the princess.

古文：壬子，盐铁使王播奏：约榷茶额，每百钱加税五十。
现代文：壬子，盐铁使王播上奏：国家茶叶专卖的税收数额，大约每一百文可加税钱五十文。
English: Jinsi, salt iron makes Wang Wang play: the amount of tax on the national tea monopoly, about every hundred coins can add 50 coins of tax.

古文：右拾遗李珏等上疏，以为 榷茶近起贞元多事之际，今天下无虞，所宜宽横敛之目，而更增之，百姓何时当得息肩！ 
现代文：右拾遗李珏等人上疏，认为： 茶叶专卖始于贞元年间朝廷多难的时期，现在，天下太平，应当减少横征暴敛的赋税数量，却反而增加，那么，百姓什么时候才能减轻负担呢？ 
English: Some scholars, such as Li Wei and others, believe that: The tea monopoly began in the difficult period of the imperial court during the Zhengyuan period. Now that the world is at peace, the amount of tax collection should be reduced, but it has increased. So, when will the people be able to reduce the burden?

古文：不从。
现代文：穆宗不听。
English: Le Zhu Rong did not listen.

古文：丙辰，建王恪薨。
现代文：丙辰，建王李恪去世。
English: Xing Chen, Jian Wang and Li Ke passed away.

古文：癸亥，以太和长公主嫁回鹘。
现代文：癸亥，唐穆宗命以太和长公主出嫁回鹘国可汗。
English: In the year of the Rooster, Tang Mu Zong's Ether and the eldest princess married and returned to the Khan of the Rooster Kingdom.

古文：公主，上之妹也。
现代文：公主，即穆宗的妹妹。
English: The princess, i.e. Muzong's younger sister.

古文：吐蕃闻唐与回鹘婚，六月，辛未，寇青寨堡，盐州刺史李文悦击却之。
现代文：吐蕃国听到唐朝和回鹘国通婚的消息，六月，辛未，出兵侵犯青寨堡，盐州刺史李文悦率兵击退吐蕃兵。
English: When Tubo Province heard the news of the marriage between the Tang Dynasty and Hui Province, in June, Xin Wei sent troops to invade Qingzhai Fort, and Li Wenyue, the governor of Yanzhou, led the troops to repel Tubo soldiers.

古文：戊寅，回鹘奏： 以万骑出北庭，万骑出安西，拒吐蕃以迎公主。 
现代文：戊寅，回鹘国上奏： 我国已经出动一万名骑兵到北庭，一万名骑兵到安西，抵抗吐蕃侵扰，以便迎接公主。 
English: Wu Yin, the Empress of the State of Yunnan: Our country has dispatched ten thousand cavalry to Beiting, and ten thousand cavalry to Anxi, to resist the invasion of Tu Wei, in order to welcome the princess.

古文：初，刘总奏分所属为三道：以幽、涿、营为一道，请除张弘靖为节度使；平、蓟、妫、檀为一道，请除平卢节度使薛平为节度使；瀛、莫为一道，请除权知京兆尹卢士玫为观察使。
现代文：当初，幽州节度使刘总上奏，建议将幽州所管辖的州县分为三道：幽州、涿州、营州为一道，请求任命张弘靖为节度使；平州、蓟州、妫州、檀州为一道，请求任命平卢节度使薛平为节度使；瀛州、莫州为一道，请求任命代理京兆尹卢士玫为观察使。
English: At first, the Yuzhou Festival Committee asked Liu Shougang to make a report, suggesting that the prefectures and counties under the jurisdiction of Yuzhou should be divided into three provinces: Yuzhou, Zhangzhou and Yingzhou together, requesting the appointment of Zhang Hongjing as the Festival Committee; Pingzhou, Zhangzhou, Zhangzhou and Danzhou together, requesting the appointment of Pinglu Festival Committee and Xueping as the Festival Committee; Zhangzhou and Muzhou together, requesting the appointment of acting Beijing Zhao Yin Lusmei as the observer.

古文：弘靖先在河东，以宽简得众，总与之邻境，闻其风望，以燕人桀骜日久，故举弘靖自代以安辑之。
现代文：张弘靖过去河东做节度使时，对部下宽容大度，因而得到将士的拥戴。幽州与河东相邻，刘总听说张弘靖在河东的情况，考虑到幽州人桀骜不驯已天长日久，因此，推荐张弘靖代替自己，以便能够安抚将士。
English: In the past, when Zhang Hongjing was sent to Hedong as a festival envoy, he was tolerant and generous to his subordinates, and thus won the support of the soldiers. Yuzhou is adjacent to Hedong. President Liu heard about the situation of Zhang Hongjing in Hedong. Considering that the people of Yuzhou have not been tamed for a long time, he recommended Zhang Hongjing to replace himself in order to appease the soldiers.

古文：平，嵩之子，知河朔风俗，而尽诚于国。
现代文：薛平是唐代宗时相卫节度使薛嵩的儿子，熟悉河朔地区的风俗习惯，所以推荐他来幽州任职。
English: Xue Ping was the son of Xue Song, the head of the Tang Dynasty Zongji Xiang Wei sect, and was familiar with the customs and habits of the Hexuo region, so he recommended him to work in Yuzhou.

古文：士玫，则总妻族之亲也。
现代文：卢士玫是刘总妻子家族的亲戚。
English: Lu Shimei is a relative of Liu's wife's family.

古文：总又尽择麾下宿将有功伉健难制者都知兵马使硃克融等送之京师，乞加奖拔，使燕人有慕羡朝廷禄位之志。
现代文：刘总又把部下骄纵强横难以管辖的将士，如都知兵马使朱克融等人全部挑选出来，送到京城，请朝廷奖励并予以提拔，以便让幽州人都能产生羡慕朝廷官爵俸禄的意向。
English: General Liu also selected all of his subordinates who were arrogant, domineering, and difficult to control, such as Zhu Kehong, the military commander of the Du Chi, and sent them to Beijing to ask the court to reward and promote them, so that the people of Yuzhou could have the intention of envying the salary of the court officials.

古文：又献征马万五千匹，然后削发委去。
现代文：同时，他又向朝廷奉献战马一万五千匹，然后，剃发离开幽州。
English: At the same time, he also dedicated 15,000 horses to the imperial court, and then left Yuzhou with his hair shaved.

古文：克融，滔之孙也。
现代文：朱克融是唐德宗时幽州节度使朱滔的孙子。
English: Zhu Ke Rong was the grandson of Zhu Tao, the governor of Yuzhou at the time of Tang Dezong.

古文：是时上方酣宴，不留意天下之务，崔植、杜元颖无远略，不知安危大体，苟崇重弘靖，惟割瀛、莫二州，以士玫领之，自馀皆统于弘靖。
现代文：这时，唐穆宗整天沉湎于酒宴之中，不大留意天下的政务，宰相崔植、杜元颖缺乏深谋远虑，没有考虑朝政的安危大局，只是想尊崇张弘靖官位，于是，仅仅把瀛州、莫州从幽州节度使管辖的地区中分割出来，由卢士玫统辖，其余各州，都由张弘靖统领。
English: At this time, Tang Mu Zong indulged in the wine banquet all day long, paying little attention to the world's political affairs. The prime ministers Cui Zhi and Du Yuan Ying lacked foresight, did not consider the overall situation of the safe and secure government of the dynasty, but only wanted to respect Zhang Hongjing's official position. Therefore, only Zhangzhou and Mozhou were divided from the areas under the jurisdiction of the Yuzhou Festival and were controlled by Lu Shimei, and the remaining states were led by Zhang Hongjing.

古文：硃克融等久羁旅京师，至假丐衣食，日诣中书求官，植、元颖不之省。
现代文：朱克融等人在京城客居很久，窘迫到借衣讨食的地步，每天到中书省去请求授予官职，崔植、杜元颖不理。
English: Zhu Ke Rong and others stayed in Beijing for a long time. They were so embarrassed that they had to borrow clothes to beg for food. They went to the Chinese Academy of Letters every day to ask for an official post, but Cui Zhi and Du Yuan Ying ignored them.

古文：及除弘靖幽州，勒克融辈归本军驱使，克融辈皆愤怨。
现代文：等到朝廷正式任命张弘靖为幽州节度使，勒令朱克融等人归回幽州，受张弘靖指使效力。朱克融等人十分怨怒。
English: When the imperial court officially appointed Zhang Hongjing as the Yuzhou Festival envoy, Zhu Ke Rong and others were ordered to return to Yuzhou and serve under Zhang Hongjing. Zhu Ke Rong and others were very angry.

古文：先是，河北节度使皆亲冒寒暑，与士卒均劳逸。
现代文：以前，幽州节度使都能冒着严寒酷暑，亲自和士卒同甘共苦。
English: In the past, the Yuzhou Festival made it possible for everyone to brave the cold and heat, and personally share the joys and sorrows with the soldiers.

古文：及弘靖至，雍容骄贵，肩舆于万众之中，燕人讶之。
现代文：等到张弘靖来到幽州上任后，却雍容闲雅，傲慢华贵，乘轿出入于众人之中，幽州人很看不惯，十分惊讶。
English: When Zhang Hongjing came to Yuzhou after taking office, he was leisurely and elegant, arrogant and gorgeous, and rode in and out of the crowd by car. Yuzhou people were very uncomfortable and very surprised.

古文：弘靖庄默自尊，涉旬乃一出坐决事，宾客将吏罕得闻其言，情意不接，政事多委之幕僚。
现代文：张弘靖庄重自尊，每十天才到节度使府办分处理军政事务一次，他的幕僚和部下将吏很难听到他说话，因此，上下关系很不融洽，日常政务大多委托他的幕僚处理。
English: Zhang Hongjing was so dignified and self-respecting that he only came to the embassy to deal with military and political affairs once every ten days. It was difficult for his staff and subordinate officers to hear him speak. As a result, the relationship between the top and bottom was very poor, and most of the daily government affairs were entrusted to his staff.

古文：而所辟判官韦雍辈多年少轻薄之士，嗜酒豪纵，出入传呼甚盛，或夜归烛火满街，皆燕人所不习也。
现代文：他所任命的判官韦雍等人大多都是年少轻浮的人，嗜好饮酒奢侈，行为放纵，进出官府时，随从传叫呼喊，十分隆重，有时夜间从外面回来，烛火满街。这些，都是幽州人所不习惯的。
English: Most of the judges appointed by him, such as Wei Yong, are young and frivolous people, with a penchant for drinking, luxury, and indulgent behavior. When they enter and leave the government office, they are accompanied by shouts and shouts, which are very grand. Sometimes they come back from outside at night, and the streets are full of candles. These are all things that Yuzhou people are not used to.

古文：诏以钱百万缗赐将士，弘靖留其二十万缗充军府杂用，雍辈复裁刻军士粮赐，绳之以法，数以反虏诟责吏卒，谓军士曰： 今天下太平，汝曹能挽两石弓，不若识一丁字！ 
现代文：穆宗下诏赐将士钱一百万缗，张弘靖截留其中二十万缗，充作切度使府杂用。韦雍等人又克扣兵士的军粮，将士不满，动不动就绳之以法，并经常嘲笑责骂官吏和士卒为反虏，他们对兵士说： 现在天下太平，你们虽然能拉开两石的强弓，但不如认识一个字。 
English: Mu Zong issued an edict to give the soldiers one million baht, of which Zhang Hongjing retained two hundred thousand baht for miscellaneous use. Wei Yong and others also withheld soldiers' military rations. The soldiers were dissatisfied and were brought to justice at every turn. They often mocked and scolded officials and soldiers for being rebels. They said to the soldiers: Now the world is at peace. Although you can pull a strong bow with two stones, it is not as good as knowing one word.

古文：由是军中人人怨怒。
现代文：于是，军中将士人人怨恨愤怒。
English: As a result, the lieutenant generals were filled with resentment and anger.

