古文：既识神骨，当辨刚柔。
现代文：已经鉴识神骨之后，应当再进一步辨别刚柔。
English: Once the skeleton has been identified, it is necessary to further distinguish between hardness and softness.

古文：刚柔，则五行生克之数，名曰 先天种子 ，不足用补，有余用泄。
现代文：刚柔源于五行相生相克，道家叫做 先天种子 ，刚柔不足的要增补它，若是过了头要消泄它，使之刚柔平衡，五行如谐。
English: Stiffness and softness originate from the five elements, which are in conflict with each other. Taoists call it the innate seed. If there is insufficient stiffness and softness, it should be supplemented. If it is excessive, it should be eliminated, so that the stiffness and softness are balanced, and the five elements are in harmony.

古文：消息与命相通，此其较然易见者。
现代文：刚柔的状态和阴阳的消长与人的命运相通，如果能辨识它就可以更好地观察人了。
English: The state of rigidity and softness and the ebb and flow of yin and yang are intertwined with a person's fate. If you can identify it, you can observe people better.

古文：五行有合法，木合火，水合木，此顺而合。顺者多富，即贵亦在浮沉之间。
现代文：五行只见相生相克，这种关系称为 合 ，而 合 又有顺合与逆合之分，如木生火、水生木，金生水，土生金，火生土，这辗转相生就是顺有顺合之相的人大多富裕，但是却不会显贵，就算显贵，也总是浮浮沉沉、升升降降，难于保持永久。
English: The five elements only see each other and oppose each other. This relationship is called "conjunction," and "conjunction" is also divided into "conjunction" and "opposite conjunction." For example, wood begets fire, water begets wood, gold begets water, earth begets gold, fire begets earth. This "reciprocal conjunction" means that people who have the phase of "conjunction" are mostly affluent, but they will not be distinguished. Even if they are distinguished, they will always be floating and sinking, rising and falling, and it is difficult to maintain them permanently.

古文：金与火仇，有时合火，推之水土者皆然，此逆而合者，其贵非常。
现代文：金仇火，有时金也需要火，如金无火炼不成器的道理一样，类而推之，水与土等等之间的关系都是这样，这就是逆合，有逆合之相的人往往显贵非常。
English: Gold chases fire, sometimes gold also needs fire, just like the principle that gold cannot be refined without fire, and by analogy, the relationship between water and earth, etc. are all like this. This is the converse, and people with the converse are often very distinguished.

古文：然所谓逆合者，金形带火则然，火形带金，则三十死矣；水形带土则然，土形带水，则孤寡终老矣；木形带金则然，金形带木，则刀剑随身矣。
现代文：然而在上述的逆合之相中，如果是金形人带有火形之相，便非常高贵，相反，如果是火形人带有金形之相，那么年龄到了岁就会死亡；如果是水形人带有土形之相，便会非常高贵，相反，如果是土形人带有水形之相，那么就会一辈子孤寡无依；如果是木形人带有金形之相，便会非常高贵，相反，如果是金形人带有木形之相，那么就会有刀剑之灾，杀身之祸。
English: However, in the above inversion, if it is a golden man with a fire-shaped face, it is very noble, on the contrary, if it is a fire-shaped man with a gold-shaped face, it will die when it is old; if it is a water-shaped man with a soil-shaped face, it will be very noble, on the contrary, if it is a soil-shaped man with a water-shaped face, it will be lonely for a lifetime; if it is a wood-shaped man with a gold-shaped face, it will be very noble, on the contrary, if it is a golden man with a wood-shaped face, then there will be a sword disaster,

古文：此外牵合，俱是杂格，不入文人正论。
现代文：至于除此之外的那些牵强附会的说法，都是杂凑的模式，不能归入文人的正宗理论。
English: As for the other far-fetched theories, they are all patchwork models and cannot be classified as the writer's authentic theory.

古文：五行为外刚柔，内刚柔，则喜怒、跳伏、深浅者是也。
现代文：前面所说的五行，是人的阳刚和阴柔之气的外在表现，即是所谓 外刚柔 。内刚柔指的是人喜怒的情感、激动或平静的情绪和有时深、有时浅的心机或城府。
English: The above-mentioned five elements are the external manifestation of man's masculine and feminine qualities, that is, the so-called external masculinity and femininity. Internal masculinity and femininity refer to people's emotions of joy and anger, excitement or calm mood, and sometimes deep, sometimes shallow heart or city.

古文：喜高怒重，过目辄忘，近 粗 。
现代文：喜怒情感表现得很强烈，但又转瞬即逝的人，这种人阳刚之气太盛，其气质接近于 粗鲁 。
English: A man whose emotions are intense but short-lived is too masculine, verging on the boorish.

古文：伏亦不伉，跳亦不扬，近 蠢 。
现代文：平静的时候没有一点张扬之气，该兴奋的时候也昂扬不起来，这种人阴柔之气太盛，其气质接近于 愚蠢 。
English: When he is calm, he is not at all ostentatious, and when he is excited, he does not get excited. This kind of person is too effeminate, and his temperament is close to "stupid."

古文：初念甚浅，转念甚深，近 奸 。
现代文：考虑事情时候开始想得很浅，然而一转念又能深思熟虑。
English: When I think about things, I start to think very shallowly, but I can think deeply when I change my mind.

古文：内奸者，功名可期。
现代文：这种人阳刚与阴柔并济较为机智。
English: This kind of person is more witty when masculine and feminine are combined.

古文：粗蠢各半者，胜人以寿。纯奸能豁达，其人终成。
现代文：内心机智的人外柔内刚，遇事能进能退，能屈能伸，日后必会功成名就。
English: People with inner wit are soft on the outside and tough on the inside. In times of trouble, they can advance and retreat, can bend and stretch, and will surely become famous in the future.

古文：纯粗无周密，半途必弃。
现代文：既粗鲁又愚蠢的人，刚柔皆能支配其心，他们乐天知命，因此其寿命往往超过常人。
English: People who are both rude and stupid, both strong and soft, can control their hearts. They are optimistic about life, so their life expectancy often exceeds that of ordinary people.

古文：观人所忽，十有九八矣。
现代文：十分机智的人倘若豁然达观，就会有不凡的成就。
English: People who are very resourceful can achieve extraordinary results if they suddenly come to their senses.

