古文：元年春，王正月，公即位。
现代文：哀公元年春季，周历正月，哀公即位。
English: In the spring of the first year, the first month of the lunar calendar, Wenkong succeeded to the throne.

古文：楚子、陈侯、随侯、许男围蔡。
现代文：楚子、陈侯、随侯、许男出兵包围蔡国。
English: Chu Tzu, Chen Hou, Sui Hou and Xu An sent troops to encircle Cai Guo.

古文：鼷鼠食郊牛，改卜牛。
现代文：鼷鼠咬伤了祭祀天地用的牛，重新占十一头牛。
English: A mole has bitten a cow that is used in the worship of heaven and earth, resulting in the recapture of eleven cows.

古文：夏四月辛巳，郊。
现代文：夏季四月辛巳日，祭祀天地。
English: In the summer, on April Shinmei Day, the heavens and earth are worshipped.

古文：秋，齐侯、卫侯伐晋。
现代文：秋季，齐侯、卫侯出兵攻打晋国。
English: In autumn, Qi Hou and Wei Hou sent troops to attack Jin.

古文：冬，仲孙何忌帅师伐邾。
现代文：冬季，仲孙何忌率领军队攻打邾国。
English: In the winter, Zhongsun He Boi led an army to attack Shandong.

古文：元年春，楚子围蔡，报伯举也。
现代文：元年春季，楚昭王发兵包围蔡国国都，这是为了报复柏举那次战役。
English: In the spring of the first year of the year, King Chu Zhao sent troops to surround the capital of Cai Guo Guo, this was in order to take revenge for the battle.

古文：里而栽，广丈高倍。
现代文：离城一里建筑堡垒，宽一丈，高二丈。
English: A mile away from the city, a fortress was built, one story wide and two stories high.

古文：夫屯昼夜九日，如子西之素。
现代文：役夫屯驻九昼夜，和子西的预定计划一样。
English: The attendant was stationed for nine days and nights, the same as Zixi's predetermined plan.

古文：蔡人男女以辨，使疆于江、汝之间而还。
现代文：蔡国人把男女奴隶分别排列捆绑作为礼物出降。楚昭王让蔡国迁移到长江、汝水之间就回去了。
English: Cai Guo's men and women slaves were lined up and tied separately as a gift. King Chu Zhao had Cai Guo move to the Yangtze River, and he returned between the two rivers.

古文：蔡于是乎请迁于吴。
现代文：蔡国因此向吴国请求迁移到吴国去。
English: Cai Guo therefore requested Wu Guo to relocate to Wu Guo.

古文：吴王夫差败越于夫椒，报槜李也。
现代文：吴王夫差在夫椒打败越军，报复在檇李被越国打败的仇恨。
English: Wu Wangfuchai defeated the Vietnamese army in Fujao, and avenged the hatred of being defeated by the Vietnamese country in Shili.

古文：遂入越。
现代文：接着，吴军就乘势攻打越国。
English: Next, the Wu army took advantage of the situation to attack Yue.

古文：越子以甲楯五千，保于会稽。使大夫种因吴大宰嚭以行成，吴子将许之。
现代文：越王带着披甲持盾的士兵五千人踞守在会稽山，派大夫种通过吴国太宰嚭而向吴国求和。
English: King Yue, with five thousand soldiers in armor and shields, stood guard at Heji Mountain, and sent a delegation to sue for peace from the State of Wu through the State Council of Wu.

古文：伍员曰： 不可。
现代文：吴王打算答应越国的请求。伍员说： 不行。
English: Wu Wang was about to agree to Yue Guo's request. The soldier said, "No."

古文：臣闻树德莫如滋，去疾莫如尽。
现代文：下臣听说： 建树德行最好不断增加，除去邪恶最好彻底干净。 
English: The vassal heard: It is best to constantly increase the virtue of building trees, and it is best to completely clean up the evil.

古文：昔有过浇杀斟灌以伐斟，灭夏后相。后方娠，逃出自窦，归于有仍，生少康焉，为仍牧正。
现代文：从前有过国的国君浇杀了斟灌而攻打斟，灭亡了夏后相，后缗正怀着孕，从城墙的小洞里逃出去，回到娘家有仍国，生了少康。
English: Once upon a time, there was a king of a country who killed the king of a country and attacked the king of a country, and the king of a country died, and the queen of a country died, and the queen of a country was pregnant, and she escaped from a small hole in the city wall and returned to her mother's house. She still had a country and gave birth to Shokang.

古文：惎浇，能戒之。浇使椒求之，逃奔有虞，为之庖正，以除其害。
现代文：少康后来在有仍做了管理畜牧的官，对浇满怀仇恨而能警惕戒备。
English: Later, Shokang still served as the official in charge of animal husbandry in You, and he was able to be vigilant and alert against hatred.

古文：虞思于是妻之以二姚，而邑诸纶。有田一成，有众一旅，能布其德，而兆其谋，以收夏众，抚其官职。使女艾谍浇，使季杼诱豷，遂灭过、戈，复禹之绩。
现代文：浇派椒寻找少康，少康逃奔到有虞国，做了那里掌管庖厨的长官，才逃避了浇的杀害，虞思因此把两个女儿嫁给了他，封他在纶邑，拥有方圆十里的土田，有五百人的兵力，能广施恩德，并开始实施复国计划。他收集夏朝的余部，安抚他的官员，派遣女艾到浇那里去做间谍，派季杼去引诱浇的弟弟豷。这样就灭亡了过国、戈国，复兴了禹的事业。
English: Gu Si married his two daughters to him, made him a vassal, owned a ten-mile radius of farmland, had a force of five hundred men, was able to extend kindness, and began to implement a plan for the restoration of the country. He gathered the remnants of the Xia Dynasty, pacified his officials, sent his daughter Ai to Gui to spy, and sent Ji Yao to seduce Gui's brother Yao. In this way, Gui's country and Guo's country were destroyed, and Yu's cause was revived.

古文：祀夏配天，不失旧物。
现代文：对有功劳的人从不抛弃而加以亲近。
English: Never abandon a meritorious person, but draw close to him.

古文：今吴不如过，而越大于少康，或将丰之，不亦难乎。句践能亲而务施，施不失人，亲不弃劳，与我同壤而世为仇雠，于是乎克而弗取，将又存之，违天而长寇仇，后虽悔之，不可食已。
现代文：越国和我国土地相连，而又世世代代是仇敌。在这种情况下如果我们战胜越国而不灭亡它，又准备保存下去，这是违背了无意而又助长了仇敌，以后即使懊悔，也来不及消除祸患了。
English: Viet Nam is connected to our land, and has been an enemy for generations. If we defeat Viet Nam under these circumstances, but do not destroy it, and are prepared to preserve it, we will have inadvertently committed treason and aided the enemy. Even if we repent later, it will be too late to eliminate the evil.

古文：姬之衰也，日可俟也。
现代文：姬姓的衰微，为时不远了。
English: The decline of the Hime surname is not far off.

古文：介在蛮夷，而长寇仇，以是求伯，必不行矣。 
现代文：我国介于蛮夷之间，而还去助长仇敌的发展，用这样的办法来求取霸业，必定是办不到的。 
English: Our country is between barbarians and barbarians, but we still help the development of the enemy. Using such a method to seek hegemony is certainly impossible.

古文：弗听。
现代文：吴王夫差不听。
English: He did not listen to the words of the crown prince.

古文：退而告人曰： 越十年生聚，而十年教训，二十年之外，吴其为沼乎！ 
现代文：伍员退下去告诉别人说： 越国用十年时间繁衍积聚，用十年时间教育训练，二十年以后，吴国的宫殿恐怕要成为池沼了。 
English: The soldier retreated and told the others, "Yue spent ten years breeding and accumulating, and ten years educating and training. After twenty years, the palace of Wu will probably become a swamp.

古文：三月，越及吴平。
现代文：三月，越国和吴国讲和。
English: In March, Yue and Wu made peace.

古文：吴入越，不书，吴不告庆，越不告败也。
现代文：吴国进入越国，《春秋》不加记载，这是由于吴国没有报告胜利，越国没有报告失败。
English: "Spring and Autumn" did not record the entry of Wu into Yue, because Wu did not report victory and Yue did not report defeat.

古文：夏四月，齐侯、卫侯救邯郸，围五鹿。
现代文：夏季，四月，齐景公、卫灵公救援邯郸，包围五鹿。
English: In the summer, in April, Qi Jing Gong and Wei Ling Gong came to the rescue and surrounded Wulu.

古文：吴之入楚也，使召陈怀公。
现代文：吴国进入楚国的时候，派人召见陈怀公。
English: When the State of Wu entered the State of Chu, it sent someone to summon Chen Huai Gong.

古文：怀公朝国人而问焉，曰： 欲与楚者右，欲与吴者左。 
现代文：怀公向国内的人们征求意见，说： 想要亲附楚国的站到右边。想要亲附吴国的站到左边。
English: Huai Gong solicited opinions from people in the country, saying: If you want to be close to the state of Chu, stand on the right. If you want to be close to the state of Wu, stand on the left.

古文：陈人从田，无田从党。
现代文：陈国人有土田的，根据土田的所在而分立左右，没有土田的和亲族站在一起。 
English: The people of Chen nationality who have their own farms are divided into right and left according to the location of the farm. Those who do not have their own farms stand together with their relatives.

古文：逢滑当公而进，曰： 臣闻国之兴也以福，其亡也以祸。今吴未有福，楚未有祸。楚未可弃，吴未可从。
现代文：逢滑正对着怀公走上前去，说： 下臣听说，国家的兴起由于福德，它的灭亡由于祸殃，现在吴国还没有福德，楚国还没有祸殃，楚国还不能抛弃，吴国还不能跟从。
English: Fenglu walked up to Huai Gong and said, "Your vassal has heard that the rise of a country is due to its good fortune, and its downfall is due to its misfortune. At present, Wu has no good fortune, Chu has no misfortune, Chu cannot be abandoned, and Wu cannot follow.

古文：而晋，盟主也，若以晋辞吴，若何？ 
现代文：晋国是盟主，如果用晋国作为借口而辞谢吴国，怎么样？ 
English: Jin is the leader of the alliance. If Jin is used as an excuse to abandon Wu, what will happen?

古文：公曰： 国胜君亡，非祸而何？ 
现代文：怀公说： 国家被吴国战胜，国君逃亡，这不是祸殃是什么？ 
English: Huai Gong said: The country was defeated by the State of Wu, and the sovereign fled. Isn't this a calamity?

古文：对曰： 国之有是多矣，何必不复。
现代文：逢滑回答说： 国家有这种情况的太多了，为什么一定不能恢复？
English: "There are too many countries with this kind of situation, so why can't it be restored?"

古文：小国犹复，况大国乎？
现代文：小国尚且能恢复，何况大国呢？
English: Small countries can recover, but what about big countries?

古文：臣闻国之兴也，视民如伤，是其福也。
现代文：下臣听说，国家的兴起，看待百姓如同受伤者而不加惊动，这就是它的福德。
English: The vassal heard that the rise of the country regarded the people as the injured without being alarmed, which was its merit.

古文：其亡也，以民为土芥，是其祸也。
现代文：国家的灭亡，把百姓作为粪土草芥，这就是它的祸殃。
English: The ruin of the state, treating the people as dung and straw, that is its bane.

古文：楚虽无德，亦不艾杀其民。
现代文：楚国虽然没有德行，也没有斩杀它的百姓。
English: Although the State of Chu was not virtuous, it did not massacre its people.

古文：吴日敝于兵，暴骨如莽，而未见德焉。
现代文：吴国每天在战争中凋敝，暴露尸骨多得像杂草一样，而又没有见到什么德行。
English: The state of Wu withered away in the war every day, exposing as many corpses as weeds, without seeing any virtue.

古文：天其或者正训楚也！
现代文：上天恐怕正是在给楚国一次教训吧！
English: I'm afraid God is teaching Chu a lesson!

古文：祸之適吴，其何日之有？ 陈侯从之。
现代文：吴国遭致祸殃，不会太久了。 陈怀公听从了。
English: The calamity that has befallen the State of Wu will not last long. Chen Huai Gong obeyed.

古文：及夫差克越，乃修先君之怨。
现代文：等到夫差攻下越国，吴国就重新清算先君时代结下的怨恨。
English: As soon as Hucha conquered Yue, the State of Wu re-settled the grudges from the time of the previous emperor.

古文：秋八月，吴侵陈，修旧怨也。
现代文：秋季，八月，吴国侵袭陈国，这就是为了重新清算过去的怨恨。
English: In the autumn, in August, the State of Wu invaded the State of Chen in order to settle old grudges.

古文：齐侯、卫侯会于乾侯，救范氏也。
现代文：齐景公、卫灵公在乾侯会见，这是为了救援范氏。
English: Lord Qi Jing and Lord Wei Ling met in Qianhou in order to rescue Mr. Fan.

古文：师及齐师、卫孔圉、鲜虞人伐晋，取棘蒲。
现代文：鲁军和齐军、卫国的孔圉、鲜虞人进攻晋国，占取了棘蒲。
English: The Lu army and the Qi army, as well as the defenders of the country, Confucius and Xiangyuan, attacked Jin Province and occupied it.

古文：吴师在陈，楚大夫皆惧，曰： 阖庐惟能用其民，以败我于柏举。
现代文：吴军驻在陈国，楚国的大夫们都恐惧，说： 吴王阖庐善于使用他的百姓作战，在柏举把我们打败了。
English: The Wu army was stationed in the State of Chen, and the doctors of the State of Chu were afraid and said, "Wu Wangye is good at using his people to fight, and he defeated us at Baijiu.

古文：今闻其嗣又甚焉。将若之何？ 
现代文：现在听说他的继承人比他还要厉害，我们将对他怎么办？ 
English: Now that we hear that his successor is even worse than him, what are we going to do with him?

古文：子西曰： 二三子恤不相睦，无患吴矣。
现代文：子西说： 您几位只应当忧虑自己不相和睦，不用害怕吴国的侵袭。
English: Zixi said, "You two should only worry about your own discord, and not be afraid of the invasion of the State of Wu.

古文：昔阖庐食不二味，居不重席，室不崇坛，器不彤镂，宫室不观，舟车不饰，衣服财用，择不取费。
现代文：从前阖庐吃饭不吃两道菜，坐着不用两层席子，房子不造在高坛上，器用不加红漆和雕刻，宫室之中不造亭台楼阁，车船不加装饰，衣服和用具，取其实用而不尚虚华。
English: Once upon a time, people did not eat two dishes at a meal, did not sit on two-layer mats, did not build houses on high altars, did not add red lacquer and carvings to utensils, did not build pavilions and pavilions in the palace, did not decorate cars and boats, and did not use clothes and utensils.

古文：在国，天有菑疠，亲巡孤寡，而共其乏困。
现代文：在国内，上天降下天灾瘟疫，就亲自巡视，安抚孤寡和资助贫困的人。
English: In the country, when God sent natural disasters and plagues, he personally visited, comforted the widows and orphans and supported the poor.

古文：在军，熟食者分，而后敢食。
现代文：在军队中，煮熟的食物必须等士兵都得到了，自己才食用，他吃的山珍海味，士兵们都有一份。
English: In the army, cooked food must wait until the soldiers have all received it before they can eat it themselves. The soldiers all have a share of the mountain and sea delicacies he eats.

古文：其所尝者，卒乘与焉。勤恤其民而与之劳逸，是以民不罢劳，死知不旷。
现代文：吴王阖庐经常抚恤百姓而和他们同甘共苦，因此百姓不疲劳，死了也知道不是白白死去。
English: Wu Wangtao often took pity on the people and shared their joys and sorrows with them. Therefore, the people did not get tired and died knowing that they did not die in vain.

古文：吾先大夫子常易之，所以败我也。
现代文：我们的先大夫子常的作法正相反，所以吴国就打败了我国。
English: Our predecessors often did the exact opposite, so the State of Wu defeated our country.

古文：今闻夫差次有台榭陂池焉，宿有妃嫱嫔御焉。一日之行，所欲必成，玩好必从。珍异是聚，观乐是务，视民如讎，而用之日新。
现代文：现在听说夫差住宿有楼台池沼，睡觉有嫔妃宫女，即使是一天在外头，想要的东西一定要到手，玩赏爱好的东西，一定要随身带走；积聚珍奇，享乐为务；把百姓看得如同仇人，没完没了驱使他们。
English: Now I've heard that the husband's poor accommodation has a basement pond, and the concubine's concubine is sleeping. Even if it's a day out, you must get what you want, play with what you like, and take it with you; accumulate curiosities, enjoy yourself; see the people as enemies, and drive them endlessly.

古文：夫先自败也已，安能败我？ 
现代文：这样做只不过是先自取失败而已，哪里能打败我国呢？ 
English: Doing so is nothing more than self-defeating. How can we defeat our country?

古文：冬十一月，晋赵鞅伐朝歌。
现代文：冬季，十一月，晋国的赵鞅进攻朝歌。
English: In winter, in November, Zhao Yao of Jin attacked the Song Dynasty.

