古文：德宗神武圣文皇帝讳适，代宗长子也。母曰睿真皇太后沈氏。初，沈氏以开元末选入代宗宫。
现代文：德宗，名适，是代宗的长子。母亲是睿真皇太后沈氏。当初，沈氏在开元末年被选入代宗宫中。
English: Desong, also known as Desu, was the eldest son of Daesong. His mother was Empress Dowager Ruizhen Shen. At first, Shen was chosen to be in the Daesong palace at the end of the first century.

古文：安禄山之乱，玄宗避贼于蜀，诸王妃妾不及从者，皆为贼所得，拘之东都之掖廷。
现代文：安禄山叛乱，玄宗躲避叛贼去到蜀郡，诸王妃妾来不及随从者，尽都被叛贼虏得，拘禁在东都的宫中旁舍。
English: In the Anlu rebellion, Emperor Xuanzong went to Shu County to avoid the traitors, and all the princesses and concubines who could not follow him were captured by the traitors and detained in the palace of Dongdu.

古文：代宗克东都，得沈氏，留之宫中；史思明再陷东都，遂失所在。
现代文：代宗收复东都，寻得沈氏，留她在宫中；史思明再次攻陷东都，竟失去了踪迹所在。
English: Daizong recovered Dongdu, found Shen, and kept her in the palace; Shi Siming once again captured Dongdu, but lost track of her.

古文：肃宗元年建丑月，封德宗奉节郡王。
现代文：肃宗元年十二月，肃宗册封德宗李适为奉节郡王。
English: In December of the first year of Su Zong's reign, Su Zong made De Zong Li Si the king of Fengjie County.

古文：代宗即位，史朝义据东都，乃以德宗为天下兵马元帅，进封鲁王。
现代文：代宗登基，史朝义占据东都，于是委任德宗为天下兵马元帅，晋封为鲁王。
English: Daizong ascended to the throne, Shichoyoshi occupied the eastern capital, and then appointed Dezong as the world's military marshal, and was promoted to the king of Lu.

古文：八月，徙封雍王。
现代文：八月改封为雍王。
English: In August, his title was changed to Yong Wang.

古文：宝应元年十月，屯于陕州，诸将进击史朝义，败之，朝义走河北，遂克东都。
现代文：宝应元年十月，德宗驻军陕州，各将领进击史朝义，打败史军，史朝义逃往河北，于是攻下东都。
English: In October of the first year of the Baoying Dynasty, Emperor Dezong's army was stationed in Shaanxi Province. The generals attacked Shichao Yi and defeated Shichao Yi's army. Shichao Yi fled to Hebei, and then captured Dongdu.

古文：十一月史朝义死幽州，守将李怀仙斩其首来献，河北平。
现代文：十一月，史朝义在幽州死去，守将李怀仙斩下史朝义首级献给朝廷，河北被平定。
English: In November, Shi Chao Yi died in Yuzhou, and the guards beheaded Li Huai Xian and presented the head of Shi Chao Yi to the imperial court. Hebei was pacified.

古文：以功兼尚书令，与功臣郭子仪、李光弼等皆赐铁券，图形凌烟阁。
现代文：论功，德宗兼尚书令。德宗与功臣郭子仪、李光弼等都被赐予享有特权的铁券，画像在凌烟阁上。
English: On the merits, Dezong and Shang Shuling. Dezong and meritorious soldiers Guo Zi Yi, Li Guangyao, etc. were all given privileged iron coupons, the image is on Lingyan Pavilion.

古文：广德二年二月，立为皇太子。
现代文：广德二年二月，被立为皇太子。
English: In February of the second year of Guangde, he was appointed crown prince.

古文：大历十四年五月辛酉，代宗崩。
现代文：大历十四年五月二十一日，代宗逝世。
English: On May 21 of the 14th year of the lunar calendar, Daizong passed away.

古文：癸亥，即皇帝位于太极殿。
现代文：二十三日，德宗在太极殿登皇帝位。
English: On the 23rd, Emperor Dezong ascended the throne in the Taiji Hall.

古文：闰月甲戌，贬常衮为河南少尹，以河南少尹崔祐甫为门下侍郎、同中书门下平章事。
现代文：闰五月初五，将常衮贬为河南少尹，委任河南少尹崔甫为门下侍郎、同中书门下平章事。
English: On the 5th day of the 5th month of the leap year, he relegated Chang Qi to Henan Shao Yin, and appointed Henan Shao Yin Cui Fu to be his subordinate attendant and subordinate subordinate subordinate subordinate subordinate subordinate subordinate.

古文：丙子，罢诸州府及新罗、渤海贡鹰鹞。
现代文：初七，取消各州府以及新罗、渤海等蕃国进贡鹰鹞。
English: On the 7th day of the first month of the year, the state capitals as well as Silla, Bohai and other provinces will cancel the tribute of eagle feathers.

古文：戊寅，罢山南贡枇杷江南甘橘非供宗庙者。
现代文：初九，取消山南进贡的枇杷、江南进贡的甘橘中非用作宗庙供品的部分。
English: On the 9th day of the first month of the year, the part of the mandarin oranges from Shannan Province and the mandarin oranges from Jiangnan Province that were used as offerings to the family temple were cancelled.

古文：辛巳，罢邕府岁贡奴婢。
现代文：十二日，取消邕府每年进贡奴婢。
English: On the 12th, the annual tribute of slaves and maids was cancelled.

古文：癸未，罢梨园乐工三百人、剑南贡生春酒。
现代文：十四日，取消梨园乐工三百人、剑南进贡的生春酒。
English: On the 14th, the 300 musicians from Liyuan and the fresh spring wine from Jian'nan were canceled.

古文：甲申，郭子仪为尚父，兼太尉、中书令。
现代文：十五日，郭子仪被尊为尚父，兼任太尉、中书令。
English: On the fifteenth day, Guo Ziyi was honored as his father, and concurrently held the posts of captain and secretary.

古文：丙戌，罢献祥瑞，贡器以金银饰者还之。
现代文：十七日，取消进献祥瑞之物，退回以金银装饰的贡器。
English: On the 17th, the donation of Xiang Rui was canceled, and the tribute decorated with gold and silver was returned.

古文：丁亥，出宫人，放舞象三十有二于荆山之阳。
现代文：十八日，放还宫女，将能做舞蹈表演的大象三十二只放至荆山南边。
English: On the 18th, the palace maiden was released, and the 32 elephants that could perform the dance were released to the south of Mount Jing.

古文：六月己亥，大赦。赐文武官阶、爵，民为户者古爵一级。
现代文：六月初一，施行大赦，赐予文武官员官阶、爵位，成家立户的平民赐给古爵衔一级。
English: On the first day of June, an amnesty was implemented, awarding civil and military officials with official ranks and peerages, and civilians who became families were awarded the first level of ancient peerage.

古文：减乘舆服御。
现代文：减少帝王、诸侯使用的车马衣物。
English: Reduce the number of chariots, horses and clothing used by emperors and lords.

古文：士庶田宅、车服逾制者，有司为立法度。
现代文：士人、平民的田地、住宅、车辆、服饰超过定制的，由有关官吏立出法令制度。
English: If the fields, houses, vehicles, or clothing of officials or commoners exceed the limit, the relevant officials shall establish a legal system.

古文：禁百官置邸贩鬻。
现代文：禁止百官开设邸店贩卖货物。
English: Officials are prohibited from opening their residences to sell goods.

古文：武德、至德将相有功者子孙予官。
现代文：武德、至德时期有功的将相，授予其子孙官职。
English: The sons and grandsons of generals who distinguished themselves during the Wude and Ziude eras were awarded official posts.

古文：庚子，进封子宣城郡王诵为宣王，封子谟为舒王，谌通王，谅虔王，详肃王，谦资王。
现代文：初二，德宗晋封其子宣城郡王李诵为宣王，封其子李谟为舒王，李谌为通王，李谅为虔王，李详为肃王，李谦为资王。
English: On the second day of the second month of the first year of the reign of Emperor Dezong, Emperor Dezong appointed his son, the king of Xuancheng County, Li Chao, as the king of Xuancheng, and his son, Li Mu, as the king of Shu, Li Yao as the king of Tong, Li Yue as the king of Qian, Li Zhe as the king of Su, and Li Qian as the king of Zi.

古文：乙己，封弟乃为益王，迅隋王，遂蜀王。
现代文：初七，德宗封其弟李为益王，李迅为隋王，李遂为蜀王。
English: On the seventh day of the first month, Emperor Dezong appointed his brother Li as the King of Yi, Li Xun as the King of Sui, and Li Sui as the King of Shu.

古文：丙午，诏六品以上清望官，日二人待制。
现代文：初八，诏令：六品以上家世清白、为人敬重的官员，每日二人值日以备皇帝顾问。
English: On the eighth day of the first month of the year, the imperial edict decreed that officials with six or more pins, with a clean pedigree and respected by the people, and two people on duty every day to prepare for the emperor's advisers.

古文：癸丑，命皇族五等以上居四方者，家一人赴山陵。
现代文：十五日，命令皇族中爵位在五等以上而居处四方者，每家派一人去往皇陵。
English: On the fifteenth day, it was ordered that those members of the imperial family who held a peerage of the fifth class or higher and resided in Shifang should send one person from each family to the imperial mausoleum.

古文：己未，罢扬州贡镜、幽州贡麝。
现代文：二十一日，取消扬州进贡镜子、幽州进贡麝。
English: On the 21st, the Yangzhou tribute mirror and the Yuzhou tribute bowl were cancelled.

古文：癸亥，举可刺史、京令者。
现代文：二十五日，举荐胜任刺史、京畿县令的人员。
English: On the 25th, the person who is qualified to be the chief historian and Gyeonggi County magistrate is recommended.

古文：七月戊辰朔，日有食之。
现代文：七月初一，日月合朔，有日蚀。
English: On the first day of July, the sun and the moon are new, and there is a solar eclipse.

古文：庚午，弛邕州金坑禁。
现代文：初三，取消邕州金矿的禁令。
English: On the third day of the first month, the ban on the Ganzhou gold mine was lifted.

古文：辛卯，罢榷酤。
现代文：二十四日，取消官府专利卖酒。
English: On the 24th, the government's license to sell alcohol was revoked.

古文：八月甲辰，道州司马杨炎为门下侍郎，怀州刺史乔琳为御史大夫：同中书门下平章事。
现代文：八月初七，道州司马杨炎任门下侍郎，怀州刺史乔琳任御史大夫，并加同中书门下平章事。
English: On the 7th day of the 8th month of the lunar month, Yang Yan, the Daozhou Sima, was appointed as the attendant of the disciple, and Qiaolin, the Waizhou Sima, was appointed as the assistant of the disciple, and was also awarded the title of the disciple of Zhongshu.

古文：乙巳，还吐蕃俘。
现代文：初八，遣返吐蕃军的俘虏。
English: On the eighth day of the first month, the prisoners of the Tubo army were repatriated.

古文：十月丁酉，吐蕃、云南蛮寇黎、茂、文、扶四州，凤翔节度使硃泚、金吾卫大将军曲环败之于七盘城。
现代文：十月初一，吐蕃、云南蛮军队进犯黎、茂、文、扶四州，凤翔节度使朱氵此、金吾卫大将军曲环在七盘城打败他们。
English: On the first day of October, the Tubo and Yunnan barbarian armies invaded the four provinces of Li, Mao, Wen, and Fu. Fengxiang Jiedu made Zhu Xuanzu and King Wuwei's general Qu Huan defeat them in Qipan City.

古文：己酉，葬睿文孝武皇帝于元陵。戊午，罢九成宫贡立兽炭、主襄州蔗蒻工。
现代文：十三日，将代宗安葬于元陵。二十二日，取消九成宫进贡立兽炭以及襄州的甘蔗加工、蒲席制作工匠。
English: On the 13th, the daizong was buried in the original mausoleum. On the 22nd, the tribute of the Jiu Chenggong Palace was canceled, as well as the charcoal making, sugar cane processing and cushion making craftsmen in Xiangzhou.

古文：辛酉，以沙苑豢豕三千给贫民。
现代文：二十五日，将沙苑豢养的猪三千头分给贫民。
English: On the 25th, 3,000 pigs raised in Sha Yuan were distributed to the poor.

古文：十一月壬午，乔琳罢。
现代文：十一月十六日，乔琳被免职。
English: On November 16th, Jolene was removed from her position.

古文：十二月乙卯，立宣王诵为皇太子。
现代文：十二月十九日，立宣王李诵为皇太子。
English: On December 19th, Xuanwang Li Xiang was crowned as the crown prince.

古文：丙寅晦，日有食之。
现代文：三十日，月终，有日蚀。
English: On the 30th, at the end of the month, there is a solar eclipse.

古文：建中元年正月丁卯，改元。
现代文：建中元年五月初一，更改年号。
English: It was built on the first day of May in the first year of Jianzhong, and its name was changed.

古文：群臣上尊号曰圣神文武皇帝。
现代文：群臣给德宗进献尊号 圣神文武皇帝 。
English: The group of courtiers gave the title of sacred god to Emperor Dezong.

古文：己巳，朝献于太清宫。庚午，朝享于太庙。
现代文：初三，在太清宫举行 朝献 祭礼。初四，在太庙祭祀。
English: On the third day of the junior high school, a morning offering ceremony was held at the Taiqing Palace, and on the fourth day of the junior high school, a ritual was held at the Tai Temple.

古文：辛未，有事于南郊，大赦。
现代文：初五，在京城南郊祭天，施行大赦。
English: On the first day of the fifth lunar month, an amnesty will be implemented in the southern suburbs of Beijing.

古文：赐文武官阶、勋、爵，遣黜陟使于天下，赐子为父后者勋两转。
现代文：赐予文武官员官阶、勋衔、爵位，派黜陟使赴全国各地考查官吏，赐予官位在其父之下的官员勋衔两级。
English: He gave civil and military officials the highest ranks, decorations, and peerages, sent envoys to inspect officials throughout the country, and gave officials with ranks below their fathers two levels of decoration.

古文：二月丙申，初定两税。
现代文：二月初一，初定两税法。
English: On the first day of February, the initial two tax laws came into effect.

古文：四月乙未，四镇、北庭行军别驾刘文喜反于泾州，伏诛。
现代文：四月初一，四镇、北庭行军别驾刘文喜在泾州反叛，伏法处死。
English: On the first day of April, Liu Wenshi rebelled in Zhangzhou and was arrested and executed in Shizhen and Beiting.

古文：己亥，地震。
现代文：初五，地震。
English: On the fifth day of the first month, there was an earthquake.

古文：六月甲午，崔祐甫薨。
现代文：六月初一，崔甫去世。
English: On June 1, Cui Fu passed away.

古文：七月丙寅，王国良降。
现代文：七月初四，湖南反将王国良投降。
English: On the 4th day of the 7th month, Hunan rebel general Wang Guoliang surrendered.

古文：己丑，杀忠州刺史刘晏。
现代文：二十七日，杀忠州刺史刘晏。
English: On the 27th, the murder of Liu Yao, the assassin of Zhongzhou.

古文：八月丁巳，遥尊母沈氏为皇太后。
现代文：八月二十六日，德宗遥尊生母沈氏为皇太后。
English: On August 26, the birth mother of Emperor Dezongyuan, Empress Dowager Shen, became Empress Dowager.

古文：九月己卯，雷。
现代文：九月十八日，响雷。
English: On September 18th, the thunder began.

古文：庚寅，睦王述为奉迎皇太后使。
现代文：二十九日，睦王李述任奉迎皇太后使。
English: On the 29th, King Mutsue appointed Li Shu as the envoy to welcome the empress dowager.

古文：是冬，无雪。
现代文：本年冬季无雪。
English: There was no snow this winter.

古文：黄河、滹沱、易水溢。
现代文：黄河、滹沱河、易水泛滥。
English: The Yellow River, the Min River and the Yangtze River are flooded.

古文：二年正月戊辰，成德军节度使李宝臣卒，其子惟岳自称留后，幽州卢龙军节度使硃滔讨之。
现代文：建中二年正月初九，成德军节度使李宝臣死去，其子李惟岳自称留后，幽州卢龙军节度使朱滔讨伐李惟岳。
English: On the ninth day of the first month of the second year of Jianzhong, the Chengde Army Festival caused Li Baochen to die, his son Li Wei Yue claimed to stay behind, and the Yuzhou Lulong Army Festival caused Zhu Tao to fight Li Wei Yue.

古文：魏博节度使田悦反，神策都战候李晟、河东节度使马燧、昭义军节度使李抱真、河阳节度副使李芃讨之。
现代文：魏博节度使田悦反叛，神策都虞候李晟、河东节度使马燧、昭义军节度使李抱真、河阳节度副使李瞞讨伐田悦。
English: Wei Bo Festival made Tian Yue rebel, Shen Zhe Du Yu awaited Li Zhe, Hedong Festival made Ma Zhe, Zhao Yi Jun Festival made Li Baozhen, and Heyang Festival deputy made Li Xie fight against Tian Yue.

古文：永平军节度使李勉为汴、滑、陈、怀、郑、汝、陕、河阳三城、宋、亳、颍节度都统。
现代文：永平军节度使李勉任汴、滑、陈、怀、郑、汝、陕、河阳三城、宋、亳、颍节度都统。
English: The Yongping Army's system of divisions made Li Qian the commander of the three cities of Heyang, Hebei, Song, Shandong, and Fujian.

古文：二月乙巳，御史大夫卢杞为门下侍郎、同中书门下平章事。
现代文：二月十六日，御史大夫卢杞任门下侍郎、同中书门下平章事。
English: On February 16th, Goshi no daibu (Master of History) Lu Yu was appointed as a disciple's attendant, and a disciple of the same school, Shuhei Shoji.

古文：乙卯，振武军乱，杀其使彭令芳及监军刘惠光。
现代文：二十六日，振武军兵变，杀其使臣彭令芳与监军刘惠光。
English: On the 26th, the Zhenwu army mutinied and killed its envoy, Peng Lingfang, and its military supervisor, Liu Huiguang.

古文：丁巳，发兵屯关东，誓师于望春楼。
现代文：二十八日，派兵驻扎关东，在望春楼誓师。
English: On the 28th, troops were stationed in Kanto and swore an oath at Mochunro.

古文：山南东道节度使梁崇义反。
现代文：山南东道节度使梁崇义反叛。
English: The Shannan Host Festival caused Liang Chongyi to rebel.

古文：五月，京师雨雹。
现代文：五月，京城长安下冰雹。
English: In May, hail fell in the capital city of Chang'an.

古文：庚申。置待诏官三十人。
现代文：初二，设置待诏官三十名。
English: On the second day of the new school year, 30 new officials were appointed.

古文：六月，荧惑、太白斗于东井。
现代文：六月，火星、太白二星在 东井 星宿处相击。
English: In June, Mars and Taibai two stars collided at the starry place in Higashii.

古文：癸巳，淮宁军节度使李希烈为汉南、汉北兵马招讨使，以讨梁崇义。
现代文：初六，淮宁军节度使李希烈任汉南、汉北兵马招讨使，以讨伐梁崇义。
English: On the 6th day of the first month of the year, Li Xili was appointed as the envoy of Han South and Han North to recruit soldiers and horses to fight against Liang Chongyi.

古文：辛丑，郭子仪薨。
现代文：十四日，郭子仪逝世。
English: On the 14th, Guo Ziyi passed away.

古文：七月庚申，杨炎罢。
现代文：七月初三，杨炎被免职。
English: On the third day of July, Yang Yan was removed from his post.

古文：检校尚书右仆射侯希逸为司空，前永平军节度使张镒为中书侍郎、同中书门下平章事。
现代文：检校尚书右仆射侯希逸任司空，前永平军节度使张镒任中书侍郎、同中书门下平章事。
English: His right-hand man, Shoho Niihito, who was in charge of the inspection of the school, was appointed to the position of secretary, and the former Yongping Army commander, Zhang Xi, was appointed to the position of the secretary of the middle school and the vice-president of the middle school.

古文：侯希逸薨。
现代文：侯希逸去世。
English: Hou Xiyi passed away.

古文：癸未，马燧、李抱真及田悦战于临洺，败之。
现代文：二十六日，马燧、李抱真在临氵名与田悦作战，打败田悦。
English: On the 26th, Ma Jun and Li Baozhen fought against Tian Yue in Linyi, defeating Tian Yue.

古文：八月，剑南西川节度使张延赏、东川节度使王叔邕、山南东道节度使贾耽、刑南节度使李昌巙、陈少游讨梁崇义，以李希烈为诸军都统。
现代文：八月，剑南西川节度使张延赏、东川节度使王叔邕、山南东道节度使贾耽、荆南节度使李昌耲、陈少游讨伐梁崇义，以李希烈任诸军都统。
English: In August, the Jian'nan West River Festival honored Zhang Yanbo, the East River Festival honored Wang Shuxuan, the Shannan Host Festival honored Jia Tan, the Jingnan Festival honored Li Changyao and Chen Shaoyou for fighting against Liang Chongyi, and Li Xili for unifying the armies.

古文：辛卯，平卢军节度使李正己卒，其子纳自称留后。
现代文：初五，平卢军节度使李正己死去，其子李纳自称留后。
English: On the fifth day of the first month, the Pinglu military festival caused Li Zhengji to die, and his son Li Na said he would stay behind.

古文：壬子，梁崇义伏诛。
现代文：二十六日，梁崇义伏法处死。
English: On the 26th, Liang Chongyi was sentenced to death.

古文：九月，李纳陷宋州。
现代文：九月，李纳攻破宋州。
English: In September, Li Na defeated Song Zhou.

古文：李惟岳将张孝忠以易、定二州降。
现代文：李惟岳的部将张孝忠献出易、定二州归降。
English: Li Wei Yue's division surrendered Zhang Xiaozhong to Yi and two provinces to Ding.

古文：壬戌，赐立功士卒帛，禀死事家三岁。
现代文：初七，赐给立功的士卒布帛；为国事而死的人员，赐给其家三年的谷物。
English: On the first day of the seventh month, cloth was given to meritorious soldiers; those who died for the state were given three years of grain for their families.

古文：十月戊申，李纳将李洧以徐州降。
现代文：十月二十三日，李纳的部将李洧献出徐州归降。
English: On October 23rd, Li Na's ministry offered Li Xi to surrender Xuzhou.

古文：十一月辛酉，纳寇徐州，宣武军节度使刘洽败之于七里沟。
现代文：十一月初七，李纳进攻徐州，宣武军节度使刘洽在七里沟打败李纳。
English: On the 7th day of the 11th month, Li Na attacked Xuzhou, and the Xuanwu army sent Liu Cai to defeat Li Na at Qili ditch.

古文：丁丑，马燧及田悦战于双冈，败之。甲申，李纳将王涉以海州降。
现代文：二十三日，马燧在双冈打败田悦。三十日，李纳的部将王涉献海州归降。
English: On the 23rd, Ma Xuan defeated Tian Yue in Shuanggang. On the 30th, Li Na's subordinate Wang Wanzhong surrendered to Haizhou.

古文：十二月丁酉，马万通以密州降。
现代文：十二月十三日，马万通献密州归降。
English: On December 13th, Ma Wantong surrendered to Mi Prefecture.

古文：马燧为魏博招讨使。
现代文：马燧任魏博招讨使。
English: Ma Jun was appointed as Wei Bo's recruiting envoy.

古文：是岁，杀崖州司马杨炎。
现代文：本年，杀崖州司马杨炎。
English: This year, kill the cliff state Sima Yangyan.

古文：三年正月丙寅，硃滔、成德军节度使张孝忠及李惟岳战于束鹿，败之。
现代文：建中三年正月十二日，朱滔、成德军节度使张孝忠与李惟岳在束鹿作战，打败李惟岳。
English: On the twelfth day of the first month of the third year of Jianzhong, Zhu Tao and Chengde Army Festival made Zhang Xiaozhong and Li Weiyue fight in Soklu, defeating Li Weiyue.

古文：辛未，减常膳及太子诸王食物。
现代文：十七日，德宗减少平日膳食及太子诸王食物。
English: On the 17th, the Desong reduced the weekday meals and the food of the princes and kings.

古文：复榷酤。
现代文：恢复官府专利卖酒。
English: The sale of government-patented alcohol will be resumed.

古文：癸未，李纳陷海、密二州。
现代文：二十九日，李纳攻破海、密二州。
English: On the 29th, Li Na broke through the sea and conquered the two states of Mi.

古文：闰月乙未，李惟岳将康日知以赵州降。
现代文：闰正月十二日，李惟岳部将康日知献赵州归降。
English: On the twelfth day of the leap month, Li Wei Yue's troops surrendered Kangri to Zhaozhou.

古文：甲辰，惟岳伏诛，其将杨荣国以深州降。
现代文：二十一日，李惟岳伏法处死，其部将杨荣国献深州归降。
English: On the twenty-first day, Li Wei Yue Fu Fa was put to death, and his troops surrendered Yang Rong Guo to Shenshu.

古文：庚戌，马燧及田悦战于洹水，败之。是月，悦将李再春以博州降，田昂以洺州降。
现代文：二十七日，马燧在洹水打败田悦。本月，田悦部将李再春献博州归降，田昂献氵名州归降。
English: On the 27th, Ma Ying defeated Tian Ying in Surabaya. This month, Tian Ying's club promoted Li Zhaichun to Bo Prefecture, and promoted Tian Ang to Yingmeizhou.

古文：二月戊午，李惟岳将杨政义以定州降。
现代文：二月初五，李惟岳部将杨政义献定州归降。
English: On the fifth day of the second month of the year, Li Wei Yue's department sent Yang Zhengyi back to Dingzhou.

古文：甲戌，给复易、定、深、赵、恒、冀六州三年，赦吏民为李惟岳迫胁者。
现代文：二十一日，免除易、定、深、赵、恒、冀六州徭役三年，赦免被李惟岳逼迫胁从的官吏、百姓。
English: On the 21st, Yi, Ding, Shen, Zhao, Heng and Hebei were exempted from three years of forced labor, and the officials and people who were forced to obey Li Weiyue were pardoned.

古文：己卯，震通化门。
现代文：二十六日，雷击通化门。
English: On the 26th, lightning struck Tonghua Gate.

古文：四月戊午，李纳将李士真以德、棣二州降。
现代文：四月初六，李纳部将李士真献德、棣二州归降。
English: On the 6th day of the 4th month of the year, the Li Na's Department made Li Shizhen surrender to the German Empire, and Li Erzhou surrendered to the Chinese Empire.

古文：甲子，借商钱。
现代文：十二日，借用商家钱财。
English: On the 12th, he borrowed money from a merchant.

古文：甲戌，昭义军节度副使卢玄卿为魏博、澶相招讨使。
现代文：二十二日，昭义军节度副使卢玄卿任魏博、澶相招讨使。
English: On the 22nd, Lu Xuanqing, the vice-envoy of the Shouyi Army, was appointed as the envoy of Wei Bo and Yuxiang.

古文：戊寅，张镒罢。
现代文：二十六日，张镒被免职。
English: On the 26th, Zhang Ye was removed from office.

古文：壬午，杀殿中侍御史郑詹。
现代文：三十日，杀殿中侍御史郑詹。
English: On the 30th, Zheng Zhan, an attendant of the palace, was killed.

古文：是月，硃滔反，陷德、棣二州。
现代文：本月，朱滔反叛，攻破德、棣两个州。
English: This month, Zhu Tao rebelled and invaded the German and Han states.

古文：五月辛卯，朔方军节度使李怀光讨田悦。
现代文：五月初九，朔方军节度使李怀光讨伐田悦。
English: On the 9th day of the 5th month of the lunar calendar, the military festival of the Shuo and Fang armies brought Li Huaiguang to fight against Jiaotian Yue.

古文：六月甲子，京师地震。
现代文：六月十三日，京城长安地震。
English: On June 13, the Beijing Chang'an earthquake occurred.

古文：恒冀观察使王武俊反。
现代文：恒冀观察使王武俊反叛。
English: Wang Wujun rebelled after observing Hengji.

古文：辛巳，李怀光、马燧、李芃、李抱真及硃滔、王武俊、田悦战于连箧山，败绩。
现代文：三十日，李怀光、马燧、李秡、李抱真在连箧山与朱滔、王武俊、田悦作战，大败。
English: On the 30th, Li Huaiguang, Ma Jun, Li Yao, and Li Bozhen fought against Zhu Tao, Wang Wujun, and Tian Yue in Lianyashan, and were soundly defeated.

古文：七月壬辰，殿中丞李云端谋反，伏诛。
现代文：七月十一日，殿中丞李云端谋反，伏法处死。
English: On July 11th, the court junior high school student Li Yunduan conspired to rebel and was sentenced to death.

古文：癸巳，停借商钱令。
现代文：十二日，停止实行向商家借钱的命令。
English: On the 12th, the implementation of the order to borrow money from businesses was suspended.

古文：八月癸丑，演州司马李孟秋、峰州刺史皮岸反，伏诛。
现代文：八月初三，演州司马李孟秋、峰州刺史皮岸反叛，伏法处死。
English: On the third day of the first month of August, Li Mengqiu, the Sima of Yenzhou, and Peizhou Zhishigang rebelled and were executed.

古文：九月丁亥，初税商钱、茶、漆、竹、木。
现代文：九月初七，开始征收商钱、茶、漆、竹、木税。
English: On the 7th day of the 9th month of the year, taxes on merchants' money, tea, lacquer, bamboo and wood began to be levied.

古文：十月丙辰，吏部侍郎关播为中书侍郎、同中书门下平章事。
现代文：十月初七，吏部侍郎关播任中书侍郎、同中书门下平章事。
English: On the 7th day of the 10th month of the year, Guan Bo, the attendant of the personnel department, was appointed as the attendant of the middle school, and Shimo Taira, the attendant of the middle school, was appointed.

古文：李希烈反。
现代文：同日，李希烈反叛。
English: On the same day, Li Xilai rebelled.

古文：丙子，肃王详薨。
现代文：二十七日，肃王李详去世。
English: On the 27th, Su Wang Li Zhe passed away.

古文：四年正月丁亥，凤翔节度使张镒及吐蕃尚结赞盟于清水。
现代文：建中四年正月初十，凤翔节度使张镒与吐蕃的尚结赞在清水结盟。
English: On the 10th day of the 1st month of the 4th year of Jianming, the Fengxiang Festival made Zhang Ye and Shang Jizan of Tubo form an alliance in Qingshui.

古文：庚寅，李希烈陷汝州，执刺史李元平。
现代文：十三日，李希烈攻破汝州，俘虏该州刺史李元平。
English: On the 13th, Li Xilai invaded Ruzhou and captured the governor of the province, Li Yuanping.

古文：戊戌，东都、汝行营节度使哥舒曜讨李希烈。
现代文：二十一日，东都、汝行营节度使哥舒曜讨伐李希烈。
English: On the twenty-first day of the month, the Dongdu and Ru Xingying sent Brother Shu to attack Li Hailie.

古文：二月丁卯，克汝州。
现代文：二月二十日，攻克汝州。
English: On February 20th, the invasion of Ruzhou began.

古文：三月辛卯，李希烈寇鄂州，刺史李兼败之。
现代文：三月十四日，李希烈进犯鄂州，刺史李兼打败李希烈。
English: On March 14th, Li Xilai invaded Ezhou, stabbed Shi Li and defeated Li Xilai.

古文：丁酉，荆南节度使张伯仪及李希烈战于安州，败绩。
现代文：二十日，荆南节度使张伯仪在安州与李希烈作战，大败。
English: On the 20th, the Jingnan Festival made Zhang Boyi fight with Li Xili in Anzhou, and he was defeated.

古文：四月庚申，李勉为淮西招讨处置使，哥舒曜副之；张伯仪为淮西应援招讨使，贾耽，江南西道节度使嗣曹王皋副之。
现代文：四月十四日，李勉任淮西招讨处置使，哥舒曜任副使；张伯仪任淮西应援招讨使，贾耽与江南西道节度使、嗣曹王李皋任副使。
English: On April 14th, Li Qian was appointed as the envoy of Huaixi to solicit for assistance, and Guo Shuyang was appointed as the deputy envoy; Zhang Bo Yi was appointed as the envoy of Huaixi to solicit for assistance, Jia Tan was appointed as the envoy of Jiangnan West Road Festival, and Cao Wang's heir, Li Xi, was appointed as the deputy envoy.

古文：甲子，京师地震，生毛。
现代文：十八日，京城长安地震，生出毛状物。
English: On the 18th, after the Beijing Chang'an earthquake, a hair-like substance was produced.

古文：丙子，哥舒曜及李希烈战于颍桥，败之。
现代文：三十日，哥舒曜在颍桥打败李希烈。五月初五，京城地震。
English: On the 30th, Go Shu You defeated Li Xili in Handan Bridge. On the 5th of May, the capital city was hit by an earthquake.

古文：五月辛巳，京师地震。
现代文：初九，颍王李王敫去世。
English: On the 9th day of the 9th month of the lunar calendar, the King of Wushu, Li Wangyao passed away.

古文：乙酉，颍王璬薨。乙未，刘洽为淄青、衮郓招讨制置使。
现代文：十九日，刘洽任淄青、兖郓招讨制置使。
English: On the 19th, Liu Chia was appointed as the envoy of the Qing Dynasty and the Qing Dynasty.

古文：六月庚戌，税屋间架，算除陌钱。
现代文：六月初五，征收屋架税，计收修路钱。
English: On the 5th day of the 6th month, the stall tax will be levied, and the road repair fee will be collected.

古文：丁卯，徒封逾为丹王，遘简王。
现代文：二十二日，改封李逾为丹王，李遘为简王。
English: On the 22nd, Li Kao was renamed as the King of Dan, and Li Jie as the King of Jian.

古文：七月，马燧为魏博、澶相节度招讨使。
现代文：七月，马燧任魏博、澶相节度招讨使。
English: In July, Ma Jun was appointed as the envoy to invite Wei Bo and Gong Xiang to the festival.

古文：壬辰，卢杞、关播、李忠臣及吐蕃区颊赞盟于京师。
现代文：十七日，卢杞、关播、李忠臣与吐蕃区颊赞在京都结盟。
English: On the 17th, Lu Wei, Guan Bo and Li Zhongchen formed an alliance with Yu Zhan of Tubo District in Kyoto.

古文：八月丁未，李希烈寇襄城。
现代文：八月初二，李希烈进犯襄城。
English: On the second day of August, Li Xili attacked Xiangcheng.

古文：乙卯，希烈将曹季昌以隋州降。
现代文：初十，李希烈部将曹季昌献隋州归降。
English: On the tenth day of the first month of the year, the Li Xi Martyrs' Department presented Cao Jichang to Suizhou for surrender.

古文：庚申，有星陨于京师。
现代文：十五日，有流星陨落在京城。
English: On the 15th, a meteorite fell in Kyoto.

古文：九月丙戌，神策军行营兵马使刘德信及李希烈战于扈涧，败绩。
现代文：九月十二日，神策军行营兵马使刘德信在扈涧与李希烈作战，大败。
English: On September 12th, Liu Dexin was defeated by Li Xilai in the battle of Shenke Military Campaign.

古文：庚子，舒王谟为荆襄、江西、沔鄂节度诸军行营兵马都元帅，徙封普王。
现代文：二十六日，舒王李谟任荆襄、江西、沔鄂节度诸军行营兵马都元帅，改封为普王。
English: On the 26th, Li Mu, the king of Shu, was appointed as the marshal of the troops and horses of Jingxiang, Jiangxi and Shanxi provinces, and was renamed as the king of Pu.

古文：十月，泾原节度使姚令言反，犯京师。
现代文：十月，泾原节度使姚令言反叛，进犯京城。
English: In October, the Shenyuan Festival made Yao Lingyan rebel and attack Beijing.

古文：戊申，如奉天。
现代文：初四，德宗去奉天。
English: In the fourth year of junior high school, Dezong went to serve Heaven.

古文：硃泚反。
现代文：朱氵此反叛。
English: Zhu Xi is the reason for this rebellion.

古文：庚戌，泚杀司农卿段秀实及左骁卫将军刘海宾。
现代文：初六，朱氵此杀司农卿段秀实与左骁卫将军刘海宾。
English: On the sixth day of his junior year, Zhu Xi killed the Secretary of Agriculture, Duan Xiusi, and the General of the Left Division of the National Guard, Liu Haibin.

古文：凤翔后营将李楚琳杀其节度使张镒，自称留后。
现代文：凤翔后营将李楚琳杀其节度使张镒，自称留后。
English: After Feng Xiang's death, Li Chuling's battalion killed his regent to make Zhang Ye leave, claiming to stay behind.

古文：癸丑，李希烈陷襄城，宣武军兵马使高翼死之。
现代文：初九，李希烈攻破襄城，宣武军兵马使高翼死难。
English: On the 9th day of the first month, Li Xilai conquered Xiangcheng, and the soldiers and horses of the Xuanwu Army made Gao Ying die.

古文：甲寅，硃泚杀泾原节度都虞候何明礼。
现代文：初十，朱氵此杀泾原节度都虞候何明礼。
English: On the tenth day of the first month of the year, Zhu Xi did not hesitate to kill the original festival.

古文：乙卯，杀尚书右仆射崔宁。
现代文：十一日，杀尚书右仆射崔宁。
English: On the 11th day of the month, he killed Shangshu's right-hand man, Choi Ning.

古文：丁巳，户部尚书萧复为吏部尚书，吏部郎中刘从一为刑部侍郎，京兆府户曹参军、翰林学士姜公辅为谏议大夫：同中书门下平章事。
现代文：十三日，户部尚书萧复任吏部尚书，吏部郎中刘从一任刑部侍郎，京兆府户曹参军、翰林学士姜公辅任谏议大夫，均为同中书门下平章事。
English: On the 13th, Xiao Shangshu of the Household Department was reinstated as Shangshu of the Personnel Department, Liu, the son-in-law of the Personnel Department, was appointed as the waiter of the Penal Department, Cao of the Household Department of Jingzhao Prefecture joined the army, and Jiang Gongfu, the bachelor of Hanlin, was appointed as the deliberation doctor, all of which were subordinate to the Zhongshumen.

古文：硃泚犯奉天，禁军败绩于城东。
现代文：朱氵此进犯奉天，禁军在奉天城东大败。
English: Zhu Xi attacked Fengtian, and the forbidden army was defeated in the east of Fengtian City.

古文：辛酉，灵盐节度留后杜希全、鄜坊节度使李建徽及硃泚战于漠谷，败绩。
现代文：十七日，灵盐节度留后杜希全、坊节度使李建徽在漠谷与朱氵此作战，大败。
English: On the 17th, after the Lingyan Festival, Du Xiquan and the Fang Festival, Li Jianhui fought with Zhu Xi in the valley and was defeated.

古文：癸亥，刘德信及泚战于思子陵，败之。
现代文：十九日，刘德信在思子陵打败朱氵此。
English: On the 19th, Liu Dexin defeated Zhu Xi Ke at Shizi Mausoleum.

古文：甲子，行在都虞候浑瑊及泚战于城下，败之，左龙武军大将军吕希倩死之。
现代文：二十日，行在都虞候浑蠨在城下打败朱氵此；左龙武大将军吕希倩阵亡。
English: On the 20th, while marching in the capital, Hun Ye defeated Zhu Xi Ke under the city; Zuo Longwu's general Lu Xi Ye was killed in the battle.

古文：乙丑，将军高重杰死之。
现代文：二十一日，将军高重杰阵亡。
English: On the 21st, General Gao Chungjie was killed in action.

古文：是月，商州军乱，杀其刺史谢良辅。
现代文：本月，商州军队兵变，杀其刺史谢良辅。
English: This month, the Shangzhou army mutinied and killed their assassin, Shi Xie Liangyu.

古文：十一月，剑南西山兵马使张朏逐其节度使张延赏，朏伏诛。
现代文：十一月，剑南、西山兵马使张月出驱逐其节度使张延赏，张月出伏法处死。
English: In November, soldiers and horses from Jian'nan and Xishan ordered Zhang Yuesheng to expel Zhang Yuesheng. Zhang Yuesheng was rewarded and Zhang Yuesheng was executed.

古文：癸巳，李怀光及硃泚战于鲁店，败之。怀光为中书令、朔方邠宁同华陕虢河中晋绛慈隰行营兵马副元帅。
现代文：二十日，李怀光在鲁店打败朱氵此。李怀光任中书令、朔方、宁、同华、陕虢、河中、晋、绛、慈、隰行营兵马副元帅。
English: On the 20th, Li Huaguang defeated Zhu Xizhe in Lucheng. Li Huaguang was appointed the deputy marshal of the soldiers and horses of Zhuling, Shuofang, Ning, Tonghua, Shaanxi, Hezhong, Jin, Yao, Ci and Minhang battalions.

古文：十二月，硃泚陷华州。
现代文：十二月，朱氵此攻破华州。
English: In December, Zhu Xi broke through Huazhou.

古文：壬戌，贬卢杞为新州司马。
现代文：十九日，将卢杞贬为新州司马。
English: On the 19th, Lu Wei was relegated to the post of Xinzhou Sima.

古文：庚午，李希烈陷汴、郑二州。
现代文：二十七日，李希烈攻破汴、郑二州。
English: On the twenty-seventh day, Li Xilei defeated Zou and Zheng Erzhou.

古文：兴元元年正月癸酉，大赦，改元。
现代文：兴元元年正月初一，施行大赦，更改年号。
English: On the first day of the first month of the first year of Xingyuan, an amnesty was implemented and the year name was changed.

古文：去 圣神文武 号。
现代文：德宗去掉 圣神文武 的尊号。
English: Emperor Dezong removed the honorific of Shengwenwu (聖神文武).

古文：复李希烈、田悦、王武俊、李纳官爵。
现代文：恢复李希烈、田悦、王武俊、李纳官职、爵位。
English: Li Xirong, Tian Yue, Wang Wujun and Li Na were restored to their official posts and titles.

古文：赴奉天收京城将士有罪减三等，子孙减二等，在行营者赐勋五转。
现代文：随赴奉天、收京城的将士有罪减三等，子孙有罪减二等，在行营者赐勋衔五级。
English: The soldiers who went to Mukden and Jingcheng were reduced to the third degree, their descendants were reduced to the second degree, and the campers were awarded the fifth degree.

古文：赐文武官阶、勋、爵。
现代文：赐予文武官员官阶、勋衔、爵位。
English: The civil and military officials were given official ranks, honorary titles, and peerages.

古文：罢间架、竹木茶漆税及除陌钱。
现代文：取消征收间架、竹木茶漆税及修路钱。
English: Cancellation of the collection of space frame, bamboo and wood tea paint tax and road repair money.

古文：给复奉天五年，城中十年。
现代文：免除奉天徭役五年，奉天城内免徭役十年。
English: He was exempted from military service in Fengtian for five years and from military service in Fengtian for ten years.

古文：关播罢。
现代文：关播被免职。
English: The broadcaster was dismissed.

古文：丙戌，吏部侍郎卢翰为兵部侍郎、同中书门下平章事。
现代文：十四日，吏部侍郎卢翰任兵部侍郎、同中书门下平章事。
English: On the 14th, Lu Han, the attendant of the personnel department, was appointed as the attendant of the military department, and he was promoted to the subordinate of the secretary of the same department.

古文：戊子，萧复为山南东西、荆湖、淮南、江西、鄂岳、浙江东西、福建、岭南宣慰安抚使。
现代文：十六日，萧复任山南东、山南西、荆湖、淮南、江西、鄂岳、浙江东、浙江西、福建、岭南宣慰安抚使。
English: On the 16th, Xiao Fuzhou was appointed as the Minister of Consolation and Pacification of Shannan Dong, Shannan Xi, Jinghu, Huainan, Jiangxi, Etu, Zhejiang Dong, Zhejiang Xi, Fujian and Lingnan.

古文：戊戌，刘洽为汴滑宋毫都统副使。
现代文：二十六日，刘洽任汴、滑、宋、亳都统副使。
English: On the 26th, Liu Chia was appointed as the deputy envoy of the three countries.

古文：二月甲子，李怀光为太尉，怀光反。
现代文：二月二十三日，李怀光任太尉，当日反叛。
English: On February 23rd, Li Huai Guang was promoted to the rank of first lieutenant and rebelled on the same day.

古文：丁卯，如梁州。
现代文：二十六日，德宗去梁州。
English: On the 26th, Dezong went to Liangzhou.

古文：怀光将孟庭保以兵来追，左卫大将军侯仲庄取之于驿店。
现代文：李怀光部将孟庭保率军追赶，左卫大将军侯仲庄在驿店打败孟庭保。
English: Li Huai Guangbu chased Meng Tingbao and his army, and General Hou Zhongzhuang of the Left Division defeated Meng Tingbao at Jiuyuan.

古文：三月，李怀光夺鄜坊京畿金商节度使李建徽、神策军兵马使阳惠元兵，惠元死之。
现代文：三月，李怀光夺取坊、京畿、金商节度使李建徽、神策军兵马使阳惠元的军队，阳惠元身亡。
English: In March, Li Huai-guang captured Fang, Gyeonggi, and Jinzhang; Li Jianhui led the troops of Jinzhao Army and Yang Hui-yuan led the troops of Jinzhao Army; Yang Hui-yuan died.

古文：癸酉，魏博兵马使田绪杀其节度使田悦。自称留后。
现代文：初二，魏博兵马使田绪杀其节度使田悦，自称留后。
English: On the second day of the junior high school, the Wei Bo soldiers and horses made Tian Xuxi kill his festival and made Tian Yue, who claimed to stay behind.

古文：甲戌，李怀光杀左厢兵马使张名振、右武锋兵马使石演芬。
现代文：初三，李怀光杀左厢兵马使张名振、右武锋兵马使石演芬。
English: On the third day of the first month of the year, Li Huaiguang killed Zhang Nianzhen, the commander of the left wing, and Shi Enfen, the commander of the right wing.

古文：丁亥，李晟为京畿、渭北、鄜坊丹延节度招讨使，神策行营兵马使尚可孤为神策、京畿、渭南、商州节度招讨使。
现代文：十六日，李晟任京畿、渭北及、坊、丹、延节度招讨使，神策行营兵马使尚可孤任神策、京畿、渭南、商州节度招讨使。
English: On the 16th, Li Jun was appointed as the envoy to invite people to the festivals in Gyeonggi, North Gyeonggi, Gwangju, Gyeonggi-do, Gyeonggi-do, Gyeonggi-do, Gyeonggi-do, Gyeonggi-do, Gyeonggi-do, Gyeonggi-do, Gyeonggi-do, Gyeonggi-do, Gyeonggi-do, Gyeonggi-do, Gyeonggi-do, Gyeonggi-do, Gyeonggi-do, Gyeonggi-do, Gyeonggi-do, G

古文：壬辰，次梁州。
现代文：二十一日，德宗歇驻梁州。
English: On the 21st, De Zong left Liangzhou.

古文：丁酉，刘洽权知汴滑宋毫都统兵马事。
现代文：二十六日，刘洽暂时掌管汴、滑、宋、亳都统兵马事务。
English: On the 26th, Liu Cai was temporarily in charge of the affairs of the armies and horses of the Three Kingdoms.

古文：己亥，浑瑊为朔方、邠宁、振武、永平、奉天行营兵马副元帅。
现代文：二十八日，浑蠨任朔方、宁、振武、永平、奉天行营兵马副元帅。
English: On the 28th, he appointed Shuo Fang, Ning, Zhenwu, Yongping, and Feng Tianxing as deputy field marshals.

古文：四月，李怀光陷坊州。
现代文：四月，李怀光攻破坊州。
English: In April, Li Huaiguang conquered Fangzhou.

古文：甲辰，李晟为京畿、渭北、商华兵马副元帅。
现代文：初四，李晟任京畿、渭北、商华兵马副元帅。
English: In the fourth year of his junior high school, Li Jun was appointed vice-marshal of the Gyeonggi, North Gyeongsang and South Hwanghae Armies.

古文：甲寅，姜公辅罢。
现代文：十四日，姜公辅被免职。
English: On the 14th, Jiang Gongfu was removed from his post.

古文：泾原兵马使田希盐杀其节度使冯河清，自称留后。
现代文：泾原兵马使田希鉴杀其节度使冯河清，自称留后。
English: The former soldiers and horses made Tian Xijian kill his festival and made Feng Heqing leave, claiming to stay behind.

古文：乙丑，浑瑊及硃泚战于武亭川，败之。
现代文：二十五日，浑蠨在武亭川打败朱氵此。
English: On the 25th, Hun Ye defeated Zhu Xi Ke in Wuting River.

古文：丁卯，义王此薨。
现代文：二十七日，义王李繣去世。
English: On the 27th, the King of Righteousness, Li Xi, passed away.

古文：是月，坊州刺史窦觎克坊州。
现代文：本月，坊州刺史窦觎收复坊州。
English: This month, Fangzhou was restored to Fangzhou.

古文：五月癸酉，泾王侹薨。
现代文：五月初三，泾王李亻廷去世。
English: On the third day of the fifth month of the lunar calendar, the Dragon King Li Yueting passed away.

古文：丙子，李抱真、王武俊及硃滔战于经城，败之。
现代文：初六，李抱真、王武俊在经城与朱滔作战，打败朱滔。
English: In the sixth year of junior high school, Li Baozhen and Wang Wujun fought with Zhu Tao in Jingcheng and defeated Zhu Tao.

古文：壬辰，尚可孤及硃泚战于蓝田之西，败之。
现代文：二十二日，尚可孤在蓝田之西与朱氵此作战，打败朱氵此。
English: On the 22nd, Shang Ke alone fought and defeated Zhu Xi Ke in the west of Lantian.

古文：乙未，李晟又败之于苑北。
现代文：二十六日，李晟在苑北再败朱氵此。
English: On the 26th, Li Yu defeated Zhu Xi again in Yuanbei.

古文：戊戌，又败之于白华，复京师。
现代文：二十九日，在白华又将其打败，收复京城。
English: On the 29th, they defeated it again in Baihua and regained the capital.

古文：六月癸卯，姚令言伏诛。
现代文：六月初四，姚令言伏法处死。
English: On June 4, Yao Lingyan was put to death.

古文：甲辰，硃泚伏诛。
现代文：初五，朱氵此伏法处死。
English: On the fifth day of the first month of the year, Zhu Xi was sentenced to death.

古文：己酉，李晟为司徒、中书令。
现代文：初十，李晟任司徒、中书令。
English: On the tenth day of the first month of the year, Li Yao was appointed as a scholar and a middle school teacher.

古文：癸丑，以梁州为兴元府，给复一年，耆老加版授。
现代文：十四日，以梁州作为兴元府，免除其徭役一年，受人敬重的老人另授予官称荣衔。
English: On the 14th, with Liangzhou as Xingyuanfu, he was exempted from serving as an officer for one year, and the respected old man was also awarded the official title.

古文：甲寅，浑瑊为侍中。
现代文：十五日，浑蠨任侍中。
English: On the fifteenth day, he was promoted to the rank of chamberlain.

古文：己巳，给复洋州一年，加给兴元一年，免凤州今岁税，父老加版授。
现代文：三十日，免除洋州徭役一年，给兴元加免徭役一年，免除凤州本年赋税，父老另授官称荣衔。
English: On the 30th, Yangzhou was exempted from military service for one year, Xingyuan was exempted from military service for one year, and Fengzhou was exempted from this year's tax.

古文：七月丙子，次凤翔，免今岁秋税，八十以上版授刺史，馀授上佐。
现代文：七月初七，德宗歇驻凤翔，免除该地本年秋税，八十岁以上老人授予刺史荣衔，其余老人授予州郡佐官荣衔。
English: On the 7th day of the 7th month of the 7th month of the 7th month of the 7th month of the 7th month of the 7th month of the 7th month of the 7th month of the 7th month of the 7th month of the 7th month of the 7th month of the 7th month of the 7th month of the 7th month of the 7th month of the 7th month of the 7th month of the 7th month of the 7th month of the 7th month of the 7th month of the 8th month of the 9th month of the 9th month of the 9th month of the 9th month of the 9th month of the 9

古文：丁丑，葬宗室遇害者。
现代文：初八，安葬宗室遇害的成员。
English: On the eighth day of the first month of the year, the family buried a member who was killed.

古文：壬午，至自兴元。
现代文：十三日，德宗自兴元返京。
English: On the 13th, Emperor Dezong returned to Beijing from Xingyuan.

古文：丁亥，李怀光杀宣慰使孔巢父。
现代文：十八日，李怀光杀宣慰使孔巢父。
English: On the 18th, Li Huaiguang killed his father.

古文：辛卯，大赦。赐百官将士阶、勋、爵，收京城者升八资。
现代文：二十二日，施行大赦，赐予百官将士官阶、勋衔、爵位；参加收复京城的人员提升晋职资历八级。
English: On the 22nd, an amnesty was implemented, awarding 100 officials with non-commissioned officer ranks, honors, and peerages; those who participated in the recovery of the capital were promoted to the eighth level of seniority.

古文：给复京兆府一年。
现代文：免除京兆府徭役一年。
English: He was exempted from serving as Keicho prefectural magistrate for one year.

古文：是月，嗣曹王皋及李希烈战于应山，败之。
现代文：本月，嗣曹王李皋在应山与李希烈作战，打败李希烈。
English: This month, the heir to Cao Wang, Li Xi, fought with Li Xili in Yingshan, defeating Li Xili.

古文：八月癸卯，李晟为凤翔陇右诸军、泾原四镇北庭行营兵马副元帅，马燧为晋、慈、隰诸军行营兵马副元帅，浑瑊为河中、同绛、陕虢诸军行营兵马副元帅。
现代文：八月初四，李晟任凤翔、陇右诸军、泾原、四镇、北庭行营兵马副元帅；马燧任晋、慈、隰诸军行营兵马副元帅；浑蠨任河中、同绛、陕虢诸军行营兵马副元帅。
English: On the 4th day of the 8th month, Li Qian was appointed as the deputy field marshal of the troops of Fengxiang, Shouyu, Shibara, Shizhen, and Beiting; Ma Qian was appointed as the deputy field marshal of the troops of Jin, Ci, and Shao; and Hun Qian was appointed as the deputy field marshal of the troops of Hezhong, Tonglu, and Shaanxi.

古文：丙午，浑碱兼朔方行营兵马副元帅。
现代文：初七，浑蠨兼朔方行营兵马副元帅。
English: On the seventh day of his junior year, he was promoted to deputy field marshal of troops and horses.

古文：己酉，延王玢、隋王迅薨。
现代文：初十，延王李玢、隋王李迅去世。
English: On the tenth day of the first month, Yan Wang Lijun and Sui King Lixun passed away.

古文：十月辛丑，李勉检校司徒、同中书门下平章事。
现代文：十月初三，李勉任检校司徒、同中书门下平章事。
English: At the beginning of October 3rd, Li Yan was appointed as the inspector of the school, and he signed a contract with the school.

古文：闰月戊子，李希烈将李澄以滑州降。
现代文：闰十月二十日，李希烈部将李澄献滑州归降。
English: On the 20th day of leap October, the Li Xi Martyrs' Department sent Li Cheng back to Nanzhou.

古文：十一月癸卯，刘洽、邠陇行营节度使曲环及李希烈战于陈州，败之。
现代文：十一月初六，刘洽和、陇行营节度使曲环在陈州与李希烈作战，打败李希烈。
English: At the beginning of November 6th, Liu Caihe and Min Xingying made Qu Huan fight with Li Xilai in Chenzhou, defeating Li Xilai.

古文：戊午，克汴州。
现代文：二十一日，攻克汴州。
English: On the twenty-first day, they conquered Zhangzhou.

古文：乙丑，萧复罢。
现代文：二十八日，萧复被免职。
English: On the 28th, Xiao Fu was dismissed from his post.

古文：十二月乙酉，浑瑊及李怀光战于乾坑，败绩。
现代文：十二月十八日，浑蠨在乾坑与李怀光作战，大败。
English: On December 18th, Hunchun fought against Li Huaguang in Qiankeng and suffered a crushing defeat.

古文：是岁，陈王珪薨。
现代文：本年，陈王李王圭去世。
English: This year, Chen Wang Li Wang Gui passed away.

古文：贞元元年正月丁酉，大赦，改元。
现代文：贞元元年正月初一，施行大赦，更改年号。
English: On the first day of the first month of the first year of the Zhengyuan era, an amnesty was implemented and the year name was changed.

古文：罢榷税。
现代文：取消专卖税。
English: The monopoly tax will be abolished.

古文：三月，李怀光杀步军兵马使田仙浩、都战候吕呜岳。
现代文：三月，李怀光杀步军兵马使田仙浩、都虞候吕鸣岳。
English: In March, Li Huaiguang killed Tian Xianhao, the commander of the infantry and cavalry, and Lv Mingyue, the prefectural governor.

古文：丁未，李希烈陷邓州，杀唐邓隋招讨使黄金岳。
现代文：十二日，李希烈攻破邓州，杀唐、邓、隋招讨使黄金岳。
English: On the 12th, Li Xilei broke through Dengzhou, killed Tang, Deng, Sui, and summoned Huang Rongyue.

古文：是春，旱。
现代文：本年春季，干旱。
English: This spring, there was a drought.

古文：四月乙丑，徙封谊为舒王。
现代文：四月初一，改封李谊为舒王。
English: On the first day of April, Li Yi's title was changed to Shu Wang.

古文：壬午，浑瑊及李怀光战于长春宫，败之。
现代文：十八日，浑蠨在长春宫与李怀光作战，打败李怀光。
English: On the 18th, Hunchun fought against Li Huaguang at the Changchun Palace and defeated Li Huaguang.

古文：丙戌，马燧、浑瑊为河中招抚使。
现代文：二十二日，马燧、浑蠨任河中招抚使。
English: On the 22nd, Ma Zheng and Hun Zheng were appointed as envoys to the middle of the river.

古文：六月己丑，幽州卢龙军节度使硃滔卒，涿州刺史刘怦自称留后。
现代文：六月二十六日，幽州卢龙军节度使朱滔死去，涿州刺史刘怦自称留后。
English: On June 26th, the Yuzhou Lulong Army Festival caused Zhu Tao to die, and Liu Ye, the governor of Zhangzhou, claimed to stay behind.

古文：辛卯，剑南西川节度使张延赏为中书侍郎、同中书门下平章事。
现代文：二十八日，剑南西川节度使张延赏任中书侍郎、同中书门下平章事。
English: On the 28th, the Jian'nan Nishikawa Festival made Zhang Yanbo be awarded the title of Junior Secretary of the Middle School and the Junior Secretary of the Middle School.

古文：戊子，马燧及李怀光战于陶城，败之。
现代文：二十五日，马燧在陶城与李怀光作战，打败李怀光。
English: On the 25th, Ma Yu fought with Li Huai Guang in Taocheng and defeated Li Huai Guang.

古文：七月，灞、浐竭。
现代文：七月，灞水、水干涸。
English: In July, the water dries up.

古文：庚子，大风拔木。
现代文：初七，大风拔起树木。
English: On the seventh day of the first month, high winds uprooted trees.

古文：八月，袭封配飨功臣子孙。甲子，以旱避正殿，减膳。
现代文：八月，将承继封爵的功臣子孙新死者礻付祭于宗庙。初二，德宗因旱灾避离正殿，减少膳食。
English: In August, the descendants of the meritorious vassals who succeeded to the peerage and the newly deceased will be enshrined in the ancestral temple. On the second day of the first month, the Tokuso avoided the main hall due to drought, reducing meals.

古文：甲戌，李怀光伏诛。
现代文：十二日，李怀光伏法处死。
English: On the 12th, Li Huai was put to death by photovoltaic method.

古文：己卯，给复河中、同绛二州一年。
现代文：十七日，免除河中、同绛二州徭役一年。
English: On the 17th, he exempted Hechu and his classmates from the two-state corvee for one year.

古文：马燧为侍中，张延赏罢。
现代文：马燧任侍中，张延赏被免职。
English: Ma Wei was appointed as a chamberlain, and Zhang Yanbo was dismissed.

古文：丙戌，李希烈杀宣慰使颜真卿。
现代文：二十四日，李希烈杀宣慰使颜真卿。
English: On the 24th, Li Xili killed Yan Zhenqing.

古文：九月辛亥，刘从一罢。
现代文：九月十九日，刘从一被免职。
English: On September 19, Liu was removed from his post.

古文：庚申，幽州卢龙军节度使刘怦卒，其子济自称留后。
现代文：二十八日，幽州卢龙军节度使刘怦死去，其子刘济自称留后。
English: On the 28th, the Yuzhou Lulong Army Festival caused Liu Qi to die, and his son Liu Ji claimed to stay behind.

古文：是秋，雨木冰。
现代文：秋季，雨水着树成冰。
English: In autumn, the rain turns the trees into ice.

古文：十一月癸卯，有事于南郊，大赦，赐奉天兴元扈从百官、收京将士阶、勋、爵。
现代文：十一月十一日，德宗在京城南郊祭天，施行大赦，赐予随从护驾至奉天、兴元的百官、收复京城的将士官阶、勋衔、爵位。
English: On November 11th, Emperor Dezong held a divine service in the southern suburb of Beijing, and granted amnesty to the hundreds of officials who had followed the escort to the divine service and the rejuvenation of the country, as well as to the soldiers who had recovered the capital.

古文：二年正月丙申，诏减御膳之半，赒贫乏者授以官。
现代文：贞元二年正月初五，德宗下诏：帝王的饮食减去一半，救济贫困百姓的富户授以官职。
English: On the 5th day of the 1st month of the 2nd year of the 1st month of the 2nd year of the 1st month of the 2nd year of the 1st month of the 1st year of the 2nd year of the 2nd year of the 1st month of the 1st year of the 2nd year of the 1st year of the 2nd year of the 1st year of the 2nd year of the 1st year of the 2nd year of the 2nd year of the 1st year of the 2nd year of the 2nd year of the 1st year of the 2nd year of the 2nd year of the 1st year of the 2nd year of the 2

古文：壬寅，卢翰罢。
现代文：十一日，卢翰被免职。
English: On the 11th day, Lu Han was removed from office.

古文：吏部侍郎刘滋为左散骑常侍，给事中崔造，中书舍人齐映：同中书门下平章事。
现代文：吏部侍郎刘滋任左散骑常侍，给事中崔造、中书舍人齐映，一并加同中书门下平章事。
English: Liu Zhi, the attendant of the cadre department, was appointed as the left straggler of the regular attendants, and he was accompanied by Cui Zou and Zhong Shusei, as well as Zhong Shusei's subordinate Ping Zhang.

古文：二月癸亥，山南东道节度使樊泽及李希烈战于泌河，败之。
现代文：二月初三，山南东道节度使樊泽在泌河与李希烈作战，打败李希烈。
English: On the third day of the second month of the year, the Shannan Host Festival made Heze fight with Li Xilai in Zhuhe and defeat Li Xilai.

古文：四月丙寅，希烈伏诛。
现代文：四月初七，李希烈伏法处死。
English: On the seventh day of the fourth lunar month, Li Xili was executed by hanging.

古文：甲戌，雨土。
现代文：十五日，天空降泥土如雨。
English: On the 15th, the sky rained down mud.

古文：甲申，给复淮西二年。
现代文：二十五日，免除淮西徭役二年。
English: On the 25th, he was exempted from Huaxi labor camp for two years.

古文：五月，李希烈将李惠登以隋州降。
现代文：五月，李希烈部将李惠登献出隋州归降。
English: In May, the Li Xi Martyrs' Department presented Li Huiden to Suizhou for surrender.

古文：己酉，地震。
现代文：二十一日，地震。
English: On the 21st, there was an earthquake.

古文：六月癸未，沧州刺史程日华卒，其子怀直自称观察留后。
现代文：六月二十六日，沧州刺史程日华死去，其子程怀直自称观察留后。
English: On June 26th, Cangzhou assassin Cheng Rihwa died, and his son Cheng Huai Zhi claimed to have stayed behind to observe.

古文：是月，淮西兵马使吴少诚杀其节度使陈仙奇，自称留后。
现代文：本月，淮西兵马使吴少诚杀了节度使陈仙奇，自称留后。
English: This month, Wu Shao-cheng, the military commander of Huaxi, killed Chen Xianqi, the military commander of Jiedu, and claimed to stay behind.

古文：七月，李希烈将薛翼以唐州降，侯召以光州降。
现代文：七月，李希烈部将薛翼献唐州归降，侯召献光州归降。
English: In July, Li Xilide offered Xue Ying to Tang Prefecture for surrender, and Hou Zhao to Gwangju for surrender.

古文：八月丙子，大雨雹。
现代文：八月二十日，降大冰雹。
English: On August 20, large hailstones fell.

古文：丙戌，吐蕃寇邠、宁、泾、陇四州。
现代文：三十日，吐蕃军进犯、宁、泾、陇四州。
English: On the 30th, the Tubo army invaded Ning, Handan and Handan.

古文：九月乙巳，寇好畤，李晟败之于汧阳。
现代文：九月十九日，吐军进犯好，李晟在阳打败吐军。
English: On September 19th, the Tu army made a good attack, and Li Lan defeated the Tu army in the sun.

古文：十月癸酉，邠宁节度使韩游瑰又败之于平川。
现代文：十月十七日，宁节度使韩游耡在平川再败吐蕃军。
English: On October 17th, Ning Jiedu defeated Han Yu's army again in Hirakawa.

古文：十一月甲午，立淑妃王氏为皇后。
现代文：十一月初九，德宗立淑妃王氏为皇后。
English: On the 9th day of the 11th month of the year, King Suk Hee, the founder of the Tokugawa shogunate, became empress.

古文：丁酉，皇后崩。
现代文：十二日，王皇后去世。
English: On the 12th, Empress Wang passed away.

古文：辛丑，吐蕃陷盐州。
现代文：十六日，吐蕃军攻破盐州。
English: On the 16th, the Tubo army broke through Yanzhou.

古文：十二月丁巳，隐夏州。
现代文：十二月初二，吐军攻破夏州。
English: On the second day of the first month of December, the Tibetan army broke through Xiazhou.

古文：马燧为绥、银、麟、胜招讨使。
现代文：马燧任绥、银、麟、胜招讨使。
English: Ma Ying-jeou, Yin, Lin, and Sheng Zhaotong are envoys.

古文：庚申，崔造罢。
现代文：初五，崔造被免职。
English: On the fifth day of the first month, Cui Zou was dismissed.

古文：甲戌，以吐蕃寇边，避正殿。
现代文：十九日，德宗因吐蕃侵犯边境，避离正殿。
English: On the 19th, Dezong fled from the main hall because of the border invasion by the Tuyun.

古文：三年正月壬寅，尚书左仆射张延赏同中书门下平章事。
现代文：贞元三年正月十七日，尚书左仆射张延赏加同中书门下平章事。
English: On the 17th day of the 1st month of the 3rd year of the reign of the Zhengde Emperor, Shang Shuxu's left-hand servant, Zhang Yanzhong, was awarded the prize, and Shang Shuxu's left-hand servant, Zhang Yanzhong, was awarded the prize.

古文：壬子，刘滋罢。
现代文：二十七日，刘滋被免职。
English: On the 27th, Liu Zhi was dismissed.

古文：贬齐映为夔州刺史。
现代文：将齐映贬为夔州刺史。
English: Qi Ying will be relegated to a footnote in the history of Zhangzhou.

古文：兵部侍郎柳浑同中书门下平章事。
现代文：兵部侍郎柳浑加同中书门下平章事。
English: The attendant of the military department, Yanagi Hunka, became a disciple of Chushimon Shimohei Shoji.

古文：二月己卯，华州潼关节度使骆元光克盐、夏二州。
现代文：二月二十四日，华州、潼关节度使骆元光攻克盐州、夏州。
English: On February 24th, Luo Yuanguang defeated Yanzhou and Xiazhou.

古文：甲申，葬昭德皇后于靖陵。
现代文：二十九日，将昭德皇后葬于靖陵。
English: On the 29th, Empress Zhao De was buried in the Jingling Mausoleum.

古文：三月丁未，李晟为太尉。
现代文：三月二十三日，李晟任太尉。
English: On March 23rd, Li Yu was promoted to the rank of lieutenant.

古文：辛亥，马燧罢副元帅。
现代文：二十七日，免去马燧副元帅职务。
English: On the 27th, Ma Jun was relieved of his duties as vice-marshal.

古文：五月，扬州江溢。
现代文：五月，扬州一带的长江泛滥。
English: In May, the Yangtze River flooded in Yangzhou.

古文：吴少诚杀申州刺史张伯元、殿中侍御史郑常。
现代文：吴少诚杀申州刺史张伯元、殿中侍御史郑常。
English: Wu Shosheng killed the prefect of Shen Prefecture, Zhang Bohuan, and the palace attendant, Zheng Chang.

古文：闰月辛未，浑瑊及吐蕃盟于平凉，吐蕃执会盟副使、兵部尚书崔汉衡，杀判官、殿中侍御史韩弇。
现代文：闰五月十九日，浑蠨在平凉与吐蕃会谈结盟，吐蕃抓了会盟副使、兵部尚书崔汉衡，杀了判官、殿中侍御史韩。
English: On the 19th day of leap May, Hun Rong made an alliance with Tubo in the Ping Liang talks. Tubo captured the vice-envoy of the alliance, the military department Shang Shu Cui Han Heng, and killed the judge and the palace attendant Shi Han.

古文：戊寅，太白昼见。
现代文：二十六日，白昼出现太白星。
English: On the 26th, a very white star appeared in the daytime.

古文：六月，吐蕃寇盐、夏二州。
现代文：六月，吐蕃军进犯盐、夏二州。
English: In June, the Tubo army invaded Yan and Xia Erzhou.

古文：丙戌，马燧为司徒，前陕虢观察使李泌为中书侍郎、同中书门下平章事。
现代文：初五，马燧任司徒，前陕虢观察使李泌任中书侍郎、同中书门下平章事。
English: On the fifth day of the first month of the year, Ma Yu was appointed as a scholar, and Li Xiu, the former Shaanxi Observer, was appointed as the attendant of the middle school, and the middle school's teacher was Heping Zhang.

古文：七月甲子，朔方节度使杜希全为朔方、灵盐、丰夏绥银节度都统。
现代文：七月十三日，朔方节度使杜希全任朔方、灵盐及丰、夏、绥、银节度都统。
English: On July 13, the Dragon Boat Festival made Du Xi the full-time leader of the Dragon Boat, Spirit Salt, Feng, Xia, Dragonfly and Silver Festivals.

古文：壬申，张延赏薨。
现代文：二十一日，张延赏去世。
English: On the 21st, Zhang Yanbo passed away.

古文：八月辛巳朔，日有食之。
现代文：八月初一，日月合朔，有日蚀。
English: On the first day of August, the sun and moon are new, and there is a solar eclipse.

古文：己丑，柳浑罢。
现代文：初九，柳浑被免职。
English: At the beginning of ninth grade, Liu Hun was dismissed.

古文：戊申，吐蕃寇青石岭，陇州刺史苏清沔败之。
现代文：二十八日，吐蕃军进犯青石岭，陇州刺史苏清沔打败吐军。
English: On the 28th, the Tubo army invaded Qingshi Ridge, and Su Qingyao, the governor of Bozhou, defeated the Tubo army.

古文：庚戌，禁大马出蒲、潼、武关。
现代文：三十日，禁止大马出蒲、潼、武关。
English: On the 30th, it was forbidden for horses to go out of the pagodas, pavilions, and military checkpoints.

古文：九月丁巳，吐蕃寇汧阳。丙寅，陷华亭及连云堡。
现代文：九月初七，吐蕃军进犯阳；十六日，攻破华亭与连云堡。
English: On the 7th day of the 9th month, the Tubo army invaded Yang; on the 16th day, they broke through Huating and Lianyungang.

古文：十月甲申，寇丰义，韩游瑰败之。
现代文：十月初四，吐军进犯丰义，韩游耡打败吐军。
English: At the beginning of October 4th, the Tu army attacked Fengyi, and Han Youjun defeated the Tu army.

古文：乙酉，寇长武城，城使韩全义败之。
现代文：初五，吐军进犯长武城，城使韩全义打败吐军。
English: On the fifth day of the first month, the Tibetan army invaded the Changwu city, and the city made Han Quan Yi defeat the Tibetan army.

古文：壬辰，射生将韩钦绪谋反，伏诛。
现代文：十二日，射生将韩钦绪谋反，伏法处死。
English: On the 12th, he shot Han Qingsu for plotting a rebellion, and he was sentenced to death.

古文：十一月己卯，京师、东都、河中地震。
现代文：十一月二十九日，长安、东都、河中地震。
English: On November 29th, the earthquakes in Chang'an, Dongdu and Hechu occurred.

古文：十二月庚辰，猎于新店。
现代文：十二月初一，德宗在新店打猎。
English: On the first day of December, Dezong went hunting at the new store.

古文：四年正月庚戌朔，京师地震。
现代文：贞元四年正月初一，日月合朔，京城地震。
English: On the first day of the first month of the fourth year of the Zhengyuan, the capital city was hit by an earthquake.

古文：大赦，刺史予一子官，增户垦田者加阶，县令减选，九品以上官言事。
现代文：施行大赦，授予刺史的一个儿子官职，扩增民户，开发农田者提升官阶；减少对县令的放逐；诏谕九品以上官员议政。
English: An amnesty was carried out, one of the sons of Susshi was granted an official post, the number of private households was increased, and those who developed farmland were promoted to higher ranks; the banishment of county magistrates was reduced; and officials above the ninth grade were allowed to discuss politics.

古文：壬申，刘玄佐为四镇北庭行营、泾原节度副元帅。
现代文：二十三日刘玄佐任四镇、北庭行营、泾原节度副元帅。
English: On the 23rd, Liu Xuan Zuo was appointed vice-marshal of Shizhen, Beiting Xingying, and Yuyuan Jiedu.

古文：是月，金、房二州地震，江溢山裂。
现代文：本月，金、房二州地震，江河泛滥，山冈崩裂。
English: This month, Jin and Fang Erzhou earthquake, river flooding, mountain collapse.

古文：雨木冰于陈留。
现代文：陈留，雨水着树成冰。
English: Chen Liu, rainwater turns trees into ice.

古文：四月，河南、淮海地生毛。
现代文：四月，河南、淮海地面生长毛状物。
English: In April, the ground in Henan and Huaihai was covered with hair-like growths.

古文：己亥，福建军乱，逐其观察使吴诜，大将郝诫溢自称留后。
现代文：二十二日，福建军队骚乱，驱逐其观察使吴诜，大将郝诫溢自称留后。
English: On the 22nd, the Fujian army rioted, expelling its observers and forcing Wu Gan, the general, to declare that he would stay behind.

古文：五月，吐蕃寇泾、邠、宁、庆、鄜五州。
现代文：五月，吐蕃军进犯泾？宁、庆、五州。
English: In May, the Tubo army invaded Shining, Qing and Wuzhou.

古文：六月己亥，封子原为邕王。
现代文：六月二十三日，德宗封其子李讠原为邕王。
English: On June 23rd, Emperor Dezong made his son, Li Shibuan, the king of Shanshan.

古文：七月庚戌，浑瑊为邠、宁庆副元帅。
现代文：七月初五，浑蠨任、宁、庆副元帅。
English: On the 5th day of the 7th month of the year, Hunyu Ren, Ning and Qing became vice-marshals.

古文：癸丑，宁州军乱，邠宁都虞候杨朝晟败之。
现代文：初八，宁州军队骚乱，宁都虞候杨朝晟平乱。
English: In the eighth day of the first month, the Ningzhou army rioted, and the Ningdu community waited for Yang Chaohui to quell the riot.

古文：己未，奚、室韦寇振武。
现代文：十四日，奚、室韦族军队进犯振武。
English: On the 14th, the Shao and Murouei troops attacked Zhenwu.

古文：是月，河水黑。
现代文：本月，黄河水变黑。
English: This month, the Yellow River turned black.

古文：八月，灞水溢。
现代文：八月，灞水泛滥。
English: In August, Surabaya was flooded.

古文：九月庚申，吐蕃寇宁州，邠宁节度使张献甫败之。
现代文：九月十六日，吐蕃军进犯宁州，宁节度使张献甫打败吐军。
English: On September 16th, the Tubo army invaded Ningzhou. Ning Jiedu ordered Zhang Xianfu to defeat the Tubo army.

古文：冬，筑夹城。
现代文：冬季，构筑夹城。
English: In winter, build a fortified city.

古文：是岁，京师城震二十。
现代文：本年，京城长安地震二十次。
English: This year, the Beijing Chang'an earthquake has occurred twenty times.

古文：五年正月甲辰朔，日有食之。
现代文：贞元五年正月初一，日月合朔，有日蚀。
English: On the first day of the first month of the fifth year of the Zhengyuan era, the sun and the moon were new, and there was a solar eclipse.

古文：二月庚子，大理卿董晋为门下侍郎，御史大夫窦参为中书侍郎：同中书门下平章事。
现代文：二月二十七日，大理卿董晋任门下侍郎，御史大夫窦参任中书侍郎，一并加同中书门下平章事。
English: On February 27th, Dong Jin, the Lord of Dali, was appointed as the junior attendant, and Dou Sheng, the Grand Historian, was appointed as the junior attendant of Zhongshu, together with the junior attendant of Zhongshu, He Ping.

古文：三月甲辰，李泌薨。
现代文：三月初二，李泌逝世。
English: On March 2nd, Li Jiu passed away.

古文：夏，吐蕃寇长武城，韩全义败之于佛堂原。
现代文：夏季，吐蕃军进犯长武城，韩全义在佛堂原打败吐军。
English: In the summer, the Tubo army invaded Changwu City, and Han Quan Yi defeated the Tubo army in the Buddhist temple.

古文：九月丙午，剑南西川节度使韦皋败吐蕃于台登北谷，克巂州。
现代文：九月初七，剑南西川节度使韦皋在台登北面山谷打败吐军，攻克州。
English: On the 7th day of the 9th month, the Jiannan Xichuan Festival made Wei Wei defeat the Tu army in the valley north of Taideng and conquer the state.

古文：十月，岭南节度使李复克琼州。
现代文：十月，岭南节度使李复收复琼州。
English: In October, the Lingnan Festival made Li regain Qiongzhou.

古文：六年春，旱。
现代文：贞元六年春季，旱灾。
English: In the spring of the sixth year of Sadamoto, there was a drought.

古文：闰四月乙卯，诏常参官、畿县令言事。
现代文：闰四月十九日，德宗下诏：定时入朝的常参官员、京畿县令议政。
English: On leap April 19th, Emperor Dezong issued an edict: Regular officials who regularly enter the imperial court and Gyeonggi prefectural governors are no longer allowed to discuss politics.

古文：免京光府夏税。
现代文：免除京兆府夏税。
English: Exempted from the summer tax of Keicho Prefecture.

古文：八月辛丑，杀皇太子妃萧氏。
现代文：八月初八，杀皇太子李诵的妃子萧氏。
English: On the 8th day of the 8th month of the 8th month, Xiao Shi, the concubine who killed the crown prince Li Qiao, died.

古文：十一月戊辰，朝献于太清宫。己巳，朝享于太庙。
现代文：十一月初六，德宗在太清宫举行装扮受祭者享用祭品的 朝献 祭礼。初七，祭祀太庙。
English: On the 6th day of the first month of the 11th month, Emperor Dezong held a morning offering ceremony at the Taiqing Palace, in which the sacrificial victims were dressed up and enjoyed the offerings.

古文：庚午，有事于南郊。
现代文：初八，在京城南郊祭天。
English: On the eighth day of the first month, a festival is held in the southern suburbs of Kyoto.

古文：赐文武官阶、爵。
现代文：赐予文武官员官阶、爵位。
English: Civil and military officials were given official ranks and peerages.

古文：降囚罪，徒以下原之。
现代文：对囚犯减刑，判拘禁劳役以下刑罚的罪犯免刑。
English: Prisoners will have their sentences reduced, and those sentenced to less than or equal to forced labor will be exempted from punishment.

古文：葬战亡暴骨者。
现代文：埋葬尸骸暴露的阵亡者。
English: Burying the remains of the dead exposed.

古文：是岁，吐蕃陷北庭都护府，节度使杨袭古奔于西州。
现代文：本年，吐蕃军攻破北庭都护府，节度使杨袭右逃往西州。
English: This year, the Tubo army broke through Beiting Duofu, and the festival caused Yang to flee to Xizhou.

古文：七年正月己巳，襄王僙薨。
现代文：贞元七年正月初八，襄王李亻黄去世。
English: On the eighth day of the first month of the seventh year of Zhengyuan, King of Xiang, Li Shuguang, passed away.

古文：四月，安南首领杜英翰反，伏诛。
现代文：四月，安南首领杜英翰反叛，伏法处死。
English: In April, the leader of Annan, Du Yinghan, rebelled and was executed.

古文：五月甲申，端王遇薨。
现代文：五月二十五日，端王李遇去世。
English: On May 25, Duan Wang Liyu passed away.

古文：九月，回鹘杀杨袭古。
现代文：九月，回纥杀杨袭古。
English: In September, the backlash killed Yang Ziguo.

古文：十二月戊戌，睦王述薨。
现代文：十二月十二日，睦王李述去世。
English: On December 12th, King Mutsu Lishu passed away.

古文：是冬，无雪。
现代文：本年冬季无雪。
English: There was no snow this winter.

古文：八年二月庚子，雨土。
现代文：贞元八年二月十五日，天降泥土如雨。
English: On the 15th day of February in the eighth year of the Jōgen era, the sky rained down mud.

古文：三月甲申，宣武军节度使刘玄佐卒，其子士宁自称留后。
现代文：三月三十日，宣武军节度使刘玄佐死去，其子刘士宁自称留后。
English: On March 30th, the Xuanwu Army Festival caused Liu Xuanzuo to die, and his son Liu Shining claimed to stay behind.

古文：四月，吐蕃寇灵州。
现代文：四月，吐蕃军进犯灵州。
English: In April, the Tubo army invaded Lingzhou.

古文：丁亥，杀左谏议大夫知制诰吴通玄。
现代文：初三，杀左谏议大夫、知制诰吴通玄。
English: In the third year of junior high school, Dr. Sui Zuo and Dr. Wu Tong Xuan, both of whom were intellectuals, were killed.

古文：乙未，贬窦参为郴州别驾。
现代文：十一日，将窦参贬为郴州别驾。
English: On the 11th day of the month, Dou Sang was downgraded to Bozhou Beidou.

古文：尚书左丞赵憬、兵部侍郎陆贽为中书侍郎、同中书门下平章事。
现代文：尚书左丞赵憬、兵部侍郎陆贽任中书侍郎，同中书门下平章事。
English: Shang Shuxu Zuo Zhao Jing, the attendant of the military department, Lu Xun, was appointed as the attendant of the middle school, and the subordinate of the middle school was Heping Zhangji.

古文：五月己未，大风发太庙屋瓦。
现代文：五月初五，大风掀开太庙的屋瓦。
English: On the fifth day of the fifth lunar month, a strong wind blew away the roof tiles of the Great Temple.

古文：癸酉，平卢军节度使李纳卒，其子师古自称留后。
现代文：十九日，平卢军节度使李纳死去，其子李师古自称留后。
English: On the 19th, the Pinglu military festival caused Li Na to die, and his son Li Shigu claimed to stay behind.

古文：六月，淮水溢。
现代文：六月，淮水泛滥。
English: In June, the Huai River flooded.

古文：吐蕃寇连云堡，大将王进用死之。
现代文：吐蕃军进犯连云堡，大将王进用阵亡。
English: The Tubo army attacked Lianyungang, and General Wang Jinwei was killed in the battle.

古文：九月丁巳，韦皋及吐蕃战于维州，败之。
现代文：九月初五，韦皋在维州与吐军交战，打败吐军。
English: On the 5th day of the 9th month, Wei Wei fought against the Tibetan army in Wuzhou and defeated the Tibetan army.

古文：十一月壬子朔，日有食之。
现代文：十一月初一，日月合朔，有日蚀。
English: On the first day of the first month of November, the sun and the moon are new, and there is a solar eclipse.

古文：庚午，山南西道节度使岩震及吐蕃战于黑水堡，败之。
现代文：十九日，山南西道节度使严震在黑水堡与吐军交战，打败吐军。
English: On the 19th, the Shannan West Road Festival caused the severe earthquake to fight with the Tu army in the Black Water Fort and defeat the Tu army.

古文：是月，幽州卢龙军节度使刘济及其弟瀛州刺史澭战于瀛州，澭败奔于京师。
现代文：本月，幽州卢龙军节度使刘济与其弟瀛州刺史刘氵雍在瀛州开战，刘氵雍败逃京城。
English: This month, the Yuzhou Lulong Army Festival caused Liu Ji and his younger brother, Liu Shiyong, the governor of Yuzhou, to go to war in Yuzhou. Liu Shiyong was defeated and fled Beijing.

古文：十二月甲辰，猎于城东。
现代文：十二月二十三日，德宗在长安城东打猎。
English: On December 23, Dezong went hunting in the east of Chang'an City.

古文：九年正月癸卯，复税茶。
现代文：贞元九年正月二十四日，恢复征收茶税。
English: On the 24th day of the first month of the 9th year of the Zhengyuan era, the tea tax was resumed.

古文：四月辛酉，关辅、河中地震。
现代文：四月十三日，京畿、河中地震。
English: On April 13th, Gyeonggi Province and Haeju Province were hit by an earthquake.

古文：五月甲辰，义成军节度使贾耽为尚书右仆射，尚书右丞卢迈：同中书门下平章事。
现代文：五月二十七日，义成军节度使贾耽任尚书右仆射，尚书右丞卢迈，一并加同中书门下平章事。
English: On May 27th, the Yicheng Army's festival brought Jia Tanren to serve as Shangshu's right-hand man, Shangshu's right-hand man, and Shangshu's right-hand man, together with Zhongshu's right-hand man.

古文：丙午，董晋罢。
现代文：二十九日，董晋被免职。
English: On the 29th, Dong Jin was dismissed.

古文：八月庚戌，李晟薨。
现代文：八月初四，李晟去世。
English: On August 4th, Li Yong passed away.

古文：十一月癸未，朝献于太清宫。甲申，朝享于太庙。
现代文：十一月初八，德宗在太清宫举行 朝献 祭礼。初九，祭祀太庙。
English: On the eighth day of the first month of the 11th month, Emperor Dezong held the morning offering ceremony at the Taiqing Palace.

古文：乙酉，有事于南郊，大赦。
现代文：初十，在京城南郊祭天，施行大赦。
English: On the 10th day of the first month of the year, an amnesty will be implemented in the southern suburbs of Beijing.

古文：十二月丙辰，宣武军将李万荣逐其节度使刘士宁，自称留后。
现代文：十二月十一日，宣武军将领李万荣驱逐了节度使刘士宁，自称留后。
English: On December 11, Li Wan Rong, the commander of the Xuanwu army, expelled Liu Shining, the chief of the festival, claiming that he would stay behind.

古文：十年正月壬辰，南诏蛮败吐蕃于神川，来献捷。
现代文：贞元十年正月十八日，南诏蛮军在神川打败吐蕃军，来朝献捷。
English: On the 18th day of the first month of the 10th year of the Zhengyuan era, the Nanzhao barbarian army defeated the Tubo army in Jinchuan and came to the North to offer victory.

古文：四月癸卯朔，赦京城。
现代文：四月初一，日月合朔，对京城施行赦免。
English: On the first day of April, at the new moon, the capital was pardoned.

古文：戊申，地震。
现代文：初六，地震。
English: On the 6th day of the 6th month, an earthquake occurred.

古文：癸丑，又震。
现代文：十一日，再次地震。
English: On the 11th, there was another earthquake.

古文：是月，太白昼见。
现代文：本月，白昼出现太白星。
English: This month, a very white star appeared in the daytime.

古文：六月丙寅，韦皋败吐蕃，克峨和城。
现代文：六月二十五日，韦皋打败吐蕃军，攻克峨和城。
English: On June 25th, Wei Wei defeated the Tu Wei army and conquered Ewa.

古文：自春不雨至于是月。
现代文：自入春无雨直至本月。
English: There has been no rain since the beginning of spring until this month.

古文：辛未，雨，大风拔木。
现代文：三十日，降雨，大风拔起树木。
English: On the 30th, rain and high winds uprooted trees.

古文：七月，西原蛮叛。
现代文：七月，西原蛮反叛。
English: In July, Nishihara rebelled.

古文：八月，陷钦、横、浔、贵四州。
现代文：八月，西原蛮军攻破钦、横、氵寻、贵四州。
English: In August, the Nishihara barbarian army broke through Qin, Yangtze, Minhang and Guizhou.

古文：十月，昭义军节度留后王虔休及摄洺州刺史元谊战于鸡泽，败之。
现代文：十月，昭义军节度留后王虔休在鸡泽与氵名州代理刺史元谊开战，打败元谊。
English: In October, after the Shouyi Army Festival, Wang Qianhui went to war in Jizhe with the agent of the State of Renmei, Jishi Yuan Rong, and defeated Yuan Rong.

古文：十二月丙辰，猎于城南。
现代文：十二月十七日，德宗在长安城南打猎。
English: On December 17th, Dezong went hunting in the south of Chang'an City.

古文：壬戌，贬陆贽为太子宾客。
现代文：二十三日，将陆贽贬为太子宾客。
English: On the 23rd, Lu Yao was relegated to being the prince's guest.

古文：十一年四月丙寅，奚寇平州，刘济败之于青都山。
现代文：贞元十一年四月二十九日，奚族军队进犯平州，刘济在青都山打败奚军。
English: On April 29th, the eleventh year of Zhengyuan, the Yao army invaded Pingzhou, and Liu Ji defeated the Yao army in Qingdu Mountain.

古文：五月庚午，中书门下虑囚。
现代文：五月初四，中书门下省讯察记录囚犯的罪状。
English: On the fourth day of the fifth month of the year, the Provincial Information Office of the People's Republic of China inspected and recorded the crimes of the prisoners.

古文：八月辛亥，马燧薨。
现代文：八月十七日，马燧逝世。
English: On August 17th, Ma Jun passed away.

古文：九月，横海军兵马使程怀信逐其兄节度使怀直，自称留后。
现代文：九月，横海军兵马使程怀信驱逐其兄、节度使程怀直，自称留后。
English: In September, Cheng Huaixin, who was sent by the Chinese navy to expel his brother, Cheng Huai Zhi, who was sent by the State Council, claimed to stay behind.

古文：十月，朗、蜀二州江溢。
现代文：十月，朗、蜀二州区域的长江泛滥。
English: In October, the Yangtze River overflowed in the regions of Lang and Shu.

古文：十二月戊辰，猎于苑中。
现代文：十二月初五，德宗在皇家林园中打猎。
English: On the fifth day of the twelfth month, Dezong went hunting in the royal forest.

古文：十二年二月己卯，吐蕃寇巂州，刺史曹高仕败之。
现代文：贞元十二年二月十七日，吐蕃军进犯州，刺史曹高仕将其打败。
English: On February 17th, the twelfth year of the Zhengyuan era, the Tubo army invaded the state, and Cao Gaoshi defeated it.

古文：三月丙辰，韶王暹薨。
现代文：三月二十四日，韶王李暹去世。
English: On March 24th, the Dragon King, Li Siem, passed away.

古文：四月庚午，魏博节度使田绪卒，其子季安自称留后。
现代文：四月初九，魏博节度使田绪死去，其子田季安自称留后。
English: On the 9th day of the 4th month, Wei Bo Jiedu caused Tian Xu to die, and his son Tian Ji'an claimed to be his heir.

古文：六月己丑，宣武军节度使李万荣卒，其子乃自称兵马使，伏诛。
现代文：六月三十日，宣武军节度使李万荣死去，其子李自称兵马使，伏法处死。
English: On June 30, Li Wan Rong was killed by the soldiers of the Xuanwu Army. His son, Li Wan Rong, who called himself a "soldier of the army," was sentenced to death.

古文：七月戊戌，韩王迥薨。
现代文：七月初九，韩王李迥去世。
English: On the 9th of July, Han Wang Lijun passed away.

古文：八月己未朔，日有食之。
现代文：八月初一，日月合朔，有日蚀。
English: On the first day of August, the sun and moon are new, and there is a solar eclipse.

古文：丙戌，赵憬薨。
现代文：二十八日，赵憬去世。
English: On the 28th, Zhao Jing passed away.

古文：九月，吐蕃寇庆州。
现代文：九月，吐蕃进犯庆州。
English: In September, Tubo invaded Gyeongju.

古文：十月甲戌，右谏议大夫崔损、给事中赵宗儒同中书门下平章事。
现代文：十月十七日，右谏议大夫崔损、给事中赵宗儒任同中书门下平章事。
English: On October 17th, Zhao Zongru was appointed to the position of Vice-Chancellor of the Chinese University of Hong Kong.

古文：十三年正月壬寅，吐蕃请和。
现代文：贞元十三年正月十五日，吐蕃求和。
English: On the fifteenth day of the first month of the thirteenth year of the Zhengyuan, Tubo came to sue for peace.

古文：四月辛酉，以旱虑囚。
现代文：四月初六，德宗因旱灾讯察记录囚犯的罪状。
English: On the 6th day of the 4th month, because of the drought, Dezong investigated and recorded the crimes of the prisoners.

古文：壬戌，雩于兴庆宫。
现代文：初七，在兴庆宫举行祈雨祭祀。
English: On the 7th day of the first month, a rain prayer ceremony was held at the Xingqing Palace.

古文：五月壬寅，吐蕃寇巂州，曹高仕败之。
现代文：五月十七日，吐蕃进犯州，曹高仕打败吐军。
English: On May 17th, Tubo invaded Guanzhou, and Cao Gaoshi defeated the Tubo army.

古文：庚戌，义宁军乱，杀其将常楚客。
现代文：二十五日，义宁军骚乱，杀了将领常楚客。
English: On the 25th, the Yining army rioted and killed the general Chang Chu.

古文：七月乙未，京师地震。
现代文：七月十二日，京都长安地震。
English: On July 12, the Kyoto-Chang'an earthquake occurred.

古文：九月己丑，卢迈罢。
现代文：九月初七，卢迈被免职。
English: On the 7th of September, Rohmai was removed from office.

古文：十四年三月丙申，凤翔监军使西门去奢杀其将夏侯衍。
现代文：贞元十四年三月十六日，凤翔监军使西门去奢杀其将领夏侯衍。
English: On the 16th day of the 3rd month of the 14th year of Zhen, Feng Xiang, the supervisor of the army, sent Ximen to kill his general Xia Houyan.

古文：五月己酉，始雷。
现代文：五月三十日，今年初次打雷。
English: May 30th, the first thunderstorm of the year.

古文：闰月辛亥，有星陨于西北。
现代文：闰五月初二，有流星陨落在西北方。
English: On the second day of the leap month of May, a meteorite fell in the northwest.

古文：辛酉，长武城军乱，逐其使韩全义。
现代文：十二日，长武城军队骚乱，驱逐城使韩全义。
English: On the 12th, the army of Changwu City rioted, expelling Han Quan Yi from the city.

古文：六月丙申，归化堡军乱，逐其将张国诚，泾原节度使刘昌败之。
现代文：六月十八日，归化堡军队骚乱，驱逐其将领张国诚，泾原节度使刘昌平定骚乱。
English: On June 18th, the army of the Naturalization Fort rioted, expelled its general Zhang Guosheng, and sent Liu Changding to quell the riot.

古文：七月壬申，赵宗儒罢。
现代文：七月二十五日，赵宗儒被免职。
English: On July 25, Zhao Zongru was removed from his post.

古文：工部侍郎郑馀庆为中书侍郎、同中书门下平章事。
现代文：工部侍郎郑余庆任中书侍郎、同中书门下平章事。
English: Zheng Yuqing, the attendant of the engineering department, was appointed as the attendant of the middle school, and Shimohei Shoji, the disciple of the middle school.

古文：九月丁卯，杞王倕薨。
现代文：九月二十一日，杞王李亻垂去世。
English: On September 21st, the King of Gong, Li Bingtuo, passed away.

古文：十二月壬寅，明州将栗锽杀其刺史卢云以反。
现代文：十二月二十七日，明州将领栗杀了刺史卢云反叛。
English: On December 27th, the Ming State General Lian Liang killed the rebel Jishu Luyun.

古文：是冬，无雪，京师饥。
现代文：本年冬季无雪，京城发生饥荒。
English: There was no snow this winter, and a famine broke out in the capital.

古文：十五年正月甲寅，雅王逸薨。
现代文：贞元十五年正月初九，雅王李逸去世。
English: On the 9th day of the 1st month of the 15th year of Zhenyuan, Ya Wang Li Yat passed away.

古文：壬戌，郴州蓝山崩。
现代文：十七日，郴州蓝山崩坍。
English: On the 17th, Luzhou Blue Mountain collapsed.

古文：二月乙酉，宣武军乱，杀节度行军司马陆长源，宋州刺史刘逸准自称留后。
现代文：二月十一日，宣武军发生骚乱，杀了节度行军司马陆长源，宋州刺史刘逸淮自称留后。
English: On February 11, the Xuanwu army rioted and killed Ma Lu Changyuan, the secretary of the festival march, and Liu Yihai, the governor of Songzhou, claimed to stay behind.

古文：三月甲寅，彰义军节度使吴少诚反，陷唐州，守将张嘉瑜死之。
现代文：三月初十，彰义军节度使吴少诚反叛，攻破唐州，守将张嘉瑜牺牲。
English: On the 10th day of the 3rd month, the festival of the Zhangyi Army caused Wu Shao Cheng to rebel and break through Tangzhou, and the guard Zhang Jiayu was sacrificed.

古文：四月乙未，栗锽伏诛。
现代文：四月二十一日，栗伏法处死。
English: On April 21, he was executed according to the Kuribushi method.

古文：九月乙巳，陈许节度留后上官涚及吴少诚战于临颍，败绩。
现代文：九月初四，陈许节度留后上官氵兑在临颍与吴少诚作战，大败。
English: On the fourth day of the first month of September, after Chen Xu Jiedu stayed behind, Shangguan Xuan Du fought with Wu Shaocheng in Linyi and suffered a crushing defeat.

古文：丙午，少诚寇许州。
现代文：初五，吴少诚进犯许州。
English: On the fifth day of the first month, Wu Shaocheng invaded Huzhou.

古文：庚戌，宣武军节度使刘全谅卒，都知兵马使韩弘自称留后。
现代文：初九，宣武军节度使刘全谅死去，都知兵马使韩弘自称留后。
English: On the 9th day of the first month of the year, Liu Zhenpeng died at the festival of the Xuanwu army, and the soldiers and horses all knew that Han Hong claimed to stay behind.

古文：丙辰，宣武、河阳、郑滑、东都汝、成德、幽州、淄青、魏博、易定、泽潞、河东、淮南、徐泗、山南东西、鄂岳军讨吴少诚。
现代文：十五日，宣武、河阳、郑滑、东都汝县、成德、幽州、淄青、魏博、易定、泽潞、河东、淮南、徐泗、山南东、山南西、鄂岳军讨伐吴少诚。
English: On the 15th, the armies of Xuanwu, Heyang, Zhenglu, Dongduyun, Chengde, Yuzhou, Jiaqing, Weibo, Yiding, Zeyao, Hedong, Huainan, Xuhui, Shannan Dong, Shannan Xi, and Ege fought against Wu Shaocheng.

古文：十月己丑，邕王原薨。
现代文：十月十九日，邕王李讠原去世。
English: On October 19th, the King of Gong, Li Bingyuan, passed away.

古文：十一月丁未，山南东道节度使于頔及吴少诚战于吴房，败之。
现代文：十一月初七，山南东道节度使于由页在吴房与吴少诚作战，打败吴少诚。
English: On the 7th day of the 11th month, the Shannan Host Festival made Yu Yufang fight with Wu Shaocheng in Wufang and defeat Wu Shaocheng.

古文：陈许节度使上官涚又败之于柴篱。
现代文：陈许节度使上官氵兑在柴篱又打败他。
English: Chen Xu Jiedu made Shangguan Yutu beat him again in Chaihen.

古文：辛亥，安黄节度使伊慎又败之于钟山。
现代文：十一日，安黄节度使伊慎在钟山再次打败吴少诚。
English: On the 11th day of the month, the Anhuang Festival made Yishen beat Wu Shaocheng again in Zhongshan.

古文：十二月庚午，寿州刺史王宗又败之于秋栅。
现代文：十二月初一，寿州刺史王宗在秋栅再败吴少诚。
English: On the first day of December, Wang Zong of Shoushu Shishi defeated Wu Shaocheng again in Qiu Zhe.

古文：辛未，浑瑊薨。
现代文：初二，浑蠨去世。
English: On the second day of his junior year, he passed away.

古文：乙未，诸道兵溃于小溵河。
现代文：二十六日，各道军队在小氵殷河溃败。
English: On the 26th, the armies of various provinces were routed in Xiaoyan Yinhe.

古文：十六年正月乙巳，易定兵及吴少诚战，败绩。
现代文：贞元十六年正月初六，易定的军队与吴少诚交战，大败。
English: On the sixth day of the first month of the 16th year of the Zhengyuan, the army of Yi Ding fought with Wu Shaocheng and suffered a great defeat.

古文：二月乙酉，盐夏绥银节度使韩全义为蔡州行营招讨处置使，上官涚副之。
现代文：二月十七日，盐、夏、绥、银节度使韩全义任蔡州行营招讨处置使，上官氵兑任副使。
English: On February 17th, Han Quan Yi was appointed as the envoy to solicit and deal with the encampment in Caizhou by the salt, summer, alfalfa, and silver departments, and the higher-ranking official was appointed as the deputy envoy.

古文：四月丁亥，黔中宴设将傅近逐其观察使吴士宗。
现代文：四月十九日，黔中宴设将傅近驱逐其观察使吴士宗。
English: On April 19th, Wu Shizong, the observation envoy of General Fu Jian, was expelled from the banquet.

古文：五月庚戌，韩全义及吴少诚战于广利城，败绩。
现代文：五月十三日，韩全义在广利城与吴少诚作战，大败。
English: On May 13th, Han Quan Yi fought against Wu Shao Cheng in Guangli City and was soundly defeated.

古文：壬子，徐泗濠节度使张建封卒，其子愔自称知军事。
现代文：十五日，徐、泗、濠节度使张建封去世，其子张忄音自称知军事。
English: On the 15th, Zhang Jianfeng passed away at the instigation of Xu, Zheng and Zheng, and his son Zhang Yuyin claimed to be a military expert.

古文：七月丁巳，伊慎及吴少诚战于申州，败之。己未，韦皋克吐蕃末恭城。
现代文：七月二十一日，在申州，伊慎打败吴少诚。二十三日，韦皋攻克吐蕃末恭城。
English: On July 21st, in Shenzhou, Yishen defeated Wu Shaocheng. On the 23rd, Wei Wei conquered the city of Tuyun.

古文：丙寅，韩全义及吴少诚战于五楼，败绩。
现代文：三十日，韩全义在五楼与吴少诚交战，又大败。
English: On the 30th, Han Quan Yi fought with Wu Shao Cheng on the 5th floor and was defeated again.

古文：八月，刘济及其弟涿州刺史源战于涿州，源败，执之。
现代文：八月，刘济与其弟、汲州刺史刘源在涿州作战，刘源失败，被俘。
English: In August, Liu Jie and his brother, Liu Yuan, the governor of Kuzhou, fought in Ganzhou. Liu Yuan was defeated and captured.

古文：己丑，杀遂州别驾崔位。
现代文：二十三日，杀遂州别驾崔位。
English: On the 23rd, he was promoted to the position of prefectural governor.

古文：韦皋克吐蕃颙城。
现代文：韦皋攻破吐蕃城。
English: Wei Wei broke through the city of Tubo.

古文：九月庚戌，贬郑馀庆为郴州司马。
现代文：九月十五日，将郑余庆贬为郴州司马。
English: On September 15th, Zheng Yuqing was relegated to the position of Zhangzhou Sima.

古文：庚申，太常卿齐抗为中书侍郎、同中书门下平章事。
现代文：二十五日，太常卿齐抗任中书侍郎、同中书门下平章事。
English: On the twenty-fifth day, Tai Changqing Qi Qi was appointed as the attendant of the middle school and the disciple of the middle school.

古文：十月辛未，杀通州别驾崔河图。
现代文：十月初六，杀通州别驾崔河图。
English: On the 6th day of the first month of October, kill Tongzhou, don't drive Cuihe map.

古文：是岁，京师饥。
现代文：本年，京城饥荒。
English: This year, there was a famine in Kyoto.

古文：十七年二月丁酉，大雨雹。
现代文：贞元十七年二月初五，下大冰雹。
English: On the fifth day of the second month of the seventeenth year of King Jeongjo, there was a big hailstorm.

古文：己亥，霜。
现代文：初七，打霜。
English: On the 7th day of the 7th month, the first frost.

古文：乙巳，韦皋及吐蕃战于鹿危山，败之。
现代文：十三日，韦皋在鹿危山与吐蕃军交战，打败吐军。
English: On the 13th, Wei Wei fought against the Tu Wei army in Lugu Mountain and defeated the Tu army.

古文：戊申，大雨雹，震电。
现代文：十六日，下大冰雹，雷劈电击。
English: On the 16th, there were large hailstones and lightning strikes.

古文：庚戌，大雪，雨雹。
现代文：十八日，大雪，冰雹。
English: On the 18th, heavy snow and hail fell.

古文：五月壬戌朔，日有食之。
现代文：五月初一，日月合朔，有日蚀。
English: On the first day of May, the sun and moon are new, and there is a solar eclipse.

古文：六月丙申，宁州军乱，杀其刺史刘南金。
现代文：六月初五，宁州军队骚乱，杀其刺史刘南金。
English: On the fifth day of the first month of June, the Ningzhou army rioted and killed Liu Nanjin.

古文：己亥，浙西观察使李锜杀上封事人崔善贞。
现代文：初八，浙西观察使李钅奇杀上封事人崔善贞。
English: On the eighth day of the first month of the year, the observation of the west of Zhejiang made Li Rongqi kill the person in charge, Cui Zenzhen.

古文：丁巳，成德军节度使王武俊卒，其子士真自称留后。
现代文：二十六日，成德军节度使王武俊去世，其子王士真自称留后。
English: On the 26th day of the month, Wang Wujun died as a result of the German invasion. His son Wang Shizhen declared that he would stay behind.

古文：七月，陨霜杀菽。
现代文：七月，降霜毁坏豆类。
English: In July, frost damage destroys the beans.

古文：戊寅，吐蕃寇盐州。
现代文：十八日，吐蕃军进犯盐州。
English: On the 18th, the Tubo army invaded Yanzhou.

古文：己丑，陷麟州，刺史郭锋死之。
现代文：二十九日，攻破麟州，刺史郭锋死难。
English: On the 29th, Linzhou was defeated and Guo Feng was stabbed to death.

古文：九月乙亥，韦鋋败吐蕃于雅州，克木波城。
现代文：九月十六日，韦皋在雅州打败吐军，攻克木波城。
English: On September 16th, Wei Wei defeated the Tu army in Yazhou and conquered Mubo City.

古文：是岁，嘉王运薨。
现代文：本年，嘉王李运去世。
English: This year, Jiawang Liyun passed away.

古文：十八年七月乙亥，罢正衙奏事。
现代文：贞元十八年七月二十一日，停止大臣在前殿奏事。
English: On the 21st of July in the 18th year of the Jōgen era, the minister stopped reporting to the front hall.

古文：十二月，环王陷欢、爱二州。
现代文：十二月，环王攻破、爱二州。
English: In December, the ring king broke through and loved the two states.

古文：十九年二月己亥，安南将王季元逐其经略使裴泰，兵马使赵均败之。
现代文：贞元十九年二月十八日，安南将领王季元驱逐其经略使裴泰，兵马使赵均将其挫败。
English: On February 18th, the 19th year of the Zhengyuan era, Annan's general, Wang Jiyuan, expelled his strategist, Pei Tai, and the soldiers and horses led by Zhao Jun defeated him.

古文：三月壬子，淮南节度使杜佑检校司空、同中书门下平章事。
现代文：三月初一，淮南节度使杜佑任检校司空、同中书门下平章事。
English: On the first day of March, the Huainan Festival appointed Du You as the inspector of the school.

古文：七月己未，齐抗罢。
现代文：七月十一日，齐抗被免职。
English: On July 11th, Qi Gong was removed from his post.

古文：自正月不雨至于是月。
现代文：今年自正月无雨直至本月。
English: This year, there was no rain from the first month of the year until this month.

古文：甲戌，雨。
现代文：二十六日，降雨。
English: On the 26th, it rained.

古文：闰十月庚戌，盐州将李庭俊反，伏诛。
现代文：闰十月初三，盐州将领李庭俊反叛，伏法处死。
English: On the third day of the tenth lunar month, Li Tingjun, the general of Yanzhou, rebelled and was executed.

古文：丁巳，崔损薨。
现代文：初十，崔损去世。
English: On the tenth day of the first month, Cui Jia passed away.

古文：十二月庚申，太常卿高郢为中书侍郎，吏部侍郎郑珣瑜为门下侍郎：同中书门下平章事。
现代文：十二月十三日，太常卿高郢任中书侍郎，吏部侍郎郑繤瑜任门下侍郎，一并加同中书门下平章事。
English: On December 13th, Gao Jian, the First Secretary of the Central Committee of the Communist Party of China, was appointed as the secretary of the Central Committee of the Communist Party of China, and Zheng Jiyu, the secretary of the General Office of the Communist Party of China, was appointed as the secretary of the Central Committee of the Communist Party of China, together with the secretary of the Central Committee of the Communist Party of China, He Ping.

古文：二十年二月庚戌，大雨雹。
现代文：贞元二十年二月初五，下大冰雹。
English: On the 5th day of the 2nd month of the 20th year of the Zhen, there was a big hailstorm.

古文：七月癸酉，大雨雹。
现代文：七月初一，下大冰雹。
English: On the first day of July, there was a large hailstorm.

古文：冬，雨木冰。
现代文：冬季，雨水着树成冰。
English: In winter, rainwater turns trees into ice.

古文：二十一年正月癸巳，皇帝崩于会宁殿，年六十四。
现代文：贞元二十一年正月二十三日，德宗在会宁殿逝世，终年六十四岁。
English: On the 23rd day of the first month of the 21st year of the Jōgen era, Emperor Dezong died at the Hoenning Palace, at the age of 64.

古文：顺宗至德弘道大圣大安孝皇帝讳诵，德宗长子也。
现代文：顺宗，名诵，德宗的长子。母亲是昭德皇后王氏。
English: The eldest son of Shunzong, Meixiao, and Dezong. His mother was Zhaode Empress Wang.

古文：母曰昭德皇后王氏。始封宣城郡王，大历十四年六月，进封宣王。十二月乙卯，立为皇太子。为人宽仁，喜学艺，善隶书，礼重师傅，见辄先拜。
现代文：最初封为宣城郡王，大历十四年六月，晋封为宣王。十二月十九日，被立为皇太子。顺宗为人宽厚仁爱，好学技艺，擅长隶书，对师傅重礼，见到师傅就先叩拜。
English: At first, he was given the title of King of Xuancheng County. In June of the 14th year of the Tai Lian calendar, he was promoted to King of Xuancheng. On December 19th, he was appointed as the crown prince. Shunzong was a generous and benevolent person, good at learning skills, good at writing, and respected his teachers. When he saw a teacher, he would bow first.

古文：从德宗幸奉天，常执弓矢居左右。
现代文：随从德宗赴奉天，常常手执弓箭守护在德宗身边。
English: He followed Emperor Dezong to Bongtian, and often guarded Emperor Dezong with a bow and arrow.

古文：郜国公主以蛊事得罪，太子妃，其女也，德宗疑之，几废者屡矣，赖李泌保护，乃免。
现代文：郜国公主因使用蛊术害人之事获罪，顺宗的妃子是郜国公主女儿，德宗也怀疑太子李诵，李诵多次几乎被废黜，仰仗李泌保护，才免遭废黜。
English: Princess Min Guo was found guilty of using sorcery to harm people. Shunzong's concubine was the daughter of Princess Min Guo. Dezong also suspected Prince Li Qiao. Li Qiao was almost dethroned many times, but he relied on the protection of Li Xiu to avoid being dethroned.

古文：后侍宴鱼藻宫，张水嬉彩艦，宫人为棹歌，众乐间发，德宗欢甚，顾太子曰： 今日何如？ 
现代文：后来，李诵在鱼藻宫陪从德宗游乐，设有水上玩乐的采船，宫女们演唱船歌，各种音乐奏演相继迭出，德宗欢快至极，问太子李诵： 今日景象如何？ 
English: Later, Li Chiao accompanied Dezong on an outing at the Aquatic Algae Palace. There was a boat for water play, the ladies of the court sang boat songs, and various musical performances took place one after another. Dezong was extremely happy and asked the prince Li Chiao: How is the scene today?

古文：太子诵《诗》 好乐无荒 以为对。
现代文：李诵以《诗经》中的诗句 好欢乐而不迷乱 作为应答。
English: Li Chao replied with a verse from the Book of Songs, "Be joyful, but not deluded."

古文：及裴延龄、韦渠牟用事，世皆畏其为相，太子每候颜色，陈其不可。
现代文：又，裴延龄、韦渠牟当权，人们都忧虑他们当宰相，李诵常常观察德宗的脸色情绪，趁便向德宗禀告不能让裴、韦二人当宰相。
English: Moreover, with Pei Yanling and Wei Quimu in power, people were worried that they would become prime ministers. Li Qiao often observed the facial expressions of Dezong, and took the opportunity to inform Dezong that he could not let Pei and Wei become prime ministers.

古文：故二人者卒不得用。
现代文：因而他们两人始终没有被任用为宰相。
English: As a result, neither of them was ever appointed as prime minister.

古文：贞元二十年，太子病风且瘖。
现代文：贞元二十年，李诵身染风症并且失音。
English: In the 20th year of Zhenyuan, Li Xie contracted rheumatism and lost his voice.

古文：二十一年正月，不能朝。
现代文：二十一年正月，李诵不能上朝。
English: In the first month of the twenty-first year, Li Chao could not go to the imperial court.

古文：是时，德宗不豫，诸王皆侍左右，惟太子卧病，不能见，德宗悲伤涕泣，疾有加。
现代文：这时，德宗生病，诸王侯都陪随在德宗身边，只有李诵卧病，不能入见父王，德宗悲伤落泪，病情加重。
English: At this time, Dezong fell ill, and all the princes accompanied Dezong. Only Li Xie was bedridden and could not see his father. Dezong shed tears of sorrow, and his condition worsened.

古文：癸巳，德宗崩。
现代文：二十三日，德宗逝世。
English: On the 23rd, Desong passed away.

古文：丙申，即皇帝位于太极殿。
现代文：二十六日，李诵在太极殿登基。
English: On the 26th, Li Ching ascended to the throne in the Taiji Hall.

古文：二月癸卯，朝群臣于紫宸门。
现代文：二月初三，顺宗在紫宸门受群臣朝见。
English: On the third day of the second month of the year, Shunzong received a group of courtiers from the Imperial Court at Shishimen.

古文：辛亥，吏部侍郎韦执谊为尚书左丞、同中书门下平章事。
现代文：十一日，吏部侍郎韦执谊任尚书左丞、同中书门下平章事。
English: On the 11th day of the month, Wei Xieyi, the attendant of the personnel department, was appointed as the left assistant of Shang Shuxu and the right assistant of Dongzhong Shumen.

古文：甲子，大赦。
现代文：二十四日，施行大赦。
English: On the 24th, a general amnesty was implemented.

古文：罢宫市。
现代文：取消宫市。
English: Cancel the palace fair.

古文：民百岁版授下州刺史，妇人郡君；九十以上上佐，妇人县君。
现代文：授予平民中百岁以上老人下等州刺史荣衔，妇人授予郡君荣衔；九十岁以上老人授予上等州郡僚属荣衔，妇人授予县君荣衔。
English: Civilians over the age of 100 will be awarded the lower rank of county magistrate, and women will be awarded the rank of county magistrate; those over the age of 90 will be awarded the higher rank of county magistrate, and women will be awarded the rank of county magistrate.

古文：乙丑，罢盐铁使月进。
现代文：二十五日，取消盐铁使每月进献财礼。
English: On the 25th, the cancellation of salt and iron made the monthly donation ceremony.

古文：三月庚午，放后宫三百人。
现代文：三月初一，放还后宫三百宫女。
English: On the first day of March, three hundred maids of honour were released back into the harem.

古文：癸酉，放后宫及教坊女妓六百人。
现代文：初四，放后宫宫女与教坊女伎六百人。
English: On the fourth day of junior high school, 600 girls from the harem and the kindergarten were released.

古文：癸巳，立广陵郡王纯为皇太子。
现代文：二十四日，立广陵郡王李纯为皇太子。
English: On the 24th, Li Chun, the king of Guangling County, was crowned crown prince.

古文：四月壬寅，封弟谔为钦王，諴珍王；进封子建康郡王经郯王，洋川郡王纬均王，临淮郡王纵溆王，弘农郡王纾莒王，汉东郡王纲密王，晋陵郡王枿郇王，郡王约邵王，云安郡王结宋王，宣城郡王缃集王，德阳郡王絿冀王，河东郡王绮和王；封子绚为衡王，纁会王，绾福王，绂抚王，绲岳王，绅袁王，纶桂王，繟翼王。
现代文：四月初三，顺宗封其弟李谔为钦王，李讠咸为珍王；晋封其子建康郡王李经为郯王，洋川郡王李纬为均王，临淮郡王李纵为溆王，弘农郡王李纾为莒王，汉东郡王李纲为密王，晋陵郡王李总为郇王，高平郡王李约为邵王，云安郡王李结为宋王，宣城郡王李缃为集王，德阳郡王李纟求为冀王，河东郡王李琦为和王；封其子李绚为衡王，李纟熏为会王，李绾为福王，李为抚王，李绲为岳王，李绅为袁王，李纶为桂王，李纟单为翼王。
English: On the third day of the fourth lunar month, Shunzong appointed his brother Li Qian as the King of Qin, Li Qianhan as the King of Zhen; his son Jiankang as the King of Zhen, Yangchuan as the King of Zhen, Linhuai as the King of Zhen, Hongnong as the King of Zhen, Handong as the King of Mi, Jinling as the King of Zhen, Gaoping as the King of Yao, Yunnan as the King of Song, Xuancheng as the King of Ji, Deyang as the King of Ji, Hedong as the King of He; his son Li Hua as the

古文：戊申，以册皇太子，降死罪以下，赐文武官子为父后者勋两转。
现代文：初九，因册立皇太子，对死罪以下囚犯减刑，赐予文武官员本人勋号在其父之下者勋衔两级。
English: On the 9th day of the first month of the year, the crown prince was enthroned, the death penalty for prisoners below the death penalty was commuted, and the civil and military officer himself was awarded the medal two levels below his father.

古文：七月辛卯，横海军节度使程怀信卒，其子执恭自称留后。
现代文：七月二十四日，横海军节度使程怀信死去，其子杨执恭自称留后。
English: On July 24th, during the Navy Day holiday, Cheng Huaixin died, and his son Yang Xigong said he would stay behind.

古文：乙未，皇太子权句当军国政事。
现代文：二十八日，皇太子李纯暂代办理军国政事。
English: On the 28th, Crown Prince Li Chun temporarily took charge of military and political affairs.

古文：太常卿杜黄裳为门下侍郎，左金吾卫大将军袁滋为中书侍郎：同中书门下平章事。
现代文：太常卿杜黄掌任门下侍郎，左金吾卫大将军袁滋任中书侍郎，一并加同中书门下平章事。
English: Grand Councilor Du Huang served as the junior attendant, General Yuan Zhi as the junior attendant, and He Ping as the junior attendant.

古文：郑珣瑜、高郢罢。
现代文：郑繤瑜、高郢被免职。
English: Zheng Yuyu and Gao Jun were dismissed.

古文：永贞元年八月庚子，立皇太子为皇帝，自称曰太上皇。
现代文：永贞元年八月初四，顺宗立皇太子李纯为皇帝，自称为太上皇。
English: On the 4th day of the 8th month of the first year of Yongzheng, Shunzong established the crown prince Li Chun as emperor, calling himself the Emperor.

古文：辛丑，改元。
现代文：初五，更改年号。
English: On the fifth day of the first month, the year was changed.

古文：降死罪以下。
现代文：对死罪以下囚犯减刑。
English: Prisoners sentenced to less than the death penalty will have their sentences commuted.

古文：立良娣王氏为太上皇后。
现代文：立良娣王氏为太上皇后。
English: She became the empress dowager of the Rikuryo Shinno clan.

古文：元和元年正月，皇帝率群臣上尊号曰应乾圣寿太上皇。
现代文：宪宗元和元年正月，宪宗率群臣给顺宗进加尊号为 应乾圣寿太上皇 。
English: In the first month of the 1st year of the reign of Emperor Gensong and the 1st year of the 1st year of the reign of Emperor Xizong, Emperor Gensong led a group of courtiers to give Shunzong Jin the honorific title of Yingqian Shengshou Grand Empress.

古文：是月，崩于咸宁殿，年四十六，谥曰至德大圣大安孝皇帝。
现代文：本月，顺宗在咸宁殿逝世，终年四十六岁，谥号为至德大圣大安孝皇帝。
English: This month, Shunzong passed away in Xianning Palace at the age of 46. His posthumous name was Emperor Shida Daanxiao.

古文：大中三年，增谥至德弘道大圣大安孝皇帝。
现代文：宣宗大中三年，增其谥号为至德弘道大圣大安孝皇帝。
English: In the third year of the middle school of Xuan Zong University, his nickname was changed to Emperor Zhi Hong Da Sheng Da An Xiao.

古文：宪宗昭文章武大圣至神孝皇帝讳纯，顺宗长子也。母曰庄宪皇太后王氏。
现代文：宪宗，名纯，顺宗的长子。母亲是庄宪皇太后王氏。
English: The eldest son of Gensong, Myochun and Shunsong. His mother was the Dowager Empress Dowager Wang of Zhuoxian.

古文：贞元四年六月己亥，封广陵郡王。
现代文：贞元四年六月二十三日，受封为广陵郡王。
English: On June 23 of the 4th year of the Zhengyuan era, he was appointed as the Guangling County King.

古文：二十一年三月，立为皇太子。
现代文：贞元二十一年三月，被立为皇太子。
English: In March of the twenty-first year of the Jōgen era, he was appointed crown prince.

古文：永贞元年八月，顺宗诏立为皇帝。
现代文：永贞元年八月，顺宗下诏书立他为皇帝。
English: In August of the first year of Emperor Yongzheng, Emperor Shunzong issued an edict to make him emperor.

古文：乙巳，即皇帝位于太极殿。
现代文：初九，宪宗在太极殿登基。
English: On the 9th day of the 9th month, Emperor Gensong ascended to the throne in the Taiji Hall.

古文：丁未，始听政。
现代文：十一日，开始处理国政。
English: On the 11th, he began to deal with national affairs.

古文：庚戌，罢献祥瑞。
现代文：十四日，取消进献祥瑞之物。
English: On the 14th, the offering of Xiang Rui was cancelled.

古文：癸丑，剑南西川节度使韦皋卒，行军司马刘辟自称留后。
现代文：十七日，剑南西川节度使韦皋亡故，行军司马刘辟自称留后。
English: On the seventeenth day of the Nishikawa festival in southern Jian, Wei Wei died, and the commander of the march, Ma Liu Bei, said he would stay behind.

古文：戊午，天有声于西北。
现代文：二十二日，在西北方天空有异常声响。
English: On the 22nd, there was an unusual sound in the northwest sky.

古文：己未，袁滋为剑南西川、山南西道安抚大使。
现代文：二十三日，袁滋任剑南西川、山南西道安抚大使。
English: On the 23rd, Yuan Zhi was appointed as the Ambassador of Pacification for the West Sichuan and West Shannan Provinces.

古文：癸亥，尚书左丞郑馀庆同中书门下平章事。
现代文：二十七日，尚书左丞郑余庆加任同中书门下平章事。
English: On the 27th, Zheng Yuqing, the left-hand man of Shangshu, was appointed to the position of the second-ranked scholar of the same school.

古文：九月己巳，罢教坊乐工正员官。
现代文：九月初三，取消宫廷教坊的乐工正员官。
English: On the 3rd day of the 9th month, the post of Musician-in-Charge of the Palace Music School was abolished.

古文：十月丁酉，为曾太皇太后举哀。
现代文：十月初二，宪宗为曾太皇太后号哭举哀。
English: On the second day of October, Emperor Kenzong mourned the passing of Empress Dowager Zeng.

古文：贾耽薨。
现代文：贾耽去世。
English: Jia Tan passed away.

古文：戊戌，舒王谊薨。
现代文：初三，舒王李谊去世。
English: In the third year of junior high school, Shu Wang Liyi passed away.

古文：袁滋罢。
现代文：袁滋被免职。
English: Yuan Zhi was dismissed.

古文：己酉，葬神武圣文皇帝于崇陵。
现代文：十四日，将神武圣文皇帝德宗安葬在崇陵。
English: On the 14th, Emperor Dezong of Shenwu Shenwen was buried in Chongling.

古文：十一月己巳，祔睿真皇后于元陵寝宫。壬申，贬韦执谊为崖州司马。
现代文：十一月初四，在元陵宗庙的后殿礻付祭睿真皇后。初七，将韦执谊贬为崖州司马。
English: On the 4th day of the first month of the 11th month, the Empress Ruizhen was enshrined in the back hall of the Yuanling ancestral temple. On the 7th day of the first month, Wei Xiyi was relegated to Yazhou Sima.

古文：夏绥银节度留后杨惠琳反。
现代文：夏、绥、银节度留后杨惠琳反叛。
English: Yang Huilin rebelled after the summer, autumn and silver festivals.

古文：十二月壬戌，中书舍人郑絪为中书侍郎、同中书门下平章事。
现代文：十二月二十七日，中书舍人郑纟因任中书侍郎、同中书门下平章事。
English: On December 27th, the person in charge of the Chinese books, Zheng Qi, was removed from his post as the secretary of the Chinese books.

古文：元和元年正月丁卯，大赦，改元。
现代文：元和元年正月初二，施行大赦，更改年号。
English: On the second day of the first month of the first year of the Yuan and the first year of the year, an amnesty was implemented and the year number was changed.

古文：赐文武官阶、勋、爵，民高年者米帛羊酒。
现代文：赐予文武官员官阶、勋衔、爵位，百姓中的高龄老人赐给米、帛、羊、酒。
English: Civil and military officials were given official ranks, decorations, and peerages, and the elderly people were given rice, millet, sheep, and wine.

古文：癸未，长武城使高崇文为左神策行营节度使，率左右神策京西行营兵马使李元奕、山南西道节度使严砺、剑南东川节度使李康以讨刘辟。
现代文：十八日，长武城使高崇文任左神策行营节度使，率领左右神策京西行营兵马使李元奕、山南西道节度使严砺、剑南东川节度使李康，讨伐刘辟。
English: On the 18th, Gao Chongwen of Changwu City was appointed as the envoy of the Left Divine Divination Campaign, and Li Yuanyi, the envoy of the Left Divine Divination Campaign in Beijing, the envoy of the West Divine Divination Campaign in Shannan, the envoy of the West Divine Divination Campaign in Yancheng, and the envoy of the East Divine Divination Campaign in Jianan, the envoy of the East Divine Divination Campaign in Jianan, and Li Kang, the envoy of the East Divine Divination Campaign in Jianan, fought against Liu Bei.

古文：甲申，太上皇崩。
现代文：十九日，太上皇顺宗逝世。
English: On the 19th, the Retired Emperor Shunsong passed away.

古文：刘辟陷梓州，执李康。
现代文：刘辟攻陷梓州，俘虏李康。
English: Liu Bei invaded Zizhou and captured Li Kang.

古文：三月丙子，高宗文克梓州。
现代文：三月十二日，高崇文攻克梓州。
English: On March 12, Gao Chongwen conquered Zizhou.

古文：辛巳，杨惠琳伏诛。
现代文：十七日，杨惠琳伏法处死。
English: On the 17th, Yang Huilin was sentenced to death.

古文：四月丁未，杜佑为司徒。
现代文：四月十四日，杜佑任司徒。
English: On April 14th, Du You was appointed as a disciple.

古文：壬戌，邵王约薨。
现代文：二十九日，邵王李约去世。
English: On the 29th, Shao Wang Li passed away.

古文：初令尚书省六品、诸司四品以上职事官，太子师傅、宾客、詹事，王府傅，日二人待制。
现代文：开始让尚书省六品、诸司四品以上的主事官，太子师傅、宾客、詹事，王府的师傅，每日二人以备顾问。
English: He began to have the leading officials of Shangshu's six provinces and four or more provinces, the prince's masters, guests, and officials, and the masters of the royal court prepare two advisers every day.

古文：五月辛卯，尊母为皇太后。
现代文：五月二十八日，宪宗尊奉母亲为皇太后。
English: On May 28th, Emperor Genso revered his mother as Empress Dowager.

古文：六月癸巳，降死罪以下。
现代文：六月初一，对死罪以下囚犯减刑。
English: On the first day of June, prisoners sentenced to less than the death penalty will have their sentences reduced.

古文：赐百姓有父母祖父母八十以上者粟二斛、物二段，九十以上粟三斛、物三段。
现代文：赐给百姓中有父母亲、祖父母在八十岁以上者粟二斛、杂帛二段；父母、祖父母在九十岁以上者赐给粟三斛、杂帛三段。
English: People with parents and grandparents over the age of 80 will be given 2 raisins and 2 dashes of miso; people with parents and grandparents over the age of 90 will be given 3 raisins and 3 dashes of miso.

古文：丙申，大风拔木。
现代文：初四，大风拔起树木。
English: On the fourth day of the new year, high winds uprooted trees.

古文：丁酉，高崇文及刘辟战于鹿头栅，败之。
现代文：初五，高崇文在鹿头栅与刘辟作战，打败刘辟。
English: On the fifth day of the first month of the year, Gao Chongwen fought with Liu Bei in Shantou Grate and defeated Liu Bei.

古文：癸卯，严砺又败之于石碑谷。
现代文：十一日，严砺在石碑谷又打败刘辟。
English: On the 11th day, Yan Xuan defeated Liu Bei again in Shibei Valley.

古文：闰月壬戌，平卢军节度使李师古卒，其弟师道自称留后。
现代文：闰六月初一，平卢军节度使李师古去世，其弟李师道自称留后。
English: On the first day of the leap month of June, the Pinglu Military Festival caused the death of Li Shigu, and his brother Li Shidao claimed to stay behind.

古文：七月壬寅，葬至德大圣大安孝皇帝于丰陵。癸丑，高崇文及刘辟战于玄武，败之。
现代文：七月十一日，将顺宗安葬在丰陵。二十二日，高崇文在玄武与刘辟作战，打败刘辟。
English: On July 11, Shunzong was buried in Fengling. On the 22nd, Gao Chongwen fought with Liu Bei in Xuanwu and defeated Liu Bei.

古文：八月丁卯，进封子平原郡王宁为邓王，同安郡王宽澧王，延安郡王宥遂王，彭城郡王察深王，高密郡王寰洋王，文安郡王寮绛王；封子审为建王。
现代文：八月初七，宪宗晋封其子平原郡王李宁为邓王，同安郡王李宽为澧王，延安郡王李宥为遂王，彭城郡王李察为深王，高密郡王李寰为洋王，文安郡王李寮为绛王；封儿子李审为建王。
English: On the 7th day of the 8th month of the lunar calendar, Emperor Jianzong appointed his son, the king of Pingyuan County, Li Ning, as the king of Deng; the king of Tongan County, Li Guang, as the king of Shao; the king of Yan'an County, Li Yu, as the king of Sui; the king of Pengcheng County, Li Cha, as the king of Sheng; the king of Gaomi County, Li Xi, as the king of Yang; the king of Wen'an County, Li Liu, as the king of Shao; and his son, Li Xian, as the king of Jian.

古文：九月丙午，严砺及刘辟战于神泉，败之。
现代文：九月十六日，严砺在神泉与刘辟作战，打败刘辟。
English: On September 16th, Yan Xuan fought Liu Bei in Shenquan and defeated Liu Bei.

古文：辛亥，高崇文克成都。
现代文：二十一日，高崇文攻克成都。
English: On the 21st, Gao Chongwen conquered Chengdu.

古文：十月甲子，减剑南东西川、山南西道今岁赋，释胁从将吏。
现代文：十月初五，减征剑南东川、西川、山南西道本年租赋，释放胁从刘辟的将领、官吏。
English: On the 5th day of October at the beginning of the month, this year's rent of Jian'nan Dongchuan, Xichuan and Shannan West Road was reduced, and the generals and officials from Liu Bei were released.

古文：葬阵亡者，禀其家五岁。
现代文：安埋阵亡人员，赐给阵亡人员家属五年谷物。
English: The war dead will be buried, and the families of the war dead will receive grain for five years.

古文：戊子，刘辟伏诛。
现代文：二十九日，刘辟伏法处死。
English: On the 29th, Liu was sentenced to death by hanging.

古文：十一月庚戌，郑馀庆罢。
现代文：十一月二十一日，郑余庆被免职。
English: On November 21, Zheng Yuqing was removed from office.

古文：是岁，召王偲薨。
现代文：本年，召王李亻思去世。
English: This year, Zhao Wang Lixin passed away.

古文：二年正月己丑，朝献于太清宫。庚寅，朝享于太庙。
现代文：元和二年正月初一，宪宗在太清宫举行装扮受祭者享用祭礼的 朝献 祭祀。初二，祭祀太庙。
English: On the 1st day of the 1st month of the 2nd year of the 1st month of the 1st year of the 2nd year of the 1st year of the 2nd year of the 1st year of the 2nd year of the 1st year of the 2nd year of the 1st year of the 1st year of the 2nd year of the 1st year of the 2nd year of the 1st year of the 2nd year of the 1st year of the 2nd year of the 1st year of the 2nd year of the 1st year of the 2nd year of the 1st year of the 2nd year of the 2nd year of the 1st year of the 2

古文：辛卯，有事于南郊，大赦。
现代文：初三，在京城南郊祭天，施行大赦。
English: On the third day of the new year, an amnesty will be implemented in the southern suburbs of Beijing.

古文：赐文武官勋、爵，文宣公、二王后、三恪、公主、诸王一子官，高年米帛羊酒加版授。
现代文：赐给文武官员勋衔、爵位；授予文宣王孔子，北周、隋朝王族后裔，商、周、汉三代王朝的后代以及公主、诸王的一个儿子官职，高龄老人赐给米、帛、羊、酒，另加官职荣衔。
English: The civil and military officials were given honorary titles and titles of nobility; Confucius, King of Manchu, the descendants of the royal families of the Northern Zhou and Sui Dynasties, the descendants of the three dynasties of Shang, Zhou and Han, as well as the princess and one of the sons of the kings, were awarded official positions. The elderly were given rice, straw, sheep and wine, in addition to official titles.

古文：乙巳，杜黄裳罢。
现代文：十七日，杜黄裳被免职。
English: On the 17th, Du Huangxiao was removed from office.

古文：己酉，御史中丞武元衡为门下侍郎，中书舍人李吉甫为中书侍郎：同中书门下平章事。
现代文：二十一日，御史中丞武元衡任门下侍郎，中书舍人李吉甫任中书侍郎，一并加同中书门下平章事。
English: On the twenty-first day of the month, Mishi Chujo, Takemoto Hira, was appointed as a junior attendant, and Li Jifu, the teacher of the junior high school, was appointed as a junior high school teacher, together with the junior high school teacher, Shimotaira Shoji.

古文：二月己巳，罢两省官次对。
现代文：二月十一日，取消中书、门下两省按官阶应对皇帝的诏问。
English: On February 11, the imperial edict was cancelled, and the two provinces under the emperor were no longer required to respond to the imperial edict according to their official ranks.

古文：癸酉，邕管经略使路恕败黄洞蛮，执其首领黄承庆。
现代文：十五日，邕管经略使路恕打败黄洞蛮族，俘获其首领黄承庆。
English: On the fifteenth day of the month, Gongguan Jing slightly defeated the Huangdong barbarians and captured their leader Huang Chengqing.

古文：九月乙酉，密王绸薨。
现代文：九月初一，密王李绸去世。
English: On the first day of September, Mi Wang Li Silk passed away.

古文：十月，镇海军节度使李锜反，杀留后王澹。
现代文：十月，镇海军节度使李琦反叛，杀了留后王澹。
English: In October, the town's naval festival made Li Jie rebel and killed the Queen of the Remnant, Wang Jie.

古文：乙丑，淮南节度使王锷为诸道行营兵马招讨使以讨之。
现代文：十一日，淮南节度使王锷任诸道行营兵马招讨使讨伐李琦。
English: On the 11th day of the Huainan Festival, Wang Qian was sent to all the provinces to recruit soldiers and horses for the crusade against Li Qian.

古文：丁卯，武元衡罢。
现代文：十三日，武元衡被免职。
English: On the 13th, Take Motohira was removed from office.

古文：癸酉，镇海军兵马使张子良执李锜。
现代文：十九日，镇海军兵马使张子良捉了李琦。
English: On the 19th, Zhang Ziliang was captured by the town's naval soldiers and horses.

古文：己卯，免润州今岁税。
现代文：二十五日，免除润州本年赋税。
English: On the 25th, Runzhou was exempted from this year's tax.

古文：十一月甲申，李锜伏诛。
现代文：十一月初一，李琦伏法处死。
English: On the first day of November, Li Yifu was executed.

古文：十二月丙寅，剑南西川节度使高崇文为邠宁节度、京西诸军都统。
现代文：十二月十三日，剑南西川节度使高崇文任宁节度、京西诸军都统。
English: On December 13th, the Jian'nan West River Festival made Gao Chong Wen Ren Ning Festival, and the armies of West Beijing unified.

古文：三年正月癸巳，群臣上尊号曰睿圣文武皇帝，大赦。
现代文：元和三年正月十一日，群臣向宪宗敬献尊号：睿圣文武皇帝。施行大赦。
English: On the 11th day of the first month of the third year of the Yuan Dynasty, a group of courtiers presented the title of honor to Emperor Xianzong: Emperor Rui Shengwenwu. An amnesty was implemented.

古文：罢诸道受代进奉钱。
现代文：取消诸道离职时奉送俸禄。
English: Cancellation of severance pay in all sectors.

古文：三月癸巳，郇王枿薨。
现代文：三月十一日，郇王李总去世。
English: On March 11th, Shao Wang Lizong passed away.

古文：四月壬申，大风坏含元殿西阙槛。
现代文：四月二十日，大风摧垮含元殿宫门外西楼台的栏杆。
English: On April 20th, high winds brought down the railings of the west terrace outside the main gate of the palace.

古文：六月，西原蛮首领黄少卿降。
现代文：六月，西原蛮族首领黄少卿归降。
English: In June, Huang Shaoqing, the leader of the barbarian tribes of the Western Plains, surrendered.

古文：七月辛巳朔，日有食之。
现代文：七月初一，日月合朔，有日蚀。
English: On the first day of July, the sun and the moon are new, and there is a solar eclipse.

古文：九月庚寅，山南东道节度使于頔为司空、同中书门下平章事。
现代文：九月十一日，山南东道节度使于由页任司空、同中书门下平章事。
English: On September 11th, the Shannan Host Festival made Yu Zhe Ren Siku and Tong Zhong Shumen Shimo Ping sign a contract.

古文：丙申，户部侍郎裴垍为中书侍郎、同中书门下平章事。
现代文：十七日，户部侍郎裴耹任中书侍郎、同中书门下平章事。
English: On the 17th, the Household Attendant, Pei Jun, was appointed as the Junior Secretary of the Middle School and the Junior Secretary of the Middle School, Shimohei Shoji.

古文：戊戌，李吉甫罢。
现代文：十九日，李吉甫被免职。
English: On the 19th, Li Jifu was removed from office.

古文：四年正月壬午，免山南东道、淮南、江西、浙东、湖南、荆南今岁税。
现代文：元和四年正月初五，免除山南东道、淮南、江西、浙东、湖南、荆南本年赋税。
English: On the fifth day of the first month of the first year of the Yuan and the fourth year of the year, Shannan Host, Huainan, Jiangxi, Zhejiang, Hunan and Jingnan were exempted from this year's tax.

古文：戊子，简王遘薨。
现代文：十一日，简王李遘去世。
English: On the 11th day of the month, King Jian Li Yong passed away.

古文：二月丁卯，郑絪罢。
现代文：二月二十一日，郑纟因被免职。
English: On February 21, Zheng Rong was removed from his post.

古文：给事中李籓为门下侍郎、同中书门下平章事。
现代文：给事中李藩任门下侍郎、同中书门下平章事。
English: In this matter, Li Han was appointed as a servant of the disciple, and the disciple of the disciple of the disciple of the disciple of the disciple.

古文：三月乙酉，成德军节度使王士真卒，其子承宗自称留后。
现代文：三月初九，成德军节度使王士真死去，其子王承宗自称留后。
English: On the 9th day of the 3rd month, the Chengde Army Festival caused Wang Shizhen to die, and his son Wang Chengzong declared that he would stay behind.

古文：闰月己酉，以旱降京师死罪非杀人者，禁刺史境内榷率、诸道旨条外进献、岭南黔中福建掠良民为奴婢者，省飞龙厩马。
现代文：闰三月初三，因旱灾对京城非杀人的死罪囚犯减刑，禁止刺史在境内的专卖法、诸道在朝廷命令、规定以外进献财物以及岭南、黔中、福建抢夺良民做奴婢，省去宫内飞龙厩的马匹。
English: On the third day of the third lunar month, due to the drought, the death penalty was reduced for non-homicidal death-row prisoners in Beijing, the exclusive sale law of engraving history in the territory was prohibited, the provinces donated goods outside the imperial order and regulations, and the good people in Lingnan, Yuzhong and Fujian were robbed to be slaves and maids, and the horses in the flying dragon stable in the palace were omitted.

古文：己未，雨。
现代文：十三日，降雨。
English: On the 13th, it rained.

古文：丁卯，立邓王宁为皇太子。
现代文：二十一日，立邓王李宁为皇太子。
English: On the 21st, Deng Wang Lining was appointed crown prince.

古文：七月癸亥，吐蕃请和。
现代文：七月十九日，吐蕃求和。
English: On July 19th, Tubo sued for peace.

古文：八月丙申，环王寇安南，都护张舟败之。
现代文：八月二十三日，环王劫掠安南，都护张舟将其打败。
English: On August 23rd, Huan Wang plundered Annan, and the tutelary Zhang Zhou defeated him.

古文：十月辛巳，成德军节度使王承宗反，执保信军节度使薛昌朝。
现代文：十月初九，成德军节度使王承宗反叛，抓了保信军节度使薛昌朝。
English: On the 9th day of the 10th month, the Chengde Army rebelled against Wang Chengzong, and the Hoxin Army rebelled against Xue Chang.

古文：癸未，左神策军护军中尉吐突承璀为左右神策、河阳、浙西、宣歙、镇州行营兵马招讨处置使以讨之。
现代文：十一日，左神策军护军中尉吐突承璀任左、右神策、河阳、浙西、宣歙、镇州行营兵马招讨处置使前往讨伐。
English: On the 11th day of the month, Lt. Tu Tu Cheng, a military escort of the Zuo Sheng Army, was assigned to the Zuo Sheng Army, the Zuo Sheng Army, the Heyang Army, the West Zhejiang Army, the Xuanlong Army, and the Zhenzhou Army.

古文：戊子，承璀为镇州招讨宣慰使。
现代文：十六日，承璀任镇州招讨宣慰使。
English: On the 16th, Chengyu was appointed as the envoy of Zhenzhou to solicit condolences.

古文：癸巳，降死罪以下，赐文武官子为父后者勋两转。
现代文：二十一日，对死罪以下的犯人减刑，赐给文武官员官位在其父以下的勋衔两级。
English: On the 21st, it commuted the sentences of prisoners with crimes punishable by death or less, and gave civil and military officials two levels of honors lower than their fathers.

古文：十一月己巳，彰义军节度使吴少诚卒，其弟少阳自称留后。
现代文：十一月二十七日，彰义军节度使吴少诚去世，其弟吴少阳自称留后。
English: On November 27th, the Zhangyi Army Festival caused Wu Shaocheng to die, and his brother Wu Shaoyang said that he would stay behind.

古文：五年正月己巳，左神策军大将军郦定进及王承宗战，死之。
现代文：元和五年正月二十八日，左神策军大将军郦定进与王承宗作战，阵亡。
English: On the 28th day of the 1st month of the 5th year of the Yuan Dynasty, the general of the Zuoshenchao Army, Yu Dingjin, went into battle with Wang Chengzong and was killed.

古文：三月甲子，大风拔木。
现代文：三月二十四日，大风拔起树木。
English: On March 24, high winds uprooted trees.

古文：四月丁亥，河东节度使范希朝、义武军节度使张茂昭及王承宗战于木刀沟，败之。
现代文：四月十八日，河东节度使范希朝、义武军节度使张茂昭在木刀沟与王承宗作战，打败王承宗。
English: On April 18th, the Hedong Festival sent Fan Xichang and the Yiwu Army Festival sent Zhang Maozhao to fight Wang Chengzong in Mokutagou and defeat Wang Chengzong.

古文：七月丁未，赦王承宗。
现代文：七月初九，赦免王承宗。
English: On July 9, Wang Chengzong was pardoned.

古文：乙卯，幽州卢龙军节度使刘济卒，其子总自称留后。
现代文：十七日，幽州卢龙军节度使刘济去世，其子刘总自称留后。
English: On the 17th, the Yuzhou Lulong Army Festival caused Liu Ji to die, and his son Liu Zong claimed to stay behind.

古文：九月丙寅，太常卿权德舆为礼部尚书、同中书门下平章事。
现代文：九月二十九日，太常卿权德舆任礼部尚书、同中书门下平章事。
English: On September 29th, Tai Changqing Quan De was appointed to the Ministry of Rites and Literature, and the Ministry of Literature was abolished.

古文：十月，张茂昭以易、定二州归于有司。
现代文：十月，张茂昭将易、定二州归于朝廷。
English: In October, Zhang Maozhao returned Yizhou and Dingzhou to the imperial court.

古文：辛巳，义武军都虞候杨伯玉反，伏诛。
现代文：十四日，义武军都虞候杨伯玉反叛，伏法处死。
English: On the 14th, Yang Bo-yul rebelled and was sentenced to death.

古文：是月，义武军兵马使张佐元反，伏诛。
现代文：本月，义武军兵马使张佐元反叛，伏法处死。
English: This month, the soldiers and horses of the People's Liberation Army led Zhang Sa Yuan to rebel, and he was put to death.

古文：十一月甲辰，会王纁薨。
现代文：十一月初七，会王李纟熏去世。
English: On the 7th day of the 11th month, the king of the association, Li Shuxuan, passed away.

古文：庚申，裴垍罢。
现代文：二十三日，裴耹被免职。
English: On the 23rd, Pei Yao was removed from office.

古文：六年正月庚申，淮南节度使李吉甫为中书侍郎、同中书门下平章事。
现代文：元和六年正月二十五日，淮南节度使李吉甫任中书侍郎、同中书门下平章事。
English: On the 25th day of the first month of the sixth year of the Yuan Dynasty, the Huainan Festival appointed Li Jifu as the attendant of the middle school and the middle school teacher.

古文：二月壬申，李籓罢。
现代文：二月初七，李藩被免职。
English: On the seventh day of the second month of the year, Li Han was dismissed.

古文：己丑，忻王造薨。
现代文：二十四日，忻王李造去世。
English: On the twenty-fourth day, King Li Zou passed away.

古文：三月戊戌，有星陨于郓州。
现代文：三月初四，有流星陨落在郓州。
English: On the fourth day of March, a meteorite fell in Zhangzhou.

古文：十二月己丑，户部侍郎李绛为中书侍郎、同中书门下平章事。
现代文：十二月二十八日，户部侍郎李绛任中书侍郎、同中书门下平章事。
English: On December 28th, Household Attendant Li Yan was appointed as the Junior Secretary of the Middle School and the Junior Secretary of the Middle School.

古文：闰月辛卯，辰、溆州首领张伯靖反，寇播、费二州。
现代文：闰十二月初一，辰、溆二州首领张伯靖反叛，劫掠播州、费州。
English: On the first day of the leap month of December, Zhang Bojing, the leader of the two states of Chen and Yan, rebelled and plundered Baozhou and Feizhou.

古文：辛亥，皇太子薨。
现代文：二十一日，皇太子李宁去世。
English: On the 21st, Crown Prince Li Ning passed away.

古文：七年正月癸酉，振武河溢，毁东受降城。
现代文：元和七年正月十三，振武一带黄河泛滥，毁坏了东受降城。
English: On the 13th day of the 1st month of the 7th year of the Yuan Dynasty, the Yellow River flooded the area around Zhenwu, destroying Dongshu Qiancheng.

古文：四月癸巳，诏民田畮树桑二。
现代文：四月初六，下诏：民田每亩植桑树二棵。
English: On the sixth day of the fourth lunar month, the following edict was issued: Two mulberry trees are to be planted per mu of people's farmland.

古文：六月癸巳，杜佑罢。
现代文：六月初七，杜佑被免职。
English: On June 7, Du You was removed from his post.

古文：七月乙亥，立遂王宥为皇太子。
现代文：七月十九日，立遂王李宥为皇太子。
English: On July 19, King Liyu was enthroned as crown prince.

古文：八月戊戌，魏博节度使田季安卒，其子怀谏自称知军府事。
现代文：八月十二日，魏博节度使田季安去世，其子田怀谏自称知军府事。
English: On August 12th, the Wei Bo Festival caused the death of Tian Ji'an, and his son Tian Huai'an claimed to be the military governor.

古文：九月，京师地震。
现代文：九月，京城长安地震。
English: In September, the Beijing Chang'an earthquake occurred.

古文：十月乙未，魏博军以田季安之将田兴知军事。
现代文：十月初十，魏博的军队推举田季安的部将田兴主持军务。
English: At the beginning of October, Wei Bo's army promoted Tian Jian's subordinate general Tian Xing to preside over military affairs.

古文：庚戌，降死罪以下，赐文武官子为父后者勋两转。
现代文：二十五日，对死罪以下的犯人减刑，赐予文武官员官位在其父以下者勋衔两级。
English: On the 25th, the sentence of prisoners with less than capital crimes was reduced, and the civil and military officials were given two levels of honors, starting with those who were younger than their fathers.

古文：是月，魏博节度使田兴以六州归于有司。
现代文：本月，魏博节度使田兴将六个州献归朝廷。
English: This month, the Wei Bo Festival made Tian Xing dedicate six states to the imperial court.

古文：十一月辛酉，赦魏、博、贝、卫、澶、相六州，给复一年，赐高年、孤独、废疾粟帛，赏军士。
现代文：十一月初六，对魏、博、贝、卫、澶、相六个州施行赦免，免除徭役一年，赐给高龄老人、孤独无靠者、残疾人员粮食布帛，奖赏军士。
English: At the beginning of November 6th, the six states of Wei, Bo, Bei, Wei, Ya and Xiang were pardoned, exempted from corvee service for one year, granted grain cloth to the elderly, the lonely and the helpless, and the disabled, and rewarded the soldiers.

古文：八年正月辛未，权德舆罢。
现代文：元和八年正月十七日，权德舆被免职。
English: On the 17th day of the first month of the eighth year of the Yuan Dynasty, Quan Deyin was dismissed.

古文：二月丁酉，贬于頔为恩王傅。
现代文：二月十三日，将于由页贬职为恩王的师傅。
English: On February 13th, he will be demoted from page to king's teacher.

古文：三月甲子，剑南西川节度使武元衡为门下侍郎、同中书门下平章事。
现代文：三月十一日，剑南西川节度使武元衡任门下侍郎、同中书门下平章事。
English: On March 11th, Jianan Nishikawa Seto appointed Takemoto Hira as a disciple's attendant, and Shimotaira as a disciple's disciple.

古文：四月己亥，黔中经略使崔能讨张伯靖。
现代文：四月十七日，黔中经略使崔能讨伐张伯靖。
English: On April 17th, the Central Committee of the Kuomintang sent Cui Neng to subdue Zhang Bojing.

古文：五月癸亥，荆南节度使严绶讨伯靖。
现代文：五月十二日，荆南节度使严绶讨伐张伯靖。
English: On May 12th, the Jingnan Festival led to a severe crackdown on Zhang Bojing.

古文：丁丑，大隗山崩。
现代文：二十六日，大隗山山崩。
English: On the 26th, a landslide occurred in Dalat Mountain.

古文：六月辛卯，渭水溢。
现代文：六月初十，渭水泛滥。
English: On the 10th day of the 6th month, floodwaters overflowed.

古文：辛丑，出宫人。
现代文：二十日，放还宫女。
English: On the 20th, Gongnian was released.

古文：七月己巳，剑南东川节度使潘孟阳讨张伯靖。
现代文：七月十九日，剑南东川节度使潘孟阳讨伐张伯靖。
English: On July 19th, the Jian'nan Dongchuan Festival sent Pan Mengyang to fight Zhang Bojing.

古文：八月辛巳，湖南观察使柳公绰讨伯靖。
现代文：八月初一，湖南观察使柳公绰讨伐张伯靖。
English: On the first day of August, Hunan Observation sent Liu Gongqiao to fight against Zhang Bojing.

古文：丁未，伯靖降。
现代文：二十七日，张伯靖投降。
English: On the 27th, Zhang Bojing surrendered.

古文：十二月庚寅，振武将杨遵宪反，逐其节度使李进贤。
现代文：十二月十一日，振武军将领杨遵宪反叛，驱逐其节度使李进贤。
English: On December 11, Yang Zunxian, the general of the Zhenwu Army, rebelled and expelled his regent, Li Jinxian.

古文：九年二月癸卯，李绛罢。
现代文：元和九年二月二十五日，李绛被免职。
English: On February 25th, Yuanhe 9, Li Jie was removed from office.

古文：三月丙辰巂州地震。
现代文：三月初八，州地震。
English: On March 8th, the prefecture was hit by an earthquake.

古文：丁卯，陨霜杀桑。
现代文：十九日，落霜毁坏了桑叶。
English: On the 19th, the frost damaged the mulberry leaves.

古文：五月乙丑，桂王纶薨。
现代文：五月十九日，桂王李纶去世。
English: On May 19, Gui Wang Lijun passed away.

古文：癸酉，以旱免京畿夏税。
现代文：二十七日，因旱灾免征京畿的夏税。
English: On the 27th, the summer tax in Gyeonggi Province was exempted due to drought.

古文：六月壬寅，河中节度使张弘靖为刑部尚书、同中书门下平章事。
现代文：六月二十七日，河中节度使张弘靖任刑部尚书、同中书门下平章事。
English: On June 27th, the Mid-Autumn Festival in Sichuan Province made Zhang Hongjing be appointed to the Department of Criminal Law and the Department of Criminal Law and the Department of Criminal Law.

古文：闰八月丙辰，彰义军节度使吴少阳卒，其子元济自称知军事。
现代文：闰八月十二日，彰义军节度使吴少阳去世，其子吴元济自称知军事。
English: On the 12th day of the 8th month of the leap year, the festival of the Zhangyi Army caused Wu Shaoyang to die, and his son Wu Yuanji claimed to be a military man.

古文：九月丁亥，山南东道节度使严绶、忠武军都知兵马使李光颜、寿州团练使李文通、河阳节度使乌重胤讨之。
现代文：九月十四日，山南东道节度使严绶、忠武军都知兵马使李光颜、寿州团练使李文通、河阳节度使乌重胤讨伐吴元济。
English: On September 14th, the Shannan Host Festival sent Yan Yan, the loyal troops sent Li Guangyan, the Shoushou Rehearsal sent Li Wentong, and the Heyang Festival sent Wu Chungyan to fight Wu Yuanji.

古文：十月，太白昼见。
现代文：十月，白昼出现太白星。
English: In October, a very white star appeared in the daytime.

古文：丙午，李吉甫薨。
现代文：初三，李吉甫去世。
English: On the third day of the new year, Li Jifu passed away.

古文：甲子，严绶为申、光、蔡招抚使。
现代文：二十一日，严绶任申、光、蔡州招抚使。
English: On the twenty-first day, Yan Xuan appointed Shen, Guang, and Cai Zhou as envoys.

古文：十一月戊子，罢京兆府猎献狐兔。
现代文：十一月十五日，取消京兆府腊献狐兔。
English: On November 15th, the Peking Opera's performance of the fox and rabbit was cancelled.

古文：十二月，诏刑部、大理官朔望入对。
现代文：十二月，诏令刑部、大理寺官员初一、十五进殿对答皇帝询问。
English: In December, the imperial edict ordered the officials of the Criminal Investigation Department and Dali Temple to come to the palace on the first day and the fifteenth day of the first month to answer the emperor's inquiry.

古文：戊辰，尚书右丞韦贯之同中书门下平章事。
现代文：二十五日，尚书右丞韦贯之加任同中书门下平章事。
English: On the 25th, Shang Shuyuan Wei Gangzhi was appointed to the same position as Zhong Shumen Shimo Pingzhang.

古文：十年正月乙酉，宣武军节度使韩弘为司徒。
现代文：元和十年正月十三日，宣武军节度使韩弘任司徒。
English: On the 13th day of the 1st month of the 1st year of the 10th year of the Yuan Dynasty, Han Hong was appointed as an attendant of the Xuanwu Army Festival.

古文：二月甲辰，严绶及吴元济战于磁丘，败绩。
现代文：二月初二，严绶在磁丘与吴元济作战，大败。
English: On the second day of the second month of February, Yan Xuan fought Wu Yuanji on the magnetic hill, and was soundly defeated.

古文：自冬不雨至于是月。
现代文：自去年冬季无雨至本月。
English: There has been no rain since last winter until this month.

古文：丙午，雪。
现代文：初四，降雪。
English: On the fourth day of the new year, it snowed.

古文：壬戌，河东戍将刘辅杀丰州刺史燕重旰，伏诛。
现代文：二十日，河东守边将领刘辅杀了丰州刺史燕重旰，伏法处死。
English: On the 20th day of the month, Liu Fu, the general in charge of the defense of Hedong, killed Fengzhou Jishi Yan Jiuyong and sentenced him to death.

古文：三月庚子，忠武军节度使李光颜及吴元济战于临颍，败之。四月甲辰，又败之于南顿。五月丙申，又败之于时曲。
现代文：三月二十九日，忠武军节度使李光颜在临颍与吴元济作战，打败吴元济；四月初三，又在南顿打败吴元济；五月二十六日，在时曲再次打败吴元济。
English: On March 29th, the festival of the Loyal Military Forces caused Li Guangyan to fight Wu Yuanji in Linyi and defeat Wu Yuanji; on April 3rd, he defeated Wu Yuanji in Nantong; on May 26th, he defeated Wu Yuanji again in Jiqu.

古文：六月癸卯，盗杀武元衡。
现代文：六月初三，刺客杀死武元衡。
English: On the third day of the sixth month, an assassin killed Takemoto Hirao.

古文：戊申，京师大索。
现代文：初八，京城大搜捕。
English: In the eighth month of the year, a large-scale search and arrest was carried out in Beijing.

古文：乙丑，御史中丞裴度为中书侍郎、同中书门下平章事。
现代文：二十五日，御史中丞裴度任中书侍郎、同中书门下平章事。
English: On the 25th, Mishi Chujo Baidu was appointed as the junior secretary of the junior secretary and the junior secretary of the junior secretary.

古文：七月甲戌，王承宗有罪，绝其朝贡。
现代文：七月初五，王承宗获罪，绝其朝贡。
English: On the 5th day of the 7th month, Wang Chengzong was found guilty and had to forfeit his tribute.

古文：八月己亥朔，日有食之。
现代文：八月初一，日月合朔，有日蚀。
English: On the first day of August, the sun and moon are new, and there is a solar eclipse.

古文：丁未，李师道将訾嘉珍反于东都，留守吕元膺败之。
现代文：初九，李师道部将訾嘉珍在东都反叛，留守吕元膺将其挫败。
English: On the 9th day of the first month of the year, Li Shiji, the head of the Ministry of Civil Affairs, rebelled against Gong Jiazhen in Dongdu, and was defeated by Lu Yuanqi, who stayed behind.

古文：乙丑，李光颜及吴元济战于时曲，败绩。
现代文：二十七日，李光颜在时曲与吴元济作战，大败。
English: On the 27th, Li Guangyan fought against Wu Yuanji in Jiqu, and was soundly defeated.

古文：九月癸酉，韩弘为淮酉行营兵马都统。
现代文：九月初五，韩弘任淮西行营兵马都统。
English: On the 5th day of the 9th month of the year, Han Hong was in charge of the Western Huai Campaign.

古文：十月，地震。
现代文：十月，地震。
English: In October, an earthquake.

古文：十一月壬申，李光颜、乌重胤及吴元济战于小溵河，败之。
现代文：十一月初五，李光颜、乌重胤在小氵殷河作战，打败吴元济。
English: On the fifth day of the first month of November, Li Guangyan and Wu Chungyan fought in Xiaoju Yinhe and defeated Wu Yuanji.

古文：丁丑，李文通又败之于固始。
现代文：初十，李文通在固始再次打败吴元济。
English: On the tenth day of the first month, Li Wentong defeated Wu Yuanji again in the beginning of the second month.

古文：戊寅，盗焚献陵寝宫。
现代文：十一日，盗贼焚烧献陵寝宫。
English: On the 11th day, thieves set fire to the mausoleum.

古文：十二月甲辰，武宁军都押衙王智兴及李师道战于平阴，败之。
现代文：十二月初七，武宁军都押衙王智兴在平阴与李师道作战，打败李师道。
English: On the 7th day of the 12th month of the lunar calendar, Wang Zhixing of the Wu Ning Army fought against Li Shidao in Pingyin and defeated Li Shidao.

古文：是岁，丹王逾薨。
现代文：本年，丹王李逾去世。
English: This year, the King of the Dan Dynasty, Li Xiang, passed away.

古文：十一年正月己巳，张弘靖罢。
现代文：元和十一年正月初三，张弘靖被免职。
English: On the third day of the first month of the eleventh year of the Yuan Dynasty, Zhang Hongjing was dismissed.

古文：乙亥，幽州卢龙军节度使刘总及王承宗战于武强，败之。
现代文：初九，幽州卢龙军节度使刘总在武强与王承宗作战，打败王承宗。
English: On the 9th day of the first lunar month, the festival of the Yuzhou Lulong Army made Liu Zong fight with Wang Chengzong in Wuqiang and defeat Wang Chengzong.

古文：癸未，免邻贼州二岁税。
现代文：十七日，免征邻近叛贼地盘州郡两年税赋。
English: On the 17th, the neighboring traitor territory of Panzhou County was exempted from tax for two years.

古文：甲申，盗断建陵门戟。
现代文：十八日，盗贼截断建陵门外的仪仗列戟。
English: On the 18th, thieves cut off the ceremonial railing outside the gate of the mausoleum.

古文：二月庚子，王承宗焚蔚州。
现代文：二月初四，王承宗焚烧蔚州。
English: On the fourth day of the second month of the year, Wang Chengzong set fire to Ulshu.

古文：乙巳，中书舍人李逢吉为门下侍郎、同中书门下平章事。
现代文：初九，中书舍人李逢吉任门下侍郎、同中书门下平章事。
English: In the ninth grade of junior high school, Li Fengji, a teacher of Chinese literature, served as a junior attendant and a junior disciple of the same school.

古文：乙丑，地震。
现代文：二十九日，地震。
English: On the 29th, an earthquake.

古文：三月庚午，皇太后崩。
现代文：三月初四，皇太后去世。
English: On March 4th, the Empress Dowager passed away.

古文：四月庚子，李光颜、乌重胤及吴元济战于凌云栅，败之。
现代文：四月初五，李光颜、乌重胤在凌云栅与吴元济作战，打败吴元济。
English: On the fifth day of the fourth lunar month, Li Guangyan and Wu Chungyan fought against Wu Yuanji in Lingyunzao and defeated Wu Yuanji.

古文：乙卯，刘总及王承宗战于深州，败之。
现代文：二十日，刘总在深州与王承宗作战，打败王承宗。
English: On the 20th, Liu Zong fought with Wang Chengzong in Shenzhou and defeated Wang Chengzong.

古文：己未，免京畿二岁逋税。
现代文：二十四日，免除京畿两年的欠税。
English: On the 24th, Gyeonggi Province was exempted from two years of tax arrears.

古文：五月丁卯，宥州军乱，逐其刺史骆怡，夏绥银节度使田缙败之。
现代文：五月初二，宥州军队骚乱，驱逐其刺史骆怡，夏、绥、银节度使田缙挫败乱军。
English: On the second day of the first month of May, the Yuzhou army rioted, expelling its assassin Shi Luo Yi. Xia, Zou and Yin Jiedu led Tian Yu to defeat the rebel army.

古文：丁亥，云南蛮寇安南。
现代文：二十二日，云南蛮族劫掠安南。
English: On the 22nd, the Yunnan barbarians pillaged Annan.

古文：六月，蜜州海溢。
现代文：六月，密州海潮泛滥。
English: In June, the sea tides in Mizhou caused flooding.

古文：甲辰，唐邓节度使高霞寓及吴元济战于铁城，败绩。
现代文：初十，唐邓节度使高霞寓在铁城与吴元济作战，大败。
English: On the tenth day of the first month of the year, Tang and Deng set Gao Xiayu to fight against Wu Yuanji in Tiecheng, and he was soundly defeated.

古文：七月壬午，韩弘及元济战于郾城。
现代文：七月十八日，韩弘在郾城与吴元济作战，打败吴元济。
English: On July 18th, Han Hong fought Wu Yuanji in Fucheng and defeated Wu Yuanji.

古文：败之。丙戌，免淮西领贼州夏税。
现代文：二十二日，免征淮西邻近叛贼地区州郡的夏税。
English: On the 22nd, the summer tax of counties and prefectures in the rebel areas near Huaxi was exempted.

古文：八月甲午，渭水溢。
现代文：八月初一，渭水泛滥。
English: On the first day of August, Surabaya was flooded.

古文：壬寅，韦贯之罢。
现代文：初九，韦贯之被免职。
English: On the first day of the ninth month, Wei Gangzhi was removed from office.

古文：戊申，西原蛮陷宾、峦二州。
现代文：十五日，西原蛮族攻破宾、峦二州。
English: On the fifteenth day, the barbarians of the Western Plains invaded Bin and Jian Erzhou.

古文：己未，昭义军节度使郗士美及王承宗战于柏乡，败之。
现代文：二十六日，昭义军节度使郗士美在柏乡与王承宗作战，打败王承宗。
English: On the twenty-sixth day, the Shouyi Army's festival made Gong Shimei fight against Wang Chengzong in Baoxiang, defeating Wang Chengzong.

古文：庚申，葬庄宪皇太后于丰陵。
现代文：二十七日，将庄宪皇太后葬在丰陵。
English: On the 27th, Empress Dowager Zhuoxian was buried in Fengling.

古文：十一月乙丑，邕管经略使韦悦克宾、峦二州。
现代文：十一月初四，邕管经略使韦悦收复宾、峦二州。
English: On the 4th day of the 11th month of the 1st month of the 1st month of the 1st month of the 1st month of the 1st month of the 1st month of the 1st month of the 1st month of the 1st month of the 1st month of the 1st month of the 1st month of the 1st month of the 1st month of the 1st month of the 1st month of the 1st month of the 1st month of the 1st month of the 1st month of the 1st month of the 1st month of the 1st month of the 1st month of the 1st month of the 1st month of the 1st month of the 1

古文：甲戌，元陵火。
现代文：十三日，元陵失火。
English: On the 13th, the original mausoleum caught fire.

古文：十二月丁未，翰林学士、工部侍郎王涯为中书侍郎、同中书门下平章事。
现代文：十二月十六日，翰林学士、工部侍郎王涯任中书侍郎、同中书门下平章事。
English: On December 16th, Wang Ya, a bachelor of Hanlin and a waiter of the engineering department, was appointed as the junior secretary of the middle school and the junior secretary of the middle school.

古文：己未，西原蛮陷岩州。
现代文：二十八日，西原蛮族军攻破岩州。
English: On the 28th, the barbarian army of the Western Plains invaded Iwashu.

古文：是冬，桃李华。
现代文：冬季，桃李开花。
English: In winter, peach and plum blossom.

古文：十二年正月丁丑，地震。
现代文：元和十二年正月十七日，地震。
English: On the 17th day of the first month of the 12th year of the Yuan Dynasty, there was an earthquake.

古文：戊子，有彗星出于毕。
现代文：二十八日，在毕宿天区出现彗星。
English: On the 28th, a comet appeared in the western sky.

古文：四月辛卯，唐邓隋节度使李愬及吴元济战于嵖岈山，败之。
现代文：四月初二，唐、邓、隋三州节度使李訫在山查岈山与吴元济作战，打败吴元济。
English: On the second day of the first month of April, the Three States Festival of Tang, Deng and Sui made Li Gan fight with Wu Yuanji in Shanzha Lushan Mountain, and defeated Wu Yuanji.

古文：乙未，李光颜又败之于郾城。
现代文：初六，李光颜在郾城又打败吴元济。
English: On the sixth day of junior high school, Li Guangyan defeated Wu Yuanji in Shicheng.

古文：五月酉，李愬又败之于张柴。
现代文：五月初二，李訫在张柴再败吴元济。
English: On the second day of May, Li Wei defeated Wu Yuanji again in Zhangzhai.

古文：七月丙辰，裴度为淮西宣慰处置使，户部侍郎崔群为中书侍郎；同中书门下平章事。
现代文：七月二十九日，裴度任淮西宣慰处置使，户部侍郎崔群任中书侍郎，一并加同中书门下平章事。
English: On July 29th, Pei Du was appointed as Huaxi Consolation and Disposition Envoy, and Choi Qun, Household Attendant, was appointed as Chushushushushushushushushushushushushushushushushushushushushushushushushushushushushushushushushushushushushushushushushushushushushushushushushushushushushushushushushushushushushushushushushushushushushushushushushushushushushushushushushushushushushushushushushushushushushushushushushushushushushushushushushushushushushushushushush

古文：八月癸亥，乌重胤及吴元济战于贾店，败绩。
现代文：八月初六，乌重胤在贾店与吴元济作战，大败。
English: On the 6th day of the 8th month, Wu Chung-yin fought against Wu Yuan-ji in Jia's shop and was soundly defeated.

古文：九月丁未，李逢吉罢。
现代文：九月二十日，李逢吉被免职。
English: On September 20, Li Fengji was removed from his post.

古文：甲寅，李愬及吴元济战于吴房，败之。
现代文：二十七日，李訫在吴房与吴元济作战，打败吴元济。
English: On the 27th, Li Gan fought with Wu Yuanji in Wufang and defeated Wu Yuanji.

古文：十月癸酉，克蔡州。
现代文：十月十七日，收复蔡州。
English: October 17th, recaptured Caizhou.

古文：甲戌，淮南节度使李庸阝为门下侍郎、同中书门下平章事。
现代文：十八日，淮南节度使李庸阝任门下侍郎、同中书门下平章事。
English: On the 18th day of the Huainan Festival, Li Yongkang was appointed as the attendant of the disciple and the disciple of the disciple of the disciple of the disciple.

古文：甲申，给复准西二年，免旁州来岁夏税。
现代文：二十八日，免除淮西徭役二年，免征附近州郡来年夏税。
English: On the 28th, Huaxi County was exempted from two years of summer duty, and the nearby counties were exempted from next year's summer tax.

古文：葬战士，禀其家五年。
现代文：安葬阵亡军士，赐给其家属谷粮五年。
English: The dead sergeant was buried and his family was given grain for the next five years.

古文：十一月丙戌，吴元济伏诛。
现代文：十一月初一，吴元济伏法处死。
English: On the first day of November, Wu Yuanji was sentenced to death.

古文：甲午，恩王连薨。
现代文：初九，恩王李连去世。
English: On the 9th day of the 9th month, King En-Wang Lilian passed away.

古文：是岁，容管经略使阳旻克钦、横、浔、贵四州。
现代文：本年，容管经略使阳收复钦、横、氵寻、贵四州。
English: This year, the economic situation has slightly improved, with the recovery of Yang, the recovery of Qin, the recovery of Heng, the recovery of Min, and the recovery of Guizhou.

古文：十三年正月乙酉，大赦，免元和二年以前逋负，赐高年米帛羊酒。
现代文：元和十三年正月初一，施行大赦，免除元和二年以前所欠的税赋，赐给高龄老人米、帛、羊、酒。
English: On the first day of the first month of the 13th year of the Yuan and the 13th year of the Heian period, an amnesty was carried out, exempting the taxes owed before the Yuan and the Heian period, and giving rice, straw, sheep and wine to the elderly.

古文：三月戊戌，御史大夫李夷简为门下侍郎、同中书门下平章事。
现代文：三月十五日，御史大夫李夷简任门下侍郎、同中书门下平章事。
English: On March 15th, Li Yijian, the master of history, was appointed as the junior attendant of the disciple, and the junior disciple of the disciple was appointed as the junior disciple of the disciple.

古文：李庸阝罢。
现代文：李庸阝被免职。
English: Li Yongyao was removed from his post.

古文：己酉，横海军节度使程权以沧、景二州归于有司，权朝于京师。
现代文：二十六日，横海军节度使程权将沧、景二州归于朝廷，程权赴京城朝见君主。
English: On the 26th day of the month, during the naval festival, Cheng Quan assigned Cangzhou and Jingzhou to the imperial court, and Cheng Quan went to the capital to meet the monarch.

古文：四月甲寅，王承宗献德、棣二州。
现代文：四月初一，王承宗献出德、棣二州。
English: On the first day of April, Wang Chengzong presented the two states of De and Handan.

古文：庚辰，赦承宗。
现代文：二十七日，赦免王承宗。
English: On the 27th, Wang Chengzong was pardoned.

古文：六月癸丑朔，日有食之。
现代文：六月初一，日月合朔，有日蚀。
English: On the first day of June, the sun and moon are new, and there is a solar eclipse.

古文：癸亥，给复德、棣、沧、景四州一年。
现代文：十一日，免除德、棣、沧、景四州徭役一年。
English: On the 11th day of the month, he was exempted from serving in the four prefectures of De, Min, Cang and Jing for one year.

古文：辛未，淮水溢。
现代文：十九日，淮水泛滥。
English: On the 19th, the Huai River flooded.

古文：七月乙酉，宣武、魏博、义成、横海军讨李师道。
现代文：七月初三，调宣武、魏博、义成、横海军的兵力讨伐李师道。
English: On the 3rd day of the 7th month, the forces of Xuanwu, Wei Bo, Yicheng and Heng navy were dispatched to fight against Li Shidao.

古文：辛丑李夷简罢。
现代文：十九日，李夷简被免职。
English: On the 19th, Li Yijian was removed from office.

古文：八月壬子，王涯罢。
现代文：八月初一，王涯被免职。
English: On August 1, Wang Ya was removed from his post.

古文：九月甲辰，户部侍郎皇甫镈，诸道盐铁转运使程异为工部侍郎：同中书门下平章事。
现代文：九月二十三日，户部侍郎皇甫，诸道盐铁转运使程异任工部侍郎，一并加同中书门下平章事。
English: On September 23rd, Emperor Fu, the Household Attendant of the Imperial Household, appointed Cheng as the Attendant of the Ministry of Works for the transfer of salt and iron from one province to another, together with Zhongshumen Shimohei.

古文：十月壬戌，吐蕃寇宥州，灵武节度使杜叔良败之于定远城。
现代文：十月十二日，吐蕃进犯宥州，灵武节度使杜叔良在定远城打败吐军。
English: On October 12th, Tubo invaded Yuzhou, and Du Shuliang defeated the Tubo army in Dingyuan.

古文：十一月丁亥，命山人柳泌为台州刺史以求药。
现代文：十一月初七，委任隐士柳泌为台州刺史以求药。
English: On the 7th day of the 11th month, the hermit Liu Xuan was appointed as the Taizhou stabbing history to seek medicine.

古文：十二月，庚戌，迎佛骨于凤翔。
现代文：十二月初一，从凤翔迎取佛骨。
English: On the first day of December, the Buddhist bones were received from Fengxiang.

古文：十四年正月丙午，田弘正及李师道战于阳谷，败之。
现代文：元和十四年正月二十七日，田弘正在阳谷与李师道作战，打败李师道。
English: On the 27th day of the first month of the 14th year of the Yuan Dynasty, Tian Hong was fighting with Li Shidao in Yanggu and defeated Li Shidao.

古文：二月戊午，师道伏诛。
现代文：二月初十，李师道伏法处死。
English: On the 10th day of the 2nd month, Li Shifu was put to death.

古文：四月辛未，程异薨。
现代文：四月二十四日，程异去世。
English: On April 24th, Cheng Yi passed away.

古文：丙子，裴度罢。
现代文：二十九日，裴度被免职。
English: On the 29th, Baidu was removed from office.

古文：七月戊寅，韩弘以汴、宋、毫、颍四州归于有司，弘朝于京师。
现代文：七月初二，韩弘将汴、宋、亳、颍四州归于朝廷，赴京城朝见君主。
English: On the second day of the first month of July, Han Hong returned the four provinces of Yunnan, Song, Fujian and Fujian to the imperial court and went to the capital to meet the monarch.

古文：己丑，群臣上尊号曰元和圣文神武法天应道皇帝。
现代文：十三日，群臣为宪宗加尊号为 元和圣文神武法天应道皇帝 。
English: On the 13th, a group of courtiers conferred the honorary title of Yuan and Shenwen Shenwu Faten on Emperor Xizong.

古文：大赦，赐文武官阶、勋、爵。
现代文：施行大赦，赐予文武官员官阶、勋衔、爵位。
English: An amnesty was implemented, and civil and military officials were granted official ranks, decorations, and peerages.

古文：遣黜陟使于天下。
现代文：派黜陟使赴全国各地考查官吏。
English: and dispatched envoys to inspect officials across the country.

古文：辛卯，沂海将王弁杀其观察使王遂，处称留后。
现代文：十五日，沂海将领王弁杀其观察使王遂，自称留后。
English: On the fifteenth day, Wang Sui, the general of the Bohai Sea, killed his observer, claiming to stay behind.

古文：丁酉，河阳节度使令狐楚为中书侍郎、同中书门下平章事。
现代文：二十一日，河阳节度使令狐楚任中书侍郎、同中书门下平章事。
English: On the twenty-first day of the Kawayang Festival, Ling Xuchu was appointed as the junior secretary of the middle school and the junior secretary of the middle school.

古文：八月己酉，韩弘为中书令。
现代文：八月初三，韩弘任中书令。
English: On the third day of the eighth month, Han Hong was appointed to the post of vice-premier.

古文：九月戊寅，王弁伏诛。
现代文：九月初三，王弁伏法处死。
English: On the third day of September, Wang Benfu was executed.

古文：十月壬戌，安南将杨清杀其都护李象古以反。
现代文：十月十七日，安南将领杨清杀了都护李象古反叛。
English: On October 17th, Annan's general Yang Qing killed the rebel governor Li Xiangu.

古文：癸酉，吐蕃寇盐州。
现代文：二十八日，吐蕃进犯盐州。
English: On the 28th, Tubo invaded Yanzhou.

古文：十一月辛卯，朔方将史敬奉及吐蕃战于瓠芦河，败之。
现代文：十一月十七日，朔方将领史敬奉在瓠芦河与吐蕃军交战，打败吐军。
English: On November 17th, Shuo's general, Shi Jingbong, fought with the Tubo army in the Huludao River and defeated the Tubo army.

古文：十二月乙卯，崔群罢。
现代文：十二月十一日，崔群被免职。
English: On December 11, Cui Qun was removed from his post.

古文：十五年正月，宦者陈弘志等反。
现代文：元和十五年正月，宦官陈弘志等反叛。
English: In the first month of the 15th year of the Yuan Dynasty, eunuchs such as Chen Hongzhi rebelled.

古文：庚子，皇帝崩，年四十三，谥曰圣神章武孝皇帝。
现代文：二十七日，宪宗逝世，终年四十三岁，谥号为圣神章武孝皇帝。
English: On the 27th, Emperor Kenzong died at the age of forty-three. His posthumous name was Emperor Shenzhenzhangwu Xiao.

古文：大中三年，加谥昭文章武大圣至神孝皇帝。
现代文：宣宗大中三年，加其谥号为昭文章武大圣至神孝皇帝。
English: In the third year of Xuan Zong High School, he was given the posthumous title of Zhaozhou Wudai Shengzhi Emperor.

古文：赞曰：德宗猜忌刻薄，以强明自任，耻见屈于正论，而忘受欺于奸谀。
现代文：评说：德宗为人好猜疑妒忌、待人冷酷寡情，以见识高明自负，以顺从正确合理的言论为羞耻，却胡乱地受奸诈邪恶的谄媚之辞欺骗。
English: Comment: Dezong is suspicious, envious, and cold-hearted. He is ashamed of his superior knowledge and conceit, and of his obedience to correct and reasonable speech, but he has been deceived by the deceitful and evil words of flattery.

古文：故其疑萧复之轻己，谓姜公辅为卖直，而不能容；用卢杞、赵赞，则至于败乱，而终不悔。
现代文：他疑心萧复轻视自己，认为姜公辅是故作正直，因而不能相容；信用卢杞、赵赞，则达到毁政乱国的地步，却始终不改。
English: He suspected that Xiao Fu despised him and thought that Jiang Gongfu pretended to be honest, so they were incompatible; the credit of Lu Wei and Zhao Zan reached the level of destroying the government and the country, but they never changed.

古文：及奉天之难，深自惩艾，遂行姑息之政。
现代文：及至奉天之难，他遭受惩创、深自戒惧，于是又推行无原则宽容的政策。
English: When it came to the difficulty of serving Heaven, he was punished and deeply afraid, so he pursued a policy of unprincipled tolerance.

古文：由是朝廷益弱，而方镇愈强，至于唐亡，其患以此。
现代文：由此朝廷权威更虚弱，而方镇势力更强悍，直至唐朝灭亡，其祸害自此发端。
English: As a result, the authority of the imperial court was weaker, while the power of Fangzhen was stronger, until the fall of the Tang Dynasty.

古文：宪宗刚明果断，自初即位，慨然发慎，志平僭叛，能用忠谋，不惑群议，卒收成功。
现代文：宪宗刚明果断，自一登基，便激昂发愤，立志平息僭位逆贼，能取用忠诚的计谋，不受各种议论的惑乱，终于收得成功之效。
English: Emperor Gensong was resolute and determined. From the moment he ascended to the throne, he was infuriated and determined to quell the usurpers of the throne. He was able to use loyal strategies and was not confused by all kinds of discussions, and finally achieved success.

古文：自吴元济诛，强籓悍将皆欲悔过而效顺。
现代文：自从吴元济伏法，强蕃悍将大都想悔改过错，恭敬听从朝廷命令。
English: Since the Wu-Yuan-Ji-Fu Law, strong and powerful generals have mostly wanted to repent their mistakes and respectfully obey the orders of the imperial court.

古文：当此之时，唐之威令，几于复振，则其为优劣，不待较而可知也。
现代文：当此之时，唐朝的朝纲刑法、军令政纪，将近恢复振兴，德宗、宪宗谁优谁劣，就不须比较而可区别了。
English: At this time, the Tang Dynasty's Imperial Criminal Law and Military and Political Discipline were about to be revitalized, and it was no longer necessary to compare and distinguish who was superior and who was inferior.

古文：及其晚节，信用非人，不终其业，而身罹不测之祸，则尤甚于德宗。
现代文：到宪宗晚年，信用行为不端之人，使其事业未得善终，而身遭意外灾祸，则更甚于德宗的结局。
English: In the later years of Kenzong's life, those who did not behave well in terms of credit did not have a good end to their career, and those who suffered an unexpected disaster were even worse than the outcome of Dezong.

古文：鸣呼！
现代文：可叹哪！
English: What a pity!

古文：小人之能败国也，不必愚君暗主，虽聪明圣智，苟有惑焉，未有不为患者也。
现代文：奸佞小人之能够败毁国家，不一定是君主愚昧昏暗，即使是聪明圣智的君主，如果偶有迷惑，亦未有不造成祸患的。
English: It is not necessarily the prince who is stupid and dim who is able to ruin the country by his treachery and villainy. Even the prince who is wise and saintly is not without mischief if he is occasionally deceived.

古文：昔韩愈言，顺宗在东宫二十年，天下阴受其赐。
现代文：当年韩愈说：顺宗身处东宫为太子二十年，天下人不知不觉中受其赐予的恩惠。
English: At that time, Han Yu said: Shunzong was in the East Palace as the prince for twenty years, and the world was unknowingly blessed by him.

古文：然享国日浅，不幸疾病，莫克有为，亦可以悲夫！
现代文：然而在位时日短暂，不幸染病，未能有所作为，确实令人悲哀呵！
English: However, his time in office was short, unfortunately he fell ill and was unable to make any difference, which is really sad!

