古文：孟春始至，黄帝燕坐，临观八极，正八风之气，而问雷公曰：阴阳之类，经脉之道，五中所主，何藏最贵？
现代文：在立春的这一天，黄帝很安闲地坐者，观看八方的远景，侯察八风的方向，向雷公问道：按照阴阳的分析方法和经脉理论，配合五脏主时，你认为哪一脏最贵？
English: On this day of the first day of spring, the Yellow Emperor was sitting very leisurely, watching the distant view of the eight directions, watching the direction of the eight winds, and asked Lei Gong: According to the analysis method of yin and yang and the theory of meridians, when matching the five internal organs, which one do you think is the most expensive?

古文：雷公对曰：春甲乙青，中主肝，治七十二日，是脉之主时，臣以其藏最贵。
现代文：雷公回答说：春季为一年之首，属甲乙木，其色青，五脏中主肝，肝旺于春季七十二日，此时也是肝脉当令的时候，所以我认为肝脏最贵。
English: Lei Gong replied, "Spring is the first day of the year. It belongs to the genus Scutellaria. Its color is blue. The main organ is the liver. The liver is in full bloom on the 72nd day of spring. This is also the time when the liver is in charge, so I think the liver is the most valuable.

古文：帝曰：却念上下经，阴阳从容，子所言最贵，其下也。
现代文：黄帝道：我依据《上、下经》阴阳比例分析的理论来体会，你认为最贵的，却是其中最贱下的。
English: Huang Di said, "Based on the theory of yin and yang ratio analysis of the "Upper and Lower Classic," I realized that what you think is the most expensive is actually the most lowly.

古文：雷公致斋七日，旦复侍坐。
现代文：雷公斋戒了七天，早晨又侍坐于黄帝的一旁。
English: Lei Gong fasted for seven days, and in the morning he sat at the side of the Yellow Emperor.

古文：帝曰：三阳为经，二阳为维，一阳为游部，此知五藏终始。
现代文：黄帝道：三阳为经，二阳为维，一阳为游部，懂得这些，可以知道五脏之气运行的终始了。
English: Huang Di said: The three yangs are the sutra, the two yangs are the dimension, and the one yang is the yang part. If you understand these, you can know the end and beginning of the operation of the five viscera.

古文：三阳为表，二阴为里，一阴至绝，作朔晦，却具合以正其理。
现代文：三阳为表，二阴为里，一阴为阴气之最终，是阳气的开始，有如朔侮的交界，都符合于天地阴阳终始的道理。
English: The three yang as the table, the two yin as the middle, and the one yin as the end of the yin, is the beginning of the yang, and is like the junction of the two yang, all of which are consistent with the principle that heaven and earth are the beginning and end of yin and yang.

古文：雷公曰：受业未能明。
现代文：雷公说：我还没有明白其中的意义。
English: Lei Gong said, "I still don't understand the significance of this.

古文：帝曰：所谓三阳者，太阳为经，三阳脉，至手太阴，弦浮而不沉，决以度，察以心，合之阴阳之论。
现代文：黄帝道：所谓 三阳 ，是指太阳，其脉至于手太阴寸口，见弦浮不沉之象，应当根据常度来判断，用心体察，并参合阴阳之论，以明好坏。
English: Huang Di said: The so-called "three suns" refers to the sun. As for the pulse of the hand, it is too yin and the mouth is too small. If you see the string floating, you should judge it according to the constancy, observe it with your heart, and participate in the theory of yin and yang to know what is good and bad.

古文：所谓二阳者，阳明也，至手太阴，弦而沉急不鼓，炅至以病皆死。一阳者，少阳也，至手太阴，上连人迎，弦急悬不绝，此少阳之病也，专阴则死。
现代文：所谓 二阳 ，就是阳明，其脉至于手太阴寸口，见弦浮不沉之急，不鼓击于指，火热大至之时而由此病脉，大都有死亡的危险。 一阳 就是少阳，其脉至于手太阴寸口，上连人迎，见弦急悬而不绝，这是少阳经的病脉，如见有阴而无阳的真脏脉象，就要死亡。
English: The so-called two yang, that is, the yang-ming, the pulse of which, as far as the hand is concerned, is too yin and the mouth is too small, the strings are in a hurry, the drums do not beat on the fingers, and when the heat is too great, and thus the diseased vein, most of them are in danger of death. The first yang is the shao-yang, the pulse of which, as far as the hand is concerned, is too yin and the mouth is too small, the strings are too long and the strings are too short, and the strings are too long and the drums do not beat on the fingers, and thus the diseased vein

古文：三阴者，六经之所主也，交于太阴，伏鼓不浮，上空志心。二阴至肺，其气归膀胱，外连脾胃。一阴独至，经绝，气浮不鼓，钩而滑。
现代文： 三阴 为手太阴肺经，肺朝百脉，所以为六经之主，其气交于太阴寸口，脉象沉浮鼓动而不浮，是太阴之气陷下而不能升天，以致心志空虚。 二阴 是少阴，其脉至于肺，其气归于膀胱，外与脾胃相连。 一阴 是厥阴，其脉独至于太阴寸口，经气已绝，故脉气浮而不鼓，脉象如钩而滑。
English: Sanyin is the master of the six meridians, as the hands are the meridians of the lungs, and the lungs are like a hundred veins. Its breath passes through the mouth of the fourth meridian, and the pulse is like a deep, buoyant beating, but not buoyant. It is the breath of the fourth meridian that sinks and cannot rise to the sky, so that the mind is empty. Second Yin is the lesser Yin, and its pulse, as for the lungs, its breath belongs to the bladder, and is connected externally with the spleen and stomach. First Yin is Jueyin, and its pulse is unique to the mouth of the fourth meridian, and

古文：此六脉者，乍阴乍阳，交属相并，缪通五藏，合于阴阳，先至为主，后至为客。
现代文：以上六种脉象，或阳脏见阴脉，或阴脏见阳脉，相互交错，会聚于寸口，都和五脏相通，与阴阳之道相合。如出现此种脉象，凡先见于寸口的为主，后见于寸口的为客。
English: The above-mentioned six kinds of pulse images, or the yang vis-a-vis the yin vein, or the yin vis-a-vis the yang vein, intertwine with each other and converge at the cusp. All of them are in communication with the five viscera and are compatible with the yin-yang path. If such pulse images appear, the first to be seen at the cusp is the main one, and the second to be seen at the cusp is a guest.

古文：雷公曰：臣悉尽意，受传经脉，颂得从容之道，以合《从容》，不知阴阳，不知雌雄。
现代文：雷公说：我已经完全懂得您的意思了，把您以前传授给我的经脉道理，以及我自己从书本上读到的从容之道，和今天您所讲的从容之法相结合的话，我还不明白其中阴阳雌雄的意义。
English: Lei Gong said, "I have fully understood your meaning. If I combine the principles of the meridians that you taught me in the past, as well as the way of calmness that I myself read from books, with the way of calmness that you are talking about today, I still don't understand the meaning of yin and yang.

古文：帝曰：三阳为父，二阳为卫，一阳为纪。三阴为母，二阴为雌，一阴为独使。
现代文：黄帝道：三阳如父亲那样高尊，二阳如外卫，一阳如枢纽；三阴如母亲那样善于养育，二阴如雌雄那样内守，一阴如使者一般，能交通阴阳。
English: Huangdi said: the three yang is as high as the father, the two yang is as the outer guard, and the one yang is as the hub; the three yin is as good at nurturing as the mother, the two yin is as the male and female, and the one yin is as the messenger, and can communicate with the yin and yang.

古文：二阳一阴，阳明主病，不胜一阴，软而动，九窍皆沉。
现代文：二阳一阴是阳明主病，二阳不胜一阴，则阳明脉软而动，九窍之气沉滞不利。
English: Two yang and one yin are the main diseases of yang and yin. If two yang and one yin are not superior, then the yang and yang veins will be soft, and the stagnation of qi in the nine meridians will be unfavorable.

古文：三阳一阴，太阳脉胜，一阴不能止，内乱五藏，外为惊骇。
现代文：三阳一阴为病，则太阳脉胜，寒水之气大盛，一阴肝气不能制止寒水，故内乱五脏，外现惊骇。
English: If three yang and one yin are diseases, then the sun pulse is superior, and the cold water qi is abundant. If one yin and one yang, the liver qi cannot stop the cold water. Therefore, the five internal organs are in turmoil, and the external appearance is shocking.

古文：二阴二阳，病在肺，少阴脉沉，胜肺伤脾，外伤四支。
现代文：二阴二阳则病在肮，少阴脉沉，少阴之气胜肺伤脾，在外伤及四肢。
English: Two yin and two yang means the disease is dirty, less yin means heavy, less yin qi is better than lung injury, spleen injury, external injury and limbs.

古文：二阴二阳皆交至，病在肾，骂詈妄行，巅疾为狂。
现代文：二阴与二阳交互为患，则土邪侮水，其病在肾，骂詈妄行，癫疾狂乱。
English: If the interaction of the two yin and two yang is a disease, then the soil is evil, the water is evil, the disease is in the kidney, the abuse is delirious, and the epilepsy is insane.

古文：二阴一阳，病出于肾，阴气客游于心脘，下空窍堤，闭塞不通，四支别离。
现代文：二阴一阳，其病出于肾，阴气上逆于心，并使脘下空窍如被堤坝阻隔一样闭塞不通，四肢好象离开身体一样不能为用。
English: Two yin and one yang, the disease is caused by the kidney, and the yin is contrary to the heart, and the underarm space is blocked as if it were blocked by a dam, and the limbs cannot be used as if they were separated from the body.

古文：一阴一阳代绝，此阴气至心，上下无常，出入不知，喉咽干燥，病在土脾。
现代文：一阴一阳为病，其脉代绝，这是厥阴之气上至于心发生的病变，或在上部，或在下部，而无定处，饮食无味，大便泄泻无度，咽喉干部，病在脾土。
English: One yin and one yang is the disease, and its pulse is absent. This is due to the influence of yin and yang. As for the pathology of the heart, it is either in the upper part or in the lower part, but there is no fixed place, the diet is tasteless, the stool is leaking without measure, the throat is cadaveric, and the disease is in the spleen.

古文：二阳三阴，至阴皆在，阴不过阳，阳气不能止阴，阴阳并绝，浮为血瘕，沉为脓胕。阴阳皆壮，下至阴阳。
现代文：二样三阴为病，包括至阴脾土在内，阴气不能至于阳，阳气不能达于阴，阴阳相互隔绝，阳浮于外则内成血瘕，阴沉于里外成脓肿；若阴阳之气都盛壮，而病变趋向于下，再男子则阳道生病，女子则阴器生病。
English: Two kinds of three yin are diseases, including the yin and yang spleen, the yin cannot reach the yang, the yang cannot reach the yin, the yin and yang are isolated from each other, the yang floating on the outside becomes internal hemorrhage, the gloomy inside and outside becomes abscess; if the yin and yang are strong, and the lesions tend to go down, then the man is sick with the yang, and the woman is sick with the yin.

古文：上合昭昭，下合冥冥，诊决生死之期，遂合岁首。
现代文：上观天道，下察地理，必以阴阳之理来决断病者死生之期，同时还要参合一岁之中何气为首。
English: Looking at the heavenly way from above and the geography from below, it is necessary to use the principle of yin and yang to determine the period of life and death of the sick, and at the same time, it is necessary to participate in the first year of life.

古文：雷公曰：请问短期。
现代文：雷公说：请问疾病的死亡日期。
English: Lei Gong said: Please ask the date of death of the disease.

古文：黄帝不应。
现代文：黄帝没有回答。
English: Huang Di did not answer.

古文：雷公复问。
现代文：雷公又问。
English: Lei Gong asked again.

古文：黄帝曰：在经论中。
现代文：黄帝道：在医书上有说明。
English: Huang Di said: There is an explanation in the medical book.

古文：雷公曰：请闻短期。
现代文：雷公又说：请问疾病的死亡日期。
English: Lei Gong also said: Please ask the date of death of the disease.

古文：黄帝曰：冬三月之病，病合于阳者，至春正月脉有死徵，皆归出春。
现代文：黄帝道：冬季三月的病，如病症脉象都属阳盛，则春季正月见脉有死征，那麽到初春交夏，阳盛阴衰之时，便会有死亡的危险。
English: Huang Di said: In the winter of March, if the symptoms of the disease are all related to the Yang Sheng, then in the spring of the first month, there will be signs of death. Then in the early spring of the summer, when the Yang Sheng and Yin decline, there will be a risk of death.

古文：冬三月之病，在理已尽，草与柳叶皆杀，春阴阳皆绝，期在孟春。
现代文：冬季三月的病，根据地理，势必将尽，草和柳叶都苦死了，如果到春天阴阳之气都绝，那麽其死期就在正月。
English: According to geography, the diseases of winter in March are bound to be exhausted, and the grass and willow leaves will die hard. If the yin and yang spirits are exhausted by spring, then their death period will be in the first month.

古文：春三月之病，曰阳杀，阴阳皆绝，期在草干。
现代文：春季三月的病，名为 阳杀 。阴阳之气都绝，死期在冬天草木苦干之时。
English: The disease of spring in March is called yangshui. The yin and yang energies are exhausted, and the time of death is in winter, when the plants are hard at work.

古文：夏三月之病，至阴不过十日，阴阳交，期在溓水。
现代文：夏季三月的病，若不痊愈，到了至阴之时，那么死期在至阴后不超过十日；若脉见阴阳交错，则死期在初冬结薄冰之时。
English: In the case of illness in March of summer, if it has not been cured by the time of the solstice, the time of death is no more than ten days after the solstice; if the veins see the intertwining of yin and yang, the time of death is in early winter when the ice is thin.

古文：秋三月之病，三阳俱起，不治自已。
现代文：冬季三月的病，表现了手足三阳的脉证，不给治疗也会自愈。
English: The disease in March of winter showed the pulse symptom of the three suns on the hands and feet, and it would heal itself without treatment.

古文：阴阳交合者，立不能坐，坐不能起。
现代文：若是阴阳叫错和而为病，则立而不能坐，坐而不能起。
English: If yin and yang call the wrong sum and become a disease, then you can't stand up and sit down, and you can't get up and sit down.

古文：三阳独至，期在石水。
现代文：若三阳脉独至，则独阳无阴，死期在冰结如石之时。
English: If the three yang veins are alone, then there is only sun and no shade, and the time of death is when it is frozen like stone.

古文：二阴独至，期在盛水。
现代文：三阴脉独至，则独阴无阳，死期在正月雨水节。
English: If there are only three yin veins, there will be only yin and no yang, and the time of death will be in the first month of the rainy season.

