古文：周公既沒，命君陈分正东郊成周，作《君陈》。
现代文：周公既沒，命令君陈治理东郊成周，史官作《君陈》。
English: Since Zhou Gong was not there, he ordered Jun Chen to govern the eastern suburb of Cheng Zhou, and the historian wrote "Jun Chen."

古文：王若曰： 君陈，惟尔令德孝恭。
现代文：成王这样说： 君陈！你有孝顺恭敬的美德。
English: Cheng Wang said, "Jun Chen, you have the virtues of filial piety and respect.

古文：惟孝友于兄弟，克施有政。
现代文：因为你孝顺父母，又友爱兄弟，就能够来处理政事。
English: Because you are filial to your parents and fraternal to your brothers, you can handle political affairs.

古文：命汝尹茲东郊，敬哉！
现代文：我命令你治理东郊成周，你要敬慎呀！
English: I order you to govern Eastern Suburbs Cheng Zhou, you should be careful!

古文：昔周公师保万民，民怀其德。
现代文：从前周公做万民的师保，人民怀念他的美德。
English: The people remember the virtues of Zhou Gong, who served as the tutor of the people.

古文：往慎乃司，茲率厥常，懋昭周公之训，惟民其乂。
现代文：你前往，要慎重对待你的职务呀！遵循周公的常道，勉力宣扬周公的教导，人民就会安定。
English: If you go, you should be careful about your duties! Follow Zhou Gong's routine and try your best to promote Zhou Gong's teachings, and the people will be stable.

古文：我闻曰： 至治馨香，感于神明。黍稷非馨，明德惟馨尔。 
现代文：我听说：至治之世的馨香，感动神明；黍稷的香气，不是远闻的香气，明德才是远闻的香气。
English: I have heard it said that the sweet fragrance of a perfect world can move the gods; the fragrance of radium is not a fragrance that can be smelled from far away, but the fragrance of wisdom and virtue can be smelled from far away.

古文：尚式时周公之猷训，惟日孜孜，无敢逸豫。
现代文：你要履行这一周公的教训，日日孜孜不倦，不要安逸享乐！
English: You must fulfill this week's public lesson, work tirelessly every day, do not enjoy leisurely enjoyment!

古文：凡人未见圣，若不克见；既见圣，亦不克由圣，尔其戒哉！
现代文：凡人未见到圣道，好象不能见到一样；已经见到圣道，又不能遵行圣人的教导。
English: Ordinary people do not see the holy path, as if they cannot see it; they have seen the holy path, but they cannot follow the teachings of the saints.

古文：尔惟风，下民惟草。
现代文：你要戒惧呀！你是风，百姓是草，草随风而动啊！
English: You should be afraid! You are the wind, the people are the grass, and the grass moves with the wind!

古文：图厥政，莫或不艰，有废有兴，出入自尔师虞，庶言同则绎。
现代文：谋划殷民的政事，不要认为不难；有废除，有兴办，要反复同众人商讨，大家意见相同才能够施行。
English: Do not think that it is not difficult to plan the political affairs of the people; there is abolition, there is initiation, it is necessary to repeatedly discuss with the people, and everyone can only implement the same opinion.

古文：尔有嘉谋嘉猷，则入告尔后于內，尔乃顺之于外，曰： 斯谋斯猷，惟我后之德。 
现代文：你有好的谋略跟言论，就要进入宫内告诉君王，你于是在外面顺从君主，并且说： 这样的好谋，这样的好言，是我们君主的美德。 啊！
English: If thou hast good counsel and good words, go into the palace and tell the king; but if thou obeyest the prince without, and say, This good counsel, this good word, is the virtue of our prince.

古文：呜呼！
现代文：臣下都象这样，就良好啊！ 
English: Alas!

古文：臣人咸若时，惟良显哉！ 
现代文：成王说： 君陈！你应当扬周公的大训！
English: Cheng Wang said, "Jun Chen! You should carry forward Zhou Gong's great teaching!"

古文：王曰： 君陈，尔惟弘周公丕训，无依势作威，无倚法以削，宽而有制，从容以和。殷民在辟，予曰辟，尔惟勿辟；予曰宥，尔惟勿宥，惟厥中。
现代文：不要倚仗势力为非作歹，不要倚仗法律侵害百姓。要宽大而有法制，从容和谐。殷国的人民有陷入刑法的，我如果说处罚，你就不要处罚；我如果说赦免，你也不要赦免；要考虑是否符合刑罚。
English: Don't rely on force to do wrong, don't rely on the law to infringe on the people. Be lenient and have the rule of law, calm and harmonious. The people of Yin have fallen into the criminal law, if I say punish, you don't punish; if I say pardon, you don't pardon; you should consider whether the punishment is appropriate.

古文：有弗若于汝政，弗化于汝训，辟以止辟，乃辟。
现代文：有人不顺从你的政事，不接受你的教导，如果处罚他能够制止他违法犯罪，才处罚。
English: If someone disobeys your policies and does not accept your teachings, he will only be punished if punishing him can stop him from breaking the law and committing crimes.

古文：狃于奸宄，败常乱俗，三细不宥。
现代文：惯于做奸宄犯法的事，破坏法规，败坏风俗，这三项中的小罪，也不能宽恕。
English: Those who habitually commit illegal acts, violate laws and regulations, and corrupt customs cannot be pardoned for minor offenses in these three items.

古文：尔无忿疾于顽，无求备于一夫。必有忍，其乃有济；有容，德乃大。
现代文：你不要忿恨愚钝无知的人，不要向一人求全责备；君王一定要有所忍耐，才能够事有所成；学会宽容，德才算是大。
English: Thou shalt not be angry with a stupid and ignorant man; thou shalt not demand a full account from any one; a prince must have patience in order to be able to accomplish anything; it is a great virtue to learn to be tolerant.

古文：简厥修，亦简其或不修。进厥良，以率其或不良。
现代文：鉴别善良的，也鉴别有不善良的；进用那些贤良的人，来勉励那些有所不良的人。
English: Discern what is good and what is bad, and use those who are good to encourage those who are not.

古文：惟民生厚，因物有迁。违上所命，从厥攸好。
现代文：百姓纯良敦厚，又依外物而有改移；往往违背上级的教命，顺从上级的喜好。
English: The people are pure and good-natured, but also change according to external things; they often violate the superior's orders and obey the superior's preferences.

古文：尔克敬典在德，时乃罔不变。
现代文：你能够敬重常法和省察自己的德行，这些人就不会不变。
English: If you can respect the common law and reflect on your own virtue, these people will not change.

古文：允升于大猷，惟予一人膺受多福，其尔之休，终有辞于永世。 
现代文：真的升到非常顺从的境地，我将享受大福，你也将被世人永远赞赏。 
English: Truly rise to a very obedient state, I will enjoy great blessings, and you will be forever appreciated by the world.

