古文：黄帝问曰：愿闻禁数。
现代文：黄帝问道：我想了解人体禁刺的部位。
English: Huang Di asked: I want to know the parts of the human body that are forbidden to be pierced.

古文：岐伯对曰：脏有要害，不可不察。
现代文：岐伯回答说：内脏各有要害之处，不能不细看详审！
English: Qibo replied, "Each of the internal organs has its own key points, and it is essential to examine them in detail!"

古文：肝生于左，肺藏于右，心部于表，肾治于里，脾为之使，胃为之市。
现代文：肝气生发于左侧，肺气肃降于右侧，心气布散体表的阳气，肾气治理体内的阴气，脾像运输官主运化水谷精微的传输，胃像集市主受纳饮食水谷的汇聚。
English: Liver qi originates on the left side, lung qi descends on the right side, heart qi distributes yang qi on the surface of the body, kidney qi controls yin qi in the body, spleen acts as a transport organ and is responsible for the subtle transmission of qi, and stomach acts as a market and is responsible for the convergence of qi.

古文：鬲肓之上，中有父母，七节之旁，中有小心。
现代文：横膈上面，有维持生命活动的父母，第七椎旁的里面有心包络。
English: Above the diaphragm, there are life-sustaining parents, and next to the seventh vertebra, there is a heart encasing.

古文：从之有福，逆之有咎。刺中心，一日死，其动为噫。
现代文：上述部位都应该禁刺，遵循这个刺禁法则，就有利于治疗；违背了，则会给人体造成祸害。刺中心脏的，约一日即死，其病变症状为噫气。
English: All the above-mentioned parts should be prohibited from stabbing, and following this rule of stabbing prohibition is conducive to treatment; if it is violated, it will cause harm to the human body. If it is stabbed in the heart, it will die in about one day, and its lesion symptoms are hernia.

古文：刺中肝，五日死，其动为语。
现代文：刺中肝脏，约五日即死，其病变症状为多言多语。
English: He was stabbed in the liver, and died about five days later. The symptoms of the lesion were slurred speech.

古文：刺中肾，六日死，其动为嚏。
现代文：刺中肾脏，约六日即死，其病变症状为打喷嚏。
English: He was stabbed in the kidney and died about six days later. His symptoms were sneezing.

古文：刺中肺，三日死，其动为欬。
现代文：刺中肺脏，约三日即死，其病变症状为咳呛。
English: He was stabbed in the lung and died about three days later. His symptoms included coughing and diarrhea.

古文：刺中脾，十日死，其动为吞。
现代文：刺中脾脏，约十日即死，其病变症状为频频吞咽。
English: He was stabbed in the spleen and died about ten days later. The symptoms of his disease were frequent swallowing.

古文：刺中胆，一日半死，其动为呕。
现代文：误刺中胆，约一日半死，其病变症状为呕吐。
English: Accidental stabbing of the larynx, about a day and a half of death, the symptoms of the disease are vomiting.

古文：刺跗上中大脉，血出不止死。
现代文：针刺足背上，误伤了大血管，若出血不止，便会死亡。
English: Needle prick on the instep, accidentally injure a large blood vessel, if the bleeding continues, it will die.

古文：刺面中溜脉，不幸为盲。
现代文：针刺面部误伤了溜脉，不幸会致眼瞎。
English: Needling the face accidentally injures the saphenous vein, which unfortunately can lead to blindness.

古文：刺头中脑户，入脑，立死。
现代文：针刺头部的脑户穴，若刺至脑髓，就会立即死亡。
English: Needle puncture of the head of the brain hole, if stabbed to the brain, it will die immediately.

古文：刺舌下中脉太过，血出不止为瘖。
现代文：针刺舌下过深，误伤了血管，若出血不止，可使喉哑失音。
English: Needling too deep under the tongue, accidentally injuring blood vessels, if the bleeding continues, it can make the larynx lose sound.

古文：刺足下布络中脉，血不出为肿。
现代文：针刺足下布散的络脉，误伤了血管，若淤血留着不去可致局部肿胀。
English: The needle punctured a diffuse vein under the foot, accidentally injuring a blood vessel. If the congestion does not go away, it can cause local swelling.

古文：刺郄中大脉，令人仆，脱色。
现代文：针刺郄中穴太深，误伤了大经脉，可令人跌仆，面色苍白。
English: The hole in the middle of the needle embroidery hoop is too deep, and the great meridians are injured by mistake, which can make people fall down and look pale.

古文：刺气街中脉，血不出为肿鼠仆。
现代文：针刺气街穴，误伤了血管，若淤血留着不去，鼠蹊部就会肿胀。
English: The needle punctures the airway, accidentally injuring the blood vessel. If the congestion does not go away, the neck of the rat will swell.

古文：刺脊间中髓，为伛。
现代文：针刺脊椎间隙，误伤了脊髓，会使人的背部弯曲不伸。
English: Needling the space between the vertebrae, injuring the spinal cord by mistake, will make a person's back bend and not stretch.

古文：刺乳上中乳房，为肿，根蚀。
现代文：针刺乳中穴，伤及乳房，可使乳房肿胀，内部腐蚀溃脓。
English: The needle punctures a hole in the breast, injuring the breast, which can cause the breast to swell and internal corrosion to occur.

古文：刺缺盆中内陷，气泄，令人喘欬逆。
现代文：针刺缺盆穴的中央太深，造成肺气外泄，可令人喘咳气逆。
English: If the needle puncture is too deep in the center of the pelvic cavity, it will cause the lung air to leak out, which can cause people to cough.

古文：刺手鱼腹内陷，为肿。
现代文：针刺手鱼腹部太深，可使局部发生肿胀。
English: The spiny dogfish's abdomen is too deep, which can cause local swelling.

古文：无刺大醉，令人气乱。
现代文：不要针刺饮酒大醉的人，否则会使气血紊乱。
English: Don't prick a very drunk person with needles. Otherwise, the qi and blood will be disturbed.

古文：无刺大怒，令人气逆。
现代文：不要针刺正值勃然大怒的人，否则会使气机上逆。
English: Don't needle someone who is in the middle of an angry outburst, or you'll wind up on the wrong end of the stick.

古文：无刺大劳人，无刺新饱人，无刺大饥人，无刺大渴人，无刺大惊人。
现代文：此外，对过度疲劳，刚刚饱食，过分饥饿，极度口渴，方受极大惊吓的人，皆不可以针刺。
English: In addition, people who are over-tired, have just had a full meal, are excessively hungry, extremely thirsty, or are extremely frightened should not be needled.

古文：刺阴股中大脉，血出不止，死。
现代文：针刺大腿内侧的穴位，误伤了大血管，若出血不止，便会死亡。
English: The needle punctured a point on the inner thigh, accidentally injuring a large blood vessel. If the bleeding continues, the patient will die.

古文：刺客主人内陷中脉，为内漏，为聋。
现代文：针刺客主人穴太深，误伤了经脉，可使耳内化脓或致耳聋。
English: Needle prick the host hole is too deep, accidentally injure the meridians, can make the ear suppuration or deafness.

古文：刺膝髌出液，为跛。
现代文：针刺膝膑盖骨部位，若误伤以致流出液体，会使人发生跛足。
English: Needling the patellar region of the knee, if unintentionally injured resulting in the outflow of fluid, can cause a person to develop clubfoot.

古文：刺臂太阴脉，出血多，立死。
现代文：针刺手太阴肺经的穴位，若误伤出血过多，则立即死亡。
English: If there is too much bleeding due to accidental injury, the person will die immediately.

古文：刺足少阴脉，重虚出血，为舌难以言。
现代文：针刺足少阴肾经的穴位，误伤出血，可使肾气更虚，以致舌体失养转动不利而语言困难。
English: Needle pricking the acupoints of the Shaoyin kidney meridian, accidental bleeding, can make the kidney qi more deficient, resulting in tongue body degeneration, unfavorable rotation and language difficulties.

古文：刺膺中陷中肺，为喘逆仰息。
现代文：针刺前胸两旁太深，伤及肺脏，就会发生气喘上逆、仰面呼吸的症状。
English: If both sides of the chest are too deep before acupuncture, and the lungs are injured, the symptoms of reverse asthma and supine breathing will occur.

古文：刺肘中内陷，气归之，为不屈伸。
现代文：针刺肘弯处太深，气便结聚于局部而不行，以致手臂不能屈伸。
English: The needle prick at the elbow bend is too deep, and it is not possible for the qi to accumulate locally, so that the arm cannot be flexed.

古文：刺阴股下三寸内陷，令人遗溺。
现代文：针刺大腿内侧下三寸处太深，使人遗尿。
English: The needle is too deep in the lower three inches of the inner thigh, causing people to urinate.

古文：刺腋下胁间内陷，令人欬。
现代文：针刺腋下胁肋间太深，使人咳嗽。
English: Needling under the armpit is too deep between the ribs, causing people to cough.

古文：刺少腹中膀胱，溺出，令人少腹满。
现代文：针刺小腹部太深，误伤膀胱，使小便漏出流入腹腔，以致小腹胀满。
English: Needling too deep in the abdomen, injuring the bladder by mistake, causing urine to leak into the abdominal cavity, causing the abdomen to swell.

古文：刺腨肠内陷，为肿。
现代文：针刺小腿肚太深，会使局部肿胀。
English: If you prick the calf too deeply, it will cause local swelling.

古文：刺匡上陷骨中脉，为漏为盲。
现代文：针刺眼眶而深陷骨间，伤及脉络，就会造成流泪不止，甚至失明。
English: If the needle pierces the eyelid and goes deep into the bone, injuring the vein, it will cause tears and even blindness.

古文：刺关节中液出，不得屈伸。
现代文：针刺关节，误伤以致液体外流，则关节不能屈伸。
English: Needle-pierced joints, accidental injury resulting in fluid outflow, then the joint cannot flex.

