古文：左史倚相廷见申公子亹，子亹不出，左史谤之，举伯以告。
现代文：左史倚相要在朝廷会见申公子亹，子亹不肯出来，倚相指责他不对，举伯告诉了子亹。
English: Zuo Shi Liang wanted to meet with Shen Gong Zi Zhuo in the imperial court, but Zi Zhuo refused to come out. Liang Zi accused him of being wrong, and Zi Zhuo told Zi Zhuo.

古文：子亹怒而出，曰： 女无亦谓我老耄而舍我，而又谤我！ 
现代文：子亹非常愤怒，出来见他说： 你莫非是认为我老了而舍弃我，而且还说我的坏话！ 
English: The son of the donkey was very angry, and went out to meet him, and said to him, "Don't you despise me, and speak evil of me, seeing that I am old?

古文：左史倚相曰： 唯子老耄，故欲见以交儆子。
现代文：左史倚相说： 正因为您老了，所以我才想见您来告诫您。
English: Zuo Shi Li Xiang said: It is precisely because you are old that I want to see you to admonish you.

古文：若子方壮，能经营百事，倚相将奔走承序，于是不给，而何暇得见？
现代文：如果您正在壮年，能处理各种事务，我倚相将往来奔走受命办事，这样还恐怕不能完成，哪里有时间来见您？
English: If you are in the prime of your life and can handle all kinds of affairs, I believe you will be rushing back and forth under orders, which may not be completed, where is there time to see you?

古文：昔卫武公年数九十有五矣，犹箴儆于国，曰： 自卿以下至于师长士，苟在朝者，无谓我老耄而舍我，必恭恪于朝，朝夕以交戒我；闻一二之言，必诵志而纳之，以训导我。 
现代文：以前卫武公年龄九十五岁的时候还告诫国人说： 从卿以下到大夫和士，只要在朝中，不要认为我老了而舍弃我，在朝廷必须恭敬从事，早晚帮助告诫我；哪怕听到一两句谏言，也要记住之后转达给我，来训导我。 
English: In the past, when he was ninety-five years old, the Duke of Weiwu also admonished the Chinese people, saying, "From the lower ranks to doctors and judges, as long as you are in the court, do not think that I am old and abandon me. In the court, you must respectfully engage, help and admonish me in the morning and evening. Even if you hear a word or two of criticism, you must remember to convey it to me afterwards, to discipline me.

古文：在舆有旅贲之规，位宁有官师之典，倚几有诵训之谏，居寝有亵御之箴，临事有瞽史之导，宴居有师工之诵。
现代文：在车上有勇士的规谏，在朝廷有官长的法典，在几案旁边有诵训官的进谏，在寝室有近侍的箴言，处理政务有瞽史的引导，平时有乐师的诵诗。
English: In the chariot, there is a warrior's code; in the imperial court, there is the code of the magistrate; next to several cases, there is the chanting of the drill sergeant; in the bedroom, there are the proverbs of the close attendants; in the handling of government affairs, there is the guidance of the eunuch; and in ordinary times, there is the chanting of the musician.

古文：史不失书，蒙不失诵，以训御之，于是乎作《懿》戒以自儆也。
现代文：史官不停止书写，乐师不停止诵读，用来训导进献，于是作了《懿》这首戒诗来自我警戒。
English: Historians do not stop writing, musicians do not stop reciting, and they are used to instruct and promote, so they made "," a poem of self-warning.

古文：及其没也，谓之睿圣武公。
现代文：等到他去世后，称他是智慧圣明的武公。
English: After his death, he was described as a wise and holy warrior.

古文：子实不睿圣，于倚相何害。
现代文：您不智慧圣明，对我有什么妨害。
English: You don't know what's wrong with me.

古文：《周书》曰： 文王至于日中昃，不皇暇食。
现代文：《周书》说： 周文王忙到日头西斜，还来不及有空吃饭。
English: "Zhou Shu" said: Zhou Wenwang was so busy that he was too late to have time to eat.

古文：惠于小民，唯政之恭。 
现代文：恩惠施及小民，恭恭敬敬处理政事。 
English: They should be benevolent to the common people and respectfully handle political affairs.

古文：文王犹不敢骄。
现代文：周文王尚且不敢骄惰。
English: Zhou Wenwang did not dare to be arrogant.

古文：今子老楚国而欲自安也，以御数者，王将何为？
现代文：现在您在楚国自恃年老，想求得自己安逸，抵制别人的各种规谏，倘若是君王又将怎样呢？
English: Now, in Chu, you are boasting of your old age, trying to seek your own comfort, and resisting the various rules of others. What would you do if you were a king?

古文：若常如此，楚其难哉！ 
现代文：如果长久这样下去，楚国就难治了！ 
English: If this continues for a long time, it will be difficult to cure Chu!

古文：子亹惧，曰： 老之过也。 
现代文：子亹听了感到害怕，说： 这是我的过错啊。 
English: The young pigeon was scared and said, "It's my fault."

古文：乃骤见左史。
现代文：于是立即会见了左史。
English: So he immediately met with Zuo Shi.

