古文：韩柳欧苏，固文人之最著；起翦颇牧，乃武将之多奇。
现代文：韩愈、柳宗元、欧阳修、苏轼是文人中最著名的人，白起、王翦、廉颇、李牧是武将中的多奇智的人。
English: Han Yu, Liu Zongyuan, Ouyang Xiu, and Su Shi are the most famous people among the literati, while Bai Qi, Wang Xi, Ren Po, and Li Mu are the most wondrous people among the military commanders.

古文：范仲淹胸中具数万甲兵，楚项羽江东有八千子弟。
现代文：范仲淹能文能武，胸中有数万甲兵；项羽渡江作战时，带过来八千江东子弟。
English: Fan Zhongdun can be literate and martial, and has tens of thousands of armored soldiers in his chest; when Xiang Yu crossed the river to fight, he brought over eight thousand children from the east of the river.

古文：孙膑吴起，将略堪夸；穰苴尉缭，兵机莫测。
现代文：孙膑和吴起，用兵的谋略值得人们夸赞；穰苴和尉缭，用兵的计谋难以猜测。
English: Sun Yat-sen and Wu Qi, the strategy of using soldiers is worthy of people's praise; the strategy of using soldiers is difficult to guess.

古文：姜太公有《六韬》，黄石公有《三略》。
现代文：姜太公曾经写过《六韬》，黄石公曾经写过《三略》。
English: Jiang Taigong once wrote "The Six Stages" and Huang Shi Gong once wrote "Three Strategies."

古文：韩信将兵，多多益善；毛遂讥众，碌碌无奇。
现代文：韩信领兵打仗，兵越多越好，没有限制；毛遂助平原君说服楚王后，讽刺同去的其他人碌碌无奇。
English: Han Xin led the soldiers to fight, the more soldiers the better, there is no limit; Mao Sui helped Pingyuan Jun to convince Queen Chu, and satirized the other people who went with him.

古文：大将曰干城，武士曰武弁。
现代文：大将保卫国家叫 干城 ，武士头戴武冠，称作 武弁 。
English: The general who defends the country is called kanjo, and the samurai who wears a warrior's crown is called buben.

古文：都督称为大镇国，总兵称为大总戎。
现代文：都督又可以称作 大镇国 ，总兵又可以称作 大总戎 。
English: The governor can also be referred to as the grand town, and the general soldier can also be referred to as the grand general.

古文：都阃即是都司，参戎即是参将。
现代文： 都阃 即是都司的别称， 参戎 即是参将的别称。
English: "Tudou" is another name for "Tsu," and "Sang Eun" is another name for "Sang Jeong."

古文：千户有户侯之仰，百户有百宰之称。
现代文：统领千户的将领叫做 户侯 ，统领百户的长官叫做 百宰 。
English: The leader of a thousand households is called a Hou, and the leader of a hundred households is called a Baizai.

古文：以车为户曰辕门，显揭战功曰露布。
现代文：用相向的车辕交接成半圆形的门称作 辕门 ，展示战功的捷报称作 露布 。
English: A semi-circular door formed by interlocking opposite carriages is called a "Kamen" (门), and a report card showing military exploits is called a "Renbu" (露布).

古文：下杀上谓之弑，上伐下谓之征。
现代文：臣下刺杀君王，就叫做 弑 ；君王讨伐臣下，就叫做 征 。
English: If a vassal assassinates a monarch, it is called a ; if a monarch fights a vassal, it is called a 征.

古文：交锋为对垒，求和曰求成。
现代文：交锋又叫 对垒 ，求和又叫 求成 。
English: Confrontation is also called confrontation, and summing up is also called achievement.

古文：战胜而回，谓之凯旋；战败而走，谓之奔北。
现代文：打了胜仗归来，就叫 凯旋 ；打了败仗逃走，就叫 奔北 。
English: If you return after winning a battle, you are said to have made a triumphant return; if you flee after losing a battle, you are said to have fled north.

古文：为君泄恨曰敌忾；为国救难曰勤王。
现代文：替君王抵抗所愤恨的敌人，叫 敌忾 ；救社稷于危难之中，叫 勤王 。
English: To stand up for the king against the hated enemy is called enmity; to save the king in danger is called loyalty.

古文：胆破心寒，比敌人慑服之状；风声鹤唳，惊士卒败北之魂。
现代文： 胆破心寒 ，是形容敌人惊恐畏惧的样子； 风声鹤唳 ，是形容士卒溃败逃跑时疑神疑鬼的样子。
English: 胆破心寒, is to describe the enemy's look of panic and fear; 風声鶴, is to describe the look of suspicion when the soldiers were routed and fled.

古文：汉冯异当论功，独立大树下，不夸己绩；汉文帝尝劳军，亲幸细柳营，按辔徐行。
现代文：东汉的冯异在别的将领论功时，总是独自站在大树下，不夸耀自己的战绩；汉文帝亲自去慰劳军兵时，细柳营军纪严明，他只好牵着马的缰绳慢慢前行。
English: Feng Yi of the Eastern Han Dynasty always stood alone under a big tree when other generals were discussing their merits, and did not boast of their achievements; when Emperor Hanwen personally went to comfort the laborers, the soldiers of the Xiliu camp had strict discipline, and he had to lead the reins of the horse slowly forward.

古文：苻坚自夸将广，投鞭可以断流；毛遂自荐才奇，处囊便当脱颖。
现代文：苻坚自夸兵多将广，把马鞭投入长江就可以让江水断流；毛遂推荐自己有过人的才能，像锥子一样处在布袋中，锥尖一定会露出来。
English: Hao Jian boasted that he had a large number of soldiers, and that if he threw a horsewhip into the Yangtze River, the water would be cut off; Mao then recommended that he had superhuman talent, and that he was like a cone in a cloth bag, and the tip of the cone would certainly be exposed.

古文：羞与哙等伍，韩信降作淮阴；无面见江东，项羽羞归故里。
现代文：韩信被贬为淮阴侯以后，对与樊哙等人为伍感到羞耻；项羽兵败之后，觉得无颜见江东父老，所以不肯渡过乌江。
English: After Han Xin was degraded to Huaiyin Hou, he felt ashamed to be in the company of Zhai and others; after Xiang Yu's defeat, he felt ashamed to see Jiangdong's father and grandfather, so he refused to cross the Wujiang River.

古文：韩信受胯下之辱，张良有进履之谦。
现代文：韩信曾经受过胯下之辱，张良曾经谦恭有礼地给黄石公拾起鞋子并帮他穿上。
English: Han Xin was once humiliated by his subordinates, and Zhang Liang once politely picked up Huang Shi Gong's shoes and helped him put them on.

古文：卫青为牧猪之奴，樊哙为屠狗之辈。
现代文：卫青曾经做过牧猪的奴隶，樊哙曾经以屠狗为业。
English: Wei Qing once worked as a pig herder's slave, and Zou once slaughtered dogs for a living.

古文：求士莫求全，毋以二卵弃干城之将；用人如用木，毋以寸朽弃连抱之材。
现代文：君王选拔人才不要太苛求，不要因为两个鸡蛋的小事而放弃能护卫国家的大将；君王任用人才要像木匠使用木头一样，不要因为一丁点的腐烂就放弃栋梁之材。
English: The king should not be too demanding in selecting talents, and should not give up the general who can protect the country because of the trifle of two eggs; the king should use talents like a carpenter uses wood, and should not give up the timber of the girders because of the slightest rot.

古文：总之君子之身，可大可小；丈夫之志，能屈能伸。
现代文：总之，一个人想做君子的话，要能做大事，也能做小事；一个人想做大丈夫的话，一定要做到能屈能伸。
English: In short, if one wants to be a gentleman, one must be able to do big things as well as small things; if one wants to do well, one must be able to bend and stretch.

古文：自古英雄，难以枚举；欲详将略，须读《武经》。
现代文：自古以来的英雄才俊真是数不胜数，要想详细知道作战的谋略，必须熟读《武经七书》。
English: Since ancient times, there have been countless heroes and geniuses. In order to know the strategy of war in detail, it is necessary to read the "Seven Books of Martial Arts."

