古文：安重荣，朔州人。
现代文：安重荣，朔州人。
English: An Chongrong, a native of Shuozhou.

古文：祖从义，利州刺史。父全，胜州刺史、振武蕃汉马步军都指挥使。
现代文：祖父安从义，做过利州刺史，父亲安全，做过胜州刺史和振武蕃汉马步军都指挥使。
English: His grandfather, An Congyi, was the commander-in-chief of the Lizhou Cavalry, and his father, Jian Sheng, was the commander-in-chief of the Shengzhou Cavalry and the Zhenwu Hanma Infantry.

古文：重荣有膂力，善骑射。
现代文：安重荣臂力强劲，善于骑马射箭。
English: An Chong Rong has strong arm strength and is good at horse riding and archery.

古文：唐长兴中，为振武道巡边指挥使，犯罪下狱。
现代文：后唐长兴年间，担任振武道巡边指挥使，因犯罪下狱。
English: During the post-Tang Changxing years, he served as a Zhenwu Road patrol commander and was imprisoned for a crime.

古文：时高行周为帅，欲杀之，其母赴阙申告，枢密使安重诲阴护之，奏于明宗，有诏释焉。
现代文：当时，高行周担任主帅，想杀掉他。他母亲上京申述请求宽恕，枢密使安重诲暗中保护，上奏明宗，诏令释放了他。
English: At that time, Gao Xing Zhou, who was the coach, wanted to kill him. His mother went to Beijing to appeal for forgiveness, the Privy Council secretly protected An Chong Chou, and the Emperor issued a decree to release him.

古文：张敬达之围晋阳也，高祖闻重荣在代北，使人诱之，重荣乃召边士，得千骑赴焉。
现代文：张敬达围困晋阳时，高祖听说安重荣在代北，派人去招诱他。安重荣便招募边疆士卒，得到一千多骑兵奔赴晋阳。
English: When Zhang Jingda besieged Jinyang, Gaozu heard that An Chongrong was in the north and sent someone to entice him. An Chongrong then recruited border soldiers and got more than a thousand cavalrymen to rush to Jinyang.

古文：高祖大喜，誓以土地。
现代文：高祖极为高兴，许诺给他土地。
English: Gaozu was overjoyed and promised him land.

古文：及即位，授成德军节度使，累加至使相。
现代文：到高祖登上帝位，让他担任成德军节度使，接连升至使相。
English: When Gao Zu ascended to the throne, he served as the chief envoy of the Chengdu German Army, and was successively promoted to the envoy.

古文：自梁、唐已来，籓侯郡牧，多以勋授，不明治道，例为左右群小惑乱，卖官鬻狱，割剥蒸民，率有贪猥之名，其实贿赂半归于下。
现代文：从后梁、后唐以来，诸侯郡守，大多因功勋封授，不明治理之道，一贯多被身旁奸佞小人惑乱，变卖官职，用钱赎罪，剥削百姓，都有贪婪鄙陋的名声。实际上，贿赂的财物，半数都被他们的手下拿去。
English: Since the time of Houliang and the Tang Dynasty, the governors of various counties were mostly awarded for meritorious service. They did not know how to govern, and they were always misled by their henchmen. They sold their official positions, used money to atone for their sins, and exploited the people. They had a reputation for greed and meanness. In fact, half of the bribe money was taken by their subordinates.

古文：惟重荣自能钩距，凡有争讼，多廷辩之，至于仓库耗利，百姓科徭，悉入于己，诸司不敢窥觊。
现代文：只有安重荣自己能反复调查，凡是争论诉讼，大都当廷辩论清楚，至于粮仓财库的耗贴赢利，老百姓的科税徭赋，皆收入到自己门下。各职掌部门不敢窥视觊觎。
English: Only An Chongrong himself can repeatedly investigate, and most of the disputes and lawsuits are clearly debated in court. As for the consumption and profit of the granary and treasury, and the scientific and tax endowment of the common people, all the income is under his own door. All official departments do not dare to peep.

古文：尝有夫妇共讼其子不孝者，重荣面加诘责，抽剑令自杀之，其父泣曰： 不忍也。 
现代文：曾经有一对夫妇一起告他们的儿子不孝顺，安重荣当面诘问指责他们的儿子，抽出宝剑令他自杀，他的父亲哭着说 ：不忍心看到如此结局。 
English: Once upon a time, a couple together accused their son of being unfilial. An Chong Rong interrogated and accused their son in person, drew his sword and made him commit suicide. His father cried and said, "I can't bear to see this end."

古文：其母诟詈，仗剑逐之。
现代文：他的母亲辱骂并拿着剑追击他。
English: His mother hurled insults and chased him with a sword.

古文：重荣疑而问之，乃其继母也，因叱出，自后射之，一箭而毙，闻者莫不快意。
现代文：安重荣疑惑不解而询问原因，原来那人是他的后母，因此，大声呵斥她出去，从她的后面一箭把她射死，听说的人莫不称快。
English: An Chong Rong was puzzled and asked the reason. It turned out that the person was his stepmother, so he shouted at her to go out and shot her dead with an arrow from behind her. People who heard about it were not happy.

古文：由此境内以为强明，大得民情。
现代文：由此，境内的百姓都认为他英明能干，大得民心。
English: As a result, the people in the territory all think that he is wise and capable, and he has won the hearts of the people.

古文：重荣起于军伍，暴得富贵，复睹累朝自节镇遽升大位，每谓人曰： 天子，兵强马壮者当为之，宁有种耶！ 
现代文：安重荣从军人行伍起家，很快获得荣华富贵，又观察历代从节度使很快登上皇位的人，常对人说： 天子，兵力雄厚势力强大的人就可以担任，哪里是祖传的！ 
English: An Chong Rong started his career as a soldier and soon became rich and famous. He also observed that the people who ascended to the throne quickly through the ages often said to people: Son of heaven, those who have strong military forces and powerful forces can serve, where is the ancestral!

古文：重荣由是以帝为怯，谓人曰： 秘琼匹夫耳，天子尚畏之，况我以将相之重、士民之众乎！ 
现代文：又因为奏请失当，被专横有权的大臣所否定，心里常愤愤不平，于是豢养聚集亡命之徒，收购战马，有飞扬跋扈之心。
English: Also, because he had made an improper request and was denied by an overbearing and powerful minister, his heart was often angry and resentful, so he raised and gathered outlaws, acquired war horses, and had a flying heart.

古文：尝因暴怒杀部校贾章，以谋叛闻。
现代文：曾经因为暴怒杀死了部下校官贾章，以谋反叛乱上报给朝廷。
English: He once killed a junior officer, Jia Zhang, in a fit of rage, and reported it to the imperial court as a counter-rebellion.

古文：章有女一人，时欲舍之，女曰： 我家三十口，继经兵乱，死者二十八口，今父就刑，存此身何为？ 
现代文：贾章有一个女儿，当时打算留下不杀，她却说 ：我家三十口人，接连经过兵荒马乱，死去了二十八人，如今父亲被杀，留下我干什么？ 
English: Jia Zhang had a daughter. At that time, she planned to stay and not be killed, but she said, "My family of thirty people went through the war in succession, and twenty-eight people died. Now my father has been killed, what am I to do?

古文：再三请死，亦杀之。
现代文：一再请求让她去死，最后，也杀掉了她。
English: He begged her repeatedly to let him kill her, but in the end he killed her too.

古文：镇人由是恶重荣之酷，而嘉贾女之烈焉。
现代文：镇州人因此憎恨安重荣的残酷，而称颂贾章女儿的刚烈。
English: As a result, the people of Zhenzhou hated the cruelty of An Chongrong and praised the bravery of Jia Zhang's daughter.

古文：天福中，朝廷姑息契丹，务安边塞，重荣每见蕃使，必以箕踞慢骂。
现代文：天福年间，朝廷宽容放纵契丹，以确保边塞安定，安重荣每当会见外族使者，一定以傲慢的态度轻视侮辱。
English: During the Tenpu era, the imperial court tolerated and indulged the Khitan in order to ensure the stability of the border fortress. Whenever An Chongrong met with foreign envoys, he always treated the insults with arrogance.

古文：如臣者虽是愚蒙，粗知可否，不思忌讳，罄写丹衷，细具敷陈，冀裨万一。
现代文：碰上梅里的几十个骑兵经过他管辖的地区，交涉中语言不谦逊，因而全部杀掉了他们，契丹国主大为恼怒，谴责指斥朝廷。
English: When he encountered dozens of Meri's cavalrymen passing through the area under his jurisdiction, he killed all of them in an impudent manner during negotiations. The Khitan ruler was very angry and denounced the court.

古文：其表数千言，大抵指斥高祖称臣奉表，罄中国珍异，贡献契丹，凌虐汉人，竟无厌足。
现代文：朝廷强忍耻辱，没有马上治罪。安重荣于是秘密与吐谷浑等各族结交，以此作为援助，上表申辩。那表奏有几千字，大都是指斥高祖奉表称臣，把中国的奇珍异宝都进贡给了契丹，欺凌虐待汉人，全无满足。
English: The imperial court had to endure the humiliation and did not immediately punish the crime. Therefore, An Chul Rong secretly made friends with all ethnic groups such as the Tuku Hun, and used this as assistance to present a defense. The speech had several thousand words, most of which were about rebuking Gao Zu for presenting himself as a vassal, paying tribute to the Khitan with all of China's rare and precious treasures, and bullying and abusing the Han people, all of which were completely unsatisfactory.

古文：又以此意为书，遗诸朝贵及籓镇诸侯。
现代文：又把上述意思写成书信，送给朝廷显贵和藩镇诸侯。
English: He also wrote the above meaning into a letter and sent it to dignitaries of the imperial court and lords of the towns.

古文：高祖忧其变也，遂幸鄴都以诏谕之，凡有十焉。
现代文：高祖担忧安重荣谋反，便驾临邺都来诏告教导他，总共达十次之多。
English: Gao Zu was worried that An Chong Rong was plotting a rebellion, so he brought Linyi to tell him to teach him, a total of ten times.

古文：其略曰： 尔身为大臣，家有老母，忿不思难，弃君与亲。
现代文：大意是 ：你身为朝廷大臣，家里有年迈的母亲，忿怒时不考虑其灾难，抛弃君王与亲友。
English: To wit: you, a minister of the court, with an aged mother at home, in anger, without considering the calamity, forsake the king and your relatives and friends.

古文：吾因契丹而兴基业，尔因吾而致富贵，吾不敢忘，尔可忘耶！
现代文：我凭借契丹的力量建立帝王的事业，你依靠我变得富有显贵，我不敢忘记这些，你哪能忘掉呢！
English: With the power of Khitan, I established the cause of the emperor, and you relied on me to become rich and prominent. I dare not forget this, how can you forget it!

古文：且前代和亲，只为安边，今吾以天下臣之，尔欲以一镇抗之，大小不等，无自辱焉。 
现代文：再说前朝和亲通婚，只是为了安定边疆，如今，我以国家来向契丹称臣，你想用一镇之地来抗拒它，大小不可等同，不要自己招来侮辱呀。 
English: Besides, the previous government married relatives only to stabilize the border. Today, I am using the country as a vassal to the Khitan. If you want to use a town to resist it, the size should not be the same. Don't bring insult on yourself.

古文：重荣愈恣纵不悛，虽有此奏，亦密令人与契丹幽州帅刘晞结托。
现代文：安重荣更恣意放纵，不思悔改，虽然有了这个奏章，但还是秘密派人和契丹幽州统帅刘结盟。
English: An Chong Rong was even more self-indulgent and unrepentant. Although he had this record, he still secretly sent people to ally with the Khitan commander Liu Yuzhou.

古文：盖重荣有内顾之心，契丹幸我多事，复欲侵吞中国，契丹之怒重荣，亦非本志也。
现代文：大概安重荣有谋反内犯的野心，契丹希望中原多添些灾难，再考虑侵吞中国。契丹怨恨安重荣，也不是他们本来的愿望。
English: Probably, An Chong Rong had the ambition of plotting against the insider, and the Khitan hoped to add more disasters to the Central Plains, and then consider annexing China. The resentment of the Khitan against An Chong Rong was not their original wish.

古文：时重荣尝与北来蕃使并辔而行，指飞鸟射之，应弦而落，观者万众，无不快抃，蕃使因辍所乘马以庆之，由是名振北方，自谓天下可以一箭而定也。
现代文：当时安重荣曾经与北边来的外族使节齐马并进，指着天空中的飞鸟发箭射击，鸟应弦而落。
English: At that time, An Chong Rong once marched side by side with the foreign envoys from the north, pointing at the birds in the sky and shooting arrows. The birds fell in response.

古文：又重荣素与襄州安从进连结，及闻从进将议起兵，而奸谋乃决。
现代文：观看的人有一万多，无不鼓掌称快。外族使节因此停下马来庆贺他，因为这件事，安重荣名振北方，自夸可用一箭安定天下，安重荣平常就与襄州安从进联合结盟，当听说安从进将计议兴兵反叛时，安重荣的奸诈阴谋就决定了。
English: There were more than ten thousand people watching, and they all applauded. Therefore, the foreign envoys stopped the horse to congratulate him. Because of this matter, An Chong Rong became famous in the north, boasting that he could stabilize the world with one arrow. An Chong Rong usually allied with Yangzhou An Cong Jin. When he heard that An Cong Jin would plan to rebel against the soldiers, An Chong Rong's treacherous plot was decided.

古文：天福六年冬，大集境内饥民，众至数万，扬旌向阙，声言入觐。
现代文：天福六年冬天，安重荣大量纠集辖区内的饥民，达几万之众，高举旌旗奔向京城，声称进宫朝见皇上。
English: In the winter of the sixth year of Tianfu, An Chongrong gathered a large number of starving people in the area under his jurisdiction, amounting to tens of thousands of people, and ran to the capital with the banner held high, claiming to enter the palace to see the emperor.

古文：朝廷遣杜重威帅师御之，遇于宗城。
现代文：朝廷派遣杜重威率领军队拦截阻击他，两军在宗城相会。
English: The imperial court dispatched Du Chongwei to lead the army to intercept and block him, and the two armies met in Mansion.

古文：军才成列，有贼将赵彦之临阵卷旗来奔。重荣方战，闻彦之背己，大恐，退于辎重中，王师因而击之，一鼓而溃。
现代文：军队刚刚排好阵式，叛将赵彦之临阵卷起旗帜前来投降，安重荣正准备开战，听说赵彦之背叛了自己，非常恐惧，退回到辎重部队里，朝廷军队乘机进攻，第一次击鼓进攻，安重荣的军队就溃败了。
English: The army had just lined up. The traitor Zhao Yanzhi rolled up his flag and came to surrender. An Chongrong was preparing to go to war. When he heard that Zhao Yanzhi had betrayed himself, he was very afraid and retreated to the heavy troops. The imperial army took the opportunity to attack. The first drumming attack, An Chongrong's army was defeated.

古文：重荣与十余骑北走，其下部众，属严冬寒冽，杀戮及冻死者二万余人。
现代文：安重荣与十几个骑兵向北逃跑，他剩下的部队，碰上严冬冽寒，被杀戮和冻死的就有二万多人。
English: An Chong Rong and a dozen cavalrymen fled north. His remaining troops encountered the harsh winter and cold, and more than twenty thousand people were killed and froze to death.

古文：重荣至镇，取牛马革旋为甲，使郡人分守夹城以待王师。
现代文：安重荣到达镇州，收取牛马的皮立即制成甲胄，让郡中百姓分别防守外城以待朝廷军队。
English: When An Chong Rong arrived at Zhenzhou, he received the skins of cattle and horses and immediately made them into armor, so that the people in the county could separately defend the outer city to wait for the imperial army.

古文：从进闻高祖往北，遂反，少帝以空名授李建崇、郭金海讨之。
现代文：杜重威到达镇州，有个部将从外城西边水门带领朝廷军队进到了城里，杀死城墙上防守的老百姓一万多人，杜重威随即杀害了引路的人，自己独占了他的功劳。
English: When Du Chongwei arrived at Zhenzhou, a certain minister led the imperial army into the city from the west gate of the outer city, killing more than ten thousand people who were defending the city wall. Du Chongwei then killed the person who led the way, and he monopolized his credit.

古文：从进引兵攻邓州，不克，进至湖阳，遇建崇等，大骇，以为神速，复为野火所烧，遂大败，从进自焚。张彦泽，其先出于突厥，后为太原人也。
现代文：安重荣带领几百个吐谷浑士兵，隐藏在牙城，杜重威派人袭击并俘获了安重荣，斩下他的头颅送回朝廷。高祖在城楼上观看俘虏，宣布捷报后，派人用漆涂了安重荣的头颅，用匣子装起来送往契丹。张彦泽，他的祖先出自突厥，后来成为太原人。
English: An Chung Rong led several hundred soldiers of the Tugu Hun and hid in the city of Ia. Du Chong Wei sent people to attack and capture An Chung Rong, cut off his head and sent it back to the imperial court. Gao Zu watched the captives on the castle tower. After announcing the victory, he sent people to paint the head of An Chung Rong and pack it in a box and send it to Khitan. Zhang Yan Ze, his ancestor was from Turkey and later became a Taiyuan person.

古文：祖、父世为阴山府裨将。
现代文：他的祖父一生做阴山府副将。
English: His grandfather was the vice-commander of Yinshan Prefecture all his life.

古文：彦泽少有勇力，目睛黄而夜有光色，顾视若鸷兽焉。以骑射事后唐庄宗、明宗，以从战有功，继领郡守。高祖即位，擢为曹州刺史。从杨光远围范延光于鄴，以功授华州节度使，寻移镇泾州，累官至检校太保。
现代文：彦泽年轻时勇敢有力，眼睛是黄色的，夜晚有光亮，看上去就像凶禽猛兽的眼睛，凭骑马射箭的本领服侍后唐庄宗、明宗，因为跟随作战有功，接着担任郡守，高祖即帝位，被提拔为曹州刺史，跟随杨光远把范延光围困在邺都，因为有功担任华州节度使，不久调移镇守泾州。历任官职至检校太保。
English: When he was young, he was brave and powerful. His eyes were yellow and shone in the night, looking like the eyes of a ferocious beast. He used his horse-riding and archery skills to serve the emperors Tang Zhuangzong and Mingzong. Because of his merits in following the war, he then served as the county governor. His great ancestor was the emperor. He was promoted to the governor of Caozhou. Following Yang Guangyuan, he besieged Fan Yanquan in the capital of Handan. Because of his merits in serving as the governor of Huazhou, he was soon transferred to the governor of Handan. He held various official positions

古文：有从事张式者，以宗人之分，受其知遇。
现代文：有个名叫张式的随从人员，因与张彦泽同宗，得到张彦泽赏识厚待。
English: There was an attendant named Zhang Shi, who, because he was from the same family as Zhang Yanze, was treated with appreciation by Zhang Yanze.

古文：时彦泽有子为内职，素不叶父意，数行笞挞，惧其楚毒，逃窜外地，齐州捕送到阙，敕旨释罪，放归父所。
现代文：当时张彦泽有个儿子在朝廷任官，一向不合父亲的心，多次被鞭杖抽打，由于害怕毒打，逃窜到外地，齐州官吏捕获送回京城，皇上下诏免除他的罪过，放还到他父亲的治所。
English: At that time, Zhang Yanze had a son who served as an official in the imperial court. He was always at odds with his father's heart. He was whipped with a cane many times. Because he was afraid of being beaten severely, he fled to another place. He was captured by officials in Qizhou and sent back to Beijing. The emperor absolved him of his sins and returned him to his father's place of jurisdiction.

古文：彦泽上章，请行朝典，式以有伤名教，屡谏止之。
现代文：张彦泽上书请求朝廷按朝中刑法治罪，张式以为这种举措有害于名声和教化，多次劝阻他。
English: Zhang Yanze sent a letter to the imperial court requesting that the crime be punished according to the laws of the DPRK and the PRC. Zhang Xie thought that this measure was harmful to his reputation and edification, and repeatedly dissuaded him.

古文：彦泽怒，引弓欲射之，式仅而获免。
现代文：张彦泽非常恼怒，拉开了箭打算射杀他，张式奋勇脱逃而免。
English: Zhang Yanze was very angry and pulled the arrow to shoot him, but Zhang escaped.

古文：寻令人逐式出衙。
现代文：不久派人把张式逐出衙门。
English: Soon, someone was sent to expel Zhang Shikai from the court.

古文：式自为宾从，彦泽委以庶务，左右群小恶之久矣，因此谗构，互来迫胁，云： 书记若不便出，断定必遭屠害。 
现代文：张式自从担任宾客幕僚，张彦泽把各种政务都委托给他，张彦泽身边的奸佞小人讨厌张式已经很久了，因此谗言陷害他，并相继前来威胁说 ：张式你如果不马上离开，必将遭受杀戮的祸害。 
English: Ever since Zhang Shih served as a guest staff member, Zhang Yanze entrusted all kinds of government affairs to him. The villains around Zhang Yanze have hated Zhang Shih for a long time, so they framed him, and came one after another to threaten: Zhang Shih, if you don't leave immediately, you will surely suffer the scourge of killing.

古文：式乃告病寻医，携其妻子将奔衍州。
现代文：张式于是称病，告假求医，带着他的妻子儿女准备投奔衍州。
English: Zhang then called in sick, took a leave of absence to seek medical treatment, and prepared to leave for Yanzhou with his wife and children.

古文：彦泽遣指挥使李兴领二十骑追之，戒曰： 张式如不从命，即斩取头来。 
现代文：张彦泽派指挥使李兴率领二十个骑兵前去追赶，并嘱咐说： 张式如果不听从命令，就杀掉他，取他头颅来见。 
English: Zhang Yanze sent his commander to send Li Xing to lead twenty cavalrymen to chase him, and ordered: "If Zhang Xie does not obey orders, kill him and bring his head to me."

古文：式恳告刺史，遂差人援送到汾州。
现代文：张式恳切求告衍州刺史，刺史于是派人帮助把张式送到汾州。
English: Zhang Shih implored Yan Zhou to sue him, and Yan Zhou sent someone to help Zhang Shih and bring him to Zhangzhou.

古文：节度使李周驿骑以闻，朝廷以姑息彦泽之故，有敕流式于商州。
现代文：节度使李周派传送文书的骑兵信使把此事上报了朝廷，朝廷因宽容放纵张彦泽的原因，下令把张式流放到商州。
English: Li Zhou sent a cavalry messenger to report the matter to the imperial court, which, for reasons of tolerance and indulgence of Zhang Yanzhe, ordered Zhang to be exiled to Shangzhou.

古文：彦泽遣行军司马郑元昭诣阙论请，面奏云： 彦泽若不得张式，恐致不测。 
现代文：张彦泽派行军司马郑元昭到朝廷辩解请示，当面上奏说： 张彦泽如果不能获得张式，恐怕会导致不测的后果。 
English: Zhang Yanze sent his marshal Zheng Yuan Zhao to the imperial court to plead his case and ask for instructions, and he said in person: If Zhang Yanze can't get Zhang style, I'm afraid it will lead to unforeseen consequences.

古文：高祖不得已而从之。
现代文：高祖没有办法只好应允他。
English: Gaozu had no choice but to agree.

古文：既至，决口割心，断手足而死之。
现代文：张式回来后，被剖腹挖心，砍断手脚致死。
English: After Zhang returned, he was disemboweled, had his heart ripped out, and his hands and feet were chopped off.

古文：式父铎诣阙诉冤，朝廷命王周代之。
现代文：张式的父亲张铎到京城申诉冤屈，朝廷下令让王周代替张彦泽的职务。
English: Zhang's father, Zhang Hui, went to Beijing to complain about the injustice, and the imperial court ordered Wang Zhou to take the place of Zhang Yanze.

古文：周至任，奏彦泽在郡恶迹二十六条，逃散五千余户。彦泽既赴阙，刑法官李涛等上章请理其罪，高祖下制，止令削夺一阶一爵而已，时以为失刑。
现代文：王周到了任所，将张彦泽在泾州的二十六劣迹、五千多户百姓逃离失散的情况上奏朝廷，张彦泽到了朝廷之后，刑部执法官李涛等上奏请求高祖治张彦泽的罪，高祖发布诏令，只贬降一级官阶、一级爵位罢了，当时人们认为量刑失误。
English: When Wang Zhou arrived at his post, he reported Zhang Yanze's twenty-six bad deeds in Zhangzhou and the situation of more than five thousand people fleeing and dispersing to the imperial court. After Zhang Yanze arrived at the imperial court, Li Tao, the executive judge of the criminal department, and others made a report requesting Gao Zu to punish Zhang Yanze's crime. Gao Zu issued a decree, only downgrading the first-level official rank and the first-level peerage. At that time, people thought that the sentencing was a mistake.

古文：少帝即位，桑维翰复举之，寻出镇安阳。既至，折节于士大夫，境内称理，旋命领军北屯恆、定。
现代文：少帝继承帝位，桑维翰又举荐张彦泽，不久，镇守安阳，到任以后，屈己下人，尊重士人，安阳境内百姓称赞他治理有方。接着令他率领军队驻扎在北面的恒州、定州一带。
English: The young emperor succeeded to the imperial throne, Sang Wichan also recommended Zhang Yanze, and soon he became the town guard of Anyang. After taking office, he bowed to his subordinates, respected the scholars, and the people in Anyang praised him for his good governance. He then ordered him to lead the army stationed in the north of Hengzhou and Dingzhou.

古文：时易州地孤，漕运不继，制令邢、魏、相、卫飞輓以输之，百姓荷担累累于路，彦泽每援之以行，见羸困者，使其部众代而助之。
现代文：当时，易州地理位置偏僻，水路运输不能衔接供给。少帝下令邢、魏、相、卫各州快速运输以供应那里的粮饷，老百姓在路上担着担子络绎不绝，张彦泽常拉着他们前行，看到疲弱困倦的人，便让他的士兵代替帮助。
English: At that time, the geographical location of Yizhou was remote, and water transport could not connect the supply. The young emperor ordered the rapid transport of grain to supply the grain in the states of Wei, Wei, Sang and Wei. The common people carried loads on the road in an endless stream. Zhang Yanzhe often pulled them forward. When he saw the weak and sleepy people, he let his soldiers help instead.

古文：洎至北边，不令百姓深入，即遣骑士以马负粮而去，往来既速，且无邀夺之患，闻者嘉之。
现代文：走到北方边境，不让百姓深入边地，就派遣骑兵将士用马驮着粮食前去。既往返快捷，又没有被拦路抢劫的危险，听说这事的人都称赞他。
English: When he came to the northern border, he did not allow the people to go deep into the borderlands, so he sent cavalrymen to go with grain on horses. People who heard about this praised him because it was quick to go back and forth and there was no danger of highway robbery.

古文：阳城之战，彦泽之功出于诸将之右，其后与敌接战，频献捷于阙下，咸谓其感高祖不杀之恩，补昔年之过也。
现代文：阳城战役中，张彦泽的功绩在各路将领之上，后来与敌人接战交锋，频频向朝廷告捷。大家都认为他在报答高祖不杀他的恩惠，弥补过去的过失。
English: In the Battle of Yangcheng, Zhang Yanze's achievements were above all generals. Later, he fought with the enemy and frequently told the court that he was successful. Everyone thought that he was repaying Gaozhu's favor of not killing him and making up for past mistakes.

古文：开运三年冬，契丹既南牧，杜重威兵次瀛州。彦泽为契丹所啖，密已变矣。乃通款于契丹，请为前导，因促骑说重威，引军沿滹水西援常山，既而与重威通谋。
现代文：开运三年冬天，契丹向南侵犯，杜重威率兵驻扎瀛州，张彦泽被契丹利诱，私下叛变了，于是与契丹国主通好言和，请求让他做前导，马上派快骑游说杜重威，带兵沿着滹沱河向西援助常山。接着和杜重威勾结密谋。
English: In the winter of the third year after the start of the campaign, the Khitan invaded the south, and Du Chongwei and his soldiers were stationed in Zhangzhou. Zhang Yanze was lured by the Khitan and secretly mutinied, so he made peace with the Khitan ruler, asked him to be a forerunner, and immediately sent a fast horse to lobby Du Chongwei and led the soldiers along the Wei River to the west to aid Changshan. Then he colluded with Du Chongwei.

古文：翌日，迁帝于开封府舍，凡内帑奇货，悉辇归私邸，仍纵军大掠，两日方止。《东都事略·李处耘传》云：居京师，遇张彦泽之暴，处耘善射，独当里门，杀数十人，里中赖之。时桑维翰为开封尹，彦泽召至麾下，待之不以礼。
现代文：到朝廷军队在中渡投降时，契丹国主派张彦泽率领二千骑兵直奔京城以控制少帝，并且将爱护抚慰之意向公卿百姓昭示。张彦泽在这一年的十二月十六日，从封丘门斩关进城，派兵围困皇宫。第二天，将少帝迁到开封居住，凡内府金帛珍货，全部用车运到自己私人宅邸里，再放纵士兵大肆抢掠，两天后才停。当时桑维翰担任开封府尹，张彦泽召他到自己帐下，不用礼仪接待他。
English: When the imperial army surrendered in Zhongdu, the Khitan ruler sent Zhang Yanze and his 2,000 cavalry straight to the capital to control the young emperor, and expressed his intention to care for and comfort the nobles and commoners. On December 16 of that year, Zhang Yanze entered the city from the Fengqiu Gate and sent troops to besiege the imperial palace. The next day, he moved the young emperor to Kaifeng to live, and transported all the rare goods of Van'efu to his private mansion by car, and then indulged the soldiers to plunder and pillage, and only stopped two days later. At that time, San Weihan served as the governor of Kaifeng,

古文：维翰责曰： 去年拔公于罪人之中，复领大镇，授以兵权，何负恩一至此耶？ 
现代文：桑维翰斥责说 ：以前我从罪人之中提拔你，又统领大镇，给予你兵权，为什么忘恩负义竟到如此地步呢？ 
English: "Why should I be so ungrateful to you, when I raised you up from among the sinners, and made you ruler of a great city, and gave you soldiers?

古文：彦泽无以对。
现代文：张彦泽无言对答。
English: Zhang Hikozawa replied without a word.

古文：是夜杀维翰，尽取其家财。
现代文：这天夜里，杀掉了桑维翰，全部掠取了他的家庭财产。
English: That night, they killed Sanveighan and looted all his family's belongings.

古文：彦泽自谓有功于契丹，昼夜以酒乐自娱。
现代文：张彦泽认为自己对契丹有功，白天黑夜饮酒作乐以自娱。
English: Zhang Yanze considered himself to be of great service to the Khitan, and enjoyed drinking alcohol day and night to amuse himself.

古文：当在京巡检之时，出入骑从常数百人，旗帜之上题曰 赤心为主 ，观者无不窃笑。
现代文：当他在京城巡检时，随他出入的骑兵常常是几百人，旗帜题写着 赤心为主 ，看到的人没有不私下耻笑的。
English: When he was on patrol in the capital, the cavalrymen who went in and out with him were often several hundred people, and the flags were inscribed with "Red Heart for the Lord." No one who saw them did not secretly laugh.

古文：又所居第，财货山积。
现代文：另外，他所居住的宅第，财帛钱货堆积如山。
English: In addition, the house where he lived was piled high with money and valuables.

古文：楚国夫人丁氏，即少帝弟曹州节度使延煦之母也，有容色，彦泽使人取之，太后迟回未与，彦泽立遣人载之而去，其负国欺君也如是。
现代文：楚国夫人丁氏，是少帝的弟弟曹州节度使石延煦的母亲，容貌姿色漂亮，张彦泽派人去迎娶她。
English: The Lady of Chu, Ding, was the mother of the young emperor's brother, Caozhou Jiedu, and the mother of Shi Yanqi. She was beautiful, and Zhang Yanzhe sent someone to marry her.

古文：数日之内，恣行杀害，或军士擒获罪人至前，彦泽不问所犯，但瞋目出一手竖三指而已，军士承其意，即出外断其腰领焉。
现代文：太后迟疑不予答复。张彦泽马上派人用车载着她离去，他背叛国家欺侮国君达到如此地步。几天之内，恣意放纵杀害，有时，军队士兵抓获罪人到他跟前，张彦泽不分清红皂白，只是瞪着眼睛，伸出一只手竖起三个指头，士兵按他的意旨，就拉到外面把犯人腰斩为三段。
English: The empress dowager hesitated and did not reply. Zhang Yanze immediately sent someone to take her away in a car. He betrayed the country and bullied the sovereign to such an extent. Within a few days, he arbitrarily indulged in killing. Sometimes, soldiers of the army caught the criminal and came to him. Zhang Yanze did not distinguish the red and white, but just stared, stretched out a hand and raised three fingers. The soldiers, according to his intention, pulled the prisoner outside and cut his waist into three pieces.

古文：彦泽与阁门使高勋不协，因乘醉至其门，害其仲父、季弟，暴尸于门外。
现代文：张彦泽与伪阁门使高勋不协和，便乘着酒醉到高勋的门第，杀害了他的二叔、三弟，并暴尸在门外。
English: Zhang Yanze did not get along with Gao Xun because of the false cabinet, so he got drunk and went to Gao Xun's house, killed his second uncle and third brother, and left the bodies outside the door.

古文：及契丹帐泊于北郊，勋往诉其冤，时契丹主已怒彦泽剽掠京城，遂令锁之。
现代文：到契丹大帐驻扎到城北的郊外，高勋就向契丹国主申诉了冤屈，这时契丹国主已憎恨张彦泽剽劫抢掠都城，便下令拘捕他。
English: When the Khitan accountant was stationed on the outskirts of the north of the city, Gao Xun complained to the Khitan sovereign. At this time, the Khitan sovereign already hated Zhang Yanzhe's looting and plundering of the capital, and ordered his arrest.

古文：仍以彦泽罪恶宣示百官及京城士庶，且云： 彦泽之罪，合诛与否？ 
现代文：又把张彦泽的罪恶宣告于文武百官和京都士人与百姓，又问： 张彦泽的罪过，该杀不该杀？ 
English: He also proclaimed Zhang Yanze's crime to hundreds of civil and military officials, Kyoto scholars and common people, and asked: Zhang Yanze's crime, should he be killed?

古文：百官连状具言罪在不赦，市肆百姓亦争投状，疏彦泽之罪。戎王知其众怒，遂令弃市，仍令高勋监决，断腕出锁，然后刑之。
现代文：百官连名上诉，都说其罪不可赦免。商人百姓也争相投诉，分条陈述张彦泽的罪过，契丹国主知道张彦泽犯了众怒，于是下令在闹市处死，暴尸街头。又让高勋监督处决，斩断他的手腕取下手械，然后处死了他。
English: Hundreds of officials appealed in succession, all saying that his crime could not be pardoned. Merchants and ordinary people also competed to file complaints, itemizing Zhang Yanze's crimes. The Khitan ruler knew that Zhang Yanze had caused public anger, so he ordered the execution in the downtown, the street of dead bodies. He also let Gao Xun supervise the execution, cut off his wrists, removed the hand weapons, and then executed him.

古文：勋使人剖其心以祭死者，市人争其肉而食之。
现代文：高勋派人剖开他的心脏来祭祀屈死的人，市民百姓都争着吃他的肉。
English: Gao Hun sent someone to cut open his heart to sacrifice the dying man, and the citizens and common people all fought to eat his flesh.

