古文：◎神宗一
现代文：神宗二
English: Shinsoji Temple

古文：神宗范天合道哲肃敦简光文章武安仁止孝显皇帝，讳翊钧，穆宗第三子也。
现代文：万历二十五年春正月二十六日，朝鲜使者请求救援。二月初五，再次商议讨伐倭寇。
English: On the 26th day of the first month of the 25th year of Wanli, a North Korean envoy requested rescue. On the 5th day of the 2nd month of the year, they again discussed how to fight the wokou.

古文：母贵妃李氏。隆庆二年，立为皇太子，时方六岁。
现代文：十五日，原都督同知麻贵担任防倭总兵官，统率南北各路兵马。三月十五日，山东右参政杨镐担任佥都御史，经略朝鲜军务。
English: On the 15th, the former governor Tong Zhimagui served as the chief military officer of the defense against Japan, commanding soldiers and horses from the north and south. On March 15th, Yang Jie, the right-wing politician of Shandong, served as the governor of Shandong, and managed the Korean military affairs.

古文：性岐嶷，穆宗尝驰马宫中，谏曰： 陛下天下主，独骑而骋，宁无衔橛忧。 
现代文：三十日，兵部侍郎邢担任尚书，总督蓟、辽、保定军务，经略防倭事宜。夏六月十九日，皇极、中极、建极三殿发生火灾。二十四日，终止编修国史。秋七月初四，诫谕群臣。初八，诏令大赦天下。当月，杨应龙反叛，攻占合江、綦江。
English: On the 30th, the secretary of the Ministry of Military Affairs served as Shangshu, and the military affairs of the governors of Shandong, Liao, and Baoding handled the defense of Japan. On the 19th of the summer, there was a fire in the three halls of the Imperial Palace, the Central Palace, and the Jianji Palace. On the 24th, the compilation of the national history was terminated. On the 4th of the beginning of the autumn of July, a group of ministers were commanded. On the 8th of the first month, the emperor was pardoned. In the same month, Yang Yinglong rebelled and occupied the He River and the Min River.

古文：穆宗喜，下马劳之。陈皇后病居别宫，每晨随贵妃候起居。
现代文：八月十九日，倭寇攻破朝鲜闲山，于是逼近南原，副总兵杨元弃城逃走，倭兵逼近王京。二十六日，京师地震。
English: On August 19th, the wako broke through the Korean idle mountain, so they approached Nanwon, vice-commander Yang Yuan abandoned the city and fled, and the wako approached Wangjing. On the 26th, the Beijing earthquake.

古文：后闻履声辄喜，为强起。
现代文：九月初四，逮捕原兵部尚书石星，将其投进监狱，判为死罪。
English: On the 4th day of the 9th month, the former military commander Shang Shuxi arrested Shi Xing, threw him into prison, and sentenced him to death.

古文：取经书问之，无不响答，贵妃亦喜。
现代文：冬十月十七日，安南黎惟潭篡位自立，并前来请罪，诏令授予其安南都统使。
English: In the winter of October 17th, Annan Liewetan usurped the throne, and came to plead guilty. The imperial edict awarded him the post of Annan Tongtong envoy.

古文：由是两宫益和。六年五月，穆宗崩。
现代文：万历二十六年春正月，官军攻击蔚山倭寇，未克，杨镐、麻贵逃奔王京。
English: In the first month of the spring of the 26th year of Wanli, the government army attacked the Ulsan wokou, and Wike, Yang Hui, and Magui fled to Wangjing.

古文：六月乙卯朔，日有食之。
现代文：三月十八日，赐赵秉忠等人以进士及第以及其他不同的出身。
English: The first day of June, a solar eclipse.

古文：甲子，即皇帝位。
现代文：二十七日，群臣前往文华门疏请皇长子成年完婚，未得允许。
English: On the 27th, a group of courtiers went to the Wenhua Gate to ask the eldest son of the emperor to marry, but they were not allowed.

古文：以明年为万历元年，诏赦天下。
现代文：夏四月十三日，辽东总兵官李如松出塞，遇伏战死。
English: On the 13th day of the 4th month of the summer, the general officer of Liaodong, Li Ruzong, left the camp and was ambushed and killed.

古文：祀建文朝尽节诸臣于乡，有苗裔者恤录。
现代文：十八日，京师大旱，朱翊钧令群臣修身反省。六月初四，杨镐被免职。
English: On the 18th day of the month, there was a severe drought in Beijing, and Zhu Xi ordered his ministers to self-reflect. On the 4th day of the 6th month, Yang Xi was dismissed.

古文：庚午，罢高拱。
现代文：初五，中官李敬在广东开采珍珠。十三日，张位被免职。
English: On the fifth day of the first month, Lieutenant General Li Jing mined pearls in Guangdong. On the 13th day, Zhang Yi was dismissed.

古文：丁丑，高仪卒。
现代文：二十三日，巡抚天津的佥都御史万世德经略朝鲜。
English: On the 23rd, the procurator of Tianjin, Wang Shih, left for Korea.

古文：壬午，礼部尚书吕调阳兼文渊阁大学士，预机务。
现代文：秋七月初三，中官鲁保专卖两淮的余盐。八月二十四日，京师地震。
English: On the 3rd day of the 7th month of autumn, Zhongguan Lubo sold surplus salt of two Huai. On August 24th, the Beijing earthquake occurred.

古文：秋七月丁亥，初通漕运于密云。
现代文：九月初十，免除浙江遭灾地区的田租。
English: On the 10th day of the 9th month, the field rent in the disaster-stricken areas of Zhejiang was exempted.

古文：庚寅，察京官。
现代文：冬十月初三，总兵官刘纟廷、麻贵分兵攻击倭寇，将其击败。
English: At the beginning of the third day of October in winter, the general officer Liu Yingting and the troops of Magui attacked the wokou and defeated it.

古文：己亥，戒谕廷臣，诏曰： 近岁以来，士习浇漓，官方刓缺，诋老成为无用，矜便佞为有才。
现代文：董一元攻击新寨倭寇，战败。
English: Dong Yiyuan attacked Xinzhai Wokor and was defeated.

古文：遂使朝廷威福之柄，徒为人臣报复之资。
现代文：十一月十七日，倭兵放弃蔚山逃遁，官军分兵追击。
English: On November 17th, the Wa soldiers abandoned Ulsan and fled, and the government troops pursued them.

古文：用是薄示惩戒，余皆曲贷。
现代文：十二月，总兵官陈瞞在乙山打败倭寇，于是朝鲜被平定。这一年，有乌斯藏前来朝贡。
English: In December, the commander-in-chief, Chen Xie, defeated the Japanese invaders on Mount E. As a result, Korea was pacified. This year, the Ussuri came to pay tribute.

古文：诸臣宜祓除前愆，共维新政。
现代文：万历二十七年春二月初二，分别派中官统领浙江、福建、广东市舶司。
English: On the second day of the second month of the second month of the 27th year of Wanli in the spring of the year, the vice-governors were sent to lead the shipping departments of Zhejiang, Fujian and Guangdong respectively.

古文：若溺于故习，背公徇私，获罪祖宗，朕不敢赦。 
现代文：当月，贵州巡抚江东之派兵讨伐杨应龙。战败。
English: In the same month, Guizhou's governor Jiang Dongzhi sent troops to fight Yang Yinglong. They were defeated.

古文：庚子，尊皇后曰仁圣皇太后，贵妃曰慈圣皇太后。
现代文：三月二十日，原兵部侍郎李化龙总督川、湖、贵州军务，讨伐杨应龙。
English: On March 20th, Li Huilong, the General Governor of the River, Lake and Guizhou Military Affairs, the former attendant of the Military Department, led a crusade against Yang Yinglong.

古文：八月戊午，祀大社大稷。
现代文：夏四月二十五日，朱翊钧驾临午门，接受倭寇俘虏。
English: On the 25th day of the 4th month of summer, Zhu Xi drove to the noon gate to accept the wokou captives.

古文：九月甲午，葬庄皇帝于昭陵。
现代文：当月，临清百姓叛乱，焚烧税使马堂官署，杀其随从三十四人。
English: In the same month, the people of Linqing rebelled and burned the tax collector's office, killing thirty-four of his followers.

古文：冬十月己未，侍郎王遴、吴百朋、汪道昆分阅边防。
现代文：闰月初八，诏示天下倭寇被平定，免除加派的东征赋税。
English: On the eighth day of the leap month, the emperor decreed that the world's wokou had been pacified, and the additional troops were exempted from the East Levy Tax.

古文：辛酉，停刑。
现代文：十二日，因久旱不雨而令群臣修身反省。
English: On the twelfth day, because of the long drought and no rain, the ministers were forced to repent.

古文：十一月乙未，河工成。
现代文：十九日，因各位皇子结婚而令从太仓取银二千四百万两。
English: On the 19th, due to the marriage of the princes, 24 million taels of silver were ordered to be taken from Taicang.

古文：十二月辛酉，振榆林、延绥饥。
现代文：户部匮乏，令从严核实各地积蓄储备。六月二十三日，杨应龙攻陷綦江，参将房嘉宠、游击张良贤战死。
English: On June 23, Yang Yinglong invaded the Minjiang River, and the general Fang Jiachou and the guerrilla Zhang Liangxian were killed in the battle.

古文：甲戌，以大行未期，罢明年元夕灯火及宫中宴。
现代文：秋八月十八日，陕西狄道县发生山崩。九月，土蛮进犯锦州。
English: In autumn, on August 18, a landslide occurred in Dido County, Shaanxi Province. In September, the barbarians invaded Jinzhou.

古文：万历元年春二月癸丑，御经筵。
现代文：冬十月初六，赈济京城饥民。初十，由于播州用兵，加派四川、湖广地区的田赋。
English: On the 6th day of the 10th month of the winter, he helped the starving people in Beijing. On the 10th day of the month, due to the use of soldiers in Banzhou, he sent more field troops to Sichuan and Hukang regions.

古文：三月丙申，诏内外官举将材。
现代文：十二日，贵州宣慰使安疆臣犯罪，诏令他讨伐贼寇以赎罪。
English: On the 12th, Guizhou Xuancheng made An Jiangsen commit a crime and ordered him to fight against thieves and robbers to atone for his sins.

古文：夏四月乙丑，潮、惠贼平。
现代文：十一月初四，免除河南受灾地区的田租。
English: On the fourth day of the first month of November, the field rent in the affected areas of Henan was exempted.

古文：庚午，旱，谕百官修省。
现代文：二十八日，赈济畿辅及凤阳等地饥荒。十二月初二，武昌、汉阳百姓叛乱，打伤税使陈奉。
English: On the 28th, there was famine in Kijiyu and Fengyang, and on the 2nd of December, the people of Wuchang and Hanyang rebelled, injuring the tax inspector Chen Bong.

古文：五月甲申，诏内外官慎刑狱。
现代文：十三日，赈济京师流民。这一年，琉球前来朝贡。
English: On the thirteenth day of the month, the emperor sent relief to the exiles in Beijing. This year, the Ryukyus came to pay tribute.

古文：六月壬申，振淮安水灾。
现代文：万历二十八年春二月初四，京师地震。
English: On the 4th day of the 2nd month of the 28th year of Wanli, there was an earthquake in Beijing.

古文：秋七月，河决徐州。
现代文：十二日，李化龙率师分八路进军讨伐播州。
English: On the 12th, Li Hualong and his division marched into Banzhou in eight directions.

古文：九月癸未，振荆州、承天及济南灾。
现代文：夏六月初六，攻克海龙囤，杨应龙自缢而死，播州平定。
English: On the 6th day of the 6th month of the 6th month of the summer, Yang Yinglong defeated Hai Long Tuo, Yang Yinglong committed suicide, and Banshu was pacified.

古文：丙戌，四川都掌蛮平。
现代文：秋七月初十，天大旱，朱翊钧又令群臣修身反省。八月初一，建成慈庆宫。
English: On the 10th day of the 7th month of the autumn, there was a severe drought, and Zhu Xi ordered the courtiers to practice self-cultivation and self-reflection. On the 1st day of the 8th month, Cixing Palace was completed.

古文：癸卯，停刑。
现代文：初六，撤除朝鲜守兵。
English: On the sixth day of the new year, the North Korean guards were removed.

古文：冬十一月庚辰，命诸司立程限文簿，以防稽缓。
现代文：九月十四日，中止行刑。同年秋天，炒花进犯辽东，副总兵解生等人战败死去。冬十月初一，贵州皮林苗叛乱，总兵官陈瞞率兵讨伐。
English: On September 14th, the execution was suspended. In the autumn of the same year, the scorched flowers invaded Liaodong, and the deputy commander-in-chief soldiers were defeated and died. In the winter, on the first day of October, the Guizhou Pirin Miao rebellion, the commander-in-chief Chen Xie led the soldiers to fight.

古文：十二月己未，振辽东饥。
现代文：初六，云南税监杨荣开采阿瓦、孟密宝井。
English: On the sixth day of junior high school, Yang Rong, a tax inspector from Yunnan, started mining Awa and Mengmi treasure wells.

古文：是年，暹罗、琉球入贡。
现代文：十二月二十六日，朱翊钧驾临午门，察看播州战俘。
English: This year, Siam and Ryukyu came to pay tribute.

古文：二年春正月甲午，召见朝觐廉能官于皇极门。
现代文：这一年，两畿各省灾伤频繁，民饥盗起，内外群臣上奏请求将矿税监官免职，朱翊钧全不采纳。
English: In that year, disasters and injuries were frequent in the provinces of the two provinces, people were starving and robberies were on the rise, and a group of domestic and foreign ministers submitted a request to remove the mining tax inspector from his post, but Zhu Xi did not accept it.

古文：二月甲寅，振四川被寇诸县。
现代文：大西洋人利玛窦进献地方特产。
English: The Atlantic man, Ricciardo, presented local special products.

古文：三月癸巳，赐孙继皋等进士及第、出身有差。夏四月丙寅，诏内外官行久任之法。
现代文：万历二十九年春正月十三日，诏告天下：由于平定了播州，免除四川、贵州、湖广、云南加派的田租赋税，同时免除官民牵连之罪。当月，皮林苗贼被平定。
English: On the 13th day of the first month of the spring of the 29th year of the Wanli calendar, the emperor announced to the world: As Banzhou was subdued, Sichuan, Guizhou, Hukang, and Yunnan were exempted from paying land rent tax, and at the same time were exempted from the crime of implicating officials and citizens. That month, the Pirin seedlings thieves were subdued.

古文：五月辛丑，穆宗神主祔太庙。
现代文：二月初五，赈济大同、宣府饥荒。
English: On the 5th day of the 2nd month of the year, there was a famine in Datong and Xuanfu.

古文：八月己巳，振山西灾。
现代文：三月十七日，赐封张以诚等人以进士及第和其他不同的出身。
English: On March 17th, he awarded Zhang Yicheng and others with the title of Jin Shi He and other different origins.

古文：庚午，振淮、扬、徐水灾。
现代文：当月，武昌发生民变，杀掉税监陈奉随从六人，焚毁巡抚公署。
English: In the same month, there was a popular uprising in Wuchang, in which six members of the tax inspector Chen Feng's entourage were killed and the inspector's office was burned down.

古文：冬十月甲寅，决囚。丁卯，视朝阅铨选。
现代文：冬十月十四日，山东大旱，饥荒严重，朝廷分别给予赈济。
English: In the winter of October 14th, Shandong suffered from a severe drought and famine, and the imperial court provided relief separately.

古文：闰十二月庚寅，诏罢明年元夕灯火。
现代文：十一月二十五日，于慎行死去。十二月，金沙江蛮阿克反叛，攻陷武定，围攻云南，攻占嵩明、禄丰。
English: On November 25th, Yu Shengxing died. In December, the Jinsha River rebelled against Ake, invaded Wuding, besieged Yunnan, and occupied Songming and Lufeng.

古文：是年，琉球入贡。
现代文：安南贼兵进犯钦州。这一年，琉球前来朝贡。
English: This year, Ryukyu came to pay tribute.

古文：三年春正月丁未，享太庙。
现代文：万历三十六年春正月，河南、江北发生饥荒。
English: In the first month of the 36th year of Wanli, famine broke out in Henan and Jiangbei.

古文：二月戊寅，祀大社大稷。
现代文：二月十一日，京师地震。
English: On February 11th, there was an earthquake in Kyoto.

古文：辛巳，诏南京职务清简，官不必备。
现代文：夏六月二十五日，南畿发生大水。秋七月十三日，京师地震。郴州矿贼大起。
English: On the 25th of June in summer, floods occurred in Nanki. On the 13th of July in autumn, there was an earthquake in Beijing. Miners in Zhangzhou rioted.

古文：丙申，始命日讲官分直记注起居，纂缉章奏，临朝侍班。
现代文：八月初九，惩治云南失事有罪之臣，巡抚都御史陈用宾、总兵官沐睿又被逮捕入狱，论为死罪。二十七日，赈南畿和嘉兴、湖州饥荒。
English: On the 9th day of the 8th month, Chen Yibin, the governor of Yunnan, and Mu Rui, the commander-in-chief of the army, were arrested and sentenced to death for punishing the guilty vassals of the Yunnan shipwreck. On the 27th day of the 8th month, there was famine in South Gyeongsang Province, Jiaxing Province and Huzhou Province.

古文：夏四月己巳朔，日有食之，既。
现代文：九月初十，四川巡抚都御史乔璧星在东川擒获阿克，贼寇被平定。冬十一月三十日，朱赓死去。
English: At the beginning of September 10th, the Sichuan governor, Shi Qiao Bixing, captured Ake in the East River, and the bandits were subdued. On November 30th, Zhu Xi died.

古文：壬申，书谨天戒、任贤能、亲贤臣、远嬖佞、明赏罚、谨出入、慎起居、节饮食、收放心、存敬畏、纳忠言、节财用十二事于座右，以自警。五月庚子，淮、扬大水，诏察二府有司，贪酷老疾者罢之。六月戊辰，浙江海溢。戊寅，命抚、按官，有司贤否一体荐劾，不得偏重甲科。是夏，苏、松、常、镇大水。
现代文：十二月初五，再次赈济南畿，免除其税粮。这一年，有琉球前来朝贡。
English: On the fifth day of the twelfth month of the lunar calendar, Jin again visited Nanki and exempted its tax grain. This year, Ryukyu came to pay tribute.

古文：秋八月丙子，礼部侍郎张四维为礼部尚书兼东阁大学士，预机务。丁丑，河决高邮、砀山。
现代文：万历三十七年春三月初十，拱兔攻陷大胜堡，游击于守志在小凌河被战败。二十九日，大学士叶向高奏请皇帝公布群臣互相攻击的奏文，以论断是非、整肃人心，未予答复。夏四月，倭贼侵犯温州。
English: In the spring of 37th year of Wanli, on the 10th day of the 3rd month of the 3rd month, the arch-rabbit attacked the Dasheng Fortress, and the guerrilla in Shushi was defeated in the Xiaoling River. On the 29th day, the university scholar Ye Xiang Gao asked the emperor to publish the report of the mutual attack of the ministers to judge the rights and wrongs and rectify the hearts of the people, but no reply was given. In the summer of April, the Japanese invaded Wenzhou.

古文：戊子，免淮、扬、凤、徐被水田租。
现代文：秋九月二十五日，左都御史詹沂封印私自离去。二十九日，中止行刑。当年秋季，福建、浙江、江西发生大水灾。
English: On the 25th day of the 9th month of autumn, the governor of Zuo Province, Zhan Ronghuai, went away on his own. On the 29th day, the execution was suspended. In the autumn of that year, major floods occurred in Fujian, Zhejiang and Jiangxi.

古文：九月戊午，京师地震。
现代文：湖广、四川、河南、陕西、山西大旱，畿内、山东、徐州大闹蝗灾。
English: On the afternoon of September 3rd, the capital city was hit by an earthquake.

古文：冬十月丁卯，地再震，敕群臣修省。
现代文：冬十二月二十二日，朝廷将畿内、山东诸省所收税收的三分之一用作赈济饥民费用。
English: On December 22 in winter, the imperial court used one-third of the taxes collected in the Kinai region and Shandong provinces to help the starving.

古文：戊辰，停刑。
现代文：这一年，日本侵入琉球，抓住其国王尚宁。
English: That year, Japan invaded Ryukyu and captured its king, Shonin.

古文：十一月乙巳，祀天于南郊。
现代文：哈密入朝进贡。万历三十八年春三月十七日，赐封韩敬等人为进士及第以及其他不同的出身。
English: On the 17th day of March in the spring of the 38th year of Wanli, Han Jing and others were awarded the title of Shinshi and Dai, as well as other different origins.

古文：十二月辛未，诏罢明年元夕灯火。
现代文：夏四月初二，正阳门楼遭火灾。十六日，以旱灾异常为由，要群臣完成自己份内职责，不准互相攻击。
English: On the second day of the fourth month of the summer, the Zhengyang Gate Tower was set on fire. On the 16th, on the grounds of abnormal drought, the ministers were required to complete their duties and were not allowed to attack each other.

古文：是年，安南、琉球、暹罗、土鲁番入贡。
现代文：二十六日，赈济畿内、山东、山西、河南、陕西、福建、四川饥民。
English: On the 26th, starving people in Gyeonggi Province, Shandong Province, Shanxi Province, Henan Province, Shaanxi Province, Fujian Province and Sichuan Province were evacuated.

古文：四年春正月丁巳，辽东巡按御史刘台以论张居正逮下狱，削籍。
现代文：五月，河南贼人陈自管等人作乱，被官吏擒获。冬十月辛丑日，中止行刑。十一月初一，有日食。
English: In May, the Henan thief Chen Zhigang and others caused a disturbance and were caught by officials. In winter, on October's Xinqiu Day, the execution was suspended. On the first day of November, there was a solar eclipse.

古文：夏五月戊申，祀地于北郊。
现代文：二十七日，以缺乏军饷为由，要廷臣陈述充仓足库之策，而且不得从宫内拨出金帛。
English: On the 27th, on the grounds of a lack of military pay, the courtiers were asked to present a strategy for replenishing the treasury, and they were not allowed to allocate gold bullion from the palace.

古文：六月庚辰，复遣内臣督苏、杭织造。
现代文：这一年，乌斯藏入朝进贡。万历三十九年春二月庚子日，河套部敌军进犯甘州的红崖、青湖，被官军击退。夏四月，京师大旱。
English: In this year, Wuxi paid tribute to the North. In the spring of the 39th year of Wanli and the second month of Geng Zi, the enemy army of Hetao invaded the Red Cliff and Qing Lake in Ganzhou and was repulsed by the government army. In the summer and April, Beijing suffered a drought.

古文：秋七月丁酉，谕吏、户二部清吏治，蠲逋赋有差，明年漕粮折收十之三。壬寅，遣御史督修江、浙水利。甲辰，修泗州祖陵。辛亥，草湾河工成。
现代文：十九日，怡神殿发生火灾。
English: On the 19th, a fire broke out in the Yi Temple.

古文：八月壬戌，释奠于先师孔子。
现代文：二十七日，设置边镇常平仓。
English: On the 27th, the border town of Changping was set up.

古文：是秋，河决崔镇。冬十月乙亥，振徐州及丰、沛、睢宁、金乡、鱼台、单、曹七县水灾，蠲租有差。
现代文：五月初三，御史徐兆魁上奏皇帝，指责东林讲学诸人暗中支持制定不同的礼典、制度，致使诸臣互相攻击。
English: On the third day of the fifth lunar month, Grand Historian Xu Zhaokui made a report to the emperor, accusing the Donglin Lectures of secretly supporting the establishment of different ceremonies and systems, which caused the vassals to attack each other.

古文：是年，安南、琉球、乌斯藏、土鲁番、天方、撒马儿罕、鲁迷、哈密入贡。
现代文：广西、广东发生大水灾。
English: Major flooding occurred in Guangxi and Guangdong.

古文：五年春正月己酉，诏凤阳、淮安力举营田。
现代文：六月，从徐州到北京普遍发生大水灾。当年夏天，停止热审。冬十月初一，户部尚书赵世卿上书离去。十八日，中止行刑。
English: In June, there were widespread floods from Xuzhou to Beijing. In the summer of that year, the hot trial was stopped. In the winter, on the first day of October, the head of the household, Shangshu Zhao Shijing, left by letter. On the 18th, the execution was suspended.

古文：二月乙丑，振广西饥。
现代文：内阁大臣请求释放轻罪犯人，未予答复。这一年，暹罗前来朝贡。
English: A cabinet minister's request for the release of a petty criminal went unanswered. This year, Siam came to pay tribute.

古文：三月乙巳，赐沈懋学等进士及第、出身有差。夏五月癸巳，广东罗旁瑶平。
现代文：万历四十年春二月十九日，吏部尚书孙丕扬上书自去官职回乡。三月十二日，赈济京师流民。夏四月初二，南京各道御史进言： 官衙空缺，各方面事务废堕，皇上深居宫中二十余年，未接见过大臣，天下将有失去的危险。 
English: On the 19th day of the 2nd month in the spring of the 40th year of the Wanli calendar, Sun Xiangyang, the head of the personnel department, wrote a letter to return to his hometown after leaving his official post. On the 12th day of the 3rd month, he went to Beijing to help the displaced people. On the 2nd day of the 4th month in the summer, the governor of each province in Nanjing made a speech: The official posts are vacant, all aspects of affairs have been abolished, the emperor has been living in the palace for more than 20 years, and he has not received the minister, the world will be in danger of losing.

古文：秋八月癸亥，河复决崔镇。
现代文：仍然未予答复。五月初一，日食。秋八月，黄河在徐州决口。
English: Still no reply. On the first day of May, a solar eclipse. In autumn and August, the Yellow River broke through in Xuzhou.

古文：闰月乙酉朔，日食，阴云不见。
现代文：九月十九日，李廷机自动离职。
English: On September 19, Li Tingji left the company automatically.

古文：九月己卯，起复张居正。
现代文：冬十月二十四日，中止行刑。
English: In the winter, on October 24th, the execution was suspended.

古文：冬十月乙巳，以论张居正夺情，杖编修吴中行、检讨赵用贤、员外郎艾穆、主事沈思孝，罢黜谪戍有差。丁未，杖进士邹元标，戍边。
现代文：这一年，琉球中山王尚宁派人奏请归附。
English: This year, Ryukyu's king of the mountains, Shang Ning, sent musicians to perform.

古文：十一月癸丑，以星变考察百官。
现代文：万历四十一年春正月初二，诏谕朝鲜练兵以防止倭寇。
English: On the second day of the first month of the 41st year of the lunar calendar, North Korea was ordered to train soldiers to prevent Japanese piracy.

古文：是年，琉球入贡。
现代文：三月十五日，赐封周延儒等人为进士及第以及其他不同出身。
English: This year, Ryukyu came to pay tribute.

古文：六年春正月，筑决河堤。二月戊戌，免兖、青、登、莱所属逋赋。庚子，立皇后王氏。
现代文：夏五月十二日，朱翊钧诏谕吏部都察院 ：几年来议论纷纷，混淆视听，朝廷宽容不予追查，致使攻击诬陷愈来愈甚，朝廷大臣犹疑畏惧，都想辞官回乡，严重损害了国体。自今以后，仍有结党乱政者，定罪绝不饶恕。 六月初八，卜失兔世袭顺义王封号。
English: On the 12th day of the 5th month of the summer, Zhu Xi's edict to the cadres of the Imperial Procuratorate: For several years, there have been discussions, confusion, and the tolerance of the imperial court has not been investigated, resulting in more and more attacks and frame-ups. The ministers of the imperial court were hesitant and afraid, and they all wanted to resign and return to their hometowns, seriously damaging the national body. From now on, there are still people who form a party and disrupt the government, and the conviction will never be forgiven. On the 8th day of the 6th month of the year, the hapless rabbit inherited the title of Shun

古文：三月甲寅，礼部尚书马自强兼文渊阁大学士，吏部侍郎申时行兼东阁大学士，预机务。
现代文：秋七月初八，兵部尚书掌管都察院事务的孙玮辞职回乡。九月十七日，吏部左侍郎方从哲、原吏部左侍郎吴道南和礼部尚书兼任东阁大学士，参与机要事务。
English: Autumn On the 8th day of the 7th month, Sun Yat-sen, who was in charge of the affairs of the Imperial Household Agency, resigned and returned to his hometown. On the 17th day of the 9th month, Fang Zong-tetsu, the left-hand man of the General Staff Department, Wu Daonan, the left-hand man of the General Staff Department, and Shang Shu, the Vice President of the Ministry of Ceremonies, who was also a scholar of Dongge University, participated in important affairs.

古文：甲子，张居正葬父归。
现代文：二十五日，吏部尚书赵焕自动离职。
English: On the 25th, the head of the personnel department, Shangshu Zhao Huan, resigned automatically.

古文：夏四月乙未，免湖广、四川逋赋。
现代文：当年，两畿、山东、江西、河南、广西、湖广、辽东发生水灾。
English: In that year, floods occurred in the two Kis, Shandong, Jiangxi, Henan, Guangxi, Hunan, and Liaodong provinces.

古文：丙午，诏户部岁增金花银二十万两。
现代文：乌斯藏前来朝贡。万历四十二年春正月十二日，总兵官刘纟廷率兵讨伐建昌叛蛮，将其平定。
English: On the 12th day of the first month of spring in the 42nd year of Wanli, the commander-in-chief Liu Bingting led his troops to fight against the rebels of Jianchang and subdue them.

古文：六月乙未，张居正还京师。
现代文：二月初九，慈圣皇太后驾崩。
English: On February 9, Empress Dowager Cixi passed away.

古文：秋七月乙卯，吕调阳致仕。
现代文：二十七日，赈济畿内饥荒。三月二十四日，福王来到都城。
English: On the 27th, the famine in the Kinai region was alleviated. On the 24th of March, King Fu came to the capital.

古文：丙子，诏江北诸府民，年十五以上无田者，官给牛一头、田五十亩开垦，三年后起科。九月庚午，诏苏州诸府开垦荒田，六年后起科。辛未，停刑。
现代文：夏四月初四，以皇太后遗命为由大赦天下。六月十三日，安葬孝定皇后。
English: On the 4th day of the 4th month of the 4th month of the 4th month of the 4th month of the 4th month of the 4th month of the 4th month of the 4th month of the 4th month of the 5th month of the 5th month of the 6th month of the 6th month of the 6th month of the 7th month of the 7th month of the 8th month of the 9th month of the 9th month of the 9th month of the 9th month of the 9th month of the 9th month of the 9th month of the 9th month of the 9th month of the 9th month of the 9th month of the 9

古文：冬十月辛卯，马自强卒。
现代文：秋八月十四日，礼部右侍郎孙慎行上疏自动去职。
English: On the 14th day of the 8th month of autumn, Sun Shengying, the right-hand man of the Ministry of Ceremonies, resigned from his post.

古文：十一月辛酉，礼天于南郊。是年，乌斯藏入贡。
现代文：二十三日，叶向高辞官。这一年有安南、土鲁番前来朝贡。
English: On the 23rd, Ye Xianggao resigned from his post. This year, Annan and Turuban came to pay tribute.

古文：七年春正月戊辰，诏毁天下书院。
现代文：万历四十三年春正月十八日，完成了徐州黄河决口的筑堤工程。
English: On the 18th day of the first month of spring in the 43rd year of Wanli, the embankment construction project at the mouth of the Yellow River in Xuzhou was completed.

古文：二月己丑，遣使分阅边防。
现代文：三月初一，有日食。
English: On the first day of March, there is a solar eclipse.

古文：三月甲子，免淮、扬逋赋。
现代文：夏五月初四，蓟州一男子张差手持木棒闯入慈庆宫，打伤守门的侍卫，被抓进监狱。
English: On the 4th day of the 5th month of the summer, Zhang Chao, a man from Zhangzhou, broke into the Cixing Palace with a wooden stick and injured the guards guarding the gate. He was arrested and sent to prison.

古文：夏五月癸亥，祀地于北郊。
现代文：十二日，刑部提牢主事王之肕弄清其情况，这就是后来所说的木廷击案。
English: On the 12th, the Criminal Investigation Department brought in Wang Zhixuan, the head of the detention center, to clarify the situation. This was later referred to as the Muting Incident.

古文：六月辛卯，核两畿、山东、陕西勋戚田赋。
现代文：二十五日，对皇城门禁严加戒备。二十九日，在慈庆宫召见廷臣。
English: On the 25th, the imperial city gates were put on high alert, and on the 29th, courtiers were summoned to the Cixing Palace.

古文：秋七月壬子，振苏、松水灾，蠲税粮。
现代文：御史刘光复被抓进监狱。三十日，张差伏诛。
English: Liu Guangfu was arrested and sent to prison. On the 30th, Zhang Shifu was arrested.

古文：戊午，京师地震。
现代文：六月初三，由于久旱不雨，朱翊钧命群臣修身反省。
English: On the second day of the first month, there was an earthquake in Kyoto.

古文：是年，乌斯藏入贡。
现代文：秋七月初四，赈济畿内饥荒。
English: This year, Wuxi paid tribute to the imperial court.

古文：八年春二月辛未朔，日有食之。
现代文：二十九日，中止行刑。闰八月初六，重建三殿。
English: On the 29th, the execution was suspended. On the 6th day of the 8th month, the third hall was rebuilt.

古文：戊子，耕耤田。
现代文：十三日，山东大旱，朱翊钧下诏将税银留下进行赈济。
English: On the 13th, Shandong was in a severe drought, and Zhu Xi issued an edict to save tax money for relief.

古文：戊戌，河工成。
现代文：二十三日，河套诸部进犯延绥，官军战败，副将孙弘谟被抓获。
English: On the 23rd, the various departments of Hetao invaded Yancheng, the government army was defeated, and Vice-General Sun Hongmu was captured.

古文：三月辛亥，奉两宫皇太后如天寿山谒陵，免所过田租。
现代文：冬十月十八日，京师地震。十一月初六，赈济京师饥民。
English: On the 18th day of October in winter, there was an earthquake in Beijing. On the 6th day of November, there was an effort to feed the hungry in Beijing.

古文：甲寅，还宫。
现代文：万历四十四年春三月初一，有日食。
English: On the 23rd, he returned to the Imperial Palace.

古文：丁卯，赐张懋修等进士及第、出身有差。
现代文：十五日，赐封钱士升等人进士及第以及其他不同出身。
English: On the fifteenth day, he bestowed the title of Qian Shi Sheng and other titles such as Jin Shi and Dai, as well as other different origins.

古文：夏闰四月庚申，广西八寨贼平。
现代文：当年春天，畿内、山东、河南、淮、徐发生大饥荒，朝廷分别给以赈济和减免田赋。
English: In the spring of that year, a great famine occurred in Kinai, Shandong, Henan, Huai and Xu, and the imperial court gave subsidies and land grants respectively.

古文：冬十月辛丑，汰内外冗官。
现代文：夏四月十九日，河南出现盗贼，朝廷命官吏进行安抚和围剿。
English: On the 19th day of the 4th month of summer, thieves appeared in Henan, and the imperial court ordered officials to pacify and surround them.

古文：乙巳，振苏、松、常、镇饥。
现代文：六月初三，河套各部落进犯延绥，总兵官杜文焕将其击退。
English: On the third day of the first month of June, the various tribes of Hetao invaded Yancheng, and the commander-in-chief, Du Wenhuan, repulsed them.

古文：十一月丙子，诏度民田。
现代文：二十九日，黄河在祥符朱家口决堤，淹没陈、杞、睢、柘各州县。
English: On the 29th, the Yellow River broke through the dike at Zhujiakou in Xiangfu, flooding the counties of Chen, Handan, Handan and Handan.

古文：是年，琉球入贡。九年春正月庚午，敕边臣备警。
现代文：秋七月二十八日，河套部落首领吉能率兵进犯高家堡，参将王国兴战败。当月，陕西大旱，江西、广东发生水灾，河南、淮、扬、常、镇大闹蝗灾，山东盗贼大起。
English: On the 28th day of the 7th month of autumn, the leader of the Hetao tribe, Jianeng, led his troops to attack Gaojia Fort, and defeated the general Wang Guoxing. In the same month, there was a drought in Shaanxi, floods in Jiangxi and Guangdong, locusts in Henan, Huai, Yang, Chang and Zhen, and thieves in Shandong.

古文：辛未，裁诸司冗官。
现代文：冬十月初十，中止行刑。
English: On the tenth day of the tenth month of the tenth month, the execution is suspended.

古文：癸酉，土蛮犯锦州，游击周之望败没。己卯，命翰林官日四人入直。
现代文：十一月初二，隆德殿发生火灾。万历四十五年春二月二十三日，由于前一年冬季无雪，入春以后又没有下雨，朱翊钧要群臣修身反省。
English: On the second day of the first month of November, a fire broke out in the Longde Hall. In the spring of the 45th year of Wanli, on the 23rd day of February, because there was no snow in the winter of the previous year and no rain after the beginning of spring, Zhu Xi asked his ministers to reflect on themselves.

古文：辛巳，裁南京冗官。甲申，辽东总兵官李成梁袭败土蛮于袄郎兔。
现代文：三月初六，镇抚司缺乏官吏，狱中很多囚犯因关押太久而死亡，大学士方从哲据此上奏，未得到答复。初十，赈济江西饥荒。
English: On the 6th day of the 3rd month of the year, the Zhenfu Division was short of officials, and many prisoners in the prison died because they had been held for too long. The university officials made a report based on this, but received no reply. On the 10th day of the month, there was a famine in Ganzi, Jiangxi Province.

古文：三月丙寅，大阅。
现代文：夏五月十三日，久旱不雨，朱翊钧又命群臣修身反省。
English: On the thirteenth day of the fifth month of the summer, after a long drought, Zhu Xi again ordered his ministers to reflect on their lives.

古文：是月，土蛮犯辽阳，副总兵曹簠御之，败绩。
现代文：六月初三，畿南大闹饥荒，当地官吏请求赈济，未得到及时答复。
English: On the third day of the first month of June, famine broke out in the southern part of Gyeonggi Province. Local officials appealed for aid, but did not receive a timely response.

古文：夏四月丁酉，振山西被灾州县。
现代文：当月，阁臣法官奏请热审，未得答复。
English: In the same month, Judge Katsuchika requested a retrial, but received no response.

古文：乙卯，振苏、松、淮、凤、徐、宿灾。
现代文：秋七月初一，日食。初五，吴道南因丁服父母丧事离职。这一年，两畿、河南、山东、山西、陕西、江西、湖广、福建、广东遭灾。
English: On the first day of autumn and the first day of July, there was a solar eclipse. On the fifth day of the first month of the year, Wu Dao Nan left his job to attend his parents' funeral. In this year, the two Kis, Henan, Shandong, Shanxi, Shaanxi, Jiangxi, Hukang, Fujian, and Guangdong suffered disasters.

古文：户部进《万历会计录》。秋八月丁未，扬州大水。
现代文：暹罗、乌斯藏曾来朝进贡。万历四十六年春二月十五日，赈济广东饥荒。
English: Siam and Wuzang once came to the DPRK to pay tribute. On February 15, the spring of the 46th year of Wanli, Guizhou helped relieve the famine in Guangdong.

古文：九月丁亥，停刑。
现代文：夏四月十五日，大清军队攻克抚顺，千总王命印战死。
English: On the 15th day of the 4th month of the summer, the Qing army conquered Fushun, and the general of the thousand, King Muyin, died in battle.

古文：冬十月己亥，土蛮犯广宁、义州，李成梁御却之。
现代文：二十日，总兵官张承胤领兵救援抚顺，也全军覆没。
English: On the 20th, General Zhang Chengyan led the troops to rescue Fushun, and the entire army was wiped out.

古文：十一月丙戌，振真定、顺德、广平灾，免税粮。
现代文：闰月初二，杨镐担任兵部左侍郎兼右佥都御史，经略辽东。六月二十六日，京师地震。这年夏天，官吏奏请热审，未得到答复。
English: On the second day of the leap month, Yang Jie served as the left attendant of the military department and the right attendant of the capital's history, and oversaw Liaodong. On June 26, the Beijing earthquake. In the summer of this year, the officials petitioned the hot trial, but did not receive a reply.

古文：是年，裁各省冗官，核徭赋，汰诸司冒滥冗费。
现代文：秋七月二十日，大清军队攻占清河堡，守将邹储贤、张旆战死。
English: On the 20th day of the 7th month of autumn, the Qing Dynasty army captured the Qinghe Fort, and the guards, Zou Shuxian and Zhang Ye, died in the battle.

古文：琉球、安南、土鲁番、天方、撒马儿罕、鲁迷、哈密、乌斯藏入贡。
现代文：八月十六日，朝廷将军饷海运到辽东。二十四日，乃蛮等七部落请求与朝廷相通。
English: On August 16th, the imperial general, Erhai, was transported to Liaodong. On the 24th, seven tribes, including Naimans, requested to communicate with the imperial court.

古文：十年春二月癸巳，顺义王俺答卒。
现代文：二十五日中止行刑。九月初七，守辽军队缺乏粮饷，有关官员奏请拨用各省税银，未得到及时答复。
English: The execution was suspended on the 25th. On the 7th day of the 9th month, the Liao army was short of rations, and the relevant officials requested the allocation of taxes and fees from various provinces, but did not receive a timely reply.

古文：丁酉，免天下积年逋赋。
现代文：二十六日，加派天下田赋。
English: On the 26th, Tian Tian Fu was added.

古文：三月庚申，杭州兵变，执巡抚吴善言。
现代文：三十日，京师发生地震。冬十一月初九，因灾异频繁而令群臣修身反省。
English: On the 30th, an earthquake occurred in the capital. In the winter, on the 9th day of the 11th month, due to frequent disasters, the ministers were forced to reflect on themselves.

古文：丁卯，兵部侍郎张佳胤巡抚浙江，讨定之。
现代文：十二月初二，河套部落首领猛克什力前来投降。
English: On the second day of December, the leader of the Hetao tribe, Meng Keshli, came to surrender.

古文：庚午，如西山谒恭让章皇后、景皇帝陵。辛未，还宫。乙酉，振临、巩、平、延、庆五府旱灾，免田租。三月甲申，追夺张居正官阶。
现代文：这一年有土鲁番、天方、撒马儿罕、鲁迷、哈密、乌斯藏前来朝贡。万历四十七年春二月十一日，经略杨镐在辽阳誓师，总兵官李如柏、杜松、刘纟廷、马林分道出塞。三月初一，杜松在吉林崖遭遇大清军队，战死。初二，马林在飞芬山战败，兵备佥事潘宗颜战死。初七，刘纟廷率军深入阿布达里冈，战死。
English: In this year, Turuban, Tianfang, Samarhan, Lumin, Hammi, and Uszang came to pay tribute to the imperial court. On February 11, the 47th year of Wanli, after Yang Jie swore the oath in Liaoyang, the chief military officers Li Rubei, Dusong, Liu Yingting, and Marin left the fortress separately. On the first day of March, Dusong encountered the Qing army in the cliff of Jilin and died in battle. On the second day of the first month, Marin was defeated in Feifen Mountain, and the soldier Pan Zongyan died in battle. On the seventh day of the first month, Liu Yingting led

古文：庚子，赐朱国祚等进士及第、出身有差。
现代文：十八日，赐庄际昌等人为进士及第以及其他不同出身。
English: On the 18th, Zhuang Jichang and others were given the honor of being promoted to Shishi and Dai, as well as other different origins.

古文：夏四月丁巳，张四维以忧去。
现代文：夏四月二十日，盔甲厂发生火灾。
English: On the 20th of April, a fire broke out in an armour factory.

古文：己未，吏部侍郎许国为礼部尚书兼东阁大学士，预机务。
现代文：六月十六日，大清军队攻克开原，马林全军覆没。二十二日，大理寺丞熊廷弼担任兵部右侍郎兼右佥都御史，经略辽东。
English: On June 16, the Qing Dynasty army conquered Kaiyuan, and the entire army of Marin was wiped out. On the 22nd, Kumo Tingyu, the president of Dali Temple, served as the right hand man of the military department and the right hand man of the capital's historian, overseeing Liaodong.

古文：甲戌，承天大雨，江溢。
现代文：二十三日，朝廷大臣聚于文华门，奏请皇帝批复奏章以及增派援军和分发粮饷，未得到答复。
English: On the 23rd, the ministers of the imperial court gathered at the Wenhua Gate and petitioned the emperor to approve the restoration of the imperial seal, as well as the dispatch of reinforcements and the distribution of grain, but received no response.

古文：是月，广东罗定兵变。
现代文：秋八月初五，山东蝗灾。
English: On the fifth day of the fifth lunar month in autumn and August, the locust plague in Shandong began.

古文：五月，我大清太祖高皇帝起兵征尼堪外兰，克图伦城。
现代文：十三日，逮捕杨镐。
English: On the 13th, Yang Qi was arrested.

古文：六月乙丑，振承天、汉阳、郧阳、襄阳灾。
现代文：九月初一，中止行刑。初九，百官跪伏于宫殿阶下，奏请朱翊钧上朝处理政事，未得到答复。
English: On the first day of September, the execution was suspended. On the ninth day of the ninth month, the hundred officials knelt at the foot of the palace steps and petitioned Zhu Xi to deal with political affairs, but received no reply.

古文：秋八月丙辰，免山西被灾税粮。
现代文：冬十月初八，赈济京师饥民。十二月，又加派全国田租赋税。
English: On the 8th day of the 10th month of winter, the Beijing relief army arrived to help the starving people. In December, the national land rent tax was also dispatched.

古文：九月甲申，如天寿山谒陵。
现代文：二十二日，镇江、宽奠、云爰阳新募援兵被击溃。
English: On the 22nd, the newly recruited reinforcements from Zhenjiang, Kuan Dian and Yunnan were defeated.

古文：己丑，还宫。
现代文：这一年有暹罗前来朝贡。
English: On the 24th, he returned to the Imperial Palace.

古文：冬十月癸亥，停刑。
现代文：万历四十八年春正月二十一日，朝鲜请求救援。
English: On October 18, the sentence was suspended.

古文：辛未，河南水灾，蠲振有差。
现代文：三月十二日，再次加派全国田租赋税。
English: On March 12th, the national land rent tax was raised again.

古文：十一月己卯朔，日有食之。
现代文：夏四月初六，皇后王氏死去。
English: On the 6th day of the 4th month of the summer, Empress Wang died.

古文：十二月庚午，慈宁宫灾，敕修省。
现代文：十一日，朱翊钧病发，在弘德殿召见方从哲。
English: On the 11th day of the month, Zhu Xi fell ill and summoned Fang Congzhe to see him at Hongde Hall.

古文：是年，琉球入贡。十二年春二月丁卯，京师地震。
现代文：秋七月十七日，朱翊钧病情加重，在弘德殿召见英国公张惟贤，大学士方从哲，尚书周嘉谟、李汝华、黄嘉善、张问达、黄克缵，侍郎孙如游，勉励各位大臣勤政敬职。
English: On the 17th day of the 7th month of autumn, Zhu Xi's condition worsened, and he summoned the British public official Zhang Weixian, the university scholar Fang Congzhe, the scholars Zhou Jia Mu, Li Ruhua, Huang Jiazhen, Zhang Qida, Huang Kegui, and the attendant Sun Ryu to Hongde Hall to encourage the ministers to be diligent in politics and honor their duties.

古文：己巳，释建文诸臣外亲谪戍者后裔。三月己亥，减江西烧造瓷器。
现代文：二十一日，死去，时年五十八岁。遗诏停止一切榷税和新增织造等。九月初十，追加尊敬谥号，庙号神宗，安葬于定陵。
English: He died on the twenty-first day of the month, at the age of fifty-eight. His last will and testament stopped all taxes and new additions to weaving, etc. On the tenth day of the ninth month, he added the honorifics 号,庙号, and 神宗, and was buried in the Dingling Mausoleum.

古文：夏四月乙卯，籍张居正家。
现代文：光宗光宗崇天契道英睿恭纯宪文景武渊仁懿孝贞皇帝，叫朱常洛，是神宗皇帝的长子。
English: Emperor Guangzong, the eldest son of Emperor Shenzong, was named Zhu Changluo.

古文：丁巳，游击将军刘綎讨平陇川贼。
现代文：其母恭妃王氏。万历十年八月出生。
English: His mother, Gongfei Wang, was born in August of the 10th year of Wanli.

古文：五月甲午，京师地震。
现代文：神宗皇帝亲到大殿接受朝贺，并到郊庙祭奠社稷，还诏告天下，封两宫徽号。
English: Emperor Shenzong personally went to the main hall to receive morning greetings, and went to the suburban temple to offer a memorial service, and also announced to the world that the two palaces would be sealed.

古文：六月辛亥，以云南用兵，免税粮及逋赋。
现代文：不久，郑贵妃生下儿子常洵，得宠于神宗皇帝。
English: Soon after, Empress Zheng Guifei gave birth to her son, Changyu, who was favored by Emperor Shenzong.

古文：秋八月丙辰，榜张居正罪于天下，家属戍边。
现代文：很久也未册立太子，朝廷大臣纷纷上奏请求，均不予理睬。
English: It had been a long time since a crown prince had been crowned, and the ministers of the Imperial Court had made repeated requests, all of which were ignored.

古文：十九年春正月，顷甸寇永昌、腾越。
现代文：万历二十九年十月，才立常洛为皇太子。
English: In October of the 29th year of Wanli, Changluo was appointed crown prince.

