古文：凡民之所以守战至死而不德其上者，有数以至焉。
现代文：凡人民之所以守战至死而不对君主自居有德，这是有必然原因的。
English: There is an inevitable reason why all peoples defend the war to the death and do not consider themselves virtuous towards the monarch.

古文：曰：大者亲戚坟墓之所在也，田宅富厚足居也。
现代文：可以说，最大的一条是因为父母的坟墓在这个地方，而且土地房屋富裕可以使人们安居乐业。
English: It can be said that the biggest one is because the graves of parents are in this place, and rich land and houses can make people live and work in peace.

古文：不然，则州县乡党与宗族足怀乐也。
现代文：若不是这个原因，就是由于州县乡里与宗族的情谊可令人感怀亲慕。
English: If not for this reason, it is because the friendship between the county township and the clan can be touching and admirable.

古文：不然，则上之教训、习俗，慈爱之于民也厚，无所往而得之。
现代文：若不是这个原因，就是君主在教训、习俗方面，爱民深厚，无处可寻。
English: If it is not for this reason, it is because the monarch has a deep love for the people in terms of teachings and customs, and is nowhere to be found.

古文：不然，则山林泽谷之利足生也。
现代文：若不是这个原因、就是山林泽谷的财源可使人维持生计。
English: If it were not for this reason, the financial resources of the mountains, forests and valleys would not be able to sustain people.

古文：不然，则地形险阻，易守而难攻也。
现代文：若不是这个原因，就是本国地形险阻，易守难攻。
English: If this is not the reason, it is because the country's terrain is dangerous and difficult to attack.

古文：不然，则罚严而可畏也。
现代文：若不是这个原因，就是刑罚严厉而令人畏惧。
English: If it is not for this reason, it is because the punishment is severe and frightening.

古文：不然，则赏明而足劝也。
现代文：若不是这个原因，就是赏赐明正而令人鼓舞。
English: If for no other reason, the rewards are clear and encouraging.

古文：不然，则有深怨于敌人也。
现代文：若不是这个原因，就是对敌人有深仇大恨。
English: If it's not that, it's a deep hatred of the enemy.

古文：不然，则有厚功干上也。
现代文：若不是这个原因，就是对君主有重大功劳。
English: If for no other reason, it is a great credit to the sovereign.

古文：此民之所以守战至死而不德其上者也。
现代文：这就是人民为什么能守战至死而不对君主自居有德的缘故。
English: This is the reason why the people can fight to the death and not feel virtuous towards the monarch.

古文：今恃不信之人，而求以智；用不守之民，而欲以固；将不战之卒，而幸以胜，此兵之三暗也。
现代文：现今，依靠不可信的人，而要求了解敌情；使用不能守的人，而想要巩固防地；指挥不能战的军队，而想要侥幸取胜。这是用兵上三种昏庸的表现。
English: Nowadays, relying on untrustworthy people, but demanding to know the enemy's situation; using people who can't defend, but want to consolidate the defense; commanding troops that can't fight, but want to win by chance.

