古文：唐张嘉贞为并州长史、天兵军使，明皇欲相之，而忘其名，诏中书侍郎韦抗曰： 朕尝记其风操，今为北方大将，张姓而复名，卿为我思之。 
现代文：唐朝张嘉贞任并州长史、天兵军使，唐明皇想让他当丞相，但忘了他的名字，便告中书侍郎韦抗说： 我曾经记得他的风度品格，现在是北方的大将，姓张，双名，你替我想想。 
English: In the Tang Dynasty, Zhang Jiazhen was appointed as the governor of history and the envoy of Heaven's army. The Emperor of Tang Ming wanted him to be the prime minister, but he forgot his name, so he told the chief secretary Lang Weikan: I once remembered his demeanor and character, now he is the general of the north, surname Zhang, double name, you think for me.

古文：抗曰： 非张齐丘乎？
现代文：韦抗说： 是不是张齐丘？
English: Wei Kang said: Is it Zhang Qiqiu?

古文：今为朔方节度使。 
现代文：现在是朔方节度使。 
English: Now it is the turn of Shuo Fang.

古文：帝即使作诏以为相。
现代文：唐明皇就让他写诏书，让张齐丘当丞相。
English: Emperor Tang Ming let him write the imperial edict, and let Zhang Qiqiu become the prime minister.

古文：夜阅大臣表疏，得嘉贞所献，遂相之。
现代文：唐明皇夜里看大臣的表章，看到张嘉贞送上的疏文，便让他当了丞相。
English: Tang Minghuang looked at the minister's badge in the night, saw the message sent by Zhang Jiazhen, and let him become the prime minister.

古文：议者谓明皇欲大用人，而卤莽若是，非得嘉贞表疏，则语相齐丘矣。
现代文：评议家说唐明皇想重用人材，却这样鲁莽，如不是见到张嘉贞的表章，就误用了张齐丘。
English: The commentator said that Emperor Tang wanted to reuse human resources, but he was so reckless that if he did not see Zhang Jiazhen's watch badge, he would misuse Zhang Qiqiu.

古文：予考其事大为不然。
现代文：我经过考查，认为并不如此。
English: After investigation, I believe this is not the case.

古文：按开元八年，嘉贞为相，而齐丘以天宝八载始为朔方节度，相去三十年，安得如上所云者？
现代文：按唐玄宗开元八年，张嘉贞任宰相，张齐丘是玄宗天宝八年才任朔方节度使的，相差三十年，怎么能象以上所说的呢？
English: According to Tang Xuan Zong, Zhang Jiazhen was appointed as prime minister in the eighth year of the first century, and Zhang Qiqiu was appointed as the governor of Shuafang in the eighth year of the reign of Emperor Xuanzong. The difference is 30 years. How can it be as mentioned above?

古文：又是时明皇临御未久，方厉精为治，不应置相而不审其名位，盖郑处诲所著《明皇杂录》妄载其事，史家误采之也。
现代文：再说当时唐明皇即位不久，正在励精图始，不应该任命丞相而不知道姓名和官位，这只是郑处诲所著的《明皇杂录》胡记了此书，历史学家误用罢了。
English: Moreover, at that time, Emperor Tang Ming was not long after his accession to the throne, and he was at the beginning of his efforts. He should not have appointed a chancellor without knowing the name and official rank. This was just a mistake made by the historian who misused the book "Minghuangzhihuo" (Minghuangzhihuo Miscellany) written by Zheng Shizhe.

古文：《资治通鉴》弃不取云。
现代文：《资治通鉴》就没有采用。
English: "Zizhi Tongjian" has not been adopted.

