古文：姚思廉，字简之，雍州万年人。
现代文：姚思廉，字简之，雍州万年人。
English: Yao Siliang, a simplified character, is a long-time resident of Yongzhou.

古文：父察，陈吏部尚书；入隋，历太子内舍人、秘书丞、北绛公，学兼儒史，见重于三代。
现代文：父亲姚察，在陈代做过吏部尚书，入隋历任太子内舍人、秘书丞、北绛公，学问兼及儒学和史学，在隋、陈二代地位显要。
English: His father, Yao Zha, worked as a clerk in the Chen dynasty, and was appointed to various positions in the Sui dynasty, such as the prince's chamberlain, secretary, and governor of the Northern Wei Dynasty. He was a scholar of both Confucianism and history, and held a prominent position in the Sui and Chen dynasties.

古文：陈亡，察自吴兴始迁关中。
现代文：陈亡后，姚察从吴兴迁到关中。
English: After Chen's death, Yao Zha moved from Wu Xing to Guanzhong.

古文：思廉少受汉史于其父，能尽传家业，勤学寡欲，未尝言及家人产业。
现代文：姚思廉年少时就随父亲学习汉代历史著作，能完全继承家传的史学，勤学寡欲，从不过问家人产业方面的事。
English: When he was young, Yao Silian studied the historical works of the Han Dynasty with his father. He was able to fully inherit the family history. He was diligent in his studies and never asked about his family's business.

古文：在陈为扬州主簿，入隋为汉王府参军，丁父忧解职。
现代文：在陈朝任扬州主簿，入隋后任汉王府参军，因居父丧辞去官职。
English: In the Chen Dynasty, he was the chief accountant of Yangzhou. After entering the Sui Dynasty, he joined the Han royal court and joined the army. Due to the death of his father, he resigned from his official position.

古文：初，察在陈尝修梁、陈二史，未就，临终令思廉续成其志。
现代文：当初，姚察在陈代时曾撰修梁、陈二史，没有完成就去世了，临终时嘱咐思廉继续完成撰修梁、陈二史的遗志。
English: At the beginning, Yao Zha had written the biography of Liang and Chen II during the Chen dynasty, but he died before completing it. At the end of his life, he instructed Siliang to continue to complete the biography of Liang and Chen II.

古文：丁继母忧，庐于墓侧，毁瘠加人。
现代文：接着思廉的母亲去世，他在坟墓旁结庐居丧，人愈加羸弱瘦削。
English: Then Silam's mother died, and he lay dying by the grave, increasingly frail and thin.

古文：服阕，补河间郡司法书佐。
现代文：居丧期满，任河间郡司法书佐。
English: At the end of his term of residence, he was appointed Kawama County Judicial Clerk.

古文：思廉上表陈父遗言，有诏许其续成《梁》、《陈史》。
现代文：思廉上表陈述其父遗言，隋炀帝下诏准许他继承父志续撰梁史、陈史。
English: Sillian recited his father's last words on the table, and Emperor Sui granted him permission to succeed his father in writing Liang Shi and Chen Shi.

古文：炀帝又令与起居舍人崔祖浚修《区宇图志》。
现代文：后来炀帝又令思廉与起居舍人崔祖浚撰修《区宇图志》。
English: Later, Emperor Qian ordered Siliang and his live-in concubine, Cui Zujun, to write "Zhuyu Tushi."

古文：后为代王侑侍读。会义师克京城，侑府僚奔骇，唯思廉侍王，不离其侧。
现代文：隋末，思廉任代王杨侑的侍读，适逢义军攻克京城，杨侑的府僚惊骇得各自奔逃，只有思廉侍奉代王，不离代王左右。
English: At the end of the Sui Dynasty, when the rebel army conquered the capital, Siliang was appointed as the attendant of the acting king, Yang Hui. Yang Hui's officials were so shocked that they fled. Only Siliang served the acting king and did not leave the acting king.

古文：兵将升殿，思廉厉声谓曰： 唐公举义，本匡王室，卿等不宜无礼于王。 
现代文：义兵攻打进来准备上殿时，思廉挺身而出，厉声对他们说： 唐公起义兵，本来是为了匡正隋朝的王室，你们不得对代王无礼！ 
English: When the volunteer soldiers came to attack and prepare to go to the hall, Siliang stepped forward and said to them in a strong voice: Tang Dynasty volunteer soldiers, it was originally to rectify the royal family of the Sui Dynasty, you must not be rude to the king!

古文：众服其言，于是布列阶下。
现代文：士兵们被他大义凛然的话说服了，于是列阵在大殿阶下。
English: The soldiers were convinced by his noble words, so they lined up at the foot of the steps of the Great Hall.

古文：高祖闻而义之，许其扶侑至顺阳阁下，泣拜而去。
现代文：唐高祖听说这事，认为姚思廉的行为合乎义理，允许他扶代王到顺阳阁下，思廉拜泣而去。
English: When Tang Gaozu heard about this, he thought that Yao Siliang's behavior was reasonable and allowed him to escort Wang to Shunyang. Siliang cried and left.

古文：观者咸叹曰： 忠烈之士也。
现代文：看的人都感叹地说 ：是个忠烈之士啊！
English: Everyone who saw it said with exclamation: what a loyal soldier!

古文：仁者有勇，此之谓乎！ 
现代文：仁者有勇，就是说的这样的人啊！ 
English: The benevolent have courage, that is to say, such people!

古文：高祖受禅，授秦王文学。
现代文：唐高祖李渊接受禅让建立唐朝，授思廉为秦王府文学官。
English: Li Yuan, the progenitor of Tang Gao, accepted Zen Buddhism to establish the Tang Dynasty, and appointed Siliang as the literary official of the Qin Dynasty.

古文：后太宗征徐圆朗，思廉时在洛阳，太宗尝从容言及隋亡之事，慨然叹曰： 姚思廉不惧兵刃，以明大节，求诸古人，亦何以加也！ 
现代文：后来太宗征伐徐圆朗，思廉当时在洛阳，太宗曾随口谈到隋代灭亡的事，感慨地赞叹说： 姚思廉不怕杀头，保护君主表现了忠君大节，与古人相比，也相差不了什么！ 
English: Later, Emperor Taizong conquered Xu Yuanlang, while Siliang was in Luoyang at the time. Emperor Taizong once casually talked about the demise of the Sui Dynasty, and said with emotion: Yao Siliang was not afraid to kill, and protected the monarch. Compared with the ancients, there is no difference!

古文：因寄物三百段以遗之，书曰： 想节义之风，故有斯赠。 
现代文：因此赠给他绸帛三百段，信上说： 念及节义之风，所以有这些赠物。 
English: So he gave him three hundred pieces of silk and satin. In the letter, he said, "These gifts are made with the spirit of the festival in mind.

古文：寻引为文学馆学士。
现代文：不久提升思廉为文学馆学士。
English: He was soon promoted to the rank of Bachelor of Arts.

古文：太宗入春宫，迁太子洗马。
现代文：太宗被立为太子，思廉升任太子洗马。
English: Taizong was made crown prince, and Siliang was promoted to prince of Saima.

古文：贞观初，迁著作郎、弘文馆学士。
现代文：贞观初，思廉升任著作郎、弘文馆学士。
English: At the beginning of Zhenguan, Sillian was promoted to the post of author and scholar of the Hongwen Museum.

古文：写其形像，列于《十八学士图》，令文学褚亮为之赞，曰： 志苦精勤，纪言实录。
现代文：画他的肖像并将它列在《十八学士图》中，命文学褚亮为他的肖像写赞语，说 ：志苦精励，纪言实录。
English: Painted his portrait and listed it in the "Eighteen Baccalaureate Chart," the life literature brightly wrote a praise for his portrait, saying: "Hard work, true story."

古文：临危殉义，余风励俗。 
现代文：临危殉义，余风励俗。 
English: Martyrdom in the face of danger is the best way to improve morals.

古文：三年，又受诏与秘书监魏徵同撰梁、陈二史。思廉又采谢炅等诸家梁史续成父书，并推究陈事，删益博综顾野王所修旧史，撰成《梁书》五十卷、《陈书》三十卷。
现代文：贞观三年，思廉又受诏与秘书监魏征同撰梁、陈二史，思廉又吸取谢炅等诸家梁史著述成果，续成父书，并推求研究陈史，参考傅纟宰、顾野王所修的旧史，删削补充，撰成《梁书》五十卷、《陈书》三十卷。
English: In the third year of Zhenguan, Sillian was again ordered by Zhao and his secretary, Guan Wei Zheng, to write the history of Liang and Chen together. Sillian also absorbed the results of Liang's writings from various families, such as Xie Yao, and continued to write his father's book. He also urged to study the history of Chen, refer to the old history written by Fu Yuzai and Gu Nong Wang, and make additions and deletions, and compile the "Book of Liang" fifty volumes, and the "Book of Chen" thirty volumes.

古文：魏徵虽裁其总论，其编次笔削，皆思廉之功也，赐彩绢五百段，加通直散骑常侍。
现代文：魏征虽然裁决写定《梁书》、《陈书》的总论，这二书编次删削，都是思廉的功劳，太宗赐给他彩绢五百段，并升任他为通直散骑常侍。
English: Although Wei Zheng decided to write the general theory of "Liang Shu" and "Chen Shu," these two books were edited and abridged, all of which were the merit of Siliang. Emperor Taizong gave him 500 pieces of gold and silver, and promoted him to be a regular attendant.

古文：思廉以籓邸之旧，深被礼遇，政有得失，常遣密奏之，思廉亦直言无隐。
现代文：思廉因为是藩王府的旧属，深受礼遇，政事上的得失，太宗常让他私下密奏其意见，思廉也能直言无隐。
English: Because Shillan was a former vassal of the royal court of the domain, he was treated with great courtesy, and the gains and losses in political affairs, Taizong often asked him to secretly express his opinions, so Shillan could speak frankly.

古文：太宗将幸九成宫，思廉谏曰： 离宫游幸，秦皇、汉武之事，固非尧、舜、禹、汤之所为也。 
现代文：有次太宗准备到九成宫游玩，思廉进谏说： 到离宫去游乐，是秦始皇、汉武帝的行为，本来不是尧、舜、禹、汤那些圣明君主的行为。 
English: Once, when Taizong was preparing to visit the Jiu Chenggong Palace, Siliang Jinlu said, "Going to the Jiu Chenggong Palace for pleasure is the behavior of the First Emperor of Qin and the Emperor of Han, but it is not the behavior of the emperors of the Ming Dynasty, such as Zhou, Yan, Yu and Tang.

古文：言甚切至。
现代文：言语非常恳切，尖锐。
English: Between the words, the rhetoric is sincere and passionate.

古文：太宗谕曰： 朕有气疾，热便顿剧，固非情好游赏也。 
现代文：太宗解释说： 朕有气病，天热病就马上加剧，本来不是生性喜好游乐玩赏。 
English: Taizong explained, "Since I have qi sickness, the hay fever will be aggravated immediately. It is not my natural inclination to play.

古文：因赐帛五十匹。
现代文：因此赐给思廉帛五十匹。
English: So he gave him fifty stallions.

古文：九年，拜散骑常侍，赐爵丰城县男。
现代文：贞观九年，拜思廉为散骑常侍，赐爵丰城县男。
English: In the ninth year of Zhenguan, Bai Siliang was a horseback riding attendant, and was awarded the title of Fengcheng County man.

古文：处平子璹、珽，别有传。颜籀，字师古，雍州万年人，齐黄门侍郎之推孙也。
现代文：贞观十一年思廉去世，太宗深切悼念惋惜他，停止上朝一天，赠给他太常卿的封号，谥号康，赐葬地于昭陵。颜师古，雍州万年人，是北齐黄门侍郎颜之推的孙子。
English: In the eleventh year of Zhenguan's reign, Siliang passed away. Taizong deeply mourned and pitied him, and on the last day of his reign, he bestowed upon him the title of Taizongqing (太常卿) and the posthumous name Kang, and gave him a burial place in Zhaoling. Yan Shigu, who lived in Yongzhou for a thousand years, was the grandson of Yan Zhitui, the attendant of the Yellow Gate of North Qi.

古文：其先本居琅邪，世仕江左。及之推，历事周、齐，齐灭，始居关中。
现代文：其先本是琅笽临沂人，世代在江左为官；到颜之推先后在北周北齐做官时，才入居关中。
English: He was originally from Jinlin, and had been an official in Jiangzao for generations. He only moved to Guanzhong when Yan Zhihui had been an official in Beizhou and Beiqi successively.

古文：父思鲁，以学艺称，武德初为秦王府记室参军。
现代文：颜师古的父亲颜思鲁，因学识文才受到人们的称许，武德初年曾任秦王府记事参军。
English: Yan Shigu's father, Yan Silu, was praised by people for his learning and literary talent. In his first year of martial arts, he was appointed as a recorder of Qin Wangfu and joined the army.

古文：师古少传家业，博览群书，尤精诂训，善属文。
现代文：师古从小受到家学的熏陶，博览群书，尤其精于训诂之学，擅长写文章。
English: From an early age, Shigu was influenced by home-schooling and read a lot of books. He was particularly adept at the study of etiquette and was good at writing articles.

古文：隋仁寿中，为尚书左丞李纲所荐，授安养尉。
现代文：隋文帝仁寿年间，由尚书左丞李纲推荐，被任命为安养县的县尉。
English: During the reign of Emperor Wen of the Sui Dynasty, he was recommended by Shangshu Zuorong Li Gang and was appointed as a county officer of Anyang County.

古文：尚书左仆射杨素见师古年弱貌羸，因谓曰： 安养剧县，何以克当？ 
现代文：尚书左仆射杨素见师古年轻体弱，因而问他说： 安养是个难以治理的县，如何能担当此任？ 
English: Shangshu's left-hand man, Yang Su, saw that his teacher was young and weak, so he asked him: Anyang is a county that is difficult to govern, how can you take on this position?

古文：师古曰： 割鸡焉用牛刀。 
现代文：师古回答说 ：割鸡焉用牛刀。 
English: The master replied, "Cutting chicken is done with a knife."

古文：素奇其对。
现代文：杨素对他的回答感到惊奇。
English: Yang Su was surprised by his answer.

古文：到官果以干理闻。
现代文：师古到任后果然以办事能干，把地方治理得好而闻名。
English: Upon taking office, Shi Gu was known for his ability to get things done and his ability to administer the local government well.

古文：时薛道衡为襄州总管，与高祖有旧，又悦其才，有所缀文，尝使其掎摭疵病，甚亲昵之。
现代文：当时薛道衡是襄州总管，与其祖是旧交，又喜欢师古的文才，有所著作，曾让他指摘文章中的毛病，与他非常亲昵。
English: At that time, Xue Daoheng was the general manager of Xiangzhou. He was an old friend of his ancestor. He was also a man of letters who liked his teacher. He had written a book and had asked him to point out the problems in the article. He was very close to him.

古文：寻坐事免，归长安，十年不得调，家贫，以教授为业。
现代文：后来师古因事被免官回到长安，十年之间不被起用，生活无着，靠教授学生维持生活。
English: Later, Shi Gu returned to Chang'an after being removed from his post for some reason. For ten years, he was not employed and had no income. He had to rely on teaching students to make ends meet.

古文：及起义，师古至长春宫谒见，授朝散大夫。
现代文：李渊起义反隋，师古到长春宫谒见，被授予朝散大夫之职。
English: Li Yuan revolted against the Sui Dynasty, Shigu went to Changchun Palace for an audience, and was awarded the post of Choshan doctor.

古文：从平京城，拜敦煌公府文学，转起居舍人，再迁中书舍人，专掌机密。
现代文：跟随平定京城，拜敦煌公府文学，转起居舍人，再迁中书舍人，专掌机密。
English: Following the pacification of Beijing, he studied the literature of Dunhuang, became a resident, then a resident, and specialized in secrets.

古文：于时军国多务，凡有制诰，皆成其手。
现代文：当时军国政务繁多，凡是诏令，都经他亲手完成。
English: At that time, there were many military and political affairs, and he personally carried out all the imperial decrees.

古文：师古达于政理，册奏之工，时无及者。
现代文：他明于政务事理，所草拟的册奏工整美好，是当时他人所不及的。
English: He was well versed in government affairs, and the book he drafted was so beautiful that it was beyond the reach of others at the time.

古文：太宗践祚，擢拜中书侍郎，封琅邪县男。
现代文：太宗即位，擢升他为中书侍郎，封为琅笽县男。
English: When Emperor Taizong ascended the throne, he was promoted to the position of the attendant of the Chinese Academy of Letters and named the man of Jixian County.

古文：以母忧去职。
现代文：师古因母亲去世离职。
English: Xie Chan left his job because of his mother's death.

古文：服阕，复为中书侍郎。岁余，坐事免。
现代文：居丧期满，恢复中书侍郎之职，过了一年多，师古因事被免去官职。
English: After more than a year, Shigu was removed from his official position because of the incident.

古文：太宗以经籍去圣久远，文字讹谬，令师古于秘书省考定《五经》，师古多所厘正，既成，奏之。
现代文：太宗认为经书经历的时间久远，在长期的辗转传抄过程中文字讹谬很多，命令师古在秘书省考定《五经》文字，师古做了很多订正，五经定本撰成后，上奏皇上。
English: Emperor Taizong thought that the scriptures had been around for a long time, and there were many absurdities in the long-term transcription process. He ordered Shigu to test the "Five Classics" text in the secretarial department. Shigu made many revisions. After the five classics were compiled, they were presented to the emperor.

古文：太宗复遣诸儒重加详议，于时诸儒传习已久，皆共非之。
现代文：太宗又召集诸儒重新进行详细的评议，当时诸儒对承袭的师说相习已久，都一起非议五经定本。
English: Emperor Taizong also summoned the Confucian scholars to re-conduct a detailed review. At that time, the Confucian scholars had been studying the inherited teachings for a long time, and they all criticized the Five Classics together.

古文：师古辄引晋、宋已来古今本，随言晓答，援据详明，皆出其意表，诸儒莫不叹服。
现代文：师古总是根据晋、宋以来的各种古今版本，对大家提出的各种问题，做了清楚明白的回答，广征博引论据详明，都出乎大家意料之外，诸儒没有不叹服的。
English: Shigu always based on various ancient and modern versions since the Jin and Song dynasties, gave clear and clear answers to various questions raised by everyone, extensively quoted and cited detailed arguments, all of which were unexpected by everyone, and the Confucianists were not unconvinced.

古文：于是兼通直郎、散骑常侍，颁其所定之书于天下，令学者习焉。
现代文：于是太宗令师古兼任通直郎、散骑常侍，把他考定的书颁布于天下，令读书人学习。
English: As a result, Emperor Taizong ordered Shigu, who also served as Tsunenairo and Sanzhishi, to publish the books he had selected, so that readers could study them.

古文：贞观七年，拜秘书少监，专典刊正。
现代文：贞观七年，师古被任命为秘书少监，专管校订古书的工作。
English: In the seventh year of Zhenguan, Shigu was appointed secretary and junior superintendent, specializing in the revision of ancient books.

古文：所有奇书难字，众所共惑者，随疑剖析，曲尽其源。
现代文：所有大家疑惑不解的奇文难字，他都能一一辨析清楚，说明其深隐的本源。
English: He is able to clearly analyze all the difficult words that are puzzling everyone, and explain their hidden origin.

古文：是时多引后进之士为雠校，师古抑素流，先贵势，虽富商大贾亦引进之，物论称其纳贿，由是出为郴州刺史。
现代文：那时他多引导后进的学者进行校雠，师古抑制家世清贫、门第不高的人，让出身富贵、有权势的人占先，即使是富商大贾也引荐提携他们，众人非议说师古收受贿赂，因此出京任郴州刺史。
English: At that time, he mostly guided the scholars who were latecomers to carry out the school. He restrained the scholars who were poor and not of high birth, and allowed those who were born rich and powerful to take the lead. Even the rich merchant Dajia also introduced and partnered with them. Everyone criticized the scholars for accepting bribes, so he went to Beijing to serve as the historian of Zhangzhou.

古文：未行，太宗惜其才，谓之曰 卿之学识，良有可称，但事亲居官，未为清论所许。
现代文：师古还未走，太宗惜其才，对他说： 卿的学识，可称是优良的，可是尽孝当官，却不能被社会上公正的舆论所赞许。
English: Shigu hadn't left yet, but Taizong felt sorry for his talent and said to him, "Sir, your knowledge can be said to be excellent, but your filial duty as an official can't be approved by the fair public opinion in society.

古文：今之此授，卿自取之。
现代文：现在授郴州刺史，是卿自作自受。
English: Now he has been awarded the title of "Provincial Historian," which is his own doing.

古文：朕以卿曩日任使，不忍遐弃，宜深自诫励也。 
现代文：朕念及卿从前受差遣、任用，不忍远弃，卿应当深刻地告诫自勉。 
English: I remember that you were once sent and appointed, and I cannot bear to abandon you. You should deeply admonish yourself.

古文：于是复以为秘书少监。
现代文：于是重又授师古任秘书少监。
English: As a result, the old position of secretary and junior superintendent was reinstated.

古文：师古既负其才，又早见驱策，累被任用，及频有罪谴，意甚丧沮。
现代文：师古已经仗恃自己的才能，又早受朝廷驱使，屡次被任用，到多次有罪受到谴责后，心里非常沮丧。
English: Shigu had already relied on his own talent, and was driven by the imperial court early on, and was repeatedly appointed. After being repeatedly condemned for his guilt, he was very depressed.

古文：自是阖门守静，杜绝宾客，放志园亭，葛巾野服。然搜求古迹及古器，耽好不已。
现代文：从此关起门来不与外界来往，杜绝宾客，放意园林亭院，戴着葛布头巾身穿粗布衣服，然而搜求古代遗踪和古董器物，深爱不已。
English: From then on, he closed the door and did not interact with the outside world, cut off the guests, let the garden pavilion yard go, wore a georgette headscarf and wore coarse cloth clothes, but searched for ancient remains and antique utensils, and loved it deeply.

古文：俄又奉诏与博士等撰定《五礼》，十一年，《礼》成，进爵为子。
现代文：不久又奉诏令与博士等撰定五礼，贞观十一年，五礼修成，师古晋升为子爵。
English: Not long after that, by imperial edict, he and other scholars compiled the Five Rites, and in the eleventh year of Zhengu, the Five Rites were completed, and Shigu was promoted to the rank of viscount.

古文：时承乾在东宫，命师古注班固《汉书》，解释详明，深为学者所重。
现代文：当时承乾为皇太子，命师古注释班固的《汉书》，师古对《汉书》解释详明，深为学者所看重。
English: At that time, Prince Chengyan was the crown prince, and he ordered Shigu to annotate Ban Gu's "Hanshu." Shigu's detailed explanation of "Hanshu" was highly valued by scholars.

古文：承乾表上之，太宗令编之秘阁，赐师古物二百段、良马一匹。
现代文：太子承乾奉表呈给太宗，太宗命令将师古所注之书收藏入秘阁。赏赐给师古帛物二百段、良马一匹。
English: Prince Jogan presented the scroll to Emperor Taizong. Emperor Taizong ordered that the book inscribed by Shigu be kept in a secret cabinet. He rewarded Shigu with 200 pieces of stolen goods and a fine horse.

古文：十五年，太宗下诏，将有事于泰山，所司与公卿并诸儒博士详定仪注。太常卿韦挺、礼部侍郎令狐德棻为封禅使，参考其仪，时论者竞起异端。
现代文：贞观十五年，太宗下诏，准备去泰山行封禅礼，主管的官吏与公卿和诸儒博士一起详定封禅仪式，太常卿韦挺、礼部侍郎令狐德任封禅使，当时的舆论者争相发表不同见解。
English: In the 15th year of Zhenguan, Emperor Taizong issued an edict to prepare to go to Mount Taishan to perform the enthronement ceremony. The officials in charge, together with the court nobles and scholars of Confucianism, detailed the enthronement ceremony. Emperor Wei Tien and the attendant of the Ministry of Ceremonies, Emperor Xude, were appointed as the enthronement ceremony envoys. At that time, the public opinion was competing to express different opinions.

古文：师古奏曰： 臣撰定《封禅仪注书》在十一年春，于时诸儒参详，以为适中。 
现代文：师古上奏说 ：臣撰定的《封禅仪注书》在贞观十一年春修成，当时诸儒参与评议，认为适中。 
English: Shigu Joso said: The "Fu Zen Rite Commentary" compiled by the minister was revised in the spring of the eleventh year of Zhengu, when the Confucianists participated in the review and considered it appropriate.

古文：于是诏公卿定其可否，多从师古之说，然而事竟不行。
现代文：于是太宗诏令公卿审定师古新撰封禅仪注可否，大家多依从师古的说法，然而泰山封禅礼最终没有成行。
English: As a result, Emperor Taizong issued an edict to the court nobles to determine whether or not it was possible for the old and new masters to write the notes for the seal ceremony, and most people followed the teachings of the old masters. However, the Taishan seal ceremony was ultimately not performed.

古文：师古俄迁秘书监、弘文馆学士。
现代文：师古不久升任秘书监、弘文馆学士。
English: Shigu was soon promoted to secretary superintendent and graduated from the Hongwen Academy.

古文：十九年，从驾东巡，道病卒，年六十五，谥曰戴。
现代文：贞观十九年，师古跟随太宗东巡，在途中病故，时年六十五岁，谥号为戴。
English: In the 19th year of the Zhengu era, Shigu followed Emperor Taizong on his eastern tour, and died of illness on the way. He was 65 years old at the time, and his posthumous name was Dai.

古文：有集六十卷。
现代文：有文集六十卷。
English: There are sixty volumes in the anthology.

古文：其所注《汉书》及《急就章》，大行于世。
现代文：他所注释的《汉书》和《急就章》，在当时广为流传。
English: The "Chinese Classics" and "Emergency Chapter" he annotated were widely circulated at that time.

古文：官至左史。尝著《格论》三卷、《通历》八卷、《戎州记》，并行于时。
现代文：永徽三年，师古的儿子颜扬庭任符玺郎，又上表奏呈师古所撰的《匡谬正俗》八卷。
English: In the third year of the Yonghui era, Yan Yangting, the son of Shigu, was appointed as Fu Yulang, and the eight volumes of "Confucianism and Morality" written by Shigu were presented at the table.

古文：孔颖达，字仲达，冀州衡水人也。
现代文：高宗下诏令将书交付给秘书阁，依例赐给颜扬庭帛五十匹。孔颖达字冲远，冀州衡水人。
English: Gao Zong issued an edict to deliver the book to Secretary Gu, and gave Yan Yangting fifty horses as usual. Kong Yingda is from Chongyuan, Hengshui, Jizhou.

古文：祖硕，后魏南台丞。父安，齐青州法曹参军。
现代文：他的祖父孔硕，是北魏南台丞，父亲孔安，北齐时任青州法曹参军。
English: His grandfather, Kong Shuo, was a Northern Wei Nan Tai Zheng, and his father, Kong An, was a Qingzhou legal officer in Northern Qi when he joined the army.

古文：颖达八岁就学，日诵千余言。
现代文：颖达八岁从师学习，每天诵读千多字的书籍。
English: At the age of eight, Yingda studied with a teacher and read more than a thousand words of books every day.

古文：及长，尤明《左氏传》、《郑氏尚书》、《王氏易》、《毛诗》、《礼记》，兼善算历，解属文。
现代文：到成年后，他更加明悉《左氏传》、郑玄注的《尚书》、王弼注的《周易》、《毛诗》、《礼记》这五部儒家经典，还擅长算术和历法，会写文章。
English: After he became an adult, he became more familiar with the five Confucian classics, "The Biography of Zuo," "The Book of Shang" annotated by Zheng Xuanrong, and "Zhou Yi," "Mao Poetry" and "The Book of Rites" annotated by Wang Xi. He was also good at arithmetic and the calendar, and could write articles.

古文：同郡刘焯名重海内，颖达造其门。焯初不之礼，颖达请质疑滞，多出其意表，焯改容敬之。
现代文：同郡刘焯是名扬海内的学者，颖达上门求教，刘焯起初很轻视他不以礼相待，等到颖达请教质疑答难问对，多出人意料，刘焯立即改变了态度，以礼相待。
English: In the same county, Liu Wei is a well-known scholar in China. Yingda came to the door to ask for advice. At first, Liu Wei despised him for not treating him with courtesy. When Yingda asked for advice and questioned and answered difficult questions, unexpectedly, Liu Wei immediately changed his attitude and treated him with courtesy.

古文：颖达固辞归，焯固留不可。还家，以教授为务。
现代文：孔颖达坚决告辞回家，刘焯本想留他共同磋商学问，他也没有答应，回家从事教学授徒的工作。
English: Kong Yingda resolutely said goodbye and went home. Liu Yibin wanted to keep him to jointly discuss the study, but he did not agree to go home to engage in the work of teaching.

古文：隋大业初，举明经高第，授河内郡博士。
现代文：隋炀帝大业初年，颖达应举明经科获及第，授任河内郡博士。
English: In the first year of Emperor Sui's reign, Yingda won the first place in the Ming Dynasty in the field of classics and was awarded the title of Doctor of Hanoi County.

古文：时炀帝征诸郡儒官集于东都，令国子秘书学士与之论难，颖达为最。
现代文：当时隋炀帝召集各郡儒学官吏到东都洛阳，命令他们与国子监的秘书学士一起论辩经学中的问题。
English: At that time, Emperor Sui Xuan summoned the officials of Confucianism from all counties to Luoyang, the eastern capital, and ordered them to discuss the problems in the study of Confucianism with the secretary and bachelor of the State Council.

古文：时颖达少年，而先辈宿儒耻为之屈，潜遣刺客图之。礼部尚书杨玄感舍之于家，由是获免。
现代文：颖达论难答对舌战群儒而一举夺魁。那时颖达最年轻，那些先辈宿儒因被他驳倒羞愤怀恨，暗中派刺客谋害颖达，礼部尚书杨玄感把孔颖达藏匿在府中，因此才幸免于难。
English: At that time, Yingda was the youngest, and those forefathers of Confucianism secretly sent assassins to plot Yingda's harm, because they were ashamed and angry at being refuted by him. Yang Xuan, a scholar of etiquette, hid Kong Yingda in the palace, so he was spared.

古文：补太学助教。
现代文：不久颖达补太学助教。
English: Soon after, Yingda became an assistant professor at Fudan University.

古文：属隋乱，避地于武牢。
现代文：接着隋朝大乱，颖达避难到武牢。
English: Then the Sui Dynasty was in turmoil, and Yingda took refuge in the Wuzhong Prison.

古文：太宗平王世充，引为秦府文学馆学士。
现代文：太宗平定王世充后，召颖达为秦府文学馆学士。
English: After Emperor Taizong subdued Wang Shichong, he summoned Yingda to become a bachelor of the Qin Literature Museum.

古文：武德九年，擢授国子博士。
现代文：武德九年，提升颖达授他国子博士。
English: In the ninth year of Wu De, Ying Da was promoted and awarded the doctor of his country.

古文：贞观初，封曲阜县男，转给事中。
现代文：贞观初年，颖达受封曲阜县男，转任给事中。
English: In the first year of Zhenguan, Yingda was awarded the title of the man of Qufu County and transferred to the middle of things.

古文：时太宗初即位，留心庶政，颖达数进忠言，益见亲待。
现代文：当时太宗刚刚即位，留心各种政务，颖达多次进谏忠言，更加受到太宗亲近信任。
English: At that time, Emperor Taizong had just ascended to the throne, and Yingda paid close attention to various government affairs. Yingda made repeated visits to Emperor Taizong for advice and was trusted by Emperor Taizong.

古文：太宗尝问曰： 《论语》云： 以能问于不能，以多问于寡，有若无，实若虚。 
现代文：太宗曾经问他说 ：《论语》说 ：以能问于不能，以多问于寡，有若无，实若虚。 
English: Emperor Taizong once asked him, "The Analects says, 'Ask what you can, not what you can't; ask more, not less; if there is nothing, it is false.'

古文：何谓也？ 
现代文：是说什么？ 
English: What does that mean?

古文：颖达对曰： 圣人设教，欲人谦光。
现代文：颖达回答说 ：圣人设施教化，是想使人因谦让而愈有光辉。
English: Yingda replied, "The purpose of cultivating sages is to make people more brilliant through humility."

古文：己虽有能，不自矜大，仍就不能之人求访能事。
现代文：自己虽然有才能，不骄傲自大，依旧向没有才能的人求访能做到的事。
English: Although he has talent, he is not proud and arrogant, and still asks people without talent what he can do.

古文：己之才艺虽多，犹以为少，仍就寡少之人更求所益。
现代文：自己的才艺虽然多，仍然认为少，却向才艺少的人求教更多的。
English: Although they have more talent, they still think they have less, but they learn more from people with less talent.

古文：己之虽有，其状若无。己之虽实，其容若虚。非唯匹庶，帝王之德，亦当如此。夫帝王内蕴神明，外须玄默，使深不可测，度不可知。
现代文：自己虽然有知识却像没有知识的人一样，自己的知识很充实却像知识空虚的人一样，不仅仅匹夫庶人要这样，帝王的德行，也应该像这样，帝王内心蕴藏着神明，外表却需表现得沉静无为，使别人感到深不可测，度不可知。
English: Although he has knowledge, he is like a man without knowledge; his knowledge is very rich, but he is like a man with empty knowledge. Not only the common man should be like this, but the emperor's virtue should also be like this. The emperor's heart contains gods, but outwardly he has to appear calm and inactive, making others feel unfathomable and unknowable.

古文：《易》称 以蒙养正，以明夷莅众 ，若其位居尊极，炫耀聪明，以才凌人，饰非拒谏，则上下情隔，君臣道乖。自古灭亡，莫不由此也。 
现代文：《易经》称这是 以蒙养正，以明夷莅众 ，如果处在极其尊贵的地位，炫耀聪明，凭才势压人，文过饰非拒不纳谏，那么上下就会感情隔阂，君臣之间思想相互背离，自古以来国家的灭亡，没有不是因为这样而造成的。 
English: "I Ching" said that this is to cultivate virtue, to enlighten the masses, if you are in an extremely noble position, show off your wisdom, use your talent to oppress others, and accept or refuse to accept gifts, then the upper and lower levels will be emotionally estranged, the thoughts between monarchs and ministers will deviate from each other, and since ancient times, the country's demise has not been caused by this.

古文：太宗深善其对。
现代文：太宗非常满意他的回答。
English: Taizong was very satisfied with his answer.

古文：六年，累除国子司业。岁余，迁太子右庶子，仍兼国子司业。
现代文：贞观六年，颖达接着被任命为国子司业，过了一年多，又迁升为太子右庶子，依旧兼国子司业。
English: In the sixth year of Zhenguan, Yingda was then appointed as the secretary of state, and after more than a year, he was promoted to the prince's right illegitimate son, still also the secretary of state.

古文：与诸儒议历及明堂，皆从颖达之说。
现代文：与群儒到明堂议论礼历、经义，都采用他的意见。
English: When he and other Confucianists went to the Ming Hall to discuss the etiquette and meaning of the sutras, they all adopted his opinions.

古文：又与魏徵撰成《隋史》，加位散骑常侍。
现代文：又与魏征撰成了《隋史》，被加位散骑常侍。
English: He also co-authored "Sui History" with Wei Zheng, and was promoted to the position of straggler.

古文：十一年，又与朝贤修定《五礼》，所有疑滞，咸谘决之。
现代文：贞观十一年，又与朝中贤德的人修订《五礼》，所有疑难不通晓的问题，都经商议做了定论。
English: In the eleventh year of Zhenguan, he revised the "Five Rites" with the wise and virtuous people of the dynasty, and all the difficult and incomprehensible issues were finalized through discussion.

古文：书成，进爵为子，赐物三百段。
现代文：书成之后，晋爵为子，朝廷赏赐绢帛三百段。
English: After the book was completed, he was promoted to the peerage, and the Imperial Court awarded him 300 dan.

古文：庶人承乾令撰《孝经义疏》，颖达因文见意，更广规讽之道，学者称之。
现代文：由太子废为庶人的承乾命令孔颖达撰《孝经义疏》，颖达根据文章表达意理，更加发扬光大以正言讽谏的方法，学者都颂扬他。
English: Kong Yingda was ordered to write "The Filial Piety and Righteousness" by the prince's son, who was a commoner. Yingda expressed the meaning according to the article, and further developed the method of magnanimity with righteous irony. Scholars have praised him.

古文：太宗以颖达在东宫数有匡谏，与左庶子于志宁各赐黄金一斤、绢百匹。
现代文：太宗因为颖达在东宫多次纠正劝谏太子，太宗给他和于志宁各赐黄金一斤、绢百匹。
English: Emperor Taizong repeatedly corrected Yingda in the East Palace and advised the crown prince, Emperor Taizong gave him and Yu Shining one catty of gold and one hundred horses.

古文：十二年，拜国子祭酒，仍侍讲东宫。
现代文：贞观十二年，拜他为国子祭酒，仍旧在东宫给太子讲学。
English: In the twelfth year of Zhenguan, he was worshiped as the son of the country, and still lectured to the prince in the East Palace.

古文：十四年，太宗幸国学观释奠，命颖达讲《孝经》，既毕，颖达上《释奠颂》，手诏褒美。
现代文：贞观十四年，太宗亲自到国学观举行祭祀先师的释奠大礼，命孔颖达主讲孝经，讲完了，颖达进献《释奠颂》，太宗手诏褒奖赞美他。
English: In the 14th year of Zhenguan, Emperor Taizong himself came to Guoguang to hold the grand ceremony of the interpretation of the sacrificial preceptor. He ordered Kong Yingda to give a lecture on the Filial Piety Sutra. When the lecture was over, Yingda presented the "Explanatory Ode," and Emperor Taizong gave him a handwritten award to praise him.

古文：后承乾不循法度，颖达每犯颜进谏。
现代文：后来承乾不遵循法度，颖达常常冒犯太子的威严直言规劝他。
English: Later, Cheng Qian did not follow the law, and Ying Da often offended the prince's majesty and bluntly admonished him.

古文：承乾乳母遂安夫人谓曰： 太子成长，何宜屡致面折？ 
现代文：承乾的乳母遂安夫人对孔颖达说： 太子成长，怎么适宜多次受到人在当面斥责他的过失。 
English: Lady Sui An, a wet nurse, said to Kong Ying Da: "As the prince grows up, how appropriate it is for him to be repeatedly rebuked in person for his mistakes.

古文：颖达对曰： 蒙国厚恩，死无所恨。 
现代文：颖达回答说 ：蒙受国家的厚恩，即使死也没有什么遗憾的。 
English: Yingda replied: Even if I die, I will have no regrets for having been blessed by the country.

古文：谏诤逾切，承乾不能纳。
现代文：直言谏劝更加恳切，承乾不能接受。
English: Frankly speaking, I advise you to be more earnest, and I cannot accept it.

古文：先是，与颜师古、司马才章、王恭、王琰等诸儒受诏撰定《五经》义训，凡一百八十卷，名曰《五经正义》。
现代文：这以前，孔颖达与颜师古、司马才章、王恭、王琰等群儒受诏命撰定《五经》义训，共一百八十卷，名叫《五经正义》。
English: Prior to this, Kong Yingda, together with Yan Shigu, Sima Cai Zhang, Wang Gong, Wang Yao and other Confucian scholars, were ordered by the emperor to compile the "Five Classics" of righteousness, a total of one hundred and eighty volumes, called "Five Classics of Justice."

古文：太宗下诏曰： 卿等博综古今，义理该洽，考前儒之异说，符圣人之幽旨，实为不朽。 
现代文：太宗下诏令说： 卿等博识通达古今，经义名理详备广博，考证前辈儒家的不同学说，符合圣人精深的主张。确实是不朽的。 
English: Emperor Taizong issued the following edict: "His vast knowledge reaches from ancient times to the present. He is well-versed in the principles of righteousness and reason, and has studied and verified the various doctrines of his predecessors, the Confucians. This is in line with the sage's profound teachings. He is truly immortal."

古文：付国子监施行，赐颖达物三百段。
现代文：交给国子监施行，赐给颖达绢帛三百段。
English: It was handed over to the State Children's Supervisor for implementation, and Ying Dacao was given three hundred dan.

古文：时又有太学博士马嘉运驳颖达所撰《正义》，诏更令详定，功竟未就。
现代文：这时又有太学博士马嘉运驳颖达所撰的《五经正义》，太宗下诏命颖达重新审定。
English: At this time, there was also the "Five Classics of Justice" written by Ma Jiayun, a doctor of Taixue, and ordered by Emperor Taizong to be re-evaluated.

古文：十七年，以年老致仕。
现代文：审定正义的事终究没有完成。
English: After all, the matter of determining justice has not been completed.

古文：十八年，图形于凌烟阁，赞曰： 道光列第，风传阙里。
现代文：贞观十七年，颖达因为年老辞官归居，贞观十八年，在凌烟阁上为他画像，颂扬他说： 儒学修养很高，有当年孔子之风。
English: In the seventeenth year of Zhenguan, Yingda returned to his residence because of his old age. In the eighteenth year of Zhenguan, there was a picture of him on Lingyakou, praising him and saying: Confucianism is highly cultivated, with the style of Confucius of that year.

古文：精义霞开，掞辞飚起。 
现代文：讲经时见精义，像彩霞满天，演说辩驳像狂飚骤起。 
English: When the sutra is recited, the essence of the sutra is seen, like the sky is full of color, and the speech and argument are like the sudden rise of a madman.

古文：二十二年卒，陪葬昭陵，赠太常卿，谥曰宪。
现代文：贞观二十二年，颖达去世，太宗特许他陪葬昭陵，赠封太常卿，谥号为宪。
English: In the 22nd year of Zhenguan, Yingda died, and Emperor Taizong specially allowed him to accompany the funeral of Zhaoling, presented him with the title of Taizongqing, and his nickname was Xian.

