古文：徐庆周仁轨徐敬业杜景佺黑齿常之顾琮路敬淳张易之郑蜀宾刘希夷崔玄暐宋善威李处鉴曲先冲吕崇粹源乾曜毋旻杨慎矜王儦崔曙元载彭偃刘淝韩滉严震李德裕李师道韦温
现代文：徐庆周仁轨徐敬业杜景佺黑齿常之顾琮路敬淳张易之郑蜀宾刘希夷崔玄暐宋善威李处鉴曲先冲吕崇粹源乾曜毋旻杨慎矜王儦崔曙元载彭偃刘淝韩滉严震李德裕李师道韦温
English: 徐庆周仁轨徐敬业杜景黑齿常之顾路敬淳张易之 Zheng Shu Bin Liu Xiyi Cui Xuan Song Shan Wei Li处鉴曲先冲吕崇粹源乾曜毋Yang Sheng Wang Cui Shu Yuan Zai Peng Liu Shao Han 严震李德裕李师道韦温

古文：徐庆
现代文：徐庆
English: Xu Qing

古文：唐高宗时，徐庆为征辽判官。
现代文：唐高宗时，徐庆为征辽判官。
English: At the time of Emperor Gaozong of Tang, Xu Qing was the judge of the Conquest of Liao.

古文：有一典，不得姓名。
现代文：有一典，不得姓名。
English: There is one author, who shall remain nameless.

古文：庆在军，忽梦己化为羊，为典所杀。
现代文：庆在军，忽梦己化为羊，为典所杀。
English: When Qing was in the army, he suddenly transformed himself into a sheep and was killed by Dian.

古文：觉后悸惧流汗。
现代文：觉后悸惧流汗。
English: I woke up sweating with fear.

古文：至晓，此典诣庆，庆问夜来有所梦否。
现代文：至晓，此典诣庆，庆问夜来有所梦否。
English: At dawn, the ceremony was over, and the celebrants wondered if they had dreamed about it in the night.

古文：典云： 梦公为羊，手加屠割。
现代文：典云： 梦公为羊，手加屠割。
English: Denyun: Mengong is a sheep, slaughtered by hand.

古文：意甚不愿，为官所使制不自由。 
现代文：意甚不愿，为官所使制不自由。 
English: They are very reluctant to do so, and are not free to follow the rules imposed by officials.

古文：庆自此不食羊肉矣。
现代文：庆自此不食羊肉矣。
English: Since then, Kei no longer eats mutton.

古文：至则天时，庆累加至司农少卿雍州司马，时典已任大理狱丞。
现代文：至则天时，庆累加至司农少卿雍州司马，时典已任大理狱丞。
English: By that time, Qinglai had been promoted to Sino-Minor Secretary of Agriculture, Yongzhou Sima, and Ji Dian had been appointed as the Grand Marshal of the Prison.

古文：后庆被诬与内史令裴炎通谋，应节英公徐敬业扬州反，被执送大理。
现代文：后庆被诬与内史令裴炎通谋，应节英公徐敬业扬州反，被执送大理。
English: Houqing was accused of conspiring with Pei Yan, who was ordered by the Inner History to plot against Yangzhou in response to the death of Ying Gong Xu Jingye, and was sent to Dali.

古文：忽见此丞押狱，庆便流涕谓之曰： 征辽之梦，今当应之。 
现代文：忽见此丞押狱，庆便流涕谓之曰： 征辽之梦，今当应之。 
English: Unexpectedly, he was sent to prison, and he said, "The dream of conquering Liao should be fulfilled now."

古文：及被杀戮之日，竟是此丞引出。
现代文：及被杀戮之日，竟是此丞引出。
English: And on the day of the killing, it was actually this young man who led them out.

古文：周仁轨
现代文：周仁轨
English: Zhou Renlu

古文：唐周仁轨，京兆万年人也，孝和皇后韦氏母党，累迁金吾大将军，除并州长史。性残酷好杀。
现代文：唐朝的周仁轨，京兆万年人。他是孝和皇后韦氏死党。多次升迁，官作到金吾大将军，任并州长史，性情残忍酷毒好杀戮。
English: Zhou Renzhong of the Tang Dynasty was born in Beijing. He was a close friend of Emperor Xiao and Empress Wei. He was promoted many times, his official title was General of Kingu, and he was also appointed governor of Shishi. He had a cruel and venomous disposition and liked to kill.

古文：在州，忽于堂阶下见一人臂，如新断来，血流沥沥。
现代文：有一次在并州，忽然由堂阶下见一条人的臂，好象刚砍下来的还在沥沥流血。
English: Once in Bozhou, I suddenly saw a man's arm under the steps, as if it had just been cut off and was still bleeding profusely.

古文：仁轨令人送去州二十余里外。
现代文：仁轨令人扔到离州衙二十多里以外。
English: The train was thrown more than 20 miles away from Zhouzhuang.

古文：数日令看，其臂尚在。
现代文：过了几天让人去看，那条人臂还在。
English: A few days later, someone went to have a look, and the human arm was still there.

古文：时盛暑毒，肉色无变。
现代文：当时正是盛夏酷暑，但肉色没有变。
English: It was the height of the summer heat, but the color of the flesh did not change.

古文：人威怪之。
现代文：人们都感到奇怪。
English: People are feeling strange.

古文：其月，孝和崩，仁轨以韦氏党伏诛。
现代文：也就在那个月，孝和皇帝死了。周仁轨因为是韦氏同党伏法被判死刑。
English: In the same month, Emperor Xiaowa died, and Zhou Ronglu was sentenced to death for being a Wei party member.

古文：介士抽刀斫之，仁轨举臂，承刃所中，其臂堕地，与比见者无异。
现代文：武士抽刀砍他，他举臂一迎，正被刀砍中，他的一条手臂掉在地上，与以前看见那一条没有什么不同。
English: The samurai drew his sword and slashed him. He raised his arm in greeting. As he was being slashed, one of his arms fell to the ground, no different from the one he had seen before.

古文：又驰骑往于先送处看之，至彼一无所见。
现代文：又有人骑马到先扔手臂的地方去看，到那里后什么也没有了。
English: Another person rode to the place where the arm was thrown first to see, and when they got there, there was nothing left.

古文：徐敬业
现代文：徐敬业
English: Xu Jingye

古文：唐徐敬业举兵，有大星蓬蓬如筐笼，经三宿而失。俄而敬业败。
现代文：唐朝徐敬业兴兵反叛朝廷，有颗蓬蓬如筐笼的大星，经三宿的时间消失了，不久敬业失败了。
English: In the Tang Dynasty, Xu Jingye rallied the troops to rebel against the imperial court. He was a big star with a pompom like a basket cage. After three days and nights, he disappeared. Soon after, Jingye failed.

古文：杜景佺
现代文：杜景佺
English: Du Jingyao

古文：唐司刑卿杜景佺授并州长史，驰驿赴任。
现代文：唐朝司刑卿杜景佺被授予并州长史之职。骑马驰往驿站赴任。
English: Du Jingyao, the Tang Dynasty's Secretary of Justice, was awarded the post of governor of history. He rode to the station to take office.

古文：其夜，有大星如斗，落于庭前，至地而没。
现代文：当天夜晚，有颗星象斗那么大，落在庭院前，到地上就不见了。
English: That night, a star the size of an elephant's trunk fell in front of the courtyard and disappeared into the ground.

古文：佺至并州祁县界而卒。
现代文：景佺到了并州祁县县界而死。
English: Jingyao died when he reached the county border of Wenzhou and Shixian.

古文：群官迎祭，回所上食为祭盘。
现代文：群官迎接祭奠，用拿来给他吃的食品作为祭品。
English: The group official welcomed the offering and used the food that was brought to him as an offering.

古文：黑齿常之
现代文：黑齿常之
English: Black-toothed Hornbill

古文：唐将军黑齿常之镇河源军。
现代文：唐朝黑齿常之将军奉命镇守河源军。
English: The general of the Tang Dynasty, He Zui Chang, was ordered to guard the Heyuan Army.

古文：城极严峻。
现代文：城很森严险峻。
English: The city is very forested and steep.

古文：有三口狼入营，绕官舍，不如从何而至。军士射杀。黑齿恶之，移之外。
现代文：有三只狼进入军营。绕着官舍走，不知道从什么地方来的，军士把它们射死了，黑齿将军很讨厌它们，命人扔到城外。
English: Three wolves entered the camp. They walked around the officers' quarters. The sergeant shot them dead. He didn't know where they had come from. General Blacktooth didn't like them and ordered them to be thrown outside the city.

古文：奏讨三曲党项，奉敕许。
现代文：黑齿将军上奏讨伐三曲党项首领，皇上下敕诏准许。
English: General Kuroto appealed to the leaders of the Sankyoku faction, and the emperor issued an imperial edict.

古文：遂差将军李谨行充替。谨行到军，旬日病卒。
现代文：就派将军李谨行接替黑齿之任，李谨行列军营，十多天就病死了。
English: He sent General Li Zhengying to take over the task of replacing Black Tooth. Li Zhengying marched to the military camp and died of illness after more than ten days.

古文：顾琮
现代文：顾琮
English: Gu Sheng

古文：唐天官侍郎顾琮新得三品。
现代文：唐朝天官侍郎顾琮刚被提升为三品官。
English: Gu Yao, the attendant of the Tang Dynasty official, has just been promoted to the third grade official.

古文：有子婿来谒。
现代文：有子婿前来拜见。
English: A son-in-law came to see me.

古文：时大门造成，琮乘马至门，鼓鼻踣地不进。鞭之，跳跃而入，从骑亦如之。
现代文：当时大门刚刚建成，琮骑马到了门前，但他的马喷鼻倒地不进门，顾琮用马鞭抽打，那马跳跃着进了门，顾琮的随从们也都是这样。
English: At that time, the gate had just been built. Gong rode to the front of the gate, but his horse snorted and did not enter the gate. Gu Gan whipped the horse with a horse whip, and the horse jumped into the gate, as did Gu Gan's followers.

古文：有顷，门无故自倒。
现代文：不一会儿，那大门无故倒塌。
English: Moments later, the gate collapsed for no apparent reason.

古文：琮不悦，遂病。
现代文：顾琮便很不高兴。于是病倒了。
English: Gu Yao was very unhappy and fell ill.

古文：郎中员外已下来问疾，琮云： 未合入三品，为诸公成就至此。
现代文：郎中员外等人前来探病，顾琮说： 不应该升为三品，承蒙你们这些人抬举。
English: Gu Yao said, "You should not be promoted to the third grade. You people should be allowed to be promoted."

古文：自知不起矣。 
现代文：我自己知道不会好了。 
English: I know I'm not going to get better.

古文：旬日而薨。
现代文：没过十多天就死了。
English: He died less than ten days later.

古文：路敬淳
现代文：路敬淳
English: Lu Jingjun

古文：唐则天如意中，著作郎路敬淳庄在济源。
现代文：唐朝武则天如意年间，著作郎路敬淳的庄园在济源。
English: During the Wu Zetian era of the Tang Dynasty, the manor of the author's great-grandson, Kei Jun, was located in Jiyuan.

古文：有水碾，碾上柱去水五六尺，一柱将坏，已易之，家人取充樵。
现代文：庄园里有个水碾，碾上的柱子距离水有五六尺。其中有个柱子要坏了，已经换了下来，路敬淳的家人要拿来作柴烧。
English: There is a water mill on the estate, and the pillars on the mill are five or six feet away from the water. One of the pillars is about to break and has been replaced, and Lu Jingjun's family wants to use it to make firewood.

古文：柱中有一鲇鱼尺余，尚活。
现代文：劈开后发现里面有一条一尺多长的鲇鱼，还活着。
English: After splitting it open, they found an eel more than a foot long inside, still alive.

古文：至数年，敬淳坐罪被杀。
现代文：几年后，路敬淳犯罪被杀。
English: A few years later, Lu Jingjun was killed in a crime.

古文：张易之
现代文：张易之
English: Zhang Yizhi

古文：唐张易之初造一大堂，甚壮丽，计用数百万。
现代文：唐朝的张易之刚建起一座大堂。很是宏伟壮丽，统计用钱几百万。
English: Zhang Yizhi of the Tang Dynasty had just built a large hall. It was very grand and magnificent, with an estimated cost of several million.

古文：红粉泥壁，文柏帖柱，琉璃沉香为饰。
现代文：红泥粉墙，柱子用好木料装饰上花纹图案，还有琉璃瓦沉香木豪华典雅。
English: The walls are made of red mud, the pillars are decorated with fine wood and patterned patterns, and the glazed tiles are luxurious and elegant.

古文：夜有鬼书其壁曰： 能得几时？ 
现代文：夜间有鬼在墙上写了几个字： 能得几时。 
English: During the night, a ghost wrote a few words on the wall: "When can I have it?"

古文：易之令削去，明日复书之。
现代文：易之让人把字削去。第二天又写上了。
English: I asked someone to erase the words, and the next day I wrote them again.

古文：前后六七削。
现代文：如此前后写削六七次。
English: This process is repeated six or seven times.

古文：易之乃题其下曰： 一月即令足。 自是不复更书。
现代文：易之就在那题字的下面又写了几个字说： 一月即令足 意思是一个月就满足了。
English: At the bottom of the inscription, Yi Zhi wrote a few more words, saying: January is enough, meaning one month is enough.

古文：经半年，易之籍没，入官。
现代文：从这以后再也没有发现写什么。半年以后，易之并全家都被杀了，收为官有。
English: Since then, nothing has been found. Six months later, Yi Zhi and his entire family were killed and taken into government custody.

古文：郑蜀宾
现代文：郑蜀宾
English: Zheng Shubin

古文：唐长寿中，有荥阳郑蜀宾颇善五言，竟不闻达。年老，方授江左一尉。亲朋饯别于上东门，蜀宾赋诗留别曰： 畏途方万里，生涯近百年；不知将白首，何处入黄泉。 
现代文：蜀宾即席赋诗留别。说： 坎坷的路途啊万里远，人生一世将近百年，不知不觉就要白头了，也不知在什么地方进入黄泉。 酒意正浓，自己咏叹，声调很哀伤。
English: Shu Bin improvised a poem to say goodbye, saying: The bumpy road is thousands of miles away, the life span is nearly a hundred years, unconsciously it will be white-haired, and I do not know where to enter the hell. The wine is strong, I sigh, the tone is very sad.

古文：酒酣自咏，声调哀感，满座为之流涕。竟卒于官。
现代文：满座的人都被感动得流了泪。后来终于死在官任上。
English: A full house was moved to tears. He eventually died in office.

古文：刘希夷
现代文：刘希夷
English: Liu Xiyi

古文：唐刘希夷一名庭芝，汝州人，少有文华，好为宫体诗。词旨悲苦，不为时人所重。
现代文：唐朝的刘希夷又名庭芝。汝州人。少年时就有文采才华，好写宫体诗，但诗词的主题悲苦，不被当时的人所重视。
English: The Tang Dynasty's Liu Xiyi, also known as Tianzhi, was from Ruzhou. As a boy, he had literary talent and was good at writing courtly poetry, but the theme of his poetry was sad and was not valued by the people of the time.

古文：善弹琵琶，尝为白头翁詠云： 今年花落颜色改，明年花开复谁在？ 
现代文：他还擅长弹琵琶。曾经为一个白头老翁詠词说： 今年花落了颜色也改变了，明年花开又在哪里呢？ 
English: He is also good at playing the pipa. He once wrote a poem for an old man with a white head, saying: This year the flowers have fallen and the color has changed, but where will the flowers bloom next year?

古文：既而自悔曰： 我此诗谶，与石崇白首同所归何异也。 
现代文：说完又后悔说： 我的这首诗可能是个预兆，和当年石崇白头归家有什么不同呢？ 
English: At the end of his speech, he regretted saying, "This poem of mine may be an omen. How is it different from when Shi Chong Baotou returned home?"

古文：乃更作一联云： 年年岁岁花相似，岁岁年年人不同。 
现代文：于是又作一个对联说： 年年岁岁花开都相似，岁岁年年人都不相同了。 
English: So he made another couplet: Year after year, the flowers are similar, and year after year, people are different.

古文：既而叹曰： 此句复似向谶矣，然死生由命，岂复由此。 
现代文：然后又长叹一声说： 这句还象有什么预兆，然而生死都是命里注定的，怎么能因为这些预兆呢。 
English: Then he sighed again and said, "This sentence also seems to have some omens. However, life and death are predestined, so how can it be because of these omens?"

古文：乃两存之。
现代文：就把两首诗都保留下来。
English: So I kept both poems.

古文：诗成未周岁，为奸人所杀。
现代文：作这诗还不到一年的时间，刘希夷就被坏人所杀害。
English: Less than a year after writing this poem, Liu Xiyi was killed by a villain.

古文：或云： 宋之问害之。 
现代文：有人说：是宋之问害了他。
English: Some people say: It was Song Zhi's question that killed him.

古文：后孙昱撰《正声集》，以希夷诗为集中之最，由是大为时人所称。
现代文：后来孙昱撰写《正声集》认为刘希夷的诗为这诗集中最好的诗了，因此被当时的人所称赞。
English: Later, when Sun Yat-sen wrote the "Zheng Sheng Shu," he thought that Liu Xiyi's poem was the best poem in this poetry collection, so it was praised by the people at that time.

古文：崔玄暐
现代文：崔玄暐
English: Choi Hyun-soo

古文：唐崔玄暐初封博陵王，身为益府长史。
现代文：唐朝崔玄暐刚被封为博陵王，任职益州长史。
English: Cui Xuanlian of the Tang Dynasty had just been crowned the king of Boling, and the history of his tenure as governor of Yixing began.

古文：受封，令所司造辂初成，有大风吹其盖倾折。
现代文：受封后，命人造一辆车刚刚作成，有一阵大风把车盖吹折。
English: After receiving the seal, there was a gust of wind that broke the cover of a newly-made car.

古文：识者以为不祥。
现代文：明白的人认为这是不祥的征兆。
English: Learned people thought it was inauspicious.

古文：无何，弟晕为云阳令，部人杀之雍州衙内。
现代文：不多时，崔玄暐的弟弟名晕任云阳县令，被手下的人杀害在雍州府衙内。
English: Not infrequently, Cui Xuanqin's younger brother, Niu Ren, the governor of Yunyang County, was killed by his subordinates in Yongzhou Prefecture.

古文：暐三从以上，长流岭南。
现代文：玄暐的妇人及父子家属长期流落在岭南。
English: Xuanzang's wife and the family members of his father and son have been living in Lingnan for a long time.

古文：斯亦咎征之先见也。
现代文：这也是预兆的先见吧。
English: This is also an omen of foresight.

古文：宋善威
现代文：宋善威
English: Song Shanwei

古文：唐瀛州饶阳人宋善威曾任一县尉。
现代文：唐朝时瀛州饶阳人宋善威曾任一个县的县尉。
English: During the Tang Dynasty, Song Shanwei, a native of Raoyang, Bozhou, was once a county official.

古文：尝昼坐，忽然取靴衫笏，走出门迎接，拜伏引入。诸人不见，但闻语声。
现代文：有一天白天正坐着，忽然取过鞋穿上衫拿着笏板，走出门外迎接，拜伏后引人进来，别的人都看不见，只听到说话声。
English: One day, I was sitting during the day, when I suddenly took off my shoes, put on a shirt, held a cutting board, walked out the door to greet them, bowed down and invited them in. I couldn't see anyone else, I only heard voices.

古文：威命酒馔乐饮，仍作诗曰： 月落三株树，日暎九重天；良夜欢宴罢，暂别庚申年。 
现代文：善威命人拿来酒菜高兴地同饮，还作诗说： 月落三株树，日映九重天，良夜欢宴罢，暂别庚申年。 
English: He also wrote a poem, saying, "The moon sets behind three trees, the sun reflects the nine heavens, let's have a good night's feast, and bid farewell to the Year of the Goat."

古文：后威果至申年而卒。
现代文：后来宋善威果然到申年那年死了。
English: Later, Song Shanwei died in the year of the Monkey.

古文：李处鉴
现代文：李处鉴
English: Li Shuanjian

古文：唐开元三年，有熊昼日入广府城内，经都督门前过。
现代文：唐朝开元第三年，有一只熊白天进入广府城里，从都督府门前经过。
English: In the third year of the first year of the Tang Dynasty, a bear entered the city of Guangfu during the day and passed in front of the gate of the governor's residence.

古文：军人逐十余里，射杀之。
现代文：军人追赶了十多里才把它射死。
English: The soldiers chased it for more than ten miles before shooting it dead.

古文：后月余，都督李处鉴死。
现代文：后来约一个多月的时间，都督李处鉴就死了。
English: About a month later, the governor, Li Shuanjian, died.

古文：自后长史朱思贤被告反，禁身半年，才出即卒。
现代文：从那以后长史朱思贤被告发有谋反罪，囚禁半年，才出狱就死了。
English: Since then, Changshi Zhu Sixian was accused of plotting treason, imprisoned for half a year, and died only after being released from prison.

古文：司马宋庆宾、长史窦崇嘉相继而卒。
现代文：司马宋庆宾、长史窦崇嘉相继死去。
English: Sima Song Qingbin and Changshi Dou Chongjia passed away one after another.

古文：曲先冲
现代文：曲先冲
English: Go ahead, go ahead

古文：唐开元四年，尚书考功院厅前一双桐树，忽然枯死。旬日，考功员外郎邵某卒。
现代文：唐朝开元四年，尚书考功院里厅堂前的两棵桐树，忽然枯死，十多天后，考功的员外郎姓邵的死了。
English: In the fourth year of the first year of the Tang Dynasty, the two paulownia trees in front of the hall of the Shangshu Gao Gong Academy suddenly withered and died. More than ten days later, Gao Lang surnamed Shao, a member of the examination, died.

古文：寻而曲先冲为郎中，判邵旧案。
现代文：立刻让曲先冲任郎中，审理批阅姓邵的留下的旧案卷。
English: Immediately let Qu Xianchong serve as his junior, and review and approve the old case file left by Shao.

古文：月余，西边树又枯死。省中忧之，未几而先冲又卒。
现代文：一个多月后，西边的桐树又枯死了，先冲在省悟中很忧虑，没过几天先冲又死了。
English: After more than a month, the west-facing paulownia tree withered and died again. Xiangchong was very worried in his reflections, and died again a few days later.

古文：吕崇粹
现代文：吕崇粹
English: Lv Chongqi

古文：唐开元中，谏议大夫吕崇粹，东平人，美秀魁梧，薄有词彩。
现代文：唐开元年间，谏议大夫吕崇粹是东平人。俊美身材高大、略有文采。
English: In the first year of the Tang Dynasty, Lu Chongzhi, a doctor of the imperial court, was from Dongping. He was handsome, tall, and had a slight literary flair.

古文：宅在京永崇坊。
现代文：他的家在京城东边永崇坊。
English: His home is in Yong Chongfang, on the eastern edge of Beijing.

古文：于家忽见数个小儿脚胫，自膝下自踝已上，流血淋沥，如新截来。
现代文：有一天在家里忽然发现几个小孩的小腿，从膝以下自踝以上。淋淋沥沥流着血，好象刚截下来一样。
English: One day at home, I suddenly found several children's lower legs, from below the knee to above the ankle, dripping with blood, as if they had just been amputated.

古文：旬日，粹遇疾而卒。
现代文：十多天的时间，吕崇粹得病身亡。
English: After more than ten days, Lü Chongzhi fell ill and died.

古文：源乾曜
现代文：源乾曜
English: Genkenshō

古文：唐源乾曜为宰相，移政事床。
现代文：唐朝时源乾曜任宰相，移动了政事厅的床。
English: During the Tang Dynasty, Shigeyuan Qianyou served as prime minister and moved the bed of the government office.

古文：时姚元崇归休。
现代文：当时姚元崇请假归家休养。
English: At that time, Yao Yuan Chong took a leave of absence to recuperate at home.

古文：及假满来，见床移，忿之。曜惧下拜。玄宗闻之，而停曜。
现代文：等到假期到了回来，看见床被移动了，很气愤，源乾曜恐惧下拜，玄宗听说这件事，让源乾曜停职。
English: When he came back from vacation and saw that the bed had been moved, he was very angry. Yuan Qianyou bowed in fear. When Xuanzong heard about this, he suspended Yuan Qianyou from his duties.

古文：宰相讳移床，移则改动。
现代文：原来宰相讳忌移床，移就是改动。
English: Originally, it was taboo for the prime minister to move the bed. To move is to change.

古文：曜停后，元崇罢。
现代文：乾曜停职后，元崇也被罢免。
English: After being suspended on Thursday, Mr. Yuan was also removed from his post.

古文：此其应也。
现代文：这就是应验。
English: This is a good sign.

古文：毋旻
现代文：毋旻
English: Without a doubt.

古文：唐右补阙毋旻，博学有著术才。
现代文：唐朝右补阙毋旻。博学广识有著述的才能。
English: During the Tang Dynasty, there was no shortage of right-hand compilers. They were all well-educated and had the ability to write.

古文：上表请修古史，先撰目录以进。
现代文：他上表请求修撰古史，先撰写了目录送给皇上，玄宗称赞很好。
English: He made a request for the compilation of ancient history, and first wrote a catalogue for the emperor, which was highly praised by Xuanzong.

古文：玄宗称善，赐绢一百疋。
现代文：赐给他一百疋绢。
English: And he gave him a hundred talents.

古文：性不饮茶，著代饮茶序。其略曰： 释滞消壅，一日之利暂佳；瘠气侵精，终身之累斯大。
现代文：他生性不好饮茶，曾写了一个代饮茶序，大概意思是：解停滞消壅肿，一天的暂时利益很好，等到瘠气侵入精髓，终身的害处很大。
English: He is not a natural tea drinker, and once wrote a tea drinking order, probably meaning: solve stagnation and eliminate bloating, the temporary benefit of one day is very good, and when the radon gas invades the essence, the lifelong harm is great.

古文：获益则归功茶力，贻患则不谓茶灾。
现代文：获得益处就归功于茶力，遇到祸患则不说是茶带来的灾难。
English: The benefits are attributed to the power of tea, and the calamities are not said to be brought about by tea.

古文：岂非福近易知，祸远难见云。 
现代文：难道不是福临近容易知道，灾祸远离很难看见吗？
English: Isn't it easy to know when good fortune is near, but hard to see when disaster is far away?

古文：后直集贤，无何以热疾暴终。
现代文：后来他一直集贤著书，不多久因热疾突然死了。
English: Later, he continued to collect and write books, but died suddenly of fever not long after.

古文：初尝梦著衣冠上北邙山，亲友相送。
现代文：当初他曾梦到自己穿上衣服戴上帽子上北邙山，亲友们都来相送。
English: At first, he had a dream that he put on clothes and a hat and went to Beilun Mountain. His relatives and friends came to see him off.

古文：及至山顶，回顾不见一人。
现代文：等到了山顶，回头看竟没有一人。
English: When I got to the top of the mountain, I looked back and there was no one there.

古文：意甚恶之。
现代文：心里厌恶这件事。
English: I'm disgusted with it.

古文：及卒，僚友送葬北邙，果如初梦。
现代文：等他死了，亲友送葬到北邙山。果然同当初的梦相同。
English: When he died, his relatives and friends sent him to be buried in Beilun Mountain. It turned out to be the same as his original dream.

古文：玄宗闻而悼之，赠朝散大夫。
现代文：玄宗听说这件事也为他悼念，赠谥号朝散大夫。
English: When Xuanzong heard about this, he also paid tribute to him and gave him the honorary title of "Dr. Chosan."

古文：杨慎矜
现代文：杨慎矜
English: by Yang Shengkun

古文：唐杨慎矜，隋室之后。
现代文：唐朝的杨慎矜，是隋朝宫室的后代。
English: Yang Shennong of the Tang Dynasty was a descendant of the imperial family of the Sui Dynasty.

古文：其父崇礼，太府卿，葬少陵原。
现代文：他的父亲崇礼，曾任太府卿，死后葬在少陵原。
English: His father, Chongli, who was once the daifu chancellor, was buried in Shoryobara after his death.

古文：封域之内，草木皆流血。守者以告，慎矜大惧。
现代文：在他的封地内，草木都流血，守墓的人把这件事报告给杨慎矜，慎矜很恐惧。
English: In his fiefdom, all the plants and trees were bleeding. The tomb guard reported the incident to Yang Shengyao, who was horrified.

古文：问史敬忠。
现代文：问史敬忠怎么回事。
English: Ask Shi Jingzhong what happened.

古文：忠有术，谓慎矜，可以禳之免祸。
现代文：史敬忠会法术，对慎矜说： 可以祈祷免祸。 
English: Shi Jingzhong would do magic, and said to Shennong: You can pray to be spared from evil.

古文：乃于慎矜后园大陈法事。
现代文：于是就在慎矜的后花园大摆法事。
English: So they made a big show of it in Shinran's back garden.

古文：罢朝归，则裸袒桎梏，坐于丛棘。
现代文：慎矜上朝回来，就光着身子戴上脚镣和手铐，坐在荆棘丛里。
English: When Shennong returned in the morning, he stripped naked, put on leg irons and handcuffs, and sat in the thorn bushes.

古文：如是者数旬，而流血亦止。敬忠曰： 可以免祸。 
现代文：象这样过了几十天，草木也不流血了。敬忠说： 可以免祸了。 
English: After dozens of days like this, the plants no longer bleed. Jingzhong said, "We can avoid disaster."

古文：慎矜愧之。
现代文：慎矜觉得惭愧，就把奴婢明珠赠送给敬忠了。
English: Shennong felt ashamed and gave the slave Pearl to Jingzhong.

古文：遣侍婢明珠，明珠有美色，路由八姨门。姨方登楼。临大道，姨与敬忠相识，使人谓曰： 何得从车乎？ 
现代文：明珠是很有姿色的。敬忠他们经过八姨门、八姨正好登楼，那楼又临近大道，八姨认识敬忠，就派人对敬忠说： 怎么得到一个从车？ 
English: Mingzhu is very handsome. They passed through the gate of Eight Aunt, and Eight Aunt just went up the building, which is also close to the avenue. Eight Aunt knew Jingzhong, so she sent someone to Jingzhong and said: How can I get a carriage?

古文：敬忠未答。
现代文：敬忠没有回答。
English: Keizhong did not answer.

古文：使人去帘观之，姨于是固留。
现代文：八姨就让人去掉车帘看里面。
English: Hachiya asked someone to remove the curtains and look inside.

古文：邀敬忠坐楼，乃曰： 后车美人，请以见遗。 
现代文：八姨于是坚决让他们留下，邀请敬忠上楼坐一会儿，然后说： 后面车里的美人，送给我好吗？ 
English: Eight aunts then resolutely let them stay, invited Jingzhong to go upstairs and sit for a while, and then said: The beauty in the car behind, can you give it to me?

古文：因驾其车以入。敬忠不敢拒。
现代文：因此叫人赶那辆车进来，敬忠不敢抗拒。
English: Therefore, someone was called to drive the car in, and Jingzhong did not dare to resist.

古文：姨明日入宫，以侍婢从。
现代文：八姨第二天进宫，让明珠以侍婢的身份随从。
English: Eight aunts entered the palace the next day and asked Pearl to accompany them as a servant.

古文：帝见而异之，问其所来。
现代文：皇帝见到很奇怪，问明珠是哪里来的。
English: The emperor found it very strange and asked where the pearl came from.

古文：明珠曰： 杨慎矜家人也，近赠史敬忠。 
现代文：明珠说： 我是杨慎矜家里的人，最近赠送给史敬忠了。 
English: Mingzhu said, "I am a member of Yang Shengyao's family and was recently given to Shi Jingzhong.

古文：帝曰： 敬忠何人，而慎矜辄遗其婢？ 
现代文：皇帝说： 敬忠是什么人，杨慎矜就赠送给他奴婢。 
English: The emperor said: What kind of person is Jingzhong, Yang Shengkun gave him slaves.

古文：明珠乃具言厌胜之事。
现代文：于是明珠就把杨慎矜信巫术的事全都告诉了皇帝。
English: Therefore, Pearl told the emperor everything about Yang Shennong's belief in witchcraft.

古文：上大怒，以告林甫。林甫素忌慎矜才，必为相。
现代文：皇帝很生气，把这事告诉了李林甫，林甫平常就忌妒慎矜的才能，认为他以后一定会作宰相。
English: The emperor was very angry and told Li Linfu about this. Linfu was usually jealous of Sheng Yao's talent and thought that he would definitely be the prime minister in the future.

古文：以吉温阴害。
现代文：便用吉温暗害慎矜，因为林甫曾有憾于慎矜。
English: He then used Ji Wen to undermine Sheng Yao, because Lin Fu had once regretted Sheng Yao.

古文：有憾于慎矜，遂构成其事，下温案之。
现代文：马上就罗织罪名。下令吉温审理此案。
English: He immediately fabricated charges and ordered Jiwen to investigate the case.

古文：温求得敬忠于汝州，诬慎矜以自谓亡隋遗裔，潜谋大逆，将复宗祖之业，於是赐自尽，皆不全其族。
现代文：吉温到汝州找到敬忠，诬陷慎矜因为自己是亡隋的后代，暗中密谋反叛，将要恢复祖宗的家业。于是杨慎矜赐自尽死，其家族也未幸免。
English: Jiwen went to Ruzhou to find Keizhong, and framed Shennong because he was a descendant of the deceased Sui Dynasty, secretly plotted a rebellion, and was going to restore the family business of his ancestors. So Yang Shennong committed suicide, and his family was not spared.

古文：王儦
现代文：王儦
English: Wang Yao

古文：唐太子仆通事舍人王儦，肃宗克复后降官。
现代文：唐朝太子仆通事的舍人王儦。肃宗重登皇位后被降官。
English: Wang Yao, a retainer of the prince's servant in the Tang Dynasty. He was demoted after Su Zong's return to the throne.

古文：为人所告，系御史台。
现代文：因为被人告发，囚禁在御史台。
English: Because he was denounced, he was imprisoned in Goshidai.

古文：儦未系之前年九月，儦与嬖姬夜坐堂下，有流星大如盎，光明照耀，坠于井中，在井久犹光明。
现代文：王儦未被囚禁的前一年九月，一天夜晚他与宠爱的妾在堂下坐着，有一颗象盎那么大的流星，光明耀眼，坠到井里，在井里很长时间还很亮。
English: In September of the year before Wang Yao was imprisoned, one night he was sitting with his favorite concubine under the hall, and there was a meteor as big as an ounce, bright and dazzling, fell into the well, and it was still very bright for a long time in the well.

古文：使人求之，无所得。
现代文：派人到井里寻求，什么也没有。
English: They sent someone to look in the well, but there was nothing.

古文：儦惧出宅，竟徙播州。儦殊不意，行至凤州，疽背裂死。
现代文：王儦害怕出了宅院。囚禁流徙到播州，但他却没有想到，走到凤州，背上生毒疮崩裂而死。
English: Wang Yao was afraid to leave the courtyard. He was exiled to Banzhou, but he did not expect that when he went to Fengzhou, the poisonous sores on his back would burst and he would die.

古文：崔曙
现代文：崔曙
English: Choi Akebono

古文：唐崔曙举进士，作明堂火珠诗赎帖。
现代文：唐朝崔曙考中进士。作明堂火珠诗赎帖。
English: He was admitted to the middle school of Cui Shuguo in the Tang Dynasty. He was the first to write the Ming Dynasty fireball poem "Redeeming a Letter."

古文：曰： 夜来双月满，曙后一星孤。 
现代文：诗曰： 夜来双月满，曙后一星孤。 
English: The poem says: At night, the double moon is full, and after dawn, a star is lonely.

古文：当时以为警句。及来年曙卒。唯一女名星星。
现代文：当时认为是警句，等到来年崔曙死了，只剩下他的一个女儿名叫星星。
English: At the time, it was thought to be an aphorism, but the following year, Cui Shuguang died, leaving only one daughter named Xingxing.

古文：人始悟其自谶也。
现代文：人们才领悟他自己的预言。
English: Only then did people understand his own prophecy.

古文：元载
现代文：元载
English: Originally uploaded by

古文：唐元载为相时，正昼有书生诣焉。
现代文：唐朝元载作宰相时，大白天有一个书生来求见。
English: When the Tang Dynasty's Yuan Zhao was prime minister, a scholar came to see him in broad daylight.

古文：既见，拜语曰： 闻公高义好士。 
现代文：接见后，那书生参拜后说： 听说你品格高尚，仁德而喜欢有才能的人。
English: After the interview, the student said after the visit: I heard that you are of high moral character, humane and like talented people.

古文：辄献诗一篇，以寄其意。
现代文：我就献诗一篇，用来寄托我的敬意。
English: So I wrote a poem to pay my respects.

古文：词曰： 城南路长无宿处，获花纷纷如柳絮；海燕衔泥欲作窠，空屋无人却飞去。 
现代文：诗是这样的： 城南的路长没有住宿的地方，荻花飘飞好象柳絮。海燕衔泥想要作窝，空屋里没有人又飞走了。 
English: The poem goes like this: There is no place to stay on the road to the south of the city, the camellias flutter like catkins. The petrels want to make a nest, and no one in the empty house flies away.

古文：载亦不晓其意。
现代文：元载不明白他的用意。
English: He didn't know what he was doing.

古文：既出门而没。
现代文：书生出了门就不见踪形了。
English: The student disappeared without a trace.

古文：后岁余，载被法家破矣。
现代文：后来过了一年多，元载被法办其家也破败了。
English: Later, after more than a year, Yuan Zai was prosecuted and his family was ruined.

古文：彭偃
现代文：彭偃
English: Peng Quan

古文：唐大历中，彭偃未仕时，尝有人谓曰： 君当得珠而贵，后且有祸。 
现代文：唐朝大历年间，彭偃未作官时，曾经有人对他说： 您会因得到珠而富贵，后来就会有灾祸。 
English: During the Tang Dynasty, when Peng Quan was not an official, someone once said to him: You will be rich and noble because of the pearl, and then there will be a disaster.

古文：寻为官得罪，谪为澧州司马。
现代文：不久他作官有了罪过，被贬官作澧州司马。
English: Soon after, he was found guilty of misconduct as an official and was demoted to the post of Zhangzhou Sima.

古文：既至，以江中多蚌。偃喜，以为珠可取。即命人采之，获蚌甚多。
现代文：到了澧州，因江里的蚌很多，他很高兴，认为可以取珠了，立即命人采蚌，结果采到很多。
English: When he arrived in Luzhou, he was very happy because there were a lot of cormorants in the river. He thought he could collect the beads, so he immediately ordered someone to collect the cormorants. As a result, he collected a lot.

古文：而卒无有应。及朱泚反，召偃为伪中书舍人。偃方悟得珠乃朱泚也。
现代文：然而以前那句话并没有应验，等到朱泚造反，召彭偃作伪中书舍人，他才领悟得珠是朱泚。
English: However, the previous sentence did not come true, and it was not until Zhu Xi rebelled and called Peng Yu to be a pseudo-Chinese scholar that he realized that Zhu Yu was Zhu Xi.

古文：后诛死。
现代文：后被杀死。
English: He was later killed.

古文：刘淝
现代文：刘淝
English: Liu Xuan

古文：唐贞元中，淮西用兵。
现代文：唐朝贞元年间，淮西有战事。
English: During the reign of Emperor Zhenyuan of the Tang Dynasty, there was a war in Huaxi.

古文：时刘淝为小将，每捉生蹋伏，淝必在数，前后重创，将死数四。
现代文：当时刘淝仅是一名小将，每次潜伏捉俘虏，淝必定在里面，前后多次受重伤，有四次将近死亡。
English: At that time, Liu Yao was only a junior general. Every time he was lurking to capture a prisoner, Yao must have been inside. He was seriously injured many times before and after, and nearly died four times.

古文：后因月黑风甚，又令捉生。
现代文：后来又一次因为月黑风大，又命令他去捉俘虏。
English: Later, once again, he was ordered to capture prisoners because of the moon and strong winds.

古文：淝愤激深入，意必死。
现代文：淝很气愤激动，深入敌后，心里想这次必死无疑。
English: Yan was very angry and excited. He went deep into the enemy's rear and thought to himself that this time he would surely die.

古文：行十余里，因坐将睡。忽有人觉之，授以双烛，曰： 君方大贵，但心存此烛在，即无忧也。 
现代文：走了十多里，因为疲乏坐着休息刚要睡，忽然有人叫醒他，给他两支蜡烛，说： 你将有大贵，但心里要想着这两支烛在，就没有什么忧患。 
English: After he had walked more than ten miles, he sat down to rest because he was tired and was just about to go to sleep, when suddenly someone woke him up, gave him two candles, and said, "You will be very rich, but if you keep these two candles in your heart, you will have no worries."

古文：淝后拜将，常见烛影在双旌上。
现代文：刘淝后来提升为大将，常常见到烛的影子在双旗上。
English: Liu Wei was later promoted to the rank of general, and he often saw the shadow of the candle on the double flag.

古文：后不复见烛，乃舆疾归京卒。
现代文：后来不再见到烛了，就得病回到京城死了。
English: Later, when she no longer saw the candle, she became ill and returned to Kyoto, where she died.

古文：韩滉
现代文：韩滉
English: Han Zheng

古文：唐丞相韩滉自金陵入朝。
现代文：唐朝的丞相韩滉从金陵入朝。
English: Han Xuan, the chancellor of the Tang Dynasty, entered the court from Jinling.

古文：岁余后，于杨子江中，有龟鳖满江浮下，而悉无头。当此时，滉在城中薨。
现代文：一年多后，在扬子江中，有龟鳖满江飘浮流下。正在这时，韩滉在城中死了。
English: More than a year later, in the Yangtze River, there were turtles floating down the river. At this time, Han Yu died in the city.

古文：人莫知其故。
现代文：人们都不知道这是什么缘故。
English: People don't know what causes it.

古文：严震
现代文：严震
English: Severe earthquake

古文：唐司空严震，梓州盐亭县人，所居枕釜戴山。
现代文：唐朝司空严震，梓州盐亭县人。居所靠釜戴山。
English: He was born in Yan Ting County, Zizhou Province during the Tang Dynasty. His home was near Mount Hamadai.

古文：但有鹿鸣，即严氏一人必殒。
现代文：只要有鹿鸣叫，严家必定有一个人死。
English: As long as there is a deer singing, someone in Yan's family must die.

古文：或一日，有亲表对坐，闻鹿鸣，其表曰： 釜戴山中鹿又鸣。 
现代文：有一天，有一个表兄与严震对面坐着。又听到鹿叫，他的表兄说： 釜戴山中鹿又叫。 
English: One day, a cousin was sitting opposite Severe Earthquake. He heard a deer braying, and his cousin said, "The deer in Mt. Budai are braying again."

古文：严曰： 此际多应到表兄。 
现代文：严震说： 这回多半要应验到表兄身上。 
English: Yan Zhen said: This time, it's more likely to happen to my cousin.

古文：其表兄遽对曰： 表兄不是严家子，合是三兄与四兄。 
现代文：他的表兄立刻说： 我不是严家子弟呀，该是三兄与四兄吧。 
English: His cousin immediately said, "I'm not a member of the Yan family, I'm the third or fourth brother."

古文：不日，严氏子一人果亡。
现代文：没过几天，严家子弟果然有一人死亡。
English: A few days later, one of Yan's children died.

古文：是何异也。
现代文：这是多么奇怪啊！
English: How strange this is!

古文：李德裕
现代文：李德裕
English: Li Deyu

古文：唐卫公李德裕，初为太原从事。
现代文：唐朝卫公李德裕当初任太原从事。
English: Li Deyu, the Tang Dynasty prince of Wei, was initially assigned to Taiyuan.

古文：睹公牍中文水县解牒称：武士彟文水县墓前有碑。
现代文：看公文中文水县的呈文中称： 武士彟在文水县的墓前有石碑。
English: According to the official document submitted by Wenshui County, "There is a stone monument in front of the tomb of the samurai Shun in Wenshui County.

古文：元和中，忽失龟头所在。碑上有武字十一处，皆镌去之。
现代文：元和年间，忽然龟头不知去向，碑上有十一处武字，都被刻掉。 
English: During the Yuan and Zhou dynasties, the head of the turtle suddenly disappeared. There were eleven Chinese characters on the monument, all of which were engraved.

古文：其碑大高于华岳者，非人力攀削所及。
现代文：那个石碑高大如华山，不是人力所能攀上刻掉的。
English: That stone monument is as tall as the Huashan Mountain, and it is not possible for manpower to climb up and carve it.

古文：不经半年，武相遇害。
现代文：没过半年，武丞相被人害死。
English: Less than half a year later, Prime Minister Takeda was killed.

古文：李师道
现代文：李师道
English: Li Shidao

古文：唐李师道既以青齐叛。
现代文：唐朝李师道已经凭借青齐而反叛，章武帝将讨伐他。
English: The Tang Dynasty's Li Shidao has already rebelled by virtue of Qingqi, and Emperor Zhangwu will fight him.

古文：章武帝将讨之，凡数年而王师不胜。师道益骄。
现代文：经几年时间皇帝的军队不能得胜。师道更骄傲了。
English: After several years, the emperor's army could not win. Shi Dao became even more proud.

古文：尝一日坐于堂，其榻前有银鼎，忽相鼓，其一鼎耳足尽坠。
现代文：曾有一天，师道在厅堂坐着，他的床前有银鼎，忽然互相撞击，其中一个鼎的耳、足都掉了。
English: Once upon a time, Shidao was sitting in the hall. In front of his bed, there were silver tripods. Suddenly, they collided with each other, and the ears and feet of one of the tripods fell off.

古文：后月余，刘悟手刃师道，青齐遂平。
现代文：一个多月后，刘悟亲手杀了师道，青齐之乱立刻平息。
English: More than a month later, Liu Gou killed Shi Dao with his own hands, and the Qingqi Rebellion immediately subsided.

古文：盖银鼎相鼓之兆也。
现代文：大概是银鼎相撞的预兆吧。
English: Probably a harbinger of the collision of the silver tripod.

古文：韦温
现代文：韦温
English: Wuyuan

古文：唐韦温为宣州，病疮于首，因托后事于女婿。且曰： 予年二十九，为校书郎，梦渡浐水，中流见二吏，赍牒相召。一吏言： 彼坟至大，功须万日，今未也。 
现代文：唐朝韦温治理宣州，在头上生了疮，因此托付后事给女婿，并且说： 我二十九岁那年，当校书郎，作梦渡浐水，在江中间见到两个官吏，抱着官牒召我，一吏说： 他的坟太大，须万日的功夫，今天还不到。 
English: Wei Wen, who governed Xuanzhou in the Tang Dynasty, had a sore on his head, so he entrusted the succession to his son-in-law, and said: When I was twenty-nine years old, when I was a school teacher, I had a dream of crossing the river, and I saw two officials in the middle of the river. They called me with their official certificates. One of them said: His grave is too big, it takes a lot of effort, and it's not enough today.

古文：今正万日，予岂免乎！ 
现代文：现在正好万日，我难道能避免吗？ 
English: It's the 10,000th day of the year. Can I avoid it?

古文：累日而卒。
现代文：不多几天就死了。
English: He died a few days later.

