古文：大法，春夏宜发汗。
现代文：在春夏季节，适宜发汗，这是汗法使用的一般原则。
English: In spring and summer, it is appropriate to perspire, which is the general principle of using the sweat method.

古文：凡发汗，欲令手足俱周，时出以然，一时间许，亦佳。
现代文：大凡发汗，最好须让病人手足及全身都有汗，并当微微汗出，维持个小时左右。
English: When sweating profusely, it is best to let the patient's hands, feet and whole body sweat, and when the sweat comes out, maintain it for about an hour.

古文：不可令如水流漓。
现代文：不能让病人像流水一样大汗淋漓。
English: The patient should not be allowed to sweat profusely.

古文：若病不解，当重发汗。
现代文：如果服药后病不解除的，应当再发汗。
English: If the disease does not go away after taking the medicine, you should sweat again.

古文：汗多必亡阳，阳虚，不得重发汗也。
现代文：如果汗出太多，势必伤阳，阳虚病人虽有表邪，也不能再发汗。
English: If you sweat too much, you're bound to get a sunburn. Although sufferers of impotence have an epiglottis, they can no longer sweat.

古文：凡服汤发汗，中病便止，不必尽剂。
现代文：大凡服汤药发汗，汗出病愈就应停止服药，不需要服完一剂药。
English: If you sweat after taking the decoction, you should stop taking the medicine as soon as you start sweating. You do not need to finish taking a dose of medicine.

古文：凡云可发汗，无汤者，丸散亦可用；要以汗出为解，然不如汤，随证良验。
现代文：凡是论中说可以发汗的，如果没有汤剂的，丸散剂也可以使用。无论汤剂或丸散剂，总以汗出病解为目的，但是丸散剂不如汤剂随证加减效果好。
English: If there is no decoction, the pill can be used. Regardless of the decoction or pill, the aim is always to resolve sweating, but the pill is not as good as the decoction with the addition and subtraction effect.

古文：夫病脉浮大，问病者言，但便硬尔。
现代文：症见脉浮大，询问病人，回答说只有大便硬结。
English: The patient was asked about the symptom of an enlarged pulse and replied that only the stool was hard.

古文：设利者，为大逆。
现代文：如果使用泻下法，就是严重的治疗错误。
English: If the laxative method is used, it is a serious treatment error.

古文：硬为实，汗出而解。何以故？
现代文：这是因为脉浮主表，大便硬为实，证属表里同病，应当用发汗解表，汗出邪散则里自和。
English: This is because the main table of the pulse is floating, the stool is hard and solid, and the symptoms are the same in the table. The table should be solved by sweating, and the sweat should be dissolved in the table.

古文：脉浮当以汗解。下利后，身疼痛，清便自调者，急当救表，宜桂枝汤发汗。
现代文：脉象浮而紧，脉浮为外感风邪，脉紧为外感寒邪，感受风邪则损伤卫气，感受寒邪则损伤营阴。
English: The pulse is floating and tight, the floating pulse is the external coldness, the tight pulse is the external coldness, the feeling of coldness damages the qi, and the feeling of coldness damages the yin.

