古文：狄仁杰苏味道侍御史李安期邓玄挺元福庆尚书郎御史里行姚崇黄幡绰杨国忠刘朝霞姚贞操裴谞张文成窦晓杜延业路励行萧諴德宗刘玄佐顾况裴佶赵宗儒熝牛头韩皋裴度姚岘
现代文：狄仁杰苏味道侍御史李安期邓玄挺元福庆尚书郎御史里行姚崇黄幡绰杨国忠刘朝霞姚贞操裴谞张文成窦晓杜延业路励行萧諴德宗刘玄佐顾况裴佶赵宗儒熝牛头韩皋裴度姚岘
English: Di Ren, Jie Su taste, attend the master of history, Li An period, Deng Xuan Ting, Yuan Fuqing, Shang Shuro, the master of history, Yao Chong, Huang Fan, Yang Guozhong, Liu Zhaoxia, Yao Zhengyu, Pei Xuan, Zhang Wencheng, Dou Xiaodu, Yan Ye Lu, Li Xuan Zi, Xiao Zheng, De Zong, Liu Xuan Zuo, Gu Zheng, Pei Zhao Zong, Confucius, Xiu Niu, Han Zheng, Pei Du Yao,

古文：狄仁杰
现代文：狄仁杰
English: Di Renjie

古文：唐秋官侍郎狄仁杰，秋官侍郎卢献曰：足下配马乃作驴。
现代文：唐朝人秋官侍郎狄仁杰，戏谑另一位秋官侍郎卢献说：配给您一匹马，就成了驴了。
English: Di Renjie, a retainer of the Tang Dynasty, joked with Lu Xian, another retainer of the Tang Dynasty: "If I give you a horse, it will become a donkey."

古文：献曰：中劈明公姓。乃成二犬。
现代文：卢献回敬道：将您的姓从中间分开，就成了两只犬。
English: Lu replied respectfully, "If you separate your family name from the middle, it will become two dogs."

古文：杰曰：狄字犬旁火也。
现代文：狄仁杰说：狄字一边是犬旁一边是火呀？
English: Di Renjie said: Di Zi is a dog on one side and a fire on the other side.

古文：献曰：犬旁有火，乃是煮熟狗。
现代文：卢献说：犬旁边有火，乃是一条煮熟了的狗。
English: Lu Xian said: There is a fire next to the dog, it is a cooked dog.

古文：苏味道
现代文：苏味道
English: Su taste

古文：唐宰相苏味道，与张昌龄俱有名。
现代文：唐朝宰相苏味道与张昌龄，都很有名望。
English: The prime ministers of the Tang Dynasty, Su Fang and Zhang Changling, were both famous.

古文：暇日相遇，互相夸诮。
现代文：一个空闲的日子，两位宰相相聚在一块儿，互相誇耀自己而讥诮对方。
English: On an idle day, the two prime ministers gathered together, boasting about themselves and mocking each other.

古文：昌龄曰：某诗所以不及相公者，为无银花合故也。
现代文：张昌龄说：我写的诗之所以没有您的诗好，是因为我的诗中滑 银花合 这样的传世佳句啊！
English: Zhang Changling said, "The reason why my poem is not as good as yours is because my poem contains such a well-known and well-loved line, 'Silver flowers mingle together'!"

古文：苏有《观灯》诗曰：火树银花合，星桥铁锁开。
现代文：苏味道曾经写过一首《观灯》诗： 火树银花合，星桥铁锁开。
English: Su Yi once wrote a poem "Watching the Lanterns": The fire tree and the silver blossom are intertwined, and the star bridge is locked.

古文：暗尘随马去，明月逐人来。
现代文：暗尘随马去，明月逐人来。
English: The dark dust goes with the horse, the bright moon comes one by one.

古文：味道云：子诗虽无银花合，还有金铜钉。
现代文：苏味道反唇相讥道：您虽然没有 银花合 ，还有 金铜钉 吗！
English: Su Ding retorted with a sneer: Although you don't have the silver flowers, do you still have the gold and bronze nails?

古文：昌龄赠张昌宗诗曰：昔日浮丘伯，今同丁令威。
现代文：原来，张昌龄曾写一首赠张昌宗的诗。其中两句是：昔日浮立伯，今同丁令威。
English: Originally, Zhang Changling had written a poem as a gift to Zhang Changzong. Two of the lines were: In the past, Bu Li Bo, now with Ding Lingwei.

古文：遂与抚掌而笑。
现代文：于是，二人互相拍掌大笑。
English: As a result, the two clapped their hands to each other and laughed.

古文：侍御史
现代文：侍御史
English: History of the Imperial Household

古文：唐京台监察院西行中间，号横劈房。
现代文：唐朝时，京台监察院西行中间，叫横劈房。
English: During the Tang Dynasty, the middle of the westbound section of the Beijing-Taiwan Inspection House was called the side-splitting room.

古文：凡迁此房者，必先盛馔台中，而后居焉。
现代文：凡是搬迁到这座房子里住的人，必须先设盛宴招待宫里的人，然后才能住进去。
English: Anyone moving into the house must first host a banquet for those in the palace before they can move in.

古文：先无窗，后人置之。
现代文：这座房子，最初没有窗户，后来有人开置了窗户。
English: At first, the house had no windows, but then someone opened a window.

古文：神龙中，侍中杨再思兼大夫，诸相毕送视事。
现代文：唐中宗神龙年间，侍中杨再思兼任御史大夫，所有的宰相都来送他上任。
English: During the reign of Emperor Shenlong in the middle of the Tang Dynasty, the chamberlain Yang Zaisi also served as the imperial secretary, and all the prime ministers came to see him off.

古文：中书令魏元忠尝任监察，台中故事素谙。
现代文：中书令魏元忠曾经担任过监察官，对宫禁中的掌故一向特别熟悉。
English: Wei Yuanzhong, the second-in-command, had once served as an inspector, and had always been particularly familiar with the history of the palace.

古文：谑指房曰：此是横劈房。
现代文：他戏谑地指着这座房子说：这是横劈房。
English: Pointing playfully at the house, he said: "It's a split-level.

古文：诸相问故，元忠具述其由。
现代文：各位宰相询问其中的缘故，魏元忠详细地讲述了这座房子的由来及其延革。
English: The prime ministers asked the reasons for this, and Wei Yuanzhong explained in detail the origin of the house and its evolution.

古文：御史曰：此房近日迁耶。
现代文：御史问：这座房子最近拆迁吗？
English: Interviewer: Has this house been demolished recently?

古文：曰：无别迁。
现代文：有人回答说：没有别的地方可以迁移。
English: One replied: "There is nowhere else to move to.

古文：元忠曰：当为开窗出气，故不迁耳。
现代文：魏元忠说：将要给它开个窗子出气，因此不迁啊！
English: Wei Yuanzhong said: I'm going to open a window for it to vent its anger, so I won't move!

古文：左右欢笑殆不禁。
现代文：在场的人听了都欢笑不止。
English: Everyone present was in fits of laughter.

古文：且御史乣察郡司，纲纪庶务，实为众官所忌。
现代文：况且，御史这种官职，是专门纠察郡府和朝中各司在执行、尊守纲常、法度上，以及署理各种政务上，有没有违法乱纪的行为，实在是让各位官员有所顾忌。
English: Moreover, an official post such as that of goshi is specifically to picket the county seat and all departments of the central government in the implementation, respect for the rules, laws, and regulations, as well as the administration of various government affairs, whether there is any illegal or undisciplined behavior, it is really for officials to have scruples.

古文：詈御史为冷峭，而突厥号御史为吐屯。
现代文：官员们背地里都辱骂御史为神情严峻的冷血动物。北方突厥人称御史为吐屯。
English: Behind the scenes, officials revile him as a grim, cold-blooded brute. Northern Turks call him Tutun.

古文：则天朝，蕃使来朝者，而吐屯独立不入班。
现代文：武则天当朝执政时，突厥人派使臣来朝见。诸位使臣中，唯有吐屯单独站立，不步入使臣的行列。
English: When the Emperor Wu Zetian was in power, the Turks sent envoys to see him. Of all the envoys, only Tutun stood alone and did not join the ranks of envoys.

古文：谕德张元一以诙谐见称，问蕃使曰：此独立者为谁？
现代文：主管对太子讽谏、规劝事情的谕德官张元一以幽默诙谐闻名于朝中。他问突厥使臣：这位单独站着的人是谁？
English: German official Zhang Yuan I, who was in charge of ridiculing and persuading the prince, was known in the imperial court for his wit and humor. He asked the Turkish envoy: Who is this man standing alone?

古文：译者曰：吐屯，此御史。
现代文：翻译回答说：吐屯，就是御史。
English: The translator replied, "Tutun is your history."

古文：元一曰：人言我朝御史独冷峭，此蕃御史亦甚冷峭。
现代文：张元一戏谑地说：人们都说我大唐朝的御史神态严肃冷峻，这位蕃邦的御史也特别严肃冷峻啊！
English: Zhang Yuan said playfully: "People say that I, the Grand Historian of the Great Tang Dynasty, have a serious and cold demeanor. This Grand Historian of the Shan State is also particularly serious and cold!"

古文：举朝喧笑。
现代文：满朝文武百官听了后，都喧闹哄笑不止。
English: After listening to the performance, all the officials in the imperial court laughed uproariously.

古文：李安期
现代文：李安期
English: Li An period

古文：唐吏部侍郎李安期，隋内史德林之孙，安平公百药之子。
现代文：唐朝吏部侍郎李安期，是隋朝内史李德林的孙子，安平公李百药的儿子。
English: Li Anji, the steward of the Tang Dynasty's cadre department, was the grandson of the Sui Dynasty's scholar Li Delin and the son of Anping Gong Li Baiyao.

古文：性机警。
现代文：李安期为人机智精警。
English: Li An was a quick-witted policeman.

古文：尝有选人被放，诉云：羞见来路。
现代文：一次，有一位候选的官员没有入选而被打发回家。这位落选的官员说；我被放回去，羞于见到来京那条路啊。
English: On one occasion, a candidate official was not selected and was sent home. The losing official said; I was sent back, ashamed to see the road to Beijing.

古文：安期问：从何关来。
现代文：李安期问：你从哪条路来的？
English: Li Anqi asked: Which way did you come from?

古文：曰：从蒲津关来。
现代文：这人回答说：从蒲津关来。
English: The man replied, "I came from Putsengwan."

古文：安期曰：取潼关路去。
现代文：李安期说：那么你就取道潼关去吧。
English: Li Anji said: Then you should take the road to Shouguan.

古文：选者曰：耻见妻子。
现代文：这人说：回到家中见到妻子感到羞耻。
English: The man said: 'I was ashamed to see my wife when I got home.

古文：安期曰：贤室本自相谙，亦应不笑。
现代文：李安期说：你的妻子原本跟你非常熟悉，肯定不会耻笑你的。
English: Li Anji said, "Your wife is very familiar with you, so she will definitely not laugh at you."

古文：又一选人引铨，安期看判曰：第书稍弱。
现代文：还有一个落选的人，将应试选官的档案拿来给李安期看。李安期看了档案中该人的考卷说：你的书法功力稍微差些。
English: There was also a failed candidate who brought the file of the candidate to show to Li Anqi. Li Anqi looked at the person's examination paper in the file and said: Your calligraphy skill is slightly worse.

古文：对曰：昨坠马损足。
现代文：该人回答说：应试那天我从马上掉下来把脚跌坏了。
English: The man replied, "On the day of the exam, I fell off my horse and broke my foot.

古文：安期曰：损足何废好书。
现代文：李安期问：脚跌坏了怎么会影响你写不出来好字呢？
English: Li Anqi asked: How does a bad fall affect your ability to write well?

古文：为读判曰：向看贤判，非但伤足，兼以内损。
现代文：于是，在试卷上批示道：刚才看了你的试卷，不但是跌伤了脚，你的内心也受到了损坏。
English: As a result, he wrote on the exam paper: "I just looked at your exam paper. Not only did you fall and hurt your foot, but your heart was also damaged.

古文：其人惭而去。
现代文：该人羞愧地走了。
English: The man left in shame.

古文：又选士姓杜名若，注芳洲官。其人惭而不伏。
现代文：还有一个候选官员叫杜若，被安排在芳州为官，这个人既感到羞愧又不服气，找到李安期来述说。
English: There was also a candidate official named Du Ruo, who was assigned to a post in Fangzhou. This person was both ashamed and unconvinced, and found Li Anji to tell about it.

古文：安期曰：君不闻芳洲有杜若，其人曰：可以赠名公。
现代文：李安期说：你没有听说过芳州盛产杜若吗？这个人说：我这株杜若可以赠送给您。
English: Li Anqi said, "Haven't you heard that Fangzhou is rich in Dourao?" The man said, "I can give you this Dourao as a gift."

古文：曰：此期非彼期。
现代文：李安期说：此时不是彼时。
English: Li Anji said: This is not his time.

古文：若曰：此若非彼若。
现代文：这个人说：此若不是彼若。
English: This person said, "If it's not him, it's someone else."

古文：安期笑，谓之改注。
现代文：李安斯听后笑了，为这位候选官改任别处。
English: Mr. Lee smiled and reassigned the candidate.

古文：又一吴士，前任有酒状。
现代文：还有一位吴郡的候选官员，在前任时，档案上记载有酗酒的前科。
English: Another Goh County candidate had a history of alcohol abuse on file when he ran for office.

古文：安期曰：君状不善。
现代文：李安期看后说：你在前任上有不好的表现啊。
English: After looking at it for a while, Li An said: You have a bad performance on your predecessor.

古文：吴士曰：知暗枪已入。
现代文：这位吴郡的候选官回答说：我就知道有人使暗枪伤我。
English: The Goh County candidate replied, "I knew someone had shot me."

古文：安期曰：为君拔暗枪。
现代文：李安期说：为你拔除暗枪。
English: Li Anji said, "Remove the hidden gun for you."

古文：答曰：可怜美女。
现代文：这人回答说：你是大贤人啊！
English: The man replied: "You are a great sage!

古文：安期曰：有精神选，还君好官。
现代文：李安期说：你能有勇气参加候选，还给你一个好官的名声。
English: Li Anji said: If you can have the courage to participate in the candidacy, it will give you the reputation of a good official.

古文：对曰：怪来晚。
现代文：这人说：都怪你来晚了。
English: The man said, "It's all your fault for coming late."

古文：安期笑而与官。
现代文：李安期听后笑了，选任他一个新的官职。
English: Li Anji smiled after listening and appointed him to a new post.

古文：邓玄挺
现代文：邓玄挺
English: Deng Xuntian

古文：唐邓玄挺入寺行香，与诸生诣园，观植蔬。
现代文：唐朝人邓玄挺来到寺院烧香拜佛，跟寺里的僧人们到菜园里观看他们种菜。
English: Deng Xuntian from the Tang Dynasty came to the temple to burn incense and worship Buddha. He went with the monks to the vegetable garden to watch them grow vegetables.

古文：见水车以木桶相连，汲于井中。
现代文：看到车水的水车上一个换一个地连放着木桶，是这些小木桶从井中将水汲上来。
English: One by one, wooden barrels are placed on the waterwheel, and it is these small barrels that draw the water up from the well.

古文：乃曰：法师等自踏此车，当大辛苦。
现代文：邓玄挺问僧人：法师们亲自踏水车，一定是非常辛苦啦？
English: Deng Xuntian asked the monk, "It must have been very hard for the mages to pedal the waterwheel by themselves."

古文：答曰：遣家人挽之。
现代文：僧人们回答说：分派仆役们来啦。
English: The monks replied, "Let's assign servants."

古文：邓应声曰：法师若不自踏，用如许木桶何为。
现代文：邓玄挺应声问：法师们如果不是亲自来踏，用这么多木桶干什么？
English: Deng Xuntian asked in response: If the mages did not come in person, what would they do with so many barrels?

古文：僧愕然思量，始知玄挺以木桶为幪秃。又尝与谢佑同射，先自矜敏手。
现代文：僧人们听了后感到很愕然，经过思索，才知道是邓玄挺将木桶误认为幪秃还有一次，邓玄挺与谢佑一块儿射箭。起先，邓玄挺认为自己是能手。
English: Hearing this, the monks were stunned. After some thought, they realized that it was Deng Xuan Ting who had mistaken the wooden bucket for a bald eagle. Another time, Deng Xuan Ting and Xie You were shooting arrows together. At first, Deng Xuan Ting thought he was a good shot.

古文：及至对射，数十发皆不中垛。
现代文：待到互相比赛时，他射了几十只箭，都没有射中箭靶子。
English: When it came time to compete against each other, he shot dozens of arrows, but none of them hit the target.

古文：佑乃云：直由箭恶，从来不曾如此。
现代文：谢佑说：一定是箭不好使，从来没射过这么差。
English: Xie You said: It must be a bad arrow, I have never shot so badly.

古文：玄挺应声报云：自须责射，因何尤箭。
现代文：邓玄挺应声回答说：只须责怪射箭的人技艺不高，为什么怨箭不好呢？
English: Deng Xuntian replied in response: We only have to blame the archery people for their low skills. Why should we blame the arrows?

古文：众人欢笑，以为辩捷。
现代文：在场的人都欢呼雀跃，认为邓玄挺反映敏捷，擅长机辩。
English: The people present cheered wildly, believing that Deng Xuantian was quick-witted and good at wit.

古文：权玄福任萧机，遣郎中员外，极晚始许出。
现代文：权玄福任萧机，被派遣为郎中员外，很长时间了才让他上任。
English: Kwon Hyun-bok was assigned as a junior officer, and it took a long time for him to take office.

古文：有郎中厅前逼阶枣树下生一小枣，穿砌砖而出。
现代文：有位郎中家厅前有一株临阶枣树，长出一株小枣树，是从砌台阶的砖缝中拱出来的。
English: In front of the hall of a relative's house, there is a jujube tree next to the steps. A small jujube tree has grown up, arched out of the brick seams of the steps.

古文：皆讶焉，既就看。
现代文：谁见了都感到惊奇。
English: Everyone was surprised when they saw it.

古文：玄挺时任员外郎云：此树不畏萧机，遂即砖辄枣出。
现代文：邓玄挺当时正任员外郎，说：这株枣树不惧怕萧机，于是专门从砖缝中拱出一株小枣树来。
English: Deng Xuntian, who was working as a clerk at the time, said: "This jujube tree is not afraid of the crushing machine, so he specially arched a small jujube tree from the brick cracks.

古文：兵部侍郎韦慎形容极短，时人弄为侏儒。
现代文：兵部侍郎韦慎身材极其矮小，当时的同事们都戏称他为侏儒。
English: Wei Shen, a waiter in the military department, was extremely short in stature, and his colleagues at the time called him a dwarf.

古文：玄挺初得员外已后，郎中员外俱来看。
现代文：邓玄挺刚刚被授予员外郎后，郎中员外们都来看望他。
English: Deng Xuntian has just been awarded the title of foreign minister, and all the foreign ministers have come to visit him.

古文：韦慎云：慎以庸鄙，滥任郎官。
现代文：韦慎自谦地说：我为人庸俗鄙陋，滥竽充数也任个郎官。
English: Wei Shen said humbly: I am a vulgar and despicable person, and I am also a vassal.

古文：公以高才，更作绿袍员外。
现代文：以你的杰出才干，应当更上一层任个绿袍员外。
English: With your outstanding talent, you should be promoted to the next level and become a member of the Green Robes.

古文：邓即报云：绿袍员外，何由可及侏儒郎中。
现代文：邓玄挺立即回答说：绿袍员外有什么资格可以比得上你这个侏儒郎中呢！
English: Deng Xuntian immediately replied, "Other than a green-robed soldier, what qualifications do you have that can be compared to you, a dwarf!"

古文：众皆大笑。
现代文：在场的人们听了后，都哈哈大笑。
English: My colleagues all burst out laughing.

古文：元福庆
现代文：元福庆
English: Yuan Fuqing

古文：唐元庆福，河南人，拜右台监察。
现代文：唐朝人元福庆，是河南人氏，官任右台监察。
English: Yuan Fuqing, a member of the Tang Dynasty, was from Henan Province and held the post of Right Division Supervisor.

古文：与韦虚名、任正名、颇事轩昂。
现代文：元福庆跟同任右台监察的韦虚名、任正名，都气宇轩昂、精神饱满，风度不凡。
English: The former Fuqing, together with Wei Huiming and Ren Zhengming, who were also supervisors on the right side of the table, were both exuberant, full of energy, and had an extraordinary demeanor.

古文：殿中监察朱评之咏曰：韦子凝而密，任生直且狂；可怜元福庆，也学坐痴床。
现代文：殿中监察朱评之写诗赞美他们三人说：韦子凝而密，任生直且狂。可怜元福庆，也学坐痴床。
English: The inspector of the hall, Zhu Han, wrote a poem to praise the three of them, saying: Wei Zi is rigid and dense, and he is free-spirited and crazy. Poor Yuan Fuqing, he also learned to sit on the bed.

古文：正名闻之，乃自改为俊且强。
现代文：任正名听说这首诗后，自己将与他的那句也学坐痴床改成也学俊且强。
English: After Ren Zhengmei heard about this poem, he changed his sentence from "also learn to sit on the bed of fools" to "also learn to be handsome and strong."

古文：尚书郎
现代文：尚书郎
English: Sho Shuro

古文：尚书郎，自两汉已后，妙选其人。
现代文：尚书郎，是在皇帝左右处理政务的官员。自两汉以后，皇上精心挑选担任这个职务的人选。
English: Shang Shuro is an official who handles government affairs around the emperor. Since the Han Dynasty, the emperor has carefully selected candidates for this position.

古文：唐武德真观以来，尤重其职。
现代文：到了唐朝，从开国皇帝李渊、唐太宗李世民起，尤其重视这个官职的人选安排。
English: In the Tang Dynasty, from the founding emperor Li Yuan and Tang Taizong Li Shimin onwards, special attention was paid to the selection of candidates for this official post.

古文：吏兵部为前行，最为要剧。
现代文：唐朝定下来的体制，尚书省下属吏部、兵部、户部、礼部、刑部、工部六部。
English: The system established by the Tang Dynasty consisted of six departments under the Ministry of Literature and Calligraphy: the Department of Officials, the Department of Military Affairs, the Department of Household Affairs, the Department of Ceremonies, the Department of Justice, and the Department of Engineering.

古文：自后行改入，皆为美选。
现代文：吏部、兵部为前行，是最为重要的官职。
English: The most important government posts are the civil service and the military.

古文：考功员外专掌试贡举人，员外郎之最望者司门都门。
现代文：从刑部、工部后行迁任兵部、吏部前行，都是最好的升迁。至于考工员外，是专门掌管科试举荐官员升迁、降罚的官员，员外郎中最让人仰慕的是司门、都门。
English: It is the best promotion to be promoted from the Criminal Investigation Department and the Engineering Department to the Military Department and the Personnel Department. As for the examination of workers, it is the official who is in charge of the promotion and reduction of the punishment of the officials who are recommended by the examination, and the most admirable of the members are Simen and Dumen.

古文：屯田虞水，膳部主客，皆在后行，闲简无事。
现代文：主管屯田垦荒的官署，主管山川林泽的民署，以及主管祭器、酒膳、外交等官署，均属后行。平常日子闲散、怠慢，一点事情也没有。
English: The government office in charge of the reclamation of waste lands, the people's affairs office in charge of the reclamation of mountains and rivers, and the government offices in charge of sacrificial vessels, wine and food, and diplomacy, are all in the following line. Ordinary days are idle and negligent, and there is nothing at all.

古文：时人语曰：司门水部，入省不数。
现代文：当时人都说：掌管城门、巡道的，和掌管水道漕运的，升入尚书省的不计其数。
English: At that time, people said: those in charge of the city gate, the parade route, and those in charge of waterway transportation were promoted to Shangshu Province in countless numbers.

古文：角觝之戏，有假作吏部令史与水部令史相逢，忽然俱倒。
现代文：百戏里，有表演吏部的办事员与水部的办事员相遇，忽然都跌倒在地上。
English: In hundreds of plays, a clerk from the performing arts department meets a clerk from the water department, and both of them suddenly fall to the ground.

古文：良久起云：冷热相激，遂成此疾。
现代文：过了好长时间才站起来，说：冷热相互冲击，于是就跌倒了。
English: It took me a long time to stand up and say, "Heat and cold collide, so I fell down."

古文：先天中，王上客为侍御史，自以才望清雅，妙当入省，常望前行。
现代文：唐玄宗先天年间，王上客任侍御史，认为自己才干声望都很高，一定会被精选到尚书省，而且盼望进入前行。
English: During the reign of Emperor Xuanzong of Tang Dynasty, Wang Shangke served as an attendant to the emperor, and he thought that his talent and reputation were very high, and he would definitely be selected to Shangshu Province, and he hoped to advance.

古文：忽除膳部员外郎，微有怅惋。
现代文：突然任命他为膳部员外郎，因此王上客略略有些惋惜、惆怅。
English: He was suddenly appointed as a member of the kitchen staff, so the king's guests were a bit sad and disappointed.

古文：吏部郎中张敬忠戏咏之曰：有意嫌兵部，专心取考功。
现代文：吏部郎中张敬忠知道这件事后，写了一首打油诗，来戏谑王上客。这首诗是这样的：有意嫌兵部，专心取考功。
English: After knowing this, Zhang Jingzhong, a junior member of the cadre, wrote a poem to make fun of Wang's guest. The poem is as follows: He deliberately dislikes the military department and concentrates on taking the examination.

古文：谁知脚踜蹬，几落省墙东。
现代文：谁知脚踜蹬，几落省墙东。
English: Who knows, a few drops may fall east of the wall.

古文：膳部在省中最东北隅，故有此句。
现代文：膳部的办公室在尚书省府衙的东北角紧靠墙边，因此有上面这句诗。
English: The office of the catering department is in the northeast corner of the provincial capital of Shangshu, close to the wall, hence the above poem.

古文：御史里行
现代文：御史里行
English: A Journey Through History

古文：唐开元中置里行，无员数。
现代文：唐玄宗开元年间，设置里行，都不是正式的官员，也没有一定的名额限制。
English: During the first year of Tang Xuan Zong's reign, there were no official officials in the ranks, and there was no specific quota limit.

古文：或有御史里行，侍御史里行，殿中里行，监察里行。
现代文：分别设有御史里行，侍御史里行，殿中里行，监察里行等。
English: Separately, there is a history line, an attendant history line, a hall line, an inspector line, etc.

古文：以未为正官。
现代文：朝中有人作诗歌咏这件事。
English: In the morning, someone wrote a poem about it.

古文：台中咏之曰：柱下虽为史，台中未是官。
现代文：诗是这样的：柱下虽为史，台中未是官。
English: The poem is like this: Although the pillar is history, Taichung is not an official.

古文：何时闻必也，早晚见任端。
现代文：何时闻必也，早晚见任端。
English: No matter when you hear it, sooner or later you will see it.

古文：任端即侍御史任正名也。
现代文：所谓任端，就是侍御史里行被授任正式的官职。
English: The so-called Renduan, is the official post given to the chamberlains in history.

古文：姚崇
现代文：姚崇
English: Yao Chong

古文：唐姚崇为紫微令，例给舍置次，不让宰相。
现代文：唐朝人姚崇官任紫微令，按照旧例，应给他新建住房，档次不亚于宰相的府第。
English: According to the old practice, when the Tang Dynasty official Yao Chong appointed Zi Wei, he should be given a newly built house, with a grade no less than the prime minister's residence.

古文：崇以年位俱高，不依旧请。
现代文：我已年老位高，住现在的房子就满好了，终归还是不该再为我建造新房。
English: I'm too old to live in my current house, so it's too late to build me a new one.

古文：令史持直簿诣之，崇批其簿曰：告直令史，遣去又来。必欲取之，有同司命。
现代文：工部的办事员将姚崇的这个批示拿回去后，部里的官员们看了都高兴地笑了，从此不再逼迫他同意新建住房。
English: After the clerk of the Ministry of Works took back the order from Yao Chong, the officials in the ministry looked at it and smiled happily, and no longer forced him to agree to build new housing.

古文：老人年事，终不宜当。诸司舍见之欢笑，不复逼也，遂停宰相宿。
现代文：于是，停止了给姚崇按照宰相的住房标准给他建造新房的计划。
English: As a result, the plan to build a new house for Yao Chong in accordance with the housing standards of the Prime Minister was stopped.

古文：黄幡绰
现代文：黄幡绰
English: Huangbanpo

古文：唐玄宗好击球，内厩所饲者，竟犹未甚适。
现代文：唐玄宗喜爱骑马击球，宫中马厩里饲养的御马，都不太符合他的心意。
English: Tang Xuan Zong liked to ride a horse and hit a ball. The royal horses bred in the palace stables did not quite meet his heart.

古文：会与黄幡绰戏语相解，因曰：吾欲良马久之，而谁能通于马经者。
现代文：一次，唐玄宗跟黄幡绰在一块儿相互戏谑解闷。唐玄宗对黄幡绰说：我早就想寻找一匹良马了，你知道谁通晓马经吗？
English: On one occasion, Tang Xuan Zong and Huang Banzhuo were joking with each other to relieve their boredom. Tang Xuan Zong said to Huang Banzhuo: "I have long wanted to find a good horse. Do you know who knows the Horse Sutra?

古文：幡绰奏曰：臣能知之。
现代文：黄幡绰回答说：我知道谁通晓马经。
English: Huang Banzhuo replied, "I know who is familiar with the Horse Sutra."

古文：且曰：今三丞相悉善马经。
现代文：当今的三位丞相都通晓马经。
English: Today's three prime ministers are all familiar with the Horse Sutra.

古文：上曰：吾与三丞相语政事外，悉究其旁学，不闻有通马经者。
现代文：玄宗皇上说：我跟三位丞相谈论朝政外，还一起讨论旁门杂学，没有听说他们谁通晓马经啊？
English: Emperor Xuanzong said, "I talk with the three prime ministers about matters other than the imperial government, and we also discuss side schools. Haven't you heard that none of them know the Horse Sutra?"

古文：尔焉得知之？
现代文：你是怎么知道的？
English: How do you know that?

古文：幡绰曰：臣自日日沙堤上。见丞相所乘，皆良马也。
现代文：黄幡绰说：我每天等候早朝时都在洛水岸边的沙堤上散步，见到三位丞相所骑的马都是良马啊。
English: Huang Hanzhong said, "I walk along the sandy embankment on the bank of the Luo River every day in the early morning, and I see that the horses ridden by the three prime ministers are all good horses.

古文：是以必知通马经。
现代文：由此知道他们一定通晓马经的。
English: From this we know that they must be familiar with the Horse Sutra.

古文：上因大笑而语他。
现代文：玄宗皇上听了哈哈大笑，趁机转换话题谈别的事情了。
English: Emperor Xuanzong heard the laughter and took the opportunity to change the subject to something else.

古文：玄宗尝登苑北楼，望谓水。见一醉人临卧水，问左右是何人。
现代文：唐玄宗一次登上御苑北楼，远望渭水，看见一个人喝醉了酒躺在水边。
English: Tang Xuan Zong once ascended the north tower of the imperial garden, looked far and wide at Surabaya, and saw a man lying drunk on the water's edge.

古文：左右不知。
现代文：唐玄宗问身边的人这是什么人？
English: Tang Xuan Zong asked the people around him, "Who is this person?"

古文：将遣使问之，幡绰曰：臣知之，此是年满令史。
现代文：身边人都说不知道。正要派人前去探问，黄幡绰说：我知道是什么人。这个人是任期年满的办事人员。
English: Everyone around him said they didn't know. Just as he was about to send someone to investigate, Huang Banzhuo said, "I know who it is. This person is an office worker whose term of office has expired."

古文：上曰：你何以知。
现代文：玄宗皇上问：你怎么知道的？
English: Emperor Xuanzong asked: How did you know?

古文：对曰：更一转入流。
现代文：黄幡绰回答说：再一调转就入流了。
English: Huang Banzhuo replied, "One more turn and you'll be in the stream."

古文：上大笑。
现代文：玄宗皇帝听了大笑。
English: The Emperor roared with laughter.

古文：又与诸王会食。宁王对御座，喷一口饭，直及龙颜。
现代文：还有一次，玄宗皇帝跟诸位皇室五子一块儿聚餐，宁王坐在玄宗的对面，忽然喷出一口饭，都喷在了玄宗的脸上。
English: On another occasion, Emperor Xuanzong was having dinner with the five sons of the imperial family. King Ning sat opposite Xuanzong and suddenly spat out a mouthful of rice, which splattered all over Xuanzong's face.

古文：上曰：宁哥何以错喉。
现代文：玄宗皇帝说；宁王兄，怎么戗着嗓子了？
English: Emperor Xuanzong said, "Brother Ning Wang, why are you hoarse?

古文：幡绰曰：此非错喉，是喷嚏。
现代文：在坐的黄幡绰说；这不是戗嗓子，是喷食！
English: Huangfan, who was sitting nearby, said, "It's not a hoarse voice, it's food spraying!"

古文：杨国忠
现代文：杨国忠
English: Yang Guozhong

古文：唐杨国忠尝会诸亲，时知吏部铨。
现代文：唐玄宗在位期间，身为国舅的杨国忠，有一次会见亲友。当时，他正在吏部掌管考核、选官员，决定他们升迁、任免的职务。
English: During the reign of Tang Xuan Zong, Yang Guozhong, who was the uncle of the king, once met with relatives and friends. At that time, he was in charge of the assessment and election of officials in the personnel department, and decided their promotion, appointment and removal.

古文：且欲大噱以娱之，呼选人名，引入于中庭。
现代文：为了造个大噱头娱乐娱乐，于是呼唤候选的官员的名字，被呼唤的人都到厅堂正中。
English: In order to create a big gimmick of entertainment, the names of the candidate officials were called, and the people who were called went to the middle of the hall.

古文：不问资叙，短小者通道参军，胡者云湖州文学。
现代文：不问资历，业绩，个子短小的都授以参军，有胡须的人一律称为湖州文学。
English: Regardless of seniority, performance, short and short are awarded to join the army, and people with beards are all called Huzhou Literature.

古文：帘下大笑。
现代文：逗引得帘内的主考、同考的官员们大笑不止。
English: The officials of the main exam and the same exam, who were attracted by the curtain, laughed and laughed.

古文：刘朝霞
现代文：刘朝霞
English: Liu Zhaoxia

古文：唐天宝初，玄宗游华清宫。
现代文：唐朝天宝年间，玄宗皇帝出游华清宫。
English: During the Tang Dynasty, Emperor Xuanzong visited the Huaxing Palace.

古文：刘朝霞献《驾幸温泉赋》，词调倜傥，杂以俳谐。文多不载，略其赋首云：若夫天宝二年，十月后兮腊月前。办有司之供具，命驾幸于温泉。
现代文：这篇《驾幸温泉赋》很长，就不全载录在这里了，现将它开头部分，简略地引用几段，大意是这样的：天宝二年，十月以后腊月之前，有关的官署置办必需要的物品、器具，皇上要移驾到华清宫的温泉宫。
English: This article "Driving Happiness to Hot Springs" is very long, so it is not fully recorded here. Now, I will briefly quote a few paragraphs from its opening part, the gist of which is as follows: In the second year of the Heavenly Treasure, after October and before the waxing moon, the emperor will move to the hot spring palace of the Huaqing Palace to purchase the necessary items and equipment for the relevant government departments.

古文：天门轧开，神仙之福塞；銮舆划出，驱甲仗而骈阗。
现代文：宫门轧轧地打开了，仿佛是神仙降临到这里；皇上的车驾忽然出现，车马、披着铠甲的武士及手执旌旗的仪仗队逶迤而来，持续不断。
English: The gates of the palace were flung open, as if a genie had landed here; the emperor's carriage suddenly appeared, and the cavalcade of horses and chariots, warriors in armor and honor guards holding banners, continued.

古文：青一队兮黄一队，熊踏胸兮豹拿背；珠一团兮绣一团，玉缕珂兮金钑鞍。其后述圣德云：直获得盘古髓，掐得女娲氏娘。
现代文：一会儿是身着黑衣的队伍，一会儿是身着黄衣的队伍，人人都象熊腆胸豹挺背一样的威武雄壮；一忽儿珠翠耀目，一忽儿锦绣入眼，美玉镶嵌的马勒黄金铸造的马鞍这篇《驾幸温泉赋》的后面，在叙述玄宗皇上的圣明与德政时，是这样写的：您得到了盘古帝的真髓，推算出女娲是母亲。
English: At one moment there is a group dressed in black, at another in yellow, and everyone is as powerful and majestic as a bear with a leopard's chest; at one moment the pearls are dazzling, at another the brocade is dazzling, and at the back of this "Driving Hot Springs Fu," when describing the holiness and virtue of Emperor Xuanzong, it is written: You have obtained the true essence of Emperor Pangu, and have deduced that the maiden is the mother.

古文：遮莫你古来千帝，岂如我今代三郎。
现代文：任凭自古以来的千百个帝王，谁能赶得上我朝今天的圣明皇上李三郎？
English: Let alone the thousands of emperors since ancient times, who can catch up with today's Holy Emperor Li San Lang?

古文：其自叙云：别有穷奇蹭蹬，失路猖狂，骨撞虽短，伎俩能长。
现代文：这篇赋在谈到作赋者自己时，说：另外还特别穷困潦倒，因没有前途而狂乱。我的机遇虽然少，我的技能、本领很强。
English: Referring to herself, the author of this article said: In addition, I am extremely poor and destitute, and I am distraught because I have no future. Although my opportunities are few, my skills and abilities are very strong.

古文：梦里几回富贵，觉来依旧凄惶。
现代文：几次梦见自己荣华富贵，醒来后依然过着这样凄惶的日子。
English: Several times I dreamed of my own glory and wealth, and after waking up, I still lived such a desolate life.

古文：只是千年一遇扣头，莫五角而六张。
现代文：现在遇上了千载难逢的叩见皇上的好机会，且莫再不顺遂。
English: Now we have a once-in-a-lifetime opportunity to meet the emperor, and it couldn't be better.

古文：上览而奇之，将加殊赏，命朝霞改去五角六张字。
现代文：玄宗皇帝看了这篇《驾幸温泉赋》，觉得它奇异不凡，准备重重地奖赏写作这篇赋的刘朝霞。玄宗皇帝让刘朝霞修改五角六张这几个字。
English: Emperor Xuanzong read this "Successful Hot Spring Fu," thought it was extraordinary, and was ready to reward Liu Asaka, the author of this Fu, heavily. Emperor Xuanzong asked Liu Asaka to revise the five-and-six-square word.

古文：奏云：臣草此赋，若有神助。自谓文不加点，笔不停缀，不愿改之。
现代文：刘朝霞回答说：我写作这篇《驾幸温泉赋》，就象有天神相助，文不加点，笔不停顿，一气呵成。
English: Liu Asaka replied, "I am writing this article, "Driving Happiness Hot Spring Fu," as if with the help of the gods, without adding a dot, without pausing, all at once.

古文：上闻，顾左右曰：真穷薄人也。
现代文：我实在难以改动。玄宗皇帝听后对身边的近侍说：真是浅薄啊！
English: It's really hard to change me. After listening, Emperor Xuanzong said to the attendants around him: "How shallow!

古文：遂授以宫卫佐而止焉。姚贞操
现代文：于是，授予刘朝霞宫卫佐这样一个只管十二个卫兵的小官职而已。姚贞操
English: As a result, Liu was awarded the post of palace guard of the palace of Liu Chaoxia, a minor official post that only manages twelve guards.

古文：唐姚贞操云：自余以评事入台，侯承训继入。
现代文：唐朝人姚贞操说；自从我凭着掌管平决刑狱的评事升入御史台后，后面的人接受我的教诲，有人也升入御史台。
English: The Tang Dynasty person Yao Zhengyu said: Since I ascended to the throne of history by virtue of the judge in charge of the prison of execution, the people behind have accepted my teachings, and some people have also ascended to the throne of history.

古文：此后相继不绝，故知拔茅连茹也。
现代文：这以后接连不断有人升入御史台，这本是递连推荐引进的缘故啊。
English: Since then, there have been a succession of people who have been promoted to the History Channel. This is due to the introduction of successive recommendations.

古文：韩琬以为不然，自则天好法，刑曹望居九寺之首。
现代文：韩琬不这样认为。他认为自从武则天皇后推行了好的改革条律，才使得掌管刑事的刑曹也有希望位居九卿之首。
English: Han Zheng does not think so. He believes that it is only since Emperor Wu Zetian began to implement good reform regulations that there is hope that the detective in charge of the criminal will also be at the top of the Nine Lords.

古文：以此评事多入台，讫今为雅例，岂评事之望，起于贞操耶？须议戏云：畿尉有六道，入御史为佛道，入评事为仙道，入京尉为人道，入畿丞为苦海道，入县令为畜生道。
现代文：过了一会儿，韩琬戏谑地说：在京都地区所属各县担任县尉职务的人，有六条出路。升任御史台是最好的出路，被称为 佛道 。升为评事次之，被称为 仙道 。升任京尉一般化，被称为 人道 。升任京都府丞就不太好了，被称为 苦海道 。升任县令就比较差了，被称为 畜牲道 。
English: After a while, Han Yan jokingly said: Those who hold the position of prefectural lieutenant in the counties belonging to the Kyoto region have six ways out. Promotion to goshidai is the best way out, known as the Buddhist way. Promotion to commentary is next, known as the sentient way. Promotion to prefectural lieutenant is generalized, known as the humane way. Promotion to prefectural governor of Kyoto is not so good, known as the bitter way. Promotion to prefectural governor is relatively poor, known as the animal way.

古文：入判司为饿鬼道，故评事之望。
现代文：升任判司是最差的了，被称为 饿鬼道 。
English: The promotion of judges is the worst, known as the "hungry ghost road."

古文：起于时君好法也，非贞操所能升降之。
现代文：因此说，评事能可望升任御史台是由则天皇后推行新法开始的，而不是姚贞操所能左右得了的。
English: Therefore, it is said that the commentator can be expected to be promoted to the imperial history platform by the emperor's new law, rather than by Yao Zhengyu.

古文：裴谞
现代文：裴谞
English: Baekhyun

古文：唐裴宽子谞复为河南尹。
现代文：唐朝人裴宽的儿子裴谞，官任河南尹。
English: Pei Xuan, the son of Pei Kuan of the Tang Dynasty, was appointed to the post of Henan Yin.

古文：谞素好诙谐，尝有投牒，误书纸背。
现代文：裴谞平素就喜欢开玩笑。一次，投送来的书札公文，误将投送的地址写在纸背上面。
English: Pei Yu likes to joke. Once, he mistakenly wrote the address on the back of a postcard by mistake.

古文：谞判云：这畔似那畔，那畔似这畔。我也不辞与你判。
现代文：裴谞在上面批示说：这边似那边，那边似这边，我也不推辞，让与你去判断吧。
English: Pei Yu said in the above instruction: This side is similar to that side, that side is similar to this side, I will not refuse, let it be judged by you.

古文：笑杀门前着靴汉。
现代文：笑坏了门前边等在那里的脚穿靴子的送信人。
English: Laughter broke out in front of the door, where a messenger with booted feet was waiting.

古文：又妇人同投状争猫儿，状云：若是儿猫儿，即是儿猫儿。若不是儿猫儿，即不是儿猫儿。
现代文：又有一次，有两位妇女投送上告信争夺一只猫。上告信上面写道：如果是我家的猫，那么就是我家的猫；如果不是我家的猫，那么就不是我家的猫。
English: On another occasion, two women competed for a cat by submitting a letter that read: "If it's my cat, it's my cat; if it's not my cat, it's not my cat."

古文：谞大笑，判其状曰：猫儿不识主，傍家搦老鼠。
现代文：裴谞看了上告信大笑，在上告信上批示道：猫不认识主人了，到别人家去捉老鼠。
English: Pei Yao laughed out loud when she read the complaint letter. She wrote on the complaint letter, "The cat doesn't know its owner anymore. It went to someone else's house to catch mice."

古文：两家不须争，将来与裴谞。
现代文：你们两家都不要争了，将这只猫送给我裴谞吧。
English: Both of your families should stop fighting, and give this cat to me, Pei Xin.

古文：遂纳其猫儿。争者亦止焉。张文成
现代文：于是，裴谞让人将这只猫抱回他家去，两位妇女也不争了。张文成
English: As a result, Pei Yao asked someone to take the cat back to his home, and the two women did not argue.

古文：唐司门员外郎张文成好为俳谐诗赋，行于代。
现代文：唐朝时，掌管京城城门的员外郎张文成，喜欢写点诙谐调侃的诗赋，有些诗赋在当时很是流传了一阵子。
English: During the Tang Dynasty, Zhang Wensheng, who was in charge of the gate of the capital city, liked to write humorous poems, some of which were circulated for a while.

古文：时太将军黑齿常之，将出征。
现代文：当时，黑齿常之将军将要率军出征。
English: At that time, General Kuroto Tsuneyoshi was about to lead his army into battle.

古文：或人勉之曰：公官卑，何不从行？
现代文：有人劝张文成说：你现任关开城门这样的小官，为什么不跟黑齿将军一块儿出征，有机会立下战功也好可望升迁。
English: Some people urged Zhang Wensheng to say: "You are a minor official who closes the city gate, why don't you go to war with General Black Tooth, you have the opportunity to make war achievements and hopefully be promoted."

古文：文成曰：宁可且将朱唇饮酒，谁能逐你黑齿常之。
现代文：张成文戏谑地跟黑齿将军说：我宁肯用朱唇饮酒，有谁敢追随你黑齿常啊！
English: Zhang Chengwen jokingly said to the black-toothed general: I would rather drink alcohol with red lips, who would dare to follow you, black-toothed general!

古文：窦晓
现代文：窦晓
English: Dou Xiao

古文：唐窦晓形容短小，眼大露睛；乐彦伟身长露齿。
现代文：唐朝人窦晓身材矮小，大眼睛向外鼓凸着；乐彦伟身材高大，牙齿往外龇露着。
English: Dou Xiao of the Tang Dynasty was short in stature, with large bulging eyes; Le Yan Wei was tall, with his teeth bared.

古文：彦伟先弄之云：足下甚有功德。
现代文：乐彦伟首先戏弄窦晓说：你呀非常有功德啊！
English: Lok Yan Wei first teased Dou Xiao and said: You are very meritorious!

古文：旁人怪问，彦伟曰：既已短肉，又复精进。
现代文：旁边的人感到奇怪，问：你为什么说他有功德啊？
English: The person next to him was puzzled and asked, "Why do you say he has merits?"

古文：岂不大有功德！窦即应声答曰：公自有大功德，因何道晓？
现代文：乐彦伟回答说：你看他既然已经短小肉了又在精神上有很大长进难道不是修得大有功德吗？窦晓听了后应声回答道：你才有大功德呢。为什么反而称赞我窦晓啊？
English: Lok Yan Wei replied, "You see, since he has short stature and has made great progress in spirit, hasn't he made great merit? Dou Xiao, after listening, replied: You only have great merit. Why did Dou Xiao praise me instead?

古文：人问其故，窦云：乐工小来长斋。
现代文：有人问他为什么这样说？窦晓回答道：乐工小来长斋。
English: Someone asked him why he said this? Dou Xiao replied: Musicians come to Changsha.

古文：又问长斋之意，窦云：身长如许，口齿齐崖。
现代文：有人问长斋是什么意思？窦晓说： 长 就是身长的意思， 斋 就是口齿突出如悬崖的意思啊！
English: Someone asked what "Changzhai" means. Dou Xiao said: "Changzhai" means "height," and "Zhai" means "mouth protruding like a cliff."

古文：岂不是长斋！
现代文：难道不是 长斋 吗？
English: Isn't it called Nagasai?

古文：众皆大笑。
现代文：听的人都被他的回答逗得哈哈大笑。
English: My colleagues all burst out laughing.

古文：杜延业
现代文：杜延业
English: Du Yanye

古文：唐华原令崔思诲口吃，每共表弟杜延业递相戏弄。
现代文：唐朝时，华原县令崔思诲有口吃病。他经常跟表弟杜延业互相调笑戏谑。
English: During the Tang Dynasty, Cui Siyu, the warden of Hua Yuan County, suffered from stuttering. He and his cousin Du Yanye often played jokes on each other.

古文：杜常语崔云：延业能遣兄作鸡鸣，但有所问，兄即须报。
现代文：杜延业一次对崔思诲说：我能让哥哥你学鸡叫，只要我问你什么，你就得告诉我。
English: Du Yanye once said to Cui Shichao: I can let my brother learn you how to crow, as long as I ask you something, you have to tell me.

古文：旁人云：他口应须自由，何处遣人驱使。
现代文：在场的另外一个人对杜延业说：嘴长在他头上，你能让他说啥就说啥吗？
English: Another person present said to Du Yanye: "He has a big mouth, can you let him say whatever he wants?

古文：若不肯作，何能遣之？
现代文：他如果不肯学，你有什么办法让他学呢？
English: If he doesn't want to learn, how can you make him learn?

古文：杜即云：能得。
现代文：杜延业当场说：能的。
English: Du Yanye said on the spot: It can be done.

古文：既而旁人即共杜私睹。
现代文：过了一会儿，杜延业与这个人偷偷地打赌。
English: After a while, Du Yanye secretly made a bet with the man.

古文：杜将一把谷来崔前云：此是何物？
现代文：杜延业捧着一把谷子走到崔思诲面前，问：这是什么东西啊？
English: Holding a handful of grain, Du Yanye walked up to Cui Shizhuang and asked: What is this?

古文：崔云：谷谷。旁人大笑，因输延业。
现代文：崔思诲喀喀吧吧地说：谷谷在旁边看着的那个人，不由得哈哈大笑。这个人因此输给了杜延业。
English: Cui Shizhen said, "The person that Gu Gu was watching next to couldn't help but laugh out loud. This person lost to Du Yanye as a result.

古文：路励行
现代文：路励行
English: Lu Lixing

古文：唐路励行初任大理丞，亲识并相贺。
现代文：唐朝人路励行刚刚升任大理寺丞，亲戚朋友都来祝贺。
English: The Tang Dynasty people have just been promoted to Dali Temple. Relatives and friends have come to congratulate.

古文：坐定，一人云：兄今既在要职，亲皆为乐。
现代文：入坐后，一个人说：哥哥现在升任重要的职务，我们所有的亲属都感到高兴。
English: After the sit-in, one person said: "All our relatives are happy that my brother has now been promoted to an important position.

古文：谚云：一人在朝，百人缓带。
现代文：常言说得好：一人在朝为官，他周围的人都可以宽束腰带，悠闲自在了。
English: As the saying goes: One person is an official in the government, and everyone around him can wear a wide belt and be at ease.

古文：岂非好事！
现代文：难道这不是一件大好的事情吗？
English: Isn't that a great thing?

古文：答云：非直唯遣缓带，并须将却幞头！
现代文：路励行回答说非但只有宽束腰带，并且将要把头上的官帽也摘下来呢！
English: Lu Lijie replied that he would not only wear a wide belt, but would also take off the official cap on his head!

古文：众皆大笑。
现代文：在座的人听了都捧腹大笑。
English: My colleagues all burst out laughing.

古文：萧諴
现代文：萧諴
English: Xiao Yao

古文：唐萧諴初拜员外，于朝列安闲自若。
现代文：唐朝人萧諴刚刚授任员外郎，在朝廷群臣中安闲自若，风度不凡。
English: Xiao Yao, a Tang dynasty member, had just been appointed as a foreign envoy. He was at ease among the courtiers of the imperial court and had an extraordinary demeanor.

古文：侍御史王旭曰：萧子从容省达。
现代文：侍御史王旭赞赏地说：萧諴这个人，别看他刚刚担任员外郎，却举止从容，清省通达。
English: The chamberlain Shi Wangxu said with appreciation: Xiao Yu this person, don't look at him, he has just served as a foreign minister, but he behaves calmly and is knowledgeable about Qing Province.

古文：韩琬应声答曰：萧任司录，早已免杖。
现代文：韩琬应声说：萧諴任司录时掌管府事，早就免除了杖刑。
English: Han Wei said in response: Xiao Wei was in charge of government affairs when he was a secretary, and he had already been exempted from the cane punishment.

古文：岂止今日方省挞耶。
现代文：难道只是到了今天才省却挞刑吗？
English: Is it only today that flogging has been abolished?

古文：闻者欢笑。
现代文：听的人都笑了。
English: Everyone in the audience laughed.

古文：德宗
现代文：德宗
English: Therefore, we can know that Xuanzong was in accordance with God's will and ruled the country for a long time. Is there no basis for this?

古文：唐马燧之孙始生，德宗命之曰继祖。
现代文：唐朝人马燧的孙子刚刚生下来，唐德宗给起个名字叫马继祖。
English: The grandson of the Tang Dynasty's great-grandson Ma Jie has just been born, and Tang Dezong has given him the name Ma Jizu.

古文：退而笑曰：此有二义，意谓以索继也。
现代文：德宗回到内殿笑着说：继祖这个名子有两层意义，其意思是说探索他的先祖和承继马氏家族。
English: Returning to the inner hall, Desong smiled and said, "There are two meanings of the name "stepfather." It means to explore one's ancestors and to succeed the Ma family.

古文：刘玄佐
现代文：刘玄佐
English: Liu Xuanzu

古文：唐刘玄佐，滑城匡城人。
现代文：唐朝人刘玄佐，是滑城匡城人。
English: Liu Xuan Zuo, a Tang Dynasty citizen, was from the city of Slum.

古文：尝出师经本县，欲申桑梓礼于令，坚辞不敢当。玄佐叹恨久之。
现代文：一次率领军队经过他的家乡匡城县时，想向县令表达乡里长幼的礼节，县令坚决辞谢不敢领受，刘玄佐过了很长时间还感叹遗憾。
English: Once, when leading an army through his hometown of Kuangcheng County, he wanted to express to the county magistrate the etiquette of the village elders. The county magistrate resolutely declined and did not dare to accept, and Liu Xuanzu still regretted it after a long time.

古文：先是陈金帛，将遣邑僚，以其愚懦而止。
现代文：他一开始准备了黄金与丝织品，想要送给同乡的一位僚属，因为这个人愚昧懦弱，于是就没有送。
English: At first, he prepared gold and silk to give to a fellow villager, but he did not give it because the man was stupid and cowardly.

古文：玄佐贵为相，其母月织絁一匹，以示不忘本。
现代文：刘玄佐后来升任宰相，位高权重，堪称显贵。他母亲依然每月织一匹粗绸，用来表示没有忘记过去所过的清苦生活。
English: His mother still knits a coarse silk horse every month to show that she has not forgotten the hard life she lived in the past.

古文：每观玄佐视事，见邑令走阶下。
现代文：刘母每次看到刘玄佐在署衙处理政务，那些郡、县的官吏们，悄悄地走在阶下，一点不敢声张。
English: Every time Liu's mother saw Liu Xuan Cao handling government affairs at the State Administration of Foreign Affairs, those county and prefectural officials quietly walked down the steps, not daring to speak out.

古文：退必语玄佐：吾向见长官白事卑敬，不觉恐悚。
现代文：回去后一定劝谕儿子：我一看到下属向长官陈述公务时那种谦卑恭敬的样子，就不由得感到慌恐不安。
English: When he returns, he must advise his son: When I see the humble and respectful manner in which subordinates present their duties to their superiors, I can't help but feel panicked and uneasy.

古文：思乃父为吏本县时，常畏长官汗栗。
现代文：就想到你父亲在本县担任小吏时，经常由于敬畏长官面恐惧得直流冷汗。
English: Just thinking about when your father worked as a minor official in this county, he often suffered from cold sweats due to his fear of authority.

古文：今尔当厅据案待之，其何安焉？
现代文：现在，儿子你离坐在厅堂的书案后边，象当年你父亲的长官那样对待下属，怎么能心安理得呢？
English: Now, my son, how can you be at peace unless you sit behind your desk in the hall and treat your subordinates as your father's superiors once did?

古文：因喻以朝廷恩寄之重，须务捐躯。
现代文：于是，刘母劝喻儿子不要辜负朝廷的恩遇与所委以的重任，一定要全部身心都用在政务上面。
English: As a result, Liu's mother advised her son not to fail to live up to the favor of the imperial court and the important task entrusted to him, and to use all his body and mind in government affairs.

古文：故玄佐始终不屈臣节。
现代文：因此，刘玄佐始终不卑下，不辱没作臣子的节操。
English: Therefore, Liu Xuan Cao was never humiliated, nor was he humiliated as a vassal.

古文：时乡里姻归，以地近，多投之。
现代文：刘玄佐在任宰相期间，家乡的亲朋故旧，因为离京城很近，许多人都来投靠他。
English: During Liu Xuanzu's tenure as prime minister, his old friends and relatives in his hometown, because it was very close to Beijing, many people came to support him.

古文：玄佐不欲以私擢居将校列，又难置于贱卒，尽置为将判官。
现代文：他不想因为私人关系而提升这些人为将校，又不好将他们安置在地位低下的卒伍中。于是，都安排为将官的僚属。
English: He did not want to promote these people to officers because of personal relationships, and it was not easy to place them in the ranks of low-ranking soldiers. Therefore, they were all arranged as subordinates of generals.

古文：此职例假绯衫银鱼袋，外示荣之，实处散冗。
现代文：这些职务也授予红色袍服、银鱼袋。从外表看你荣耀，实际都是无职无权的散官冗员。
English: These posts are also awarded to red robes and silver fish bags. From the appearance of your glory, in fact, they are redundant officials without duties and powers.

古文：其类渐众，久之，有人启诉于刘者，一联云：覆盆子落地，变赤烘烘。羊羔儿作声，尽没益益。
现代文：这种安排越来越多。时间长了，亲朋故旧中有人向刘玄佐述说这件事，写了一付对联给他，讽喻这件事。上联是：覆盆子落地，变赤烘烘；下联是：羊羔儿作声，尽没益益。
English: This kind of arrangement became more and more frequent. As time went on, someone from the circle of friends and relatives told Liu Xuan Cao about this matter and wrote a couplet to him, allegorizing the matter. The first couplet was: A raspberry falls to the ground and turns red; the second couplet was: A lamb makes a sound, but to no avail.

古文：览之而笑，各改着他职。
现代文：刘玄佐看了后笑，将这些人都各自改任别的官职。
English: Liu Xuanzuo looked back and laughed, and each of these people were reassigned to other official positions.

古文：顾况
现代文：顾况
English: Status Quo

古文：唐白居易初举未振，以歌诗谒顾况。
现代文：唐朝人白居易第一次参加科考举士落第后，拿着自己写的诗歌去拜见顾况。
English: After Bai Juyi of the Tang Dynasty failed the entrance examination for the first time, he went to see Gu Zheng with a poem he had written.

古文：况谑曰：居易。长安百物贵，居大不易。
现代文：顾况戏谑地说：居易，京城长安，各种东西都很贵，居住生活很不容易啊。
English: Gu Jian said jokingly: Juyi, Beijing Chang'an, all kinds of things are very expensive, living life is not easy.

古文：及读至《赋得原上草送友》曰：野火烧不尽。春风吹又生。叹曰：有句如此，居大不难。
现代文：待到读到《赋得原上草送友》一诗中的野火烧不尽，春风吹又生句时，赞叹地说：写出这样千古绝唱的诗句，居住在长安一点也不难。
English: When he read that the wildfires in the poem "Fu De Yuan Shang Cao Xing You" never burn out, and the spring wind blows fresh verses, he said with admiration: It is not at all difficult to live in Chang'an to write such a poem that has been sung for thousands of years.

古文：老夫前言戏之耳！
现代文：老夫前面说的话是开玩笑罢了！
English: What the old man said earlier was just a joke!

古文：裴佶
现代文：裴佶
English: Baekhyun

古文：唐北省班：谏议在给事中上，中书舍人在给事中下。
现代文：唐朝时，尚书省的等级是这样分列的：谏议大夫在给事中之上，中书舍人在给事中之下。
English: During the Tang Dynasty, the ranks of Shang and Shuxuan were classified as follows: the leading scholar was on the top, and the middle scholar was on the bottom.

古文：裴佶为谏议，形质短小，诸舍人戏之曰：如此短，何得向上？
现代文：裴佶任谏议大夫。他身材矮小，诸位中书舍人都很戏谑他说：这样矮小，怎么攀到上面去了呢？
English: He was a short man, and all of you scholars made fun of him, saying, "He is so short, how did he climb to the top?"

古文：裴佶曰：若怪，即曳向下着。
现代文：裴佶回答说：你们如果觉得奇怪，就将我拽到下边来吧！
English: Pei Yao replied: "If you think it's strange, just drag me to the bottom!

古文：众人皆大笑。
现代文：在场的人听了都捧腹大笑。
English: Everyone present burst out laughing.

古文：后除舍人。
现代文：后来，裴佶到底改任中书舍人。
English: Later, Pei Xuan was transferred to the post of secretary of the Chinese Academy of Sciences.

古文：赵宗儒
现代文：赵宗儒
English: Zhao Zongru

古文：唐宪宗问赵宗儒曰：人言卿在荆州，球场草生，何也？
现代文：唐宪宗问赵宗儒，说：听人说你在荆州时，球场上草生，为什么啊？
English: Tang Xianzong asked Zhao Zongru, saying: I heard that when you were in Jingzhou, there was grass on the pitch. Why?

古文：对曰：死罪有之。
现代文：赵宗儒回答说：我有了死罪啊，虽然草生。
English: Zhao Zongru replied, "I've been given the death penalty, even though I'm a commoner.

古文：虽然草生，不妨球子，上为启齿。
现代文：但是，并不妨碍击球子。有劳皇上过问这件事。
English: However, it does not interfere with batting. The emperor had the trouble to inquire about this.

古文：熝牛头
现代文：熝牛头
English: Snail's Head

古文：有士人，平生好吃熝牛头。
现代文：有一个读书人，平素最喜欢吃卤制的牛头肉。
English: There is a reader who likes to eat halal beef jerky the most.

古文：一日，忽梦其物故，拘至地府丰都狱。
现代文：一天，他忽然梦见自己死了，被小鬼押送到地府里的丰都牢狱。
English: One day, he suddenly dreamed that he was dead, and was being escorted by an imp to the Fengdu Prison in the Underworld.

古文：有牛首阿旁，其人了无畏惮，仍以手抚阿旁云：只这头子，大堪熝。
现代文：丰都牢狱中有个叫陈旁的牛头鬼，这个读书人见了后一点也不畏惧，还用手抚摸着牛头鬼陈旁说：就这牛头，大可值得一卤。
English: In the Fengdu Prison, there was a bull-headed ghost named Chen Bong. This reader was not afraid at all after seeing it. He also stroked the bull-headed ghost Chen Bong with his hand and said, "This bull's head is worth a whole loaf of bread."

古文：阿旁笑而放回。
现代文：牛头鬼阿旁听了后笑了，将这位读书人放了回来。
English: After listening, the bullheaded ghost Ah Bong laughed and let the reader back in.

古文：韩皋
现代文：韩皋
English: Han Zheng

古文：唐仆射韩皋镇夏口，常病小疮，令医付膏药，不濡。
现代文：唐朝时，仆射韩皋镇守夏口，一次身上长了一块小疮，让医生给他的疮上贴上一贴膏药，怎么贴也不粘。
English: During the Tang Dynasty, a servant of the Han Dynasty, who guarded Xiakou, once had a small sore on his body. He asked the doctor to put a plaster on his sore, but it did not stick.

古文：公问之，医云：天寒骨硬。
现代文：韩皋问医生：怎么贴不上？医生回答说：天寒膏硬。
English: Han Zheng asked the doctor: how can it not be affixed? The doctor replied: the cold cream is hard.

古文：公笑曰：韩膏实是硬。
现代文：韩皋笑着说：韩膏确实是硬啊！
English: Han Yu said with a smile: Han paste is really hard!

古文：裴度
现代文：裴度
English: Pei Du

古文：唐裴晋公度在相位日，有人寄槐瘿一枚，欲削为枕。
现代文：唐朝时，晋国公裴度任宰相时，有个人送给他一个槐木瘿瘤，他想用这个瘿瘤削制成一只木枕。
English: During the Tang Dynasty, when Jin Guo Gong Pei Du was the prime minister, someone gave him a camphor tree. He wanted to use the camphor tree to make a wooden pillow.

古文：时郎中庾威，世称博物，召请别之。
现代文：当时任郎中的庾威，人们都说他通晓众物，裴度将他请来给鉴别一下。
English: At that time, his son-in-law, Hao Wei, was said to be well-versed in many things, and Pei Du invited him to come and identify him.

古文：庾捧玩良久，白曰：此槐瘿是雌树生者，恐不堪用。
现代文：庾威将这只槐木瘿瘤捧在手中把玩了很长时间，向裴度讲解道：这是一只雌树生的瘿瘤，恐怕不能使用。
English: Hao Wei held this eucalyptus cankerworm in his hands and played with it for a long time, explaining to Pei Du: This is a female tree cankerworm, I'm afraid it can't be used.

古文：裴曰：郎中甲子多少。
现代文：裴度问：庾郎中多大岁数了？
English: Pei Du asked: How old is the middle son?

古文：庾曰：某与令公同是甲辰生。
现代文：庾威回答说：我与大人您都是甲辰生人。
English: Hao Wei replied, "You and I are both born in Jia Chen.

古文：公笑曰：郎中便是雌甲辰
现代文：裴度笑着说：庾郎中便是雌甲辰啊！
English: Pei Du said with a smile, "Among the brothers is the female Ji Chen!

古文：姚岘
现代文：姚岘
English: Yao Wei

古文：唐姚岘有文学而好滑稽，遇机即发。
现代文：唐朝人姚岘擅长文学而且为人诙谐滑稽，遇着机会就表现出来。
English: The Tang Dynasty person Yao Xuan was good at literature and was witty and funny, which he showed whenever he had the opportunity.

古文：仆射姚南仲，廉察陕郊。
现代文：仆射姚南仲视察陕郊。
English: Deputy Yao Nanzhong inspects the outskirts of Shaanxi Province.

古文：岘初释艰服后见，以宗从之旧。
现代文：姚岘刚刚脱去丧服后，就去拜见姚南仲，以同族本家的身份叙旧。
English: After Yao Yao had just taken off his mourning clothes, he went to visit Yao Nanzhong and introduced himself as a member of the same family.

古文：延于中堂，吊罢，未语及他事。陕当两京之路，宾客无时。门外忽投刺云：李过庭。
现代文：姚岘被请到正中的会客厅，姚南仲刚刚说完慰藉姚岘居丧的话，未来得及谈别的事情，门外忽然投递上来名片，上面写着：李过庭。
English: Yao Yao was invited to the meeting room of the middle school. Yao Nanzhong had just finished saying the words of consolation for Yao Yao's death, and there was no time to talk about other things. A business card was suddenly delivered outside the door, which read: Li has passed the court.

古文：南仲曰：过庭之名甚新，未知谁家子弟？
现代文：陕郊正当东、西两京的中间，来往的宾客说不上什么时候就来造访。姚南仲问：过庭这个名字很是生疏，不知道他是谁家的子弟？
English: Shaanxi's suburbs are right in the middle of East and West Beijing, and guests come to visit at any time. Yao Nanzhong asked: "The name of the courthouse is very unfamiliar, I don't know whose son he is?"

古文：左右皆称不知。
现代文：身边的人都说不知道。
English: Everyone around me said they didn't know.

古文：又问岘知之乎？
现代文：姚南仲又问姚岘知道不？
English: Yao Nanzhong also asked Yao Jun if he knew?

古文：岘初犹俯首嚬眉，顷之，自不可忍，敛手言曰：恐是李趋儿。
现代文：姚岘起初就俯首皱眉装作在苦苦思索。不一会儿，自己忍耐不住了，拱手说：恐怕是李趋儿。
English: At first, Yao Yao bowed his head and frowned, pretending to be thinking hard. Soon, he couldn't stand it and said, "I'm afraid it's Li Xiang'er."

古文：南仲久方悟而大笑。
现代文：姚仲南思考了好久才领悟到其中的函意，不由得大笑起来。
English: Yao Zhongnan thought for a long time before he understood the meaning of the letter, and couldn't help but burst into laughter.

