古文：有父之丧，如未没丧而母死，其除父之丧也，服其除服。卒事，反丧服。
现代文：父亲去世，正在服丧，如果在服丧期限未满以前母亲又不幸去世，那么在为父亲举行大祥之祭时，还应该穿上除服；祭过之后，再换上为母服丧的丧服。
English: When the father dies and is in mourning, if the mother unfortunately dies before the period of mourning is over, the father should also wear the mourning clothes when holding the great auspicious festival; after the festival, he should change into the mourning clothes for the mother.

古文：虽诸父昆弟之丧，如当父母之丧，其除诸父昆弟之丧也，皆服其除丧之服。卒事，反丧服。
现代文：这个原则可以推而广之：即令是正在为伯父、叔父、兄弟服丧，如果又遇到父母之丧，那么在为伯父、叔父、兄弟举行除服之祭时，也都可以暂时改穿吉服；等到祭过之后，再换上为父母应穿的重丧服。
English: This principle can be extended: even if you are mourning for an uncle, uncle, or brother, and if you encounter the death of your parents, you can temporarily change to a good luck costume when holding a funeral for an uncle, uncle, or brother; wait until after the festival, and then change to the heavy funeral clothes that your parents should wear.

古文：如三年之丧，则既顈，其练祥皆同。王父死，未练祥而孙又死，犹是附于王父也。
现代文：如果在三年之中先后遇到两个三年之丧的丧事，那么在后一个丧事的卒哭之后，如果举行前一个丧事的小祥和大祥之祭，也可以先换上小祥和大祥所受的轻服；事过之后再改穿后丧的重服。祖父先死，还没有举行小祥、大祥之祭而孙又死，孙子的神主仍然附在祖父后面。
English: If, in the course of three years, two three-year mourning funerals occur in succession, then after the last mourning, if the Small and Great Martyrs' Festival of the previous mourning is held, it is also possible to first change into the light clothing of the Small and Great Martyrs; after the event, change into the heavy clothing of the later mourning. The grandfather died first, the Small and Great Martyrs' Festival has not yet been held, and the grandson died, and the grandson's god is still attached to the grandfather.

古文：有殡，闻外丧，哭之他室。
现代文：父死或母死，正停殡在堂，此时又听到居处遥远的亲属的死讯，就应该到别的房间去哭他。
English: If you hear the news of the death of a distant relative, you should go to another room to cry.

古文：入奠，卒奠，出，改服即位，如始即位之礼。
现代文：第二天早晨身着重服先到殡宫哭奠父母，哭奠毕出来，再换上新死者尚未成服之服即位而哭，所即之位就是头一天听到死讯时在别的房间哭泣的位置。
English: The next morning, I went to the funeral home in full mourning dress to cry for my parents. When I finished crying, I changed into my new, not-yet-completed mourning dress and wept at the altar. The altar was the place where I cried in the other room when I heard the news of the death the day before.

古文：大夫、士将与祭于公，既视濯，而父母死，则犹是与祭也，次于异宫。
现代文：大夫、士将要参加国君的祭祀，祭祀已经进行到视灌阶段而父母去世，在这种情况下还是要继续参加祭祀，只不过不要和大家住在一起，因为吉凶不可以同处。
English: The doctor and the priest will participate in the ritual of the sovereign, the ritual has been carried out to the visual irrigation stage and the parents have died, in this case you still have to continue to participate in the ritual, but do not live with everyone, because the auspicious and unlucky can not be together.

古文：既祭，释服出公门外，哭而归。
现代文：等祭祀结束，脱掉祭服走出公门，然后哭着回家。
English: When the ritual is over, they take off their ceremonial robes, walk out the front door, and then go home crying.

古文：其它如奔丧之礼。
现代文：其他仪节和奔丧礼一样。
English: The rest of the rituals are the same as for funerals.

古文：如未视濯，则使人告。告者反，而后哭。
现代文：如果还没有进行到视灌阶段而父母去世，就应派人向国君报告，等到派去报告的人回来才能哭。
English: If it has not yet reached the stage of visual irrigation and the parents have died, someone should be sent to report to the sovereign, and it is not possible to cry until the person who sent the report returns.

古文：如诸父昆弟姑姊妹之丧，则既宿，则与祭。
现代文：大夫、士将要参加国君的祭祀，如果此时有伯父、叔父、兄弟、姑、姊妹等人去世的情况发生，那么只要是在被召去斋戒以后，就得参加祭祀。
English: Doctors and scholars will participate in the sacrificial rites of the sovereign. If an uncle, uncle, brother, sister-in-law, or sister-in-law passes away at this time, then they must participate in the sacrificial rites as long as they have been called to fast.

古文：卒事，出公门，释服而后归。
现代文：等祭祀结束，走出公门，再脱掉祭服回家。
English: After the ritual is over, they go out of the public gate, take off their ceremonial robes, and return home.

古文：其它如奔丧之礼。
现代文：其他仪节和奔丧礼一样。
English: The rest of the rituals are the same as for funerals.

古文：如同宫，则次于异宫。
现代文：前面所说的 次于异宫 ，是针对本来同宫而说的。
English: The above-mentioned "subordinate to a different palace" was said in reference to the original "same palace."

古文：曾子问曰： 卿大夫将为尸于公，受宿矣，而有齐衰内丧，则如之何？ 
现代文：曾子问道： 卿大夫将在国君的祭祀中作尸，已经接受邀请并斋戒了，这时突然有家门内齐衰之亲去世，该怎么办呢？ 
English: Zengzi asked, "Dr. Xing will make a corpse in the king's sacrifice, has accepted the invitation and fasted, when suddenly a family member passed away, what should I do?

古文：孔子曰： 出舍乎公宫以待事，礼也。 
现代文：孔子回答道： 要从自己出来，住在国君的公馆里等待祭祀，这才合理。 
English: Confucius replied: It is only reasonable to come out of oneself and live in the official residence of the sovereign to wait for the ritual.

古文：孔子曰： 尸弁冕而出，卿、大夫、士皆下之。
现代文：孔子又说： 尸出门时，或戴弃，或戴冕，这要看他这个尸所代表的祖先是何身份而定。
English: Confucius also said, "When a corpse goes out, it may be abandoned or crowned, depending on the status of the ancestor represented by the corpse."

古文：尸必式，必有前驱。 
现代文：卿大夫在路上遇到尸，都要下车致敬，而为尸者也须凭轼答礼。
English: If a doctor encounters a corpse on the road, he or she must get out of the car to pay homage, and if it is a corpse, he or she must also bow.

古文：父母之丧，将祭，而昆弟死；既殡而祭。如同宫，则虽臣妾，葬而后祭。祭，主人之升降散等，执事者亦散等。
现代文：上自诸侯，下至于士，在举行小祥之祭时，正祭之后，主人对于宾长回敬的酒，只用嘴唇沾一下；而众宾、兄弟对于主人进献的酒，都可以喝一小口。
English: From the lords down to the commoners, when holding a small auspicious festival, after the main festival, the host only touches the wine with his lips for the guests to return the honor; and all the guests and brothers can drink a small sip of the wine offered to the host.

古文：虽虞附亦然。自诸侯达诸士，小祥之祭，主人之酢也哜之；众宾兄弟，则皆啐之。
现代文：在举行大祥之祭时，主人对于宾长回敬的酒可以喝一小口，而众宾、兄弟对于主人进献的酒，都干杯也可以。
English: At the time of the great auspicious festival, the host can drink a small sip of the wine for the guest, and the guests and brothers can drink a toast to the wine donated by the host.

古文：大祥：主人啐之，众宾兄弟皆饮之，可也。凡侍祭丧者，告宾祭荐而不食。
现代文：在小祥、大祥之祭时，凡是司仪告知宾客进献脯酿时，宾客只献而不食。
English: At the festival of Xiao Xiang and Da Xiang, when the master of ceremonies tells the guests to offer brewing, the guests only offer and do not eat.

古文：子贡问丧，子曰： 敬为上，哀次之，瘠为下。
现代文：子贡问怎样为父母守丧，孔子答道： 诚心守丧是最重要的，哀痛还在其次，形容憔悴甚至闹出病来最使不得。
English: When Zigong asked how to mourn for his parents, Confucius replied: "Mourning with sincerity is the most important thing, while grief is secondary. It is most difficult to describe grief and even illness.

古文：颜色称其情；戚容称其服。 
现代文：脸色要和哀情相称，悲容要和孝服相称。 
English: The countenance should be commensurate with the sorrow, and the sorrowful countenance should be commensurate with the filial piety.

古文：请问兄弟之丧，子曰： 兄弟之丧，则存乎书策矣。 
现代文：子贡又问如何居兄弟之丧，孔子回答说： 你提的这个问题，书本上记载了。 
English: Zigong also asked how to mourn the death of a brother. Confucius replied, "The question you asked is recorded in the book.

古文：君子不夺人之丧，亦不可夺丧也。
现代文：作为君子，既不可强迫他人抛开丧亲之悲痛，也不可忘掉自己丧亲的哀痛。
English: As a gentleman, you should neither force others to put aside the grief of bereavement, nor forget the grief of your own bereavement.

古文：孔子曰： 少连、大连善居丧，三日不怠，三月不解，期悲哀，三年忧。
现代文：孔子说： 少连、大连这两个人都很懂得为父母居丧的礼节。父母去世后的头三天，一味哭泣，不进饮食；三个月内，哭泣祭奠等不松懈；到了一周年以后，经常哀苦；到了三年头上还愁容满面。
English: Confucius said: Xiaolian and Dalian both know the etiquette of mourning for their parents. For the first three days after the death of their parents, they cried and did not eat; within three months, they cried and paid tribute without slackening; after the first anniversary, they were often sad; at the beginning of the third year, they were still sad.

古文：东夷之子也。 
现代文：他们东夷地方的人，也能如此懂礼。 
English: They, the people of Dongyi, can also be so polite.

古文：三年之丧，言而不语，对而不问：庐，垩室之中，不与人坐焉；在垩室之中，非时见乎母也，不入门。
现代文：在为父母守丧期间，和别人说话只说自己的丧事而不谈论其他，只回答问话而不主动提问。住在依庐或奎室之中，不和别人坐在一起。周年以后，由依庐搬到奎室去住，如果不是为了按时向母亲问安，不进中门。
English: During the mourning period for parents, talk to others only to talk about your own funeral without talking about others, only answer questions without taking the initiative to ask questions. Live in the snuggle or Kwei room, do not sit with others. After the anniversary, move from the snuggle to the Kwei room to live, if it is not to say hello to the mother on time, do not enter the middle door.

古文：疏衰皆居垩室不庐。
现代文：穿齐衰丧服的人住垄室，不住依庐。
English: People who wear mourning clothes live in a room with a moat, they don't live together.

古文：庐，严者也。
现代文：依庐是哀敬之处，没有那份哀敬就不去住。
English: Snuggling is a place of reverence, and without that reverence we would not go to live.

古文：妻视叔父母，姑姊妹视兄弟，长、中、下殇视成人。
现代文：守丧之礼，妻之丧比照叔父母，姑、姊妹之丧比照兄弟，长、中、下疡之丧比照成人。
English: In the funeral ceremony, the wife's death is compared with that of her uncles and parents, the mother-in-law's and sister-in-law's with that of their brothers and sisters, and the eldest, middle and youngest with that of an adult.

古文：亲丧外除，兄弟之丧内除。
现代文：为父母守丧，丧期已满，外边的孝服虽然脱掉了，但内心的悲哀仍在。
English: A memorial service is being held for the parents. The mourning period is over, and although the outward filial piety has been removed, the inner sadness still lingers.

古文：视君之母与妻，比之兄弟。
现代文：为兄弟守丧，外边的孝服脱掉了，内心的悲哀也就同时消失了。
English: At the brother's funeral, the outer filial piety was stripped off, and the inner sadness disappeared at the same time.

古文：发诸颜色者，亦不饮食也。
现代文：为国君的母亲和夫人守丧，其礼数比照兄弟。在守丧期间，凡是影响面部哀容之物，都不可饮食。
English: During the mourning for the mother and wife of the sovereign, the number of courtesies is the same as for brothers. During the mourning period, anything that affects the sadness of the face should not be eaten.

古文：免丧之外，行于道路，见似目瞿，闻名心瞿。吊死而问疾，颜色戚容必有以异于人也。
现代文：除丧以后，孝子走在路上，遇到面庞有几分和父母相似的人就眼神为之一惊，听到和父母名字相同的名字就心里猛地一惊；去别人家吊孝或探视病人，脸色之悲，表情之忧一定有异乎常人之处。
English: After the funeral, the filial son walked on the road, and when he met a person with a face somewhat similar to his parents, his eyes were shocked, and when he heard the name that was the same as his parents, his heart was shocked; when he went to other people's homes to visit the sick, the sadness of his face and the sorrow of his expression must have something different from ordinary people.

古文：如此而后可以服三年之丧。
现代文：能这样去做，才算是真正会为父母守丧。
English: To be able to do this is to be able to truly mourn for one's parents.

古文：其余则直道而行之，是也。
现代文：会为父母守丧了，那么为其他的人守丧就好比在直路上行走，容易多了。
English: If you can mourn for your parents, then mourning for others is like walking on a straight road, much easier.

古文：祥，主人之除也，于夕为期，朝服。祥因其故服。
现代文：大祥之祭，是孝子除服之祭。在大祥之祭的前夕，孝子身穿朝服，宣布大祥之祭的日期。
English: Daxiang Festival is the festival of the filial son's retirement. On the eve of Daxiang Festival, the filial son wears a morning dress and announces the date of Daxiang Festival.

古文：子游曰： 既祥，虽不当缟者必缟，然后反服。 
现代文：到了举行大祥之祭时，就穿着前夕穿的朝服。子游说： 既然举行大祥之祭，那么那些虽然还不到穿素搞麻衣时候的人也得穿上素搞麻衣，等到祥祭结束，再换上该穿的孝服。 
English: When it came to the time of the great auspicious festival, they wore the imperial robes they had worn the night before. The son lobbied: Since the great auspicious festival was being held, those who were not yet old enough to wear plain clothes had to put on plain clothes and wait until the end of the festival to change into the proper filial clothing.

古文：当袒，大夫至，虽当踊，绝踊而拜之，反改成踊，乃袭。
现代文：小敛、大敛时，孝子正在袒露左臂哭踊，刚好大夫这时候来吊丧，孝子此刻虽然正在哭踊，也要立即停下前去拜谢大夫，然后返回原位，再从头开始完成哭踊，然后掩好上衣。
English: At the time of the minor and major austerities, the filial son was wailing and dancing with his left arm bared, just when the doctor came to pay his respects. Although the filial son was wailing and dancing at this moment, he should immediately stop and bow to the doctor, then return to his original position, and then complete the wailing dance from scratch, and then cover up his coat.

古文：于士，既事成踊，袭而后拜之，不改成踊。
现代文：如果是士在这时来吊丧，孝子就可以把小敛或大敛进行完毕，完成哭踊之礼，掩好上衣，然后再前去拜谢。拜谢之后，无须更从头哭踊。
English: If the priest comes at this time, the filial son can complete the small or large wailing, complete the wailing dance, cover up the coat, and then go to the thanksgiving. After the thanksgiving, there is no need to start the wailing dance again.

古文：上大夫之虞也，少牢。卒哭成事，附，皆大牢。下大夫之虞也，特牲。
现代文：上大夫死后的虞祭，用羊、枣二牲；其卒哭和衬庙之祭，都用牛、羊、采三牲。
English: The yakitori festival after the death of the chief abbot used two animals, a sheep and a jujube; his funeral and the temple festival both used three animals, a cow, a sheep and a cowherd.

古文：卒哭成事，附，皆少牢。
现代文：下大夫死后的虞祭，用一只泵；其卒哭和衬庙之祭，都用羊、永二牲。
English: The state festival after the death of the lower doctor, with a pump; its pied cry and the temple festival, both with sheep and eternal sacrifice.

古文：祝称卜葬虞，子孙曰哀，夫曰乃，兄弟曰某，卜葬其兄弟曰伯子某。
现代文：卜葬日和虞祭时的祝词称谓是：儿子自称 哀子某 ，孙自称 哀孙某 ，丈夫自称 乃夫某 ，兄弟之间自称日 某 。为兄弟卜葬，如果是为老大，祝词就应是 弟某卜葬其伯子某 。
English: The titles of the eulogies at the Funeral Day and the Fortune Festival are as follows: the son calls himself 哀子, the grandson calls himself 哀孙, the husband calls himself 乃夫, and the brothers call each other 日. If the eulogy is for a brother, or for a boss, the eulogy should be 弟某 бу葬其伯子.

古文：古者，贵贱皆杖。
现代文：古时候，不分贵贱，只要是孝子就执丧杖。
English: In ancient times, no matter how high or low, as long as the filial son is the best, he will hold the stick.

古文：叔孙武叔朝，见轮人以其杖关毂而輠轮者，于是有爵而后杖也。
现代文：后来叔孙武叔上朝，看见轮人竟然以其丧杖穿通车毅转动车轮，视丧杖如同玩具，于是定下规矩，只许有爵位的人执丧杖。
English: Later, when Uncle Sun and Uncle Wu ascended to the throne, they saw that the wheelman actually used his cane to turn the wheel, and regarded the cane as a toy, so they set a rule that only those with a title could hold the cane.

古文：凿巾以饭，公羊贾为之也。
现代文：在尸体的蒙面巾上凿个小孔以便饭含，这本是大夫之礼，作为士也这样办，是从公羊贾开始的。
English: It is a doctor's duty to cut a small hole in the shroud of the corpse so that the meal can be eaten. As a scholar, I did the same, starting with Jia the ram.

古文：冒者何也？
现代文：冒是什么东西？
English: What the hell is that?

古文：所以掩形也。
现代文：冒是用来包裹尸体的布套。
English: A bier is a cloth cover used to wrap a corpse.

古文：自袭以至小敛，不设冒则形，是以袭而后设冒也。
现代文：从袭到小敛，如果不用冒，担心人们见了尸体产生恶感，所以在为尸体穿衣以后就要用冒。
English: From the attack to the small restraint, if you don't have to take it, you worry that people will have a bad feeling when they see the corpse, so you have to take it after dressing the corpse.

古文：或问于曾子曰： 夫既遣而包其余，犹既食而裹其余与？
现代文：有人问曾子说： 遣奠之后又把剩下的供品包裹起来送入墓中，这就好像吃过人家的招待饭以后还要把没吃完的食品兜着走吧？
English: Someone asked Zengzi, "After paying tribute, you wrapped up the rest of the offerings and sent them to the grave. It's just like eating someone else's dinner and then carrying the uneaten food with you."

古文：君子既食，则裹其余乎？ 曾子曰： 吾子不见大飨乎？
现代文：这样做像是君子的作派吗？ 曾子答道： 您难道未曾看到过诸侯的大宴宾客吗？
English: Zeng Zi replied, "Haven't you ever seen the great banquet guests of lords?

古文：夫大飨，既飨，卷三牲之俎归于宾馆。
现代文：诸侯的大宴宾客，宾客们在吃饱喝足之后，主国国君还要把没有吃完的美味佳肴送往宾馆，这是热情待宾的表现。
English: After the guests have had enough to eat and drink, the host country's sovereign sends the uneaten delicacies to the hotel, which is a sign of hospitality.

古文：父母而宾客之，所以为哀也！
现代文：回到正题上说，孝子在父母即将下葬时以宾客之礼对待他们，正是以此种方式表达悲哀。
English: Returning to the main topic, when a filial son is about to bury his parents, he treats them as guests, and it is in this way that he expresses his grief.

古文：子不见大飨乎！ 
现代文：您如果见过诸侯的大宴宾客就不难明白了。 
English: If you have ever seen the guests at a grand banquet of princes, it is not difficult to understand.

古文：非为人丧，问与赐与？
现代文：岂非因为人家有了丧事，所以才馈赠吗？
English: Wasn't it because of a funeral that the gift was given?

古文：三年之丧，以其丧拜；非三年之丧，以吉拜。
现代文：所以才赏赐吗？接受馈赠和赏赐，对于穿三年之丧孝服的人来说，应该以丧拜表示感谢；对于不是穿三年之丧孝服的人来说，应该以吉拜表示感谢。
English: Receiving gifts and rewards, for those who wear the three-year mourning filial piety, they should express their gratitude with a funeral prayer; for those who do not wear the three-year mourning filial piety, they should express their gratitude with a funeral prayer.

古文：三年之丧，如或遗之酒肉，则受之必三辞。主人衰绖而受之。
现代文：如果别人赠送的是酒肉，一定要一而再、再而三地推辞，确实推辞不掉才予以接受，接受时孝子要披麻戴孝。
English: If someone gives you meat and wine, you must refuse it again and again. If you really can't refuse it, you must accept it. When you accept it, you must be a filial son.

古文：如君命，则不敢辞，受而荐之。
现代文：如果是国君的赏赐，那就不敢谢绝，一定要接受，接受之后先供祭父母的亡灵。
English: If it is a reward from the sovereign, then they dare not refuse it, they must accept it, and after accepting it, they must first sacrifice the souls of their parents.

古文：丧者不遗人，人遗之，虽酒肉，受也。
现代文：居丧的人是不向别人馈赠东西的，别人向居丧的人馈赠东西，哪怕是酒肉，居丧的人也可以接受。
English: The bereaved do not give gifts to others. Others give gifts to the bereaved. Even if it is meat and wine, the bereaved can accept it.

古文：从父昆弟以下，既卒哭，遗人可也。
现代文：为叔伯兄弟这类大功以下的亲属居丧，在卒哭以后，向别人赠送东西也是可以的。
English: It is also possible to give something to others after crying over the loss of relatives such as uncles and brothers who did less than great feats.

古文：县子曰： 三年之丧，如斩。期之丧，如剡。 三年之丧，虽功衰不吊，自诸侯达诸士。
现代文：县子说： 丧期为三年的亲人死了，孝子心中的悲痛就像刀砍；丧期为一年的亲人死了，孝子心里的悲痛就像刀刮。 凡服三年之丧的人，即令是已经过了练祭，也不到别人家去吊丧，在这一点上，从诸侯到士都是如此。
English: The county magistrate said, "When a relative with a three-year mourning period dies, the grief in the heart of a filial son is like a knife cutting; when a relative with a one-year mourning period dies, the grief in the heart of a filial son is like a knife scraping.

古文：如有服而将往哭之，则服其服而往。
现代文：在此期间，如果遇到五服之内的亲属死了则可以前去哭吊，去哭吊时，穿上与死者关系相称的丧服。
English: During this period, if a relative within five clothes dies, they can go to cry and hang. When they go to cry and hang, they should wear mourning clothes commensurate with their relationship with the deceased.

古文：期之丧，十一月而练，十三月而祥，十五月禫。
现代文：为丧期为一年的亲人服丧，在第十一个月举行练祭，第十三个月举行大祥之祭，第十五个月举行樟祭。
English: For the mourning period of a year for relatives to mourn, the training festival is held in the eleventh month, the auspicious festival is held in the thirteenth month, and the wreath-laying festival is held in the fifteenth month.

古文：练则吊。既葬，大功吊，哭而退，不听事焉。
现代文：对于服一年之丧的人来说，练祭以后可以出外吊丧。入葬以后，穿大功丧服的亲属可以出外吊丧，但哭吊之后就马上回来，不要管主家其他的事咋办。
English: For those who have been mourning for a year, they can go out to hang the coffin after the ceremony. After the funeral, relatives wearing grand funeral clothes can go out to hang the coffin, but they will come back immediately after crying and hanging, and do not have to take care of other matters of the host family.

古文：期之丧，未丧，吊于乡人。哭而退，不听事焉。
现代文：服一年丧服的人，在自己的亲人没有入葬之前，到同乡人家去吊丧，也是哭吊之后就马上回来，不要管主家其他的事咋办。
English: People who have been in mourning for a year, before their relatives are buried, go to a fellow villager's house to mourn, but also come back immediately after crying, and do not care about other things in the owner's house.

古文：功衰吊，待事不执事。
现代文：如果是在练·祭之后前去吊丧，可以等到袭、敛等事完成后再走，但不可插手帮忙。
English: If you go to the funeral after the practice or festival, you can wait until the attack, restraint, etc. are completed before you go, but you can't help.

古文：小功缌，执事不与于礼。
现代文：服小功、绍麻的人出外吊丧，可以插手帮忙，但不可参预行礼之事。
English: Those who have served in minor meritorious deeds and Shaoma may go out to attend the funeral. They can help, but they are not allowed to participate in the pre-ceremony.

古文：相趋也，出宫而退。相揖也，哀次而退。相问也，既封而退。相见也。反哭而退。朋友，虞附而退。
现代文：参加葬礼的客人，如果和死者本不相识，只是慕名来会，就在灵枢抬出庙门以后退出；如果和死者是点头之交，就在灵枢经过大门外举哀之处时退出；如果和死者曾经互赠礼品，互相走动，就等到下棺封土以后退出飞如果自己曾经带着见面礼请教过死者，那就等到主人回家反哭后才退出；如果和死者是朋友，那就等到虞祭以后才退出。
English: The guests attending the funeral, if they do not know the deceased, but only come to the meeting to pray, will withdraw after the spirit center is carried out of the temple door; if they are nodding friends with the deceased, they will withdraw when the spirit center passes through the mourning place outside the gate; if they have exchanged gifts with the deceased and walk around with each other, they will wait until after the coffin is sealed; if they have asked the deceased for advice with a meeting gift, they will wait until the owner comes home and cries; if they are friends with the deceased, they will wait until after the festival.

古文：吊，非从主人也。四十者执綍：乡人五十者从反哭，四十者待盈坎。
现代文：参加葬礼，·并不是简单地跟着主人走一走，而是要帮助主人办事的。所以，四十岁以下的人参加葬礼，都要帮助牵引枢车。
English: To attend a funeral is not simply to follow one's master, but to help one's master. Therefore, anyone under the age of forty who attends a funeral must help to pull the hearse.

古文：丧食虽恶必充饥，饥而废事，非礼也；饱而忘哀，亦非礼也。
现代文：乡人参加葬礼者，五十岁以上的人，在孝子回家反，哭时可以跟着一道回去；而四十岁以下的人，就要等到填土成坟以后才可回去。居丧者的食品虽然粗恶，也必须用以充饥。
English: Villagers who attend funerals, people over the age of fifty, can go back with their children when they go home and cry; while people under the age of forty can only go back after filling the grave. Although the food of the bereaved is coarse, it must also be used to satisfy hunger.

古文：视不明，听不聪，行不正，不知哀，君子病之。
现代文：如果因为饥饿而耽误了办事，那不合乎礼的要求；如果因为饱食而忘掉了悲哀，那也不合乎礼的要求。
English: If, because of hunger, you delay your work, that is not a proper request; if, because of fullness, you forget your sorrow, that is not a proper request.

古文：故有疾饮酒食肉，五十不致毁，六十不毁，七十饮酒食肉，皆为疑死。有服，人召之食，不往。
现代文：如果由于悲痛过度而造成眼睛看不清楚，耳朵听不明白，走路摇摇晃晃，精神麻木不知哀伤，就不好了，君子对此表示担忧。所以礼文上又规定，居丧者如果有病可以饮酒吃肉，五十岁以上的人不能无限度的悲伤，六十岁以上的人不能过于哀伤，七十岁以上的人可以饮酒吃肉。其目的就在于担心孝子因悲伤过度而致死。
English: If the eyes do not see clearly, the ears do not hear clearly, the walk is unsteady, the spirit is numb and does not know sadness due to excessive grief, it is not good, and the gentleman is concerned about this. Therefore, the ritual also stipulates that the bereaved can drink alcohol and eat meat if they are sick, people over the age of fifty cannot be infinitely sad, people over the age of sixty cannot be too sad, and people over the age of seventy can drink alcohol and eat meat. The purpose is to worry about the death of the filial son due to excessive sadness.

古文：大功以下，既葬，适人，人食之，其党也食之，非其党弗食也。
现代文：身上正穿着孝报，有人邀请他去吃饭，不应该去。如果是为大功以下的亲属穿孝服，下葬以后，可以走访亲友。人家请吃饭，如果是亲属，可以接受；如果不是亲属， 就不可接受。
English: If someone invites him to dinner, he should not go. If he is wearing a filial piety robe for relatives with less than great merits, he can visit relatives and friends after the funeral. If someone invites him to dinner, he can accept it if he is a relative; if he is not a relative, he cannot accept it.

古文：功衰食菜果，饮水浆，无盐酪。不能食食，盐酪可也。
现代文：三年之丧，过了练祭以后，可以吃蔬菜水果，可以喝水浆，但没有盐和醋；如果缺少盐醋就不能下饭，那么吃点盐醋也可以。
English: After the three-year mourning period, after the training festival, you can eat vegetables and fruits, you can drink water, but there is no salt and vinegar; if you can't have dinner without salt and vinegar, then you can eat some salt and vinegar.

古文：孔子曰： 身有疡则浴，首有创则沐，病则饮酒食肉。
现代文：孔子说： 孝子的身上生了疮就应该洗澡，头上生了疮就应该洗头，有了病就可以饮酒吃肉。
English: Confucius said: If a filial son has a boil on his body, he should take a bath; if he has a boil on his head, he should wash his hair; if he has a disease, he can drink alcohol and eat meat.

古文：毁瘠为病，君子弗为也。
现代文：哀伤过度形容憔悴以致于有病，君子是不这样干的。
English: It is not becoming of a gentleman to be so sad as to be ill.

古文：毁而死，君子谓之无子。 
现代文：倘因哀毁而死，君子就会说他的父母白养活了这个儿子。 
English: If he died of grief, the gentleman would say that his parents had brought up this son in vain.

古文：非从柩与反哭，无免于堩。
现代文：孝子如果不是送葬及葬毕回家反哭，都不应戴着免在路上行走。
English: If the filial son does not attend the funeral and go home crying after the funeral, he should not wear the amulet on the road.

古文：凡丧，小功以上，非虞附练祥，无沐浴。
现代文：在居丧期间，凡小功以上的亲属，除非虞祭、衬祭、练祭、大祥之祭，其他时间都不可洗头洗澡。
English: During the mourning period, all relatives of minor merit and above are not allowed to wash their hair and take a bath at other times, except for the Yu Festival, the Lin Festival, the Training Festival, and the Great Good Luck Festival.

古文：疏衰之丧，既葬，人请见之，则见；不请见人。
现代文：居齐衰之丧，在下葬以后，别人来求见则予以接见，但不主动去求见别人。
English: After the funeral, if others came to see him, he would receive them, but he would not take the initiative to see others.

古文：小功，请见人可也。
现代文：如果是为小功以下亲属服丧，既葬之后，求见别人是可以的。
English: If it is a funeral for a relative of minor merit or less, it is possible to ask to see others after the funeral.

古文：大功不以执挚。唯父母之丧，不辟涕泣而见人。
现代文：如果是为大功亲属服丧，求见别人也可以，但不能带着见面礼去。只有父母去世，才不忌讳满面泪水去见人。
English: If it's a funeral for a great relative, you can ask to see someone else, but you can't go with a greeting. Only if your parents have passed away should you go to see someone with tears in your eyes.

古文：三年之丧，祥而从政；期之丧，卒哭而从政；九月之丧，既葬而从政；小功缌之丧，既殡而从政。
现代文：守丧三年的人，大祥以后即服摇役。守丧一年的人，卒哭以后即服摇役。服丧九个月的人，下葬以后，即服摇役。为小功、绍麻亲属服丧五个月、三个月的人，移殡之后即服摇役。
English: For those who have been in mourning for three years, they will perform the shaking ceremony after the death of the deceased. For those who have been in mourning for one year, they will perform the shaking ceremony after the death of the deceased. For those who have been in mourning for nine months, they will perform the shaking ceremony after the burial. For those who have been in mourning for five months or three months for relatives of Shoko and Shoma, they will perform the shaking ceremony after the funeral.

古文：曾申问于曾子曰： 哭父母有常声乎？ 
现代文：曾申向曾子问道： 父母去世，孝子的哭声是否也有规定？ 
English: Zeng Shen asked his great-grandson: When parents die, is there a rule for the crying of a filial son?

古文：曰： 中路婴儿失其母焉，何常声之有？ 卒哭而讳。
现代文：曾子答道： 就像小孩子在半道上找不着母亲时乱哭一样，哪里有什么关于哭声的规定呢？ 
English: Zeng Zi replied, "Just like a child crying uncontrollably when it can't find its mother halfway down the road, where are the rules about crying?

古文：王父母兄弟，世父叔父，姑姊妹。子与父同讳。
现代文：妻子娘家已故亲属的名字，不可在妻子身边提起。
English: The name of a deceased relative of the wife's family must not be mentioned in the presence of the wife.

古文：母之讳，宫中讳。妻之讳，不举诸其侧；与从祖昆弟同名则讳。以丧冠者，虽三年之丧，可也。
现代文：如果母亲、妻子娘家已故的亲属与自己的从祖兄弟有同名者，那就要不论什么场合都避讳。遇到丧事仍可举行冠礼，这一条对于遇到三年之丧的人也适用。
English: If your mother, your wife, your daughter, or a deceased relative from your family has the same name as your grandparent, you should avoid it on any occasion. When there is a funeral, you can still hold a wreath-laying ceremony, and this rule also applies to people who have experienced a three-year death.

古文：既冠于次，入哭踊，三者三，乃出。
现代文：在倚庐中加冠后，进入灵堂，每哭一次跳起跺脚三次，一共哭三次跳起九次，然后走出灵堂。
English: After the crowning ceremony, he entered the chapel, jumped up and stamped his feet three times for every cry, jumping up and down a total of nine times for three cries, and then walked out of the chapel.

古文：大功之末，可以冠子，可以嫁子。
现代文：服大功丧服的人即将除服时，可以为儿子行冠礼，可以出嫁女儿。
English: When those who have performed great feats are about to take off their uniforms, they can perform the coronation ceremony for their sons and marry off their daughters.

古文：父，小功之末，可以冠子，可以嫁子，可以取妇。
现代文：父亲在即将除去大功丧服时，可以为儿子行冠礼，可以出嫁女儿，可以为儿子娶媳妇。
English: When a father is about to remove his funeral clothes, he can perform a coronation for his son, he can marry his daughter, and he can marry his son's daughter-in-law.

古文：己虽小功，既卒哭，可以冠，取妻；下殇之小功，则不可。
现代文：对于自己来说，只有在小功亲属的卒哭祭后，才可以行冠礼、娶媳妇；但如果是下疡的小功亲属，卒哭之后仍不可这样做。
English: For oneself, one can only perform the coronation rite and marry one's daughter-in-law after the wailing ceremony of minor meritorious relatives; however, if it is a minor meritorious relative who is chosen, one still cannot do so after the wailing ceremony.

古文：凡弁绖，其衰侈袂。
现代文：凡头戴弃纽去吊丧，其吊服的袖口都比较宽大。
English: The cuffs of the cape worn by those who go to funerals with a noose around their necks are relatively large.

古文：父有服，宫中子不与于乐。
现代文：父亲正在服丧，家中的子弟就不能观赏音乐。
English: The father is in mourning, and the children in the family cannot watch the music.

古文：母有服，声闻焉不举乐。
现代文：母亲正在服丧，可以听人家奏乐，但不能自己动手演奏。 
English: My mother is in mourning. I can listen to music, but I can't play it myself.

古文：妻有服，不举乐于其侧。
现代文：妻子正在服丧，不得在她身旁奏乐。
English: His wife is in mourning, and he is not allowed to play music near her.

古文：大功将至，辟琴瑟。小功至，不绝乐。
现代文：有大功丧服的人，在其亲人下葬后来访，就要收起乐器；如果是有小功丧服的人来访，不必停止奏乐。
English: If a person of great merit comes to visit after the funeral of his relative, he should put away his musical instruments; if a person of small merit comes to visit, he does not have to stop playing.

古文：姑姊妹，其夫死，而夫党无兄弟，使夫之族人主丧。妻之党，虽亲弗主。
现代文：姑、姊妹出嫁以后无子，其丈夫死了，而其丈夫家里又无兄弟，在这种情况下，就要让夫家的族人来主丧；姑、姊妹的娘家，虽有亲人也不应为之主丧。
English: If a mother-in-law or sister-in-law has no son after marriage, her husband has died, and there is no brother in her husband's family, in this case, it is necessary to let the husband's family members come to mourn; the mother-in-law or sister-in-law's family, although they have relatives, should not mourn for them.

古文：夫若无族矣，则前后家，东西家；无有，则里尹主之。
现代文：夫家如果连族人也没有，那就请前后左右的邻居主丧；如果前后左右邻居也没有，那就请里尹来主持。
English: If the couple does not have any relatives, they should invite their neighbors to be the chief mourners; if they do not have any neighbors, they should invite Li Yin to preside over the funeral.

古文：或曰：主之，而附于夫之党。
现代文：有的人说：让姑、姊妹的娘家人来主丧也可以，但神主却要附于夫的祖父。
English: Some people say, "It's okay to have your mother-in-law, sister-in-law's daughter, and family members come to mourn the Lord, but the Lord must be attached to your husband's grandfather."

古文：麻者不绅，执玉不麻。
现代文：服丧的人已束腰经，就不能再束吉服的大带。执玉行礼时不可穿丧服。
English: If the mourners have already tied up their waist, they can no longer tie up the large belt of the auspicious dress. They can't wear the mourning dress when performing the funeral rites.

古文：麻不加于采。
现代文：身上穿的是玄衣缥裳，头上就不可戴弃续。
English: If you wear a black dress on your body, you must not wear a turban on your head.

古文：国禁哭，则止朝夕之奠。即位自因也。
现代文：国家举行大祭祀时全国禁哭，遭丧的人家在举行朝夕奠时可以遵令不哭，但照旧站在哭位上是允许的。
English: Crying is prohibited throughout the country when the state holds large-scale religious services. The families of the deceased can obey the order not to cry when the morning and evening memorial services are held, but it is still allowed to stand on the crying place.

古文：童子哭不偯，不踊，不杖，不菲，不庐。
现代文：孝子如果还是个小孩子，就可以哭而不拉长声调，不跳起跺脚，不执丧杖，不穿绳展，不住依庐。
English: If a filial son is still a child, he can cry without raising his voice, without jumping up and stamping his feet, without holding a cane, without wearing a cape, without snuggling.

古文：孔子曰： 伯母、叔母，疏衰，踊不绝地。姑姊妹之大功，踊绝于地。
现代文：孔子说： 伯母、叔母死，为她们穿的是齐衰孝服，但哭时的跳耀却脚不离地；姑、姊妹死，为她们穿的是大功丧服，但哭时的跳跃却脚离地面。
English: Confucius said, "When aunts and uncles die, they wear the uniform of filial piety, but when they cry, their feet don't leave the ground. When sisters and aunts die, they wear the uniform of great merit, but when they cry, their feet don't leave the ground.

古文：如知此者，由文矣哉！由文矣哉！ 
现代文：如果明白了此中的道理，那才算是把礼文用到家了，把礼文用到家了。 
English: If you understand the reason for this, then it is considered to have used the eulogy to the home, to have used the eulogy to the home.

古文：世柳之母死，相者由左。
现代文：世柳的母亲去世，办丧事的时候，相者都是站在主人的左边。
English: When Se-ryu's mother passed away and the funeral was held, the groomsmen all stood to the left of the host.

古文：世柳死，其徒由右相。
现代文：泄柳死的时候，他的学生当相者却站在主人的右边。
English: At the time of his death, however, his pupil, the onlooker, was standing to the right of his master.

古文：由右相，世柳之徒为之也。
现代文：站在主人右边协助主人行礼，这种错误作法是从泄柳的学生开始的。
English: Standing on the right side of the host to assist the host in the salute, this wrong practice began with the students of Leyu Rong.

古文：天子饭，九贝；诸侯七，大夫五，士三。
现代文：天子死后，饭含用九个贝壳，诸侯用七个，大夫用五个，士用三个。
English: After the death of the heavenly son, nine shells were used for rice, seven for lords, five for doctors, and three for nobles.

古文：士三月而葬，是月也卒哭；大夫三月而葬，五月而卒哭；诸侯五月而葬，七月而卒哭。
现代文：士死后第三个月下葬，葬之当月就举行卒哭之祭。大夫死后第三个月下葬，第五个月举行卒哭之祭。诸侯死后第五个月下葬，第七个月举行卒哭之祭。
English: In the third month after the death of a scholar, the funeral is held, and the memorial service is held in the same month. In the third month after the death of a doctor, the funeral is held, and the memorial service is held in the fifth month. In the fifth month after the death of a vassal, the funeral is held, and the memorial service is held in the seventh month.

古文：士三虞，大夫五，诸侯七。
现代文：葬后的虞祭，士举行三次，大夫五次，诸侯七次。
English: After the funeral, the state festival was held three times for nobles, five times for doctors, and seven times for lords.

古文：诸侯使人吊，其次：含襚赗临，皆同日而毕事者也，其次如此也。
现代文：诸侯派遣使者到他国吊、含、隧、帽、临，这些仪节都是在同一天内完成的，其先后次序就是如此。
English: Princes sent emissaries to other countries to hang, contain, tunnel, cap and crown. These ceremonies were all completed on the same day, and their order of precedence is as follows.

古文：卿大夫疾，君问之无算；士一问之。
现代文：卿大夫生病，国君要探问无数次；士生病，国君只探问一次。
English: When a noble doctor is ill, the sovereign has to inquire countless times; when a scholar is ill, the sovereign has to inquire only once.

古文：君于卿大夫，比葬不食肉，比卒哭不举乐；为士，比殡不举乐。
现代文：国君对于卿大夫的去世，到了下葬那天不吃肉，到了卒哭那天不听音乐；对于士的去世，在入殡那天不欣赏音乐。
English: The sovereign does not eat meat on the day of burial for the death of a noble doctor, and does not listen to music on the day of mourning; for the death of a scholar, he does not enjoy music on the day of burial.

古文：升正柩，诸侯执綍五百人，四綍，皆衔枚，司马执铎，左八人，右八人，匠人执羽葆御柩。
现代文：将葬，移枢朝于祖庙，把灵枢抬到堂上放正。诸侯出葬，枢车上系四条大绳，由五百人来拉绳，拉绳的人皆衔枚；司马手执金铎，灵车左右各八人，摇动金铎以号令于众。
English: The dead are buried, the hearse is moved to the ancestral temple, and the coffin is carried to the hall to be placed upright. The princes are buried, the hearse is attached to four large ropes, five hundred people pull the ropes, and the people pulling the ropes all hold a piece; Sima holds the golden urn in his hand, and there are eight people on each side of the hearse, and they shake the golden urn to call out to the crowd.

古文：大夫之丧，其升正柩也，执引者三百人，执铎者左右各四人，御柩以茅。
现代文：匠人一名，手执羽葆走在灵车前面，以羽葆作为指挥灵车前进的信号。大夫出葬，在朝祖以后出葬时，枢车上系两条大绳，由三百人来牵引；·在灵车左右各有四个手执金铎的人；用旗帜作为指挥灵车前进的信号。
English: An artisan walks in front of the hearse, holding a feather duster, and uses the feather duster as a signal to command the hearse forward. The doctor is buried, and when he is buried after the ancestor, two large ropes are attached to the hearse, which is pulled by three hundred people; · There are four people holding gold hoops on each side of the hearse; Use the flag as a signal to command the hearse forward.

古文：孔子曰： 管仲镂簋而朱纮，旅树而反坫，山节而藻棁。
现代文：孔子说： 管仲身为大夫，却使用镂花镶玉的篡，系着朱红色的帽带，在大门内设置屏风，在堂上设置用以放还空酒杯的土台子，住室的斗拱上刻着山形图案，梁上的短柱雕有水草。
English: Confucius said: Guanzhong is a doctor, but he wears an embroidered and beaded cassock, wears a scarlet cap, sets up a screen in the gate, sets up a base for returning empty wine glasses in the hall, engraves a mountain pattern on the arch of the living room, and carves aquatic plants on the short column on the beam.

古文：贤大夫也，而难为上也。
现代文：不能说管仲不是个贤大夫，但从他的上述潜上行为来看，要当他的国君也够不容易的。
English: It cannot be said that Guan Zhong is not a wise doctor, but judging from his above-mentioned surreptitious behavior, it is not easy to be his sovereign.

古文：晏平仲祀其先人。豚肩不掩豆。
现代文：晏平仲身为大夫，却在祭祖时仅用一只小小的猪蹄膀，连碗都盛不满。
English: Zou Pingzhong is a doctor, but he only uses a small pig's trotter when offering sacrifices to the ancestors, and he is not even satisfied with the bowl.

古文：贤大夫也，而难为下也。
现代文：不能说晏平仲不是个贤大夫，但从他的这般克己来看，要当他的下属也够不容易的。
English: It cannot be said that Gong Pingzhong is not a wise doctor, but judging from his self-restraint, it is not easy to be his subordinate.

古文：君子上不僭上，下不偪下。 
现代文：君子的行为要与身份相称，既不潜上，又不逼下。 
English: A gentleman's behavior should be commensurate with his status, neither sneaking up nor forcing down.

古文：妇人非三年之丧，不逾封而吊。
现代文：妇道人家如果不是由于父母去世，就不越境到他国去吊丧。
English: If it is not due to the death of their parents, women will not cross the border to another country to mourn.

古文：如三年之丧，则君夫人归。
现代文：如果父母去世，就是贵为国君夫人也要归国奔丧。
English: If your parents die, even if you are the wife of the sovereign, you will have to return to the country to mourn.

古文：夫人其归也以诸侯之吊礼，其待之也若待诸侯然。
现代文：夫人归国奔丧之礼的规格，与诸侯亲自出吊的规格一样。主国接待夫人，也要像接待诸侯一样。
English: The specifications of the funeral ceremony for the return of the wife to the country are the same as those for the arrival of the princes in person. The host country should receive the wife in the same way as the princes.

古文：夫人至，入自闱门，升自侧阶，君在阼。
现代文：夫人来到主国，从宫旁小门进去，从侧阶登堂，主国国君站在东阶上等候，并不下阶相迎。
English: When the lady comes to the host country, she enters through the small gate next to the palace and ascends the hall from the side steps. The host country's sovereign stands waiting on the east steps and does not come down to meet her.

古文：其它如奔丧礼然。
现代文：其他礼仪都和奔丧礼一样。
English: The rest of the rites are the same as for a funeral.

古文：嫂不抚叔，叔不抚嫂。
现代文：小叔子死了，作嫂子的不可抚尸而哭；嫂子死了，作小叔子的也不可抚尸而哭。
English: If a younger brother-in-law dies, the sister-in-law may not touch the body and cry; if a younger brother-in-law dies, the sister-in-law may not touch the body and cry.

古文：君子有三患：未之闻，患弗得闻也；既闻之，患弗得学也；既学之，患弗能行也。
现代文：君子有三种忧虑：没有听说过的东西， 比虑不能够听说；已经听说到的东西，忧虑不能够学会；已经学会的东西，忧虑不能够实行。
English: There are three kinds of worries for a gentleman: what he has not heard, he cannot hear; what he has heard, he cannot learn; and what he has learned, he cannot put into practice.

古文：君子有五耻：居其位，无其言，君子耻之；有其言，无其行，君子耻之；既得之而又失之，君子耻之；地有余而民不足，君子耻之；众寡均而倍焉，君子耻之。
现代文：君子还有五种自感羞耻的事：身居其位而不谋其政，君子引以为耻；谋其政而不能付诸实行，君子引以为耻；已经付诸实行了而又半途而废，君子引以为耻，地广而民稀，君子引以为耻；与别国人口一样多而人家的财富比自己多一倍，君子引以为耻。
English: There are also five things of which a gentleman should be ashamed: he should be ashamed to occupy his position without seeking his government; he should be ashamed to seek his government without being able to put it into practice; he should be ashamed to have put it into practice and abandoned it halfway; he should be ashamed that his country is vast and his people are few; he should be ashamed that his country has as many people as other countries but twice as much wealth as himself.

古文：孔子曰： 凶年则乘驽马。祀以下牲。 
现代文：孔子说： 凶荒年景，乘车要用蓦马，祭祀用牲的规格要比平时降等。 
English: Confucius said: In the fierce years, it is necessary to use a steed to ride a car, and the specifications of sacrificial animals are lower than usual.

古文：恤由之丧，哀公使孺悲之孔子学士丧礼，士丧礼于是乎书。
现代文：恤由死时，鲁哀公派孺悲到孔子那里去学习士丧礼，于是《士丧礼》才被记载了下来。
English: At the time of his death, Lu Aikong sent Xing Kuang to Confucius to study the funeral rites of scholars, and so "The Funeral Rites of Scholars" was recorded.

古文：子贡观于蜡。孔子曰： 赐也乐乎？ 
现代文：子贡观看年终的蜡祭，孔子问他： 赐啊，你看出蜡祭给人们带来的巨大欢乐了吗？ 
English: Zigong watched the year-end Wax Festival. Confucius asked him, "Tell me, do you see the great joy that the Wax Festival brings to people?

古文：对曰： 一国之人皆若狂，赐未知其乐也！ 
现代文：子贡答道： 举国上卞都像是在发酒疯，学生我还看不出乐在何处？ 
English: Zigong replied, "The whole country seems to be going mad with drinking. I can't see where the fun is.

古文：子曰： 百日之蜡，一日之泽，非尔所知也。
现代文：孔子说。 人们辛勤劳作一年，好不容易才有这么一天享受，这是你体会不到的。
English: Confucius said, "People work hard for a year, and finally have such a day to enjoy, which you can't experience.

古文：张而不弛，文武弗能也；弛而不张，文武弗为也。
现代文：让民众一味紧张而没有一天轻松，即使文王、武王也不能把天下治理得好；让民众一味轻松而没有一天紧张，文王、武王也不会这么办。
English: Even King Wen and King Wu could not govern the world well if they kept the people tense all the time without a single day of relaxation; if they kept the people relaxed all the time without a single day of relaxation, King Wen and King Wu would not do so.

古文：一张一弛，文武之道也。 
现代文：该紧张时紧张，该轻松时轻松，这才是文主、武王治理天下的办法。 
English: When it is tense, it should be tense, and when it is relaxed, it should be relaxed. This is how the author, King Wu, governs the world.

古文：孟献子曰： 正月日至，可以有事于上帝；七月日至，可有事于祖。 
现代文：孟献子说： 正月冬至那一天，可以祭祀上天。七月夏至那一天，可以祭祀祖先。 
English: Meng Xianzi said: On the day of the winter solstice in the first month of the year, you can offer sacrifices to the heavens. On the day of the summer solstice in July, you can offer sacrifices to your ancestors.

古文：七月而禘，献子为之也。
现代文：在七月举行谛祭，是从孟献子开始的。
English: Held in July, the festival began with the offering of Meng Zi.

古文：夫人之不命于天子，自鲁昭公始也。
现代文：国君的夫人不再经过天子的认可，是从鲁昭公开始的。
English: The wife of the sovereign no longer had to be approved by the emperor. This began with King Lu Zhaogu.

古文：外宗为君夫人，犹内宗也。
现代文：外宗为国君、夫人服丧，其规格同于内宗。
English: The Gaizong will hold a funeral for the Emperor and Empress, with the same specifications as the Naizong.

古文：厩焚，孔子拜乡人为火来者。拜之，士壹，大夫再。亦相吊之道也。
现代文：孔子的马棚失火，乡人纷纷前来慰问，孔子表示拜谢时，对士拜谢一次，对大夫拜谢两次，用的也是拜谢吊客的礼数。
English: Confucius' stable caught fire, and villagers came in droves to offer their condolences. When Confucius expressed thanks, he thanked the attendant once, the doctor twice, and also used the number of thanks to thank the hangman.

古文：孔子曰： 管仲遇盗，取二人焉，上以为公臣，曰：管仲死，桓公使为之服。
现代文：孔子说： 管仲遇到一伙窃贼，从中选出二人，推荐给齐桓公为臣，说： 这两个人是由于结交匪类，所以犯法。
English: Confucius said: Guanzhong came across a group of thieves. He selected two of them and recommended them to Qi Huan as his vassals. He said: These two people broke the law because they were in league with bandits.

古文：宦于大夫者之为之服也，自管仲始也，有君命焉尔也。 
现代文：实际他们都是可以造就的人才。 管仲去世，齐桓公命令这两个人为管仲服丧。
English: In fact, both of them were talents that could be cultivated. When Guan Zhong passed away, King Qi ordered these two men to mourn for Guan Zhong.

古文：过而举君之讳，则起。
现代文：对于外国的侵犯，则虽赴汤蹈火，在所不辞。
English: With regard to foreign encroachments, although we will go to any lengths, we will not hesitate to do so.

古文：与君之讳同，则称字。内乱不与焉，外患弗辟也。赞，大行曰圭。公九寸，侯、伯七寸，子、男五寸。博三寸，厚半寸。剡上，左右各寸半，玉也。
现代文：《赞大行》上讲：朝见天子所用的圭，上公是九寸长，侯、伯是七寸长，子、男是五寸长；宽度都是三寸，圭的上端左右各削去一寸半，这些圭都是用玉制成的。
English: "Zan Da Xing" said: the cedar used to see the emperor in the morning is nine inches long, Hou and Bo are seven inches long, and Zi and Meng are five inches long; the width is three inches, and the upper end of the cedar is shaved off one and a half inches on the left and right. These cedars are made of jade.

古文：藻三采六等。
现代文：圭垫上用三种颜色横绕着画了六圈。
English: A rune in three colors was drawn six times around the cushion.

古文：哀公问子羔曰： 子之食奚当？ 
现代文：鲁哀公问子羔说： 你的祖上何时开始做官，傣禄又是多少？ 
English: Lu Aigong asked the lamb, "When did your ancestors start working as officials, and how much money did they earn?"

古文：对曰： 文公之下执事也。 
现代文：子羔答道： 从文公时开始当个低级办事员。 
English: The lamb replied: I have been working as a low-level clerk since I was a clerk.

古文：成庙则衅之。其礼：祝、宗人、宰夫、雍人，皆爵弁纯衣。雍人拭羊，宗人视之，宰夫北面于碑南，东上。
现代文：新庙落成就要举行血祭，其作法是：祝、宗人、宰夫、雍人都头戴爵弃，身穿丝质的吉服，由雍人把要杀的羊擦拭干净，由宗人检视一下，然后宰夫面向北站在碑南靠东的首位上。
English: When a new temple was built, a blood sacrifice was to be held. The procedure was as follows: Zhu, Zongren, Zaifu, and Yongren all wore silk clothes with their heads shaved, the Yongren wiped the sheep to be killed clean, the Zongren inspected it, and then Zaifu stood facing north at the top of the monument, south to east.

古文：雍人举羊，升屋自中，中屋南面，刲羊，血流于前，乃降。
现代文：雍人扛起羊从前檐正中登上屋顶，站在屋脊正中，面向南，把羊杀掉，等羊血流到前檐，才下来。
English: The Yong people carried the sheep from the middle of the front yard to the roof, stood in the middle of the roof ridge, facing south, killed the sheep, and waited for the sheep's blood to flow to the front yard before coming down.

古文：门、夹室皆用鸡。
现代文：衅庙门和夹室都用鸡。
English: Chicken is used for both the front door and the door between the rooms.

古文：先门而后夹室。
现代文：顺序是先衅庙门，后衅夹室。
English: The order is to attack the temple gate first, and then attack the room.

古文：其衈皆于屋下。
现代文：衅祭都在屋下进行。
English: All the provocative rituals take place under the roof.

古文：割鸡，门当门，夹室中室。
现代文：杀鸡血祭时，如果是祭门，就对着门杀鸡；如果是祭夹室，就在夹室中央杀鸡。
English: During the chicken blood sacrifice, if it is the sacrificial door, kill the chicken facing the door; if it is the sacrificial room, kill the chicken in the middle of the room.

古文：有司皆乡室而立，门则有司当门北面。
现代文：血祭夹室时，宰夫、祝、宗人皆面向夹室而立。血祭庙门时，宰夫、祝、宗人皆对着门，面向北。
English: When the blood sacrifice is held in the antechamber, the priest, the celebrant, and the priest's family all stand facing the antechamber. When the blood sacrifice is held at the temple gate, the priest, the celebrant, and the priest's family all face the gate, facing north.

古文：既事，宗人告事毕，乃皆退。反命于君曰： 衅某庙事毕。 
现代文：这些事情都作过了，宗人就向宰夫报告衅礼结束，于是全体退出，去向国君报告： 某庙的衅礼已经完毕。 
English: After all these things had been done, the patriarch reported to Zaif that the defiance ceremony was over, so they all withdrew and went to report to the sovereign: The defiance ceremony of a certain temple has ended.

古文：反命于寝，君南乡于门内朝服。
现代文：报告是在国君的路寝进行，国君面朝南，立于路寝门内，身穿朝服。
English: The report was made while the sovereign was sleeping on the road, facing south, standing in the doorway of the road, wearing a royal robe.

古文：既反命，乃退。
现代文：向国君报告以后，大家才退下。
English: After reporting to the sovereign, everyone retreated.

古文：路寝成则考之而不衅。
现代文：如果是路寝落成，那就只举行一个落成典礼而不举行血祭。
English: If the road is completed, then there will only be an inauguration ceremony and not a blood sacrifice.

古文：衅屋者，交神明之道也。
现代文：之所以要衅庙，是因为庙是和神明打交道的地方。
English: The reason why they want to attack the temple is because the temple is the place where they deal with the gods.

古文：凡宗庙之器。其名者成则衅之以豭豚。
现代文：凡是宗庙所用的器物，其重要者制成以后，都要用一只小公猪进行血祭。
English: After all the important objects used in the ancestral temple were made, a small boar was used for the blood sacrifice.

古文：诸侯出夫人，夫人比至于其国，以夫人之礼行；至，以夫人入。
现代文：诸侯休弃夫人，派使者将夫人送回本国，沿途仍以夫人之礼相待；来到本国，仍以夫人的身份入境。
English: Princes abandoned their wives and sent emissaries to return them to their home countries, still treating them with the courtesy of a wife along the way; when they came to their home countries, they still entered the country as a wife.

古文：使者将命曰： 寡君不敏，不能从而事社稷宗庙，使使臣某，敢告于执事。 
现代文：使者通过主国摈者传话说： 敝国国君不才，没有能力跟随夫人一道祭祀宗庙社樱，特派使臣某某将此下情报告您的左右。 
English: The envoy sent a message through the host country's messenger saying: "The host country's sovereign is incompetent and unable to follow his wife to worship the Imperial Family together. The special envoy will report this situation to you."

古文：主人对曰： 寡君固前辞不教矣，寡君敢不敬须以俟命。 
现代文：主国国君通过摈者回答说： 敝国国君本来一开始就说过没有把女儿教调好，现在闹到这个地步，敝国国君敢不恭敬从命吗。 
English: The host country's sovereign replied through the eavesdropper: "From the very beginning, you said that you did not adjust your daughter's education well, and now you have brought it to this point. Do you dare not respect and obey your orders?"

古文：有司官陈器皿；主人有司亦官受之。
现代文：于是跟随使者前来的办事人员就按规矩把夫人的陪嫁器物陈列出来，主国的办事人员也按规矩点收。
English: As a result, the clerk who came with the emissary displayed the lady's wedding accessories according to the rules, and the clerk of the host country also received them according to the rules.

古文：妻出，夫使人致之曰： 某不敏，不能从而共粢盛，使某也敢告于侍者。 
现代文：如果是大夫、士、庶民休弃其妻，就派人把妻送回娘家，并致词说： 某某不才，不能和她一道祭祀祖宗，特派我冒昧享告左右。 
English: If it is a doctor, a judge, or a commoner who abandons his wife, he will send someone to take her back to her mother's house, and make a speech saying, "This person is incompetent and cannot join her in the ancestor worship, so I have been specially sent to tell you about it."

古文：主人对曰： 某之子不肖，不敢辟诛，敢不敬须以俟命。 
现代文：主人回答说： 我的女儿不好，不敢逃避责罚，敢不恭敬从命。 
English: The master replied, "My daughter is not good. She dares not evade punishment. She dares not disobey orders.

古文：使者退，主人拜送之。
现代文：使者退出，主人以礼相送。
English: The messenger withdraws and the host sends him on his way.

古文：如舅在，则称舅；舅没，则称兄；无兄，则称夫。主人之辞曰： 某之子不肖。 
现代文：使者传话时，如果被休弃的妇人公公还在，就以公公的名义说： 某之子不敏。 
English: When the messenger comes, if the woman's father-in-law, from whom she has been estranged, is still alive, she shall say in the name of the father-in-law, "A certain man's son is ill."

古文：如姑姊妹，亦皆称之。
现代文：如果公公去世，就以其兄的名义说： 某之弟不敏。 
English: If the father-in-law dies, it is said in the name of his brother: "A certain brother is insensitive."

古文：孔子曰： 吾食于少施氏而饱，少施氏食我以礼。
现代文：如果没有兄长，就用丈夫的名义致词。主人的答词说： 我的女儿不好。 
English: If there is no brother, then she shall speak in the name of her husband, and he shall answer and say, My daughter is not well.

古文：吾祭，作而辞曰： 疏食不足祭也。 
现代文：如果被休弃的是主人的姑或姊妹，答词就要做相应的改动。孔子说： 我在少施氏家作客能吃得饱，因为少施氏能依礼招待我。
English: If it is the host's sister-in-law or sister-in-law who is rejected, the answer should be changed accordingly.Confucius said: I can eat my fill as a guest in the house of Shosi, because Shosi can invite me according to etiquette.

古文：吾飧，作而辞曰： 
现代文：我祭食时，他就起身辞谢说： 粗茶淡饭，不值得祭。 
English: When I was sacrificing food, he stood up and said, "Coarse tea and light meals are not worthy of sacrifice.

古文：纳币一束：束五两，两五寻。
现代文：食毕，我赞美主人做的饭菜可口时，他又起身辞谢说： 粗茶淡饭，只怕伤了您的胃口。 
English: After the meal, when I complimented my host on the deliciousness of the meal, he stood up and said, "I'm afraid I've hurt your appetite with the weak tea and light rice.

古文：妇见舅姑，兄弟、姑姊妹，皆立于堂下，西面北上，是见已。
现代文：订婚的礼品是布帛一束，一束五卷，每卷四丈长。新媳妇拜见公婆时，丈夫的兄弟、姑、姊妹等亲属都立在堂下，面向西，以北头为上位，这也等于是和这些人都见过了。
English: The betrothal gift is a bundle of cloth, a bundle of five rolls, each roll four feet long. When the new daughter-in-law visits her parents-in-law, the husband's brothers, sisters, and other relatives are standing under the hall, facing west, with the north end as the top, which is also equivalent to seeing these people.

古文：见诸父，各就其寝。
现代文：至于拜见丈夫的伯父、叔父，因其是长辈，所以要到他们的住处去拜见。
English: As for visiting her husband's uncles and aunts, since they are the elders, she has to visit them at their homes.

古文：女虽未许嫁，年二十而笄，礼之，妇人执其礼。
现代文：女子虽未许嫁，到了二十岁时也要行异礼。为她行异礼时，在家找个妇人就行了，不须另请女宾。
English: Although a girl is not allowed to marry, she has to perform a rite of passage at the age of twenty. When performing a rite of passage for her, it is enough to find a woman at home, there is no need to invite another female guest.

古文：燕则鬈首。
现代文：行过异礼之后，平常在家，还是暮首发型。
English: After going through the rite, usually at home, or twilight hairstyle.

古文：韠：长三尺，下广二尺，上广一尺。
现代文：桦的形制：长三尺，下端宽二尺，上端宽一尺，五寸。
English: The shape of the pestle: three feet long, two feet wide at the bottom, one foot wide at the top, five inches.

古文：会去上五寸，纰以爵韦六寸，不至下五寸。纯以素，紃以五采。
现代文：领缝以下的桦的两边，用爵韦表里镶边共六寸领缝距上端，下端有五寸长不用爵韦镶边，而用素绩镶边；在所有镶边的缝中都嵌有五彩丝带。
English: Both sides of the collar below the neckline are trimmed with jacquard lace, with a total of six inches of neckline from the upper end, and the lower end is five inches long. Do not use jacquard lace, but use plain lace; there are multicolored ribbons embedded in all the seams of the lace.

