古文：弘辨更以纸帖墨刻本公所勒相畀，且言遍周师以青蚨相赆，余作柬谢之。
现代文：十一日饭后，觉得左脚拇指不舒服，是被皮鞋压迫所致。而复吾又要我不要外出，姑且休息一天，我听从了。弘辨、安仁取出其师所写的书给我看，弘辨另外送给我纸帖墨刻，而且说遍周法师要送钱给我作路费，我写帖子答谢他。
English: After dinner on the 11th day, I felt my left big toe was uncomfortable, which was caused by the pressure of the leather shoes. Fugu also asked me not to go out, but to take a day off, and I obeyed. Hongban and Anren took out a book written by their teacher to show me. Hongban also gave me a paper sticker and ink, and said that Master Fen Zhou wanted to give me money for travel expenses. I wrote a post to thank him.

古文：甫令顾仆持去，而大觉僧复路遇持来，余姑纳之笥：可盛物。
现代文：刚让顾仆去送帖子，而大觉寺僧人又送钱来，和顾仆在路上相遇，我暂时收下装进竹箱。
English: I had just sent a messenger to deliver a post, and a monk from Daegu Temple sent money. I met the messenger on the road, and I temporarily accepted it and put it in a bamboo box.

古文：上午，赴复吾招，出茶果，皆异品。
现代文：上午，赴复吾的招待，摆出的茶果都是珍品。
English: In the morning, the invitation to go to Fugu, the tea fruits displayed are all rare.

古文：有本山参，以蜜炙为脯，又有孩儿参，颇具人形，皆山中产。
现代文：有本山参，加蜜烤干成脯，又有孩儿参，很像人形，都是山中出产。
English: There is the main mountain ginseng, roasted with honey and dried into a stew, and there is also a child's ginseng, very much like a doll, all of which are produced in the mountains.

古文：又有桂子，又有海棠子，皆所未见者。
现代文：又有桂子，又有海棠子，都是从未见过的。
English: There was also a guinea fowl and a crabapple, both of which had never been seen before.

古文：大抵迤西果品，吾地所有者皆有，惟栗差小，而枣无肉。
现代文：大抵滇西的果品，我家乡有的都有，只是栗子比较小，而枣子没有肉。
English: Most of the fruits from Shaanxi are available in my hometown, but the chestnuts are relatively small, and the dates have no flesh.

古文：松子、胡桃、花椒，皆其所出，惟龙眼、荔枝市中亦无。
现代文：松子、胡桃、花椒，都是滇西出产，而龙眼、荔枝市场上也没有。
English: Pine nuts, walnuts, and bell peppers are all produced in the west of Shaanxi, but there is no longan or lychee on the market.

古文：菌之类，鸡葼之外，有白生香蕈。
现代文：菌子之类，除鸡萝之外，有白生、香覃。
English: Fungi and the like, in addition to dill, include white radish and scallions.

古文：此间石蜜最佳，白若凝脂，视之有肥腻之色，而一种香气甚异，因过安仁斋中观兰。
现代文：白生生长在树上，形状像半朵香覃，不圆而薄，脆而不硬。此山中的石蜜最好，白得像凝脂，看上去有肥腻之色，而且有一种很奇异的香气。接着到安仁斋中观赏兰花。
English: Bai Sheng grows on a tree, shaped like a half of a carnation, not round but thin, crisp but not hard. The stone honey in this mountain is the best, white like curd, looks greasy, and has a very strange aroma. Then go to Anren Lai to see the orchids.

古文：兰品最多，有所谓雪兰、花白玉兰花绿最上，虎头兰最大，红舌、白舌以心中一点，如舌外吐也。最易开，其叶皆阔寸五分，长二尺而柔，花一穗有二十余朵，长二尺五者，花朵大二三寸，瓣阔共五六分，此家兰也。
现代文：兰花的品种很多，有所说的雪兰、玉兰最上品，虎头兰最大，红舌、白舌最容易开花，其叶子都一寸五分宽，长二尺而且柔软，一穗花有二十余朵，长二尺五寸，花朵有二三寸大，花瓣宽五六分，这是家兰。
English: There are many varieties of orchids. It has been said that Xuelang and Magnolia are the most elegant, and the tiger's head orchid is the largest. Red tongue and white tongue are the easiest to bloom. Its leaves are one and a half inches wide, two feet long and soft. One spikelet has more than 20 flowers, two feet and five inches long, the flowers are two or three inches large, and the petals are five or six inches wide. This is the orchid.

古文：十二日四长老期上九重崖，赴一衲轩供，一衲轩为木公所建，守僧岁支寺中粟百石，故每岁首具供一次。
现代文：那些野生的，一穗一花，和我家乡的没有两样，但叶更细，花香也清新，飘得远。这里也重视牡丹，悉檀寺没有山茶但牡丹很多，元宵节前，花蕊已经像鸡蛋一样大了。
English: Those wild ones, one spike and one flower, are no different from those in my hometown, but the leaves are finer, the flower scent is also fresh, and it floats far away. Peonies are also valued here. Siddanji does not have mountain tea, but there are a lot of peonies. Before the Lantern Festival, the flower stamens are already as big as eggs.

古文：以雨不能行。饭后坐斋头，抵午而霁，乃相拉上崖。
现代文：十二日四位长老约好上九重崖，去赴一钠轩的供饭，因下雨不能出发。饭后坐在书斋里，到中午天才晴开，于是互相牵拉着上九重崖。
English: On the twelfth day, the four elders made an appointment to climb the nine-story cliff, to go to a monastery for a meal, but could not set out because of the rain. After the meal, they sat in the study, and it was not clear until noon, so they pulled each other up the nine-story cliff.

古文：始由寺左半里，上弘辨静室基旁。
现代文：开始沿寺左走半里，登上弘辨静室的地基旁。
English: Start by walking half a mile along the left side of the temple and climb up next to the foundation of the Koban Seclusion Room.

古文：又西半里，过天柱静室旁。
现代文：又往西半里，经过天柱的静室旁。
English: Another half-mile to the west, past the still-life room of the Temple of Heaven.

古文：又北跻一里半，横陟峡箐，始与一西来路合，遂东盘峡上。
现代文：又往北登攀一里半，横穿峡著，于是和一条西边伸来的路会合，就往东盘绕峡谷而上。
English: Another mile-and-a-half north, across the gorge, where it meets a road coming from the west and winds its way up the gorge to the east.

古文：半里，其北又下坠一峡，大路陟峡而逾东北岭，乃北下后川向罗川之道；小路攀脊西北上，乃九重崖之东道，其路甚峻，即余前所上者。
现代文：半里，北面又往下坠有一道峡谷，大路穿过峡谷然后越东北岭，于是往北下后川通向罗川的路；小路攀脊往西北上，是九重崖的东道，这条路很陡，就是我以前所上去的路。
English: Half a mile to the north, there is a canyon that plunges down. The main road crosses the canyon and then crosses the Northeast Ridge, and then goes north to the road from Houchuan to Luochuan; the path climbs the ridge to the northwest and is the host of the nine cliffs. This road is very steep, which is the road I used to go up.

古文：第此时阴晴未定，西南望香木坪一带积雪峥嵘，照耀山谷，使人心目融彻，与前之丽日澄空，又转一光明法界境界矣。
现代文：只是此时阴晴未定，往西南眺望香木坪一带，积雪峥嵘，照耀山谷，使人心目通明透亮，和以前的丽日澄空相比，又是另一种光明境界。
English: However, it was cloudy and overcast at this time. Looking southwest, I saw the area around Xiangmuping covered with snow and shining in the valley, which made my eyes bright and clear. Compared to the clear sky of the previous days, it was another bright realm.

古文：一里余，抵河南师静室。
现代文：走一里多，到河南法师的静室。
English: Walk more than a mile to the Henan mage's seclusion room.

古文：路过其外，问而知之。
现代文：从室外路过，询问后才知道。
English: Passing by outside, I didn't know until I asked.

古文：雨色复来，余令众静侣先上一衲轩，而独往探之。
现代文：雨又来临，我让众静侣先上一钠轩，然后独自去访法师。
English: The rain came again, and I let all the quiet couples go to the Sodium Pavilion first, and then I went to visit the mage alone.

古文：师为河南人，至山即栖此庐，而曾未旁出。
现代文：法师是河南省人，到鸡足山后就住在此屋，而未曾外出。
English: The monk is from Henan Province. He lived in this house after he arrived in Jiefu Mountain, and never went out.

古文：余前从九重崖登顶，不知而过其上；后从狮林欲横过野愚东点头峰下，又不得路；踌躇至今，恰得所怀。
现代文：我以前从九重崖登绝顶，不知道有屋而从上面走过；后来从狮子林想横穿野愚静室东边的点头峰下，又没有路；犹豫到今天，才恰好得以实现所想。
English: In the past, I climbed to the top of a cliff in Jiujie County, but I didn't know if there was a house there, so I walked over it. Later, I wanted to cross the lion forest to the foot of the nodding peak on the east side of the Wild Fool's Room, but there was no way. I hesitated until today, when I was able to realize what I wanted.

古文：比入庐，见师，人言其独栖，而见其一室三侣；人言其不语，而见其条答有叙；人言其不出，而见其把臂入林，亦非块然者。
现代文：等进入房屋，见到法师，人们说他独自一人居住，却见一间屋中有三个僧侣；人们说他不讲话，却见他逐条对答而有次序；人们说他不出屋，却见他与友把臂入林，也没有孤独的样子。
English: People say that he does not speak, but they see him answering questions in an orderly manner; people say that he does not go out of the house, but they see him walking with a friend into the forest, and he does not look lonely.

古文：九重崖静室得师，可与狮林、罗汉鼎足矣。
现代文：九重崖静室住着这位法师，使其地位可以和狮子林、罗汉壁鼎足而立了。
English: The sorcerer lives in Jiuya Static Room, making his status equal to that of Lion Forest and Luohan Wall.

古文：坐少定，一衲轩僧来邀，雨阵大至，既而雪霏，师挽留，稍霁乃别。
现代文：稍微坐定，一钠轩的僧人来邀请，雨又阵阵地下起来，不久又雪花霏霏，法师挽留，到雪渐渐停了才告别。
English: After settling down a bit, a monk from Nanxuan came to invite him, the rain came down in waves, and soon the snowflakes fell, and the sorcerer stayed until the snow gradually stopped before saying goodbye.

古文：蹑磴半里，有大道自西上，横陟之，遂入一衲轩。
现代文：攀登半里石阶，有大路往西边上，横穿大路，就进入一钠轩。
English: After climbing half a kilometer of stone steps, there is a road to the west, cross the road, and enter a salt mine.

古文：崖中静主大定、拙明辈，皆供餐络绎，迨暮不休。
现代文：九重崖静室的主人大定、拙明之辈，都络绎不断地供餐，直到傍晚还没停止。
English: The owners of the quiet room in Jiuya, Da Ding and Zhuo Ming, were constantly serving meals, until the evening had not stopped.

古文：雨雪时作，四长老以骑送余，自大道西下。
现代文：雨雪不时地下，四位长老用马送我，从大路往西下。
English: It rained and snowed from time to time, and four elders on horseback escorted me down the main road to the west.

古文：其道从点头峰下，横盘脊峡，时岚雾在下，深崖峭壑，茫不可辨。
现代文：大路顺点头峰而下，横绕山脊峡谷，此时雾在下方，深崖峭壑，茫然一片，不能分辨。
English: The road descends along the head of the mountain, across the ridge of the canyon, at this time the fog is below, the deep cliff is steep, a daze, can not be distinguished.

古文：二里，与狮林道合，已在幻住庵之后，西与大觉塔院隔峡相对矣。
现代文：二里，与去狮子林的路会合，已经在幻住庵之后，西边和大觉寺塔院隔峡谷相对了。
English: Two miles later, at the junction with the road to the lion forest, already after the phantom hermitage, the west side and the pagoda yard of Da Jue Temple are opposite the canyon.

古文：至此始胜骑，从幻住前下山，又四里而入悉檀。篝灯作杨赵州书。
现代文：到这里才能够骑马，从幻住庵前下山，又走四里就进入悉檀寺，点灯给赵州杨知州写信。
English: It is only here that you can ride a horse, descend the mountain in front of the phantom hermitage, walk four miles to enter Siddan Temple, light a lamp and write a letter to Zhao Zhou Yang Chizhou.

古文：十三日晨起饭，即以杨赵州书畀顾仆，令往致杨君。
现代文：十三日早晨起床吃饭，就把给杨知州的信交顾仆，让他送去给杨君。
English: On the morning of the thirteenth day, when he got up to eat, he handed the letter to Yang Zhizhou to his attendant and asked him to send it to Yang Jun.

古文：余追忆日记于东楼。下午，云净天皎。
现代文：我在东楼补记日记。下午，阴云散尽，天色明亮。
English: I'm filling in my diary in the East Building. In the afternoon, the clouds have dispersed and the sky is bright.

古文：十四日早寒，以东楼背日，余移砚于藏经阁前桃花下，就暄为记。
现代文：十四日早上很冷，因为东楼背阳光，我把砚台移到藏经阁前的桃花下，就着温暖的太阳写日记。
English: It was very cold on the morning of the 14th, because the east building was shaded from the sun, so I moved the desk to under the peach blossoms in front of the library, and wrote my diary in the warm sun.

古文：上午，妙宗师以鸡葼茶果饷，师亦检藏其处也。
现代文：上午，妙宗法师带鸡萝、茶果来吃，法师也在这里查阅经藏。
English: In the morning, Mage Myosong brought chicken, radish and tea fruits to eat, and Mage also checked the scriptures here.

古文：是日，晴霁如故。
现代文：这天，天气晴朗。
English: On this day, the weather is fine.

古文：迨晚，余忽病嗽。
现代文：到晚上，我忽然生病咳嗽。
English: In the evening, I suddenly fell ill with a cough.

古文：十五日余以嗽故，卧迟迟，午方起。
现代文：十五日我因为咳嗽的原故，很晚还躺着，中午才起床。
English: On the fifteenth day, because of my cough, I stayed up late and did not get up until noon.

古文：日中云集，迨晚而翳。
现代文：白天浓云聚集，到晚上就遮蔽天空。
English: Dense clouds will gather during the day and obscure the sky in the evening.

古文：余欲索灯卧，弘辨诸长老邀过西楼观灯。
现代文：我想要灯睡下，弘辨等长老邀请过西楼观赏灯。
English: I wanted to sleep under the lamp, and the elders such as Hongban invited me to the West Tower to watch the lamp.

古文：灯乃闽中纱围者，佐以柑皮小灯，或挂树间，或浮水面，皆有荧荧明星意，惟走马纸灯，则而不章也楼下采青松毛铺藉为茵席，去卓桌趺坐，前各设盒果注茶为玩，初清茶，中盐茶，次蜜茶，本堂诸静侣环坐满室，而外客与十方诸僧国外来的僧人不与焉。
现代文：灯是用福建省出的纱围成的，配搭上柑皮小灯，有的挂在树间，有的浮在水面，都有星光闪烁的意境，只有走马灯，则是昏暗而不显著。楼下采回青松毛铺垫成座席，去掉桌子而结枷跌坐，各自面前设置盒果，泡茶赏玩，第一道清茶，第二道是盐茶，第三道为蜜茶，本寺众静侣环室坐满，而外来的客人与十方众僧不参与。
English: The lanterns are made of yarn from cucumbers from Fujian Province. They are paired with small lanterns made of citrus peel. Some are hung between trees, and some float on the water surface. They all have a star-spangled artistic mood. Only the horse lanterns are dim and inconspicuous. Downstairs, the collected green pine hairs are cushioned into seats. The tables are removed and the shackles are put down. Box fruits are set up in front of each other. Tea is brewed and enjoyed. The first course is clear tea, the second course is salt tea, and the third course is honey tea. This temple is full of couples,

古文：余因忆昔年三里龙灯，一静一闹；粤西、滇南，方之异也；梵宇官衙，寓之异也，惟佳节与旅魂无异！
现代文：我于是回忆去年三里的龙灯，一静一闹。广西、云南地方不同，庙宇官衙，住处不同，只有元宵佳节和旅客游魂没有什么不同。
English: I then recalled the dragon lanterns in Sanli last year, one quiet and one noisy. Guangxi and Yunnan are different, the temples are different, the residences are different, only the Lantern Festival and the tourists are no different.

古文：为黯然而起，则殿角明蟾，忽破云露魄矣。
现代文：因为感到神情沮丧而起身，则殿角的明月，忽然穿破云层，洒下了月光。
English: Because he felt depressed and got up, the bright moon in the corner of the hall suddenly broke through the clouds and shed moonlight.

古文：十六日晨餐后，复移砚就喧于藏经阁前桃花下。
现代文：十六日早饭后，又移砚台到藏经阁前桃花下就阳光写日记。
English: On the 16th, after breakfast, I moved to Zojie Pavilion in front of the peach blossoms to write a diary in the sunshine.

古文：日色时翳。
现代文：太阳不时地被遮蔽。
English: The sun is occluded from time to time.

古文：下午返东楼，嗽犹未已。
现代文：下午返回东楼，咳嗽还没停。
English: In the afternoon, I returned to the East Building. My cough had not stopped.

古文：抵暮，复云开得月。
现代文：到晚上，云又散开而得以看到月亮。
English: In the evening, the clouds parted again and we could see the moon.

古文：十七日作记东楼。
现代文：十七日在东楼写日记。
English: On the seventeenth day, write a diary in the east building.

古文：雨色时作。
现代文：天不时有要下雨的样子。
English: It looks like it's going to rain from time to time.

古文：十八日浓云密布，既而开霁。
现代文：十八日浓云密布，不久散开夫晴。
English: On the 18th, the clouds were thick and soon cleared.

古文：薄暮，顾仆返自赵州。
现代文：傍晚，顾仆从赵州返回。
English: In the evening, Gu Min returned from Zhaozhou.

古文：十九日饭后，晴霁殊甚。
现代文：十九日饭后，天气特别晴朗。
English: After lunch on the 19th, the weather was particularly fine.

古文：遂移卧具，由悉檀而东，越大乘东涧，一里上脊，即迎祥寺。
现代文：于是搬迁卧具，从悉檀寺往东走，越过大乘庵东边的沟涧，走一里上脊，就是迎祥寺。
English: So they moved the bedding, walked east from Siddan-ji Temple, crossed the gully on the east side of the Daijyo-an, and walked one mile up the ridge to Yingxiao-ji Temple.

古文：从其南上，寺后半里为石钟寺，又后为圆通、极乐二庵。
现代文：从寺南往上走，寺后半里处是石钟寺，再往后是圆通、极乐二庵。
English: Walking up from the south of the temple, half a mile behind the temple is the Stone Bell Temple, and further back is the Round Street, Jiule 2 An.

古文：极乐之右即西竺，西竺之后即龙华。
现代文：极乐庵的右边就是西竺寺，西竺寺之后是龙华寺。
English: To the right of Gokuraku-an is Saiho-ji Temple, and after Saiho-ji Temple is Ronghwa-ji Temple.

古文：从龙华前西过大路，已在西竺之上，去石钟又一里矣。
现代文：从龙华寺前往西到大路，已经在西竺寺之上，距离石钟寺又有一里了。
English: From Longhua Temple to Xidi Road, it is already above Xidi Temple, and it is another mile away from Shihong Temple.

古文：龙华之北坡上，即大觉寺。
现代文：龙华寺的北坡上就是大觉寺。
English: On the northern slope of Longhua Temple is Daikyo Temple.

古文：龙华西，临涧又有一寺，前与石钟同东南向。
现代文：龙华寺西，正对沟涧又有一座寺，和前面的石钟寺一样面朝东南。
English: West of Longhua Temple, just opposite the gully, there is another temple, facing south-east, just like the Stone Bell Temple in front.

古文：从其后渡涧，即彼岸桥，下流即息阴轩，已为中支之脊矣。
现代文：从其后面渡过沟涧，是彼岸桥，下游就是息阴轩，已经到中支的山脊了。
English: After crossing the ravine, it is the other bank bridge, and the downstream is Siyin Xuan, which has reached the ridge of the middle branch.

古文：从轩左北向上，过观音阁，为千佛寺，其前即昔之街子，正当中脊，今为墟矣。
现代文：从轩左往北上，经过观音阁，是千佛寺，寺前就是从前的街子，正好位于中支脊上，如今空无一人。
English: From the left of Xuan to the north, past Guanyin Pavilion, is the Thousand Buddha Temple. In front of the temple is the former town, right on the middle ridge, now empty.

古文：复北渡涧，从大觉侧西北上。
现代文：又往北渡沟涧，从大觉寺侧边往西北上。
English: It also went to the Beidou ravine, and from the side of the Daikyo-ji Temple to the northwest.

古文：寺僧留余人，谢之。
现代文：寺中的僧人挽留我进去，我辞谢了。
English: The monk in the temple asked me to stay inside, but I declined.

古文：仍过涧桥，上有屋，额曰 彼岸同登 ，其水从望台岭东下，界于寂光、大觉之间者，龙华至此，又一里矣。
现代文：仍然从沟涧上的桥过去，桥上有屋，匾额为 彼岸同登 ，桥下的水从望台岭东流下来，以寂光寺、大觉寺之间为界，从龙华寺到这里，又有一里了。
English: I still went over the bridge on the gully, there was a house on the bridge, the bridge was built on the other side of the river, and the water under the bridge flowed down from the east of Wangdai Ridge, bounded by Jakuang Temple and Daegu Temple, and it was another mile from Longhua Temple to here.

古文：过桥复蹑中支上，半里，中脊为水月庵，脊之东腋为寂光，脊之西腋为首传。
现代文：过桥后又攀登中支而上，半里，脊正中的是水月庵，脊的东侧是寂光寺，脊的西侧是首传寺。
English: After crossing the bridge, I climbed up the middle branch, half a mile. In the middle of the ridge is Suigetsu-an, on the east side of the ridge is Jakko-ji Temple, and on the west side of the ridge is Shuchuan-ji Temple.

古文：僧净方，年九十矣，留余，未入。
现代文：僧人净方，有九十岁了，留我，我没进去。
English: The ninety-year-old monk, Rinpoche, let me stay. I didn't go in.

古文：由寺右盘一嘴，东觑一庵，桃花嫣然，松影历乱，趋之，即积行庵也。
现代文：从寺西绕过一道山口，往东看到一座庵，桃花开得很美，松影纷乱，急忙过去，就是积行庵。
English: From the west of the temple, you go around a mountain pass, and to the east you see a hermitage. The peach blossoms are beautiful, the pine shadows are chaotic, and you hurry past it. This is Jyogyo-an.

古文：其庵在水月之西，首传之北。
现代文：此庵在水月庵之西，首传寺之北。
English: This hermitage is to the west of Suigetsu hermitage and to the north of Shudenji.

古文：僧觉融留饭。
现代文：僧人觉融留我吃饭。
English: The monk Jue melted my heart and kept me from eating.

古文：后乃从庵左东上，转而西北登脊。从中支脊上二里，有静室当脊，是曰烟霞室，克心之徒本和所居。
现代文：饭后就从庵左往东上，转向西北登山脊，顺中支山脊上二里，有静室位于脊上，这是烟霞室，克心的徒弟本和的住所。
English: After the meal, I walked from the hermitage to the east, turned to the northwest ridge, and walked along the middle branch ridge for two miles. There was a quiet room on the ridge. This was the smoke and haze room, the residence of Benwa, the disciple of Kechin.

古文：由其西分岐上罗汉壁，由其东盘峡上旃檀岭。
现代文：从其西分出的岔路上罗汉壁，从罗汉壁东盘绕峡谷上旎檀岭。
English: Luo Hanbi is on the branch road from the west, and Shangyu Danling is on the winding canyon from the east of Luo Hanbi.

古文：岭从峡西下，路北向作 之 字上，一里，得克心静室。
现代文：岭从峡谷西边伸下去，路往北作 之 字形上，一里，到克心的静室。
English: The ridge stretches down from the west side of the canyon, and the road goes north along the zigzag, one mile, to the quiet room of Keshin.

古文：克心者，用周之徒，昔住持寂光，今新构此，退休。
现代文：克心是用周的徒弟，从前是寂光寺的住持，如今新建此静室退休。
English: Keshin is Zhou's apprentice, formerly the abbot of Jakko Temple, now retired in this newly built seclusion room.

古文：其地当垂脊之左，东向稍带南，又以西支外禾字孔大山为虎砂，以点头峰为龙砂，龙近而虎远，又与狮林之砂异。
现代文：静室位于中支山脊的左边，东向而稍微偏南，又以西支外禾字孔大山作为虎砂，以点头峰作为龙砂，龙砂近而虎砂远，与狮子林的龙砂、虎砂又不相同。
English: The quiet room is located on the left side of the mid-branch ridge, eastward and slightly southward, and the west branch of the mountain outside the mountain as the tiger sand, with the nodding peak as the dragon sand, the dragon sand is close and the tiger sand is far away, and the dragon sand and tiger sand of the lion forest are different.

古文：其东有中和静室，亦其徒也，为郁攸火所焚，今中和往省矣。
现代文：室东有中和的静室，也是他的徒弟的，被火焚毁，如今中和到省城去了。
English: Muroto had Nakawa's study, also his apprentice's, destroyed by fire, and now Nakawa has gone to the provincial capital.

古文：克心留余，点茶稠叠，久之别，已下午。
现代文：克心留我，点心多茶水勤，很久才告别，已经下午了。
English: Kept me awake, made lots of tea and biscuits, took a long time to say goodbye, it was already afternoon.

古文：遂从右上、小径峻极，令其徒偕。
现代文：于是从右边上，小路极其陡峻，克心让他的徒弟陪同。
English: So from the right side, the path is extremely steep, and he reluctantly let his apprentice accompany him.

古文：上半里，得西来大道，随之东上。
现代文：上半里，走到西边伸来的大路，顺路往东上。
English: In the first half, walk to the main road that stretches to the west and follow the road to the east.

古文：又半里，破旋檀岭脊而西南行，经烟霞室，渐转东南，为水月、寂光。由其前，又西南一里，盘一嘴，有庐在嘴上，余三过皆钥门不得入，其下即白云寺所托也。
现代文：又半里，登旎檀岭脊而往西南行，经过烟霞室，渐渐转向东南，到水月庵、寂光寺，从庵前、寺前经过，又往西南走一里，绕过一道山口，山口上有房舍，我三次经过都锁着门，不能进去，下面就是白云寺所傍靠的地方。
English: After another half mile, I climbed the ridge of the Danzhong Mountains to the southwest, passed through the Smoky Room, and gradually turned to the southeast, to the Suigetsu Crane Temple, Jakko Temple, passed through the front of the hermitage and the temple, and walked another mile to the southwest, bypassing a mountain pass. There was a house on the mountain pass. I locked the door three times and could not get in. Below is the place next to the Baiyun Temple.

古文：又西半里，再盘突嘴而上，即慧心静室。
现代文：又往西半里，再绕着突起的山口而上，就是慧心的静室。
English: Another half-mile to the west, then around the protruding mountain pass and up, is the quiet room of wisdom.

古文：慧心为幻空徒，始从野愚处会之，前曾过悉檀来叩，故入叩之，方禅诵会灯庵，其徒供茶而去。
现代文：慧心是幻空的徒弟，最早在野愚那里会过面，以前曾来到悉檀寺拜访，所以我进入拜访他，他正在会灯庵禅诵，他的徒弟上茶后离去。
English: Wisdom is a disciple of illusion and emptiness. I first met him at the Wild Goose. I had previously visited Siddan Temple, so I went to visit him. He was chanting at the Lantern Hall, and his disciple left after tea.

古文：后即碧云寺，不入。
现代文：后面就是碧云寺，没有进去。
English: Behind is the Bi Yun Temple, but we didn't go inside.

古文：从其侧又盘嘴两重，二里，北上西来寺，西经印雪楼前，又西循诸绝壁行，一里，为一真兰若，其上覆石平飞。
现代文：从静室侧面又绕过两道山口，二里，往北上西来寺，往西经过印雪楼前，又往西顺着路在绝壁上走。一里，到一真兰若，上面覆盖的石头平滑如欲飞状。
English: From the side of the still room, walk around the two mountain passes, two miles, go north to the west to the temple, go west past the Insei-ro, and walk west along the road on the cliff. One mile, to Ichinran, the stone covered above is smooth as if it were flying.

古文：又西半里，崖尽而成峡。
现代文：又往西半里，崖壁尽头处是峡谷。
English: Half a mile to the west, there is a canyon at the end of the cliff.

古文：其峡即峰顶与罗汉壁夹峙而成者，上自兜率宫，下抵罗、李二先生坊，两壁夹成中溜，路当其中。
现代文：此峡谷就是峰顶和罗汉壁对峙而形成的，上面起自兜率宫，下面到达罗、李二先生坊，两壁夹成中溜，路在其中。
English: This canyon is formed by the confrontation between the peak and the Luohan Wall. From the top, there is a self-guided palace, and from the bottom, there are Luo and Li Er's Fang. The two walls are sandwiched in the middle, and the road is in the middle.

古文：溜之半，崖脚内嵌，前耸巨木，有旧碑，刻峋鹤诗，乃题罗汉壁者。
现代文：中溜一半的地方，崖脚内嵌，前面耸起巨木，有旧碑，刻着峋鹤的诗，是描写罗汉壁的。
English: In the middle, half way down, the foot of the cliff is embedded, huge trees rise in front, there is an old monument, engraved with a poem about cranes, depicting the Lohan Wall.

古文：中横一岐，由其上涉溜半里，过玄武庙。
现代文：中间横着一条岔路，顺岔路穿过溜走半里，经过玄武庙。
English: In the middle, there is a fork in the road, and it is a half-mile walk along the fork, passing by the Xuanwu Temple.

古文：又半里，过兜率宫，已暮，而宫圮无居人。
现代文：又半里，经过兜率宫，天已经傍晚，而宫坍塌，没有人居住。
English: Half a mile further, after passing the palace, it was already evening, and the palace had collapsed and no one was living there.

古文：又上一里，叩铜佛殿，入而栖焉，即所谓传灯寺也。
现代文：又上一里，敲铜佛殿门，进去居住，就是所说的传灯寺。
English: Another mile up, knock on the door of the Bronze Buddha Hall, enter and live, that is, the so-called Lantern Transmission Temple.

古文：前过时，朝山之履相错，余不及入，兹寂然。
现代文：从前经过时，朝山的人交错不绝，我来不及进去，现在很静。
English: When I used to pass by, the people of the morning mountain were staggering, I couldn't get in, now it's very quiet.

古文：久之，得一老僧启开门户，宿。
现代文：过了很久，有一个老僧人打开丁，进去住宿。
English: After a long time, an old monk opened the door and went in to stay.

古文：二十日晨起，欲录寺中古碑，寒甚，留俟下山录，遂置行具寺中。
现代文：二十日早晨起床，准备录寺中的古碑，十分寒冷，留着等到下山时录，于是把行李放在寺中。
English: On the morning of the 20th, I got up and prepared to record the ancient monument in the temple. It was very cold, so I waited until it was time to go down the mountain to record, and then put my luggage in the temple.

古文：寺中地俱大理石所铺。
现代文：因为攀登绝顶的两条路，都从寺这里分出去，返回也必须顺此路。
English: Because the two paths to the top of the mountain are separated from the temple, the return must also follow this path.

古文：盖以登绝顶二道，俱从寺而分，还必从之也。出寺，将北由袈裟石上，念猢狲梯前已蹑之，登其崖端而下，束身峡向虽从之下，犹未及仰升，兹不若由南上北下，庶交览无偏。
现代文：出寺，准备往北顺袭装石而上，想到瑚娜梯以前已经攀登过了，是登其崖端而下，从前虽然从束身峡而下，但还没来得及往上升登，这次不如从南上、往北下，希望遍览无遗。
English: I left the temple and prepared to go north to load the stones. I remembered that I had climbed Hu Na Di before, climbing down from the cliff edge. In the past, although I went down from the Bamboo Gorge, I did not have time to climb up. This time, it would be better to go from the south to the north, hoping to see everything.

古文：乃从寺右循崖西行，遂过华首门而西，崖石上下俱峭甚，路缘其间，止通一线，下瞰则放光寺正在其底，上眺则峰顶之舍身崖即其端，而莫能竟也。
现代文：就从寺右沿崖往西行，经过华首往西走，崖石上下都十分陡峭，路伸向崖石间，只通着这一条线，往下看则放光寺正处在崖底，往上望则峰顶舍身崖就是崖端，但不能穷究。
English: From the right side of the temple, go west along the cliff, pass Huashu and go west. The cliffs are very steep up and down. The road extends to the cliff between the rocks, and only passes through this line. Looking down, Houguang Temple is at the bottom of the cliff. Looking up, the peak of the cliff is the cliff edge, but it can not be exhausted.

古文：其西一里，有岐悬崖侧，余以为下放光道，又念层崖间何能垂隙下。
现代文：往西一里，有岔路悬在崖边，我以为是下放光寺的路，又考虑如何能够从层崖间的缝隙中坠下去。
English: A mile to the west, there's a cliffside overhanging path. I thought it was the path to the Temple of Light, and I thought about how I could fall down through the gap between the cliffs.

古文：少下，有水出崖侧树根间，刳木盛之，是为八功德水。
现代文：稍稍下去，有水从崖侧的树根之间流出，把树木剖开、挖空盛水，这是八功德水。
English: A little further down, water flows out from between the roots of the trees on the cliff side, and the trees are cut open and hollowed out to hold the water. This is the Eight Merits Water.

古文：制木之外无余地，水即飞洒重崖，细不能见也。
现代文：除剖空的木头之外，没有其它余地，水就向重重山崖飞洒，细小得看不见。
English: There was no room for anything but the hollowed-out wood, and the water sprayed down the mountain cliffs, so small you couldn't see them.

古文：路尽仍上，即前西来入大道处，有革龛倚崖间，一河南僧习静其中，就此水也。
现代文：走完路仍然往上，就是以前从西边来，走上大路之处，有草屋靠在崖中，一个河南僧人在屋里静修，他的生活就靠此水。
English: At the end of the walk, the path still goes up, that is, where we used to come from the west and walk up the main road, there is a grass hut leaning against the cliff, a Henan monk is meditating in the house, his life depends on this water.

古文：又西半里，稍上，又半里，为曹溪庵。
现代文：又往西半里，逐渐往上走，又半里，到曹溪庵。
English: Another half-mile to the west, gradually going up, and another half-mile to Caoxi'an.

古文：庵止三楹，倚崖，门扃无人。
现代文：庵只有三间屋子，靠着崖壁，门关着，没有人。
English: There are only three rooms in the hermitage, which is built into the cliff face. The door is closed and there is no one there.

古文：其水较八功德稍大，其后危崖，稍前抱如玦。
现代文：这里的水比八功德水略微大些，背后的陡崖，略微向前环抱，如同有缺口的玉环。
English: The water here is slightly larger than that of the Eight Meritorious Merits, and the steep cliff behind is slightly forward, like a jade ring with a gap.

古文：余攀石直跻崖下，东望左崖前抱处，忽离立成峰，圆若卓锥，而北并崖顶，若即若离，移步他转，即为崖顶所掩不可辨。惟此处则可尽其离合之妙，而惜乎旧曾累址，今已成棘，人莫能登。
现代文：我攀爬石头直登崖下，往东望到左崖向前环抱之处，忽然分立出山峰，圆圆的像锥子拔地而立，而北面连着崖顶，若即若离，移步转到其它角度，山峰就被崖顶遮蔽而分辨不出，只有此处才可以穷尽其离合之妙，可惜从前曾修有的基址，现在已经变成荆棘，人不能上去。
English: I climbed the stone straight to the bottom of the cliff, looked eastward to the place where the left cliff hugged forward, and suddenly the peaks separated. The round ones stood up like cones, while the north side was connected to the cliff top. If it was separated, it moved to other angles. The peaks were obscured by the cliff top and could not be distinguished. Only here could they exhaust their separation. Unfortunately, the foundation site that had been built before had become thorns, and people could not go up.

古文：盖鸡山无拔地之峰，此一见真如闪影也。
现代文：因为鸡足山没有拔地而起的山峰，在此见到这一峰真像影子闪过。
English: Because the Chicken's Foot Mountain does not have a towering peak, seeing this peak here is really like a shadow passing by.

古文：又西半里余，过束身峡下，转而南，过伏虎庵，又南过礼佛庵，共一里，再登礼佛台。
现代文：又往西走半里多，经过束身峡下，转向南，经过伏虎庵，又往南经过礼佛庵，共一里，第二次登上礼佛台。
English: I walked another half-mile to the west, passed the Bundi Gorge, turned south, passed the Fuhuan, and went south through the Reverend Buddha's hermitage, a total of one mile, and ascended the Reverend Buddha's platform for the second time.

古文：台南悬桃花箐过脉之上，正与香木坪夹箐相对，西俯桃花箐，东俯放光寺，如在重渊之下。
现代文：台朝南悬在桃花警越过来的山脉之上，正好和香木坪隔警相对，往西俯视桃花警，往东俯视放光寺，如同在重重深渊之下。
English: To the south, Taiwan hangs over the mountains that the peach blossom police have crossed, just opposite the Xiangwuping checkpoint. To the west, it looks down on the peach blossom police, and to the east, it looks down on the Baoguang Temple, as if it were under a deep abyss.

古文：余从台端坠石穴而入，西透窟而出，复有耸石，攒ｚｎ穿隙成台，其下皆危崖万仞，栈木以通，即所谓太子过玄关也。
现代文：我从台边坠入石洞中，往西穿洞而出，又有耸立的石头，穿出缝隙而形成台，其下都是万初陡崖，用木头架成栈道通过，就是所说的太子过玄关。
English: I fell from the edge of the platform into the stone cave, went through the hole to the west, and came out. There were also towering stones, which formed a platform through the gap. Underneath it were incredibly steep cliffs, which were made into a boardwalk with wood, that is, the so-called prince passed through the entrance.

古文：过栈即台后礼佛龛。
现代文：过了栈道就是台后的礼佛完。
English: After passing the walkway, it's time for the Buddhist ceremony behind the stage.

古文：昔由栈以入穴，今由窟以出栈，其凭眺虽同，然前则香客骈众多趾，今则诸庵俱扃，寂无一人，觉身与灏灵同其游衍而已。
现代文：以前从栈道进洞，现在从洞中出到栈道，登临眺望虽然相同，然而以前是进香客擦肩接踵，现在则各庵都关着，空无一人，只觉得自己是与无边无际的神灵一同尽情游乐而已。
English: In the past, people used to enter the cave from the path, but now they come out of the cave to the path. Although the view from the top is the same, it used to be that pilgrims rubbed shoulders with each other, but now the hermitages are all closed, there is no one there, and they only feel like they are having fun with the boundless gods.

古文：栈西沿崖端北转，有路可循，因披之而西，遂过桃花箐之上。
现代文：栈道往西沿崖边向北转，有路可以顺着走，于是穿过栈道往西走，就到桃花著之上。
English: The boardwalk turns west along the cliff edge to the north, there is a road you can walk along, so walk west across the boardwalk to the top of the peach blossoms.

古文：共一里，路穷，乃樵径也。
现代文：共一里，路尽，是砍柴的小路。
English: A total of one mile, the end of the road, is a path for chopping wood.

古文：仍返过伏虎庵，由束身峡上。
现代文：仍然返回到伏虎庵，沿束身峡而上。
English: I still returned to Fuguo-an and walked up the Sokushin Gorge.

古文：峡势逼束，半里，透其上，是为文殊堂，始闻有老僧持诵声。
现代文：峡势窄狭紧束，半里，穿出到束身峡上面，这是文殊堂，才开始听到有老僧诵读经文的声音。
English: The gorge is narrow and tightly bunched, half a mile, penetrating into the upper part of the gorge, this is Manjushri Hall, and only then do you begin to hear the sound of an old monk chanting scriptures.

古文：路由其前蹑脊，乃余前东自顶来者，见其后有小径，亦蹑脊西去，余从之。
现代文：道路从堂前面登脊，是我以前从东边顺绝顶过来的路，看见堂后面有小路，也是登脊往西去，我走小路。
English: The road climbs up the ridge from the front of the hall. It was the road I used to take to get from the east to the top. I saw a path behind the hall and also climbed the ridge to go west. I took the path.

古文：盖文殊堂脊处，乃脊之坳；从东复耸而起者，即绝顶之造而为城者也；从西复耸而起者，桃花箐之度而首峙者也。
现代文：因为文殊堂所在的山脊，是脊上的坳地；顺东边又耸起的，就是绝顶上建的城墙；顺西边又耸起的，是桃花警伸来的第一道高峰。
English: Because the ridge where Manjushri Hall is located is the ploughed land on the ridge; along the east and rising, it is the city wall built on the top; along the west and rising, it is the first peak of the peach blossom guard.

古文：西一里，丛木蒙茸，雪痕连亘，遂造其极山顶最高处。
现代文：往西一里，草丛树木蓬蓬松松，雪迹连绵不绝，于是登上鸡足山绝顶。
English: One mile to the west, the grass and trees are fluffy and loose, and the snow traces are continuous, so I climbed to the top of the Chicken Foot Mountain.

古文：盖其山自桃花箐北度，即凌空高峙，此其首也。
现代文：原来从桃花著往北延伸，就凌空高耸，这里是开始。
English: Originally stretching from the Peach Blossom to the north, it soars high into the sky. This is the beginning.

古文：其脊北垂而下，二十里而尽于大石头，所谓后距也。
现代文：山脊向北伸下去，延伸二十里然后到大石头结束，是所说的鸡足山后距。
English: The ridge stretches northwards for twenty miles and ends in a large rock, the so-called "Chicken's Foot Ridge."

古文：其横亘而东者，至文殊堂后，少逊而中伏，又东而复起为绝顶，又东而稍下，遂为罗汉壁、旃檀岭、狮子林以后之脊，又东而突为点头峰，环为九重崖之脊，皆迤逦如屏。
现代文：向东横贯的山脉，伸到文殊堂背后，稍微后退而正中低伏，又往东延伸而再耸立为绝顶，又往东逐渐延伸下去，就成为罗汉壁、旗檀岭、狮子林以后的山脊，又往东就突起为点头峰，环绕为九重崖的山脊，都屏障般地连绵不断。
English: To the east, the transverse mountain ranges reach behind Wenshu Hall, recede slightly and are in the middle and low, extend eastward and then rise to the peak, and gradually extend eastward, becoming the ridge after Luohan Wall, Qidanling and Lion Forest, and then protrude eastward as the nodding peak, surrounded by the ridge of the nine cliffs, all of which are barrier-like and continuous.

古文：于是掉尾而南转，坠为塔基马鞍岭，则鸡山之门户矣。
现代文：于是尾端掉头向南，坠下去成为塔基所在的马鞍岭，是鸡足山的门户。
English: As a result, the tail end turned to the south and fell down to become Ma Ong Ridge, where Taki is located, which is the gateway to Chicken's Foot Mountain.

古文：垂脊而东，直下为鸡坪关，则鸡山之胫足矣。
现代文：中脊向东延伸，直下去是鸡坪关，是鸡足山的胫足。
English: The middle ridge extends to the east, and straight ahead is the Chicken Ping Pass, which is the foot of Chicken Foot Mountain.

古文：故山北之水，北向而出于大石东；山西之水，其南发于西洱海之北者，由和光桥；西发于河底桥者，由南、北衙，皆会于大石之下，东环牟尼山之北，与宾川之流，共北下金沙大江焉。
现代文：所以山北的水，向北流出到大石头东。山西的水，南发源于西洱海北面的，沿着和光桥流；西发源于河底桥的，沿着南、北衙流；都在大石头之下会合，往东绕牟尼山之北，和宾川州的水，一起往北流下金沙大江。
English: Therefore, the water north of the mountain flows north to the east of the big rock. The water in Shanxi originates in the south from the northern part of the West Bohai Sea and flows along the Waguang Bridge; the west originates from the river bottom bridge and flows along the south and north fork; they all meet under the big rock, east around the north of Mount Muni, and together with the water from Binchuan, flow north down the Jinsha River.

古文：始知南龙大脉，自丽江之西界，东走为文笔峰，是为剑川、丽江界。
现代文：于是知道南边的主峰山脉，从丽江府的西部往东伸延为文笔峰，这是剑川州、丽江府的分界。
English: So I knew that the main peak mountain range in the south, stretching from the west of Lijiang Prefecture to the east, is Wenpeng Peak, which is the boundary between Jianchuan and Lijiang.

古文：抵丽东南邱塘关，南转为朝霞洞，是为剑川、鹤庆界。
现代文：伸延到丽江府东南的邱塘关，往南转到朝霞洞，这是剑川州、鹤庆府的分界。
English: It stretches to Qiu Tangguan in the southeast of Lijiang Prefecture, and turns south to Asaka-dong, which is the boundary between Jianchuan Prefecture and Heqing Prefecture.

古文：又直南而抵腰龙洞山，是为鹤庆、邓川州界。
现代文：又直南延伸到腰龙洞山，这是鹤庆府、邓川州的分界。
English: It also extends directly south to the mountains of Hsiaolongdong, which is the border between Heqing Prefecture and Dengchuan Prefecture.

古文：又南过西山湾，抵西洱海之北，转而东，是为邓川、太和界。
现代文：又往南越过西山湾，伸到西洱海的北面，转向东延伸，这是邓川州、太和县的分界。
English: Further south, it crosses Xishan Bay, stretches to the north of the West Bohai Sea, and extends eastward. This is the boundary between Dengchuan Prefecture and Taihe County.

古文：抵海东隅，于是正支则遵海而南，为青山，太和、宾川州界；又东南峙为乌龙坝山，为赵州、小云南界；遂东度为九鼎，又南抵于清华洞，又东度而达于水目焉。
现代文：延伸到西洱海东隅，于是正支则沿海往南伸，为青山，是太和县、宾川州分界；又往东南延伸，峙立为乌龙坝山，是赵州、小云南县的分界；于是往东延伸为九鼎山，又往南伸到清华洞，又往东延伸而抵达水目山。
English: It extends to the eastern corner of the West Bohai Sea, and then the Zheng branch extends southward along the coast to Qingshan, which is the boundary between Taihe County and Binchuan County; it also extends southeastward to Ulongba Mountain, which is the boundary between Zhao State and Xiaoyunnan County; it then extends eastward to Jiuding Mountain, and then southward to Tsinghua Cave, and then eastward to Suimei Mountain.

古文：分支由海东隅，北峙为香木坪之山，从桃花坞北度，是为宾川、邓川界。
现代文：分支从海东隅，往北峙立为香木坪山，顺桃花警往北延伸，这是宾川州、邓川州的分界。
English: From the eastern corner of the sea, the branch stands northward as Xiangmu Pingshan, and extends northward along the Peach Blossom Road, which is the boundary between Binchuan and Dengchuan.

古文：是鸡足虽附于大支，而犹正脊也。
现代文：这样看来，鸡足山虽然依附于主峰山脉，但仍然是中脊。
English: In this way, although the Chicken's Foot Mountain is attached to the main peak mountain range, it is still the middle ridge.

古文：登此直北望雪山，茫不可见。
现代文：登上此山直北望雪山，茫然看不见。
English: After climbing the mountain, I looked straight north at the snow-capped mountains, but I couldn't see anything.

古文：惟西北有山一带，自北而南者，雪痕皑皑，即腰龙洞、南、北衙西倚之山也。
现代文：只是西北有一座山环绕，从北向南，雪迹皑皑，就是腰龙洞，南衙、北衙西边傍靠的山。
English: However, there is a mountain in the northwest that is surrounded by snow from north to south. It is the mountain next to the west side of Waist Dragon Cave, South Pagoda and North Pagoda.

古文：其下麦畦浮翠，直逼鸡山之麓，是为罗川，若一琵琶蟠地，虽在三十里下，而黛色欲袭人衣。
现代文：山下翠绿的麦田，一直靠近鸡足山脚，这是罗川，像一把琵琶琴形状的弯曲地带，虽然在山下三十里外，但黛色像要浸透人衣。
English: The verdant wheat fields at the foot of the mountain have always been close to the foot of the mountain. This is the Luo River, a curved area in the shape of a lute. Although it is thirty miles away from the foot of the mountain, the color of the river seems to permeate people's clothes.

古文：四顾他麓，皆平楚苍苍也。西南洱海，是日独潏荡如浮杯在掌。
现代文：环顾四周其它山麓，都是深绿色的树梢平齐，西南边的洱海，唯独今日看到水波荡漾，如同水杯浮在掌上。
English: Looking around at the other foothills, the dark green treetops are all flat, the Bohai Sea in the southwest, but today I saw the water waves rippling, like a water cup floating in the palm of your hand.

古文：盖前日见雪山而不见海，今见海而不见雪山，所谓阴晴众壑殊，出没之不可定如此。
现代文：以前看得见雪山而看不见洱海。今天看得见洱海却看不见雪山，所以说阴天晴天众山壑是不同的，显出、隐没就是如此的不能确定。
English: In the past, one could see the snow-capped mountains but not the Bohai Sea. Today, one can see the Bohai Sea but not the snow-capped mountains. Therefore, it is said that the snow-capped mountains are different on cloudy and sunny days, and it is uncertain whether they appear or disappear.

古文：此峰之西尽处也。
现代文：这是山峰西边的尽头处。
English: This is the western end of the peak.

古文：东还一里，过文殊堂后脊，于是脊南皆危崖凌空，所谓舍身崖也。
现代文：往东返回一里，经过文殊堂背后的山脊，在这里脊南都是陡崖凌空，是所说的舍身崖。
English: Returning one mile to the east, passing the ridge behind Wenshu Hall, where the south of the ridge is a steep cliff, is the so-called "sacrificial cliff."

古文：愈东愈甚，余凌其端瞰之，其下即束身峡，东抵曹溪后东峰，向跻其下，今临其上，东峰一片，自崖底并立而上，相距丈余，而中有一脉联属，若拇指然，可坠坳上其巅也。
现代文：越往东越陡，我登上崖端俯瞰，下面就是束身峡，往东到曹溪寺后的东峰，以前从崖下升登，如今登临崖上，东峰那一带，从崖底并立而上，相距一丈多，而其中有一条山脉连接，像拇指一样，可以坠下坳后登上山顶。
English: The further east I go, the steeper it gets. I climb to the cliff edge for a bird's-eye view. Below is the Bamboo Gorge. To the east, the East Peak after Caoxi Temple. I used to climb up from below the cliff, but now I'm on the cliff. The area around the East Peak, from the bottom of the cliff and up, is much further apart, and there is a mountain range connected, like a thumb, you can fall down and climb to the top of the mountain.

古文：余攀蹑从之，顾仆不能至。
现代文：我顺这条山脉攀登，顾仆不能走。
English: I'm climbing this mountain, and my servant can't go.

古文：时罡横厉，欲卷人掷向空中，余手粘足踞，幸不为舍身者，几希矣。
现代文：此时强烈的风纵横凌厉，像要把人卷起抛向空中，我手抓脚踩，庆幸自己没有成为舍身之人。
English: At this time, a strong wind was howling, as if it wanted to roll people up and throw them into the air. I clapped my hands and stamped my feet, glad that I did not become a person who gave up.

古文：又共一里，入顶城门，实西门也。
现代文：又走了共一里，进入绝顶城门，其实是西门。
English: I walked a total of one mile and entered the highest gate, which is actually the West Gate.

古文：入多宝楼，河南僧不在，其徒以菉豆粥、芝麻盐为饷。
现代文：到多宝楼，河南僧不在，他的徒弟用绿豆粥、芝麻盐招待。
English: At Taobao Tower, the Henan monk was not there, but his apprentice invited him with mung bean porridge and sesame salt.

古文：余再录善雨亭中未竟之碑。
现代文：我又录善雨亭中没录完的碑文。
English: I also recorded the unfinished inscription in Zhenyu Pavilion.

古文：下午，其徒复引余观其师退休静室。
现代文：下午，这徒弟又带我参观他师傅退休后的静室。
English: In the afternoon, the apprentice took me on another tour of his master's retirement home.

古文：其室在城北二里，即前所登西峰之北坳也。
现代文：静室在城墙北二里处，就是以前所攀登的西峰北坳。
English: The quiet room is located two miles north of the city wall, which is where the previously climbed West Peak North Col is located.

古文：路由文殊堂脊，北向稍下循西行，当北垂之腋。
现代文：道路沿着文殊堂的山脊，向北逐渐下，顺西行，位于鸡足山北垂的侧边。
English: The road follows the ridge of Wenshu Hall, gradually descends to the north, and runs westward, and is located on the side of the north slope of the Chicken Foot Mountain.

古文：室三楹，北向，环拱亦称。
现代文：静室有三间，向北，环拱也对称。
English: There are three chambers, facing north, with symmetrical circular arches.

古文：盖鸡山回合之妙，俱在其南，当山北者仅有此，亦幽峻之奥区也。
现代文：鸡足山回合的妙处，都在山南，位于山北的仅此一处，也是幽深、陡峻的隐蔽地区。
English: The best parts of the Rooster's Foot Round are all in the south of the mountain, and this is the only place in the north of the mountain, which is also a deep, steep, hidden area.

古文：其左稍下，有池二方，上下连汇，水不多，亦不竭，顶城所供，皆取给焉。
现代文：往左稍微下去，有两个方形池塘，上下相连汇通，水不多，也不枯竭，绝顶的供水，都取之于这里。
English: Slightly to the left, there are two square ponds, connected at the top and bottom. There is not much water, nor is it depleted. The best water supply is taken from here.

古文：还抵城北，竟从城外趋南门，不及入迦叶前殿。
现代文：返回到城北，就顺城墙外走到南门，来不及进入迩叶前殿。
English: Returning to the north of the city, I walked along the outside of the city wall to the south gate, too late to enter the Naraha front hall.

古文：由门前东向悬石隙下，一里，有殿三楹，东向，额曰 万山拱胜 ，而户亦扃。
现代文：从门前往东顺石隙悬空而下，一里，有三间殿，向东，匾额为 万山拱胜 ，但门也紧闭。
English: From the door to the east along the stone gap, it hangs in the air, one mile, there are three halls, to the east, the threshold is Wanshan Gongsheng, but the door is also closed.

古文：由其前下坠，级甚峻。
现代文：从殿前往下坠，台阶非常陡。
English: From the hall to the chute, the steps are very steep.

古文：将抵糊狲梯，遇一人，乃悉檀僧令来候余者，以丽江有使来邀也。
现代文：快到瑚孙梯时，遇到一个人，是悉檀寺僧人派来等候我的，因为有丽江府的使者来邀请。
English: When I was approaching Husun Di, I met a man who had been sent by the monks of Siddan Monastery to wait for me, because an envoy from Lijiang Prefecture had come to invite me.

古文：遂同下，共一里而至铜佛殿。
现代文：于是一齐下山，共一里就到铜佛殿。
English: So we went down the mountain together, a total of one mile to the Bronze Buddha Hall.

古文：余初拟宿此，以候者至，乃取行李。
现代文：我当初打算在这里住宿，因为等我的人来到，于是取走行李。
English: I originally planned to stay here, because when my people arrived, they took away my luggage.

古文：五里，过碧云寺前。
现代文：走五里，经过碧云寺前。
English: Walk five miles and pass in front of the Big Cloud Temple.

古文：直下五里，过白云寺。
现代文：直下五里，经过白云寺。
English: Straight down for five miles, past Baiyun Temple.

古文：由寺北渡一小涧，又东五里，过首传寺后，时已昏黑。
现代文：从寺北渡过一条小涧，又往东走五里，经过首传寺背后，这时天色已经昏暗。
English: After crossing a small stream from the north of the temple and walking five miles to the east, past the back of Shuchuan Temple, it was already dark.

古文：又三里，过寂光寺西，候者腰间出一石如栗，击火附艾，拾枯枝燃之以火石取火。遵中支三里，叩息阴轩门，出火炬为导。
现代文：又走三里，经过寂光寺西，等我的人从腰间拿出像栗子一样的石子，就着艾草打火，捡枯枝点燃。沿中支走三里，敲开息阴轩的门，要出火把照路。
English: I walked another three miles, passing the west side of Jakko-ji Temple, and waited for my men to take out a stone like a chestnut from their waists, light a fire with mugwort, pick up dead branches and light it. I walked three miles along the middle branch, knocking on the door of Xiyin Xuan, to get a torch to light the way.

古文：又一里余，逾瀑布东脊而北，又三里而至悉檀。
现代文：又走一里多，越过瀑布东边的山脊往北走，又走三里才到悉檀寺。
English: I walked one more kilometer, crossing the ridge on the eastern side of the waterfall to the north, and walked another three miles to Siddanji.

古文：弘辨师引丽府通事见，以生白公招柬来致，相与期迟一日行。
现代文：弘辨师带丽江府的通事来见面，把木生白公请我的柬帖送来，互相约定推迟一天出发。
English: Hongbanshi brought a messenger from Lijiang to meet me, and sent me the invitation letter from Muxeng Bai Gong, and we mutually agreed to postpone the departure for one day.

古文：二十一日晨起，余约束行李为行计。
现代文：二十一日早晨起来，我捆好行李，作好出发的准备。
English: On the morning of the 21st, I got up, packed my bags and got ready to leave.

古文：通事由九重崖为山顶游。
现代文：通事从九重崖去山顶游览。
English: I went to the top of the mountain from the Jiu Jiao cliff.

古文：将午，复吾邀题七松册子，弘辨又磨石令其徒鸡仙书《静闻碑》。
现代文：将近中午，复吾请我题写七松册子，弘辨又磨石让其徒鸡仙书写静闻碑。
English: Near noon, Fugu asked me to inscribe the Shichimatsu Brochure, and Hongban and Grindstone asked their Chicken Immortal to write the Jingwen Monument.

