古文：初五日晨餐后，别丘、夏。
现代文：初五日早餐后，辞别了丘、夏两人。
English: After breakfast on the fifth day of the first month, the two of them, Yau and Xia, said their goodbyes.

古文：二里，仍出大路南。
现代文：走二里，仍然到了大路南面。
English: After walking two miles, we still arrived at the south side of the highway.

古文：十里，登一岭，曰杨源岭。
现代文：十里，登上一座山岭，叫杨源岭。
English: Ten miles up a mountain, called Yangyuan Ridge.

古文：下岭，东则大溪自南而北，渡溪二里，曰东界山铺，去府已二十里。
现代文：下了岭，东面有条大溪自南往北流，渡过溪走二里，为东界山铺，这里离开府城已经有二十里。
English: After descending the ridge, there is a large stream flowing from south to north in the east. It is a two-mile walk across the stream. It is the eastern mountain range, and it is already twenty miles away from the capital.

古文：于是循溪东行，五里，曰大洋，三里，曰界下。
现代文：从这里沿着溪向东，行五里，叫大洋，又走三里，叫界下。
English: From here, follow the stream to the east, walk five miles, called the ocean, and walk three miles, called the boundary.

古文：众舟鳞次溪中，以上流有石箭滩，重舟不能上下，俱泊此以待交兑者也。
现代文：众多船只像鱼鳞一样排列在溪中，这是因为溪流上游有个石箭滩，载重量大的船只不能上航和下行，都停泊在这里等待兑换货物。
English: Many ships are lined up in the stream like fish scales, because there is a rocky beach upstream of the stream. Heavy-duty ships cannot sail up and down, and are moored here waiting to exchange goods.

古文：其北多益府王墓。
现代文：溪北面有许多益王府的陵墓。
English: To the north of the creek, there are many mausoleums of the Ikswang Palace.

古文：再上二里，即石箭滩，乱石填塞，溪流甚急。
现代文：再往上游行二里，就是石箭滩，滩中乱石填塞，流水很急。
English: Further up the parade for two miles is Shijiazhuang Beach. The beach is clogged with rocks, and the current is very fast.

古文：其西为凌霄峰，亭亭独上，有佛宇焉。
现代文：滩的西面是凌霄峰，一座孤峰高耸，有佛教寺庙建在山峰间。
English: On the west side of the beach is Lingxiao Peak, a lonely peak, with a Buddhist temple built between the peaks.

古文：自杨源来，山势回合，而凌霄独高，过此山渐开，亦渐伏矣。
现代文：从杨源岭过来，山势曲折环绕相互交合，而唯独凌霄峰高高耸立，过了此峰，山峦逐渐分开，也逐渐低伏了。
English: Coming from Yangyuanling, the mountain twists and turns around and intersects with each other, but only the Lingxiao peak stands tall. After this peak, the mountains gradually separate and gradually sink.

古文：又三里，溪南一山逊于凌霄，而尖峭过之，曰八仙过腿。
现代文：又走三里，溪南面有一座山，它低于凌霄峰但比凌霄峰尖峭，叫八仙过腿山。
English: After another three miles, there is a mountain to the south of the creek. It is lower than Lingxiao Peak but steeper than Lingxiao Peak. It is called Eight Immortals Passing Leg Mountain.

古文：上有石耸起，颇异众山，以无渡不及登。
现代文：山上有石头高高耸起，与众山很不相同犷因为没有摆渡的船而未能攀登。
English: On the mountain there are stones towering high, very different from other mountains, but because there is no ferry boat, it is not possible to climb.

古文：又七里为硝石铺，去府已四十里矣。
现代文：又走七里为硝石铺，这里离开府城已经四十里了。
English: I walked another seven miles to get to the saltpeter shop. I am now forty miles away from the capital.

古文：市肆其长，南、东两溪至此合流，南来者为新城之溪，东北者为杉关之水。
现代文：硝石铺的集市店铺延伸得很长，南面、东面两条溪流在此汇合，南面的那条是从新城县流来的，东北面的那条是从杉关流来的。
English: The market stall of the saltpeter shop extends for a long distance. Two streams, one from the south and the other from the east, converge here. The one from the south comes from Xincheng County, and the one from the northeast comes from Sugiguan.

古文：东溪舟抵五福尚四十里，至杉关尚陆行三十里，则江、闽分界。
现代文：从东面的溪流中乘船抵达五福还有四十里，从五福到杉关走陆路还有三十里。杉关那里就是江西、福建两省的分界。
English: From the stream in the east, it is another forty miles by boat to Wufu, and another thirty miles by land from Wufu to Sugiguan, which is the border between Jiangxi and Fujian provinces.

古文：南溪则六十里而舟抵新城。
现代文：从南面的溪中乘船走则六十里就到新城县。
English: It's a sixty-mile boat ride from the creek in the south to Xincheng County.

古文：新城之陆路，自硝石东渡东溪桥而南，为铁仙岩。
现代文：到新城县去的陆路上，从硝石铺东面跨过东溪桥往南，是铁仙岩。
English: On the overland route to Xincheng County, from the east side of the saltpeter shop across the Dongxi Bridge to the south, is the Tiesian Rock.

古文：其处山俱纯石，如钟推釜覆，北半俱斩峭为崖，屏立平畴间。
现代文：那里满山都是清一色的石头，如同钟堆叠着、锅翻盖着。北面半个山都是齐斩斩的峻峭的山崖，像屏风一样插立在平坦的田间。
English: All over the mountains there are uniformly colored stones, stacked like bells and covered with pots. The northern half of the mountains are uniformly steep cliffs, standing out like a screen in the flat fields.

古文：由崖隙而上，两崖之间潴ǜ积累水成溪，崖插溪底。
现代文：我从山崖的缝隙往上爬，两边崖壁中间水流汇聚形成一溪，崖壁直插溪底。
English: I climbed up from the crevice of the cliff. The water flow converged in the middle of the cliff wall on both sides to form a stream, and the cliff wall plunged straight into the bottom of the stream.

古文：凿栈以入，又一水自东注，亦纯石插底，隘不容足。
现代文：沿着在崖壁上凿出的栈道走进去，又有一股水从东面流入，也是清一色的石头插入水底，那栈道窄得立不下脚。
English: Walking along the boardwalk hewn out of the cliff wall, another stream of water flows in from the east, the same clear stone is inserted into the bottom of the water, and the boardwalk is too narrow to stand on.

古文：架梁南渡，又转一桥，西渡大溪，遂蹑山峡而上，则飞岩高穹东向而出，髡徒和尚法宣依岩结阁，种竹于外，亦幽亦敞。
现代文：往南越过架在那股水上的桥，又转过另一桥，向西渡过大的那条溪流，便顺着山峡往上爬，高大弯隆的岩石向东伸出，和尚法宣背靠岩石建了阁，在阁外种植了竹子，显得又幽静又宽敞。
English: He crossed the bridge over that water to the south, turned over another bridge, and crossed the large stream to the west, then climbed up along the mountain gorge. The tall, curving rock jutted out to the east. The monk Faxun built a pavilion against the rock and planted bamboo outside the pavilion, appearing quiet and spacious.

古文：时日已欲坠，拟假榻于中，而髡奴逐客甚急，形于声色。
现代文：当时太阳已快要落山，我打算借宿在阁中，然而那和尚非常急迫地驱赶着客人，并且显露在声色中。
English: The sun was about to set and I was going to sleep in the pavilion, but the monk was very anxious to drive away the guests and it showed in his voice.

古文：遂出，仍渡峡桥，见有石级西上，遂蹑之登。
现代文：于是走出阁，仍然越过山峡中那座桥，看见有石阶梯向西延伸上去，便踏着石阶梯登上了山顶。
English: So he went out of the pavilion, still crossed the bridge in the gorge, saw a stone staircase extending to the west, and climbed the stone staircase to the top of the mountain.

古文：盘旋山顶，两度过脊，皆深坑断峡，回豆纵横，或水或涸，想霖雨时靡非深浸也。
现代文：我在山顶上徘徊流连，两次跨越山脊穿越过去的地方，下面都是深坑断峡，纵横交错，曲折绵亘，或者积水，或者干涸，我猜想多雨时节无不都是些深水沟塘。
English: I wandered on the top of the mountain, twice crossing the ridge and passing through the past place, below are deep pits and canyons, crisscrossed, tortuous, or waterlogged, or dry, I guess rainy seasons are nothing but deep water ditches.

古文：时日已落崦嵫，下山二里，仍西，宿硝石东溪桥之南。
现代文：当时太阳已经落山，我朝山下走二里，仍旧转往西面，投宿在硝石铺东溪桥的南边。
English: At that time, the sun had already set, I walked two miles down the mountain, still turned to the west, and stayed at the south side of the saltpeter shop Dongxi Bridge.

古文：初六日早起，闻有言觉海寺之胜者。
现代文：初六日早晨起来，听到有人谈论觉海寺景致的优美。
English: On the morning of the 6th day of the first month, I heard someone talking about the beauty of the scenery of Jokhang Temple.

古文：平明，南趋二里，则南溪之左也。
现代文：天大亮后，快速地往南走二里，就到了南溪的左边。
English: After daybreak, quickly walk two miles south to the left of Nanxi.

古文：寺亦古，其前即铁仙以西之第二重也。
现代文：寺也很古老，它前面就是铁仙岩以西山峦的第二重。
English: The temple is also very old. In front of it is the second highest peak in the mountains west of Tetsuseiwa.

古文：盖硝石之南，其山皆块石堆簇，南则交互盘错，斩若截堵，峰峰皆然，以铁仙为中；而西则两突而尽于南溪之左；即觉海寺前。东则两突而至于止岩之东，再东则山转而南矣。
现代文：硝石铺的南面，各山上都是石块堆叠聚集，南边的山峰盘绕交错，如断开的墙壁一样齐斩，座座山峰都如此，铁仙岩位于中间；而西边的山峰则两处突起，延伸到硝石铺南面溪流的左边而终止；东边的山峰两处突起而延伸到止止岩的东面结束，再往东山就折向南了。
English: On the south side of the saltpeter pavement, all the mountains are made up of stone blocks. The peaks on the south side are intertwined and interlaced, like disconnected walls. The peaks of the constellations are all like this, and the Tetsu Rock is located in the middle. The peaks on the west side are two protrusions that extend to the left side of the stream on the south side of the saltpeter pavement and end. The peaks on the east side are two protrusions that extend to the east end of the standing rock, and then turn south to the east mountain.

古文：入觉海，见山在其前，即出而循崖以登崖之西，下瞰南溪涓涓北流，时有小舟自新城来。
现代文：走进觉海寺，见山在寺前面，就出了寺顺崖壁登上山崖的西面，往下俯瞰，南面溪水涓涓向北流去，当时正好有只小船从新城方向来。
English: I walked into the Juehai Temple, saw the mountain in front of the temple, walked out of the temple along the cliff wall, climbed to the west side of the cliff, looked down, and the creek in the south flowed north. At that time, there happened to be a small boat coming from the direction of Xincheng.

古文：既南行，崖尽，有峡东下，盖南北两崖对峙其来峡，其度脊处反在西濒溪之上。
现代文：又走五里，到韩公桥。
English: Walk another five miles to Hankong Bridge.

古文：余见其峡深沉，遂蹑山级，东向直登其巅。
现代文：再走三里，到双同槽。折往南二里，到紫云岩。
English: Walk another three miles to Shuangdong Groove. Turn south two miles to Ziyun Rock.

古文：其巅有东西两台。
现代文：又折往西一里，渡过溪水到夫子岩。
English: I turned west one mile and crossed the stream to Fuzi Rock.

古文：初七日竺岫渡桥，东南三里，舒坑岭。
现代文：返出紫云岩，走一里到响石岩，又登上一座山岭，走一里到竺崎。初七日从竺帕越过桥，往东南走三里，到舒坑岭。
English: Returned from Ziyun Rock, walked one mile to Xingshi Rock, climbed another mountain ridge, walked one mile to Nagasaki. On the seventh day of the first month, crossed the bridge from Zangba, walked three miles southeast to Shukeng Ridge.

古文：又三里，缅湾。
现代文：又走三里，到缅湾。
English: Walk another three miles to the Gulf of Maine.

古文：又六里，陈坊。
现代文：又走六里，到陈坊。
English: Walk another six miles to Chen Fang.

古文：陈坊有溪自北南流，盖自沪溪而下东溪者也。
现代文：陈坊有条溪水自北往南流，它大概是从沪溪县流下来而汇人东溪的一条溪水。
English: Chenfang has a stream that flows from north to south. It is probably a stream that flows down from Huxi County and collects the water of East Renren Creek.

古文：越桥而东上一岭，又下而复上，日铁湾岭。
现代文：越过溪上的桥向东登上一座山岭，又下了此岭而登上另一座山岭，那岭叫铁湾岭。
English: Cross the bridge over the stream to the east and climb up a mountain ridge, and then descend this ridge and climb up another mountain ridge, which is called Tiewan Ridge.

古文：共三里，下岭为钱家湾。
现代文：共走三里，下了铁湾岭为钱家湾。
English: A total of three miles, down the Tiewan Ridge to Qianjia Bay.

古文：又随东溪二里至黄源桥。
现代文：又顺东溪走二里到黄源桥。
English: and walked two miles along Dongxi to Huangyuan Bridge.

古文：渡溪而南一里，过黄湾岭。
现代文：渡过东溪往南一里，经过黄湾岭。
English: Cross the Dongxi to the south for one mile, passing through the Huangwan Ridge.

古文：南六里，长行岭。
现代文：再往南六里，翻越长行岭。
English: Another six miles to the south, over the Changxing Mountains.

古文：下岭为连家湾，是为新城西北界。
现代文：下了岭为连家湾，这里是新城县的西北界。
English: Down the ridge is Lianjia Bay, which is the northwest border of Xincheng County.

古文：连家湾出冈为周家隘，即新城入郡官道。又西十里，百顺辅。
现代文：从连家湾走出山冈为周家隘，这里是新城县到建昌府的官道，又往东十里，到百顺铺。
English: From Lianjiawan, the mountain ridge is Zhoujia Pass. Here is the official road from Xincheng County to Jianchang Prefecture, and ten miles to the east, to Baishunpu.

古文：又三里上分水岭。
现代文：又走三里，登上分水岭。
English: Walk another three miles and you'll reach the watershed.

古文：先是自百顺西至周家隘，有小水西流，余以为入南溪者；及登分水，而后知犹北入东溪者也。
现代文：原先，从百顺铺往西到周家隘的路上，见到一条小水西流，我以为它是流入南溪中的，等登上分水岭，才知道它仍是往北流入东溪中的。
English: Originally, on my way west from Bai Shun Pu to Zhoujiakou, I saw a small west-flowing stream. I thought it was flowing into the Nanxi River. It was only when I reached the watershed that I realized it was still flowing north into the Dongxi River.

古文：又五里，过沙路岭。
现代文：又走五里，经过沙路岭。
English: I walked another five miles and passed Shalu Ling.

古文：又五里过一桥，其水自高学坡来，五六里越桥而南，即与南大溪遇。
现代文：又走五里跨过一座桥，桥下的水从高觉坡流来，五六里后越过一座桥往南走，就和南面的大溪相遇。
English: I walked another five miles across a bridge, and the water under the bridge came from the Gao Jue slope. After five or six miles, I crossed a bridge to the south and met the stream on the south side.

古文：又二里，东为观者崖，西为仙居院，两崖束溪如门，门以内澄潭甚深。
现代文：又走二里，东面为观音崖，西面为仙居院，两边山崖紧夹着溪流，如同一道门，门以内澄澈的潭水很深。
English: Walk two more miles, the east side is the Guanyin Cliff, the west side is Xianjuyuan. The mountain cliffs on both sides are tightly sandwiched by streams, like a door. The clear pool of water inside the door is very deep.

古文：又三里，入新城北门，出西门。
现代文：又走三里，进入新城县北门，从西门出了城。
English: I walked another three miles, entered the north gate of Xincheng County, and left the city through the west gate.

古文：石门不甚壮，而阛闠颇盛。
现代文：石砌的城门不很宏大，但街市较为繁盛。
English: The stone city gate is not very grand, but the street market is more prosperous.

古文：出门渡石梁，则日峰山当梁瞰溪。越桥即南随溪行。
现代文：走出城西门跨越石桥，就见日峰山对着石桥，下临溪流屯过了桥就往南沿溪流行。
English: When you walk out of the West Gate of the city and cross the stone bridge, you will see Mount Nifeng facing the stone bridge, and the downstream stream flows south along the stream after crossing the bridge.

古文：已折西南，登白石岭。
现代文：随后折向西南，攀登白石岭。
English: Then turn to the southwest and climb Shiroishi Ridge.

古文：十里，过文江桥，始复与大溪遇，溪流至此已不胜舟矣。
现代文：十里后跨过文江桥，才又与大溪相遇，溪流到这里已不能行船了。
English: Ten miles later, after crossing the Wenjiang Bridge, we met the big stream again, and the stream was no longer navigable here.

古文：于是多随溪，西南过竹山，山亦峭特自异，上有竹仙院。
现代文：从这里起多是沿溪走，往西南经过竹山，此山也是峻峭独特不同于其它山，山上有个竹仙院。
English: From here, it is mostly along the creek and to the southwest through the Bamboo Mountain. This mountain is also steep and unique and different from other mountains. There is a Bamboo Fairy Temple on the mountain.

古文：又十里，周舍。
现代文：又走十里，到周舍。
English: I walked another ten miles to Zhou's house.

古文：周舍之南，路折而东，有潭偃水，颇觉汪洋，即文江之上流也。
现代文：周舍的南边，路折往东去，有个潭储聚水流，很让人觉得宽广无际，它就是文江的上游水流。
English: On the south side of Zhou She, turning east, there is a pond storing water flow, which makes people feel wide and boundless. It is the upstream water flow of Wenjiang River.

古文：十五里，宿于石瓶冈，去城二十五里，去福山十五里。
现代文：又走十五里，投宿在石瓶冈，此地离新城县城二十五里，离福山十五里。
English: They walked another fifteen miles and stayed in Shibeioka, which is twenty-five miles from the county seat of Xincheng and fifteen miles from Fukuyama.

