古文：盖兼济独善，显晦之殊，其事不同，由来久矣。
现代文：兼济天下与独善其身，显达与隐晦的分别，这些事情不一样，由来很久了。
English: The difference between helping the world and benefiting oneself, between revealing and concealing, these things are different and have been around for a long time.

古文：昔夷、齐获全于周武，华矞不容于太公，何哉？
现代文：过去伯夷、叔齐在周武王时得到保全，华却不被太公所容。
English: In the past, Boyi and Shuqi were preserved during the reign of King Zhou Wu, but Hua was not tolerated by the Grand Duke.

古文：求其心者，许以激贪之用；督其迹者，矫以教义之风。
现代文：为什么呢？探究他们的心志，大约是性情激昂或贪婪的作用。观察他们的行为，假托为教化礼义的风范，而避世隐居不归。
English: Why? To probe their minds, perhaps as a function of impetuosity or greed; to observe their behavior, as a pretense of civility, as a retreat from the world.

古文：而肥遁不归，代有其人矣。故《易》称 遁世无闷 ， 不事王侯 。
现代文：代代都有这样的人。所以《周易》说： 逃离世俗，没有苦恼，不侍奉王侯。 
English: There have been such people for generations. Therefore, "Zhou Yi" said: Escape from the world, do not suffer, do not serve the prince.

古文：《诗》云 皎皎白驹，在彼空谷 。
现代文：《诗经》说： 皎皎白驹，在彼空谷。 
English: "The Book of Songs" says: "He is in the valley of the sky.

古文：《礼》云 儒有上不臣天子，下不事诸侯 。
现代文：《礼记》说： 儒生有对上不向天子称臣，对下不侍奉诸侯的。 
English: "Li Ji" said: There are Confucian scholars who do not worship the Son of Heaven above, and do not serve the princes below.

古文：《语》曰 举逸民，天下之人归心焉 。
现代文：《论语》说： 举荐隐逸的人，天下的百姓就会归服了。 
English: "The Analects" says: "If you recommend someone who is a recluse, the people of the world will submit."

古文：虽出处殊途，语默异用，各言其志，皆君子之道也。
现代文：虽然出仕和隐居不同，说话和沉默有不同的用处，但各言其志向，却都是君子奉行的做法。
English: Although serving and seclusion are different, and speaking and silence have different uses, each has its own aspiration, but they are all the practices of a gentleman.

古文：洪崖兆其始，箕山扇其风，七人作乎周年，四皓光乎汉日。
现代文：洪崖做出隐逸的开端，箕山扇动这种风气，七人在周代涌现，商山四皓在汉朝扬名。
English: Hongya made a hidden beginning, Lushan instigated this style, seven people emerged in the Zhou Dynasty, and Shangshan four mountains became famous in the Han Dynasty.

古文：魏、晋以降，其流逾广。
现代文：魏、晋以来，这种流风更加广泛。
English: Since the Wei and Jin dynasties, this style has become more widespread.

古文：其大者则轻天下，细万物；其小者则安苦节，甘贱贫。
现代文：大隐士以天下为轻，以万物为细小，小隐士安于艰苦品节，甘心贫困低贱。
English: The great hermit regards the world as light and all things as small. The small hermit is content with the hardships of life and is willing to be poor and humble.

古文：或与世同尘，随波澜以俱逝；或违时矫俗，望江湖而独往。
现代文：有的与世风混同，追波逐澜一同消逝；有的与时世风俗相背，向往江湖只身独去。
English: Some are confused with the world, chasing the waves and disappearing together; some are contrary to the customs of the times, yearning to be alone.

古文：狎玩鱼鸟，左右琴书，拾遗粒而织落毛，饮石泉而庇松柏。
现代文：玩赏鱼鸟，身边琴书相伴，拾捡地上的粮粒，编织鸟儿的落毛，饮用石中泉水，乘荫在松柏之下。
English: Enjoying the fish and birds, accompanied by the piano, picking up the grains on the ground, weaving the birds' fallen feathers, drinking the stone spring water, and enjoying the shade under the pine trees.

古文：放情宇宙之外，自足怀抱之中。
现代文：纵情宇庙之外，对自身怀抱感到满足。
English: In addition to indulging in the temple, they are satisfied with their own embrace.

古文：然皆欣欣于独善，鲜汲汲于兼济。夷情得丧，忘怀累有。
现代文：可是都乐于独善其身，为兼济天下而情急心迫的人很少；泯灭性情得失，失掉志向的人很多。
English: However, there are few people who are happy to be self-sufficient and eager to help the world; there are many people who have lost their ambition.

古文：比夫迈德弘道，匡俗庇人，可得而小，不可得而忽也。
现代文：较之超越道德，弘扬大道，匡正世俗，庇护众人，能够得到的却很小，不能得到的却忽视了。
English: Compared with the transcendence of morality, the promotion of the road, the rectification of the world, and the protection of the people, what can be obtained is very small, and what cannot be obtained is ignored.

古文：而受命哲王，守文令主，莫不束帛交驰，蒲轮结辙，奔走岩谷，唯恐不逮者，何哉？
现代文：而承受天命的英明帝王，遵守成法的圣明君主，无不捆扎丝帛，遣使竞驰于道路，蒲轮车辙交错，奔走在高山深谷，还惟恐做得不够，是什么原因呢？
English: But what is the reason for the wise emperor who bears the destiny of heaven, the holy monarch who abides by the established law, all tie silk ribbons, send emissaries to race on the road, interlace the ruts of the wheelbarrow, run in the high mountains and deep valleys, and still fear that they have not done enough?

古文：以其道虽未弘，志不可夺，纵无舟楫之功，终有坚贞之操，足以立懦夫之志，息贪竞之风。
现代文：是因为大道虽然没有弘扬，志向却很坚定不移。即使没有舟楫戈征战之功，终归有坚贞的节操，足以让懦夫树立志向，平息贪婪争竞的风气。
English: It is because although the road has not been promoted, the aspiration is very firm and unswerving. Even if there is no achievement of conquering the war, there will eventually be a steadfast discipline, which is enough for cowards to establish aspirations and quell the greedy competitive culture.

古文：与苟得之徒，不可同年共日，所谓无用以为用，无为而无不为也。
现代文：与苟且生活的人，不可同年共日。所谓以无用为有用，以无为而无不为啊。
English: You can't spend the same day with someone who lives in the same place. So-called usefulness is uselessness, and nothingness is nothingness.

古文：自叔世浇浮，淳风殆尽，锥刀之末，竞入成群。
现代文：自末世浇薄轻浮，淳美的世风差不多消失完了，锥刀那样的小利，争夺的人成群结队。
English: Since the end of the world, the frivolous, honest world style has almost disappeared, and small profits like the cone knife have been fought over by hordes of people.

古文：而能冥心物表，介然离俗，望古独适，求友千龄，亦异人矣！
现代文：而能面对万物息心无欲，耿介地脱离世俗，向往古代，独寻静地，寻求千年之友，也就是很不寻常的人了。
English: On the other hand, it is a very unusual person who is able to face all things with peace of mind and without desire, to break away from the world, to yearn for antiquity, to seek solitude, and to seek a friend for a thousand years.

古文：何必御霞乘云而追日月，穷极天地，始为超远哉！
现代文：何必乘云驾霞追日逐月，穷尽天地，才算是超远呢？
English: Why do you have to ride the clouds and chase the sun month after month, exhausting heaven and earth, to be considered ultra-distant?

古文：案《魏书》列眭夸、冯亮、李谧、郑脩为《逸士传》。
现代文：案《魏书》列眭夸、冯亮、李谧、郑修为《逸士传》。
English: In the "Weishu" (Book of the Wei Dynasty), the characters of Quan Gua, Feng Liang, Li Xuan and Zheng Xiu are listed as "Historical Figures."

古文：《隋书》列李士谦、崔廓、廓子赜、徐则、张文诩为《隐逸传》。
现代文：《隋书》列李士谦、崔廓、崔廓的儿子崔赜、徐则、张文诩为《隐逸传》。
English: "Sui Shu" listed Li Shichen, Cui Kuo, Cui Kuo's son Cui Wei, Xu Ze and Zhang Wenyi as "Hidden History."

古文：今以李谧、士谦附其家传，其余并编附篇，以备《隐逸传》云。
现代文：现把李谧、李士谦附在他们的家族传记上，其余的一同编为附篇，以充实《隐逸传》。
English: Now, Li Xi and Li Shixian are attached to their family biography, and the rest are compiled as an appendix to enrich the "Hidden History."

古文：眭夸，一名旭，赵郡高邑人也。
现代文：眭夸名旭，赵郡高邑人。
English: Zou Kua Mingxu, a native of Gaoyu, Zhao County.

古文：祖迈，晋东海王越军谋掾，后没石勒，为徐州刺史。
现代文：祖父眭迈，是晋朝东海王司马越的军谋掾，后来消灭石勒，做了徐州刺史。
English: Grandfather Qimai was the military strategist of the East Sea King Sima Yue of the Jin Dynasty. Later, he eliminated Shile and made Xuzhou history.

古文：父邃，字怀道，慕容宝中书令。
现代文：父亲眭邃，字怀道，是慕容宝的中书令。
English: Vater, literally "to cherish the way," is the Chinese calligraphy of Murongbao.

古文：夸少有大度，不拘小节，耽好书传，未曾以世务经心。
现代文：眭夸年轻时胸怀大度，不拘泥小节，爱好书传，沉浸其中，不曾留心当世事务。
English: When he was young, Zou Bo was broad-minded, unconstrained, fond of books, immersed in them, and did not pay attention to current affairs.

古文：好饮酒，浩然物表。
现代文：好喝酒，超然物外。
English: He's a good drinker. He's a bit of an eccentric.

古文：年三十，遭父丧，须鬓致白，每一悲哭，闻者为之流涕。
现代文：三十岁时，遭逢父亲亡故，以致须鬓变白，每当悲伤痛苦，听者为之流泪。
English: At the age of thirty, he suffered the death of his father, so that his whiskers turned white, and whenever he was sad and in pain, his listeners shed tears.

古文：高尚不仕，寄情丘壑。
现代文：性情高洁不愿仕宦，寄情山丘沟壑。
English: A high-spirited person does not want to work hard, and loves the hills and ravines.

古文：同郡李顺愿与之交，夸拒而不许。
现代文：同郡人李顺希望与他结交，眭夸拒不答应。
English: Li Shun, a fellow county resident, hoped to make friends with him, but Hao Qua refused.

古文：邦国少长莫不惮之。
现代文：郡中长幼没有不惧怕他的。
English: Children and adults in the county have grown up fearing him.

古文：少与崔浩为莫逆之交。浩为司徒，奏征为中郎，辞疾不赴。
现代文：年轻时与崔浩是莫逆之交，崔浩为司徒，曾上奏皇上征召他为中郎，眭夸推托有病不去赴任。
English: When he was young, he was close friends with Cui Hao. Cui Hao was a disciple. He had been summoned by the emperor to serve as a middle-ranking official, but he was too ill to take up the post.

古文：州郡逼遣，不得已，入京都，与浩相见。
现代文：州郡长官逼迫上路，不得已到了京都，同崔浩相见。
English: The prefect of the prefecture was forced to go on the road and had no choice but to go to Kyoto to meet with Choi Ho.

古文：经留数日，唯饮酒谈叙平生，不及世利。
现代文：一直停留好多天，只是饮酒叙谈往事，不涉及世俗私利。
English: He has been staying for many days, just drinking and talking about the past, not involving worldly self-interest.

古文：浩每欲论屈之，竟不能发言，其见敬惮如此。
现代文：崔浩每次想通过谈道理让他屈服，竟不能开口，对眭夸的敬畏就是这样子。
English: Every time Cui Hao tried to talk him into submission, he couldn't open his mouth. That's how much he feared Zou Bo.

古文：浩后遂投诏书于夸怀，亦不开口。
现代文：崔浩后来便将皇上诏书扔在眭夸怀中，也没有开口。
English: Cui Hao later threw the imperial edict into the arms of Zou Quanguo and did not open his mouth.

古文：夸曰： 桃简，卿已为司徒，何足以此劳国士也？
现代文：眭夸说： 桃简，你已经做了司徒，为什么还要以此烦劳国中人士呢？
English: Hao Qua said: Taojian, you have already become a scholar, why should you bother the people of the country with this?

古文：吾便将别。 
现代文：我准备和你告别。 
English: I'm ready to say goodbye.

古文：桃简，浩小名。
现代文：桃简，是崔浩的小名。
English: Taojian is a nickname for Cui Hao.

古文：浩虑夸即还，时乘一骡，更无兼骑，乃以夸骡内之厩中，冀相维絷。
现代文：崔浩担心眭夸随即还乡，当时只乘一头骡子，再没有别的坐骑，就把眭夸的骡子牵入马棚中，希望用这种办法挽留他。
English: Cui Hao was worried that Zou Kua would immediately return to his hometown. At that time, there was only one mule and no other horse, so he took Zou Kua's mule into the stable, hoping to use this method to retain him.

古文：夸遂托乡人输租者，谬为御车，乃得出关。
现代文：眭夸于是托付同乡交租的人，假称为他驾车，于是得以出关。
English: Zou Gua then entrusted a fellow villager to pay the rent, pretending that he was driving, so he was able to leave the customs.

古文：浩知而叹曰： 眭夸独行士，本不应以小职辱之，又使其人杖策复路，吾当何辞以谢也！ 
现代文：崔浩知道后感叹说： 眭夸是个独来独往的人，本来不应该用这种小职务羞辱他，又让他拿鞭上路，我应该用什么话来向他谢罪呢？ 
English: After knowing this, Cui Hao sighed and said: Zou Kua is a loner. I should not have humiliated him with such a small post and let him take the whip on the road. What words should I use to apologize to him?

古文：时朝法甚峻，夸既私还，将有私归之咎。
现代文：当时朝廷法令非常严厉，眭夸既然私自回乡，就将有私自回乡的罪过。
English: At that time, the imperial edict was very strict, saying that since I returned to my hometown, I would be guilty of returning to my hometown.

古文：浩仍相左右，始得无坐。
现代文：崔浩便左右周旋，才得以无罪。
English: Cui Hao then twisted and turned until he was acquitted.

古文：经年，送夸本骡，兼遗以所乘马，为书谢之。
现代文：过了一年，送还眭夸原来那头骡子，同时送给他自己乘的马，写信谢罪。
English: A year later, he returned the mule to Zou Kua, and at the same time gave him his own horse to ride, and wrote a letter of apology.

古文：夸更不受其骡马，亦不复书。
现代文：眭夸再不接受他的骡马，也不回信。
English: Zou Kua no longer accepts his horses and does not reply to his letters.

古文：及浩没，为之素服，受乡人吊唁，经一时乃止。
现代文：崔浩下世时，眭夸为他穿了白色丧服，接受乡人吊唁，历经一年才停止。
English: When Cui Hao passed away, Zou Kua dressed him in white mourning clothes and accepted the condolences of the villagers. It took a year before he stopped.

古文：叹曰： 崔公既死，谁能更容眭夸！ 
现代文：眭夸叹息说 ：崔浩公已经死了，还有谁能容纳眭夸？ 
English: Zou Gua sighed and said, "Cui Haogong is dead, who else can contain Zou Gua?"

古文：妇父巨鹿魏攀，当时名达之士，未尝备婿之礼，情同朋好。
现代文：妻子的父亲钜鹿人魏攀，是当时名声显达的人。不曾尽女婿的礼节，情义如同朋友。
English: His wife's father, Wei Pan, was a famous man at the time. He did not live up to the etiquette of a son-in-law, but treated her like a friend.

古文：或人谓夸曰： 吾闻有大才者必居贵仕，子何独在桑榆乎？ 
现代文：有人对眭夸说 ：我听说有大才能的人一定官居显贵之位，你为何偏偏在桑榆之间呢？ 
English: Someone said to Hao Qua: I have heard that people with great talent must occupy high-ranking positions. Why are you in the middle of the mulberry tree?

古文：遂著《知命论》以释之。
现代文：于是写《知命论》来解释原因。
English: So he wrote "Theory of Mind" to explain why.

古文：及卒，葬日赴会者如市。
现代文：等到死时，埋葬那天前去参加葬礼的如同街市一样热闹。
English: At the time of death, those who go to the funeral on the day of burial are as lively as the street market.

古文：无子。
现代文：没有儿子。
English: Wang Jun has no son.

古文：冯亮，字灵通，南阳人，梁平北将军蔡道恭之甥也。少博览诸书，又笃好佛理。
现代文：冯亮字灵通，南阳人，是梁朝平北将军蔡道恭的外甥，自幼博览群书，又特别喜爱佛家禅理。
English: Feng Liangziling Tong, Nanyang people, is the nephew of the Northern General Cai Daogong of the Northern General Liang Chaoping. He has read a lot of books since childhood, and is particularly fond of Buddhist Zen.

古文：随道恭至义阳，会中山王英平义阳，获焉。
现代文：跟随蔡道恭到义阳，适逢中山王英平定义阳，做了俘虏。
English: He followed Cai Daogong to Yiyang, just as Zhongshan King Yingping conquered Yiyang and made him a prisoner.

古文：英素闻其名，以礼待接。
现代文：中山王平常就听到冯亮的名声，于是以礼相待。
English: Zhongshan Wang usually heard about Feng Liang's reputation, so he treated him with courtesy.

古文：亮性清静，后隐居嵩山，感英之德，以时展觐。
现代文：冯亮性情好清静，后来隐居嵩山，感念中山王的恩德，定期拜见。
English: Feng Liang had a good and quiet disposition. Later, he lived in seclusion in Songshan, feeling the benevolence of Zhongshan Wang, and visited him regularly.

古文：英亡，亮奔赴，尽其哀恸。
现代文：中山王死时，冯亮去吊唁，极尽哀恸。
English: When Zhongshan Wang died, Feng Liang went to pay his condolences and mourn as much as possible.

古文：宣武尝召以为羽林监，领中书舍人，将令侍讲《十地》诸经，固辞不许。
现代文：宣武帝曾召他为羽林监，兼任中书舍人，准备让他为皇上讲读《十地》等经书，坚决推辞不答应。
English: Emperor Xuanwu once called him to serve as an overseer of the forests and a librarian of the middle school. He was prepared to have him read "Ten Lands" and other scriptures for the emperor, but he resolutely refused.

古文：又欲使衣帻入见，苦求以幅巾就朝，遂不强逼。
现代文：又想让他穿戴整齐入朝进见，他苦苦请求用一束绢扎住头发朝见，于是不再强迫。
English: He also wanted him to be dressed neatly for his court appearance, and he begged to have his hair tied back with a bunch of ribbons, so they didn't force him.

古文：还山数年，与僧礼诵为业，蔬食饮水，有终焉之志。
现代文：回嵩山几年，与僧人礼貌相处，诵读经书为业，吃蔬菜饮清水，有终此一生的想法。
English: After returning to Songshan for a few years, I got along politely with the monks, read scriptures as my profession, ate vegetables and drank clear water, and had the idea of living this life to the full.

古文：会逆人王敞事发，连山中沙门法。
现代文：碰上叛贼王敞的事情败露，牵连到山中和尚法。
English: When the affair of the traitor Wang Bi came to light, it implicated the monk Fa in the mountains.

古文：而亮被执赴尚书省，十余日，诏特免雪。
现代文：将冯亮逮捕押送尚书省，十多天，皇上下诏特意赦免昭雪。
English: Feng Liang was arrested and escorted to Shangshu Province. After more than ten days, the emperor issued an imperial edict specifically pardoning Zhaoxue.

古文：亮不敢还山，遂寓居景明寺，敕给衣食及其从者数人。
现代文：冯亮不敢回嵩山，于是客居在景明寺，朝廷下令供给衣食，包括跟从的几个人。
English: Feng Liang did not dare to return to Songshan, so he stayed at Jingming Temple, and the imperial court ordered the provision of food and clothing, including several people who followed him.

古文：后思其旧居，复还山室。
现代文：后来思念他的旧居，又回到嵩山住室。
English: Later, he missed his old home and returned to the Songshan residence.

古文：亮既雅爱山水，又兼工思，结架岩林，甚得栖游之适。
现代文：冯亮既然向来喜爱山水，又加上勤于思考，结庐山林，很得栖息赏游的乐趣。
English: Since Feng Liang has always loved the landscape, coupled with his diligent thinking, he has built a mountain forest, and it is very fun to stay and enjoy the tour.

古文：颇以此闻，宣武给其工力，令与沙门统僧暹、河南尹甄深等同视嵩山形胜之处，遂造闲居佛寺。林泉既奇，营制又美，曲尽山居之妙。
现代文：以此而比较有名，宣武帝供给他人士物力，令他和僧人统领僧暹、河南尹甄琛等一同考察嵩山地理位置优越、山水有特色的地方，于是建造闲居佛寺，林泉既奇妙，建筑构造又很美，极尽山居之妙趣。
English: It is famous for this. Emperor Xuanwu provided material resources to his people, so that he and the monks led by the monks Siam, Henan Yin Zhenluo and others to investigate the geographical location of Songshan and the distinctive features of the landscape, so they built a leisurely Buddhist temple. The forest spring is strange, the building structure is beautiful, and the charm of the mountain residence is exhausted.

古文：亮时出京师。延昌二年冬，因遇笃疾，宣武敕以马舆送令还山，居嵩高道场寺，数日卒。
现代文：冯亮当时离开京师，延昌二年冬，因遇重病，宣武帝下令用车驾将他送还嵩山，住在嵩高道场寺，几天后死去。
English: Feng Liang left Beijing Division at that time, and in the winter of the second year of Yanchang, due to serious illness, Emperor Xuanwu ordered him to be sent back to Songshan by car, lived in Songgao Dojo Temple, and died a few days later.

古文：诏赠帛二百匹，以供凶事。
现代文：皇帝赠给绢帛二百匹，以供丧事之用。
English: The emperor gave him two hundred yakitori to use at the funeral.

古文：遗诫兄子综，殓以衣蒨，左手持板，右手执《孝经》一卷，置尸盘石上，去人数里外，积十余日，乃焚于山，灰烬处，起佛塔经藏。
现代文：遗命告诫哥哥的儿子冯综，穿衣戴帽后入殓，左手拿着板子，右手拿着《孝经》一卷，把尸身放在盘石上，离开人群住处数里外，停留十多天，在山上焚尸，灰烬所在的地方，建造佛塔藏经书。
English: The will admonished his brother's son, Feng Zomei, to get dressed, put on a cap and enter the coffin, holding a board in his left hand and a volume of the "Filial Piety Sutra" in his right hand, place the corpse on a stone slab, leave the crowd's residence several miles away, stay for more than ten days, burn the corpse on the mountain, and where the ashes are, build a stupa to store the scriptures.

古文：初、亮以盛冬丧，连日骤雪，穷山荒涧，鸟兽饥窘，僵尸山野，无所防护。
现代文：当初，冯亮在隆冬死去，连日大雪，穷山荒涧，鸟兽饿极，尸身横放荒野，无法护防。
English: At first, Feng Liang died in the middle of winter, after days of heavy snow, poor mountains were deserted, birds and animals were extremely hungry, and his body was left in the wilderness, unable to be protected.

古文：时有寿春道人惠需，每旦往看其尸，拂去尘霰。禽虫之迹，交横左右，而初无侵毁。
现代文：当时有寿春道人惠需，每天早上去看尸体，拂去尘土雪珠，禽兽的足迹，纵横交织在尸身周围，然而没有一点损坏。
English: At that time, there was a need for people in Shouchun Road to visit the body every morning, brush off the dust and snow, and the footprints of animals, intertwined around the body, but there was no damage at all.

古文：衣服如本，唯风蒨巾。
现代文：衣服像入殓时一样，只是帽巾被风吹得稍有偏斜。
English: The clothes are the same as they were at the time of the wedding, except that the hood is slightly tilted by the wind.

古文：又以亮识旧南方法师信大栗十枚，言期之将来十地果报，开亮手，以置把中。
现代文：又因冯亮旧友南方法师拿出十粒大粟子，说将来还会有十地因果报应，于是伸开冯亮的手，把粟子放在手中。
English: Also, because Feng Liang's old friend, the Southern Methodist, took out ten large corns, saying that there would be ten karmic retributions in the future, so he stretched out Feng Liang's hand and put the corns in his hand.

古文：经宿，乃为虫鸟盗食，皮壳在地，而亦不伤肌体。
现代文：过了一夜，却被鸟兽偷吃，皮壳落在地上，但也没有损伤尸体。
English: After one night, it was eaten by birds and beasts. The skin shell fell to the ground, but it did not damage the body.

古文：兰根申表荐修，明帝诏付雍州刺史萧宝夤访实以闻。
现代文：焚烧那天，有浓浓的白雾，回绕在旁边，自地面连到天空，整个早上没有消散。
English: On the day of the burning, there was a thick white fog that swirled around, from the ground to the sky, and did not dissipate all morning.

古文：会宝夤作逆，事不行。崔廓，字士玄，博陵安平人也。
现代文：山中道人与普通百姓帮忙的百余人，没有不感到惊异的。崔廓字士玄，博爱安平人。
English: The more than one hundred people who helped the Taoists and ordinary people in the mountains are nothing short of amazing. Cui Guo Zi Xuan, Boai Anping Ren.

古文：父子元，齐燕州司马。
现代文：父亲崔子元，在齐朝为燕州司马。
English: His father, Cui Ziyuan, was the Yangzhou Sima in the Qi Dynasty.

古文：廓少孤贫，母贱，由是不为邦族所齿。
现代文：崔廓幼时孤苦贫困，母亲地位低下，因此不被同族人所看重。
English: When she was young, Cui Kuo was poor, and her mother's status was low, so she was not valued by her people.

古文：初为里佐，屡逢屈辱，于是感激，逃入山中。
现代文：开始做里佐，屡次遭受别人羞辱，于是愤激而起，逃进山中，开始博览群书，很多书都通览涉及。
English: Began to do Rizzo, repeatedly suffered the humiliation of others, so angered, fled into the mountains, began to read books, many books are involved in the review.

古文：遂博览书籍，多所通涉，山东学者皆宗之。
现代文：太行山以东的学者都以他为宗师。回乡之后，不接受征召。
English: Scholars east of Mount Taihang all regard him as their guru. After returning to his hometown, he refused to be conscripted.

古文：既还乡，不应辟命。与赵郡李士谦为忘言友，时称崔、李。
现代文：与赵郡的李士谦成为忘言之友，当时称崔、李。
English: and Li Shixian of Zhao County became silent friends, then known as Cui and Li.

古文：士谦死，廓哭之恸，为之作传，输之秘府。
现代文：李士谦死时，崔廓哭得很悲恸，为李士谦作了传记，送交朝中秘府。
English: When Li Shixian died, Cui Kuo cried bitterly. He wrote a biography of Li Shixian and sent it to the Imperial Palace.

古文：士谦妻卢氏寡居，每家事，辄令人谘廓取定。
现代文：李士谦的妻子卢氏寡居，每逢家中有事，就命人向崔廓询问然后决定。
English: Li Shih-hsien's wife Lu was a widow. Whenever there was a problem at home, she would order someone to ask Cui Kuo for advice and then make a decision.

古文：未及施行，江都倾覆，咸为煨烬。徐则，东海郯人也。
现代文：崔廓曾经著文论述刑名的原则，义理非常精深，文章多不见记载。隋朝大业年间，死在家中。徐则，东海郯地人。
English: Cui Kuo once wrote a treatise on the principle of punitive names. The principles are very profound, and many articles are not recorded. He died at home during the Sui Dynasty. Xu Ze, a native of the East China Sea.

古文：幼沈静，寡嗜欲，受业于周弘正，善三玄，精于论议，声擅都邑。
现代文：幼时性情深沉闲静，很少有嗜好欲望，在周弘正处接受学业，擅长《周易》、《老子》、《庄子》三种玄学，对论议很精通，名声传扬都邑。
English: When he was young, his disposition was deep and quiet, with few desires for hobbies. He received his education at the same time as Zhou Hongzhi, and excelled in the three metaphysics of "Zhou Yi," "Lao Zi" and "Zhuang Zi." He was very proficient in debate, and his fame spread all over the country.

古文：则叹曰： 名者实之宾，吾其为宾乎！ 
现代文：徐则感叹说： 名是实质的从属，我难道要做从属吗？ 
English: Xu lamented, "Name is the essence of subordination. Do I really want to be subordinate?

古文：遂怀栖隐之操，杖策入缙云山。
现代文：于是心怀栖隐山林的志向，拄着手杖进了缙云山。
English: Therefore, with the aspiration of living in the hidden mountain forest, he walked into the Qinyun Mountain with a cane.

古文：后学者数百人苦请教授，则谢而遣之。
现代文：后进学者数百人苦苦请求他传授知识，徐则谢绝打发了他们。
English: Hundreds of underachievers pleaded with him to teach them knowledge, but he turned them down.

古文：不娶妻，常服巾褐。
现代文：不娶妻室，常常戴头巾穿粗布短袄。
English: He does not marry a wife, and often wears a headscarf and coarse cloth shorts.

古文：陈太建中，应召来憩于至真观。期月，又辞入天台山。
现代文：陈朝宣帝太建年间，应皇帝征召住在至真观，满一月，又辞别进入天台山。
English: During the reign of Emperor Taiken of the Chen Dynasty, he was summoned by the emperor to live in Shizhenguan. After one month, he resigned and entered Tiantai Mountain.

古文：因绝粒养性，所资唯松水而已，虽隆冬冱寒，不服绵絮。
现代文：因断绝粮食以养品性，所依靠的只有松籽、白术而已，即使是隆冬寒气冻闭，也不穿棉絮。
English: Due to the abandonment of grain to raise quality, only pine seeds and white cedar are relied on. Even if it is frozen in the middle of winter, it does not wear cotton wool.

古文：太傅徐陵为之刊山立颂。
现代文：太傅徐陵为他刻山石立名称颂。
English: Taifu Xuling carves the names of mountains and mountains for him.

古文：初在缙云山，太极真人徐君降之曰： 汝年出八十，当为王者师，然后得道也。 
现代文：当初在缙云山，太极真人徐君降临，对他说 ：你年过八十，要做王者的老师，然后才得道。 
English: Once upon a time, in Shanyun Mountain, the real-life Taijiquan master Xu Jun came to him and said, "You are over eighty years old, you should be the teacher of the king, and only then will you attain the Way.

古文：晋王广镇扬州，闻其名，手书召之曰： 夫道得众妙，法体自然，包涵二仪，混成万物，人能弘道，道不虚行。
现代文：晋王广镇守扬州，听说他的大名，亲笔写信召请他说： 道术兼得众家之精妙，法术出于自然，包涵天地，浑然而与万物一体，人能弘扬道术，道术才不空自流播。
English: Jin Wang Guangzhen, the governor of Yangzhou, heard of his great name and personally wrote to him to invite him to say: Taoism is both exquisite and popular, magic comes from nature, embraces heaven and earth, yet is one with all things, people can promote Taoism, and Taoism is not self-propagating.

古文：先生履德养空，宗玄齐物，深晓义理，颇味法门。
现代文：先生坚守德操，培养淡泊品性，宗师玄学，与万物相等，通晓义理，颇能使人体味出门径。
English: The teacher adheres to moral conduct, cultivates light-hearted character, masters metaphysics, is equal to all things, understands the principles, and is quite able to make the human taste go out of the door.

古文：悦性冲玄，恬神虚白，餐松饵术，栖息烟霞。
现代文：喜悦冲淡玄远，恬静清纯的心境，服松籽吃白术，栖息在烟霞之中。
English: Joy dilutes the profound, tranquil and pure state of mind, wears pine seeds, eats white jujube, and dwells in the haze.

古文：望赤城而待风云，游玉堂而驾龙凤。
现代文：远望赤城而等待风云，遨游玉堂而跨乘龙凤。
English: Looking far and wide at Akagi while waiting for the wind and clouds, wandering around Gyokudo while straddling the dragon and phoenix.

古文：虽复藏名台岳，犹且腾实江、淮。
现代文：虽然埋名台岳，仍然飞腾在江淮之间。
English: Although the famous Mount Tai is buried, it still soars between the Yangtze River and the Huai River.

古文：藉甚嘉猷，有劳寤寐。
现代文：精妙的谋划令人感到非常慰藉，自身却每刻都在劳累。
English: Sophisticated planning is very comforting, but it is exhausting at every moment.

古文：钦承素道，久积虚襟，侧席幽人，梦想岩穴。
现代文：敬重您的道术，长时间占据在我空虚的胸怀，侧卧席上的昏昧之人，做梦都想着您栖息的山洞。
English: Respect your Taoism, occupy my empty mind for a long time, and the dim-witted person on the side bench dreams of the cave where you live.

古文：霜风已冷，海气将寒，偃息茂林，道体休悆。
现代文：霜风已经寒冷，海气将要冻闭，仍然偃卧栖息在山林之中，不要忘记保重道体。
English: The frosty wind is already cold, the sea air will be frozen, still lying in the mountains and forests, do not forget to protect the body.

古文：昔商山四皓，轻举汉庭；淮南八公，来仪籓邸。
现代文：过去商山四老，轻易兴举汉室，淮南八公，来到藩臣官邸。
English: In the past, the four old merchants of Shangshan easily promoted the Han family, and the eight princes of Huainan came to the official residence of the vassal.

古文：古今虽异，山谷不殊。
现代文：古今虽不一样，山谷却没有什么不同。
English: Although the past and the present are different, the valley is no different.

古文：市朝之隐，前贤已说。
现代文：市朝中的隐士，前代贤人已经称赞。
English: The hermit in the middle of the city has been praised by the previous generation of sages.

古文：导凡述圣。非先生而谁？
现代文：引导凡愚讲述圣道，除了先生还有谁？
English: Who else is there to guide the common fool in preaching the gospel but the teacher?

古文：故遣使人，往彼延请，想无劳东帛，贲然来思，不待蒲轮，去彼空谷。
现代文：所以派遣使臣，前去你那迎请，猜想不用束帛之礼，您就会屈驾光临，不待蒲轮去请，您就会离开那空寂的山谷。
English: So send your envoys, go to your welcome, guess without a bow, you will bow down, without waiting for the crane to go please, you will leave the empty valley.

古文：希能屈己，伫望披云。 
现代文：仰慕贤能委曲自身，伫立远望光明。 
English: Admire the virtuous committee itself, stand up and look forward to the light.

古文：则谓门人曰： 吾今年八十一，王来召我，徐君之旨，信而不征。 
现代文：徐则对门下人说： 我今年八十一岁，晋王来召请我，徐君的话，可信而有应验。 
English: Xu then said to his disciple: I am eighty-one years old this year. Jin Wang has come to summon me. Xu Jun's words are credible and have come true.

古文：于是遂诣扬州。
现代文：于是到了扬州。
English: So I came to Yangzhou.

古文：晋王将请受道法，则辞以时日不便。
现代文：晋王准备请他传授道法，徐则推辞说日期不方便。
English: Jin Wang was going to ask him to teach Taoism, but Xu declined, saying the date was inconvenient.

古文：其后夕中，命待者取香火，如平常朝礼之仪，至于五更而死。
现代文：之后的一天半夜，命侍者取来香火，就像平常朝见进的服饰，到五更时死去。
English: In the middle of the night the next day, the attendant of death took the incense, just like the usual morning apparel, and died at five o'clock.

古文：支体柔弱如生，停留数旬，颜色不变。
现代文：肢体柔软像活着时一样，停放几十天，颜色不变。
English: The limb is as soft as when it was alive. After being parked for dozens of days, the color does not change.

古文：晋王下书曰： 天台真隐东海徐先生，虚确居宗，冲玄成德，齐物处外，检行安身。
现代文：晋王颂布文书说 ：天台真隐士东海徐先生，保持正宗思想坚定不移，崇尚玄远而成就德术，与万物相齐超然世外，修检品行以安身立命。
English: Jin Wang's eulogy said: Mr. Donghai Xu, the true hermit of the Tiantai Kingdom, kept the authentic thought unswervingly, advocated the profound and achieved the virtue, was equal to all things and transcended the world, and practiced the rectification and inspection with peace of mind.

古文：草褐蒲衣，餐松饵，栖隐灵岳，五十余年。
现代文：穿草鞋披短衣，吃松籽食白术，栖息隐居在灵山之中，五十多年了。
English: Wearing straw sandals, wearing shorts, eating pine seeds, eating white art, living in seclusion in the mountains, for more than fifty years.

古文：卓矣仙才，飘然腾气，千寻万顷，莫测其涯。
现代文：仙才卓著飘然腾空。即使千寻长万顷广，也无法揣测他的道术的边际。
English: Xian Cai stands out, soaring into the sky. Even if you searched far and wide, you wouldn't be able to fathom the limits of his martial arts.

古文：寡人钦承道风，久餐德素，频遣使乎，远此延屈，冀得虔受上法，式建良缘。
现代文：我恭敬地继承他道德风范，长时间吮吸他的道术，频频派遣使者，远远地延请他，希望虔心受法，成就良缘。
English: I respectfully inherit his moral demeanor, suck his Taoism for a long time, frequently send messengers, and invite him from afar, hoping to piously accept the law and achieve a good marriage.

古文：至止甫尔，未淹旬日，厌尘羽化，反真灵府。
现代文：刚刚来到这里，未停留一旬数日，他就嫌弃尘俗羽化升仙，返朴归真进入天堂。
English: Having just arrived here, he did not stay for more than a few days before he renounced the world, became a saint, returned to earth, and entered heaven.

古文：身体柔软，颜色不变，经方所谓尸解地仙者哉。
现代文：尸身柔软，颜色不变，就是经书上所说的尸体分解立地成仙。
English: The corpse is soft and its color does not change, which is what the scripture says about the body decomposing and becoming immortal.

古文：诚复师礼未申，而心许有在，虽忘怛化，犹怆于怀。
现代文：虽然拜师礼节确实未曾申明，但内心尊他为师的情志还在，即使忘记悲恸，但伤感情怀萦绕于心。
English: Although it is true that the etiquette of worshiping a teacher has not been declared, the heart's desire to respect him as a teacher is still there. Even if you forget the sadness, the sad feelings linger in your heart.

古文：丧事所资，随须供给。
现代文：丧事所需物品，随需要保证供给霓霞般的衣裳和羽毛装饰的车益。
English: items needed for funerals, with the added benefit of being able to source ethereal gowns and feather adornments on demand.

古文：霓裳羽盖，既且腾云；空椁余衣，讵藉坟垄？
现代文：既然已经腾云升仙，空空的棺材和遗留衣服，怎么能付之于坟垄？
English: Now that he has ascended to heaven, how can the empty coffin and the clothes he left behind be placed in a grave?

古文：但杖舄在尔，可同俗法。
现代文：但手杖鞋子还在，可以按风俗处理。
English: But the cane shoes are still there and can be disposed of according to custom.

古文：宜遣使人，送还天台定葬。 
现代文：应该派遣使者，送回天台山安葬。 
English: An envoy should be sent to take him back to Tiantai Mountain for burial.

古文：是时，自江都至天台，在道多见则徒步，云得放还。
现代文：当时，从江都到天台山，在路上常见徐则徒步而行，说是要回去。
English: At that time, from Jiangdu to Tiantai Mountain, it was common on the road for Xu to walk on foot, saying that he wanted to go back.

古文：至其旧居，取经书道法，分遣弟子，仍令净扫一房，曰： 若有客至，宜延之于此。 
现代文：到他的旧居，取来经书道法，分送给弟子，仍叫打扫干净一间房子，说： 如果有客人来，要请到这里。 
English: He went to his old house, took the sutras and gave them to his disciples. He still told them to clean one room and said, "If any guests come, they should come here."

古文：然后跨石梁而去，不知所之。
现代文：然后跨过石梁而去，不知到哪里去了。
English: Then he stepped over the stone beam and went I don't know where.

古文：须臾尸柩至，知其灵化，时年八十二。
现代文：一会儿尸身灵柩到，知道他已仙逝，时年八十二岁。
English: A moment later, the corpse was found, and it was known that he had passed away at the age of eighty-two.

古文：晋王闻而益异之，赗物千段，遣画工图其状，令柳为之赞。
现代文：晋王听说后越发感到奇异，送来丧葬物品千段，派画工绘出他的形貌，让柳为他写讠赞。
English: After hearing this, Jin Wang felt more and more strange. He sent a thousand pieces of funeral goods, sent an artist to draw his appearance, and asked Liu to write a eulogy for him.

古文：时有建安宋玉泉、会稽孔道茂、丹阳王远知等，亦行辟谷道，以松水自给，皆为炀帝所重。
现代文：当时还有建安人宋玉泉、会稽人孔道茂、升阳人王远知等，也都喜好道术，行为怪僻，以松籽白术养活自己，都被隋炀帝所敬重。
English: At that time, there were also Song Yuquan, the founder of Jianan, Kong Doumao, the auditor of the imperial court, and Wang Yuanchi, the man of the rising sun, who were also fond of Taoism, behaved strangely, and supported themselves with the white art of pine seeds. All of them were respected by the Sui and Qian Dynasties.

