古文：孝献皇帝讳协，灵帝中子也。
现代文：孝献皇帝刘协，灵帝中子。
English: Filial piety to Emperor Liu Xie, the spirit of Emperor Zhongzi.

古文：母王美人，为何皇后所害。
现代文：母王美人，为何皇后所害。
English: Why did the queen harm the queen's beauty?

古文：中平六年四月，少帝即位，封帝为勃海王，徙封陈留王。
现代文：中平六年四月，少帝刘辩即位，封帝为渤海王，迁封陈留王。
English: In April of the sixth year of the Middle Ages, the young Emperor Liu Bei ascended to the throne. He was given the title of King of the Bohai Sea and the title of King of Chenliu.

古文：九月甲戌，即皇帝位，年九岁。
现代文：九月初一，刘协即皇帝位，年九岁。
English: On the first day of September, Liu Xie became emperor at the age of nine.

古文：迁皇太后于永安宫。
现代文：把皇太后迁到永安宫。
English: The Empress Dowager was moved to Yongan Palace.

古文：大赦天下。
现代文：大赦天下。
English: Amnesty for the whole world.

古文：改昭宁为永汉。
现代文：改昭宁为永汉。
English: He changed his name from Shonin to Yonghan.

古文：丙子，董卓杀皇太后何氏。
现代文：初三，董卓杀皇太后何氏。
English: In the third year of junior high school, Dong Zhuo killed Empress Dowager He.

古文：初令侍中、给事黄门侍郎员各六人。
现代文：初令侍中、给事黄门侍郎员各六人。
English: For the first time, six attendants from the middle-ranking attendants and attendants from the yellow gate attendants were brought to the event.

古文：赐公卿以下至黄门侍郎家一人为郎，以补宦官所领诸署，侍于殿上。
现代文：赐公卿以下至黄门侍郎家一人为郎，以补宦官所领诸署，侍于殿上。
English: He gave one person from the Kugyo family down to the Huangmen family of attendants as a retainer, and he served in the palace with the help of eunuchs.

古文：乙酉，以太尉刘虞为大司马。
现代文：九月十二日，任太尉刘虞为大司马。
English: On September 12th, Lieutenant Liu Yu was appointed as the Chief Secretary.

古文：董卓自为太尉，加鈇钺、虎贲。
现代文：董卓自为太尉，加钅夫钺、虎贲。
English: Dong Zhuo himself is a captain, and the other actors are Fu Yao and Hu Yao.

古文：丙戌，太中大夫杨彪为司空。
现代文：十三日，任太中大夫杨彪为司空。
English: On the 13th, Dr. Yang Biao, who was appointed to the post of Taizhong Doctor, became the secretary.

古文：甲午，豫州牧黄琬为司徒。
现代文：二十一日，任豫州牧黄琬为司徒。
English: On the twenty-first day of the month, he was appointed as a disciple of Mugu Huangyao in Yuzhou.

古文：遣使吊祠故太傅陈蕃、大将军窦武等。
现代文：遣使追悼祭祀已故太傅陈蕃、大将军窦武等。
English: Envoys were sent to pay tribute to the late Grand Master Chen Qi, General Dou Wu and others.

古文：冬十月乙巳，葬灵思皇后。
现代文：冬季十月初三，葬灵思皇后。
English: On the third day of October in winter, the funeral of Empress Ling Si took place.

古文：白波贼寇河东，董卓遣其将牛辅击之。
现代文：白波贼寇掠河东，董卓派其将牛辅去攻打。
English: Bai Bo's bandits raided the eastern part of the river, and Dong Zhuo sent him to attack Niu Fu.

古文：十一月癸酉，董卓自为相国。
现代文：十一月初一，董卓自任为相国。
English: On the first day of November, Dong Zhuo appointed himself as a partner country.

古文：十二月戊戌，司徒黄琬为太尉，司空杨彪为司徒，光禄勋荀爽为司空。
现代文：十二月戊戌，任司徒黄琬为太尉，任司空杨彪为司徒，任光禄勋荀爽为司空。
English: In December, Huang Qi was appointed as the first lieutenant, Yang Biao as the second lieutenant, and Guang Rong Xun as the second lieutenant.

古文：省扶风都尉，置汉安都护。
现代文：省去扶风都尉，设置汉安都护。
English: Eliminate Fu Feng Duifeng and set up Han'an Duifeng.

古文：诏除光熹、昭宁、永汉三号，还复中平六年。
现代文：诏令废除光熹、昭宁、永汉三年号，还复中平六年。
English: The edict abolished the three years of Guangyao, Zhaoning and Yonghan, and restored the six years of Zhongping.

古文：初平元年春正月，山东州郡起兵以讨董卓。
现代文：初平元年春季正月，山东州郡起兵讨伐董卓。
English: In the first month of the spring of the first year of the Heian period, Shandong Prefecture raised an army to fight against Dong Zhuo.

古文：辛亥，大赦天下。
现代文：正月初十，大赦天下。
English: On the day of Xinhai, there will be a general amnesty.

古文：癸酉，董卓杀弘农王。
现代文：二月初三，董卓杀弘农王刘辩。
English: On the third day of the second month of the year, Dong Zhuo killed the peasant king Liu Fen.

古文：白波贼寇东郡。
现代文：白波贼寇掠东郡。
English: Bandits from the White Wave raid Dong County.

古文：二月乙亥，太尉黄琬、司徒杨彪免。
现代文：二月初五，太尉黄琬、司徒杨彪免职。
English: On the fifth day of the second month of the year, First Lieutenant Huang Qi and Second Lieutenant Yang Biao were relieved of their duties.

古文：庚辰，董卓杀城门校尉伍琼、督军校尉周珌。
现代文：初十，董卓杀城门校尉伍琼、督军校尉周秘。
English: At the age of ten, Dong Zhuo killed the castle gate captain Wu Qiong and the military commander captain Zhou Ji.

古文：以光禄勋赵谦为太尉，太仆王允为司徒。
现代文：任光禄勋赵谦为太尉，任太仆王允为司徒。
English: Zhao Qian, who was awarded the Guanglu Medal, was promoted to the rank of lieutenant, and Wang Yun, who was promoted to the rank of eunuch, was promoted to the rank of disciple.

古文：丁亥，迁都长安。
现代文：二月十七日，迁都长安。
English: On February 17, the capital was moved to Chang'an.

古文：董卓驱徙京师百姓悉西入关，自留屯毕圭苑。
现代文：董卓驱赶京师百姓悉数西徙入关，自己留驻于毕圭苑。
English: Dong Zhuo drove all the people of Beijing Division to migrate to the west and settled in Biguiyuan.

古文：壬辰，白虹贯日。
现代文：二月二十二日，白虹贯日。
English: February 22nd, the day of the white rainbow.

古文：三月乙巳，车驾入长安，幸未央宫。
现代文：三月初五，帝入长安，到未央宫。
English: On the fifth day of March, the emperor entered Chang'an and went to the Weiyang Palace.

古文：己酉，董卓焚洛阳宫庙及人家。
现代文：初九，董卓焚烧洛阳宫庙及百姓人家。
English: On the 9th day of the first month, Dong Zhuo set fire to the Luoyang Palace Temple and the homes of the common people.

古文：戊午，董卓杀太傅袁隗、太仆袁基，夷其族。
现代文：三月十八日，董卓杀太傅袁隗、太仆袁基，夷灭他们的亲族。
English: On March 18th, Dong Zhuo killed the daifu, Yuan Qi, and the daibu, Yuan Qi, and destroyed their relatives.

古文：夏五月，司空荀爽薨。
现代文：夏季五月，司空荀爽逝世。
English: In the summer of May, Siku passed away.

古文：六月辛丑，光禄大夫种拂为司空。
现代文：六月辛丑，任光禄大夫种拂为司空。
English: In June, Ren Guanglu, a doctor, was promoted to the position of secretary.

古文：大鸿胪韩融、少府阴脩、执金吾胡母班、将作大匠吴脩、越骑校尉王瑰安集关东，后将军袁术、河内太守王匡各执而杀之，唯韩融获免。
现代文：大鸿胪韩融、少府阴脩、执金吾胡母班、将作大匠吴脩、越骑校尉王瑰安集关东，后将军袁术、河内太守王匡分别捕执把他们杀了，只有韩融获免。
English: The great general Han Rong, the minor governor Yin Rong, the secretary of the king Wu Hu, the great master Wu Rong, and the captain of the Yue cavalry Wang Gui An gathered in Guandong, and the rear admiral Yuan Shu and the governor of Hanoi Wang Kuang arrested and killed them separately. Only Han Rong was spared.

古文：董卓坏五铢钱，更铸小钱。
现代文：董卓毁坏五铢钱，换铸小钱。
English: Dong Zhuo destroyed the 50 yuan coin and replaced it with a small coin.

古文：冬十一月庚戌，镇星、荧惑、太白合于尾。
现代文：冬季十一月十四日，土星、火星、金星汇合于二十八宿之一的尾宿。
English: In winter, on November 14th, Saturn, Mars, and Venus come together in one of the 28 mansions, Okujuku.

古文：是岁，有司奏，和、安、顺、桓四帝无功德，不宜称宗，又恭怀、敬隐、恭愍三皇后并非正嫡，不合称后，皆请除尊号。
现代文：这一年，管事人奏请，和帝穆宗、安帝恭宗、顺帝敬宗、桓帝威宗无功德，不宜称宗；又恭怀、敬隐、恭愍三皇后并非正嫡，不合称后，都请撤除尊号。
English: In this year, the steward requested that the names of Emperor Mu, Emperor An, Emperor Shun, Emperor Kei, and Emperor Kuan should not be used, and that the three empresses, Empress Kuan, Empress Keiin, and Empress Kuan were not legitimate. If they were not used together, the honorary titles should be removed.

古文：制曰： 可。 孙坚杀荆州刺史王叡，又杀南阳太守张咨。
现代文：献帝诏令说： 可以。 孙坚杀荆州刺史王睿又，又杀了南阳太守张咨。
English: The imperial edict for the dedication of the emperor said: Yes. Sun Jian killed Wang Rui, the governor of Jingzhou, and Zhang Zi, the governor of Nanyang.

古文：二年春正月辛丑，大赦天下。
现代文：二年春正月初六，大赦天下。
English: On the 6th day of the 1st month of the 2nd year of spring, the general amnesty began.

古文：二月丁丑，董卓自为太师。
现代文：二月十二日，董卓自任为太师。
English: On February 12th, Dong Zhuo appointed himself as Grand Master.

古文：袁术遣将孙坚与董卓将胡轸战于阳人，轸军大败。
现代文：袁术派将领孙坚在阳人与董卓将领胡轸战斗，胡轸军大败。
English: Sun Jian, the leader of the Yuan Shuping faction, fought with Dong Zhuo, the leader of the Huyi faction, in Yangyang. The Huyi army suffered a crushing defeat.

古文：董卓遂发掘洛阳诸帝陵。
现代文：董卓于是发掘洛阳诸帝陵墓。
English: Dong Zhuo then excavated the mausoleums of the emperors of Luoyang.

古文：夏四月，董卓入长安。
现代文：夏四月，董卓入长安。
English: In the summer of April, Dong Zhuo entered Chang'an.

古文：六月丙戌，地震。
现代文：六月二十三日，地震。
English: June 23rd, an earthquake.

古文：秋七月，司空种拂免，光禄大夫济南淳于嘉为司空。
现代文：秋季七月，司空种拂免职，任光禄大夫济南淳于嘉为司空。
English: In the autumn of July, Sikyong Seonghyuk was relieved of his duties, and Dr. Jinan Junyujia was appointed as Sikyong.

古文：太尉赵谦罢，太常马日磾为太尉。
现代文：太尉赵谦罢去，任太常马日石单为太尉。
English: Second Lieutenant Zhao Qian was dismissed, and Second Lieutenant Ma Rishizhimen was appointed as First Lieutenant.

古文：九月，蚩尤旗见于角、亢。
现代文：九月，类彗星而后曲，象旗帜，黄上白下的蚩尤星出现于二十八宿之角亢二宿。
English: In September, a comet-like comet, like a flag, appeared at the corner of the 28th and the 2nd.

古文：冬十月壬戌，董卓杀卫尉张温。
现代文：冬季十月初一，董卓杀卫尉张温。
English: On the first day of October in winter, Dong Zhuo killed Lieutenant Zhang Wen.

古文：十一月，青州黄巾寇太山，太山太守应劭击破之。
现代文：十一月，青州黄巾军寇掠太山，太山太守应劭把他们打败。
English: In November, the Qingzhou Yellow Turban Army raided Taishan, and the governor of Taishan defeated them.

古文：黄巾转寇勃海，公孙瓒与战于东光，复大破之。
现代文：黄巾军转而寇掠勃海，公孙瓒与他们战于东光，又把他们打得大败。
English: The Yellow Turban Army turned to plundering the Bohai Sea, and Gongsun Qi fought with them in Dongguang and defeated them.

古文：是岁，长沙有人死经月复活。
现代文：这一年，长沙有人死了，经过一月复活。
English: This year, someone in Changsha died and was revived after one month.

古文：三年春正月丁丑，大赦天下。
现代文：三年春正月丁丑，大赦天下。
English: On the first day of spring in the third year, Ding Ugly was pardoned.

古文：袁术遣将孙坚攻刘表于襄阳，坚战殁。
现代文：袁术派将领孙坚在襄阳攻打刘表，孙坚战死。
English: Yuan Shuping sent his general Sun Jian to attack Liu Biao in Xiangyang. Sun Jian was killed in the battle.

古文：袁绍及公孙瓒战于界桥，瓒军大败。
现代文：袁绍与公孙瓒在界桥战斗，公孙瓒军队大败。
English: Yuan Shao and Gongsun Yao fought at the border bridge, and Gongsun Yao's army suffered a crushing defeat.

古文：夏四月辛巳，诛董卓，夷三族。
现代文：夏季四月二十三日，董卓被诛，夷灭父、母、妻三族。
English: On the summer day of April 23rd, Dong Zhuo was arrested and his father, mother and wife were killed.

古文：司徒王允录尚书事，总朝政，遣使者张种抚慰山东。
现代文：司徒王允代理尚书事，总揽朝政，派使者张种安抚慰问山东地区民众。
English: Sitou Wang Yun acted as Shang's representative for correspondence, and he was in charge of the overall policy of the dynasty. He sent an envoy, Zhang Zong, to appease and comfort the people of Shandong.

古文：青州黄巾击杀兖州刺史刘岱于东平。
现代文：青州黄巾军击杀兖州刺史刘岱于东平。
English: The Qingzhou Yellow Turban Army killed the Zhangzhou assassin Liu Xuan in Dongping.

古文：东郡太守曹操大破黄巾于寿张，降之。
现代文：东郡太守曹操大破黄巾军于寿张，迫使他们投降。
English: Cao Cao, the governor of Dong County, defeated the Yellow Turban Army in Shou Zhang and forced them to surrender.

古文：五月丁酉，大赦天下。
现代文：五月初十，大赦天下。
English: On the tenth day of the fifth month, a general amnesty was declared.

古文：丁未，征西将军皇甫嵩为车骑将军。
现代文：五月二十日，任征西将军皇甫嵩为车骑将军。
English: On May 20, Emperor Fusong, the general of the Western Expedition, was appointed as the general of chariots and cavalry.

古文：董卓部曲将李傕、郭汜、樊稠、张济等反，攻京师。
现代文：董卓部属将领李莈、郭汜、樊稠、张济等反叛，攻击京师。
English: Dong Zhuo's subordinate generals Li Jun, Guo Jun, Zeng Cong, Zhang Ji and others rebelled and attacked the Beijing Division.

古文：六月戊午，陷长安城，太常种拂、太仆鲁旭、大鸿胪周奂、城门校尉崔烈、越骑校尉王颀并战殁，吏民死者万余人。
现代文：六月初一，攻陷长安城，太常种拂、太仆鲁旭、太鸿胪周奂、城门校尉崔烈、越骑校尉王颀一并战死，官吏民众死者万余人。
English: On the first day of June, the city of Chang'an was attacked and captured. Taizhong Zhaozhu, Taipo Lu Xu, Taihong Yao Zhou Qi, Shingmen Captain Cui Li and Yue Cavalry Captain Wang Qi all died in the battle. More than 10,000 officials and civilians were killed.

古文：李傕等并自为将军。
现代文：李莈等都自称将军。
English: Li Yao and others all called themselves generals.

古文：己未，大赦天下。
现代文：六月初二，大赦天下。
English: On the 9th, a general amnesty was declared.

古文：李傕杀司隶校尉黄琬，甲子，杀司徒王允，皆灭其族。
现代文：李莈杀司隶校尉黄琬。六月初七日，杀司徒王允；黄琬、王允都被灭族。
English: On the 7th day of the first month of June, the assassin Wang Yun; Huang Yun and Wang Yun were both exterminated.

古文：丙子，前将军赵谦为司徒。
现代文：六月十九日，任前将军赵谦为司徒。
English: On June 19th, the former general Zhao Qian became a disciple.

古文：秋七月庚子，太尉马日磾为太傅，录尚书事。
现代文：秋季七月十三日，任太尉马日石单为太傅，代理尚书事。
English: On the 13th day of the 7th month of autumn, Ma Rishi Shan, who had been appointed as Tai Fu, became Tai Fu, acting for Shang Shujie.

古文：八月，遣日磾及太仆赵岐，持节尉抚天下。
现代文：八月，派马日石单及太仆赵岐持符节慰问安抚天下。
English: In August, he sent Ma Rishisheksan and his eunuch Zhao Qiming to offer condolences to appease the world.

古文：车骑将军皇甫嵩为太尉。
现代文：任车骑将军皇甫嵩为太尉。
English: The general in charge of chariots and cavalry, Emperor Fusang, was promoted to the rank of lieutenant.

古文：司徒赵谦罢。
现代文：司徒赵谦罢去。
English: Sidu Zhao Qian is gone.

古文：九月，李傕自为车骑将军，郭汜后将军，樊稠右将军，张济镇东将军。
现代文：九月，李莈自任为车骑将军，郭汜为后将军，樊稠为右将军，张济为镇东将军。
English: In September, Li Jie appointed himself as the general of chariot and cavalry, Guo Jie as the general of the rear, Gao Zongguo as the general of the right, and Zhang Jie as the general of the east.

古文：济出屯弘农。
现代文：张济出京驻扎于弘农。
English: Zhang Jie left Beijing and was stationed in Hongnong.

古文：甲申，司空淳于嘉为司徒，光禄大夫杨彪为司空，并录尚书事。
现代文：九月二十九日，任司空淳于嘉为司徒，任光禄大夫杨彪为司空，并代理尚书事。
English: On the 29th of September, Jun Yujia was appointed as the secretary, and Yang Biao, the doctor of Guanglu, was appointed as the secretary, and also acted as the secretary.

古文：冬十二月，太尉皇甫嵩免。光禄大夫周忠为太尉，参录尚书事。
现代文：冬季十二月，太尉皇甫嵩免职，任光禄大夫周忠为太尉，参与总领尚书事。
English: In the winter of December, the first lieutenant, Wang Fusong, was relieved of his duties, and the doctor of Guanglu, Zhou Zhong, was appointed second lieutenant to participate in the general secretary's correspondence.

古文：四年春正月甲寅朔，日有食之。丁卯，大赦天下。
现代文：四年春正月初一，日蚀。正月十四日，大赦天下。
English: On the first day of the first month of the fourth year of spring, a solar eclipse. On the 14th day of the first month, a general amnesty.

古文：三月，袁术杀杨州刺史陈温，据淮南。
现代文：三月，袁术杀扬州刺史陈温，占据淮南。
English: In March, Yuan Shou killed Yangzhou assassin Chen Wen and occupied Huainan.

古文：长安宣平城门外屋自坏。
现代文：长安宣平城门外屋自行坏圯。
English: The outbuilding of Chang'an Xuanping City Gate self-destructed.

古文：夏五月癸酉，无云而雷。
现代文：夏季五月二十二日，无云而雷震。
English: On the summer's 22nd day of May, there is no cloud but thunder.

古文：六月，扶风大风，雨雹。
现代文：六月，扶风地区刮大风，落冰雹。
English: In June, high winds and hailstorms are common in the Fufeng area.

古文：华山崩裂。
现代文：华山崩裂。
English: Huashan has collapsed.

古文：太尉周忠免，太仆朱俊为太尉，录尚书事。
现代文：太尉周忠免职，任太仆朱俊为太尉，代理尚书事。
English: Captain Zhou Zhong was relieved of his duties, and his manservant Zhu Jun was appointed captain, with Shang Shujie as his deputy.

古文：下邳贼阙宣自称天子。
现代文：下邳寇贼阙宣自称天子。
English: The next day, the bandit proclaimed himself to be the son of heaven.

古文：雨水。
现代文：雨水多。
English: There is a lot of rain.

古文：遣侍御史裴茂讯诏狱，原轻系。
现代文：派侍御史裴茂讯问诏令所关押的犯人，宽宥轻罪在押的犯人。
English: He sent his attendant, Shi Peimao, to interrogate the prisoners detained by the imperial edict, and pardoned the prisoners detained for minor crimes.

古文：六月辛丑，天狗西北行。
现代文：六月二十日，天狗星向西北运行。
English: On June 20th, the Tengu star moved northwestward.

古文：九月甲午，试儒生四十余人，上第赐位郎中，次太子舍人，下第者罢之。
现代文：九月甲午，分科取士的项目儒生四十余人，上等名次赐位郎中，次等名次赐位太子舍人，下等名次罢去不作安排。
English: In the afternoon of September 1st, more than forty Confucian students were removed from the project of sub-subjects, the higher rank was given to the junior high school, the lower rank was given to the prince, and the lower rank was dismissed without arrangement.

古文：诏曰： 孔子叹 学之不讲 ，不讲则所识日忘。
现代文：诏令说 ：孔子慨叹不讲习学术，不讲习那么晓得的知识也就一天天忘记了。
English: The edict said: "Confucius lamented that if one does not study science, one will forget the knowledge one knows day by day.

古文：今耆儒年逾六十，去离本土，营求粮资，不得专业。
现代文：现在年老的儒生已超过六十岁，离乡背井，营求糊口生活，不能够从事专门的事业。
English: Now the old Confucianism students are over sixty years old, have left their hometowns, and are living for a living, unable to engage in a specialized career.

古文：结童入学，白首空归，长委农野，永绝荣望，朕甚愍焉。
现代文：童年结发入学，到老年白发空手而归，长时间委弃于农村田野，永远地断绝了获得荣宠的希望，我很怜惜和悲悯他们。
English: I feel pity and compassion for them, who have been sent to school in their childhood, returned empty-handed with white hair in their old age, abandoned to the rural fields for a long time, and have forever lost hope of gaining favor.

古文：其依科罢者，听为太子舍人。 
现代文：按照考试落第的，接受为太子舍人。 
English: Those who pass the examination will be accepted as crown prince.

古文：冬十月，太学行礼，车驾幸永福城门，临观其仪，赐博士以下各有差。
现代文：冬季十月，太学举行典礼，献帝到永福城门，亲临观看其仪式，赏赐博士以下钱物分别不等。
English: In the winter of October, Taixu held a ceremony to dedicate the emperor to the Yongfu City Gate, and attended the ceremony in person, awarding money and goods to the doctor and below.

古文：辛丑，京师地震。
现代文：十月二十二日，京师地震。
English: October 22nd, Beijing earthquake.

古文：有星孛于天市。
现代文：彗星出现于天市星。
English: The comet appeared in the constellation Draco.

古文：司空杨彪免，太常赵温为司空。
现代文：司空杨彪免职，任太常赵温为司空。
English: Sikyong Yang Biao was relieved of his duties, and Zhao Wen was appointed as Sikyong.

古文：公孙瓒杀大司马刘虞。
现代文：公孙瓒杀大司马刘虞。
English: His grandson assassinated the chief magistrate Ma Liuyu.

古文：十二月辛丑，地震。
现代文：十二月二十三日，地震。
English: December 23rd, earthquake.

古文：司空赵温免，乙巳，卫尉张喜为司空。
现代文：司空赵温被罢免，十二月二十七日，任卫尉张喜为司空。
English: Air Vice-Marshal Zhao Wen was dismissed, and on December 27th, Lieutenant Zhang Xi was appointed as Air Vice-Marshal.

古文：是岁，琅邪王容薨。
现代文：这一年，琅笽王刘容逝世。
English: In the same year, Liu Rong, the King of Gong, passed away.

古文：兴平元年春正月辛酉，大赦天下，改元兴平。
现代文：兴平元年春正月十三日，大赦天下，改元兴平。
English: On the 13th day of the first month of the spring of the first year of Xingping, the world was amnestied and the era was changed to Xingping.

古文：甲子，帝加元服。
现代文：十六日，帝加冠于首。
English: On the 16th, Diga was crowned.

古文：二月壬午，追尊谥皇妣王氏为灵怀皇后，甲申，改葬于文昭陵。
现代文：二月初五，追尊谥皇妣王氏为灵怀皇后，初七，改葬于文昭陵。
English: On the 5th day of the 2nd month of the year, Emperor Shun and the Wang clan were honored as the spiritual empresses. On the 7th day of the month, they were reburied in the Mausoleum of Emperor Wenzhao.

古文：丁亥，帝耕于藉田。
现代文：初十，帝耕于藉田。
English: On the 19th, Emperor Wu went to work in a field that had been reserved for the emperor's ministers.

古文：三月，韩遂、马腾与郭汜、樊稠战于长平观，遂、腾败绩，左中郎将刘范、前益州刺史种劭战殁。
现代文：三月，韩遂、马腾与郭汜、樊稠交战于长平观，韩遂、马腾失败，左中郎将刘范、前益州刺史种劭战死。
English: In March, Han Sui and Ma Teng fought with Guo Yao and Gao Chou in Changping, Han Sui and Ma Teng lost, and Zuo Zhonglang killed Liu Fan and Qian Yizhou Zhishi Zong Yao.

古文：夏六月丙子，分凉州河西四郡为廱州。
现代文：夏季六月初一，分凉州河西四郡为颿州。
English: On the first day of June in summer, the four counties west of the Liangzhou River are divided into four counties.

古文：丁丑，地震；戊寅，又震。
现代文：初二，地震；初三，又地震。
English: On the second day of the new year, an earthquake; on the third day, another earthquake.

古文：乙巳晦，日有食之，帝避正殿，寝兵，不听事五日。
现代文：三十日，日蚀。帝不入正殿，不动兵器，不理朝政五天。
English: On the 30th, a solar eclipse. The emperor did not enter the main hall, did not move weapons, and ignored the government for five days.

古文：大蝗。
现代文：大蝗灾。
English: A serious locust plague occurred.

古文：秋七月壬子，太尉朱俊免。
现代文：秋季七月初七，大尉朱俊免职。
English: On the 7th day of the 7th month of autumn, Captain Zhu Jun was relieved of duty.

古文：戊午，太常杨彪为太尉，录尚书事。
现代文：十三日，任太常杨彪为太尉，代理尚书事。
English: On the 13th, Ren Taizhang promoted Yang Biao to the rank of lieutenant, acting as his secretary.

古文：三辅大旱，自四月至于是月。
现代文：三辅地区大旱，自四月至七月。
English: From April to July, there is a drought in the Sanfu area.

古文：帝避正殿请雨，遣使者洗囚徒，原轻系。
现代文：帝入正殿祭天求雨，派使者清理审查囚徒，对在押的轻罪犯人，进行宽恕。
English: The emperor entered the main hall and prayed to the heavens for rain, and sent an envoy to clean up and examine the prisoners, and to pardon the minor criminals in custody.

古文：是时谷一斛五十万，豆麦一斛二十万，人相食啖，白骨委积。
现代文：这时一斛谷要五十万钱，一斛豆麦要二十万钱，饿得人吃人，尸骨到处丢积。
English: At this time, a bowl of rice cost 500,000 yuan, a pea and wheat cost 200,000 yuan. People were so hungry that they were eating each other, and dead bodies were piling up everywhere.

古文：帝使侍御史侯汶出太仓米豆，为饥人作糜粥，经日而死者无降。
现代文：帝派侍御史侯汶拿出京城太仓的米豆，为饥民施舍糜粥，而饥民经日而死者仍然没有减少。
English: The emperor sent his attendant, Shih Houwen, to take out the rice beans from Taicang in the capital to give out gruel to the starving people, but the number of starving people and the number of deaths still did not decrease.

古文：帝疑赋恤有虚，乃亲于御坐前量试作糜，乃知非实，使侍中刘艾出让有司。
现代文：帝怀疑赈济有虚假，于是亲自在自己的座位前量取米豆试作糜粥，结果知道了侯汶糜粥质和量都不实在。派侍中刘艾责问管事人。
English: The emperor suspected that the rice gruel was fake, so he personally measured the rice beans in front of his seat and tried to make rice gruel. As a result, he found out that the quality and quantity of Houwen rice gruel were not real. Liu Ai, one of the attendants, questioned the steward.

古文：于是尚书令以上皆诣省阁谢，奏收侯汶考实。
现代文：于是，尚书令以下都到禁中官署省中内阁认错，奏请拘捕侯汶考查核实。
English: As a result, Shang Shuling and the following all went to the Forbidden City Central Government Office of the Provincial Central Cabinet to admit the mistake and request the arrest of Hou Wen for examination and verification.

古文：诏曰： 未忍致汶于理，可杖五十。 自是之后，多得全济。
现代文：帝下诏说 ：不忍使侯汶受狱官审理，杖刑五十就是。 从此以后，饥民大多得到全部的救济。
English: The imperial edict said, "It is intolerable to make Houwen be tried by prison officials, and the punishment is fifty strokes of the cane." Since then, most of the starving people have received full relief.

古文：八月，冯翊羌叛，寇属县，郭汜、樊稠击破之。
现代文：八月，冯翊羌叛乱，入侵属县，郭汜、樊稠击败了他们。
English: In August, Feng Qi rebelled and invaded Guoxian County. Guo Qi and Gong Cong defeated them.

古文：九月，桑复生椹，人得以食。
现代文：九月，桑树再长一次椹，人们得以采食。
English: In September, the mulberry trees sprouted again, and people were able to gather food.

古文：司徒淳于嘉罢。
现代文：司徒淳于嘉罢去。
English: Sutsu Junyujia left.

古文：冬十月，长安市门自坏。
现代文：冬季十月，长安市门自行坏圯。
English: In the winter of October, the gate of Chang'an City collapsed on its own.

古文：以卫尉赵温为司徒，录尚书事。
现代文：以卫尉赵温为司徒，代理尚书事。
English: With Lieutenant Zhao Wen as his assistant, acting as his secretary.

古文：十二月，分安定、扶风为新平郡。
现代文：十二月，分安定、扶风为新平郡。
English: In December, Xinping County was stable and windy.

古文：是岁，杨州刺史刘繇与袁术将孙策战于曲阿，繇军败绩，孙策遂据江东。
现代文：这一年，扬州刺史刘繇与袁术将领孙策在曲阿交战，刘繇战败，孙策便占据江东。
English: In that year, the Yangzhou statesman Liu Bei and the Yuan general Sun Ce fought in Qu'ao. Liu Bei was defeated, and Sun Ce occupied the eastern part of the Yangtze River.

古文：太傅马日磾薨于寿春。
现代文：太傅马日石单在寿春去世。
English: Taifu MaRiShiDan passed away in ShouChun.

古文：二年春正月癸丑，大赦天下。
现代文：二年春正月十一，大赦天下。
English: On the 11th day of the 1st month of the 2nd year of spring, the general amnesty began.

古文：二月乙亥，李傕杀樊稠而与郭汜相攻。
现代文：二月初三，李莈杀樊稠而与郭汜相攻打。
English: On the third day of the second month of the year, Li Xuan was in the thick of the battle with Guo Xuan.

古文：三月丙寅，李傕胁帝幸其营，焚宫室。
现代文：三月二十五日，李莈胁迫献帝到他的军营，焚烧宫室。
English: On March 25th, Li Gan forced Emperor Xian to come to his military camp and burned the palace.

古文：夏四月甲午，立贵人伏氏为皇后。
现代文：夏季四月二十三日，献帝立贵人伏氏为皇后。
English: On the summer's 23rd day of the 4th month, the emperor appointed the noblewoman Fushi as empress.

古文：丁酉，郭汜攻李傕，矢及御前。
现代文：四月二十六日，郭汜进攻李莈，箭射到了献帝所住高楼前。
English: On April 26, Guo Jian attacked Li Jian and shot an arrow into the front of the high-rise where Emperor Xian lived.

古文：是日，李傕移帝幸北坞。
现代文：这天，李莈把献帝迁移到北坞。
English: On this day, Li Yao moved the emperor to the north dock.

古文：大旱。
现代文：发生大的干旱。
English: There was a severe drought.

古文：五月壬午，李傕自为大司马。
现代文：五月壬午，李莈自为大司马。
English: In May, at noon, Li Yao declared himself to be the chief steward.

古文：六月庚午，张济自陕来和傕、汜。
现代文：六月庚午，张济自陕来长安劝李莈、郭汜讲和，不要互相攻打。
English: In the late afternoon of June, Zhang Jie from Shaanxi came to Chang'an to persuade Li Xi and Guo Xi to make peace and not to attack each other.

古文：秋七月甲子，车驾东归。
现代文：秋季七月甲子，献帝启程自长安东归洛阳。
English: In autumn, in July, Emperor Xianzi left Chang'an for Luoyang.

古文：郭汜自为车骑将军，杨定为后将军，杨奉为兴义将军，董承为安集将军，并侍送乘舆。
现代文：郭汜自任为车骑将军，杨定为后将军，杨奉为兴义将军，董承为安集将军，一起侍送献帝。
English: Guo Wei appointed himself as the general of chariot and cavalry, Yang as the general of the rear, Yang Feng as the general of Xingyi, and Dong Cheng as the general of Anji, and together they escorted the emperor.

古文：张济为票骑将军，还屯陕。
现代文：张济为骠骑将军，回来仍驻屯在陕。
English: Zhang Jie was the general of the cavalry, and when he came back, he was still stationed in Shaanxi.

古文：八月甲辰，幸新丰。
现代文：八月初六，献帝到达新丰。
English: On the sixth day of the eighth lunar month, Emperor Xian reached Xinfeng.

古文：冬十月戊戌，郭汜使其将伍习夜烧所幸学舍，逼胁乘舆。
现代文：冬十月初一，郭汜派他的部将伍习夜里焚烧献帝所住学舍。逼迫威胁献帝。
English: On the first day of October in winter, Guo Gan sent his subordinate Wu Xi to burn down the dormitory of the emperor's residence in the night. He forced and threatened the emperor.

古文：杨定、杨奉与郭汜战，破之。
现代文：杨定、杨奉与郭汜交战，郭汜被打败。
English: Yang Ding and Yang Feng fought with Guo Yu, and Guo Yu was defeated.

古文：壬寅，幸华阴，露次道南。
现代文：初五，献帝到达华阴，露宿于大道南边。
English: On the fifth day of the first month, Xian Di arrived in Huayin and camped on the south side of the avenue.

古文：是夜，有赤气贯紫宫。
现代文：这夜，有红色的气带横贯紫宫星座。
English: On this night, there is a red band of air across the constellation of the Purple Palace.

古文：张济复反，与李傕、郭汜合。
现代文：张济再返，与李莈、郭汜相联合。
English: Zhang Jie returned and united with Li Jun and Guo Jun.

古文：十一月庚午，李傕、郭汜等追乘舆，战于东涧，王师败绩，杀光禄勋邓泉、卫尉士孙瑞、廷尉宣播、大长秋苗祀、步兵校尉魏桀、侍中朱展、射声校尉沮俊。
现代文：十一月初三，李莈、郭汜等追赶献帝。在东涧打起来，王师被打败。光禄勋邓泉、卫尉士孙瑞、廷尉宣播、大长秋苗祀、步兵校尉魏桀、侍中朱展、射声校尉沮鯭被杀。
English: On the third day of the first month of November, Li Yu, Guo Yu and others chased after Emperor Xian. Fights broke out in Donglu, and Wang Shih was defeated. Guanglu Commander Deng Quan, Guardsman Sun Rui, Courtier Xuan Bo, Grand Marshal Qiu Miao Zhi, Infantry Lieutenant Wei Wei, Junior Chamberlain Zhu Zhan, and Gunnery Lieutenant Xie Xuan were killed.

古文：壬申，幸曹阳，露次田中。
现代文：初五，献帝到达曹阳，露宿于田中。
English: On the fifth day of the first month, Xiandi arrived in Caoyang and camped in Tanaka.

古文：杨奉、董承引白波帅胡才、李乐、韩暹及匈奴左贤王去卑，率师奉迎，与李傕等战，破之。
现代文：杨奉、董承引白波将帅胡才、李乐、韩暹及匈奴左贤王去卑，率领军队迎接献帝，与李莈等交战，把李莈打败。
English: Yang Bong and Dong Chenggong led Bai Bo to humiliate Shuai Hu Cai, Li Le, Han Siem and Xiongnu Zuoxian Wang, led the army to meet the emperor, and fought with Li Jie and others to defeat Li Jie.

古文：十二月庚辰，车驾乃进。
现代文：十二月庚辰，献帝才继续前进。
English: In December, Geng Chen and Xian Di continued to advance.

古文：李傕等复来追战，王师大败，杀掠宫人，少府田芬、大司农张义等皆战殁。
现代文：李莈等又来追击，王师大败，李莈等杀死掠夺宫人，少府田芬、大司农张义等都战死。
English: Li Xi and others came to pursue, Wang Shi was defeated, Li Xi and others killed the robbers of the palace, Shofu Tianfen, Daisho Nong Zhang Yi and others all died in battle.

古文：进幸陕，夜度河。
现代文：献帝行进到陕州，夜渡黄河。
English: They marched to Shaanxi to offer sacrifices to the emperor and crossed the Yellow River at night.

古文：乙亥，幸安邑。
现代文：乙亥，献帝到达安邑。
English: In the second year of the Heian period, Emperor Go-Shirakawa arrived in Anyu.

古文：是岁，袁绍遣将麹义与公孙瓒战于鲍丘，瓒军大败。
现代文：这一年，袁绍派将曲义与公孙瓒在鲍丘交战，瓒军大败。
English: In this year, Yuan Shao sent Quyi to fight with Gongsun Yao in Baoqiu, and the Yao army suffered a great defeat.

古文：建安元年春正月癸酉，郊祀上帝于安邑，大赦天下，改元建安。
现代文：建安元年春正月初七，在安邑郊祀上天，大赦天下，改元建安。
English: On the seventh day of the first month of the spring of the first year of Jian'an, in the suburbs of An'i, it was time to worship God, forgive the world, and change the name to Jian'an.

古文：二月，韩暹攻卫将军董承。
现代文：二月，白波帅攻击卫将军董承。
English: In February, Bai Bo attacked Wei general Dong Cheng.

古文：夏六月乙未，幸闻喜。
现代文：夏六月初一，献帝到闻喜。
English: On the first day of June in the summer, Emperor Xian reached Wenshi.

古文：秋七月甲子，车驾至洛阳，幸故中常侍赵忠宅。
现代文：秋季七月初一，献帝到达洛阳，到故中常侍赵忠住宅。
English: In autumn, on the first day of July, the emperor arrived in Luoyang and visited the residence of the late Zhao Zhong.

古文：丁丑，郊祀上帝，大赦天下。
现代文：十四日，郊祀上天，大赦天下。
English: On the 14th, the suburb went to heaven and was pardoned by heaven.

古文：己卯，谒太庙。
现代文：十六日，参谒太庙。
English: On the 16th, he visited the Imperial Temple.

古文：八月辛丑，幸南宫杨安殿。
现代文：八月初八，献帝到南宫杨安殿。
English: On the eighth day of the eighth month of August, the imperial offering was brought to the Yang'an Hall of the Southern Palace.

古文：癸卯，安国将军张杨为大司马，韩暹为大将军，杨奉为车骑将军。
现代文：初十，任安国将军张杨为大司马、韩暹为大将军、杨奉为车骑将军。
English: On the tenth day of the first month of the year, Zhang Yang, the general of An Guo, was the grand steward, Han Siem was the general, and Yang Bong was the general of chariot and cavalry.

古文：是时，宫室烧尽，百官披荆棘，依墙壁间。
现代文：这时，宫室烧尽，百官斩除荆棘，靠墙壁间生活。
English: At this time, the palace burned down, and all the officials had to live between the walls.

古文：州郡各拥强兵，而委输不至，群僚饥乏，尚书郎以下自出采稆，或饥死墙壁间，或为兵士所杀。
现代文：州郡各拥有强兵，粮物没有运送供给，众多官员饥乏，尚书郎以下，自己外出采取自生的禾类充饥，有的饿死在墙壁间，有的被兵士所杀。
English: Each prefecture and county had strong soldiers, grain was not transported and supplied, many officials were starving, Shang Shulang and others went out to take their own self-grown cereals to satisfy their hunger, some starved to death between the walls, and some were killed by soldiers.

古文：辛亥，镇东将军曹操自领司隶校尉，录尚书事。
现代文：八月十八日，镇东将军曹操自行兼任司隶校尉，兼尚书事。
English: On August 18th, Zhendong General Cao Cao took it upon himself to serve as the sub-lieutenant of the sub-lieutenant of the sub-lieutenant of the sub-lieutenant of the sub-lieutenant of the sub-lieutenant of the sub-lieutenant of the sub-lieutenant.

古文：曹操杀侍中台崇、尚书冯硕等。
现代文：曹操杀侍中台崇、尚书冯硕等。
English: Cao Cao killed his attendants, including Taizong and Shangshu Feng Shuo.

古文：封卫将军董承为辅国将军，伏完等十三人为列侯，赠沮俊为弘农太守。
现代文：封卫将军董承为辅国将军。伏完等十三人为列侯，赠沮鯭为弘农太守。
English: Fengwei general Dong Cheng was the general of the auxiliary state. Fukan and thirteen others were vassals, and Xie Duan was the governor of Hongnong.

古文：庚申，迁都许。己巳，幸曹操营。
现代文：二十七日，迁都许昌，己巳，献帝到曹操军营。
English: On the 27th, the capital was moved to Xu Chang, and the emperor was dedicated to Cao Cao's military camp.

古文：九月，太尉杨彪、司空张喜罢。
现代文：九月，太尉杨彪、司空张喜罢去。
English: In September, First Lieutenant Yang Biao and Second Lieutenant Zhang Xi retired.

古文：冬十一月丙戌，曹操自为司空，行车骑将军事，百官总己以听。
现代文：冬季十一月二十五日，曹操自任为司空，兼代车骑将军，百官都听他的。
English: On the 25th day of November in winter, Cao Cao appointed himself as Secretary of the Air Force and Acting General of Cavalry and Cavalry. All the officials listened to him.

古文：二年春，袁术自称天子。
现代文：二年春，袁术自称天子。
English: In the spring of the second year, Yuan Shou called himself the son of heaven.

古文：三月，袁绍自为大将军。
现代文：三月，袁绍自任为大将军。
English: In March, Yuan Shao appointed himself general.

古文：夏五月，蝗。
现代文：夏季五月，出现蝗灾。
English: In the summer of May, a plague of locusts appeared.

古文：秋九月，汉水溢。
现代文：秋季九月，汉水涨溢。
English: In the autumn of September, the Chinese water rises and overflows.

古文：是岁饥，江淮间民相食。
现代文：这年饥荒，江淮间人吃人。
English: In this year of famine, people were eating each other in the Huai River.

古文：袁术杀陈王宠。
现代文：袁术杀陈王刘宠。
English: Yuan Shuxu killed Chen Wang Liu Qiao.

古文：孙策遣使奉贡。
现代文：孙策派使者纳贡。
English: Sun Ce sent an envoy to collect the tribute.

古文：三年夏四月，遣谒者裴茂率中郎将段煨讨李傕，夷三族。
现代文：三年夏四月，派遣谒者裴茂率领中郎将段煨讨诛李莈，夷灭李莈父、母、妻三族。
English: In April of the summer of the third year, Pei Mao, who had dispatched the eunuchs, led the junior vassals to torture Duan Yao and Li Yao, and exterminate Li Yao's father, mother, and wife.

古文：吕布叛。
现代文：吕布叛反。
English: Lvbu rebelled.

古文：冬十一月，盗杀大司马张杨。
现代文：冬季十一月，盗贼杀了大司马张杨。
English: In the winter of November, thieves killed the chief steward Zhang Yang.

古文：十二月癸酉，曹操击吕布于徐州，斩之。
现代文：十二月二十四日，曹操在徐州进击吕布，把他杀掉。
English: On December 24, Cao Cao attacked Lv Bu in Xuzhou and killed him.

古文：四年春三月，袁绍攻公孙瓒于易京，获之。
现代文：四年春三月，袁绍攻打公孙瓒于易京，将他俘获。
English: In March of the spring of the fourth year, Yuan Shao attacked Gongsun Rong in Yijing and captured him.

古文：卫将军董承为车骑将军。
现代文：卫将军董承为车骑将军。
English: Guards General Dong Cheng is the cavalry general.

古文：夏六月，袁术死。
现代文：夏六月，袁术死去。
English: In the summer of June, Yuan Shou died.

古文：是岁，初置尚书左右仆射。
现代文：这年，开始设置尚书左右仆射。
English: In the same year, it began to set up the Shangshu left and right shoots.

古文：武陵女子死十四日复活。
现代文：武陵女子李娥死去十四日，复活。
English: Wuling woman Li E died on the 14th and was resurrected.

古文：五年春正月，车骑将军董承、偏将军王服、越骑校尉种辑受密诏诛曹操，事泄。
现代文：五年春正月，车骑将军董承、偏将军王服、越骑校尉种辑受献帝秘密诏令诛杀曹操，事机泄漏。
English: In the first month of the fifth year of the Spring, the cavalry general Dong Cheng, the partial general Wang Fu, and the Yue cavalry lieutenant were secretly ordered by the emperor to kill Cao Cao, and the opportunity was leaked.

古文：壬午，曹操杀董承等，夷三族。
现代文：初九，曹操杀董承等，夷灭其父、母、妻三族。
English: On the first day of the ninth month, Cao Cao killed Dong Cheng and others, and wiped out his father, mother, and wife.

古文：秋七月，立皇子冯为南阳王。
现代文：秋季七月，立皇子刘冯为南阳王。
English: In the autumn of July, the crown prince Liu Feng became the king of Nanyang.

古文：壬午，南阳王冯薨。
现代文：十二日，南阳王刘冯逝世。
English: On the 12th, Liu Feng, the king of Nanyang, passed away.

古文：九月庚午朔，日有食之。
现代文：九月初一，日蚀。
English: On the first day of September, a solar eclipse.

古文：诏三公举至孝二人，九卿、校尉、郡国守、相各一人。
现代文：献帝诏令三公举荐至孝之人二人，九卿、校尉、郡国守相各举荐一人。
English: According to the imperial edict of dedicating the emperor, the three princes recommended two persons of the highest filial piety, and the nine nobles, the captain of the school, and the governor of the county each recommended one person.

古文：皆上封事，靡有所讳。
现代文：都对朝政秘密上书陈述利害，不要有所忌讳。
English: All of them have a vested interest in submitting a confidential letter to the Imperial Household Agency, so don't be shy.

古文：曹操与袁绍战于官度，绍败走。
现代文：曹操与袁绍在官渡交战，袁绍战败逃跑。
English: Cao Cao and Yuan Shao fought in Guandu. Yuan Shao was defeated and fled.

古文：冬十月辛亥，有星孛于大梁。
现代文：冬十月十二日，彗星现于大梁星次。
English: In winter, on October 12th, the comet appeared in the constellation of Ursa Major.

古文：东海王祗薨。
现代文：东海王刘祗逝世。
English: East Sea King Liu Ye passed away.

古文：是岁，孙策死，弟权袭其余业。
现代文：这一年，孙策去世，他弟弟孙权继承他留下的事业。
English: This year, Sun Ce died, and his brother Sun Quan inherited the business he left behind.

古文：六年春二月丁卯朔，日有食之。七年夏五月庚戌，袁绍薨。
现代文：六年春二月初一，日蚀。七年夏五月二十一日，袁绍逝世。
English: On the first day of February in the spring of the sixth year, there was a solar eclipse. On the 21st day of May in the summer of the seventh year, Yuan Shao died.

古文：于窴国献驯象。
现代文：于窴国贡献驯化了的象。
English: Yunnan has contributed many domesticated elephants.

古文：是岁，越巂男子化为女子。
现代文：这年，越巂男子转变为女子。
English: This year, the Yueqing men's team was transformed into a women's team.

古文：八年冬十月己巳，公卿初迎冬于北郊，总章始复务八佾舞。
现代文：八年冬十月己巳，公卿初次迎接冬至节气于北郊，乐官总章开始恢复具备八佾舞。
English: In October of the winter of the eighth year, Kugyo welcomed the winter solstice for the first time in the northern suburbs, and the general chapter of music officials began to restore the eight-bowl dance.

古文：初置司直官，督中都官。
现代文：初次设置司直官，以督察中都官。
English: For the first time, the post of Shizhi official was set up, with the post of inspector-general of the capital.

古文：九年秋八月戊寅，曹操大破袁尚，平冀州，自领冀州牧。
现代文：九年秋八月初二，曹操大败袁尚，平定冀州，自兼领冀州牧。
English: In the autumn of the ninth year and the beginning of the second month of August, Cao Cao defeated Yuan Shang, pacified Jizhou, and became the leader of Jizhou.

古文：冬十月，有星孛于东井。
现代文：冬季十月，彗星现于东井星。
English: In the winter of October, the comet is now in the eastern constellation of Orion.

古文：十二月，赐三公已下金、帛，各有差。自是三年一赐，以为常制。
现代文：十二月，赏赐三公以下金帛分别不等，从此以后三年一赐，成为经常的制度。
English: In December, the gold ingots for the three princes and below were awarded in different amounts. From then on, the system of awarding one gold ingot every three years became regular.

古文：十年春正月，曹操破袁谭于青州，斩之。
现代文：十年春正月，曹操在青州打败袁谭，并把他杀掉。
English: In the first month of the tenth year of the Spring, Cao Cao defeated Yuan Tan in Qingzhou and killed him.

古文：夏四月，墨山贼张燕率众降。
现代文：夏季四月，黑山贼张燕率领部众投降。
English: In the summer of April, the Montenegrin thief Zhang Yan led the crowd to surrender.

古文：秋九月，赐百官尤贫者金、帛，各有差。
现代文：秋九月，赏赐百官中特别贫困的人金帛，分别不等。
English: In the autumn and September, there were varying amounts of gold ingots awarded to the most impoverished among the hundred officials.

古文：十一年春正月，有星孛于北斗。
现代文：十一年春正月，彗星出现于北斗星。
English: In the first month of the eleventh year of the Spring, a comet appeared in the constellation of the Big Dipper.

古文：三月，曹操破高幹于并州，获之。
现代文：三月，曹操在并州打败高幹，并把他抓获。
English: In March, Cao Cao defeated Gao Gan in Bianzhou and captured him.

古文：秋七月，武威太守张猛杀雍州刺史邯郸商。
现代文：秋七月，武威太守张猛杀雍州刺史邯郸商。
English: In the autumn of July, the Wuwei Emperor Zhang killed a merchant in Yongzhou.

古文：是岁，立故琅邪王容子熙为琅邪王。
现代文：这一年，立故琅笽王刘容子刘熙为琅笽王。
English: In this year, Liu Yongzhi, the late King of Gong, named Liu Xi as the King of Gong.

古文：齐、北海、阜陵、下邳、常山、甘陵、济北、平原八国皆除。
现代文：撤销齐、北海、阜陵、下邳、常山、甘陵、济北、平原八个封国。
English: Eight fiefdoms were revoked: Qi, Beihai, Fuling, Jiaozuo, Changshan, Ganling, Jibei and Pingyuan.

古文：十二年秋八月，曹操大破乌桓于柳城，斩其蹋顿。
现代文：十二年秋八月，曹操在柳城大败乌桓，斩其王蹋顿。
English: In the autumn and August of the twelfth year, Cao Cao defeated Wu Huan in Liucheng and beheaded his king, Xutong.

古文：冬十月辛卯，有星孛于鹑尾。
现代文：冬十月初三，彗星现于鹑尾星次。
English: On the third day of winter in early October, the comet appeared in the constellation of Iris.

古文：乙巳，黄巾贼杀济南王赟。
现代文：十七日，黄巾贼杀济南王刘斌贝。
English: On the 17th, a thief in a yellow scarf killed the king of Jinan, Liu Binbei.

古文：十一月，辽东太守公孙康杀袁尚、袁熙。
现代文：十一月，辽东太守公孙康杀袁尚、袁照。
English: In November, the Liaodong governor Gongsun Kang killed Yuan Shang and Yuan Zhao.

古文：十三年春正月，司徒赵温免。
现代文：十三年春正月，司徒赵温免职。
English: On the first day of spring in the 13th year of the Heian period, Sitoru Zhao Wen was dismissed.

古文：夏六月，罢三公官，置丞相、御史大夫。
现代文：夏六月，罢去三公官，设丞相、御史大夫。
English: In the summer of June, three public officials were dismissed, and the positions of chancellor and chief historian were created.

古文：癸巳，曹操自为丞相。
现代文：初九，曹操自任为丞相。
English: On the ninth day of the ninth month, Cao Cao appointed himself as chancellor.

古文：秋七月，曹操南征刘表。
现代文：秋七月，曹操南征刘表。
English: In autumn and July, Cao Cao led the Southern Expedition against Liu Bei.

古文：八月丁未，光禄勋郗虑为御史大夫。
现代文：八月二十四日，任光禄勋希阝虑为御史大夫。
English: On August 24th, Ren Guanglu was promoted to the post of Imperial Historian.

古文：壬子，曹操杀太中大夫孔融，夷其族。
现代文：二十九日，曹操杀太中大夫孔融，夷灭他的亲族。
English: On the 29th, Cao Cao killed the Grand Vizier Kong Rong and wiped out his relatives.

古文：是月，刘表卒，少子琮立，琮以荆州降操。
现代文：这个月，刘表逝世，少子刘琮立，刘琮以荆州投降曹操。
English: This month, Liu Biao passed away, and his younger son Liu Xingli and Liu Biao surrendered to Cao Cao in Jingzhou.

古文：冬十月癸未朔，日有食之。
现代文：冬十月初一，日蚀。
English: Winter On the first day of October, a solar eclipse.

古文：曹操以舟师伐孙权，权将周瑜败之于乌林、赤壁。
现代文：曹操率领水军征伐孙权，孙权将周瑜在乌林、赤壁打败曹操。
English: Cao Cao led the navy to conquer Sun Quan, and Sun Quan defeated Cao Cao and Zhou Yu at Wulin and Chibi.

古文：十四年冬十月，荆州地震。
现代文：十四年冬十月，荆州地震。
English: In October of the winter of 2014, Jingzhou was hit by an earthquake.

古文：十五年春二月乙巳朔，日有食之。
现代文：十五年春二月初一，出现日食。
English: On the first day of the second month of the fifteenth year of spring, a solar eclipse occurred.

古文：十六年秋九月庚戌，曹操与韩遂、马超战于渭南，遂等大败，关西平。
现代文：十六年秋九月十五日，曹操与韩遂、马超在渭南交战，韩遂等大败，关西平定。
English: On September 15, the 16th year of autumn, Cao Cao fought with Han Sui and Ma Chao in the south of Fujian. Han Sui and others were defeated, and Kansai was pacified.

古文：是岁，赵王赦薨。
现代文：这一年，赵王刘赦逝世。
English: In the same year, Zhao Wang Liu Meng passed away.

古文：十七年夏五月癸未，诛卫尉马腾，夷三族。
现代文：十七年夏五月癸未，诛卫尉马腾，夷灭其父、母、妻三族。
English: In the late summer and early May of the seventeenth year of the Heian period, Ma Teng, a military officer, annihilated his father, mother, and wife.

古文：六月庚寅晦，日有食之。秋七月，洧水、颍水溢。
现代文：六月二十九日，日蚀。秋季七月，洧水、颍水涨溢。
English: June 29th, solar eclipse. Autumn in July, rain, rain, rain.

古文：螟。
现代文：蝗灾。
English: A plague of locusts.

古文：八月，马超破凉州，杀刺史韦康。
现代文：八月，马超攻占凉州，杀刺史韦康。
English: In August, Ma Chao captured Liangzhou and assassinated Shi Wei Kang.

古文：九月庚戌，立皇子熙为济阴王，懿为山阳王，为济北王，敦为东海王。
现代文：九月二十一日，立皇子刘熙为济阴王，刘懿为山阳王，刘为济北王，刘敦为东海王。
English: On September 21st, the crown prince Liu Xi was appointed as the king of Jilin, Liu Xuan as the king of Shanyang, Liu as the king of North Jilin, and Liu Dun as the king of East China Sea.

古文：冬十二月，星孛于五诸侯。
现代文：冬十二月，彗星现于五诸侯星。
English: In the winter of December, the comet is now at the Five Sovereign Stars.

古文：十八年春正月庚寅，复《禹贡》九州。
现代文：十八年春正月初三，恢复《禹贡》兖、豫、青、徐、荆、扬、雍、益、冀九州之名。
English: On the third day of the first month of the 18th year of the Spring, the names of "Yugong", Yu, Qing, Xu, Jing, Yang, Yong, Yi and Ji Kyushu were restored.

古文：夏五月丙申，曹操自立为魏公，加九锡。
现代文：夏五月初十，曹操自立为魏公，加九锡。
English: On the tenth day of the fifth month of the summer, Cao Cao declared himself Emperor of Wei and Emperor of Jiu Si.

古文：大雨水。
现代文：下了大雨。
English: It rained heavily.

古文：徙赵王珪为博陵王。
现代文：调徙赵王刘王圭为博陵王。
English: Zhao Wang Liu Wang Gui was transferred to Boling Wang.

古文：是岁，岁星、镇星、荧惑俱入太微。
现代文：这一年，岁星、镇星、荧惑三星入太微星垣。
English: This year, the Year Star, Town Star, and Fluorescent Star entered the Star Wall.

古文：彭城王和薨。
现代文：彭城王刘和逝世。
English: Liu He, King of Pengcheng, passed away.

古文：十九年夏四月，旱。
现代文：十九年，夏四月，发生旱灾。
English: In the summer of 1919, in April, a drought occurred.

古文：五月，雨水。
现代文：五月，雨水多。
English: In May, there was a lot of rain.

古文：刘备破刘璋，据益州。
现代文：刘备打败刘璋。占据益州。
English: Liu Bei defeated Liu Bei and occupied Yizhou.

古文：冬十月，曹操遣将夏侯渊讨宋建于枹罕，获之。
现代文：冬季十月，曹操遣将夏侯渊在木包罕讨伐宋建，将宋建俘获。
English: In the winter of October, Cao Cao sent Xia Houyuan to fight Song Jian in Muboahan, and Song Jian was captured.

古文：十一月丁卯，曹操杀皇后伏氏，灭其族及二皇子。
现代文：十一月二十日，曹操杀皇后伏氏，灭其族及二皇子。
English: On November 20th, Cao Cao killed the Empress Fuxi and exterminated her family and the two princes.

古文：二十年春正月甲子，立贵人曹氏为皇后。
现代文：二十年春正月十八日，立贵人曹氏为皇后。
English: On the 18th day of the first month of the 20th year of the Spring, the noble Cao family was established as the empress.

古文：赐天下男子爵，人一级，孝悌、力田二级。
现代文：赐天下男子爵位，每人一级；三老、孝悌、力田每人二级。
English: Give every man in the world a knighthood, one for each; the three elders, filial piety, and virtue, two for each.

古文：赐诸王侯公卿以下谷，各有差。
现代文：赐诸王侯公卿以下谷，分别不等。
English: It was given to kings, princes, and nobles from the lowest to the highest ranks.

古文：秋七月，曹操破汉中，张鲁降。
现代文：秋季七月，曹操攻破汉中，张鲁投降。
English: In the autumn of July, Cao Cao defeated Hanzhong, and Zhang Lu surrendered.

古文：二十一年夏四月甲午，曹操自进号魏王。
现代文：二十一年夏四月二十五日，曹操自进号魏王。
English: In the summer of twenty-one, on April 25th, Cao Cao called himself Wei Wang.

古文：五月己亥朔，日有食之。秋七月，匈奴南单于来朝。
现代文：五月初一，日蚀。秋季七月，匈奴南单于来朝拜。
English: On the first day of May, there was a solar eclipse. In the autumn, in July, the Xiongnu Nanxiang came to pay homage.

古文：是岁，曹操杀琅邪王熙，国除。
现代文：这年，曹操杀琅笽王刘熙，封国撤销。
English: In the same year, Cao Cao killed Liu Xi, the king of the Xiongnu, and the state was revoked.

古文：二十二年夏六月，丞相军师华歆为御史大夫。
现代文：二十二年夏六月，丞相军师华歆为御史大夫。
English: In the summer and June of 1922, the chancellor's military instructor, Hua Wei, was promoted to goshi taifu.

古文：冬，有星孛于东北。
现代文：冬季，彗星出现于东北。
English: In winter, the comet appears in the northeast.

古文：是岁大疫。
现代文：这年疾疫大流行。
English: There was a major outbreak of plague the following year.

古文：二十三年春正月甲子，少府耿纪、丞相司直韦晃起兵诛曹操，不克，夷三族。
现代文：二十三年春正月初六，少府耿纪、丞相司直韦晃起兵诛曹操。没有成功，被夷灭父、母、妻三族。
English: On the sixth day of the first month of the spring of the 23rd year, the minor prefect Geng Ji and the minister of the imperial court, the secretary of the imperial court, the minister of the imperial court, the minister of the imperial court, the minister of the imperial court, the minister of the imperial court, the minister of the imperial court, the minister of the imperial court, the minister of the imperial court, the minister of the imperial court, the minister of the imperial court, the minister of the imperial court, the minister of the imperial court, the minister of the imperial court, the minister of the imperial court, the minister of the imperial court, the minister of the imperial court, the minister of the

古文：三月，有星孛于东方。
现代文：三月，彗星出现于东方。
English: In March, the comet appeared in the east.

古文：二十四年春二月壬子晦，日有食之。
现代文：二十四年春二月三十日，出现日食。
English: On the 30th day of the 2nd month in the spring of the 24th year, a solar eclipse occurred.

古文：夏五月，刘备取汉中。
现代文：夏季五月，刘备攻取汉中。
English: In the summer of May, Liu Bei conquered Hanzhong.

古文：秋七月庚子，刘备自称汉中王。
现代文：秋季七月庚子，刘备自称汉中王。
English: Autumn, July, Geng Zi, Liu Bei called himself the king of Han.

古文：八月，汉水溢。
现代文：八月，汉水涨溢。
English: In August, the Han River overflowed.

古文：冬十一月，孙权取荆州。
现代文：冬季十一月，孙权攻取荆州。
English: In the winter of November, Sun Quan conquered Jingzhou.

古文：二十五年春正月庚子，魏王曹操薨。
现代文：二十五年春正月二十三日，魏王曹操逝世。
English: On the 23rd day of the first month of spring in the year 25, the Wei king Cao Cao passed away.

古文：子丕袭位。
现代文：子曹丕继承王位。
English: His son Cao Pi succeeded to the throne.

古文：二月丁未朔，日有食之。三月，改元延康。
现代文：二月初一，出现日食。三月，改元延康。
English: On the first day of February, there was a solar eclipse. In March, the era was changed to Yan Kang.

古文：冬十月乙卯，皇帝逊位，魏王丕称天子。
现代文：冬季十月十三日，献帝让位，魏王曹丕称天子。
English: On the 13th day of October in winter, Emperor Xian gave up his throne, and the Wei King Cao Pi called him the Son of Heaven.

古文：奉帝为山阳公，邑一万户，位在诸侯王上，奏事不称臣，受诏不拜，以天子车服郊祀天地，宗庙、祖、腊皆如汉制，都山阳之浊鹿城。
现代文：封献帝为山阳公，封地一万户，地位在诸侯王之上，对魏帝曹丕奏事不称臣，受魏帝诏见不跪拜，以天子车驾服饰郊祀天地，汉室宗庙、祖茔以及农历腊月的祭祀都照汉朝的制度，建都山阳浊鹿城。
English: The dedicated emperor was the lord of Shanyang, with 10,000 households in his fief, and his status was higher than that of the princes and kings. He was not a subject to the Wei Emperor Cao Pi, and he did not kneel when receiving the Wei Emperor's edict. He worshipped heaven and earth in the suburbs, dressed in a celestial chariot. The Han Dynasty's system was followed for the Han Dynasty's ancestral temple, the ancestral hall, and the Lunar New Year's sacrificial rites, and the capital was built in Shanyang Elk City.

古文：四皇子封王者，皆降为列侯。
现代文：刘熙、刘懿、刘、刘敦四皇子封王者，都降为列侯。
English: Liu Xi, Liu Ye, Liu and Liu Dun, the four princes who were crowned, were all reduced to vassals.

古文：明年，刘备称帝于蜀，孙权亦自王于吴，于是天下遂三分矣。
现代文：第二年，刘备称帝于蜀，孙权也自称王于吴，于是天下就成了魏、蜀、吴三分的格局。
English: In the second year, Liu Bei claimed to be the emperor of Shu, and Sun Quan also claimed to be the king of Wu, so the world became a three-part pattern of Wei, Shu, and Wu.

古文：魏青龙二年三月庚寅，山阳公薨。自逊位至薨，十有四年，年五十四，谥孝献皇帝。
现代文：魏青龙二年三月初六，山阳公一一一退位汉献帝刘协逝世，自逊位至逝世共十四年，年五十四，谥孝献皇帝。
English: On the 6th day of the 3rd month of the 2nd year of Wei Qinglong, Sanyang Gong died of abdication of Han Emperor Liu Xie. It was a total of 14 years from the abdication to his death. In the 54th year, Zou Xiao Xian became the emperor.

古文：八月壬申，以汉天子礼仪葬于禅陵，置园邑令丞。
现代文：八月二十日，以汉天子礼仪葬于怀州修武县禅陵，设置守护陵园的居民区，委派管理陵园的官吏。
English: On August 20, he was buried at the Zen Mausoleum in Xiuwu County, Waizhou, with the Han Emperor's etiquette. A residential area was set up to guard the cemetery, and officials were appointed to manage the cemetery.

古文：太子早卒，孙康立五十一年，晋太康六年薨。
现代文：献帝的太子即长子早卒，孙刘康立五十一年，晋武帝太康六年逝世。
English: The prince who dedicated himself to the emperor, that is, the eldest son, died early. Sun Liu Kangli was fifty-one years old, and Emperor Taikang of the Jin Dynasty died six years later.

古文：子瑾立四年，太康十年薨。
现代文：刘康子刘瑾立四年，太康十年逝世。
English: Liu Kangzi Liu Xingli was four years old, Taikang died ten years later.

古文：子秋立二十年，永嘉中为胡贼所杀，国除。
现代文：刘瑾子刘秋立二十一年，晋怀帝永嘉中被胡人所杀，封国撤销。
English: In the twenty-first year of Liu Qiu's reign, Emperor Huai was killed by the Hu people in Yongjia, and the state was revoked.

古文：论曰：传称鼎之为器，虽小而重，故神之所宝，不可夺移。
现代文：史家评论说：《左氏传》称，鼎为传国之神器，虽小而重，神灵所宝，不可夺移。
English: Historians commented: "The Legend of Zuo" said that the tripod was a national treasure. Although small and heavy, it was a treasure of the gods and could not be taken away.

古文：至令负而趋者，此亦穷运之归乎！
现代文：如果王室不造，昏凶肆虐，神鼎虽大亦轻，以至被人背着它奔走，这也就是国运穷尽，不可复振的时候了。
English: If the royal family is not built, if the evil spirits are rampant, and if the divine throne is so large and light that people run behind it, this is the time when the national fortune is exhausted and cannot be revived.

古文：天厌汉德久矣，山阳其何诛焉！
现代文：汉自和帝以来，政教渐失，天下厌恶汉德由来已久，怎么能把这个祸患完全推到献帝山阳公身上，责怪他一个人呢！
English: Ever since Emperor He, politics and religion have been on the wane, and the world has had a long-standing distaste for the Han and De. How can we blame this disaster entirely on Emperor Xian and Shanyang, and on him alone!

古文：赞曰：献生不辰，身播国屯。
现代文：史家赞：献帝生不逢时，颠沛流离，国家遭难。
English: Shi Jiazan: It's not a good time to give birth to a new emperor. People are being displaced and the country is in distress.

古文：终我四百，永作虞宾。
现代文：汉家四百年天下，终于断送在他手里，自己也只能像尧帝儿子丹朱为舜帝之宾一样，作为魏帝曹丕之宾了。
English: The 400-year-old Han dynasty was finally destroyed at his hands, and he could only be the guest of Cao Cao, the Wei emperor, just as Emperor Zhao's son, Dan Zhu, was the guest of Emperor Zhao.

