古文：蜀刘禅时，南中诸郡叛，诸葛亮征之，孟获为夷汉所服，七战七擒，曰： 公，天威也，南人不复反矣。 
现代文：三国蜀汉后主刘禅时，南中地区各郡反叛，丞相诸葛亮率军征讨，反叛首领为当地人所佩服的孟获，和诸葛亮打了七次仗，被擒获七次，最后心悦诚服地说： 先生真是有天助之威，南中之人再也不敢反叛朝廷了。 
English: When Liu Zhen, the empress dowager of Shu Han of the Three Kingdoms, was in power, the counties in the south-central region rebelled, and the chancellor Zhuge Liang led the army to fight. The rebel leader was Meng Guo, who was admired by the locals. He fought seven battles with Zhuge Liang and was captured seven times. Finally, he said with a sincere heart: Teacher really has the power of heaven, and the people of Nanzhong will never dare to rebel against the imperial court.

古文：《蜀志》所载，止于一时之事。
现代文：《三国志•蜀志》中所记载的，只是蜀汉时期的事。
English: What is recorded in the "History of the Three Kingdoms • Shu" is only from the Shu Han period.

古文：国朝淳化中，李顺乱蜀，招安使雷有终遣嘉州士人辛怡显使于南诏，至姚州，其节度使赵公美以书来迎，云： 当境有泸水，昔诸葛武侯戒曰： 非贡献征讨，不得辄渡此水；若必欲过，须致祭，然后登舟。 
现代文：我大宋朝太宗淳化年间，李顺在蜀地反叛朝廷，招安使雷有终派遣嘉州士人怡显出使到南诏，到了姚州，当地节度使赵公美捧着国书出来迎接，他对辛怡说： 去南诏的路上有条河叫泸水，蜀汉时武侯诸葛亮先生告诫说： 如果不是进贡或征讨，就不能渡过这条河；假如一定要过，就必须祭祀，然后才可以登舟过河。 
English: During the reign of Emperor Taizong of the Great Song Dynasty, Li Shun rebelled against the imperial court in Shu and eventually dispatched an envoy to Nanzhao. When he arrived in Yaozhou, the local festival made Zhao Gongmei come out to greet him, holding the national anthem. He said to Xinyi: On the way to Nanzhao, there is a river called Surabaya. When he was in Shuhan, Wuhou Zhuge Liang warned: If it is not a tribute or a levy, you cannot cross this river; if you must cross, you must make a sacrifice before you can cross the river by boat.

古文：今遣本部军将赍金龙二条、金钱二千文并设酒脯，请先祭享而渡。 
现代文：现在，我已派本部将士带金龙二条，金钱二千文并摆下酒肉，请求先祭祀之后再渡河。 
English: Now, I have sent my general staff to take two golden dragons, two thousand monies, and wine and meat, and request that they first perform a ritual before crossing the river.

古文：乃知南夷心服，虽千年如初。
现代文：由此可见，南夷对诸葛亮心悦诚服，即使是千年之后也仍然和当初一样。
English: From this, it can be seen that Nanyi is sincerely pleased with Zhuge Liang, even after a thousand years, it is still the same as it was at the beginning.

古文：呜呼！可谓贤矣！
现代文：唉，诸葛亮可以称得上是英明啊！
English: Alas, Zhuge Liang can be called wise!

古文：事见怡显所作《云南录》。
现代文：此事见于辛怡所作的《云南录》中。
English: This was reported in "Yunnan Record" by Xin Yi.

