古文：高祖三王高祖八男：丁贵嫔生昭明太子统，太宗简文皇帝，庐陵威王续；阮修容生世祖孝元皇帝；吴淑媛生豫章王综；董淑仪生南康简王绩；丁充华生邵陵携王纶；葛修容生武陵王纪。
现代文：高祖有八个儿子：丁贵嫔生昭明太子统、太宗简文皇帝、庐陵威王续，阮脩容生世祖孝元皇童，吴淑媛生豫章王综，董淑仪生南康简王绩，丁充华生邵陵携王纶，葛修容生武陵王纪。
English: Gao Zu had eight sons: Ding Guizhong was born to Prince Zhaoming, Taizong was born to Emperor Jianwen, Fuling was born to Emperor Wei, Ruan Yuanzhong was born to Emperor Xiaoyuan, Wu Shuyuan was born to Emperor Yuanzhong, Dong Shuyi was born to Emperor Kangjian, Ding Chongwah was born to Emperor Shao Ling and Empress Wangye, and Ge Xiuyong was born to Emperor Wuling.

古文：综及纪别有传。
现代文：蕉钟及芦起另有传。
English: Banana bells and reed cymbals are also said to have existed.

古文：南康简王绩，字世谨，高祖第四子。
现代文：南康简王萧绩字世谨，是高祖第四子。
English: Nankang Jianwang Xiao Jian is the fourth son of Gao Zu.

古文：天监八年，封南康郡王，邑二千户。
现代文：天监八年，封为南康郡王，食邑二千户。
English: In the eighth year of Tianjun, he was named the king of Nankang County, with 2,000 households in food villages.

古文：出为轻车将军，领石头戍军事。
现代文：出任轻车将军，领石头戍军事。
English: He was appointed as the general of light vehicles, leading the military of stone rafts.

古文：十年，迁使持节、都督南徐州诸军事、南徐州刺史，进号仁威将军。
现代文：十年，迁任使持节、都督南徐州诸军事、南徐州刺史，进升号仁威将军。
English: Ten years later, he was transferred to the position of envoy to Jizhixi, the governor of South Xuzhou to the military, the governor of South Xuzhou to the history, and promoted to the post of General Ren Wei.

古文：绩时年七岁，主者有受货，洗改解书，长史王僧孺弗之觉，绩见而辄诘之，便即时首服，众咸叹其聪警。
现代文：萧绩当时年仅七岁，主管的人在接收货物时，更改了解送的书信，长史王僧孺没有发觉，萧绩看见了就立即责问他，主管当时就自首服罪，众人都赞叹他聪明警觉。
English: At that time, Xiao Rong was only seven years old. When the person in charge received the goods, he changed the delivery address of the letter. Changshi Wang Sengyu did not notice. When Xiao Rong saw it, he immediately blamed him. At that time, the person in charge turned himself in and pleaded guilty. Everyone praised him for being smart and alert.

古文：十六年，征为宣毅将军、领石头戍军事。
现代文：十六年，征任宣毅将军、领石头戍军事。
English: Sixteen years later, he was conscripted as General Xuan Yi and became a military leader.

古文：十七年，出为使持节、都督南、北兗、徐、青、冀五州诸军事、南兗州刺史，在州著称。
现代文：十七年，出任使持节，都督南兖、北兖、徐、青、冀五州诸军事，南兖州刺史，在州著名。
English: In the seventeenth year, he served as the commander-in-chief of the five states of Nanxun, Beibei, Xu, Qing and Hebei, and wrote the history of Nanxun. He was famous in the state.

古文：寻有诏征还，民曹嘉乐等三百七十人诣阙上表，称绩尤异一十五条，乞留州任，优诏许之，进号北中郎将。
现代文：不久有韶令征还京师，百姓曹嘉乐等三百七十人赴朝廷上表，称誉萧绩做的特别优异的政事十五条，乞请留任州刺史，优韶同意他们的请求，进升号北中郎将。
English: Soon, there were three hundred and seventy people, including scholars who were ordered by the emperor to return to Beijing and commoners such as Cao Jiale, who went to the imperial court to present the 15 articles praising the outstanding political achievements made by Xiao, and begged to remain in the post of state historian. The eminent scholar agreed to their request, and was promoted to the position of North Vice Admiral.

古文：普通四年，征为侍中、云麾将军，领石头戍军事。
现代文：普通四年，征入任侍中、云麾将军，领石头戍军事。
English: Ordinary four years, conscripted as a chamberlain, general of the cloud, military leader of the stone.

古文：五年，出为使持节、都督江州诸军事、江州刺史。
现代文：五年，出任使持节、都督江州诸军事、江州刺史。
English: In five years, he served as the envoy of the festival, the governor of Jiangzhou, the military, and the history of Jiangzhou.

古文：丁董淑仪忧，居丧过礼，高祖手诏勉之，使摄州任，固求解职，乃征授安右将军、领石头戍军事，寻加护军。
现代文：母亲董淑仪去世，服丧完全按照礼仪，高祖手韶劝勉他，让他代理江州刺史，他坚决要求解除职务，便征入授安右将军、领石头戍军事，不久加任护军。
English: After the death of his mother, Dong Shuxi, his funeral was held in full accordance with the etiquette. Gao Zu advised him and asked him to act as the chief historian of Jiangsu Province. He firmly demanded to be relieved of his duties. He was then conscripted into the Zhuan Yu general, the leader of the Stone Army, and soon he was appointed as a military escort.

古文：羸瘠弗堪视事。
现代文：身体瘦弱不能治理政务。
English: A thin body cannot manage government affairs.

古文：大通三年，因感病薨于任，时年二十五。
现代文：大通三年，因感病在任上去世，时年二十五岁。
English: Three years later, due to illness, he died in office, at the age of twenty-five.

古文：赠侍中、中军将军、开府仪同三司，给鼓吹一部。
现代文：追赠侍中、中军将军、开府仪同三司，给鼓吹一部。
English: He posthumously presented the Samurai Junior High School, the General of the Chinese Army, the Kaifu Rite and the Three Departments, and gave a part of it to the propagandist.

古文：谥曰简。
现代文：谧号为简。
English: Her nickname is Jane.

古文：绩寡玩好，少嗜欲，居无仆妾，躬事约俭，所有租秩，悉寄天府。
现代文：萧绩少玩赏与爱好，也少嗜好欲望，家中没有仆妾，亲自办理事情，简约节俭，所有的田赋俸禄，都寄送到朝廷的仓库中。
English: They had fewer hobbies and interests, fewer desires for indulgence, no servants or concubines in their homes, they managed their own affairs, they were simple and frugal, and all their rice fields were sent to the warehouse of the imperial court.

古文：及薨后，府有南康国无名钱数千万。
现代文：在他去世后，仓库中存有南康国没有标出名目的钱数千万。
English: After his death, there were tens of millions of nameless money from South Korea in the warehouse.

古文：子会理嗣，字长才。
现代文：子会理嗣爵位，字长才。
English: His children will inherit the title of nobility, the word "long-serving" will be used.

古文：少聪慧，好文史。
现代文：年少聪慧，喜好文史。
English: Young and intelligent, he likes literature and history.

古文：年十一而孤，特为高祖所爱，衣服礼秩与正王不殊。
现代文：年仅十一岁丧父，特被高祖所爱，服饰及所受礼仪俸禄与正王没有不同。
English: He lost his father when he was only eleven years old. He was especially loved by his great-grandfather, and his clothing and the etiquette he received were no different from those of Zheng Wang.

古文：年十五，拜轻车将军、湘州刺史，又领石头戍军事。
现代文：十五岁，拜授轻车将军、湘州刺史，又领石头戍军事。
English: At the age of fifteen, he was awarded the title of light vehicle general, the history of Xiangzhou, and the military rank of stone eunuch.

古文：迁侍中，兼领军将军。
现代文：迁任侍中，兼领军将军。
English: He was transferred to the position of chamberlain, concurrently leading the army as a general.

古文：寻除宣惠将军、丹阳尹，置佐史。
现代文：不久除授宣惠将军、丹阳尹，设置佐史。
English: Soon after, Danyang Yin was awarded the title of General Xuan Hui, and Sashi was established.

古文：出为使持节、都督南、北兗、北徐、青、冀、东徐、谯七州诸军事、平北将军、南兗州刺史。
现代文：出任使持节，都督南兖、北兖、北徐、壹、冀、塞涂、垄七州诸军事，平北将军，宜蛮州刺史。
English: He was appointed as the envoy of the Jixi Festival, the governor of Nan'an, Beichuan, Beichuan, Hebei, Hebei, Jiaozuo, the military of the seven states, the general of Pingbei, and the history of Yimanzhou.

古文：太清元年，督众军北讨，至彭城，为魏师所败，退归本镇。
现代文：太清元年，督率众军北讨，至彭城，被魏师打败，退归南兖州。
English: In the first year of the Taiqing Dynasty, he led the army to the north, to Pengcheng, was defeated by Wei Shi, and retreated to the south of Luzhou.

古文：二年，侯景围京邑，会理治严将入援，会北徐州刺史封山侯正表将应其兄正德，外托赴援，实谋袭广陵，会理击破之。
现代文：二年，侯景围攻京城，会理整治行装将入援，这时北徐州刺史封山侯正表将要应合其兄正垄，对外托言赴援，实际想谋袭卢堕，盒玺击破他，才得以进路。
English: In the second year, Hou Jing besieged the capital, and the reform and rectification of the association was ready to come to the aid. At this time, the North Xuzhou Jishi Fengshan Hou Zhengbo would meet his brother Zheng Reng, and he would go to the aid of the outside world, but he actually wanted to attack Lu Qi, and the box broke him, and he was able to enter the road.

古文：方得进路，台城陷，侯景遣前临江太守董绍先以高祖手敕召会理，其僚佐咸劝距之。会理曰： 诸君心事，与我不同，天子年尊，受制贼虏，今有手敕召我入朝，臣子之心，岂得违背。
现代文：台城失陷，侯景遣前任临江太守董钮先以直担手谕召盒理，他的僚佐都劝他拒召，会理说： 诸君的心事，与我不同，天子性命尊贵，受贼虏控制，今有手谕召我入朝，臣子之心，怎能违背?
English: After the fall of Taicheng, the former Linjiang governor, Dong Niu, was summoned to the imperial court by the direct bearing of a hand oracle. His colleagues and advisors all advised him to refuse the summons. He said, "Your hearts are different from mine. The life of the emperor is precious and is controlled by thieves. Now there is a hand oracle calling me to the imperial court. How can I go against the heart of a vassal?

古文：且远处江北，功业难成，不若身赴京都，图之肘腋。
现代文：而且远处江北，功业难有成就，不如身赴京都，在天子左右谋略。
English: Moreover, it is far away from the northern part of the Yangtze River, and it is difficult to achieve achievements. It is better to go to Kyoto and strategize around the emperor.

古文：吾计决矣。 
现代文：我的计虑已决定了。 
English: My mind is made up.

古文：遂席卷而行，以城输绍先。
现代文：于是带着所有的军备出发，将南兖州交舆绍先。
English: So they set out with all their armaments, leaving South Luzhou in the lead.

古文：至京，景以为侍中、司空、兼中书令。
现代文：至京，侯景任他侍中、司空、兼中书令。
English: When he arrived in Kyoto, Hou Jing served as his chamberlain, secretary, and secretary.

古文：虽在寇手，每思匡复，与西乡侯劝等潜布腹心，要结壮士。
现代文：他虽在寇手下任职，但常思匡复，舆西乡侯劝等人暗中布署亲信，邀约勇士。
English: Although he served under the Kuo, he often thought of Kuangfu, and persuaded the western townsfolk to secretly dispatch their close friends and invite warriors.

古文：时范阳祖皓斩绍先，据广陵城起义，期以会理为内应。
现代文：逭时范阳人童匡壁斩杀了钮先，占据卢堡球起义，希望盒翌为内应。
English: At that time, Fan Yang Ren Tong Kuangbi killed Niu Xian, occupied the Luboqiu uprising, and hoped that the next step would be internal correspondence.

古文：皓败，辞相连及，景矫诏免会理官，犹以白衣领尚书令。
现代文：祖皓失败，供辞连及会理，侯景诈称诏令免去会理官职，仍以平民百姓的身份领尚书令。
English: When Zu Xi failed, he resigned as a member and the secretary of the association. Hou Jing fraudulently claimed that he was exempted from the position of secretary of the association, but he still received Shang Shuling as a commoner.

古文：是冬，景往晋熙，景师虚弱，会理复与柳敬礼谋之。
现代文：冬天，景前往晋熙，京师兵力虚弱，盒理复与柳敬礼图谋起兵。
English: In winter, Jing went to Jinxi, the strength of the Beijing division was weak, and Box Lifu and Liu Jianli planned to raise an army.

古文：敬礼曰： 举大事必有所资，今无寸兵，安可以动？ 
现代文：敬礼说： 举办大事必有所资靠，今无寸兵，怎么可以行动? 
English: The salute said: It is necessary to have a foundation for holding major events. Now there are no soldiers, how can we act?

古文：会理曰： 湖熟有吾旧兵三千余人，昨来相知，克期响集，听吾日定，便至京师。
现代文：盒理说： 湖熟有我旧兵三千余人，昨日来人相告，到时响应聚集，听到我起兵日子一定，便至京师。
English: Box Li said, "More than 3,000 of my old soldiers are familiar with the lake. Yesterday, someone came to inform me, and when the time came, they gathered in response. When they heard that I would start the army on a certain day, they went to the Beijing Division.

古文：计贼守兵不过千人耳，若大兵外攻，吾等内应，直取王伟，事必有成。
现代文：估计贼的守兵不过千人吧，如果大兵在外进攻，我们在内应合，直取王伟，事必有成。
English: Estimate the thief's guards to be no more than a thousand people. If the soldiers attack outside, we will meet them inside, take Wang Wei directly, and we will succeed.

古文：纵景后归，无能为也。 
现代文：即使侯景后归，也不能有作为了。 
English: Even if Hou Jing returns later, he can't do anything.

古文：敬礼曰 善 ，因赞成之。
现代文：敬礼说 好 ，因此赞成起兵。
English: The salute was good, so he was in favor of raising an army.

古文：于时百姓厌贼，咸思用命，自丹阳至于京口，靡不同之。
现代文：这时百姓厌恶贼人，都思听从命令，自丹阳至于京口，没有不同意的。
English: At this time, the people abhorred thieves and wanted to obey orders. From Danyang to Jingkou, no one disagreed.

古文：后事不果，与弟祁阳侯通理并遇害。
现代文：后来事情没有成功，与弟祁阳侯通理并被杀害。
English: Later, things did not work out, and he and his brother, Shanyang Hou, were killed.

古文：通理字仲宣，位太子洗马，封祁阳侯。
现代文：通理字仲宣，职位是太子洗马，封为祁阳侯。
English: Tong Li is called Zhong Xuan, his position is the Prince of Shima, and he is given the title of the Marquis of Shenyang.

古文：通理弟乂理，字季英，会理第六弟也。
现代文：通理的弟弟义理字季英，是会理第六弟。
English: Tong Li's younger brother, Yili, surnamed Ji Ying, is the sixth younger brother of Cong Li.

古文：生十旬而简王薨，至三岁而能言，见内人分散，涕泣相送，乂理问其故，或曰： 此简王宫人，丧毕去尔。 
现代文：出生一百天而简王去世，至三岁就有见解，见内人分散离去，流着泪互相送别，义理询问事情原因，有人说： 这是简王宫中的人，丧事完毕离去。 
English: He was born a hundred days after the death of King Jan, and by the age of three he had an opinion. He saw his relatives scatter and leave, bidding each other farewell with tears. Giri asked the reason for the matter. Someone said: This is a person in King Jan's palace, leaving after the funeral.

古文：乂理便号泣，悲不自胜，诸宫人见之，莫不伤感，为之停者三人焉。
现代文：义理便号泣，悲伤不能控制自己。诸宫人看见了，没有不伤感的，因为这样留下的有三人。
English: Giri cried loudly, unable to control her grief. The people of the palace saw this, and couldn't help but feel sad, because there were three people left behind.

古文：服阕后，见高祖，又悲泣不自胜。
现代文：服丧期满除服后，看见高祖，又悲泣不能控制自己。
English: After the mourning period was over, she saw Gao Zu and couldn't control herself from crying.

古文：高祖为之流涕，谓左右曰： 此儿大必为奇士。 
现代文：高祖因此流涕，对左右人说： 此儿长大必成为奇士。 
English: Gao Zu was outraged and said to the people around him, "Growing up here, you're bound to be a miracle worker."

古文：大同八年，封安乐县侯，邑五百户。
现代文：大同八年，封为安乐县侯，食邑五百户。
English: In the 8th year of the Datong era, he was appointed as the lord of Anle County, with 500 households in the food village.

古文：乂理性慷慨，慕立功名，每读书见忠臣烈士，未尝不废卷叹曰： 一生之内，当无愧古人。 
现代文：丛理性情慷慨，向往建立功名，每读书看到忠臣烈士的事迹，未曾不合起书赞叹说： 这些人的一生，在古人面前不会感到惭愧。 
English: He was generous and generous-hearted, yearning to build a name for himself. Every time he read a book, he saw the deeds of loyal subjects and martyrs. He never failed to open the book and praise it, saying, "These people's lives will not be ashamed in front of the ancients."

古文：博览多识，有文才，尝祭孔文举墓，并为立碑，制文甚美。
现代文：博览多识，有文才，曾祭祀孔文举墓，并为他立碑，碑文写得极美。
English: He was a man of wide knowledge and literary talent. He once held a memorial service for Confucius and erected a monument for him. The inscription is extremely beautiful.

古文：太清中，侯景内寇，乂理聚宾客数百，轻装赴南兗州，随兄会理入援，恒亲当矢石，为士卒先。
现代文：太清年间，侯景内侵京师，乂理聚集宾客数百人，轻装赶赴南兖州，随兄会理入援朝廷，经常亲身抵当矢石，冲锋总在士卒前面。
English: During the Qing Dynasty, Hou Jingshi invaded Beijing, and Bo Li gathered hundreds of guests and rushed to Nanluozhou in light clothing. He followed his brother Bo Li to assist the imperial court, and often arrived at Dangyaishi in person. He was always in front of the soldiers.

古文：及城陷，又随会理还广陵，因入齐为质，乞师。
现代文：在城失陷后，又随盒理返还庐撞，想入壹为人质，乞求出师。
English: After the fall of the city, he returned to the castle with the box theory, wanted to be a hostage, and begged to be a teacher.

古文：行二日，会侯景遣董绍先据广陵，遂追会理，因为所获。
现代文：行二日，侯景遣董绍先占据广陵，于是追捕会理，丛理被俘获。
English: On the second day of the march, Hou Jing sent Dong Shao to occupy Guangling first, so he hunted down the councilor, and the councilor was captured.

古文：绍先防之甚严，不得与兄弟相见，乃伪请先还京，得入辞母，谓其姊安固公主曰： 事既如此，岂可合家受毙。
现代文：纽防备得很严密，他不能舆兄弟相见，便偶请先还京师，得以舆母亲告别，对姐姐安固公主说： 事已到如今，怎能让全家人都被杀害。
English: Nüken was very well prepared. He couldn't see his brothers, so he asked to go back to Beijing first, so that his mother could say goodbye. He said to his sister, Princess Anggu, "How can the whole family be killed when things have come to this?

古文：兄若至，愿为言之，善为计自勉，勿赐以为念也。
现代文：哥哥如果回来，希望你代我对他讲，让他想好计谋自己努力去做，不要再想念我。
English: If my brother comes back, I hope you will tell him on my behalf, let him think of a good plan to do his best, and don't miss me anymore.

古文：家国阽危，虽死非恨，前途亦思立效，但未知天命何如耳！ 
现代文：家庭国家都面临危险，为此献出生命也不怨恨，我也想将来能为国家建立功业，但不知天命如何。 
English: My family and country are all facing danger, and I do not resent giving my life for this. I also want to build a career for the country in the future, but I do not know what fate is.

古文：至京师，以魏降人元贞立节忠正，可以托孤，乃以玉柄扇赠之。
现代文：到了京师，认为魏投降梁朝人元贞忠诚正直，注重名节，自己死后可让他收尸，于是把玉柄扇赠给他。
English: When he arrived in Beijing, he thought that Wei had surrendered to the Liang Dynasty, that Yuan Zhen was loyal and honest, and that he would pay attention to the name day, and that he could let him collect the body after his death, so he gave him the jade fan.

古文：贞怪其故，不受。
现代文：元贞对赠送感到奇怪，所以不接受。
English: Motozane was surprised by the gift and did not accept it.

古文：乂理曰： 后当见忆，幸勿推辞。 
现代文：义理说： 以后会明白，希望不要推辞。 
English: Giri said, "I'll understand later. I hope you don't refuse."

古文：会祖皓起兵，乂理奔长芦，收军得千余人。
现代文：这时祖皓起兵，义理也奔赴长芦，召兵一千多。
English: At this time, Zu Xi raised an army, and Yili also rushed to Changlu, calling up more than a thousand soldiers.

古文：其左右有应贼者，因间劫会理，其众遂骇散，为景所害，时年二十一。
现代文：义理身旁有通贼的人，趁机劫持他，他招集的兵众遂即惊散，自己也被侯景杀害，时年二十一岁。
English: Someone close to Yili who knew the thief took advantage of the situation to kidnap him. The soldiers he had gathered then scattered, and he himself was killed by Hou Jing at the age of twenty-one.

古文：元贞始悟其前言，往收葬焉。
现代文：元贞逭时才明白他以前的用意，前去收尸安葬了他。
English: Yuan Zhengyi only understood his previous intention when he went to collect the corpse and bury him.

古文：庐陵威王续，字世，高祖第五子，天监八年，封庐陵郡王，邑二千户。
现代文：庐陵威王续字世欣，是高祖第五子。天监八年，封为庐陵郡王，食邑二千户。
English: Shixin, the fifth son of Gao Zu, was named the county king of Fuling County in the eighth year of Tianjing, with a population of 2,000 households.

古文：十年，拜轻车将军、南彭城琅邪太守。
现代文：十年，拜授轻车将军、南彭城琅邪太守。
English: Ten years later, he was awarded the title of General of Light Vehicles, and became the Grand Master of Nan Pengcheng.

古文：十三年，转会稽太守。
现代文：十三年，转任会稽太守。
English: Thirteen years later, he was transferred to the position of auditor-general.

古文：十六年，为都督江州诸军事、云麾将军、江州刺史。
现代文：十六年，任都督辽业诸军事、云麾将军、江州刺史。
English: For 16 years, he served as the military governor of Liaoyang, the general of Yunnan Province and the governor of Jiangsu Province.

古文：普通元年，征为宣毅将军，领石头戍军事。
现代文：普通元年，征入任宣毅将军，领石头戍军事。
English: In the first year of the common era, he was conscripted to serve as General Xuan Yi, leading the military with a stone axe.

古文：续少英果，膂力绝人，驰射游猎，应发命中。
现代文：萧续少年时处事英勇果断，体力超人，骑马射箭、出游打猎，都是百发百中。
English: When he was a teenager, he acted heroically and decisively, had superhuman physical strength, went horseback archery, and went hunting.

古文：高祖常叹曰： 此我之任城也。 
现代文：高祖常赞叹说： 此儿就是我家的任城呀。 
English: Gao Zu often said with admiration: This is my family's hometown.

古文：尝与临贺王正德及胡贵通、赵伯超等驰射于高祖前，续冠于诸人，高祖大悦。
现代文：曾舆临贺王正德以及胡贵通、趟伯超等人在高祖面前驱马射箭，萧续名列第一，高祖很高兴。
English: He Wang Zhengde, Hu Guitong, Zibo Chaochao and others drove horses and shot arrows in front of Gaozu, and ranked first in succession. Gaozu was very happy.

古文：三年，为使持节、都督雍、梁、秦、沙四州诸军事、西中郎将、雍州刺史。
现代文：三年，任使持节，都督雍、梁、秦、沙四州诸军事，西中郎将，壅州刺史。
English: In the third year, he was appointed to hold the festival, and the governors of the four states of Yong, Liang, Qin, and Sha were military officers, the West was a middle-ranking general, and Zhangzhou was a historian.

古文：七年，加宣毅将军。
现代文：七年，加任宣毅将军。
English: Seven years later, he was promoted to General Xuan Yi.

古文：中大通二年，又为使持节、都督雍、梁、秦、沙四州诸军事、平北将军、宁蛮校尉、雍州刺史，给鼓吹一部。
现代文：中大通二年，又任使持节、都督雍、梁、秦、沙四州诸军事，平北将军，宁蛮校尉，雍州刺史，给一部鼓吹。
English: In the second year of Zhongdazhong, he also appointed the military envoys of Jichijie, the governor of Yong, Liang, Qin, and Shaxu, the general of Pingbei, the captain of Ningban, and the historian of Yongzhou to preach to a group.

古文：续多聚马仗，畜养骁雄，金帛内盈，仓廪外实。
现代文：萧续收集了许多兵器，畜养良马，金钱货物充满室内，粮食堆满外面的仓库。
English: He collected a lot of weapons, bred good horses, money and goods filled the interior, and grain piled up outside the warehouse.

古文：四年，迁安北将军。
现代文：四年，迁任安北将军。
English: Four years later, he was transferred to General Anbei.

古文：大同元年，为使持节、都督江州诸军事、安南将军、江州刺史。
现代文：大同元年，任使持节、都督江州诸军事、安南将军、江州刺史。
English: In the first year of Datong, he was appointed to hold the festival, the military governor of Jiangzhou, General Annan, and the governor of Jiangzhou.

古文：三年，征为护军将军、领石头戍军事。
现代文：三年，征入任护军将军、领互玺虚军事。
English: Three years later, he was conscripted to serve as a general of the garrison, leading troops in mutual aid.

古文：五年，为骠骑将军、开府仪同三司。
现代文：五年，任骠骑将军、开府仪同三司。
English: Five years later, he was appointed as the general of the imperial cavalry and the head of the imperial ceremony and the three departments.

古文：又出为使持节、都督荆、郢、司、雍、南、北秦、梁、巴、华九州诸军事、荆州刺史。
现代文：又出任使持节，都督荆、郢、司、雍、南、北秦、梁、巴、华九州诸军事，荆州刺史。
English: He also served as the military commander of Jing, Min, Shih, Yong, Nan, North Qin, Liang, Ba, and Huayu, and the governor of Jing Province.

古文：中大同二年，薨于州，时年四十四。
现代文：中大同二年，在于州去世，时年四十四岁。
English: In the second year of junior high school, he died in Yuzhou at the age of forty-four.

古文：赠司空、散骑常侍、骠骑大将军，鼓吹一部，谥曰威。
现代文：追赠司空、散骑常侍、骠骑大将军，给一部鼓吹，谧号为威。
English: Afterward, he gave gifts to Siku, Sanzhijishi, and Zoujishi, and preached to some of them, and his nickname became a threat.

古文：长子安嗣。
现代文：长子萧安继嗣。
English: The eldest son, Xiao An, became the heir.

古文：邵陵携王纶，字世调，高祖第六子也。
现代文：邵陵携王萧纶字世调，是高祖第六子。
English: Shao Ling with Wang Xiaojun is the sixth son of Gao Zu.

古文：少聪颖，博学善属文，尤工尺牍。
现代文：小时就很聪明，有出众的才能，博学，文章写得漂亮，更擅长写书信。
English: He is clever, talented, erudite, writes beautifully, and is better at writing letters.

古文：天监十三年，封邵陵郡王，邑二千户。
现代文：天监十三年，封为邵陵郡王，食邑二千户。
English: In the thirteenth year of Tianjun, he was named the king of Shaoling County, with 2,000 households in the food village.

古文：出为宁远将军、琅邪、彭城二郡太守，迁轻车将军、会稽太守。
现代文：出任宁远将军、琅邪彭城二郡太守，迁任轻车将军、会稽太守。
English: He was appointed as the general of Ningyuan, the governor of the two counties of Ziyang and Pengcheng, the general of light vehicles, and the governor of the association.

古文：十八年，征为信威将军。
现代文：十八年，征入任信威将军。
English: In 18 years, he was conscripted as General Xinwei.

古文：普通元年，领石头戍军事，寻为江州刺史。
现代文：普通元年，领石头戍军事，不久任红州刺史。
English: In the first year of the common era, he served in the military with the rank of quartermaster, and was soon appointed as the chief historian of Hongzhou.

古文：五年，以西中郎将权摄南兗州，坐事免官夺爵。
现代文：五年，以西中郎将代理南兖州刺史。因事获罪，被罢免官职，除去爵位。
English: Five years later, Yoshinaka Nishi, who was acting for the governor of Minamiboso, was found guilty, removed from office, and stripped of his peerage.

古文：七年，拜侍中。
现代文：七年。拜授侍中。
English: Seven years later, he was awarded the title of Samurai Junior High School.

古文：大通元年，复封爵，寻加信威将军，置佐史。
现代文：大通元年，恢复封爵，不久加任信威将军，设置属官。
English: In the first year of Datong, his knighthood was restored, and he was soon appointed as General Xinwei, with subordinate officers.

古文：中大通元年，为丹阳尹。
现代文：中大通元年，任丹阳尹。
English: In the first year of Zhongdaxu, he was appointed as Danyang Yin.

古文：四年，为侍中、宣惠将军、扬州刺史。
现代文：四年，任侍中、宣惠将军、扬州刺史。
English: In four years, he served as a chamberlain, General Xuan Hui, and Yangzhou chief historian.

古文：以侵渔细民，少府丞何智通以事启闻，纶知之，令客戴子高于都巷刺杀之。
现代文：因侵吞平民财物，少府丞何智通将此事上报，萧纶知道了，令门客戴子高在都巷刺杀他。
English: For misappropriating civilian property, Shofu-jo He Zhitong reported the matter to the authorities. Xiao Yao learned of this and ordered his protégé, Dai Zigao, to assassinate him in Duxiang.

古文：智通子诉于阙下，高祖令围纶第，捕子高，纶匿之，竟不出。
现代文：智通的儿子向皇帝控诉此事，高祖令人包围萧纶的住宅，捉拿戴子产。萧捡将他藏起来，竟捉拿不到。
English: Zhitong's son complained to the emperor about this, and Gaozhu had people surround Xiao Yao's house to capture him. Xiao Yao hid him, but he could not be caught.

古文：坐免为庶人。
现代文：蔻纶因此事被免职成为平民。
English: He was dismissed from his post and became a civilian as a result.

古文：顷之，复封爵。
现代文：不久，恢复封爵。
English: The knighthood was soon restored.

古文：大同元年，为侍中、云麾将军。
现代文：大同元年，任侍中、云麾将军。
English: In the first year of the Datong era, he was appointed as a chamberlain and general of the Yunqi army.

古文：七年，出为使持节、都督郢、定、霍、司四州诸军事、平西将军、郢州刺史，迁为安前将军、丹阳尹。
现代文：七年，出任使持节，都督郢、宣、霍、亘四州诸军事，平西将军，郢州刺史，迁任安前将军、丹阳尹。
English: In the seventh year, he served as the envoy of the festival, and the military of the four states, the general of Pingxi, the general of Zhangzhou, the general of Anzen, and the general of Danyangyin, were transferred to the four states.

古文：中大同元年，出为镇东将军、南徐州刺史。
现代文：中大同元年，出任镇柬将军、南徐州刺史。
English: In the first year of the middle and high school, he served as the general of the town of Cambodia and the governor of South Xuzhou.

古文：太清二年，进位中卫将军、开府仪同三司。
现代文：太清二年，进升中卫将军、开府仪同三司。
English: In the second year of the Taiching Dynasty, he was promoted to the rank of General of the Middle Guard, and was appointed to the Kaifu Yi and the Third Division.

古文：侯景构逆，加征讨大都督，率众讨景。
现代文：堡量发动叛乱，加任盖枪征讨大都督，率众兵讨伐谴。
English: Fort quantity launched a rebellion, added the appointment of a gun to fight against the great governor, and led the soldiers to fight.

古文：将发，高祖诫曰： 侯景小竖，颇习行阵，未可以一战即殄，当以岁月图之。 
现代文：出发前，高祖告诚他说： 谜这个小人，非常熟悉打仗的阵法，不可能衹靠打一仗就把他消灭了，应当从长计议。 
English: Before setting out, Gaozu said sincerely, "This villain, Enigma, is very familiar with the tactics of war. It is impossible to rely on one battle to eliminate him. We should think long-term.

古文：纶次钟离，景已度采石。
现代文：萧纶到钟离时，侯景已过采石互。
English: By the time Xiao Wei left Zhong, Hou Jing had already passed the quarry.

古文：纶乃昼夜兼道，游军入赴。
现代文：萧纶于是日夜兼行，不设固定防守地，带领流动出击的军队追赶。
English: As a result, Xiao Yao marched day and night, without setting up a fixed defensive position, and led the army of mobile attack to catch up.

古文：济江中流，风起，人马溺者十一二。
现代文：遇长江至江中心刮起大风，人马被淹死者有十分之一二。
English: In the event of a strong wind blowing from the Yangtze River to the center of the river, one out of every two people drowned.

古文：遂率宁远将军西豊公大春、新淦公大成等，步骑三万，发自京口。
现代文：于是率领宁远将军西丰公大春、新淦公大成等人，率步骑兵三万人，从京出发。
English: Therefore, he led the Ningyuan generals Xi Feng Gong Dechun and Xinyi Gong Decheng and others, with 30,000 infantry and cavalry, and set out from Beijing.

古文：将军赵伯超曰： 若从黄城大道，必与贼遇，不如径路直指钟山，出其不意。 
现代文：将军趟伯超说： 假若走董越大道，必与贼相遇，不如走小路直向钟山，出其不意。 
English: General Wai Bo Chao said: "If you walk along Dong Yue Avenue, you are bound to encounter thieves. It is better to take a side road straight to Zhongshan and surprise them."

古文：纶从之。
现代文：芦舱听从了。
English: The cormorant obeyed.

古文：众军奄至，贼徒大骇，分为三道攻纶，纶与战，大破之，斩首千余级。
现代文：众军突然出现，贼兵十分惊骇，分为三路攻打萧纶军，萧纶军与战，打败他，杀死千余人。
English: The army suddenly appeared, the robber soldiers were very shocked, divided into three ways to attack Xiao Jun's army, Xiao Jun's army fought and defeated him, killing more than a thousand people.

古文：翌日，贼又来攻，相持日晚，贼稍引却，南安侯骏以数十骑驰之。
现代文：第二天，贼军又来攻打，两军相持到黄昏，贼军稍有退却，南安侯盖茔带领数十骑兵追击。
English: The next day, the bandits attacked again, and the two armies held each other until dusk. The bandits retreated slightly, and Nan'an Hougeyao led dozens of cavalry in pursuit.

古文：贼回拒骏，骏部乱。贼因逼大军，军遂溃。
现代文：贼兵回击萧骏，萧墅部队大乱，贼兵因此逼近大军，大军于是溃败。
English: The robber soldiers counterattacked Xiao Yao, and the troops of Xiaoshu were in chaos. As a result, the robber soldiers approached the large army, and the large army was routed.

古文：纶至钟山，众裁千人，贼围之，战又败，乃奔还京口。
现代文：芦输至钟业，军队才有千余人，贼又围攻他，萧纶又战败，便逃回京口。
English: When Lu was transferred to Zhongye, the army only had more than a thousand people. Thieves besieged him, and Xiao Yao was defeated and fled back to Beijing.

古文：三年春，纶复与东扬州刺史大连等入援，至于骠骑洲。
现代文：三年春，萧纶又与束扬州刺史大连等人入援朝廷，到达骠骑洲。
English: In the spring of the third year, Xiao Jie and other people such as Sok Yangzhou Jishi Dalian joined the imperial court and arrived in Zhangjiazhou.

古文：进位司空。
现代文：进升司空。
English: Go ahead, Sora.

古文：台城陷，奔禹穴。
现代文：台城失陷，逃奔到禹穴。
English: After the fall of Taichung, he fled to Yuhuan.

古文：大宝元年，纶至郢州，刺史南平王恪让州于纶，纶不受，乃上纶为假黄钺、都督中外诸军事。
现代文：大实元年，萧纶至郢州，刺史南平王萧恪要把郢州让给萧纶，萧纶不接受，便向上举荐萧纶，任萧纶假黄绒、都督中外诸军事。
English: In the first year of the Dashi era, Xiao Yu went to Zhangzhou and tried to persuade the king of Nanping, Xiao Jia, to cede Zhangzhou to Xiao Yu. Xiao Yu did not accept, so he recommended Xiao Yu to the emperor, and Xiao Yu was appointed the fake Huang Rong and the military governor of the Middle Kingdom.

古文：纶于是置百官，改厅事为正阳殿。
现代文：萧纶于是设置百宫，将厅事改为正阳殿。
English: As a result, Xiao Yu set up a hundred palaces and changed the name of the palace to Zhengyang Palace.

古文：数有灾怪，纶甚恶之。
现代文：多次出现灾怪事，萧纶很厌恶。
English: Repeatedly, disasters and strange occurrences occurred, which greatly disgusted Xiao Yu.

古文：时元帝围河东王誉于长沙既久，内外断绝，纶闻其急，欲往救之，为军粮不继，遂止。
现代文：当时元帝在长沙围攻河东王萧誉已经很久，内外来往被断绝，萧纶闻萧誉的情况很紧急，想去救援他，因为军粮不足，竟然停止。
English: At that time, Emperor Yuan had been besieging Xiao Ren, the King of the East River, in Changsha for a long time. Internal and external communication had been cut off. Xiao Ren heard that Xiao Ren's situation was very urgent and wanted to rescue him. However, because of the shortage of military rations, he stopped.

古文：乃与世祖书曰：
现代文：于是给世祖写信说：
English: So he wrote to his ancestor, saying:

古文：伏以先朝圣德，孝治天下，九亲雍睦，四表无怨，诚为国政，实亦家风。
现代文：以先朝皇帝的圣德，用孝道治理天下，众亲族和睦相处。四方人民没有怨恨，国政确应如此，家风也实应如此。
English: With the sacred virtue of the previous emperor, governing the world with filial piety, and all relatives living in harmony, the people of Shifang have no resentment. This is how the national politics should be, and this is how the family style should be.

古文：唯余与尔，同奉神训，宜敦旨喻，共承无改。
现代文：衹有我与你，共同奉听皇帝的这一教诲，应当互相勉励遵守谕旨，共同承诺不改悔。
English: You and I should listen to this teaching of the emperor, and we should encourage each other to abide by the edict and make a joint commitment not to repent.

古文：且道之斯美，以和为贵，况天时地利，不及人和，岂可手足肱支，自相屠害。
现代文：而且道的最高境界，是以和为贵，占有天时地利，都不如人和重要，难道自己的亲兄弟，自相屠害?
English: Moreover, the highest realm of the Tao is to cherish harmony, to occupy heaven, time, and space, and to be less important than people. Is it possible for one's own brothers and sisters to slaughter each other?

古文：日者闻誉专情失训，以幼陵长，湘、峡之内，遂至交锋。
现代文：往日听闻萧誉处事独断独行，违背教诲，以晚辈欺侮长辈，湘江、峡江之内，于是发生了战争。
English: In the past, it was heard that Xiao Rong dealt with things arbitrarily, contrary to the teachings, and bullied the elders with the juniors, within the Hunan River and the canyon, so there was a war.

古文：方等身遇乱兵，毙于行阵，殒于吴局。
现代文：方等参战遇到乱兵，在战阵中被打死，在吴地送掉性命，正逢此时也不算冤枉。
English: Fang et al. who participated in the war encountered disorderly soldiers, were killed in the battle, and lost their lives in Wudi. It is not unreasonable at this time.

古文：方此非冤，闻问号怛，惟增摧愤，念以兼悼，当何可称。
现代文：通音间哀号痛哭，更增添了悲愤，哀痛地怀念，说什么好呢。
English: Between the sounds of wailing and weeping, more added grief, sadly missed, what to say.

古文：吾在州所居遥隔，虽知其状，未喻所然。
现代文：我在郢州，所居地与此遥隔，虽知发生的事情，但不知为什么会这样。
English: I live in Zhangzhou, far away from here. Although I know what happened, I don't know why it happened.

古文：及届此籓，备加觌访，咸云誉应接多替，兵粮闭壅；弟教亦不悛，故兴师以伐。
现代文：当我来到此地，向各方询访，都说萧誉应接多替，不输送兵粮；你教育他他也不改正，所以你兴师讨伐他。
English: When I came to this place and made inquiries with various parties, they all said that Xiao Rong should have more successors and not send soldiers' rations; if you educate him, he will not correct himself, so you should set up a division to fight him.

古文：誉未识大体，意断所行，虽存急难，岂知窃思。
现代文：萧誉不识大体，随意断定所行，虽然出现急难，哪会知道去想想。
English: Xiao Rong does not know the general situation, arbitrarily determines what to do, although there is an emergency, who will know to think about it.

古文：不能礼争，复以兵来。
现代文：不能与他争礼，就出兵而来。
English: You can't argue with him, so you send in the troops.

古文：萧墙兴变，体亲成敌，一朝至此，能不鸣呼。
现代文：内部兴变，兄弟成为仇敌，一朝至此，能不悲伤。
English: Internal turmoil, brothers become enemies, once this happens, it can not be sad.

古文：既有书问，云雨传流，噂沓其间，委悉无因详究。
现代文：已经有书问，恩泽传流，议论纷杂其间，确实都知道没有办法详究。
English: There have already been book inquiries, the passing on of favors, and discussions, all of which, indeed, know that there is no way to investigate in detail.

古文：方今社稷危耻，创巨痛深，人非禽虫，在知君父。
现代文：当今国家有危险与耻辱，创痛巨深，人不同禽虫，在于知道报效君父。
English: In today's country, there is danger and disgrace, the pain is deep, and people are different from birds and insects in that they know how to repay their parents.

古文：即日大敌犹强，天仇未雪，余尔昆季，在外三人，如不匡难，安用臣子。
现代文：近日大敌很强，天仇未报，我你兄弟，在外有三人，如果不挽救国家危难，还有什么地方用得着我们?
English: Recently, the great enemy is very strong, the natural enemy has not been reported, I am your brother, there are three people outside, if we do not save the national peril, what other place needs us?

古文：唯应剖心尝胆，泣血枕戈，感誓苍穹，凭灵宗祀，昼谋夕计，共思匡复。
现代文：衹应当竭诚相见，泣血枕戈，感誓苍天，依靠神灵祖宗，昼夜谋计，共思匡复。
English: They should meet each other wholeheartedly, shed tears, swear by heaven, rely on the gods and ancestors, and make plans day and night.

古文：至于其余小忿，或宜宽贷。
现代文：至于其余小怨恨，或者应该宽免。
English: As for the rest of the petty grudges, perhaps they should be forgiven.

古文：诚复子憾须臾，将奈国冤未逞。
现代文：如果你再仇恨片刻，将奈何未伸的国冤。
English: If you continue to hate for a moment, you will be unable to avenge the unsatisfied national grievance.

古文：正当轻重相推，小大易夺，遣无益之情，割下流之悼，弘豁以理，通识勉之。
现代文：正应当更换事情的轻重，重新定夺事情的大小，排遣无益的情绪，割舍失去儿子的哀痛，以理宽宏豁达，通识勉之。
English: It is time to change the weight of things, re-determine the size of things, dispel unhelpful emotions, let go of the grief of losing a son, be broad-minded and open-minded, and be knowledgeable.

古文：今已丧钟山，复诛犹子，将非扬汤止沸，吞冰疗寒。
现代文：今已丧失钟山，儿子也被杀害，再不要做扬汤止沸、吞冰疗寒的事情。
English: Now that Zhongshan has been lost, and his son has also been killed, don't do things like stirring the pot and swallowing ice to cure the cold.

古文：若以誉之无道，近远同疾，弟复效尤，攸非独罪。
现代文：若因萧誉的无道，所有的人都憎恨他，你又仿效他们，就不是他一人的遇错了。
English: If all men hate him for the iniquity of his reproach, and you follow their example, he is not the only one in the wrong.

古文：幸宽于众议，忍以事宁。
现代文：希望众议对他宽厚，忍耐使矛盾平息。
English: It is hoped that the public discussion will be lenient towards him, and that patience will make the contradiction subside.

古文：如使外寇未除，家祸仍构，料今访古，未或弗亡。
现代文：如果是外寇未除，家祸仍起，观今访古，国家没有不亡的。
English: If foreign invaders have not been eliminated, domestic disasters will still occur. Looking at today's visit to ancient times, the country will not perish.

古文：夫征战之理，义在克胜；至于骨肉之战，愈胜愈酷，捷则非功，败则有丧，劳兵损义，亏失多矣。
现代文：征战的道理，重要的是打胜仗；至于骨肉之间的战争，愈胜就愈残酷，胜利不是功绩，失败的就是丧事，劳苦军队损害道义，这亏失就太多了。
English: According to the principle of going to war, it is important to win the war; as for the war between flesh and blood, the more victorious the more cruel, victory is not a merit, failure is a tragedy, the labor army damages morality, this loss is too much.

古文：侯景之军所以未窥江外者，正为籓屏盘固，宗镇强密。
现代文：侯景的军队之所以不敢窥视江南，正是因为藩篱屏蔽盘桓牢固，同族兄弟镇守严密强大。
English: The reason why Hou Jing's army did not dare to peek into the south of the Yangtze River was precisely because the fence was firmly shielded and the brothers of the same ethnicity had a tight and strong defense.

古文：若自相鱼肉，是代景行师。景便不劳兵力，坐致成效，丑徒闻此，何快如之！
现代文：如果我们自相鱼肉，就是替侯景出兵，侯景便不劳兵力，坐收成效，丑徒听闻此事，多么称意。
English: If we let ourselves be fooled into sending troops to fight for Houjing, then Houjing would not have to expend troops and would reap the benefits. When the villain heard about this, he was very pleased.

古文：又庄铁小竖作乱，久挟观宁、怀安二侯，以为名号，当阳有事克掣，殊废备境。第闻征伐，复致分兵，便是自于瓜州至于湘、雍，莫非战地，悉以劳师。
现代文：又庄铁小人作乱，长久挟持观宁侯、怀安侯，打着他们的旗号，当阳有战事他从旁牵掣兵力，极度地废除疆界防备力量，当听到要出兵征伐，他又将兵力分散，便使从瓜州至湘、雍，全成为战地，使所有军队疲奔。
English: Moreover, Zhuang Tie villain caused turmoil, holding the banner of Guan Ning Hou and Huai An Hou for a long time. When there was a war, he took troops from the side and abolished the border defense force to the extreme. When he heard that troops were to be dispatched, he dispersed the troops, so that from Guazhou to Hunan and Yong, everything became a battlefield, causing all the troops to run away.

古文：侯景卒承虚藉衅，浮江豕突，岂不表裹成虞，首尾难救？
现代文：侯景终于承虚挑衅，渡江横冲直撞，岂不是造成裹外忧虑，首尾难以援救的局面?
English: Hou Jing finally succumbed to the false provocation and stormed across the river. Wasn't it a situation that caused external worries and was difficult to rescue?

古文：可为寒心，其事已切。
现代文：可使人寒心，逭件事已经很迫切了。
English: It's chilling, but it's urgent.

古文：弟若苦陷洞庭，兵戈不戢，雍州疑迫，何以自安？
现代文：弟如果坚决攻陷洞庭，不停止战争，在雍州的萧察也怀疑你要进迫他，他用什么办法自安?
English: If your younger brother resolutely attacks Dongting and does not stop the war, and Xiao Zha in Yongzhou also suspects that you are trying to force him, how can he reassure himself?

古文：必引进魏军，以求形援。
现代文：必然引进魏的军队，以求援助。
English: It was inevitable that Wei troops would be brought in to help.

古文：侯景事等内痈，西秦外同瘤肿。
现代文：侯景的事情等于自身内部长了恶性脓疮，西魏的援兵如同身体外部长了肿瘤。
English: What happened to Houjing is equivalent to a malignant abscess growing inside oneself, and the reinforcements of the Western Wei Dynasty are like a tumor growing outside the body.

古文：直置关中，已为咽气，况复贪狼难测，势必侵吞。
现代文：西魏兵置治在关中，已被他塞住咽喉，何况贪狼之心难测，势必向内侵害。
English: The West Wei soldiers had him by the throat in the middle of the pass. Moreover, the wolf's heart is hard to fathom, and it is bound to encroach inward.

古文：弟若不安，家国去矣。
现代文：弟若感到自己不安而攻洞庭，家国就要灭亡了。
English: If my younger brother feels insecure and attacks Dongting, our country will perish.

古文：吾非有深鉴，独能弘理，正是采藉风谣，博参物论，咸以为疑，皆欲解体故耳。
现代文：我并不是有深的洞察力，衹是能够弘扬道理，正是采集了风闻谣传，广泛地参听众人的议论，认为可疑，这些是想要解体的计谋。
English: It is not because I have deep insight, but because I am able to promote the truth. It is because I have collected rumors and gossip, listened to the discussions of many people extensively, and considered them suspicious. These are schemes to disintegrate.

古文：自我国五十许年，恩格玄穹，德弥赤县，虽有逆难，未乱邕熙。
现代文：自我国成立五十多年来，恩感苍天，德漫全国，虽有逆难发生，但没有破坏国家的和平盛世。
English: Since the founding of our country more than 50 years ago, thanks to the heavens, the whole country has been full of virtues. Although adversity has occurred, it has not destroyed the country's peace and prosperity.

古文：溥天率土，忠臣愤慨，比屋罹祸，忠义奋发，无不抱甲负戈，冲冠裂眦，咸欲事刂刃于侯景腹中，所须兵主唱耳。
现代文：普天下境域内，忠臣愤慨，近邻遇祸，大家忠义奋发，怀抱镗甲背负兵器，怒发冲冠，怒气裂目，都想把刀剑插入侯景腹中，所须主帅倡导而已。
English: Throughout the world's territory, loyal subjects are indignant, close neighbors are in distress, everyone is loyal and hard-working, embracing armor and carrying weapons, angry hair, angry cracks, all want to insert the sword into the belly of Hou Jing. All that is needed is the coach's advocacy.

古文：今人皆乐死，赴者如流。
现代文：现在人们都乐于赴死，参加的人如流水。
English: Nowadays, people are happy to die, and the number of people taking part is soaring.

古文：弟英略振远，雄伯当代，唯德唯艺，资文资武，拯溺济难，朝野咸属，一匡九合，非弟而谁？
现代文：弟英才谋略震动远方，雄霸当代，你的德艺，你的文资武功，能拯溺济难，朝野都归属你，九合诸侯一匡天下，非弟而谁能?
English: The younger brother's brilliant strategy shakes the distant land, the contemporary hegemony, your virtue, your literature and martial arts can save the day, the court and the country all belong to you, the princes of the Nine Kingdoms are the most powerful in the world, who can do it without the younger brother?

古文：岂得自违物望，致招群！
现代文：怎能自己违背众望，招致众人的怨言诽谤!
English: How can he defy the expectations of the public and invite the complaints and slander of the public!

古文：其间患难，具如所陈。
现代文：其中艰苦处境，都如我所陈述。
English: All of them are in a difficult situation, as I have said.

古文：斯理皎然，无劳请箸；验之以实，宁须确引。
现代文：这个道理很明白，无庸赘述。检验都真实，不须再精确表明。
English: This principle is very clear and does not need to be elaborated on. The tests are real and do not need to be precisely stated.

古文：吾所以间关险道，出自东川，政谓上游诸籓，必连师狎至，庶以残命，预在行间；及到九江，安北兄遂溯流更上，全由饩馈悬断，卒食半菽，阻以菜色，无因进取。
现代文：我所以越间关险道，从塞川出来，正是要告诉垦江上游诸王，必须亲密关系联合出兵，将我的余年，效力在行伍中；等到了九江，安北兄应逆流而上，全因军粮将断绝，士兵食物多半是菜，脸色饥馑，所以不能再进取。
English: That's why I crossed the dangerous road and came out of the Sai River, just to tell the kings in the upper reaches of the Li River that we must have a close relationship and jointly send troops. I will spend the rest of my life in the army. When I got to Jiujiang, my brother An Bei should go upstream, all because the military food will be cut off. The soldiers' food is mostly vegetables, and they look hungry, so they can't advance any further.

古文：侯景方延假息，复缓诛刑，信增号愤，启处无地。
现代文：侯景正好藉机休整，又缓死刑，倍增激愤，想安居无地方。
English: Hou Jing just took the opportunity to rest, and suspended the death penalty, doubling the indignation, and there was no place to live.

古文：计潇湘谷粟，犹当红委，若阻弟严兵，唯事交切，至于运转，恐无暇发遣。
现代文：算计懑迩的谷粟，应当储积丰富，若阻止弟陈兵，惟此事紧迫，至于运转，恐无暇发派。
English: According to the calculation, the millet should be well-stocked, and if the younger brother Chen Bing is prevented, the matter is urgent, but as for the operation, there is no time to dispatch.

古文：即日万心慊望，唯在民天，若遂等西河，时事殆矣！
现代文：近日万心恳切希望的，就是有足够的粮食，如果等从酉周转输来，时事就危险了。
English: The earnest hope these days is that there will be enough grain. If we wait for it to be transported from Handan, the current situation will be dangerous.

古文：必希令弟豁照兹途，解汨川之围，存社稷之计，使其运输粮储，应赡军旅，庶协力一举，指日宁泰。
现代文：必希望贤弟迅速地照此途径办理，解除对叫的包围，存社稷之计，使他运输粮储，供应军旅，衹要齐心协力，不日天下太平安宁。
English: It is hoped that the virtuous brother will quickly follow this way, lift the siege of the enemy, save the company's plan, make him transport grain reserves, supply the army brigade, and make concerted efforts to keep the world peaceful and tranquil.

古文：宗庙重安，天下清复，推弟之功，岂非幸甚。
现代文：宗庙重安，天下清复，推举弟的功劳，难道不是很幸运的。
English: Isn't it fortunate that the ancestral temple is in a good condition, the country is clean and prosperous, and the younger brother's merit is highly commended?

古文：吾才懦兵寡，安能为役，所寄令弟，庶得申情，朝闻夕死，万殒何恨。
现代文：我才薄兵少，怎能去做这些事情，所有都寄托于贤弟，如果能表达情意，朝闻夕死，死一万次有什么怨恨。
English: How can I do all these things when I'm so short of talent? Everything is entrusted to my wise younger brother. If I can express my feelings, I can die at any time of the day. What's there to hate about dying ten thousand times?

古文：聊陈闻见，幸无怪焉。
现代文：姑且陈述我的见闻，希望不要怪罪。
English: Let me state what I have seen and heard, and I hope that I am not to blame.

古文：临纸号迷，诸失次绪。
现代文：写信时六神无主，很多地方失去次序。
English: When writing a letter, the six gods have no master, and many places are out of order.

古文：世祖复书，陈河东有罪，不可解围之状。
现代文：世祖覆信，陈说河东王有罪，包围不可解除的原因。
English: In reply to the letter, the patriarch said that the king of Hedong was guilty and the reason why the siege could not be lifted.

古文：纶省书流涕曰： 天下之事，一至于斯！ 
现代文：纶看信流着泪说： 天下的事情，竟成这样! 
English: Gao Xuanxin said with tears streaming down his face: How could things in the world have turned out like this!

古文：左右闻之，莫不掩泣。
现代文：左右人听了，没有不哭泣的。
English: There was no one who did not cry when they heard it.

古文：于是大修器甲，将讨侯景。
现代文：于是芦输大修兵器，将出兵征讨住量。
English: As a result, the government has transferred major overhaul weapons, and will send troops to collect housing quotas.

古文：元帝闻其强盛，乃遣王僧辩帅舟师一万以逼纶，纶将刘龙武等降僧辩，纶军溃，遂与子踬等十余人轻舟走武昌。
现代文：五童听闻他兵力强盛，于是派王僧辩率舟师一万逼攻芦纶，萧纶将刘龙武等人向王僧辩投降，萧纶军溃败，于是与子萧踬等十余人乘船逃到武昌。
English: The five sons heard that he had a strong army, so they sent Wang Sofen to lead 10,000 boatmen to attack Lushan. Xiao Gan forced Liu Longwu and others to surrender to Wang Sofen. Xiao Gan's army was defeated, so he and his son Xiao Gan and more than ten others fled to Wuchang by boat.

古文：时纶长史韦质、司马姜律先在于外，闻纶败，驰往迎之。于是复收散卒，屯于齐昌郡，将引魏军共攻南阳。
现代文：当时萧纶的长史韦质、司马姜律原先在外面，听闻萧纶兵败，驱马前往迎接他，于是萧纶重新收集散兵，驻扎在齐昌郡，将要引进魏军共攻南阳。
English: At that time, Xiao Yao's eldest sons, Shi Weijing and Sima Jianglu, were originally outside. Hearing of Xiao Yao's defeat, they drove their horses to meet him. Therefore, Xiao Yao re-gathered the scattered soldiers and stationed them in Qichang County. They were going to bring in the Wei army to attack Nanyang.

古文：侯景将任约闻之，使铁骑二百袭纶，纶无备，又败走定州。
现代文：侯景部将任约闻知此事，派铁骑二百袭击芦枪，董捡没有防备，又战败逃到宣州。
English: The Houjing Department sent 200 cavalrymen to attack the guns, but Dong Zai was unprepared and fled to Xuanzhou in defeat.

古文：定州刺史田龙祖迎纶，纶以龙祖荆镇所任，惧为所执，复归齐昌。
现代文：室州刺史田龙祖迎接芦枪，芦枪因为垄担为塑噬所任，惧怕被他捉去，就再回齐昌。
English: Muroshu stabber, Tian Longzu, greets Lugang. Lugang is afraid of being caught by Lugang, so he returns to Qichang.

古文：行至汝南，西魏所署汝南城主李素者，纶之故吏，闻纶败，开城纳之。
现代文：行至汝南，西魏所任命的这亩城主奎塞，是趸输的旧部下，闻芦捡兵败，开城接纳他。
English: When he went to the south of the Ryukyus, he was appointed by the Western Wei Dynasty as the mu of the city's lord, Kuisei. He was an old subordinate who had been defeated, and when he heard that he had been defeated, he went to the city to receive him.

古文：纶乃修浚城池，收集士卒，将攻竟陵。
现代文：趸捡便修筑城池，收集士卒，将要攻打竟陵。
English: He will build a castle, gather soldiers, and attack the Mausoleum.

古文：西魏安州刺史马岫闻之，报于西魏，西魏遣大将军杨忠、仪同侯几通率众赴焉。二年二月，忠等至于汝南，纶婴城自守。
现代文：西魏安州刺史马岫听闻此事，向玺龚报告，酉苏派大将军荡盅、仪同堡盏通率众赶来，彊盅等人到了达直，盖钥亲自环城固守。
English: West Wei'an Province's Zhang Shima heard about this and reported it to Zhang Rong, who sent the general Zhang Rong and the commander of the garrison to lead the crowd to arrive. Zhang Rong and others arrived in Dazhi, and personally guarded the city.

古文：会天寒大雪，忠等攻不能克，死者甚众。
现代文：遣时天寒大雪，杨忠等人攻城失利，死者甚众。
English: At the time of sending, it was cold and snowy, Yang Zhong and others were defeated in the siege of the city, and many people died.

古文：后李素中流矢卒，城乃陷。
现代文：后来李素中箭而亡，城失陷。
English: Later, Li Su was killed by an arrow and the city fell.

古文：忠等执纶，纶不为屈，遂害之。投于江岸，经日颜色不变，鸟兽莫敢近焉。
现代文：查蝗等人捉住芦输，董捡不向他们屈服，于是被杀害，尸体被投到江岸，多日萧纶的脸色不变，鸟兽都不敢接近他。
English: Cha Locust and others caught Lu Hao, and Dong Zhao did not give in to them, so he was killed, and his body was thrown to the riverbank. Xiao Yao's face did not change for many days, and birds and animals did not dare to approach him.

古文：时年三十三。
现代文：时年三十三岁。
English: He was thirty-three years old.

古文：百姓怜之，为立祠庙，后世祖追谥曰携。
现代文：百姓同情他，为他建祠庙，后来世祖给他追封谧号称作遭。
English: The people sympathized with him and built an ancestral temple for him. Later, the ancestors gave him the posthumous title of "Wen."

古文：长子坚，字长白。
现代文：长子萧坚，字长白。
English: The eldest son, Xiao Jian, is white.

古文：大同元年，以例封汝南侯，邑五百户。
现代文：大同元年，按例封为汝南侯，食邑五百户。
English: In the first year of Datong, he was granted the title of Ru Nan Hou, with 500 households in the food village.

古文：亦善草隶，性颇庸短。
现代文：也擅长草书、隶书，性情很庸懒浮浅。
English: He is also good at cursive and cursive writing, and his temperament is very lazy and shallow.

古文：侯景围城，坚屯太阳门，终日蒲饮，不抚军政。
现代文：侯景围城，萧坚驻扎在太阳门，终赌博酗酒，不过问军政。
English: During the siege of Houjing, Xiao Jian was stationed at the Gate of the Sun. He eventually became addicted to gambling and alcohol, but never mind the military and politics.

古文：吏士有功，未尝申理，疫疠所加，亦不存恤，士咸愤怨。
现代文：吏士有功，也不申报，得了瘟疫，也不关军政抚慰，士兵都很愤怨。
English: Officials with meritorious service do not declare it, and soldiers are resentful when they get the plague and are not concerned with military and political consolation.

古文：太清三年三月，坚书佐董勋华、白昙朗等以绳引贼登楼，城遂陷，坚遇害。
现代文：太清三年三月，萧坚的书佐董勋华、白昙朗等人用绳子引贼登楼，城立即失陷，萧坚被杀害。
English: In March of the third year of the Taiqing Dynasty, Xiao Jian's secretary Dong Xunhua, Bai Yulang and others used a rope to lure the thieves onto the building. The city immediately fell, and Xiao Jian was killed.

古文：弟确，字仲正。
现代文：弟萧确，字仲正。
English: His younger brother, Xiao Ji, goes by the name Zhong Zheng.

古文：少骁勇，有文才。
现代文：年少时很勇猛，又有文才。
English: When he was young, he was very brave and talented in literature.

古文：大同二年，封为正阶侯，邑五百户，后徙封永安。
现代文：大同二年，封为正阶侯，食邑五百户，后改封丞窒堡。
English: In the second year of Datong, he was given the title of Zhengxiao Hou, with 500 households in Shiyou, and later changed his title to Zhenchengbao.

古文：常在第中习骑射，学兵法，时人皆以为狂。
现代文：经常在家中练习骑射，学习兵法，时人都认为他狂妄。
English: He often practiced shooting on horseback at home and studied military tactics. At the time, people thought he was arrogant.

古文：左右或以进谏，确曰： 听吾为国家破贼，使汝知之。 
现代文：左右有人直言规劝他，萧确说： 等我为国家破贼，使你们知道我。 
English: Some people around him directly admonished him, and Xiao Ju said, "Wait until I become a traitor to the country, so that you will know me."

古文：除秘书丞，太子中舍人。
现代文：授秘书丞，太子中舍人。
English: He was awarded the title of secretary-general, and became the prince's middle son.

古文：钟山之役，确苦战，所向披靡，群虏惮之。
现代文：钟山一仗，芦碴苦战，所向披靡，群虏都怕他。
English: The battle of Zhongshan, the hard battle of Lushan, all are invincible, and the herdsmen are afraid of him.

古文：确每临阵对敌，意气详赡。带甲据鞍，自朝及夕，驰骤往反，不以为劳，诸将服其壮勇。
现代文：芦硿每临阵对敌，意气充盈饱满，披甲跨马，自朝及夕，往返奔驰，不觉辛劳，诸将领佩服他的壮勇。
English: Every time Reedy faced the enemy, he was full of spirit, wearing armor and straddling a horse. From morning to evening, he drove back and forth, not noticing the toil. The generals admired his bravery.

古文：及侯景乞盟，确在外，虑为后患，启求召确入城。
现代文：当彊乞求结盟时，芦碴在外，堡景怕萧确成为后患，请求召萧确入城。
English: When the dragonfly begged for alliance, the reed warbler was outside, and the castle feared that Xiao Jie would become a hindrance, and requested Xiao Jie to enter the city.

古文：诏乃召确为南中郎将、广州刺史，增封二千户。
现代文：于是下韶书任萧确为南中郎将、广州刺史，增封二千户。
English: As a result, Xiao Jizhen appointed Xiao Jizhen as the vice-commander of the south and the governor of Guangzhou, increasing the number of fiefs by two thousand.

古文：确知此盟多贰，城必沦没，因欲南奔。携王闻之，逼确使入，确犹不肯。
现代文：萧确知此次结盟可疑，城必沦没，想前往南方，携王知道了，逼使萧确入城。
English: Xiao Jizhong knew that the alliance was suspicious and that the city would fall, so he wanted to go to the south. When he found out, he and Wang forced Xiao Jizhong to enter the city.

古文：携王流涕谓曰： 汝欲反邪！ 
现代文：萧确还是不肯，携王流着泪对他说： 你想造反呀! 
English: Xiao Zhen still refused, and said to Wang with tears streaming down his face: "You want to rebel!

古文：时台使周石珍在坐，确谓石珍曰： 侯景虽云欲去，而不解长围，以意而推，其事可见。
现代文：当时台使周石珍在座，萧确对石珍说： 侯景虽说想撤军，但又不解除长围，以意推论，结盟的事情很清楚了。
English: At that time, Zhou Shizhen, an envoy of the Central Committee of the Communist Party of China, was present, and Xiao Zhengyi said to Shizhen: Although Hou Jing said that he wanted to withdraw his troops, he did not lift the encirclement. By inference, the alliance was very clear.

古文：今召我入，未见其益也。 
现代文：今召我入城，没有看到有什么益处。 
English: Now they have called me to the city, and I have not found it profitable.

古文：石珍曰： 敕旨如此，侯岂得辞？ 
现代文：石珍说： 敕旨如此，侯怎能推辞? 
English: Shi Zhen said: If it is so, how can Hou refuse?

古文：确执意犹坚，携王大怒，谓赵伯超曰： 谯州，卿为我斩之，当赉首赴阙。 
现代文：萧确坚持自己的决定，携王大怒，对趟伯超说： 谯州，卿为我斩了他，提着他的头颅赴宫阙。 
English: Xiao Zhen adhered to his decision, and with the king's great anger, he said to Zhi Bo Chao: Zhengzhou, sir, cut him for me, and carry his head to the palace.

古文：伯超挥刃眄确曰： 我识君耳，刀岂识君？ 
现代文：伯超挥刀斜视萧确说： 我认识君，刀难道认识君? 
English: Bo Chao waved his sword and squinted at Xiao Ji, saying, "I know you. Does the sword know you?"

古文：确于是流涕而出，遂入城。
现代文：萧确于是流涕而出，便入城。
English: Xiao Zhen then left in a rage and entered the city.

古文：及景背盟复围城，城陷，确排闼入，启高祖曰： 城已陷矣。 
现代文：等到侯景背叛盟约再次围城时，城失陷，萧确推宫门而入，启禀高祖说： 城已失陷了。 
English: When Houjing betrayed the covenant and besieged the city again, the city was lost. Xiao Jing pushed the palace gate and entered, and Kaizhen Gaozu said: The city has been lost.

古文：高祖曰： 犹可一战不？ 
现代文：高祖说： 还能决一战吗? 
English: Gaozu said, "Can we still have a decisive battle?"

古文：对曰： 不可。
现代文：回答说： 不可能了。
English: Fan Ye replied, "It's not appropriate."

古文：臣向者亲格战，势不能禁，自缒下城，仅得至此。 
现代文：臣一向都是亲自格战，现有的力量禁止不了，衹能顺着绳子下城，衹有这个办法。 
English: The minister has always been personally fighting, the existing power can not be prohibited, if you can follow the rope down the city, you have this method.

古文：高祖叹曰： 自我得之，自我失之，亦复何恨。 
现代文：高祖叹气说： 国家是从我手中得到的，又从我逭失去，又有什么可悔恨的。 
English: Gao Zu sighed and said: The country was gained from me, and lost from me, and there is nothing to regret.

古文：乃使确为慰劳文。
现代文：于是让萧确写慰劳文。
English: So he asked Xiao Jizhen to write a letter of condolence.

古文：确既出见景，景爱其膂力，恒令在左右。
现代文：萧确出城见侯景，侯景爱他有体力，经常让他守在自己身旁。
English: Xiao did go out of the city to see Houjing. Houjing loved him for his physical strength and often let him stay by his side.

古文：后从景行，见天上飞鸢，群虏争射不中，确射之，应弦而落。
现代文：有一次随侯景出行，见天上有老鹰，群虏争射不中，萧确射箭，老鹰中箭掉下来。
English: Once, when traveling with Hou Jing, he saw an eagle in the sky. The flocks could not shoot well, but they did shoot arrows, and the eagle's arrow fell down.

古文：贼徒忿嫉，咸劝除之。
现代文：贼徒愤恨嫉妒他，都劝侯景除掉他。
English: The thieves were enraged and jealous of him, and they all advised Hou Jing to get rid of him.

古文：先是携王遣人密导确，确谓使者曰： 侯景轻佻，可一夫力致，确不惜死，正欲手刃之；但未得其便耳。
现代文：先是携王派人密去引导萧确，萧确对使者说： 侯景为人很轻佻，一个人就可对付他，萧确不怕死，正想亲手杀了他，但还没有得到机会。
English: First, the king sent an emissary to guide Xiao Zhen. Xiao Zhen said to the emissary: "Hou Jing is a very frivolous person. One person can deal with him. Xiao Zhen is not afraid of death. He is trying to kill him with his own hands, but he has not yet had the chance."

古文：卿还启家王，愿勿以为念也。 
现代文：卿还启告家王，让他不要挂念此事。 
English: He also told the king not to worry about it.

古文：事未遂而为贼所害。
现代文：事没办成而被贼杀害。
English: He was killed by thieves when the job was not done.

古文：史臣曰：自周、汉广树籓屏，固本深根；高祖之封建，将遵古制也。
现代文：史臣曰：自从周朝、汉朝封许多诸侯王保卫朝廷，他们固本深根；高祖分封诸侯，是想遵循古制。
English: Shichen said: Since the Zhou Dynasty and the Han Dynasty, many princes have been appointed to defend the imperial court, and they have deep roots; Gao Zu, who was appointed as a prince, wanted to follow the ancient system.

古文：南康、庐陵并以宗室之贵，据磐石之重，绩以孝著，续以勇闻。
现代文：南康王、庐陵王是因宗室的贵位，占据如盘石样的重地，萧绩因有孝道出名，萧续因有勇气闻名。
English: King Nankang and King Baoling occupied the most important positions due to their noble lineage. King Xiao Rong was famous for his filial piety, and King Xiao Jian was famous for his courage.

古文：纶聪警有才学，性险躁，屡以罪黜，及太清之乱，忠孝独存，斯可嘉矣。
现代文：萧纶聪警有才学，性情险诈浮躁，多次因获罪被罢职，到了太清年间的战乱，他们的忠孝独存，这是值得嘉奖的。
English: Xiao Yucong was a talented policeman with a dangerous and impetuous temperament. He was dismissed many times for crimes. When the war broke out during the Taiching Dynasty, his loyalty and filial piety remained, which is worthy of commendation.

