古文：十有四年春正月，公会郑伯于曹。
现代文：十四年春正月，桓公与郑厉公在曹国会面。
English: In the first month of spring in the 14th year of the Heian period, Emperor Kan and Emperor Zheng met in the capital of Cao.

古文：无冰。
现代文：正月没有结冰。
English: There was no ice on New Year's Day.

古文：夏五。郑伯使其弟语来盟。
现代文：夏季五月，郑伯派遣他的弟弟语来盟会。
English: In the summer of May, Zheng Bo sent his younger brother Yu to join the League.

古文：秋八月壬申，御廪灾。
现代文：秋季八月壬申日，储藏祭祀谷物的仓库发生火灾。
English: In the autumn, on August 15, a fire broke out in a warehouse storing sacrificial grain.

古文：乙亥，尝。
现代文：乙亥日，举行秋天的祭祀。
English: On the 18th, a tasting festival was held.

古文：冬十有二月丁巳，齐侯禄父卒。
现代文：冬季十二月丁巳日，齐僖公禄父去世。
English: In the winter of December, on the 13th day of the 12th month, Qi Xinggong's father passed away.

古文：宋人以齐人、蔡人、卫人、陈人伐郑。
现代文：宋国人联合齐国、蔡国、卫国、陈国进攻郑国。
English: Song people united with Qi, Cai, Wei and Chen to attack Zheng.

古文：十四年春，会于曹。
现代文：十四年春季，鲁桓公和郑厉公在曹国会见。
English: In the spring of the 14th year, Lu Huan and Zheng Li met in Cao Guo.

古文：曹人致饩，礼也。
现代文：曹国人送来食物，这是合于礼的。
English: It is proper for the people of Cao to send food.

古文：夏，郑子人来寻盟，且修曹之会。
现代文：夏季，郑国的子人前来重温过去盟会的友好，并且也是重温在曹国的会见。
English: In the summer, the children of Zheng Guo came to revisit the friendship of the past alliance, and also to revisit the meeting in Cao Guo.

古文：秋八月壬申，御廪灾。
现代文：秋季，八月十五日，储藏祭祀谷物的仓库发生火灾。
English: In the autumn, on August 15, a fire broke out in a warehouse storing sacrificial grain.

古文：乙亥，尝。
现代文：十八日，举行尝祭。
English: On the 18th, a tasting festival was held.

古文：书不害也。冬，宋人以诸侯伐郑，报宋之战也。
现代文：《春秋》所以记载这件事，是表示火灾尚不足为害。冬季，宋国人联合诸侯进攻郑国，这是为了报复在宋国的那次战争。
English: "Spring and Autumn" recorded this incident to indicate that the fire was not yet harmful. In the winter, the Song people attacked Zheng with the princes in order to take revenge for the war in Song.

古文：焚渠门，入及大逵。伐东郊，取牛首。以大宫之椽归，为卢门之椽。
现代文：诸侯联军焚烧了郑国都城的渠门，进了城到了大街上，攻打东郊，占取牛首，把郑国太庙的椽子拿回去做宋国卢门的椽子。
English: The allied forces of the princes burned the canal gate of the capital city of Zheng, entered the city to the main street, attacked the eastern suburbs, occupied the head of the cow, and took back the mule of the Zheng Guotai Temple to make the mule of the Song Guotai Temple.

