古文：大司乐掌成均之法，以治建国之学政，而合国之子弟焉。
现代文：大司乐掌管大学的教学法，建立并掌理王国有关学校的政令，聚集国子到学校里学习。
English: Daesile presided over the teaching methods of the university, established and administered the decrees of the relevant schools in the kingdom, and gathered the sons of the kingdom to study in the school.

古文：凡有道者，有德者，使教焉。死则以为乐祖，祭於瞽宗。
现代文：凡有道艺、有德行的人，让他们在学校任教，死了就奉之为乐祖，在学校祭祀他们。
English: All those who have virtue and virtue, let them teach in the school, and when they die, they will be regarded as music ancestors, and they will be sacrificed in the school.

古文：以乐德教国子，中、和、祗庸、孝、友；以乐语教国子，兴、道、讽、诵、言、语；以乐舞教国子，舞云门、大卷、大咸、大磬、大夏、大濩、大武。
现代文：用乐德教育国子具备忠诚、刚柔得当、恭敬、有原则、孝顺父母、友爱兄弟的德行，用乐语教国子掌握比喻、称引古语、背诵诗文、吟咏诗文、提起话头、回签筮述的语言按巧，用乐舞教国子学会《云门》、《大卷》、《大咸》、《大韶》、《大夏》、《大湮》、《大武》等舞蹈。
English: Using music to teach Kuniko the virtues of loyalty, firmness, respect, principles, filial piety, and brotherly love, using music to teach Kuniko to master metaphors, to recite ancient languages, to recite poems, to chant poems, to recite prefaces, to sign back and recite language skillfully, using music and dance to teach Kuniko to learn dances such as "Cloud Gate," "Great Scroll," "Great Ham," "Great Plough," "Great Summer," "Great Plough," and "Great Warrior."

古文：以六律、六同、五声、八音、六舞、大合乐。以致鬼、神、示，以和邦国，以谐万民，以安宾客，以说远人，以作动物。
现代文：用六律、六同、五声、八音和六代的舞一起配合演奏，以招致人鬼、天神和地神而祭祀，以使各国亲睦，民众和谐，宾客安定，远人悦服，动物繁生。
English: Six rhythms, six harmonies, five voices, eight tones and six generations of dances are played together to invite ghosts, gods and earth gods to make sacrifices, so that all countries can be friendly, the people can be harmonious, the guests can be stable, the distant people can wear pleasant clothes, and the animals can flourish.

古文：乃分乐而序之，以祭、以享、以祀。
现代文：于是分别演奏六代的乐舞而依尊卑排列先后，用以祭祀地神、人鬼、天神。
English: As a result, the music and dance of the six generations were performed separately and arranged successively according to dignity and inferiority, to be used to worship earth gods, ghosts, and gods.

古文：乃奏黄钟，歌大吕，舞云门，以祀天神；乃奏大簇，歌应钟，舞咸池，以祭地示；乃奏姑洗，歌南吕，舞大，以祀四望；乃奏蕤宾，歌函钟，舞大夏，以祭山川；乃奏夷则，歌小吕，舞大濩，以享先妣；乃奏无射，歌夹钟，舞大武，以享先祖。
现代文：用黄钟宫的调式演奏钟磬，用大吕宫的调式歌唱，跳《云门》舞，以祭祀天神；用大蔟宫的调式演奏钟磬，用应钟宫的调式歌唱，跳《咸池》舞，以祭祀地神；用姑洗宫的调式演奏钟磬，用南吕宫的调式歌唱，跳《大韶》舞，以祭祀四方名山大川；用蕤宾宫的调式演奏钟磬，用函钟宫的调式歌唱，跳《大夏》舞，以祭祀山川；用夷则宫的调式演奏钟磬，用小吕宫的调式歌唱，跳《大灌》舞，以祭祀姜嫖；用无射宫的调式演奏钟磬，用夹钟宫的调式歌唱，跳《大武》舞，以祭祀先王、先公。
English: Play the gongfu in the tune of the Yellow Bell Palace, sing in the tune of the Great Lu Palace, dance the "Cloud Gate" dance to worship the gods; play the gongfu in the tune of the Great Lu Palace, sing in the tune of the Ying Bell Palace, dance the "Salty Pond" dance to worship the gods of the earth; play the gongfu in the tune of the Guchang Palace, sing in the tune of the South Lu Palace, dance the "Great Gong" dance to worship the famous mountains and rivers of the four directions; play the gongfu in the tune of the Shubin Palace, sing in the tune of the Hako Bell Palace, dance

古文：凡六乐者，文之以五声，播之以八音。
现代文：所有六种调式的舞乐，都要用五声、八音相配合。
English: All six types of dance music must be accompanied by a five-part or eight-part chorus.

古文：凡六乐者，一变而致羽物及川泽之示，再变而致赢物及山林之示，三变而致鳞物及丘陵之示，四变而致毛物及坟衍之示，五变而致介物及土示，六变而致象物及天神。
现代文：六种舞乐，演奏一遍而招致有羽毛的动物，以及川泽之神；演奏两遍而招致毛短浅的动物，以及山林之神；演奏三遍而招致有鳞甲的动物，以及丘陵之神；演奏四遍而招致毛细密的动物，以及坟衍之神；演奏五遍而招致有甲壳的动物，以及土神；演奏六遍而招致龙凤龟麟，以及天神。
English: Six kinds of dance music, play once and invite feathered animals, and the god of Kawazawa; play twice and invite short-haired animals, and the god of the mountain forest; play three times and invite scaly animals, and the god of the hills; play four times and invite hairy animals, and the god of the grave; play five times and invite crusted animals, and the earth god; play six times and invite the dragon, the phoenix, the turtle, and the sky god.

古文：凡乐，圜钟为宫，黄钟为角，大蔟为征，姑洗为羽，雷鼓、雷鼗，孤竹之管；云和之琴瑟，云门之舞。冬日至，於地上之圜丘奏之，若乐六变，则天神皆降，可得而礼矣。
现代文：凡舞乐，用圜钟律定宫音的音高，用黄钟律定角音的音高，用大蔟律定徵音的音高，用姑洗律定羽音的音高，敲响雷鼓、雷鼗，吹奏孤竹做的管，弹奏云和山的木材做的琴瑟，表演《云门》舞，冬至那天，在地上的圜丘上进行演奏，如果舞乐演奏六遍，天神就都会下降，就可以向神进献玉继而进行祭祀了。
English: In all kinds of dance music, the pitch of the palace tone is determined by the cymbal rhythm, the pitch of the horn tone is determined by the yellow bell rhythm, the pitch of the call tone is determined by the great cymbal rhythm, and the pitch of the feather tone is determined by the cymbal rhythm. The thunder drum and thunder cymbal are sounded, the pipe made of lone bamboo is played, the cloud and mountain wood are played, and the "Cloud Gate" dance is performed. On the day of the winter solstice, the performance is performed on the mound on the ground. If the dance music is played six times, the gods will descend, and it is possible

古文：凡乐，函钟为宫，大蔟为角，姑洗为征，南吕为羽，灵鼓、灵鼗，孙竹之管，空桑之琴瑟，咸池之舞。夏日至，於泽中之方丘奏之，若乐八变，则地示皆出，可得而礼矣。
现代文：凡舞乐，用函钟律定宫音的音高，用大蔟律定角音的音高，用姑洗律定徵音的音高，用南宫律定羽音的音高，敲响灵鼓、灵鼗，吹奏孙竹做的管，弹奏空桑山的木材做的琴瑟，表演《咸池》舞，夏至那天，在泽中的方丘上进行演奏，如果舞乐演奏八遍，地神就都会出来，可以向神进献玉，继而进行祭祀了。
English: All dance music uses the Hanzhong rhythms to determine the pitch of the palace sound, the Daxing rhythms to determine the pitch of the horns, the Guzai rhythms to determine the pitch of the call, and the Nangu rhythms to determine the pitch of the feathers. They play the spiritual drums and coffin, play the pipe made by Sun Zhu, play the lyre made of wood from the empty Mulberry Mountain, and perform the "Salt Pond" dance. On the day of the summer solstice, they perform on the square hill in Zezhong. If the dance music is played eight times, the earth gods will come out, and they

古文：凡乐，黄钟为宫，大吕为角，大蔟为征，应钟为羽，路鼓、路鼗，阴竹之管，龙门之琴瑟，九德之歌，九之舞，於宗庙之中奏之，若乐九变，则人鬼可得而礼矣。
现代文：凡舞乐，用黄钟律定宫音的音高，用大吕律定角音的音高，用大蔟律定徵音的音高，用应钟律定羽音的音高，敲响路鼓、路鼗，吹奏阴竹做的管，弹奏龙门山的木材做的琴瑟，唱《九德》歌，表演《大韶》舞，在宗庙中进行演奏，如果舞乐演奏九遍，就可以向祖先的神灵进献玉，继而进行祭祀了。
English: In all kinds of dance music, the yellow bell is used to set the pitch of the palace tone, the big bell is used to set the pitch of the horn tone, the big gong is used to set the pitch of the call tone, the bell is used to set the pitch of the feather tone, the road drum and the road gong are played, the pipe made of the dark bamboo is played, the lute made of the wood of the Longmen Mountain is played, the "Jude" song is sung, the "Big Gong" dance is performed, and the performance is carried out in the ancestral temple. If the dance music is played nine times, it is possible to donate beads to the

古文：凡乐事，大祭祀，宿县，遂従声展之。
现代文：凡演奏音乐，如果是大祭祀，就在祭祀前夕悬挂乐器，将乐器依次陈列并试奏检查。
English: Where music is played, if it is a great sacrifice, the musical instruments should be hung up on the eve of the sacrifice, and the musical instruments should be displayed in sequence and checked by playing.

古文：王出入，则令奏王夏；尸出入，则令奏肆夏；牲出入，则令奏昭夏，帅国子而舞，大飨不入牲。
现代文：祭祀时王出入就令演奏《王夏》；尸出入就令演奏《肆夏》；牲出入就令演奏《昭夏》。率领国子表演舞蹈。
English: At the time of sacrifice, the king enters and performs "King Xia"; the corpse enters and performs "Boasting Summer"; and the animal enters and performs "Shining Summer." He leads the Kuniko to perform the dance.

古文：其他，皆如祭祀。
现代文：招待宾客举行大飨礼不牵牲入庙，其他都同祭祀时一样。
English: Guests are not allowed to bring their animals into the temple when holding the grand memorial service, and everything else is the same as during a religious service.

古文：大射，王出入，令奏王夏；及射，令奏驺虞，诏诸侯以弓矢舞。
现代文：举行大射礼，王出入就令演奏《王夏》，到王射箭的时候，就令演奏《驺虞》；告教诸侯拿着弓矢舞蹈。
English: When the grand archery ceremony was held, "King Xia" was played when the king entered and exited the palace. When the king went to shoot arrows, "Shuyu" was played. The princes danced with their bows and arrows.

古文：王大食，三宥，皆令奏钟鼓。
现代文：王大食时，要三次奏乐以劝王饱食，都命令演奏钟鼓。
English: When the king was gluttonous, it was necessary to play music three times to persuade the king to eat his fill, and they all ordered the bell and drum to be played.

古文：王师大献，则令奏恺乐。
现代文：王出征凯旋向宗庙祖先大献战功，就令演奏凯乐。
English: On his return from the expedition, Wang made a great tribute to the ancestors of the ancestral temple, and ordered the performance of the imperial anthem.

古文：凡日月食、四镇五岳崩、大傀异灾、诸侯薨，令去乐。
现代文：凡出现日食、月食，四镇、五岳崩裂，以及大怪异的灾害，或有诸侯死，就命令彻去舞乐。
English: Whenever there is a solar eclipse, a lunar eclipse, the collapse of the four towns and five mountains, as well as great and strange disasters, or the death of lords, they order to dance.

古文：大丧，莅廞乐器。及葬，藏乐器，亦如之。
现代文：大瘟疫、大饥馑、大水灾或火灾、大臣死，凡遇国家的大忧患，就命令解下悬挂的乐器。遇有大丧，要亲临督察陈放随葬的乐器。
English: In the event of a great plague, great famine, great flood or fire, or the death of a minister, in the event of a great sorrow of the country, the hanging musical instruments should be ordered to be removed. In the event of a great mourning, the inspector should come in person to display and play the musical instruments with the funeral.

古文：乐师掌国学之政，以教国子小舞。
现代文：乐师掌管有关小学的政令，而教国子小舞。
English: The musician is in charge of the decree concerning primary schools, and teaches Kuniko small dances.

古文：凡舞，有帗舞，有羽舞，有皇舞，有旄舞，有干舞，有人舞。
现代文：凡小舞，有帗舞，有羽舞，有皇舞，有旄舞，有干舞，有人舞。
English: In all the small dances, there is a gong dance, there is a feather dance, there is a royal dance, there is a gong dance, there is a dry dance, there is a folk dance.

古文：教乐仪，行以肆夏，趋以采荠，车亦如之。
现代文：教王依音乐节奏行礼仪：行走的时候依《肆夏》的节奏，小步快走的时候依《采荠》的节奏，乘车的时候也这样。
English: The priests performed the rites according to the rhythm of the music: when walking, according to the rhythm of "Wu Xia," when walking fast, according to the rhythm of "Cherry Picking," and when riding in a car.

古文：环拜以钟鼓为节。
现代文：转身行拜礼就依钟鼓的节奏。
English: When we turn around to pray, we do so to the rhythm of the bell and drum.

古文：凡射，王以驺虞为节，诸侯以狸首为节，大夫以采苹为节，士以采蘩为节。
现代文：凡举行射礼，王射箭的时候演奏《驺虞》为节奏，诸侯射箭的时候演奏《狸首》为节奏，大夫射箭的时候演奏《采蒴》为节奏，士射箭的时候演奏《采蘩》为节奏。
English: Whenever a shooting ceremony is held, when the king shoots arrows, the rhythm is to play "Shuyu," when the princes shoot arrows, the rhythm is to play "Bullhead," when the doctor shoots arrows, the rhythm is to play "Tsechuan," and when the scholar shoots arrows, the rhythm is to play "Tsechuan."

古文：凡乐，掌其序事，治其乐政。
现代文：凡演奏音乐掌管有关乐器陈列和演奏先后次序的事，治理有关音乐的事务。
English: Where music is performed, it shall be in charge of the display of musical instruments, the order of performance, and the administration of music-related affairs.

古文：凡国之小事用乐者，令奏钟鼓。
现代文：凡国家举行小祭祀需用乐的，就命令演奏钟鼓。
English: Whenever a country needs music for a small religious service, the bell and drum are ordered to be played.

古文：凡乐成，则告备，诏来瞽皋舞。及彻，帅学士而歌彻，令相。飨食诸侯，序其乐事，令奏钟鼓，令相，如祭之仪。
现代文：用飨礼或食礼招待诸侯的时候，安排有关乐器陈列和演奏先后次序的事，命令演奏钟鼓，命令视嘹搀扶瞽者，都如同祭祀的礼仪。
English: When the princes were invited to a banquet or a meal, the display of musical instruments and the order in which they were to be played were arranged, the bells and drums were ordered to be played, and the attendants were ordered to look at the cymbals. All of this was like the ritual of a religious service.

古文：燕射，帅射夫以弓矢舞，乐出入，令奏钟鼓。
现代文：举行燕射时，率领射夫手持弓矢而舞。乐人出入的时候，就命令演奏钟鼓。
English: When the Yansha is held, the archer dances with a bow and arrow in his hand. When the musicians enter and leave, he orders the bell and drum to be played.

古文：凡军大献，教恺歌，遂倡之。
现代文：凡征伐而向祖庙大献战功，事前教就担任领唱。
English: For those who have made a great contribution to the ancestral temple through conquest, the pre-service teacher will serve as the lead singer.

古文：凡丧，陈乐器，则帅乐官。
现代文：凡王家的丧事，陈设随葬的乐器时，就率领乐官前往陈设。
English: At the funerals of the royal family, when the musical instruments accompanying the funeral were set up, they led the musicians to the stage.

古文：及序哭，亦如之。
现代文：到随葬乐器填入墓穴排列哭位而哭的时候，也率领乐官而哭。
English: When the mourners wept as the funeral instruments were filled into the grave and the wailing places were arranged, the musicians also led the mourners in weeping.

古文：凡乐官，掌其政令，听其治讼。
现代文：掌管所有乐官的事务和戒令，听断他们的请求和争讼。
English: He shall have power over the business and commands of all officers, and shall hear all their petitions and disputes.

古文：大胥掌学士之版，以待致诸子。
现代文：大胥掌管学士的名册，以待有事时召集他们。
English: The Daesang is in charge of the roster of bachelors and can call them up in case of emergency.

古文：春入学舍采，合舞；秋颁学，合声。
现代文：学士春季入学，用菜祭先师教他们舞蹈，使他们动作整齐而又符合音乐节奏。
English: Bachelors enter the school in the spring, and they are taught to dance by a dance master, so that their movements are neat and in line with the rhythm of the music.

古文：以六乐之会正舞位，以序出入舞者。比乐官，展乐器。
现代文：秋季颁布他们的学习成绩，并使他们的歌声整齐而符合音乐节奏。用六代的音乐与舞蹈相配合并端正舞者的位置，依年龄长幼排列舞者出入的次序。考核乐官，检查乐器。
English: In the autumn, their academic results are announced, and their singing is adjusted to the rhythm of the music. Six generations of music and dance are used to match and adjust the position of the dancers, and the dancers are arranged in order of age. Musicians are assessed, and musical instruments are checked.

古文：凡祭祀之用乐者，以鼓征学士，序宫中之事。
现代文：凡祭祀需要用乐的，就击鼓召集学士。依次安排学宫中有关教授舞乐的事。
English: Whenever a ritual requires the use of music, the drummers call for the bachelors. Arrangements are then made for the teaching of dance music in the palace.

古文：小胥掌学士之征令而比之。觵其不敬者，巡舞列而挞其怠慢者。
现代文：小胥负责协助大胥发布征召学士的命令而考核人数，迟到的就罚他饮酒；巡视舞蹈的队列，而挞罚怠慢的人。
English: Xiao Yao is responsible for assisting Dai Yao to issue the order to recruit bachelors and assess the number of cadres. If he is late, he will be punished by drinking alcohol; patrol the dance queue, and punish those who are negligent.

古文：正乐县之位，王宫县，诸侯轩县，卿大夫判县，士特县。
现代文：端正所悬挂的乐器的位置。王的乐器悬挂四面，诸侯悬挂三面，卿大夫悬挂两面，士悬挂一面。
English: The king's instruments hang on four sides, the lords' instruments hang on three sides, the doctors' instruments hang on two sides, and the judges' instruments hang on one side.

古文：辨其声，凡县钟磬，半为堵，全为肆。
现代文：辨别所悬挂乐器的声音是否符合音律。凡悬挂钟磬，仅悬挂十六枚钟或十六枚磬叫做堵，钟磬全都悬挂叫做肆。
English: It is used to distinguish whether the sound of the suspended musical instrument is in accordance with the melody. When a belfry is suspended, only sixteen bells or sixteen cymbals are suspended, and it is called a block. When all the bells are suspended, it is called a bell tower.

古文：大师掌六律、六同以合阴阳之声。
现代文：大师掌理六律、六同，以使阴声与阳声相配合。
English: The master is in charge of the six laws and the six unities, so that the yin and yang are compatible.

古文：阳声：黄钟、大簇、姑洗、蕤宾、夷则、无射。阴声：大吕、应钟、南吕、函钟、小吕、夹钟。
现代文：阳声是指：黄钟、大蔟、姑洗、蕤宾、夷则、无射这六律；阴声是指：大吕、应钟、南吕、函钟、小吕、夹钟这六同。
English: The yang tone refers to the following six principles: Huang Zhong, Daxing, Gu Zi, Zhibing, Yizhe, and Muxing; the yin tone refers to the following six principles: Da Lv, Ying Zhong, Nan Lv, Huan Zhong, Xiao Lv, and Zhi Zhong.

古文：皆文之以五声：宫、商、角、徵、羽；皆播之以八音：金、石、土、革、丝、木、匏、竹。
现代文：阳声和阴声都用宫、商、角、徵、羽五声和金、石、土、革、丝、木、匏、竹八音相配合。
English: Both the yang and yin voices use the five sounds of palace, merchant, horn, feather and feather to match the eight sounds of gold, stone, earth, leather, silk, wood, bamboo and bamboo.

古文：教六诗：曰风、曰赋、曰比、曰兴、曰雅、曰颂。
现代文：教瞽蒙六种诗的表现手法：叫做风，叫做赋，叫做比，叫做兴，叫做雅，叫做颂。
English: Six kinds of poetic expression methods were taught: called wind, called fu, called bi, called xing, called ya, and called ode.

古文：以六德为之本，以六律为之音。
现代文：学诗的人要以六德作为根本，用六律来确定歌唱的音调。
English: Those who study poetry should take the six virtues as the foundation, and use the six laws to determine the tone of singing.

古文：大祭祀，帅瞽登歌，令奏击拊，下管播乐器，令奏鼓朄。
现代文：举行大祭祀，就率瞽噱登堂歌唱，敲击拊作为开始歌唱的命令。
English: When a large religious service is being held, he will lead the choir into the hall to sing, and strike the gong as a command to begin singing.

古文：大飨，亦如之。
现代文：歌毕堂下演奏管及其他乐器时，敲击悚作为开始演奏的命令。
English: This is also done when the Imperial Banquet is held to invite all the princes to come to the Imperial Court.

古文：大射，帅瞽而歌射节。
现代文：举行大飨礼招待来朝诸侯时也这样做。
English: This is also done when the Imperial Banquet is held to invite all the princes to come to the Imperial Court.

古文：大师，执同律以听军声而诏吉凶。
现代文：举行大射礼时，率领瞽噱歌唱以作为射箭的节奏。大征伐时，手持铜制的律管以辨别军将发出的呼声，而告诉王吉凶。
English: During the grand archery ceremony, he led the singing of the cymbals as the rhythm of the archery. During the great expedition, he held a copper bellows to distinguish the shouts of the generals, and told the king good luck.

古文：大丧，帅瞽而廞作谥。凡国之瞽蒙正焉。
现代文：有大丧时，率领瞽蒙陈设随葬的乐器；将把棺柩装载到柩车上的时候，为死者作谥号。凡王国的瞽蒙都听从大师的政教。
English: When there is a great funeral, he leads the Yimeng to set up the musical instruments to accompany the funeral; when the coffin is loaded onto the hearse, he will make the funeral call for the deceased. All the Yimeng in the kingdom obey the master's politics and religion.

古文：小师掌教鼓鼗、柷、敔、埙、箫、管、弦、歌。
现代文：小师掌管教授演奏鼓、鼗、枧、敌、埙、箫、管、琴瑟和歌唱。
English: The little master is in charge of teaching the playing of drums, gongs, cymbals, cymbals, gongs, cymbals, trumpets, harpsichords and singing.

古文：大祭祀，登歌击拊，下管击应鼓，彻歌。
现代文：举行大祭祀，瞽蒙登堂歌唱的时候，就敲击拊；歌毕堂下演奏管笙等乐器时，就敲击应鼓；彻祭器的时候，就歌唱。
English: When a large religious service is held, when the priest enters the hall to sing, he strikes the gong; when he leaves the hall to play a musical instrument such as the gong, he strikes the tambourine; and when he is performing the ritual, he sings.

古文：大飨，亦如之。
现代文：举行大飨礼招待来朝诸侯时也这样做。
English: This is also done when the Imperial Banquet is held to invite all the princes to come to the Imperial Court.

古文：大丧，与廞。
现代文：有大丧的时候，参与陈放随葬的乐器。
English: When there is a great mourning, participate in the display of musical instruments that accompany the funeral.

古文：凡小祭祀、小乐事，鼓朄，掌六乐声音之节。
现代文：凡举行小祭祀而小规模地演奏音乐，就敲击朄以为管笙等的演奏发令。掌管六代舞乐声音的节奏及其相互应和
English: Whenever there is a small-scale performance of music at a small-scale ritual, the gong is struck to give orders for the performance of the gong and so on.

