古文：起旃蒙作噩，尽柔兆阉茂，凡二年。
现代文：起，止，一共两年。晋孝武帝太元十年
English: It lasted for a total of two years. Emperor Jinxiao Wu was enthroned in the tenth year of the Yuan Dynasty.

古文：烈宗孝武皇帝中之上太元十年
现代文：春季正月，前秦王苻坚祭祀太庙，宴请群臣。
English: In the first month of spring, the former Qin King He Jian made a sacrifice at the Great Temple and held a banquet for a group of ministers.

古文：春，正月，秦王坚朝飨群臣，时长安饥，人相食，诸将归，吐肉以饲妻子。
现代文：当时长安正值饥荒，人相残食，众将领回家以后，都把吃进去的肉吐出来再让妻子儿女们吃。
English: At that time, Chang'an was in the midst of a famine, and people were eating each other's leftovers. After the generals were led home, they all spat out the meat they had eaten and then let their wives and children eat it.

古文：慕容冲即皇帝位于阿房，改元更始。
现代文：慕容冲在阿房城即皇帝位，改年号为更始。
English: Murongchong was crowned emperor in Afang City, and the year was changed to the new year.

古文：冲有自得之志，赏罚任情。
现代文：慕容冲踌躇满志，任意赏罚。
English: Murongchong is full of ambition and will accept any reward or punishment.

古文：慕容盛年十三，谓慕容柔曰： 夫十人之长，亦须才过九人，然后得安。
现代文：慕容盛年方十三，对慕容柔说： 就是在十人中位居首位，也必须是才能超过其他九人，然后才能安稳。
English: Murong Sheng Fang, age thirteen, said to Murong Rou: Even if you are the first among ten people, you must be able to surpass the other nine people before you can be stable.

古文：今中山王才逮人，功未有成，而骄汰已甚，殆难济乎！ 
现代文：如今中山王慕容冲才能不及别人，没有建立战功，而骄奢傲慢已经十分严重，恐怕难以成功啊！ 
English: Nowadays, Zhongshan King Murongchong is not as talented as others, has not established military exploits, and his arrogance is already very serious, I am afraid it will be difficult to succeed!

古文：后秦王苌留诸将攻新平，自引兵击安定，擒秦安西将军勃海公珍，岭北诸城悉降之。
现代文：后秦王姚苌留下众将领攻打新平，自己带领军队去攻打安定，擒获了前秦安西将军勃海公苻珍，岭北各城全都投降了姚苌。
English: Later, Qin King Yao Jie left the generals to attack Xinping, and led the army to attack and stabilize himself. He captured the former Qin Anxi general Bo Hai Gong Yuzhen, and all the cities in Lingbei surrendered to Yao Jie.

古文：甲寅，秦王坚与西燕主冲战于仇班渠，大破之。
现代文：甲寅，前秦王苻坚与西燕国主慕容冲在仇班渠交战，大败慕容冲。
English: A Yin, the former Qin King Yu Jian and the West Yan sovereign Mu Rongchong fought in a duel, with Mu Rongchong suffering a great defeat.

古文：乙卯，战于雀桑，又破之。
现代文：乙卯，在雀桑交战，又打败了他。
English: Etu, who fought at Chosan, defeated him again.

古文：甲子，战于白渠，秦兵大败。
现代文：甲子，在白渠交战，前秦的军队大败。
English: The armies of the former Qin Dynasty suffered a crushing defeat at the Battle of Baiqiu.

古文：西燕兵围秦王坚，殿中将军邓迈等力战却之，坚乃得免。
现代文：西燕的军队包围了前秦王苻坚，殿中将军邓迈奋力阻击，苻坚才得以幸免。
English: Xiyan's army encircled the former Qin King He Jian, and the general of the palace, Deng Mai, fought hard to prevent it, so that He Jian was spared.

古文：壬申，冲遣尚书令高盖夜袭长安，入其南城，左将军窦冲、前禁将军李辩等击破之，斩首八百级，分其尸而食之。
现代文：壬申，慕容冲派尚书令高盖夜袭长安，进入了南城，前秦左将军窦冲、前禁将军李辩等打败了他们，斩首八百多人，士兵们把尸体分开吃掉。
English: Jinshin, Murongchong sent Shang Shuling Gao Gai to attack Chang'an at night and entered Nancheng. Former Qin Zuo general Dou Chong and former forbidden general Li Yan defeated them, beheaded more than 800 people, and the soldiers ate the corpses separately.

古文：乙亥，高盖引兵攻渭北诸垒，太子宏与战于成贰壁，大破之，斩首三万。
现代文：乙亥，高盖带领军队攻打渭北各营垒，太子苻宏与他在成贰壁交战，大败高盖，斩首三万人。
English: In the Year of the Fire Rooster, Gao Gai led the army to attack the camps in the north of Yunnan. Prince Gong Hong and Gao Gai fought against each other at Chengyuan Wall. Gao Gai was defeated and 30,000 people were beheaded.

古文：燕带方王佐与宁朔将军平规共攻蓟，王永兵屡败。
现代文：前燕带方王慕容佐与宁朔将军平规一起攻打蓟城，王永的军队屡战屡败。
English: Wang Murong Zuo and Ningshuo General Ping Gu attacked Lucheng together, and Wang Yong's army was repeatedly defeated.

古文：二月，永使宋敞烧和龙及蓟城宫室，帅众三万奔壶关；佐等入蓟。
现代文：二月，王永让宋敞焚烧了和龙以及蓟城的宫室，率领三万兵众逃奔壶关。慕容佐等进入蓟城。
English: In February, Wang Yong ordered Song Chang to burn the palace of He Long and Shicheng, and led 30,000 soldiers to flee to Kuguan. Murong So and others entered Shicheng.

古文：慕容农引兵会慕容麟于中山，与共攻翟真。
现代文：慕容农带领军队与慕容麟在中山会合，与他共同攻打翟真。
English: Murong Nong led the army to meet with Murong Lin in Zhongshan, and together they attacked Shizhen.

古文：麟、农先帅数千骑至承营，观察形势。
现代文：慕容麟？慕容农先率领数千骑兵到了承营，察看地势。
English: Murong Lin? Murong Nongxian led thousands of cavalry to the camp to inspect the situation.

古文：翟真望见，陈兵而出。
现代文：翟真远远望见，部署军队出动。
English: In the distance, the deployment of the army begins.

古文：诸将欲退，农曰： 丁零非不劲勇，而翟真懦弱，今简精锐，望真所在而冲之，真走，众必散矣，乃邀门而蹙之，可尽杀也。 
现代文：众将领想要撤退，慕容农说： 丁零人不是不强劲勇猛，而翟真却很懦弱，现在应该选择精锐士兵，看准翟真所在的位置发起冲击，翟真一逃跑，其兵众必然溃散，就可以堵截城门围歼他们，可以把他们全部消灭。 
English: When the generals wanted to retreat, Murong Nong said, "Ting Zi's men are not weak and brave, but Yu Zhen is very cowardly. Now we should choose elite soldiers, look for Yu Zhen's location to launch an attack. Once Yu Zhen escapes, his soldiers will inevitably disperse. We can block the city gate, surround them, and annihilate them all.

古文：使骁骑将军慕容国帅百馀骑冲之，真走，其众争门，自相蹈藉，死者太半；遂拔承营外郭。
现代文：于是就派骁骑将军慕容国率领一百多名骑兵冲击翟真，翟真逃跑，其兵众夺门溃逃，自相践踏，死者过半，于是就攻下了承营的外城。
English: So he sent his cavalry general, Murong Guo, to lead more than a hundred cavalrymen to attack Shizhen, Shizhen fled, his soldiers took the gate and fled, trampled each other, and more than half of them died, so he captured the outer city of the camp.

古文：癸未，秦王坚与西燕主冲战于城西，大破之，追奔至阿城。
现代文：癸未，前秦王苻坚与西燕国主慕容冲在长安城西交战，大败慕容冲，一直追击到阿城。
English: Not long ago, the former Qin King Yu Jian fought with the West Yan sovereign Murong Chong in the west of Chang'an City, defeated Murong Chong, and pursued him all the way to A City.

古文：诸将请乘胜入城，坚恐为冲所掩，引兵还。
现代文：众将领请求乘胜入城，苻坚担心被慕容冲包围，带领军队返回。
English: The generals requested to take advantage of the victory to enter the city, and Yu Jian, fearing that he would be surrounded by Murongchong, led the army back.

古文：乙酉，秦益州刺史王广以蜀人江阳太守李丕为益州刺史，守成都。
现代文：乙酉，前秦益州刺史王广让蜀人江阳太守李丕出任益州刺史，戍守成都。
English: Acetylene, the former Qin ruler of Yizhou, Wang Guang, appointed the Shu people's Jiangyang Taishou Li Jie as the ruler of Yizhou and the ruler of Chengdu.

古文：己丑，广帅所部奔还陇西，依其兄秦州刺史统，蜀人随之者三万馀人。
现代文：己丑，王广率领部众逃回陇西，跟随他的蜀人有三万多。刘牢之抵达枋头。
English: Disgraced, Wang Guang led his followers to flee back to Shaanxi, followed by more than 30,000 Shu people. Liu Diao's arrival in Shantou.

古文：刘牢之至枋头。杨膺、姜让谋泄，长乐公丕收杀之。
现代文：杨膺、姜让的阴谋泄露，长乐公苻丕拘捕并斩杀了他们。
English: When the plot of Yang Hui and Jiang Zhang was leaked, Changle Gongjun arrested and killed them.

古文：牢之闻之，盘桓不进。
现代文：刘牢之听说以后，便徘徊不进。
English: After hearing about Liu Diao, he lingered and did not advance.

古文：秦平原悼公晖数为西燕主冲所败，秦王坚让之曰： 汝，吾之才子也，拥大众与白虏小儿战，而屡败，何用生为！ 
现代文：前秦平原悼公苻晖多次被西燕国主慕容冲打败，前秦王苻坚责备他说： 你是我有才能的儿子，带领众多的兵众与白虏的稚嫩小孩子作战，反而屡屡失败，活着还有什么用呢！ 
English: Former Qin plain mourner Gongjun repeatedly defeated by Xiyan sovereign Mu Rongchong, former Qin king Shujian scolded him: "You are my talented son, leading a large number of soldiers to fight with Bai Rui's young children, but you have repeatedly failed. What is the use of being alive?"

古文：三月，晖愤恚自杀。
现代文：三月，苻晖愤恨自杀。
English: In March, she committed suicide out of resentment.

古文：前禁将军李辩、都水使者陇西彭和正恐长安不守，召集西州人屯于韭园；坚召之，不至。
现代文：前禁将军李辩、都水使者陇西人彭和正担心长安失守，召集西方各州人驻扎在韭园。苻坚征召他们，他们却不到。
English: The former forbidden general Li Yan and the western Shaanxi emissary of the capital water, Peng He, were worried about losing the defense of Chang'an, and summoned people from all the western states to be stationed in Linyuan. Yan Jian conscripted them, but they did not come.

古文：西燕主冲攻秦高阳愍公方于骊山，杀之，执秦尚书韦钟，以其子谦为冯翊太守，使招集三辅之民。
现代文：西燕国主慕容冲在骊山攻打前秦高阳愍公苻方，杀掉了他，抓获了前秦左将军苟池、右将军俱石子与西燕主冲战于骊山，兵败。
English: Mu Rongchong, the lord of the State of West Yan, attacked the former Qin Gaoyang, Shigong, in Lushan, killed him, captured the former Qin left general Guo Chi, the right general Gu Shizi and the lord of West Yan in Lushan, and was defeated.

古文：冯诩垒主邵安民等责谦曰： 君雍州望族，今乃从贼，与之为不忠不义，何面目以行于世乎？ 
现代文：西燕将军慕容永斩苟池，俱石子奔邺。永，弟运之孙；石子，难之弟也。秦王坚遣领军将军杨定击冲，大破之，虏鲜卑万余人而还，悉坑之。定，佛奴之孙也。
English: Murong Yong, the general of the Western Yan Dynasty, is the son of the younger brother Yun; Shi Zi, the younger brother of Nan; Yang Ding, the general of the Qin Dynasty, is the son of the Buddha; Yang Ding, the general of the Qin Dynasty, is the son of the Buddha.

古文：谦以告钟，钟自杀，谦来奔。秦左将军苟池、右将军俱石子与西燕主冲战于骊山，兵败。西燕将军慕容永斩苟池，俱石子奔鄴。永，廆弟运之孙；石子，难之弟也。
现代文：前秦左将军苟池、右将军俱石子与西燕国主慕容冲在骊山交战，战败。西燕将军慕容永斩杀了苟池，俱石子逃奔邺城。慕容永是慕容弟弟慕容运的孙子；俱石子是俱难的弟弟。
English: The former Qin Left General Gouchi and the Right General Gou Shi Zi fought against the Western Yan sovereign Murong Chong in Shaoshan and were defeated. The Western Yan General Murong Yong killed Gouchi, and Gou Shi Zi fled to Lucheng. Murong Yong was the grandson of Murong's brother Murong Yun; Gou Shi Zi was the younger brother of Gou Nan.

古文：秦王坚遣领军将军杨定击冲，大破之，虏鲜卑万馀人而还，悉坑之。
现代文：前秦王苻坚派领军将军杨定攻打慕容冲，大败慕容冲，俘虏了一万多鲜卑人后返回，把他们全都活埋了。
English: The former Qin King Yu Jian sent the leading general Yang Ding to attack Murongchong, defeated Murongchong, captured more than ten thousand Xianbei, and then returned and buried them all alive.

古文：定，佛奴之孙，坚之婿也。荥阳人郑燮以郡来降。
现代文：杨定是杨佛奴的孙子。荥阳人郑燮举郡向东晋投降。
English: Yang Ding is the grandson of Yang Fonu. Zheng Yizhu County, a native of Fenyang, surrendered to the East Jin Dynasty.

古文：燕王垂攻鄴，久不下，将北诣冀州，乃命抚军大将军麟屯信都，乐浪王温屯中山，召骠骑大将军农还鄴；于是远近闻之，以燕为不振，颇怀去就。
现代文：后燕王慕容垂攻打邺城，久攻不下，准备向北到冀州去，就命令抚军大将军慕容麟驻扎在信都，乐浪王慕容温驻扎在中山，征召骠骑大将军慕容农返回邺城。远近的人们听说以后，认为后燕威势不振，都在考虑归附还是离去的问题。
English: Houyan King Murong attacked and besieged Shicheng for a long time, but was unable to conquer it for a long time, and was preparing to go north to Jizhou. He ordered the general of the Fuzhou army, Muronglin, to be stationed in Xindu, and the king of Le Lang, Murongwen, to be stationed in Zhongshan, and summoned the cavalry general, Murong Nong, to return to Shicheng. After hearing this, people near and far thought that Houyan's power was weak, and they were all considering the question of whether to join or leave.

古文：农至高邑，遣从事中郎眭邃近出，违期不还。
现代文：慕容农抵达高邑，派从事中郎眭邃到附近外出，过了期限还没有返回。
English: Murong farmer arrived in Gaoyu, sent to go out to the neighborhood to engage in middlemen, and has not returned after the deadline.

古文：长史张攀言于农曰： 邃目下参佐，敢欺罔不还，请回军计之。 
现代文：长史张攀向慕容农进言说： 眭邃是您身边的部下，胆敢欺骗蒙蔽您，逾期不归，请求回军讨伐他。 
English: Changshi Zhang Pang gave advice to Murong Nong: "He is your subordinate. He dares to deceive and blind you. He does not return on time and asks you to go back to the army to fight him.

古文：农不应，敕备假版，以邃为高阳太守，参佐家在赵北者，悉假署遣归。
现代文：慕容农没有答应，敕令准备借国王名义下达的诏书，任命眭邃为高阳太守，僚属部下中凡是家在赵地以北的人，全都派他们回去暂时代理官职，共选拔补充了太守三人，长史二十多人。
English: Murong Nong did not agree, and the imperial edict was prepared to issue an edict in the name of the king, appointing Zou as the governor of Gaoyang. All of his colleagues and subordinates who were from north of Zhao Di were sent back to temporarily fill the position. A total of three governors were selected, with a long history of more than 20 people.

古文：凡举补太守三人，长史二十馀人，退谓攀曰： 君所见殊误，当今岂可自相鱼肉！
现代文：慕容农退下去以后对张攀说： 你的见解非常错误，当今之时，怎么能自相残杀！
English: After Murong Nong retreated, he said to Zhang Peng: Your opinion is very wrong, how can you kill each other at this time!

古文：俟吾北还，邃等自当迎于道左，君但观之。 
现代文：等我从北边返回来时，眭邃等人自然应当夹道欢迎，你只管等着瞧吧。 
English: When I come back from the north, it's only natural that the baboons and others should welcome me. You'll just have to wait and see.

古文：乐浪王温在中山，兵力甚弱，丁零四布，分据诸城。
现代文：乐浪王慕容温在中山，兵力很弱，四周则布满了丁零人，分别占据着各城邑。
English: Murongwen, the king of music and dance, was in Zhongshan. His army was very weak, and he was surrounded by tens of thousands of people, occupying each town separately.

古文：温谓诸将曰： 以吾之众，攻则不足，守则有馀。
现代文：慕容温对众将领说： 以我们的兵力，进攻则力量不足，防守则绰绰有余。
English: Murong Wen said to the generals: With our strength, the attack is insufficient, and the defense is more than enough.

古文：骠骑、抚军，首尾连兵，会须灭贼，但应聚粮厉兵以俟时耳。 
现代文：骠骑将军、抚军将军的兵力汇集起来，应当能够消灭寇贼，只是需要聚集军粮、训练军队以等待时机。 
English: The combined forces of the general of the cavalry and the general of the army should be able to eliminate the bandits, but it is necessary to gather military supplies, train the army and wait for the opportunity.

古文：于是抚旧招新，劝课农桑，民归附者相继，郡县壁垒争送军粮，仓库充溢。
现代文：于是他就安抚故旧，招纳新兵，劝勉督促农耕桑蚕，前来归附的民众络绎不绝，郡县村落争先恐后地运来军粮，仓库充实丰盈。
English: So he appeased the ancients and moderns, recruited new soldiers, exhorted and urged the cultivation of mulberry and silkworms, and the people who came to join him were incessant. Counties, counties and villages scrambled to transport military grain, and warehouses were full and abundant.

古文：翟真夜袭中山，温击破之，自是不敢复至。
现代文：翟真趁夜袭击中山，慕容温击败了他，从此翟真不敢再来了。
English: Gong Zhen attacked Zhongshan at night, Murong Wen defeated him, and since then Gong Zhen did not dare to come again.

古文：温乃遣兵一万运粮以饷垂，且营中山宫室。
现代文：慕容温于是派遣一万兵众运送粮食用以犒饷慕容垂，而且在中山营建宫室。
English: Murong Wen then dispatched ten thousand soldiers to transport grain to feed Murong Tie, and built a palace in Zhongshan.

古文：刘牢之攻燕黎阳太守刘抚于孙就栅，燕王垂留慕容农守鄴围，自引兵救之。
现代文：刘牢之在孙就栅攻打后燕黎阳太守刘抚，后燕王慕容垂留下慕容农镇守包围邺城的部队，亲自带领兵众救援刘抚。
English: Liu Dolezhi personally led the troops to rescue Liu Fuzi after Sun Rongzhu attacked Yan Liyang's father-in-law Liu Fuzi, and after Yan's father-in-law Murong left Murong's farmers to defend the troops that had surrounded Lucheng.

古文：秦长乐公丕闻之，出兵乘虚夜袭燕营，农击败之。
现代文：前秦长乐公苻丕听说以后，乘虚出兵夜袭后燕的军营，慕容农打败了他。
English: After the former Qin Emperor Changle Gongjun heard of this, he took advantage of the situation to attack Houyan's camp at night. Murong Nong defeated him.

古文：刘牢之与垂战，不胜，退屯黎阳。垂复还鄴。
现代文：刘牢之与慕容垂交战，没能获胜，退守黎阳，慕容垂又返回了邺城。
English: Liu Duozhi fought with Murong Tie, but failed to win. He retreated to Liyang, and Murong Tie returned to Lucheng.

古文：吕光以龟兹饶乐，欲留居之。
现代文：吕光因为龟兹富饶安乐，想在此居住久留。
English: Lu Guang wants to live here for a long time because of the richness and tranquility of Guizi.

古文：天竺沙门鸠摩罗什谓光曰： 此凶亡之地，不足留也。
现代文：天竺僧人鸠摩罗什对吕光说： 这里是凶亡之地，不值得久留。
English: Tianyao monk Gong Morosh said to Lü Guang: "This is a place of violent death, it is not worth staying here for a long time.

古文：将军但东归，中道自有福地可居。 
现代文：将军只要东返，半路上自会有福地可以居住。 
English: As long as the general returns to the east, he will be able to live in the middle of the road.

古文：光乃大飨将士，议进止，众皆欲还。
现代文：吕光于是就大肆宴请将士，讨论是否停留的问题，众人都想返回。
English: Luguang then invited the generals to a large banquet to discuss whether to stay or not, and everyone wanted to return.

古文：乃以驼二万馀头载外国珍宝奇玩，驱骏马万馀匹而还。
现代文：于是就用二万多头骆驼载着境外之国的珍宝奇玩，驱赶了一万多匹骏马东返。
English: So he used more than twenty thousand camels to carry the treasures of foreign countries to play, and drove more than ten thousand horses back to the east.

古文：夏，四月，刘牢之进兵至鄴。燕王垂逆战而败；遂撤围，退屯新城；乙卯，自新城北遁。
现代文：夏季，四月，刘牢之进军抵达邺城，后燕王慕容垂迎战，但失败了，于是就撤除了对邺城的包围，退到新城驻扎。乙卯，从新城向北逃走。
English: In the summer, in April, Liu Diao's march arrived in Fucheng, and Houyan Wang Murongdiao met the battle, but failed, so he lifted the siege of Fucheng and retreated to Xincheng to camp. Yi Wu fled from Xincheng to the north.

古文：牢之不告秦长乐公丕，即引兵追之。
现代文：刘牢之没有向前秦长乐公苻丕报告，就带领军队追击。
English: Liu Dolezhi did not report to the former Qin Changle, he led the army to pursue.

古文：丕闻之，发兵继进。
现代文：苻丕听说以后，也紧跟着出兵追击。
English: After hearing about it, Zou also followed suit by sending troops to pursue it.

古文：庚申，牢之追及垂于董唐渊。
现代文：庚申，刘牢之在董唐渊追上了慕容垂。
English: According to Goshun, Liu Dolezhi caught up with Murong Diao in Dong Tangyuan.

古文：垂曰： 秦、晋瓦合，相待为强。一胜则俱豪，一失则俱溃，非同心也。
现代文：慕容垂说： 秦国、晋朝苟且聚合，互相依靠才显得强大，一方取胜则全都威风，一方失败则全都溃散，双方并不是同心同德。
English: Murongdeli said: The Qin and Jin dynasties are closely united and rely on each other to appear strong. On the one hand, when they win, they are all powerful; on the other hand, when they lose, they are all scattered. The two sides are not of the same mind.

古文：今两军相继，势既未合，宜急击之。 
现代文：如今双方的军队相继而来，既然兵力尚未汇合，就应该迅速猛击他们。 
English: Now the armies of both sides are coming in succession, and since the forces have not yet converged, they should be quickly pounded.

古文：牢之军疾趋二百里，至五桥泽，争燕辎重；垂邀击，大破之。斩首数千级。
现代文：刘牢之的军队急速行进了二百里，到了五桥泽，争抢后燕的轻重物资，慕容垂迎头攻击，大败他们，斩首数千人。
English: Liu Diaozhi's army quickly marched two hundred miles to Wu Qiao Ze, competing for Hou Yan's heavy and light supplies. Murong Diao attacked head-on, defeated them, and beheaded thousands of people.

古文：牢之单马走，会秦救至，得免。
现代文：刘牢之只身匹马逃跑，恰好前秦前来救助，才得以幸免。
English: Liu was the only one to escape on horseback, and it was only when Qian Qin came to his rescue that he was able to escape.

古文：燕冠军将军宜都王凤每战，奋不顾身。前后大小二百五十七战，未尝无功。
现代文：后燕冠军将军宜都王慕容凤，每逢战斗都奋不顾身，前后参与了大小二百五十七次战役，没有不建立战功的。
English: Wang Murongfeng, the champion general of the Later Yan Dynasty, devoted himself to every battle. He participated in 257 battles, large and small, and did not fail to establish his war exploits.

古文：垂戒之曰： 今大业甫济，汝当先自爱！ 
现代文：慕容垂告诫他说： 如今大业刚刚成就，你应当首先自爱！ 
English: Murong Zhui admonished him, "Now that your great cause has just been accomplished, you should first love yourself!

古文：使为车骑将军德之副，以抑其锐。
现代文：让他做车骑将军慕容德的副手以抑制他的锐气。
English: He was made the second-in-command to the charioteer General Murongde in order to curb his impetuosity.

古文：鄴中饥甚，秦长乐公丕帅众就晋谷于枋头。
现代文：邺城中的饥荒十分严重，长乐公苻丕率领兵众到枋头去求东晋的粮谷。
English: The famine in Shantou was very serious, and Changle Gongjun led the troops to Shantou to seek grain from the East Jin.

古文：刘牢之入屯鄴城，收集亡散，兵复少振；坐军败，征还。
现代文：刘牢之进入邺城，收罗逃散的士兵，兵众又稍微有所振作。
English: Liu Dangzhi entered Shicheng, collected the soldiers who had fled, and the soldiers cheered up a little.

古文：燕、秦相持经年，幽、冀大饥，人相食，邑落萧条。
现代文：刘牢之因军队失败坐罪，朝廷征召他返回。后燕、前秦相持了一年多，幽州、冀州出现了严重饥荒，人相残食，城邑村落一片萧条。
English: Liu Dolezhi committed a crime because of the failure of the army, and the court conscripted him to return. Houyan and Qianqin held each other for more than a year. There was a severe famine in Yuzhou and Jizhou, people were eating each other's leftovers, and the towns and villages were in a depression.

古文：燕之军士多饿死，燕王垂禁民养蚕，以桑椹为军粮。
现代文：后燕的士兵有很多被锇死。后燕王慕容垂禁止百姓养蚕，以桑椹作为军粮。
English: Many of Houyan's soldiers were strangled to death. Houyan's king, Murongdian, forbade the people to raise silkworms, and used mulberry stalks as military rations.

古文：垂将北趣中山，以骠骑大将军农为前驱，前所假授吏眭邃等皆来迎候，上下如初，李乃服农之智略。
现代文：慕容垂准备北赴中山，以骠骑大将军慕容农作为前锋，以前暂时授职的官吏眭邃等人全都前来迎候，上上下下和当初一样，张攀于是对慕容农的远见卓识表示折服。
English: Murongtai was preparing to go north to Zhongshan, with the cavalry general Murongnong as the vanguard. All the officials and others who had been temporarily assigned to the post came to greet him, up and down as in the beginning. Zhang Peng then expressed his appreciation for Murongnong's foresight.

古文：会稽王道子好专权，复为奸谄者所构扇，与太保安有隙。
现代文：会稽王司马道子喜好专权，又被奸邪谄媚者挑拨煽动，与太保谢安有了隔阂。
English: Wang Sima Daozi, the inspector of the imperial court, favored autocracy, and was instigated and instigated by the adulterer and sycophant. He had a rift with the grand tutor Xie An.

古文：安欲避之，会秦王坚来求救，安乃请自将救之。
现代文：谢安想躲避他，恰好前秦王苻坚前来求救，谢安就请求亲自率兵去救援苻坚。
English: Xie An wanted to avoid him, just as the former Qin King Yu Jian came to the rescue, Xie An asked to personally lead the troops to rescue Yu Jian.

古文：壬戌，出镇广陵之步丘，筑垒曰新城而居之。
现代文：壬戌，离开朝廷去镇守广陵的步丘，建筑了叫做新城的营垒，居住在这里。
English: Rinchen, who left the imperial court to guard Guangling's hill, built a camp called Xincheng and lived here.

古文：蜀郡太守任权攻拔成都，斩秦益州刺史李丕，复取益州。
现代文：蜀郡太守任权攻下了成都，斩杀了前秦益州刺史李丕，又夺取了益州。
English: Shu County's Tai Shou Renquan conquered Chengdu, killed the former Qin Yizhou assassin Li Yan, and captured Yizhou.

古文：新平粮竭矢尽，外救不至。
现代文：新平城内箭尽粮绝，外边救援的部队没有到达。
English: The arrows in Xinping City ran out of food, and the outside rescue forces did not arrive.

古文：后秦王苌使人谓苟辅曰： 吾方以义取天下，岂仇忠臣邪！
现代文：后秦王姚苌派人对苟辅说： 我正在以道义夺取天下，怎么能仇恨忠臣呢！
English: Later, Qin King Yao Tong sent people to Gou Yu to say: I am seizing the world with morality, how can I hate loyal subjects!

古文：卿但帅城中之人还长安，吾正欲得此城耳。 
现代文：你只要率领城里的民众返回长安就行了，我只是想得到这座城邑。 
English: All you have to do is lead the people in the city back to Chang'an. I just want to get this city.

古文：辅以为然，帅民五千口出城。苌围而坑之，男女无遗，独冯杰子终得脱，奔长安。
现代文：苟辅认为此话有理，就率领民众五千人出了城，姚苌包围了他们，然后把他们全都活埋，不论男女，无一遗漏。只有冯杰的儿子冯终得以逃脱，逃到长安。
English: Guo Zuo thought that this was true, so he led five thousand people out of the city. Yao Wei surrounded them and then buried them all alive, both men and women, without missing a single one. Only Feng Jie's son Feng finally managed to escape and fled to Chang'an.

古文：秦王坚追赠辅等官爵，皆谥曰节愍侯；以终为新平太守。
现代文：前秦王苻坚给苟辅等人追赠了官职爵位，全都定谥号叫节愍侯，任命冯终为新平太守。
English: The former King of Qin, Qian Jian, posthumously bestowed official ranks and titles on Guo Shuo and others, and all of them were given the title of prince, and Feng was eventually appointed the new governor of Ping.

古文：翟真自承营徙屯行唐，真司马鲜于乞杀真及诸翟，自立为赵王。
现代文：翟真从承营转移到行唐驻扎，翟真的司马鲜于乞杀掉了翟真及其亲属，自立为赵王。
English: Yao Zhen was transferred from Chengyuan to Xingtang. Yao Zhen's Sima Xiang killed Yao Zhen and his relatives and established himself as King Zhao.

古文：营人共杀乞，立真从弟成为主；其众多降于燕。
现代文：军营里的人一起杀掉了鲜于乞，立翟真的堂弟翟成为主。其兵众大都投降了后燕。
English: The people in the military camp together killed Xian Yuqian, and made Yan Zhen's cousin Yan the master. Most of his soldiers surrendered to Houyan.

古文：五月，西燕主冲攻长安，秦王坚身自督战，飞矢满体，流血淋漓。
现代文：五月，西燕国主慕容冲攻打长安，前秦王苻坚亲自督战，被飞来的乱箭射得遍体麟伤，鲜血淋漓。
English: In May, Mu Rong, the ruler of the State of Xiyan, stormed and attacked Chang'an. The former King of Qin, Qian Jian, personally supervised the battle. He was wounded by flying arrows, and his body was covered in blood.

古文：冲纵兵暴掠，关中士民流散，道路断绝，千里无烟。
现代文：慕容冲放纵军队残暴掠夺，关中士人百姓流离失所，道路被阻绝，千里不见炊烟。
English: Murongchong indulged in the army's brutal plunder, Guan sergeants and civilians were displaced, roads were blocked, and there was no smoke for thousands of miles.

古文：有堡壁三十馀，推平远将军赵敖为主，相与结盟，冒难遣兵粮助坚，多为西燕兵所杀。
现代文：有三十多个堡寨营垒，推举平远将军赵敖为主，互相结盟，冒着危险派兵送粮救助苻坚，但大多都被西燕杀掉。
English: There are more than thirty fortresses, mainly promoted by Pingyuan General Zhao Jun, allied with each other, and risked sending troops to send grain to rescue Yu Jian, but most of them were killed by Xiyan.

古文：坚谓之曰： 闻来者率不善达，此诚忠臣之义。然今寇难殷繁，非一人之力所能济也。徒相随入虎口，何益？
现代文：苻坚对他们说： 听说前来救助的人大都不能顺利到达，这确实表现了忠臣的大义，但如今敌寇制造的祸难繁多，不是靠一个人的力量就能解决的，只能是白白地相继落入虎口，有什么好处！
English: Yu Jian said to them, "I heard that most of the people who came to help couldn't arrive smoothly, which really showed the great righteousness of the loyal subjects, but now there are many calamities caused by the enemy bandits, which can't be solved by the power of one person, but can only fall into the mouth of the tiger in vain one after another, what's the benefit!

古文：汝曹宜为国自爱，畜粮厉兵，以俟天时，庶几善不终否，有时而泰也！ 
现代文：你们应该为了国家而自我保重，积蓄粮食，训练军队，以等待天时，也许做善事不会长久困顿，还会有时机否极泰来的！ 
English: You should take care of yourselves for the sake of the country, save grain, train the army, and wait for the right time. Perhaps doing good deeds will not be a long-term struggle, and there will be an opportunity!

古文：三辅之民为冲所略者，遣人密告坚，请遣兵攻冲，欲纵火为内应。
现代文：三辅地区被慕容冲掠夺的百姓派人秘密地向苻坚报告，请求苻坚派兵攻打慕容冲，他们想要在里边放火以作为内应。
English: The people in the Sanfu area who were plundered by Murongchong sent a secret report to Yu Jian, asking him to send soldiers to attack Murongchong. They wanted to set fire to it as an internal response.

古文：坚曰： 甚哀诸卿忠诚！
现代文：苻坚说： 非常怜悯你们的忠诚！
English: Yu Jian said, "I feel very sorry for your loyalty!"

古文：然吾猛士如虎豹，利兵如霜雪，困于乌合之虏，岂非天乎？
现代文：然而我勇猛的将士如同虎豹，锋利的兵器如同霜雪，反而受困于乌合之众，这难道不是天意吗！
English: However, my brave soldiers are like tigers and leopards, and my sharp weapons are like frost and snow, but I am trapped by the mob. Isn't this God's will?

古文：恐徒使诸卿坐自夷灭，吾不忍也！ 
现代文：恐怕会白白地让你们招致覆灭，我不忍心这样干！ 
English: I'm afraid I'll ruin you for nothing, I can't bear to do it!

古文：其人固请不已，乃遣七百骑赴之。
现代文：派来的人不停地固执请求，苻坚就派遣七百骑兵前往。
English: The person sent kept insisting on the request, and He Jian sent seven hundred cavalrymen.

古文：冲营纵火者，反为风火所烧，其得免者什一二；坚祭而哭之。
现代文：在慕容冲军营里放火的人，反而被乘风之火所烧，得以幸免的人只有十之一二，苻坚设祭痛哭他们。
English: The people who set fire to the military camp in Murongchong, on the other hand, were burned by the wind-driven fire. Only two out of ten people were spared, and they wept bitterly.

古文：卫将军杨定与冲战于城西，为冲所擒。
现代文：卫将军杨定与慕容冲在城西交战，被慕容冲擒获。
English: The Wei general Yang Ding fought with Murong Chong in the west of the city and was captured by Murong Chong.

古文：定，秦之骁将也。
现代文：杨定是前秦的勇猛战将。
English: Yang Ding was a valiant general of the former Qin Dynasty.

古文：坚大惧，以谶书云 帝出五将久长得 ，乃留太子宏守长安，谓之曰： 天其或者欲导予出外。
现代文：苻坚十分害怕，依据谶书中所说： 帝王出走五将山才能得到长久的命运， 便留下太子苻宏守卫长安，对他说： 上天大概是想引导我外出。
English: Yu Jian was very afraid. According to the imperial edict, "Only when the emperor leaves the Five Generals' Mountain can he obtain a long-term destiny." He left Prince Yu Hong to guard Chang'an, and said to him, "The heavens are probably trying to guide me out."

古文：汝善守城，勿与贼争利，吾当出陇收兵运粮以给汝。 
现代文：你好好地守卫城池，不要与寇贼争锋，我要走出陇地招集兵众运送粮食供给你。 
English: Guard the castle well, and do not fight with the robbers. I will go out and gather an army to transport grain to you.

古文：遂帅骑数百与张夫人及中山公诜、二女宝、锦出奔五将山，宣告州郡，期以孟冬救长安。
现代文：于是苻坚就率领数百骑兵与张夫人、中山公苻诜及两个女儿苻宝、苻锦奔往五将山，向各州郡公开宣布，约定在初冬时拯救长安。
English: Therefore, Yu Jian led hundreds of cavalrymen with Mrs. Zhang, Zhongshan Gongyi and two daughters, Yu Bao and Yu Jin, to Wuzhongshan, and publicly announced to all states and counties that they agreed to save Chang'an in early winter.

古文：坚过袭韭园，李辩奔燕，彭和正惭，自杀。
现代文：苻坚顺路袭击了韭园，李辩逃奔后燕，彭和正感到惭愧，自杀而死。
English: Zou Jian attacked the Summer Palace along the way, Li Yan fled after Yan, and Peng He Zheng felt ashamed and committed suicide.

古文：闰月，以广州刺史罗友为益州刺史，镇成都。
现代文：闰五月，东晋任命广州刺史罗友为益州刺史，镇守成都。
English: In leap May, the Eastern Jin Dynasty appointed Luo You, the eunuch of Guangzhou, as the eunuch of Yizhou and the town guard of Chengdu.

古文：庚戌，燕王垂至常山，围翟成于行唐。
现代文：庚戌，后燕王慕容垂抵达常山，在行唐包围了翟成。
English: Genghis Khan and Emperor Wu of Yan arrived in Changshan and besieged Lucheng in the Tang Dynasty.

古文：命带方王佐镇龙城。
现代文：命令带方王慕容佐镇守龙城。
English: Ordered to take Fang Wang Murong Sazhen to defend Longcheng.

古文：六月，高句丽寇辽东，佐遣司马郝景将兵救之，为高句丽所败，高句丽遂陷辽东、玄菟。
现代文：六月，高句丽进犯辽东，慕容佐派司马郝景统帅军队救援，被高句丽打败，高句丽于是攻陷了辽东、玄菟。
English: In June, Goguryeo invaded Liaodong, and Murong Zuo sent Sima Bingjing, commander of the army, to rescue them. He was defeated by Goguryeo, and Goguryeo then invaded Liaodong and Xuanzang.

古文：秦太子宏不能守长安，将数千骑与母、妻、宗室西奔下辨；百官逃散，司隶校尉权翼等数百人奔后秦。
现代文：前秦太子苻宏无法坚守长安，带领数千骑兵与母亲、妻子、宗室亲属向西逃奔到下辨。僚属百官全都逃散，司隶校尉权翼等数百人投奔后秦。
English: Former Qin Crown Prince Yan Hong was unable to hold on to Chang'an, and he led thousands of cavalrymen and his mother, wife, and family members to flee westward to Shibuan. All of his colleagues and 100 officials fled, and hundreds of people, such as Sili Lieutenant Quan Ying, fled to Later Qin.

古文：西燕主冲入据长安，纵兵大掠，死者不可胜计。
现代文：西燕国主慕容冲进城占据了长安，放纵军队大肆抢掠，城中死亡的人不计其数。
English: Mu Rong, the ruler of Xiyan, stormed into the city and occupied Chang'an, indulging the army to plunder and pillage. Countless people died in the city.

古文：秋，七月，旱，饥，井皆竭。
现代文：秋季，七月，东晋发生大旱、饥荒，水井全都枯竭。
English: In the autumn, in July, there was a drought and famine in the Eastern Jin, and all the wells dried up.

古文：后秦王苌自故县如新平。
现代文：后秦王姚苌从过去的安定县到新平。
English: After the Qin Dynasty, King Yao Jie moved from the former Anding County to Xinping.

古文：秦王坚至五将山，后秦王苌遣骁骑将军吴忠帅骑围之。
现代文：前秦王苻坚抵达五将山，后秦王姚苌派骁骑将军吴忠率领骑兵包围了他。
English: The former Qin King Yu Jian arrived at Wuzhong Mountain, and the later Qin King Yao Tong sent the cavalry general Wu Zhong to lead the cavalry to surround him.

古文：秦兵皆散走，独侍御十数人在侧，坚神色自若，坐而待之，召宰人进食。
现代文：前秦的兵众全都溃散逃走，只有十几个侍从官留在身边，苻坚神色自若，坐在那里等待吴忠的军队，召唤掌管膳食的官吏进上食物。
English: The former Qin soldiers all scattered and fled. Only a dozen or so attendants remained with the officials. Yu Jian, looking confident, sat there waiting for Wu Zhong's army and summoned the officials in charge of the meal to bring in the food.

古文：俄而忠至，执之，送诣新平，幽于别室。
现代文：不一会儿吴忠来到，拘捕了苻坚，把他送到新平，幽禁在特设的房间内。
English: Soon after, Wu Zhong arrived, arrested Yu Jian, and sent him to Xinping, where he was confined in a special room.

古文：太子宏至下辨，南秦州刺史杨璧拒之。
现代文：太子苻宏抵达下辨，南秦州刺史杨壁拒绝接纳他。
English: Prince Gong Hong arrived in Shideban, but the Southern Qin State Jishi Yangbi refused to accept him.

古文：璧妻，坚之女顺阳公主也，弃其夫从宏。
现代文：杨壁的妻子，是苻坚的女儿顺阳公主，她抛弃了丈夫，跟苻宏走了。
English: Yangbi's wife was Princess Shunyang, the daughter of Yu Jian. She abandoned her husband and went away with Yu Hong.

古文：宏奔武都，投氐豪强熙，假道来奔，诏处之江州。
现代文：苻宏逃奔到武都，投靠氐族豪强强熙，然后借道投奔东晋，朝廷下达诏令，把他安置在江州。
English: Qian Hong fled to Wudu, and took refuge with the powerful and powerful leader of the Yi people. He then took refuge in East Jin, and the imperial court issued an edict to resettle him in Jiangzhou.

古文：长乐公丕帅众三万自枋头将归鄴城，龙骧将军檀玄击之，战于谷口，玄兵败，丕复入鄴城。
现代文：长乐公苻丕率领三万兵众准备从枋头返回邺城，龙骧将军檀玄向他发起攻击，在谷口交战，檀玄的军队失败，苻丕又进入了邺城。
English: Changle Gongyi led 30,000 soldiers to prepare to return from Shantou to Shicheng. Longyi's general, Dang Xuan, launched an attack on him and fought in Taniguchi. Dang Xuan's army was defeated, and Longyi entered Shicheng again.

古文：燕建节将军馀岩叛，自武邑北趣幽州。
现代文：后燕建节将军馀岩反叛，从武邑北赴幽州。
English: After Yan Jianjie rebelled against Yuyan, he went to Yuzhou from the north of Wuyi.

古文：燕王垂驰使敕幽州将平规曰： 固守勿战，俟吾破丁零自讨之。 
现代文：后燕王慕容垂迅速派使者敕令幽州将领平规说： 加强固守，不要交战，等我攻破丁零以后亲自去讨伐他。 
English: Afterward, Yan Wang Murongtai quickly sent an envoy to Yuzhou General Ping Gu, saying: "Strengthen the defense, do not engage in battle, wait until I break through Ding Zi, and then personally go to fight him."

古文：规出战，为岩所败。
现代文：平规出兵迎战，被余岩打败。
English: He sent troops to fight, but was defeated by Yuyan.

古文：岩入蓟，掠千馀户而去，遂据令支。
现代文：馀岩进入蓟城，掳掠了一千多户人后离去，于是占据了令支。
English: Yuyan entered Lucheng, plundered more than a thousand households and then left, thus occupying Lingzhi.

古文：癸酉，翟成长史鲜于得斩成出降；垂屠行唐，尽坑成众。
现代文：癸酉，翟成的长史鲜于得斩杀了翟成后出来投降，慕容垂在行唐大肆屠杀，将翟成的兵众全部活埋。
English: However, Rongcheng's long history was short-lived. After Rongcheng was killed, Rongcheng came out to surrender, and Murongdang massacred all the Rongcheng's soldiers and buried them alive.

古文：太保安有疾，求还，诏许之；八月；安至建康。
现代文：太保谢安因病请求回建康，朝廷下达诏令同意了。八月，谢安回到了建康。
English: At the request of Taiho Xie An, who was ill, to return to Jiankang, the imperial court issued a decree and agreed. In August, Xie An returned to Jiankang.

古文：甲午，大赦。
现代文：甲午，东晋实行大赦。
English: On the 22nd, an amnesty was implemented.

古文：丁酉，建昌文靖公谢安薨。
现代文：丁酉，建昌文靖公谢安去世。
English: Ding Jun, Jianchang, Wenjing and Xie An passed away.

古文：诏加殊礼，如大司马温故事。
现代文：朝廷下达诏令，按非常的礼仪安葬他，仿照大司马桓温的遗规。
English: The imperial court issued a decree to bury him in accordance with the highest etiquette, following the example of Grand Master Ma Huanwen.

古文：庚子，以司徒琅邪王道子领扬州刺史、录尚书、都督中外诸军事，以尚书令谢石为卫将军。
现代文：庚子，任命司徒琅邪王司马道子兼扬州刺史、录尚书、都督中外诸军事，任命尚书令谢石为卫将军。
English: Geng Zi appointed Sima Daozi, the evil king of Sima, as Yangzhou's historian, recorder, and military governor, and appointed Xie Shi as Wei general.

古文：后秦王苌使求传国玺于秦王坚曰： 苌次应历数，可以为惠。 
现代文：后秦王姚苌派人去向前秦王苻坚索取传国印玺，说： 姚苌按顺序承接天命，可以把玉玺交给我。 
English: Later, Qin King Yao Jian sent a man to the former Qin King Jian Jian to obtain the imperial seal, saying: Yao Jian, in accordance with the order of inheriting the Mandate of Heaven, can give me the jade seal.

古文：坚瞋目叱之曰： 小羌敢逼天子，五胡次序，无汝羌名。
现代文：苻坚怒目斥责来人说： 小羌胆敢威逼天子，五胡的次序，没有你羌族的名称。
English: Hao Jian angrily rebuked the caller, saying: "Little Hao dares to intimidate the Son of Heaven, the order of the five Hu, and you do not have the name of the Yao people.

古文：玺已送晋，不可得也！ 
现代文：传国印玺已经送到了晋朝，无法得到了！ 
English: The imperial seal has been sent to the Jin Dynasty, but it cannot be retrieved!

古文：苌复遣右司马尹纬说坚，求为禅代；坚曰： 禅代，圣贤之事。姚苌叛贼，何得为之！ 
现代文：姚苌又派右司马严纬劝说苻坚，要求苻坚把君主之位禅让给他，苻坚说： 禅让，是圣贤的事情，姚苌是叛贼，怎么能让他继位呢！ 
English: Yao Wei also sent his right secretary Ma Yanwei to persuade Yu Jian, demanding that Yu Jian cede the monarch's throne of Zen to him. Yu Jian said: "Zen ceding is a matter for sages, Yao Wei is a traitor, how can he be allowed to succeed!"

古文：坚与纬语，问纬： 在朕朝何官？ 
现代文：苻坚与尹纬谈论了一番，问尹纬： 你在朕的朝廷里做什么官？ 
English: Yu Jian talked with Yin Wei for a while, and asked Yin Wei: What position do you hold in my court?

古文：纬曰： 尚书令史 。
现代文：尹纬说： 尚书令史。 
English: Yin Wei said: Shang Shuling is history.

古文：坚叹曰： 卿，王景略为俦，宰相才也，而朕不知卿，宜其亡也！ 
现代文：苻坚叹息地说： 你是王猛那样人才，具有宰相的才能，然而朕却不知道你，应该灭亡了。 
English: Zou Jian said with a sigh: You are as talented as Wang Meng, with the talent of a prime minister, but I don't know you, you should perish.

古文：坚自以平生遇苌有恩，尤忿之，数骂苌求死，谓张夫人曰： 岂可令羌奴辱吾儿。 
现代文：苻坚自认为平时对待姚苌有恩，越发愤恨他，多次痛骂姚苌，以求一死，对张夫人说： 岂能让羌奴侮辱我的儿女。 
English: Xuan Jian thought that he had been kind to Yao Xuan in ordinary times, and he became more and more angry with him. He cursed Yao Xuan many times, hoping to die, and said to Mrs. Zhang: "How can I let you humiliate my children?"

古文：乃先杀宝、锦。
现代文：于是就先杀掉了苻宝、苻锦。
English: So he first killed the cormorant and the cormorant.

古文：辛丑，苌遣人缢坚于新平佛寺，张夫人、中山公诜皆自杀，后秦将士皆为之哀恸。
现代文：辛丑，姚苌派人把苻坚吊死在新平的佛寺。张夫人、中山公苻诜全都自杀。后秦的将士全都为他们悲痛。
English: Sin ugly, Yao Yan sent people to hang Zou Jian to death in the Buddhist temple in Xinping. Mrs. Zhang, Zhongshan Gongjun all committed suicide. The post-Qin generals all grieved for them.

古文：苌欲隐其名，谥坚曰壮烈天王。
现代文：姚苌想隐埋苻坚的名字，给苻坚定谥号为壮烈天王。
English: Yao Yao wanted to bury the name of Yao Jian and give Yao Jian the nickname of "Majestic King."

古文：臣光曰：论者皆以为秦王坚之亡，由不杀慕容垂、姚苌故也，臣独以为不然。
现代文：臣司马光说：谈论这段历史的人都认为秦王苻坚的灭亡，是由于没有杀掉慕容垂、姚苌的缘故。臣唯独认为不是这样。
English: The subject Sima Guang said: People who talk about this period of history think that the demise of Qin King He Jian was due to the fact that he did not kill Mu Rongtui and Yao Yao. Only the subject thinks otherwise.

古文：许劭谓魏武帝治世之能臣，乱世之奸雄。
现代文：许劭说魏武帝曹操是太平盛世的能臣，混乱世道的奸雄。
English: Xu Yao said that Cao Cao, the Emperor of Wei and Wu, was an able minister in a peaceful and prosperous world, and a villain in a chaotic world.

古文：使坚治国无失其道，则垂、苌皆秦之能臣也，乌能为乱哉！
现代文：假使苻坚治理国家不违背治国之道，那么慕容垂、姚苌全都是秦国的能臣，怎么能作乱呢！
English: Assuming that Yan Jian's governance of the country does not violate the way of governing the country, then Murong Tie and Yao Xi are all able ministers of Qin, so how can they make trouble!

古文：坚之所以亡，由骤胜而骄故也。
现代文：苻坚之所以灭亡的原因，是由于屡次取胜后骄傲的缘故。
English: The reason why He Jian perished was because of his pride after repeated victories.

古文：魏文侯问李克吴之所以亡，对曰： 数战数胜。 
现代文：魏文侯问李克关于吴国失败的原因，李克回答说： 经常征战又经常胜利。 
English: Wei Wenhou asked Li Ke about the reasons for the failure of the State of Wu, Li Ke replied: He often fought and often won.

古文：文侯曰： 数战数胜，国之福也，何故亡？ 
现代文：魏文侯说： 经常征战又经常胜利，这是国家的福份，为什么灭亡了呢？ 
English: Wei Wenhou said: It is a blessing for a country to go to war often and win often. Why did it perish?

古文：对曰： 数战则民疲，数胜则主骄，以骄主御疲民，未有不亡者也。 
现代文：李克回答说： 经常征战则民众疲惫，经常胜利则主上骄傲，以骄傲的君主统治疲惫的民众，没有不灭亡的道理。 
English: Li Ke replied, "If you constantly go to war, the people will get tired; if you constantly win, the people will get proud; if you have a proud monarch, the people will get tired. There is no reason why you should not perish."

古文：秦王坚似之矣。
现代文：秦王苻坚就与此相似。
English: Qin King He Jian is similar to this.

古文：长乐公丕在鄴，将西赴长安，幽州刺史王永在壶关，遣使招丕，丕乃帅鄴中男女六万馀口西如潞川，骠骑将军张蚝、并州刺史王腾迎之入晋阳。
现代文：长乐公苻丕在邺城，准备西赴长安，幽州刺史王永在壶关，派使者去招纳苻丕，苻丕就率领邺城中的男女六万多人向西到潞川，骠骑将军张蚝、并州刺史王腾迎接他们进入晋阳。
English: Changle Gongjun was in Lucheng, preparing to go west to Chang'an, and Yuzhou Shishi Wangyong was in Kuguan, sending an envoy to recruit Yan. Yan led more than sixty thousand men and women in Lucheng to the west to Luchuan, where General Zhang Yan and State Shishi Wangten welcomed them into Jinyang.

古文：王永留平州刺史苻冲守壶关，自帅骑一万会丕于晋阳。丕始知长安不守，坚已死，乃发丧，即皇帝位。追谥坚曰宣昭皇帝，庙号世祖，大赦，改元大安。
现代文：这时苻丕才知道长安已经失守，苻坚已经死亡，于是便公开宣布了苻坚死亡的消息，他自己即皇帝位，给苻坚定谥号为宣昭皇帝，庙号为世祖，实行大赦，改年号为大安。
English: At this time, Zou only knew that Chang'an had been lost, and Zou Jian had died, so he publicly announced the news of Zou Jian's death. He himself was the emperor, gave Zou Jian the title of Emperor Xuan Zhao, the temple name was Shizuo, implemented amnesty, and changed the year name to Da'an.

古文：燕主垂以鲁王和为南中郎将，镇鄴。
现代文：后燕王慕容垂任命鲁王慕容和为南中郎将，镇守邺城。
English: Later, Yan Wang Murong appointed Lu Wang Muronghe as the Southern Middle Steward to guard Shicheng.

古文：遣慕容农出蠮螉塞，历凡城，趣龙城，会兵讨馀岩，慕容麟、慕容隆自信都徇勃海、清河。
现代文：派慕容农出塞，经过凡城，开赴龙城，会合兵力讨伐余岩，慕容麟、慕容隆从信都出发，带兵巡行勃海、清河。
English: He sent Murong Lin and Murong Long out of Xindu, passed through Fancheng, and drove to Longcheng, gathering troops to fight Yuyan. Murong Lin and Murong Long set out from Xindu, and led troops to patrol the Bohai Sea and Qinghe River.

古文：麟击勃海太守封懿，执之，因屯历口。
现代文：慕容麟攻打勃海太守封懿，抓获了他，顺势驻扎在历口。
English: Muronglin attacked Bo Hai Taishu Fong Yao, captured him, and stationed him in Lekou.

古文：懿，放之子也。
现代文：封懿是封放的儿子。
English: The seal is the son of the release.

古文：鲜卑刘头眷击破贺兰部于善无，又破柔然于意亲山。
现代文：鲜卑人刘头眷在善无击败了贺兰部，又在意亲山击败了柔然。
English: Liu Touxin, a freshman, defeated He Lanbu in Good-for-Nothing, and defeated Zhu Ran in Caring for Kinshan.

古文：头眷子罗辰言于头眷曰： 比来行兵，所向无敌。然心腹之疾，愿早图之！ 
现代文：刘头眷的儿子刘罗辰向刘头眷进言说： 近来的征战，所向无敌，然而对心腹之患，愿早作图谋！ 
English: Liu Luo Chen, the son of Liu Touyan, said to Liu Touyan: The recent campaign is invincible, but for the troubles of the heart and the stomach, I would like to make plans early!

古文：头眷曰： 谁也？ 
现代文：刘头眷说： 谁是心腹之患？ 
English: Liu Touyan said: Who is the problem of the confidant?

古文：罗辰曰： 从兄显，忍人也，必将为乱。 
现代文：刘罗辰说： 堂兄刘显，是残酷无情的人，必将要作乱。 
English: Liu Rochen said: "Cousin Liu Xian is a cruel and heartless person, and he is bound to cause trouble.

古文：头眷不听。
现代文：刘头眷没有听从。
English: Liu Touxin did not listen.

古文：显，库仁之子也。
现代文：刘显是刘库仁的儿子。
English: Liu Xian is the son of Liu Kuren.

古文：顷之，显果杀头眷自立。
现代文：不久，刘显果然杀掉了刘头眷而自立。
English: Soon after, Liu Xian killed Liu Tou and became independent.

古文：又将杀拓跋珪，显弟亢泥妻，珪之姑也，以告珪母贺氏。
现代文：又准备杀掉拓跋。刘显弟弟刘亢的妻子，是拓跋的姑姑，她把这一消息告诉了拓拔的母亲贺氏。
English: He also planned to kill Tuoba. Liu Xian's brother Liu Yao's wife, who was Tuoba's aunt, told Tuoba's mother He about this.

古文：显谋主梁六眷，代王什翼犍之甥也，亦使其部人穆崇、奚牧密告珪，且以其爱妻、骏马付崇曰： 事泄，当以此自明。 
现代文：刘显的主谋梁六眷，是代王拓跋什翼犍的外甥，他也派其部属穆崇、奚牧把消息秘密地报告了拓跋，并且把宠爱的妻子、骏马交给穆崇说： 如果事情泄露，就用这些来证明自己。 
English: Liu Xian's chief strategist, Liang Rukong, was the nephew of the king of Tuoba, Shijiazhuang. He also sent his subordinates, Mu Chong and Yan Mu, to secretly report the news to Tuoba, and gave his beloved wife and horse to Mu Chong, saying: If the matter is leaked, use these to prove yourself.

古文：贺氏夜饮显酒，令醉，使珪阴与旧臣长孙犍、元他、罗结轻骑亡去。
现代文：贺氏当晚让刘显喝酒，等他喝醉以后，让拓跋暗中与旧臣长孙犍、元他、罗结轻装骑马逃走。
English: That night, He let Liu Xian drink, and after he got drunk, he let Tuoba and his former vassals Sun Yat-sen, Yuan Tao and Luo Jie escape on horseback in the dark.

古文：向晨，贺氏故惊厩中群马，使显起视之。
现代文：第二天早晨，贺氏故意惊动马厩中的马匹，让刘显起来察看。
English: The next morning, He purposely startled the horses in the stables, causing Liu to appear and inspect them.

古文：贺氏哭曰： 吾子适在此，今皆不见，汝等谁杀之邪？ 
现代文：贺氏哭泣着说： 我的儿子们就在这里，现在全都不见了，你们谁杀了他们呢？ 
English: Mr. He wept and said, "My sons were right here, and now they are all gone. Who killed them?"

古文：显以故不急追。
现代文：刘显因此没有急于追赶。
English: As a result, Liu Xian did not rush to catch up.

古文：珪遂奔贺兰部，依其舅贺讷，讷惊喜曰： 复国之后，当念老臣！ 
现代文：拓跋于是就逃奔到贺兰部，投靠了他的舅舅贺讷。贺讷惊喜地说： 恢复国家以后，还应该想着老臣！ 
English: As a result, Tuoba fled to Horanbe and joined his uncle, Horne. Horne said in surprise, "After restoring the country, we should still think about the old minister!"

古文：珪笑曰： 诚如舅言，不敢忘也。 
现代文：拓跋笑着说： 确实像舅舅所说，不敢忘记。 
English: Tuoba said with a smile, "It's really like my uncle said, I dare not forget.

古文：显疑梁六眷泄其谋，将囚之。
现代文：刘显怀疑梁六眷泄露了他的计谋，准备要把他囚禁起来。
English: Liu Xian suspected that Liang Lukian had leaked his plot and was preparing to imprison him.

古文：穆崇宣言曰： 六眷不顾恩义，助显为逆，我掠得其妻马，足以解忿。 
现代文：穆崇扬言说： 梁六眷不顾恩义，辅佐刘显却干出了叛逆之事，我夺取了他的妻子、骏马，足以解除愤恨。 
English: Mu Chong threatened: Liang Liukin did not care about gratitude, but his aide Liu Xian did something rebellious. I took his wife and horse, which was enough to relieve the resentment.

古文：显乃舍之。
现代文：刘显于是就不再理会梁六眷了。
English: As a result, Liu Xian no longer paid attention to Liang Liukin.

古文：贺氏从弟外朝大人贺悦举所部以奉珪。
现代文：贺氏的堂弟外朝大人贺悦带领所属部众尊奉拓跋。
English: Mr. He's cousin, He Yue, an adult of the Outer Court, led his club in the performance of Takubasu.

古文：显怒，将杀贺氏，贺氏奔亢泥家，匿神车中三日，亢泥举家为之请，乃得免。
现代文：刘显很气愤，准备杀掉贺氏，贺氏逃奔到刘亢家，在供奉着神像的车子中躲藏了三天，刘亢全家人都为她求情，贺氏这才免于一死。
English: Liu Xian was very angry and prepared to kill Ms. He. Ms. He fled to Ms. Liu's home and hid for three days in a car dedicated to a god. Ms. Liu's entire family pleaded for her, and Ms. He was spared from death.

古文：故南部大人长孙嵩帅所部七百馀家叛显，将奔五原。
现代文：过去的南部大人长孙嵩率领部众七百多家背叛了刘显，逃奔到五原。
English: In the past, the head of the Southern Adults, Sun Song, led the leadership of more than seven hundred people who betrayed Liu Xian and fled to Wuhuan.

古文：时拓跋寔君之子渥亦聚众自立，嵩欲归之；乌渥谓嵩曰： 逆父之子，不足从也。不如归珪。 
现代文：当时拓跋君的儿子拓跋渥也聚众自立，长孙嵩想归附他。乌渥对长孙嵩说： 叛逆之父的儿子，不值得归附，不如归附拓跋。 
English: At that time, Tuoba-kun's son Tuoba-wo also gathered a crowd to become independent, and his eldest grandson Song wanted to join him. Wuwo said to his eldest son Song: The son of a rebellious father is not worth joining, it is better to join Tuoba.

古文：嵩从之。
现代文：长孙嵩听从了他的意见。
English: The eldest grandson, Song, followed his advice.

古文：久之，刘显所部有乱，故中部大人庾和辰奉贺氏奔珪。
现代文：过了很久，刘显的部族内发生祸乱，过去的中部大人庾和辰侍奉着贺氏投奔跖跋。
English: After a long time, a calamity occurred in Liu Xian's tribe, and the past adults of the central region, Zou and Tatsu, served the He clan.

古文：贺讷弟染干以珪得众心，忌之，使其党侯引七突杀珪；代人尉古真知之，以告珪，侯引七突不敢发。
现代文：贺讷的弟弟贺染干因为拓跋深得人心，便忌恨他，让自己的党羽侯引七突杀掉拓跋。代国人尉古真知道此事，把它告诉了拓跋，侯引七突不敢动手了。
English: Honne's younger brother, He Zeng Gan, hated Tuoba because he was so popular, so he had his henchmen, the Hou Chihuahua, kill Tuoba. The deputy governor, Gu Zhen, knew about this and told Tuoba about it, but the Hou Chihuahua did not dare to do anything.

古文：染干疑古真泄其谋，执而讯之，以两车轴夹其头，伤一目，不伏，乃免之。
现代文：贺染干怀疑尉古真泄露了他的计谋。便把尉古真抓起来审讯，用两个车轮夹他的头部，伤害了他的一只眼睛，尉古真拒不承认，贺染干就放了他。
English: He suspected Guzheng of revealing his plot. He arrested Guzheng and interrogated him. He clamped two wheels on Guzheng's head and injured one of his eyes. Guzheng refused to confess, and Hezheng released him.

古文：染干遂举兵围珪；贺氏出谓染干曰： 汝等欲于何置我，而杀吾子乎！ 
现代文：贺染干于是就出兵包围了拓跋，贺氏出来对贺染干说： 你们想要把我发落到什么地方，而要杀我的儿子呢？ 
English: He then sent troops to surround Tuoba. He came out and said to He: "Where do you want to send me, to kill my son?

古文：染干惭而去。
现代文：贺染干惭愧地离开了。
English: Somesho left very ashamed.

古文：九月，秦主丕以张蚝为侍中、司空，王永为侍中、都督中外诸军事、车骑大将军、尚书令，王腾为中军大将军、司隶校尉，苻冲为尚书左仆射，封西平王；又以左长史杨辅为右仆射，右长史王亮为护军将军；立妃杨氏为皇后，子宁为皇太子，寿为长乐王，锵为平原王，懿为勃海王，昶为济北王。
现代文：九月，前秦国主苻丕任命张蚝为侍中、司空，任命王永为侍中、都督中外诸军事、车骑大将军、尚书令，任命王腾为中军大将军、司隶校尉，任命苻冲为尚书左仆射，封为西平王。又任命左长史杨辅为右仆射，右长史王亮为护军将军，立妃杨氏为皇后，儿子苻宁为皇太子，苻寿为长乐王，苻锵为平原王，苻懿为勃海王，苻昶为济北王。
English: In September, the former lord of Qin appointed Zhang Ye as a chamberlain and secretary, appointed Wang Yong as a chamberlain, appointed the military, cavalry and cavalry generals and secretary of the military in and out of the capital, appointed Wang Teng as the general of the Chinese army, the lieutenant of the secretary, appointed Xuchong as the left servant of the secretary and the king of Xiping. He also appointed the left long Shi Yang Fu as the right servant, the right long Shi Wang Liang as the general of the guard, the Yang clan as the queen, the son Xuning as the crown prince, Zou Shou as the king of Changle, Zou as the king of

古文：吕光自龟兹还至宜禾，秦凉州刺史梁熙谋闭境拒之。
现代文：吕光从龟兹返回到宜禾，前秦凉州刺史梁熙计划封锁边境拒绝他进入。
English: Lu Guang returned to Yihe from Guizi. Former Qin governor of Liangzhou, Liang Xi, planned to block the border and refuse him entry.

古文：高昌太守杨翰言于熙曰： 吕光新破西域，兵强气锐，闻中原丧乱，必有异图。
现代文：高昌太守杨翰向梁熙进言说： 吕光刚刚攻破西域，兵力强盛，气势锋锐，听说中原动乱，一定会有不同寻常的图谋。
English: Yang Han, the governor-general of Gaochang, said to Liang Xi: "Luguang has just broken through the western region, the army is strong, the momentum is sharp, I heard that the Central Plains is in turmoil, there will definitely be unusual plans.

古文：河西地方万里，带甲十万，足以自保。
现代文：河西地广万里，拥有十万披甲将士，足以自我保全。
English: The west of the river is vast and has 100,000 armored soldiers, which is enough for self-preservation.

古文：若光出流沙，其势难敌。
现代文：如果吕光走出沙漠，他的威势就难以抵挡了。
English: If Lü Guang comes out of the desert, his power will be hard to resist.

古文：高梧谷口险阻之要，宜先守之而夺其水；波既穷渴，可以坐制。
现代文：高梧谷口是险阻的要塞，应该先据守那里，从而断绝他们的水源。等他们疲困干渴以后，我们就可以坐而制之。
English: Gaowogokou is a precarious fortress, and we should first establish a foothold there to cut off their water source. When they are exhausted and thirsty, we can control them.

古文：如以为远，伊吾关亦可拒也。
现代文：如果认为那里路途遥远，也可以在伊吾关拒守。
English: If you think there is a long way to go, you can also refuse to defend Iguguazu.

古文：度此二厄，虽有子房之策，无所施矣！ 
现代文：除了这两处险阻要塞，就是有张良那样的谋略，也无处施展！ 
English: In addition to these two dangerous fortresses, there is no place to apply the strategy of Zhang Liang!

古文：熙弗听。
现代文：梁熙没有听从。
English: Liang Xi did not obey.

古文：美水令犍为张统谓熙曰： 今关中大乱，京师存亡不可知。
现代文：美水令犍为人张统对梁熙说： 如今关中大乱，京师长安不知道是存是亡。
English: Zhang Tong said to Liang Xi: "Nowadays, there is a big turmoil in Guanzhong, and Beijing Division Chang'an doesn't know whether to survive or die.

古文：吕光之来，其志难测，将军何以拒之？ 
现代文：吕光前来，其志向难以预测，将军怎样抵抗他？ 
English: When Lü Guang came, his ambitions were unpredictable. How did the general resist him?

古文：熙曰： 忧之，未知所出。 
现代文：梁熙说： 正对此事忧虑，但不知道该怎么办。 
English: Liang Xi said: I'm worried about this, but I don't know what to do.

古文：统曰： 光智略过人，今拥思归之士，乘战胜之气，其锋未易当也。
现代文：张统说： 吕光谋略过人，如今带领着盼望归家的将士，乘着交战取胜的气势，其锋芒不容易抵挡。
English: Zhang Tong said: Luguang has outmaneuvered others and is now leading soldiers who are looking forward to returning home, taking advantage of the momentum of winning the war. Its edge is not easy to resist.

古文：将军世受大恩，忠诚夙著；立勋王室，宜在今日！
现代文：将军您世代承受恩泽，历来以忠诚著称，为王室建立功勋，应该就在今天。
English: General, your generation has been blessed with a reputation for loyalty and for building a legacy for the royal family, and it's time to live up to it.

古文：行唐公洛，上之从弟，勇冠一时，为将军计，莫若奉为盟主以收众望，推忠义以帅群豪，则光虽至，不敢有异心也。
现代文：行唐公苻洛，是主上的堂弟，勇猛冠绝一时，为将军着想，不如尊奉他为盟主以凝聚众人的期望，推举忠义之人以率领众豪强，如此则吕光虽然到来，也不敢怀有异心。
English: For the general's sake, it is better to honor him as the commander-in-chief to rally the expectations of the people, and to nominate a loyal person to lead the heroes. In this way, even if Luguang comes, he will not dare to harbor any other intentions.

古文：资其精锐，东兼毛兴，连王统、杨璧，合四州之众，扫凶逆，宁王室，此桓、文之举也。 
现代文：凭借他的精锐部队，就可以兼并东面的毛兴，联合王统、杨壁，汇集四州的兵众，扫除顽凶叛逆，安定王室，这是像齐桓公、晋文公那样的举动。 
English: With his elite troops, he could annex Mao Xing in the east, unite Wang Tong and Yang Bi, gather soldiers from four states, sweep away the stubborn rebels, and stabilize the royal family. This was a move like that of Prince Qi Huan and Prince Jinwen.

古文：熙又弗听，杀洛于西海。
现代文：梁熙又没有听从，在西海杀掉了苻洛。
English: Liang Xi did not listen and killed Gong Luo in the West Sea.

古文：光闻杨翰之谋，惧，不敢进。
现代文：吕光听说了杨翰的计谋，很害怕，不敢前进。
English: Lu Guang heard about Yang Han's scheme and was very scared and did not dare to move forward.

古文：杜进曰： 梁熙文雅有馀，机鉴不足，终不能用翰之谋，不足忧也。
现代文：杜进说： 梁熙文雅有余，随机应变不足，最终也不会采纳杨翰的计谋，不值得担忧。
English: Du Jin said: Liang Xi has more than enough elegance, but not enough random contingency. In the end, he will not adopt Yang Han's strategy. It is not worth worrying about.

古文：宜及其上下离心，速进以取之。 
现代文：应该乘着他上下离心的时机，迅速进军以攻取他。 
English: We should seize the opportunity of his centrifugal force and quickly march to capture him.

古文：光从之。
现代文：吕光听从了杜进的意见。
English: Luguang obeyed his words.

古文：进至高昌，杨翰以郡迎降。
现代文：前进到高昌，杨翰出来迎接，举郡投降。
English: Advancing to Gaochang, Yang Han came out to meet them and surrendered the county.

古文：至玉门，熙移檄责光擅命还师，以子胤为鹰扬将军，与振威将军南安姚皓、别驾卫翰帅众五万拒光于酒泉。
现代文：到了玉门，梁熙传递檄文责备吕光擅自命令军队返回，任命儿子梁胤为鹰扬将军，与振威将军南安人姚皓、别驾卫翰率领五万兵众在酒泉阻击吕光。
English: When they arrived at the Jade Gate, Liang Xi passed on an imperial edict reproaching Lü Guang for ordering the army to return without authorization, appointed his son Liang Yin as General Ying Yang, and together with General Zhenwei, the Nan'an people Yao Zhen and Bie Jia Wei Han led fifty thousand soldiers to resist Lü Guang in Jiuquan.

古文：敦煌太守姚静、晋昌太守李纯以郡降光。
现代文：敦煌太守姚静、晋昌太守李纯举郡投降了吕光。
English: Dunhuang's governor Yao Jing and Jinchang's governor Li Jun surrendered to Lü Guang.

古文：光报檄凉州，责熙无赴难之志，五遏归国之众；遣彭晁、杜进、姜飞为前锋，与胤战于安弥，大破擒之。
现代文：吕光向凉州发出了回复檄文，责备梁熙没有以身赴难的志向，反而阻止归国的兵众。派彭晃、杜进、姜飞作为前锋，与梁胤在安弥交战，大败梁胤的军队，擒获了梁胤。
English: Luguang sent a reply letter to Liangzhou, reproaching Liang Xi for not having the ambition to go through the hardships with his own body, but instead preventing the returning soldiers. He sent Peng Huan, Du Jin, and Jiang Fei as forwards to fight with Liang Yin in Anmi, defeated Liang Yin's army, and captured Liang Yin.

古文：于是四山胡、夷皆附于光。
现代文：于是周围依山而居的胡人、夷人全都归附于吕光。
English: As a result, all the Hu people and Iroquois who lived around the mountain joined Luguang.

古文：武威太守彭济执熙以降，光杀之。
现代文：武威太守彭济拘押着梁熙投降，吕光杀掉了梁熙。
English: Wuwei's eunuch Peng Ji detained Liang Xi and forced him to surrender. Lu Guang killed Liang Xi.

古文：光入姑臧，自领凉州刺史，表杜进为武威太守，自馀将佐，各受职位。
现代文：吕光进入姑臧，自己兼任凉州刺史，上表请求任命杜进为武威太守，自己其余的将领辅佐，分别都接受了职位。
English: When Lü Guang entered Gushan, he also served as the chief historian of Liangzhou. He requested that Du Jin be appointed as the governor of Wuwei, and the rest of his generals and assistants accepted the positions.

古文：凉州郡县皆降于光，独酒泉太守宋皓、西郡太守索泮城守不下。
现代文：凉州的郡县全都投降了吕光，只有酒泉太守宋皓、西郡太守索泮固守城池不投降。
English: All counties and counties in Liangzhou surrendered to Luguang, only Jiuquan Governor Song Tao and West County Governor Sokun refused to surrender.

古文：光攻而执之，让泮曰： 吾受诏平西域，而梁熙绝我归路，此朝廷之罪人，卿何为附之？ 
现代文：吕光发起攻击，抓获了他们，责备索泮说： 我接受诏令平定西域，而梁熙却断绝我的归路，这是朝廷的罪人，你为什么要依附他呢？ 
English: Luguang launched an attack, captured them, and reproached Sokun, saying, "I accepted the imperial edict to pacify the Western Regions, but Liang Xi cut off my way back. This is a sinner of the imperial court. Why do you cling to him?

古文：泮曰： 将军受诏平西域，不受诏乱凉州，梁公何罪而将军杀之？
现代文：索泮说： 将军接受诏令平定西域，并没有接受诏令搞乱凉州，梁公有什么罪过而将军杀了他？
English: Soh said: The general accepted the imperial edict to pacify the western region, but did not accept the imperial edict to mess up Liangzhou. What was the crime of Liang Gong that the general killed him?

古文：泮但苦力不足，不能报君父之仇耳，岂肯如逆氐彭济之所为乎！
现代文：我只是苦于力量不足，不能为君父报仇，怎么肯干像叛逆的氐人彭济那样的事情呢！
English: I just suffer from a lack of strength, I can't avenge my father, how could I do something like the traitorous scoundrel Peng Ji!

古文：主灭臣死，固其常也。 
现代文：主灭臣死，这本来就是千古不变之理。 
English: The death of the master is the death of the vassal. This is a principle that has remained unchanged for thousands of years.

古文：光杀泮及皓。
现代文：吕光杀掉了索泮及宋皓。
English: Luguang killed So Yeon and Song Yeon.

古文：主簿尉祐，奸佞倾险，与彭济同执熙，光宠信之。
现代文：主簿尉，奸佞凶险，与彭济一起抓获了梁熙，吕光对他宠爱信任。
English: The chief bookkeeper, a treacherous traitor, captured Liang Xi together with Peng Zi, and Luguang loved and trusted him.

古文：祐谮杀名士姚皓等十馀人，凉州人由是不悦。
现代文：尉诬陷杀害了名士姚皓等十多人，凉州人因此很不高兴。
English: He was framed for the murder of more than ten people, including the famous Yao Xuan, which made the people of Liangzhou very unhappy.

古文：光以祐为金城太守，祐至允吾，袭据其城以叛；姜飞击破之，祐奔据兴城。
现代文：吕光任命尉为金城太守，尉到了允吾，突然占据了该城反叛。姜飞攻破了他，尉逃奔，占据了兴城。
English: Luguang appointed his lieutenant as the governor of Jincheng. When the lieutenant arrived at Yunwu, he suddenly occupied the city and rebelled. Jiang Fei defeated him, the lieutenant fled and occupied Xingcheng.

古文：乞伏国仁自称大都督、大将军、单于，领秦、河二州牧，改元建义，以乙旃童泥为左相，屋引出支为右相，独孤匹蹄为左辅，武群勇士为右辅，弟乾归为上将军，分其地置武城等十二郡，筑勇士城而都之。
现代文：乞伏国仁自称大都督、大将军、单于、兼秦、河二州牧，改年号为建义，任命乙旃童为左相，屋引出支为右相，独孤匹蹄为左辅，武群勇士为右辅，弟弟乞伏乾归为上将军，在所辖领地分别设置了武城等十二郡，建筑了勇士城作为都城。
English: Kuibuku Kunihito called himself the great governor, the great general, Tsuru, Shanyu, Kanechin, and He Ershu Maki, and changed his era name to Jianyi. He appointed Acetylene Boy as the left phase, Yadui Branch as the right phase, Doko Lone Horse Hoof as the left auxiliary, Warriors of the Armed Forces as the right auxiliary, and his brother Kuibuku Qian as the superior general. In the territory under his jurisdiction, he separately set up twelve counties such as Wucheng and built Warriors' City as the capital city.

古文：秦尚书令魏昌公纂自关中奔晋阳；秦主丕拜纂太尉，封东海王。
现代文：前秦尚书令、魏昌公苻纂从关中奔赴晋阳。前秦国主苻丕授予苻纂太尉官职，封他为东海王。
English: Former Qin Emperor Shang Shuling and Wei Emperor Chang Gong Xizan rushed from Guanzhong to Jinyang. The former Qin Emperor granted Xizan the official post of captain and made him the king of the East Sea.

古文：冬，十月，西燕主冲遣尚书令高盖帅众五万伐后秦，战于新平南，盖大败，降于后秦。
现代文：冬季，十月，西燕国主慕容冲派尚书令高盖率领五万兵众讨伐后秦，在新平以南交战，高盖大败，投降了后秦。
English: In winter, in October, the lord of Xiyan, Murong Chong, sent Shang Shuling to Gao Gai to lead fifty thousand soldiers to fight against Hou Qin. They fought south of Xinping. Gao Gai was defeated and surrendered to Hou Qin.

古文：初，盖以杨定为子，及盖败，定亡奔陇右，复收集其旧众。
现代文：当初，高盖把杨定作为儿子，等到高盖失败，杨定逃奔到陇右，又收集起了他过去的兵众。
English: At first, Gao Gai regarded Yang Ding as his son. When Gao Gai failed, Yang Ding fled to Shizhu and gathered up his former soldiers.

古文：苻定、苻绍、苻谟、苻亮闻秦主丕即位，皆自河北遣使谢罪。
现代文：苻定、苻绍、苻谟、苻亮听说前秦国主苻丕即位，全都从河北派遣使者前来谢罪。
English: When Yu Ding, Yu Shao, Yu Mu, and Yu Liang heard that the former Qin sovereign Yu had ascended to the throne, they all sent envoys from Hebei to express their gratitude.

古文：中山太守王兗，本新平氐也，固守博陵，为秦拒燕。
现代文：中山太守王兖，本是新平的氐族人，他固守博陵，替前秦抵抗后燕。
English: Wang Yao, the governor of Zhongshan, was originally a member of the Yao tribe in Xinping. He held fast to Boling and resisted Houyan in place of Qian Qin.

古文：十一月，丕以兗为平州刺史，定为冀州牧，绍为冀州都督，谟为幽州牧，亮为幽、平二州都督，并进郡公。
现代文：十一月，苻丕任命王兖为平州刺史，苻定为冀州牧，苻绍为冀州都督，苻谟为幽州牧，苻亮为幽、平二州都督，全都晋升爵位为郡公。
English: In November, Zou appointed Wang Qian as the governor of Pingzhou, Zou as the governor of Jizhou, Zou Shao as the governor of Jizhou, Zou Mo as the governor of Yuzhou, Zou Liang as the governor of Yuzhou, and Ping Er as the governor of Yuzhou. All of them were promoted to the title of county magistrate.

古文：左将军窦冲据兹川，有众数万，与秦州刺史王统、河州刺史毛兴、益州刺史王广、南秦州刺史杨璧、卫将军杨定皆自陇右遣使邀丕，共击后秦。
现代文：左将军窦冲占据着兹川，拥有兵众数万，他与秦州刺史王统、河州刺史毛兴、益州刺史王广、南秦州刺史杨璧、卫将军杨定全都从陇右派遣使者邀请苻丕，共同攻打后秦。
English: The left general Dou Chong occupied the Zi River and had tens of thousands of soldiers. He and the Qin state general Wang Tong, the Hezhou general Mao Xing, the Yizhou general Wang Guang, the Southern Qin state general Yang Bi, and the Wei general Yang Ding all sent envoys from the right to invite the right to jointly attack Houqin.

古文：丕以定为雍州牧，冲为梁州牧，加统镇西大将军，兴车骑大将军。璧征南大将军，并开府仪同三司，加广安西将军，皆进位州牧。
现代文：苻丕任命杨定为雍州牧，窦冲为梁州牧，让王统担任镇西大将军，毛兴担任车骑大将军，杨璧担任征南大将军，同时授予他们开府仪同三司，王广担任安西将军，全都晋升职位为州牧。
English: Gong appointed Yang as the Yongzhou Patriarch, Dou Chong as the Liangzhou Patriarch, Wang Tong as the Zhenxi Grand General, Mao Xing as the Cavalry General, Yang Bi as the Southern Conquest Grand General, and awarded them the Kaifu Yi and the three divisions, Wang Guang as the Anxi General, all promoted to the position of state patriarch.

古文：杨定寻徙治历城，置储蓄于百顷，自称龙骧将军、仇池公，遣使来称籓；诏因其所号假之。
现代文：不久，杨定将治所迁移到历城，把储备物资安放在百顷，自称龙骧将军、仇池公，派遣使者前来向东晋称藩。
English: Soon after, Yang Ding moved the administration center to Licheng, placed the reserve materials on a hundred hectares, called himself General Longyu and Prince Qiuqi, and sent envoys to East Jin to claim the domain.

古文：其后又取天水、略阳之地，自称秦州刺史、陇西王。
现代文：朝廷下达诏令，把他自封的称号暂时授予他。而后他又夺取了天水、略阳的领地，自称秦州刺史、陇西王。
English: The imperial court issued a decree to temporarily grant him his self-proclaimed title of "Chen," and then he seized the territories of Tianshui and Liaoyang, calling himself the King of Qin State and the King of Shaanxi.

古文：绎幕人蔡匡据城以叛燕，燕慕容麟、慕容隆共攻之。
现代文：绎幕人蔡匡据城背叛了后燕，后燕慕容麟、慕容隆共同攻打他。
English: Cai Kuangcheng betrayed Houyan, and Houyan, Muronglin and Muronglong jointly attacked him.

古文：泰山太守任泰潜师救匡，至匡垒南八里，燕人乃觉之。
现代文：泰山太守任泰暗中出兵救援蔡匡。到了蔡匡营垒以南八里的地方，后燕人才发现了他们。
English: Taishan Taishu Ren Taiming sent troops to rescue Cai Kuang. When they reached the place eight miles south of Cai Kuang's camp, Houyan talent discovered them.

古文：诸将以匡未下而外敌奄至，甚患之。
现代文：众将领因为还没有攻下蔡匡而外面的敌人又突然到来，深以为患。
English: The generals were deeply worried because they had not yet captured Cai Kuang and the enemy outside had suddenly arrived.

古文：隆曰： 匡恃外救，故不时下。
现代文：慕容隆说： 蔡匡靠着外边的救援，所以不会马上攻下。
English: Muronglong said: Cai Kuang is relying on outside help, so he won't be captured immediately.

古文：今计泰之兵不过数千人，及其未合，击之，泰败，匡自降矣。 
现代文：如今考虑任泰的兵力不超过数千人，趁着他们尚未汇合，展开攻击，任泰一失败，蔡匡自然就会投降。 
English: Now, considering that Ren Tai's troops are no more than a few thousand, he will take advantage of the fact that they have not yet converged to launch an attack. If Ren Tai fails, Cai Kuang will naturally surrender.

古文：乃释匡击泰，大破之，斩首千馀级。
现代文：于是就丢开蔡匡去攻击任泰，大败任泰，斩首一千多人。
English: So he left Cai Kuang to attack Ren Tai, defeated Ren Tai, and beheaded more than a thousand people.

古文：匡遂降，燕王垂杀之，且屠其垒。
现代文：蔡匡于是也就投降了，后燕王慕容垂杀掉了他，并且在他的营垒内大肆屠杀。
English: Cai Kuang then also surrendered, after which Yan Wang Murong killed him and carried out a large-scale massacre in his camp.

古文：慕容农至龙城，休士马十馀日。
现代文：慕容农抵达龙城，让士兵军马休整了十多天。
English: Murong Nong arrived in Longcheng, allowing soldiers and horses to rest for more than ten days.

古文：诸将皆曰： 殿下之来，取道甚速，今至此。久留不进，何也？ 
现代文：众将领都说： 殿下来的时候，选择道路非常迅速，如今到了这里却长久地停留而不再前进，这是为什么呢？ 
English: The generals all said, "When you came down, you chose your path very quickly, but now that you are here, you are staying for a long time and no longer moving forward. Why is that?"

古文：农曰： 吾来速者，恐馀岩过山钞盗，侵扰良民耳。
现代文：慕容农说： 我来得迅速的原因，是担心余馀会越过白狼山强取豪夺，侵扰百姓。
English: Murong Nong said, "The reason why I came quickly is that I was worried that the rest of them would cross the White Wolf Mountain to take the land by force and disturb the people."

古文：岩才不逾人，诳诱饥儿，乌集为群，非有纲纪。
现代文：馀岩没有过人之才，欺骗诱惑处于饥饿状态的人，乌合成群，并没有什么法度纪律。
English: Yuyan has no extraordinary talent, deceiving and tempting people who are in a state of starvation, forming a group, and there is no law or discipline.

古文：吾已扼其喉，久将离散，无能为也。
现代文：我现在已经扼制了他的咽喉，时间一久他们就会自行离散，不能为患了。
English: I've got him by the throat now, they'll disperse on their own in no time.

古文：今此田善熟，未收而行，徒自耗损；当俟收毕，往则枭之，亦不出旬日耳。 
现代文：如今这里的庄稼丰收，不收拾完就离开，只能白白地浪费掉，应当等收拾完以后，再去斩了他，也不过是十来天以后的事情。 
English: Nowadays, there is a bumper harvest of crops here. If you leave without tidying up, you can only waste it in vain. You should wait until you have finished tidying up before you cut it down. It will only be a matter of ten days.

古文：顷之，农将步骑三万至令支，岩众震骇，稍稍逾城归农。
现代文：不久，慕容农统率步、骑兵三万人抵达令支，馀岩的兵众非常震惊害怕，逐渐逃出城外归附了慕容农。
English: Soon after, Murong Nongtong marched with 30,000 cavalry and arrived at Lingzhi. The soldiers of Yuyan were very shocked and afraid, and gradually fled out of the city to join Murong Nong.

古文：岩计穷出降，农斩之。
现代文：馀岩无计可施，出来投降，慕容农斩杀了他。
English: With nothing he could do, Yuyan came out to surrender, and Murong Nong killed him.

古文：进击高句丽，复辽东、玄菟二郡。
现代文：慕容农又进军攻打高句丽，夺回了辽东、玄菟二郡。
English: Murong farmers also marched to attack Goguryeo and recaptured Liaodong and Xuanzang counties.

古文：还至龙城上，上疏请缮修陵庙。
现代文：返回龙城以后，上疏请求修缮先帝的陵庙。
English: After returning to Longcheng, Shangsu requested to repair the former emperor's mausoleum.

古文：燕王垂以农为使持节、都督幽、平二州、北狄诸军事、幽州牧，镇龙城。
现代文：后燕王慕容垂任命慕容农为使持节，都督幽州、平州、北狄诸军事及幽州牧，镇守龙城。
English: Later, Yan Wang Murongli appointed Murong Nongru as the envoy of the festival, the governor of Yuzhou, Pingzhou, North Dizhu, military and Yuzhou Maki, and the town guard of Longcheng.

古文：徙平州刺史带方王佐镇平郭。
现代文：调动平州刺史带方王慕容佐镇守平郭。
English: Transferring the governor of Pingzhou to take Fangwang Murong Sazhen to guard Pinggu.

古文：农于是创立法制，事从宽简，清刑狱，省赋役，劝课农桑，居民富赡，四方流民前后至者数万口。
现代文：慕容农于是便建立法律制度，实行宽松简略的政策，清理刑狱，减免赋役，鼓励督促人们种田养蚕，当地的民众十分富足，各地的流民前后来到这里的有数万人。
English: The Murong farmers then established a legal system, implemented a loose and simple policy, cleaned up the prison, reduced and exempted forced labor, encouraged and urged people to farm and raise silkworms. The local people are very rich, and tens of thousands of displaced people from all over the country have come here.

古文：先是幽、冀流民多入高句丽，农以骠骑司马范阳庞渊为辽东太守，招抚之。
现代文：此前，幽州、冀州的流民大多都去了高句丽，慕容农任命骠骑司马范阳人庞渊为辽东太守，招纳安抚他们。
English: Previously, most of the displaced people from Yuzhou and Jizhou had gone to Goguryeo, and the Murong farmers appointed the horse rider Sima Fanyang as the governor of Liaodong, recruiting and appeasing them.

古文：慕容麟攻王兗于博陵，城中粮竭矢尽，功曹张猗逾城出，聚众以应麟。
现代文：慕容麟在博陵攻打王兖，博陵城中箭尽粮绝，功曹张猗翻越城墙逃出，聚集兵众以响应慕容麟。
English: Muronglin attacked Wang Qian in Boling. The arrows in Boling ran out of food. Gong Cao Zhang Qian escaped over the city wall and gathered soldiers to respond to Muronglin.

古文：兗临城数之曰： 卿是秦民，吾是卿君，卿起兵应贼，自号 义兵 ，何名实之相违也？
现代文：王兖登上城墙数说张猗： 你是秦国的臣民，我是你的君主，你起兵响应寇贼，自称 义兵 ，为什么名实不副呢？
English: Wang Yao climbed onto the city wall and said to Zhang Yao: You are a subject of Qin, I am your sovereign, you raised an army in response to the bandits, calling yourself a volunteer, why is the name not appropriate?

古文：古人求忠臣必于孝子之门，卿母在城，弃而不顾，吾何有焉！
现代文：古人求取忠臣一定要到孝子家门，你的母亲在城里，你弃而不顾，对我有何损害呢？
English: The ancients must go to the door of a filial son to solicit a loyal retainer. Your mother is in the city, and you ignore her. What harm is there to me?

古文：今人取卿一切之功则可矣，宁能忘卿不忠不孝之事乎！
现代文：如今人们要记取你的一时功劳，当然可以，但难道能忘掉你所干的不忠不孝的事情吗？
English: Now people want to remember your momentary merit, of course, but can they forget the disloyalty you have done?

古文：不意中州礼义之邦，乃有如卿者也！ 
现代文：没想到在中州这样的礼义之邦，居然还有像你这样的人！ 
English: I didn't expect that in Zhongzhou, a country of courtesy and justice, there would actually be people like you!

古文：十二月，麟拔博陵，执兗及苻鉴，杀之。
现代文：十二月，慕容麟攻下了博陵，抓获了王兖及苻鉴，杀掉了他们。
English: In December, Muronglin captured Boling, captured Wang Xuan and Xuan Jian, and killed them.

古文：昌黎太守宋敞帅乌桓、索头之众救兗，不及而还。
现代文：昌黎太守宋敞率领乌桓、索头的兵众救援王兖，没有来得及，只好返回去了。
English: Changli's grand marshal Song Zhan led the troops of Wuhuan and Sokou to rescue Wang Hui, but he did not have time and had to return.

古文：秦主丕以敞为平州刺史。
现代文：前秦国主苻丕任命宋敞为平州刺史。
English: Former Qin sovereign Zang appointed Song Zhan as the governor of Pingzhou.

古文：燕王垂北如中山，谓诸将曰： 乐浪王招流散，实仓廪，外给军粮，内营宫室，虽萧何何以加之！ 
现代文：后燕王慕容垂到北面的中山，对众将军领说： 乐浪王慕容温招纳流离失所的民众，充实粮仓谷库，在外军粮丰足，在内营建宫室，即使是萧何的功劳，又怎么能超过他！ 
English: Afterward, Yan Wang Murong descended to Zhongshan in the north and said to the generals: Le Lang Wang Murong warmly recruited the displaced people, enriched the granary, abundant grain for foreign troops, and built a palace room inside, even if it was the merit of Xiao He, how could it surpass him!

古文：丙申，垂始定都中山。
现代文：丙申，慕容垂开始定都中山。
English: Bishen, Murongdali began to settle in Zhongshan.

古文：秦苻定据信都以拒燕，燕王垂以从弟北地王精为冀州刺史，将兵攻之。
现代文：前秦苻定据守信都以抵抗后燕，后燕王慕容垂任命堂弟北地王慕容精为冀州刺史，带领军队攻打苻定。
English: According to legend, former Qin Yu Ding resisted Houyan. Later, King Mu Rongtai appointed his cousin, King Mu Rongjie of Hebei Province, to write the history of Jizhou and lead the army to attack Yu Ding.

古文：拓跋珪从曾祖纥罗与其弟建及诸部大人，共请贺讷推珪为主。
现代文：拓跋的叔伯曾祖父拓跋纥罗与他的弟弟拓跋建以及各部大人一起向贺讷请求，推举拓跋为国主。
English: Tuoba's great-uncle and great-grandfather Tuoba Zhao Luo and his younger brother Tuoba Jian, as well as adults from various ministries, petitioned Honne to nominate Tuoba as the ruler of the country.

古文：烈宗孝武皇帝中之上太元十一年春，正月，戊申，拓跋珪大会于牛川，即代王位，改元登国。
现代文：太元十一年春季，正月，戊申，拓跋在牛川与后燕的军队会合，拓跋即代王位，改年号为登国。
English: In the spring of the eleventh year of the Taiyuan era, in the first month of the year, Boushen, Tuoba met with Houyan's army in Niu River. Tuoba became the king, and the year was changed to the year of the landing.

古文：以长孙嵩为南部大人，叔孙普洛为北部大人，分治其众。
现代文：任命长孙嵩为南部大人，叔孙普洛为北部大人，分别统领他们的部众。
English: He appointed the eldest grandson Song as the southern adult and the great-uncle grandson Puro as the northern adult, respectively, to lead their subordinates.

古文：以上谷张兗为左长史，许谦为右司马，广宁王建、代人和跋、叔孙建、庾岳等为外朝大人，奚牧为治民长，皆掌宿卫及参军国谋议。
现代文：任命上谷人张兖为左长史，许谦为右司马，广宁人王建、代国人和跋、叔孙建、庾岳为外朝大人，任命奚牧为治民长，全都掌管宫中警卫及参与讨论军队国家的谋略。
English: He appointed Shangguan's Zhang Qian as the left chief historian, Xu Qian as the right chief secretary, Guangning's Wang Jian, Dai Guojin, Bao, Uncle Sun Jian, and Zou Yue as the adults of the foreign court, and appointed Zou Mu as the chief administrator of the people, all of whom were in charge of the guards in the palace and participated in the discussion of the strategy of the army and the country.

古文：长孙道生、贺毘等侍从左右，出纳教命。
现代文：长孙道生、贺毗等人在拓跋左右侍从，传递命令。
English: The eldest grandson, Dousheng, He Wei and others followed around Tuoba, passing on orders.

古文：王建娶代王什翼犍之女；岳，和辰之弟；道生，嵩之从子也。
现代文：王建娶了代王拓跋什翼犍的女儿。庾岳是庾和辰的弟弟；长孙道生是长孙嵩的侄子。
English: Wang Jian married the daughter of the king of Tuobao, Shifeng Yao. Zou Yue is the younger brother of Zou and Chen; the eldest grandson, Daosheng, is the nephew of the eldest grandson, Song.

古文：燕王垂即皇帝位。
现代文：后燕王慕容垂即皇帝位。
English: After the death of Yan Wang, Murong became emperor.

古文：后秦王苌如安定。
现代文：后秦王姚苌到安定。
English: After the Qin Dynasty, King Yao Xuan became stable.

古文：南安秘宜帅羌、胡五万馀人攻乞伏国仁，国仁将兵五千逆击，大破之。
现代文：南安人秘宜率领五万多羌族、胡族人攻打乞伏国仁，乞伏国仁带领五千兵众迎击，大败秘宜。
English: Nan'an people secretly led more than fifty thousand Yi people and Hu people to attack and besiege Guo Ren, and Guo Ren led five thousand soldiers to counterattack, and defeated secretly.

古文：宜奔还南安。
现代文：秘宜逃回了南安。
English: Shigeyoshi fled back to Nan'an.

古文：鲜于乞之杀翟真也，翟辽奔黎阳，黎阳太守滕恬之甚爱信之。
现代文：鲜于乞斩杀翟真的时候，翟辽逃奔到黎阳，黎阳太守滕恬之非常宠爱信任他。
English: When it was too late to kill him, Gong Liao fled to Liyang. The governor of Liyang, Teng Yu, was very fond of and trusted him.

古文：恬之喜畋猎，不爱士卒，辽潜施奸惠以收从心。
现代文：滕恬之喜欢打猎，不爱护士兵，翟辽暗中施行奸巧的恩惠以收买人心。
English: Teng Xizhi liked to hunt, did not care for soldiers, and secretly carried out treacherous favors to win people's hearts.

古文：恬之南攻鹿鸣城，辽于后闭门拒之；恬之东奔鄄城，辽追执之，遂据黎阳。
现代文：滕恬之在南面攻打鹿鸣城，翟辽则在他身后紧闭城门不让他返回，滕恬之向东逃奔鄄城，翟辽追击并抓获了他，于是就占据了黎阳。
English: Teng Banzhi attacked Lu Ming City in the south, and Gong Liao closed the gate behind him and did not allow him to return. Teng Banzhi fled to the east to Lucheng, and Gong Liao pursued and captured him, and then occupied Liyang.

古文：豫州刺史硃序遣将军秦膺、童斌与淮、泗诸郡共讨之。
现代文：豫州刺史朱序派将军秦膺、童斌与淮河、泗水一带的各郡共同讨伐翟辽。
English: Zhu Xun, the governor of Yuzhou, sent generals Qin Hui and Tong Bin to jointly fight against the Liao in counties along the Huaihe River and the Surabaya River.

古文：秦益州牧王广自陇右引兵攻河州牧毛兴于枹罕，兴遣建节将军卫平帅其宗人一千七百夜袭广，大破之。
现代文：前秦益州牧王广从陇右带领军队在罕攻打河州牧毛兴，毛兴派建节将军卫平率领他的一千七百多同族人夜袭王广，大败王广。
English: Former Qin and Yizhou general Wang Guang led the army from the right to attack Hezhou general Mao Xing. Mao Xing sent Jianjie general Weiping and more than 1,700 of his compatriots to attack Wang Guang at night, and defeated Wang Guang.

古文：二月，秦州牧王统遣兵助广攻兴，兴婴城自守。
现代文：二月，秦州牧王统派兵帮助王广攻打毛兴，毛兴环城自守。
English: In February, Qinzhou Mu Wangtong sent troops to help Wang Guang attack Mao Xing, and Mao Xing surrounded the city to defend itself.

古文：燕大赦，改元建兴，置公卿尚书百官，缮宗庙、社稷。
现代文：后燕实行大赦，改年号为建兴，设置公卿尚书百官，修缮宗庙、社稷坛。
English: Later, Yan implemented an amnesty, changed the year name to Jianxing, set up the Kugyo Shoshu Hyakunan, and repaired the ancestral temple and the shrine altar.

古文：西燕主冲乐在长安，且畏燕主垂强，不敢东归，课农筑室，为久安之计，鲜卑咸怨之。
现代文：西燕国主慕容冲喜欢住在长安，而且畏惧后燕国主慕容垂的强盛，不敢东归，便督促农耕，建筑宫室，作长久安居的打算。鲜卑人全都怨恨他。
English: Murongchong, the lord of the Western Yan, liked to live in Chang'an, and was afraid of the prosperity of Murongdiao, the lord of the Eastern Yan, and did not dare to return to the East, so he urged farming, building a palace, and planning to live in peace for a long time. The Xianbei people all resented him.

古文：左将军韩延因众心不悦，攻冲，杀之，立冲将段随为燕王，改元昌平。
现代文：左将军韩延顺应众人心中的不满，攻打慕容冲，杀掉了他，立慕容冲的将领段随为西燕王，改年号为昌平。
English: Left General Han Yan complied with the dissatisfaction in the hearts of the people, attacked Murongchong and killed him. The commander of Murongchong was named Xiyan Wang, and his era name was changed to Changping.

古文：初，张天锡之南奔也，秦长水校尉王穆匿其世子大豫，与俱奔河西，依秃发思复鞬，思复鞬送于魏安。
现代文：当初，张天锡南逃的时候，前秦长水校尉王穆把他的长子张大豫藏了起来，后来与张大豫一起逃奔到河西，投靠了秃发思复，秃发思复把张大豫送到了魏安。
English: At first, when Zhang Tianxin fled to the south, the former Qin Changshui lieutenant Wang Mu hid his eldest son Zhang Dayu. Later, he and Zhang Dayu fled to Hexi and took refuge with Bald-haired Si Fu. Bald-haired Si Fu sent Zhang Dayu to Wei'an.

古文：魏安人焦松、齐肃、张济等聚兵数千人迎大豫为主，攻吕光昌松郡，拔之，执太守王世强。
现代文：魏安人焦松、齐肃、张济等聚集兵众数千人迎接张大豫为盟主，攻打吕光占据的昌松郡，攻了下来，抓获了太守王世强。
English: Wei'an people Jiaosong, Qi Su, Zhang Jie and others gathered thousands of soldiers to welcome Zhang Dayu as the leader, attacked Changsong County occupied by Luguang, attacked and captured the governor Wang Shijiang.

古文：光使辅国将军杜进击之，进兵败，大进豫逼姑臧。
现代文：吕光让辅国将军杜进攻打他们，结果杜进的军队失败，张大豫进军威逼姑臧。
English: Luguang let Fu Guo's general Du attack and fight them. As a result, Du Jin's army failed, and Zhang Dayu marched in and forced Gu Yu to retreat.

古文：王穆谏曰： 光粮丰城固，甲兵精锐，逼之非利；不如席卷岭西，砺兵积粟，然后东向与之争，不及期年，光可取也。 
现代文：王穆劝谏张大豫说： 吕光粮食充足，城池坚固，武器精良，军队锋锐，威逼他于己不利，不如横扫岭西，训练军队积蓄粮食，然后再东进与他抗争，不用一年，就可以攻取吕光。 
English: Wang Mu advised Zhang Dayu, saying: Luguang has enough grain, its city is strong, its weapons are excellent, and its army is sharp. If you try to force Luguang to your disadvantage, it is better to sweep the west of Lingding, train the army to accumulate grain, and then go east to fight against him. You can capture Luguang in less than a year.

古文：大豫不从，自号抚军将军、凉州牧，改元凤凰，以王穆为长史，传檄郡县，传穆说谕岭西诸郡，建康太守李隰、祁连都尉严纯皆起兵应之，有众三万，保据杨坞。
现代文：张大豫没有听从，自称抚军将军、凉州牧，改年号为凤凰，任命王穆为长吏，向郡县传递檄文，让王穆去游说劝谕岭西各郡，建康太守李隰、祁连都尉严纯全都起兵响应他，拥有兵众三万人，坚守杨坞。
English: Zhang Dayu did not listen, he claimed to be the general of the Fuzhun army and the leader of the Liangzhou army, changed his name to Fenghuang, appointed Wang Mu as the chief official, passed the imperial edict to the counties, and asked Wang Mu to lobby and advise the counties in the west of Lingding. Jiankang's grand marshal Li Qian and Qilian's captain Yan Chun all raised an army to respond to him, with 30,000 soldiers, and firmly defended Yangwu.

古文：代王珪徙居定襄之盛乐，务农息民，国人悦之。
现代文：代王拓跋迁徙到定襄的盛乐居住，致力于农耕，让百姓休养生息，国内的人对此都很高兴。
English: The generation of King Tuoba migrated to Dingxiang to live in prosperity, committed to farming, and let the people rest and recuperate. People in China are very happy about this.

古文：三月，大赦。
现代文：三月，东晋实行大赦。
English: In March, the Eastern Jin implemented an amnesty.

古文：泰山太守张愿以郡叛，降翟辽。
现代文：泰山太守张愿带领本郡背叛了东晋，投降翟辽。
English: Taishan Daju Zhang Jian led the county to betray the Eastern Jin Dynasty and surrender to the Liao Dynasty.

古文：初，谢玄欲使硃序屯梁国，玄自屯彭城，以北固河上，西援洛阳。
现代文：当初，谢玄想让朱序驻扎在梁国，谢玄自己驻扎彭城，用以在北面稳固黄河沿岸，西南支援洛阳。
English: At first, Xie Xuan wanted Zhu Xuan to be stationed in Liang Province, and Xie Xuan himself stationed in Pengcheng, to be used to stabilize the coast of the Yellow River in the north and support Luoyang in the southwest.

古文：朝议以征役既久，欲令玄置戍而还。
现代文：朝延商议认为在外征战已久，想让谢玄部署防守力量返回。
English: Asanobu deliberated that it had been a long time since the foreign campaign, and wanted to let Xie Xuan deploy defensive forces to return.

古文：会翟辽、张愿继叛，北方骚动，玄谢罪，乞解职，诏慰谕，令还淮阴。
现代文：恰好这时翟辽、张原相继背叛，北方动荡不安，谢玄谢罪，请求解除他的职务，朝廷下达诏令抚慰他，让他回到淮阴。
English: Just at this time, Gong Liao and Zhang Yuan successively betrayed, the north was in turmoil, Xie Xuan Xie pleaded guilty, asked to be relieved of his duties, and the court issued a decree to comfort him and let him return to Huaiyin.

古文：燕主垂追尊母兰氏为文昭皇后，欲迁文明段后，以兰后配享太祖，诏百官议之，皆以为当然。
现代文：后燕国主慕容垂追尊母亲兰氏为文昭皇后，想要迁走文明段后的灵位，把兰氏的灵位和太祖慕容的灵位供奉在一起，便诏令百官讨论此事，百官都认为应当如此。
English: Later, Emperor Murong of the State of Yan, who revered his mother, Empress Ran, as the Empress of Wenzhao, wanted to move the spiritual position after the civilization section, and to enshrine the spiritual position of Ran and the spiritual position of the great-grandfather Murong together, and ordered the officials to discuss the matter. The officials all thought that this should be the case.

古文：博士刘详、董谧以为： 尧母为帝喾妃，位第三，不以贵陵姜原。明圣之道，以至公为先；文昭后宜立别庙。 
现代文：博士刘详、董谧认为 尧的母亲是帝喾的妻子，位居第三，不因为尊贵就凌驾于姜原之上，清明圣哲之道，首先应该出以公心，文昭皇后的灵位应该另立庙。 
English: Dr. Liu Zhao and Dr. Dong Yao believed that the mother of Emperor Zhao was the wife of Emperor Zhao and ranked third. It was not because of her dignity that she was superior to Jiang Yuan. The way of a clear sage should first be done with a righteous heart. The spiritual position of Empress Wenzhao should be another temple.

古文：垂怒，逼之，详、谧曰： 上所欲为，无问于臣。
现代文：慕容垂很愤怒，对他们施以威胁，刘详、董谧说： 主上想要这样做，就不要向臣下询问了。
English: Murong Zhuang was very angry and threatened them. Liu Zhe and Dong Qi said, "If the Lord wants to do this, he should not ask his vassals."

古文：臣案经奉礼，不敢有贰。 
现代文：臣依据经典崇奉礼法，不敢违背。 
English: In accordance with the classic reverence for courtesy, the vassal does not dare to violate it.

古文：垂乃不复问诸儒，卒迁段后，以兰后代之。
现代文：慕容垂于是就不再询问众儒生，终于迁走了段后的灵位，而用兰后的灵位代替。
English: Murongdiao then stopped asking the Confucians, and finally moved away from the position after the paragraph, and replaced it with the position after the line.

古文：又以景昭可足浑后倾覆社稷，追废之；尊烈祖昭仪段氏为景德皇后，配享列祖。
现代文：又因为景昭可足浑后使国家倾覆，追废了她。尊奉烈祖慕容俊的昭仪段氏为景德皇后，与烈祖的灵位供奉在一起。
English: She was also dethroned because she overthrew the country after the death of Emperor Jingzhao. Empress Jingde, revered as the spiritual ancestor of Emperor Murongjun, was revered as the spiritual ancestor of Emperor Jingzhao.

古文：崔鸿曰： 齐桓公命诸侯无发妾为妻。
现代文：崔鸿曰：齐桓公命令诸侯王不能以妾为妻。
English: Cui Hong said: Prince Qi Huan ordered the princes not to take concubines as wives.

古文：夫之于妻，犹不可以妾代之，况子而易其母乎？
现代文：丈夫对于妻子，尚且不能以妾来代替，何况是儿子来改换他的母亲呢！
English: A husband cannot replace his wife with a concubine, and a son cannot replace his mother.

古文：《春秋》所称母以子贵者，君母既没，得以妾母为小君也；至于享祀宗庙，则成风终不得配庄公也。
现代文：《春秋》中所说的母亲因为儿子而尊贵的话，是指生母死后，可以让妾母转而为正。至于在宗庙里供奉的牌位，则鲁庄公之妾成风最终也不能和鲁庄公供奉在一起。
English: In "Spring and Autumn," when the mother is honored because of her son, it means that after the death of the birth mother, the concubine mother can be turned into the righteous one. As for the cards offered in the ancestral temple, Lu Zhuang's concubine Chengfeng could not be offered together with Lu Zhuang after all.

古文：君父之所为，臣子必习而效之，犹形声之于影响也。
现代文：君主、父亲之所为，臣下、儿子必然要学习而后效仿，这就像形体之于影子，声音之于回响一样。
English: What the prince, the father, does, the vassal, the son, must learn and imitate, as the body is to the shadow, and the voice to the echo.

古文：宝之逼杀其母，由垂为之渐也。
现代文：慕容宝威逼杀害他的母亲，就是从慕容垂那里受到了影响。
English: Murong Baowei forced to kill his mother was influenced by Murong Tie.

古文：尧、舜之让，犹为之、哙之祸，况违礼而纵私者乎？
现代文：战国时以尧、舜那样的禅让，尚且还出现了子之、燕王哙那样的祸乱，何况是违背礼法放纵私情的人呢！
English: During the Warring States period, there were Zen masters like Zou and Zou, but there were also disasters like Zizhi and Yan Wang and Zou, not to mention those who violated etiquette and indulged in personal affairs!

古文：昔文姜得罪于桓公，《春秋》不之废。
现代文：过去文姜在鲁桓公面前犯了罪，据《春秋》的记载后来也没有黜废她。
English: In the past, Wen Jiang committed a crime in front of Lu Huan. According to the records of "Spring and Autumn," she was not decadent afterwards.

古文：可足浑氏虽有罪于前朝，然小君之礼成矣；垂以私憾废之，又立兄妾之无子者，皆非礼也。
现代文：可是浑氏虽然有罪于前朝，但对待她这样的皇后的礼法已有成规，慕容垂因为私恨而废黜了她，又立哥哥的妻妾中没有儿子的人作为皇太后，这些全都违背了礼法。
English: However, although Hun was guilty in the previous dynasty, the etiquette of treating a queen like her had already been established. Murong Tie deposed her out of self-hatred, and appointed his brother's wife and concubine, who had no son, as empress dowager. All of these were against the etiquette.

古文：刘显自善无南走马邑，其族人奴真帅所部降于代。
现代文：刘显从善无向南逃奔到马邑，他的同族人刘奴真率领部众向代国请求投降。
English: Liu Xian fled south from Shanwu to Mayi, and his compatriot Liu Nuzhen led the people to request the country to surrender.

古文：奴真有兄犍，先居贺兰部，奴真言于代王珪，请召犍而以所部让之；珪许之。
现代文：刘奴真有个哥哥叫刘，以前居住在贺兰部，刘奴真向代王拓跋进言，请求征召刘前来，让他统领自己的部众，拓跋同意了。
English: Liu Nuzhen had an older brother named Liu, who used to live in Helanbu. Liu Nuzhen proposed to the acting king Tuoba, requesting that Liu be summoned to come and let him command his subordinates. Tuoba agreed.

古文：犍既领部，遣弟去斤遗贺讷金马。
现代文：刘统领了部众以后，派他的弟弟刘去斤给贺讷送去金子和马。
English: After Liu had led his followers, he sent his younger brother Liu to Jin to send gold and horses to Honna.

古文：贺染干谓去斤曰： 待汝兄弟厚，汝今领部，宜来从我。 
现代文：贺染干对刘去斤说： 我对待你们兄弟很优厚，如今你们统领了部众，应该来归附我。 
English: He Zeng Gan said to Liu Dejin: I have treated your brothers very well. Now that you are in charge of your subordinates, you should return to me.

古文：去斤许之。
现代文：刘去斤答应了。
English: Liu reluctantly agreed.

古文：奴真怒曰： 我祖父以来，世为代忠臣，故我以部让汝等，欲为义也。
现代文：刘奴真愤怒地说： 我们自从祖父以来，世代都是代国的忠臣，所以我才把部众交给了你们，想让你们奉行道义。
English: Liu Nuzhen said angrily, "Since our grandfathers, we have been loyal servants of the state for generations. That is why I handed over my subordinates to you. I wanted you to be moral.

古文：今汝等无状，乃谋叛国，义于何在！ 
现代文：如今你们毫无德行，反而阴谋叛国，道义何在！ 
English: Now you have no virtue, but conspire to commit treason, where is the morality!

古文：遂杀犍及去斤。
现代文：于是就杀了刘及刘去斤。
English: So he killed Liu and Liu went to jail.

古文：染干闻之，引兵攻奴真，奴真奔代。
现代文：贺染干听说以后，带领军队攻打刘奴真，刘奴真逃奔到代国。
English: After He Zeng Gan heard about it, he led the army to attack Liu Nuzhen, and Liu Nuzhen fled to Dai Province.

古文：珪遣使责染干，染干乃止。
现代文：拓跋派使者去责备贺染干，贺染干才停止了行动。
English: Tuoba sent an envoy to reprimand He Zeng Gan, but He Zeng Gan only stopped the action.

古文：西燕左仆射慕容恒、尚书慕容永袭段随，杀之；立宜都王子顗为燕王，改元建明，帅鲜卑男女四十馀万口去长安而东。
现代文：西燕仆射慕容恒、尚书慕容永袭击段随，把他杀掉了。立宜都王慕容恒的儿子慕容为燕王，改年号为建明，率领鲜卑男女四十多万人离开长安东去。
English: Western Yan servants shot Murong Heng and Shang Shu Murong Yong followed the attack and killed him. Murong, the son of the Yidu king Murong Heng, was named Yan Wang, and the year name was changed to Jianming. He led more than 400,000 men and women to leave Chang'an East.

古文：恒弟护军将军韬，诱顗于临晋，恒怒，舍韬去咏与武卫将军刁云帅众攻韬。韬败，奔恒营。
现代文：慕容恒的弟弟护军将军慕容韬诱骗慕容，在临晋杀掉了他，慕容恒很愤怒，丢下慕容韬离开了。慕容永与武卫将军刁云率领兵众攻打慕容韬，慕容韬失败，逃奔到慕容恒的军营。
English: Murong Heng's younger brother, Murong Yao, a military escort general, tricked Murong and killed him in Linjin. Murong Heng was very angry and left Murong Yao. Murong Yong and Wuwei general Zou Yun led the troops to attack Murong Yao. Murong Yao failed and fled to Murong Heng's military camp.

古文：恒立西燕主冲之子瑶为帝，改元建平，谥冲曰威皇帝。
现代文：慕容恒立西燕国主慕容冲的儿子慕容瑶为帝，改年号为建平，给慕容冲定谥号为威皇帝。
English: Murong Heng made Murong Qian, the son of Murong Chong, the lord of Xiyan, the emperor, changed the era name to Jianping, and gave Murong Qian the posthumous name Wei Emperor.

古文：众皆去瑶奔永，永执瑶，杀之，立慕容泓子忠为帝，改元建武。
现代文：兵众全都离开慕容瑶投奔慕容永，慕容永抓获了慕容瑶，杀掉了他，立慕容泓的儿子慕容忠为帝，改年号为建武。
English: All the soldiers left Murongtao and went to Murongyong. Murongyong captured Murongtao and killed him. Murongtao's son, Murongzhong, was made emperor, and the era name was changed to Jianwu.

古文：忠以永为太尉，守尚书令，封河东公。
现代文：慕容忠任命慕容永为太尉，暂任尚书令，封为河东公。
English: Murong Yong was appointed by Murong Zhong to be a second lieutenant, temporarily acting as Shang Shuling, and was given the title of Lord of Hedong.

古文：永持法宽平，鲜卑安之。
现代文：慕容永施行法令宽松平和，鲜卑人安居乐业。
English: Murongyong's enforcement of the law is relaxed and peaceful, and people can live and work in peace.

古文：至闻喜，闻燕主垂已称尊号，不敢进，筑燕熙城而居之。
现代文：慕容永到了闻喜，听说后燕国主慕容垂已经称帝号，不敢继续前进，修筑燕熙城居住。
English: Murong Yong heard the news and was delighted. He heard that the ruler of the Later Yan Kingdom, Murong Dui, had been given the title of emperor. He did not dare to go ahead and build Yanxi City to live in.

古文：鲜卑既东，长安空虚。
现代文：鲜卑人既已东去，长安空虚。
English: Now that the Xianbei people have gone to the east, Chang'an is empty.

古文：前荥阳太守高陵赵穀等招杏城卢水胡郝奴，帅户四千入于长安，温北皆应之，以穀为丞相。
现代文：从前的荥阳太守高陵人赵谷等人招纳杏城的卢水胡人郝奴率领四千户人家进入长安，渭北的人们全都响应他，以赵谷作为丞相。
English: Zhao Gu, the former governor of Shenyang and a native of Gaoling, and others recruited Lu Shui, Hu Ren and Xiong Niu from Xiangcheng to lead four thousand households into Chang'an. The people in northern Shandong all responded to him, with Zhao Gu as the prime minister.

古文：扶风王穀有众数千，保据马嵬，奴遣弟多攻之。
现代文：扶风人王有数千兵众，据守马嵬，郝奴派弟弟郝多攻打他。
English: Fu Feng Ren Wang had thousands of soldiers, and according to the guard Ma Wei, Yan Nong sent his younger brother Yan Duo to attack him.

古文：夏，四月，后秦王苌自安定伐之，渭奔汉中。
现代文：夏季，四月，后秦王姚苌从安定出发讨伐他们，王逃奔汉中。
English: In the summer, in April, the late Qin King Yao Jie set out from Ding'an to fight them, and the king fled to Hanzhong.

古文：苌执多而进，奴惧，请降，拜镇北将军、六谷大都督。
现代文：姚苌抓获了郝多以后继续前进，郝奴害怕了，请求投降，姚苌给他授官镇北将军、六谷大都督。
English: After Yao Yao captured Xinduo, he continued to advance. Xinduo was scared and asked to surrender. Yao Yao awarded him the position of Zhenbei General and Rokkoku Grand Governor.

古文：癸巳，以尚书仆射陆纳为左仆射，谯王恬为右仆射。
现代文：癸巳，东晋任命尚书仆射陆纳为左仆射，谯王司马恬为右仆射。
English: At the same time, the Eastern Jin Dynasty appointed Shang Shuxu's servant Lu Na as his left-hand servant and Wang Shima as his right-hand servant.

古文：纳，玩之子也。
现代文：陆纳是陆玩的儿子。
English: Lu Na is the son of Lu Yu.

古文：毛兴袭击王广，败之，广奔秦州；陇西鲜卑匹兰执广送后秦。
现代文：毛兴袭击王广，打败了他，王广逃奔秦州。陇西的鲜卑人匹兰抓获了王广，把他送到后秦。
English: Mao Xing attacked Wang Guang, defeated him, and Wang Guang fled to Qin State. Pilan, a commoner from Shaanxi, captured Wang Guang and sent him to Houqin.

古文：兴复欲攻王统于上邽，枹罕诸氐皆厌苦兵事，乃共杀兴，推卫平为河州刺史，遣使请命于秦。
现代文：毛兴又想在上攻打王统，罕的众氐族人都厌恶战事，于是就一起杀掉了毛兴，推举卫平为河州刺史，派使者去前秦请求指令。
English: Mao Xing also wanted to attack Wang Tong in Shang. The rare Qiang people all abhorred war, so they killed Mao Xing together, promoted Wei Ping as the prefect of Hezhou, and sent an envoy to Qian Qin to request instructions.

古文：燕主垂封其子农为辽西王，麟为赵王，隆为高阳王。
现代文：后燕国主慕容垂封他的儿子慕容农为辽西王，慕容麟为赵王，慕容隆为高阳王。
English: Later, Murong Nong, the ruler of Yan, crowned his son Murong Nong as the king of Liaoxi, Murong Lin as the king of Zhao, and Murong Long as the king of Gaoyang.

古文：代王珪改称魏王。
现代文：代王拓跋开始改称魏王。
English: King Tuoba began to change his name to Wei Wang.

古文：张大豫自杨坞进屯姑臧城西，王穆及秃发思复鞬子奚于帅众三万屯于城南；吕光出击，大破之，斩奚于等二万馀级。
现代文：张大豫从杨坞进军驻扎在姑臧城西，王穆及秃发思复的儿子秃发奚于率领三万兵众驻扎在城南，吕光出城攻击，把他们打得大败，斩杀了秃发奚于等二万多人。
English: Zhang Dayu marched from Yangshuo and was stationed in the west of Guzheng. Wang Mu and Baldassare's son, Baldassare Yu, led 30,000 soldiers stationed in the south of the city. Lu Guang attacked from the city, defeated them and killed more than 20,000 people including Baldassare Yu.

古文：秦大赦，以卫平为抚军将军、河州刺史，吕光为车骑大将军、凉州牧。
现代文：前秦实行大赦，任命卫平为抚军将军、河州刺史，任命吕光为车骑大将军、凉州牧。
English: Before the Qin Dynasty, an amnesty was implemented, appointing Weiping as the general of the Fuzhu army and Hezhou Zhishi, and appointing Luguang as the general of the chariot and cavalry and Liangzhou Mucun.

古文：使者皆没于后秦，不能达。
现代文：传达任命的使者全都落于后秦之手，没能到达目的地。
English: The messengers who conveyed the appointment all fell into the hands of Hou Qin and failed to reach their destination.

古文：燕主垂以范阳王德为尚书令，太原王楷为左仆射，乐浪王温为司隶校尉。
现代文：后燕国主慕容垂任命范阳王慕容德为尚书令，太原王慕容楷为左仆射，乐浪王慕容温为司隶校尉。
English: Later, the lord of the Yan Kingdom, Murong Li, appointed Fan Yang Wang Murong De as Shang Shuling, Taiyuan Wang Murong Kai as Zuopu Ya, and Le Lang Wang Murong Wen as Sili.

古文：后秦王苌即皇帝位于长安，大赦，改元建初，国号大秦。
现代文：后秦王姚苌在长安即皇帝位，实行大赦，改年号为建初，立国号为大秦。
English: After the Qin Dynasty, King Yao Jie was enthroned in Chang'an, and a general amnesty was implemented. The year was changed to Jianzhu, and the country was named Great Qin.

古文：追尊其父弋仲为景元皇帝，立妻虵氏为皇后，子兴为皇太子。置百官。
现代文：追尊他的父亲姚弋仲为景元皇帝，立妻子氏为皇后，儿子姚兴为皇太子，设置百官。
English: He appointed his father, Yao Xizhong, as the emperor of Jingyuan, his wife as the empress, and his son, Yao Xing, as the crown prince, setting up hundreds of officials.

古文：苌与群臣宴，酒酣，言曰： 诸卿皆与朕北面秦朝，今忽为君臣，得无耻乎！ 
现代文：姚苌与群臣聚宴，酒喝到尽兴时，说道： 你们全都与朕北面称臣于秦朝，今天突然成为君臣关系，不感到耻辱吗？ 
English: When Yao Yao was having a banquet with his vassals and drinking wine to his heart's content, he said: Aren't you ashamed that all of you and I, who were once vassals of the Qin Dynasty, have suddenly become vassals today?

古文：赵迁曰： 天不耻以陛下为子，臣等何耻为臣！ 
现代文：赵迁说： 上天不耻于以陛下作为儿子，我们为什么耻于作为臣下呢！ 
English: Zhao Qian said: Heaven is not ashamed to have His Majesty as a son, why should we be ashamed to be a subject?

古文：苌大笑。
现代文：姚苌开怀大笑。
English: Yao Yao burst out laughing.

古文：魏王珪东如陵石，护佛侯部帅侯辰、乙佛部帅代题皆叛走。
现代文：魏王拓跋到东面的陵石，护佛侯部的主帅侯辰、乙佛部的主帅代题全都背叛逃走。
English: Wei Wang Tuoba went to the east of the mausoleum, the head coach of the Buddhist Protection Division, Hou Chen, and the head coach of the Second Buddhist Protection Division, Zetai, all betrayed and fled.

古文：诸将请追之，珪曰： 侯辰等累世服役，有罪且当忍之。
现代文：众将领请求追击他们，拓跋说： 侯辰等人世代为我们效劳，有罪过也应该暂且容忍他们。
English: The generals requested that they be pursued, and Tuoba said: "Hou Chen and others have served us for generations, and their crimes should be tolerated for the time being.

古文：方今国家草创，人情未壹，愚者固宜前却，不足追也！ 
现代文：如今国家刚刚建立，人心尚未统一，愚昧的人本来就是进退无常，不值得追击！ 
English: Now the country has just been established, people's hearts have not yet been unified, and ignorant people are inherently unstable and not worth pursuing!

古文：六月，庚寅，以前辅国将军杨亮为雍州刺史，镇卫山陵。
现代文：六月，庚寅，东晋任命以前的辅国将军杨亮为雍州刺史，镇守戍卫洛阳的陵庙。
English: In June, the Eastern Jin Dynasty appointed Yang Liang, a former auxiliary general, as the chief historian of Yongzhou and the town guard of Luoyang's mausoleum.

古文：荆州刺史桓石民遣将军晏谦击弘农，下之。
现代文：荆州刺史桓石民派将军晏谦攻打弘农，攻了下来。
English: Jingzhou's pro-Shi Kuan Shih people's faction general Zou Qian attacked Hongnong and took it down.

古文：初置湖、陕二戍。
现代文：开始设置了湖、陕二县的戍卫。
English: At the beginning, the garrisons of Hubei and Shaanxi were established.

古文：西燕刁云等杀西燕主忠，推慕容永为使持节、大都督中外诸军事、大将军、大单于、雍、秦、梁、凉四州牧、录尚书事、河东王，称籓于燕。
现代文：西燕的刁云等人杀掉了西燕国主慕容忠，推举慕容永为使持节、大都督中外诸军事、大将军、大单于以及雍、秦、梁、凉四州牧，录尚书事，河东王，向后燕称藩。
English: Xiyan's Jinyun and others killed Xiyan's sovereign, Murongzhong, and elected Murongyong as the envoy, the great military governor, the great general, the great single, and the Yong, Qin, Liang, and Liang four state pastors, the king of Shandong, and the king of Hedong. Later, Yan was called the domain.

古文：燕主垂遣太原王楷、赵王麟、陈留王绍、章武王宙攻秦苻定、苻绍、苻谟、苻亮等；楷先以书与之，为陈祸福，定等皆降。
现代文：后燕国主慕容垂派太原王慕容楷、赵王慕容麟、陈留王慕容绍、章武王慕容宙攻打前秦苻定、苻绍、苻谟、苻亮等。慕容楷先写信送给了他们，为他们陈述祸福，苻定等人全都投降。
English: Later, the lord of Yan Province, Murong Li, sent the Taiyuan King Murong Kai, Zhao King Murong Lin, Chen Liu King Murong Shao, Zhang Wu King Murong to attack the former Qin Yu Ding, Yu Shao, Yu Moo, Yu Liang and so on. Murong Kai sent a letter to them, stating the misfortunes and blessings for them, and the Yu Ding and others all surrendered.

古文：垂封定等为侯，曰： 以酬秦主之德。 
现代文：慕容垂封苻定等人为侯，说： 以此来报答秦国主苻坚的恩德。 
English: Murong Tuifeng, Yu Ding and others were the guests and said, "This is to repay the kindness of the Qin sovereign Yu Jian."

古文：秦主丕以都督中外诸军事、司徒、录尚书事王永为左丞相，太尉、东海王纂为大司马，司空张虵为太尉，尚书令咸阳徐义为司空，司隶校尉王腾为骠骑大将军、仪同三司。
现代文：前秦国主苻丕任命都督中外诸军事、司徒、录尚书事王永为左丞相，任命太尉、东海王苻纂为大司马，任命司空张蚝为太尉，任命尚书令咸阳人徐义为司空，任命司隶校尉王腾为骠骑大将军、仪同三司。
English: The former ruler of Qin appointed Wang Yong, the military governor of the Middle and Outer Provinces, as the Left Vice-Minister of the Military, the Secretary of the Military, and the Recorder of the Military, appointed the First Lieutenant of the East Sea, Wang Xizang, as the Grand Secretary of the Horse, appointed the First Lieutenant of the Air Force, Zhang Jun as the First Lieutenant of the Air Force, appointed the First Lieutenant of the Air Force, Xu Yi of Xianyang as the First Lieutenant of the Air Force, and appointed the First Lieutenant of the Air Force, Wang Teng, as the General of the Cavalry and the Third Secretary of the Air Force.

古文：永传檄四方公侯、牧守、垒主、民豪，共讨姚苌、慕容垂，令各帅所统，以孟冬上旬会大驾于临晋。
现代文：王永向各地的公侯、州牧郡守、垒主、豪族传递檄文，共同讨伐姚苌、慕容垂，命令他们各自率领所统辖的部众，以十月上旬为期，在临晋与前秦国主汇合。
English: Wang Yong passed the imperial edict to princes, provincial and county governors, fortress owners, and powerful clans in various regions to jointly fight against Yao Xuan and Murong Tu, and ordered them to lead their subordinates under their respective jurisdiction to join the former Qin sovereign in Linjin by the beginning of October.

古文：于是天水姜延、冯翊寇明、河东王昭、新平张晏、京兆杜敏、扶风马朗、建忠将军、高平牧官都尉扶风王敏等咸承檄起兵，各有众数万，遣使诣秦，丕皆就拜将军、郡守，封列侯。
现代文：于是天水人姜延、冯翊人寇明、河东人王昭、新平人张晏、京兆人杜敏、扶风人马朗及建忠将军、高平牧官都尉扶风人王敏等，全都禀承檄文起兵，各自拥有兵众数万人，派使者到前秦，苻丕全都授予他们将军、郡守职位，封为列侯。
English: As a result, Jiang Yan from Tianshui, Kou Ming from Fengye, Wang Zhao from Hedong, Zhang Ye from Xinping, Du Min from Jingzhao, Malang from Fengye, General Jian Zhong, and Wang Min from Gaoping, all of whom had tens of thousands of soldiers and sent envoys to Qianqin, all of whom were awarded the positions of general and county governor, and were made lords.

古文：冠军将军邓景拥众五千据彭池，与窦冲为首尾，以击后秦。
现代文：冠军将军邓景拥有五千兵众据守彭池，与窦冲首尾呼应，用以攻击后秦。
English: The champion general Deng Jing had five thousand soldiers guarding Pengchi, echoing with Dou Chong, to attack Houqin.

古文：丕以景为京兆尹。
现代文：苻丕任命邓景为京兆尹。
English: He appointed Deng Jing as the new emperor.

古文：景，羌之子也。
现代文：邓景是邓羌的儿子。
English: Deng Jing is the son of Deng Yao.

古文：后秦主苌徙安定五千馀户于长安。
现代文：后秦王姚苌把安定的五千多户人家迁徙到长安。
English: After the Qin Dynasty, King Yao Jie moved more than 5,000 households to Chang'an.

古文：秋，七月，秦平凉太守金熙、安定都尉没弈干与后秦左将军姚方成战于孙丘谷，方成兵败。
现代文：秋季，七月，前秦平凉太守金熙、安定都尉没弈干与后秦左将军姚方成在孙丘谷交战，姚方成的军队失败。
English: In the autumn, in July, the former Qin emperor Ping Liang's grand marshal Kim Xi and the captain of the stabilization army did not dare to fight with the late Qin general Yao Fangcheng in Sun Qiu Valley, and Yao Fangcheng's army failed.

古文：后秦主苌以其弟征虏将军绪为司隶校尉，镇长安；自将至安定击熙等，大破之。
现代文：后秦国主姚苌任命他的弟弟征虏将军姚绪为司隶校尉，镇守长安。自己统领部队抵达安定，攻打金熙等人，把他们打得大败。
English: Later, the ruler of Qin, Yao Xi, appointed his younger brother, the conscript general Yao Xu, as the captain of Sili and the town guard of Chang'an. He led his troops to stability, attacked Kim Xi and others, and defeated them.

古文：金熙本东胡之种；没弈干，鲜卑多兰部帅也。
现代文：金熙本来属东胡种族；没弈干是鲜卑多兰部的首领。
English: Kim Hee originally belonged to the Eastern Hu ethnic group; he was the leader of the Lower Korean and Korean ethnic groups.

古文：枹罕诸氐以卫平衰老，难为成功，议废之，而惮其宗强，累日不决。氐啖青谓诸将曰： 大事宜时定，不然，变生。
现代文：枹罕的众氐族部落，因为卫平年老，难以与他成就功业，商量要废黜他，但害怕他宗族的强大，好多天都没有决定下来，氐人啖青对众将领说： 重大事情应该及时决定，不然，就会产生变故。
English: Because Wei Ping was old, it was difficult for the Yao tribes in Shan to accomplish their tasks with him. They discussed to depose him, but they were afraid of the strength of his clan, and they did not decide for many days. The Yao people said to the generals: Important things should be decided in time, otherwise, there will be changes.

古文：诸君但请卫公为会，观我所为。 
现代文：诸君只要请求卫平召集聚会就行了，看我的行动。 
English: All you have to do is ask Wei Ping to convene a meeting, and see what I do.

古文：会七夕大宴，青抽剑而前曰： 今天下大乱，吾曹休戚同之，非贤主不可以济大事。
现代文：正逢七月初七大宴聚会，啖青拔剑上前说： 如今天下大乱，我们休戚与共，没有贤明的君主无法成就大事。
English: At the 7th Grand Banquet in early July, Indigo drew his sword and said, "If there is a great disturbance today, we will stand together in solidarity. Without a wise monarch, great things cannot be accomplished."

古文：卫公老，宜返初服以避贤路。狄道长苻登，虽王室疏属，志略雄明，请共立之，以赴大驾。
现代文：卫公已经年老，应该辞去官职为贤人晋升让开道路，狄道首领苻登，虽然是王室的远亲，但志向才略宏伟英明，请求共同立他为首领，以奔赴秦国主苻丕。
English: The Duke of Wei was already old and should have resigned from his official position to make way for the promotion of wise men. The leader of the Didao, Zenden, although a distant relative of the royal family, was ambitious and wise, and asked to jointly establish him as the leader to go to the capital of Qin.

古文：诸君有不同者，即下异议！ 
现代文：诸君如有不同意的，马上说出不同的看法。 
English: If you do not agree, immediately express a different opinion.

古文：乃奋剑攘袂，将斩异己者。
现代文：接着就挥剑捋袖，准备斩杀持不同意见的人。
English: He then brandished a sword and prepared to kill those who disagreed with him.

古文：众皆从之，莫敢仰视。
现代文：众人全都服从了他，没有人敢仰头观望。
English: Everyone obeyed him, and no one dared to look up.

古文：于是推登为使持节、都督陇右诸军事、抚军大将军、雍、河二州牧、略阳公，帅众五万，东下陇，攻南安，拔之，驰使请命于秦。
现代文：于是便推举苻登为使持节、都督陇右诸军事、抚军大将军及雍、河二州牧，略阳公，率领五万兵众，东下陇郡，攻打南安，攻了下来，迅速派使者到前秦请求指令。
English: Therefore, he proposed that the general of the military, the general of the military and the general of the army of Yong, He Erzhou Maki, and Liangyang, led by fifty thousand soldiers, attack Nan'an County in the east and attack it, and quickly sent an envoy to Qian Qin to request instructions.

古文：登，秦主丕族子也。
现代文：苻登是前秦国主苻丕同族兄弟的儿子。
English: Zheng Deng was the son of the former Qin sovereign Zheng Deng's brother.

古文：祕宜与莫侯悌眷帅其众三万馀户降于乞伏国仁，国仁拜宜东秦州刺史，悌眷梁州刺史。
现代文：祕宜与莫侯悌眷率领他们的三万多户部众投降了乞伏国仁，乞伏国仁给秘宜授官东秦州刺史，给莫侯悌眷授官梁州刺史。
English: Shigeyoshi, together with more than thirty thousand households led by relatives of Mokhou, surrendered and begged Guo Ren. Guo Ren granted Shigeyoshi the post of East Qin State Historian and granted Mokhouyoshi the post of Liang State Historian.

古文：已酉，魏王珪还盛乐，代题复以部落来降，十馀日，又奔刘显；珪使其孙倍斥代领其众。
现代文：己酉，魏王拓跋回到盛乐，代题又带领部落前来投降，十多天以后，又投奔了刘显。拓跋让他的孙子倍斤代替他统领其兵众。
English: When Wei King Tuoba returned to Shengle, he led the tribe to surrender. Ten days later, he joined Liu Xian. Tuoba asked his grandson Beilin to lead his troops in his place.

古文：刘显弟肺泥帅众降魏。
现代文：刘显的弟弟刘肺泥率领兵众投降了魏国。
English: Liu Xian's younger brother Liu Lungdei led the troops to surrender to Wei.

古文：八月，燕主垂留太子宝守中山，以赵王麟为尚书右仆射，录留台。
现代文：八月，后燕国主慕容垂留下太子慕容宝守卫中山，任命赵王慕容麟为尚书右仆射，总领留台。
English: In August, Emperor Wu of Yan left Prince Murong Bao to guard Zhongshan, and appointed Zhao Wang Muronglin as his right-hand man, leaving the general in charge.

古文：庚午，自帅范阳王德等南略地，使高阳王隆东徇平原。
现代文：庚午，慕容垂亲自率领范阳王慕容德等人攻打南部地域，让高阳王慕容隆向东开辟平原地区。
English: In the afternoon of the 7th day of the 7th month, Murongdol personally led Fanyang King Murongde and others to attack the southern region, and let Goyang King Muronglong open up the plain area to the east.

古文：丁零鲜于乞保曲阳西山，闻垂南伐，出营望都，剽掠居民。
现代文：丁零人鲜于乞据守在曲阳以西的山岭，听说慕容垂到南方讨伐，出山驻扎在望都，抢掠当地民众。
English: Ding Zi, who was less than a beggar, stayed in the mountains to the west of Quyang. It is said that Murong went to the south to fight, and stationed in Bodu to rob the local people.

古文：赵王麟自出讨之，诸将皆曰： 殿下虚镇远征，万一无功而返，亏损威重，不如遣诸将讨之。 
现代文：赵王慕容麟准备亲自出征讨伐他，众将领都说： 殿下使镇守之地空虚而远征讨伐，万一无功而返，有损威严，不如派遣众将领去讨伐他。 
English: Zhao Wang Muronglin prepared to personally go out to fight him, and all the generals said: "Your highness, if you make the town's defense area empty and go on an expedition to fight, you will return with nothing and lose your dignity. It is better to send the generals to fight him."

古文：麟曰： 乞闻大驾在外，无所畏忌，必不设备，一举可取，不足忧也。 
现代文：慕容麟说： 鲜于乞听说国主在外，无所畏惧，一定不会设防，一举就可以攻取他，不值得忧虑。 
English: Muronglin said, "It is better to hear that the lord of the country is not there than to beg. He is fearless and will not set up a defense. He can be captured in one fell swoop. It is not worth worrying about.

古文：乃声言至鲁口，夜，回趣乞，比明，至其营；掩击，擒之。
现代文：于是就扬言前往鲁口，夜晚，回师直奔鲜于乞，等到天亮时，到了他的营地，突然发起攻击，擒获了鲜于乞。
English: So he threatened to go to Lukou. In the evening, he returned to his division and headed straight for Xiang Yu Qian. When he arrived at his camp at dawn, he suddenly launched an attack and captured Xiang Yu Qian.

古文：翟辽寇谯，硃序击走之。
现代文：翟辽进犯谯郡，朱序击退了他。
English: Zou Liao invaded Yixian County, and Zhu Xuan repulsed him.

古文：秦主丕以苻登为征西大将军、开府仪同三司、南安王，持节、州牧、都督，皆因其所称而授之。
现代文：前秦国主苻丕任命苻登为征西大将军、开府仪同三司、南安王，持节、州牧、都督，全都根据他的自称而加以正式任命。
English: The former ruler of Qin appointed him as General of the Western Expedition, Kaifu Rites and Three Departments, King of Nan'an, Jisai, State Pastor, and Governor, all of which were officially appointed according to his self-proclamation.

古文：又以徐义为右丞相。
现代文：又任命徐义为右丞相。
English: He also appointed Xu Yi as Minister of the Right.

古文：留王腾守晋阳，右仆射杨辅戍壶关，帅众四万，进屯平阳。
现代文：留下王腾镇守晋阳，右仆射杨辅戍守壶关，率领四万兵众，进军到平阳驻扎。
English: He left Wang Tengzhen to guard Jinyang, and his right-hand man, Yan Yangfu, to guard Juguan, and led 40,000 soldiers to march to Pingyang.

古文：初，后秦主苌之弟硕德统所部羌居陇上，闻苌起兵，自称征西将军，聚众于冀城以应之；以兄孙详为安远将军，据陇城，从孙训为安西将军，据南安之赤亭，与秦秦州刺史王统相持。
现代文：当初，后秦国主姚苌的弟弟姚硕德统领他的羌族部众驻守陇上，听说姚苌起兵后，就自称征西将军，在冀城聚集兵众以响应姚苌。姚苌任命哥哥的孙子姚详为安远将军，据守陇城，任命弟弟的孙子姚训为安西将军，据守南安的赤亭，与前秦秦州刺史王统相对峙。
English: At the beginning, Yao Shuode, the younger brother of the later Qin sovereign Yao Jie, led his people of the Yi nationality to garrison Jiaxiang. When he heard that Yao Jie had raised an army, he called himself the general of the Western Conquest and gathered soldiers in Jicheng to respond to Yao Jie. Yao Jie appointed his brother's grandson Yao Zhe as the general of Anyuan, the garrison of Jiaxiang, the appointment of his brother's grandson Yao Jie as the general of Anxi, the garrison of Nan'an's Chiting, and the confrontation with the former Qin and Qin

古文：苌自安定引兵会硕德攻统，天水屠各、略阳羌胡应之者一万馀户，秦略阳太守王皮降之。
现代文：姚苌从安定带领军队与姚硕德会合攻打王统，天水的屠各人、略阳的羌胡人响应他的有二万多户。前秦略阳太守王皮投降了姚苌。
English: Yao Xuan led the army from Ding'an to join with Yao Shuo De to attack Wang Du, and more than 20,000 households of Tu people in Tianshui and Yan Hu people in Liaoyang responded to him. The former Qin Liaoyang Daju Wang Pi surrendered to Yao Xuan.

古文：初，秦灭代，迁代王什翼犍少子窟咄于长安，从慕容永东徙，永以窟咄为新兴太守。
现代文：当初，前秦消灭了代国，把代王拓跋什翼犍的小儿子拓跋窟咄迁徙到了长安，后来他跟着慕容永向东迁徙，慕容永任命拓跋窟咄为新兴太守。
English: At first, the former Qin dynasty destroyed the dynasty and moved the youngest son of the king, Tuoba Guo, Tuoba Guo, to Chang'an. Later, he followed Murong Yong to the east, and Murong Yong appointed Tuoba Guo as the new crown prince.

古文：刘显遣其弟亢泥迎窟咄，以兵随之，逼魏南境，诸部骚动。
现代文：刘显派他的弟弟刘亢迎接拓跋窟咄，并带领军队跟随着他，威逼魏国的南部边境，众部落骚动不安。
English: Liu Xian sent his brother Liu Bei to meet Tuobao, and led the army to follow him, threatening the southern border of Wei, and the tribes were restless.

古文：魏王珪左右于桓等与部人谋执珪以应窟咄，幢将代人莫题等亦潜与窟咄交通。
现代文：魏王拓跋的身边侍从于桓等人与部落中的一些人谋划拘捕拓跋以响应拓跋窟咄，幢将代国人莫题等也暗中与拓跋窟咄相勾结。
English: Wei King Tuoba's entourage was accompanied by Yu Huan and others, and some people in the tribe plotted to arrest Tuoba in response to the Tuoba Grottoes, and the generals also secretly colluded with the Tuoba Grottoes.

古文：桓舅穆崇告之，珪诛桓等五人，莫题等七姓悉原不问。
现代文：于桓的舅舅穆崇告发了他们，拓跋斩杀了于桓等五人，对莫题等七人则全部原谅不追究。
English: Yu Huan's uncle Mu Chong denounced them, Tuoba killed five people including Yu Huan, and pardoned and did not investigate seven people including Mo Qi.

古文：珪惧内难，北逾阻山，复依贺兰部，遣外朝大人辽东安同求救于燕，燕主垂遣赵王麟救之。
现代文：拓跋害怕内部的人发难，便向北翻越阴山，又依附了贺兰部，派遣外朝大人辽东人安同去向后燕求救，后燕国主慕容垂派赵王慕容麟救援他们。
English: Tuoba was afraid that the people inside would be in trouble, so he climbed over the dark mountains to the north. He also attached himself to Helan, and sent adult Liaodong people from other dynasties to go to Houyan for help. The ruler of Houyan, Murong Li, sent Zhao Wang Murong Lin to rescue them.

古文：九月，王统以秦州降于后秦。
现代文：九月，王统献秦州投降了后秦。
English: In September, Wang Tongxian surrendered Qinzhou to Later Qin.

古文：后秦主苌以姚硕德为使持节、都督陇右诸军事、秦州刺史，镇上邽。
现代文：后秦国主姚苌任命姚硕德为使持节、都督陇右诸军事、秦州刺史，镇守上。
English: Later, the ruler of Qin State, Yao Xi, appointed Yao Shuode as the envoy of the festival, the military governor of the capital, the governor of Qin State, and the town guard.

古文：吕光得秦王坚凶问，举军缟素，谥曰文昭皇帝。
现代文：吕光获悉前秦王苻坚死的消息，全军将士都身穿白色丧服志哀，给苻坚定谥号为文昭皇帝。
English: Luguang learned the news of the death of the former Qin King Qian Jian. The soldiers of the whole army wore white mourning clothes and gave Qian Jian the nickname of Emperor Wen Zhao.

古文：冬，十月，大赦，改元大安。
现代文：冬季，十月，实行大赦，改年号为大安。
English: In winter, in October, an amnesty was implemented, and the year was changed to Da'an.

古文：西燕慕容永遣使诣秦主丕，求假道东归。丕弗许，与永战于襄陵，秦兵大败，左丞相王永、卫大将军俱石子皆死。
现代文：西燕慕容永派使者到前秦国主苻丕那里请求借道东返，苻丕不同意，与慕容永在襄陵交战，前秦的军队大败，左丞相王永、卫大将军俱石子全都战死。
English: Xiyan Murongyong sent an envoy to the former Qin sovereign Yan to request a route to return to the east. Yan did not agree, and fought with Murongyong at Xiangling. The former Qin army was defeated, and the Left Minister Wang Yong and the General of Wei Da were all killed in battle.

古文：初，东海王纂自长安来，麾下壮士三千馀人，丕忌之，既败，惧为纂所杀，帅骑数千南奔东垣，谋袭洛阳。
现代文：当初，东海王苻纂从长安来投奔苻丕，手下有勇士三千多人，苻丕非常忌恨他，等到苻丕失败以后，害怕被苻纂杀掉，就率领数千骑兵向南逃奔东垣，打算袭击洛阳。
English: At the beginning, the East Sea King Shikado came from Chang'an to attack Luoyang. He had more than 3,000 warriors under his command. Shikado hated him very much. After Shikado's defeat, afraid of being killed by Shikado, he led thousands of cavalry to flee south to Donggaki, intending to attack Luoyang.

古文：扬威将军冯该自陕邀击之，杀丕，执其太子宁、长乐王寿送建康；诏赦不诛，以付苻宏。
现代文：扬威将军冯该从陕城出发迎击他，斩杀了苻丕，抓获了他的太子苻宁、长东王苻寿，把他们送到了建康。朝廷下达诏令赦免他们，不予诛杀，把他们交给了苻宏。
English: Yangwei's general Feng Gai set out from Shaanxi to meet him, killed Zou, captured his princes Yan Ning and Changdong Wang Shou, and sent them to Jiankang. The imperial court issued a decree to pardon them, not to kill them, and handed them over to Zou Hong.

古文：纂与其弟尚书永平侯师奴帅秦众数万走据杏城，其馀王公百官皆没于永。
现代文：苻纂与他的弟弟尚书永平侯苻师奴率领前秦的数万兵众逃奔占据了杏城，其余的王公百官全都落入慕容永之手。
English: Gongzang and his younger brother, Shangshu Yongping, led tens of thousands of soldiers of the former Qin Dynasty to flee and occupied Xingcheng, and the remaining officials all fell into the hands of Murongyong.

古文：永遂进据长子，即皇帝位，改元中兴。
现代文：慕容永于是就进军占据了长子，即皇帝位，改年号为中兴。
English: Murong Yong then marched in to occupy his eldest son, the emperor, and changed his name to Zhongxing.

古文：将以秦后杨氏为上夫人，杨氏引剑刺永，为永所杀。
现代文：正准备要以前秦王后杨氏作为上夫人，杨氏拔剑刺击慕容永，被慕容永杀掉。
English: He was preparing to have the former Qin Queen Yang as his wife. Yang drew his sword to stab Murong Yong and was killed by Murong Yong.

古文：甲申，海西公弈薨于吴。
现代文：甲申，海西公司马奕在吴郡去世。
English: Gaoshin, Haixi Company Ma Yi passed away in Wuxi County.

古文：燕寺人吴深据清河反，燕主垂攻之，不克。
现代文：后燕宦官吴深占据清河反叛，后燕国主慕容垂攻打他，没有攻克。
English: Later, Yan Xuan official Wu Sheng occupied Qinghe and rebelled. Later, Yan sovereign Murong Dui attacked him, but failed to conquer him.

古文：后秦主苌还安定。
现代文：后秦国主姚苌回到了安定。
English: Later, the ruler of Qin, Yao Xi, returned to stability.

古文：秦南安王登既克南安，夷、夏归之者三万馀户，遂进攻姚硕德于秦州，后秦主苌自往救之。
现代文：前秦南安王苻登攻克了南安以后，夷人、汉人归附他的人有三万多户，于是他就进军秦州，攻打姚硕德，后秦国主姚苌亲自前往救援。
English: After the former Qin Nan'an king, Yao Deng, conquered Nan'an, more than thirty thousand households of barbarians and Han people were annexed to him. Therefore, he marched into Qin State and attacked Yao Shuo De. Later, the Qin sovereign, Yao Wei, personally went to the rescue.

古文：登与苌战于胡奴阜，大破之，斩首二万馀级，将军啖青射苌，中之。
现代文：苻登与姚苌在胡奴阜交战，大败姚苌，斩首二万多人，将军啖青射击姚苌，射中了他。
English: Yu Deng fought with Yao Yao in Hunufu, defeated Yao Yao, beheaded more than twenty thousand people, and shot Yao Yao by the general Zou Qing, who shot him.

古文：苌创重，走保上邽，姚硕德代之统众。
现代文：姚苌伤势严重，逃至上自保，姚硕德代替他统领部众。
English: Yao Yao was seriously injured and had to flee for his own safety. Yao Shuo De took his place to lead the troops.

古文：燕赵王麟军未至魏，拓跋窟咄稍前逼魏王珪，贺染干侵魏北部以应之。
现代文：后燕赵王慕容麟的军队没有抵达魏国，拓跋窟咄逐渐前进紧逼魏王拓跋，贺染干入侵魏国北部以响应他。
English: After Yan Zhao Wang Muronglin's army failed to reach Wei, Tuoba Guo gradually advanced and pressed Wei Wang Tuoba, He Zeng Gan invaded northern Wei to respond to him.

古文：魏众惊扰，北部大人叔孙普洛亡奔刘卫辰。
现代文：魏国的兵众惊恐混乱，北部大人叔孙普洛投奔刘卫辰。
English: The soldiers of Wei were terrified and confused, and the northern adult uncle and grandson of Pluo went to Liu Weichen.

古文：麟闻之，遽遣安同等归。
现代文：慕容麟听说以后，迅速派安同等人返回。
English: After Muronglin heard about it, he quickly sent a person of the same level as An to return.

古文：魏人知燕军在近，众心少安。
现代文：魏国人知道后燕的军队就在近处，众人的心里稍微安定了一点。
English: The Wei people knew that Hou Yan's army was nearby, and everyone's hearts were a little more stable.

古文：窟咄进屯高柳，珪引兵与麟会击之，窟咄大败，奔刘卫辰，卫辰杀之。
现代文：拓跋窟咄进军驻扎在高柳，拓跋带领军队与慕容麟会合攻打他，拓跋窟咄大败，逃奔刘卫辰，刘卫辰杀掉了他。
English: He marched into the Tuoba Grottoes and stationed his army in Gaoliu. Tuoba led the army to meet with Murong Lin to attack him. He was defeated in the Tuoba Grottoes and fled to Liu Weichen, who killed him.

古文：珪悉收其众，以代人库狄干为北部大人。
现代文：拓跋接收了他的全部兵众，任命代国人库狄干为北部大人。
English: Tuoba received all his soldiers and appointed his deputy, Kudikan, as the ruler of the north.

古文：麟引兵还中山。
现代文：慕容麟带领军队返回了中山。
English: Muronglin led the army back to Zhongshan.

古文：刘卫辰居朔方，士马甚盛。
现代文：刘卫辰驻军朔方，士兵战马非常强盛。
English: Liu Weichen was stationed on the Shuo side, and the soldiers were very strong.

古文：后秦主苌以卫辰为大将军、大单于、河西王、幽州牧，西燕主永以卫辰为大将军、朔州牧。
现代文：后秦国主姚苌任命刘卫辰为大将军、大单于、河西王、幽州牧，西燕国主慕容永任命刘卫辰为大将军、朔州牧。
English: Later, the Qin sovereign, Yao Wei, appointed Liu Weichen as the general, Datan Yu, the king of Hexi and Yuzhou Mu, and the Xiyan sovereign, Murong Yong, appointed Liu Weichen as the general and Shuozhou Mu.

古文：十一月，秦尚书寇遗奉勃海王懿、济北王昶自杏城奔南安，南安王登发丧行服，谥秦主丕曰哀平皇帝。
现代文：十一月，前秦尚书寇遗奉送勃海王苻懿、济北王苻昶从杏城投奔南安，南安王苻登公布了前秦国主苻丕死亡的消息，并为他服丧守孝，定立谥号为哀平皇帝。
English: In November, the remains of the former Qin Emperor Shang Shuko were sent to King Bao Hai and King Jibei, who fled from Ancheng to Nan'an. The King of Nan'an announced the news of the death of the former Qin Emperor Bao Jibei, and honored him with the title of "Emperor Paiping."

古文：登议立懿为主，众曰： 勃海王虽先帝之子，然年在幼冲，未堪多难。
现代文：苻登商议立苻懿为国主，众人说： 勃海王苻懿虽然是先帝的儿子，但是年龄幼小，没有经历过多的磨难。
English: The people said, "Although King Bo Hai is the son of the former emperor, he is young and has not experienced many hardships.

古文：今三虏窥觎，宜立长君，非大王不可。 
现代文：如今三国的敌人都在窥伺图谋我们，应该立年长的君主，此人非大王不可。 
English: Now that the enemies of the three countries are spying on us and plotting against us, we should install an elderly monarch, who must be a great king.

古文：登乃为坛于陇东，即皇帝位，大赦，改元太初，大置百官。
现代文：苻登于是就在陇东设立了祭坛，即皇帝位，实行大赦，改年号为太初，设置百官。
English: So in Shandong, Xu Deng set up an altar, that is, the emperor's throne, implemented an amnesty, changed the year to the beginning of the year, and set up a hundred officials.

古文：慕容柔、慕容盛及盛弟会皆在长子，盛谓柔、会曰： 主上已中兴幽、冀，东西未壹，吾属居嫌疑之地，为智为愚，皆将不免。不若以时东归，无为坐待鱼肉也。 
现代文：慕容柔、慕容盛以及慕容盛的弟弟慕容会全都在长子，慕容盛对慕容柔、慕容会说： 主上已在幽州、冀州中兴，但东西尚未统一，我们身居容易引起怀疑的地方，不管做得明智还是愚鲁，都将难免于祸，不如及时东归，不要干坐以待毙的事情！ 
English: Murong Rou, Murong Sheng, and Murong Sheng's brother Murong Hui are all in the eldest son. Murong Sheng would say to Murong Rou and Murong: The Lord has been in Yuzhou and Jizhou, but things have not yet been unified. We live in a place that is easy to arouse suspicion. Whether it is done wisely or foolishly, it will be difficult to avoid disaster. It is better to return to the East in a timely manner. Don't do things that wait for death!

古文：遂相与亡归燕。
现代文：于是他们就一起逃回了后燕。
English: So they fled back to Houyan together.

古文：后岁馀，西燕主永悉诛燕主俊及燕主垂之子孙，男女无遗。
现代文：此后一年多，西燕国主慕容永将前燕国主慕容俊及后燕国主慕容垂的子孙们全部诛杀，不论男女，无一遗漏。
English: After that, for more than a year, Murong Yong, the lord of the State of West Yan, killed all the descendants of the former Lord of the State of Yan, Murong Jun, and the later Lord of the State of Yan, Murong Du, both men and women, without missing a single one.

古文：张大豫自西郡入临洮，掠民五千馀户，保据俱城。
现代文：张大豫从西郡进入临洮，掳掠了五千多户百姓，据守俱城。
English: Zhang Dayu entered Linyi from West County, plundered more than five thousand households, and occupied the city.

古文：十二月，吕光自称使持节、侍中、中外大都督、督陇右、河西诸军事、大将军、凉州牧、酒泉公。
现代文：十二月，吕光自称使持节、侍中、中外大都督、督陇右、河西诸军事、大将军、凉州牧、酒泉公。
English: In December, Luguang claimed to be the envoy of the Jixi Festival, a chamberlain, the grand governor of China and foreign countries, the governor of Zhengyu, the military of Hexi, the general, the mayor of Liangzhou and the lord of Jiuquan.

古文：秦主登立世祖神主于军中，载以辎軿，建黄旗青盖，以虎贲三百人卫之，凡所欲为，必启主而后行。
现代文：前秦国主苻登在军队中设立了世祖苻坚的牌位，放在四周遮蔽的车乘里，并给车乘装上黄色的旗帜，蓝色的车盖，让三百名虎贲士兵守卫，凡是想干的事情，一定要先向苻坚的牌位报告，然后才行动。
English: In the army, the former Qin sovereign Yu Deng set up the position of the ancestor Yu Jian, placed it in a covered carriage, and equipped the carriage with a yellow flag, a blue cover, and let three hundred tiger soldiers guard it. Whatever you want to do, you must first report to the position of Yu Jian, and then act.

古文：引兵五万，东击后秦，将士皆刻鉾、铠为 死  休 字；每战以剑槊为方圆大阵，知有厚薄，从中分配，故人自为战，所向无前。
现代文：苻登带领五万军队，东进攻打后秦，将士们全都在头盔铠甲上刻了 死 、 休 二字，每逢战斗都用剑矛组成方圆大阵，知道了力量分布不均后，再重新调整，所以人人各自为战，所向无敌。
English: Zhou Deng led fifty thousand troops to attack the Eastern Qin Dynasty after the Eastern attack. The soldiers all engraved the words "death" and "rest" on their helmets and armor. Whenever they fought, they used swords and spears to form a large square array. After they knew the uneven distribution of power, they readjusted it, so everyone fought for themselves, and they were invincible.

古文：初，长安之将败也，中垒将军徐嵩、屯骑校尉胡空各聚众五千，结垒自固；既而受后秦官爵。
现代文：当初，长安将要失守的时候，中垒将军徐嵩、屯骑校尉胡空各自聚集五千兵众，构筑营垒自我固守。此后又接受了后秦授予的官职爵位。
English: At first, when Chang'an was about to be lost, the middle general Xu Song and the cavalry captain Hu Ku each gathered five thousand soldiers to build a camp to defend themselves. After that, they accepted the official rank conferred by the Later Qin Dynasty.

古文：后秦主苌以王礼葬秦主坚于二垒之间。
现代文：后秦国主姚苌以国王的礼仪把前秦国主苻坚安葬在二垒之间。
English: The late Qin Emperor Yao Jian buried the former Qin Emperor Shujian between the second base with the king's etiquette.

古文：及登至，嵩、空以众降之。
现代文：等到苻登抵达，徐嵩、胡空带领兵众投降了苻登。
English: When Xudeng arrived, Xu Song and Hu Kuang led the troops to surrender to Xudeng.

古文：登拜嵩雍州刺史，空京兆尹，改葬坚以天子之礼。
现代文：苻登授予徐嵩雍州刺史，授予胡空京兆尹，按天子的礼仪重新安葬了苻坚。
English: Yu Deng awarded Xu Song with the title of Yongzhou History, Hu Kong with the title of Beijing Zhaoyun, and re-buried Yu Jian according to the etiquette of the Son of Heaven.

古文：乙酉，燕主垂攻吴深垒，拔之，深单马走。垂进屯聊城之逢关陂。
现代文：乙酉，后燕国主慕容垂攻打吴深的营垒，攻了下来，吴深单身匹马逃走，慕容垂进军驻扎在聊城的逢关陂。
English: At the end of the war, Murong Diao, the ruler of Yan, attacked Wu Sheng's camp and defeated him. Wu Sheng escaped on a single horse, while Murong Diao marched into Fengguan, which was stationed in Liaocheng.

古文：初，燕太子洗马温详来奔，以为济北太守，屯东阿。
现代文：当初，后燕太子洗马温详前来投奔东晋，东晋任命他为济北太守，驻扎东阿。
English: At first, Emperor Yan's son Prince Zema Wenzhao came to the Eastern Jin Dynasty, and the Eastern Jin Dynasty appointed him as the governor of Jibei and stationed him in Donga.

古文：燕主垂遣范阳王德、高阳王隆攻之，详遣从弟攀守河南岸，子楷守碻磝以拒之。
现代文：后燕国主慕容垂派范阳王慕容德、高阳王慕容隆攻打他，温详派他的堂弟温攀坚守黄河南岸，派儿子温楷坚守以抵抗他们。
English: Later, the lord of Yan Province, Murong Li, sent Fan Yang Wang, Murong De, and Gaoyang King, Murong Long, to attack him. Wen Zi sent his cousin, Wen Pang, to defend the south bank of the Yellow River, and sent his son, Wen Kai, to resist them.

古文：燕主垂以魏王珪为西单于，封上谷王，珪不受。
现代文：后燕国主慕容垂任命魏王拓跋为西单于，封为上谷王。拓跋不予接受。
English: Later, Mu Rongtai, the ruler of Yan, appointed Wei King Tuoba as Xidan Yu, with the title of Shangguo King. Tuoba was not accepted.

