古文：张昭字子布，彭城人也。
现代文：张昭，字子布，彭城人。
English: Zhang Zhao, Zhibu, from Pengcheng.

古文：少好学，善隶书，从白侯子安受左氏春秋，博览众书，与琅邪赵昱、东海王朗俱发名友善。
现代文：年少时就很好学，擅长隶书，师从白侯子安学习《左氏春秋》，博览群书，与琅王牙人赵昱、东海人王朗一同显名，关系友好。
English: When he was young, he was very good at learning, good at reading and writing, and studied "The Spring and Autumn of Zuo Shi" from Bai Hou Zi An. He was well-versed in books, and was famous with Zhao Wei, a native of Wangya, and Wang Lang, a native of the East China Sea. They had a friendly relationship.

古文：弱冠察孝廉，不就，与朗共论旧君讳事，州里才士陈琳等皆称善之。
现代文：成年后被推举为孝廉，但他没有就任，和王朗一起讨论过去君王避讳之事，州里的才士陈琳等都很赞赏他。
English: After he became an adult, he was elected as a filial son, but he did not take office. Together with Wang Lang, they discussed the issue of shunning the king in the past. Chen Lin, a talented person in the state, appreciated him very much.

古文：刺史陶谦举茂才，不应，谦以为轻己，遂见拘执。
现代文：刺史陶谦推举他为茂才，他推辞不就，陶谦认为张昭轻视自己，于是将他收押起来。
English: The assassin, Tao Qian, nominated him as Mao Cai, but his refusal was not enough. Tao Qian thought that Zhang Zhao despised himself, so he detained him.

古文：昱倾身营救，方以得免。
现代文：赵昱竭尽全力解救，才免于一难。
English: Zhao Wei did his best to rescue her, and she was saved from a difficult situation.

古文：汉末大乱，徐方士民多避难扬土，昭皆南渡江。
现代文：汉末天下动乱，徐州一带士人百姓大多到扬州避难，张昭也南渡长江。
English: At the end of the Han Dynasty, the country was in turmoil. Most of the scholars and common people in the Xuzhou area took refuge in Yangzhou. Zhang Zhao also traveled south to the Yangtze River.

古文：孙策创业，命昭为长史、抚军中郎将，升堂拜母，如比肩之旧，文武之事，一以委昭。
现代文：孙策奠定东吴基业，以张昭为长史、抚军中郎将，和他一起登堂拜见母亲，如故交旧友，朝中文武大事，全部托付给张昭。
English: Sun Ce laid the foundation of Dongwu, with Zhang Zhao as the long history and the middle commander of the army, and went to the hall with him to visit his mother, such as the old friends, the important events of the Chinese martial arts, all entrusted to Zhang Zhao.

古文：昭每得北方士大夫书疏，专归美於昭，昭欲嘿而不宣则惧有私，宣之则恐非宜，进退不安。
现代文：张昭每次得到北方士大夫的书信函件，他们都将功劳归于张昭一人。张昭想藏而不传又担心被人误认有私情，如果上报又担心有不妥之处，进退两难，心中不安。
English: Every time Zhang Zhao received a letter or a letter from a scholar in the north, they all attributed the credit to Zhang Zhao alone. Zhang Zhao wanted to hide it and not pass it on, and was worried about being mistaken for having personal feelings. If he reported it, he was worried that there was something wrong. He was in a dilemma and felt uneasy.

古文：策闻之，欢笑曰： 昔管仲相齐，一则仲父，二则仲父，而桓公为霸者宗。
现代文：孙策得知这种情况后，高兴地笑着说： 古代管仲为齐国国相，人家开口仲父、闭口仲父，而齐桓公被天下称霸之人所尊崇。
English: After learning of this situation, Sun Ce smiled happily and said, "In ancient times, Guanzhong was the minister of Qi, and people talked to him and talked back to him, but Qi Kuan Gong was revered by the world's rulers.

古文：今子布贤，我能用之，其功名独不在我乎！ 
现代文：现在子布贤能，我能重用，他的功名难道不为我所有吗? 
English: Now that Zibuxian is able, I can reuse it. Isn't his fame all mine?

古文：策临亡，以弟权讬昭，昭率群僚立而辅之。
现代文：孙策临终前，把弟弟孙权托付给张昭，张昭率领朝臣拥立孙权并辅佐他。
English: Before his death, Sun Ce entrusted his younger brother Sun Quan to Zhang Zhao. Zhang Zhao led the courtiers to support Sun Quan and assisted him.

古文：上表汉室，下移属城，中外将校，各令奉职。
现代文：向汉朝呈上奏表，给各属县发公文，朝廷内外的官吏将领，则令他们各守其职。
English: A report form was submitted to the Han Dynasty, official documents were issued to each subordinate county, and officials and generals inside and outside the imperial court were ordered to perform their duties.

古文：权悲感未视事，昭谓权曰： 夫为人后者，贵能负荷先轨，克昌堂构，以成勋业也。
现代文：孙权因为悲痛没有主管政事，张昭就对他说： 作为国家继承人，贵在能继承先辈基业，让它兴盛强大，以成就伟大的功业。
English: As Sun Quan was not in charge of political affairs due to grief, Zhang Zhao said to him: As a national heir, you should be able to inherit the ancestral heritage, make it prosperous and strong, and achieve great feats.

古文：方今天下鼎沸，群盗满山，孝廉何得寝伏哀戚，肆匹夫之情哉？ 
现代文：现在天下动荡不安，盗贼依山作乱，孝廉您怎么能因悲伤而卧床不起，放纵个人的感情呢? 
English: Now the world is in turmoil, thieves are running amok, how can you be bedridden with grief and indulge your personal feelings?

古文：乃身自扶权上马，陈兵而出，然后众心知有所归。
现代文：于是他亲自扶着孙权上马，侍卫随后列队而出，这才使众人心中感觉有所依附。
English: So he personally helped Sun Quan onto the horse, and the attendants then lined up, which made everyone feel attached to him.

古文：昭复为权长史，授任如前。
现代文：张昭又担任孙权的长史，与从前接受同样的职任。
English: Zhang Zhao also served as the long history of Sun Quan, and received the same position as before.

古文：后刘备表权行车骑将军，昭为军师。
现代文：后来刘备上表任命孙权代理车骑将军，张昭做军师。
English: Later, Liu Bei appointed Sun Quan as the deputy general and Zhang Zhao as the military commander.

古文：权每田猎，常乘马射虎，虎常突前攀持马鞍。
现代文：孙权每次打猎，常乘马射虎，老虎曾突然前扑抓住他所坐的马鞍。
English: Every time Sun Quan went hunting, he often rode a horse to shoot a tiger. The tiger suddenly lunged forward and grabbed the saddle he was sitting on.

古文：昭变色而前曰： 将军何有当尔？
现代文：张昭脸色大变上前对孙权说： 将军您何须这样做。
English: Zhang Zhao's face changed dramatically and he said to Sun Quan: "General, why do you have to do this?

古文：夫为人君者，谓能驾御英雄，驱使群贤，岂谓驰逐於原野，校勇於猛兽者乎？
现代文：为人君主，是说能驾驭英雄，使用贤人，怎么是在原野奔驰追逐，与猛兽比较勇力呢!
English: To be a human monarch means to be able to control heroes and use sages. How is it possible to pursue a galloping horse in the wilderness and compare one's strength with a ferocious beast?

古文：如有一旦之患，奈天下笑何？ 
现代文：如果不慎出现意外，而受天下取笑该怎么办? 
English: What should you do if you accidentally have an accident and the world makes fun of you?

古文：权谢昭曰： 年少虑事不远，以此惭君。 
现代文：孙权向张昭道歉说： 我年轻考虑事情不深远，此事有愧于您。 
English: Sun Quan apologized to Zhang Zhao, saying, "I am too young to think that things are not far-reaching, and I am ashamed of this matter.

古文：然犹不能已，乃作射虎车，为方目，间不置盖，一人为御，自於中射之。
现代文：但孙权依然没有停止这件事，就做了一辆射虎车，车上开有方孔，孔洞上并没有板盖，一人驾车，他自己坐在车中从方孔向外射猎。
English: However, Sun Quan still didn't stop the matter, so he made a tiger-shooting car, with square holes on the car, and no plate cover on the holes. One person drove the car, and he himself sat in the car and shot from the square holes.

古文：时有逸群之兽，辄复犯车，而权每手击以为乐。
现代文：不时有离群的猛兽，动辄冲犯他的车子，而孙权却常以用手击打野兽为乐。
English: From time to time, a rogue beast would attack his car, but Sun Quan often took pleasure in beating the beast with his hands.

古文：昭虽谏争，常笑而不答。
现代文：张昭虽竭力劝谏，他也只是笑而不应。
English: Although Zhang Zhao tried his best to dissuade him, he just laughed and should not have.

古文：魏黄初二年，遣使者邢贞拜权为吴王。
现代文：魏黄初二年，魏国派遣使者邢贞授孙权为吴王。
English: In the second year of the Yellow Emperor's reign, the State of Wei dispatched an envoy, Zou Zhen, to confer the right of succession to King Wu.

古文：贞入门，不下车。
现代文：邢贞进入宫门却没有下车。
English: Yu Zhen entered the palace gate but did not get off.

古文：昭谓贞曰： 夫礼无不敬，故法无不行。
现代文：张昭对邢贞说： 礼节没有不讲究恭敬的，所以法律也全都施行。
English: Zhang Zhao said to Yu Zhen: There is no etiquette that does not pay attention to respect, so all laws are enforced.

古文：而君敢自尊大，岂以江南寡弱，无方寸之刃故乎！ 
现代文：而你胆敢妄自尊大，难道是认为江南人寡势弱，连一把用来执法行刑的小刀子也没有吗? 
English: And you dare to be arrogant, do you really think that people in the south of the Yangtze River are weak and do not even have a small knife used for law enforcement and execution?

古文：贞即遽下车。
现代文：邢贞立即下车。
English: Yan Zhen immediately got off the bus.

古文：拜昭为绥远将军，封由拳侯。
现代文：又以张昭担任绥远将军，封由拳侯。
English: He also appointed Zhang Zhao as the general of Suiyuan, and gave him the title of kenghou.

古文：权於武昌，临钓台，饮酒大醉。
现代文：孙权到武昌时，登临钓台，喝醉大醉。
English: When Sun Quan arrived in Wuchang, he went to the fishing platform and got very drunk.

古文：权使人以水洒群臣曰： 今日酣饮，惟醉堕台中，乃当止耳。 
现代文：他让人用水泼洒大臣们说： 今日痛饮，只有醉倒在台上，才能停止。 
English: He had water thrown over the ministers and said: "Drinking heavily today can only be stopped by falling down drunk on the stage."

古文：昭正色不言，出外车中坐。
现代文：张昭神色严肃没有说话，到外面车中坐着。
English: Zhang Zhao looked serious and did not speak. He went outside and sat in the car.

古文：权遣人呼昭还，谓曰： 为共作乐耳，公何为怒乎？ 
现代文：孙权派人喊他回来，对他说： 只是为了大家共同作乐罢了，您为什么生气呢? 
English: Sun Quan sent someone to call him back and said to him, "It's just for everyone to make music together. Why are you angry?

古文：昭对曰： 昔纣为糟丘酒池长夜之饮，当时亦以为乐，不以为恶也。 
现代文：张昭回答说： 过去商纣王修建酒糟山、美酒池而彻夜饮酒，当时他也认为是作乐，而不认为这是恶行啊! 
English: Zhang Zhao replied: In the past, the merchant Wang built a mountain of wine dregs and a beautiful wine pool and drank alcohol all night. At that time, he also thought it was for fun, but did not think it was a bad deed!

古文：权默然，有惭色，遂罢酒。
现代文：孙权默然不语，面露愧色，就停止宴饮。
English: Sun Quan was silent, his face was ashamed, and he stopped the banquet.

古文：初，权当置丞相，众议归昭。
现代文：当初，孙权要设置丞相，大家都推举张昭。
English: At first, Sun Quan wanted to appoint a chancellor, and everyone recommended Zhang Zhao.

古文：权曰： 方今多事，职统者责重，非所以优之也。 
现代文：孙权说： 现在天下变故，执掌统管工作的人责任重大，这不是用来优待人的职位。 
English: Sun Quan said: Now the world has changed, the person in charge of the work has great responsibility, this is not a position to treat people favorably.

古文：后孙邵卒，百寮复举昭，权曰： 孤岂为子布有爱乎？领丞相事烦，而此公性刚，所言不从，怨咎将兴，非所以益之也。 
现代文：后来孙邵去世，朝臣又共同推举张昭，孙权说： 孤人怎么是对子布吝啬呢，只是兼任丞相之职，事务繁多，而他性情刚烈，他的话要是没有被听从采纳，怨愤诘问就产生了，这对他并无益处。 
English: Later, Sun Shao died, and the courtiers jointly nominated Zhang Zhaojun. Sun Quan said, "How can a lone person be stingy with the cloth? He only concurrently held the post of prime minister. He had a lot of affairs, and he had a strong character. If his words were not heeded, resentment and questions would arise, which was not beneficial to him.

古文：乃用顾雍。
现代文：于是任用顾雍为丞相。
English: As a result, Gu Yong was appointed chancellor.

古文：权既称尊号，昭以老病，上还官位及所统领。
现代文：孙权登基之后，张昭因为年老多病，将官职及所统的军队归还朝廷。
English: After Sun Quan ascended to the throne, Zhang Zhao, due to his old age and illness, returned his official position and the army under his command to the imperial court.

古文：更拜辅吴将军，班亚三司，改封娄侯，食邑万户。
现代文：孙权改任他为辅吴将军，职位仅次于三公，改封为娄侯，食邑一万户。
English: Sun Quan was appointed as the general of Fu Wu, a position second only to that of the three princes, and he was given the title of the prince of ten thousand households.

古文：在里宅无事，乃著春秋左氏传解及论语注。
现代文：张昭在家中无事时，就著写《春秋左氏传解》和《论语注》。
English: When Zhang Zhao was not busy at home, he wrote "The Interpretation of Spring and Autumn" and "Commentary on the Analects."

古文：权尝问卫尉严峻： 宁念小时所闇书不？ 
现代文：孙权曾经问卫尉严峻说： 你记得幼时熟读过的书吗? 
English: Sun Quan once asked the guard captain sternly: Do you remember the books you read when you were young?

古文：峻因诵孝经 仲尼居 。
现代文：严峻就背诵了《孝经》中 仲尼居 一节。
English: He solemnly recited a passage from the "Filial Piety Sutra" about Zhongniju.

古文：昭曰： 严畯鄙生，臣请为陛下诵之。 
现代文：张昭说： 严峻是浅薄书生，我请求为陛下诵读。 
English: Zhang Zhao said: Severe is a shallow student, I request to recite for His Majesty.

古文：乃诵 君子之事上 ，咸以昭为知所诵。
现代文：就背诵 君子之事上 一段，大家都认为张昭知道该在皇上面前背诵什么。
English: As far as reciting "On the Matter of Nobles" is concerned, everyone thinks that Zhang Zhao knows what to recite in front of the emperor.

古文：昭每朝见，辞气壮厉，义形於色，曾以直言逆旨，中不进见。
现代文：张昭每次朝见，言辞气质雄壮严厉，正色凛然，曾经因为直言而违背孙权的意旨，有一段时间未朝见。
English: Every time Zhang Zhao met with Sun Quan in the morning, his words were strong and stern, and his appearance was dignified. He once violated Sun Quan's will because of his blunt speech, and did not meet with Sun Quan for some time.

古文：后蜀使来，称蜀德美，而群臣莫拒，权叹曰： 使张公在坐，彼不折则废，安复自夸乎？ 
现代文：后来蜀国的使者前来吴国，称颂蜀国的品德美行，东吴百官无人上前应对，孙权感叹说： 如果张公在坐，此人不需别人使他折服就会丧气，哪里还敢自夸呢? 
English: Later, the emissaries of Shu came to Wu, praising the virtues and virtues of Shu. No one of the hundreds of officials in East Wu came forward to respond. Sun Quan sighed and said: If Zhang Gong is sitting, this person will be discouraged without others to make him bow down. How dare he boast?

古文：明日，遣中使劳问，因请见昭。
现代文：第二天，他就派宫中使臣前去慰问张昭，并乘机召见张昭。
English: The next day, he sent an envoy from the palace to console Zhang Zhao, and took the opportunity to summon Zhang Zhao.

古文：昭避席谢，权跪止之。
现代文：张昭离席向孙权谢罪，孙权以下跪阻止了他。
English: Zhang Zhao left his seat to apologize to Sun Quan. Sun Quan knelt down to stop him.

古文：昭坐定，仰曰： 昔太后、桓王不以老臣属陛下，而以陛下属老臣，是以思尽臣节，以报厚恩，使泯没之后，有可称述，而意虑浅短，违逆盛旨，自分幽沦，长弃沟壑，不图复蒙引见，得奉帷幄。
现代文：张昭坐定后，抬头说： 昔日太后、桓王不把老臣托付给陛下，而将陛下托付给老臣，所以我希望能尽到臣子的气节，以回报这深厚恩德，也能让自己在埋没以后，有可以称赞的地方。但我见识思虑短浅，违逆陛下圣明的意旨，自想身后之事，尸骨必会永远丢弃在沟壑中，不料又蒙召见，得以为陛下朝廷提供建议。
English: After Zhang Zhao sat down, he looked up and said: In the past, the Empress Dowager and King Huan did not entrust the old minister to His Majesty, but entrusted His Majesty to the old minister. Therefore, I hope that I can do my best as a courtier to repay this profound kindness, and also allow myself to have a place to be praised after being buried. But I saw that my thoughts were short-sighted, that I violated His Majesty's sacred intention, and that I thought about the things behind me, and that the bones would be forever discarded in the ditch. Unexpectedly, I was summoned again, and I thought that His Majesty's court would provide advice.

古文：然臣愚心所以事国，志在忠益，毕命而已。
现代文：但我私心认为，报效国家，志向应该忠诚恳切，至死不移。
English: But I sincerely believe that the desire to serve the country should be loyal and sincere until death.

古文：若乃变心易虑，以偷荣取容，此臣所不能也 权辞谢焉。
现代文：假如说要我改变想法，以求得高位和陛下的欢心，这是臣做不到的! 孙权向他深表歉意。
English: If you want me to change my mind in order to obtain a high position and please Your Majesty, I can't do it! Sun Quan expressed his deep apologies to him.

古文：权以公孙渊称藩，遣张弥、许晏至辽东拜渊为燕王，昭谏曰： 渊背魏惧讨，远来求援，非本志也。
现代文：孙权因为公孙渊派人前来称藩，就派张弥、许晏前往辽东任命公孙渊为燕王，张昭劝谏说： 公孙渊背叛魏国，担心魏国讨伐，才远道前来求援，这不是他的本意。
English: Sun Quan sent Zhang Mi and Xu Xi to Liaodong to appoint Gongsun Yuan as the King of Yan because Gongsun Yuan had sent people to claim the domain. Zhang Zhao advised Gongsun Yuan saying: Gongsun Yuan betrayed Wei, he was afraid of Wei's attack, so he came a long way to ask for help. This was not his intention.

古文：若渊改图，欲自明於魏，两使不反，不亦取笑於天下乎？ 
现代文：如果公孙渊改变想法，想向魏国自表心意，我们的两位使者就不能回来了，这不是要让天下人取笑吗? 
English: If Gongsun Yuan changes his mind and wants to show his intentions to Wei, our two emissaries can't come back. Isn't this just to make the world laugh?

古文：权与相反覆，昭意弥切。
现代文：孙权与他反复争辩，但张昭意见更加坚定。
English: Sun Quan argued with him repeatedly, but Zhang Zhao's opinion was firmer.

古文：权不能堪，案刀而怒曰： 吴国士人入宫则拜孤，出宫则拜君，孤之敬君，亦为至矣，而数於众中折孤，孤尝恐失计。 
现代文：孙权无法忍受，手拿着刀大怒说： 吴国的官极士人进宫则向我朝见，出宫就拜谒您。孤人对您的敬重，也是很深了，而您却多次在众人面前反驳孤人，孤人担心自己会做出失策的事。 
English: Sun Quan couldn't bear it, and he held a sword in his hand and said angrily, "The most powerful officials of the State of Wu come to see me when they enter the palace, and they bow to you when they leave the palace. No one respects you very much, but you have repeatedly contradicted no one in front of everyone. No one is worried that they will make a mistake.

古文：昭熟视权曰： 臣虽知言不用，每竭愚忠者，诚以太后临崩，呼老臣於床下，遗诏顾命之言故在耳。 
现代文：张昭定定地注视着孙权说： 臣虽然知道自己的话不会被采纳，到总是竭尽愚忠，实在是太后临终之前，将老臣叫到床前，遗诏顾命的话语仍张在我的耳边啊! 
English: Zhang Zhao gazed steadily at Sun Quan and said: Although the minister knew that his words would not be accepted, he always tried his best to be loyal. It is true that before the empress dowager passed away, he called the old minister to the bedside. The words of the last will and testament are still in my ears!

古文：因涕泣横流。
现代文：说着泪流不止。
English: She burst into tears as she spoke.

古文：权掷刀致地，与昭对泣。
现代文：孙权将刀扔在地上，与张昭相对流泪。
English: Sun Quan threw the knife on the ground and burst into tears in front of Zhang Zhao.

古文：然卒遣弥、晏往。
现代文：但是孙权最终还是派张弥、许晏前往辽东。
English: However, Sun Quan eventually sent Zhang Ya and Xu Xi to Liaodong.

古文：昭忿言之不用，称疾不朝。
现代文：张昭恼怒自己的谏言未被采用，就称病不再上朝。
English: Zhang Zhao was angry that his rebuke had not been accepted, and said that he would no longer go to the imperial court due to illness.

古文：权恨之，土塞其门，昭又於内以土封之。
现代文：孙权很是怨恨，用土堵住张昭家的大门，张昭又在里面用土把门封死。
English: Grudgingly, Sun Quan blocked the door of Zhang Zhao's house with soil, and Zhang Zhao died inside with the door sealed with soil.

古文：渊果杀弥、晏。
现代文：公孙渊果然杀害了张弥、许晏。
English: Gongsun Yuan did indeed kill Zhang Ya and Xu Xi.

古文：权数慰谢昭，昭固不起，权因出过其门呼昭，昭辞疾笃。
现代文：孙权多次派人慰问张昭向他致歉，张昭坚决不起，孙权因事路过张昭门口而召见他，张昭以病重坚决推辞。
English: Sun Quan repeatedly sent condolences to Zhang Zhao and apologized to him. Zhang Zhao resolutely refused. Sun Quan summoned Zhang Zhao to meet him because he passed by Zhang Zhao's door. Zhang Zhao resolutely declined due to his serious illness.

古文：权烧其门，欲以恐之，昭更闭户。
现代文：孙权用火烧他家的大门，想借此恐吓他，而张昭又把内室的门窗关严。
English: Sun Quan tried to intimidate him by setting fire to the door of his house, while Zhang Zhao kept the doors and windows of the inner room tightly closed.

古文：权使人灭火，住门良久，昭诸子共扶昭起，权载以还宫，深自克责。
现代文：孙权让人扑灭火，在门外长久站立，张昭的儿子们一同把张昭搀扶起来，孙权用车把他带进宫中，做了深切的自我谴责。
English: Sun Quan had the fire put out and stood outside the gate for a long time. Zhang Zhao's sons helped Zhang Zhaohui up. Sun Quan took him into the palace by car and made a deep self-condemnation.

古文：昭不得已，然后朝会。
现代文：张昭不得已，又重新上朝。
English: Zhang Zhao had no choice but to return to the imperial court.

古文：昭容貌矜严，有威风，权常曰： 孤与张公言，不敢妄也。 
现代文：张昭容貌矜持严整，很有威严。孙权常说： 我与张公谈话，不敢随口妄言。 
English: Zhang Zhao's appearance is reserved and neat, very dignified. Sun Quan often said: When I talk with Zhang Gong, I dare not speak carelessly.

古文：举邦惮之。
现代文：举国上下都敬畏他。
English: The whole country is in awe of him.

古文：年八十一，嘉禾五年卒。
现代文：他在嘉禾五年，八十一岁时去世。
English: He passed away at the age of 81, five years after he joined Jiahe.

古文：遗令幅巾素棺，敛以时服。
现代文：遗命要求对他用缣布束发，用不上漆色的棺材，以平常服饰入殓。
English: His will requested that he be buried in a coffin made of woven cloth, not in a lacquer-colored coffin, and that he be buried in his usual clothes.

古文：权素服临吊，谥曰文侯。
现代文：孙权穿着素服凭吊，追谥他为 文侯 。
English: Sun Quan, dressed in plain clothes, chased after him as if he were a prince.

古文：长子承已自封侯，少子休袭爵。
现代文：张昭长子张承已被封侯，所以小儿子张休承袭爵位。
English: Zhang Zhao's eldest son, Zhang Cheng, had been given the title of marquess, so his youngest son, Zhang Xiu, inherited the title.

古文：昭弟子奋年二十，造作攻城大攻车，为步骘所荐。
现代文：张昭弟弟的儿子张奋，二十岁时建造了攻城用的大攻车，被步騭举荐。
English: Zhang Fen, the son of Zhang Zhao's younger brother, built a large attack vehicle for attacking the city when he was 20 years old, and was recommended by Zhu Xi.

古文：昭不愿曰： 汝年尚少，何为自委於军旅乎？ 
现代文：张昭不愿他就任，说： 你年纪还小，为什么要委身于军旅之事呢？ 
English: Zhang Zhao did not want him to take office, saying: You are still young, why should you commit yourself to military travel?

古文：奋对曰： 昔童汪死难，子奇治阿，奋实不才耳，於年不为少也。 
现代文：张奋回答说： 过去童汪为国家危难而死，子奇治理阿城，我实在没有什么才干，但年纪上已经不小了。 
English: Zhang Fen replied: In the past, Tong Wang died for the country's peril, and Ziqi governed Ahcheng. I really don't have any talent, but I'm getting old.

古文：遂领兵为将军，连有功效，至半州都督，封乐乡亭侯。
现代文：就率领担任将军，接连做出成效，后来官至半州都督，封为乐乡亭侯。
English: He led and served as a general, and successively made achievements. Later, he was promoted to the governor of Hanzhou, and was named the prince of Le Township.

古文：承字仲嗣，少以才学知名，与诸葛瑾、步骘、严畯相友善。
现代文：张承，字仲嗣，年少时就因才学出名，和诸葛亮、步騭、严畯关系友善。
English: Zhang Cheng, known as Zhong Zi, was famous for his ability to learn when he was young, and he had a friendly relationship with Zhuge Liang, Bu Xuan and Yan Xuan.

古文：权为骠骑将军，辟西曹掾，出为长沙西部都尉。
现代文：孙权为骠骑将军时，征召他为西曹掾，又出任长沙西部都尉。
English: When Sun Quan was the cavalry general, he was conscripted as the West Cao Pi, and also served as the West Changsha captain.

古文：讨平山寇，得精兵万五千人。
现代文：征讨平山一带的贼寇，收编了精兵一万五千人。
English: Fifteen thousand elite soldiers were recruited to fight the bandits in the Hirayama area.

古文：后为濡须都督、奋威将军，封都乡侯，领部曲五千人，承为人壮毅忠谠，能甄识人物，拔彭城蔡款、南阳谢景於孤微童幼，后并为国士，款至卫尉，景豫章太守。
现代文：后来担任濡须都督、奋威将军，封为都乡侯，率领部众五千人。张承为人壮烈果敢、忠诚正直，能赏识人才，在彭城人蔡款、南阳人谢景还年轻时就举荐了他们，他们后来都成为了国士，蔡款官至卫尉，谢景官至豫章太守。
English: Later, he served as the governor of Nusu and the general of Fenwei, was named the mayor of the capital, and led 5,000 people. Zhang Cheng was a brave and courageous person, loyal and honest, and could appreciate talents. When he was young, he recommended them to Cai Jia from Pengcheng and Xie Jing from Nanyang. Later, they all became statesmen, Cai Jia from the officer to the guard, and Xie Jia from the officer to the governor of Yuzhang.

古文：又诸葛恪年少时，众人奇其英才，承言终败诸葛氏者元逊也。
现代文：又有诸葛恪年少时，众人都因他的英才而惊奇，张承说最终使诸葛氏覆败的就是诸葛恪。
English: When Zhuge Ke was young, everyone was surprised by his talent. Zhang Cheng said that Zhuge Ke was the one who finally overthrew Zhuge.

古文：勤於长进，笃於物类，凡在庶几之流，无不造门。
现代文：他勤学上进，处事坚定，凡是未得赏识的人才，都登门造访。
English: He is diligent in his studies, determined in his work, and visits all unappreciated talents.

古文：年六十七，赤乌七年卒，谥曰定侯。
现代文：张承享年六十七岁，在赤乌七年去世，谥号为定侯。
English: Zhang Cheng was sixty-seven years old. He died in the seventh year of Chao Wu. His posthumous name was Dinghou.

古文：子震嗣。
现代文：他的儿子张震继承爵位。
English: His son, Daguizhen, inherited the title.

古文：初，承丧妻，昭欲为索诸葛瑾女，承以相与有好，难之，权闻而劝焉，遂为婿。
现代文：当初，张承丧妻，张昭想为他求娶诸葛瑾的女儿，张承因为关系友好而难以抉择，孙权得知后就劝解他，他就做了诸葛瑾的女婿。
English: At first, Zhang Cheng lost his wife, Zhang Zhao wanted to ask him to marry Zhuge Liang's daughter, Zhang Cheng found it difficult to choose because of the friendly relationship, Sun Quan persuaded him after learning about it, and he became Zhuge Liang's son-in-law.

古文：生女，权为子和纳之。
现代文：生下一女，孙权为儿子孙和纳娶了她。
English: She gave birth to a daughter, and Sun Quan married her to his son Sun Wo Na.

古文：权数令和脩敬於承，执子婿之礼。
现代文：孙权多次令孙和对张承恭敬和善，行女婿的礼节。
English: Sun Quan repeatedly asked his grandson to be respectful and kind to Zhang Cheng, and to act with the etiquette of a son-in-law.

古文：震诸葛恪诛时亦死。
现代文：张震在诸葛恪被诛杀时也死了。
English: Zhang Zhen also died when Zhuge Ke was beaten to death.

古文：休字叔嗣，弱冠与诸葛恪、顾谭等俱为太子登僚友，以汉书授登。
现代文：张休，字叔嗣，二十岁时和诸葛恪、顾谭等人一同是太子孙登的同僚，并将汉书教授给孙登。
English: At the age of twenty, Zhang Xiu, the so-called uncle, was a colleague of the prince's son, Sun Deng, together with Zhuge Ke, Gu Tan and others, and taught Chinese books to Sun Deng.

古文：从中庶子转为右弼都尉。
现代文：他从中庶子的职位转为右弼都尉。
English: He was promoted from the position of middle child to that of captain of the Right Division.

古文：权常游猎，迨暮乃归，休上疏谏戒，权大善之，以示於昭。
现代文：孙权经常外出打猎，一直到日暮时分才回来，孙休上疏劝谏，孙权很是高兴，将奏表拿给孙登看。
English: Sun Quan often went out to hunt, and did not return until dusk. Sun Xiu gave him some advice. Sun Quan was very happy and showed his report card to Sun Deng.

古文：及登卒后，为侍中，拜羽林都督，平三典军事，迁扬武将军。
现代文：孙登去世后，张休担任侍中，为羽林都尉，平三典农事，升为扬武将军。
English: After the death of Sun Deng, Zhang Xiu served as a chamberlain, as a captain of Ulin, as a farmer of Ping San Dian, and as a general of Yangwu.

古文：为鲁王霸友党所谮，与顾谭、承俱以芍陂论功事，休、承与典军陈恂通情，诈增其伐，并徙交州。
现代文：他被鲁王孙霸的同党陷害，和顾谭、张承都因为芍陂记述功劳，张休、张承和典军陈恂往来，诈称增加军队，一同被流放到交州。
English: He was framed by the same party as Sun Ba, King of Lu, and was exiled to Jiaozhou together with Gu Tan and Zhang Chengdu, because they falsely wrote about their merits, and Zhang Xiu and Zhang Chengdu had dealings with Chen Yu, commander of the First Army, and fraudulently claimed to increase the number of troops.

古文：中书令孙弘佞伪险诐，休素所忿，弘因是谮诉，下诏书赐休死，时年四十一。
现代文：中书令孙弘奸佞伪诈，张休向来愤恨他，孙弘因此砌词陷害，皇帝下诏赐死张休，张休死时四十一岁。
English: The imperial edict ordered Sun Hongzhi to commit treachery and fraud, and Zhang Xiu always resented him. As a result, Sun Hongzhi framed him, and the emperor issued an edict to kill Zhang Xiu. Zhang Xiu was forty-one years old when he died.

古文：顾雍字元叹，吴郡吴人也。
现代文：顾雍，字元叹，吴郡吴县人。
English: Gu Yong, the character Yuan sigh, Wu County, a native of Wu County.

古文：蔡伯喈从朔方还，尝避怨於吴，雍从学琴书。
现代文：蔡伯喈从朔方回来后，曾到吴县躲避仇家，顾雍向他学习琴粤书籍。
English: After Cai Boqi returned from Shuo Fang, he went to Wuxian County to avoid his enemies, and Gu Yong learned from him the books of Qin Yue.

古文：州郡表荐，弱冠为合肥长，后转在娄、曲阿、上虞，皆有治迹。
现代文：州郡上表推举他，二十岁时就任合肥县县长，后转任娄县、曲阿、上虞，任所都有政绩。
English: He was nominated by the prefectural government, and at the age of 20, he was appointed as the prefect of Hefei County. Later, he served as the prefect of Handan County, Qu'ao County, and Shangyu County, all of which had political achievements.

古文：孙权领会稽太守，不之郡，以雍为丞，行太守事，讨除寇贼，郡界宁静，吏民归服。
现代文：孙权兼任会稽太守，不到郡府任职，就让顾雍做郡丞，代理太守职任，征讨消除贼寇，郡内安定下来，官民都顺服他。
English: Sun Quan concurrently served as the auditor-general of the guild, and when he was no longer able to serve in the county government, he asked Gu Yong to serve as the county magistrate, acting as the deputy superintendent, to solicit the elimination of thieves and robbers, and the county settled down, and the government and the people obeyed him.

古文：数年，入为左司马。
现代文：几年后，他入朝任左司马。
English: A few years later, he entered the imperial court as Sasema.

古文：权为吴王，累迁大理奉常，领尚书令，封阳遂乡侯，拜侯还寺，而家人不知，后闻乃惊。
现代文：孙权做吴王时，顾雍渐渐升任为大理奉常，兼任尚书令，封为阳遂乡侯，后回到府衙。而家中人都不知道他被封侯，得知后才感到惊奇。
English: When Sun Quan was the king of Wu, Gu Yong was gradually promoted to the post of Dali Fuchang, concurrently served as Shang Shuling, was named Yang Sui Xiang Hou, and then returned to the capital. And his family did not know that he was named Hou, and they were surprised when they learned.

古文：黄武四年，迎母於吴。
现代文：黄武四年，顾雍到吴郡迎接母亲。
English: In the fourth year of Huangwu, Gu Yong went to Wu County to meet his mother.

古文：既至，权临贺之，亲拜其母於庭，公卿大臣毕会，后太子又往庆焉。
现代文：母亲到达后，孙权前往庆贺，亲自在庭中向他母亲行拜礼。公卿大臣们都参与聚会，后来太子又前往庆贺。
English: After his mother's arrival, Sun Quan went to celebrate and personally paid homage to his mother in the courtyard. Noblemen and ministers all participated in the gathering, and later the crown prince also went to celebrate.

古文：雍为人不饮酒，寡言语，举动时当。
现代文：顾雍为人从不饮酒，寡言少语，举止得当。
English: Gu Yong is a person who never drinks alcohol, speaks little, and behaves properly.

古文：权尝叹曰： 顾君不言，言必有中。 
现代文：孙权曾感叹地说： 顾君不说话，一旦说话必在理。 
English: Sun Quan once said with a sigh: Gu Jun does not speak, once he speaks, he must be right.

古文：至饮宴欢乐之际，左右恐有酒失而雍必见之，是以不敢肆情。
现代文：到宴饮欢乐之时，身边的人都担心酒后言行有失而顾雍见怪，所以不敢纵情任性。
English: At the time of feasting and rejoicing, people around them are worried about the loss of words and deeds after drinking, so they dare not indulge in capriciousness.

古文：权亦曰： 顾公在坐，使人不乐。 
现代文：孙权又说： 顾公在这里，大家不敢作乐。 
English: Sun Quan also said, "Since Gu Gong is here, no one dares to make music.

古文：其见惮如此。
现代文：他让人敬畏到此地步。
English: Emperor-in-waiting Wang Feng has come to such a pass.

古文：是岁，改为太常，进封醴陵侯，代孙邵为丞相，平尚书事。
现代文：这一年，顾雍改任太常，晋封醴陵侯，代替孙邵担任丞相，兼管尚书事。
English: In the same year, Gu Yong was promoted to the position of Taizang, was appointed to the position of Gu Linghou, replaced Sun Shao as chancellor, and was also in charge of official correspondence.

古文：其所选用文武将吏各随能所任，心无適莫。
现代文：他所选择任用的文武官午安都能尽忠职守，心中没有不满之情。
English: The civil and military officers he chose to appoint were all able to perform their duties faithfully, and there was no dissatisfaction in their hearts.

古文：时访逮民间，及政职所宜，辄密以闻。
现代文：他常到民间探查，如有政事上应施行的地方，就当即秘密上报。
English: He often goes to the people to investigate, and if there is a place that should be implemented in political affairs, he will immediately report it secretly.

古文：若见纳用，则归之於上，不用，终不宣泄。
现代文：如意见被采纳施行，就说是君主的功劳，如果未被采纳，也始终不表露其中情况。
English: If the opinion is accepted and implemented, it is said to be the merit of the monarch, and if it is not accepted, it is never revealed.

古文：权以此重之。
现代文：孙权因此很是敬重他。
English: Sun Quan therefore held him in high esteem.

古文：然於公朝有所陈及，辞色虽顺而所执者正。
现代文：凡他在朝堂中有所陈述建议，言辞神色虽然恭顺，但坚守己见。
English: Whenever he has made a statement or suggestion in the Imperial Court, his words, though courteous, have stuck to his own opinion.

古文：权尝咨问得失，张昭因陈听采闻，颇以法令太稠，刑罚微重，宜有所蠲损。
现代文：孙权曾咨询朝政得失，张昭趁机将自己收集到的意见陈述出来，有认为法令太严，刑罚过重，应该有所免除降低的意味。
English: Sun Quan had consulted on the merits and demerits of the government, and Zhang Zhao took the opportunity to present the opinions he had collected. Some people thought that the law was too strict and the punishment was too heavy, and that it should be exempted from reduction.

古文：权默然，顾问雍曰： 君以为何如？ 
现代文：孙权默然不应。他回头问顾雍： 您认为怎样? 
English: Sun Quan was silent. He turned to Gu Yong and asked: What do you think?

古文：雍对曰： 臣之所闻，亦如昭所陈。 
现代文：顾雍回答说： 我所听到的情况，也像张昭说的那样。 
English: Gu Yong replied: What I have heard is the same as what Zhang Zhao said.

古文：於是权乃议狱轻刑。
现代文：由此孙权才讨论案件减轻刑罚。
English: As a result, Sun Quan only discussed the case to reduce the sentence.

古文：久之，吕壹、秦博为中书，典校诸官府及州郡文书。
现代文：过了一段时间，吕壹、秦博担任中书，主管审核各官府和州郡上报的文书。
English: After a period of time, Lu Yi and Qin Bo served as the middlemen in charge of reviewing the documents submitted by various government offices and prefectures.

古文：壹等因此渐作威福，遂造作榷酤障管之利，举罪纠奸，纤介必闻，重以深案丑诬，毁短大臣，排陷无辜，雍等皆见举白，用被谴让。
现代文：吕壹等因此逐渐作威作福，于是开始设置机构卖酒、修建关隘征税牟取暴利，检举罪过纠发奸邪，细微小事也上报朝廷，又加重案情加以诬陷，诋毁大臣，排斥陷害无辜之人，顾雍等人都曾被举报，并因此被谴责。
English: As a result, Lü Yi and others gradually began to use their power for their own benefit. Therefore, they began to set up institutions to sell alcohol, build barriers and collect taxes to make huge profits, prosecute crimes and correct evil deeds, report minor matters to the imperial court, aggravate cases and frame them, defame ministers, and reject and frame innocent people. Gu Yong and others had been reported and condemned for this reason.

古文：后壹奸罪发露，收系廷尉。
现代文：后来吕壹奸邪之罪暴露，收押在廷尉府中。
English: Later, Lu Yi's crime of treachery was exposed, and he was detained in the palace.

古文：雍往断狱，壹以囚见，雍和颜色，问其辞状，临出，又谓壹曰： 君意得无欲有所道？ 
现代文：顾雍前往审理此案，吕壹以囚犯身份见顾雍，顾雍神色宽和，问他言辞情状。临走时，又对吕壹说： 你没有什么想说的了吗? 
English: Gu Yong went to the trial of this case. Lv Yi saw Gu Yong as a prisoner. Gu Yong was very calm and asked him about his words. Before leaving, he said to Lv Yi: "Don't you have anything to say?"

古文：壹叩头无言。
现代文：吕壹磕头不兴。
English: Lv Yibin is not happy.

古文：时尚书郎怀叙面詈辱壹，雍责叙曰： 官有正法，何至於此！ 
现代文：当时尚书郎怀叙当面辱骂吕壹，顾雍责备他说： 官府明文法令，何必如此呢? 
English: At that time, Shang Shulang Huaixu verbally abused Lü Yi in front of him, and Gu Yong rebuked him, saying, "Why is it necessary for the government to issue a clear decree?

古文：雍为相十九年，年七十六，赤乌六年卒。
现代文：顾雍做丞相十九年，享年七十六岁，赤乌六年去世。
English: Gu Yong served as chancellor for 19 years and died at the age of 76, six years after the founding of the Red Guard.

古文：初疾微时，权令医赵泉视之，拜其少子济为骑都尉。
现代文：起初病情轻微时，孙权命令医官赵泉前去诊视，又以他的小儿子顾济为骑都尉。
English: At first, when the illness was mild, Sun Quan ordered the medical officer Zhao Quan to go to the clinic, and his youngest son Gu Zhi as the cavalry captain.

古文：雍闻，悲曰： 泉善别死生，吾必不起，故上欲及吾目见济拜也。 
现代文：顾雍得知这个任命，悲伤地说： 赵泉善于诊别生死，我必会一病不起，所以皇上想让我亲眼看到顾济被任命。 
English: Gu Yong learned of this appointment and said sadly: Zhao Quan is good at diagnosing life and death, I will definitely be sick, so the emperor wanted me to see Gu Jie's appointment with my own eyes.

古文：权素服临吊，谥曰肃侯。
现代文：孙权身穿素服亲自吊唁，谥号为 肃侯 。
English: Sun Quan, dressed in plain clothes, offered his condolences in person. His nickname was "Suhou."

古文：长子邵早卒，次子裕有笃疾，少子济嗣，无后，绝。
现代文：顾雍长子顾邵早亡，次子顾裕身患顽疾，少子顾济继承爵位。
English: Gu Yong's eldest son Gu Shao died at an early age, his second son Gu Yu suffered from an incurable disease, and his youngest son Gu Ji inherited the peerage.

古文：永安元年，诏曰： 故丞相雍，至德忠贤，辅国以礼，而侯统废绝，朕甚愍之。
现代文：顾济无后，所以爵位断绝。永安元年，孙休下诏说： 已故丞相顾雍，品德至高，忠诚贤明，以礼仪辅佐国事。
English: In the first year of the Yongan era, Sun Hui issued an edict saying, "The late Emperor Gu Yong had the highest moral character, was loyal and wise, and supported state affairs with etiquette.

古文：其以雍次子裕袭爵为醴陵侯，以明著旧勋。 
现代文：但他的爵位后继无人，朕非常痛惜，现以他的次子顾裕继承爵位，为醴陵侯，以表彰顾雍过去的功勋。 
English: However, there is no successor to his title, which I very much regret. Now, his second son, Gu Yu, will inherit the title and become the Prince of Fuling, in recognition of Gu Yong's past achievements.

古文：邵字孝则，博览书传，好乐人伦。
现代文：顾邵，字孝则，博览群书，喜好品评人物。
English: Gu Shao, Zi Xiao Ze, well-versed in books, likes to comment on characters.

古文：少与舅陆绩齐名，而陆逊、张敦、卜静等皆亚焉。
现代文：他年少时与舅舅陆绩齐名，而陆逊、张敦、卜静等都在他们之下。
English: When he was young, he was on a par with his uncle Lu Jie, while Lu Xun, Zhang Dun and Bu Jing were all below them.

古文：自州郡庶几及四方人士，往来相见，或言议而去，或结厚而别，风声流闻，远近称之。
现代文：从州郡贤士到四方俊杰，都与他相见来往，有的与他交谈议论就离开，有的与他结交深厚才分别，他声名愿播，远近称颂。
English: From the state and county sages to Shifang Junjie, they all met and interacted with him. Some talked and discussed with him and left, and some had deep friendships with him before they separated. His fame is willing to spread, and he is praised far and wide.

古文：权妻以策女。
现代文：孙权将孙策的女儿嫁给他为妻。
English: Sun Quan married Sun Ce's daughter to him.

古文：年二十七，起家为豫章太守。
现代文：顾邵二十七岁时，离家担任豫章郡太守。
English: When Gu Shao was 27 years old, he left home to serve as the governor of Yuzhang County.

古文：下车祀先贤徐孺子之墓，优待其后；禁其淫祀非礼之祭者。
现代文：他到豫章，刚下车就去祭祀前代贤士徐孺子的坟墓，优待他的后人;同时禁止那些不合礼仪过分祭祀的祭奠。
English: When he arrived at Yuanzhang, as soon as he got off the train, he went to worship the tomb of the former sage Xu Yanzi, and treated his descendants well. At the same time, he forbade those who did not comply with the etiquette of excessive sacrifice.

古文：小吏资质佳者，辄令就学，择其先进，擢置右职，举善以教，风化大行。
现代文：部下吏役中资质良好的，就令他们去读书，选取先进优异你，提拔他们的职位，以此崇尚推广教化，使当地风俗大为改善。
English: Among the subordinate officials with good qualifications, they should make them go to school, select advanced and excellent talents, and promote their positions, so as to advocate the promotion of enlightenment and greatly improve local customs.

古文：初，钱唐丁谞出於役伍，阳羡张秉生於庶民，乌程吴粲、云阳殷礼起乎微贱，邵皆拔而友之，为立声誉。
现代文：当初，钱塘人丁讠胥出身于军旅，阳羡人张秉出身于普通百姓，乌程人吴粲、云阳人殷礼来自低贱家庭，顾邵都提拔他们并与他们亲近，为他们树立声名。
English: At the beginning, Qiantang's Ding Rong came from a military brigade, Yang Zhen's Zhang Bing came from ordinary people, Wucheng's Wu Zhen and Yunyang's Yin Li came from low-class families. Gu Shao promoted them and was close to them, establishing a reputation for them.

古文：秉遭大丧，亲为制服结绖。
现代文：张秉遇到父母大丧，顾邵亲自穿着丧服束上麻带去吊唁。
English: When Zhang Bing encountered his parents' great mourning, Gu Shao personally wore mourning clothes and tied a hemp ribbon to mourn.

古文：邵当之豫章，发在近路，值秉疾病，时送者百数，邵辞宾客曰： 张仲节有疾，苦不能来别，恨不见之，暂还与诀，诸君少时相待。 
现代文：顾邵当前往豫章，临行前，适逢张秉生病，当时送行的有上百人，顾邵向宾客道歉说： 张仲节生病，苦于不能来与我告别，我也遗憾不能见到他，暂且让我回去与他辞行，各位稍待片刻。 
English: Gu Shao is currently on his way to Yuzhang. Before his departure, Zhang Bing fell ill. At that time, there were more than a hundred people to see him off. Gu Shao apologized to the guests and said: Zhang Zhongjie is ill, so I can't come to say goodbye to him. I'm sorry I can't see him. Let me go back and leave with him for the time being. Everyone, wait a moment.

古文：其留心下士，惟善所在，皆此类也。
现代文：他留心下层贤士，以善相待，就像如此。
English: He looked out for the lesser sages and treated them with kindness, just like this.

古文：谞至典军中郎，秉云阳太守，礼零陵太守，粲太子少傅。
现代文：丁讠胥官至典军中郎，张秉官至云阳太守，殷礼官为零陵太守，吴粲官任太子少傅。
English: Ding Yongguan was promoted to Lieutenant General, Zhang Bingguan was promoted to Yunyang Daju, Yin Lijuan was promoted to Zering Daju, and Wu Yongguan was promoted to Prince Junior Master.

古文：世以邵为知人。
现代文：世人都认为顾邵能鉴别人才。
English: People all over the world think that Gu Shao is a good judge of talent.

古文：在郡五年，卒官，子谭、承云。
现代文：他在郡任职五年，于官任上去世，他的儿子顾谭、顾承。
English: He served in the county for five years and died in office. His sons are Gu Tan and Gu Cheng.

古文：谭字子默，弱冠与诸葛恪等为太子四友，从中庶子转辅正都尉。
现代文：顾谭，字子默，二十岁时和诸葛恪等同为太子四友，从中庶子转任辅正都尉。
English: Gu Tan, nicknamed Zi Mu, at the age of twenty was the same as Zhuge Ke as the four friends of the prince, and the son-in-law was transferred to the post of deputy captain.

古文：赤乌中，代恪为左节度。
现代文：赤乌年间，他替代诸葛恪担任左节度。
English: During the Aka-U period, he replaced Zhuge Ke as Zuo Jiedu.

古文：每省簿书，未尝下筹，徒屈指心计，尽发疑谬，下吏以此服之。
现代文：每次次次阅账簿，还未下筹计算，只是屈指心算，就能将其中错谬之处全部找出，手下官员们因此很佩服他。
English: Every time he read the account book, he was able to find out all the mistakes and fallacies in it without doing any calculations, and his subordinate officials admired him for this.

古文：加奉车都尉。
现代文：他被加任奉车都尉。
English: He was promoted to lieutenant of Fengche.

古文：薛综为选曹尚书，固让谭曰： 谭心精体密，贯道达微，才照人物，德允众望，诚非愚臣所可越先。 
现代文：薛综做选曹尚书时，坚持让位给顾谭，说： 顾谭心思细腻行事慎密，通晓道义，明析微情，才华过人，德行合于众望，这些实在不是我可以相比的。 
English: When selecting Cao Shangshu, Xue Zhan insisted on giving way to Gu Tan, saying: Gu Tan is meticulous in his thoughts, prudent in his actions, knowledgeable in morality, clear in his feelings, brilliant in his talent, and virtuous in accordance with the expectations of the public. These are really not comparable to me.

古文：后遂代综。
现代文：后来顾谭还是替代了薛综。
English: Gu Tan later replaced Xue Siming.

古文：祖父雍卒数月，拜太常，代雍平尚书事。
现代文：祖父顾雍去世几个月后，顾谭担任太常，接替顾雍兼理尚书事。
English: A few months after the death of Gu Yong's grandfather, Gu Tan assumed the post of chief secretary, succeeding Gu Yong and taking charge of bookkeeping.

古文：是时鲁王霸有盛宠，与太子和齐衡，谭上疏曰： 臣闻有国有家者，必明嫡庶之端，异尊卑之礼，使高下有差，阶级逾邈，如此则骨肉之恩生，觊觎之望绝。
现代文：当时鲁王孙霸深受恩宠，与太子孙和抗衡，顾谭上疏说： 为臣听说有国有家者，必须明确嫡庶的区分，区别尊卑的礼节，使高下有别，等级不能逾越。这样则骨肉之间的恩情才能产生，断绝非分的念想。
English: At that time, Lu King Sunba was deeply favored and competed with the princes and grandsons, Gu Tan Shangsuo said: If a vassal hears that there is a state-owned family, he must make a clear distinction between the heir and the heir, and distinguish the etiquette of the superior and the inferior, so that there is a difference between the high and the low, and the level cannot be exceeded. In this way, the affection between the flesh and the bone can be generated, and the thought of non-division can be cut off.

古文：昔贾谊陈治安之计，论诸侯之势，以为势重，虽亲必有逆节之累，势轻，虽疏必有保全之祚。
现代文：过去贾谊陈数治国理政的大计，评论诸侯的势力，认为他们势力过大，即使是亲属也一定有逆犯名节的弊端;势力弱小，虽是疏远之人也一定有保全自身的福祚。
English: In the past, he criticized the power of the lords, saying that their power was too great, and even relatives must have the drawback of committing crimes; the power was weak, and even if they were estranged, they must have the blessing of preserving themselves.

古文：故淮南亲弟，不终飨国，失之於势重也；吴芮疏臣，传祚长沙，得之於势轻也。
现代文：所以淮南王是汉文帝的亲弟，不能永享封国，就因为权势过重;吴芮是外臣，却将长沙王位流传后代，就得在权势微小。
English: Therefore, King Huainan was the younger brother of Emperor Hanwen, and he could not enjoy the fiefdom forever, because his power was too heavy; Wu Xi was a foreign minister, but he passed down the throne of Changsha to his descendants, so his power must be small.

古文：昔汉文帝使慎夫人与皇后同席，袁盎退夫人之座，帝有怒色，及盎辨上下之仪，陈人彘之戒，帝既悦怿，夫人亦悟。
现代文：过去汉文帝让慎夫人和皇后同席，袁盎撤去慎夫人座位，文帝脸带怒色，等到袁盎辨析上下尊卑的礼仪，陈述戚夫人成为 人彘 的教训，文帝怒气消减，慎夫人也醒悟过来。
English: In the past, Emperor Wen of the Han Dynasty made Lady Shen and the Empress sit at the same table, Yuan Ang removed Lady Shen's seat, Emperor Wen's face was angry, until Yuan Ang analyzed the etiquette of superiority and inferiority, and stated the lesson of the relative's wife becoming a concubine, Emperor Wen's anger subsided, and Lady Shen also woke up.

古文：今臣所陈，非有所偏，诚欲以安太子而便鲁王也。 
现代文：现在为臣陈述这些，并不是有所偏私，实在是想让太子安定而使鲁王受益! 
English: Presenting these things to his vassals now is not a selfish act, but a genuine attempt to keep the crown prince stable and benefit the king of Lu!

古文：由是霸与谭有隙。
现代文：因此孙霸与顾谭生了嫌隙。
English: As a result, Sun Ba fell out with Gu Tan.

古文：时长公主婿卫将军全琮子寄为霸宾客，寄素倾邪，谭所不纳。
现代文：当时长公主的丈夫卫将军全琮之子全寄是孙霸的宾客，全寄向来行为偏斜，顾谭不能容纳他。
English: At that time, the eldest princess's husband, General Wei Quanzhang's son, Quanzhang, was a guest of Sun Ba. Quanzhang had always been a deviant, and Gu Tan could not accommodate him.

古文：先是，谭弟承与张休俱北征寿春，全琮时为大都督，与魏将王凌战於芍陂，军不利，魏兵乘胜陷没五营将秦晃军，休、承奋击之。遂驻魏师。
现代文：之前，顾谭的弟弟顾承与张休一同北征寿春，全琮当时是大都督，和魏国将领王凌在芍陂交战，战事失利，魏兵乘胜攻陷了五营将秦晃的部队，张休、顾承奋力抵御，终于阻挡了魏军的攻势。
English: Previously, Gu Tan's younger brother Gu Cheng and Zhang Hui jointly led the Northern Expedition of Shuchun. At that time, Quanzhang was the grand governor. He fought against the Wei general Wang Ling in Shao, but lost the battle. The Wei soldiers took advantage of the victory to capture the troops of the five battalion general Qin Xiao. Zhang Hui and Gu Cheng fought hard to resist and finally blocked the offensive of the Wei army.

古文：时琮群子绪、端亦并为将，因敌既住，乃进击之，凌军用退。
现代文：当时全琮的儿子们全绪、全端都是军中将领，他们乘敌军被阻挡之机就出兵进攻，王凌军队就退却了。
English: At that time, the sons of Quanzhang were all generals in the army. They took advantage of the opportunity when the enemy army was blocked to attack, and Wang Ling's army retreated.

古文：时论功行赏，以为驻敌之功大，退敌之功小，休、承并为杂号将军，绪、端偏裨而已。
现代文：当时论功行赏，认为阻挡敌军攻势的功劳大，使敌军撤退的功劳小，所以张休、顾承都升为杂号将军，全绪、全端只升为偏将而已。
English: At that time, it was a matter of merit and reward, and it was believed that the merit of blocking the enemy's offensive was great, and the merit of causing the enemy to retreat was small. Therefore, Zhang Xiu and Gu Cheng were both promoted to the rank of general, and Quan Xiu and Quan Dong were only promoted to general.

古文：寄父子益恨，共构会谭。
现代文：全寄父子更为怨恨，一起构陷顾谭。
English: Zenzai father and son are even more resentful, and together they frame Gu Tan.

古文：谭坐徙交州，幽而发愤，著新言二十篇。
现代文：顾谭因此获罪被流放到交州，他幽居发愤，著写了《新言》二十篇。
English: Gu Tan was therefore convicted and exiled to Jiaozhou. He lived in seclusion and anger, and wrote 20 "New Words."

古文：其知难篇盖以自悼伤也。
现代文：其中《知难篇》大概是感伤自身的。
English: Among them, "The Difficult Lesson" is probably the most sentimental.

古文：见流二年，年四十二，卒於交阯。
现代文：他被流放两年，四十二岁时在交阯去世。
English: He was exiled for two years and died in captivity at the age of forty-two.

古文：承字子直，嘉禾中与舅陆瑁俱以礼徵。
现代文：顾承，字子直。嘉禾年间与舅舅陆瑁都被已礼征召。
English: During the Jiahe era, both Gu Cheng and his uncle Lu Yao were conscripted.

古文：权赐丞相雍书曰： 贵孙子直，令问休休，至与相见，过於所闻，为君嘉之。 
现代文：孙权赐予顾雍丞相信中说： 您的孙儿顾子直，有美好正直的名声，等到和他相见，才知道还有超过传闻，我为您嘉赏。 
English: I believe that Sun Quan bestowed Gu Yongzheng with the following words: Your grandson Gu Zizhong has a reputation for beauty and honesty. When I meet him, I will know that there is more to him than hearsay. I commend you.

古文：拜骑都尉，领羽林兵。
现代文：就任命他为骑都尉，统领羽林军。
English: He appointed him as a cavalry captain to lead the Uebayashi army.

古文：后为吴郡西部都尉，与诸葛恪等共平山越，别得精兵八千人，还屯军章坑，拜昭义中郎将，入为侍中。
现代文：后来顾承担任吴郡西部都尉，与诸葛恪等一起平定山越，各率精兵八千人，回军据守享坑，被任为昭义中郎将，又入朝担任侍中。
English: Later, Gu Cheng served as the captain of the western part of Wu County, and together with Zhuge Cang and others, they pacified Shan Yue with eight thousand elite soldiers each. After returning to the army, he was assigned to guard Jiaokeng. He was appointed as the middle commander of Shouyi, and then he entered the imperial court as a chamberlain.

古文：芍陂之役，拜奋威将军，出领京下督。
现代文：芍陂之战，他升任奋威将军，出京兼任京下督。
English: After the Battle of Shun, he was promoted to General Fenwei, and went to Beijing to serve as the Vice-governor of Beijing.

古文：数年，与兄谭、张休等俱徙交州，年三十七卒。
现代文：过了几年，和哥哥顾谭、张休等一同被流放交州，三十七岁时去世。
English: A few years later, he was exiled to Jiaozhou together with his brothers Gu Tan and Zhang Hui, and died at the age of thirty-seven.

古文：诸葛瑾字子瑜，琅邪阳都人也。
现代文：诸葛瑾，字子瑜，琅邪郡阳都人。
English: Zhuge Liang, Zi Ziyu, and Zi Yao are all from Yangdu County.

古文：汉末避乱江东。
现代文：汉朝末年他到江东避难。
English: At the end of the Han Dynasty, he took refuge in Jiangdong.

古文：值孙策卒，孙权姊婿曲阿弘咨见而异之，荐之於权，与鲁肃等并见宾待，后为权长史，转中司马。
现代文：适逢孙策去世，孙权的姐夫曲阿人弘咨认为诸葛瑾有奇才，将他举荐给孙权，和鲁肃等一同被作宾客礼待，诸葛瑾后来是孙权的长史，转任中司马。
English: At the time of Sun Ce's death, Sun Quan's brother-in-law Qu Ah Ren Hong Zhao thought Zhuge Liang was a genius and recommended him to Sun Quan. Zhuge Liang was treated as a guest along with Lu Su and others. Zhuge Liang later became Sun Quan's long-term successor and was transferred to Zhong Sima.

古文：建安二十年，权遣瑾使蜀通好刘备，与其弟亮俱公会相见，退无私面。
现代文：建安二十年，孙权派遣诸葛瑾出使蜀国与刘备交好，和他的弟弟诸葛亮都因公事才见面，此外没有任何私人的会见。
English: In the 20th year of Jian'an, Sun Quan sent Zhuge Liang to Shu to make friends with Liu Bei, and his brother Zhuge Liang only met because of business, and there was no private meeting.

古文：与权谈说谏喻，未尝切愕，微见风彩，粗陈指归，如有未合，则舍而及他，徐复讬事造端，以物类相求，於是权意往往而释。
现代文：诸葛瑾同孙权谈论进谏，不曾急切慌张，只是稍微表示出自己的倾向，大略表达自己的想法。如有两人意见不合，他便放弃正在进行的内容转谈其他话题，慢慢再由其他事情从头开始，以对相似事情的看法以求和孙权相合，所以孙权的想法也往往能表达清晰。
English: When Zhuge Li and Sun Quan were talking about the future, Zhuge Li did not panic, but only slightly expressed his own inclination and roughly expressed his thoughts. If two people disagreed, he would give up the ongoing content to talk about other topics, and slowly start from scratch with other things, with the view of similar things to meet Sun Quan, so Sun Quan's thoughts can often be expressed clearly.

古文：吴郡太守朱治，权举将也，权曾有以望之，而素加敬，难自诘让，忿忿不解。
现代文：吴郡太守朱治，是推举孙权为孝廉的将领，孙权曾怨愤他，但素来敬重他，难于亲自启齿责备他，所以心中愤懑无法疏解。
English: Zhu Zhi, the governor of Wu County, was the general who recommended Sun Quan as a filial son. Sun Quan was angry with him, but he had always respected him. It was difficult for him to criticize him in person, so the anger in his heart could not be relieved.

古文：瑾揣知其故，而不敢显陈，乃乞以意私自问，遂於权前为书，泛论物理，因以己心遥往忖度之。
现代文：诸葛瑾揣摩到其中缘故，又不敢直接表达。就请求用孙权的意思来自问，就在孙权面前写信，广泛地阐明万物的道理，趁机用自己的想法推测分析孙权的思想。
English: Zhuge Li guessed the reason for this, but did not dare to express it directly. He asked to use Sun Quan's meaning to ask himself, wrote a letter in front of Sun Quan, extensively clarified the truth of all things, and took the opportunity to use his own thoughts to speculate and analyze Sun Quan's thoughts.

古文：毕，以呈权，权喜，笑曰： 孤意解矣。
现代文：写完后，他将信呈交孙权，孙权大喜，笑着说： 我的郁闷解开了。
English: After he finished writing, he presented the letter to Sun Quan. Sun Quan was overjoyed and said with a smile, "My depression has been relieved."

古文：颜氏之德，使人加亲，岂谓此邪？ 
现代文：颜渊的德行，是要人更为亲爱，难道就是这个意思吧! 
English: Yan Yuan's virtue is that he wants people to be more dear to him. Is that what he means?

古文：权又怪校尉殷模，罪至不测。
现代文：孙权又责备过校尉殷模，所定罪名难以预料。
English: Sun Quan also reprimanded Lieutenant Yin Miao, and the names of those convicted are difficult to predict.

古文：群下多为之言，权怒益甚，与相反覆，惟瑾默然，权曰： 子瑜何独不言？ 
现代文：朝臣们多为殷模求情，孙权更加愤怒，与求情大臣反复论争，只有诸葛瑾默然不语。孙权说： 怎么只有子瑜不说话? 
English: Most of the courtiers pleaded for Yin Mo, but Sun Quan was even more angry, arguing repeatedly with the Minister of the Ministry of the Ministry of the Ministry of the Ministry of the Ministry of the Ministry of the Ministry of the Ministry of the Ministry of the Ministry of the Ministry of the Ministry of the Ministry of the Ministry of the Ministry of the Ministry of the Ministry of the Ministry of the Ministry of the Ministry of the Ministry of the Ministry of the Ministry of the Ministry.

古文：瑾避席曰： 瑾与殷模等遭本州倾覆，生类殄尽。
现代文：诸葛瑾离开座席说： 臣下与殷模等因遭受故土沦陷，百姓流离，生灵涂炭。
English: Zhuge Liang left his seat and said: Due to the fall of their homeland, their subjects and Yin Mo suffered, the people were displaced, and their lives were ruined.

古文：弃坟墓，携老弱，披草莱，归圣化，在流隶之中，蒙生成之福，不能躬相督厉，陈答万一，至令模孤负恩惠，自陷罪戾。
现代文：离弃祖坟，带着家中老小，披荆斩棘，前来归顺圣明的教化，在流亡低贱之人中，蒙主公活命之福，不能自我互相督促勉励，以报答万分之一的恩德，以至于殷模辜负圣上的恩惠，将自己陷入罪恶之中。
English: Those who forsake the graves of their forefathers, and take with them the elders and children of their families, and overcome the thorns and thistles, and come to be converted to the enlightenment of the holy light, among the lowly in exile, are blessed with the blessing of the Lord's life, and are unable to urge and encourage each other to reciprocate the one-thousand-percent grace, so that they fall short of the grace of the Lord, and plunge themselves into sin.

古文：臣谢过不暇，诚不敢有言。 
现代文：为臣认罪尚来不及，实在不敢多言。 
English: It's too late for me to plead guilty, I really don't dare to say more.

古文：权闻之怆然，乃曰： 特为君赦之。 
现代文：孙权听后心中怆然，就说： 我特为您而宽赦他。 
English: Hearing this, Sun Quan's heart was moved, and he said, "I am pardoning him especially for you."

古文：后从讨关羽，封宣城侯，以绥南将军代吕蒙领南郡太守，住公安。
现代文：后来诸葛瑾跟随孙权征讨关羽，被封为宣城侯，以绥南将军的身份接替吕蒙兼任南郡太守，驻守公安。
English: Later, Zhuge Liang followed Sun Quan in the conquest of Guan Yu and was appointed as the mayor of Xuancheng. He succeeded Lv Meng as the commander of Nan County and was stationed at the Public Security Bureau.

古文：刘备东伐吴，吴王求和，瑾与备笺曰： 奄闻旗鼓来至白帝，或恐议臣以吴王侵取此州，危害关羽，怨深祸大，不宜答和，此用心於小，未留意於大者也。
现代文：刘备东征吴国，吴王孙权请求议和，诸葛瑾给刘备写信说： 突然得知您的大军从白帝城出军，有人担心您的议事大臣会认为吴王侵夺此州，杀害关羽，怨恨深厚，事关重大祸大，不应同意和解，这种思想认识只是从小处用心，没有留意大的方面。
English: Liu Bei marched eastward to the State of Wu, and the King of Wu, Sun Quan, petitioned for a negotiated peace. Zhuge Liang wrote to Liu Bei, "Upon suddenly learning that your great army had marched out of the White Emperor's City, some people were worried that your councilor would think that the King of Wu had invaded and seized this state, killed Guan Yu, that the resentment was deep and the matter was a great calamity, and that he should not agree to a reconciliation. This kind of ideological understanding was only from a small point of view, and did not pay attention to the big aspects.

古文：试为陛下论其轻重，及其大小。
现代文：我尝试为陛下分析其中轻重利害。
English: I'm trying to work out what's at stake for His Majesty.

古文：陛下若抑威损忿，蹔省瑾言者，计可立决，不复咨之於群后也。
现代文：陛下如能抑制威势，消减愤怒，姑且审查一下我的意见，计谋就能随即确定，不需向朝臣们咨询。
English: If His Majesty can control his power and temper his anger, he will be able to determine his strategy without consulting his courtiers, once he has reviewed my opinion.

古文：陛下以关羽之亲何如先帝？
现代文：陛下和关羽的亲义能比上同汉朝先皇之亲吗?
English: Can the kinship between His Majesty and Guan Yu be compared to that of the relatives of the first emperor of the Han Dynasty?

古文：荆州大小孰与海内？
现代文：荆州的大小和天下相比，哪个大呢？
English: How big is Jingzhou compared to the rest of the world?

古文：俱应仇疾，谁当先后？
现代文：对曹操和孙权都应仇恨，谁先谁后呢?
English: Both Cao Cao and Sun Quan should be hated. Who should be hated first?

古文：若审此数，易於反掌。 
现代文：如果思量权衡这些，作出决定就易于反掌。 
English: If you weigh these things up, it's easier to make a decision.

古文：时或言瑾别遣亲人与备相闻，权曰： 孤与子瑜有死生不易之誓，子瑜之不负孤，犹孤之不负子瑜也。 
现代文：当时有人说诸葛瑾另派亲信和刘备来往，孙权说： 孤人与子瑜有生死不改的誓言，子瑜不会辜负我，就像我不会辜负他一样。 
English: At that time, it was said that Zhuge Liang sent another close confidant to visit Liu Bei. Sun Quan said: "The orphan and Ziyu have a vow of life and death. Ziyu will not fail me, just as I will not fail him."

古文：黄武元年，迁左将军，督公安，假节，封宛陵侯。
现代文：黄武元年，诸葛瑾升任左将军，督守公安，持节，封为宛陵侯。
English: In the first year of the Yellow Martial Law, Zhuge Liang was promoted to General of the Left, he supervised the public security, held festivals, and was given the title of Wanling Hou.

古文：虞翻以狂直流徙，惟瑾屡为之说。
现代文：虞翻因为狂放耿直被流放，只有诸葛瑾多次为他说情。
English: Gu Fu was exiled because of Geng Zhi, only Zhuge Liang repeatedly interceded for him.

古文：翻与所亲书曰： 诸葛敦仁，则天活物，比蒙清论，有以保分。
现代文：虞翻在给亲友的信中说： 诸葛瑾敦厚仁义，效法上天使生灵活命，最近承蒙他直言劝谏，我才得以保全名分。
English: In a letter to his relatives and friends, Gu Tuo said: Zhuge Liang was full of benevolence and justice, and lived a flexible life according to the example of angels. Recently, thanks to his straightforward advice, I was able to keep my title.

古文：恶积罪深，见忌殷重，虽有祁老之救，德无羊舌，解释难冀也。 
现代文：但我积怨很多犯罪过深，陛下怨恨得很严重，虽有祁奚之类的人相救，但我德行不能比拟羊舌氏，是没有什么希望被释放了。 
English: But I have a lot of deep-rooted grudges from my many crimes. Your Majesty's grudges are very serious. Although there are people like Zou to save me, my virtue cannot be compared to Sheep Tongue's. I have no hope of being released.

古文：瑾为人有容貌思度，于时服其弘雅。
现代文：诸葛瑾为人雍容大度长于思虑，当时的人们都佩服他的弘大雅量。
English: Zhuge Liang was a man of grace and magnanimity, and people at that time admired his great elegance.

古文：权亦重之，大事咨访。
现代文：孙权很看重他，凡有大事都要咨询他的意见。
English: Sun Quan thinks highly of him, and consults his opinion on all important matters.

古文：又别咨瑾曰： 近得伯言表，以为曹丕已死，毒乱之民，当望旌瓦解，而更静然。
现代文：他又另外征询诸葛瑾说： 近来收到陆伯言的上表，认为曹丕已死，遭受祸乱的北方百姓，应当一见到我们的旌旗就会瓦解，但他们反而很平静。
English: He also consulted Zhuge again and said, "The people in the north who have recently received the above chart from Lu Boyan and believe that Cao Pi is dead and have suffered calamity should collapse at the sight of our banner, but they are calm.

古文：闻皆选用忠良，宽刑罚，布恩惠，薄赋省役，以悦民心，其患更深於操时。孤以为不然。
现代文：得知朝廷全都任用忠良之臣，宽恕刑罚，施以恩惠，减轻赋税徭役，以使百姓愉悦，其中的祸患比曹操时期更为深重。
English: To learn that the imperial court all appointed loyal and good ministers, pardoned punishments, granted favors, and reduced taxes and duties in order to make the people happy, the scourge was more serious than that of Cao Cao's time.

古文：操之所行，其惟杀伐小为过差，及离间人骨肉，以为酷耳。
现代文：孤人认为不是这样。曹操的行为，恐怕只有杀戮征战是小过失，谈到他离间他人骨肉，只是残酷而已。
English: No one thinks so. Cao Cao's actions, I'm afraid, only killing for war is a minor offense, but when it comes to him separating the flesh and blood of others, it's just cruel.

古文：至於御将，自古少有。
现代文：至于任用能人，是自古少有的。
English: As for the appointment of capable people, it has been rare since ancient times.

古文：丕之於操，万不及也。
现代文：曹丕与曹操比，是远远不及的。
English: Compared to Cao Cao, Cao Pi is far behind.

古文：今叡之不如丕，犹丕不如操也。
现代文：现在曹睿比不上曹丕，正像曹丕比不上曹操一样。
English: Now Cao Rui is no match for Cao Pi, just as Cao Pi is no match for Cao Cao.

古文：其所以务崇小惠，必以其父新死，自度衰微，恐困苦之民一朝崩沮，故强屈曲以求民心，欲以自安住耳，宁是兴隆之渐邪！
现代文：他之所以努力施行小恩小惠，一定是因为他父亲刚去世，自己考虑到能力衰弱，担心困苦的百姓有朝一朝使他势力崩溃，所以勉强委屈自己来求得民心，想要借此来安稳自己的地位，哪里是走向兴盛的趋势呢?
English: The reason why he is trying to do small favors must be because his father has just passed away, he considers his ability to be weak, and he is worried that the poor people will collapse his power one day, so he reluctantly wrongs himself to win the hearts of the people, and wants to use this to stabilize his position. Where is the trend towards prosperity?

古文：闻任陈长文、曹子丹辈，或文人诸生，或宗室戚臣，宁能御雄才虎将以制天下乎？
现代文：听说他任用陈长文、曹子丹这类人，这些人有的是文弱书生，有的是皇亲国戚，哪能驾驭威猛的将领以制服天下啊!
English: I heard that he appointed people like Chen Changwen and Cao Zidang, some of whom were weak scholars, and some of whom were relatives of the emperor. Who can control the powerful generals and subdue the world?

古文：夫威柄不专，则其事乖错，如昔张耳、陈馀，非不敦睦，至於秉势，自还相贼，乃事理使然也。
现代文：威势权柄不集中，那朝政就会错乱背离，就像过去张耳、陈余，他们并非不想和睦，只是涉及到权势，就自相残害，是事理发展导致这种情况。
English: If authority and power are not concentrated, then the government will be disorderly and deviate. Just like Zhang Er and Chen Yu in the past, they did not want to be reconciled, but when it comes to power, they will harm each other. It is the development of events that has led to this situation.

古文：又长文之徒，昔所以能守善者，以操笮其头，畏操威严，故竭心尽意，不敢为非耳。
现代文：况且陈长文这类人，以前之所以能坚守善道，是因为曹操控制了他们的头，畏惧曹操的威势，所以尽心竭力，不敢做恶事罢了。
English: Moreover, the reason why people like Chen Changwen were able to stick to the good path in the past was because Cao Cao controlled their heads and they were afraid of Cao Cao's power, so they did their best and dared not do evil.

古文：逮丕继业，年已长大，承操之后，以恩情加之，用能感义。
现代文：等到曹丕继承父位，年岁已经很大，他延续曹操的步伐，用恩惠网罗他们，所以他们心中感念。
English: By the time Cao Pi succeeded to his father's throne, he was already very old. He continued Cao Cao's pace and entrapped them with favors, so they were deeply moved.

古文：今叡幼弱，随人东西，此曹等辈，必当因此弄巧行态，阿党比周，各助所附。
现代文：现在曹睿年幼势弱，只能任人摆布，这类人必然趁机而巧做姿态，结党营私，扶助自己依附的势力。
English: Now that Cao Rui is young and weak, he can only be manipulated by others. Such people will inevitably take advantage of the opportunity to make clever gestures, form a party, and support the forces they depend on.

古文：如此之日，奸谗并起，更相陷怼，转成嫌贰。
现代文：这样的状况，奸邪小人必然并起，互相陷害仇视，转而彼此嫌恶对立。
English: In such a situation, the traitors and villains will inevitably rise up together, frame each other for enmity, and turn to hate each other.

古文：一尔已往，群下争利，主幼不御，其为败也焉得久乎？
现代文：长此以往，在下的大臣争权谋利，在上的君主年幼不能控御，他们的失败还要等很久吗?
English: In the long run, the lower ministers compete for power and profit, the upper monarchs cannot control the young, will their failure wait for a long time?

古文：所以知其然者，自古至今，安有四五人把持刑柄，而不离刺转相蹄齧者也！
现代文：所以知道他们必定失败的缘故，是因为从古至今，哪有四五人把持国家刑罚权柄，而不离心离德转相互相撕咬的争斗呢?
English: Therefore, the reason why they know that they must fail is because from ancient times to the present, where are the four or five people who hold the power of state punishment, but do not turn away from morality and turn into a battle of biting each other?

古文：强当陵弱，弱当求援，此乱亡之道也。
现代文：强者会欺凌弱者，弱者会寻求援助，这确是国家乱亡的道理啊!
English: The strong will bully the weak, and the weak will seek assistance. This is indeed the reason for the ruin of nations!

古文：子瑜，卿但侧耳听之，伯言常长於计校，恐此一事小短也。 
现代文：子瑜，你只需用心听着，伯言平日能善于从长远之处分析问题，恐怕在这件事上的认识有些短浅吧。 
English: Ziyu, all you have to do is listen attentively. Bojan is usually good at analyzing problems from a long-term perspective. I'm afraid his understanding of this matter is somewhat shallow.

古文：权称尊号，拜大将军、左都护，领豫州牧。
现代文：孙权登基称帝后，任命诸葛瑾为大将军、左都护，兼任豫州牧。
English: Sun Quan ascended to the throne and named her Empress Dowager. He appointed Zhuge Liang as General and Left Capital Protector, and concurrently as the Herdsman of Yuzhou.

古文：及吕壹诛，权又有诏切磋瑾等，语在权传。
现代文：等到吕壹被诛杀，孙权又有诏书责备诸葛瑾等，这些事记载在《孙权传》里。
English: By the time Lu Yi was killed, Sun Quan had issued an edict to reprimand Zhuge Liang, etc. These events are recorded in "The Biography of Sun Quan."

古文：瑾辄因事以答，辞顺理正。
现代文：诸葛瑾随即根据事情作了答复，言辞恭顺而事理明确。
English: Zhuge immediately made a reply according to the circumstances, the words were courteous and the reason was clear.

古文：瑾子恪，名盛当世，权深器异之；然瑾常嫌之，谓非保家之子，每以忧戚。
现代文：诸葛瑾的儿子诸葛恪名盛一时，孙权对他很是器重，但是诸葛瑾常常嫌弃他，认为他不是个保全家业的儿子，经常因此忧虑。
English: When Zhuge Yao's son Zhuge Ke was famous, Sun Quan was very fond of him, but Zhuge Yao often disliked him, believing that he was not a son who preserved the family business, and was often worried about it.

古文：赤乌四年，年六十八卒，遗命令素棺敛以时服，事从省约。
现代文：赤乌四年，诸葛瑾在六十八岁去世，遗命要求用不上漆色的棺材，穿上平日的衣服装殓他，丧事从简。
English: In the fourth year of the Red Emperor Wu, Zhuge Liang died at the age of sixty-eight. His will requested that a lacquer-colored coffin not be used, that he be dressed in ordinary clothes, and that the funeral be simple.

古文：恪已自封侯，故弟融袭爵，摄兵业驻公安，部曲吏士亲附之。
现代文：诸葛恪已经被封了侯，所以他的弟弟诸葛融承袭父亲的爵位，并代理军职领兵驻守公安，部众将领士兵都亲近依附他。
English: Zhuge has already been knighted, so his younger brother Zhuge Rong inherits his father's title, and acts as military leader to guard the public security. The generals and soldiers of the ministry are closely attached to him.

古文：疆外无事，秋冬则射猎讲武，春夏则延宾高会，休吏假卒，或不远千里而造焉。
现代文：边境上如果没有战事，诸葛融就在秋、冬之日狩猎，讲习武事，春夏时节邀请朋友聚会，并招待休假的官兵，有人不远千里赶来参加。
English: If there is no war on the border, Zhuge Rong will go hunting in autumn and winter, learn martial arts, invite friends to gatherings in spring and summer, and invite officers and soldiers on leave. Some people come from thousands of miles away to participate.

古文：每会辄历问宾客，各言其能，乃合榻促席，量敌选对，或有博弈，或有摴蒱，投壶弓弹，部别类分，於是甘果继进，清酒徐行，融周流观览，终日不倦。
现代文：每次设宴聚会诸葛融总是遍问宾客，让他们各自言明自己的技能，就合并榻床连接座席，衡量能力，择选对手，有的人喜欢下棋，有的人喜欢摴蒱，投壶弓弹，分门别类。这时鲜甜水果相继送来，清甜美酒缓缓斟酒，诸葛融本人在其中来往浏览，终日不倦。
English: Every time Zhuge Rong held a banquet, he always asked the guests to tell him their skills. He connected the couches with the seats, measured their abilities, and chose their opponents. Some people like to play chess, some people like to play badminton, throw pots and bowls, and divide them into different categories. At this time, fresh fruits were sent one after another, sweet wine was slowly poured, and Zhuge Rong himself went to and fro among them, never tiring.

古文：融父兄质素，虽在军旅，身无采饰；而融锦罽文绣，独为奢绮。
现代文：诸葛融的父亲和哥哥都穿着朴素，即使在军旅之中，服饰上也没有华丽配饰，而诸葛融则服饰锦绣，偏爱追求奢丽绮丽。
English: Zhuge Rong's father and brother were dressed in plain clothes. Even during the military expedition, there were no ornate accessories on the clothing, while Zhuge Rong was dressed in embroidered clothes, preferring to pursue luxury.

古文：孙权薨，徙奋威将军。
现代文：孙权去世后，他升任为奋威将军。
English: After Sun Quan's death, he was promoted to General Fenwei.

古文：后恪征淮南，假融节，令引军入沔，以击西兵。
现代文：后来诸葛恪征讨淮南时，授予诸葛融符节，令他率军进入沔水一带，攻打西部敌军。
English: Later, when Zhuge Qiu led an army to invade Huainan, he was awarded the Zhuge Rongfu Festival, which allowed him to lead his army into the Surabaya area and attack the western enemy army.

古文：恪既诛，遣无难督施宽就将军施绩、孙壹、全熙等取融。
现代文：诸葛恪被诛杀，孙峻派无难督施宽召集将军施绩、孙壹、全熙等前去攻取诸葛融。
English: Zhuge Ke was killed in the battle. Sun Jun sent Shih Kuan, the commander-in-chief, to summon the generals Shiji, Sun Yi and Quan Xi to attack Zhuge Rong.

古文：融卒闻兵士至，惶惧犹豫，不能决计，兵到围城，饮药而死，三子皆伏诛。
现代文：诸葛融突然得知大军前来，惶恐犹豫，不能定计。大军来到包围城池，他饮药酒自杀，三个儿子都被诛杀。
English: Zhuge Rong suddenly learned that a large army was coming, panicked, hesitated, and could not make a definite plan. The large army came to surround the city, he drank medicinal liquor and committed suicide, and his three sons were all killed.

古文：步骘字子山，临淮淮阴人也。
现代文：步騭，字子山，临淮郡淮阴人。
English: Bu Wei, Zizishan, Linhuai County Huaiyin people.

古文：世乱，避难江东，单身穷困，与广陵卫旌同年相善，俱以种瓜自给，昼勤四体，夜诵经传。
现代文：因天下动乱，他到江东避难到，只身一人穷困潦倒，和广陵人卫旌同岁，关系友好，都靠种瓜养活自己，白天勤奋劳作，夜间诵读经传。
English: Due to the turmoil in the world, he took refuge in the east of the Yangtze River. He was destitute and alone. He was the same age as Guangling's Wei Wei, and they had a friendly relationship. They both depended on growing melons to feed themselves. They worked hard during the day and read scriptures at night.

古文：会稽焦征羌，郡之豪族，人客放纵。
现代文：会稽人焦征羌，是郡中的豪门大族，他的门客行事放纵。
English: The auditor of the association, Jiao Zhengqi, was a member of a wealthy family in the county, and his clients were indulgent.

古文：骘与旌求食其地，惧为所侵，乃共脩刺奉瓜，以献征羌。
现代文：步騭和卫旌在当地谋生，担心受到他们的侵扰，就一道写好名帖带着瓜果，来献给焦征羌。
English: Bu Qian and Wei Qian were making a living in the area, and fearing that they would be harassed, they wrote a postcard together with melons and fruits to dedicate to Jiao Zheng.

古文：征羌方在内卧，驻之移时，旌欲委去，骘止之曰： 本所以来，畏其强也；而今舍去，欲以为高，祗结怨耳。 良久，征羌开牖见之，身隐几坐帐中，设席致地，坐骘、旌於牖外，旌愈耻之，骘辞色自若。
现代文：征羌当时在在内屋睡觉，步騭和卫旌在外等候很久，卫旌想放下瓜离开，步騭阻止他说： 我们之所以来，是畏惧他的强横，现在放下刮离开，想借以显示清高，只会和他结下怨仇。 过了很久，焦征羌开窗看到他们，他自己靠在案几坐在帷帐内，在地上铺席，让步騭、卫旌坐在窗外。卫旌更加感到耻辱，而步騭言谈神色自若。
English: At that time, Seong-soo was sleeping in the inner room, and Go-yeon and Wee-yeon were waiting outside for a long time. Wee-yeon wanted to put down the melon and leave, but Go-yeon stopped him saying, "The reason we came was that we were afraid of his arrogance. Now, let's put down the melon and leave, we want to show that we are high-minded, and we will only create a grudge with him." After a long time, Jia-seong-yeon opened the window and saw them. He himself leaned on the desk to sit inside the curtain, and made a seat on the

古文：征羌作食，身享大案，殽膳重沓，以小盘饭与骘、旌，惟菜茹而已。
现代文：焦征羌吃饭，自己独享大桌案，上面堆满了美食，而用小盘盛饭给步騭、卫旌，只有蔬菜而已。
English: When Jiao Zhengqi dined, he enjoyed the large table all to himself, which was piled high with delicious food, while the small plates of rice served to Bu Jun and Wei Jun contained only vegetables.

古文：旌不能食，骘极饭致饱乃辞出。
现代文：卫旌吃不下去，步騭却极力吃饭直至吃饱才告辞离开。
English: Wei Yao couldn't keep eating, but Bu Yao tried his best to eat until he was full before leaving.

古文：旌怒骘曰： 何能忍此？ 
现代文：卫旌愤怒地对步騭说： 你怎能忍受这样的侮辱? 
English: Wei Wei angrily said to Bu Wei: "How can you bear such an insult?

古文：骘曰： 吾等贫贱，是以主人以贫贱遇之，固其宜也，当何所耻？ 
现代文：步騭说： 我们是低贱之人，所以主人以贫贱的礼节对待我们，本来是应该的，有什么可耻辱的呢? 
English: Bu Wei said, "We are lowly people, so the master treats us with poor etiquette, which is as it should be. What is there to be ashamed of?

古文：孙权为讨虏将军，召骘为主记，除海盐长，还辟车骑将军东曹掾。
现代文：孙权担任讨虏将军时，征召步騭为主记，让他担任海盐县县长，后又召还他任命为车骑将军东曹掾。
English: When Sun Quan served as the general of the anti-hijacking campaign, he enlisted Gao Quan as the main, let him serve as the county governor of Haiyan County, and later recalled him to be appointed as the cavalry general of Dong Cao Quan.

古文：建安十五年，出领鄱阳太守。
现代文：建安十五年，步騭出京兼任鄱阳太守。
English: In the fifteenth year of Jian'an, he left Beijing step by step and concurrently served as the governor of Shenyang.

古文：岁中，徙交州刺史、立武中郎将，领武射吏千人，便道南行。
现代文：同年，又改任交州刺史、立武中郎将，统管武射吏一千人，又取道南行。
English: In the same year, he was transferred to the post of Jiaozhou Sashishi and appointed to the post of Wu Zhongro Shogun, in charge of a thousand shooters, and went south again.

古文：明年，追拜使持节、征南中郎将。
现代文：第二年，追授为使持节、征南中郎将。
English: In the second year, he was posthumously awarded the title of General of the Southern Expedition.

古文：刘表所置苍梧太守吴巨阴怀异心，外附内违。
现代文：刘表任命的苍梧太守吴巨暗中怀有二心，表面归附内心背离。
English: Wu Jiu, the Cangwu Grand Empress Dowager appointed by Liu Bei, harbored two hearts in the dark, with the surface belonging to the heart deviating.

古文：骘降意怀诱，请与相见，因斩徇之，威声大震。
现代文：步騭假意招抚吴巨，请吴巨前来相见，趁机将他斩首示众，步騭声名大震。
English: Bu Xun pretended to be wooing Wu Jiu, invited Wu Jiu to come and meet him, and took the opportunity to behead him in public, making Bu Xun famous.

古文：士燮兄弟，相率供命，南土之宾，自此始也。
现代文：士燮兄弟相继接受王命，南方归顺东吴，就是从此时开始。
English: It was from this time that the Shifu brothers successively accepted the king's order, and Nanfang surrendered to Dongwu.

古文：益州大姓雍闿等杀蜀所署太守正昂，与燮相闻，求欲内附。
现代文：益州豪族雍闿等杀害蜀国所设置的太守正昂，与士燮联络，请求归顺东吴。
English: Emperor Zheng'ang, who had been set up by Shu State after the murder of the powerful Yizhou clan Yong'ao and others, contacted Shi Yan and asked him to surrender to Dongwu.

古文：骘因承制遣使宣恩抚纳，由是加拜平戎将军，封广信侯。
现代文：步騭奉命派遣使者宣示恩典，招揽安抚，从此步騭被加官平戎将军，封为广信侯。
English: Bu Xun was ordered to send an envoy to proclaim grace and solicit appeasement. From then on, Bu Xun was promoted to the rank of General Ping Rong and named Guangxin marquis.

古文：延康元年，权遣吕岱代骘，骘将交州义士万人出长沙。
现代文：延康元年，孙权派遣吕岱替代步騭，步騭率领交州一万义士抵达长沙。
English: In the first year of the Yan Kang era, Sun Quan sent Lv Xuan to replace Bu Xuan, and Bu Xuan led ten thousand loyalists from Jiaozhou to Changsha.

古文：会刘备东下，武陵蛮夷蠢动，权遂命骘上益阳。
现代文：正值刘备东下，武陵的少数民族蠢蠢欲动，孙权就下令步騭北上益阳。
English: As Liu Bei was heading east, the ethnic minorities in Wuling were on the move, and Sun Quan gave the order to march north to Yiyang.

古文：备既败绩，而零、桂诸郡犹相惊扰，处处阻兵；骘周旋征讨，皆平之。
现代文：刘备溃败后，零陵、桂阳等郡仍然扰动不安，处处行军遇阻，步騭辗转征讨，都平定了。
English: After Liu Bei's defeat, the counties of Luling, Guiyang and other counties were still disturbed and uneasy. The marching troops encountered obstacles everywhere, and the marches turned into campaigns of conquest. All of them were pacified.

古文：黄武二年，迁右将军左护军，改封临湘侯。
现代文：黄武二年，他升任右将军左护军，改封为临湘侯。
English: In the second year of Huangwu, he was promoted to the position of the right general of the left garrison, and changed his title to the prince of Linxiang.

古文：五年，假节，徙屯沤口。
现代文：黄武五年，持节，移伦驻扎沤口。
English: In the fifth year of Huangwu, he was stationed in Hekou.

古文：权称尊号，拜骠骑将军，领冀州牧。
现代文：孙权登基后，步騭担任骠骑将军，兼任冀州牧。
English: After Sun Quan ascended to the throne, Bu Xi served as the general of the cavalry, and also served as the leader of Jizhou.

古文：是岁，都督西陵，代陆逊抚二境，顷以冀州在蜀分，解牧职。
现代文：同年，都督西陵，接替陆逊安抚南北边境，不久因冀州划在蜀国名分下，所以解除州牧之职。
English: In the same year, the governor of Xiling, who succeeded Lu Xun in pacifying the north-south border, was soon relieved of the post of provincial leader because Jizhou was placed under the name of Shu.

古文：时权太子登驻武昌，爱人好善，与骘书曰： 夫贤人君子，所以兴隆大化，佐理时务者也。
现代文：当时孙权的太子孙登驻守武昌，待人友好好行善事，他给步騭的信说： 贤人君子，就是要兴盛教化，辅佐治理时务之人。
English: At that time, Sun Quan's grandson, the crown prince, was stationed in Wuchang. He treated people kindly and did good deeds. In his letter to Bu Wei, he said: "A wise man and gentleman is a person who wants to prosper, educate, and assist in the management of current affairs."

古文：受性闇蔽，不达道数，虽实区区欲尽心於明德，归分於君子，至於远近士人，先后之宜，犹或缅焉，未之能详。
现代文：我生来昏庸，不通晓道义，虽然确实想在完美的德行努力践行，向贤明的君子表达敬意，至于远近的士人，其先后名位如何相宜，恐怕我的想法与实际不合，未能详察他们的情况。
English: I was born stupid and ignorant of morality, and although I really want to strive to practice perfect virtue and show respect to wise gentlemen, I am afraid that my thoughts are not in line with reality and I have not been able to examine their situation in detail.

古文：传曰： 爱之能勿劳乎？
现代文：《易传》有言： 爱惜他能不使他劳苦吗?
English: There is a saying in "I Chuan": If you love him, won't you make him work hard?

古文：忠焉能勿诲乎？ 
现代文：忠诚之人能不加以教诲吗? 
English: Can a faithful man be without discipline?

古文：斯其义也，岂非所望於君子哉！ 
现代文：其中的意味，难道不是对君子所寄予的希望吗? 
English: Isn't the meaning of this the hope placed in the gentleman?

古文：骘於是条于时事业在荆州界者，诸葛瑾、陆逊、朱然、程普、潘濬、裴玄、夏侯承、卫旌、李肃、周条、石幹十一人，甄别行状，因上疏奖劝曰： 臣闻人君不亲小事，百官有司各任其职。
现代文：步騭就把当时在荆州境内任职的人，如诸葛瑾、陆逊、朱然、程普、潘氵睿、裴玄、夏侯承、卫旌、李肃、周条、石干十一人罗列了出来，甄别他们的言行情状，趁机上书进行劝说鼓励孙登说： 为臣听说君主不亲自处理小事，朝中百官各司其职。
English: Bu Xun listed eleven people who were in office in Jingzhou at that time, such as Zhu Gejun, Lu Xun, Zhu Ran, Cheng Pu, Pan Zhaorai, Pei Xuan, Xia Houcheng, Wei Wei, Li Su, Zhou Jie, and Shikan, and screened their words and deeds, and took the opportunity to write a letter to encourage Sun Deng to say: "As a subject, I have heard that the monarch does not personally deal with minor matters, and the hundreds of officials in the imperial court each perform their duties.

古文：故舜命九贤，则无所用心，弹五弦之琴，咏南风之诗，不下堂庙而天下治也。
现代文：所以大舜任用九位小人，自己就无需操心，只是弹五弦琴，咏南风诗，不用下庙堂而天下治理好了。
English: Therefore, Daju appointed nine villains, and he did not have to worry about it. He just played the five-stringed fiddle and recited poems in the southern style. He did not have to go down to the temple, and the world was well governed.

古文：齐桓用管仲，被发载车，齐国既治，又致匡合。
现代文：齐桓公任用管仲，自己披散头发乘车出游，齐国既得到治理，还能匡合天下、多次聚集诸侯。
English: Qi Kuan was appointed as the vice-governor, and he traveled by car with his hair disheveled. Qi was not only governed, but it was also able to unite the world and gather princes many times.

古文：近汉高祖揽三杰以兴帝业，西楚失雄俊以丧成功。
现代文：近代汉高祖任用三杰而使大业兴盛，西楚霸王失去英雄俊杰而使功业衰亡。
English: The modern ancestors of the Han Dynasty appointed the Three Heroes to make the great cause flourish, while the Western Chu Emperor lost the hero Junjie, causing the cause to decline.

古文：汲黯在朝，淮南寝谋；郅都守边，匈奴窜迹。
现代文：汲黯在朝时，淮南王搁置叛乱阴谋;郅都守卫边境，匈奴人远离当地。
English: During his reign, King Huainan put aside the rebellion plot; Xingdu guarded the border, and the Xiongnu people stayed away from the area.

古文：故贤人所在，折冲万里，信国家之利器，崇替之所由也。
现代文：所以贤人所在的地方，可以防御于千里之外，实在为保卫国家的利器，也是王朝兴替的缘由。
English: Therefore, the place where the wise men are located can be defended from thousands of miles away. It is really a good weapon to defend the country, and it is also the reason for the change of dynasty.

古文：方今王化未被於汉北，河、洛之滨尚有僣逆之丑，诚揽英雄拔俊任贤之时也。
现代文：现在朝廷教化还未覆盖汉江以北，黄河、洛水之滨还有僭位叛乱的奸丑之人，这确实是一个招揽英雄选拔俊杰任用贤能的时代。
English: At present, the imperial edification has not yet covered the north of the Han River, the Yellow River, the coast of Luoshui, and the treacherous and ugly people who rebelled against the throne. This is indeed an era of recruiting heroes, selecting heroes, and appointing talents.

古文：愿明太子重以轻意，则天下幸甚。 
现代文：希望太子加以留意重视，那天下人就相当幸运! 
English: I hope the Crown Prince will pay attention to this, for then the whole world will be very lucky!

古文：后中书吕壹典校文书，多所纠举，骘上疏曰： 伏闻诸典校擿抉细微，吹毛求瑕，重案深诬，辄欲陷人以成威福；无罪无辜，横受大刑，是以使民跼天蹐地，谁不战栗？
现代文：后来中书吕壹主管审查文书，受到他们纠举的人很多，步騭上疏说： 我听说各位典校官员挑剔细微，吹毛求疵，加重案情加以诬陷，总想陷害他人以成就自己的威势，无罪无辜的人，莫名遭受酷刑。因此导致百姓在天地间局促不安，谁人不惶恐战栗?
English: Later, Lu Yi, the head of the Chinese Academy of Letters, examined the documents, and there were many people who were pestered by them, and he said: I heard that the officials of the academy were picky and meticulous, aggravated the case and framed it, and always wanted to frame others to achieve their own power. Innocent and innocent people were tortured for no reason. This caused the people to be uneasy in heaven and earth. Who would not be afraid and tremble?

古文：昔之狱官，惟贤是任，故皋陶作士，吕侯赎刑，张、于廷尉，民无冤枉，休泰之祚，实由此兴。
现代文：过去的狱官，都是任人唯贤，所以皋陶主管典狱，吕侯主管赎刑，张释之、于定国担任廷尉，则百姓没有冤屈，国运吉祥太平，实在由此兴起。
English: In the past, prison officials were all appointed on the basis of merit. Therefore, Jintao was in charge of prison, Luhou was in charge of expiation, Zhang Xizhi and Yu Dingguo served as court officers. The people did not have any grievances, and the national movement was auspicious and peaceful. This was the real reason for the rise of the movement.

古文：今之小臣，动与古异，狱以贿成，轻忽人命，归咎于上，为国速怨。
现代文：现在的这些小官元，行为与古人背离，判案断绝看重行贿，轻视人命，又将责任归于上级，为国家招来怨恨。
English: Today's petty officials are deviating from the behavior of the ancients, refusing to value bribery, despising human life, and attributing responsibility to superiors, causing resentment for the country.

古文：夫一人吁嗟，王道为亏，甚可仇疾。
现代文：一人悲叹，则王道受损，实在可恨!
English: If one person laments, then the royal road is damaged, it is really hateful!

古文：明德慎罚，哲人惟刑，书传所美。
现代文：有德之人慎重刑罚，贤哲之人判刑公正，这是古籍传扬的事情。
English: A virtuous person carefully punishes, and a wise person justly sentences. This is what ancient books have been propagating.

古文：自今蔽狱，都下则宜谘顾雍，武昌则陆逊、潘濬，平心专意，务在得情，骘党神明，受罪何恨？ 
现代文：从今以后凡有真相不明的案例，京城之内的则应咨询顾雍，属于武昌的则应征询陆逊、潘氵睿，专心尽意，以求得真相为要务，步騭倘有明见之处，受到惩罚又怨恨什么呢? 
English: From now on, in any case where the truth is unclear, those in Beijing should consult Gu Yong, and those in Wuchang should consult Lu Xun and Pan Zhenrui, and concentrate on obtaining the truth as a matter of urgency. If there is a clear point, what is the punishment and resentment?

古文：又曰： 天子父天母地，故宫室百官，动法列宿。
现代文：又说： 天子以天为父以地为母，所以宫室百官的设置，都是效法上天星宿的排列。
English: He also said: The Son of Heaven takes the sky as his father and the earth as his mother. Therefore, the arrangement of the hundred officials in the Imperial Household follows the order of the stars in the heavens.

古文：若施政令，钦顺时节，官得其人，则阴阳和平，七曜循度。
现代文：如果施行政令，能顺应时节，官职任用贤人，那阴阳之气调和，七星遵循规律运转。
English: If an executive order is implemented, it can adapt to the season, appoint wise people to official positions, and harmonize the yin and yang, and the seven stars will operate according to the law.

古文：至於今日，官寮多阙，虽有大臣，复不信任，如此天地焉得无变？
现代文：至于今日，官职有很多缺失，虽有大臣，但未得信任，这样则天地岂能没有异变?
English: As for today, there are many defects in the official position, although there is a minister, but he is not trusted, so can there be no change in heaven and earth?

古文：故频年枯旱，亢阳之应也。
现代文：所以连年干旱，这是阳气过盛的感应。
English: Therefore, it has been dry for years, which is an effect of the yang being too strong.

古文：又嘉禾六年五月十四日，赤乌二年正月一日及二十七日，地皆震动。
现代文：又嘉禾六年五月十四日，赤乌二年正月初一及二十七日，都发生地震。
English: In addition, earthquakes occurred in Jiahe on May 14, 2006, and on the first day of the first month and the 27th day of the second month of the second year of the Edo period.

古文：地阴类，臣之象，阴气盛故动，臣下专政之故也。
现代文：地属阴，是臣子的象征，阴气过强故有此震动，这是为臣的人专擅朝政的缘故。
English: The earth is yin, a symbol of the vassal, and the yin is too strong, which is why there is this vibration. This is the reason why the vassal is exclusively in charge of the government.

古文：夫天地见异，所以警悟人主，可不深思其意哉！ 
现代文：天地出现异象，都是警告人间君主，怎么能不仔细考虑其中用意? 
English: The appearance of visions in heaven and on earth is a warning to earthly monarchs. How can one not carefully consider the intention behind them?

古文：又曰： 丞相顾雍、上大将军陆逊、太常潘濬，忧深责重，志在谒诚，夙夜兢兢，寝食不宁，念欲安国利民，建久长之计，可谓心膂股肱，社稷之臣矣。
现代文：又说： 丞相顾雍、上大将军陆逊、太常潘氵睿，他们忧虑深远责任重大，志在精诚报国，日夜勤勉，寝食不安，心中忧及政事百姓有利之事，谋划长治久安的大计，可说是心腹股肱、社稷重臣。
English: He also said: the prime minister Gu Yong, the general Lu Xun, and the prime minister Pan Ye Rui, they are worried about far-reaching responsibilities, aspire to sincerely serve the country, work diligently day and night, sleep and eat uneasily, worry about the political affairs and the people's interests, and plan the long-term peace and stability. They can be said to be confidants and social leaders.

古文：宜各委任，不使他官监其所司，责其成效，课其负殿。
现代文：应当各自委以重任，不让其他官员监督他们管理的部门，责令他们有所见效，考察他们工作优劣。
English: Each of them should be entrusted with important tasks, and other officials should not be allowed to supervise the departments they manage, they should be ordered to be effective, and their work should be examined for strengths and weaknesses.

古文：此三臣者，思虑不到则已，岂敢专擅威福欺负所天乎？ 又曰： 县赏以显善，设刑以威奸，任贤而使能，审明於法术，则何功而不成，何事而不辨，何听而不闻，何视而不睹哉？
现代文：这三位大臣，只是有考虑不周的地方，怎么敢独揽大权仗势欺人辜负陛下呢? 又说： 悬赏是为了表彰善行，设置刑罚是为了威慑奸佞，选贤任能，明确律令，则什么功业不能成就，什么事理不能明析，什么言语不能听闻，什么现象不能认清呢?
English: How can these three ministers dare to monopolize great power and bully others to betray His Majesty, just because they are not well-considered? He also said: The reward is to commend good deeds, the punishment is to deter traitors, the choice of the wise is to allow the ability, and the rules are clear, then what kind of work can not be accomplished, what reason can not be clearly analyzed, what words can not be heard, and what phenomenon can not be recognized?

古文：若今郡守百里，皆各得其人，共相经纬，如是，庶政岂不康哉？
现代文：假若今日郡守县令，都有合适人选，共同协助治理国家，这样，各种政事怎么会不顺遂呢？
English: If today's county governors and county magistrates had the right candidates to jointly help govern the country, how could various political affairs not be successful?

古文：窃闻诸县并有备吏，吏多民烦，俗以之弊。
现代文：我私下听说各县都有备用官员，官吏多了民众就受烦扰，当地风气因此败坏。
English: I have heard in private that there are reserve officials in every county. If there are more officials, the people will be disturbed, and the local culture will be corrupted.

古文：但小人因缘衔命，不务奉公而作威福，无益视听，更为民害，愚以为可一切罢省。 
现代文：而小人们趁机奉命做事，不已奉行公务为要务却作威作福，于君主的视听无益，却成为百姓的祸害，我认为这类官员可全部罢免。 
English: But the little people take advantage of the opportunity to do what they are ordered to do. They do not perform their official duties as a matter of urgency but as a blessing. They are of no benefit to the monarch but become a scourge to the people. I think that all such officials can be dismissed.

古文：权亦觉梧，遂诛吕壹。
现代文：孙权阅读奏章后也醒悟过来，就杀了吕壹。
English: Sun Quan also came to his senses after reading the musical score and killed Lü Yi.

古文：骘前后荐达屈滞，救解患难，书数十上。
现代文：步騭先后推举被埋没的人才，解救遭逢祸患的蒙冤之人，上奏几十次。
English: Bu Xi has successively promoted the buried talents, rescued the victims of misfortune, and played dozens of times.

古文：权虽不能悉纳，然时采其言，多蒙济赖。
现代文：孙权虽没有全都采纳，但还是经常接受他的意见，也从中得到很多益处。
English: Although Sun Quan did not adopt all of them, he often accepted his opinions and benefited a lot from them.

古文：赤乌九年，代陆逊为丞相，犹诲育门生，手不释书，被服居处有如儒生。
现代文：赤乌九年，步騭接任陆逊为丞相，他依然教诲门生，手不释书，服饰居所都像儒生。
English: In the ninth year of the Red Emperor Wu, Bu Xun succeeded Lu Xun as the prime minister. He was still a disciple of the teachings, his hands did not interpret the books, and his clothing and residence were like a Confucian.

古文：然门内妻妾服饰奢绮，颇以此见讥。
现代文：但他家中妻妾服饰奢侈华丽，因此多被人讥讽。
English: But the wives and concubines in his family wear extravagant and gorgeous clothes, so they are often ridiculed.

古文：在西陵二十年，邻敌敬其威信。
现代文：他在西陵任官二十年，邻近的敌人都敬畏他的威势诚信。
English: He served in Xiling for twenty years, and the nearby enemies were awed by his dignity and integrity.

古文：性宽弘得众，喜怒不形於声色，而外内肃然。
现代文：步騭性情宽宏，得众人之心，喜怒不形于声色，内外人士对他肃然起敬。
English: Bu Xun's magnanimous disposition has won the hearts of many people. People both at home and abroad hold him in high esteem.

古文：十年卒，子协嗣，统骘所领，加抚军将军。
现代文：赤乌十年，步騭去世。他的儿子步协承袭爵位，统率步騭统领部队，加授抚军将军。
English: In the 10th year of the reign of Emperor Akau, Bu Xie died. His son Bu Xie inherited the title of nobility, commanded the troops led by Bu Xie, and was awarded the title of general of the army.

古文：协卒，子玑嗣侯。
现代文：步协去世后，他的儿子步玑继承爵位。
English: After the death of Bu Xie, his son Bu Xi inherited the peerage.

古文：协弟阐，继业为西陵督，加昭武将军，封西亭侯。
现代文：步协的弟弟步阐，继承父业担任西陵督，加官昭武将军，封为西亭侯。
English: Bu Xie's younger brother, Bu Yao, succeeded his father as the governor of the Western Necropolis, was promoted to the rank of general, and was given the title of Xitingo.

古文：凤皇元年，召为绕帐督。
现代文：凤凰元年，朝廷征召他为绕帐督。
English: In the first year of the phoenix, the imperial court called him to be the chief accountant.

古文：阐累世在西陵，卒被徵命，自以失职，又惧有谗祸，於是据城降晋。
现代文：步阐家几代都在西陵，突然受到征召，自觉失职，又担心有谗言之祸，就据守西陵投降晋国。
English: After several generations of scholars had been in Xiling, they were suddenly conscripted, and, conscious of dereliction of duty and fearing the calamity of being slandered, they surrendered Xiling to Jin.

古文：遣玑与弟璿诣洛阳为任，晋以阐为都督西陵诸军事、卫将军、仪同三司，加侍中，假节领交州牧，封宜都公；玑监江陵诸军事、左将军，加散骑常侍，领庐陵太守，改封江陵侯；璿给事中、宣威将军，封都乡侯。
现代文：他遣送步玑和弟弟步王睿到洛阳任职，晋朝廷任命步阐为都督西陵诸军事、卫将军、仪同三司，加官侍中，持节兼任交州牧，封为宜都公;任命步玑监管江陵各军事、左将军，加官散骑常侍，兼任庐陵太守，改封为江陵侯;任命步王睿为给事中、宣威将军，封为都乡侯。
English: He sent Bu Xuan and his brother Bu Wang Rui to Luoyang to serve, and the Jin court appointed Bu Xuan as the military governor of Xiling, the general of the imperial guard, the third secretary of the imperial etiquette, and the vice-governor of the imperial palace, and also served as the provincial vicar of Jiaozhou and the governor of Yidu; appointed Bu Xuan to supervise the military and left-wing generals of Jiangling, and the vice-governor of the imperial palace, and the vice-governor of the imperial cavalry, and also served as the governor of Jiaozhou and the governor of Jiaozhou

古文：命车骑将军羊祜、荆州刺史杨肇往赴救阐。
现代文：命令车骑将军羊祜、荆州刺史杨肇赶赴援救步阐。
English: The order was given to the chariot-riding general Yang Xuan and the Jingzhou knight Yang Zhao to rush to the rescue.

古文：孙皓使陆抗西行，祜等遁退。
现代文：孙皓派陆抗出兵向西，羊祜等撤退。
English: Sun Yat-sen dispatched troops to the west to resist the invasion, and Yang Kui and others retreated.

古文：抗陷城，斩阐等，步氏泯灭，惟璿绍祀。
现代文：陆抗攻占西陵城，斩杀步阐等人。步氏家族覆灭，只有步王睿延续宗祠。
English: The land resistance captured Xiling City, killing Bu Xuan and others. The Bu family was destroyed, and only Bu Wang Rui continued the ancestral shrine.

古文：颍川周昭著书称步骘及严畯等曰： 古今贤士大夫所以失名丧身倾家害国者，其由非一也，然要其大归，总其常患，四者而已。
现代文：颍川人周昭撰文称赞步騭及严畯等人说： 古往今来贤明的士大夫之所以会失掉名节自己丧命，危害家庭国家，其中原因不止一个，然而归纳其中大致规律，总结其中常有的忧患，也就四种原因原因。
English: Zhou Zhao, a native of Luochuan, wrote an article praising Bu Xuan and Yan Xuan and others, saying: From ancient times to the present, there are more than one reason why a wise scholar-doctor would lose his reputation, lose his life, and endanger his family and country. However, there are also four reasons to generalize the general rule and summarize the common worries.

古文：急论议一也，争名势二也，重朋党三也，务欲速四也。
现代文：一是急于议论，二是争名逐利，三是结成朋党，四是追求速效。
English: On the one hand, they are eager to discuss, on the other hand, they are competing for fame and profit, on the third hand, they are forming crony parties, and on the fourth hand, they are pursuing quick results.

古文：急论议则伤人，争名势则败友，重朋党则蔽主，务欲速则失德，此四者不除，未有能全也。
现代文：急于议论就会伤害他人，追名逐利就损害朋友，结交朋党就会蒙蔽君主，追求速效就会失去德行。这四个原因不消除，没有过能保全自己的人。
English: Those who are eager to argue will hurt others, those who pursue fame and profit will harm friends, those who make friends and allies will deceive the monarch, and those who pursue quick results will lose virtue. If these four reasons are not eliminated, there is no one who can protect themselves.

古文：当世君子能不然者，亦比有之，岂独古人乎！
现代文：现在君子也常有人能做到不这样，哪里只是古人这样呢?
English: Nowadays, there are often gentlemen who can do this, but where are the ancients?

古文：然论其绝异，未若顾豫章、诸葛使君、步丞相、严卫尉、张奋威之为美也。
现代文：然而要评论其中最为有才的者，就无人向顾豫章、诸葛使君、步丞相、严卫尉、张奋威表现得如此完美了。
English: However, to comment on the most talented among them, no one has performed so perfectly to Gu Yuzhang, Zhuge Zhijun, Bu Zhengxian, Yan Wei, and Zhang Fenwei.

古文：论语言 夫子恂恂然善诱人 ，又曰 成人之美，不成人之恶 ，豫章有之矣。望之俨然，即之也温，听其言也厉 ，使君体之矣。恭而安，威而不猛 ，丞相履之矣。
现代文：《论语》中说 夫子恂恂善诱他人 ，又说 成人之美，不成人之恶 ，顾豫章有这样的德行。 望去庄严可畏，接近则温和可亲，听其言严厉可警 ，诸葛使君体现出了这种特质。 庄严安静，威严不凶 ，步丞相践行了这种原则。
English: In the "Analects," it is said that Gu Yuzhang had the virtue of seducing others, and also said that the beauty of an adult, the evil of an immature person, Gu Yuzhang had such a virtue. Looking away is solemn and terrible, approaching is gentle and amiable, listening to his words is stern and watchful, Zhuge Zikun embodied this trait. Solemn and quiet, dignified and not fierce, Zhuge Zikun practiced this principle.

古文：学不求禄，心无苟得，卫尉、奋威蹈之矣。
现代文：学习不是为了追求名利，心中没有非分贪念，严卫尉、张奋威履行了这种品德。
English: Learning is not for the pursuit of fame and fortune, there is no greed in the heart, Yan Wei and Zhang Fenwei have fulfilled this virtue.

古文：此五君者，虽德实有差，轻重不同，至於趣舍大检，不犯四者，俱一揆也。
现代文：这五个人，虽说德行品格上有所差异，地位轻重不同，但在举止进退的节操上，没有涉及这四种弊病，这一点他们是一致的。
English: These five people, although there are differences in virtue and character, and their positions are different, but they are consistent in that they do not involve these four ills in the discipline of manners.

古文：昔丁谞出於孤家，吾粲由於牧竖，豫章扬其善，以并陆、全之列，是以人无幽滞而风俗厚焉。
现代文：过去丁讠胥出身孤贫之家，吾粲来自牧童中，顾豫章发扬他们的优势，使他们得以和陆、全同列，所以人才没有受到幽闭阻塞，社会风气淳厚。
English: In the past, Ding Xi came from a poor family, Wu Xi from a herd boy, Gu Yuzhang promoted their advantages, so that they could be on the same level as the mainland, so the talent was not blocked and the social atmosphere was pure.

古文：使君、丞相、卫尉三君，昔以布衣俱相友善，诸论者因各叙其优劣。
现代文：诸葛使君、步丞相、严卫尉三人，过去还是布衣时就交好，许多议论者依此品评他们的优劣。
English: The three of them, Zhuge Zhijun, Bu Zhengxian and Yan Wei, were friends when they were still in civilian clothes, and many commentators have commented on their merits and demerits.

古文：初，先卫尉，次丞相，而后有使君也；其后并事明主，经营世务，出处之才有不同，先后之名须反其初，此世常人决勤薄也。
现代文：起初，先是严卫尉，再是步丞相，再是诸葛使君。后来他们共同侍奉明主，管理国家大事，出世处事的才干有所不同，所以他们的名次先后和当初相反。这是世俗人依据他们职位高低来评定的。
English: At first, it was Captain Yan Wei, then Minister Bu Rong, and then Minister Zhu Ge. Later, they jointly served the Lord, managed national affairs, and were born with different talents in handling affairs, so their ranks were reversed from the beginning. This was judged by the secular people according to their positions.

古文：至於三君分好，卒无亏损，岂非古人交哉！
现代文：至于他们三人关系友好，友情一直没有消减，这难道不是古人交友的作风吗?
English: As for the three of them being on friendly terms, their friendship has never diminished. Isn't this the way of making friends in ancient times?

古文：又鲁横江昔杖万兵，屯据陆口，当世之美业也，能与不能，孰不愿焉？
现代文：又有过去鲁横江率领一万兵马，局守陆口，这是当时的美事，能或不能，谁不愿意担任这样的职位呢?
English: In the past, Lu Yangjiang led ten thousand soldiers and horses to guard Lukou, which was a wonderful thing at the time. Can or can not, who would not want to hold such a position?

古文：而横江既亡，卫尉应其选，自以才非将帅，深辞固让，终於不就。
现代文：而鲁肃死后，严卫尉应朝廷挑选继承鲁肃，但他自认并非将帅之才，坚决推辞，终于没有就任。
English: After Lu Su's death, Captain Yan Wei was chosen by the imperial court to succeed Lu Su, but he did not consider himself to be a great military leader, so he firmly declined and eventually did not take up the post.

古文：后徙九列，迁典八座，荣不足以自曜，禄不足以自奉。
现代文：后来他升至九卿、职典八座，荣耀不足以自夸，俸禄不足以自给。
English: Later, he rose to the ninth peer and the eighth official, but the glory was not enough to boast of, and the salary was not enough to support himself.

古文：至於二君，皆位为上将，穷富极贵。
现代文：至于其他两位君子，都位居上将，尽享富贵。
English: As for the other two gentlemen, they were both ranked as generals and enjoyed great wealth.

古文：卫尉既无求欲，二君又不称荐，各守所志，保其名好。
现代文：严卫尉既没有世俗贪欲，诸葛使君、步丞相二位也没有自夸举荐，各人坚守自己志向，保全自己的名声。
English: Yan Wei did not have worldly greed, and Zhuge Zhijun and Bu Zhenglu did not boast of recommending him. Each of them adhered to their own aspirations and preserved their reputation.

古文：孔子曰： 君子矜而不争，群而不党。
现代文：孔子有言： 君子庄重而不争夸，合群而不结党 。
English: Confucius said: "A gentleman is dignified without being boastful, and is united without being partisan."

古文：斯有风矣。
现代文：这三人都有这种风范。
English: All three of them have this style.

古文：又奋威之名，亦三君之次也，当一方之戍，受上将之任，与使君、丞相不异也。
现代文：还有张奋威的声名，也和三位同列，承担戍守一方的职责，接受上将职任，和使君、丞相没有不同。
English: There is also the reputation of Zhang Fenwei, who is also on the same level as the three, taking on the responsibility of defending one side, accepting the post of admiral, and is no different from the envoy and the prime minister.

古文：然历国事，论功劳，实有先后，故爵位之荣殊焉。
现代文：但是各项国事，论述功劳，确实有先后区别，所以他们的爵位荣耀有所不同。
English: However, there is indeed a difference in the succession of state affairs and the discussion of merits, so their titles and honors are different.

古文：而奋威将处此，决能明其部分，心无失道之欲，事无充诎之求，每升朝堂，循礼而动，辞气謇謇，罔不惟忠。
现代文：而张奋威身处职位，作出决定能明白自己的不同，心中没有不合道义的欲念，处事没有自大失控的要求，每次上朝，言谈举止遵循礼节，言辞恳切，都表示出忠诚。
English: Zhang Fenwei, on the other hand, is in a position to make decisions, can understand his own differences, does not have immoral desires in his heart, does not have arrogant and out-of-control requirements, and every time he goes to the morning, his speech and behavior follow etiquette, and his words are sincere, all of which show loyalty.

古文：叔嗣虽亲贵，言忧其败，蔡文至虽疏贱，谈称其贤。
现代文：张叔嗣虽是亲贵大臣，言谈中忧虑他的失败;蔡文至虽然卑贱，言谈中称赞他的贤明。
English: Zhang Shushi, although he was a close minister, worried about his failure in his speech; Cai Wen, although he was lowly, praised his wisdom in his speech.

古文：女配太子，受礼若吊，慷忾之趋，惟笃人物，成败得失，皆如所虑，可谓守道见机，好古之士也。
现代文：他的女儿嫁予太子，接受聘礼像接受吊唁，慷慨奔赴君命，确是忠厚笃实之人，他的成败得失，都像他所思虑的，可说是坚守道义见机行事，喜好古风的贤士。
English: His daughter was married to a crown prince, he accepted an engagement gift as if it were a condolence gift, and he generously devoted himself to the prince's life. He was truly a loyal and sincere person. His successes and failures were like his thoughts. He could be said to be a sage who adhered to morality and acted according to his opportunities, and liked the old style.

古文：若乃经国家，当军旅，於驰骛之际，立霸王之功，此五者未为过人。
现代文：至于管理国家，统管军队，在驰骋沙场之时，建立霸王功业，这五个人都没有超过常人之处。
English: As far as managing the country, commanding the army, and establishing the overlord's exploits while riding the battlefield, these five people are no better than ordinary people.

古文：至其纯粹履道，求不苟得，升降当世，保全名行，邈然绝俗，实有所师。
现代文：至于忠诚纯粹，坚守道义，不贪图私欲，处事有所进退，都能保全名节，超尘脱俗，确实有所师承。
English: As for loyalty pure, adhere to morality, do not covet selfish desires, deal with some advances and retreats, can preserve the festival, superior to the world, there is indeed a teacher.

古文：故粗论其事，以示后之君子。 
现代文：所以粗略地记述他们事迹，以此向后来君子展示。 
English: Therefore, it is necessary to roughly describe their deeds in order to show them to later gentlemen.

古文：周昭者字恭远，与韦曜、薛莹、华覈并述吴书，后为中书郎，坐事下狱，覈表救之，孙休不听，遂伏法云。
现代文：周昭，字恭远，和韦曜、薛莹、华核一起著写《吴书》，后担任中书郎，因犯罪下狱，华核上表援救，孙休不同意，于是伏法被诛。
English: Zhou Zhao, also known as Jingyuan, wrote "Wu Shu" together with Wei You, Xue Ying, and Hua Jiao, and later served as a middle school teacher. He was sent to prison for a crime. Hua Jiao came to the rescue, but Sun Xiu did not agree, so he was arrested.

古文：评曰：张昭受遗辅佐，功勋克举，忠謇方直，动不为己；而以严见惮，以高见外，既不处宰相，又不登师保，从容闾巷，养老而已，以此明权之不及策也。
现代文：评曰：张昭接受遗诏辅佐皇帝，功勋卓著，忠诚恳切为人正直。却因为严厉而受到忌惮，因为高见而被远离，既不身处宰相之位，也没有担任过太师太保，在普通街巷中从容度日，安心养老罢了，由此可知孙权比不上孙策。
English: The commentary said: Zhang Zhao accepted the imperial edict and assisted the emperor, his achievements were outstanding, his loyalty was sincere and honest. However, he was shunned because he was strict, and he was kept away because he was high-minded. He was neither in the position of prime minister, nor had he served as a grand tutor. He just spent his days in the ordinary streets and alleys, and lived a secure old age. From this, it can be seen that Sun Quan is not as good as Sun Ce.

古文：顾雍依杖素业，而将之智局，故能究极荣位。
现代文：顾雍倚仗一直以来的事业，而将其放入智谋布局中，所以最后能到达显赫高位。
English: Gu Yong relied on his long-standing career and put it into a clever layout, so he could finally reach a prominent high position.

古文：诸葛瑾、步骘并以德度规检见器当世，张承、顾邵虚心长者，好尚人物，周昭之论，称之甚美，故详录焉。
现代文：诸葛瑾、步騭都因为品德气度规范严谨而被当时人看重，张承、顾邵都是虚心钻研的学者，喜欢品评人物，周昭的说法，对比很是称赞，所以详细记录在这里。
English: Zhuge Yao and Bu Yao were both valued by people at the time because of their strict moral standards. Zhang Cheng and Gu Shao were scholars who studied with an open mind and liked to evaluate people. Zhou Zhao's comparison was very praiseworthy, so it is recorded in detail here.

古文：谭献纳在公，有忠贞之节。
现代文：谭献纳在公事上，有忠贞的节操。
English: In business, Tan Xianna is a man of integrity.

古文：休、承脩志，咸庶为善。
现代文：孙休、张承修行志向，都素来行善。
English: Both Sun Xiu and Zhang Cheng have always been good at doing good.

古文：爱恶相攻，流播南裔，哀哉！
现代文：但因喜恶而互相攻伐，导致被流放南疆，可惜啊！
English: But because of their likes and dislikes, they attacked each other, which led to their exile to southern Xinjiang. What a pity!

