古文：公之优曰施，通于骊姬。
现代文：晋献公有个为他乐舞逗趣的艺人叫施，与骊姬有私情。
English: Jin Xian Gong has an entertainer named Shi who makes fun of his music and dance, and he has a personal relationship with Zou Ji.

古文：骊姬问焉，曰： 吾欲作大事，而难三公子之徒如何？ 
现代文：骊姬向他请教说： 我想办件大事，向三位公子发难，应该怎么做？ 
English: Zou Ji asked him for advice and said, "I want to do something big, and I want to make trouble for the three princes. What should I do?"

古文：对曰： 早处之，使知其极。
现代文：施回答说： 早点把他们的地位固定下来，使他们认识到自己的地位已经到顶。
English: Shi replied: Fix their status early, and make them realize that their status has reached the top.

古文：夫人知极，鲜有慢心；虽其慢，乃易残也。 骊姬曰： 吾欲为难，安始而可？ 
现代文：人若知道自己的地位已经到顶，就不敢再有非分之想。即使有轻慢之心，也能很容易击败了。 骊姬又问： 我要发难，先从谁下手呢？ 
English: If one knows that one's position has reached the top, one dare not think of anything else. Even if one has a light heart, it can be easily defeated. Hao Ji also asked: If I want to start a fight, who should I attack first?

古文：优施曰： 必于申生。
现代文：施回答说： 必须先从太子申生开始。
English: Shi replied, "We must start with Prince Shen Sheng."

古文：其为人也，小心精洁，而大志重，又不忍人。
现代文：申生为人胆小怕事，受不得辱，而且年长稳重，又不忍心害人。
English: Shen Sheng was a timid and fearful person. He did not like to be humiliated. Moreover, he was old and steady, and he did not have the heart to harm others.

古文：精洁易辱，重偾可疾，不忍人，必自忍也。
现代文：那受不得辱的人，就容易羞辱；稳重而不灵活的人，就可以找他的毛病；不忍心害人的人，就只能自忍。
English: Those who can't bear to be humiliated are easily humiliated; those who are steady and inflexible can find fault with others; those who can't bear to hurt others can only bear with themselves.

古文：辱之近行。 
现代文：可以对他最近的行为进行诬蔑。 
English: He can be vilified for his recent actions.

古文：骊姬曰： 重，无乃难迁乎？ 
现代文：骊姬说： 稳重的人，恐怕难以动摇他吧。 
English: Kaede said, "He's a steady person, I'm afraid it's hard to shake him."

古文：优施曰： 知辱可辱，可辱迁重；若不知辱，亦必不知固秉常矣。
现代文：施说： 懂得羞耻的人才可以羞辱他，即使性格再稳重也会动摇的。如果一个人不在乎羞辱，也就一定不知道固守常规而容易动摇了。
English: Shi said: Only those who know shame can humiliate him, even if the personality is stable, it will be shaken. If a person does not care about humiliation, he must not know to stick to the routine and is easily shaken.

古文：今子内固而外宠，且善否莫不信。
现代文：现在夫人内得君心，外受宠爱，你说一个人好话或坏话，国君没有不相信的。
English: Now the lady has won the prince's heart inside and is favored outside. When you say something good or bad about someone, the prince does not disbelieve you.

古文：若外殚善而内辱之，无不迁矣。
现代文：如果你表面做出善待申生的样子，私下用不义的罪名羞辱他，那他的意志没有不动摇的。
English: If you pretend to be kind to him on the surface and humiliate him with unjust accusations in private, his will will not be unshaken.

古文：且吾闻之：甚精必愚。
现代文：我还听说，过分精明的人近于愚蠢。
English: I've also heard that people who are too smart are close to being stupid.

古文：精为易辱，愚不知避难。
现代文：精明的人容易受辱，就会愚蠢得不知躲避祸难。
English: The shrewd are easily insulted, and are so stupid that they do not know how to avoid disaster.

古文：虽欲无迁，其得之乎？ 
现代文：即使想不动摇，他能办得到吗？ 
English: Even if he wanted to hold firm, could he do it?

古文：是故先施谗于申生。
现代文：于是骊姬就先对申生施加谗言。
English: As a result, Yan Ji first imposed a reprimand on Shen Sheng.

古文：骊姬赂二五，使言于公曰： 夫曲沃，君之宗也；蒲与二屈，君之疆也，不可以无主。
现代文：骊姬买通梁五和东关五，叫他们向献公进言说： 曲沃，是您的宗庙所在之地；蒲和南北二屈，是您的边疆要地，不能没有人主管。
English: She bribed Liang Wu and Dongguan Wu, asking them to make suggestions to Xiangguo, saying: Quwo is the place where your ancestral temple is located; Pu and Nan Nan Er Qu are your important border areas, and there must not be anyone in charge.

古文：宗邑无主，则民不威；疆埸无主，则启戎心。
现代文：宗庙所在地没有人主管，民众就不会畏惧；边疆要地没有人主管，就会引发戎狄的侵略野心。
English: If there is no one in charge of the location of the ancestral temple, the people will not be afraid; if there is no one in charge of the important border areas, it will trigger the military's aggressive ambitions.

古文：戎之生心，民慢其政，国之患也。
现代文：戎狄产生野心，民众轻慢朝廷，这是国家的大患。
English: Ambitions arise in the army, and the people despise the imperial court. This is a great danger for the country.

古文：若使太子主曲沃，而二公子主蒲与屈，乃可以威民而惧戎，且旌君伐。 
现代文：如果让太子申生去主管曲沃的宗庙，让公子重耳和夷吾去主管蒲和南北二屈，就可以威服民众并使戎狄惧怕，而且也彰明了您的功绩。 
English: If you let Prince Shen Sheng take charge of the ancestral temple in Quwo, and let Prince Chong Er and Yiwu take charge of Pu and Nan Nan Bi Qu, you will be able to persuade the people and make the army afraid, and also highlight your achievements.

古文：使俱曰： 狄之广莫，于晋为都。晋之启土，不亦宜乎？ 
现代文：骊姬又指使这两个人一同对献公说： 戎狄有广阔土地，让它成为晋国的下邑，晋国开拓了疆土，不也是一件很好的事吗？ 
English: Hao Ji also ordered the two people to say to Xiang Gong together: Eun Di has a vast land, let it become the lower town of Jin, Jin has opened up the territory, isn't it also a good thing?

古文：公悦，乃城曲沃，太子处焉；又城蒲，公子重耳处焉；又城二屈，公子夷吾处焉。
现代文：献公听了很高兴，就下令在曲沃筑城，让太子申生住在那里，又下令在蒲筑城，让公子重耳住在那里；又下令在南北二屈筑城，让公子夷吾住在那里。
English: After listening to the dedication, he was very pleased, and ordered to build a city in Quwo so that Prince Shen Sheng could live there. He also ordered to build a city in Putuo so that Prince Chong'er could live there. He also ordered to build a city in the north and south of Erqu so that Prince Erwu could live there.

古文：骊姬既远太子，乃生之言，太子由是得罪。
现代文：骊姬达到使太子离开国都的目的之后，就开始编造谗言谤语，太子申生从此蒙受了不白之冤。
English: After she achieved her goal of getting the prince to leave the capital, she began to fabricate slanderous words. From then on, Prince Shinsho suffered a great misfortune.

