古文：高祖敞，昭帝时为丞相，封安平侯。
现代文：◆杨震传，杨震字伯起，弘农华阴人。八世祖杨喜，汉高祖时因功封赤泉侯。
English: ◆Yang Zhen Chuan, Yang Zhen Zi Boqi, Hong Nong Hua Yin Ren. Eighth-generation ancestor Yang Xi, Han Gao ancestor, was awarded the title of Akizumi Marquis.

古文：父宝，习《欧阳尚书》。哀、平之世，隐居教授。
现代文：父亲杨宝，学《欧阳尚书》，哀帝、平帝时，不问世事，隐居教学。
English: His father, Yang Bao, studied the Ouyang Shangshu, and when he was mourning the emperor and Emperor Ping, he did not care about worldly affairs and taught in seclusion.

古文：居摄二年，与两龚、蒋诩俱征，遂遁逃，不知所处。
现代文：居摄二年，同龚胜、龚舍、蒋诩一道被征召，不受，逃跑，不知所在。
English: After two years of residence, he was conscripted together with Yan Sheng, Yao She and Jiang Qi. He did not accept the conscription, ran away, and his whereabouts are unknown.

古文：光武高其节。
现代文：光武帝非常赞赏他的气节。
English: Emperor Guangwu was very appreciative of his generosity.

古文：建武中，公车特征，老病不到，卒于家。
现代文：建武中，公车特别征召他，以年老多病，不应，在家去世。
English: In Jianwu, he was specially recruited by the bus and died at home due to old age and illness.

古文：震少好学，受《欧阳尚书》于太常桓郁，明经博览，无不穷究。
现代文：杨震少年时爱学习，从太常桓郁学《欧阳尚书》，通晓经术，博览群书，专心探究。
English: Yang Zhen loved to study when he was a boy. He learned "The Book of the Western Yang Dynasty" from Tai Chang Huan Yu, was familiar with the classics, was well-versed in books, and devoted himself to study.

古文：诸儒为之语曰： 关西孔子杨伯起。 
现代文：当时儒生为之语说 ：关西孔子杨伯起。 
English: At that time, Confucians said: Kansai Confucius Yang Boqi.

古文：常客居于湖，不答州郡礼命数十年，众人谓之晚暮，而震志愈笃。
现代文：居住湖城，几十年不答州郡的礼聘。很多人说他年纪大了，应该出去做官了，杨震不仕的志概，更加坚决。
English: Living in Hucheng, he has not responded to the county's invitation for several decades. Many people say that he is old and should go out to work as an official. Yang Zhenfu's ambition is more resolute.

古文：后有冠雀衔三鳣鱼，飞集讲堂前，都讲取鱼进曰： 蛇鳣者，卿大夫服之象也。
现代文：后来有冠雀衔了三条鱼，飞栖讲堂前面，主讲老师拿着鱼说： 蛇，是卿大夫衣服的象征。
English: Later, there was a crowned finch leading three fish. In front of the flying lecture hall, the keynote speaker teacher held the fish and said: Snake, is the symbol of the doctor's clothes.

古文：数三者，法三台也。先生自此升矣。 
现代文：三是表示三台的意思，先生从此要高升了。 
English: Three is the meaning of three units, and he will rise higher from now on.

古文：年五十，乃始仕州郡。
现代文：五十岁才作州郡之官。
English: He didn't become a county sheriff until he was 50.

古文：大将军邓骘闻其贤而辟之，举茂才，四迁荆州刺史、东莱太守。
现代文：大将军邓骘听说杨震是个人才，举他为茂才，四次升荆州刺史、东莱太守。
English: General Deng Wei heard that Yang Zhen was a talented person. He named him as Maocai, and promoted him to Jingzhou four times, and Donglai governor four times.

古文：当之郡，道经昌邑，故所举荆州茂才王密为昌邑令，谒见，至夜怀金十斤以遗震。
现代文：当他去郡经过昌邑时，从前他推举的荆州茂才王密正做昌邑县长，去看杨震，晚上送金十斤给他。
English: When he passed through Changyi on his way to the county, Wang Mi, the leader of Changyi County, who had previously been elected by him, went to see Yang Zhen and gave him ten jin of gold in the evening.

古文：震曰： 故人知君，君不知故人，何也？ 
现代文：杨震说 ：老朋友知道你，你为什么不知道老朋友呢？ 
English: Yang Zhen said: An old friend knows you, why don't you know an old friend?

古文：密曰： 暮夜无知者。 
现代文：王密说： 晚上没有人知道。 
English: Wang Mi said, "In the evening, no one knows.

古文：震曰： 天知，神知，我知，子知。何谓无知！ 
现代文：杨震说： 天知、神知、我知、你知，怎么说没有人知道呢。 
English: Yang Zhen said: Heaven knows, God knows, I know, you know, how can you say that no one knows?

古文：密愧而出。
现代文：王密惭愧地走了。
English: Wang Mi walked away in shame.

古文：后转涿郡太守。
现代文：后转涿郡太守。
English: Later, he became the governor of Gyeongju County.

古文：性公廉，不受私谒。
现代文：公正廉明，不接受私人请托。
English: Be fair and honest, and do not accept personal requests.

古文：子孙常蔬食步行，故旧长者或欲令为开产业，震不肯，曰： 使后世称为清白吏子孙，以此遗之，不亦厚乎！ 元初四年，征入为太仆，迁太常。
现代文：子孙蔬食徒步，生活俭朴，他的一些老朋友或长辈，想要他为子孙置产业，他说： 让后世的人称他们为清白吏的子孙，不是很好吗？ 元初四年，征召作太仆，升太常。
English: His children and grandchildren eat vegetables and walk on foot, and live a simple life. Some of his old friends or elders want him to set up an estate for his children and grandchildren. He said: "Wouldn't it be great if future generations called them the children of the white officials? In the first four years of the Yuan Dynasty, he was conscripted as a servant and promoted frequently.

古文：先是博士选举多不以实，震举荐明经名士陈留杨伦等，显传学业，诸儒称之。
现代文：以前的博士选举大多名不副实，杨震推举通晓经术的名士陈留杨伦等，传授学业，得到儒生们的称赞。
English: Most of the previous doctoral candidates were not worthy of the name, and Yang Zhen recommended the famous scholar Chen Liu Yang Lun, who was familiar with the classics, to teach his studies, which was praised by Confucians.

古文：永宁元年，代刘恺为司徒。
现代文：永宁元年，代刘恺为司徒。
English: In the first year of the Yongning era, Liu Ye was appointed as the successor.

古文：明年，邓太后崩，内宠始横。
现代文：第二年，邓太后去世，安帝喜欢的一些后妃，开始骄横起来。
English: The following year, Empress Dowager Deng died, and some of the empresses that Emperor An liked began to become arrogant.

古文：安帝乳母王圣，因保养之勤，缘恩放恣；圣子女伯荣出入宫掖，传通奸赂。
现代文：安帝的奶娘王圣，困为抚养安帝有功，依靠帝恩，无法无天。王圣的子女伯荣出入宫中，贪赃枉法。
English: Wang Sheng, An Di's wet nurse, worked hard to raise An Di, relied on the emperor's grace, and was lawless. Wang Sheng's children, Bo Rong, entered and left the palace, and abused the law.

古文：震上疏曰：
现代文：杨震上疏。
English: Yang Zhen is on the right.

古文：臣闻政以得贤为本，理以去秽为务。
现代文：说： 我听说政治赖的是人才，治理国家必须去掉那些害人虫。
English: He said: I have heard that politics depends on talent, and those pests must be removed from governing the country.

古文：阿母王圣出自贱微，得遭千载，奉养圣躬，虽有推燥居湿之勤，前后赏惠，过报劳苦，而无厌之心，不知纪极，外交属托，扰乱天下，损辱清朝，尘点日月。
现代文：所以唐尧虞舜时代，优秀的人才在位，浑敦、穷奇、杌、饕餮四个坏人，都给流放到边远地方去了，人人心服口服，国家太平。道德堕落，宫廷里尽是一些卑鄙谄媚的人。王圣出身下贱，碰上千载一时的机会，养育圣躬，虽然有些洗洗涮涮的功劳，但得到的赏赐，已经远远超过她的劳苦了。而她贪得无厌，没完没了。在外面转相托请，扰乱天下，损害了朝廷，给皇帝脸上抹黑。
English: Therefore, during the reign of Emperor Gaozong of the Tang Dynasty, excellent talents were on the throne, and the four villains, Hun-tun, Quan-Qi, Yao and Yao, were all exiled to remote places. Everyone was convinced, and the country was at peace. Morality was degraded, and the court was full of despicable and charming people. Wang Sheng was from a low-class background, and she encountered a once-in-a-lifetime opportunity to raise Sheng Mu. Although she did some work, the rewards she received far exceeded her hard work. And she was insatiably greedy, endless. She solicited outside, disturbed the world,

古文：《书》诫牝鸡牡鸣，《诗》刺哲妇丧国。
现代文：《书经》警诫母鸡作公鸡叫，《诗经》讽刺妇人丧国。
English: The "Book of Songs" warns the hen to make a rooster crow, and the "Song of Songs" satirizes the woman's loss of her country.

古文：昔郑严公从母氏之欲，恣骄弟之情，几至危国，然后加讨，《春秋》贬之，以为失教。
现代文：从前郑严公听从母亲的私欲，放纵骄傲的弟弟，为所欲为，几乎把国家灭亡了，然后再来治理。《春秋》曾经批评他，认为教育不好。
English: Once upon a time, Zheng Yan Gong listened to his mother's selfish desires, indulged his proud brother, did whatever he wanted, almost destroyed the country, and then came back to govern. "Spring and Autumn" once criticized him, saying that education was not good.

古文：夫女子小人，近之喜，远之怨，实为难养。
现代文：那些女子小人，亲近她，就高兴；疏远她，就怨恨你。是很难对付的。
English: Those female villains, if you are close to her, you will be happy; if you are distant from her, you will resent you. It is difficult to deal with.

古文：《易》曰： 无攸遂，在中馈。 
现代文：《易》说 ：不能放纵，在厨房里就行了。 
English: "Women are in charge of eating and drinking in the home," Yi said.

古文：言妇人不得与于政事也。
现代文：就是说妇人不得干预政治啊！
English: That is to say, women must not interfere in politics!

古文：宜速出阿母，令居外舍，断绝伯荣，莫使往来，令恩德两隆，上下俱美。
现代文：应该赶快让王圣离开宫中，使她住在外面，与伯荣断绝关系，莫使他们往来，使有恩有德，上下都好。
English: They should quickly let Wang Sheng leave the palace, make her live outside, break off relations with Bo Rong, and prevent them from coming and going, so that there is grace and virtue, and everyone is good.

古文：惟陛下绝婉娈之私，割不忍之心，留神万机，诫慎拜爵，减省献御，损节征发。
现代文：希望皇上去掉私爱，铲除不忍之心，留心国家大事，谨慎地挑选臣子，减少开支和赋税。
English: It is hoped that the emperor will eliminate selfishness, eradicate impatience, pay attention to national affairs, carefully select courtiers, and reduce expenses and taxes.

古文：令野无《鹤鸣》之叹，朝无《小明》之悔，《大东》不兴于今，劳止不怨于下。
现代文：使四方无不在位的优秀人才，朝廷的官员没有乱世做官的悔恨。《大东》讽刺乱世赋敛多的诗句不行于今天，人民也无 迄可小康 之怨。
English: The outstanding talents of the four quarters, the officials of the imperial court did not have the remorse of the chaotic world. "Da Dong" satirized the chaotic world. Many poems do not work today, and the people do not have the resentment of the well-off.

古文：拟踪往古，比德哲王，岂不休哉！
现代文：效法往古，与历代圣哲同德，难道不好吗？ 
English: Is it not good to follow the example of the ancients and live in harmony with the sages of all ages?

古文：奏御，帝以示阿母等，内幸皆怀忿恚。
现代文：安帝看了给阿母王圣等，她们都怀恨在心。
English: An Di showed it to Amo Wang Sheng and others, and they all harbored hatred in their hearts.

古文：而伯荣骄淫尤甚，与故朝阳侯刘护从兄瑰交通，瑰遂以为妻，得袭护爵，位至侍中。
现代文：而伯荣骄奢淫乱更加严重，与前朝阳侯刘护从兄刘瑰勾搭，刘瑰居然娶了她为妻子，并袭了刘护的爵位，官至侍中。
English: But Bo Rong's arrogance, extravagance, and adultery were even more serious. He hooked up with Liu Guo, the former Prince of Chaoyang, who was Liu Guo's brother-in-law. Liu Guo actually married her, and succeeded to Liu Guo's title of nobility, and rose to the rank of chamberlain.

古文：震深疾之，复诣阙上疏曰：臣闻高祖与群臣约，非功臣不得封，故经制父死子继，兄亡弟及，以防篡也。
现代文：杨震恨透了，再上疏说： 我听说昔高祖与群臣相约，不是功臣不得封，治国的制度规定，父死子继，兄亡弟及，所以防止篡夺。
English: Yang Zhen was filled with hatred, and then he said: I heard that Gao Zu had an agreement with the ministers in the past. If you are not a meritorious minister, you are not allowed to hold a title. The system of governing the country stipulates that the father is succeeded by the son, and the brother is succeeded by the brother, so it is necessary to prevent usurpation.

古文：伏见诏书封故朝阳侯刘护再从兄瑰袭护爵为侯。护同产弟威，今犹见在。
现代文：今天子有诏封前朝阳侯刘护再从兄刘瑰袭刘护爵为侯，刘护的亲弟弟刘威还在。
English: Today's child has the imperial seal of the former Prince of the Morning Sun, Liu Guo, and then from his brother Liu Rui, Liu Guo's brother Liu Wei is still alive.

古文：臣闻天子专封封有功，诸侯专爵爵有德。
现代文：我听说天子专封封有功，诸侯专爵爵有德。
English: I have heard that the sons of heaven have merit in their titles, and the princes have virtue.

古文：今瑰无佗功行，但以配阿母女，一时之间，既位侍中，又至封侯，不稽旧制，不合经义，行人喧哗，百姓不安。
现代文：现在刘瑰没有其他功绩，仅仅因为配了阿母女儿，一时之间，既位侍中又至封侯，不符旧制，不合经义，行人喧嚷，百姓不安。
English: Now Liu Gui has no other achievements. Just because he was matched with a mother and daughter, he was both an attendant and a vassal for a while. This does not conform to the old system, does not conform to the scriptures, pedestrians are noisy, and the people are uneasy.

古文：陛下宜览镜既往，顺帝之则。
现代文：皇上应该吸取过去教训，遵守作帝之道。 
English: The emperor should learn the lessons of the past and abide by the ways of emperors.

古文：书奏不省。
现代文：疏上，皇帝不理。
English: When the calligraphy is played, it cannot be reflected upon.

古文：延光二年，代刘恺为太尉。
现代文：延光二年，代刘恺为太尉。
English: In the second year of Yan Guang, he was promoted to lieutenant on behalf of Liu Ye.

古文：帝舅大鸿胪耿宝荐中常侍李闰兄于震，震不从。
现代文：帝舅大鸿胪耿宝荐中常侍李闺的哥哥给杨震，杨震不受。
English: Yang Zhen was recommended by his uncle Geng Bao, the great-great-grandson of Emperor Xuanzong, who was the elder brother of the regular attendant Li Biao. Yang Zhen did not accept the recommendation.

古文：宝乃自往候震曰： 李常侍国家所重，欲令公辟其兄，宝唯传上意耳。 
现代文：耿宝去问杨震，说 ：李常侍国家所重，皇上想叫你推荐他的哥哥，我耿宝不过是传达皇上的意见而已。 
English: Geng Bao went to ask Yang Zhen and said, "Li Changzhu is the most important person in the country. The emperor wants you to recommend his brother. I, Geng Bao, am merely conveying the emperor's opinion."

古文：震曰： 如朝廷欲令三府辟召，故宜有尚书敕。 
现代文：杨震说 ：如果朝廷想令三府推举，应该有尚书命令。 
English: Yang Zhen said: If the imperial court wants to order the three prefectures to be selected, there should be a written order.

古文：遂拒不许，宝大恨而去。
现代文：拒绝了他，耿宝恨极而去。
English: When he refused, Geng Bao left in disgust.

古文：皇后兄执金吾阎显亦荐所亲厚于震，震又不从。
现代文：皇后兄执金吾阎显也向杨震推荐他亲戚友好，杨震又不从。
English: The empress's brother, Jingu Yanxian, also recommended Yang Zhen to befriend his relatives, but Yang Zhen did not comply.

古文：司空刘授闻之，即辟此二人，旬日中皆见拔擢。
现代文：司空刘接听说了，马上推举这二个人，十天之内皆见提拔。
English: Upon hearing the news, Liu Jie, secretary of the Civil Aviation Administration, immediately promoted the two people, and they were all promoted within ten days.

古文：由是震益见怨。
现代文：因此，杨震更加遭怨。
English: As a result, Yang Zhen suffered more grievances.

古文：时诏遣使者大为阿母修弟，中常侍樊丰及侍中周广、谢恽等更相扇动，倾摇朝廷。
现代文：当时有诏遣使者为阿母王圣大肆建造房屋，中常侍樊丰及侍中周广、谢恽等更相鼓动，扰乱朝廷。
English: At that time, an envoy was sent by the emperor to build a house for King Amo Saint Dasha, and the middle-ranking courtier Shufeng and the middle-ranking courtier Zhou Guang and Xie Jun further agitated each other, disturbing the imperial court.

古文：震复上疏曰：
现代文：杨震再上疏。
English: Yang Zhen went up again.

古文：臣闻古者九年耕必有三年之储，故尧遭洪水，人无菜色。
现代文：说： 我听说古时九年耕种，一定有三年的储蓄。所以尧时洪水为灾，人民没有饥饿。
English: He said, "I heard that in ancient times, if you farmed for nine years, you must have saved for three years. That's why floods were a disaster in bad times, and people didn't go hungry.

古文：臣伏念方今灾害发起，弥弥滋甚，百姓空虚，不能自赡。
现代文：现在灾害严重，百姓空虚，不能自给。
English: Now the disaster is serious, the people are empty and cannot provide for themselves.

古文：重以螟蝗，羌虏抄掠，三边震扰，战斗之役至今未息，兵甲军粮不能复给。大司农帑藏匮乏，殆非社稷安宁之时。
现代文：加之螟蝗为害，羌虏抢掠，边疆不安，战斗至今不止，兵员粮草都不。大司农国库虚空，不是国家安宁的时候。
English: In addition, the locusts are pernicious, the invaders are robbing and pillaging, the frontiers are restless, the battles have not stopped so far, and the soldiers have no grain and grass. The agricultural treasury is empty, and it is not the time for national tranquility.

古文：伏见诏书为阿母兴起津城门内第舍，合两为一，连里竟街，雕修缮饰，穷极巧伎。
现代文：诏书为阿母兴建津城门内第舍，合二而一，连里通街，雕刻修饰，极为华丽。
English: The edict ordered Ama to build a second house inside the gate of Tsu Castle. The two buildings, connected by a street, were decorated with carvings and were extremely ornate.

古文：今盛夏土王，而攻山采石，其大匠左校别部将作合数十处，转相迫促，为费巨亿。
现代文：现在正当夏天，土旺之时，上山采石，大匠左校别部将作共数十处，互相催促，耗费何止亿万！
English: Now, in the summer, when the soil is rich, there will be dozens of quarries on the mountain, and the left division of the left division will be made, urging each other, costing hundreds of millions!

古文：周广、谢恽兄弟，与国无肺腑枝叶之属，依倚近幸奸佞之人，与樊丰、王永等分威共权，属托州郡，倾动大臣。
现代文：周广、谢恽兄弟，与国家无骨肉之亲，依靠一班奸佞之徒，与樊丰、王永等分威共权，连络州郡，架空大臣。
English: Brothers Zhou Guang and Xie Qian, who are close relatives of the state, rely on a group of traitors to share power with Zou Feng, Wang Yong, and so on.

古文：宰司辟召，承望旨意，招来海内贪污之人，受其货赂，至有臧锢弃世之徒复得显用。
现代文：宰司征召，全按上面意旨办，招来海内贪污之人，接受他们的贿赂，至有赃贿不用之辈，再次重用。
English: The recruitment of the secretary-general was carried out in full accordance with the above intention, inviting corrupt people from overseas to accept their bribes, and reusing those who did not need bribes.

古文：白黑混淆，清浊同源，天下哗，咸曰财货上流，为朝结讥。
现代文：混淆黑白，不分清浊，天下哗然，都说： 财货上流，是为朝廷结下讥怨。 
English: Confusing black and white, not distinguishing between clear and ambiguous, the whole world is in an uproar, saying: The flow of wealth and goods is a mockery of the imperial court.

古文：臣闻师言： 上之所取，财尽则怨，力尽则叛。 
现代文：我听老师说： 上之所取，钱财尽了，就生怨；劳力尽了，就生叛乱。 
English: I heard my teacher say: When the upper class takes over, and money and wealth are exhausted, resentment arises; when labor is exhausted, rebellion arises.

古文：怨叛之人，不可复使，故曰： 百姓不足，君谁与足？ 
现代文：怨叛的人，不可再用。所以说： 百姓不足，君谁与足？ 
English: A rebellious man shall not go out. Therefore they say, "The people are few; who are you, Lord?"

古文：惟陛下度之。
现代文：希望皇上考虑。 
English: I hope the Emperor will consider it.

古文：丰、恽等见震连切谏不从，无所顾忌，遂诈作诏书，调发司农钱谷、大匠见徒材木，各起家舍、园池、庐观，役费无数。
现代文：樊丰、谢恽等看到杨震多次切谏不见采纳，没有什么顾忌了，假作诏书，调用国库钱谷、大匠，征用材木，各起家舍、园地、庐观，劳役、费用，无法统计。
English: Yu Feng, Xie Yao and others saw that Yang Zhen repeatedly cut and cut and could not be adopted, there was nothing to be afraid of, pretending to be an edict, calling the state treasury Qiantu, master craftsmen, requisitioning timber, building houses, gardens, pavilions, labor, and expenses, can not be counted.

古文：震因地震，复上疏曰：
现代文：杨震因地震，又上疏。
English: Yang Zhen, due to the earthquake, is also on the rise.

古文：臣蒙恩备台辅，不能奉宣政化，调和阴阳，去年十二月四日，京师地动。
现代文：曰： 我蒙恩供职台府，不能宣扬政化，调和阴阳，去年十二月四日，京师地动。
English: He said, "I have been blessed to work for the Taiwanese government, and I cannot promote politicalization and reconcile yin and yang. On December 4 last year, the capital was shaken.

古文：臣闻师言： 地者阴精，当安静承阳。 
现代文：我听老师说： 地属阴精，当安静承阳。 
English: I heard my teacher say: The earth is a yin spirit, so be quiet and follow the sun.

古文：而今动摇者，阴道盛也。
现代文：现在动摇，是阴道太盛的缘故。
English: If you're wavering now, it's because your vagina is too full.

古文：其日戊辰，三者皆土，位在中官，此中臣近官盛于持权用事之象也。
现代文：那天戊干辰支并地动，三者皆土，位在中宫，这是中臣近官操权用事的象征。
English: On that day, the phoenix and the dragon stood side by side, and all three were earth, located in the middle palace, which is a symbol of the power of the middle minister's close officials.

古文：臣伏惟陛下以边境未宁，躬自菲薄，宫殿垣屋倾倚，枝柱而已，无所兴造，欲令远近咸知政化之清流，商邑之翼翼也。
现代文：我想皇上因边境不宁，自己非常刻苦，官殿垣屋倾斜，也只用一根支柱撑撑罢了。土木不兴，想使远近都知道政化清廉，京师庄严雄伟，不在乎崇楼高阁。
English: I think that the emperor, because of the border unrest, is very hard on himself, the official palace fence is tilted, and it can only be supported with a pillar. Civil engineering is not popular, and he wants to make it known far and wide that the government is clean, the Beijing division is solemn and majestic, and he does not care about lofty buildings.

古文：而亲近幸臣，未崇断金，骄溢逾法，多请徒士，盛修第舍，卖弄威福。
现代文：而一些谄媚之徒，不能与皇上同心，骄奢越法，浪用劳役，大修房屋，作威作福。
English: On the other hand, some flatterers, who could not be of the same mind as the emperor, arrogantly overstepped the law, forced labor, overhauled houses, and pretended to be virtuous.

古文：道路哗，众所闻见。
现代文：道路议论纷纷，大家耳闻目睹。
English: People have heard and witnessed a lot of road talk.

古文：地动之变，近在城郭，殆为此发。
现代文：地动的变异，就在京城附近，大概就是因此发生。
English: The variation of the ground motion, just near the capital, is probably the reason for this.

古文：又冬无宿雪，春节未雨，百僚心，而缮修不止，诚致旱之征也。
现代文：又冬无宿雪，春节未雨，百官焦急，而修建不止，真是致旱的先兆。
English: Another winter without snow, the Spring Festival without rain, officials anxious, and more and more construction, really a harbinger of drought.

古文：《书》曰： 僭恒阳若，臣无作威作福玉食。 
现代文：《尚书》说： 僭恒阳若，臣无作威作福玉公。 
English: "Shangshu" said: "If you are a Zang Hengyang, you should not be proud to be a Fu Yu Gong."

古文：唯陛下奋乾刚之德，弃骄奢之臣，以掩訞言之口，奉承皇天之戒，无令威福久移于下。
现代文：就是说：只有君王得专威福，为美食。请皇上发扬刚健中正的精神，抛弃那些骄奢之徒，杜塞妖言的来源，秉承皇天的警戒，莫令威福久移在下，大权旁落。 
English: That is to say, only the king can enjoy the special blessing of food. I would like to ask the emperor to carry forward the spirit of vigor and uprightness, abandon those arrogant people, the source of Duce's oracle, and adhere to the emperor's vigilance. Do not let the blessing of food move down and the power fall by the wayside.

古文：震前后所上，转有切至，帝既不平之，而樊丰等皆侧目愤怨，俱以其名儒，未敢加害。
现代文：杨震前后所上，言词激切，帝已经不高兴他，而樊丰等又都侧目憎怨，只是因为他是名儒，不敢加害。
English: Yang Zhen said before and after, his words were fierce, the emperor was already unhappy with him, and Yu Feng and others all looked at him with hatred, but because he was a famous Confucian, he did not dare to harm him.

古文：寻有河间男子赵腾诣阙上书，指陈得失。
现代文：不久，河间男子至朝廷上书，言朝政的得失。
English: Soon after, the men from Kawama sent a letter to the Imperial Court, stating the gains and losses of the imperial government.

古文：帝发怒，遂收考诏狱。结以罔上不道。
现代文：帝发怒，下令逮捕入狱，定为欺上不道。
English: The emperor was enraged and ordered his arrest and imprisonment as a traitor.

古文：震复上疏救之曰： 臣闻尧、舜之世，谏鼓谤木，立之于朝；殷、周哲王，小人怨詈，则还自敬德。
现代文：杨震又上疏救他，说： 我听说尧舜时，谏鼓谤木，立于朝廷；商周圣哲之主，小人怨，还自我检查，勉励自己。
English: Yang Zhen went to rescue him again, saying, "I heard that when the gongs were rung, the gongs and drums were rung, and the wood was set up in the imperial court; the lord of the Shang and Zhou sages, the villain, also self-examined and encouraged himself.

古文：乞为亏除，全腾之命，以诱刍荛舆人之言。 
现代文：这是为了广开言路，集思广益，使下情上达。
English: This is in order to open the way for discussion, to pool ideas, and to reach a consensus.

古文：帝不省，腾竟伏尸都市。会三年春，东巡岱宗，樊丰等因乘舆在外，竞修第宅，震部掾高舒召大匠令史考校之，得丰等所诈下诏书，具奏，须行还上之。
现代文：现在赵腾以攻击诽谤获罪，与杀人犯法有差别，请皇上减罪，保全腾的性命，启发百姓敢于说话。 帝不理，赵腾被杀掉。到了三年春，皇帝东登泰山，樊丰等乘机竞修房屋。杨震部掾高舒召大匠令史稽查这件事。获得赵丰等的假诏书，写了奏书，要等皇上回来再送上。
English: Now Zhao Teng was found guilty of libel and slander, which is different from the law of murderers. He asked the emperor to commute the crime, save Teng's life, and inspire the people to dare to speak. The emperor ignored it, and Zhao Teng was killed. In the spring of the third year, the emperor went to Mount Tai in the east, and Gao Feng and others took the opportunity to compete to repair the house. Yang Zhenbu, Gao Shu, summoned the master to order the historical audit of this matter. He obtained the fake imperial edict from Zhao Feng and others, wrote a report, and waited for the emperor to return before sending it.

古文：丰等闻，惶怖，会太史言星变逆行，遂共谮震云： 自赵腾死后，深用怨怼；且邓氏故吏，有恚恨之心。 
现代文：樊丰等听说了，惶恐万状。正好太史说星变倒行，就一起诬陷杨震说： 自赵腾死后，杨震深为怨怒。并且为邓骘的旧部，怀恨在心。 
English: Zou Feng and others heard about it and panicked. Just as Tai Shi said that the star had changed backwards, they framed Yang Zhen together and said: Since Zhao Teng's death, Yang Zhen has been deeply resentful. And he is an old member of Deng Xuan and holds a grudge.

古文：及车驾行还，便时太学，夜遣使者策收震太尉印绶，于是柴门绝宾客。
现代文：等皇上返回，在太学待吉日入宫，晚上派使者持令收了杨震太尉印绶，杨震于是闭门绝宾客。
English: When the emperor returned, he waited for the auspicious day to enter the palace in Taishu. In the evening, he sent an envoy with an order to receive the seal of Yang Zhen, so Yang Zhen closed the door and became a guest.

古文：丰等复恶之，乃请大将军耿宝奏震大臣不服罪，怀恚望，有诏遣归本郡。
现代文：樊丰等还是恨他，竟请大将军耿宝奏杨震大臣不服罪，心怀怨恨，有令送归原籍。
English: Yu Feng and others still hated him, and actually invited General Geng Baozhuo to persuade Minister Yang Zhen to plead not guilty, harboring resentment and ordering him to return to his hometown.

古文：震行至城西几阳亭，乃慷慨谓其诸子门人曰： 死者士之常分。
现代文：杨震走到城西几阳亭，慷慨地对他的儿子、学生说 ：死是一个人不可免的。
English: Yang Zhen walked to the west of the city to Kiyotei, and generously said to his son and student: Death is inevitable for a person.

古文：吾蒙恩居上司，疾奸臣狡猾而不能诛，恶嬖女倾乱而不能禁，何面目复见日月！
现代文：我蒙恩居位，痛恨奸臣狡猾而不能诛，恶嬖女倾乱而不能禁，还有什么面目见天下呢？
English: I am in a position of grace, I hate my treacherous vassal who is cunning but cannot be beaten, and I hate the wicked woman who is turbulent but cannot be restrained. What other face can I show to the world?

古文：身死之日，以杂木为棺，布单被裁足盖形，勿归冢次，忽设祭祠。 
现代文：身死之日，用杂木为棺，布单被只要盖住形体，不归葬所，不设祭祠。 
English: On the day of death, the coffin should be made of miscellaneous wood, and the cloth sheet should only cover the body. There should be no funeral home and no shrine.

古文：因饮鸩而卒，时年七十余。
现代文：于是服毒而死，时年七十余岁。
English: As a result, he took poison and died at the age of over seventy.

古文：弘农太守移良承樊丰等旨，遣吏于陕县留停震丧，露棺道侧，谪震诸子代邮行书，道路皆为陨涕。
现代文：弘农太守移良奉樊丰等旨意，派吏在陕县留停杨震丧，露棺道旁，责令杨震诸子代邮行书，道路之人，皆为之流泪。
English: In accordance with the wishes of Gongnong Daju Iliang Bongfu Feng and others, officials were sent to stay in Shaanxi County for Yang Zhen's funeral, and ordered Yang Zhen's children to act as postmen and women, and everyone on the road shed tears for them.

古文：岁余，顺帝即位，樊丰、周广等诛死，震门生虞放、陈翼诣阙追讼震事。
现代文：岁余，顺帝即位，樊丰、周广等诛死，杨震学生虞放，陈翼至朝廷申诉杨震事。
English: Years later, Emperor Shun ascended to the throne, Yu Feng, Zhou Guang and others died, Yang Zhen students were released, and Chen Ying went to the imperial court to complain about Yang Zhen.

古文：朝廷咸称其忠，乃下诏除二子为郎，赠钱百万，以礼改葬于华阴潼亭，远近毕至。
现代文：朝廷都称杨震忠。下诏授二子为郎，赠钱百万，以礼改葬杨震于华阴潼亭，远近毕至。
English: The imperial court called Yang Zhenzhong. The next emperor conferred the title of second son on him, gave him a million of money, and buried Yang Zhen in Huayin Pavilion with courtesy, from near and far.

古文：先葬十余日，有大鸟高丈余，集震丧前，俯仰悲鸣，泪下沾地，葬毕，乃飞去。
现代文：葬前十几天，有大鸟高丈余，飞到杨震丧前，俯仰悲鸣，泪流湿地，葬完，才飞去。
English: A dozen days before the funeral, there was a large bird, taller than the rest, which flew to Yang Zhengyi, prostrated and wailed, shed tears in the wetland, and only flew away after the funeral.

古文：郡以状上。
现代文：郡里将这一情况报告上去。
English: The county reported the incident.

古文：时连有灾异，帝感震之枉，乃下诏策曰： 故太尉震，正直是与，俾匡时政，而青蝇点素，同兹在籓。上天降威，灾眚屡作，尔卜尔筮，惟震之故。
现代文：当时灾异连续出现，帝觉得杨震为冤案，下诏说 ：已故太尉杨震，正直为怀，使他辅佐时政，而小人颠倒黑白，谄害忠良，上天降威，灾害屡作，求神问卜，都说是杨震枉死之故。
English: At that time, disasters appeared one after another, and the emperor thought that Yang Zhen was a wrongful case, and issued the following edict: The late First Lieutenant Yang Zhen was honest and made him assist the current government, while the villain reversed black and white, harmed the faithful, humiliated the heavens, repeatedly caused disasters, and prayed to the gods, all of which were said to be the cause of Yang Zhen's death.

古文：朕之不德，用彰厥咎，山崩栋折，我其危哉！
现代文：我的昏庸，加重了这种罪过。山岳崩塌，栋梁折断，我是多么危险啊！
English: My stupidity aggravates this sin. Mountains crumble, beams break, how dangerous I am!

古文：今使太守丞以中牢具祠，魂而有灵，傥其歆享。 
现代文：现在使太守丞用中牢具祠，魂而有灵，或者来享受我的这些祭品吧。 
English: Now let the grand marshal use the middle cell to build a shrine, the soul to have a spirit, or come and enjoy these offerings of mine.

古文：于是时人立石鸟象于其墓所。
现代文：于是人们立石鸟像于杨震墓前，以纪念他。
English: As a result, people erected a stone bird statue in front of Yang Zhen's tomb to commemorate him.

古文：震之被谮也，高舒亦得罪，以减死论。
现代文：杨震被诬陷，高舒也获罪，作减死论。
English: Yang Zhen was framed, Gaoshu was also found guilty, and the death sentence was commuted.

古文：及震事显，舒拜侍御史，至荆州刺史。
现代文：等到杨震事平反，高舒拜侍御史，至荆州判史。
English: By the time Yang Zhenjie was rehabilitated, Gao Shubai had become history, and Jingzhou had become history.

古文：震五子。
现代文：杨震五个儿子。
English: Yang Zhen has five sons.

古文：长子牧，富波相。
现代文：长子杨牧，任富波相。
English: The eldest son Yang Mu, Ren Fubo Sang.

