古文：贯高谋杀汉祖，事发觉，汉诏赵王，有敢随王罪三族，唯田叔，孟舒等自髠钳随王，赵王既出，上以叔等为郡守。
现代文：贯高谋杀害汉高祖，事情被发觉，汉廷下诏书给赵王，有敢跟随赵王的，灭他三族。只有田叔、孟舒自己剃发钳颈跟随赵王。赵王既被赦出狱后，皇帝用田叔等当了郡守。
English: Cheng Gao murdered Han Gao Zu, the matter was discovered, the Han court issued an edict to King Zhao, if anyone dared to follow King Zhao, he would destroy his three tribes. Only Uncle Tian and Meng Shu themselves shaved their heads and necks to follow King Zhao. After King Zhao was released from prison, the emperor used Uncle Tian and others to be the county governor.

古文：文帝初立，召叔问曰； 公知天下长者乎？ 
现代文：文帝初登皇位，召见田叔问道： 你知道谁是天下的贤人君子吗？ 
English: When Emperor Wen ascended the throne for the first time, he summoned Uncle Tian and asked: "Do you know who is the wisest gentleman in the world?

古文：曰： 故云中守孟舒，长者也。 
现代文：田叔说： 原来的云中守孟舒是贤人君子呀！ 
English: Uncle Tian said: Meng Shu, the original governor of Yunzhong, was a wise man and gentleman!

古文：是时，舒坐虏大入云中免。
现代文：当时，孟舒因为匈奴进入云中被罢免。
English: At that time, Meng Shou was ousted from the top position because the Xiongnu entered the clouds.

古文：上曰： 虏入云中，孟舒不能坚守，士卒死者数百人，长者固杀人乎？
现代文：文帝说： 匈奴攻入云中、孟舒没有守住，战士死了几百人，贤人君子是这样的吗？ 
English: Emperor Wen said: The Xiongnu invaded the clouds, Mengshu did not hold out, hundreds of soldiers died, is this the way of a wise man?

古文：叔叩头曰： 夫贯高等谋反，天子下明诏，赵有敢随张王者，罪三族。
现代文：田叔叩头说： 当年贯高谋反，皇帝明明有诏书，赵国人胆效跟随赵王，灭他三族。
English: Uncle Tian kowtowed and said, "Back then, the imperial high command plotted a rebellion, the emperor clearly issued an edict, and the people of Zhao had the audacity to follow King Zhao and exterminate his three tribes.

古文：然孟舒自髠钳，随张王，以身死之，岂自知为云中守哉！
现代文：然而孟舒自己剃发钳颈，跟随张敖，准各死去，哪里知道会当云中守呢！
English: However, Meng Shu himself shaved his head and neck, followed Zhang Ye, and was about to die. Who knew that he would become the guardian of the clouds!

古文：是乃所以为长者。 上曰： 贤哉孟舒！ 
现代文：所以是贤人君子。 文帝说： 好样的呀，孟舒！ 
English: Therefore, he was a wise man and a gentleman. Emperor Wen said, "Well done, Meng Shu!

古文：复召以为云中守。
现代文：又让他当了云中守。
English: And let him be the keeper of the clouds.

古文：按，田叔、孟舒同随张王，今叔指言舒事，几于自荐矣。
现代文：考田叔、孟舒一同跟随赵王，现在田叔径直叙说孟舒的长处，几乎就是自荐了。
English: Uncle Gao Tian and Meng Shu followed Zhao Wang together. Now Uncle Tian went straight to the point and said that Meng Shu's strengths were almost self-recommended.

古文：叔不自以为嫌，但欲直孟舒之事，文帝不以为过，一言开悟，为之复用舒，君臣之诚意相与如此。
现代文：但田叔并不避嫌，只是想说清孟舒的事情，文帝也不认为他是自荐，一句话受了启发，又用了孟舒，君臣诚意互相交流就是如此。
English: But Uncle Tian did not shy away, he just wanted to talk about the matter of Qing Mengshu. Emperor Wen did not think that he was self-recommended. He was inspired by a sentence and used Mengshu. This is how princes and ministers sincerely communicate with each other.

