古文：鲁直《题阳关图》诗云： 想得阳关更西路，北风低草见牛羊。 
现代文：黄庭坚的诗《题阳关图》是这么写的： 想得阳关更西路，北风低草见牛羊。 
English: Huang Tingjian's poem "Theme Yang Guan Map" is written like this: Thinking of Yang Guan further west, the north wind low grass sees cattle and sheep.

古文：又《集》中有《书韦深道诸帖》云：斛律明月，胡儿也，不以文章显，老胡以重兵困敕勒川，召明月作歌以排闷。
现代文：此外在他的合集中有《书韦深道诸帖》，里头写到： 斛律明月，胡儿也，不以文章显。老胡以重兵困敕勒川，召明月作歌以排闷。
English: In addition, there is "Shuwei Shengdao Zhuangzhuang" in his collection, in which it is written: "Bao Rui Mingyue, Hu Er also, does not appear as an article. Old Hu trapped the Qule River with heavy troops, and called on Mingyue to make a song to dispel the boredom.

古文：仓卒之间，语奇壮如此，盖率意道事实耳。 
现代文：仓卒之间，语奇壮如此，盖率意道事实耳。 
English: Among the hoarders, the language is so bizarre and powerful that it covers the ears of the truth.

古文：予按《古乐府》有《敕勒歌》，以为齐高欢攻周玉壁而败，恚愤疾发，使斛律金唱《敕勒》，欢自和之。
现代文：我参考查阅了《古乐府》，其中有一篇《敕勒歌》，根据里面的记载，我认为是北齐高欢攻打北周玉璧时惨败，悲愤过度而生了病，叫来斛律金让他唱歌舒缓排解，斛律金于是唱诵了《敕勒》，当时高欢自己也跟着他唱了起来。
English: I referred to the "Ancient Music House," which contains an article on "Song of Zhele." According to the records in it, I believe that it was the Northern Qi Gao Huan who suffered a disastrous defeat when he attacked the Northern Zhou Yubi. He was overwhelmed with grief and became ill. He asked Zhele Jin to let him sing a soothing solution. Zhele Jin then sang "Song of Zhele." At that time, Gao Huan himself also sang along with him.

古文：其歌本鲜卑语，语曰： 敕勒川，阳山下。天似穹庐，笼罩四野。
现代文：这首歌最初原本是用鲜卑语唱的，歌词是： 敕勒川，阴山下，天似穹庐，笼罩四野。
English: The song was originally sung in Xianbei, with the lyrics: "The Qule River, beneath the shadowy mountains, is like a dome, enveloping the four provinces."

古文：天苍苍，野茫茫，风吹草低见牛羊。 
现代文：天苍苍，野茫茫，风吹草低见牛羊。 
English: The sky is overcast, the fields are vast, and the wind-blown grass hides the cattle and sheep.

古文：鲁直所题及诗中所用，盖此也。
现代文：黄庭坚所题写的和诗中所说的，应该就是这首歌。
English: What Huang Tingjian wrote and what is said in the poem should be this song.

古文：但误以斛律金为明月。明月名光，金之子也。
现代文：但是他把斛律金当成了斛律明月，斛律明月则是斛律金的儿子，名字叫光。
English: But he mistook Pelican Gold for Pelican Moon, and Pelican Moon for Pelican Gold's son, named Light.

古文：欢败于玉壁，亦非困于敕勒川。
现代文：高欢当时是在玉壁战败，而不是被困在了敕勒川。
English: At that time, Gao Huan was defeated in Yubi, rather than being trapped in the Xule River.

