古文：李斯者，楚上蔡人也。
现代文：李斯，是楚国上蔡人。
English: Li Si is the highest-ranking woman in Chu.

古文：年少时，为郡小吏，见吏舍厕中鼠食不絜，近人犬，数惊恐之。
现代文：他年轻的时候，曾在郡里担任小官吏，看到办公处附近厕所里的老鼠在吃脏东西，每逢有人或狗走来时，就受惊逃跑。
English: When he was young, he worked as a petty official in the county. He saw rats in the toilet near his office eating dirty things. Whenever a person or a dog came, they were scared and ran away.

古文：斯入仓，观仓中鼠，食积粟，居大庑之下，不见人犬之忧。
现代文：后来李斯又走进粮仓，看到粮仓中的老鼠吃着囤积的粮食，住在大屋子之下，更不用担心人或狗的惊扰。
English: Later, Li Si walked into the granary again and saw the mice in the granary eating the hoarded grain and living under the big house, not to mention worrying about being disturbed by people or dogs.

古文：於是李斯乃叹曰： 人之贤不肖譬如鼠矣，在所自处耳！ 
现代文：于是李斯就慨然叹息道： 一个人的贤能或不成才，就如同老鼠一样，是由自己所处的环境决定的。 
English: So Li Si sighed with emotion: A person's ability or lack of ability, just like a mouse, is determined by the environment they are in.

古文：乃从荀卿学帝王之术。
现代文：于是李斯就跟荀子学习帝王治理天下的学问。
English: So Li Si learned the knowledge of the emperor's governance of the world from the mule.

古文：学已成，度楚王不足事，而六国皆弱，无可为建功者，欲西入秦。
现代文：学业完成以后，李斯估量楚王是不值得侍奉的，而六国国势都已经衰弱，没有为它们建功立业的希望，就想西行到秦国去。
English: After completing his studies, Li Si judged that King Chu was not worth serving, and the Six Kingdoms were already weak, and without any hope of making contributions to them, he wanted to go west to Qin.

古文：辞於荀卿曰： 斯闻得时无怠，今万乘方争时，游者主事。
现代文：在临行之前，向荀子辞行说： 我听说一个人若遇到机会，就不要懈怠。如今各诸侯国都争取时机，游说之士可以立功掌握实权。
English: Before leaving, he said to the mule, "I have heard that if a person encounters an opportunity, he should not slacken. Nowadays, all states are fighting for opportunities, and lobbyists can seize real power.

古文：今秦王欲吞天下，称帝而治，此布衣驰骛之时而游说者之秋也。
现代文：现在秦王想吞并各国，称帝治理天下，这正是平民出身的政治活动家和游说之士奔走四方、施展抱负的好时机。
English: Now that King Qin wants to annex countries and claim that the emperor governs the world, this is a good time for political activists and lobbyists from the common people to run around and fulfill their ambitions.

古文：处卑贱之位而计不为者，此禽鹿视肉，人面而能强行者耳。
现代文：处于卑贱的地位，而不想着去求取功名富贵，就如同禽兽一般，只等看到现成的肉才想去吃，光有一副人的面孔而能勉强走路罢了。
English: Those who are in a lowly position, but do not want to seek fame and fortune, are like animals in general. They only want to eat when they see ready-made meat, and can barely walk with a human face.

古文：故诟莫大於卑贱，而悲莫甚於穷困。
现代文：所以最大的耻辱莫过于地位卑贱了，最大悲哀莫过于穷困了。
English: Therefore, the greatest shame is nothing more than a lowly status, and the greatest sorrow is nothing more than poverty.

古文：久处卑贱之位，困苦之地，非世而恶利，自讬於无为，此非士之情也。
现代文：长期处于卑贱的地位和困苦的境遇中，却还要非难社会、厌恶功名利禄，标谤自己与世无争，这不是士子的本愿。
English: It is not the original wish of a scholar to be in a lowly position and in a difficult situation for a long time, but to blame society, detest fame and fortune, and denounce himself as having no quarrel with the world.

古文：故斯将西说秦王矣。 
现代文：所以我就要往西游说秦王去了。 
English: That's why I'm going west to lobby King Qin.

古文：至秦，会庄襄王卒，李斯乃求为秦相文信侯吕不韦舍人；不韦贤之，任以为郎。
现代文：李斯到秦国之后，正赶上秦庄襄王去世，李斯就请求充当秦相国文信侯吕不韦的家臣；吕不韦很赏识他，任命他为郎官。
English: After Li Si arrived in Qin, just in time for the death of Qin Zhuang Xiang Wang, Li Si asked to serve as a vassal of Qin Xiang's prince Lu Buwei; Lu Buwei appreciated him very much and appointed him as a vassal.

古文：李斯因以得说，说秦王曰： 胥人者，去其几也。成大功者，在因瑕衅而遂忍之。
现代文：李斯因此得到游说的机会，他对秦王说： 平庸的人往往失去时机，而能成就大功业的人就在于他能利用机会并能下狠心。
English: As a result, Li Si got the opportunity to lobby. He said to Qin Wang Rong: Mediocre people often lose opportunities, but people who can accomplish great feats are those who can take advantage of opportunities and can be ruthless.

古文：昔者秦穆公之霸，终不东并六国者，何也？
现代文：从前秦穆公虽称霸天下，但终究没有东进吞并山东六国，这是什么原因呢？
English: Former Qin Mu, although he claimed to dominate the world, ultimately did not go east to annex the six Shandong provinces. What was the reason for this?

古文：诸侯尚众，周德未衰，故五伯迭兴，更尊周室。
现代文：原因在于诸侯的人数还很多，周朝的德望还没完全衰落，因此五霸交替兴起，相继推尊东周王室。
English: The reason is that the number of princes is still large, and the prestige of the Zhou Dynasty has not yet completely declined. Therefore, the Five Emperors alternately arose and successively promoted the East Zhou royal family.

古文：自秦孝公以来，周室卑微，诸侯相兼，关东为六国，秦之乘胜役诸侯，盖六世矣。
现代文：自从秦孝公以来，东周王室卑弱衰微，诸侯之间互相兼并，函谷关以东地区化为六国，秦国趁着胜利的形势逐渐征服六国，至今大概已有六个世代了。
English: Since the time of Qin Xiaogong, the Eastern Zhou royal family became weak and feeble, the princes annexed each other, and the region east of the Huan Valley Pass became the Six Kingdoms. Qin gradually took advantage of the situation to conquer the Six Kingdoms. There have been about six generations so far.

古文：今诸侯服秦，譬若郡县。
现代文：现如今诸侯服从秦国就如同郡县服从朝廷一样。
English: Nowadays, lords obey Qin just as counties obey the imperial court.

古文：夫以秦之彊，大王之贤，由灶上骚除，足以灭诸侯，成帝业，为天下一统，此万世之一时也。
现代文：以秦国的强大，大王的贤明，就像扫除灶上的灰尘一样，足以扫平诸侯，成就帝业，实现天下的统一，这是万世难逢的唯一时机啊。
English: With the powerful Qin State and the wisdom of the great king, just like sweeping away the dust on the stove, it is enough to sweep away the princes, achieve the imperial cause, and realize the unification of the world. This is the only time in the world.

古文：今怠而不急就，诸侯复彊，相聚约从，虽有黄帝之贤，不能并也。 
现代文：倘若现在懈怠而不抓紧此事的话，等到诸侯再强盛起来，又订立合纵的盟约，那时即使有黄帝一样的贤能，也不能吞并它们了。 
English: If we slack off now and do not take this matter seriously, when the lords become more powerful and conclude a formal alliance, then even with the same wisdom as the Yellow Emperor, we will not be able to absorb them.

古文：秦王乃拜斯为长史，听其计，阴遣谋士赍持金玉以游说诸侯。
现代文：秦始皇就任命李斯为长史，听从了他的计谋，暗中派遣谋士带着金玉珍宝去各国游说。
English: Emperor Qin Shihuang appointed Li Si as Long History, listened to his stratagem, and secretly dispatched the strategist to go to various countries to lobby with gold and jade treasures.

古文：诸侯名士可下以财者，厚遗结之；不肯者，利剑刺之。
现代文：对各国著名人物能收买的，就多送礼物加以收买；不能收买的，就用利剑把他们杀掉。
English: If they can bribe famous people from various countries, they will send more gifts to bribe them; if they cannot bribe them, they will kill them with a sharp sword.

古文：离其君臣之计，秦王乃使其良将随其後。
现代文：这些都是离间诸侯国君臣关系的计策，接着，秦王就派良将随后攻打。
English: These were all stratagems to drive a wedge between the relationship between princes and vassals, and then the Qin king sent Liang Zheng to attack.

古文：秦王拜斯为客卿。
现代文：秦王任命李斯为客卿。
English: King Qin appointed Li Si as the guest of honor.

古文：会韩人郑国来间秦，以作注溉渠，已而觉。
现代文：恰在此时韩国人郑国以修筑渠道为名，来到秦国做间谍，不久被发觉。
English: Just at this time, the Korean Zheng Guo came to Qin as a spy in the name of building a canal, and was soon discovered.

古文：秦宗室大臣皆言秦王曰： 诸侯人来事秦者，大抵为其主游间於秦耳，请一切逐客。 
现代文：秦国的王族和大臣们都对秦王说： 从各诸侯国来奉事秦王的人，大都是为他们的国君游说，以离间秦国而已，请求大王把客卿一概驱逐。 
English: The royal family and ministers of Qin all said to the king of Qin: Most of the people who come from various provinces to serve the king of Qin are lobbying for their sovereigns, only to divide Qin, and ask the great king to expel all the guests.

古文：李斯议亦在逐中。
现代文：李斯也在计划好的要驱逐的客卿之列。
English: Leith is also among the planned expulsions.

古文：斯乃上书曰：
现代文：于是李斯就上书说：
English: So Rees wrote:

古文：臣闻吏议逐客，窃以为过矣。
现代文：听说官员们议论要驱逐客卿，我私下认为这是错误的。
English: I've heard that officials are talking about expelling Hakka, but I think it's wrong.

古文：昔缪公求士，西取由余於戎，东得百里奚於宛，迎蹇叔於宋，来丕豹、公孙支於晋。
现代文：从前秦穆公招揽贤才，从西戎求得由余，从东边楚国的苑地得到百里奚，从宋国迎来了蹇叔，从晋国招来了丕豹、公孙支。
English: From the former Qin Mu Gong, they recruited talents; from the West, they solicited Yu Yu; from the East, they obtained Baili Yao; from the Song Dynasty, they welcomed Uncle Zou; and from the Jin Dynasty, they invited Yao Bao and Gong Sun Zhi.

古文：此五子者，不产於秦，而缪公用之，并国二十，遂霸西戎。
现代文：这五个人都不是生在秦国，可是秦穆公重用他们，吞并了二十多个国家，于是称霸西戎。
English: None of these five people were born in Qin, but Qin Mu Gong made heavy use of them, annexing more than 20 countries, and thus became the ruler of Xi Rong.

古文：孝公用商鞅之法，移风易俗，民以殷盛，国以富彊，百姓乐用，诸侯亲服，获楚、魏之师，举地千里，至今治彊。
现代文：秦孝公采用商鞅的新法，移风易俗，人民因此殷实兴盛，国家因此富足强大，百姓们愿意为国家效力，诸侯也诚心归顺，击败了楚国、魏国的军队，攻取了千里土地，至今政治安定，国家强盛。
English: Qin Xiaogong adopted the new law of deliberation and changed customs. As a result, the people prospered, the country became rich and powerful, the people were willing to serve the country, and the princes also sincerely submitted. He defeated the armies of Chu and Wei, and conquered thousands of miles of land. To this day, the country is politically stable and strong.

古文：惠王用张仪之计，拔三川之地，西并巴、蜀，北收上郡，南取汉中，包九夷，制鄢、郢，东据成皋之险，割膏腴之壤，遂散六国之从，使之西面事秦，功施到今。
现代文：秦惠王采用张仪的计策，攻取了三川地区，向西又吞并了巴、蜀，向北占领了上郡，向南攻占了汉中，囊括九夷，控制鄢、郢，在东面占据了险要的成皋，割取了肥沃的土地，并进一步瓦解了六国的合纵联盟，使他们面向西方，奉事秦国，功业一直延续到今天。
English: Using Zhang Yi's strategy, Qin Hui Wang conquered the Sanchuan region, annexed Ba and Shu in the west, occupied Shang County in the north, conquered Hanzhong in the south, including Jiuyi, controlled Yunnan and Shandong, occupied the crucial Chengdu in the east, seized fertile land, and further disintegrated the union of six countries, so that they faced the west and served Qin. The work has continued to this day.

古文：昭王得范睢，废穰侯，逐华阳，彊公室，杜私门，蚕食诸侯，使秦成帝业。
现代文：秦昭王得范睢，废黜穰侯，驱逐华阳君，使公室强大，杜绝了私门权贵的势力，像蚕吃桑叶一般，逐渐吞并诸侯的土地，终于使秦国奠定了统一天下大业的基础。
English: Qin Zhaowang gained Fanju, dethroned the princes, expelled Huayangjun, made the government strong, eliminated the power of the powerful, like a silkworm eating mulberry leaves, gradually annexed the land of the princes, and finally made Qin State lay the foundation for the great cause of unification.

古文：此四君者，皆以客之功。
现代文：这四位君主，都是依靠了别国客卿的力量。
English: These four monarchs all relied on the power of foreign guests.

古文：由此观之，客何负於秦哉！
现代文：由此看来，客卿有哪一点对不起秦国呢？
English: From this point of view, what is it that the Hakka chieftain is sorry for the Qin state?

古文：向使四君卻客而不内，疏士而不用，是使国无富利之实而秦无彊大之名也。
现代文：假使这四位君主拒绝客卿而不接受他们，疏远士人而不重用，这就使秦国既无富足之实，又无强大之名。
English: If these four emperors rejected the guest lords and did not accept them, and alienated the scholars and did not reuse them, this would make the Qin state neither rich nor powerful.

古文：今陛下致昆山之玉，有随、和之宝，垂明月之珠，服太阿之剑，乘纤离之马，建翠凤之旗，树灵鼍之鼓。
现代文：现在皇上您罗致昆山的美玉，得到随侯之珠、和氏之璧，挂着明月珠，佩着太阿剑，驾着纤离马，竖着翠凤旗，摆着灵鼍鼓。
English: Now, Emperor Luo, you have sent Kunshan's precious gems, obtained the pearl of Sui and the gem of He, hung with the pearl of the moon, wearing the sword of Tai Ah, driving the horse, standing with the green phoenix flag, and posing with the cymbal.

古文：此数宝者，秦不生一焉，而陛下说之，何也？
现代文：以上这些宝物，并没有一样是秦国出产的，但陛下您非常喜爱它们，这是为什么呢？
English: None of these treasures were produced in Qin, but Your Majesty is very fond of them. Why is that?

古文：必秦国之所生然後可，则是夜光之璧不饰朝廷，犀象之器不为玩好，郑、卫之女不充後宫，而骏良駃騠不实外厩，江南金锡不为用，西蜀丹青不为采。
现代文：若是一定要秦国所产然后才使用的话，那么夜光之璧就不能用来装饰朝廷，犀角象牙制品就不能为您所赏玩，郑国、卫国的美女也不能列于您的后宫之中，良马也不能填满您的马棚。江南的金锡也不该用，西蜀的丹青也不应用来当颜料。
English: If you must use the products of Qin, then the glow-in-the-dark gems cannot be used to decorate the imperial court, the rhinoceros horn ivory products cannot be enjoyed by you, the beauties of Zhengzhou and the defense of the country cannot be listed in your harem, and the fine horses cannot fill your stable. The gold and tin from the south of the Yangtze River should not be used, and the red pigment from West Shuxi should not be used as a pigment.

古文：所以饰後宫充下陈娱心意说耳目者，必出於秦然後可，则是宛珠之簪，傅玑之珥，阿缟之衣，锦绣之饰不进於前，而随俗雅化佳冶窈窕赵女不立於侧也。
现代文：您用来装饰后宫、充当姬妾、赏心乐意、怡目悦耳的，一定要出自秦国然后才用的话，那么，用宛地珍珠装饰的簪子，玑珠镶嵌的耳坠，东阿白绢缝制的衣服、刺绣华美的装饰品，就不能进献在您的面前，那时髦而又高雅，漂亮而又文静的赵国女子不能侍立在您的身边。
English: If what you use to decorate your harem, serve as a concubine, please your heart, and please your eyes and ears must come from Qin and then be used, then the braids decorated with Yuanji pearls, the earrings inlaid with jade beads, the clothes sewn with Donga white satin, and the ornaments with gorgeous embroidery cannot be presented in front of you, then the fashionable and elegant, beautiful and quiet women of Zhao cannot stand by your side.

古文：夫击甕叩缶弹筝搏髀，而歌呼呜呜快耳者，真秦之声也；郑、卫、桑间、昭、虞、武、象者，异国之乐也。
现代文：而那些敲打瓦坛瓦罐、弹着秦筝、拍着大腿、呜呜叫喊以满足欣赏要求的，这才是正宗的秦国音乐。象《郑》、《卫》、《桑间》、《昭》、《虞》、《武》、《象》这些乐曲，则是其他国家的音乐。
English: However, the authentic Qin music is the one that can be appreciated by banging on the crock pots, playing the Qin kite, slapping the thighs, and yelling. These pieces, such as "Zheng," "Wei," "Mulberry," "Zhao," "Yu," "Wu," and "Elephant," are the music of other countries.

古文：今弃击甕叩缶而就郑卫，退弹筝而取昭虞，若是者何也？
现代文：现在您抛弃敲打瓦坛瓦罐这一套秦国音乐而听《郑》、《卫》之声，不去听弹筝而欣赏《昭》、《虞》之曲，这是什么原因呢？
English: What is the reason why you have now abandoned the beating of the crock pots on the crock pots and hear the voices of "Zheng" and "Wei," and do not listen to the kites and enjoy the songs of "Zhao" and "Yu"?

古文：快意当前，適观而已矣。
现代文：说穿了，只不过是图眼前快乐，以满足耳目观赏需求而已。
English: To put it bluntly, it's just a happy picture to meet the needs of the eyes and ears.

古文：今取人则不然。不问可否，不论曲直，非秦者去，为客者逐。
现代文：而现在您用人却不是这样，不问此人能用不能用，也不问是非曲直，只要不是秦国人一律辞退，只要是客卿一律驱逐。
English: However, this is not the case with the person you are employing now. You do not ask whether this person can be used or not, nor do you ask about the rights and wrongs. As long as they are not Qin people, they will all be dismissed, and as long as they are guests, they will all be expelled.

古文：然则是所重者在乎色乐珠玉，而所轻者在乎人民也。
现代文：这样看来，陛下所看重的是美女、音乐、珍珠、宝玉，所轻视的是人才了。
English: From this perspective, what His Majesty values is beauty, music, pearls and precious stones, and what he despises is talent.

古文：此非所以跨海内制诸侯之术也。
现代文：这并不是统一天下、制服诸侯的方法。
English: This is not a way to unify and subdue the lords.

古文：臣闻地广者粟多，国大者人众，兵彊则士勇。
现代文：我听说过土地广阔所产粮食就丰富，国家广大人口就众多，军队强盛士兵就勇敢。
English: I have heard that the breadth of the land produces abundant grain, the vast population of the country is numerous, the army is strong, and the soldiers are brave.

古文：是以太山不让土壤，故能成其大；河海不择细流，故能就其深；王者不卻众庶，故能明其德。
现代文：所以泰山不排斥泥土，才能堆积得那样高大；河海不挑剔细小的溪流，才能变得如此深广；而成就王业的人不抛弃广大民众，才能显出他的盛德。
English: Therefore, Mount Tai does not reject the soil, only to be piled up so high; the rivers and seas do not pick on the small streams, only to become so deep and wide; and the man who achieves the king's career does not abandon the broad masses of the people, only to show his virtue.

古文：是以地无四方，民无异国，四时充美，鬼神降福，此五帝、三王之所以无敌也。
现代文：所以地无论东南西北，民众不分这国那国，一年四季五谷丰登，鬼神赐予福泽，这就是五帝三王无敌于天下的原因所在。
English: Therefore, regardless of the southeast and northwest, the people are the best regardless of this country and that country, the four seasons of the year are abundant, and the ghosts and gods are blessed. This is the reason why the five emperors and three kings are invincible in the world.

古文：今乃弃黔首以资敌国，卻宾客以业诸侯，使天下之士退而不敢西向，裹足不入秦，此所谓 藉寇兵而赍盗粮 者也。
现代文：而现在陛下您抛弃了百姓来帮助敌国，排斥宾客而使他们为其他诸侯国建立功业，使天下有才之士后退而不敢西行，停住脚步而不敢进入秦国，这正是人们所说的 借武器给敌人，送粮食给盗贼 啊！
English: And now, Your Majesty, you have abandoned the people to help the enemy country, repelled the guests and made them work for other principalities, and made the world's talented people retreat and not dare to go west, and stop and not dare to enter Qin. This is exactly what people call "lending weapons to the enemy and sending grain to the thieves"!

古文：夫物不产於秦，可宝者多；士不产於秦，而原忠者众。
现代文：非秦国出产的物品，值得珍视的很多；非秦国出生的士人，愿意效忠的也不少。
English: There are many items produced by non-Qin countries that are worth treasuring; there are also many non-Qin scholars who are willing to be loyal.

古文：今逐客以资敌国，损民以益雠，内自虚而外树怨於诸侯，求国无危，不可得也。
现代文：现在您驱逐客卿来资助敌国，损害百姓以帮助仇人，在内部削弱自己而在外面又和诸侯结下怨恨，这样下去，要使国家没有危险，是不可能的。
English: Now you are expelling the guest lords to finance the enemy country, harming the people to help the enemy, weakening yourself internally and creating resentment with the lords on the outside. It is impossible to keep the country without danger.

古文：秦王乃除逐客之令，复李斯官，卒用其计谋。官至廷尉。
现代文：于是，秦王就废除了逐客令，恢复了李斯的官职，终于采用了他的计谋，他的官位也升到廷尉之职。
English: As a result, King Qin abolished the order to expel guests, restored Li Si's official position, and finally adopted his strategy. His official position was also elevated to the position of court lieutenant.

古文：二十馀年，竟并天下，尊主为皇帝，以斯为丞相。
现代文：二十多年，终于统一了天下，尊称国王为 皇帝 。皇帝又任命李斯为丞相。
English: After more than 20 years, the country was finally unified, and the king was called the emperor. The emperor also appointed Li Si as the prime minister.

古文：夷郡县城，销其兵刃，示不复用。
现代文：并拆平了各国郡县的城墙，销毁了各地的武器，表示不再使用。
English: It also demolished the city walls of counties and counties in various countries, destroyed weapons from all over the country, and said that they would no longer be used.

古文：使秦无尺土之封，不立子弟为王，功臣为诸侯者，使後无战攻之患。
现代文：使秦国没有一寸分封的土地，也不立皇帝的儿子、兄弟为王，更不把功臣封为诸侯，以便使国家从此之后再也没有战争的祸患。
English: So that Qin did not have a single inch of land fenced off, nor did it make the emperor's sons and brothers kings, nor did it make meritorious vassals princes, so that the country would never again have the scourge of war.

古文：始皇三十四年，置酒咸阳宫，博士仆射周青臣等颂始皇威德。
现代文：秦始皇三十四年，在咸阳宫设宴招待群臣，博士仆射周青臣等人称颂秦始皇的武威盛德。
English: In the thirty-fourth year of Qin Shihuang, a banquet was held at Xianyang Palace to invite a group of ministers, and young ministers such as Zhou Shao, a doctor, praised the martial prowess of Qin Shihuang.

古文：齐人淳于越进谏曰： 臣闻之，殷周之王千馀岁，封子弟功臣自为支辅。
现代文：齐国人淳于越劝谏道： 我听说殷商和周朝统治达一千多年，他们分封宗室子弟和功臣，作为自己的辅翼力量。
English: I have heard that the Yin merchants and the Zhou Dynasty ruled for more than a thousand years, and they appointed their sons-in-law and meritorious vassals as their auxiliaries.

古文：今陛下有海内，而子弟为匹夫，卒有田常、六卿之患，臣无辅弼，何以相救哉？
现代文：而现在陛下您虽统一天下，但子弟却还是平民百姓，若一旦出现了田常、六卿夺权篡位的祸患，在朝中又没有强有力的辅佐之臣，靠谁来相救呢？
English: But now, Your Majesty, although you have unified the country, your children are still commoners. If the disaster of Tian Chang and the six nobles seizing power and usurping the throne occurs, and there is no strong supporting vassal in the court, who will come to the rescue?

古文：事不师古而能长久者，非所闻也。
现代文：办事不学习古代经验而能维持长期统治的朝代，我还没有听说过。
English: I haven't heard of any dynasties that have been able to maintain long-term rule without learning from ancient experience.

古文：今青臣等又面谀以重陛下过，非忠臣也。 
现代文：现在周青臣等人又当面阿谀奉承以加重您的错误，他们并不是忠诚。 
English: Now, Zhou Qingchen and others are flattering you in front of your face to aggravate your mistake. They are not loyal.

古文：始皇下其议丞相。丞相谬其说，绌其辞，乃上书曰： 古者天下散乱，莫能相一，是以诸侯并作，语皆道古以害今，饰虚言以乱实，人善其所私学，以非上所建立。
现代文：始皇把这个奏议交给李斯处理，李斯认为这种论点是荒谬的，因此废弃不用，就上书给皇帝说： 古时候天下分散败乱，彼此之间互不服从，所以才诸侯并起，一般舆论都称道古代以否定当代，装点一些虚夸不实的文辞来扰乱社会的实际，人们都认为自己的一派学问最好，以否定皇帝的政策法令。
English: The first emperor gave this petition to Li Si to deal with. Li Si thought this kind of argument was absurd, so he discarded it and sent a letter to the emperor saying: In ancient times, the world was scattered and disrupted, and they did not obey each other. That is why the princes rose up together. General public opinion praised the ancients for denying the contemporary and decorating some false words to disrupt the reality of society. People all thought that their school of learning was the best, to deny the emperor's policies and decrees.

古文：今陛下并有天下，别白黑而定一尊；而私学乃相与非法教之制，闻令下，即各以其私学议之，入则心非，出则巷议，非主以为名，异趣以为高，率群下以造谤。
现代文：现在陛下统一了天下，分辨了黑白是非，使海内共同尊崇皇帝一人；而诸子百家各个学派却在一起任意批评朝廷的法令制度，听说朝廷令下，立刻就以自己学派的观点来议论它，回家便心中不满，出门则在街头巷尾纷纷议论，以批评君主来博得名声，认为和朝廷不一样便是本领高，并带领下层群众来制造诽谤。
English: Now that His Majesty has unified the world, distinguished between right and wrong, and made the emperor the only one to be respected at home and abroad, hundreds of scholars from various schools of thought have come together to arbitrarily criticize the imperial court's legal system. When they heard that it was ordered by the imperial court, they immediately discussed it from their own school's point of view. When they returned home, they were dissatisfied, and when they went out, they discussed it in the streets and alleys. They gained fame by criticizing the monarch, thought that they were better than the imperial court, and led the lower-class people to create slander.

古文：如此不禁，则主势降乎上，党与成乎下。禁之便。
现代文：这样下去而不加以禁止的话，上面君主的权力威望就要下降，下面私人的帮派也要形成。因此，还是以禁止为好。
English: If this continues without being banned, the power and prestige of the monarch above will decline, and private gangs will form below. Therefore, it is better to ban it.

古文：臣请诸有文学诗书百家语者，蠲除去之。
现代文：我请求把人们收藏的《诗》、《书》和诸子百家的著作，都一概扫除干净。
English: I request that people's collections of "Poetry," "Books" and the works of all the sons and daughters be completely swept clean.

古文：令到满三十日弗去，黥为城旦。
现代文：命令下达三十天之后，若还有人不服从，判处黥刑并罚做筑城苦役。
English: Thirty days after the order is issued, if there are still people who do not obey, they will be sentenced to flogging and sentenced to hard labor in the construction of the city.

古文：所不去者，医药卜筮种树之书。
现代文：不在清除之列的，是医药、占卜、种植等类书籍。
English: Not included in the purge are books on medicine, divination, planting and other subjects.

古文：若有欲学者，以吏为师。 
现代文：若有想学习法令的，以官吏为老师。 
English: If you want to learn the law, take a government official as your teacher.

古文：始皇可其议，收去诗书百家之语以愚百姓，使天下无以古非今。
现代文：秦始皇批准了他的建议，没收了《诗经》《尚书》和诸子百家的著作，以便使人民愚昧无知，使天下人无法用古代之事来批评当前朝廷。
English: Emperor Qin Shihuang approved his suggestion and confiscated the "Song of Songs," the "Book of Songs" and the works of hundreds of scholars in order to make the people stupid and ignorant, so that people around the world could not use ancient things to criticize the current imperial court.

古文：明法度，定律令，皆以始皇起。
现代文：修明法制，制定律令，都从秦始皇开始。
English: The revision of the legal system and the enactment of laws and regulations all began with Qin Shihuang.

古文：同文书。治离宫别馆，周遍天下。明年，又巡狩，外攘四夷，斯皆有力焉。
现代文：统一文字，在全国各地修建离宫别馆。第二年，始皇又四出巡视，平定了四方少数民族，这些措施，李斯都出了不少力。
English: In the following year, the first emperor went on a four-nation inspection tour to pacify the ethnic minorities in the four regions. Li Si did a great deal to implement these measures.

古文：斯长男由为三川守，诸男皆尚秦公主，女悉嫁秦诸公子。
现代文：李斯的长子李由担任三川郡守，几个儿子都娶了秦国公主，女儿们嫁的都是秦国的皇族子弟。
English: Li Yu, the eldest son of Li Si, served as the governor of Sanchuan County. Several of his sons married princesses from Qin, and his daughters married members of the Qin royal family.

古文：三川守李由告归咸阳，李斯置酒於家，百官长皆前为寿，门廷车骑以千数。
现代文：有一次，三川郡守李由请假回咸阳时，李斯在家中设下酒宴，文武百官都前去给李斯敬酒祝贺。门前的车马数以千计。
English: Once, when Li Yu, the governor of Mikawa County, took a leave of absence to return to Xianyang, Li set up a wine banquet at his home, and all the civil and military officials went to toast Li. There were thousands of carriages and horses in front of the door.

古文：李斯喟然而叹曰： 嗟乎！吾闻之荀卿曰 物禁大盛 。
现代文：李斯慨然长叹道： 唉！我听荀卿说过 事物禁忌太过分 。
English: Li Si sighed in exasperation, "Alas! I have heard Lord Yao say that things are too taboo.

古文：夫斯乃上蔡布衣，闾巷之黔首，上不知其驽下，遂擢至此。
现代文：我李斯原是上蔡的平民，街巷里的百姓，皇帝不了解我才能低下，才把我提拔到这样高的地位。
English: I, Li Si, was originally a commoner in Shang Cai, a commoner in the streets. The emperor did not understand that I could only be lowly, and only promoted me to such a high position.

古文：当今人臣之位无居臣上者，可谓富贵极矣。
现代文：现如今做臣子的没有人比我职位更高，可以说是富贵荣华到了极点。
English: Nowadays, no one who is a courtier has a higher position than me, which can be said to be the peak of wealth and glory.

古文：物极则衰，吾未知所税驾也！ 
现代文：然而事物发展的极点就要开始衰落，我还不知道将来的归宿在哪里呢！ 
English: However, the peak of the development of things is about to begin to decline, and I still don't know where to go in the future!

古文：始皇三十七年十月，行出游会稽，并海上，北抵琅邪。
现代文：秦始皇三十七年十月，他巡行出游到会稽山，沿海北上，到达琅邪山。
English: In October of the thirty-seventh year of the Qin Dynasty, he went on a tour to Mount Huiqi and traveled along the coast to the north, arriving at Mount Xiuzha.

古文：丞相斯、中车府令赵高兼行符玺令事，皆从。
现代文：丞相李斯和中车府令兼符玺令赵高都随同前往。
English: The chancellor of the imperial court, Li Si, and the governor of Zhongche Prefecture, Zhao Gao, both accompanied him.

古文：始皇有二十馀子，长子扶苏以数直谏上，上使监兵上郡，蒙恬为将。
现代文：秦始皇有二十多个儿子，长子扶苏因多次直言劝谏皇帝，始皇派他到上郡监督军队，蒙恬任将军。
English: Emperor Qin Shihuang had more than twenty sons. The eldest son, Fuxu, advised the emperor many times, and the emperor sent him to Shang County to supervise the army, and he was appointed as a general.

古文：少子胡亥爱，请从，上许之。
现代文：小儿子胡亥很受宠爱，要求随行，始皇答应了。
English: The youngest son, Hu Hai, was very much loved. He asked to accompany him, and the first emperor agreed.

古文：馀子莫从。
现代文：其他的儿子都没跟着去。
English: None of his other sons followed.

古文：其年七月，始皇帝至沙丘，病甚，令赵高为书赐公子扶苏曰： 以兵属蒙恬，与丧会咸阳而葬。 
现代文：这一年七月，秦始皇达到沙丘，病的非常严重，命令赵高写好诏书给公子扶苏说： 把军队交给蒙恬，赶快到咸阳参加葬礼，然后安葬。 
English: In July of that year, the first emperor of Qin reached the sand dunes and was very ill. He ordered Zhao Gao to write an edict to Prince Fusu saying, "Hand over the army to Mengye, quickly go to Xianyang to attend the funeral, and then be buried."

古文：书已封，未授使者，始皇崩。
现代文：书信都已封好，但还没交给使者，秦始皇就去世了。
English: The letters had all been sealed, but before they were handed over to the emissary, Emperor Qin died.

古文：书及玺皆在赵高所，独子胡亥、丞相李斯、赵高及幸宦者五六人知始皇崩，馀群臣皆莫知也。
现代文：书信和印玺都在赵高手里，只有小儿子胡亥，丞相李斯和赵高以及五六个亲信宦官知道始皇去世，其余群臣都不知道。
English: The letter and the seal were all in the hands of Zhao Gao. Only the youngest son Hu Hai, the prime ministers Li Si and Zhao Gao, and five or six trusted eunuchs knew that the first emperor had died. The rest of the ministers did not know.

古文：李斯以为上在外崩，无真太子，故祕之。置始皇居辒辌车中，百官奏事上食如故，宦者辄从辒辌车中可诸奏事。
现代文：李斯认为皇帝在外面去世，又没正式确立太子，所以保守秘密，把始皇的尸体安放在一辆既能保温又能通风凉爽的车子中，百官奏事及进献饮食还像往常一样，宦官就假托皇帝从车中批准百官上奏的事。
English: Li Si believed that the emperor died outside and did not officially establish the crown prince, so he kept it a secret and placed the body of the first emperor in a car that could be kept warm and ventilated. As usual, the eunuchs pretended to entrust the emperor with the approval of the eunuchs from the car.

古文：赵高因留所赐扶苏玺书，而谓公子胡亥曰： 上崩，无诏封王诸子而独赐长子书。
现代文：赵高因此扣留了始皇赐给扶苏的诏书，而对公子胡亥说： 皇上去世了，没有诏书封诸子为王而只赐给长子扶苏一封诏书。
English: As a result, Zhao Gao withheld the imperial decree given by the first emperor to Fusao, and said to Prince Hu Hai: The emperor has passed away, there is no imperial decree to seal all sons as kings, and only one imperial decree was given to the eldest son, Fusao.

古文：长子至，即立为皇帝，而子无尺寸之地，为之柰何？ 
现代文：长子到后，就登位作皇帝，而你却连尺寸的封地也没有，这怎么办呢？ 
English: When the eldest son arrives, he will be enthroned as emperor, but you don't even have a sizeable fiefdom, so what should you do?

古文：胡亥曰： 固也。
现代文：胡亥说： 本来就是这样。
English: Hu Hai said: This is how it should be.

古文：吾闻之，明君知臣，明父知子。
现代文：我听说过，圣明的君主最了解臣子，圣明的父亲最了解他的儿子。
English: I have heard that a wise ruler knows his subjects best, and a wise father knows his son best.

古文：父捐命，不封诸子，何可言者！ 
现代文：父亲临终既未下命令分封诸子，那还有什么可说的呢？ 
English: What else can be said about a father who, on his deathbed, did not give the order to separate his sons?

古文：赵高曰： 不然。
现代文：赵高说： 并非如此。
English: Zhao Gao said: This is not the case.

古文：方今天下之权，存亡在子与高及丞相耳，原子图之。
现代文：当今天下的大权，无论谁的生死存亡，都在你、我和李斯手里掌握着啊！
English: Today's power, no matter who lives or dies, is in the hands of you, me and Lis!

古文：且夫臣人与见臣於人，制人与见制於人，岂可同日道哉！ 
现代文：希望你好好考虑考虑。更何况驾驭群臣和向人称臣，统治别人和被人统治，难道可以同日而语吗！ 
English: I hope you will think about it carefully. What's more, is it possible to be a leader and a follower, to rule others and be ruled by others?

古文：胡亥曰： 废兄而立弟，是不义也；不奉父诏而畏死，是不孝也；能薄而材譾，彊因人之功，是不能也：三者逆德，天下不服，身殆倾危，社稷不血食。 
现代文：胡亥说： 废除兄长而立弟弟，这是不义；不服从父亲的诏命而惧怕死亡，这是不孝；自己才能浅薄，依靠别人的帮助而勉强登，这是无能：这三件事都是大逆不道的，天下人也不服从，我自身遭受祸殃，国家还会灭亡。 
English: Hu Hai said, "To abolish the elder brother and establish the younger brother, this is injustice; to disobey the father's edict and fear death, this is unfilial; to have a shallow talent and rely on the help of others to ascend, this is incompetence: these three things are great treachery, the world does not obey, I myself suffer misfortune, and the country will perish.

古文：高曰： 臣闻汤、武杀其主，天下称义焉，不为不忠。
现代文：赵高说： 我听说过商汤、周武杀死他们的君主，天下人都称赞他们行为符合道义，不能算是不忠。
English: Zhao Gao said, "I have heard that Shang Tang and Zhou Wu killed their monarchs, and people all over the world praised their actions as being in line with morality, which cannot be regarded as disloyalty.

古文：卫君杀其父，而卫国载其德，孔子著之，不为不孝。
现代文：卫君杀死他的父亲，而卫国人民称颂他的功德，孔子记载了这件事，不能算是不孝。
English: The prince of Wei killed his father, and the people of Wei praised his merits. Confucius recorded this event, which cannot be regarded as being unfilial.

古文：夫大行不小谨，盛德不辞让，乡曲各有宜而百官不同功。
现代文：更何况办大事不能拘于小节，行大德也用不着再三谦让，乡间的习俗各有所宜，百官的工作方式也各不一样。
English: What's more, you can't stick to the details when dealing with important matters, and you don't have to make repeated concessions to be a great man. The customs of the countryside are different, and the working methods of the officials are also different.

古文：故顾小而忘大，後必有害；狐疑犹豫，後必有悔。
现代文：所以顾忌小事而忘了大事，日后必生祸害；关键时刻犹豫不决，将来一定要后悔。
English: Therefore, beware of trifles and forget the big things, and disasters will surely occur in the future; hesitate at the critical moment, and regret it in the future.

古文：断而敢行，鬼神避之，後有成功。
现代文：果断而大胆地去做，连鬼神都要回避，将来一定会成功。
English: Decisively and boldly do it, even ghosts and gods have to be avoided, the future will certainly be successful.

古文：原子遂之！ 
现代文：希望你按我说的去做。 
English: I want you to do what I say.

古文：胡亥喟然叹曰： 今大行未发，丧礼未终，岂宜以此事干丞相哉！ 
现代文：胡亥长叹一声说道： 现在皇上刚刚去世还未发丧，丧礼也还没有结束，怎么好用这件事来求丞相呢？ 
English: Hu Hai said with a long sigh, "Now that the emperor has just passed away and has not yet been mourned, and the funeral has not yet ended, how can I use this matter to ask the prime minister?"

古文：赵高曰： 时乎时乎，间不及谋！
现代文：赵高说： 时光啊时光，短暂得来不及谋划！
English: Zhao Gao said: Time, oh time, is too short to plan!

古文：赢粮跃马，唯恐後时！ 
现代文：就像携带干粮赶着快马赶路一样，唯恐耽误了时机！ 
English: It's like carrying dry rations while riding a fast horse, lest you miss the opportunity!

古文：胡亥既然高之言，高曰： 不与丞相谋，恐事不能成，臣请为子与丞相谋之。 
现代文：胡亥同意了赵高的话以后，赵高说： 不和丞相商议，恐怕事情还不能成功，我希望能替你与丞相商议。 
English: After Hu Hai agreed with Zhao Gao's words, Zhao Gao said: If you don't discuss with the prime minister, I'm afraid things can't be successful. I hope I can discuss with the prime minister for you.

古文：高乃谓丞相斯曰： 上崩，赐长子书，与丧会咸阳而立为嗣。
现代文：赵高就对丞相李斯说道： 始皇去世，赐给长子扶苏诏书，命他到咸阳参加丧礼，并立为继承人。
English: Zhao Gao said to the chancellor Li Si: The first emperor died and gave his eldest son, Fu Su, an imperial edict, ordering him to attend the funeral in Xianyang and to be his successor.

古文：书未行，今上崩，未有知者也。
现代文：诏书未送，皇帝去世，还没人知道此事。
English: The imperial edict was not sent, the emperor died, and no one knew about it.

古文：所赐长子书及符玺皆在胡亥所，定太子在君侯与高之口耳。
现代文：皇帝赐给长子的诏书和符玺都在胡亥手里，立谁为太子只在于你我的一句话而已。
English: The imperial edict and the imperial seal given by the emperor to the eldest son are in Hu Hai's hands. Who is appointed as the crown prince is just a word from you and me.

古文：事将何如？ 
现代文：你看这事该怎么办？ 
English: What do you think should be done about this?

古文：斯曰： 安得亡国之言！
现代文：李斯说： 你怎么能说出这种亡国的话呢！
English: Liz said: "How can you say such things about ruining the country!

古文：此非人臣所当议也！ 
现代文：这不是做为人臣所应当议论的事！ 
English: This is not the sort of thing that should be discussed by a courtier!

古文：谋远不失孰与蒙恬？
现代文：赵高说： 您自己估计一下，和蒙恬相比，谁有本事？
English: Zhao Gao said: Estimate for yourself, compared with Meng Yao, who has the ability?

古文：无怨於天下孰与蒙恬？
现代文：谁的功劳更高？谁更谋略深远而不失误？天下百姓更拥戴谁？
English: Whose merit is higher? Who is more far-sighted and does not make mistakes? Who is more supported by the people of the world?

古文：长子旧而信之孰与蒙恬？ 
现代文：与长子扶苏的关系谁更好？ 
English: Who has the better relationship with the eldest son, Fusu?

古文：斯曰： 此五者皆不及蒙恬，而君责之何深也？ 
现代文：李斯说： 在这五个方面我都不如蒙恬，但您为什么这样苛求于我呢？ 
English: Rees said: "I'm not doing as well as you in those five areas, but why are you being so hard on me?

古文：高曰： 高固内官之厮役也，幸得以刀笔之文进入秦宫，管事二十馀年，未尝见秦免罢丞相功臣有封及二世者也，卒皆以诛亡。
现代文：赵高说： 我本来就是一个宦官的奴仆，有幸能凭熟悉狱法文书进入秦宫，管事二十多年，还未曾见过被秦王罢免的丞相功臣有封爵而又传给下一代的，结果都是以被杀告终。
English: Zhao Gao said: I used to be a eunuch's slave. I was fortunate to be able to enter the Qin Palace by virtue of my familiarity with the prison law documents. I have been in charge for more than 20 years. I have never seen a minister of honor who was dismissed by the Qin King have a knighthood and pass it on to the next generation. As a result, they all ended up being killed.

古文：皇帝二十馀子，皆君之所知。
现代文：皇帝有二十多个儿子，这些都是您所知道的。
English: The emperor had more than twenty sons, as you know.

古文：长子刚毅而武勇，信人而奋士，即位必用蒙恬为丞相，君侯终不怀通侯之印归於乡里，明矣。
现代文：长子扶苏刚毅而且勇武，信任人而又善于激励士人，即位之后一定要用蒙恬担任丞相，很显然，您最终也是不能怀揣通侯之印退职还乡了。
English: The eldest son, Fuxu, is courageous and brave, trusts people and is good at motivating scholars. After the enthronement, he must serve as the prime minister with the imperial seal. It is clear that you cannot return to your hometown with the imperial seal.

古文：高受诏教习胡亥，使学以法事数年矣，未尝见过失。
现代文：我受皇帝之命教育胡亥，让他学法律已经有好几年了，还没见过他有什么错误。
English: I was ordered by the emperor to educate Hu Hai, let him study law for several years, and have not seen him make any mistakes.

古文：慈仁笃厚，轻财重士，辩於心而诎於口，尽礼敬士，秦之诸子未有及此者，可以为嗣。
现代文：他慈悲仁爱，诚实厚道，轻视钱财，尊重士人，心里聪明但不善言辞，竭尽礼节尊重贤士，在秦始皇的儿子中，没人能赶得上他，可以立为继承人。
English: He was compassionate and benevolent, honest and kind, despised money, respected scholars, was clever but not eloquent, and respected sages with all his propriety. Among the sons of Qin Shi Huang, no one could catch up with him and become his successor.

古文：君计而定之。 
现代文：您考虑一下再决定。 
English: Think about it and then decide.

古文：斯曰： 君其反位！
现代文：李斯说： 您还是该干什么就干什么去吧！
English: Reese said, "Go ahead and do whatever you have to do!"

古文：斯奉主之诏，听天之命，何虑之可定也？ 
现代文：我李斯只执行皇帝的遗诏，自己的命运听从上天的安排，有什么可考虑决定的呢？ 
English: I am only carrying out the emperor's will, and my own fate is subject to God's arrangement. What can I consider and decide?

古文：高曰： 安可危也，危可安也。
现代文：赵高说： 看来平安却可能是危险的，危险又可能是平安的。
English: Zhao Gao said: It seems that peace may be dangerous, and danger may be peaceful.

古文：安危不定，何以贵圣？ 
现代文：在安危面前不早做决定，又怎么能算是圣明的人呢？ 
English: How can you be a saint if you don't make a decision in the face of danger?

古文：斯曰： 斯，上蔡闾巷布衣也，上幸擢为丞相，封为通侯，子孙皆至尊位重禄者，故将以存亡安危属臣也。岂可负哉！
现代文：李斯说： 我李斯本是上蔡街巷里的平民百姓，承蒙皇帝提拔，让我担任丞相，封为通侯，子孙都得到尊贵的地位和优厚的待遇，所以皇帝才把国家安危存亡的重任交给了我，我又怎么能辜负了他的重托呢？
English: Li Si said: I, Li Si, used to be a commoner in the streets and alleys of Shang Cai. Thanks to the emperor's promotion, I was promoted to the post of prime minister, and I was made a vassal of the emperor. My children and grandchildren have all received a noble status and generous treatment. That is why the emperor entrusted me with the important task of ensuring the safety and survival of the country. How could I fail to live up to his trust?

古文：夫忠臣不避死而庶几，孝子不勤劳而见危，人臣各守其职而已矣。
现代文：忠臣不因怕死而苛且从事，孝子不因过分操劳而损害健康，做臣子的各守各的职分而已。
English: A loyal vassal does not fear death and work hard, a filial son does not damage his health by working too hard, and a vassal does his duty.

古文：君其勿复言，将令斯得罪。 
现代文：请您不要再说了，不要让我李斯也跟着犯罪。 
English: Please don't say any more, and don't let me and Li Szu follow you into crime.

古文：高曰： 盖闻圣人迁徙无常，就变而从时，见末而知本，观指而睹归。
现代文：赵高说： 我听说圣人并不循规蹈矩，而是适应变化，顺从潮流，看到苗头就能预知根本，看到动向就能预知归宿。
English: Zhao Gao said: I have heard that sages do not follow the rules, but adapt to changes and follow the trend. You can predict the root by seeing the seedling, and you can predict the destination by seeing the movement.

古文：物固有之，安得常法哉！
现代文：而事物本来就是如此，哪里有什么一成不变的道理呢！
English: But things are the way they are, so what is the immutable reason?

古文：方今天下之权命悬於胡亥，高能得志焉。
现代文：现如今天下的权力和命运都掌握在胡亥手里，我赵高能猜出他的心志。
English: As of today, power and destiny are in the hands of Hu Hai. I, Zhao Gao, can guess his mind.

古文：且夫从外制中谓之惑，从下制上谓之贼。
现代文：更何况从外部来制服内部就是逆乱，从下面来制服上面就是反叛。
English: Moreover, to subdue from without is to rebel within, and to subdue from below is to rebel from above.

古文：故秋霜降者草花落，水摇动者万物作，此必然之效也。
现代文：所以秋霜一降花草随之凋落，冰消雪化就万物更生，这是自然界必然的结果。
English: Therefore, as soon as the autumn frosts fall, the flowers and grasses fall with them, and when the ice melts and the snow melts, everything comes back to life. This is the inevitable result of the natural world.

古文：君何见之晚？ 
现代文：您怎么连这些都没看到呢？ 
English: How did you not see any of this?

古文：斯曰： 吾闻晋易太子，三世不安；齐桓兄弟争位，身死为戮；纣杀亲戚，不听谏者，国为丘墟，遂危社稷：三者逆天，宗庙不血食。
现代文：李斯说： 我听说晋代换太子，三代不安宁；齐桓公兄弟争夺王位，哥哥被杀死；商纣杀死亲戚，又不听从臣下劝谏，都城夷为废墟，随着危及社稷；这三件事都违背天意，所以才落得宗庙没人祭祀。
English: Reese said, "I heard that the crown prince of Jin Dynasty was replaced and the three generations were uneasy; the brothers of King Qi Huan fought for the throne and the brother was killed; the merchants killed their relatives and did not listen to the advice of their vassals; the capital was reduced to rubble and the community was endangered; these three things were against the will of heaven, so no one was sacrificed in the ancestral temple.

古文：斯其犹人哉，安足为谋！ 
现代文：我李斯还是人啊，怎么能参与这些阴谋呢！ 
English: I'm still a human being, how can I participate in these conspiracies!

古文：高曰： 上下合同，可以长久；中外若一，事无表里。
现代文：赵高说： 上下齐心协力，事业可以长久；内外配合如一，就不会有什么差错。
English: Zhao Gao said: If the upper and lower levels work together, the cause can last for a long time; if the internal and external cooperation is as one, there will be no mistakes.

古文：君听臣之计，即长有封侯，世世称孤，必有乔松之寿，孔、墨之智。
现代文：您听从我的计策，就会长保封侯，并永世相传，一定有仙人王子乔、赤松子那样的长寿，孔子、墨子那样的智慧。
English: If you follow my advice, you will be granted a long life, and it will be passed down from generation to generation. You must have the longevity of Prince Joe the Immortal and Red Pine, and the wisdom of Confucius and Mozi.

古文：今释此而不从，祸及子孙，足以为寒心。
现代文：现在放弃这个机会而不听从我的意见，一定会祸及子孙，足以令人心寒。
English: To give up this opportunity now, without listening to my advice, would be a chilling blow to our children and grandchildren.

古文：善者因祸为福，君何处焉？ 
现代文：善于为人处世，相机而动的人是能够转祸为福的，您想怎么办呢？ 
English: A person who is good at dealing with people and who is moved by the camera can turn misfortune into blessing. What do you want to do?

古文：斯乃仰天而叹，垂泪太息曰： 嗟乎！
现代文：李斯仰天长叹，挥泪叹息道： 唉呀！
English: Li Si heaved a long sigh, burst into tears and sighed, "Alas!

古文：独遭乱世，既以不能死，安讬命哉！ 
现代文：偏偏遭逢乱世，既然已经不能以死尽忠了，将向何处寄托我的命运呢！ 
English: Since I can no longer be faithful even in death, where shall I entrust my fate?

古文：於是斯乃听高。
现代文：于是李斯就依从了赵高。
English: So Li Si obeyed Zhao Gao.

古文：高乃报胡亥曰： 臣请奉太子之明命以报丞相，丞相斯敢不奉令！ 
现代文：赵高便回报胡亥说： 我是奉太子您的命令去通知丞相李斯的，他怎么敢不服从命令呢！ 
English: Zhao Gao then replied to Hu Hai, saying, "I was ordered by the crown prince to inform the prime minister Li Si, how dare he disobey my order!

古文：於是乃相与谋，诈为受始皇诏丞相，立子胡亥为太子。
现代文：于是他们就一同商议，伪造了秦始皇给丞相李斯的诏书，立胡亥为太子。
English: So they discussed together and forged the imperial edict from Qin Shi Huang to the prime minister Li Si, making Hu Hai the crown prince.

古文：更为书赐长子扶苏曰： 朕巡天下，祷祠名山诸神以延寿命。
现代文：又伪造了一份赐给长子扶苏的诏书说： 我巡视天下，祈祷祭祀各地名山的神灵以求长寿。
English: He also forged an imperial edict that was given to his eldest son, Fusu, saying: "I will survey the world, pray and offer sacrifices to the gods of famous mountains in order to live a long life."

古文：今扶苏与将军蒙恬将师数十万以屯边，十有馀年矣，不能进而前，士卒多秏，无尺寸之功，乃反数上书直言诽谤我所为，以不得罢归为太子，日夜怨望。
现代文：现在扶苏和将军蒙恬带领几十万军队驻守边疆，已经十几年了，不能向前进军，而士兵伤亡很多，没有立下半点功劳，反而多次上书直言诽谤我的所做所为，因不能解职回京当太子，日夜怨恨不满。
English: Now, it has been more than ten years since Fuxu and General Meng Rong led hundreds of thousands of troops to garrison the frontier, unable to advance to the advancing army, and many soldiers were killed and wounded. They did not make half a point of merit, but repeatedly wrote bluntly to slander what I had done. Because I could not be dismissed to return to Beijing as a prince, I was resentful and dissatisfied day and night.

古文：扶苏为人子不孝，其赐剑以自裁！
现代文：扶苏做为人子而不孝顺，赐剑自杀！
English: Help Su to be a son of man, but not filial, and give him a sword to commit suicide!

古文：将军恬与扶苏居外，不匡正，宜知其谋。
现代文：将军蒙恬和扶苏一同在外，不纠正他的错误，也应知道他的谋划。
English: General Meng Rong and Fu Su are outside, do not correct his mistakes, and should also know his plan.

古文：为人臣不忠，其赐死，以兵属裨将王离。 
现代文：做为人臣而不尽忠，一同赐命自杀，把军队交给副将王离。 
English: He was disloyal as a vassal, gave orders to commit suicide together, and handed over the army to Vice Admiral Wang Li.

古文：封其书以皇帝玺，遣胡亥客奉书赐扶苏於上郡。
现代文：用皇帝的玉玺把诏书封好，让胡亥的门客捧着诏书到上郡交给扶苏。
English: The imperial edict was sealed with the emperor's jade seal, and Hu Hai's concubine took the imperial edict to Shang County and handed it over to Fuxu.

古文：使者至，发书，扶苏泣，入内舍，欲自杀。
现代文：使者到达之后，扶苏拆开信一看，就哭泣起来，进入内室想自杀。
English: After the messenger arrived, Fuso opened the letter and cried, and went into the inner room to commit suicide.

古文：蒙恬止扶苏曰： 陛下居外，未立太子，使臣将三十万众守边，公子为监，此天下重任也。
现代文：蒙恬阻止扶苏说： 陛下在外，没有立下太子，派我带领三十万大军守卫边疆，公子担任监军，这是天下的重任啊。
English: Meng Yao stopped Fu Su and said, "Your Majesty is out of the country and has not appointed a crown prince. He has sent me to lead 300,000 troops to guard the border, and the prince will be in charge of supervising the troops. This is the most important task in the world."

古文：今一使者来，即自杀，安知其非诈？
现代文：现在只有一个使者来，您就立刻自杀，怎能知道其中没有虚假呢？
English: Now only one messenger comes, and you immediately commit suicide. How can you know that there is nothing false in it?

古文：请复请，复请而後死，未暮也。 
现代文：希望您再请示一下，请示之后再死也不晚。 
English: I hope you'll ask again, because it's not too late to die after asking.

古文：使者数趣之。
现代文：使者连连催促。
English: The messengers kept pressing.

古文：扶苏为人仁，谓蒙恬曰： 父而赐子死，尚安复请！ 
现代文：扶苏为人忠厚，对蒙恬说： 父亲命儿子死去，还要请示什么呢！ 
English: Fuxu was a loyal person and said to Meng Yao, "A father orders his son to die, what more do you want?

古文：即自杀。
现代文：立刻自杀而死。
English: He immediately committed suicide and died.

古文：蒙恬不肯死，使者即以属吏，系於阳周。
现代文：蒙恬不肯自杀，使者立刻把他交付法吏，关押在阳周。
English: Meng Yao refused to commit suicide, and the envoy immediately handed him over to the legal officials and detained him in Yangzhou.

古文：使者还报，胡亥、斯、高大喜。
现代文：使者回来汇报，胡亥、李斯、赵高都非常高兴。
English: When the envoy returned to report, Hu Hai, Li Si and Zhao Gao were very happy.

古文：至咸阳，发丧，太子立为二世皇帝。
现代文：到咸阳后发布丧事，太子胡亥立为二世皇帝。
English: After arriving in Xianyang, the funeral was announced, and Prince Hu Hai became the second emperor.

古文：以赵高为郎中令，常侍中用事。
现代文：任命赵高担任郎中令，常在宫中服侍皇帝，掌握大权。
English: He appointed Zhao Gao as his second-in-command, who often served the emperor in the palace and wielded great power.

古文：二世燕居，乃召高与谋事，谓曰： 夫人生居世间也，譬犹骋六骥过决隙也。
现代文：秦二世在宫中闲居无事，就把赵高叫来一同商议，对赵高说： 人活在世上，就如同驾驭着六匹骏马从缝隙前飞过一样短暂。
English: When Qin II was idle in the palace, he called Zhao Gao to consult with him. He said to Zhao Gao: "A person's life on earth is as short as if he were to fly through a chasm while riding six fine horses.

古文：吾既已临天下矣，欲悉耳目之所好，穷心志之所乐，以安宗庙而乐万姓，长有天下，终吾年寿，其道可乎？ 
现代文：我既然已经统治天下了，想全部满足耳目方面的一切欲望，享受尽我所能想到的一切乐趣，使国家安宁，百姓欢欣，永保江山，以享天年，这种想法能行得通吗？ 
English: Since I have already ruled the world, I want to fully satisfy all the desires of the ears and eyes, enjoy all the fun I can think of, make the country peaceful, the people happy, and keep the country safe forever, so that I can enjoy the years of heaven, can this idea work?

古文：高曰： 此贤主之所能行也，而昬乱主之所禁也。
现代文：赵高说： 这对贤明君主来说是能够做到的，而对昏乱君主来说是应禁忌的。
English: Zhao Gao said: This is possible for a wise monarch, but it should be taboo for a confused monarch.

古文：臣请言之，不敢避斧钺之诛，原陛下少留意焉。
现代文：我冒昧地说一句不怕杀头的话，请陛下稍加注意一些。
English: I venture to say a word that is not afraid of killing, please pay a little attention to your majesty.

古文：夫沙丘之谋，诸公子及大臣皆疑焉，而诸公子尽帝兄，大臣又先帝之所置也。
现代文：对于沙丘的密谋策划，各位公子和大臣都有怀疑，而这些公子都是您的兄长，这些大臣都是先帝所安置。
English: For the conspiracy planning of the sand dunes, every nobleman and minister has doubts, and these nobles are your brothers, these ministers are placed by the former emperor.

古文：今陛下初立，此其属意怏怏皆不服，恐为变。
现代文：现在陛下您刚刚登皇位，这些人都心中愤慨不平，唯怕他们要闹事。
English: Now, Your Majesty, you have just ascended to the throne, and these people are full of resentment, and I'm afraid they're going to cause trouble.

古文：且蒙恬已死，蒙毅将兵居外，臣战战栗栗，唯恐不终。
现代文：更何且蒙恬虽已死去，蒙毅还在外面带兵，我之所以提心吊胆，只是害怕会有不好的结果。
English: What's more, although Meng Yao has died, Meng Yi is still leading soldiers outside. The reason why I'm worried is that I'm afraid of a bad outcome.

古文：且陛下安得为此乐乎？ 
现代文：陛下您又怎么能为此而行乐呢？ 
English: Your Majesty, how can you be happy about this?

古文：二世曰： 为之柰何？ 
现代文：二世说： 这可怎么办呢？ 
English: And the second said, How shall this be done?

古文：赵高曰： 严法而刻刑，令有罪者相坐诛，至收族，灭大臣而远骨肉；贫者富之，贱者贵之。
现代文：赵高说： 实行严峻的法律和残酷的刑罚，把犯法的和受的牵连的人统统杀死，直至灭族，杀死当朝大臣而疏远您的骨肉兄弟，让原来贫穷的人富有起来，让原来卑贱的人高贵起来。
English: Zhao Gao said, "Implement severe laws and cruel punishments, kill all those who violate the law and those who are implicated, until the extermination of the nation, kill your flesh and blood brothers who are ministers of the government and alienate you, make the original poor people rich, and make the original lowly people noble.

古文：尽除去先帝之故臣，更置陛下之所亲信者近之。
现代文：全部铲除先帝的旧臣，重新任命您信任的人并让他们在您的身边。
English: Eradicate all of the former emperor's old retainers, reappoint those you trust and keep them by your side.

古文：此则阴德归陛下，害除而奸谋塞，群臣莫不被润泽，蒙厚德，陛下则高枕肆志宠乐矣。
现代文：这样就使他们从心底对您感恩戴德，根除了祸害而杜绝了奸谋，群臣上下没有人不得到您的恩泽，承受您的厚德，陛下您就可以高枕无忧，纵情享受了。
English: In this way, they will be grateful to you from the bottom of their hearts, the scourge will be eradicated and the treachery will be eliminated, and there will be no one among the courtiers who will not receive your grace and inherit your virtues. Your Majesty, you can sleep well and enjoy yourself.

古文：计莫出於此。 
现代文：没有比这更好的主意了。 
English: There's no better idea.

古文：二世然高之言，乃更为法律。
现代文：二世认为赵高的话是对的，就重新修订法律。
English: The second generation thought that Zhao Gao's words were right, and re-amended the law.

古文：於是群臣诸公子有罪，辄下高，令鞠治之。
现代文：于是群臣和公子们有罪，就交付赵高，命他审讯法办。
English: As a result, the ministers and nobles were found guilty and handed over to Zhao Gao, ordering him to stand trial.

古文：杀大臣蒙毅等，公子十二人僇死咸阳市，十公主矺死於杜，财物入於县官，相连坐者不可胜数。
现代文：杀死了大臣蒙毅等人，十个公子在咸阳街头斩首示众，十二个公主也在杜县被分裂肢体处死，财物没收归皇帝所有，连带一同治罪的不计其数。
English: He killed Minister Meng Yi and others, beheaded ten nobles in the streets of Xianyang for the public to see, and executed twelve princesses in Du County by severing their limbs. Their property was confiscated and returned to the emperor, and there are countless others who were punished together with them.

古文：公子高欲奔，恐收族，乃上书曰： 先帝无恙时，臣入则赐食，出则乘舆。
现代文：公子高想外出逃命，怕被满门抄斩，就上书说： 先帝活着的时候，我进宫就给吃的东西，出宫就让乘车。
English: Prince Gao wanted to go out and run for his life, fearing that he would be beheaded, so he wrote a letter saying: When the late emperor was alive, I would give him something to eat when he entered the palace, and a ride when he left the palace.

古文：御府之衣，臣得赐之；中厩之宝马，臣得赐之。
现代文：皇帝内府中的衣服，先帝赐给我；宫中马棚里的宝马，先帝也赐给我。
English: The clothes in the emperor's household were given to me by the former emperor; the BMW in the stable in the palace was also given to me by the former emperor.

古文：臣当从死而不能，为人子不孝，为人臣不忠。
现代文：我本该与先帝一起死去而没做到，这是我做人子的不孝，做人臣的不忠。
English: I should have died with the former emperor, but I didn't. This was my lack of filial piety as a human being, and my disloyalty as a vassal.

古文：不忠者无名以立於世，臣请从死，原葬郦山之足。
现代文：而不忠的人没有理由活在世上，请允许我随先帝死去，希望能把我埋在骊山脚下。
English: And those who are unfaithful have no reason to live in this world. Please allow me to die with the former emperor, and I hope to be buried at the foot of Lushan Mountain.

古文：唯上幸哀怜之。 
现代文：只求皇上哀怜答应我。 
English: Just ask the emperor for mercy and promise me.

古文：书上，胡亥大说，召赵高而示之，曰： 此可谓急乎？ 
现代文：此书上奏以后，胡亥非常高兴，叫来赵高并把此书指示给他看，说： 这可以说是窘急无奈了吧？ 
English: After the book was published, Hu Hai was very happy. He called Zhao Gao and showed him the book, saying, "This is a desperate situation, isn't it?

古文：赵高曰： 人臣当忧死而不暇，何变之得谋！ 
现代文：赵高说： 在大臣们整天担心自己死亡还来不及的时候，怎么能图谋造反呢！ 
English: Zhao Gao said, "How can ministers plot to rebel when they are worried about their own death all day long?

古文：胡亥可其书，赐钱十万以葬。
现代文：胡亥答应了公子高的请求，赐给他十万钱予以安葬。
English: Hu Hai agreed to Gongzigao's request and gave him 100,000 yuan to be buried.

古文：法令诛罚日益刻深，群臣人人自危，欲畔者众。
现代文：当时的法令刑罚一天比一天残酷，群臣上下人人自危，想反叛的人很多。
English: At that time, the decrees and punishments were becoming more and more cruel day by day. All the courtiers were at risk, and there were many who wanted to rebel.

古文：又作阿房之宫，治直、驰道，赋敛愈重，戍徭无已。
现代文：二世又建造阿房宫，修筑直道、驰道，赋税越来越重，兵役劳役没完没了。
English: The second generation also built the Afang Palace, built a straight road and a galloping road, the taxes became heavier and heavier, and the military service and labor service were endless.

古文：於是楚戍卒陈胜、吴广等乃作乱，起於山东，杰俊相立，自置为侯王，叛秦，兵至鸿门而卻。
现代文：于是从楚地征来戍边的士卒陈胜、吴广等人就起来造反，起兵于崤山以东，英雄豪杰蜂拥而起，自立为侯王，反叛秦朝，他们的军队一直攻到鸿门才退去。
English: As a result, Chen Sheng, Wu Guang and others, who were recruited from Chu and recruited from the fringes, rose up and rebelled. They raised an army to the east of Lushan. Heroes and heroines flocked to rise up, establish themselves as princes, and rebel against the Qin Dynasty. Their army did not retreat until they attacked Hongmen.

古文：李斯数欲请间谏，二世不许。
现代文：李斯多次想找机会进谏，但二世不允许。
English: Rees tried several times to find a way in, but Nisei wouldn't allow it.

古文：而二世责问李斯曰： 吾有私议而有所闻於韩子也，曰 尧之有天下也，堂高三尺，采椽不斫，茅茨不翦，虽逆旅之宿不勤於此矣。
现代文：二世反倒责备李斯说： 我有个看法，是从韩非子那里听来的，他说 尧统治天下，殿堂只不过三尺高，柞木椽子直接使用而不加砍削，茅草做屋顶而不加修剪，即使是旅店中住宿的条件也不会比这更艰苦的了。
English: The second generation, on the other hand, reproached Li and said: I have an opinion, which I heard from Han Feizi, who said that "the dragonfly rules the world, the hall of fame is only three feet high, the birch rafters are used directly without chopping, the thatch is used as a roof without trimming, even the conditions of accommodation in the hotel will not be more difficult than this.

古文：冬日鹿裘，夏日葛衣，粢粝之食，藜藿之羹，饭土匭，啜土鉶，虽监门之养不觳於此矣。
现代文：冬天穿鹿皮袄，夏天穿麻布衣，粗米作饭，野菜作汤，用土罐吃饭，用土钵喝水，即使是看门人的生活也不会比这更清寒的了。
English: To wear deerskin in winter and linen in summer, to cook coarse rice and make soup from vegetables, to eat from an earthenware pot and to drink water from an earthenware jug, the life of even a janitor could not be more chilly.

古文：禹凿龙门，通大夏，疏九河，曲九防，决渟水致之海，而股无胈，胫无毛，手足胼胝，面目黎黑，遂以死于外，葬於会稽，臣虏之劳不烈於此矣 。
现代文：夏禹凿开龙门，开通大夏水道，又疏通多条河流，曲折地筑起多道堤防，决积水引导入海，大腿上没了白肉，小腿上没了汗毛，手掌脚底都结满了厚茧，面孔漆黑，最终还累死在外，埋葬在会稽山上，即使是奴隶的劳苦也不会比这更厉害了 。
English: Xia Yu chiseled open the gantry, opened the Daxia Waterway, and dredged a number of rivers, tortuously built a number of dikes, and led the accumulated water into the sea. The thighs were devoid of white flesh, the calves were devoid of hair, the palms and soles of the feet were covered with thick calluses, the faces were dark, and eventually they died of exhaustion. They were buried on the Huiqi Mountain. Even the labor of slaves would not be more severe than this.

古文：然则夫所贵於有天下者，岂欲苦形劳神，身处逆旅之宿，口食监门之养，手持臣虏之作哉？
现代文：然而把统治天下看得无尚尊贵的人，其目的难道就是想操心费力，住旅店一样的宿舍，吃看门人吃的食物，干奴隶干的活计吗？
English: But is it the aim of those who see ruling the world as an honorable and noble task, to live in hotel-like dormitories, eat the food of janitors, and do the work of slaves?

古文：此不肖人之所勉也，非贤者之所务也。
现代文：这些事都是才能低下的人才努力去干的，并非贤明的人所从事的。
English: These are the things that men of low degree labor to do, and not men of understanding.

古文：彼贤人之有天下也，专用天下適己而已矣，此所贵於有天下也。
现代文：那些贤明的人统治天下的时候，只是把天下的一切都拿来满足自己的欲望而已，这正是把统治天下看得无尚尊贵的原因所在。
English: When those wise men ruled the world, they merely used everything in the world to satisfy their own desires. This is precisely the reason why ruling the world is considered so noble.

古文：夫所谓贤人者，必能安天下而治万民，今身且不能利，将恶能治天下哉！
现代文：人们所说的贤明之人，一定能安定天下、治理万民，倘若连给自己捞好处都不会，又怎么能治理天下呢！
English: Wise men, as they are called, will surely be able to stabilize the world and govern all people. If they cannot even benefit themselves, how can they govern the world?

古文：故吾原赐志广欲，长享天下而无害，为之柰何？ 
现代文：所以我才想姿心广欲，永远享有天下而没有祸害。这该怎么办呢？ 
English: That's why I want to be broad-minded and enjoy the world forever without any harm. What should I do?

古文：李斯子由为三川守，群盗吴广等西略地，过去弗能禁。
现代文：李斯的儿子李由任三川郡守，群起造反的吴广等人向西攻占地盘，任意往来，李由不能阻止。
English: Li's son, Li Yu, was appointed governor of Mikawa County, and Wu Guang, who rebelled en masse, occupied the territory to the west. Li Yu was unable to stop the arbitrary dealings.

古文：章邯以破逐广等兵，使者覆案三川相属，诮让斯居三公位，如何令盗如此。
现代文：章邯在击败并驱逐了吴广等人的军队之后，派到三川去调查的使者一个接着一个，并责备李斯身居三公之位，为何让盗贼猖狂到这种地步。
English: After defeating and expelling the army of Wu Guang and others, Zhang Ye sent envoys one after another to investigate in Sanchuan, and reproached Li Si for allowing the thieves to run amok to such an extent while he was in the position of the three princes.

古文：李斯恐惧，重爵禄，不知所出，乃阿二世意，欲求容，以书对曰：
现代文：李斯很是害怕，又把爵位俸禄看得很重，不知如何是好，就曲意阿顺二世的心意，想求得宽容，便上书回答二世说：
English: Li Si was very afraid, and he valued his title and salary very highly. He did not know what to do, so he tried to bend the will of Ashun II, and in order to gain his tolerance, he wrote a letter to the second saying:

古文：夫贤主者，必且能全道而行督责之术者也。
现代文：贤明的君主，必将是能够全面掌握为君之道，又对下行使督责的统治术的君主。
English: A wise monarch will surely be a monarch who can fully grasp the way of being a monarch, and exercise the governing skills of supervision and responsibility.

古文：督责之，则臣不敢不竭能以徇其主矣。
现代文：对下严加督责，则臣子们不敢不竭尽全力为君主效命。
English: On the other hand, if there is strict supervision, the courtiers will not dare not to do their best to serve the monarch.

古文：此臣主之分定，上下之义明，则天下贤不肖莫敢不尽力竭任以徇其君矣。
现代文：这样，君主和臣子的职分一经确定，上下关系的准则也明确了，那么天下不论是有才德的还是没有才德的，都不敢不竭尽全力为君主效命了。
English: In this way, once the duties of the monarch and the courtiers have been determined, and the principles of the relationship between the upper and lower ranks have been clarified, then no one in the world, whether talented or not, would dare not to do their best to serve the monarch.

古文：是故主独制於天下而无所制也。
现代文：因此君主才能专制天下而不受任何约束，能享尽达到极致的乐趣。
English: This is why monarchs are able to rule the world without any constraints and enjoy the ultimate pleasure.

古文：能穷乐之极矣，贤明之主也，可不察焉！
现代文：贤明的君主啊，又怎能看不清这一点呢！
English: O wise prince, how can you fail to see this?

古文：故申子曰 有天下而不恣睢，命之曰以天下为桎梏 者，无他焉，不能督责，而顾以其身劳於天下之民，若尧、禹然，故谓之 桎梏 也。
现代文：所以申不害先生说： 占有天下要是还不懂得纵情姿欲，这就叫把天下当成自己的镣铐 这样的话，没有别的意思，只是讲不督责臣下，而自己反辛辛苦苦为天下百姓操劳，像尧和禹那样，所以称之为 镣铐 。
English: Therefore, Mr. Shin said, "If you do not know how to indulge in lust when you occupy the world, it is called treating the world as your puppet. Such words have no other meaning, but to say that you do not supervise your subjects, but you work hard for the people of the world, like Yu and Yu, so it is called puppet.

古文：夫不能修申、韩之明术，行督责之道，专以天下自適也，而徒务苦形劳神，以身徇百姓，则是黔首之役，非畜天下者也，何足贵哉！
现代文：不能学习申不害、韩非的高明法术，推行督责措施，一心以天下使自己舒服快乐，而只是白白地操心费力，拼命为百姓干事，那就是百姓的奴仆，并不是统治天下的帝王，这有什么值得尊贵的呢！
English: It is not possible to learn the skillful spells of Shen Nihong and Han Nihong, to implement supervision measures, to make oneself comfortable and happy with the whole world, but only to worry and work hard in vain, to be a people's officer, that is, a servant of the people, not an emperor who rules the world. What is so precious about this?

古文：夫以人徇己，则己贵而人贱；以己徇人，则己贱而人贵。
现代文：让别人为自己献身，就自己尊贵而别人卑贱；让自己为别人献身，就自己卑贱而别人尊贵。
English: Let others sacrifice themselves for you, and you will be exalted and others will be humbled. Let yourself sacrifice for others, and you will be humbled and others will be exalted.

古文：故徇人者贱，而人所徇者贵，自古及今，未有不然者也。
现代文：所以献身的人卑贱，接受献身的人尊贵，从古到今，没有不是这样的。
English: Therefore, from ancient times to the present, it has never been otherwise.

古文：凡古之所为尊贤者，为其贵也；而所为恶不肖者，为其贱也。
现代文：自古以来之所以尊重贤人，是因为受尊敬的人自己尊贵；之所以讨厌不肖的人，是因为不肖的人自己卑贱。
English: The reason why wise men have been respected since ancient times is that those who are respected are themselves noble; the reason why ugly people are disliked is because ugly people are themselves lowly.

古文：而尧、禹以身徇天下者也，因随而尊之，则亦失所为尊贤之心矣，夫可谓大缪矣。
现代文：而尧、禹是为天下献身的人，因袭世俗的评价而予以尊重，这也就失去了所以尊贤的用心了，这可说是绝大的错误。
English: But Yu and Yu are people who have dedicated their lives to the world, and they are respected because they follow the secular evaluation. This has also lost the intention of honoring the virtuous. This can be said to be a huge mistake.

古文：谓之为 桎梏 ，不亦宜乎？
现代文：说尧、禹把天下当作自己的 镣铐 ，不也是很合适的吗？
English: Isn't it appropriate to say that Yu regards the whole world as his own?

古文：不能督责之过也。
现代文：这是不能督责的过错。
English: This is a fault for which we cannot be held responsible.

古文：故韩子曰： 慈母有败子而严家无格虏 者，何也？
现代文：所以韩非先生说 慈爱的母亲会养出败家的儿子，而严厉的主人家中没有强悍的奴仆 ，是什么原因呢？
English: That is why Mr. Han Fei said that a loving mother will raise a son of a loser, but there is no strong servant in a strict master's house, what is the reason?

古文：则能罚之加焉必也。
现代文：这是由于能严加惩罚的必然结果。
English: This is the inevitable result of being able to punish severely.

古文：故商君之法，刑弃灰於道者。
现代文：所以商鞅的新法规定，在道路上撒灰的人就要判刑。
English: Therefore, the controversial new law stipulates that those who scatter ashes on the road will be sentenced.

古文：夫弃灰，薄罪也，而被刑，重罚也。
现代文：撒灰于道是轻罪，而加之以刑是重罚。
English: Scattering ashes on the road is a misdemeanour, while adding it to the sentence is a heavy penalty.

古文：彼唯明主为能深督轻罪。
现代文：只有贤明的君主才能严厉地督责轻罪。
English: Only a wise monarch can severely punish misdemeanors.

古文：夫罪轻且督深，而况有重罪乎？
现代文：轻罪尚且严厉督责，何况犯有重罪呢？
English: Misdemeanors are punished severely, but what about felonies?

古文：故民不敢犯也。
现代文：所以百姓不敢犯法。
English: That's why people don't dare to break the law.

古文：是故韩子曰 布帛寻常，庸人不释，铄金百溢，盗跖不搏 者，非庸人之心重，寻常之利深，而盗跖之欲浅也；又不以盗跖之行，为轻百镒之重也。
现代文：因此韩非先生又说： 对几尺绸布，一般人见到就会顺手拿走，百镒美好的黄金，盗跖不会夺取 ，并不因为常人贪心严重，几尺绸布价值极高，盗跖利欲淡泊；也不是因为盗跖行为高尚，轻视百镒黄金的重利。
English: Therefore, Mr. Han Fei also said: For a few feet of silk cloth, the average person will see it and take it without hesitation. For a hundred ounces of beautiful gold, thieves will not take it. It is not because ordinary people are greedy, a few feet of silk cloth is extremely valuable, and thieves want to take advantage of it; nor is it because thieves are noble and despise the heavy profit of a hundred ounces of gold.

古文：搏必随手刑，则盗跖不搏百镒；而罚不必行也，则庸人不释寻常。
现代文：原因是一旦夺取，随手就要受刑，所以盗跖不敢夺取白镒黄金；若是不坚决施行刑罚的话，那么一般人也就不会放弃几尺绸布。
English: The reason for this is that once you seize it, you will be punished, so thieves do not dare to seize palladium gold; if you do not resolutely enforce the punishment, then the average person will not give up a few feet of silk cloth.

古文：是故城高五丈，而楼季不轻犯也；泰山之高百仞，而跛牧其上。
现代文：因此五丈高的城墙，楼季不敢轻易冒犯；泰山高达百仞，而跛脚的牧羊人却敢在上面放牧。
English: Therefore, the five-storey-high city wall, the quarter dare not easily offend; Mount Tai is as high as a hundred folds, but the lame shepherd dares to graze on it.

古文：夫楼季也而难五丈之限，岂跛也而易百仞之高哉？
现代文：难道楼季把攀越五丈高的城墙看得很难，而跛脚的牧羊人登上百仞高的泰山看得很容易吗？
English: Is it really so difficult for a peasant to climb the five-story-high city wall, while it is so easy for a lame shepherd to climb the hundred-meter-high Mount Tai?

古文：峭堑之势异也。
现代文：这是因为陡峭和平缓，两者形势不同。
English: This is because steep and gentle are two different situations.

古文：明主圣王之所以能久处尊位，长执重势，而独擅天下之利者，非有异道也，能独断而审督责，必深罚，故天下不敢犯也。
现代文：圣明的君主之所以能久居尊位，长掌大权，独自垄断天下利益，其原因并不在于他们有什么特殊的办法，而是在于他们能够独揽大权，精于督责，对犯法的人一定严加惩处，所以天下人不敢违犯。
English: The reason why the holy monarchs have been able to stay in their dignified positions for a long time, hold great power, and monopolize the interests of the world alone is not because they have any special methods, but because they can monopolize power, are good at supervision, and must severely punish those who violate the law, so people around the world dare not violate it.

古文：今不务所以不犯，而事慈母之所以败子也，则亦不察於圣人之论矣。
现代文：现在不制订防止犯罪的措施，去仿效慈母养成败家子的作法，那就太不了解前代圣哲的论说了。
English: If we do not formulate measures to prevent crime now, if we imitate the practice of a loving mother raising a loser son, then we do not understand the theory of the previous sages.

古文：夫不能行圣人之术，则舍为天下役何事哉？
现代文：不能实行圣人治理天下的方法，除去给天下当奴仆还能干什么呢？
English: If we can't implement the method of saints governing the world, what else can we do but be slaves to the world?

古文：可不哀邪！
现代文：这不是太令人悲伤的事吗！
English: Isn't that so sad!

古文：且夫俭节仁义之人立於朝，则荒肆之乐辍矣；谏说论理之臣间於侧，则流漫之志诎矣；烈士死节之行显於世，则淫康之虞废矣。
现代文：更何况节俭仁义的人在朝中任职，那荒诞放肆的乐趣就得中止；规劝陈说，高谈道理的臣子在身边干预，放肆无忌的念头就要收敛；烈士死节的行为受到世人的推崇，纵情享受的娱乐就要放弃。
English: What's more, if a thrifty, benevolent and righteous person holds a post in the imperial court, the absurd and extravagant fun will have to be stopped; if a high-minded courtier intervenes nearby, the extravagant thoughts will have to be restrained; if the behavior of the martyrs on the Day of the Dead is respected by the world, the indulgent entertainment will have to be given up.

古文：故明主能外此三者，而独操主术以制听从之臣，而修其明法，故身尊而势重也。
现代文：所以圣明的君主能排斥这三种人，而独掌统治大权以驾驭言听计从的臣子，建立严明的法制，所以自身尊贵而权势威重。
English: That is why a saintly monarch can exclude these three kinds of people, and rule with great power in his sole hand to control his obedient subjects and establish a strict legal system. That is why he is dignified and powerful.

古文：凡贤主者，必将能拂世磨俗，而废其所恶，立其所欲，故生则有尊重之势，死则有贤明之谥也。
现代文：所有的贤明君主，都能拂逆世风、扭转民俗，废弃他所厌恶的，树立他所喜欢的，因此在他活着的时候才有尊贵的威势，在他死后才有贤明的谥号。
English: All wise monarchs are able to break the trend of the times, reverse the customs of the people, discard what they detest, and establish what they like. Therefore, they have a noble dignity when they are alive, and a wise nickname when they die.

古文：是以明君独断，故权不在臣也。然後能灭仁义之涂，掩驰说之口，困烈士之行，塞聪揜明，内独视听，故外不可倾以仁义烈士之行，而内不可夺以谏说忿争之辩。
现代文：正因为这样，贤明的君主才集权专制，使权力不落入臣下手中，然后才能斩断仁义之路，堵住游说之口，困厄烈士的死节行为，闭目塞听，任凭自己独断专行，这样在外就不致被仁义节烈之士的行为所动摇，在内也不会被劝谏争论所迷惑。
English: It is precisely for this reason that wise monarchs centralize power and autocracy, so that power does not fall into the hands of their subjects, and then they can cut off the path of benevolence and righteousness, block the mouth of lobbying, the death rites of the martyrs of hardship, close their eyes and listen, and let themselves act arbitrarily. In this way, they will not be shaken by the actions of the martyrs of the Day of Benevolence and Righteousness outside, and they will not be confused by persuasion and argument inside.

古文：故能荦然独行恣睢之心而莫之敢逆。
现代文：因此才能卓荦独行逞其为所欲为的心志，而没有人敢反抗。
English: Therefore, it is only possible for Zhuge Liang to act independently and pursue his desire to do whatever he wants, and no one dares to resist.

古文：若此然後可谓能明申、韩之术，而脩商君之法。
现代文：像这样，然后才可以说是了解了申不害、韩非的统治术，学会了商鞅的法制。
English: In this way, only then can it be said to have understood the ruling skills of Shin, Han, and Africa, and learned the legal system of negotiation.

古文：法脩术明而天下乱者，未之闻也。
现代文：法制和统治术都学好而明了了，天下还会大乱，这样的事我还没听说过。
English: The rule of law and the art of governing have been well learned and understood, and there will be great chaos in the world. I have never heard of such a thing.

古文：故曰 王道约而易操 也。
现代文：所以，有人说： 帝王的统治术是简约易行的。 
English: Therefore, some people say: The emperor's ruling technique is simple and easy to do.

古文：唯明主为能行之。
现代文：只有贤明君主才能这么做。
English: Only a wise monarch can do that.

古文：若此则谓督责之诚，则臣无邪，臣无邪则天下安，天下安则主严尊，主严尊则督责必，督责必则所求得，所求得则国家富，国家富则君乐丰。
现代文：像这样，才可以说是真正实行了督责，臣下才能没有离异之心，天下才能安定，天下安定才能有君主的尊严，君主有了尊严才能使督责严格执行，督责严格执行后君主的欲望才能得到满足，满足之后国家才能富强，国家富强了君主才能享受得更多。
English: In this way, it can be said that the supervision is truly implemented, the subjects can be free from dissent, the world can be stable, the world can be stable to have the dignity of the monarch, the monarch has the dignity to strictly implement the supervision, after the strict implementation of the supervision, the monarch's desire can be satisfied, after the satisfaction, the country can be rich and strong, the country is rich and strong, and the monarch can enjoy more.

古文：故督责之术设，则所欲无不得矣。
现代文：所以督责之术一确立，君主就任何欲望都能满足了。
English: Therefore, once the art of supervision is established, the monarch can satisfy any desire.

古文：群臣百姓救过不给，何变之敢图？
现代文：群臣百姓想补救自己的过失都来不及，哪里还敢图谋造反？
English: It is too late for the common people to remedy their mistakes. How dare they try to rebel?

古文：若此则帝道备，而可谓能明君臣之术矣。
现代文：像这样，就可以说是掌握了帝王的统治术，也可以说了解了驾驭群臣的方法。
English: In this way, it can be said to have mastered the emperor's ruling skills, and it can also be said to have understood the way to control the courtiers.

古文：虽申、韩复生，不能加也。
现代文：即使申不害、韩非复生，也不能超过了。
English: Even if Shin is not harmed and Han is not revived, it cannot be exceeded.

古文：书奏，二世悦。
现代文：这封答书上奏之后，二世看了非常高兴。
English: After this reply was read out, Nisei was very happy.

古文：於是行督责益严，税民深者为明吏。
现代文：于是更加严厉地实行督责，向百姓收税越多越是贤明的官吏。
English: As a result, supervision was more strictly enforced, and the more taxes were collected from the people, the wiser the officials became.

古文：二世曰： 若此则可谓能督责矣。 
现代文：二世说： 像这样才可称得上善于督责了。 
English: The second generation said, "This is what it's like to be in charge."

古文：刑者相半於道，而死人日成积於市。杀人众者为忠臣。
现代文：路上的行人，有一半是犯人，在街市上每天都堆积着刚杀死的人的尸体，而且杀人越多的越是忠臣。
English: Half of the pedestrians on the road are prisoners, and the bodies of those who have just been killed are piled up in the streets every day, and the more people are killed, the more loyal they are.

古文：二世曰： 若此则可谓能督责矣。 
现代文：二世说： 像这样才可称的上实行督责了。 
English: The second generation said, "This is what it's like to be in charge."

古文：初，赵高为郎中令，所杀及报私怨众多，恐大臣入朝奏事毁恶之，乃说二世曰： 天子所以贵者，但以闻声，群臣莫得见其面，故号曰 朕 。
现代文：起初，赵高在担任郎中令时，杀死的人和为了报私仇而陷害的人非常多，唯恐大臣们在入朝奏事时向二世揭露他，就劝说二世道： 天子之所以尊贵，就在于大臣只能听到他的声音，而不能看到他的面容，所以才自称为 朕 。
English: At first, when Zhao Gao served as the second-in-command, he killed a lot of people and framed people for personal revenge. In order to prevent the ministers from exposing him to Nisei when reporting to the Imperial Court, he persuaded Nisei to say, "The reason why the Son of Heaven is noble is that the minister can only hear his voice, but cannot see his face, so he calls himself "I."

古文：且陛下富於春秋，未必尽通诸事，今坐朝廷，谴举有不当者，则见短於大臣，非所以示神明於天下也。
现代文：况且陛下还很年轻，未必什么事情都懂，现在坐在朝廷上，若惩罚和奖励有不妥当的地方，就会把自己的短处暴露给大臣，这也就不能向天下人显示您的圣明了。
English: Moreover, your majesty is still very young and may not know everything. Now that you are sitting in the imperial court, if there is anything improper about the punishment and reward, you will expose your shortcomings to the minister, which will not show the world your wisdom.

古文：且陛下深拱禁中，与臣及侍中习法者待事，事来有以揆之。
现代文：陛下不妨深居宫中，和我及熟悉法律的侍中在一起，等待大臣把公事呈奏上来，等公文一旦呈上，我们就可以研究决定。
English: Your Majesty may as well stay deep in the palace, together with me and the attendants who are familiar with the law, and wait for the minister to present the official matter, and once the official document is presented, we can study the decision.

古文：如此则大臣不敢奏疑事，天下称圣主矣。 
现代文：这样，大臣们就不敢把疑难的事情报上来，天下的人也就称您为圣明之主了。 
English: In this way, ministers do not dare to report difficult things, and people around the world call you the Lord of Light.

古文：二世用其计，乃不坐朝廷见大臣，居禁中。
现代文：二世听从了赵高的主意，就不再坐在朝廷上接见大臣，深居在宫禁之中。
English: The second generation listened to Zhao Gao's idea and no longer sat in the imperial court to receive ministers, living deep within the palace walls.

古文：赵高常侍中用事，事皆决於赵高。
现代文：赵高总在皇帝身边侍奉办事，一切公务都由赵高决定。
English: Zhao Gao always served and worked alongside the emperor, and all official duties were decided by Zhao Gao.

古文：高闻李斯以为言，乃见丞相曰： 关东群盗多，今上急益发繇治阿房宫，聚狗马无用之物。
现代文：赵高听说李斯对此有不满的言论，就找到李斯说： 函谷关以东地区盗贼很多，而现在皇上却加紧遣发劳役修建阿房宫，搜集狗马等没用的玩物。
English: When Zhao Gao heard that Li Si was dissatisfied with this, he found Li Si and said: There are many thieves in the area east of the Hangu Pass, but now the emperor is stepping up the dispatch of laborers to build the Afang Palace and collect useless toys such as dogs and horses.

古文：臣欲谏，为位贱。
现代文：我想劝谏，但我的地位卑贱。
English: I want to advise you, but my position is lowly.

古文：此真君侯之事，君何不谏？ 
现代文：可实在是您丞相的事，为什么不劝谏呢？ 
English: But it is really a matter for your prime minister, why not persuade him?

古文：李斯曰： 固也，吾欲言之久矣。
现代文：李斯说 确实这样，我早就想说话了。
English: "It's true, I've been wanting to talk for a long time," Lees said.

古文：今时上不坐朝廷，上居深宫，吾有所言者，不可传也，欲见无间。 
现代文：可是现在皇帝不临朝听政，常居深宫之中，我虽然有话想说，又不便让别人传达，想见皇帝却又没有机会。 
English: But now the emperor does not come to the court to listen to politics, he often lives in the depths of the palace. Although I have something to say, it is inconvenient for others to convey it. I want to see the emperor, but I have no chance.

古文：赵高谓曰： 君诚能谏，请为君候上间语君。 
现代文：赵高对他说： 您若真能劝谏的话，请允许我替你打听，只要皇上一有空闲，我立刻通知你。 
English: Zhao Gao said to him: If you can really persuade him, please allow me to inquire for you. As long as the emperor is free, I will inform you immediately.

古文：於是赵高待二世方燕乐，妇女居前，使人告丞相： 上方间，可奏事。 
现代文：于是赵高趁二世在闲居娱乐，美女在前的时候，派人告丞相说： 皇上正有空闲，可以进宫奏事。 
English: So Zhao Gao took advantage of the fact that the second emperor was relaxing and entertaining, and the beautiful woman was in front of him, and sent someone to tell the prime minister: "The emperor is free and can enter the palace to attend to matters.

古文：丞相至宫门上谒，如此者三。
现代文：丞相李斯就到宫门求见，接连三次都是这样。
English: Prime Minister Riis went to the Imperial Palace to ask for an audience, and this happened three times in a row.

古文：二世怒曰： 吾常多间日，丞相不来。
现代文：二世非常生气地说： 我平时空闲的日子很多，丞相都不来。
English: The second said very angrily: I usually have a lot of free time, but the prime minister doesn't come.

古文：吾方燕私，丞相辄来请事。
现代文：每当我在寝室休息的时候，丞相就来请示奏事。
English: Whenever I was resting in my bedroom, the prime minister would come and ask me to make a report.

古文：丞相岂少我哉？
现代文：丞相是瞧不起我呢？
English: Does the prime minister despise me?

古文：且固我哉？ 
现代文：还是以为我鄙陋？ 
English: Do you still think I'm despicable?

古文：赵高因曰： 如此殆矣！
现代文：赵高又乘机说： 您这样说话可太危险了！
English: Zhao Gao also took the opportunity to say: It's too dangerous for you to talk like that!

古文：夫沙丘之谋，丞相与焉。
现代文：沙丘的密谋，丞相是参与了的。
English: The Prime Minister was involved in the conspiracy of the dunes.

古文：今陛下已立为帝，而丞相贵不益，此其意亦望裂地而王矣。
现代文：现在陛下您已即位皇帝，而丞相的地位却没有提高，显然他的意思是想割地封王呀！
English: Now, Your Majesty, you have ascended to the throne of the emperor, but the position of the prime minister has not improved. It is obvious that he means to cut the land and make himself king!

古文：且陛下不问臣，臣不敢言。
现代文：如果皇帝您不问我，我不敢说。
English: If you, Emperor, do not ask me, I dare not say.

古文：丞相长男李由为三川守，楚盗陈胜等皆丞相傍县之子，以故楚盗公行，过三川，城守不肯击。
现代文：丞相的大儿子李由担任三川郡守，楚地强盗陈胜等人都是丞相故乡邻县的人，因此他们才敢公开横行，经过三川时，李由只是守城而不出击。
English: The prime minister's eldest son, Li Yu, served as the governor of Mikawa County, and the Chu robbers, Chen Sheng and others, were all from counties neighboring the prime minister's hometown, which is why they dared to openly run amok. When passing through Mikawa, Li Yu only defended the city and did not attack.

古文：高闻其文书相往来，未得其审，故未敢以闻。
现代文：我曾听说他们之间有书信来往，但还没有调查清楚，所以没敢向陛下报告。
English: I had heard that there had been correspondence between them, but I hadn't investigated it, so I didn't dare report it to His Majesty.

古文：且丞相居外，权重於陛下。 
现代文：更何况丞相在外，权力比陛下还大。 
English: What's more, with the exception of the prime minister, they have more power than His Majesty.

古文：二世以为然。欲案丞相，恐其不审，乃使人案验三川守与盗通状。
现代文：二世认为赵高的话没错，想法办丞相，但但又担心情况不实，就派人去调查三川郡守与盗贼勾结的具体情况。
English: The second generation thought that Zhao Gao's words were right, and the idea of running for chancellor, but they were worried that the situation was not true, so they sent someone to investigate the specifics of the collusion between the governor of Mikawa County and the thieves.

古文：李斯闻之。
现代文：李斯知道了这个消息。
English: Reese got the news.

古文：是时二世在甘泉，方作觳抵优俳之观。
现代文：当时二世正在甘泉宫观看摔跤和滑稽戏表演。
English: At the time, the second son was watching a wrestling and burlesque show at Ganquan Palace.

古文：李斯不得见，因上书言赵高之短曰： 臣闻之，臣疑其君，无不危国；妾疑其夫，无不危家。
现代文：李斯不能进见，就上书揭发赵高的短处说： 我听说，臣子比同君主，没有不危害国家的；妾比同丈夫，没有不危害家庭的。
English: Li Si, unable to see into the matter, wrote a letter exposing Zhao Gao's shortcomings, saying, "I have heard that a courtier, compared to a monarch, does nothing without endangering the country; a concubine, compared to a husband, does nothing without endangering the family.

古文：今有大臣於陛下擅利擅害，与陛下无异，此甚不便。
现代文：现在有的大臣擅自掌握赏罚大权，和您没有什么不同，这是非常不妥当的。
English: It is very inappropriate that some ministers now have the power to reward and punish without authorization, which is no different from you.

古文：昔者司城子罕相宋，身行刑罚，以威行之，期年遂劫其君。
现代文：从前司城子罕当宋国丞相，自己掌握刑罚大权，用威权行事，一年之后就劫持了宋国国君，篡夺了王位。
English: Once upon a time, Shicheng Zihan was the prime minister of Song Guojuan. He held the power of punishment and acted with authority. A year later, he kidnapped the king of Song Guojuan and usurped the throne.

古文：田常为简公臣，爵列无敌於国，私家之富与公家均，布惠施德，下得百姓，上得群臣，阴取齐国，杀宰予於庭，即弑简公於朝，遂有齐国。
现代文：田常当齐简公的臣子，爵位高到全国无人与他相匹敌，自家的财富和公家的一样多，他行恩施惠，下得百姓的爱戴，上得群臣的拥护，暗中窃取了齐国的权力，在厅堂里杀死了宰予，又在朝廷上杀死齐简公，这样，就完全控制了齐国。
English: Tian Chang was a courtier of Qi Jiangong, his title was so high that no one in the whole country could match him, and his family's wealth was as much as that of the court. He did favors, won the love of the people, and won the support of the ministers. He secretly stole the power of Qi, killed Zha You in the hall, and killed Qi Jiangong in the court, thus completely controlling Qi.

古文：此天下所明知也。
现代文：这是天下人明明知道的。
English: Everyone in the world knows this.

古文：今高有邪佚之志，危反之行，如子罕相宋也；私家之富，若田氏之於齐也。
现代文：现在赵高有邪辟过分的心志和险诈叛逆的行为，就如同子罕当宋国丞相时的所作所为；私人占有的财富，也正像田常在齐国那样多。
English: Now Zhao Gao has a perverse and excessive mind and treacherous and treacherous behavior, just as Zi Han did when he was the prime minister of Song Guo Rong; privately owned wealth is just as much as Tian Chang in Qi.

古文：兼行田常、子罕之逆道而劫陛下之威信，其志若韩为韩安相也。
现代文：他一并使用田常、子罕的叛逆方式而又窃取了陛下您的威信，他志向就如同韩玘当韩安的宰相时一样。
English: He has also stolen Your Majesty's prestige by using the traitorous methods of Tian Chang and Zi Han, and his ambition is the same as Han Yu's when he was Han An's prime minister.

古文：陛下不图，臣恐其为变也。 
现代文：陛下你不早打算，我担心他迟早会发动叛乱啊。 
English: Your Majesty, if you don't do something soon, I'm afraid he'll start a rebellion sooner or later.

古文：二世曰： 何哉？
现代文：二世说： 这是什么话？
English: And the second said, What is this word?

古文：夫高，故宦人也，然不为安肆志，不以危易心，絜行脩善，自使至此，以忠得进，以信守位，朕实贤之，而君疑之，何也？
现代文：赵高原本是个宦官，但他不因处境安逸就为所欲为，也不因处境危险就改变忠心，他品行廉洁，一心向善，靠自己的努力才得到今天的地位，因忠心耿耿才被提拔，因讲信义才保住禄位，我确实认为他是贤才，而你怀疑他，这是什么原因呢？
English: Zhao Gao was originally a eunuch, but he did not do whatever he wanted because of the ease of the situation, nor did he change his loyalty because of the danger of the situation. He was honest and good-hearted. He got to where he is today through his own efforts. He was promoted because of his loyalty, and kept his position because of his loyalty. I really think he is a genius, but you doubt him. What is the reason for this?

古文：且朕少失先人，无所识知，不习治民，而君又老，恐与天下绝矣。
现代文：再加上我年纪轻轻就失去了父亲，没什么知识，不知如何管理百姓，而你年纪又大了，我担心与天下人隔绝了。
English: Add to that the fact that I lost my father at a young age, have little knowledge, and don't know how to manage people, and you're older, and I'm worried about being cut off from the world.

古文：朕非属赵君，当谁任哉？
现代文：我如果不把国事托付给赵高，还应当用谁呢？
English: If I don't entrust state affairs to Zhao Gao, who else should I use?

古文：且赵君为人精廉彊力，下知人情，上能適朕，君其勿疑。 
现代文：况且赵先生为人精明廉洁，竭尽其力，下能了解民情，上能顺适我的心意，请你不要怀疑。 
English: Moreover, Mr. Zhao is a shrewd and incorruptible person, and he will do his best to understand the people's feelings and accommodate my wishes, please do not doubt it.

古文：李斯曰： 不然。
现代文：李斯说： 并非如此。
English: Lees said: "That's not the case.

古文：夫高，故贱人也，无识於理，贪欲无厌，求利不止，列势次主，求欲无穷，臣故曰殆。 
现代文：赵高从前是卑贱的人，并不懂道理，贪得无厌，求利不止，地位权势仅次于陛下，但他追求地位和权势的欲望没有止境，所以我说是很危险的。 
English: Zhao Gao used to be a lowly person, he did not understand the truth, he was insatiably greedy, he sought profit more than anything else, his status and power were second only to His Majesty, but his desire to pursue status and power had no end, so I said he was very dangerous.

古文：二世已前信赵高，恐李斯杀之，乃私告赵高。
现代文：二世早上已相信了赵高，担心李斯杀掉他，就暗中把这些话告诉了赵高。
English: In the morning, the second generation had already believed Zhao Gao. Fearing that Li Si would kill him, he secretly told Zhao Gao these words.

古文：高曰： 丞相所患者独高，高已死，丞相即欲为田常所为。 
现代文：赵高说： 丞相所忧虑的只有我赵高，我死之后，丞相就可以干田常所干的那些事了。 
English: Zhao Gao said, "I am the only one that the prime minister is worried about. After my death, the prime minister can do what Tian Chang did."

古文：於是二世曰： 其以李斯属郎中令！ 
现代文：于是二世说： 就把李斯交给你这郎中令查办吧！ 
English: Then the second son said: Just give Li Si to your henchman to investigate!

古文：赵高案治李斯。
现代文：赵高查办李斯。
English: Zhao Gao investigates Li Si.

古文：李斯拘执束缚，居囹圄中，仰天而叹曰： 嗟乎，悲夫！
现代文：李斯被捕后并套上刑具，关在监狱中，仰天长叹道： 唉呀！可悲啊！
English: After Li Si was arrested and put on the torture device, he was locked up in prison and sighed for a long time: Alas! How sad!

古文：不道之君，何可为计哉！
现代文：无道的昏君，怎么能为他出谋划策呢！
English: How can you give him advice when he's a hopeless dimwit!

古文：昔者桀杀关龙逢，纣杀王子比干，吴王夫差杀伍子胥。
现代文：从前夏桀杀死关龙逢，商纣杀死王子比干，吴王夫差杀死伍子胥。
English: Once upon a time, Xia Yao killed Guan Longfeng, Shang Yao killed Prince Bi Gan, and Wu Wangfuba killed Wu Zixuan.

古文：此三臣者，岂不忠哉，然而不免於死，身死而所忠者非也。
现代文：这三个大臣，难道不忠吗！然而免不了一死，他们虽然尽忠而死，只可惜忠非其人。
English: These three ministers, were they not, unfaithful? Yet they were not spared death, and though they died faithfully, it is a pity that their loyalty was misplaced.

古文：今吾智不及三子，而二世之无道过於桀、纣、夫差，吾以忠死，宜矣。
现代文：现在我的智慧赶不上这三个人，而二世的暴虐无道超过了桀、纣、夫差，我因尽忠而死，也是应该的呀。
English: Now my wisdom can't keep up with these three men, and Nisei's tyrannical ways surpass those of his father-in-law, father-in-law, and husband-in-law. I should die for my loyalty.

古文：且二世之治岂不乱哉！
现代文：况且二世治国不是胡搞么！
English: Moreover, the second-generation governance is not a hoax!

古文：日者夷其兄弟而自立也，杀忠臣而贵贱人，作为阿房之宫，赋敛天下。
现代文：不久前杀死了自己的兄弟而自立为皇帝，又杀害忠良，重用低贱的人，修建阿房宫，对天下百姓横征暴敛。
English: Not long ago, he killed his own brother and established himself as emperor. He also killed the loyal and the good, made heavy use of the lowly, built the Afang Palace, and levied heavy taxes on the people of the world.

古文：吾非不谏也，而不吾听也。
现代文：并不是我不劝谏，而是他不听我的呀。
English: It's not that I don't advise him, it's that he doesn't listen to me.

古文：凡古圣王，饮食有节，车器有数，宫室有度，出令造事，加费而无益於民利者禁，故能长久治安。
现代文：凡是古代圣明的帝王饮食都有一定的节制，车马器物有一定的数量，宫殿都有一定的限度，颁布命令和办事情，增加费用而不利于百姓的一律禁止，所以才能长治久安。
English: The emperor's diet, which was sacred in ancient times, had a certain degree of moderation, there were a certain number of chariots and horses, and the palace had a certain limit. Issuing orders and doing things, and increasing expenses to the detriment of the people were all prohibited, so that there could be long-term peace.

古文：今行逆於昆弟，不顾其咎；侵杀忠臣，不思其殃；大为宫室，厚赋天下，不爱其费：三者已行，天下不听。
现代文：现在二世对自己的兄弟，施以违反常情常理的残暴手段，不考虑会有什么灾祸，迫害、杀戮忠臣，也不考虑会有什么灾殃；大力修筑宫殿，加重对天下百姓的税收，不吝惜钱财：这三件措施实行之后，天下百姓不服从。
English: Now the Second Emperor is using cruel methods against his brothers, contrary to common sense, without considering what disasters may occur, persecuting and killing loyalists without considering what disasters may occur; vigorously building palaces, increasing taxes on the people of the world, and not sparing money: after these three measures are implemented, the people of the world disobey.

古文：今反者已有天下之半矣，而心尚未寤也，而以赵高为佐，吾必见寇至咸阳，麋鹿游於朝也。 
现代文：现在造反的人已占天下人的一半了，但二世心中还未觉悟，居然任用赵高为辅佐，我一定会看到盗贼攻进咸阳，使朝廷变为麋鹿嬉游的地方。 
English: Now the rebels have accounted for half of the people in the world, but the second son has not yet realized in his heart that he actually appointed Zhao Gao as an assistant. I will definitely see the thieves break into Xianyang and turn the court into a place for elk to play.

古文：於是二世乃使高案丞相狱，治罪，责斯与子由谋反状，皆收捕宗族宾客。
现代文：于是二世就派赵高审理丞相一案，对他加以惩处，查问李斯和儿子李由谋反的情状，将其宾客和家族全部逮捕。
English: As a result, the second emperor sent Zhao Gao to try the case of the prime minister, punish him, inquire about the situation of Li Si and his son Li Yu plotting rebellion, and arrest all his guests and family members.

古文：赵高治斯，榜掠千馀，不胜痛，自诬服。
现代文：赵高惩治李斯，拷打他一千多下，李斯不能忍受痛苦的折磨，冤屈地招供了。
English: Zhao Gao punished Li Si and tortured him more than a thousand times. Li Si could not bear the painful torture and confessed wrongfully.

古文：斯所以不死者，自负其辩，有功，实无反心，幸得上书自陈，幸二世之寤而赦之。
现代文：李斯之所以不自杀而死，是他自负能言善辩，又对秦国有大功，确实没有反叛之心，希望能够上书为自己辩护，希望二世能觉悟过来并赦免他。
English: The reason why Li Si did not commit suicide and died was that he was conceited and eloquent, and he had made great contributions to the Qin State. He really did not have a rebellious heart. He hoped to be able to write a letter to defend himself, and hoped that the Second Emperor would come to his senses and pardon him.

古文：李斯乃从狱中上书曰： 臣为丞相治民，三十馀年矣。
现代文：李斯于是在监狱中上书说： 我担任丞相治理百姓，已经三十多年了。
English: Li Si then wrote a letter in prison, saying: I have served as chancellor to govern the people for more than thirty years.

古文：逮秦地之陕隘。
现代文：我来秦国赶上领土还很狭小。
English: I came to Qin to catch up with the territory is still very small.

古文：先王之时秦地不过千里，兵数十万。
现代文：先王的时候，秦国的土地不过千里，士兵不过几十万。
English: At the time of the previous king, the land of Qin was only thousands of miles away, and the soldiers were only hundreds of thousands.

古文：臣尽薄材，谨奉法令，阴行谋臣，资之金玉，使游说诸侯，阴脩甲兵，饰政教，官斗士，尊功臣，盛其爵禄，故终以胁韩弱魏，破燕、赵，夷齐、楚，卒兼六国，虏其王，立秦为天子。
现代文：我用尽了自己微薄的才能，小心谨慎地执行法令，暗中派遣谋臣，资助他们金银珠宝，让他们到各国游说，暗中准备武装，整顿政治和教化，任用英勇善战的人为官，提高功臣的社会地位，给他们很高的爵位和俸禄，所以终于威胁韩国，削弱魏国，击败了燕国，赵国，削平了齐国、楚国，最后兼并六国，俘获了他们的国王，拥立秦王为天子。
English: I exhausted my meager talents, carefully implemented the decrees, secretly sent advisers, funded them with gold, silver and jewels, let them lobby in various countries, secretly prepared weapons, rectified politics and indoctrination, appointed brave and warlike people as officials, improved the social status of heroes, and gave them high ranks and salaries, so I finally threatened South Korea, weakened Wei, defeated Yan and Zhao, flattened Qi and Chu, and finally annexed six countries, captured their kings, and established King Qin as the Son of Heaven.

古文：罪一矣。
现代文：这是我的第一条罪状。
English: That's my first count.

古文：地不广，又北逐胡、貉，南定百越，以见秦之彊。
现代文：秦国的疆域并不是不广阔，还要在北方驱逐胡人，貉人，在南方平定百越，以显示秦国的强大。
English: The territory of the State of Qin is not very vast. It is necessary to expel the Hu people and the Qiang people in the north, and to subdue the Baiyue people in the south, in order to show the strength of the State of Qin.

古文：罪二矣。
现代文：这是我的第二条罪状。
English: That's my second count.

古文：尊大臣，盛其爵位，以固其亲。
现代文：尊重大臣，提高他们的爵位，用以巩固他们同秦王的亲密关系。
English: He respected the ministers and raised their ranks to consolidate their close relationship with the Qin king.

古文：罪三矣。
现代文：这是我的第三条罪状。
English: This is my third count.

古文：立社稷，脩宗庙，以明主之贤。
现代文：建立社稷，修建宗庙，以显示主上的贤明。
English: To establish a shrine, to build a family temple, to show the wisdom of the Lord.

古文：罪四矣。
现代文：这是我的第四条罪状。
English: This is my fourth count.

古文：更剋画，平斗斛度量文章，布之天下，以树秦之名。
现代文：更改尺度衡器上所刻的标志，统一度量衡和文字，颁布天下，以树立秦朝的威名。
English: In order to establish the prestige of the Qin Dynasty, the emblem engraved on the measuring instrument was changed, and the weights and measures and words were unified and promulgated to the world.

古文：罪五矣。
现代文：这是我的第五条罪状。
English: This is my fifth count.

古文：治驰道，兴游观，以见主之得意。
现代文：修筑驰道，兴建游观之所，以显示主上志满意得。
English: Build a road, build a place for sightseeing, to show that the Lord is satisfied.

古文：罪六矣。
现代文：这是我的第六条罪状。
English: This is my sixth count.

古文：缓刑罚，薄赋敛，以遂主得众之心，万民戴主，死而不忘。
现代文：减轻刑罚，减少税收，以满足主上赢得民众的心愿，使万民百姓都拥戴皇帝，至死都不忘记皇帝的恩德。
English: Reduce the penalty, reduce the tax, to satisfy the Lord's desire to win the people, so that all the people support the emperor, and do not forget the emperor's kindness until death.

古文：罪七矣。
现代文：这是我的第七条罪状。
English: This is my seventh count.

古文：若斯之为臣者，罪足以死固久矣。上幸尽其能力，乃得至今，原陛下察之！ 
现代文：像我李斯这样作臣子的，所犯罪状足以处死，本来已经很久了，皇帝希望我竭尽所能，才得以活到今天，希望陛下明察。 
English: It's been a long time since a courtier like me, Li Si, has been guilty of a crime punishable by death. The emperor wants me to do everything I can to live to this day. I hope his majesty can see that.

古文：书上，赵高使吏弃去不奏，曰： 囚安得上书！ 
现代文：奏书呈上之后，赵高让狱吏丢在一边而不上报，说： 囚犯怎能上书！ 
English: After the report was submitted, Zhao Gao asked the prison officer to throw it aside and not report it, saying: "How can a prisoner submit a report!

古文：赵高使其客十馀辈诈为御史、谒者、侍中，更往覆讯斯。
现代文：赵高派他的门客十多人假扮成御史、谒者、侍中，轮流往复审问李斯。
English: Zhao Gao sent more than ten of his disciples to pose as the imperial historian, the eunuch, and the chamberlain, and they took turns interrogating Li Si.

古文：斯更以其实对，辄使人复榜之。
现代文：李斯改为以实对答时，赵高就让人再拷打他。
English: When Li Si changed his answer to the truth, Zhao Gao had someone torture him again.

古文：後二世使人验斯，斯以为如前，终不敢更言，辞服。
现代文：后来二世派人去验证李斯的口供，李斯以为还和以前一样，终不敢再改口供，在供词上承认了自己的罪状。
English: Later, the emperor sent someone to verify Li Si's confession. Li Si thought that it was still the same as before, and finally did not dare to change his confession, and admitted his guilt in the confession.

古文：奏当上，二世喜曰： 微赵君，几为丞相所卖。 
现代文：赵高把判决书呈给皇帝，二世皇帝很高兴地说： 没有赵君，我几乎被丞相出卖了。 
English: Zhao Gao submitted the verdict to the emperor, and the second emperor said happily: Without Zhao Jun, I was almost betrayed by the prime minister.

古文：及二世所使案三川之守至，则项梁已击杀之。
现代文：等二世派的使者到达三川调查李由时，项粱已经将他杀死。
English: By the time the envoys sent by the Second Emperor arrived in Mikawa to investigate Li Yu, Xiang Yu had already killed him.

古文：使者来，会丞相下吏，赵高皆妄为反辞。
现代文：使者返回时，正当李斯已被交付狱吏看押，赵高就编造了一整套李由谋反的罪状。
English: When the envoy returned, just as Li Si had been placed under the custody of prison officials, Zhao Gao fabricated a whole set of charges against Li Yu for plotting rebellion.

古文：二世二年七月，具斯五刑，论腰斩咸阳市。
现代文：二世二年七月，李斯被判处五刑，判在咸阳街市上腰斩。
English: In July of the second year of the second year, Li Si was sentenced to five punishments and was sentenced to beheading on Xianyang Street.

古文：斯出狱，与其中子俱执，顾谓其中子曰： 吾欲与若复牵黄犬俱出上蔡东门逐狡兔，岂可得乎！ 
现代文：李斯出狱时，跟他的次子一同被押解，他回头对次子说： 我想和你再牵着黄狗一同出上蔡东门去打猎追逐狡兔，又怎能办得到呢！ 
English: When Li Si was released from prison, he was escorted out together with his second son. He turned back to his second son and said, "I want to take the yellow dog with you and go out to Cai Dongmen to hunt and chase the cunning rabbit. How can I do it?"

古文：遂父子相哭，而夷三族。
现代文：于是父子二人相对痛哭，三族的人都被处死了。
English: As a result, father and son cried bitterly to each other, and people from all three ethnic groups were executed.

古文：李斯已死，二世拜赵高为中丞相，事无大小辄决於高。
现代文：李斯死后，二世任命赵高任中丞相，无论大事小事都由赵高决定。
English: After the death of Li Si, the Second Emperor appointed Zhao Gao as the Minister of the Middle Joseon Dynasty. No matter how big or small, Zhao Gao made the decisions.

古文：高自知权重，乃献鹿，谓之马。
现代文：赵高自知权力过重，就献上鹿，称它为马。
English: Zhao Gao knew that he had too much power, so he presented a deer and called it a horse.

古文：二世问左右： 此乃鹿也？ 
现代文：二世问左右侍从说： 这是鹿吧？ 
English: The second generation asked the attendants: "Is this a deer?"

古文：左右皆曰 马也 。
现代文：左右都说： 是马 。
English: Both sides said, "It's a horse."

古文：二世惊，自以为惑，乃召太卜，令卦之，太卜曰： 陛下春秋郊祀，奉宗庙鬼神，斋戒不明，故至于此。
现代文：二世惊慌起来，以为自己迷惑，就把太卜召来，叫他算上一卦。太卜说： 陛下春秋两季到郊外祭祀，供奉宗庙鬼神，斋戒时不虔诚，所以才到这种地步。
English: The second generation panicked, thinking that he was confused, and summoned the godmother to tell him a tale. The godmother said, "Your majesty, in spring and autumn, you go to the suburbs to offer sacrifices and worship the ghosts of your ancestral temple. When you fast, you are not pious, and that is why you have come to this point.

古文：可依盛德而明斋戒。 
现代文：可依照圣明君主的样子再虞诚地斋戒一次。 
English: You can follow the example of the Holy Monarch and fast once again with sincerity.

古文：於是乃入上林斋戒。
现代文：于是，二世就到上林苑中去斋戒。
English: As a result, Nisei went to Shanglin Yuan Middle School to break his fast.

古文：日游弋猎，有行人入上林中，二世自射杀之。
现代文：整天在上林苑中游玩射猎，一次有个行人走进上林苑中，二世亲手把他射死。
English: He spent all day playing shooting in the middle of Shanglin Court. Once, a pedestrian walked into Shanglin Court, and Nisei shot him dead with his own hands.

古文：赵高教其女婿咸阳令阎乐劾不知何人贼杀人移上林。
现代文：赵高就让他的女婿咸阳令阎乐出面弹劾，说是不知谁杀死了人，把尸体搬进上林苑中。
English: Zhao Gao asked his son-in-law Xianyang Ling Yan Le to impeach him, saying that he did not know who killed the person and moved the body into Shanglinyuan.

古文：高乃谏二世曰： 天子无故贼杀不辜人，此上帝之禁也，鬼神不享，天且降殃，当远避宫以禳之。 
现代文：赵高就劝谏二世说 天子无缘无故杀死没有罪的人，这是上天所不允许的，鬼神也不会接受您的祭祀，上天将会降下灾祸，应该远远地离去皇宫以祈祷消灾。 
English: Zhao Gao advised Emperor Xuan II that the Son of Heaven would kill a person without sin for no reason. This was not allowed by Heaven, and the ghosts and gods would not accept your sacrifice. Heaven would bring disaster, and he should go far away from the palace to pray for disaster relief.

古文：二世乃出居望夷之宫。
现代文：二世就离开皇宫到望夷宫去居住。
English: The second generation left the Imperial Palace and went to live in Mogi Palace.

古文：留三日，赵高诈诏卫士，令士皆素服持兵内乡，入告二世曰： 山东群盗兵大至！ 
现代文：二世在望夷宫里住了三天，赵高就假托二世的命令，让卫士们都穿着白色的衣服，手持兵器面向宫内，自己进宫告诉二世说： 山东各路强盗大批大批地来了！ 
English: The second emperor stayed in the Wangyi Palace for three days. Zhao Gao pretended to follow the order of the second emperor, so that the guards were all wearing white clothes and holding weapons facing the palace. He went into the palace himself to tell the second emperor: A large number of robbers from all over Shandong have come!

古文：二世上观而见之，恐惧，高既因劫令自杀。
现代文：二世上楼台观看，看到卫士拿着兵器朝向宫内，非常害怕，赵高立刻逼迫二世让他自杀。
English: Zhao Gao was very scared when he saw the guard holding a weapon and heading towards the palace. He immediately forced Zhao Gao to let him commit suicide.

古文：引玺而佩之，左右百官莫从；上殿，殿欲坏者三。
现代文：然后取过玉玺把它带在自己身上，身边的文武百官无一人跟从；他登上大殿时，大殿有好几次都像要坍塌似的。
English: Then he took the jade gong and carried it on his own body. None of the military and civilian officials around him followed him. When he ascended to the main hall, the main hall seemed to collapse several times.

古文：高自知天弗与，群臣弗许，乃召始皇弟，授之玺。
现代文：赵高自知上天不给予他皇帝之位，群臣也不会答应，就把秦始皇弟弟的弟弟叫来，把玉玺交给了他。
English: Zhao Gao knew that the heavens would not grant him the position of emperor, and that the courtiers would not agree, so he called the younger brother of the younger brother of Qin Shi Huang and gave him the jade scepter.

古文：子婴既位，患之，乃称疾不听事，与宦者韩谈及其子谋杀高。
现代文：子婴即位之后，担心赵高再作乱，就假称有病而不上朝处理政务，与宦官韩谈和他的儿子商量如何杀死赵高。
English: After the enthronement of the infant, fearing that Zhao Gao would again cause chaos, he pretended to be ill and did not go to the North to deal with government affairs, and discussed with the eunuch Han Dan and his son how to kill Zhao Gao.

古文：高上谒，请病，因召入，令韩谈刺杀之，夷其三族。
现代文：赵高前来求见，询问病情，子婴就把他召进皇宫，命令韩谈刺杀了他，诛灭了他的三族。
English: Zhao Gao came to see him and inquire about his condition. The infant summoned him to the imperial palace and ordered Han Dan to assassinate him and exterminate his three clans.

古文：子婴立三月，沛公兵从武关入，至咸阳，群臣百官皆畔，不適。
现代文：子婴即位三个月，刘邦的军队就从武关打了进来，到达咸阳，文武百官都起义叛秦，不抵抗沛公。
English: Three months after the infant was enthroned, Liu Bang's army marched in from Wuguan and arrived in Xianyang. All the civil and military officials rebelled against Qin and did not resist.

古文：子婴与妻子自系其颈以组，降轵道旁。
现代文：子婴和妻子儿女都用丝带系在自己脖子上，到轵道亭旁去投降。
English: The child, his wife and children all tied a ribbon around their necks and went to surrender next to the roadside pavilion.

古文：沛公因以属吏。
现代文：刘邦把他们交给部下官吏看押。
English: Liu Bang put them under the custody of subordinate officials.

古文：项王至而斩之。遂以亡天下。
现代文：项羽到达咸阳后把他们杀死，秦就这样失去了天下。
English: After Xiang Yu arrived in Xianyang, he killed them, and thus Qin lost the whole country.

古文：太史公曰：李斯以闾阎历诸侯，入事秦，因以瑕衅，以辅始皇，卒成帝业，斯为三公，可谓尊用矣。
现代文：太史公说：李斯以一个里巷平民的身份，游历诸侯，入关奉事秦国，抓住机会，辅佐秦始皇，终于完成统一大业。李斯位居三公之职，可以称得上是很受重用了。
English: Taishigong said: Li Si, as a commoner, traveled to various provinces, entered the customs to serve Qin, seized the opportunity to assist Qin Shi Huang, and finally completed the great cause of unification. Li Si is in the position of the three princes, and can be said to be very useful.

古文：斯知六艺之归，不务明政以补主上之缺，持爵禄之重，阿顺苟合，严威酷刑，听高邪说，废適立庶。
现代文：李斯知道儒家《六经》的要旨，却不致力于政治清明，用以弥补皇帝的过失，而是凭仗他显贵的地位，阿谀奉承，随意附合，推行酷刑峻法，听信赵高的邪说，废掉嫡子扶苏而立庶子胡亥。
English: Li Si knew the essence of the Confucian "Six Classics," but he did not devote himself to political clarity to make up for the emperor's mistakes. Instead, he relied on his prominent position, flattered, attached at will, implemented the harsh torture method, listened to the evil sayings of Zhao Gao, and abolished his legitimate son, Fuxu, and established his illegitimate son, Hu Hai.

古文：诸侯已畔，斯乃欲谏争，不亦末乎！
现代文：等到各地已经群起反叛，李斯这才想直言劝谏，这不是太愚蠢了吗！
English: It wasn't until there were rebellions all over the country that Li Si wanted to speak out. Isn't that too stupid?

古文：人皆以斯极忠而被五刑死，察其本，乃与俗议之异。
现代文：人们都认为李斯忠心耿耿，反受五刑而死，但我仔细考察事情的真相，就和世俗的看法有所不同。
English: People think that Li Si was a loyal person, but he was sentenced to five years in prison and died, but when I carefully examined the truth of the matter, it was different from the world's opinion.

古文：不然，斯之功且与周、召列矣。
现代文：否则的话，李斯的功绩真的要和周公，召公相提并论了。
English: Otherwise, Li Si's exploits would really be on a par with Zhou Gong and Zhao Gong.

