古文：李茂贞，本姓宋，名文通，深州博野人。
现代文：李茂贞，本来姓宋，名叫文通，深州博野人。
English: Li Maozhen, originally surnamed Song, named Wentong, was from the wilds of Shenzhou.

古文：祖铎，父端。
现代文：祖父名铎，父亲名端。
English: His grandfather was Naosuke, and his father was Nagata.

古文：唐乾符中，镇州有博野军，宿卫京师，屯于奉天，文通时隶本军为市巡，累迁至队长。
现代文：唐僖宗乾符年间，镇州有博野军，守卫京师长安，屯驻在奉天，文通当时隶属于博野军做市内巡逻，接连升迁为队长。
English: During the reign of Emperor Qianfu of the Tang Dynasty, there was a Bono army in Zhenzhou, guarding the Beijing division of Chang'an, stationed in Mingtian. At that time, Wentsong was subordinate to the Bono army to patrol the city, and was successively promoted to captain.

古文：黄巢犯阙，博野军留于凤翔，时郑畋理兵于岐下，畋遣文通以本军败尚让之众于龙尾坡，以功为神策军指挥使。
现代文：黄巢进犯京城时，博野军留驻在凤翔，这时郑畋领兵在岐下，派文通率领本部在龙尾坡击败尚让的部队，因战功升任神策军指挥使。
English: When Huang Chao attacked Beijing, Bono's army was stationed in Fengxiang. At that time, Zheng Yao was leading the troops in Qishan, and sent Wen Tong to lead the headquarters to defeat Shang Zhan's troops in Longtaipo, and was promoted to the commander of Shensha's army for his war service.

古文：硃玫之乱，唐僖宗再幸兴元，文通扈跸山南，论功第一，迁检校太保、同平章事、洋蓬壁等州节度使，赐姓，名茂贞，僖宗亲为制字曰正臣。
现代文：朱玫叛乱时，唐僖宗再次驾临兴元，文通护驾驻扎在山南，论功数第一，迁升为检校太保、同平常事，洋州、蓬州、壁州节度使，赐姓李，名茂贞，僖宗亲自为他取字叫正臣。
English: When Zhu Mei rebelled, Tang Yizong once again went to Xingyuan, and Wen Tong escorted him and stationed him in Shannan. On the basis of the number of merits, he was promoted to the first. He was promoted to the position of the school inspector, the same as the ordinary thing, the Yangzhou, the Pengzhou, and the Bishuo festival envoy. He was given the surname Li and the name Mao Zhen. Yizong personally took the name Zheng Chen for him.

古文：光启二年，王行瑜杀硃玫于京师，李昌符拥兵于岐下，诏茂贞与陈佩等讨之。
现代文：光启二年，王行瑜在京师杀死朱玫。李昌符领着部队逃到岐下，诏令李茂贞与陈佩等人征讨他。
English: In the second year of Guangqi, Wang Xingyu killed Zhu Mei in Beijing. Li Changfu led the troops to escape to Qishan, and ordered Li Maozhen and Chen Pei to recruit him.

古文：三年，诛昌符，车驾还京，以茂贞为凤翔节度使，加检校太尉、兼待中、陇西郡王。
现代文：三年，诛杀李昌符，圣驾回到京师，以李茂贞任凤翔节度使，加封为检校太尉、兼侍中、陇西郡王。
English: Three years later, after the assassination of Li Changfu, the saint returned to Beijing and appointed Li Maozhen as Fengxiang's regent, with the additional titles of school inspector, attendant, and King of Shaanxi.

古文：大顺二年，观军容使杨复恭得罪，奔山南，与杨守亮据兴元叛，茂贞与王行瑜讨平之。
现代文：大顺二年，观军容使杨复恭犯了罪，逃到山南，与杨守亮据守兴元反叛，李茂贞与王行瑜讨伐平定了他们。
English: In the second year of Dashun, Guanjun Rong made Yang Fuqiong commit a crime, fled to Shannan, and rebelled against Yang Shouliang and Yang Shouliang Xingyuan. Li Maozhen and Wang Xingyu fought and pacified them.

古文：诏以宰相徐彦若镇兴元，茂贞违诏，表其假子继徽为留后，坚请旄钺，昭宗不得已而授之。
现代文：诏令以宰相徐彦若镇守兴元，李茂贞违抗诏令，推荐他的养子李继徽任兴元留后，坚持请求节旄斧钺，昭宗不得已而交给他。
English: Li Maozhen disobeyed the edict and recommended that his adopted son, Li Jihui Ren Xingyuan, stay in the country. He insisted that he be allowed to stay, but Zhaozong had no choice but to hand him over.

古文：自是茂贞恃勋恣横，擅兵窥伺，颇干朝政，始萌问鼎之志矣。
现代文：从此李茂贞自恃功勋放任专横，独揽兵权窥伺朝柄，大肆干预朝政，开始萌生篡位之心。
English: From then on, Li Maozhen arrogantly allowed herself to be awarded for meritorious service, monopolized military power, spied on the imperial family, interfered in imperial politics, and began to harbor a desire to usurp the throne.

古文：既而逐泾原节度使张球、洋州节度使杨守忠、凤州刺史满存，皆夺据其地，奏请子弟为牧伯，朝廷不能制。
现代文：不久赶走泾原节度使张球、洋州节度使杨守忠、凤州刺史满存，都占据了他们的地盘，上奏请求任他的子弟做首领，朝廷不能制止他。
English: Soon after, he drove away Zhang Qiu, Yangshuo, Yang Shuzhong, and Fengzhou, and they all occupied their territory. He requested that his son be appointed as the leader, and the court could not stop him.

古文：大臣奏议言其过者，茂贞即上章论列，辞旨不逊，奸邪者因之附丽，遂成朋党，朝政于是隳焉。
现代文：大臣要是上奏责备他的过错，李茂贞就上奏申辩，文词很不恭敬，奸佞邪恶之人因而依附他，于是结成朋党，朝政因而瓦解。
English: If the minister wrote a report blaming him for his mistakes, Li Maozhen would write a report defending him. The text was very disrespectful, and the traitors and evil people thus clung to him, and thus formed a party of friends, and the government thus collapsed.

古文：昭宗性英俊，不任其逼，欲加讨伐。
现代文：昭宗性情刚毅，受不了他的逼迫，想讨伐他。
English: Zhaozong had a strong will and could not bear his persecution and wanted to fight him.

古文：乾宁初，命宰臣杜让能调发军旅，师未越境，为茂贞所败。
现代文：乾宁初年，命令宰臣杜让能调集出动军队，军队还没越过境内，就被李茂贞击破。
English: In Qianning's first year, he ordered the aide-de-camp Du Jiang to mobilize an army. The army had not yet crossed the territory when it was defeated by Li Maozhen.

古文：茂贞乘胜进屯三桥，京师大震，士庶奔散，天子乃诛中尉西门君遂、李周潼等谢之。
现代文：李茂贞乘胜进军屯驻在三桥，京城震动，兵士百姓奔走逃散，天子于是诛杀中尉西门重遂和李周潼等人向李茂贞道歉。
English: Li Maozhen took advantage of the victory to enter the army and stationed in Sanqiao. The capital was shaken, the soldiers and people ran away and dispersed. Tianzi then killed Lieutenant Ximen Chongsui and Li Zhouqi, and others apologized to Li Maozhen.

古文：茂贞严兵不解，势将指阙，抗言让能之罪，诛之方罢。
现代文：李茂贞仍拥重兵不退，势将直指京城，大肆宣扬杜让能的罪过，直到杀了他才罢休。
English: Li Maozhen still holds a heavy army and does not retreat. She will march straight to the capital and loudly proclaim the crime of Dujaneng. She will not stop until she has killed him.

古文：及韦昭度、李谿为相，茂贞听崔昭纬之邪说，复沮其事，表昭度等无相业，不可置之台司，恐乱天下。
现代文：到韦昭度、李溪做宰相时，李茂贞听信崔昭纬的邪说，又诋毁韦昭度、李溪，上表说韦昭度等没有做宰相的功业，不可担任相位，不然恐怕乱了天下。
English: When Wei Zhaodu and Li Xi became the prime ministers, Li Maozhen listened to the evil sayings of Cui Zhaowei and slandered Wei Zhaodu and Li Xi. The above table said that Wei Zhaodu and others did not do the work of the prime minister and could not hold the position, otherwise I am afraid the world would be in chaos.

古文：诏报曰： 军旅之事，吾则与籓臣图之，朝廷命相，出自朕怀。 
现代文：诏令回答说： 军队的事情，我就交给你管理，朝廷任命宰相，就由我决定。 
English: The Emperor replied, "I will leave the management of the army to you, and the appointment of the prime minister by the imperial court is up to me.

古文：又请授王珙河中节度使，诏报曰： 太原表先至，已许王珂，不可追改。 
现代文：李茂贞又请求让王珙担任河中节度使，诏令回报说 ：太原奏表先到，已批准了王珂，不能追改。 
English: Li Maozhen also requested that Wang Qian be appointed as the envoy to the Mid-Hebei Festival. The imperial edict replied: Taiyuan's report arrived first, Wang Ke has approved it, and it cannot be changed.

古文：乾宁二年五月，茂贞与王行瑜、韩建称兵入觐，京师震恐，天子御楼待之，抗表请杀宰相韦昭度、李谿以谢天下，移王珙于河中。
现代文：乾宁二年五月，李茂贞与王行瑜、韩建领兵到京师朝拜天子，京师震惊，天子在御楼接待他们，李茂贞强硬上表请求诛杀韦昭度、李溪以告谢天下，调王珙到河中。
English: In May of the second year of Qianning, Li Maozhen, Wang Xingyu, and Han Jian led the soldiers to the Beijing division to worship the heavenly son. The Beijing division was shocked. The heavenly son received them in the imperial palace. Li Maozhen made a strong request to kill Wei Zhaodu and Li Xi to thank the world, and transferred Wang Xi to the river.

古文：既还，留其假子继鹏宿卫，即阎珪也。
现代文：回去时，留下他的养子李继鹏守卫京城。
English: When he returned, he left his adopted son, Li Jipeng, to guard the capital.

古文：时后唐武皇上表，请讨三镇以宁关辅。
现代文：这时后唐武皇上表，请求讨伐三镇以安定京城周围。
English: At this time, Emperor Wu of the Tang Dynasty made a request to attack three towns in order to stabilize the area around the capital.

古文：是岁七月，太原之师至河中，继鹏与中尉景宣之子继晟迫车驾幸凤翔，昭宗曰： 太原军未至，銮舆不可辄动，朕与诸王固守大内，卿等安辑京师，如太原实至，吾可以方略制之。 
现代文：这年七月，武皇的太原部队到达河中，李继鹏与中尉李景宣的儿子李继晟胁迫圣驾到凤翔，昭宗说： 太原军队未到，御驾不可轻动，我与各王固守朝廷，您们等人安定京师；如果太原部队真的来到，我可以用计谋对付他们。 
English: In July of that year, Emperor Wu's Taiyuan troops arrived in the middle of the river. Li Jipeng and Lieutenant Li Jingxuan's son, Li Jizhe, coerced the saint to drive to Fengxiang. Zhaozong said: "Before the Taiyuan army arrives, you must not drive lightly. I and the kings will firmly defend the imperial court. You wait for the stabilization of the Beijing division. If the Taiyuan troops really come, I can use strategies to deal with them."

古文：继鹏与景宣、中尉骆全权因燔烧东市，中夜大噪。
现代文：李继鹏与李景宣、中尉骆全馞便焚烧东边市区，半夜喧哗叫嚷。
English: Li Jipeng, Li Jingxuan and Lieutenant Luo Quanzhang set fire to the eastern part of the city, shouting loudly in the middle of the night.

古文：昭宗登承天门楼避乱，令捧日都将李云守楼下，继鹏率众攻云。
现代文：昭宗登上承天门楼避乱，命捧日都将李云守卫楼下，李继鹏带人攻击李云。
English: Zhaozong boarded the Chengdu Gate Tower to escape the turmoil. Li Yun was guarded downstairs by Li Jipeng and his men.

古文：昭宗凭轩慰谕，继鹏弯弧大呼，矢拂御衣，中楼桷。
现代文：昭宗靠着楼上栏杆抚慰劝导，李继鹏拉开弓箭大叫，一箭射过来拂过昭宗的衣服，射中楼上的椽子。
English: Zhaozong leaned on the upstairs railing to soothe and advise him. Li Jipeng pulled out his bow and arrow and shouted. An arrow shot past Zhaozong's clothes and hit the upstairs rafters.

古文：侍臣掖昭宗下楼还宫，继鹏即纵火攻宫门。
现代文：侍臣搀扶着昭宗下楼回宫，李继鹏就放火攻击宫门。
English: Li Jipeng set fire to the palace gate after Li Jipeng and his attendants helped Shao Zong down the stairs to return to the palace.

古文：昭宗诏诸王谋其所向，李云奏曰： 事急矣，请且幸臣营。 
现代文：昭宗召集各王商量出路，李云上奏说： 事情危急了，请暂时到我帐营中避避。 
English: Zhaozong called the kings together to discuss a way out, and Li Yun reported: "The situation is critical. Please take refuge in my tent for the time being.

古文：云乃与扈跸都将李君庆卫昭宗出启夏门，驻华严寺。
现代文：李云便与扈跸都将李君庆保护昭宗出了启夏门，停驻华严寺。
English: Li Yun and Zou both took Li Junqing to protect Zhaozong out of the Qixia Gate and stopped at Huayan Temple.

古文：晡晚，出幸南山之莎城，驻于石门山之佛寺。
现代文：到天黑，逃到南山的莎城，住在石门山上的佛寺中。
English: By nightfall, they had fled to Shacheng on Nanshan Mountain and were living in a Buddhist temple on Shimen Mountain.

古文：是月，武皇至渭北，遣副使王瑰奉表行在，昭宗以武皇为行营都统，进讨邠、岐。
现代文：这一月，武皇到达渭水北岸，派副使王瑰奉表到天子暂驻的地方，昭宗任武皇为行营都统，进攻讨伐州、岐下。
English: In this month, Emperor Wu arrived at the northern shore of Surabaya, and sent the deputy envoy Wang Jifong to the place where the emperor was temporarily stationed. Emperor Wu was appointed by Emperor Zhaozong to camp in Totou, and attacked and besieged Zhoushou and Qishita.

古文：茂贞惧，斩继鹏、继晟，上表待罪，昭宗原之，武皇曰： 不诛茂贞，关辅无由宁谧。 
现代文：李茂贞害怕了，斩了李继鹏、李继晟，上表请求处罚，昭宗原谅了他，武皇说 ：不杀了李茂贞，京城四周不得安宁。 
English: Li Maozhen got scared, beheaded Li Jipeng and Li Jizhe, and petitioned for punishment. Zhaozong pardoned him. Emperor Wu said, "If you don't kill Li Maozhen, there will be no peace around the capital."

古文：时附茂贞者奏云： 若太原尽殄邠、岐，必入关辅，京师忧未艾也。 
现代文：这时依附李茂贞的人上奏说 ：要是太原军队全部杀尽州、岐下部队，他们必将进入京城四周，京城的患难将没有停止之日。 
English: At this time, Li Maozhen's followers made a report, saying, "If the Taiyuan army were to kill all the troops in Shuzhou and Qishan, they would surely enter the capital's perimeter, and there would be no end to the city's suffering."

古文：乃诏武皇与茂贞和。
现代文：于是诏令武皇与李茂贞和解。
English: Emperor Wu then issued a decree to reconcile with Li Maozhen.

古文：及行瑜诛，武皇班师，茂贞怨望骄横如故。
现代文：到王行瑜被杀，武皇回师，李茂贞怨恨骄横又像以前一样。
English: By the time Wang Xingyu was killed, Emperor Wu had returned to his teacher, and Li Maozhen was still as resentful and arrogant as before.

古文：明年五月，制授茂贞东川节度使。
现代文：第二年五月，诏令任李茂贞为东川节度使。
English: In May of the following year, the imperial edict appointed Li Maozhen as the Dongchuan Festival envoy.

古文：仍命通王、覃王治禁军于阙下，如茂贞违诏，即讨之。
现代文：又令通王、覃王在京城统领禁军，如果李茂贞违抗诏令，就讨伐他。
English: He also ordered King Tong and King Gong to lead the forbidden army in the capital, and if Li Maozhen disobeyed the edict, they would fight him.

古文：茂贞惧，将赴镇。
现代文：李茂贞害怕，准备赴任。
English: Li Maozhen was afraid and prepared to take office.

古文：王师至兴平，夜自惊溃，茂贞因出乘之，官军大败。
现代文：王室军队到兴平时，夜里自己受惊溃散，李茂贞趁机攻击他们，王室军队大败。
English: When the royal army arrived at Xingping, Li Maozhen took the opportunity to attack them, and the royal army was defeated.

古文：车驾仓猝出幸华州，茂贞之众因犯京师，焚烧宫阙，大掠坊市而去，自此长安大内尽为丘墟矣。
现代文：天子车驾匆忙逃到华州，李茂贞部队因而进犯京师，焚烧宫殿，大肆抢劫街市后撤走，从此长安宫庭全变成废墟了。
English: Tianzi drove a car and hurriedly fled to Huazhou. As a result, Li Maozhen's troops attacked the Beijing Division, burned the palace, and looted the streets and markets before withdrawing. From then on, the Chang'an courtyard was completely in ruins.

古文：四年，昭宗复命宰臣孙偓统军进讨，韩建谏止，令茂贞上章请雪。
现代文：四年，昭宗又命宰臣孙翭领军进讨，韩建劝谏而止，命李茂贞上表章洗刷罪责。
English: In the fourth year, Zhaozong also ordered his vassal Sun Yat-sen to lead the army to investigate, while Han Jian advised him to stop, and ordered Li Maozhen to wear a badge to clear his guilt.

古文：光化中，加茂贞尚书令、岐王，令其子继筠以兵宿卫。
现代文：光化年间，加封李茂贞为尚书令、岐王，令他儿子李继筠领兵守卫京师。
English: During the Gwanghwa era, Li Maozhen was given the additional titles of Shang Shuling (尚書令) and Qi Wang (岐王), and his son, Li Jizhe (李继), was made the leader of the soldiers guarding the capital.

古文：天复元年十月，梁祖攻同、华，势逼京师。
现代文：天复元年十月，后梁太祖进攻同州、华州，势逼京城。
English: In October of the first year of Tianfu, Houliang Taizu attacked Tongzhou and Huazhou, forcing the capital.

古文：十一月六日，继筠与中尉韩全诲劫昭宗幸凤翔，茂贞遂与全诲矫诏征兵天下，将讨梁祖。
现代文：十一月六日，李继筠与中尉韩全诲将昭宗劫持到凤翔，李茂贞就与韩全诲伪造诏令向天下征兵，准备讨伐梁太祖。
English: On November 6, Li Jizhen and his lieutenant Han Quanlian abducted Zhaozong to Fengxiang. Li Maozhen and Han Quanlian forged an edict to recruit soldiers from all over the world and prepared to fight Liang Taizu.

古文：宰相崔允召梁祖引四镇之兵屯岐下，重沟复垒围守。
现代文：宰相崔裔召梁太祖领四镇的兵力驻扎在岐下，层层战壕重重堡垒围住李茂贞。
English: The troops of the four towns led by Liang Taizu, who was summoned by Prime Minister Cui Rong, were stationed in Qishan. Trench after trench and fortress after fortress surrounded Li Maozhen.

古文：三年，茂贞山南诸州尽为王建所陷，泾、原、秦、陇、邠、鄜、延、夏皆降于汴。
现代文：三年，李茂贞的山南各州全被王建攻陷，泾、原、秦、陇？延、夏等州都投降了汴梁。
English: In three years, all of Li Maozhen's provinces in Shannan were conquered by Wang Jian, and the provinces of Min, Yuan, Qin, Suiyan, and Xia all surrendered to Yan Liang.

古文：大军之后，府库空竭，彦琦请使甘州以通回鹘，往复二载，美玉、名马相继而至，所获万计，茂贞赖之。及梁祖建号，茂贞与王建会兵于太原，志图兴复，竟无成功。
现代文：李茂贞独守孤城，里外援助断绝，于是恭送天子车驾回京，向汴梁求和，立即砍下韩全诲等二十人的头送给梁太祖。从此兵力耗尽，一蹶不振，又怕梁太祖再次讨伐他，就请求辞退中书令一职，昭宗同意了。到梁太祖建立年号，李茂贞与王建在太原会合兵力，想恢复势力，后来终未成功。
English: Li Maozhen was left to defend the isolated city on his own, without any foreign aid, so he sent a messenger car back to Beijing to sue for peace with Yan Liang. He immediately cut off the heads of twenty people, including Han Quanzhang, and sent them to Liang Taizu. From then on, his forces were exhausted, and he was afraid that Liang Taizu would attack him again, so he asked to resign from the post of Clerk of the Privy Council. Zhaozong agreed. In the year of Liang Taizu's founding, Li Maozhen and Wang Jian joined forces in Taiyuan to restore their power, but they were ultimately unsuccessful.

古文：茂贞疆土危蹙，不遂僭窃之志，但开岐王府，署天官，目妻为皇后，鸣鞘掌扇，宣词令，一如王者之制，然尚行昭宗之正朔焉。
现代文：李茂贞占据的地方濒危狭小，不能实现篡权称帝的心愿，只建起岐王府，设置天官官署，将妻子看作皇后，甩响鞭梢摇动羽扇，宣读辞令，全如君王的礼仪，但还是遵守昭宗的年号纪元。
English: The place occupied by Li Maozhen was too small and endangered, and his wish to usurp power and become emperor could not be realized. He only built the Qi royal palace, set up the heavenly official office, regarded his wife as the queen, cracked the whip, shook the feather fan, and read out the speech, all of which were like the royal etiquette, but still adhered to the year and era of Zhaozong.

古文：茂贞鼠形，多智数，军旅之事，一经耳目，无忘之者。
现代文：李茂贞形如老鼠，颇多机智谋略，用兵打仗的事，一经耳闻眼见，就不会忘记。
English: Li Maozhen is shaped like a mouse, has a lot of wit and strategy, and will not forget the matter of using soldiers to fight once he hears and sees it.

古文：性至宽，有部将符昭者，人或告其谋变，茂贞亲至其家，去其爪牙，熟寝经宿而还。
现代文：性格极宽宏，有个叫符道昭的部下将领，有人诬告他谋反，李茂贞亲自到符道昭家里，撤掉自己的卫士，熟睡了一夜而回。
English: He had an extremely broad-minded personality. There was a subordinate general named Fu Daozhao. Someone falsely accused him of plotting a rebellion. Li Maozhen personally went to Fu Daozhao's home, removed his guards, and slept soundly for one night.

古文：军士有斗而诉者，茂贞曰： 吃令公一碗不托，与尔和解。 
现代文：军士中有相斗而投诉的，李茂贞说： 吃你们令公一碗饣乇，与你们和解。 
English: Li Maozhen said to the sergeants who complained about fighting with each other, "Eat a bowl of bean curd and make peace with each other."

古文：遂致上下服之。
现代文：遂使上下都服他。
English: So he made everyone obey him.

古文：尤善事母，母终，茂贞哀毁几灭性，闻者嘉之。
现代文：特别尽心侍奉他母亲，母亲去世，李茂贞哀痛伤身几乎死掉，听到的人都赞扬他。
English: He especially devoted himself to serving his mother. When his mother passed away, Li Maozhen was so grief-stricken that he almost died. Everyone who heard him praised him.

古文：但御军整众，都无纪律，当食则造庖厨，往往席地而坐，内外持管钥者，亦呼为司空太保，与夫细柳、大树之威名，盖相远矣。
现代文：但统率军队治理兵士，完全没有纪律，要吃饭就往厨房跑，常常坐在地上，里外管钥匙的人，也叫作司空太保，与那周亚夫细柳营、大树将军冯异的威名，差得远了。
English: However, he was completely undisciplined in leading the army and managing the soldiers. When he wanted to eat, he would run to the kitchen and often sat on the floor. The person who was in charge of the keys inside and outside was also called the deputy airmaster. It was a far cry from the prestige of that Zhou Yafu Xiliu camp and the great tree general Feng Yi.

古文：及庄宗平梁，茂贞自为季父，以书贺之。
现代文：到后唐庄宗灭了后梁时，李茂贞自称叔父，写信祝贺他。
English: When Emperor Tangzhuangzong finally killed Houliang, Li Maozhen claimed to be his uncle and wrote to congratulate him.

古文：及闻庄宗入洛，惧不自安，方上表称臣，寻遣其子继严来朝，诏茂贞仍旧官，进封秦王，所赐诏敕不名。
现代文：当听说庄宗进了洛阳，又害怕不安，才上表称臣，接着派他儿子李继日严朝拜，庄宗诏令李茂贞仍任原官，进封为秦王，所赐诏令不称他名字。
English: When he heard that Zhuangzong had entered Luoyang, he was afraid and uneasy, and only then did he publicly declare himself a minister. He then sent his son Li to pay strict homage the next day. Zhuangzong issued a decree that Li Maozhen should remain in his original position and be crowned as the King of Qin. The issued decree did not mention his name.

古文：又以茂贞宿望耆老，特加优礼。
现代文：又因李茂贞是望重故老，特别加以优待礼遇。
English: In addition, because Li Maozhen is a respected veteran, she was given special preferential treatment.

古文：及疾笃，遣中使遣医药问讯。
现代文：到他病重时，派宫中使者赐给医药，致以问候。
English: When he was gravely ill, he sent an emissary from the palace to give him medicine and greetings.

古文：同光二年夏四月薨，年六十九。
现代文：同光二年夏四月去世，年六十九岁。
English: He died in April of the same year, at the age of 69.

古文：谥曰忠敬。
现代文：谥号叫忠敬。
English: His nickname is Zhongjing.

