古文：武帝时，西域内属，有三十六国。汉为置使者、校尉领护之。宣帝改曰都护。
现代文：武帝时，西域内附为属地，有三十六个国家，汉朝为西域设置使者、校尉来统领保护西域，宣帝改叫都护。
English: At the time of Emperor Wu, the western region was annexed as a dependent territory, with thirty-six countries. The Han Dynasty set up emissaries and lieutenants for the western region to command and protect the western region. Emperor Xuan was called the protector of the capital.

古文：元帝又置戊己二校尉，屯田于车师前王庭。
现代文：元帝又设置戊己二校尉，在车师前王庭垦种荒地。
English: Emperor Yuan also set up a second lieutenant, Wuji, to cultivate wasteland in the former Wangting.

古文：哀、平间，自相分割，为五十五国。
现代文：哀帝、平帝时期，西域自己互相分裂为五十五个国家。
English: During the reigns of Emperor Ai and Emperor Ping, the Western Regions were divided into 55 countries.

古文：王莽篡位，贬易侯王，由是西域怨叛，与中国遂绝，并复役属匈奴。
现代文：王莽篡位后，贬抑和改换侯王，自此西域埋怨反叛，与中原大国断绝关系，而且再次从属匈奴，为其服役。
English: After Wang Mang usurped the throne, he dethroned and replaced Hou Wang, and since then, the Western Regions have complained and rebelled, severed relations with the Central Plains countries, and once again subordinated to the Xiongnu and served them.

古文：匈奴敛税重刻，诸国不堪命，建武中，皆遣使求内属，愿请都护。
现代文：匈奴赋税繁重严刻，各国没法忍受，到建武年间，他们都派使者要求归属汉朝，情愿请派都护。
English: The Huns imposed heavy and strict taxes, which the countries could not bear. By the Jianwu era, they had all sent envoys to demand to belong to the Han Dynasty, and were willing to ask for the protection of the capital.

古文：光武以天下初定，未遑外事，竟不许之。
现代文：光武因为天下刚刚平定，没时间处理境外的事情，最终没有答应。
English: Since the country had just been pacified, Guangwu did not have time to deal with matters outside the country, and ultimately did not agree.

古文：会匈奴衰弱，莎车王贤诛灭诸国。贤死之后，遂更相攻伐。小宛、精绝、戎庐、且末为鄯善所并。
现代文：正好匈奴衰败，莎车王贤讨伐减掉各国，莎车王贤死后，他们就互相进攻，小宛、精绝、戎庐、且末为鄯善所吞并。
English: Just as the Xiongnu fell into decline, Zhaozhe Wangxian's crusade reduced various countries. After Zhaozhe Wangxian's death, they attacked each other, Xiaowan, Jingzhu, Rongzhu, and finally were annexed by Shanshan.

古文：渠勒、皮山为于窴所统，悉有其地。
现代文：渠勒、皮山被于宾统管，土地全部被于宾占有。
English: Qianle and Pishan were under the unified management of Yu Bin, and all the land was occupied by Yu Bin.

古文：郁立、单桓、孤胡、乌贪訾离为车师所灭。
现代文：郁立、单桓、孤胡、乌贪訾离为车师所减。
English: Yu Li, Shan Kuan, Gu Gu, and Wu Qian were eliminated by the coaches.

古文：后其国并复立。
现代文：以后这些国家又都恢复。
English: All of these countries have since recovered.

古文：永平中，北虏乃胁诸国共寇河西郡县，城门昼闭。
现代文：永乎年间，北部敌虏于是胁迫各国一同侵犯河西各郡县，大白天城门关闭。
English: For a long time, the northern enemy then coerced all countries to jointly invade the counties and counties in Hexi, and the city gate was closed in broad daylight.

古文：十六年，明帝乃命将帅北征匈奴，取伊吾卢地，置宜禾都尉以屯田，遂通西域，于窴诸国皆遣子入侍。
现代文：十六年，明帝于是任命将帅，北征匈奴，占领了伊吾卢地，设立宜禾都尉来垦种荒地，终于打通了西域。于实各国都派儿子到朝中侍奉皇帝。
English: Sixteen years later, Emperor Ming then appointed a general to lead the Northern Expedition against the Xiongnu, occupied the Iguru region, set up the Yihe captain to cultivate the wasteland, and finally opened up the western region. In fact, all countries sent their sons to the Middle Kingdom to serve the emperor.

古文：西域自绝六十五载，乃复通焉。
现代文：西域自己同中央大国中断往来有六十五年，这才重新来往。
English: For sixty-five years, the Western Regions had suspended their contacts with the Central Powers, and only then did they resume them.

古文：明年，始置都护、戊己校尉。
现代文：第二年，开始设立都护和戊己校尉。
English: In the following year, the posts of Metropolitan Protector and Captain Tomoki were established.

古文：及明帝崩，焉耆、龟兹攻没都护陈睦，悉覆其众，匈奴、车师围戊己校尉。
现代文：到明帝去世，焉耆、龟兹进攻杀害了都护陈睦，陈睦的人马全部覆灭，匈奴、车师包围了戊己校尉。
English: When Emperor Ming died, Yan Xun and Gui Zi attacked and killed the tutelary of the capital, Chen Mugu. Chen Mugu's men and horses were all destroyed, and the Xiongnu and the coachmen surrounded Captain Wu Ji.

古文：建初元年春，酒泉太守段彭大破车师于交河城。章帝不欲疲敝中国以事夷狄，乃迎还戊己校尉，不复遣都护。
现代文：建初元年春天，酒泉太守段彭在交河城大败车师军队，章帝不愿意为了对付夷狄而使中原困苦穷乏，就接回戊己校尉，不再派都护。
English: In the spring of the first year of the first century, Jiuquan's governor Duan Peng defeated the army of the chariot division in Jiaohe City. Emperor Zhang did not want to make the Central Plains poor and impoverished in order to deal with the Yidi, so he took back Captain Wu Ji and no longer sent the capital guard.

古文：二年，复罢屯田伊吾，匈奴因遣兵守伊吾地。
现代文：二年，又撤销在伊吾的屯田，匈奴趁机派兵把守伊昔的地盘。
English: Two years later, the military garrison in Igo was abolished, and the Xiongnu took the opportunity to send soldiers to guard Igo's former territory.

古文：时军司马班超留于窴，绥集诸国。
现代文：当时车司马班超留在于贾，安抚集聚西域各国。
English: At that time, the chauffeur Ma Ban Chao stayed in Jia to appease the countries in the western region.

古文：和帝永元元年，大将军窦宪大破匈奴。
现代文：和帝永元元年，大将军宝宪大败匈拯。
English: In the first year of the reign of Emperor Yongle, the great general Bao Xian was defeated by the Hungarians.

古文：二年，宪因遣副校尉阎槃将二千余骑掩击伊吾，破之。
现代文：二年，宣童因此派副校尉幽圭率领两千多骑兵袭击伊吾，打败了伊吾。
English: In the second year, Xuan Tong therefore sent Vice-Colonel Yu Gui to lead more than two thousand cavalry to attack Igu, defeating Igu.

古文：三年，班超遂定西域，因以超为都护，居龟兹。
现代文：三年，班超终于平定酉越，朝廷因此任命班超为都护，驻龟兹。
English: Three years later, Banchao finally pacified Yue Yue, and the imperial court therefore appointed Banchao to be the protector of the capital, stationed in Kuez.

古文：复置戊己校尉，领兵五百人，居车师前部高昌壁。又置戊部候，居车师后部候城，相去五百里。
现代文：又设置戊己校尉，带领五百士兵，住在车师前部高昌壁，又设置戊部候吏，位于车师后部候城，两地相距五百里。
English: It also set up a Wu Ji lieutenant, leading five hundred soldiers, living in Gaochangbi in the front of the division, and set up a Wu Department waiting officer, located in the rear of the division, five hundred miles apart.

古文：六年，班超复击破焉耆，于是五十余国悉纳质内属。
现代文：六年，班超又击败焉耆，这时候五十多个国家都送来人质，归属汉朝。
English: Six years later, Banchao defeated Yan again, and at this time, more than 50 countries sent hostages, belonging to the Han Dynasty.

古文：其条支、安息诸国至于海濒四万里外，皆重译贡献。
现代文：条支、安息各国一直到四万里以外的海边国家，都通过辗转翻译前来进贡物品。
English: Tribute goods came from as far away as 40,000 miles away from the coastal countries, including the countries of the Straits and Saba.

古文：九年，班超遣掾甘英穷临西海而还。
现代文：九年，班超派佐吏甘英一直到达最西边的大海才回来。
English: In the ninth year, Banchao sent Saori Kanei all the way to the westernmost sea before returning.

古文：皆前世所不至，《山经》所未详，莫不备其风土，传其珍怪焉。
现代文：这些都是前代人没有到过，《山经》没有详细记载的地方，他们详细了解了那裹的风俗习惯和地理环境，运来当地的珍奇物品。
English: These were places that previous generations had never been to and were not recorded in detail in the Sanjing. They learned in detail about the customs and geographical environment there and brought back local rare items.

古文：于是远国蒙奇、兜勒皆来归服，遣使贡献。
现代文：这样，相距很远的国家蒙奇、兜勒都派人前来归顺，派来使者贡献物品。
English: In this way, countries as far apart as Mengqi and Dule all sent people to come to submit, and sent emissaries to contribute goods.

古文：及孝和晏驾，西域背畔。
现代文：到孝和帝逝世时，西域背叛。
English: By the time of Emperor Xiaowa's death, the Western Regions had rebelled.

古文：安帝永初元年，频攻围都护任尚、段禧等，朝廷以其险远，难相应赴，诏罢都护。
现代文：安帝永初元年，西域多次包围都护任尚、段禧等人，朝廷因为西域艰险遥远，难以接应和赶赴那裹，下韶书撤去都护。
English: At the beginning of the first year of Andi Yong, the western region was repeatedly besieged by the capital guards such as Ren Shang and Duan Xi. Because the western region was far away and difficult, it was difficult for the imperial court to respond and rush there. Therefore, the capital guards were withdrawn at the last minute.

古文：自此遂弃西域。
现代文：白此就放弃了西域。
English: For this reason, they gave up the western region.

古文：北匈奴即复收属诸国，共为边寇十余岁。
现代文：北匈奴立刻又收复统管西域各国，联合侵犯边境有十多年。
English: The Northern Xiongnu immediately regained control of the countries in the western region, and jointly violated the border for more than ten years.

古文：敦煌太守曹宗患其暴害，元初六年，乃上遣行长史索班，将千余人屯依吾，以招抚之。于是车师前王及鄯善王来降。
现代文：敦煌太守曹宗担心他们的凶暴祸害，在元初六年，就上书请求派行长史索班率领一千多人驻守伊吾来招降安抚西域，这样，车师前王和鄯善王前来投降。
English: Cao Zong, the governor of Dunhuang, was worried about their ferocious scourge. In the first six years of the Yuan Dynasty, he sent a letter requesting the governor Shi Soban to lead more than a thousand people to stay in Igu to recruit and pacify the western region. In this way, the former king and the good king came to surrender.

古文：数月，北匈奴复率车师后部王共攻没班等，遂击走其前王。
现代文：几个月后，北匈奴又率领车师后部王一起进攻杀害了索班等人，接着打跑了车师前王。
English: A few months later, the Northern Xiongnu, led by the driver Wang Houbu, attacked and killed Soban and others, and then ran away with the driver Wang Qian.

古文：鄯善逼急，求救于曹宗。宗因此请出兵击匈奴，报索班之耻，复欲进取西域。
现代文：鄯善被逼急了，向曹宗求救，曹宗因此请求出兵攻打匈奴，替索班报仇，又想进兵夺取西域。
English: Hun Sen was forced into a desperate situation and appealed to Cao Zong for help. As a result, Cao Zong requested to send troops to attack the Xiongnu, take revenge for Soban, and also wanted to enter the army to seize the western region.

古文：邓太后不许，但令置护西域副校尉，居敦煌，复部营兵三百人，羁縻而已。
现代文：邓太后不同意，祇是下令设置护西域副校尉，住在敦煌，另外部署了三百士兵，牵制西域而已。
English: Empress Dowager Deng did not agree, but ordered the establishment of a deputy lieutenant to guard the western region, living in Dunhuang, and deployed another three hundred soldiers to contain the western region.

古文：其后北虏连与车师入寇河西，朝廷不能禁，议者因欲闭玉门、阳关，以绝其患。
现代文：在这之后北部敌虏同车师连续入侵河西，朝廷没法制止。有人提议想关闭玉门关、阳关，以切断匈奴的为害。
English: After this, the northern invaders and their drivers invaded Hexi in succession, and the imperial court was unable to stop them. It was proposed to close Yumen Pass and Yang Pass to cut off the Xiongnu.

古文：延光二年，敦煌太守张珰上书陈三策，以为 北虏呼衍王常展转蒲类、秦海之间，专制西域，共为寇抄。
现代文：延光二年，敦煌太守张瑺上书提出三条计策，认为 北部敌虏呼衍王经常在蒲类和秦海之间辗转活动，一心控制西域，一起入侵和抄掠边境。
English: In the 2nd year of Yan Guang, Zhang Xuan, the governor of Dunhuang, put forward three strategies in a letter, saying that the northern enemy Huyan Wang often moved between Putuo and the Qin Sea, concentrating on controlling the western region and invading and plundering the border.

古文：今以酒泉属国吏士二千余人集昆仑塞，先击呼衍王，绝其根本，因发鄯善兵五千人胁车师后部，此上计也。
现代文：现在将酒泉属国的二千多将士在昆仑塞集结，先进攻呼衍王，从根上斩断，接着征调鄯善的五千兵力威胁车师后部，这是上策。
English: Now more than two thousand soldiers of Jiuquan's vassal state are assembled in Kunlun, and the best strategy is to attack and cut off Yan Wang from the root, and then recruit and transfer the five thousand troops of Shanshan to threaten the rear of the car division.

古文：若不能出兵，可置军司马，将士五百人，四郡供其梨牛、谷食，出据柳中，此中计也。
现代文：如果不能出兵，可以设置军司马和派五百将士，由四个郡供给他们耕牛、粮食，让他们出兵占领柳中，这是中策。
English: If it is not possible to send troops, it is possible to set up a military commander and send five hundred soldiers, and four counties will provide them with cattle and grain, so that they can send troops to occupy Liuzhong. This is the middle strategy.

古文：如又不能，则宜弃交河城，收鄯善等悉使入塞，此下计也。 
现代文：如果还不能做到，那么最好放弃交河城，收聚鄯善等国的人，让他们全部进入边关，这是下策。 
English: If this is still not possible, then it would be best to give up Jiahe City, gather people from other countries such as Hunan, and let them all enter the border. This is the next step.

古文：朝廷下其议。
现代文：朝廷将他的意见交给大臣讨论。
English: The court referred his opinion to the minister for discussion.

古文：尚书陈忠上疏曰：臣闻八蛮之寇，莫甚北虏。
现代文：尚书陈忠上书说： 臣听说八方的蛮人入侵，这时敌虏更厉害的。
English: Shangshu Chen Zhong wrote: The minister heard that barbarians from eight directions had invaded, and this time the enemy was more powerful.

古文：汉兴，高祖窘平城之围，太宗屈供奉之耻。
现代文：汉兴起以后，高祖在平城受窘被围，太宗有屈身供奉匈奴的耻辱。
English: After the rise of the Han Dynasty, Gaozu was embarrassed and besieged in Pingcheng, and Taizong had the shame of bowing down to worship the Xiongnu.

古文：故孝武愤怒，深惟久长之计，命遣虎臣，浮河绝漠，穷破虏庭。
现代文：所以孝武帝心怀愤怒，深刻考虑长久的计策，下令派威武的大臣，渡过黄河，穿过沙漠，一直打到敌人的王庭。
English: Therefore, Emperor Xiaowu, with anger in his heart, deeply considering the long-term strategy, ordered to send powerful ministers to cross the Yellow River, cross the desert, and fight all the way to the enemy's royal court.

古文：当斯之役，黔首陨于狼望之北，财币縻于卢山之壑，府库单竭，杼柚空虚，算至舟车，赀及六畜。
现代文：面临这样的战役，很多百姓死在狼望山的北面，财富金钱都填进了卢山的沟壑，府库裹空虚罄尽，织布机上也空无一物，算赋算到了船只和车子，抽税抽到了六畜。
English: Faced with such a battle, many people died on the north side of Wolfang Mountain, wealth and money filled the ravines of Lushan Mountain, the treasury was empty, and there was nothing on the loom, including ships and cars, and taxes were levied on six animals.

古文：夫岂不怀，虑久故也。
现代文：难道武帝没有考虑？原因是他作长远的考虑。
English: Didn't Emperor Wu think about it? The reason is that he took a long-term view.

古文：遂开河西四郡，以隔绝南羌，收三十六国，断匈奴右臂。
现代文：终于开辟了河西的四个郡，隔开了南边的羌人，收服了三十六个国家，斩断了匈奴的右胳膊。
English: He finally opened up the four counties in the west of the river, separated the Xiongnu people in the south, conquered thirty-six countries, and cut off the right arm of the Xiongnu.

古文：是以单于孤特，鼠窜远藏。
现代文：所以单于被孤立，抱头鼠窜，逃往远方躲藏。
English: So he was left alone, put his head in his hands and ran away to hide.

古文：至于宣、元之世，遂备蕃臣，关徼不闭，羽檄不行。
现代文：到了宣帝、元帝时期，西域终于成为藩国臣下，边关不用关闭，不用再传送紧急的军事文书。
English: By the time of Emperor Xuan and Emperor Yuan, the western region finally became a vassal state of the domain. The border did not have to be closed, and there was no need to send urgent military documents.

古文：由此察之，戎狄可以威服，难以化狎。
现代文：由此来看，戎狄可以用武力制服，很难通过教化使其亲近。
English: From this point of view, it is possible to subdue the jongdee by force, but it is difficult to make it familiar through indoctrination.

古文：西域内附日久，区区东望扣关者数矣，此其不乐匈奴慕汉之效也。
现代文：西域归顺朝廷时间已久，真心向东企望扣敲边关请求归附有许多次了，这是他们不喜欢匈奴而仰慕汉的明证。
English: It has been a long time since the Western Regions submitted to the imperial court, and they have sincerely appealed to the Eastern Enterprises for annexation many times. This is clear evidence that they do not like the Xiongnu but admire the Han.

古文：今北虏已破车师，势必南攻鄯善，弃而不救，则诸国从矣。
现代文：现在北部的敌虏已经击败车师，势必向南进攻鄯善，丢下鄯善而不去援救，那么这些国家都顺从匈奴了。
English: Now that the enemy in the north has defeated the Chariot Division, it is bound to attack Shanshan in the south, abandon Shanshan and not go to the rescue, then all these countries will obey the Hun.

古文：若然，则虏财贿益增，胆势益殖，威临南羌，与之交连。如此，河西四郡危矣。
现代文：要是这样的话，敌虏的财货就会愈益增多，胆量和实力也愈益增大，他们用武力抵临南羌，同南羌勾结联合，这样的话，河西的四郡就危险了。
English: If this is the case, the wealth and goods of the enemy will increase more and more, and their courage and strength will also increase more and more. They will use force to resist Nanlu and collude and unite with Nanlu. In this case, the four counties in Hexi will be in danger.

古文：河西既危，不得不救，则百倍之役兴，不訾之费发矣。
现代文：河西一旦危险，不得不援救，那么就会兴动比现在多一百倍的劳役，就会出现没法计算的耗费。
English: If there is any danger in Hexi and we have to come to the rescue, there will be a hundred times more laborers than now, and there will be incalculable expenses.

古文：议者但念西域绝远，恤之烦费，不见先世苦心勤劳之意也。
现代文：商议的人衹考虑西域极其遥远，救助西域花费很大，没有想到前代的人苦心勤劳的用意。
English: The negotiators considered that the western region was extremely far away, and the cost of rescuing the western region was very high. They did not think about the hard work of the previous generation.

古文：方今边境守御之具不精，内郡武卫之备不修，敦煌孤危，远来告急。复不辅助。内无以慰劳吏民，外无以威示百蛮。
现代文：现在守卫边境的器具不够精良，内地各郡的防卫没有准备，敦煌孤立危险，远远赶来告急，现在还不去帮助，对内没法慰劳吏民，对外不能向百蛮展示威力。
English: At present, the equipment for guarding the border is not sophisticated enough, the defense of the counties in the mainland is not prepared, Dunhuang is in danger of isolation, it is urgent to come from far away, it is not time to help, it is impossible to comfort the laborers and the people at home, and it is impossible to show power to the outside world.

古文：蹙国减土，经有明诫。
现代文：造成国家窘迫，土地减少，经典上对此有明确的告诫。
English: There is a clear admonition in the scriptures against causing national distress and diminishing the land.

古文：臣以为敦煌宜置校尉，案旧增四郡屯兵，以西抚诸国。
现代文：臣认为应当在敦煌设置校尉，根据旧制增加河西四郡的驻守兵力，用来安抚西域各国。
English: The minister believed that a lieutenant should be set up in Dunhuang, and the garrison of the four counties in Hexi should be increased according to the old system, which would be used to pacify the countries in the western region.

古文：庶足折冲万里，震怖匈奴。
现代文：这样足以在万里以外制敌取胜，使包躯恐惧。 
English: This is enough to win over the enemy from thousands of miles away and make the whole body afraid.

古文：帝纳之，乃以班勇为西域长史，将驰刑士五百人，西屯柳中。
现代文：皇帝采纳了速忠的意见，于是任命班勇为西域长史，率领五百名被解除枷锁的刑徒，西行驻守柳中。
English: The emperor adopted the opinion of Hayatada, and appointed Ban Yong as the governor of the western region, leading five hundred prisoners who had been released from the shackles, and stationed in the west of Liuzhong.

古文：勇遂破平车师。
现代文：班勇于是打败并平定了车师。
English: Ban Yong then defeated and leveled the driver.

古文：自建武至于延光，西域三绝三通。
现代文：从建武到延光，西域三次和中原中断往来，又三次恢复往来。
English: From Jianwu to Yan'guang, the West interrupted exchanges with the Central Plains three times, and resumed exchanges three times.

古文：顺帝永建二年，勇复击降焉耆。
现代文：顺帝永建二年，班勇又击败降服焉耆。
English: In the second year of Emperor Shun's reign, Banyong defeated and subjugated Yan.

古文：于是龟兹、疏勒、于胘、莎车等十七国皆来服从，而乌孙、葱领已西遂绝。
现代文：这时候，龟兹、疏勒、于实、莎车等十七个国家都来归顺，但乌孙、葱岭以西的国家自此断绝往来。
English: At this time, seventeen countries such as Kuez, Shule, Jushi, and Yarkand all came to submit, but the countries west of Wusun and Qiu Ling have since broken off contacts.

古文：六年，帝以伊吾旧膏腴之地，傍近西域，匈奴资之，以为抄暴，复令开设屯田，如永元时事，置伊吾司马一人。
现代文：六年，皇帝因为伊吾以前是肥沃的地方，靠近西域，匈奴凭藉伊吾进行抄掠侵暴，又下令在伊吾开设屯田，如同永元时的做法，设置伊吾司马一人。
English: In the sixth year, the emperor, because Igu was previously a fertile place, close to the western region, the Huns used Igu to plunder and invade, and ordered the establishment of military camps in Igu, as was the case with Yongyuan, setting up Igu Sima alone.

古文：自阳嘉以后，朝威稍损，诸国骄放，转相陵伐。
现代文：自阳嘉以后，朝廷威信逐步下降，西域各国骄傲放纵，转而相互欺凌攻打。
English: Since Yangjia, the prestige of the imperial court has gradually declined, and the countries in the western region have indulged in pride and turned to bullying each other.

古文：元嘉二年，长史王敬为于窴所没。
现代文：元嘉二年，长史王敬被于实人杀害。
English: In the second year of Yuan Jia, Chang Shi Wang Jing was killed by Yu Si Ren.

古文：永兴元年，车师后王复反攻屯营。
现代文：永兴元年，车师后王又反过来攻打屯田部队。
English: In the first year of the Yongxing era, the chariot master, the Queen, in turn, attacked the troops in Tonden.

古文：虽有降首，曾莫惩革，自此浸以疏慢矣。
现代文：虽然也有降服的国家，但他们并没有惩戒改变，从此逐渐对中原疏远而轻慢了。
English: Although there were also countries that surrendered, they did not change the punishment. From then on, they gradually alienated and belittled the Central Plains.

古文：班固记诸国风土人俗，皆已详备《前书》。
现代文：班固记载了这些国家的风俗习惯和地理环境，这都已在《前汉书》中详细记述。
English: Banggu recorded the customs and geographical environment of these countries, which have been described in detail in the "Former Chinese Book."

古文：今撰建武以后其事异于先者，以为《西域传》，皆安帝末班勇所记云。
现代文：现在将建武以后不同于前代的事情写成《西域传》，这都是安帝末年班勇记述的。
English: Now, the things that were different from the previous generation after Jianwu were written into "Western Regions Biography," which were all recorded by Ban Yong in the last years of An Di.

古文：西域内属诸国，东西六千余里，南北千余里，东极玉门、阳关，西至葱领。
现代文：西域归属漠的各个国家，东西长六千多里，南北长一千多里，东到玉门关、阳关，西到葱岭。
English: The western region belongs to the various countries of the desert. It is more than six thousand miles long from east to west, more than one thousand miles long from north to south, east to Yumen Pass and Yangguan, and west to Qiuling.

古文：其东北与匈奴、乌孙相接。
现代文：西域的东北部与匈奴、乌孙接壤。
English: The north-eastern part of the western region is bordered by the Xiongnu and Wusun.

古文：南北有大山，中央有河。
现代文：南部和北部都有大山，中央有河流。
English: There are mountains in the south and north, and rivers in the center.

古文：其南山东出金城，与汉南山属焉。
现代文：西域的南山向东延伸到金城，与汉的南山相连。
English: The Nanshan of the Western Regions extends eastward to Jincheng and is connected to the Nanshan of the Han Dynasty.

古文：其河有两源，一出葱领东流，一出于窴南山下北流，与葱领河合，东注蒲昌海。
现代文：西域的河有两个源头：一个发源于葱岭，向东流去，一个发源于于宾南山脚下，向北流去，同葱岭河汇合，向东注入蒲昌海。
English: The rivers in the western region have two sources: one originates in the Qilian Mountains and flows to the east, and the other originates at the foot of the Binan Mountain and flows to the north, merging with the Qilian Mountains and flowing into the Puchang Sea to the east.

古文：蒲昌海一名盐泽，去玉门三百余里。
现代文：蒲昌海又叫盐泽，距玉门关有三百多里。
English: Puchang Sea, also known as Yanze, is more than three hundred miles away from Yumen Pass.

古文：自敦煌西出玉门、阳关，涉鄯善，北通伊吾千余里，自伊吾北通车师前部高昌壁千二百里，自高昌壁北通后部金满城五百里。
现代文：从敦煌向西出玉门关、阳关，经过鄯善，北边通往伊吾有一千多里，从伊吾向北通往车师前部的高昌壁有一千二百里，从高昌壁向北通往后部的金满城有五百里。
English: From Dunhuang to the west, there are Yumen Pass and Yang Pass, and after passing Shaoshan, there are more than one thousand miles to the north to Igu, twelve hundred miles to the north from Igu to Gaochang Wall in the front of the coach, and five hundred miles to the north from Gaochang Wall to Jinman City in the back.

古文：此其西域之门户也，故戊己校尉更互屯焉。
现代文：这是西域的门户，所以戊己校尉交替驻守这些地方。
English: This is the gateway to the western region, so Captain Wu Ji alternately stationed in these places.

古文：伊吾地宜五谷、桑麻、蒲萄。
现代文：伊吾的土地适合种植五谷、桑、麻和葡萄。
English: Igo's land is suitable for growing corn, mulberry, hemp and grapes.

古文：其北又有柳中，皆膏腴之地。
现代文：伊吾的北面又有柳中，全是肥沃的土地。
English: To the north of Igo is Willow Middle, which is all fertile land.

古文：故汉常与匈奴争车师、伊吾，以制西域焉。
现代文：所以汉经常与匈奴争夺车师、伊吾，为的是控制西域。
English: Therefore, the Han often competed with the Xiongnu for the coachman, Igu, in order to control the western region.

古文：自鄯善逾葱领出西诸国，有两道。
现代文：从鄯善翻过葱岭出西域各国，有两条道路。
English: There are two roads leading out of the countries in the western region from Shaoshan across the Zhili Mountains.

古文：傍南山北，陂河西行至莎车，为南道。
现代文：贴近南山北边，沿着河往西走，到达莎车，这是南道。
English: Close to the north side of Nanshan, walk west along the river to reach Shache, which is the south road.

古文：南道西逾葱领，则出大月氏、安息之国也。
现代文：南道向西翻过葱岭，就可以到达大月氏、童皇等国。
English: If you turn the south road westward over the green onion ridge, you can reach the Otsuki clan, Tongo and other countries.

古文：自车师前王庭随北山，陂河西行至疏勒，为北道。
现代文：从车鳄前王庭沿着韭山，顺河向西走到蕴勤，这是北道。
English: From Wangting in front of Chequered Crocodile, walk along Lushan Mountain, along the river to the west to reach Yanqin, which is the north road.

古文：北道西逾葱领，出大宛、康居、奄蔡焉。
现代文：北道向西翻过茎岭，到达去洼、尘昼、童基这些国家。
English: The North Road turns westward over the stem ridge, reaching the countries of Dengwa, Ducheng and Tongji.

古文：出玉门，经鄯善、且末、精绝三千余里至拘弥。
现代文：出玉盟飓，经过差曙、旦苤、撞钟，有三千多里，到达翅疆。
English: Out of the Jade League of Hurricanes, through the dawn, dusk, and the bell, there are more than three thousand miles to reach the Winged Empire.

古文：拘弥国，居宁弥城，去长史所居柳中四千九百里，去洛阳万二千八百里。领户二千一百七十三，口七千二百五十一，胜兵千七百六十人。
现代文：拘弥国地处宁弥城，距长史所在的柳中有四千九百里，距洛阳有一万二千八百里，管辖二千一百七十三产，七千二百五十一人，能当兵打仗的有一千七百六十人。
English: Jimei Province is located in Ningmi City, 4,900 miles from Liuye, where Changshi is located, and 12,800 miles from Luoyang. It has jurisdiction over 2,173 provinces, 7,2501 people, and 1,760 people who can fight as soldiers.

古文：顺帝永建四年，于窴王放前杀拘弥王兴，自立其子为拘弥王，而遣使者贡献于汉。
现代文：顺帝永建四年，于责王放前杀死了拘弥王兴，立他自己的儿子为拘弥王，并且派使者向汉朝贡献物品。
English: Shun Emperor Yongjian, in the fourth year of his reign, killed Wang Xing, the King of Guanmai, before releasing the King of Guanmai, appointed his own son as the King of Guanmai, and sent an envoy to contribute goods to the Han Dynasty.

古文：敦煌太守除由上求讨之，帝赦于窴罪，令归拘弥国，放前不肯。
现代文：敦煌太守徐由上书要求征讨放前，皇帝赦免于宾的罪责，要于宾还复拘弥国，放前不答应。
English: Dunhuang Daju Xu Yu's letter requested that the emperor pardon Yu Bin's guilt before releasing him. However, the emperor did not agree to release Yu Bin before re-imprisoning him.

古文：阳嘉元年，徐由遣疏勒王臣槃发二万人击于窴，破之，斩首数百级，放兵大掠，更立兴宗人成国为拘弥王而还。
现代文：阳嘉元年，徐由派疏勒王臣槃发兵两万人攻打于实，打败了于实，杀了数百人，纵放部队大肆抄掠，重新立兴的同宗成国为拘弥王后班师。
English: In the first year of the Yang Jia era, Xu Yu sent 20,000 soldiers led by Wang Zhenqin of Shuo Le to attack and defeat Husi, killing hundreds of people. His troops plundered and pillaged extensively, and the reinstated Tongzong Chengguo became the successor of Queen Zhenmi.

古文：至灵帝熹平四年，于窴王安国攻拘弥，大破之，杀其王，死者甚众。戊己校尉、西域长史各发兵辅立拘弥侍子定兴为王。
现代文：到灵帝熹平四年，于宾王安国攻打拘弥，大败拘弥人，杀死了拘弥王，被杀的人非常多，戊己校尉、西域长史各白发兵帮助立拘弥王入侍的儿子定兴为国王。
English: In the fourth year of Ling Di's reign, in Bin Wang's An Guo, he attacked and defeated the Zhenmi people, and killed the Zhenmi king. A large number of people were killed. Captain Wu Zi and the governor of the Western Regions Shi Gui Bai sent soldiers to help Ding Xing, the son of the Zhenmi king, to become the king.

古文：时人众裁有千口。
现代文：当时拘弥的人口一千。
English: At that time, the population of Tsuchiya was one thousand.

古文：其国西接于窴三百九十里。
现代文：拘弥国西接于宾三百九十里。
English: It is 390 li to the west of Shimi Province from Bin.

古文：于窴国，居西城，去长史所居五千三百里，去洛阳万一千七百里。领户三万二千，口八万三千，胜兵三万余人。
现代文：于宾国地处西城，距长史所在的地方有五千三百里，距洛阳有一万一千七百里，管辖三万二千户：人口八万三千人，能当兵打仗的有三万多人。
English: The guesthouse is located in Xicheng, 5,300 miles from the place where Changshi is located, 11,700 miles from Luoyang, and has jurisdiction over 32,000 households: the population is 83,000, and there are more than 30,000 people who can fight as soldiers.

古文：建武末，莎车王贤强盛，攻并于窴，徙其王俞林为骊归王。
现代文：建武末年，莎车王贤强盛，攻打并吞并了于寞，将于寞王俞林迁到别处为骊归王。
English: In the last years of the Jianwu period, Zhaozhe Wangxian was strong and prosperous. He attacked and annexed Yuxian, and moved from Yuxian Wang Yulin to another place to become the king of Yuxian.

古文：明帝永平中，于窴将休莫霸反莎车，自立为于窴王。
现代文：明帝永平年间，于宝的将领休莫霸反叛莎车，立自己为于实王。
English: During the Yongping era of the Ming Dynasty, the general of Yubao, Xiu Mo Ba, rebelled against Shache and established himself as the king of Jushi.

古文：休莫霸死，兄子广德立，后遂灭莎车，其国转盛。
现代文：休莫霸死后，他的哥哥的儿子广德立为国王，后来终于灭掉莎车，于实国转而强盛。
English: After the death of Humo Ba, his brother's son, Quang De, became king. Later, he finally eliminated the yakitori and became powerful in the State of Sichuan.

古文：从精绝西北至疏勒十三国皆服从。而鄯善王亦始强盛。
现代文：从精绝西北到疏勒的十三个国家都服从于实，但鄯善王也开始强盛。
English: Thirteen countries from Jingzhu Northwest to Shule all obeyed the truth, but King Juxian also began to flourish.

古文：自是南道目葱领以东，唯此二国为大。
现代文：自此南道在葱岭以东，仅此二国强大。
English: Since then, the southern route is east of the green onion, and only these two countries are strong.

古文：顺帝永建六年，于窴王放前遣侍子诣阙贡献。
现代文：顺帝永建六年，于宾王放前派儿子入侍，来向朝廷进贡。
English: Six years after Shun Emperor Yongjian died, he sent his son to be an attendant to Bin Wangfang to pay tribute to the imperial court.

古文：元嘉元年，长史赵评在于窴病痈死，评子迎丧，道经拘弥。
现代文：元嘉元年，长史赵评在于宾出恶疮病死，赵评的儿子迎接赵评的灵柩，途中经过拘弥。
English: In the first year of the Yuan Jia era, the elder statesman Zhao Han died of a malignant wound in Bin, Zhao Han's son greeted Zhao Han's coffin, passing through Zhimi on the way.

古文：拘弥王成国与于窴王建素有隙，乃语评子云： 于窴王令胡医持毒药著创中，故致死耳。 
现代文：拘弥王成国与于寞王建一向有仇隙，就对趟评的儿子说： 于宾王要胡人医生拿毒药贴在疮上，所以造成死亡。 
English: Zhenya Wang Chengguo and Yu Xian Wang Jian had always had a grudge against each other, so he said to Wanyan's son: "Hu Bin Wang asked Hu Ren Doctor to take poison and stick it on the wound, which caused the death.

古文：评子信之，还入塞，以告敦煌太守马达。
现代文：赵评的儿子相信了他的话，回到塞内，将这些话告诉了敦煌太守马达。
English: Zhao Zhan's son believed his words, returned to Senai, and told these words to Dunhuang Taishou Mada.

古文：明年，以王敬代为长史，达令敬隐核其事。
现代文：第二年，朝廷任命王敬接任长史，马达要王敬暗中查实这件事。
English: The following year, the imperial court appointed Wang Jing to succeed Chang Shi, and Ma Da asked Wang Jing to secretly investigate the matter.

古文：敬先过拘弥，成国复说云： 于窴国人欲以我为王，今可因此罪诛建，于窴必服矣。 
现代文：王敬先经过拘弥，成国又说道： 于实国的人希望我当国王，现在可藉这件罪名杀掉建，于宾必然归顺。 
English: After Wang Jing was detained, Chengguo said, "The people of Yuxi want me to be king. Now they can use this crime to kill Jian. Yubin will surely submit."

古文：敬贪立功名，且受成国之说，前到于窴，设供具请建，而阴图之。
现代文：王敬贪图建立功名，而且接受了成国的说法，到达于责后，设酒食请于实王建，但暗中打他的主意。
English: Wang Jing was eager to establish his reputation, and he accepted Chengguo's suggestion. After arriving at his destination, he invited Wang Jian to dinner and drinks, but secretly thwarted his plan.

古文：或以敬谋告建，建不信，曰： 我无罪，王长史何为欲杀我？ 
现代文：有人将王敬的密谋告诉建，他不相信，说： 我没有罪，王长史为什么要杀我？ 
English: Someone told Jian that Wang Jing was plotting, but he didn't believe them and said, "I'm not guilty, why would Wang Changshi kill me?

古文：旦日，建从官属数十人诣敬。
现代文：第二天早晨，于实王建带领几十名手下官员来见王敬。
English: The next morning, Yu Shi Wang Jian led dozens of subordinate officials to see Wang Jing.

古文：坐定，建起行酒，敬叱左右执之，吏士并无杀建意，官属悉得突走。时成国主簿秦牧随敬在会，持刀出曰： 大事已定，何为复疑？ 
现代文：坐定以后，建起来依次斟酒，王敬喝令身边的人将建拿下，官吏士兵们并没有杀建的意思，所以建手下的官吏得以全都冲了出去当时成国的主簿秦牧跟随王敬在宴会上，他拔出刀站出来说： 大事已经决定，为什么又要迟疑？ 
English: After sitting down, they stood up and poured wine one after another. Wang Jing shouted and ordered the people around him to take down the building. The officials and soldiers had no intention of killing Jian Jian, so the officials under Jian Jian's command were all able to rush out. Qin Mu, the main book of Chengguo at the time, followed Wang Jing at the banquet. He pulled out his sword and stood up and said: The important matter has been decided, why should we hesitate?

古文：即前斩建。
现代文：随即上前杀了建。
English: He then went forward and killed Jian.

古文：于窴侯将输等遂会兵攻敬，敬持建头上楼宣告曰： 天子使我诛建耳。 
现代文：于实的诸侯和将领输焚等人于是会合人马进攻王敬，王敬拿着建的头颅宣告说： 天子要我杀了建。 
English: As a result, the lords and generals of Juxi gathered to attack Wang Jing. Wang Jing took Jian's head and declared, "God wants me to kill Jian."

古文：于窴侯将遂焚营舍，烧杀吏士，上楼斩敬，悬首于市。
现代文：于实的诸侯将领接着焚烧了军营房屋，烧死杀害官吏士兵，并上楼杀了王敬，将王敬的脑袋悬挂在集市。
English: The generals of the princes of Juxi then burned the military camp house, burned and killed the officials and soldiers, and went upstairs to kill Wang Jing and hung Wang Jing's head in the bazaar.

古文：输欲自立为王，国人杀之，而立建子安国焉。
现代文：输焚想立自己为国王，国人杀了他，立建的儿子安国为王。
English: Thubten wanted to establish himself as king, his countrymen killed him, and his son Ankoku became king.

古文：马达闻之，欲将诸郡兵出塞击于窴，桓帝不听，征达还，而以宋亮代为敦煌太守。
现代文：马达知道后，想率领各郡的部队出边关攻打于宾，桓帝不答应，将马达召了回来，任命宋亮接任敦煌太守。
English: After Mada found out, he wanted to lead the troops of each county to attack Yubin outside the border. Emperor Huan did not agree, called Mada back, and appointed Song Liang to take over as the governor of Dunhuang.

古文：亮到，开募于窴，令自斩输。
现代文：宋亮一到，悬赏招募于宾人，要于寞人自己杀掉输焚。
English: As soon as Song Liang arrived, he offered a reward to recruit guests, and asked lonely people to kill and burn themselves.

古文：时输死已经月。乃断死人头送敦煌，而不言其状。
现代文：当时输焚已死有一个月了，于宾人砍下死人的脑袋送到敦煌，并且不说明实际情况。
English: At that time, the deceased had already been dead for a month, and Yubin cut off the dead man's head and sent it to Dunhuang, without explaining the actual situation.

古文：亮后知其诈，而竟不能出兵，于窴恃此遂骄。
现代文：宋亮后来知道其中有假，但最终没能出兵。于实仗着造一点因而越来越骄纵。
English: Song Liang later knew that some of them were fake, but in the end he was unable to send troops. He became more and more arrogant as he tried to create something real.

古文：自于窴经皮山，至西夜、子合、德若焉。
现代文：从于宾经过皮山，到达西夜、子合、德若等国。
English: From Yubin, it passed through Pishan and reached Xi'an, Zi'a, De Ruo and other provinces.

古文：西夜国，一名漂沙，去洛阳万四千四百里。
现代文：西夜国又名漂沙国，距洛阳有一万四千四百里。
English: Xiyang Country, also known as the Country of Drifting Sands, is 14,400 miles away from Luoyang.

古文：户二千五百，口万余，胜兵三千人。
现代文：西夜国有二千五百户，一万多人口，能当兵打仗的有三千人。
English: Xiyang has 2,500 households and more than 10,000 people. There are 3,000 people who can fight as soldiers.

古文：地生白草，有毒，国人煎以为药，傅箭镞，所中即死。
现代文：当地生长一种白色的草，有毒，西夜国的人将它煎成药，涂在箭头上，被箭射中立刻就死。
English: A poisonous white grass grows in the area, and the people of the West Night Country fry it into a medicine, apply it to their arrows, and die immediately when they are shot.

古文：《汉书》中误云西夜、子合是一国，今各自有王。
现代文：《漠书》中误以为西夜、子合是一个国家，现在他们各有自己的国王。
English: In "The Book of the Desert," it was mistakenly thought that Xi'er and Zi He were one country, but now they each have their own king.

古文：子合国，居呼鞬谷。去疏勒千里。
现代文：子合国地处呼鞑谷，距疏勒有一千里。
English: Ziheguo is located in Wuyi Valley, a thousand miles away from Shule.

古文：领户三百五十，口四千，胜兵千人。
现代文：管辖三百五十户，人四千人，能打仗的有一千人。
English: He was in charge of three hundred and fifty families, with four thousand men under him, and a thousand able to go to war.

古文：德若国，领户百余，口六百七十，胜兵三百五十人。
现代文：德若国管辖一百多户，人口六百七十人，能当兵打仗的有三百五十人。
English: There are more than a hundred households under the jurisdiction of De Ruo Guo, with a population of six hundred and seventy people, and three hundred and fifty people who can fight as soldiers.

古文：东去长史居三千五百三十里，去洛阳万二千一百五十里，与子合相接。
现代文：德若国东部距长史所在的地方有三千五百三十里，距洛阳有一万二千一百五十里，与子合国相接。
English: The eastern part of De Ruo Province is 3,530 miles away from the place where Changshi is located, and 12,150 miles away from Luoyang. It is adjacent to Zihe Province.

古文：其俗皆同。
现代文：风俗都相同。
English: The customs are the same.

古文：自皮山西南经乌秅，涉悬度，历罽宾，六十余日行至乌弋山离国，地方数千里，时改名排持。
现代文：从皮山向西南经过乌耗，越过悬度、厨宾，走六十多天以后可到达乌弋山离国，地域方圆几千里，当时改名叫排持。
English: From Pishan to the southwest, passing through Wukong, over the overhang and the kitchen guests, after more than sixty days of walking, you can reach Wushan, thousands of miles away from the country. At that time, it was renamed Paiji.

古文：复西南马行百余日至条支。
现代文：再向西南骑马走一百多天到达条支国。
English: They then rode southwest for more than a hundred days to reach Jochi Province.

古文：条支国城在山上，周回四十余里。
现代文：条支国城建在山上，方圆有四十多里。
English: Built on a hill, Jochi National City is more than forty miles in circumference.

古文：临西海，海水曲环其南及东北，三面路绝，唯西北隅通陆道。
现代文：旁靠西海，海水环绕条支的南面束面和北面。条支三面没有道路，衹有西北角有陆路相通。
English: Next to the West Sea, the sea water surrounds the south side of the branch and the north side. There is no road on the three sides of the branch, but there is a land connection in the northwest corner.

古文：土地暑湿，出师子、犀牛、封牛、孔雀、大雀。
现代文：条支土地高温潮湿，出产狮子、犀牛、封牛、孔雀、大雀。
English: The strip of land is hot and humid, producing lions, rhinoceroses, cattle, peacocks, and great finches.

古文：大雀其卵如甕。
现代文：大雀下的卵像瓦瓮一样大。
English: The eggs laid by the great auk are as big as corrugated roof tiles.

古文：转北而东，复马行六十余日至安息。
现代文：由条支转而向北再向东，骑马再走六十多天到安息。
English: Turning from the branch to the north and then to the east, they rode on horseback for more than sixty days to rest.

古文：后役属条支，为置大将，临领诸小城焉。
现代文：安息后来隶属条支，为其役使，条支在安息设立大将，监督掌管各座小城邑。
English: Atabeki was later subordinated to Jo branch and served it. Jo branch set up a general in Atabeki to supervise and control all the small towns.

古文：安息国，居和椟城，去洛阳二万五千里。
现代文：安息国地处和椟城，距洛阳有二万五千里。
English: The country of rest is located in Huancheng, which is 25,000 miles away from Luoyang.

古文：北与康居接，南与乌弋山离接。
现代文：安息的北面与康居接壤，南面与乌弋山离接壤。
English: The northern side of Anji is bordered by Kangju, and the southern side is bordered by Wuyi Mountain.

古文：地方数千里，小城数百，户口胜兵最为殷盛。
现代文：安息地域有几千里见方，小城邑有几百个。安息的户数、人口数和能当兵打仗的人数最多。
English: There are thousands of square kilometers of rest areas, and hundreds of small towns. The number of households, the number of people, and the number of people who can fight as soldiers in rest are the largest.

古文：其东界木鹿城，号为小安息，去洛阳二万里。
现代文：安息的束部边界上有个木鹿城，号称小安息，距洛阳有二万里。
English: There is a wood deer city on the Sokube border of Anshu, known as Little Anshu, which is 20,000 miles away from Luoyang.

古文：章帝章和元年，遣使献师子、符拔。
现代文：章帝章和元年，安息派使者贡献狮子、符拔。
English: In the year of Emperor Zhang and the first year of the year, the envoys of the Seventh-day Adventists contributed lions and emblems.

古文：符拔形似麟而无角。
现代文：符拔的样子像麒麟但没有角。
English: It looks like a unicorn, but without horns.

古文：和帝永元九年，都护班超遣甘英使大秦，抵条支。
现代文：和帝永元九年，都护班超派甘英出使大秦，到达条支。
English: In the ninth year of the reign of Emperor Yongzheng, Duobanchao sent Ganying to dispatch an envoy to Daqin, and arrived at Jiezhi.

古文：临大海欲度，而安息西界船人谓英曰： 海水广大，往来者逢善风三月乃得度，若遇迟风，亦有二岁者，故入海人皆赍三岁粮。
现代文：甘英到了大海边想渡海，但安息西部边境的船工对甘英说： 海水辽阔，来往的人遇上顺风需三个月才能过去，如果遇到缓慢的风，也有需两年时间的，所以航海的人都带了三年的粮食。
English: When Gan Ying got to the coast, she wanted to cross the sea, but a boatman from the western border of Shifang said to Gan Ying: The sea is vast, and it takes three months for people to cross when there is a tail wind, and if there is a slow wind, it will take two years, so the sailors all brought three years of grain.

古文：海中善使人思土恋慕，数有死亡者。 
现代文：在海上常使人想念家乡，经常有人死亡。 
English: At sea, people often miss their hometowns, and people often die.

古文：英闻之乃止。
现代文：甘英听说以后这才作罢。
English: It was only after Amaeng heard about this that she stopped.

古文：十三年，安息王满屈复献师子及条支大鸟，时谓之安息雀。
现代文：十三年，安息王满屈再次献来狮子和条支的大鸟，当时的人称为 安息雀 。
English: In the thirteenth year, the king of rest, Manqu, once again offered a lion and a large bird with stripes. At that time, people called it the bird of rest.

古文：自安息西行三千四百里至阿蛮国。
现代文：从安息向西走三千四百里到达阿蛮国。
English: From Shifang, they walked 3,400 miles westward to arrive in Abang.

古文：从阿蛮西行三千六百里至斯宾国。
现代文：从阿蛮厘向西走三千六百里到堑宣厘。
English: From Abanli, walk west for 3,600 li to Xuanli.

古文：从斯宾南行度河，又西南至于罗国九百六十里，安息西界极矣。
现代文：从基堕向南过河，再往西南走九百六十里，就到王攫玺，玄旦的西边就到头了。
English: If you cross the river from Ji De to the south, and then walk nine hundred and sixty miles to the southwest, you will reach Wang Ye, and the west side of Xuan Dan will come to an end.

古文：自此南乘海，乃通大秦。
现代文：由此向南乘船渡海，就通往去童。
English: From there, you can take a boat to the south to cross the sea and go to Tongzhou.

古文：其土多海西珍奇异物焉。
现代文：那裹有很多大海西部特有的珍奇物产。
English: There are many rare products unique to the western part of the country.

古文：大秦国，一名犁鞬，以在海西，亦云海西国。
现代文：大秦国又叫犁鞑，因为地处大海的西面，所以也叫海西国。
English: Daqin is also known as Jiu, because it is located on the west side of the sea, so it is also called Haixi.

古文：地方数千里，有四百余城。
现代文：大秦范围有几千里，有四百多座城市。
English: Daqin has a range of several thousand miles and more than four hundred cities.

古文：小国役属者数十。
现代文：为其役使附属的小国有几十个。
English: Dozens of small states have been made subordinate to it.

古文：以石为城郭。列置邮亭，皆垩塈之。
现代文：城墙用石头垒成，国内设有邮亭，全都用白色泥土涂饰。
English: The city walls are made of stone, and there is a post office in the country, all painted with white mud.

古文：有松柏诸木百草。
现代文：长有松柏、各种各样的树和百草。
English: There are conifers, all kinds of trees and grasses.

古文：人俗力田作，多种树蚕桑。
现代文：那裹的风俗是人们致力于农业耕作，很多人种桑树养蠢。
English: The local custom is that people devote themselves to agricultural cultivation, and many people grow mulberry trees to raise ducks.

古文：皆髡头而衣文绣，乘辎軿白盖小车，出入击鼓，建旌旗幡帜。
现代文：他们都剃去头发，身穿绣有彩色花纹的衣服，乘坐白色车盖的、用马拉的轻车，进出敲鼓，树有各种旗帜。
English: They all had their hair shaved off, wore clothes embroidered with colorful patterns, rode in white-covered, horse-drawn carts, marched in and out beating drums, and waved flags.

古文：所居城邑，周圜百余里。
现代文：他们所住的城邑，方圆有一百多里。
English: The cities they live in have a radius of more than a hundred miles.

古文：城中有五宫，相去各十里。
现代文：城内有五座宫殿，每个相距十里。
English: There are five palaces in the city, each ten miles apart.

古文：宫室皆以水精为柱，食器亦然。
现代文：宫室裹面都用水晶做成柱子，吃饭的器具也这样。
English: The bedchambers are made of crystal pillars, as are the eating utensils.

古文：其王日游一宫，听事五日而后遍。
现代文：大秦的国王每天住在其中的一宫，治理政事每隔五天五个王宫轮住一遍。
English: The king of the Great Qin Dynasty lived in one of the palaces every day and resided in five palaces every five days to govern the country.

古文：常使一人持囊随王车，人有言事者，即以书投囊中，王室宫发省，理其枉直。
现代文：国王经常要一个人拿了袋子跟着国王的车子，谁有事情要说，就将文书放到袋子裹面，国王回到宫裹打开来看，审理他们的是非曲直。
English: The king would often have one person take the bag and follow the king's carriage. If anyone had something to say, they would put the document in the bag and the king would return to the palace, open the bag, and judge them on their merits.

古文：各有官曹文书。
现代文：国王有分管各方面的文书官员。
English: The king has clerical officials in charge of all aspects of the crown.

古文：置三十六将，皆会议国事。
现代文：国家设有三十六位将领，都参与商议国家事务。
English: The country has thirty-six generals, all of whom are involved in discussing national affairs.

古文：其王无有常人。
现代文：国王没有固定的人，都挑选有才德的人担任国王。
English: The king does not have a fixed number of people, but chooses people with talent to serve as king.

古文：皆简立贤者。国中灾异及风雨不时，辄废而更立，受放者甘黜不怨。
现代文：国内发生灾异或者风雨不合时节，便将国王废掉重新立国王，被罢免的人心甘情愿而不埋怨。
English: When disasters or unseasonable wind and rain occur in the country, the king is abolished and the king is re-established, and the deposed people willingly do not complain.

古文：其人民皆长大平正，有类中国，故谓之大秦。
现代文：那儿的人都长得又高又大，长相端正，和中原人差不多，所以称为大秦。
English: The people there are tall and large, with a neat appearance, similar to the Central Plains people, so they are called the Great Qin.

古文：土多金银奇宝，有夜光璧、明月珠、骇鸡犀、珊瑚、虎魄、琉璃、琅玕、朱丹、青碧。
现代文：当地有很多的金银和珍奇宝物，有夜光璧、明月珠、骇鸡犀、珊瑚、琥珀、琉璃、琅歼、朱砂、碧玉。
English: There are a lot of gold and silver and rare treasures in the area, including glow-in-the-dark pearls, moonbeams, rhinestones, coral, amber, glass, jade, cinnabar, and jasper.

古文：刺金缕绣，织成金缕罽、杂色绫。
现代文：他们用金丝绣成彩色花纹，织成金丝织品和各种颜色的绫帛。
English: They used gold thread to embroider colorful patterns, weave gold thread fabrics and various colors of satin.

古文：作黄金涂、火浣市。又有细布，或言水羊毳，野蚕茧所作也。
现代文：他们用黄金镀物，制作石棉布另外有一种很细软的织品，有人说是用水羊的捆毛和野蚕茧制作而成。
English: They used gold plating to make asbestos cloth, and there was also a very soft fabric, which some said was made from the wool of water sheep and wild silk cocoons.

古文：合会诸香，煎其汁以为苏合。
现代文：他们把许多香料合在一起，将香料的汁煎煮做成苏合。
English: They put a lot of spices together and boiled the juice of the spices to make suho.

古文：凡外国诸珍异皆出焉。
现代文：凡是国外的许多珍奇物品都出自这儿。
English: Many of the rarest items from abroad come from here.

古文：以金银为钱，银钱十当金钱一。
现代文：他们用金银作为钱币，十个银钱相当于一个金钱。
English: They used gold and silver as money, and ten pieces of silver was equal to a denarius.

古文：与安息、天竺交市于海中，利有十倍。
现代文：他们与安息、天竺的人在海上互相买卖，赚的钱有十倍。
English: They traded on the sea with the people of Tarshish and of the coastlands, and brought back ten times as much.

古文：其人质直，市无二价。
现代文：那儿的人质朴正直，市场上没有两样价格。
English: The people there are simple and honest, and there are no two prices on the market.

古文：谷食常贱，国用富饶。
现代文：粮食价格一般很低，国内的用品丰富充足。
English: Grain prices are generally very low, and domestic supplies are abundant and sufficient.

古文：邻国使到其界首者，乘驿诣王都，至则给以金钱。
现代文：相邻国家的使者到了大秦境内，乘驿马到国都，到国都以后大秦就给他们金钱。
English: When envoys from neighboring countries arrived in the territory of the Great Qin Dynasty, they rode on horses to the capital. After arriving at the capital, the Great Qin Dynasty gave them money.

古文：其王常欲通使于汉，而安息欲以汉缯彩与之交市，故遮阂不得自达。
现代文：大秦的国王经常想和漠互通使者，但安息的人想拿汉的彩色丝帛跟他们做生意，所以拦阻大秦的使者，使他们不能自己到汉。
English: The kings of the Great Qin Dynasty often wanted to exchange envoys with the nomads, but the Shanshan people wanted to do business with them using the colored silk of the Han Dynasty, so they blocked the emissaries of the Great Qin Dynasty so that they could not go to the Han Dynasty themselves.

古文：至桓帝延熹九年，大秦王安敦遣使自日南徼外献象牙、犀角、玳瑁，始乃一通焉。
现代文：到桓帝延熹九年，大秦王安敦派使者从曰南边界外献来象牙、犀牛角、玳瑁，才第一次通使者。
English: In the ninth year of Emperor Huan's reign, King Andong of the Great Qin Dynasty sent an envoy from the southern border of Japan to present ivory, rhinoceros horn, and ivory. This was the first time the envoy was sent.

古文：其所表贡，并无珍异，疑传者过焉。
现代文：所上表进贡的东西，并没有什么珍宝异物，怀疑是人们传闻夸张。
English: There is no precious foreign object in the above table of tributes, and it is suspected that the rumors are exaggerated.

古文：或云其国西有弱水、流沙，近西王母所居处，几于日所入也。《汉书》云 从条支西行二百余日，近日所入 ，则与今书异矣。
现代文：有人说大秦国的西南有弱水、流沙，靠近西王母住的地方，接近太阳落山之处，《汉书》说： 从条支向西走二百多天，接近太阳落山的地方 。
English: Some people say that the southwest of the Great Qin State has weak water and quicksand, close to the place where Xi Wangmu lives, and close to the place where the sun sets. "The Chinese Book of the Law" says: "Walk westward for more than two hundred days, and you will be close to the place where the sun sets."

古文：前世汉使皆自乌弋以还，莫有至条支者也。
现代文：逭就与现在的书不同了。前代漠的使者都是到乌弋就回来了，没有人到过条支。
English: It is different from the present book. The previous generation of desert emissaries all came back to Ur, and no one went to Jokhang.

古文：又云 从安息陆道绕海北行出海西至大秦，人庶连属，十里一亭，三十里一置，终无盗贼寇警。
现代文：又说： 从安息由陆路绕海边向北走，出海西到大秦，人口众多，城邑相连，每十里有一个亭子，隔三十里有一个驿馆，始终没有盗贼和兵寇入侵的警报。
English: He also said: From Shifang, take the overland route around the coast to the north, and go out to the west of the sea to Daqin. The population is large and the towns are connected. There is a pavilion every ten miles and a pavilion every thirty miles. There is always no warning of the invasion of thieves and soldiers.

古文：而道多猛虎、师子，遮害行旅，不百余人赍兵器，辄为所食 。
现代文：但路上有许多猛虎、狮子，拦阻为害路上行人，如果不是一百多人，拿了兵器，就经常被野兽吃掉。 
English: However, there are many fierce tigers and lions on the road, blocking pedestrians on the road. If there are not more than a hundred people with weapons, they are often eaten by wild animals.

古文：又言 有飞桥数百里可度海北诸国 。
现代文：又说 有几百里长的浮桥可以渡过大海到达北岸 。
English: He also said that there are hundreds of miles of floating bridges that can cross the sea to the north coast.

古文：所生奇异玉石诸物，谲怪多不经，故不记云。
现代文：各国所产的珍奇玉石及各种物品，大多奇诡怪异，荒诞不经，所以没有记述。
English: Most of the rare jade and various items produced in various countries are bizarre, bizarre, and absurd, so there is no description.

古文：大月氏国，居蓝氏城，西接安息，四十九日行，东去长史所居六千五百三十七里，去洛阳万六千三百七十里。
现代文：大月氏国地处蓝氏城，西部和安息接壤，到安息要走四十九天。东部距长史所在的地方有六千五百三十七里，距洛阳有一万六千三百七十里。
English: The country of the Otsuki clan is located in the city of Lan, bordering Shibuya in the west, and it takes forty-nine days to get to Shibuya. In the east, it is sixty-five hundred and thirty-seven miles from the place where Nagashi is located, and sixteen thousand three hundred and seventy miles from Luoyang.

古文：户十万，口四十万，胜兵十余万人。
现代文：大月氏国有十万户，人口四十万人，能当兵打仗的人有十多万人。
English: The Otsuki clan owned 100,000 households and had a population of 400,000. There were more than 100,000 people who could fight as soldiers.

古文：初，月氏为匈奴所灭，遂迁于大夏，分其国为休密、双靡、贵霜、肹顿、都密，凡五部翕侯。
现代文：起初，月氏为匈奴所灭，于是迁到大夏，将国家分为休密、双靡、贵霜、胎顿、都密，一共是五部翎侯。
English: At first, the Yue clan was exterminated by the Xiongnu, so they moved to Daxia and divided the country into Xiumi, Shuangmai, Guizhong, Baiton and Duimi, a total of five provinces.

古文：后百余岁，贵霜翕侯丘就却攻灭四翕侯，自立为王，国号贵霜。
现代文：一百多年以后，贵霜翎侯丘就却进攻灭掉了另外四个翎侯，立自己为国王，国号为贵霜。
English: More than a hundred years later, Guizhong Gonghouqiu attacked and eliminated the other four Gonghou, establishing himself as king, and the country's name was Guizhong.

古文：侵安息。取高附地。
现代文：贵霜王入侵安息，占领了高附地区。
English: Guizhong Wang invaded Fengtai and occupied the Gaozhu District.

古文：又灭濮达、罽宾，悉有其国。
现代文：又灭掉濮达、厨宾，占领了它们的全部国土。
English: It also wiped out the Sunda and Cuisine peoples and occupied all of their lands.

古文：丘就却年八十余死，子阎膏珍代为王。
现代文：丘就却八十多岁时死亡，他的儿子阎膏珍继承王位。
English: However, Oka died in his eighties, and his son Yan Jizhen succeeded to the throne.

古文：复灭天竺，置将一人监领之。
现代文：又灭掉了天竺，设置一名将领监管天竺。
English: He also eliminated Tianyu and set up a general to supervise Tianyu.

古文：月氏自此之后，最为富盛，诸国称之，皆曰贵霜王。
现代文：自此以后，月氏最为富足强盛，各国都称之为贵霜王。
English: Since then, the Yue clan has been the richest and most powerful, and all countries call it the king of precious frost.

古文：汉本其故号，言大月氏云。
现代文：汉朝根据它原先的名称，称之为大月氏。
English: According to its original name, the Han Dynasty called it the Big Moon Clan.

古文：高附国，在大月氏西南，亦大国也。
现代文：高附国位于大月氏的西南方向，也是大国。
English: Takatsuki Province is located in the southwest of Otsuki Province and is also a large country.

古文：其俗似天竺，而弱，易服。
现代文：高附的习俗和天竺相近，但人的性情柔弱，容易制服。
English: The customs of high attachment are similar to those of heaven, but human nature is weak and easily subdued.

古文：善贾贩，内富于财。
现代文：高附国的人擅长经商贩卖，家中财富丰足。
English: The people of Gaofei Province are good at trading and selling, and their family is rich.

古文：所属无常，天竺、罽宾、安息三国强则得之，弱则失之，而未尝属月氏。
现代文：高附归属哪个国家不固定，天竺、厨宾、安息这三个国家谁强大谁就得到高附，谁弱小谁就失去高附，但它从未归属月氏。
English: Gao Zui does not have a fixed country to which it belongs. In the three countries of Tianzhu, Cuisine, and Rest, whoever is strong gets Gao Zui, and whoever is weak loses Gao Zui, but it has never belonged to the Yue clan.

古文：《汉书》以为五翕侯数，非其实也。
现代文：《汉书》将它算入五翎侯，不符合事实。
English: The "Hanshu" counted it as part of the Five Administrative Regions, which is not true.

古文：后属安息。及月氏破安息，始得高附。
现代文：后来高附归属安息，到月氏打败安息，才得到高附。
English: Later, Gao Zui belonged to Renmin, and it was not until the Yue clan defeated Renmin that Gao Zui was obtained.

古文：天竺国，一名身毒，在月氏之东南数千里。
现代文：天竺国又叫身毒，在月氏的东南，距月氏有几千里远。
English: Tianyao Province, also known as Zhengzhou, is in the southeast of Yue, several thousand miles away from Yue.

古文：俗与月氏同，而卑湿暑热。
现代文：天竺的习俗与月氏相同，但地势低而潮湿，气候炎热。
English: The customs of Tianzhu are the same as those of Yue, but the terrain is low and humid, and the climate is hot.

古文：其国临大水。乘象而战。
现代文：天竺国靠近大河，人们骑着象去打仗。
English: The country of Tianzhu is close to a large river, and people ride elephants to go to war.

古文：其人弱于月氏，修浮图道，不杀伐，遂以成俗。
现代文：天竺人比月氏人生性柔弱，信奉佛教，不杀人，不征伐，由此成为习俗。
English: Compared to the Yue people, the Tianyu people are more effeminate, believe in Buddhism, do not kill, do not conquer, and thus become a custom.

古文：从月氏、高附国以西，南至西海，东至磐起国，皆身毒之地。
现代文：从月氏、高附国向西，南到西海，东到磐起国，都是身毒的地盘。
English: From the Yue clan and Gaozuke Province to the west, from the south to the West Sea, and from the east to Iwaki Province, they are poisonous.

古文：身毒有别城数百，城置长。
现代文：身毒另外有几百座城邑，每座城邑设有长官。
English: There are also hundreds of townships, each with its own magistrate.

古文：别国数十，国置王。
现代文：另有几十个小国，每个国家都设有国王。
English: There are dozens of smaller states, each with its own king.

古文：虽各小异，而俱以身毒为名，其时皆属月氏。
现代文：虽然这些国家各有些差异，但都打着身毒的名称，这时候他们都属于月氏管辖。
English: Although these countries are somewhat different from each other, they all bear the name of poison, and at this time they all belong to the jurisdiction of the Moon.

古文：月氏杀其王而置将，令统其人。
现代文：月氏杀了他们的国王而设置将领，要将领来统管这些国家的人。
English: The Yue killed their kings and installed generals, who wanted to rule over the people of these countries.

古文：土出象、犀、玳瑁、金、银、铜、铁、铅、锡，西与大秦通，有大秦珍物。
现代文：天竺出产象、犀牛、玳瑁、金、银、铜、铁、铅、锡，西部与大秦相通，拥有大秦的珍奇物品。
English: Tianyao produces elephants, rhinoceroses, armadillos, gold, silver, copper, iron, lead, and tin. The western part of Tianyao is connected to the Great Qin Dynasty and has the Great Qin Dynasty's rare items.

古文：又有细布、好、诸香、石蜜、胡椒、姜、黑盐。
现代文：还出产细软的布、上等毛席、各种香料、白砂糖、胡椒、姜、黑色的盐。
English: It also produces fine soft cloth, high-quality woolen seats, various spices, white sugar, pepper, ginger, and black salt.

古文：和帝时，数遣使贡献，后西域反畔，乃绝。
现代文：和帝时，天竺多次派使者前来进贡物品。后来西域反叛，这才中断往来。
English: When making peace with the emperor, Tianzhu repeatedly sent emissaries to bring tribute goods. Later, when the Western Regions rebelled, the exchange was broken off.

古文：至桓帝延熹二年、四年，频从日南徼外来献。
现代文：到桓帝延熹二年和延熹四年，天竺多次从曰南边界外来进贡物品。
English: In the 2nd and 4th years of the reign of Emperor Mokuantai, envoys from heaven repeatedly came from beyond Japan's southern borders to offer tribute.

古文：世传明帝梦见金人，长大，顶有光明，以问群臣。
现代文：世间传说明帝梦见金人，身材高大，头顶放光，就向大臣们询问。
English: Legend has it that the emperor dreamed of a golden man, tall and with a halo over his head, and asked his ministers about it.

古文：或曰： 西方有神，名曰佛，其形长丈六尺而黄金色。 
现代文：有人说： 西方有位神仙，名叫佛，佛的形像高一丈六尺，而且是金黄色的。 
English: Some people say: In the West, there is a deity named Buddha. The image of Buddha is six feet high and golden yellow.

古文：帝于是遣使天竺，问佛道法，遂于中国图画形象焉。
现代文：皇帝于是派使者到天竺了解佛教教义，自此在中原画了佛的形像。
English: The emperor then sent an envoy to Tianzhu to learn about Buddhist teachings, and from then on he painted the image of Buddha in the Central Plains.

古文：楚王英始信其术，中国因此颇有奉其道者。
现代文：楚王英首先相信佛教，中原因此有不少人信奉佛教。
English: Chu Wangying believed in Buddhism first, so many people in Central Plains believed in Buddhism.

古文：后桓帝好神，数祀浮图、老子，百姓稍有奉者，后遂转盛。
现代文：以后桓帝对神仙有兴趣，多次祭祀佛和老于，老百姓也逐渐有人信奉，以后信佛的人就越来越多。
English: Later, Emperor Kantei became interested in the immortals, and made many sacrifices to Buddha and Lao-tzu. The common people also gradually came to believe in them, and more and more people came to believe in Buddha.

古文：东离国，居沙奇城，在天竺东南三千余里，大国也。
现代文：东离国地处沙奇城，位于天竺东南方向三千多里远的地方，是个大国。
English: Located more than 3,000 miles southeast of Tianjin, Shaji City is a big country.

古文：其土气、物类与天竺同。
现代文：那裹的土地气候、物种与天竺相同。
English: The land climate and species are the same as that of the Himalayas.

古文：列城数十，皆称王。
现代文：有几十座城邑，每座城邑都称国王。
English: There are dozens of cities, and each city is called a king.

古文：大月氏伐之，遂臣服焉。
现代文：大月氏攻打束离，他们就向月氏臣服。
English: When the Otsuki clan attacked and drove them away, they surrendered to the Otsuki clan.

古文：男女皆长八尺，而怯弱。
现代文：东离的男人女人都身高八尺，但性情懦弱。
English: Both men and women in the east are eight feet tall, but they are weak-willed.

古文：乘象、骆驼，往来邻国。
现代文：他们骑象和骆驼，来往于相邻的国家。
English: They rode elephants and camels to and from neighboring countries.

古文：有寇，乘象以战。
现代文：有敌人入侵，他们就骑着象去打仗。
English: When the enemy invaded, they rode elephants to fight.

古文：栗戈国，属康居。
现代文：栗弋国隶属于康居，出产名马和牛羊，以及葡萄等各种水果。
English: Kuritsuki Province, which belongs to Kangju, produces famous horses, cattle and sheep, as well as grapes and other fruits.

古文：出名马、牛、羊、蒲萄众果，其土水美，故蒲萄酒特有名焉。严国，在奄蔡北，属康居，出鼠皮以输之。
现代文：当地的水质非常好，所以葡萄酒特别有名。严国位于奄蔡的北面，隶属于康居，出产老鼠皮运往康居。
English: The local water quality is very good, so the wine is particularly famous. Yan Guo is located in the north of Ama Cai, affiliated to Kangju, producing mouse skins and shipping them to Kangju.

古文：奄蔡国，改名阿兰聊国，居地城，属康居。
现代文：查蓝埋改名为阿兰聊国，地处塑继，隶属于尘昼。
English: Cha Lan Burying changed its name to Alang Liao Guo, located in Shuxi, and was affiliated with Deng Rong.

古文：土气温和，多桢松、白草。
现代文：那裹的地理气候温和，有很多桢木、松树和白草。
English: The area has a mild climate, with lots of birch trees, pines and white grass.

古文：民俗衣服与康居同。
现代文：民间风俗和人们所穿的衣服舆尘昼相同。
English: Folk customs and the clothes people wear remain the same.

古文：莎车国，西经蒲犁、无雷至大月氏，东去洛阳万九百五十里。
现代文：莎车国向西经过蒲犁、无雷到大月氏。莎车距洛阳有一万零九百五十里。
English: The country of the yakitori goes westward through the city of Budai, without thunder, to the city of Otsuki. The yakitori is 10,950 miles from Luoyang.

古文：匈奴单于因王莽之乱，略有西域，唯莎车王延最强，不肯附属。
现代文：匈奴单于趁着王莽之乱，占据西域，惟独莎车王延最为强大，不肯附属。
English: The Xiongnu alone took advantage of Wang Mang's turmoil to occupy the western region, but Shache Wang Yan was the most powerful and refused to be subordinate.

古文：元帝时，尝为侍子，长于京师，慕乐中国，亦复参其典法。
现代文：元帝时，延曾经当过侍子，在京师长大，他仰慕喜爱中央大国，因此也参考汉的制度法律。
English: During the Yuan Dynasty, Yan had been a chamberlain and grew up in Beijing. He admired and loved the Central Powers, so he also referred to the system and laws of Han.

古文：常敕诸子，当世奉汉家，不可负也。
现代文：他经常吩咐儿子们，应当世代尊奉漠，不可有负汉。
English: He often told his sons that they should respect and serve the fatherland for generations to come, and that they should not be dishonest.

古文：天凤五年，延死，谥忠武王，子康代立。
现代文：天凤五年，延死后，谧号为忠武王，他的儿子康继承王位。
English: Five years after Tian Feng's death, his posthumous name was Zhongwu Wang, and his son Kang Zeng succeeded to the throne.

古文：光武初，康率傍国拒匈奴，拥卫故都护吏士妻子千余口，檄书河西，问中国动静，自陈思慕汉家。
现代文：光武初年，康率领相邻的国家抵御匈奴，护卫原都护将士们的妻子孩子有一千多人，发文书给河西，询问中央大国的情况，叙述自己对汉的想念和仰慕。
English: In the first year of Guangwu, Kang led the neighboring countries to resist the Huns. There were more than a thousand wives and children who escorted the former capital guards. He sent a letter to Hexi, inquired about the situation of the central powers, and described his thoughts and admiration for Han.

古文：建武五年，河西大将军窦融乃承制立康为汉莎车建功怀德王、西域大都尉，五十五国皆属焉。
现代文：建武五年，河西大将军窦融于是以天子的名义立康为汉莎车建功怀德王和西域大都尉，五十五个国家都属莎车王统管。
English: In the fifth year of Jianwu, the great general Dou Rong of Hexi, in the name of the son of heaven, established Kang as the king of Hansa car building and the grand captain of the western region. Fifty-five countries are under the overall control of the king of Hansa.

古文：九年，康死，谥宣成王。
现代文：建武九年，康去世，谧号为宣成王。
English: In the ninth year of Jianwu, Kang died, and his posthumous name was Xuancheng Wang.

古文：弟贤代立，攻破拘弥、西夜国，皆杀其王，而立其兄康两子为拘弥、西夜王。
现代文：其弟贤继承王位，他进攻并打败了拘弥国、西夜国，杀了这两个国家的国王，并且立其兄康的两个儿子为拘弥王、西夜王。
English: His younger brother Xian succeeded to the throne. He attacked and defeated the kingdoms of Jimi and Xiyang, killed the kings of these two countries, and appointed his brother Kang's two sons as King Jimi and King Xiyang.

古文：十四年，贤与鄯善王安并遣使诣阙贡献，于是西域始通。
现代文：十四年，贤与鄯善王安一道派使者到朝廷进贡物品，自此西域才和汉朝往来。
English: In the 14th year, Xian sent an emissary to the imperial court to bring tribute goods, and it was from this western region that Xian made contact with the Han Dynasty.

古文：葱领以东诸国皆属贤。
现代文：葱岭以束的国家都服从贤管辖。
English: All the countries in the world are under the jurisdiction of the virtuous.

古文：十七年，贤复遣使奉献，请都护。
现代文：十七年，贤再次派使者进贡，请求朝廷派都护。
English: In the seventeenth year, Xian again sent an envoy to pay tribute, requesting the imperial court to protect the capital.

古文：天子以问大司空窦融，以为贤父子兄弟相约事汉，款诚又至，宜加号位以镇安之。
现代文：天子就逭件事向大司空宝融询问，窦融认为贤父子兄弟相互约定侍奉汉朝，又十分诚恳，最好给他加上官位使其安心。
English: Tianzi inquired about the matter with the grand secretary Ku Baorong. Dou Rong thought that the brothers agreed to serve the Han Dynasty and were very sincere. It would be best to give him an official position to reassure him.

古文：帝乃因其使，赐贤西域都护印绶，及车旗黄金锦绣。
现代文：皇帝于是就藉贤派来的使者，赐给贤西域都护的印绶，以及车子、旗帜、黄金和彩色丝帛。
English: The emperor then sent an envoy to Xian, and gave Xian the seal of the Western Capital Protector, as well as cars, flags, gold, and colorful silk scarves.

古文：敦煌太守裴遵上言： 夷狄不可假以大权，又令诸国失望。 
现代文：敦煌太守裴遵上书说： 夷狄之人不可给予他们很大权力，而且造成其他国家失望。 
English: Pei Zun, the governor of Dunhuang, said in a letter: "The people of Yidi should not give them great power, and cause other countries to be disappointed.

古文：诏书收还都护印绶，更赐贤以汉大将军印绶。
现代文：天子下诏书收回都护印绶，重新赐给贤汉大将军印绶。
English: The Emperor issued an edict withdrawing the Imperial Seal of the Capital and re-awarding the Seal of the General Xianhan.

古文：其使不肯易，遵迫夺之，贤由是始恨。
现代文：贤的使者不肯换，裴遵强行夺过印绶，贤自此怀恨在心。
English: Xian's messenger refused to change, Pei Zun forcibly took the seal, and Xian held a grudge against him.

古文：而犹诈称大都护，移书诸国，诸国悉服属焉，号贤为单于。
现代文：但他仍然谎称自己是大都护，向各国发送文书，西域各国全都服从他的管辖，称贤为单于。
English: However, he still falsely claimed that he was the protector of the capital and sent documents to all countries, claiming that all countries in the western region were under his jurisdiction.

古文：贤浸以骄横，重求赋税，数攻龟兹诸国，诸国愁惧。
现代文：贤逐渐变得骄傲横暴，索求很重的赋税，多次攻打龟兹等许多国家，各国都忧愁害怕。
English: The Xian gradually became proud and tyrannical, demanding heavy taxes, repeatedly attacking many countries such as Tibet, and all countries were worried and afraid.

古文：二十一年冬，车师前王、鄯善、焉耆等十八国俱遣子入侍，献其珍宝。
现代文：二十一年冬天，车师前王、鄯善、焉耆等十八个国家都派王子入朝侍奉皇帝，进献国内的珍宝。
English: In the winter of the 21st year, princes from 18 countries, including the former king of the chariots, Shanshan, and Yanqi, were sent to the imperial court to serve the emperor and present domestic treasures.

古文：及得见，皆流涕稽首，愿得都护。
现代文：等见到天子，他们都流着眼泪叩头，希望能派都护。
English: When they saw the heavenly son, they all bowed down in tears, hoping that he would protect the capital.

古文：天子以中国初定，北边未服，皆还其侍子，厚赏赐之。
现代文：天子因为国家刚刚平定，北方边境没有归顺，将他们的侍子全部送还，赏赐他们很多东西。
English: Since the country had just been pacified and the northern border did not surrender, the emperor sent back all of their retainers and rewarded them with many things.

古文：是时贤自负兵强，欲并兼西域，攻击益甚。
现代文：这时贤仗着自己军队强盛，想吞并西域，加紧进攻其他国家。
English: At this time, he took advantage of the strength of his own army and wanted to annex the western region and step up attacks on other countries.

古文：诸国闻都护不出，而侍子皆还，大忧恐，乃与敦煌太守檄，愿留侍子以示莎车，言侍子见留，都护寻出，冀且息其兵。
现代文：各国听说没派都护，而且侍子都回来了，十分忧愁恐惧，就给敦煌太守发去文书，情愿留下侍子，目的是给莎车看，说侍子被留下，朝廷不久就会派出都护，希望暂且制止贤的入侵。
English: When the various states heard that no tutelage had been sent, and that the attendants had all returned, they were very sad and fearful. They sent a letter to the Dunhuang governor, saying that they would prefer to keep the attendants. The purpose was to show the cart, saying that if the attendants were left behind, the court would soon send the tutelage, hoping to temporarily stop the invasion of the Xian.

古文：裴遵以状闻，天子许之。
现代文：裴遵将情况报告朝廷，皇帝同意了。
English: Peizun reported the situation to the imperial court, and the emperor agreed.

古文：二十二年，贤知都护不至，遂遗鄯善王安书，令绝通汉道。
现代文：二十二年，贤知道都护不来，于是送信给鄯善王安，要他切断通往汉的道路。
English: Twenty-two years later, Xian knew that Du Fu could not come, so he sent a message to Gong Son Wang An, asking him to cut off the road to Han.

古文：安不纳而杀其使。
现代文：安没有听从，并且杀掉了贤的使者。
English: Ahn disobeyed and killed the messenger.

古文：贤大怒，发兵攻鄯善。
现代文：贤大怒，发兵攻打鄯善。
English: Xian flew into a rage and sent an army to attack Xian Zhen.

古文：安迎战，兵败，亡入山中。
现代文：安迎战失败，逃进山中。
English: An was defeated and fled into the mountains.

古文：贤杀略千余人而去。
现代文：贤杀害掳掠了一千多人而去。
English: Xian killed and abducted more than a thousand people and left.

古文：其冬，贤复攻杀龟兹王，遂兼其国。
现代文：这年冬天，贤又攻打并杀害了龟兹王，接着吞并了龟兹国。
English: In the winter of the same year, Xian attacked and killed the King of Kuez, and then annexed Kuez.

古文：鄯善、焉耆诸国侍子久留敦煌，愁思，皆亡归。
现代文：鄯善、焉耆等各国的侍子长期留在敦煌，忧愁想家，都跑了回去。
English: The attendants from various countries, such as Zou Zhen and Yan Zheng, stayed in Dunhuang for a long time, were sad and homesick, and all ran back.

古文：鄯善王上书，愿复遣子入侍，更请都护。都护不出，诚迫于匈奴。
现代文：鄯善王上书，愿意再派儿子入朝侍奉，重新请求派都护，说不派出都护，他们仍要受匈奴压迫。
English: The benevolent king wrote a letter, saying that he was willing to send his son to serve in the imperial court again, and again requested that a tutelary be sent, saying that if the tutelary was not sent, they would still be oppressed by the Huns.

古文：天子报曰： 今使者大兵未能得出，如诸国力不从心，东西南北自在也。 
现代文：天子回信说： 现在使者和大军没法派出，假如各国力不从心的话，东西南北随你们自己投靠哪方。 
English: The emperor replied in a letter, "It is not possible to send an envoy and a large army at this time. If all countries are unable to do so, the east, west, north and south can choose which side to support.

古文：于是鄯善、车师复附匈奴，而贤益横。
现代文：于是鄯善、车师再次依附匈奴，而贤更加横暴。
English: As a result, Shanshan and the coachman once again clung to the Xiongnu, while Xian became even more tyrannical.

古文：妫塞王自以国远，遂杀贤使者，贤击灭之，立其国贵人驷鞬为妫塞王。
现代文：嫣塞王自以为国家较远，就杀掉了贤的使者，贤攻打灭掉了妈塞国，立婿塞国的贵族驷鞑为妈塞王。
English: King Mace thought that the country was far away, so he killed the envoy of Xian, Xian attacked and destroyed Mace, and the son-in-law of the nobles of Mace became King Mace.

古文：贤又自立其子则罗为龟兹王。
现代文：贤又立自己的儿子则罗为龟兹王。
English: Xian also set up his own son, Zhao Luo, as the King of Kamezi.

古文：贤以则罗年少，乃分龟兹为乌垒国，徙驷鞬为乌垒王，又更以贵人为妫塞王。
现代文：贤因为则罗年纪轻，就从龟兹国分出乌垒国，将驷鞑改任为乌垒王，另外重新任命另一位贵族为妈塞王。
English: Because of Zhelo's young age, Xian separated Wuduo Province from Kuez Province, changed Zhe to Wuduo King, and reappointed another nobleman as Masa King.

古文：数岁，龟兹国人共杀则罗、驷鞬，而遣使匈奴，更请立王。
现代文：几年以后，龟兹国的人一起杀了则罗、驷鞑，并且派人出使匈奴，请求重新立国王。
English: A few years later, the people of Kuez killed Zhelo and Yao together, and sent an envoy to the Xiongnu to request the reinstatement of the king.

古文：匈奴立龟兹贵人身毒为龟兹王，龟兹由是属匈奴。
现代文：匈奴立龟兹的贵族身毒为龟兹王，龟兹自此归附匈奴。
English: The aristocrats of the Xiongnu who established Kuez became the King of Kuez, and Kuez was annexed to the Xiongnu.

古文：贤以大宛贡税减少，自将诸国兵数万人攻大宛，大宛王延留迎降，贤因将还国，徙拘弥王桥塞提为大宛王。
现代文：贤因为大宛进贡的赋税减少，亲自统领各国的军队有几万人，进攻大宛，大宛王延留迎接贤并投降。贤就此带了延留回国，将拘弥王桥塞提改任为大宛王。
English: Due to the reduction of taxes paid as tribute to Dawan, Emperor Xian personally led tens of thousands of troops from various countries to attack Dawan. King Dawan stayed behind to welcome Emperor Xian and surrendered. Emperor Xian then took Emperor Xian back to China and changed the name of King Jimei to King Dawan.

古文：而康居数攻之，桥塞提在国岁余，亡归，贤复以为拘弥王，而遣延留还大宛，使贡献如常。
现代文：但康居多次进攻桥塞提，桥塞提在大宛一年多，逃了回去，贤又让他当拘弥王，并且打发延留回到大宛，要他像往常一样进贡。
English: However, Kangju attacked Qiao Seti several times. Qiao Seti stayed in Dayuan for more than a year and fled back. Xian also made him the king of detention, and sent Yan Rong back to Dayuan, asking him to pay tribute as usual.

古文：贤又徙于窴王俞林为骊归王，立其弟位侍为于窴王。
现代文：贤又将于宝王俞林改为骊归王，立俞林的弟弟位侍为于实王。
English: Xian also changed Bao Wang Yulin to Zi Gui Wang, and Zi Yulin's younger brother became the attendant of King Shi.

古文：岁余，贤疑诸国欲畔，召位侍及拘弥、姑墨、子合王，尽杀之，不复置王，但遣将镇守其国。
现代文：过了一年多，贤怀疑各国想反叛，召来位侍和拘弥王、姑墨王、子合王，将他们全都杀死，不再设国王，衹派将领镇守这些国家。
English: After more than a year, Xian suspected that all the countries wanted to rebel, and summoned his attendants and the kings of Zhenmei, Gumo, and Zia, and killed them all. There would be no more kings, and the Shao faction of generals would guard these countries.

古文：位侍子戎亡降汉。封为守节侯。
现代文：位侍的儿子戎逃走，投降了汉朝，被封为守节侯。
English: Eun, the son of a samurai, ran away, surrendered to the Han Dynasty, and was made the guardian of the festival.

古文：莎车将君得在于窴暴虐，百姓患之。
现代文：莎车的将领君得在于宾残暴毒虐，百姓痛恨昼猩。
English: The charioteer's generals are brutal and cruel, and the people hate the orangutans.

古文：明帝永平三年，其大人都末出城，见野豕，欲射之。
现代文：明帝永平三年，于实的部族首领都末到城外去，看见一只野猪，想用箭射野猪。
English: In the third year of Emperor Yongping of the Ming Dynasty, the tribal leader of Yusheng went to the outskirts of the city and saw a wild boar. He wanted to shoot the boar with an arrow.

古文：豕乃言曰： 无射我，我乃为汝杀君得。 
现代文：野猪说： 不要射我，我就为你杀死君得。 
English: The wild boar said, "Don't shoot me, I'll kill you for you."

古文：都末因此即与兄弟共杀君得。
现代文：都末因此就与弟兄一道杀掉了君得。
English: As a result, he and his brothers killed Kunde.

古文：而大人休莫霸复与汉人韩融等杀都末兄弟，自立为于窴王，复与拘弥国人攻杀莎车将在皮山者，引兵归。
现代文：但部族首领休莫霸又同汉人韩融等人杀掉了都末兄弟，立自己为于宝王。他又与拘弥国的人攻打并杀死了莎车在皮山驻守的将领，而后率兵回国。
English: However, the tribal leader Shumoba, together with Han Rong and others, killed the Tu Mu brothers and established himself as the treasure king. He also attacked and killed the generals stationed in Pishan, and then led the troops back to China.

古文：于是贤遣其太子、国相，将诸国兵二万人击休莫霸，霸迎与战，莎车兵败走，杀万余人。
现代文：这时贤派太子、国相率领几个国家的军队有二万人，攻打休莫霸，休莫霸迎战，莎车军队战败逃走，一万多人被杀。
English: At this time, there were 20,000 troops from several countries led by the prince of the Xian faction and the minister of state. They attacked Shumoba, Shumoba fought back, the Yarkand army was defeated and fled, and more than 10,000 people were killed.

古文：贤复发诸国数万人，自将击休莫霸，霸复破之，斩杀过半，贤脱身走归国。
现代文：贤再次征调各国的军队，有几万人，亲自统率，攻打休莫霸，休莫霸又一次打败了贤，杀死贤的军队一多半。贤脱身逃回莎车。
English: Xian once again conscripted the armies of various countries, with tens of thousands of people, and personally led them to attack Shu Moba. Shu Moba once again defeated Xian and killed more than half of Xian's army. Xian escaped and fled back to Shache.

古文：休莫霸进围莎车，中流矢死，兵乃退。
现代文：休莫霸进兵包围莎车，但身中流箭而死，于寞兵这才退走。
English: Hu Moba marched in and surrounded the cart, but he was killed by a stray arrow, and only then did Yu Lianbing retreat.

古文：于窴国相苏榆勒等共立休莫霸兄子广德为王。
现代文：于实国相苏榆勒等人一同立休莫霸哥哥的儿子广德为国王。
English: Yu Shih Guo, Xiang Su Zhele and others together made Quang De, the son of Xiu Mo Ba's brother, the king.

古文：匈奴与龟兹诸国共攻莎车，不能下。
现代文：匈奴与龟兹各国的军队共同进攻莎车，但攻不下来。
English: The Xiongnu and the armies of the Kuez countries jointly attacked Yarko, but were unable to take it.

古文：广德承莎车之敝，使弟辅国侯仁将兵攻贤。
现代文：广德趁着莎车衰败，派弟弟辅国侯仁率领人马进攻贤。
English: Taking advantage of the decay of the cart, Guang De sent his brother Fu Guo Hou Ren to lead the attack on Xian.

古文：贤连被兵革，乃遣使与广德和。
现代文：贤连续遭受战争，于是派使者同广德讲和。
English: Xian continuously suffered from war, so he sent an envoy to make peace with Guangde.

古文：先是广德父拘在莎车数岁，于是贤归其父，而以女妻之，结为昆弟，广德引兵去。
现代文：在这以前广德的父亲在莎车被关押了几年，这时贤将广德的父亲放了回去，而且把女儿嫁给广德，同他结为兄弟，广德率兵退走。
English: Prior to this, Guangde's father had been imprisoned in Yarkand for several years. At this time, Xian released Guangde's father and married his daughter to Guangde, making him a brother. Guangde led the soldiers away.

古文：明年，莎车相且运等患贤骄暴，密谋反城降于窴。
现代文：第二年，莎车相且运等人担心贤骄傲横暴，秘密谋反，想将城邑投降于宾。
English: In the second year, Yarko Sanghyeon and others, fearing the arrogance and violence of Xian, secretly plotted a rebellion and wanted to surrender the city to Bin.

古文：于窴王广德乃将诸国兵三万人攻莎车。
现代文：于宾王广德于是率领各国人马有三万人，进攻莎车。
English: Yu Bin Wang Guangde then led 30,000 men and horses from all over the country to attack Shache.

古文：贤城守，使使谓广德曰： 我还汝父，与汝妇，汝来击我，何为？ 
现代文：贤据城防守，派使者对广德说： 我放回了你父亲，给你妻子，你为什么还要来攻打我？ 
English: Xian, who was defending the city, sent an envoy to Guangde saying, "I have returned your father and given you your wife, why do you still want to attack me?

古文：广德曰： 王，我妇父也，久不相见，愿各从两人会城外结盟。 
现代文：广德说： 您是我妻子的父亲，很长时间没见面了，希望各带两个人在城外相会结盟。 
English: Guangde said, "You are my wife's father. We haven't seen each other for a long time. I hope you can meet each other outside the city and make an alliance."

古文：贤以问且运，且运曰： 广德女婿，至亲，宜出见之。 
现代文：贤就此事问且运的意见，且运说： 广德身为女婿，是最亲的人，应该出城见他。 
English: Xian asked Qian Yun's opinion on this matter, and Qian Yun said: Guang De, as a son-in-law, is the closest person, and you should go out of town to see him.

古文：贤乃轻出，广德遂执贤。
现代文：贤于是轻率出城，广德于是抓了贤。
English: Xian then rashly left the city, and Guangde then arrested Xian.

古文：而且运等因内于窴兵，虏贤妻子而并其国。
现代文：且运等人又趁机放于实军队进城，广德俘虏了贤的妻子孩子并且吞并了莎车国。
English: And the Yuan and others took advantage of the opportunity to let the real army enter the city. Guangde captured Xian's wife and children and annexed the country of Yarkand.

古文：锁贤将归，岁余杀之。
现代文：广德用铁链锁了贤，将他带回国，一年多以后杀了他。
English: Guande chained Xian, took him back to China, and killed him more than a year later.

古文：匈奴闻广德灭莎车，遣五将发焉耆、尉黎、龟兹十五国兵三万余人围于窴，广德乞降，以其太子为质，约岁给罽絮。
现代文：匈奴听说广德减掉莎车，派了五位将领，征调焉耆，尉黎、龟兹等十五个国家的军队共三万多人，包围了于寞，广德乞求投降，将太子作为人质，约定每年向匈奴提供毛絮。
English: The Xiongnu heard that Guangde had reduced the number of wagons, sent five generals, and recruited and transferred more than 30,000 troops from 15 countries, including the Yunnan, Liaoning, and Hunza, and surrounded Yu Lian. Guangde begged for surrender, took the prince as a hostage, and agreed to provide the Xiongnu with furs every year.

古文：冬，匈奴复遣兵将贤质子不居徵立为莎车王，广德又攻杀之，更立其弟齐黎为莎车王，章帝元和三年也。
现代文：冬天，匈奴又派军队送贤在匈奴作人质的儿子不居征回国，立他为莎车王，广德再次进攻杀死了不居征，重新立自己的弟弟齐黎为莎车王，这时正当章帝元和三年。
English: In winter, the Xiongnu also sent troops to send Xiongnu's hostage, the son of the Xiongnu's hostage, Bu Rui, back to the country for conscription, and appointed him as the king of Zhaqi. Guangde once again attacked and killed Bu Rui, and re-appointed his brother Zili as the king of Zhaqi. At this time, it was the third year of Emperor Zhang's reign.

古文：时，长史班超发诸国兵击莎车，大破之，由是遂降汉。事已惧《班超传》。
现代文：当时长史班超征调各国的军队攻打莎车，大败莎车军队，莎车自此终于归降漠，其事已记载在《班超传》。
English: At that time, the Long History Class Super-Selection transferred the armies of various countries to attack Shache, defeated the Shache army, and Shache finally returned to the desert, which has been recorded in the "Class Super-Selection."

古文：莎车东北至疏勒。
现代文：由莎车向东北到达疏勒。
English: From Yarko, head northeast to Sule.

古文：疏勒国，去长史所居五千里，去洛阳万三百里。
现代文：疏勒国距长史所在的地方有五千里，距洛阳有一万零三百里。
English: Shule Province is 5,000 miles away from the place where Changshi is located, and 10,300 miles away from Luoyang.

古文：领户二万一千，胜兵三万余人。
现代文：管辖二万一千户，能够当兵打仗的有三万多人。
English: It has jurisdiction over 21,000 households, and more than 30,000 people are able to fight as soldiers.

古文：明帝永平十六年，龟兹王建攻杀疏勒王成，自以龟兹左侯兜题为疏勒王。
现代文：明帝永平十六年，龟兹王建进攻杀死了疏勒王成，自己任命龟兹左侯兜题为疏勒王。
English: In the 16th year of the Yongping reign of the Ming Dynasty, King Jian of Kuez attacked and killed King Cheng of Shule. He named himself King Shule.

古文：冬，汉遣军司马班超劫缚兜题，而立成之兄子忠为疏勒王。
现代文：冬天，汉派遣军司马班超劫持绑架了兜题，而且立成的哥哥的儿子忠为疏勒王。
English: In the winter, the Han Dynasty dispatched the military commander Ma Banchao to kidnap and abduct Houtai, and established his brother's son Zhong as the king of Shule.

古文：忠后反畔，超击斩之。
现代文：忠后来反叛，班超进攻忠并杀了他。
English: Zhong later rebelled, and Banchao attacked and killed him.

古文：事已具《超传》。
现代文：事情已记载在《班超传》。
English: The incident has been recorded in "Bancao Chuan."

古文：安帝元初中，疏勒王安国以舅臣磐有罪，徙于月氏。月氏王亲爱之。
现代文：安帝元初年间，疏勒王安国因为舅舅臣磐有罪，将他流放到月氏，月氏王对他很是亲近喜欢。
English: In the first year of the Andean era, King An of Sule, because of the guilt of his uncle and minister, Ban, exiled him to the Yue clan. The Yue king was very close to him and liked him.

古文：后安国死，无子，母持国政，与国人共立臣磐同产弟子遗腹为疏勒王。
现代文：以后安国去世，没有儿子，安国的母亲主持国家政务，与国人一同立臣磐同母弟弟的儿子遣腹为疏勒王。
English: After that, Ankoku died and had no son. Ankoku's mother presided over state affairs, and the son of her younger brother, who was raised as a vassal along with his compatriots, was crowned King of Sule.

古文：臣磐闻之，请月氏王曰： 安国无子，种人微弱，若立母氏，我乃遗腹叔父也，我当为王。 
现代文：臣磐得知后，向月氏王请求说： 安国没有儿子，种族衰弱，如果立娘家人，我是遣腹的叔父，我应该当国王。 
English: After learning of this, Minban made a request to the King of the Moon Clan, saying, "Angu has no son, the race is weak, if you set up a daughter's family, I am an uncle with a big belly, I should be king.

古文：月氏乃遣兵送还疏勒。
现代文：月氏王于是派军队送臣磐回疏勒。
English: King Gesshi then sent an army to escort Iwakura back to Sora.

古文：国人素敬爱臣磐，又畏惮月氏，即共夺遗腹印绶，迎臣磐立为王，更以遗腹为磐稿城侯。
现代文：国内的人一向敬重喜欢臣螌，而且害怕旦旦，随即一道夺过：曲的印绶，迎接旦磐，立他为国王，重新任命遣腹为磐禀城堡。
English: The people of the country have always respected and liked Zhenqi, but they are afraid of Dandan, so they immediately seized: Qu's seal, greeted Dangan, made him king, and reappointed Qianbel as Dangan's castle.

古文：后莎车连畔于窴，属疏勒，疏勒以强，故得与龟兹、于窴为敌国焉。
现代文：以后茎堕连续背叛王童，归顺蕴勤，蕴勤因此强大，所以能够成为与龟兹、于实匹敌的国家。
English: After that, Zhuge Liang continuously betrayed Wang Tong and surrendered to Yan Qin. As a result, Yan Qin became powerful and was able to become a country comparable to Kuez and Yusi.

古文：顺帝永建二年，臣磐遣使奉献，帝拜臣磐为汉大都尉，兄子臣勋为守国司马。
现代文：顺帝永建二年，臣磐派使者进贡，皇帝授巨磐为选大都尉，授旦磐哥哥的儿子旦勉为守国司马。
English: In the second year of Emperor Shun's reign, Emperor Iwan sent an envoy to pay tribute. Emperor Shun awarded Emperor Iwan the title of Elected Grand Captain, and Emperor Shun awarded Emperor Iwan's brother's son, Emperor Dan, the title of Keeper of the State.

古文：五年，臣磐遣侍子与大宛、莎车使俱诣阙贡献。
现代文：五年，臣磐派侍子与大宛、莎车的使者一道到朝廷进贡。
English: In the fifth year, Omiwa sent his attendants to pay tribute to the Imperial Court, together with Owan and the messenger of the cart.

古文：阳嘉二年，臣磐复献师子、封牛。
现代文：阳嘉二年，臣磐又进献狮子、封牛。
English: In the second year of the Yangjia era, the minister of Iwate also presented a lion and a cow.

古文：至灵帝建宁元年，疏勒王汉大都尉于猎中为其季父和得所射杀，和得自立为王。
现代文：到玺童婆元年，疏勒王汉大都尉在打猎时被他的季父和得射死，和得立自己为国王。
English: In the first year of the reign of the Empress Dowager Cixi, Captain Wang Han of Shule was shot and killed by his father-in-law while hunting, and he had to establish himself as king.

古文：三年，凉州刺史孟佗遣从事任涉将敦煌兵五百人，与戊司马曹宽、西域长史张晏，将焉耆、龟兹、车师前后部，合三万余人，讨疏勒，攻桢中城，四十余日不能下，引去。
现代文：三年，凉州刺史孟佗派从事任涉率领敦煌的五百士兵，与戊部司马曹宽、西域长史张晏，统领了焉昼、蛊茎、车面前部和后部的人马，共有三万多人，征讨疏勒，进攻桢中城，四十多天未能攻克，只好率兵退去。
English: In the third year, the 500 soldiers led by Dunhuang were engaged by the Mengqi faction of the Liangzhou Jishi Mengqi faction. Together with Ma Cao Kuan, the secretary of the E Department, and Zhang Qi, the governor of the Western Region, they led a total of more than 30,000 people and horses in the afternoon, the morning, the front and the rear of the car, to recruit Sule and attack the middle city of Kunlun. They failed to conquer for more than 40 days, and had no choice but to lead the troops to retreat.

古文：其后疏勒王连相杀害，朝廷亦不能禁。
现代文：在这之后疏勒王连续相互攻杀，朝廷也没有能力禁止。
English: After this, the Shule kings continuously attacked and killed each other, and the imperial court was not able to prohibit it.

古文：东北经尉头、温宿、姑墨、龟兹至焉耆。
现代文：由此向东北经过昼灵、逼查、魑里、趣茎可到达焉耆。
English: From there, you can reach Yancheng in the northeast via Hailing, Juchang, Xili and Fuzhu.

古文：焉耆国王居南河城，北去长史所居八百里，东去洛阳八千二百里。
现代文：焉耆国国王住在南河城，北部距长史所在的地方有八百里，束部距洛阳有八千二百里。
English: The king of Yan'an lived in Nanhe City. In the north, it was eight hundred miles away from the place where Changshi was located, and Sokube was eight thousand two hundred miles away from Luoyang.

古文：户万五千，口五万二千，胜兵二万余人。
现代文：焉耆国有一万五千户、人口五万二千，能当兵打仗的有两万多人。
English: Yancheng Province has 15,000 households, 52,000 people, and more than 20,000 people who can fight as soldiers.

古文：其国四面有大山，与龟兹相连，道险厄，易守。
现代文：焉耆国四面都有大山，山岭与龟兹山岭相连，道路艰险，容易防守。
English: There are large mountains on all four sides of the country, and the mountains are connected to the Kuez Mountains. The road is difficult and dangerous, and it is easy to defend.

古文：有海水曲入四山之内，周匝其城三十余里。
现代文：有湖水弯弯曲曲流入四周的山裹，环绕南河城长达三十多里。
English: Lake water flows into the surrounding mountains in a meandering way, encircling Nanhe City for more than 30 miles.

古文：永平末，焉耆与龟兹共攻没都护陈睦、副校尉郭恂，杀吏士二千余人。
现代文：永平末年，焉耆与龟兹一道进攻并杀害了都护陈睦、副校尉郭恂，被他们杀害的佐吏和士兵有二千多人。
English: In the last years of the Yongping Dynasty, Yan Xuan and Gui Zi together attacked and killed the tutelary of the capital, Chen Mutu, and the vice-captain, Guo Xuan. They killed more than two thousand officers and soldiers.

古文：至永元六年，都护班超发诸国兵讨焉耆、危须、尉黎、山国，遂斩焉耆、尉黎二王首，传送京师，县蛮夷邸。
现代文：到永元六年，都护班超征调各国的军队征讨焉耆、危须、尉黎、山国、终于砍下焉耆国国王和尉黎国国王的脑袋，将首级送往京师，悬挂在蛮夷的客馆。
English: In the sixth year of the Yongyuan era, the Duoban oversaw the recruitment and transfer of troops from various countries to recruit the heads of the kings of Yan'an, Gansu, Yili and Shan States, and finally cut off the heads of the kings of Yan'an and Yili. The heads were sent to the Beijing Division and hung in the barbarian guesthouse.

古文：超乃立焉耆左候元孟为王，尉黎、危须、山国皆更立其王。
现代文：接着，班超立焉耆的左侯元孟为国王，尉黎、危须、山国都重新立了国王。
English: Next, Ban Chao made Yuan Meng, the left-hand lord of Yanqi, the king, and Yi Li, Guisu, and Shan Guo all re-established the king.

古文：至安帝时，西域背畔。
现代文：到安帝时，西域背叛。
English: When it came to the Andean Empire, the Western Regions rebelled.

古文：延光中，超子勇为西域长史，复讨定诸国。
现代文：延光年间，班超的儿子班勇担任西域长史，再次征讨平定了西域各国。
English: During the Yan Guang era, Ban Chao's son, Ban Yong, served as the long history of the western region, and once again conquered and leveled the countries in the western region.

古文：元孟与尉黎、危须不降。
现代文：元孟与尉黎、危须不肯投降。
English: Yuan Meng and his lieutenant Li and Xu refused to surrender.

古文：永建二年，勇与敦煌太守张朗击破之，元孟乃遣子诣阙贡献。
现代文：永建二年，班勇与敦煌太守张朗打败了他们，元孟这才派儿子到朝廷进贡。
English: In the second year of Yong Jian, Ban Yong and Zhang Lang, the governor of Dunhuang, defeated them. It was only then that Yuan Meng sent his son to the imperial court to pay tribute.

古文：蒲类国，居天山西疏榆谷，东南去长史所居千二百九十里，去洛阳万四百九十里。
现代文：蒲类国位于天山西面的疏榆谷，东南边距长史所在的地方有一千二百九十里，距洛阳有一万零四百九十里。
English: Putuo Province is located in the Soso Valley on the western side of Tianshan Mountain. The southeastern edge is 1,290 miles from the place where Changshi is located, and 10,490 miles from Luoyang.

古文：户八百余，口二千余，胜兵七百余人。
现代文：蒲类国有八百多户、二千多人，能当兵打仗的有七百多人。
English: There are more than eight hundred households and more than two thousand people in the state of Putuo, and more than seven hundred people can fight as soldiers.

古文：庐帐而居，逐水草，颇知田作。
现代文：他们住在帐篷裹，逐水草而居，懂得不少种田的知识。
English: They live in tents, move from place to place, and know a lot about farming.

古文：有牛、马、骆驼、羊畜。
现代文：蒲类国有牛、马、骆驼、羊和其他牲畜。
English: The state has cattle, horses, camels, sheep and other livestock.

古文：能作弓矢。
现代文：蒲类人能够制作弓箭。
English: People of the Po class are able to make bows and arrows.

古文：国出好马。
现代文：国中出产良马。
English: The country produces good horses.

古文：蒲类本大国也，前西域属匈奴，而其王得罪单于，单于怒，徙蒲类人六千余口，内之匈奴右部阿恶地，因号曰阿恶国。
现代文：蒲类原是大国，过去西域附属于匈奴，蒲类国国王得罪了单于，单于发怒，将蒲类的六千多口人迁到匈奴右部名叫阿恶的地方，所以称之为阿恶国。
English: Pudi was originally a great power, and in the past, the western region was attached to the Huns. The king of Pudi was offended by this alone, by his anger alone, and moved more than six thousand people from Pudi to a place on the right of the Huns called Ah Cun, so it was called Ah Cun.

古文：南去车师后部马行九十余日。
现代文：它的南边距车师后部骑马要走九十多天。
English: Its southern edge is more than ninety days away from the rear of the coachman riding a horse.

古文：人口贫羸，逃亡山谷间，故留为国云。
现代文：蒲类人贫困羸弱，逃亡到山谷裹面，所以留下来成为一个国家。
English: The Bushmen, poor and weak, fled to the valley to hide, so they stayed and became a nation.

古文：移支国，居蒲类地。
现代文：整吏迩人生活在渣类境内。
English: The law enforcers live in the territory of the dregs.

古文：户千余，口三千余，胜兵千余人。
现代文：有一千多户，三千多人口，能当兵打仗的有一千多人。
English: There are more than a thousand households, more than three thousand people, and more than a thousand people who can fight as soldiers.

古文：其人勇猛敢战，以寇抄为事。
现代文：那裹的人很勇猛，敢打仗，专做入侵抄掠的事情。
English: The people there are very brave, they dare to fight, and they specialize in invading and plundering.

古文：皆被发，随畜逐水草，不知田作。
现代文：他们都披着头发，跟着牲畜逐水草而居，不懂得农田耕作。
English: They all wear their hair in a ponytail, live off the land with their livestock, and don't know how to farm.

古文：所出皆与蒲类同。
现代文：出产的东西全与渣题相同。
English: Everything that comes out is exactly the same.

古文：东且弥国，东去长史所居八百里，去洛阳九千二百五十里。
现代文：束且弥国束部距长史所在的地方有八百里，距渔荡有九千二百五十里。
English: Sokchimi's country Sokube is eight hundred miles away from the place where Nagashi is located, and it is nine thousand two hundred and fifty miles away from the fishing village.

古文：户三千余，口五千余，胜兵二千余人。
现代文：束且弥国有三千多户，五千多人口，能当兵打仗的有二千多人。
English: There are more than three thousand households and more than five thousand people in Sokchimi, and more than two thousand people can fight as soldiers.

古文：庐帐居，逐水草，颇田作。
现代文：他们住在帐篷里，逐水草而居，能从事农田耕作。
English: They live in tents, move from place to place, and are able to farm.

古文：其所出有亦与蒲类同。
现代文：出产的东西也与渣类相同。
English: The output is also the same as that of slag.

古文：所居无常。
现代文：他们没有固定的住处。
English: They have no fixed abode.

古文：车师前王居交河城。
现代文：车师前王住在交河城。
English: Wang, a former driver, lives in Jiaohe City.

古文：河水分流绕城，故号交河。
现代文：河水分成两条环城流过，所以叫做交河。
English: The water of the river flows through the city in two rings, which is why it is called the cross-river.

古文：去长史所居柳中八十里，东去洛阳九千一百二十里。
现代文：这裹距长史所住的柳中有八十里，东部距洛阳有九千一百二十里。
English: It is eighty miles from Liu, where Changshi lived, and nine thousand one hundred and twenty miles from Luoyang in the east.

古文：领户千五百余，口四千余，胜兵二千人。
现代文：车师前部管辖一千五百多户，四千多人口，能当兵打仗的有二千人。
English: More than 1,500 households and more than 4,000 people are under the jurisdiction of the front of the division, and there are 2,000 people who can fight as soldiers.

古文：后王居务涂谷，去长史所居五百里，去洛阳九千六百二十里。
现代文：车师后王住在务涂谷，距长史所在的地方有五百里，距洛阳有九千六百二十里。
English: Queen Wang, a driver, lives in Wudu Valley, 500 miles away from where Changshi is, and 9,620 miles away from Luoyang.

古文：领户四千余，口万五千余，胜兵三千余人。
现代文：车师后部管辖四千多户、一万五千多人口，能当兵打仗的有三千多人。
English: The rear of the division controls more than four thousand households, more than fifteen thousand people, and there are more than three thousand people who can fight as soldiers.

古文：前后部及东且弥、卑陆、蒲类、移支，是为车师六国，北与匈奴接，前部西通焉耆北道，后部西通乌孙。
现代文：车师前部和后部、束且弥、卑陆、蒲类、移支，这是车师六国，车师的北面与匈奴接壤。车师前部向西通往焉耆北道，后部向西通往乌孙。
English: The front and back of the coach, Sokchiya, Bielu, Putuo and Yizhi, are the six countries of the coach. The north side of the coach is bordered by the Xiongnu. The front of the coach goes west to Yancheng North Road, and the back part goes west to Wusun.

古文：建武二十一年，与鄯善、焉耆遣子入侍，光武遣还之，乃附属匈奴。
现代文：建武二十一年，车师与鄯善、焉耆派王子入朝侍奉，光武让他们回国，于是车师附属于匈奴。
English: In the twenty-first year of the Jianwu era, the chariot master, together with Jianzhen and Yanlu, sent princes to serve in the imperial court, but Guangwu sent them back to China, so the chariot master became a vassal of the Xiongnu.

古文：明帝永平十六年，汉取伊吾卢，通西域，车师始复内属。
现代文：明帝永平十六年，汉朝军队占领了伊吾卢，打通了西域，车师才又归属汉。
English: In the 16th year of the Yongping reign of the Ming Dynasty, the Han Dynasty army occupied Iguru and opened up the western region. It was only then that it became part of the Han Dynasty.

古文：匈奴遣兵击之，复降北虏。
现代文：匈奴派军队攻打车师，车师再次投降了北匈奴。
English: The Huns sent troops to attack the coachmen, who again surrendered to the Northern Huns.

古文：和帝永元二年，大将军窦宪破北匈奴，车师震慑，前后王各遣子奉贡入侍，并赐印绶金帛。
现代文：和帝永元二年，大将军窦宪打败了北匈奴，车师震动畏惧，前王和后王各自派儿子携带贡品入朝侍奉，他们一并被赐给印绶、金和丝帛。
English: In the second year of Emperor Yongzheng's reign, the great general Dou Xian defeated the Northern Xiongnu, and the drivers were shocked and afraid. The former king and the queen each sent their sons to carry the tribute into the imperial service, and they were given the seal, gold and silk.

古文：八年，戊己校尉索頵欲废后部王涿鞮，立破虏侯细致。
现代文：八年，戊己校尉索滪想废除后部国王涿千，立破虏侯细致为国王。
English: In the eighth year, Captain Wuji Sohong wanted to abolish the back of the king and set up a king.

古文：涿鞮忿前王尉卑大卖己，因反击尉卑大，获其妻子。
现代文：涿千痛恨前王尉卑大出卖自己，因此反叛，攻打尉卑大，俘获了他的妻子和孩子。
English: Yan Qian hated the former Wang Yibida for betraying him, so he rebelled, attacked Wang Yibida, and captured his wife and child.

古文：明年，汉遣将兵长史王林，发凉州六郡兵及羌胡二万余人，以讨涿鞮，获首虏千余人。
现代文：第二年，汉派将兵长史王林，征调了凉州六个郡的部队和羌胡军队，有二万多人，征讨涿千，杀死和俘虏一千多人。
English: In the second year, the Han Dynasty sent the commander Shi Wanglin to recruit troops from the six counties of Liangzhou and the Yanhu army, with more than twenty thousand people, recruit thousands, kill and capture more than one thousand people.

古文：涿鞮入北匈奴，汉军追击，斩之，立涿鞮弟农奇为王。
现代文：涿千跑到北匈奴，汉军追击，杀了涿千，立涿千的弟弟农奇为王。
English: Xuanqian ran to the Northern Huns, the Chinese army chased and killed Xuanqian, and made Xuanqian's brother, Nongqi, king.

古文：至永宁元年，后王军就及母沙麻反畔，杀后部司马及敦煌行事。
现代文：到永宁元年，车师后王军就和母亲沙麻反叛，杀害了后部司马和敦煌行事。
English: In the first year of the Yongning era, the coachman Hou Wangjun rebelled against his mother, Shama, and killed the rear Sima and Dunhuang.

古文：至安帝延光四年，长史班勇击军就，大破，斩之。
现代文：到安帝延光四年，长史班勇攻打军就，大败军就，并杀了他。
English: After four years of An Di's extension, Chang Shi Ban bravely attacked the army, defeated the army, and killed him.

古文：顺帝永建元年，勇率后王农奇子加特奴及八滑等，发精兵击北虏呼衍王，破之。
现代文：顺帝永建元年，班勇率领车师后王农奇的儿子加特奴和八滑等人，征调精锐部队攻打北方的敌虏呼衍王，打败了呼衍王。
English: In the first year of Shun Emperor Yongjian's reign, Ban Yong led Gatenu, son of the chariot master Qowang Nongqi, and others such as Hachinohe to recruit elite troops to attack the enemy in the north, King Huyan, and defeated King Huyan.

古文：勇于是上立加特奴为后王，八滑为后部亲汉侯。
现代文：班勇于是上书奏立加特奴为后王，封八滑为后部亲漠侯。
English: Therefore, Ban Yong wrote a letter to set up Gatnu as the queen, and Fuhaxia as the rear part of the clan.

古文：阳嘉三年夏，车师后部司马率加特奴等千五百人，掩击北匈奴于阊吾陆谷，坏其庐落，斩数百级，获单于母、季母及妇女数百人，牛、羊十余万头，车千余两，兵器什物甚众。
现代文：阳嘉三年夏天，车师后部司马率领加特奴等一千五百人，袭击了在阐吾陆谷的北匈奴人，毁坏了他们的庐帐，杀了几百人，俘虏了单于的母亲、叔母和几百名妇女，得到十多万头牛羊、一千多辆车，还有非常多的兵器和杂品。
English: In the summer of the third year of Yang Jia, the rear of the division, Sima, led by Gatenu and other fifteen hundred people, attacked the Northern Huns in the Xuanwu valley, destroyed their credit, killed several hundred people, captured the mother, aunt and several hundred women of Shan Yu, obtained more than one hundred thousand cattle and sheep, more than one thousand vehicles, and a large number of weapons and miscellaneous goods.

古文：四年春，北匈奴呼衍王率兵侵后部，帝以车师六国接近北虏，为西域蔽，乃令敦煌太守发诸国兵，及玉门关候、伊吾司马，合六千三百骑救之，掩击北虏于勒山，汉军不利。
现代文：四年春天，北匈奴呼衍王率领人马入侵后部，皇帝因为车师六国接近北方的敌虏，是西域的屏障，就下令要敦煌太守征调各国军队，连同玉门关候、伊吾司马，合起来有六千三百骑兵，援救车师，袭击在勒山的北部敌虏，汉军不利。
English: In the spring of the fourth year, the northern Hun, Huyan Wang, led the cavalry to invade the rear. The emperor ordered the Dunhuang Taishou to conscript the armies of all countries, together with the Yumen Guanwa and the Izu Sima, a total of 6,300 cavalrymen and a rescue division, to attack the northern enemy in Leshan, because the cavalry division of the six countries was close to the enemy in the north and was a barrier in the western region. The Han army was unfavorable.

古文：秋，呼衍王复将二千人攻后部，破之。
现代文：秋天，呼衍王又率领二千人进攻后部，打败了后部。
English: In autumn, Huyan Wang led another two thousand people to attack the rear and defeated the rear.

古文：桓帝元嘉元年，呼衍王将三千余骑寇伊吾，伊吾司马毛恺遣吏兵五百人于蒲类海东与呼衍王战，悉为所没，呼衍王遂攻伊吾屯城。
现代文：桓帝元嘉元年，呼衍王率领三千多骑兵入侵伊吾，伊吾司马毛恺派五百官兵在蒲类海束面与呼衍王交战，全军覆没，呼衍王接着攻打伊吾军队驻守的城邑。
English: In the first year of Emperor Kan's reign, King Huyan led more than three thousand cavalrymen to invade Igu. Igu's Sima Mao sent five hundred officers and soldiers to fight King Huyan at Putuo, and the entire army was wiped out. King Huyan then attacked the towns where the Igu army was stationed.

古文：夏，遣敦煌太守司马达将敦煌、酒泉，张掖属国吏士四千余人救之，出塞至蒲类海，呼衍王闻而引去，汉军无功而还。
现代文：夏天，朝廷派錾蝗太守司马达率领敦煌？酝、张掖属国的四千多官兵援救堕，出边关赶到渣类海，呼衍王知道后率兵退走，汉军无功而返。
English: In the summer, the imperial court sent the commander-in-chief, Sima Da, to lead more than 4,000 officers and soldiers from Dunhuang, Sichuan, and Zhangye to rescue the fallen. They rushed to the slag-like sea outside the border, and after Huyan Wang knew it, he led the soldiers to retreat. The Han army returned without success.

古文：永兴元年，军师后部王阿罗多与戊部候严皓不相得，遂忿戾反畔，攻围汉屯田且固城，杀伤吏士。
现代文：永兴元年，车师后部王阿罗多与戊部候严皓不相投合，因而忿恨反叛，攻打包围了漠军的屯田且固城，杀死杀伤官兵。
English: In the first year of Yongxing, the king of the rear division, Arodo, did not get along with the eunuch of the eunuch division, so he rebelled angrily, attacked and surrounded the military camp of the Muslim army, and killed and injured officers and soldiers.

古文：后部候炭遮领余人畔阿罗多，诣汉吏降。
现代文：后部候炭遮带领其他人背叛阿罗多向汉朝官吏投降。
English: At the back, the charcoal-burner led the others to betray Aroldo and surrender to the Han officials.

古文：阿罗多迫急，将其母妻子，从百余骑亡走北匈奴中，敦煌太守宋亮上立后部故王军就质子卑君为后部王。
现代文：阿罗多急迫无奈，带领他的母亲、妻子、孩子和一百多骑兵逃往北匈奴，敦煌太守宋亮上书奏立原后部国王军就做人质的儿子卑君为后部王。
English: Desperate and helpless, Arodo led his mother, wife, children and more than a hundred cavalrymen to flee to the northern Huns. Dunhuang's governor Song Liang wrote a letter to the king of the rear, and the son of the hostage, Bijun, became the king of the rear.

古文：后阿罗多复从匈奴中还，与卑君争国，颇收其国人。
现代文：后来阿罗多又从匈奴回来，与卑君争夺国家，聚集了不少国民。
English: Later, Arodo returned from the Huns and fought with the petty princes for the country, gathering a lot of people.

古文：戊校尉阎详虑其招引北虏，将乱西域，乃开信告示，许复为王，阿罗多乃诣详降。
现代文：戊部校尉间详担心阿罗多招引北方的敌虏，将会祸乱西域，于是公开告示，答应恢复阿罗多的国王地位，阿罗多这才向阎详投降。
English: Worried that Aroldo would attract enemies from the north and wreak havoc in the west, the captain of the Eighth Division publicly announced that he would restore Aroldo's status as king. Only then did Aroldo surrender to Yamei.

古文：于是收夺所赐卑君印绶，更立阿罗多为王，仍将卑君还敦煌，以后部人三百帐别属役之，食其税。
现代文：于是强行收回赐给卑君的印绶，重新立阿罗多为国王，仍旧带卑君回到敦煌，另外将后部三百帐的人给卑君支配役使，用他们的赋税作为俸禄。
English: So he forcibly took back the seal money given to the humble one, reinstated Arodo as king, and still brought the humble one back to Dunhuang. In addition, he gave the people of the rear three hundred accounts to the humble ruler, using their taxes as a salary.

古文：帐者，犹中国之户数也。论曰：西域风土之载，前古未闻也。
现代文：一帐相当于汉的一户。论日：有关西域风俗人情和地理环境的记载，前古没听说过。
English: One account is equivalent to one household in the Han Dynasty.On Japan: Records on the customs, people and geographical environment of the Western Regions were unheard of in ancient times.

古文：汉世张骞怀致远之略，班超奋封侯之志，终能立功西遐，羁服外域。
现代文：汉代张骞身怀招致远方国家归顺的谋略，班超奋发封侯的志向，而最终能够在遥远的西域建立功业，控制了境外地区，使其臣服。
English: During the Han Dynasty, Zhang Xuan conceived the strategy of winning the submission of faraway countries, and Ban Chao worked hard to develop the ambition of a feudal lord. In the end, he was able to establish his career in the far west, control the overseas regions, and subjugate them.

古文：自兵威之所肃服，财赂之所怀诱，莫不献方奇，纳爱质，露顶肘行，东向而朝天子。
现代文：凡是被武力肃然臣服、财货所安抚引诱的国家，无不献来当地珍奇物品，送纳爱子作人质，摘下冠帽，用肘前行，面朝束站立朝拜天子。
English: All countries that have been subdued by force and seduced by wealth and goods have offered local rare items, sent their beloved son as a hostage, taken off their crowned hats, marched forward with their elbows, and stood with their heads bowed to worship the Son of God.

古文：故设戊己之官，分任其事；建都护之帅，总领其权。
现代文：所以朝廷设置戊己官员，分别负责西域事务；委派都护这样的一方主帅，总揽西域最高职权。
English: Therefore, the imperial court set up officials who were responsible for Western affairs, and appointed a commander such as the tutelary, who had the highest authority in the Western region.

古文：先驯则赏金以赐龟绶，后服则系头颡而衅北阙。
现代文：先归顺的就被赏给金银财宝和印绶，后臣服的就系绳于颈而向朝廷请罪。
English: Those who surrendered first were rewarded with gold, silver, treasures, and seals, while those who surrendered later tied a rope around their necks and pleaded guilty to the imperial court.

古文：立屯田于膏腴之野，列邮置于要害之路。
现代文：汉朝在肥沃的原野上设立屯田，在冲要的道路上分布驿站。
English: The Han Dynasty set up military garrisons on fertile fields and distributed post stations on important roads.

古文：驰命走驿，不绝于时月；商胡贩客，日款于塞下。
现代文：为传送命令骑马飞奔的驿使，一年四季连续不断；来做生意贩运东西的胡人和客商，每天都有人叩关。
English: Envoys gallop on horseback to deliver orders continuously throughout the year; Hu people and merchants who come to do business and traffic things knock on the gate every day.

古文：其后甘英乃抵条支而历安息，临西海以望大秦，拒玉门、阳关者四万余里，靡不周尽焉。
现代文：在这以后苴茎到达修主，历经塞皇，来到酉迤，遥望大秦，距玉门关、阳关四万多里以内的地方，甘英全都走遍了。
English: After this, Gan Ying walked all the way to the place where the stalk reached the cultivator, and after passing through Caiwang, came to Lu, and looked at Daqin from a distance of more than forty thousand miles from Yumen Pass and Yangguan.

古文：若其境俗性智之优薄，产载物类之区品，川河领障之基源，气节凉暑之通隔，梯山栈谷、绳行沙度之道，身热首痛、风灾鬼难之域，莫不备写情形，审求根实。
现代文：至于境内习俗和人的性情才智的优劣，出产生长的各种物类，河流和山岭的发源，气候节令和凉热方面的畅达和闭隔，攀越高山，在山谷间架设栈道，用绳索悬缒而行，穿越沙漠中的道路，使人浑身发热头脑疼痛，有暴风和恶鬼出现的地区，各种情形无不详细记述，仔细推求它们的来龙去脉。
English: As for the merits and demerits of the customs and human nature and intelligence within the territory, the various species that have grown up, the sources of rivers and mountains, the smooth access and isolation of climatic seasons and coolness, climbing over high mountains, erecting footbridges between valleys, hanging with ropes, crossing roads in the desert, making people feel hot and sore, areas with storms and evil spirits, all situations are described in detail, carefully investigating their ins and outs.

古文：至于佛道神化，兴自身毒，而二汉方志，莫有称焉。
现代文：至于佛教的神灵变化，起源于身毒，但两漠记述四方情况的书没有一本提到佛教。
English: As for the change of deities in Buddhism, it originated from the body and the mind, but none of the books describing the situation in the four directions in the two deserts mentioned Buddhism.

古文：张骞但著地多暑湿，乘象而战，班勇虽列其奉浮图，不杀伐，而精文善法、导达之功，靡所传述。
现代文：张骞衹记录了那裹土地多，炎热潮湿，人们骑象去打仗。班勇虽然条列了身毒人信奉佛教，不杀戮，不征伐，但对他们精于用文德和善于用法令加以引导疏通的功效没有记述。
English: Zhang Qian recorded that there was a lot of land, hot and humid, and people rode elephants to go to war. Although Ban Yong listed people who believed in Buddhism, did not kill, and did not go to war, he did not describe the effect of their proficiency in using literature and good at using laws to guide and clear up.

古文：余闻之后说也，其国则殷乎中土，玉烛和气。
现代文：我听到的是后人所说。身毒比中原富饶，四时之气和畅，是神仙和圣人降生聚集、有才德的人生长的地方。
English: What I heard was what later generations said: the Central Plains are rich in health and vitality, and the four seasons are pleasant. It is a place where immortals and sages were born and gathered, and where talented people grew up.

古文：灵圣之所降集，贤懿之所挺生，神迹诡怪，则理绝人区，感验明显，则事出天外。
现代文：神的事迹怪异奇特，其事理和人世全然不同；神的感化应验显明昭著，其事情超出于人世以外。
English: God's deeds are strange and peculiar, and their causes are completely different from the human world; God's influence and response are obvious, and His things are beyond the human world.

古文：而骞、超无闻者，岂其道闭往运，数开叔叶乎？
现代文：然而张骞、班超没有听说过，难道这是天道闭隔运数逝去，天数预示衰乱时代的开始吗？
English: However, Zhang Xuan and Banchao have not heard of it. Is this the beginning of the era of decadence?

古文：不然，何诬异之甚也！
现代文：如果不是这样的话，怎会出现这么严重的虚妄和差异呢？
English: If this were not the case, how could there be such serious falsehoods and discrepancies?

古文：汉自楚英始盛斋戒之祀，桓帝又修华盖之饰。
现代文：汉代自楚王刘英开始举行佛教隆重的斋戒祭祀，桓帝又注重车上伞盖的装饰。
English: In the Han Dynasty, since King Liu Ying of Chu, a grand Buddhist fasting ritual was held, and Emperor Kuan paid attention to the decoration of the umbrella cover on the car.

古文：将微义未译，而但神明之邪？
现代文：那时佛教精微的教义尚未翻译，难道是神人明示给他们吗？
English: At that time, the subtle teachings of Buddhism had not yet been translated. Was it the man of God who revealed them to them?

古文：详其清心释累之训，空有兼遣之宗，道书之流也。
现代文：审察佛教无思无虑，忘掉一切烦恼的训诫，空和有俱各两忘的宗旨，属于道家者流。
English: To examine Buddhism thoughtlessly, to forget all the troublesome precepts, and to forget the purpose of emptiness and duality, belongs to the Taoist school.

古文：且好仁恶杀，蠲敝崇善，所以贤达君子多爱其法焉。
现代文：而且佛教喜好仁爱，厌恶杀戮，革除弊政，崇尚善行，所以贤明通达的君子大都喜爱佛法。
English: Moreover, Buddhism favors benevolence and love, abhors killing, abolishes bad politics, and advocates good deeds, so most wise and knowledgeable gentlemen love Buddhism.

古文：然好大不经，奇谲无已，虽邹衍谈天之辩，庄周蜗角之论，尚未足以概其万一。
现代文：但佛教喜欢夸大，不合常理，奇特怪诞，没完没了，即使是邹衍讲述天数的辩术，庄周关于蜗牛触角的论述，尚不足以涵盖佛教于万一。
English: But Buddhism likes to exaggerate, it is not reasonable, it is strange and grotesque, and it is endless. Even the argument about the number of days, Zhuang Zhou's discussion about the tentacles of snails, is not enough to cover Buddhism in the unlikely event.

古文：又精灵起灭，因报相寻。若晓而昧者，故通人多惑焉。
现代文：另外，生命的生死轮回，因果报应的相互接续，似乎说得很明白，实际模糊不清，所以才智渊博的人大都感到疑惑。
English: In addition, the life and death cycle of life, the interdependence of karmic retribution, seems to be very clear, but the reality is vague, so most people with profound wisdom are puzzled.

古文：盖导俗无方，适物异会，取诸同归，措夫疑说，则大道通矣。
现代文：大概引导世俗没有定式，顺应事物殊途同归，取其相同的主旨，抛弃可疑的学说，那么最高的道都可以相通了。
English: Presumably, there is no formula for guiding the mundane, conforming to the same path of things, taking the same theme, abandoning dubious doctrines, then the highest way can be connected.

古文：赞曰：矣西胡，天之外区。
现代文：赞曰：遥远的西域，天外的地方。
English: Zang Zhai: the far west, a place beyond the heavens.

古文：土物琛丽，人性淫虚。
现代文：那裹的物产珍美瑰丽，人的禀性放纵虚浮。
English: The products of that wrapping are precious and magnificent, and people's stubbornness is indulgent and vain.

古文：不率华礼，莫有典书。
现代文：不遵循中华的礼制，也没有典章文书。
English: They do not follow the Chinese etiquette, and there are no official documents.

古文：若微神道，何恤何拘！
现代文：要不是有佛教的教义，他们怎会有所忧惧有所拘忌呢？
English: If it weren't for the teachings of Buddhism, how could they have any fears or inhibitions?

