古文：祥符以后，凡天书礼文、宫观典册、祭祀巡幸、祥瑞颂声之事，王文正公旦实为参政宰相，无一不预。
现代文：宋真宗大中祥符以后，凡是所谓的天书礼文、宫观的典册、祭祀天地、巡幸各地、吉祥瑞符、歌功颂德等事情，文正公王旦身为宰相，都参预其事。
English: After the Song Dynasty, the Song Dynasty, the Song Dynasty, the Song Dynasty, the Song Dynasty, the Song Dynasty, the Song Dynasty, the Song Dynasty, the Song Dynasty, the Song Dynasty, the Song Dynasty, the Song Dynasty, the Song Dynasty, the Song Dynasty, the Song Dynasty, the Song Dynasty, the Song Dynasty, the Song Dynasty, the Song Dynasty, the Song Dynasty, the Song Dynasty, the Song Dynasty, the Song Dynasty, the Song Dynasty, the Song Dynasty, the Song Dynasty, the Song Dynasty, the Song Dynasty, the Song Dynasty, the Song Dynasty, the Song Dynasty, the Song Dynasty, the Song Dynasty, the Song Dynasty, the Song Dynasty, the Song Dynasty, the Song Dynasty

古文：官自侍郎至太保，公心知得罪于清议，而固恋患失，不能决去。
现代文：王旦做官自侍部到太保，他自知得罪了不少士大夫，但却患得患失，不能断然辞职而去。
English: Wang Dan worked as an official from the Chamberlain's Department to the Imperial Household Agency. He knew that he had offended many magistrates, but he was troubled and could not resign outright.

古文：及其临终，乃欲削发僧服以敛，何所补哉？
现代文：到他临终前，才想剃发为僧并要求在自己死后身穿僧服入处，这于事何补？
English: It was only on his deathbed that he wanted to shave off his hair and become a monk, and he asked to wear a monk's robe after his death.

古文：魏野赠诗，所谓 西祀东封今已了，好来相伴赤松游 ，可谓君子爱人以德，其箴戒之意深矣。
现代文：隐士魏野曾赠王旦诗说： 西祀东封念已了，好夫相伴赤松游 ，真可以称得上是君子爱人以德，其中所含的鉴戒之意也是很深远的。
English: The hermit Wei Ye once gave Wang Dan a poem, saying: "The West has forgotten the East, and the good man travels with the red pine tree. He can truly be called a gentleman who loves people with virtue. The meaning of the warning is also very far-reaching."

古文：欧阳公神道碑，悉隐而不书，盖不可书也。
现代文：欧阳修先生在作神道碑文时，上述之事一点也没有写，大概他认为不能写。
English: Mr. Ouyang Xiu did not write any of the above-mentioned things when he made the Shinto inscription, probably because he did not think he could.

古文：虽持身公清，无一可议，然特张禹、孔光、胡广之流云。
现代文：文正公王旦虽然公正清廉，后人也不能议其是非，但他也只不过是象汉代的张禹、孔光、胡广之类的人罢了。
English: Although Prince Wenzheng Wangdan was fair and honest, later generations could not discuss his rights and wrongs, but he was just like Zhang Yu, Kong Guang, Hu Guang and other people in the Han Dynasty.

