古文：己卯四月初十日闪知愿早令徐使来问夫，而昨所定者竟不至。
现代文：己卯年四月初十日闪知愿早上叫姓徐的使者来询问找脚夫的情况，而昨天讲定的脚夫竟然不来。
English: On the 10th day of the 4th month of the 1st month of the 1st year of the 2nd month of the 2nd year of the 3rd year of the 3rd year of the 4th year of the 3rd year of the 4th year of the 3rd year of the 4th year of the 5th year of the 4th year of the 5th year of the 4th year of the 5th year of the 4th year of the 5th year of the 4th year of the 5th year of the 4th year of the 5th year of the 5th year of the 6th year of the 5th year of the 6th year of the 5th year of the 6

古文：徐复趋南关觅一夫来，余饭已久矣。
现代文：姓徐的又赶去南关找来一个脚夫，我吃过饭已经很久了。
English: My surname is Xu, and I rushed to Nanguan to find a porter. It's been a long time since I've had a meal.

古文：乃以衣四件、书四本、并袜包等寄陶道，遂同至夫寓。
现代文：于是把四件衣服、四本书及袜子包裹等寄给陶道士，便一同来到脚夫家。
English: So he sent four pieces of clothing, four books, and a package of socks to Taoist, and together they came to the porter's house.

古文：候其饭，上午乃行，徐使始去。
现代文：等他吃饭，上午才动身，姓徐的使者这才离去。
English: After he had eaten, he did not leave until the morning, and the messenger surnamed Xu did not leave until then.

古文：出南门，门外有小水自西而东，吊桥跨其上，即太保山南峡所出者。
现代文：走出南门，门外有小溪自西流向东，有吊桥跨在溪上，就是太保山南峡流出的溪流。
English: Out of the south gate, there is a stream flowing from west to east outside the gate, and there is a suspension bridge across the stream, which is the stream flowing out of the South Gorge of Taibo Mountain.

古文：南行五里，有巨石梁跨深溪上，其下水断而不成流，想即沙河之水也。
现代文：往南行五里，有座大石桥跨在深溪上，桥下的水断断续续不成流，猜想就是沙河的水了。
English: Five miles to the south, there is a large stone bridge spanning a deep stream. The water under the bridge is intermittent and does not flow. I guess it is the water of the Sand River.

古文：又南半里，坡间树色依然，颇似余乡樱珠，而不见火齐映树，一二家结棚树下，油碧舆五六肩，乃妇人之游于林间者，不能近辨其为何树也。
现代文：又向南半里，山坡间树影依然，很像我家乡的樱桃，但不见火样的果实映衬在树上，一二家人在树下搭了棚子，旁边有五六乘油绿色的轿子，这是在林间游玩的妇女乘坐的，所以我不便走近分辨它是什么树。
English: Halfway to the south, the shadows of the trees between the hillsides are still very much like the cherries of my hometown, but the fruit that does not look like fire is silhouetted against the trees. One or two families have built sheds under the trees, and next to them are five or six oily green sedans, which are used by women who play in the woods, so I can't get close enough to distinguish which tree it is.

古文：又南半里，有堤如城垣，自西山环绕来。
现代文：又向南半里，有堤坝如城墙，从西山环绕而来。
English: Half a mile to the south, there are dykes like city walls, encircling it from the west.

古文：登其上，则堤内堰水成塘，西浸山麓，东筑堰高丈余即诸葛堰，今尚存。
现代文：登到堤上，就见堤内拦水成塘，西边浸到山麓，东边修筑了一丈多高的堤坝。
English: Climbing up the embankment, you can see the water in the embankment has become a pond, the west side has been submerged to the foot of the mountain, and the east side has built a high dam.

古文：随东堰西南行，二里堰尽，山从堰西南环而下，有数家当曲中在山湾中。
现代文：顺着东边的堤坝往西南行，走二里堤坝到了头，山从堤坝西南环绕而下，有数家人住在山弯中。
English: Along the east side of the dike to the southwest, walk two miles to the end of the dike, the mountain is surrounded by the southwest of the dike, and several families live in the mountains.

古文：南转行其前，又二里，有数十家倚西山下，山复环其南，是为卧狮窝。
现代文：向南转走到村前，又走二里，有数十家人紧靠在西山下，山又环绕在村南，这是卧狮窝。
English: I turned south and walked to the front of the village, and walked another two miles. There were dozens of families clinging to the bottom of the west mountain, and the mountain surrounded the south of the village. This was the lion's den.

古文：盖其西大山将南尽，支乃东转，其北先有近支，东向屡下，如太保、九隆皆是也；又南为卧狮，在西南坳中，山形再跌而下，其上峰石崖盘突，俨然一如狻猊之首，其下峰颇长，则卧形也。
现代文：这里西面的大山将要到南面的尽头处，支脉就向东转，它北面先有近处的支脉，屡屡向东下延，如太保山、九隆山都是这样的支脉；又向南延成为卧狮窝，在西南山坳中，山势再次跌落而下，它上面的山峰上石崖盘结突兀，俨然雄狮的头部，它下边的山峰很长，就是狮子躺卧的身形了。
English: Here, the large mountain in the west will reach the end of the south, and the branch will turn to the east. It has a nearby branch in the north first, and repeatedly extends to the east, such as Mount Taibo and Mount Kowloon. It also extends to the south to become a crouching lion's den. In the southwest ridge, the mountain once again falls down. The stone cliffs on the peak above it are jagged, resembling the head of a lion. The peak below it is long, which is the shape of a lion lying down.

古文：余先望见大路在南坡之上，初不知小路之西折而当狮崖盘突间，但遥见其崖突兀，与前峰凑峡甚促，心异之。
现代文：我先望见大路在南面山坡之上，开始并不知小路折向西后隐入盘结突兀的狮形石崖之间，只远远望见那里石崖突兀，与前边山峰凑扰的山峡十分靠近，心里觉得它很奇异。
English: I first saw the main road on the southern slope of the mountain, and at first I did not know that the path turned westward and disappeared between the lion-shaped stone cliffs. I only saw the rocky cliffs there far away, very close to the canyon with the peaks in front, and I thought it was very strange.

古文：候土人而问，初一人曰： 此石花洞也。 
现代文：就站住等候当地人打听，起初一个人说： 这是石花洞。 
English: They stopped and waited for the locals to inquire. At first, one man said, "This is a rock flower cave."

古文：再问一人，曰： 此芭蕉洞也。 
现代文：再问另一个人，说： 这是芭蕉洞。 
English: Then he asked another person and said, "This is Basho-dong."

古文：小路正从其下过，石花即其后来之名耳。
现代文：小路正从它下边经过，石花洞是它后来的名字罢了。
English: The path is passing under it, and the stone flower cave is only its later name.

古文：盖大路上南坡，而小路西折而由此，余时欲从小路上，而仆担俱在后，坐待久之。
现代文：大路往南面的山坡上延伸，小路折向西经由此处，我此时想从小路上走，可仆人担子都在后头，就坐下等了他们很久。
English: The main road extends to the south on the hillside, and the path turns to the west at this point. At this time, I wanted to walk from the path, but the servants' burdens were behind me, so I sat down and waited for them for a long time.

古文：俟其至，从村南过小桥，有碑称卧佛桥。
现代文：等他们来到后，从村南走过小桥，有碑称为卧佛桥。
English: After they arrived, they walked across a small bridge from the south of the village. There is a monument called the Reclining Buddha Bridge.

古文：过桥，即西折从小路上坡。
现代文：过桥后，立即向西折从小路上坡。
English: After crossing the bridge, immediately turn west uphill from the trail.

古文：一里余，从坡坳间渡小水，即仰见芭蕉洞在突崖之下，盖突崖乃狮首，而洞则当其卧脐之间。
现代文：走了一里多，从山坡山坳间渡过小溪，马上仰面望见芭蕉洞在突兀的石崖之下，原来突兀的石崖是狮首，而洞则正当它躺卧的肚脐眼之间。
English: I walked for more than a mile, crossing the stream from the hillside between the hawthorns, and immediately looked up to see the banana hole under the jagged cliff. Originally, the jagged cliff was the lion's head, and the hole was right between its lying navel and eyes.

古文：涉涧，又西上而探洞。
现代文：涉过涧水，又向西上山去探洞。
English: After wading through Surabaya, they went up the mountain to the west to explore the cave.

古文：洞门东向，高穹二丈，正与笔架山遥对。
现代文：洞口向东，高高隆起二丈，正与笔架山遥遥相对。
English: The mouth of the cave faces east, rising two stories high, directly opposite the Pen Stand Mountain.

古文：洞内丈余，即西北折而下。
现代文：洞内进去一丈多，立即折向西北下走。
English: Go into the cave and immediately turn northwest.

古文：其洞下虽峻而路颇夷平坦，下三丈渐暗，闻秉炬入，深里余，姑挨归途携炬以穷也。
现代文：此洞下走虽然陡峻，但路很平坦，下走三丈渐渐暗下来，听说举着火把进去，深一里多，姑且留待归途时带上火把来穷究它了。
English: Although it is steep to go down this hole, the path is very flat. It gradually darkens as you go down. I heard that if you go into it with a torch, it is more than a mile deep. I'll have to bring a torch when I go back to explore it.

古文：出洞，循崖西上一里，过突崖下峡，透脊而西半里，度一洼。
现代文：出洞来，沿石崖向西上走一里，经过突兀石崖下边的山峡，越过山脊往西半里，走过一处洼地。
English: Out of the cave, walk one mile westward along the cliff, pass through the gorge at the bottom of the jagged cliff, cross the ridge to the west half a mile, and walk through a depression.

古文：脊以内乃中洼之峡，水东挨突崖脊，下捣其崖麓，无穴以泄，水沫淤浊，然而所渡芭蕉洞前小水，即其透崖沥峡而出者。
现代文：山脊以内是中央下洼的峡谷，有积水向东紧靠石崖突兀的山脊，下泻直捣那石崖的山麓下，无洞穴外泄，水沫淤滞浑浊，不过前边渡过的芭蕉洞前的小溪，就是这里的水渗过山崖滴到峡中流出去的水流。
English: Within the ridge is a canyon with a depression in the center. There is standing water to the east close to the jagged ridge of the cliff, and it flows down to the foot of the cliff. There is no cave leakage, and the water droplets are stagnant and turbid. However, the stream in front of the banana cave that passed in front is the water flow that seeps through the cliff and drips into the canyon.

古文：从水上循岭南转，一里，逾南坡之脊，始见脊南亦下坠成大洼，而中无水。
现代文：从水边沿山岭向上南转，一里，越过南面山坡的山脊，才见到山脊南面也下坠成大洼地，但中间无水。
English: From the water's edge, I turned south along the mountain ridge, one mile, and crossed the ridge of the southern slope of the mountain, only to see that the southern ridge also fell into a large depression, but there was no water in the middle.

古文：南坡大道，从右洼中西南上；而余所从小道，则循西大山南行岭间。
现代文：南面山坡的大道，从右边的洼地中向西南上走；而我所走的小道，则是沿西面的大山向南从山岭间穿过。
English: The main road on the southern slope of the mountain goes up to the southwest from the depression on the right; and the path I take is along the big mountain on the west and south through the mountains.

古文：五里，连逾二坡脊。
现代文：五里，一连越过二条山坡上的山脊。
English: Five miles, one after the other, over two ridges on the hillside.

古文：共二里，则西界大山南向坠为低脊，此其东转之最长者也，南坡涉洼之路，至此而合。
现代文：共二里，就见西面一列大山向南下坠成低矮的山脊，此处是它往东转的最长的山脊，南面山坡涉过洼地的路，到此后会合。
English: For a total of two miles, you can see a line of large mountains in the west falling southward into a low ridge. Here is the longest ridge it turns to the east. The southern slope wades through the depression road and then meets.

古文：乃共转西向，循低脊而进，脊北亦中洼潴水焉。
现代文：于是一同转向西，沿低矮的山脊前进，山脊北面也是中央下洼积着水。
English: So they turned west together, moving along a low ridge, with water accumulating in the central depression north of the ridge.

古文：西一里，降而下坡，半里而得洼底铺，五六家在坑峡间。
现代文：向西一里，降落下坡，半里后走到洼底铺，有五六家人住在坑峡间。
English: One mile to the west, down the slope, half a mile later to the bottom of the valley, there are five or six families living between the pits.

古文：其峡虽纵横而实中洼，中无滴水。
现代文：此峡虽纵横裂开但实际中间下洼，峡中无滴水。
English: Although this gorge is split vertically and horizontally, there is actually a depression in the middle, and there is no dripping water in the gorge.

古文：随洼西下一里，直抵大山下。
现代文：顺洼地往西下行一里，直达大山下。
English: Follow the valley down to the west for one mile, straight to the foot of the mountain.

古文：复南行洼峡中二里，又得东坠之脊，脊南坞稍开，于是小圆峰离立矣，然其水犹东行。
现代文：再向南在洼峡中行走二里，又遇上向东下坠的山脊，山脊南面的山坞稍微开阔起来，一座小圆峰耸立在这里，然而这里的水仍往东流。
English: Further south, after walking two miles in the ravine, I encountered a ridge that fell down to the east. The dock on the south side of the ridge was slightly open, and a small round peak stood here, but the water here still flowed to the east.

古文：一里，又南上坡，盘坡南离立圆峰，取道峰隙而南。
现代文：走了一里，又向南上坡，绕着山坡南面耸立的圆峰，取道山峰间的缺口往南行。
English: I walked for a mile, then headed south uphill, around the rounded peak that rises on the south side of the slope, and headed south through the gap between the peaks.

古文：路逾北支，从其上西向入峡；其南支则木丛其上，箐树木丛生的山谷为箐，此为云贵之地所称坠其下。虽甚深而不闻水声焉。
现代文：一里，转到峰侧，开始向东南上走绕到西南。共一里多，就见南北两条支脉，都从北面大山的西边分出支脉向东绕，中间夹成峡谷，很深。路越过北面的支脉，从它上边向西入峡；那南面的支脉有树木丛生在山上，山警深坠在山下，虽然非常深但其中听不到水声。
English: One mile, turn to the side of the peak, begin to walk up to the southeast and go around to the southwest. A total of more than one mile, you can see the two north-south branches, both branching off from the west side of the big mountain in the north and going around to the east, sandwiched in the middle into a canyon, very deep. The road crosses the northern branch and enters the canyon from the top of it to the west; the southern branch has trees on the mountain, and the mountain police fall deep under the mountain, although it is very deep, but there is no sound of water.

古文：西行二里，乃西下箐中。
现代文：往西行二里，就向西下到山著中。
English: Go west for two miles, then go west down into the mountains.

古文：又一里，有数家当箐底，是为冷水箐，乃饭于鬻腐者买豆腐的人家。
现代文：又走一里，有数家人正当山著底，这是冷水著，于是在卖豆腐的人家吃了饭。
English: After walking for another mile, a few families had to swim to the bottom of the mountain, which was cold water, so they ate at the house of the person selling tofu.

古文：于是西南随箐上，一里，过一脊，其脊乃从西而东度之脉也。
现代文：从这里向西南顺山著上走，一里，越过一条山脊，这条山脊是从西往东延伸的山脉。
English: From here, walk southwest up the mountain for one mile, over a ridge, this ridge is a mountain range extending from west to east.

古文：脊南始见群山俱伏，有远山横其西南。
现代文：山脊南面开始见到群山全都低伏着，远处有山横在它的西南。
English: To the south of the ridge you begin to see the mountains, all low-lying, and in the distance there are mountains to the southwest of it.

古文：路又逾冈西上，一里，登其南突之崖，是为油革关旧址，乃旧之设关而榷税处，今已无之。
现代文：路又翻越山冈向西上走，一里，登到山冈南突的山崖上，这里是油革关的旧址，是旧时设关征税之处，今天已无关。
English: The road then climbs over the hill to the west, for one mile, and climbs to the cliff at the southern end of the hill. This is the old site of the oil and leather customs, the place where customs duties were levied in the old days. It is no longer relevant today.

古文：其西即坠崖西下，甚峻。
现代文：它西面的山崖马上向西下坠，十分高峻。
English: The cliffs to the west of it plunge straight down to the west and are very high.

古文：下二里，渐平。
现代文：下行二里，渐平缓了些。
English: Downhill for two miles, gradually flattening out.

古文：又二里，西峡渐开，有僧新结楼倚北山下施茶，曰孔雀寺。
现代文：又走二里，西面山峡渐渐开阔起来，有和尚新建了楼依傍在北山下施舍茶水，叫孔雀寺。
English: After walking another two miles, the western mountain gorge gradually widened, and a monk built a new building next to the north mountain to give out tea, called Peacock Temple.

古文：由寺西循山嘴南转，共一里，逾嘴而西，乃西北盘其余支，三里而得一亭桥。
现代文：由寺西沿山嘴向南转，共一里，越过山嘴往西走，就向西北绕过它的余脉，三里后走到一座亭桥。
English: From the west of the temple, turn south along the mountain mouth for a total of one mile, cross the mountain mouth to the west, then go northwest around its remnants, and after three miles walk to a pavilion bridge.

古文：桥跨两峡间，下有小涧，自北而南，已中涸无滴。
现代文：桥跨在两侧山峡间，桥下有小涧，自北向南延伸，涧中已干涸无滴水。
English: The bridge spans between the mountain gorges on both sides. Under the bridge there is a small moat, extending from north to south. The middle of the moat has dried up and there is no dripping water.

古文：桥西逾坡西北下，路旁多黄果，即覆盆子也，色黄，酸甘可以解渴。
现代文：从桥西越过山坡向西北下走，路旁有很多黄色的野果，就是覆盆子了，黄色，味酸甜可以解渴。
English: Walking from the west of the bridge over the hillside to the northwest, there are many yellow wild fruits on the roadside, that is, raspberries. Yellow, sweet and sour can quench thirst.

古文：其西坞大开，坞西大山，一横于西，一横于南，而蒲缥之村，当西大山下。
现代文：它西面的山坞十分开阔，山坞西边的大山，一座横在西面，一座横在南面，而蒲缥的村落，位于西面大山下。
English: The dock on the west side of it is very open, the mountains on the west side of the dock, one is on the west side, one is on the south side, and the village of Pooh is located under the big mountain on the west side.

古文：其山南自南横大山，又东自油革关南下之支，横度为低脊而复起者；其中水反自南而北，抵罗岷而西入潞江焉。
现代文：这里的山南面起自横在南面的大山，又在东方起自油革关南下的支脉，横向延伸成为低矮的山脊而后重又突起；其中的水流反而自南流向北，抵达罗眠山向西流入潞江。
English: The south side of the mountain here originates from the big mountain in the south, and in the east from the branch of the Yugang south, which extends horizontally into a low ridge and then rises again; the water flow in it, on the other hand, flows from the south to the north, reaching the Roming Mountain and flowing into the Lijiang River in the west.

古文：共西下二里，乃得引水之塍，其中俱已插秧遍绿。
现代文：共向西下走二里，就走到引水灌溉的田腿中，田中都已插秧，遍野碧绿。
English: After walking two miles to the west, they came to a paddy field that was being irrigated with diverted water. The paddy fields had all been replanted, and the fields were lush and green.

古文：又西北行二里余，过蒲缥之东村。
现代文：又往西北行二里多，走过蒲缥的东村。
English: I drove northwest for more than two miles, passing through the East Village of Pu'er.

古文：村之西，有亭桥跨北注之溪，曰吴氏舆梁。
现代文：村子西头，有座亭桥跨在往北流注的溪流上，叫做吴氏舆梁。
English: At the west end of the village, there is a pavilion bridge spanning the stream flowing northward, called Wu's Bridge.

古文：又西半里，宿于蒲缥之西村。
现代文：又向西半里，住宿在蒲缥的西村。
English: Another half-mile to the west, the accommodation is in the West Village of Budai.

古文：其地米价颇贱，二十文可饱三四人。
现代文：此地米价很贱，二十文钱可吃饭三四个人。
English: The price of rice here is very low. Twenty cents can feed three or four people.

古文：蒲缥东西村俱夹道成街，而西村更长，有驿在焉。
现代文：蒲缥东、西村都是夹住道路形成街市，而西村更长些，有骚站在村中。
English: Both the east and west villages of Popo are sandwiched by roads to form a town market, while the west village is longer, and there is a market in the village.

古文：十一日鸡鸣起，具饭。
现代文：十一日鸡鸣起床，准备早饭。
English: On the 11th day, the rooster crowed, I got up and prepared breakfast.

古文：昧爽，从村西即北向循西大山行，随溪而北，渐高而陟崖，共八里，为石子哨，有数家倚西山之东北隅。
现代文：黎明，从村西马上向北沿西面的大山行。顺溪流往北走，地势渐渐高起来，上登山崖，共八里，是石子哨，有数家人靠在西山的东北隅。
English: At dawn, from the west of the village, immediately go north along the big mountain in the west. Go north along the stream, the terrain gradually rises, and the climbing cliff is a total of eight miles. It is a stone post, and there are several families leaning on the northeast corner of the West Mountain.

古文：又北二里，乃盘山西转，有峡自西而东，合于枯飘北注之峡。
现代文：又向北二里，于是绕着山向西转，有峡谷自西延向东，与枯飘往北流注的峡谷会合。
English: Another two miles to the north, then around the mountain to the west, there is a canyon stretching from the west to the east, meeting the canyon flowing to the north stream.

古文：溯之，依南山之北，西入二里，下陟南来峡口。
现代文：逆峡谷走，靠南山的北面，向西深入二里，下行南来的峡口。
English: Go through the reverse canyon, on the north side of Nanshan, go west for two miles, and go down to the canyon mouth.

古文：峡中所种，俱红花可制作胭脂的一种菊科植物成畦，已可采矣。西一里，陟西来峡口，其上不多，水亦无几，有十余家当峡而居，是为落马厂。
现代文：峡中种植的，全是成块的红花，已经可以采摘了。向西一里，越过西来的峡口，上登的路不多，水也没多少，有十多家临峡口居住，这里是落马厂。
English: One mile to the west, across the gorge from the west, there is not much road to climb up, and there is not much water. There are more than ten people living at the mouth of the gorge, and this is the horse-drawn carriage factory.

古文：度峡北，复依北山之南西入，一里，平上逾脊。
现代文：越到峡谷北面，又靠着北山的南面向西深入，一里，平缓上山翻越山脊。
English: Crossing to the north side of the canyon, and leaning against the south side of the North Mountain to the west, one mile deep, gently climbing up the mountain to climb over the ridge.

古文：其脊自南而北度，起为峡北之山，而北尽于罗岷者也。
现代文：这条山脊自南往北延伸，突起成为北峡的山，而后向北在罗眠山到了尽头。
English: This ridge extends from south to north, jutting out into the mountains of the North Gorge, and then north to the end in the Romye Mountains.

古文：逾脊西行峡中，甚平，路南渐有涧形依南崖西下，路行其北。
现代文：越过山脊往西行走在峡中，十分平坦，路南渐渐有山涧依傍在南面山崖下往西下流，路在山涧北边延伸。
English: Cross the ridge to the west and walk in the gorge. It is very flat. To the south of the road, there are gradually ridges along the side. The road flows westward under the cliff on the south side. The road extends to the north of the ridges.

古文：三里，数家倚北山而居，有公馆在焉，是为大坂铺。
现代文：三里，数家人背靠北山居住，有公馆在那里，这儿是大坂铺。
English: Three miles away, several families live with their backs to Kitayama. There is a public house there, and here is Osaka Shop.

古文：从其西下陟一里，有亭桥跨涧，于是涉涧南，依南山之北西下。
现代文：从它西边下走一里，有座亭桥跨在涧上，于是过到涧南，靠着南山的北面向西下走。
English: From the west side of it, walk one mile, there is a pavilion bridge straddling the moat, then cross to the south of the moat and walk westward along the north side of Nanshan Mountain.

古文：二里，有数家当南峡，是为湾子桥。
现代文：二里，有数家人位于南面峡中，这是湾子桥。
English: In the second mile, there are several families located in the South Face Gorge, which is the Bay Bridge.

古文：有卖浆者，连糟而啜之，即余地之酒酿即醪糟，云贵一带称甜酒也。
现代文：有人卖淡甜酒的，连酒糟喝了它，就是我们地方的酒酿了。
English: Someone was selling light sweet wine, and even the dregs drank it, and that's how our local wine was made.

古文：山至是环耸杂沓，一涧自东来者，即大坂之水；一涧自南峡来者，坠峡倒崖，势甚逼仄，北下与东来之涧合而北去，小木桥横架其上。
现代文：山到了这里杂沓环列高耸，一条山涧从东方流来的，就是大坂的水流；一条山涧自南面峡中流来的，坠入峡谷倒悬下山崖，水势十分狭窄，向北下流与东来的山涧合流后往北流去，有小木桥横架在涧上。
English: A mountain stream flowing from the east is the water flow of Osaka; a mountain stream flowing from the middle of the South Face Gorge falls into the canyon and overhangs the cliff, the water potential is very narrow, the downstream flow to the north merges with the mountain stream coming from the east and flows to the north, there is a small wooden bridge across the stream.

古文：度桥，即依西山之东北行，东山至是亦有水从此峡西下，三水合而北向破峡去。
现代文：过桥后，即刻靠着西山的东面往北行，东山到了此地也有水流从此峡中往西下流，三条水流会合后向北冲破山峡流去。
English: After crossing the bridge, immediately go north along the east side of the West Mountain. When the East Mountain reaches this place, there is also a stream flowing westward from this gorge. After the three streams meet, they break through the mountain gorge to the north.

古文：排石齿而北三里，转向西下，石势愈峻愈合。又西二里，峡曲而南，涧亦随峡而曲，路亦随涧而曲。
现代文：东西两面的山崖夹成一条线，全都上摩云天夹住红日，溪流深嵌在下方，山著蒙密，溪石滚沸，路沿着上方延伸，穿石壁破山崖，攀着齿状的岩石向北行三里，转向西下走，石山的山势越加险峻越加合陇。又向西二里，峡谷弯向南，山涧也随着山峡弯曲，路也顺着山涧弯曲。
English: The cliffs on both sides of the east and west clamped into a line, all on the cloudy sky clamped the red sun, the stream was deeply embedded below, the mountain was covered with clouds, the stream stones were boiling, the road extended along the top, broke through the cliff, climbed the jagged rocks to the north for three miles, turned to the west and went down, the mountain of the stone mountain became more and more dangerous and steepened. And two miles to the west, the canyon curved to the south, the mountains also curved with the canyon, and the road also curved along the mountains.

古文：半里，复西盘北转，路皆凿崖栈木。
现代文：半里，又向西盘旋转向北，路都是凿山崖修成的木栈道。
English: For half a mile, and then circling to the west and turning to the north, the road is a wooden boardwalk made of hewn cliffs.

古文：水寨高出众险之上，此峡深盘众壑之下，滇南二绝，于此乃见。碑南渐下，峡亦渐开。
现代文：半里，又向西沿着山崖行。一里，有块碑靠在南山的石崖下，题写着 此处是古盘蛇谷 ，是武侯诸葛亮火烧藤甲兵之处，这才相信此处天险真是雄冠滇南呀！从碑南渐渐下走，峡谷也渐渐开阔起来。
English: Half a mile further west, along the cliff. One mile, there is a monument leaning against the stone cliff of Nanshan, inscribed with "Here is the ancient Valley of the Serpents, the place where the Wuhou Zhuge Liang set fire to the wisteria soldiers. This is why I believe that the natural hazard here is really the majestic south! Gradually go down from the south of the monument, and the canyon gradually opens up.

古文：又西二里，乃北转下坡。
现代文：又向西二里，便转向北下坡。
English: After another two miles to the west, I turned to the north downhill.

古文：复转而西一里，有木桥横涧而北，乃度，循北崖西行。
现代文：再转向西一里，有木桥横到山涧北边，于是过桥，沿北面的山崖往西行。
English: Then turn west one mile, there is a wooden bridge across to the north side of the ridge, so cross the bridge and follow the northern cliff to the west.

古文：一里，逾南突之脊，于是西谷大开，水盘南壑，路循北山。
现代文：一里，越过南突的山脊，西面的山谷就一下子开阔起来，涧水绕着南面的壑谷流，路沿北山走。
English: One mile beyond the ridge of the southern spur, the valley on the west side suddenly opens up. The rushing water flows around the south side of the valley, and the road goes along the north mountain.

古文：又西平下三里，北山西断，路乃随坡南转。
现代文：又往西平缓下走三里，北山在西边断开，路于是顺着山坡往南转。
English: After another three-mile leisurely walk down to Xiping, the north mountain was cut off on the west side, so the road turned south along the hillside.

古文：西望坡西有峡自北而南，俱崇山夹立，知潞江当在其下而不能见。
现代文：往西望去山坡西面有峡谷自北延向南，全是崇山峻岭相夹而立，心知潞江应当就在峡谷下方但不能见到。
English: Looking westward to the western slope of the mountain, there is a canyon extending from north to south, all of which are surrounded by high mountains. I knew that the Li River should be just below the canyon, but I couldn't see it.

古文：南行二里余，则江流已从西北嵌脚下，逼东山南峡之山，转而南去矣。
现代文：往南行二里多，就见江流已从西北流来嵌在脚下，逼近东山南峡的山，转向南流去了。
English: More than two miles to the south, I saw that the river flow had been embedded at the foot from the northwest flow, approaching the mountains of the Dongshan South Gorge and turning to the south flow.

古文：乃南向下坡，一里，有两三家倚江岸而栖，其前有公馆焉，乃就瀹水以饭。
现代文：于是向南下坡，一里，有两三家人紧靠江岸居住，村前有公馆，于是走进村烧水做饭。
English: So they went downhill to the south, one mile, and there were two or three families living right next to the riverbank. There was a mansion in front of the village, so they went into the village to boil water and cook.

古文：时渡舟在江南岸，待久之乃至。
现代文：此时渡船在江南岸，等了很久才来到。
English: At this time, the ferry was on the south bank of the river, and it took a long time to arrive.

古文：注南峡去，或言东与澜沧合，或言从中直下交南，故蒙氏封为 四渎ｄū独流发源注海的大河 之一。以余度之，亦以为独流不合者是。
现代文：登船后，船夫返回石崖岸上吃饭，长时间不来，下午才放船渡到南岸。江流很宽，似乎是澜沧江的一倍，但澜沧江渊深不可测，而此处正当肆意奔流的冲要之地，水流虽急但深处赶不上澜沧江，但两条江各有特点正好不相上下。此江从北面的峡中流来，注入南面峡中流去，有人说向东流与澜沧江合流，有人说从中间一直下流到交趾南部，所以蒙氏把它封为 四读 之一。以我的推测，也认为独自流淌不合流的说法是对的。
English: After boarding the boat, the boatman returned to the cliff shore for dinner. He did not come for a long time, and in the afternoon the boat was allowed to cross to the south shore. The river is very wide, it seems to be twice as wide as the Lancang River, but the Lancang River is unfathomable, and here is the place where the rushing current is justifiable. Although the water flow is rapid, it cannot catch up with the Lancang River in depth, but the characteristics of the two rivers are just comparable. This river flows from the gorge in the north and flows into the gorge in the south. Some people say that the eastward flow merges with the Lancang River

古文：土人言瘴疠痛毒甚毒，必饮酒乃渡，夏秋不可行。
现代文：当地人说瘴气非常毒，必得饮酒后才能渡江，夏秋两季不能渡。
English: Locals say that the miasma is very poisonous, and one must drink alcohol before crossing the river, which cannot be done in summer or autumn.

古文：余正当孟夏，亦但饭而不酒，坐舟中，擢流甚久，亦乌睹所云瘴母哉。
现代文：我此时正当初夏，也只吃了饭而未饮酒，坐在船中，在江流中划了许久，也未见到所说的瘴母呀！
English: I was in the early summer at this time, and I only ate rice and did not drink alcohol. I sat in the boat and paddled in the river for a long time, and I did not see the said dragonfly!

古文：渡南崖，暴雨急来，见崖西有树甚巨，而郁葱如盘，急趋其下。
现代文：渡到江南的山崖，暴雨急骤来临见山崖西边有棵树十分巨大，郁郁葱葱好像盘子，急忙赶到树下。
English: Crossing the cliff to the south of the Yangtze River, when a sudden rainstorm came, I saw a tree on the west side of the cliff that was very huge and lush like a plate. I hurried to get under the tree.

古文：树甚异，本根干高二丈，大十围，有方石塔甃其间，高与干等，干跨而络之，西北则于密而石不露，东南临江，则干疏而石出，干与石已连络为一，不可解矣，亦穷崖一奇也。
现代文：此树非常奇特，树干高二丈，大处要十人围抱，有坐方形石塔砌在其间，高处与树千相等，树干高跨缠绕着它，西北的一面树干密布未露出石塔，东南一面临江，树干稀疏石塔便露了出来，树干与石塔已连接缠绕为一体，不可分了，这也是偏僻山崖间的一处奇景。
English: This tree is very peculiar. The trunk is two meters high, and it takes ten people to embrace it in most places. There is a square stone tower in the middle of it. The height is equal to that of a thousand trees, and the trunk is wrapped around it. The northwest side of the trunk is densely covered with stone towers, and the southeast side faces the river. The sparse stone tower of the trunk is exposed. The trunk and the stone tower are connected and entwined as one, inseparable. This is also a strange scene in the remote mountains and cliffs.

古文：已大风扬厉，雨散，复西向平行上坡。
现代文：不久大风凌厉飞扬，雨散开，又向西平行上坡。
English: Soon the wind was blowing hard, the rain was dispersing, and the wind was blowing westward parallel to the uphill.

古文：望西北穹峰峻极，西南骈崖东突，其南崖有居庐当峰而踞，即磨盘石也。
现代文：望见西北弯隆的山峰极为高峻，西南并立的山崖向东突出去，它南面的山崖上有房屋正当山峰盘踞着，就是磨盘石了。
English: Looking to the northwest, the craggy mountain peaks are extremely high, and the parallel cliffs in the southwest jut out to the east. There are houses on the cliffs to the south of it, which are just as high as the mountain peaks. It is the millstone.

古文：望之西行，十里，逼西山，雨阵复来。
现代文：望着它向西行，十里，逼近西山，阵雨重又来临。
English: Looked at it heading west, ten miles, approaching the West Mountain, heavy showers coming again.

古文：已虹见同 现 ，出现之意东山盘蛇谷上，雨遂止。从来言暴雨多瘴，亦未见有异也。
现代文：不久彩虹出现在东山盘蛇谷上方，雨终于停了。从来都说暴雨时瘴气很多，也未见有什么异状。
English: Soon after, the rainbow appeared above the Dongshan Pan She Valley, and the rain finally stopped. It has always been said that there is a lot of radon gas during rainstorms, and nothing unusual has been seen.

古文：稍折而南，二里，有村当山下，曰八湾，数家皆茅舍。
现代文：稍折向南，二里，有个村庄坐落在山下，叫做八湾，几家人都是茅草房。
English: Slightly to the south, two miles, there is a village located at the foot of the mountain, called Eight Bays, where several families live in thatched houses.

古文：一行人言此地热不可栖，当上山乃凉。
现代文：同行的人说此地炎热不能居住，猜想要上山后才会凉爽。
English: My companions say that the heat here is unbearable, so I guess it will only cool down when I go up the mountain.

古文：从村西随山南转，一里，过一峡口。
现代文：从村西顺山势向南转，一里，走过一处峡口。
English: From the west of the village to the south of Shun Mountain, one mile, walked through a gorge.

古文：循峡西入，南涉而逾一崖，约一里，遂从南崖西上。
现代文：顺峡谷往西深入，向南涉水后越过一处山崖，约走一里，于是从南面的山崖向西上登。
English: I went deep into the west along the canyon, waded to the south, crossed a cliff, walked about a mile, and then climbed westward from the southern cliff.

古文：其上甚峻，曲折盘崖，八里而上凌峰头，则所谓磨盘石也。
现代文：那上面非常高峻，曲曲折折绕着山崖走，八里后登上峰头，就是所谓的磨盘石了。
English: It's very high up there, winding around the cliff, and after eight miles you reach the peak, which is the so-called millstone.

古文：百家倚峰头而居，东临绝壑，下嵌甚深，而其壑东南为大田，禾芃芃焉。
现代文：百来家人依傍着峰头居住，东边面临绝壑，下嵌之处非常深，而这个壑谷东南边是大片农田，禾苗茁壮生长在田中。
English: Hundreds of families live next to the peak, the east side faces the cliff, the lower part is very deep, and the southeast side of the valley is a large area of farmland, and the seedlings grow in the field.

古文：其夜倚峰而栖，月色当空，此即高黎贡山之东峰。
现代文：此夜背靠峰头住下，月色当空，此地就是高黎贡山的东峰。
English: On this night, I stayed with my back to the peak, and the moon was in the sky. This place is the east peak of Gaoligong Mountain.

古文：忆诸葛武侯、王靖远骥之前后开疆，方威远政之独战身死，往事如看镜，浮生独倚岩，慨然者久之。
现代文：回忆起武侯诸葛亮、靖远侯王骥前后开拓边疆，威远伯方政只身战死，往事如镜中之影，漂泊的人生短暂。
English: Recalling the Wuhou Zhuge Liang, Jingyuan Hou Wang Yao before and after the opening up of the frontier, Weiyuan Bo Fang Zheng died in battle, the past is like a shadow in the mirror, the drifting life is short.

古文：十二日鸡再鸣，饭，昧爽出门。
现代文：独自一人背靠着高峻的山崖，感慨了很长时间。十二日鸡叫两遍，吃饭，黎明出门。
English: Alone with my back against the steep cliff, I felt sad for a long time. On the twelfth day, the rooster crowed twice, ate, and went out at dawn.

古文：其处虽当峻峰之上，而居庐甚盛，有公馆在村北，潞江驿在其上。
现代文：此处虽正当高峻的山峰之上，但居民房屋十分繁盛，有公馆在村北，潞江骚在它上边。
English: Here, although it is right on top of a high mountain peak, residential housing is very prosperous, with a mansion in the north of the village and the Lijiang River upstream.

古文：山下东南成大川，已插秧盈绿，潞江沿东山东南去，安抚司依西南川坞而居。
现代文：山下东南一面成为大平川，已插满秧绿色盈野，潞江沿东山向东南流去，安抚司依傍着西南平川的山坞居住。
English: The south-eastern side of the mountain has become the Daping River, which has been interspersed with lush green fields. The Daping River flows south-eastwards along the eastern mountain, and the pacifier lives next to the dock of the south-western Daping River.

古文：遂由磨盘石西南上，仍峻甚。
现代文：于是由磨盘石向西南上山，仍非常陡峻。
English: So I climbed up the mountain from the millstone to the southwest, and it was still very steep.

古文：二里，逾其南峡之上，其峡下嵌甚深，自西而东向，出安抚司下。
现代文：二里，翻越到它南边的山峡之上，这里的山峡下嵌得非常深，自西延向东，延到安抚司下。
English: Two miles, crossing over to the gorge on its southern side, where the gorge is embedded very deep, extending from the west to the east, extending to the pacification division.

古文：峡底无余隙，惟闻水声潺潺在深箐中。
现代文：峡底没有空余的缝隙，只听到深警中有潺潺水声。
English: There was no gap at the bottom of the canyon, only the sound of rushing water could be heard.

古文：峡深山亦甚峻，藤木蒙蔽，猿鼯ｗū即鼯鼠，前后肢之间有飞蹼，可滑翔飞跃昼号不绝。峡北则路缘崖上，随峡西进，上去山顶不一二里，缘峡平行西四里，有石洞南临路崖，深阔丈余，土人凿石置山神碑于中。
现代文：峡深山也十分高峻，藤枝树木蒙密荫蔽，猿猴藉鼠白昼号叫不停。峡谷北边路沿着山崖向上延伸，顺着山峡往西前进，上边离山顶不到一二里，沿山峡向西平缓行四里，有个石洞向南面临道路边的山崖，深处宽处各有一丈多，本地人用石头凿了山神碑放置在洞中。
English: The deep mountains of the canyon are also very high, the wisteria trees are densely shaded, and the monkeys call incessantly in the daytime. The north side road of the canyon extends upwards along the cliff, moving westward along the canyon, the upper side is less than one or two miles from the top of the mountain, slowly moving four miles along the canyon to the west, there is a stone cave facing the cliff on the roadside to the south, the depth and width are more than a meter apart, and the locals have carved a mountain monument with stones and placed it in the cave.

古文：又四里，稍折而北上崖，旋西，西登临峡之坡。
现代文：又走四里，稍折向北登上山崖，旋即向西，往西上登面临山峡的山坡。
English: I walked another four miles, turned slightly north to climb the cliff, then immediately turned west and climbed westward up the slope of the mountain facing the gorge.

古文：北峡之上，至是始南垂一坡，而南峡之下，则有峡自南山夹底而出，与东出之峡会成 丁 字，而北向垂坡焉。
现代文：北面山峡之上，到这里开始向南下垂成一个山坡，但南面山峡之下，却有峡谷自南山的夹谷底部延伸出来，与向东延出来的峡谷相会成一个 丁 字，然后向北一面下垂成山坡。
English: Above the canyon to the north, a slope begins to descend to the south here, but below the canyon to the south, a canyon extends from the bottom of the valley of the Nanshan, meets the canyon extending to the east to form a "T," and then descends to the north to form a hillside.

古文：又西二里，或陟山脊，或缘峰南，又三里，有数家当东行分脊间，是为蒲满哨。
现代文：又向西二里，有时上登山脊，有时沿峰南走，又行三里，有数家人居住在东分支延伸的山脊之间，这是蒲满哨。
English: Another two miles to the west, sometimes climbing up the ridge, sometimes walking along the south of the peak, and another three miles. Several families live between the ridges extending from the east branch. This is the Pu Man Sentinel.

古文：盖山脊至是分支东行，又突起稍高，其北又坠峡北下，其南即安抚司后峡之上流也。
现代文：大体上山脊到了此地分出支脉往东延伸，又稍稍高高突起，它北面又向北下坠成峡，它南面就是安抚司后峡的上游了。
English: In general, when the ridge reaches this place, the branching branch extends to the east, and it protrudes slightly higher and higher. To the north, it falls into a gorge to the north, and to the south, it is the upstream of the Anfu Shiou Gorge.

古文：由此西望，一尖峰当西复起，其西北高脊排穹，始为南渡大脊，所谓高黎贡山，土人讹错传为高良工山，蒙氏僭僭越，私自作主之意封为西岳者也。
现代文：由此往西望，一座尖峰正当西方重又耸起，尖峰西北排列着高大弯隆的山脊，开始成为向南延伸的大山脊，这就是所谓的高黎贡山，本地人错读为高良工山，是蒙氏潜封为西岳的山。
English: Looking westward from here, a spike rises again just to the west, the spikes are lined with tall, curved ridges to the northwest, and begin to become a large ridge extending southward. This is the so-called Gaoligong Mountain, which the locals misread as Gaolagong Mountain, and is a mountain hidden by the Mongols as Xidake Mountain.

古文：其山又称为昆仑冈，以其高大而言，然正昆仑南下正支，则方言亦非无谓也。
现代文：此山又称为昆仑冈，是就它的高大而言的。不过它正好是昆仑山向南下延支脉中的正脉，那么方言也不是没有道理的。
English: This mountain is also known as the Kunlun Mountains, in reference to its height. However, it happens to be the main branch of the southward branch of the Kunlun Mountains, so the dialect is not without reason.

古文：由蒲满哨西下一里，抵所望尖峰，即蹑级数转而上。
现代文：由蒲满哨往西下走一里，抵达来时望见的尖峰，立即踩着石阶转了数道弯上登。
English: I walked one mile westward from the Bouman post, and when I arrived at the peak I saw, I immediately stepped on the stone steps and turned several corners to climb up.

古文：两旁削崖夹起，中坠成路，路由夹崖中曲折上升，两岸高木蟠空，根纠垂崖外，其上竹树茸密，覆阴排幕，从其上行，不复知在万山之顶，但如唐人所咏： 两边山木合，终日子规啼 ，情与境合也。
现代文：两旁陡削的山崖夹立耸起，中间深坠成路，路由相夹的山崖中曲折上升，两侧的高崖上高大的树木盘曲在空中，树根纠缠下垂露在山崖外边，山崖上浓密的竹丛树林绿茸茸的，下覆的树荫排成筛幕，从它上边走，不再觉得是万山之顶，只是如唐人所吟咏的： 两边山林合，终日杜鹃啼 ，情与境合一了。
English: The steep cliffs on both sides of the cliff rise up, and the middle of the cliff falls into the road. The route climbs up the cliff with twists and turns. The tall trees on the high cliff on both sides are twisted in the air, and the roots of the trees are entangled and exposed on the outside of the cliff. The dense bamboo thicket on the cliff is green and shiny, and the underlying shade is arranged as a screen. When walking on it, it no longer feels like the top of the mountain, but as the Chinese people sing: The mountains and forests on both sides are united, and the cuckoos are there all day long. The

古文：一里余，登其脊。
现代文：一里多，登上山脊。
English: A mile and a half up the ridge.

古文：平行脊上，又二里余，有数家倚北脊，是为分水关，村西有水沿北坡南下，此为潞江安抚司后峡发源处矣。
现代文：平缓行走在山脊上，又是二里多，有数家人背靠北面的山脊，这是分水关，村西有水沿北面的山坡向南下流，这是潞江安抚司后峡的发源处了。
English: The smooth walk on the ridge is more than two miles, and several families have their backs to the ridge on the north side. This is the watershed, and there is water in the west of the village flowing southward along the northern slope. This is the source of the Lijiang River to pacify the Shihou Gorge.

古文：南转，西逾岭脊，砖砌巩门，跨度脊上。
现代文：转向南，往西越过岭脊，有砖砌的拱门，横跨在延伸的山脊上。
English: Turning south and heading west over the ridge, there are brick arches straddling the extended ridge.

古文：其关甚古，顶已中颓，此即关之分水者。
现代文：此关十分古老，顶上中央已经坍塌，这就是分水的关隘。
English: This pass is very old, the top and middle have collapsed, and this is the water-dividing pass.

古文：关东水下潞江，关西水下龙川江。于是西下峡，稍转而南，即西上穿峡逾脊，共五里，度南横之脊，有村庐，是为新安哨。
现代文：从这里往西下峡，稍转向南，马上向西上走穿越峡谷越过山脊，共五里，越过横在南面的山脊，有村庄房屋，这是新安哨。
English: From here, go to the West Lower Gorge, turn slightly to the south, and immediately walk westward through the canyon and over the ridge, a total of five miles, across the ridge in the south, there are village houses, this is Xin'an Sentinel.

古文：由哨南复西转，或过山脊，或蹈踩过岭峡，屡上屡下，十里，为太平哨。
现代文：由哨南再向西转，有时翻过山脊，有时跋涉岭峡，屡上屡下，十里，是太平哨。
English: From the south of the sentry post to the west, sometimes over the ridge, sometimes trudging through the Lingxia, repeatedly up and down, ten miles, is the Taiping sentry post.

古文：于是屡下屡平，始无上陟之脊。
现代文：从这里起屡次下山屡次遇上平地，开始没有上登的山脊。
English: From here, we repeatedly descended the mountain and repeatedly encountered flat ground, beginning with a ridge that was not climbed.

古文：五里，为小歇厂。
现代文：五里，是小歇厂。
English: Wuli is a small brewery.

古文：五里，为竹笆铺。
现代文：五里，是竹笆铺。
English: Wuli is a bamboo shoots shop.

古文：自过分水关，雨阵时至，至竹笆铺始晴。
现代文：自从过了分水关，阵雨时时来临，到竹笆铺才晴起来。
English: Since we passed the watershed, showers have come from time to time, and it only clears up when we get to the bamboo raft shop.

古文：数家夹路成衢，有卖鹿肉者，余买而炙脯烤干肉。
现代文：数家人夹住道路形成街市，有卖鹿肉的人，我买了些熏烤成肉干。
English: A few families cling to the road to form a street market, there are people selling venison, I bought some smoked and roasted into jerky.

古文：于是直下三里，为茶庵。
现代文：从这里一直下走三里，是茶庵。
English: From here, it's a three-mile walk down to the tea house.

古文：又西下五里，及山麓，坡间始盘塍为田。
现代文：又往西下行五里，到达山麓，山坡间开始有田埂环绕的农田。
English: Another five miles to the west, to the foot of the mountain, where farmland surrounded by rice paddies begins to grow between the slopes.

古文：其下即龙川江自北而南，水不及潞江三分之一，而奔坠甚沸。
现代文：坡下就是龙川江，自北流向南，水面不到潞江的三分之一宽，但水势奔腾倾泻十分汹涌。
English: At the bottom of the slope is the Longchuan River, which flows from north to south. The water surface is less than one-third the width of the Li River, but the rushing water is very turbulent.

古文：西崖削壁插江，东则平坡环塍。
现代文：西岸山崖陡削的石壁插入江中，东岸则是平缓的山坡田滕环绕。
English: The steep rock walls of the cliffs on the west bank plunge into the middle of the river, while the east bank is surrounded by gently sloping fields.

古文：行塍间半里，抵龙川江东岸。
现代文：行走在田滕间半里，到达龙川江东岸。
English: After walking half a mile between fields, we arrived at the east bank of the Longchuan River.

古文：溯江北行，又半里，有铁锁桥架江上。
现代文：溯江往北行，又是半里，有铁索桥架在江上。
English: There is an iron cable-stayed bridge on the river half a mile north of the river.

古文：其制两头悬练，中穿板如织，法其制作方法一如澜沧之铁锁桥，而狭止得其半。
现代文：它的建造方法是两头悬吊着铁链，中间用木板像织布一样穿起来，方法完全与澜沧江的铁索桥一样，但很窄，只有澜沧江的一半宽。
English: It was built by suspending iron chains at the two ends and using wooden planks to weave through the middle like a woven cloth. The method is exactly the same as the Lancang River's iron cable bridge, but it is very narrow, only half the width of the Lancang River.

古文：由桥西即蹑级南上，半里为龙关，数十家当坡而居，有税司以榷负贩者。
现代文：由桥西头立即踏石阶往南上走，半里是龙关，数十家人临山坡居住，设有税司向肩挑背驮贩卖的人征税。
English: From the west end of the bridge, immediately walk up the stone steps to the south. Longguan is half a mile away. Dozens of families live on the hillside. There is a tax department to collect taxes from those who peddle drugs.

古文：又西向平上四里余，而宿于橄榄坡。
现代文：又向西平缓上走四里多，便住宿在橄榄坡。
English: I walked slowly for more than four miles to Xiping and stayed at the Olive Slope.

古文：其坡自西山之脊，东向层突，百家当坡而居，夹路成街，踞山之半。
现代文：此处山坡自西山的山脊处起，向东层层突过来，百来户人家正当山坡居住，夹住道路形成街市，盘踞在山半腰。
English: Here, the slope of the mountain rises from the ridge of the West Mountain and rushes to the east. Hundreds of households live on the hillside, clamp the road to form a street market, and are entrenched halfway up the mountain.

古文：龙川江发源于群山北峡峨昌蛮即阿昌族七藏甸，经此，东为高黎贡，西为赤土山。下流至缅甸太公城，合大盈江。
现代文：此处米价很贱，每二十文钱住宿一晚，管两餐饭，另有带在路上吃的食品。龙川江发源于峨昌蛮七藏甸北面山峡的群山之中，流经此地，往下流到缅甸的太公城，汇合大盈江。
English: Here, the price of rice is very low, with a night's stay and two meals for every 20 yuan, and there is also food to take with you on the road. The Longchuan River originates in the mountains of the northern gorges of Echang, flows through this place, flows down to Taigong City in Myanmar, and merges with the Yangtze River.

古文：十三日平明而饭。
现代文：十三日黎明吃饭。
English: At dawn on the 13th, we had dinner.

古文：由坡西登岭西北上，八里，稍北，逾北峡西上，二里，从岭上平行。
现代文：由坡西向西北登岭上走，八里，略偏北，越过北面的山峡往西上行，二里，从岭上平缓前行。
English: Walk from the west slope to the northwest ridge, eight miles, slightly north, over the northern canyon to the west, two miles, from the ridge gently forward.

古文：望西北有层峰排簇岭上，初以为将由其南垂行，一里，忽从岭头转北，三里，乃西南下峡中。一里，有四五家当峡而居，竹篱茅舍，颇觉清幽，是为赤土铺。
现代文：望见西北方有层层山峰成排簇拥在岭上，起初以为将从它的南垂走，一里后，忽然从岭头转向北，三里，就向西南下到峡中，一里，有四五家人位于峡中居住，竹篱笆茅草房，觉得相当清静幽雅，这是赤土铺。
English: Looking northwest, I saw rows of mountain peaks clustered on the ridge. At first, I thought that I would walk from the south of it. After one mile, I suddenly turned north from the ridge head. After three miles, I went southwest to the gorge. One mile, there were four or five families living in the gorge, with bamboo fences and thatched houses. I felt quite quiet and elegant. This was a red clay shop.

古文：其村当西面排簇层峰之麓，东与橄榄坡夹而为坳。
现代文：此村正当西面成排簇拥的层层山峰的山麓，东边与橄榄坡相夹成为山坳。
English: To the west of the village lies the foothills of the mountain ranges, while to the east the olive groves form the foothills.

古文：村西有亭桥架小涧上，其水自南峡来，捣北峡去，桥名建安。
现代文：村西有亭桥架在小涧上，涧水自南边峡中流来，捣入北面山峡流去，桥名叫建安。
English: In the west of the village, there is a bridge with a pavilion on a small pier. The water flows from the middle of the south side gorge and flows into the mountain gorge in the north. The bridge is called Jian'an.

古文：按《志》，大盈江之水，一出自东北赤土山，而此铺名赤土，水犹似东北下龙川者，岂其西排簇层峰为赤土山，而此犹其东麓之水，以其在麓，即以名铺耶？
现代文：据志书，大盈江的水流，一条出自东北的赤土山，而此铺名叫赤土，水仍似乎是向东北下流进龙川江的样子，莫非村西成排簇拥的层层山峰是赤土山，而此水仍是它东麓的水流，因为它在山麓，就用山来起铺名铺吗？
English: According to the diary, the water flow of the Daying River is a red soil mountain from the northeast, and this shop is called red soil. The water still seems to flow down to the northeast into the Longchuan River. Is it possible that the rows of layered peaks clustered in the west of the village are red soil mountains, and this water is still the water flow of its eastern foot, because it is at the foot of the mountain, using the mountain to start a famous shop?

古文：由桥西即南向上坡，二里，西南登脊，即自排簇峰东南分支下者。
现代文：由桥西立即向南上坡，二里，向西南登山脊，就是从成排簇拥的山峰往东南分支下延的山脊。
English: From the west of the bridge, it immediately climbs southward, and two miles to the southwest is the mountain ridge, which extends from the rows of peaks to the southeastern branch.

古文：又转而西一里余，有庵施茶，当脊北向而踞，是为甘露寺。
现代文：又转向西走一里多，有寺庵施舍茶水，在山脊上向北盘踞着，这是甘露寺。
English: I turned west and walked for more than a kilometer. There was a temple and hermitage that dispensed tea and was perched on the ridge to the north. This was Kanro-ji Temple.

古文：又西一里，坡间水北向坠崖，路越之西向下峡。
现代文：又往西一里，山坡间的水流向北坠下山崖，路越过流水向西下到峡中。
English: Another mile to the west, the water flow between the mountain slopes falls northward down the cliff, and the road crosses the flowing water and descends westward into the gorge.

古文：峡中有水自北而南，又与坡上水分南北流，以余意度之，犹俱东下龙川者。
现代文：峡中有水自北流向南，又与山坡上的水分向南北流去，按我的意思来估计，仍然都是往东下流进龙川江的水流。
English: The water in the gorge flows from north to south, and together with the water on the mountain slope, it flows north to south. According to my estimation, it is still the water flowing eastward into the Longchuan River.

古文：半里，乃从峡底溯水北入。
现代文：半里，就从峡底溯水流向北深入。
English: Half a mile downstream from the bottom of the canyon, the water flows northward and deeper.

古文：其峡东西两崖，俱从排簇层峰分支南下者，西崖即其本支，东崖乃分支，东南由甘露寺脊而下者也，第峡水南出东转，不知其北合于建安桥，抑直东而下龙川否也？
现代文：此峡东西两面的山崖，都是从成排簇拥的层层山峰分支南下的，西崖就是它的干支，东崖是分支，往东南由甘露寺的山脊下延的山崖，只是峡中的水流出南边向东转后，不知它向北在建安桥合流，还是一直往东流下龙川江呢？
English: The cliffs on both the east and west sides of the gorge descend from the branches of the mountain peaks clustered in rows to the south. The west cliff is its main branch, and the east cliff is a branch. The cliff extends to the southeast from the ridge of Kanro-ji Temple. However, after the water in the gorge flows out to the south and turns to the east, I don't know if it flows north to meet at Jian'an Bridge, or if it flows east all the way down the Longchuan River.

古文：北行峡底一里余，水分二道来，皆细甚。
现代文：向北在峡底行一里多，水分两条流来，都十分细小。
English: More than a mile northward at the bottom of the gorge, two streams of water come, both very small.

古文：遂从坡西蹑峻上，一里，北穿岭夹，半里，透脊。
现代文：于是从山坡西侧踩着陡峻的山坡上走，一里，向北穿过岭上的夹谷，半里，穿过山脊。
English: So from the west side of the mountain slope, I walked on the steep slope, one mile, northward through the valley on the ridge, half a mile, through the ridge.

古文：其脊自东北度西南，脊以北即坠峡西下。
现代文：这里的山脊自东北延向西南，山脊以北马上往西下坠到峡中。
English: The ridge here stretches from the northeast to the southwest, and the area north of the ridge plunges westward into the gorge.

古文：路从峡端北转而西，有数家倚北山之上，是为乱箭哨，至是始出排簇层峰岭脊之西。
现代文：道路从峡谷尽头由北转向西，有数家人依傍在北山之上，这是乱箭哨，到这里才出到成排簇拥层层山峰岭脊的西面。
English: The road turns from north to west at the end of the canyon, with several families leaning on the side on the top of the North Mountain, which is a random arrow, and it is only here that it reaches the west side of the mountain ridge with rows of peaks.

古文：按《志》，赤土山在州城东三十里，水至是始分，则前之赤土铺犹东岸之麓，非分流之正脊可知也。
现代文：据志书，赤土山在州城东面三十里，水到此处开始分流，那么前边的赤土铺还是东崖的山麓，可知不是分流的正脊。
English: According to the history book, the Red Earth Mountain is about thirty miles east of the state capital, and the water begins to divert here, so the red earth pavement in front is still the foot of the east cliff, but it is not the right ridge of the diversion.

古文：饭于岭哨。
现代文：在岭上的哨站吃了饭。
English: We had lunch at the sentry post on the ridge.

古文：西向行稍下，共二里，有坞自南而北，细流注其中。
现代文：向西稍往下走，共二里，有山坞自南延向北，有细流流注坞中。
English: A little further down to the west, a total of two miles, there is a dock stretching from south to north, with a trickle of water flowing into the dock.

古文：按《志》，大盈江有三源，一出赤土山，当即此矣，从此而西，出马邑河，绕州城北而西合巃嵸、罗生二水，同为大盈之源者也。
现代文：据志书，大盈江有三个源头，一个出自赤土山，应当就是此处了，从此往西，流出马邑河，绕过州城北面往西会合笼岌山、罗生山的两条溪水，一同成为大盈江的源头。
English: According to the history book, the Great Ying River has three sources. One comes from the Red Earth Mountain, which should be the source of the Great Ying River. From here, it flows westward, flowing out of the Ma'i River, and bypassing the north of the state capital to the west, where it joins the two streams of Jiaozhuang Mountain and Lousheng Mountain, together becoming the source of the Great Ying River.

古文：又北上坡二里余，有一二家当坡之南，环堵围南峡之坳甚遥，杂植果树于中，是为板厂。
现代文：又往北上坡二里多，有一二家人正当山坡的南边，环绕的围墙围住南面山峡的山坳非常长，在其中杂种着果树，这里是板厂。
English: Further north, more than two miles uphill, there are one or two families on the south side of the hillside. The surrounding wall encloses the very long ridges of the gorge to the south, in which there are hybrid fruit trees. This is the board factory.

古文：由其西二里，又西下半里，有十余家当峡坳而居，是为芹菜塘。
现代文：由它西边走二里，又向西下行半里，有十多家正当峡坳居住，这是芹菜塘。
English: Two miles west of it, and half a mile down to the west, there are more than ten legitimate gorges. This is Celery Pond.

古文：其前小水，东北与大盈之源合。
现代文：村前有小河，向东北与大盈江的源头合流。
English: There is a small river in front of the village, which flows northeast to join the source of the Great Ying River.

古文：村庐不多，而皆有杜鹃灿烂，血艳夺目。
现代文：村中房屋不多，但都有灿烂的杜鹃花，血红的颜色鲜艳夺目。
English: There are not many houses in the village, but they all have brilliant rhododendrons, the blood-red colour of which is eye-catching.

古文：若以为家植者，岂深山野人，有此异趣？
现代文：以为是农家种植的，难道深山中的野人，有此等奇异的情趣？
English: Thought to be cultivated by farmers, do wild people in the deep mountains have such strange tastes?

古文：若以为山土所宜，何他冈别陇，杳然无遗也？
现代文：如果认为是山上的土适宜杜鹃生长，为什么别的山冈土陇上，杳然不见踪影呢？
English: If it is believed that the soil on the mountain is suitable for cuckoo growth, why is there no trace of it on other mountain mounds?

古文：由村西复西上坡一里余，转峡而平行顶上三里余，乃出西岭之端。
现代文：由村西再往西上坡一里多，转出山峡在山顶上平缓行三里多，便到达西岭的顶端。
English: From the west of the village, continue westward uphill for more than one mile, turn out of the gorge and gently walk more than three miles on the top of the mountain to reach the top of Xiling.

古文：下望其坞甚深，而中平如砥，良畴远村，交映其间。
现代文：向下望山坞很深，可坞中平得如磨刀石，良田远村，交相掩映在其间。
English: Looking down, the dock is very deep, but the middle of the dock is as flat as a grindstone, and the village of Ryoda is far away.

古文：其坞大而圆，乃四面小山环围而成者，不比他川之沿溪成峡而已。
现代文：此处山坞又大又圆，是四面的小山环绕围抱而成的，不像别的平川只是沿溪流形成的峡谷而已。
English: The dock here is large and round, surrounded by hills on all sides. Unlike other flat rivers, it is just a canyon formed along the stream.

古文：西向峻下者五里，循峡东北折，又折而西三里，乃循东山北行，其下稍平。
现代文：向西陡峻地下山五里，沿峡谷往东北转，又折向西三里，就沿东山往北行，这段下走的路稍稍平缓些。
English: Steep downhill five miles to the west, turn northeast along the canyon, turn west three miles, then north along the east mountain, the road is a little smoother in this section.

古文：又二里，有村当东山之麓，是为坡脚村。
现代文：又走二里，有个村庄正当东山的山麓，这是坡脚村。
English: After another two miles, there is a village right at the foot of Dongshan Mountain. This is Po Jiao Village.

古文：有卖浆者，出酒甚旨味美，以醋芹为菜。
现代文：有卖酒的人，拿出的酒味道很美，用醋渍的芹菜当下酒菜。
English: There was a man selling wine. The wine he brought out was delicious. He served it with vinegar-stained celery.

古文：与同行崔姓者，连啜二壶乃行。
现代文：与同行姓崔的人，一连饮了两壶才上路。
English: He and his companion, surnamed Cui, drank two pots in a row before setting out.

古文：于是西行平畴中，一里，有小水自南而北，即《志》所云罗生山之水，亦大盈三源之一，分流塍中者也。
现代文：从这里起往西行走在平旷的田野中，一里，有小溪自南流向北，就是志书所说的罗生山的溪水，也是大盈江的三个源头之一，分流在田野中。
English: From here, we walked westward in the open fields. For one mile, there was a stream flowing from the south to the north, which was the stream of Mount Lawson mentioned in the book. It was also one of the three sources of the Daying River, branching off in the fields.

古文：又西北二里余，有村曰雷打田。
现代文：又向西北行二里多，有个村庄叫雷打田。
English: Another two miles to the northwest, there is a village called Lei Datian.

古文：其东亦有小溪，自南而北，则罗生山之正流也，与前过小流，共为大盈之一源云。
现代文：村东也有条小溪，自南流向北，是罗生山的主流，与前边走过的小溪流，共同成为大盈江的源头之一。
English: There is also a small stream in the east of the village, which flows from the south to the north. It is the main stream of Mount Rason, and together with the small stream that passed in front of it, it has become one of the sources of the Great Ying River.

古文：是溪之东田洼间，土皆黑坟这里指高出地面的土堆，土人芟其上层曝干供爂，盖煤坚而深入土下，此柔而浮出土上，而色则同也，由村北又西三里，有庐舍当坡塍间，曰土锅村，村皆烧土为锅者。
现代文：此溪东边的田间洼地中，土地都是黑土堆，当地人铲来它的上层晒干后供烧火做饭用，煤炭都很坚硬探深埋在地下，此种东西柔软浮出地上，但颜色则是相同的。由村北又向西走三里，有房屋位于坡上的田野间，叫土锅村，村中都是用土烧制土锅的人家。
English: In the field depressions on the east side of this stream, the land is all black mounds. Locals shovel the top layer of it to dry and dry for cooking. The coal is very hard and buried deep in the ground. This kind of thing is soft and floats to the ground, but the color is the same. From the north of the village and three miles to the west, there are houses located between the fields on the slope, called clay pot village. The village is full of people who use clay to make clay pots.

古文：于是其西庐舍联络，一里为东街，又半里，西交大街，则 十 字为衢者也。
现代文：从这里起村西房屋连接，走一里是东街，又行半里，与西边大街相交，成为 十 字形的路口。
English: From here, the houses on the west side of the village are connected. East Street is one mile away, and half a mile away, it intersects with West Side Street, becoming a zigzag intersection.

古文：腾越州城之南门，即当大街之北，城南居市甚盛，城中所无，而此城又迤西所无。
现代文：腾越州城的南门，就位于大街的北边。城南居民街市十分繁荣，是城中所没有的，而此城又是迄西所没有的。
English: The south gate of Tengyue City is located on the north side of the avenue. The residential street market in the south of the city is very prosperous, which is not found in the city, and this city is not found in the west.

古文：乃税驾于大街东黔府官舍，时适过午也。
现代文：于是住宿在大街东头黔府官邸的客舍，此时恰好过了正午。
English: As a result, they stayed in a guest house at the official residence of the Shogunate at the east end of the main street. It was just after noon.

