古文：大公鼎，渤海人，先世籍辽阳率宾县。
现代文：大公鼎，渤海人，其先祖著籍于辽阳率宾县。
English: Dagongding, a native of Bohai, whose ancestors were registered in Liaoyang Ruzhongbin County.

古文：统和间，徙辽东豪右以实中京，因家于大定。
现代文：统和年间，皇上迁徙辽东豪强大户以填充中京，于是定居于大定。
English: During the years of unification, the emperor moved the powerful families of Liaodong to fill Zhongjing, and then settled in Dating.

古文：曾祖忠，礼宾使。
现代文：曾祖大忠，为礼宾使。
English: Zeng Zu Datong, the protocol envoy.

古文：父信，兴中主簿。
现代文：父大信，任兴中主簿。
English: Father Daishin, Ren Xingzhong's chief accountant.

古文：公鼎幼庄愿，长而好学。
现代文：公鼎幼时端庄诚实，成年后好学。
English: When he was young, he was dignified and honest. When he became an adult, he was eager to learn.

古文：咸雍十年，登进士第，调沈州观察判官。
现代文：咸雍十年，中进士，调任沈州观察判官。
English: In the 10th year of the Xian and Yong Dynasties, he was promoted to middle school and transferred to the post of Shenzhou observation judge.

古文：时辽东雨水伤稼，北枢密院大发濒河丁壮以完堤防。
现代文：当时辽东下雨伤害了庄稼，北枢密院大举征发濒河住户之男丁以修治堤防。
English: At that time, the rains in Liaodong damaged the crops, and the North Privy Council conscripted a large number of male residents along the river to repair the dike.

古文：有司承令峻急，公鼎独曰： 边障甫宁，大兴役事，非利国便农之道。 
现代文：有司接旨后觉得十分严厉紧急，只有公鼎说： 边境要地刚刚安宁，又大兴徭役，这不是利国便农之道。 
English: After receiving the order, some officials felt that it was very severe and urgent, but only Gong Ding said: The border areas have just been peaceful and prosperous. This is not the way to benefit the country and benefit the farmers.

古文：乃疏奏其事。
现代文：于是上疏奏说此事。
English: So the matter was discussed in detail.

古文：朝廷从之，罢役，水亦不为灾。
现代文：朝廷依从了他，停止征发劳役，而河水也没有酿成灾害。
English: The imperial court obeyed him and stopped conscripting laborers, and the river did not cause any disasters.

古文：濒河千里，人莫不悦。
现代文：沿河千里的百姓无不欢欣鼓舞。
English: Thousands of people along the river are delighted and encouraged.

古文：改良乡令，省徭役，务农桑，建孔子庙学，部民服化。
现代文：改任良乡县令，减省徭役，致力于农桑，修建孔子庙和庙内学校，部民顺服归化。
English: He was reappointed as the county magistrate of Liangxiang County, reduced the number of provincial officials, devoted himself to agriculture and mulberry, built a Confucius Temple and a school in the temple, and his subordinates submitted to naturalization.

古文：累迁兴国军节度副使。
现代文：累迁兴国军节度副使。
English: He was successively appointed as the vice-envoy of the Qing Dynasty.

古文：时有隶鹰坊者，以罗毕为名，扰害田里。
现代文：当时有隶属于鹰坊之人，以张网捕鸟为名，扰乱为害百姓田地。
English: At that time, someone affiliated with Yingfang, in the name of setting a net to catch birds, disturbed and harmed the people's fields.

古文：岁久，民不堪。
现代文：时间久了，百姓无法忍受。
English: It's been a long time, and the people can't stand it.

古文：公鼎言于上，即命禁戢。
现代文：公鼎向上申奏，道宗当即下令禁止。
English: After the public appeal, the Dao Sect immediately issued an order to ban it.

古文：会公鼎造朝，大臣谕上嘉纳之意，公鼎曰： 一郡获安，诚为大幸；他郡如此者众，愿均其赐于天下。 
现代文：适逢公鼎上朝，大臣们告知皇上嘉许采纳其意见，公鼎说： 一郡获得安宁，实在幸甚；别的郡像这种事也很多，希望能将恩赐平均于天下。 
English: When Emperor Gongding ascended to the throne, the ministers told Emperor Gaozhu to accept their advice. Emperor Gongding said, "It is indeed fortunate that one county has achieved tranquility; there are many other counties like this, and I hope that the gift will be shared with the world."

古文：从之。
现代文：皇上从之。
English: I followed his advice.

古文：徙长春州钱帛都提点。
现代文：迁任长春州钱帛都提点。
English: Changchun Qian Ye's relocation to Changchun is a case in point.

古文：车驾如春水，贵主例为假贷，公鼎曰： 岂可辍官用，徇人情？ 
现代文：皇上到春水，当地酋长按例要从州里借钱，公鼎说 ：怎么能断了官府用度，来曲从私情？ 
English: When the emperor went to Chunshui, the local chieftain had to borrow money from the state as usual. Gunding said, "How can you cut off the government's expenses and come to the song from your private affairs?"

古文：拒之。
现代文：加以拒绝。
English: It was rejected.

古文：颇闻怨詈语，曰： 此吾职，不敢废也。 
现代文：听到许多怨恨咒骂的话，公鼎说： 这是我的职守，不敢荒废。 
English: After hearing many words of hatred and cursing, Gong Ding said: This is my duty, I dare not waste it.

古文：俄拜大理卿，多所平反。
现代文：不久拜为大理卿，平反了很多冤案。
English: He soon became known as Lord Dali, and many cases of injustice were rectified.

古文：天祚即位，历长宁军节度使、南京副留守，改东京户部使。
现代文：天祚即位，公鼎历任长宁军节度使、南京副留守，改任东京户部使。
English: When Emperor Tenzin ascended to the throne, Guo Ding, who had served as the envoy to the Changning Army Festival and the vice-envoy to Nanjing, was reassigned as the envoy to the Tokyo household.

古文：时盗杀留守萧保先，始利其财，因而倡乱。
现代文：当时盗贼杀了留守萧保先，初时贪图其财物，杀他以后乘机倡导作乱。
English: At that time, the thief killed the left-behind Xiao Bao, coveted his property at first, and took the opportunity to advocate disorder after killing him.

古文：民亦互生猜忌，家自为斗。
现代文：百姓也互生猜忌，家庭之间互相争斗。
English: People are also suspicious of each other, and families fight with each other.

古文：公鼎单骑行郡，陈以祸福，众皆投兵而拜曰： 是不欺我，敢弗听命。 
现代文：公鼎单骑巡行郡中，陈说祸福利害，众人均放下兵器拜伏说： 您不会欺骗我们，怎敢不从命。 
English: In the public single-rider parade county, Chen said that it was a disaster and a welfare harm, and everyone put down their weapons and bowed down and said: You will not deceive us, how dare you not follow your life.

古文：安辑如故。
现代文：安定如故。
English: Stable as ever.

古文：拜中京留守，赐贞亮功臣，乘传赴官。
现代文：拜为中京留守，赐为贞亮功臣，得以乘坐驿站的传车前往官府。
English: He was given the title of Zhenliang Hero for staying in the capital, and was able to take the shuttle bus from the station to the government office.

古文：时盗贼充斥，有遇公鼎于路者，即叩马乞自新。
现代文：当时盗贼遍地皆是，其中有人在路上遇到公鼎，便在马前叩首请求改过自新。
English: At that time, thieves were everywhere, and some of them encountered a gong on the road and bowed their heads in front of the horse to ask for rehabilitation.

古文：公鼎给以符约，俾还业，闻者接踵而至。
现代文：公鼎交给他一块符照，让他恢复旧业，听说者接踵前来。
English: He was given a certificate by the court to resume his old job, and those who heard about it came one after another.

古文：不旬日，境内清肃。
现代文：不上十天，辖境以内便清平宁静了。
English: Within ten days, peace and tranquility were restored within the jurisdiction.

古文：天祚闻之，加赐保节功臣。
现代文：天祚知道后，加赐保节功臣。
English: When Heaven knows, it will bestow a boon on the meritorious subjects of the festival.

古文：时人心反侧，公鼎虑生变，请布恩惠以安之，为之肆赦。
现代文：当时人心不安分，公鼎担心发生变乱，请皇上降恩惠加以安抚，皇上为之赦免了囚犯。
English: At that time, people's hearts were uneasy, and King Ding was worried that there would be turmoil. He asked the emperor to grant him a favor to appease him, and the emperor pardoned the prisoners.

古文：但反躬自责，蝗尽飞去，遗者亦不食苗，散在草莽，为乌鹊所食。
现代文：公鼎多次上表请求辞官归田，皇上不批准。适逢奴贼张撒八率领无赖结伙为盗，公鼎想攻打他们却没有能力。叹道 ：我想辞官已经好久了。为世务所牵累，不幸到了这一步，难道真是命吗？ 
English: Gunding repeatedly petitioned the emperor to allow him to return to the field, but the emperor did not approve. When the slave thief Zhang Saba led a gang of ruffians to steal, Gunding wanted to attack them but was powerless. He sighed, "I think it's been a long time since I became a diplomat. I've been dragged down by the world affairs office, and unfortunately I've come to this step. Is this really my fate?"

古文：会霪雨不止，文复随祷而霁。
现代文：因而忧愤成疾。保大元年去世，年七十九岁。
English: As a result, grief and anger developed into a disease. He died in 1981, at the age of seventy-nine.

古文：是岁，大熟。朝廷以文可大用，迁唐古部节度使，高阳勒石颂之。后不知所终。马人望，字俨叔，高祖胤卿，为石晋青州刺史，太宗兵至，坚守不降。
现代文：子大昌龄，任左承制；大昌嗣，氵名州刺史；大昌朝，镇宁军节度使。马人望，字俨叔，高祖马胤卿，为后晋青州刺史，太宗兵到，坚守不降。
English: His son, Dajangling, was the successor of Ren Zu; Dajangling's son, Dajangling's son, Dajangling's son, Dajangling's son, Dajangling's son, Dajangling's son, Dajangling's son, Dajangling's son, Dajangling's son, Dajangling's son, Dajangling's son, Dajangling's son, Dajangling's son, Dajangling's son, Dajangling's son, Dajangling's son, Dajangling'

古文：城破被执，太宗义而释之，徙其族于医巫闾山，因家焉。
现代文：城破被俘，太宗觉得他有气节，放了他，迁其全族于医巫闾山，于是就在那里安家。
English: After the city was captured, Emperor Taizong thought he had the right idea, released him, and moved his entire family to Iwushan Mountain, where they made their home.

古文：曾祖廷煦，南京留守。
现代文：曾祖马廷煦，南京留守。
English: Zeng Zumatingyu, the leader of Nanjing, was absent.

古文：祖渊，中京副留守。
现代文：祖父马渊，中京副留守。
English: Grandfather Ma Yuan, vice-governor of Chukyo, was absent.

古文：父诠，中京文思使。
现代文：父马诠，中京文思使。
English: His father, Ma Yan, was a literary agent in Beijing.

古文：人望颖悟。
现代文：人望聪慧。
English: Wisdom is in high demand.

古文：幼孤，长以才学称。
现代文：幼时丧父，成年后以才学著称。
English: He lost his father at a young age, and became famous for learning to sing as an adult.

古文：咸雍中，第进士，为松山县令。
现代文：咸雍年间，进士及第，为松山县令。
English: During the reign of Emperor Xianyong, he was promoted to the first and second rank, and became the governor of Matsuyama County.

古文：岁运泽州官炭，独役松山，人望请于中京留守萧吐浑均役他邑。
现代文：每年运送泽州官炭，朝廷只役使松山人，人望向中京留守萧吐浑请求能平均地役使外邑人。
English: Every year, Zezhou's official charcoal is transported. The imperial court only assigns Matsuyama people, and people are looking to Xiao Tuhun, who stayed in Beijing, to request that he be able to assign foreign citizens on an equal footing.

古文：吐浑怒，下吏，系几百日。
现代文：萧吐浑大怒，将人望交法官审讯，囚禁近百日后又将他提出审讯，人望不肯屈服。
English: Xiao Tuhun flew into a rage and brought Renwang to a judge for trial. After nearly a hundred days of imprisonment, he was put on trial again. Renwang refused to give in.

古文：复引诘之，人望不屈，萧喜曰： 君为民如此，后必大用。 
现代文：萧吐浑高兴地说： 你为了百姓能这样做，将来必定大有作为。 
English: Xiao Tuhun said happily: If you can do this for the people, you will surely do great things in the future.

古文：以事闻于朝，悉从所请。
现代文：并将此事奏告朝廷，朝廷完全从其所请。
English: He also reported the matter to the Imperial Court, which fully complied with his request.

古文：徙知涿州新城县。
现代文：迁为涿州新城县知县。
English: It was relocated to Ji County, Xincheng County, Zhangzhou.

古文：县与宋接境，驿道所从出。
现代文：该县与宋接壤，为驿道必经之地。
English: The county borders on Song and is a must-visit place for travelers.

古文：人望治不扰，吏民畏爱。
现代文：人望治县，不收受财物饮食，吏民畏服爱戴。
English: People want to live in Zhixian, do not accept wealth and food, officials and people are afraid of clothing and love it.

古文：近臣有聘宋还者，帝问以外事，多荐之，擢中京度支司盐铁判官。
现代文：近臣有访宋回国者，皇上问京外之事，大多推荐他，于是被提升为中京度支司盐铁判官。
English: Some of his close vassals visited Song and returned to China, and when the emperor asked him about matters outside of Beijing, most of them recommended him, so he was promoted to be the judge of salt and iron in Beijing.

古文：转南京三司度支判官，公私兼裕。
现代文：转任南京三司度支判官，公家和私人都富足了。
English: He was transferred to the Third Division of the Nanjing Intermediate People's Court, and both the public and private sectors became rich.

古文：迁警巡使。
现代文：迁警巡使。
English: He's a patrolman for the relocation police.

古文：京城狱讼填委，人望处决，无一冤者。
现代文：京城案件堆积，人望加以处理判决，无一冤枉者。
English: The cases in Beijing are piling up, and it is hoped that they will be handled and adjudicated, and no one will be wronged.

古文：曾检括户口，未两旬而毕。
现代文：适逢检括户口，不到二十天他便将此事处理完毕。
English: When it was time to check the account, he dealt with the matter in less than twenty days.

古文：同知留守萧保先怪而问之，人望曰： 民产若括之无遗，他日必长厚敛之弊，大率十得六七足矣。 
现代文：同知留守萧保先感到奇怪而问之，人望说： 百姓之产业如果检括得毫无遗留，将来一定会助长重敛财物之弊端，大概得到十分之六七就够了。 
English: Xiao Baoxian, a left-behind acquaintance, felt strange and asked him about it. Ren Wang said, "If the people's property is controlled so that nothing is left behind, it will definitely promote the evil of repeated accumulation of wealth in the future. It is enough to get about sixty-seven out of ten."

古文：保先谢曰： 公虑远，吾不及也。 
现代文：保先致歉说： 您深谋远虑，我虑不及此。 
English: Apologizing in advance, he said: You are far-sighted, but I am not.

古文：先是，枢密使乙辛窃弄威柄，卒害太子。
现代文：在此之前，枢密使乙辛窃用权柄，最终害死了太子。
English: Prior to this, the privy council had allowed Yixing to usurp power and eventually kill the crown prince.

古文：及天祚嗣位，将报父仇，选人望与萧报恩究其事。
现代文：待到天祚即位，想报父仇，选人望及萧报恩追究其事。
English: Waiting for the enthronement of Emperor Tianyao, he wanted to avenge his father's death and investigate the matter.

古文：人望平心以处，所活甚众。
现代文：人望处理公正，很多人因为他得以不死。
English: He is reputed to dispense justice, and many people are said to have become immortal because of him.

古文：改上京副留守。
现代文：改为上京副留守。
English: It was changed to "the vice mayor is away in Kyoto."

古文：会剧贼赵钟哥犯阙，劫宫女、御物，人望率众捕之。
现代文：适逢大盗赵钟哥进犯宫廷，劫掠宫女、御物，人望率众捕之。
English: At the right time, the great thief Zhao Zhongge attacked the palace, robbed the palace maidens and imperial objects, and was arrested with great popularity.

古文：右臂中矢，炷以艾，力疾驰逐，贼弃所掠而遁。
现代文：右臂中了箭，以艾条灸之，勉强支撑病体急速追赶，贼人抛弃所掠人、物逃走。
English: He was hit by an arrow in his right arm. He was treated with moxibustion, barely able to support his sick body, and quickly chased after it. The thief abandoned the person and things he had taken and ran away.

古文：人望令关津讥察行旅，悉获其盗。
现代文：人望下令关卡、渡口稽查盘问过往旅客，将盗贼全部抓获。
English: People's Daily ordered checkpoints and ferry inspection to interrogate past passengers, and the thieves were all caught.

古文：寻擢枢密都承旨。
现代文：不久提升为枢密都承旨。
English: He was soon promoted to Privy Councillor.

古文：宰相耶律俨恶人望与己异，迁南京诸宫提辖制置。
现代文：宰相耶律俨讨厌人望与自己意见相左，迁之为南京诸宫提辖制置。
English: The chancellor, Yeludong, disliked the idea of people disagreeing with him, so he moved the capital to Nanjing.

古文：岁中，为保静军节度使。
现代文：这年年中，任为保静军节度使。
English: In the middle of the year, he was appointed as the military envoy of the Qing Dynasty.

古文：有二吏凶暴，民畏如虎。
现代文：有两个小吏凶狠残暴，百姓畏之如虎。
English: There are two petty officials who are ferocious and cruel, and the people are afraid of them.

古文：人望假以辞色，阴令发其事，黥配之。
现代文：人望假装和他们交好，暗地里派人揭露其行事，黥其面而发配之。
English: People pretend to be friends with them, secretly send people to expose their actions, slap them in the face and dispatch them.

古文：是岁诸处饥乏，惟人望所治粒食不阙，路不鸣桴。
现代文：这一年各地饥荒缺粮，只有人望所治区域粮米不缺，路上听不到报警的桴鼓。
English: This was a year of famine and food shortages all over the country. Only the regions governed by the people were not short of grain and rice. On the road, no police sirens could be heard.

古文：遥授彰义军节度使。
现代文：遥授彰义军节度使。
English: The remote award in recognition of the volunteer army festival.

古文：迁中京度支使，始至，府廪皆空；视事半岁，积粟十五万斛，钱二十万繦。
现代文：迁中京度支使，刚到任时，府库仓廪均空无一物；任职半年，就积累起粟十五万斛，钱二十万镪。
English: When he was transferred to Beijing as the Vice-Minister of Education and Culture, when he first took office, the government treasury warehouses were all empty; after half a year in office, he accumulated 150,000 mu of millet and 200,000 mu of money.

古文：徙左散骑常侍，累迁枢密直学士。
现代文：迁为左散骑常侍，累迁至枢密直学士。
English: He was transferred to the rank of Zuo Sanzhong (左散騎) regular attendant, and gradually moved up to the rank of Privy Councilor.

古文：未几，拜参知政事，判南京三司使事。
现代文：不多久，拜参知政事，判南京三司使事。
English: Not long after, he was appointed to the post of vice-governor, and was assigned to the Third Division of the Nanjing Military Region.

古文：时钱粟出纳之弊，惟燕为甚。
现代文：当时在钱粟支出和收入上的舞弊行为，尤其以燕地最为严重。
English: At that time, the malpractice in the expenditure and income of the money-poppy was the most serious, especially in Yanchi.

古文：人望以缣帛为通历，凡库物出入，皆使别籍，名曰 临库 。
现代文：人望用缣帛制作历书，凡是府库物品之支出和收入，都派人另外登记，称为 临库 。
English: People are expected to use money to make almanacs, and all the expenditure and income of the prefectural treasury items are sent to be registered separately, known as the temporary treasury.

古文：奸人黠吏莫得轩轾，乃以年老扬言道路。
现代文：奸邪之辈，狡黠之吏无法翻云覆雨，便到处扬言人望年老昏聩。
English: Treacherous people and cunning officials can't turn the tide, so they go around threatening people with old age and senility.

古文：朝论不察，改南院宣徽使，以示优老。
现代文：朝论失察，改任人望为南院宣徽使，以表示优待老人。
English: After the failure of the morning discussion, he was reappointed as the Southern Yuan's Herald of the Annunciation in order to show preferential treatment to the elderly.

古文：逾年，天祚手书 宣马宣徽 四字诏之。
现代文：过了一年，天祚帝手书 宣马宣徽 四字诏令他到京。
English: A year later, Emperor Tianyao ordered him to come to Beijing in the four-character imperial edict of "Xuan Ma Xuan Hui."

古文：既至，谕曰： 以卿为老，误听也。 
现代文：到京以后，皇帝说： 我以为你已衰老，是误听人言了。 
English: After arriving in Beijing, the emperor said, "I thought you were old, but I misheard.

古文：遂拜南院枢密使。
现代文：于是拜他为南院枢密使。
English: As a result, he was made a privy councilor of the Southern Court.

古文：人不敢干以私，用人必公议所当与者。
现代文：人人都不敢向人望徇私求职，人望用人也必取录公议认为恰当的人。
English: No one dares to ask for a job from a person who is selfish, and a person who is looking for an employer must also choose a person who is considered appropriate by the public.

古文：如曹勇义、虞仲文尝为奸人所挤，人望推荐，皆为名臣。
现代文：如曹勇义、虞仲文曾为奸人所排挤，人望加以推荐，均成为名臣。
English: For example, Cao Yongyi and Gu Zhongwen were once ousted as traitors, but were recommended by the people, and both became famous ministers.

古文：当时民所甚患者，驿递、马牛、旗鼓、乡正、厅隶、仓司之役，至破产不能给。
现代文：当时百姓所患害的驿递、马牛、旗鼓、乡正、厅隶、仓司之类的徭役，他们往往至破产也不能供给役事。
English: At that time, the common people suffered the misfortune of being unable to provide services such as mule delivery, horse and oxen, cymbals, village chiefs, clerks, and warehouse managers, often to the point of bankruptcy.

古文：人望使民出钱，官自募役，时以为便。
现代文：人望让百姓出钱，由官府募人服役，时人皆以为便利。
English: It was popular to ask the people to pay and the government to recruit people to serve, which everyone thought was convenient at the time.

古文：久之请老，以守司徒、兼侍中致仕。
现代文：又过了好久，请求告老还乡，以守司徒、兼侍中离职回故里。
English: After a long time, he asked to return to his hometown as an old man, and returned to his hometown as an officer of the guard and a chamberlain.

古文：卒，谥曰文献。
现代文：卒，谥曰文献。
English: At long last, here is the literature.

古文：人望有操守，喜怒不形，未尝附丽求进。
现代文：人望有操守，喜怒不形于色，不曾依附他人以求升进。
English: People are reputed to have integrity, to be incorruptible, and not to have attached themselves to others in order to advance.

古文：初除执政，家人贺之。
现代文：起先被任命为执政，家中人庆贺。
English: At first, he was appointed to govern, and his family celebrated.

古文：人望愀然曰： 得勿喜，失勿忧。
现代文：人望忧惧地说 ：得之不值得喜，失之不值得忧。
English: People say anxiously: what is gained is not worth rejoicing, what is lost is not worth worrying about.

古文：抗之甚高，挤之必酷。 
现代文：与你相争的人地位太高，排挤起你来一定惨酷。 
English: The person you are competing with is too high-ranking, and it must be terrible to push you out.

古文：其畏慎如此。
现代文：其处世警惕小心如此。
English: That's how careful he is in his dealings.

